veɪnz ʌv ɡoʊld ɛpəlɔɡ: beɪðd ɪn laɪt ɡlɔsɝi taʊɝz ə mɪdnaɪt viwʌnpɔɪnzɪɹoʊ

Veins of Gold EPILOGUE: Bathed in Light GLOSSARY Towers of Midnight v1.0

pɹuf baɪ dʒɹæɡoʊnæʃ (ɑkə mɛɹɪθɪn)

Proofed by DragonAshe (aka Merithyn)

ðə wil ə taɪm baɪ ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝl ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ðə ʃædoʊ ɹaɪzɪŋ ðə faɪɝz ə hɛvən lɔɹɾ ə keɪɑs eɪ kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz ðə pæθ ə dæɡɝz wɪntɝz hɑɹt kɹɔsɹoʊdz ə twaɪlaɪt naɪf ə dʒɹimz baɪ ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən ən bɹændən sændɝsən ðə ɡæðɝɪŋ stɔɹm taʊɝz ə mɪdnaɪt taʊɝz ə mɪdnaɪt ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən ən bɹændən sændɝsən tɔɹ fæntəsi eɪ tɑm doʊɝɾi əsoʊsiɪts bʊk nu jɔɹk ðɪs ɪz ə wɝk ə fɪkʃən. ɔl ə ðə kæɹɪktɝz, ɔɹɡənəzeɪʃənz, ən ɪvɛns pɔɹtʃɹeɪɾ ɪn ðɪs nɑvəl ɑɹ iðɝ pɹɑɾəkts ə ði ɔθɝz' ɪmædʒəneɪʃənz əɹ ɑɹ juz fɪktɪʃəsli.

The Wheel of Time by Robert Jordan The Eye of the World The Great Hunt The Dragon Reborn The Shadow Rising The Fires of Heaven Lord of Chaos A Crown of Swords The Path of Daggers Winter's Heart Crossroads of Twilight Knife of Dreams by Robert Jordan and Brandon Sanderson The Gathering Storm Towers of Midnight Towers of Midnight ROBERT JORDAN AND BRANDON SANDERSON TOR fantasy A TOM DOHERTY ASSOCIATES BOOK NEW YORK This is a work of fiction. All of the characters, organizations, and events portrayed in this novel are either products of the authors' imaginations or are used fictitiously.

taʊɝz ə mɪdnaɪt kɑpiɹaɪt  twɛntiɾɛn baɪ ðə bændɝsnætʃ ɡɹup, ɪŋk.

TOWERS OF MIDNIGHT Copyright  2010 by The Bandersnatch Group, Inc.

ðə fɹeɪzəz "ðə wil ə taɪm" ən "ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," ən ðə sneɪk-wil sɪmbəl, ɑɹ tʃɹeɪdmɑɹks ə ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən.

The phrases "The Wheel of Time" and "The Dragon Reborn," and the snake-wheel symbol, are trademarks of Robert Jordan.

ɔl ɹaɪts ɹɪzɝvd.

All rights reserved.

mæps baɪ ɛlisə mɪtʃəl ɪntɪɹiɝ ɪləstʃɹeɪʃənz baɪ mæθju si nilsən ən ɛlisə mɪtʃəl eɪ tɔɹ bʊk pʌblɪʃt baɪ tɑm doʊɝɾi əsoʊsiɪts,  wʌnhʌnʒɹədsɛvəntifaɪv fɪfθ ævənu nu jɔɹk, nujɔɹk wʌnzɪɹoʊzɪɹoʊwʌnzɪɹoʊ

Maps by Ellisa Mitchell Interior illustrations by Matthew C. Nielsen and Ellisa Mitchell A Tor Book Published by Tom Doherty Associates, LLC 175 Fifth Avenue New York, NY 10010

wwwtɔɹ-fɔɹdʒkɑm tɔɹ ɪz ə ɹɛdʒəstɝd tʃɹeɪdmɑɹk ə tɑm doʊɝɾi əsoʊsiɪts, .

www.tor-forge.com Tor is a registered trademark of Tom Doherty Associates, LLC.

 naɪnsɛvəneɪt-zɪɹoʊ-sɛvənθaʊzənsɪkshʌndʒɹədfɪftiθɹi-tufaɪvnaɪnfɔɹ-faɪv

ISBN 978-0-7653-2594-5

fɝst ədɪʃən: noʊvɛmbɝ twɛntiɾɛn

First Edition: November 2010

pɹɪntəɾ ɪn ðə junaɪɾəd steɪts ʌv əmɛɹəkə zɪɹoʊnaɪneɪtsɛvənsɪksfaɪvfɔɹθɹiɾuwʌn

Printed in the United States of America 0987654321

fəɹ dʒeɪsən dɛnzəl, məlɪsə kɹeɪb, bɑb klʌts, dʒɛnəfɝ ljæŋ, lɪndə tɑɡlɪɹi, mæt hætʃ, li bʌtlɝ, maɪk mækɝt, ən ɔl ðoʊz ɹiɾɝz u oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz əv meɪd ðə wil ə taɪm pɑɹɾ ə ðɛɹ laɪvz, ən ɪn duɪŋ soʊ hæv meɪd ðə laɪvz ʌv ʌðɝz bɛɾɝ.

For Jason Denzel, Melissa Craib, Bob Kluttz, Jennifer Liang, Linda Taglieri, Matt Hatch, Leigh Butler, Mike Mackert, and all those readers who over the years have made The Wheel of Time part of their lives, and in doing so have made the lives of others better.

kɑntɛns mæpspɔɪntwʌnzɪɹoʊ-wʌnwʌn, tuhʌnʒɹədsɪkstisɛvən

CONTENTS MAPS..................................10-11, 267

pɹoʊlɑɡ: dɪstɪŋkʃənzpɔɪntwʌnfaɪv

PROLOGUE: Distinctions.........................15

wʌn æpəlz fɝspɔɪntfaɪvθɹi

1 Apples First....................................53

tu kwɛstʃənz ə liɾɝʃɪppɔɪntsɪkszɪɹoʊ

2 Questions of Leadership...........................60

θɹi ði æmɪɝlɪnz æŋɡɝpɔɪnsɛvənθɹi

3 The Amyrlin's Anger.............................73

fɔɹ ðə pæɾɝn ɡɹoʊnzpɔɪnteɪtsɛvən

4 The Pattern Groans...............................87

faɪv ɹaɪɾɪŋzpɔɪntwʌnzɪɹoʊθɹi

5 Writings......................................103

sɪks kwɛstʃənɪŋ ɪntɛntʃənzpɔɪntwʌntuwʌn

6 Questioning Intentions...........................121

sɛvən laɪɾɝ ðən ə fɛðɝpɔɪntwʌnθɹiθɹi

7 Lighter than a Feather............................133

eɪt ðə sɛvən-stʃɹaɪp læspɔɪntwʌnfɔɹθɹi

8 The Seven-Striped Lass...........................143

naɪn blʌɾ ɪn ði ɛɹpɔɪntwʌnfaɪvnaɪn

9 Blood in the Air................................159

tɛn æftɝ ðə teɪnpɔɪntwʌnsɪkssɛvən

10 After the Taint.................................167

ɪlɛvən ən ʌnɪkspɛktɪd lɛɾɝpɔɪntwʌnsɛvənsɪks

11 An Unexpected Letter............................176

twɛlv ən ɛmpti ɪŋk bɑɾəlpɔɪntwʌneɪtsɛvən

12 An Empty Ink Bottle............................187

θɝtin fəɹ wʌɾ əz bɪn ɹɔtpɔɪntwʌnnaɪntu

13 For What Has Been Wrought......................192

fɔɹtin eɪ vaʊpɔɪntuzɪɹoʊzɪɹoʊ

14 A Vow.......................................200

fɪftin juz ə pɛbəlpɔɪntuwʌnfaɪv

15 Use a Pebble...................................215

sɪkstin ʃænəhɑɹpɔɪntuθɹizɪɹoʊ

16 Shanna'har....................................230

sɛvəntin pɑɹɾɪŋz, ən ə miɾɪŋpɔɪnttufɔɹfɔɹ

17 Partings, and a Meeting..........................244

eɪtin ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ə ðɪs pleɪspɔɪntusɪkszɪɹoʊ

18 The Strength of This Place........................260

naɪntin tɔk ə dʒɹæɡənzpɔɪntusɛvənnaɪn

19 Talk of Dragons................................279

twɛnti eɪ tʃɔɪspɔɪntunaɪnsɛvən

20 A Choice......................................297

twɛntiwʌn ən oʊpən ɡeɪtpɔɪnθɹiwʌnsɛvən

21 An Open Gate.................................317

twɛntiɾu ði ɛn ʌv ə lɛdʒənpɔɪntθɹiθɹifaɪv

22 The End of a Legend.............................335

twɛntiθɹi fɑkshɛdzpɔɪnθɹisɪksθɹi

23 Foxheads......................................363

twɛntifɔɹ tə meɪk ə stænpɔɪntθɹieɪttu

24 To Make a Stand................................382

twɛntifaɪv ɹɪtɝn tə bændɑɹ ɛbənpɔɪnfɔɹzɪɹoʊwʌn

25 Return to Bandar Eban...........................401

twɛntisɪks pɑɹlipɔɪnfɔɹwʌnwʌn

26 Parley........................................411

twɛntisɛvən eɪ kɔl tə stænpɔɪntfɔɹtusɪks

27 A Call to Stand.................................426

twɛntieɪɾ ɑɾətizpɔɪntfɔɹθɹisɛvən

28 Oddities......................................437

twɛntinaɪn eɪ tɛɹəbəl filɪŋpɔɪnfɔɹfaɪvtu

29 A Terrible Feeling...............................452

θɝɾi mɛn dʒɹim hɪɹpɔɪnfɔɹsɪksnaɪn

30 Men Dream Here...............................469

θɝɾiwʌn ɪndə ðə vɔɪdpɔɪnfɔɹeɪtθɹi

31 Into the Void..................................483

θɝɾitu eɪ stɔɹm ə laɪtpɔɪnfɔɹnaɪnfɔɹ

32 A Storm of Light...............................494

θɝɾiθɹi eɪ ɡʊd suppɔɪnfaɪvzɪɹoʊnaɪn

33 A Good Soup..................................509

θɝɾifɔɹ dʒʌdʒmənpɔɪntfaɪvtueɪt

34 Judgment.....................................528

θɝɾifaɪv ðə ɹaɪt θɪŋpɔɪnfaɪvfɔɹfaɪv

35 The Right Thing...............................545

θɝɾisɪks ən ɪnvɪteɪʃənpɔɪnfaɪvfaɪvsɪks

36 An Invitation..................................556

θɝɾisɛvən dɑɹknəs ɪn ðə taʊɝpɔɪnfaɪvsɪksnaɪn

37 Darkness in the Tower...........................569

θɝɾieɪt wunzpɔɪntfaɪveɪtsɛvən

38 Wounds......................................587

θɝɾinaɪn ɪn ðə θɹi-foʊld lænpɔɪntsɪkszɪɹoʊtu

39 In the Three-fold Land...........................602

fɔɹɾi eɪ meɪkɪŋpɔɪnsɪkszɪɹoʊeɪt

40 A Making.....................................608

fɔɹɾiwʌn ən ʌnɪkspɛktɪɾ ælaɪpɔɪnsɪkstufaɪv

41 An Unexpected Ally.............................625

fɔɹɾitu stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən blʌdpɔɪnsɪksθɹisɛvən

42 Stronger than Blood.............................637

fɔɹɾiθɹi səm tipɔɪnsɪksfɔɹfɔɹ

43 Some Tea.....................................644

fɔɹɾifɔɹ eɪ bækhændəd ɹɪkwɛspɔɪntsɪksfaɪvtu

44 A Backhanded Request...........................652

fɔɹɾifaɪv eɪ ɹiunjənpɔɪnsɪkssɪksfɔɹ

45 A Reunion....................................664

fɔɹɾisɪks wɝkɪŋ lɛðɝpɔɪnsɪkssɛvənsɛvən

46 Working Leather................................677

fɔɹɾisɛvən eɪ titʃɪŋ tʃeɪmbɝpɔɪnsɪksnaɪntu

47 A Teaching Chamber............................692

fɔɹɾieɪt nɪɹ ɑvɛndɪsɔɹəpɔɪnsɛvənwʌntu

48 Near Avendesora.................................712

fɔɹɾinaɪn kɔɹɾ ə ðə sʌnpɔɪnsɛvəntufɔɹ

49 Court of the Sun................................724

fɪfti tʃuzɪŋ ɛnəmizpɔɪnsɛvənθɹisɛvən

50 Choosing Enemies..............................737

fɪftiwʌn eɪ tɛstɪŋpɔɪnsɛvənfɔɹsɪks

51 A Testing.....................................746

fɪftiɾu buts .......................................sɛvənfaɪvsɛvən

52 Boots .......................................757

fɪftiθɹi ɡeɪtweɪzpɔɪnsɛvənsɛvənwʌn

53 Gateways.....................................771

fɪftifɔɹ ðə laɪɾ ə ðə wɝlpɔɪntsɛvənnaɪnwʌn

54 The Light of the World...........................791

fɪftifaɪv ðə wʌn lɛf bɪhaɪnpɔɪnteɪtzɪɹoʊfaɪv

55 The One Left Behind............................805

fɪftisɪks sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋpɔɪnteɪtwʌnfɔɹ

56 Something Wrong..............................814

fɪftisɛvən eɪ ɹæbət fəɹ sʌpɝpɔɪnteɪttuwʌn

57 A Rabbit for Supper.............................821

ɛpəlɔɡ: ən æftɝpɔɪnteɪttunaɪn

EPILOGUE: And After..........................829

ɡlɔsɝipɔɪnteɪtfɔɹfaɪv

GLOSSARY...................................845

ɪt sun bɪkeɪm ɑbviəs, ivən wɪðɪn ðə stɛɾɪŋ, ðət ðə pæɾɝn wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ fɹeɪl. ðə skaɪ dɑɹkənd. əɹ dɛɾ əpɪɹd, stændɪŋ ɪn ɹɪŋz aʊtsaɪd ðə bɔɹɾɝz ə ðə stɛɾɪŋ, lʊkɪŋ ɪn. moʊs tʃɹʌbəlɪŋli, tʃɹiz fɛl ɪl, ən noʊ sɔŋ wəd hil ðɛm.

It soon became obvious, even within the stedding, that the Pattern was growing frail. The sky darkened. Our dead appeared, standing in rings outside the borders of the stedding, looking in. Most troublingly, trees fell ill, and no song would heal them.

ɪt wɑz ɪn ðɪs taɪm ə sɑɹoʊz ðəɾ aɪ stɛpt ʌp tə ðə ɡɹeɪt stʌmp. ət fɝst, aɪ wɑz fɔɹbɪɾən, bʌt maɪ mʌðɝ, koʊvɹəl, dɪmændəɾ aɪ hæv maɪ tʃæns. aɪ də nɑt noʊ wʌt spɑɹkt əɹ tʃeɪnʒ ə hɑɹt, əz ʃi hɝsɛlf hæɾ ɑɹɡjud kwaɪt dɪsaɪsɪvli fəɹ ði əpoʊzɪŋ saɪd. maɪ hænz ʃʊk. aɪ wəd bi ðə læst spikɝ, ən moʊst sim tə hæv ɔlɹɛɾi meɪɾ ʌp ðɛɹ maɪnz tə oʊpən ðə bʊk ə tʃɹænzleɪʃən. ðeɪ kənsɪɾɝd mi ən æftɝθɑt.

It was in this time of sorrows that I stepped up to the Great Stump. At first, I was forbidden, but my mother, Covril, demanded I have my chance. I do not know what sparked her change of heart, as she herself had argued quite decisively for the opposing side. My hands shook. I would be the last speaker, and most seemed to have already made up their minds to open the Book of Translation. They considered me an afterthought.

ən aɪ nu ðəɾ ənlɛs aɪ spoʊk tʃɹu, hjumænɪɾi wəd bi lɛft əloʊn tə feɪs ðə ʃædoʊ. ɪn ðət moʊmənt, maɪ nɝvəsnəs flɛd. aɪ fɛlt oʊnli ə stɪlnəs, ə kɑm sɛns ə pɝpəs. aɪ oʊpən maɪ maʊθ, ən aɪ bɪɡæn tə spik.

And I knew that unless I spoke true, humanity would be left alone to face the Shadow. In that moment, my nervousness fled. I felt only a stillness, a calm sense of purpose. I opened my mouth, and I began to speak.

 - fɹəm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, baɪ lɔɪəl, sʌn ʌv ɑɹən sʌn ə hɑlən, ʌv stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ 
 - from The Dragon Reborn, by Loial, son of Arent son of Halan, of Stedding Shangtai 
pɹoʊlɑɡ dɪstɪŋkʃənz



PROLOGUE Distinctions

mændɑɹbz hʊvz biɾ ə fəmɪljɝ ɹɪðəm ɑn bɹoʊkən ɡɹaʊn əz læn mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən ɹoʊd təwɔɹɾ ɪz dɛθ. ðə dʒɹaɪ ɛɹ meɪɾ ɪz θɹoʊt ɹʌf ən ði ɝθ wɑz spɹɪŋkəld waɪt wɪð kɹɪstəlz ə sɔl ðət pɹɪsɪpɪteɪɾɪd fɹəm bɪloʊ. dɪstən ɹɛd ɹɑk fɔɹmeɪʃənz lum tə ðə nɔɹθ, wɛɹ sɪknəs steɪn ðɛm. blaɪt mɑɹks, ə kɹipɪŋ dɑɹk laɪkən.

Mandarb's hooves beat a familiar rhythm on broken ground as Lan Mandragoran rode toward his death. The dry air made his throat rough and the earth was sprinkled white with crystals of salt that precipitated from below. Distant red rock formations loomed to the north, where sickness stained them. Blight marks, a creeping dark lichen.

hi kəntɪnjud ɹaɪɾɪŋ ist, pɛɹəlɛl tə ðə blaɪt. ðɪs wɑz stɪl sɑldɑiə, wɛɹ ɪz waɪf hæd dəpɑzɪɾɪd hɪm, oʊnli nɛɹoʊli kipɪŋ əɹ pɹɑməs tə teɪk ɪm tə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. ɪt hæd stʃɹɛtʃt bɪfɔɹ ɪm fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm, ðɪs ɹoʊd. hid tɝn əweɪ fɹəm ɪt twɛnti jɪɹz əɡoʊ, əɡɹiɪŋ tə fɑloʊ mɔɪɹeɪn, bʌt hiɾ ɔlweɪz noʊn i wəd ɹɪtɝn. ðɪs wɑz wʌɾ ɪt mɛn tə bɛɹ ðə neɪm ə hɪz fɑðɝz, ðə sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz hɪp, ən ðə hædɔɹi ɑn ɪz hɛd.

He continued riding east, parallel to the Blight. This was still Saldaea, where his wife had deposited him, only narrowly keeping her promise to take him to the Borderlands. It had stretched before him for a long time, this road. He'd turned away from it twenty years ago, agreeing to follow Moiraine, but he'd always known he would return. This was what it meant to bear the name of his fathers, the sword on his hip, and the hadori on his head.

ðɪs ɹɑki sɛkʃən ə nɔɹðɝn sɑldɑiə wɑz noʊn əz ðə pɹɔskə flæts. ɪt wɑz ə ɡɹɪm pleɪs tə ɹaɪd; nɑɾ ə plænt ɡɹu ɑn ɪt. ðə wɪn blu fɹəm ðə nɔɹθ, kæɹiɪŋ wɪð ɪɾ ə faʊl stɛntʃ. laɪk ðəɾ ʌv ə dip, swɛltɝɪŋ maɪɹ bloʊɾɪd wɪð kɔɹpsəz. ðə skaɪ oʊvɝhɛd stɔɹm dɑɹk, bɹuɾɪŋ.

This rocky section of northern Saldaea was known as the Proska Flats. It was a grim place to ride; not a plant grew on it. The wind blew from the north, carrying with it a foul stench. Like that of a deep, sweltering mire bloated with corpses. The sky overhead stormed dark, brooding.

ðət wʊmən, læn θɔt, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd. haʊ kwɪkli nɪneɪiv hæd lɝn tə tɔk, ən θɪŋk, laɪk ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɹaɪɾɪŋ tə hɪz dɛθ dɪdn peɪn hɪm, bʌt noʊɪŋ ʃi fɪɹd fəɹ ɪm . . . ðət dɪd hɝt. vɛɹi bædli.

That woman, Lan thought, shaking his head. How quickly Nynaeve had learned to talk, and think, like an Aes Sedai. Riding to his death didn't pain him, but knowing she feared for him . . . that did hurt. Very badly.

hi hædn sin ənʌðɝ pɝsən ɪn deɪz. ðə sɑldəiənz hæd fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃənz tə ðə saʊθ, bʌt ðə læn hɪɹ wɑz skɑɹd wɪð bɹoʊkən ɹeɪvinz ðət meɪɾ ɪt dɪfəkəl fəɹ tʃɹɑləks tə əsɔlt; ðeɪ pɹəfɝɾ ətækɪŋ nɪɹ mɛɹədɑn.

He hadn't seen another person in days. The Saldaeans had fortifications to the south, but the land here was scarred with broken ravines that made it difficult for Trollocs to assault; they preferred attacking near Maradon.

ðət wɑz noʊ ɹizən tə ɹɪlæks, haʊɛvɝ. wʌn ʃəd nɛvɝ ɹɪlæks, ðɪs kloʊs tə ðə blaɪt. hi noʊɾəd ə hɪltɑp; ðət wəd bi ə ɡʊd pleɪs fəɹ ə skaʊts poʊst. hi meɪd sɝɾən tə wɑtʃ ɪt fəɹ ɛni saɪn ə muvmənt. hi ɹoʊɾ ɝaʊn ə dɪpɹɛʃən ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs ɪt hɛld weɪɾɪŋ æm-bʊʃɝz. hi kɛpt ɪz hæn ɑn ɪz baʊ. wʌns i tʃɹævəld ə lɪɾəl fɑɹðɝ istwɝd, hid kʌt daʊn ɪndə sɑldɑiə ən kɹɔs kændɝ ɑn ɪts ɡʊd ɹoʊdweɪz. ðən -  səm ɡɹævəl ɹoʊl daʊn ə hɪlsaɪd nɪɹbaɪ.

That was no reason to relax, however. One should never relax, this close to the Blight. He noted a hilltop; that would be a good place for a scout's post. He made certain to watch it for any sign of movement. He rode around a depression in the ground, just in case it held waiting am-bushers. He kept his hand on his bow. Once he traveled a little farther eastward, he'd cut down into Saldaea and cross Kandor on its good roadways. Then -  Some gravel rolled down a hillside nearby.

læn kɛɹfəli slɪɾ ən æɹoʊ fɹəm ðə kwɪvɝ taɪd tə mændɑɹbz sæɾəl. wɛɹ hæd ðə saʊn kʌm fɹʌm? tə ðə ɹaɪt, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd. saʊθwɝd. ðə hɪlsaɪd ðɛɹ; sʌmwʌn wɑz əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ fɹəm bɪhaɪn ɪt.

Lan carefully slid an arrow from the quiver tied to Mandarb's saddle. Where had the sound come from? To the right, he decided. Southward. The hillside there; someone was approaching from behind it.

læn dɪd nɑt stɑp mændɑɹb. ɪf ðə hʊfbits tʃeɪnʒd, ɪt wəd ɡɪv wɔɹnɪŋ. hi kwaɪətli ɹeɪz ðə baʊ, filɪŋ ðə swɛɾ ə hɪz fɪŋɡɝz ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz fɔn-haɪd ɡlʌvz. hi nɑk ði æɹoʊ ən pʊl kɛɹfəli, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪt tə hɪz tʃik, bɹiðɪŋ ɪn ɪts sɛnt. ɡus fɛðɝz, ɹɛzən.

Lan did not stop Mandarb. If the hoofbeats changed, it would give warning. He quietly raised the bow, feeling the sweat of his fingers inside his fawn-hide gloves. He nocked the arrow and pulled carefully, raising it to his cheek, breathing in its scent. Goose feathers, resin.

ə fɪɡjɝ wɔkt ɝaʊn ðə sʌðɝn hɪlsaɪd. ðə mæn fɹoʊz, ən oʊld, ʃæɡi-meɪn pækhɔɹs wɔkɪŋ ɝaʊn bɪsaɪɾ ɪm ən kəntɪnjuɪŋ ɑn əhɛd. ɪt stɑpt oʊnli wən ðə ɹoʊp əɾ ɪts nɛk ɡɹu tɔt.

A figure walked around the southern hillside. The man froze, an old, shaggy-maned packhorse walking around beside him and continuing on ahead. It stopped only when the rope at its neck grew taut.

ðə mæn wɔɹ ə leɪs tæn ʃɝɾ ən dʌsti bɹitʃɪz. hi hæɾ ə sɔɹɾ əɾ ɪz weɪst, ən ɪz ɑɹmz wɝ θɪk ən stʃɹɔŋ, bʌɾ i dɪdn lʊk θɹɛɾənɪŋ. ɪn fækt, hi sim feɪnli fəmɪljɝ.

The man wore a laced tan shirt and dusty breeches. He had a sword at his waist, and his arms were thick and strong, but he didn't look threatening. In fact, he seemed faintly familiar.

"lɔɹd mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən!" ðə mæn sɛd, heɪsənɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, pʊlɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs æftɝ. "aɪv faʊn jə ət læst. aɪ əsum jud bi tʃɹævlɪŋ ðə kɹ-mɛɹ ɹoʊd!"

"Lord Mandragoran!" the man said, hastening forward, pulling his horse after. "I've found you at last. I assumed you'd be traveling the Kre-mer Road!"

læn loʊɝɾ ɪz baʊ ən stɑp mændɑɹb. "du aɪ noʊ ju?"

Lan lowered his bow and stopped Mandarb. "Do I know you?"

"aɪ bɹɔt səplaɪz, maɪ lɔɹd!" ðə mæn hæd blæk hɛɹ ən tæn skɪn. bɔɹɾɝləndɝ stɑk, pɹɑbli. hi kəntɪnjud fɔɹwɝd, oʊvɝiɡɝ, jæŋkɪŋ ɑn ði oʊvɝloʊɾɪd pækhɔɹsəz ɹoʊp wɪð ə θɪk- fɪŋɡɝd hænd. "aɪ fɪɡjɝd ðət jə wʊdn əv ɪnʌf fud. tɛns - fɔɹ ə ðɛm, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs - səm wɔɾɝ tu. fid fəɹ ðə hɔɹsəz. ən - "

"I brought supplies, my Lord!" The man had black hair and tanned skin. Borderlander stock, probably. He continued forward, overeager, yanking on the overloaded packhorse's rope with a thick- fingered hand. "I figured that you wouldn't have enough food. Tents - four of them, just in case - some water too. Feed for the horses. And - "

"hu ɑɹ ju?" læn bɑɹkt. "æn haʊ dʒju noʊ hu aɪ æm?"

"Who are you?" Lan barked. "And how do you know who I am?"

ðə mæn dʒɹu ʌp ʃɑɹpli. "aɪm bʌlən, maɪ lɔɹd. fɹəm kændɝ?"

The man drew up sharply. "I'm Bulen, my Lord. From Kandor?"

fɹəm kændɝ . . . læn ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ə ɡæŋli jʌŋ mɛsənʒɝ bɔɪ. wɪð sɝpɹaɪz, hi sɔ ðə ɹɪzɛmbləns. "bʌlən? ðət wɑz twɛnti jɪɹz əɡoʊ, mæn!"

From Kandor . . . Lan remembered a gangly young messenger boy. With surprise, he saw the resemblance. "Bulen? That was twenty years ago, man!"

"aɪ noʊ, lɔɹd mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən. bʌt wən wɝd spɹɛɾ ɪn ðə pæləs ðət ðə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn wɑz ɹeɪzd, aɪ nu wʌɾ aɪ hæd tə du. aɪv lɝn ðə sɔɹd wɛl, maɪ lɔɹd. aɪv kʌm tə ɹaɪd wɪð jə ænd  - "

"I know, Lord Mandragoran. But when word spread in the palace that the Golden Crane was raised, I knew what I had to do. I've learned the sword well, my Lord. I've come to ride with you and  - "

"ðə wɝɾ ə maɪ tʃɹævəl əz spɹɛd tə ɛɛzdeɪʃɝ?"

"The word of my travel has spread to Aesdaishar?"

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd. ɪlnineɪiv, ʃi keɪm tə ʌs, jə si. toʊld əs wʌt jud dʌn. ʌðɝz ɑɹ ɡæðɝɪŋ, bʌɾ aɪ lɛft fɝst. nu jud nid səplaɪz."

"Yes, my Lord. El'Nynaeve, she came to us, you see. Told us what you'd done. Others are gathering, but I left first. Knew you'd need supplies."

bɝn ðət wʊmən, læn θɔt. ən ʃid meɪɾ ɪm swɛɹ ðəɾ i wəɾ æksɛp ðoʊz u wɪʃt tə ɹaɪd wɪð hɪm! wɛl, ɪf ʃi kəd pleɪ ɡeɪmz wɪð ðə tʃɹuθ, ðən soʊ kəd hi. læn hæd sɛd hid teɪk ɛniwʌn u wɪʃt tə ɹaɪd wɪð hɪm. ðɪs mæn wɑz nɑt maʊntəd. ðɛɹfɔɹ, læn kəd ɹəfjuz hɪm. ə pɛɾi dɪstɪŋkʃən, bʌt twɛnti jɪɹz wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd tɔɾ ɪm ə fju θɪŋz əbaʊt haʊ tə wɑtʃ wʌnz wɝdz.

Burn that woman, Lan thought. And she'd made him swear that he would accept those who wished to ride with him! Well, if she could play games with the truth, then so could he. Lan had said he'd take anyone who wished to ride with him. This man was not mounted. Therefore, Lan could refuse him. A petty distinction, but twenty years with Aes Sedai had taught him a few things about how to watch one's words.

"ɡoʊ bæk tə ɛɛzdeɪʃɝ," læn sɛd. "tɛl əm ðət maɪ waɪf wɑz ɹɔŋ, ən aɪ hæv nɑt ɹeɪz ðə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn."

"Go back to Aesdaishar," Lan said. "Tell them that my wife was wrong, and I have not raised the Golden Crane."

"bʌt - "

"But - "

"aɪ doʊnt nid ju, sʌn. əweɪ wɪð ju." lænz hilz nʌdʒ mændɑɹb ɪndə ə wɔk, ən i pæs ðə mæn stændɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹoʊd. fəɹ ə fju moʊməns, læn θɔt ðəɾ ɪz ɔɹɾɝ wəd bi oʊbeɪd, ðoʊ ði ɪveɪʒən ə hɪz oʊθ pɹɪkt əɾ ɪz kɑnʃəns.

"I don't need you, son. Away with you." Lan's heels nudged Mandarb into a walk, and he passed the man standing on the road. For a few moments, Lan thought that his order would be obeyed, though the evasion of his oath pricked at his conscience.

"maɪ fɑðɝ wɑz mɔlkɪɹi," bʌlən sɛd fɹəm bɪhaɪnd.

"My father was Malkieri," Bulen said from behind.

læn kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn.

Lan continued on.

"hi daɪd wən aɪ wɑz faɪv," bʌlən kɔld. "hi mɛɹiɾ ə kændɔɹi wʊmən. ðeɪ boʊθ fɛl tə bændəts. aɪ doʊn ɹɪmɛmbɝ mʌtʃ ə ðɛm. oʊnli sʌmθɪŋ maɪ fɑðɝ toʊl mi: ðət sʌmdeɪ, wi wəd faɪt fəɹ ðə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn. ɔl aɪ hæv ə hɪm ɪz ðɪs."

"He died when I was five," Bulen called. "He married a Kandori woman. They both fell to bandits. I don't remember much of them. Only something my father told me: that someday, we would fight for the Golden Crane. All I have of him is this."

læn kʊdn hɛlp bʌt lʊk bæk əz mændɑɹb kəntɪnjud tə wɔk əweɪ. bʌlən hɛld ʌp ə θɪn stʃɹæp ə lɛðɝ, ðə hædɔɹi, wɔɹn ɑn ðə hɛɾ ʌv ə mɔlkɪɹi swɔɹn tə faɪt ðə ʃædoʊ.

Lan couldn't help but look back as Mandarb continued to walk away. Bulen held up a thin strap of leather, the hadori, worn on the head of a Malkieri sworn to fight the Shadow.

"aɪ wəd wɛɹ ðə hædɔɹi ʌv maɪ fɑðɝ," bʌlən kɔld, vɔɪs ɡɹoʊɪŋ laʊɾɝ. "bʌɾ aɪ hæv noʊbɑdi tə æsk ɪf aɪ meɪ. ðəɾ ɪz ðə tʃɹədɪʃən, ɪz ɪt nɑt? sʌmwʌn əz tə ɡɪmi ðə ɹaɪt tə dɑn ɪt. wɛl, aɪ wəd faɪt ðə ʃædoʊ ɔl maɪ deɪz." hi lʊk daʊn ət ðə hædɔɹi, ðən bæk ʌp əɡɛn ən jɛld, "aɪ wəd stæn əɡɛns ðə dɑɹknəs, ælən mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən! wɪl jə tɛl mi aɪ kænɑt?"

"I would wear the hadori of my father," Bulen called, voice growing louder. "But I have nobody to ask if I may. That is the tradition, is it not? Someone has to give me the right to don it. Well, I would fight the Shadow all my days." He looked down at the hadori, then back up again and yelled, "I would stand against the darkness, al'Lan Mandragoran! Will you tell me I cannot?"

"ɡoʊ tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," læn kɔl tə hɪm. "ɔɹ tə jəɹ kwinz ɑɹmi. iðɝ ə ðɛm wɪl teɪk ju."

"Go to the Dragon Reborn," Lan called to him. "Or to your queen's army. Either of them will take you."

"æn ju? jəl ɹaɪɾ ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə sɛvən taʊɝz wɪθaʊt səplaɪz?"

"And you? You will ride all the way to the Seven Towers without supplies?"

"aɪl fɔɹɪdʒ."

"I'll forage."

"pɑɹɾən mi, maɪ lɔɹd, bʌɾ əv jə sin ðə læn ðiz deɪz? ðə blaɪt kɹips fɑɹðɝ ən fɑɹðɝ saʊθ. nʌθɪŋ ɡɹoʊz, ivən ɪn wʌns-fɝɾəl lænz. ɡeɪm ɪz skɛɹs."

"Pardon me, my Lord, but have you seen the land these days? The Blight creeps farther and farther south. Nothing grows, even in once-fertile lands. Game is scarce."

læn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. hi ɹeɪn mændɑɹb ɪn.

Lan hesitated. He reined Mandarb in.

"ɔl ðoʊz jɪɹz əɡoʊ," bʌlən kɔld, wɔkɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, hɪz pækhɔɹs wɔkɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm. "aɪ hɑɹdli nu hu jə wɝ, ðoʊ aɪ noʊ jə lɔst sʌmwʌn dɪɹ tə jə əmʌŋ ʌs. aɪv spɛn jɪɹz kɝsɪŋ maɪsɛlf fəɹ nɑt sɝvɪŋ jə bɛɾɝ. aɪ swɔɹ ðəɾ aɪ wəd stænd wɪð jə sʌmdeɪ." hi wɔkt ʌp bɪsaɪd læn. "aɪ æsk jə kəz aɪ hæv noʊ fɑðɝ. meɪ aɪ wɛɹ ðə hædɔɹi ən faɪɾ ət jəɹ saɪd, ælən mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən? maɪ kɪŋ?"

"All those years ago," Bulen called, walking forward, his packhorse walking behind him. "I hardly knew who you were, though I know you lost someone dear to you among us. I've spent years cursing myself for not serving you better. I swore that I would stand with you someday." He walked up beside Lan. "I ask you because I have no father. May I wear the hadori and fight at your side, al'Lan Mandragoran? My King?"

læn bɹiðd aʊt sloʊli, stɪlɪŋ ɪz ɪmoʊʃənz. nɪneɪiv, wən nɛkst aɪ si jə . . . bʌɾ i wəd nɑt si hɝ əɡɛn. hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə dwɛl əpɑn ðæt.

Lan breathed out slowly, stilling his emotions. Nynaeve, when next I see you . . . But he would not see her again. He tried not to dwell upon that.

hi hæd meɪɾ ən oʊθ. ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪɡɡəld ɝaʊn ðɛɹ pɹɑməsəz, bʌt dɪd ðət ɡɪv ɪm ðə seɪm ɹaɪt? noʊ. ə mæn wɑz ɪz ɑnɝ. hi kəd nɑt dɪnaɪ bʌlən.

He had made an oath. Aes Sedai wiggled around their promises, but did that give him the same right? No. A man was his honor. He could not deny Bulen.

"wi ɹaɪɾ ənɑnəməsli," læn sɛd. "wi də nɑt ɹeɪz ðə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn. jə tɛl noʊbɑdi hu aɪ æm."

"We ride anonymously," Lan said. "We do not raise the Golden Crane. You tell nobody who I am."

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd," bʌlən sɛd.

"Yes, my Lord," Bulen said.

"ðɛn wɛɹ ðət hædɔɹi wɪð pɹaɪd," læn sɛd. "tu fju kip tə ði oʊld weɪz. ən jɛs, jə meɪ dʒɔɪn mi."

"Then wear that hadori with pride," Lan said. "Too few keep to the old ways. And yes, you may join me."

læn nʌdʒ mændɑɹb ɪndə moʊʃən, bʌlən fɑloʊɪŋ ɑn fʊt. ən ðə wʌn bɪkeɪm tu.

Lan nudged Mandarb into motion, Bulen following on foot. And the one became two.

pɛɹɪn slæmd ɪz hæmɝ əɡɛns ðə ɹɛd-hɑt lɛŋθ ʌv aɪɝn. spɑɹks spɹeɪɾ ɪndə ði ɛɹ laɪk ɪnkəndɛsən ɪnsɛks. swɛt biɾɪd ɑn ɪz feɪs.

Perrin slammed his hammer against the red-hot length of iron. Sparks sprayed into the air like incandescent insects. Sweat beaded on his face.

səm pipəl faʊn ðə klæŋ ə mɛɾəl əɡɛns mɛɾəl ɡɹeɪɾɪŋ. nɑt pɛɹɪn. ðət saʊnd wɑz suðɪŋ.

Some people found the clang of metal against metal grating. Not Perrin. That sound was soothing.

hi ɹeɪz ðə hæmɝ ən slæmd ɪt daʊn.

He raised the hammer and slammed it down.

spɑɹks. flaɪɪŋ tʃɪps ə laɪt ðət baʊnst ɔf ɪz lɛðɝ vɛst ən ɪz eɪpɹən. wɪð itʃ stʃɹaɪk, ðə wɔlz ə ðə ɹum - stɝɾi lɛðɝlif wʊd -  fʌzd, ɹɪspɑndɪŋ tə ðə bits ə mɛɾəl ɑn mɛɾəl. hi wɑz dʒɹimɪŋ, ðoʊ hi wɑzn ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. hi nu ðɪs, ðoʊ hi dɪdnt noʊ haʊ hi nu.

Sparks. Flying chips of light that bounced off his leather vest and his apron. With each strike, the walls of the room - sturdy leatherleaf wood -  fuzzed, responding to the beats of metal on metal. He was dreaming, though he wasn't in the wolf dream. He knew this, though he didn't know how he knew.

ðə wɪndoʊz wɝ dɑɹk; ði oʊnli laɪt wɑz ðəɾ ə ðə dip ɹɛd faɪɝ bɝnɪŋ ɑn ɪz ɹaɪt. tu bɑɹz ʌv aɪɝn sɪmɝɾ ɪn ðə koʊlz, weɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ tɝn ət ðə fɔɹdʒ. pɛɹɪn slæm ðə hæmɝ daʊn əɡɛn.

The windows were dark; the only light was that of the deep red fire burning on his right. Two bars of iron simmered in the coals, waiting their turn at the forge. Perrin slammed the hammer down again.

ðɪs wɑz pis. ðɪs wɑz hoʊm.

This was peace. This was home.

hi wɑz meɪkɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt. soʊ vɛɹi ɪmpɔɹɾənt. ɪt wɑz ə pis ə sʌmθɪŋ lɑɹdʒɝ. ðə fɝst stɛp tə kɹieɪɾɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ wɑz tə fɪɡjɝ aʊɾ ɪts pɑɹts. mæstɝ luhən hæd tɔt pɛɹɪn ðəɾ ɑn ɪz fɝs deɪ ət ðə fɔɹdʒ. jə kʊdn meɪk ə speɪd wɪθaʊɾ ʌndɝstændɪŋ haʊ ðə hændəl fɪt tə ðə bleɪd. jə kʊdn meɪk ə hɪnʒ wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ haʊ ðə tu livz muvd wɪð ðə pɪn. jə kʊdn ivən meɪk ə neɪl wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ ɪts pɑɹts: hɛd, ʃæft, pɔɪnt.

He was making something important. So very important. It was a piece of something larger. The first step to creating something was to figure out its parts. Master Luhhan had taught Perrin that on his first day at the forge. You couldn't make a spade without understanding how the handle fit to the blade. You couldn't make a hinge without knowing how the two leaves moved with the pin. You couldn't even make a nail without knowing its parts: head, shaft, point.

ʌndɝstæn ðə pisəz, pɛɹɪn.

Understand the pieces, Perrin.

ə wʊlf leɪ ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə ɹum. ɪt wɑz lɑɹdʒ ən ɡɹɪzəld, fɝ ðə kʌlɝ ʌv ə peɪl ɡɹeɪ ɹɪvɝ stoʊn, ən skɑɹd fɹəm ə laɪftaɪm ə bæɾəlz ən hʌns. ðə wʊlf leɪɾ ɪts hɛɾ ɑn ɪts pɔz, wɑtʃɪŋ pɛɹɪn. ðət wɑz nætʃɹəl. ʌv kɔɹs ðəɹ wɑz ə wʊlf ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ. waɪ wʊdn ðəɹ bi? ɪt wɑz hɑpɝ.

A wolf lay in the corner of the room. It was large and grizzled, fur the color of a pale gray river stone, and scarred from a lifetime of battles and hunts. The wolf laid its head on its paws, watching Perrin. That was natural. Of course there was a wolf in the corner. Why wouldn't there be? It was Hopper.

pɛɹɪn wɝkt, ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ ðə dip, bɝnɪŋ hiɾ ə ðə fɔɹdʒ, ðə fil ə ðə swɛt tʃɹeɪlɪŋ daʊn ɪz ɑɹmz, ðə sɛn ə ðə faɪɝ. hi ʃeɪp ðə lɛŋθ ʌv aɪɝn, wʌn bloʊ fəɹ ɛvɹi sɛkən biɾ ə hɪz hɑɹt.

Perrin worked, enjoying the deep, burning heat of the forge, the feel of the sweat trailing down his arms, the scent of the fire. He shaped the length of iron, one blow for every second beat of his heart.

ðə mɛɾəl nɛvɝ ɡɹu kul, bʌɾ ɪnstɛd ɹɪteɪn ɪts mæliəbəl ɹɛd-jɛloʊ.

The metal never grew cool, but instead retained its malleable red-yellow.

wʌɾ æm aɪ meɪkɪŋ? pɛɹɪn pɪkt ʌp ðə lɛŋθ ʌv ɡloʊɪŋ aɪɝn wɪð ɪz tɑŋz. ði ɛɹ wɔɹpt ɝaʊn ɪt.

What am I making? Perrin picked up the length of glowing iron with his tongs. The air warped around it.

paʊnd, paʊnd, paʊnd, hɑpɝ sɛnt, kəmjunəkeɪɾɪŋ ɪn ɪmədʒəz ən sɛns. laɪk ə pʌp dʒʌmpɪŋ ət bʌɾɝflaɪz.

Pound, pound, pound, Hopper sent, communicating in images and scents. Like a pup jumping at butterflies.

hɑpɝ dɪdn si ðə pɔɪn ə ɹiʃeɪpɪŋ mɛɾəl, ən faʊn ɪɾ əmjuzɪŋ ðət mɛn dɪd sətʃ θɪŋz. tə ə wʊlf, ə θɪŋ wɑz wʌɾ ɪt wɑz. waɪ ɡoʊ θɹu soʊ mʌtʃ ɛfɝt tə tʃeɪnʒ ɪɾ ɪndə sʌmθɪŋ ɛls?

Hopper didn't see the point of reshaping metal, and found it amusing that men did such things. To a wolf, a thing was what it was. Why go through so much effort to change it into something else?

pɛɹɪn sɛt ðə lɛŋθ ʌv aɪɝn əsaɪd. ɪt kuld ɪmiɾiətli, feɪɾɪŋ fɹəm jɛloʊ, tə ɔɹənʒ, tə kɹɪmzən, tə ə dʌl blæk. pɛɹɪn hæd paʊndɪɾ ɪɾ ɪndə ə mɪsʃeɪpən nʌɡɪt, pɝhæps ðə saɪz ə tu fɪsts.

Perrin set the length of iron aside. It cooled immediately, fading from yellow, to orange, to crimson, to a dull black. Perrin had pounded it into a misshapen nugget, perhaps the size of two fists.

mæstɝ luhən wəd bi əʃeɪm tə si sətʃ ʃɑɾi wɝk. pɛɹɪn niɾəd tə dɪskʌvɝ wʌɾ i wɑz meɪkɪŋ sun, bɪfɔɹ ɪz mæstɝ ɹɪtɝnd.

Master Luhhan would be ashamed to see such shoddy work. Perrin needed to discover what he was making soon, before his master returned.

noʊ. ðət wɑz ɹɔŋ. ðə dʒɹim ʃʊk, ən ðə wɔlz ɡɹu mɪsti.

No. That was wrong. The dream shook, and the walls grew misty.

aɪm nɑɾ ən əpɹɛntəs. pɛɹɪn ɹeɪzd ə θɪk-ɡlʌv hæn tə hɪz hɛd. aɪm nɑɾ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. ɪm ə mæn, ə mɛɹid mæn.

I'm not an apprentice. Perrin raised a thick-gloved hand to his head. I'm not in the Two Rivers any longer. I'm a man, a married man.

pɛɹɪn ɡɹæb ðə lʌmp ʌv ənʃeɪpt aɪɝn wɪð ɪz tɑŋz, θɹʌstɪŋ ɪt daʊn ɑn ði ænvəl. ɪt flɛɹd tə laɪf wɪð hit. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪz stɪl ɹɔŋ. pɛɹɪn smæʃt ɪz hæmɝ daʊn. ɪt ʃəɾ ɔl bi bɛɾɝ naʊ! bʌɾ ɪɾ ɪzənt. ɪt simz wɝs sʌmhaʊ.

Perrin grabbed the lump of unshaped iron with his tongs, thrusting it down on the anvil. It flared to life with heat. Everything is still wrong. Perrin smashed his hammer down. It should all be better now! But it isn't. It seems worse somehow.

hi kəntɪnjud paʊndɪŋ. hi heɪɾəd ðoʊz ɹumɝz ðət ðə mɛn ɪn kæmp wɪspɝɾ əbaʊt hɪm. pɛɹɪn hæd bɪn sɪk ən bɹəleɪn hæd kɛɹd fəɹ hɪm. ðət wɑz ði ɛn ʌv ɪt. bʌt stɪl ðoʊz wɪspɝz kəntɪnjud.

He continued pounding. He hated those rumors that the men in camp whispered about him. Perrin had been sick and Berelain had cared for him. That was the end of it. But still those whispers continued.

hi slæmd ɪz hæmɝ daʊn oʊvɝ ən oʊvɝ. spɑɹks flu ɪn ði ɛɹ laɪk splæʃəz ʌv wɔɾɝ, fɑɹ tu mɛni tə kʌm fɹəm wʌn lɛŋθ ʌv aɪɝn. hi ɡeɪv wʌn faɪnəl stʃɹaɪk, ðən bɹiðd ɪn ən aʊt.

He slammed his hammer down over and over. Sparks flew in the air like splashes of water, far too many to come from one length of iron. He gave one final strike, then breathed in and out.

ðə lʌmp hædn tʃeɪnʒd. pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld ən ɡɹæb ðə tɑŋz, sɛɾɪŋ ðə lʌmp əsaɪɾ ən teɪkɪŋ ə fɹɛʃ bɑɹ fɹəm ðə koʊlz. hi hæd tə fɪnɪʃ ðɪs pis. ɪt wɑz soʊ ɪmpɔɹɾənt. bʌt wʌt wɑz i meɪkɪŋ?

The lump hadn't changed. Perrin growled and grabbed the tongs, setting the lump aside and taking a fresh bar from the coals. He had to finish this piece. It was so important. But what was he making?

hi stɑɹɾəd paʊndɪŋ. aɪ nid tə spɛn taɪm wɪð feɪl, tə fɪɡjɝ θɪŋz aʊt, ɹimuv ði ɔkwɝdnəs bɪtwin ʌs. bʌt ðɛɹz noʊ taɪm! ðoʊz laɪt-blaɪndɪd fulz ɝaʊn ɪm kʊdn teɪk kɛɹ ə ðɛmsɛlvz. noʊbɑdi ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɛvɝ niɾəd ə lɔɹd bɪfɔɹ.

He started pounding. I need to spend time with Faile, to figure things out, remove the awkwardness between us. But there's no time! Those Light-blinded fools around him couldn't take care of themselves. Nobody in the Two Rivers ever needed a lord before.

hi wɝk fəɹ ə taɪm, ðən hɛld ʌp ðə sɛkən tʃʌŋk ʌv aɪɝn. ɪt kuld, tɝnɪŋ ɪndə ə mɪsʃeɪpən, flæɾənd lɛŋθ əbaʊɾ əz lɔŋ əz ɪz fɔɹɑɹm. ənʌðɝ ʃɑɾi pis. hi sɛɾ ɪɾ əsaɪd.

He worked for a time, then held up the second chunk of iron. It cooled, turning into a misshapen, flattened length about as long as his forearm. Another shoddy piece. He set it aside.

ɪf jə ɑɹ ənhæpi, hɑpɝ sɛnt, teɪk jəɹ ʃi ən liv. ɪf jə də nɑt wɪʃ tə lid ðə pæk, ənʌðɝ wɪl. ðə wʊlfs sɛndɪŋ keɪm əz ɪmədʒəz ə ɹʌnɪŋ əkɹɔs oʊpən filz, stɔks ʌv ɡɹeɪn bɹʌʃɪŋ əlɔŋ ɪz snaʊt. ən oʊpən skaɪ, ə kul bɹiz, ə θɹɪl ən lʌs fəɹ ædvɛntʃɝ. ðə sɛns ə nu ɹeɪn, ʌv waɪl pæstʃɝz.

If you are unhappy, Hopper sent, take your she and leave. If you do not wish to lead the pack, another will. The wolf's sending came as images of running across open fields, stalks of grain brushing along his snout. An open sky, a cool breeze, a thrill and lust for adventure. The scents of new rain, of wild pastures.

pɛɹɪn ɹitʃt ɪz tɑŋz ɪndə ðə koʊlz fəɹ ðə faɪnəl bɑɹ ʌv aɪɝn. ɪt bɝn ə dɪstənt, deɪnʒɝəs jɛloʊ. "aɪ kæn liv." hi hɛl ðə bɑɹ ʌp təwɔɹd ðə wʊlf. "ɪt wəd min ɡɪvɪŋ ɪn tə biɪŋ ə wʊlf.

Perrin reached his tongs into the coals for the final bar of iron. It burned a distant, dangerous yellow. "I can't leave." He held the bar up toward the wolf. "It would mean giving in to being a wolf.

ɪt wəd min luzɪŋ maɪsɛlf. aɪ woʊn də ðæt."

It would mean losing myself. I won't do that."

hi hɛl ðə nɪɹ-moʊltən stil bɪtwin ðɛm, ən hɑpɝ wɑtʃt ɪt, jɛloʊ pɪnpɹɪks ə laɪt ɹəflɛktɪŋ ɪn ðə wʊlfs aɪz. ðɪs dʒɹim wɑz soʊ ɑd. ɪn ðə pæst, pɛɹɪnz ɔɹɾənɛɹi dʒɹimz ən ðə wʊlf dʒɹim hæd bɪn sɛpɹət. wʌd ðɪs blɛndɪŋ min?

He held the near-molten steel between them, and Hopper watched it, yellow pinpricks of light reflecting in the wolf's eyes. This dream was so odd. In the past, Perrin's ordinary dreams and the wolf dream had been separate. What did this blending mean?

pɛɹɪn wɑz əfɹeɪd. hid kʌm tə ə pɹikɛɹiəs tʃɹus wɪð ðə wʊlf ɪnsaɪɾ ə hɪm. ɡɹoʊɪŋ tu kloʊs tə ðə wʊlvz wɑz deɪnʒɝəs, bʌt ðət hædn pɹɪvɛntɪɾ ɪm tɝnɪŋ tə ðɛm wən sikɪŋ feɪl.

Perrin was afraid. He'd come to a precarious truce with the wolf inside of him. Growing too close to the wolves was dangerous, but that hadn't prevented him turning to them when seeking Faile.

ɛniθɪŋ fəɹ feɪl. ɪn duɪŋ soʊ, pɛɹɪn hæd nɪɹli ɡɔn mæd, ən hæɾ ivən tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl hɑpɝ.

Anything for Faile. In doing so, Perrin had nearly gone mad, and had even tried to kill Hopper.

pɛɹɪn wɑznt nɪɹli əz ɪn kəntʃɹoʊl əz hiɾ əsumd. ðə wʊlf wɪðɪn ɪm kəd stɪl ɹeɪn.

Perrin wasn't nearly as in control as he'd assumed. The wolf within him could still reign.

hɑpɝ jɔnd, lɛɾɪŋ ɪz tʌŋ lɑl. hi smɛld ə swiɾ əmjuzmənt.

Hopper yawned, letting his tongue loll. He smelled of sweet amusement.

"ðɪs ɪz nɑt fʌni." pɛɹɪn sɛt ðə faɪnəl bɑɹ əsaɪd wɪθaʊt wɝkɪŋ ɑn ɪt. ɪt kuld, teɪkɪŋ ɑn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə θɪn ɹɛktæŋɡəl, nɑɾ ənlaɪk ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋz ʌv ə hɪnʒ.

"This is not funny." Perrin set the final bar aside without working on it. It cooled, taking on the shape of a thin rectangle, not unlike the beginnings of a hinge.

pɹɑbləmz ɑɹ nɑɾ əmjuzɪŋ, jʌŋ bʊl, hɑpɝ əɡɹid. bʌt jə ɑɹ klaɪmɪŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ oʊvɝ ðə seɪm wɔl. kʌm. lɛɾ əs ɹʌn.

Problems are not amusing, Young Bull, Hopper agreed. But you are climbing back and forth over the same wall. Come. Let us run.

wʊlvz lɪvd ɪn ðə moʊmənt; ðoʊ ðeɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə pæst ən sim tə hæv ən ɑd sɛns fəɹ ðə fjutʃɝ, ðeɪ dɪdnt wɝi əbaʊɾ iðɝ. nɑɾ əz mɛn dɪd. wʊlvz ɹæn fɹi, tʃeɪsɪŋ ðə wɪnz. tə dʒɔɪn əm wəd bi tə ɪɡnɔɹ peɪn, sɑɹoʊ ən fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. tə bi fɹi . . .

Wolves lived in the moment; though they remembered the past and seemed to have an odd sense for the future, they didn't worry about either. Not as men did. Wolves ran free, chasing the winds. To join them would be to ignore pain, sorrow and frustration. To be free . . .

ðət fɹiɾəm wəd kɑs pɛɹɪn tu mʌtʃ. hid luz feɪl, wəd luz ɪz vɛɹi sɛlf i dɪdnt wɑnə bi ə wʊlf. hi wɑntəd tə bi ə mæn. "ɪz ðəɹ ə weɪ tə ɹɪvɝs wʌɾ əz hæpən tə mi?"

That freedom would cost Perrin too much. He'd lose Faile, would lose his very self He didn't want to be a wolf. He wanted to be a man. "Is there a way to reverse what has happened to me?"

ɹɪvɝs? hɑpɝ kɑkt ɪz hɛd. tə ɡoʊ bækwɝd wɑz nɑɾ ə weɪ ʌv wʊlvz.

Reverse? Hopper cocked his head. To go backward was not a way of wolves.

"kæn aɪ . . ." pɛɹɪn stʃɹʌɡəl tə ɪkspleɪn. "kæn aɪ ɹʌn soʊ fɑɹ ðət ðə wʊlvz kænɑt hɪɹ mi?"

"Can I . . ." Perrin struggled to explain. "Can I run so far that the wolves cannot hear me?"

hɑpɝ sim kənfjuzd. noʊ. "kənfjuzd" dɪd nɑt kənveɪ ðə peɪn sɛndɪŋz ðət keɪm fɹəm hɑpɝ. nʌθɪŋnəs, ðə sɛn ə ɹɑɾɪŋ mit, wʊlvz haʊlɪŋ ɪn æɡəni. biɪŋ kʌɾ ɔf wɑz nɑɾ ə θɪŋ hɑpɝ kəd kənsiv.

Hopper seemed confused. No. "Confused" did not convey the pained sendings that came from Hopper. Nothingness, the scent of rotting meat, wolves howling in agony. Being cut off was not a thing Hopper could conceive.

pɛɹɪnz maɪnd ɡɹu mzi. waɪ hæɾ i stɑp fɔɹdʒɪŋ? hi hæd tə fɪnɪʃ. mæstɝ luhən wəd bi dɪsəpɔɪntɪd! ðoʊz lʌmps wɝ tɛɹəbəl. hi ʃəd haɪd ðɛm. kɹieɪt sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, ʃoʊ hi wɑz keɪpəbəl. hi kəd fɔɹdʒ. kʊdn hi?

Perrin's mind grew mzzy. Why had he stopped forging? He had to finish. Master Luhhan would be disappointed! Those lumps were terrible. He should hide them. Create something else, show he was capable. He could forge. Couldn't he?

ə hɪsɪŋ keɪm fɹəm bɪsaɪd hɪm. pɛɹɪn tɝnd, sɝpɹaɪz tə si ðət wʌn ə ðə kwɛntʃɪŋ bæɹəlz bɪsaɪd ðə hɑɹθ wɑz bɔɪlɪŋ. ʌv kɔɹs, hi θɔt. ðə fɝs pisəz aɪ fɪnɪʃt. aɪ dʒɹɑpt əm ɪn ðɛɹ.

A hissing came from beside him. Perrin turned, surprised to see that one of the quenching barrels beside the hearth was boiling. Of course, he thought. The first pieces I finished. I dropped them in there.

sʌɾənli æŋkʃəs, pɛɹɪn ɡɹæbd ɪz tɑŋz ən ɹitʃt ɪndə ðə tɝbjələnt wɔɾɝ, stim ɪnɡʌlfɪŋ ɪz feɪs. hi faʊn sʌmθɪŋ ət ðə bɑɾəm ən bɹɔɾ ɪɾ aʊt wɪð ɪz tɑŋz: ə tʃʌŋk ʌv waɪt-hɑt mɛɾəl.

Suddenly anxious, Perrin grabbed his tongs and reached into the turbulent water, steam engulfing his face. He found something at the bottom and brought it out with his tongs: a chunk of white-hot metal.

ðə ɡloʊ feɪɾəd. ðə tʃʌŋk wɑz æktʃəli  ə smɔl stil fɪɡjɝin ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə tɔl, θɪn mæn wɪð ə sɔɹd taɪd tə hɪz bæk. itʃ laɪn ɑn ðə fɪɡjɝ wɑz dɪteɪld, ðə ɹʌfəlz ə ðə ʃɝt, ðə lɛðɝ bænz ɑn ðə hɪlt ə ðə taɪni sɔɹd. bʌt ðə feɪs wɑz dɪstɔɹɾəd, ðə maʊθ oʊpən ɪn ə twɪstəd skɹim.

The glow faded. The chunk was actually a small steel figurine in the shape of a tall, thin man with a sword tied to his back. Each line on the figure was detailed, the ruffles of the shirt, the leather bands on the hilt of the tiny sword. But the face was distorted, the mouth open in a twisted scream.

ɛɹæm, pɛɹɪn θɔt. hɪz neɪm wɑz ɛɹæm.

Aram, Perrin thought. His name was Aram.

pɛɹɪn kʊdnt ʃoʊ ðɪs tə mæstɝ luhən! waɪ hæɾ i kɹieɪɾəd sətʃ ə θɪŋ?

Perrin couldn't show this to Master Luhhan! Why had he created such a thing?

ðə fɪɡjɝinz maʊθ oʊpən fɑɹðɝ, skɹimɪŋ saʊnləsli. pɛɹɪn kɹaɪɾ aʊt, dʒɹɑpɪŋ ɪt fɹəm ðə tɑŋz ən dʒʌmpɪŋ bæk. ðə fɪɡjɝin fɛl tə ðə wʊd flɔɹ ən ʃæɾɝd.

The figurine's mouth opened farther, screaming soundlessly. Perrin cried out, dropping it from the tongs and jumping back. The figurine fell to the wood floor and shattered.

waɪ dʒju θɪŋk soʊ mʌtʃ əbaʊt ðət wʌn? hɑpɝ jɔn ə waɪd-dʒɔd wʊlf jɔn, tʌŋ kɝlɪŋ. ɪts kɑmən ðəɾ ə jʌŋ pʌp tʃælənʒɪz ðə pæk liɾɝ. hi wɑz fulɪʃ, ən jə dɪfiɾəd hɪm.

Why do you think so much about that one? Hopper yawned a wide-jawed wolf yawn, tongue curling. It is common that a young pup challenges the pack leader. He was foolish, and you defeated him.

"noʊ," pɛɹɪn wɪspɝd. "ɪɾ ɪz nɑt kɑmən fəɹ hjumənz. nɑt fəɹ fɹɛnz."

"No," Perrin whispered. "It is not common for humans. Not for friends."

ðə wɔl ə ðə fɔɹdʒ sʌɾənli mɛltəɾ əweɪ, bɪkʌmɪŋ smoʊk. ɪt fɛl nætʃɹəl fəɹ ðət tə hæpən.

The wall of the forge suddenly melted away, becoming smoke. It felt natural for that to happen.

aʊtsaɪd, pɛɹɪn sɔ ən oʊpən, deɪlɪt stʃɹit. ə sɪɾi wɪð bɹoʊkən-wɪndoʊd ʃɑps.

Outside, Perrin saw an open, daylit street. A city with broken-windowed shops.

"meɪɾən," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Maiden," Perrin said.

ə smoʊki, tʃɹænslusən ɪmədʒ ə hɪmsɛlf stʊɾ aʊtsaɪd. ði ɪmədʒ wɔɹ noʊ koʊt; hɪz bɛɹ ɑɹmz bʌlʒd wɪð mʌsəlz. hi kɛpt ɪz bɪɹd ʃɔɹt, bʌɾ ɪt meɪɾ ɪm lʊk oʊldɝ, mɔɹ ɪntɛns. dɪd pɛɹɪn ɹɪli lʊk ðəɾ ɪmpoʊzɪŋ? ə skwɑt fɔɹtʃɹəs ʌv ə mæn wɪð ɡoʊldən aɪz ðət sim tə ɡloʊ, kæɹiɪŋ ə ɡlimɪŋ hæf-mun æks əz lɑɹdʒ əz ə mænz hɛd.

A smoky, translucent image of himself stood outside. The image wore no coat; his bare arms bulged with muscles. He kept his beard short, but it made him look older, more intense. Did Perrin really look that imposing? A squat fortress of a man with golden eyes that seemed to glow, carrying a gleaming half-moon axe as large as a man's head.

ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ əbaʊt ðəɾ æks. pɛɹɪn stɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə smɪθi, pæsɪŋ θɹu ðə ʃæɾoʊi vɝʒən ə hɪmsɛlf. wən i dɪd, hi bɪkeɪm ðəɾ ɪmədʒ, æks hɛvi ɪn ɪz hænd, wɝk kloʊðz vænɪʃɪŋ ən bæɾəl ɡɪɹ ɹɪpleɪsɪŋ ɪt.

There was something wrong about that axe. Perrin stepped out of the smithy, passing through the shadowy version of himself. When he did, he became that image, axe heavy in his hand, work clothes vanishing and battle gear replacing it.

hi tʊk ɔf ɹʌnɪŋ. jɛs, ðɪs wɑz meɪɾən. ðəɹ wɝ il ɪn ðə stʃɹits. hid lɪv ðɪs bæɾəl, ðoʊ hi wɑz mʌtʃ kɑmɝ ðɪs taɪm. bɪfɔɹ, hid bɪn lɔst ɪn ðə θɹɪl ə faɪɾɪŋ ən ə sikɪŋ feɪl. hi stɑpt ɪn ðə stʃɹit. "ðɪs ɪz ɹɔŋ. aɪ kæɹid maɪ hæmɝ ɪndə meɪɾən. aɪ θɹu ði æks əweɪ."

He took off running. Yes, this was Maiden. There were Aiel in the streets. He'd lived this battle, though he was much calmer this time. Before, he'd been lost in the thrill of fighting and of seeking Faile. He stopped in the street. "This is wrong. I carried my hammer into Maiden. I threw the axe away."

ə hɔɹn əɹ ə huf, jʌŋ bʊl, dʌz ɪt mæɾɝ wɪtʃ wʌn jə jus tə hʌnt? hɑpɝ wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌnlɪt stʃɹit bɪsaɪd hɪm.

A horn or a hoof, Young Bull, does it matter which one you use to hunt? Hopper was sitting in the sunlit street beside him.

"jɛs. ɪt mæɾɝz. ɪt dʌz tə mi."

"Yes. It matters. It does to me."

ən jɛt jə juz əm ðə seɪm weɪ.

And yet you use them the same way.

ə pɛɹ ə ʃeɪɾoʊ il əpɪɹɾ ɝaʊn ə kɔɹnɝ. ðeɪ wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ tə ðə lɛft, sʌmθɪŋ pɛɹɪn kʊdn si. hi ɹæn tə ətæk ðɛm.

A pair of Shaido Aiel appeared around a corner. They were watching something to the left, something Perrin couldn't see. He ran to attack them.

hi ʃɪɹd θɹu ðə tʃɪn ʌv wʌn, ðən swʌŋ ðə spaɪk ɑn ði æks ɪndə ðə tʃɛst ə ði ʌðɝ. ɪt wɑz ə bɹuɾəl, tɛɹəbəl ətæk, ən ɔl θɹi ʌv əm ɛndəɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ɪt tʊk sɛvɹəl stæbz fɹəm ðə spaɪk tə kɪl ðə sɛkənd ʃeɪɾoʊ.

He sheared through the chin of one, then swung the spike on the axe into the chest of the other. It was a brutal, terrible attack, and all three of them ended on the ground. It took several stabs from the spike to kill the second Shaido.

pɛɹɪn stʊɾ ʌp. hi dɪd ɹɪmɛmbɝ kɪlɪŋ ðoʊz tu il, ðoʊ hi hæd dʌn ɪt wɪð hæmɝ ən naɪf. hi dɪdn ɹəɡɹɛt ðɛɹ dɛθs. səmtaɪmz ə mæn niɾəd tə faɪt, ən ðət wɑz ðæt. dɛθ wɑz tɛɹəbəl, bʌt ðət dɪdn stɑp ɪt fɹəm biɪŋ nɛsəsɛɹi. ɪn fækt, ɪt hæd bɪn wʌndɝfəl tə klæʃ wɪð ði il. hid fɛlt laɪk ə wʊlf ɑn ðə hʌnt.

Perrin stood up. He did remember killing those two Aiel, though he had done it with hammer and knife. He didn't regret their deaths. Sometimes a man needed to fight, and that was that. Death was terrible, but that didn't stop it from being necessary. In fact, it had been wonderful to clash with the Aiel. He'd felt like a wolf on the hunt.

wən pɛɹɪn fɔt, hi keɪm kloʊs tə bɪkʌmɪŋ sʌmwʌn ɛls. ən ðət wɑz deɪnʒɝəs.

When Perrin fought, he came close to becoming someone else. And that was dangerous.

hi lʊkt əkjuzɪŋli ət hɑpɝ, hu laʊnʒd ɑn ə stʃɹit kɔɹnɝ. "waɪ ɑɹ jə meɪkɪŋ mi dʒɹim ðɪs?"

He looked accusingly at Hopper, who lounged on a street corner. "Why are you making me dream this?"

meɪkɪŋ ju? hɑpɝ æskt. ðɪs ɪz nɑt maɪ dʒɹim, jʌŋ bʊl. dʒju si maɪ dʒɔz ɑn jəɹ nɛk, fɔɹsɪŋ jə tə θɪŋk ɪt?

Making you? Hopper asked. This is not my dream, Young Bull. Do you see my jaws on your neck, forcing you to think it?

pɛɹɪnz æks stʃɹimd wɪð blʌd. hi nu wʌt wɑz kʌmɪŋ nɛkst. hi tɝnd. fɹəm bɪhaɪnd, ɛɹæm əpɹoʊtʃt, mɝɾɝ ɪn ɪz aɪz. hæf ə ðə fɔɹmɝ tɪŋkɝz feɪs wɑz koʊɾəd ɪn blʌd, ən ɪt dʒɹɪp fɹəm ɪz tʃɪn, steɪnɪŋ ɪz ɹɛd-stʃɹaɪp koʊt.

Perrin's axe streamed with blood. He knew what was coming next. He turned. From behind, Aram approached, murder in his eyes. Half of the former Tinker's face was coated in blood, and it dripped from his chin, staining his red-striped coat.

ɛɹæm swʌŋ ɪz sɔɹd fəɹ pɛɹɪnz nɛk, ðə stil hɪsɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ. pɛɹɪn stɛp bæk. hi ɹəfjuz tə faɪt ðə bɔɪ əɡɛn.

Aram swung his sword for Perrin's neck, the steel hissing in the air. Perrin stepped back. He refused to fight the boy again.

ðə ʃæɾoʊi vɝʒən ə hɪmsɛlf splɪɾ ɔf, livɪŋ ðə ɹil pɛɹɪn ɪn ɪz blæksmɪθs kloʊðɪŋ. ðə ʃædoʊ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd bloʊz wɪð ɛɹæm. ðə pɹɑfəɾ ɪkspleɪn ɪt tə mi . . . jəɹ ɹɪli ʃæɾoʊzpɔn. . . . wʌn əv tə ɹɛskju ðə leɪɾi feɪl fɹəm ju. . . .

The shadowy version of himself split off, leaving the real Perrin in his blacksmith's clothing. The shadow exchanged blows with Aram. The Prophet explained it to me . . . You're really Shadowspawn. . . . 1 have to rescue the Lady Faile from you. . . .

ðə ʃæɾoʊi pɛɹɪn tʃeɪnʒd, sʌɾənli, ɪndə ə wʊlf. ɪt lɛpt, fɝ nɪɹli əz dɑɹk əz ðəɾ ʌv ə ʃæɾoʊbɹəðɝ, ən ɹɪpt aʊɾ ɛɹæmz θɹoʊt.

The shadowy Perrin changed, suddenly, into a wolf. It leaped, fur nearly as dark as that of a Shadowbrother, and ripped out Aram's throat.

"noʊ! ɪt dɪdn hæpən laɪk ðæt!"

"No! It didn't happen like that!"

ɪts ə dʒɹim, hɑpɝ sɛnt.

It is a dream, Hopper sent.

"bʌɾ aɪ dɪdn kɪl hɪm," pɛɹɪn pɹətɛstəd. "sʌm il ʃɑɾ ɪm wɪð æɹoʊz ɹaɪt bɪfɔɹ. . . ."

"But I didn't kill him," Perrin protested. "Some Aiel shot him with arrows right before. . . ."

ɹaɪt bɪfɔɹ ɛɹæm wʊɾə kɪl pɛɹɪn.

Right before Aram would have killed Perrin.

ðə hɔɹn, ðə huf, əɹ ðə tuθ, hɑpɝ sɛnt, tɝnɪŋ ən æmbəlɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ə bɪldɪŋ. ɪts wɔl vænɪʃt, ɹɪvilɪŋ mæstɝ luhənz smɪθi ɪnsaɪd. dʌz ɪt mæɾɝ? ðə dɛɾ ɑɹ dɛd. tu-lɛɡz də nɑt kʌm hɪɹ, nɑt juʒəwəli, wʌns ðeɪ daɪ. aɪ də nɑt noʊ wɛɹ ɪts ðət ðeɪ ɡoʊ.

The horn, the hoof, or the tooth, Hopper sent, turning and ambling toward a building. Its wall vanished, revealing Master Luhhan's smithy inside. Does it matter? The dead are dead. Two-legs do not come here, not usually, once they die. I do not know where it is that they go.

pɛɹɪn lʊk daʊn əɾ ɛɹæmz bɑɾi. "aɪ ʃʊɾə teɪkən ðət ful sɔɹd fɹəm ɪm ðə moʊmən i pɪkt ɪɾ ʌp. aɪ ʃʊɾə sɛn ɪm bæk tə hɪz fæmli."

Perrin looked down at Aram's body. "I should have taken that fool sword from him the moment he picked it up. I should have sent him back to his family."

dʌz nɑɾ ə kʌb dɪzɝv ɪz fæŋz? hɑpɝ æskt, dʒɛnjəwənli kənfjuzd. waɪ wəd jə pʊl ðɛm?

Does not a cub deserve his fangs? Hopper asked, genuinely confused. Why would you pull them?

"ɪɾ ɪz ə θɪŋ ə mɛn," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"It is a thing of men," Perrin said.

θɪŋz ə tu-lɛɡz, ʌv mɛn. ɔlweɪz, ɪts ə θɪŋ ə mɛn tə ju. wʌɾ ə θɪŋz ʌv wʊlvz?

Things of two-legs, of men. Always, it is a thing of men to you. What of things of wolves?

"aɪ æm nɑɾ ə wʊlf."

"I am not a wolf."

hɑpɝ ɛntɝd ðə fɔɹdʒ, ən pɛɹɪn ɹɪlʌktənli fɑloʊd. ðə bæɹəl wɑz stɪl bɔɪlɪŋ. ðə wɔl ɹɪtɝnd, ən pɛɹɪn wɑz wʌns əɡɛn wɛɹɪŋ ɪz lɛðɝ vɛst ən eɪpɹən, hoʊldɪŋ ɪz tɑŋz.

Hopper entered the forge, and Perrin reluctantly followed. The barrel was still boiling. The wall returned, and Perrin was once again wearing his leather vest and apron, holding his tongs.

hi stɛpt oʊvɝ ən pʊld aʊɾ ənʌðɝ fɪɡjɝin. ðɪs wʌn wɑz ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ə tɑɾ ɑlkɑɹ. əz ɪt kuld, pɛɹɪn faʊn ðət ðə feɪs wɑzn dɪstɔɹɾəd laɪk ɛɹæmz, ðoʊ ðə loʊɝ hæf ə ðə fɪɡjɝin wɑz ənfɔɹmd, stɪl ə blɑk ə mɛɾəl. ðə fɪɡjɝin kəntɪnjud tə ɡloʊ, feɪnli ɹɛɾɪʃ, æftɝ pɛɹɪn sɛɾ ɪt daʊn ɑn ðə flɔɹ. hi θɹʌst ɪz tɑŋz bæk ɪndə ðə wɔɾɝ ən pʊl fɹi ə fɪɡjɝ ə dʒɔɹi kɔŋɡɝ, ðən wʌn ʌv ɑzi ælθoʊn.

He stepped over and pulled out another figurine. This one was in the shape of Tod al'Caar. As it cooled, Perrin found that the face wasn't distorted like Aram's, though the lower half of the figurine was unformed, still a block of metal. The figurine continued to glow, faintly reddish, after Perrin set it down on the floor. He thrust his tongs back into the water and pulled free a figure of Jori Congar, then one of Azi al'Thone.

pɛɹɪn wɛn tə ðə bʌbəlɪŋ bæɹəl taɪm ən taɪm əɡɛn, pʊlɪŋ aʊt fɪɡjɝin æftɝ fɪɡjɝin. æftɝ ðə weɪ ʌv dʒɹimz, fɛtʃɪŋ əm ɔl tʊk boʊθ ə bɹif sɛkən ən wʌt sim laɪk aʊɝz. wən i fɪnɪʃt, hʌnʒɹədz ə fɪɡjɝinz stʊɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ feɪsɪŋ hɪm. wɑtʃɪŋ. itʃ stil fɪɡjɝ wɑz lɪt wɪð ə taɪni faɪɝ ɪnsaɪd, əz ɪf weɪɾɪŋ tə fil ðə fɔɹdʒɝz hæmɝ.

Perrin went to the bubbling barrel time and time again, pulling out figurine after figurine. After the way of dreams, fetching them all took both a brief second and what seemed like hours. When he finished, hundreds of figurines stood on the floor facing him. Watching. Each steel figure was lit with a tiny fire inside, as if waiting to feel the forger's hammer.

bʌt fɪɡjɝinz laɪk ðɪs wʊdn bi fɔɹdʒd; ðeɪd bi kæst. "wʌt dʌz ɪt min?" pɛɹɪn sæt daʊn ɑn ə stul.

But figurines like this wouldn't be forged; they'd be cast. "What does it mean?" Perrin sat down on a stool.

min? hɑpɝ oʊpən ɪz maʊθ ɪn ə wʊlf læf. ɪt minz ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛni lɪɾəl mɛn ɑn ðə flɔɹ, nʌn ʌv wɪtʃ jə kən it. jəɹ kaɪn ɪz tu fɑn ə ɹɑks ən wʌɾ ɪz ɪnsaɪɾ ə ðɛm.

Mean? Hopper opened his mouth in a wolf laugh. It means there are many little men on the floor, none of which you can eat. Your kind is too fond of rocks and what is inside of them.

ðə fɪɡjɝinz simd əkjuzɪŋ. ɝaʊn əm leɪ ðə bɹoʊkən ʃɑɹdz ʌv ɛɹæm. ðoʊz pisəz sim tə bi ɡɹoʊɪŋ lɑɹdʒɝ. ðə ʃæɾɝd hænz bɪɡæn wɝkɪŋ, klɔɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ðə ʃɑɹdz ɔl bɪkeɪm lɪɾəl hænz, klaɪmɪŋ təwɔɹd pɛɹɪn, ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ hɪm.

The figurines seemed accusing. Around them lay the broken shards of Aram. Those pieces seemed to be growing larger. The shattered hands began working, clawing on the ground. The shards all became little hands, climbing toward Perrin, reaching for him.

pɛɹɪn ɡæspt, lipɪŋ tə hɪz fit. hi hɝd læftɝ ɪn ðə dɪstəns, ɹɪŋɪŋ kloʊsɝ, ʃeɪkɪŋ ðə bɪldɪŋ. hɑpɝ dʒʌmpt, slæmɪŋ ɪndə hɪm. ən ðən . . .

Perrin gasped, leaping to his feet. He heard laughter in the distance, ringing closer, shaking the building. Hopper jumped, slamming into him. And then . . .

pɛɹɪn stɑɹɾəd əweɪk. hi wɑz bæk ɪn ɪz tɛnt, ɪn ðə fild wɛɹ ðeɪd bɪn kæmp fəɹ ə fju deɪz naʊ. ðeɪd ɹʌn əkɹɔs ə bʌbəl ʌv ivəl ðə wik bɪfɔɹ ðət hæd kɑzd æŋɡɹi ɹɛd, ɔɪli sɝpəns tə wɪɡəl fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊn ɔl θɹu kæmp. sɛvɹəl hʌnʒɹəd wɝ sɪk fɹəm ðɛɹ baɪts; ɛɛs sədaɪ hilɪŋ hæd bɪn ɪnʌf tə kip moʊst ə ðɛm əlaɪv, bʌt nɑt ɹɪstɔɹ əm kəmplitli.

Perrin started awake. He was back in his tent, in the field where they'd been camped for a few days now. They'd run across a bubble of evil the week before that had caused angry red, oily serpents to wiggle from the ground all through camp. Several hundred were sick from their bites; Aes Sedai Healing had been enough to keep most of them alive, but not restore them completely.

feɪl slɛp bɪsaɪd pɛɹɪn, pisfəl. aʊtsaɪd, wʌn ə hɪz mɛn tæpt ə poʊs tə kaʊn ɔf ði aʊɝ.

Faile slept beside Perrin, peaceful. Outside, one of his men tapped a post to count off the hour.

θɹi tæps. stɪl aʊɝz əntɪl dɔn.

Three taps. Still hours until dawn.

pɛɹɪnz hɑɹt paʊndɪd sɔfli, ən i ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə hɪz bɛɹ tʃɛst. hi hæf-ɪkspɛktəɾ ən ɑɹmi ʌv taɪni mɛɾəl hænz tə kɹɔl aʊt fɹəm bɪniθ ɪz bɛdʒɹoʊl.

Perrin's heart pounded softly, and he raised a hand to his bare chest. He half-expected an army of tiny metal hands to crawl out from beneath his bedroll.

ɪvɛntʃəwəli, hi fɔɹst ɪz aɪz kloʊzd ən tʃɹaɪd tə ɹɪlæks. ðɪs taɪm, slip wɑz vɛɹi ɪlusɪv.

Eventually, he forced his eyes closed and tried to relax. This time, sleep was very elusive.

ɡɹeɪndəl sɪpt əɾ əɹ waɪn, wɪtʃ ɡlɪsən ɪn ə ɡɑblət tʃɹɪmd wɪð ə wɛb ə sɪlvɝ ɝaʊn ðə saɪdz. ðə ɡɑblət hæd bɪn kɹæftɪd wɪð dʒɹɑps ə blʌd kɑɾ ɪn ə ɹɪŋ pæɾɝn wɪðɪn ðə kɹɪstəl.

Graendal sipped at her wine, which glistened in a goblet trimmed with a web of silver around the sides. The goblet had been crafted with drops of blood caught in a ring pattern within the crystal.

fɹoʊzən fɝɛvɝ, taɪni bʌbəlz ə bɹɪljən ɹɛd.

Frozen forever, tiny bubbles of brilliant red.

"wi ʃəd bi duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ," ɝæŋɡɝ sɛd, laʊnʒɪŋ ɑn ðə ʃeɪz ən aɪɪŋ wʌn ʌv ɡɹeɪndəlz pɛts wɪð ə pɹɛɾətɔɹi hʌŋɡɝ əz i pæst. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ jə stæn ɪt, steɪɪŋ soʊ fɑɹ fɹəm ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪvɛns, laɪk səm skɑlɝ hoʊld ʌp ɪn ə dʌsti kɔɹnɝ."

"We should be doing something," Aran'gar said, lounging on the chaise and eyeing one of Graendal's pets with a predatory hunger as he passed. "I don't know how you stand it, staying so far from important events, like some scholar holed up in a dusty corner."

ɡɹeɪndəl ɑɹtʃt ən aɪbɹaʊ. ə skɑlɝ? ɪn səm dʌsti kɔɹnɝ? nætʃɹɪnz bæɹoʊ wɑz mɑɾəst kəmpɛɹd tə səm pæləsəz ʃi hæd noʊn, dʊɹɪŋ ðə pɹiviəs eɪdʒ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz hɑɹdli ə hʌvəl. ðə fɝnɪʃɪŋz wɝ faɪn, ðə wɔlz bɛɹɪŋ ən ɑɹtʃɪŋ pæɾɝn ə θɪk, dɑɹk hɑɹdwʊdz, ðə mɑɹbəl ə ðə flɔɹ spɑɹklɪŋ wɪð ɪnleɪd tʃɪps ə mʌðɝ-ʌv-pɝl ən ɡoʊld.

Graendal arched an eyebrow. A scholar? In some dusty corner? Natrin's Barrow was modest compared to some palaces she had known, during the previous Age, but it was hardly a hovel. The furnishings were fine, the walls bearing an arching pattern of thick, dark hardwoods, the marble of the floor sparkling with inlaid chips of mother-of-pearl and gold.

ɝæŋɡɝ wɑz dʒʌs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɹəvoʊk hɝ. ɡɹeɪndəl pʊt ði ɪɹɪteɪʃən aʊɾ ə hɝ maɪnd. ðə faɪɝ bɝn loʊ ɪn ðə hɑɹθ, bʌt ðə pɛɹ ə dɔɹz -  liɾɪŋ aʊɾ ɑntu ə fɔɹɾəfaɪd wɔkweɪ θɹi stɔɹiz ɪn ði ɛɹ - wɝ oʊpən, lɛɾɪŋ ɪn ə kɹɪsp maʊntən bɹiz. ʃi ɹɛɹli lɛft ə wɪndoʊ əɹ dɔɹ oʊpən tə ði aʊtsaɪd, bʌt tədeɪ ʃi laɪk ðə kɑntʃɹæst: wɔɹmθ fɹəm wʌn saɪd, ə kul bɹiz fɹəm ði ʌðɝ.

Aran'gar was just trying to provoke her. Graendal put the irritation out of her mind. The fire burned low in the hearth, but the pair of doors -  leading out onto a fortified walkway three stories in the air - were open, letting in a crisp mountain breeze. She rarely left a window or door open to the outside, but today she liked the contrast: warmth from one side, a cool breeze from the other.

laɪf wɑz əbaʊt filɪŋ. tʌtʃəz ɑn jəɹ skɪn, boʊθ pæʃənəɾ ən aɪsi. ɛniθɪŋ ʌðɝ ðən ðə nɔɹməl, ði ævɝɪdʒ, ðə lukwɔɹm.

Life was about feeling. Touches on your skin, both passionate and icy. Anything other than the normal, the average, the lukewarm.

"ɑɹ jə lɪsnɪŋ tə mi?" ɝæŋɡɝ æskt.

"Are you listening to me?" Aran'gar asked.

"aɪ ɔlweɪz lɪsən," ɡɹeɪndəl sɛd, sɛɾɪŋ əsaɪɾ əɹ ɡɑbləɾ əz ʃi sæɾ ɑn əɹ oʊn ʃeɪz. ʃi wɔɹ ə ɡoʊldən, ɪnvɛləpɪŋ dʒɹɛs, ʃɪɹ bʌt bʌɾənd tə ðə nɛk. wʌt mɑɹvələs fæʃənz ðiz dəmɑni hæd, aɪdil fəɹ tizɪŋ waɪl ɹɪvilɪŋ.

"I always listen," Graendal said, setting aside her goblet as she sat on her own chaise. She wore a golden, enveloping dress, sheer but buttoned to the neck. What marvelous fashions these Domani had, ideal for teasing while revealing.

"aɪ loʊð biɪŋ soʊ ɹimuv fɹəm θɪŋz," ɝæŋɡɝ kəntɪnjud. "ðɪs eɪdʒ ɪz ɪksaɪɾɪŋ. pɹɪməɾɪv pipəl kən bi soʊ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ." ðə vəlʌptʃəwəs, aɪvɝi-skɪnd wʊmən ɑɹtʃt əɹ bæk, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ ɑɹmz təwɔɹd ðə wɔl. "wɝ mɪsɪŋ ɔl ə ði ɪksaɪtmənt."

"I loathe being so removed from things," Aran'gar continued. "This Age is exciting. Primitive people can be so interesting." The voluptuous, ivory-skinned woman arched her back, stretching arms toward the wall. "We're missing all of the excitement."

"ɪksaɪtmən ɪz bɛs vjud fɹəm ə dɪstəns," ɡɹeɪndəl sɛd. "aɪ wəd θɪŋk juɾ ʌndɝstæn ðæt."

"Excitement is best viewed from a distance," Graendal said. "I would think you'd understand that."

ɝæŋɡɝ fɛl saɪlənt. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd hæd nɑt bɪn plizd wɪð əɹ fəɹ luzɪŋ kəntʃɹoʊl ʌv ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ.

Aran'gar fell silent. The Great Lord had not been pleased with her for losing control of Egwene al'Vere.

"wɛl," ɝæŋɡɝ sɛd, stændɪŋ. "ɪf ðəɾ ɪz jəɹ θɔɾ ɑn ɪt, əl sik mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ ivnɪŋ spɔɹt."

"Well," Aran'gar said, standing. "If that is your thought on it, I will seek more interesting evening sport."

hɝ vɔɪs wɑz kul; pɝhæps ðɛɹ əlaɪəns wɑz wɛɹɪŋ θɪn. ɪn ðət keɪs, ɪt wɑz taɪm fəɹ ɹiɪnfɔɹsmənt. ɡɹeɪndəl oʊpən hɝsɛlf ən æksɛptɪd ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz dɑmənəns ə hɝ, filɪŋ ðə θɹɪlɪŋ ɛkstəsi ʌv ɪz paʊɝ, hɪz pæʃən, hɪz vɛɹi sʌbstəns. ɪt wɑz soʊ mʌtʃ mɔɹ ɪntɑksɪkeɪɾɪŋ ðən ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ðɪs ɹeɪdʒɪŋ tɔɹən ə faɪɝ.

Her voice was cool; perhaps their alliance was wearing thin. In that case, it was time for reinforcement. Graendal opened herself and accepted the Great Lord's dominance of her, feeling the thrilling ecstasy of his power, his passion, his very substance. It was so much more intoxicating than the One Power, this raging torrent of fire.

ɪt θɹɛɾənd tə oʊvɝwɛlm ən kənsum hɝ, ən dɪspaɪt biɪŋ fɪld wɪð ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ, ʃi kəd tʃænəl oʊnli ə θɪn tʃɹɪkəl ʌv ɪt. ə ɡɪf tə hɝ fɹəm mɔɹaɪɾɪn. noʊ, fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd. bɛs nɑt tə bɪɡɪn əsoʊsieɪɾɪŋ ðoʊz tu ɪn əɹ maɪnd. fəɹ naʊ, mɔɹaɪɾɪn wɑz nɛbli. fəɹ naʊ oʊnli.

It threatened to overwhelm and consume her, and despite being filled with the True Power, she could channel only a thin trickle of it. A gift to her from Moridin. No, from the Great Lord. Best not to begin associating those two in her mind. For now, Moridin was Nae'blis. For now only.

ɡɹeɪndəl woʊv ə ɹɪbən ʌv ɛɹ. wɝkɪŋ wɪð ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ wɑz sɪməlɝ, jɛt nɑɾ aɪdɛntɪkəl, tə wɝkɪŋ wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ə wiv ə ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ wəɾ ɔfən fʌŋkʃən ɪn ə slaɪtli dɪfɹənt weɪ, əɹ əv ən ʌnæntɪsəpeɪɾɪd saɪɾ ɪfɛkt. ən ðəɹ wɝ səm wivz ðət kəɾ oʊnli bi kɹæftɪd baɪ ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ.

Graendal wove a ribbon of Air. Working with the True Power was similar, yet not identical, to working with the One Power. A weave of the True Power would often function in a slightly different way, or have an unanticipated side effect. And there were some weaves that could only be crafted by the True Power.

ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz ɛsəns fɔɹs ðə pæɾɝn, stʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɪɾ ən livɪŋ ɪt skɑɹd. ivən sʌmθɪŋ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ hæd dɪzaɪn tə bi ɪtɝnəl kəd bi ənɹævəl juzɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz ɛnɝdʒiz. ɪt bɪspoʊk ən ɪtɝnəl tʃɹuθ -  sʌmθɪŋ əz kloʊs tə biɪŋ seɪkɹəɾ əz ɡɹeɪndəl wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə æksɛpt. wʌtɛvɝ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ kəd bɪld, ðə dɑɹk wʌn kəd dɪstʃɹɔɪ.

The Great Lord's essence forced the Pattern, straining it and leaving it scarred. Even something the Creator had designed to be eternal could be unraveled using the Dark One's energies. It bespoke an eternal truth -  something as close to being sacred as Graendal was willing to accept. Whatever the Creator could build, the Dark One could destroy.

ʃi sneɪkt əɹ ɹɪbən ʌv ɛɹ θɹu ðə ɹum təwɔɹɾ ɝæŋɡɝ. ði ʌðɝ tʃoʊzən hæd stɛpt aʊɾ ɑntu ðə bælkəni; ɡɹeɪndəl fɝbeɪd ðə kɹieɪʃən ʌv ɡeɪtweɪz ɪnsaɪd, lɛs ðeɪ dæmədʒ əɹ pɛts əɹ əɹ fɝnɪʃɪŋz. ɡɹeɪndəl lɪftəd ðə ɹɪbən ʌv ɛɹ ʌp tə ɝæŋɡɝz tʃik ən kɝɛst ɪt dɛləkətli.

She snaked her ribbon of Air through the room toward Aran'gar. The other Chosen had stepped out onto the balcony; Graendal forbade the creation of gateways inside, lest they damage her pets or her furnishings. Graendal lifted the ribbon of Air up to Aran'gar's cheek and caressed it delicately.

ɝæŋɡɝ fɹoʊz. ʃi tɝnd, səspɪʃəs, bʌɾ ɪt tʊk oʊnli ə moʊmən fəɹ əɹ aɪz tə oʊpən waɪd. ʃi wʊdn əv fɛl ðə ɡus bʌmps ɑn əɹ ɑɹmz tə ɪndəkeɪt ɡɹeɪndəl wɑz tʃænəlɪŋ. ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ ɡeɪv noʊ hɪnt, noʊ saɪn. meɪl əɹ fimeɪl, noʊ wʌn kəd si əɹ sɛns ðə wivz - nɑɾ ənlɛs i əɹ ʃi hæd bɪn ɡɹæntəd ðə pɹɪvlədʒ ə tʃænəlɪŋ ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ.

Arangar froze. She turned, suspicious, but it took only a moment for her eyes to open wide. She wouldn't have felt the goose bumps on her arms to indicate Graendal was channeling. The True Power gave no hint, no sign. Male or female, no one could see or sense the weaves - not unless he or she had been granted the privilege of channeling the True Power.

"wʌt?" ðə wʊmən æskt. "haʊ? mɔɹaɪɾɪn ɪz - "

"What?" the woman asked. "How? Moridin is - "

"nɛbli," ɡɹeɪndəl sɛd. "jɛs. bʌt wʌns ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz feɪvɝ ɪn ðɪs ɹəɡɑɹd wɑz nɑt kənfaɪn tə ðə nɛbli." ʃi kəntɪnjud tə kɝɛs ɝæŋɡɝz tʃik, ən ðə wʊmən flʌʃt.

"Nae'blis," Graendal said. "Yes. But once the Great Lord's favor in this regard was not confined to the Nae'blis." She continued to caress Arangar's cheek, and the woman flushed.

ɝæŋɡɝ, laɪk ði ʌðɝ tʃoʊzən, lʌstɪd fəɹ ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ waɪl fɪɹɪŋ ɪɾ ət ðə seɪm taɪm -  deɪnʒɝəs, plɛʒɝəbəl, sɪdʌktɪv. wən ɡɹeɪndəl wɪθdʒɹu hɝ laɪn ʌv ɛɹ, ɝæŋɡɝ stɛp bæk ɪndə ðə ɹum ən ɹɪtɝn tə hɝ ʃeɪz, ðən sɛnt wʌn ʌv ɡɹeɪndəlz pɛts tə fɛtʃ əɹ tɔɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Arangar, like the other Chosen, lusted for the True Power while fearing it at the same time -  dangerous, pleasurable, seductive. When Graendal withdrew her line of Air, Arangar stepped back into the room and returned to her chaise, then sent one of Graendal's pets to fetch her toy Aes Sedai.

lʌst stɪl bɝn ɝæŋɡɝz tʃiks; laɪkli ʃi wəd juz dɛlænə tə dɪstʃɹæk hɝsɛlf. ɝæŋɡɝ sim tə faɪn ɪɾ əmjuzɪŋ tə fɔɹs ðə hoʊmli ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪndə səbsɝviəns.

Lust still burned Arangar's cheeks; likely she would use Delana to distract herself. Arangar seemed to find it amusing to force the homely Aes Sedai into subservience.

dɛlænə ɝaɪv moʊməns leɪɾɝ; ʃi ɔlweɪz ɹɪmeɪnd nɪɹbaɪ. ðə ʃaɪn-ɛɹən wʊmən wɑz peɪl- hɛɹɾ ən staʊt, wɪð θɪk lɪmz. ɡɹeɪndəlz lɪps tɝn daʊn. sətʃ ən ʌnpɹɛɾi θɪŋ. nɑt laɪk ɝæŋɡɝ hɝsɛlf. ʃiɾ əv meɪɾ ən aɪdil pɛt. meɪbi sʌmdeɪ ɡɹeɪndəl wəɾ əv ðə tʃæns tə meɪk əɹ ɪndə wʌn.

Delana arrived moments later; she always remained nearby. The Shien-aran woman was pale- haired and stout, with thick limbs. Graendal's lips turned down. Such an unpretty thing. Not like Arangar herself. She'd have made an ideal pet. Maybe someday Graendal would have the chance to make her into one.

ɝæŋɡɝ ən dɛlænə bɪɡæn tə ɪkstʃeɪnʒ əfɛkʃənz ɑn ðə ʃeɪz. ɝæŋɡɝ wɑz ɪnseɪʃəbəl, ə fækt ɡɹeɪndəl hæɾ ɛksplɔɪɾəd ɑn numɝəs əkeɪʒənz, ðə lʊɹ ə ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ biɪŋ oʊnli ðə leɪɾəst. ʌv kɔɹs, ɡɹeɪndəl ɛndʒɔɪd plɛʒɝz hɝsɛlf, bʌt ʃi meɪd sɝɾən ðət pipəl θɔt ʃi wɑz fɑɹ mɔɹ sɛlf-ɪndʌlʒənt ðən ʃi wɑz. ɪf jə nu wʌt pipəl ɪkspɛktəd jə tə bi, jə kəd juz ðoʊz ɛkspɛkteɪʃənz. ɪt -  ɡɹeɪndəl fɹoʊz əz ən əlɑɹm wɛn ɔf ɪn əɹ ɪɹz, ðə saʊn ə kɹæʃɪŋ weɪvz biɾɪŋ əɡɛnst wʌn ənʌðɝ. ɝæŋɡɝ kəntɪnjuɾ əɹ plɛʒɝz; ʃi kʊdn hɪɹ ðə saʊnd. ðə wiv wɑz vɛɹi spəsɪfɪk, pleɪst wɛɹ əɹ sɝvəns kəd tʃɹɪp ɪt tə ɡɪv əɹ wɔɹnɪŋ.

Arangar and Delana began to exchange affections on the chaise. Arangar was insatiable, a fact Graendal had exploited on numerous occasions, the lure of the True Power being only the latest. Of course, Graendal enjoyed pleasures herself, but she made certain that people thought she was far more self-indulgent than she was. If you knew what people expected you to be, you could use those expectations. It -  Graendal froze as an alarm went off in her ears, the sound of crashing waves beating against one another. Arangar continued her pleasures; she couldn't hear the sound. The weave was very specific, placed where her servants could trip it to give her warning.

ɡɹeɪndəl klaɪm tə hɝ fit, stʃɹoʊlɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum, ɡɪvɪŋ noʊ ɪndəkeɪʃən ə ɝdʒənsi. ət ðə dɔɹ, ʃi sɛn ə fju ʌv əɹ pɛts ɪn tə hɛlp dɪstʃɹækt ɝæŋɡɝ. bɛs tə dɪskʌvɝ ðə skoʊp ə ðə pɹɑbləm bɪfɔɹ ɪnvɑlvɪŋ hɝ.

Graendal climbed to her feet, strolling around the side of the room, giving no indication of urgency. At the door, she sent a few of her pets in to help distract Arangar. Best to discover the scope of the problem before involving her.

ɡɹeɪndəl wɔk daʊn ə hɔlweɪ hʌŋ wɪð ɡoʊldən ʃændəlɪz ən ɔɹnəmɛntɪd wɪð mɪɹɝz.

Graendal walked down a hallway hung with golden chandeliers and ornamented with mirrors.

ʃi wɑz hæfweɪ daʊn ə stɛɹwɛl wən ɡɝumænd - ðə kæptən ə hɝ pæləs ɡɑɹd - keɪm bʌsəlɪŋ ʌp. hi wɑz sɑldəiən, ə dɪstən kʌzən ə ðə kwin, ən wɔɹ ə θɪk mʌstæʃ ɑn ɪz lin, hænsəm feɪs. kəmpʌlʃən hæd meɪɾ ɪm ʌɾɝli lɔɪəl, ʌv kɔɹs.

She was halfway down a stairwell when Garumand - the captain of her palace guard - came bustling up. He was Saldaean, a distant cousin of the Queen, and wore a thick mustache on his lean, handsome face. Compulsion had made him utterly loyal, of course.

"ɡɹeɪt leɪɾi," hi sɛd, pæntɪŋ. "ə mæn əz bɪn kæptʃɝɾ əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ðə pæləs. maɪ mɛn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ɪm əz ə maɪnɝ lɔɹd fɹəm bændɑɹ ɛbən, ə mɛmbɝ ə haʊs ɹæmʃələn."

"Great Lady," he said, panting. "A man has been captured approaching the palace. My men recognize him as a minor lord from Bandar Eban, a member of House Ramshalan."

ɡɹeɪndəl fɹaʊnd, ðən weɪv fəɹ ɡɝumæn tə fɑloʊ əz ʃi meɪɾ əɹ weɪ tə wʌn ə hɝ ɑɾiəns tʃeɪmbɝz - ə smɔl, wɪndoʊləs ɹum dɛkɝeɪɾəd ɪn kɹɪmzən. ʃi woʊv ə wɔɹɾ əɡɛnst ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ, ðən sɛnt ɡɝumæn tə bɹɪŋ ði ɪntʃɹuɾɝ.

Graendal frowned, then waved for Garumand to follow as she made her way to one of her audience chambers - a small, windowless room decorated in crimson. She wove a ward against eavesdropping, then sent Garumand to bring the intruder.

sun, hi ɹɪtɝnd wɪð səm ɡɑɹdz ən ə dəmɑni mæn dʒɹɛst ɪn bɹaɪt ɡɹinz ən bluz, ə bjuɾi mɑɹk ʃeɪp laɪk ə bɛl ɑn ɪz tʃik. hɪz nit, ʃɔɹt bɪɹd wɑz taɪd wɪð taɪni bɛlz, ən ðeɪ dʒɪŋɡəld əz ðə ɡɑɹdz ʃʌvd ɪm fɔɹwɝd. hi bɹʌʃt ɔf ɪz ɑɹmz, ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət ðə soʊlʒɝz, ən stʃɹeɪɾənd ɪz ɹʌfəld ʃɝt. "æm aɪ tə ʌndɝstæn ðəɾ aɪ hæv bɪn dɪlɪvɝd tə - "

Soon, he returned with some guards and a Domani man dressed in bright greens and blues, a beauty mark shaped like a bell on his cheek. His neat, short beard was tied with tiny bells, and they jingled as the guards shoved him forward. He brushed off his arms, glaring at the soldiers, and straightened his ruffled shirt. "Am I to understand that I have been delivered to - "

hi kʌɾ ɔf wɪð ə tʃoʊkɪŋ saʊn əz ɡɹeɪndəl ɹæpt ɪm ɪn wivz ʌv ɛɹ ən dʌɡ ɪndə hɪz maɪnd. hi stʌɾɝd, aɪz ɡɹoʊɪŋ ənfoʊkəst.

He cut off with a choking sound as Graendal wrapped him in weaves of Air and dug into his mind. He stuttered, eyes growing unfocused.

"aɪ æm paɪkɝ ɹæmʃələn," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə mɑnətoʊn. "aɪ hæv bɪn sɛn baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn tə sik ən əlaɪəns wɪð ðə mɝtʃən fæmli ɹɪzaɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðɪs fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃən. əz aɪm smɑɹɾɝ ən mɔɹ klɛvɝ ðən ælθɹ, hi nidz mi tə bɪld əlaɪənsəz fəɹ hɪm. hiz pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli əfɹeɪɾ ə ðoʊz lɪvɪŋ ɪn ðɪs pæləs, wɪtʃ aɪ faɪn ɹɪdɪkjələs, sɪns ɪts dɪstən ən ənɪmpɔɹɾənt.

"I am Piqor Ramshalan," he said in a monotone. "I have been sent by the Dragon Reborn to seek an alliance with the merchant family residing in this fortification. As I am smarter and more clever than al'Thor, he needs me to build alliances for him. He is particularly afraid of those living in this palace, which I find ridiculous, since it is distant and unimportant.

"ɑbviəsli, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪz ə wik mæn. aɪ bɪliv ðət baɪ ɡeɪnɪŋ ɪz kɑnfəɾəns, aɪ kən bi tʃoʊzən əz ðə nɛks kɪŋ ʌv ɑɹæd dumən. aɪ wɪʃ fəɹ jə tə meɪk ən əlaɪəns wɪð mi, nɑt wɪð hɪm, ən wɪl pɹɑməs jə feɪvɝz wʌns aɪm kɪŋ. aɪ di - "

"Obviously, the Dragon Reborn is a weak man. I believe that by gaining his confidence, I can be chosen as the next King of Arad Doman. I wish for you to make an alliance with me, not with him, and will promise you favors once I am king. I d - "

ɡɹeɪndəl weɪvd ə hæn ən i kʌɾ ɔf ɪn mɪdwɝd. ʃi foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz, hɛɹz bɹɪsəlɪŋ əz ʃi ʃɪvɝd.

Graendal waved a hand and he cut off in midword. She folded her arms, hairs bristling as she shivered.

ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn hæd faʊn hɝ.

The Dragon Reborn had found her.

hi hæd sɛn ə dɪstʃɹækʃən fəɹ hɝ.

He had sent a distraction for her.

hi θɔɾ i kəd mənɪpjəleɪt hɝ.

He thought he could manipulate her.

ʃi ɪnstənli woʊv ə ɡeɪtweɪ tə wʌn ə hɝ moʊst sɪkjʊɹ haɪɾɪŋ pleɪsəz. kul ɛɹ wɑftɪɾ ɪn fɹəm ən ɛɹiə ʌv ðə wɝld wɛɹ ɪt wɑz mɔɹnɪŋ, nɑɾ ɝli ivnɪŋ. bɛs tə bi kɛɹfəl. bɛs tə fli. ən jɛt . .

She instantly wove a gateway to one of her most secure hiding places. Cool air wafted in from an area of the world where it was morning, not early evening. Best to be careful. Best to flee. And yet . .

.

.

ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. hi mʌs noʊ peɪn . . . hi mʌs noʊ fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən . . . hi mʌs noʊ æŋɡwɪʃ. bɹɪŋ ðiz tə hɪm. jəl bi ɹɪwɔɹɾɪd.

She hesitated. He must know pain . . . he must know frustration . . . he must know anguish. Bring these to him. You will be rewarded.

ɝæŋɡɝ hæd flɛd fɹəm əɹ pleɪs əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ, fulɪʃli əlaʊɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə bi sɛns tʃænəlɪŋ seɪɾɪn. ʃi stɪl bɔɹ pʌnɪʃmən fəɹ əɹ feɪljɝ. ɪf ɡɹeɪndəl lɛf naʊ - dɪskɑɹɾɪŋ ə tʃæns tə twɪst ælθɹ əbaʊt hɪmsɛlf - wəd ʃi bi sɪməlɝli pʌnɪʃt?

Aran'gar had fled from her place among Aes Sedai, foolishly allowing herself to be sensed channeling saidin. She still bore punishment for her failure. If Graendal left now - discarding a chance to twist al'Thor about himself - would she be similarly punished?

"wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs?" ɝæŋɡɝz vɔɪs æskt aʊtsaɪd. "lɛt mi θɹu, jə fulz. ɡɹeɪndəl? wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ?"

"What is this?" Aran'gar's voice asked outside. "Let me through, you fools. Graendal? What are you doing?"

ɡɹeɪndəl hɪst sɔfli, ðən kloʊz ðə ɡeɪtweɪ ən kəmpoʊz hɝsɛlf. ʃi nɑɾəd fəɹ ɝæŋɡɝ tə bi əlaʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹum. ðə laɪð wʊmən stɛpt ʌp tə ðə dɔɹweɪ, aɪɪŋ - ən əsɛsɪŋ -  ɹæmʃələn. ɡɹeɪndəl ʃʊdn əv sɛn ðə pɛts tə hɝ; ðə muv hæd laɪkli meɪɾ əɹ səspɪʃəs.

Graendal hissed softly, then closed the gateway and composed herself. She nodded for Aran'gar to be allowed into the room. The lithe woman stepped up to the doorway, eyeing - and assessing -  Ramshalan. Graendal shouldn't have sent the pets to her; the move had likely made her suspicious.

"ælθɹ əz faʊn mi," ɡɹeɪndəl sɛd kɝtli. "hi sɛn ðɪs wʌn tə meɪk ən 'əlaɪəns' wɪð mi, bʌt dɪd nɑt tɛl ɪm u aɪ wɑz. ælθɹ laɪkli wɑns mi tə θɪŋk ðət ðɪs mæn stʌmbəld əpɑn mi æksədɛntəli."

"Al'Thor has found me," Graendal said curtly. "He sent this one to make an 'alliance' with me, but did not tell him who I was. Al'Thor likely wants me to think that this man stumbled upon me accidentally."

ɝæŋɡɝ pɝst əɹ lɪps. "soʊ jəl fli? ɹʌn fɹəm ðə sɛntɝ ʌv ɪksaɪtmən əɡɛn?"

Aran'gar pursed her lips. "So you'll flee? Run from the center of excitement again?"

"ðɪs, fɹəm ju?"

"This, from you?"

"aɪ wɑz sɝaʊndəd baɪ ɛnəmiz. flaɪt wɑz maɪ oʊnli ɑpʃən." ɪt saʊndəd laɪk ə pɹæktəs laɪn.

"I was surrounded by enemies. Flight was my only option." It sounded like a practiced line.

wɝdz laɪk ðoʊz wɝ ə tʃælənʒ. ɝæŋɡɝ wəd sɝv hɝ. pɝhæps . . . "dʌz ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv jʊɹz noʊ kəmpʌlʃən?"

Words like those were a challenge. Aran'gar would serve her. Perhaps . . . "Does that Aes Sedai of yours know Compulsion?"

ɝæŋɡɝ ʃɹʌɡd. "ʃiz bɪn tʃɹeɪn ɪn ɪt. ʃiz pæsəbli skɪld."

Aran'gar shrugged. "She's been trained in it. She's passably skilled."

"fɛtʃ hɝ."

"Fetch her."

ɝæŋɡɝ ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ, bʌt nɑɾəd ɪn dɛfɝəns, dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ tə ɹʌn ði ɛɹən hɝsɛlf -  pɹɑbli tə ɡeɪn taɪm tə θɪŋk. ɡɹeɪndəl sɛn ə sɝvən fəɹ wʌn ə hɝ dʌv keɪdʒɪz. ðeɪ ɝaɪvd wɪð ðə bɝd bɪfɔɹ ɝæŋɡɝ wɑz bæk, ən ɡɹeɪndəl kɛɹfəli woʊv ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ - wʌns əɡɛn θɹɪlɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹʌʃ ə hoʊldɪŋ ɪt - ən kɹæftɪɾ ə kɑmplɛks wiv ə spɪɹət. kəd ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝ haʊ tə də ðɪs? ɪt hæd bɪn soʊ lɔŋ.

Aran'gar raised an eyebrow, but nodded in deference, disappearing to run the errand herself -  probably to gain time to think. Graendal sent a servant for one of her dove cages. They arrived with the bird before Aran'gar was back, and Graendal carefully wove the True Power - once again thrilling in the rush of holding it - and crafted a complex weave of Spirit. Could she remember how to do this? It had been so long.

ʃi oʊvɝleɪd ðə wiv ɑn ðə bɝdz maɪnd. hɝ vɪʒən sim tə snæp. ɪn ə moʊmənt, ʃi kəd si tu ɪmədʒəz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ - ðə wɝld əz ʃi sɔ ɪɾ ən ə ʃæɾoʊd vɝʒən ʌv wʌt ðə bɝd sɔ. ɪf ʃi foʊkəst, ʃi kəd tɝn əɹ ətɛnʃən tə wʌn əɹ ði ʌðɝ.

She overlaid the weave on the bird's mind. Her vision seemed to snap. In a moment, she could see two images in front of her - the world as she saw it and a shadowed version of what the bird saw. If she focused, she could turn her attention to one or the other.

ɪt meɪɾ əɹ maɪn hɝt. ðə vɪʒən ʌv ə bɝd wɑz ɪntaɪɝli dɪfɹən fɹəm ðəɾ ʌv ə hjumən biɪŋ: ʃi kəd si ə mʌtʃ lɑɹdʒɝ fild, ən ðə kʌlɝz wɝ soʊ vɪvəɾ əz tə bi nɪɹli blaɪndɪŋ, bʌt ðə vju wɑz blɝi, ən ʃi hæd tʃɹʌbəl dʒʌdʒɪŋ dɪstəns.

It made her mind hurt. The vision of a bird was entirely different from that of a human being: She could see a much larger field, and the colors were so vivid as to be nearly blinding, but the view was blurry, and she had trouble judging distance.

ʃi tʌk ðə bɝdz saɪɾ ɪndə ðə bæk ə hɝ hɛd. ə dʌv wəd bi ʌnəbtʃɹusɪv, bʌt juzɪŋ wʌn wɑz mɔɹ dɪfəkəl ðən ə ɹeɪvən əɹ ə ɹæt, ðə dɑɹk wʌnz oʊn feɪvɝɾ aɪz. ðə wiv wɝk bɛɾɝ ɑn ðoʊz ðən ɪt dɪɾ ʌðɝ ænəməlz. ðoʊ, moʊs vɝmɪn ðət wɑtʃt fəɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn hæd tə ɹipɔɹt bæk bɪfɔɹ i nu wʌt ðeɪd sin. waɪ ðət wɑz, ʃi wɑz nɑt sɝɾən - ði ɪntʃɹəkəsiz ə ðə tʃɹu paʊɝz spɛʃəl wivz nɛvɝ hæd meɪd mʌtʃ sɛns tə hɝ. nɑɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ hæd tə eɪdʒɪnɝ, ət list.

She tucked the bird's sight into the back of her head. A dove would be unobtrusive, but using one was more difficult than a raven or a rat, the Dark One's own favored eyes. The weave worked better on those than it did other animals. Though, most vermin that watched for the Dark One had to report back before he knew what they'd seen. Why that was, she was not certain - the intricacies of the True Power's special weaves never had made much sense to her. Not as much as they had to Aginor, at least.

ɝæŋɡɝ ɹɪtɝnd wɪð əɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, hu wɑz lʊkɪŋ ɪnkɹisɪŋli tɪmɪd ðiz deɪz. ʃi kɝtsid loʊ tə ɡɹeɪndəl, ðən ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ə səbsɝviən pɑstʃɝ. ɡɹeɪndəl kɛɹfəli ɹimuvd əɹ kəmpʌlʃən fɹəm ɹæmʃə-læn, livɪŋ ɪm deɪzd ən dɪsɔɹiɛntɪd.

Aran'gar returned with her Aes Sedai, who was looking increasingly timid these days. She curtsied low to Graendal, then remained in a subservient posture. Graendal carefully removed her Compulsion from Ramsha-lan, leaving him dazed and disoriented.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt jə wɪʃ mi tə du, ɡɹeɪt wʌn?" dɛlænə æskt, ɡlænsɪŋ əɾ ɝæŋɡɝ ən ðən bæk ət ɡɹeɪndəl.

"What is it you wish me to do, Great One?" Delana asked, glancing at Arangar and then back at Graendal.

"kəmpʌlʃən," ɡɹeɪndəl sɛd. "æz ɪntʃɹəkəɾ ən əz kɑmplɛks əz jə kən meɪk ɪt."

"Compulsion," Graendal said. "As intricate and as complex as you can make it."

"wʌt dʒju wɪʃ ɪt tə du, ɡɹeɪt leɪɾi?"

"What do you wish it to do, Great Lady?"

"liv ɪm eɪbəl tə æk laɪk hɪmsɛlf," ɡɹeɪndəl sɛd. "bʌt ɹimuv ɔl mɛmɹi ʌv ɪvɛns hɪɹ.

"Leave him able to act like himself," Graendal said. "But remove all memory of events here.

ɹipleɪs əm wɪð ə mɛmɹi ʌv tɔkɪŋ tə ə mɝtʃən fæmli ən sɪkjʊɹɪŋ ðɛɹ əlaɪəns. æɾ ə fju ʌðɝ ɹændəm ɹɪkwaɪɹməns ɑn hɪm, wʌtɛvɝ əkɝz tə ju."

Replace them with a memory of talking to a merchant family and securing their alliance. Add a few other random requirements on him, whatever occurs to you."

dɛlænə fɹaʊnd, bʌt ʃi hæd lɝnd nɑt tə kwɛstʃən ðə tʃoʊzən. ɡɹeɪndəl foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz ən tæpt wʌn fɪŋɡɝ əz ʃi wɑtʃt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝk. ʃi fɛlt ɪnkɹisɪŋli nɝvəs. ælθɹ nu wɛɹ ʃi wɑz. wəɾ i ətæk? noʊ, hi wʊdn hɑɹm wɪmən. ðət pɝtɪkjəlɝ feɪlɪŋ wɑz ən ɪmpɔɹɾənt wʌn. ɪt mɛnt ʃi hæd taɪm tə ɹɪspɑnd. dɪdnt ʃi?

Delana frowned, but she had learned not to question the Chosen. Graendal folded her arms and tapped one finger as she watched the Aes Sedai work. She felt increasingly nervous. Al'Thor knew where she was. Would he attack? No, he wouldn't harm women. That particular failing was an important one. It meant she had time to respond. Didn't she?

haʊ hæɾ i mænədʒ tə tʃɹeɪs əɹ tə ðɪs pæləs? ʃi hæd kʌvɝd hɝsɛlf pɝfəkli. ði oʊnli mɪnjənz ʃid lɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ saɪt wɝ ʌndɝ kəmpʌlʃən soʊ hɛvi ðəɾ ɪt wəd kɪl əm tə ɹimuv ɪt. kəɾ ɪt bi ðət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hi kɛpt wɪð ɪm - nɪneɪiv, ðə wʊmən ɡɪftəɾ ɪn hilɪŋ -  hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə ʌndɝmaɪn ən ɹɛd ɡɹeɪndəlz wivz?

How had he managed to trace her to this palace? She had covered herself perfectly. The only minions she'd let out of her sight were under Compulsion so heavy that it would kill them to remove it. Could it be that the Aes Sedai he kept with him - Nynaeve, the woman gifted in Healing -  had been able to undermine and read Graendal's weaves?

ɡɹeɪndəl niɾəd taɪm, ən ʃi niɾəd tə dɪskʌvɝ wʌɾ ælθɹ nu. ɪf nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə hæd ðə skɪl niɾəd tə ɹid kəmpʊlʃənz, ðət wɑz deɪnʒɝəs. ɡɹeɪndəl niɾəd tə leɪ hɪm ə fɔls tʃɹeɪl, dɪleɪ hɪm - hɛns əɹ ɹɪkwaɪɹmən ðət dɛlænə kɹieɪɾ ə θɪk kəmpʌlʃən wɪð stʃɹeɪnʒ pɹəvɪʒənz ɪn ɪt.

Graendal needed time, and she needed to discover what al'Thor knew. If Nynaeve al'Meara had the skill needed to read Compulsions, that was dangerous. Graendal needed to lay him a false trail, delay him - hence her requirement that Delana create a thick Compulsion with strange provisions in it.

bɹɪŋ ɪm æɡəni. ɡɹeɪndəl kəd də ðæt.

Bring him agony. Graendal could do that.

"ju nɛkst," ʃi sɛd tə ɝæŋɡɝ wʌns dɛlænə hæd fɪnɪʃt. "sʌmθɪŋ kɑnvəluɾəd. aɪ wɑn ælθɹ ən ɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ tə faɪn ðə tʌtʃ ʌv ə mæn ɑn ðə maɪnd." ðət wəd kənfjuz əm fɝðɝ.

"You next," she said to Arangar once Delana had finished. "Something convoluted. I want al'Thor and his Aes Sedai to find the touch of a man on the mind." That would confuse them further.

ɝæŋɡɝ ʃɹʌɡd, bʌt dɪɾ əz æskt, leɪɪŋ daʊn ə θɪk ən kɑmplɛks kəmpʌlʃən ɑn ði ənfɔɹtʃənət ɹæmʃələnz maɪnd. hi wɑz sʌmwʌt pɹɪɾi. dɪɾ ælθɹ əsum ʃid wɑn ɪm fəɹ wʌn ə hɝ pɛts? dɪɾ i ivən ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪnʌf ə biɪŋ luz θɝɪn tə noʊ ðəɾ əbaʊt hɝ? hɝ ɹɪpɔɹts ɑn haʊ mʌtʃ ə hɪz oʊld laɪf i ɹɪmɛmbɝd wɝ kɑntʃɹədɪktɝi, bʌɾ i sim tə bi ɹɪkɔlɪŋ mɔɹ ən mɔɹ. ðət wɑz wʌt wɝid hɝ. luz θɝɪn cʊɾə tʃɹækt əɹ tə ðɪs pæləs, pɝhæps.

Arangar shrugged, but did as asked, laying down a thick and complex Compulsion on the unfortunate Ramshalan's mind. He was somewhat pretty. Did al'Thor assume she'd want him for one of her pets? Did he even remember enough of being Lews Therin to know that about her? Her reports on how much of his old life he remembered were contradictory, but he seemed to be recalling more and more. That was what worried her. Lews Therin could have tracked her to this palace, perhaps.

ʃid nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd ðəɾ ælθɹ wəd bi eɪbəl tə də ðə seɪm.

She'd never expected that al'Thor would be able to do the same.

ɝæŋɡɝ fɪnɪʃt.

Arangar finished.

"naʊ," ɡɹeɪndəl sɛd, ɹilisɪŋ əɹ wivz ʌv ɛɹ ən spikɪŋ tə ɹæmʃələn, "ɹɪtɝn ən tɛl ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ə jəɹ səksɛs hɪɹ."

"Now," Graendal said, releasing her weaves of Air and speaking to Ramshalan, "return and tell the Dragon Reborn of your success here."

ɹæmʃələn blɪŋkt, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd. "aɪ . . . jɛs, maɪ leɪɾi. jɛs, aɪ bɪliv ðə taɪz wi meɪd tədeɪ wɪl bi ɪkstʃɹimli bɛnəfɪʃəl tə boʊθ ʌv ʌs." hi smaɪld. wik-maɪndəd ful. "pɝhæps wi ʃəd daɪn ən dʒɹɪŋk tə əɹ səksɛs, leɪɾi bæsin? ɪts bɪn ə wiɹiɪŋ tʃɹɪp tə si ju, ən aɪ - "

Ramshalan blinked, shaking his head. "I . . . Yes, my Lady. Yes, I believe the ties we made today will be extremely beneficial to both of us." He smiled. Weak-minded fool. "Perhaps we should dine and drink to our success, Lady Basene? It has been a wearying trip to see you, and I - "

"ɡoʊ," ɡɹeɪndəl sɛd koʊldli.

"Go," Graendal said coldly.

"vɛɹi wɛl. jəl bi ɹɪwɔɹɾɪd wən aɪm kɪŋ!"

"Very well. You will be rewarded when I am king!"

hɝ ɡɑɹdz lɛɾ ɪm əweɪ, ən i bɪɡæn wɪslɪŋ wɪð ə sɛlf-sæɾəsfaɪd ɛɹ. ɡɹeɪndəl sæt daʊn ən kloʊzd əɹ aɪz; sɛvɹəl ə hɝ soʊlʒɝz stɛpt oʊvɝ tə ɡɑɹd hɝ, ðɛɹ buts sɑft ɑn ðə θɪk ɹʌɡ.

Her guards led him away, and he began whistling with a self-satisfied air. Graendal sat down and closed her eyes; several of her soldiers stepped over to guard her, their boots soft on the thick rug.

ʃi lʊk θɹu ðə dʌvz aɪz, əkʌstəmɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə ɪts stʃɹeɪnʒ weɪ ʌv siɪŋ. əɾ əɹ ɔɹɾɝ, ə sɝvən pɪkt ɪɾ ʌp ən kæɹiɾ ɪt tə ə wɪndoʊ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ aʊtsaɪd ðə ɹum. ðə bɝd hɑpt ɑntu ðə wɪndaʊsəl. ɡɹeɪndəl ɡeɪv ɪɾ ə sɑf nʌdʒ tə ɡoʊ fɔɹwɝd; ʃi wɑzn pɹæktəst ɪnʌf tə teɪk kəntʃɹoʊl kəmplitli. flaɪɪŋ wɑz fɑɹ mɔɹ dɪfəkəl ðən ɪt lʊkt.

She looked through the dove's eyes, accustoming herself to its strange way of seeing. At her order, a servant picked it up and carried it to a window in the hallway outside the room. The bird hopped onto the windowsill. Graendal gave it a soft nudge to go forward; she wasn't practiced enough to take control completely. Flying was far more difficult than it looked.

ðə dʌv flæpt aʊɾ ə ðə wɪndoʊ. ðə sʌn wɑz loʊɝɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðə maʊntənz, aʊtlaɪnɪŋ əm ɪn æŋɡɹi ɹɛɾ ən ɔɹənʒ, ən ðə leɪk bɪloʊ fɛl ɪndə ə dip, ʃæɾoʊi blu-blæk. ðə vju wɑz θɹɪlɪŋ bʌt nɔʒieɪɾɪŋ əz ðə dʌv sɔɹɾ ʌp ɪndə ði ɛɹ ən lændəɾ ɑn wʌn ə ðə taʊɝz.

The dove flapped out of the window. The sun was lowering behind the mountains, outlining them in angry red and orange, and the lake below fell into a deep, shadowy blue-black. The view was thrilling but nauseating as the dove soared up into the air and landed on one of the towers.

ɹæmʃələn ɪvɛntʃəwəli wɔkt aʊɾ ə ðə ɡeɪts bɪloʊ. ɡɹeɪndəl nʌdʒ ðə dʌv ən ɪt lɛpt ɔf ðə taʊɝ, plʌnʒɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ɡɹeɪndəl ɡɹɪɾɪd əɹ tiθ ət ðə stʌmək-tʃɝnɪŋ dɪsɛnt, ðə pæləs stoʊnwɝks bɪkʌmɪŋ ə blɝ. ðə dʌv lɛvəld aʊɾ ən flæpt æftɝ ɹæmʃələn. hi sim tə bi ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf, ðoʊ ʃi kəd meɪk aʊɾ oʊnli ɹuɾəmɛntɝi saʊnz θɹu ðə dʌvz ʌnfəmɪljɝ ɪɹhoʊlz.

Ramshalan eventually walked out of the gates below. Graendal nudged the dove and it leaped off the tower, plunging toward the ground. Graendal gritted her teeth at the stomach-churning descent, the palace stoneworks becoming a blur. The dove leveled out and flapped after Ramshalan. He seemed to be grumbling to himself, though she could make out only rudimentary sounds through the dove's unfamiliar earholes.

ʃi fɑloʊɾ ɪm fəɹ səm taɪm θɹu ðə dɑɹkənɪŋ wʊdz. ən aʊl wʊɾə bɪn bɛɾɝ, bʌt ʃi dɪdn əv wʌn kæptɪv. ʃi tʃaɪɾɪd hɝsɛlf fəɹ ðæt. ðə dʌv flu fɹəm bɹæntʃ tə bɹæntʃ. ðə fɔɹəs flɔɹ wɑz ə mɛsi tæŋɡəl ʌv ʌndɝbɹʌʃ ən fɔlən paɪn niɾəlz. ʃi faʊn ðət dɪstɪŋkli ənplɛzənt.

She followed him for some time through the darkening woods. An owl would have been better, but she didn't have one captive. She chided herself for that. The dove flew from branch to branch. The forest floor was a messy tangle of underbrush and fallen pine needles. She found that distinctly unpleasant.

ðəɹ wɑz laɪɾ ʌp əhɛd. ɪt wɑz feɪnt, bʌt ðə dʌvz aɪz kəɾ izəli pɪk aʊt laɪɾ ən ʃædoʊ, moʊʃən ən stɪlnəs. ʃi nʌdʒd ɪt tə ɪnvɛstəɡeɪt, livɪŋ ɹæmʃələn.

There was light up ahead. It was faint, but the dove's eyes could easily pick out light and shadow, motion and stillness. She nudged it to investigate, leaving Ramshalan.

ðə laɪt wɑz kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ə ɡeɪtweɪ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə klɪɹ pætʃ, spɪlɪŋ fɔɹθ ə wɔɹm ɡloʊ.

The light was coming from a gateway in the middle of a clear patch, spilling forth a warm glow.

ðəɹ wɝ fɪɡjɝz stændɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ɪt. wʌn ə ðɛm wɑz ælθɹ.

There were figures standing before it. One of them was al'Thor.

ɡɹeɪndəl fɛlt ɪnstən pænɪk. hi wɑz hɪɹ. lʊkɪŋ daʊn oʊvɝ ðə ɹɪdʒ, təwɔɹd hɝ. dɑɹknəs wɪðɪn! ʃi hædnt noʊn fəɹ sɝɾən ɪf hid bi hɪɹ ɪn pɝsən, əɹ ɪf ɹæmʃələn wəd tʃɹævəl θɹu ə ɡeɪtweɪ tə ɡɪv ɪz ɹipɔɹt. wʌt ɡeɪm wɑz ælθɹ pleɪɪŋ? ʃi lændəɾ əɹ dʌv ɑn ə bɹæntʃ. ɝæŋɡɝ wɑz kəmpleɪnɪŋ ən æskɪŋ ɡɹeɪndəl wʌt ʃi wɑz siɪŋ. ʃid sin ðə dʌv, ən wəd noʊ wʌt ɡɹeɪndəl wɑz ʌp tə.

Graendal felt instant panic. He was here. Looking down over the ridge, toward her. Darkness within! She hadn't known for certain if he'd be here in person, or if Ramshalan would travel through a gateway to give his report. What game was al'Thor playing? She landed her dove on a branch. Aran'gar was complaining and asking Graendal what she was seeing. She'd seen the dove, and would know what Graendal was up to.

ɡɹeɪndəl kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd hɑɹɾɝ. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ðə mæn u hæd wʌns bɪn luz θɝɪn tɛləmən. hi nu wɛɹ ʃi wɑz. hi hæd wʌns heɪɾəd əɹ dipli; haʊ mʌtʃ dɪɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝ? dɪɾ i ɹikɔl əɹ mɝɾɝ ə jənət?

Graendal concentrated harder. The Dragon Reborn, the man who had once been Lews Therin Telamon. He knew where she was. He had once hated her deeply; how much did he remember? Did he recall her murder of Yanet?

ælθɝz teɪm il bɹɔt ɹæmʃələn fɔɹwɝd, ən nɪneɪiv ɪnspɛktɪd hɪm. jɛs, ðət nɪneɪiv dɪd sim tə bi eɪbəl tə ɹid kəmpʌlʃən. ʃi nu wʌt tə lʊk fɔɹ, ət list. ʃi wəɾ əv tə daɪ;

Al'Thors tame Aiel brought Ramshalan forward, and Nynaeve inspected him. Yes, that Nynaeve did seem to be able to read Compulsion. She knew what to look for, at least. She would have to die;

ælθɹ ɹɪlaɪɾ əpɑn hɝ; hɝ dɛθ wəd bɹɪŋ ɪm peɪn. ən æftɝ hɝ, ælθɝz dɑɹk-hɛɹd lʌvɝ.

al'Thor relied upon her; her death would bring him pain. And after her, al'Thors dark-haired lover.

ɡɹeɪndəl nʌdʒ ðə dʌv daʊn ɑntu ə loʊɝ bɹæntʃ. wʌt wəɾ ælθɹ du? ɡɹeɪndəlz ɪnstɪŋks sɛɾ i wʊdn dɛɹ muv, nɑɾ əntɪl i ənɹævəld əɹ plɑt. hi æktəd ðə seɪm naʊ əz i hæd dʊɹɪŋ əɹ eɪdʒ; hi laɪk tə plæn, tə spɛn taɪm bɪldɪŋ tə ə kɹɪʃɛndoʊ ʌv ən əsɔlt.

Graendal nudged the dove down onto a lower branch. What would al'Thor do? Graendal's instincts said he wouldn't dare move, not until he unraveled her plot. He acted the same now as he had during her Age; he liked to plan, to spend time building to a crescendo of an assault.

ʃi fɹaʊnd. wʌt wɑz i seɪɪŋ? ʃi stʃɹeɪnd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk sɛns ə ðə saʊnz. kɝs bɝdz ɪɹhoʊlz - ðə vɔɪsəz saʊndəd laɪk kɹoʊks. kæl-lændɝ? waɪ wɑz i tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt kælændɝ? ən ə bɑks . . .

She frowned. What was he saying? She strained, trying to make sense of the sounds. Cursed bird's earholes - the voices sounded like croaks. Cal-landor? Why was he talking about Callandor? And a box . . .

sʌmθɪŋ bɝst əlaɪɾ ɪn ɪz hænd. ði æksɛs ki. ɡɹeɪndəl ɡæspt. hid bɹɔt ðət wɪð hɪm?

Something burst alight in his hand. The access key. Graendal gasped. He'd brought that with him?

ɪt wɑz nɪɹli əz bæɾ əz bɑlfaɪɝ.

It was nearly as bad as balefire.

sʌɾənli ʃi ʌndɝstʊd. ʃid bɪn pleɪd.

Suddenly she understood. She'd been played.

koʊld, tɛɹəfaɪd, ʃi ɹilis ðə dʌv ən snæpt əɹ aɪz oʊpən. ʃi wɑz stɪl sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə smɔl, wɪndoʊləs ɹum, ɝæŋɡɝ linɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹweɪ wɪð ɑɹmz foʊldəd.

Cold, terrified, she released the dove and snapped her eyes open. She was still sitting in the small, windowless room, Aran'gar leaning beside the doorway with arms folded.

ælθɹ hæd sɛn ɹæmʃələn ɪn, ɪkspɛktɪŋ ɪm tə bi kæptʃɝd, ɪkspɛktɪŋ ɪm tə hæv kəmpʌlʃən pleɪst ɑn hɪm. ɹæmʃələnz oʊnli pɝpəs wɑz tə ɡɪv ælθɹ kɑnfɝmeɪʃən ðət ɡɹeɪndəl wɑz ɪn ðə taʊɝ.

Al'Thor had sent Ramshalan in, expecting him to be captured, expecting him to have Compulsion placed on him. Ramshalan's only purpose was to give al'Thor confirmation that Graendal was in the tower.

laɪt! haʊ klɛvɝ hiz bɪkʌm.

Light! How clever he's become.

ʃi ɹilis ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ ən ɛmbɹeɪs lɛs-wʌndɝfəl seɪaɪdɑɹ. kwɪkli! ʃi wɑz soʊ ənsɛɾəld ðəɾ əɹ ɛmbɹeɪs nɪɹli feɪld. ʃi wɑz swɛɾɪŋ.

She released the True Power and embraced less-wonderful saidar. Quickly! She was so unsettled that her embrace nearly failed. She was sweating.

ɡoʊ. ʃi hæd tə ɡoʊ.

Go. She had to go.

ʃi oʊpən ə nu ɡeɪtweɪ. ɝæŋɡɝ tɝnd, stɛɹɪŋ θɹu ðə wɔlz ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ʌv ælθɹ.

She opened a new gateway. Aran'gar turned, staring through the walls in the direction of al'Thor.

"soʊ mʌtʃ paʊɝ! wʌɾ ɪz i duɪŋ?"

"So much power! What is he doing?"

ɝæŋɡɝ. ʃi ən dɛlænə hæd meɪd ðə wivz ə kəmpʌlʃən.

Aran'gar. She and Delana had made the weaves of Compulsion.

ælθɹ mʌs θɪŋk ɡɹeɪndəl dɛd. ɪf i dɪstʃɹɔɪd ðə pleɪs ən ðoʊz kəmpʊlʃənz ɹɪmeɪnd, ælθɹ wəd noʊ ðət hid mɪst ən ðət ɡɹeɪndəl lɪvd.

Al'Thor must think Graendal dead. If he destroyed the place and those Compulsions remained, al'Thor would know that he'd missed and that Graendal lived.

ɡɹeɪndəl fɔɹm tu ʃilz ən slæmd əm ɪndə pleɪs, wʌn fəɹ ɝæŋɡɝ, wʌn fəɹ dɛlænə. ðə wɪmən ɡæspt. ɡɹeɪndəl taɪɾ ɔf ðə wivz ən baʊn ðə tu ɪn ɛɹ.

Graendal formed two shields and slammed them into place, one for Aran'gar, one for Delana. The women gasped. Graendal tied off the weaves and bound the two in Air.

"ɡɹeɪndəl?" ɝæŋɡɝ sɛd, vɔɪs pænɪkt. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə - "

"Graendal?" Aran'gar said, voice panicked. "What are you - "

ɪt wɑz kʌmɪŋ. ɡɹeɪndəl lɛp fəɹ ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, ɹoʊlɪŋ θɹu ɪt, tʌmbəlɪŋ ən ɹɪpɪŋ əɹ dʒɹɛs ɑn ə bɹæntʃ. ə blaɪndɪŋ laɪt ɹoʊz bɪhaɪn hɝ. ʃi stʃɹʌɡəl tə dɪsmɪs ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, ən kɑt wʌn ɡlɪmps ə ðə hɔɹəfaɪɾ ɝæŋɡɝ bɪfɔɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ bɪhaɪnd wɑz kənsumd ɪn bjuɾəfəl, pjʊɹ waɪtnəs.

It was coming. Graendal leaped for the gateway, rolling through it, tumbling and ripping her dress on a branch. A blinding light rose behind her. She struggled to dismiss the gateway, and caught one glimpse of the horrified Aran'gar before everything behind was consumed in beautiful, pure whiteness.

ðə ɡeɪtweɪ vænɪʃt, livɪŋ ɡɹeɪndəl ɪn dɑɹknəs.

The gateway vanished, leaving Graendal in darkness.

ʃi leɪ, hɑɹt biɾɪŋ əɾ ə tɛɹəbəl spid, nɪɹli blaɪndɪd baɪ ðə ɡlɛɹ. ʃid meɪd ðə kwɪkɪst ɡeɪtweɪ ʃi kʊd, wʌn ðət lɛɾ oʊnli ə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns əweɪ. ʃi leɪ ɪn ðə dɝɾi ʌndɝbɹʌʃ ətɑp ə ɹɪdʒ bɪhaɪn ðə pæləs.

She lay, heart beating at a terrible speed, nearly blinded by the glare. She'd made the quickest gateway she could, one that led only a short distance away. She lay in the dirty underbrush atop a ridge behind the palace.

ə weɪv ə ɹɔŋɡnəs wɑʃt oʊvɝ hɝ, ə wɔɹpɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, ðə pæɾɝn ɪtsɛlf ɹɪpəlɪŋ. ə bɑlɛskɹim, ɪt wɑz kɔld - ə moʊmənt wən kɹieɪʃən ɪtsɛlf haʊld ɪn peɪn.

A wave of wrongness washed over her, a warping in the air, the Pattern itself rippling. A balescream, it was called - a moment when creation itself howled in pain.

ʃi bɹiðd ɪn ən aʊt, tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ. bʌt ʃi hæd tə si. ʃi hæd tə noʊ. ʃi ɹoʊz tə hɝ fit, lɛft æŋkəl twɪstəd. ʃi hɑbəl tə ðə tʃɹilaɪn ən lʊk daʊn.

She breathed in and out, trembling. But she had to see. She had to know. She rose to her feet, left ankle twisted. She hobbled to the treeline and looked down.

nætʃɹɪnz bæɹoʊ - ði ɪntaɪɝ pæləs - wɑz ɡɔn. bɝn aʊɾ ə ðə pæɾɝn. ʃi kʊdn si ælθɹ ɑn ɪz dɪstən ɹɪdʒ, bʌt ʃi nu wɛɹ i wɑz.

Natrin's Barrow - the entire palace - was gone. Burned out of the Pattern. She couldn't see al'Thor on his distant ridge, but she knew where he was.

"ju," ʃi ɡɹaʊld. "ju hæv bɪkʌm fɑɹ mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ðən aɪ əsumd."

"You," she growled. "You have become far more dangerous than I assumed."

hʌnʒɹədz ə bjuɾəfəl mɛn ən wɪmən, ðə faɪnəst ʃid ɡæðɝd, ɡɔn. hɝ stʃɹɔŋhoʊld, dʌzənz ʌv aɪɾəmz ə paʊɝ, hɝ ɡɹeɪɾəst ælaɪ əmʌŋ ðə tʃoʊzən. ɡɔn. ðɪs wɑz ə dɪzæstɝ.

Hundreds of beautiful men and women, the finest she'd gathered, gone. Her stronghold, dozens of items of Power, her greatest ally among the Chosen. Gone. This was a disaster.

noʊ, ʃi θɔt. / laɪv. ʃiɾ æntɪsəpeɪɾəd hɪm, ɪf oʊnli baɪ ə fju moʊməns. naʊ hi wəd θɪŋk ʃi wɑz dɛd.

No, she thought. / live. She'd anticipated him, if only by a few moments. Now he would think she was dead.

ʃi wɑz sʌɾənli ðə seɪfəst ʃid bɪn sɪns ɪskeɪpɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən. ɪksɛpt, ʌv kɔɹs, ðət ʃid dʒʌs kɑz ðə dɛθ ʌv wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd wəd nɑt bi plizd.

She was suddenly the safest she'd been since escaping the Dark One's prison. Except, of course, that she'd just caused the death of one of the Chosen. The Great Lord would not be pleased.

ʃi lɪmpt əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɹɪdʒ, ɔlɹɛɾi plænɪŋ əɹ nɛks muv. ðɪs wəɾ əv tə bi hændəl vɛɹi, vɛɹi kɛɹfəli.

She limped away from the ridge, already planning her next move. This would have to be handled very, very carefully.

ɡɑləd dəmədʒɹd, lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, jæŋkt ɪz buɾɪd fʊt fɹi ʌv ði æŋkəl-dip mʌd wɪð ə slɝpɪŋ saʊnd. baɪtmz bʌzd ɪn ðə mʌɡi ɛɹ. ðə stɛntʃ ə mʌɾ ən stæɡnənt wɔɾɝ θɹɛɾənd tə ɡæɡ hɪm wɪð itʃ bɹɛθ əz i lɛɾ ɪz hɔɹs tə dʒɹaɪɝ ɡɹaʊn ɑn ðə pæθ. bɪhaɪn ɪm tʃɹʌdʒd ə lɔŋ, twɪstɪŋ kɑləm fɔɹ mɛn waɪd, itʃ wʌn əz mʌɾid, swɛɾi ən wɪɹi əz i wɑz.

Galad Damodred, Lord Captain Commander of the Children of the Light, yanked his booted foot free of the ankle-deep mud with a slurping sound. Bitemes buzzed in the muggy air. The stench of mud and stagnant water threatened to gag him with each breath as he led his horse to drier ground on the path. Behind him trudged a long, twisting column four men wide, each one as muddied, sweaty and weary as he was.

ðeɪ wɝ ɑn ðə bɔɹɾɝ ʌv ɡildən ən ɔltɑɹə, ɪn ə swɑmpi wɛtlænd wɛɹ ði oʊks ən spɪswʊdz hæd ɡɪvən weɪ tə lɔɹəlz ən spaɪɾɝi saɪpɹəs, ðɛɹ nɑɹld ɹuts spɹɛd laɪk spɪnli fɪŋɡɝz. ðə stɪŋkɪŋ ɛɹ wɑz hɑt - dɪspaɪt ðə ʃeɪɾ ən klaʊd kʌvɝ - ən θɪk. ɪt wɑz laɪk bɹiðɪŋ ɪn ə faʊl sup. ɡɑləd stim bɪniθ ɪz bɹɛstpleɪɾ ən meɪl, hɪz kɑnɪkəl hɛlmət hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl, hɪz skɪn ɪtʃɪŋ fɹəm ðə ɡɹaɪm ən sɔlti swɛt.

They were on the border of Ghealdan and Altara, in a swampy wetland where the oaks and spicewoods had given way to laurels and spidery cypress, their gnarled roots spread like spindly fingers. The stinking air was hot - despite the shade and cloud cover - and thick. It was like breathing in a foul soup. Galad steamed beneath his breastplate and mail, his conical helmet hanging from his saddle, his skin itching from the grime and salty sweat.

mɪzɝəbəl ðoʊ ɪt wɑz, ðɪs ɹut wɑz ðə bɛst weɪ. əsunɑwə wəd nɑɾ æntɪsəpeɪɾ ɪt. ɡɑləd waɪpt ɪz bɹaʊ wɪð ðə bæk ə hɪz hæn ən tʃɹaɪd tə wɔk wɪð hɛd haɪ fəɹ ðə bɛnəfɪɾ ə ðoʊz u fɑloʊd hɪm. sɛvən θaʊzən mɛn, tʃɪlʒɹən u hæd tʃoʊzən ɪm ɹæðɝ ðən ðə sintʃæn ɪnveɪɾɝz.

Miserable though it was, this route was the best way. Asunawa would not anticipate it. Galad wiped his brow with the back of his hand and tried to walk with head high for the benefit of those who followed him. Seven thousand men, Children who had chosen him rather than the Seanchan invaders.

dʌl ɡɹin mɔs hʌŋ fɹəm ðə bɹæntʃəz, dʒɹupɪŋ laɪk ʃɹɛdz ə flɛʃ fɹəm ɹɑɾɪŋ kɔɹpsəz. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ ðə sɪkli ɡɹeɪz ən ɡɹinz wɝ ɹɪliv baɪ ə bɹaɪt bɝst ə taɪni pɪŋk əɹ vaɪəlɪt flaʊɝz klʌstɝɪŋ ɝaʊn tʃɹɪklɪŋ stʃɹimz. ðɛɹ sʌɾən kʌlɝ wɑz ʌnɪkspɛktɪd, əz ɪf sʌmwʌn hæd spɹɪŋkəl dʒɹɑps ə peɪn ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

Dull green moss hung from the branches, drooping like shreds of flesh from rotting corpses. Here and there the sickly grays and greens were relieved by a bright burst of tiny pink or violet flowers clustering around trickling streams. Their sudden color was unexpected, as if someone had sprinkled drops of paint on the ground.

ɪt wɑz stʃɹeɪnʒ tə faɪn bjuɾi ɪn ðɪs pleɪs. kəɾ i faɪn ðə laɪɾ ɪn ɪz oʊn sɪtʃueɪʃən əz wɛl? hi fɪɹɾ ɪt wəd nɑt bi soʊ izi.

It was strange to find beauty in this place. Could he find the Light in his own situation as well? He feared it would not be so easy.

hi tʌɡd staʊt fɔɹwɝd. hi kəd hɪɹ wɝid kɑnvɝseɪʃənz fɹəm bɪhaɪnd, pʌŋktʃueɪɾɪd baɪ ði əkeɪʒənəl kɝs. ðɪs pleɪs, wɪð ɪts stɛntʃ ən baɪɾɪŋ ɪnsɛks, wəd tʃɹaɪ ðə bɛst ə mɛn. ðoʊz u fɑloʊd ɡɑləd wɝ ənnɝv baɪ ðə pleɪs ðə wɝld wɑz bɪkʌmɪŋ. ə wɝld wɛɹ ðə skaɪ wɑz kɑnstənli klaʊɾəd blæk, wɛɹ ɡʊd mɛn daɪd tə stʃɹeɪnʒ twɪstɪŋz ə ðə pæɾɝn, ən wɛɹ vɑldə  - ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ bɪfɔɹ ɡɑləd -  hæd tɝn aʊt tə bi ə mɝɾɝɝ ən ə ɹeɪpɪst.

He tugged Stout forward. He could hear worried conversations from behind, punctuated by the occasional curse. This place, with its stench and biting insects, would try the best of men. Those who followed Galad were unnerved by the place the world was becoming. A world where the sky was constantly clouded black, where good men died to strange twistings of the Pattern, and where Valda  - the Lord Captain Commander before Galad -  had turned out to be a murderer and a rapist.

ɡɑləd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. ðə læs bæɾəl wəd sun kʌm.

Galad shook his head. The Last Battle would soon come.

ə klɪŋkɪŋ ə tʃeɪn meɪl ənaʊnst sʌmwʌn muvɪŋ ʌp ðə laɪn. ɡɑləd ɡlænst oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ əz deɪn bɔɹnhəld ɝaɪvd, səluɾəd, ən fɛl ɪndə pleɪs bɪsaɪd hɪm. "dəmədʒɹd," deɪn sɛd sɔfli, ðɛɹ buts skwɪʃɪŋ ɪn mʌd, "pɝhæps wi ʃəd tɝn bæk."

A clinking of chain mail announced someone moving up the line. Galad glanced over his shoulder as Dain Bornhald arrived, saluted, and fell into place beside him. "Damodred," Dain said softly, their boots squishing in mud, "perhaps we should turn back."

"bækwɝd lidz oʊnli tə ðə pæst," ɡɑləd sɛd, skænɪŋ ðə pæθweɪ əhɛd. "aɪ hæv θɔɾ əbaʊt ðɪs mʌtʃ, tʃaɪl bɔɹnhəld. ðɪs skaɪ, ðə weɪstɪŋ ə ðə lænd, ðə weɪ ðə dɛd wɔk . . . ðəɹ ɪz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ taɪm tə faɪn ælaɪz ən faɪɾ əɡɛns ðə sintʃæn. wi mʌs mɑɹtʃ tə ðə læs bæɾəl."

"Backward leads only to the past," Galad said, scanning the pathway ahead. "I have thought about this much, Child Bornhald. This sky, the wasting of the land, the way the dead walk . . . There is no longer time to find allies and fight against the Seanchan. We must march to the Last Battle."

"bʌt ðɪs swɑmp," bɔɹnhəl sɛd, ɡlænsɪŋ tə ðə saɪɾ əz ə lɑɹdʒ sɝpən slɪd θɹu ði ʌndɝbɹʌʃ. "aʊɝ mæps seɪ wi ʃʊɾə bɪn aʊɾ ʌv ɪt baɪ naʊ."

"But this swamp," Bornhald said, glancing to the side as a large serpent slid through the underbrush. "Our maps say we should have been out of it by now."

"ðɛn ʃʊɹli wəɹ nɪɹ ði ɛdʒ."

"Then surely we are near the edge."

"pɝhæps," deɪn sɛd, ə tʃɹeɪl ə swɛt ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm ɪz bɹaʊ daʊn ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz lin feɪs, wɪtʃ twɪtʃt. fɔɹtʃənətli, hid ɹʌn aʊɾ ə bɹændi ə fju deɪz bæk. "ənlɛs ðə mæp ɪz ɪn ɛɹɝ."

"Perhaps," Dain said, a trail of sweat running from his brow down the side of his lean face, which twitched. Fortunately, he'd run out of brandy a few days back. "Unless the map is in error."

ɡɑləd dɪdn ɹɪspɑnd. wʌns-ɡʊd mæps wɝ pɹuvɪŋ fɔlti ðiz deɪz. oʊpən filz wəd tɝn tə bɹoʊkən hɪlz, vɪlədʒəz wəd vænɪʃ, pæstʃɝz wəd bi ɛɹəbəl wʌn deɪ, ðən sʌɾənli oʊvɝɡɹoʊn wɪð vaɪnz ən fʌŋɡəs. ðə swɑmp kəɾ ɪndiɾ əv spɹɛd.

Galad didn't respond. Once-good maps were proving faulty these days. Open fields would turn to broken hills, villages would vanish, pastures would be arable one day, then suddenly overgrown with vines and fungus. The swamp could indeed have spread.

"ðə mɛn ɑɹ ɪɡzɔstəd," bɔɹnhəl sɛd. "ðeɪɹ ɡʊd mɛn - jə noʊ ðeɪ ɑɹ. bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ stɑɹɾɪŋ tə kəmpleɪn." hi wɪnst, əz ɪf æntɪsəpeɪɾɪŋ ə ɹɛpɹəmæn fɹəm ɡɑləd.

"The men are exhausted," Bornhald said. "They're good men - you know they are. But they are starting to complain." He winced, as if anticipating a reprimand from Galad.

pɝhæps wʌns i wʊɾə ɡɪvən wʌn. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ʃəd bɛɹ ðɛɹ əflɪkʃənz wɪð pɹaɪd.

Perhaps once he would have given one. The Children should bear their afflictions with pride.

haʊɛvɝ, mɛmɹiz ə lɛsənz mɔɹɡeɪs hæd tɔt -  lɛsənz i hædn ʌndɝstʊɾ ɪn ɪz juθ -  wɝ næɡɪŋ ət hɪm. lɛd baɪ ɪɡzæmpəl. ɹikwaɪɝ stʃɹɛŋkθ, bʌt fɝst ʃoʊ ɪt.

However, memories of lessons Morgase had taught -  lessons he hadn't understood in his youth -  were nagging at him. Lead by example. Require strength, but first show it.

ɡɑləd nɑɾəd. ðeɪ wɝ nɪɹɪŋ ə dʒɹaɪ klɪɹɪŋ. "ɡæðɝ ðə mɛn. əl spik tə ðoʊz ət ðə fɹʌnt. hæv maɪ wɝdz ɹəkɔɹɾəd, ðən pæs tə ðoʊz bɪhaɪnd."

Galad nodded. They were nearing a dry clearing. "Gather the men. I will speak to those at the front. Have my words recorded, then passed to those behind."

bɔɹnhəld lʊk pɝplɛkst, bʌt dɪɾ əz kəmændəd. ɡɑləd stɛpt ɔf tə ðə saɪd, klaɪmɪŋ ʌp ə smɔl hɪl. hi pleɪst ɪz hæn ɑn ðə hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹd, ɪnspɛktɪŋ ɪz mɛn əz ðə kʌmpəniz ət ðə fɹʌnt ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊnd. ðeɪ stʊd wɪð slaʊtʃt pɑstʃɝz, lɛɡz mʌɾid. hænz fleɪld ət baɪtmz əɹ skɹætʃt ət kɑlɝz.

Bornhald looked perplexed, but did as commanded. Galad stepped off to the side, climbing up a small hill. He placed his hand on the hilt of his sword, inspecting his men as the companies at the front gathered around. They stood with slouched postures, legs muddied. Hands flailed at bitemes or scratched at collars.

"wi ɑɹ tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt," ɡɑləɾ ənaʊnst, wʌns ðeɪ wɝ ɡæðɝd. "ðiz ɑɹ ðə dɑɹkəs deɪz ə mɛn. deɪz wən hoʊp ɪz wik, deɪz wən dɛθ ɹeɪnz. bʌɾ ɪts ɑn ðə dipəs naɪts wən laɪɾ ɪz moʊst ɡlɔɹiəs. dʊɹɪŋ ðə deɪ, ə bɹɪljən bikən kən əpɪɹ wik. bʌt wən ɔl ʌðɝ laɪts feɪl, ɪɾəl ɡaɪd!

"We are Children of the Light," Galad announced, once they were gathered. "These are the darkest days of men. Days when hope is weak, days when death reigns. But it is on the deepest nights when light is most glorious. During the day, a brilliant beacon can appear weak. But when all other lights fail, it will guide!

"wi ɑɹ ðət bikən. ðɪs maɪɹ ɪz ən əflɪkʃən. bʌt wəɹ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, ən əɹ əflɪkʃənz ɑɹ əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ. wəɹ hʌntəd baɪ ðoʊz u ʃəd lʌv ʌs, ən ʌðɝ pæθweɪz lɛd tə əɹ ɡɹeɪvz. ən soʊ wɪl ɡoʊ fɔɹwɝd. fəɹ ðoʊz wi mʌs pɹətɛkt, fəɹ ðə læs bæɾəl, fəɹ ðə laɪt!

"We are that beacon. This mire is an affliction. But we are the Children of the Light, and our afflictions are our strength. We are hunted by those who should love us, and other pathways lead to our graves. And so we will go forward. For those we must protect, for the Last Battle, for the Light!

"wɛɹ ɪz ðə vɪktɝi ʌv ðɪs swɑmp? aɪ ɹəfjuz tə fil ɪts baɪt, fəɹ aɪm pɹaʊd. pɹaʊd tə lɪv ɪn ðiz deɪz, pɹaʊd tə bi pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌɾ ɪz tə kʌm. ɔl ðə laɪvz ðət keɪm bɪfɔɹ əs ɪn ðɪs eɪdʒ lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə əɹ deɪ, ðə deɪ wən mɛn wɪl bi tɛstəd. lɛɾ ʌðɝz bɪmoʊn ðɛɹ feɪt. lɛɾ ʌðɝz kɹaɪ ən weɪl. wɪl nɑt, fəɹ wɪl feɪs ðɪs tɛst wɪð hɛdz hɛl haɪ. ən wɪl lɛɾ ɪt pɹuv əs stʃɹɔŋ!"

"Where is the victory of this swamp? I refuse to feel its bite, for I am proud. Proud to live in these days, proud to be part of what is to come. All the lives that came before us in this Age looked forward to our day, the day when men will be tested. Let others bemoan their fate. Let others cry and wail. We will not, for we will face this test with heads held high. And we will let it prove us strong!"

nɑɾ ə lɔŋ spitʃ; hi dɪd nɑt wɪʃ tə ɪkstɛn ðɛɹ taɪm ɪn ðə swɑmp oʊvɝli mʌtʃ. stɪl, ɪt sim tə də ɪts duɾi. ðə mɛnz bæks stʃɹeɪɾənd, ən ðeɪ nɑɾəd. mɛn u hæd bɪn tʃoʊzən tə də soʊ ɹoʊt daʊn ðə wɝdz, ən muv bæk tə ɹiɾ əm tə ðoʊz u hæd nɑt bɪn eɪbəl tə hɪɹ.

Not a long speech; he did not wish to extend their time in the swamp overly much. Still, it seemed to do its duty. The men's backs straightened, and they nodded. Men who had been chosen to do so wrote down the words, and moved back to read them to those who had not been able to hear.

wən ðə tʃɹup kəntɪnjud fɔɹwɝd, ðə mɛnz fʊtstɛps noʊ lɔŋɡɝ dʒɹæɡd, ðɛɹ pɑstʃɝz wɝ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ slʌmpt. ɡɑləd ɹɪmeɪn ɑn ɪz hɪlsaɪd, teɪkɪŋ ə fju ɹɪpɔɹts, lɛɾɪŋ ðə mɛn si hɪm əz ðeɪ pæst.

When the troop continued forward, the men's footsteps no longer dragged, their postures were no longer slumped. Galad remained on his hillside, taking a few reports, letting the men see him as they passed.

wən ðə læst ə ðə sɛvən θaʊzən hæd ɡɔn baɪ, ɡɑləd noʊɾəd ə smɔl ɡɹup weɪɾɪŋ ət ðə beɪs ə ðə hɪl. tʃaɪl jɹət baɪɑɝ stʊd wɪð ðɛm, lʊkɪŋ ʌp ət ɡɑləd, sʌŋkən aɪz əlaɪt wɪð zil. hi wɑz ɡɔnt, wɪð ə nɛɹoʊ feɪs.

When the last of the seven thousand had gone by, Galad noted a small group waiting at the base of the hill. Child Jaret Byar stood with them, looking up at Galad, sunken eyes alight with zeal. He was gaunt, with a narrow face.

"tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ," ɡɑləd sɛd, wɔkɪŋ daʊn fɹəm ðə hɪlsaɪd.

"Child Byar," Galad said, walking down from the hillside.

"ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊd spitʃ, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," baɪɑɝ sɛd fɝvənli. "ðə læs bæɾəl. jɛs, ɪts taɪm tə ɡoʊ tə ɪt."

"It was a good speech, my Lord Captain Commander," Byar said fervently. "The Last Battle. Yes, it is time to go to it."

"ɪɾ ɪz əɹ bɝɾən," ɡɑləd sɛd. "æn əɹ duɾi."

"It is our burden," Galad said. "And our duty."

"wi wɪl ɹaɪd nɔɹθwɝd," baɪɑɝ sɛd. "mɛn wɪl kʌm tə ʌs, ən wɪl ɡɹoʊ. ən ɪnɔɹməs fɔɹs ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən, tɛnz ə θaʊzənz. hʌnʒɹədz ə θaʊzənz. wɪl wɑʃ oʊvɝ ðə lænd. meɪbi wɪl əv ɪnʌf mɛn tə kæs daʊn ðə waɪt taʊɝ ən ðə wɪtʃəz, ɹæðɝ ðən niɾɪŋ tə əlaɪ wɪð ðɛm."

"We will ride northward," Byar said. "Men will come to us, and we will grow. An enormous force of the Children, tens of thousands. Hundreds of thousands. We will wash over the land. Maybe we will have enough men to cast down the White Tower and the witches, rather than needing to ally with them."

ɡɑləd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "wi wɪl nid ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ. ðə ʃædoʊ wɪl əv dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz, mɹdʒɹɑl, fɔɹseɪkən"

Galad shook his head. "We will need the Aes Sedai, Child Byar. The Shadow will have Dreadlords, Myrddraal, Forsaken"

"jɛs, aɪ səpoʊz." baɪɑɝ simd ɹɪlʌktənt. wɛl, hid simd ɹɪlʌktən əbaʊt ði aɪdiə bɪfɔɹ, bʌɾ i hæɾ əɡɹid tə ɪt.

"Yes, I suppose." Byar seemed reluctant. Well, he'd seemed reluctant about the idea before, but he had agreed to it.

"aʊɝ ɹoʊɾ ɪz dɪfəkəlt, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ, bʌt ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt wɪl bi liɾɝz ət ðə læs bæɾəl."

"Our road is difficult, Child Byar, but the Children of the Light will be leaders at the Last Battle."

vɑldəz mɪsdidz hæd tɑɹnɪʃt ði ɪntaɪɝ ɔɹɾɝ. mɔɹ ðən ðæt, ɡɑləd wɑz ɪnkɹisɪŋli kənvɪns ðəɾ əsunɑwə hæd pleɪɾ ə lɑɹdʒ ɹoʊl ɪn ðə mɪstʃɹitmən ən dɛθ ə hɪz stɛpmʌðɝ. ðət mɛn ðə haɪ ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ hɪmsɛlf wɑz kɝʌpt.

Valda's misdeeds had tarnished the entire order. More than that, Galad was increasingly convinced that Asunawa had played a large role in the mistreatment and death of his stepmother. That meant the High Inquisitor himself was corrupt.

duɪŋ wʌt wɑz ɹaɪt wɑz ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ ɪn laɪf. ɪt ɹikwaɪɝɾ ɛni sækɹəfaɪs. ət ðɪs taɪm, ðə ɹaɪt θɪŋ tə də wɑz fli. ɡɑləd kəd nɑt feɪs əsunɑwə; ðə haɪ ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ wɑz bæk baɪ ðə sintʃæn. bɪsaɪdz, ðə læs bæɾəl wɑz mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt.

Doing what was right was the most important thing in life. It required any sacrifice. At this time, the right thing to do was flee. Galad could not face Asunawa; the High Inquisitor was backed by the Seanchan. Besides, the Last Battle was more important.

ɡɑləd stɛp swɪfli, wɔkɪŋ θɹu ðə mʌk bæk təwɔɹd ðə fɹʌn ə ðə laɪn ə tʃɪlʒɹən.

Galad stepped swiftly, walking through the muck back toward the front of the line of Children.

ðeɪ tʃɹævəld laɪt, wɪð fju pæk ænəməlz, ən ɪz mɛn wɔɹ ðɛɹ ɑɹmɝ - ðɛɹ maʊns wɝ leɪɾən wɪð fuɾ ən səplaɪz.

They traveled light, with few pack animals, and his men wore their armor - their mounts were laden with food and supplies.

ət ðə fɹʌnt, ɡɑləd faʊn tʃɹɑm spikɪŋ wɪð ə fju mɛn u wɔɹ lɛðɝz ən bɹaʊn kloʊks, nɑt waɪt tɑbɝdz ən stil kæps. ðɛɹ skaʊts. tʃɹɑm nɑɾəd tə hɪm ɪn ɹɪspɛkt; ðə lɔɹd kæptən wɑz wʌn ʌv ɡɑlədz moʊs tʃɹʌstɪd mɛn. "skaʊts seɪ ðɛɹz ə smɔl ɪʃu əhɛd, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," tʃɹɑm sɛd.

At the front, Galad found Trom speaking with a few men who wore leathers and brown cloaks, not white tabards and steel caps. Their scouts. Trom nodded to him in respect; the Lord Captain was one of Galad's most trusted men. "Scouts say there's a small issue ahead, my Lord Captain Commander," Trom said.

"wʌɾ ɪʃu?"

"What issue?"

"ɪt wəd bi bɛs tə ʃoʊ ɪt tə jə dɝɛkli, sɝ," sɛd tʃaɪl bɑɹlɪt, ðə liɾɝ ə ðə skaʊts.

"It would be best to show it to you directly, sir," said Child Barlett, the leader of the scouts.

ɡɑləd nɑɾəd ɪm fɔɹwɝd. əhɛd, ðə swɑmpi fɔɹəst sim tə bi θɪnɪŋ. θæŋk ðə laɪt -  dɪd ðət min ðeɪ wɝ nɪɹli fɹi?

Galad nodded him forward. Ahead, the swampy forest seemed to be thinning. Thank the Light -  did that mean they were nearly free?

noʊ. əz ɡɑləɾ ɝaɪvd, hi faʊn sɛvɹəl ʌðɝ skaʊts lʊkɪŋ aʊɾ əɾ ə dɛd fɔɹəst. moʊs tʃɹiz ɪn ðə swɑmp bɔɹ livz, ðoʊ sɪkli wʌnz, bʌt ðoʊz əhɛd wɝ skɛləɾəl ən æʃən, əz ɪf bɝnd. ðəɹ wɑz səm kaɪndə sɪkli waɪt laɪkən əɹ mɔs ɡɹoʊɪŋ oʊvɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ðə tʃɹi tʃɹʌŋks lʊkt ɪmeɪʃieɪɾɪd.

No. As Galad arrived, he found several other scouts looking out at a dead forest. Most trees in the swamp bore leaves, though sickly ones, but those ahead were skeletal and ashen, as if burned. There was some kind of sickly white lichen or moss growing over everything. The tree trunks looked emaciated.

wɔɾɝ flʌɾəd ðɪs ɛɹiə, ə waɪd bʌt ʃæloʊ ɹɪvɝ wɪð ə vɛɹi sloʊ kɝənt. ɪt hæd swɑloʊd ðə beɪsəz ə mɛni ʌv ðə tʃɹiz, ən fɔlən tʃɹi lɪmz bɹoʊk ðə dɝɾi bɹaʊn wɔɾɝ laɪk ɑɹmz ɹitʃɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə skaɪ.

Water flooded this area, a wide but shallow river with a very slow current. It had swallowed the bases of many of the trees, and fallen tree limbs broke the dirty brown water like arms reaching toward the sky.

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ kɔɹpsəz, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," wʌn ə ðə skaʊts sɛd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ ʌpɹɪvɝ.

"There are corpses, my Lord Captain Commander," one of the scouts said, gesturing upriver.

"floʊɾɪŋ daʊn. lʊks laɪk ðə ɹɛmnəns ʌv ə dɪstən bæɾəl."

"Floating down. Looks like the remnants of a distant battle."

"ɪz ðɪs ɹɪvɝ ɑn əɹ mæps?" ɡɑləɾ æskt.

"Is this river on our maps?" Galad asked.

wʌn baɪ wʌn, ðə skaʊts ʃʊk ðɛɹ hɛdz.

One by one, the scouts shook their heads.

ɡɑləd sɛɾ ɪz dʒɔ. "kæn ðɪs bi fɔɹɾɪd?"

Galad set his jaw. "Can this be forded?"

"ɪts ʃæloʊ, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," tʃaɪl bɑɹlɪt sɛd. "bʌt wɪl əv tə wɑtʃ fəɹ hɪɾən dɛpθs."

"It's shallow, my Lord Captain Commander," Child Barlett said. "But we'll have to watch for hidden depths."

ɡɑləd ɹitʃt aʊt tə ə tʃɹi bɪsaɪɾ ɪm ən bɹoʊk fɹi ə lɔŋ bɹæntʃ, ðə wʊd snæpɪŋ laʊdli. "aɪ wɪl ɡoʊ fɝst. hæv ðə mɛn ɹimuv ðɛɹ ɑɹmɝ ən kloʊks."

Galad reached out to a tree beside him and broke free a long branch, the wood snapping loudly. "I will go first. Have the men remove their armor and cloaks."

ði ɔɹɾɝz wɛn daʊn ðə laɪn, ən ɡɑləd tʊk ɔf ɪz ɑɹmɝ ən ɹæpt ɪɾ ɪn ɪz kloʊk, ðən taɪɾ ɪt tə hɪz bæk. hi haɪkt ʌp ɪz tʃɹaʊzɝz əz fɑɹ əz i kʊd, ðən stɛp daʊn ðə dʒɛntəl bæŋk ən plaʊd fɔɹwɝɾ ɪndə ðə mɝki wɔɾɝ. ðə ʃɑɹpli koʊl spɹɪŋ ɹʌnɔf meɪɾ ɪm tɛns. hɪz buts sæŋk ɪntʃəz ɪndə ðə sændi bɑɾəm, fɪlɪŋ wɪð wɔɾɝ, stɝɪŋ ʌp swɝlz ə mʌd. staʊt meɪɾ ə laʊɾɝ splæʃ əz i stɛpt ɪndə ðə wɔɾɝ bɪhaɪnd.

The orders went down the line, and Galad took off his armor and wrapped it in his cloak, then tied it to his back. He hiked up his trousers as far as he could, then stepped down the gentle bank and plowed forward into the murky water. The sharply cold spring runoff made him tense. His boots sank inches into the sandy bottom, filling with water, stirring up swirls of mud. Stout made a louder splash as he stepped into the water behind.

ɪt wɑzn tu dɪfəkəl tə wɔk ɪn; ðə wɔɾɝ oʊnli keɪm ʌp tə hɪz niz. hi juzd ɪz stɪk tə faɪn ðə bɛs fʊɾɪŋ. ðoʊz skɛləɾəl, daɪɪŋ tʃɹiz wɝ ənɝvɪŋ. ðeɪ dɪdn sim tə bi ɹɑɾɪŋ, ən naʊ ðəɾ i wɑz kloʊsɝ, hi kəd bɛɾɝ si ði æʃ-ɡɹeɪ fʌz əmʌŋ ðə laɪkən ðət koʊɾəd ðɛɹ tʃɹʌŋks ən bɹæntʃəz.

It wasn't too difficult to walk in; the water only came up to his knees. He used his stick to find the best footing. Those skeletal, dying trees were unnerving. They didn't seem to be rotting, and now that he was closer, he could better see the ash-gray fuzz among the lichen that coated their trunks and branches.

ðə tʃɪlʒɹən bɪhaɪn splæʃt laʊdli əz mɔɹ ən mɔɹ ə ðɛm ɛntɝd ðə waɪd stʃɹim. nɪɹbaɪ, bʌlbəs fɔɹmz floʊɾəd daʊn ðə ɹɪvɝ tə kætʃ əpɑn ɹɑks. səm wɝ ðə kɔɹpsəz ə mɛn, bʌt mɛni wɝ lɑɹdʒɝ. mjulz, hi ɹilaɪzd, kætʃɪŋ ə bɛɾɝ lʊk əɾ ə snaʊt. dʌzənz ə ðɛm. ðeɪd bɪn dɛd fəɹ səm taɪm, dʒʌdʒɪŋ baɪ ðə bloʊt.

The Children behind splashed loudly as more and more of them entered the wide stream. Nearby, bulbous forms floated down the river to catch upon rocks. Some were the corpses of men, but many were larger. Mules, he realized, catching a better look at a snout. Dozens of them. They'd been dead for some time, judging by the bloat.

laɪkli ə vɪlədʒ ʌpstʃɹim hæd bɪn ətæk fəɹ ɪts fud. ðɪs wɑzn ðə fɝst ɡɹup ə dɛd ðeɪd faʊnd.

Likely a village upstream had been attacked for its food. This wasn't the first group of dead they'd found.

hi ɹitʃt ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ, ðən klaɪmd aʊt. əz i ənɹoʊld ɪz tʃɹaʊzɝ lɛɡz ən dɑn ɪz ɑɹmɝ ən kloʊk, hi fɛlt ɪz ʃoʊldɝ eɪkɪŋ fɹəm ðə bloʊz vɑldə hæd ɡɪvən hɪm. hɪz θaɪ stɪl stʌŋ, tu.

He reached the other side of the river, then climbed out. As he unrolled his trouser legs and donned his armor and cloak, he felt his shoulder aching from the blows Valda had given him. His thigh still stung, too.

hi tɝn ən kəntɪnjud daʊn ðə ɡeɪm tʃɹeɪl nɔɹθwɝd, liɾɪŋ ðə weɪ əz ʌðɝ tʃɪlʒɹən ɹitʃt ðə bæŋk. hi lɔŋ tə ɹaɪd staʊt, bʌɾ i dɛɹd nɑt. ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ, ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɑz stɪl dæmp, ənivən, ən pɑkt wɪð hɪɾən sɪŋkhoʊlz. ɪf i ɹoʊd, hi kəɾ izəli kɑst staʊɾ ə bɹoʊkən lɛɡ ən hɪmsɛlf ə bɹoʊkən kɹaʊn.

He turned and continued down the game trail northward, leading the way as other Children reached the bank. He longed to ride Stout, but he dared not. Though they were out of the river, the ground was still damp, uneven, and pocked with hidden sinkholes. If he rode, he could easily cost Stout a broken leg and himself a broken crown.

soʊ hi ən ɪz mɛn wɔkt, sɝaʊndəd baɪ ðoʊz ɡɹeɪ tʃɹiz, swɛɾɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪzɝəbəl hit. hi lɔŋ fəɹ ə ɡʊd bæθ.

So he and his men walked, surrounded by those gray trees, sweating in the miserable heat. He longed for a good bath.

ɪvɛntʃəwəli, tʃɹɑm dʒɑɡd ʌp ðə laɪn tə hɪm. "ɔl mɛn ɑɹ əkɹɔs seɪfli." hi tʃɛk ðə skaɪ.

Eventually, Trom jogged up the line to him. "All men are across safely." He checked the sky.

"bɝn ðoʊz klaʊdz. aɪ kən nɛvɝ tɛl wʌt taɪm ɪɾ ɪz."

"Burn those clouds. I can never tell what time it is."

"fɔɹ aʊɝz pæs mɪddeɪ," ɡɑləd sɛd.

"Four hours past midday," Galad said.

"jɔɹ sɝɾən?"

"You're certain?"

"jɛs."

"Yes."

"wɝnt wi tə stɑp ət mɪddeɪ tə dɪskʌs əɹ nɛkst stɛp?" ðət miɾɪŋ wɑz tə hæv teɪkən pleɪs wʌns ðeɪ ɡɑt θɹu ðə swɑmp.

"Weren't we to stop at midday to discuss our next step?" That meeting was to have taken place once they got through the swamp.

"fɔɹ naʊ, wɪv fju tʃɔɪsəz," ɡɑləd sɛd. "aɪ wɪl lid ðə mɛn nɔɹθwɝd tə ændɝ."

"For now, we have few choices," Galad said. "I will lead the men northward to Andor."

"ðə tʃɪlʒɹən əv mɛt . . . hɑstɪləɾi ðɛɹ."

"The Children have met . . . hostility there."

"aɪ hæv səm sɪkluɾɪd læn ʌp ɪn ðə nɔɹθwɛst. əl nɑt bi tɝn əweɪ ðɛɹ, ɹəɡɑɹdləs ə hu kəntʃɹoʊlz ðə θɹoʊn."

"I have some secluded land up in the northwest. I will not be turned away there, regardless of who controls the throne."

laɪt sɛn ðəɾ ɪleɪn hɛl ðə laɪən θɹoʊn. laɪt sɛn ðət ʃi hæɾ ɪskeɪp ðə tæŋɡəlz ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðoʊ hi fɪɹd ðə wɝst. ðəɹ wɝ mɛni hu wəd juz əɹ əz ə pɔn, ælθɹ nɑt ðə list ə ðɛm. ʃi wɑz hɛdstʃɹɔŋ, ən ðət kəd meɪk əɹ izi tə mənɪpjəleɪt.

Light send that Elayne held the Lion Throne. Light send that she had escaped the tangles of the Aes Sedai, though he feared the worst. There were many who would use her as a pawn, al'Thor not the least of them. She was headstrong, and that could make her easy to manipulate.

"wil nid səplaɪz," tʃɹɑm sɛd. "fɔɹɪdʒ ɪz dɪfəkəlt, ən mɔɹ ən mɔɹ vɪlədʒəz ɑɹ ɛmpti."

"We'll need supplies," Trom said. "Forage is difficult, and more and more villages are empty."

ɡɑləd nɑɾəd. ə lədʒɪɾəmət kənsɝn.

Galad nodded. A legitimate concern.

"ɪts ə ɡʊd plæn, ðoʊ," tʃɹɑm sɛd, ðən loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs. "aɪl ədmɪt, dəmədʒɹd, aɪ wɝid ðət jud ɹɛfjus liɾɝʃɪp."

"It's a good plan, though," Trom said, then lowered his voice. "I'll admit, Damodred, I worried that you'd refuse leadership."

"aɪ kəd nɑt. tə əbændən ðə tʃɪlʒɹən naʊ, æftɝ kɪlɪŋ ðɛɹ liɾɝ, wəd bi ɹɔŋ."

"I could not. To abandon the Children now, after killing their leader, would be wrong."

tʃɹɑm smaɪld. "ɪts əz sɪmpəl əz ðət tə ju, ɪzən ɪt?"

Trom smiled. "It's as simple as that to you, isn't it?"

"ɪt ʃəd bi əz sɪmpəl əz ðət tə ɛniwʌn." ɡɑləd hæd tə ɹaɪz tə ðə steɪʃən i hæd bɪn ɡɪvən. hi hæd noʊ ʌðɝ ɑpʃən. "ðə læs bæɾəl kʌmz ən ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt wɪl faɪt. ivən ɪf wɪv tə meɪk əlaɪənsəz wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn hɪmsɛlf, wɪl faɪt."

"It should be as simple as that to anyone." Galad had to rise to the station he had been given. He had no other option. "The Last Battle comes and the Children of the Light will fight. Even if we have to make alliances with the Dragon Reborn himself, we will fight."

fəɹ səm taɪm, ɡɑləd hædn bɪn sɝɾən əbaʊɾ ælθɹ. sɝɾənli ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wəɾ əv tə faɪɾ ət ðə læs bæɾəl. bʌt wɑz ðət mæn ælθɹ, əɹ wɑz i ə pʌpəɾ ə ðə taʊɝ, ən nɑt ðə tʃɹu dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn? ðət skaɪ wɑz tu dɑɹk, ðə læn tu bɹoʊkən. ælθɹ mʌs bi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

For some time, Galad hadn't been certain about al'Thor. Certainly the Dragon Reborn would have to fight at the Last Battle. But was that man al'Thor, or was he a puppet of the Tower, and not the true Dragon Reborn? That sky was too dark, the land too broken. Al'Thor must be the Dragon Reborn.

ðət dɪdn min, ʌv kɔɹs, ðəɾ i wɑzn ɔlsoʊ ə pʌpəɾ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

That didn't mean, of course, that he wasn't also a puppet of the Aes Sedai.

sun ðeɪ pæs bɪɑn ðə skɛləɾəl ɡɹeɪ tʃɹiz, ɹitʃɪŋ wʌnz ðət wɝ mɔɹ ɔɹɾənɛɹi. ðiz stɪl hæd jɛloʊd livz, tu mɛni dɛd bɹæntʃəz. bʌt ðət wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən ðə fʌz.

Soon they passed beyond the skeletal gray trees, reaching ones that were more ordinary. These still had yellowed leaves, too many dead branches. But that was better than the fuzz.

əbaʊɾ ən aʊɝ leɪɾɝ, ɡɑləd noʊɾəd tʃaɪl bɑɹlɪt ɹɪtɝnɪŋ. ðə skaʊt wɑz ə lin mæn, skɑɹɾ ɑn wʌn tʃik. ɡɑləd hɛld ʌp ə hæn əz ðə mæn əpɹoʊtʃt. "wʌt wɝd?"

About an hour later, Galad noted Child Barlett returning. The scout was a lean man, scarred on one cheek. Galad held up a hand as the man approached. "What word?"

bɑɹlɪt səluɾəd wɪð ɑɹm tə tʃɛst. "ðə swɑmp dʒɹaɪz aʊɾ ən ðə tʃɹiz θɪn ɪn əbaʊt wʌn maɪl, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ. ðə fil bɪɑn ɪz oʊpən ən ɛmpti, ðə weɪ klɪɹ tə ðə nɔɹθ."

Barlett saluted with arm to chest. "The swamp dries out and the trees thin in about one mile, my Lord Captain Commander. The field beyond is open and empty, the way clear to the north."

laɪt bi θæŋkt! ɡɑləd θɔt. hi nɑɾəd tə bɑɹlɪt, ən ðə mæn hɝid bæk θɹu ðə tʃɹiz.

Light be thanked! Galad thought. He nodded to Barlett, and the man hurried back through the trees.

ɡɑləd ɡlæns bæk ət ðə laɪn ə mɛn. ðeɪ wɝ mʌɾid, swɛɾi, ən fətiɡd. bʌt stɪl, ðeɪ wɝ ə ɡɹæn saɪt, ðɛɹ ɑɹmɝ ɹipleɪst, ðɛɹ feɪsəz dɪtɝmənd. ðeɪ hæd fɑloʊɾ ɪm θɹu ðɪs pɪɾ ʌv ə swɑmp. ðeɪ wɝ ɡʊd mɛn.

Galad glanced back at the line of men. They were muddied, sweaty, and fatigued. But still, they were a grand sight, their armor replaced, their faces determined. They had followed him through this pit of a swamp. They were good men.

"pæs ðə wɝd tə ði ʌðɝ lɔɹdz kæptən, tʃɹɑm," ɡɑləd sɛd. "hæv əm sɛnd wɝd tə ðɛɹ lidʒənz. wɪl bi aʊɾ ə ðɪs ɪn ʌndɝ ən aʊɝ."

"Pass the word to the other Lords Captain, Trom," Galad said. "Have them send word to their legions. We'll be out of this in under an hour."

ði oʊldɝ mæn smaɪld, lʊkɪŋ əz ɹɪlivd əz ɡɑləd fɛlt. ɡɑləd kəntɪnjuɾ ɔnwɝd, dʒɔ sɛɾ əɡɛns ðə peɪn ə hɪz lɛɡ. ðə kʌt wɑz wɛl baʊnd, ən ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl deɪnʒɝ ə fɝðɝ dæmədʒ. ɪt wɑz peɪnfəl, bʌt peɪn kəd bi dɛlt wɪð.

The older man smiled, looking as relieved as Galad felt. Galad continued onward, jaw set against the pain of his leg. The cut was well bound, and there was little danger of further damage. It was painful, but pain could be dealt with.

faɪnəli fɹi ʌv ðɪs bɑɡ! hi wəd nid tə plɑt ðɛɹ nɛks kɔɹs kɛɹfəli, steɪɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ɛni taʊnz, meɪdʒɝ ɹoʊdz, əɹ ɪsteɪts hɛl baɪ ɪnfluɛntʃəl lɔɹdz. hi ɹæn θɹu ðə mæps ɪn ɪz hɛd - mæps mɛmɝaɪz bɪfɔɹ ɪz tɛnθ neɪmdeɪ.

Finally free of this bog! He would need to plot their next course carefully, staying away from any towns, major roads, or estates held by influential lords. He ran through the maps in his head - maps memorized before his tenth nameday.

hi wɑz ðʌs ɛnɡeɪdʒd wən ðə jɛloʊ kænəpi θɪnd, klaʊɾəd sʌnlaɪt pikɪŋ bɪtwin bɹæntʃəz. sun i kɑt saɪɾ ə bɑɹlɪt weɪɾɪŋ ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə laɪn ə tʃɹiz. ðə fɔɹəst ɛndəɾ əbɹʌpli, ɔlmoʊst əz niɾ əz ə laɪn ɑn ə mæp.

He was thus engaged when the yellow canopy thinned, clouded sunlight peeking between branches. Soon he caught sight of Barlett waiting at the edge of the line of trees. The forest ended abruptly, almost as neat as a line on a map.

ɡɑləd saɪɾ ɪn ɹɪlif, ɹɛlɪʃɪŋ ðə θɔɾ ə biɪŋ aʊɾ ɪn ði oʊpən əɡɛn. hi stɛp fɹəm ðə tʃɹiz. oʊnli ðən dɪɾ ən ɪnɔɹməs fɔɹs ə tʃɹups bɪɡɪn tə əpɪɹ, klaɪmɪŋ oʊvɝ ə ɹaɪz dɝɛkli tə hɪz ɹaɪt.

Galad sighed in relief, relishing the thought of being out in the open again. He stepped from the trees. Only then did an enormous force of troops begin to appear, climbing over a rise directly to his right.

ɑɹmɝ klæŋd, hɔɹsəz wɪniɪŋ, əz θaʊzənz ə soʊlʒɝz laɪn ʌp ətɑp ðə ɹaɪz. səm wɝ tʃɪlʒɹən ɪn ðɛɹ pleɪɾ ən meɪl, wɪð kɑnɪkəl hɛlmz ʃaɪn tə pɝfɛkʃən. ðɛɹ pɹɪstin tɑbɝdz ən kloʊks ʃoʊn, sʌnbɝsts ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ ət ðə bɹɛsts, lænsɪz ɹeɪzd ɪn ɹæŋks. ðə lɑɹdʒɝ nʌmbɝ wɝ fʊt soʊlʒɝz, nɑt wɛɹɪŋ ðə waɪɾ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən, bʌɾ ɪnstɛd sɪmpəl bɹaʊn lɛðɝz. ɑmɑdɪʃənz, laɪkli pɹəvaɪɾəd baɪ ðə sintʃæn. mɛni hæd baʊz.

Armor clanged, horses whinnying, as thousands of soldiers lined up atop the rise. Some were Children in their plate and mail, with conical helms shined to perfection. Their pristine tabards and cloaks shone, sunbursts glittering at the breasts, lances raised in ranks. The larger number were foot soldiers, not wearing the white of the Children, but instead simple brown leathers. Amadicians, likely provided by the Seanchan. Many had bows.

ɡɑləd stʌmbəl bæk, hænd ɡoʊɪŋ tə hɪz sɔɹd. bʌɾ i nu, ɪmiɾiətli, ðəɾ i hæd bɪn tʃɹæpt. nɑɾ ə fju ʌv ðə tʃɪlʒɹən wɔɹ kloʊðɪŋ ədɔɹnd wɪð ðə kɹʊk ə ðə hæn ə ðə laɪt -  ðə kwɛstʃənɝz. ɪf ɔɹɾənɛɹi tʃɪlʒɹən wɝ ə fleɪm tə bɝn əweɪ ivəl, ðə kwɛstʃənɝz wɝ ə ɹeɪdʒɪŋ bɑnfaɪɝ.

Galad stumbled back, hand going to his sword. But he knew, immediately, that he had been trapped. Not a few of the Children wore clothing adorned with the crook of the Hand of the Light -  the Questioners. If ordinary Children were a flame to burn away evil, the Questioners were a raging bonfire.

ɡɑləd dɪɾ ə kwɪk kaʊnt. θɹi tə fɔɹ θaʊzən tʃɪlʒɹən ən ət list ənʌðɝ sɪks tə eɪt θaʊzən fʊt, hæf ə ðoʊz wɪð baʊz. tɛn θaʊzən fɹɛʃ tʃɹups. hɪz hɑɹt sæŋk.

Galad did a quick count. Three to four thousand Children and at least another six to eight thousand foot, half of those with bows. Ten thousand fresh troops. His heart sank.

tʃɹɑm, bɔɹnhəld ən baɪɑɝ heɪsən aʊɾ ə ðə fɔɹəs bɪhaɪnd ɡɑləɾ əlɔŋ wɪð ə ɡɹup ʌv ʌðɝ tʃɪlʒɹən. tʃɹɑm kɝst sɔfli.

Trom, Bornhald and Byar hastened out of the forest behind Galad along with a group of other Children. Trom cursed softly.

"soʊ," ɡɑləd sɛd, tɝnɪŋ tə ðə skaʊt, bɑɹlɪt, "ju ɑɹ ə tʃɹeɪɾɝ?"

"So," Galad said, turning to the scout, Barlett, "you are a traitor?"

"ju ɑɹ ðə tʃɹeɪɾɝ, tʃaɪl dəmədʒɹd," ðə skaʊt ɹɪplaɪd, feɪs hɑɹd.

"You are the traitor, Child Damodred," the scout replied, face hard.

"jɛs," ɡɑləd sɛd, "aɪ səpoʊz ɪt kəd bi pɝsiv ðət weɪ." ðɪs mɑɹtʃ θɹu ðə swɑmp hæd bɪn sədʒɛstəd baɪ hɪz skaʊts. ɡɑləd kəd si naʊ; ɪt hæd bɪn ə dɪleɪɪŋ tæktɪk, ə weɪ fəɹ əsunɑwə tə ɡɛɾ əhɛɾ ʌv ɡɑləd. ðə mɑɹtʃ hæɾ ɔlsoʊ lɛft ɡɑlədz mɛn taɪɝd waɪl əsunɑwəz fɔɹs wɑz fɹɛʃ ən ɹɛɾi fəɹ bæɾəl.

"Yes," Galad said, "I suppose it could be perceived that way." This march through the swamp had been suggested by his scouts. Galad could see now; it had been a delaying tactic, a way for Asunawa to get ahead of Galad. The march had also left Galad's men tired while Asunawa's force was fresh and ready for battle.

ə sɔɹd skɹeɪpt ɪn ɪts ʃiθ.

A sword scraped in its sheath.

ɡɑləɾ ɪmiɾiətli ɹeɪzd ə hænd wɪθaʊt tɝnɪŋ. "pis, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ." baɪɑɝ wʊɾə bɪn ðə wʌn tə ɹitʃ fəɹ ɪz wɛpən, pɹɑbli tə stʃɹaɪk daʊn bɑɹlɪt.

Galad immediately raised a hand without turning. "Peace, Child Byar." Byar would have been the one to reach for his weapon, probably to strike down Barlett.

pɝhæps sʌmθɪŋ ə ðɪs kəd bi sælvɪdʒd. ɡɑləd meɪɾ ɪz dɪsɪʒən swɪfli. "tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ ən tʃaɪl bɔɹnhəld, jə ɑɹ wɪð mi. tʃɹɑm, jə ən ði ʌðɝ lɔɹdz kæptən bɹɪŋ əɹ mɛn aʊɾ ɪn ɹæŋks ɑntu ðə fild."

Perhaps something of this could be salvaged. Galad made his decision swiftly. "Child Byar and Child Bornhald, you are with me. Trom, you and the other Lords Captain bring our men out in ranks onto the field."

ə lɑɹdʒ klʌstɝ ə mɛn nɪɹ ðə fɹʌn ʌv əsunɑwəz fɔɹs wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, daʊn ðə hɪlsaɪd.

A large cluster of men near the front of Asunawa's force was riding forward, down the hillside.

mɛni wɔɹ ðə kɹʊk ə ðə kwɛstʃənɝz. ðeɪ cʊɾə spɹʌŋ ðɛɹ æmbʊʃ ən kɪld ɡɑlədz ɡɹup kwɪkli. ɪnstɛd, ðeɪ sɛn daʊn ə ɡɹup tə pɑɹli. ðət wɑz ə ɡʊd saɪn.

Many wore the crook of the Questioners. They could have sprung their ambush and killed Galad's group quickly. Instead, they sent down a group to parley. That was a good sign.

ɡɑləd maʊntəd, səpɹɛsɪŋ ə wɪns fəɹ ɪz wundəd lɛɡ. baɪɑɝ ən bɔɹnhəl maʊntəɾ əz wɛl, ən ðeɪ fɑloʊɾ ɪm ɑntu ðə fild, hʊfbits mʌfəl baɪ ðə θɪk, jɛloʊd ɡɹæs. əsunɑwə hɪmsɛlf wɑz əmʌŋ ðə ɡɹup əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ. hi hæd θɪk, ɡɹeɪɪŋ aɪbɹaʊz ən wɑz soʊ θɪn əz tə əpɪɹ ə dɑl meɪɾ ə stɪks, wɪð fæbɹɪk stʃɹɛtʃt əkɹɔs əm tə ɪməteɪt skɪn.

Galad mounted, suppressing a wince for his wounded leg. Byar and Bornhald mounted as well, and they followed him onto the field, hoofbeats muffled by the thick, yellowed grass. Asunawa himself was among the group approaching. He had thick, graying eyebrows and was so thin as to appear a doll made of sticks, with fabric stretched across them to imitate skin.

əsunɑwə wɑz nɑt smaɪlɪŋ. hi ɹɛɹli dɪd.

Asunawa was not smiling. He rarely did.

ɡɑləd pʊld ɪz hɔɹs ʌp bɪfɔɹ ðə haɪ ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ. əsunɑwə wɑz sɝaʊndəd baɪ ə smɔl ɡɑɹɾ ə hɪz kwɛstʃənɝz, bʌt wɑz ɔlsoʊ əkʌmpənid baɪ faɪv lɔɹdz kæptən, itʃ ə hum ɡɑləd hæd mɛt wɪð - əɹ sɝvd ʌndɝ - dʊɹɪŋ ɪz ʃɔɹt taɪm ɪn ðə tʃɪlʒɹən.

Galad pulled his horse up before the High Inquisitor. Asunawa was surrounded by a small guard of his Questioners, but was also accompanied by five Lords Captain, each of whom Galad had met with - or served under - during his short time in the Children.

əsunɑwə lin fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, sʌŋkən aɪz nɛɹoʊɪŋ. "jɔɹ ɹɛbəlz fɔɹm ɹæŋks. tɛl əm tə stæn daʊn əɹ maɪ ɑɹtʃɝz wɪl lus."

Asunawa leaned forward in his saddle, sunken eyes narrowing. "Your rebels form ranks. Tell them to stand down or my archers will loose."

"ʃʊɹli jə wəd nɑɾ ɪɡnɔɹ ðə ɹulz ə fɔɹməl ɛnɡeɪdʒmənt?" ɡɑləd sɛd. "ju wəd dʒɹɔ æɹoʊz əpɑn mɛn əz ðeɪ fɔɹm ɹæŋks? wɛɹ ɪz jəɹ ɑnɝ?"

"Surely you would not ignore the rules of formal engagement?" Galad said. "You would draw arrows upon men as they form ranks? Where is your honor?"

"dɑɹkfɹɛnz dɪzɝv noʊ ɑnɝ," əsunɑwə snæpt. "nɔɹ də ðeɪ dɪzɝv pɪɾi."

"Darkfriends deserve no honor," Asunawa snapped. "Nor do they deserve pity."

"ju neɪm əs dɑɹkfɹɛnz ðɛn?" ɡɑləɾ æskt, tɝnɪŋ ɪz maʊn slaɪtli. "ɑ sɛvən θaʊzən tʃɪlʒɹən u wɝ ʌndɝ vɑldəz kəmænd? mɛn jəɹ soʊlʒɝz əv sɝvd wɪð, iɾən wɪð, noʊn ən fɔt bɪsaɪd? mɛn jə jɝsɛlf wɑtʃt oʊvɝ nɑt tu mʌnθs əɡoʊ?"

"You name us Darkfriends then?" Galad asked, turning his mount slightly. "AH seven thousand Children who were under Valda's command? Men your soldiers have served with, eaten with, known and fought beside? Men you yourself watched over not two months ago?"

əsunɑwə hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. neɪmɪŋ sɛvən θaʊzən ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən əz dɑɹkfɹɛnz wəd bi ɹɪdɪkjələs -  ɪt wəd min ðət tu aʊɾ ə θɹi ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ tʃɪlʒɹən hæd ɡɔn tə ðə ʃædoʊ.

Asunawa hesitated. Naming seven thousand of the Children as Darkfriends would be ridiculous -  it would mean that two out of three remaining Children had gone to the Shadow.

"noʊ," əsunɑwə sɛd. "pɝhæps ðeɪ ɑɹ sɪmpli . . . mɪsɡaɪɾɪd. ivən ə ɡʊd mæn kən stʃɹeɪ daʊn ʃæɾoʊd pæðz ɪf ɪz liɾɝz ɑɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz."

"No," Asunawa said. "Perhaps they are simply . . . misguided. Even a good man can stray down shadowed paths if his leaders are Darkfriends."

"aɪ æm noʊ dɑɹkfɹɛnd." ɡɑləd mɛɾ əsunɑwəz aɪz.

"I am no Darkfriend." Galad met Asunawa's eyes.

"səbmɪt tə maɪ kwɛstʃənɪŋ ən pɹuv ɪt."

"Submit to my questioning and prove it."

"ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ sʌbmɪts hɪmsɛlf tə noʊ wʌn," ɡɑləd sɛd. "ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, aɪ ɔɹɾɝ jə tə stæn daʊn."

"The Lord Captain Commander submits himself to no one," Galad said. "Under the Light, I order you to stand down."

əsunɑwə læft. "tʃaɪld, wi hoʊld ə naɪf tə jəɹ θɹoʊt! ðɪs ɪz jəɹ tʃæns tə sɝɛndɝ!"

Asunawa laughed. "Child, we hold a knife to your throat! This is your chance to surrender!"

"ɡəlivɝ," ɡɑləd sɛd, lʊkɪŋ ət ðə lɔɹd kæptən əɾ əsunɑwəz lɛft. ɡəlivɝ wɑz ə læŋki, bɪɹɾəd mæn, əz hɑɹɾ əz ðeɪ keɪm - bʌɾ i wɑz ɔlsoʊ fɛɹ. "tɛl mi, də ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt sɝɛndɝ?"

"Golever," Galad said, looking at the Lord Captain at Asunawa's left. Golever was a lanky, bearded man, as hard as they came - but he was also fair. "Tell me, do the Children of the Light surrender?"

ɡəlivɝ ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "wi də nɑt. ðə laɪt wɪl pɹuv əs vɪktɔɹiəs."

Golever shook his head. "We do not. The Light will prove us victorious."

"æn ɪf wi feɪs supɪɹiɝ ɑdz?" ɡɑləɾ æskt.

"And if we face superior odds?" Galad asked.

"wi faɪɾ ɑn."

"We fight on."

"ɪf wəɹ taɪɝɾ ən sɔɹ?"

"If we are tired and sore?"

"ðə laɪt wɪl pɹətɛkt ʌs," ɡəlivɝ sɛd. "æn ɪf ɪts əɹ taɪm tə daɪ, ðən soʊ bi ɪt. lɛɾ əs teɪk əz mɛni ɛnəmiz wɪð əs əz wi meɪ."

"The Light will protect us," Golever said. "And if it is our time to die, then so be it. Let us take as many enemies with us as we may."

ɡɑləd tɝn bæk tə əsunɑwə. "ju si ðəɾ aɪm ɪn ə pɹɪdɪkəmənt. tə faɪɾ ɪz tə lɛt jə neɪm əs dɑɹkfɹɛnz, bʌt tə sɝɛndɝ ɪz tə dɪnaɪ əɹ oʊðz. baɪ maɪ ɑnɝ əz ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ, aɪ kən æksɛp niðɝ ɑpʃən."

Galad turned back to Asunawa. "You see that I am in a predicament. To fight is to let you name us Darkfriends, but to surrender is to deny our oaths. By my honor as the Lord Captain Commander, I can accept neither option."

əsunɑwəz ɪkspɹɛʃən dɑɹkənd. "ju ɑɹ nɑt ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ. hiz dɛd."

Asunawa's expression darkened. "You are not the Lord Captain Commander. He is dead."

"baɪ maɪ hænd," ɡɑləd sɛd, ənʃiðɪŋ ɪz wɛpən, hoʊldɪŋ ɪt fɔɹwɝd soʊ ðət ðə hɛɹənz ɡlimd ɪn ðə laɪt. "æn aɪ hoʊld ɪz sɔɹd. dʒju dɪnaɪ ðət jə jɝsɛlf wɑtʃt mi feɪs vɑldə ɪn fɛɹ kɑmbæt, əz pɹiskɹaɪbd baɪ lɔ?"

"By my hand," Galad said, unsheathing his weapon, holding it forward so that the herons gleamed in the light. "And I hold his sword. Do you deny that you yourself watched me face Valda in fair combat, as prescribed by law?"

"æz baɪ ðə lɔ, pɝhæps," əsunɑwə sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ wəd nɑt kɔl ðət faɪt fɛɹ. jə dʒɹu ɑn ðə paʊɝz ə ʃædoʊ; aɪ sɔ jə stændɪŋ ɪn dɑɹknəs dɪspaɪt ðə deɪlaɪt, ən aɪ sɔ ðə dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ spɹaʊɾ ɑn jəɹ fɔɹhɛd. vɑldə nɛvɝ hæɾ ə tʃæns."

"As by the law, perhaps," Asunawa said. "But I would not call that fight fair. You drew on the powers of Shadow; I saw you standing in darkness despite the daylight, and I saw the Dragon's Fang sprout on your forehead. Valda never had a chance."

"hɑɹnɪʃ," ɡɑləd sɛd, tɝnɪŋ tə ðə lɔɹd kæptən tə ðə ɹaɪɾ ʌv əsunɑwə. hi wɑz ə ʃɔɹt mæn, bɔld, mɪsɪŋ wʌn ɪɹ fɹəm faɪɾɪŋ dʒɹæɡ-ɑnsɔɹn. "tɛl mi. ɪz ðə ʃædoʊ stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ðə laɪt?"

"Harnesh," Galad said, turning to the Lord Captain to the right of Asunawa. He was a short man, bald, missing one ear from fighting Drag-onsworn. "Tell me. Is the Shadow stronger than the Light?"

"ʌv kɔɹs nɑt," ðə mæn sɛd, spɪɾɪŋ tə ðə saɪd.

"Of course not," the man said, spitting to the side.

"ɪf ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝz kɑz hæd bɪn ɑnɝəbəl, wəɾ i hæv fɔlən tə mi ɪn ə bæɾəl ʌndɝ ðə laɪt? ɪf aɪ wɝ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, kəɾ aɪ hæv sleɪn ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ hɪmsɛlf?"

"If the Lord Captain Commander's cause had been honorable, would he have fallen to me in a battle under the Light? If I were a Darkfriend, could I have slain the Lord Captain Commander himself?"

hɑɹnɪʃ dɪdn ænsɝ, bʌt ɡɑləd kəɾ ɔlmoʊst si ðə θɔts ɪn ɪz hɛd. ðə ʃædoʊ maɪt dɪspleɪ stʃɹɛŋkθ ət taɪmz, bʌt ðə laɪɾ ɔlweɪz ɹɪvild ən dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ɪt. ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl fəɹ ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ tə fɔl tə ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd - ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl fəɹ ɛni mæn tə fɔl. bʌɾ ɪn ə duəl bɪfɔɹ ði ʌðɝ tʃɪlʒɹən? ə duəl fəɹ ɑnɝ, ʌndɝ ðə laɪt?

Harnesh didn't answer, but Galad could almost see the thoughts in his head. The Shadow might display strength at times, but the Light always revealed and destroyed it. It was possible for the Lord Captain Commander to fall to a Darkfriend - it was possible for any man to fall. But in a duel before the other Children? A duel for honor, under the Light?

"səmtaɪmz ðə ʃædoʊ dɪspleɪz kʌnɪŋ ən stʃɹɛŋkθ," əsunɑwə kʌɾ ɪn bɪfɔɹ ɡɑləd kəd kəntɪnju tə kwɛstʃən. "æt taɪmz, ɡʊd mɛn daɪ."

"Sometimes the Shadow displays cunning and strength," Asunawa cut in before Galad could continue to question. "At times, good men die."

"ju ɔl noʊ wʌt vɑldə dɪd," ɡɑləd sɛd. "maɪ mʌðɝ ɪz dɛd. ɪz ðəɹ ən ɑɹɡjəmən əɡɛns maɪ ɹaɪt tə tʃælənʒ hɪm?"

"You all know what Valda did," Galad said. "My mother is dead. Is there an argument against my right to challenge him?"

"ju hæv noʊ ɹaɪts əz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd! əl pɑɹli noʊ mɔɹ wɪð ju, mɝɾɝɝ." əsunɑwə weɪvd ə hænd, ən sɛvɹəl ə hɪz kwɛstʃənɝz dʒɹu sɔɹdz. ɪmiɾiətli, ɡɑlədz kəmpænjənz dɪd ðə seɪm.

"You have no rights as a Darkfriend! I will parley no more with you, murderer." Asunawa waved a hand, and several of his Questioners drew swords. Immediately, Galad's companions did the same.

bɪhaɪnd, hi kəd hɪɹ ɪz wɪɹi fɔɹsɪz heɪstəli kloʊzɪŋ ðɛɹ ɹæŋks.

Behind, he could hear his weary forces hastily closing their ranks.

"wʌt wɪl hæpən tə ʌs, əsunɑwə, ɪf tʃaɪl faɪts tʃaɪld?" ɡɑləɾ æsk sɔfli. "aɪ wɪl nɑt sɝɛndɝ, ən aɪ wəd nɑɾ ətæk ju, bʌt pɝhæps wi kən ɹiunaɪt. nɑɾ əz ɛnəmiz, bʌɾ əz bɹʌðɝz sɛpɝeɪɾəd fəɹ ə taɪm."

"What will happen to us, Asunawa, if Child fights Child?" Galad asked softly. "I will not surrender, and I would not attack you, but perhaps we can reunite. Not as enemies, but as brothers separated for a time."

"aɪ wɪl nɛvɝ əsoʊsieɪt wɪð dɑɹkfɹɛnz," əsunɑwə sɛd, ðoʊ hi saʊndəd hɛzɪɾənt. hi wɑtʃt ɡɑlədz mɛn. əsunɑwə wəd wɪn ə bæɾəl, bʌɾ ɪf ɡɑlədz mɛn stʊd ðɛɹ ɡɹaʊnd, ɪt wəd bi ə kɑsli vɪktɝi. boʊθ saɪdz wəd luz θaʊzənz.

"I will never associate with Darkfriends," Asunawa said, though he sounded hesitant. He watched Galad's men. Asunawa would win a battle, but if Galad's men stood their ground, it would be a costly victory. Both sides would lose thousands.

"aɪ wɪl səbmɪt tə ju," ɡɑləd sɛd. "ɑn sɝɾən tɝmz."

"I will submit to you," Galad said. "On certain terms."

"noʊ!" bɔɹnhəl sɛd fɹəm bɪhaɪnd, bʌt ɡɑləd ɹeɪzd ə hænd, saɪlənsɪŋ hɪm.

"No!" Bornhald said from behind, but Galad raised a hand, silencing him.

"wʌt tɝmz wəd ðoʊz bi?" əsunɑwə æskt.

"What terms would those be?" Asunawa asked.

"ju swɛɹ - bɪfɔɹ ðə laɪɾ ən ðə lɔɹdz kæptən hɪɹ wɪð jə - ðət jəl nɑt hɑɹm, kwɛstʃən, əɹ ʌðɝwaɪz kəndɛm ðə mɛn u fɑloʊd mi. ðeɪ wɝ oʊnli duɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ θɔt wɑz ɹaɪt."

"You swear - before the Light and the Lords Captain here with you - that you will not harm, question, or otherwise condemn the men who followed me. They were only doing what they thought was right."

əsunɑwəz aɪz nɛɹoʊd, hɪz lɪps fɔɹmɪŋ ə stʃɹeɪt laɪn.

Asunawa's eyes narrowed, his lips forming a straight line.

"ðæɾ ɪnkludz maɪ kəmpænjənz hɪɹ," ɡɑləd sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ tə baɪɑɝ ən bɔɹnhəld. "ɛvɹi mæn, əsunɑwə. ðeɪ mʌs nɛvɝ noʊ kwɛstʃənɪŋ."

"That includes my companions here," Galad said, nodding to Byar and Bornhald. "Every man, Asunawa. They must never know questioning."

"ju kænɑt hɪndɝ ðə hæn ə ðə laɪɾ ɪn sətʃ ə weɪ! ðɪs wəd ɡɪv əm fɹi ɹeɪn tə sik ðə ʃædoʊ!"

"You cannot hinder the Hand of the Light in such a way! This would give them free rein to seek the Shadow!"

"æn ɪz ɪɾ oʊnli fɪɹ ə kwɛstʃənɪŋ ðət kips əs ɪn ðə laɪt, əsunɑwə?" ɡɑləɾ æskt. "ɑɹ nɑt ðə tʃɪlʒɹən væljən ən tʃɹu?"

"And is it only fear of Questioning that keeps us in the Light, Asunawa?" Galad asked. "Are not the Children valiant and true?"

əsunɑwə fɛl saɪlənt. ɡɑləd kloʊzd ɪz aɪz, filɪŋ ðə weɪɾ ə liɾɝʃɪp. itʃ moʊmən i stɔld ɪnkɹis ðə bɑɹɡɪnɪŋ pəzɪʃən fəɹ ɪz mɛn. hi oʊpən ɪz aɪz. "ðə læs bæɾəl kʌmz, əsunɑwə. wi hævən taɪm fəɹ skwɑbəlɪŋ. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɔks ðə lænd."

Asunawa fell silent. Galad closed his eyes, feeling the weight of leadership. Each moment he stalled increased the bargaining position for his men. He opened his eyes. "The Last Battle comes, Asunawa. We haven't time for squabbling. The Dragon Reborn walks the land."

"hɛɹəsi!" əsunɑwə sɛd.

"Heresy!" Asunawa said.

"jɛs," ɡɑləd sɛd. "æn tʃɹuθ əz wɛl."

"Yes," Galad said. "And truth as well."

əsunɑwə ɡɹaʊn ɪz tiθ, bʌt sim tə bi kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ði ɔfɝ.

Asunawa ground his teeth, but seemed to be considering the offer.

"ɡɑləd," bɔɹnhəl sɛd sɔfli. "doʊn də ðɪs. wi kən faɪt. ðə laɪt wɪl pɹətɛkt ʌs!"

"Galad," Bornhald said softly. "Don't do this. We can fight. The Light will protect us!"

"ɪf wi faɪt, wɪl kɪl ɡʊd mɛn, tʃaɪl bɔɹnhəld," ɡɑləd sɛd, wɪθaʊt tɝnɪŋ. "itʃ stʃɹoʊk ʌv əɹ sɔɹdz wɪl bi ə bloʊ fəɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ɑɹ ði oʊnli tʃɹu faʊndeɪʃən ðət ðɪs wɝld əz lɛft. wəɹ niɾəd. ɪf maɪ laɪf ɪz wʌɾ ɪz dɪmændəd tə bɹɪŋ junəɾi, ðən soʊ bi ɪt. jə wəd də ðə seɪm, aɪ bɪliv." hi mɛɾ əsunɑwəz aɪz.

"If we fight, we will kill good men, Child Bornhald," Galad said, without turning. "Each stroke of our swords will be a blow for the Dark One. The Children are the only true foundation that this world has left. We are needed. If my life is what is demanded to bring unity, then so be it. You would do the same, I believe." He met Asunawa's eyes.

"teɪk hɪm," əsunɑwə snæpt, lʊkɪŋ dɪsæɾəsfaɪd. "æn tɛl ðə lidʒənz tə stæn daʊn. ɪnfɔɹm əm ðəɾ aɪ hæv teɪkən ðə fɔls lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ ɪndə kʌstəɾi, ən wɪl kwɛstʃən ɪm tə dətɝmən ði ɪkstɛn ə hɪz kɹaɪmz." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "bʌɾ ɔlsoʊ pæs ðə wɝd ðət ðoʊz u fɑloʊɾ ɪm ɑɹ nɑt tə bi pʌnɪʃt əɹ kwɛstʃənd." əsunɑwə spʌn ɪz hɔɹs ən ɹoʊɾ əweɪ.

"Take him," Asunawa snapped, looking dissatisfied. "And tell the legions to stand down. Inform them that I have taken the false Lord Captain Commander into custody, and will Question him to determine the extent of his crimes." He hesitated. "But also pass the word that those who followed him are not to be punished or Questioned." Asunawa spun his horse and rode away.

ɡɑləd tɝn ɪz sɔɹɾ ən hændəɾ ɪɾ aʊt tə bɔɹnhəld. "ɹɪtɝn tə əɹ mɛn; tɛl əm wʌt hæpən hɪɹ, ən də nɑt lɛɾ əm faɪɾ əɹ tʃɹaɪ tə ɹɛskju mi. ðəɾ ɪz ən ɔɹɾɝ."

Galad turned his sword and handed it out to Bornhald. "Return to our men; tell them what happened here, and do not let them fight or try to rescue me. That is an order."

bɔɹnhəl mɛɾ ɪz aɪz, ðən sloʊli tʊk ðə sɔɹd. ət læst, hi səluɾəd. "jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ."

Bornhald met his eyes, then slowly took the sword. At last, he saluted. "Yes, my Lord Captain Commander."

əz sun əz ðeɪ tɝn tə ɹaɪɾ əweɪ, ɹʌf hænz ɡɹæbd ɡɑləɾ ən pʊld ɪm fɹəm staʊts sæɾəl. hi hɪt ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɪð ə ɡɹʌnt, hɪz bæd ʃoʊldɝ θɹoʊɪŋ ə spaɪk ʌv æɡəni əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst.

As soon as they turned to ride away, rough hands grabbed Galad and pulled him from Stout's saddle. He hit the ground with a grunt, his bad shoulder throwing a spike of agony across his chest.

hi tʃɹaɪd tə klaɪm tə hɪz fit, bʌt sɛvɹəl kwɛstʃənɝz dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ən nɑkt ɪm daʊn əɡɛn.

He tried to climb to his feet, but several Questioners dismounted and knocked him down again.

wʌn fɔɹst ɡɑləd tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ə buɾ ɑn ɪz bæk, ən ɡɑləd hɝd ðə mətælɪk ɹæsp ʌv ə naɪf biɪŋ ənʃiðd. ðeɪ kʌɾ ɪz ɑɹmɝ ən kloʊðɪŋ fɹi.

One forced Galad to the ground, a boot on his back, and Galad heard the metallic rasp of a knife being unsheathed. They cut his armor and clothing free.

"ju wɪl nɑt wɛɹ ðə junəfɔɹm ʌv ə tʃaɪld ə ðə laɪt, dɑɹkfɹɛnd," ə kwɛstʃənɝ sɛɾ ɪn ɪz ɪɹ.

"You will not wear the uniform of a Child of the Light, Darkfriend," a Questioner said in his ear.

"aɪ æm nɑɾ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd," ɡɑləd sɛd, feɪs pɹɛs tə ðə ɡɹæsi ɝθ. "aɪ wɪl nɛvɝ spik ðət laɪ. aɪ wɔk ɪn ðə laɪt."

"I am not a Darkfriend," Galad said, face pressed to the grassy earth. "I will never speak that lie. I walk in the Light."

ðəɾ ɝn ɪm ə kɪk tə ðə saɪd, ðən ənʌðɝ, ən ənʌðɝ. hi kɝld ʌp, ɡɹʌntɪŋ. bʌt ðə bloʊz kəntɪnjud tə fɔl.

That earned him a kick to the side, then another, and another. He curled up, grunting. But the blows continued to fall.

faɪnəli, ðə dɑɹknəs tʊk hɪm.

Finally, the darkness took him.

ðə kɹitʃɝ ðət hæd wʌns bɪn pdən feɪn wɔk daʊn ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə hɪl. ðə bɹaʊn widz ɡɹu ɪn bɹoʊkən pætʃəz, laɪk ðə skɹʌb ɑn ðə tʃɪn ʌv ə bɛɡɝ.

The creature that had once been Padan Fain walked down the side of a hill. The brown weeds grew in broken patches, like the scrub on the chin of a beggar.

ðə skaɪ wɑz blæk. ə tɛmpəst. hi laɪk ðæt, ðoʊ hi heɪɾəd ðə wʌn u kɑzd ɪt.

The sky was black. A tempest. He liked that, though he hated the one who caused it.

heɪtʃɹəd. ɪt wɑz ðə pɹuf ðəɾ i stɪl lɪvd, ðə wʌn ɪmoʊʃən lɛft. ði oʊnli ɪmoʊʃən. ɪt wɑz ɔl ðət ðəɹ kəd bi.

Hatred. It was the proof that he still lived, the one emotion left. The only emotion. It was all that there could be.

kənsumɪŋ. θɹɪlɪŋ. bjuɾəfəl. wɔɹmɪŋ. vaɪələnt. heɪtʃɹəd. wʌndɝfəl. ɪt wɑz ðə stɔɹm ðət ɡeɪv ɪm stʃɹɛŋkθ, ðə pɝpəs ðət dʒɹoʊv hɪm. ælθɹ wəd daɪ. baɪ hɪz hænd. ən pɝhæps æftɝ ðæt, ðə dɑɹk wʌn. wʌndɝfəl . . .

Consuming. Thrilling. Beautiful. Warming. Violent. Hatred. Wonderful. It was the storm that gave him strength, the purpose that drove him. Al'Thor would die. By his hand. And perhaps after that, the Dark One. Wonderful . . .

ðə kɹitʃɝ ðət hæd bɪn pdən feɪn fɪŋɡɝɾ ɪz bjuɾəfəl dæɡɝ, filɪŋ ðə ɹɪdʒəz ə ðə dɪzaɪnz ɪn ðə faɪn ɡoʊldən waɪɝ ðət ɹæpt ɪts hɪlt. ə lɑɹdʒ ɹubi kæp ði ɛn ʌv ɪts hɪlt, ən i kæɹid ðə wɛpən ənʃiðd ɪn ɪz ɹaɪt hæn soʊ ðət ðə bleɪɾ ɪkstɛndəd bɪtwin ɪz fɝs tu fɪŋɡɝz. ðə saɪdz ə ðoʊz fɪŋɡɝz hæd bɪn kʌɾ ə dʌzən taɪmz oʊvɝ.

The creature that had been Padan Fain fingered his beautiful dagg'er, feeling the ridges of the designs in the fine golden wire that wrapped its hilt. A large ruby capped the end of its hilt, and he carried the weapon unsheathed in his right hand so that the blade extended between his first two fingers. The sides of those fingers had been cut a dozen times over.

blʌd dʒɹɪp fɹəm ðə tɪp ə ðə dæɡɝ daʊn ɑntu ðə widz. kɹɪmzən spɑts tə tʃɪɹ hɪm. ɹɛd bɪloʊ, blæk əbʌv. pɝfəkt. dɪɾ ɪz heɪtʃɹəd kɑz ðət stɔɹm? ɪt mʌs bi soʊ. jɛs.

Blood dripped from the tip of the dagger down onto the weeds. Crimson spots to cheer him. Red below, black above. Perfect. Did his hatred cause that storm? It must be so. Yes.

ðə dʒɹɑps ə blʌd fɛl əlɔŋsaɪd spɑts ə dɑɹknəs ðəɾ əpɪɹɾ ɑn dɛd livz ən stɛmz əz i muv fɑɹðɝ nɔɹθ ɪndə ðə blaɪt.

The drops of blood fell alongside spots of darkness that appeared on dead leaves and stems as he moved farther north into the Blight.

hi wɑz mæd. ðət wɑz ɡʊd. wən jə æksɛptɪd mædnəs ɪndə jɝsɛlf -  ɛmbɹeɪst ɪɾ ən dʒɹæŋk ɪɾ ɪn əz ɪf ɪt wɝ sʌnlaɪɾ əɹ wɔɾɝ əɹ ði ɛɹ ɪtsɛlf - ɪt bɪkeɪm ənʌðɝ pɑɹɾ ə ju. laɪk ə hæn əɹ ən aɪ. jə kəd si baɪ mædnəs. jə kəd hoʊl θɪŋz wɪð mædnəs. ɪt wɑz wʌndɝfəl. lɪbɝeɪɾɪŋ.

He was mad. That was good. When you accepted madness into yourself -  embraced it and drank it in as if it were sunlight or water or the air itself - it became another part of you. Like a hand or an eye. You could see by madness. You could hold things with madness. It was wonderful. Liberating.

hi wɑz faɪnəli fɹi.

He was finally free.

ðə kɹitʃɝ ðət hæd bɪn mɔɹɾɪθ ɹitʃt ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə hɪl ən dɪd nɑt lʊk bæk ət ðə lɑɹdʒ, pɝplɪʃ mæs ðət hid lɛft ətɑp ɪt. wɝmz wɝ vɛɹi mɛsi tə kɪl ðə ɹaɪt weɪ, bʌt səm θɪŋz niɾəd tə bi dʌn ðə ɹaɪt weɪ. ɪt wɑz ðə pɹɪnsəpəl ə ðə θɪŋ.

The creature that had been Mordeth reached the bottom of the hill and did not look back at the large, purplish mass that he'd left atop it. Worms were very messy to kill the right way, but some things needed to be done the right way. It was the principle of the thing.

mɪs hæd bɪɡʌn tə tʃɹeɪl hɪm, kɹipɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊnd. wɑz ðət mɪst ɪz mædnəs, əɹ wɑz ɪɾ ɪz heɪtʃɹəd? ɪt wɑz soʊ fəmɪljɝ. ɪt twɪstəɾ ɝaʊn ɪz æŋkəlz ən lɪkt əɾ ɪz hilz.

Mist had begun to trail him, creeping up from the ground. Was that mist his madness, or was it his hatred? It was so familiar. It twisted around his ankles and licked at his heels.

sʌmθɪŋ pikt ɝaʊn ə hɪlsaɪd nɪɹbaɪ, ðən dʌk bæk. wɝmz daɪd laʊdli. wɝmz dɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ laʊdli. ə pæk ʌv wɝmz kəd dɪstʃɹɔɪ ən ɪntaɪɝ lidʒən. wən jə hɝd ðɛm, jə wɛn ði ʌðɝ weɪ, kwɪkli. bʌt ðɛn, ɪt kəd bi ædvənteɪdʒəs tə sɛn skaʊts tə ɡoʊ dʒʌdʒ ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðə pæk, lɛs jə kəntɪnju ɑn ən ɹʌn əkɹɔs ɪɾ əɡɛn ɛlswɛɹ.

Something peeked around a hillside nearby, then ducked back. Worms died loudly. Worms did everything loudly. A pack of Worms could destroy an entire legion. When you heard them, you went the other way, quickly. But then, it could be advantageous to send scouts to go judge the direction of the pack, lest you continue on and run across it again elsewhere.

soʊ ðə kɹitʃɝ ðət hæd bɪn pdən feɪn wɑz nɑt sɝpɹaɪzd wən i ɹaʊndəd ðə hɪlsaɪɾ ən faʊn ə nɝvəs ɡɹup ə tʃɹɑləks ðɛɹ, ə mɹdʒɹɑl ɡaɪɾɪŋ ðɛm.

So the creature that had been Padan Fain was not surprised when he rounded the hillside and found a nervous group of Trollocs there, a Myrddraal guiding them.

hi smaɪld. maɪ fɹɛnz. ɪt hæd bɪn tu lɔŋ.

He smiled. My friends. It had been too long.

ɪt tʊk ə moʊmən fəɹ ðɛɹ bɹuɾɪʃ bɹeɪnz tə kʌm tə ði ɑbviəs -  bʌt fɔls - kənkluʒən: ɪf ə mæn wɑz wɑndɝɪŋ ɝaʊnd, ðən wɝmz kʊdn bi nɪɹ. ðoʊz wʊɾə sɝnɛld ɪz blʌɾ ən kʌm fəɹ hɪm. wɝmz pɹəfɝd hjumənz oʊvɝ tʃɹɑləks. ðət meɪd sɛns. ðə kɹitʃɝ ðət hæd bɪn mɔɹɾɪθ hæd teɪstəd boʊθ, ən tʃɹɑlɑk flɛʃ hæd lɪɾəl tə ɹɛkəmɛn ɪt.

It took a moment for their brutish brains to come to the obvious -  but false - conclusion: If a man was wandering around, then Worms couldn't be near. Those would have srnelled his blood and come for him. Worms preferred humans over Trollocs. That made sense. The creature that had been Mordeth had tasted both, and Trolloc flesh had little to recommend it.

ðə tʃɹɑləks tɔɹ fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ə mɪsmætʃt pæk, fɛðɝz, biks, klɔz, tiθ, tʌsks. ðə kɹitʃɝ ðət hæd bɪn feɪn stʊd stɪl, mɪs lɪkɪŋ ɪz ənʃɑd fit. haʊ wʌndɝfəl! ət ðə vɛɹi bæk ə ðə ɡɹup, ðə mɹdʒɹɑl hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ɪts aɪləs ɡeɪz fɪkst ɑn hɪm. pɝhæps ɪt sɛns ðət sʌmθɪŋ wɑz tɛɹəbli, tɛɹəbli ɹɔŋ. ən ɹaɪt, ʌv kɔɹs. jə kʊdn bi wʌn wɪθaʊt ði ʌðɝ. ðət wʊdn meɪk sɛns.

The Trollocs tore forward in a mismatched pack, feathers, beaks, claws, teeth, tusks. The creature that had been Fain stood still, mist licking his unshod feet. How wonderful! At the very back of the group, the Myrddraal hesitated, its eyeless gaze fixed on him. Perhaps it sensed that something was terribly, terribly wrong. And right, of course. You couldn't be one without the other. That wouldn't make sense.

ðə kɹitʃɝ ðət hæd bɪn mɔɹɾɪθ - hi wəd niɾ ə nu neɪm sun - smaɪl dipli.

The creature that had been Mordeth - he would need a new name soon - smiled deeply.

ðə mɹdʒɹɑl tɝn tə ɹʌn əweɪ.

The Myrddraal turned to run away.

ðə mɪst stʃɹʌk.

The mist struck.

ɪt ɹoʊld oʊvɝ ðə tʃɹɑləks, muvɪŋ kwɪkli, laɪk ðə tɛntəkəlz ʌv ə ləvaɪəθən ɪn ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən.

It rolled over the Trollocs, moving quickly, like the tentacles of a leviathan in the Aryth Ocean.

lɛŋθs ʌv ɪt snæp fɔɹwɝd θɹu tʃɹɑlɑk tʃɛsts. wʌn lɔŋ ɹoʊp wɪpt əbʌv ðɛɹ hɛdz, ðən ʃɑt fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ə blɝ, teɪkɪŋ ðə feɪɾ ɪn ðə nɛk.

Lengths of it snapped forward through Trolloc chests. One long rope whipped above their heads, then shot forward in a blur, taking the Fade in the neck.

ðə tʃɹɑləks skɹimd, dʒɹɑpɪŋ, spæzəmɪŋ. ðɛɹ hɛɹ fɛl aʊɾ ɪn pætʃəz, ən ðɛɹ skɪn bɪɡæn tə bɔɪl. blɪstɝz ən sɪsts. wən ðoʊz pɑpt, ðeɪ lɛf kɹeɪɾɝlaɪk pɑks ɪn ðə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn skɪn, laɪk bʌbəlz ɑn ðə sɝfəs ə mɛɾəl ðət kul tu kwɪkli.

The Trollocs screamed, dropping, spasming. Their hair fell out in patches, and their skin began to boil. Blisters and cysts. When those popped, they left craterlike pocks in the Shadowspawn skin, like bubbles on the surface of metal that cooled too quickly.

ðə kɹitʃɝ ðət hæd bɪn pdən feɪn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ ɪn ɡli, kloʊzɪŋ ɪz aɪz tə ðə tumʌltʃuəs blæk skaɪ ən ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz feɪs, lɪps pɑɹɾəd, ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ ɪz fist. æftɝ ɪt pæst, hi saɪd, hoʊldɪŋ ɪz dæɡɝ taɪɾɝ -  kʌɾɪŋ ɪz flɛʃ.

The creature that had been Padan Fain opened his mouth in glee, closing his eyes to the tumultuous black sky and raising his face, lips parted, enjoying his feast. After it passed, he sighed, holding his dagger tighter -  cutting his flesh.

ɹɛd bɪloʊ, blæk əbʌv. ɹɛɾ ən blæk, ɹɛɾ ən blæk, soʊ mʌtʃ ɹɛɾ ən blæk. wʌndɝfəl.

Red below, black above. Red and black, red and black, so much red and black. Wonderful.

hi wɔkt ɑn θɹu ðə blaɪt.

He walked on through the Blight.

ðə kɝʌptɪd tʃɹɑləks klaɪm tə ðɛɹ fit bɪhaɪn hɪm, lɝtʃɪŋ ɪndə moʊʃən, spɪɾəl dʒɹɑpɪŋ fɹəm ðɛɹ lɪps. ðɛɹ aɪz hæd ɡɹoʊn slʌɡɪʃ ən dʌl, bʌt wən i dɪzaɪɝɾ ɪt, ðeɪ wəd ɹɪspɑnd wɪð ə fɹɛnzid bæɾəl lʌs ðət wəd sɝpæs wʌt ðeɪ hæd noʊn ɪn laɪf.

The corrupted Trollocs climbed to their feet behind him, lurching into motion, spittle dropping from their lips. Their eyes had grown sluggish and dull, but when he desired it, they would respond with a frenzied battle lust that would surpass what they had known in life.

hi lɛf ðə mɹdʒɹɑl. ɪt wəd nɑt ɹaɪz, əz ɹumɝz sɛd ðeɪ dɪd. hɪz tʌtʃ naʊ bɹɔɾ ɪnstən dɛθ tə wʌn ʌv ɪts kaɪnd. pɪɾi. hi hæɾ ə fju neɪlz i maɪɾ əv ʌðɝwaɪz pʊt tə ɡʊd jus.

He left the Myrddraal. It would not rise, as rumors said they did. His touch now brought instant death to one of its kind. Pity. He had a few nails he might have otherwise put to good use.

pɝhæps i ʃəd ɡɛt səm ɡlʌvz. bʌɾ ɪf i dɪd, hi kʊdn kʌɾ ɪz hænd. wʌɾ ə pɹɑbləm.

Perhaps he should get some gloves. But if he did, he couldn't cut his hand. What a problem.

noʊ mæɾɝ. ɔnwɝd. ðə taɪm hæd kʌm tə kɪl ælθɹ.

No matter. Onward. The time had come to kill al'Thor.

ɪt sæɾənd ɪm ðət ðə hʌn mʌst ɛnd. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ə ɹizən fəɹ ə hʌnt. jə dɪdn hʌn sʌmθɪŋ wən jə nu ɪɡzækli wɛɹ ɪt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə bi. jə mɪɹli ʃoʊɾ ʌp tə miɾ ɪt.

It saddened him that the hunt must end. But there was no longer a reason for a hunt. You didn't hunt something when you knew exactly where it was going to be. You merely showed up to meet it.

laɪk ən oʊl fɹɛnd. ə dɪɹ, bɪlʌvd oʊl fɹɛn ðət jə wɝ gɑnə stæb θɹu ði aɪ, oʊpən ʌp ət ðə ɡʌɾ ən kənsum baɪ hænfəlz waɪl dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ɪz blʌd. ðət wɑz ðə pɹɑpɝ weɪ tə tʃɹit fɹɛnz.

Like an old friend. A dear, beloved old friend that you were going to stab through the eye, open up at the gut and consume by handfuls while drinking his blood. That was the proper way to treat friends.

ɪt wɑz ən ɑnɝ.

It was an honor.

mɑlənɝɪn ɹɑi ʃʌfəl θɹu səplaɪ ɹɪpɔɹts. ðət blæstəd ʃʌɾɝ ɑn ðə wɪndoʊ bɪhaɪn ɪz dɛsk snæpt ən blu oʊpən əɡɛn, lɛɾɪŋ ɪn ðə dæmp hiɾ ə ðə blaɪt.

Malenarin Rai shuffled through supply reports. That blasted shutter on the window behind his desk snapped and blew open again, letting in the damp heat of the Blight.

dɪspaɪt tɛn jɪɹz sɝvɪŋ əz kəmændɝ ə hiθ taʊɝ, hi hædnt ɡɹoʊn əkʌstəm tə ðə hiɾ ɪn ðə haɪlənz. dæmp. mʌɡi, ði ɛɹ ɔfən fʊl ə ɹɑɾɪŋ sɛns.

Despite ten years serving as commander of Heeth Tower, he hadn't grown accustomed to the heat in the highlands. Damp. Muggy, the air often full of rotting scents.

ðə wɪslɪŋ wɪn ɹæɾəld ðə wʊɾən ʃʌɾɝ. hi ɹoʊz, wɔkɪŋ oʊvɝ tə pʊl ɪt ʃʌt, ðən twɪstəɾ ə bɪɾ ə twaɪn ɝaʊn ɪts hændəl tə kip ɪt kloʊzd.

The whistling wind rattled the wooden shutter. He rose, walking over to pull it shut, then twisted a bit of twine around its handle to keep it closed.

hi wɔk bæk tə hɪz dɛsk, lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə ɹɑstɝ ə nuli ɝaɪv soʊlʒɝz. itʃ neɪm hæɾ ə spɛʃəlti bɪsaɪɾ ɪt - ʌp hɪɹ, ɛvɹi soʊlʒɝ hæd tə fɪl tu əɹ mɔɹ duɾiz. skɪl ət baɪndɪŋ wunz.

He walked back to his desk, looking over the roster of newly arrived soldiers. Each name had a specialty beside it - up here, every soldier had to fill two or more duties. Skill at binding wounds.

swɪft fit fəɹ ɹʌnɪŋ mɛsədʒəz. ə kin aɪ wɪð ə baʊ. ði əbɪləɾi tə meɪk ðə seɪm oʊl mʌʃ teɪs laɪk nu mʌʃ. mɑlənɝɪn ɔlweɪz æsk spəsɪfɪkli fəɹ mɛn ɪn ðə læst ɡɹup. ɛni kʊk u kəd meɪk soʊlʒɝz iɡɝ tə kʌm tə mɛs wɑz wɝθ ɪz weɪɾ ɪn ɡoʊld.

Swift feet for running messages. A keen eye with a bow. The ability to make the same old mush taste like new mush. Malenarin always asked specifically for men in the last group. Any cook who could make soldiers eager to come to mess was worth his weight in gold.

mɑlənɝɪn sɛɾ əsaɪɾ ɪz kɝən ɹipɔɹt, weɪɪŋ ɪt daʊn wɪð ðə lɛd-fɪl tʃɹɑlɑk hɔɹn i kɛp fəɹ ðə pɝpəs. ðə nɛkst ʃiɾ ɪn ɪz stæk wɑz ə lɛɾɝ fɹəm ə mæn neɪm bɑɹiɡə, ə mɝtʃən u wɑz bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪz kæɹəvæn tə ðə taʊɝ tə tʃɹeɪd. mɑlənɝɪn smaɪld; hi wɑz ə soʊlʒɝ fɝst, bʌɾ i wɔɹ ðə θɹi sɪlvɝ tʃeɪnz əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛs ðət mɑɹkt ɪm əz ə mæstɝ mɝtʃənt. waɪl ɪz taʊɝ ɹəsiv mɛni ʌv ɪts səplaɪz dɝɛkli fɹəm ðə kwin, noʊ kændɔɹi kəmændɝ wɑz dɪnaɪd ði ɑpɝtunəɾi tə bɑɹɾɝ wɪð mɝtʃəns.

Malenarin set aside his current report, weighing it down with the lead-filled Trolloc horn he kept for the purpose. The next sheet in his stack was a letter from a man named Barriga, a merchant who was bringing his caravan to the tower to trade. Malenarin smiled; he was a soldier first, but he wore the three silver chains across his chest that marked him as a master merchant. While his tower received many of its supplies directly from the Queen, no Kandori commander was denied the opportunity to barter with merchants.

ɪf i wɑz lʌki, hid bi eɪbəl tə ɡɛt ðɪs aʊtləndɝ mɝtʃən dʒɹʌŋk ət ðə bɑɹɡɪnɪŋ teɪbəl.

If he was lucky, he'd be able to get this outlander merchant drunk at the bargaining table.

mɑlənɝɪn hæd fɔɹs mɔɹ ðən wʌn mɝtʃən ɪndə ə jɪɹ ə mɪlətɛɹi sɝvəs əz pɛnəns fəɹ ɛntɝɪŋ bɑɹɡənz i kəd nɑt kip. ə jɪɹ ə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ wɪð ðə kwinz fɔɹsɪz ɔfən dɪd plʌmp fɔɹən mɝtʃəns ə ɡɹeɪt dil ʌv ɡʊd.

Malenarin had forced more than one merchant into a year of military service as penance for entering bargains he could not keep. A year of training with the Queen's forces often did plump foreign merchants a great deal of good.

hi sɛt ðət ʃit bɪniθ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk hɔɹn, ðən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd əz i sɔ ðə læst aɪɾəm fəɹ ɪz ətɛnʃən ət ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə stæk. ɪt wɑz ə ɹimaɪndɝ fɹəm ɪz stuɝd. kimlɪn, hɪz ɛldəst sʌn, wɑz əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ɪz fɔɹtinθ neɪmdeɪ. əz ɪf mɑlənɝɪn kəd fɝɡɛɾ əbaʊt ðæt! hi niɾəd noʊ ɹimaɪndɝ.

He set that sheet beneath the Trolloc horn, then hesitated as he saw the last item for his attention at the bottom of the stack. It was a reminder from his steward. Keemlin, his eldest son, was approaching his fourteenth nameday. As if Malenarin could forget about that! He needed no reminder.

hi smaɪld, sɛɾɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk hɔɹn ɑn ðə noʊt, ɪn keɪs ðət ʃʌɾɝ bɹoʊk oʊpən əɡɛn. hid sleɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk u hæd bɔɹn ðət hɔɹn hɪmsɛlf. ðən i wɔkt oʊvɝ tə ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz ɔfəs ən oʊpən ɪz bæɾɝd oʊk tʃɹʌŋk. əmʌŋ ði ʌðɝ ɪfɛks ɪnsaɪd wɑz ə klɔθ-ɹæp sɔɹd, ðə bɹaʊn skæbɝd kɛpt wɛl ɔɪld ən meɪnteɪnd, bʌt feɪɾəd wɪð taɪm. hɪz fɑðɝz sɔɹd.

He smiled, setting the Trolloc horn on the note, in case that shutter broke open again. He'd slain the Trolloc who had borne that horn himself. Then he walked over to the side of his office and opened his battered oak trunk. Among the other effects inside was a cloth-wrapped sword, the brown scabbard kept well oiled and maintained, but faded with time. His father's sword.

ɪn θɹi deɪz, hi wəd ɡɪv ɪt tə kimlɪn. ə bɔɪ bɪkeɪm ə mæn ɑn ɪz fɔɹtinθ neɪmdeɪ, ðə deɪ hi wɑz ɡɪvən ɪz fɝst sɔɹɾ ən bɪkeɪm ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ hɪmsɛlf. kimlɪn hæd wɝk hɑɹd tə lɝn ɪz fɔɹmz ʌndɝ ðə hɑɹʃəs tʃɹeɪnɝz mɑlənɝɪn kəd pɹəvaɪd. sun ɪz sʌn wəd bɪkʌm ə mæn. haʊ kwɪkli ðə jɪɹz pæst.

In three days, he would give it to Keemlin. A boy became a man on his fourteenth nameday, the day he was given his first sword and became responsible for himself. Keemlin had worked hard to learn his forms under the harshest trainers Malenarin could provide. Soon his son would become a man. How quickly the years passed.

teɪkɪŋ ə pɹaʊd bɹɛθ, mɑlənɝɪn kloʊz ðə tʃɹʌŋk, ðən ɹoʊz ən lɛft ɪz ɔfəs fəɹ ɪz deɪli ɹaʊnz. ðə taʊɝ haʊz tu hʌnʒɹəd ən fɪfti soʊlʒɝz, ə bæstʃən ə dɪfɛns ðət wɑtʃt ðə blaɪt.

Taking a proud breath, Malenarin closed the trunk, then rose and left his office for his daily rounds. The tower housed two hundred and fifty soldiers, a bastion of defense that watched the Blight.

tə hæv ə duɾi wɑz tə hæv pɹaɪd - dʒʌst əz tə bɛɹ ə bɝɾən wɑz tə ɡeɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ. wɑtʃɪŋ ðə blaɪt wɑz ɪz duɾi ən ɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ, ən ɪt wɑz pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðiz deɪz, wɪð ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ stɔɹm tə ðə nɔɹθ, ən wɪð ðə kwin ən mʌtʃ ə ðə kændɔɹi ɑɹmi hævɪŋ mɑɹtʃt tə sik ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. hi pʊl ðə dɔɹ tə hɪz ɔfəs kloʊzd, ðən θɹu ðə hɪɾən lætʃ ðət bɑɹɾ ɪɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. ɪt wɑz wʌn ə sɛvɹəl sətʃ dɔɹz ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ; ən ɛnəmi stɔɹmɪŋ ðə taʊɝ wʊdnt noʊ wɪtʃ wʌn oʊpən ɑntu ðə stɛɹwɛl ʌpwɝd. ɪn ðɪs weɪ, ə smɔl ɔfəs kəd fʌŋkʃən əz pɑɹɾ ə ðə taʊɝ dɪfɛns.

To have a duty was to have pride - just as to bear a burden was to gain strength. Watching the Blight was his duty and his strength, and it was particularly important these days, with the strange storm to the north, and with the Queen and much of the Kandori army having marched to seek the Dragon Reborn. He pulled the door to his office closed, then threw the hidden latch that barred it on the other side. It was one of several such doors in the hallway; an enemy storming the tower wouldn't know which one opened onto the stairwell upward. In this way, a small office could function as part of the tower defense.

hi wɔk tə ðə stɛɹwɛl. ðiz tɑp lɛvəlz wɝ nɑɾ æksɛsəbəl fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊn lɛvəl - ði ɪntaɪɝ bɑɾəm fɔɹɾi fiɾ ə ðə taʊɝ wɑz ə tʃɹæp. ən ɛnəmi hu ɛntɝɾ ət ðə ɡɹaʊn flɔɹ ən klaɪmd ʌp θɹi flaɪts ʌv ɡɛɹɪsən kɔɹɾɝz wəd dɪskʌvɝ noʊ weɪ ʌp tə ðə fɔɹθ flɔɹ. ði oʊnli weɪ tə ɡoʊ tə ðə fɔɹθ lɛvəl wɑz tə klaɪm ə nɛɹoʊ, kəlæpsəbəl ɹæmp ɑn ði aʊtsaɪɾ ə ðə taʊɝ ðət lɛd fɹəm ðə sɛkən lɛvəl ʌp tə ðə fɔɹθ. ɹʌnɪŋ ɑn ɪt lɛft ətækɝz fʊli ɪkspoʊz tə æɹoʊz fɹəm əbʌv. ðɛn, wʌns səm ə ðɛm wɝ ʌp bʌɾ ʌðɝz nɑt, ðə kændɔɹi wəd kəlæps ðə ɹæmp, dɪvaɪɾɪŋ ði ɛnəmi fɔɹs ən livɪŋ ðoʊz əbʌv tə bi kɪld əz ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd tə faɪn ði ɪntɪɹiɝ stɛɹwəlz.

He walked to the stairwell. These top levels were not accessible from the ground level - the entire bottom forty feet of the tower was a trap. An enemy who entered at the ground floor and climbed up three flights of garrison quarters would discover no way up to the fourth floor. The only way to go to the fourth level was to climb a narrow, collapsible ramp on the outside of the tower that led from the second level up to the fourth. Running on it left attackers fully exposed to arrows from above. Then, once some of them were up but others not, the Kandori would collapse the ramp, dividing the enemy force and leaving those above to be killed as they tried to find the interior stairwells.

mɑlənɝɪn klaɪmd əɾ ə bɹɪsk peɪs. pɪɹiɑɾɪk slɪts tə ðə saɪdz ə ðə stɛps lʊk daʊn ɑn ðə stɛɹz bɪniθ, ən wəɾ əlaʊ ɑɹtʃɝz tə faɪɝ ɑn ɪnveɪɾɝz. wən i wɑz əbaʊt hæfweɪ tə ðə tɑp, hi hɝd heɪsti fʊtfɔlz kʌmɪŋ daʊn. ə sɛkən leɪɾɝ, dʒɑɹɡən - sɑɹdʒən ə ðə wɑtʃ - ɹaʊndəd ðə bɛnd.

Malenarin climbed at a brisk pace. Periodic slits to the sides of the steps looked down on the stairs beneath, and would allow archers to fire on invaders. When he was about halfway to the top, he heard hasty footfalls coming down. A second later, Jargen - sergeant of the watch - rounded the bend.

laɪk moʊs kændɔɹi, dʒɑɹɡən wɔɹ ə fɔɹk bɪɹd; hɪz blæk hɛɹ wɑz dʌstɪd wɪð ɡɹeɪ.

Like most Kandori, Jargen wore a forked beard; his black hair was dusted with gray.

dʒɑɹɡən hæd dʒɔɪn ðə blaɪtwɑtʃ ðə deɪ æftɝ ɪz fɔɹtinθ neɪm-deɪ. hi wɔɹ ə kɔɹd lupt ɝaʊn ðə ʃoʊldɝ ə hɪz bɹaʊn junəfɔɹm; ɪt bɔɹ ə nɑt fəɹ itʃ tʃɹɑlɑk hid kɪld. ðəɹ hæd tə bi əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ fɪfti nɑts ɪn ðə θɪŋ baɪ naʊ.

Jargen had joined the Blightwatch the day after his fourteenth name-day. He wore a cord looped around the shoulder of his brown uniform; it bore a knot for each Trolloc he'd killed. There had to be approaching fifty knots in the thing by now.

dʒɑɹɡən səluɾəd wɪð ɑɹm tə bɹɛst, ðən loʊɝɾ ɪz hæn tə ɹɛst ɑn ɪz sɔɹd, ə saɪn ə ɹɪspɛk fəɹ ɪz kəmændɝ. ɪn mɛni kʌntʃɹiz, hoʊldɪŋ ðə wɛpən laɪk ðət wəd bi ən ɪnsəlt, bʌt sʌðɝnɝz wɝ noʊn tə bi pivɪʃ ən ɪl-tɛmpɝd. kʊdn ðeɪ si ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ən ɑnɝ tə hoʊl jəɹ sɔɹɾ ən ɪmplaɪ jə faʊn jəɹ kəmændɝ ə wɝði θɹɛt?

Jargen saluted with arm to breast, then lowered his hand to rest on his sword, a sign of respect for his commander. In many countries, holding the weapon like that would be an insult, but Southerners were known to be peevish and ill-tempered. Couldn't they see that it was an honor to hold your sword and imply you found your commander a worthy threat?

"maɪ lɔɹd," dʒɑɹɡən sɛd, vɔɪs ɡɹʌf. "ə flæʃ fɹəm ɹinə taʊɝ."

"My Lord," Jargen said, voice gruff. "A flash from Rena Tower."

"wʌt?" mɑlənɝɪn æskt. ðə tu fɛl ɪndə stɛp, tʃɹɑɾɪŋ ʌp ðə stɛɹwɛl.

"What?" Malenarin asked. The two fell into step, trotting up the stairwell.

"ɪt wɑz dɪstɪŋkt, sɝ," dʒɑɹɡən sɛd. "sɔ ɪt maɪsɛlf, aɪ dɪd. oʊnli ə flæʃ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ."

"It was distinct, sir," Jargen said. "Saw it myself, I did. Only a flash, but it was there."

"dɪd ðeɪ sɛn ə kɝɛkʃən?"

"Did they send a correction?"

"ðeɪ meɪ hæv baɪ naʊ. aɪ ɹæn tə fɛtʃ jə fɝst."

"They may have by now. I ran to fetch you first."

ɪf ðəɹ hæd bɪn mɔɹ nuz, dʒɑɹɡən wʊɾə ʃɛɹɾ ɪt, soʊ mɑlənɝɪn dɪd nɑt weɪs bɹɛθ pɹɛsɪŋ hɪm. ʃɔɹtli, ðeɪ stɛpt ʌp ɑntu ðə tɑp ə ðə taʊɝ, wɪtʃ hɛld ən ɪnɔɹməs mɛkənɪzəm ə mɪɹɝz ən læmps. wɪð ði æpɝæɾəs, ðə taʊɝ kəd sɛn mɛsədʒəz tə ði ist əɹ wɛst - wɛɹ ʌðɝ taʊɝz laɪn ðə blaɪt - əɹ saʊθwɝd, əlɔŋ ə laɪn ə taʊɝz ðət ɹæn tə ði ɛɛzdeɪʃɝ pæləs ɪn tʃeɪkɪn.

If there had been more news, Jargen would have shared it, so Malenarin did not waste breath pressing him. Shortly, they stepped up onto the top of the tower, which held an enormous mechanism of mirrors and lamps. With the apparatus, the tower could send messages to the east or west - where other towers lined the Blight - or southward, along a line of towers that ran to the Aesdaishar Palace in Chachin.

ðə væst, ʌnʒəleɪtɪŋ kændɔɹi haɪlənz spɹɛɾ aʊt fɹəm ɪz taʊɝ. səm ə ðə sʌðɝn hɪlz wɝ stɪl laɪtli leɪst wɪð mɔɹnɪŋ fɑɡ. ðət læn tə ðə saʊθ, fɹi ʌv ðɪs ənnætʃɹəl hit, wəd sun ɡɹoʊ ɡɹin, ən kændɔɹi hɝdzmɪn wəd klaɪm tə ðə haɪ pæstʃɝz tə ɡɹeɪz ðɛɹ ʃip.

The vast, undulating Kandori highlands spread out from his tower. Some of the southern hills were still lightly laced with morning fog. That land to the south, free of this unnatural heat, would soon grow green, and Kandori herdsmen would climb to the high pastures to graze their sheep.

nɔɹθwɝd leɪ ðə blaɪt. mɑlənɝɪn hæd ɹɛɾ ə deɪz wən ðə blaɪt hæd bɛɹli bɪn vɪzəbəl fɹəm ðɪs taʊɝ. naʊ ɪt ɹæn nɪɹli tə ðə beɪs ə ðə stoʊnwɝk. ɹinə taʊɝ wɑz nɔɹθwɛst əz wɛl. ɪts kəmændɝ - lɔɹd naɪɑk ə haʊs oʊkətoʊmoʊ - wɑz ə dɪstən kʌzən ən ə ɡʊd fɹɛnd. hi wəd nɑɾ əv sɛn ə flæʃ wɪθaʊt ɹizən, ən wəd sɛn ə ɹitʃɹækʃən ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn ən æksəɾənt.

Northward lay the Blight. Malenarin had read of days when the Blight had barely been visible from this tower. Now it ran nearly to the base of the stonework. Rena Tower was northwest as well. Its commander - Lord Niach of House Okatomo - was a distant cousin and a good friend. He would not have sent a flash without reason, and would send a retraction if it had been an accident.

"ɛni fɝðɝ wɝd?" mɑlənɝɪn æskt.

"Any further word?" Malenarin asked.

ðə soʊlʒɝz ɑn wɑtʃ ʃʊk ðɛɹ hɛdz. dʒɑɹɡən tæpt ɪz fʊt, ən mɑlənɝɪn foʊldəɾ ɪz ɑɹmz tə weɪt fəɹ ə kɝɛkʃən.

The soldiers on watch shook their heads. Jargen tapped his foot, and Malenarin folded his arms to wait for a correction.

nʌθɪŋ keɪm. ɹinə taʊɝ stʊd wɪðɪn ðə blaɪt ðiz deɪz, əz ɪt wɑz fɑɹðɝ nɔɹθ ðən hiθ taʊɝ. ɪts pəzɪʃən wɪðɪn ðə blaɪt wɑz nɔɹməli nɑɾ ən ɪʃu. ivən ðə moʊs fɪɹsəm kɹitʃɝz ə ðə blaɪt nu nɑt tə ətæk ə kændɔɹi taʊɝ.

Nothing came. Rena Tower stood within the Blight these days, as it was farther north than Heeth Tower. Its position within the Blight was normally not an issue. Even the most fearsome creatures of the Blight knew not to attack a Kandori tower.

noʊ kɝɛkʃən keɪm. nɑɾ ə ɡlɪmɝ. "sɛn ə mɛsədʒ tə ɹinə," mɑlənɝɪn sɛd. 'æsk ɪf ðɛɹ flæʃ wɑz ə mɪsteɪk. ðən æsk fɑɹm taʊɝ ɪf ðeɪv noʊɾəst ɛniθɪŋ stʃɹeɪnʒ."

No correction came. Not a glimmer. "Send a message to Rena," Malenarin said. 'Ask if their flash was a mistake. Then ask Farmay Tower if they have noticed anything strange."

dʒɑɹɡən sɛt ðə mɛn tə wɝk, bʌt ɡeɪv mɑlənɝɪn ə flæt ɡlæns, əz ɪf tə æsk, "ju θɪŋk aɪ hævən dʌn ðəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi?"

Jargen set the men to work, but gave Malenarin a flat glance, as if to ask, "You think I haven't done that already?"

ðət mɛn mɛsədʒəz hæd bɪn sɛnt, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wɝd bæk. wɪn blu əkɹɔs ðə taʊɝ tɑp, kɹikɪŋ ðə stil ə ðə mɪɹɝ æpɝæɾəs əz ɪz mɛn sɛn ənʌðɝ sɪɹiz ə flæʃɪz. ðət wɪnd wɑz hjuməd. fɑɹ tu hɑt. mɑlənɝɪn ɡlænst ʌpwɝd, təwɔɹd wɛɹ ðət seɪm blæk stɔɹm bɔɪld ən ɹoʊld. ɪt sim tə hæv sɛɾəld daʊn.

That meant messages had been sent, but there was no word back. Wind blew across the tower top, creaking the steel of the mirror apparatus as his men sent another series of flashes. That wind was humid. Far too hot. Malenarin glanced upward, toward where that same black storm boiled and rolled. It seemed to have settled down.

ðət stʃɹʌk ɪm əz vɛɹi dɪskʌmfɝɾɪŋ.

That struck him as very discomforting.

"flæʃ ə mɛsədʒ bækwɝd," mɑlənɝɪn sɛd, "təwɔɹd ði ɪnlæn taʊɝz. tɛl əm wʌt wi sɔ;

"Flash a message backward," Malenarin said, "toward the inland towers. Tell them what we saw;

tɛl əm tə bi ɹɛɾi ɪn keɪs ə tʃɹʌbəl."

tell them to be ready in case of trouble."

ðə mɛn sɛt tə wɝk.

The men set to work.

"sɑɹdʒənt," mɑlənɝɪn sɛd, "hu ɪz nɛkst ɑn ðə mɛsənʒɝ ɹɑstɝ?"

"Sergeant," Malenarin said, "who is next on the messenger roster?"

ðə taʊɝ fɔɹs ɪnkluɾəd ə smɔl ɡɹup ə bɔɪz u wɝ ɛksələn ɹaɪɾɝz. laɪtweɪt, ðeɪ kəd ɡoʊ ɑn fæs hɔɹsəz ʃəɾ ə kəmændɝ dɪsaɪd tə baɪpæs ðə mɪɹɝz. mɪɹɝ laɪt wɑz fæst, bʌɾ ɪt kəd bi sin baɪ wʌnz ɛnəmiz. bɪsaɪdz, ɪf ðə laɪn ə taʊɝz wɑz bɹoʊkən - əɹ ɪf ði æpɝæɾəs wɑz dæmədʒd - ðeɪ wəd niɾ ə minz tə ɡɛt wɝd tə ðə kæpəɾəl.

The tower force included a small group of boys who were excellent riders. Lightweight, they could go on fast horses should a commander decide to bypass the mirrors. Mirror light was fast, but it could be seen by one's enemies. Besides, if the line of towers was broken - or if the apparatus was damaged - they would need a means to get word to the capital.

"nɛkst ɑn ðə ɹɑstɝ . . ." dʒɑɹɡən sɛd, tʃɛkɪŋ ə lɪs neɪl tə ði ɪnsaɪɾ ə ðə dɔɹ ɑntu ðə ɹuftɑp. "ɪt wəd bi kimlɪn, maɪ lɔɹd."

"Next on the roster . . ." Jargen said, checking a list nailed to the inside of the door onto the rooftop. "It would be Keemlin, my Lord."

kimlɪn. hɪz kimlɪn.

Keemlin. His Keemlin.

mɑlənɝɪn ɡlæns tə ðə nɔɹθwɛst, təwɔɹd ðə saɪlən taʊɝ ðət hæd flæʃt soʊ ɑmənəsli. "bɹɪŋ mi wɝɾ ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ə hɪn ə ɹɪspɑns fɹəm ði ʌðɝ taʊɝz," mɑlənɝɪn sɛd tə ðə soʊlʒɝz. "dʒɑɹɡən, kʌm wɪð mi."

Malenarin glanced to the northwest, toward the silent tower that had flashed so ominously. "Bring me word if there is a hint of response from the other towers," Malenarin said to the soldiers. "Jargen, come with me."

ðə tu ʌv əm hɝid daʊn ðə stɛɹz. "wi nid tə sɛn ə mɛsənʒɝ saʊθwɝd," mɑlənɝɪn sɛd, ðən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "noʊ. noʊ, wi nid tə sɛn sɛvɹəl mɛsənʒɝz. dʌbəl ʌp. dʒʌst ɪn keɪs ðə taʊɝz fɔl." hi bɪɡæn muvɪŋ əɡɛn.

The two of them hurried down the stairs. "We need to send a messenger southward," Malenarin said, then hesitated. "No. No, we need to send several messengers. Double up. Just in case the towers fall." He began moving again.

ðə tu ʌv əm lɛf ðə stɛɹwɛl ən ɛntɝd mɑlənɝɪnz ɔfəs. hi ɡɹæbd ɪz bɛs kwɪl ɔf ðə ɹæk ɑn ɪz wɔl. ðət blæstəd ʃʌɾɝ wɑz bloʊɪŋ ən ɹætlɪŋ əɡɛn; ðə peɪpɝz ɑn ɪz dɛsk ɹʌsəld əz i pʊld aʊɾ ə fɹɛʃ ʃiɾ ə peɪpɝ.

The two of them left the stairwell and entered Malenarin's office. He grabbed his best quill off the rack on his wall. That blasted shutter was blowing and rattling again; the papers on his desk rustled as he pulled out a fresh sheet of paper.

ɹinə ən fɑɹm nɑt ɹɪspɑndɪŋ tə flæʃ mɛsədʒəz. pɑsəbli oʊvɝɹʌn əɹ səvɪɹli hæmpɝd. bi ædvaɪzd. hiθ wɪl stænd.

Rena and Farmay not responding to flash messages. Possibly overrun or severely hampered. Be advised. Heeth will stand.

hi foʊldəd ðə peɪpɝ, hoʊldɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp tə dʒɑɹɡən. ðə mæn tʊk ɪt wɪð ə lɛðɝi hænd, ɹɛɾ ɪɾ oʊvɝ, ðən ɡɹʌntɪd. "tu kɑpiz, ðɛn?"

He folded the paper, holding it up to Jargen. The man took it with a leathery hand, read it over, then grunted. "Two copies, then?"

"θɹi," mɑlənɝɪn sɛd. "moʊbəlaɪz ði ɑɹtʃɝz ən sɛn əm tə ðə ɹuf. tɛl əm deɪnʒɝ meɪ kʌm fɹəm əbʌv."

"Three," Malenarin said. "Mobilize the archers and send them to the roof. Tell them danger may come from above."

ɪf i wɑzn mɪɹli dʒʌmpɪŋ ət ʃædoʊz - ɪf ðə taʊɝz tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə hiθ hæd fɔlən soʊ kwɪkli - ðən soʊ kəd ðoʊz tə ðə saʊθ. ən ɪf hid bɪn ðə wʌn meɪkɪŋ ən əsɔlt, hiɾ əv dʌn ɛniθɪŋ i kəd tə snik ɝaʊn ən teɪk aʊt wʌn ə ðə sʌðɝn taʊɝz fɝst. ðət wɑz ðə bɛst weɪ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ noʊ mɛsədʒəz ɡɑt bæk tə ðə kæpəɾəl.

If he wasn't merely jumping at shadows - if the towers to either side of Heeth had fallen so quickly - then so could those to the south. And if he'd been the one making an assault, he'd have done anything he could to sneak around and take out one of the southern towers first. That was the best way to make sure no messages got back to the capital.

dʒɑɹɡən səluɾəd, fɪs tə tʃɛst, ðən wɪθdʒɹu. ðə mɛsədʒ wəd bi sɛn ɪmiɾiətli: θɹi taɪmz ɑn lɛɡz ə hɔɹsflɛʃ, wʌns ɑn lɛɡz ə laɪt. mɑlənɝɪn lɛt hɪmsɛlf fil ə hɪn ə ɹɪlif ðəɾ ɪz sʌn wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz ɹaɪɾɪŋ tə seɪfti. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ dɪsɑnɝ ɪn ðæt; ðə mɛsədʒəz niɾəd tə bi dɪlɪvɝd, ən kimlɪn wɑz nɛkst ɑn ðə ɹɑstɝ.

Jargen saluted, fist to chest, then withdrew. The message would be sent immediately: three times on legs of horseflesh, once on legs of light. Malenarin let himself feel a hint of relief that his son was one of those riding to safety. There was no dishonor in that; the messages needed to be delivered, and Keemlin was next on the roster.

mɑlənɝɪn ɡlænst aʊɾ ɪz wɪndoʊ. ɪt feɪs nɔɹθ, təwɔɹd ðə blaɪt. ɛvɹi kəmændɝz ɔfəs dɪd ðæt. ðə bʌbəlɪŋ stɔɹm, wɪð ɪts sɪlvɝi klaʊdz. səmtaɪmz ðeɪ lʊk laɪk stʃɹeɪt dʒiəmɛtʃɹɪk ʃeɪps. hi hæd lɪsənd wɛl tə pæsɪŋ mɝtʃəns. tʃɹʌbəl taɪmz wɝ kʌmɪŋ. ðə kwin wəd nɑɾ əv ɡɔn saʊθ tə sik ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ kʌnɪŋ əɹ ɪnfluɛntʃəl i maɪt bi. ʃi bɪlivd.

Malenarin glanced out his window. It faced north, toward the Blight. Every commander's office did that. The bubbling storm, with its silvery clouds. Sometimes they looked like straight geometric shapes. He had listened well to passing merchants. Troubled times were coming. The Queen would not have gone south to seek a false Dragon, no matter how cunning or influential he might be. She believed.

ɪt wɑz taɪm fəɹ tɑɹmən ɡdən. ən lʊkɪŋ aʊɾ ɪndə ðət stɔɹm, mɑlənɝɪn θɔɾ i kəd si tə ðə vɛɹi ɛdʒ ə taɪm ɪtsɛlf. ən ɛdʒ ðət wɑz nɑt fɑɹ dɪstənt. ɪn fækt, ɪt sim tə bi ɡɹoʊɪŋ dɑɹkɝ. ən ðəɹ wɑz ə dɑɹknəs bɪniθ ɪt, ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd nɔɹθwɝd.

It was time for Tarmon Gai'don. And looking out into that storm, Malenarin thought he could see to the very edge of time itself. An edge that was not far distant. In fact, it seemed to be growing darker. And there was a darkness beneath it, on the ground northward.

ðət dɑɹknəs wɑz ədvænsɪŋ.

That darkness was advancing.

mɑlənɝɪn dæʃt aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum, ɹeɪsɪŋ ʌp ðə stɛps tə ðə ɹuf, wɛɹ ðə wɪn swɛpt əɡɛns mɛn pʊʃɪŋ ən muvɪŋ mɪɹɝz.

Malenarin dashed out of the room, racing up the steps to the roof, where the wind swept against men pushing and moving mirrors.

"wɑz ðə mɛsədʒ sɛn tə ðə saʊθ?" hi dɪmændəd.

"Was the message sent to the south?" he demanded.

"jɛs, sɝ," lutɛnən lændəlɪn sɛd. hid bɪn ɹaʊz tə teɪk kəmæn ə ðə taʊɝz tɑp. "noʊ ɹɪplaɪ jɛt."

"Yes, sir," Lieutenant Landalin said. He'd been roused to take command of the tower's top. "No reply yet."

mɑlənɝɪn ɡlæns daʊn, ən pɪkt aʊt θɹi ɹaɪɾɝz bɹeɪkɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə taʊɝ ət fʊl spid.

Malenarin glanced down, and picked out three riders breaking away from the tower at full speed.

ðə mɛsənʒɝz wɝ ɔf. ðeɪ wəd stɑp ət bɑɹklən ɪf ɪt wɑzn biɪŋ ətækt. ðə kæptən ðəɹ wəd sɛn əm ɑn saʊθwɝd, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs. ən ɪf bɑɹklən dɪdn stænd, ðə bɔɪz wəd kəntɪnju ɑn, ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə kæpəɾəl ɪf niɾəd.

The messengers were off. They would stop at Barklan if it wasn't being attacked. The captain there would send them on southward, just in case. And if Barklan didn't stand, the boys would continue on, all the way to the capital if needed.

mɑlənɝɪn tɝn bæk tə ðə stɔɹm. ðəɾ ədvænsɪŋ dɑɹknəs hæɾ ɪm ɑn ɛdʒ. ɪt wɑz kʌmɪŋ.

Malenarin turned back to the storm. That advancing darkness had him on edge. It was coming.

"ɹeɪz ðə hɔɹɾɪŋz," hi ɔɹɾɝd lændəlɪn. "bɹɪŋ ʌp ðə stɔɹ hɪtʃ-ɪŋz ən ɛmpti ðə sɛlɝz.

"Raise the hoardings," he ordered Landalin. "Bring up the store hitch-ings and empty the cellars.

hæv ðə loʊɾɝz ɡæðɝ ɔl ə ði æɹoʊz ən sɛɾ ʌp steɪʃənz fəɹ ɹisʌplaɪɪŋ ði ɑɹtʃɝz, ən pʊɾ ɑɹtʃɝz əɾ ɛvɹi tʃoʊk pɔɪnt, kɪl slɪɾ ən wɪndoʊ. stɑɹt ðə faɪɝpɑts ən əv mɛn ɹɛɾi tə dʒɹɑp ði aʊɾɝ ɹæmps. pɹipɛɹ fəɹ ə sidʒ."

Have the loaders gather all of the arrows and set up stations for resupplying the archers, and put archers at every choke point, kill slit and window. Start the firepots and have men ready to drop the outer ramps. Prepare for a siege."

əz lændəlɪn bɑɹkt ɔɹɾɝz, mɛn ɹʌʃt əweɪ. mɑlənɝɪn hɝd buts skɹeɪp stoʊn bɪhaɪn hɪm, ən i ɡlænst oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. wɑz ðət dʒɑɹ-dʒɛnɝəl bæk əɡɛn?

As Landalin barked orders, men rushed away. Malenarin heard boots scrape stone behind him, and he glanced over his shoulder. Was that Jar-gen back again?

noʊ. ɪt wɑz ə juθ ə nɪɹli fɔɹtin sʌmɝz, tu jʌŋ fəɹ ə bɪɹd, hɪz dɑɹk hɛɹ dɪʃɛvəld, hɪz feɪs stʃɹimɪŋ wɪð swɛt kɑzd -  pɹəzuməbli - baɪ ə ɹʌn ʌp sɛvən lɛvəlz ə ðə taʊɝ.

No. It was a youth of nearly fourteen summers, too young for a beard, his dark hair disheveled, his face streaming with sweat caused -  presumably - by a run up seven levels of the tower.

kimlɪn. mɑlənɝɪn fɛlt ə stæb ə fɪɹ, ɪnstənli ɹipleɪst wɪð æŋɡɝ. "soʊlʒɝ! jə wɝ tə ɹaɪd wɪð ə mɛsədʒ!"

Keemlin. Malenarin felt a stab of fear, instantly replaced with anger. "Soldier! You were to ride with a message!"

kimlɪn bɪɾ ɪz lɪp. "wɛl, sɝ," hi sɛd. "tʃjɑn, fɔɹ pleɪsəz daʊn fɹəm mi. hiz faɪv, meɪbi tɛn paʊnz laɪɾɝ ðən aɪ. ɪt meɪks ə bɪɡ dɪfɝəns, sɝ. hi ɹaɪdz ə lɑt fæstɝ, ən aɪ fɪɡjɝd ðɪs wəd bi ən ɪmpɔɹɾənt mɛsədʒ. soʊ aɪ æsk fəɹ ɪm tə bi sɛn ɪn maɪ pleɪs."

Keemlin bit his lip. "Well, sir," he said. "Tian, four places down from me. He is five, maybe ten pounds lighter than I. It makes a big difference, sir. He rides a lot faster, and I figured this would be an important message. So I asked for him to be sent in my place."

mɑlənɝɪn fɹaʊnd. soʊlʒɝz muvd ɝaʊn ðɛm, ɹʌʃɪŋ daʊn ðə stɛɹz əɹ ɡæðɝɪŋ wɪð baʊz ət ðə ɹɪm ə ðə taʊɝ. ðə wɪn haʊld aʊtsaɪɾ ən θʌndɝ bɪɡæn tə saʊn sɔfli - jɛɾ ɪnsɪstənli.

Malenarin frowned. Soldiers moved around them, rushing down the stairs or gathering with bows at the rim of the tower. The wind howled outside and thunder began to sound softly - yet insistently.

kimlɪn mɛɾ ɪz aɪz. "tʃjɑnz mʌðɝ, leɪɾi jəbəθ, hæz lɔs fɔɹ sʌnz tə ðə blaɪt," hi sɛd, sɔfli ɪnʌf ðəɾ oʊnli mɑlənɝɪn kəd hɪɹ. "tʃjɑnz ði oʊnli wʌn ʃiz lɛft. ɪf wʌn ʌv əs əz ə ʃɑɾ ət ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊt, sɝ, aɪ fɪɡjɝɾ ɪt ʃəd bi hɪm."

Keemlin met his eyes. "Tian's mother, Lady Yabeth, has lost four sons to the Blight," he said, softly enough that only Malenarin could hear. "Tian's the only one she has left. If one of us has a shot at getting out, sir, I figured it should be him."

mɑlənɝɪn hɛld ɪz sʌnz aɪz. ðə bɔɪ ʌndɝstʊd wʌt wɑz kʌmɪŋ. laɪt hɛlp hɪm, bʌɾ i ʌndɝstʊd. ən hid sɛn ənʌðɝ əweɪ ɪn ɪz pleɪs.

Malenarin held his son's eyes. The boy understood what was coming. Light help him, but he understood. And he'd sent another away in his place.

"kɹeɪl," mɑlənɝɪn bɑɹkt, ɡlænsɪŋ təwɔɹd wʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz pæsɪŋ baɪ.

"Kralle," Malenarin barked, glancing toward one of the soldiers passing by.

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd kəmændɝ?"

"Yes, my Lord Commander?"

"ɹʌn daʊn tə maɪ ɔfəs," mɑlənɝɪn sɛd. "ðɛɹ ɪz ə sɔɹɾ ɪn maɪ oʊeɪkən tʃɹʌŋk. fɛtʃ ɪt fəɹ mi."

"Run down to my office," Malenarin said. "There is a sword in my oaken trunk. Fetch it for me."

ðə mæn səluɾəd, oʊbeɪɪŋ.

The man saluted, obeying.

"fɑðɝ?" kimlɪn sɛd. "maɪ neɪmdeɪ ɪzən fəɹ θɹi deɪz."

"Father?" Keemlin said. "My nameday isn't for three days."

mɑlənɝɪn weɪɾəd wɪð ɑɹmz bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk. hɪz moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt tæsk ət ðə moʊmənt wɑz tə bi sin ɪn kəmænd, tə ɹiəʃʊɹ ɪz tʃɹups. kɹeɪl ɹɪtɝnd wɪð ðə sɔɹd; ɪts wɔɹn skæbɝd bɔɹ ði ɪmədʒ ə ði oʊk sɛɾ əfleɪm. ðə sɪmbəl ə haʊs ɹɑi.

Malenarin waited with arms behind his back. His most important task at the moment was to be seen in command, to reassure his troops. Kralle returned with the sword; its worn scabbard bore the image of the oak set aflame. The symbol of House Rai.

"fɑðɝ. . . ." kimlɪn ɹɪpiɾɪd. "aɪ - "

"Father. . . ." Keemlin repeated. "I - "

"ðɪs wɛpən ɪz ɔfɝd tə ə bɔɪ wən i bɪkʌmz ə mæn," mɑlənɝɪn sɛd. "ɪt simz ɪts tu leɪɾ ɪn kʌmɪŋ, sʌn. fəɹ aɪ si ə mæn stændɪŋ bɪfɔɹ mi." hi hɛl ðə wɛpən fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ɪz ɹaɪt hænd.

"This weapon is offered to a boy when he becomes a man," Malenarin said. "It seems it is too late in coming, son. For I see a man standing before me." He held the weapon forward in his right hand.

ɝaʊn ðə taʊɝ tɑp, soʊlʒɝz tɝn təwɔɹd hɪm: ði ɑɹtʃɝz wɪð baʊz ɹɛɾi, ðə soʊlʒɝz u ɑpɝeɪɾəd ðə mɪɹɝz, ðə duɾi wɑtʃmən. əz bɔɹɾɝləndɝz, itʃ ən ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm wʊɾə bɪn ɡɪvən ɪz sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz fɔɹtinθ neɪm-deɪ. itʃ wʌn hæd fɛl ðə kætʃ ɪn ðə tʃɛst, ðə wʌndɝfəl filɪŋ ə kʌmɪŋ ʌv eɪdʒ. ɪt hæd hæpən tə itʃ ə ðɛm, bʌt ðət dɪd nɑt meɪk ðɪs əkeɪʒən ɛni lɛs spɛʃəl.

Around the tower top, soldiers turned toward him: the archers with bows ready, the soldiers who operated the mirrors, the duty watchmen. As Borderlanders, each and every one of them would have been given his sword on his fourteenth name-day. Each one had felt the catch in the chest, the wonderful feeling of coming of age. It had happened to each of them, but that did not make this occasion any less special.

kimlɪn wɛn daʊn ɑn wʌn ni.

Keemlin went down on one knee.

"waɪ dʒju dʒɹɔ jəɹ sɔɹd?" mɑlənɝɪn æskt, vɔɪs laʊd soʊ ðəɾ ɛvɹi mæn ətɑp ðə taʊɝ wəd hɪɹ.

"Why do you draw your sword?" Malenarin asked, voice loud so that every man atop the tower would hear.

"ɪn dɪfɛns ə maɪ ɑnɝ, maɪ fæmli, əɹ maɪ hoʊmlænd," kimlɪn ɹɪplaɪd.

"In defense of my honor, my family, or my homeland," Keemlin replied.

"haʊ lɔŋ dʒju faɪt?"

"How long do you fight?"

"əntɪl maɪ læs bɹɛθ dʒɔɪnz ðə nɔɹðɝn wɪnz."

"Until my last breath joins the northern winds."

"wɛn dʒju stɑp wɑtʃɪŋ?"

"When do you stop watching?"

"nɛvɝ," kimlɪn wɪspɝd.

"Never," Keemlin whispered.

"spik ɪt laʊɾɝ!"

"Speak it louder!"

"nɛvɝ!"

"Never!"

"wʌns ðɪs sɔɹɾ ɪz dʒɹɔn, jə bɪkʌm ə wɔɹiɝ, ɔlweɪz wɪð ɪt nɪɹ jə ɪn pɹɛpɝeɪʃən tə faɪt ðə ʃædoʊ. wɪl jə dʒɹɔ ðɪs bleɪɾ ən dʒɔɪn ʌs, əz ə mæn?"

"Once this sword is drawn, you become a warrior, always with it near you in preparation to fight the Shadow. Will you draw this blade and join us, as a man?"

kimlɪn lʊkt ʌp, ðən tʊk ðə hɪlt ɪn ə fɝm ɡɹɪp ən pʊl ðə wɛpən fɹi.

Keemlin looked up, then took the hilt in a firm grip and pulled the weapon free.

"ɹaɪz əz ə mæn, maɪ sʌn!" mɑlənɝɪn dɪklɛɹd.

"Rise as a man, my son!" Malenarin declared.

kimlɪn stʊd, hoʊldɪŋ ðə wɛpən əlɔft, ðə bɹaɪt bleɪd ɹəflɛktɪŋ ðə dɪfjus sʌnlaɪt. ðə mɛn ətɑp ðə taʊɝ tʃɪɹd.

Keemlin stood, holding the weapon aloft, the bright blade reflecting the diffuse sunlight. The men atop the tower cheered.

ɪt wɑz noʊ ʃeɪm tə faɪn tɪɹz ɪn wʌnz aɪz ət sətʃ ə moʊmənt. mɑlənɝɪn blɪŋkt əm fɹi, ðən nɛl daʊn, bʌklɪŋ ðə sɔɹd bɛlt əɾ ɪz sʌnz weɪst. ðə mɛn kəntɪnjud tə tʃɪɹ ən jɛl, ən i nu ɪt wɑz nɑɾ oʊnli fəɹ ɪz sʌn. ðeɪ jɛld ɪn dɪfaɪəns ə ðə ʃædoʊ. fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðɛɹ vɔɪsəz ɹæŋ laʊɾɝ ðən ðə θʌndɝ.

It was no shame to find tears in one's eyes at such a moment. Malenarin blinked them free, then knelt down, buckling the sword belt at his son's waist. The men continued to cheer and yell, and he knew it was not only for his son. They yelled in defiance of the Shadow. For a moment, their voices rang louder than the thunder.

mɑlənɝɪn stʊd, leɪɪŋ ə hæn ɑn ɪz sʌnz ʃoʊldɝ əz ðə bɔɪ slɪɾ ɪz sɔɹɾ ɪndə ɪts ʃiθ.

Malenarin stood, laying a hand on his son's shoulder as the boy slid his sword into its sheath.

təɡɛðɝ ðeɪ tɝn tə feɪs ði ɔnkʌmɪŋ ʃædoʊ. ðɛɹ!" wʌn ə ði ɑɹtʃɝz sɛd, pɔɪntɪŋ ʌpwɝd.

Together they turned to face the oncoming Shadow. There!" one of the archers said, pointing upward.

"ðɛɹz sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðə klaʊdz!"

"There's something in the clouds!"

"dʒɹæɡkɝ!" ənʌðɝ wʌn sɛd.

"Draghkar!" another one said.

ði ənnætʃɹəl klaʊdz wɝ kloʊs naʊ, ən ðə ʃeɪd ðeɪ kæs kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ haɪd ði ʌnʒəleɪtɪŋ hɔɹɾ ə tʃɹɑləks bɪniθ. sʌmθɪŋ flu aʊt fɹəm ðə skaɪ, bʌɾ ə dʌzən ə hɪz ɑɹtʃɝz lɛt lus. ðə kɹitʃɝ skɹimd ən fɛl, dɑɹk wɪŋz flæpɪŋ ɔkwɝdli.

The unnatural clouds were close now, and the shade they cast could no longer hide the undulating horde of Trollocs beneath. Something flew out from the sky, but a dozen of his archers let loose. The creature screamed and fell, dark wings flapping awkwardly.

dʒɑɹɡən pʊʃt ɪz weɪ θɹu tə mɑlənɝɪn. "maɪ lɔɹd," dʒɑɹɡən sɛd, ʃuɾɪŋ ə ɡlæns ət kimlɪn, "ðə bɔɪ ʃəd bi bɪloʊ."

Jargen pushed his way through to Malenarin. "My Lord," Jargen said, shooting a glance at Keemlin, "the boy should be below."

"nɑɾ ə bɔɪ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ," mɑlənɝɪn sɛd wɪð pɹaɪd. "ə mæn. wʌɾ ɪz jəɹ ɹipɔɹt?"

"Not a boy any longer," Malenarin said with pride. "A man. What is your report?"

"ɔl ɪz pɹipɛɹd." dʒɑɹɡən ɡlænst oʊvɝ ðə wɔl, aɪɪŋ ði ɔnkʌmɪŋ tʃɹɑləks əz ivənli əz ɪf i wɝ ɪnspɛktɪŋ ə steɪbəl ə hɔɹsəz. "ðeɪ wɪl nɑt faɪn ðɪs tʃɹi ən izi wʌn tə fɛl."

"All is prepared." Jargen glanced over the wall, eyeing the oncoming Trollocs as evenly as if he were inspecting a stable of horses. "They will not find this tree an easy one to fell."

mɑlənɝɪn nɑɾəd. kimlɪn ɛs ʃoʊldɝ wɑz tɛns. ðət si ʌv tʃɹɑləks simd ɛnləs. əɡɛns ðɪs foʊ, ðə taʊɝ wəɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli fɔl. ðə tʃɹɑləks wəd kip kʌmɪŋ, weɪv æftɝ weɪv.

Malenarin nodded. Keemlin s shoulder was tense. That sea of Trollocs seemed endless. Against this foe, the tower would eventually fall. The Trollocs would keep coming, wave after wave.

bʌɾ ɛvɹi mæn ətɑp ðət taʊɝ nu hɪz duɾi. ðeɪd kɪl ʃædoʊ-spɑn əz lɔŋ əz ðeɪ kʊd, hoʊpɪŋ tə baɪ ɪnʌf taɪm fəɹ ðə mɛsədʒəz tə də səm ɡʊd.

But every man atop that tower knew his duty. They'd kill Shadow-spawn as long as they could, hoping to buy enough time for the messages to do some good.

mɑlənɝɪn wɑz ə mæn ə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, seɪm əz ɪz fɑðɝ, seɪm əz ɪz sʌn bɪsaɪd hɪm. ðeɪ nu ðɛɹ tæsk. jə hɛld əntɪl jə wɝ ɹɪlivd.

Malenarin was a man of the Borderlands, same as his father, same as his son beside him. They knew their task. You held until you were relieved.

ðæts ɔl ðəɹ wɑz tə ɪt.

That's all there was to it.


tʃæptɝ wʌn


CHAPTER 1

æpəlz fɝst


Apples First

ðə wil ə taɪm tɝnz, ən eɪdʒəz kʌm ən pæs, livɪŋ mɛmɹiz ðət bɪkʌm lɛdʒənd. lɛdʒən feɪdz tə mɪθ, ən ivən mɪθ ɪz lɔŋ fɝɡɑɾən wən ði eɪdʒ ðət ɡeɪv ɪt bɝθ kʌmz əɡɛn. ɪn wʌn eɪdʒ, kɔl ðə θɝɾ eɪdʒ baɪ sʌm, ən eɪdʒ jɛt tə kʌm, ən eɪdʒ lɔŋ pæst, ə wɪn ɹoʊz əbʌv ðə mɪsti piks ʌv ɪmfɹəl. ðə wɪnd wɑz nɑt ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. ðəɹ ɑɹ niðɝ bɪɡɪnɪŋz nɔɹ ɛndɪŋz tə ðə tɝnɪŋ ə ðə wil ə taɪm. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə bɪɡɪnɪŋ.

The Wheel of Time turns, and Ages come and pass, leaving memories that become legend. Legend fades to myth, and even myth is long forgotten when the Age that gave it birth comes again. In one Age, called the Third Age by some, an Age yet to come, an Age long past, a wind rose above the misty peaks of Imfaral. The wind was not the beginning. There are neither beginnings nor endings to the turning of the Wheel of Time. But it was a beginning.

kɹɪsp ən laɪt, ðə wɪn dænst əkɹɔs filz ə nu maʊntən ɡɹæs stɪf wɪð fɹɔst. ðət fɹɔs lɪŋɡɝd pæs fɝs laɪt, ʃɛltɝd baɪ ði ɑmnɪpɹɛzən klaʊdz ðət hʌŋ laɪk ə dɛθ mæsk haɪ əbʌv. ɪt hæd bɪn wiks sɪns ðoʊz klaʊdz hæd bʌdʒd, ən ðə wɑn, jɛloʊd ɡɹæs ʃoʊɾ ɪt.

Crisp and light, the wind danced across fields of new mountain grass stiff with frost. That frost lingered past first light, sheltered by the omnipresent clouds that hung like a death mask high above. It had been weeks since those clouds had budged, and the wan, yellowed grass showed it.

ðə wɪn tʃɝn mɔɹnɪŋ mɪst, muvɪŋ saʊθwɝd, tʃɪlɪŋ ə smɔl pɹaɪɾ ə tɔɹm. ðeɪ ɹɛklən ɑn ə flæt, laɪkən-steɪnd ɡɹænət ʃɛlf, weɪɾɪŋ tə bæsk ɪn mɔɹnɪŋ sʌnlaɪt ðət wəd nɑɾ ɝaɪv. ðə wɪn pɔɹɾ oʊvɝ ðə ʃɛlf, ɹeɪsɪŋ daʊn ə hɪlsaɪɾ ə skɹæɡli mʊɹə tʃɹiz, wɪð ɹoʊpɪlaɪk bɑɹk ən ɡɹin tʌfs ə θɪk, niɾəllaɪk livz ətɑp ðɛm.

The wind churned morning mist, moving southward, chilling a small pride of torm. They reclined on a flat, lichen-stained granite shelf, waiting to bask in morning sunlight that would not arrive. The wind poured over the shelf, racing down a hillside of scraggly mura trees, with ropelike bark and green tufts of thick, needlelike leaves atop them.

ət ðə beɪs ə ðə fʊthɪlz, ðə wɪn tɝn istwɝd, pæsɪŋ ən oʊpən pleɪn kɛp fɹi ʌv tʃɹiz ən skɹʌb baɪ ðə soʊlʒɝz æks. ðə kɪlɪŋ fil sɝaʊndəd θɝtin fɔɹtʃɹəsəz, tɔl ən kʌɾ ɪntaɪɝli fɹəm ʌnpəlɪʃt blæk mɑɹbəl, ðɛɹ blɑks lɛft ɹʌf-hjun tə ɡɪv əm ə pɹaɪməl filɪŋ ɛf ənfɔɹm stʃɹɛŋkθ. ðiz wɝ taʊɝz mɛn fəɹ wɔɹ. baɪ tʃɹədɪʃən ðeɪ wɝ ənɑkjəpaɪd. haʊ lɔŋ ðət wəd læst - haʊ lɔŋ tʃɹədɪʃən ɪtsɛlf wəd bi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪn ə kɑntənən ɪn keɪɑs - ɹɪmeɪn tə bi sin.

At the base of the foothills, the wind turned eastward, passing an open plain kept free of trees and scrub by the soldier's axe. The killing field surrounded thirteen fortresses, tall and cut entirely from unpolished black marble, their blocks left rough-hewn to give them a primal feeling f unformed strength. These were towers meant for war. By tradition they were unoccupied. How long that would last - how long tradition itself would be remembered in a continent in chaos - remained to be seen.

ðə wɪn kəntɪnjuɾ istwɝd, ən sun ɪt wɑz pleɪɪŋ wɪð ðə mæsts ə hæf-bɝnd ʃɪps ət ðə dɑks ə tækɪsɹəm. aʊɾ ɪndə ðə slipɪŋ beɪ, ɪt pæs ði ətækɝz: ɪnɔɹməs ɡɹieɪtʃɪps wɪð seɪlz peɪntəd blʌd ɹɛd. ðeɪ seɪl saʊθwɝd, ðɛɹ ɡɹɪzli wɝk dʌn.

The wind continued eastward, and soon it was playing with the masts of half-burned ships at the docks of Takisrom. Out into the Sleeping Bay, it passed the attackers: enormous greatships with sails painted blood red. They sailed southward, their grisly work done.

ðə wɪn blu ɑntu læn əɡɛn, pæst smoʊldɝɪŋ taʊnz ən vɪlədʒəz, oʊpən pleɪnz fɪld wɪð tʃɹups ən dɑks fæt wɪð wɔɹʃɪps. smoʊk, wɔɹ kɔlz ən bænɝz flu əbʌv daɪɪŋ ɡɹæs ən bɪniθ ə dɑkmæstɝz ɡlumi skaɪ.

The wind blew onto land again, past smoldering towns and villages, open plains filled with troops and docks fat with warships. Smoke, war calls and banners flew above dying grass and beneath a dockmaster's gloomy sky.

mɛn dɪd nɑt wɪspɝ ðət ðɪs maɪt bi ði ɛn ə taɪmz. ðeɪ jɛld ɪt. ðə filz ə pis wɝ əfleɪm, ðə taʊɝ ə ɹeɪvənz wɑz bɹoʊkən əz pɹɑfəsaɪɾ ən ə mɝɾɝɝ oʊpənli ɹuld ɪn sindɑɹ. ðɪs wɑz ə taɪm tə lɪft wʌnz sɔɹɾ ən tʃuz ə saɪd, ðən spɪl blʌd tə ɡɪv ə faɪnəl kʌlɝ tə ðə daɪɪŋ lænd.

Men did not whisper that this might be the end of times. They yelled it. The Fields of Peace were aflame, the Tower of Ravens was broken as prophesied and a murderer openly ruled in Seandar. This was a time to lift one's sword and choose a side, then spill blood to give a final color to the dying land.

ðə wɪn haʊld istwɝɾ oʊvɝ ðə feɪmd ɛmɹəl klɪfs ən kɔɹst aʊɾ oʊvɝ ði oʊʃən.

The wind howled eastward over the famed Emerald Cliffs and coursed out over the ocean.

bɪhaɪnd, smoʊk sim tə ɹaɪz fɹəm ði ɪntaɪɝ kɑntənən ə sintʃæn.

Behind, smoke seemed to rise from the entire continent of Seanchan.

fəɹ aʊɝz, ðə wɪn blu - meɪkɪŋ wʌt wʊɾə bɪn kɔl tʃɹeɪdwaɪnz ɪn ənʌðɝ eɪdʒ -  twɪstɪŋ bɪtwin waɪtkæps ən dɑɹk, mɪstɪɹiəs weɪvz. ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ðə wɪn ɪnkaʊntɝɾ ənʌðɝ kɑntənənt, ðɪs wʌn kwaɪət, laɪk ə mæn hoʊldɪŋ ɪz bɹɛθ bɪfɔɹ ðə hɛdzmənz æks fɛl.

For hours, the wind blew - making what would have been called tradewinds in another Age -  twisting between whitecaps and dark, mysterious waves. Eventually, the wind encountered another continent, this one quiet, like a man holding his breath before the headsman's axe fell.

baɪ ðə taɪm ðə wɪn ɹitʃt ði ɪnɔɹməs, bɹoʊkən-pik maʊntən noʊn əz dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt, ɪt hæd lɔs mʌtʃ ʌv ɪts stʃɹɛŋkθ. ɪt pæst ɝaʊn ðə beɪs ə ðə maʊntən, ðən θɹu ə lɑɹdʒ ɔɹtʃɝɾ ʌv æpəl tʃɹiz, lɪt baɪ ɝli-æftɝnun sʌnlaɪt. ðə wʌns-ɡɹin livz hæd feɪɾəd tə jɛloʊ.

By the time the wind reached the enormous, broken-peaked mountain known as Dragonmount, it had lost much of its strength. It passed around the base of the mountain, then through a large orchard of apple trees, lit by early-afternoon sunlight. The once-green leaves had faded to yellow.

ðə wɪn pæs baɪ ə loʊ wʊɾən fɛns, taɪɾ əɾ ɪts dʒɔɪns wɪð tæn lɪnən twaɪn. tu fɪɡjɝz stʊd ðɛɹ: ə juθ ən ə sɑmbɝ mæn ɪn ɪz leɪɾɝ jɪɹz. ði oʊldɝ mæn wɔɹ ə pɛɹ ʌv wɔɹn bɹaʊn tʃɹaʊzɝz ən ə lus waɪt ʃɝt wɪð wʊɾən bʌɾənz. hɪz feɪs wɑz soʊ fɝoʊd wɪð ɹɪŋkəlz ðəɾ ɪt sim kɪn tə ðə bɑɹk ə ðə tʃɹiz.

The wind passed by a low wooden fence, tied at its joints with tan linen twine. Two figures stood there: a youth and a somber man in his later years. The older man wore a pair of worn brown trousers and a loose white shirt with wooden buttons. His face was so furrowed with wrinkles that it seemed kin to the bark of the trees.

ɑlmɛn bʌn dɪdnt noʊ ə lɑɾ əbaʊɾ ɔɹtʃɝdz. oʊ, hi hæd plæntəɾ ə fju tʃɹiz bæk ɑn ɪz fɑɹm ɪn ændɝ. hu dɪdn əv ə tʃɹi əɹ tu tə fɪl ɪn speɪs ɑn ðə dɪnɝ teɪbəl? hid plæntəɾ ə pɛɹ ʌv wɔlnʌt tʃɹiz ɑn ðə deɪ hid mɛɹiɾ ɑdʒɹɪn. ɪt hæd fɛlt ɡʊd tə hæv əɹ tʃɹiz ðɛɹ, aʊtsaɪɾ ɪz wɪndoʊ, æftɝ ʃid daɪd.

Almen Bunt didn't know a lot about orchards. Oh, he had planted a few trees back on his farm in Andor. Who didn't have a tree or two to fill in space on the dinner table? He'd planted a pair of walnut trees on the day he'd married Adrinne. It had felt good to have her trees there, outside his window, after she'd died.

ɹʌnɪŋ ən ɔɹtʃɝd wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls ɪntaɪɝli. ðəɹ wɝ nɪɹli θɹi hʌnʒɹəd tʃɹiz ɪn ðɪs fild. ɪt wɑz ɪz sɪstɝz ɔɹtʃɝd; hi wɑz vɪzəɾɪŋ waɪl ɪz sʌnz mænədʒd ɪz fɑɹm nɪɹ kɛɹisfɝd.

Running an orchard was something else entirely. There were nearly three hundred trees in this field. It was his sister's orchard; he was visiting while his sons managed his farm near Carysford.

ɪn ɪz ʃɝt pɑkət, ɑlmɛn kæɹiɾ ə lɛɾɝ fɹəm ɪz sʌnz. ə dɛspɹɪt lɛɾɝ, pliɾɪŋ fəɹ hɛlp, bʌɾ i kʊdnt ɡoʊ tə ðɛm. hi wɑz niɾəd hɪɹ.

In his shirt pocket, Almen carried a letter from his sons. A desperate letter, pleading for help, but he couldn't go to them. He was needed here.

bɪsaɪdz, ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊd taɪm fəɹ ɪm tə bi aʊɾ ʌv ændɝ. hi wɑz ə kwinz mæn. ðəɹ hæd bɪn taɪmz, ɹisənli, wən biɪŋ ə kwinz mæn kəd ɡɛt sʌmwʌn ɪndə əz mʌtʃ tʃɹʌbəl əz hævɪŋ wʌn tu mɛni kaʊz ɪn ɪz pæstʃɝ.

Besides, it was a good time for him to be out of Andor. He was a Queen's man. There had been times, recently, when being a Queen's man could get someone into as much trouble as having one too many cows in his pasture.

"wʌt də wi du, ɑlmɛn?" æɾɪm æskt. "ðoʊz tʃɹiz, ðeɪ . . . wɛl, ɪɾ eɪn səpoʊz tə hæpən laɪk ðɪs." ðə bɔɪ ʌv θɝtin hæd ɡoʊldən hɛɹ fɹəm ɪz fɑðɝz saɪd.

"What do we do, Almen?" Adim asked. "Those trees, they . . . Well, it ain't supposed to happen like this." The boy of thirteen had golden hair from his father's side.

ɑlmɛn ɹʌbd ɪz tʃɪn, skɹætʃɪŋ əɾ ə pætʃ ʌv wɪskɝz hid mɪs dʊɹɪŋ ʃeɪvɪŋ. hɑn, æɾɪmz oʊldɝ bɹʌðɝ, əpɹoʊtʃt ðɛm. ðə læd hæd kɑɹvd ɑlmɛn ə sɛɾ ʌv wʊɾən tiθ əz ən ɝaɪvəl ɡɪft ɝliɝ ɪn ðə spɹɪŋ. wʌnʒɹəs θɪŋz, hɛl təɡɛðɝ baɪ waɪɝz, wɪð ɡæps fəɹ ðə fju ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ tiθ i hæd. bʌɾ ɪf i tʃud tu hɑɹd, ðeɪd ɡoʊ ɔl aʊɾ ə ʃeɪp.

Almen rubbed his chin, scratching at a patch of whiskers he'd missed during shaving. Hahn, Adim's older brother, approached them. The lad had carved Almen a set of wooden teeth as an arrival gift earlier in the spring. Wondrous things, held together by wires, with gaps for the few remaining teeth he had. But if he chewed too hard, they'd go all out of shape.

ðə ɹoʊz ə tʃɹiz wɝ stʃɹeɪɾ ən pɝfəkli speɪst. ɡɹɛɡɝ - ɑlmɛn ɛs bɹʌðɝ-ɪn-lɔ - ɔlweɪz hæd bɪn mətɪkjələs. bʌɾ i wɑz dɛd naʊ, wɪtʃ wɑz waɪ ɑlmɛn hæd kʌm. ðə nit ɹoʊz ə tʃɹiz kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn fəɹ spænz ən spænz, kɛɹfəli pɹund, fɝɾəlaɪzd, ən wɔɾɝd.

The rows of trees were straight and perfectly spaced. Graeger - Almen s brother-in-law - always had been meticulous. But he was dead now, which was why Almen had come. The neat rows of trees continued on for spans and spans, carefully pruned, fertilized, and watered.

ən dʊɹɪŋ ðə naɪt, ɛvɹi sɪŋɡəl wʌn ə ðɛm hæd ʃɛd ðɛɹ fɹut. taɪni æpəlz, bɛɹli əz lɑɹdʒ əz ə mænz θʌm. θaʊzənz ə ðɛm. ðeɪd ʃɹɪvəl dʊɹɪŋ ðə naɪt, ðən fɔlən. ən ɪntaɪɝ kɹɑp, ɡɔn.

And during the night, every single one of them had shed their fruit. Tiny apples, barely as large as a man's thumb. Thousands of them. They'd shriveled during the night, then fallen. An entire crop, gone.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt tə seɪ, lædz," ɑlmɛn faɪnəli ədmɪɾəd.

"I don't know what to say, lads," Almen finally admitted.

"ju, əɾ ə lɔs fəɹ wɝdz?" hɑn sɛd. æɾɪmz bɹʌðɝ hæd dɑɹkɝ kʌlɝɪŋ, laɪk ɪz mʌðɝ, ən wɑz tɔl fəɹ ɪz fɪftin jɪɹz. "ʌŋkəl, jə juʒəwəli hæv əz mʌtʃ tə seɪ əz ə ɡlimən huz bɪn ət ðə bɹændi fəɹ hæf ðə naɪt!" hɑn laɪk tə meɪnteɪn ə stʃɹɔŋ fɹʌn fəɹ ɪz bɹʌðɝ, naʊ ðəɾ i wɑz ðə mæn ə ðə fæmli. bʌt səmtaɪmz ɪt wɑz ɡʊd tə bi wɝid.

"You, at a loss for words?" Hahn said. Adim's brother had darker coloring, like his mother, and was tall for his fifteen years. "Uncle, you usually have as much to say as a gleeman who's been at the brandy for half the night!" Hahn liked to maintain a strong front for his brother, now that he was the man of the family. But sometimes it was good to be worried.

ən ɑlmɛn wɑz wɝid. vɛɹi wɝid.

And Almen was worried. Very worried.

"wi bɛɹli hæv ə wiks ɡɹeɪn lɛft," æɾɪm sɛd sɔfli. "ænd wʌt wiv ɡɑt, wi ɡɑt baɪ pɹɑməsəz ɑn ðə kɹɑp. noʊbɑdi wɪl ɡɪv əs ɛniθɪŋ, naʊ. noʊbɑdi hæz ɛniθɪŋ."

"We barely have a week's grain left," Adim said softly. "And what we've got, we got by promises on the crop. Nobody will give us anything, now. Nobody has anything."

ði ɔɹtʃɝd wɑz wʌn ə ðə lɑɹdʒəs pɹədusɝz ɪn ðə ɹidʒən; hæf ðə mɛn ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ wɝkt ɪt dʊɹɪŋ wʌn steɪdʒ əɹ ənʌðɝ. ðeɪ wɝ dɪpɛndɪŋ ɑn ɪt. ðeɪ niɾəd ɪt. wɪð soʊ mʌtʃ fud ɡoʊɪŋ bæd, wɪð ðɛɹ stɔɹz juzd ʌp dʊɹɪŋ ði ənnætʃɹəl wɪntɝ . . .

The orchard was one of the largest producers in the region; half the men in the village worked it during one stage or another. They were depending on it. They needed it. With so much food going bad, with their stores used up during the unnatural winter . . .

ən ðən ðəɹ wɑz ði ɪnsəɾənt ðət hæd kɪld ɡɹɛɡɝ. ðə mæn hæd wɔkt ɝaʊn ə kɔɹnɝ oʊvɝ ɪn nɛdʒɪn bɹɪdʒ ən vænɪʃt. wən pipəl wɛn lʊkɪŋ, ɔl ðeɪ faʊnd wɑz ə twɪstəd, lifləs tʃɹi wɪð ə ɡɹeɪ-waɪt tʃɹʌŋk ðət smɛld ə sʌlfɝ.

And then there was the incident that had killed Graeger. The man had walked around a corner over in Negin Bridge and vanished. When people went looking, all they found was a twisted, leafless tree with a gray-white trunk that smelled of sulphur.

ðə dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ hæd bɪn skɹɔld ɑn ə fju dɔɹz ðət naɪt. pipəl wɝ mɔɹ ən mɔɹ nɝvəs. wʌns, ɑlmɛn wʊɾə neɪmd əm ɔl fulz, dʒʌmpɪŋ ət ʃædoʊz ən siɪŋ blʌɾi tʃɹɑləks ʌndɝ ɛvɹi kɑbəlstoʊn.

The Dragon's Fang had been scrawled on a few doors that night. People were more and more nervous. Once, Almen would have named them all fools, jumping at shadows and seeing bloody Trollocs under every cobblestone.

naʊ . . . wɛl, naʊ hi wɑzn soʊ ʃʊɹ. hi ɡlænst istwɝd, təwɔɹd tɑɹ vəlɑn. kəd ðə wɪtʃəz bi tə bleɪm fəɹ ðə feɪl kɹɑp? hi heɪɾəd biɪŋ soʊ kloʊs tə ðɛɹ nɛst, bʌɾ ælɪsə niɾəd ðə hɛlp.

Now . . . well, now he wasn't so sure. He glanced eastward, toward Tar Valon. Could the witches be to blame for the failed crop? He hated being so close to their nest, but Alysa needed the help.

ðeɪd tʃɑp daʊn ðət tʃɹi ən bɝn ɪt. jə kəd stɪl smɛl bɹɪmstoʊn ɪn ðə skwɛɹ.

They'd chopped down that tree and burned it. You could still smell brimstone in the square.

"ʌŋkəl?" hɑn sɛd, saʊndɪŋ ənkʌmftəɹbəl. "wʌt . . . wʌt də wi du?"

"Uncle?" Hahn said, sounding uncomfortable. "What . . . what do we do?"

"aɪ . . ." wʌd ðeɪ du? "bɝn mi, bʌt wi ʃəɾ ɔl ɡoʊ tə keɪɛmlɪn. aɪm ʃʊɹ ðə nu kwin əz ɛvɹiθɪŋ klɪɹɾ ʌp ðəɹ baɪ naʊ. wi kən ɡɛt mi sɛɾəld ɹaɪt baɪ ðə lɔ. hu ɛvɝ hɝɾ ə sətʃ ə θɪŋ, ɡeɪnɪŋ ə pɹaɪs ɑn jəɹ hɛd fəɹ spikɪŋ aʊɾ ɪn feɪvɝ ə ðə kwin?" hi ɹilaɪzd i wɑz ɹæmblɪŋ. ðə bɔɪz kɛp lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm.

"I . . ." What did they do? "Burn me, but we should all go to Caemlyn. I'm sure the new Queen has everything cleared up there by now. We can get me settled right by the law. Who ever heard of such a thing, gaining a price on your head for speaking out in favor of the Queen?" He realized he was rambling. The boys kept looking at him.

"noʊ," ɑlmɛn kəntɪnjud. "bɝn mi, bɔɪz, bʌt ðæts ɹɔŋ. wi kænt ɡoʊ. wi nid tə kip ɑn wɝkɪŋ. ðɪs ɪzən ɛni wɝs ðən wən aɪ lɔs maɪ ɪntaɪɝ mɪlət fil tə ə leɪt fɹɔs twɛnti jɪɹz bæk.

"No," Almen continued. "Burn me, boys, but that's wrong. We can't go. We need to keep on working. This isn't any worse than when I lost my entire millet field to a late frost twenty years back.

wɪl ɡɛt θɹu ðɪs, ɹaɪɾ əz laɪt wi wɪl."

We'll get through this, right as Light we will."

ðə tʃɹiz ðɛmsɛlvz lʊk faɪn. nɑɾ ən ɪnsɛk baɪɾ ɑn ðɛm, livz ə lɪɾəl jɛloʊd, bʌt stɪl ɡʊd. ʃʊɹ, ðə spɹɪŋ bʌdz hæd kʌm leɪt, ən ði æpəlz hæd ɡɹoʊn sloʊli. bʌt ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɡɹoʊɪŋ.

The trees themselves looked fine. Not an insect bite on them, leaves a little yellowed, but still good. Sure, the spring buds had come late, and the apples had grown slowly. But they had been growing.

"hɑn," ɑlmɛn faʊn hɪmsɛlf seɪɪŋ. "ju noʊ jəɹ fɑðɝz fɛlɪŋ æks əz ðoʊz tʃɪps ɑn ɪt?

"Hahn," Almen found himself saying. "You know your father's felling axe has those chips on it?

waɪ doʊn jə ɡoʊ əbaʊt ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪt ʃɑɹpənd? æɾɪm, ɡoʊ fɛtʃ ʌsoʊ ən mʊɹ ən ðɛɹ kɑɹts. wɪl sɔɹt θɹu ðoʊz fɔlən æpəlz ən si ɪf ɛni ɑɹən ɹɑɾɪd tu bædli. meɪbi ðə pɪɡz wɪl teɪk ðɛm." ət lis ðeɪ stɪl hæd tu. bʌt ðɛɹəd bɪn noʊ paɪɡələts ðɪs spɹɪŋ.

Why don't you go about getting it sharpened? Adim, go fetch Uso and Moor and their carts. We'll sort through those fallen apples and see if any aren't rotted too badly. Maybe the pigs will take them." At least they still had two. But there'd been no piglets this spring.

ðə juðz hɛzɪteɪɾɪd.

The youths hesitated.

"ɡoʊ ɑn naʊ," ɑlmɛn sɛd. "noʊ jus dæliɪŋ kəz wiv hæɾ ə sɛtbæk."

"Go on now," Almen said. "No use dallying because we've had a setback."

ðə lædz heɪsən ɔf, oʊbiɾiənt. aɪɾəl hænz meɪɾ aɪɾəl maɪnz. səm wɝk wəd kip əm fɹəm θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt wʌt wɑz tə kʌm.

The lads hastened off, obedient. Idle hands made idle minds. Some work would keep them from thinking about what was to come.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ hɛlpɪŋ ðət fəɹ hɪm. hi lin daʊn ɑn ðə fɛns, filɪŋ ðə ɹʌf ɡɹuvz ə ði ənsəndɪd plæŋks ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹmz. ðət wɪn tʌɡd ət ðə teɪlz ə hɪz ʃɝɾ əɡɛn; ɑdʒɹɪn hæɾ ɔlweɪz fɔɹst ɪm tə tʌk ɪɾ ɪn, bʌt naʊ ðət ʃi wɑz ɡɔn, hi . . . wɛl, hi nɛvɝ hæd laɪkt wɛɹɪŋ ɪt ðət weɪ.

There was no helping that for him. He leaned down on the fence, feeling the rough grooves of the unsanded planks under his arms. That wind tugged at the tails of his shirt again; Adrinne had always forced him to tuck it in, but now that she was gone, he . . . well, he never had liked wearing it that way.

hi tʌk ðə ʃɝɾ ɪn ɛniweɪ.

He tucked the shirt in anyway.

ði ɛɹ smɛld ɹɔŋ sʌmhaʊ. steɪl, laɪk ði ɛɹ ɪnsaɪɾ ə sɪɾi. flaɪz wɝ stɑɹɾɪŋ tə bʌz ɝaʊn ðə ʃɹɪvəl bɪts ðət hæd wʌns bɪn æpəlz.

The air smelled wrong somehow. Stale, like the air inside a city. Flies were starting to buzz around the shriveled bits that had once been apples.

ɑlmɛn hæd lɪvd ə lɔŋ taɪm. hid nɛvɝ kɛp kaʊnt; ɑdʒɹɪn hæd dʌn ðət fəɹ hɪm. ɪt wɑzn ɪmpɔɹɾənt. hi nu hid sin ə lɑɾ ə jɪɹz, ən ðət wɑz ðæt.

Almen had lived a long time. He'd never kept count; Adrinne had done that for him. It wasn't important. He knew he'd seen a lot of years, and that was that.

hid sin ɪnsɛks ətæk ə kɹɑp; hid sin plæns lɔs tə flʌd, tə dʒɹaʊt, əɹ tə nɛɡlədʒəns. bʌɾ ɪn ɔl ɪz jɪɹz, hid nɛvɝ sin ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ðɪs. ðɪs wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ivəl. ðə vɪlədʒ wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi stɑɹvɪŋ. ðeɪ dɪdn tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt, nɑt wən ðə tʃɪlʒɹən əɹ juðz wɝ ɝaʊnd. ði ədʌls kwaɪətli ɡeɪv wʌt ðeɪ hæd tə ðə jʌŋ ən tə wɪmən u wɝ nɝsɪŋ. bʌt ðə kaʊz wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ dʒɹaɪ, ðə stɔɹz spɔɪlɪŋ, ðə kɹɑps daɪɪŋ.

He'd seen insects attack a crop; he'd seen plants lost to flood, to drought, or to negligence. But in all his years, he'd never seen anything like this. This was something evil. The village was already starving. They didn't talk about it, not when the children or youths were around. The adults quietly gave what they had to the young and to women who were nursing. But the cows were going dry, the stores spoiling, the crops dying.

ðə lɛɾɝ ɪn ɪz pɑkət sɛɾ ɪz oʊn fɑɹm hæd bɪn sɛɾ əpɑn baɪ pæsɪŋ mɝsənɛɹiz. ðeɪ hædn hɑɹmd ɛniwʌn, bʌt ðeɪd teɪkən ɛvɹi skɹæp ə fud. hɪz sʌnz sɝvaɪvd oʊnli baɪ dɪɡɪŋ hæf-ɡɹoʊn pəteɪɾoʊz fɹəm ðə kɹɑp ən bɔɪlɪŋ ðɛm. ðeɪ faʊnd naɪntin aʊɾ ʌv ɛvɹi twɛnti ɹɑɾɪŋ ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɪnɪksplɪkəbli fʊl ʌv wɝmz dɪspaɪt ɡɹin ɡɹoʊθ əbʌv.

The letter in his pocket said his own farm had been set upon by passing mercenaries. They hadn't harmed anyone, but they'd taken every scrap of food. His sons survived only by digging half-grown potatoes from the crop and boiling them. They found nineteen out of every twenty rotting in the ground, inexplicably full of worms despite green growth above.

dʌzənz ə nɪɹbaɪ vɪlədʒəz wɝ sʌfɝɪŋ ðə seɪm weɪ. noʊ fud tə bi hæd. tɑɹ vəlɑn ɪtsɛlf wɑz hævɪŋ tʃɹʌbəl fiɾɪŋ ɪts pipəl.

Dozens of nearby villages were suffering the same way. No food to be had. Tar Valon itself was having trouble feeding its people.

stɛɹɪŋ daʊn ðoʊz nit, pɝfəkt ɹoʊz ə jusləs æpəl tʃɹiz, ɑlmɛn fɛl ðə kɹʌʃɪŋ weɪɾ ʌv ɪt.

Staring down those neat, perfect rows of useless apple trees, Almen felt the crushing weight of it.

ʌv tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹɪmeɪn pɑzəɾɪv. ʌv siɪŋ ɔl ɪz sɪstɝ hæd wɝk fəɹ feɪl ən ɹɑt. ðiz æpəlz . . .

Of trying to remain positive. Of seeing all his sister had worked for fail and rot. These apples . . .

ðeɪ wɝ səpoʊz tə hæv seɪv ðə vɪlədʒ, ən ɪz sʌnz.

they were supposed to have saved the village, and his sons.

hɪz stʌmək ɹʌmbəld. ɪt dɪd ðəɾ ə lɑt leɪtli.

His stomach rumbled. It did that a lot lately.

ðɪs ɪz ɪt ðɛn, ɪzən ɪt? hi θɔt, aɪz təwɔɹd ðə tu-jɛloʊ ɡɹæs bɪloʊ. ðə faɪt dʒʌst ɛndəd.

This is it then, isn't it? he thought, eyes toward the too-yellow grass below. The fight just ended.

ɑlmɛn slʌmp daʊn, filɪŋ ə weɪɾ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. ɑdʒɹɪn, hi θɔt. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə taɪm wən hid bɪn kwɪk tə læf, kwɪk tə tɔk. naʊ hi fɛlt wɔɹn, laɪk ə poʊs ðət hæd bɪn sændɪɾ ən sændɪɾ ən sændɪɾ əntɪl oʊnli ə slɪvɝ wɑz lɛft. meɪbi ɪt wɑz taɪm tə lɛt ɡoʊ.

Almen slumped down, feeling a weight on his shoulders. Adrinne, he thought. There had been a time when he'd been quick to laugh, quick to talk. Now he felt worn, like a post that had been sanded and sanded and sanded until only a sliver was left. Maybe it was time to let go.

hi fɛl sʌmθɪŋ ɑn ɪz nɛk. wɔɹmθ.

He felt something on his neck. Warmth.

hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən tɝnd wɪɹi aɪz təwɔɹd ðə skaɪ. sʌnlaɪt beɪðd ɪz feɪs. hi ɡeɪpt; ɪt sim soʊ lɔŋ sɪns hid sin pjʊɹ sʌnlaɪt. ɪt ʃoʊn daʊn θɹu ə lɑɹdʒ bɹeɪk ɪn ðə klaʊdz, kʌmfɝɾɪŋ, laɪk ðə wɔɹmθ ʌv ən ʌvən beɪkɪŋ ə loʊf ʌv ɑdʒɹɪnz θɪk saʊɝɾoʊ bɹɛd.

He hesitated, then turned weary eyes toward the sky. Sunlight bathed his face. He gaped; it seemed so long since he'd seen pure sunlight. It shone down through a large break in the clouds, comforting, like the warmth of an oven baking a loaf of Adrinne's thick sourdough bread.

ɑlmɛn stʊd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ə hæn tə ʃeɪɾ ɪz aɪz. hi tʊk ə dip, lɔŋ bɹɛθ, ən smɛld . . . æpəl blɑsəmz? hi spʌn wɪð ə stɑɹt.

Almen stood, raising a hand to shade his eyes. He took a deep, long breath, and smelled . . . apple blossoms? He spun with a start.

ði æpəl tʃɹiz wɝ flaʊɝɪŋ.

The apple trees were flowering.

ðət wɑz pleɪn ɹɪdɪkjələs. hi ɹʌbd ɪz aɪz, bʌt ðət dɪdn dɪspɛl ði ɪmədʒ. ðeɪ wɝ blumɪŋ, ɔl ə ðɛm, waɪt flaʊɝz bɹeɪkɪŋ aʊt bɪtwin ðə livz. ðə flaɪz bʌzd ɪndə ði ɛɹ ən zɪpt əweɪ ɑn ðə wɪnd. ðə dɑɹk bɪts ʌv æpəl ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn mɛltəɾ əweɪ, laɪk wæks bɪfɔɹ ə fleɪm. ɪn sɛkənz, ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ lɛft ə ðɛm, nɑɾ ivən dʒus. ðə ɡɹaʊn hæɾ əbzɔɹb ðɛm.

That was plain ridiculous. He rubbed his eyes, but that didn't dispel the image. They were blooming, all of them, white flowers breaking out between the leaves. The flies buzzed into the air and zipped away on the wind. The dark bits of apple on the ground melted away, like wax before a flame. In seconds, there was nothing left of them, not even juice. The ground had absorbed them.

wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ? æpəl tʃɹiz dɪdn blɑsəm twaɪs. wɑz i ɡoʊɪŋ mæd?

What was happening? Apple trees didn't blossom twice. Was he going mad?

fʊtstɛps saʊndəd sɔfli ɑn ðə pæθ ðət ɹæn pæs ði ɔɹtʃɝd. ɑlmɛn spʌn tə faɪn ə tɔl jʌŋ mæn wɔkɪŋ daʊn aʊɾ ə ðə fʊthɪlz. hi hæd dip ɹɛd hɛɹ ən i wɔɹ ɹæɡəd kloʊðɪŋ: ə bɹaʊn kloʊk wɪð lus slivz ən ə sɪmpəl waɪt lɪnən ʃɝt bɪniθ. ðə tʃɹaʊzɝz wɝ faɪnɝ, blæk wɪð ə dɛləkəɾ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ʌv ɡoʊld ət ðə kʌf.

Footsteps sounded softly on the path that ran past the orchard. Almen spun to find a tall young man walking down out of the foothills. He had deep red hair and he wore ragged clothing: a brown cloak with loose sleeves and a simple white linen shirt beneath. The trousers were finer, black with a delicate embroidery of gold at the cuff.

"hoʊ, stʃɹeɪnʒɝ," ɑlmɛn sɛd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ə hænd, nɑt noʊɪŋ wʌɾ ɛls tə seɪ, nɑɾ ivən ʃʊɹ ɪf hid sin wʌɾ i θɔt hid sin. "dɪd jə . . . dɪd jə ɡɛt lɔst ʌp ɪn ðə fʊthɪlz?"

"Ho, stranger," Almen said, raising a hand, not knowing what else to say, not even sure if he'd seen what he thought he'd seen. "Did you . . . did you get lost up in the foothills?"

ðə mæn stɑpt, tɝnɪŋ ʃɑɹpli. hi sim sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ɑlmɛn ðɛɹ. wɪð ə stɑɹt, ɑlmɛn ɹilaɪz ðə mænz lɛft ɑɹm ɛndəɾ ɪn ə stʌmp.

The man stopped, turning sharply. He seemed surprised to find Almen there. With a start, Almen realized the man's left arm ended in a stump.

ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ lʊkt əbaʊt, ðən bɹiðd ɪn dipli. "noʊ. aɪm nɑt lɔst. faɪnəli. ɪt filz laɪk ə ɡɹeɪt lɔŋ taɪm sɪns aɪv ʌndɝstʊd ðə pæθ bɪfɔɹ mi."

The stranger looked about, then breathed in deeply. "No. I'm not lost. Finally. It feels like a great long time since I've understood the path before me."

ɑlmɛn skɹætʃt ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz feɪs. bɝn hɪm, ðəɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ pætʃ hid mɪst ʃeɪvɪŋ. hɪz hæn hæd bɪn ʃeɪkɪŋ soʊ mʌtʃ ðəɾ i maɪɾ əz wɛl əv skɪp ðə ɹeɪzɝ ɪntaɪɝli. "nɑt lɔst? sʌn, ðət pæθweɪ oʊnli lidz ʌp ðə sloʊps ə dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt. ði ɛɹiəz bɪn hʌntəd klin, ɪf jə wɝ hoʊpɪŋ tə faɪn səm ɡeɪm. ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ bæk ðəɹ ə jus."

Almen scratched the side of his face. Burn him, there was another patch he'd missed shaving. His hand had been shaking so much that he might as well have skipped the razor entirely. "Not lost? Son, that pathway only leads up the slopes of Dragonmount. The area's been hunted clean, if you were hoping to find some game. There's nothing back there of use."

"aɪ wʊdn seɪ ðæt," ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ sɛd, ɡlænsɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ɔlweɪz θɪŋz ə jus ɝaʊnd, ɪf jə lʊk kloʊsli ɪnʌf. jə kæn stɛɹ əɾ əm tu lɔŋ. tə lɝn bʌt nɑt bi oʊvɝwɛlmd, ðəɾ ɪz ðə bæləns."

"I wouldn't say that," the stranger said, glancing over his shoulder. "There are always things of use around, if you look closely enough. You can't stare at them too long. To learn but not be overwhelmed, that is the balance."

ɑlmɛn foʊldəɾ ɪz ɑɹmz. ðə mænz wɝdz ... ɪt sim ðeɪ wɝ hævɪŋ tu dɪfɹən kɑnvɝseɪʃənz. pɝhæps ðə læd wɑzn ɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə hɛd. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə mæn, ðoʊ.

Almen folded his arms. The man's words ... it seemed they were having two different conversations. Perhaps the lad wasn't right in the head. There was something about the man, though.

ðə weɪ hi stʊd, ðə weɪ ðoʊz aɪz ə hɪz stɛɹd wɪð sətʃ kɑm ɪntɛnsəɾi. ɑlmɛn fɛlt laɪk stændɪŋ ʌp ən dʌstɪŋ ɔf ɪz ʃɝt tə meɪk hɪmsɛlf mɔɹ pɹəzɛntəbəl.

The way he stood, the way those eyes of his stared with such calm intensity. Almen felt like standing up and dusting off his shirt to make himself more presentable.

"du aɪ noʊ ju?" ɑlmɛn æskt. sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə jʌŋ mæn wɑz fəmɪljɝ.

"Do I know you?" Almen asked. Something about the young man was familiar.

"jɛs," ðə læd sɛd. ðən i nɑɾəd təwɔɹd ði ɔɹtʃɝd. "ɡæðɝ jəɹ pipəl ən kəlɛk ðoʊz æpəlz. ðəl bi niɾəd ɪn ðə deɪz tə kʌm."

"Yes," the lad said. Then he nodded toward the orchard. "Gather your people and collect those apples. They'll be needed in the days to come."

"ði æpəlz?" ɑlmɛn sɛd, tɝnɪŋ. "bʌt - " hi fɹoʊz. ðə tʃɹiz wɝ bɝdʒənɪŋ wɪð nu, ɹaɪp ɹɛɾ æpəlz. ðə blɑsəmz hid sin ɝliɝ hæd fɔlən fɹi, ən blæŋkəɾɪd ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪn waɪt, laɪk snoʊ.

"The apples?" Almen said, turning. "But - " He froze. The trees were burgeoning with new, ripe red apples. The blossoms he'd seen earlier had fallen free, and blanketed the ground in white, like snow.

ðoʊz æpəlz sim tə ʃaɪn. nɑt dʒʌs dʌzənz ə ðɛm ɑn itʃ tʃɹi, bʌt hʌnʒɹədz. mɔɹ ðən ə tʃɹi ʃəd hoʊld, itʃ wʌn pɝfəkli ɹaɪp.

Those apples seemed to shine. Not just dozens of them on each tree, but hundreds. More than a tree should hold, each one perfectly ripe.

"aɪ æm ɡoʊɪŋ mæd," ɑlmɛn sɛd, tɝnɪŋ bæk tə ðə mæn.

"I am going mad," Almen said, turning back to the man.

"ɪts nɑt jə hu ɪz mæd, fɹɛnd," ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ sɛd. "bʌt ði ɪntaɪɝ wɝld. ɡæðɝ ðoʊz æpəlz kwɪkli. maɪ pɹɛzəns wɪl hoʊld ɪm ɔf fəɹ ə taɪm, aɪ θɪŋk, ən wʌtɛvɝ jə teɪk naʊ ʃəd bi seɪf fɹəm ɪz tʌtʃ."

"It's not you who is mad, friend," the stranger said. "But the entire world. Gather those apples quickly. My presence will hold him off for a time, I think, and whatever you take now should be safe from his touch."

ðət vɔɪs . . . ðoʊz aɪz, laɪk ɡɹeɪ dʒɛmstoʊnz kʌɾ ən sɛɾ ɪn ɪz feɪs. "aɪ də noʊ ju," ɑlmɛn sɛd, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ən ɑd pɛɹ ə juðz i hæd ɡɪvən ə lɪft ɪn ɪz kɑɹt jɪɹz əɡoʊ. "laɪt! jəɹ hɪm, ɑɹən ju? ðə wʌn ðəɹ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt?"

That voice . . . Those eyes, like gray gemstones cut and set in his face. "I do know you," Almen said, remembering an odd pair of youths he had given a lift in his cart years ago. "Light! You're him, aren't you? The one they're talking about?"

ðə mæn lʊk bæk əɾ ɑlmɛn. miɾɪŋ ðoʊz aɪz, ɑlmɛn fɛlt ə stʃɹeɪnʒ sɛns ə pis. "ɪɾ ɪz laɪkli," ðə mæn sɛd. "mɛn ɑɹ ɔfən spikɪŋ ə mi." hi smaɪld, ðən tɝn ən kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn ɪz weɪ daʊn ðə pæθ.

The man looked back at Almen. Meeting those eyes, Almen felt a strange sense of peace. "It is likely," the man said. "Men are often speaking of me." He smiled, then turned and continued on his way down the path.

"weɪt," ɑlmɛn sɛd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ə hæn təwɔɹd ðə mæn u kəɾ oʊnli bi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

"Wait," Almen said, raising a hand toward the man who could only be the Dragon Reborn.

"wɛɹ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ?"

"Where are you going?"

ðə mæn lʊk bæk wɪð ə feɪnt ɡɹɪmɑs. "tə də sʌmθɪŋ aɪv bɪn pʊɾɪŋ ɔf. aɪ daʊt ʃɪl bi pliz baɪ wʌɾ aɪ tɛl hɝ."

The man looked back with a faint grimace. "To do something I've been putting off. I doubt she will be pleased by what I tell her."

ɑlmɛn loʊɝɾ ɪz hænd, wɑtʃɪŋ əz ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ stʃɹoʊɾ əweɪ, daʊn ə pæθweɪ bɪtwin tu fɛnst ɔɹtʃɝdz, tʃɹiz leɪɾən wɪð blʌd-ɹɛɾ æpəlz. ɑlmɛn θɔt - fəɹ ə moʊmənt - hi kəd si sʌmθɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə mæn. ə laɪtnəs tə ði ɛɹ, wɔɹpt ən bɛnt.

Almen lowered his hand, watching as the stranger strode away, down a pathway between two fenced orchards, trees laden with blood-red apples. Almen thought - for a moment - he could see something around the man. A lightness to the air, warped and bent.

ɑlmɛn wɑtʃt ðə mæn əntɪl i vænɪʃt, ðən dæʃt təwɔɹɾ ælɪsəz haʊs. ði oʊl peɪn ɪn ɪz hɪp wɑz ɡɔn, ən i fɛlt əz ɪf i kəd ɹʌn ə dʌzən liɡz. hæfweɪ tə ðə haʊs, hi mɛɾ æɾɪm ən ðə tu wɝkɝz kʌmɪŋ tə ði ɔɹtʃɝd. ðeɪ ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ɪm wɪð kənsɝn aɪz əz i pʊl tə ə hɔlt.

Almen watched the man until he vanished, then dashed toward Alysa's house. The old pain in his hip was gone, and he felt as if he could run a dozen leagues. Halfway to the house, he met Adim and the two workers coming to the orchard. They regarded him with concerned eyes as he pulled to a halt.

əneɪbəl tə spik, ɑlmɛn tɝn ən pɔɪntəd bæk ət ði ɔɹtʃɝdz. ði æpəlz wɝ ɹɛd spɛks, dɑɾɪŋ ðə ɡɹin laɪk fɹɛkəlz.

Unable to speak, Almen turned and pointed back at the orchards. The apples were red specks, dotting the green like freckles.

"wʌts ðæt?" ʌsoʊ æskt, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz lɔŋ feɪs. mʊɹ skwɪntɪd, ðən bɪɡæn ɹʌnɪŋ təwɔɹd ði ɔɹtʃɝd.

"What's that?" Uso asked, rubbing his long face. Moor squinted, then began running toward the orchard.

"ɡæðɝ ɛvɹiwʌn," ɑlmɛn sɛd, wɪndɪd. "ɛvɹiwʌn fɹəm ðə vɪlədʒ, fɹəm ðə vɪlədʒəz nɪɹbaɪ, pipəl pæsɪŋ ɑn ʃaɪmənz ɹoʊd. ɛvɹiwʌn. ɡɛɾ əm hɪɹ tə ɡæðɝ ən pɪk."

"Gather everyone," Almen said, winded. "Everyone from the village, from the villages nearby, people passing on Shyman's road. Everyone. Get them here to gather and pick."

"pɪk wʌt?" æɾɪm æskt wɪð ə fɹaʊn.

"Pick what?" Adim asked with a frown.

"æpəlz," ɑlmɛn sɛd. "wʌɾ ɛls blʌɾi ɡɹoʊz ɑn æpəl tʃɹiz! lɪsən, wi niɾ ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðoʊz æpəlz pɪk bɪfɔɹ ðə deɪ ɛnz. jə hɪɹ mi? ɡoʊ! spɹɛd ðə wɝd! ðɛɹz ə hɑɹvəst æftɝ ɔl!"

"Apples," Almen said. "What else bloody grows on apple trees! Listen, we need every one of those apples picked before the day ends. You hear me? Go! Spread the word! There's a harvest after all!"

ðeɪ ɹæn ɔf tə lʊk, ʌv kɔɹs. ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə bleɪm əm fəɹ ðæt. ɑlmɛn kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn, ən əz i dɪd, hi noʊɾəst fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ðət ðə ɡɹæs ɝaʊn ɪm simd ɡɹinɝ, hɛlθiɝ.

They ran off to look, of course. It was hard to blame them for that. Almen continued on, and as he did, he noticed for the first time that the grass around him seemed greener, healthier.

hi lʊkt istwɝd. ɑlmɛn fɛlt ə pʊl ɪnsaɪɾ ə hɪm. sʌmθɪŋ wɑz tʌɡɪŋ ɪm sɔfli ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ hæd ɡɔn.

He looked eastward. Almen felt a pull inside of him. Something was tugging him softly in the direction the stranger had gone.

æpəlz fɝst, hi θɔt. ðən . . . wɛl, ðən hid si.

Apples first, he thought. Then . . . well, then he'd see.


tʃæptɝ tu


CHAPTER 2

kwɛstʃənz ə liɾɝʃɪp


Questions of Leadership

θʌndɝ ɹʌmbəld əbʌv, sɑft ən mɛnəsɪŋ laɪk ðə ɡɹaʊl ʌv ə dɪstən bist. pɛɹɪn tɝn ɪz aɪz təwɔɹd ðə skaɪ. ə fju deɪz əɡoʊ, ðə pɝveɪsɪv klaʊd kʌvɝ hæd tɝn blæk, dɑɹkənɪŋ laɪk ði ædvɛn ʌv ə hɔɹəbəl stɔɹm. bʌt ɹeɪn hæd kʌm oʊnli ɪn spɝts.

Thunder rumbled above, soft and menacing like the growl of a distant beast. Perrin turned his eyes toward the sky. A few days ago, the pervasive cloud cover had turned black, darkening like the advent of a horrible storm. But rain had come only in spurts.

ənʌðɝ ɹʌmbəl ʃʊk ði ɛɹ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ laɪtnɪŋ. pɛɹɪn pæɾəd steɪɝ ɑn ðə nɛk; ðə hɔɹs smɛl skɪɾɪʃ - pɹɪkli, swɛɾi. ðə hɔɹs wɑzn ði oʊnli wʌn. ðət sɛn hʌŋ əbʌv ɪz ɪnɔɹməs fɔɹs ə tʃɹups ən ɹɛfjudʒiz əz ðeɪ tʃɹæmpt əkɹɔs ðə mʌɾi ɡɹaʊnd. ðət fɔɹs kɹieɪɾəd ə θʌndɝ ʌv ɪts oʊn, fʊtstɛps, hʊfbits, wæɡən wilz tɝnɪŋ, mɛn ən wɪmən kɔlɪŋ.

Another rumble shook the air. There was no lightning. Perrin patted Stayer on the neck; the horse smelled skittish - prickly, sweaty. The horse wasn't the only one. That scent hung above his enormous force of troops and refugees as they tramped across the muddy ground. That force created a thunder of its own, footsteps, hoofbeats, wagon wheels turning, men and women calling.

ðeɪ hæd nɪɹli ɹitʃt ðə dʒəhænə ɹoʊd. ɝɪdʒənəli, pɛɹɪn hæd plæn tə kɹɔs ðəɾ ən kəntɪnju ɑn nɔɹθwɝd, təwɔɹɾ ændɝ. bʌt hid lɔst ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə taɪm tə ðə sɪknəs ðət hæd stʃɹʌk ɪz kæmp - boʊθ æʃəmən hæd nɪɹli daɪd. ðən ðɪs θɪk mʌd hæd sloʊɾ əm ivən fɝðɝ. ɔl toʊld, ɪt hæd bɪn oʊvɝ ə mʌnθ sɪns ðeɪd lɛf meɪɾən, ən ðeɪd tʃɹævəld oʊnli əz fɑɹ əz pɛɹɪn hæɾ ɝɪdʒənəli hoʊp tə ɡoʊ ɪn ə wik.

They had nearly reached the Jehannah Road. Originally, Perrin had planned to cross that and continue on northward, toward Andor. But he'd lost a great deal of time to the sickness that had struck his camp - both Asha'man had nearly died. Then this thick mud had slowed them even further. All told, it had been over a month since they'd left Maiden, and they'd traveled only as far as Perrin had originally hoped to go in a week.

pɛɹɪn pʊɾ ɪz hæn ɪndə hɪz koʊt pɑkət, filɪŋ ət ðə smɔl blæksmɪθs pʌzəl ðɛɹ. ðeɪd faʊn ɪɾ ɪn meɪɾən, ən hid teɪkən tə ɹɪɾəlɪŋ wɪð ɪt. soʊ fɑɹ, hi hædn fɪɡjɝɾ aʊt haʊ tə ɡɛt ðə pisəz əpɑɹt. ɪt wɑz əz kɑmplɛks ə pʌzəl əz hiɾ ɛvɝ sin.

Perrin put his hand into his coat pocket, feeling at the small blacksmith's puzzle there. They'd found it in Maiden, and he'd taken to riddling with it. So far, he hadn't figured out how to get the pieces apart. It was as complex a puzzle as he'd ever seen.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn ə mæstɝ ɡɪl əɹ ðə pipəl pɛɹɪn hæd sɛn ɑn əhɛd wɪð səplaɪz. ɡɹeɪɾi hæd mænədʒd ə fju smɔl ɡeɪtweɪz əhɛd tə sɛn skaʊts tə faɪn ðɛm, bʌt ðeɪ hæd ɹɪtɝnd wɪθaʊt nuz.

There was no sign of Master Gill or the people Perrin had sent on ahead with supplies. Grady had managed a few small gateways ahead to send scouts to find them, but they had returned without news.

pɛɹɪn wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə wɝi əbaʊt ðɛm.

Perrin was beginning to worry about them.

"maɪ lɔɹd?" ə mæn æskt. hi stʊd bɪsaɪd pɛɹɪnz hɔɹs. tɝn wɑz ə læŋki fɛloʊ wɪð kɝli ɹɛd hɛɹ ən ə bɪɹɾ i taɪɾ ɔf wɪð lɛðɝ kɔɹdz. hi kæɹiɾ ə wɔɹiɝz æks ɪn ə lup əɾ ɪz bɛlt, ə wɪkəd θɪŋ wɪð ə spaɪk ət ðə bæk.

"My Lord?" a man asked. He stood beside Perrin's horse. Turne was a lanky fellow with curly red hair and a beard he tied off with leather cords. He carried a warrior's axe in a loop at his belt, a wicked thing with a spike at the back.

"wi kæn peɪ jə mʌtʃ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "jɔɹ mɛn doʊn əv hɔɹsəz?"

"We can't pay you much," Perrin said. "Your men don't have horses?"

"noʊ, maɪ lɔɹd," tɝn sɛd, ɡlænsɪŋ əɾ ɪz dʌzən kəmpænjənz. "dʒɹ hæd wʌn. wi eɪɾ ɪɾ ə fju wiks bæk." tɝn smɛld ənwɑʃt ən dɝɾi, ən əbʌv ðoʊz sɛns wɑz ən ɑd steɪlnəs. hæd ðə mænz ɪmoʊʃənz ɡɔn nʌm? "ɪf jə doʊn maɪnd, maɪ lɔɹd. weɪdʒəz kən weɪt. ɪf juv fud . . .

"No, my Lord," Turne said, glancing at his dozen companions. "Jarr had one. We ate it a few weeks back." Turne smelled unwashed and dirty, and above those scents was an odd staleness. Had the man's emotions gone numb? "If you don't mind, my Lord. Wages can wait. If you have food . . .

wɛl, ðət wɪl bi ɪnʌf fəɹ naʊ."

well, that will be enough for now."

/ ʃəd tɝn əm əweɪ, pɛɹɪn θɔt. wi ɔlɹɛɾi hæv tu mɛni maʊðz tə fid. laɪt, hi wɑz səpoʊz tə bi ɡɛɾɪŋ ɹɪɾ ə pipəl. bʌt ðiz fɛloʊz lʊk hændi wɪð ðɛɹ wɛpənz, ən ɪf i tɝn əm əweɪ, ðeɪd noʊ daʊt tɝn tə pɪlɪdʒɪŋ.

/ should turn them away, Perrin thought. We already have too many mouths to feed. Light, he was supposed to be getting rid of people. But these fellows looked handy with their weapons, and if he turned them away, they'd no doubt turn to pillaging.

"ɡoʊ wɔk daʊn ðə laɪn," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "faɪn ə mæn neɪm tæm ælθɹ -  hiz ə stɝɾi fɛloʊ, dʒɹɛs laɪk ə fɑɹmɝ. ɛniwʌn ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə pɔɪn jə ɪn ɪz dɝɛkʃən. tɛl ɪm jə spoʊk tə pɛɹɪn, ən aɪ sɛd tə teɪk jə ɑn fəɹ milz."

"Go walk down the line," Perrin said. "Find a man named Tam al'Thor -  he's a sturdy fellow, dressed like a farmer. Anyone should be able to point you in his direction. Tell him you spoke to Perrin, and I said to take you on for meals."

ðə dɝɾi mɛn ɹɪlækst, ən ðɛɹ læŋki liɾɝ æktʃəli  smɛld ɡɹeɪtfəl. ɡɹeɪtfəl! sɛl-sɔɹdz -  meɪbi bændəts - ɡɹeɪtfəl tə bi teɪkən ɑn oʊnli fəɹ milz. ðət wɑz ðə steɪɾ ə ðə wɝld.

The dirty men relaxed, and their lanky leader actually smelled grateful. Grateful! Sell-swords -  maybe bandits - grateful to be taken on only for meals. That was the state of the world.

"tɛl mi, maɪ lɔɹd," tɝn sɛɾ əz ɪz ɡɹup bɪɡæn tə haɪk daʊn ðə laɪn ə ɹɛfjudʒiz. "du jə ɹɪli hæv fud?"

"Tell me, my Lord," Turne said as his group began to hike down the line of refugees. "Do you really have food?"

"wi du," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪ dʒʌst sɛd soʊ."

"We do," Perrin said. "I just said so."

"æn ɪt dʌzn spɔɪl æftɝ ə naɪt lɛft əloʊn?"

"And it doesn't spoil after a night left alone?"

"kɔɹs ɪt dʌznt," pɛɹɪn sɛd stɝnli. "nɑɾ ɪf jə kip ɪt ɹaɪt." səm ə ðɛɹ ɡɹeɪn maɪɾ əv wivəlz ɪn ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɛɾəbəl. ðə mæn sim tə faɪn ðəɾ ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl, əz ɪf pɛɹɪn hæd sɛɾ ɪz wæɡənz wəd sun spɹaʊt wɪŋz ən flaɪ ɔf fəɹ ðə maʊntənz.

"Course it doesn't," Perrin said sternly. "Not if you keep it right." Some of their grain might have weevils in it, but it was edible. The man seemed to find that incredible, as if Perrin had said his wagons would soon sprout wings and fly off for the mountains.

"ɡoʊ ɑn naʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "æn meɪk ʃʊɹ tə tɛl jəɹ mɛn ðət wi ɹʌn ə taɪt kæmp. noʊ faɪɾɪŋ, noʊ stilɪŋ. ɪf aɪ ɡɛɾ ə wɪf ə jə meɪkɪŋ tʃɹʌbəl, jəl bi aʊɾ ɑn jəɹ ɪɹz."

"Go on now," Perrin said. "And make sure to tell your men that we run a tight camp. No fighting, no stealing. If I get a whiff of you making trouble, you'll be out on your ears."

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd," tɝn sɛd, ðən heɪsən ɔf tə dʒɔɪn ɪz mɛn. hi smɛl sənsɪɹ. tæm wɑzn gɑnə bi pliz tə hæv ənʌðɝ bætʃ ə mɝsənɛɹiz tə wɑtʃ oʊvɝ, bʌt ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɝ stɪl aʊt ðəɹ sʌmwɛɹ. moʊst ə ðɛm sim tə hæv tɝn istwɝd. bʌt wɪð haʊ sloʊli pɛɹɪnz fɔɹs hæd bɪn tʃɹævlɪŋ, hi wɑz wɝid ði il maɪt tʃeɪnʒ ðɛɹ maɪnz ən kʌm bæk fəɹ hɪm.

"Yes, my Lord," Turne said, then hastened off to join his men. He smelled sincere. Tam wasn't going to be pleased to have another batch of mercenaries to watch over, but the Shaido were still out there somewhere. Most of them seemed to have turned eastward. But with how slowly Perrin's force had been traveling, he was worried the Aiel might change their minds and come back for him.

hi nʌdʒ steɪɝ fɔɹwɝd, flæŋk baɪ ə pɛɹ ə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn. naʊ ðəɾ ɛɹæm wɑz ɡɔn, ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn hæd - ənfɔɹtʃənətli - teɪkən ɪɾ əpɑn ðɛmsɛlvz tə pɹəvaɪd pɛɹɪn wɪð bɑɾiɡɑɹdz.

He nudged Stayer forward, flanked by a pair of Two Rivers men. Now that Aram was gone, the Two Rivers men had - unfortunately - taken it upon themselves to provide Perrin with bodyguards.

tədeɪz ənɔɪənsɪz wɝ wɪl ælsin ən ɹid soʊələn. pɛɹɪn hæd tʃɹaɪd tʃuɪŋ aʊt ðə mɛn əbaʊɾ ɪt.

Todays annoyances were Wil al'Seen and Reed Soalen. Perrin had tried chewing out the men about it.

bʌt ðeɪ ɪnsɪstəd, ən i hæd bɪɡɝ wɝiz tə bɑðɝ hɪm, nɑt ðə list ʌv wɪtʃ wɝ ɪz stʃɹeɪnʒ dʒɹimz. hɔntɪŋ vɪʒənz ʌv wɝkɪŋ ðə fɔɹdʒɪz ən biɪŋ əneɪbəl tə kɹieɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ ʌv wɝθ.

But they insisted, and he had bigger worries to bother him, not the least of which were his strange dreams. Haunting visions of working the forges and being unable to create anything of worth.

pʊɾ əm aʊɾ ə jəɹ maɪnd, hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf, ɹaɪɾɪŋ ʌp ðə lɔŋ kɑləm, ælsin ən soʊələn kipɪŋ ʌp. juv naɪtmɛɹz ɪnʌf waɪl əweɪk. dil wɪð ðoʊz fɝst.

Put them out of your mind, he told himself, riding up the long column, al'Seen and Soalen keeping up. You have nightmares enough while awake. Deal with those first.

ðə mɛdoʊ ɝaʊn ɪm wɑz oʊpən, ðoʊ ðə ɡɹæs wɑz jɛloʊɪŋ, ən i noʊɾəst wɪð dɪsplɛʒɝ sɛvɹəl lɑɹdʒ swɑθs ə dɛd waɪldflaʊɹz, ɹɑɾɪŋ. ðə spɹɪŋ ɹeɪnz hæd tɝn moʊst ɛɹiəz laɪk ðɪs ɪndə mʌd tʃɹæps. muvɪŋ soʊ mɛni ɹɛfjudʒiz wɑz sloʊ, ivən dɪskaʊntɪŋ ðə bʌbəl ʌv ivəl ən ðə mʌd. ɛvɹiθɪŋ tʊk lɔŋɡɝ ðən i ɪkspɛktəd, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə meɪɾən.

The meadow around him was open, though the grass was yellowing, and he noticed with displeasure several large swaths of dead wildflowers, rotting. The spring rains had turned most areas like this into mud traps. Moving so many refugees was slow, even discounting the bubble of evil and the mud. Everything took longer than he expected, including getting out of Maiden.

ðə fɔɹs kɪkt ʌp mʌɾ əz ɪt mɑɹtʃt; moʊst ə ðə ɹɛfjudʒiz' tʃɹaʊzɝz ən skɝts wɝ kʌvɝd wɪð ɪt, ən ði ɛɹ wɑz θɪk wɪð ɪts stɪki sɛnt. pɛɹɪn nɪɹd ðə fɹʌn ə ðɛɹ laɪn, pæsɪŋ ɹaɪɾɝz ɪn ɹɛd bɹɛstpleɪts, lænsɪz hɛl haɪ, ðɛɹ hɛlmz laɪk ɹɪm pɑts. ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹɾ ə min.

The force kicked up mud as it marched; most of the refugees' trousers and skirts were covered with it, and the air was thick with its sticky scent. Perrin neared the front of their line, passing riders in red breastplates, lances held high, their helms like rimmed pots. The Winged Guard of Mayene.

lɔɹd ɡælɛn ɹoʊɾ ət ðɛɹ fɹʌnt, ɹɛd-plum hɛlm hɛld əɾ ɪz saɪd. hɪz bɛɹɪŋ wɑz fɔɹməl ɪnʌf ðət jə maɪt θɪŋk i wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn ə pɝeɪd, bʌɾ ɪz sɪŋɡəl aɪ wɑz kin əz i skæn ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd. hi wɑz ə ɡʊd soʊlʒɝ. ðəɹ wɝ ə lɑɾ ʌv ɡʊd soʊlʒɝz ɪn ðɪs fɔɹs, ðoʊ səmtaɪmz ɪt wɑz tʌf əz bɛndɪŋ ə hɔɹsʃu tə kip ðɛɹ hænz fɹəm wʌn ənʌðɝz θɹoʊts.

Lord Gallenne rode at their front, red-plumed helm held at his side. His bearing was formal enough that you might think he was riding in a parade, but his single eye was keen as he scanned the countryside. He was a good soldier. There were a lot of good soldiers in this force, though sometimes it was tough as bending a horseshoe to keep their hands from one another's throats.

"lɔɹd pɛɹɪn!" ə vɔɪs ʃaʊɾəd. ɑɹɡændə, fɝs kæptən ʌv ɡildən, pʊʃt θɹu ðə minɝ laɪnz ɹaɪɾɪŋ ə tɔl ɹoʊn ɡɛldɪŋ. hɪz tʃɹups ɹoʊɾ ɪn ə waɪd kɑləm bɪsaɪd ðə minɝz - ɛvɝ sɪns æliændɝz ɹɪtɝn, ɑɹɡændə hæd bɪn sɛɾ ɑn ikwəl tʃɹitmənt. hid kəmpleɪn ðət ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹɾ ɔfən ɹoʊɾ ɪn fɹʌnt. ɹæðɝ ðən spɝ fɝðɝ ɑɹɡjəməns, pɛɹɪn hæɾ ɔɹɾɝd ðɛɹ kɑləmz tə ɹaɪd saɪd baɪ saɪd.

"Lord Perrin!" a voice shouted. Arganda, First Captain of Ghealdan, pushed through the Mayener lines riding a tall roan gelding. His troops rode in a wide column beside the Mayeners - ever since Alliandre's return, Arganda had been set on equal treatment. He'd complained that the Winged Guard often rode in front. Rather than spur further arguments, Perrin had ordered their columns to ride side by side.

"wɑz ðəɾ ənʌðɝ bætʃ ə mɝsənɛɹiz?" ɑɹɡændə dɪmændəd, pʊlɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs ʌp bɪsaɪd pɛɹɪn.

"Was that another batch of mercenaries?" Arganda demanded, pulling his horse up beside Perrin.

"ə smɔl bænd," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "pɹɑbli wʌns ðə ɡɑɹɾ ə səm loʊkəl sɪɾiz lɔɹd."

"A small band," Perrin said. "Probably once the guard of some local city's lord."

"dɛzɝɾɝz." ɑɹɡændə spæt tə ðə saɪd. "ju ʃʊɾə sɛn fəɹ mi.

"Deserters." Arganda spat to the side. "You should have sent for me.

maɪ kwin wəd wɑn əm stʃɹʌŋ ʌp! doʊn fɝɡɛt ðət wɝ ɪn ɡil-dæn naʊ."

My queen would want them strung up! Don't forget that we're in Gheal-dan now."

"jɔɹ kwin ɪz maɪ laɪdʒwʊmən," pɛɹɪn sɛɾ əz ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə fɹʌn ə ðə kɑləm. "wɝ nɑt stʃɹɪŋɪŋ ɛniwʌn ʌp ənlɛs wɪv pɹuf ə ðɛɹ kɹaɪmz. wʌns ɛvɹiwʌn ɪz seɪfli bæk wɛɹ ðeɪ bɪlɔŋ, jə kən stɑɹt sɔɹɾɪŋ θɹu ðə sɛl-sɔɹdz ən si ɪf jə kən tʃɑɹdʒ ɛni ʌv ðɛm. əntɪl ðɛn, ðəɹ dʒʌs hʌŋɡɹi mɛn lʊkɪŋ fəɹ sʌmwʌn tə fɑloʊ."

"Your queen is my leigewoman," Perrin said as they reached the front of the column. "We're not stringing anyone up unless we have proof of their crimes. Once everyone is safely back where they belong, you can start sorting through the sell-swords and see if you can charge any of them. Until then, they're just hungry men looking for someone to follow."

ɑɹɡændə smɛl fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd. pɛɹɪn hæd ɡeɪn ə fju wiks ʌv ɡʊdwɪl fɹəm ɪm ən ɡælɛn fɑloʊɪŋ ðə səksɛsfəl əsɔlt ɑn meɪɾən, bʌɾ oʊl dɪvɪʒənz wɝ ɹisɝfəsɪŋ ɪn ði ɛnləs mʌd, ʌndɝ ə skaɪ fʊl ə tʌmbəlɪŋ θʌndɝhɛdz.

Arganda smelled frustrated. Perrin had gained a few weeks of goodwill from him and Gallenne following the successful assault on Maiden, but old divisions were resurfacing in the endless mud, under a sky full of tumbling thunderheads.

"doʊnt wɝi jɝsɛlf," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪ hæv mɛn wɑtʃɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə nukʌmɝz." hi ɔlsoʊ hæɾ əm wɑtʃɪŋ ðə ɹɛfjudʒiz. səm wɝ soʊ dɑsəl ðət ðeɪ wəd hɑɹdli ɡoʊ tə ðə pɹɪvi wɪθaʊt biɪŋ ɪnstʃɹʌktəd tə də soʊ; ʌðɝz kɛp lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, əz ɪf ɪkspɛktɪŋ ʃeɪɾoʊ tə spɹɪŋ fɹəm ðə dɪstən laɪn ʌv oʊks ən switɡəm tʃɹiz əɾ ɛni moʊmənt. pipəl u smɛl ðət tɛɹəfaɪd kəd bi tʃɹʌbəl, ən ðə vɛɹiəs fækʃənz ə hɪz kæmp ɔlɹɛɾi wɔkt əz ɪf tʃɹʌdʒɪŋ θɹu ɪtʃwid.

"Don't worry yourself," Perrin said. "I have men watching over the newcomers." He also had them watching the refugees. Some were so docile that they would hardly go to the privy without being instructed to do so; others kept looking over their shoulders, as if expecting Shaido to spring from the distant line of oaks and sweetgum trees at any moment. People who smelled that terrified could be trouble, and the various factions of his camp already walked as if trudging through itchweed.

"ju meɪ sɛn sʌmwʌn tə tɔk tə ðə nukʌmɝz, ɑɹɡændə," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "tɔk oʊnli. faɪn aʊt wɛɹ ðəɹ fɹʌm, lɝn wɛðɝ ðeɪ dɪd sɝv ə lɔɹd, si ɪf ðeɪ kən æɾ ɛniθɪŋ tə ðə mæps."

"You may send someone to talk to the newcomers, Arganda," Perrin said. "Talk only. Find out where they're from, learn whether they did serve a lord, see if they can add anything to the maps."

ðeɪ dɪdn əv ɛni ɡʊd mæps ə ði ɛɹiə, ən hæd bɪn fɔɹs tə hæv ðə ɡildænɪn mɛn -  ɑɹɡændə ɪnkluɾəd - dʒɹɔ səm fɹəm mɛmɹi.

They didn't have any good maps of the area, and had been forced to have the Ghealdanin men -  Arganda included - draw some from memory.

ɑɹɡændə ɹoʊɾ ɔf, ən pɛɹɪn muv tə ðə fɹʌn ə ðə kɑləm. biɪŋ ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ dɪɾ əv ɪts naɪs moʊməns; ʌp hɪɹ, ðə smɛlz ʌv ənwɑʃt bɑɾiz ən pʌnʒənt mʌd wɝnt nɪɹli soʊ stʃɹɔŋ. əhɛd, hi kəd faɪnəli si ðə dʒəhænə ɹoʊd laɪk ə lɔŋ stʃɹæp ə lɛðɝ kʌɾɪŋ θɹu ðə haɪlən pleɪnz, ɹʌnɪŋ ɪn ə nɔɹθwɛstɝn dɝɛkʃən.

Arganda rode off, and Perrin moved to the front of the column. Being in charge did have its nice moments; up here, the smells of unwashed bodies and pungent mud weren't nearly so strong. Ahead, he could finally see the Jehannah Road like a long strap of leather cutting through the highland plains, running in a northwestern direction.

pɛɹɪn ɹoʊd, lɔst ɪn θɔt fəɹ ə taɪm. ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə ɹoʊdweɪ. ðə mʌd dɪdn lʊk əz bæɾ ɑn ðə ɹoʊɾ əz ɪt hæɾ ɪn ðə mɛdoʊz -  ðoʊ ɪf ɪt wɝ laɪk ɛni ʌðɝ ɹoʊd pɛɹɪn hæd tʃɹævəld ɑn, ɪt wəɾ əv ɪts maɪɹz ən wɑʃt-aʊt sɛkʃənz. əz i ɹitʃt ɪt, hi noʊɾəst ɡɔl əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ. ði il hæd bɪn ɔf skaʊɾɪŋ əhɛd, ən əz pɛɹɪnz hɔɹs stɛpt ʌp ɑntu ðə ɹoʊd, hi noʊɾəst ðət sʌmwʌn wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪnd ɡɔl ʌp təwɔɹd ðɛm.

Perrin rode, lost in thought for a time. Eventually, they reached the roadway. The mud didn't look as bad on the road as it had in the meadows -  though if it were like any other road Perrin had traveled on, it would have its mires and washed-out sections. As he reached it, he noticed Gaul approaching. The Aiel had been off scouting ahead, and as Perrin's horse stepped up onto the road, he noticed that someone was riding behind Gaul up toward them.

ɪt wɑz fɛnəl, wʌn ə ðə fɛɹiɝz ðət pɛɹɪn hæd sɛn əhɛd wɪð mæstɝ ɡɪl ən ði ʌðɝz.

It was Fennel, one of the farriers that Perrin had sent ahead with Master Gill and the others.

pɛɹɪn fɛlt ə wɑʃ ə ɹɪlif tə si hɪm, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz fɑloʊd baɪ wɝi. wɛɹ wɝ ði ʌðɝz?

Perrin felt a wash of relief to see him, but it was followed by worry. Where were the others?

"lɔɹd pɛɹɪn!" ðə mæn sɛd, ɹaɪɾɪŋ ʌp. ɡɔl stɛp tə ðə saɪd. fɛnəl wɑz ə waɪd-ʃoʊldɝd mæn, ən kæɹiɾ ə lɔŋ-hændəld wɝkmənz æks stʃɹæp tə hɪz bæk. hi smɛld ə ɹɪlif. "pɹeɪz ðə laɪt. aɪ θɔt jud nɛvɝ ɡɛt hɪɹ. jəɹ mæn sɛz ðə ɹɛskju wɝkt?"

"Lord Perrin!" the man said, riding up. Gaul stepped to the side. Fennel was a wide-shouldered man, and carried a long-handled workman's axe strapped to his back. He smelled of relief. "Praise the Light. I thought you'd never get here. Your man says the rescue worked?"

"ɪt dɪd, fɛnəl," pɛɹɪn sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "wɛɹ ɑɹ ði ʌðɝz?"

"It did, Fennel," Perrin said, frowning. "Where are the others?"

"ðeɪ wɛn ɑn əhɛd, maɪ lɔɹd," fɛnəl sɛd, boʊɪŋ fɹəm hɔɹsbæk. "aɪ vɑləntɪɹd tə steɪ bɪhaɪnd, fəɹ wən jə kɑɾ ʌp. wi niɾəd tə ɪkspleɪn, jə si."

"They went on ahead, my Lord," Fennel said, bowing from horseback. "I volunteered to stay behind, for when you caught up. We needed to explain, you see."

"ɪkspleɪn?"

"Explain?"

"ðə ɹɛs tɝn təwɔɹd luɡɹd," fɛnəl ɪkspleɪnd. "əlɔŋ ðə ɹoʊd."

"The rest turned toward Lugard," Fennel explained. "Along the road."

"wʌt?" pɛɹɪn sɛd, fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd. "aɪ ɡeɪv əm ɔɹɾɝz tə kəntɪnju nɔɹθwɝd!"

"What?" Perrin said, frustrated. "I gave them orders to continue northward!"

"maɪ lɔɹd," fɛnəl sɛd, lʊkɪŋ əbæʃt. "wi mɛt tʃɹævəlɝz kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðət weɪ; sɛd ðət mʌd meɪd ðə ɹoʊdz tə ðə nɔɹθ ɔlmoʊs kəmplitli ɪmpæsəbəl fəɹ wæɡənz əɹ kɑɹts. mæstɝ ɡɪl dɪsaɪɾɪd ðət hɛɾɪŋ tə keɪɛmlɪn θɹu luɡɹd wəd bi ðə bɛst weɪ tə fɑloʊ jəɹ ɔɹɾɝz. sɑɹi, maɪ lɔɹd.

"My Lord," Fennel said, looking abashed. "We met travelers coming from that way; said that mud made the roads to the north almost completely impassable for wagons or carts. Master Gill decided that heading to Caemlyn through Lugard would be the best way to follow your orders. Sorry, my Lord.

ðæts waɪ wʌn ʌv əs hæd tə steɪ bɪhaɪnd."

That's why one of us had to stay behind."

laɪt! noʊ wʌndɝ ðə skaʊts hædn faʊnd ɡɪl ən ði ʌðɝz. ðeɪd ɡɔn ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ dɝɛkʃən.

Light! No wonder the scouts hadn't found Gill and the others. They'd gone in the wrong direction.

wɛl, æftɝ slɑɡɪŋ θɹu mʌd fəɹ wiks hɪmsɛlf - səmtaɪmz hævɪŋ tə stɑp ən weɪɾ aʊt stɔɹmz -  pɛɹɪn kʊdn bleɪm əm fəɹ dəsaɪɾɪŋ tə teɪk ðə ɹoʊd. ðət dɪdn stɑp ɪm fɹəm filɪŋ fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd.

Well, after slogging through mud for weeks himself - sometimes having to stop and wait out storms -  Perrin couldn't blame them for deciding to take the road. That didn't stop him from feeling frustrated.

"haʊ fɑɹ bɪhaɪn ɑɹ wi?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"How far behind are we?" Perrin asked.

"aɪv bɪn hɪɹ faɪv deɪz, maɪ lɔɹd."

"I've been here five days, my Lord."

soʊ ɡɪl ən ði ʌðɝz hæd bɪn sloʊd tu. wɛl, ðət wɑz sʌmθɪŋ, ət list.

So Gill and the others had been slowed too. Well, that was something, at least.

"ɡoʊ ɡɛt jɝsɛlf sʌmθɪŋ tə it, fɛnəl," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "æn θæŋk jə fəɹ steɪɪŋ bɪhaɪn tə lemi noʊ wʌt hæpənd. ɪt wɑz ə bɹeɪv θɪŋ jə dɪd, weɪɾɪŋ əloʊn fəɹ soʊ lɔŋ."

"Go get yourself something to eat, Fennel," Perrin said. "And thank you for staying behind to let me know what happened. It was a brave thing you did, waiting alone for so long."

"sʌmbɑɾi hæd tə də ɪt, maɪ lɔɹd." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "moʊs fɪɹd jə hædnt . . . wɛl, ðət θɪŋz hæd ɡɔn ɹɔŋ, maɪ lɔɹd. jə si, wi fɪɡjɝd jud bi fæstɝ ðən ʌs, sɪns wi hæd ðoʊz kɑɹts. bʌt fɹəm ðə lʊk ə θɪŋz hɪɹ, jə dɪsaɪɾɪd tə bɹɪŋ ði ɪntaɪɝ taʊn wɪð ju!"

"Somebody had to do it, my Lord." He hesitated. "Most feared you hadn't . . . well, that things had gone wrong, my Lord. You see, we figured you'd be faster than us, since we had those carts. But from the look of things here, you decided to bring the entire town with you!"

ɪt wɑzn fɑɹ fɹəm ðə tʃɹuθ, ənfɔɹtʃənətli. hi weɪv fɛnəl ɑn.

It wasn't far from the truth, unfortunately. He waved Fennel on.

"aɪ faʊn ɪm əbaʊɾ ən aʊɝ əlɔŋ ðə ɹoʊd," ɡɔl sɛd sɔfli. "bɪsaɪɾ ə hɪl ðət wəd meɪk ən ɛksələn kæmp. wɛl wɔɾɝd, wɪð ə ɡʊd vju ʌv ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ ɛɹiə."

"I found him about an hour along the road," Gaul said softly. "Beside a hill that would make an excellent camp. Well watered, with a good view of the surrounding area."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. ðeɪɾ əv tə dɪsaɪd wʌt tə də - weɪɾ əntɪl ɡɹeɪɾi ən nil kəd meɪk lɑɹdʒ ɡeɪtweɪz, fɑloʊ əlɔŋ æftɝ mæstɝ ɡɪl ən ði ʌðɝz ɑn fʊt, əɹ sɛn moʊs pipəl nɔɹθwɝɾ ən sɛn oʊnli ə fju təwɔɹd luɡɹd. ɹəɡɑɹdləs ə ðə dɪsɪʒən, ɪt wəd bi ɡʊd tə kæmp fəɹ ðə deɪ ən sɔɹt θɹu θɪŋz.

Perrin nodded. They'd have to decide what to do - wait until Grady and Neald could make large gateways, follow along after Master Gill and the others on foot, or send most people northward and send only a few toward Lugard. Regardless of the decision, it would be good to camp for the day and sort through things.

"pæs ðə wɝd tə ði ʌðɝz, ɪf jə wɪl," pɛɹɪn sɛd tə ɡɔl. "wil haɪk daʊn ðə ɹoʊd tə ðə pleɪs jə faʊnd, ðən dɪskʌs wʌt tə də nɛkst. ən æsk səm ə ðə meɪɾənz ɪf ðeɪd skaʊɾ əlɔŋ ðə ɹoʊɾ ɪn ði ʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən tə meɪk ʃʊɹ wɝ nɑt gɑnə bi sɝpɹaɪz baɪ ɛniwʌn muvɪŋ ʌp ðə ɹoʊd bɪhaɪn ʌs."

"Pass the word to the others, if you will," Perrin said to Gaul. "We'll hike down the road to the place you found, then discuss what to do next. And ask some of the Maidens if they'd scout along the road in the other direction to make sure we're not going to be surprised by anyone moving up the road behind us."

ɡɔl nɑɾəd ən muvd ɔf tə pæs ðə wɝd. pɛɹɪn ɹɪmeɪn sɪɾɪŋ ətɑp steɪɝ, θɪŋkɪŋ. hi hæd hæf ə maɪn tə sɛn ɑɹɡændə ən ɔiɑndɝ ɔf tə ðə nɔɹθwɛst ɹaɪt naʊ, sɛɾɪŋ ɑn ə pæθ tə dʒəhænə. bʌt ðə meɪɾənz hæd pɪkt aʊt səm ʃeɪɾoʊ skaʊts wɑtʃɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmi. ðoʊz wɝ pɹɑbli ðəɹ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ pɛɹɪn wɑzn ə θɹɛt, bʌt ðeɪ meɪɾ ɪm ənizi. ðiz wɝ deɪnʒɝəs taɪmz.

Gaul nodded and moved off to pass the word. Perrin remained sitting atop Stayer, thinking. He had half a mind to send Arganda and AUiandre off to the northwest right now, setting on a path to Jehannah. But the Maidens had picked out some Shaido scouts watching his army. Those were probably there to make sure Perrin wasn't a threat, but they made him uneasy. These were dangerous times.

ɪt wɑz bɛs tə kip ɔiɑndɝ ən əɹ pipəl wɪð ɪm fəɹ naʊ, boʊθ fəɹ əɹ seɪfti ən ɪz oʊn, ət list əntɪl ɡɹeɪɾi ən nild ɹəkʌvɝd. ðə sneɪkbaɪts fɹəm ðə bʌbəl ʌv ivəl hæɾ əfɛktəd ðə tu ʌv əm ən mɑsʊɝi - ði oʊnli wʌn ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæd bɪn bɪɾən - wɝs ðən ði ʌðɝz.

It was best to keep AUiandre and her people with him for now, both for her safety and his own, at least until Grady and Neald recovered. The snakebites from the bubble of evil had affected the two of them and Masuri - the only one of the Aes Sedai who had been bitten - worse than the others.

stɪl, ɡɹeɪɾi wɑz stɑɹɾɪŋ tə lʊk heɪl əɡɛn. sun hid bi eɪbəl tə meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə muv ði ɑɹmi θɹu. ðən pɛɹɪn kəd sɛn ɔiɑndɝ ən ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn hoʊm. hi hɪmsɛlf kəd tʃɹævəl bæk tə ɹænd, pɹitɛn tə meɪk ʌp - moʊs pipəl wəd stɪl θɪŋk ðəɾ i ən ɹænd hæd pɑɹɾəd weɪz æŋɡɹəli - ən ðən faɪnəli bi ɹɪɾ ə bɹəleɪn ən əɹ wɪŋd ɡɑɹd. ɛvɹiθɪŋ kəd ɡoʊ bæk tə ðə weɪ ɪt ʃəd bi.

Still, Grady was starting to look hale again. Soon he'd be able to make a gateway large enough to move the army through. Then Perrin could send AUiandre and the Two Rivers men home. He himself could Travel back to Rand, pretend to make up - most people would still think that he and Rand had parted ways angrily - and then finally be rid of Berelain and her Winged Guard. Everything could go back to the way it should be.

laɪt sɛn ɪɾ ɔl wɛn ðəɾ izəli. hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, dɪspɛlɪŋ ðə swɝlɪŋ kʌlɝz ən vɪʒənz ðəɾ əpɪɹd tə hɪz aɪz wɛnɛvɝ i θɔɾ ə ɹænd.

Light send it all went that easily. He shook his head, dispelling the swirling colors and visions that appeared to his eyes whenever he thought of Rand.

nɪɹbaɪ, bɹəleɪn ən əɹ fɔɹs wɝ mɑɹtʃɪŋ aʊɾ ɑntu ðə ɹoʊd, lʊkɪŋ vɛɹi pliz tə ɹitʃ səm sɑləd fʊɾɪŋ. ðə bjuɾəfəl dɑɹk-hɛɹd wʊmən wɔɹ ə faɪn ɡɹin dʒɹɛs ən ə bɛlt ə faɪɝdʒɹɑps.

Nearby, Berelain and her force were marching out onto the road, looking very pleased to reach some solid footing. The beautiful dark-haired woman wore a fine green dress and a belt of firedrops.

hɝ nɛklaɪn wɑz dɪskʌmfɝɾɪŋli loʊ. hid stɑɹɾəd ɹilaɪɪŋ ɑn əɹ dʊɹɪŋ feɪlz æbsəns, wʌns ʃid stɑp tʃɹiɾɪŋ ɪm laɪk ə pɹaɪz bɔɹ tə bi hʌntəɾ ən skɪnd.

Her neckline was discomfortingly low. He'd started relying on her during Faile's absence, once she'd stopped treating him like a prize boar to be hunted and skinned.

feɪl wɑz bæk naʊ, ən ɪɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪz tʃɹus wɪð bɹəleɪn wɑz oʊvɝ. əz juʒəwəl, ənʊɹə ɹoʊd nɪɹ hɝ, ðoʊ ʃi dɪdn spɛn ðə taɪm tʃæɾɪŋ wɪð bɹəleɪn əz ʃi wʌns hæd. pɛɹɪn nɛvɝ hæd fɪɡjɝɾ aʊt waɪ ʃid bɪn miɾɪŋ wɪð ðə pɹɑfət. pɹɑbli nɛvɝ wʊd, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ wʌt hæd hæpən tə mæsimə. ə deɪ aʊɾ ə meɪɾən, pɛɹɪnz skaʊts hæd ɹʌn əkɹɔs ə ɡɹup ə kɔɹpsəz ðət hæd bɪn kɪld wɪð æɹoʊz ən ɹɑbd ə ðɛɹ ʃuz, bɛls, ən ɛni væljəbəlz. ðoʊ ɹeɪvənz hæd ɡɑɾən ði aɪz, pɛɹɪn hæd smɛl mæsiməz sɛn θɹu ðə ɹɑt.

Faile was back now, and it appeared his truce with Berelain was over. As usual, Annoura rode near her, though she didn't spend the time chatting with Berelain as she once had. Perrin never had figured out why she'd been meeting with the Prophet. Probably never would, considering what had happened to Masema. A day out of Maiden, Perrin's scouts had run across a group of corpses that had been killed with arrows and robbed of their shoes, belts, and any valuables. Though ravens had gotten the eyes, Perrin had smelled Masema's scent through the rot.

ðə pɹɑfət wɑz dɛd, kɪl baɪ bændəts. wɛl, pɝhæps ðət wɑz ə fɪɾɪŋ ɛn fəɹ hɪm, bʌt pɛɹɪn stɪl fɛl hid feɪld. ɹænd hæd wɑntəd mæsimə bɹɔt tə hɪm. ðə kʌlɝz swɝld əɡɛn. iðɝ weɪ, ɪt wɑz taɪm fəɹ pɛɹɪn tə ɹɪtɝn tə ɹænd. ðə kʌlɝz swɝld, ʃoʊɪŋ ɹænd stændɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə bɪldɪŋ wɪð ə bɝn fɹʌnt, stɛɹɪŋ wɛstwɝd. pɛɹɪn bænɪʃt ði ɪmədʒ. hɪz duɾi wɑz dʌn, ðə pɹɑfət sin tə, æliændɝz əlidʒəns sɪkjʊɹ. oʊnli, pɛɹɪn fɛlt əz ɪf sʌmθɪŋ wɝ stɪl vɛɹi ɹɔŋ.

The Prophet was dead, killed by bandits. Well, perhaps that was a fitting end for him, but Perrin still felt he'd failed. Rand had wanted Masema brought to him. The colors swirled again. Either way, it was time for Perrin to return to Rand. The colors swirled, showing Rand standing in front of a building with a burned front, staring westward. Perrin banished the image. His duty was done, the Prophet seen to, Alliandre's allegiance secure. Only, Perrin felt as if something were still very wrong.

hi fɪŋɡɝd ðə blæksmɪθs pʌzəl ɪn ɪz pɑkət. tə ʌndɝstæn sʌmθɪŋ. . . juv tə fɪɡjɝ aʊɾ ɪts pɑɹts . . .

He fingered the blacksmith's puzzle in his pocket. To understand something. . . you have to figure out its parts . . .

hi smɛl feɪl bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹitʃt hɪm, hɝɾ əɹ hɔɹs ɑn ðə sɑft ɝθ. "soʊ, ɡɪl tɝn təwɔɹd luɡɹd?" ʃi æskt, stɑpɪŋ bɪsaɪd hɪm.

He smelled Faile before she reached him, heard her horse on the soft earth. "So, Gill turned toward Lugard?" she asked, stopping beside him.

hi nɑɾəd.

He nodded.

"ðæt meɪ hæv bɪn waɪz. pɝhæps wi ʃəd tɝn ðət weɪ tu. wɝ ðoʊz mɔɹ sɛl-sɔɹdz u dʒɔɪn ʌs?"

"That may have been wise. Perhaps we should turn that way too. Were those more sell-swords who joined us?"

"jɛs."

"Yes."

"wi mʌst əv pɪkt ʌp faɪv θaʊzən pipəl ðiz læs fju wiks," ʃi sɛd θɔtfəli.

"We must have picked up five thousand people these last few weeks," she said thoughtfully.

"pɝhæps mɔɹ. ɑd, ɪn ðɪs dɛsələt lændskeɪp."

"Perhaps more. Odd, in this desolate landscape."

ʃi wɑz bjuɾəfəl, wɪð əɹ ɹeɪvən hɛɹ ən stʃɹɔŋ fitʃɝz - ə ɡʊd sɑldəiən noʊz sɛt bɪtwin tu tɪltəɾ aɪz. ʃi wɑz dʒɹɛs fəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn dip waɪn ɹɛd. hi lʌvd əɹ dɪɹli, ən pɹeɪz ðə laɪt ðət hid ɡɑɾən əɹ bæk. waɪ dɪɾ i fil soʊ ɑkwɝɾ ɝaʊn əɹ naʊ?

She was beautiful, with her raven hair and strong features - a good Saldaean nose set between two tilted eyes. She was dressed for riding in deep wine red. He loved her dearly, and praised the Light that he'd gotten her back. Why did he feel so awkward around her now?

"jɔɹ tʃɹʌbəld, maɪ hʌzbənd," ʃi noʊɾəd. ʃi ʌndɝstʊɾ ɪm soʊ wɛl, ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf ʃi kəd ɹid sɛns. ɪt sim tə bi ə θɪŋ ʌv wɪmən, ðoʊ. bɹəleɪn kəd də ɪt tu.

"You're troubled, my husband," she noted. She understood him so well, it was almost as if she could read scents. It seemed to be a thing of women, though. Berelain could do it too.

"wiv ɡæðɝd tu mɛni pipəl," hi sɛd wɪð ə ɡɹʌnt. "aɪ ʃəd stɑɹt tɝnɪŋ əm əweɪ."

"We've gathered too many people," he said with a grunt. "I should start turning them away."

"aɪ səspɛk ðeɪd faɪn ðɛɹ weɪ bæk tə əɹ fɔɹs ɛniweɪ."

"I suspect they'd find their way back to our force anyway."

"waɪ ʃəd ðeɪ? aɪ kəd liv ɔɹɾɝz."

"Why should they? I could leave orders."

"ju kænt ɡɪv ɔɹɾɝz tə ðə pæɾɝn ɪtsɛlf, maɪ hʌzbənd." ʃi ɡlænst oʊvɝ ət ðə kɑləm ə pipəl əz ðeɪ muvd ɑntu ðə ɹoʊd.

"You can't give orders to the Pattern itself, my husband." She glanced over at the column of people as they moved onto the road.

"wʌt də - " hi kʌɾ ɔf, kætʃɪŋ əɹ minɪŋ. "ju θɪŋk ðɪs ɪz mi? biɪŋ tɑvɝən?'

"What do - " He cut off, catching her meaning. "You think this is me? Being ta'veren?'

"ɛvɹi stɑp əlɔŋ əɹ tʃɹɪp, juv ɡeɪn mɔɹ fɑloʊɝz," feɪl sɛd. "dɪspaɪɾ əɹ lɔsəz əɡɛns ði il, wi keɪm aʊɾ ə meɪɾən wɪð ə stʃɹɔŋɝ fɔɹs ðən wən wi stɑɹɾəd. hævən jə faʊn ɪɾ ɑd ðət soʊ mɛni ʌv ðə fɔɹmɝ ɡeɪʃeɪn ɑɹ teɪkɪŋ tə tɑɹnz tʃɹeɪnɪŋ wɪð wɛpənz?"

"Every stop along our trip, you've gained more followers," Faile said. "Despite our losses against the Aiel, we came out of Maiden with a stronger force than when we started. Haven't you found it odd that so many of the former gai'shain are taking to Tarn's training with weapons?"

"ðeɪ wɝ biɾən daʊn soʊ lɔŋ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðeɪ wɑnə stɑp ðət fɹəm hæpənɪŋ əɡɛn."

"They were beaten down so long," Perrin said. "They want to stop that from happening again."

"æn soʊ kupɝz lɝn ðə sɔɹd," feɪl sɛd, "æn faɪn ðeɪv ə tælən fəɹ ɪt. meɪsənz u nɛvɝ θɔɾ ə faɪɾɪŋ bæk əɡɛns ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ naʊ tʃɹeɪn wɪð ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf. sɛl-sɔɹdz ən ɑɹmmɪn flɑk tə ʌs."

"And so coopers learn the sword," Faile said, "and find they have a talent for it. Masons who never thought of fighting back against the Shaido now train with the quarterstaff. Sell-swords and armsmen flock to us."

"ɪts koʊɪnsɪɾəns."

"It's coincidence."

"koʊɪnsɪɾəns?" ʃi saʊndəɾ əmjuzd. "wɪð ə tɑvɝən ət ði ɑɹmiz hɛd?"

"Coincidence?" She sounded amused. "With a ta'veren at the army's head?"

ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt, ən əz i fɛl saɪlənt, hi kəd smɛl əɹ sæɾəsfækʃən ət wɪnɪŋ ði ɑɹɡjəmənt. hi dɪdn θɪŋk ʌv ɪɾ əz ən ɑɹɡjəmənt, bʌt ʃid si ɪɾ əz wʌn. ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, ʃid bi mæd ðəɾ i hædn ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs.

She was right, and as he fell silent, he could smell her satisfaction at winning the argument. He didn't think of it as an argument, but she'd see it as one. If anything, she'd be mad that he hadn't raised his voice.

"ðɪs ɪz ɔl gɑnə ɛn ɪn ə fju deɪz, feɪl," hi sɛd. "wʌns wɪv ɡeɪtweɪz əɡɛn, əl sɛn ðiz pipəl tə ðɛɹ pɹɑpɝ pleɪsəz. aɪm nɑt ɡæðɝɪŋ ən ɑɹmi. aɪm hɛlpɪŋ səm ɹɛfjudʒiz tə ɡɛt hoʊm."

"This is all going to end in a few days, Faile," he said. "Once we have gateways again, I'll send these people to their proper places. I'm not gathering an army. I'm helping some refugees to get home."

ðə læs θɪŋ i niɾəd wɑz mɔɹ pipəl kɔlɪŋ ɪm "maɪ lɔɹd" ən boʊɪŋ ən skɹeɪpɪŋ.

The last thing he needed was more people calling him "my Lord" and bowing and scraping.

"wi ʃæl si," ʃi sɛd.

"We shall see," she said.

"feɪl." hi saɪɾ ən loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs. "ə mænz ɡɑt tə si ə θɪŋ fəɹ wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz. noʊ sɛns ɪn kɔlɪŋ ə bʌkəl ə hɪnʒ əɹ kɔlɪŋ ə neɪl ə hɔɹsʃu. aɪv toʊl ju; aɪm nɑɾ ə ɡʊd liɾɝ. aɪ pɹuv ðæt."

"Faile." He sighed and lowered his voice. "A man's got to see a thing for what it is. No sense in calling a buckle a hinge or calling a nail a horseshoe. I've told you; I'm not a good leader. I proved that."

"ðæts nɑt haʊ aɪ si ɪt."

"That's not how I see it."

hi ɡɹɪp ðə blæksmɪθs pʌzəl ɪn ɪz pɑkət. ðeɪd dɪskʌs ðɪs dʊɹɪŋ ðə wiks sɪns meɪɾən, bʌt ʃi ɹəfjuz tə si sɛns. "ðə kæmp wɑz ə mɛs waɪl jə wɝ ɡɔn, feɪl! aɪv toʊl jə haʊ ɑɹɡændə ən ðə meɪɾənz nɪɹli kɪld wʌn ənʌðɝ. ən ɛɹæm - mæsimə kɝʌptɪɾ ɪm ɹaɪɾ ʌndɝ maɪ noʊz. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pleɪɾ ət ɡeɪmz aɪ kænt ɡɛs, ən ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn . . . jə si haʊ ðeɪ lʊk ət mi wɪð ʃeɪm ɪn ðɛɹ aɪz."

He gripped the blacksmith's puzzle in his pocket. They'd discussed this during the weeks since Maiden, but she refused to see sense. "The camp was a mess while you were gone, Faile! I've told you how Arganda and the Maidens nearly killed one another. And Aram - Masema corrupted him right under my nose. The Aes Sedai played at games I can't guess, and the Two Rivers men . . . you see how they look at me with shame in their eyes."

feɪlz sɛn spaɪkt wɪð æŋɡɝ wən i sɛd ðæt, ən ʃi tɝnd ʃɑɹpli təwɔɹd bɹəleɪn.

Faile's scent spiked with anger when he said that, and she turned sharply toward Berelain.

"ɪts nɑɾ əɹ fɔlt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɪf aɪd bɪn eɪbəl tə θɪŋk ʌv ɪt, aɪɾ əv stɑp ðə ɹumɝz dɛd.

"It's not her fault," Perrin said. "If I'd been able to think of it, I'd have stopped the rumors dead.

bʌɾ aɪ dɪdnt. naʊ aɪv ɡɑt tə slip ɪn ðə bɛɾ aɪ meɪd fəɹ maɪsɛlf. laɪt! wʌɾ ɪz ə mæn ɪf ɪz oʊn neɪbɝz doʊn θɪŋk wɛl ə hɪm? ɪm noʊ lɔɹd, feɪl, ən ðæts ðæt. aɪv pɹuvən ɪt saʊnli."

But I didn't. Now I've got to sleep in the bed I made for myself. Light! What is a man if his own neighbors don't think well of him? I'm no lord, Faile, and that's that. I've proven it soundly."

"ɑd," ʃi sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪv bɪn spikɪŋ tə ði ʌðɝz, ən ðeɪ tɛl ə dɪfɹən stɔɹi. ðeɪ seɪ ðət jə kɛpt ɑɹɡændə kənteɪn ən pʊɾ aʊt flɛɹ-ʌps ɪn kæmp. ðən ðɛɹz ði əlaɪəns wɪð ðə sintʃæn; ðə mɔɹ aɪ lɝn ə ðæt, ðə mɔɹ ɪmpɹɛst aɪ æm. jə æktəd dɪsaɪsɪvli ɪn ə taɪm ʌv ɡɹeɪɾ ənsɝɾənti, jə foʊkəst ɛvɹiwʌnz ɛfɝts, ən jə əkɑmplɪʃt ði ɪmpɑsəbəl ɪn teɪkɪŋ meɪɾən.

"Odd," she said. "But I've been speaking to the others, and they tell a different story. They say that you kept Arganda contained and put out flare-ups in camp. Then there's the alliance with the Seanchan; the more I learn of that, the more impressed I am. You acted decisively in a time of great uncertainty, you focused everyone's efforts, and you accomplished the impossible in taking Maiden.

ðoʊz ɑɹ ði ækʃənz ʌv ə liɾɝ."

Those are the actions of a leader."

"feɪl . . ." hi sɛd, səpɹɛsɪŋ ə ɡɹaʊl. waɪ wʊdnt ʃi lɪsən? wən ʃid bɪn ə kæptɪv, nʌθɪŋ hæd mæɾɝd tə hɪm bʌt ɹəkʌvɝɪŋ hɝ. nɑθ-ɪŋ. ɪt dɪdn mæɾɝ u hæd niɾəd ɪz hɛlp, əɹ wʌɾ ɔɹɾɝz hid bɪn ɡɪvən. tɑɹmən ɡdən ɪtsɛlf kəɾ əv stɑɹɾəd, ən hiɾ əv ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪɾ ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə faɪn feɪl.

"Faile . . ." he said, suppressing a growl. Why wouldn't she listen? When she'd been a captive, nothing had mattered to him but recovering her. Noth-ing. It didn't matter who had needed his help, or what orders he'd been given. Tarmon Gai'don itself could have started, and he'd have ignored it in order to find Faile.

hi ɹiliɾuɛd naʊ haʊ deɪnʒɝəs ɪz ækʃənz hæd bɪn. tʃɹʌbəl wɑz, hid teɪk ðoʊz seɪm ækʃənz əɡɛn. hi dɪdn ɹəɡɹɛt wʌt hid dʌn, nɑt fəɹ ə moʊmənt. ə liɾɝ kʊdn bi laɪk ðæt.

He reali2ed now how dangerous his actions had been. Trouble was, he'd take those same actions again. He didn't regret what he'd done, not for a moment. A leader couldn't be like that.

hi nɛvɝ ʃʊɾə lɛɾ əm ɹeɪz ðət wʊlfhɛd bænɝ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs. naʊ ðət hid kəmpliɾəd ɪz tæsks, naʊ ðət feɪl wɑz bæk, ɪt wɑz taɪm tə pʊɾ ɔl ə ðət fulɪʃnəs bɪhaɪn hɪm.

He never should have let them raise that wolfhead banner in the first place. Now that he'd completed his tasks, now that Faile was back, it was time to put all of that foolishness behind him.

pɛɹɪn wɑz ə blæksmɪθ. ɪt dɪdn mæɾɝ wʌt feɪl dʒɹɛst ɪm ɪn, əɹ wʌt taɪɾəlz pipəl ɡeɪv hɪm.

Perrin was a blacksmith. It didn't matter what Faile dressed him in, or what titles people gave him.

jə kʊdn meɪk ə dʒɹɔnaɪf ɪndə ə hɔɹsʃu baɪ peɪntɪŋ ɪt, əɹ baɪ kɔlɪŋ ɪt sʌmθɪŋ dɪfɹənt.

You couldn't make a drawknife into a horseshoe by painting it, or by calling it something different.

hi tɝn tə ðə saɪd, wɛɹ dʒɔɹi kɔŋɡɝ ɹoʊd bɪfɔɹ ðə kɑləm, ðət blæstəd ɹɛd wʊlfhɛd bænɝ flæpɪŋ pɹaʊdli fɹəm ə poʊl tɔlɝ ðən ə kævəlɹimənz læns. pɛɹɪn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə ʃaʊt fəɹ ɪm tə teɪk ɪt daʊn, bʌt feɪl spoʊk sʌɾənli.

He turned to the side, where Jori Congar rode before the column, that blasted red wolfhead banner flapping proudly from a pole taller than a cavalryman's lance. Perrin opened his mouth to shout for him to take it down, but Faile spoke suddenly.

"jɛs, ɪndid," ʃi sɛd, mjuzɪŋli. "aɪv bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ ɑn ðɪs fəɹ ðə læs fju wiks, ən - ɑd ðoʊ ɪt simz - aɪ bɪliv maɪ kæptɪvəɾi meɪ hæv bɪn pɹɪsaɪsli wʌt wi niɾəd. boʊθ ʌv ʌs."

"Yes, indeed," she said, musingly. "I've been thinking on this for the last few weeks, and - odd though it seems - I believe my captivity may have been precisely what we needed. Both of us."

wʌt? pɛɹɪn tɝn tə hɝ, smɛlɪŋ əɹ θɔtfəlnəs. ʃi bɪlivd wʌt ʃid sɛd.

What? Perrin turned to her, smelling her thoughtfulness. She believed what she'd said.

"naʊ," feɪl sɛd, "wi nid tə spik ʌv - "

"Now," Faile said, "we need to speak of - "

"skaʊts ɹɪtɝnɪŋ," hi sɛd, pɝhæps mɔɹ əbɹʌpli ðən i ɪntɛndəd. "il ʌp əhɛd."

"Scouts returning," he said, perhaps more abruptly than he intended. "Aiel up ahead."

feɪl ɡlænst əz i pɔɪntəd, bʌɾ ə kɔɹs ʃi kʊdn si ɛniθɪŋ jɛt. ʃi nu ʌv ɪz aɪz, ðoʊ. ʃi wɑz wʌn ə ðə fju hu dɪd.

Faile glanced as he pointed, but of course she couldn't see anything yet. She knew of his eyes, though. She was one of the few who did.

ðə kɔl wɛn ʌp əz ʌðɝz noʊɾəst ðə θɹi fɪɡjɝz ɪn keɪɾɪnsɝ əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ əlɔŋsaɪd ðə ɹoʊd, ðə wʌnz pɛɹɪn hæd sɛn tə skaʊt. tu meɪɾənz hɝid fəɹ ðə waɪz wʌnz ən wʌn loʊpt ʌp tə pɛɹɪn.

The call went up as others noticed the three figures in cadin'sor approaching alongside the road, the ones Perrin had sent to scout. Two Maidens hurried for the Wise Ones and one loped up to Perrin.

"ðɛɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə ɹoʊd, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," ðə wʊmən sɛd. ʃi smɛl kənsɝnd.

"There is something beside the road, Perrin Aybara," the woman said. She smelled concerned.

ðət wɑz ə deɪnʒɝəs saɪn. "ɪɾ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ ðət jəl wɪʃ tə si."

That was a dangerous sign. "It is something that you will wish to see."

ɡɑləd woʊk tə ðə saʊn ʌv ə tɛn flæp ɹʌslɪŋ. ʃɑɹp peɪnz bɝn əɾ ɪz saɪd wɛɹ i hæd bɪn ɹɪpiɾɪdli kɪkt; ðeɪ mætʃt ðə dʌlɝ eɪks ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, lɛft ɑɹm, ən θaɪ wɛɹ hid bɪn wundəd baɪ vɑldə. hɪz paʊndɪŋ hɛdeɪk wɑz ɔlmoʊst stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə dʒɹaʊn aʊɾ ɔl ɛls.

Galad woke to the sound of a tent flap rustling. Sharp pains burned at his side where he had been repeatedly kicked; they matched the duller aches on his shoulder, left arm, and thigh where he'd been wounded by Valda. His pounding headache was almost strong enough to drown out all else.

hi ɡɹoʊnd, ɹoʊlɪŋ ɑntu hɪz bæk. ɔl wɑz dɑɹk ɝaʊn hɪm, bʌt pɪnpɹɪk laɪts ʃoʊn ɪn ðə skaɪ.

He groaned, rolling onto his back. All was dark around him, but pinprick lights shone in the sky.

stɑɹz? ɪt hæd bɪn oʊvɝkæs fəɹ soʊ lɔŋ.

Stars? It had been overcast for so long.

noʊ . . . sʌmθɪŋ wɑz ɹɔŋ əbaʊt ðɛm. hɪz hɛd pʌlsd wɪð peɪn, ən i blɪŋk tɪɹz fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪz. ðoʊz stɑɹz lʊk soʊ feɪnt, soʊ dɪstənt. ðeɪ meɪd noʊ fəmɪljɝ pæɾɝnz. wɛɹ kəɾ əsunɑwə hæv teɪkən ɪm ðət ðə vɛɹi stɑɹz wɝ dɪfɹənt?

No . . . something was wrong about them. His head pulsed with pain, and he blinked tears from the corner of his eyes. Those stars looked so faint, so distant. They made no familiar patterns. Where could Asunawa have taken him that the very stars were different?

əz ɪz maɪn klɪɹd, hi bɪɡæn tə meɪk aʊɾ ɪz sɝaʊndɪŋz. ðɪs wɑz ə hɛvi slipɪŋ tɛnt, kənstʃɹʌktəd tə bi dɑɹk dʊɹɪŋ ðə deɪlaɪɾ aʊɝz. ðə laɪts əbʌv wɝn stɑɹz əɾ ɔl, bʌt sʌnlaɪt θɹu ði əkeɪʒənəl pɪnhoʊlz ʌv wɛɹ ɪn ðə kænvəs.

As his mind cleared, he began to make out his surroundings. This was a heavy sleeping tent, constructed to be dark during the daylight hours. The lights above weren't stars at all, but sunlight through the occasional pinholes of wear in the canvas.

hi wɑz stɪl neɪkəd, ən wɪð tɛntəɾɪv fɪŋɡɝz i dɪtɝmən ðət ðəɹ wɑz dʒɹaɪd blʌɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs. ɪt hæd kʌm fɹəm ə lɔŋ ɡæʃ ɪn ɪz fɔɹhɛd. ɪf i dɪdnt wɑʃ ɪt sun, ɪnfɛkʃən wɑz laɪkli. hi leɪ ɑn ɪz bæk, bɹiðɪŋ ɪn ən aʊt wɪð kɛɹ. ɪf i tʊk ɪn tu mʌtʃ ɛɹ ət wʌns, hɪz saɪd skɹimd.

He was still naked, and with tentative fingers he determined that there was dried blood on his face. It had come from a long gash in his forehead. If he didn't wash it soon, infection was likely. He lay on his back, breathing in and out with care. If he took in too much air at once, his side screamed.

ɡɑləd dɪd nɑt fɪɹ dɛθ əɹ peɪn. hi hæd meɪd ðə ɹaɪt tʃɔɪsəz. ɪt wɑz ənfɔɹtʃənət ðət hid niɾəd tə liv ðə kwɛstʃənɝz ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ; ðeɪ wɝ kəntʃɹoʊl baɪ ðə sintʃæn. haʊɛvɝ, ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ ʌðɝ ɑpʃən, nɑɾ æftɝ hid wɔkt ɪndə əsunɑwəz hænz.

Galad did not fear death or pain. He had made the right choices. It was unfortunate that he'd needed to leave the Questioners in charge; they were controlled by the Seanchan. However, there had been no other option, not after he'd walked into Asunawa's hands.

ɡɑləd fɛl noʊ æŋɡɝ ət ðə skaʊts u hæd bɪtʃɹeɪd hɪm. ðə kwɛstʃənɝz wɝ ə væləd sɔɹs ʌv əθɔɹəɾi ɪn ðə tʃɪlʒɹən, ən ðɛɹ laɪz hæd noʊ daʊt bɪn kənvɪnsɪŋ. noʊ, ðə wʌn i wɑz æŋɡɹi ət wɑz əsunɑwə, hu tʊk wʌt wɑz tʃɹu ən mʌɾid ɪt. ðəɹ wɝ mɛni hu dɪd ðəɾ ɪn ðə wɝld, bʌt ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ʃəd bi dɪfɹənt.

Galad felt no anger at the scouts who had betrayed him. The Questioners were a valid source of authority in the Children, and their lies had no doubt been convincing. No, the one he was angry at was Asunawa, who took what was true and muddied it. There were many who did that in the world, but the Children should be different.

sun ðə kwɛstʃənɝz wəd kʌm fəɹ hɪm, ən ðən ðə tʃɹu pɹaɪs fəɹ seɪvɪŋ ɪz mɛn wəd bi ɪɡzæktɪd wɪð ðɛɹ hʊks ən naɪvz. hi hæd bɪn əwɛɹ ə ðət pɹaɪs wən hid meɪɾ ɪz dɪsɪʒən. ɪn ə weɪ, hi hæd wʌn, fəɹ i hæd mənɪpjəleɪɾɪd ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən bɛst.

Soon the Questioners would come for him, and then the true price for saving his men would be exacted with their hooks and knives. He had been aware of that price when he'd made his decision. In a way, he had won, for he had manipulated the situation best.

ði ʌðɝ weɪ tə ɛnʃʊɹ ɪz vɪktɝi wɑz tə hoʊl tə ðə tʃɹuθ ʌndɝ ðɛɹ kwɛstʃənɪŋ. tə dɪnaɪ biɪŋ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd wɪð ɪz faɪnəl bɹɛθ. ɪt wəd bi dɪfəkəlt, bʌɾ ɪt wəd bi ɹaɪt.

The other way to ensure his victory was to hold to the truth under their questioning. To deny being a Darkfriend with his final breath. It would be difficult, but it would be right.

hi fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə sɪɾ ʌp, ɪkspɛktɪŋ - ən wɛðɝɪŋ - ðə dɪzinəs ən nɔziə. hi fɛlt ɝaʊnd. hɪz lɛɡz wɝ tʃeɪn təɡɛðɝ, ən ðət tʃeɪn wɑz lɑk tə ə spaɪk ðət hæd bɪn dʒɹɪvən dip ɪndə ði ɝθ, pɪɹsɪŋ ðə ɹʌf kænvəs tɛn bɑɾəm.

He forced himself to sit up, expecting - and weathering - the dizziness and nausea. He felt around. His legs were chained together, and that chain was locked to a spike that had been driven deep into the earth, piercing the rough canvas tent bottom.

hi tʃɹaɪd jæŋkɪŋ ɪt fɹi, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs. hi pʊl soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ ɪz mʌsəlz feɪld ɪm ən i nɪɹli pæst aʊt. wʌns i hæd ɹəkʌvɝd, hi kɹɔl tə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə tɛnt. hɪz tʃeɪnz ɡeɪv ɪm ɪnʌf ɹum tə ɹitʃ ðə flæps. hi tʊk wʌn ə ðə klɔθ taɪz - juz tə hoʊl ðə flæps ʌp wən ðeɪ wɝ oʊpənd - ən spæɾ ɑn ɪt. ðɛn, məθɑɾɪkəli, hi waɪp ðə ɡɹaɪm ən blʌd fɹəm ɪz feɪs.

He tried yanking it free, just in case. He pulled so hard that his muscles failed him and he nearly passed out. Once he had recovered, he crawled to the side of the tent. His chains gave him enough room to reach the flaps. He took one of the cloth ties - used to hold the flaps up when they were opened - and spat on it. Then, methodically, he wiped the grime and blood from his face.

ðə klinɪŋ ɡeɪv ɪm ə ɡoʊl, kɛpt ɪm muvɪŋ ən stɑpt ɪm fɹəm θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə peɪn. hi kɛɹfəli skɹʌb ðə kɹʌstɪd blʌd fɹəm ɪz tʃik ən noʊz. ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəlt; hɪz maʊθ wɑz dʒɹaɪ. hi bɪt daʊn ɑn ɪz tʌŋ tə ɡɛt səlaɪvə. ðə stʃɹɪps wɝ nɑt kænvəs, bʌɾ ə laɪɾɝ mətɪɹiəl. ðeɪ smɛld ə dʌst.

The cleaning gave him a goal, kept him moving and stopped him from thinking about the pain. He carefully scrubbed the crusted blood from his cheek and nose. It was difficult; his mouth was dry. He bit down on his tongue to get saliva. The strips were not canvas, but a lighter material. They smelled of dust.

hi spæɾ ɑn ə fɹɛʃ sɛkʃən, ðən wɝk ðə spɪɾəl ɪndə ðə klɔθ. ðə waʊn tə hɪz hɛd, ðə dɝɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs . . . ðiz θɪŋz wɝ mɑɹks ə vɪktɝi fəɹ ðə kwɛstʃənɝz. hi wəd nɑt liv ðɛm. hi wəd ɡoʊ ɪndə ðɛɹ tɔɹtʃɝz wɪð ə klin feɪs.

He spat on a fresh section, then worked the spittle into the cloth. The wound to his head, the dirt on his face . . . these things were marks of victory for the Questioners. He would not leave them. He would go into their tortures with a clean face.

hi hɝd ʃaʊts aʊtsaɪd. mɛn pɹipɛɹɪŋ tə bɹeɪk daʊn ðə kæmp. wəd ðət dɪleɪ ðɛɹ kwɛstʃənɪŋ? hi daʊɾɪd ɪt. stʃɹaɪkɪŋ kæmp kəd teɪk aʊɝz. ɡɑləd kəntɪnjud klinɪŋ, sɔɪlɪŋ ðə lɛŋθs ə boʊθ stʃɹæps, juzɪŋ ðə wɝk əz ə kaɪndə ɹɪtʃuəl, ə ɹɪðmɪk pæɾɝn tə ɡɪv ɪm ə foʊkəs fəɹ mɛɾəteɪʃən. hɪz hɛdeɪk wɪθdʒɹu, ðə peɪnz ə hɪz bɑɾi bɪkʌmɪŋ lɛs səɡnɪfɪkənt.

He heard shouts outside. Men preparing to break down the camp. Would that delay their questioning? He doubted it. Striking camp could take hours. Galad continued cleaning, soiling the lengths of both straps, using the work as a kind of ritual, a rhythmic pattern to give him a focus for meditation. His headache withdrew, the pains of his body becoming less significant.

hi wəd nɑt ɹʌn. ivən ɪf i kəɾ ɪskeɪp, fliɪŋ wəɾ ɪnvælɪdeɪɾ ɪz bɑɹɡən wɪð əsunɑwə.

He would not run. Even if he could escape, fleeing would invalidate his bargain with Asunawa.

bʌɾ i wəd feɪs ɪz ɛnəmiz wɪð sɛlf-ɹɪspɛkt.

But he would face his enemies with self-respect.

əz i fɪnɪʃt, hi hɝd vɔɪsəz aʊtsaɪd ðə tɛnt. ðeɪ wɝ kʌmɪŋ fəɹ hɪm. hi skɹæbəl kwaɪətli bæk tə ðə steɪk ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. teɪkɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ dɪspaɪt ðə peɪn, hi ɹoʊld ɑntu hɪz niz. ðən i tʊk ðə tɑp ə ði aɪɝn spaɪk ɪn ɪz lɛf hæn ən pʊʃt, hivɪŋ hɪmsɛlf tə hɪz fit.

As he finished, he heard voices outside the tent. They were coming for him. He scrabbled quietly back to the stake in the ground. Taking a deep breath despite the pain, he rolled onto his knees. Then he took the top of the iron spike in his left hand and pushed, heaving himself to his feet.

hi wɑbəld, ðən stɛɾid hɪmsɛlf, stændɪŋ ʌp ɔl ðə weɪ. hɪz peɪnz wɝ nʌθɪŋ, naʊ. hi hæd fɛlt ɪnsɛk baɪts ðət wɝ wɝs. hi pʊɾ ɪz fit waɪɾ ɪn ə wɔɹiɝz stæns, hɪz hænz hɛl bɪfɔɹ hɪmsɛlf wɪð ɪz ɹɪsts kɹɔst. hi oʊpən ɪz aɪz, bæk stʃɹeɪt, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə tɛn flæps. ɪt wɑzn ðə kloʊk, ðə junəfɔɹm, ðə hɛɹəlʒɹi, əɹ ðə sɔɹd ðət meɪɾ ə mæn. ɪt wɑz ðə weɪ hi hɛl hɪmsɛlf.

He wobbled, then steadied himself, standing up all the way. His pains were nothing, now. He had felt insect bites that were worse. He put his feet wide in a warriors stance, his hands held before himself with his wrists crossed. He opened his eyes, back straight, staring at the tent flaps. It wasn't the cloak, the uniform, the heraldry, or the sword that made a man. It was the way he held himself.

ðə flæps ɹʌsəld, ðən dʒɹu oʊpən. ði aʊtsaɪd laɪt wɑz bɹɪljən tə ɡɑləɾ ɛs aɪz, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt blɪŋk. hi dɪd nɑt flɪntʃ.

The flaps rustled, then drew open. The outside light was brilliant to Galad s eyes, but he did not blink. He did not flinch.

sɪləwɛts muvd əɡɛnst ən oʊvɝkæst skaɪ. ðeɪ hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, bæklɪt. hi kəd tɛl ðeɪ wɝ sɝpɹaɪz tə si hɪm stændɪŋ ðɛɹ.

Silhouettes moved against an overcast sky. They hesitated, backlit. He could tell they were surprised to see him standing there.

"laɪt!" wʌn ɪkskleɪmd. "dəmədʒɹd, haʊ ɪz ɪt ðət jəɹ əweɪk?" ʌnɪkspɛktɪdli, ðə vɔɪs wɑz fəmɪljɝ.

"Light!" one exclaimed. "Damodred, how is it that you're awake?" Unexpectedly, the voice was familiar.

"tʃɹɑm?" ɡɑləɾ æskt, hɪz vɔɪs ɹæɡəd.

"Trom?" Galad asked, his voice ragged.

mɛn spɪld ɪndə ðə ɹum. əz ɪz aɪz ədʒʌstəd, ɡɑləd meɪɾ aʊt stɑki tʃɹɑm, əlɔŋ wɪð bɔɹnhəld ən baɪɑɝ. tʃɹɑm fʌmbəld wɪð ə sɛɾ ə kiz.

Men spilled into the room. As his eyes adjusted, Galad made out stocky Trom, along with Bornhald and Byar. Trom fumbled with a set of keys.

"stɑp!" ɡɑləd sɛd. "aɪ ɡeɪv ɔɹɾɝz tə jə θɹi. bɔɹnhəld, ðəɹ ɪz blʌɾ ɑn jəɹ kloʊk! aɪ kəmændəd jə nɑt tə tʃɹaɪ tə fɹi mi!"

"Stop!" Galad said. "I gave orders to you three. Bornhald, there is blood on your cloak! I commanded you not to try to free me!"

"jɔɹ mɛn oʊbeɪd jəɹ ɔɹɾɝz, dəmədʒɹd," ə nu vɔɪs sɛd. ɡɑləd lʊkt ʌp tə si θɹi mɛn ɛntɝɪŋ ðə ɹum: bɛɹəb ɡəlivɝ, tɔl ən bɪɹɾəd; əlɑbɹ hɑɹnɪʃ, hɪz bɔld, ʃæɾoʊd hɛd mɪsɪŋ ɪts lɛft ɪɹ; bɹændəl vɔɹdɛɹiən, ə blɑn hʌlk ʌv ə mæn fɹəm ɡɑlədz neɪɾɪv ændɝ. ɔl θɹi wɝ lɔɹdz kæptən, ɔl θɹi hæd stʊd wɪð əsunɑwə.

"Your men obeyed your orders, Damodred," a new voice said. Galad looked up to see three men entering the room: Berab Golever, tall and bearded; Alaabar Harnesh, his bald, shadowed head missing its left ear; Brandel Vordarian, a blond hulk of a man from Galad's native Andor. All three were Lords Captain, all three had stood with Asunawa.

"wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs?" ɡɑləɾ æsk ðɛm.

"What is this?" Galad asked them.

hɑɹnɪʃ oʊpən ə sæk ən dʌmp sʌmθɪŋ bʌlbəs tə ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɡɑləd. ə hɛd.

Harnesh opened a sack and dumped something bulbous to the ground in front of Galad. A head.

əsunɑwəz.

Asunawa's.

ɔl θɹi mɛn dʒɹu sɔɹdz ən nɛl bɪfɔɹ hɪm, ðə pɔɪns ə ðɛɹ wɛpənz stæbɪŋ ðə kænvəs.

All three men drew swords and knelt before him, the points of their weapons stabbing the canvas.

tʃɹɑm ənlɑk ðə mænəkəlz ət ɡɑlədz fit.

Trom unlocked the manacles at Galad's feet.

"aɪ si," ɡɑləd sɛd. "ju hæv tɝn jəɹ sɔɹdz ɑn fɛloʊ tʃɪlʒɹən."

"I see," Galad said. "You have turned your swords on fellow Children."

"wʌt wəd juv hæɾ əs du?" bɹændəl æskt, lʊkɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ɪz nilɪŋ pəzɪʃən.

"What would you have had us do?" Brandel asked, looking up from his kneeling position.

ɡɑləd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ də nɑt noʊ. pɝhæps jə ɑɹ ɹaɪt; aɪ ʃəd nɑt tʃaɪd jə ɑn ðɪs tʃɔɪs. ɪt meɪ hæv bɪn ði oʊnli wʌn jə kəɾ əv meɪd. bʌt waɪ dɪd jə tʃeɪnʒ jəɹ maɪnz?"

Galad shook his head. "I do not know. Perhaps you are right; I should not chide you on this choice. It may have been the only one you could have made. But why did you change your minds?"

"wi hæv lɔs tu lɔɹdz kæptən kəmændɝ ɪn ʌndɝ hæf ə jɪɹ," hɑɹnɪʃ sɛɾ ɪn ə ɡɹʌf vɔɪs.

"We have lost two Lords Captain Commander in under half a year," Harnesh said in a gruff voice.

"ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs ə ðə laɪɾ əz bɪkʌm ə pleɪɡɹaʊn fəɹ ðə sintʃæn. ðə wɝld ɪz ɪn keɪɑs."

"The Fortress of the Light has become a playground for the Seanchan. The world is in chaos."

"æn jɛt," ɡəlivɝ sɛd, "əsunɑwə mɑɹtʃt əs ɔl ðə weɪ aʊt hɪɹ tə hæv əs bæɾəl əɹ fɛloʊ tʃɪlʒɹən. ɪt wɑz nɑt ɹaɪt, dəmədʒɹd. wi ɔl sɔ haʊ jə pɹizɛntəd jɝsɛlf, wi ɔl sɔ haʊ jə stɑpt əs fɹəm kɪlɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ. feɪst wɪð ðæt, ən wɪð ðə haɪ ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ neɪmɪŋ əz dɑɹkfɹɛn ə mæn wi ɔl noʊ tə bi ɑnɝəbəl . . . wɛl, haʊ kəd wi nɑt tɝn əɡɛns hɪm?"

"And yet," Golever said, "Asunawa marched us all the way out here to have us battle our fellow Children. It was not right, Damodred. We all saw how you presented yourself, we all saw how you stopped us from killing one another. Faced with that, and with the High Inquisitor naming as Darkfriend a man we all know to be honorable . . . Well, how could we not turn against him?"

ɡɑləd nɑɾəd. "ju æksɛp mi əz lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ?"

Galad nodded. "You accept me as Lord Captain Commander?"

ðə θɹi mɛn baʊd ðɛɹ hɛdz. "ɔl ðə lɔɹdz kæptən ɑɹ fəɹ ju," ɡəlivɝ sɛd. "wi wɝ fɔɹs tə kɪl ə θɝɾ ə ðoʊz u wɔɹ ðə ɹɛd ʃɛpɝdz kɹʊk ə ðə hæn ə ðə laɪt. səm ʌðɝz junaɪɾəd wɪð ʌs; səm tʃɹaɪd tə fli. ði ɑmɑdɪʃənz dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɝfɪɹ, ən mɛni hæv sɛd ðeɪd ɹæðɝ dʒɔɪn wɪð əs ðən ɹɪtɝn tə ðə sintʃæn. wɪv ði ʌðɝ ɑmɑdɪʃənz - ən ðə kwɛstʃənɝz u tʃɹaɪd tə ɹʌn - hɛld ət sɔɹdpɔɪnt."

The three men bowed their heads. "All the Lords Captain are for you," Golever said. "We were forced to kill a third of those who wore the red shepherd's crook of the Hand of the Light. Some others united with us; some tried to flee. The Amadicians did not interfere, and many have said they'd rather join with us than return to the Seanchan. We have the other Amadicians - and the Questioners who tried to run - held at swordpoint."

"lɛt fɹi ðoʊz u wɪʃ tə liv," ɡɑləd sɛd. "ðeɪ meɪ ɹɪtɝn tə ðɛɹ fæmliz ən ðɛɹ mæstɝz. baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ ɹitʃ ðə sintʃæn, wɪl bi bɪɑn ðɛɹ ɡɹæsp."

"Let free those who wish to leave," Galad said. "They may return to their families and their masters. By the time they reach the Seanchan, we will be beyond their grasp."

ðə mɛn nɑɾəd.

The men nodded.

"aɪ æksɛp jəɹ əlidʒəns," ɡɑləd sɛd. "ɡæðɝ ði ʌðɝ lɔɹdz kæptən ən fɛtʃ mi səplaɪ ɹɪpɔɹts. stʃɹaɪk kæmp. wi mɑɹtʃ fəɹ ændɝ."

"I accept your allegiance," Galad said. "Gather the other Lords Captain and fetch me supply reports. Strike camp. We march for Andor."

nʌn ə ðɛm æskt wɛðɝ i niɾəd ɹɛst, ðoʊ tʃɹɑm dɪd lʊk wɝid. ɡɑləɾ æksɛptɪd ðə waɪt ɹoʊb ə tʃaɪl bɹɔt tə hɪm, ən ðən sæɾ ɪn ə heɪstəli səplaɪd tʃɛɹ əz ənʌðɝ-tʃaɪl kændiɑɝ, ə mæn ɛkspɝɾ ɪn wunz ɛntɝd tə ɪnspɛkt ɪz ɪnʒɝiz. ɡɑləd dɪdn fil waɪz əɹ stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə bɛɹ ðə taɪɾəl i dɪd.

None of them asked whether he needed rest, though Trom did look worried. Galad accepted the white robe a Child brought to him, and then sat in a hastily supplied chair as another-Child Candeiar, a man expert in wounds entered to inspect his injuries. Galad didn't feel wise or strong enough to bear the title he did.

bʌt ðə tʃɪlʒɹən hæd meɪd ðɛɹ dɪsɪʒən. ðə laɪt wəd pɹətɛkt əm fəɹ ɪt.

But the Children had made their decision. The light would protect them for it.


tʃæptɝ θɹi


CHAPTER 3

ði ɑɹnɪɹlɪnz æŋɡɝ


The Arnyrlin's Anger

ɛɡwin floʊɾəd ɪn blæknəs. ʃi wɑz wɪθaʊt fɔɹm, lækɪŋ ʃeɪp əɹ bɑɾi. ðə θɔts, ɪmædʒɪnɪŋz, wɝiz, hoʊps, ən aɪdiəz ʌv ɔl ðə wɝld ɪkstɛndəɾ ɪndə ɪtɝnəɾi ɝaʊn hɝ.

Egwene floated in blackness. She was without form, lacking shape or body. The thoughts, imaginings, worries, hopes, and ideas of all the world extended into eternity around her.

ðɪs wɑz ðə pleɪs bɪtwin dʒɹimz ən ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld, ə blæknəs pɪnpɹɪkt wɪð θaʊzənz əpɑn θaʊzənz ə dɪstɪŋk laɪts, itʃ mɔɹ foʊkəst ən ɪntɛns ðən ðə stɑɹz ə ðə skaɪz. ðeɪ wɝ dʒɹimz, ən ʃi kəd lʊk ɪn ɑn ðɛm, bʌt dɪd nɑt. ðə wʌnz ʃi wɑntəd tə si wɝ wɔɹɾɪd, ən moʊst ə ði ʌðɝz wɝ mɪstɝiz tə hɝ.

This was the place between dreams and the waking world, a blackness pinpricked with thousands upon thousands of distinct lights, each more focused and intense than the stars of the skies. They were dreams, and she could look in on them, but did not. The ones she wanted to see were warded, and most of the others were mysteries to her.

ðəɹ wɑz wʌn dʒɹim ʃi lɔŋ tə slɪp ɪntu. ʃi ɹistʃɹeɪn hɝsɛlf. ðoʊ hɝ filɪŋz fəɹ ɡɔɪn wɝ stɪl stʃɹɔŋ, hɝ əpɪnjən ə hɪm wɑz mʌɾəld ɹisənli. ɡɛɾɪŋ lɔst ɪn ɪz dʒɹimz wəd nɑt hɛlp.

There was one dream she longed to slip into. She restrained herself. Though her feelings for Gawyn were still strong, her opinion of him was muddled recently. Getting lost in his dreams would not help.

ʃi tɝn əbaʊt, lʊkɪŋ θɹu ði ɪkspæns. ɹisənli, ʃid stɑɹɾəd kʌmɪŋ hɪɹ tə floʊɾ ən θɪŋk. ðə dʒɹimz ʌv ɔl ðə pipəl hɪɹ - səm fɹəm əɹ wɝld, səm fɹəm ʃædoʊz ʌv ɪt - ɹimaɪndəɾ əɹ waɪ ʃi fɔt. ʃi mʌs nɛvɝ fɝɡɛt ðət ðəɹ wɑz ən ɪntaɪɝ wɝld aʊtsaɪd ðə waɪt taʊɝz wɔlz. ðə pɝpəs ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz tə sɝv ðət wɝld.

She turned about, looking through the expanse. Recently, she'd started coming here to float and think. The dreams of all the people here - some from her world, some from shadows of it - reminded her why she fought. She must never forget that there was an entire world outside the White Tower's walls. The purpose of Aes Sedai was to serve that world.

taɪm pæst əz ʃi leɪ beɪðd ɪn ðə laɪɾ ə dʒɹimz. ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ʃi wɪl hɝsɛlf tə muv, ən loʊkeɪɾəd ə dʒɹim ʃi ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd - ðoʊ ʃi wɑzn sɝɾən haʊ ʃi dɪɾ ɪt. ðə dʒɹim swɛpt ʌp təwɔɹd hɝ, fɪlɪŋ əɹ vɪʒən.

Time passed as she lay bathed in the light of dreams. Eventually, she willed herself to move, and located a dream she recognized - though she wasn't certain how she did it. The dream swept up toward her, filling her vision.

ʃi pɹɛst əɹ wɪl əɡɛns ðə dʒɹim ən sɛn ə θɔɾ ɪndə ɪt. nɪneɪiv. ɪts taɪm tə stɑp əvɔɪɾɪŋ mi. ðəɹ ɪz wɝk tə bi dʌn, ən aɪ hæv nuz fəɹ ju. mit mi ɪn tu naɪts ɪn ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ. ɪf jə də nɑt kʌm, əl bi fɔɹs tə teɪk mɛʒɝz. jəɹ dæliəns θɹɛɾənz əs ɔl.

She pressed her will against the dream and sent a thought into it. Nynaeve. It is time to stop avoiding me. There is work to be done, and I have news for you. Meet me in two nights in the Hall of the Tower. If you do not come, I will be forced to take measures. Your dalliance threatens us all.

ðə dʒɹim sim tə ʃʌɾɝ, ən ɛɡwin pʊl bæk əz ɪt vænɪʃt. ʃiɾ ɔlɹɛɾi spoʊkən tə ɪleɪn. ðoʊz tu wɝ lus θɹɛdz; ðeɪ niɾəd tə bi tʃɹuli ɹeɪz tə ðə ʃɔl, wɪð ði oʊðz ədmɪnəstɝd.

The dream seemed to shudder, and Egwene pulled back as it vanished. She'd already spoken to Elayne. Those two were loose threads; they needed to be truly raised to the shawl, with the oaths administered.

bɪɑn ðæt, ɛɡwin niɾəd ɪnfɝmeɪʃən fɹəm nɪneɪiv. hoʊpfəli, ðə θɹɛt mɪkst wɪð ə pɹɑməs ə nuz wəd bɹɪŋ hɝ. ən ðət nuz wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. ðə waɪt taʊɝ faɪnəli junəfaɪd, ði æmɪɝlɪn sit sɪkjʊɹ, ɪleɪɾə kæptʃɝd baɪ ðə sintʃæn.

Beyond that, Egwene needed information from Nynaeve. Hopefully, the threat mixed with a promise of news would bring her. And that news was important. The White Tower finally unified, the Amyrlin Seat secure, Elaida captured by the Seanchan.

pɪnpɹɪk dʒɹimz stʃɹikt ɝaʊn ɛɡwin. ʃi kənsɪɾɝd tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɑntæk ðə waɪz wʌnz, bʌt dɪsaɪɾɪd əɡɛnst ɪt. haʊ ʃəd ʃi dil wɪð ðɛm? ðə fɝs θɪŋ wɑz tə kip əm fɹəm θɪŋkɪŋ ðeɪ wɝ biɪŋ "dɛlt wɪð." hɝ plæn fəɹ əm wɑz nɑt jɛt fɝm.

Pinprick dreams streaked around Egwene. She considered trying to contact the Wise Ones, but decided against it. How should she deal with them? The first thing was to keep them from thinking they were being "dealt with." Her plan for them was not yet firm.

ʃi lɛt hɝsɛlf slɪp bæk ɪndə hɝ bɑɾi, kɑntɛn tə spɛn ðə ɹɛst ə ðə naɪt wɪð əɹ oʊn dʒɹimz.

She let herself slip back into her body, content to spend the rest of the night with her own dreams.

hɪɹ, ʃi kʊdn kip θɔts ʌv ɡɔɪn fɹəm vɪzəɾɪŋ hɝ, nɔɹ dɪd ʃi wɑn tə. ʃi stɛpt ɪndə hɝ dʒɹim, ən ɪndə hɪz ɛmbɹeɪs. ðeɪ stʊɾ ɪn ə smɔl stoʊn-wɔld ɹum ʃeɪp laɪk əɹ stʌɾi ɪn ðə taʊɝ, jɛt dɛkɝeɪɾəd laɪk ðə kɑmən ɹum ə hɝ fɑðɝz ɪn. ɡɔɪn wɑz dʒɹɛst ɪn stɝɾi tu ɹɪvɝz wʊlənz ən dɪd nɑt wɛɹ ɪz sɔɹd. ə mɔɹ sɪmpəl laɪf. ɪt kəd nɑt bi hɝz, bʌt ʃi kəd dʒɹim . . .

Here, she couldn't keep thoughts of Gawyn from visiting her, nor did she want to. She stepped into her dream, and into his embrace. They stood in a small stone-walled room shaped like her study in the Tower, yet decorated like the common room of her fathers inn. Gawyn was dressed in sturdy Two Rivers woolens and did not wear his sword. A more simple life. It could not be hers, but she could dream . . .

ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃʊk. ðə ɹum ə pæst ən pɹɛzən sim tə ʃæɾɝ, ʃɹɛɾɪŋ ɪndə swɝlɪŋ smoʊk.

Everything shook. The room of past and present seemed to shatter, shredding into swirling smoke.

ɛɡwin stɛp bæk, ɡæspɪŋ, əz ɡɔɪn ɹɪpt əpɑɹɾ əz ɪf meɪɾ ə sænd. ɔl wɑz dʌst ɝaʊn hɝ, ən θɝtin blæk taʊɝz ɹoʊz ɪn ðə dɪstəns bɪniθ ə tɑɹlaɪk skaɪ.

Egwene stepped back, gasping, as Gawyn ripped apart as if made of sand. All was dust around her, and thirteen black towers rose in the distance beneath a tarlike sky.

wʌn fɛl, ən ðən ənʌðɝ, kɹæʃɪŋ tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. əz ðeɪ dɪd, ðə wʌnz ðət ɹɪmeɪnd ɡɹu tɔlɝ ən tɔlɝ. ðə ɡɹaʊnd ʃʊk əz sɛvɹəl mɔɹ taʊɝz fɛl. ənʌðɝ taʊɝ ʃʊk ən kɹækt, kəlæpsɪŋ moʊst ə ðə weɪ tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd - bʌt ðɛn, ɪt ɹəkʌvɝɾ ən ɡɹu tɔlɪst ʌv ɔl.

One fell, and then another, crashing to the ground. As they did, the ones that remained grew taller and taller. The ground shook as several more towers fell. Another tower shook and cracked, collapsing most of the way to the ground - but then, it recovered and grew tallest of all.

ət ði ɛn ə ðə kweɪk, sɪks taʊɝz ɹɪmeɪnd, lumɪŋ əbʌv hɝ. ɛɡwin hæd fɔlən tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, wɪtʃ hæd bɪkʌm sɑft ɝθ kʌvɝɾ ɪn wɪðɝd livz. ðə vɪʒən tʃeɪnʒd. ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ daʊn əɾ ə nɛst. ɪn ɪt, ə ɡɹup ə flɛdʒlɪŋ iɡəlz skɹitʃt təwɔɹd ðə skaɪ fəɹ ðɛɹ mʌðɝ.

At the end of the quake, six towers remained, looming above her. Egwene had fallen to the ground, which had become soft earth covered in withered leaves. The vision changed. She was looking down at a nest. In it, a group of fledgling eagles screeched toward the sky for their mother.

wʌn ə ði iɡələts ʌnkɔɪld, ən ɪt wɑzn ən iɡəl əɾ ɔl, bʌɾ ə sɝpənt. ɪt bɪɡæn tə stʃɹaɪk ət ðə flɛdʒəlɪŋz wʌn əɾ ə taɪm, swɑloʊɪŋ əm hoʊl. ði iɡələts sɪmpli kəntɪnjud tə stɛɹ ɪndə ðə skaɪ, pɹitɛndɪŋ ðət ðə sɝpənt wɑz ðɛɹ sɪblɪŋ əz ɪt dɪvaʊɝd ðɛm.

One of the eaglets uncoiled, and it wasn't an eagle at all, but a serpent. It began to strike at the fledglings one at a time, swallowing them whole. The eaglets simply continued to stare into the sky, pretending that the serpent was their sibling as it devoured them.

ðə vɪʒən tʃeɪnʒd. ʃi sɔ ən ɪnɔɹməs sfɪɹ meɪɾ ə ðə faɪnəs kɹɪstəl. ɪt spɑɹkəld ɪn ðə laɪɾ ə twɛnti-θɹi ɪnɔɹməs stɑɹz, ʃaɪnɪŋ daʊn ɑn ɪt wɛɹ ɪt sæɾ ɑn ə dɑɹk hɪltɑp. ðəɹ wɝ kɹæks ɪn ɪt, ən ɪt wɑz biɪŋ hɛl təɡɛðɝ baɪ ɹoʊps.

The vision changed. She saw an enormous sphere made of the finest crystal. It sparkled in the light of twenty-three enormous stars, shining down on it where it sat on a dark hilltop. There were cracks in it, and it was being held together by ropes.

ðəɹ wɑz ɹænd, wɔkɪŋ ʌp ðə hɪlsaɪd, hoʊldɪŋ ə wʊdzmənz æks. hi ɹitʃt ðə tɑp ən hɛftəd ði æks, ðən swʌŋ ət ðə ɹoʊps wʌn əɾ ə ɹaɪm, tʃɑpɪŋ əm fɹi. ðə læst wʌn pɑɹɾəd, ən ðə sfɪɹ bɪɡæn tə bɹeɪk əpɑɹt, ðə bjuɾəfəl ɡloʊb fɔlɪŋ ɪn pisəz. ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

There was Rand, walking up the hillside, holding a woodsman's axe. He reached the top and hefted the axe, then swung at the ropes one at a rime, chopping them free. The last one parted, and the sphere began to break apart, the beautiful globe falling in pieces. Rand shook his head.

ɛɡwin ɡæspt, keɪm əweɪk, ən sæɾ əpɹaɪt. ʃi wɑz ɪn əɹ ɹumz ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ðə bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ wɑz nɪɹli ɛmpti - ʃid hæɾ ɪleɪɾəz θɪŋz ɹimuvd, bʌt hædn kəmplitli fɝnɪʃt ɪɾ əɡɛn. ʃi hæɾ oʊnli ə wɑʃstænd, ə ɹʌɡ ʌv θɪk-woʊvən bɹaʊn faɪbɝz, ən ə bɛd wɪð poʊsts ən dʒɹeɪps.

Egwene gasped, came awake, and sat upright. She was in her rooms in the White Tower. The bedchamber was nearly empty - she'd had Elaida's things removed, but hadn't completely furnished it again. She had only a washstand, a rug of thick-woven brown fibers, and a bed with posts and drapes.

ðə wɪndoʊ ʃʌɾɝz wɝ kloʊzd; mɔɹnɪŋ sʌnlaɪt pik θɹu.

The window shutters were closed; morning sunlight peeked through.

ʃi bɹiðd ɪn ən aʊt. ɹɛɹli dɪd dʒɹimz ənsɛɾəl əɹ əz mʌtʃ əz ðɪs wʌn hæd.

She breathed in and out. Rarely did dreams unsettle her as much as this one had.

kɑmɪŋ hɝsɛlf, ʃi ɹitʃt daʊn tə ðə saɪɾ ə hɝ bɛd, pɪkɪŋ ʌp ðə lɛðɝ-baʊn bʊk ʃi kɛp ðəɹ tə ɹəkɔɹɾ əɹ dʒɹimz. ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə θɹi ðɪs naɪt wɑz ðə klɪɹɪs tə hɝ. ʃi fɛl ðə minɪŋ ʌv ɪt, ɪntɝpɹɛɾɪŋ ɪɾ əz ʃi səmtaɪmz kʊd. ðə sɝpənt wɑz wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən, hɪɾən ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɛɡwin hæd səspɛktəd ðɪs wɑz ðə keɪs - vɛɹɪn hæd sɛd ʃi bɪlivd ɪt soʊ.

Calming herself, she reached down to the side of her bed, picking up the leather-bound book she kept there to record her dreams. The middle of the three this night was the clearest to her. She felt the meaning of it, interpreting it as she sometimes could. The serpent was one of the Forsaken, hidden in the White Tower, pretending to be Aes Sedai. Egwene had suspected this was the case - Verin had said she believed it so.

mɛsænə wɑz stɪl ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. bʌt haʊ dɪd ʃi ɪməteɪɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ? ɛvɹi sɪstɝ hæd ɹɪswɔɹn ði oʊðz. əpɛɹənli mɛsænə kəd dɪfit ði oʊθ ɹɑd. əz ɛɡwin kɛɹfəli ɹəkɔɹɾəd ðə dʒɹimz, ʃi θɔɾ əbaʊt ðə taʊɝz, lumɪŋ, θɹɛɾənɪŋ tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ hɝ, ən ʃi nu səm ə ðə minɪŋ ðəɹ tu.

Mesaana was still in the White Tower. But how did she imitate an Aes Sedai? Every sister had resworn the oaths. Apparently Mesaana could defeat the Oath Rod. As Egwene carefully recorded the dreams, she thought about the towers, looming, threatening to destroy her, and she knew some of the meaning there too.

ɪf ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt faɪn mɛsænə ən stɑp hɝ, sʌmθɪŋ tɛɹəbəl wəd hæpən. ɪt kəd min ðə fɔl ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, pɝhæps ðə vɪktɝi ʌv ðə dɑɹk wʌn. dʒɹimz wɝ nɑt fɔɹtɛlɪŋz - ðeɪ dɪdnt ʃoʊ wʌt wəd hæpən, bʌt wʌt kʊd.

If Egwene did not find Mesaana and stop her, something terrible would happen. It could mean the fall of the White Tower, perhaps the victory of the Dark One. Dreams were not Foretellings - they didn't show what would happen, but what could.

laɪt, ʃi θɔt, fɪnɪʃɪŋ əɹ ɹɛkɝd. əz ɪf aɪ dɪdn əv ɪnʌf tə wɝi əbaʊt.

Light, she thought, finishing her record. As if I didn't have enough to worry about.

ɛɡwin ɹoʊz tə kɔl əɹ meɪdz, bʌɾ ə nɑk ət ðə dɔɹ ɪntɝʌptɪd hɝ. kjʊɹiəs, ʃi wɔkt əkɹɔs ðə θɪk ɹʌɡ - wɛɹɪŋ oʊnli hɝ naɪtɡaʊn -  ən oʊpən ðə dɔɹ ɪnʌf tə si sɪlviænə stændɪŋ ɪn ði æntətʃæmbɝ. skwɛɹ-fitʃɝɾ ən dʒɹɛst ɪn ɹɛd, ʃi hæɾ əɹ hɛɹ ʌp ɪn ɪts tɪpəkəl bʌn, ən əɹ ɹɛd kipɝz stoʊl oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz.

Egwene rose to call her maids, but a knock at the door interrupted her. Curious, she walked across the thick rug - wearing only her nightgown -  and opened the door enough to see Silviana standing in the antechamber. Square-featured and dressed in red, she had her hair up in its typical bun, and her red Keeper's stole over her shoulders.

'mʌðɝ," ðə wʊmən sɛd, hɝ vɔɪs tɛns. "aɪ əpɑlədʒaɪz fəɹ weɪkɪŋ ju."

'Mother," the woman said, her voice tense. "I apologize for waking you."

"aɪ wɑzn əslip," ɛɡwin sɛd. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt? wʌɾ əz hæpənd?"

"I wasn't asleep," Egwene said. "What is it? What has happened?"

"hiz hɪɹ, mʌðɝ. ət ðə waɪt taʊɝ."

"He's here, Mother. At the White Tower."

"hu?"

"Who?"

"ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. hiz æskɪŋ tə si ju."

"The Dragon Reborn. He's asking to see you."

* * * "wɛl, ðɪs ɪz ə pɑɾ ə fɪʃɝmænz stu meɪɾ oʊnli wɪð ðə hɛdz," sɪuən sɛɾ əz ʃi stɔk θɹu ə hɔlweɪ ʌv ðə waɪt taʊɝ. "haʊ dɪɾ i ɡɛt θɹu ðə sɪɾi wɪθaʊɾ ɛniwʌn siɪŋ hɪm?"

* * * "Well, this is a pot of fisherman's stew made only with the heads," Siuan said as she stalked through a hallway of the White Tower. "How did he get through the city without anyone seeing him?"

haɪ kæptən tʃʌbn wɪnst.

High Captain Chubain winced.

əz wɛl i ʃʊd, sɪuən θɔt. ðə ɹeɪvən-hɛɹd mæn wɔɹ ðə junəfɔɹm ə ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹd, ə waɪt tɑbɝɾ oʊvɝ ɪz meɪl ɛmbleɪzənd wɪð ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn. hi wɔkt wɪð ə hæn ɑn ɪz sɔɹd. ðəɹ hæd bɪn səm tɔk ðəɾ i maɪt bi ɹipleɪst əz haɪ kæptən naʊ ðət bɹaɪn wɑz ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, bʌɾ ɛɡwin hæd fɑloʊd sɪuənz ædvaɪs nɑt tə də soʊ. bɹaɪn dɪdnt wɑnə bi haɪ kæptən, ən i wəd bi niɾəd əz ə fil dʒɛnɝəl fəɹ ðə læs bæɾəl.

As well he should, Siuan thought. The raven-haired man wore the uniform of the Tower Guard, a white tabard over his mail emblazoned with the flame of Tar Valon. He walked with a hand on his sword. There had been some talk that he might be replaced as High Captain now that Bryne was in Tar Valon, but Egwene had followed Siuan's advice not to do so. Bryne didn't want to be High Captain, and he would be needed as a field general for the Last Battle.

bɹaɪn wɑz aʊt wɪð ɪz mɛn; faɪndɪŋ kɔɹɾɝz ən fud fəɹ fɪfti θaʊzən tʃɹups wɑz pɹuvɪŋ tə bi nɪɹ ɪmpɑsəbəl. ʃid sɛn ɪm wɝd, ən kəd fil ɪm ɡɛɾɪŋ kloʊsɝ. stɝn blɑk ʌv wʊd ðoʊ ðə mæn wɑz, sɪuən fɛl ðəɾ ɪz stəbɪlɪɾi wʊɾə bɪn naɪs tə hæv nɪɹ əɹ ɹaɪt naʊ. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn? ɪnsaɪd tɑɹ vəlɑn?

Bryne was out with his men; finding quarters and food for fifty thousand troops was proving to be near impossible. She'd sent him word, and could feel him getting closer. Stern block of wood though the man was, Siuan felt that his stability would have been nice to have near her right now. The Dragon Reborn? Inside Tar Valon?

"ɪts nɑt ɹɪli ðət sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ i ɡɑt soʊ fɑɹ, sɪuən," sɹɪn sɛd. ði ɑləv-skɪn bɹaʊn hæd bɪn wɪð sɪuən wən ðeɪd sin ðə kæptən ɹeɪsɪŋ baɪ, peɪl-feɪst. sɹɪn hæd waɪɾ əɾ əɹ tɛmpəlz, səm mɛʒɝ ʌv eɪdʒ əz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən hæɾ ə skɑɹ ɑn wʌn tʃik, ði ɔɹədʒən ʌv wɪtʃ sɪuən hædn bɪn eɪbəl tə pɹaɪ aʊɾ ə hɝ.

"It's not really that surprising he got so far, Siuan," Saerin said. The olive-skinned Brown had been with Siuan when they'd seen the captain racing by, pale-faced. Saerin had white at her temples, some measure of age as an Aes Sedai, and had a scar on one cheek, the origin of which Siuan hadn't been able to pry out of her.

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ hʌnʒɹədz ə ɹɛfjudʒiz pɔɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi itʃ deɪ," sɹɪn kəntɪnjud, "æn ɛni mæn wɪð hæf ən ɪnkləneɪʃən tə faɪɾ ɪz biɪŋ sɛn fəɹ ɹəkɹutmən ɪndə ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹd. ɪts noʊ wʌndɝ noʊbɑdi stɑpt ælθɹ."

"There are hundreds of refugees pouring into the city each day," Saerin continued, "and any man with half an inclination to fight is being sent for recruitment into the Tower Guard. It's no wonder nobody stopped al'Thor."

tʃʌbn nɑɾəd. "hi wɑz ət ðə sʌnsɛt ɡeɪt bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn kwɛstʃən hɪm. ən ðən i dʒʌst . . .

Chubain nodded. "He was at the Sunset Gate before anyone questioned him. And then he just . . .

wɛl, hi dʒʌst sɛɾ i wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən ðəɾ i wɑntəd tə si ði æmɪɝlɪn. dɪdn jɛl ɪɾ aʊɾ əɹ ɛniθɪŋ, sɛɾ ɪt kɑm əz spɹɪŋ ɹeɪn."

well, he just said he was the Dragon Reborn, and that he wanted to see the Amyrlin. Didn't yell it out or anything, said it calm as spring rain."

ðə hɔlweɪz ə ðə taʊɝ wɝ bɪzi, ðoʊ moʊst ə ðə wɪmən dɪdn sim tə noʊ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ tə du, dɑɹɾɪŋ ðɪs weɪ ən ðət laɪk fɪʃ ɪn ə nɛt.

The hallways of the Tower were busy, though most of the women didn't seem to know what they were to do, darting this way and that like fish in a net.

stɑp ðæt, sɪuən θɔt. hiz kʌm ɪndə əɹ siɾ ə paʊɝ. hiz ðə wʌn kɑɾ ɪn ðə nɛt.

Stop that, Siuan thought. He's come into our seat of power. He's the one caught in the net.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪz ɡeɪm, dʒju θɪŋk?" sɹɪn æskt.

"What is his game, do you think?" Saerin asked.

"bɝn mi ɪf aɪ noʊ," sɪuən ɹɪplaɪd. "hiz baʊn tə bi moʊsli ɪnseɪn baɪ naʊ. meɪbi hiz fɹaɪɾənd, ən əz kʌm tə tɝn hɪmsɛlf ɪn."

"Burn me if I know," Siuan replied. "He's bound to be mostly insane by now. Maybe he's frightened, and has come to turn himself in."

"aɪ daʊt ðæt."

"I doubt that."

'æz də aɪ," sɪuən sɛd ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli. dʊɹɪŋ ðiz læs fju deɪz, ʃid faʊnd - tə hɝ əmeɪzmənt - ðət ʃi laɪk sɹɪn. əz æmɪɝlɪn, sɪuən hædn hæd taɪm fəɹ fɹɛndʃɪps; ɪt hæd bɪn tu ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə pleɪ ði ədʒəz ɔf wʌn ənʌðɝ. ʃid θɔt sɹɪn ɑbstənəɾ ən fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾɪŋ. naʊ ðət ðeɪ wɝn bʌɾɪŋ hɛdz soʊ ɔfən, ʃi faʊn ðoʊz ætʃɹəbjuts əpilɪŋ.

'As do I," Siuan said grudgingly. During these last few days, she'd found - to her amazement - that she liked Saerin. As Amyrlin, Siuan hadn't had time for friendships; it had been too important to play the Ajahs off one another. She'd thought Saerin obstinate and frustrating. Now that they weren't butting heads so often, she found those attributes appealing.

"meɪbi hi hɝd ðəɾ ɪleɪɾə wɑz ɡɔn," sɪuən sɛd, "æn θɔt ðəɾ i wəd bi seɪf hɪɹ, wɪð ən oʊl fɹɛn ɑn ði æmɪɝlɪn sit."

"Maybe he heard that Elaida was gone," Siuan said, "and thought that he would be safe here, with an old friend on the Amyrlin Seat."

"ðæt dʌzn mætʃ wʌɾ aɪv ɹɛɾ ə ðə bɔɪ," sɹɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "ɹɪpɔɹts kɔl ɪm mɪstʃɹʌsfəl ən ɪɹæɾɪk, wɪð ə dɪmændɪŋ tɛmpɝ ən ən ɪnsɪstəns ɑn əvɔɪɾɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"That doesn't match what I've read of the boy," Saerin replied. "Reports call him mistrustful and erratic, with a demanding temper and an insistence on avoiding Aes Sedai."

ðət wɑz wʌt sɪuən hæd hɝɾ əz wɛl, ðoʊ ɪt hæd bɪn tu jɪɹz sɪns ʃid sin ðə bɔɪ. ɪn fækt, ðə læs taɪm hid stʊd bɪfɔɹ hɝ, ʃid bɪn ði æmɪɝlɪn ən hid bɪn ə sɪmpəl ʃifɝɾɝ.

That was what Siuan had heard as well, though it had been two years since she'd seen the boy. In fact, the last time he'd stood before her, she'd been the Amyrlin and he'd been a simple sheepherder.

moʊst ʌv wʌt ʃi nu ʌv ɪm sɪns ðən hæd kʌm θɹu ðə blu ədʒɑz aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz. ɪt tʊk ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə skɪl tə sɛpɝeɪt spɛkjəleɪʃən fɹəm tʃɹuθ, bʌt moʊst əɡɹiɾ əbaʊɾ ælθɹ. tɛmpɹəmɛntəl, dɪstʃɹʌsfəl, ɛɹəɡənt. laɪt bɝn ɪleɪɾə! sɪuən θɔt. ɪf nɑt fəɹ hɝ, wiɾ əv hæɾ ɪm seɪfli ɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ kɛɹ lɔŋ əɡoʊ.

Most of what she knew of him since then had come through the Blue Ajah's eyes-and-ears. It took a great deal of skill to separate speculation from truth, but most agreed about al'Thor. Temperamental, distrustful, arrogant. Light burn Elaida! Siuan thought. If not for her, we'd have had him safely in Aes Sedai care long ago.

ðeɪ klaɪm daʊn θɹi spaɪɹəlɪŋ ɹæmps ən ɛntɝɾ ənʌðɝ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝz waɪt-wɔl hɔlweɪz, muvɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ. ɪf ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz gɑnə ɹəsiv ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ðən ʃid də ɪt ðɛɹ. tu twɪstɪŋ tɝnz leɪɾɝ - pæs mɪɹɝd stænd-læmps ən steɪtli tæpəstʃɹiz - ðeɪ ɛntɝd wʌn læs hɔlweɪ ən fɹoʊz.

They climbed down three spiraling ramps and entered another of the White Tower's white-walled hallways, moving toward the Hall of the Tower. If the Amyrlin was going to receive the Dragon Reborn, then she'd do it there. Two twisting turns later - past mirrored stand-lamps and stately tapestries - they entered one last hallway and froze.

ðə flɔɹ taɪlz hɪɹ wɝ ðə kʌlɝ ə blʌd. ðət wɑzn ɹaɪt. ðə wʌnz hɪɹ ʃʊɾə bɪn waɪɾ ən jɛloʊ. ðiz ɡlɪsənd, əz ɪf wɛt.

The floor tiles here were the color of blood. That wasn't right. The ones here should have been white and yellow. These glistened, as if wet.

tʃʌbn ɪnheɪld ʃɑɹpli, hænd ɡoʊɪŋ tə hɪz sɔɹd hɪlt. sɹɪn ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ. sɪuən wɑz tɛmptəd tə bæɹəl ɔnwɝd, bʌt ðiz pleɪsəz wɛɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn hæd tʌtʃt ðə wɝl kəd bi deɪnʒɝəs. ʃi maɪt faɪn hɝsɛlf sɪŋkɪŋ θɹu ðə flɔɹ, əɹ biɪŋ ətæk baɪ ðə tæpəstʃɹiz.

Chubain inhaled sharply, hand going to his sword hilt. Saerin raised an eyebrow. Siuan was tempted to barrel onward, but these places where the Dark One had touched the world could be dangerous. She might find herself sinking through the floor, or being attacked by the tapestries.

ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ tɝn ən wɔk ði ʌðɝ weɪ. tʃʌbn lɪŋɡɝd fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən hɝiɾ æftɝ. ɪt wɑz izi tə ɹid ðə tɛnʃən ɪn ɪz feɪs. fɝs ðə sintʃæn, ən naʊ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn hɪmsɛlf, kʌm tə əsɔl ðə taʊɝ ɑn ɪz wɑtʃ.

The two Aes Sedai turned and walked the other way. Chubain lingered for a moment, then hurried after. It was easy to read the tension in his face. First the Seanchan, and now the Dragon Reborn himself, come to assault the Tower on his watch.

əz ðeɪ pæs θɹu ðə hɔlweɪz, ðeɪ mɛɾ ʌðɝ sɪstɝz floʊɪŋ ɪn ðə seɪm dɝɛkʃən. moʊst ə ðɛm wɔɹ ðɛɹ ʃɔlz. wʌn maɪɾ əv ɑɹɡjud ðət wɑz kəz ə ðə nuz ə ðə deɪ, bʌt ðə tʃɹuθ wɑz ðət mɛni stɪl hɛl tə ðɛɹ dɪstʃɹʌst ʌv ʌðɝ ədʒəz. ənʌðɝ ɹizən tə kɝs ɪleɪɾə. ɛɡwin hæd bɪn wɝkɪŋ hɑɹd tə ɹɪfɔɝdʒ ðə taʊɝ, bʌt wʌn kʊdn mɛn jɪɹz' wɝθ ə bɹoʊkən nɛts ɪn wʌn mʌnθ.

As they passed through the hallways, they met other sisters flowing in the same direction. Most of them wore their shawls. One might have argued that was because of the news of the day, but the truth was that many still held to their distrust of other Ajahs. Another reason to curse Elaida. Egwene had been working hard to reforge the Tower, but one couldn't mend years' worth of broken nets in one month.

ðeɪ faɪnəli ɝaɪvd ət ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ. sɪstɝz klʌstɝɾ ɪn ðə waɪd hɔlweɪ aʊtsaɪd, dɪvaɪɾəd baɪ ədʒɑ. tʃʌbn hɝid tə spik wɪð ɪz ɡɑɹdz ət ðə dɔɹ, ən sɹɪn ɛntɝd ðə hɔl pɹɑpɝ, wɛɹ ʃi kəd weɪt wɪð ði ʌðɝ sɪɾɝz. sɪuən ɹɪmeɪn stændɪŋ wɪð ðə dʌzənz aʊtsaɪd.

They finally arrived at the Hall of the Tower. Sisters clustered in the wide hallway outside, divided by Ajah. Chubain hurried to speak with his guards at the door, and Saerin entered the Hall proper, where she could wait with the other Sitters. Siuan remained standing with the dozens outside.

θɪŋz wɝ tʃeɪnʒɪŋ. ɛɡwin hæɾ ə nu kipɝ tə ɹipleɪs ʃɛɹiɑɹn. ðə tʃɔɪs ə sɪlviænə meɪɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə sɛns - ðə wʊmən wɑz noʊn tə hæv ə lɛvəl hɛd, fəɹ ə ɹɛd, ən tʃuzɪŋ əɹ hæd hɛlp fɔɹdʒ ðə tu hævz ə ðə taʊɝ bæk təɡɛðɝ. bʌt sɪuən hæd hɑɹbɝɾ ə smɔl hoʊp ðət ʃi hɝsɛlf wəd bi tʃoʊzən. naʊ ɛɡwin hæd soʊ mɛni dɪmænz ɑn əɹ taɪm - ən wɑz bɪkʌmɪŋ soʊ keɪpəbəl ɑn əɹ oʊn - ðət ʃi wɑz ɹilaɪɪŋ ɑn sɪuən lɛs ən lɛs.

Things were changing. Egwene had a new Keeper to replace Sheriarn. The choice of Silviana made a great deal of sense - the woman was known to have a level head, for a Red, and choosing her had helped forge the two halves of the Tower back together. But Siuan had harbored a small hope that she herself would be chosen. Now Egwene had so many demands on her time - and was becoming so capable on her own - that she was relying on Siuan less and less.

ðət wɑz ə ɡʊd θɪŋ. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔlsoʊ ɪnfjʊɹieɪɾɪŋ.

That was a good thing. But it was also infuriating.

ðə fəmɪljɝ hɔlweɪz, ðə sɛn ə fɹɛʃli wɑʃt stoʊn, ði ɛkoʊɪŋ ə fʊtstɛps . . . wən læst ʃid bɪn ɪn ðɪs pleɪs, ʃid kəmændəɾ ɪt. noʊ lɔŋɡɝ.

The familiar hallways, the scent of freshly washed stone, the echoing of footsteps . . . When last she'd been in this place, she'd commanded it. No longer.

ʃi hæd noʊ maɪn tə klaɪm əɹ weɪ ɪndə pɹɑmənəns əɡɛn. ðə læs bæɾəl wɑz əpɑn ðɛm; ʃi dɪdnt wɑnə spɛn əɹ taɪm dilɪŋ wɪð ðə skwɑbəlz ə ðə blu ədʒɑ əz ðeɪ ɹiɪntəɡɹeɪɾɪd ɪndə ðə taʊɝ. ʃi wɑntəd tə də wʌt ʃid sɛɾ aʊt tə du, ɔl ðoʊz jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn. ʃɛpɝd ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn tə ðə læs bæɾəl.

She had no mind to climb her way into prominence again. The Last Battle was upon them; she didn't want to spend her time dealing with the squabbles of the Blue Ajah as they reintegrated into the Tower. She wanted to do what she'd set out to do, all those years before with Moiraine. Shepherd the Dragon Reborn to the Last Battle.

θɹu ðə bɑnd, ʃi fɛl bɹaɪn ɝaɪv bɪfɔɹ i spoʊk. "naʊ, ðɛɹz ə kənsɝn feɪs," hi sɛd, pɪɹsɪŋ ðə hɔlweɪz dʌzənz ə hʌʃt kɑnvɝseɪʃənz əz i wɔkt ʌp bɪhaɪn hɝ.

Through the bond, she felt Bryne arrive before he spoke. "Now, there's a concerned face," he said, piercing the hallways dozens of hushed conversations as he walked up behind her.

sɪuən tɝn tə hɪm. hi wɑz steɪtli ən ɹɪmɑɹkəbli kɑm - pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli fəɹ ə mæn u hæd bɪn bɪtʃɹeɪd baɪ mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkənd, ðən sʌkt ɪndə ɛɛs sədaɪ pɑlətɪks, ðən toʊld i wɑz gɑnə bi liɾɪŋ ɪz tʃɹups ɑn ðə fɹʌn laɪnz ə ðə læs bæɾəl. bʌt ðət wɑz bɹaɪn. sɝin tə ə fɔlt. hi suðd əɹ wɝiz dʒʌs baɪ biɪŋ ðɛɹ.

Siuan turned to him. He was stately and remarkably calm - particularly for a man who had been betrayed by Morgase Trakand, then sucked into Aes Sedai politics, then told he was going to be leading his troops on the front lines of the Last Battle. But that was Bryne. Serene to a fault. He soothed her worries just by being there.

"ju keɪm fæstɝ ðən aɪɾ əsum jud bi eɪbəl tə," ʃi sɛd. "æn aɪ də nɑɾ əv ə 'kənsɝn feɪs,' ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn. aɪm ɛɛs sədaɪ. maɪ vɛɹi neɪtʃɝ ɪz tə bi ɪn kəntʃɹoʊl ə maɪsɛlf ən maɪ sɝaʊndɪŋz."

"You came faster than I'd assumed you'd be able to," she said. "And I do not have a 'concerned face,' Gareth Bryne. I'm Aes Sedai. My very nature is to be in control of myself and my surroundings."

"jɛs," hi sɛd. "æn jɛt, ðə mɔɹ taɪm aɪ spɛn ɝaʊn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðə mɔɹ aɪ wʌndɝ əbaʊt ðæt. ɑɹ ðeɪ ɪn kəntʃɹoʊl ə ðɛɹ ɪmoʊʃənz? əɹ də ðoʊz ɪmoʊʃənz dʒʌs nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒ? ɪf wʌn ɪz ɔlweɪz kənsɝnd, wʌn wɪl ɔlweɪz lʊk ðə seɪm."

"Yes," he said. "And yet, the more time I spend around the Aes Sedai, the more I wonder about that. Are they in control of their emotions? Or do those emotions just never change? If one is always concerned, one will always look the same."

ʃi aɪd hɪm. "ful mæn."

She eyed him. "Fool man."

hi smaɪld, tɝnɪŋ tə lʊk θɹu ðə hɔlweɪ fʊl ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ ən wɔɹɾɝz. "aɪ wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ðə taʊɝ wɪð ə ɹipɔɹt wən jəɹ mɛsənʒɝ faʊn mi. θæŋk ju."

He smiled, turning to look through the hallway full of Aes Sedai and Warders. "I was already returning to the Tower with a report when your messenger found me. Thank you."

"jɔɹ wɛlkəm," ʃi sɛd ɡɹʌflaɪ.

"You're welcome," she said gruffly.

"ðeɪɹ nɝvəs," hi sɛd. "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk aɪv ɛvɝ sin ði ɛɛs sədaɪ laɪk ðɪs."

"They're nervous," he said. "I don't think I've ever seen the Aes Sedai like this."

"wɛl, kən jə bleɪm ʌs?" ʃi snæpt.

"Well, can you blame us?" she snapped.

hi lʊkt ət hɝ, ðən ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝ. hɪz stʃɹɔŋ, kælʌz fɪŋɡɝz bɹʌʃt əɹ nɛk. "wʌɾ ɪz ɹɔŋ?"

He looked at her, then raised a hand to her shoulder. His strong, callused fingers brushed her neck. "What is wrong?"

ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ɡlænsɪŋ tə ðə saɪɾ əz ɛɡwin faɪnəli ɝaɪvd, wɔkɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə hɔl ɪn kɑnvɝseɪʃən wɪð sɪlviænə. əz juʒəwəl, ðə sɑmbɝ ɡɔɪn tʃɹəkən lɝk bɪhaɪn laɪk ə dɪstənt ʃædoʊ. ʌnəknɑlədʒ baɪ ɛɡwin, nɑt bɑndəɾ əz əɹ wɔɹɾɝ, jɛt nɑt kæs fɹəm ðə taʊɝ iðɝ.

She took a deep breath, glancing to the side as Egwene finally arrived, walking toward the Hall in conversation with Silviana. As usual, the somber Gawyn Trakand lurked behind like a distant shadow. Unacknowledged by Egwene, not bonded as her Warder, yet not cast from the Tower either.

hid spɛn ðə naɪts sɪns ðə ɹiunəfəkeɪʃən ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ɛɡwinz dɔɹz, dɪspaɪt ðə fæk ðəɾ ɪɾ æŋɡɝd hɝ.

He'd spent the nights since the reunification guarding Egwene's doors, despite the fact that it angered her.

əz ɛɡwin nɪɹd ði ɛntʃɹəns tə ðə hɔl, sɪstɝz stɛp bæk ən meɪd weɪ, səm ɹɪlʌktənli, ʌðɝz ɹɛvɝənli. ʃid bɹɔt ðə taʊɝ tə ɪts niz fɹəm ði ɪnsaɪd, waɪl biɪŋ biɾən ɛvɹi deɪ ən daʊst wɪð soʊ mʌtʃ fɔkɹut ʃi kəd bɛɹli laɪɾ ə kændəl wɪð ðə paʊɝ. soʊ jʌŋ. jɛt wʌt wɑz eɪdʒ tə ɛɛs sədaɪ?

As Egwene neared the entrance to the Hall, sisters stepped back and made way, some reluctantly, others reverently. She'd brought the Tower to its knees from the inside, while being beaten every day and doused with so much forkroot she could barely light a candle with the Power. So young. Yet what was age to Aes Sedai?

"aɪ ɔlweɪz θɔɾ aɪ wəd bi ðə wʌn ɪn ðɛɹ," sɪuən sɛd sɔfli, dʒʌs fəɹ bɹaɪn. "ðæɾ aɪ wəd ɹəsiv hɪm, ɡaɪd hɪm. aɪ wɑz ðə wʌn u wɑz tə bi sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðət tʃɛɹ."

"I always thought I would be the one in there," Siuan said softly, just for Bryne. "That I would receive him, guide him. I was the one who was to be sitting in that chair."

bɹaɪnz ɡɹɪp taɪɾənd. "sɪuən, aɪ . . ."

Bryne's grip tightened. "Siuan, I . . ."

"oʊ, doʊn bi laɪk ðæt," ʃi ɡɹaʊld, lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. "aɪ doʊn ɹəɡɹɛɾ ə θɪŋ."

"Oh, don't be like that," she growled, looking at him. "I don't regret a thing."

hi fɹaʊnd.

He frowned.

"ɪts fəɹ ðə bɛst," sɪuən sɛd, ðoʊ ɪt twɪstəɾ əɹ ɪnsaɪdz ɪn nɑts tə ədmɪɾ ɪt. "fɔɹ ɔl əɹ tɪɹəni ən fulɪʃnəs, ɪts ɡʊd ðəɾ ɪleɪɾə ɹimuv mi, kəz ðəɾ ɪz wʌt lɛɾ əs tə ɛɡwin. ʃɪl də bɛɾɝ ðən aɪ kəd hæv. ɪts hɑɹd tə swɑloʊ - aɪ dɪd wɛl əz æmɪɝlɪn, bʌɾ aɪ kʊdn də ðæt. lɛd baɪ pɹɛzəns ɪnstɛɾ ə fɔɹs, junaɪɾɪŋ ɪnstɛɾ ə dɪvaɪɾɪŋ. ən soʊ, aɪm ɡlæd ðəɾ ɛɡwin ɪz ɹəsivɪŋ hɪm."

"It's for the best," Siuan said, though it twisted her insides in knots to admit it. "For all her tyranny and foolishness, it is good that Elaida removed me, because that is what led us to Egwene. She'll do better than I could have. It's hard to swallow - I did well as Amyrlin, but I couldn't do that. Lead by presence instead of force, uniting instead of dividing. And so, I'm glad that Egwene is receiving him."

bɹaɪn smaɪld, ən i skwizd əɹ ʃoʊldɝ fɑnli.

Bryne smiled, and he squeezed her shoulder fondly.

"wʌt?" ʃi æskt.

"What?" she asked.

"aɪm pɹaʊɾ ə ju."

"I'm proud of you."

ʃi ɹoʊld əɹ aɪz. "bɑ. ðət sɛntəmɛntælɪɾi ʌv jʊɹz ɪz gɑnə dʒɹaʊn mi wʌn ə ðiz deɪz."

She rolled her eyes. "Bah. That sentimentality of yours is going to drown me one of these days."

"ju kæn haɪd jəɹ ɡʊdnəs fɹəm mi, sɪuən sɑntʃ. aɪ si jəɹ hɑɹt."

"You can't hide your goodness from me, Siuan Sanche. I see your heart."

"ju ɑɹ sətʃ ə bəfun."

"You are such a buffoon."

"ɹəɡɑɹdləs. jə bɹɔɾ əs hɪɹ, sɪuən. wʌtɛvɝ haɪts ðət ɡɝl klaɪmz tə, ʃɪl də ɪt kəz jə kɑɹv ðə stɛps fəɹ hɝ."

"Regardless. You brought us here, Siuan. Whatever heights that girl climbs to, she'll do it because you carved the steps for her."

"jɛs, ðən hændəd ðə tʃɪzəl tə ɪleɪɾə." sɪuən ɡlæns təwɔɹɾ ɛɡwin, hu stʊɾ ɪnsaɪd ðə dɔɹweɪ ɪndə ðə hɔl. ðə jʌŋ æmɪɝlɪn ɡlænst oʊvɝ ðə wɪmən ɡæðɝɾ aʊtsaɪd, ən nɑɾəd ɪn ɡɹiɾɪŋ tə sɪuən. meɪbi ivən ə lɪɾəl ɪn ɹɪspɛkt.

"Yes, then handed the chisel to Elaida." Siuan glanced toward Egwene, who stood inside the doorway into the Hall. The young Amyrlin glanced over the women gathered outside, and nodded in greeting to Siuan. Maybe even a little in respect.

"ʃiz wʌt wi nid naʊ," bɹaɪn sɛd, "bʌt jəɹ wʌt wi niɾəd ðɛn. jə dɪd wɛl, sɪuən.

"She's what we need now," Bryne said, "but you're what we needed then. You did well, Siuan.

ʃi noʊz ɪt, ən ðə taʊɝ noʊz ɪt."

She knows it, and the Tower knows it."

ðət fɛl vɛɹi ɡʊd tə hɪɹ. "wɛl. dɪd jə si hɪm wən jə keɪm ɪn?"

That felt very good to hear. "Well. Did you see him when you came in?"

"jɛs," bɹaɪn sɛd. "hiz stændɪŋ bɪloʊ, wɑtʃt oʊvɝ baɪ ət list ə hʌnʒɹəd wɔɹɾɝz ən twɛnti-sɪks sɪstɝz - tu fʊl sɝkəlz. əndaʊɾɪdli hiz ʃildɪd, bʌɾ ɔl twɛnti-sɪks wɪmən simd ɪn ə nɪɹ pænɪk. noʊbɑdi dɛɹz tʌtʃ ɪm əɹ baɪn hɪm."

"Yes," Bryne said. "He's standing below, watched over by at least a hundred Warders and twenty-six sisters - two full circles. Undoubtedly he's shielded, but all twenty-six women seemed in a near panic. Nobody dares touch him or bind him."

"soʊ lɔŋ əz hiz ʃildɪd, ɪt ʃʊdn mæɾɝ. dɪɾ i lʊk fɹaɪɾənd? hɔɾi? æŋɡɹi?"

"So long as he's shielded, it shouldn't matter. Did he look frightened? Haughty? Angry?"

"nʌn ə ðæt."

"None of that."

"wɛl, wʌɾ i lʊk laɪk, ðɛn?"

"Well, what did he look like, then?"

"ɑnəsli, sɪuən? hi lʊk laɪk ən ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"Honestly, Siuan? He looked like an Aes Sedai."

sɪuən snæpt əɹ dʒɔ kloʊzd. wɑz i tɔntɪŋ əɹ əɡɛn? noʊ, ðə dʒɛnɝəl sim sɪɹiəs. bʌt wʌɾ i min?

Siuan snapped her jaw closed. Was he taunting her again? No, the general seemed serious. But what did he mean?

ɛɡwin ɛntɝd ðə hɔl, ən ðən ə waɪt-dʒɹɛs nɑvəs wɛn skʌɾəlɪŋ əweɪ, teɪl baɪ tu ʌv tʃʌbnz soʊlʒɝz. ɛɡwin hæd sɛn fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən. bɹaɪn ɹɪmeɪnd wɪð ɪz hæn ɑn sɪuənz ʃoʊldɝ, stændɪŋ dʒʌs bɪhaɪn əɹ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ. sɪuən fɔɹs hɝsɛlf tə bi kɑm.

Egwene entered the Hall, and then a white-dressed novice went scuttling away, tailed by two of Chubain's soldiers. Egwene had sent for the Dragon. Bryne remained with his hand on Siuan's shoulder, standing just behind her in the hallway. Siuan forced herself to be calm.

ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ʃi sɔ moʊʃən ət ði ɛn ə ðə hɔlweɪ. ɝaʊn hɝ, sɪstɝz bɪɡæn tə ɡloʊ əz ðeɪ ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs. sɪuən ɹɪzɪstɪd ðət mɑɹk ʌv ɪnsɪkjʊɹɪɾi.

Eventually, she saw motion at the end of the hallway. Around her, sisters began to glow as they embraced the Source. Siuan resisted that mark of insecurity.

sun ə pɹəsɛʃən əpɹoʊtʃt, wɔɹɾɝz wɔkɪŋ ɪn ə skwɛɹ ɝaʊn ə tɔl fɪɡjɝ ɪn ə wɔɹn bɹaʊn kloʊk, twɛnti-sɪks ɛɛs sədaɪ fɑloʊɪŋ bɪhaɪnd. ðə fɪɡjɝ ɪnsaɪd ɡloʊd tə hɝ aɪz. ʃi hæd ðə tælən ə siɪŋ tɑvɝən, ən ælθɹ wɑz wʌn ə ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ə ðoʊz tə ɛvɝ lɪv.

Soon a procession approached, Warders walking in a square around a tall figure in a worn brown cloak, twenty-six Aes Sedai following behind. The figure inside glowed to her eyes. She had the Talent of seeing ta'veren, and al'Thor was one of the most powerful of those to ever live.

ʃi fɔɹs hɝsɛlf tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðə ɡloʊ, lʊkɪŋ əɾ ælθɹ hɪmsɛlf. ɪɾ əpɪɹd ðət ðə bɔɪ hæd bɪkʌm ə mæn. ɔl hɪns ə juθfəl sɔfnəs wɝ ɡɔn, ɹipleɪst wɪð hɑɹd laɪnz. hid lɔs ði ʌnkɑnʃəsli slʌmpt pɑstʃɝ ðət mɛni jʌŋ mɛn ədæptəd, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ðə tɔl wʌnz. ɪnstɛɾ i ɛmbɹeɪst ɪz haɪɾ əz ə mæn ʃʊd, wɔkɪŋ wɪð kəmænd. sɪuən hæd sin fɔls dʒɹæɡənz dʊɹɪŋ əɹ taɪm əz æmɪɝlɪn. ɑd, haʊ mʌtʃ ðɪs mæn ʃəd lʊk laɪk ðɛm. ɪt wɑz -  ʃi fɹoʊz əz i mɛɾ əɹ aɪz. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɪndɪfaɪnəbəl əbaʊt ðɛm, ə weɪt, ən eɪdʒ. əz ðoʊ ðə mæn bɪhaɪn əm wɑz siɪŋ θɹu ðə laɪɾ ʌv ə θaʊzən laɪvz kəmpaʊndəɾ ɪn wʌn. hɪz feɪs dɪd lʊk laɪk ðəɾ ʌv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðoʊz aɪz, ət list, hæɾ eɪɡləsnəs.

She forced herself to ignore the glow, looking at al'Thor himself. It appeared that the boy had become a man. All hints of youthful softness were gone, replaced with hard lines. He'd lost the unconsciously slumped posture that many young men adapted, particularly the tall ones. Instead he embraced his height as a man should, walking with command. Siuan had seen false Dragons during her time as Amyrlin. Odd, how much this man should look like them. It was -  She froze as he met her eyes. There was something indefinable about them, a weight, an age. As though the man behind them was seeing through the light of a thousand lives compounded in one. His face did look like that of an Aes Sedai. Those eyes, at least, had agelessness.

ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɹeɪzd ɪz ɹaɪt hænd - hɪz lɛft ɑɹm wɑz foʊldəd bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk - ən hɔltəd ðə pɹəsɛʃən. "ɪf jə pliz," hi sɛd tə ðə wɔɹɾɝz, stɛpɪŋ θɹu ðɛm.

The Dragon Reborn raised his right hand - his left arm was folded behind his back - and halted the procession. "If you please," he said to the Warders, stepping through them.

ðə wɔɹɾɝz, ʃɑkt, lɛɾ ɪm pæs; ðə dʒɹæɡənz sɑf vɔɪs meɪɾ əm stɛp əweɪ. ðeɪ ʃʊɾə noʊn bɛɾɝ. ælθɹ wɔkt ʌp tə sɪuən, ən ʃi stil hɝsɛlf.

The Warders, shocked, let him pass; the Dragon's soft voice made them step away. They should have known better. Al'Thor walked up to Siuan, and she steeled herself.

hi wɑz ənɑɹmd ən ʃildɪd. hi kʊdn hɑɹm hɝ. stɪl, bɹaɪn stɛpt ʌp tə hɝ saɪɾ ən loʊɝɾ ɪz hæn tə hɪz sɔɹd.

He was unarmed and shielded. He couldn't harm her. Still, Bryne stepped up to her side and lowered his hand to his sword.

"pis, ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn," ælθɹ sɛd. "aɪ wɪl də noʊ hɑɹm. juv lɛɾ əɹ bɑn ju, aɪ əsum?

"Peace, Gareth Bryne," al'Thor said. "I will do no harm. You've let her bond you, I assume?

kjʊɹiəs. ɪleɪn wɪl bi ɪntʃɹəstəd tə hɪɹ ə ðæt. ən sɪuən sɑntʃ. juv tʃeɪnʒd sɪns wi læs mɛt."

Curious. Elayne will be interested to hear of that. And Siuan Sanche. You've changed since we last met."

"tʃeɪnʒ kʌmz tə ɔl ʌv əs əz ðə wil tɝnz."

"Change comes to all of us as the Wheel turns."

"æn ɛɛs sədaɪ ænsɝ fəɹ sɝɾən." ælθɹ smaɪld. ə ɹɪlækst, sɑf smaɪl. ðət sɝpɹaɪz hɝ. "aɪ wʌndɝ ɪf əl ɛvɝ ɡɹoʊ əkʌstəm tə ðoʊz. jə wʌns tʊk ən æɹoʊ fəɹ mi. dɪɾ aɪ θæŋk jə fəɹ ðæt?"

"An Aes Sedai answer for certain." Al'Thor smiled. A relaxed, soft smile. That surprised her. "I wonder if I will ever grow accustomed to those. You once took an arrow for me. Did I thank you for that?"

"aɪ dɪdn də ɪɾ ɪntɛnʃənəli, əz aɪ ɹikɔl," ʃi sɛd dʒɹaɪli.

"I didn't do it intentionally, as I recall," she said dryly.

"ju hæv maɪ θæŋks nʌnðəlɛs." hi tɝn təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ tə ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ. "wʌt kaɪndə æmɪɝlɪn ɪz ʃi?"

"You have my thanks nonetheless." He turned toward the door to the Hall of the Tower. "What kind of Amyrlin is she?"

waɪ æsk mi? hi kʊdnt noʊ ʌv ðə kloʊsnɪs bɪtwin sɪuən ən ɛɡwin. "ʃiz ən ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl wʌn," sɪuən sɛd. "wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst wiv hæd, fəɹ ɔl ðə fæk ðət ʃiz oʊnli hɛl ðə siɾ ə ʃɔɹt taɪm."

Why ask me? He couldn't know of the closeness between Siuan and Egwene. "She's an incredible one," Siuan said. "One of the greatest we've had, for all the fact that she's only held the Seat a short time."

hi smaɪld əɡɛn. "aɪ ʃʊɾə ɪkspɛktəd nʌθɪŋ lɛs. stʃɹeɪnʒ, bʌɾ aɪ fil ðət siɪŋ əɹ əɡɛn wɪl hɝt, ðoʊ ðəɾ ɪz wʌn waʊn ðəɾ əz wɛl ən tʃɹuli hild. aɪ kən stɪl ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə peɪn ʌv ɪt, aɪ səpoʊz."

He smiled again. "I should have expected nothing less. Strange, but I feel that seeing her again will hurt, though that is one wound that has well and truly healed. I can still remember the pain of it, I suppose."

laɪt, bʌt ðɪs mæn wɑz meɪkɪŋ ə mʌɾəl ə hɝ ɛkspɛkteɪʃənz! ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɑz ə pleɪs ðət ʃʊɾə ənnɝvd ɛni mæn u kəd tʃænəl, dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əɹ nɑt. jɛɾ i dɪdn sim wɝiɾ ɪn ðə list.

Light, but this man was making a muddle of her expectations! The White Tower was a place that should have unnerved any man who could channel, Dragon Reborn or not. Yet he didn't seem worried in the least.

ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, bʌt wɑz kʌɾ ɔf əz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ pʊʃt θɹu ðə ɡɹup. tiɑnə?

She opened her mouth, but was cut off as an Aes Sedai pushed through the group. Tiana?

ðə wʊmən pʊl sʌmθɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɝ sliv ən pɹɑfɝɾ ɪt tə ɹænd. ə smɔl lɛɾɝ wɪð ə ɹɛd sil. "ðɪs ɪz fəɹ ju," ʃi sɛd. hɝ vɔɪs saʊndəd tɛns, ən əɹ fɪŋɡɝz tʃɹɛmbəld, ðoʊ ðə tʃɹɛmbəl wɑz soʊ feɪn ðət moʊst wʊɾə mɪst ɪt. sɪuən hæd lɝn tə lʊk fəɹ saɪnz ʌv ɪmoʊʃən ɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ, haʊɛvɝ.

The woman pulled something out of her sleeve and proffered it to Rand. A small letter with a red seal. "This is for you," she said. Her voice sounded tense, and her fingers trembled, though the tremble was so faint that most would have missed it. Siuan had learned to look for signs of emotion in Aes Sedai, however.

ælθɹ ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ, ðən ɹitʃt oʊvɝ ən tʊk ɪt. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?"

Al'Thor raised an eyebrow, then reached over and took it. "What is it?"

"aɪ pɹɑməs tə dɪlɪvɝ ɪt," tiɑnə sɛd. "aɪ wʊɾə sɛd noʊ, bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ θɔt juɾ æktʃəli  kʌm tə ... aɪ min . . ." ʃi kʌt hɝsɛlf ɔf, kloʊzɪŋ əɹ maʊθ. ðən ʃi wɪθdʒɹu ɪndə ðə kɹaʊd.

"I promised to deliver it," Tiana said. "I would have said no, but I never thought you'd actually come to ... I mean . . ." She cut herself off, closing her mouth. Then she withdrew into the crowd.

ælθɹ slɪp ðə noʊɾ ɪndə hɪz pɑkət wɪθaʊt ɹiɾɪŋ ɪt. "du jəɹ bɛs tə kɑm ɛɡwin wən aɪm dʌn," hi sɛd tə sɪuən. ðən i tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən stʃɹoʊd fɔɹwɝd, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ɪz ɡɑɹdz. ðeɪ heɪsən æftɝ hɪm, ðə wɔɹɾɝz lʊkɪŋ ʃipɪʃ, bʌt noʊbɑdi dɛɹd tʌtʃ ɪm əz i stʃɹoʊd bɪtwin ðə dɔɹz ən ɪndə ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ.

Al'Thor slipped the note into his pocket without reading it. "Do your best to calm Egwene when I am done," he said to Siuan. Then he took a deep breath and strode forward, ignoring his guards. They hastened after him, the Warders looking sheepish, but nobody dared touch him as he strode between the doors and into the Hall of the Tower.

* * * hɛɹz bɹɪsəld ɑn ɛɡwinz ɑɹmz əz ɹænd keɪm ɪndə ðə ɹum, ʌnəkʌmpənid. ɛɛs sədaɪ aʊtsaɪd kɹaʊɾəd ɝaʊn ðə dɔɹweɪ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lʊk əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ɡɔkɪŋ. sɪlviænə ɡlænst əɾ ɛɡwin.

* * * Hairs bristled on Egwene's arms as Rand came into the room, unaccompanied. Aes Sedai outside crowded around the doorway, trying to look as if they were not gawking. Silviana glanced at Egwene.

ʃəd ðɪs miɾɪŋ bi sil tə ðə hɔl?

Should this meeting be Sealed to the Hall?

noʊ, ɛɡwin θɔt.. ðeɪ nid tə si mi kənfɹʌn hɪm. laɪt, bʌɾ aɪ doʊn fil ɹɛɾi fəɹ ðɪs.

No, Egwene thought.. They need to see me confront him. Light, but I don't feel ready for this.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ hɛlpɪŋ ɪt. ʃi stil hɝsɛlf, ɹɪpiɾɪŋ ɪn əɹ hɛd ðə seɪm wɝdz ʃid bɪn ɡoʊɪŋ oʊvɝ ɔl mɔɹnɪŋ. ðɪs wɑz nɑt ɹænd ælθɹ, fɹɛn ə hɝ tʃaɪldhʊd, ðə mæn ʃiɾ əsum ðət ʃid wʌn deɪ mɛɹi. ɹænd ælθɹ ʃi kəd bi liniənt wɪð, bʌt linjənsi hɪɹ kəd bɹɪŋ əbaʊt ði ɛn ə ðə wɝld.

There was no helping it. She steeled herself, repeating in her head the same words she'd been going over all morning. This was not Rand al'Thor, friend of her childhood, the man she'd assumed that she'd one day marry. Rand al'Thor she could be lenient with, but leniency here could bring about the end of the world.

noʊ. ðɪs mæn wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ðə moʊs deɪnʒɝəs mæn ɛvɝ tə dʒɹɔ bɹɛθ. tɔl, mʌtʃ mɔɹ kɑnfəɾənt ðən ʃi ɛvɝ ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪm biɪŋ. hi wɔɹ sɪmpəl kloʊðɪŋ.

No. This man was the Dragon Reborn. The most dangerous man ever to draw breath. Tall, much more confident than she ever remembered him being. He wore simple clothing.

hi wɔk dɝɛkli ɪndə ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə hɔl, hɪz wɔɹɾɝ ɡɑɹdz ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ aʊtsaɪd. hi stɑpt ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə fleɪm ɑn ðə flɔɹ, sɝaʊndəd baɪ sɪɾɝz ɪn ðɛɹ sits.

He walked directly into the center of the Hall, his Warder guards remaining outside. He stopped in the center of the Flame on the floor, surrounded by Sitters in their seats.

"ɛɡwin," ɹænd sɛd, vɔɪs ɛkoʊɪŋ ɪn ðə tʃeɪmbɝ. hi nɑɾəd tə hɝ, əz ɪf ɪn ɹɪspɛkt. "ju hæv dʌn jəɹ pɑɹt, aɪ si. ði æmɪɝlɪnz stoʊl fɪts jə wɛl."

"Egwene," Rand said, voice echoing in the chamber. He nodded to her, as if in respect. "You have done your part, I see. The Amyrlin's stole fits you well."

fɹəm wʌt ʃi hæd hɝɾ ə ɹænd ɹisənli, ʃi hæd nɑɾ æntɪsəpeɪɾəd sətʃ kɑm ɪn hɪm. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz ðə kɑm ə ðə kɹɪmənəl u hæd faɪnəli ɡɪvən hɪmsɛlf ʌp.

From what she had heard of Rand recently, she had not anticipated such calm in him. Perhaps it was the calm of the criminal who had finally given himself up.

wɑz ðət haʊ ʃi θɔɾ ə hɪm? əz ə kɹɪmənəl? hi hæd dʌn æks ðət sɝɾənli sim kɹɪmənəl;

Was that how she thought of him? As a criminal? He had done acts that certainly seemed criminal;

hi hæd dɪstʃɹɔɪd, hi hæd kɑŋkɝd. wən ʃid læst spɛn ɛni lɛŋθ ə taɪm wɪð ɹænd, ðeɪ hæd tʃɹævəl θɹu ði il weɪst. hi hæd bɪkʌm ə hɑɹd mæn dʊɹɪŋ ðoʊz mʌnθs, ən ʃi sɔ ðət hɑɹdnəs ɪn ɪm stɪl. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, sʌmθɪŋ dipɝ.

he had destroyed, he had conquered. When she'd last spent any length of time with Rand, they had traveled through the Aiel Waste. He had become a hard man during those months, and she saw that hardness in him still. But there was something else, something deeper.

"wʌɾ əz hæpən tə ju?" ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf æskɪŋ əz ʃi lin fɔɹwɝɾ ɑn ði æmɪɝlɪn sit.

"What has happened to you?" she found herself asking as she leaned forward on the Amyrlin Seat.

"aɪ wɑz bɹoʊkən," ɹænd sɛd, hænz bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk. 'æn ðɛn, ɹɪmɑɹkəbli, aɪ wɑz ɹɪfɔɝdʒd. aɪ θɪŋk i ɔlmoʊs hæd mi, ɛɡwin. ɪt wɑz kædzueɪn u sɛt mi tə fɪksɪŋ ɪt, ðoʊ ʃi dɪd soʊ baɪ æksəɾənt.

"I was broken," Rand said, hands behind his back. 'And then, remarkably, I was reforged. I think he almost had me, Egwene. It was Cadsuane who set me to fixing it, though she did so by accident.

stɪl, aɪ ʃæl əv tə lɪft əɹ ɛɡzaɪl, aɪ səspɛkt."

Still, I shall have to lift her exile, I suspect."

hi spoʊk dɪfɹənli. ðəɹ wɑz ə fɔɹmæləɾi tə hɪz wɝdz ðət ʃi dɪdn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz. ɪn ənʌðɝ mæn, ʃi wʊɾə əsumd ə kʌltʃɝd, ɛdʒəkeɪɾəd bækɡɹaʊnd. bʌt ɹænd dɪdn əv ðæt. kəd tuɾɝz əv tʃɹeɪn ɪm soʊ kwɪkli?

He spoke differently. There was a formality to his words that she didn't recognize. In another man, she would have assumed a cultured, educated background. But Rand didn't have that. Could tutors have trained him so quickly?

"waɪ hæv jə kʌm bɪfɔɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit?" ʃi æskt. "hæv jə kʌm tə meɪk ə pətɪʃən, əɹ əv jə kʌm tə sɝɛndɝ jɝsɛlf tə ðə waɪt taʊɝz ɡaɪɾəns?"

"Why have you come before the Amyrlin Seat?" she asked. "Have you come to make a petition, or have you come to surrender yourself to the White Tower's guidance?"

hi stʌɾid hɝ, hænz stɪl bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk. dʒʌs bɪhaɪn hɪm, θɝtin sɪstɝz kwaɪətli faɪld ɪndə ðə hɔl, ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ ɝaʊn əm əz ðeɪ meɪnteɪn ɪz ʃild.

He studied her, hands still behind his back. Just behind him, thirteen sisters quietly filed into the Hall, the glow of saidar around them as they maintained his shield.

ɹænd dɪdn sim tə kɛɹ əbaʊt ðæt. hi stʌɾid ðə ɹum, lʊkɪŋ ət ðə vɛɹiəs sɪɾɝz. hɪz aɪz lɪŋɡɝɾ ɑn ðə sits ə ɹɛdz, tu ʌv wɪtʃ wɝ ɛmpti. pɛvɑɹə ən dʒəvɪnʒɹə hædn jɛt ɹɪtɝn fɹəm ðɛɹ ənnoʊn mɪʃən. oʊnli bɑɹɑsin - nuli tʃoʊzən tə ɹipleɪs dʌɑɹə - wɑz ɪn ətɛndəns.

Rand didn't seem to care about that. He studied the room, looking at the various Sitters. His eyes lingered on the seats of Reds, two of which were empty. Pevara and Javindhra hadn't yet returned from their unknown mission. Only Barasine - newly chosen to replace Duhara - was in attendance.

tə hɝ kɹɛɾət, ʃi mɛt ɹændz aɪz ivənli.

To her credit, she met Rand's eyes evenly.

"aɪv heɪɾəd jə bɪfɔɹ," ɹænd sɛd, tɝnɪŋ bæk tə ɛɡwin. "aɪv fɛlt ə lɑɾ ʌv ɪmoʊʃənz, ɪn ɹisən mʌnθs. ɪt simz ðət fɹəm ðə vɛɹi moʊmən mɔɪɹeɪn keɪm tə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, aɪv bɪn stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə əvɔɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ stʃɹɪŋz ə kəntʃɹoʊl. ən jɛt, aɪ əlaʊɾ ʌðɝ stʃɹɪŋz - mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs stʃɹɪŋz - tə ɹæp ɝaʊn mi ənsin.

"I've hated you before," Rand said, turning back to Egwene. "I've felt a lot of emotions, in recent months. It seems that from the very moment Moiraine came to the Two Rivers, I've been struggling to avoid Aes Sedai strings of control. And yet, I allowed other strings - more dangerous strings - to wrap around me unseen.

"ɪɾ əkɝz tə mi ðəɾ aɪv bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tu hɑɹd. aɪ wɝid ðəɾ ɪf aɪ lɪsən tə ju, jud kəntʃɹoʊl mi.

"It occurs to me that I've been trying too hard. I worried that if I listened to you, you'd control me.

ɪt wɑzn ə dɪzaɪɝ fəɹ ɪndɪpɛndəns ðət dʒɹoʊv mi, bʌɾ ə fɪɹ ʌv ɪɹɛləvəns. ə fɪɹ ðət ði æks aɪ əkɑmplɪʃt wəd bi jʊɹz, ən nɑt maɪ oʊn." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "aɪ ʃʊɾə wɪʃt fəɹ sətʃ ə kənvinjən sɛɾ ə bæks əpɑn wɪtʃ tə hip ðə bleɪm fəɹ maɪ kɹaɪmz."

It wasn't a desire for independence that drove me, but a fear of irrelevance. A fear that the acts I accomplished would be yours, and not my own." He hesitated. "I should have wished for such a convenient set of backs upon which to heap the blame for my crimes."

ɛɡwin fɹaʊnd. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn hæd kʌm tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ tə ɛnɡeɪdʒ ɪn aɪɾəl fəlɑsəfi? pɝhæps i hæd ɡɔn mæd. "ɹænd," ɛɡwin sɛd, sɔfənɪŋ əɹ toʊn. "aɪm gɑnə hæv səm sɪstɝz tɔk tə jə tə dɪsaɪɾ ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ɛniθɪŋ . . . ɹɔŋ wɪð ju. pliz tʃɹaɪ tə ʌndɝstænd."

Egwene frowned. The Dragon Reborn had come to the White Tower to engage in idle philosophy? Perhaps he had gone mad. "Rand," Egwene said, softening her tone. "I'm going to have some sisters talk to you to decide if there is anything . . . wrong with you. Please try to understand."

wʌns ðeɪ nu mɔɹ əbaʊɾ ɪz steɪt, ðeɪ kəd dɪsaɪd wʌt tə də wɪð hɪm. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn dɪd nid fɹiɾəm tə də əz ðə pɹɑfəsiz sɛɾ i wʊd, bʌt kəd ðeɪ sɪmpli lɛɾ ɪm ɹoʊm əweɪ, naʊ ðət ðeɪ hæd hɪm?

Once they knew more about his state, they could decide what to do with him. The Dragon Reborn did need freedom to do as the prophecies said he would, but could they simply let him roam away, now that they had him?

ɹænd smaɪld. "oʊ, aɪ də ʌndɝstænd, ɛɡwin. ən aɪm sɑɹi tə dɪnaɪ ju, bʌɾ aɪ hæv tu mʌtʃ tə du. pipəl stɑɹv kəz ə mi, ʌðɝz lɪv ɪn tɛɹɝ ʌv wʌɾ aɪ hæv dʌn. ə fɹɛn ɹaɪdz tə hɪz dɛθ wɪθaʊɾ ælaɪz. ðəɹ ɪz soʊ lɪɾəl taɪm tə də wʌɾ aɪ mʌst."

Rand smiled. "Oh, I do understand, Egwene. And I am sorry to deny you, but I have too much to do. People starve because of me, others live in terror of what I have done. A friend rides to his death without allies. There is so little time to do what I must."

"ɹænd," ɛɡwin sɛd, "wi hæv tə meɪk ʃʊɹ."

"Rand," Egwene said, "we have to make sure."

hi nɑɾəd, əz ɪf ɪn ʌndɝstændɪŋ. "ðɪs ɪz ðə pɑɹt wʌn ɹəɡɹɛt. aɪ dɪd nɑt wɪʃ tə kʌm ɪndə jəɹ sɛntɝ ə paʊɝ, wɪtʃ juv ətʃiv soʊ wɛl, ən dɪfaɪ ju. bʌɾ ɪt kænɑt bi hɛlpt. jə mʌs noʊ wʌt maɪ plænz ɑɹ soʊ ðət jə kən pɹipɛɹ.

He nodded, as if in understanding. "This is the part I regret. I did not wish to come into your center of power, which you have achieved so well, and defy you. But it cannot be helped. You must know what my plans are so that you can prepare.

"ðə læs taɪm aɪ tʃɹaɪd tə sil ðə bɔɹ, aɪ wɑz fɔɹs tə də ɪt wɪθaʊt ðə hɛlp ə ðə wɪmən. ðət wɑz pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌt lɛd tə dɪzæstɝ, ðoʊ ðeɪ meɪ hæv bɪn waɪz tə dɪnaɪ mi ðɛɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ. wɛl, bleɪm mʌs bi spɹɛɾ ivənli, bʌɾ əl nɑt meɪk ðə seɪm mɪsteɪks ə sɛkən taɪm. aɪ bɪliv ðət seɪɾɪn ən seɪaɪdɑɹ mʌs boʊθ bi juzd. aɪ doʊn əv ði ænsɝz jɛt."

"The last time I tried to seal the Bore, I was forced to do it without the help of the women. That was part of what led to disaster, though they may have been wise to deny me their strength. Well, blame must be spread evenly, but I will not make the same mistakes a second time. I believe that saidin and saidar must both be used. I don't have the answers yet."

ɛɡwin lin fɔɹwɝd, stʌɾiɪŋ hɪm. ðəɹ dɪdn sim tə bi mædnəs ɪn ɪz aɪz. ʃi nu ðoʊz aɪz. ʃi nu ɹænd.

Egwene leaned forward, studying him. There didn't seem to be madness in his eyes. She knew those eyes. She knew Rand.

laɪt, ʃi θɔt. aɪm ɹɔŋ. aɪ kæn θɪŋk ə hɪm oʊnli əz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. aɪm hɪɹ fəɹ ə ɹizən.

Light, she thought. I'm wrong. I can't think of him only as the Dragon Reborn. I'm here for a reason.

hiz hɪɹ fəɹ ə ɹizən. tə mi, hi mʌs bi ɹænd. kəz ɹænd kən bi tʃɹʌstɪd, waɪl ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn mʌs bi fɪɹd.

He's here for a reason. To me, he must be Rand. Because Rand can be trusted, while the Dragon Reborn must be feared.

"wɪtʃ ɑɹ ju?" ʃi wɪspɝɾ ʌnkɑnʃəsli.

"Which are you?" she whispered unconsciously.

hi hɝd. "aɪ æm boʊθ, ɛɡwin. aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ hɪm. luz θɝɪn. aɪ kən si hɪz ɪntaɪɝ laɪf, ɛvɹi dɛspɹɪt moʊmənt. aɪ si ɪt laɪk ə dʒɹim, bʌɾ ə klɪɹ dʒɹim. maɪ oʊn dʒɹim. ɪts pɑɹɾ ə mi."

He heard. "I am both, Egwene. I remember him. Lews Therin. I can see his entire life, every desperate moment. I see it like a dream, but a clear dream. My own dream. It's part of me."

ðə wɝdz wɝ ðoʊz ʌv ə mædmæn, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ spoʊkən ivənli. ʃi lʊkt ət hɪm, ən ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə juθ ðəɾ i hæd bɪn. ði ɝnɪs jʌŋ mæn. nɑt sɑləm laɪk pɛɹɪn, bʌt nɑt waɪld laɪk mæt. sɑləd, stʃɹeɪtfɔɹwɝd. ðə taɪp ə mæn jə kəd tʃɹʌst wɪð ɛniθɪŋ.

The words were those of a madman, but they were spoken evenly. She looked at him, and remembered the youth that he had been. The earnest young man. Not solemn like Perrin, but not wild like Mat. Solid, straightforward. The type of man you could trust with anything.

ivən ðə feɪɾ ə ðə wɝld.

Even the fate of the world.

"ɪn wʌn mʌnθs taɪm," ɹænd sɛd, "aɪm gɑnə tʃɹævəl tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl ən bɹeɪk ðə læst ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ silz ɑn ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən. aɪ wɑn jəɹ hɛlp."

"In one month's time," Rand said, "I'm going to travel to Shayol Ghul and break the last remaining seals on the Dark One's prison. I want your help."

bɹeɪk ðə silz? ʃi sɔ ði ɪmədʒ fɹəm əɹ dʒɹim, ɹænd hækɪŋ ət ðə ɹoʊps ðət baʊn ðə kɹɪstəlaɪn ɡloʊb. "ɹænd, noʊ," ʃi sɛd.

Break the seals? She saw the image from her dream, Rand hacking at the ropes that bound the crystalline globe. "Rand, no," she said.

"aɪm gɑnə nid ju, ɔl ə ju," hi kəntɪnjud. "aɪ hoʊp tə ðə laɪt ðət ðɪs taɪm, jəl ɡɪmi jəɹ səpɔɹt. aɪ wɑn jə tə mit wɪð mi ɑn ðə deɪ bɪfɔɹ aɪ ɡoʊ tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl. ən ðən . . . wɛl, ðən wɪl dɪskʌs maɪ tɝmz."

"I'm going to need you, all of you," he continued. "I hope to the Light that this time, you will give me your support. I want you to meet with me on the day before I go to Shayol Ghul. And then . . . well, then we will discuss my terms."

"jɔɹ tɝmz?" ɛɡwin dɪmændəd.

"Your terms?" Egwene demanded.

"ju wɪl si," hi sɛd, tɝnɪŋ əz ɪf tə liv.

"You will see," he said, turning as if to leave.

"ɹæn ælθɹ!" ʃi sɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ. "ju wɪl nɑt tɝn jəɹ bæk ɑn ði æmɪɝlɪn sit!"

"Rand al'Thor!" she said, rising. "You will not turn your back on the Amyrlin Seat!"

hi fɹoʊz, ðən tɝn bæk təwɔɹd hɝ.

He froze, then turned back toward her.

"ju kæn bɹeɪk ðə silz," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ðæt wəd ɹɪsk lɛɾɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn fɹi."

"You can't break the seals," Egwene said. "That would risk letting the Dark One free."

"ə ɹɪsk wi mʌs teɪk. klɪɹ əweɪ ðə ɹʌbəl. ðə bɔɹ mʌs bi oʊpən fʊli əɡɛn bɪfɔɹ ɪt kən bi sild."

"A risk we must take. Clear away the rubble. The Bore must be opened fully again before it can be sealed."

"wi mʌs tɔk əbaʊt ðɪs," ʃi sɛd. "plæn."

"We must talk about this," she said. "Plan."

"ðæɾ ɪz waɪ aɪ keɪm tə ju. tə lɛt jə plæn."

"That is why I came to you. To let you plan."

hi simd əmjuzd. laɪt! ʃi sæt bæk daʊn, æŋɡɹi. ðət bʊlhɛd-ɛdnəs ə hɪz wɑz dʒʌs laɪk ðəɾ ə hɪz fɑðɝ. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ θɪŋz wi mʌst spik ʌv, ɹænd. nɑt dʒʌs ðɪs, bʌɾ ʌðɝ θɪŋz - ðə sɪstɝz jəɹ mɛn əv bɑndəd nɑt ðə list əmʌŋ ðɛm."

He seemed amused. Light! She sat back down, angry. That bullhead-edness of his was just like that of his father. "There are things we must speak of, Rand. Not just this, but other things - the sisters your men have bonded not the least among them."

"wi kən spik ə ðət wən wi nɛks mit."

"We can speak of that when we next meet."

ʃi fɹaʊn ət hɪm.

She frowned at him.

"æn soʊ hɪɹ wi kʌm tə ɪt," ɹænd sɛd. hi baʊd tə hɝ - ə ʃæloʊ baʊ, ɔlmoʊs mɔɹ ə tɪp ə ðə hɛd. "ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ, wɑtʃɝ ə ðə silz, fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, meɪ aɪ hæv jəɹ pɝmɪʃən tə wɪðdʒɹɔ?"

"And so here we come to it," Rand said. He bowed to her - a shallow bow, almost more a tip of the head. "Egwene al'Vere, Watcher of the Seals, Flame of Tar Valon, may I have your permission to withdraw?"

hi æskt ɪt soʊ pəlaɪtli. ʃi kʊdn tɛl ɪf i wɑz mɑkɪŋ əɹ əɹ nɑt. ʃi mɛɾ ɪz aɪz. doʊn meɪk mi də ɛniθɪŋ aɪ wəd ɹəɡɹɛt, hɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən sim tə seɪ.

He asked it so politely. She couldn't tell if he was mocking her or not. She met his eyes. Don't make me do anything I would regret, his expression seemed to say.

kəd ʃi ɹɪli kɑnfaɪn ɪm hɪɹ? æftɝ wʌt ʃid sɛd tə ɪleɪɾə əbaʊɾ ɪm niɾɪŋ tə bi fɹi?

Could she really confine him here? After what she'd said to Elaida about him needing to be free?

"aɪ wɪl nɑt lɛt jə bɹeɪk ðə silz," ʃi sɛd. "ðæɾ ɪz mædnəs."

"I will not let you break the seals," she said. "That is madness."

"ðɛn mit wɪð mi ət ðə pleɪs noʊn əz ðə fild ə mɛɹɪlɝ, dʒʌs tə ðə nɔɹθ. wɪl tɔk bɪfɔɹ aɪ ɡoʊ tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl. fəɹ naʊ, aɪ də nɑt wɑnə dɪfaɪ ju, ɛɡwin. bʌɾ aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ."

"Then meet with me at the place known as the Field of Merrilor, just to the north. We will talk before I go to Shayol Ghul. For now, I do not want to defy you, Egwene. But I must go."

niðɝ ə ðɛm lʊkt əweɪ. ði ʌðɝz ɪn ðə ɹum sim nɑt tə bɹið. ðə tʃeɪmbɝ wɑz stɪl ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛɡwin tə hɪɹ ðə feɪn bɹiz meɪkɪŋ ðə ɹoʊz wɪndoʊ ɡɹoʊn ɪn ɪts lɛd.

Neither of them looked away. The others in the room seemed not to breathe. The chamber was still enough for Egwene to hear the faint breeze making the rose window groan in its lead.

"vɛɹi wɛl," ɛɡwin sɛd. "bʌt ðɪs ɪz nɑɾ ɛndəd, ɹænd."

"Very well," Egwene said. "But this is not ended, Rand."

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ noʊ ɛndɪŋz, ɛɡwin," hi ɹɪplaɪd, ðən nɑɾəd tə hɝ ən tɝn tə wɔk fɹəm ðə hɔl.

"There are no endings, Egwene," he replied, then nodded to her and turned to walk from the Hall.

laɪt! hi wɑz mɪsɪŋ ɪz lɛf hænd! haʊ hæd ðət hæpənd?

Light! He was missing his left hand! How had that happened?

ðə sɪstɝz ən wɔɹɾɝz ɹɪlʌktənli pɑɹɾəd fəɹ hɪm. ɛɡwin ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə hɝ hɛd, filɪŋ dɪzi.

The sisters and Warders reluctantly parted for him. Egwene raised a hand to her head, feeling dizzy.

"laɪt!" sɪlviænə sɛd. "haʊ kəd jə θɪŋk dʊɹɪŋ ðæt, mʌðɝ?"

"Light!" Silviana said. "How could you think during that, Mother?"

"wʌt?" ɛɡwin lʊkt əbaʊt ðə hɔl. mɛni ʌv ðə sɪɾɝz wɝ slʌmpɪŋ vɪzəbli ɪn ðɛɹ sits.

"What?" Egwene looked about the Hall. Many of the Sitters were slumping visibly in their seats.

"sʌmθɪŋ ɡɹɪp maɪ hɑɹt," bɑɹɑsin sɛd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ə hæn tə hɝ bɹɛst, "skwizɪŋ ɪt taɪt. aɪ dɪdn dɛɹ spik."

"Something gripped my heart," Barasine said, raising a hand to her breast, "squeezing it tight. I didn't dare speak."

"aɪ tʃɹaɪd tə spik," jukɪɝi sɛd. "maɪ maʊθ wʊdn muv."

"I tried to speak," Yukiri said. "My mouth wouldn't move."

"tɑvɝən" sɹɪn sɛd. "bʌɾ ən ɪfɛkt əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ðət ... aɪ fɛl ðəɾ ɪt wəd kɹʌʃ mi fɹəm ði ɪnsaɪd."

"Ta'veren" Saerin said. "But an effect as strong as that ... I felt that it would crush me from the inside."

"haʊ dɪd jə ɹɪzɪst ɪt, mʌðɝ?" sɪlviænə æskt.

"How did you resist it, Mother?" Silviana asked.

ɛɡwin fɹaʊnd. ʃi hædn fɛl ðət weɪ. pɝhæps kəz ʃi θɔɾ ə hɪm əz ɹænd. "wi nid tə dɪskʌs ɪz wɝdz. ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ wɪl ɹikənvin ɪn wʌn aʊɝz taɪm fəɹ dɪskʌʃən." ðət kɑnvɝseɪʃən wəd bi sil tə ðə hɔl. "æn sʌmwʌn fɑloʊ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ i ɹɪli livz."

Egwene frowned. She hadn't felt that way. Perhaps because she thought of him as Rand. "We need to discuss his words. The Hall of the Tower will reconvene in one hour's time for discussion." That conversation would be Sealed to the Hall. "And someone follow to make sure he really leaves."

"ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn ɪz duɪŋ soʊ," tʃʌbn sɛd fɹəm aʊtsaɪd.

"Gareth Bryne is doing so," Chubain said from outside.

ðə sɪɾɝz pʊl ðɛmsɛlvz tə ðɛɹ fit, ʃeɪkən. sɪlviænə lin daʊn. "jɔɹ ɹaɪt, mʌðɝ.

The Sitters pulled themselves to their feet, shaken. Silviana leaned down. "You're right, Mother.

hi kæn bi əlaʊd tə bɹeɪk ðə silz. bʌt wʌɾ ɑɹ wi tə du? ɪf jə woʊn hoʊld ɪm kæptɪv . . ."

He can't be allowed to break the seals. But what are we to do? If you won't hold him captive . . ."

"aɪ daʊt wi cʊɾə hɛl hɪm," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ðɛɹz sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt hɪm. aɪ... aɪ hæd ðə sɛns i cʊɾə bɹoʊkən ðət ʃild wɪθaʊɾ ə stʃɹʌɡəl."

"I doubt we could have held him," Egwene said. "There's something about him. I... I had the sense he could have broken that shield without a struggle."

"ðɛn haʊ? haʊ də wi stɑp hɪm?"

"Then how? How do we stop him?"

"wi niɾ ælaɪz," ɛɡwin sɛd. ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "hi maɪt bi pɝsweɪɾəd baɪ pipəl ðəɾ i tʃɹʌsts." əɹ i maɪt bi fɔɹs tə tʃeɪnʒ ɪz maɪn ɪf kənfɹʌntəd baɪ ə lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf ɡɹup junaɪɾəd tə stɑp hɪm.

"We need allies," Egwene said. She took a deep breath. "He might be persuaded by people that he trusts." Or he might be forced to change his mind if confronted by a large enough group united to stop him.

ɪt wɑz naʊ mɔɹ vaɪɾəl ðət ʃi spik wɪð ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv.

It was now more vital that she speak with Elayne and Nynaeve.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹ


CHAPTER 4

ðə pæɾɝn ɡɹoʊnz


The Pattern Groans

wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?" pɛɹɪn æskt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðə ʃɑɹp sɛn ə ɹɑɾɪŋ mit. hi kʊdn si ɛni kɔɹpsəz, bʌt baɪ hɪz noʊz, ðə ɡɹaʊnd ʃəd bi lɪɾɝd wɪð ðɛm.

What is it?" Perrin asked, trying to ignore the sharp scent of rotting meat. He couldn't see any corpses, but by his nose, the ground should be littered with them.

hi stʊd wɪð ən ədvæns ɡɹup ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə dʒəhænə ɹoʊd, lʊkɪŋ nɔɹθwɝɾ əkɹɔs ə ɹoʊlɪŋ pleɪn wɪð fju tʃɹiz. ðə ɡɹæs wɑz bɹaʊn ən jɛloʊ, əz ɪn ʌðɝ pleɪsəz, bʌɾ ɪt ɡɹu dɑɹkɝ fɑɹðɝ əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɹoʊd, əz ɪf ɪnfɛktəd wɪð səm dɪziz.

He stood with an advance group at the side of the Jehannah Road, looking northward across a rolling plain with few trees. The grass was brown and yellow, as in other places, but it grew darker farther away from the road, as if infected with some disease.

"aɪv sin ðɪs bɪfɔɹ," siɑnɪd sɛd. ðə dɪmɪnjəɾɪv, peɪl-skɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ stupt ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə ɹoʊd, tɝnɪŋ ðə lif ʌv ə smɔl wiɾ oʊvɝ ɪn əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. ʃi wɔɹ ɡɹin wʊl, faɪn bʌɾ ənɔɹnəmɛntɪd, hɝ oʊnli dʒuəlɹi hɝ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ.

"I've seen this before," Seonid said. The diminutive, pale-skinned Aes Sedai stooped at the edge of the road, turning the leaf of a small weed over in her fingers. She wore green wool, fine but unornamented, her only jewelry her Great Serpent ring.

θʌndɝ ɹʌmbəl sɔfli əbʌv. sɪks waɪz wʌnz stʊd bɪhaɪn siɑnɪd, ɑɹmz foʊldəd, feɪsəz ənɹiɾəbəl. pɛɹɪn hædn kənsɪɾɝd tɛlɪŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz - əɹ ðɛɹ tu ɛɛs sədaɪ əpɹɛntəsɪz - tə steɪ bɪhaɪnd. hi wɑz pɹɑbli lʌki ðeɪ lɛɾ ɪm əkʌmpəni ðɛm.

Thunder rumbled softly above. Six Wise Ones stood behind Seonid, arms folded, faces unreadable. Perrin hadn't considered telling the Wise Ones - or their two Aes Sedai apprentices - to stay behind. He was probably lucky they let him accompany them.

"jɛs," nəvɛɝɪn sɛd, bɹeɪslɪts klæɾɝɪŋ əz ʃi nɛlt ən tʊk ðə lif fɹəm siɑnɪd. "aɪ vɪzəɾəd ðə blaɪt wʌns əz ə ɡɝl; maɪ fɑðɝ fɛlt ɪɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt fəɹ mi tə si. ðɪs lʊks laɪk wʌɾ aɪ sɔ ðɛɹ."

"Yes," Nevarin said, bracelets clattering as she knelt and took the leaf from Seonid. "I visited the Blight once as a girl; my father felt it important for me to see. This looks like what I saw there."

pɛɹɪn hæd bɪn tə ðə blaɪɾ oʊnli wʌns, bʌt ðə lʊk ə ðoʊz dɑɹk spɛks wɑz ɪndid dɪstɪŋktɪv.

Perrin had been to the Blight only once, but the look of those dark specks was indeed distinctive.

ə ɹɛdʒeɪ flʌɾɝd daʊn tə wʌn ə ðə dɪstən tʃɹiz ən bɪɡæn pɪkɪŋ ət bɹæntʃəz ən livz, bʌt faʊnd nʌθɪŋ ʌv ɪntʃɹəst ən tʊk wɪŋ əɡɛn.

A redjay fluttered down to one of the distant trees and began picking at branches and leaves, but found nothing of interest and took wing again.

ðə dɪstɝbɪŋ θɪŋ wɑz, ðə plæns hɪɹ sim bɛɾɝ ðən mɛni ðeɪd pæst əlɔŋ ðə weɪ.

The disturbing thing was, the plants here seemed better than many they'd passed along the way.

kʌvɝd wɪð spɑts, bʌɾ əlaɪv, ivən θɹaɪvɪŋ.

Covered with spots, but alive, even thriving.

laɪt, pɛɹɪn θɔt, teɪkɪŋ ðə lif əz nəvɛɝɪn hændəɾ ɪt tə hɪm. ɪt smɛld ə dəkeɪ. wʌt kaɪndə wɝld ɪz ɪt wɛɹ ðə blaɪɾ ɪz ðə ɡʊɾ ɔltɝnəɾɪv?

Light, Perrin thought, taking the leaf as Nevarin handed it to him. It smelled of decay. What kind of world is it where the Blight is the good alternative?

"mɔɹi sɝkəl ði ɪntaɪɝ pætʃ," nəvɛɝɪn sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ tə ə meɪɾən stændɪŋ nɪɹbaɪ. "ɪt ɡɹoʊz dɑɹkɝ nɪɹ ðə sɛntɝ. ʃi kəd nɑt si wʌt wɑz ðɛɹ."

"Mori circled the entire patch," Nevarin said, nodding to a Maiden standing nearby. "It grows darker near the center. She could not see what was there."

pɛɹɪn nʌdʒ steɪɝ daʊn ɔf ðə ɹoʊd. feɪl fɑloʊd; ʃi dɪdn smɛl ðə lis bɪɾ əfɹeɪd, ðoʊ pɛɹɪnz tu ɹɪvɝz ɑɹmmɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd.

Perrin nudged Stayer down off the road. Faile followed; she didn't smell the least bit afraid, though Perrin's Two Rivers armsmen hesitated.

"lɔɹd pɛɹɪn?" wɪl kɔld.

"Lord Perrin?" Wil called.

"ɪts pɹɑbli nɑt deɪnʒɝəs," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ænəməlz stɪl muv ɪn ən aʊɾ ʌv ɪt." ðə blaɪt wɑz deɪnʒɝəs kəz ʌv wʌt lɪv ðɛɹ. ən ɪf ðoʊz bists hæd sʌmhaʊ kʌm saʊθwɝd, ðeɪ niɾəd tə noʊ. ði il stʃɹoʊɾ æftɝ ɪm wɪθaʊɾ ə kɑmɛnt. ən sɪns feɪl hæd dʒɔɪn hɪm, bɹəleɪn hæd tə əz wɛl, ənʊɹə ən ɡælɛn tʃɹeɪlɪŋ hɝ. blɛsədli, æliændɝ hæɾ əɡɹid tə ɹɪmeɪn bɪhaɪnd, ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ ə ðə kæmp ən ɹɛfjudʒiz waɪl pɛɹɪn wɑz əweɪ.

"It's probably not dangerous," Perrin said. "Animals still move in and out of it." The Blight was dangerous because of what lived there. And if those beasts had somehow come southward, they needed to know. The Aiel strode after him without a comment. And since Faile had joined him, Berelain had to as well, Annoura and Gallenne trailing her. Blessedly, Alliandre had agreed to remain behind, in charge of the camp and refugees while Perrin was away.

ðə hɔɹsəz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi skɪɾɪʃ, ən ðə sɝaʊndɪŋz dɪdn hɛlp ðɛɹ mudz ɛni. pɛɹɪn bɹið θɹu hɪz maʊθ tə dæmpən ðə stɛntʃ ə ɹɑɾ ən dɛθ. ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɑz wɛt hɪɹ tu - ɪf oʊnli ðoʊz klaʊdz wəd pæs soʊ ðeɪ kəd ɡɛt səm ɡʊd sʌnlaɪt tə dʒɹaɪ ðə sɔɪl - ən ðə hɔɹsəz'

The horses were already skittish, and the surroundings didn't help their moods any. Perrin breathed through his mouth to dampen the stench of rot and death. The ground was wet here too - if only those clouds would pass so they could get some good sunlight to dry the soil - and the horses'

fʊɾɪŋ wɑz tʃɹɛtʃɝəs, soʊ ðeɪ tʊk ðɛɹ taɪm. moʊst ə ðə mɛdoʊ wɑz kʌvɝɾ ɪn ɡɹæs, kloʊvɝ ən smɔl widz, ən ðə fɑɹðɝ ðeɪ ɹoʊd, ðə mɔɹ pɝveɪsɪv ðə dɑɹk spɑts bɪkeɪm. wɪðɪn mɪnəts, mɛni ʌv ðə plæns wɝ mɔɹ bɹaʊn ðən ðeɪ wɝ ɡɹin əɹ jɛloʊ.

footing was treacherous, so they took their time. Most of the meadow was covered in grass, clover and small weeds, and the farther they rode, the more pervasive the dark spots became. Within minutes, many of the plants were more brown than they were green or yellow.

ɪvɛntʃəwəli ðeɪ keɪm tə ə smɔl deɪl nɛsəld əmɪd θɹi hɪlsaɪdz. pɛɹɪn pʊl steɪɝ tə ə hɔlt;

Eventually they came to a small dale nestled amid three hillsides. Perrin pulled Stayer to a halt;

ði ʌðɝz bʌntʃt ʌp ɝaʊn hɪm. ðəɹ wɑz ə stʃɹeɪnʒ vɪlədʒ hɪɹ. ðə bɪldɪŋz wɝ hʌts bɪl fɹəm ən ɑd taɪp ʌv wʊd, laɪk lɑɹdʒ ɹidz, ən ðə ɹufs wɝ θætʃ - bʌt θætʃ bɪl fɹəm ɪnɔɹməs livz, əz waɪɾ əz tu mænz pɑmz.

the others bunched up around him. There was a strange village here. The buildings were huts built from an odd type of wood, like large reeds, and the roofs were thatch - but thatch built from enormous leaves, as wide as two man's palms.

ðəɹ wɝ noʊ plæns hɪɹ, oʊnli ə vɛɹi sændi sɔɪl. pɛɹɪn slɪd fɹi ʌv ðə sæɾəl ən stup daʊn tə fil ɪt, ɹʌbɪŋ ðə ɡɹɪɾi stʌf bɪtwin ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. hi lʊkt ət ði ʌðɝz. ðeɪ smɛl kənfjuzd.

There were no plants here, only a very sandy soil. Perrin slid free of the saddle and stooped down to feel it, rubbing the gritty stuff between his fingers. He looked at the others. They smelled confused.

hi kɔʃəsli lɛd steɪɝ fɔɹwɝɾ ɪndə ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə vɪlədʒ. ðə blaɪt wɑz ɹeɪɾieɪtɪŋ fɹəm ðɪs pɔɪnt, bʌt ðə vɪlədʒ ɪtsɛlf ʃoʊd noʊ tʌtʃ ʌv ɪt. meɪɾənz skæɾɝd fɔɹwɝd, veɪlz ɪn pleɪs, səlɪn ət ðɛɹ hɛd. ðeɪ dɪɾ ə kwɪk ɪnspɛkʃən ə ðə hʌts, saɪnɪŋ tə wʌn ənʌðɝ wɪð kwɪk dʒɛstʃɝz, ðən ɹɪtɝnd.

He cautiously led Stayer forward into the center of the village. The Blight was radiating from this point, but the village itself showed no touch of it. Maidens scattered forward, veils in place, Sulin at their head. They did a quick inspection of the huts, signing to one another with quick gestures, then returned.

"noʊbɑdi?" feɪl æskt.

"Nobody?" Faile asked.

"noʊ," səlɪn sɛd, kɔʃəsli loʊɝɪŋ əɹ veɪl. "ðɪs pleɪs ɪz dɪzɝɾɪd."

"No," Sulin said, cautiously lowering her veil. "This place is deserted."

"hu wəd bɪld ə vɪlədʒ laɪk ðɪs," pɛɹɪn æskt, "ɪn ɡildən ʌv ɔl pleɪsəz?"

"Who would build a village like this," Perrin asked, "in Ghealdan of all places?"

"ɪt wɑzn bɪl hɪɹ," mɑsʊɝi sɛd.

"It wasn't built here," Masuri said.

pɛɹɪn tɝn təwɔɹd ðə slɛndɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Perrin turned toward the slender Aes Sedai.

"ðɪs vɪlədʒ ɪz nɑt neɪɾɪv tə ðɪs ɛɹiə," mɑsʊɝi sɛd. "ðə wʊɾ ɪz ənlaɪk ɛniθɪŋ aɪv sin bɪfɔɹ."

"This village is not native to this area," Masuri said. "The wood is unlike anything I've seen before."

'ðə pæɾɝn ɡɹoʊnz," bɹəleɪn sɛd sɔfli. "ðə dɛd wɔkɪŋ, ði ɑd dɛθs. ɪn sɪɾiz, ɹumz vænɪʃ ən fud spɔɪlz."

'The Pattern groans," Berelain said softly. "The dead walking, the odd deaths. In cities, rooms vanish and food spoils."

pɛɹɪn skɹætʃt ɪz tʃɪn, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ə deɪ wən ɪz æks hæd tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl hɪm. ɪf ɪntaɪɝ vɪlədʒəz wɝ vænɪʃɪŋ ən əpɪɹɪŋ ɪn ʌðɝ pleɪsəz, ɪf ðə blaɪt wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ aʊɾ ə ɹɪfs wɛɹ ðə pæɾɝn wɑz fɹeɪɪŋ . . . laɪt! haʊ bæd wɝ θɪŋz bɪkʌmɪŋ?

Perrin scratched his chin, remembering a day when his axe had tried to kill him. If entire villages were vanishing and appearing in other places, if the Blight was growing out of rifts where the Pattern was fraying . . . Light! How bad were things becoming?

"bɝn ðə vɪlədʒ," hi sɛd, tɝnɪŋ. "juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ. skaʊɝ əz mɛni ʌv ðə teɪntɪd plæns əz jə kæn. meɪbi wi kən kip ɪt fɹəm spɹɛɾɪŋ. wɪl muv ði ɑɹmi tə ðət kæmp ən aʊɝ əweɪ, ən wɪl steɪ ðəɹ təmɑɹoʊ ɪf jə nid mɔɹ taɪm."

"Burn the village," he said, turning. "Use the One Power. Scour as many of the tainted plants as you can. Maybe we can keep it from spreading. We'll move the army to that camp an hour away, and will stay there tomorrow if you need more time."

fəɹ wʌns, niðɝ ðə waɪz wʌnz nɔɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ vɔɪst soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə snɪf ə kəmpleɪn ət ðə dɝɛkt ɔɹɾɝ.

For once, neither the Wise Ones nor the Aes Sedai voiced so much as a sniff of complaint at the direct order.

hʌnt wɪð ʌs, bɹʌðɝ.

Hunt with us, brother.

pɛɹɪn faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. hi veɪɡli ɹɪmɛmbɝd sɪɾɪŋ dʒɹaʊsəli baɪ ðə dwɪndəlɪŋ laɪɾ ʌv ən oʊpən læmp, ə sɪŋɡəl fleɪm ʃɪvɝɪŋ ɑn ɪts tɪp, weɪɾɪŋ tə hɪɹ ə ɹipɔɹt fɹəm ðoʊz dilɪŋ wɪð ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ vɪlədʒ. hi hæd bɪn ɹiɾɪŋ ə kɑpi ʌv ðə tʃɹævəlz ə dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ ðət ɡɔl hæd faʊn əmʌŋ ðə sælvədʒ fɹəm meɪɾən.

Perrin found himself in the wolf dream. He vaguely remembered sitting drowsily by the dwindling light of an open lamp, a single flame shivering on its tip, waiting to hear a report from those dealing with the strange village. He had been reading a copy of The Travels of Jain Farstrider that Gaul had found among the salvage from Maiden.

naʊ pɛɹɪn leɪ ɑn ɪz bæk ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə lɑɹdʒ fild wɪð ɡɹæs əz tɔl əz ə mænz weɪst. hi ɡeɪzd ʌp, ɡɹæs bɹʌʃɪŋ ɪz tʃiks ən ɑɹmz əz ɪt ʃɪvɝɾ ɪn ðə wɪnd. ɪn ðə skaɪ, ðət seɪm stɔɹm bɹud, hɪɹ əz ɪn ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld. mɔɹ vaɪələn hɪɹ.

Now Perrin lay on his back in the middle of a large field with grass as tall as a man's waist. He gazed up, grass brushing his cheeks and arms as it shivered in the wind. In the sky, that same storm brewed, here as in the waking world. More violent here.

stɛɹɪŋ ʌp əɾ ɪt - hɪz vɪʒən fɹeɪm baɪ ðə stɔks ə bɹaʊn ən ɡɹin ɡɹæs ən stɛmz ʌv waɪl mɪlət - hi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fil ðə stɔɹm ɡɹoʊɪŋ kloʊsɝ. əz ɪf ɪt wɑz kɹɔlɪŋ daʊn aʊɾ ə ðə skaɪ tə ɪnɡʌlf hɪm.

Staring up at it - his vision framed by the stalks of brown and green grass and stems of wild millet - he could almost feel the storm growing closer. As if it was crawling down out of the sky to engulf him.

jʌŋ bʊl! kʌm! kʌm hʌnt!

Young Bull! Come! Come hunt!

ðə vɔɪs wɑz ðəɾ ʌv ə wʊlf. pɛɹɪn baɪ ɪnstɪŋk nu ðət ʃi wɑz kɔld oʊk dænsɝ, neɪm fəɹ ðə weɪ ʃi hæd skæmpɝd bɪtwin sæplɪŋz əz ə wɛlp. ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝz, tu. wɪspɝɝ.

The voice was that of a wolf. Perrin by instinct knew that she was called Oak Dancer, named for the way she had scampered between saplings as a whelp. There were others, too. Whisperer.

mɔɹnɪŋɡlaɪt. spɑɹks, baʊnləs. ə ɡʊd dʌzən wʊlvz kɔl tə hɪm, səm lɪvɪŋ wʊlvz u slɛpt, ʌðɝz ðə spɪɹəts ʌv wʊlvz u hæd daɪd.

Morninglight. Sparks, boundless. A good dozen wolves called to him, some living wolves who slept, others the spirits of wolves who had died.

ðeɪ kɔl tə hɪm wɪð ə mɪkstʃɝ ə sɛns ən ɪmədʒəz ən saʊnz. ðə smɛl ʌv ə spɹɪŋ bʌk, pɑkɪŋ ði ɝθ wɪð ɪts lips. fɔlən livz kɹʌmbəlɪŋ bɪniθ ɹʌnɪŋ wʊlvz. ðə ɡɹaʊlz ə vɪktɝi, ðə θɹɪl ʌv ə pæk ɹʌnɪŋ təɡɛðɝ.

They called to him with a mixture of scents and images and sounds. The smell of a spring buck, pocking the earth with its leaps. Fallen leaves crumbling beneath running wolves. The growls of victory, the thrill of a pack running together.

ði ɪnvɪteɪʃənz əweɪkən sʌmθɪŋ dip wɪðɪn hɪm, ðə wʊlf i tʃɹaɪd tə kip lɑkt əweɪ. bʌɾ ə wʊlf kəd nɑt bi lɑkt ʌp fəɹ lɔŋ. ɪt: iðɝ ɪskeɪpt əɹ ɪt daɪd; ɪt wəd nɑt stæn kæptɪvəɾi. hi lɔŋ tə lip tə hɪz fiɾ ən sɛn ɪz dʒɔɪəs æksɛptəns, luzɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɪn ðə pæk. hi wɑz jʌŋ bʊl, ən i wɑz wɛlkəm hɪɹ.

The invitations awakened something deep within him, the wolf he tried to keep locked away. But a wolf could not be locked up for long. It: either escaped or it died; it would not stand captivity. He longed to leap to his feet and send his joyous acceptance, losing himself in the pack. He was Young Bull, and he was welcome here.

"noʊ!" pɛɹɪn sɛd, sɪɾɪŋ ʌp, hoʊldɪŋ ɪz hɛd. "aɪ wɪl nɑt luz maɪsɛlf ɪn ju."

"No!" Perrin said, sitting up, holding his head. "I will not lose myself in you."

hɑpɝ sæɾ ɪn ðə ɡɹæs tə hɪz ɹaɪt. ðə lɑɹdʒ ɡɹeɪ wʊlf ɹəɡɑɹɾəd pɛɹɪn, ɡoʊldən aɪz ənblɪŋkɪŋ, ɹəflɛktɪŋ flæʃɪz ə laɪɾɪŋ fɹəm əbʌv. ðə ɡɹæs keɪm ʌp tə hɑpɝz nɛk.

Hopper sat in the grass to his right. The large gray wolf regarded Perrin, golden eyes unblinking, reflecting flashes of lighting from above. The grass came up to Hopper's neck.

pɛɹɪn loʊɝɾ ə hæn fɹəm ɪz hɛd. ði ɛɹ wɑz hɛvi, fʊl ə hjumɪɾəti, ən ɪt smɛld ə ɹeɪn.

Perrin lowered a hand from his head. The air was heavy, full of humidity, and it smelled of rain.

əbʌv ðə sɛn ə ðə wɛðɝ ən ðəɾ ə ðə dʒɹaɪ fild, hi kəd smɛl hɑpɝz peɪʃəns.

Above the scent of the weather and that of the dry field, he could smell Hopper's patience.

jə ɑɹ ɪnvaɪɾəd, jʌŋ bʊl, hɑpɝ sɛnt.

You are invited, Young Bull, Hopper sent.

"aɪ kæn hʌnt wɪð ju," pɛɹɪn ɪkspleɪnd. "hɑpɝ, wi spoʊk ə ðɪs. aɪm luzɪŋ maɪsɛlf. wən aɪ ɡoʊ ɪndə bæɾəl, aɪ bɪkʌm ɛnɹeɪdʒd. laɪk ə wʊlf."

"I can't hunt with you," Perrin explained. "Hopper, we spoke of this. I'm losing myself. When I go into battle, I become enraged. Like a wolf."

laɪk ə wʊlf? hɑpɝ sɛnt. jʌŋ bʊl, jə ɑɹ ə wʊlf. ən ə mæn. kʌm hʌnt.

Like a wolf? Hopper sent. Young Bull, you are a wolf. And a man. Come hunt.

"aɪ toʊl jə aɪ kænt! əl nɑt lɛt ðɪs kənsum mi." hi θɔɾ ʌv ə jʌŋ mæn wɪð ɡoʊldən aɪz, lɑkt ɪn ə keɪdʒ, ɔl hjumænɪɾi ɡɔn fɹəm hɪm. hɪz neɪm hæd bɪn noʊm - pɛɹɪn hæd sin ɪm ɪn ə vɪlədʒ kɔl dʒɹə.

"I told you I can't! I will not let this consume me." He thought of a young man with golden eyes, locked in a cage, all humanity gone from him. His name had been Noam - Perrin had seen him in a village called Jarra.

laɪt, pɛɹɪn θɔt. ðæts nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm hɪɹ. əɹ ət lis nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm wɛɹ ɪz bɑɾi slʌmbɝɾ ɪn ðə ɹil wɝld. dʒɹə wɑz ɪn ɡildən. ən ɑd koʊɪnsɪɾəns.

Light, Perrin thought. That's not far from here. Or at least not far from where his body slumbered in the real world. Jarra was in Ghealdan. An odd coincidence.

wɪð ə tɑ vɹən nɪɹbaɪ, ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ koʊɪnsəɾənsɪz.

With a ta veren nearby, there are no coincidences.

hi fɹaʊnd, ɹaɪzɪŋ ən skænɪŋ ðə lændskeɪp. mɔɪɹeɪn hæd toʊl pɛɹɪn ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ hjumən lɛft ɪnsaɪɾ ə noʊm. ðət wɑz wʌɾ əweɪɾəd ə wʊlfbɹəðɝ ɪf i lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi kəmplitli kənsum baɪ ðə wʊlf.

He frowned, rising and scanning the landscape. Moiraine had told Perrin there was nothing human left inside of Noam. That was what awaited a wolfbrother if he let himself be completely consumed by the wolf.

"aɪ mʌs lɝn tə kəntʃɹoʊl ðɪs, əɹ aɪ mʌs bænɪʃ ðə wʊlf fɹəm mi," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ taɪm lɛft fəɹ kɑmpɹəmaɪz, hɑpɝ."

"I must learn to control this, or I must banish the wolf from me," Perrin said. "There is no time left for compromise, Hopper."

hɑpɝ smɛl dɪsæɾəsfaɪd. hi dɪdn laɪk wʌt hid kɔld ə hjumən tɛndənsi tə wɪʃ tə kəntʃɹoʊl θɪŋz.

Hopper smelled dissatisfied. He didn't like what he'd called a human tendency to wish to control things.

kʌm, hɑpɝ sɛnt, stændɪŋ ʌp ɪn ðə ɡɹæs. hʌnt.

Come, Hopper sent, standing up in the grass. Hunt.

kʌm lɝn, hɑpɝ sɛnt, fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd. ðə læs hʌn kʌmz.

Come learn, Hopper sent, frustrated. The Last Hunt comes.

hɑpɝz sɛndɪŋz ɪnkluɾəd ði ɪmədʒ ʌv ə jʌŋ pʌp meɪkɪŋ ɪz fɝs kɪl. ðəɾ ən ə wɝi fəɹ ðə fjutʃɝ - ə nɔɹməli ənwʊlflaɪk ətʃɹɪbjut, ðə læs hʌn bɹɔt tʃeɪnʒ.

Hopper's sendings included the image of a young pup making his first kill. That and a worry for the future - a normally unwolflike attribute, the Last Hunt brought change.

pɛɹɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ɪn ə pɹiviəs vɪzət tə ðə wʊlf dʒɹim, pɛɹɪn hæd dɪmændəd ðət hɑpɝ tʃɹeɪn ɪm tə mæstɝ ðə pleɪs. vɛɹi ɪnəpɹoʊpɹiɪt fəɹ ə jʌŋ wʊlf - ə kaɪndə tʃælənʒ tə ði ɛldɝz sinjɔɹɪɾi  - bʌt ðɪs wɑz ə ɹɪspɑns. hɑpɝ hæd kʌm tə titʃ, bʌɾ i wəd də ɪɾ əz ə wʊlf tɔt.

Perrin hesitated. In a previous visit to the wolf dream, Perrin had demanded that Hopper train him to master the place. Very inappropriate for a young wolf - a kind of challenge to the elder's seniority  - but this was a response. Hopper had come to teach, but he would do it as a wolf taught.

"aɪm sɑɹi," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪ wɪl hʌnt wɪð jə - bʌɾ aɪ mʌs nɑt luz maɪsɛlf."

"I'm sorry," Perrin said. "I will hunt with you - but I must not lose myself."

ðiz θɪŋz jə θɪŋk, hɑpɝ sɛnt, dɪsplizd. haʊ kən jə θɪŋk sətʃ ɪmədʒəz ə nʌθɪŋ? ðə ɹɪspɑns wɑz əkʌmpənid baɪ ɪmədʒəz ə blæŋknəs - ən ɛmpti skaɪ, ə dɛn wɪð noʊbɑdi ɪn ɪt, ə bæɹən fild. jə ɑɹ jʌŋ bʊl. jəl ɔlweɪz bi jʌŋ bʊl. haʊ kən jə luz jʌŋ bʊl? lʊk daʊn, ən jəl si hɪz pɔz bɪniθ. baɪt, ən ɪz tiθ wɪl kɪl. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ luzɪŋ ðɪs.

These things you think, Hopper sent, displeased. How can you think such images of nothing? The response was accompanied by images of blankness - an empty sky, a den with nobody in it, a barren field. You are Young Bull. You will always be Young Bull. How can you lose Young Bull? Look down, and you will see his paws beneath. Bite, and his teeth will kill. There is no losing this.

"ɪɾ ɪz ə θɪŋ ə hjumənz."

"It is a thing of humans."

ðə seɪm ɛmpti wɝdz oʊvɝ ən oʊvɝ, hɑpɝ sɛnt.

The same empty words over and over, Hopper sent.

pɛɹɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, sʌkɪŋ ɪn ən ɹilisɪŋ ðə tu-wɛɾ ɛɹ. "vɛɹi wɛl," hi sɛd, hæmɝ ən naɪf əpɪɹɪŋ ɪn ɪz hænz. "lɛts ɡoʊ."

Perrin took a deep breath, sucking in and releasing the too-wet air. "Very well," he said, hammer and knife appearing in his hands. "Let's go."

jə hʌnt ɡeɪm wɪð jəɹ hʊvz? ən ɪmədʒ ʌv ə bʊl ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ɪts hɔɹnz ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lip ɑntu ðə bæk ʌv ə dɪɹ ən stɑmp ɪt tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

You hunt game with your hooves? An image of a bull ignoring its horns and trying to leap onto the back of a deer and stomp it to the ground.

"jɔɹ ɹaɪt." pɛɹɪn wɑz sʌɾənli hoʊldɪŋ ə ɡʊd tu ɹɪvɝz lɔŋboʊ. hi wɑzn əz ɡʊɾ ə ʃɑɾ əz dʒɑndɪn bæɹən əɹ ɹænd, bʌɾ i kəd hoʊld ɪz oʊn.

"You're right." Perrin was suddenly holding a good Two Rivers longbow. He wasn't as good a shot as Jondyn Barran or Rand, but he could hold his own.

hɑpɝ sɛn ə bʊl spɪɾɪŋ əɾ ə dɪɹ. pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld, sɛndɪŋ bæk ə wʊlfs klɔz ʃuɾɪŋ fɹəm ɪts pɔz ən stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ə dɪɹ əɾ ə dɪstəns, bʌt ðɪs oʊnli sim tə əmjuz hɑpɝ fɝðɝ. dɪspaɪɾ ɪz ənɔɪəns, pɛɹɪn hæd tə ədmɪt ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ə ɹæðɝ ɹɪdɪkjələs ɪmədʒ.

Hopper sent a bull spitting at a deer. Perrin growled, sending back a wolf's claws shooting from its paws and striking a deer at a distance, but this only seemed to amuse Hopper further. Despite his annoyance, Perrin had to admit that it was a rather ridiculous image.

ðə wʊlf sɛn ði ɪmədʒ tə ði ʌðɝz, kɑzɪŋ əm tə haʊl ɪn əmjuzmənt, ðoʊ moʊst ə ðɛm sim tə pɹəfɝ ðə bʊl dʒʌmpɪŋ ʌp ən daʊn ɑn ðə dɪɹ. pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld, tʃeɪsɪŋ æftɝ hɑpɝ təwɔɹd ðə dɪstənt wʊdz, wɛɹ ði ʌðɝ wʊlvz weɪɾəd.

The wolf sent the image to the others, causing them to howl in amusement, though most of them seemed to prefer the bull jumping up and down on the deer. Perrin growled, chasing after Hopper toward the distant woods, where the other wolves waited.

əz i ɹæn, ðə ɡɹæsəz sim tə ɡɹoʊ mɔɹ dɛns. ðeɪ hɛld ɪm bæk, laɪk snɑɹəl fɔɹəst ʌndɝɡɹoʊθ. hɑpɝ sun aʊtpeɪs hɪm.

As he ran, the grasses seemed to grow more dense. They held him back, like snarled forest undergrowth. Hopper soon outpaced him.

ɹʌn, jʌŋ bʊl!

Run, Young Bull!

aɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ, pɛɹɪn sɛn bæk.

I'm trying, Perrin sent back.

nɑɾ əz juv bɪfɔɹ!

Not as you have before!

pɛɹɪn kəntɪnjud tə pʊʃ ɪz weɪ θɹu ðə ɡɹæs. ðɪs stʃɹeɪnʒ pleɪs, ðɪs wʌndɝfəl wɝld wɛɹ wʊlvz ɹæn, kəd bi ɪntɑksɪkeɪɾɪŋ. ən deɪnʒɝəs. hɑpɝ hæd wɔɹn pɛɹɪn ə ðət mɔɹ ðən wʌns.

Perrin continued to push his way through the grass. This strange Place, this wonderful world where wolves ran, could be intoxicating. And dangerous. Hopper had warned Perrin of that more than once.

deɪnʒɝz fəɹ təmɑɹoʊ. ɪɡnɔɹ əm fəɹ naʊ, hɑpɝ sɛnt, ɡɹoʊɪŋ mɔɹ dɪstənt. wɝi ɪz fəɹ tu-lɛɡz.

Dangers for tomorrow. Ignore them for now, Hopper sent, growing more distant. Worry is for two-legs.

aɪ kæn ɪɡnɔɹ maɪ pɹɑbləmz! pɛɹɪn θɔt bæk.

I can't ignore my problems! Perrin thought back.

jɛt jə ɔfən du, hɑpɝ sɛnt.

Yet you often do, Hopper sent.

ɪt stʃɹʌk tʃɹu - mɔɹ tʃɹu, pɝhæps, ðən ðə wʊlf nu. pɛɹɪn bɝst ɪndə ə klɪɹɪŋ ən pʊl tə ə hɔlt. ðɛɹ, laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, wɝ ðə θɹi tʃʌŋks ə mɛɾəl hid fɔɹdʒd ɪn ɪz ɝliɝ dʒɹim. ðə lɑɹdʒ lʌmp ðə saɪz ə tu fɪsts, ðə flæɾənd ɹɑd, ðə θɪn ɹɛktæŋɡəl. ðə ɹɛktæŋɡəl ɡloʊd feɪnli jɛloʊ-ɹɛd, sɪŋɡɪŋ ðə ʃɔɹt ɡɹæs ɝaʊn ɪt.

It struck true - more true, perhaps, than the wolf knew. Perrin burst into a clearing and pulled to a halt. There, lying on the ground, were the three chunks of metal he'd forged in his earlier dream. The large lump the size of two fists, the flattened rod, the thin rectangle. The rectangle glowed faintly yellow-red, singeing the short grass around it.

ðə lʌmps vænɪʃt ɪmiɾiətli, ðoʊ ðə sɪmɝɪŋ ɹɛktæŋɡəl lɛft ə bɝn spɑt. pɛɹɪn lʊkt ʌp, sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ðə wʊlvz. əhɛɾ ə hɪm, ɪn ðə skaɪ əbʌv ðə tʃɹiz əhɛd, ə lɑɹdʒ hoʊl ə blæknəs oʊpən ʌp. hi kəd nɑt tɛl haʊ fɑɹ ɪt wɑz əweɪ, ən ɪt sim tə dɑməneɪɾ ɔl i kəd si waɪl biɪŋ dɪstən ət ðə seɪm taɪm.

The lumps vanished immediately, though the simmering rectangle left a burned spot. Perrin looked up, searching for the wolves. Ahead of him, in the sky above the trees ahead, a large hole of blackness opened up. He could not tell how far it was away, and it seemed to dominate all he could see while being distant at the same time.

mæt stʊd ðɛɹ. hi wɑz faɪɾɪŋ əɡɛns hɪmsɛlf, ə dʌzən dɪfɹən mɛn wɛɹɪŋ ɪz feɪs, ɔl dʒɹɛst ɪn dɪfɹən taɪps ə faɪn kloʊðɪŋ. mæt spʌn ɪz spɪɹ, ən nɛvɝ sɔ ðə ʃæɾoʊi fɪɡjɝ kɹipɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm, bɛɹɪŋ ə blʌɾi naɪf.

Mat stood there. He was fighting against himself, a dozen different men wearing his face, all dressed in different types of fine clothing. Mat spun his spear, and never saw the shadowy figure creeping behind him, bearing a bloody knife.

"mæt!" pɛɹɪn kɹaɪd, bʌɾ i nu ɪt wɑz minɪŋləs. ðɪs θɪŋ i wɑz siɪŋ, ɪt wɑz səm kaɪndə dʒɹim əɹ vɪʒən ə ðə fjutʃɝ. ɪt hæd bɪn səm taɪm sɪns hid sin wʌn ə ðiz. hiɾ ɔlmoʊs bɪɡʌn tə θɪŋk ðeɪ wəd stɑp kʌmɪŋ.

"Mat!" Perrin cried, but he knew it was meaningless. This thing he was seeing, it was some kind of dream or vision of the future. It had been some time since he'd seen one of these. He'd almost begun to think they would stop coming.

hi tɝn əweɪ ən ənʌðɝ dɑɹknəs oʊpən ɪn ðə skaɪ. hi sɔ ʃip, sʌɾənli, ɹʌnɪŋ ɪn ə flɑk təwɔɹd ðə wʊdz. wʊlvz tʃeɪs ðɛm, ən ə tɛɹəbəl bist weɪɾəd ɪn ðə wʊdz, ənsin. hi wɑz ðɛɹ, ɪn ðət dʒɹim, hi sɛnst. bʌɾ u wɑz i tʃeɪsɪŋ, ən waɪ? sʌmθɪŋ lʊkt ɹɔŋ wɪð ðoʊz wʊlvz.

He turned away and another darkness opened in the sky. He saw sheep, suddenly, running in a flock toward the woods. Wolves chased them, and a terrible beast waited in the woods, unseen. He was there, in that dream, he sensed. But who was he chasing, and why? Something looked wrong with those wolves.

ə θɝd dɑɹknəs, tə ðə saɪd. feɪl, ɡɹeɪɾi, ɛlaɪəs, ɡɔl ... ɔl wɔk təwɔɹɾ ə klɪf, fɑloʊd baɪ θaʊzənz ʌv ʌðɝz.

A third darkness, to the side. Faile, Grady, Elyas, Gaul ... all walked toward a cliff, followed by thousands of others.

ðə vɪʒən kloʊzd. hɑpɝ sʌɾənli ʃɑt bæk θɹu ði ɛɹ, lændɪŋ bɪsaɪd pɛɹɪn, skɪɾɪŋ tə ə stɑp. ðə wʊlf wʊdn əv sin ðə hoʊlz; ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ əpɪɹd tə hɪz aɪz. ɪnstɛd, hi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ðə bɝn pætʃ wɪð dɪsdeɪn ən sɛn ði ɪmədʒ ə pɛɹɪn, ənkɛmpt ən blɪɹi-aɪd, hɪz bɪɹɾ ən hɛɹ əntʃɹɪmd ən ɪz kloʊðɪŋ dɪʃɛvəld. pɛɹɪn ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə taɪm; ɪt hæd bɪn dʊɹɪŋ ði ɝli deɪz ə feɪlz kæptɪvəɾi.

The vision closed. Hopper suddenly shot back through the air, landing beside Perrin, skidding to a stop. The wolf wouldn't have seen the holes; they had never appeared to his eyes. Instead, he regarded the burned patch with disdain and sent the image of Perrin, unkempt and bleary-eyed, his beard and hair untrimmed and his clothing disheveled. Perrin remembered the time; it had been during the early days of Faile's captivity.

hæɾ i ɹɪli lʊk ðət bæd? laɪt, bʌɾ i simd ɹæɡəd. ɔlmoʊs laɪk ə bɛɡɝ. əɹ . . . laɪk noʊm.

Had he really looked that bad? Light, but he seemed ragged. Almost like a beggar. Or . . . like Noam.

"stɑp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənfjuz mi!" pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪ bɪkeɪm ðət weɪ kəz aɪ wɑz dɛɾəkeɪtəd tə faɪndɪŋ feɪl, nɑt kəz aɪ wɑz ɡɪvɪŋ ɪn tə ðə wʊlvz!"

"Stop trying to confuse me!" Perrin said. "I became that way because I was dedicated to finding Faile, not because I was giving in to the wolves!"

ðə nuəs pʌps ɔlweɪz bleɪm ði ɛldɝz ə ðə pæk. hɑpɝ baʊndəd θɹu ðə ɡɹæsəz əɡɛn.

The newest pups always blame the elders of the pack. Hopper bounded through the grasses again.

wʌd ðət min? ðə sɛns ən ɪmədʒəz kənfjuz hɪm. ɡɹoʊlɪŋ, pɛɹɪn tʃɑɹdʒ fɔɹwɝd, livɪŋ ðə klɪɹɪŋ ən ɹiɪntɝɪŋ ðə ɡɹæsəz. wʌns əɡɛn ðə stɔks ɹɪzɪstɪd hɪm. ɪt wɑz laɪk faɪɾɪŋ əɡɛnst ə kɝənt, hɑpɝ ʃɑɾ ɑn əhɛd.

What did that mean? The scents and images confused him. Growling, Perrin charged forward, leaving the clearing and reentering the grasses. Once again the stalks resisted him. It was like fighting against a current, Hopper shot on ahead.

"bɝn ju, weɪt fəɹ mi!" pɛɹɪn jɛld.

"Burn you, wait for me!" Perrin yelled.

ɪf wi weɪt, wi luz ðə pɹeɪ. ɹʌn, jʌŋ bʊl!

If we wait, we lose the prey. Run, Young Bull!

pɛɹɪn ɡɹɪɾɪd ɪz tiθ. hɑpɝ wɑz ə spɛk ɪn ðə dɪstəns naʊ, ɔlmoʊs tə ðə tʃɹiz. pɛɹɪn wɑntəd tə θɪŋk ɑn ðoʊz vɪʒənz, bʌt ðəɹ wɑzn taɪm. ɪf i lɔs hɑpɝ, hi nu ðəɾ i wəd nɑt si hɪm əɡɛn ðɪs naɪt. faɪn, hi θɔt wɪð ɹɛzəɡneɪʃən.

Perrin gritted his teeth. Hopper was a speck in the distance now, almost to the trees. Perrin wanted to think on those visions, but there wasn't time. If he lost Hopper, he knew that he would not see him again this night. Fine, he thought with resignation.

ðə læn lɝtʃt ɝaʊn hɪm, ɡɹæsəz spiɾɪŋ baɪ ɪn ə flæʃ. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf pɛɹɪn hæd lɛpt ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz ɪn wʌn stɛp. hi stɛpt əɡɛn, ʃuɾɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. hi lɛft ə feɪn blɝ bɪhaɪn hɪm.

The land lurched around him, grasses speeding by in a flash. It was as if Perrin had leaped a hundred paces in one step. He stepped again, shooting forward. He left a faint blur behind him.

ðə ɡɹæsəz pɑɹɾəd fəɹ hɪm. ðə wɪn blu ɪn ɪz feɪs wɪð ə kʌmftəɹbəl ɹɔɹ. ðət pɹaɪməl wʊlf ɪnsaɪɾ ə hɪm spɑɹk tə weɪkfəlnəs. pɛɹɪn ɹitʃt ðə wʊdz ən sloʊd. itʃ stɛp naʊ tʊk ɪm ə dʒʌmp ʌv oʊnli əbaʊt tɛn fit. ði ʌðɝ wʊlvz wɝ ðɛɹ, ən ðeɪ fɔɹmd ʌp ən ɹæn wɪð hɪm, ɪksaɪɾəd.

The grasses parted for him. The wind blew in his face with a comfortable roar. That primal wolf inside of him sparked to wakefulness. Perrin reached the woods and slowed. Each step now took him a jump of only about ten feet. The other wolves were there, and they formed up and ran with him, excited.

tu fit, jʌŋ bʊl? oʊk dænsɝ æskt. ʃi wɑz ə juθfəl fimeɪl, hɝ pɛl soʊ laɪɾ əz tə bi ɔlmoʊst waɪt, wɪð ə stʃɹik ə blæk ɹʌnɪŋ əlɔŋ əɹ ɹaɪt saɪd.

Two feet, Young Bull? Oak Dancer asked. She was a youthful female, her pelt so light as to be almost white, with a streak of black running along her right side.

hi dɪdn ænsɝ, ðoʊ hi dɪɾ əlaʊ hɪmsɛlf tə ɹʌn wɪð əm θɹu ðə tʃɹiz. wʌt hæd sim laɪk ə smɔl stæn hæd bɪkʌm ən ɪkspænsɪv fɔɹəst. pɛɹɪn muv pæs tʃɹʌŋks ən fɝnz, bɛɹli filɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪniθ ɪz fit.

He didn't answer, though he did allow himself to run with them through the trees. What had seemed like a small stand had become an expansive forest. Perrin moved past trunks and ferns, barely feeling the ground beneath his feet.

ðɪs wɑz ðə weɪ tə ɹʌn. paʊɝfəl. ɛnɝdʒɛɾɪk. hi loʊpt oʊvɝ fɔlən lɔɡz, hɪz dʒʌmps teɪkɪŋ ɪm soʊ haɪ ðəɾ ɪz hɛɹ bɹʌʃt ðə bɑɾəmz ə ðə bɹæntʃəz. hi lændəd smuðli. ðə fɔɹəst wɑz hɪz. ɪt bɪlɔŋ tə hɪm, ən i ʌndɝstʊɾ ɪt.

This was the way to run. Powerful. Energetic. He loped over fallen logs, his jumps taking him so high that his hair brushed the bottoms of the branches. He landed smoothly. The forest was his. It belonged to him, and he understood it.

hɪz wɝiz bɪɡæn tə mɛlt əweɪ. hi əlaʊd hɪmsɛlf tə æksɛp θɪŋz əz ðeɪ wɝ, nɑɾ əz wʌɾ i fɪɹd ðeɪ maɪt bɪkʌm. ðiz wʊlvz wɝ ɪz bɹʌðɝz ən sɪstɝz. ə ɹʌnɪŋ wʊlf ɪn ðə ɹil wɝld wɑz ə mæstɝwɝk ə bæləns ən kəntʃɹoʊl. hɪɹ - wɛɹ ðə ɹulz ə neɪtʃɝ bɛn tə ðɛɹ wɪl -  ðeɪ wɝ fɑɹ mɔɹ. wʊlvz baʊndəd tə ðə saɪdz ən lɛpt ɔf tʃɹiz, nʌθɪŋ hoʊldɪŋ əm tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. səm æktʃəli  tʊk tə ðə bɹæntʃəz, sɔɹɪŋ fɹəm lɪm tə lɪm.

His worries began to melt away. He allowed himself to accept things as they were, not as what he feared they might become. These wolves were his brothers and sisters. A running wolf in the real world was a masterwork of balance and control. Here - where the rules of nature bent to their will -  they were far more. Wolves bounded to the sides and leaped off trees, nothing holding them to the ground. Some actually took to the branches, soaring from limb to limb.

ɪt wɑz ɪɡzɪlɝeɪɾɪŋ. hæɾ i ɛvɝ fɛl soʊ əlaɪv? soʊ mʌtʃ ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə wɝld ɝaʊn hɪm, jɛt mæstɝ ʌv ɪɾ ət ðə seɪm taɪm? ðə ɹʌf, ɹiɡəl lɛðɝlifs wɝ ɪntɝspɝst wɪð ju ən ði əkeɪʒənəl ɔɹnəmɛntɪd spɪswʊɾ ɪn fʊl blum. hi θɹu hɪmsɛlf ɪndə ði ɛɹ əz i pæst wʌn ə ðiz, ðə wɪn ə hɪz pæsɪŋ pʊlɪŋ ə stɔɹm ə kɹɪmzən blɑsəmz fɹəm ðə bɹæntʃəz. ðeɪ sɝdʒd ɝaʊn ɪm ɪn ə swɝlɪŋ blɝ, kɑɾ ɪn ðə kɝəns, kɹeɪɾəlɪŋ ɪm ɪn ðɛɹ swit sɛnt.

It was exhilarating. Had he ever felt so alive? So much a part of the world around him, yet master of it at the same time? The rough, regal leatherleafs were interspersed with yew and the occasional ornamented spicewood in full bloom. He threw himself into the air as he passed one of these, the wind of his passing pulling a storm of crimson blossoms from the branches. They surged around him in a swirling blur, caught in the currents, cradling him in their sweet scent.

ðə wʊlvz bɪɡæn tə haʊl. tə mɛn, wʌn haʊl wɑz laɪk ənʌðɝ. tə pɛɹɪn, itʃ wɑz dɪstɪŋkt.

The wolves began to howl. To men, one howl was like another. To Perrin, each was distinct.

ðiz wɝ ðə haʊlz ə plɛʒɝ, ði ɪnɪʃieɪʃən ʌv ə hʌnt.

These were the howls of pleasure, the initiation of a hunt.

weɪt. ðɪs ɪz wʌɾ aɪ fɪɹd! aɪ kænɑt lɛt maɪsɛlf bi tʃɹæpt. aɪm ə mæn, nɑɾ ə wʊlf ət ðət moʊmənt, haʊɛvɝ, hi kɑt sɛn ʌv ə stæɡ. ə maɪɾi ænəməl, wɝði pɹeɪ. ɪt hæd pæs ðɪs weɪ ɹisənli.

Wait. This is what I feared! I cannot let myself be trapped. I am a man, not a wolf At that moment, however, he caught scent of a stag. A mighty animal, worthy prey. It had passed this way recently.

pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd tə ɹistʃɹeɪn hɪmsɛlf, bʌɾ æntɪsəpeɪʃən pɹuv tu stʃɹɔŋ. hi tɔɹ ɔf daʊn ðə ɡeɪm tʃɹeɪl æftɝ ðə sɛnt. ðə wʊlvz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ hɑpɝ, dɪd nɑt ɹeɪs əhɛɾ ə hɪm. ðeɪ ɹæn wɪð hɪm, ðɛɹ sɛns plizd əz ðeɪ lɛɾ ɪm teɪk ðə lɛd.

Perrin tried to restrain himself, but anticipation proved too strong. He tore off down the game trail after the scent. The wolves, including Hopper, did not race ahead of him. They ran with him, their scents pleased as they let him take the lead.

hi wɑz ðə hɛɹəld, ðə pɔɪnt, ðə tɪp ə ði ətæk. ðə hʌn ɹɔɹd bɪhaɪn hɪm. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf i lɛd ðə kɹæʃɪŋ weɪvz ə ði oʊʃən ɪtsɛlf. bʌɾ i wɑz ɔlsoʊ hoʊldɪŋ əm bæk.

He was the herald, the point, the tip of the attack. The hunt roared behind him. It was as if he led the crashing waves of the ocean itself. But he was also holding them back.

aɪ kænɑt meɪk əm sloʊ fəɹ mi, pɛɹɪn θɔt.

I cannot make them slow for me, Perrin thought.

ən ðən i wɑz ɑn ɔl fɔɹz, hɪz baʊ tɔst əsaɪɾ ən fɝɡɑɾən, hɪz hænz ən lɛɡz bɪkʌmɪŋ pɔz. ðoʊz bɪhaɪn ɪm haʊld ənu ət ðə ɡlɔɹi ʌv ɪt. jʌŋ bʊl hæd tʃɹuli dʒɔɪn ðɛm.

And then he was on all fours, his bow tossed aside and forgotten, his hands and legs becoming paws. Those behind him howled anew at the glory of it. Young Bull had truly joined them.

ðə stæɡ wɑz əhɛd. jʌŋ bʊl pɪkt ɪɾ aʊt θɹu ðə tʃɹiz; ɪt wɑz ə bɹɪljənt waɪt, wɪð ə ɹæk ʌv ət lis twɛnti-sɪks pɔɪns, ðə wɪntɝ fɛlt wɔɹn əweɪ. ən ɪt wɑz ɪnɔɹməs, lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ə hɔɹs. ðə stæɡ tɝnd, lʊkɪŋ ʃɑɹpli ət ðə pæk. ɪt mɛt pɛɹɪnz aɪz, ən i smɛld ɪts əlɑɹm.

The stag was ahead. Young Bull picked it out through the trees; it was a brilliant white, with a rack of at least twenty-six points, the winter felt worn away. And it was enormous, larger than a horse. The stag turned, looking sharply at the pack. It met Perrins eyes, and he smelled its alarm.

ðɛn, wɪð ə paʊɝfəl sɝdʒ ʌv ɪts haɪn lɛɡz - flæŋks tɔt wɪð mʌsəlz -  ðə stæɡ lɛpt ɔf ðə tʃɹeɪl.

Then, with a powerful surge of its hind legs - flanks taut with muscles -  the stag leaped off the trail.

jʌŋ bʊl haʊld ɪz tʃælənʒ, ɹeɪsɪŋ θɹu ði ʌndɝbɹʌʃ ɪn pɝsut. ðə ɡɹeɪt waɪt stæɡ baʊndəɾ ɑn, itʃ lip teɪkɪŋ ɪt twɛnti peɪsɪz. ɪt nɛvɝ hɪɾ ə bɹæntʃ əɹ lɔst ɪts fʊɾɪŋ, dɪspaɪt ðə tʃɹɛtʃɝəs fɔɹəs flɔɹ koʊɾəd wɪð slɪk mɔs.

Young Bull howled his challenge, racing through the underbrush in pursuit. The great white stag bounded on, each leap taking it twenty paces. It never hit a branch or lost its footing, despite the treacherous forest floor coated with slick moss.

jʌŋ bʊl fɑloʊd wɪð pɹisɪʒən, pleɪsɪŋ ɪz pɔz wɛɹ hʊvz hæd fɔlən dʒʌs moʊməns bɪfɔɹ, mætʃɪŋ itʃ stʃɹaɪɾ ɪɡzækli. hi kəd hɪɹ ðə stæɡ pæntɪŋ, kəd si ðə swɛt foʊmɪŋ ɑn ɪts koʊt, kəd smɛl ɪts fɪɹ.

Young Bull followed with precision, placing his paws where hooves had fallen just moments before, matching each stride exactly. He could hear the stag panting, could see the sweat foaming on its coat, could smell its fear.

bʌt noʊ. jʌŋ bʊl wəd nɑɾ æksɛp ði ɪnfɪɹiɝ vɪktɝi ʌv ɹʌnɪŋ ɪz pɹeɪ tə ɪɡzɔstʃən. hi wəd teɪs ðə blʌɾ ə ðə θɹoʊt, pʌmpɪŋ fʊl fɔɹs fɹəm ə hɛlθi hɑɹt. hi wəd bɛst ɪz pɹeɪ ɪn ɪts pɹaɪm.

But no. Young Bull would not accept the inferior victory of running his prey to exhaustion. He would taste the blood of the throat, pumping full force from a healthy heart. He would best his prey in its prime.

hi bɪɡæn tə vɛɹi hɪz lips, nɑt fɑloʊɪŋ ðə stæɡz ɪɡzæk pæθ. hi niɾəd tə bi əhɛd, nɑt fɑloʊ!

He began to vary his leaps, not following the stag's exact path. He needed to be ahead, not follow!

ðə stæɡz sɛnt ɡɹu mɔɹ əlɑɹmd. ðət dʒɹoʊv jʌŋ bʊl tə ɡɹeɪɾɝ spid. ðə stæɡ boʊltəd tə ðə ɹaɪt, ən jʌŋ bʊl lɛpt, hɪɾɪŋ ən əpɹaɪt tʃɹi tʃɹʌŋk wɪð ɔl fɔɹ pɔz ən pʊʃɪŋ hɪmsɛlf saɪdweɪz tə tʃeɪnʒ dɝɛkʃənz. hɪz tɝn ɡeɪn ɪm ə fɹækʃən ʌv ə hɑɹtbit.

The stag's scent grew more alarmed. That drove Young Bull to greater speed. The stag bolted to the right, and Young Bull leaped, hitting an upright tree trunk with all four paws and pushing himself sideways to change directions. His turn gained him a fraction of a heartbeat.

sun i wɑz baʊndɪŋ ə sɪŋɡəl bɹɛθ bɪhaɪn ðə stæɡ, itʃ lip bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪm wɪðɪn ɪntʃəz ʌv ɪts hʊvz. hi haʊld, ən ɪz bɹʌðɝz ən sɪstɝz ɹɪplaɪd fɹəm dʒʌs bɪhaɪnd. ðɪs hʌnt wɑz ɔl ə ðɛm.

Soon he was bounding a single breath behind the stag, each leap bringing him within inches of its hooves. He howled, and his brothers and sisters replied from just behind. This hunt was all of them.

əz wʌn.

As one.

bʌt jʌŋ bʊl lɛd.

But Young Bull led.

hɪz haʊl bɪkeɪm ə ɡɹaʊl ə tʃɹaɪəmf əz ðə stæɡ tɝn əɡɛn. ðə tʃæns hæd kʌm! jʌŋ bʊl lɛpt oʊvɝ ə lɔɡ ən siz ðə stæɡz nɛk ɪn ɪz dʒɔz. hi kəd teɪs ðə swɛt, ðə fɝ, ðə wɔɹm blʌd bɪniθ pulɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪz fæŋz. hɪz weɪt θɹu ðə stæɡ tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. əz ðeɪ ɹoʊld, jʌŋ bʊl kɛpt ɪz ɡɹɪp, fɔɹsɪŋ ðə stæɡ tə ðə fɔɹəs flɔɹ, ɪts skɪn leɪst skɑɹlət wɪð blʌd.

His howl became a growl of triumph as the stag turned again. The chance had come! Young Bull leaped over a log and seized the stag's neck in his jaws. He could taste the sweat, the fur, the warm blood beneath pooling around his fangs. His weight threw the stag to the ground. As they rolled, Young Bull kept his grip, forcing the stag to the forest floor, its skin laced scarlet with blood.

ðə wʊlvz haʊld ɪn vɪktɝi, ən i lɛt ɡoʊ fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ɪntɛndɪŋ tə baɪɾ ət ðə fɹʌn ə ðə nɛk ən kɪl. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɛls. ðə fɔɹəst wɑz ɡɔn. ðə haʊlz feɪɾəd. ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ðə kɪl. ðə swit kɪl.

The wolves howled in victory, and he let go for a moment, intending to bite at the front of the neck and kill. There was nothing else. The forest was gone. The howls faded. There was only the kill. The sweet kill.

ə fɔɹm kɹæʃt ɪndə hɪm, θɹoʊɪŋ ɪm bæk ɪndə ðə bɹʌʃ. jʌŋ bʊl ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, deɪzd, snɑɹlɪŋ. ənʌðɝ wʊlf hæd stɑp hɪm. hɑpɝ! waɪ?

A form crashed into him, throwing him back into the brush. Young Bull shook his head, dazed, snarling. Another wolf had stopped him. Hopper! Why?

ðə stæɡ baʊndəd tə ɪts fit, ən ðən baʊndəɾ ɔf θɹu ðə fɔɹəst əɡɛn. jʌŋ bʊl haʊld ɪn fjʊɹi ən ɹeɪdʒ, pɹipɛɹɪŋ tə ɹʌn æftɝ ɪt. əɡɛn hɑpɝ lɛpt, θɹoʊɪŋ ɪz weɪɾ əɡɛns jʌŋ bʊl.

The stag bounded to its feet, and then bounded off through the forest again. Young Bull howled in fury and rage, preparing to run after it. Again Hopper leaped, throwing his weight against Young Bull.

ɪf ɪt daɪz hɪɹ, ɪt daɪz ðə læs dɛθ, hɑpɝ sɛnt. ðɪs hʌn ɪz dʌn, jʌŋ bʊl. wɪl hʌn ənʌðɝ taɪm.

If it dies here, it dies the last death, Hopper sent. This hunt is done, Young Bull. We will hunt another time.

jʌŋ bʊl nɪɹli tɝn tə ətæk hɑpɝ. bʌt noʊ. hi hæd tʃɹaɪd ðət wʌns, ən ɪt hæd bɪn ə mɪsteɪk. hi wɑz nɑɾ ə wʊlf. hi -  pɛɹɪn leɪ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, teɪstɪŋ blʌd ðət wɑz nɑɾ ɪz oʊn, ɪkshəlɪŋ dipli, hɪz feɪs dʒɹɪpɪŋ wɪð swɛt. hi pʊʃt hɪmsɛlf tə hɪz niz, ðən sæt daʊn, pæntɪŋ, ʃeɪkɪŋ fɹəm ðət bjuɾəfəl, tɛɹəfaɪɪŋ hʌnt.

Young Bull nearly turned to attack Hopper. But no. He had tried that once, and it had been a mistake. He was not a wolf. He -  Perrin lay on the ground, tasting blood that was not his own, exhaling deeply, his face dripping with sweat. He pushed himself to his knees, then sat down, panting, shaking from that beautiful, terrifying hunt.

ði ʌðɝ wʊlvz sæt daʊn, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt spik. hɑpɝ leɪ bɪsaɪd pɛɹɪn, sɛɾɪŋ ɪz ɡɹɪzəl hɛɾ ɑn eɪdʒ pɔz.

The other wolves sat down, but they did not speak. Hopper lay beside Perrin, setting his grizzled head on aged paws.

"ðæt," pɛɹɪn faɪnəli sɛd, "ɪz wʌɾ aɪ fɪɹ."

"That," Perrin finally said, "is what I fear."

noʊ, jə də nɑt fɪɹ ɪt, hɑpɝ sɛnt.

No, you do not fear it, Hopper sent.

"jɔɹ tɛlɪŋ mi wʌɾ aɪ fil?"

"You're telling me what I feel?"

jə də nɑt smɛl əfɹeɪd, hɑpɝ sɛnt.

You do not smell afraid, Hopper sent.

pɛɹɪn leɪ bæk, stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ət ðə bɹæntʃəz əbʌv, twɪɡz ən livz kɹʌmplɪŋ bɪniθ hɪm. hɪz hɑɹt θʌmp fɹəm ðə tʃeɪs. "aɪ wɝi əbaʊɾ ɪt, ðɛn."

Perrin lay back, staring up at the branches above, twigs and leaves crumpling beneath him. His heart thumped from the chase. "I worry about it, then."

wɝi ɪz nɑt ðə seɪm əz fɪɹ, hɑpɝ sɛnt. waɪ seɪ wʌn ən fil ði ʌðɝ? wɝi, wɝi, wɝi.

Worry is not the same as fear, Hopper sent. Why say one and feel the other? worry, worry, worry.

ɪts ɔl ðət jə du.

It is all that you do.

"noʊ. aɪ ɔlsoʊ kɪl. ɪf jəɹ gɑnə titʃ mi tə mæstɝ ðə wʊlf dʒɹim, ɪts gɑnə hæpən laɪk ðɪs?"

"No. I also kill. If you're going to teach me to master the wolf dream, it's going to happen like this?"

jɛs.

Yes.

pɛɹɪn lʊk tə ðə saɪd. ðə stæɡz blʌd hæd spɪld ɑn ə dʒɹaɪ lɔɡ, dɑɹknəs sipɪŋ ɪndə ðə wʊd. lɝnɪŋ ðɪs weɪ wəd pʊʃ ɪm tə ðə vɛɹi ɛdʒ ə bɪkʌmɪŋ ə wʊlf.

Perrin looked to the side. The stag's blood had spilled on a dry log, darkness seeping into the wood. Learning this way would push him to the very edge of becoming a wolf.

bʌɾ i hæd bɪn əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðɪs ɪʃu fəɹ tu lɔŋ, meɪkɪŋ hɔɹsʃuz ɪn ðə fɔɹdʒ waɪl livɪŋ ðə moʊs dɪfəkəlt ən dɪmændɪŋ pisəz əloʊn, ʌn-tʌtʃt. hi ɹɪlaɪɾ ɑn ðə paʊɝz ə sɛn hid bɪn ɡɪvən, ɹitʃɪŋ aʊt tə wʊlvz wən i niɾəd əm - bʌɾ ʌðɝwaɪz hiɾ ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛm.

But he had been avoiding this issue for too long, making horseshoes in the forge while leaving the most difficult and demanding pieces alone, un-touched. He relied on the powers of scent he'd been given, reaching out to wolves when he needed them - but otherwise he'd ignored them.

jə kʊdn meɪk ə θɪŋ əntɪl jə ʌndɝstʊɾ ɪts pɑɹts. hi wʊdnt noʊ haʊ tə dil wɪð - əɹ ɹɪdʒɛkt - ðə wʊlf ɪnsaɪɾ ɪm əntɪl i ʌndɝstʊd ðə wʊlf dʒɹim.

You couldn't make a thing until you understood its parts. He wouldn't know how to deal with - or reject - the wolf inside him until he understood the wolf dream.

"vɛɹi wɛl," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "soʊ bi ɪt."

"Very well," Perrin said. "So be it."

ɡɑləd kæntɝd staʊt θɹu ðə kæmp. ɑn ɔl saɪdz, tʃɪlʒɹən ɪɹɛktəd tɛns ən dʌɡ faɪɹɛpɪts, pɹipɛɹɪŋ fəɹ ðə naɪt. hɪz mɛn mɑɹtʃt ɔlmoʊst əntɪl naɪtfɔl itʃ deɪ, ðən ɝoʊz ɝli ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. ðə sunɝ ðeɪ ɹitʃt ændɝ, ðə bɛɾɝ.

Galad cantered Stout through the camp. On all sides, Children erected tents and dug firepits, preparing for the night. His men marched almost until nightfall each day, then arose early in the morning. The sooner they reached Andor, the better.

ðoʊz laɪt-kɝst swɑmps wɝ bɪhaɪn ðɛm; naʊ ðeɪ tʃɹævəld oʊvɝ oʊpən ɡɹæslænz. pɝhæps ɪt wʊɾə bɪn fæstɝ tə kʌɾ ist ən kætʃ wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪt haɪweɪz tə ðə nɔɹθ, bʌt ðət wʊdn bi seɪf. bɛs tə steɪ əweɪ fɹəm ðə muvməns ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹnz ɑɹmiz ən ðə sintʃæn. ðə laɪt wəd ʃaɪn əpɑn ðə tʃɪlʒɹən, bʌt mɔɹ ðən wʌn væljən hɪɹoʊ hæd daɪd wɪðɪn ðət laɪt. ɪf ðəɹ wɑz noʊ deɪnʒɝ ə dɛθ, ðəɹ kəd bi noʊ bɹeɪvɝi, bʌt ɡɑləd wəd ɹæðɝ əv ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn ɪm waɪl i kəntɪnjud tə dʒɹɔ bɹɛθ.

Those Light-cursed swamps were behind them; now they traveled over open grasslands. Perhaps it would have been faster to cut east and catch one of the great highways to the north, but that wouldn't be safe. Best to stay away from the movements of the Dragon Reborn's armies and the Seanchan. The Light would shine upon the Children, but more than one valiant hero had died within that Light. If there was no danger of death, there could be no bravery, but Galad would rather have the Light shine on him while he continued to draw breath.

ðeɪ hæd kæmp nɪɹ ðə dʒəhænə ɹoʊɾ ən wəd kɹɔs ɪɾ ɑn ðə mɑɹoʊ tə kəntɪnju nɔɹθ. hi hæd sɛn ə pətʃɹoʊl tə wɑtʃ ðə ɹoʊd. hi wɑntəd tə noʊ wʌt kaɪndə tʃɹæfɪk ðə haɪweɪ wɑz dʒɹɔɪŋ, ən i wɑz ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ niɾ ə səplaɪz.

They had camped near the Jehannah Road and would cross it on the morrow to continue north. He had sent a patrol to watch the road. He wanted to know what kind of traffic the highway was drawing, and he was in particular need of supplies.

ɡɑləd kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn ɪz ɹaʊnz θɹu kæmp, əkʌmpənid baɪ ə hændfʊl ə maʊntəɾ ətɛndəns, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ði eɪks ə hɪz vɛɹiəs wunz. ðə kæmp wɑz ɔɹɾɝli ən nit. ðə tɛns wɝ ɡɹup baɪ lidʒən, ðən sɛɾ ʌp fɔɹmɪŋ kənsɛntʃɹɪk ɹɪŋz wɪð noʊ stʃɹeɪt pæθweɪz. ðət wɑz ɪntɛndəd tə kənfjuz ən sloʊ ətækɝz.

Galad continued on his rounds through camp, accompanied by a handful of mounted attendants, ignoring the aches of his various wounds. The camp was orderly and neat. The tents were grouped by legion, then set up forming concentric rings with no straight pathways. That was intended to confuse and slow attackers.

ə sɛkʃən ə ðə kæmp leɪ ɛmpti nɪɹ ðə mɪɾəl. ə hoʊl ɪn ðə fɔɹmeɪʃən wɛɹ ðə kwɛstʃənɝz hæd wʌns sɛɾ ʌp ðɛɹ tɛns. hi hæɾ ɔɹɾɝd ði ɑustʃənɝz spɹɛɾ aʊt, tu əsaɪn tə itʃ kʌmpəni. ɪf ðə kwɛstʃənɝz wɝ nɑt sɛɾ əpɑɹt fɹəm ði ʌðɝz, pɝhæps ðeɪ wəd fil mɔɹ kɪnʃɪp wɪð ði ʌðɝ tʃɪlʒɹən. ɡɑləd meɪɾ ə noʊt tə hɪmsɛlf tə dʒɹɔ ʌp ə nu kæmp leɪaʊt, ɪlɪməneɪɾɪŋ ðət hoʊl.

A section of the camp lay empty near the middle. A hole in the formation where the Questioners had once set up their tents. He had ordered the Ouestioners spread out, two assigned to each company. If the Questioners were not set apart from the others, perhaps they would feel more kinship with the other Children. Galad made a note to himself to draw up a new camp layout, eliminating that hole.

ɡɑləɾ ən ɪz kəmpænjənz kəntɪnjud θɹu ðə kæmp. hi ɹoʊd tə bi sin, ən mɛn səluɾəd əz i pæst. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd wɛl ðə wɝdz ðət ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn hæd wʌns sɛd: moʊst ə ðə taɪm, ə dʒɛnɝəlz moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt fʌŋkʃən wɑz nɑt tə meɪk dɪsɪʒənz, bʌt tə ɹimaɪn mɛn ðət sʌmwʌn wəd meɪk dɪsɪʒənz.

Galad and his companions continued through the camp. He rode to be seen, and men saluted as he passed. He remembered well the words that Gareth Bryne had once said: Most of the time, a general's most important function was not to make decisions, but to remind men that someone would make decisions.

"maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," sɛd wʌn ə hɪz kəmpænjənz. bɹændəl vɔɹdɛɹiən. hi wɑz ən oʊldɝ mæn, ɛldəst ə ðə lɔɹdz kæptən u sɝvd ʌndɝ ɡɑləd. "aɪ wɪʃ jə wəd ɹikənsɪɾɝ sɛndɪŋ ðɪs mɪsɪv."

"My Lord Captain Commander," said one of his companions. Brandel Vordarian. He was an older man, eldest of the Lords Captain who served under Galad. "I wish you would reconsider sending this missive."

vɔɹdɛɹiən ɹoʊd dɝɛkli bɪsaɪd ɡɑləd, wɪð tʃɹɑm ɑn ɪz ʌðɝ saɪd. lɔɹdz kæptən ɡəlivɝ ən hɑɹnɪʃ ɹoʊd bɪhaɪnd, wɪðɪn ɪɹʃɑt, ən bɔɹnhəl fɑloʊd, æktɪŋ əz ɡɑləɾ ɛs bɑɾiɡɑɹd fəɹ ðə deɪ.

Vordarian rode directly beside Galad, with Trom on his other side. Lords Captain Golever and Harnesh rode behind, within earshot, and Bornhald followed, acting as Galad s bodyguard for the day.

"ðə lɛɾɝ mʌs bi sɛnt," ɡɑləd sɛd.

"The letter must be sent," Galad said.

"ɪt simz fulhɑɹɾi, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," vɔɹdɛɹiən kəntɪnjud. klin-ʃeɪvən, wɪð sɪlvɝ wɑʃɪŋ ɪz ɡoʊldən hɛɹ, ði ændɔɝən wɑz ən ɪnɔɹməs skwɛɹ ʌv ə mæn. ɡɑləd wɑz veɪɡli fəmɪljɝ wɪð vɔɹdɛɹiənz fæmli, maɪnɝ noʊbəlz u hæd bɪn ɪnvɑlvd ɪn ɪz mʌðɝz kɔɹt.

"It seems foolhardy, my Lord Captain Commander," Vordarian continued. Clean-shaven, with silver washing his golden hair, the Andoran was an enormous square of a man. Galad was vaguely familiar with Vordarian's family, minor nobles who had been involved in his mother's court.

oʊnli ə ful ɹəfjuz tə lɪsən tə ædvaɪs fɹəm ðoʊz oʊldɝ ən waɪzɝ ðən hɪmsɛlf. bʌɾ oʊnli ə ful tʊk ɔl ə ði ædvaɪs ɡɪvən hɪm.

Only a fool refused to listen to advice from those older and wiser than himself. But only a fool took all of the advice given him.

"pɝhæps fulhɑɹɾi," ɡɑləd ɹɪplaɪd. "bʌɾ ɪts ðə ɹaɪt θɪŋ tə du." ðə lɛɾɝ wɑz ədʒɹɛs tə ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ kwɛstʃənɝz ən tʃɪlʒɹən ʌndɝ ðə kəntʃɹoʊl ə ðə sintʃæn; ðəɹ wəd bi səm u hæd nɑt kʌm wɪð æsu-nɑwə. ɪn ðə lɛɾɝ, ɡɑləɾ ɪkspleɪnd wʌt hæd hæpənd, ən kəmændəɾ əm tə ɹipɔɹt tə hɪm əz sun əz pɑsəbəl. ɪt wɑz ənlaɪkli ɛni wəd kʌm, bʌt ði ʌðɝz hæɾ ə ɹaɪt tə noʊ wʌt hæd hæpənd.

"Perhaps foolhardy," Galad replied. "But it is the right thing to do." The letter was addressed to the remaining Questioners and Children under the control of the Seanchan; there would be some who had not come with Asu-nawa. In the letter, Galad explained what had happened, and commanded them to report to him as soon as possible. It was unlikely any would come, but the others had a right to know what had happened.

lɔɹd vɔɹdɛɹiən saɪd, ðən meɪd weɪ əz hɑɹnɪʃ ɹoʊɾ ʌp bɪsaɪd ɡɑləd. ðə bɔl mæn skɹætʃt æbsənli ət ðə skɑɹ tɪsju wɛɹ ɪz lɛft ɪɹ hæd bɪn. "ɪnʌf əbaʊt ðɪs lɛɾɝ, vɔɹdɛɹiən. ðə weɪ jə ɡoʊ ɑn əbaʊɾ ɪt tʃɹaɪz maɪ peɪʃəns." fɹəm ɡɑlədz ɑbzɝveɪʃən, ðəɹ wɝ mɛni θɪŋz ðət tʃɹaɪd ðə mʊɹændiənz peɪʃəns.

Lord Vordarian sighed, then made way as Harnesh rode up beside Galad. The bald man scratched absently at the scar tissue where his left ear had been. "Enough about this letter, Vordarian. The way you go on about it tries my patience." From Galad's observation, there were many things that tried the Murandian's patience.

"ju hæv ʌðɝ mæɾɝz jə wɪʃ tə dɪskʌs, aɪ əsum?" ɡɑləd nɑɾəd tə ə pɛɹ ə tʃɪlʒɹən kʌɾɪŋ lɔɡz, hu stɑp ðɛɹ wɝk tə səlut hɪm.

"You have other matters you wish to discuss, I assume?" Galad nodded to a pair of Children cutting logs, who stopped their work to salute him.

"ju toʊl tʃaɪl bɔɹnhəld, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ, ən ʌðɝz ðət jə plæn tə əlaɪ əs wɪð ðə wɪtʃəz ə tɑɹ vəlɑn!"

"You told Child Bornhald, Child Byar, and others that you plan to ally us with the witches of Tar Valon!"

ɡɑləd nɑɾəd. "aɪ ʌndɝstæn ðət ðə noʊʃən maɪt bi tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪf jə kənsɪɾɝ, jəl si ðəɾ ɪts ði oʊnli ɹaɪt dɪsɪʒən."

Galad nodded. "I understand that the notion might be troubling, but if you consider, you will see that it is the only right decision."

"bʌt ðə wɪtʃəz ɑɹ ivəl!"

"But the witches are evil!"

"pɝhæps," ɡɑləd sɛd. wʌns, hi maɪɾ əv dɪnaɪd ðæt. bʌt lɪsnɪŋ tə ði ʌðɝ tʃɪlʒɹən, ən kənsɪɾɝɪŋ wʌt ðoʊz ət tɑɹ vəlɑn hæd dʌn tə  hɪz sɪstɝ, wɑz meɪkɪŋ ɪm θɪŋk i maɪt bi tu sɑft ɑn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. "haʊɛvɝ, lɔɹd hɑɹnɪʃ, ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ ivəl, ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪnsɪɡnjɪfɪkənt wən kəmpɛɹd tə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ðə læs bæɾəl kʌmz. dʒju dɪnaɪ ðɪs?"

"Perhaps," Galad said. Once, he might have denied that. But listening to the other Children, and considering what those at Tar Valon had done to | his sister, was making him think he might be too soft on the Aes Sedai. "However, Lord Harnesh, if they are evil, they are insignificant when compared to the Dark One. The Last Battle comes. Do you deny this?"

hɑɹnɪʃ ən ði ʌðɝz lʊkt ʌp ət ðə skaɪ. ðət dʒɹɪɹi oʊvɝkæs hæd stʃɹɛtʃt fəɹ wiks naʊ.

Harnesh and the others looked up at the sky. That dreary overcast had stretched for weeks now.

ðə deɪ bɪfɔɹ, ənʌðɝ mæn hæd fɔlən tə ə stʃɹeɪnʒ ɪlnəs wɛɹ biɾəlz hæd kʌm fɹəm ɪz maʊθ əz i kɔft. ðɛɹ fud stɔɹz wɝ dɪmɪnɪʃɪŋ əz mɔɹ ən mɔɹ wɑz faʊn spɔɪld.

The day before, another man had fallen to a strange illness where beetles had come from his mouth as he coughed. Their food stores were diminishing as more and more was found spoiled.

"noʊ, aɪ də nɑt dɪnaɪ ɪt," hɑɹnɪʃ mʌɾɝd.

"No, I do not deny it," Harnesh muttered.

"ðɛn jə ʃəd ɹɪdʒɔɪs," ɡɑləd sɛd, "fɔɹ ðə weɪ ɪz klɪɹ. wi mʌs faɪɾ ət ðə læs bæɾəl. əɹ liɾɝʃɪp ðəɹ meɪ ʃoʊ ðə weɪ ʌv laɪt tə mɛni hu hæv spɝn ʌs. bʌɾ ɪf ɪt dʌz nɑt, wɪl faɪt ɹəɡɑɹdləs, fəɹ ɪts əɹ duɾi. dʒju dɪnaɪ ðɪs, lɔɹd kæptən?"

"Then you should rejoice," Galad said, "for the way is clear. We must fight at the Last Battle. Our leadership there may show the way of Light to many who have spurned us. But if it does not, we will fight regardless, for it is our duty. Do you deny this, Lord Captain?"

"əɡɛn, noʊ. bʌt ðə wɪtʃəz, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ?"

"Again, no. But the witches, my Lord Captain Commander?"

ɡɑləd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ kən θɪŋk ə noʊ weɪ ɝaʊn ɪt. wi niɾ ælaɪz. lʊk əbaʊt ju, lɔɹd hɑɹnɪʃ. haʊ mɛni tʃɪlʒɹən də wi hæv? ivən wɪð ɹisən ɹəkɹuts, wəɹ ʌndɝ twɛnti θaʊzənd.

Galad shook his head. "I can think of no way around it. We need allies. Look about you, Lord Harnesh. How many Children do we have? Even with recent recruits, we are under twenty thousand.

əɹ fɔɹtʃɹəs əz bɪn teɪkən. wəɹ wɪθaʊt sʌkɝ əɹ əlidʒəns, ən ðə ɡɹeɪt neɪʃənz ə ðə wɝld ɹɛvaɪl ʌs. noʊ, doʊn dɪnaɪ ɪt! jə noʊ ðəɾ ɪts tʃɹu."

Our fortress has been taken. We are without succor or allegiance, and the great nations of the world revile us. No, don't deny it! You know that it is true."

ɡɑləd mɛt ði aɪz ə ðoʊz ɝaʊn hɪm, ən wʌn baɪ wʌn ðeɪ nɑɾəd.

Galad met the eyes of those around him, and one by one they nodded.

"ðə kwɛstʃənɝz ɑɹ ət fɔlt," hɑɹnɪʃ mʌɾɝd.

"The Questioners are at fault," Harnesh muttered.

"pɑɹɾ ə ðə bleɪm ɪz ðɛɹz," ɡɑləɾ əɡɹid. "bʌɾ ɪts ɔlsoʊ kəz ðoʊz u wəd də ivəl lʊk wɪð dɪsɡʌst ən ɹɪzɛnmənt əpɑn ðoʊz u stæn fəɹ wʌɾ ɪz ɹaɪt."

"Part of the blame is theirs," Galad agreed. "But it is also because those who would do evil look with disgust and resentment upon those who stand for what is right."

ði ʌðɝz nɑɾəd.

The others nodded.

"wi mʌs tʃɹɛd kɛɹfəli," ɡɑləd sɛd. "ɪn ðə pæst, ðə boʊlnəs - ən pɝhæps oʊvɝiɡɝnəs -  ʌv ðə tʃɪlʒɹən əz eɪliəneɪɾəd ðoʊz u ʃʊɾə bɪn əɹ ælaɪz. maɪ mʌðɝ ɔlweɪz sɛd ðəɾ ə vɪktɝi ʌv dɪploʊməsi dɪd nɑt kʌm wən ɛvɹiwʌn ɡɑt wʌt ðeɪ wɑntəd - ðət meɪɾ ɛvɹiwʌn əsum ðeɪd ɡɑɾən ðə bɛɾɝ ə hɝ, wɪtʃ ɛnkɝɪdʒ mɔɹ ɪkstʃɹævəɡən dɪmænz. ðə tʃɹɪk ɪz nɑt tə sæɾəsfaɪ ɛvɹiwʌn, bʌt tə liv ɛvɹiwʌn filɪŋ ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə bɛs pɑsəbəl ɹɪzʌlt. ðeɪ mʌs bi sæɾəsfaɪd ɪnʌf tə də əz jə wɪʃ, jɛt dɪsæɾəsfaɪd ɪnʌf tə noʊ ðət jə bɛstɪd ðɛm."

"We must tread carefully," Galad said. "In the past, the boldness - and perhaps overeagerness -  of the Children has alienated those who should have been our allies. My mother always said that a victory of diplomacy did not come when everyone got what they wanted - that made everyone assume they'd gotten the better of her, which encouraged more extravagant demands. The trick is not to satisfy everyone, but to leave everyone feeling they reached the best possible result. They must be satisfied enough to do as you wish, yet dissatisfied enough to know that you bested them."

"ænd wʌt dʌz ðɪs əv tə də wɪð ʌs?" ɡəlivɝ sɛd fɹəm bɪhaɪnd. "wi fɑloʊ noʊ kwin əɹ kɪŋ."

"And what does this have to do with us?" Golever said from behind. "We follow no queen or king."

"jɛs," ɡɑləd sɛd, "æn ðət fɹaɪɾənz mɑnɑɹks. aɪ ɡɹu ʌp ɪn ðə kɔɹɾ ʌv ændɝ. aɪ noʊ haʊ maɪ mʌðɝ ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. ɪn ɛvɹi dilɪŋ wɪð ðɛm, ʃi iðɝ ɡɹu fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd əɹ dɪsaɪɾɪd ðət ʃi hæd tə səpɹɛs əm æbsəlutli. wi kænɑɾ əfɔɹɾ iðɝ ɹiækʃən! ðə mɑnɑɹks ə ðiz lænz mʌst ɹɪspɛkt ʌs, nɑt heɪɾ ʌs."

"Yes," Galad said, "and that frightens monarchs. I grew up in the court of Andor. I know how my mother regarded the Children. In every dealing with them, she either grew frustrated or decided that she had to suppress them absolutely. We cannot afford either reaction! The monarchs of these lands must respect us, not hate us."

"dɑɹkfɹɛnz," hɑɹnɪʃ mʌɾɝd.

"Darkfriends," Harnesh muttered.

"maɪ mʌðɝ wɑz noʊ dɑɹkfɹɛnd," ɡɑləd sɛd kwaɪətli.

"My mother was no Darkfriend," Galad said quietly.

hɑɹnɪʃ flʌʃt. "ɛksɛptɪŋ hɝ, ʌv kɔɹs."

Harnesh flushed. "Excepting her, of course."

"ju spik laɪk ə kwɛstʃənɝ," ɡɑləd sɛd. "səspɛktɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn u əpoʊzɪz əs ə biɪŋ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd. mɛni ʌv əm ɑɹ ɪnfluəns baɪ ðə ʃædoʊ, bʌɾ aɪ daʊt ðəɾ ɪts kɑnʃəs. ðəɾ ɪz wɛɹ ðə hæn ə ðə laɪt wɛn ɹɔŋ. ðə kwɛstʃənɝz ɔfən kəd nɑt tɛl ðə dɪfɝəns bɪtwin ə hɑɹɾənd dɑɹkfɹɛnd, ə pɝsən u wɑz biɪŋ ɪnfluəns baɪ dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ən ə pɝsən u sɪmpli dɪsəɡɹid wɪð ðə tʃɪlʒɹən."

"You speak like a Questioner," Galad said. "Suspecting everyone who opposes us of being a Darkfriend. Many of them are influenced by the Shadow, but I doubt that it is conscious. That is where the Hand of the Light went wrong. The Questioners often could not tell the difference between a hardened Darkfriend, a person who was being influenced by Darkfriends, and a person who simply disagreed with the Children."

"soʊ wʌt də wi du?" vɔɹdɛɹiən æskt. "wi baʊ tə ðə wɪmz ə mɑnɑɹks?"

"So what do we do?" Vordarian asked. "We bow to the whims of monarchs?"

"aɪ doʊn jɛt noʊ wʌt tə du," ɡɑləd kənfɛst. "aɪ wɪl θɪŋk ɑn ɪt. ðə ɹaɪt kɔɹs wɪl kʌm tə mi. wi kænɑt bɪkʌm læpdɔɡz tə kɪŋz ən kwinz. ən jɛt, θɪŋk ʌv wʌt wi kəɾ ətʃiv ɪnsaɪɾ ʌv ə neɪʃənz baʊndɝiz ɪf wi kəɾ ækt wɪθaʊt niɾɪŋ ən ɪntaɪɝ lidʒən tə ɪntɪmɪdeɪt ðət neɪʃənz ɹulɝ."

"I don't yet know what to do," Galad confessed. "I will think on it. The right course will come to me. We cannot become lapdogs to kings and queens. And yet, think of what we could achieve inside of a nations boundaries if we could act without needing an entire legion to intimidate that nation's ruler."

ði ʌðɝz nɑɾəd ət ðɪs, θɔtfəl.

The others nodded at this, thoughtful.

"maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ!" ə vɔɪs kɔld.

"My Lord Captain Commander!" a voice called.

ɡɑləd tɝn tə si baɪɑɝ ɑn ɪz waɪt stæljən kæntɝɪŋ təwɔɹd ðɛm. ðə hɔɹs hæd bɪlɔŋ tə əsunɑwə; ɡɑləd hæd ɹəfjuzd ɪt, pɹɪfɝɪŋ ɪz oʊn beɪ. ɡɑləd pʊld ɪz ɡɹup tə ə hɔlt əz ðə ɡɔnt- feɪs baɪɑɝ nɪɹd, hɪz waɪt tɑbɝd pɹɪstin. baɪɑɝ wɑzn ðə moʊs laɪkəbəl ə mɛn ɪn ðə kæmp, bʌɾ i hæd pɹuvən tə bi lɔɪəl.

Galad turned to see Byar on his white stallion cantering toward them. The horse had belonged to Asunawa; Galad had refused it, preferring his own bay. Galad pulled his group to a halt as the gaunt- faced Byar neared, his white tabard pristine. Byar wasn't the most likable of men in the camp, but he had proven to be loyal.

baɪɑɝ wɑz nɑt, haʊɛvɝ, səpoʊz tə bi ɪn ðə kæmp.

Byar was not, however, supposed to be in the camp.

"aɪ sɛt jə wɑtʃɪŋ dʒəhænə ɹoʊd, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ," ɡɑləd sɛd fɝmli. "ðæt duɾi wɑz nɑt tə ɛn fəɹ ə ɡʊd fɔɹ aʊɝz jɛt."

"I set you watching Jehannah Road, Child Byar," Galad said firmly. "That duty was not to end for a good four hours yet."

baɪɑɝ səluɾəd əz i pʊld ʌp. "maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ. wi kæptʃɝɾ ə səspɪʃəs ɡɹup ə tʃɹævəlɝz ɑn ðə ɹoʊd. wʌt wəd juv əs də wɪð ðɛm?"

Byar saluted as he pulled up. "My Lord Captain Commander. We captured a suspicious group of travelers on the road. What would you have us do with them?"

"ju kæptʃɝd ðɛm?" ɡɑləɾ æskt. "aɪ sɛn jə tə wɑtʃ ðə ɹoʊd, nɑt teɪk pɹɪznɝz."

"You captured them?" Galad asked. "I sent you to watch the road, not take prisoners."

"maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," baɪɑɝ sɛd. "haʊ ɑɹ wi tə noʊ ðə kɛɹɪktɝ ə ðoʊz pæsɪŋ ənlɛs wi spik wɪð ðɛm? jə wɑntəɾ əs tə wɑtʃ fəɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz."

"My Lord Captain Commander," Byar said. "How are we to know the character of those passing unless we speak with them? You wanted us to watch for Darkfriends."

ɡɑləd saɪd. "aɪ wɑntəd jə tə wɑtʃ fəɹ tʃɹup muvməns əɹ mɝtʃəns wi kəɾ əpɹoʊtʃ, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ."

Galad sighed. "I wanted you to watch for troop movements or merchants we could approach, Child Byar."

ðiz dɑɹkfɹɛnz əv səplaɪz," baɪɑɝ sɛd. "aɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ maɪt bi mɝtʃəns."

These Darkfriends have supplies," Byar said. "I think they might be merchants."

ɡɑləd saɪd. noʊbɑdi kəd dɪnaɪ baɪɑɝz dɛɾəkeɪʃən - hid ɹɪɾən wɪð ɡɑləd tə feɪs vɑldə wən ɪt cʊɾə mɛn ði ɛn ə hɪz kɝɪɹ. ən jɛt ðəɹ wɑz sətʃ ə θɪŋ əz biɪŋ tu zɛləs.

Galad sighed. Nobody could deny Byar's dedication - he'd ridden with Galad to face Valda when it could have meant the end of his career. And yet there was such a thing as being too zealous.

ðə θɪn ɔfəsɝ lʊk tʃɹʌbəld. wɛl, ɡɑləɾ ɛs ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz hædn bɪn pɹɪsaɪs ɪnʌf. hi wəɾ əv tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðəɾ ɪn ðə fjutʃɝ, pɑɹ-tɪkjəlɝli wɪð baɪɑɝ. "pis," ɡɑləd sɛd, "ju dɪd noʊ ɹɔŋ, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ. haʊ mɛni ʌv ðiz pɹɪznɝz ɑɹ ðɛɹ?"

The thin officer looked troubled. Well, Galad s instructions hadn't been precise enough. He would have to remember that in the future, par-ticularly with Byar. "Peace," Galad said, "you did no wrong, Child Byar. How many of these prisoners are there?"

"dʌzənz, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ." baɪɑɝ lʊkt ɹɪlivd. "kʌm."

"Dozens, my Lord Captain Commander." Byar looked relieved. "Come."

hi tɝn ɪz maʊn tə lid ðə weɪ. ɔlɹɛɾi, kʊk faɪɝz wɝ spɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp ɪn ðə pɪts, ðə sɛn ə bɝnɪŋ tɪndɝ ɹaɪzɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ. ɡɑləd kɑt slaɪsəz ə kɑnvɝseɪʃən əz i ɹoʊd pæs ðə soʊlʒɝz. wʌt wəd ðə sintʃæn də wɪð ðoʊz tʃɪlʒɹən u hæd ɹɪmeɪn bɪhaɪnd? wɑz ɪt ɹɪli ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn u hæd kɑŋkɝɾ ɪljən ən tiɹ, əɹ səm fɔls dʒɹæɡən? ðəɹ wɑz tɔk ʌv ə dʒaɪɡæntɪk stoʊn fɹəm ðə skaɪ hævɪŋ stʃɹʌk ði ɝθ fɑɹ tə ðə nɔɹθ ɪn ændɝ, dɪstʃɹɔɪɪŋ ən ɪntaɪɝ sɪɾi ən livɪŋ ə kɹeɪɾɝ.

He turned his mount to lead the way. Already, cook fires were springing up in the pits, the scent of burning tinder rising in the air. Galad caught slices of conversation as he rode past the soldiers. What would the Seanchan do with those Children who had remained behind? Was it really the Dragon Reborn who had conquered Illian and Tear, or some false Dragon? There was talk of a gigantic stone from the sky having struck the earth far to the north in Andor, destroying an entire city and leaving a crater.

ðə tɔk əmʌŋ ðə mɛn ɹɪvil ðɛɹ wɝiz. ðeɪ ʃəɾ əv ʌndɝstʊd ðət wɝi sɝv noʊ jusfəl fʌŋkʃən. nʌn kəd noʊ ðə wivɪŋ ə ðə wil.

The talk among the men revealed their worries. They should have understood that worry served no useful function. None could know the weaving of the Wheel.

baɪɑɝz kæptɪvz tɝn aʊt tə bi ə ɡɹup ə pipəl wɪð ə sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝ ə hɛvəli leɪɾən kɑɹts, pɝhæps ə hʌnʒɹəd əɹ mɔɹ. ðə pipəl klʌstɝd təɡɛðɝ ɝaʊn ðɛɹ kɑɹts, ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən wɪð hɑstɪləɾi. ɡɑləd fɹaʊnd, duɪŋ ə kwɪk ɪnspɛkʃən.

Byar's captives turned out to be a group of people with a surprisingly large number of heavily laden carts, perhaps a hundred or more. The people clustered together around their carts, regarding the Children with hostility. Galad frowned, doing a quick inspection.

"ðæts kwaɪɾ ə kæɹəvæn," bɔɹnhəl sɛd sɔfli əɾ ɪz saɪd. "mɝtʃəns?"

"That's quite a caravan," Bornhald said softly at his side. "Merchants?"

"noʊ," ɡɑləd sɛd sɔfli. "ðæts tʃɹævəl fɝnɪtʃɝ - noʊɾəs ðə pɛɡz ɑn ðə saɪdz, soʊ ðeɪ kən bi kæɹiɾ ɪn pisəz. sæks ə bɑɹli fəɹ hɔɹsəz. ðoʊz ɑɹ fɛɹiɝz tulz ɹæpt ɪn kænvəs ət ðə bæk ə ðət kɑɹt tə ðə ɹaɪt. si ðə hæmɝz pikɪŋ aʊt?"

"No," Galad said softly. "That's travel furniture - notice the pegs on the sides, so they can be carried in pieces. Sacks of barley for horses. Those are farrier's tools wrapped in canvas at the back of that cart to the right. See the hammers peeking out?"

"laɪt!" bɔɹnhəld wɪspɝd. hi sɔ ɪt tu. ðiz wɝ ðə kæmp fɑloʊɝz ʌv ən ɑɹmi ʌv səbstæntʃəl saɪz. bʌt wɛɹ wɝ ðə soʊlʒɝz?

"Light!" Bornhald whispered. He saw it too. These were the camp followers of an army of substantial size. But where were the soldiers?

"bi ɹɛɾi tə sɛpɝeɪt ðɛm," ɡɑləd toʊl bɔɹnhəld, dɪsmaʊntɪŋ. hi wɔkt ʌp tə ðə lɛd kɑɹt.

"Be ready to separate them," Galad told Bornhald, dismounting. He walked up to the lead cart.

ðə mæn dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ɪt hæɾ ə θɪk fɪɡjɝ ən ə ɹʌɾi feɪs, wɪð hɛɹ ðət hæd bɪn ɝeɪnʒd ɪn ə vɛɹi pʊɹ ətɛmpt ət haɪɾɪŋ ɪz ɪnkɹisɪŋ bɔlnəs. hi nɝvəsli wɝkt ə bɹaʊn fɛl hæɾ ɪn ɪz hænz, ə pɛɹ ʌv ɡlʌvz tʌkt ɪndə ðə bɛlt ə hɪz staʊt dʒækət. ɡɑləd kəd si noʊ wɛpənz ɑn hɪm.

The man driving it had a thick figure and a ruddy face, with hair that had been arranged in a very poor attempt at hiding his increasing baldness. He nervously worked a brown felt hat in his hands, a pair of gloves tucked into the belt of his stout jacket. Galad could see no weapons on him.

bɪsaɪd ðə kɑɹt stʊd tu ʌðɝz, mʌtʃ jʌŋɡɝ. wʌn wɑz ə bʌlki, mʌskjəlɝ taɪp wɪð ðə lʊk ʌv ə faɪɾɝ - bʌt nɑɾ ə soʊlʒɝ - hu kəd bi səm tʃɹʌbəl. ə pɹɪɾi wʊmən klʌtʃt ɪz ɑɹm, baɪɾɪŋ əɹ loʊɝ lɪp.

Beside the cart stood two others, much younger. One was a bulky, muscular type with the look of a fighter - but not a soldier - who could be some trouble. A pretty woman clutched his arm, biting her lower lip.

ðə mæn ɪn ðə kɑɹt ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ əpɑn siɪŋ ɡɑləd. ɑ, ɡɑləd θɔt, soʊ hi noʊz ɪnʌf tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz mɔɹɡeɪsəz stɛpsʌn.

The man in the cart gave a start upon seeing Galad. Ah, Galad thought, so he knows enough to recognize Morgase's stepson.

"soʊ, tʃɹævəlɝz," ɡɑləd sɛd kɛɹfəli. "maɪ mæn sɛz jə toʊld ɪm ðət jə ɑɹ mɝtʃəns?"

"So, travelers," Galad said carefully. "My man says you told him that you are merchants?"

"jɛs, ɡʊd lɔɹd," sɛd ðə dʒɹaɪvɝ.

"Yes, good Lord," said the driver.

"aɪ noʊ lɪɾəl ə ðɪs ɛɹiə. ɑɹ jə fəmɪljɝ wɪð ɪt?"

"I know little of this area. Are you familiar with it?"

"nɑt mʌtʃ, sɝ," ðə dʒɹaɪvɝ sɛd, ɹɪŋɪŋ ðət hæɾ ɪn ɪz hænz. "wi ɑɹ æktʃəli  fɑɹ fɹəm hoʊm aɪm æm bɑzəl ɡɪl, ʌv keɪɛmlɪn. aɪ hæv kʌm saʊθ sikɪŋ bɪznəs wɪð ə mɝtʃən ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ. bʌt ðiz ʃɔn-tʃæn ɪnveɪɾɝz əv lɛf mi əneɪbəl tə də maɪ tʃɹeɪd."

"Not much, sir," the driver said, wringing that hat in his hands. "We are actually far from home ourselves. I am Basel Gill, of Caemlyn. I have come south seeking business with a merchant in Ebou Dar. But these Sean-chan invaders have left me unable to do my trade."

hi sim vɛɹi nɝvəs. ət list i hædn laɪɾ əbaʊt wɛɹ i wɑz fɹʌm. "ænd wʌt wɑz ðɪs mɝtʃəns neɪm?" ɡɑləɾ æskt.

He seemed very nervous. At least he hadn't lied about where he was from. "And what was this merchant's name?" Galad asked.

"waɪ, fælɪn dɛbɝʃə, maɪ lɔɹd," ɡɪl sɛd. "ɑɹ jə fəmɪljɝ wɪð ɛbu dɑɹ?"

"Why, Falin Deborsha, my Lord," Gill said. "Are you familiar with Ebou Dar?"

"aɪ hæv bɪn ðɛɹ," ɡɑləd sɛd kɑmli. "ðɪs ɪz kwaɪɾ ə kæɹəvæn jə hæv. ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ kəlɛkʃən ʌv wɛɹz."

"I have been there," Galad said calmly. "This is quite a caravan you have. Interesting collection of wares."

"wi hæv hɝd ðət ðəɹ ɑɹ ɑɹmiz moʊbəlaɪzɪŋ hɪɹ ɪn ðə saʊθ, maɪ lɔɹd. aɪ pɝtʃəs mɛni ʌv ðiz səplaɪz fɹəm ə mɝsənɛɹi tʃɹup u wɑz dɪsbændɪŋ, ən θɔɾ aɪ kəd sɛl əm daʊn hɪɹ.

"We have heard that there are armies mobilizing here in the south, my Lord. I purchased many of these supplies from a mercenary troop who was disbanding, and thought I could sell them down here.

pɝhæps jəɹ oʊn ɑɹmi hæz niɾ ə kæmp fɝnɪtʃɝ? wɪv tɛns, moʊbəl smɪθi ɪkwɪpmənt, ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət soʊlʒɝz kəd juz."

Perhaps your own army has need of camp furniture? We have tents, mobile smithy equipment, everything that soldiers could use."

klɛvɝ, ɡɑləd θɔt. ɡɑləd maɪɾ əv æksɛptɪd ðə laɪ, bʌt ðə "mɝtʃənt" hæd tu mɛni kʊks, wɑʃwɪmən, ən fɛɹiɝz wɪð hɪm, ən nɑt nɪɹli ɪnʌf ɡɑɹdz fəɹ soʊ væljəbəl ə kæɹəvæn.

Clever, Galad thought. Galad might have accepted the lie, but the "merchant" had too many cooks, washwomen, and farriers with him, and not nearly enough guards for so valuable a caravan.

"aɪ si," ɡɑləd sɛd. "wɛl, ɪt hæpənz ðəɾ aɪ də hæv niɾ ə səplaɪz. pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli fud."

"I see," Galad said. "Well, it happens that I do have need of supplies. Particularly food."

"əlæs, maɪ lɔɹd," ðə mæn sɛd. "aʊɝ fud kænɑt bi spɛɹd. ɛniθɪŋ ɛls əl sɛl, bʌt ðə fuɾ aɪ hæv pɹɑməs baɪ mɛsənʒɝ tə sʌmwʌn ɪn luɡɹd."

"Alas, my Lord," the man said. "Our food cannot be spared. Anything else I will sell, but the food I have promised by messenger to someone in Lugard."

"aɪ wɪl peɪ mɔɹ."

"I will pay more."

"aɪ meɪɾ ə pɹɑməs, maɪ ɡʊd lɔɹd," ðə mæn sɛd. "aɪ kəd nɑt bɹeɪk ɪt, ɹəɡɑɹdləs ə ðə pɹaɪs."

"I made a promise, my good Lord," the man said. "I could not break it, regardless of the price."

"aɪ si." ɡɑləd weɪv tə bɔɹnhəld. ðə soʊlʒɝ ɡeɪv kəmænz, ən tʃɪlʒɹən ɪn waɪt tɑbɝdz muv fɔɹwɝd, wɛpənz aʊt.

"I see." Galad waved to Bornhald. The soldier gave commands, and Children in white tabards moved forward, weapons out.

"wʌt . . . wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ?" ɡɪl æskt.

"What . . . what are you doing?" Gill asked.

"sɛpɝeɪɾɪŋ jəɹ pipəl," ɡɑləd sɛd. "wil tɔk tə itʃ ə ðɛm əloʊn ən si ɪf ðɛɹ stɔɹiz mætʃ. aɪ wɝi ðət jə maɪɾ əv bɪn . . . ʌn-fɔɹθkʌmɪŋ wɪð ʌs. æftɝ ɔl, wʌɾ ɪt simz laɪk tə mi ɪz ðət jə ɑɹ ðə kæmp fɑloʊɝz ʌv ə lɑɹdʒ ɑɹmi. ɪf ðəɾ ɪz ðə keɪs, ðən aɪ wəd vɛɹi mʌtʃ laɪk tə noʊ huz ɑɹmi ɪɾ ɪz, nɑt tə mɛnʃən wɛɹ ɪɾ ɪz."

"Separating your people," Galad said. "We'll talk to each of them alone and see if their stories match. I worry that you might have been . . . un-forthcoming with us. After all, what it seems like to me is that you are the camp followers of a large army. If that is the case, then I would very much like to know whose army it is, not to mention where it is."

ɡɪlz fɔɹhɛd stɑɹɾəd tə swɛɾ əz ɡɑlədz soʊlʒɝz ɪfɪʃənli sɛpɝeɪɾəd ðə kæptɪvz. ɡɑləd weɪɾəd fəɹ ə taɪm wɑtʃɪŋ ɡɪl. ɪvɛntʃəwəli bɔɹnhəld ən baɪɑɝ keɪm dʒɑɡɪŋ ʌp tə hɪm, hænz ɑn ðɛɹ sɔɹdz.

Gill's forehead started to sweat as Galad's soldiers efficiently separated the captives. Galad waited for a time watching Gill. Eventually Bornhald and Byar came jogging up to him, hands on their swords.

"maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," bɔɹnhəl sɛɾ ɝdʒənli.

"My Lord Captain Commander," Bornhald said urgently.

ɡɑləd tɝn əweɪ fɹəm ɡɪl. "jɛs?"

Galad turned away from Gill. "Yes?"

"wi meɪ hæv ə sɪtʃueɪʃən hɪɹ," bɔɹnhəl sɛd. hɪz feɪs wɑz flʌʃt wɪð æŋɡɝ. bɪsaɪd hɪm, baɪɑɝz aɪz wɝ waɪd, ɔlmoʊs fɹɛnzid. "sʌm ə ðə pɹɪznɝz əv tɔkt. ɪts əz jə fɪɹd. ə lɑɹdʒ ɑɹmi ɪz nɪɹbaɪ. ðeɪv skɝmɪʃt wɪð il - ðoʊz fɛloʊz oʊvɝ ðəɹ ɪn ðə waɪt ɹoʊbz ɑɹ æktʃəli  il ðɛmsɛlvz."

"We may have a situation here," Bornhald said. His face was flushed with anger. Beside him, Byar's eyes were wide, almost frenzied. "Some of the prisoners have talked. It's as you feared. A large army is nearby. They've skirmished with Aiel - those fellows over there in the white robes are actually Aiel themselves."

"ænd?"

"And?"

baɪɑɝ spæt tə ðə saɪd. "hæv jə ɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ə mæn kɔl pɛɹɪn ɡoʊldeɪniz?"

Byar spat to the side. "Have you ever heard of a man called Perrin Goldeneyes?"

"noʊ. ʃəɾ aɪ hæv?"

"No. Should I have?"

"jɛs," bɔɹnhəl sɛd. "hi kɪl maɪ fɑðɝ."

"Yes," Bornhald said. "He killed my father."


tʃæptɝ faɪv


CHAPTER 5

ɹaɪɾɪŋz


Writings

ɡɔɪn heɪsən daʊn ðə hɔlweɪz ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, buɾɪd fit θʌmpɪŋ ɑn ə dip blu ɹʌɡ ətɑp kɹɪmzən ən waɪt flɔɹ taɪlz. mɪɹɝd stænd-læmps ɹəflɛktəd laɪt, itʃ laɪk ə sɛntʃɹi əlɔŋ ðə weɪ.

Gawyn hastened down the hallways of the White Tower, booted feet thumping on a deep blue rug atop crimson and white floor tiles. Mirrored stand-lamps reflected light, each like a sentry along the way.

slit wɔkt kwɪkli bɪsaɪd hɪm. dɪspaɪt ðə læmps' ɪluməneɪʃən, slits feɪs sim hæf- ʃɹaʊɾɪd ɪn ʃædoʊ. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz ðə tu-deɪ stʌbəl ɑn ɪz dʒɔ - ən ɑɾəti fəɹ ə wɔɹɾɝ - əɹ ðə lɔŋ hɛɹ, klin bʌɾ ənʃɹn. əɹ meɪbi ɪt wɑz ɪz fitʃɝz. ənivən, laɪk ən ənfɪnɪʃt dʒɹɔɪŋ, wɪð ʃɑɹp laɪnz, ə klft ɪn ɪz tʃɪn, ə hʊk tə hɪz wʌns-bɹoʊkən noʊz, tʃikboʊnz ðət dʒʌɾɪd aʊt.

Sleete walked quickly beside him. Despite the lamps' illumination, Sleete's face seemed half- shrouded in shadow. Perhaps it was the two-day stubble on his jaw - an oddity for a Warder - or the long hair, clean but unshorn. Or maybe it was his features. Uneven, like an unfinished drawing, with sharp lines, a cleft in his chin, a hook to his once-broken nose, cheekbones that jutted out.

hi hæd ðə laɪð moʊʃənz ʌv ə wɔɹɾɝ, bʌt wɪð ə mɔɹ pɹaɪməl fil ðən moʊst. ɹæðɝ ðən ðə hʌnsmən muvɪŋ θɹu ðə wʊdz, hi wɑz ðə saɪlənt, ʃædoʊ-baʊn pɹɛɾətɝ ðət pɹeɪ nɛvɝ sɔ əntɪl ðə tiθ wɝ flæʃɪŋ.

He had the lithe motions of a Warder, but with a more primal feel than most. Rather than the huntsman moving through the woods, he was the silent, shadow-bound predator that prey never saw until the teeth were flashing.

ðeɪ ɹitʃt ən ɪntɝsɛkʃən wɛɹ sɛvɹəl ə tʃʌbnz ɡɑɹdz stʊd wɑtʃ daʊn wʌn ə ðə hɔlz. ðeɪ hæd sɔɹdz ət ðɛɹ saɪdz ən wɔɹ waɪt tɑbɝdz ɛmbleɪzənd wɪð ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn. wʌn hɛld ʌp ə hænd.

They reached an intersection where several of Chubain's guards stood watch down one of the halls. They had swords at their sides and wore white tabards emblazoned with the Flame of Tar Valon. One held up a hand.

"aɪm əlaʊɾ ɪn," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "ði æmɪɝlɪn - "

"I'm allowed in," Gawyn said. "The Amyrlin - "

"ðə sɪstɝz ɑɹən dʌn jɛt," ðə ɡɑɹd ɹɪplaɪd, hɑstəl.

"The sisters aren't done yet," the guard replied, hostile.

ɡɔɪn ɡɹaʊn ɪz tiθ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə bi dʌn əbaʊɾ ɪt. hi ən slit stɛp bæk ən weɪɾəd əntɪl - faɪnəli - θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ wɔkt aʊɾ ʌv ə ɡɑɹɾəd ɹum. ðeɪ lʊk tʃɹʌbəld.

Gawyn ground his teeth, but there was nothing to be done about it. He and Sleete stepped back and waited until - finally - three Aes Sedai Walked out of a guarded room. They looked troubled.

ðeɪ stʃɹoʊɾ əweɪ, fɑloʊd baɪ ə pɛɹ ə soʊlʒɝz kæɹiɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ɹæpt ɪn ə waɪt klɔθ. ðə bɑɾi.

They strode away, followed by a pair of soldiers carrying something wrapped in a white cloth. The body.

faɪnəli, ðə tu ɡɑɹdz ɹɪlʌktənli stɛpt əsaɪɾ ən lɛt ɡɔɪn ən slit pæs. ðeɪ hɝid daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ ən ɛntɝɾ ə smɔl ɹɛɾɪŋ ɹum. ɡɔɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ, ɡlænsɪŋ bæk daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ. hi kəd si səm æksɛptɪd pikɪŋ ɝaʊn ə kɔɹnɝ, wɪspɝɪŋ.

Finally, the two guards reluctantly stepped aside and let Gawyn and Sleete pass. They hurried down the hallway and entered a small reading room. Gawyn hesitated beside the door, glancing back down the hallway. He could see some Accepted peeking around a corner, whispering.

ðɪs mɝɾɝ meɪd fɔɹ sɪstɝz kɪld. ɛɡwin hæɾ əɹ hænz fʊl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ði ədʒəz fɹəm tɝnɪŋ bæk tə ðɛɹ mɪstʃɹʌst ʌv wʌn ənʌðɝ. ʃid wɔɹn ɛvɹiwʌn tə bi əlɝt, ən toʊl sɪstɝz nɑt tə ɡoʊ əbaʊɾ əloʊn. ðə blæk ədʒɑ nu ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɛl, ðɛɹ mɛmbɝz hævɪŋ lɪv hɪɹ fəɹ jɪɹz. wɪð ɡeɪtweɪz, ðeɪ kəd slɪp ɪndə ðə hɔlweɪz ən kəmɪt mɝɾɝ.

This murder made four sisters killed. Egwene had her hands full trying to keep the Ajahs from turning back to their mistrust of one another. She'd warned everyone to be alert, and told sisters not to go about alone. The Black Ajah knew the White Tower well, their members having lived here for years. With gateways, they could slip into the hallways and commit murder.

ət list, ðət wɑz ði əfɪʃəl ɛkspləneɪʃən fəɹ ðə dɛθs. ɡɔɪn wɑzn soʊ sɝɾən. hi dʌkt ɪndə ðə ɹum, slit fɑloʊɪŋ.

At least, that was the official explanation for the deaths. Gawyn wasn't so certain. He ducked into the room, Sleete following.

tʃʌbn hɪmsɛlf wɑz ðɛɹ. ðə hænsəm mæn ɡlænst ət ɡɔɪn, lɪps tɝnɪŋ daʊn. "lɔɹd tʃɹəkənd."

Chubain himself was there. The handsome man glanced at Gawyn, lips turning down. "Lord Trakand."

"kæptən," ɡɔɪn ɹɪplaɪd, sɝveɪɪŋ ðə ɹum. ɪt wɑz əbaʊt θɹi peɪsɪz skwɛɹ, wɪð ə sɪŋɡəl dɛsk sɛɾ əɡɛns ðə fɑɹ wɔl ən ən ənlɪt koʊl-bɝnɪŋ bɹeɪziɝ. ə bɹɑnz stænd-læmp bɝn ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ, ən ə sɝkjəlɝ ɹʌɡ nɪɹli fɪl nɪɹli ði ɪntaɪɝ flɔɹ. ðət ɹʌɡ wɑz steɪnd wɪð ə dɑɹk lɪkwəd bɪniθ ðə dɛsk.

"Captain," Gawyn replied, surveying the room. It was about three paces square, with a single desk set against the far wall and an unlit coal-burning brazier. A bronze stand-lamp burned in the corner, and a circular rug nearly filled nearly the entire floor. That rug was stained with a dark liquid beneath the desk.

"du jə ɹɪli θɪŋk jəl faɪn ɛniθɪŋ ðə sɪstɝz dɪd nɑt, tʃɹəkənd?" tʃʌbn æskt, foʊldɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmz.

"Do you really think you'll find anything the sisters did not, Trakand?" Chubain asked, folding his arms.

"aɪm lʊkɪŋ fəɹ dɪfɹən θɪŋz," ɡɔɪn sɛd, ɡoʊɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. hi nɛl daʊn tə ɪnspɛk ðə ɹʌɡ.

"I'm looking for different things," Gawyn said, going forward. He knelt down to inspect the rug.

tʃʌbn snɪft, ðən wɔkt ɪndə ðə hɔlweɪ. ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹd wəd wɑtʃ oʊvɝ ði ɛɹiə əntɪl sɝvəns hæd kʌm tə klin ɪt. ɡɔɪn hæɾ ə fju mɪnəts.

Chubain sniffed, then walked into the hallway. The Tower Guard would watch over the area until servants had come to clean it. Gawyn had a few minutes.

slit stɛpt ʌp tə wʌn ə ðə ɡɑɹdz dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə dɔɹweɪ. ðeɪ wɝn əz æntæɡənɪstɪk təwɔɹɾ ɪm əz ðeɪ tɛndəd tə bi təwɔɹd ɡɔɪn. hi stɪl hædn fɪɡjɝɾ aʊt waɪ ðeɪ wɝ laɪk ðət wɪð hɪm.

Sleete stepped up to one of the guards just inside the doorway. They weren't as antagonistic toward him as they tended to be toward Gawyn. He still hadn't figured out why they were like that with him.

"ʃi wɑz əloʊn?" sliɾ æsk ðə mæn ɪn ɪz ɡɹævəli vɔɪs.

"She was alone?" Sleete asked the man in his gravelly voice.

"jɛs," ðə ɡɑɹd sɛd, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd. "ʃʊdn əv ɪɡnɔɹd ði æmɪɝlɪnz ædvaɪs."

"Yes," the guard said, shaking his head. "Shouldn't have ignored the Amyrlin's advice."

"hu wɑz ʃi?"

"Who was she?"

"keɪtɛɹi nɛpvu, ʌv ðə waɪɾ ədʒɑ. ə sɪstɝ fəɹ twɛnti jɪɹz."

"Kateri Nepvue, of the White Ajah. A sister for twenty years."

ɡɔɪn ɡɹʌntɪɾ əz i kəntɪnjud tə kɹɔl əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ, ɪnspɛktɪŋ ðə ɹʌɡ. fɔɹ sɪstɝz fɹəm fɔɹ dɪfɹən ədʒəz. tu hæd səpɔɹɾəd ɛɡwin, wʌn hæd səpɔɹɾəd ɪleɪɾə, ən wʌn hæd bɪn nutʃɹəl, oʊnli ɹisənli ɹɪtɝnd. ɔl hæd bɪn kɪld ɑn dɪfɹən lɛvəlz ə ðə taʊɝ dʊɹɪŋ dɪfɹən taɪmz ə deɪ.

Gawyn grunted as he continued to crawl across the floor, inspecting the rug. Four sisters from four different Ajahs. Two had supported Egwene, one had supported Elaida, and one had been neutral, only recently returned. All had been killed on different levels of the Tower during different times of day.

ɪt sɝɾənli dɪd sim laɪk ðə wɝk ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ. ðeɪ wɝn lʊkɪŋ fəɹ spəsɪfɪk tɑɹɡəts, dʒʌs kənvən ,*nt wʌnz. bʌɾ ɪt fɛlt ɹɔŋ tə hɪm. waɪ nɑt tʃɹævəl ɪndə ðə sɪstɝz' kɔɹɾɝz ət naɪɾ ən kɪl əm ɪn ðɛɹ slip? waɪ dɪd noʊbɑdi sɛns tʃænəlɪŋ fɹəm ðə pleɪsəz wɛɹ ðə wɪmən wɝ kɪld?

It certainly did seem like the work of the Black Ajah. They weren't looking for specific targets, just conven ,*nt ones. But it felt wrong to him. Why not Travel into the sisters' quarters at night and kill them in their sleep? Why did nobody sense channeling from the places where the women were killed?

sliɾ ɪnspɛktɪd ðə dɔɹ ən lɑk wɪð ə kɛɹfəl aɪ. wən ɛɡwin hæd toʊld ɡɔɪn i kəd vɪzət ðə sinz ə ðə mɝɾɝz ɪf i wɪʃt, hiɾ æskt ɪf i kəd bɹɪŋ slit wɪð hɪm. ɪn ɡɔɪnz pɹiviəs ɪntɝækʃənz wɪð ðə wɔɹɾɝ, slit hæd pɹuvən hɪmsɛlf tə bi nɑɾ oʊnli mətɪkjələs, bʌt dɪskɹit.

Sleete inspected the door and lock with a careful eye. When Egwene had told Gawyn he could visit the scenes of the murders if he wished, he'd asked if he could bring Sleete with him. In Gawyn's previous interactions with the Warder, Sleete had proven himself to be not only meticulous, but discreet.

ɡɔɪn kəntɪnjud lʊkɪŋ. ɛɡwin wɑz nɝvəs əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ, hi wɑz sɝɾən. ʃi wɑzn biɪŋ kəmplitli fɔɹθkʌmɪŋ əbaʊt ðiz mɝɾɝz. hi faʊnd noʊ slɪts ɪn ðə kɑɹpəɾ əɹ taɪlz, noʊ kʌts ɪn ðə fɝnɪtʃɝ ə ðə kɹæmpt ɹum.

Gawyn continued looking. Egwene was nervous about something, he was certain. She wasn't being completely forthcoming about these murders. He found no slits in the carpet or tiles, no cuts in the furniture of the cramped room.

ɛɡwin kleɪm ðə mɝɾɝɝz wɝ kʌmɪŋ ɪn baɪ ɡeɪtweɪ, bʌt hid faʊnd noʊ ɛvəɾəns ə ðæt.

Egwene claimed the murderers were coming in by gateway, but he'd found no evidence of that.

tʃɹu, hi dɪdnt noʊ mʌtʃ əbaʊt ɡeɪtweɪz jɛt, ən pipəl kəd ɹɪpɔɹɾədli meɪk əm hæŋ əbʌv ðə ɡɹaʊn soʊ ðeɪ dɪdn kʌɾ ɛniθɪŋ. bʌt waɪ wəd ðə blæk ədʒɑ kɛɹ əbaʊt ðæt? bɪsaɪdz, ðɪs ɹum wɑz soʊ taɪni, ɪt sim tə hɪm ɪt wʊɾə bɪn vɛɹi hɑɹd tə ɡɛɾ ɪn wɪθaʊt livɪŋ səm tʃɹeɪs.

True, he didn't know much about gateways yet, and people could reportedly make them hang above the ground so they didn't cut anything. But why would the Black Ajah care about that? Besides, this room was so tiny, it seemed to him it would have been very hard to get in without leaving some trace.

"ɡɔɪn, kʌm hɪɹ," slit sɛd. ðə ʃɔɹɾɝ mæn wɑz stɪl nilɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹweɪ.

"Gawyn, come here," Sleete said. The shorter man was still kneeling beside the doorway.

ɡɔɪn dʒɔɪn hɪm. slit θɹu ðə dɛdboʊlt ə fju taɪmz ɪn ɪts lɑk. "ðɪs dɔɹ maɪɾ əv bɪn fɔɹst," hi sɛd sɔfli. "si ðə skɹeɪp hɪɹ ɑn ðə dɛdboʊlt? jə kən pɑp oʊpən ðɪs kaɪndə lɑk baɪ slaɪɾɪŋ ə θɪn pɪk ɪn ən pʊʃɪŋ ɪɾ ɑn ðə dɛdboʊlt, ðən pʊɾɪŋ pɹɛʃɝ ɑn ðə hændəl. ɪt kən bi dʌn vɛɹi kwaɪətli."

Gawyn joined him. Sleete threw the deadbolt a few times in its lock. "This door might have been forced," he said softly. "See the scrape here on the deadbolt? You can pop open this kind of lock by sliding a thin pick in and pushing it on the deadbolt, then putting pressure on the handle. It can be done very quietly."

"waɪ wəd ðə blæk ədʒɑ nid tə fɔɹs ə dɔɹ?" ɡɔɪn æskt.

"Why would the Black Ajah need to force a door?" Gawyn asked.

"meɪbi ðeɪ tʃɹævəld ɪndə ðə hɔlweɪ, ðən wɔkt əntɪl ðeɪ sɔ t ʌndɝ ə dɔɹweɪ," slit sɛd.

"Maybe they Traveled into the hallway, then walked until they saw Hght under a doorway," Sleete said.

"waɪ nɑt ðən meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ tə ði ʌðɝ saɪd?"

"Why not then make a gateway to the other side?"

"tʃænəlɪŋ cʊɾə əlɝɾɪd ðə wʊmən ɪnsaɪd," slit sɛd.

"Channeling could have alerted the woman inside," Sleete said.

"ðæts tʃɹu," ɡɔɪn sɛd. hi lʊk təwɔɹd ðə blʌɾi pætʃ. ðə dɛsk wɑz sɛt soʊ ðət ði ɑkjəpəns bæk wəd bi tə ðə dɔɹweɪ. ðəɾ ɝeɪnʒmənt meɪd ɡɔɪnz ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz ɪtʃ. hu wəd pʊɾ ə dɛsk laɪk ðæt? ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hu θɔt ʃi wɑz kəmplitli seɪf, ən u wɑntəd tə bi sɪɾɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə dɪstʃɹækʃənz aʊtsaɪd. ɛɛs sədaɪ, fəɹ ɔl ə ðɛɹ kʌnɪŋ, səmtaɪmz sim tə hæv ɹɪmɑɹkəbli ʌndɝɾɪvɛləpt sɛnsɪz ə sɛlf- pɹɛzɝveɪʃən.

"That's true," Gawyn said. He looked toward the bloody patch. The desk was set so that the occupant's back would be to the doorway. That arrangement made Gawyn's shoulder blades itch. Who would put a desk like that? An Aes Sedai who thought she was completely safe, and who Wanted to be sitting away from the distractions outside. Aes Sedai, for all of their cunning, sometimes seemed to have remarkably underdeveloped senses of self- preservation.

əɹ meɪbi ðeɪ dʒʌs dɪdn θɪŋk laɪk soʊlʒɝz. ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz dɛlt wɪð ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɔt. "dɪd ʃi hæv ə wɔɹɾɝ?"

Or maybe they just didn't think like soldiers. Their Warders dealt with that sort of thought. "Did she have a Warder?"

"noʊ," slit sɛd. "aɪv mɛɾ əɹ bɪfɔɹ. ʃi dɪdn əv wʌn." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "nʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz mɝɾɝd hæd wɔɹɾɝz."

"No," Sleete said. "I've met her before. She didn't have one." He hesitated. "None of the sisters murdered had Warders."

ɡɔɪn ɡeɪv sliɾ ə ɹeɪzd aɪbɹaʊ.

Gawyn gave Sleete a raised eyebrow.

"meɪks sɛns," slit sɛd. "huɛvɝ ɪz duɪŋ ðə kɪlɪŋ dɪdnt wɑnə əlɝt wɔɹɾɝz."

"Makes sense," Sleete said. "Whoever is doing the killing didn't want to alert Warders."

"bʌt waɪ kɪl wɪð ə naɪf?" ɡɔɪn sɛd. ɔl fɔɹ hæd bɪn kɪl ðət weɪ. "ðə blæk ədʒɑ dʌzn əv tə oʊbeɪ ðə θɹi oʊðz. ðeɪ cʊɾə juz ðə paʊɝ tə kɪl. mʌtʃ mɔɹ dɝɛkt, mʌtʃ iziɝ."

"But why kill with a knife?" Gawyn said. All four had been killed that way. "The Black Ajah doesn't have to obey the Three Oaths. They could have used the Power to kill. Much more direct, much easier."

"bʌt ðət wəɾ ɔlsoʊ ɹɪsk əlɝɾɪŋ ðə vɪktəm əɹ ðoʊz ɝaʊnd," slit noʊɾəd.

"But that would also risk alerting the victim or those around," Sleete noted.

ənʌðɝ ɡʊd pɔɪnt. bʌt stɪl, sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðiz kɪlɪŋz dɪdn sim tə æɾ ʌp.

Another good point. But still, something about these killings didn't seem to add up.

əɹ meɪbi hi wɑz dʒʌst stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə faɪn sʌmθɪŋ i kəd də tə hɛlp. ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm θɔt ðəɾ ɪf i kəɾ eɪɾ ɛɡwin wɪð ðɪs, meɪbi ʃi wəd sɑfən təwɔɹd hɪm.

Or maybe he was just stretching at nothing, struggling to find something he could do to help. A part of him thought that if he could aid Egwene with this, maybe she would soften toward him.

pɝhæps fɝɡɪv ɪm fəɹ ɹɛskjuɪŋ əɹ fɹəm ðə taʊɝ dʊɹɪŋ ðə sintʃæn ətæk.

Perhaps forgive him for rescuing her from the Tower during the Seanchan attack.

tʃʌbn ɛntɝɾ ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ. "aɪ tʃɹʌs jəɹ lɔɹdʃɪp əz hæd səfɪʃən taɪm," hi sɛd stɪfli.

Chubain entered a moment later. "I trust Your Lordship has had sufficient time," he said stiffly.

"ðə stæf ɪz hɪɹ tə klin."

"The staff is here to clean."

ɪnsʌfɝəbəl mæn! ɡɔɪn θɔt. dʌz i hæv tə bi soʊ dɪsmɪsɪv təwɔɹd mi? aɪ ʃəd -  noʊ. ɡɔɪn fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə kip ɪz tɛmpɝ. wʌns, ðət hædn bɪn nɪɹli soʊ hɑɹd.

Insufferable man! Gawyn thought. Does he have to be so dismissive toward me? I should -  No. Gawyn forced himself to keep his temper. Once, that hadn't been nearly so hard.

waɪ wɑz tʃʌbn soʊ hɑstəl təwɔɹd hɪm? ɡɔɪn faʊn hɪmsɛlf wʌndɝɪŋ haʊ hɪz mʌðɝ wʊɾə hændəl sətʃ ə mæn əz ðɪs. ɡɔɪn dɪdn ɔfən θɪŋk ə hɝ, əz duɪŋ soʊ bɹɔɾ ɪz maɪn bæk tə ælθɹ. ðət mɝɾɝɝ hæd bɪn əlaʊd tə wɔk əweɪ fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf! ɛɡwin hæd hɛld ɪm ɪn əɹ hænd, ən hæd ɹilis hɪm.

Why was Chubain so hostile toward him? Gawyn found himself wondering how his mother would have handled such a man as this. Gawyn didn't often think of her, as doing so brought his mind back to al'Thor. That murderer had been allowed to walk away from the White Tower itself! Egwene had held him in her hand, and had released him.

tʃɹu, ælθɹ wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. bʌɾ ɪn ɪz hɑɹt, ɡɔɪn wɑntəd tə miɾ ælθɹ wɪð sɔɹɾ ɪn hæn ən ɹæm stil θɹu hɪm, dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əɹ nɑt.

True, al'Thor was the Dragon Reborn. But in his heart, Gawyn wanted to meet al'Thor with sword in hand and ram steel through him, Dragon Reborn or not.

ælθɹ wəd ɹɪp jə əpɑɹt wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf. jəɹ biɪŋ fulɪʃ, ɡɔɪn tʃɹəkənd. hɪz heɪtʃɹəɾ ʌv ælθɹ kəntɪnjud tə smoʊldɝ ɛniweɪ.

Al'Thor would rip you apart with the One Power, he told himself. You're being foolish, Gawyn Trakand. His hatred of al'Thor continued to smolder anyway.

wʌn ə tʃʌbnz ɡɑɹdz keɪm ʌp, spikɪŋ, pɔɪntɪŋ ət ðə dɔɹ. tʃʌbn lʊkt ənɔɪd ðeɪ hædn faʊn ðə fɔɹs lɑk. ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹd wɑz nɑɾ ə pəlisɪŋ fɔɹs - ðə sɪstɝz hæd noʊ niɾ ə ðæt, ən wɝ mɔɹ ɪfɛktɪv ət ðɪs kaɪn ɑɾ ɪnvɛstəɡeɪʃən ɛniweɪ. bʌt ɡɔɪn kəd tɛl ðət tʃʌbn wɪʃt i kəd stɑp ðə mɝɾɝz. pɹətɛktɪŋ ðə taʊɝ, ən ɪts ɑkjəpəns, wɑz pɑɹɾ ə hɪz duɾi.

One of Chubain's guards came up, speaking, pointing at the door. Chubain looked annoyed they hadn't found the forced lock. The Tower Guard was not a policing force - the sisters had no need of that, and were more effective at this kind ot investigation anyway. But Gawyn could tell that Chubain wished he could stop the murders. Protecting the Tower, and its occupants, was part of his duty.

soʊ hi ən ɡɔɪn wɝk fəɹ ðə seɪm kɑz. bʌt tʃʌbn æktəɾ əz ɪf ðɪs wɝ ə pɝsənəl kɑntɛs bɪtwin ðɛm. ðoʊ hɪz saɪd dɪd, ɪsɛnʃəli, mit dɪfit baɪ bɹaɪnz saɪɾ ɪn ðə taʊɝ dɪvɪʒən, ɡɔɪn θɔt. ən əz fɑɹ əz i noʊz, aɪm wʌn ə bɹaɪnz feɪvɝd mɛn.

So he and Gawyn worked for the same cause. But Chubain acted as if this were a personal contest between them. Though his side did, essentially, meet defeat by Bryne's side in the Tower division, Gawyn thought. And as far as he knows, I'm one of Bryne's favored men.

ɡɔɪn wɑzn ə wɔɹɾɝ, jɛɾ i wɑz ə fɹɛn ə ði æmɪɝlɪn. hi daɪnd wɪð bɹaɪn. haʊ wəd ðət lʊk tə tʃʌbn, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli naʊ ðət ɡɔɪn hæd bɪn ɡɪvən paʊɝ tə lʊk ɪn ɑn ðə mɝɾɝz?

Gawyn wasn't a Warder, yet he was a friend of the Amyrlin. He dined with Bryne. How would that look to Chubain, particularly now that Gawyn had been given power to look in on the murders?

laɪt! ɡɔɪn θɔɾ əz tʃʌbn ʃɑɾ ɪm ə hɑstəl ɡleɪs. hi θɪŋks aɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə teɪk ɪz pəzɪʃən.

Light! Gawyn thought as Chubain shot him a hostile glace. He thinks I'm trying to take his position.

hi θɪŋks aɪ wɑnə bi haɪ kæptən ə ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹd!

He thinks I want to be High Captain of the Tower Guard!

ðə kɑnsɛpt wɑz læfəbəl. ɡɔɪn cʊɾə bɪn fɝs pɹɪns ə ðə sɔɹd - ʃʊɾə bɪn fɝs pɹɪns ə ðə sɔɹd - liɾɝ ʌv ændɝz ɑɹmiz ən pɹətɛktɝ ə ðə kwin. hi wɑz sʌn tə mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkənd, wʌn ə ðə moʊst ɪnfluɛntʃəl ən paʊɝfəl ɹulɝz ændɝ hæɾ ɛvɝ noʊn. hi hæd noʊ dɪzaɪɝ fəɹ ðɪs mænz pəzɪʃən.

The concept was laughable. Gawyn could have been First Prince of the Sword - should have been First Prince of the Sword - leader of Andor's armies and protector of the Queen. He was son to Morgase Trakand, one of the most influential and powerful rulers Andor had ever known. He had no desire for this man's position.

ðət wʊdn bi haʊ ɪt lʊk tə tʃʌbn. dɪsɡɹeɪs baɪ ðə dɪstʃɹʌktɪv sintʃæn ətæk, hi mʌs fil ðəɾ ɪz pəzɪʃən wɑz ɪn deɪnʒɝ.

That wouldn't be how it looked to Chubain. Disgraced by the destructive Seanchan attack, he must feel that his position was in danger.

"kæptən," ɡɔɪn sɛd, "meɪ aɪ spik wɪð jə ɪn pɹaɪvət?"

"Captain," Gawyn said, "may I speak with you in private?"

tʃʌbn lʊkt ət ɡɔɪn səspɪʃəsli, ðən nɑɾəd təwɔɹd ðə hɔlweɪ. ðə tu ʌv əm ɹitʃɹiɾəd. nɝvəs taʊɝ sɝvəns weɪɾəd aʊtsaɪd, ɹɛɾi tə klin ðə blʌɾ əweɪ.

Chubain looked at Gawyn suspiciously, then nodded toward the hallway. The two of them retreated. Nervous Tower servants waited outside, ready to clean the blood away.

tʃʌbn foʊldəɾ ɪz ɑɹmz ən ɪnspɛktɪd ɡɔɪn. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt jə wɪʃ ə mi, maɪ lɔɹd?"

Chubain folded his arms and inspected Gawyn. "What is it you wish of me, my Lord?"

hi ɔfən ɛmfəsaɪz ðə ɹæŋk. kɑm, ɡɔɪn θɔt. hi stɪl fɛl ðə ʃeɪm ə haʊ hid bʊliɾ ɪz weɪ ɪndə bɹaɪnz kæmp. hi wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən ðæt. lɪvɪŋ wɪð ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz, ɛndʒjʊɹɪŋ ðə kənfjuʒən ən ðən ðə ʃeɪm ə ði ɪvɛns sɝaʊndɪŋ ðə taʊɝz bɹeɪkɪŋ, hæd tʃeɪnʒd hɪm. hi kʊdn kəntɪnju daʊn ðət pæθ.

He often emphasized the rank. Calm, Gawyn thought. He still felt the shame of how he'd bullied his way into Bryne's camp. He was better than that. Living with the Younglings, enduring the confusion and then the shame of the events surrounding the Tower's breaking, had changed him. He couldn't continue down that path.

"kæptən," ɡɔɪn sɛd, "aɪ əpɹiʃieɪt jə lɛɾɪŋ mi ɪnspɛk ðə ɹum."

"Captain," Gawyn said, "I appreciate you letting me inspect the room."

"aɪ dɪdn əv mʌtʃ tʃɔɪs."

"I didn't have much choice."

"aɪ ɹilaɪz ðæt. bʌt juv maɪ θæŋks nʌnðəlɛs. ɪts ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə mi ðət ði æmɪɝlɪn si mi hɛlpɪŋ. ɪf aɪ faɪn sʌmθɪŋ ðə sɪstɝz mɪs, ɪt kəd min ə ɡɹeɪt dil fəɹ mi."

"I realize that. But you have my thanks nonetheless. It's important to me that the Amyrlin see me helping. If I find something the sisters miss, it could mean a great deal for me."

"jɛs," tʃʌbn sɛd, aɪz nɛɹoʊɪŋ. "aɪ səspɛkt ɪt kʊd."

"Yes," Chubain said, eyes narrowing. "I suspect it could."

"meɪbi ʃɪl faɪnəli hæv mi əz əɹ wɔɹɾɝ."

"Maybe she'll finally have me as her Warder."

tʃʌbn blɪŋkt. "hɝ . . . wɔɹɾɝ?"

Chubain blinked. "Her . . . Warder?"

"jɛs. wʌns, ɪt sim sɝɾən ðət ʃi wəd teɪk mi, bʌt naʊ . . . wɛl, ɪf aɪ kən hɛlp jə wɪð ðɪs ɪnvɛstəɡeɪʃən, pɝhæps ɪɾəl kul əɹ æŋɡɝ ət mi." hi ɹeɪzd ə hænd, ɡɹɪpɪŋ tʃʌbnz ʃoʊldɝ. "aɪ wɪl ɹɪmɛmbɝ jəɹ eɪd. jə kɔl mi lɔɹd, bʌt maɪ taɪɾəl ɪz ɔl bʌt minɪŋləs tə mi naʊ. ɔl aɪ wɑn ɪz tə bi ɛɡwinz wɔɹɾɝ, tə pɹətɛk hɝ."

"Yes. Once, it seemed certain that she would take me, but now . . . well, if I can help you with this investigation, perhaps it will cool her anger at me." He raised a hand, gripping Chubain's shoulder. "I will remember your aid. You call me Lord, but my title is all but meaningless to me now. All I want is to be Egwene's Warder, to protect her."

tʃʌbn ɹɪŋkəld ɪz bɹaʊ. ðən i nɑɾəd ən sim tə ɹɪlæks. "aɪ hɝd jə tɔkɪŋ. jəɹ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ mɑɹks ʌv ɡeɪtweɪz. waɪ?"

Chubain wrinkled his brow. Then he nodded and seemed to relax. "I heard you talking. You're looking for marks of gateways. Why?"

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðɪs ɪz ðə wɝk ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "aɪ θɪŋk ɪt maɪt bi ə ɡɹeɪ mæn, əɹ səm ʌðɝ kaɪndə əsæsən. eɪ dɑɹkfɹɛn əmʌŋ ðə pæləs stæf, pɝhæps? aɪ min, lʊk ət haʊ ðə wɪmən ɑɹ kɪld. naɪvz."

"I don't think this is the work of the Black Ajah," Gawyn said. "I think it might be a Gray Man, or some other kind of assassin. A Darkfriend among the palace staff, perhaps? I mean, look at how the women are killed. Knives."

tʃʌbn nɑɾəd. "ðɛɹ wɝ səm saɪnz ʌv ə stʃɹʌɡəl tu. ðə sɪstɝz duɪŋ ði ɪnvɛstəɡeɪʃən mɛnʃən ðæt. ðə bʊks swɛp fɹəm ðə teɪbəl. ðeɪ θɔɾ ɪt wɑz dʌn baɪ ðə wʊmən fleɪlɪŋ əz ʃi daɪd."

Chubain nodded. "There were some signs of a struggle too. The sisters doing the investigation mentioned that. The books swept from the table. They thought it was done by the woman flailing as she died."

"kjʊɹiəs," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "ɪf aɪ wɝ ə blæk sɪstɝ, aɪd juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ɹəɡɑɹdləs ə ðə fæk ðəɾ ʌðɝz maɪt sɛns ɪt. wɪmən tʃænəl ɔl ðə taɪm ɪn ðə taʊɝ; ðɪs wʊdn bi səspɪʃəs. aɪɾ ɪmoʊbəlaɪz maɪ vɪktəm wɪð wivz, kɪl əɹ wɪð ðə paʊɝ, ðən ɪskeɪp bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn θɔɾ ɑdli ʌv ɪt. noʊ stʃɹʌɡəl."

"Curious," Gawyn said. "If I were a Black sister, I'd use the One Power, regardless of the fact that others might sense it. Women channel all the time in the Tower; this wouldn't be suspicious. I'd immobilize my victim with weaves, kill her with the Power, then escape before anyone thought oddly of it. No struggle."

"pɝhæps," tʃʌbn sɛd. "bʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn simz kɑnfəɾənt ðət ðɪs ɪz ðə wɝk ə blæk sɪstɝz."

"Perhaps," Chubain said. "But the Amyrlin seems confident that this is the work of Black sisters."

"aɪl tɔk tə hɝ ən si waɪ," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "fɔɹ naʊ, pɝhæps jə ʃəd sədʒɛs tə ðoʊz duɪŋ ði ɪnvɛstəɡeɪʃən ðəɾ ɪt wəd bi waɪz tə ɪntɝvju ðə pæləs sɝvəns? ɡɪv ðɪs ɹizənɪŋ?"

"I'll talk to her and see why," Gawyn said. "For now, perhaps you should suggest to those doing the investigation that it would be wise to interview the palace servants? Give this reasoning?"

"jɛs ... aɪ θɪŋk aɪ maɪt də ðæt." ðə mæn nɑɾəd, simɪŋ lɛs θɹɛɾənd.

"Yes ... I think I might do that." The man nodded, seeming less threatened.

ðə tu stɛpt əsaɪd, tʃʌbn weɪvɪŋ ðə sɝvəns tə ɛntɝ fəɹ ðɛɹ klinɪŋ. slit keɪm aʊt, lʊkɪŋ θɔtfəl. hi hɛl sʌmθɪŋ ʌp, pɪntʃt bɪtwin ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. "blæk sɪlk," hi sɛd. "ðɛɹz noʊ weɪ ʌv noʊɪŋ ɪf ɪt keɪm fɹəm ði ətækɝ."

The two stepped aside, Chubain waving the servants to enter for their cleaning. Sleete came out, looking thoughtful. He held something up, pinched between his fingers. "Black silk," he said. "There's no way of knowing if it came from the attacker."

tʃʌbn tʊk ðə faɪbɝz. "ɑd."

Chubain took the fibers. "Odd."

"eɪ blæk sɪstɝ wʊdn sim laɪkli tə pɹoʊkleɪm hɝsɛlf baɪ wɛɹɪŋ blæk," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "ə mɔɹ ɔɹɾənɛɹi əsæsən, ðoʊ, maɪt nid ðə dɑɹk kʌlɝz tə haɪd."

"A Black sister wouldn't seem likely to proclaim herself by wearing black," Gawyn said. "A more ordinary assassin, though, might need the dark colors to hide."

tʃʌbn ɹæp ðə faɪbɝz ɪn ə hæŋkɝtʃɪf ən pɑkəɾɪd ðɛm. "aɪl teɪk ðiz tə sin sədaɪ."

Chubain wrapped the fibers in a handkerchief and pocketed them. "I'll take these to Seaine Sedai."

hi lʊkt ɪmpɹɛst.

He looked impressed.

ɡɔɪn nɑɾəd tə slit, ən ðə tu ʌv əm ɹitʃɹiɾəd.

Gawyn nodded to Sleete, and the two of them retreated.

"ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪz əbʌz ðiz deɪz wɪð ɹɪtɝnɪŋ sɪstɝz ən nu wɔɹɾɝz," slit sɛd sɔfli. "haʊ wəɾ ɛniwʌn - noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ stɛlθi -  tʃɹævəl ði ʌpɝ lɛvəlz wɛɹɪŋ blæk wɪθaʊt dʒɹɔɪŋ ətɛnʃən?"

"The White Tower is abuzz these days with returning sisters and new Warders," Sleete said softly. "How would anyone - no matter how stealthy -  travel the upper levels wearing black without drawing attention?"

"ɡɹeɪ mɛn ɑɹ səpoʊz tə bi eɪbəl tə əvɔɪd noʊɾəs," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "aɪ θɪŋk ðɪs ɪz mɔɹ pɹuf. aɪ min, ɪt simz ɑd ðət noʊbɑdi hæz æktʃəli  sin ɹiz blæk sɪstɝz. wɝ meɪkɪŋ ə lɑɾ ʌv əsʌmpʃənz."

"Gray Men are supposed to be able to avoid notice," Gawyn said. "I think this is more proof. I mean, it seems odd that nobody has actually seen rhese Black sisters. We're making a lot of assumptions."

slit nɑɾəd, aɪɪŋ ə tʃɹioʊ ʌv nɑvəsɪz u hæd ɡæðɝd tə ɡɔk ət ðə ɡɑɹdz. ðeɪ sɔ slit lʊkɪŋ ən tʃɪɾɝd tə wʌn ənʌðɝ bɪfɔɹ skæmpɝɪŋ əweɪ.

Sleete nodded, eyeing a trio of novices who had gathered to gawk at the guards. They saw Sleete looking and chittered to one another before scampering away.

"ɛɡwin noʊz mɔɹ ðən ʃiz seɪɪŋ," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "aɪl tɔk tə hɝ."

"Egwene knows more than she's saying," Gawyn said. "I'll talk to her."

"əsumɪŋ ʃɪl si ju," slit sɛd.

"Assuming she'll see you," Sleete said.

ɡɔɪn ɡɹʌntɪɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli. ðeɪ wɔk daʊn ə sɪɹiz ə ɹæmps tə ðə lɛvəl ə ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi.

Gawyn grunted irritably. They walked down a series of ramps to the level of the Amyrlin's study.

slit ɹɪmeɪnd wɪð ɪm - hɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ə ɡɹin neɪm hɑtɔɹi, ɹɛɹli hæd duɾiz fəɹ hɪm. ʃi stɪl hæɾ əɹ aɪz ɑn ɡɔɪn fəɹ ə wɔɹɾɝ; ɛɡwin wɑz biɪŋ soʊ ɪnfjʊɹieɪɾɪŋ, ɡɔɪn hæd hæf ə maɪn tə lɛt hɑtɔɹi bɑn hɪm.

Sleete remained with him - his Aes Sedai, a Green named Hattori, rarely had duties for him. She still had her eyes on Gawyn for a Warder; Egwene was being so infuriating, Gawyn had half a mind to let Hattori bond him.

noʊ. noʊ, nɑt ɹɪli. hi lʌvd ɛɡwin, ðoʊ hi wɑz fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd wɪð hɝ. ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn izi tə dɪsaɪd tə ɡɪv ʌp ændɝ - nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz - fəɹ hɝ. jɛt ʃi stɪl ɹəfjuz tə bɑn hɪm.

No. No, not really. He loved Egwene, though he was frustrated with her. It had not been easy to decide to give up Andor - not to mention the Younglings - for her. Yet she still refused to bond him.

hi ɹitʃt əɹ stʌɾi, ən əpɹoʊtʃt sɪlviænə. ðə wʊmən sæɾ əɾ əɹ nit, ɔɹɾɝli kipɝz dɛsk ɪn ði æntətʃæmbɝ bɪfɔɹ ɛɡwinz stʌɾi. ðə wʊmən ɪnspɛktɪd ɡɔɪn, hɝ aɪz ənɹiɾəbəl bɪhaɪn əɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ mæsk. hi səspɛktəd ðət ʃi dɪdn laɪk hɪm.

He reached her study, and approached Silviana. The woman sat at her neat, orderly Keeper's desk in the antechamber before Egwene's study. The woman inspected Gawyn, her eyes unreadable behind her Aes Sedai mask. He suspected that she didn't like him.

"ði æmɪɝlɪn ɪz kəmpoʊzɪŋ ə lɛɾɝ ə səm ɪmpɔɹt," sɪlviænə sɛd. "ju meɪ weɪt."

"The Amyrlin is composing a letter of some import," Silviana said. "You may wait."

ɡɔɪn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ.

Gawyn opened his mouth.

"ʃi æsk nɑt tə bi ɪntɝʌptɪd," sɪlviænə sɛd, tɝnɪŋ bæk tə ðə peɪpɝ ʃi hæd bɪn ɹɛɾɪŋ.

"She asked not to be interrupted," Silviana said, turning back to the paper she had been reading.

"ju meɪ weɪt."

"You may wait."

ɡɔɪn saɪd, bʌt nɑɾəd. əz i dɪd soʊ, slit kɑɾ ɪz aɪ ən dʒɛstʃɝd ðəɾ i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ.

Gawyn sighed, but nodded. As he did so, Sleete caught his eye and gestured that he was going.

waɪ hæɾ i əkʌmpənid ɡɔɪn daʊn hɪɹ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs? hi wɑz ən ɑd mæn. ɡɔɪn weɪv fɛɹwɛl, ən slit vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə hɔlweɪ.

Why had he accompanied Gawyn down here in the first place? He was an odd man. Gawyn waved farewell, and Sleete vanished into the hallway.

ði æntətʃæmbɝ wɑz ə ɡɹæn ɹum wɪð ə dip ɹɛd ɹʌɡ ən wʊd tʃɹɪm ɑn ðə stoʊn wɔlz. hi nu fɹəm ɪkspɪɹiəns ðət nʌn ə ðə tʃɛɹz wɝ kʌmftəɹbəl, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə sɪŋɡəl wɪndoʊ.

The antechamber was a grand room with a deep red rug and wood trim on the stone walls. He knew from experience that none of the chairs were comfortable, but there was a single window.

ɡɔɪn stɛpt ʌp tə ɪt fəɹ səm ɛɹ ən ɹɛstəɾ ɪz ɑɹm ɑn ðə ɹɪsɛst stoʊn, stɛɹɪŋ aʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz. ðɪs haɪ ʌp, ði ɛɹ fɛl kɹɪspɝ, nuɝ.

Gawyn stepped up to it for some air and rested his arm on the recessed stone, staring out over the white Tower grounds. This high up, the air felt crisper, newer.

bɪloʊ, hi kəd si ðə nu wɔɹɾɝ pɹæktəs ɡɹaʊnz. ði oʊld wʌnz wɝ dʌɡ ʌp wɛɹ ɪleɪɾə hæd bɪɡʌn bɪldɪŋ əɹ pæləs. noʊbɑdi wɑz ʃʊɹ wʌɾ ɛɡwin wəɾ ɛn ʌp duɪŋ wɪð ðə kənstʃɹʌkʃən.

Below, he could see the new Warder practice grounds. The old ones were dug up where Elaida had begun building her palace. Nobody was sure what Egwene would end up doing with the construction.

ðə pɹæktəs ɡɹaʊnz wɝ bɪzi, ə bʌsəl ə fɪɡjɝz spɑɹɪŋ, ɹʌnɪŋ, fɛnsɪŋ. wɪð ði ɪnflʌks ə ɹɛfjudʒiz, soʊlʒɝz ən sɛl-sɔɹdz, ðəɹ wɝ mɛni hu pɹəzum ðɛmsɛlvz wɔɹɾɝ mətɪɹiəl.

The practice grounds were busy, a bustle of figures sparring, running, fencing. With the influx of refugees, soldiers and sell-swords, there were many who presumed themselves Warder material.

ɛɡwin hæɾ oʊpən ðə ɡɹaʊnz tə ɛni hu wɑntəd tə tʃɹeɪn ən tʃɹaɪ tə pɹuv ðɛmsɛlvz, əz ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə pʊʃ fəɹ əz mɛni wɪmən əz wɝ ɹɛɾi tə bi ɹeɪzd oʊvɝ ðə nɛks fju wiks.

Egwene had opened the grounds to any who wanted to train and try to prove themselves, as she intended to push for as many women as were ready to be raised over the next few weeks.

ɡɔɪn hæd spɛn ə fju deɪz tʃɹeɪnɪŋ, bʌt ðə ɡoʊsts ə mɛn i hæd kɪl simd mɔɹ pɹɛzən daʊn ðɛɹ. ðə ɡɹaʊnz wɝ ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪz pæs laɪf, ə taɪm bɪfɔɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ hæd ɡɔn ɹɔŋ. ʌðɝ jʌŋɡəlɪŋz hæɾ izəli - ən hæpəli - ɹɪtɝn tə ðət laɪf. ɔlɹɛɾi dʒɪsaʊ, ɹeɪjɹ, dɔɹən ən moʊst ə hɪz ʌðɝ ɔfəsɝz hæd bɪn tʃoʊzən əz wɔɹɾɝz. bɪfɔɹ lɔŋ, nʌθɪŋ wəd ɹɪmeɪn ə hɪz bænd. ɪksɛp fəɹ ɡɔɪn hɪmsɛlf.

Gawyn had spent a few days training, but the ghosts of men he had killed seemed more present down there. The grounds were a part of his past life, a time before everything had gone wrong. Other Younglings had easily - and happily - returned to that life. Already Jisao, Rajar, Durrent and most of his other officers had been chosen as Warders. Before long, nothing would remain of his band. Except for Gawyn himself.

ði ɪnɝ dɔɹ klɪkt, fɑloʊd baɪ hʌʃt vɔɪsəz. ɡɔɪn tɝn tə faɪn ɛɡwin, dʒɹɛst ɪn ɡɹin ən jɛloʊ, wɔkɪŋ oʊvɝ tə spik wɪð sɪl-viænə. ðə kipɝ ɡlænst ət hɪm, ən i θɔɾ i kɑɾ ə tʃɹeɪs ʌv ə fɹaʊn ɑn əɹ feɪs.

The inner door clicked, followed by hushed voices. Gawyn turned to find Egwene, dressed in green and yellow, walking over to speak with Sil-viana. The Keeper glanced at him, and he thought he caught a trace of a frown on her face.

ɛɡwin sɔ hɪm. ʃi kɛpt əɹ feɪs ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝin - ʃid ɡɹoʊn ɡʊɾ ət ðət soʊ kwɪkli - ən i faʊn hɪmsɛlf filɪŋ ɑkwɝd.

Egwene saw him. She kept her face Aes Sedai serene - she'd grown good at that so quickly - and he found himself feeling awkward.

"ðɛɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ dɛθ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ," hi sɛd kwaɪətli, wɔkɪŋ ʌp tə hɝ.

"There was another death this morning," he said quietly, walking up to her.

"tɛknɪkəli," ɛɡwin sɛd, "ɪt wɑz læs naɪt."

"Technically," Egwene said, "it was last night."

"aɪ nid tə tɔk tə ju," ɡɔɪn blɝɾɪd.

"I need to talk to you," Gawyn blurted.

ɛɡwin ən sɪlviænə ʃɛɹɾ ə lʊk. "vɛɹi wɛl," ɛɡwin sɛd, ɡlaɪɾɪŋ bæk ɪndə hɝ stʌɾi.

Egwene and Silviana shared a look. "Very well," Egwene said, gliding back into her study.

ɡɔɪn fɑloʊd, nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət ðə kipɝ. ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi wɑz wʌn ə ðə ɡɹændəst ɹumz ɪn ðə taʊɝ. ðə wɔlz wɝ pænəld wɪð ə peɪl stʃɹaɪpt wʊd, kɑɹv tə ʃoʊ fænsɪfəl sinz, mɑɹvələsli dɪteɪld. ðə hɑɹθ wɑz mɑɹbəl, ðə flɔɹ meɪɾ ə dip ɹɛd stoʊn kʌɾ ɪndə daɪmən blɑks. ɛɡwinz lɑɹdʒ, kɑɹv dɛsk wɑz sɛt wɪð tu læmps. ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ə tu wɪmən ɹeɪzɪŋ ðɛɹ hænz tə ði ɛɹ, fleɪmz bɝnɪŋ bɪtwin itʃ sɛɾ ə pɑmz.

Gawyn followed, not looking at the Keeper. The Amyrlin's study was one of the grandest rooms in the Tower. The walls were paneled with a pale striped wood, carved to show fanciful scenes, marvelously detailed. The hearth was marble, the floor made of deep red stone cut into diamond blocks. Egwene's large, carved desk was set with two lamps. They were in the shape of two women raising their hands to the air, flames burning between each set of palms.

wʌn wɔl hæd bʊkkeɪsɪz fɪld wɪð bʊks ɝeɪnʒd - ɪt simd - baɪ kʌlɝ ən saɪz ɹæðɝ ðən baɪ sʌbʒɪkt. ðeɪ wɝ ɔɹnəmɛntəl, bɹɔɾ ɪn tə tʃɹɪm ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi əntɪl ɛɡwin kəd meɪk əɹ oʊn səlɛkʃənz.

One wall had bookcases filled with books arranged - it seemed - by color and size rather than by subject. They were ornamental, brought in to trim the Amyrlin's study until Egwene could make her own selections.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt jə faɪn soʊ nɛsəsɛɹi tə dɪskʌs?" ɛɡwin sɛd, sɪɾɪŋ daʊn əɾ əɹ dɛsk.

"What is it you find so necessary to discuss?" Egwene said, sitting down at her desk.

"ðə mɝɾɝz," ɡɔɪn sɛd.

"The murders," Gawyn said.

"wʌɾ əbaʊt ðɛm?"

"What about them?"

ɡɔɪn ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ. "bɝn mi, ɛɡwin. juv tə ʃoʊ mi ði æmɪɝlɪn ɛvɹi taɪm wi spik? wʌns ɪn ə waɪl, kæn aɪ si ɛɡwin?"

Gawyn shut the door. "Burn me, Egwene. Do you have to show me the Amyrlin every time we speak? Once in a while, can't I see Egwene?"

"aɪ ʃoʊ jə ði æmɪɝlɪn," ɛɡwin sɛd, "bɪkɔz jə ɹəfjuz tə æksɛp hɝ. wʌns jə də soʊ, pɝhæps wi kən muv bɪɑn ðæt."

"I show you the Amyrlin," Egwene said, "because you refuse to accept her. Once you do so, perhaps we can move beyond that."

"laɪt! juv lɝn tə tɔk laɪk wʌn ə ðɛm."

"Light! You've learned to talk like one of them."

"ðæts kəz aɪm wʌn ə ðɛm," ʃi sɛd. "jɔɹ tʃɔɪs ʌv wɝdz bɪtʃɹeɪz ju. ði æmɪɝlɪn kænɑt bi sɝv baɪ ðoʊz u ɹəfjuz tə si hɝ əθɔɹəɾi."

"That's because I am one of them," she said. "Your choice of words betrays you. The Amyrlin cannot be served by those who refuse to see her authority."

"aɪ æksɛp ju," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "aɪ du, ɛɡwin. bʌɾ ɪzən ɪɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə hæv pipəl u noʊ jə fəɹ jɝsɛlf ən nɑt ðə taɪɾəl?"

"I accept you," Gawyn said. "I do, Egwene. But isn't it important to have people who know you for yourself and not the title?"

"soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ noʊ ðət ðəɹ ɪz ə pleɪs fəɹ oʊbiɾiəns." hɝ feɪs sɔfənd. "ju ɑɹən ɹɛɾi jɛt, ɡɔɪn. aɪm sɑɹi."

"So long as they know that there is a place for obedience." Her face softened. "You aren't ready yet, Gawyn. I'm sorry."

hi sɛɾ ɪz dʒɔ. doʊn oʊvɝɹiækt, hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf. "vɛɹi wɛl. ðɛn, əbaʊt ði əsæsəneɪʃənz.

He set his jaw. Don't overreact, he told himself. "Very well. Then, about the assassinations.

wiv ɹilaɪz ðət nʌn ə ðə wɪmən kɪl hæd wɔɹɾɝz."

We've realized that none of the women killed had Warders."

"jɛs, aɪ wɑz ɡɪvən ə ɹipɔɹɾ ɑn ðæt," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"Yes, I was given a report on that," Egwene said.

"ɹəɡɑɹdləs," hi sɛd, "ɪt bɹɪŋz maɪ θɔts tə ə lɑɹdʒɝ ɪʃu. wi doʊn əv ɪnʌf wɔɹɾɝz."

"Regardless," he said, "it brings my thoughts to a larger issue. We don't have enough Warders."

ɛɡwin fɹaʊnd.

Egwene frowned.

"wɝ pɹipɛɹɪŋ fəɹ ðə læs bæɾəl, ɛɡwin," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "æn jɛt ðəɹ ɑɹ sɪstɝz wɪθaʊt wɔɹɾɝz. ə lɑɾ ə sɪstɝz. səm hæd wʌn, bʌt nɛvɝ tʊk ənʌðɝ æftɝ i daɪd. ʌðɝz nɛvɝ wɑntəd wʌn ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk jə kən əfɔɹd ðɪs."

"We're preparing for the Last Battle, Egwene," Gawyn said. "And yet there are sisters without Warders. A lot of sisters. Some had one, but never took another after he died. Others never wanted one in the first place. I don't think you can afford this."

"wʌt wəd juv mi du?" ʃi sɛd, foʊldɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz. "kəmæn ðə wɪmən tə teɪk wɔɹɾɝz?"

"What would you have me do?" she said, folding her arms. "Command the women to take Warders?"

"jɛs."

"Yes."

ʃi læft. "ɡɔɪn, ði æmɪɝlɪn dʌzn əv ðət kaɪndə paʊɝ."

She laughed. "Gawyn, the Amyrlin doesn't have that kind of power."

"ðɛn ɡɛt ðə hɔl tə də ɪt."

"Then get the Hall to do it."

"ju doʊnt noʊ wʌt jəɹ seɪɪŋ. ðə tʃuzɪŋ ən kipɪŋ ʌv ə wɔɹɾɝ ɪz ə vɛɹi pɝsənəl ən ɪntəmət dɪsɪʒən. noʊ wʊmən ʃəd bi fɔɹs tə ɪt."

"You don't know what you're saying. The choosing and keeping of a Warder is a very personal and intimate decision. No woman should be forced to it."

"wɛl," ɡɔɪn sɛd, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə bi ɪntɪmɪdeɪɾɪd, "ðə tʃɔɪs tə ɡoʊ tə wɔɹ ɪz vɛɹi 'pɝsənəl' ən 'ɪntəmət' əz wɛl - jɛɾ ɔl əkɹɔs ðə lænd, mɛn ɑɹ kɔld ɪndə ɪt. səmtaɪmz, filɪŋz ɑɹən əz ɪmpɔɹɾənt əz sɝvaɪvəl.

"Well," Gawyn said, refusing to be intimidated, "the choice to go to war is very 'personal' and 'intimate' as well - yet all across the land, men are called into it. Sometimes, feelings aren't as important as survival.

"wɔɹɾɝz kip sɪstɝz əlaɪv, ən ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪz gɑnə bi ʌv vaɪɾəl ɪmpɔɹɾəns sun. ðəɹ wɪl bi lidʒənz əpɑn lidʒənz ə tʃɹɑləks. ɛvɹi sɪstɝ ɑn ðə fild wɪl bi mɔɹ væljəbəl ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd soʊlʒɝz, ən ɛvɹi sɪstɝ hilɪŋ wɪl bi eɪbəl tə seɪv dʌzənz ə lɪvz. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ æsɛts ðət bɪlɔŋ tə hjumænɪɾi. jə kænɑɾ əfɔɹd tə lɛɾ əm ɡoʊ əbaʊɾ ʌnpɹətɛktɪd."

"Warders keep sisters alive, and every Aes Sedai is going to be of vital importance soon. There will be legions upon legions of Trollocs. Every sister on the field will be more valuable than a hundred soldiers, and every sister Healing will be able to save dozens of lives. The Aes Sedai are assets that belong to humanity. You cannot afford to let them go about unprotected."

ɛɡwin dʒɹu bæk, pɝhæps ət ðə fɝvɝ ə hɪz wɝdz. ðɛn, ʌnɪkspɛktɪdli, ʃi nɑɾəd. "pɝhæps ðəɹ ɪz . . . wɪzdəm ɪn ðoʊz wɝdz, ɡɔɪn."

Egwene drew back, perhaps at the fervor of his words. Then, unexpectedly, she nodded. "Perhaps there is . . . wisdom in those words, Gawyn."

"bɹɪŋ ɪt bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "æɾ ɪts kɔɹ, ɛɡwin, ə sɪstɝ nɑt bɑndɪŋ ə wɔɹɾɝ ɪz ən ækt ə sɛlfɪʃnəs. ðət bɑn meɪks ə mæn ə bɛɾɝ soʊlʒɝ, ən wɪl niɾ ɛvɹi ɛdʒ wi kən faɪnd.

"Bring it before the Hall," Gawyn said. "At its core, Egwene, a sister not bonding a Warder is an act of selfishness. That bond makes a man a better soldier, and we'll need every edge we can find.

ðɪs wɪl ɔlsoʊ hɛlp pɹɪvɛn ðə mɝɾɝz."

This will also help prevent the murders."

"aɪ wɪl si wʌt kən bi dʌn," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"I will see what can be done," Egwene said.

"kʊd jə lemi si ðə ɹɪpɔɹts ðə sɪstɝz ɑɹ ɡɪvɪŋ?" ɡɔɪn sɛd, "əbaʊt ðə mɝɾɝz, aɪ min?"

"Could you let me see the reports the sisters are giving?" Gawyn said, "About the murders, I mean?"

"ɡɔɪn," ʃi sɛd, "aɪv əlaʊd jə tə bi ə pɑɹɾ ə ði ɪnvɛstəɡeɪʃən kəz aɪ θɔɾ ɪt maɪt bi ɡʊd tə hæv ə dɪfɹən sɛɾ ʌv aɪz lʊkɪŋ θɪŋz oʊvɝ. ɡɪvɪŋ jə ðɛɹ ɹɪpɔɹts wəd dʒʌst ɪnfluəns jə tə dʒɹɔ ðə seɪm kənkluʒənz əz ðeɪ du."

"Gawyn," she said, "I've allowed you to be a part of the investigation because I thought it might be good to have a different set of eyes looking things over. Giving you their reports would just influence you to draw the same conclusions as they do."

"æt lis tɛl mi ðɪs," hi sɛd. "hæv ðə sɪstɝz ɹeɪz ðə wɝi ðət ðɪs maɪt nɑt bi ðə wɝk ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ? ðət ði əsæsən maɪt bi ə ɡɹeɪ mæn əɹ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd?"

"At least tell me this," he said. "Have the sisters raised the worry that this might not be the work of the Black Ajah? That the assassin might be a Gray Man or a Darkfriend?"

"noʊ, ðeɪv nɑt," ɛɡwin sɛd, "bɪkɔz wi noʊ ðət ði əsæsən ɪz nɑt wʌn ə ðoʊz tu."

"No, they have not," Egwene said, "because we know that the assassin is not one of those two."

"bʌt ðə dɔɹ læs naɪt, ɪt wɑz fɔɹst. ən ðə wɪmən ɑɹ kɪld wɪð naɪvz, nɑt ðə wʌn paʊɝ.

"But the door last night, it was forced. And the women are killed with knives, not the One Power.

ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ saɪnz ʌv ɡeɪtweɪz əɹ - "

There are no signs of gateways or - "

"ðə kɪlɝ əz æksɛs tə ðə wʌn paʊɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd, spikɪŋ vɛɹi kɛɹfəli. "æn pɝhæps ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt juzɪŋ ɡeɪtweɪz."

"The killer has access to the One Power," Egwene said, speaking very carefully. "And perhaps they are not using gateways."

ɡɔɪn nɛɹoʊɾ ɪz aɪz. ðoʊz saʊndəd laɪk ðə wɝdz ʌv ə wʊmən stɛpɪŋ ɝaʊn əɹ oʊθ nɑt tə laɪ. "jɔɹ kipɪŋ sikɹəts," hi sɛd. "nɑt dʒʌs fɹəm mi. fɹəm ði ɪntaɪɝ taʊɝ."

Gawyn narrowed his eyes. Those sounded like the words of a woman stepping around her oath not to lie. "You're keeping secrets," he said. "Not just from me. From the entire Tower."

"sikɹəts ɑɹ niɾəd səmtaɪmz, ɡɔɪn."

"Secrets are needed sometimes, Gawyn."

"kæn jə tʃɹʌs mi wɪð ðɛm?" hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "aɪm wɝid ðət ði əsæsən wɪl kʌm fəɹ ju, ɛɡwin. jə doʊn əv ə wɔɹɾɝ."

"Can't you trust me with them?" He hesitated. "I'm worried that the assassin will come for you, Egwene. You don't have a Warder."

"əndaʊɾɪdli ʃɪl kʌm fəɹ mi, ɪvɛntʃəwəli." ʃi tɔɪd wɪð sʌmθɪŋ ɑn əɹ dɛsk. ɪt lʊk laɪk ə wɔɹn lɛðɝ stʃɹæp, ðə taɪp juz tə pʌnɪʃ ə kɹɪmənəl. ɑd.

"Undoubtedly she will come for me, eventually." She toyed with something on her desk. It looked like a worn leather strap, the type used to punish a criminal. Odd.

ʃi? "pliz, ɛɡwin," hi sɛd. "wʌts ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn?"

She? "Please, Egwene," he said. "What's going on?"

ʃi stʌɾid hɪm, ðən ʃi saɪd. "vɛɹi wɛl. aɪv toʊl ðɪs tə ðə wɪmən duɪŋ ði ɪnvɛstəɡeɪʃən.

She studied him, then she sighed. "Very well. I've told this to the women doing the investigation.

pɝhæps aɪ ʃəd tɛl jə tu. wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɪz ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ."

Perhaps I should tell you too. One of the Forsaken is in the White Tower."

hi loʊɝɾ ɪz hæn tə hɪz sɔɹd. "wʌt? wɛɹ! juv əɹ kæptɪv?"

He lowered his hand to his sword. "What? Where! You have her captive?"

"noʊ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ʃiz ði əsæsən."

"No," Egwene said. "She's the assassin."

"ju noʊ ðɪs?"

"You know this?"

"aɪ noʊ mɛsænə ɪz hɪɹ; aɪv dʒɹim ðəɾ ɪts tʃɹu. ʃi haɪdz əmʌŋ ʌs. naʊ, fɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, dɛd? ɪts hɝ, ɡɔɪn. ɪts ði oʊnli θɪŋ ðət meɪks sɛns."

"I know Mesaana is here; I've dreamed that it is true. She hides among us. Now, four Aes Sedai, dead? It's her, Gawyn. It's the only thing that makes sense."

hi bɪɾ ɔf kwɛstʃənz. hi nu vɛɹi lɪɾəl ə dʒɹimɪŋ, bʌt nu ʃi hæd ðə tælənt. ɪt wɑz sɛd tə bi laɪk fɔɹtɛlɪŋ.

He bit off questions. He knew very little of Dreaming, but knew she had the Talent. It was said to be like Foretelling.

"aɪ hævən toʊl ði ɪntaɪɝ taʊɝ," ɛɡwin kəntɪnjud. "aɪ wɝi ðəɾ ɪf ðeɪ nu wʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz ɝaʊn əm ɪz sikɹɪtli wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən, ɪt wəd dɪvaɪɾ əs ɔl əɡɛn, əz ʌndɝ ɪleɪɾə. wiɾ ɔl bi səspɪʃəs ʌv wʌn ənʌðɝ.

"I haven't told the entire Tower," Egwene continued. "I worry that if they knew one of the sisters around them is secretly one of the Forsaken, it would divide us all again, as under Elaida. We'd all be suspicious of one another.

"ɪts bæɾ ɪnʌf naʊ, wɪð əm θɪŋkɪŋ blæk sɪstɝz ɑɹ tʃɹævlɪŋ ɪn tə kəmɪt mɝɾɝz, bʌɾ ət lis ðət dʌzn meɪk əm səspɪʃəs ʌv wʌn ənʌðɝ. ən meɪbi mɛsænə wɪl θɪŋk ðəɾ aɪm nɑɾ əwɛɹ ɪts hɝ. bʌt ðɛɹ, ðæts ðə sikɹət jə bɛɡd tə noʊ. ɪts nɑɾ ə blæk sɪstɝ wi hʌnt, bʌt wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən."

"It's bad enough now, with them thinking Black sisters are Traveling in to commit murders, but at least that doesn't make them suspicious of one another. And maybe Mesaana will think that I'm not aware it is her. But there, that's the secret you begged to know. It's not a Black sister we hunt, but one of the Forsaken."

ɪt wɑz dɔntɪŋ tə kənsɪɾɝ - bʌt noʊ mɔɹ soʊ ðən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɔkɪŋ ðə lænd. laɪt, ə fɔɹseɪkən ɪn ðə taʊɝ simd mɔɹ plɔzəbəl ðən ɛɡwin biɪŋ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit! "wil dil wɪð ɪt," hi sɛd, saʊndɪŋ fɑɹ mɔɹ kɑnfəɾənt ðən i fɛlt.

It was daunting to consider - but no more so than the Dragon Reborn walking the land. Light, a Forsaken in the Tower seemed more plausible than Egwene being the Amyrlin Seat! "We'll deal with it," he said, sounding far more confident than he felt.

"aɪ hæv sɪstɝz sɝtʃɪŋ ðə hɪstɝiz ʌv ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə taʊɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "æn ʌðɝz ɑɹ wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ səspɪʃəs wɝdz əɹ ækʃənz. wɪl faɪn hɝ. bʌɾ aɪ doʊn si haʊ wi kən meɪk ðə wɪmən ɛni mɔɹ sɪkjʊɹ wɪθaʊɾ ɪnsaɪɾɪŋ ən ivən mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs pænɪk."

"I have sisters searching the histories of everyone in the Tower," Egwene said. "And others are watching for suspicious words or actions. We'll find her. But I don't see how we can make the women any more secure without inciting an even more dangerous panic."

"wɔɹɾɝz," ɡɔɪn sɛd fɝmli.

"Warders," Gawyn said firmly.

"aɪ wɪl θɪŋk ɑn ɪt, ɡɔɪn. fəɹ naʊ, ðəɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ aɪ niɾ ə ju."

"I will think on it, Gawyn. For now, there is something I need of you."

"ɪf ɪts wɪðɪn maɪ paʊɝ, ɛɡwin." hi tʊk ə stɛp təwɔɹd hɝ. "ju noʊ ðæt."

"If it is within my power, Egwene." He took a step toward her. "You know that."

"ɪz ðət soʊ?" ʃi æsk dʒɹaɪli. "vɛɹi wɛl. aɪ wɑn jə tə stɑp ɡɑɹɾɪŋ maɪ dɔɹ ət naɪt."

"Is that so?" she asked dryly. "Very well. I want you to stop guarding my door at night."

"wʌt? ɛɡwin, noʊ!"

"What? Egwene, no!"

ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ju si? jəɹ fɝst ɹiækʃən ɪz tə tʃælənʒ mi."

She shook her head. "You see? Your first reaction is to challenge me."

"ɪɾ ɪz ðə duɾi ʌv ə wɔɹɾɝ tə ɔfɝ tʃælənʒ, ɪn pɹaɪvət, wɛɹ ɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪz kənsɝnd!"

"It is the duty of a Warder to offer challenge, in private, where his Aes Sedai is concerned!"

hæmɝ hæd tɔɾ ɪm ðæt.

Hammar had taught him that.

"ju ɑɹ nɑt maɪ wɔɹɾɝ, ɡɔɪn."

"You are not my Warder, Gawyn."

ðət bɹɔɾ ɪm ʌp ʃɔɹt.

That brought him up short.

"bɪsaɪdz," ɛɡwin sɛd, "ju kəd də lɪɾəl tə stɑp wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən. ðɪs bæɾəl wɪl bi fɔt baɪ sɪstɝz, ən aɪm biɪŋ vɛɹi kɛɹfəl wɪð ðə wɔɹdz aɪ sɛt. aɪ wɑn maɪ kɔɹɾɝz tə lʊk ɪnvaɪɾɪŋ.

"Besides," Egwene said, "you could do little to stop one of the Forsaken. This battle will be fought by sisters, and I am being very careful with the wards I set. I want my quarters to look inviting.

ɪf ʃi tʃɹaɪz tə ətæk mi, pɝhæps aɪ kən sɝpɹaɪz əɹ wɪð ən æmbʊʃ."

If she tries to attack me, perhaps I can surprise her with an ambush."

"juz jɝsɛlf əz beɪt?" ɡɔɪn wɑz bɛɹli eɪbəl tə ɡɛt ðə wɝdz aʊt. 'ɛɡwin, ðɪs ɪz mædnəs!"

"Use yourself as bait?" Gawyn was barely able to get the words out. 'Egwene, this is madness!"

"noʊ. ɪts dɛspɝeɪʃən. ɡɔɪn, wɪmən aɪm ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ ɑɹ daɪɪŋ. mɝɾɝd ɪn ðə naɪt, ɪn ə taɪm wən jə jɝsɛlf sɛd wɪl niɾ ɛvɹi wʊmən."

"No. It's desperation. Gawyn, women I am responsible for are dying. Murdered in the night, in a time when you yourself said we will need every woman."

fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, fətiɡ ʃoʊd θɹu hɝ mæsk, ə wɪɹinəs ə toʊn ən ə slaɪt slʌmp tə hɝ bæk. ʃi foʊldəɾ əɹ hænz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, sʌɾənli simɪŋ wɔɹn.

For the first time, fatigue showed through her mask, a weariness of tone and a slight slump to her back. She folded her hands in front of her, suddenly seeming worn.

"aɪ hæv sɪstɝz ɹisɝtʃɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ wi kən faɪn əbaʊt mɛsænə," ɛɡwin kəntɪnjud. "ʃiz nɑɾ ə wɔɹiɝ, ɡɔɪn. ʃiz ən ədmɪnəstʃɹeɪɾɝ, ə plænɝ. ɪf aɪ kən kənfɹʌn hɝ, aɪ kən dɪfit hɝ. bʌt wi mʌs faɪn əɹ fɝst. ɪkspoʊzɪŋ maɪsɛlf ɪz oʊnli wʌn ə maɪ plænz - ən jə ɑɹ ɹaɪt, ɪts deɪnʒɝəs. bʌt maɪ pɹikɔʃənz əv bɪn ɪkstɛnsɪv."

"I have sisters researching everything we can find about Mesaana," Egwene continued. "She's not a warrior, Gawyn. She's an administrator, a planner. If I can confront her, I can defeat her. But we must find her first. Exposing myself is only one of my plans - and you are right, it is dangerous. But my precautions have been extensive."

"aɪ doʊn laɪk ɪɾ əɾ ɔl."

"I don't like it at all."

"jɔɹ əpɹuvəl ɪz nɑt ɹikwaɪɝd." ʃi aɪd hɪm. "ju wɪl əv tə tʃɹʌs mi."

"Your approval is not required." She eyed him. "You will have to trust me."

"aɪ də tʃɹʌs ju," hi sɛd.

"I do trust you," he said.

"ɔl aɪ æsk ɪz ðət jə ʃoʊ ɪt fəɹ wʌns."

"All I ask is that you show it for once."

ɡɔɪn ɡɹɪɾɪd ɪz tiθ. ðən i baʊd tə hɝ ən lɛf ðə stʌɾi, tʃɹaɪɪŋ - ən feɪlɪŋ - tə kip ðə dɔɹ fɹəm ʃʌɾɪŋ tu hɑɹd wən i pʊld ɪt kloʊzd. sɪlviænə ɡeɪv ɪm ə dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ lʊk əz i pæs hɝ.

Gawyn gritted his teeth. Then he bowed to her and left the study, trying - and failing - to keep the door from shutting too hard when he pulled it closed. Silviana gave him a disapproving look as he passed her.

fɹəm ðɛɹ, hi hɛɾəd fəɹ ðə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɡɹaʊnz dɪspaɪɾ ɪz dɪskʌmfɝt wɪð ðɛm. hi niɾəd ə wɝkaʊt wɪð ðə sɔɹd.

From there, he headed for the training grounds despite his discomfort with them. He needed a workout with the sword.

ɛɡwin lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ saɪ, sɪɾɪŋ bæk, kloʊzɪŋ əɹ aɪz. waɪ wɑz ɪt soʊ hɑɹd tə kip əɹ filɪŋz ɪn tʃɛk wən dilɪŋ wɪð ɡɔɪn? ʃi nɛvɝ fɛlt əz pʊɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ əz ʃi dɪd wən spikɪŋ wɪð hɪm.

Egwene let out a long sigh, sitting back, closing her eyes. Why was it so hard to keep her feelings in check when dealing with Gawyn? She never felt as poor an Aes Sedai as she did when speaking with him.

soʊ mɛni ɪmoʊʃənz swɝld wɪðɪn hɝ, laɪk dɪfɹən kaɪnz ʌv waɪn spɪlɪŋ ən mɪksɪŋ təɡɛðɝ:

So many emotions swirled within her, like different kinds of wine spilling and mixing together:

ɹeɪdʒ əɾ ɪz stʌbɝnnəs, bɝnɪŋ dɪzaɪɝ fəɹ ɪz ɑɹmz, kənfjuʒən əɾ əɹ oʊn ɪnəbɪlɪɾi tə pleɪs wʌn ə ðoʊz bɪfɔɹ ði ʌðɝ.

rage at his stubbornness, burning desire for his arms, confusion at her own inability to place one of those before the other.

ɡɔɪn hæɾ ə weɪ ʌv bɔɹɪŋ θɹu hɝ skɪn ən ɪndə hɝ hɑɹt. ðət pæʃən ə hɪz wɑz ɛntʃɹænsɪŋ. ʃi wɝid ðəɾ ɪf ʃi bɑndəd hɪm, ɪt wəɾ ɪnfɛk hɝ. wɑz ðət haʊ ɪt wɝkt? wʌɾ ɪt fil laɪk tə bi bɑndəd, tə sɛns ənʌðɝz ɪmoʊʃənz?

Gawyn had a way of boring through her skin and into her heart. That passion of his was entrancing. She worried that if she bonded him, it would infect her. Was that how it worked? What did it feel like to be bonded, to sense another's emotions?

ʃi wɑntəd ðət wɪð hɪm, ðə kənɛkʃən ðəɾ ʌðɝz hæd. ən ɪt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðət ʃi hæv pipəl ʃi kəd ɹɪlaɪ əpɑn tə kɑntʃɹədɪk hɝ, ɪn pɹaɪvət. pipəl u nu hɝ əz ɛɡwin, ɹæðɝ ðən ði æmɪɝlɪn.

She wanted that with him, the connection that others had. And it was important that she have people she could rely upon to contradict her, in private. People who knew her as Egwene, rather than the Amyrlin.

bʌt ɡɔɪn wɑz tu lus, tu əntʃɹʌstɪŋ, jɛt.

But Gawyn was too loose, too untrusting, yet.

ʃi lʊkt oʊvɝ əɹ lɛɾɝ tə ðə nu kɪŋ ə tɛɹ, ɪkspleɪnɪŋ ðət ɹænd wɑz θɹɛɾənɪŋ tə bɹeɪk ðə silz. hɝ plæn tə stɑp ɪm wəd dɪpɛn ɑn əɹ ɡæðɝɪŋ səpɔɹt fɹəm pipəl i tʃɹʌstɪd. ʃi hæd kənflɪktɪŋ ɹɪpɔɹts əbaʊt dɑɹlɪn sɪsnɛɹə. səm sɛɾ i wɑz wʌn ə ɹændz ɡɹeɪɾəst səpɔɹɾɝz, waɪl ʌðɝz kleɪmd i wɑz wʌn ə ɹændz ɡɹeɪɾəst dɪtʃɹæktɝz.

She looked over her letter to the new King of Tear, explaining that Rand was threatening to break the seals. Her plan to stop him would depend on her gathering support from people he trusted. She had conflicting reports about Darlin Sisnera. Some said he was one of Rand's greatest supporters, while others claimed he was one of Rand's greatest detractors.

ʃi sɛt ðə lɛɾɝ əsaɪd fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, ðən ɹoʊt səm θɔts ɑn haʊ tə əpɹoʊtʃ ðə hɔl ɑn ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɪʃu. ɡɔɪn meɪɾ ən ɛksələn ɑɹɡjəmənt, ðoʊ hi wɛn tu fɑɹ ən əsum tu mʌtʃ.

She set the letter aside for the moment, then wrote some thoughts on how to approach the Hall on the Warder issue. Gawyn made an excellent argument, though he went too far and assumed too much.

meɪkɪŋ ə pli fəɹ wɪmən u hæd noʊ wɔɹɾɝz tə tʃuz wʌn, ɪkspleɪnɪŋ ɔl ə ði ædvæntɪdʒɪz ən pɔɪntɪŋ aʊt haʊ ɪt kəd seɪv laɪvz ən hɛlp dɪfit ðə ʃædoʊ ðət wəd bi əpɹoʊpɹiət.

Making a plea for women who had no Warders to choose one, explaining all of the advantages and pointing out how it could save lives and help defeat the Shadow that would be appropriate.

ʃi pɔɹd hɝsɛlf səm mɪn ti fɹəm ðə pɑɾ ɑn ðə saɪɾ ə hɝ dɛsk. ɑdli, ɪt hædn bɪn spɔɪlɪŋ əz ɔfən leɪtli, ən ðɪs kʌp teɪstəd kwaɪt ɡʊd. ʃi hædn toʊld ɡɔɪn ə ði ʌðɝ ɹizən ʃiɾ æskt ɪm tə liv əɹ dɔɹ ət naɪts. ʃi hæd tʃɹʌbəl slipɪŋ, noʊɪŋ i wɑz aʊt ðɛɹ, oʊnli ə fju fiɾ əweɪ. ʃi wɝid ʃid slɪp ən ɡoʊ tə hɪm.

She poured herself some mint tea from the pot on the side of her desk. Oddly, it hadn't been spoiling as often lately, and this cup tasted quite good. She hadn't told Gawyn of the other reason she'd asked him to leave her door at nights. She had trouble sleeping, knowing he was out there, only a few feet away. She worried she'd slip and go to him.

sɪlviænəz stʃɹæp hæd nɛvɝ bɪn eɪbəl tə bɹeɪk əɹ wɪl, bʌt ɡɔɪn tʃɹəkənd ... hi wɑz kʌmɪŋ deɪnʒɝəsli kloʊs tə duɪŋ soʊ.

Silviana's strap had never been able to break her will, but Gawyn Trakand ... he was coming dangerously close to doing so.

ɡɹeɪndəl æntɪsəpeɪɾəd ðə mɛsənʒɝz ɝaɪvəl. ivən hɪɹ, ɪn əɹ moʊst sikɹəɾ ə haɪɾɪŋ pleɪsəz, hɪz ɝaɪvəl wɑz nɑɾ ʌnɪkspɛktɪd. ðə tʃoʊzən kəd nɑt haɪd fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd.

Graendal anticipated the messenger's arrival. Even here, in her most secret of hiding places, his arrival was not unexpected. The Chosen could not hide from the Great Lord.

ðə haɪɾɪŋ pleɪs wɑz nɑɾ ə pæləs, ə faɪn lɑdʒ əɹ ən eɪntʃən fɔɹtʃɹəs. ɪt wɑz ə kævɝn ɑn ən aɪlənd noʊbɑdi kɛɹɾ əbaʊt, ɪn ən ɛɹiə ʌv ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən ðət noʊbɑdi ɛvɝ vɪzəɾəd. soʊ fɑɹ əz ʃi nu, ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ə noʊɾ əɹ ɪntʃɹəst ɛniwɛɹ nɪɹ.

The hiding place was not a palace, a fine lodge or an ancient fortress. It was a cavern on an island nobody cared about, in an area of the Aryth Ocean that nobody ever visited. So far as she knew, there was nothing of note or interest anywhere near.

ði əkɑmədeɪʃənz wɝ daʊnɹaɪt dʒɹɛdfəl. sɪks ə hɝ lɛsɝ pɛts kɛɹd fəɹ ðə pleɪs, wɪtʃ wɑz mɪɹli θɹi tʃeɪmbɝz. ʃid kʌvɝɾ oʊvɝ ði ɛntʃɹəns wɪð stoʊn, ən ði oʊnli weɪ ɪn əɹ aʊt wɑz baɪ ɡeɪtweɪ. fɹɛʃ wɔɾɝ keɪm fɹəm ə nætʃɹəl spɹɪŋ, fud fɹəm stɔɹz ʃid bɹɔɾ ɪn pɹiviəsli, ən ɛɹ θɹu kɹæks. ɪt wɑz dæŋk, ən ɪt wɑz loʊli.

The accommodations were downright dreadful. Six of her lesser pets cared for the place, which was merely three chambers. She'd covered over the entrance with stone, and the only way in or out was by gateway. Fresh water came from a natural spring, food from stores she'd brought in previously, and air through cracks. It was dank, and it was lowly.

ɪn ʌðɝ wɝdz, ɪt wɑz pɹɪsaɪsli ðə sɔɹɾ ə pleɪs wɛɹ noʊbɑdi wəɾ ɪkspɛk tə faɪn hɝ.

In other words, it was precisely the sort of place where nobody would expect to find her.

ɛvɹiwʌn nu ðət ɡɹeɪndəl kəd nɑt stæn ə læk ə lʌɡʒɝi. ðət wɑz tʃɹu. bʌt ðə bɛs pɑɹɾ əbaʊt biɪŋ pɹɪdɪktəbəl wɑz ðəɾ ɪɾ əlaʊd jə tə də ði ʌnɪkspɛktɪd.

Everyone knew that Graendal could not stand a lack of luxury. That was true. But the best part about being predictable was that it allowed you to do the unexpected.

ənfɔɹtʃənətli, nʌn ə ðəɾ əplaɪd tə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd. ɡɹeɪndəl wɑtʃt ði oʊpən ɡeɪtweɪ bɪfɔɹ əɹ əz ʃi ɹɪlækst ɑn ə ʃeɪz ə jɛloʊ ən blu sɪlk. ðə mɛsənʒɝ wɑz ə mæn wɪð flæt fitʃɝz ən dip tæn skɪn, wɛɹɪŋ blæk ən ɹɛd. hi dɪdnt nid tə spik - hɪz pɹɛzəns wɑz ðə mɛsədʒ.

Unfortunately, none of that applied to the Great Lord. Graendal watched the open gateway before her as she relaxed on a chaise of yellow and blue silk. The messenger was a man with flat features and deep tanned skin, wearing black and red. He didn't need to speak - his presence was the message.

wʌn ə hɝ pɛts - ə bjuɾəfəl, blæk-hɛɹd wʊmən wɪð lɑɹdʒ bɹaʊn aɪz u hæd wʌns bɪn ə tɛɹən haɪ leɪɾi - stɛɹɾ ət ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, ʃi lʊk fɹaɪɾənd. ɡɹeɪndəl fɛl mʌtʃ ðə seɪm weɪ.

One of her pets - a beautiful, black-haired woman with large brown eyes who had once been a Tairen high lady - stared at the gateway, She looked frightened. Graendal felt much the same way.

ʃi kloʊz ðə wʊd-baʊn kɑpi ʌv əlaɪɾ ɪn ðə snoʊ ɪn əɹ hænz ən stʊɾ ʌp, wɛɹɪŋ ə dʒɹɛs ə θɪn blæk sɪlk wɪð ɹɪbənz ə stʃɹaɪθ ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn ɪt. ʃi stɛp θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, kɛɹfəl tə pɹədʒɛkt ən ɛɹ ə kɑnfəɾəns.

She closed the wood-bound copy of Alight in the Snow in her hands and stood up, wearing a dress of thin black silk with ribbons of streith running down it. She stepped through the gateway, careful to project an air of confidence.

mɔɹaɪɾɪn stʊɾ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz blæk stoʊn pæləs. ðə ɹum hæd noʊ fɝnɪtʃɝ;

Moridin stood inside his black stone palace. The room had no furniture;

oʊnli ðə hɑɹθ, wɪð ə faɪɝ bɝnɪŋ. ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd! ə faɪɝ, ɑn sətʃ ə wɔɹm deɪ? ʃi meɪnteɪn əɹ kəmpoʊʒɝ, ən dɪd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə swɛt.

only the hearth, with a fire burning. Great Lord! A fire, on such a warm day? She maintained her composure, and did not begin to sweat.

hi tɝn təwɔɹd hɝ, ðə blæk flɛks ə sæɑ swɪmɪŋ əkɹɔs ɪz aɪz. "ju noʊ waɪ aɪ hæv sʌmən ju." nɑɾ ə kwɛstʃən.

He turned toward her, the black flecks of saa swimming across his eyes. "You know why I have summoned you." Not a question.

"aɪ du."

"I do."

"ɝæŋɡɝ ɪz dɛd, lɔs tə əs - ən æftɝ ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd tʃɹænsməɡɹeɪɾɪd əɹ soʊl ðə læs taɪm. wʌn maɪt θɪŋk jə ɑɹ meɪkɪŋ ə hæbəɾ ə ðɪs sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ, ɡɹeɪndəl."

"Aran'gar is dead, lost to us - and after the Great Lord transmigrated her soul the last time. One might think you are making a habit of this sort of thing, Graendal."

"aɪ lɪv tə sɝv, nɛbli," ʃi sɛd. kɑnfəɾəns! ʃi hæd tə sim kɑnfəɾənt.

"I live to serve, Nae'blis," she said. Confidence! She had to seem confident.

hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd dʒʌs bɹifli. ɡʊd. "ʃʊɹli jə də nɑɾ ɪmplaɪ ðəɾ ɝæŋɡɝ hæd tɝn tʃɹeɪɾɝ."

He hesitated just briefly. Good. "Surely you do not imply that Aran'gar had turned traitor."

"wʌt?" ɡɹeɪndəl sɛd. "noʊ, ʌv kɔɹs nɑt."

"What?" Graendal said. "No, of course not."

"ðɛn haʊ ɪz wʌt jə dɪɾ ə sɝvəs?"

"Then how is what you did a service?"

ɡɹeɪndəl peɪstɪɾ ə lʊk ə kənsɝn kənfjuʒən ɑn əɹ feɪs. "waɪ, aɪ wɑz fɑloʊɪŋ ðə kəmæn aɪ wɑz ɡɪvən. æm aɪ nɑt hɪɹ tə ɹəsiv ən ækəleɪd?"

Graendal pasted a look of concerned confusion on her face. "Why, I was following the command I was given. Am I not here to receive an accolade?"

"fɑɹ fɹəm ɪt," mɔɹaɪɾɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "jɔɹ feɪn kənfjuʒən wɪl nɑt wɝk ɑn mi, wʊmən."

"Far from it," Moridin said dryly. "Your feigned confusion will not work on me, woman."

"ɪɾ ɪz nɑt feɪnd," ɡɹeɪndəl sɛd, pɹipɛɹɪŋ əɹ laɪ. "waɪl aɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛk ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd tə bi pliz tə luz wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən, ðə ɡeɪn wɑz ɑbviəsli wɝθ ðə kɑst."

"It is not feigned," Graendal said, preparing her lie. "While I did not expect the Great Lord to be pleased to lose one of the Chosen, the gain was obviously worth the cost."

"wʌt ɡeɪn?" mɔɹaɪɾɪn snɑɹəld. "ju əlaʊd jɝsɛlf tə bi kɑɾ ʌnəwɛɹ, ən fulɪʃli lɔs ðə laɪf ʌv wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən! wi ʃʊɾə bɪn eɪbəl tə ɹɪlaɪ ɑn ju, ʌv ɔl pipəl, tə əvɔɪd stʌmbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ ælθɹ."

"What gain?" Moridin snarled. "You allowed yourself to be caught unaware, and foolishly lost the life of one of the Chosen! We should have been able to rely on you, of all people, to avoid stumbling over al'Thor."

hi dɪdnt noʊ ðət ʃid baʊn ɝæŋɡɝ ən lɛft əɹ tə daɪ; hi θɔt ðɪs wɑz ə mɪsteɪk. ɡʊd.

He didn't know that she'd bound Aran'gar and left her to die; he thought this was a mistake. Good.

"kɑɾ ʌnəwɛɹ?" ʃi sɛd, saʊndɪŋ mɔɹɾəfaɪd. "aɪ nɛvɝ . . . mɔɹaɪɾɪn, haʊ kəd jə θɪŋk ðəɾ aɪd lɛɾ ɪm faɪn mi baɪ æksəɾənt!"

"Caught unaware?" she said, sounding mortified. "I never . . . Moridin, how could you think that I'd let him find me by accident!"

"ju dɪd ðɪs ɪntɛnʃənəli?"

"You did this intentionally?"

"ʌv kɔɹs," ɡɹeɪndəl sɛd. "aɪ pɹæktəkli hæd tə liɾ ɪm baɪ ðə hæn tə nætʃɹɪnz bæɹoʊ. luz θɝɪn nɛvɝ wɑz ɡʊɾ ət siɪŋ fæks dɝɛkli ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz noʊz. mɔɹaɪɾɪn, doʊn jə si? haʊ wɪl luz θɝɪn ɹiæk tə wʌt hiz dʌn? dɪstʃɹɔɪɪŋ ən ɪntaɪɝ fɔɹtʃɹəs, ə mɪniətʃʊɹ sɪɾi ʌv ɪts oʊn, wɪð hʌnʒɹədz ʌv ɑkjəpəns? kɪlɪŋ ɪnəsəns tə ɹitʃ ɪz ɡoʊl? wɪl ðət sɪɾ izəli wɪðɪn hɪm?"

"Of course," Graendal said. "I practically had to lead him by the hand to Natrins Barrow. Lews Therin never was good at seeing facts directly in front of his nose. Moridin, don't you see? How will Lews Therin react to what he has done? Destroying an entire fortress, a miniature city of its own, with hundreds of occupants? Killing innocents to reach his goal? Will that sit easily within him?"

mɔɹaɪɾɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. noʊ, hi hæd nɑt kənsɪɾɝd ðæt. ʃi smaɪld ɪnwɝdli. tə hɪm, eɪθɹz ækʃənz wʊɾə meɪd pɝfək sɛns. ðeɪ wɝ ðə moʊs lɑdʒɪkəl, ən ðɛɹfɔɹ moʊst sɛnsəbəl, minz ʌv əkɑmplɪʃɪŋ ə ɡoʊl.

Moridin hesitated. No, he had not considered that. She smiled inwardly. To him, ai'Thor's actions would have made perfect sense. They were the most logical, and therefore most sensible, means of accomplishing a goal.

bʌɾ ælθɹ hɪmsɛlf... hɪz maɪnd wɑz fʊl ə deɪdʒɹimz əbaʊɾ ɑnɝ ən vɝtʃu. ðɪs ɪvɛnt wəd nɑt sɪɾ izəli wɪðɪn hɪm, ən spikɪŋ ə hɪm əz luz θɝɪn tə mɔɹaɪɾɪn wəd ɹiɪnfɔɹs ðæt. ðiz ækʃənz wəd tɛɹ əɾ ælθɹ, ɹɪp əɾ ɪz soʊl, læʃ ɪz hɑɹt ɹɔ ən bliɾɪŋ. hi wəɾ əv naɪtmɛɹz, wɛɹ ɪz ɡɪlt ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz laɪk ðə joʊk ʌv ə hɛvəli leɪɾən kɑɹt.

But al'Thor himself... his mind was full of daydreams about honor and virtue. This event would not sit easily within him, and speaking of him as Lews Therin to Moridin would reinforce that. These actions would tear at al'Thor, rip at his soul, lash his heart raw and bleeding. He would have nightmares, wear his guilt on his shoulders like the yoke of a heavily laden cart.

ʃi kəd veɪɡli ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌɾ ɪt hæd bɪn laɪk, teɪkɪŋ ðoʊz fɝs fju stɛps təwɔɹd ðə ʃædoʊ. hæd ʃi ɛvɝ fɛl ðət fulɪʃ peɪn? jɛs, ənfɔɹtʃənətli. nɑɾ ɔl ə ðə tʃoʊzən hæd. sɛmɝhɪdʒ hæd bɪn kɝʌp tə ðə boʊn fɹəm ðə stɑɹt. bʌɾ ʌðɝz ə ðɛm hæd teɪkən dɪfɹən pæðz tə ðə ʃædoʊ, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ɪʃəml.

She could vaguely remember what it had been like, taking those first few steps toward the Shadow. Had she ever felt that foolish pain? Yes, unfortunately. Not all of the Chosen had. Semirhage had been corrupt to the bone from the start. But others of them had taken different paths to the Shadow, including Ishamael.

ʃi kəd si ðə mɛmɹiz, soʊ dɪstənt, ɪn mɔɹaɪɾɪnz aɪz. wʌns, ʃid nɑt bɪn ʃʊɹ u ðɪs mæn wɑz, bʌt naʊ ʃi wɑz. ðə feɪs wɑz dɪfɹənt, bʌt ðə soʊl ðə seɪm. jɛs, hi nu ɪɡzækli wʌɾ ælθɹ wɑz filɪŋ.

She could see the memories, so distant, in Moridin's eyes. Once, she'd not been sure who this man was, but now she was. The face was different, but the soul the same. Yes, he knew exactly what al'Thor was feeling.

"ju toʊl mi tə hɝt hɪm," ɡɹeɪndəl sɛd. "ju toʊl mi tə bɹɪŋ ɪm æŋɡwɪʃ. ðɪs wɑz ðə bɛst weɪ. ɝæŋɡɝ hɛlp mi, ðoʊ ʃi dɪd nɑt fli wən aɪ sədʒɛstəd. ðət wʌn ɔlweɪz əz kənfɹʌntəɾ əɹ pɹɑbləmz tu əɡɹɛsɪvli. bʌɾ aɪm sɝɾən ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd kən faɪn ʌðɝ tulz. wi tʊk ə ɹɪsk, ən ɪt wɑz nɑt wɪθaʊt kɑst. bʌt ðə ɡeɪn . . . bɪɑn ðæt, luz θɝɪn naʊ θɪŋks aɪm dɛd. ðəɾ ɪz ə lɑɹdʒ ædvæntɪdʒ."

"You told me to hurt him," Graendal said. "You told me to bring him anguish. This was the best way. Aran'gar helped me, though she did not flee when I suggested. That one always has confronted her problems too aggressively. But I'm certain the Great Lord can find other tools. We took a risk, and it was not without cost. But the gain . . . Beyond that, Lews Therin now thinks I am dead. That is a large advantage."

ʃi smaɪld. nɑt tu mʌtʃ plɛʒɝ. mɪɹli ə lɪɾəl sæɾəsfækʃən. mɔɹi-dɪn skaʊld, ðən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ɡlænsɪŋ tə ðə saɪd. ət nʌθɪŋ. "aɪ æm tə liv jə wɪθaʊt pʌnɪʃmənt, fəɹ naʊ," hi faɪnəli sɛd, ðoʊ hi dɪdn saʊn plizd əbaʊɾ ɪt.

She smiled. Not too much pleasure. Merely a little satisfaction. Mori-din scowled, then hesitated, glancing to the side. At nothing. "I am to leave you without punishment, for now," he finally said, though he didn't sound pleased about it.

hæd ðət bɪn ə kəmjunəkeɪʃən dɝɛkli fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd? əz fɑɹ əz ʃi nu, ɔl tʃoʊzən ɪn ðɪs eɪdʒ hæd tə ɡoʊ tə hɪm ɪn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl tə ɹəsiv ðɛɹ ɔɹɾɝz. əɹ ət list sʌfɝ ə vɪzət fɹəm ðət hɔɹəd kɹitʃɝ ʃaɪ-dɑɹ hæɹən. naʊ ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ əpɪɹd tə bi spikɪŋ tə ðə nɛbli dɝɛkli.

Had that been a communication directly from the Great Lord? As far as she knew, all Chosen in this Age had to go to him in Shayol Ghul to receive their orders. Or at least suffer a visit from that horrid creature Shai-dar Haran. Now the Great Lord appeared to be speaking to the Nae'blis directly.

ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ. ən wɝisəm.

Interesting. And worrisome.

ɪt mɛn ði ɛnd wɑz vɛɹi nɪɹ. ðəɹ wəd nɑt bi mʌtʃ taɪm lɛft fəɹ pɑstʃɝɪŋ. ʃi wəd si hɝsɛlf nɛbli ən ɹul ðɪs wɝld əz əɹ oʊn wʌns ðə læs bæɾəl wɑz dʌn.

It meant the end was very near. There would not be much time left for posturing. She would see herself Nae'blis and rule this world as her own once the Last Battle was done.

"aɪ θɪŋk," ɡɹeɪndəl sɛd, "ðæɾ aɪ ʃəd - "

"I think," Graendal said, "that I should - "

jə ɑɹ tə steɪ əweɪ fɹəm ælθɹ," mɔɹaɪɾɪn sɛd. "ju ɑɹ nɑt tə bi pʌnɪʃt, bʌɾ aɪ doʊn si ɹizən tə pɹeɪz jə iðɝ. jɛs, ælθɹ meɪ bi hɝt, bʌt jə stɪl bʌŋɡəl jəɹ plæn, kɔstɪŋ əs ə jusfəl tul."

You are to stay away from al'Thor," Moridin said. "You are not to be punished, but I don't see reason to praise you either. Yes, al'Thor may be hurt, but you still bungled your plan, costing us a useful tool."

ʌv kɔɹs," ɡɹeɪndəl sɛd smuðli, "aɪ wɪl sɝv əz ɪt plizɪz ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd. aɪ wɑz nɑt gɑnə sədʒɛs ðəɾ aɪ muv əɡɛnst ælθɹ ɛniweɪ. hi θɪŋks mi dɛd, ən soʊ bɛs tə lɛɾ ɪm ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ɪz ɪɡnɝəns waɪl aɪ wɝk ɛlswɛɹ, fəɹ naʊ."

Of course," Graendal said smoothly, "I will serve as it pleases the Great Lord. I was not going to suggest that I move against al'Thor anyway. He thinks me dead, and so best to let him remain in his ignorance while I work elsewhere, for now."

"ɛlswɛɹ?"

"Elsewhere?"

ɡɹeɪndəl niɾəd ə vɪktɝi, ə dɪsaɪsɪv wʌn. ʃi sɪftɪd θɹu ðə dɪfɹən plænz ʃid dɪvaɪzd, səlɛktɪŋ ðə moʊs laɪkli tə səksid. ʃi kʊdn muv əɡɛnst ɔltʃɹiɝ? vɛɹi wɛl. ʃi wəd bɹɪŋ tə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd sʌmθɪŋ hid lɔŋ dɪzaɪɝd.

Graendal needed a victory, a decisive one. She sifted through the different plans she'd devised, selecting the most likely to succeed. She couldn't move against al'Trior? Very well. She would bring to the Great Lord something he'd long desired.

"pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," ɡɹeɪndəl sɛd. ʃi fɛlt ɪkspoʊzd, hævɪŋ tə ɹɪvil əɹ ɪntɛntʃənz tə mɔɹaɪɾɪn. ʃi pɹəfɝd tə kip əɹ plɑts tə hɝsɛlf. haʊɛvɝ, ʃi daʊɾɪd ʃid bi eɪbəl tə ɪskeɪp ðɪs miɾɪŋ wɪθaʊt tɛlɪŋ hɪm. "aɪ wɪl bɹɪŋ jə hɪz hɛd."

"Perrin Aybara," Graendal said. She felt exposed, having to reveal her intentions to Moridin. She preferred to keep her plots to herself. However, she doubted she'd be able to escape this meeting without telling him. "I will bring you his head."

mɔɹaɪɾɪn tɝn təwɔɹd ðə faɪɝ, klæspɪŋ ɪz hænz bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk. hi wɑtʃt ðə fleɪmz.

Moridin turned toward the fire, clasping his hands behind his back. He watched the flames.

wɪð ə ʃɑk, ʃi fɛl swɛt tʃɹɪkəl daʊn əɹ bɹaʊ. wʌt? ʃi wɑz eɪbəl tə əvɔɪd hiɾ ən koʊld.

With a shock, she felt sweat trickle down her brow. What? She was able to avoid heat and cold.

wʌt wɑz ɹɔŋ? ʃi meɪnteɪn əɹ foʊkəs . . . ɪt dʒʌs dɪdnt wɝk. nɑt hɪɹ. nɑt nɪɹ hɪm.

What was wrong? She maintained her focus . . . it just didn't work. Not here. Not near him.

ðəɾ ənsɛɾəld əɹ dipli.

That unsettled her deeply.

"hiz ɪmpɔɹɾənt," ɡɹeɪndəl sɛd. "ðə pɹɑfəsiz - "

"He's important," Graendal said. "The prophecies - "

"aɪ noʊ ðə pɹɑfəsiz," mɔɹaɪɾɪn sɛd sɔfli. hi dɪd nɑt tɝn. "haʊ wəd jə də ɪt?"

"I know the prophecies," Moridin said softly. He did not turn. "How would you do it?"

"maɪ spaɪz əv loʊkeɪɾəd ɪz ɑɹmi," ɡɹeɪndəl sɛd. "aɪ hæv ɔlɹɛɾi sɛt səm plænz ɪn moʊʃən ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ hɪm, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs. aɪ ɹɪteɪn ðə ɡɹup ə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn ɡɪvən mi tə kɑz keɪɑs, ən aɪ hæv ə tʃɹæp pɹipɛɹd. ɪɾəl bɹeɪk ælθɹ, ɹuən hɪm, ɪf i luzəz eɪbɑɹə."

"My spies have located his army," Graendal said. "I have already set some plans in motion regarding him, just in case. I retain the group of Shadowspawn given me to cause chaos, and I have a trap prepared. It will break al'Thor, ruin him, if he loses Aybara."

"ɪt wɪl də mɔɹ ðən ðæt," mɔɹaɪɾɪn sɛd sɔfli. "bʌt jəl nɛvɝ mænədʒ ɪt. hɪz mɛn əv ɡeɪtweɪz. hɪl ɪskeɪp ju."

"It will do more than that," Moridin said softly. "But you will never manage it. His men have gateways. He will escape you."

"hi wɪl ɪskeɪp ju," mɔɹaɪɾɪn sɛd sɔfli.

"He will escape you," Moridin said softly.

ðə swɛt tʃɹɪkəl daʊn əɹ tʃik, ðən tə hɝ tʃɪn. ʃi waɪpt ɪt kæʒəwəli, bʌɾ əɹ bɹaʊ kəntɪnjud tə bid.

The sweat trickled down her cheek, then to her chin. She wiped it casually, but her brow continued to bead.

"kʌm," mɔɹaɪɾɪn sɛd, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ fɹəm ðə hɑɹθ ən təwɔɹd ðə hɔlweɪ aʊtsaɪd.

"Come," Moridin said, striding from the hearth and toward the hallway outside.

ɡɹeɪndəl fɑloʊd, kjʊɹiəs bʌɾ əfɹeɪd. mɔɹaɪɾɪn lɛɾ əɹ tə ə nɪɹbaɪ dɔɹ, sɛɾ ɪn ðə seɪm blæk stoʊn wɔlz. hi pʊʃt ɪɾ oʊpən.

Graendal followed, curious but afraid. Moridin led her to a nearby door, set in the same black stone walls. He pushed it open.

ɡɹeɪndəl fɑloʊɾ ɪm ɪnsaɪd. ðə nɛɹoʊ ɹum wɑz laɪnd wɪð ʃɛlvz. ən ɑn əm wɝ dʌzənz - pɝhæps hʌnʒɹədz - ʌv ɑbʒɛkts ə paʊɝ. dɑɹknəs wɪðɪn! ʃi θɔt. wɛɹ dɪɾ i ɡɛt soʊ mɛni?

Graendal followed him inside. The narrow room was lined with shelves. And on them were dozens - perhaps hundreds - of objects of Power. Darkness within! she thought. Where did he get so many?

mɔɹaɪɾɪn wɔk tə ði ɛn ə ðə ɹum, wɛɹ i pɪk θɹu ɑbʒɛkts ɑn ə ʃɛlf. ɡɹeɪndəl ɛntɝd, ɔd. "ɪz ðəɾ ə ʃɑkləns?" ʃi æskt, pɔɪntɪŋ tə ə lɔŋ θɪn bɪɾ ə mɛɾəl. "θɹi baɪndɪŋ ɹɑdz? ə ɹimɑkɹ? ðoʊz pisəz ʌv ə ʃoʊ - "

Moridin walked to the end of the room, where he picked through objects on a shelf. Graendal entered, awed. "Is that a shocklance?" she asked, pointing to a long thin bit of metal. "Three binding rods? A rema'kar? Those pieces of a sho - "

"ɪɾ ɪz ənɪmpɔɹɾənt," hi sɛd, səlɛktɪŋ ən aɪɾəm.

"It is unimportant," he said, selecting an item.

"ɪf aɪ kəd dʒʌst - "

"If I could just - "

"ju ɑɹ kloʊs tə luzɪŋ feɪvɝ, ɡɹeɪndəl," hi sɛd, tɝnɪŋ ən hoʊldɪŋ lɔŋ, spɪklaɪk pis ə mɛɾəl, sɪlvɝi ən tɑpt wɪð ə lɑɹdʒ mɛɾəl hɛd sɛt wɪð ɡoʊldən ɪnleɪ. "aɪ hæv faʊn oʊnli tu ʌv ðiz. ði ʌðɝ ɪz biɪŋ pʊt tə ɡʊd juz. jə meɪ juz ðɪs wʌn."

"You are close to losing favor, Graendal," he said, turning and holding long, spikelike piece of metal, silvery and topped with a large metal head set with golden inlay. "I have found only two of these. The other is being put to good use. You may use this one."

"ə dʒɹimspaɪk?" ʃi sɛd, aɪz oʊpənɪŋ waɪd. haʊ bædli ʃid wɑntəd tə hæv wʌn ə ðiz!

"A dreamspike?" she said, eyes opening wide. How badly she'd wanted to have one of these!

"ju faʊn tu?"

"You found two?"

hi tæp ðə tɑp ə ðə dʒɹimspaɪk ən ɪt vænɪʃt fɹəm ɪz hænd. "ju wɪl noʊ wɛɹ tə faɪn ɪt?"

He tapped the top of the dreamspike and it vanished from his hand. "You will know where to find it?"

"jɛs," ʃi sɛd, ɡɹoʊɪŋ hʌŋɡɹi. ðɪs wɑz ən əbdʒɛkt ʌv ɡɹeɪt paʊɝ. jusfəl ɪn soʊ mɛni dɪfɹənt weɪz.

"Yes," she said, growing hungry. This was an object of great Power. Useful in so many different ways.

mɔɹaɪɾɪn stɛp fɔɹwɝd, sizɪŋ əɹ aɪz wɪð ɪz oʊn. "ɡɹeɪndəl," hi sɛd sɔfli, deɪnʒɝəsli.

Moridin stepped forward, seizing her eyes with his own. "Graendal," he said softly, dangerously.

"aɪ noʊ ðə ki fəɹ ðɪs wʌn. ɪɾəl nɑt bi juzd əɡɛns mi, əɹ ʌðɝz ə ðə tʃoʊzən. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd wɪl noʊ ɪf jə du. aɪ də nɑt wɪʃ jəɹ əpɛɹən hæbət tə bi ɪndʌlʒd fɝðɝ, nɑɾ əntɪl eɪbɑɹə ɪz dɛd."

"I know the key for this one. It will not be used against me, or others of the Chosen. The Great Lord will know if you do. I do not wish your apparent habit to be indulged further, not until Aybara is dead."

"aɪ. . . jɛs, ʌv kɔɹs." ʃi fɛl koʊld, sʌɾənli. haʊ kəd ʃi fil koʊl hɪɹ? ən waɪl stɪl swɛɾɪŋ?

"I. . . yes, of course." She felt cold, suddenly. How could she feel cold here? And while still sweating?

"eɪbɑɹə kən wɔk ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz," mɔɹaɪɾɪn sɛd. "aɪ wɪl lɛn jə ənʌðɝ tul, ðə mæn wɪð tu soʊlz. bʌt hiz maɪn, dʒʌst əz ðət spaɪk ɪz maɪn. dʒʌst əz jə ɑɹ maɪn. dʒju ʌndɝstænd?"

"Aybara can walk the World of Dreams," Moridin said. "I will lend you another tool, the man with two souls. But he is mine, just as that spike is mine. Just as you are mine. Do you understand?"

ʃi nɑɾəd. ʃi kʊdn hɛlp hɝsɛlf. ðə ɹum sim tə bi ɡɹoʊɪŋ dɑɹkɝ. ðət vɔɪs ə hɪz .

She nodded. She couldn't help herself. The room seemed to be growing darker. That voice of his .

. . ɪt saʊndəd, dʒʌs feɪnli, laɪk ðəɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd.

. . it sounded, just faintly, like that of the Great Lord.

"lɛt mi tɛl jə ðɪs, haʊɛvɝ," mɔɹaɪɾɪn sɛd, ɹitʃɪŋ fɔɹwɝd wɪð ɪz ɹaɪt hænd, kʌpɪŋ əɹ tʃɪn. "ɪf jə də səksid, ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd wɪl bi plizd. vɛɹi plizd. ðət wɪtʃ əz bɪn ɡɹæntəd jə ɪn spɑɹsnəs wɪl bi hipt əpɑn jə ɪn ɡlɔɹi."

"Let me tell you this, however," Moridin said, reaching forward with his right hand, cupping her chin. "If you do succeed, the Great Lord will be pleased. Very pleased. That which has been granted you in sparseness will be heaped upon you in glory."

ʃi lɪkt əɹ dʒɹaɪ lɪps. ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, mɔɹaɪɾɪnz ɪkspɹɛʃən ɡɹu dɪstənt.

She licked her dry lips. In front of her, Moridin's expression grew distant.

"mɔɹaɪɾɪn?" ʃi æsk hɛzɪɾəntli.

"Moridin?" she asked hesitantly.

hi ɪɡnɔɹd hɝ, ɹilisɪŋ əɹ tʃɪn ən wɔkɪŋ tə ði ɛn ə ðə ɹum. fɹəm ə teɪbəl, hi pɪkt ʌp ə θɪk toʊm ɹæpt ɪn peɪl tæn skɪn. hi flɪp tə ə sɝɾən peɪdʒ ən stʌɾid ɪt fəɹ ə moʊmənt. ðən i weɪv fəɹ əɹ tə əpɹoʊtʃ.

He ignored her, releasing her chin and walking to the end of the room. From a table, he picked up a thick tome wrapped in pale tan skin. He flipped to a certain page and studied it for a moment. Then he waved for her to approach.

ʃi dɪd soʊ, kɛɹfəl. wən ʃi ɹɛd wʌt wɑz ɑn ðə peɪdʒ, ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf stʌnd.

She did so, careful. When she read what was on the page, she found herself stunned.

dɑɹknəs wɪðɪn! "wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs bʊk?" ʃi faɪnəli mænədʒ tə fɔɹs aʊt. wɛɹ dɪd ðiz pɹɑfəsiz kʌm fɹʌm?"

Darkness within! "What is this book?" she finally managed to force out. Where did these prophecies come from?"

"ðeɪ hæv lɔŋ bɪn noʊn tə mi," mɔɹaɪɾɪn sɛd sɔfli, stɪl stʌɾiɪŋ ðə bʊk. "bʌt nɑt tə mɛni ʌðɝz, nɑɾ ivən ðə tʃoʊzən. ðə wɪmən ən mɛn u spoʊk ðiz wɝ aɪsəleɪɾəd ən hɛld əloʊn. ðə laɪt mʌs nɛvɝ noʊ ʌv ðiz wɝdz.

"They have long been known to me," Moridin said softly, still studying the book. "But not to many others, not even the Chosen. The women and men who spoke these were isolated and held alone. The Light must never know of these words.

wi noʊ ʌv ðɛɹ pɹɑfəsiz, bʌt ðəl nɛvɝ noʊ ɔl ʌv aʊɝz."

We know of their prophecies, but they will never know all of ours."

"bʌt ðɪs . . ." ʃi sɛd, ɹiɹiɾɪŋ ðə pæsədʒ. "ðɪs sɛz eɪbɑɹə wɪl daɪ!"

"But this . . ." she said, rereading the passage. "This says Aybara will die!"

"ðɛɹ kən bi mɛni ɪntɝpɹɪteɪʃənz ʌv ɛni pɹɑfəsi," mɔɹaɪɾɪn sɛd. "bʌt jɛs. ðɪs fɔɹtɛlɪŋ pɹɑməsəz ðəɾ eɪbɑɹə wɪl daɪ baɪ əɹ hænd. jəl bɹɪŋ mi ðə hɛɾ ə ðɪs wʊlf, ɡɹeɪndəl. ən wən jə du, ɛniθɪŋ jə æsk ʃæl bi jʊɹz." hi slæp ðə bʊk kloʊzd. "bʌt mɑɹk mi. feɪl, ən jəl luz wʌt juv ɡeɪnd. ən mʌtʃ mɔɹ."

"There can be many interpretations of any prophecy," Moridin said. "But yes. This Foretelling promises that Aybara will die by our hand. You will bring me the head of this wolf, Graendal. And when you do, anything you ask shall be yours." He slapped the book closed. "But mark me. Fail, and you will lose what you have gained. And much more."

hi oʊpən ə pɔɹɾəl fəɹ əɹ wɪð ə weɪv ə ðə hænd; hɝ feɪn əbɪləɾi tə tʌtʃ ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ -  ðət hædn bɪn ɹimuv fɹəm əɹ - əlaʊɾ əɹ tə si twɪstəd wivz stæb ði ɛɹ ən ɹɛn ɪt, ɹɪpɪŋ ə hoʊl ɪn ðə fæbɹɪk ə ðə pæɾɝn. ði ɛɹ ʃɪmɝd ðɛɹ. ɪt wəd lɛd bæk tə hɝ hɪɾən kævɝn, ʃi nu.

He opened a portal for her with a wave of the hand; her faint ability to touch the True Power -  that hadn't been removed from her - allowed her to see twisted weaves stab the air and rend it, ripping a hole in the fabric of the Pattern. The air shimmered there. It would lead back to her hidden cavern, she knew.

ʃi wɛn θɹu wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd. ʃi dɪdn tʃɹʌst əɹ vɔɪs tə spik wɪθaʊt ʃeɪkɪŋ.

She went through without a word. She didn't trust her voice to speak without shaking.

tʃæptɝ sɪks

CHAPTER 6

kwɛstʃənɪŋ ɪntɛntʃənz mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkənd, wʌns kwin ʌv ændɝ, sɝv ti. ʃi muv fɹəm pɝsən tə pɝsən ɪn ðə lɑɹdʒ pəvɪljən pɛɹɪn hæd teɪkən fɹəm meɪɾən. ɪt hæd saɪdz ðət kəd bi ɹoʊld ʌp ən noʊ tɛn flɔɹ.

Questioning Intentions Morgase Trakand, once Queen of Andor, served tea. She moved from person to person in the large pavilion Perrin had taken from Maiden. It had sides that could be rolled up and no tent floor.

lɑɹdʒ ðoʊ ðə tɛnt wɑz, ðəɹ wɑz bɛɹli ɪnʌf ɹum fəɹ ɔl u hæd wɑntəd tə ətɛn ðə miɾɪŋ. pɛɹɪn ən feɪl wɝ ðɛɹ, ʌv kɔɹs, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. nɛks tə ðɛm sæt ɡoʊldən-aɪɾ ɛlaɪəs ən tæm ælθɹ, ðə sɪmpəl fɑɹmɝ wɪð ðə bɹɔd ʃoʊldɝz ən ðə kɑm mænɝz. wɑz ðɪs mæn ɹɪli ðə fɑðɝ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn? ʌv kɔɹs, mɔɹɡeɪs hæd sin ɹænd ælθɹ wʌns, ən ðə bɔɪ hædn lʊk mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən ə fɑɹmɝ hɪmsɛlf.

Large though the tent was, there was barely enough room for all who had wanted to attend the meeting. Perrin and Faile were there, of course, sitting on the ground. Next to them sat golden-eyed Elyas and Tam al'Thor, the simple farmer with the broad shoulders and the calm manners. Was this man really the father of the Dragon Reborn? Of course, Morgase had seen Rand al'Thor once, and the boy hadn't looked much more than a farmer himself.

bɪsaɪd tæm sæt pɛɹɪnz dʌsti sɛkɹətɛɹi, sɛbæn beɪlwɝ. haʊ mʌtʃ dɪd pɛɹɪn noʊ ʌv ɪz pæst?

Beside Tam sat Perrin's dusty secretary, Sebban Balwer. How much did Perrin know of his past?

dʒɝ ɡɹeɪɾi wɑz ðəɹ ɔlsoʊ, wɛɹɪŋ ɪz blæk koʊt wɪð ə sɪlvɝ sɔɹd pɪn ɑn ðə kɑlɝ. hɪz lɛðɝi fɑɹmɝz feɪs wɑz hɑloʊ-aɪɾ ən stɪl peɪl fɹəm ðə sɪknəs hid sʌfɝd ɹisənli. nild - ði ʌðɝ æʃəmən - wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ. hi hædn jɛt ɹəkʌvɝd fɹəm ɪz sneɪkbaɪts.

Jur Grady was there also, wearing his black coat with a silver sword pin on the collar. His leathery farmer's face was hollow-eyed and still pale from the sickness he'd suffered recently. Neald - the other Asha'man - was not there. He hadn't yet recovered from his snakebites.

ɔl θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ðɛɹ. siɑnɪɾ ən mɑsʊɝi sæt wɪð ðə waɪz wʌnz, ən ənʊɹə sæt bɪsaɪd bɹəleɪn, əkeɪʒənəli ʃuɾɪŋ ɡlænsɪz ət ðə sɪks waɪz wʌnz. ɡælɛn sæɾ ɑn bɹəleɪnz ʌðɝ saɪd. əkɹɔs fɹəm əm sæɾ æliændɝ ən ɑɹɡændə.

All three Aes Sedai were there. Seonid and Masuri sat with the Wise Ones, and Annoura sat beside Berelain, occasionally shooting glances at the six Wise Ones. Gallenne sat on Berelain's other side. Across from them sat Alliandre and Arganda.

ði ɔfəsɝz meɪd mɔɹɡeɪs θɪŋk ʌv ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn. ʃi hædn sin ɪm ɪn ə lɔŋ waɪl, nɑt sɪns ʃiɾ ɛɡzaɪld ɪm fəɹ ɹizənz ʃi stɪl kʊdn kwaɪɾ ɪkspleɪn. vɛɹi lɪɾəl əbaʊt ðət taɪm ɪn əɹ laɪf meɪd sɛns tə hɝ naʊ. hæd ʃi ɹɪli bɪn soʊ ɪnfætʃueɪɾɪd wɪð ə mæn ðət ʃid bænɪʃt æɛmlɪn ən ɛlɹin?

The officers made Morgase think of Gareth Bryne. She hadn't seen him in a long while, not since she'd exiled him for reasons she still couldn't quite explain. Very little about that time in her life made sense to her now. Had she really been so infatuated with a man that she'd banished Aemlyn and Ellorien?

ɛniweɪ, ðoʊz deɪz wɝ ɡɔn. naʊ mɔɹɡeɪs pɪkt əɹ weɪ kɛɹfəli θɹu ðə ɹum ən sɔ ðət pipəlz kʌps wɝ kɛp fʊl.

Anyway, those days were gone. Now Morgase picked her way carefully through the room and saw that people's cups were kept full.

"jɔɹ wɝk tʊk lɔŋɡɝ ðən aɪɾ ɪkspɛktəd," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Your work took longer than I'd expected," Perrin said.

"ju ɡeɪv əs ə duɾi tə ətɛn tə, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," nəvɛɝɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "wi əkɑmplɪʃt ɪt. ɪt tʊk əs əz mʌtʃ taɪm əz niɾəd tə də ɪt kɝɛkli. ʃʊɹli jə doʊn ɪmplaɪ ðət wi dɪɾ ʌðɝwaɪz." ðə sændi- hɛɹd waɪz wʌn sæt dɝɛkli ɪn fɹʌn ə siɑnɪɾ ən mɑsʊɝi.

"You gave us a duty to attend to, Perrin Aybara," Nevarin replied. "We accomplished it. It took us as much time as needed to do it correctly. Surely you don't imply that we did otherwise." The sandy- haired Wise One sat directly in front of Seonid and Masuri.

"ɡɪv oʊvɝ, nəvɛɝɪn," pɛɹɪn ɡɹʌntɪɾ əz i ənɹoʊld ə mæp bɪfɔɹ ɪm ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd; ɪt hæd bɪn dʒɹɔn baɪ beɪlwɝ juzɪŋ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz fɹəm ðə ɡildænɪn. "aɪ wɑzn kwɛstʃənɪŋ ju. aɪ wɑz æskɪŋ ɪf ðəɹ wɝ ɛni pɹɑbləmz ɪn ðə bɝnɪŋ."

"Give over, Nevarin," Perrin grunted as he unrolled a map before him on the ground; it had been drawn by Balwer using instructions from the Ghealdanin. "I wasn't questioning you. I was asking if there were any problems in the burning."

"ðə vɪlədʒ ɪz ɡɔn," nəvɛɝɪn sɛd. "æn ɛvɹi plænt wi faʊnd wɪð ə hɪn ə blaɪɾ əz bɪn bɝn tə æʃ. əz wɛl wi dɪd. jə wɛtləndɝz wəɾ əv mʌtʃ tʃɹʌbəl dilɪŋ wɪð sʌmθɪŋ əz dɛdli əz ðə blaɪt."

"The village is gone," Nevarin said. "And every plant we found with a hint of Blight has been burned to ash. As well we did. You wetlanders would have much trouble dealing with something as deadly as the Blight."

"aɪ θɪŋk," feɪl sɛd, "ðæt jə wəd bi sɝpɹaɪzd."

"I think," Faile said, "that you would be surprised."

mɔɹɡeɪs ɡlænst ət feɪl, hu lɑkt aɪz wɪð ðə waɪz wʌn. feɪl sæt laɪk ə kwin, wʌns əɡɛn dʒɹɛs tə hɝ steɪʃən ɪn ə faɪn dʒɹɛs ʌv ɡɹin ən vaɪəlɪt, pliɾɪd daʊn ðə saɪdz ən dɪvaɪɾəd fəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ. ɑdli, vɔɪlz sɛns ə liɾɝʃɪp sim tə hæv bɪn ɛnhæns baɪ hɝ taɪm spɛnt wɪð ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ.

Morgase glanced at Faile, who locked eyes with the Wise One. Faile sat like a queen, once again dressed to her station in a fine dress of green and violet, pleated down the sides and divided for riding. Oddly, Voiles sense of leadership seemed to have been enhanced by her time spent with the Shaido.

mɔɹɡeɪs ən feɪl hæd kwɪkli ɡɔn bæk tə biɪŋ mɪstʃɹəs ən sɝvənt. ɪn fækt, mɔɹɡeɪsəz laɪf hɪɹ wɑz stʃɹaɪkɪŋli sɪməlɝ tə wʌɾ ɪt hæd bɪn ɪn ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ kæmp. tʃɹu, səm θɪŋz wɝ dɪfɹənt;

Morgase and Faile had quickly gone back to being mistress and servant. In fact, Morgase's life here was strikingly similar to what it had been in the Shaido camp. True, some things were different;

mɔɹɡeɪs wɑzn laɪkli tə bi stʃɹæp hɪɹ, fəɹ ɪnstəns. ðət dɪdn tʃeɪnʒ ðə fæk ðət -  fəɹ ə taɪm -  ʃi ən ði ʌðɝ fɔɹ wɪmən hæd bɪn ikwəlz. noʊ lɔŋɡɝ.

Morgase wasn't likely to be strapped here, for instance. That didn't change the fact that -  for a time -  she and the other four women had been equals. No longer.

mɔɹɡeɪs stɑp bɪsaɪd lɔɹd ɡælɛn ən ɹifɪld ɪz kʌp, juzɪŋ ðə seɪm skɪlz ʃid kʌltəveɪɾəd ɪn ətɛndɪŋ sɪvænə. ət taɪmz, biɪŋ ə sɝvən sim tə ɹikwaɪɝ mɔɹ stɛlθ ðən biɪŋ ə skaʊt. ʃi wɑzn tə bi sin, wɑzn tə dɪstʃɹækt. hæɾ əɹ oʊn sɝvəns æktəd ðɪs weɪ ɝaʊn hɝ?

Morgase stopped beside Lord Gallenne and refilled his cup, using the same skills she'd cultivated in attending Sevanna. At times, being a servant seemed to require more stealth than being a scout. She wasn't to be seen, wasn't to distract. Had her own servants acted this way around her?

"wɛl," ɑɹɡændə sɛd, "ɪf ɛniwʌn ɪz wʌndɝɪŋ wɛɹ wiv ɡɔn, ðə smoʊk fɹəm ðət faɪɝ ɪz ən izi ɪndəkeɪɾɝ."

"Well," Arganda said, "if anyone is wondering where we've gone, the smoke from that fire is an easy indicator."

"wɝ fɑɹ tu mɛni pipəl tə θɪŋk ə haɪɾɪŋ," siɑnɪd sɛd. ɹisənli, ʃi ən mɑsʊɝi hæd bɪɡʌn biɪŋ əlaʊd tə spik wɪθaʊt ɹɛpɹəmæn fɹəm ðə waɪz wʌnz, ðoʊ ðə ɡɹin dɪd stɪl ɡlæns ət ði il wɪmən bɪfɔɹ spikɪŋ. ɪt ɡæl mɔɹɡeɪs tə si ðæt. sɪstɝz ə ðə taʊɝ, meɪɾ əpɝən- taɪsəz tə ə bʌntʃ ʌv waɪldɝz? ɪt wɑz sɛd tə hæv bɪn dʌn ət ɹænd ælθɹz ɔɹɾɝ, bʌt haʊ wəɾ ɛni mæn - ivən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn - bi keɪpəbəl ə sətʃ ə θɪŋ?

"We're far too many people to think of hiding," Seonid said. Recently, she and Masuri had begun being allowed to speak without reprimand from the Wise Ones, though the Green did still glance at the Aiel women before speaking. It galled Morgase to see that. Sisters of the Tower, made appren- tices to a bunch of wilders? It was said to have been done at Rand al'Thor's order, but how would any man - even the Dragon Reborn - be capable of such a thing?

ɪt dɪskʌmfɝɾɪd əɹ ðət ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ sim tə ɹɪzɪs ðɛɹ steɪʃən. ə pɝsənz sɪtʃueɪʃən ɪn laɪf kəd tʃeɪnʒ əɹ dʒɹəmæɾɪkli. ɡeɪbɹəl, ðən vɑldə, hæd tɔt mɔɹɡeɪs ðət lɛsən.

It discomforted her that the two Aes Sedai no longer seemed to resist their station. A person's situation in life could change her dramatically. Gaebril, then Valda, had taught Morgase that lesson.

ði il kæptɪvəɾi hæd bɪn mɪɹli ənʌðɝ stɛp ɪn ðə pɹɑsɛs.

The Aiel captivity had been merely another step in the process.

itʃ ə ðiz ɪkspɪɹiənsɪz hæd muvd əɹ fɑɹðɝ əweɪ fɹəm ðə kwin ʃi hæd bɪn. naʊ ʃi dɪdn lɔŋ fəɹ faɪn θɪŋz əɹ əɹ θɹoʊn. ʃi dʒʌst wɑntəd səm stəbɪlɪɾi. ðæt, ɪt simd, wɑz ə kəmɑɾəti mɔɹ pɹɛʃəs ðən ɡoʊld.

Each of these experiences had moved her farther away from the Queen she had been. Now she didn't long for fine things or her throne. She just wanted some stability. That, it seemed, was a commodity more precious than gold.

"ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, tæpɪŋ ðə mæp. "soʊ, wɝ dɪsaɪɾɪd? wi tʃeɪs æftɝ ɡɪl ən ði ʌðɝz ɑn fʊt fəɹ naʊ, sɛndɪŋ skaʊts baɪ ɡeɪtweɪ tə faɪn ðɛm, ɪf pɑsəbəl. hoʊpfəli, wɪl kætʃ əm bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹitʃ luɡɹd. haʊ lɔŋ tə ðə sɪɾi wəd jə seɪ, ɑɹɡændə?"

"It doesn't matter," Perrin said, tapping the map. "So, we're decided? We chase after Gill and the others on foot for now, sending scouts by gateway to find them, if possible. Hopefully, we'll catch them before they reach Lugard. How long to the city would you say, Arganda?"

"dɪpɛnz ɑn ðə mʌd," ðə wɪɹi soʊlʒɝ sɛd. "ðɛɹz ə ɹizən wi kɔl ðɪs taɪm ə jɪɹ ðə swɑmpɪŋ. waɪz mɛn doʊn tʃɹævəl dʊɹɪŋ ðə spɹɪŋ mɛlt."

"Depends on the mud," the wiry soldier said. "There's a reason we call this time of year the swamping. Wise men don't travel during the spring melt."

"wɪzdəm ɪz fəɹ ðoʊz u hæv taɪm fəɹ ɪt," pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd, kaʊntɪŋ ɔf dɪstəns ɑn ðə mæp wɪð ɪz fɪŋɡɝz.

"Wisdom is for those who have time for it," Perrin muttered, counting off distance on the map with his fingers.

mɔɹɡeɪs muv tə ɹifɪl ənʊɹəz kʌp. pɔɹɪŋ ti wɑz mɔɹ kɑmpləkeɪɾəd ðən ʃiɾ ɛvɝ əsumd. ʃi hæd tə noʊ huz kʌp tə teɪk əsaɪɾ ən fɪl, ən huz tə fɪl waɪl ðeɪ wɝ hoʊldɪŋ ɪt. ʃi hæd tə noʊ pɹɪsaɪsli haʊ haɪ tə fɪl ə kʌp soʊ ðəɾ ɪt wəd nɑt spɪl, ən haʊ tə pɔɹ ðə ti wɪθaʊt ɹætlɪŋ ðə pɔɹsələn əɹ splæʃɪŋ. ʃi nu wən tə nɑt bi sin ən wən tə meɪk ə slaɪt pɹədʌkʃən aʊɾ ə fɪlɪŋ kʌps ɪn keɪs ʃid mɪs pipəl, fɝɡɑɾən əm əɹ mɪsdʒʌdʒ ðɛɹ nidz.

Morgase moved to refill Annoura's cup. Pouring tea was more complicated than she'd ever assumed. She had to know whose cup to take aside and fill, and whose to fill while they were holding it. She had to know precisely how high to fill a cup so that it would not spill, and how to pour the tea without rattling the porcelain or splashing. She knew when to not be seen and when to make a slight production out of filling cups in case she'd missed people, forgotten them or misjudged their needs.

ʃi kɛɹfəli tʊk pɛɹɪnz kʌp fɹəm bɪsaɪɾ ɪm ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hi laɪk tə dʒɛstʃɝ wən i spoʊk, ən kəd nɑk ðə kʌp fɹəm əɹ hæn ɪf ʃi wɑz ənwɛɹi. ɔl ɪn ɔl, ðəɹ wɑz ə ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl ɑɹt tə sɝvɪŋ ti - ən ɪntaɪɝ wɝl ðət mɔɹɡeɪs ðə kwin hæd nɛvɝ bɑðɝd tə noʊɾəs. ʃi ɹifɪl pɛɹɪnz kʌp ən pleɪst ɪt bæk bɪsaɪd hɪm. pɛɹɪn æskt ʌðɝ kwɛstʃənz əbaʊt ðə mæp - nɪɹbaɪ taʊnz, pətɛnʃəl sɔɹsəz ə ɹisəp-plaɪ. hi hæɾ ə lɑɾ ə pɹɑməs əz ə liɾɝ, ivən ɪf i wɑz ɹæðɝ ɪnɪkspɪɹiənst. ə lɪɾəl ædvaɪs fɹəm mɔɹɡeɪs -  ʃi kʌt ðət θɔɾ ɔf. pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə wɑz ə ɹɛbəl. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɑz pɑɹɾ ʌv ændɝ, ən hid neɪm hɪmsɛlf lɔɹɾ ʌv ɪt, flaɪɪŋ ðət wʊlfhɛd bænɝ. ət lis ðə flæɡ ʌv meɪnɛðɝən hæd bɪn teɪkən daʊn. flaɪɪŋ ðət hæd bɪn nʌθɪŋ ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ən oʊpən dɛklɝeɪʃən ʌv wɔɹ.

She carefully took Perrin's cup from beside him on the ground. He liked to gesture when he spoke, and could knock the cup from her hand if she was unwary. All in all, there was a remarkable art to serving tea - an entire world that Morgase the Queen had never bothered to notice. She refilled Perrin's cup and placed it back beside him. Perrin asked other questions about the map - nearby towns, potential sources of resup-ply. He had a lot of promise as a leader, even if he was rather inexperienced. A little advice from Morgase -  She cut that thought off. Perrin Aybara was a rebel. The Two Rivers was part of Andor, and he'd named himself lord of it, flying that wolfhead banner. At least the flag of Manetheren had been taken down. Flying that had been nothing short of an open declaration of war.

mɔɹɡeɪs noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bɹɪsəld ɛvɹi taɪm sʌmwʌn neɪmd ɪm ə lɔɹd, bʌt ʃi ɔlsoʊ dɪdn ɪntɛn tə ɔfɝ ɪm ɛni hɛlp. nɑɾ əntɪl ʃi dɪtɝmən haʊ tə muv ɪm bæk bɪniθ ðə kloʊk ə ði ændɔɝən mɑnɑɹki.

Morgase no longer bristled every time someone named him a lord, but she also didn't intend to offer him any help. Not until she determined how to move him back beneath the cloak of the Andoran monarchy.

bɪsaɪdz, mɔɹɡeɪs ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli ədmɪɾəd, feɪl ɪz ʃɑɹp ɪnʌf tə ɡɪv ɛni ædvaɪs aɪ wəd hæv.

Besides, Morgase grudgingly admitted, Faile is sharp enough to give any advice I would have.

feɪl wɑz æktʃəli  ə pɝfəkt kɑmpləmən tə pɛɹɪn. wɛɹ i wɑz ə blʌn ən lɛvəld læns ət tʃɑɹdʒ, ʃi wɑz ə sʌɾəl kævəlɹi baʊ. ðə kɑmbəneɪʃən ə ðə tu - wɪð feɪlz kənɛkʃənz tə ðə sɑldəiən θɹoʊn - wɑz wʌt ɹɪli wɝid mɔɹɡeɪs. jɛs, hid teɪkən daʊn ðə meɪnɛðɝən bænɝ, bʌt hiɾ ɔɹɾɝd ðət wʊlfhɛd bænɝ teɪkən daʊn bɪfɔɹ. ɔfən, fɝbɪɾɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ wɑz ðə bɛst weɪ tə ɛnʃʊɹ ðəɾ ɪt hæpənd.

Faile was actually a perfect complement to Perrin. Where he was a blunt and leveled lance at charge, she was a subtle cavalry bow. The combination of the two - with Faile's connections to the Saldaean throne - was what really worried Morgase. Yes, he'd taken down the Manetheren banner, but he'd ordered that wolfhead banner taken down before. Often, forbidding something was the best way to ensure that it happened.

æliændɝ ɛs kʌp wɑz hæf ɛmpti. mɔɹɡeɪs muvd oʊvɝ tə ɹifɪl ɪt; laɪk mɛni haɪbɹn leɪɾiz, æliændɝ ɔlweɪz ɪkspɛktəɾ əɹ kʌp tə bi fʊl. æliændɝ ɡlænst ət mɔɹɡeɪs, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə feɪnt ɡlɪmɝ ə dɪskʌmfɝɾ ɪn ðoʊz aɪz. æliændɝ fɛlt ənsɝɾən wʌt ðɛɹ ɹileɪʃənʃɪp ʃəd bi. ðət wɑz kjʊɹiəs, əz æliændɝ hæd bɪn soʊ hɔɾi dʊɹɪŋ ðɛɹ kæptɪvəɾi. ðə pɝsən mɔɹɡeɪs hæd wʌns bɪn, ðə kwin, wɑntəd tə sɪɾ æliændɝ daʊn ən ɡɪv ə lɛŋθi ɛkspləneɪʃən ə haʊ tə bɛɾɝ meɪnteɪn əɹ ɡɹænduɹ.

Alliandre s cup was half empty. Morgase moved over to refill it; like many highborn ladies, Alliandre always expected her cup to be full. Alliandre glanced at Morgase, and there was a faint glimmer of discomfort in those eyes. Alliandre felt uncertain what their relationship should be. That was curious, as Alliandre had been so haughty during their captivity. The person Morgase had once been, the Queen, wanted to sit Alliandre down and give a lengthy explanation of how to better maintain her grandeur.

ʃiɾ əv tə lɝn ɑn əɹ oʊn. mɔɹɡeɪs wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ðə pɝsən ʃi hæd wʌns bɪn. ʃi wɑznt ʃʊɹ wʌt ʃi wɑz, bʌt ʃi wəd lɝn haʊ tə də hɝ duɾi əz ə leɪɾiz meɪd. ðɪs wɑz bɪkʌmɪŋ ə pæʃən fəɹ hɝ. ə weɪ tə pɹuv tə hɝsɛlf ðət ʃi wɑz stɪl stʃɹɔŋ, stɪl ə vælju.

She'd have to learn on her own. Morgase was no longer the person she had once been. She wasn't sure what she was, but she would learn how to do her duty as a lady's maid. This was becoming a passion for her. A way to prove to herself that she was still strong, still of value.

ɪn ə weɪ, ɪt wɑz tɛɹəfaɪɪŋ ðət ʃi wɝiɾ əbaʊt ðæt.

In a way, it was terrifying that she worried about that.

"lɔɹd pɛɹɪn," æliændɝ sɛɾ əz mɔɹɡeɪs muvd əweɪ. "ɪz ɪt tʃɹu ðət jəɹ plænɪŋ ɑn sɛndɪŋ maɪ pipəl bæk tə dʒəhænə æftɝ jə faɪnd ɡɪl ən ɪz ɡɹup?"

"Lord Perrin," Alliandre said as Morgase moved away. "Is it true that you're planning on sending my people back to Jehannah after you find Gill and his group?"

mɔɹɡeɪs kəntɪnjud pæs mɑsʊɝi - ði ɛɛs sədaɪ laɪkt əɹ kʌp ɹifɪld oʊnli wən ʃi tæpt ɑn ɪt laɪtli wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝneɪl.

Morgase continued past Masuri - the Aes Sedai liked her cup refilled only when she tapped on it lightly with her fingernail.

"aɪ du," pɛɹɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "wi ɔl noʊ ɪt wɑzn kəmplitli jəɹ wɪl tə dʒɔɪn əs ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs. ɪf wi hædn bɹɔt jə əlɔŋ, jud nɛvɝ əv bɪn kæptʃɝd baɪ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ. mæsimə ɪz dɛd. taɪm tə lɛt jə ɹɪtɝn tə ɡʌvɝnɪŋ jəɹ neɪʃən."

"I do," Perrin replied. "We all know it wasn't completely your will to join us in the first place. If we hadn't brought you along, you'd never have been captured by the Shaido. Masema is dead. Time to let you return to governing your nation."

"wɪð ɔl du ɹɪspɛkt, maɪ lɔɹd," æliændɝ sɛd. "waɪ ɑɹ jə ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ fɹəm əmʌŋ maɪ kʌntʃɹimɪn ɪf nɑt tə ɡæðɝ ən ɑɹmi fəɹ fjutʃɝ jus?"

"With all due respect, my Lord," Alliandre said. "Why are you recruiting from among my countrymen if not to gather an army for future use?"

"aɪm nɑt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹəkɹut," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "dʒʌs kəz aɪ doʊn tɝn əm əweɪ dʌzn min aɪ ɪntɛn tə ɛnlɑɹdʒ ðɪs ɑɹmi ɛni fɝðɝ."

"I'm not trying to recruit," Perrin said. "Just because I don't turn them away doesn't mean I intend to enlarge this army any further."

"maɪ lɔɹd," æliændɝ sɛd. "bʌt ʃʊɹli ɪts waɪz tə kip wʌt jə hæv."

"My Lord," Alliandre said. "But surely it is wise to keep what you have."

"ʃi hæz ə pɔɪnt, pɛɹɪn," bɹəleɪn æɾəd sɔfli. "wʌn niɾ oʊnli lʊk ət ðə skaɪ tə noʊ ðə læs bæɾəl ɪz ɪmənənt. waɪ sɛn əɹ fɔɹs bæk? aɪm sɝɾən ðət ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən wɪl əv niɾ ʌv ɛvɹi soʊlʒɝ fɹəm ɛvɹi læn swɔɹn tə hɪm."

"She has a point, Perrin," Berelain added softly. "One need only look at the sky to know the Last Battle is imminent. Why send her force back? I'm certain that the Lord Dragon will have need of every soldier from every land sworn to him."

"hi kən sɛn fəɹ əm wən i dɪsaɪdz tə," pɛɹɪn sɛd stʌbɝnli.

"He can send for them when he decides to," Perrin said stubbornly.

"maɪ lɔɹd," æliændɝ sɛd. "aɪ dɪd nɑt swɛɹ tə hɪm. aɪ swɔɹ tə ju. ɪf ɡildən wɪl mɑɹtʃ fəɹ tɑɹmən ɡdən, ɪt ʃəd də soʊ bɪniθ jəɹ bænɝ."

"My Lord," Alliandre said. "I did not swear to him. I swore to you. If Ghealdan will march for Tarmon Gai'don, it should do so beneath your banner."

pɛɹɪn stʊɾ ʌp, stɑɹtlɪŋ sɛvɹəl pipəl ɪn ðə tɛnt. wɑz i livɪŋ? hi wɔk tə ði oʊpən saɪɾ ə ðə tɛnt wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd, poʊkɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ aʊt. "wɪl, kʌm hɪɹ," hi kɔld.

Perrin stood up, startling several people in the tent. Was he leaving? He walked to the open side of the tent without a word, poking his head out. "Wil, come here," he called.

ə wiv ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ kɛpt pipəl aʊtsaɪd fɹəm lɪsnɪŋ ɪn. mɔɹɡeɪs kəd si mɑsʊɝiz wivz, taɪɾ ɔf ən wɔɹɾɪŋ ðə tɛnt. ðɛɹ ɪntʃɹəkəsi sim tə mɑk əɹ oʊn mɪnəskjul tælənt.

A weave of the One Power kept people outside from listening in. Morgase could see Masuri's weaves, tied off and warding the tent. Their intricacy seemed to mock her own minuscule talent.

mɑsʊɝi tæp ðə saɪɾ ə hɝ kʌp, ən mɔɹɡeɪs heɪsən tə ɹifɪl ɪt. ðə wʊmən laɪk tə sɪp ti wən nɝvəs.

Masuri tapped the side of her cup, and Morgase hastened to refill it. The woman liked to sip tea when nervous.

pɛɹɪn tɝn bæk ɪndə ðə tɛnt, fɑloʊd baɪ ə hænsəm juθ kæɹiɪŋ ə klɔθ-ɹæp bʌndəl.

Perrin turned back into the tent, followed by a handsome youth carrying a cloth-wrapped bundle.

"ənfɝl ɪt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. ðə jʌŋ mæn dɪd soʊ, lʊkɪŋ æpɹɪhɛnsɪv. ɪt bɔɹ ðə wʊlfhɛɾ ɛmbləm ðət wɑz pɛɹɪnz sɪdʒəl.

"Unfurl it," Perrin said. The young man did so, looking apprehensive. It bore the wolfhead emblem that was Perrin's sigil.

"aɪ dɪdn meɪk ðɪs bænɝ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪ nɛvɝ wɑntəɾ ɪt, bʌt -  əpɑn ædvaɪs - aɪ lɛɾ ɪt flaɪ. wɛl, ðə ɹizənz fəɹ duɪŋ ðəɾ ɑɹ pæst. aɪɾ ɔɹɾɝ ðə θɪŋ teɪkən daʊn, bʌt ðət nɛvɝ simz tə wɝk fəɹ lɔŋ." hi lʊk tə wɪl. "wɪl, aɪ wɑn ɪt pæs θɹu kæmp. aɪm ɡɪvɪŋ ə dɝɛkt ɔɹɾɝ. aɪ wɑn itʃ ən ɛvɹi kɑpi ʌv ðɪs blæstəd bænɝ bɝnd. jə ʌndɝstænd?"

"I didn't make this banner," Perrin said. "I never wanted it, but -  upon advice - I let it fly. Well, the reasons for doing that are past. I'd order the thing taken down, but that never seems to work for long." He looked to Wil. "Wil, I want it passed through camp. I'm giving a direct order. I want each and every copy of this blasted banner burned. You understand?"

wɪl peɪld. "bʌt - "

Wil paled. "But - "

"du ɪt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "æliændɝ, jəl swɛɹ tə ɹænd əz sun əz wi faɪn hɪm. jə woʊn ɹaɪd bɪniθ maɪ bænɝ, kəz aɪ woʊn əv ə bænɝ. ɪm ə blæksmɪθ, ən ðæts ði ɛn ʌv ɪt. aɪv stʌmɑtʃt ðɪs fulɪʃnəs fəɹ tu lɔŋ."

"Do it," Perrin said. "Alliandre, you'll swear to Rand as soon as we find him. You won't ride beneath my banner, because I won't have a banner. I'm a blacksmith, and that's the end of it. I've stomached this foolishness for too long."

"pɛɹɪn?" feɪl æskt. ʃi lʊk sɝpɹaɪzd. "ɪz ðɪs waɪz?"

"Perrin?" Faile asked. She looked surprised. "Is this wise?"

ful mæn. hi ʃəɾ əv ət lis tɔk tə hɪz waɪf əbaʊt ðɪs. bʌt mɛn wəd bi mɛn. ðeɪ laɪk ðɛɹ sikɹəts ən ðɛɹ plænz.

Fool man. He should have at least talked to his wife about this. But men would be men. They liked their secrets and their plans.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf ɪts waɪz. bʌɾ ɪt wʌɾ aɪm duɪŋ," hi sɛd, sɪɾɪŋ daʊn. bi ɔf, wɪl. aɪ wɑn ðoʊz bænɝz bɝn baɪ tənaɪt. noʊ hoʊldaʊts, jə ʌndɝstænd?"

"I don't know if it's wise. But it what I'm doing," he said, sitting down. Be off, Wil. I want those banners burned by tonight. No holdouts, you understand?"

wɪl stɪfənd, ðən spʌn ən stʃɹoʊd fɹəm ðə tɛnt wɪθaʊt ɡɪvɪŋ ə ɹɪplaɪ. ðə læd lʊkt əz ɪf i fɛl bɪtʃɹeɪd. ɑdli, mɔɹɡeɪs faʊn hɝsɛlf filɪŋ ə lɪɾəl ə ðə seɪm. ɪt wɑz fulɪʃ. ðɪs wɑz wʌt ʃi wɑntəd - ɪt wɑz wʌt pɛɹɪn ʃəd du. ən jɛt, ðə pipəl wɝ fɹaɪɾənd, wɪð ɡʊd ɹizən.

Wil stiffened, then spun and strode from the tent without giving a reply. The lad looked as if he felt betrayed. Oddly, Morgase found herself feeling a little of the same. It was foolish. This was what she wanted - it was what Perrin should do. And yet, the people were frightened, with good reason.

ðət skaɪ, ðə θɪŋz ðət wɝ hæpənɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝld . . . wɛl, ɪn ə taɪm laɪk ðɪs, pɝhæps ə mæn kəd bi ɪkskjuz fəɹ teɪkɪŋ kəmænd.

That sky, the things that were happening in the world . . . Well, in a time like this, perhaps a man could be excused for taking command.

"ju ɑɹ ə ful, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," mɑsʊɝi sɛd. ʃi hæɾ ə blʌnt weɪ əbaʊt hɝ.

"You are a fool, Perrin Aybara," Masuri said. She had a blunt way about her.

"sʌn," tɑɹn ədʒɹɛs pɛɹɪn, "ðə lædz pʊɾ ə lɑɾ ə stɑk ɪn ðət bænɝ."

"Son," Tarn addressed Perrin, "the lads put a lot of stock in that banner."

"tu mʌtʃ," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Too much," Perrin said.

"pɝhæps. bʌɾ ɪts ɡʊd tə hæv sʌmθɪŋ tə lʊk tə. wən jə tʊk daʊn ði ʌðɝ bænɝ, ɪt wɑz hɑɹɾ ɑn ðɛm. ðɪs wɪl bi wɝs."

"Perhaps. But it's good to have something to look to. When you took down the other banner, it was hard on them. This will be worse."

"ɪt nidz tə bi dʌn," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn əv ɡɑɾən tu ətætʃt tə ɪt, stɑɹɾəd tɔkɪŋ laɪk ðəɹ gɑnə steɪ wɪð mi ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ bæk tə ðɛɹ fæmliz wɛɹ ðeɪ bɪlɔŋ.

"It needs to be done," Perrin said. "The Two Rivers men have gotten too attached to it, started talking like they're going to stay with me instead of going back to their families where they belong.

wən wi ɡɛt ɡeɪtweɪz wɝkɪŋ əɡɛn, tɑɹn, jəl bi teɪkɪŋ əm ən ɡoʊɪŋ." hi lʊkt ət bɹəleɪn.

When we get gateways working again, Tarn, you'll be taking them and going." He looked at Berelain.

"aɪ səpoʊz aɪ kæn bi ɹɪɾ ə jə ən jəɹ mɛn. jəl ɡoʊ bæk wɪð mi tə ɹænd."

"I suppose I can't be rid of you and your men. You'll go back with me to Rand."

"aɪ wɑzn əwɛɹ," bɹəleɪn sɛd stɪfli, "ðæt jə niɾəd tə 'bi ɹɪd' ʌv ʌs. jə sim fɑɹ lɛs ɹɪlʌktən tə æksɛp maɪ səpɔɹt wən dɪmændɪŋ ðə sɝvəsəz ə maɪ wɪŋd ɡɑɹdzmɪn ɪn ɹɛskjuɪŋ jəɹ waɪf."

"I wasn't aware," Berelain said stiffly, "that you needed to 'be rid' of us. You seemed far less reluctant to accept my support when demanding the services of my Winged Guardsmen in rescuing your wife."

pɛɹɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "aɪ əpɹiʃieɪt jəɹ hɛlp, ɔl ə ju. wi dɪɾ ə ɡʊd θɪŋ ɪn meɪɾən, ən nɑt dʒʌs fəɹ feɪl ən æliændɝ. ɪt wɑz ə θɪŋ ðət niɾəd duɪŋ. bʌt bɝn mi, ðæts oʊvɝ naʊ. ɪf jə wɑnə ɡoʊ ɑn tə fɑloʊ ɹænd, aɪm ʃʊɹ hɪl əv ju. bʌt maɪ æʃəmən ɑɹ ɪɡzɔstəd, ən ðə tæsks aɪ wɑz ɡɪvən ɑɹ kəmplit. aɪv ɡɑt ðiz hʊks ɪnsaɪɾ ə mi, pʊlɪŋ mi bæk tə ɹænd. bɪfɔɹ aɪ kən də ðæt, aɪ nid tə bi dʌn wɪð ɔl ə ju."

Perrin took a deep breath. "I appreciate your help, all of you. We did a good thing in Maiden, and not just for Faile and Alliandre. It was a thing that needed doing. But burn me, that's over now. If you want to go on to follow Rand, I'm sure he'll have you. But my Asha'man are exhausted, and the tasks I was given are complete. I've got these hooks inside of me, pulling me back to Rand. Before I can do that, I need to be done with all of you."

"hʌzbənd," feɪl sɛd, hɝ wɝdz klɪpt. "maɪɾ aɪ sədʒɛs ðət wi bɪɡɪn wɪð ðə wʌnz u wɑnə bi sɛn əweɪ?"

"Husband," Faile said, her words clipped. "Might I suggest that we begin with the ones who want to be sent away?"

"jɛs," ɝɑvin sɛd. ðə fɔɹmɝ ɡeɪʃeɪn sæt nɪɹ ðə bæk ə ðə tɛnt, izi tə oʊvɝlʊk, ðoʊ ʃi hæd bɪkʌm ən ɪmpɔɹɾənt fɔɹs ɪn pɛɹɪnz kæmp ædmɪnɪstʃɹeɪʃən. ʃi æktəɾ əz sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ən ʌnəfɪʃəl stuɝd fəɹ hɪm. "sʌm ə ðə ɹɛfjudʒiz wəd bi hæpi tə ɹɪtɝn tə ðɛɹ hoʊmz."

"Yes," Aravine said. The former gai'shain sat near the back of the tent, easy to overlook, though she had become an important force in Perrin's camp administration. She acted as something of an unofficial steward for him. "Some of the refugees would be happy to return to their homes."

"aɪd ɹæðɝ muv ɛvɹiwʌn, ɪf aɪ kæn," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɡɹeɪɾi?"

"I'd rather move everyone, if I can," Perrin said. "Grady?"

ði æʃəmən ʃɹʌɡd ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. "ðə ɡeɪtweɪz aɪv meɪd fəɹ skaʊts hævən tæks mi tu mʌtʃ, ən aɪ θɪŋk aɪ kəd meɪk səm lɑɹdʒɝ wʌnz. aɪm stɪl ə lɪɾəl wik, bʌɾ aɪm moʊsli oʊvɝ ðə sɪknəs. nild wɪl nid mɔɹ taɪm, ðoʊ."

The Asha'man shrugged his shoulders. "The gateways I've made for scouts haven't taxed me too much, and I think I could make some larger ones. I'm still a little weak, but I am mostly over the sickness. Neald will need more time, though."

"maɪ lɔɹd." beɪlwɝ kɔf sɔfli. "aɪ hæv səm fɪɡjɝz ə kjʊɹiəs noʊt. muvɪŋ əz mɛni pipəl əz jə naʊ hæv θɹu ɡeɪtweɪz wɪl teɪk aʊɝz, meɪbi deɪz. ɪt woʊn bi ə kwɪk ɪndɛvɝ, əz wən wi əpɹoʊtʃt meɪɾən."

"My Lord." Balwer coughed softly. "I have some figures of curious note. Moving as many people as you now have through gateways will take hours, maybe days. It won't be a quick endeavor, as when we approached Maiden."

"ðæts gɑnə bi ɹʌf, maɪ lɔɹd," ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd. "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk aɪ kəd hoʊld wʌn oʊpən sətʃ ə lɔŋ taɪm. nɑɾ ɪf jə wɑn mi stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə bi ɪn faɪɾɪŋ ʃeɪp, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs."

"That's going to be rough, my Lord," Grady said. "I don't think I could hold one open such a long time. Not if you want me strong enough to be in fighting shape, just in case."

pɛɹɪn sɛɾəld bæk daʊn, ɪnspɛktɪŋ ðə mæp əɡɛn. bɹəleɪnz kʌp wɑz ɛmpti; mɔɹɡeɪs hɝiɾ oʊvɝ tə fɪl ɪt. "ɔl ɹaɪt, ðɛn," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "wil stɑɹt sɛndɪŋ səm smɔlɝ ɡɹups ə ɹɛfjudʒiz əweɪ, bʌt ðoʊz u wɑnə liv fɝst."

Perrin settled back down, inspecting the map again. Berelain's cup was empty; Morgase hurried over to fill it. "All right, then," Perrin said. "We'll start sending some smaller groups of refugees away, but those who want to leave first."

"ɔlsoʊ," feɪl sɛd. "pɝhæps ɪts taɪm tə sɛn mɛsənʒɝz tə kɑntæk ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən; hi maɪt bi wɪlɪŋ tə sɛn mɔɹ æʃəmən."

"Also," Faile said. "Perhaps it is time to send messengers to contact the Lord Dragon; he might be willing to send more Asha'man."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. "jɛs."

Perrin nodded. "Yes."

"læst wi nu," siɑnɪd sɛd, "hi wɑz ɪn kɛɹhin. ðə lɑɹdʒəs nʌmbɝ ə ðə ɹɛfjudʒiz ɑɹ fɹəm ðɛɹ, soʊ wi kəd bɪɡɪn baɪ sɛndɪŋ səm ə ðɛm hoʊm, əlɔŋ wɪð skaʊts tə mit wɪð ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən."

"Last we knew," Seonid said, "he was in Cairhien. The largest number of the refugees are from there, so we could begin by sending some of them home, along with scouts to meet with the Lord Dragon."

"hiz nɑt ðɛɹ," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"He's not there," Perrin said.

"haʊ dʒju noʊ?" ɛdʒɹə sɛt daʊn əɹ kʌp. mɔɹɡeɪs kɹɛpt ɝaʊn ðə pɝɪməɾɝ ə ðə tɛn ən snætʃt ɪt fəɹ ɹifɪlɪŋ. ɛldəst ə ðə waɪz wʌnz, ən pɝhæps fɔɹmoʊst əmʌŋ əm - ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə tɛl wɪð waɪz wʌnz - ɛdʒɹə lʊk stʃɹaɪkɪŋli jʌŋ fəɹ əɹ ɹipɔɹɾəd eɪdʒ. mɔɹɡeɪsəz oʊn taɪni əbɪləɾi ɪn ðə wʌn paʊɝ wɑz ɪnʌf tə tɛl əɹ ðət ðɪs wʊmən wɑz stʃɹɔŋ. pɹɑbli ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst ɪn ðə ɹum.

"How do you know?" Edarra set down her cup. Morgase crept around the perimeter of the tent and snatched it for refilling. Eldest of the Wise Ones, and perhaps foremost among them - it was hard to tell with Wise Ones - Edarra looked strikingly young for her reported age. Morgase's own tiny ability in the One Power was enough to tell her that this woman was strong. Probably the strongest in the room.

"aɪ . . ." pɛɹɪn sim tə flaʊndɝ. hæɾ i ə sɔɹs ʌv ɪnfɝmeɪʃən i wɑznt ʃɛɹɪŋ? "ɹæn əz ə hæbəɾ ə biɪŋ wɛɹ jə doʊn ɪkspɛk hɪm. aɪ daʊt hiz ɹɪmeɪn ɪn kɛɹhin. bʌt siɑnɪɾ ɪz ɹaɪt - ɪts ðə bɛs pleɪs tə stɑɹt lʊkɪŋ."

"I . . ." Perrin seemed to flounder. Had he a source of information he wasn't sharing? "Rand has a habit of being where you don't expect him. I doubt he's remained in Cairhien. But Seonid is right - it's the best place to start looking."

"maɪ lɔɹd," beɪlwɝ sɛd. "aɪ wɝi əbaʊt wʌt wi maɪt, əhɛm, blʌndɝ ɪndə ɪf wəɹ nɑt kɛɹfəl.

"My Lord," Balwer said. "I worry about what we might, ahem, blunder into if we are not careful.

flits ə ɹɛfjudʒiz, ɹɪtɝnɪŋ θɹu ɡeɪtweɪz ʌnɪkspɛktɪdli? wɪv bɪn aʊɾ ə tʌtʃ fəɹ səm taɪm. pɝhæps, ɪn ədɪʃən tə kɑntæktɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən, wi kəd sɛn skaʊts tə ɡæðɝ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən?"

Fleets of refugees, returning through gateways unexpectedly? We have been out of touch for some time. Perhaps, in addition to contacting the Dragon, we could send scouts to gather information?"

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. "aɪ kəɾ əpɹuv ðæt."

Perrin nodded. "I could approve that."

beɪlwɝ sɛɾəld bæk, lʊkɪŋ plizd, ðoʊ ðət mæn wɑz stʃɹaɪkɪŋli ɡʊɾ ət haɪɾɪŋ ɪz ɪmoʊʃənz.

Balwer settled back, looking pleased, though that man was strikingly good at hiding his emotions.

waɪ dɪɾ i wɑn soʊ bædli tə sɛn sʌmwʌn tə kɛɹhin?

Why did he want so badly to send someone to Cairhien?

"aɪl ədmɪt," ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd, "aɪm wɝiɾ əbaʊt muvɪŋ ɔl ə ðiz pipəl. ivən wʌns nild ɪz wɛl, ɪts gɑnə bi ɪɡzɔstɪŋ tə hoʊld ɡeɪtweɪz oʊpən lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɡɛɾ əm ɔl θɹu."

"I'll admit," Grady said, "I'm worried about moving all of these people. Even once Neald is well, it's going to be exhausting to hold gateways open long enough to get them all through."

"pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," ɛdʒɹə sɛd. "ðɛɹ meɪ bi ə weɪ tə fɪks ðɪs pɹɑbləm."

"Perrin Aybara," Edarra said. "There may be a way to fix this problem."

"haʊ?"

"How?"

"ðiz əpɹɛntəsɪz əv bɪn spikɪŋ ə sʌmθɪŋ. ə sɝkəl, ɪts kɔld? ɪf wi lɪŋk təɡɛðɝ, ði æʃəmən ən səm ʌv ʌs, ðən pɝhæps wi kəd ɡɪv əm ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ tə kɹieɪt lɑɹdʒɝ ɡeɪtweɪz."

"These apprentices have been speaking of something. A circle, it is called? If we linked together, the Ashaman and some of us, then perhaps we could give them the strength to create larger gateways."

pɛɹɪn skɹætʃt əɾ ɪz bɪɹd. "ɡɹeɪɾi?"

Perrin scratched at his beard. "Grady?"

"aɪv nɛvɝ lɪŋkt ɪn ə sɝkəl bɪfɔɹ, maɪ lɔɹd. bʌɾ ɪf wi kəd fɪɡjɝ ɪɾ aʊtwɛl, bɪɡɝ ɡeɪtweɪz wəd muv mɔɹ pipəl θɹu fæstɝ. ðət kəd hɛlp ə lɑt."

"I've never linked in a circle before, my Lord. But if we could figure it out...well, bigger gateways would move more people through faster. That could help a lot."

"ɔl ɹaɪt," pɛɹɪn sɛd, tɝnɪŋ bæk tə ðə waɪz wʌn. "wʌt wəɾ ɪt kɑs mi fəɹ jə tə tʃɹaɪ ðɪs?"

"All right," Perrin said, turning back to the Wise One. "What would it cost me for you to try this?"

"ju hæv wɝk tu lɔŋ wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," ɛdʒɹə sɛd wɪð ə snɪf. "nɑɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ mʌs bi dʌn əɾ ə kɑst. ðɪs wɪl bɛnəfɪɾ əs ɔl. aɪ hæv bɪn kɑntəmpleɪɾɪŋ sədʒɛstɪŋ ɪt fəɹ səm taɪm."

"You have worked too long with Aes Sedai, Perrin Aybara," Edarra said with a sniff. "Not everything must be done at a cost. This will benefit us all. I have been contemplating suggesting it for some time."

pɛɹɪn fɹaʊnd. "haʊ lɔŋ əv jə noʊn ðət ðɪs maɪt wɝk?"

Perrin frowned. "How long have you known that this might work?"

"lɔŋ ɪnʌf."

"Long enough."

"bɝn ju, wʊmən, waɪ dɪdn jə bɹɪŋ ɪt tə mi ɝliɝ, ðɛn?"

"Burn you, woman, why didn't you bring it to me earlier, then?"

"ju sim hɑɹdli ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn jəɹ pəzɪʃən əz tʃif, moʊst ə ðə taɪm," ɛdʒɹə sɛd koʊldli.

"You seem hardly interested in your position as chief, most of the time," Edarra said coldly.

"ɹɪspɛkt ɪz ə θɪŋ ɝn ən nɑt dɪmændəd, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə."

"Respect is a thing earned and not demanded, Perrin Aybara."

mɔɹɡeɪs hɛld əɹ bɹɛθ ət ðəɾ ɪnsələn kɑmɛnt. mɛni ə lɔɹd wəd snæp ət sʌmwʌn fəɹ ðət toʊn. pɛɹɪn fɹoʊz, bʌt ðən nɑɾəd, əz ɪf ðət wɝ ði ɪkspɛktəɾ ænsɝ.

Morgase held her breath at that insolent comment. Many a lord would snap at someone for that tone. Perrin froze, but then nodded, as if that were the expected answer.

"jɔɹ æʃəmən wɝ sɪk wən aɪ fɝs θɔɾ ə ðɪs," ɛdʒɹə kəntɪnjud. "ɪt wəd nɑɾ əv wɝk bɪfɔɹ. ðɪs ɪz ði əpɹoʊpɹiət taɪm tə ɹeɪz ðə kwɛstʃən. ðɛɹfɔɹ, aɪ hæv dʌn soʊ."

"Your Asha'man were sick when I first thought of this," Edarra continued. "It would not have worked before. This is the appropriate time to raise the question. Therefore, I have done so."

ʃi ɪnsəls ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð wʌn bɹɛθ, mɔɹɡeɪs θɔt, ðən æks dʒʌs laɪk wʌn wɪð ðə nɛkst. stɪl, biɪŋ ə kæptɪv ɪn meɪɾən hæd hɛlp mɔɹɡeɪs bɪɡɪn tə ʌndɝstæn il weɪz. ɛvɹiwʌn kleɪm ði il wɝ ɪŋkɑmpɹəhɛnsɪbəl, bʌt ʃi ɡeɪv tɔk laɪk ðət lɪɾəl kɹiɾəns. il wɝ pipəl, laɪk ɛni ʌðɝ. ðeɪ hæɾ ɑd tʃɹədɪʃənz ən kʌltʃɝəl kwɝks, bʌt soʊ dɪɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls. ə kwin hæd tə bi eɪbəl tə ʌndɝstæn ɔl ə ðə pipəl wɪðɪn əɹ ɹɛlm -  ən ɔl ə hɝ ɹɛlmz pətɛnʃəl ɛnəmiz.

She insults Aes Sedai with one breath, Morgase thought, then acts just like one with the next. Still, being a captive in Maiden had helped Morgase begin to understand Aiel ways. Everyone claimed the Aiel were incomprehensible, but she gave talk like that little credence. Aiel were people, like any other. They had odd traditions and cultural quirks, but so did everyone else. A queen had to be able to understand all of the people within her realm -  and all of her realm's potential enemies.

"vɛɹi wɛl," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɡɹeɪɾi, doʊn fətiɡ jɝsɛlf tu mʌtʃ, bʌt stɑɹt wɝkɪŋ wɪð ðɛm.

"Very well," Perrin said. "Grady, don't fatigue yourself too much, but start working with them.

si ɪf jə kən mænədʒ fɔɹmɪŋ ə sɝkəl."

See if you can manage forming a circle."

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd," ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd. ði æʃəmən ɔlweɪz sim sʌmwʌt dɪstənt. "maɪt bi ɡʊd tə ɪnvɑlv nild ɪn ðɪs. hi ɡɛts dɪzi wən i stænz, bʌt hiz bɪn ɪtʃɪŋ tə də sʌmθɪŋ wɪð ðə paʊɝ. ðɪs maɪt bi ə weɪ fəɹ ɪm tə ɡɛt bæk ɪndə pɹæktəs."

"Yes, my Lord," Grady said. The Asha'man always seemed somewhat distant. "Might be good to involve Neald in this. He gets dizzy when he stands, but he's been itching to do something with the Power. This might be a way for him to get back into practice."

"ɔl ɹaɪt," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"All right," Perrin said.

"wi hæv nɑt fɪnɪʃt tɔkɪŋ ə ðə skaʊts wəɹ sɛndɪŋ tə kɛɹhin," siɑnɪd sɛd. "aɪ wəd laɪk tə bi wɪð ðə ɡɹup."

"We have not finished talking of the scouts we are sending to Cairhien," Seonid said. "I would like to be with the group."

pɛɹɪn skɹætʃt ɪz bɪɹɾəd tʃɪn. "aɪ səpoʊz. teɪk jəɹ wɔɹɾɝz, tu meɪɾənz ən pɛl eɪdɑɹ.

Perrin scratched his bearded chin. "I suppose. Take your Warders, two Maidens and Pel Aydaer.

bi ʌnəbtʃɹusɪv, ɪf jə kæn."

Be unobtrusive, if you can."

"ɔlsoʊ kɑmɛl noʊlsən wɪl ɡoʊ," feɪl sɛd. ʌv kɔɹs ʃi wəɾ æd wʌn tʃɑ feɪl tə ðə ɡɹup.

"Also Camaille Nolaisen will go," Faile said. Of course she would add one Cha Faile to the group.

beɪlwɝ klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. "maɪ lɔɹd. wəɹ ɪn daɪɹ niɾ ə peɪpɝ ən nu pɛn nɪbz, nɑt tə mɛnʃən səm ʌðɝ dɛləkət mətɪɹiəlz."

Balwer cleared his throat. "My Lord. We are in dire need of paper and new pen nibs, not to mention some other delicate materials."

"ʃʊɹli ðət kən weɪt." pɛɹɪn fɹaʊnd.

"Surely that can wait." Perrin frowned.

"noʊ," feɪl sɛd sloʊli. '"noʊ, hʌzbənd, aɪ θɪŋk ðɪs ɪz ə ɡʊd sədʒɛstʃən. wi ʃəd sɛnd wʌn pɝsən tə kəlɛk səplaɪz. beɪlwɝ, wəd jə ɡoʊ ən fɛtʃ ðə θɪŋz jɝsɛlf?"

"No," Faile said slowly. '"No, husband, I think this is a good suggestion. We should send one person to collect supplies. Balwer, would you go and fetch the things yourself?"

"ɪf maɪ leɪɾi wɪʃɪz ɪt," ðə sɛkɹətɛɹi sɛd. "aɪ hæv ætʃt tə vɪzət ðɪs skul ðə dʒɹæɡən əz oʊpən ɪn kɛɹhin. ðeɪ wəɾ əv ðə səplaɪz wi nid."

"If my Lady wishes it," the secretary said. "I have ached to visit this school the Dragon has opened in Cairhien. They would have the supplies we need."

"aɪ səpoʊz jə kən ɡoʊ, ðɛn," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "bʌt noʊbɑdi ɛls. laɪt! ɛni mɔɹ, ən wi maɪɾ əz wɛl sɛn ðə hoʊl bɝnɪŋ ɑɹmi θɹu."

"I suppose you can go, then," Perrin said. "But nobody else. Light! Any more, and we might as well send the whole burning army through."

beɪlwɝ nɑɾəd, lʊkɪŋ sæɾəsfaɪd. ðət wʌn wɑz ɑbviəsli spaɪɪŋ fəɹ pɛɹɪn naʊ. wəɾ i tɛl eɪbɑɹə hu ʃi ɹɪli wɑz? hæɾ i dʌn soʊ ɔlɹɛɾi? pɛɹɪn dɪdn ækt əz ɪf i nu.

Balwer nodded, looking satisfied. That one was obviously spying for Perrin now. Would he tell Aybara who she really was? Had he done so already? Perrin didn't act as if he knew.

ʃi ɡæðɝɾ ʌp mɔɹ kʌps; ðə miɾɪŋ wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə bɹeɪk ʌp. ʌv kɔɹs beɪlwɝ wəɾ ɔfɝ tə spaɪ fəɹ eɪbɑɹə; ʃi ʃʊɾə əpɹoʊtʃt ðə dʌsti mæn ɝliɝ, tə si wʌt ðə pɹaɪs wəd bi tə kip ɪz saɪləns. mɪsteɪks laɪk ðət kəd kɑst ə kwin əɹ θɹoʊn.

She gathered up more cups; the meeting was beginning to break up. Of course Balwer would offer to spy for Aybara; she should have approached the dusty man earlier, to see what the price would be to keep his silence. Mistakes like that could cost a queen her throne.

ʃi fɹoʊz, hæn hæfweɪ tə ə kʌp. jəɹ nɑɾ ə kwin ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. juv tə stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ laɪk wʌn!

She froze, hand halfway to a cup. You're not a queen any longer. You have to stop thinking like one!

dʊɹɪŋ ðə fɝst wiks fɑloʊɪŋ əɹ saɪlən æbdɪkeɪʃən, ʃid hoʊp tə faɪn ə weɪ tə ɹɪtɝn tə ændɝ, soʊ ʃi kəd bi ə ɹisɔɹs fəɹ ɪleɪn. haʊɛvɝ, ðə mɔɹ ʃid kənsɪɾɝd ɪt, ðə mɔɹ ʃid ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi hæd tə steɪ əweɪ. ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ændɝ hæd tə əsum ðət mɔɹɡeɪs wɑz dɛd. itʃ kwin hæd tə meɪk əɹ oʊn weɪ, ən ɪleɪn maɪt sim ə pʌpət tə hɝ oʊn mʌðɝ ɪf mɔɹɡeɪs ɹɪtɝnd. bɪɑn ðæt, mɔɹɡeɪs hæd meɪd mɛni ɛnəmiz bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ. waɪ hæd ʃi dʌn sətʃ θɪŋz? hɝ mɛmɹi ʌv ðoʊz taɪmz wɑz klaʊɾi, bʌɾ əɹ ɹɪtɝn wəɾ oʊnli ɹɪp oʊpən oʊld wunz.

During the first weeks following her silent abdication, she'd hoped to find a way to return to Andor, so she could be a resource for Elayne. However, the more she'd considered it, the more she'd realized that she had to stay away. Everyone in Andor had to assume that Morgase was dead. Each queen had to make her own way, and Elayne might seem a puppet to her own mother if Morgase returned. Beyond that, Morgase had made many enemies before leaving. Why had she done such things? Her memory of those times was cloudy, but her return would only rip open old wounds.

ʃi kəntɪnjud ɡæðɝɪŋ ʌp kʌps. pɝhæps ʃi ʃʊɾə dʌn ðə noʊbəl θɪŋ ən kɪl hɝsɛlf.

She continued gathering up cups. Perhaps she should have done the noble thing and killed herself.

ɪf ɛnəmiz ə ðə θɹoʊn dɪskʌvɝɾ u ʃi wɑz, ðeɪ kəd juz əɹ əɡɛnst ɪleɪn, ðə seɪm weɪ ðət ðə waɪtkloʊks wəd hæv. bʌt fəɹ naʊ, ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ə θɹɛt. bɪsaɪdz, ʃi wɑz kɑnfəɾənt ðəɾ ɪleɪn wəd nɑt ɹɪsk ændɝz seɪfti, ivən tə seɪv əɹ mʌðɝ.

If enemies of the throne discovered who she was, they could use her against Elayne, the same way that the Whitecloaks would have. But for now, she was not a threat. Besides, she was confident that Elayne would not risk Andor's safety, even to save her mother.

pɛɹɪn beɪd fɛɹwɛl tə ði ətɛndiz ən ɡeɪv səm beɪsɪk ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz fəɹ ði ivnɪŋ kæmp.

Perrin bade farewell to the attendees and gave some basic instructions for the evening camp.

mɔɹɡeɪs nɛl daʊn, juzɪŋ ə ɹæɡ tə waɪp dɝt fɹəm ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə tikʌp ðət hæd ɹoʊld oʊvɝ. naɪl hæd toʊld əɹ ðət ɡeɪbɹəl wɑz dɛd, ən ælθɹ hɛl keɪɛmlɪn. ðət wʊɾə pɹɑmptəɾ ɪleɪn tə ɹɪtɝn, wʊdn ɪt? wɑz ʃi kwin? hæd ðə haʊsəz səpɔɹɾəd hɝ, əɹ hæd ðeɪ æktəɾ əɡɛnst əɹ kəz ʌv wʌt mɔɹɡeɪs hæd dʌn?

Morgase knelt down, using a rag to wipe dirt from the side of a teacup that had rolled over. Niall had told her that Gaebril was dead, and al'Thor held Caemlyn. That would have prompted Elayne to return, wouldn't it? Was she queen? Had the Houses supported her, or had they acted against her because of what Morgase had done?

ðə skaʊɾɪŋ pɑɹɾi maɪt bɹɪŋ nuz ðət mɔɹɡeɪs hʌŋɡɝd fɔɹ. ʃi wəɾ əv tə faɪn ə weɪ ɪndə ɛni miɾɪŋ dɪskʌsɪŋ ðɛɹ ɹɪpɔɹts, pɝ-hæps baɪ ɔfɝɪŋ tə sɝv ðə ti. ðə bɛɾɝ ʃi ɡɹu əɾ əɹ dʒɑb əz feɪlz meɪd, ðə kloʊsɝ ʃid bi eɪbəl tə ɡɛt tə ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪvɛns.

The scouting party might bring news that Morgase hungered for. She would have to find a way into any meeting discussing their reports, per-haps by offering to serve the tea. The better she grew at her job as Faile's maid, the closer she'd be able to get to important events.

əz ðə waɪz wʌnz meɪd ðɛɹ weɪ fɹəm ðə tɛnt, mɔɹɡeɪs kɑt saɪɾ ə sʌmwʌn aʊtsaɪd.

As the Wise Ones made their way from the tent, Morgase caught sight of someone outside.

tɑlænvɝ, duɾifəl əz ɔlweɪz. tɔl, bɹɔɾ ə ʃoʊldɝ, hi wɔɹ ɪz sɔɹɾ əɾ ɪz weɪst ən ə lʊk ə pɔɪntəd kənsɝn ɪn ɪz aɪz.

Tallanvor, dutiful as always. Tall, broad of shoulder, he wore his sword at his waist and a look of pointed concern in his eyes.

hid fɑloʊɾ əɹ pɹæktəkli nɑnstɑp sɪns meɪɾən, ən waɪl ʃid kəmpleɪn ʌv ɪɾ aʊɾ ə pɹɪnsəpəl, ʃi dɪdn maɪnd. æftɝ tu mʌnθs əpɑɹɾ i wɑntəd tə teɪk ɛvɹi ɑpɝtunəɾi tə bi təɡɛðɝ.

He'd followed her practically nonstop since Maiden, and while she'd complained of it out of principle, she didn't mind. After two months apart he wanted to take every opportunity to be together.

lʊkɪŋ ɪndə ðoʊz bjuɾəfəl jʌŋ aɪz ə hɪz, ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɛntɝteɪn ðə noʊʃən ə suəsaɪɾ ivən fəɹ ðə ɡʊɾ ʌv ændɝ. ʃi fɛlt ə ful fəɹ ðæt. hædnt ʃi lɛɾ əɹ hɑɹt lɛɾ əɹ ɪndə ɪnʌf tʃɹʌbəl ɔlɹɛɾi?

Looking into those beautiful young eyes of his, she could not entertain the notion of suicide even for the good of Andor. She felt a fool for that. Hadn't she let her heart lead her into enough trouble already?

meɪɾən hæd tʃeɪnʒd hɝ, ðoʊ. ʃid mɪs tɑlænvɝ dɪɹli. ən ðən hid kʌm fəɹ hɝ, wən i ʃʊdn əv ɹɪsk hɪmsɛlf soʊ. hi wɑz mɔɹ dɪvoʊɾəd tə hɝ ðən tə ændɝ ɪtsɛlf. ən fəɹ səm ɹizən, ðət wɑz ɪɡzækli wʌt ʃi niɾəd. ʃi bɪɡæn tə meɪk əɹ weɪ təwɔɹd hɪm, bælənsɪŋ eɪt kʌps ɪn ðə kɹʊk ə hɝ ɑɹm waɪl kæɹiɪŋ ðə sɔsɝz ɪn əɹ hænd.

Maiden had changed her, though. She'd missed Tallanvor dearly. And then he'd come for her, when he shouldn't have risked himself so. He was more devoted to her than to Andor itself. And for some reason, that was exactly what she needed. She began to make her way toward him, balancing eight cups in the crook of her arm while carrying the saucers in her hand.

"meɪaɪɡdɪn," pɛɹɪn sɛɾ əz ʃi pæst aʊɾ ə ðə tɛnt. ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, tɝnɪŋ bæk. ɛvɹiwʌn bʌt pɛɹɪn ən ɪz waɪf hæd wɪθdʒɹɔn.

"Maighdin," Perrin said as she passed out of the tent. She hesitated, turning back. Everyone but Perrin and his wife had withdrawn.

"kʌm bæk hɪɹ, pliz," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "æn tɑlænvɝ, jə maɪɾ əz wɛl kʌm ɪn. aɪ kən si jə lɝkɪŋ aʊt ðɛɹ. ɑnəsli. ɪts nɑɾ əz ɪf ɛniwʌn wɑz gɑnə swup daʊn ən stil əɹ əweɪ waɪl ʃi wɑz ɪnsaɪɾ ə tɛn fʊl ʌv waɪz wʌnz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ!"

"Come back here, please," Perrin said. "And Tallanvor, you might as well come in. I can see you lurking out there. Honestly. It's not as if anyone was going to swoop down and steal her away while she was inside a tent full of Wise Ones and Aes Sedai!"

mɔɹɡeɪs ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ. fɹəm wʌt ʃid sin, pɛɹɪn hɪmsɛlf hæd fɑloʊd feɪl ɝaʊn leɪtli nɪɹli əz mʌtʃ.

Morgase raised an eyebrow. From what she'd seen, Perrin himself had followed Faile around lately nearly as much.

tɑlænvɝ ʃɑɾ əɹ ə smaɪl əz i ɛntɝd. hi tʊk səm ə ðə kʌps fɹəm əɹ ɑɹm, ðən boʊθ ə ðɛm pɹizɛntəd ðɛmsɛlvz bɪfɔɹ pɛɹɪn. tɑlænvɝ baʊd fɔɹməli, wɪtʃ ɡeɪv mɔɹɡeɪs ə stæb ʌv ənɔɪəns. hi wɑz stɪl ə mɛmbɝ ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹd - ði oʊnli lɔɪəl mɛmbɝ, əz fɑɹ əz ʃi nu.

Tallanvor shot her a smile as he entered. He took some of the cups from her arm, then both of them presented themselves before Perrin. Tallanvor bowed formally, which gave Morgase a stab of annoyance. He was still a member of the Queen's Guard - the only loyal member, as far as she knew.

hi ʃʊdn bi boʊɪŋ tə ðɪs ɹʊɹəl ʌpstɑɹt.

He shouldn't be bowing to this rural upstart.

"aɪ wɑz ɡɪvən ə sədʒɛstʃən bæk wən jə fɝs dʒɔɪn ʌs," pɛɹɪn sɛd ɡɹʌflaɪ. "wɛl, aɪ θɪŋk ɪts əbaʊt taɪm aɪ tʊk ɪt. leɪtli, jə tu ɑɹ laɪk juðz fɹəm dɪfɹən vɪlədʒəz, munɪŋ oʊvɝ wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn ði aʊɝ bɪfɔɹ sʌndeɪ ɛnz. ɪts haɪ taɪm jə wɝ mɛɹid. wi kəɾ əv æliændɝ də ɪt, əɹ meɪbi aɪ kʊd. juv səm tʃɹədɪʃən jə fɑloʊ?"

"I was given a suggestion back when you first joined us," Perrin said gruffly. "Well, I think it's about time I took it. Lately, you two are like youths from different villages, mooning over one another in the hour before Sunday ends. It's high time you were married. We could have Alliandre do it, or maybe I could. Do you have some tradition you follow?"

mɔɹɡeɪs blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. kɝs lini fəɹ pʊɾɪŋ ðəɾ aɪdiə ɪn pɝ-ɹɪnz hɛd! mɔɹɡeɪs fɛlt ə sʌɾən pænɪk, ðoʊ tɑlænvɝ ɡlænst əɾ əɹ kwɛstʃənɪŋli.

Morgase blinked in surprise. Curse Lini for putting that idea in Per-rin's head! Morgase felt a sudden panic, though Tallanvor glanced at her questioningly.

"ɡoʊ tʃeɪnʒ ɪndə sʌmθɪŋ naɪsɝ ɪf jə wɑnt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɡæðɝ ɛni jə wɑnə wɪtnəs ən bi bæk hɪɹ ɪn ən aʊɝ. ðən wɪl ɡɛt ðɪs sɪlinəs oʊvɝ wɪð."

"Go change into something nicer if you want," Perrin said. "Gather any you want to witness and be back here in an hour. Then we'll get this silliness over with."

ʃi fɛlt əɹ feɪs ɡɹoʊ hɑt wɪð æŋɡɝ. sɪlinəs? haʊ dɛɹ hi! ən ɪn sətʃ ə weɪ! sɛndɪŋ əɹ ɔf laɪk ə tʃaɪld, əz ɪf əɹ ɪmoʊʃən - hɝ lʌv - wɑz mɪɹli ən ɪnkənvinjəns tə hɪm?

She felt her face grow hot with anger. Silliness? How dare he! And in such a way! Sending her off like a child, as if her emotion - her love - was merely an inconvenience to him?

hi wɑz ɹoʊlɪŋ ʌp ɪz mæp, bʌt ðən feɪlz hæn pleɪst ɑn ɪz ɑɹm kɑzd ɪm tə lʊk ʌp ən noʊɾəs ðəɾ ɪz ɔɹɾɝz hæd nɑt bɪn fɑloʊd.

He was rolling up his map, but then Faile's hand placed on his arm caused him to look up and notice that his orders had not been followed.

"wɛl?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"Well?" Perrin asked.

"noʊ," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. ʃi kɛpt əɹ ɡeɪz ɑn pɛɹɪn; ʃi dɪdnt wɑnə si ði ɪnɛvəɾəbəl dɪsəpɔɪnmənt ən ɹɪdʒɛkʃən ɪn tɑlænvɝz feɪs.

"No," Morgase said. She kept her gaze on Perrin; she didn't want to see the inevitable disappointment and rejection in Tallanvor's face.

"wʌt?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"What?" Perrin asked.

"noʊ, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "aɪ wɪl nɑt bi bæk hɪɹ ɪn ən aʊɝ tə bi mɛɹid."

"No, Perrin Aybara," Morgase said. "I will not be back here in an hour to be married."

"bʌt - "

"But - "

"ɪf jə wɑn ti sɝvd, əɹ jəɹ tɛn klind, əɹ sʌmθɪŋ pækt, ðən kɔl fəɹ mi. ɪf jə wɪʃ jəɹ kloʊðɪŋ wɑʃt, əl əblaɪdʒ. bʌɾ aɪm jəɹ sɝvənt, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə, nɑt jəɹ sʌbʒɪkt. aɪm lɔɪəl tə ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ. juv noʊ əθɔɹəɾi tə ɡɪmi ðɪs sɔɹɾ ə kəmænd."

"If you want tea served, or your tent cleaned, or something packed, then call for me. If you wish your clothing washed, I will oblige. But I am your servant, Perrin Aybara, not your subject. I am loyal to the Queen of Andor. You have no authority to give me this sort of command."

"aɪ-"

"I-"

"waɪ, ðə kwin hɝsɛlf wʊdn dɪmæn ðɪs! fɔɹsɪŋ tu pipəl tə mɛɹi kəz jəɹ taɪɝɾ ə ðə weɪ ðeɪ lʊk ət wʌn ənʌðɝ? laɪk tu haʊnz jə ɪntɛn tə bɹid, ðən sɛl ðə pʌps?"

"Why, the Queen herself wouldn't demand this! Forcing two people to marry because you're tired of the way they look at one another? Like two hounds you intend to breed, then sell the pups?"

"aɪ dɪdn min ɪt ðət weɪ."

"I didn't mean it that way."

"ju sɛɾ ɪt nʌnðəlɛs. bɪsaɪdz, haʊ kən jə bi ʃʊɹ ə ðə jʌŋ mænz ɪntɛntʃənz? hæv jə spoʊkən tə hɪm, æsk hɪm, ɪntɝvjuɾ ɪm əz ə lɔɹd ʃəɾ ɪn ə mæɾɝ laɪk ðɪs?"

"You said it nonetheless. Besides, how can you be sure of the young man's intentions? Have you spoken to him, asked him, interviewed him as a lord should in a matter like this?"

"bʌt meɪaɪɡdɪn," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "hi dʌz kɛɹ fəɹ ju. jə ʃʊɾə sin ðə weɪ hi æktəd wən jə wɝ teɪkən. laɪt, wʊmən, bʌɾ ɪts ɑbviəs!"

"But Maighdin," Perrin said. "He does care for you. You should have seen the way he acted when you were taken. Light, woman, but it's obvious!"

"mæɾɝz ə ðə hɑɹɾ ɑɹ nɛvɝ ɑbviəs." pʊlɪŋ hɝsɛlf ʌp tə hɝ fʊl haɪt, ʃi ɔlmoʊs fɛlt ə kwin əɡɛn. "ɪf aɪ tʃuz tə mɛɹi ə mæn, əl meɪk ðət dɪsɪʒən ɑn maɪ oʊn. fəɹ ə mæn u kleɪmz i dʌzn laɪk biɪŋ ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ, jə sɝɾənli də laɪk ɡɪvɪŋ kəmænz. haʊ kən jə bi ʃʊɹ ðəɾ aɪ wɑn ðɪs jʌŋ mænz əfɛkʃənz? dʒju noʊ maɪ hɑɹt?"

"Matters of the heart are never obvious." Pulling herself up to her full height, she almost felt a queen again. "If I choose to marry a man, I will make that decision on my own. For a man who claims he doesn't like being in charge, you certainly do like giving commands. How can you be sure that I want this young man's affections? Do you know my heart?"

tə ðə saɪd, tɑlænvɝ stɪfənd. ðən i baʊd fɔɹməli tə pɛɹɪn ən stʃɹoʊd fɹəm ðə tɛnt. hi wɑz ən ɪmoʊʃənəl wʌn. wɛl, hi niɾəd tə noʊ ðət ʃi wəd nɑt bi ʃʌvd ɝaʊnd. nɑɾ ɛnimɔɹ.

To the side, Tallanvor stiffened. Then he bowed formally to Perrin and strode from the tent. He was an emotional one. Well, he needed to know that she would not be shoved around. Not anymore.

fɝst ɡeɪbɹəl, ðən vɑldə, ən naʊ pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə? tɑlænvɝ wəd bi ɪl-sɝvd ɪf i wɝ tə ɹəsiv ə wʊmən u mɛɹiɾ ɪm kəz ʃi wɑz toʊl tə də soʊ.

First Gaebril, then valda, and now Perrin Aybara? Tallanvor would be ill-served if he were to receive a woman who married him because she was told to do so.

mɔɹɡeɪs mɛʒɝd pɛɹɪn, hu wɑz blʌʃɪŋ. ʃi sɔfən əɹ toʊn.

Morgase measured Perrin, who was blushing. She softened her tone.

"jɔɹ jʌŋ ət ðɪs jɛt, soʊ əl ɡɪv jə ædvaɪs. ðəɹ ɑɹ səm θɪŋz ə lɔɹd ʃəd bi ɪnvɑlvd ɪn, bʌɾ ʌðɝz i ʃəɾ ɔlweɪz liv əntʌtʃt.

"You're young at this yet, so I'll give you advice. There are some things a lord should be involved in, but others he should always leave untouched.

jəl lɝn ðə dɪfɝəns əz jə pɹæktəs, bʌt kaɪnli ɹɪfɹeɪn fɹəm meɪkɪŋ dɪmænz laɪk ðɪs wʌn əntɪl juv ət lis kaʊnsəld wɪð jəɹ waɪf."

You'll learn the difference as you practice, but kindly refrain from making demands like this one until you've at least counseled with your wife."

wɪð ðæt, ʃi kɝtsid - stɪl kæɹiɪŋ ðə tikəps - ən wɪθdʒɹu. ʃi ʃʊdn əv spoʊkən tə hɪm soʊ. wɛl, hi ʃʊdn əv meɪɾ ə kəmæn laɪk ðæt! ɪt simd ʃi hæd səm spɑɹk lɛft ɪn əɹ æftɝ ɔl. ʃi hædn fɛl ðət fɝm əɹ sɝɾən ə hɝsɛlf sɪns . . . wɛl, sɪns bɪfɔɹ ɡaɪ-bɹɪlz ɝaɪvəl ɪn keɪɛmlɪn! ðoʊ ʃi wəɾ əv tə faɪn tɑlænvɝ ən suð ɪz pɹaɪd.

With that, she curtsied - still carrying the teacups - and withdrew. She shouldn't have spoken to him so. Well, he shouldn't have made a command like that! It seemed she had some spark left in her after all. She hadn't felt that firm or certain of herself since . . . well, since before Gae-bril's arrival in Caemlyn! Though she would have to find Tallanvor and soothe his pride.

ʃi ɹɪtɝn ðə kʌps tə ðə nɪɹbaɪ wɑʃɪŋ steɪʃən, ðən wɛn θɹu ðə kæmp, lʊkɪŋ fəɹ tɑlænvɝ. ɝaʊn hɝ, sɝvəns ən wɝkɝz wɝ bɪzi ət ðɛɹ duɾiz. mɛni ʌv ðə fɔɹmɝ ɡeɪʃeɪn stɪl æktəɾ əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ əmʌŋ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, boʊɪŋ ən skɹeɪpɪŋ wɛnɛvɝ sʌmwʌn soʊ mʌtʃ əz lʊkt ət ðɛm. ðoʊz fɹəm kɛɹhin wɝ ðə wɝst; ðeɪd bɪn hɛld lɔŋɡəst, ən il wɝ vɛɹi ɡʊɾ ət titʃɪŋ lɛsənz.

She returned the cups to the nearby washing station, then went through the camp, looking for Tallanvor. Around her, servants and workers were busy at their duties. Many of the former gai'shain still acted as if they were among the Shaido, bowing and scraping whenever someone so much as looked at them. Those from Cairhien were the worst; they'd been held longest, and Aiel were very good at teaching lessons.

ðəɹ wɝ, ʌv kɔɹs, ə fju ɹil il ɡeɪʃeɪn. wʌɾ ən ɑd kʌstəm. fɹəm wʌt mɔɹɡeɪs hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə dətɝmən, səm ə ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn hɪɹ hæd bɪn teɪkən baɪ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, ðən hæd bɪn lɪbɝeɪɾɪd ɪn meɪɾən. ðeɪ ɹɪteɪn ðə waɪt, ən soʊ ðət mɛn ðeɪ wɝ naʊ æktɪŋ əz sleɪvz tə ðɛɹ oʊn ɹɛləɾɪvz ən fɹɛnz.

There were, of course, a few real Aiel gai'shain. What an odd custom. From what Morgase had been able to determine, some of the gai'shain here had been taken by the Shaido, then had been liberated in Maiden. They retained the white, and so that meant they were now acting as slaves to their own relatives and friends.

ɛni pipəl kəd bi ʌndɝstʊd. bʌt, ʃi ədmɪɾəd, pɝhæps ði il wəd teɪk lɔŋɡɝ ðən ʌðɝz. teɪk, fəɹ ɪnstəns, ðət ɡɹup ə meɪɾənz ləpɪŋ θɹu kæmp. waɪ dɪd ðeɪv tə fɔɹs ɛvɹiwʌn aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ weɪ? ðəɹ wɑz noʊ -  mɔɹɡeɪs hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ðoʊz meɪɾənz wɝ hɛɾɪŋ stʃɹeɪt fəɹ pɛɹɪnz tɛnt. ðeɪ lʊk laɪk ðeɪ hæd nuz.

Any people could be understood. But, she admitted, perhaps the Aiel would take longer than others. Take, for instance, that group of Maidens loping through camp. Why did they have to force everyone out of their way? There was no -  Morgase hesitated. Those Maidens were heading straight for Perrin's tent. They looked like they had news.

hɝ kjʊɹiɑsəɾi ɡɛɾɪŋ ðə bɛɾɝ ə hɝ, mɔɹɡeɪs fɑloʊd. ðə meɪɾənz lɛf tu ɡɑɹdz baɪ ðə fɹʌn tɛn flæps, bʌt ðə wɔɹɾ əɡɛnst ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ hæd bɪn ɹimuvd. mɔɹɡeɪs ɹaʊndəd ðə tɛnt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lʊk əz ɪf ʃi wɑz duɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ ʌðɝ ðən ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ, filɪŋ ə stæb ə ʃeɪm fəɹ livɪŋ tɑlænvɝ tə hɪz peɪn.

Her curiosity getting the better of her, Morgase followed. The Maidens left two guards by the front tent flaps, but the ward against eavesdropping had been removed. Morgase rounded the tent, trying to look as if she was doing anything other than eavesdropping, feeling a stab of shame for leaving Tallanvor to his pain.

"waɪtkloʊks, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," səlɪnz staʊt vɔɪs ɹipɔɹɾəd fɹəm ɪnsaɪd. "ðɛɹ ɪz ə lɑɹdʒ fɔɹs ə ðɛm ɑn ðə ɹoʊd dɝɛkli ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ʌs."

"Whitecloaks, Perrin Aybara," Sulin's stout voice reported from inside. "There is a large force of them on the road directly in front of us."


tʃæptɝ sɛvən


CHAPTER 7

laɪɾɝ ðən ə fɛðɝ


Lighter than a Feather

ði ɛɹ fɛl kɑmɝ ət naɪt, ðoʊ ðə θʌndɝ stɪl wɔɹn læn ðət nɑɾ ɔl wɑz wɛl. ɪn ɪz wiks tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð bʌlən, ðət stɔɹm əbʌv sim tə hæv ɡɹoʊn dɑɹkɝ.

The air felt calmer at night, though the thunder still warned Lan that not all was well. In his weeks traveling with Bulen, that storm above seemed to have grown darker.

æftɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ saʊθwɝd, ðeɪ kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn tə ði ist; ðeɪ wɝ sʌmwɛɹ nɪɹ ðə bɔɹɾɝ bɪtwin kændɝ ən sɑldɑiə, ɑn ðə pleɪn ə lænsɪz. taʊɝɪŋ, wɛðɝd hɪlz - stip-saɪɾəd, laɪk fɔɹtʃɹəsəz - ɹoʊz ɝaʊn ðɛm.

After riding southward, they continued on to the east; they were somewhere near the border between Kandor and Saldaea, on the Plain of Lances. Towering, weathered hills - steep-sided, like fortresses - rose around them.

pɝhæps ðeɪd mɪs ðə bɔɹɾɝ. ðəɹ ɔfən wɑz noʊ mɑɹkɝ ɑn ðiz bæk ɹoʊdz, ən ðə maʊntənz kɛɹd nɑt wɪtʃ neɪʃən tʃɹaɪd tə kleɪm ðɛm.

Perhaps they'd missed the border. There often was no marker on these back roads, and the mountains cared not which nation tried to claim them.

"mæstɝ ænʒɹə," bʌlən sɛd fɹəm bɪhaɪnd. læn hæd pɝtʃəst ə hɔɹs fəɹ ɪm tə ɹaɪd, ə dʌsti waɪt mɛɹ. hi stɪl lɛɾ ɪz pækhɔɹs, skaʊɾɝ.

"Master Andra," Bulen said from behind. Lan had purchased a horse for him to ride, a dusty white mare. He still led his packhorse, Scouter.

bʌlən kɑɾ ʌp tə hɪm. læn ɪnsɪstəɾ əpɑn biɪŋ kɔld "ænʒɹə." wʌn fɑloʊɝ wɑz bæɾ ɪnʌf. ɪf noʊbɑdi nu hu hi wɑz, ðeɪ kʊdn æsk tə kʌm wɪð hɪm. hi hæd bʌlən tə θæŋk - ɪnədvɝɾəntli  - fəɹ ðə wɔɹnɪŋ ʌv wʌt nɪneɪiv hæd dʌn. fəɹ ðæt, hi oʊd ðə mæn ə dɛt.

Bulen caught up to him. Lan insisted upon being called "Andra." One follower was bad enough. If nobody knew who he was, they couldn't ask to come with him. He had Bulen to thank - inadvertently  - for the warning of what Nynaeve had done. For that, he owed the man a debt.

bʌlən dɪd laɪk tə tɔk, ðoʊ.

Bulen did like to talk, though.

'mæstɝ ænʒɹə," bʌlən kəntɪnjud. "ɪf aɪ meɪ sədʒɛst, wi kəd tɝn saʊθ ət ðə bɝn kɹɔsɹoʊdz, jɛs? aɪ noʊ ə weɪpɔɪn ɪn ɪn ðət dɝɛkʃən ðət sɝvz ðə vɛɹi bɛs kweɪl. wi kəd tɝn istwɝɾ əɡɛn ɑn ðə ɹoʊd tə saʊθ mɛtlɝ. ə mʌtʃ iziɝ pæθ. maɪ kʌzən əz ə fɑɹm əlɔŋ ðət ɹoʊd - - kʌzən ɑn maɪ mʌðɝz saɪd, mæstɝ ænʒɹə - ən wi kəd - " "wi kəntɪnju ðɪs weɪ," læn sɛd.

'Master Andra," Bulen continued. "If I may suggest, we could turn south at the Berndt Crossroads, yes? I know a waypoint inn in that direction that serves the very best quail. We could turn eastward again on the road to South Mettler. A much easier path. My cousin has a farm along that road - - cousin on my mother's side, Master Andra - and we could - " "We continue this way," Lan said.

"bʌt saʊθ mɛtlɝ ɪz ə mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ɹoʊdweɪ!"

"But South Mettler is a much better roadway!"

"æn ðɛɹfɔɹ mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ tʃɹævəl tu, bʌlən."

"And therefore much better traveled too, Bulen."

bʌlən saɪd, bʌt fɛl saɪlənt. ðə hædɔɹi lʊkt ɡʊɾ ɝaʊn ɪz hɛɾ ən i hæd pɹuvən sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli keɪpəbəl wɪð ðə sɔɹd. əz tæləntəɾ ə stuɾənt əz læn hæd sin ɪn ə waɪl.

Bulen sighed, but fell silent. The hadori looked good around his head and he had proven surprisingly capable with the sword. As talented a student as Lan had seen in a while.

ɪt wɑz dɑɹk - naɪt keɪm ɝli hɪɹ, kəz ə ðoʊz maʊntənz. kəmpɛɹd tə ði ɛɹiəz nɪɹ ðə blaɪt, ɪɾ ɔlsoʊ fɛl tʃɪli. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ðə læn hɪɹ wɑz fɛɹli wɛl pɑpjəleɪɾəd. ɪndid, əbaʊɾ ən aʊɝ pæs ðə kɹɔsɹoʊdz ðeɪ ɝaɪvd əɾ ən ɪn, wɪndoʊz stɪl ɡloʊɪŋ wɪð laɪt.

It was dark - night came early here, because of those mountains. Compared to the areas near the Blight, it also felt chilly. Unfortunately, the land here was fairly well populated. Indeed, about an hour past the crossroads they arrived at an inn, windows still glowing with light.

bʌlən lʊk təwɔɹɾ ɪt lɔŋɪŋli, bʌt læn kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn. hi hæɾ əm tʃɹævlɪŋ ət naɪt, moʊsli.

Bulen looked toward it longingly, but Lan continued on. He had them traveling at night, mostly.

ðə bɛɾɝ tə kip fɹəm biɪŋ sin.

The better to keep from being seen.

ə tʃɹioʊ ʌv mɛn sæɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ɪn, smoʊkɪŋ ðɛɹ paɪps ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. ðə pʌnʒənt smoʊk waʊn ɪn ði ɛɹ, pæs ði ɪnz wɪndoʊz. læn dɪdnt ɡɪv əm mʌtʃ kənsɪɾɝeɪʃən əntɪl - əz ə ɡɹup -  ðeɪ bɹoʊk ɔf ðɛɹ smoʊkɪŋ. ðeɪ ənhʊk hɔɹsəz fɹəm ðə fɛns ət ðə saɪɾ ə ði ɪn.

A trio of men sat in front of the inn, smoking their pipes in the darkness. The pungent smoke wound in the air, past the inns windows. Lan didn't give them much consideration until - as a group -  they broke off their smoking. They unhooked horses from the fence at the side of the inn.

wʌndɝfəl, læn θɔt. haɪweɪmɪn, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə naɪt ɹoʊd fəɹ wɪɹi tʃɹævəlɝz. wɛl, θɹi mɛn ʃʊdn pɹuv tu deɪnʒɝəs. ðeɪ ɹoʊd bɪhaɪn læn əɾ ə tʃɹɑt. ðeɪ wʊdn ətæk əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ fɑɹðɝ fɹəm ði ɪn. læn ɹitʃt tə lusən ɪz sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪts ʃiθ.

Wonderful, Lan thought. Highwaymen, watching the night road for weary travelers. Well, three men shouldn't prove too dangerous. They rode behind Lan at a trot. They wouldn't attack until they were farther from the inn. Lan reached to loosen his sword in its sheath.

"maɪ lɔɹd," bʌlən sɛɾ ɝdʒənli, lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "tu ʌv ðoʊz mɛn ɑɹ wɛɹɪŋ ðə hædɔɹi'.'

"My Lord," Bulen said urgently, looking over his shoulder. "Two of those men are wearing the hadori'.'

læn spʌn ɝaʊnd, kloʊk wɪpɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm. ðə θɹi mɛn əpɹoʊtʃt ən dɪd nɑt stɑp. ðeɪ splɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪm ən bʌlən.

Lan spun around, cloak whipping behind him. The three men approached and did not stop. They split around him and Bulen.

læn wɑtʃt əm pæs. "ændɪɹ?" hi kɔld. "wʌt dʒju θɪŋk jəɹ duɪŋ?"

Lan watched them pass. "Andere?" he called. "What do you think you're doing?"

wʌn ə ðə θɹi - ə lin, deɪnʒɝəs-lʊkɪŋ mæn - ɡlænst oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, hɪz lɔŋ hɛɹ hɛl bæk wɪð ðə hædɔɹi. ɪt hæd bɪn jɪɹz sɪns læn hæd sin ændɪɹ. hi lʊkt əz ɪf hid ɡɪvən ʌp ɪz kændɔɹi junəfɔɹm, faɪnəli; hi wɑz wɛɹɪŋ ə dip blæk kloʊk ən hʌntɪŋ lɛðɝz ʌndɝniθ.

One of the three - a lean, dangerous-looking man - glanced over his shoulder, his long hair held back with the hadori. It had been years since Lan had seen Andere. He looked as if he'd given up his Kandori uniform, finally; he was wearing a deep black cloak and hunting leathers underneath.

"ɑ, læn," ændɪɹ sɛd, ðə θɹi mɛn pʊlɪŋ ʌp tə stɑp. "aɪ dɪdnt noʊɾəs jə ðɛɹ."

"Ah, Lan," Andere said, the three men pulling up to stop. "I didn't notice you there."

"aɪm ʃʊɹ jə dɪdnt," læn sɛd flætli. 'æn ju, nɑzɑɹ. jə pʊt jəɹ hædɔɹi əweɪ wən jə wɝ ə læd. naʊ jə dɑn wʌn?"

"I'm sure you didn't," Lan said flatly. 'And you, Nazar. You put your hadori away when you were a lad. Now you don one?"

"aɪ meɪ də əz aɪ wɪʃ," nɑzɑɹ sɛd. hi wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ oʊld - hi mʌs bi pæst ɪz sɛvəntiɪθ jɪɹ - bʌɾ i kæɹiɾ ə sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz sæɾəl. hɪz hɛɹ hæd ɡɔn waɪt.

"I may do as I wish," Nazar said. He was getting old - he must be past his seventieth year - but he carried a sword on his saddle. His hair had gone white.

ðə θɝd mæn, ɹɑkim, wɑzn mɔlkɪɹi. hi hæd ðə tɪltəɾ aɪz ʌv ə sɑldəiən, ən i ʃɹʌɡd ət læn, lʊkɪŋ ə lɪɾəl ɪmbɛɹəst.

The third man, Rakim, wasn't Malkieri. He had the tilted eyes of a Saldaean, and he shrugged at Lan, looking a little embarrassed.

læn ɹeɪzd ɪz fɪŋɡɝz tə hɪz fɔɹhɛd, kloʊzɪŋ ɪz aɪz əz ðə θɹi ɹoʊɾ əhɛd. wʌt fulɪʃ ɡeɪm wɝ ðeɪ pleɪɪŋ? noʊ mæɾɝ, læn θɔt, oʊpənɪŋ ɪz aɪz.

Lan raised his fingers to his forehead, closing his eyes as the three rode ahead. What foolish game were they playing? No matter, Lan thought, opening his eyes.

bʌlən stɑɹɾəd tə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ, bʌt læn kwaɪəɾəd ɪm wɪð ə ɡlɛɹ. hi tɝn saʊθwɝɾ ɔf ðə ɹoʊd, kʌɾɪŋ daʊn ə smɔl, wɔɹn tʃɹeɪl.

Bulen started to say something, but Lan quieted him with a glare. He turned southward off the road, cutting down a small, worn trail.

bɪfɔɹ lɔŋ, hi hɝd mʌfəl hʊfbits fɹəm bɪhaɪnd. læn spʌn əz i sɔ ðə θɹi mɛn ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm. læn pʊl mændɑɹb tə ə hɔlt, tiθ ɡɹɪɾɪd. "aɪm nɑt ɹeɪzɪŋ ðə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn!"

Before long, he heard muffled hoofbeats from behind. Lan spun as he saw the three men riding behind him. Lan pulled Mandarb to a halt, teeth gritted. "I'm not raising the Golden Crane!"

"wi dɪdn seɪ jə wɝ," nɑzɑɹ sɛd. ðə θɹi pɑɹɾəd ɝaʊn ɪm əɡɛn, ɹaɪɾɪŋ pæst.

"We didn't say you were," Nazar said. The three parted around him again, riding past.

læn kɪk mændɑɹb fɔɹwɝd, ɹaɪɾɪŋ ʌp tə ðɛm. "ðɛn stɑp fɑloʊɪŋ mi."

Lan kicked Mandarb forward, riding up to them. "Then stop following me."

"læst aɪ tʃɛkt, wi wɝ əhɛɾ ə ju," ændɪɹ sɛd.

"Last I checked, we were ahead of you," Andere said.

"ju tɝn ðɪs weɪ æftɝ mi," læn əkjuzd.

"You turned this way after me," Lan accused.

"ju doʊn oʊn ðə ɹoʊdz, læn mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən," ændɪɹ sɛd. hi ɡlænst ət læn, feɪs ʃæɾoʊd ɪn ðə naɪt. "ɪf jə hævənt noʊɾəst, ɪm noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ðə bɔɪ ðə hɪɹoʊ ʌv sælmɑɹnə bɪɹeɪɾɪd soʊ lɔŋ əɡoʊ. aɪv bɪkʌm ə soʊlʒɝ, ən soʊlʒɝz ɑɹ niɾəd. soʊ əl ɹaɪd ðɪs weɪ ɪf aɪ pliz."

"You don't own the roads, Lan Mandragoran," Andere said. He glanced at Lan, face shadowed in the night. "If you haven't noticed, I'm no longer the boy the Hero of Salmarna berated so long ago. I've become a soldier, and soldiers are needed. So I will ride this way if I please."

"aɪ kəmæn jə tə tɝn ən ɡoʊ bæk," læn sɛd. "faɪn ə dɪfɹən pæθ istwɝd."

"I command you to turn and go back," Lan said. "Find a different path eastward."

ɹɑkim læft, hɪz vɔɪs stɪl hɔɹs æftɝ ɔl ðiz jɪɹz. "jɔɹ nɑt maɪ kæptən ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, læn.

Rakim laughed, his voice still hoarse after all these years. "You're not my captain any longer, Lan.

waɪ wəɾ aɪ oʊbeɪ jəɹ ɔɹɾɝz?" ði ʌðɝz tʃʌkəld.

Why would I obey your orders?" The others chuckled.

"wiɾ oʊbeɪ ə kɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs," nɑzɑɹ sɛd.

"We'd obey a king, of course," Nazar said.

"jɛs," ændɪɹ sɛd. "ɪf i ɡeɪv əs kəmænz, pɝhæps wi wʊd. bʌɾ aɪ doʊn si ə kɪŋ hɪɹ.

"Yes," Andere said. "If he gave us commands, perhaps we would. But I don't see a king here.

ənlɛs aɪm mɪsteɪkən."

Unless I'm mistaken."

"ðɛɹ kən bi noʊ kɪŋ ʌv ə fɔlən pipəl," læn sɛd. "noʊ kɪŋ wɪθaʊɾ ə kɪŋdəm."

"There can be no king of a fallen people," Lan said. "No king without a kingdom."

"æn jɛt jə ɹaɪd," nɑzɑɹ sɛd, flɪkɪŋ ɪz ɹeɪnz. "ɹaɪd tə jəɹ dɛθ ɪn ə læn jə kleɪm ɪz noʊ kɪŋdəm."

"And yet you ride," Nazar said, flicking his reins. "Ride to your death in a land you claim is no kingdom."

"ɪɾ ɪz maɪ dɛstəni."

"It is my destiny."

ðə θɹi ʃɹʌɡd, ðən pʊld əhɛɾ ə hɪm.

The three shrugged, then pulled ahead of him.

"doʊn bi fulz," læn sɛd, vɔɪs sɑft əz i pʊl mændɑɹb tə ə hɔlt. "ðɪs pæθ lidz tə dɛθ."

"Don't be fools," Lan said, voice soft as he pulled Mandarb to a halt. "This path leads to death."

"dɛθ ɪz laɪɾɝ ðən ə fɛðɝ, læn mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən," ɹɑkim kɔld oʊvɝ "ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "ɪf wi ɹaɪɾ oʊnli tə dɛθ, ðən ðə tʃɹeɪl wɪl bi iziɝ ðən aɪd θɔt!"

"Death is lighter than a feather, Lan Mandragoran," Rakim called over "is shoulder. "If we ride only to death, then the trail will be easier than I'd thought!"

læn ɡɹɪɾɪd ɪz tiθ, bʌt wʌt wɑz i tə du? biɾ ɔl θɹi ʌv əm sɛnsləs ən liv əm bɪsaɪd ðə ɹoʊd? hi nʌdʒ mændɑɹb fɔɹwɝd.

Lan gritted his teeth, but what was he to do? Beat all three of them senseless and leave them beside the road? He nudged Mandarb forward.

ðə tu hæd bɪkʌm faɪv.

The two had become five.

* * * ɡɑləd kəntɪnjuɾ ɪz mɔɹnɪŋ mil, noʊɾɪŋ ðət tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ hæd kʌm tə spik wɪð hɪm. ðə mil wɑz sɪmpəl fɛɹ: pɔɹədʒ wɪð ə hændfʊl ə ɹeɪzənz stɝɾ ɪn. ə sɪmpəl mil fəɹ ɛvɹi soʊlʒɝ kɛpt əm ɔl fɹəm ɛnvi. səm lɔɹdz kæptən kəmændɝ hæd daɪn fɑɹ bɛɾɝ ðən ðɛɹ mɛn. ðət wəd nɑt də fəɹ ɡɑləd. nɑt wən soʊ mɛni ɪn ðə wɝl stɑɹvd.

* * * Galad continued his morning meal, noting that Child Byar had come to speak with him. The meal was simple fare: porridge with a handful of raisins stirred in. A simple meal for every soldier kept them all from envy. Some Lords Captain Commander had dined far better than their men. That would not do for Galad. Not when so many in the world starved.

tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ weɪɾəd ɪnsaɪd ðə flæps ʌv ɡɑlədz tɛnt, əweɪɾɪŋ ɹɛkəɡnɪʃən. ðə ɡɔnt, sʌŋkən- tʃik mæn wɔɹ ɪz waɪt kloʊk, ə tɑbɝɾ oʊvɝ meɪl ʌndɝniθ.

Child Byar waited inside the flaps of Galad's tent, awaiting recognition. The gaunt, sunken- cheeked man wore his white cloak, a tabard over mail underneath.

ɡɑləɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli sɛɾ əsaɪɾ ɪz spun ən nɑɾəd tə baɪɑɝ. ðə soʊlʒɝ stʃɹoʊɾ ʌp tə ðə teɪbəl ən weɪɾəd, stɪl əɾ ətɛnʃən. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ɪlæbɹət fɝnɪʃɪŋz tə ɡɑlədz tɛnt. hɪz sɔɹd - vɑldəz sɔɹd - leɪ ɑn ðə pleɪn teɪbəl bɪhaɪn ɪz wʊɾən boʊl, slaɪtli dʒɹɔn. ðə hɛɹənz ɑn ðə bleɪd pikt aʊt fɹəm bɪniθ ðə skæbɝd, ən ðə pɑlɪʃt stil ɹəflɛktəd baɪɑɝz fɔɹm.

Galad eventually set aside his spoon and nodded to Byar. The soldier strode up to the table and waited, still at attention. There were no elaborate furnishings to Galad's tent. His sword - Valda's sword - lay on the plain table behind his wooden bowl, slightly drawn. The herons on the blade peeked out from beneath the scabbard, and the polished steel reflected Byar's form.

"spik," ɡɑləd sɛd.

"Speak," Galad said.

"aɪ hæv mɔɹ nuz əbaʊt ði ɑɹmi, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," baɪɑɝ sɛd. "ðeɪ ɑɹ nɪɹ wɛɹ ðə kæptɪvz sɛd ðeɪ wəd bi, ə fju deɪz fɹəm ʌs."

"I have more news about the army, my Lord Captain Commander," Byar said. "They are near where the captives said they would be, a few days from us."

ɡɑləd nɑɾəd. "ðeɪ flaɪ ðə flæɡ ʌv ɡildən?"

Galad nodded. "They fly the flag of Ghealdan?"

"əlɔŋsaɪd ðə flæɡ ʌv min." ðət fleɪm ə zil ɡlɪntɪɾ ɪn baɪɑɝz aɪz. "æn ðə wʊlfhɛd, ðoʊ ɹɪpɔɹts seɪ ðeɪ tʊk ðət daʊn leɪt jɛstɝdeɪ. ɡoʊldeɪniz ɪz ðɛɹ. əɹ skaʊts ɑɹ ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt."

"Alongside the flag of Mayene." That flame of zeal glinted in Byar's eyes. "And the wolfhead, though reports say they took that down late yesterday. Goldeneyes is there. Our scouts are sure of it."

"dɪɾ i ɹɪli kɪl bɔɹnhəlz fɑðɝ?"

"Did he really kill Bornhald's father?"

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ. aɪ hæv ə fəmɪljɛɹəɾi wɪð ðɪs kɹitʃɝ. hi ən ɪz tʃɹups kʌm fɹəm ə pleɪs kɔl ðə tu ɹɪvɝz."

"Yes, my Lord Captain Commander. I have a familiarity with this creature. He and his troops come from a place called the Two Rivers."

"ðə tu ɹɪvɝz?" ɡɑləd sɛd. "kjʊɹiəs, haʊ ɔfən aɪ sim tə hɪɹ ə ðət pleɪs, ðiz deɪz. ɪz ðət nɑt wɛɹ ælθɹ ɪz fɹʌm?"

"The Two Rivers?" Galad said. "Curious, how often I seem to hear of that place, these days. Is that not where al'Thor is from?"

"soʊ ɪts sɛd," baɪɑɝ ɹɪplaɪd.

"So it is said," Byar replied.

ɡɑləd ɹʌbd ɪz tʃɪn. "ðeɪ ɡɹoʊ ɡʊd təbæk ðɛɹ, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ, bʌɾ aɪ hæv nɑt hɝɾ ə ðɛm ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɑɹmiz."

Galad rubbed his chin. "They grow good tabac there, Child Byar, but I have not heard of them growing armies."

"ɪɾ ɪz ə dɑɹk pleɪs, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ. tʃaɪl bɔɹnhəld ən aɪ spɛn səm taɪm ðəɹ læs jɪɹ; ɪts fɛstɝɪŋ wɪð dɑɹkfɹɛnz."

"It is a dark place, my Lord Captain Commander. Child Bornhald and I spent some time there last year; it is festering with Darkfriends."

ɡɑləd saɪd. "ju saʊn laɪk ə kwɛstʃənɝ."

Galad sighed. "You sound like a Questioner."

"maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," baɪɑɝ ɝnəsli kəntɪnjud, "maɪ lɔɹd, pliz bɪliv mi. aɪm nɑt sɪmpli spɛkjəleɪɾɪŋ. ðɪs ɪz dɪfɹənt."

"My Lord Captain Commander," Byar earnestly continued, "my Lord, please believe me. I am not simply speculating. This is different."

ɡɑləd fɹaʊnd. ðən i dʒɛstʃɝd təwɔɹd ði ʌðɝ stul bɪsaɪɾ ɪz teɪbəl. baɪɑɝ tʊk ɪt.

Galad frowned. Then he gestured toward the other stool beside his table. Byar took it.

"ɪkspleɪn jɝsɛlf," ɡɑləd sɛd. "æn tɛl mi ɛvɹiθɪŋ jə noʊ ʌv ðɪs pɛɹɪn ɡoʊldeɪniz."

"Explain yourself," Galad said. "And tell me everything you know of this Perrin Goldeneyes."

pɛɹɪn kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ə taɪm wən sɪmpəl bɹɛkfəsts ə bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz hæd sæɾəsfaɪd hɪm. ðət wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ðə keɪs. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz du tə hɪz ɹileɪʃənʃɪp wɪð ðə wʊlvz, əɹ meɪbi hɪz teɪsts hæd tʃeɪnʒd oʊvɝ taɪm. ðiz deɪz i kɹeɪv mit, ɪspɛʃli ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. hi kʊdn ɔlweɪz əv ɪt, ən ðət wɑz faɪn. bʌt dʒɛnɝəli hi dɪdn əv tə æsk.

perrin could remember a time when simple breakfasts of bread and cheese had satisfied him. That was no longer the case. Perhaps it was due to his relationship with the wolves, or maybe his tastes had changed over time. These days he craved meat, especially in the morning. He couldn't always have it, and that was fine. But generally he didn't have to ask.

ðət wɑz ðə keɪs ðɪs deɪ. hid ɹɪzən, wɑʃt ɪz feɪs, ən faʊn ə sɝvən ɛntɝɪŋ wɪð ə lɑɹdʒ tʃɑp ə hæm, stimɪŋ ən sʌkjəlɪnt. noʊ binz, noʊ vɛdʒtəbəlz. noʊ ɡɹeɪvi. dʒʌs ðə hæm, ɹʌbd wɪð sɔlt ən sɪɹɾ oʊvɝ ðə faɪɝ, wɪð ə pɛɹ ə bɔɪld ɛɡz. ðə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən sɛɾ əm ɑn ɪz teɪbəl, ðən wɪθdʒɹu.

That was the case this day. He'd risen, washed his face, and found a servant entering with a large chop of ham, steaming and succulent. No beans, no vegetables. No gravy. Just the ham, rubbed with salt and seared over the fire, with a pair of boiled eggs. The serving woman set them on his table, then withdrew.

pɛɹɪn waɪpt ɪz hænz, kɹɔsɪŋ ðə ɹʌɡ ʌv ɪz tɛn ən teɪkɪŋ ɪn ðə hæmz sɛnt. pɑɹɾ ə hɪm fɛlt i ʃəd tɝn ɪɾ əweɪ, bʌɾ i kʊdnt. nɑt wən ɪt wɑz ɹaɪt ðɛɹ. hi sæt daʊn, tʊk ʌp fɔɹk ən naɪf ən dʌɡ ɪn.

Perrin wiped his hands, crossing the rug of his tent and taking in the ham's scent. Part of him felt he should turn it away, but he couldn't. Not when it was right there. He sat down, took up fork and knife and dug in.

"aɪ stɪl doʊn si haʊ jə kən it ðət fəɹ bɹɛkfəst" feɪl noʊɾəd, livɪŋ ðə wɑʃɪŋ tʃeɪmbɝ ə ðɛɹ tɛnt, waɪpɪŋ əɹ hænz ɑn ə klɔθ. ðɛɹ lɑɹdʒ tɛn hæd sɛvɹəl kɝteɪn dɪvɪʒənz tə ɪt. ʃi wɔɹ wʌn ə hɝ ʌnəbtʃɹusɪv ɡɹeɪ dʒɹɛsəz. pɝfəkt, kəz ɪt dɪdn dɪstʃɹæk fɹəm əɹ bjuɾi. ɪt wɑz æksɛntɪd baɪ ə stɝɾi blæk bɛlt - ʃi hæd sɛn əweɪ ɔl ə hɝ ɡoʊldən bɛls, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ faɪn. hid sədʒɛstəd faɪndɪŋ əɹ wʌn ðət wɑz mɔɹ tə hɝ laɪkɪŋ, ən ʃid lʊk sɪk.

"I still don't see how you can eat that for breakfast" Faile noted, leaving the washing chamber of their tent, wiping her hands on a cloth. Their large tent had several curtained divisions to it. She wore one of her unobtrusive gray dresses. Perfect, because it didn't distract from her beauty. It was accented by a sturdy black belt - she had sent away all of her golden belts, no matter how fine. He'd suggested finding her one that was more to her liking, and she'd looked sick.

"ɪts fud," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"It's food," Perrin said.

"aɪ kən si," ʃi sɛd wɪð ə snɔɹt, lʊkɪŋ hɝsɛlf oʊvɝ ɪn ðə mɪɹɝ. "wʌt dɪd jə θɪŋk aɪ əsumd ɪt wɑz? ə ɹɑk?"

"I can see," she said with a snort, looking herself over in the mirror. "What did you think I assumed it was? A rock?"

"aɪ mɛnt," pɛɹɪn sɛd bɪtwin baɪts, "ðæt fuɾ ɪz fud. waɪ ʃəɾ aɪ kɛɹ wʌɾ aɪ it fəɹ bɹɛkfəst ən wʌɾ aɪ it fəɹ ə dɪfɹən mil?"

"I meant," Perrin said between bites, "that food is food. Why should I care what I eat for breakfast and what I eat for a different meal?"

"bɪkɔz ɪts stʃɹeɪnʒ," ʃi sɛd, klæspɪŋ ɑn ə kɔɹd hoʊldɪŋ ə smɔl blu stoʊn. ʃi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd hɝsɛlf ɪn ðə mɪɹɝ, ðən tɝnd, ðə lus slivz ə hɝ sɑldəiən-kʌt dʒɹɛs swɪʃɪŋ. ʃi pɔz bɪsaɪɾ ɪz pleɪt, ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ. "aɪm hævɪŋ bɹɛkfəst wɪð ɔiɑndɝ. sɛn fəɹ mi ɪf ðəɹ ɪz nuz."

"Because it's strange," she said, clasping on a cord holding a small blue stone. She regarded herself in the mirror, then turned, the loose sleeves of her Saldaean-cut dress swishing. She paused beside his plate, grimacing. "I'm having breakfast with AUiandre. Send for me if there is news."

hi nɑɾəd, swɑloʊɪŋ. waɪ ʃəɾ ə pɝsən əv miɾ ət mɪddeɪ, bʌt ɹəfjuz ɪt fəɹ bɹɛkfəst? ɪt dɪdn meɪk sɛns.

He nodded, swallowing. Why should a person have meat at midday, but refuse it for breakfast? It didn't make sense.

hid dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ɹɪmeɪn kæmp bɪsaɪd ðə dʒəhænə ɹoʊd. wʌɾ ɛls wɑz i tə du, wɪð ən ɑɹmi ʌv waɪtkloʊks dɝɛkli əhɛd, bɪtwin ɪm ən luɡɹd? hɪz skaʊts niɾəd taɪm tə əsɛs ðə deɪnʒɝ.

He'd decided to remain camped beside the Jehannah Road. What else was he to do, with an army of Whitecloaks directly ahead, between him and Lugard? His scouts needed time to assess the danger.

hid spɛn mʌtʃ taɪm θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ vɪʒənz hid sin, ðə wʊlvz tʃeɪsɪŋ ʃip təwɔɹɾ ə bist ən feɪl wɔkɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ə klɪf. hi hædn bɪn eɪbəl tə meɪk sɛns ə ðɛm, bʌt kəd ðeɪv sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə waɪtkloʊks? ðɛɹ əpɪɹəns bɑðɝɾ ɪm mɔɹ ðən i wɑntəd tə ədmɪt, bʌɾ i hɑɹbɝɾ ə taɪni hoʊp ðət ðeɪ wəd pɹuv ɪnsɪɡnjɪfɪkən ən nɑt sloʊ hɪm tu mʌtʃ.

He'd spent much time thinking about the strange visions he'd seen, the wolves chasing sheep toward a beast and Faile walking toward a cliff. He hadn't been able to make sense of them, but could they have something to do with the Whitecloaks? Their appearance bothered him more than he wanted to admit, but he harbored a tiny hope that they would prove insignificant and not slow him too much.

"pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," ə vɔɪs kɔl fɹəm aʊtsaɪɾ ɪz tɛnt. "du jə ɡɪmi liv tə ɛntɝ?"

"Perrin Aybara," a voice called from outside his tent. "Do you give me leave to enter?"

"kʌm ɪn, ɡɔl," hi kɔld. "maɪ ʃeɪɾ ɪz jʊɹz."

"Come in, Gaul," he called. "My shade is yours."

ðə tɔl il stʃɹoʊɾ ɪn. "θæŋk ju, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," hi sɛd, ɡlænsɪŋ ət ðə hæm. "kwaɪɾ ə fist.

The tall Aiel strode in. "Thank you, Perrin Aybara," he said, glancing at the ham. "Quite a feast.

dʒju sɛləbɹeɪt?"

Do you celebrate?"

"nʌθɪŋ bɪsaɪdz bɹɛkfəst."

"Nothing besides breakfast."

"ə maɪɾi vɪktɝi," ɡɔl sɛd, læfɪŋ.

"A mighty victory," Gaul said, laughing.

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. il hjumɝ. hid stɑp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk sɛns ʌv ɪt. ɡɔl sɛɾəld hɪmsɛlf ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ən pɛɹɪn saɪɾ ɪnwɝdli bɪfɔɹ pɪkɪŋ ʌp ɪz pleɪɾ ən muvɪŋ tə sɪɾ ɑn ðə ɹʌɡ əkɹɔs fɹəm ɡɔl. pɛɹɪn pleɪs ðə mil ɪn ɪz læp ən kəntɪnjud tə it.

Perrin shook his head. Aiel humor. He'd stopped trying to make sense of it. Gaul settled himself on the ground and Perrin sighed inwardly before picking up his plate and moving to sit on the rug across from Gaul. Perrin placed the meal in his lap and continued to eat.

"ju nid nɑt sɪɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ kəz ə mi," ɡɔl sɛd.

"You need not sit on the floor because of me," Gaul said.

"aɪm nɑt duɪŋ ɪt kəz aɪ nid tə, ɡɔl."

"I'm not doing it because I need to, Gaul."

ɡɔl nɑɾəd.

Gaul nodded.

pɛɹɪn kʌɾ ɔf ənʌðɝ baɪt. ðɪs wəd bi soʊ mʌtʃ iziɝ ɪf i ɡɹæb ðə hoʊl θɪŋ ɪn ɪz fɪŋɡɝz ən stɑɹɾəd ɹɪpɪŋ ɔf tʃʌŋks. iɾɪŋ wɑz sɪmpəlɝ fəɹ wʊlvz. jutɛnsəlz. wʌt wɑz ðə pɔɪnt?

Perrin cut off another bite. This would be so much easier if he grabbed the whole thing in his fingers and started ripping off chunks. Eating was simpler for wolves. Utensils. What was the point?

θɔts laɪk ðət ɡeɪv ɪm pɔz. hi wɑz nɑɾ ə wʊlf, ən dɪdnt wɑnə θɪŋk laɪk wʌn. meɪbi hi ʃəd stɑɹt hævɪŋ fɹut fəɹ ə pɹɑpɝ bɹɛkfəst, əz feɪl sɛd. hi fɹaʊnd, ðən tɝn bæk tə hɪz mit.

Thoughts like that gave him pause. He was not a wolf, and didn't want to think like one. Maybe he should start having fruit for a proper breakfast, as Faile said. He frowned, then turned back to his meat.

"wi fɔt tʃɹɑləks ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz," baɪɑɝ sɛd, loʊɝɪŋ ɪz vɔɪs. ɡɑlədz pɔɹədʒ kuld, fɝɡɑɾən ɑn ðə teɪbəl. "sɛvɹəl dʌzən mɛn ɪn əɹ kæmp kən kənfɝm ɪt. aɪ kɪl sɛvɹəl ə ðə bists wɪð maɪ oʊn sɔɹd."

"We fought Trollocs in the Two Rivers," Byar said, lowering his voice. Galad's porridge cooled, forgotten on the table. "Several dozen men in our camp can confirm it. I killed several of the beasts with my own sword."

"tʃɹɑləks ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz?" ɡɑləd sɛd. "ðæts hʌnʒɹədz ə liɡz fɹəm ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz!"

"Trollocs in the Two Rivers?" Galad said. "That's hundreds of leagues from the Borderlands!"

"ðeɪ wɝ ðəɹ nʌnðəlɛs," baɪɑɝ sɛd. "lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ naɪl mʌst əv səspɛktəɾ ɪt. wi wɝ sɛn tə ðə pleɪs ɑn ɪz ɔɹɾɝz. jə noʊ ðət peɪdʒɹən naɪl wəd nɑɾ əv sɪmpli dʒʌmpt ət nʌθɪŋ."

"They were there nonetheless," Byar said. "Lord Captain Commander Niall must have suspected it. We were sent to the place on his orders. You know that Pedron Niall would not have simply jumped at nothing."

"jɛs. aɪ əɡɹi. bʌt ðə tu ɹɪvɝz?"

"Yes. I agree. But the Two Rivers?"

"ɪɾ ɪz fʊl ə dɑɹkfɹɛnz," baɪɑɝ sɛd. "bɔɹnhəl toʊl jə ʌv ɡoʊldən-aɪz. ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ðɪs pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə wɑz ɹeɪzɪŋ ðə flæɡ ʌv eɪntʃən meɪnɛðɝən ən ɡæðɝɪŋ ən ɑɹmi fɹəm əmʌŋ ðə fɑɹmɝz. tʃɹeɪn soʊlʒɝz meɪ skɔf ət fɑɹmɝz pɹɛst ɪndə sɝvəs, bʌt ɡɛɾ ɪnʌf ə ðɛm təɡɛðɝ, ən ðeɪ kən bi ə deɪnʒɝ. səm ɑɹ skɪld wɪð ðə stæf əɹ ðə baʊ."

"It is full of Darkfriends," Byar said. "Bornhald told you of Golden-eyes. In the Two Rivers, this Perrin Aybara was raising the flag of ancient Manetheren and gathering an army from among the farmers. Trained soldiers may scoff at farmers pressed into service, but get enough of them together, and they can be a danger. Some are skilled with the staff or the bow."

"aɪ æm əwɛɹ," ɡɑləd sɛd flætli, ɹɪkɔlɪŋ ə pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ lɛsən hid wʌns bɪn ɡɪvən.

"I am aware," Galad said flatly, recalling a particularly embarrassing lesson he'd once been given.

"ðæt mæn, ðɪs pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," baɪɑɝ kəntɪnjud. "hiz ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, əz pleɪn əz deɪ. ðeɪ kɔl ɪm ɡoʊldeɪniz kəz ɪz aɪz ɑɹ ɡoʊldən, noʊ ʃeɪd ðəɾ ɛni pɝsən əz ɛvɝ noʊn. wi wɝ sɝɾən ðəɾ eɪbɑɹə wɑz bɹɪŋɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑləks ɪn, juzɪŋ əm tə fɔɹs ðə pipəl ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz tə dʒɔɪn ɪz ɑɹmi. hi ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɹæn əs aʊɾ ə ðə pleɪs. naʊ hiz hɪɹ, bɪfɔɹ ʌs." ə koʊɪnsɪɾəns, əɹ sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ?

"That man, this Perrin Aybara," Byar continued. "He's Shadowspawn, as plain as day. They call him Goldeneyes because his eyes are golden, no shade that any person has ever known. We were certain that Aybara was bringing the Trollocs in, using them to force the people of the Two Rivers to join his army. He eventually ran us out of the place. Now he's here, before us." A coincidence, or something more?

baɪɑɝ wɑz ɑbviəsli θɪŋkɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə seɪm laɪnz. "maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ, pɝhæps aɪ ʃʊɾə mɛnʃən ðɪs ɝliɝ, bʌt ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɑzn maɪ fɝst ɪkspɪɹiəns wɪð ðɪs kɹitʃɝ eɪbɑɹə. hi kɪl tu ʌv ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ɑn ə fɝɡɑɾən ɹoʊɾ ɪn ændɝ səm tu jɪɹz əɡoʊ. aɪ wɑz tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð bɔɹnhəlz fɑðɝ. wi mɛɾ eɪbɑɹə ɪn ə kæmpsaɪɾ ɔf ə meɪn ɹoʊd. hi wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ wɪð wʊlvz laɪk ə waɪlmən! hi kɪl tu mɛn bɪfɔɹ wi kəd səbdu hɪm, ðən ɪskeɪpt ɪndə ðə naɪɾ æftɝ wi hæɾ ɪm kæptʃɝd. maɪ lɔɹd, hi wɑz tə bi hæŋd."

Byar was obviously thinking along the same lines. "My Lord Captain Commander, perhaps I should have mentioned this earlier, but the Two Rivers wasn't my first experience with this creature Aybara. He killed two of the Children on a forgotten road in Andor some two years ago. I was traveling with Bornhald's father. We met Aybara in a campsite off a main road. He was running with wolves like a wildman! He killed two men before we could subdue him, then escaped into the night after we had him captured. My Lord, he was to be hanged."

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝz u kən kənfɝm ðɪs?" ɡɑləɾ æskt.

"There are others who can confirm this?" Galad asked.

"tʃaɪld ɔɹæɾɝ kæn. ən tʃaɪl bɔɹnhəl kən kənfɝm wʌt wi sɔ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ɡoʊldeɪniz wɑz ət fɑlm, tu. fəɹ wʌɾ i dɪd ðəɹ əloʊn i ʃəd bi bɹɔt tə dʒʌstəs. ɪts klɪɹ. ðə laɪɾ əz dɪlɪvɝɾ ɪm tə ʌs."

"Child Oratar can. And Child Bornhald can confirm what we saw in the Two Rivers. Goldeneyes was at Falme, too. For what he did there alone he should be brought to justice. It is clear. The Light has delivered him to us."

"jɔɹ sɝɾən əɹ pipəl ɑɹ əmʌŋ ðə waɪtkloʊks?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"You're certain our people are among the Whitecloaks?" Perrin asked.

"aɪ kəd nɑt si feɪsəz," ɡɔl sɛd, "bʌɾ ɛlaɪəs mækɛɹəz aɪz ɑɹ vɛɹi kin. hi sɛz hiz sɝɾən i sɔ bɑzəl ɡɪl."

"I could not see faces," Gaul said, "but Elyas Machera's eyes are very keen. He says he's certain he saw Basel Gill."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. ɛlaɪəs' ɡoʊldən aɪz wəd bi əz ɡʊɾ əz pɛɹɪnz oʊn.

Perrin nodded. Elyas' golden eyes would be as good as Perrin's own.

"səlɪn ən əɹ skaʊts əv sɪməlɝ ɹɪpɔɹts," ɡɔl sɛd, æksɛptɪŋ ə kʌp ʌv eɪl pɔɹd fɹəm pɛɹɪnz pɪtʃɝ. "ðə waɪtkloʊk ɑɹmi hæz ə lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝ ə kɑɹts, mʌtʃ laɪk ðə wʌnz wi sɛn əhɛd.

"Sulin and her scouts have similar reports," Gaul said, accepting a cup of ale poured from Perrin's pitcher. "The Whitecloak army has a large number of carts, much like the ones we sent ahead.

ʃi dɪskʌvɝd ðɪs ɝli ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, bʌɾ æsk mi tə pæs ðiz wɝdz tə jə wʌns jə əwoʊk, əz ʃi noʊz ðət wɛtləndɝz ɑɹ tɛmpɹəmɛntəl wən dɪstɝbd ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ."

She discovered this early in the morning, but asked me to pass these words to you once you awoke, as she knows that wetlanders are temperamental when disturbed in the morning."

ɡɔl ɑbviəsli hæd noʊ aɪdiə ðəɾ i maɪt bi ɡɪvɪŋ əfɛns. pɛɹɪn wɑz ə wɛtləndɝ. wɛtləndɝz wɝ tɛmpɹəmɛntəl, ət list ɪn ði əpɪnjən ə ði il. soʊ ɡɔl wɑz steɪɾɪŋ ən æksɛptɪd fækt. pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ wʌn ə ði ɛɡz. oʊvɝkʊkt, bʌɾ ɛɾəbəl. "dɪd səlɪn spɑɾ ɛniwʌn ʃi ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd?"

Gaul obviously had no idea that he might be giving offense. Perrin was a wetlander. Wetlanders were temperamental, at least in the opinion of the Aiel. So Gaul was stating an accepted fact. Perrin shook his head, trying one of the eggs. Overcooked, but edible. "Did Sulin spot anyone she recognized?"

"noʊ, ðoʊ ʃi sɔ səm ɡeɪʃeɪn" ɡɔl sɛd. "haʊɛvɝ, səlɪn ɪz ə meɪɾən, soʊ pɝhæps wi ʃəd sɛn sʌmwʌn tə kənfɝm wʌt ʃi sɛd -  sʌmwʌn u woʊn dɪmæn ði ɑpɝtunəɾi tə wɑʃ əɹ smɔlkloʊðz."

"No, though she saw some gai'shain" Gaul said. "However, Sulin is a Maiden, so perhaps we should send someone to confirm what she said -  someone who won't demand the opportunity to wash our smallclothes."

"tʃɹʌbəl wɪð beɪn ən kiæd?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"Trouble with Bain and Chiad?" Perrin asked.

ɡɔl ɡɹɪməst. "aɪ swɛɹ, ðoʊz wɪmən wɪl dʒɹaɪv ðə maɪn fɹəm mi. wʌt mæn ʃəd bi ɪkspɛktəd tə sʌfɝ sətʃ θɪŋz? ɔlmoʊs bɛɾɝ tə hæv saɪtblɪndɝ hɪmsɛlf əz ə ɡeɪʃeɪn ðən ðoʊz tu."

Gaul grimaced. "I swear, those women will drive the mind from me. What man should be expected to suffer such things? Almost better to have Sightblinder himself as a gai'shain than those two."

pɛɹɪn tʃʌkəld.

Perrin chuckled.

"ɹəɡɑɹdləs, ðə kæptɪvz lʊk ənhɑɹmd ən hɛlθi. ðəɹ ɪz mɔɹ tə ðə ɹipɔɹt. wʌn ə ðə meɪɾənz sɔ ə flæɡ flaɪɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə kæmp ðət lʊk dɪstɪŋktɪv, soʊ ʃi kɑpiɾ ɪt daʊn fəɹ jəɹ sɛkɹətɛɹi, sɛbæn beɪlwɝ. hi sɛz ðəɾ ɪt minz ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ hɪmsɛlf ɹaɪdz wɪð ðɪs ɑɹmi."

"Regardless, the captives look unharmed and healthy. There is more to the report. One of the Maidens saw a flag flying over the camp that looked distinctive, so she copied it down for your secretary, Sebban Balwer. He says that it means the Lord Captain Commander himself rides with this army."

pɛɹɪn lʊk daʊn ət ðə læs tʃʌŋk ə hæm. ðət wɑz nɑt ɡʊd nuz. hid nɛvɝ mɛt ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ, bʌɾ i bæd mɛt wʌn ə ðə waɪtkloʊk lɔɹdz kæptən wʌns. ðət hæd bɪn ðə naɪt wən hɑpɝ hæd daɪd, ə naɪt ðət hæd hɔntəd pɛɹɪn fəɹ tu jɪɹz.

Perrin looked down at the last chunk of ham. That was not good news. He'd never met the Lord Captain Commander, but he bad met one of the Whitecloak Lords Captain once. That had been the night when Hopper had died, a night that had haunted Perrin for two years.

ðət hæd bɪn ðə naɪt wən i hæd kɪl fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm.

That had been the night when he had killed for the first time.

"wʌt mɔɹ dʒju nid?" baɪɑɝ lin ɪn kloʊs, sʌŋkən aɪz əlaɪt wɪð zil. "wi hæv wɪtnəsəz u sɔ ðɪs mæn mɝɾɝ tu ʌv əɹ oʊn! də wi lɛɾ ɪm mɑɹtʃ baɪ, əz ɪf ɪnəsənt?"

"What more do you need?" Byar leaned in close, sunken eyes alight with zeal. "We have witnesses who saw this man murder two of our own! Do we let him march by, as if innocent?"

"noʊ," ɡɑləd sɛd. "noʊ, baɪ ðə laɪt, ɪf wʌt jə seɪ ɪz tʃɹu ðən wi kænɑt tɝn əɹ bæks ɑn ðɪs mæn. əɹ duɾi ɪz tə bɹɪŋ dʒʌstəs tə ðə ɹɔŋd."

"No," Galad said. "No, by the Light, if what you say is true then we cannot turn our backs on this man. Our duty is to bring justice to the wronged."

baɪɑɝ smaɪld, lʊkɪŋ iɡɝ. "ðə pɹɪznɝz ɹɪvil ðət ðə kwin ʌv ɡildən əz swɔɹn fiəlti tə hɪm."

Byar smiled, looking eager. "The prisoners revealed that the Queen of Ghealdan has sworn fealty to him."

"ðæt kəd pɹizɛn ə pɹɑbləm."

"That could present a problem."

"ɔɹ ən ɑpɝtunəɾi. pɝhæps ɡildən ɪz pɹɪsaɪsli wʌt ðə tʃɪlʒɹən nid. ə nu hoʊm, ə pleɪs tə ɹibɪld. jə spik ʌv ændɝ, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ, bʌt haʊ lɔŋ wɪl ðeɪ sʌfɝ ʌs? jə spik ə ðə læs bæɾəl, bʌɾ ɪt kəd bi mʌnθs əweɪ. wʌɾ ɪf wi wɝ tə fɹi ən ɪntaɪɝ neɪʃən fɹəm ðə ɡɹɪp ʌv ə tɛɹəbəl dɑɹkfɹɛnd? ʃʊɹli ðə kwin - əɹ əɹ səksɛsɝ - wəd fil ɪndɛɾəd tə ʌs."

"Or an opportunity. Perhaps Ghealdan is precisely what the Children need. A new home, a place to rebuild. You speak of Andor, my Lord Captain Commander, but how long will they suffer us? You speak of the Last Battle, but it could be months away. What if we were to free an entire nation from the grip of a terrible Darkfriend? Surely the Queen - or her successor - would feel indebted to us."

"əsumɪŋ wi kən dɪfit ðɪs eɪbɑɹə."

"Assuming we can defeat this Aybara."

"wi kæn. əɹ fɔɹsɪz ɑɹ smɔlɝ ðən hɪz, bʌt mɛni ʌv ɪz soʊlʒɝz ɑɹ fɑɹmɝz."

"We can. Our forces are smaller than his, but many of his soldiers are farmers."

"fɑɹmɝz jə dʒʌs pɔɪntəɾ aʊt kən bi deɪnʒɝəs," ɡɑləd sɛd. "ðeɪ ʃəd nɑt bi ʌndɝɛstəmeɪɾɪd."

"Farmers you just pointed out can be dangerous," Galad said. "They should not be underestimated."

"jɛs, bʌɾ aɪ noʊ wi kən dɪfit ðɛm. ðeɪ kən bi deɪnʒɝəs, jɛs, bʌt ðəl bɹeɪk bɪfɔɹ ðə maɪɾ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. ðɪs taɪm, faɪnəli, ɡoʊld-ɛnɛiz woʊn bi eɪbəl tə haɪd bɪhaɪn ɪz lɪɾəl vɪlədʒ fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃənz əɹ ɪz ɹæɡtæɡ əlaɪz. noʊ mɔɹ ɪkskjusɪz."

"Yes, but I know we can defeat them. They can be dangerous, yes, but they will break before the might of the Children. This time, finally, Gold-eneyes won't be able to hide behind his little village fortifications or his ragtag allies. No more excuses."

wɑz ðɪs pɑɹɾ ə biɪŋ tɑvɝən? kəd pɛɹɪn nɑɾ ɪskeɪp ðət naɪt, jɪɹz əɡoʊ? hi sɛɾ ɪz pleɪɾ əsaɪd, filɪŋ sɪk.

Was this part of being ta'veren? Could Perrin not escape that night, years ago? He set his plate aside, feeling sick.

"ɑɹ jə wɛl, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə?" ɡɔl sɛd.

"Are you well, Perrin Aybara?" Gaul said.

"dʒʌs θɪŋkɪŋ." ðə waɪtkloʊks wəd nɑt liv ɪm əloʊn, ən ðə pæɾɝn - bɝn ɪt! - wɑz gɑnə kip lupɪŋ əm ɪndə hɪz pæθ əntɪl i dɛlt wɪð ðɛm.

"Just thinking." The Whitecloaks would not leave him alone, and the Pattern - burn it! - was going to keep looping them into his path until he dealt with them.

"haʊ lɑɹdʒ ɪz ðɛɹ ɑɹmi?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"How large is their army?" Perrin asked.

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ twɛnti θaʊzən soʊlʒɝz əmʌŋ ðɛm," ɡɔl ɹɪplaɪd. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ sɛvɹəl θaʊzən ʌðɝz u hæv laɪkli nɛvɝ hɛld ə spɪɹ."

"There are twenty thousand soldiers among them," Gaul replied. "There are several thousand others who have likely never held a spear."

sɝvəns ən kæmp fɑloʊɝz. ɡɔl kɛp ði əmjuzmən fɹəm ɪz vɔɪs, bʌt pɛɹɪn kəd smɛl ɪɾ ɑn hɪm. əmʌŋ ði il, nɪɹli ɛvɹi mæn - ɔl bʌt blæksmɪθs - wəd pɪk ʌp ə spɪɹ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ətækt. ðə fæk ðət mɛni wɛtləndɝz wɝ ɪnkeɪpəbəl ə dɪfɛndɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz iðɝ bɪfʌɾəld əɹ ɪnfjʊɹieɪɾəd ði il.

Servants and camp followers. Gaul kept the amusement from his voice, but Perrin could smell it on him. Among the Aiel, nearly every man - all but blacksmiths - would pick up a spear if they were attacked. The fact that many wetlanders were incapable of defending themselves either befuddled or infuriated the Aiel.

"ðɛɹ fɔɹs ɪz lɑɹdʒ," ɡɔl kəntɪnjud, "bʌɾ aʊɝz ɪz lɑɹdʒɝ. ən ðeɪv noʊ ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ nɔɹ æʃəmən, nɔɹ tʃænlɝz ʌv ɛni taɪp, ɪf sɛbæn beɪlwɝz wɝɾ ɪz nɑɾ ɪn ɛɹɝ. hi simz tə noʊ mʌtʃ ə ðiz waɪt-kloʊks."

"Their force is large," Gaul continued, "but ours is larger. And they have no algai'd'siswai nor Asha'man, nor channelers of any type, if Sebban Balwer's word is not in error. He seems to know much of these White-cloaks."

"hiz ɹaɪt. waɪtkloʊks heɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən θɪŋk ɛniwʌn u kən juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd."

"He's right. Whitecloaks hate Aes Sedai and think anyone who can use the One Power is a Darkfriend."

"wi muv əɡɛns hɪm, ðɛn?" baɪɑɝ æskt.

"We move against him, then?" Byar asked.

ɡɑləd stʊd. "wi hæv noʊ tʃɔɪs. ðə laɪɾ əz dɪlɪvɝɾ ɪm ɪndə əɹ hænz. bʌt wi nid mɔɹ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən. pɝhæps aɪ ʃəd ɡoʊ tə ðɪs eɪbɑɹə ən lɛɾ ɪm noʊ ðət wi hoʊld ɪz ælaɪz, ən ðən æsk ɪz ɑɹmi tə mit wɪð əs ɑn ðə fild ə bæɾəl. aɪd ɹæðɝ dʒɹɔ hɪm aʊt tə meɪk jus ə maɪ kævəlɹi."

Galad stood. "We have no choice. The Light has delivered him into our hands. But we need more information. Perhaps I should go to this Aybara and let him know that we hold his allies, and then ask his army to meet with us on the field of battle. I'd rather draw him out to make use of my cavalry."

"wʌt dʒju wɑnt, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə?" ɡɔl æskt.

"What do you want, Perrin Aybara?" Gaul asked.

wʌɾ i wɑnt? hi wɪʃt i kəɾ ænsɝ ðæt.

What did he want? He wished he could answer that.

sɛn mɔɹ skaʊts," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "faɪn əs ə bɛɾɝ pleɪs tə kæmp. wɪl wɑnə ɔfɝ pɑɹli, bʌt ðəɹ ɛs noʊ weɪ ʌndɝ ðə laɪɾ aɪm livɪŋ. ɡɪl ən ði ʌðɝz ɪn ðə hænz ə ðə waɪɾitʃoʊks. wɪl ɡɪv ðə tʃɪlʒɹən tʃæns tə ɹɪtɝn əɹ pipəl. ɪf ðeɪ doʊnt. . . wɛl, ðən wɪl si "

Send more scouts," Perrin said. "Find us a better place to camp. We'll want to offer parley, but there s no way under the Light I'm leaving. Gill and the others in the hands of the Whitecioaks. We'll give the Children chance to return our people. If they don't. . . well, then we'll see "


tʃæptɝ eɪt


CHAPTER 8

ðə sɛvən-stʃɹaɪp læs


The Seven-Striped Lass

mæt sæɾ ɑn ə wɔɹn stul, hɪz ɑɹmz linɪŋ əɡɛnst ə dɑɹk wʊɾən bɑɹ kaʊntɝ. ði ɛɹ smɛld ɡʊd - ʌv eɪl, smoʊk, ən ə ðə wɑʃklɔθ ðət hæd ɹisənli waɪp ðə kaʊntɝ. hi laɪk ðæt. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ kɑmɪŋ əbaʊɾ ə ɡʊd, ɹaʊɾi tævɝn ðət wɑz ɔlsoʊ kɛp klin. wɛl, klin əz wɑz ɹizənəbəl, ɛniweɪ. noʊbɑdi laɪkt ə tævɝn ðət wɑz tu klin. ðət meɪɾ ə pleɪs fil nu. laɪk ə koʊt ðət hæd nɛvɝ bɪn wɔɹn əɹ ə paɪp ðət hæd nɛvɝ bɪn smoʊkt.

Mat sat on a worn stool, his arms leaning against a dark wooden bar counter. The air smelled good - of ale, smoke, and of the washcloth that had recently wiped the counter. He liked that. There was something calming about a good, rowdy tavern that was also kept clean. Well, clean as was reasonable, anyway. Nobody liked a tavern that was too clean. That made a place feel new. Like a coat that had never been worn or a pipe that had never been smoked.

mæt flɪpt ə foʊldəd lɛɾɝ bɪtwin tu fɪŋɡɝz ə hɪz ɹaɪt hænd. ðət lɛɾɝ, ɑn θɪk peɪpɝ, wɑz sild wɪð ə ɡlɑb ə blʌd-ɹɛd wæks. hi hæd bɪn kæɹiɪŋ ɪɾ oʊnli ə ʃɔɹt taɪm, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ə sɔɹs ʌv əz mʌtʃ æɡɹəveɪʃən tə hɪm əz ɛni wʊmən. wɛl, meɪbi nɑɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt moʊst ɛni ʌðɝ wʊmən. ðət wɑz seɪɪŋ ə lɑt.

Mat flipped a folded letter between two fingers of his right hand. That letter, on thick paper, was sealed with a glob of blood-red wax. He had been carrying it only a short time, but it was already a source of as much aggravation to him as any woman. Well, maybe not an Aes Sedai, but most any other woman. That was saying a lot.

hi stɑp spɪnɪŋ ðə lɛɾɝ ən tæpt ɪɾ ɑn ðə kaʊntɝ. bɝn vɛɹɪn fəɹ duɪŋ ðɪs tə hɪm! ʃi hɛld ɪm baɪ hɪz oʊθ laɪk ə fɪʃ kɑɾ ɑn ə hʊk.

He stopped spinning the letter and tapped it on the counter. Burn Verin for doing this to him! She held him by his oath like a fish caught on a hook.

wɛl, mæstɝ kɹɪmzən?" æsk ðə tɑvɝŋkipɝ. ðət wɑz ðə neɪm i wɑz juzɪŋ ðiz deɪz. bɛs tə bi seɪf. "ju wɑn ə ɹifɪl əɹ nɑt?"

Well, Master Crimson?" asked the tavernkeeper. That was the name he was using these days. Best to be safe. "You want a refill or not?"

ðə tɑvɝŋkipɝ lin daʊn bɪfɔɹ hɪm, kɹɔsɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz. mɛli kɹɛb wɑz ə pɹɪɾi wʊmən, wɪð ə ɹaʊn feɪs ən ɑbɝn hɛɹ ðət kɝl kwaɪt fɛtʃəŋli. mæt wʊɾə ɡɪvən əɹ ɪz bɛst smaɪl - ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ə wʊmən i hæd mɛɾ u dɪd nɑt mɛl fəɹ ɪz bɛst smaɪl - bʌɾ i wɑz ə mɛɹid mæn naʊ. hi kəd nɑt ɡoʊ bɹeɪkɪŋ hɑɹts; ɪt wəd nɑt bi ɹaɪt.

The tavernkeeper leaned down before him, crossing her arms. Melli Craeb was a pretty woman, with a round face and auburn hair that curled quite fetchingly. Mat would have given her his best smile - there was not a woman he had met who did not melt for his best smile - but he was a married man now. He could not go breaking hearts; it would not be right.

ðoʊ, linɪŋ əz ʃi dɪd ʃoʊd səm æmpəl bʊzəm. ʃi wɑz ə ʃɔɹt wʊmən, bʌt ʃi kɛp ði ɛɹiə bɪhaɪn ðə bɑɹ ɹeɪzd. jɛs, ə naɪs bʊzəm ɪndid. hi fɪɡjɝd ʃi wəd bi ɡʊd fəɹ ə bɪɾ ə kɪsɪŋ, pɝhæps tʌkt ɪndə wʌn ə ðə buθs ət ðə bæk ə ðə tævɝn. ʌv kɔɹs, mæt dɪd nɑt lʊk ət wɪmən ɛnimɔɹ, nɑt laɪk ðæt. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk əbaʊɾ əɹ fəɹ ɪm tə kɪs. meɪbi fəɹ tælmɑnz. hi wɑz soʊ stɪf, ə ɡʊd kɪs ən kʌɾəl wəd də hɪm ɡʊd.

Though, leaning as she did showed some ample bosom. She was a short woman, but she kept the area behind the bar raised. Yes, a nice bosom indeed. He figured she would be good for a bit of kissing, perhaps tucked into one of the booths at the back of the tavern. Of course, Mat did not look at women anymore, not like that. He did not think about her for him to kiss. Maybe for Talmanes. He was so stiff, a good kiss and cuddle would do him good.

"wɛl?" mɛli æskt.

"Well?" Melli asked.

"wʌt wəd jə də ɪf jə wɝ mi, mɛli?" hɪz ɛmpti mʌɡ sæt bɪsaɪd hɪm, ə fju sʌdz klɪŋɪŋ tə ðə ɹɪm.

"What would you do if you were me, Melli?" His empty mug sat beside him, a few suds clinging to the rim.

"ɔɹɾɝ ənʌðɝ ɹaʊnd," ʃi sɛɾ ɪmiɾiətli. "fɔɹ ði ɪntaɪɝ bɑɹ. ɪt wəd bi daʊnɹaɪt tʃæɹəɾəbəl ə ju. pipəl laɪk ə tʃæɹəɾəbəl fɛloʊ."

"Order another round," she said immediately. "For the entire bar. It would be downright charitable of you. People like a charitable fellow."

"aɪ mɛn əbaʊt ðə lɛɾɝ."

"I meant about the letter."

"ju pɹɑməs nɑt tə oʊpən ɪt?" ʃi sɛd.

"You promised not to open it?" she said.

"wɛl, nɑɾ ɪɡzækli. aɪ pɹɑməs ðəɾ ɪf aɪ oʊpən ɪt, aɪd də ɪɡzækli wʌɾ ɪt sɛɾ ɪnsaɪd."

"Well, not exactly. I promised that if I opened it, I'd do exactly what it said inside."

"ɡeɪv ən oʊθ, dɪd ju?"

"Gave an oath, did you?"

hi nɑɾəd.

He nodded.

ʃi snætʃt ɪt fɹəm ɪz fɪŋɡɝz, kɑzɪŋ ɪm tə jɛlp. hi ɹitʃt tə teɪk ɪt bæk bʌt ʃi pʊld əweɪ, tɝnɪŋ ɪɾ oʊvɝ ɪn əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. mæt səpɹɛst ən ɝdʒ tə ɹitʃ fəɹ ɪɾ əɡɛn; hi hæd pleɪd mɔɹ ðən ə fju ɡeɪmz ə teɪk-əweɪ, ən hæd noʊ ɝdʒ tə lʊk ðə bəfun. ə wʊmən laɪk nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən tə meɪk ə mæn skwɝm, ən ɪf jə lɛɾ əɹ də ɪt, ʃi wəɾ oʊnli kip ɡoʊɪŋ.

She snatched it from his fingers, causing him to yelp. He reached to take it back but she pulled away, turning it over in her fingers. Mat suppressed an urge to reach for it again; he had played more than a few games of take-away, and had no urge to look the buffoon. A woman liked nothing more than to make a man squirm, and if you let her do it, she would only keep going.

stɪl, hi bɪɡæn tə swɛt. "naʊ, mɛli . . ."

Still, he began to sweat. "Now, Melli . . ."

"aɪ kəɾ oʊpən ɪt fəɹ ju," ʃi sɛd, linɪŋ bæk əɡɛns ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə bɑɹ, lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə lɛɾɝ. nɪɹbaɪ, ə mæn kɔl fəɹ ənʌðɝ mʌɡ ʌv eɪl, bʌt ʃi weɪvd ɪm daʊn. ðə ɹɛd-noʊz mæn lʊkt əz ɪf i hæd hæɾ ɪnʌf ɛniweɪ. mɛliz tævɝn wɑz pɑpjəlɝ ɪnʌf ðət ʃi hæɾ ə hæf-dʌzən sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz teɪkɪŋ kɛɹ ə ðə peɪtʃɹənz. wʌn wəd ɡɛt tə hɪm ɪvɛntʃəwəli. "aɪ kəɾ oʊpən ɪt," ʃi kəntɪnjud tə mæt, "æn kəd tɛl jə wʌts ɪnsaɪd."

"I could open it for you," she said, leaning back against the other side of the bar, looking over the letter. Nearby, a man called for another mug of ale, but she waved him down. The red-nosed man looked as if he had had enough anyway. Melli's tavern was popular enough that she had a half-dozen serving girls taking care of the patrons. One would get to him eventually. "I could open it," she continued to Mat, "and could tell you what's inside."

blʌɾi æʃəz! ɪf ʃi dɪd ðæt, hi wəɾ əv tə də wʌɾ ɪt sɛd. wʌtɛvɝ ɪt blʌɾi sɛd! ɔl i hæd tə də wɑz weɪɾ ə fju wiks, ən i wəd bi fɹi. hi kəd weɪt ðət lɔŋ. ɹɪli, hi kʊd. "ɪt wʊdn du," mæt sɛd, sɪɾɪŋ ʌp wɪð ə dʒɝk əz ʃi ɹitʃt əɹ θʌm bɪtwin tu saɪdz ə ðə lɛɾɝ, əz ɪf tə ɹɪp ɪt. "aɪd stɪl əv tə də wʌɾ ɪt sɛd, mɛli. doʊn jə də ðæt, naʊ. bi kɛɹfəl!"

Bloody ashes! If she did that, he would have to do what it said. Whatever it bloody said! All he had to do was wait a few weeks, and he would be free. He could wait that long. Really, he could. "It wouldn't do," Mat said, sitting up with a jerk as she reached her thumb between two sides of the letter, as if to rip it. "I'd still have to do what it said, Melli. Don't you do that, now. Be careful!"

ʃi smaɪld ət hɪm. hɝ tævɝn, ðə sɛvən-stʃɹaɪp læs, wɑz wʌn ə ðə bɛst ɪn wɛstɝn keɪɛmlɪn.

She smiled at him. Her tavern, The Seven-Striped Lass, was one of the best in western Caemlyn.

eɪl wɪð ə ɹoʊbʌs fleɪvɝ, ɡeɪmz ə daɪs wən jə wɑntəd ðɛm, ən nɑɾ ə ɹæt tə bi sin. ðeɪ pɹɑbli dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɹɪsk ɹʌnɪŋ əfaʊl ə mɛli.

Ale with a robust flavor, games of dice when you wanted them, and not a rat to be seen. They probably did not want to risk running afoul of Melli.

laɪt, bʌt ðə wʊmən kəd ʃeɪm ðə wɪskɝz ɔf ə mænz tʃiks wɪθaʊt mʌtʃ tʃɹaɪɪŋ. "ju nɛvɝ dɪd tɛl mi hu ɪt wɑz fɹʌm," mɛli sɛd, tɝnɪŋ ðə lɛɾɝ oʊvɝ. "ʃiz ə lʌvɝ, ɪzənt ʃi? ɡɑt jə taɪɾ ʌp ɪn əɹ stʃɹɪŋz?"

Light, but the woman could shame the whiskers off a man's cheeks without much trying. "You never did tell me who it was from," Melli said, turning the letter over. "She's a lover, isn't she? Got you tied up in her strings?"

ʃi hæd ðə sɛkən pɑɹt ɹaɪɾ ɪnʌf, bʌɾ ə lʌvɝ? vɛɹɪn? ɪt wɑz ɹɪdɪkjələs ɪnʌf tə meɪk mæt læf. kɪsɪŋ vɛɹɪn wʊɾə bɪn əbaʊɾ əz mʌtʃ fʌn əz kɪsɪŋ ə laɪən. ʌv ðə tu, hi wʊɾə tʃoʊzən ðə laɪən. ɪt wʊɾə bɪn mʌtʃ lɛs laɪkli tə tʃɹaɪ tə baɪt hɪm.

She had the second part right enough, but a lover? Verin? It was ridiculous enough to make Mat laugh. Kissing Verin would have been about as much fun as kissing a lion. Of the two, he would have chosen the lion. It would have been much less likely to try to bite him.

"aɪ ɡeɪv maɪ oʊθ, mɛli," mæt sɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə ʃoʊ hɪz nɝvəsnəs. "doʊn jə ɡoʊ oʊpənɪŋ ðæt, naʊ."

"I gave my oath, Melli," Mat said, trying not to show his nervousness. "Don't you go opening that, now."

"aɪ dɪdnt ɡɪv ɛni oʊθ," ʃi sɛd. "meɪbi əl ɹɛɾ ɪt, ən ðən nɑt tɛl jə wʌɾ ɪt sɛz. dʒʌst ɡɪv jə hɪns, naʊ ən ðɛn, əz ɛnkɝɪdʒmənt."

"I didn't give any oath," she said. "Maybe I'll read it, and then not tell you what it says. Just give you hints, now and then, as encouragement."

ʃi aɪd hɪm, fʊl lɪps smaɪlɪŋ. jɛs, ʃi wɑz ə pɹɪɾi wʌn. nɑɾ əz pɹɪɾi əz tuɑn, ðoʊ, wɪð əɹ bjuɾəfəl skɪn ən lɑɹdʒ aɪz. bʌt mɛli wɑz stɪl pɹɪɾi, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ðoʊz lɪps ə hɝz. biɪŋ mɛɹid mɛn i kəd nɑt stɛɹ ət ðoʊz lɪps, bʌɾ i dɪd ɡɪv əɹ ɪz bɛst smaɪl. ɪt wɑz kɔl fɔɹ, ðɪs taɪm, ðoʊ ɪt kəd bɹeɪk əɹ hɑɹt. hi kəd nɑt lɛɾ əɹ oʊpən ðət lɛɾɝ.

She eyed him, full lips smiling. Yes, she was a pretty one. Not as pretty as Tuon, though, with her beautiful skin and large eyes. But Melli was still pretty, particularly those lips of hers. Being married meant he could not stare at those lips, but he did give her his best smile. It was called for, this time, though it could break her heart. He could not let her open that letter.

"ɪts ðə seɪm θɪŋ, mɛli," mæt sɛd wɪnɪŋli. "ɪf jə oʊpən ðət lɛɾɝ ən aɪ doʊn də wʌɾ ɪt sɛz, maɪ oʊθ ɪz əz ɡʊɾ əz dɪʃwɔɾɝ." hi saɪd, ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðəɹ wɑz wʌn weɪ tə ɡɛt ðə lɛɾɝ bæk. "ðə wʊmən u ɡeɪv ɪt tə mi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, mɛli. jə doʊnt wɑnə æŋɡɝ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, də ju?"

"It's the same thing, Melli," Mat said winningly. "If you open that letter and I don't do what it says, my oath is as good as dishwater." He sighed, realizing there was one way to get the letter back. "The woman who gave it to me was Aes Sedai, Melli. You don't want to anger an Aes Sedai, do you?"

"ɛɛs sədaɪ?" mɛli sʌɾənli lʊkt iɡɝ. "aɪv ɔlweɪz fænsid ɡoʊɪŋ ʌp tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, tə si ɪf ðəl lemi dʒɔɪn ðɛm." ʃi lʊkt ət ðə lɛɾɝ, əz ɪf mɔɹ kjʊɹiəs əbaʊɾ ɪts kɑntɛns.

"Aes Sedai?" Melli suddenly looked eager. "I've always fancied going up to Tar Valon, to see if they'll let me join them." She looked at the letter, as if more curious about its contents.

laɪt! ðə wʊmən wɑz dæft. mæt hæd teɪkən əɹ fəɹ ðə sɛnsəbəl taɪp. hi ʃʊɾə noʊn bɛɾɝ.

Light! The woman was daft. Mat had taken her for the sensible type. He should have known better.

hi bɪɡæn tə swɛt mɔɹ. kəɾ i ɹitʃ ðə lɛɾɝ? ʃi wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ɪt kloʊs. . . .

He began to sweat more. Could he reach the letter? She was holding it close. . . .

ʃi sɛɾ ɪt daʊn ɑn ðə bɑɹ bɪfɔɹ hɪm. ʃi lɛft wʌn fɪŋɡɝ ɑn ðə lɛɾɝ, dɝɛkli ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə wæks sil. "jul ɪntʃɹədus mi tə ðɪs ɛɛs sədaɪ, wən jə nɛks mit hɝ."

She set it down on the bar before him. She left one finger on the letter, directly in the middle of the wax seal. "You'll introduce me to this Aes Sedai, when you next meet her."

"ɪf aɪ si hɝ waɪl aɪm ɪn keɪɛmlɪn," mæt sɛd. "aɪ pɹɑməs ɪt."

"If I see her while I'm in Caemlyn," Mat said. "I promise it."

"kæn aɪ tʃɹʌs jə tə kip jəɹ wɝd?"

"Can I trust you to keep your word?"

hi ɡeɪv əɹ ən ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd lʊk. "wʌt wɑz ðɪs hoʊl blʌɾi kɑnvɝseɪʃən əbaʊt, mɛli?"

He gave her an exasperated look. "What was this whole bloody conversation about, Melli?"

ʃi læft, tɝnɪŋ ən livɪŋ ðə lɛɾɝ ɑn ðə bɑɹ, gɑnə hɛlp ðə ɡæp-tuθ mæn u wɑz stɪl kɔlɪŋ fəɹ mɔɹ eɪl. mæt snætʃt ðə lɛɾɝ, tʌkɪŋ ɪt kɛɹfəli ɪndə hɪz koʊt pɑkət. blʌɾi wʊmən. ði oʊnli weɪ fəɹ ɪm tə steɪ fɹi ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ plɑts wɑz tə nɛvɝ oʊpən ðɪs lɛɾɝ. wɛl, nɑɾ ɪɡzækli fɹi. mæt hæd plɛnti ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ plɑɾɪŋ ɝaʊn hɪm;

She laughed, turning and leaving the letter on the bar, going to help the gap-toothed man who was still calling for more ale. Mat snatched the letter, tucking it carefully into his coat pocket. Bloody woman. The only way for him to stay free of Aes Sedai plots was to never open this letter. Well, not exactly free. Mat had plenty of Aes Sedai plotting around him;

hi hæɾ əm kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪz ɪɹz. bʌɾ oʊnli ə mæn wɪð sɔdʌs fəɹ bɹeɪnz wəɾ æsk fəɹ ənʌðɝ.

he had them coming out of his ears. But only a man with sawdust for brains would ask for another.

mæt saɪd, tɝnɪŋ ɑn ɪz stul. ə vɛɹid kɹaʊd klɔɡd ðə sɛvən-stʃɹaɪp læs. keɪɛmlɪn wɑz fʊlɝ ðən ə laɪənfɪʃ əɾ ə ʃɪpɹɪk ðiz deɪz pɹæktəkli bɝstɪŋ ət ðə simz. ðət kɛp ðə tævɝnz bɪzi. ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ səm fɑɹmɝz ɪn wɝkoʊts fɹeɪɪŋ ət ðə kɑlɝz pleɪɾ ət daɪs. mæt hæd pleɪɾ ə fju ɹaʊnz wɪð əm ɝliɝ, ən hæd peɪd fəɹ ɪz dʒɹɪŋk wɪð ðɛɹ kɔɪnz, bʌɾ i heɪɾəd ɡæmbəlɪŋ fəɹ kɑpɝz.

Mat sighed, turning on his stool. A varied crowd clogged The Seven-Striped Lass. Caemlyn was fuller than a lionfish at a shipwreck these days practically bursting at the seams. That kept the taverns busy. In the corner some farmers in workcoats fraying at the collars played at dice. Mat had played a few rounds with them earlier, and had paid for his drink with their coins, but he hated gambling for coppers.

ðə blʌf-feɪs mæn ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ wɑz stɪl dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ - mʌs bi fɔɹtin mʌɡz sɪɾɪŋ ɛmpti bɪsaɪɾ ɪm naʊ - hɪz kəmpænjənz tʃɪɹɪŋ ɪm ɔnwɝd. ə ɡɹup ə noʊbəlz sæɾ ɔf fɹəm ðə ɹɛst, ən i wʊɾə æskt əm fəɹ ə naɪs ɡeɪm ə daɪs, bʌt ði ɪkspɹɛʃənz ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz cʊɾə fɹaɪɾənd əweɪ bɛɹz. ðeɪ hæd pɹɑbli bɪn ɑn ðə ɹɔŋ saɪɾ ə ðə səksɛʃən wɔɹ.

The bluff-faced man in the corner was still drinking - must be fourteen mugs sitting empty beside him now - his companions cheering him onward. A group of nobles sat off from the rest, and he would have asked them for a nice game of dice, but the expressions on their faces could have frightened away bears. They had probably been on the wrong side of the Succession war.

mæt wɔɹ ə blæk koʊt wɪð leɪs ət ðə kʌfs. oʊnli ə lɪɾəl leɪs, ən noʊ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi. ɹɪlʌktənli, hi hæd lɛft ɪz waɪd-bɹɪm hæt bæk ɪn kæmp, ən i hæd ɡɹoʊn ə fju deɪz' skɹʌb ɑn ɪz tʃɪn. ðəɾ ɪtʃt laɪk i hæd fliz, ən i lʊkt ə blʌɾi ful. bʌt ðə skɹʌb meɪɾ ɪm hɑɹɾɝ tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz.

Mat wore a black coat with lace at the cuffs. Only a little lace, and no embroidery. Reluctantly, he had left his wide-brimmed hat back in camp, and he had grown a few days' scrub on his chin. That itched like he had fleas, and he looked a bloody fool. But the scrub made him harder to recognize.

wɪð ɛvɹi fʊtpæɾ ɪn ðə sɪɾi hævɪŋ ə pɪktʃɝ ə hɪm, ɪt wɑz bɛs tə bi seɪf. hi wɪʃt biɪŋ tɑvɝən wəd hɛlp ɪm fəɹ wʌns, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz bɛs nɑt tə kaʊn ɑn ðæt. biɪŋ tɑvɝən hæd nɑt bɪn ɡʊd fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ i kəd tɛl.

With every footpad in the city having a picture of him, it was best to be safe. He wished being ta'veren would help him for once, but it was best not to count on that. Being ta'veren had not been good for anything he could tell.

hi kɛpt ɪz skɑɹf tʌk loʊ ən ɪz koʊt bʌɾənd, ðə haɪ kɑlɝ ʌp nɪɹli tə hɪz tʃɪn. hi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi daɪd wʌns, hi wɑz fɛɹli sɝɾən, ən wɑz nɑɾ iɡɝ tə tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn.

He kept his scarf tucked low and his coat buttoned, the high collar up nearly to his chin. He had already died once, he was fairly certain, and was not eager to try again.

ə pɹɪɾi sɝvɪŋ ɡɝl wɔk baɪ, slɛndɝ ən waɪd-hɪpt, wɪð lɔŋ dɑɹk hɛɹ ʃi lɛt hæŋ fɹi.

A pretty serving girl walked by, slender and wide-hipped, with long dark hair she let hang free.

hi muv tə ðə saɪd, əlaʊɪŋ ɪz ɛmpti mʌɡ tə lʊk loʊnli ən ɑbviəs ɑn ðə kaʊntɝ, ən ʃi wɔkt oʊvɝ wɪð ə smaɪl tə ɹifɪl ɪt. hi ɡɹɪn əɾ əɹ ən tɪpt ə kɑpɝ. hi wɑz ə mɛɹid mæn, ən kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə tʃɑɹm hɝ, bʌɾ i kəd kip ən aɪ aʊt fəɹ ɪz fɹɛnz. θɔɹn maɪt laɪk hɝ.

He moved to the side, allowing his empty mug to look lonely and obvious on the counter, and she walked over with a smile to refill it. He grinned at her and tipped a copper. He was a married man, and could not afford to charm her, but he could keep an eye out for his friends. Thorn might like her.

ə ɡɝl maɪt meɪk ɪm stɑp moʊpɪŋ əbaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ, ət list. mæt wɑtʃt ðə ɡɝlz feɪs fəɹ ə taɪm tə bi sɝɾən i wəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz əɹ əɡɛn.

A girl might make him stop moping about so much, at least. Mat watched the girl's face for a time to be certain he would recognize her again.

mæt sɪpt əɾ ɪz eɪl, wʌn hæn filɪŋ ət ðə lɛɾɝ ɪn ɪz pɑkət. hi dɪd nɑt spɛkjəleɪɾ ət wʌt wɑz ɪn ɪt. də ðæt, ən i wəd bi oʊnli wʌn stɛp fɹəm ɹɪpɪŋ ɪɾ oʊpən. hi wɑz ə lɪɾəl laɪk ə maʊs stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ə tʃɹæp wɪð moʊldi tʃiz ɪn ɪt. hi dɪd nɑt wɑn ðət tʃiz. ɪt kəd ɹɑt, fəɹ ɔl i kɛɹd.

Mat sipped at his ale, one hand feeling at the letter in his pocket. He did not speculate at what was in it. Do that, and he would be only one step from ripping it open. He was a little like a mouse staring at a trap with moldy cheese in it. He did not want that cheese. It could rot, for all he cared.

ðə lɛɾɝ wəd pɹɑbli ɪnstʃɹʌkt ɪm tə də sʌmθɪŋ deɪnʒɝəs. ən ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ. ɛɛs sədaɪ hæɾ ə fɑndnəs fəɹ meɪkɪŋ mɛn lʊk laɪk fulz. laɪɾ i hoʊp ðət ʃi hæd nɑt lɛft ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz fəɹ ɪm tə hɛlp sʌmwʌn ɪn tʃɹʌbəl. ɪf ðət wɝ ðə keɪs, ʃʊɹli ʃi wʊɾə sin tə ɪt hɝsɛlf.

The letter would probably instruct him to do something dangerous. And embarrassing. Aes Sedai had a fondness for making men look like fools. Light he hoped that she had not left instructions for him to help someone in trouble. If that were the case, surely she would have seen to it herself.

hi saɪɾ ən tʊk ənʌðɝ pʊl ɑn ɪz eɪl. ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ, ðə dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ mæn faɪnəli tɑpəld oʊvɝ. sɪkstin mʌɡz. nɑt bæd. mæt sɛɾ əsaɪɾ ɪz oʊn dʒɹɪŋk, lɛft ə fju kɔɪnz əz peɪmənt, ðən nɑɾəd fɛɹwɛl tə mɛli. hi kəlɛktəɾ ɪz wɪnɪŋz ɑn ðə weɪdʒɝ ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ mæn fɹəm ə lɔŋ-fɪŋɡɝd fɛloʊ ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ. mæt hæd bɛɾ ɑn sɛvəntin mʌɡz, wɪtʃ wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf tə wɪn sʌm. ðən i wɑz ɑn ɪz weɪ, teɪkɪŋ ɪz wɔkɪŋ stɪk fɹəm ðə stæn baɪ ðə dɔɹ.

He sighed and took another pull on his ale. In the corner, the drinking man finally toppled over. Sixteen mugs. Not bad. Mat set aside his own drink, left a few coins as payment, then nodded farewell to Melli. He collected his winnings on the wager regarding the drinking man from a long-fingered fellow in the corner. Mat had bet on seventeen mugs, which was close enough to win some. Then he was on his way, taking his walking stick from the stand by the door.

ðə baʊnsɝ, bɝɡ, aɪd hɪm. bɝɡ hæɾ ə feɪs ʌɡli ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪz oʊn mʌðɝ wɪns. ðə ʃoʊldɝθʌmpɝ dɪd nɑt laɪk mæt, ən fɹəm ðə weɪ bɝɡ lʊkt ət mɛli, ðət wɑz pɹɑbli kəz i fɪɡjɝd mæt wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk aɪz əɾ ɪz wʊmən. nɛvɝ maɪn ðət mæt hæɾ ɪkspleɪn i wɑz mɛɹid, ən dɪd nɑt də ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. səm mɛn wəd bi dʒɛləs noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ toʊld.

The bouncer, Berg, eyed him. Berg had a face ugly enough to make his own mother wince. The shoulderthumper did not like Mat, and from the way Berg looked at Melli, that was probably because he figured Mat was trying to make eyes at his woman. Never mind that Mat had explained he was married, and did not do that sort of thing any longer. Some men would be jealous no matter what they were told.

ðə stʃɹits ə keɪɛmlɪn wɝ bɪzi, ivən ət ðɪs leɪɾ aʊɝ. ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz wɝ dæmp fɹəm ə ɹisənt ʃaʊɝ, ðoʊ ðoʊz klaʊdz hæd pæs baɪ ən - ɹɪmɑɹkəbli - lɛf ðə skaɪ oʊpən tə ði ɛɹ. hi muv nɔɹθwɝɾ əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹit, hɛɾɪŋ fəɹ ənʌðɝ tævɝn i nu, wʌn wɛɹ mɛn daɪs fəɹ sɪlvɝ ən ɡoʊld. mæt wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊɾ ɛni spəsɪfɪk tæsk tənaɪt, dʒʌs lɪsnɪŋ fəɹ ɹumɝz, ɡɛɾɪŋ ə fil fəɹ keɪɛmlɪn. ə lɑt hæd tʃeɪnʒd sɪns i hæd bɪn hɪɹ læst.

The streets of Caemlyn were busy, even at this late hour. The paving stones were damp from a recent shower, though those clouds had passed by and - remarkably - left the sky open to the air. He moved northward along the street, heading for another tavern he knew, one where men diced for silver and gold. Mat was not about any specific task tonight, just listening for rumors, getting a feel for Caemlyn. A lot had changed since he had been here last.

əz i wɔkt, hi kəd nɑt hɛlp lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ðoʊz blʌɾi pɪktʃɝz hæɾ ɪm ənnɝvd. mɛni ʌv ðə pipəl ɑn ðə stʃɹit sim səspɪʃəs. ə fju mʊɹændiənz pæst, lʊkɪŋ soʊ dʒɹʌŋk ðəɾ i cʊɾə lɪt ðɛɹ bɹɛθ ɑn faɪɝ. mæt kɛpt ɪz dɪstəns. æftɝ wʌt hæd hæpən tə hɪm ɪn hɪndɝstæp, hi fɪɡjɝɾ i kəd nɑt bi tu kɛɹfəl. laɪt, hi hæd hɝd stɔɹiz ə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz ətækɪŋ pipəl. ɪf ə mæn kəd nɑt tʃɹʌs ðə ɹɑks ʌndɝ ɪz fit, wʌt kəɾ i tʃɹʌst?

As he walked, he could not help looking over his shoulder. Those bloody pictures had him unnerved. Many of the people on the street seemed suspicious. A few Murandians passed, looking so drunk that he could have lit their breath on fire. Mat kept his distance. After what had happened to him in Hinderstap, he figured he could not be too careful. Light, he had heard stories of paving stones attacking people. If a man could not trust the rocks under his feet, what could he trust?

hi ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɹitʃt ðə tævɝn i wɑntəd, ə tʃɪɹi pleɪs kɔl ðə dɛd mænz bɹɛθ. ɪt hæd tu tʌfs aʊt fɹʌnt, hoʊldɪŋ kʌdʒəlz ðeɪ pæɾəd əɡɛnst ɪnɔɹməs pɑmz. lɑts ʌv ɛkstʃɹə tævɝn tʌfs wɝ biɪŋ haɪɝd ðiz deɪz. mæt wəɾ əv tə wɑtʃ hɪmsɛlf, nɑt wɪn tu mʌtʃ. tævɝn-kipɝz dɪd nɑt laɪk ə mæn wɪnɪŋ tu mʌtʃ, əz ɪt kəd bɹɪŋ ə faɪt. ənlɛs ðə mæn spɛn ɪz wɪnɪŋz ɑn fuɾ ən dʒɹɪŋk. ðən i kəd wɪn ɔl i laɪkt, θæŋk jə vɛɹi mʌtʃ.

He eventually reached the tavern he wanted, a cheery place called The Dead Man's Breath. It had two toughs out front, holding cudgels they patted against enormous palms. Lots of extra tavern toughs were being hired these days. Mat would have to watch himself, not win too much. Tavern-keepers did not like a man winning too much, as it could bring a fight. Unless the man spent his winnings on food and drink. Then he could win all he liked, thank you very much.

ði ɪnsaɪɾ ə ðɪs tævɝn wɑz dɑɹkɝ ðən ðə sɛvən-stʃɹaɪp læs hæd bɪn. ðə mɛn hɪɹ hʌntʃt loʊ oʊvɝ dʒɹɪŋks əɹ ɡeɪmz, ən ðəɹ wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ fud biɪŋ sɝvd. dʒʌst stʃɹɔŋ dʒɹɪŋks. ðə wʊɾən bɑɹ hæd neɪlz huz hɛdz dʒʌɾɪd aʊɾ ə fɪŋɡɝneɪl əɹ soʊ haɪ ən dʒæb jə ɪn ði ɑɹmz. mæt fɪɡjɝd ðeɪ wɝ wɝkɪŋ tə pʊl ðɛmsɛlvz fɹi ən ɹʌn fəɹ ðə dɔɹ.

The inside of this tavern was darker than The Seven-Striped Lass had been. The men here hunched low over drinks or games, and there was not much food being served. Just strong drinks. The wooden bar had nails whose heads jutted out a fingernail or so high and jabbed you in the arms. Mat figured they were working to pull themselves free and run for the door.

ðə tɑvɝŋkipɝ, bɝnhɝd, wɑz ə ɡɹisi-hɛɹd tɛɹən wɪð ə maʊθ soʊ smɔl ɪt lʊk laɪk i hæd swɑloʊɾ ɪz lɪps baɪ mɪsteɪk. hi smɛld ə ɹæɾɪʃɪz, ən mæt hæd nɛvɝ sin ɪm smaɪl, nɑɾ ivən wən tɪpt. moʊs tɑvɝŋkipɝz wəd smaɪl ət ðə dɑɹk wʌn hɪmsɛlf fəɹ ə tɪp.

The tavernkeeper, Bernherd, was a greasy-haired Tairen with a mouth so small it looked like he had swallowed his lips by mistake. He smelled of radishes, and Mat had never seen him smile, not even when tipped. Most tavernkeepers would smile at the Dark One himself for a tip.

mæt heɪɾəd ɡæmbəlɪŋ ən dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ɪn ə pleɪs wɛɹ jə hæd tə kip wʌn hæn ɑn jəɹ kɔɪn pɝs.

Mat hated gambling and drinking in a place where you had to keep one hand on your coin purse.

bʌɾ i hæɾ ə maɪn tə wɪn səm ɹil mʌni tənaɪt, ən ðəɹ wɝ daɪs ɡeɪmz ɡoʊɪŋ ən kɔɪnz klɪŋkɪŋ, soʊ hi fɛl sʌmwʌɾ ət hoʊm. ðə leɪs ɑn ɪz koʊt dɪd ɡɛt ɡlænsɪz. waɪ hæɾ i teɪkən tə wɛɹɪŋ ðæt, ɛniweɪ? bɛst əv ləpɪn pʊl ɪɾ ɔf ɪz kʌfs wən i ɡɑt bæk tə ðə kæmp. wɛl, nɑɾ ɔl ʌv ɪt. səm ʌv ɪt, meɪbi.

But he had a mind to win some real money tonight, and there were dice games going and coins clinking, so he felt somewhat at home. The lace on his coat did get glances. Why had he taken to wearing that, anyway? Best have Lopin pull it off his cuffs when he got back to the camp. Well, not all of it. Some of it, maybe.

mæt faʊn ə ɡeɪm ət ðə bæk biɪŋ pleɪd baɪ θɹi mɛn ən ə wʊmən ɪn bɹitʃɪz. ʃi hæd ʃɔɹt ɡoʊldən hɛɹ ən naɪs aɪz; mæt noʊɾəst ðoʊz pjʊɹli fəɹ θɔɹnz seɪk. ʃi hæɾ ə fʊl bʊzəm, ɛniweɪ, ən leɪtli mæt hæɾ ə maɪn fəɹ wɪmən u wɝ mɔɹ slɛndɝ θɹu ðə tʃɛst.

Mat found a game at the back being played by three men and a woman in breeches. She had short golden hair and nice eyes; Mat noticed those purely for Thorn's sake. She had a full bosom, anyway, and lately Mat had a mind for women who were more slender through the chest.

ɪn mɪnəts mæt wɑz dɪsɪŋ wɪð ðɛm, ən ðət kɑmd ɪm ə mɛʒɝ. hi kɛpt ɪz kɔɪn paʊtʃ ɪn saɪt, ðoʊ, leɪɪŋ ɪɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. bɪfɔɹ lɔŋ, ðə paɪl ə kɔɪnz bɪsaɪɾ ɪt ɡɹu, moʊsli sɪlvɝz.

In minutes Mat was dicing with them, and that calmed him a measure. He kept his coin pouch in sight, though, laying it on the floor in front of him. Before long, the pile of coins beside it grew, mostly silvers.

"ju hɪɹ əbaʊt wʌt hæpən oʊvɝ ət fɛɹiɝz ɡɹin?" wʌn ə ðə mɛn æskt ɪz fɛloʊz əz mæt tɔst. "ɪt wɑz ə tɛɹəbəl θɪŋ." ðə spikɝ wɑz ə tɔl fɛloʊ, wɪð ə pɪntʃt-ʌp feɪs ðət lʊk laɪk ɪt hæd bɪn kloʊzd ɪn ə dɔɹ ə fju taɪmz. hi kɔl hɪmsɛlf tʃeɪsɝ. mæt fɪɡjɝd ðət wɑz kəz ðə wɪmən ɹæn əweɪ fɹəm ɪm æftɝ ðeɪ ɡɑɾ ə lʊk ət ðət feɪs, ən i hæd tə ɹʌn æftɝ ðɛm.

"You hear about what happened over at Farrier's Green?" one of the men asked his fellows as Mat tossed. "It was a terrible thing." The speaker was a tall fellow, with a pinched-up face that looked like it had been closed in a door a few times. He called himself Chaser. Mat figured that was because the women ran away from him after they got a look at that face, and he had to run after them.

"wʌt?" klɛɹ æskt. ʃi wɑz ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd wʊmən. mæt ɡeɪv əɹ ə smaɪl. hi dɪd nɑt daɪs əɡɛnst wɪmən mʌtʃ, əz moʊs kleɪm tə faɪn dɪsɪŋ ɪmpɹɑpɝ. nɛvɝ maɪn ðət ðeɪ nɛvɝ kəmpleɪnd wən ə mæn bɑɾ əm sʌmθɪŋ naɪs wɪð wʌɾ i hæd wʌn. ɛniweɪ, dɪsɪŋ wɪð wɪmən wɑz nɑt fɛɹ, sɪns wʌn ə hɪz smaɪlz kəd sɛt ðɛɹ hɑɹts flʌɾɝɪŋ ən ðeɪ wəd ɡɛɾ ɔl wik ɪn ðə niz. bʌt mæt dɪd nɑt smaɪl ət ɡɝlz ðət weɪ ɛnimɔɹ. bɪsaɪdz, ʃi hæd nɑt ɹɪspɑndɪd tə ɛni ʌv ɪz smaɪlz ɛniweɪ.

"What?" Clare asked. She was the golden-haired woman. Mat gave her a smile. He did not dice against women much, as most claimed to find dicing improper. Never mind that they never complained when a man bought them something nice with what he had won. Anyway, dicing with women was not fair, since one of his smiles could set their hearts fluttering and they would get all weak in the knees. But Mat did not smile at girls that way anymore. Besides, she had not responded to any of his smiles anyway.

"dʒoʊɾɝi," tʃeɪsɝ sɛɾ əz mæt ʃʊk ɪz daɪs. "ðeɪ faʊn ɪm dɛd ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. θɹoʊt ɹɪp klin aʊt. bɑɾi wɑz dʒɹeɪn ə blʌd, laɪk ə waɪnɛskɪn fʊl ə hoʊlz."

"Jowdry," Chaser said as Mat shook his dice. "They found him dead this morning. Throat ripped clean out. Body was drained of blood, like a wineskin full of holes."

mæt wɑz soʊ stɑɹɾəld ðəɾ i θɹu ðə daɪs, bʌt dɪd nɑt wɑtʃ əm ɹoʊl. "wʌt?" hi dɪmændəd.

Mat was so startled that he threw the dice, but did not watch them roll. "What?" he demanded.

"wʌt dɪd jə seɪ?"

"What did you say?"

"hɪɹ naʊ," tʃeɪsɝ sɛd, lʊkɪŋ təwɔɹd mæt. "ɪts dʒʌst sʌmwʌn wi nu. oʊd mi tu kɹaʊnz, hi dɪd."

"Here now," Chaser said, looking toward Mat. "It's just someone we knew. Owed me two crowns, he did."

"dʒɹeɪn ə blʌd," mæt sɛd, "ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ? dɪd jə si ðə bɑɾi?" "wʌt?" tʃeɪsɝ sɛd, ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ. "blʌɾi æʃəz, mæn! wʌts ɹɔŋ wɪð ju?"

"Drained of blood," Mat said, "Are you sure? Did you see the body?" "What?" Chaser said, grimacing. "Bloody ashes, man! What's wrong with you?"

"tʃeɪsɝ," klɛɹ sɛd. "wɪl jə lʊk ət ðæt?"

"Chaser," Clare said. "Will you look at that?"

ðə lin mæn ɡlæns daʊn, əz dɪd mæt. ðə daɪs i hæd tɔst - ɔl θɹi ʌv əm - hæd lændəd stɪl ən wɝ bælənst ɑn ðɛɹ kɔɹnɝz. laɪt! hi hæd tɔs kɔɪnz soʊ ðeɪ fɛl ɑn ðɛɹ saɪdz bɪfɔɹ, bʌɾ i hæd nɛvɝ dʌn ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ðɪs.

The lean man glanced down, as did Mat. The dice he had tossed - all three of them - had landed still and were balanced on their corners. Light! He had tossed coins so they fell on their sides before, but he had never done anything like this.

ɹaɪt ðɛɹ, ɔl ʌv ə sʌɾən, ðə daɪs stɑɹɾəd ɹætlɪŋ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd. hi ɔlmoʊs dʒʌmp klɪɹ tə ðə silɪŋ. blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz! ðoʊz daɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd nɛvɝ mɛn ɛniθɪŋ ɡʊd. ðeɪ oʊnli stɑpt wən sʌmθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒd, sʌmθɪŋ ðət juʒəwəli mɛn bæd nuz fəɹ pʊɹ meɪtʃɹim kɔθən.

Right there, all of a sudden, the dice started rattling inside his head. He almost jumped clear to the ceiling. Blood and bloody ashes! Those dice in his head never meant anything good. They only stopped when something changed, something that usually meant bad news for poor Matrim Cauthon.

"aɪ eɪnt nɛvɝ . . ." tʃeɪsɝ sɛd.

"I ain't never . . ." Chaser said.

"wil kɔl ðəɾ ə lɔs," mæt sɛd, tɔsɪŋ ə fju kɔɪnz daʊn ən skupɪŋ ʌp ðə ɹɛst ə hɪz wɪnɪŋz.

"We'll call that a loss," Mat said, tossing a few coins down and scooping up the rest of his winnings.

"wʌt dʒju noʊ əbaʊt dʒoʊɾɝi?" klɛɹ dɪmændəd. ʃi wɑz ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ əɹ weɪst. mæt wʊɾə bɛt ɡoʊld əɡɛns kɑpɝz ɑn əɹ hævɪŋ ə naɪf ðɛɹ, ðə weɪ ʃi ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɪm.

"What do you know about Jowdry?" Clare demanded. She was reaching for her waist. Mat would have bet gold against coppers on her having a knife there, the way she glared at him.

"nʌθɪŋ," mæt sɛd. nʌθɪŋ ən tu mʌtʃ ət ðə seɪm taɪm. "ɪkskjus mi."

"Nothing," Mat said. Nothing and too much at the same time. "Excuse me."

hi heɪstəli kɹɔs ðə tævɝn. əz i dɪd, hi noʊɾəst wʌn ə ðə θɪk-ɑɹm tʌfs fɹəm ðə dɔɹ stændɪŋ ən tɔkɪŋ tə bɝnhɝd ðə tævɝn-kipɝ, pɔɪntɪŋ əɾ ə pis ə peɪpɝ ɪn ɪz hænz. mæt kəd nɑt si wʌt wɑz ɑn ɪt, bʌɾ i kəd ɡɛs: hɪz oʊn feɪs.

He hastily crossed the tavern. As he did, he noticed one of the thick-armed toughs from the door standing and talking to Bernherd the tavern-keeper, pointing at a piece of paper in his hands. Mat could not see what was on it, but he could guess: his own face.

hi kɝst ən dʌkt aʊɾ ɑntu ðə stʃɹit. hi tʊk ðə fɝst æli hi sɔ, bɹeɪkɪŋ ɪndə ə ɹʌn.

He cursed and ducked out onto the street. He took the first alley he saw, breaking into a run.

ðə fɔɹseɪkən hʌntɪŋ hɪm, ə pɪktʃɝ ə hɪz feɪs ɪn ðə pɑkəɾ ʌv ɛvɹi fʊtpæɾ ɪn ðə sɪɾi ən ə kɔɹps kɪld ən dʒɹeɪn ʌv ɪts blʌd. ðət kəɾ oʊnli min wʌn θɪŋ. ðə ɡoʊləm wɑz ɪn keɪɛmlɪn.

The Forsaken hunting him, a picture of his face in the pocket of every footpad in the city and a corpse killed and drained of its blood. That could only mean one thing. The gholam was in Caemlyn.

ɪt simd ɪmpɑsəbəl ðəɾ ɪt cʊɾə ɡɑɾən hɪɹ ðɪs kwɪkli. ʌv kɔɹs, mæt hæd sin ɪt skwiz θɹu ə hoʊl nɑt tu hændspænz waɪd. ðə θɪŋ dɪd nɑt sim tə hæv ə ɹaɪt sɛns ʌv wʌt wɑz pɑsəbəl ən wʌt wɑz nɑt pɑsəbəl.

It seemed impossible that it could have gotten here this quickly. Of course, Mat had seen it squeeze through a hole not two handspans wide. The thing did not seem to have a right sense of what was possible and what was not possible.

blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz, hi θɔt, dʌkɪŋ ɪz hɛd. hi niɾəd tə kəlɛk θɔɹn ən ɡɛt bæk tə ðə bænz kæmp aʊtsaɪɾ ə ðə sɪɾi. hi heɪsən daʊn ðə dɑɹk, ɹeɪn-slɪk stʃɹit. peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz ɹəflɛktəd ðə lɪɾ ɔɪl læmps əhɛd. ɪleɪn kɛp ðə kwinz wɔk wɛl ɪluməneɪɾəd ət naɪt.

Blood and bloody ashes, he thought, ducking his head. He needed to collect Thorn and get back to the Band's camp outside of the city. He hastened down the dark, rain-slicked street. Paving stones reflected the lit oil lamps ahead. Elayne kept the Queen's Walk well illuminated at night.

hi hæd sɛnt wɝd tə hɝ, bʌt hæd nɑt ɡɑɾən ə ɹɪplaɪ. haʊ wɑz ðət fəɹ ɡɹæɾətud? baɪ hɪz kaʊnt, hi hæd seɪvd əɹ laɪf twaɪs. wʌns ʃʊɾə bɪn ɪnʌf tə ɹədus əɹ tə tɛɹz ən kɪsəz, bʌɾ i hæd nɑt sin ivən ə pɛk ɑn ðə tʃik. nɑt ðəɾ i wɑntəd wʌn; nɑt fɹəm ɹɔɪəlti. bɛs tə əvɔɪd ! ðɛm.

He had sent word to her, but had not gotten a reply. How was that for gratitude? By his count, he had saved her life twice. Once should have been enough to reduce her to tears and kisses, but he had not seen even a peck on the cheek. Not that he wanted one; not from royalty. Best to avoid ! them.

jəɹ mɛɹid tə ə blʌɾi haɪ leɪɾi ʌv ðə simən, hi θɔt. dɔɾɝ ə ði ɛmpɹɛs hɝsɛlf ðəɹ wɑz noʊ əvɔɪɾɪŋ ɹɔɪəlti naʊ! nɑt fəɹ hɪm. ət lis tuɑn wɑz pɹɪɾi. ən ɡʊɾ ət pleɪɪŋ stoʊnz. ən vɛɹi kin ʌv wɪt, ɡʊd fəɹ tɔkɪŋ tə, ivən ɪf ʃi wɑz fleɪmɪŋ fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾɪŋ moʊst ə ðə . . .

You're married to a bloody high lady of the Seamhan, he thought. Daughter of the Empress herself There was no avoiding royalty now! Not for him. At least Tuon was pretty. And good at playing stones. And very keen of wit, good for talking to, even if she was flaming frustrating most of the . . .

noʊ. noʊ θɪŋkɪŋ ə tuɑn ɹaɪt naʊ.

No. No thinking of Tuon right now.

ɛniweɪ, hi hæd ɹəsiv noʊ ɹɪplaɪ fɹəm ɪleɪn. hi wəd nid tə bi mɔɹ fɝm. ɪt wɑz nɑt dʒʌst ɑlʌdʒɹə ən əɹ dʒɹæɡənz naʊ. ðə blʌɾi ɡoʊləm wɑz ɪn ðə sɪɾi.

Anyway, he had received no reply from Elayne. He would need to be more firm. It was not just Aludra and her dragons now. The bloody gholam was in the city.

hi stɛpt aʊɾ ɑntu ə lɑɹdʒ, bɪzi stʃɹit, hænz pʊʃt ɪndə ðə pɑkəts ə hɪz koʊt. ɪn ɪz heɪst, hi hæd lɛft ɪz wɔkɪŋ stæf bæk ɪn ðə dɛd mænz bɹɛθ. hi ɡɹʌmbəl tə hɪmsɛlf; hi wɑz səpoʊz tə bi spɛndɪŋ ɪz deɪz ɹɪlæksɪŋ, hɪz naɪts dɪsɪŋ ɪn faɪn ɪnz, ən ɪz mɔɹnɪŋz slipɪŋ leɪt waɪl weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ vɛɹɪnz θɝɾi-deɪ ɹɪkwaɪɹmən tə ɹʌn aʊt. naʊ ðɪs.

He stepped out onto a large, busy street, hands pushed into the pockets of his coat. In his haste, he had left his walking staff back in The Dead Man's Breath. He grumbled to himself; he was supposed to be spending his days relaxing, his nights dicing in fine inns, and his mornings sleeping late while waiting for Verin's thirty-day requirement to run out. Now this.

hi hæɾ ə skɔɹ tə sɛɾəl wɪð ðət ɡoʊləm. ði ɪnəsəns ɪt hæd slɔɾɝd waɪl lɝkɪŋ ɝaʊn ɛbu dɑɹ wɝ bæɾ ɪnʌf, ən mæt hæd nɑt fɝɡɑɾən neɪlzin ən ðə faɪv ɹɛdʒɹmz u hæd bɪn mɝɾɝd iðɝ. blʌɾi æʃəz, ɪt hæd hæɾ ɪnʌf tə ænsɝ fəɹ ɔlɹɛɾi. ðən ɪt hæd teɪkən taɪlɪn.

He had a score to settle with that gholam. The innocents it had slaughtered while lurking around Ebou Dar were bad enough, and Mat had not forgotten Nalesean and the five Redarms who had been murdered either. Bloody ashes, it had had enough to answer for already. Then it had taken Tylin.

mæt ɹimuvd ə hæn fɹəm ɪz pɑkət, filɪŋ ət ðə fɑkshɛd mədæljən, ɹɛstɪŋ - əz ɔlweɪz -  əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst. hi wɑz taɪɝɾ ə ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm ðət mɑnstɝ. ə plæn stɑɹɾəd tə fɔɹm ɪn ɪz maɪnd, əkʌmpənid baɪ ðə ɹætlɪŋ ə daɪs. hi tʃɹaɪd tə bænɪʃ ði ɪmədʒ ə ðə kwin laɪɪŋ ɪn bɑnz mæt hɪmsɛlf hæd taɪd, hɝ hɛd ɹɪp fɹi. ðəɹ wʊɾə bɪn soʊ mʌtʃ blʌd. ðə ɡoʊləm lɪvd ɑn fɹɛʃ blʌd.

Mat removed a hand from his pocket, feeling at the foxhead medallion, resting - as always -  against his chest. He was tired of running from that monster. A plan started to form in his mind, accompanied by the rattling of dice. He tried to banish the image of the Queen lying in bonds Mat himself had tied, her head ripped free. There would have been so much blood. The gholam lived on fresh blood.

mæt ʃɪvɝd, ʃʌvɪŋ ɪz hæn bæk ɪndə hɪz pɑkəɾ əz i əpɹoʊtʃt ðə sɪɾi ɡeɪt. dɪspaɪt ðə dɑɹknəs, hi kəd pɪk aʊt saɪnz ə ðə bæɾəl ðət hæd bɪn fɔt hɪɹ. ən æɹoʊhɛɾ ɛmbɛɾɪd ɪndə ðə dɔɹweɪ ʌv ə bɪldɪŋ tə hɪz lɛft, ə dɑɹk pætʃ ɑn ðə wɔl ʌv ə ɡɑɹdhaʊs, steɪnɪŋ ðə wʊd bɪniθ ðə wɪndoʊ. ə mæn hæd daɪd ðɛɹ, pɝhæps waɪl faɪɹɪŋ ə kɹɔsboʊ aʊt, ən hæd slʌmp daʊn oʊvɝ ðə wɪndoʊz lɛdʒ, bliɾɪŋ ɪz laɪfblʌd daʊn ðə wʊd.

Mat shivered, shoving his hand back into his pocket as he approached the city gate. Despite the darkness, he could pick out signs of the battle that had been fought here. An arrowhead embedded into the doorway of a building to his left, a dark patch on the wall of a guardhouse, staining the wood beneath the window. A man had died there, perhaps while firing a crossbow out, and had slumped down over the windows ledge, bleeding his lifeblood down the wood.

ðət sidʒ wɑz oʊvɝ naʊ, ən ə nu kwin - ðə ɹaɪt kwin - hɛl ðə θɹoʊn. fəɹ wʌns, ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə bæɾəl ən i hæd mɪst ɪt. ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðət laɪɾənd ɪz mud sʌmwʌt. ən ɪntaɪɝ wɔɹ hæd bɪn fɔɾ oʊvɝ ðə laɪən θɹoʊn, ən nɑt wʌn æɹoʊ, bleɪɾ əɹ spɪɹ hæɾ ɛntɝd ðə kɑnflɪk sikɪŋ meɪtʃɹim kɔθənz hɑɹt.

That siege was over now, and a new Queen - the right Queen - held the throne. For once, there had been a battle and he had missed it. Remembering that lightened his mood somewhat. An entire war had been fought over the Lion Throne, and not one arrow, blade or spear had entered the conflict seeking Matrim Cauthon's heart.

hi tɝn ɹaɪt, əlɔŋ ði ɪnsaɪɾ ə ðə sɪɾi wɔl. ðəɹ wɝ ə lɑɾ ʌv ɪnz hɪɹ. ðəɹ wɝ ɔlweɪz ɪnz nɪɹ sɪɾi ɡeɪts. nɑt ðə naɪsɪst wʌnz, bʌɾ ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz ðə moʊs pɹɑfəɾəbəl wʌnz.

He turned right, along the inside of the city wall. There were a lot of inns here. There were always inns near city gates. Not the nicest ones, but almost always the most profitable ones.

laɪt spɪl fɹəm dɔɹweɪz ən wɪndoʊz, peɪntɪŋ ðə ɹoʊd ɡoʊldən ɪn ætʃəz. dɑɹk fɔɹmz kɹaʊɾəd ði æliweɪz ɪksɛpt wɛɹ ði ɪnz hæd haɪɝd mɛn tə kip ðə pʊɹ əweɪ. keɪɛmlɪn wɑz stʃɹeɪnd. ðə flʌɾ ə ɹɛfjudʒiz, ðə ɹisən faɪɾɪŋ, ði . . . ʌðɝ mæɾɝz. stɔɹiz əbaʊndəɾ ə ðə dɛd wɔkɪŋ, ʌv fud spɔɪlɪŋ, ʌv waɪtwɑʃt wɔlz sʌɾənli ɡoʊɪŋ ɡɹaɪmi.

Light spilled from doorways and windows, painting the road golden in atches. Dark forms crowded the alleyways except where the inns had hired men to keep the poor away. Caemlyn was strained. The flood of refugees, the recent fighting, the . . . other matters. Stories abounded of the dead walking, of food spoiling, of whitewashed walls suddenly going grimy.

ði ɪn wɛɹ θɔɹn hæd tʃoʊzən tə pɝfɔɹm wɑz ə stip-ɹuft, bɹɪk-fɹʌntɪd stʃɹʌktʃɝ wɪð ə saɪn ðət ʃoʊd tu æpəlz, wʌn iɾən daʊn tə ðə kɔɹ. ðət meɪɾ ɪt stɑɹk waɪt, ði ʌðɝ wɑz stɑɹk ɹɛd - kʌlɝz .ʌv ði æn-dɔɹæn flæɡ. ðə tu æpəlz wɑz wʌn ə ðə naɪsɝ ɛstæblɪʃməns ɪn ði ɛɹiə.

The inn where Thorn had chosen to perform was a steep-roofed, brick-fronted structure with a sign that showed two apples, one eaten down to the core. That made it stark white, the other was stark red - colors .of the An-doran flag. The Two Apples was one of the nicer establishments in the area.

mæt kəd hɪɹ ðə mjuzɪk fɹəm aʊtsaɪd. hi ɛntɝɾ ən sɔ θɔɹn sɪɾɪŋ ətɑp ə smɔl deɪz ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ðə kɑmən ɹum, pleɪɪŋ ɪz fluɾ ən wɛɹɪŋ ɪz pætʃwɝk ɡlimənz kloʊk. hɪz aɪz wɝ kloʊzd əz i pleɪd, hɪz mʌstæʃ dʒɹupɪŋ lɔŋ ən waɪɾ ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə ði ɪnstʃɹəmənt. ɪt wɑz ə hɔntɪŋ tun, "ðə mɛɹɪdʒ ə sɪni weɪd." mæt hæd lɝn ɪɾ əz "ɔlweɪz tʃuz ðə ɹaɪt hɔɹs," ən stɪl wɑz nɑt juz tə ɪt biɪŋ pɝfɔɹmd əz sloʊli əz tɑm dɪd.

Mat could hear the music from outside. He entered and saw Thorn sitting atop a small dais on the far side of the common room, playing his flute and wearing his patchwork gleeman's cloak. His eyes were closed as he played, his mustache drooping long and white on either side of the instrument. It was a haunting tune, "The Marriage of Cinny Wade." Mat had learned it as "Always Choose the Right Horse," and still was not used to it being performed as slowly as Thom did.

ə smɔl kəlɛkʃən ə kɔɪnz wɑz skæɾɝd ɑn ðə flɔɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə tɑm. ði ɪn əlaʊɾ ɪm tə pleɪ fəɹ tɪps. mæt stɑp nɪɹ ðə dɔɹweɪ ən lin bæk tə lɪsən. noʊbɑdi spoʊk ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz stʌf soʊ fʊl mæt cʊɾə meɪd hæf ə kʌmpəni ʌv soʊlʒɝz dʒʌst wɪð ðə mɛn ɪnsaɪd. ɛvɹi aɪ wɑz ɑn tɑm.

A small collection of coins was scattered on the floor in front of Thom. The inn allowed him to play for tips. Mat stopped near the doorway and leaned back to listen. Nobody spoke in the common room, though it was stuffed so full Mat could have made half a company of soldiers just with the men inside. Every eye was on Thom.

mæt hæd bɪn ɔl ɝaʊn ðə wɝl naʊ, wɔkɪŋ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ʌv ɪɾ ɑn ɪz oʊn tu fit. hi hæd nɪɹli lɔst ɪz skɪn ɪn ə dʌzən dɪfɹən sɪɾiz, ən hæd steɪɾ ɪn ɪnz fɑɹ ən nɪɹ. hi hæd hɝd ɡlimən, pɝfɔɹmɝz ən bɑɹdz. tɑm meɪd ði ɪntaɪɝ lɑt sim laɪk tʃɪlʒɹən wɪð stɪks, bæŋɪŋ ɑn pɑts.

Mat had been all around the world now, walking a great deal of it on his own two feet. He had nearly lost his skin in a dozen different cities, and had stayed in inns far and near. He had heard gleemen, performers and bards. Thom made the entire lot seem like children with sticks, banging on pots.

ðə flut wɑz ə sɪmpəl ɪnstʃɹəmənt. ə lɑɾ ə noʊbəlz wəd ɹæðɝ hɪɹ ðə hɑɹp ɪnstɛd; wʌn mæn ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ hæd toʊl mæt ðə hɑɹp wɑz mɔɹ ɛləveɪɾɪd." mæt fɪɡjɝɾ i wʊɾə ɡɔn slæk-dʒɔɾ ən sɔsɝ-aɪɾ ɪf i hæd hɝd tɑm pleɪ. ðə ɡlimən meɪd ðə flut saʊn laɪk ən ɪkstɛnʃən ə hɪz oʊn soʊl. sɑf tʃɹɪlz, maɪnɝ skeɪlz ən paʊɝfli boʊld lɔŋ hoʊlz. sətʃ ə ləmɛntɪŋ mɛləɾi. hu wɑz tɑm sɑɹoʊɪŋ fɔɹ?

The flute was a simple instrument. A lot of nobles would rather hear the harp instead; one man in Ebou Dar had told Mat the harp was more elevated." Mat figured he would have gone slack-jawed and saucer-eyed if he had heard Thom play. The gleeman made the flute sound like an extension of his own soul. Soft trills, minor scales and powerfully bold long holds. Such a lamenting melody. Who was Thom sorrowing for?

ðə kɹaʊd wɑtʃt. keɪɛmlɪn wɑz wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst sɪɾiz ɪn ðə wɝld, bʌt stɪl ðə vɝaɪəɾi simd ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl. kɹʌsti ɪliɑnɝz sæt bɪsaɪd smuð dəmɑni, kɹæfti kɛɹhinɪn, staʊt tɛɹənz ən ə spɹɪŋklɪŋ ə bɔɹ-dɝləndɝz. keɪɛmlɪn wɑz sin əz wʌn ə ðə fju pleɪsəz wɛɹ wʌn kəd bi seɪf fɹəm boʊθ ðə sintʃæn ən ðə dʒɹæɡən. ðəɹ wɑz ə bɪɾ ə fud, tu.

The crowd watched. Caemlyn was one of the greatest cities in the world, but still the variety seemed incredible. Crusty Illianers sat beside smooth Domani, crafty Cairhienin, stout Tairens and a sprinkling of Bor-derlanders. Caemlyn was seen as one of the few places where one could be safe from both the Seanchan and the Dragon. There was a bit of food, too.

θɔɹn fɪnɪʃt ðə pis ən muvd ɑn tə ənʌðɝ wɪθaʊɾ oʊpənɪŋ hz aɪz. mæt saɪd, heɪɾɪŋ tə bɹeɪk ʌp θɔɹnz pɝfɔɹməns. ənfɔɹtʃənətli ɪt wɑz taɪm tə bi muvɪŋ ɑn bæk tə kæmp. ðeɪ hæd tə tɔk əbaʊt ði aɪ ɡoʊləm, ən mæt niɾəd tə faɪn ə weɪ tə ɡɛt θɹu tə ɪleɪn. meɪbi θɔɹn wəd ɡoʊ tɔk tə hɝ fəɹ hɪm.

Thorn finished the piece and moved on to another without opening hjs eyes. Mat sighed, hating to break up Thorn's performance. Unfortunately it was time to be moving on back to camp. They had to talk about the I gholam, and Mat needed to find a way to get through to Elayne. Maybe Thorn would go talk to her for him.

mæt nɑɾəd tə ði ɪnkipɝ - ə steɪtli, dɑɹk-hɛɹd wʊmən neɪm bɹɑməz. ʃi nɑɾəd tə mæt, hup ɪɹɪŋz kætʃɪŋ ðə laɪt. ʃi wɑz ə lɪɾəl oʊldɝ ðən ɪz nɔɹməl teɪst - bʌt ðɛn, taɪlɪn hæd bɪn əɹ eɪdʒ. hi wəd kip əɹ ɪn maɪnd. fəɹ wʌn ə hɪz mɛn, ʌv kɔɹs. meɪbi veɪnɪn.

Mat nodded to the innkeeper - a stately, dark-haired woman named Bromas. She nodded to Mat, hoop earrings catching the light. She was a little older than his normal taste - but then, Tylin had been her age. He would keep her in mind. For one of his men, of course. Maybe Vanin.

mæt ɹitʃt ðə steɪdʒ, ðən bɪɡæn tə skup ʌp ðə kɔɪnz. hi wəd lɛt θɔɹn fɪnɪʃ ən -  mæts hæn dʒɝkt. hɪz ɑɹm wɑz sʌɾənli pɪn baɪ ðə kʌf tə ðə steɪdʒ, ə naɪf stɪkɪŋ θɹu ðə klɔθ. ðə θɪn lɛŋθ ə mɛɾəl kwɪvɝd. mæt ɡlænst ʌp tə faɪn θɔɹn stɪl pleɪɪŋ, ðoʊ ðə ɡlimən hæd kɹækt ən aɪ bɪfɔɹ θɹoʊɪŋ ðə naɪf.

Mat reached the stage, then began to scoop up the coins. He would let Thorn finish and -  Mat's hand jerked. His arm was suddenly pinned by the cuff to the stage, a knife sticking through the cloth. The thin length of metal quivered. Mat glanced up to find Thorn still playing, though the gleeman had cracked an eye before throwing the knife.

θɔɹn ɹeɪzd ɪz hæn bæk ʌp ən kəntɪnjud pleɪɪŋ, ə smaɪl ʃoʊɪŋ ɑn ɪz pʌkɝd lɪps. mæt ɡɹʌmbəld ən jæŋkt ɪz kʌf fɹi, weɪɾɪŋ əz θɔɹn fɪnɪʃt ðɪs tun, wɪtʃ wɑz nɑɾ əz doʊlfəl əz ði ʌðɝ. wən ðə læŋki ɡlimən loʊɝd ðə flut, ðə ɹum bɝst ɪndə əplɔz.

Thorn raised his hand back up and continued playing, a smile showing on his puckered lips. Mat grumbled and yanked his cuff free, waiting as Thorn finished this tune, which was not as doleful as the other. When the lanky gleeman lowered the flute, the room burst into applause.

mæt feɪvɝd ðə ɡlimən wɪð ə skaʊl. "bɝn ju, θɔɹn. ðɪs ɪz wʌn ə maɪ feɪvɹɪt koʊts!"

Mat favored the gleeman with a scowl. "Burn you, Thorn. This is one of my favorite coats!"

"bi ɡlæɾ aɪ dɪd nɑɾ eɪm fəɹ ðə hænd," θɔɹn noʊɾəd, waɪpɪŋ daʊn ðə flut, nɑɾɪŋ tə ðə tʃɪɹɪŋ ən əplɔz ə ði ɪnz peɪtʃɹənz. ðeɪ kɔl fəɹ ɪm tə kəntɪnju, bʌɾ i ʃʊk ə ɹɪɡɹɛtfəl hɛɾ ən ɹipleɪst ɪz fluɾ ɪn ɪts keɪs.

"Be glad I did not aim for the hand," Thorn noted, wiping down the flute, nodding to the cheering and applause of the inn's patrons. They called for him to continue, but he shook a regretful head and replaced his flute in its case.

"aɪ ɔlmoʊst wɪʃ jə wəd hæv," mæt sɛd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz kʌf ən stɪkɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝ θɹu ðə hoʊlz.

"I almost wish you would have," Mat said, raising his cuff and sticking a finger through the holes.

"blʌd wəd nɑɾ əv ʃoʊn ðət mʌtʃ ɑn ðə blæk, bʌt ðə stɪtʃɪŋ wɪl bi ɑbviəs. dʒʌs kəz jə wɛɹ mɔɹ pætʃəz ðən kloʊk dʌzn min aɪ wɑnə ɪməteɪt ju."

"Blood would not have shown that much on the black, but the stitching will be obvious. Just because you wear more patches than cloak doesn't mean I want to imitate you."

"æn jə kəmpleɪn ðət jəɹ nɑɾ ə lɔɹd," θɔɹn sɛd, linɪŋ daʊn tə kəlɛkt ɪz ɝnɪŋz.

"And you complain that you're not a lord," Thorn said, leaning down to collect his earnings.

"aɪm nɑt!" mæt sɛd. "ænd nɛvɝ maɪnd wʌt tuɑn sɛd, bɝn ju. ɪm noʊ blʌɾi noʊbəlmən."

"I'm not!" Mat said. "And never mind what Tuon said, burn you. I'm no bloody nobleman."

"ɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ə fɑɹmɝ kəmpleɪnɪŋ ðəɾ ɪz koʊt stɪtʃɪz wəd ʃoʊ?"

"Ever heard of a farmer complaining that his coat stitches would show?"

"ju doʊn əv tə bi ə lɔɹd tə wɑnə dʒɹɛs wɪð səm sɛns," mæt ɡɹʌmbəld.

"You don't have to be a lord to want to dress with some sense," Mat grumbled.

θɔɹn læft, slæpɪŋ ɪm ɑn ðə bæk ən hɑpɪŋ daʊn. "aɪm sɑɹi, mæt. aɪ muv baɪ ɪnstɪŋkt, dɪdn ɹilaɪz ɪt wɑz jə əntɪl aɪ sɔ ðə feɪs ətætʃt tə ði ɑɹm. baɪ ðɛn, ðə naɪf wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi aʊɾ ə maɪ fɪŋɡɝz."

Thorn laughed, slapping him on the back and hopping down. "I'm sorry, Mat. I moved by instinct, didn't realize it was you until I saw the face attached to the arm. By then, the knife was already out of my fingers."

mæt saɪd. "θɔɹn," hi sɛd ɡɹɪmli, "æn oʊl fɹɛn ɪz ɪn taʊn. wʌn u livz foʊks dɛd wɪð ðɛɹ θɹoʊts ɹɪp klin aʊt."

Mat sighed. "Thorn," he said grimly, "an old friend is in town. One who leaves folks dead with their throats ripped clean out."

θɔɹn nɑɾəd, lʊkɪŋ tʃɹʌbəld. "aɪ hɝɾ əbaʊɾ ɪt fɹəm səm ɡɑɹdzmɪn dʊɹɪŋ maɪ bɹeɪk. ən wɝ stʌk hɪɹ ɪn ðə sɪɾi ənlɛs jə dɪsaɪd . . ."

Thorn nodded, looking troubled. "I heard about it from some Guardsmen during my break. And we're stuck here in the city unless you decide . . ."

"aɪm nɑɾ oʊpənɪŋ ðə lɛɾɝ," mæt sɛd. "vɛɹɪn cʊɾə lɛft ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz fəɹ mi tə kɹɔl ɔl ðə weɪ tə fɑlm ɑn maɪ hænz, ən aɪd blʌɾi hæv tə də ɪt! aɪ noʊ jə heɪt ðə dɪleɪ, bʌt ðət lɛɾɝ kəd meɪk ə mʌtʃ wɝs dɪleɪ."

"I'm not opening the letter," Mat said. "Verin could have left instructions for me to crawl all the way to Falme on my hands, and I'd bloody have to do it! I know you hate the delay, but that letter could make a much worse delay."

θɔɹn nɑɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli.

Thorn nodded reluctantly.

"lɛts ɡɛt bæk tə kæmp," mæt sɛd.

"Let's get back to camp," Mat said.

ðə bænz kæmp wɑz ə liɡ aʊtsaɪɾ ə keɪɛmlɪn. θɔɹn ən mæt hæd nɑt ɹɪɾən ɪn - wɔkɝz wɝ lɛs kənspɪkjuəs, ən mæt wəd nɑt bɹɪŋ hɔɹsəz ɪndə ðə sɪɾi əntɪl i faʊn ə steɪbəl ðəɾ i tʃɹʌstɪd. ðə pɹaɪs ʌv ɡʊd hɔɹsəz wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ ɹɪdɪkjələs. hi hæd hoʊp tə liv ðət bɪhaɪnd wʌns i lɛf sintʃæn lænz, bʌɾ ɪleɪnz ɑɹmiz wɝ baɪɪŋ ʌp ɛvɹi ɡʊd hɔɹs ðeɪ kəd faɪnd, ən moʊst ə ðə nɑt-soʊ-ɡʊd wʌnz, tu. bɪɑn ðæt, hi hæd hɝd ðət hɔɹsəz hæɾ ə weɪ ʌv dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ ðiz deɪz. mit wɑz mit, ən pipəl wɝ kloʊs tə stɑɹvɪŋ, ivən ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. ɪt meɪd mæts skɪn kɹɔl, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə tʃɹuθ.

The Band's camp was a league outside of Caemlyn. Thorn and Mat had not ridden in - walkers were less conspicuous, and Mat would not bring horses into the city until he found a stable that he trusted. The price of good horses was getting ridiculous. He had hoped to leave that behind once he left Seanchan lands, but Elayne's armies were buying up every good horse they could find, and most of the not-so-good ones, too. Beyond that, he had heard that horses had a way of disappearing these days. Meat was meat, and people were close to starving, even in Caemlyn. It made Mat's skin crawl, but it was the truth.

hi ən θɔɹn spɛn ðə wɔk bæk tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə ɡboʊləm, dəsaɪɾɪŋ vɛɹi lɪɾəl ʌðɝ ðən tə meɪk ɛvɹiwʌn əlɝɾ ən əv mæt stɑɹt slipɪŋ ɪn ə dɪfɹən tɛn ɛvɹi naɪt.

He and Thorn spent the walk back talking about the gbolam, deciding very little other than to make everyone alert and have Mat start sleeping in a different tent every night.

mæt ɡlænst oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ əz ðə tu ʌv əm kɹɛstəɾ ə hɪltɑp. keɪɛmlɪn wɑz əbleɪz wɪð ðə laɪɾ ə tɔɹtʃɪz ən læmps. ɪluməneɪʃən hʌŋ oʊvɝ ðə sɪɾi laɪk ə fɑɡ, ɡɹæn spaɪɹz ən taʊɝz lɪt baɪ ðə ɡloʊ. ði oʊl mɛmɹiz ɪnsaɪɾ ɪm ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðɪs sɪɾi - ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ əsɔltɪŋ ɪt bɪfɔɹ ændɝ wɑz ivən ə neɪʃən. keɪɛmlɪn hæd nɛvɝ meɪd fəɹ ən izi faɪt. hi dɪd nɑɾ ɛnvi ðə haʊsəz ðət hæd tʃɹaɪd tə siz ɪt fɹəm ɪleɪn.

Mat glanced over his shoulder as the two of them crested a hilltop. Caemlyn was ablaze with the light of torches and lamps. Illumination hung over the city like a fog, grand spires and towers lit by the glow. The old memories inside him remembered this city - remembered assaulting it before Andor was even a nation. Caemlyn had never made for an easy fight. He did not envy the Houses that had tried to seize it from Elayne.

θɔɹn stɛpt ʌp bɪsaɪd hɪm. "ɪt simz laɪk fɝɛvɝ sɪns wi lɛf hɪɹ læst, dʌzn ɪt, mæt?"

Thorn stepped up beside him. "It seems like forever since we left here last, doesn't it, Mat?"

"bɝn mi, bʌɾ ɪt dʌz," mæt sɛd. "wʌɾ ɛvɝ kənvɪnst əs tə ɡoʊ hʌnt-ɪŋ ðoʊz ful ɡɝlz? nɛks taɪm, ðeɪ kən seɪv ðɛmsɛlvz."

"Burn me, but it does," Mat said. "What ever convinced us to go hunt-ing those fool girls? Next time, they can save themselves."

θɔɹn aɪd hɪm. "ɑɹənt wi əbaʊt tə də ðə seɪm θɪŋ? wən wi ɡoʊ tə ðə taʊɝ ʌv ɡɛndʒeɪaɪ?"

Thorn eyed him. "Aren't we about to do the same thing? When we go to the Tower of Ghenjei?"

ɪts dɪfɹənt. wi kæn liv əɹ wɪð ðɛm. ðoʊz sneɪks ən fɑksəz - "

It's different. We can't leave her with them. Those snakes and foxes - "

"aɪm nɑt kəmpleɪnɪŋ, mæt," θɔɹn sɛd. "aɪm dʒʌs θɔtfəl."

"I'm not complaining, Mat," Thorn said. "I'm just thoughtful."

θɔɹn sim θɔtfəl ə lɑt, leɪtli. moʊpɪŋ ɝaʊnd, kɝɛsɪŋ ðət wɔɹn lɛɾɝ fɹəm mɔɪɹeɪn. ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə lɛɾɝ. "kʌm ɑn," mæt sɛd, tɝn-ɪŋ bæk əlɔŋ ðə ɹoʊd. "ju wɝ tɛlɪŋ mi əbaʊt ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪn tə si ðə kwin?"

Thorn seemed thoughtful a lot, lately. Moping around, caressing that worn letter from Moiraine. It was only a letter. "Come on," Mat said, turn-ing back along the road. "You were telling me about getting in to see the Queen?"

θɔɹn dʒɔɪn ɪm ɑn ðə dɑɹk ɹoʊdweɪ. "aɪm nɑt sɝpɹaɪzd ʃi hæzən ɹɪplaɪd tə ju, mæt. ʃiz pɹɑbli ɡɑɾ əɹ hænz fʊl. wɝɾ ɪz ðət tʃɹoʊl-lɑks əv ɪnveɪɾəd ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz ɪn fɔɹs, ən ændɝ ɪz stɪl fɹæktʃɝd fɹəm ðə səksɛʃən. ɪleɪn - "

Thorn joined him on the dark roadway. "I'm not surprised she hasn't replied to you, Mat. She's probably got her hands full. Word is that Trol-locs have invaded the Borderlands in force, and Andor is still fractured from the Succession. Elayne - "

"du juv ɛni ɡʊd nuz, θɔɹn?" mæt sɛd. "tɛl mi sʌm, ɪf jə du. aɪv ə maɪn fəɹ ɪt."

"Do you have any good news, Thorn?" Mat said. "Tell me some, if you do. I've a mind for it."

"aɪ wɪʃ ðət ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ wɝ stɪl oʊpən. ɡɪl ɔlweɪz hæd tɪdbɪts tə ʃɛɹ."

"I wish that The Queen's Blessing were still open. Gill always had tidbits to share."

"ɡʊd nuz," mæt pɹɑɾɪd əɡɛn.

"Good news," Mat prodded again.

"ɔl ɹaɪt. wɛl, ðə taʊɝ ʌv ɡɛndʒeɪaɪ ɪz ɹaɪt wɛɹ doʊmən sɛd. aɪ hæv wɝd fɹəm θɹi ʌðɝ ʃɪps kæptənz. ɪts pæst ən oʊpən pleɪn sɛvɹəl hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz nɔɹθwɛst ʌv waɪtbɹɪdʒ."

"All right. Well, the Tower of Ghenjei is right where Domon said. I have word from three other ship's captains. It's past an open plain several hundred miles northwest of Whitebridge."

mæt nɑɾəd, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz tʃɪn. hi fɛlt laɪk i kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ sʌmθɪŋ ə ðə taʊɝ. ə sɪlvɝi stʃɹʌktʃɝ, ənnætʃɹəl, ɪn ðə dɪstəns. ə tʃɹɪp ɑn ə boʊt, wɔɾɝ læpɪŋ ət ðə saɪdz. beɪl doʊmənz θɪk ɪliɑnɝ æksɛnt. . .

Mat nodded, rubbing his chin. He felt like he could remember something of the tower. A silvery structure, unnatural, in the distance. A trip on a boat, water lapping at the sides. Bayle Domon's thick Illianer accent. . .

ðoʊz ɪmədʒəz wɝ veɪɡ tə mæt; hɪz mɛmɹiz ə ðə taɪm wɝ fʊl ə mɔɹ hoʊlz ðən wʌn ə dʒɔɹi kɔŋɡɝz æləbaɪz. beɪl doʊmən hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə tɛl əm wɛɹ tə faɪn ðə taʊɝ, bʌt mæt wɑntəd kɑnfɝmeɪʃən. ðə weɪ doʊmən baʊɾ ən skɹeɪp fəɹ laɪlwɪn meɪd mæt ɪtʃ. niðɝ ʃoʊd mæt mʌtʃ əfɛkʃən, fəɹ ɔl ðə fæk ðəɾ i hæd seɪv ðɛm. nɑt ðəɾ i hæd wɑntəɾ ɛni əfɛkʃən fɹəm laɪlwɪn. kɪsɪŋ əɹ wəd bi əbaʊɾ əz fʌn əz kɪsɪŋ ə stoʊnioʊks bɑɹk.

Those images were vague to Mat; his memories of the time were full of more holes than one of Jori Congar's alibis. Bayle Domon had been able to tell them where to find the tower, but Mat wanted confirmation. The way Domon bowed and scraped for Leilwin made Mat itch. Neither showed Mat much affection, for all the fact that he had saved them. Not that he had wanted any affection from Leilwin. Kissing her would be about as fun as kissing a stoneoak's bark.

"ju θɪŋk doʊmənz dɪskɹɪpʃən wɪl bi ɪnʌf fəɹ sʌmwʌn tə meɪk əs wʌn ə ðoʊz ɡeɪtweɪz ðɛɹ?" mæt æskt.

"You think Domon's description will be enough for someone to make us one of those gateways there?" Mat asked.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ," θɔɹn sɛd. "ðoʊ ðæts ə sɛkəndɛɹi pɹɑbləm, aɪ ʃəd θɪŋk. wɛɹ ɑɹ wi gɑnə faɪn sʌmwʌn tə meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ? vɛɹɪn əz vænɪʃt."

"I don't know," Thorn said. "Though that's a secondary problem, I should think. Where are we going to find someone to make a gateway? Verin has vanished."

"aɪl faɪn ə weɪ."

"I'll find a way."

"ɪf jə doʊnt, wɪl ɛn ʌp spɛndɪŋ wiks tʃɹævlɪŋ tə ðə pleɪs,' θɔɹn sɛd. "aɪ doʊn laɪk - "

"If you don't, we'll end up spending weeks traveling to the place,' Thorn said. "I don't like - "

"aɪl faɪn əs ə ɡeɪtweɪ," mæt sɛd fɝmli. "meɪbi vɛɹɪn wɪl kʌm bæk ən ɹilis mi fɹəm ðɪs blʌɾi oʊθ."

"I'll find us a gateway," Mat said firmly. "Maybe Verin will come back and release me from this bloody oath."

"bɛs ðət wʌn steɪz əweɪ," θɔɹn sɛd. "aɪ doʊn tʃɹʌs hɝ. ðɛɹz sʌmθɪŋ ɔf əbaʊt ðət wʌn."

"Best that one stays away," Thorn said. "I don't trust her. There's something off about that one."

"ʃiz ɛɛs sədaɪ," mæt sɛd. "ðɛɹz sʌmθɪŋ ɔf əbaʊɾ əm ɔl -  laɪk daɪs wɛɹ ðə pɪps doʊn æɾ ʌp - bʌt fəɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, aɪ kaɪndə laɪk vɛɹɪn. ən ɪm ə ɡʊd dʒʌdʒ ə kɛɹɪktɝ, jə noʊ ðæt."

"She's Aes Sedai," Mat said. "There's something off about them all -  like dice where the pips don't add up - but for an Aes Sedai, I kind of like Verin. And I'm a good judge of character, you know that."

θɔɹn ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ. mæt skaʊl bæk.

Thorn raised an eyebrow. Mat scowled back.

"iðɝ weɪ," θɔɹn sɛd, "wi ʃəd pɹɑbli stɑɹt sɛndɪŋ ɡɑɹdz wɪð jə wən jə vɪzət ðə sɪɾi."

"Either way," Thorn said, "we should probably start sending guards with you when you visit the city."

"ɡɑɹdz woʊn hɛlp əɡɛns ðə ɡoʊləm."

"Guards won't help against the gholam."

"noʊ, bʌt wʌɾ ə ðə θʌɡz u dʒʌmp jə ɑn jəɹ weɪ bæk tə kæmp θɹi naɪts bæk?"

"No, but what of the thugs who jumped you on your way back to camp three nights back?"

mæt ʃɪvɝd. "æt lis ðoʊz wɝ dʒʌst ɡʊd, ɑnəs θivz. ðeɪ oʊnli wɑntəd maɪ pɝs, naɪs ən nætʃɹəl. nɑɾ ə wʌn hæɾ ə pɪktʃɝ ə mi ɪn ðɛɹ pɑkəts. ən ɪts nɑt laɪk ðeɪ wɝ twɪstəd baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz paʊɝ tə ɡoʊ kɹeɪzi ət sʌnsɛɾ əɹ ɛniθɪŋ."

Mat shivered. "At least those were just good, honest thieves. They only wanted my purse, nice and natural. Not a one had a picture of me in their pockets. And it's not like they were twisted by the Dark One's power to go crazy at sunset or anything."

"stɪl," θɔɹn sɛd.

"Still," Thorn said.

mæt meɪd noʊ ɑɹɡjəmənt. bɝn hɪm, bʌɾ i pɹɑbli ʃəd bi bɹɪŋɪŋ soʊlʒɝz wɪð hɪm. ə fju ɹɛdʒɹmz, ɛniweɪ. ðə kæmp wɑz dʒʌst əhɛd. wʌn ʌv ɪleɪnz klɝks, ə mæn neɪm nɔɹi, hæd ɡɹæntəd ðə bæn pɝmɪʃən tə kæmp ɪn keɪɛmlɪnz pɹɑksɪməɾi. ðeɪ hæd tə əɡɹi tə əlaʊ noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd mɛn tə ɡoʊ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi ɑn ə ɡɪvən deɪ, ən hæd tə kæmp ət list ə liɡ fɹəm ðə wɔlz, aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ ʌv ɛni vɪlədʒəz ən nɑɾ ɑn ɛniwʌnz fɑɹmlænd.

Mat made no argument. Burn him, but he probably should be bringing soldiers with him. A few Redarms, anyway. The camp was just ahead. One of Elayne's clerks, a man named Norry, had granted the Band permission to camp in Caemlyn's proximity. They had to agree to allow no more than a hundred men to go into the city on a given day, and had to camp at least a league from the walls, out of the way of any villages and not on anyone's farmland.

tɔkɪŋ tə ðət klɝk mɛn ɪleɪn nu mæt wɑz hɪɹ. ʃi hæd tə. bʌt ʃi hæd sɛnt noʊ ɡɹiɾɪŋz, noʊ æknɑlɪdʒmən ðət ʃi oʊd mæt əɹ skɪn.

Talking to that clerk meant Elayne knew Mat was here. She had to. But she had sent no greetings, no acknowledgment that she owed Mat her skin.

əɾ ə bɛn ɪn ðə ɹoʊd, θɔɹnz læntɝn ʃoʊɾ ə ɡɹup ə ɹɛdʒɹmz laʊnʒɪŋ baɪ ðə saɪd. ɡʌfɹɪn, sɑɹdʒən ʌv ə skwɑd, stʊɾ ən səluɾəd. hi wɑz ə stɝɾi, bɹɔd-ʃoʊldɝd mæn. nɑt tɛɹəbli bɹaɪt, bʌt kin aɪd.

At a bend in the road, Thorn's lantern showed a group of Redarms lounging by the side. Gufrin, sergeant of a squad, stood and saluted. He was a sturdy, broad-shouldered man. Not terribly bright, but keen eyed.

"lɔɹd mæt!" hi sɛd.

"Lord Mat!" he said.

"ɛni nuz, ɡʌfɹɪn?" mæt æskt.

"Any news, Gufrin?" Mat asked.

ðə sɑɹdʒən fɹaʊn tə hɪmsɛlf. "wɛl," hi sɛd. "aɪ θɪŋk ðɛɹz sʌmθɪŋ jə maɪt wɑnə noʊ." laɪt! ðə mæn spoʊk mɔɹ sloʊli ðən ə dʒɹʌŋk sintʃæn. "ði ɛɛs sədaɪ keɪm bæk tə kæmp tədeɪ. waɪl jə wɑz əweɪ, maɪ lɔɹd."

The sergeant frowned to himself. "Well," he said. "I think there's something you might want to know." Light! The man spoke more slowly than a drunk Seanchan. "The Aes Sedai came back to camp today. While you was away, my Lord."

"ɔl θɹi ʌv ðɛm?" mæt æskt.

"All three of them?" Mat asked.

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd."

"Yes, my Lord."

mæt saɪd. ɪf ðəɹ hæd bɪn ɛni hoʊp ə ðɪs deɪ tɝnɪŋ aʊt tə bi ɛniθɪŋ ʌðɝ ðən saʊɝ, ðət wɑʃt ɪɾ əweɪ. hi hæd hoʊp ðeɪ wəd steɪ ɪnsaɪd ðə sɪɾi fəɹ ə fju mɔɹ deɪz.

Mat sighed. If there had been any hope of this day turning out to be anything other than sour, that washed it away. He had hoped they would stay inside the city for a few more days.

hi ən θɔɹn kəntɪnjud, livɪŋ ðə ɹoʊɾ ən hɛɾɪŋ daʊn ə pæθ θɹu ə fild ə blækwæsp nɛɾəlz ən naɪfɡɹæs. ðə widz kɹʌntʃt əz ðeɪ wɔkt, θɔɹnz læntɝn laɪɾɪŋ ðə bɹaʊn stɔks.

He and Thorn continued, leaving the road and heading down a path through a field of blackwasp nettles and knifegrass. The weeds crunched as they walked, Thorn's lantern lighting the brown stalks.

ɑn wʌn hænd, ɪt wɑz ɡʊd tə bi bæk ɪn ændɝ əɡɛn; ɪɾ ɔlmoʊs fɛlt laɪk hoʊm, wɪð ðoʊz nz ə lɛðɝlif tʃɹiz ən saʊɝɡəm. haʊɛvɝ, kʌmɪŋ bæk tə faɪn ɪt lʊkɪŋ soʊ dɛd wɑz dɪshɑɹɾənɪŋ. wʌt tə də əbaʊɾ ɪleɪn? wɪmən wɝ tʃɹʌbəlsəm. ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ wɝs. kwinz wɝ ðə wɝst ə ðə lɑt. ən ʃi wɑz ɔl blʌɾi θɹi haʊ wɑz i gɑnə ɡɛɾ əɹ tə ɡɪv ɪm əɹ faʊnʒɹiz? hi hæd teɪkən vɛɹɪnz ɔfɝ ɪn pɑɹt kəz i θɔɾ ɪt wəd ɡɛɾ ɪm tə ændɝ kwɪkɝ ən ðɛɹfɔɹ tə stɑɹt wɝk ɑn ɑlʌdʒɹəz dʒɹæɡənz!

On one hand, it was good to be back in Andor again; it almost felt like home, with those nds of leatherleaf trees and sourgum. However, coming back to find it looking so dead was disheartening. What to do about Elayne? Women were troublesome. Aes Sedai were worse. Queens were the worst of the lot. And she was all bloody three How was he going to get her to give him her foundries? He had taken Verin's offer in part because he thought it would get him to Andor quicker and therefore to start work on Aludra's dragons!

əhɛd, ðə bænz kæmp sæɾ ɑn ə smɔl sɪɹiz ə hɪlz, ɛntʃɹɛntʃt ɝaʊn ðə lɑɹdʒəst ə ðɛm ət ðə sɛntɝ. mæts fɔɹs hæd mɛɾ ʌp wɪð ɛs-tin ən ði ʌðɝz ðət hæd ɡɔn əhɛd tə ændɝ, ən ðə bænd wɑz wɛl ən tʃɹuli hoʊl əɡɛn. faɪɝz bɝnd; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tʃɹʌbəl faɪndɪŋ dɛd wʊd fəɹ faɪɝz ðiz deɪz. smoʊk lɪŋɡɝɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ, ən mæt hɝd mɛn tʃæɾɪŋ ən kɔlɪŋ. ɪt wɑz nɑt tu leɪt jɛt, ən mæt dɪd nɑɾ ɛnfɔɹs ə kɝfju. ɪf i kəd nɑt ɹɪlæks, ət list ɪz mɛn kʊd. ɪt maɪt bi ðə læs tʃæns ðeɪ ɡɑt bɪfɔɹ ðə læs bæɾəl.

Ahead, the Band's camp sat on a small series of hills, entrenched around the largest of them at the center. Mat's force had met up with Es-tean and the others that had gone ahead to Andor, and the Band was well and truly whole again. Fires burned; there was no trouble finding dead wood for fires these days. Smoke lingered in the air, and Mat heard men chatting and calling. It was not too late yet, and Mat did not enforce a curfew. If he could not relax, at least his men could. It might be the last chance they got before the Last Battle.

tʃɹɑləks ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, mæt θɔt. wi nid ðoʊz dʒɹæɡənz. sun.

Trollocs in the Borderlands, Mat thought. We need those dragons. Soon.

mæt ɹɪtɝn səluts fɹəm ə fju ɡɑɹd poʊsts ən pɑɹɾəd wɪð θɔɹn, minɪŋ tə ɡoʊ faɪn ə bɛɾ ən slip ɑn ɪz pɹɑbləmz fəɹ ðə naɪt. əz i dɪd, hi noʊɾəd ə fju tʃeɪnʒəz i kəd meɪk tə ðə kæmp. ðə weɪ ðə hɪlsaɪdz wɝ ɝeɪnʒd, ə laɪt kævəlɹi tʃɑɹdʒ kəd kʌm ɡæləpɪŋ θɹu ðə kɔɹəɾɝ bɪtwin ðɛm. oʊnli sʌmwʌn vɛɹi boʊld wəd tʃɹaɪ sətʃ ə tæktɪk, bʌɾ i hæd dʌn dʒʌs ðət dʊɹɪŋ ðə bæɾəl ə mɛɹɪsɪn væli bæk ɪn oʊl kɔɹmændə. wɛl, nɑt mæt hɪmsɛlf, bʌt sʌmwʌn ɪn ðoʊz oʊl mɛmɹiz.

Mat returned salutes from a few guard posts and parted with Thorn, meaning to go find a bed and sleep on his problems for the night. As he did, he noted a few changes he could make to the camp. The way the hillsides were arranged, a light cavalry charge could come galloping through the corridor between them. Only someone very bold would try such a tactic, but he had done just that during the Battle of Marisin Valley back in old Coremanda. Well, not Mat himself, but someone in those old memories.

mɔɹ ən mɔɹ, hi sɪmpli æksɛptɪd ðoʊz mɛmɹiz əz ɪz oʊn. hi hæd nɑɾ æsk fəɹ əm - noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ðoʊz blʌɾi fɑksəz kleɪmd - bʌɾ i hæd peɪd fəɹ əm wɪð ðə skɑɹ ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk.

More and more, he simply accepted those memories as his own. He had not asked for them - no matter what those bloody foxes claimed - but he had paid for them with the scar around his neck.

ðeɪ hæd bɪn jusfəl ɑn mɔɹ ðən wʌn əkeɪʒən.

They had been useful on more than one occasion.

hi faɪnəli ɹitʃt ɪz tɛnt, ɪntɛndɪŋ tə ɡɛt fɹɛʃ smɔlkloʊðz bɪfɔɹ faɪndɪŋ ə dɪfɹən tɛn fəɹ ðə naɪt, wən i hɝɾ ə wʊmənz vɔɪs kɔlɪŋ tə hɪm. "meɪtʃɹim kɔθən!"

He finally reached his tent, intending to get fresh smallclothes before finding a different tent for the night, when he heard a woman's voice calling to him. "Matrim Cauthon!"

blʌɾi æʃəz. hi hæɾ ɔlmoʊs meɪɾ ɪt. hi tɝn ɹɪlʌktənli.

Bloody ashes. He had almost made it. He turned reluctantly.

tɛslɪn bɑɹədɑn wɑz nɑɾ ə pɹɪɾi wʊmən, ðoʊ ʃi maɪɾ əv meɪɾ ə pæsəbəl peɪpɝbɑɹk tʃɹi, wɪð ðoʊz boʊni fɪŋɡɝz, ðoʊz nɛɹoʊ ʃoʊldɝz ən ðət ɡɔn feɪs. ʃi wɔɹ ə ɹɛd dʒɹɛs, ən oʊvɝ ðə wiks əɹ aɪz hæd lɔs moʊst ə ðə nɝvəs skɪɾɪʃnəs ʃi hæd ʃoʊn sɪns spɛndɪŋ taɪm əz ə deɪmeɪn. ʃi hæɾ ə ɡlɛɹ soʊ pɹæktəst ʃi cʊɾə wʌn ə stɛɹɪŋ kɑntɛst wɪð ə poʊst.

Teslyn Baradon was not a pretty woman, though she might have made a passable paperbark tree, with those bony fingers, those narrow shoulders and that gaunt face. She wore a red dress, and over the weeks her eyes had lost most of the nervous skittishness she had shown since spending time as a damane. She had a glare so practiced she could have won a staring contest with a post.

"meɪtʃɹim kɔθən," ʃi sɛd, stɛpɪŋ ʌp tə hɪm. "aɪ də bi niɾɪŋ tə spik wɪð ju."

"Matrim Cauthon," she said, stepping up to him. "I do be needing to speak with you."

"wɛl, simz ðət jəɹ duɪŋ soʊ ɔlɹɛɾi," mæt sɛd, dʒɹɑpɪŋ ɪz hæn fɹəm ɪz tɛn flæp. hi hæɾ ə slaɪt fɑndnəs fəɹ tɛslɪn, əɡɛnst ɪz bɛɾɝ dʒʌdʒmənt, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə ɪnvaɪɾ əɹ ɪn. noʊ mɔɹ ðən i wəɾ ɪnvaɪɾ ə fɑks ɪndə hɪz hɛnhaʊs, ɹəɡɑɹdləs ə haʊ kaɪnli hi θɔɾ ə ðə fɑks ɪn kwɛstʃən.

"Well, seems that you're doing so already," Mat said, dropping his hand from his tent flap. He had a slight fondness for Teslyn, against his better judgment, but he was not about to invite her in. No more than he would invite a fox into his henhouse, regardless of how kindly he thought of the fox in question.

"soʊ aɪ də bi," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd. "juv hɝd ðə nuz ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ?"

"So I do be," she replied. "You've heard the news of the White Tower?"

"nuz?" mæt sɛd. "noʊ, aɪv hɝd noʊ nuz. ɹumɝz, ðoʊ . . . aɪv ə bɹeɪnfəl ə ðoʊz. səm seɪ ðə waɪt taʊɝ əz bɪn ɹiunəfaɪd, wɪtʃ ɪz wʌt jəɹ pɹɑbli tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt. bʌɾ aɪv ɔlsoʊ hɝd dʒʌst əz mɛni kleɪmɪŋ ðəɾ ɪts stɪl ət wɔɹ. ən ðət ði æmɪɝlɪn fɔt ðə læs bæɾəl ɪn ɹændz pleɪs, ən ðət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæv dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ɹeɪz ən ɑɹmi ʌv soʊlʒɝz baɪ ɡɪvɪŋ bɝθ tə ðɛm, ən ðət flaɪɪŋ mɑnstɝz ətæk ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ðət læst wʌn ɪz pɹɑbli dʒʌst stɔɹiz ə ɹeɪkən dʒɹɪftɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ðə saʊθ. bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ðə wʌn əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹeɪzɪŋ ən ɑɹmi ʌv beɪbiz hoʊlz səm wɔɾɝ."

"News?" Mat said. "No, I've heard no news. Rumors, though . . . I've a brainful of those. Some say the White Tower has been reunified, which is what you're probably talking about. But I've also heard just as many claiming that it is still at war. And that the Amyrlin fought the Last Battle in Rand's place, and that the Aes Sedai have decided to raise an army of soldiers by giving birth to them, and that flying monsters attacked the White Tower. That last one is probably just stories of raken drifting up from the south. But I think the one about Aes Sedai raising an army of babies holds some water."

tɛslɪn ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ɪm wɪð ə flæt stɛɹ. hi dɪd nɑt lʊk əweɪ. ɡʊd θɪŋ mæts fɑðɝ hæɾ ɔlweɪz sɛɾ i wɑz mɔɹ stʌbɝn ðən ə fleɪmɪŋ tʃɹi stʌmp.

Teslyn regarded him with a flat stare. He did not look away. Good thing Mat's father had always said he was more stubborn than a flaming tree stump.

ɹɪmɑɹkəbli, tɛslɪn saɪd, hɝ feɪs sɔfənɪŋ. "ju bi, ʌv kɔɹs, ɹaɪtli skɛptəkəl. bʌt wi kænɑɾ ɪɡnɔɹ ðə nuz. ivən idɛzinə, hu fulɪʃli saɪɾəd wɪð ðə ɹɛbəlz, dʌz wɪʃ tə ɹɪtɝn. wi də plæn tə ɡoʊ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. əz ɪts jəɹ hæbət tə slip leɪt, aɪ wɑntəd tə kʌm tə jə tənaɪɾ ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə ɡɪv jə maɪ θæŋks."

Remarkably, Teslyn sighed, her face softening. "You be, of course, rightly skeptical. But we cannot ignore the news. Even Edesina, who foolishly sided with the rebels, does wish to return. We do plan to go in the morning. As it is your habit to sleep late, I wanted to come to you tonight in order to give you my thanks."

"jɔɹ wʌt?"

"Your what?"

"maɪ θæŋks, mæstɝ kɔθən," tɛslɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "ðɪs tʃɹɪp dɪd nɑt bi izi əpɑn ɛni ʌv ʌs. ðəɹ əv bɪn moʊməns ʌv. . . tɛnʃən. aɪ də nɑt seɪ ðəɾ aɪ əɡɹi wɪð itʃ dɪsɪʒən jə meɪd. ðət də nɑt ɹimuv ðə fæk ðət wɪθaʊt ju, aɪ wəd stɪl bi ɪn sintʃæn hænz." ʃi ʃɪvɝd. "aɪ pɹitɛnd, dʊɹɪŋ maɪ mɔɹ kɑnfəɾənt moʊməns, ðəɾ aɪ wʊɾə ɹɪzɪstɪɾ əm ən ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɪskeɪpt ɑn maɪ oʊn. ɪt də bi ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə meɪnteɪn səm ɪluʒənz wɪð jɝsɛlf, wəd jə nɑt seɪ?"

"My thanks, Master Cauthon," Teslyn said dryly. "This trip did not be easy upon any of us. There have been moments of. . . tension. I do not say that I agree with each decision you made. That do not remove the fact that without you, I would still be in Seanchan hands." She shivered. "I pretend, during my more confident moments, that I would have resisted them and eventually escaped on my own. It do be important to maintain some illusions with yourself, would you not say?"

mæt ɹʌbd ɪz tʃɪn. "meɪbi, tɛslɪn. meɪbi ɪndid."

Mat rubbed his chin. "Maybe, Teslyn. Maybe indeed."

ɹɪmɑɹkəbli, ʃi hɛld aʊɾ əɹ hæn tə hɪm. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ʃəd jə ɛvɝ kʌm tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, jə də hæv wɪmən ðəɹ u ɑɹ ɪn jəɹ dɛt, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən. aɪ də nɑt fɝɡɛt."

Remarkably, she held out her hand to him. "Remember, should you ever come to the White Tower, you do have women there who are in your debt, Matrim Cauthon. I do not forget."

hi tʊk ðə hænd. ɪt fɛlt əz boʊni əz ɪt lʊkt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz wɔɹmɝ ðən i hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd. səm ɛɛs sədaɪ hæɾ aɪs ɹʌnɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ veɪnz, ðət wɑz fəɹ sɝɾən. bʌɾ ʌðɝz wɝ nɑt soʊ bæd.

He took the hand. It felt as bony as it looked, but it was warmer than he had expected. Some Aes Sedai had ice running in their veins, that was for certain. But others were not so bad.

ʃi nɑɾəd tə hɪm. ə ɹɪspɛkfəl nɑd. ɔlmoʊst ə baʊ. mæt ɹilist əɹ ænd, filɪŋ əz ənsɛɾəld əz ɪf sʌmwʌn hæd kɪkt ɪz lɛɡz aʊt fɹəm ʌn-dɝniθ hɪm. ʃi tɝn tə wɔk bæk təwɔɹɾ əɹ oʊn tɛnt.

She nodded to him. A respectful nod. Almost a bow. Mat released her and, feeling as unsettled as if someone had kicked his legs out from un-derneath him. She turned to walk back toward her own tent.

jəl bi niɾɪŋ hɔɹsəz," hi sɛd. "ɪf jə weɪt tə liv əntɪl aɪ ɡɛɾ ʌp ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, əl ɡɪv jə sʌm. ən səm pɹəvɪʒənz. wʊdn də fəɹ jə tə stɑɹv bɪfɔɹ jə ɡɛt tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən fɹəm wʌt wiv sin leɪtli ðə vɪlədʒəz jəl pæs woʊn əv ɛniθɪŋ tə spɛɹ."

You'll be needing horses," he said. "If you wait to leave until I get up in the morning, I'll give you some. And some provisions. Wouldn't do for you to starve before you get to Tar Valon, and from what we've seen lately the villages you'll pass won't have anything to spare."

"ju toʊl dʒoʊlin - "

"You told Joline - "

"aɪ kaʊntəd maɪ hɔɹsəz əɡɛn," mæt sɛd. ðoʊz daɪs wɝ stɪl ɹætlɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd, bɝn ðɛm. "aɪ dɪɾ ənʌðɝ kaʊn ə ðə bænz hɔɹsəz. tɝnz aʊt wɪv səm tə spɛɹ. jə meɪ teɪk ðɛm."

"I counted my horses again," Mat said. Those dice were still rattling in his head, burn them. "I did another count of the Band's horses. Turns out we have some to spare. You may take them."

"aɪ dɪd nɑt kʌm tə jə tənaɪt tə mənɪpjəleɪt jə ɪndə ɡɪvɪŋ mi hɔɹsəz," tɛslɪn sɛd. "aɪ də bi sənsɪɹ."

"I did not come to you tonight to manipulate you into giving me horses," Teslyn said. "I do be sincere."

"soʊ aɪ fɪɡjɝd," mæt sɛd, tɝnɪŋ lɪftɪŋ ʌp ðə flæp tə hɪz tɛnt. "ðæts waɪ aɪ meɪd ði ɔfɝ." hi stɛpt ɪndə ðə tɛnt.

"So I figured," Mat said, turning lifting up the flap to his tent. "That's why I made the offer." He stepped into the tent.

ðɛɹ, hi fɹoʊz. ðət sɛnt. . .

There, he froze. That scent. . .

blʌd.

Blood.


tʃæptɝ naɪn


CHAPTER 9

blʌɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ


Blood in the Air

mæt dʌkt ɪmiɾiətli. ðəɾ ɪnstɪŋk seɪvd ɪz laɪf əz sʌmθɪŋ swʌŋ θɹu ði ɛɹ əbʌv ɪz hɛd. mæt ɹoʊl tə ðə saɪd, hɪz hæn hɪɾɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ wɛɾ əz ɪt tʌtʃt ðə flɔɹ. "mɝɾɝ!" hi bɛloʊd. "mɝɾɝ ɪn ðə kæmp! blʌɾi mɝɾɝ!"

Mat ducked immediately. That instinct saved his life as something swung through the air above his head. Mat rolled to the side, his hand hitting something wet as it touched the floor. "Murder!" he bellowed. "Murder in the camp! Bloody murder!"

sʌmθɪŋ muv təwɔɹd hɪm. ðə tɛnt wɑz kəmplitli blæk, bʌɾ i kəd hɪɹ ɪt. mæt stʌmbəld, bʌt lʌk wɑz wɪð ɪm əz əɡɛn sʌmθɪŋ swɪʃt nɪɹ hɪm.

Something moved toward him. The tent was completely black, but he could hear it. Mat stumbled, but luck was with him as again something swished near him.

mæt hɪt ðə ɡɹaʊn ən ɹoʊld, flɪŋɪŋ ɪz hæn tə ðə saɪd. hi hæd lɛft. . .

Mat hit the ground and rolled, flinging his hand to the side. He had left. . .

ðɛɹ! hi keɪm ʌp bɪsaɪɾ ɪz slipɪŋ pælət, hɪz hænd ɡɹæspɪŋ ət ðə lɔŋ wʊɾən hæf ðɛɹ. hi θɹu hɪmsɛlf bækwɝd tə hɪz fit, hɔlɪŋ ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ ʌp, ðən spʌn ən slæʃt - nɑɾ ət ðə fɔɹm muvɪŋ θɹu ðə tɛn təwɔɹd hɪm, bʌɾ ət ðə wɔl.

There! He came up beside his sleeping pallet, his hand grasping at the long wooden haft there. He threw himself backward to his feet, hauling the ashandarei up, then spun and slashed - not at the form moving through the tent toward him, but at the wall.

ðə fæbɹɪk kʌɾ izəli ən mæt lɛpt aʊt, klʌtʃɪŋ ɪz lɔŋ-bleɪɾɪd spɪɹ ɪn wʌn hænd. wɪð ɪz ʌðɝ hænd, hi ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə lɛðɝ stʃɹæp əɾ ɪz nɛk, hɪz fɪŋɡɝneɪlz ɹɪpɪŋ əɾ ɪz skɪn ɪn ɪz heɪst.

The fabric cut easily and Mat leaped out, clutching his long-bladed spear in one hand. With his other hand, he reached for the leather strap at his neck, his fingernails ripping at his skin in his haste.

hi pʊl ðə fɑks-hɛd mədæljən ɔf ən tɝn ɪn ðə bɹʌʃ aʊtsaɪd ðə tɛnt.

He pulled the fox-head medallion off and turned in the brush outside the tent.

ə wik laɪt keɪm fɹəm ə nɪɹbaɪ læntɝn ɑn ə poʊst əɾ ən ɪntɝsɛkʃən ə kæmp pæθweɪz. baɪ ɪt, mæt meɪɾ aʊt ðə fɪɡjɝ slaɪɾɪŋ aʊt ðə ɹɪp ɪn ðə tɛnt. ə fɪɡjɝ i hæd fɪɹd tə si. ðə ɡoʊləm lʊk laɪk ə mæn, slɛndɝ wɪð sændi hɛɹ ən ənɹɪmɑɹkəbəl fitʃɝz. ði oʊnli θɪŋ dɪstɪŋkt əbaʊt ðə θɪŋ wɑz ðə skɑɹ ɑn ɪts tʃik.

A weak light came from a nearby lantern on a post at an intersection of camp pathways. By it, Mat made out the figure sliding out the rip in the tent. A figure he had feared to see. The gholam looked like a man, slender with sandy hair and unremarkable features. The only thing distinct about the thing was the scar on its cheek.

ɪt wɑz səpoʊz tə lʊk hɑɹmləs, səpoʊz tə bi fɔɹɡɛɾəbəl. ɪf moʊs pipəl sɔ ðɪs θɪŋ ɪn ə kɹaʊd, ðeɪ wəɾ ɪɡnɔɹ ɪt. ɹaɪɾ ʌp tə ðə pɔɪnt wɛɹ ɪt ɹɪp ðɛɹ θɹoʊɾ aʊt.

It was supposed to look harmless, supposed to be forgettable. If most people saw this thing in a crowd, they would ignore it. Right up to the point where it ripped their throat out.

mæt bækt əweɪ. hɪz tɛnt wɑz nɪɹ ə hɪlsaɪd, ən i bækt ʌp tə ɪt, pʊlɪŋ ðə fɑkshɛd mədæljən ʌp ən ɹæpɪŋ ɪt taɪtli baɪ ɪts lɛðɝ stʃɹæp tə ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ ɛs bleɪd. ɪt wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm ə pɝfək fɪt, bʌɾ i hæd pɹæktəs ðɪs. ðə mədæljən wɑz ði oʊnli θɪŋ i nu ðət kəd hɝt ðə ɡoʊləm. hi wɝk swɪfli, stɪl jɛlɪŋ fəɹ hɛlp. soʊlʒɝz wəd bi noʊ jus əɡɛns ðɪs θɪŋ, bʌt ðə ɡoʊləm hæd sɛd bɪfɔɹ ðəɾ ɪt hæd bɪn ɔɹɾɝd tə əvɔɪd tu mʌtʃ noʊɾəs. ətɛnʃən maɪt fɹaɪɾən ɪɾ əweɪ.

Mat backed away. His tent was near a hillside, and he backed up to it, pulling the foxhead medallion up and wrapping it tightly by its leather strap to the side of his ashandarei s blade. It was far from a perfect fit, but he had practiced this. The medallion was the only thing he knew that could hurt the gholam. He worked swiftly, still yelling for help. Soldiers would be no use against this thing, but the gholam had said before that it had been ordered to avoid too much notice. Attention might frighten it away.

ɪt dɪd hɛzəteɪt, ɡlænsɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə kæmp. ðən ɪt tɝn bæk tə mæt stɛpɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. ɪts muvməns wɝ əz fluəɾ əz sɪlk ɹɪpəlɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪnd. "ju ʃəd bi pɹaʊd," ɪt wɪspɝd. "ðə wʌn u naʊ kəntʃɹoʊlz mi wɑns jə mɔɹ ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls. aɪm tə ɪɡnɔɹ ɔl ʌðɝz əntɪl aɪ hæv teɪstəd jəɹ blʌd."

It did hesitate, glancing toward the camp. Then it turned back to Mat stepping forward. Its movements were as fluid as silk rippling in the wind. "You should be proud," it whispered. "The one who now controls me wants you more than anyone else. I am to ignore all others until I have tasted your blood."

ɪn ɪts lɛf hænd, ðə kɹitʃɝ kæɹiɾ ə lɔŋ dæɡɝ. ɪts ɹaɪt hæn dʒɹɪp blʌd. mæt fɛlt ə fɹizɪŋ tʃɪl. hu hæɾ ɪt kɪld? hu ɛls hæd bɪn mɝɾɝd ɪn meɪtʃɹim kɔθən ɛs stɛd? ði ɪmədʒ ə taɪlɪn flæʃt ɪn ɪz maɪn əɡɛn. hi hæd nɑt sin əɹ kɔɹps; ðə sin wɑz lɛf tə hɪz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən.

In its left hand, the creature carried a long dagger. Its right hand dripped blood. Mat felt a freezing chill. Who had it killed? Who else had been murdered in Matrim Cauthon s stead? The image of Tylin flashed in his mind again. He had not seen her corpse; the scene was left to his imagination.

ənfɔɹtʃənətli, mæt hæɾ ə pɹɪɾi ɡʊɾ ɪmædʒəneɪʃən.

Unfortunately, Mat had a pretty good imagination.

ðəɾ ɪmədʒ ɪn ɪz hɛd, smɛlɪŋ ðə blʌɾ ɑn ði ɛɹ, hi dɪd ðə moʊs fulɪʃ θɪŋ i kəd hæv.

That image in his head, smelling the blood on the air, he did the most foolish thing he could have.

hi ətækt.

He attacked.

skɹimɪŋ ɪn ði oʊpən dɑɹknəs, mæt spʌn fɔɹwɝd, swɪŋɪŋ ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ. ðə kɹitʃɝ wɑz soʊ fæst. ɪt sim tə floʊ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ ʌv ɪz wɛpən.

Screaming in the open darkness, Mat spun forward, swinging the ashandarei. The creature was so fast. It seemed to flow out of the way of his weapon.

ɪt ɹaʊndəd hɪm, laɪk ə sɝkəlɪŋ wʊlf, fʊtstɛps bɛɹli meɪkɪŋ ə saʊn ɪn ðə dʒɹaɪd widz. ɪt stʃɹʌk, ɪts fɔɹm ə blɝ, ən oʊnli ə bækwɝd dʒʌmp baɪ ɹiflɛks seɪv mæt. hi skɹæmbəl θɹu ðə widz, swɪŋɪŋ ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ. ɪt simd wɛɹi ʌv ðə mədæljən. laɪt, wɪθaʊt ðæt, mæt wəd bi dɛɾ ən bliɾɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd!

It rounded him, like a circling wolf, footsteps barely making a sound in the dried weeds. It struck, its form a blur, and only a backward jump by reflex saved Mat. He scrambled through the weeds, swinging the ashandarei. It seemed wary of the medallion. Light, without that, Mat would be dead and bleeding on the ground!

ɪt keɪm əɾ ɪm əɡɛn, laɪk lɪkwəd dɑɹknəs. mæt swʌŋ waɪldli ən klɪp ðə ɡoʊləm mɔɹ baɪ lʌk ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. ðə mədæljən meɪɾ ə sɪɹɪŋ hɪs əz ɪt tʌtʃt ðə bists hænd. ðə sɛn ə bɝn flɛʃ ɹoʊz ɪn ði ɛɹ, ən ðə ɡoʊləm skɹæmbəl bæk.

It came at him again, like liquid darkness. Mat swung wildly and clipped the gholam more by luck than anything else. The medallion made a searing hiss as it touched the beast's hand. The scent of burned flesh rose in the air, and the gholam scrambled back.

"ju dɪdn əv tə kɪl hɝ, bɝn ju," mæt jɛld əɾ ɪt. "ju cʊɾə lɛf hɝ! jə dɪdnt wɑn hɝ; jə wɑntəd mi!"

"You didn't have to kill her, burn you," Mat yelled at it. "You could have left her! You didn't want her; you wanted me!"

ðə θɪŋ mɪɹli ɡɹɪnd, ɪts maʊð ən ɑfəl blæk, tiθ twɪstəd. "ə bɝd mʌs flaɪ. ə mæn mʌs bɹið. aɪ mʌs kɪl." ɪt stɔk fɔɹwɝd, ən mæt nu hi wɑz ɪn tʃɹʌbəl. ðə kɹaɪz ʌv əlɑɹm wɝ laʊd naʊ. ɪt hæɾ oʊnli bɪn ə fju moʊməns, bʌɾ ə fju mɔɹ, ən hɛlp wəɾ ɝaɪv. oʊnli ə fju mɔɹ moʊməns . . .

The thing merely grinned, its mouth an awful black, teeth twisted. "A bird must fly. A man must breathe. I must kill." It stalked forward, and Mat knew he was in trouble. The cries of alarm were loud now. It had only been a few moments, but a few more, and help would arrive. Only a few more moments . . .

"aɪv bɪn toʊl tə kɪl əm ɔl," ðə ɡoʊləm sɛd sɔfli. "tə bɹɪŋ jə aʊt ðə mæn wɪð ðə mʌstæʃ, ði eɪdʒɪd wʌn u ɪntɝfɪɹd læs taɪm, ðə lɪɾəl dɑɹk-skɪnd wʊmən u hoʊlz jəɹ əfɛkʃən. ɔl ə ðɛm, ənlɛs aɪ teɪk jə naʊ."

"I've been told to kill them all," the gholam said softly. "To bring you out The man with the mustache, the aged one who interfered last time, the little dark-skinned woman who holds your affection. All of them, unless I take you now."

bɝn ðət ɡoʊləm; haʊ dɪd ðə θɪŋ noʊ əbaʊt tuɑn? haʊ? ɪt wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl!

Burn that gholam; how did the thing know about Tuon? How? It was impossible!

hi wɑz soʊ stɑɹɾəld ðəɾ i bɛɹli hæd taɪm tə ɹeɪz ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ əz ðə ɡoʊləm lɛp fəɹ hɪm.

He was so startled that he barely had time to raise the ashandarei as the gholam leaped for him.

mæt kɝst, twɪstɪŋ tə ðə saɪd, bʌt tu leɪt. ðə kɹitʃɝz naɪf flæʃt ɪn ði ɛɹ. ðən ðə wɛpən dʒɝkt ən ɹɪp saɪdweɪz fɹəm ɪts fɪŋɡɝz. mæt stɑɹɾəd, ðən fɛl sʌmθɪŋ ɹæp ɝaʊn ɪm ən dʒɝk ɪm bækwɝd, aʊɾ ə ðə ɹitʃ ə ðə ɡoʊləmz swaɪp.

Mat cursed, twisting to the side, but too late. The creature's knife flashed in the air. Then the weapon jerked and ripped sideways from its fingers. Mat started, then felt something wrap around him and jerk him backward, out of the reach of the gholam's swipe.

wivz ʌv ɛɹ. tɛslɪn! ʃi stʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz tɛnt, hɝ feɪs ə mæsk ə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən.

Weaves of Air. Teslyn! She stood in front of his tent, her face a mask of concentration.

"ju woʊn bi eɪbəl tə tʌtʃ ɪt dɝɛkli wɪð wivz!" mæt skɹimd əz əɹ ɛɹ dəpɑzɪɾɪd ɪm ə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns fɹəm ðə ɡoʊləm. ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə blʌɾi ɹeɪz ɪm ʌp haɪ ɪnʌf, hi wʊɾə bɪn faɪn wɪð ðæt! bʌɾ i hæd nɛvɝ sin ən ɛɛs sədaɪ lɪf sʌmwʌn mɔɹ ðən ə peɪs əɹ soʊ ɪn ði ɛɹ.

"You won't be able to touch it directly with weaves!" Mat screamed as her Air deposited him a short distance from the gholam. If she had been able to bloody raise him up high enough, he would have been fine with that! But he had never seen an Aes Sedai lift someone more than a pace or so in the air.

hi skɹæmbəl tə ðə saɪd, ðə ɡoʊləm tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ æftɝ hɪm. ðən sʌmθɪŋ lɑɹdʒ flu bɪtwin ðɛm, kɑzɪŋ ðə ɡoʊləm tə dɑdʒ fludli. ði ɑbʒɛkt - ə tʃɛɹ! - kɹæʃt ɪndə ðə hɪlsaɪd bɪsaɪd ðɛm. ðə ɡoʊləm spʌn əz ə lɑɹdʒ bɛntʃ smæʃt ɪndə ɪt, θɹoʊɪŋ ɪt bækwɝd.

He scrambled to the side, the gholam charging after him. Then something large flew between them, causing the gholam to dodge fluidly. The object - a chair! - crashed into the hillside beside them. The gholam spun as a large bench smashed into it, throwing it backward.

mæt stɛɾid hɪmsɛlf, lʊkɪŋ ət tɛslɪn, hu wɑz ɹitʃɪŋ ɪndə hɪz tɛnt wɪð ɪnvɪzəbəl wivz ʌv ɛɹ. klɛvɝ wʊmən, hi θɔt. wivz kəd nɑt tʌtʃ ðə ɡoʊləm, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ θɹoʊn baɪ ðɛm kʊd.

Mat steadied himself, looking at Teslyn, who was reaching into his tent with invisible weaves of Air. Clever woman, he thought. Weaves could not touch the gholam, but something thrown by them could.

ðət wəd nɑt stɑp ɪt. mæt hæd sin ðə kɹitʃɝ plʌk aʊɾ ə naɪf ðət hæd bɪn ɹæmd ɪndə ɪts tʃɛst; ɪt hæd ʃoʊn ði ɪndɪfɝəns ə mæn wəd ʃoʊ ət plʌkɪŋ ə bɝ fɹəm ɪz kloʊðɪŋ. bʌt naʊ soʊlʒɝz wɝ lipɪŋ oʊvɝ pæθweɪz, kæɹiɪŋ paɪks əɹ sɔɹdz ən ʃilz. ði ɪntaɪɝ kæmp wɑz biɪŋ lɪɾ ʌp.

That would not stop it. Mat had seen the creature pluck out a knife that had been rammed into its chest; it had shown the indifference a man would show at plucking a burr from his clothing. But now soldiers were leaping over pathways, carrying pikes or swords and shields. The entire camp was being lit up.

ðə ɡoʊləm ɡeɪv mæt ə ɡlɛɹ, ðən dæʃt ɔf təwɔɹd ðə dɑɹknəs aʊt-saɪɾ ə kæmp. mæt spʌn, ðən fɹoʊz əz i sɔ tu ɹɛdʒɹmz sɛt paɪks əɡɛns ði ɔnkʌmɪŋ ɡoʊləm. ɡɔɹɾɝən ən fɝdʒɪn. boʊθ mɛn u hæd sɝvaɪv ðə taɪm ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ.

The gholam gave Mat a glare, then dashed off toward the darkness out-side of camp. Mat spun, then froze as he saw two Redarms set pikes against the oncoming gholam. Gorderan and Fergin. Both men who had survived the time in Ebou Dar.

"noʊ!" mæt jɛld. "lɛɾ ɪt - "

"No!" Mat yelled. "Let it - "

tu leɪt. ðə ɡoʊləm ɪndɪfɹənli slɪd bɪtwin ðə paɪks, ɡɹæbɪŋ itʃ mænz θɹoʊɾ ɪn ə hænd, ðən kɹʌʃɪŋ ɪts fɪŋɡɝz təɡɛðɝ. wɪð ə spɪn, ɪt ɹɪp fɹi ðɛɹ flɛʃ, dʒɹɑpɪŋ boʊθ mɛn. ðən ɪt wɑz ɔf ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs.

Too late. The gholam indifferently slid between the pikes, grabbing each man's throat in a hand, then crushing its fingers together. With a spin, it ripped free their flesh, dropping both men. Then it was off into the darkness.

bɝn ju! mæt θɔt, stɑɹɾɪŋ tə dæʃ æftɝ ɪt. əl ɡʌt jə ən -  hi fɹoʊz. blʌɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ. fɹəm ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz tɛnt. hi hæd nɪɹli fɝɡɑɾən ðæt.

Burn you! Mat thought, starting to dash after it. I'll gut you and -  He froze. Blood in the air. From inside his tent. He had nearly forgotten that.

oʊlvɝ! mæt skɹæmbəl bæk tə ðə tɛnt. ɪt wɑz dɑɹk wɪðɪn, ðoʊ ðə sɛn ə blʌd wʌns əɡɛn əsɔltɪd hɪm. "laɪt! tɛslɪn, kən jə - "

Olver! Mat scrambled back to the tent. It was dark within, though the scent of blood once again assaulted him. "Light! Teslyn, can you - "

ə ɡloʊb ə laɪɾ əpɪɹd bɪhaɪn hɪm.

A globe of light appeared behind him.

ðə laɪɾ ə hɝ ɡloʊb wɑz ɪnʌf tə ɪlumɪnɪɾ ə tɛɹəbəl sin ɪnsaɪd. ləpɪn, mæts sɝvɪŋ mæn, leɪ dɛd, hɪz blʌd dɑɹkənɪŋ ðə tɛn flɔɹ ɪn ə lɑɹdʒ blæk pul. tu ʌðɝ mɛn - ɹɪəm ən wɪl ɹiv, ɹɛdʒɹmz u hæd bɪn ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ɪz dɔɹ - wɝ hipt ɑntu hɪz slipɪŋ pælət. hi ʃʊɾə noʊɾəst ðət ðeɪ wɝ mɪsɪŋ fɹəm ðɛɹ poʊst. ful!

The light of her globe was enough to illuminate a terrible scene inside. Lopin, Mats serving man, lay dead, his blood darkening the tent floor in a large black pool. Two other men - Riddem and Will Reeve, Redarms who had been guarding his door - were heaped onto his sleeping pallet. He should have noticed that they were missing from their post. Fool!

mæt fɛlt ə stæb ə sɑɹoʊ fəɹ ðə dɛd. ləpɪn, hu hæɾ oʊnli ɹisənli ʃoʊn ðəɾ i wɑz ɹəkʌvɝd fɹəm neɪlzinz dɛθ. laɪt bɝn hɪm, hi hæd bɪn ə ɡʊd mæn! nɑɾ ivən ə soʊlʒɝ, dʒʌst ə sɝvɪŋ mæn, kɑntɛn tə hæv sʌmwʌn tə teɪk kɛɹ ʌv. mæt naʊ fɛl tɛɹəbəl fəɹ hævɪŋ kəmpleɪn əbaʊt hɪm.

Mat felt a stab of sorrow for the dead. Lopin, who had only recently shown that he was recovered from Nalesean's death. Light burn him, he had been a good man! Not even a soldier, just a serving man, content to have someone to take care of. Mat now felt terrible for having complained about him.

wɪθaʊt ləpɪnz hɛlp, mæt wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn eɪbəl tə ɪskeɪp ɛbu dɑɹ.

Without Lopin's help, Mat would not have been able to escape Ebou Dar.

ən ðə fɔɹ ɹɛdʒɹmz, tu ʌv hum hæd sɝvaɪvd ɛbu dɑɹ ən ðə ɡoʊləmz pɹiviəs ətæk.

And the four Redarms, two of whom had survived Ebou Dar and the gholam's previous attack.

aɪ ʃʊɾə sɛnt wɝd, mæt θɔt. ʃʊɾə pʊt ði ɪntaɪɝ kæmp ɑn əlɝt. wəd ðəɾ əv dʌn ɛni ɡʊd? ðə ɡoʊləm hæd pɹuvən ɪtsɛlf pɹæktəkli ənstɑpəbəl. mæt hæd ðə səspɪʃən ðəɾ ɪt kəd kʌt daʊn ði ɪntaɪɝ bæn ɪn ɡɛɾɪŋ tə hɪm, ɪf ɪt niɾəd tə. oʊnli ɪts mæstɝz kəmæn ðəɾ ɪɾ əvɔɪɾ ətɛnʃən pɹɪvɛntɪɾ ɪt fɹəm duɪŋ soʊ.

I should have sent word, Mat thought. Should have put the entire camp on alert. Would that have done any good? The gholam had proven itself practically unstoppable. Mat had the suspicion that it could cut down the entire Band in getting to him, if it needed to. Only its master's command that it avoid attention prevented it from doing so.

hi dɪd nɑt si ɛni saɪn ʌv oʊlvɝ, ðoʊ ðə bɔɪ ʃʊɾə bɪn slipɪŋ ɑn ɪz pæləɾ ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ. ləpɪnz blʌd hæd pul nɪɹbaɪ, ən oʊlvɝz blæŋkət wɑz soʊkɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp fɹəm ðə bɑɾəm. mæt tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən bɪɡæn sɝtʃɪŋ θɹu ðə ʃæmbəlz, oʊvɝtɝnɪŋ blæŋkəts ən lʊkɪŋ bɪhaɪn tʃɹævəl fɝnɪtʃɝ, wɝiɾ ət wʌɾ i maɪt faɪnd.

He did not see any sign of Olver, though the boy should have been sleeping on his pallet in the corner. Lopin's blood had pooled nearby, and Olver's blanket was soaking it up from the bottom. Mat took a deep breath and began searching through the shambles, overturning blankets and looking behind travel furniture, worried at what he might find.

mɔɹ soʊlʒɝz ɝaɪvd, kɝsɪŋ. ðə kæmp wɑz kʌmɪŋ əlɝt: hɔɹnz ʌv wɔɹnɪŋ bloʊɪŋ, læntɝnz biɪŋ lɪt, ɑɹmɝ klæŋkɪŋ.

More soldiers arrived, cursing. The camp was coming alert: horns of warning blowing, lanterns being lit, armor clanking.

"oʊlvɝ," mæt sɛd tə ðə soʊlʒɝz ɡæðɝɪŋ əɾ ɪz dɔɹweɪ. hi hæd sɝtʃt ði ɪntaɪɝ blʌɾi tɛnt! "hæz ɛniwʌn sin hɪm?"

"Olver," Mat said to the soldiers gathering at his doorway. He had searched the entire bloody tent! "Has anyone seen him?"

"aɪ θɪŋk i wɑz wɪð noʊl," sɛd sloʊn mæɾoʊ, ə waɪd-ɪɹd ɹɛdɑɹm. "ðeɪ - "

"I think he was with Noal," said Slone Maddow, a wide-eared Redarm. "They - "

mæt ʃʌvd ɪz weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə tɛnt, ðən ɹæn θɹu kæmp təwɔɹd noʊlz tɛnt. hi ɝaɪv dʒʌst əz ðə waɪt-hɛɹd mæn wɑz stɛpɪŋ aʊt, lʊkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪn əlɑɹm.

Mat shoved his way out of the tent, then ran through camp toward Noal's tent. He arrived just as the white-haired man was stepping out, looking about in alarm.

"oʊlvɝ?" mæt æskt, ɹitʃɪŋ ði oʊldɝ mæn.

"Olver?" Mat asked, reaching the older man.

"hiz seɪf, mæt," noʊl sɛd, ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ. "aɪm sɑɹi - aɪ dɪdn min tə əlɑɹm ju. wi wɝ pleɪɪŋ sneɪks ən fɑksəz, ən ðə bɔɪ fɛl əslip ɑn vi flɔɹ. aɪ pʊld ə blæŋkəɾ oʊvɝ hɪm; hiz bɪn steɪɪŋ ʌp soʊ leɪt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ jə ðiz naɪts ðəɾ aɪ fɪɡjɝɾ ɪt wɑz bɛs nɑt tə weɪk hɪm. aɪ ʃʊɾə sɛnt wɝd."

"He's safe, Mat," Noal said, grimacing. "I'm sorry - I didn't mean to alarm you. We were playing Snakes and Foxes, and the boy fell asleep on v floor. I pulled a blanket over him; he's been staying up so late waiting for you these nights that I figured it was best not to wake him. I should have sent word."

"jɔɹ sɑɹi?" mæt sɛd, ɡɹæbɪŋ noʊl ɪn ən ɛmbɹeɪs. "ju blʌɾi wʌndɝfəl mæn. jə seɪvd ɪz laɪf!"

"You're sorry?" Mat said, grabbing Noal in an embrace. "You bloody wonderful man. You saved his life!"

ən aʊɝ leɪɾɝ, mæt sæt wɪð θɔɹn ən noʊl ɪnsaɪd θɔɹnz smɔl tɛnt. ə dʌzən ɹɛdʒɹmz ɡɑɹɾəd ðə pleɪs, ən oʊlvɝ hæd bɪn sɛn tə slip ɪn tɛslɪnz tɛnt. ðə bɔɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ kloʊs i hæd kʌm tə biɪŋ kɪld. hoʊpfəli hi nɛvɝ wʊd.

An hour later, Mat sat with Thorn and Noal inside Thorn's small tent. A dozen Redarms guarded the place, and Olver had been sent to sleep in Teslyn's tent. The boy did not know how close he had come to being killed. Hopefully he never would.

mæt wɔɹ ɪz mədæljən əɡɛn, ðoʊ hi niɾəd tə faɪn ə nu lɛðɝ stʃɹæp. ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ hæd kʌt ði ʌðɝ wʌn ʌp pɹɪɾi bæd. hi wəd nid tə faɪn ə bɛɾɝ weɪ tə taɪ ɪɾ ɑn ðɛɹ.

Mat wore his medallion again, though he needed to find a new leather strap. The ashandarei had cut the other one up pretty bad. He would need to find a better way to tie it on there.

"θɔɹn," mæt sɛd sɔfli, "ðə kɹitʃɝ θɹɛɾənd ju, ən jə tu, noʊl. ɪt dɪdn mɛnʃən oʊlvɝ, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd mɛnʃən tuɑn."

"Thorn," Mat said softly, "the creature threatened you, and you too, Noal. It didn't mention Olver, but it did mention Tuon."

"haʊ wəd ðə θɪŋ noʊ əbaʊt hɝ?" tɑm æskt, skɹætʃɪŋ əɾ ɪz hɛd.

"How would the thing know about her?" Thom asked, scratching at his head.

"ðə ɡɑɹdz faʊn ənʌðɝ kɔɹps aʊtsaɪɾ ə ðə kæmp. dɛɹi." dɛɹi wɑz ə soʊlʒɝ u hæd ɡɔn mɪsɪŋ ə fju deɪz bæk, ən mæt hæd pɹəzumd ɪm tə hæv dɪzɝɾɪd. ɪt hæpən səmtaɪmz, ðoʊ dɪzɝʃən wɑz ɪɹɛɡjəlɝ ɪn ðə bænd. "hid bɪn dɛɾ ə fju deɪz."

"The guards found another corpse outside of the camp. Derry." Derry was a soldier who had gone missing a few days back, and Mat had presumed him to have deserted. It happened sometimes, though desertion was irregular in the Band. "He'd been dead a few days."

"ɪt tʊk ɪm ðət lɔŋ əɡoʊ?" noʊl sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. noʊlz ʃoʊldɝz wɝ stupt ən i hæɾ ə noʊz ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə lɑɹdʒ, bɛn pɛpɝ ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɹaɪɾ aʊt ðə mɪɾəl ə hɪz feɪs. hi hæɾ ɔlweɪz lʊkt . . . wɔɹn tə mæt. hɪz hænz wɝ soʊ nɑɹld, ðeɪ sim tə bi ɔl nʌkəlz.

"It took him that long ago?" Noal said, frowning. Noal's shoulders were stooped and he had a nose the shape of a large, bent pepper growing right out the middle of his face. He had always looked . . . worn to Mat. His hands were so gnarled, they seemed to be all knuckles.

"ɪt mʌst əv ɪntɛɹəɡeɪɾɪd hɪm," mæt sɛd. "faʊn aʊt pipəl aɪ spɛn taɪm wɪð, wɛɹ maɪ tɛnt wɑz."

"It must have interrogated him," Mat said. "Found out people I spent time with, where my tent was."

"ɪz ðə θɪŋ keɪpəbəl ə ðæt?" tɑm sɛd. "ɪt simd mɔɹ laɪk ə haʊn tə mi, hʌntɪŋ jə aʊt."

"Is the thing capable of that?" Thom said. "It seemed more like a hound to me, hunting you out."

ɪt nu wɛɹ tə faɪn mi ɪn taɪlɪnz pæləs," mæt sɛd. "ivən æftɝ aɪ wɑz ɡɔn, ɪt wɛn tə hɝ ɹumz. soʊ iðɝ ɪɾ æsk sʌmwʌn, əɹ ɪt wɑz əbzɝvɪŋ. wɪl nɛvɝ noʊ ɪf dɛɹi wɑz tɔɹtʃɝd, əɹ ɪf i dʒʌst ɹæn əkɹɔs ðə ɡoʊləm waɪl ɪt wɑz snikɪŋ əbaʊt ðə kæmp ən spaɪɪŋ. bʌt ðə θɪŋ ɪz klɛvɝ."

It knew where to find me in Tylin's palace," Mat said. "Even after I was gone, it went to her rooms. So either it asked someone, or it was observing. We'll never know if Derry was tortured, or if he just ran across the gholam while it was sneaking about the camp and spying. But the thing is clever."

ɪt wʊdn æktʃəli  ɡoʊ æftɝ tuɑn, wəɾ ɪt? θɹɛɾənɪŋ ɪz fɹɛnz wɑz pɹɑbli dʒʌst ə weɪ tə ənhɪnʒ mæt. æftɝ ɔl, ðə θɪŋ hæd ʃoʊn tənaɪt ðəɾ ɪt stɪl hæɾ ɔɹɾɝz tə əvɔɪd tu mʌtʃ ətɛnʃən. ðət dɪdn kɑnsoʊl mæt mʌtʃ. ɪf ðət mɑnstɝ hɝt tuɑn . . .

It wouldn't actually go after Tuon, would it? Threatening his friends was probably just a way to unhinge Mat. After all, the thing had shown tonight that it still had orders to avoid too much attention. That didn't console Mat much. If that monster hurt Tuon . . .

ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn weɪ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðət dɪdn hæpən.

There was only one way to make sure that didn't happen.

"soʊ wʌt də wi du?" noʊl æskt.

"So what do we do?" Noal asked.

"wɝ gɑnə hʌn ɪt," mæt sɛd sɔfli, "ænd wɝ gɑnə kɪl ðə blʌɾi θɪŋ."

"We're going to hunt it," Mat said softly, "and we're going to kill the bloody thing."

noʊl ən θɔɹn fɛl saɪlənt.

Noal and Thorn fell silent.

"aɪ woʊn əv ðɪs θɪŋ tʃeɪsɪŋ əs ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə taʊɝ ʌv ɡɛn-dʒeɪaɪ," mæt sɛd.

"I won't have this thing chasing us all the way to the Tower of Ghen-jei," Mat said.

"bʌt kən ɪt bi kɪld, mæt?" tɑm æskt.

"But can it be killed, Mat?" Thom asked.

"ɛniθɪŋ kən bi kɪld," mæt sɛd. "tɛslɪn pɹuv ðət ʃi kəd stɪl hɝɾ ɪt juzɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ɪf ʃi wɑz klɛvɝ. wɪl əv tə də sʌmθɪŋ sɪməlɝ."

"Anything can be killed," Mat said. "Teslyn proved that she could still hurt it using the One Power, if she was clever. We'll have to do something similar."

"wʌt?" noʊl æskt.

"What?" Noal asked.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ jɛt," mæt sɛd. "aɪ wɑn jə tu tə kəntɪnju jəɹ pɹɛpɝeɪʃənz; ɡɛɾ əs ɹɛɾi soʊ ðət wi kən liv fəɹ ðə taʊɝ ʌv ɡɛndʒeɪaɪ əz sun əz maɪ oʊθ tə vɛɹɪn wɪl lɛɾ ʌs. bɝn mi, aɪ stɪl nid tə tɔk tə ɪleɪn. aɪ wɑn ɑlʌdʒɹəz dʒɹæɡənz stɑɹɾəd. əl əv tə ɹaɪɾ əɹ ənʌðɝ lɛɾɝ. stʃɹɔŋɝ, ðɪs taɪm.

"I don't know yet," Mat said. "I want you two to continue your preparations; get us ready so that we can leave for the Tower of Ghenjei as soon as my oath to Verin will let us. Burn me, I still need to talk to Elayne. I want Aludra's dragons started. I'll have to write her another letter. Stronger, this time.

"fɔɹ naʊ, wɝ gɑnə meɪk səm tʃeɪnʒəz. aɪm gɑnə stɑɹt slipɪŋ ɪn ðə sɪɾi. ə dɪfɹən ɪn itʃ naɪt. wɪl lɛt ðə bænd noʊ ɪt, soʊ ɪf ðə ɡoʊləm lɪsənz, ɪɾəl faɪn aʊt. ðəɹ wɪl bi noʊ nid fəɹ ɪt tə ətæk ðə mɛn.

"For now, we're going to make some changes. I'm going to start sleeping in the city. A different inn each night. We'll let the Band know it, so if the gholam listens, it will find out. There will be no need for it to attack the men.

"ju tu wɪl nid tə muv tə ðə sɪɾi tu. əntɪl ðɪs ɪz dʌn, əntɪl ɪts dɛɾ əɹ aɪ æm. ðə kwɛstʃən ɪz wʌt tə də əbaʊɾ oʊlvɝ. ðə θɪŋ dɪdn mɛnʃən hɪm, bʌt . . ."

"You two will need to move to the city too. Until this is done, until it is dead or I am. The question is what to do about Olver. The thing didn't mention him, but . . ."

hi sɔ ʌndɝstændɪŋ ɪn θɔɹnz ən noʊlz aɪz. mæt hæd lɛf taɪlɪn bɪhaɪnd, ən ʃi wɑz dɛd naʊ. hi wɑz nɑt gɑnə də ðə seɪm tə oʊlvɝ.

He saw understanding in Thorn's and Noal's eyes. Mat had left Tylin behind, and she was dead now. He was not going to do the same to Olver.

"wil əv tə teɪk ðə bɔɪ wɪð ʌs," tɑm sɛd. "iðɝ ðəɾ əɹ sɛn ɪm əweɪ."

"We'll have to take the boy with us," Thom said. "Either that or send him away."

"aɪ hɝd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tɔkɪŋ ɝliɝ," noʊl sɛd, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz feɪs wɪð ə boʊni fɪŋɡɝ. "ðeɪɹ plænɪŋ tə liv. meɪbi sɛn ɪm wɪð ðɛm?"

"I heard the Aes Sedai talking earlier," Noal said, rubbing his face with a bony finger. "They're planning to leave. Maybe send him with them?"

mæt ɡɹɪməst. ðə weɪ oʊlvɝ lɪɹɾ ət wɪmən, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wəɾ əv ɪm stʃɹʌŋ ʌp baɪ hɪz toʊz ɪn ə deɪ flæt. mæt wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd ɪt hæd nɑt hæpən ɔlɹɛɾi. ɪf i ɛvɝ faʊn aʊt wɪtʃ ə ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz wɑz titʃɪŋ ðə bɔɪ tə æk ðət weɪ ɝaʊnd wɪmən . . .

Mat grimaced. The way Olver leered at women, the Aes Sedai would have him strung up by his toes in a day flat. Mat was surprised it had not happened already. If he ever found out which of the Redarms was teaching the boy to act that way around women . . .

"aɪ daʊt wid bi eɪbəl tə ɡɛɾ ɪm tə ɡoʊ," mæt sɛd. "hid bi aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ saɪɾ ən bæk hɪɹ ðɛɹ fɝs naɪɾ əweɪ."

"I doubt we'd be able to get him to go," Mat said. "He'd be out of their sight and back here their first night away."

tɑm nɑɾəd ɪn əɡɹimənt.

Thom nodded in agreement.

"wil əv tə teɪk ɪm wɪð ʌs," mæt sɛd. "hæv ɪm steɪ ət ði ɪnz ɪnsaɪd ðə sɪɾi. meɪbi ðæt  - "

"We'll have to take him with us," Mat said. "Have him stay at the inns inside the city. Maybe that  - "

"meɪtʃɹim kɔθən!" ðə ʃɹɪl kɔl keɪm fɹəm aʊtsaɪd θɔɹnz tɛnt.

"Matrim Cauthon!" The shrill call came from outside Thorn's tent.

mæt saɪd, ðən nɑɾəd tə ði ʌðɝ tu ən stʊɾ ʌp. hi stɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə tɛn tə faɪn ðət dʒoʊlin ən əɹ wɔɹɾɝz hæd bʊlid ðɛɹ weɪ hɹaʊ ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz ən hæd nɪɹli jæŋkt oʊpən ðə tɛn flæps tə kʌm stɔkɪŋ ɪn. hɪz əpɪɹəns dʒɹu hɝ ʌp ʃɔɹt.

Mat sighed, then nodded to the other two and stood up. He stepped out of the tent to find that Joline and her Warders had bullied their way hrough the Redarms and had nearly yanked open the tent flaps to come stalking in. His appearance drew her up short.

sɛvɹəl ə ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz lʊkt əbæʃt ət hævɪŋ lɛɾ əɹ θɹu, bʌt ðə mɛn kəd nɑt bi bleɪmd. blʌɾi ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd blʌɾi də wʌt ðeɪ blʌɾi plizd.

Several of the Redarms looked abashed at having let her through, but the men could not be blamed. Bloody Aes Sedai would bloody do what they bloody pleased.

ðə wʊmən hɝsɛlf wɑz ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət tɛslɪn wɑz nɑt. slɛndɝ ən pɹɪɾi, ʃi wɔɹ ə waɪt dʒɹɛs wɪð ə dip nɛklaɪn. ʃi ɔfən smaɪld, ðoʊ ðət smaɪl bɪkeɪm θɪn-lɪpt wən ʃi tɝn ɪɾ ɑn mæt, ən ʃi hæd lɑɹdʒ bɹaʊn aɪz. ðə taɪp ʌv aɪz ðət kəd sʌk ə mæn ɪn ən tʃɹaɪ tə dʒɹaʊn hɪm.

The woman herself was everything that Teslyn was not. Slender and pretty, she wore a white dress with a deep neckline. She often smiled, though that smile became thin-lipped when she turned it on Mat, and she had large brown eyes. The type of eyes that could suck a man in and try to drown him.

pɹɪɾi əz ʃi wɑz, mæt dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ə hɝ əz ə mætʃ fəɹ wʌn ə hɪz fɹɛnz. hi wəd nɛvɝ wɪʃ dʒoʊlin əpɑn sʌmwʌn i laɪkt. ɪn fækt, hi wɑz tu dʒɛntəlmənli tə wɪʃ əɹ ɑn moʊst ə hɪz ɛnəmiz.

Pretty as she was, Mat did not think of her as a match for one of his friends. He would never wish Joline upon someone he liked. In fact, he was too gentlemanly to wish her on most of his enemies.

bɛst ʃi steɪd wɪð fɛn ən blɹɪk, hɝ wɔɹɾɝz, hu wɝ mædmən ɪn mæts əpɪnjən.

Best she stayed with Fen and Blaeric, her Warders, who were madmen in Mat's opinion.

boʊθ wɝ bɔɹɾɝləndɝz - wʌn ʃaɪnɝən, ði ʌðɝ sɑldəiən. fɛnz tɪltəɾ aɪz wɝ hɑɹd. hi ɔlweɪz sim tə bi lʊkɪŋ fəɹ sʌmwʌn tə mɝɾɝ; itʃ kɑnvɝseɪʃən wɪð ɪm wɑz ən ɪntɝvju tə si ɪf jə fɪt ðə kɹaɪtɪɹiə. blɝɪks tɑpnɑt wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɪn, ən ɡɛɾɪŋ lɔŋɡɝ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl tu ʃɔɹt. mæt wʊɾə mɛnʃən ðəɾ ɪt lʊkt ɹɪmɑɹkəbli laɪk ə bædʒɝz teɪl ɡlud tə hɪz hɛd, ɪksɛp ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt fil laɪk biɪŋ mɝɾɝd tədeɪ. ɪt hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn ə blʌɾi ɑfəl ivnɪŋ.

Both were Borderlanders - one Shienaran, the other Saldaean. Fen's tilted eyes were hard. He always seemed to be looking for someone to murder; each conversation with him was an interview to see if you fit the criteria. Blaerics topknot was growing in, and getting longer, but it was still too short. Mat would have mentioned that it looked remarkably like a badger's tail glued to his head, except that he did not feel like being murdered today. It had already been a bloody awful evening.

dʒoʊlin foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts. "ɪɾ əpɪɹz ðət jəɹ ɹɪpɔɹts ə ðɪs . . . kɹitʃɝ ðəɾ ɪz tʃeɪsɪŋ jə wɝ ækjɝət." ʃi saʊndəd skɛptəkəl. hi hæd lɔs faɪv ɡʊd mɛn, ən ʃi saʊndəd skɛptəkəl. blʌɾi ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Joline folded her arms beneath her breasts. "It appears that your reports of this . . . creature that is chasing you were accurate." She sounded skeptical. He had lost five good men, and she sounded skeptical. Bloody Aes Sedai.

"ænd?" hi æskt. "ju noʊ sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ɡoʊləm?"

"And?" he asked. "You know something about gholam?"

"nɑɾ ə θɪŋ," ʃi sɛd. "ɹəɡɑɹdləs, aɪ nid tə ɹɪtɝn tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. əl bi livɪŋ təmɑɹoʊ." ʃi lʊk hɛzɪɾənt. "aɪ wəd laɪk tə æsk ɪf jə wəd lɛn mi səm hɔɹsəz fəɹ ðə tʃɹɪp.

"Not a thing," she said. "Regardless, I need to return to the White Tower. I will be leaving tomorrow." She looked hesitant. "I would like to ask if you would lend me some horses for the trip.

wʌtɛvɝ jə kən spɛɹ. əl nɑt bi pɪki."

Whatever you can spare. I will not be picky."

noʊbɑdi ɪn taʊn wəd sɛl jə ɛni, ɛ?" mæt sɛd wɪð ə ɡɹʌnt.

Nobody in town would sell you any, eh?" Mat said with a grunt.

hɝ feɪs bɪkeɪm ivən mɔɹ sɝin.

Her face became even more serene.

wɛl, ɔl ɹaɪt," mæt sɛd. "æt lis jə æsk naɪsli ðɪs taɪm, ðoʊ aɪ kən si haʊ hɑɹɾ ɪt wɑz fəɹ ju. aɪv pɹɑməst səm tə tɛslɪn ɔlɹɛɾi. juv səm tu. ɪɾəl bi wɝθ ɪt tə hæv jə blʌɾi wɪmən aʊɾ ə maɪ hɛɹ."

Well, all right," Mat said. "At least you asked nicely this time, though I can see how hard it was for you. I've promised some to Teslyn already. You have some too. It will be worth it to have you bloody women out of my hair."

θæŋk ju," ʃi sɛd, hɝ vɔɪs kəntʃɹoʊld. "haʊɛvɝ, ə wɝɾ ʌv ædvaɪs.

Thank you," she said, her voice controlled. "However, a word of advice.

kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðə kʌmpəni jə ɔfən kip, jə maɪt wɑnə lɝn tə kɑn-tʃɹoʊl jəɹ læŋɡwədʒ."

Considering the company you often keep, you might want to learn to con-trol your language."

"kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðə kʌmpəni aɪ kip ɔl tu ɔfən," mæt sɛd, "ɪts blʌdv əmeɪzɪŋ aɪ doʊn swɛɹ mɔɹ. ɔf wɪð ju, dʒoʊlin. aɪ nid tə ɹaɪɾ ə lɛɾɪaɪ tə hɝ ɹɔɪəl blʌɾi mædʒəsti kwin ɪleɪn ðə pɹɪm."

"Considering the company I keep all too often," Mat said, "it's bloodv amazing I don't swear more. Off with you, Joline. I need to write a lettei to Her Royal bloody Majesty Queen Elayne the prim."

dʒoʊlin snɪft. "ɑɹ jə gɑnə swɛɹ əɾ əɹ tu?"

Joline sniffed. "Are you going to swear at her too?"

"ʌv kɔɹs aɪ æm," mæt mʌɾɝd, tɝnɪŋ tə ɡoʊ bæk tə θɔɹnz tɛnt "haʊ ɛls ɪz ʃi gɑnə tʃɹʌs ðəɾ ɪts ɹɪli fɹəm mi?"

"Of course I am," Mat muttered, turning to go back to Thorn's tent "How else is she going to trust that it's really from me?"


tʃæptɝ tɛn


CHAPTER 10

æftɝ ðə teɪnt


After the Taint

aɪ əɡɹi wɪð ðoʊz kaʊns," ɛlaɪəs sɛd, wɔkɪŋ ət pɛɹɪnz saɪd. ɡɹeɪɾi wɔkt ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd, θɔtfəl ɪn ɪz blæk koʊt. mɑntəm ælzən ən ɑzi ælθoʊn - pɛɹɪnz tu ɡɑɹdz fəɹ ðə deɪ -  tʃɹeɪl bɪhaɪnd.

I agree with those counts," Elyas said, walking at Perrin's side. Grady walked on the other side, thoughtful in his black coat. Montem al'San and Azi al'Thone - Perrin's two guards for the day -  trailed behind.

ɪt wɑz stɪl ɝli ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. pɛɹɪn wɑz ɑstɛnsəbli tʃɛkɪŋ ɑn ɡɑɹd poʊsts, bʌɾ i ɹɪli dʒʌst wɑntəd tə bi wɔkɪŋ. ðeɪd muv ðə kæmp tə ən ɛləveɪɾɪd mɛdoʊ əlɔŋ ðə dʒəhænə ɹoʊd. ɪt hæɾ ə ɡʊd wɔɾɝ səplaɪ ən wɑz nɪɹ ɪnʌf tə ðə ɹoʊd tə kəntʃɹoʊl ɪt, bʌt fɑɹ ɪnʌf bæk tə bi dɪfɛnsəbəl.

It was still early in the morning. Perrin was ostensibly checking on guard posts, but he really just wanted to be walking. They'd moved the camp to an elevated meadow along the Jehannah Road. It had a good water supply and was near enough to the road to control it, but far enough back to be defensible.

ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə mɛdoʊ, ən eɪntʃən stætʃu leɪ bɪfɔɹ ə pætʃ ə tʃɹiz. ðə stætʃu hæd fɔlən ɑn ɪts saɪd lɔŋ əɡoʊ, ən moʊst ʌv ɪt wɑz naʊ bɛɹid, bʌɾ ən ɑɹm ɹoʊz fɹəm ði ɝθ, hoʊldɪŋ ðə hɪlt ʌv ə sɔɹd. ðə bleɪd wɑz θɹʌst ɪndə ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

On one side of the meadow, an ancient statue lay before a patch of trees. The statue had fallen on its side long ago, and most of it was now buried, but an arm rose from the earth, holding the hilt of a sword. The blade was thrust into the ground.

"aɪ ʃʊdn əv sɛnt ɡɪl ən ði ʌðɝz əhɛd," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðæt lɛɾ əm bi snætʃt ʌp baɪ ðə fɝs pæsɪŋ fɔɹs."

"I shouldn't have sent Gill and the others ahead," Perrin said. "That let them be snatched up by the first passing force."

"ju kʊdn əv æntɪsəpeɪɾəd ðɪs," ɛlaɪəs sɛd. "nɔɹ kəd juv æntɪsəpeɪɾəd biɪŋ dɪleɪd.

"You couldn't have anticipated this," Elyas said. "Nor could you have anticipated being delayed.

wɛɹ wəd juv lɛf ðɛm? ʃeɪɾoʊ wɝ kʌmɪŋ ʌp bɪhaɪnd, ən ɪf əɹ bæɾəl ət meɪɾən hædnt ɡɔn wɛl, ɡɪl ən ði ʌðɝz wʊɾə bɪn tʃɹæp bɪtwin tu ɡɹups ʌv ɛnəmi il."

Where would you have left them? Shaido were coming up behind, and if our battle at Maiden hadn't gone well, Gill and the others would have been trapped between two groups of enemy Aiel."

pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊl tə hɪmsɛlf. hɪz buɾɪd fit stʌk ə lɪɾəl ɪn ðə sɑɾən ɡɹaʊnd. hi heɪɾəd ðə sɛn ə ðət tʃɹæmpəld, stæɡnən mʌd mɪkst wɪð ɹɑɾɪŋ dɛd plæns. ɪt wɑznt nɪɹli əz bæɾ əz ðə blaɪt dɪziz, bʌɾ ɪt sim tə hɪm ðə hoʊl lænd wɑz oʊnli ə fju stɛps əweɪ fɹəm ðæt.

Perrin growled to himself. His booted feet stuck a little in the sodden ground. He hated the scent of that trampled, stagnant mud mixed with rotting dead plants. It wasn't nearly as bad as the Blight disease, but it seemed to him the whole land was only a few steps away from that.

ðeɪ əpɹoʊtʃt ə ɡɑɹd poʊst. tu mɛn - hu bæɹən ən dɑɹl kɑplɪn__.

They approached a guard post. Two men - Hu Barran and Darl Coplin__.

stʊd wɑtʃ hɪɹ. ðəɹ wəd bi ədɪʃənəl skaʊts, ʌv kɔɹs: tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn ɪn tʃɹiz, meɪɾənz pətʃɹoʊlɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊnd. bʌt pɛɹɪn hæd lɝn ðəɾ ə fju mɛn ɡɪvən poʊsts ɝaʊn ðə kæmp lɛn ɛvɹiwʌn ɪnsaɪɾ ə sɛns ʌv ɔɹɾɝ.

stood watch here. There would be additional scouts, of course: Two Rivers men in trees, Maidens patrolling the ground. But Perrin had learned that a few men given posts around the camp lent everyone inside a sense of order.

ðə ɡɑɹdz səluɾəd hɪm, ðoʊ dɑɹlz səlut wɑz slɑpi. ðeɪ ɡeɪv ɔf ən ɑd mɪkstʃɝ ə sɛns  - ɹəɡɹɛt, fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən, dɪsəpɔɪnmənt. ən ɪmbɛɹəsmənt. ðət læst wʌn wɑz feɪnt, bʌt stɪl ðɛɹ.

The guards saluted him, though Darl's salute was sloppy. They gave off an odd mixture of scents  - regret, frustration, disappointment. And embarrassment. That last one was faint, but still there.

pɛɹɪnz səpoʊz dæliəns wɪð bɹəleɪn wɑz stɪl ɹisən ɪn ðɛɹ maɪnz, ən feɪlz ɹɪtɝn sim tə ɪnkɹis ðɛɹ dɪskʌmfɝt. ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, wʌn dɪd nɑɾ izəli lɪv daʊn ə ɹɛpjəteɪʃən fəɹ ɪnfɪdɛlɪɾi.

Perrin's supposed dalliance with Berelain was still recent in their minds, and Faile's return seemed to increase their discomfort. In the Two Rivers, one did not easily live down a reputation for infidelity.

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd tə ðɛm, ðən kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn. hi dɪdn də mʌtʃ fɔɹməl ɪnspɛktɪŋ. ɪf ðə mɛn nu hi wəd wɔk baɪ sʌmtaɪm itʃ deɪ, ðeɪd kip ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn ɔɹɾɝ. fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt. læs naɪt, hi hæd niɾəd tə pɹɑd slipɪŋ bɛɹɪn θeɪn əweɪk wɪð ɪz but, ən i wɑz ɔlweɪz kɛɹfəl tə wɑtʃ fəɹ ðə sɛn ə stʃɹɔŋ dʒɹɪŋk əmʌŋ ðɛm. hi wʊdn pʊɾ ɪt pæs dʒɔɹi kɔŋɡɝ tə snik ə nɪp əɹ tu waɪl ɑn ɡɑɹd.

Perrin nodded to them, then continued on. He didn't do much formal inspecting. If the men knew he would walk by sometime each day, they'd keep themselves in order. For the most part. Last night, he had needed to prod sleeping Berin Thane awake with his boot, and he was always careful to watch for the scent of strong drink among them. He wouldn't put it past Jori Congar to sneak a nip or two while on guard.

"ɔl ɹaɪt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðə waɪtkloʊks əv əɹ pipəl ən əɹ səplaɪz." hi ɡɹɪməst, θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðə ɡɹeɪn pɝtʃəst ɪn soʊ hæbɝ gɑnə fɪl waɪtkloʊk bɛliz. "kʊd wi snik ɪn ən fɹi ðɛm?"

"All right," Perrin said. "The Whitecloaks have our people and our supplies." He grimaced, thinking of the grain purchased in So Habor going to fill Whitecloak bellies. "Could we sneak in and free them?"

"aɪ doʊn si ðə nid fəɹ snikɪŋ," ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd fɹəm bɪhaɪnd. "pɑɹɾən, maɪ lɔɹd, bʌt jə sim tə bi meɪkɪŋ ðɪs ə lɑɹdʒɝ pɹɑbləm ðən ɪɾ ɪz."

"I don't see the need for sneaking," Grady said from behind. "Pardon, my Lord, but you seem to be making this a larger problem than it is."

pɛɹɪn lʊk bæk ət ðə lɛðɝi mæn. "ðeɪɹ waɪtkloʊks, ɡɹeɪɾi. ðəɹ ɔlweɪz ə lɑɹdʒ pɹɑbləm."

Perrin looked back at the leathery man. "They're Whitecloaks, Grady. They're always a large problem."

"ðeɪ woʊn əv ɛniwʌn u kən tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ." ɡɹeɪɾi ʃɹʌɡd, hænz klæsp bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk əz i wɔkt. wɪð ðə blæk koʊt, ðə pɪn ən ði ɪnkɹisɪŋli soʊlʒɹlaɪk æɾətud, hi wɑz lʊkɪŋ lɛs ən lɛs laɪk ə fɑɹmɝ. "nild ɪz filɪŋ bɛɾɝ. hi ən aɪ kəd paʊn ðoʊz tʃɪlʒɹən daʊn əntɪl ðeɪ ɡɪv əs wʌt wi wɑnt."

"They won't have anyone who can channel the One Power." Grady shrugged, hands clasped behind his back as he walked. With the black coat, the pin and the increasingly soldierlike attitude, he was looking less and less like a farmer. "Neald is feeling better. He and I could pound those Children down until they give us what we want."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. hi heɪɾəd ði aɪdiə ʌv lɛɾɪŋ ði æʃəmən lus wɪð ɪmpjunɪɾi. ðə sɛn ə bɝn flɛʃ ɪn ði ɛɹ, ði ɝθ ɹɪpt əpɑɹɾ ən bɹoʊkən. ðə sɛns ə dəməaɪz wɛlz. haʊɛvɝ, hi kʊdn əfɔɹɾ ənʌðɝ dɪstʃɹækʃən laɪk meɪɾən. ɪf ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs, hid ɡɪv ði ɔɹɾɝ.

Perrin nodded. He hated the idea of letting the Asha'man loose with impunity. The scent of burned flesh in the air, the earth ripped apart and broken. The scents of Dumai's Wells. However, he couldn't afford another distraction like Maiden. If there were no other choice, he'd give the order.

nɑt jɛt, ðoʊ. ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ koʊɪnsəɾənsɪz wɪð tɑvɝən. ðə wʊlvz, ðə waɪtkloʊks. θɪŋz i hæd bɪn aʊtʃɹʌnɪŋ fəɹ səm taɪm wɝ ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə hʌn hɪm. hid pʊʃt ðə tʃɪlʒɹən aʊɾ ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. mɛni ʌv ðə mɛn u hæd bɪn wɪð ɪm ðən naʊ fɑloʊɾ ɪm hɪɹ.

Not yet, though. There are no coincidences with ta'veren. The wolves, the Whitecloaks. Things he had been outrunning for some time were returning to hunt him. He'd pushed the Children out of the Two Rivers. Many of the men who had been with him then now followed him here.

"pɝhæps ɪɾəl kʌm tə ðæt," pɛɹɪn sɛd tə ɡɹeɪɾi, stɪl wɔkɪŋ. "bʌt meɪbi nɑt. wiv ɡɑɾ ə lɑɹdʒɝ fɔɹs ðən ðeɪ du, ən wɪð ðət blæstəd wʊlfhɛd bænɝ faɪnəli teɪkən daʊn, ðeɪ meɪ nɑt ɹilaɪz u wi ɑɹ. wi flaɪ ðə bænɝ ə ðə kwin ʌv ɡildən, ən ðəɹ pæsɪŋ θɹu æl-liɑndɝz tɛɹɪtɔɹi. laɪkli ðeɪ sɔ ðə səplaɪz ɪn əɹ pipəlz kɑɹts ən dɪsaɪɾɪd tə 'pɹətɛk ðɛm.' səm dɪskʌʃən, pɝhæps ə lɪɾəl ɪntɪmɪdeɪʃən, meɪ bi ɪnʌf tə pɝsweɪɾ əm tə ɹɪtɝn əɹ pipəl."

"Perhaps it will come to that," Perrin said to Grady, still walking. "But maybe not. We've got a larger force than they do, and with that blasted wolfhead banner finally taken down, they may not realize who we are. We fly the banner of the Queen of Ghealdan, and they're passing through Al-liandre's territory. Likely they saw the supplies in our people's carts and decided to 'protect them.' Some discussion, perhaps a little intimidation, may be enough to persuade them to return our people."

ɛlaɪəs nɑɾəd, ən ɡɹeɪɾi sim tə əɡɹi, ðoʊ pɛɹɪn wɑzn kənvɪns baɪ hɪz oʊn wɝdz. ðə waɪtkloʊks hæd hɔntəɾ ɪm sɪns ɪz ɝli deɪz aʊɾ ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. dilɪŋ wɪð əm hæd nɛvɝ bɪn sɪmpəl.

Elyas nodded, and Grady seemed to agree, though Perrin wasn't convinced by his own words. The Whitecloaks had haunted him since his early days out of the Two Rivers. Dealing with them had never been simple.

ɪt fɛlt laɪk ðə taɪm hæd kʌm. taɪm tə meɪk ən ɛn tə hɪz tʃɹʌbəlz wɪð ðɛm, wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ.

It felt like the time had come. Time to make an end to his troubles with them, one way or another.

hi kəntɪnjuɾ ɪz ɹaʊnz, ɝaɪvɪŋ ət ði il sɛkʃən ə ðə kæmp. hi nɑɾəd əɾ ə pɛɹ ə meɪɾənz laʊnʒɪŋ ɑn ɡɑɹd wɪð ɹɪlækst əlɝtnəs. ðeɪ dɪdn stæn ʌp əɹ səlut - wɪtʃ suɾəd ɪm faɪn -  ðoʊ ðeɪ dɪd nɑd. hiɾ əpɛɹənli ɡeɪnd ɡɹeɪt dʒi ɪn ðɛɹ aɪz baɪ ðə weɪ hid plænd, ðən əkɑmplɪʃt, ði ətæk ɑn ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ.

He continued his rounds, arriving at the Aiel section of the camp. He nodded at a pair of Maidens lounging on guard with relaxed alertness. They didn't stand up or salute - which suited him fine -  though they did nod. He'd apparently gained great ji in their eyes by the way he'd planned, then accomplished, the attack on the Shaido.

ði il meɪnteɪn ðɛɹ oʊn ɡɑɹd poʊsts, ən i hæd noʊ ɹizən tə ɪnspɛk ðɛm. bʌɾ i ɪnkluɾəd əm ɪn ɪz ɹaʊnz ɛniweɪ. ɪt sim ðəɾ ɪf i wɑz gɑnə vɪzət ði ʌðɝ sɛkʃənz ə kæmp, hi ʃəd də ɪt hɪɹ, tu.

The Aiel maintained their own guard posts, and he had no reason to inspect them. But he included them in his rounds anyway. It seemed that if he was going to visit the other sections of camp, he should do it here, too.

ɡɹeɪɾi stɑp sʌɾənli ən spʌn təwɔɹd ðə waɪz wʌnz' tɛns.

Grady stopped suddenly and spun toward the Wise Ones' tents.

"wʌt?" pɛɹɪn æskt ɝdʒənli, skænɪŋ ðə kæmp. hi kʊdn si ɛniθɪŋ ənjuʒəwəl.

"What?" Perrin asked urgently, scanning the camp. He couldn't see anything unusual.

ɡɹeɪɾi smaɪld. "aɪ θɪŋk ðeɪv mænədʒd ɪt." hi stɑɹɾəd ɪndə ði il kæmp, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə ɡlɛɹz sɛvɹəl meɪɾənz ɡeɪv hɪm. ðeɪ maɪt vɛɹi wɛl əv tɔst ɪm aʊt, æʃəmən əɹ noʊ, ɪf pɛɹɪn hædn bɪn ðɛɹ.

Grady smiled. "I think they've managed it." He started into the Aiel camp, ignoring the glares several Maidens gave him. They might very well have tossed him out, Asha'man or no, if Perrin hadn't been there.

nild, pɛɹɪn θɔt. hiz bɪn wɝkɪŋ wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə fɪɡjɝ aʊt sɝkəlz. ɪf ɡɹeɪɾi hæd sin sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðə wivz . . .

Neald, Perrin thought. He's been working with the Aes Sedai to figure out circles. If Grady had seen something in the weaves . . .

pɛɹɪn fɑloʊd, ən sun ðeɪ ɹitʃt ə ɹɪŋ ʌv waɪz wʌn tɛns ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ði il kæmp, ði ɛɹiə bɪtwin əm dʒɹaɪd - pɝhæps baɪ wivz - ən ðə ɡɹaʊn pæk daʊn. nild, ɛdʒɹə ən mɑsʊɝi sæt ðɛɹ. feɪɡɝ nild wɑz ə jʌŋ mʊɹændiən wɪð ə mʌstæʃ ðət kɝl tə pɔɪns. hi wɔɹ noʊ pɪnz ɑn ðə kɑlɝ ə hɪz blæk koʊt, ðoʊ hid laɪkli bi pɹəmoʊɾəd əz sun əz ðə ɡɹup ɹɪtɝn fɹəm ðɛɹ ɪkskɝʒən. hid ɡɹoʊn ɪn paʊɝ sɪns ðeɪd bɪɡʌn.

Perrin followed, and soon they reached a ring of Wise One tents in the center of the Aiel camp, the area between them dried - perhaps by weaves - and the ground packed down. Neald, Edarra and Masuri sat there. Fager Neald was a young Murandian with a mustache that curled to points. He wore no pins on the collar of his black coat, though he'd likely be promoted as soon as the group returned from their excursion. He'd grown in Power since they'd begun.

hi wɑz stɪl peɪl fɹəm ðə sneɪkbaɪts hid teɪkən, bʌt lʊk mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ðən i hæɾ oʊnli ə fju deɪz bæk. hi wɑz smaɪlɪŋ, stɛɹɪŋ ət ði ɛɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, ən i smɛld ɪɡzubɝənt.

He was still pale from the snakebites he'd taken, but looked much better than he had only a few days back. He was smiling, staring at the air in front of him, and he smelled exuberant.

ə lɑɹdʒ ɡeɪtweɪ splɪt ði ɛɹ. pɛɹɪn ɡɹʌntɪd. ɪɾ əpɪɹd tə lid bæk tə ə pleɪs wɛɹ ðeɪd kæmp sɛvɹəl wiks əɡoʊ - ən oʊpən fild ə noʊ ɹil noʊt.

A large gateway split the air. Perrin grunted. It appeared to lead back to a place where they'd camped several weeks ago - an open field of no real note.

'ɪts wɝkɪŋ?" ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd, nilɪŋ daʊn bɪsaɪd nild.

'It's working?" Grady said, kneeling down beside Neald.

"ɪts bjuɾəfəl, dʒɝ," nil sɛd sɔfli. hɪz vɔɪs bɔɹ noʊ hɪn ə ðə bɹəvɑɾoʊ hi ɔfən dɪspleɪd. "aɪ kən filseɪaɪdɑɹ. ɪts laɪk aɪm mɔɹ kəmplit naʊ."

"It's beautiful, Jur," Neald said softly. His voice bore no hint of the bravado he often displayed. "I can feelsaidar. It's like I'm more complete now."

"jɔɹ tʃænəlɪŋ ɪt?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"You're channeling it?" Perrin asked.

"noʊ. aɪ doʊnt nid tə. aɪ kən juz ɪt."

"No. I don't need to. I can use it."

"juz ɪt haʊ?" ɡɹeɪɾi æskt, iɡɝ.

"Use it how?" Grady asked, eager.

"aɪ . . . ɪts hɑɹd tə ɪkspleɪn. ðə wivz ɑɹ seɪɾɪn, bʌɾ aɪ sim tə bi eɪbəl tə stʃɹɛŋθən əm wɪð seɪaɪdɑɹ. soʊ lɔŋ əz aɪ kən meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ ɑn maɪ oʊn ɪɾ əpɪɹz ðəɾ aɪ kən ɪnkɹis ðə paʊɝ - ən saɪz - wɪð wʌt ðə wɪmən lɛn mi. laɪt! ɪts wʌndɝfəl. wi ʃʊɾə dʌn ðɪs mʌnθs əɡoʊ."

"I . . . It's hard to explain. The weaves are saidin, but I seem to be able to strengthen them with saidar. So long as I can make a gateway on my own it appears that I can increase the Power - and size - with what the women lend me. Light! It's wonderful. We should have done this months ago."

pɛɹɪn ɡlænst ət ðə tu wɪmən, mɑsʊɝi ən ɛdʒɹə. niðɝ simd əz ɪɡzʌltən əz nild.

Perrin glanced at the two women, Masuri and Edarra. Neither seemed as exultant as Neald.

mɑsʊɝi lʊkt ə lɪɾəl sɪk, ən ʃi smɛld ə fɪɹ. ɛdʒɹə smɛl kjʊɹiəs ən wɛɹi. ɡɹeɪɾi hæd mɛnʃən ðət kɹieɪɾɪŋ ə sɝkəl ðɪs weɪ sim tə ɹikwaɪɝ ðə mɛn tə ɡeɪn kəntʃɹoʊl oʊvɝ ðə wɪmən.

Masuri looked a little sick, and she smelled of fear. Edarra smelled curious and wary. Grady had mentioned that creating a circle this way seemed to require the men to gain control over the women.

"wil sɛn ðə skaʊɾɪŋ ɡɹup θɹu tə kɛɹhin sun, ðɛn," pɛɹɪn sɛd, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə blæksmɪθs pʌzəl ɪn ɪz pɑkət. "ɡɹeɪɾi, ɝeɪnʒ wɪð ði il əbaʊt ðət mɪʃən, sɛɾ ʌp ðə ɡeɪtweɪz əz ðeɪ æsk."

"We'll send the scouting group through to Cairhien soon, then," Perrin said, fingering the blacksmith's puzzle in his pocket. "Grady, arrange with the Aiel about that mission, set up the gateways as they ask."

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd," ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz lɛðɝi feɪs. "aɪ ʃəd pɹɑbli lɝn ðɪs tɛknik ɹæðɝ ðən kəntɪnjuɪŋ ɑn ɹaʊnz. ðoʊ ðɛɹz sʌmθɪŋ əl bi wɑntɪŋ tə tɔk tə jə əbaʊt fɝst. ɪf juv ðə taɪm."

"Yes, my Lord," Grady said, rubbing his leathery face. "I should probably learn this technique rather than continuing on rounds. Though there's something I'll be wanting to talk to you about first. If you've the time."

"ɪf jə wɪʃ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, stɛpɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɡɹup. tə ðə saɪd, sɛvɹəl ə ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz keɪm fɔɹwɝɾ ən toʊl nild ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ tɝn tə tʃɹaɪ ðə sɝkəl wɪð hɪm. ðeɪ dɪdn ækt əɾ ɔl əz ɪf nild wɝ ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ, ən i wɑz kwɪk tə oʊbeɪ. hid bɪn wɔkɪŋ laɪtli ɝaʊn ði il sɪns hid sɛd sʌmθɪŋ ə lɪɾəl tu fɹɪski tə ə meɪɾən ən ɛndəɾ ʌp pleɪɪŋ meɪɾənz kɪs.

"If you wish," Perrin said, stepping away from the group. To the side, several of the other Wise Ones came forward and told Neald it was their turn to try the circle with him. They didn't act at all as if Neald were in charge, and he was quick to obey. He'd been walking lightly around the Aiel since he'd said something a little too frisky to a Maiden and ended up playing Maiden's Kiss.

"wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs əbaʊt, ɡɹeɪɾi?" pɛɹɪn æskt wʌns ðeɪ wɝ ə lɪɾəl weɪ ɔf.

"What is this about, Grady?" Perrin asked once they were a little way off.

"wɛl, nild ən aɪ ɑɹ boʊθ wɛl ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɡeɪtweɪz, ɪt simz," ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd. "aɪ wɑz wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf aɪ maɪt. . ." hi sim hɛzɪɾənt. "wɛl, ɪf aɪ maɪɾ əv liv tə slɪp oʊvɝ tə ðə blæk taʊɝ fəɹ ən æftɝnun, tə si maɪ fæmli."

"Well, Neald and I are both well enough to make gateways, it seems," Grady said. "I was wondering if I might. . ." He seemed hesitant. "Well, if I might have leave to slip over to the Black Tower for an afternoon, to see my family."

ðæts ɹaɪt, pɛɹɪn θɔt. hiz ɡɑɾ ə waɪf ən ə sʌn. ði æʃəmən dɪdn ɔfən tɔk əbaʊt ðɛm.

That's right, Perrin thought. He's got a wife and a son. The Asha'man didn't often talk about them.

æktʃəli , hi dɪdn ɔfən tɔk əbaʊt mʌtʃ.

Actually, he didn't often talk about much.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ, ɡɹeɪɾi," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ɡlænsɪŋ ʌp ət ðə dɑɹkli klaʊɾəd skaɪ. "wi hæv waɪtkloʊks əhɛd, ən ðɛɹz stɪl noʊ tɛlɪŋ fəɹ ʃʊɹ ɪf ðoʊz ʃeɪɾoʊ wɪl lup ɝaʊn ən tʃɹaɪ tə æmbʊʃ ʌs. aɪm loʊθ tə bi wɪθaʊt jə əntɪl aɪ noʊ wɝ sʌmpleɪs seɪf."

"I don't know, Grady," Perrin said, glancing up at the darkly clouded sky. "We have Whitecloaks ahead, and there's still no telling for sure if those Shaido will loop around and try to ambush us. I'm loath to be without you until I know we're someplace safe."

"ɪt nidn bi fəɹ lɔŋ, maɪ lɔɹd," ɡɹeɪɾi sɛɾ ɝnəsli. pɛɹɪn səmtaɪmz fɝɡɑt haʊ jʌŋ ðə mæn wɑz, oʊnli sɪks əɹ sɛvən jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən hɪmsɛlf. ɡɹeɪɾi sim soʊ mʌtʃ oʊldɝ ɪn ðət blæk koʊt, wɪð ɪz sʌn-dɑɹkən feɪs.

"It needn't be for long, my Lord," Grady said earnestly. Perrin sometimes forgot how young the man was, only six or seven years older than himself. Grady seemed so much older in that black coat, with his sun-darkened face.

"wil faɪn ə taɪm," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "sun. aɪ doʊnt wɑnə əpsɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ əntɪl wɪv wɝɾ ʌv wʌts bɪn hæpənɪŋ sɪns wi lɛft." ɪnfɝmeɪʃən kəd bi poʊɾənt. beɪlwɝ hæd tɔɾ ɪm ðæt.

"We'll find a time," Perrin said. "Soon. I don't want to upset anything until we have word of what's been happening since we left." Information could be potent. Balwer had taught him that.

ɡɹeɪɾi nɑɾəd, lʊkɪŋ plækeɪɾɪd, ðoʊ pɛɹɪn hædnt ɡɪvən ɪm ɛni-θɪŋ dɛfənət. laɪt! ivən ði æʃəmən wɝ stɑɹɾɪŋ tə smɛl laɪk pipəl hoʊ sɔ hɪm əz ðɛɹ lɔɹd. ðeɪd bɪn soʊ əluf wən ðɪs ɔl bɪɡæn.

Grady nodded, looking placated, though Perrin hadn't given him any-thing definite. Light! Even the Asha'man were starting to smell like people ho saw him as their lord. They'd been so aloof when this all began.

"ju nɛvɝ wɝiɾ əbaʊt ðɪs bɪfɔɹ, ɡɹeɪɾi," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "hæz sʌmθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒd?"

"You never worried about this before, Grady," Perrin said. "Has something changed?"

"ɛvɹiθɪŋ," ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd sɔfli. pɛɹɪn ɡɑɾ ə wɪf ə hɪz sɛnt. hoʊpfəl "ɪt tʃeɪnʒd ə fju wiks bæk. bʌɾ ə kɔɹs jə doʊnt noʊ. noʊbɑdi noʊz. feɪɡɝ ən aɪ wɝn sɝɾən ət fɝst, ən wi wɝnt ʃʊɹ ɪf wi ʃəd tɛl ɛniwʌn fəɹ fɪɹ ə saʊndɪŋ dɛluʒənəl."

"Everything," Grady said softly. Perrin got a whiff of his scent. Hopeful "It changed a few weeks back. But of course you don't know. Nobody knows. Fager and I weren't certain at first, and we weren't sure if we should tell anyone for fear of sounding delusional."

"noʊ wʌt?"

"Know what?"

"maɪ lɔɹd, ðə teɪnt. ɪts ɡɔn'.'

"My Lord, the taint. It's gone'.'

pɛɹɪn fɹaʊnd. wɑz ðɪs mædnəs spikɪŋ? bʌt ɡɹeɪɾi dɪdn smɛl mæd.

Perrin frowned. Was this madness speaking? But Grady didn't smell mad.

"ɪt hæpən ɑn ðət deɪ," ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd, "wɛn wi sɔ sʌmθɪŋ tə ðə nɔɹθ. maɪ lɔɹd, aɪ noʊ ɪt saʊnz ʌnbəlivəbəl, bʌɾ ɪts tʃɹu'.'

"It happened on that day," Grady said, "when we saw something to the north. My Lord, I know it sounds unbelievable, but it is true'.'

"simz ðə sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ ɹænd maɪɾ əv bɪn əbaʊt," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ən ðə kʌlɝz swɝld ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. hi bænɪʃt ðɛm. "ɪf jə seɪ ɪt, əl tʃɹʌs ju, ɡɹeɪɾi. bʌt wʌt dʌz ðɪs əv tə də wɪð ðə blæk taʊɝ ən jəɹ fæmli? jə wɑnə ɡoʊ si ɪf ʌðɝ æʃəmən əɡɹi?"

"Seems the sort of thing Rand might have been about," Perrin said, and the colors swirled in front of him. He banished them. "If you say it, I'll trust you, Grady. But what does this have to do with the Black Tower and your family? You want to go see if other Asha'man agree?"

"oʊ, ðəl əɡɹi," ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd. "ɪts . . . wɛl, maɪ lɔɹd, ɪm ə sɪmpəl mæn. sɔɹə, ʃiz ɔlweɪz bɪn ðə θɪŋkɝ. aɪ də wʌt nidz duɪŋ, ən ðæts ðæt. wɛl, dʒɔɪnɪŋ ðə blæk taʊɝ, ðət wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ðət niɾəd duɪŋ. aɪ nu wʌt wɑz gɑnə hæpən wən aɪ wɑz tɛstəd. aɪ nu ɪt wɑz ɪn mi. ɪt wɑz ɪn maɪ fɑðɝ, jə si. wi doʊn tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ. ɹɛdz faʊn ɪm jʌŋ, ɹaɪɾ æftɝ aɪ wɑz bɔɹn.

"Oh, they'll agree," Grady said. "It's . . . well, my Lord, I'm a simple man. Sora, she's always been the thinker. I do what needs doing, and that's that. Well, joining the Black Tower, that was something that needed doing. I knew what was going to happen when I was tested. I knew it was in me. It was in my father, you see. We don't talk about it, but it was there. Reds found him young, right after I was born.

"wɛn aɪ dʒɔɪn ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, aɪ nu wʌt wəd hæpən tə mi. ə fju mɔɹ jɪɹz ən aɪd bi ɡɔn. maɪɾ əz wɛl spɛn əm faɪɾɪŋ. ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən toʊl mi aɪ wɑz ə soʊlʒɝ, ən ə soʊlʒɝ kæn liv ɪz duɾi. soʊ aɪ hævən æsk tə ɡoʊ bæk bɪfɔɹ naʊ. jə niɾəd mi."

"When I joined the Lord Dragon, I knew what would happen to me. A few more years and I'd be gone. Might as well spend them fighting. The Lord Dragon told me I was a soldier, and a soldier can't leave his duty. So I haven't asked to go back before now. You needed me."

"ðæts tʃeɪnʒd?"

"That's changed?"

maɪ lɔɹd, ðə teɪn ɪz ɡɔn. ɪm nɑt gɑnə ɡoʊ mæd. ðət minz . . . wɛl, aɪ ɔlweɪz hæɾ ə ɹizən tə faɪt. bʌt naʊ aɪv ɡɑɾ ə ɹizən tə lɪv, tu."

My Lord, the taint is gone. I'm not going to go mad. That means . . . well, I always had a reason to fight. But now I've got a reason to live, too."

lʊkɪŋ ɪndə ðə mænz aɪz, pɛɹɪn ʌndɝstʊd. wʌt mʌst ɪɾ əv bɪn laɪk? noʊɪŋ ðət juɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɡoʊ mæɾ ən nid tə bi ɛksəkjuɾəd. laɪkli baɪ jəɹ fɹɛnz, hu wəd kɔl ɪɾ ə mɝsi.

Looking into the man's eyes, Perrin understood. What must it have been like? Knowing that you'd eventually go mad and need to be executed. Likely by your friends, who would call it a mercy.

ðət wɑz wʌt pɛɹɪn hæd sɛnst ɪn ði æʃəmən ɔl əlɔŋ, ðə ɹizən ðeɪ hɛl ðɛmsɛlvz əpɑɹt, ɔfən simɪŋ soʊ sɑmbɝ. ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls fɔt fəɹ laɪf. ði æʃəmən . . . ðeɪd fɔt tə daɪ.

That was what Perrin had sensed in the Asha'man all along, the reason they held themselves apart, often seeming so somber. Everyone else fought for life. The Asha'man . . . they'd fought to die.

ðæts haʊ ɹænd filz, pɛɹɪn θɔt, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə kʌlɝz swɝl əɡɛn ən ɪz fɹɛn əpɪɹ. hi wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪz lɑɹdʒ blæk hɔɹs θɹu ə sɪɾi wɪð mʌɾi stʃɹits, spikɪŋ wɪð nɪneɪiv, hu ɹoʊd bɪsaɪd hɪm.

That's how Rand feels, Perrin thought, watching the colors swirl again and his friend appear. He was riding his large black horse through a city with muddy streets, speaking with Nynaeve, who rode beside him.

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ən bænɪʃt ði ɪmədʒ. "wil ɡɛt jə hoʊm ɡɹeɪɾi," hi pɹɑməst. "jul əv səm taɪm wɪð əɹ bɪfɔɹ ði ɛn kʌmz."

Perrin shook his head and banished the image. "We'll get you home Grady," he promised. "You'll have some time with her before the end comes."

ɡɹeɪɾi nɑɾəd, ɡlænsɪŋ ət ðə skaɪ əz ə loʊ ɹʌmbəl ə θʌndɝ keɪm fɹəm ðə nɔɹθ. "aɪ dʒʌst wɑnə tɔk tə hɝ, jə noʊ? ən aɪ nid tə si lɪɾəl ɡæɾɝən əɡɛn. aɪ woʊn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə læd."

Grady nodded, glancing at the sky as a low rumble of thunder came from the north. "I just want to talk to her, you know? And I need to see little Gadren again. I won't recognize the lad."

"aɪm ʃʊɹ hiz ə hænsəm tʃaɪld, ɡɹeɪɾi."

"I'm sure he's a handsome child, Grady."

ɡɹeɪɾi læft. ɪt fɛlt ɑd, bʌt ɡʊd, tə hɪɹ ðət fɹəm ðə mæn. "hænsəm? ɡæɾɝən? noʊ, maɪ lɔɹd, hi maɪt bi bɪɡ fəɹ ɪz eɪdʒ, bʌt hiz əbaʊɾ əz pɹɪɾi əz ə stʌmp. stɪl, aɪ lʌv ɪm sʌmθɪŋ fɪɹs." hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, əmjuzd. "bʌɾ aɪ ʃəd bi ɔf lɝnɪŋ ðɪs tʃɹɪk wɪð nild. θæŋk ju, maɪ lɔɹd."

Grady laughed. It felt odd, but good, to hear that from the man. "Handsome? Gadren? No, my Lord, he might be big for his age, but he's about as pretty as a stump. Still, I love him something fierce." He shook his head, amused. "But I should be off learning this trick with Neald. Thank you, my Lord."

pɛɹɪn smaɪld, wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm ɡoʊ əz ə meɪɾən keɪm hɝiɪŋ ɪndə kæmp. ʃi ɹipɔɹɾəd tə ðə waɪz wʌnz, bʌt spoʊk laʊɾ ɪnʌf tə lɛt pɛɹɪn hɪɹ. "ðɛɹ ɪz ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə ɹoʊd təwɔɹd kæmp. hi flaɪz ə flæɡ ʌv pis, bʌɾ i wɛɹz ðə kloʊðɪŋ ə ðiz tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt."

Perrin smiled, watching him go as a Maiden came hurrying into camp. She reported to the Wise Ones, but spoke loud enough to let Perrin hear. "There is a stranger riding along the road toward camp. He flies a flag of peace, but he wears the clothing of these Children of the Light."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd, ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪz ɡɑɹdz. əz i heɪsən təwɔɹd ðə fɹʌn ə ðə kæmp, tɑɹn əpɪɹɾ ən fɛl ɪn bɪsaɪd hɪm. ðeɪ ɝaɪv dʒʌst əz ðə waɪtkloʊk əpɹoʊtʃt ðə fɝst ɡɑɹd poʊsts. ðə mæn ɹoʊɾ ə bɹɪljənt waɪt ɡɛldɪŋ, ən i kæɹiɾ ə lɔŋ poʊl wɪð ə waɪt bænɝ. hɪz waɪt kloʊðɪŋ -  meɪl wɪð ə tɑbɝɾ ʌndɝ ðə kloʊk - bɔɹ ə jɛloʊ sʌnbɝst ɑn ðə bɹɛst.

Perrin nodded, gathering his guards. As he hastened toward the front of the camp, Tarn appeared and fell in beside him. They arrived just as the Whitecloak approached the first guard posts. The man rode a brilliant white gelding, and he carried a long pole with a white banner. His white clothing -  mail with a tabard under the cloak - bore a yellow sunburst on the breast.

pɛɹɪn fɛlt ə ʃɑɹp sɪŋkɪŋ filɪŋ. hi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðɪs mæn. deɪn bɔɹnhəld.

Perrin felt a sharp sinking feeling. He recognized this man. Dain Bornhald.

"aɪ kʌm tə spik wɪð ðə kɹɪmənəl pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," bɔɹnhəld ənaʊnst ɪn ə laʊd vɔɪs, pʊlɪŋ tə ə stɑp.

"I come to speak with the criminal Perrin Aybara," Bornhald announced in a loud voice, pulling to a stop.

"aɪm hɪɹ, bɔɹnhəld," pɛɹɪn kɔld, stɛpɪŋ aʊt.

"I'm here, Bornhald," Perrin called, stepping out.

bɔɹnhəld lʊkt ət hɪm. "ɪɾ ɪz ju. ðə laɪɾ əz dɪlɪvɝd jə tə ʌs."

Bornhald looked at him. "It is you. The Light has delivered you to us."

"ənlɛs ɪts ɔlsoʊ dɪlɪvɝd jə ən ɑɹmi θɹi əɹ fɔɹ taɪmz ðə saɪz ə ðə wʌn juv naʊ,"

"Unless it has also delivered you an army three or four times the size of the one you have now,"

pɛɹɪn kɔld, "ðɛn aɪ daʊt vɛɹi mʌtʃ ðəɾ ɪɾəl mæɾɝ."

Perrin called, "then I doubt very much that it will matter."

"wi hæv ɪn əɹ pəzɛʃən pipəl u kleɪm fiəlti tə ju, eɪbɑɹə."

"We have in our possession people who claim fealty to you, Aybara."

"wɛl, jə kən lɛɾ əm ɹaɪɾ ɑn bæk tə əɹ kæmp, ən wɪl bi ɑn əɹ weɪ."

"Well, you can let them ride on back to our camp, and we'll be on our way."

ðə jʌŋ waɪtkloʊk tɝn ɪz maʊn tə ðə saɪd, skaʊlɪŋ. "wi hæv ənfɪnɪʃt bɪznəs, dɑɹkfɹɛnd."

The young Whitecloak turned his mount to the side, scowling. "We have unfinished business, Darkfriend."

"noʊ nid fəɹ ðɪs tə tɝn næsti, bɔɹnhəld," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðə weɪ aɪ si ɪt, wi kən stɪl itʃ ɡoʊ əɹ oʊn weɪ."

"No need for this to turn nasty, Bornhald," Perrin said. "The way I see it, we can still each go our own way."

"ðə tʃɪlʒɹən wəd ɹæðɝ daɪ ðən liv dʒʌstəs əndʌn," deɪn sɛd, hɛn spæt tə ðə saɪd. "bʌɾ əl liv ðət fəɹ ðə lɔɹd kæptən kɑm-ændɝ tə ɪkspleɪn. hi wɪʃɪz tə si jə fəɹ hɪmsɛlf. aɪ hæv bɪn ɔɹɾɝd tə mi ən tɛl jə ðət hiz weɪɾɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə ɹoʊɾ ə ʃɔɹt ɹaɪɾ əhɛd. hi wəd laɪk jə tə mit wɪð hɪm."

"The Children would rather die than leave justice undone," Dain said, hen spat to the side. "But I will leave that for the Lord Captain Com-ander to explain. He wishes to see you for himself. I have been ordered to me and tell you that he is waiting beside the road a short ride ahead. He would like you to meet with him."

"ju θɪŋk aɪm gɑnə wɔk ɪndə sətʃ ən ɑbviəs tʃɹæp?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"You think I'm going to walk into such an obvious trap?" Perrin asked.

bɔɹnhəld ʃɹʌɡd. "kʌm əɹ də nɑt. maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ ɪz ə mæn ʌv ɑnɝ, ən swɛɹz baɪ oʊθ jəl ɹɪtɝn seɪfli - wɪtʃ ɪz mɔɹ ðən aɪɾ əv ɡɪvən ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd. jə meɪ bɹɪŋ jəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪkɛɹɛɾɪf juv ðɛm, fəɹ seɪfti." wɪð ðæt, bɔɹnhəl tɝn ɪz maʊn ən ɡæləpt əweɪ.

Bornhald shrugged. "Come or do not. My Lord Captain Commander is a man of honor, and swears by oath you will return safely - which is more than I'd have given a Darkfriend. You may bring your Aes Sedai^if you have them, for safety." With that, Bornhald turned his mount and galloped away.

pɛɹɪn stʊd θɔtfəli, wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm ɹitʃɹit.

Perrin stood thoughtfully, watching him retreat.

"jɔɹ nɑt ɹɪli θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ, ɑɹ ju, sʌn?" tɑɹn æskt.

"You're not really thinking of going, are you, son?" Tarn asked.

"aɪd ɹæðɝ noʊ fəɹ sɝɾən u ɪm feɪsɪŋ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ænd wi dɪɾ æsk fəɹ pɑɹli. meɪbi bɑɹɡən fəɹ əɹ pipəl bæk. bɝn mi, tɑɹn. aɪ hæv tə ət lis tʃɹaɪ bɪfɔɹ ətækɪŋ ðɛm."

"I'd rather know for certain who I'm facing," Perrin said. "And we did ask for parley. Maybe bargain for our people back. Burn me, Tarn. I have to at least try before attacking them."

tɑɹn saɪd, bʌt nɑɾəd.

Tarn sighed, but nodded.

"hi mɛnʃən ɛɛs sədaɪ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, "bʌt nɑɾ æʃəmən. əl bɛɾ i dʌznt noʊ mʌtʃ əbaʊt ðɛm. ɡoʊ hæv ɡɹeɪɾi dʒɹɛs laɪk ə tu ɹɪvɝz mæn ən tɛl ɪm tə ɹipɔɹt tə mi, əlɔŋ wɪð ɡɔl ən səlɪn. æsk ɛdʒɹə ɪf ʃɪl dʒɔɪn əs tu. bʌt doʊn tɛl maɪ waɪf əbaʊt ðɪs. wi faɪv wɪl ɡoʊ ɑn əhɛɾ ən si ɪf ðə waɪtkloʊks wɪl ɹɪli mit wɪð əs pisfəli. ɪf sʌmθɪŋ ɡoʊz ɹɔŋ, wɪl əv ɡɹeɪɾi ɹɛɾi tə ɡɛɾ əs aʊt baɪ ɡeɪtweɪ."

"He mentioned Aes Sedai," Perrin said, "but not Asha'man. I'll bet he doesn't know much about them. Go have Grady dress like a Two Rivers man and tell him to report to me, along with Gaul and Sulin. Ask Edarra if she'll join us too. But don't tell my wife about this. We five will go on ahead and see if the Whitecloaks will really meet with us peacefully. If something goes wrong, we'll have Grady ready to get us out by gateway."

tɑɹn nɑɾəd ən hɝiɾ əweɪ. pɛɹɪn weɪɾəd nɝvəsli əntɪl tæm ɹɪtɝnd wɪð ɡɔl, səlɪn ən ɛdʒɹə. ɡɹeɪɾi keɪm ə fju mɪnəts leɪɾɝ, wɛɹɪŋ ə bɹaʊn wʊl kloʊk ən bɹaʊn ən ɡɹin kloʊðɪŋ bɑɹoʊd fɹəm wʌn ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn. hi kæɹiɾ ə lɔŋboʊ, bʌt wɔk laɪk ə soʊlʒɝ, wɪð ɪz bæk stʃɹeɪt, hɪz aɪz kin əz i lʊkt əbaʊt hɪm. ðəɹ wɑz ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ ɛɹ ə deɪnʒɝ tə hɪm ðət noʊ kɑmən vɪlɪdʒɝ wəd bɛɹ. hoʊpfəli, ɪt wʊdn spɔɪl ðə dɪsɡaɪz.

Tarn nodded and hurried away. Perrin waited nervously until Tam returned with Gaul, Sulin and Edarra. Grady came a few minutes later, wearing a brown wool cloak and brown and green clothing borrowed from one of the Two Rivers men. He carried a longbow, but walked like a soldier, with his back straight, his eyes keen as he looked about him. There was a particular air of danger to him that no common villager would bear. Hopefully, it wouldn't spoil the disguise.

ðə sɪks ə ðɛm bɹoʊk əweɪ fɹəm kæmp, ən blɛsədli, feɪl dɪdn sim tə hæv hɝd wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ. pɛɹɪn wəd bɹɪŋ əɹ ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ə lɔŋɡɝ pɑɹli əɹ dɪskʌʃən, bʌɾ i ɪntɛndəd ðɪs tʃɹɪp tə bi kwɪk, ən i niɾəd tə bi eɪbəl tə muv wɪθaʊt wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt hɝ.

The six of them broke away from camp, and blessedly, Faile didn't seem to have heard what was happening. Perrin would bring her if there was a longer parley or discussion, but he intended this trip to be quick, and he needed to be able to move without worrying about her.

ðeɪ wɛn ɑn fʊt, ən faʊn ðə waɪtkloʊks ə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns əhɛd daʊn ðə ɹoʊd. ðəɹ lʊk tə bi oʊnli əbaʊɾ ə dʌzən ə ðɛm, stændɪŋ nɪɹ ə smɔl tɛn ðət hæd bɪn sɛɾ ʌp bɪsaɪd ðə ɹoʊd. ðeɪ wɝ ʌpwɪnd, wɪtʃ ɹɪlæks pɛɹɪn ə lɪɾəl. hi kɑt sɛns ʌv æŋɡɝ ən dɪsɡʌst, bʌɾ ɪt dɪdn fil laɪk ə tʃɹæp tə hɪm.

They went on foot, and found the Whitecloaks a short distance ahead down the road. There looked to be only about a dozen of them, standing near a small tent that had been set up beside the road. They were upwind, which relaxed Perrin a little. He caught scents of anger and disgust, but it didn't feel like a trap to him.

əz i ən ði ʌðɝz nɪɹd, sʌmwʌn stɛp fɹəm ðə smɔl tɛnt, wɛɹɪŋ waɪt. ðə tɔl mæn hæd faɪn fitʃɝz ən ʃɔɹt, dɑɹk hɛɹ. moʊst wɪmən wəd pɹɑbli kɔl ɪm hænsəm. hi smɛld . . . bɛɾɝ ðən ði ʌðɝ waɪtkloʊks. ðeɪ hæɾ ə waɪl sɛn tə ðɛm, laɪk ðəɾ ʌv ə ɹæbɪɾ ænəməl. ðɪs liɾɝ ə ðɛɹz smɛl kɑm, ən nɑt sɪkli əɾ ɔl.

As he and the others neared, someone stepped from the small tent, wearing white. The tall man had fine features and short, dark hair. Most women would probably call him handsome. He smelled . . . better than the other Whitecloaks. They had a wild scent to them, like that of a rabid animal. This leader of theirs smelled calm, and not sickly at all.

pɛɹɪn ɡlæns təwɔɹɾ ɪz kəmpænjənz.

Perrin glanced toward his companions.

"aɪ də nɑt laɪk ðɪs, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," ɛdʒɹə sɛd, lʊkɪŋ fɹəm saɪd tə saɪd. "ðiz tʃɪlʒɹən əv ə sɛns ə ɹɔŋɡnəs əbaʊt ðɛm."

"I do not like this, Perrin Aybara," Edarra said, looking from side to side. "These Children have a sense of wrongness about them."

"ɑɹtʃɝz kəd hɪɾ əs fɹəm ðoʊz tʃɹiz," tɑɹn sɛd wɪð ə ɡɹʌnt, nɑɾɪŋ tə ə stæn ɪn ðə dɪstəns.

"Archers could hit us from those trees," Tarn said with a grunt, nodding to a stand in the distance.

"ɡɹeɪɾi, jəɹ hoʊldɪŋ ðə paʊɝ?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"Grady, you're holding the Power?" Perrin asked.

"ʌv kɔɹs."

"Of course."

"bi ɹɛɾi, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ðən stɛp fɔɹwɝd təwɔɹd ðə smɔl ɡɹup ʌv waɪtkloʊks. ðɛɹ liɾɝ stʌɾid pɛɹɪn wɪð hænz klæsp bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk. "ɡoʊldən aɪz," ðə mæn sɛd. "soʊ ɪts tʃɹu."

"Be ready, just in case," Perrin said, then stepped forward toward the small group of Whitecloaks. Their leader studied Perrin with hands clasped behind his back. "Golden eyes," the man said. "So it is true."

"jɔɹ ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"You're the Lord Captain Commander?" Perrin asked.

"aɪ æm."

"I am."

"wʌt wɪl ɪt teɪk fəɹ jə tə ɹilis ðə pipəl ə maɪn jəɹ hoʊldɪŋ?"

"What will it take for you to release the people of mine you're holding?"

"maɪ mɛn tɛl mi ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd sətʃ ən ɪkstʃeɪnʒ wʌns," ðə waɪtkloʊk liɾɝ sɛd. "æn ðət jə dɪsivd əm ən bɪtʃɹeɪd ðɛm."

"My men tell me they tried such an exchange once," the Whitecloak leader said. "And that you deceived them and betrayed them."

"ðeɪ hæd kɪdnæpt ɪnəsəns," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "æn dɪmændəd maɪ laɪf ɪn ɹɪtɝn. wɛl, aɪ tʊk maɪ pipəl bæk. doʊn fɔɹs mi tə də ðə seɪm θɪŋ hɪɹ."

"They had kidnapped innocents," Perrin said. "And demanded my life in return. Well, I took my people back. Don't force me to do the same thing here."

ðə waɪtkloʊk liɾɝ nɛɹoʊɾ ɪz aɪz. hi smɛl θɔtfəl. "aɪ wɪl də wʌɾ ɪz ɹaɪt, ɡoʊldeɪniz. ðə kɑst ɪz ɪɹɛləvənt. maɪ mɛn tɛl mi jə mɝɾɝd sɛvɹəl tʃɪlʒɹən ə fju jɪɹz bæk, ən əv nɛvɝ noʊn dʒʌstəs fəɹ ɪt. ðət jə lɛd tʃɹɑləks tə ətæk vɪlədʒəz."

The Whitecloak leader narrowed his eyes. He smelled thoughtful. "I will do what is right, Goldeneyes. The cost is irrelevant. My men tell me you murdered several Children a few years back, and have never known justice for it. That you lead Trollocs to attack villages."

"jɔɹ mɛn ɑɹ nɑt vɛɹi ɹɪlaɪəbəl," pɛɹɪn sɛd wɪð ə ɡɹaʊl. "aɪ wɑn ə mɔɹ fɔɹməl pɑɹli, wɛɹ wi kən sɪt daʊn ən dɪskʌs. nɑt sʌmθɪŋ ɪmpɹəvaɪz laɪk ðɪs."

"Your men are not very reliable," Perrin said with a growl. "I want a more formal parley, where we can sit down and discuss. Not something improvised like this."

"aɪ daʊt ðət wɪl bi niɾəd," ðə waɪtkloʊk liɾɝ sɛd. "aɪ æm nɑt hɪɹ tə bɑɹɡən. aɪ mɪɹli wɑntəd tə si jə fəɹ maɪsɛlf. jə wɪʃ jəɹ pipəl fɹid? mit maɪ ɑɹmi ɑn ðə fild ə bæɾəl. də ðɪs, ən əl ɹilis ðə kæptɪvz, ɹəɡɑɹdləs ə ði aʊtkʌm. ðeɪ ɑɹ ɑbviəsli nɑt soʊlʒɝz. əl lɛɾ əm ɡoʊ."

"I doubt that will be needed," the Whitecloak leader said. "I am not here to bargain. I merely wanted to see you for myself. You wish your people freed? Meet my army on the field of battle. Do this, and I will release the captives, regardless of the outcome. They are obviously not soldiers. I will let them go."

"æn ɪf aɪ ɹɛfjus?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"And if I refuse?" Perrin asked.

"ðɛn ɪɾəl nɑt boʊd . . . wɛl fəɹ ðɛɹ hɛlθ."

"Then it will not bode . . . well for their health."

pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊn ɪz tiθ.

Perrin ground his teeth.

"jɔɹ fɔɹs wɪl feɪs aʊɝz ʌndɝ ðə laɪt," ðə waɪtkloʊk liɾɝ sɛd. "ðoʊz ɑɹ əɹ tɝmz."

"Your force will face ours under the Light," the Whitecloak leader said. "Those are our terms."

pɛɹɪn ɡlæns tə ðə saɪd. ɡɹeɪɾi mɛɾ ɪz aɪz, ən ðəɹ wɑz ən ɑbviəs kwɛstʃən ɪn ðɛm. hi kəd teɪk ðə waɪtkloʊk liɾɝ kæptɪv ɹaɪt hɪɹ, wɪð bɛɹli ə θɔt.

Perrin glanced to the side. Grady met his eyes, and there was an obvious question in them. He could take the Whitecloak leader captive right here, with barely a thought.

pɛɹɪn wɑz tɛmptəd. bʌt ðeɪ hæd kʌm ʌndɝ ðə waɪtkloʊks oʊθ ɛf seɪfti. hi wəd nɑt bɹeɪk ðə pis. ɪnstɛd, hi tɝnd, ən lɛɾ ɪz pipəl bæk təwɔɹɾ ɪz kæmp.

perrin was tempted. But they had come under the Whitecloak's oath f safety. He would not break the peace. Instead, he turned, and led his people back toward his camp.

ɡɑləd wɑtʃt eɪbɑɹə wɪðdʒɹɔ. ðoʊz ɡoʊldən aɪz wɝ ənsɛɾəlɪŋ. hi hæd dɪskaʊntɪd baɪɑɝz ɪnsɪstəns ðət ðɪs mæn wɑz nɑt mɪɹli ə dɑɹk-fɹɛnd, bʌt ʃæɾoʊzpɔn. haʊɛvɝ, lʊkɪŋ ɪndə ðoʊz aɪz, ɡɑləd wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ sɝɾən i kəd dɪsmɪs ðoʊz kleɪmz.

Galad watched Aybara withdraw. Those golden eyes were unsettling. He had discounted Byar's insistence that this man was not merely a Dark-friend, but Shadowspawn. However, looking into those eyes, Galad was no longer certain he could dismiss those claims.

tə ðə saɪd, bɔɹnhəld lɛɾ aʊɾ ə bɹɛθ. "aɪ kæn bɪliv jə wɑntəd tə də ðɪs. wʌɾ ɪf i hæd bɹɔɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ? wi kʊdn əv stɑp ðə wʌn paʊɝ."

To the side, Bornhald let out a breath. "I can't believe you wanted to do this. What if he had brought Aes Sedai? We couldn't have stopped the One Power."

"ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ əv hɑɹmd mi," ɡɑləd sɛd. "æn bɪsaɪdz, ɪf eɪbɑɹə hæd ði əbɪləɾi tə əsæsəneɪt mi hɪɹ wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, hi cʊɾə dʌn ðə seɪm tə mi ɪn maɪ kæmp. bʌɾ ɪf hiz əz jə ən tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ seɪ, ðən i wɝiz ɡɹeɪtli əbaʊɾ ɪz ɪmədʒ. hi dɪdn lɛd tʃɹɑləks əɡɛns ðə tu ɹɪvɝz dɝɛkli. hi pɹitɛndəd tə dɪfɛn ðɛm." sətʃ ə mæn wəɾ ækt wɪð sʌɾəlti. ɡɑləd hæd bɪn seɪf.

"They would not have harmed me," Galad said. "And besides, if Aybara had the ability to assassinate me here with the One Power, he could have done the same to me in my camp. But if he is as you and Child Byar say, then he worries greatly about his image. He didn't lead Trollocs against the Two Rivers directly. He pretended to defend them." Such a man would act with subtlety. Galad had been safe.

hid wɑntəd tə si eɪbɑɹə hɪmsɛlf, ən i wɑz ɡlæɾ i hæd. ðoʊz aɪz . . . ðeɪ wɝ ɔlmoʊst ə kɑndəmneɪʃən baɪ ðɛmsɛlvz. ən eɪbɑɹə hæd ɹiæktəd tə ðə mɛnʃən ə ðə mɝɾɝd waɪtkloʊks, stɪfənɪŋ. bɪɑn ðæt, ðəɹ wɑz ðə tɔk ɪz pipəl ɡeɪv ə hɪm ɪn əlaɪəns wɪð ðə ʃɔn-tʃæn ən hævɪŋ wɪð ɪm mɛn u kəd tʃænəl.

He'd wanted to see Aybara himself, and he was glad he had. Those eyes . . . they were almost a condemnation by themselves. And Aybara had reacted to the mention of the murdered Whitecloaks, stiffening. Beyond that, there was the talk his people gave of him in alliance with the Sean-chan and having with him men who could channel.

jɛs, ðɪs eɪbɑɹə wɑz ə deɪnʒɝəs mæn. ɡɑləd hæd bɪn wɝiɾ əbaʊt kəmɪɾɪŋ ɪz fɔɹsɪz tə faɪɾɪŋ hɪɹ, bʌt ðə laɪt wəd si ðɛm θɹu ɪt. bɛɾɝ tə dɪfit ðɪs eɪbɑɹə naʊ, ðən tə weɪɾ ən feɪs ɪm ət ðə læs bæɾəl. əz kwɪkli əz ðæt, hi meɪɾ ɪz dɪsɪʒən. ðə ɹaɪt dɪsɪʒən. ðeɪ wəd faɪt.

Yes, this Aybara was a dangerous man. Galad had been worried about committing his forces to fighting here, but the Light would see them through it. Better to defeat this Aybara now, than to wait and face him at the Last Battle. As quickly as that, he made his decision. The right decision. They would fight.

"kʌm," ɡɑləd sɛd, weɪvɪŋ tə hɪz mɛn. "lɛts ɡɛt bæk tə kæmp."

"Come," Galad said, waving to his men. "Let's get back to camp."


tʃæptɝ ɪlɛvən


CHAPTER 11

ən ʌnɪkspɛktɪd lɛɾɝ


An Unexpected Letter

ðeɪ kæn pɑsəbli θɪŋk əl saɪn ðɪs," ɪleɪn sɛd, tɔsɪŋ ðə ʃif ə peɪpɝz ɑntu ðə flɔɹ bɪsaɪɾ əɹ tʃɛɹ. "ɪts ənlaɪkli ðət ðeɪ du," daɪɛlɪn sɛd. hɝ ɡoʊldən hɛɹ wɑz pɹɪstin, hɝ fɝm feɪs kəntʃɹoʊld, hɝ slɪm bɑɾi pɔɪzd. ðə wʊmən wɑz pɝfəkt! ɪt wɑz ənfɛɹ ðət ʃi ʃəd lʊk soʊ pɹɪstin waɪl ɪleɪn fɛlt laɪk ə saʊ, fæɾənd ʌp ən ɹaɪp fəɹ ðə slɔɾɝ.

They can't possibly think I'll sign this," Elayne said, tossing the sheaf of papers onto the floor beside her chair. "It's unlikely that they do," Dyelin said. Her golden hair was pristine, her firm face controlled, her slim body poised. The woman was perfect! It was unfair that she should look so pristine while Elayne felt like a sow, fattened up and ripe for the slaughter.

ðə hɑɹθ ɪn ɪleɪnz sɪɾɪŋ ɹum kɹækəld wɔɹmli. waɪn sæɾ ɪn ə pɪtʃɝ ɑn wʌn ə ðə wɔlz saɪdbɔɹdz, bʌɾ ə kɔɹs ʃi wɑzn əlaʊɾ ɛni ʌv ðæt. ɪf wʌn mɔɹ pɝsən tʃɹaɪd tə ɔfɝ əɹ blʌɾi ɡoʊts mɪlk . . .

The hearth in Elayne's sitting room crackled warmly. Wine sat in a pitcher on one of the wall's sideboards, but of course she wasn't allowed any of that. If one more person tried to offer her bloody goat's milk . . .

bɝdʒɪt laʊnʒd nɪɹ ðə fɑɹ wɔl, ɡoʊldən bɹeɪd hæŋɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ɹaɪt ʃoʊldɝ, kəntʃɹæstɪŋ wɪð əɹ waɪt-kɑlɝd ɹɛd koʊɾ ən skaɪ-blu tʃɹaʊzɝz. ʃid pɔɹd hɝsɛlf ə kʌp ə ti, ən smaɪld oʊvɝ ɪt, əmjuz baɪ ɪleɪnz ənɔɪəns. ɪleɪn kəd fil ði ɪmoʊʃən θɹu ðə bɑnd!

Birgitte lounged near the far wall, golden braid hanging over her right shoulder, contrasting with her white-collared red coat and sky-blue trousers. She'd poured herself a cup of tea, and smiled over it, amused by Elayne's annoyance. Elayne could feel the emotion through the bond!

ðeɪ wɝ ði oʊnli wʌnz ɪn ðə ɹum. ɪleɪn hæd ɹɪtaɪɹd tə ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum æftɝ æksɛptɪŋ ðə pɹəpoʊzəl fɹəm ɛlɹinz mɛsənʒɝ, ɪkspleɪnɪŋ ðət ʃi wəd laɪk tə "kənsɪɾɝ" ði ɔfɝ ɪn pɹaɪvət.

They were the only ones in the room. Elayne had retired to the sitting room after accepting the proposal from Ellorien's messenger, explaining that she would like to "consider" the offer in private.

wɛl, ʃid kənsɪɾɝ ɪt! kənsɪɾɝ ɪt tʃɹæʃ, fəɹ ðət wɑz ɔl ɪt wɑz!

Well, she'd consider it! Consider it trash, for that was all it was!

"ðɪs ɪz ən ɪnsəlt," ʃi sɛd, swipɪŋ əɹ hæn təwɔɹd ðə peɪdʒəz.

"This is an insult," she said, sweeping her hand toward the pages.

"du jə ɪntɛn tə kip əm ɪmpɹɪzən fɝɛvɝ, ɪleɪn?" daɪɛlɪn æskt, ɹeɪzɪŋ ən aɪbɹaʊ.

"Do you intend to keep them imprisoned forever, Elayne?" Dyelin asked, raising an eyebrow.

"ðeɪ kæn əfɔɹd tə peɪ ə ɹænsəm, nɑɾ æftɝ wʌt ðeɪ spɛn fʌndɪŋ ðɛɹ səksɛʃən bɪd. ðət livz jə wɪð ə dɪsɪʒən."

"They can't afford to pay a ransom, not after what they spent funding their Succession bid. That leaves you with a decision."

"ðeɪ kən ɹɑt," ɪleɪn sɛd, foʊldɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz. "ðeɪ ɹeɪzd ɑɹmiz ɡeɪns mi ən bɪsidʒ keɪɛmlɪn!"

"They can rot," Elayne said, folding her arms. "They raised armies gainst me and besieged Caemlyn!"

"jɛs," daɪɛlɪn sɛd flætli. "aɪ bɪliv aɪ wɑz ðɛɹ."

"Yes," Dyelin said flatly. "I believe I was there."

ɪleɪn kɝst sɔfli tə hɝsɛlf, ðən stʊɾ ʌp ən bɪɡæn tə peɪs. bɝdʒɪɾ aɪd hɝ; ðeɪ boʊθ nu ðət mɛlfən hæd sədʒɛstəd ðəɾ ɪleɪn əvɔɪd tæksɪŋ hɝsɛlf. ɪleɪn mɛt ðə wɔɹɾɝz aɪz stʌbɝnli, ðən kəntɪnjuɾ əɹ peɪsɪŋ. bɝn hɝ, ən bɝn ðət blʌɾi mɪdwaɪf! wɔkɪŋ wɑzn tæksɪŋ.

Elayne cursed softly to herself, then stood up and began to pace. Birgitte eyed her; they both knew that Melfane had suggested that Elayne avoid taxing herself. Elayne met the Warder's eyes stubbornly, then continued her pacing. Burn her, and burn that bloody midwife! Walking wasn't taxing.

ɛlɹin wɑz wʌn ə ðə læs voʊkəl hoʊldaʊts tə ɪleɪnz ɹul, ən wɑz ðə moʊs pɹɑbləmæɾɪk - seɪv, pɝhæps, fəɹ dʒɑɝɪd sɑɝənd. ðiz mʌnθs mɑɹk ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ʌv ə lɔŋ pɪɹiəɾ ə tɛstɪŋ fəɹ ɪleɪn.

Ellorien was one of the last vocal holdouts to Elayne's rule, and was the most problematic - save, perhaps, for Jarid Sarand. These months marked the beginning of a long period of testing for Elayne.

haʊ wəd ʃi stæn ɑn sɝɾən ɪʃuz? haʊ izəli wəd ʃi bi pʊʃt? haʊ mʌtʃ dɪd ʃi teɪk æftɝ əɹ mʌðɝ?

How would she stand on certain issues? How easily would she be pushed? How much did she take after her mother?

ðeɪ ʃəd noʊ ðət ʃi wʊdn bi izəli ɪntɪmɪdeɪɾɪd. bʌt ði ənfɔɹtʃənət tʃɹuθ wɑz ðət ʃi stʊɾ ətɑp ə pɹikɛɹiəs pɝtʃ meɪɾ ə tikəps, stæk haɪ. itʃ ə ðoʊz kʌps wɑz ən ændɔɝən haʊs; səm hæd səpɔɹɾəd əɹ wɪlɪŋli, ʌðɝz ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli. vɛɹi fju ʌv əm wɝ əz stɝɾi əz ʃi wəɾ əv laɪkt.

They should know that she wouldn't be easily intimidated. But the unfortunate truth was that she stood atop a precarious perch made of teacups, stacked high. Each of those cups was an Andoran House; some had supported her willingly, others grudgingly. Very few of them were as sturdy as she would have liked.

"ðə kæptɪv noʊbəlz ɑɹ ə ɹisɔɹs," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ðeɪ ʃəd bi vjuɾ əz sʌtʃ."

"The captive nobles are a resource," Elayne said. "They should be viewed as such."

daɪɛlɪn nɑɾəd. ðə noʊbəlwʊmən hæɾ ə weɪ ʌv ɡoʊɾɪŋ ɪleɪn, fɔɹsɪŋ əɹ tə stʃɹɛtʃ fəɹ ði ænsɝz ðeɪ boʊθ nu ʃi niɾəd tə faɪnd. "ə ɹisɔɹs ɪz minɪŋləs ənlɛs ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɪkspɛndɪd,"

Dyelin nodded. The noblewoman had a way of goading Elayne, forcing her to stretch for the answers they both knew she needed to find. "A resource is meaningless unless eventually expended,"

daɪɛlɪn noʊɾəd. ʃi hɛld ə kʌp ʌv waɪn. blæstəd wʊmən.

Dyelin noted. She held a cup of wine. Blasted woman.

"jɛs," ɪleɪn sɛd, "bʌt tə sɛl ə ɹisɔɹs ʃɔɹt wəd bi tə ɪstæblɪʃ ə ɹɛpjəteɪʃən fəɹ kɛɹləsnəs."

"Yes," Elayne said, "but to sell a resource short would be to establish a reputation for carelessness."

"ənlɛs jə sɛl sʌmθɪŋ dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ɪts vælju plʌməts," daɪɛlɪn sɛd. "mɛni ə mɝtʃən əz bɪn kɔl fulɪʃ fəɹ tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ aɪs pɛpɝz əɾ ə dɪskaʊnt, oʊnli tə bi kɔld waɪz wən pɹaɪsəz fɔl ivən fɝðɝ."

"Unless you sell something just before its value plummets," Dyelin said. "Many a merchant has been called foolish for trading ice peppers at a discount, only to be called wise when prices fall even further."

"æn ðiz kæptɪvz? jə si ðɛɹ vælju fɔlɪŋ sun?"

"And these captives? You see their value falling soon?"

'ðɛɹ haʊsəz əv bɪn kɑmpɹəmaɪzd," daɪɛlɪn sɛd. "ðə stʃɹɔŋɝ jəɹ pəzɪʃən bɪkʌmz, ɪleɪn, ðə lɛs væljəbəl ðiz pəlɪɾəkəl kæptɪvz ɡɹoʊ. jə ʃʊdn skwɑndɝ ði ædvæntɪdʒ, bʌt niðɝ ʃəd jə lɑk ɪɾ əweɪ əntɪl noʊbɑdi kɛɹz ɛnimɔɹ."

'Their Houses have been compromised," Dyelin said. "The stronger your position becomes, Elayne, the less valuable these political captives grow. You shouldn't squander the advantage, but neither should you lock it away until nobody cares anymore."

"ju kəɾ ɛksəkjut ðɛm," bɝdʒɪt sɛd.

"You could execute them," Birgitte said.

ðeɪ boʊθ stɛɹɾ ət hɝ.

They both stared at her.

wʌt?" bɝdʒɪt sɛd. "ɪts wʌt ðeɪ dɪzɝv, ən ɪt wəɾ ɪstæblɪʃ ə hɑɹd fɪstɪd ɹɛpjəteɪʃən."

What?" Birgitte said. "It's what they deserve, and it would establish a hard fisted reputation."

ɪts nɑt ɹaɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ðeɪ ʃəd nɑt bi kɪl fəɹ səpɔɹɾɪŋ sʌmwʌn ɛls fəɹ ðə θɹoʊn.

It's not right," Elayne said. "They should not be killed for supporting someone else for the throne.

ðəɹ kən bi noʊ tʃɹizən wɛɹ ðəɹ ɪz noʊ kwin."

There can be no treason where there is no Queen."

"soʊ əɹ soʊlʒɝz kən daɪ, bʌt ðə noʊbəlz blʌɾi wɔk əweɪ?" bɝdʒɪɾ æskt. ðən ʃi ɹeɪzd ə hæn bɪfɔɹ ɪleɪn kəd pɹoʊtɛst. "spɛɹ ðə lɛk-tʊɹ, ɪleɪn. aɪ ʌndɝstænd. aɪ doʊn əɡɹi, bʌɾ aɪ ʌndɝstænd. ɪts ɔlweɪz bɪn ðɪs weɪ."

"So our soldiers can die, but the nobles bloody walk away?" Birgitte asked. Then she raised a hand before Elayne could protest. "Spare the lec-ture, Elayne. I understand. I don't agree, but I understand. It's always been this way."

ɪleɪn ɹɪtɝn tə hɝ peɪsɪŋ. ʃi dɪd stɑp, haʊɛvɝ, tə stɑmp ɑn ɛl-lɔɹinz pɹəpoʊzəl əz ʃi pæst ɪt. ðəɾ ɝn əɹ ən aɪ ɹoʊl fɹəm bɝdʒɪt bʌɾ ɪt fɛlt ɡʊd. ðə "pɹəpoʊzəl" wɑz ə lɪst ʌv ɛmpti pɹɑməsəz ðət kənkluɾəd wɪð ə dɪmæn ðəɾ ɪleɪn ɹilis ðə kæptɪvz fəɹ "ðə ɡʊɾ ʌv ændɝ." ɛlɹin kleɪm ðət sɪns ðə kæptɪvz hæd noʊ fʌnz, ðə kɹaʊn ʃəd pɑɹɾən əm ən ɹilis əm tə hɛlp ɹibɪld.

Elayne returned to her pacing. She did stop, however, to stomp on El-lorien's proposal as she passed it. That earned her an eye roll from Birgitte but it felt good. The "proposal" was a list of empty promises that concluded with a demand that Elayne release the captives for "the good of Andor." Ellorien claimed that since the captives had no funds, the crown should pardon them and release them to help rebuild.

tʃɹuθ bi toʊld, ɪleɪn hæd bɪn kənsɪɾɝɪŋ duɪŋ soʊ. bʌt naʊ ɪf ʃi ɹilis ðɛm, ðə θɹi wəd si ɛlɹin əz ðɛɹ seɪvjɝ! ɛni ɡɹæɾətud ðəɾ ɪleɪn cʊɾə ɡeɪnd wəɾ ɪnstɛd bi ɡɪvən tə hɝ ɹaɪvəl. blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz!

Truth be told, Elayne had been considering doing so. But now if she released them, the three would see Ellorien as their savior! Any gratitude that Elayne could have gained would instead be given to her rival. Blood and bloody ashes!

"ðə wɪndfɪndɝz ɑɹ bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə æsk æftɝ ðə læn jə pɹɑməs ðɛm," daɪɛlɪn noʊɾəd.

"The Windfinders are beginning to ask after the land you promised them," Dyelin noted.

"ɔlɹɛɾi?"

"Already?"

ði oʊldɝ wʊmən nɑɾəd. "ðə ɹɪkwɛst stɪl tʃɹʌbəlz mi. waɪ də ðeɪ wɑn ə slɪvɝ ə læn laɪk ðæt?"

The older woman nodded. "The request still troubles me. Why do they want a sliver of land like that?"

"ðeɪ ɝn ɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd.

"They earned it," Elayne said.

"pɝhæps. ðoʊ ðɪs dʌz min ðət jəɹ ðə fɝs kwin ɪn faɪv dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz tə siɾ ə pɔɹʃən ʌv ændɝ - noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ smɔl - tə ə fɔɹən ɛntəɾi."

"Perhaps. Though this does mean that you're the first Queen in five generations to cede a portion of Andor - no matter how small - to a foreign entity."

ɪleɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ən ɑdli faʊn hɝsɛlf kɑmɝ. blæstəd mud swɪŋz! hædn mɛlfən pɹɑməs ðoʊz wəd ɡɹoʊ lɛs pɹənaʊnst əz ðə pɹɛɡnənsi pɹəɡɹɛst? jɛɾ ət taɪmz ʃi stɪl fɛlt əɹ ɪmoʊʃənz baʊnsɪŋ ɝaʊn laɪk ə bɔl ɪn ə tʃɪlʒɹənz ɡeɪm.

Elayne took a deep breath, and oddly found herself calmer. Blasted mood swings! Hadn't Melfane promised those would grow less pronounced as the pregnancy progressed? Yet at times she still felt her emotions bouncing around like a ball in a children's game.

ɪleɪn kəmpoʊz hɝsɛlf ən sæt. "aɪ kænɑɾ əlaʊ ðɪs. ðə haʊsəz ɑɹ ɔl lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ɑpɝtunəɾiz tə ʃoʊldɝ ðɛɹ weɪ ɪndə paʊɝ."

Elayne composed herself and sat. "I cannot allow this. The Houses are all looking for opportunities to shoulder their way into power."

"ju wəd bi duɪŋ ðə seɪm ɪn ðɛɹ pleɪs, aɪ wɔɹənt," daɪɛlɪn sɛd.

"You would be doing the same in their place, I warrant," Dyelin said.

"nɑɾ ɪf aɪ nu ðət ðə læs bæɾəl wɑz əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ," ɪleɪn snæpt. "wi nid tə də sʌmθɪŋ tə dɝɛk ðə noʊbəlz təwɔɹd mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt mæɾɝz. sʌmθɪŋ tə junəfaɪ ðɛm bɪhaɪn mi, əɹ ət lis kənvɪns əm ðəɾ aɪm nɑt tə bi tɔɪd wɪð."

"Not if I knew that the Last Battle was approaching," Elayne snapped. "We need to do something to direct the nobles toward more important matters. Something to unify them behind me, or at least convince them that I'm not to be toyed with."

"æn juv ə minz ʌv ətʃivɪŋ ðɪs?" daɪɛlɪn æskt.

"And you have a means of achieving this?" Dyelin asked.

"jɛs," ɪleɪn sɛd, ɡlænsɪŋ istwɝd. "ɪts taɪm tə siz kɛɹhin."

"Yes," Elayne said, glancing eastward. "It's time to seize Cairhien."

bɝdʒɪt tʃoʊkt kwaɪətli ɑn əɹ ti. daɪɛlɪn mɪɹli ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ. "ə boʊl muv."

Birgitte choked quietly on her tea. Dyelin merely raised an eyebrow. "A bold move."

"boʊld?" bɝdʒɪɾ æskt, waɪpɪŋ əɹ tʃɪn. "ɪts blʌɾi ɪnseɪn. ɪleɪn, jə bɛɹli hæv jəɹ fɪŋɡɝz ɑn ændɝ."

"Bold?" Birgitte asked, wiping her chin. "It's bloody insane. Elayne, you barely have your fingers on Andor."

"ðæt meɪks ðə taɪmɪŋ ivən bɛɾɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd. "wi hæv moʊmən-bɪsaɪdz, ɪf wi muv fəɹ kɛɹhin naʊ, ɪɾəl ʃoʊ ðəɾ aɪ min tə bi mɔɹ ðən ə sɪmpɝɪŋ pʌf ʌv ə kwin."

"That makes the timing even better," Elayne said. "We have momen-Besides, if we move for Cairhien now, it will show that I mean to be more than a simpering puff of a queen."

"aɪ daʊɾ ɛniwʌn ɪkspɛks ðəɾ ə ju," bɝdʒɪt sɛd. "ɪf ðeɪ du, ðeɪ oʊbəbli tʊk wʌn tu mɛni nɑks tə ðə hɛd dʊɹɪŋ ðə faɪɾɪŋ."

"I doubt anyone expects that of you," Birgitte said. "If they do, they obably took one too many knocks to the head during the fighting."

"ʃiz ɹaɪt, haʊɛvɝ ʌnkuθ ðə pɹɛzənteɪʃən," daɪɛlɪn əɡɹid. ʃi lænst ət bɝdʒɪt, ən ɪleɪn kəd fil ə stæb ə dɪslaɪk θɹu bɝdʒɪts bɑnd. laɪt! wʌt wəɾ ɪt teɪk tə meɪk ðə tu ʌv əm ɡɛɾ əlɔŋ? "noʊbɑdi daʊts jəɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ əz ə kwin, ɪleɪn. ðət woʊn stɑp ði ʌðɝz fɹəm sizɪŋ wʌt paʊɝ ðeɪ kæn; ðeɪ noʊ ðəɹ ənlaɪkli tə bi eɪbəl tə ɡɛɾ ɪt leɪɾɝ."

"She's right, however uncouth the presentation," Dyelin agreed. She lanced at Birgitte, and Elayne could feel a stab of dislike through Birgitte's bond. Light! What would it take to make the two of them get along? "Nobody doubts your strength as a queen, Elayne. That won't stop the others from seizing what power they can; they know they're unlikely to be able to get it later."

"aɪ doʊn əv fɪftin jɪɹz tə steɪbəlaɪz maɪ ɹul, laɪk mʌðɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd. "lʊk, wi ɔl noʊ wʌt ɹænd kɛp seɪɪŋ əbaʊt mi teɪkɪŋ ðə sʌn θɹoʊn. ə stuɝd ɹulz ðəɹ naʊ, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ mi, ən æftɝ wʌt hæpən tə koʊləveɪɪɹ, noʊbɑdi dɛɹz dɪsəbeɪ ɹændz iɾɪkts."

"I don't have fifteen years to stabilize my rule, like Mother," Elayne said. "Look, we all know what Rand kept saying about me taking the Sun Throne. A steward rules there now, waiting for me, and after what happened to Colavaere, nobody dares disobey Rand's edicts."

"baɪ teɪkɪŋ ðət θɹoʊn," daɪɛlɪn sɛd, "ju ɹɪsk lʊkɪŋ əz ɪf jəɹ lɛɾɪŋ ælθɹ hæn ɪt tə ju."

"By taking that throne," Dyelin said, "you risk looking as if you're letting al'Thor hand it to you."

"soʊ?" ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪ hæd tə teɪk ændɝ ɑn maɪ oʊn, bʌt ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ ɹɔŋ wɪð mi æksɛptɪŋ ɪz ɡɪft ə kɛɹhin. hɪz il wɝ ðə wʌnz tə lɪbɝeɪɾ ɪt. wid bi duɪŋ ðə kɛɹhinɪn ə feɪvɝ baɪ pɹɪvɛntɪŋ ə mɛsi səksɛʃən. maɪ kleɪm tə ðə θɹoʊn ɪz stʃɹɔŋ, ət list əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ɛniwʌn ɛlsəz, ən ðoʊz lɔɪəl tə ɹænd wɪl fɔl bɪhaɪn mi."

"So?" Elayne said. "I had to take Andor on my own, but there is nothing wrong with me accepting his gift of Cairhien. His Aiel were the ones to liberate it. We'd be doing the Cairhienin a favor by preventing a messy Succession. My claim to the throne is strong, at least as strong as anyone else's, and those loyal to Rand will fall behind me."

"æn dʒju nɑt ɹɪsk oʊvɝɪkstɛndɪŋ jɝsɛlf?"

"And do you not risk overextending yourself?"

"pɑsəbli," ɪleɪn sɛd, "bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ɪts wɝθ ðə ɹɪsk. ɪn wʌn stɛp aɪ kəd bɪkʌm wʌn ə ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl mɑnɑɹks sɪns ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ."

"Possibly," Elayne said, "but I think it's worth the risk. In one step I could become one of the most powerful monarchs since Artur Hawkwing."

fɝðɝ ɑɹɡjəmənt wɑz kʌɾ ɔf baɪ ə pəlaɪt nɑk ət ðə dɔɹ. ɪleɪn ɡlænst ət daɪɛlɪn, ən ðə wʊmənz θɔtfəl ɪkspɹɛʃən mɛnt ʃi wɑz kənsɪɾɝɪŋ wʌɾ ɪleɪn hæd sɛd. wɛl, ɪleɪn wəd stʃɹaɪk fəɹ ðə sʌn θɹoʊn, wɪð əɹ wɪθaʊt daɪɛlɪnz əpɹuvəl. ðə wʊmən wɑz bɪkʌmɪŋ ɪnkɹisɪŋli jusfəl tə ɪleɪn əz ən ædvaɪzɝ - laɪt bi pɹeɪz ðət daɪɛlɪn hædnt wɑntəd ðə θɹoʊn hɝsɛlf! - bʌɾ ə kwin kəd nɑt lɛt hɝsɛlf fɔl ɪndə ðə tʃɹæp ə ɹilaɪɪŋ ɑn ɛni wʌn pɝsən tu mʌtʃ.

Further argument was cut off by a polite knock at the door. Elayne glanced at Dyelin, and the woman's thoughtful expression meant she was considering what Elayne had said. Well, Elayne would strike for the Sun Throne, with or without Dyelin's approval. The woman was becoming increasingly useful to Elayne as an advisor - Light be praised that Dyelin hadn't wanted the throne herself! - but a queen could not let herself fall into the trap of relying on any one person too much.

bɝdʒɪɾ ænsɝd ðə dɔɹ, lɛɾɪŋ ɪn ðə stɔɹklaɪk mæstɝ nɔɹi. hi wɑz dʒɹɛst ɪn ɹɛɾ ən waɪt, hɪz lɔŋ feɪs kɛɹəktɝɪstɪkli sɑmbɝ. hi kæɹiɾ ɪz lɛðɝ foʊldɝ ʌndɝ wʌn ɑɹm, ən ɪleɪn səpɹɛst ə ɡɹoʊn. "aɪ θɔt wi wɝ fɪnɪʃt fəɹ ðə deɪ."

Birgitte answered the door, letting in the storklike Master Norry. He was dressed in red and white, his long face characteristically somber. He carried his leather folder under one arm, and Elayne suppressed a groan. "I thought we were finished for the day."

aɪ θɔt soʊ əz wɛl, jəɹ mædʒəsti," hi sɛd. "bʌt sɛvɹəl nu mæɾɝz əv ɝɪzən. aɪ θɔt ðət ðeɪ maɪt bi . . . ʌm . . . ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ tə ju."

I thought so as well, Your Majesty," he said. "But several new matters have arisen. I thought that they might be . . . um . . . interesting to you."

'wʌt dʒju min?"

'What do you mean?"

"wɛl, jəɹ mædʒəsti," nɔɹi sɛd, "ju noʊ ðəɾ aɪm nɑt . . . pɑɹ-tɪkjəlɝli fɑn ə sɝɾən taɪps ʌv wɝk. bʌɾ ɪn laɪɾ ə ɹisən ədɪʃənz tə maɪ stæf, aɪ hæv sin ɹizən tə ɪkspæn maɪ ətɛnʃənz."

"Well, Your Majesty," Norry said, "you know that I am not . . . par-ticularly fond of certain types of work. But in light of recent additions to my staff, I have seen reason to expand my attentions."

"jɔɹ teɪkɪŋ əbaʊt hɑɹk, ɑɹən ju?" bɝdʒɪt sɛd. "haʊz ðə wɝθləs pis ʌv ɡɹaɪm duɪŋ?"

"You're taking about Hark, aren't you?" Birgitte said. "How's the worthless piece of grime doing?"

nɔɹi ɡlænst ət hɝ. "hi ɪz . . . ɝ . . . ɡɹaɪmi, aɪ ʃəd seɪ." hi lʊk bæk əɾ ɪleɪn. "bʌt hiz ɹæðɝ ədɛpt, wʌns ɡɪvən pɹɑpɝ moʊɾəveɪʃən. pliz fɝɡɪv mi ɪf aɪ hæv teɪkən lɪbɝɾiz, bʌɾ æftɝ ði ɪnkaʊntɝz ɹisənli- - ən ðə ɡɛsts tə jəɹ dʌnʒənz ðeɪ pɹəvaɪɾəd - aɪ θɔɾ ɪt waɪz."

Norry glanced at her. "He is . . . er . . . grimy, I should say." He looked back at Elayne. "But he is rather adept, once given proper motivation. Please forgive me if I have taken liberties, but after the encounters recently- - and the guests to your dungeons they provided - I thought it wise."

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt, mæstɝ nɔɹi?" ɪleɪn æskt.

"What are you talking about, Master Norry?" Elayne asked.

"mɪstʃɹəs bəseɪhin, jəɹ mædʒəsti," nɔɹi sɛd. "ðə fɝst ɪnstʃɹʌkʃən aɪ ɡeɪv əɹ ɡʊd mæstɝ hɑɹk wɑz tə wɑtʃ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɛs pleɪs ə ɹɛzəɾəns - ə sɝɾən ɪn noʊn əz ðə ɡɹiɾɪŋ hɔl."

"Mistress Basaheen, Your Majesty," Norry said. "The first instruction I gave our good Master Hark was to watch the Aes Sedai s place of residence - a certain inn known as The Greeting Hall."

ɪleɪn sæɾ əpɹaɪt, filɪŋ ə bɝst ʌv ɪksaɪtmənt. dʌɑɹə bəseɪhin hæd ɹɪpiɾɪdli ətɛmptəd tə ɡeɪn ɑɾiəns wɪð ɪleɪn baɪ bʊliɪŋ ðə vɛɹiəs mɛmbɝz ə ðə pæləs stæf. ðeɪ ɔl nu naʊ, haʊɛvɝ, ðət ʃi wɑz nɑt tə bi ədmɪɾəd. ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ nɑt, ʃi wɑz ə ɹɛpɹəzɛntəɾɪv ʌv ɪleɪɾə, ən ɪleɪn ɪntɛndəd tə hæv nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð hɝ.

Elayne sat upright, feeling a burst of excitement. Duhara Basaheen had repeatedly attempted to gain audience with Elayne by bullying the various members of the palace staff. They all knew now, however, that she was not to be admitted. Aes Sedai or not, she was a representative of Elaida, and Elayne intended to have nothing to do with her.

"ju hæɾ əɹ wɑtʃt," ɪleɪn sɛɾ iɡɝli. "pliz tɛl mi jə dɪskʌvɝd sʌmθɪŋ aɪ kən juz tə bænɪʃ ðəɾ ɪnsʌfɝəbəl wʊmən."

"You had her watched," Elayne said eagerly. "Please tell me you discovered something I can use to banish that insufferable woman."

"ðɛn aɪm ʌndɝ noʊ kɑndəmneɪʃən?" mæstɝ nɔɹi æskt kɛɹfəli, stɪl əz dʒɹaɪ ən ʌnɪksaɪɾɪd əz ɛvɝ. hi wɑz jɛɾ ɪnɪkspɪɹiənst wən ɪt keɪm tə spaɪɪŋ.

"Then I am under no condemnation?" Master Norry asked carefully, still as dry and unexcited as ever. He was yet inexperienced when it came to spying.

"laɪt noʊ," ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪ ʃʊɾə ɔɹɾɝd ɪt dʌn maɪsɛlf. juv seɪv mi fɹəm ðəɾ oʊvɝsaɪt, mæstɝ nɔɹi. ɪf wʌt juv dɪskʌvɝɾ ɪz ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf nuz, aɪ maɪt dʒʌs bi laɪkli tə kɪs ju."

"Light no," Elayne said. "I should have ordered it done myself. You've saved me from that oversight, Master Norry. If what you've discovered is good enough news, I might just be likely to kiss you."

ðət pɹɑmptəɾ ə ɹiækʃən; hɪz aɪz waɪɾənd ɪn hɔɹɝ. ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪleɪn læf, ən bɝdʒɪt tʃʌkəld əz wɛl. daɪɛlɪn dɪdn sim plizd. wɛl, ʃi kəd ɡoʊ sʌk ɑn ə ɡoʊts fʊt, fəɹ ɔl ɪleɪn kɛɹd.

That prompted a reaction; his eyes widened in horror. It was enough to make Elayne laugh, and Birgitte chuckled as well. Dyelin didn't seem pleased. Well, she could go suck on a goat's foot, for all Elayne cared.

"ɝ . . . wɛl," nɔɹi sɛd, "ðæt wʊdn bi nɛsəsɛɹi, jəɹ mædʒəsti. aɪ hæd θɔt ðæt, ɪf ðəɹ wɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə sɪɾi" - hi, laɪk ði ʌðɝz, hæd lɝnd nɑt tə ɹəfɝ tə fæljən ən ði ʌðɝz əz "ɛɛs sədaɪ" ɪn ɪleɪnz pɹɛzəns - "wi maɪt wɑnə kip ɡʊd wɑtʃ ɑn ɛni hu pɝpɔɹɾɪd tə bi fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ."

"Er . . . well," Norry said, "that wouldn't be necessary, Your Majesty. I had thought that, if there were Darkfriends pretending to be Aes Sedai in the city" - he, like the others, had learned not to refer to Falion and the others as "Aes Sedai" in Elayne's presence - "we might want to keep good watch on any who purported to be from the White Tower."

ɪleɪn nɑɾəd iɡɝli. maɪ, bʌt nɔɹi kəd ɹæmbəl!

Elayne nodded eagerly. My, but Norry could ramble!

"aɪm əfɹeɪɾ aɪ mʌs dɪsəpɔɪn jəɹ mædʒəsti," nɔɹi sɛd, ɑbviəsli noʊɾɪŋ ɪleɪnz ɪksaɪtmənt, "ɪf jə ɑɹ hoʊpɪŋ fəɹ pɹuf ðət ðɪs wʊmən ɪz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd."

"I'm afraid I must disappoint Your Majesty," Norry said, obviously noting Elayne's excitement, "if you are hoping for proof that this woman is a Darkfriend."

"oʊ."

"Oh."

"haʊɛvɝ," nɔɹi sɛd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ə slɛndɝ fɪŋɡɝ. "aɪ hæv ɹizən tə bi-liv ðət dʌɑɹə sədaɪ meɪ hæv hæɾ ə hæn ɪn ðə dɑkjəmɛn jə sim tə bi tʃɹiɾɪŋ wɪð . . . ʌm . . . ənjuʒəwəl ɹɛvɝəns." hi ɡlænst ət ðə peɪdʒəz pi, ni hæd tɔs tə ðə flɔɹ. wʌn bɔɹ ðə dɪstɪŋkt aʊtlaɪn ə hɝ ʃu.

"However," Norry said, raising a slender finger. "I have reason to be-lieve that Duhara Sedai may have had a hand in the document you seem to be treating with . . . um . . . unusual reverence." He glanced at the pages p, ne had tossed to the floor. One bore the distinct outline of her shoe.

"dʌɑɹə hæz bɪn miɾɪŋ wɪð ɛlɹin?" ɪleɪn æskt.

"Duhara has been meeting with Ellorien?" Elayne asked.

"ɪndid ʃi hæz," mæstɝ nɔɹi sɛd. "ðə vɪzəts ɑɹ ɡɹoʊɪŋ mɔɹ fɹ-ɛnt. ðeɪ ɑɹ dʌn wɪð səm mɛʒɝ ə sikɹəsi əz wɛl."

"Indeed she has," Master Norry said. "The visits are growing more fre-ent. They are done with some measure of secrecy as well."

ɪleɪn ɡlænst ət daɪɛlɪn. "waɪ dʌz dʌɑɹə wɑn maɪ ɹaɪvəlz fɹid?"

Elayne glanced at Dyelin. "Why does Duhara want my rivals freed?"

daɪɛlɪn lʊk tʃɹʌbəld. "ʃi kʊdn bi soʊ fulɪʃ əz tə əsum ʃi kən ɹeɪz ʌp ə muvmən əɡɛns ju, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli juzɪŋ ə ɡɹup ə bɹoʊkən, bæŋkɹəp lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz."

Dyelin looked troubled. "She couldn't be so foolish as to assume she can raise up a movement against you, particularly using a group of broken, bankrupt lords and ladies."

"jɔɹ mædʒəsti?" nɔɹi æskt. "ɪf aɪ meɪ ɔfɝ ə kɑmɛnt . . ."

"Your Majesty?" Norry asked. "If I may offer a comment . . ."

"ʌv kɔɹs, mæstɝ nɔɹi."

"Of course, Master Norry."

"pɝhæps ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kʌɹi feɪvɝ wɪð ðə leɪɾi ɛlɹin. wi doʊnt noʊ fəɹ sɝɾən ðeɪ kənspaɪɝɾ ɑn ðɪs pɹəpoʊzəl; ɪt sɪmpli sim laɪkli, dʒʌdʒɪŋ fɹəm ðə fɹikwənsi ən taɪmɪŋ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪz vɪzəts. bʌt ʃi meɪ nɑɾ əv ɹizən tə səpɔɹt jəɹ ɛnəmiz soʊ mʌtʃ əz ʃiz ɹizən tə bi ɪn ðə ɡʊd ɡɹeɪsɪz ə səm ə ðə sɪɾiz noʊbɪləɾi."

"Perhaps the Aes Sedai is trying to curry favor with the Lady Ellorien. We don't know for certain they conspired on this proposal; it simply seemed likely, judging from the frequency and timing of the Aes Sedai's visits. But she may not have reason to support your enemies so much as she has reason to be in the good graces of some of the city's nobility."

ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl. dʌɑɹə wɑzn laɪkli tə ɹɪtɝn tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ɔfən ɪleɪn sədʒɛstəd ðət ʃi də soʊ. tə ɡoʊ bæk wəd bi tə pɹizɛn ɪleɪɾə wɪð ɛmpti hænz ən ə hɑstəl ændɝ. noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd bi soʊ izəli dɪsweɪɾɪd. haʊɛvɝ, ɪf ʃi kəd ɹɪtɝn wɪð ðə lɔɪəlti ʌv səm ə ði ændɔɝən noʊbɪləɾi, ɪt wəd bi sʌmθɪŋ.

It was possible. Duhara wasn't likely to return to the White Tower, no matter how often Elayne suggested that she do so. To go back would be to present Elaida with empty hands and a hostile Andor. No Aes Sedai would be so easily dissuaded. However, if she could return with the loyalty of some of the Andoran nobility, it would be something.

"wɛn dʌɑɹə lɛft əɹ ɪn tə vɪzəɾ ɛlɹinz hoʊm," ɪleɪn sɛd, "haʊ dɪd ʃi dʒɹɛs?" ðoʊ ɛlɹin hæd bɹifli spoʊkən ə ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə hɝ ɪsteɪts, ʃi hædn lɛft, pɝhæps ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðəɾ ɪt wɑzn pəlɪɾɪkəli jusfəl əz ə jɛt. ʃi ɹɪzaɪɾɪd ɪn əɹ mænʃən ɪn keɪɛmlɪn ət ðə moʊmənt.

"When Duhara left her inn to visit Ellorien's home," Elayne said, "how did she dress?" Though Ellorien had briefly spoken of returning to her estates, she hadn't left, perhaps realizing that it wasn't politically useful as of yet. She resided in her mansion in Caemlyn at the moment.

"ɪn ə kloʊk, jəɹ mædʒəsti," nɔɹi sɛd. "wɪð ðə hʊd dʒɹɔn."

"In a cloak, Your Majesty," Norry said. "With the hood drawn."

"ɹɪtʃ əɹ pʊɹ?"

"Rich or poor?"

'aɪ ... aɪ doʊnt noʊ," nɔɹi ɹɪplaɪd, saʊndɪŋ ɪmbɛɹəst. "aɪ kəd fɛtʃ mæstɝ hɑɹk___"

'I ... I don't know," Norry replied, sounding embarrassed. "I could fetch Master Hark___"

'ðæt woʊn bi niɾəd," ɪleɪn sɛd. "bʌt tɛl mi. dɪd ʃi ɡoʊ əloʊn?"

'That won't be needed," Elayne said. "But tell me. Did she go alone?"

noʊ. aɪ bɪliv ʃi ɔlweɪz hæɾ ə ɹæðɝ lɑɹdʒ kəntɪnʒənt ʌv ətɛndəns wɪð hɝ."

No. I believe she always had a rather large contingent of attendants with her."

ɪleɪn nɑɾəd. ʃi wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə bɛt ðət waɪl dʌɑɹə wɔɹ ə kloʊk ən dʒɹɔn hʊd, ʃi lɛft əɹ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɑn ən tʃoʊz ə dɪstɪŋktɪvli ɹɪtʃ kloʊk fəɹ ðə sʌbtɝfjudʒ, əlɔŋ wɪð teɪkɪŋ ətɛndəns. mæstɝ nɔɹi," ɪleɪn sɛd, "aɪ fɪɹ ðət juv bɪn pleɪd."

Elayne nodded. She was willing to bet that while Duhara wore a cloak and drawn hood, she left her Great Serpent ring on and chose a distinctively rich cloak for the subterfuge, along with taking attendants. Master Norry," Elayne said, "I fear that you've been played."

"jɔɹ mædʒəsti?"

"Your Majesty?"

daɪɛlɪn wɑz nɑɾɪŋ. "ʃi wɑntəd tə bi sin vɪzəɾɪŋ ɛlɹin. ʃi dɪdnt wɑn ðə vɪzəts tə bi əfɪʃəl - ðət wəd pʊɾ əɹ tu fɔɹməli əɡɛns jəɹ θɹoʊn. bʌt ʃi wɑntəd jə tə noʊ wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ."

Dyelin was nodding. "She wanted to be seen visiting Ellorien. She didn't want the visits to be official - that would put her too formally against your throne. But she wanted you to know what she was doing."

"ʃiz bleɪɾəntli mɪŋɡəlɪŋ wɪð maɪ ɛnəmiz," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ɪts ə wɔɹnɪŋ. ʃi θɹɛɾənd mi ɝliɝ, seɪɪŋ ðəɾ aɪ wəd nɑɾ əpɹiʃieɪt biɪŋ ɪn ɑpəzɪʃən tə hɝ ən ɪleɪɾə."

"She's blatantly mingling with my enemies," Elayne said. "It's a warning. She threatened me earlier, saying that I would not appreciate being in opposition to her and Elaida."

"ɑ," nɔɹi sɛd, dɪfleɪɾɪd. "soʊ maɪ ɪnɪʃəɾɪv wɑzn soʊ kin æftɝ ɔl."

"Ah," Norry said, deflated. "So my initiative wasn't so keen after all."

"oʊ, ɪt wɑz stɪl væljəbəl," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ɪf jə hædn hæɾ əɹ wɑtʃt wiɾ əv mɪs ðɪs -  wɪtʃ wʊɾə bɪn ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ. ɪf sʌmwʌn ɪz gɑnə ɡoʊ aʊɾ ə hɝ weɪ tə ɪnsʌl mi, ðən aɪ ət list wɑnə bi əwɛɹ ʌv ɪt. ɪf oʊnli soʊ ðəɾ aɪ noʊ hum tə bɪhɛd leɪɾɝ ɑn."

"Oh, it was still valuable," Elayne said. "If you hadn't had her watched we'd have missed this -  which would have been embarrassing. If someone is going to go out of her way to insult me, then I at least want to be aware of it. If only so that I know whom to behead later on."

nɔɹi peɪld.

Norry paled.

"fɪɡjʊɹəɾɪvli, mæstɝ nɔɹi," ʃi sɛd. əz mʌtʃ əz ʃid laɪk tə də ɪt. ən ɪleɪɾə tu! ʃi dɛɹd sɛn ə wɑtʃdɔɡ tə "kaʊnsəl" ɪleɪn? ɪleɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. hɝi ʌp, ɛɡwin. wi nid jə ɪn ðə taʊɝ, ðə wɝl nidz jə ðɛɹ.

"Figuratively, Master Norry," she said. As much as she'd like to do it. And Elaida too! She dared send a watchdog to "counsel" Elayne? Elayne shook her head. Hurry up, Egwene. We need you in the Tower, The world needs you there.

ʃi saɪd, tɝnɪŋ bæk tə nɔɹi. "ju sɛd ðəɹ wɝ 'sɛvɹəl nu mæɾɝz' ðət niɾəd maɪ ətɛnʃən?"

She sighed, turning back to Norry. "You said there were 'several new matters' that needed my attention?"

"ɪndid, jəɹ mædʒəsti," hi sɛd, ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ɪz hɔɹəbəl lɛðɝ foʊldɝ. hi ɹimuvd ə peɪdʒ fɹəm ɪt - wʌn i dɪd nɑt ɹəɡɑɹd wɪð nɪɹli əz mʌtʃ ɹɛvɝəns əz moʊst i kəlɛktəd. ɪndid, hi pɪntʃt ðɪs wʌn bɪtwin tu fɪŋɡɝz ən hɛld ɪɾ əlɔft, laɪk ə mæn pɪkɪŋ ʌp ə dɛɾ ænəməl faʊn ɪn ðə ɡʌɾɝ.

"Indeed, Your Majesty," he said, getting out his horrible leather folder. He removed a page from it - one he did not regard with nearly as much reverence as most he collected. Indeed, he pinched this one between two fingers and held it aloft, like a man picking up a dead animal found in the gutter.

"ju wɪl ɹikɔl jəɹ ɔɹɾɝz ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ mɝsənɛɹi bænz?"

"You will recall your orders regarding mercenary bands?"

"jɛs," ʃi sɛd, ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ. ʃi wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ θɝsti. ɡluməli, ʃi aɪd ðə kʌp ʌv wɔɹm ɡoʊts mɪlk ɑn ðə teɪbəl nɛks tə hɝ tʃɛɹ. nuz ə bæɾəl bɹɔt bænz ə sɛl-sɔɹdz iɡɝ tə ɔfɝ ðɛɹ sɝvəsəz.

"Yes," she said, grimacing. She was getting thirsty. Gloomily, she eyed the cup of warm goat's milk on the table next to her chair. News of battle brought bands of sell-swords eager to offer their services.

ənfɔɹtʃənətli fəɹ moʊst ə ðə mɝsənɛɹiz, ðə sidʒ hæd bɪn ə ʃɔɹt wʌn. nuz tʃɹævəl fæst, bʌt wɪɹi ən hʌŋɡɹi soʊlʒɝz tʃɹævəl sloʊli. soʊlʒɝ bænz kəntɪnjud tə ɝaɪv ət ðə sɪɾi ɪn ə stɛɾi floʊ, ðə mɛn ɪn əm dɪsəpɔɪntɪd tə faɪnd noʊ nid fəɹ ðɛɹ wɛpənz.

Unfortunately for most of the mercenaries, the siege had been a short one. News traveled fast, but weary and hungry soldiers traveled slowly. Soldier bands continued to arrive at the city in a steady flow, the men in them disappointed to find no need for their weapons.

ɪleɪn hæd bɪɡʌn baɪ sɛndɪŋ əm əweɪ. ðən ʃid ɹilaɪz ðə fulɪʃnəs ɪn ðɪs. ɛvɹi mæn wəd bi niɾəd ət tɑɹmən ɡdən, ən ɪf ændɝ kəd pɹəvaɪɾ ən ɛkstʃɹə faɪv əɹ tɛn θaʊzən soʊlʒɝz tə ðə kɑnflɪkt, ʃi wɑntəd tə də soʊ.

Elayne had begun by sending them away. Then she'd realized the foolishness in this. Every man would be needed at Tarmon Gai'don, and if Andor could provide an extra five or ten thousand soldiers to the conflict, she wanted to do so.

ʃi dɪdn əv ðə kɔɪn tə peɪ ðɛm naʊ, bʌt niðɝ dɪd ʃi wɑnə luz ðɛm. soʊ ɪnstɛd, ʃi hæɾ ɔɹɾɝd mæstɝ nɔɹi ən kæptən ɡaɪbɑn tə ɡɪv ɔl ə ðə mɝsənɛɹi bænz ðə seɪm ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz. ðeɪ wɝ tə əlaʊ noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə sɝɾən nʌmbɝ ə soʊlʒɝz ɪndə keɪɛmlɪn əɾ ə taɪm, ən ðeɪ wɝ tə kæmp noʊ kloʊsɝ ðən wʌn liɡ fɹəm ðə sɪɾi.

She didn't have the coin to pay them now, but neither did she want to lose them. So instead, she had ordered Master Norry and Captain Guybon to give all of the mercenary bands the same instructions. They were to allow no more than a certain number of soldiers into Caemlyn at a time, and they were to camp no closer than one league from the city.

ðɪs wɑz tə liv əm wɪð ði aɪdiə ðət ʃid mit wɪð əm ivɛnəli ən ɔfɝ əm wɝk. ʃi dʒʌs maɪt də ðæt, naʊ ðət ʃi hæd di- tʃɪɾɪd tə teɪk ðə sʌn θɹoʊn. ʌv kɔɹs, ðə læst sɛl-sɔɹdz ʃid haɪɝd hæd ɡɔn ɹɑɾən ɑn əɹ mɔɹ ɔfən ðən nɑt.

This was to leave them with the idea that she'd meet with them evenally and offer them work. She just might do that, now that she had de- cided to take the Sun Throne. Of course, the last sell-swords she'd hired had gone rotten on her more often than not.

əɡɛnst əɹ bɛɾɝ dʒʌdʒmənt, ʃi pɪkt ʌp ðə kʌp ə mɪlk ən tʊk sɪp. bɝdʒɪt nɑɾəd ɪn sæɾəsfækʃən, bʌɾ ɪleɪn ɡɹɪməst. bɛɾɝ tə dʒisɪks

Against her better judgment, she picked up the cup of milk and took sip. Birgitte nodded in satisfaction, but Elayne grimaced. Better to g6

θɝsti!

thirsty!

"wɛl," mæstɝ nɔɹi sɛd, lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə peɪdʒ ɪn ɪz fɪŋɡɝz, "wʌn ə ðə mɝsənɛɹi kæptənz əz teɪkən ɪɾ əpɑn hɪmsɛlf tə sɛn jə ə vɛɹi . . . fəmɪljɝ lɛɾɝ. aɪ wʊdn əv bɹɔɾ ɪt tə ju, bʌɾ əpɑn sɛkən ɹiɾɪŋ ɪt simz ðəɾ ɪts sʌmθɪŋ jə ʃəd si. ðə ɹʌfaɪənz kleɪmz ɑɹ aʊtlændɪʃ, bʌɾ aɪ wəd nɑt laɪk tə hæv bɪn ðə wʌn tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðɛm, ʃəd ðeɪ pɹuv . . . ɝn . . . ækjɝət."

"Well," Master Norry said, looking over the page in his fingers, "one of the mercenary captains has taken it upon himself to send you a very . . . familiar letter. I wouldn't have brought it to you, but upon second reading it seems that it is something you should see. The ruffian's claims are outlandish, but I would not like to have been the one to ignore them, should they prove . . . urn . . . accurate."

kjʊɹiəs, ɪleɪn ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə peɪpɝ. aʊtlændɪʃ kleɪmz? ʃi dɪdnt noʊ ɛni mɝsənɛɹi kæptənz. ðə skɹɔl ɑn ðə peɪdʒ wɑz ənivən, ðəɹ wɝ numɝəs kɹɔst aʊt wɝdz, ən səm ə ðə spɛlɪŋ wɑz . . . kɹieɪɾɪv. huɛvɝ ðɪs mæn wɑz, ʃi -  ʃi blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz əz ʃi ɹitʃt ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə lɛɾɝ. ðən ʃi ɹɛɾ ɪɾ əɡɛn.

Curious, Elayne reached for the paper. Outlandish claims? She didn't know any mercenary captains. The scrawl on the page was uneven, there were numerous crossed out words, and some of the spelling was . . . creative. Whoever this man was, she -  She blinked in surprise as she reached the bottom of the letter. Then she read it again.

jəɹ ɹɔɪəl blʌɾi peɪn ɪn maɪ bæk, wɝ blʌɾi weɪɾɪŋ hɪɹ tə tɔk tə ju, ən wɝ ɡɛɾɪŋ æŋɡɹi pɝtɝbd. (ðæt minz æŋɡɹi.) tɑm sɛz ðət jəɹ ə kwin naʊ, bʌɾ aɪ fɪɡjɝ ðət tʃeɪnʒəz nʌθɪŋ, sɛns jə æktəd laɪk ə kwin ɔl ðə taɪm ɛniweɪ. doʊn fɝɡɛt ðəɾ aɪ kæɹid heɪl jəɹ pɹɪɾi lɪɾəl bæksaɪɾ aʊɾ ʌv ə hoʊl ɪn tiɹ, bʌt jə æktəd laɪk ə kwin ðɛn, soʊ aɪ ɡɛs aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ aɪm supɹaɪz naʊ ðət jə æk laɪk wʌn wən jə ɹɪli ɑɹ ə kwin.

Your Royal Bloody Pain in My Back, We're bloody waiting here to talk to you, and we're getting angry perturbed. (That means angry.) Thom says that you're a queen now, but I figure that changes nothing, sense you acted like a queen all the time anyway. Don't forget that I carried hailed your pretty little backside out of a hole in Tear, but you acted like a queen then, so I guess I don't know why I'm suprised now that you act like one when you really are a queen.

soʊ ɪm θɪŋkɪŋ aɪ ʃəd tʃɹit jə laɪk ə blʌɾi kwin ən sɛn jə ə blʌɾi lɛɾɝ ən ɔl, spikɪŋ wɪð haɪ tɔk ən ɡɛɾɪŋ jəɹ ətɛnʃən. aɪ ivən juz maɪ ɹɪŋ əz ə sɪɡnɪt, laɪk ɪt wɑz peɪpɝ pɹɑpɝ. soʊ hɪɹ ɪz maɪ fɔɹməl səluteɪʃən. soʊ blʌɾi stɑp tɝnɪŋ mi əweɪ soʊ wi kən tɔk. aɪ nid jəɹ bɛlfndɝz. ɪts blʌɾi ɪmpɔɹɾənt.

So I'm thinking I should treat you like a bloody Queen and send you a bloody letter and all, speaking with high talk and getting your attention. I even used my ring as a signet, like it was paper proper. So here is my formal salutation. So BLOODY STOP TURNING ME AWAY so we can talk. I need your bellfounders. It's bloody important.

 - mæt piɛs. səluteɪʃən minz ɡɹiɾɪŋ.

 - Mat p.s. Salutation means greeting.

pipiɛs. doʊn maɪn ðə skɹætʃt aʊt wɝdz ən bæd spɛlɪŋz. aɪ wɑz gɑnə ɹiɹaɪt ðɪs lɛɾɝ, bʌt tɑm ɪz læfɪŋ soʊ hɑɹɾ ət mi ðəɾ aɪ wɑnə bi dʌn.

p.p.s. Don't mind the scratched out words and bad spellings. I was going to rewrite this letter, but Thom is laffing so hard at me that I want to be done.

pipiɛs. doʊn maɪn mi kɔlɪŋ jəɹ bæksaɪd pɹɪɾi. aɪ hɑɹdli ɛvɝ spɛn ɛni taɪm lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪt, əz aɪv ən əwɛɹnəs ðət jud pʊl maɪ aɪz aʊɾ ɪf jə sɔ mi. bɪsaɪdz, aɪm mɛɹid naʊ, soʊ ðəɾ ɔl dʌzn mæɾɝ.

p.p.s. Don't mind me calling your backside pretty. I hardly ever spent any time looking at it, as I've an awareness that you'd pull my eyes out if you saw me. Besides, I'm married now, so that all doesn't matter.

ɪleɪn kʊdn dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ tə bi aʊtʃɹeɪdʒd əɹ ɪɡzubɝənt. mæt wɑz ɪn ændɝ, ən θɔɹn wɑz əlaɪv! ðeɪɾ ɪskeɪpt ɛbu dɑɹ. hæd ðeɪ faʊn oʊlvɝ? haʊ hæd ðeɪ ɡɑɾən əweɪ fɹəm ðə sintʃæn?

Elayne couldn't decide whether to be outraged or exuberant. Mat was in Andor, and Thorn was alive! They'd escaped Ebou Dar. Had they found Olver? How had they gotten away from the Seanchan?

soʊ mɛni ɪmoʊʃənz ən kwɛstʃənz wɛld ʌp ɪn hɝ. bɝdʒɪt stʊɾ əpɹaɪt, fɹaʊnɪŋ, filɪŋ ði ɪmoʊʃənz. "ɪleɪn? wʌɾ ɪz ɪt? dɪd ðə mæn ɪnsəl ju?"

So many emotions and questions welled up in her. Birgitte stood upright, frowning, feeling the emotions. "Elayne? What is it? Did the man insult you?"

ɪleɪn faʊn hɝsɛlf nɑɾɪŋ, tɪɹz fɔɹmɪŋ ɪn əɹ aɪz.

Elayne found herself nodding, tears forming in her eyes.

bɝdʒɪt kɝst, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ oʊvɝ. mæstɝ nɔɹi lʊk teɪkən əbæk, əz ɪf ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ ðət hid bɹɔt ðə lɛɾɝ.

Birgitte cursed, striding over. Master Norry looked taken aback, as if regretting that he'd brought the letter.

ɪleɪn bɝst ɪndə læftɝ.

Elayne burst into laughter.

bɝdʒɪt fɹoʊz. "ɪleɪn?"

Birgitte froze. "Elayne?"

"ɪm ɔl ɹaɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd, waɪpɪŋ ðə tɪɹz fɹəm əɹ aɪz ən fɔɹsɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə teɪk ə dip bɹɛθ. "oʊ, laɪt. aɪ niɾəd ðæt. hɪɹ, ɹɛɾ ɪt."

"I'm all right," Elayne said, wiping the tears from her eyes and forcing herself to take a deep breath. "Oh, Light. I needed that. Here, read it."

bɝdʒɪt snætʃt ðə lɛɾɝ, ən əz ʃi ɹɛd, hɝ feɪs laɪɾənd. ʃi tʃʌkəld. "ju hæv ə naɪs bæksaɪd? hi ʃəd bi tɔkɪŋ. mæts ɡɑɾ əz faɪn ə ɹʌmp əz kʌmz ɑn ə mæn."

Birgitte snatched the letter, and as she read, her face lightened. She chuckled. "You have a nice backside? He should be talking. Mat's got as fine a rump as comes on a man."

"bɝdʒɪt!" ɪleɪn sɛd.

"Birgitte!" Elayne said.

"wɛl ɪts tʃɹu," ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd, hændɪŋ bæk ðə lɛɾɝ. "aɪ faɪn ɪz feɪs fɑɹ tu pɹɪɾi, bʌt ðət dʌzn min aɪ kæn dʒʌdʒ ə ɡʊd bæksaɪd wən aɪ si wʌn. laɪt, ɪɾəl bi ɡʊd tə hæv ɪm bæk!

"Well it's true," the Warder said, handing back the letter. "I find his face far too pretty, but that doesn't mean I can't judge a good backside when I see one. Light, it will be good to have him back!

faɪnəli, sʌmwʌn aɪ kən ɡoʊ dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ wɪð u dʌzn lʊk ət mi əz ðɛɹ blʌɾi mɪlətɛɹi supɪɹiɝ."

Finally, someone I can go drinking with who doesn't look at me as their bloody military superior."

"kənteɪn jɝsɛlf, bɝdʒɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd, foʊldɪŋ ðə lɛɾɝ ʌp. nɔɹi lʊk skændəlaɪz baɪ ði ɪkstʃeɪnʒ. daɪɛlɪn sɛd nʌθɪŋ. ɪt tʊk ə lɑt tə feɪz ðət wʊmən, ən ʃid hɝd wɝs fɹəm bɝdʒɪt.

"Contain yourself, Birgitte," Elayne said, folding the letter up. Norry looked scandalized by the exchange. Dyelin said nothing. It took a lot to faze that woman, and she'd heard worse from Birgitte.

"ju dɪd wɛl, mæstɝ nɔɹi," ɪleɪn sɛd. "θæŋk jə fəɹ bɹɪŋɪŋ ðɪs tə maɪ ətɛnʃən."

"You did well, Master Norry," Elayne said. "Thank you for bringing this to my attention."

"ju də ɪndid noʊ ðiz mɝsənɛɹiz, ðɛn?" hi æskt, ə hɪn ə sɝpɹaɪz saʊndɪŋ ɪn ɪz vɔɪs.

"You do indeed know these mercenaries, then?" he asked, a hint of surprise sounding in his voice.

"ðeɪɹ nɑt mɝsənɛɹiz. æktʃəli , aɪm nɑt sɝɾən wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ. fɹɛnz. ən ælaɪz, aɪ ʃəd hoʊp." waɪ hæd mæt bɹɔt ðə bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hæn tə ændɝ? wɝ ðeɪ lɔɪəl tə ɹænd? kəd ʃi meɪk jus ə ðɛm? mæt wɑz ə skaʊnʒɹəl, bʌɾ i hæɾ ə stʃɹeɪnʒli ɡʊɾ aɪ fəɹ tæktɪks ən wɔɹfɛɹ.

"They're not mercenaries. Actually, I'm not certain what they are. Friends. And allies, I should hope." Why had Mat brought the Band of the Red Hand to Andor? Were they loyal to Rand? Could she make use of them? Mat was a scoundrel, but he had a strangely good eye for tactics and warfare.

ə soʊlʒɝ ʌndɝ ɪz kəmænd wəd bi wɝθ tɛn ə ðə sɛl-sɔɹd ɹɪfɹæf ʃid bɪn fɔɹs tə haɪɝ ɹisənli.

A soldier under his command would be worth ten of the sell-sword riffraff she'd been forced to hire recently.

"maɪ pɑɹɾən, jəɹ mædʒəsti, fəɹ maɪ mɪsteɪk," nɔɹi sɛd. "aɪ ʃʊɾə bɹɔt ðɪs tə jə sunɝ. maɪ ɪnfɔɹməns toʊl mi ðət ðɪs ɡɹup wɑz nli ɪn ði ɛmplɔɪ ʌv ðə kɹaʊn ə mʊɹændi, soʊ aɪ dɪskaʊntɪd ðɛɹ wʌn eɪɾɝz ɪnsɪstəns ðəɾ i wɑzn ə mɝsənɛɹi."

"My pardon, Your Majesty, for my mistake," Norry said. "I should have brought this to you sooner. My informants told me that this group was ntly in the employ of the Crown of Murandy, so I discounted their 1 ader's insistence that he wasn't a mercenary."

"ju dɪd wɛl, mæstɝ nɔɹi," ɪleɪn sɛd, stɪl filɪŋ əmjuzd ən nsʌltɪd. ɪt wɑz ɑd haʊ ɔfən wʌn muv bɪtwin ðoʊz tu ɪmoʊʃənz wən meɪtʃɹim kɔθən wɑz ɪnvɑlvd. "laɪt noʊz aɪv bɪn bɪzi ɪnʌf.

"You did well, Master Norry," Elayne said, still feeling amused and nsulted. It was odd how often one moved between those two emotions when Matrim Cauthon was involved. "Light knows I've been busy enough.

bʌt pliz, ɪf sʌmwʌn kleɪmz tə noʊ mi pɝsənəli, ət lis bɹɪŋ ɪt tə bɝdʒɪts ətɛnʃən."

But please, if someone claims to know me personally, at least bring it to Birgitte's attention."

"jɛs, jəɹ mædʒəsti."

"Yes, Your Majesty."

"ɝeɪnʒ ə miɾɪŋ wɪð mæstɝ kɔθən," ʃi sɛd, aɪdli wɪʃɪŋ ʃi hæd taɪm tə ɹaɪɾ ɪm bæk ə lɛɾɝ əz ɪnsʌltɪŋ əz ðə wʌn hid ɹɪɾən hɝ. "tɛl ɪm i mʌs bɹɪŋ θɔɹn wɪð hɪm. tə . . . kip ɪm ɪn laɪn."

"Arrange a meeting with Master Cauthon," she said, idly wishing she had time to write him back a letter as insulting as the one he'd written her. "Tell him he must bring Thorn with him. To . . . keep him in line."

"æz jə wɪʃ, jəɹ mædʒəsti," nɔɹi sɛd wɪð ə kɛɹəktɝɪstɪkli stɪf baʊ. "ɪf aɪ meɪ wɪðdʒɹɔ .

"As you wish, Your Majesty," Norry said with a characteristically stiff bow. "If I may withdraw .

. ."

. ."

ʃi nɑɾəd ɪn θæŋks ən i lɛft, pʊlɪŋ ðə dɔɹ kloʊzd. ɪleɪn hɛl mæts lɛɾɝ aɪdli bɪtwin tu fɪŋɡɝz. kəd ʃi juz mæt, sʌmhaʊ, tə hɛlp əɹ wɪð ðə tʃɹʌbəlz ɛlɹin wɑz meɪkɪŋ? əz ʃid juz ðə bɔɹɾɝlənd-ɝz? əɹ wɑz ðət tu ɑbviəs?

She nodded in thanks and he left, pulling the door closed. Elayne held Mat's letter idly between two fingers. Could she use Mat, somehow, to help her with the troubles Ellorien was making? As she'd used the Borderland-ers? Or was that too obvious?

"waɪ dɪɾ i mɛnʃən bɛlfndɝz, dʒju θɪŋk?" bɝdʒɪɾ æskt.

"Why did he mention bellfounders, do you think?" Birgitte asked.

"ɪt kəd bi sʌmθɪŋ əz sɪmpəl əz niɾɪŋ ə nu bɛl tə ɹɪŋ ði aʊɝ fəɹ ɪz kæmp."

"It could be something as simple as needing a new bell to ring the hour for his camp."

"bʌt jə doʊn θɪŋk ɪts sɪmpəl."

"But you don't think it's simple."

"mæts ɪnvɑlvd," ɪleɪn sɛd. "hi hæz ə weɪ ʌv kɑmpləkeɪɾɪŋ θɪŋz, ən ðə weɪ hi ɹoʊt ðət laɪn meɪks ɪt smɛl laɪk wʌn ə hɪz skimz."

"Mat's involved," Elayne said. "He has a way of complicating things, and the way he wrote that line makes it smell like one of his schemes."

"tʃɹu. ən ɪf i mɪɹli wɑntəɾ ə bɛl, hi kəd wɪn hɪmsɛlf ɪnʌf tə baɪ ɪɾ æftɝ ən aʊɝ dɪsɪŋ."

"True. And if he merely wanted a bell, he could win himself enough to buy it after an hour dicing."

"kʌm naʊ," ɪleɪn sɛd. "hiz nɑt ðət lʌki."

"Come now," Elayne said. "He's not that lucky."

bɝdʒɪt snɔɹɾɪd ɪndə hɝ ti. "ju nid tə peɪ bɛɾɝ ətɛnʃən, ɪleɪn. ðət mæn kəd daɪs wɪð ðə dɑɹk wʌn ən wɪn."

Birgitte snorted into her tea. "You need to pay better attention, Elayne. That man could dice with the Dark One and win."

ɪleɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. soʊlʒɝz, bɝdʒɪɾ ɪnkluɾəd, kəd bi sətʃ ə supɝstɪʃəs lɑt. "meɪk sɝɾən tə hæv ə fju ɛkstʃɹə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən ɑn duɾi wən mæt kʌmz. hi kən bi ɪɡzubɝənt, ən aɪ wʊdnt wɑn ɪm tə meɪk ə sin."

Elayne shook her head. Soldiers, Birgitte included, could be such a superstitious lot. "Make certain to have a few extra Guardswomen on duty when Mat comes. He can be exuberant, and I wouldn't want him to make a scene."

hu ɪz ðɪs mæn?" daɪɛlɪn æskt, saʊndɪŋ kənfjuzd. wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ tu tɑvɝən u ɡɹu ʌp wɪð ɹænd ælθɹ," bɝdʒɪt sɛd, ɡʌlpɪŋ daʊn əɹ ti. ʃid ɡɪvən ʌp dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ waɪl ɪleɪn wɑz pɹɛɡnənt. ət list sʌmwʌn ɛls hæd tə sʌfɝ tu.

Who is this man?" Dyelin asked, sounding confused. One of the other two ta'veren who grew up with Rand al'Thor," Birgitte said, gulping down her tea. She'd given up drinking while Elayne was pregnant. At least someone else had to suffer too.

mæt ɪz ... ə pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli daɪnæmɪk ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl," ɪleɪn sɛd. "hi kən bi vɛɹi jusfəl wən pɹɑpɝli hɑɹnəst. wən hiz nɑt - wɪtʃ ɪz moʊst ə ðə taɪm - hi kən bi ən aʊtʃɹaɪt dɪzæstɝ. bʌt wʌtɛvɝ ɛls kən bi sɛɾ əbaʊt ðə mæn, hi ən ɪz bænd noʊ haʊ tə faɪt."

Mat is ... a particularly dynamic individual," Elayne said. "He can be very useful when properly harnessed. When he is not - which is most of the time - he can be an outright disaster. But whatever else can be said about the man, he and his Band know how to fight."

"jɔɹ gɑnə juz ðɛm, ɑɹən ju?" bɝdʒɪt sɛd, aɪɪŋ əɹ əpɝ-tʃiæɾɪvli.

"You're going to use them, aren't you?" Birgitte said, eyeing her appre-ciatively.

"ʌv kɔɹs," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ænd, fɹəm wʌɾ aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ mæt seɪɪŋ, hiz ə lɑɾ ə kɛɹhinɪn ɪn ðə bænd. ðeɪ ɑɹ neɪɾɪv sʌnz. ɪf aɪ ɝaɪv wɪð ðət sɛkʃən ə ðə bæn əz pɑɹɾ ə maɪ ɑɹmi, pɝhæps ðə tʃɹænzɪʃən wɪl bi iziɝ."

"Of course," Elayne said. "And, from what I remember Mat saying, he has a lot of Cairhienin in the Band. They are native sons. If I arrive with that section of the Band as part of my army, perhaps the transition will be easier."

"soʊ jə ɹɪli də ɪntɛn tə ɡoʊ θɹu wɪð ðɪs?" daɪɛlɪn æskt. "teɪkɪŋ ðə sʌn θɹoʊn? naʊ?"

"So you really do intend to go through with this?" Dyelin asked. "Taking the Sun Throne? Now?"

"ðə wɝl nidz junəɾi," ɪleɪn sɛd, stændɪŋ. "wɪð kɛɹhin, aɪ bɪɡɪn nɪɾɪŋ əs ɔl təɡɛðɝ.

"The world needs unity," Elayne said, standing. "With Cairhien, I begin knitting us all together.

ɹænd ɔlɹɛɾi kəntʃɹoʊlz ɪljən ən tiɹ, ən əz bɑnz tə ði il. wɝ ɔl kənɛktəd."

Rand already controls Illian and Tear, and has bonds to the Aiel. We're all connected."

ʃi ɡlæns tə ðə wɛst, wɛɹ ʃi kəd fil ðət nɑɾ ʌv ɪmoʊʃənz ðət wɑz ɹænd. ði oʊnli θɪŋ ʃi ɛvɝ sɛns fɹəm ɪm ðiz deɪz wɑz ə koʊld æŋɡɝ, bɛɹid dipli. wɑz i ɪn ɑɹæd dumən?

She glanced to the west, where she could feel that knot of emotions that was Rand. The only thing she ever sensed from him these days was a cold anger, buried deeply. Was he in Arad Doman?

ɪleɪn lʌv hɪm. bʌt ʃi dɪdn ɪntɛn tə si ændɝ bɪkʌm mɪɹli ənʌðɝ pɑɹɾ ə ðə dʒɹæɡənz ɛmpaɪɝ. bɪsaɪdz, ɪf ɹænd wɝ tə daɪ ət ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, hu wəd ɹul ðəɾ ɛmpaɪɝ? ɪt kəd bɹeɪk ʌp, bʌt ʃi wɝid ðət sʌmwʌn - dɑɹlɪn, pɝhæps - wəd bi stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə hoʊld ɪt təɡɛðɝ. ɪf soʊ, ændɝ wəd stæn əloʊn bɪtwin ən əɡɹɛsɪv sintʃæn ɛmpaɪɝ tə ðə saʊθwɛst, ɹændz səksɛsɝ tə ðə nɔɹθwɛst ən ðə saʊθist ən ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz junaɪɾəd təɡɛðɝ ɪn ðə nɔɹθ ən nɔɹθist.

Elayne loved him. But she didn't intend to see Andor become merely another part of the Dragon's empire. Besides, if Rand were to die at Shayol Ghul, who would rule that empire? It could break up, but she worried that someone - Darlin, perhaps - would be strong enough to hold it together. If so, Andor would stand alone between an aggressive Seanchan empire to the southwest, Rand's successor to the northwest and the southeast and the Borderlanders united together in the north and northeast.

ʃi kəd nɑt lɛt ðət hæpən. ðə wʊmən ɪn əɹ kɹɪnʒd tə θɪŋk ə plænɪŋ fəɹ ɹændz dɛθ, bʌt ðə kwin kəd nɑt bi soʊ skwimɪʃ. ðə wɝld wɑz tʃeɪnʒɪŋ.

She could not let that happen. The woman in her cringed to think of planning for Rand's death, but the Queen could not be so squeamish. The world was changing.

"aɪ ɹilaɪz ɪɾəl bi dɪfəkəl tə ədmɪnəstɝ tu neɪʃənz," ɪleɪn sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ mʌs hoʊl kɛɹhin.

"I realize it will be difficult to administer two nations," Elayne said. "But I must hold Cairhien.

fəɹ ðə ɡʊɾ ə boʊθ θɹoʊnz."

For the good of both thrones."

ʃi tɝn ən mɛt daɪɛlɪnz aɪz, ən ði oʊldɝ wʊmən nɑɾəd sloʊli. "ɪt simz jə ɑɹ kəmɪɾəd."

She turned and met Dyelin's eyes, and the older woman nodded slowly. "It seems you are committed."

"aɪ æm," ɪleɪn sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ fil aɪm gɑnə nid ɹɪlaɪəbəl jus ə tʃɹævlɪŋ ɪf aɪm gɑnə mænədʒ ɪt. lɛts sɛɾ ʌp ə miɾɪŋ fəɹ mi wɪð sumeɪkoʊ ən æləz. wi nid tə dɪskʌs ðə fjutʃɝ ə ðə kɪn."

"I am," Elayne said. "But I feel I'm going to need reliable use of Traveling if I'm going to manage it. Let's set up a meeting for me with Sumeko and Alise. We need to discuss the future of the Kin."


tʃæptɝ twɛlv


CHAPTER 12

ən ɛmpti ɪŋk bɑɾəl


An Empty Ink Bottle

mɪn sæɾ ɑn ə wɪndoʊ lɛdʒ ɪn ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ, ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ ðə wɔɹmθ. ði æftɝnun bɹiz wɑz ɹɪfɹɛʃɪŋ, leɪɾən ðoʊ ɪt wɑz wɪð hjumɪɾəti ən ðə sɛns ə ðə sɪɾi bɪloʊ. ðə tɛɹənz hæd bɪn kɔlɪŋ ðə wɛðɝ "tʃɪli," wɪtʃ meɪd mɪn smaɪl. haʊ wəd ðiz foʊk ɹɪspɑn tə ə ɡʊɾ ændɔɝən wɪntɝ, wɪð snoʊ paɪld ʌp ət ðə saɪdz ə bɪldɪŋz ən aɪsɪkəlz hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ði ivz?

Min sat on a window ledge in the Stone of Tear, enjoying the warmth. The afternoon breeze was refreshing, laden though it was with humidity and the scents of the city below. The Tairens had been calling the weather "chilly," which made Min smile. How would these folk respond to a good Andoran winter, with snow piled up at the sides of buildings and icicles hanging from the eaves?

ɔl ðət kəd bi sɛɾ ə ðə wɛðɝ leɪtli wɑz ðəɾ ɪt wɑz lɛs swɛltɝɪŋ ðən juʒəwəl. ðə wɔɹmθ ðət mɪn wɑz ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ, haʊɛvɝ, hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə hiɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ.

All that could be said of the weather lately was that it was less sweltering than usual. The warmth that Min was enjoying, however, had nothing to do with the heat in the air.

sʌnlaɪt ʃoʊn əpɑn ðə sɪɾi. ɪn ðə stoʊnz kɔɹtʃjɑɹdz, dɪfɛndɝz ɪn ðɛɹ stʃɹaɪp slivz ən bɹitʃɪz kɛp stɑpɪŋ ən lʊkɪŋ ʌp təwɔɹd ði oʊpən skaɪ. ðə klaʊdz stɪl lɝkt ɑn ðə hɝaɪzən, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ bɹoʊkən ɝaʊn ðə sɪɾi ɪn ən ənnætʃɹəl ɹɪŋ. pɝfəkli sɝkjəlɝ.

Sunlight shone upon the city. In the Stone's courtyards, Defenders in their striped sleeves and breeches kept stopping and looking up toward the open sky. The clouds still lurked on the horizon, but they were broken around the city in an unnatural ring. Perfectly circular.

ðə wɔɹmθ ðət mɪn fɛlt wɑz nɑt kɑz baɪ ðə sʌnlaɪt. haʊ kən jə dʒʌst sɪt ðɛɹ?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd. mɪn tɝn əɹ hɛd. ðə wɪndoʊ wɑz waɪɾ oʊpən, ən ðə wɔlz ə ðə stoʊn wɝ θɪk.

The warmth that Min felt was not caused by the sunlight. How can you just sit there?" Nynaeve demanded. Min turned her head. The window was wide open, and the walls of the Stone were thick.

mɪn sæɾ ɑn ðə wɪndaʊsəl wɪð əɹ niz bɛnt, hɝ bɛɹ oʊɛs tʌtʃɪŋ ðə wɔl ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. hɝ buts ən stɑkɪŋz leɪ ɑn ðə flɔɹ bɪsaɪɾ ə stæk ə bʊks.

Min sat on the windowsill with her knees bent, her bare oes touching the wall on the other side. Her boots and stockings lay on the floor beside a stack of books.

nɪneɪiv peɪs ðə ɹum. ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ hæd wɪθstʊd sidʒəz ən stɔɹmz, wɔɹz ən dɛsəleɪʃən, bʌt mɪn wʌndɝɾ ɪf ɪt hæɾ ɛvɝ sɝvaɪvd ɛni. θɪŋ kwaɪt laɪk nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə ɪn ə pik. ðə dɑɹk-hɛɹɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd spɛn ðə læs θɹi deɪz stɔkɪŋ θɹu ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz laɪk ə kɹæklɪŋ θʌndɝhɛd, ɪntɪmɪdeɪɾɪŋ dɪfɛndɝz, tɛɹəfaɪɪŋ sɝvəns.

Nynaeve paced the room. The Stone of Tear had withstood sieges and storms, wars and desolation, but Min wondered if it had ever survived any. thing quite like Nynaeve al'Meara in a pique. The dark-haired Aes Sedai had spent the last three days stalking through the corridors like a crackling thunderhead, intimidating Defenders, terrifying servants.

"θɹi deɪz," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "θɹi deɪz hiz bɪn ɡɔn! ðə læs bæɾəl lumz, ən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪz mɪsɪŋ."

"Three days," Nynaeve said. "Three days he's been gone! The Last Battle looms, and the Dragon Reborn is missing."

"hiz nɑt mɪsɪŋ," mɪn sɛd sɔfli. "ɹænd noʊz wɛɹ i ɪz."

"He's not missing," Min said softly. "Rand knows where he is."

"ju də əz wɛl," nɪneɪiv sɛd, hɝ vɔɪs kɝt.

"You do as well," Nynaeve said, her voice curt.

"aɪm nɑt liɾɪŋ jə tə hɪm, nɪneɪiv."

"I'm not leading you to him, Nynaeve."

"ænd waɪ nɑt? ʃʊɹli jə kænt - "

"And why not? Surely you can't - "

"hi nidz tə bi əloʊn."

"He needs to be alone."

nɪneɪiv kʌɾ ɔf. ʃi wɔkt oʊvɝ tə ðə kɔɹnɝ teɪbəl ən pɔɹd hɝsɛlf ə kʌp ə tʃɪl tʃɹɛmælkɪŋ blæk. tʃɪl ti. ðət sim soʊ ɑd. ti wɑz mɛn tə bi wɔɹmɪŋ dʊɹɪŋ koʊl deɪz.

Nynaeve cut off. She walked over to the corner table and poured herself a cup of chilled Tremalking black. Chilled tea. That seemed so odd. Tea was meant to be warming during cold days.

mɪn tɝn əɹ aɪz nɔɹθwɝɾ əɡɛn, ɪndə ðə dɪstənt, klaʊd-smʌðɝd heɪz. əz fɑɹ əz ʃi kəd dətɝmən θɹu ðə bɑnd, ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ dɝɛkli ət hɪm. wɑz i ɪn ændɝ, pɝhæps? əɹ ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz? ʃid bɪn tɛmptəd tə juz ðə bɑn tə sik ɪm aʊɾ ət fɝst, wən hid fɛl ðəɾ ɑfəl æŋɡwɪʃ. peɪn dipɝ ðən ðə wunz ɪn ɪz saɪd. æɡəni, æŋɡɝ ən dɪspɛɹ. ɪn ðoʊz moʊməns, ɹænd hæd simd mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ðən i ɛvɝ hæd bɪfɔɹ. nɑɾ ivən ðət naɪt - wən hid nɛlt əbʌv hɝ, stʃɹæŋɡəlɪŋ əɹ wɪð wʌn hænd - hæɾ i bɪn əz fɹaɪɾənɪŋ.

Min turned her eyes northward again, into the distant, cloud-smothered haze. As far as she could determine through the bond, she was looking directly at him. Was he in Andor, perhaps? Or in the Borderlands? She'd been tempted to use the bond to seek him out at first, when he'd felt that awful anguish. Pain deeper than the wounds in his side. Agony, anger and despair. In those moments, Rand had seemed more dangerous than he ever had before. Not even that night - when he'd knelt above her, strangling her with one hand - had he been as frightening.

ən ðən . . .

And then . . .

ʃi smaɪld. ən ðən hæd kʌm ðə wɔɹmθ. ɪt ɹeɪɾieɪtəd fɹəm ðə bɑn laɪk ðə kʌmfɝɾ ʌv ə wɪntɝ hɑɹθ. sʌmθɪŋ wʌndɝfəl wɑz hæpənɪŋ, sʌmθɪŋ ʃid bɪn əweɪɾɪŋ wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ ɪt.

She smiled. And then had come the warmth. It radiated from the bond like the comfort of a winter hearth. Something wonderful was happening, something she'd been awaiting without knowing it.

"ɪt wɪl bi ɔl ɹaɪt, nɪneɪiv," ʃi sɛd.

"It will be all right, Nynaeve," she said.

"haʊ kən jə seɪ ðæt?" ðə wʊmən tʊk ə sɪp ə hɝ ti. "hi dɪdn dɪstʃɹɔɪ ɛbu dɑɹ, bʌt ðət dʌzn min hiz nɑt deɪnʒɝəs. jə hɝd wʌɾ i nɪɹli dɪd tə tɑɹn. hɪz oʊn fɑðɝ, mɪn."

"How can you say that?" The woman took a sip of her tea. "He didn't destroy Ebou Dar, but that doesn't mean he's not dangerous. You heard what he nearly did to Tarn. His own father, Min."

"ə mæn ʃəd nɑt bi kəndɛm fəɹ wʌɾ i 'nɪɹli' dɪd, nɪneɪiv. hi stɑp hɪmsɛlf."

"A man should not be condemned for what he 'nearly' did, Nynaeve. He stopped himself."

"hi dɪdn stɑp hɪmsɛlf ət nætʃɹɪnz bæɹoʊ."

"He didn't stop himself at Natrin's Barrow."

"ðæt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi."

"That was necessary."

"ju dɪdn bɪliv ðəɾ ət ðə taɪm."

"You didn't believe that at the time."

mɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. nɪneɪiv hæd bɪn ɡoʊɾɪŋ əɹ ɪndə ɑɹɡjəməns leɪtli; ʃi sɝɾənli hæd ɡʊd ɹizən tə bi tɛns. hɝ hʌzbənd wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ɪz dɛθ. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn - ə mæn ʃi sɔ əz əɹ tʃɑɹdʒ, stɪl - wɑz wɑndɝɪŋ əloʊn, ən ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ nɪneɪiv kəd du. ən ɪf ðəɹ wɑz wʌn θɪŋ nɪneɪiv heɪɾəd, ɪt wɑz biɪŋ paʊɝləs.

Min took a deep breath. Nynaeve had been goading her into arguments lately; she certainly had good reason to be tense. Her husband was riding toward his death. The Dragon Reborn - a man she saw as her charge, still - was wandering alone, and there was nothing Nynaeve could do. And if there was one thing Nynaeve hated, it was being powerless.

"nɪneɪiv," mɪn sɛd. "ɪf ðɪs læsts mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ, əl lɛd jə tə hɪm. aɪ pɹɑməs."

"Nynaeve," Min said. "If this lasts much longer, I'll lead you to him. I promise."

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ nɛɹoʊɾ əɹ aɪz. " 'mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ?"

The Aes Sedai narrowed her eyes. " 'Much longer?"

"ə fju deɪz."

"A few days."

"ɪn ə fju deɪz i kəd lɛvəl kɛɹhin."

"In a few days he could level Cairhien."

"du jə ɹɪli θɪŋk i wəd də ðæt, nɪneɪiv?" mɪn æsk sɔfli.

"Do you really think he would do that, Nynaeve?" Min asked softly.

"tʃɹuli?"

"Truly?"

"du aɪ?" nɪneɪiv ɡɹɪpt əɹ kʌp ə ti, stɛɹɪŋ daʊn əɾ ɪts kɑntɛns.

"Do I?" Nynaeve gripped her cup of tea, staring down at its contents.

"wʌns aɪ wʊɾə læft ət ði aɪdiə. aɪ nu ɹænd ælθɹ, ən ðə bɔɪ stɪl ɪnsaɪd hɪm. ðə mæn hiz bɪkʌm fɹaɪɾənz mi. aɪ ɔlweɪz toʊld ɪm i niɾəd tə ɡɹoʊ ʌp. ən ðən . . . ən ðən i dɪd." ʃi ʃɪvɝd vɪzəbli.

"Once I would have laughed at the idea. I knew Rand al'Thor, and the boy still inside him. The man he's become frightens me. I always told him he needed to grow up. And then . . . and then he did." She shivered visibly.

mɪn stɑɹɾəd tə ɹɪplaɪ, bʌt moʊʃən dʒɹu hɝ ətɛnʃən. tu meɪɾənz -  sʊɹiəl ən lɹiən - ɡɑɹɾəd ði oʊpən dɔɹweɪ tə ðə hɔlweɪ; ðeɪd tɝn tə wɑtʃ sʌmwʌn əpɹoʊtʃ. ðəɹ wɝ ɔlweɪz meɪɾənz ɝaʊn mɪn, ðiz deɪz.

Min started to reply, but motion drew her attention. Two Maidens -  Surial and Lerian - guarded the open doorway to the hallway; they'd turned to watch someone approach. There were always Maidens around Min, these days.

sɝin nɛmdɑl ɛntɝd ðə smɔl ɹum ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ. mɪnz kɔɹɾɝz ɪn ðə stoʊn wɝ nɑɾ ɪkspænsɪv - ʃi ɹɛɹli juz ðɛm, ɪnstɛd steɪɪŋ wɪð ɹænd. hɝ sɪɾɪŋ ɹum hæɾ ə θɪk blu-ænd- waɪt ɹʌɡ ən ə smɔl tʃɛɹi dɛsk, bʌt nʌθɪŋ ɛls.

Sarene Nemdahl entered the small room a moment later. Min's quarters in the Stone were not expansive - she rarely used them, instead staying with Rand. Her sitting room had a thick blue-and- white rug and a small cherry desk, but nothing else.

sɝin wɔɹ əɹ dɑɹk hɛɹ ɪn ɪts kʌstəmɛɹi biɾɪd bɹeɪdz fɹeɪmɪŋ əɹ nɪɹ-pɝfək feɪs.

Sarene wore her dark hair in its customary beaded braids framing her near-perfect face.

"kædzueɪn sədaɪ," sɝin sɛd, "ʃi hæz niɾ ə ju."

"Cadsuane Sedai," Sarene said, "she has need of you."

"ɪz ðət soʊ?" nɪneɪiv sɛd. "wɛl, pɝhæps kædzueɪn sədaɪ kən - "

"Is that so?" Nynaeve said. "Well, perhaps Cadsuane Sedai can - "

"ɑlɑnə ɪz ɡɔn," sɝin kəntɪnjud, ənɹʌfəld. "vænɪʃt ɹaɪt fɹəm əɹ tʃeɪmbɝz. ðə dɪfɛndɝz, ðeɪ dɪdn si hɝ ɡoʊ, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn ʌv ə ɡeɪtweɪ."

"Alanna is gone," Sarene continued, unruffled. "Vanished right from her chambers. The Defenders, they didn't see her go, and there was no sign of a gateway."

"oʊ. wɛl, lɛts ɡoʊ ðɛn." nɪneɪiv bʌsəld aʊɾ ə ðə tʃeɪmbɝ.

"Oh. Well, let's go then." Nynaeve bustled out of the chamber.

ən aɪm tɛlɪŋ jə ðəɾ aɪ fɛl nʌθɪŋ," kɔɹəl sɛd. ʃi smaɪld, tæpɪŋ ðə saɪɾ ə hɝ noʊz. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ ʃi ɡɑɾ aʊt. ənlɛs jə θɪŋk ʃi sʌmhaʊ ɪnvɛntəd flaɪɪŋ - wɪtʃ aɪ dɛɹɪs wʊdn bi aʊtsaɪd ɹizən, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ səm ʌv wʌɾ əz əkɝd leɪtli."

And I'm telling you that I felt nothing," Corele said. She smiled, tapping the side of her nose. "I don't know how she got out. Unless you think she somehow invented flying - which I daresay wouldn't be outside reason, considering some of what has occurred lately."

ful wʊmən, kædzueɪn θɔt, lɛvəlɪŋ ə flæt stɛɹ ət kɔɹəl. ðə wʊmənz flɪpənsi wɑz pɹɛfɝəbəl tə ðə sɛlf-ɪmpɔɹɾəns ə səm ʌðɝ ɛɛs æədaɪ, bʌt tədeɪ kædzueɪn hædn ðə peɪʃəns fəɹ ɪt.

Fool woman, Cadsuane thought, leveling a flat stare at Corele. The woman's flippancy was preferable to the self-importance of some other Aes aedai, but today Cadsuane hadn't the patience for it.

ðə jɛloʊ ʃɹʌɡd, stɪl smaɪlɪŋ, bʌt sɛd nʌθɪŋ fɝðɝ. kædzueɪn pleɪs hænz ɑn hɪps, sɝveɪɪŋ ðə smɔl tʃeɪmbɝ. ɹum fəɹ ə tʃɹʌŋk tə hoʊl kloʊðɪŋ, ə kɑt fəɹ slipɪŋ ən ə dɛsk. kædzueɪn wʊɾə ɪkspɛktəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ tə dɪmæn mɔɹ, ivən ɪn tiɹ. ʌv kɔɹs, ɑlɑnə dɪdn ɔfən ɹvil əɹ ɪntəmət kənɛkʃən tə ðə dʒɹæɡən. moʊs dɪdnt noʊ ʌv ɪt.

The Yellow shrugged, still smiling, but said nothing further. Cadsuane Placed hands on hips, surveying the small chamber. Room for a trunk to hold clothing, a cot for sleeping and a desk. Cadsuane would have expected Aes Sedai to demand more, even in Tear. Of course, Alanna didn't often rveal her intimate connection to the Dragon. Most didn't know of it.

tu ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ - ɹæfɛlə sɪndəl ən bɛɹə hɑɹkɪn - stʊɾ ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum. bɛɹə sɛd ʃid fɛlt ɑlɑnə tʃænəlɪŋ, bʌt nʌθɪŋ dɪmændɪŋ sɝɾənli nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə kɹieɪɾ ə ɡeɪtweɪ.

Two other Aes Sedai - Rafela Cindal and Bera Harkin - stood at the side of the room. Bera said she'd felt Alanna channeling, but nothing demanding Certainly not enough to create a gateway.

bɝn ðət wʊmən! kædzueɪn hæd θɔɾ ɑlɑnə wɛl ɪn hænd, dɪspaɪt ɹisən stʌbɝnnəs. ʃiɾ ɑbviəsli slɪpt aʊɾ ɪntɛnʃənəli. ðə kloʊðɪŋ fɹəm ðə tʃɹʌŋk wɑz ɡɔn ən ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ dɛsk wɑz moʊsli bɛɹ. oʊnli ən ɛmpti ɪŋk bɑɾəl ɹɪmeɪnd.

Burn that woman! Cadsuane had thought Alanna well in hand, despite recent stubbornness. She'd obviously slipped out intentionally. The clothing from the trunk was gone and the writing desk was mostly bare. Only an empty ink bottle remained.

"ʃi sɛd nʌθɪŋ tə ju?" kædzueɪn sɛd.

"She said nothing to you?" Cadsuane said.

"noʊ, kædzueɪn sədaɪ," bɛɹə ɹɪplaɪd. "wi hævən spoʊkən mɔɹ ðən pæsɪŋ wɝdz ɪn wiks. aɪ. . .

"No, Cadsuane Sedai," Bera replied. "We haven't spoken more than passing words in weeks. I. . .

wɛl, aɪ dɪɾ ɔfən hɪɹ wipɪŋ ɪn əɹ ɹum."

well, I did often hear weeping in her room."

"wʌɾ ɪz ɔl ðə fʌs əbaʊt?" ə nu vɔɪs sɛd. kædzueɪn ɡlænst ət ðə dɔɹweɪ əz nɪneɪiv ɝaɪvd ən mɛt kædzueɪnz stɛɹ. "ʃiz oʊnli wʌn pɝsən, ən soʊ fɑɹ əz aɪ ʌndɝstænd, ʃi wɑz fɹi tə liv wən ʃi wɪʃt."

"What is all the fuss about?" a new voice said. Cadsuane glanced at the doorway as Nynaeve arrived and met Cadsuane's stare. "She's only one person, and so far as I understand, she was free to leave when she wished."

"fɔ," kædzueɪn sɛd. "ðə ɡɝl ɪzənt 'oʊnli wʌn pɝsən.' ʃiz ə tul. ən ɪmpɔɹɾənt wʌn." ʃi ɹitʃt oʊvɝ tə ðə dɛsk, hoʊldɪŋ ʌp ə ʃiɾ ə peɪpɝ ðət ðeɪd faʊn ɪn ðə ɹum. ɪt hæd bɪn foʊldəd wɪð ə blʌd-ɹɛd sil ʌv wæks ɑn wʌn saɪd. "du jə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðɪs?"

"Phaw," Cadsuane said. "The girl isn't 'only one person.' She's a tool. An important one." She reached over to the desk, holding up a sheet of paper that they'd found in the room. It had been folded with a blood-red seal of wax on one side. "Do you recognize this?"

nɪneɪiv fɹaʊnd. "noʊ. ʃəɾ aɪ?"

Nynaeve frowned. "No. Should I?"

laɪɪŋ əɹ tʃɹuθfəl? kædzueɪn heɪɾəd nɑt biɪŋ eɪbəl tə tʃɹʌs ðə wɝdz ə sʌmwʌn u kɔl hɝsɛlf ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. bʌt nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə hæd nɛvɝ hɛl ði oʊθ ɹɑd.

Lying or truthful? Cadsuane hated not being able to trust the words of someone who called herself an Aes Sedai. But Nynaeve al'Meara had never held the Oath Rod.

ðoʊz aɪz lʊk dʒɛnjəwənli kənfjuzd. nɪneɪiv ʃəd bi tʃɹʌstwɝði; ʃi pɹaɪɾɪd hɝsɛlf ɑn əɹ ɑnəsti. ənlɛs ðət wɑz ə fɹʌnt. ənlɛs ʃi wɑz blæk.

Those eyes looked genuinely confused. Nynaeve should be trustworthy; she prided herself on her honesty. Unless that was a front. Unless she was Black.

kɛɹfəl, ʃi θɔt. jəl ɛn ʌp əz dɪstʃɹʌsfəl əz ðə bɔɪ ɪz. nɪneɪiv hædnt ɡɪvən ɑlɑnə ðə noʊt, wɪtʃ ɪlɪməneɪɾəd əɹ læst ɡʊd θɪɹi ɑn ɪts ɔɹədʒən.

Careful, she thought. You'll end up as distrustful as the boy is. Nynaeve hadn't given Alanna the note, which eliminated her last good theory on its origin.

"soʊ, wʌɾ ɪz ɪt, kædzueɪn sədaɪ?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd. ət list ʃi juz ði ɑnɝɪfɪk; kædzueɪn nɪɹli tʃaɪɾɪd ðə ɡɝl fəɹ əɹ toʊn. bʌt, tʃɹuθ bi toʊld, ʃi fɛlt əz fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd əz nɪneɪiv dɪd. ðəɹ wɝ taɪmz wən sətʃ ɪmoʊʃənz wɝ dʒʌstəfaɪd. feɪsɪŋ ði ɛn ə ðə wɝld wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn kəmplitli aʊɾ ə kəntʃɹoʊl wɑz wʌn ə ðɛm.

"So, what is it, Cadsuane Sedai?" Nynaeve demanded. At least she used the honorific; Cadsuane nearly chided the girl for her tone. But, truth be told, she felt as frustrated as Nynaeve did. There were times when such emotions were justified. Facing the end of the world with the Dragon Reborn completely out of control was one of them.

"aɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ," kædzueɪn sɛd. "ðə lɛɾɝ wɑz oʊpən ɪn heɪst - ðə peɪpɝ wɑz tɔɹn. ɪt wɑz dʒɹɑpt ɑn ðə flɔɹ, ən ðə noʊɾ ɪnsaɪd teɪkən, əlɔŋ wɪð kloʊðɪŋ ən ɪmɝdʒənsi aɪɾəmz."

"I'm not sure," Cadsuane said. "The letter was opened in haste - the paper was torn. It was dropped on the floor, and the note inside taken, along with clothing and emergency items."

"bʌt waɪ dʌz ɪt mæɾɝ?" nɪneɪiv æskt. bɪhaɪn hɝ, mɪn slɪpt ɪndə ðə ɹum, tu meɪɾənz teɪkɪŋ ʌp pəzɪʃənz baɪ ðə dɔɹ. hæd mɪn jɛt fɪɡjɝɾ aʊt ðə ɹil ɹizən ði il tʃɹeɪl hɝ?

"But why does it matter?" Nynaeve asked. Behind her, Min slipped into the room, two Maidens taking up positions by the door. Had Min yet figured out the real reason the Aiel trailed her?

"bɪkɔz, nɪneɪiv," mɪn sɛd. "ʃi ɪz ə pæθweɪ tə hɪm."

"Because, Nynaeve," Min said. "She is a pathway to him."

nɪneɪiv snɪft. "ʃiz bɪn noʊ mɔɹ hɛlpfəl ðən ju, mɪn."

Nynaeve sniffed. "She's been no more helpful than you, Min."

əz pɝsweɪsɪv əz jə kən bi, nɪneɪiv," kædzueɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "ðə ʃædoʊ hæz minz tə meɪk pipəl mɔɹ fɔɹθkʌmɪŋ."

As persuasive as you can be, Nynaeve," Cadsuane said dryly, "the Shadow has means to make people more forthcoming."

nɪneɪiv blʌʃt fjʊɹiəsli, ðən bɪɡæn mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. æl- ænə kəd pɔɪn ðə weɪ tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ɪf eɪdʒəns ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn hæd teɪkən hɝ, ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ haɪɾɪŋ ɹænd fɹəm ðɛm. ðɛɹ tʃɹæps hæd bɪn dɛdli ɪnʌf wən ðeɪd niɾəd tə koʊks ən lʊɹ ɪm ɪndə ðɛm.

Nynaeve blushed furiously, then began muttering under her breath. Al- anna could point the way to the Dragon Reborn. If agents of the Dark One had taken her, there would be no hiding Rand from them. Their traps had been deadly enough when they'd needed to coax and lure him into them.

"wiv bɪn fulz," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ðɛɹ ʃʊɾə bɪn ə hʌnʒɹəd meɪɾənz ɡɑɹɾɪŋ hɝ."

"We've been fools," Nynaeve said. "There should have been a hundred Maidens guarding her."

"ðə fɔɹseɪkən əv noʊn wɛɹ tə faɪn ɪm bɪfɔɹ," kædzueɪn sɛd, ðoʊ ɪnwɝdli ʃi əɡɹid. ʃi ʃʊɾə sin ɑlɑnə bɛɾɝ wɑtʃt. "æn hiz sɝvaɪvd. ðɪs ɪz sɪmpli wʌn mɔɹ θɪŋ tə bi əwɛɹ ʌv." ʃi saɪd. "kæn sʌmwʌn bɹɪŋ əs səm ti?"

"The Forsaken have known where to find him before," Cadsuane said, though inwardly she agreed. She should have seen Alanna better watched. "And he has survived. This is simply one more thing to be aware of." She sighed. "Can someone bring us some tea?"

bɛɹə wɑz æktʃəli  ðə wʌn u wɛn tə fɛtʃ ɪt, ðoʊ kædzueɪn hædn teɪkən ɛni kɛɹ tə kʌltəveɪɾ ɪnfluəns wɪð ðə wʊmən. wɛl, ə ɹɛpjəteɪʃən wɑz wɝθ sʌmθɪŋ, ɪɾ əpɪɹd.

Bera was actually the one who went to fetch it, though Cadsuane hadn't taken any care to cultivate influence with the woman. Well, a reputation was worth something, it appeared.

bɛɹə ɹɪtɝnd ʃɔɹtli; kædzueɪn hæd stɛpt aʊɾ ɪndə ðə hɔl tə θɪŋk. ʃi æksɛptɪd ðə kʌp ən bɹeɪs hɝsɛlf fəɹ ðə tiz bɪɾɝ teɪst -  ʃiɾ æsk fəɹ ɪt pɑɹʃəli kəz ʃi niɾəd ə moʊmən tə θɪŋk, ən ən ɛmpti-hændəd wʊmən ɔfən lʊk nɝvəs.

Bera returned shortly; Cadsuane had stepped out into the hall to think. She accepted the cup and braced herself for the tea's bitter taste -  she'd asked for it partially because she needed a moment to think, and an empty-handed woman often looked nervous.

ʃi ɹeɪz ðə kʌp tə hɝ lɪps. wʌt nɛkst? æsk ðə dɪfɛndɝz ət ðə ɡeɪɾ ə ðə stoʊn? læs naɪt, ɑlɑnə - æftɝ biɪŋ pɹɑɾɪd - hæd kənfɝm ðəɾ ælθɹ wɑz stɪl ɪn ðə seɪm pleɪs. ʌp nɔɹθ, ændɝ pɝhæps. fəɹ θɹi deɪz. wʌt wɑz ðə ful bɔɪ -  kædzueɪn fɹoʊz. ðə ti teɪstəd ɡʊd.

She raised the cup to her lips. What next? Ask the Defenders at the gate of the Stone? Last night, Alanna - after being prodded - had confirmed that al'Thor was still in the same place. Up north, Andor perhaps. For three days. What was the fool boy -  Cadsuane froze. The tea tasted good.

ɪt wɑz wʌndɝfəl, əz ə mæɾɝ ə fækt. pɝfəkli swiɾənd wɪð hʌni. feɪn bɪɾɝnəs ən ə ɹɪlæksɪŋ fleɪvɝ. ɪt hæd bɪn wiks, pɝhæps mʌnθs, sɪns kædzueɪn hæd teɪstəd ti ðət wɑzn spɔɪld.

It was wonderful, as a matter of fact. Perfectly sweetened with honey. Faint bitterness and a relaxing flavor. It had been weeks, perhaps months, since Cadsuane had tasted tea that wasn't spoiled.

mɪn ɡæspt, tɝnɪŋ ʃɑɹpli təwɔɹd ðə nɔɹðɝn kɔɹɾɝ ə ðə sɪɾi. ðə tu meɪɾənz ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ wɝ ɡɔn ɪn ə hɑɹtbit, dæʃɪŋ daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ. kædzueɪnz səspɪʃənz wɝ kənfɝmd; ðɛɹ kɛɹfəl wɑtʃ ə mɪn hæd bɪn lɛs əbaʊt pɹətɛktɪŋ əɹ ən mɔɹ əbaʊt wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ saɪnz ʌv...

Min gasped, turning sharply toward the northern quarter of the city. The two Maidens in the doorway were gone in a heartbeat, dashing down the hallway. Cadsuane's suspicions were confirmed; their careful watch of Min had been less about protecting her and more about watching for signs of...

"hiz hɪɹ," mɪn sɛd sɔfli.

"He's here," Min said softly.


tʃæptɝ θɝtin


CHAPTER 13

fəɹ wʌɾ əz bɪn ɹɔt


For What Has Been Wrought

mɪn bɝs fɹəm ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl ɡeɪɾ ɑn ði istɝn saɪɾ ə ðə stoʊn ən dæʃt əkɹɔs ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. wʌt sim laɪk ən ɪntaɪɝ klænz wɝθ ʌv il flʌɾəd aʊt bɪhaɪn hɝ, bɹeɪkɪŋ ɝaʊn mɪn laɪk dɪɹ bɹeɪkɪŋ ɝaʊn ən oʊk. ðeɪ wiv bɪtwin stɑɹɾəld dɪfɛndɝz ən ɡɹumz, muvɪŋ wɪð ɡɹeɪs ən spid təwɔɹd ðə wɔl.

Min burst from the Dragonwall Gate on the eastern side of the Stone and dashed across the courtyard. What seemed like an entire clan's worth of Aiel flooded out behind her, breaking around Min like deer breaking around an oak. They weaved between startled Defenders and grooms, moving with grace and speed toward the wall.

ɪt wɑz ɡɔlɪŋ haʊ izəli ðeɪ aʊtpeɪst əɹ - jɪɹz əɡoʊ, ʃid pɹaɪɾɪd hɝsɛlf ɑn biɪŋ eɪbəl tə biɾ ɛni bɔɪ ʃi nu ɪn ən ɑnəs fʊtʃɹeɪs. naʊ . . . wɛl, tu mɛni mʌnθs spɛn pɪkɪŋ θɹu bʊks, pɝhæps.

It was galling how easily they outpaced her - years ago, she'd prided herself on being able to beat any boy she knew in an honest footrace. Now . . . well, too many months spent picking through books, perhaps.

ʃi stɪl aʊtpeɪs ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, hu wɝ bɹaɪɾəld baɪ ðɛɹ nid tə meɪnteɪn pɹɑpɝ dɪkɔɹəm.

She still outpaced the Aes Sedai, who were bridled by their need to maintain proper decorum.

mɪn hæd lɔŋ əɡoʊ tɔst əsaɪɾ ɔl sɛns ə dɪkɔɹəm fəɹ əɹ taʊɝɪŋ ʃifɝɾɝ. ən soʊ ʃi ɹæn, θæŋkfəl fəɹ əɹ bɹitʃɪz ən buts, meɪkɪŋ fəɹ ðə ɡeɪt.

Min had long ago tossed aside all sense of decorum for her towering sheepherder. And so she ran, thankful for her breeches and boots, making for the gate.

ən ðəɹ i wɑz. ʃi pʊld ʌp ʃɑɹpli, lʊkɪŋ θɹu ən oʊpən kɑləm ʌv il ɪn keɪɾɪnsɝ təwɔɹd ðə mæn hɪmsɛlf, stændɪŋ ən spikɪŋ wɪð tu dɪfɛndɝz u wɝ pɑɹɾ ə ðə wɔl ɡɑɹd.

And there he was. She pulled up sharply, looking through an open column of Aiel in cadin'sor toward the man himself, standing and speaking with two Defenders who were part of the wall guard.

hi ɡlænst əɾ əɹ əz ʃi ɡɹu kloʊs; hi kəd fil əɹ kʌmɪŋ, əz ʃi fɛl hɪm.

He glanced at her as she grew close; he could feel her coming, as she felt him.

ɹænd hæd faʊn ən oʊld, lɔŋ bɹaʊn kloʊk sʌmwɛɹ. ɪt hæd slivz laɪk ə koʊt, ðoʊ ɪt fɛl lus fɹəm ðə ʃoʊldɝz. ʌndɝniθ ɪt, hi hæɾ ɑn ə ʃɝɾ ən faɪn blæk tʃɹaʊzɝz.

Rand had found an old, long brown cloak somewhere. It had sleeves like a coat, though it fell loose from the shoulders. Underneath it, he had on a shirt and fine black trousers.

naʊ ðəɾ i wɑz kloʊz, ðə wɔɹmθ θɹu ðə bɑn simd oʊvɝwɛlmɪŋ. kʊdn ði ʌðɝz si ɪt? ɪt meɪɾ əɹ wɑnə ɹeɪz əɹ ɑɹm ən ʃeɪɾ əɹ aɪz, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə æktʃəli  si.

Now that he was close, the warmth through the bond seemed overwhelming. Couldn't the others see it? It made her want to raise her arm and shade her eyes, though there was nothing to actually see.

ɪt wɑz dʒʌs ðə bɑnd. ɪksɛpt . . . ði ɛɹ dɪd sim tə dɪstɔɹɾ ɝaʊn hɪm. wɑz ðəɾ ə tʃɹɪk ə ðə sʌnlaɪt? nu vjuɪŋz spʌn ɝaʊn ɪz hɛd. ʃi nɔɹməli ɪɡnɔɹd ðoʊz, bʌt ʃi kʊdn də soʊ naʊ. ən oʊpən kævɝn, ɡeɪpɪŋ laɪk ə maʊθ. blʌdsteɪn ɹɑks. tu dɛd mɛn ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, sɝaʊndəd baɪ ɹæŋks ən ɹæŋks ə tʃɹɑləks, ə paɪp wɪð smoʊk kɝlɪŋ fɹəm ɪt.

It was just the bond. Except . . . the air did seem to distort around him. Was that a trick of the sunlight? New viewings spun around his head. She normally ignored those, but she couldn't do so now. An open cavern, gaping like a mouth. Bloodstained rocks. Two dead men on the ground, surrounded by ranks and ranks of Trollocs, a pipe with smoke curling from it.

ɹænd mɛɾ əɹ ɡeɪz, ən - dɪspaɪt ðə bɑnd - ʃi wɑz əmeɪzd ət wʌt ʃi sɔ ɪn hɪm. ðoʊz ɡɹeɪ dʒɛmstoʊn aɪz ə hɪz wɝ dipɝ. ðəɹ wɝ feɪn ɹɪŋkəlz ɝaʊn ðɛm. hæd ðoʊz bɪn ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ? ʃʊɹli hi wɑz tu jʌŋ fəɹ ðæt.

Rand met her gaze, and - despite the bond - she was amazed at what she saw in him. Those gray gemstone eyes of his were deeper. There were faint wrinkles around them. Had those been there before? Surely he was too young for that.

ðoʊz aɪz dɪd nɑt lʊk jʌŋ. mɪn fɛlt ə moʊmən ə pænɪk əz ɪz aɪz hɛl hɝz. wɑz ðɪs ðə seɪm mæn? hæd ðə ɹænd ʃi lʌv bɪn stoʊlən əweɪ, ɹipleɪst wɪð ən eɪntʃən fɔɹs ʌv ə mæn ʃi kəd nɛvɝ noʊ əɹ ʌndɝstænd? hæd ʃi lɔst ɪm æftɝ ɔl?

Those eyes did not look young. Min felt a moment of panic as his eyes held hers. Was this the same man? Had the Rand she loved been stolen away, replaced with an ancient force of a man she could never know or understand? Had she lost him after all?

ən ðən i smaɪld, ən ði aɪz - dip ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd bɪkʌm -  wɝ hɪz. ðət smaɪl wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ʃid bɪn weɪɾɪŋ ə vɛɹi lɔŋ taɪm tə si əɡɛn. ɪt wɑz naʊ mʌtʃ mɔɹ kɑnfəɾənt ðən ðə wʌn hid ʃoʊn əɹ dʊɹɪŋ ðɛɹ ɝli deɪz təɡɛðɝ, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl vʌlnɝəbəl. ɪt lɛɾ əɹ si ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm ðəɾ ʌðɝz wɝ nɛvɝ əlaʊd.

And then he smiled, and the eyes - deep though they had become -  were his. That smile was something she'd been waiting a very long time to see again. It was now much more confident than the one he'd shown her during their early days together, yet it was still vulnerable. It let her see a part of him that others were never allowed.

ðət pɑɹt wɑz ðə juθ, sʌmhaʊ ɪnəsən stɪl. ʃi ɹæn ʌp tə hɪm ən sizd ɪm ɪn ən ɛmbɹeɪs.

That part was the youth, somehow innocent still. She ran up to him and seized him in an embrace.

"ju wʊl-hɛɾəd ful! θɹi deɪz? wʌɾ əv jə bɪn duɪŋ fəɹ θɹi deɪz}"

"You wool-headed fool! Three days? What have you been doing for three days}"

"ɪɡzɪstɪŋ, mɪn," hi sɛd, ɹæpɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɝ.

"Existing, Min," he said, wrapping his arms around her.

"aɪ wɑzn əwɛɹ ðət wɑz sətʃ ə dɪfəkəl tæsk."

"I wasn't aware that was such a difficult task."

"ɪɾ əz bɪn fəɹ mi ət taɪmz." hi fɛl saɪlənt, ən ʃi wɑz kɑntɛn tə hoʊl hɪm. jɛs, ðɪs wɑz ðə seɪm mæn. tʃeɪnʒd - ən fəɹ ðə bɛɾɝ - bʌt stɪl ɹænd. ʃi klʌŋ tə hɪm. ʃi dɪdn kɛɹ ðət pipəl wɝ ɡæðɝɪŋ, mɔɹ ən mɔɹ ə ðɛm. lɛɾ əm wɑtʃ.

"It has been for me at times." He fell silent, and she was content to hold him. Yes, this was the same man. Changed - and for the better - but still Rand. She clung to him. She didn't care that people were gathering, more and more of them. Let them watch.

faɪnəli ʃi ɛksheɪld, ɹɪlʌktənli pʊlɪŋ bæk. "ɹænd, ɑlɑnə ɪz ɡɔn. ʃi vænɪʃt ɝliɝ tədeɪ."

Finally she exhaled, reluctantly pulling back. "Rand, Alanna is gone. She vanished earlier today."

"jɛs. aɪ fɛlt əɹ ɡoʊ. nɔɹθwɝd sʌmwɛɹ. ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, pɝhæps ɝæfəl."

"Yes. I felt her go. Northward somewhere. The Borderlands, perhaps Arafel."

"ʃi kəd bi juzd əɡɛns ju, tə faɪnd wɛɹ jə ɑɹ." hi smaɪld. laɪt, bʌɾ ɪt fɛlt ɡʊd tə si ðəɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn ɪz feɪs əɡɛn! "ðə ʃædoʊ dʌz nɑt niɾ əɹ tə faɪn mi, mɪn, nɔɹ wɪl ɪɾ ɛvɝ əɡɛn. ɔl ɪts aɪz ɑɹ fɪks dɝɛkli əpɑn mi, ən wɪl bi əntɪl aɪ blaɪn ðɛm."

"She could be used against you, to find where you are." He smiled. Light, but it felt good to see that expression on his face again! "The Shadow does not need her to find me, Min, nor will it ever again. All its eyes are fixed directly upon me, and will be until I blind them."

"wʌt? bʌt ɹænd - "

"What? But Rand - "

'ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt, mɪn. ðə taɪm wən ɪt kəd saɪləns mi kwaɪətli - ən ðɛɹfɔɹ wɪn - hæz pæst.

'It's all right, Min. The time when it could silence me quietly - and therefore win - has passed.

ðə kɑnfɹənteɪʃən ɪz əʃʊɹɾ ən ðə skɹim ðət bɪɡɪnz ði ævəlæntʃ əz bɪn saʊndəd."

The confrontation is assured and the scream that begins the avalanche has been sounded."

hi simd əfaɪɹ wɪð laɪf. ðə θɹɪl ʌv ɪt wɑz ɪntɑksɪkeɪɾɪŋ. hi lɛft ən ɑɹm ɝaʊn əɹ - ði ɑɹm ðəɾ ɛndəɾ ɪn ə stʌmp - əz i tɝn tə ɹəɡɑɹd ði il. "aɪ hæv toʊ." ðoʊ ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd bɪhaɪn əm wɑz ɪn keɪɑs, ði il stʊd kwaɪətli.

He seemed afire with life. The thrill of it was intoxicating. He left an arm around her - the arm that ended in a stump - as he turned to regard the Aiel. "I have toh." Though the courtyard behind them was in chaos, the Aiel stood quietly.

ðeɪ wɝ ɹɛɾi fəɹ ðɪs, mɪn θɔt. ði il wɝn hɑstəl, ɪɡzækli bʌt ðeɪ dɪdnt ʃɛɹ ði ɪksaɪtmən ə ðə dɪfɛndɝz. ðə tɛɹənz θɔt ɹænd hæd ɹɪtɝn tə liɾ əm tə ðə læs bæɾəl.

They were ready for this, Min thought. The Aiel weren't hostile, exactly but they didn't share the excitement of the Defenders. The Tairens thought Rand had returned to lead them to the Last Battle.

"ɪn ðə weɪst," ɹəɑɹk sɛd, stɛpɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, "ðɛɹ ɪz ən ænəməl. ðə miɡɝlɪŋ. ɪt lʊks mʌtʃ laɪk ə ɹæt, bʌɾ ɪts fɑɹ mɔɹ stupəd. ɪf jə pleɪs ɪt nɪɹ ɡɹeɪn, ɪɾəl ɡoʊ stʃɹeɪt təwɔɹɾ ɪt, ɹəɡɑɹdləs ə ðə deɪnʒɝ. noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ mɛni taɪmz ɪt fɔlz ɪn ə tʃɹɛntʃ bɪtwin ɪtsɛlf ən ðə fuɾ ɪɾəl ɹɪpit ðə seɪm ækʃən ɪf jə muv ɪt bæk tə ðə stɑɹt. il tʃɪlʒɹən əmjuz ðɛmsɛlvz wɪð ðə ɡeɪm." hi stʌɾid ɹænd. "aɪ hæd nɑt θɔt jə wəd bi ə miɡɝlɪŋ, ɹænd ælθɹ."

"In the Waste," Rhuarc said, stepping forward, "there is an animal. The meegerling. It looks much like a rat, but it is far more stupid. If you place it near grain, it will go straight toward it, regardless of the danger. No matter how many times it falls in a trench between itself and the food it will repeat the same action if you move it back to the start. Aiel children amuse themselves with the game." He studied Rand. "I had not thought you would be a meegerling, Rand al'Thor."

"aɪ pɹɑməs əl nɛvɝ liv jə əɡɛn," ɹænd sɛd. "nɑɾ ə maɪ oʊn tʃɔɪs, ən nɑt wɪθaʊɾ ɪnfɔɹmɪŋ ən - ɪf ðeɪ kənsɛnt - bɹɪŋɪŋ meɪɾənz əz ə ɡɑɹd."

"I promise I will never leave you again," Rand said. "Not of my own choice, and not without informing and - if they consent - bringing Maidens as a guard."

ði il dɪd nɑt bʌdʒ. "ðɪs wɪl pɹɪvɛn jə fɹəm ɝnɪŋ mɔɹ toʊ" ɹəɑɹk sɛd. "ɪt wɪl nɑt tʃeɪnʒ wʌɾ əz ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ. ən pɹɑməsəz əv bɪn meɪd bɪfɔɹ."

The Aiel did not budge. "This will prevent you from earning more toh" Rhuarc said. "It will not change what has gone before. And promises have been made before."

"ðɪs ɪz tʃɹu," ɹænd sɛd, miɾɪŋ ɹəɑɹks aɪz. "aɪ wɪl mit maɪ toʊ, ðɛn."

"This is true," Rand said, meeting Rhuarc's eyes. "I will meet my toh, then."

sʌmθɪŋ pæs bɪtwin ðɛm, sʌmθɪŋ mɪn dɪdn ʌndɝstænd, ən ði il pɑɹɾəd, lʊkɪŋ mɔɹ ɹɪlækst. twɛnti meɪɾənz keɪm fɔɹwɝd tə ækt əz ə ɡɑɹɾ ɝaʊn ɹænd. ɹəɑɹk ɹitʃɹiɾəd wɪð ði ʌðɝz, dʒɔɪnɪŋ ə smɔl ɡɹup ʌv waɪz wʌnz u wɑtʃt fɹəm ðə pɝɪfɝi.

Something passed between them, something Min didn't understand, and the Aiel parted, looking more relaxed. Twenty Maidens came forward to act as a guard around Rand. Rhuarc retreated with the others, joining a small group of Wise Ones who watched from the periphery.

"ɹænd?" mɪn sɛd.

"Rand?" Min said.

"ɪt wɪl bi ɔl ɹaɪt," hi sɛd, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡɹɪm kæs tə hɪz ɪmoʊʃənz. "ðɪs wɑz wʌn ə ðə θɪŋz aɪ niɾəd tə fɪks. wʌn ə mɛni." hi tʊk ɪz ɑɹm fɹəm ɝaʊn əɹ ən skæn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, filɪŋ hɛzɪɾənt, əz ɪf i wɝ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ. wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz, hi dɪdn si ɪt, soʊ hi bɪɡæn tə stʃɹaɪd təwɔɹd kɪŋ dɑɹlɪn, hu hæd dʒʌst ɝaɪvd ɪn ə hɝi.

"It will be all right," he said, though there was a grim cast to his emotions. "This was one of the things I needed to fix. One of many." He took his arm from around her and scanned the courtyard, feeling hesitant, as if he were looking for something. Whatever it was, he didn't see it, so he began to stride toward King Darlin, who had just arrived in a hurry.

kɪŋ dɑɹlɪn baʊd, hæn ɑn ðə pɑməl ə hɪz nɛɹoʊ saɪd-sɔɹd. "maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. ɑɹ wi tə mɑɹtʃ, faɪnəli?"

King Darlin bowed, hand on the pommel of his narrow side-sword. "My Lord Dragon. Are we to march, finally?"

"wɔk wɪð mi, dɑɹlɪn," ɹænd sɛɾ ɪn ɹɪplaɪ əz i muv θɹu ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. "ðɛɹ ɪz mʌtʃ tə du. hu ɛls ɪz hɪɹ? nɛɹɪʃmə, flɪn. ɛksələnt." hi nɑɾəd tə ðə tu blæk-koʊɾəd æʃəmən u ɝaɪvd əɾ ə ɹʌn. "jɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ? ɑ, ðəɹ ðeɪ kʌm. wɛl, ðət wɪl bi nɛkst. kaɪ-ni, wəd jə bi soʊ kaɪn əz tə ɡæðɝ mi səm mɛsənʒɝz?"

"Walk with me, Darlin," Rand said in reply as he moved through the courtyard. "There is much to do. Who else is here? Narishma, Flinn. Excellent." He nodded to the two black-coated Asha'man who arrived at a run. "Your Aes Sedai? Ah, there they come. Well, that will be next. Kai-nea, would you be so kind as to gather me some messengers?"

wʌn ə ðə meɪɾənz - ə wʊmən wɪð ɑdli dɑɹk hɛɹ fəɹ ən il - ɹæn əz ɔf tə də əz ɹɪkwɛstɪd.

One of the Maidens - a woman with oddly dark hair for an Aiel - ran as off to do as requested.

mɪn fɹaʊnd, kipɪŋ peɪs wɪð ɹænd ən dɑɹlɪn ðə tu æʃəmən fɛl ɪndə stɛp bɪhaɪnd. nɪneɪiv ən mɛɹaɪs lɛd ðə ɡɹup ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðeɪ stɑpt wən ðeɪ sɔ ɹænd əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ, əz ɪf tə lɛɾ ɪm bi ðə wʌn u keɪm tə mit ðɛm. ðeɪ pʊl təɡɛðɝ ɪn ə klʌmp, fɪdlɪŋ wɪð ðɛɹ kloʊðɪŋ, lʊk-ni mɔɹ ənsɛɾəld ðən ɛɛs sədaɪ nɔɹməli dɪd.

Min frowned, keeping pace with Rand and Darlin the two Asha'man fell into step behind. Nynaeve and Merise led the group of Aes Sedai. They stopped when they saw Rand approaching, as if to let him be the one who came to meet them. They pulled together in a clump, fiddling with their clothing, look-ne more unsettled than Aes Sedai normally did.

ɹænd kɹɔs ðə bʌsəlɪŋ, oʊpən kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, wɔkɪŋ ɪndə ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv ðə stoʊnz taʊɝɪŋ fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃənz, ðən stɛpt ʌp tə ðɛm.

Rand crossed the bustling, open courtyard, walking into the shadow of the Stone's towering fortifications, then stepped up to them.

"ɹæn ælθɹ," nɪneɪiv sɛd, foʊldɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz əz i wɔkt ʌp tə ðɛm. "ju ɑɹ - "

"Rand al'Thor," Nynaeve said, folding her arms as he walked up to them. "You are - "

'æn ɪɾiət?" ɹænd fɪnɪʃt, saʊndɪŋ əmjuzd. "æn ɛɹəɡən ful? ən ɪmpʌlsɪv, wʊl-hɛɾəd bɔɪ ɪn niɾ ʌv ə saʊn ɪɹ-bɑksɪŋ?" "ɝ. jɛs."

'An idiot?" Rand finished, sounding amused. "An arrogant fool? An impulsive, wool-headed boy in need of a sound ear-boxing?" "Er. Yes."

"ɔl tʃɹu, nɪneɪiv," hi sɛd. "aɪ si ɪt, naʊ. pɝhæps aɪv faɪnəli ɡeɪn ə pɔɹʃən ʌv wɪzdəm. aɪ də θɪŋk jə nid səm nu ɪnsʌls, haʊɛvɝ. ðə wʌnz jə jus ɑɹ wɛɹɪŋ aʊt laɪk læs jɪɹz leɪs.

"All true, Nynaeve," he said. "I see it, now. Perhaps I've finally gained a portion of wisdom. I do think you need some new insults, however. The ones you use are wearing out like last year's lace.

sʌmwʌn sɛn fəɹ kædzueɪn. aɪ pɹɑməs nɑt tə ɛksəkjut hɝ."

Someone send for Cadsuane. I promise not to execute her."

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ simd ʃɑk baɪ hɪz bɹʌsk toʊn, bʌt mɪn smaɪld. hɪz kɑnfəɾəns hæd sɝdʒd əɡɛn fɑloʊɪŋ ðə kɑnfɹənteɪʃən wɪð ði il. ɪt wɑz supɹiməli sæɾɪsfaɪɪŋ tə si hɪm dɪsɑɹm ɛɛs sədaɪ, əbdʒɛkʃənz ən kɑndəmneɪʃənz daɪɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ lɪps. mɛɹaɪs sɛn ə sɝvən tə fɛtʃ kædzueɪn.

The Aes Sedai seemed shocked by his brusque tone, but Min smiled. His confidence had surged again following the confrontation with the Aiel. It was supremely satisfying to see him disarm Aes Sedai, objections and condemnations dying on their lips. Merise sent a servant to fetch Cadsuane.

"nɛɹɪʃmə," ɹænd sɛd, tɝnɪŋ. "aɪ nid jə tə vɪzət ðət bɔɹɾɝləndɝ ɑɹmi ðət keɪm lʊkɪŋ fəɹ mi.

"Narishma," Rand said, turning. "I need you to visit that Borderlander army that came looking for me.

aɪm əsumɪŋ ɪts stɪl ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ. tɛl ðə liɾɝz ðəɹ ðəɾ aɪ æksɛp ðɛɹ tɝmz ən wɪl kʌm ɪn ə fju deɪz tə mit wɪð ðɛm."

I'm assuming it's still in Far Madding. Tell the leaders there that I accept their terms and will come in a few days to meet with them."

"maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən?" nɛɹɪʃmə sɛd. "ɪz ðət pɹuɾənt, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðə neɪtʃɝ ə ðət pleɪs?"

"My Lord Dragon?" Narishma said. "Is that prudent, considering the nature of that place?"

"pɹuɾənt? pɹuɾəns ɪz fəɹ ðoʊz u ɪntɛn tə lɪv lɔŋ laɪvz, nɛɹɪʃmə. dɑɹlɪn, aɪ nid ðə haɪ lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz laɪn ʌp tə ɹəsiv mi. wʌn ə ðiz ɝaɪvɪŋ mɛsənʒɝz ʃəd bi səfɪʃən fəɹ ðə tæsk. ɔlsoʊ, poʊst wɝd ðət ðə waɪt taʊɝ əz bɪn ɹiunəfaɪd, ən ðəɾ ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ ɪz ði æmɪɝlɪn sit."

"Prudent? Prudence is for those who intend to live long lives, Narishma. Darlin, I need the High Lords and Ladies lined up to receive me. One of these arriving messengers should be sufficient for the task. Also, post word that the White Tower has been reunified, and that Egwene al'Vere is the Amyrlin Seat."

"wʌt?" mɛɹaɪs sɛd. sɛvɹəl ə ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡæspt. ɹænd," mɪn sɛd. "aɪ daʊt ði æmɪɝlɪn wɪl bi pliz tə hæv jə pʌbləsaɪzɪŋ ðə dɪvɪʒən."

"What?" Merise said. Several of the other Aes Sedai gasped. Rand," Min said. "I doubt the Amyrlin will be pleased to have you publicizing the division."

ə væləd pɔɪnt," ɹænd sɛd. "dɑɹlɪn, ɹaɪɾ ə pɹɑkləmeɪʃən ðəɾ ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ əz səksiɾəd ɪleɪɾə ɹɔɪhən əz ði æmɪɝlɪn. ðət ʃəd bi ɪnʌf tə ɪnfɔɹm wɪθaʊt ɹɪvilɪŋ tu mʌtʃ. laɪt noʊz aɪ doʊnt nid tə də ɛniθɪŋ ɛls tə meɪk ɛɡwin æŋɡɹi wɪð mi. . . ." ɛls?" kɔɹəl æskt, pælɪŋ.

A valid point," Rand said. "Darlin, write a proclamation that Egwene al'Vere has succeeded Elaida a'Roihan as the Amyrlin. That should be enough to inform without revealing too much. Light knows I don't need to do anything else to make Egwene angry with me. . . ." Else?" Corele asked, paling.

"jɛs," ɹænd sɛɾ ɑfhændɪdli. "aɪv ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ tə si hɝ."

"Yes," Rand said offhandedly. "I've already been to the White Tower to see her."

"æn ðeɪ lɛt jə ɡoʊ?" kɔɹəl æskt.

"And they let you go?" Corele asked.

"aɪ dɪdn əlaʊ ðɛm ʌðɝ ɑpʃənz. dɑɹlɪn, kaɪnli mɑɹʃəl əɹ fɔɹsɪz hɪɹ. aɪ wɑn əm ɡæðɝd baɪ ði ivnɪŋ. flɪn, wɪl nid ɡeɪtweɪz lɑɹdʒ wʌnz. ə sɝkəl maɪt bi niɾəd."

"I didn't allow them other options. Darlin, kindly marshal our forces here. I want them gathered by the evening. Flinn, we'll need gateways Large ones. A circle might be needed."

"tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp?" nɪneɪiv sɛd, iɡɝ.

"Tarwin's Gap?" Nynaeve said, eager.

ɹænd ɡlænst əɾ əɹ ən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. mɪn kəd fil ɪz peɪn - ʃɑɹp spaɪkɪŋ, ɹil - əz i spoʊk.

Rand glanced at her and hesitated. Min could feel his pain - sharp spiking, real - as he spoke.

"nɑt jɛt, nɪneɪiv. aɪv pɔɹd hɑɾ ɔɪl ɪndə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən ɪɾəl bi bɔɪlɪŋ sun. taɪm. wi doʊn əv taɪm! əl ɡɛt hɛlp tə læn, aɪ vaʊ ɪt tə ju, bʌt ɹaɪt naʊ aɪ mʌs pɹipɛɹ tə feɪs ɛɡwin."

"Not yet, Nynaeve. I've poured hot oil into the White Tower, and it will be boiling soon. Time. We don't have time! I will get help to Lan, I vow it to you, but right now I must prepare to face Egwene."

"feɪs hɝ?" nɪneɪiv sɛd, stɛpɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. "ɹænd, wʌɾ əv jə dʌn?"

"Face her?" Nynaeve said, stepping forward. "Rand, what have you done?"

"wʌt niɾəd tə bi dʌn. wɛɹ ɪz bæʃɪɹ?"

"What needed to be done. Where is Bashere?"

"hi wɑz aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi wɪð ɪz mɛn, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," flɪn sɛd, "ɹʌnɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz. ʃəd bi bæk sun."

"He was out of the city with his men, my Lord Dragon," Flinn said, "running their horses. Should be back soon."

"ɡʊd. hiz ɡoʊɪŋ wɪð mi tə ɑɹæd dumən. jə tu, nɪneɪiv. mɪn." hi lʊkt ət hɝ, ən ðoʊz ənfæθəməbəl aɪz sim tə dʒɹɔ hɝ ɪn. "aɪ nid ju, mɪn."

"Good. He's going with me to Arad Doman. You too, Nynaeve. Min." He looked at her, and those unfathomable eyes seemed to draw her in. "I need you, Min."

"ju hæv mi. stupəd lubi."

"You have me. Stupid looby."

"kælændɝ" hi sɛd. "ɪt pleɪz ə pɑɹɾ ɪn ðɪs. juv tə faɪn aʊt haʊ. aɪ kænɑt sil ðə bɔɹ ðə weɪ aɪ tʃɹaɪd læs taɪm. aɪm mɪsɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ, sʌmθɪŋ vaɪɾəl. faɪn ɪt fəɹ mi."

"Callandor" he said. "It plays a part in this. You have to find out how. I cannot seal the Bore the way I tried last time. I'm missing something, something vital. Find it for me."

"aɪ wɪl, ɹænd." ə koʊld ʃɪvɝ ɹæn θɹu hɝ. "aɪ pɹɑməs."

"I will, Rand." A cold shiver ran through her. "I promise."

"aɪ tʃɹʌs ju." hi lʊkt ʌp əz ə fɪɡjɝ ɪn ə dip hʊɾɪd kloʊk wɔkt aʊɾ ʌv wʌn ə ðə stoʊnz mɛni ɡɑɹd poʊsts.

"I trust you." He looked up as a figure in a deep hooded cloak walked out of one of the Stone's many guard posts.

"kædzueɪn məleɪdʒɹɪn," ɹænd sɛd, "aɪ pɑɹɾən jə fəɹ pæs mɪsteɪks ən aɪ ɹɪvoʊk jəɹ ɛɡzaɪl. nɑt ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ɛvɝ ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ə maɪnɝ ɪnkənvinjəns tə ju."

"Cadsuane Melaidhrin," Rand said, "I pardon you for past mistakes and I revoke your exile. Not that it was ever anything more than a minor inconvenience to you."

ʃi snɪft, loʊɝɪŋ ðə hʊd. "ɪf jə bɪliv ðət wɛɹɪŋ ə kloʊk ɪn ðɪs hiɾ ɪz ə 'maɪnɝ'

She sniffed, lowering the hood. "If you believe that wearing a cloak in this heat is a 'minor'

ɪnkənvinjəns, bɔɪ, ðən jə niɾ ə lɛsən ɪn kɑntʃɹæst. aɪ tʃɹʌs jə si ði ɛɹɝ ɪn jəɹ did. ɪt stʃɹaɪks mi əz ənsuɾəbəl ðəɾ aɪ ʃəd nid 'fɝɡɪvnəs' əɹ ə 'pɑɹɾən' ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs."

inconvenience, boy, then you need a lesson in contrast. I trust you see the error in your deed. It strikes me as unsuitable that I should need 'forgiveness' or a 'pardon' in the first place."

"wɛl, ðɛn," ɹænd sɛd. "pliz æksɛp maɪ pɑɹɾən əlɔŋsaɪd maɪ əpɑlədʒi. jə meɪ seɪ aɪ hæv bɪn ʌndɝ ənjuʒəwəl stʃɹɛs əz ə leɪt."

"Well, then," Rand said. "Please accept my pardon alongside my apology. You may say I have been under unusual stress as of late."

"ʌv ɔl pipəl," kædzueɪn sɛd stɝnli, "ju kænɑɾ əfɔɹd tə lɛt ðə pɹɛʃɝ ə laɪf dʒɹaɪv ju."

"Of all people," Cadsuane said sternly, "you cannot afford to let the pressure of life drive you."

"ɑn ðə kɑntʃɹɛɹi. aɪm u aɪ hæv bɪkʌm kəz ə ðət pɹɛʃɝ, kædzueɪn. mɛɾəl kænɑt bi ʃeɪpt wɪθaʊt ðə bloʊz ə ðə hæmɝ. bʌt ðəɾ ɪz bɪsaɪd ðə pɔɪnt. jə tʃɹaɪd tə mənɪpjəleɪt mi, ən jə feɪl hɔɹi-blaɪ. bʌɾ ɪn ðət feɪljɝ, juv ʃoʊn mi sʌmθɪŋ."

"On the contrary. I am who I have become because of that pressure, Cadsuane. Metal cannot be shaped without the blows of the hammer. But that is beside the point. You tried to manipulate me, and you failed horri-bly. But in that failure, you have shown me something."

"wɪtʃ ɪz?"

"Which is?"

"aɪ θɔɾ aɪ wɑz biɪŋ fɔɹdʒd ɪndə ə sɔɹd," ɹænd sɛd, aɪz ɡɹoʊɪŋ dɪstənt. "bʌɾ aɪ wɑz ɹɔŋ.

"I thought I was being forged into a sword," Rand said, eyes growing distant. "But I was wrong.

aɪm nɑɾ ə wɛpən. aɪ nɛvɝ əv bɪn."

I'm not a weapon. I never have been."

"ðɛn wʌɾ ɑɹ ju?" mɪn æskt, dʒɛnjəwənli kjʊɹiəs.

"Then what are you?" Min asked, genuinely curious.

hi mɪɹli smaɪld. "kædzueɪn sədaɪ, aɪ hæv ə tæsk fəɹ ju, ɪf jəl æksɛpt ɪt."

He merely smiled. "Cadsuane Sedai, I have a task for you, if you will accept it."

"aɪ ɪkspɛk ðət wɪl dɪpɛn ɑn ðə tæsk," ʃi sɛd, foʊldɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz.

"I expect that will depend on the task," she said, folding her arms.

"aɪ nid jə tə loʊkeɪt sʌmwʌn. sʌmwʌn u ɪz mɪsɪŋ, sʌmwʌn aɪ naʊ səspɛk meɪ bi ɪn ðə hænz ʌv wɛl-minɪŋ ælaɪz. jə si, aɪv bɪn ɪnfɔɹm ðət ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪz hoʊldɪŋ mæɾɪn stɛpeɪnəoʊz."

"I need you to locate someone. Someone who is missing, someone I now suspect may be in the hands of well-meaning allies. You see, I've been informed that the White Tower is holding Mattin Stepaneos."

kædzueɪn fɹaʊnd. "æn jə wɑn hɪm?"

Cadsuane frowned. "And you want him?"

"nɑɾ əɾ ɔl. aɪ hævən dɪsaɪɾɪd wʌt tə də əbaʊɾ ɪm jɛt, soʊ hi kən steɪ ɛɡwinz pɹɑbləm fəɹ ðə taɪm. noʊ, ðə pɝsən aɪ wɑn ɪz pɹɑbli sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə kæɹələn ɡɹæs. əl ɪkspleɪn mɔɹ wən wəɹ nɑɾ ɪn ði oʊpən."

"Not at all. I haven't decided what to do about him yet, so he can stay Egwene's problem for the time. No, the person I want is probably somewhere in the Caralain Grass. I'll explain more when we are not in the open."

ðə haɪ lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz wɝ ɡæðɝɪŋ. ɹænd lʊk təwɔɹd ðɛm, ðoʊ wʌns əɡɛn i skæn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, əz ɪf lʊkɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ. sʌmθɪŋ ðət meɪɾ ɪm fil æŋkʃəs.

The High Lords and Ladies were gathering. Rand looked toward them, though once again he scanned the courtyard, as if looking for something. Something that made him feel anxious.

hi tɝn bæk tə ðə haɪ lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz. mɪn wɑtʃt əm skɛptɪkəli. əsaɪd fɹəm dɑɹlɪn, ʃid nɛvɝ bɪn ɪmpɹɛst wɪð ðɛm. ɹænd ɹɛstəɾ ɪz hæn ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. ðə ɡæðɝd noʊbəlz lʊk dɪʃɛvəld, əpɛɹənli sʌmən fɹəm næps əɹ milz, ɔlðoʊ ðeɪ wɔɹ ən əsɔɹtmən ə faɪn sɪlks ən ɹʌfəlz. ðeɪ lʊkt ɑdli aʊɾ ə pleɪs ɪn ðə stoʊnz kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, wɛɹ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls hæɾ ə pɝpəs.

He turned back to the High Lords and Ladies. Min watched them skeptically. Aside from Darlin, she'd never been impressed with them. Rand rested his hand on her shoulder. The gathered nobles looked disheveled, apparently summoned from naps or meals, although they wore an assortment of fine silks and ruffles. They looked oddly out of place in the Stone's courtyard, where everyone else had a purpose.

/ ʃʊdn bi soʊ hɑɹʃ ɑn ðɛm, mɪn θɔt, foʊldɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz. bʌt ðɛn, ʃi hæd wɑtʃt ðɛɹ plɑɾɪŋ ən pændɝɪŋ fɹʌstʃɹeɪt ɹænd. bɪsaɪdz, ʃid nɛvɝ bɪn fɑn ə ðoʊz u θɔt ðɛmsɛlvz mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls.

/ shouldn't be so harsh on them, Min thought, folding her arms. But then, she had watched their plotting and pandering frustrate Rand. Besides, she'd never been fond of those who thought themselves more important than everyone else.

"fɔɹm ə laɪn," ɹænd sɛd, wɔkɪŋ ʌp tə ðɛm.

"Form a line," Rand said, walking up to them.

ðə haɪ lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz lʊkt ət hɪm, kənfjuzd.

The High Lords and Ladies looked at him, confused.

ə laɪn" ɹænd sɛd, vɔɪs laʊɾ ən fɝm. "naʊ."

A line" Rand said, voice loud and firm. "Now."

ðeɪ dɪd soʊ, ɝeɪnʒɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz wɪð heɪst. ɹænd bɪɡæn tə wɔk daʊn ðə ɹoʊ, stɑɹɾɪŋ wɪð dɑɹlɪn, lʊkɪŋ itʃ mæn əɹ wʊmən ɪn ði aɪ. ɹændz ɪmoʊʃənz wɝ . . . kjʊɹiəs. pɝhæps ə tʌtʃ æŋɡɹi. wʌt wɑz i duɪŋ?

They did so, arranging themselves with haste. Rand began to walk down the row, starting with Darlin, looking each man or woman in the eye. Rand's emotions were . . . curious. Perhaps a touch angry. What was he doing?

ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd ɡɹu stɪl. ɹænd kəntɪnjud daʊn ðə laɪn, lʊkɪŋ əɾ itʃ ə ðə noʊbəlz ɪn tɝn, nɑt spikɪŋ. mɪn ɡlæns tə ðə saɪd. nɪɹ ði ɛn ə ðə laɪn, wɪɹɑmɑn kɛpt ɡlænsɪŋ ət ɹænd, ðən lʊkɪŋ əweɪ. ðə tɔl mæn hæd θɪnɪŋ ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ, hɪz bɪɹɾ ɔɪl tə ə pɔɪnt.

The courtyard grew still. Rand continued down the line, looking at each of the nobles in turn, not speaking. Min glanced to the side. Near the end of the line, Weiramon kept glancing at Rand, then looking away. The tall man had thinning gray hair, his beard oiled to a point.

ɹænd ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɹitʃt hɪm. "mit maɪ aɪz, wɪɹɑmɑn," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli.

Rand eventually reached him. "Meet my eyes, Weiramon," Rand said softly.

"maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, ʃʊɹli aɪm nɑt wɝði tə - "

"My Lord Dragon, surely I am not worthy to - "

"du ɪt."

"Do it."

wɪɹɑmɑn dɪd soʊ wɪð ən ɑd dɪfəkəlti. hi lʊkt əz ɪf i wɑz ɡɹɪɾɪŋ ɪz tiθ, hɪz aɪz wɔɾɝɪŋ.

Weiramon did so with an odd difficulty. He looked as if he was gritting his teeth, his eyes watering.

"soʊ ɪts ju," ɹænd sɛd. mɪn kəd fil ɪz dɪsəpɔɪnmənt. ɹænd lʊk tə ðə saɪd, tə wɛɹ ænɑiɛlə stʊd læst ɪn laɪn. ðə pɹɪɾi wʊmən hæd pʊld əweɪ fɹəm ɹænd, hɝ hɛd tɝnd. "boʊθ ə ju."

"So it is you," Rand said. Min could feel his disappointment. Rand looked to the side, to where Anaiyella stood last in line. The pretty woman had pulled away from Rand, her head turned. "Both of you."

"maɪ lɔɹd - " wɪɹɑmɑn bɪɡæn.

"My Lord - " Weiramon began.

"aɪ wɑn jə tə dɪlɪvɝ ə mɛsədʒ fəɹ mi," ɹænd sɛd. "tə ði ʌðɝz ə jəɹ . . . əsoʊsieɪʃən. tɛl əm ðət ðeɪ kænɑt haɪɾ əmʌŋ maɪ əlaɪz ɛni lɔŋɡɝ."

"I want you to deliver a message for me," Rand said. "To the others of your . . . association. Tell them that they cannot hide among my allies any longer."

wɪɹɑmɑn tʃɹaɪd tə blʌstɝ, bʌt ɹænd tʊk ə stɛp kloʊsɝ. wɪɹɑmɑnz aɪz oʊpənd waɪd, ən ænɑiɛlə kɹaɪɾ aʊt, ʃeɪɾɪŋ əɹ feɪs.

Weiramon tried to bluster, but Rand took a step closer. Weiramon's eyes opened wide, and Anaiyella cried out, shading her face.

"tɛl ðɛm," ɹænd kəntɪnjud, vɔɪs sɑf bʌt dɪmændɪŋ, "ðæɾ aɪm noʊ lɔŋɡɝ blaɪnd."

"Tell them," Rand continued, voice soft but demanding, "that I am no longer blind."

"waɪ . . ." ænɑiɛlə sɛd. "waɪ ɑɹ jə lɛɾɪŋ əs ɡoʊ?"

"Why . . ." Anaiyella said. "Why are you letting us go?"

"bɪkɔz tədeɪ ɪz ə deɪ ʌv ɹiunjən," ɹænd sɛd. "nɑɾ ə deɪ ʌv dɛθ. ɡoʊ."

"Because today is a day of reunion," Rand said. "Not a day of death. Go."

ðə tu stʌmbəld əweɪ, lʊkɪŋ dʒɹeɪnd. ði ʌðɝz ɪn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd wɑtʃt wɪð sɝpɹaɪz ən kənfjuʒən. ði il, haʊɛvɝ, bɪɡæn tə bit ðɛɹ spɪɹz əɡɛns ðɛɹ ʃilz. ænɑiɛlə ən wɪɹɑmɑn sim tə kip tə ðə ʃædoʊz ə ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹɾ əz ðeɪ dʌkt ɪndə ðə stoʊn.

The two stumbled away, looking drained. The others in the courtyard watched with surprise and confusion. The Aiel, however, began to beat their spears against their shields. Anaiyella and Weiramon seemed to keep to the shadows of the courtyard as they ducked into the Stone.

"li," ɹænd sɛd. "teɪk tu ʌðɝz. wɑtʃ ðɛm."

"Leeh," Rand said. "Take two others. Watch them."

θɹi meɪɾənz splɪt fɹəm ðoʊz wɑtʃɪŋ oʊvɝ ɹænd, dɑɹɾɪŋ æftɝ ðə tu fɔɹmɝ noʊbəlz. mɪn stɛpt ʌp tə ɹænd, teɪkɪŋ ɪz ɑɹm. "ɹænd? wʌt wɑz ðæt? wʌd jə si ɪn ðɛm?"

Three Maidens split from those watching over Rand, darting after the two former nobles. Min stepped up to Rand, taking his arm. "Rand? What was that? What did you see in them?"

"ðə taɪm fəɹ haɪɾɪŋ ɪz pæst, mɪn. ðə ʃædoʊ meɪɾ ɪts pleɪ fəɹ mi ən lɔst. ɪts wɔɹ, nɑt sʌbtɝfjudʒ, ðət tɝnz ðə deɪ naʊ."

"The time for hiding is past, Min. The Shadow made its play for me and lost. It is war, not subterfuge, that turns the day now."

"soʊ ðəɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz?" mɪn æskt, fɹaʊnɪŋ.

"So they're Darkfriends?" Min asked, frowning.

ɹænd tɝn tə hɝ, smaɪlɪŋ. "ðeɪ ɑɹ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ə θɹɛt. aɪ - " hi kʌɾ ɔf sʌɾənli, lʊkɪŋ tə ðə saɪd. mɪn tɝnd, ən ɡɹu tʃɪl.

Rand turned to her, smiling. "They are no longer a threat. I - " He cut off suddenly, looking to the side. Min turned, and grew chill.

tɑɹn ælθɹ stʊd nɪɹbaɪ. hi hæd dʒʌst wɔkt aʊɾ ʌv ə nɪɹbaɪ ɛntʃɹəns ɪndə ðə stoʊn, pɔzɪŋ ɑn ə loʊ sɛɾ ə stɛps liɾɪŋ daʊn tə ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. ɹændz ɪmoʊʃənz ɡɹu æpɹɪhɛnsɪv əɡɛn, ən mɪn ɹilaɪzd wʌt hid bɪn sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ɝliɝ.

Tarn al'Thor stood nearby. He had just walked out of a nearby entrance into the Stone, pausing on a low set of steps leading down to the courtyard. Rand's emotions grew apprehensive again, and Min realized what he'd been searching for earlier.

tɑɹn lʊkt əɾ ɪz sʌn, fɔlɪŋ stɪl. hɪz hɛɹ wɑz ɡɹeɪ ən ɪz feɪs laɪnd, jɛɾ i wɑz sɑləɾ ɪn ə weɪ ðət fju pipəl wɝ.

Tarn looked at his son, falling still. His hair was gray and his face lined, yet he was solid in a way that few people were.

ɹænd lɪftəɾ ɪz hænd, ən ðə kɹaʊd - ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪnkluɾəd - pɑɹɾəd. ɹænd pæs θɹu ðɛm, mɪn fɑloʊɪŋ bɪhaɪnd, kɹɔsɪŋ tə ðə stɛps ʌp ðə stoʊn. ɹænd klaɪmd ə fju ʌv ðoʊz stɛps, hɛzɪɾənt.

Rand lifted his hand, and the crowd - Aes Sedai included - parted. Rand passed through them, Min following behind, crossing to the steps up the Stone. Rand climbed a few of those steps, hesitant.

ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd fɛl saɪlənt; ivən ðə ɡʌlz stɑp kɔlɪŋ.

The courtyard fell silent; even the gulls stopped calling.

ɹænd stɑpt ɑn ðə stɛps, ən mɪn kəd fil ɪz ɹɪlʌktəns, hɪz heɪm, hɪz tɛɹɝ. ɪt sim soʊ stʃɹeɪnʒ. ɹænd - hu hæd feɪs fɔɹseɪkən wɪθaʊɾ ə tʃɹɛmɝ - wɑz əfɹeɪɾ ə hɪz fɑðɝ.

Rand stopped on the steps, and Min could feel his reluctance, his hame, his terror. It seemed so strange. Rand - who had faced Forsaken without a tremor - was afraid of his father.

ɹænd tʊk ðə læs fju stɛps ɪn tu sʌɾən stʃɹaɪdz ən ɡɹæb tɑɹn ɪn ən ɛmbɹeɪs. hi stʊd wʌn stɛp daʊn, wɪtʃ bɹɔɾ əm nɪɹ ən ikwəl haɪt. ɪn fækt, ɪn ðət pɑstʃɝ, tɑɹn ɔlmoʊst simd ə dʒaɪənt, ən ɹænd bʌɾ ə tʃaɪld u wɑz klɪŋɪŋ tə hɪm.

Rand took the last few steps in two sudden strides and grabbed Tarn in an embrace. He stood one step down, which brought them near an equal height. In fact, in that posture, Tarn almost seemed a giant, and Rand but a child who was clinging to him.

ðɛɹ, hoʊldɪŋ tə hɪz fɑðɝ, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn bɪɡæn tə wip.

There, holding to his father, the Dragon Reborn began to weep.

ðə ɡæðɝɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, tɛɹənz ən il wɑtʃt sɔləmli. nʌn ʃʌfəld əɹ tɝn əweɪ. ɹænd skwizd ɪz aɪz ʃʌt. "aɪm sɑɹi, fɑðɝ," hi wɪspɝd. mɪn kəd bɛɹli hɪɹ. "aɪm soʊ sɑɹi."

The gathered Aes Sedai, Tairens and Aiel watched solemnly. None shuffled or turned away. Rand squeezed his eyes shut. "I'm sorry, Father," he whispered. Min could barely hear. "I'm so sorry."

"ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt, sʌn. ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt."

"It's all right, son. It's all right."

"aɪv dʌn soʊ mʌtʃ ðəɾ ɪz tɛɹəbəl."

"I've done so much that is terrible."

"noʊbɑdi wɔks ə dɪfəkəl pæθ wɪθaʊt stʌmbəlɪŋ naʊ ən əɡɛn. ɪt dɪdn bɹeɪk jə wən jə fɛl. ðæts ði ɪmpɔɹɾənt pɑɹt."

"Nobody walks a difficult path without stumbling now and again. It didn't break you when you fell. That's the important part."

ɹænd nɑɾəd. ðeɪ hɛld itʃ ʌðɝ fəɹ ə taɪm. ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ɹænd pʊl bæk, ðən dʒɛstʃɝd tə mɪn, stændɪŋ ət ðə beɪs ə ðə stɛps.

Rand nodded. They held each other for a time. Eventually, Rand pulled back, then gestured to Min, standing at the base of the steps.

"kʌm, fɑðɝ," ɹænd sɛd. "ðɛɹ ɪz sʌmwʌn aɪ wɑnə ɪntʃɹədus tə ju."

"Come, Father," Rand said. "There is someone I want to introduce to you."

tɑɹn tʃʌkəld. "ɪts bɪn θɹi deɪz, ɹænd. aɪv ɔlɹɛɾi mɛt hɝ."

Tarn chuckled. "It's been three days, Rand. I've already met her."

"jɛs, bʌt / dɪdn ɪntʃɹədus ju. aɪ nid tə." hi weɪv tə mɪn, ən ʃi ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ, foʊldɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz. hi lʊkt əɾ əɹ pliɾɪŋli, soʊ ʃi saɪɾ ən klaɪmd ʌp ðə stɛps.

"Yes, but / didn't introduce you. I need to." He waved to Min, and she raised an eyebrow, folding her arms. He looked at her pleadingly, so she sighed and climbed up the steps.

"fɑðɝ," ɹænd sɛd, ɹɛstɪŋ ɪz hæn ɑn mɪnz bæk. "ðɪs ɪz mɪn fɑɹ-ʃɔ. ən ʃiz vɛɹi spɛʃəl tə mi."

"Father," Rand said, resting his hand on Min's back. "This is Min Far-shaw. And she's very special to me."


tʃæptɝ fɔɹtin


CHAPTER 14

eɪ vaʊ


A Vow

ɛɡwin wɔkt ʌp ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə dʒɛntəl sloʊp, ðə ɡɹæs ɡɹin əɾ əɹ fit, ði ɛɹ kul ən plɛzənt.

Egwene walked up the side of a gentle slope, the grass green at her feet, the air cool and pleasant.

leɪzi bʌɾɝflaɪz floʊɾəd fɹəm blɑsəm tə blɑsəm, laɪk kjʊɹiəs tʃɪlʒɹən pikɪŋ ɪndə kʌbɝdz.

Lazy butterflies floated from blossom to blossom, like curious children peeking into cupboards.

ɛɡwin meɪɾ əɹ ʃuz vænɪʃ soʊ ʃi kəd fil ðə bleɪdz bɪniθ əɹ fit.

Egwene made her shoes vanish so she could feel the blades beneath her feet.

ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, smaɪlɪŋ, ðən lʊkt ʌp ət ðə bɔɪlɪŋ blæk klaʊdz. æŋɡɹi, vaɪələnt, saɪlən dɪspaɪt flæʃɪz ʌv æmɪθɪs laɪtnɪŋ. tɛɹəbəl stɔɹm əbʌv, kwaɪət, plæsəd mɛdoʊ bɪniθ. ə daɪkɑɾəmi ʌv ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz.

She took a deep breath, smiling, then looked up at the boiling black clouds. Angry, violent, silent despite flashes of amethyst lightning. Terrible storm above, quiet, placid meadow beneath. A dichotomy of the World of Dreams.

ɑdli, tɛlɝɑnɹbiəd fɛl mɔɹ ənnætʃɹəl tə hɝ naʊ ðən ɪt hæd dʊɹɪŋ əɹ fɝs fju vɪzəts juzɪŋ vɛɹɪnz tɛɹæŋɡɹil. ʃid tʃɹiɾəd ðɪs pleɪs laɪk ə pleɪɡɹaʊnd, tʃeɪnʒɪŋ əɹ kloʊðz ɑn ə wɪm, əsumɪŋ ðət ʃi wɑz seɪf. ʃi hædn ʌndɝstʊd. tɛlɝɑnɹbiəd wɑz əbaʊɾ əz seɪf əz ə bɛɹ tʃɹæp peɪntəɾ ə pɹɪɾi kʌlɝ. ɪf ðə waɪz wʌnz hædn stʃɹeɪɾənd əɹ aʊt, ʃi maɪt nɑɾ əv lɪv tə bɪkʌm æmɪɝlɪn.

Oddly, Tel'aran'rbiod felt more unnatural to her now than it had during her first few visits using Verin's ter'angreal. She'd treated this place like a playground, changing her clothes on a whim, assuming that she was safe. She hadn't understood. Tel'aran'rbiod was about as safe as a bear trap painted a pretty color. If the Wise Ones hadn't straightened her out, she might not have lived to become Amyrlin.

jɛs, aɪ θɪŋk ðɪs ɪz ɪt. ðə ɹoʊlɪŋ ɡɹin hɪlz, ðə stænz ə tʃɹiz. ɪt wɑz ðə fɝs pleɪs ʃid kʌm, wɛl oʊvɝ ə jɪɹ əɡoʊ. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ minɪŋfəl əbaʊt stændɪŋ hɪɹ, hævɪŋ kʌm soʊ fɑɹ. ən jɛɾ ɪt simd ʃi wəɾ əv tə kʌvɝ ən ikwəl dɪstəns bɪfɔɹ ðɪs wɑz dʌn, ən ɪn fɑɹ ʃɔɹɾɝ ə taɪm.

Yes, I think this is it. The rolling green hills, the stands of trees. It was the first place she'd come, well over a year ago. There was something meaningful about standing here, having come so far. And yet it seemed she would have to cover an equal distance before this was done, and in far shorter a time.

wən ʃid bɪn kæptɪv ɪn ðə taʊɝ, ʃi hæd ɹimaɪndəd hɝsɛlf - -ɹɪpiɾɪdli - ðət ʃi kəd foʊkəs ɑn oʊnli wʌn pɹɑbləm əɾ ə taɪm. ðə ɹiunəfəkeɪʃən ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ hæd tə kʌm fɝst. naʊ, haʊɛvɝ, boʊθ pɹɑbləmz ən pɑsəbəl səluʃənz simd ʌnkaʊntəbəl. ðeɪ oʊvɝwɛlmd əɹ dʒɹaʊnɪŋ əɹ ɪn ɔl ə ðə θɪŋz ʃi ʃəɾ i duɪŋ.

When she'd been captive in the Tower, she had reminded herself - -repeatedly - that she could focus on only one problem at a time. The reunification of the White Tower had to come first. Now, however, both problems and possible solutions seemed uncountable. They overwhelmed her drowning her in all of the things she should he doing.

fɔɹtʃənətli, dʊɹɪŋ ðə læs fju deɪz, sɛvɹəl ʌnɪkspɛktɪd stɔɹz ʌv ɡɹeɪn hæd bɪn dɪskʌvɝɾ ɪn ðə sɪɾi. ɪn wʌn keɪs ə fɝɡɑɾən wɛɹhaʊs, oʊn baɪ ə mæn u hæd daɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə wɪntɝ. ði ʌðɝz wɝ smɔlɝ, ə fju sæks hɪɹ ən ðɛɹ. ɹɪmɑɹkəbli, nʌn ə ðɛm hæd bɔɹn ɛni kaɪndə ɹɑt.

Fortunately, during the last few days, several unexpected stores of grain had been discovered in the city. In one case a forgotten warehouse, owned by a man who had died over the winter. The others were smaller, a few sacks here and there. Remarkably, none of them had borne any kind of rot.

ʃi hæd tu miɾɪŋz ðɪs ivnɪŋ, dilɪŋ wɪð ʌðɝ pɹɑbləmz. hɝ bɪɡəs dɪfəkəlti wɑz gɑnə bi ðə pɝsɛpʃənz ə ðə pipəl ʃi mɛt wɪð. niðɝ ɡɹup wəd si hɝ əz wʌt ʃi hæd bɪkʌm.

She had two meetings this evening, dealing with other problems. Her biggest difficulty was going to be the perceptions of the people she met with. Neither group would see her as what she had become.

ʃi kloʊzd əɹ aɪz, wɪlɪŋ hɝsɛlf əweɪ. wən ʃi oʊpən əɹ aɪz, ʃi wɑz stændɪŋ ɪn ə lɑɹdʒ ɹum, dipli ʃæɾoʊd ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝz, ɪts kɑləmz ɹaɪzɪŋ laɪk θɪk taʊɝz. ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ.

She closed her eyes, willing herself away. When she opened her eyes, she was standing in a large room, deeply shadowed in the corners, its columns rising like thick towers. The Heart of the Stone of Tear.

tu waɪz wʌnz sæɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ ət ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə ɹum, əmɪɾ ə fɔɹəst ə kɑləmz. əbʌv ðɛɹ laɪt bɹaʊn skɝts ən waɪt blaʊsəz, ðɛɹ feɪsəz wɝ dɪstɪŋkli dɪfɹənt. bɛɹz wɑz ɹɪŋkəld wɪð eɪdʒ, laɪk lɛðɝ lɛf tə kjʊɹ ɪn ðə sʌn. fəɹ ɔl əɹ əkeɪʒənəl stɝnnəs, smaɪl laɪnz woʊv fɹəm əɹ aɪz ən maʊθ.

Two Wise Ones sat on the floor at the center of the room, amid a forest of columns. Above their light brown skirts and white blouses, their faces were distinctly different. Bair's was wrinkled with age, like leather left to cure in the sun. For all her occasional sternness, smile lines wove from her eyes and mouth.

æmɪz' feɪs wɑz sɪlki smuð, ən ɪfɛkt ə biɪŋ eɪbəl tə tʃænəl. hɝ feɪs wɑz nɑɾ eɪdʒləs, bʌt ʃi cʊɾə bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ ði ɪmoʊʃən ʃi ʃoʊd.

Amys' face was silky smooth, an effect of being able to channel. Her face was not ageless, but she could have been Aes Sedai for the emotion she showed.

ðə tu hæd ðɛɹ ʃɔlz ət ðɛɹ weɪsts, ðɛɹ blaʊsəz ənleɪst. ɛɡwin sæt bɪfɔɹ əm bʌt lɛf hɝsɛlf wɛɹɪŋ wɛtləndɝ kloʊðɪŋ. æmɪz ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ; wɑz ʃi θɪŋkɪŋ ðəɾ ɛɡwin ʃəɾ əv tʃeɪnʒd? əɹ dɪd ʃi əpɹiʃieɪt ðəɾ ɛɡwin dɪd nɑɾ ɪməteɪt sʌmθɪŋ ʃi wɑz nɑt? ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl tə tɛl.

The two had their shawls at their waists, their blouses unlaced. Egwene sat before them but left herself wearing wetlander clothing. Amys raised an eyebrow; was she thinking that Egwene should have changed? Or did she appreciate that Egwene did not imitate something she was not? It was difficult to tell.

"ðə bæɾəl wɪðɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪz oʊvɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"The battle within the White Tower is over," Egwene said.

"ðə wʊmən ɪleɪɾə ɹɔɪhən?" æmɪz æskt.

"The woman Elaida a'Roihan?" Amys asked.

"teɪkən baɪ ðə sintʃæn," ɛɡwin sɛd. "aɪ hæv bɪn æksɛptɪɾ əz æmɪɹ-lɪn baɪ ðoʊz u fɑloʊd hɝ. maɪ pəzɪʃən ɪz fɑɹ fɹəm sɪkjʊɹ - ət taɪmz, aɪ fil bælənst ətɑp ə stoʊn ðət sɪts bælənst ətɑp ənʌðɝ stoʊn. bʌt ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪz əɡɛn hoʊl."

"Taken by the Seanchan," Egwene said. "I have been accepted as Amyr-lin by those who followed her. My position is far from secure - at times, I feel balanced atop a stone that sits balanced atop another stone. But the White Tower is again whole."

æmɪz klɪkt əɹ tʌŋ sɔfli. ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ hæn ən ə stʃɹaɪp stoʊl - ən æmɪɝlɪnz stoʊl -  əpɪɹɾ ɪn ɪt. "aɪ səpoʊz jə ʃəd bi wɛɹɪŋ ðɪs, ðɛn."

Amys clicked her tongue softly. She raised her hand and a striped stole - an Amyrlin's stole -  appeared in it. "I suppose you should be wearing this, then."

ɛɡwin lɛɾ aʊɾ ə sɑft, sloʊ bɹɛθ. ɪt wɑz ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl tə hɝ, səmtaɪmz, haʊ mʌtʃ stɑk ʃi pʊɾ ɪn ði əpɪnjənz ə ðiz wɪmən. ʃi tʊk ðə stoʊl, pʊɾɪŋ ɪɾ ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz.

Egwene let out a soft, slow breath. It was remarkable to her, sometimes, how much stock she put in the opinions of these women. She took the stole, putting it around her shoulders.

sɔɹɪliə wɪl dɪslaɪk ðɪs nuz," bɛɹ sɛd, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd. "ʃi stɪl hæɾ ə hoʊp ðət jə wəd liv ðoʊz fulz ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ ən ɹɪtɝn tə ʌs."

Sorilea will dislike this news," Bair said, shaking her head. "She still had a hope that you would leave those fools in the White Tower and return to us."

"pliz teɪk kɛɹ," ɛɡwin sɛd, sʌmənɪŋ hɝsɛlf ə kʌp ə ti. "aɪ æm nɑɾ oʊnli wʌn ə ðoʊz fulz, maɪ fɹɛnd, bʌɾ aɪm ðɛɹ liɾɝ. kwin ə ðə fulz, jə maɪt seɪ."

"Please take care," Egwene said, summoning herself a cup of tea. "I am not only one of those fools, my friend, but I am their leader. Queen of the fools, you might say."

bɛɹ hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "aɪ hæv toʊ."

Bair hesitated. "I have toh."

"nɑt fəɹ spikɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ," ɛɡwin əʃʊɹd hɝ. "mɛni ʌv əm ɑɹ fulz, bʌɾ ɑɹ wi nɑɾ ɔl fulz ət səm pɔɪnt? jə dɪd nɑɾ əbændən mi tə maɪ feɪljɝz wən jə faʊn mi wɔkɪŋ tɛlɝɑnɹbiəd. ɪn laɪk mænɝ bækslæʃ kænɑɾ əbændən ðoʊz ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ."

"Not for speaking the truth," Egwene assured her. "Many of them are fools, but are we not all fools at some point? You did not abandon me to my failures when you found me walking Tel'aran'rbiod. In like manner \ cannot abandon those of the White Tower."

æmɪz' aɪz nɛɹoʊd. "ju hæv ɡɹoʊn mʌtʃ sɪns wi læs mɛt, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ."

Amys' eyes narrowed. "You have grown much since we last met, Egwene al'Vere."

ðət sɛn ə θɹɪl θɹu ɛɡwin. "aɪ hæd mʌtʃ nid tə ɡɹoʊ. maɪ laɪf əz bɪn dɪfəkəlt ə leɪt."

That sent a thrill through Egwene. "I had much need to grow. My life has been difficult of late."

"wɛn kənfɹʌntəd baɪ ə kəlæpst ɹuf," bɛɹ sɛd, "sʌm wɪl bɪɡɪn tə hɔl əweɪ ðə ɹɛfjus, bɪkʌmɪŋ stʃɹɔŋɝ fəɹ ðə pɹɑsɛs. ʌðɝz wɪl ɡoʊ tə vɪzət ðɛɹ bɹʌðɝz hoʊld ən dʒɹɪŋk ɪz wɔɾɝ."

"When confronted by a collapsed roof," Bair said, "some will begin to haul away the refuse, becoming stronger for the process. Others will go to visit their brother's hold and drink his water."

"hæv jə sin ɹænd ɹisənli?" ɛɡwin æskt.

"Have you seen Rand recently?" Egwene asked.

"ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn əz ɛmbɹeɪs dɛθ," æmɪz sɛd. "hi hæz ɡɪvən ʌp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bi əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ðə stoʊnz, ən əz ɪnstɛɾ ətʃiv ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ə ðə wɪnd."

"The Car'a'carn has embraced death," Amys said. "He has given up trying to be as strong as the stones, and has instead achieved the strength of the wind."

bɛɹ nɑɾəd. "ɔlmoʊst, wɪl əv tə stɑp kɔlɪŋ ɪm ə tʃaɪld." ʃi smaɪld. "ɔlmoʊst."

Bair nodded. "Almost, we will have to stop calling him a child." She smiled. "Almost."

ɛɡwin ɡeɪv noʊ hɪn ə hɝ ʃɑk. ʃiɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ əm tə bi dɪsplizd wɪð ɹænd. "aɪ wɪʃ jə tə noʊ ðə ɹɪspɛkt aɪ hæv fəɹ ju. juv mʌtʃ ɑnɝ fəɹ teɪkɪŋ mi ɪn əz jə dɪd. aɪ θɪŋk ðət ði oʊnli ɹizən aɪ si fɑɹðɝ ðən maɪ sɪstɝz ɪz kəz jə tɔt mi tə wɔk wɪð maɪ bæk stʃɹeɪɾ ən hɛd haɪ."

Egwene gave no hint of her shock. She'd expected them to be displeased with Rand. "I wish you to know the respect I have for you. You have much honor for taking me in as you did. I think that the only reason I see farther than my sisters is because you taught me to walk with my back straight and head high."

"ɪt wɑz ə sɪmpəl θɪŋ," æmɪz sɛd, ɑbviəsli plizd. "wʌn ðəɾ ɛni wʊmən wəɾ əv dʌn."

"It was a simple thing," Amys said, obviously pleased. "One that any woman would have done."

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ fju plɛʒɝz mɔɹ sæɾɪsfaɪɪŋ ðən teɪkɪŋ ə kɔɹd sʌmwʌn ɛls əz nɑɾɪd," bɛɹ sɛd, "ðɛn tizɪŋ ɪt stʃɹeɪɾ əɡɛn. haʊɛvɝ, ɪf ðə kɔɹɾ ɪz nɑɾ ʌv ɡʊd mətɪɹiəl, ðən noʊ əntæŋlɪŋ wɪl seɪv ɪt. jə ɡeɪv əs faɪn mətɪɹiəl, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ."

"There are few pleasures more satisfying than taking a cord someone else has knotted," Bair said, "then teasing it straight again. However, if the cord is not of good material, then no untangling will save it. You gave us fine material, Egwene al'Vere."

"aɪ wɪʃ ðət ðəɹ wɝ ə weɪ," ɛɡwin sɛd, "tə tʃɹeɪn mɔɹ sɪstɝz ɪn ðə weɪz ə ðə waɪz wʌnz."

"I wish that there were a way," Egwene said, "to train more sisters in the ways of the Wise Ones."

"ju kəd sɛn əm tə ʌs," æmɪz sɛd. "pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɪf ðeɪ nid pʌnɪʃɪŋ. wi wʊdn kɑɾəl əm laɪk ðə waɪt taʊɝ."

"You could send them to us," Amys said. "Particularly if they need punishing. We wouldn't coddle them like the White Tower."

ɛɡwin bɹɪsəld. ðə biɾɪŋz ʃid teɪkən hæd bɪn "kɑɾəlɪŋ"? ðət wɑz ə faɪt ʃi dɪdnt wɑnə dʒɔɪn, haʊɛvɝ. ði il wəɾ ɔlweɪz əsum wɛtləndɝ weɪz tə bi sɑft, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ðəɾ əsʌmpʃən.

Egwene bristled. The beatings she'd taken had been "coddling"? That was a fight she didn't want to join, however. The Aiel would always assume wetlander ways to be soft, and there was no changing that assumption.

"aɪ daʊt ðə sɪstɝz wəɾ əɡɹi tə ðæt," ɛɡwin sɛd kɛɹfəli. "bʌt hæt maɪt wɝk wəd bi tə sɛn jʌŋ wɪmən - ðoʊz stɪl tʃɹeɪn- .__tə stʌɾi wɪð ju. ðət wɑz pɑɹɾ ʌv waɪ maɪ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ wɑz soʊ ɪfɪk- tɪv; aɪ wɑzn jɛt sɛɾ ɪn ðə weɪz ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ." "wʊd ðeɪ əɡɹi tə ðɪs?" bɛɹ æskt.

"I doubt the sisters would agree to that," Egwene said carefully. "But hat might work would be to send young women - those still train- .__to study with you. That was part of why my training was so effec- tive; I wasn't yet set in the ways of the Aes Sedai." "Would they agree to this?" Bair asked.

"ðeɪ maɪt," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ɪf wi sɛn æksɛptɪd. nɑvəsɪz wəd bi ɑnsɪɾɝd tu ɪnɪkspɪɹiənst, sɪstɝz tu dɪɡnəfaɪd. bʌɾ æksɛptɪd . . . pɝhæps. ðəɹ wəd nid tə bi ə ɡʊd ɹizən ðət simz tə bɛnəfɪt ðə waɪt taʊɝ."

"They might," Egwene said. "If we sent Accepted. Novices would be onsidered too inexperienced, sisters too dignified. But Accepted . . . perhaps. There would need to be a good reason that seems to benefit the White Tower."

"ju ʃəd tɛl əm tə ɡoʊ," bɛɹ sɛd, "æn ɪkspɛkt əm tə oʊbeɪ.

"You should tell them to go," Bair said, "and expect them to obey.

hæv jə nɑt ðə moʊst ɑnɝ əmʌŋ ðɛm? ʃəd ðeɪ nɑt lɪsən tə jəɹ kaʊnsəl wən ɪts waɪz?"

Have you not the most honor among them? Should they not listen to your counsel when it is wise?"

"dʌz ðə klæn ɔlweɪz də əz ə tʃif dɪmænz?" ɛɡwin sɛd.

"Does the clan always do as a chief demands?" Egwene said.

"ʌv kɔɹs nɑt," æmɪz sɛd. "bʌt wɛtləndɝz ɑɹ ɔlweɪz fɔnɪŋ oʊvɝ kɪŋz ən lɔɹdz. ðeɪ sim tə laɪk biɪŋ toʊld wʌt tə du. ɪt meɪks əm fil seɪf."

"Of course not," Amys said. "But wetlanders are always fawning over kings and lords. They seem to like being told what to do. It makes them feel safe."

"ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ dɪfɹənt," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"Aes Sedai are different," Egwene said.

"ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kip ɪmplaɪɪŋ ðət wi ʃəɾ ɔl bi tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ," æmɪz sɛd. hɝ toʊn ɪndəkeɪɾəd wʌt ʃi θɔɾ ə ðəɾ aɪdiə. "ðeɪ dʒɹoʊn ɑn, əz nɔɪzi əz ə blaɪn tʃɪpəbɝd ðət kænɑt tɛl ɪf ɪts deɪ əɹ naɪt. ðeɪ nid tə si ðət wɪl nɛvɝ də sətʃ ə θɪŋ. tɛl əm ðət jəɹ sɛndɪŋ wɪmən tə əs tə stʌɾi əɹ weɪz soʊ wi kən ʌndɝstænd wʌn ənʌðɝ. ɪts oʊnli ðə tʃɹuθ;

"The Aes Sedai keep implying that we should all be training in the White Tower," Amys said. Her tone indicated what she thought of that idea. "They drone on, as noisy as a blind chippabird that cannot tell if it's day or night. They need to see that we will never do such a thing. Tell them that you're sending women to us to study our ways so we can understand one another. It is only the truth;

ðeɪ nidnt noʊ ðət jə ɔlsoʊ ɪkspɛkt əm tə bi stʃɹɛŋθən baɪ ði ɪkspɪɹiəns."

they needn't know that you also expect them to be strengthened by the experience."

"ðæt maɪt wɝk." ɛɡwin wɑz plizd; ðə plæn wɑz oʊnli ə fju hɛɹz ɔf fɹəm wʌt ʃi ɪvɛntʃəwəli wɑntəd tə əkɑmplɪʃ.

"That might work." Egwene was pleased; the plan was only a few hairs off from what she eventually wanted to accomplish.

"ðɪs ɪz ə tɑpɪk tə kənsɪɾɝ ɪn iziɝ deɪz," bɛɹ sɛd. "aɪ sɛns ɡɹeɪɾɝ tʃɹʌbəl ɪn jə ðən ðɪs, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ."

"This is a topic to consider in easier days," Bair said. "I sense greater trouble in you than this, Egwene al'Vere."

"ðɛɹ ɪz ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ tʃɹʌbəl," ʃi sɛd. "ɹæn ælθɹ. hæz i toʊl jə wʌɾ i dɪklɛɹd wən i vɪzəɾəd ðə waɪt taʊɝ?"

"There is a greater trouble," she said. "Rand al'Thor. Has he told you what he declared when he visited the White Tower?"

"hi sɛɾ i æŋɡɝd ju," æmɪz sɛd. "aɪ faɪn ɪz ækʃənz ɑd. hi vɪzəts jə æftɝ ɔl ɪz tɔk ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ lɑkɪŋ ɪm ʌp ən pʊɾɪŋ ɪm ɪn ə bɑks?"

"He said he angered you," Amys said. "I find his actions odd. He visits you after all his talk of the Aes Sedai locking him up and putting him in a box?"

"hi wɑz . . . dɪfɹənt wən i keɪm hɪɹ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "hi hæz ɛmbɹeɪs dɛθ," bɛɹ sɛɾ əɡɛn, nɑɾɪŋ. "hi bɪkʌmz ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn tʃɹuli."

"He was . . . different when he came here," Egwene said. "He has embraced death," Bair said again, nodding. "He becomes the Car'a'carn truly."

hi spoʊk paʊɝfli," ɛɡwin sɛd, "bʌɾ ɪz wɝdz wɝ ðoʊz ə mædnəs. hi sɛd hiz gɑnə bɹeɪk ðə silz ɑn ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən." æmɪz ən bɛɹ boʊθ fɹoʊz. jə ɑɹ sɝɾən ə ðɪs?" bɛɹ æskt. "jɛs."

He spoke powerfully," Egwene said, "but his words were those of madness. He said he is going to break the seals on the Dark One's prison." Amys and Bair both froze. You are certain of this?" Bair asked. "Yes."

"ðɪs ɪz dɪstɝbɪŋ nuz," æmɪz sɛd. "wi wɪl kənsʌlt wɪð ɪm ɑn ðɪs. θæŋk jə fəɹ bɹɪŋɪŋ ðɪs tə ʌs."

"This is disturbing news," Amys said. "We will consult with him on this. Thank you for bringing this to us."

"aɪ wɪl bi ɡæðɝɪŋ ðoʊz u ɹɪzɪs hɪm." ɛɡwin ɹɪlækst. əntɪl ðət moʊmənt, ʃi hædn bɪn sɝɾən wɪtʃ weɪ ðə waɪz wʌnz wəd ɡoʊ. "pɝhæps ɹænd wɪl lɪsən tə ɹizən ɪf ɪnʌf vɔɪsəz ɑɹ pɹɛzənt."

"I will be gathering those who resist him." Egwene relaxed. Until that moment, she hadn't been certain which way the Wise Ones would go. "Perhaps Rand will listen to reason if enough voices are present."

"hi ɪz nɑt noʊn fəɹ ɪz wɪlɪŋnəs tə lɪsən tə ɹizən," æmɪz sɛd wɪð ə saɪ, ɹaɪzɪŋ. ɛɡwin ən bɛɹ dɪd soʊ əz wɛl. ðə waɪz wʌnz' blaʊsəz wɝ leɪst ɪn ən ɪnstənt.

"He is not known for his willingness to listen to reason," Amys said with a sigh, rising. Egwene and Bair did so as well. The Wise Ones' blouses were laced in an instant.

"ðə taɪm ɪz lɔŋ pæs fəɹ ðə waɪt taʊɝ tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðə waɪz wʌnz" ɛɡwin sɛd, "ɔɹ fəɹ ðə waɪz wʌnz tə əvɔɪd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. wi mʌst wɝk təɡɛðɝ. hæn ɪn hæn əz sɪstɝz."

"The time is long past for the White Tower to ignore the Wise Ones" Egwene said, "or for the Wise Ones to avoid the Aes Sedai. We must work together. Hand in hand as sisters."

"soʊ lɔŋ əz ɪɾ ɪzən səm sʌn-blaɪndɪd ɹɪdɪkjələs θɔɾ əbaʊt ðə waɪz wʌnz tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə taʊɝ," bɛɹ sɛd. ʃi smaɪl tə ʃoʊ ɪt wɑz ə dʒoʊk, bʌt səksiɾəd oʊnli ɪn bɛɹɪŋ əɹ tiθ.

"So long as it isn't some sun-blinded ridiculous thought about the Wise Ones training in the Tower," Bair said. She smiled to show it was a joke, but succeeded only in baring her teeth.

ɛɡwin smaɪld. ʃi dɪd wɑn ðə waɪz wʌnz tə tʃɹeɪn ɪn ðə taʊɝ. ðəɹ wɝ mɛni mɛθədz ə tʃænəlɪŋ ðət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd bɛɾɝ ðən ðə waɪz wʌnz. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, ðə waɪz wʌnz wɝ bɛɾɝ əbaʊt wɝkɪŋ təɡɛðɝ ən - ɛɡwin ədmɪɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli - wɪð liɾɝʃɪp.

Egwene smiled. She did want the Wise Ones to train in the Tower. There were many methods of channeling that the Aes Sedai did better than the Wise Ones. On the other hand, the Wise Ones were better about working together and - Egwene admitted reluctantly - with leadership.

ðə tu ɡɹups kəd lɝn mʌtʃ fɹəm wʌn ənʌðɝ. ʃi wəd faɪn ə weɪ tə taɪ ðɛm təɡɛðɝ.

The two groups could learn much from one another. She would find a way to tie them together.

sʌmhaʊ.

Somehow.

ʃi fɑnli beɪd fɛɹwɛl tə ðə tu waɪz wʌnz, wɑtʃɪŋ əz ðeɪ feɪɾəd fɹəm tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd.

She fondly bade farewell to the two Wise Ones, watching as they faded from Tel'aran'rhiod.

wəd ðət ðɛɹ kaʊnsəl əloʊn pɹuvd ɪnʌf tə tɝn ɹænd fɹəm ɪz ɪnseɪn plæn. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ənlaɪkli.

Would that their counsel alone proved enough to turn Rand from his insane plan. But it was unlikely.

ɛɡwin tʊk ə bɹɛθ. ɪn ən ɪnstənt ʃi stʊɾ ɪn ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, hɝ fit plæntəd dɝɛkli ɑn ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn peɪntəɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ. sɛvən spaɪɹəlz ə kʌlɝ waʊn aʊt fɹəm hɝ, spɪnɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə pɝɪməɾɝ ə ðə doʊm tʃeɪmbɝ.

Egwene took a breath. In an instant she stood in the Hall of the Tower, her feet planted directly on the Flame of Tar Valon painted on the floor. Seven spirals of color wound out from her, spinning toward the perimeter of the domed chamber.

nɪneɪiv wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ. ɛɡwin dʒɹu hɝ lɪps tə ə laɪn. ðət wʊmən! ɛɡwin kəd bɹɪŋ ðə waɪt taʊɝ tə ɪts niz, tɝn ə stɔntʃ mɛmbɝ ə ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ tə hɝ saɪd, ɝn ðə ɹɪspɛkt ə ðə tʌfəst waɪz wʌnz. bʌt laɪt hɛlp əɹ ɪf ʃi niɾəd ðə lɔɪəlti ʌv əɹ fɹɛnz! ɹænd, ɡɔɪn, nɪneɪiv - ɔl ɪnfjʊɹieɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ oʊn weɪz.

Nynaeve was not there. Egwene drew her lips to a line. That woman! Egwene could bring the White Tower to its knees, turn a staunch member of the Red Ajah to her side, earn the respect of the toughest Wise Ones. But Light help her if she needed the loyalty of her friends! Rand, Gawyn, Nynaeve - all infuriating in their own ways.

ʃi foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz tə weɪt. pɝhæps nɪneɪiv wəd stɪl kʌm. ɪf nɑt, ðɪs wʊdn bi ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi hæd dɪsəpɔɪntɪɾ ɛɡwin. ə mæsɪv ɹoʊz wɪndoʊ dɑməneɪɾəd ðə fɑɹ wɔl bɪhaɪn ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɪtsɛlf. ðə fleɪm ət ðə sɛntɝ spɑɹkəld, əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ sʌnlaɪt bɪɑnd, ðoʊ ɛɡwin nu ðoʊz bɔɪlɪŋ blæk klaʊdz kʌvɝɾ ɔl ðə skaɪ ʌv ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz.

She folded her arms to wait. Perhaps Nynaeve would still come. If not, this wouldn't be the first time she had disappointed Egwene. A massive rose window dominated the far wall behind the Amyrlin Seat itself. The Flame at the center sparkled, as if there were sunlight beyond, though Egwene knew those boiling black clouds covered all the sky of the World of Dreams.

ʃi tɝn fɹəm ðə wɪndoʊ, ðən fɹoʊz.

She turned from the window, then froze.

ðɛɹ, sɛɾ ɪndə ðə ɡlæs bɪloʊ ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, wɑz ə lɑɹdʒ sɛɡmən ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ə ðə dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ. ðət wɑzn pɑɹɾ ə ði ɝɪdʒənəl wɪndoʊ. ɛɡwin stɛp fɔɹwɝd, ɪnspɛktɪŋ ðə ɡlæs.

There, set into the glass below the Flame of Tar Valon, was a large segment in the shape of the Dragon's Fang. That wasn't part of the original window. Egwene stepped forward, inspecting the glass.

ðəɹ ɪz ə θɝd kɑnstən bɪsaɪdz ðə kɹieɪɾɝ ən ðə dɑɹk wʌn, vɛɹɪnz mi-tɪkjələs vɔɪs sɛd, ə mɛmɹi fɹəm ənʌðɝ taɪm. ðəɹ ɪz ə wɝl ðət laɪz ɪθən itʃ ə ðiz ʌðɝz, ɪnsaɪɾ ɔl ə ðɛm ət ðə seɪm taɪm. əɹ pɝhæps sɝɾɪldə ɹaʊndɪŋ ðɛm. ɹaɪɾɝz ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz kɔld ɪt tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd.

There is a third constant besides the Creator and the Dark One, Verin's me-ticulous voice said, a memory from another time. There is a world that lies ithin each of these others, inside all of them at the same time. Or perhaps sur~ rounding them. Writers in the Age of Legends called it Tel'aran'rhiod.

dɪd ðɪs wɪndoʊ ɹɛpɹəzɛnt wʌn ə ðoʊz, ənʌðɝ wɝld wɛɹ dʒɹæɡən ən æmɪɝlɪn ɹul tɑɹ vəlɑn saɪd baɪ saɪd?

Did this window represent one of those, another world where Dragon and Amyrlin ruled Tar Valon side by side?

"ðæts ən ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ wɪndoʊ," ə vɔɪs sɛd fɹəm bɪhaɪn hɝ.

"That's an interesting window," a voice said from behind her.

ɛɡwin stɑɹɾəd, spɪnɪŋ. nɪneɪiv stʊd ðɛɹ, wɛɹɪŋ ə dʒɹɛs ə bɹaɪt jɛloʊ tʃɹɪmd wɪð ɡɹin əkɹɔs ðə haɪ bɑɾəs ən əlɔŋ ðə skɝt. ʃi wɔɹ ə ɹɛd dɑɾ ət ðə sɛntɝ ə hɝ fɔɹhɛd, ən hæɾ əɹ hɛɹ woʊvən ɪndə ɪts kɛɹəktɝɪstɪk bɹeɪd.

Egwene started, spinning. Nynaeve stood there, wearing a dress of bright yellow trimmed with green across the high bodice and along the skirt. She wore a red dot at the center of her forehead, and had her hair woven into its characteristic braid.

ɛɡwin fɛlt ə sɝdʒ ə ɹɪlif. faɪnəli! ɪt hæd bɪn mʌnθs sɪns ʃid sin nɪneɪiv. kɝsɪŋ ɪnsaɪd fəɹ lɛɾɪŋ hɝsɛlf bi sɝpɹaɪzd, ʃi smuðd əɹ feɪs ən ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs, wivɪŋ spɪɹət. ə fju ɪnvɝɾɪd wɔɹdz maɪt hɛlp kip əɹ fɹəm biɪŋ stɑɹɾəld əɡɛn. ɪleɪn wɑz səpoʊz tə ɝaɪv ə lɪɾəl leɪɾɝ.

Egwene felt a surge of relief. Finally! It had been months since she'd seen Nynaeve. Cursing inside for letting herself be surprised, she smoothed her face and embraced the Source, weaving Spirit. A few inverted wards might help keep her from being startled again. Elayne was supposed to arrive a little later.

"aɪ dɪdn tʃuz ðɪs pæɾɝn," ɛɡwin sɛd, lʊkɪŋ bæk ət ðə ɹoʊz wɪndoʊ. "ðɪs ɪz tɛlɝɑnɹhiədz ɪntɝpɹɪteɪʃən."

"I didn't choose this pattern," Egwene said, looking back at the Rose Window. "This is Tel'aran'rhiod's interpretation."

"bʌt ðə wɪndoʊ ɪtsɛlf ɪz ɹil?" nɪneɪiv æskt.

"But the window itself is real?" Nynaeve asked.

"ənfɔɹtʃənətli," ɛɡwin sɛd. "wʌn ə ðə hoʊlz ðə sintʃæn lɛft wən ðeɪ ətækt."

"Unfortunately," Egwene said. "One of the holes the Seanchan left when they attacked."

"ðeɪ ətækt}" nɪneɪiv æskt.

"They attacked}" Nynaeve asked.

"jɛs," ɛɡwin sɛd. sʌmθɪŋ jə wʊɾə noʊn ɪf juɾ ɛvɝ ɹɪspɑndɪd tə maɪ sʌmənz!

"Yes," Egwene said. Something you would have known if you'd ever responded to my summons!

nɪneɪiv foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz, ən ðə tu ʌv əm ɹəɡɑɹɾəd wʌn ənʌðɝ əkɹɔs ðə ɹum, fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn sɛntɝɪŋ ðə flɔɹ bɪniθ ðɛm. ðɪs wəɾ əv tə bi hændəl vɛɹi kɛɹfəli; nɪneɪiv kəd bi əz pɹɪkli əz ðə wɝst ə θɔɹnbəʃɪz.

Nynaeve folded her arms, and the two of them regarded one another across the room, Flame of Tar Valon centering the floor beneath them. This would have to be handled very carefully; Nynaeve could be as prickly as the worst of thornbushes.

'wɛl," nɪneɪiv sɛd, saʊndɪŋ dɪstɪŋkli ənkʌmftəɹbəl, "aɪ noʊ jəɹ bɪzi, ən laɪt noʊz aɪ hæv ɪnʌf θɪŋz tə bi duɪŋ. tɛl mi ðə nuz jə θɪŋk aɪ nid tə noʊ, ən əl bi ɔf."

'Well," Nynaeve said, sounding distinctly uncomfortable, "I know you're busy, and Light knows I have enough things to be doing. Tell me the news you think I need to know, and I'll be off."

"nɪneɪiv," ɛɡwin sɛd, "aɪ dɪdn bɹɪŋ jə hɪɹ oʊnli tə ɡɪv jə nuz."

"Nynaeve," Egwene said, "I didn't bring you here only to give you news."

nɪneɪiv ɡɹæspt əɹ bɹeɪd. ʃi nu ʃi ʃəd bi ɹɪbjuk fəɹ ðə weɪ ʃiɾ əvɔɪɾəd ɛɡwin.

Nynaeve grasped her braid. She knew she should be rebuked for the way she'd avoided Egwene.

æktʃəli ," ɛɡwin kəntɪnjud, "aɪ wɑntəd tə æsk jəɹ ædvaɪs."

Actually," Egwene continued, "I wanted to ask your advice."

nɪneɪiv blɪŋkt. "ædvaɪs ɑn wʌt?"

Nynaeve blinked. "Advice on what?"

wɛl," ɛɡwin sɛd, stʃɹoʊlɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə fleɪm, "jɔɹ wʌn ə ðə fju pipəl aɪ kən θɪŋk ə hu hæz bɪn ɪn ə sɪtʃueɪʃən sɪməlɝ tə maɪn."

Well," Egwene said, strolling across the Flame, "you're one of the few people I can think of who has been in a situation similar to mine."

"æmɪɝlɪn?" nɪneɪiv æsk flætli.

"Amyrlin?" Nynaeve asked flatly.

"ə liɾɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd, pæsɪŋ nɪneɪiv ən nɑɾɪŋ fəɹ əɹ tə wɔk bɪsaɪd hɝ, "ðæɾ ɛvɹiwʌn θɪŋks ɪz tu jʌŋ. hu ɹoʊz tə hɝ pəzɪʃən əbɹʌpli. hu noʊz ʃiz ðə ɹaɪt wʊmən fəɹ ðə dʒɑb, jɛɾ əz oʊnli ɡɹʌdʒɪŋ æksɛptəns fɹəm moʊst ə ðoʊz nɪɹ hɝ."

"A leader," Egwene said, passing Nynaeve and nodding for her to walk beside her, "that everyone thinks is too young. Who rose to her position abruptly. Who knows she is the right woman for the job, yet has only grudging acceptance from most of those near her."

"jɛs," nɪneɪiv sɛd, wɔkɪŋ wɪð ɛɡwin, aɪz ɡɹoʊɪŋ dɪstənt. "ju aɪ kəd seɪ aɪ noʊ sʌmθɪŋ ə biɪŋ ɪn ðət sɪtʃueɪʃən."

"Yes," Nynaeve said, walking with Egwene, eyes growing distant. "You I could say I know something of being in that situation."

"haʊ dɪd jə dil wɪð ɪt?" ɛɡwin æskt. "ɪt simz ðəɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ aɪ du, aɪ nid tə də maɪsɛlf -  kəz ɪf aɪ doʊnt, ðeɪ ɪɡnɔɹ mi wʌns aɪm aʊɾ ə saɪt. mɛni əsum ðəɾ aɪ ɡɪv ɔɹɾɝz dʒʌs tə bi sin meɪkɪŋ nɔɪz, əɹ ðeɪ ɹɪzɛn maɪ pəzɪʃən əbʌv ðɛm."

"How did you deal with it?" Egwene asked. "It seems that everything I do, I need to do myself -  because if I don't, they ignore me once I'm out of sight. Many assume that I give orders just to be seen making noise, or they resent my position above them."

"haʊ dɪɾ aɪ dil wɪð ɪt wən aɪ wɑz wɪzdəm?" nɪneɪiv æskt. "ɛɡwin, aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf aɪ dɪd. aɪ kəd bɛɹli kip maɪsɛlf fɹəm bɑksɪŋ dʒɑn θeɪnz ɪɹz hæf ðə deɪz, ən doʊnt ɡɛt mi tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt sɛn!"

"How did I deal with it when I was Wisdom?" Nynaeve asked. "Egwene, I don't know if I did. I could barely keep myself from boxing Jon Thane's ears half the days, and don't get me talking about Cenn!"

"bʌɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli ðeɪ ɹɪspɛktɪd ju."

"But eventually they respected you."

"ɪt wɑz ə mæɾɝ ə nɑt lɛɾɪŋ əm fɝɡɛt maɪ steɪʃən. ðeɪ kʊdn bi əlaʊd tə kəntɪnju tə θɪŋk ə mi əz ə jʌŋ ɡɝl. ɪstæblɪʃ jəɹ əθɔɹəɾi kwɪkli. bi fɝm wɪð ðə wɪmən ɪn ðə taʊɝ, ɛɡwin, kəz ðəl bɪɡɪn baɪ siɪŋ haʊ fɑɹ ðeɪ kən pʊʃ ju. ən wʌns juv lɛɾ əm pʊʃ jə ə hændspæn, ɪts hɑɹɾɝ ðən wɪntɝ məlæsəz tə ɡɛt bæk wʌt juv lɔst."

"It was a matter of not letting them forget my station. They couldn't be allowed to continue to think of me as a young girl. Establish your authority quickly. Be firm with the women in the Tower, Egwene, because they'll begin by seeing how far they can push you. And once you've let them push you a handspan, it's harder than winter molasses to get back what you've lost."

"ɔl ɹaɪt," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"All right," Egwene said.

"æn doʊn kʌm ʌp wɪð aɪɾəl wɝk fəɹ əm tə du," nɪneɪiv sɛd. ðeɪ pæst aʊɾ ə ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, stʃɹoʊlɪŋ θɹu ðə hɔlweɪz. "ɡɛɾ əm juz tə jə ɡɪvɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz, bʌt meɪk ðoʊz ɔɹɾɝz ɡʊd wʌnz. meɪk ʃʊɹ ðeɪ doʊn baɪpæs ju. aɪd ɡɛs ðəɾ ɪt maɪt bi izi fəɹ əm tə stɑɹt lʊkɪŋ tə ðə sɪɾɝz əɹ ði ədʒɑ hɛdz ɪnstɛɾ ə ju; wɪmən ɪn ɛmənz fil stɑɹɾəd ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl ɪnstɛɾ ə mi.

"And don't come up with idle work for them to do," Nynaeve said. They passed out of the Hall of the Tower, strolling through the hallways. "Get them used to you giving orders, but make those orders good ones. Make sure they don't bypass you. I'd guess that it might be easy for them to start looking to the Sitters or the Ajah heads instead of you; women in Emond's Field started going to the Women's Circle instead of me.

"ɪf jə dɪskʌvɝ ðət ðə sɪɾɝz ɑɹ meɪkɪŋ dɪsɪʒənz ðət ʃʊɾə kʌm bɪfɔɹ ði ɪntaɪɝ hɔl, juv tə meɪk ə bɪɡ fʌs əbaʊɾ ɪt. tʃɹʌs mi. ðəl ɡɹaʊs ðət jəɹ meɪkɪŋ tu mʌtʃ nɔɪz oʊvɝ smɔl θɪŋz, bʌt ðəl θɪŋk twaɪs əbaʊt duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt wɪθaʊt jəɹ ətɛnʃən."

"If you discover that the Sitters are making decisions that should have come before the entire Hall, you have to make a big fuss about it. Trust me. They'll grouse that you're making too much noise over small things, but they'll think twice about doing something important without your attention."

ɛɡwin nɑɾəd. ɪt wɑz ɡʊɾ ædvaɪs, ðoʊ - ʌv kɔɹs - ɪt keɪm kʌlɝd baɪ nɪneɪivz vju ʌv ðə wɝld. "aɪ θɪŋk ðə bɪɡəs pɹɑbləm," ɛɡwin sɛd, "ɪz ðəɾ aɪ hæv soʊ fju tʃɹu səpɔɹɾɝz."

Egwene nodded. It was good advice, though - of course - it came colored by Nynaeve's view of the world. "I think the biggest problem," Egwene said, "is that I have so few true supporters."

"ju hæv mi. ən ɪleɪn."

"You have me. And Elayne."

"du aɪ?" ɛɡwin sɛd, stɑpɪŋ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ ən lʊkɪŋ ət nɪneɪiv. "du aɪ ɹɪli hæv ju, nɪneɪiv?"

"Do I?" Egwene said, stopping in the hallway and looking at Nynaeve. "Do I really have you, Nynaeve?"

ðə fɔɹmɝ wɪzdəm stɑp bɪsaɪd hɝ. "ʌv kɔɹs jə du. doʊn bi sɪli"

The former Wisdom stopped beside her. "Of course you do. Don't be silly"

"æn haʊ wɪl ɪt sim," ɛɡwin æskt, "ɪf ðoʊz u noʊ mi bɛs fjuz maɪ əθɔɹəɾi? maɪɾ ɪt sim tə ði ʌðɝz ðət ðəɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ hɛv də nɑt noʊ? səm wiknəs ðəɾ oʊnli maɪ fɹɛnz əv sin?"

"And how will it seem," Egwene asked, "if those who know me best fuse my authority? Might it seem to the others that there is something hev do not know? Some weakness that only my friends have seen?"

nɪneɪiv fɹoʊz. sʌɾənli, hɝ ɑnəsti mɛltəɾ ɪndə səspɪʃən, hɝ aɪz nɛɹoʊɪŋ. "ðɪs wɑzn əbaʊɾ æskɪŋ mi fəɹ ædvaɪs əɾ ɔl, wɑz ɪt?"

Nynaeve froze. Suddenly, her honesty melted into suspicion, her eyes narrowing. "This wasn't about asking me for advice at all, was it?"

"ʌv kɔɹs ɪt wɑz," ɛɡwin sɛd. "oʊnli ə ful wəɾ ɪɡnɔɹ ði ædvaɪs ə ðoʊz u səpɔɹt hɝ.

"Of course it was," Egwene said. "Only a fool would ignore the advice of those who support her.

bʌt haʊ dɪɾ ɪt fil fəɹ ju, ðoʊz fɝst wiks wən jə bɪkeɪm wɪzdəm? wən ɔl ðə wɪmən jə wɝ səpoʊz tə bi liɾɪŋ lʊkt ət jə oʊnli əz ðə ɡɝl ðeɪ hæd noʊn?"

But how did it feel for you, those first weeks when you became Wisdom? When all the women you were supposed to be leading looked at you only as the girl they had known?"

"tɛɹəbəl," nɪneɪiv sɛd sɔfli.

"Terrible," Nynaeve said softly.

"ænd wɝ ðeɪ ɹɔŋ tə də soʊ?"

"And were they wrong to do so?"

"jɛs. kəz aɪd bɪkʌm sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ. ɪt wɑzn mi ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, ɪt wɑz maɪ steɪʃən."

"Yes. Because I'd become something more. It wasn't me any longer, it was my station."

ɛɡwin mɛt ði oʊldɝ wʊmənz aɪz, hoʊldɪŋ ðɛm, ən ən ʌndɝstændɪŋ pæs bɪtwin ðɛm.

Egwene met the older woman's eyes, holding them, and an understanding passed between them.

"laɪt," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ju kɑt mi kwaɪt saʊnli, dɪdn ju?"

"Light," Nynaeve said. "You caught me quite soundly, didn't you?"

"aɪ nid ju, nɪneɪiv," ɛɡwin sɛd. "nɑt dʒʌs kəz jəɹ soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ðə paʊɝ, nɑt dʒʌs kəz jəɹ ə klɛvɝ, dɪtɝmənd wʊmən. nɑt dʒʌs kəz jəɹ ɹifɹɛʃɪŋli ənteɪntɪd baɪ taʊɝ pɑlətɪks, ən nɑt dʒʌs kəz jəɹ wʌn ə ðə fju hu nu ɹænd bɪfɔɹ ðɪs ɔl bɪɡæn. bʌt kəz aɪ nid pipəl aɪ kən tʃɹʌst ɪmplɪsətli. ɪf jə kən bi wʌn ə ðoʊz."

"I need you, Nynaeve," Egwene said. "Not just because you're so strong in the Power, not just because you're a clever, determined woman. Not just because you're refreshingly untainted by Tower politics, and not just because you're one of the few who knew Rand before this all began. But because I need people I can trust implicitly. If you can be one of those."

"jul əv mi nilɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "kɪsɪŋ jəɹ ɹɪŋ."

"You'll have me kneeling on the ground," Nynaeve said. "Kissing your ring."

"ænd? wəd juv dʌn ɪt fəɹ ənʌðɝ æmɪɝlɪn?"

"And? Would you have done it for another Amyrlin?"

"nɑt hæpəli."

"Not happily."

"bʌt juɾ əv dʌn ɪt."

"But you'd have done it."

"jɛs."

"Yes."

"æn dʒju ɑnəsli θɪŋk ðəɹ ɪz ənʌðɝ u wəd də ə bɛɾɝ dʒɑb ðən aɪ?"

"And do you honestly think there is another who would do a better job than I?"

nɪneɪiv hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd.

Nynaeve hesitated, then shook her head.

ðən waɪ ɪz ɪt soʊ bɪɾɝ fəɹ jə tə sɝv ði æmɪɝlɪn? nɑt mi, nɪneɪiv, bʌt ðə steɪʃən."

Then why is it so bitter for you to serve the Amyrlin? Not me, Nynaeve, but the station."

nɪneɪivz feɪs lʊkt əz ɪf ʃid dʒɹʌŋk sʌmθɪŋ vɛɹi bɪɾɝ. "ðɪs wɪl  . . nɑt bi izi fəɹ mi."

Nynaeve's face looked as if she'd drunk something very bitter. "This will  . . not be easy for me."

aɪ vi nɛvɝ noʊn jə tə əvɔɪɾ ə tæsk kəz ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəlt, nɪneɪiv." "ðə steɪʃən. ɔl ɹaɪt.

I ve never known you to avoid a task because it was difficult, Nynaeve." "The station. All right.

əl tʃɹaɪ." ðən jə maɪt bɪɡɪn baɪ kɔlɪŋ mi mʌðɝ." ɛɡwin hɛld ʌp ə fɪŋɡɝ tə kʌɾ ɔf nɪneɪivz əbdʒɛkʃən. "tə ɹimaɪn jɝsɛlf, nɪneɪiv. ɪt nidn bi pɝmənənt, ət lis nɑɾ ɪn pɹaɪvət. bʌt jə mʌs bɪɡɪn θɪŋkɪŋ ə mi əz aɪ æmɪɝlɪn."

I'll try." Then you might begin by calling me Mother." Egwene held up a finger to cut off Nynaeve's objection. "To remind yourself, Nynaeve. It needn't be permanent, at least not in private. But you must begin thinking of me as I Amyrlin."

"ɔl ɹaɪt, ɔl ɹaɪt. juv pɹɪk mi wɪð ɪnʌf θɔɹnz. aɪ ɔlɹɛɾi fil əz ɪf aɪv bɪn dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ wɪndsæɾɝz dʒɹæft ɔl deɪ." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən æɾəd, "mʌðɝ." ʃi ɔlmoʊst sim tə tʃoʊk ɑn ðə wɝd.

"All right, all right. You've pricked me with enough thorns. I already feel as if I've been drinking windsatter's draught all day." She hesitated, then added, "Mother." She almost seemed to choke on the word.

ɛɡwin smaɪld ɛnkɝɪdʒɪŋli.

Egwene smiled encouragingly.

"aɪ woʊn tʃɹit jə ðə weɪ wɪmən dɪd mi æftɝ aɪ wɑz fɝs neɪmd wɪzdəm," nɪneɪiv pɹɑməst.

"I won't treat you the way women did me after I was first named Wisdom," Nynaeve promised.

"laɪt! ɑd tə bi eɪbəl tə fil əz ðeɪ dɪd wɛl, ðeɪ wɝ stɪl fulz. əl də bɛɾɝ; jəl si ɪt.

"Light! Odd to be able to feel as they did Well, they were still fools. I'll do better; you'll see it.

mʌðɝ."

Mother."

ɪt saʊndəɾ ə lɪɾəl lɛs fɔɹs ðət taɪm. ɛɡwin bɹɔɾənd əɹ smaɪl. ðəɹ wɝ fju weɪz tə moʊɾəveɪt nɪneɪiv bɛɾɝ ðən ə kɑmpətɪʃən.

It sounded a little less forced that time. Egwene broadened her smile. There were few ways to motivate Nynaeve better than a competition.

sʌɾənli, ə tɪŋkəlɪŋ bɛl ɹæŋ ɪn ɛɡwinz maɪnd. ʃiɾ ɔlmoʊs fɝɡɑɾən əɹ wɔɹdz. "aɪ θɪŋk ɪleɪn əz ɝaɪvd."

Suddenly, a tinkling bell rang in Egwene's mind. She'd almost forgotten her wards. "I think Elayne has arrived."

"ɡʊd," nɪneɪiv sɛd, saʊndɪŋ ɹɪlivd. "lɛts ɡoʊ tə hɝ, ðɛn." ʃi bɪɡæn stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ bæk təwɔɹd ðə hɔl, ðən fɹoʊz. ʃi ɡlæns bæk. "ɪf ɪt plizɪz ju, mʌðɝ."

"Good," Nynaeve said, sounding relieved. "Let's go to her, then." She began striding back toward the Hall, then froze. She glanced back. "If it pleases you, Mother."

aɪ wʌndɝ ɪf ʃɪl ɛvɝ bi eɪbəl tə seɪ ðət wɪθaʊt saʊndɪŋ ɑkwɝd, ɛɡwin θɔt. wɛl, soʊ lɔŋ əz ʃiz tʃɹaɪɪŋ. "æn ɛksələn sədʒɛstʃən." ʃi dʒɔɪnd nɪneɪiv. əpɑn ɝaɪvɪŋ ɪn ðə hɔl, haʊɛvɝ, ðeɪ faʊn ɪɾ ɛmpti. ɛɡwin foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz, lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊnd.

I wonder if she'll ever be able to say that without sounding awkward, Egwene thought. Well, so long as she's trying. "An excellent suggestion." She joined Nynaeve. Upon arriving in the Hall, however, they found it empty. Egwene folded her arms, looking around.

"meɪbi ʃi wɛn lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ʌs," nɪneɪiv sɛd.

"Maybe she went looking for us," Nynaeve said.

"wiɾ əv sin əɹ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "bɪsaɪdz . . ."

"We'd have seen her in the hallway," Egwene said. "Besides . . ."

ɪleɪn pɑpt ɪndə ðə ɹum. ʃi wɔɹ ə ɹiɡəl waɪt ɡaʊn, spɑɹklɪŋ wɪð daɪmənz. əz sun əz ʃi sɔ ɛɡwin, ʃi smaɪl bɹɔdli, ɹʌʃɪŋ oʊvɝ ən teɪkɪŋ əɹ hænz. "ju dɪɾ ɪt, ɛɡwin! wɝ hoʊl əɡɛn!"

Elayne popped into the room. She wore a regal white gown, sparkling with diamonds. As soon as she saw Egwene, she smiled broadly, rushing over and taking her hands. "You did it, Egwene! We're whole again!"

ɛɡwin smaɪld. "jɛs, ðoʊ ðə taʊɝ ɪz stɪl ɪnʒɝd. ðəɹ ɪz mʌtʃ tə du."

Egwene smiled. "Yes, though the Tower is still injured. There is much to do."

"ju saʊn laɪk nɪneɪiv." ɪleɪn ɡlænst ət nɪneɪiv, smaɪlɪŋ.

"You sound like Nynaeve." Elayne glanced at Nynaeve, smiling.

"θæŋk ju," nɪneɪiv sɛd dʒɹaɪli.

"Thank you," Nynaeve said dryly.

"oʊ, doʊn bi soʊ sɪli." ɪleɪn wɔkt oʊvɝ ən ɡeɪv nɪneɪiv ə fɹɛnli hʌɡ. "aɪm ɡlæd jəɹ hɪɹ. aɪd wɝid ðət jə wʊdn kʌm, ən ɛɡwin wəɾ əv tə hʌn jə daʊn ən pʊl jəɹ toʊz ɔf wʌn əɾ ə taɪm."

"Oh, don't be so silly." Elayne walked over and gave Nynaeve a friendly hug. "I'm glad you're here. I'd worried that you wouldn't come, and Egwene would have to hunt you down and pull your toes off one at a time."

"ði æmɪɝlɪn," nɪneɪiv sɛd, "hæz mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ θɪŋz tə du. ɪzən ðət ɹaɪt, mʌðɝ?"

"The Amyrlin," Nynaeve said, "has much better things to do. Isn't that right, Mother?"

ɪleɪn stɑɹɾəd, lʊkɪŋ əmeɪzd. ʃi ɡɑɾ ə ɡlɪmɝ ɪn əɹ aɪ, ən hɪɾ ə smaɪl. ʃi əsum ðət nɪneɪiv hæd bɪn ɡɪvən ə tʌŋ-læʃɪŋ. bʌt, ʌv kɔɹs, ɛɡwin nu ðət wʊdn əv wɝkt wɪð nɪneɪiv; ɪt wəd bi laɪk tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə jæŋk ə bɝ aʊɾ ə jəɹ skɪn wən ɪts spaɪnz hæd ɡɔn ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ weɪ.

Elayne started, looking amazed. She got a glimmer in her eye, and hid a smile. She assumed that Nynaeve had been given a tongue-lashing. But, of course, Egwene knew that wouldn't have worked with Nynaeve; it would be like trying to yank a burr out of your skin when its spines had gone in the wrong way.

"ɪleɪn," ɛɡwin sɛd. "wɛɹ dɪd jə ɡoʊ, bɪfɔɹ wi ɹɪtɝnd?"

"Elayne," Egwene said. "Where did you go, before we returned?"

"wʌt dʒju min?" ʃi sɛd.

"What do you mean?" she said.

"wɛn jə fɝs keɪm hɪɹ, wi wɝ ɡɔn. dɪd jə ɡoʊ sʌmwɛɹ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ʌs?"

"When you first came here, we were gone. Did you go somewhere looking for us?"

ɪleɪn sim pɝplɛkst. "aɪ tʃænəld ɪndə maɪ tɛɹæŋɡɹil, wɛn tə slip, ən jə wɝ hɪɹ wən aɪ əpɪɹd."

Elayne seemed perplexed. "I channeled into my terangreal, went to sleep, and you were here when I appeared."

"ðɛn u sɛɾ ɔf ðə wɔɹdz?" nɪneɪiv æskt.

"Then who set off the wards?" Nynaeve asked.

tʃɹʌbəld, ɛɡwin ɹisɛt ðə wɔɹdz ən ðən - θɪŋkɪŋ kɛɹfəli - ʃi woʊv ən ɪnvɝɾɪd wɔɹɾ əɡɛnst ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ bʌɾ ɔltɝɾ ɪt tə əlaʊ ə lɪɾəl bɪɾ ə saʊn θɹu. wɪð ənʌðɝ wiv, ʃi pɹədʒɛktəd ðət lɪɾəl bɪt fɑɹ aʊɾ ɝaʊn ðɛm.

Troubled, Egwene reset the wards and then - thinking carefully - she wove an inverted ward against eavesdropping but altered it to allow a little bit of sound through. With another weave, she projected that little bit far out around them.

sʌmwʌn u ɡɹu nɪɹ wəd hɪɹ əm əz ɪf wɪspɝɪŋ. ðeɪɾ ɛdʒ kloʊsɝ, bʌt ðə saʊnd wəd ɹɪmeɪn ə wɪspɝ. pɝhæps ðət wəd dʒɹɔ ðɛm kloʊsɝ, ɪntʃ baɪ ɪntʃ, əz ðeɪ stʃɹeɪn tə hɪɹ.

Someone who grew near would hear them as if whispering. They'd edge closer, but the sound would remain a whisper. Perhaps that would draw them closer, inch by inch, as they strained to hear.

nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn wɑtʃt əɹ meɪk ðə wivz, ɪleɪn lʊkɪŋ ɔd, ðoʊ nɪneɪiv nɑɾəd θɔtfəli tə hɝsɛlf.

Nynaeve and Elayne watched her make the weaves, Elayne looking awed, though Nynaeve nodded thoughtfully to herself.

"sɪt, pliz," ɛɡwin sɛd, meɪkɪŋ hɝsɛlf ə tʃɛɹ ən sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ɪt. "wi hæv mʌtʃ tə dɪskʌs."

"Sit, please," Egwene said, making herself a chair and sitting in it. "We have much to discuss."

ɪleɪn meɪd hɝsɛlf ə θɹoʊn, pɹɑbli ʌnkɑnʃəsli, ən nɪneɪiv meɪɾ ə sit kɑpiɪŋ ðə tʃɛɹz ə ðə sɪɾɝz ɪn ðə ɹum. ɛɡwin, ʌv kɔɹs, hæd muv ði æmɪɝlɪn sit.

Elayne made herself a throne, probably unconsciously, and Nynaeve made a seat copying the chairs of the Sitters in the room. Egwene, of course, had moved the Amyrlin Seat.

nɪneɪiv lʊk fɹəm wʌn θɹoʊn tə ənʌðɝ, ɑbviəsli dɪsæɾəsfaɪd. meɪbi ðət wɑz waɪ ʃid ɹɪzɪstɪd ðiz miɾɪŋz fəɹ soʊ lɔŋ; ɛɡwin ən ɪleɪn hæd ɹɪzən soʊ fɑɹ.

Nynaeve looked from one throne to another, obviously dissatisfied. Maybe that was why she'd resisted these meetings for so long; Egwene and Elayne had risen so far.

ɪt wɑz taɪm fəɹ səm hʌni tə teɪk əweɪ ðə bɪɾɝnəs. "nɪneɪiv," ɛɡwin sɛd. "aɪd laɪk ɪt vɛɹi mʌtʃ ɪf jə kəd ɹɪtɝn tə ðə taʊɝ ən titʃ mɔɹ ə ðə sɪstɝz ɪn jəɹ nu mɛθəɾ ə hilɪŋ.

It was time for some honey to take away the bitterness. "Nynaeve," Egwene said. "I'd like it very much if you could return to the Tower and teach more of the sisters in your new method of Healing.

mɛni ɑɹ lɝnɪŋ ɪt, bʌt ðeɪ kəd juz mɔɹ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃən. ən ðəɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝz u ɑɹ ɹɪlʌktən tə əbændən ði oʊld weɪz."

Many are learning it, but they could use more instruction. And there are others who are reluctant to abandon the old ways."

"stʌbɝn ɡoʊts," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ʃoʊ ðɛm tʃɛɹiz ən ðəl stɪl it ðə ɹɑɾən æpəlz, ɪf ðeɪv bɪn duɪŋ ɪt lɔŋ ɪnʌf. aɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪt wəd bi pɹuɾənt fəɹ mi tə kʌm, ðoʊ. ɝ, mʌðɝ."

"Stubborn goats," Nynaeve said. "Show them cherries and they'll still eat the rotten apples, if they've been doing it long enough. I'm not sure it would be prudent for me to come, though. Er, Mother."

"waɪ ɪz ðæt?"

"Why is that?"

ɹænd," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "sʌmwʌn əz tə kip ən aɪ ɑn hɪm. sʌmwʌn ʌðɝ ðən kædzueɪn, ət list." hɝ lɪps tɝn daʊn ət ðət wʊmənz neɪm. "hiz tʃeɪnʒd ɹisənli."

Rand," Nynaeve said. "Someone has to keep an eye on him. Someone other than Cadsuane, at least." Her lips turned down at that woman's name. "He's changed recently."

tʃeɪnʒd?" ɪleɪn sɛd, saʊndɪŋ kənsɝnd. "wʌt dʒju min?"

Changed?" Elayne said, sounding concerned. "What do you mean?"

hæv jə sin ɪm ɹisənli?" ɛɡwin æskt.

Have you seen him recently?" Egwene asked.

noʊ," ɪleɪn sɛɾ ɪmiɾiətli. tu kwɪkli. ɪt wɑz əndaʊɾɪdli ðə tʃɹuθ- - ɪleɪn wʊdn laɪ tə hɝ - bʌt ðəɹ wɝ θɪŋz ʃi wɑz haɪɾɪŋ əbaʊt ɹænd. ɛɡwin hæd səspɛktəɾ ɪt fəɹ ə taɪm. kəd ʃi hæv bɑndəd hɪm?

No," Elayne said immediately. Too quickly. It was undoubtedly the truth- - Elayne wouldn't lie to her - but there were things she was hiding about Rand. Egwene had suspected it for a time. Could she have bonded him?

"hi hæz tʃeɪnʒd," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "æn ɪts ə vɛɹi ɡʊd θɪŋ. mʌðɝ . . . jə doʊnt noʊ haʊ bæɾ i ɡɹu. ðəɹ wɝ taɪmz wən ti wɑz tɛɹəfaɪɾ ə hɪm. naʊ ... ðæts ɡɔn. hiz ðə seɪm pɝsən -  hi ivən tɔks ðə seɪm weɪ əz bɪfɔɹ. kwaɪətli, wɪθaʊɾ æŋɡɝ. bɪfɔɹ ɪt wɑz laɪk ðə kwaɪəɾ ʌv ə naɪf biɪŋ dʒɹɔn, ən naʊ ɪts laɪk ðə kwaɪəɾ ʌv ə bɹiz."

"He has changed," Nynaeve said. "And it's a very good thing. Mother . . . you don't know how bad he grew. There were times when T was terrified of him. Now ... that's gone. He's the same person -  he even talks the same way as before. Quietly, without anger. Before it was like the quiet of a knife being drawn, and now it's like the quiet of a breeze."

"hiz əweɪkənd," ɪleɪn sɛd sʌɾənli. "hiz wɔɹm naʊ."

"He's awakened," Elayne said suddenly. "He's warm now."

ɛɡwin fɹaʊnd. "wʌt dʌz ðət min?"

Egwene frowned. "What does that mean?"

"aɪ . . . æktʃəli , aɪ doʊnt noʊ." ɪleɪn blʌʃt. "ɪt keɪm aʊt. sɑɹi."

"I . . . Actually, I don't know." Elayne blushed. "It came out. Sorry."

jɛs, ʃid bɑndəd hɪm. wɛl, ðət kəd bi jusfəl. waɪ dɪdnt ʃi wɪʃ tə spik ʌv ɪt? ɛɡwin wəɾ əv tə tɔk tə hɝ əloʊn sʌmtaɪm.

Yes, she'd bonded him. Well, that could be useful. Why didn't she wish to speak of it? Egwene would have to talk to her alone sometime.

nɪneɪiv wɑz stʌɾiɪŋ ɪleɪn wɪð nɛɹoʊɾ aɪz. hæd ʃi noʊɾəst əz wɛl? hɝ aɪz flɪkɝd təwɔɹɾ ɪleɪnz tʃɛst, ðən daʊn əɾ əɹ bɛli.

Nynaeve was studying Elayne with narrowed eyes. Had she noticed as well? Her eyes flickered toward Elayne's chest, then down at her belly.

"jɔɹ pɹɛɡnənt!" nɪneɪiv əkjuz sʌɾənli, pɔɪntɪŋ əɾ ɪleɪn.

"You're pregnant!" Nynaeve accused suddenly, pointing at Elayne.

ði ændɔɝən kwin blʌʃt. ðət wɑz ɹaɪt, nɪneɪiv wʊdnt noʊ ʌv ðə pɹɛɡnənsi, ðoʊ ɛɡwin hæd hɝd fɹəm eɪvinhə.

The Andoran queen blushed. That was right, Nynaeve wouldn't know of the pregnancy, though Egwene had heard from Aviendha.

"laɪt!" nɪneɪiv sɛd. "aɪ dɪdn θɪŋk aɪd lɛt ɹænd aʊɾ ə maɪ saɪt lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ ðæt. wən dɪɾ ɪt hæpən?"

"Light!" Nynaeve said. "I didn't think I'd let Rand out of my sight long enough for that. When did it happen?"

ɪleɪn blʌʃt. "noʊbɑdi sɛd ðəɾ i - "

Elayne blushed. "Nobody said that he - "

nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv ɪleɪn ə flæt stɛɹ, ən ðə kwin blʌʃt fɝðɝ. boʊθ nu nɪneɪivz filɪŋz əbaʊt pɹəpɹaɪəɾi ɪn ðiz mæɾɝz - ænd, ɪn tʃɹuθ, ɛɡwin əɡɹid. bʌɾ ɪleɪnz pɹaɪvət laɪf wɑz nʌn ə hɝ bɪznəs.

Nynaeve gave Elayne a flat stare, and the Queen blushed further. Both knew Nynaeve's feelings about propriety in these matters - and, in truth, Egwene agreed. But Elayne's private life was none of her business.

"aɪm hæpi fəɹ ju, ɪleɪn," ɛɡwin sɛd. "æn fəɹ ɹænd. aɪm nɑt sɝɾən wʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ə ðə taɪmɪŋ. jə ʃəd noʊ ðət ɹænd ɪz plænɪŋ tə bɹeɪk ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ silz əpɑn ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən, ən ɪn soʊ duɪŋ, ɹɪsk ɹilisɪŋ ɪm əpɑn ðə wɝld."

"I'm happy for you, Elayne," Egwene said. "And for Rand. I'm not certain what I think of the timing. You should know that Rand is planning to break the remaining seals upon the Dark One's prison, and in so doing, risk releasing him upon the world."

ɪleɪn pɝst əɹ lɪps. "wɛl, ðəɹ ɑɹ oʊnli θɹi silz lɛft, ən ðəɹ kɹʌmbəlɪŋ."

Elayne pursed her lips. "Well, there are only three seals left, and they're crumbling."

"soʊ wʌɾ ɪf hiz ɹʌnɪŋ ðət ɹɪsk?" nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɪl bi fɹid wən ðə faɪnəl sil kɹʌmbəlz; bɛst ɪf ɪt hæpənz wən ɹænd ɪz ðəɹ tə bæɾəl hɪm."

"So what if he is running that risk?" Nynaeve said. "The Dark One will be freed when the final seal crumbles; best if it happens when Rand is there to battle him."

"jɛs, bʌt ðə silz? ðæts fulhɑɹɾi. ʃʊɹli ɹænd kən feɪs ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ən dɪfit hɪm, ən sil ɪm əweɪ wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ ðət ɹɪsk."

"Yes, but the seals? That's foolhardy. Surely Rand can face the Dark One, and defeat him, and seal him away without taking that risk."

"meɪbi jəɹ ɹaɪt," nɪneɪiv sɛd.

"Maybe you're right," Nynaeve said.

ɪleɪn lʊk tʃɹʌbəld.

Elayne looked troubled.

ðɪs wɑz ə mɔɹ lukwɔɹm ɹɪsɛpʃən ðən ɛɡwin hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd. ʃid θɔt ðət ðə waɪz wʌnz wəd ɹɪzɪs hɝ, waɪl nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn wəɾ ɪmiɾiətli si ðə deɪnʒɝ.

This was a more lukewarm reception than Egwene had expected. She'd thought that the Wise Ones would resist her, while Nynaeve and Elayne would immediately see the danger.

nɪneɪiv əz bɪn ɝaʊn ɪm tu mʌtʃ, ɛɡwin θɔt. ʃi wɑz laɪkli kɑɾ ʌp baɪ hɪz tɑvɝən neɪtʃɝ. ðə pæɾɝn bɛn ɝaʊn hɪm. ðoʊz nɪɹ ɪm wəd bɪɡɪn tə si θɪŋz ɪz weɪ, wəd wɝk - ʌnkɑnʃəsli - tə si hɪz wɪl dʌn.

Nynaeve has been around him too much, Egwene thought. She was likely caught up by his ta'veren nature. The Pattern bent around him. Those near him would begin to see things his way, would work - unconsciously - to see his will done.

ðət hæd tə bi ði ɛkspləneɪʃən. nɔɹməli, nɪneɪiv wɑz soʊ lɛvlhɛɾɪd əbaʊt ðiz sɔɹts ə θɪŋz. əɹ . . . wɛl, nɪneɪiv wɑzn ɪɡzækli lɛvlhɛɾɪd, ɹɪli. bʌt dʒɛnɝəli dɪd si ðə ɹaɪt weɪ θɪŋz niɾəd tə bi dʌn, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðət ɹaɪt weɪ dɪdn ɪnvɑlv əɹ biɪŋ ɹɔŋ.

That had to be the explanation. Normally, Nynaeve was so levelheaded about these sorts of things. Or . . . well, Nynaeve wasn't exactly levelheaded, really. But generally did see the right way things needed to be done, so long as that right way didn't involve her being wrong.

"aɪ nid boʊθ ə jə tə ɹɪtɝn tə ðə taʊɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ɪleɪn, aɪ noʊ wʌt jəɹ gɑnə seɪ - ən jɛs, aɪ ɹilaɪz ðət jə ɑɹ kwin, ən ðəɾ ændɝz nidz mʌs bi mɛt. bʌt soʊ lɔŋ əz jə hævən teɪkən ði oʊðz, ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪl θɪŋk jə ʌndɪzɝvɪŋ."

"I need both of you to return to the Tower," Egwene said. "Elayne, I know what you're going to say - and yes, I realize that you are Queen, and that Andor's needs must be met. But so long as you haven't taken the oaths, other Aes Sedai will think you undeserving."

"ʃiz ɹaɪt, ɪleɪn," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ju nidn vɪzət fəɹ lɔŋ -  ɪnʌf taɪm tə bi ɹeɪz fɔɹməli tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ən bi æksɛptɪɾ ɪndə ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ. ðə noʊbəlz ʌv ændɝ woʊnt noʊ ðə dɪfɝəns, bʌɾ ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪl."

"She's right, Elayne," Nynaeve said. "You needn't visit for long -  enough time to be raised formally to an Aes Sedai and be accepted into the Green Ajah. The nobles of Andor won't know the difference, but other Aes Sedai will."

"tʃɹu," ɪleɪn sɛd. "bʌt ðə taɪmɪŋ ɪz . . . ɑkwɝd. aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf aɪ wɑnə ɹɪsk swɛɹɪŋ ði oʊðz waɪl pɹɛɡnənt. ɪt maɪt hɑɹm ðə tʃɪlʒɹən."

"True," Elayne said. "But the timing is . . . awkward. I don't know if I want to risk swearing the oaths while pregnant. It might harm the children."

ðət ɡeɪv nɪneɪiv pɔz.

That gave Nynaeve pause.

"ju meɪ hæv ə pɔɪnt," ɛɡwin sɛd. "aɪ wɪl əv sʌmwʌn lʊk ɪndə wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ði oʊðz ɑɹ deɪnʒɝəs ɪn pɹɛɡnənsi. bʌt nɪneɪiv, aɪ wɑn jə bæk hɪɹ fəɹ sɝɾən."

"You may have a point," Egwene said. "I will have someone look into whether or not the oaths are dangerous in pregnancy. But Nynaeve, I want you back here for certain."

"ɪt wɪl liv ɹænd kəmplitli ənətɛndɪd, mʌðɝ."

"It will leave Rand completely unattended, Mother."

"aɪm əfɹeɪɾ ɪts ɪmpɑsəbəl tə əvɔɪd." ɛɡwin mɛt nɪneɪivz aɪz. "aɪ woʊn əv jə əz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ fɹi ʌv ði oʊðz. noʊ, kloʊs jəɹ maʊθ - aɪ noʊ jə tʃɹaɪ tə hoʊl tə ði oʊðz. bʌt soʊ lɔŋ əz jə ɑɹ fɹi ʌv ði oʊθ ɹɑɾ ɪtsɛlf, ʌðɝz wɪl wʌndɝ ɪf ðeɪ kəd bi fɹi əz wɛl."

"I'm afraid it is impossible to avoid." Egwene met Nynaeve's eyes. "I won't have you as an Aes Sedai free of the oaths. No, close your mouth - I know you try to hold to the oaths. But so long as you are free of the Oath Rod itself, others will wonder if they could be free as well."

"jɛs," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "aɪ səpoʊz."

"Yes," Nynaeve said. "I suppose."

"soʊ jəl ɹɪtɝn?"

"So you will return?"

nɪneɪiv klɛntʃt əɹ dʒɔ, ən sim tə bi faɪɾɪŋ ən ɪntɝnəl bæɾəl. jɛs, mʌðɝ," ʃi sɛd.

Nynaeve clenched her jaw, and seemed to be fighting an internal battle. Yes, Mother," she said.

ɪleɪn oʊpən əɹ aɪz waɪɾɝ ɪn ʃɑk.

Elayne opened her eyes wider in shock.

"ðɪs ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt, nɪneɪiv," ɛɡwin sɛd. "aɪ daʊt ðəɹ ɪz ɛniθɪŋ jə əloʊn kəd də tə stɑp ɹænd naʊ. wi nid tə ɡæðɝ ælaɪz fəɹ ə junəfaɪd fɹʌnt."

"This is important, Nynaeve," Egwene said. "I doubt there is anything you alone could do to stop Rand now. We need to gather allies for a unified front."

"ɔl ɹaɪt," nɪneɪiv sɛd.

"All right," Nynaeve said.

"wʌt wɝiz mi ɪz ðə tɛstɪŋ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ðə sɪɾɝz əv bɪɡʌn tə ɑɹɡju ðət - waɪl ɪt wɑz ɔl ɹaɪt tə ɹeɪz jə ən ði ʌðɝz ɪn ɛɡzaɪl-ju ʃəd stɪl əv tə ɡoʊ θɹu ðə tɛstɪŋ, naʊ ðət ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪz ɹiunəfaɪd. ðeɪ meɪk vɛɹi ɡʊɾ ɑɹɡjəməns. pɝhæps aɪ kən ɑɹɡju ðət jəɹ dɪfəkəl tʃælənʒɪz ɹisənli ʃəɾ ɝn jə ən ɪɡzɛmpʃən. wi doʊn əv taɪm tə titʃ jə tu ɔl ə ðə wivz jud nid."

"What worries me is the testing," Egwene said. "The Sitters have begun to argue that - while it was all right to raise you and the others in exile-you should still have to go through the testing, now that the White Tower is reunified. They make very good arguments. Perhaps I can argue that your difficult challenges recently should earn you an exemption. We don't have time to teach you two all of the weaves you'd need."

ɪleɪn nɑɾəd. nɪneɪiv ʃɹʌɡd. "aɪl də ðə tɛstɪŋ. ɪf aɪm gɑnə kʌm bæk, ðən aɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl də ðɪs pɹɑpɝli."

Elayne nodded. Nynaeve shrugged. "I'll do the testing. If I'm going to come back, then I might as well do this properly."

ɛɡwin blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. "nɪneɪiv, ðiz ɑɹ vɛɹi kɑmplɛks wivz aɪ hævən hæd taɪm tə mɛmɝaɪz ɔl ə ðɛm; aɪ swɛɹ ðət mɛni ɑɹ nid-lɛsli ɔɹneɪt sɪmpli tə bi dɪfəkəlt." ɛɡwin hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ θɹu ðə tɛstɪŋ hɝsɛlf, ən dɪdnt nid tə. ðə lɔ wɑz spəsɪfɪk. v biɪŋ meɪɾ æmɪɝlɪn, ʃi hæd bɪkʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ. θɪŋz wɝn əz klɪɹ ɪn ɹɪɡɑɹdz tə nɪneɪiv ən ði ʌðɝz ðəɾ ɛɡwin hæd ɹeɪzd.

Egwene blinked in surprise. "Nynaeve, these are very complex weaves I haven't had time to memorize all of them; I swear that many are need-lessly ornate simply to be difficult." Egwene had no intention of going through the testing herself, and didn't need to. The law was specific. Bv being made Amyrlin, she had become Aes Sedai. Things weren't as clear in regards to Nynaeve and the others that Egwene had raised.

nɪneɪiv ʃɹʌɡd əɡɛn. "ðə hʌnʒɹəd tɛstɪŋ wivz ɑɹən soʊ bæɾ aɪ kəd ʃoʊ ðɛm tə jə ɹaɪt hɪɹ, ɪf jə wɑntəd mi tə."

Nynaeve shrugged again. "The hundred testing weaves aren't so bad I could show them to you right here, if you wanted me to."

"wɛn əv jə hæd taɪm tə lɝn ðoʊz?" ɪleɪn ɪkskleɪmd.

"When have you had time to learn those?" Elayne exclaimed.

"aɪ hævən spɛn ðə læs fju mʌnθs munɪŋ əbaʊɾ ən dʒɹimɪŋ ə ɹænd ælθɹ."

"I haven't spent the last few months mooning about and dreaming of Rand al'Thor."

"sɪkjʊɹɪŋ ðə θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ ɪz nɑt 'munɪŋ əbaʊt'!"

"Securing the throne of Andor is not 'mooning about'!"

"nɪneɪiv," ɛɡwin kʌɾ ɪn, "ɪf jə tʃɹuli hæv ðə wivz mɛmɝaɪzd, ðən biɪŋ ɹeɪz pɹɑpɝli wəd hɛlp mi ə ɡɹeɪt dil. ɪt wəd lʊk lɛs laɪk aɪm feɪvɝɪŋ maɪ fɹɛnz."

"Nynaeve," Egwene cut in, "if you truly have the weaves memorized, then being raised properly would help me a great deal. It would look less like I'm favoring my friends."

"ðə tɛstɪŋ ɪz səpoʊz tə bi deɪnʒɝəs," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ juv ðə wivz ɪn hænd?"

"The testing is supposed to be dangerous," Elayne said. "Are you sure you have the weaves in hand?"

"aɪl bi faɪn," nɪneɪiv sɛd.

"I'll be fine," Nynaeve said.

"ɛksələnt," ɛɡwin sɛd. "aɪl ɪkspɛk jə hɪɹ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ."

"Excellent," Egwene said. "I'll expect you here in the morning."

"soʊ sun!" nɪneɪiv sɛd, əɡæst.

"So soon!" Nynaeve said, aghast.

"ðə sunɝ jə kən hoʊl ðəɾ oʊθ ɹɑd, ðə sunɝ əl bi eɪbəl tə stɑp wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt ju.

"The sooner you can hold that Oath Rod, the sooner I'll be able to stop worrying about you.

ɪleɪn, wɪl stɪl əv tə də sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ju."

Elayne, we'll still have to do something about you."

"ðə pɹɛɡnənsi," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ɪts ɪntɝfɪɹɪŋ wɪð maɪ əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl. ðæts ɡɛɾɪŋ bɛɾɝ - aɪ kəd ɡɛt hɪɹ, θæŋkfəli - bʌɾ ɪts stɪl ə pɹɑbləm. ɪkspleɪn tə ðə hɔl ɪt wəd bi tu deɪnʒɝəs fəɹ mi - ən fəɹ ðə beɪbz - tə ʌndɝɡoʊ ðə tɛstɪŋ waɪl əneɪbəl tə tʃænəl kənsɪstənli."

"The pregnancy," Elayne said. "It's interfering with my ability to channel. That's getting better - I could get here, thankfully - but it's still a problem. Explain to the Hall it would be too dangerous for me - and for the babes - to undergo the testing while unable to channel consistently."

"ðeɪ maɪt sədʒɛs jə weɪt," nɪneɪiv sɛd.

"They might suggest you wait," Nynaeve said.

"æn lɛf mi ɹʌn ɝaʊnd wɪθaʊt ði oʊðz?" ɪleɪn sɛd. "ðoʊ aɪ wəd laɪk tə noʊ ɪf ɛniwʌnz teɪkən ði oʊðz waɪl pɹɛɡnən bɪfɔɹ, dʒʌs tə bi ʃʊɹ."

"And lef me run around without the oaths?" Elayne said. "Though I would like to know if anyone's taken the oaths while pregnant before, just to be sure."

"aɪl faɪnd wʌɾ aɪ kæn," ɛɡwin sɛd. "əntɪl ðɛn, aɪ hæv ənʌðɝ tæsk fəɹ ju."

"I'll find what I can," Egwene said. "Until then, I have another task for you."

"aɪ æm ɹæðɝ bɪzi wɪð ɹulɪŋ ændɝ, mʌðɝ."

"I am rather busy with ruling Andor, Mother."

"aɪ noʊ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ðɛɹz noʊbɑdi ɛls aɪ kən æsk. aɪ nid mɔɹ dʒɹim tɛɹæŋɡɹil.'

"I know," Egwene said. "Unfortunately, there's nobody else I can ask. I need more dream ter'angreal.'

"aɪ maɪt bi eɪbəl tə mænədʒ," ɪleɪn sɛd. "əsumɪŋ aɪ kən stɑɹt tʃænəlɪŋ ɹɪlaɪəbli."

"I might be able to manage," Elayne said. "Assuming I can start channeling reliably."

"wʌt hæpən tə ðə dʒɹim tɛɹæŋɡɹil jə hæd?" nɪneɪiv æskt ɛɡwin.

"What happened to the dream ter'angreal you had?" Nynaeve asked Egwene.

"stoʊlən," ɛɡwin sɛd. "baɪ ʃɛɹiəm - hu, baɪ ðə weɪ, wɑz blæk ədʒɑ"

"Stolen," Egwene said. "By Sheriam - who, by the way, was Black Ajah"

ðə tu ɡæspt, ən ɛɡwin ɹilaɪz ðət ðə ɹɛvəleɪʃən ə ðə hʌnʒɹədz ə blæk sɪstɝz wɑz ənnoʊn tə ðɛm. ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "stil jʊɹsɛlvz," ʃi sɛd. "aɪv ɡɑɾ ə peɪnfəl stɔɹi fəɹ ju. bɪfɔɹ ðə sintʃæn ətæk, vɛɹɪn keɪm tə - "

The two gasped, and Egwene realized that the revelation of the hundreds of Black sisters was unknown to them. She took a deep breath. "Steel yourselves," she said. "I've got a painful story for you. Before the Seanchan attack, Verin came to - "

ət ðət moʊmənt, ðə bɛl wɛn ɔf ɪn əɹ hɛɾ əɡɛn. ɛɡwin wɪl hɝsɛlf tə muv. ðə ɹum blɪŋkt ɝaʊn hɝ, ən ʃi wɑz sʌɾənli stændɪŋ aʊtsaɪɾ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ, wɛɹ əɹ wɔɹdz wɝ sɛt.

At that moment, the bell went off in her head again. Egwene willed herself to move. The room blinked around her, and she was suddenly standing outside in the hallway, where her wards were set.

ʃi keɪm feɪs-tə-feɪs wɪð tælvə, ə θɪn wʊmən wɪð ə bʌn ʌv ɡoʊldən hɛɹ. ʃi hæd wʌns bɪn ə ðə jɛloʊ ədʒɑ, bʌt wɑz wʌn ə ðə blæk sɪstɝz u hæd flɛd ðə taʊɝ. wivz ə faɪɝ spɹæŋ ʌp ɝaʊn tælvə, bʌɾ ɛɡwin hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡʌn wɝkɪŋ ɑn ə ʃild. ʃi slæmd ɪt bɪtwin ði ʌðɝ wʊmən ən ðə sɔɹs, ɪmiɾiətli wivɪŋ ɛɹ tə snɛɹ hɝ. ə saʊn keɪm fɹəm bɪhaɪnd. ɛɡwin dɪdn θɪŋk; ʃi muv hɝsɛlf, ɹilaɪɪŋ ɑn pɹæktəs fəmɪljɛɹəɾi wɪð tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. ʃi əpɪɹd bɪhaɪn ə wʊmən u wɑz lɛɾɪŋ lus ə dʒɛɾ ə faɪɝ. ɑlviɛɝɪn. ɛɡwin snɑɹəld, bɪɡɪnɪŋ ənʌðɝ ʃild əz ɑlviɛɝɪnz weɪv ə faɪɝ hɪt ði ənfɔɹtʃənət tælvə, kɑzɪŋ əɹ tə skɹim əz əɹ flɛʃ bɝnd.

She came face-to-face with Talva, a thin woman with a bun of golden hair. She had once been of the Yellow Ajah, but was one of the Black sisters who had fled the Tower. Weaves of Fire sprang up around Talva, but Egwene had already begun working on a shield. She slammed it between the other woman and the Source, immediately weaving Air to snare her. A sound came from behind. Egwene didn't think; she moved herself, relying on practiced familiarity with Tel'aran'rhiod. She appeared behind a woman who was letting loose a jet of Fire. Alviarin. Egwene snarled, beginning another shield as Alviarin's wave of Fire hit the unfortunate Talva, causing her to scream as her flesh burned.

ɑlviɛɝɪn spʌn, ðən jɛlpt, vænɪʃɪŋ. bɝn hɝ! ɛɡwin θɔt. ɑlviɛɝɪn wɑz ət ðə vɛɹi tɑp ə ðə lɪst ə pipəl ʃi wɑntəd kæptʃɝd. ðə hɔlweɪ fɛl stɪl, tælvəz kɔɹps -  blækən ən smoʊkɪŋ -  slʌmpɪŋ tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ʃid nɛvɝ əweɪkən; daɪ hɪɹ, ən wʌn daɪɾ ɪn ðə ɹil wɝld.

Alviarin spun, then yelped, vanishing. Burn her! Egwene thought. Alviarin was at the very top of the list of people she wanted captured. The hallway fell still, Talva's corpse -  blackened and smoking -  slumping to the ground. She'd never awaken; die here, and one died in the real world.

ɛɡwin ʃɪvɝd; ðət mɝɾɝəs wiv hæd bɪn mɛn fəɹ hɝ. aɪ ɹɪlaɪd tu mʌtʃ ɑn tʃænəlɪŋ, ʃi θɔt. θɔt hæpənz mɔɹ kwɪkli ðən wivz kən bi meɪd. aɪ ʃʊɾə ɪmædʒən ɹoʊps ɝaʊn ɑlviɛɝɪn.

Egwene shivered; that murderous weave had been meant for her. I relied too much on channeling, she thought. Thought happens more quickly than weaves can be made. I should have imagined ropes around Alviarin.

noʊ, ɑlviɛɝɪn wəd stɪl əv bɪn eɪbəl tə dʒʌmp əweɪ fɹəm ɹoʊps. ɛɡwin hædn bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ laɪk ə dʒɹimɝ. leɪtli, hɝ maɪn hæd bɪn ɑn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðɛɹ pɹɑbləmz, ən wivz hæd kʌm nætʃɹəli tə hɝ. bʌt ʃi kʊdn lɛt hɝsɛlf fɝɡɛt ðəɾ ɪn ðɪs pleɪs, θɔt wɑz mɔɹ paʊɝfəl ðən ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ɛɡwin lʊkt ʌp əz nɪneɪiv bæɹəld aʊɾ ə ðə hɔl, ɪleɪn fɑloʊ-ɪŋ mɔɹ kɔʃəsli. "aɪ sɛns tʃænəlɪŋ," nɪneɪiv sɛd. ʃi lʊkt ət ðə bɝn kɔɹps. "laɪt!" blæk sɪstɝz," ɛɡwin sɛd, foʊldɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz. "ɪt simz ðəɹ mæk-ɪŋ ɡʊd jus ə ðoʊz dʒɹim tɛɹæŋɡɹil. aɪd ɡɛs ðəɹ ʌndɝ ɔɹɾɝz tə pɹaʊl ðə waɪt taʊɝ ət naɪt. pɝhæps lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ʌs, pɝhæps lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən tə juz əɡɛnst ʌs." ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz hæd dʌn ðət vɛɹi θɪŋ dʊɹɪŋ ɪleɪɾəz ɹeɪn.

No, Alviarin would still have been able to jump away from ropes. Egwene hadn't been thinking like a Dreamer. Lately, her mind had been on the Aes Sedai and their problems, and weaves had come naturally to her. But she couldn't let herself forget that in this place, thought was more powerful than the One Power. Egwene looked up as Nynaeve barreled out of the Hall, Elayne follow-ing more cautiously. "I sensed channeling," Nynaeve said. She looked at the burned corpse. "Light!" Black sisters," Egwene said, folding her arms. "It seems they're mak-ing good use of those dream ter'angreal. I'd guess they're under orders to prowl the White Tower at night. Perhaps looking for us, perhaps looking for information to use against us." Egwene and the others had done that very thing during Elaida's reign.

"wi ʃʊdn əv mɛt hɪɹ," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "nɛks taɪm, wɪl juz ə dɪfɹən pleɪs." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "ɪf ɪt suts ju, mʌðɝ."

"We shouldn't have met here," Nynaeve said. "Next time, we'll use a different place." She hesitated. "If it suits you, Mother."

"ɪt maɪt," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ɪt maɪt nɑt. wɪl nɛvɝ dɪfiɾ əm ənlɛs wi kən faɪn ðɛm."

"It might," Egwene said. "It might not. We'll never defeat them unless we can find them."

"wɔkɪŋ ɪndə tʃɹæps ɪz hɑɹdli ðə bɛst weɪ tə dɪfit ðɛm, mʌðɝ" nɪneɪiv sɛd flætli.

"Walking into traps is hardly the best way to defeat them, Mother" Nynaeve said flatly.

"dɪpɛnz ɑn jəɹ pɹɛpɝeɪʃən," ɛɡwin sɛd. ʃi fɹaʊnd. hæd ʃi dʒʌst sin ə flʌɾɝ ə blæk klɔθ, dʌkɪŋ ɝaʊn ə kɔɹnɝ? ɛɡwin wɑz ðəɹ ɪn ə moʊmənt; ɪleɪnz stɑɹɾəld kɝs saʊndəd daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ bɪhaɪn hɝ. maɪ, bʌt ðə wʊmən hæɾ ə tʌŋ ɑn hɝ.

"Depends on your preparation," Egwene said. She frowned. Had she just seen a flutter of black cloth, ducking around a corner? Egwene was there in a moment; Elayne's startled curse sounded down the hallway behind her. My, but the woman had a tongue on her.

ðə pleɪs wɑz ɛmpti. ɪɹi, ɔlmoʊs tu saɪlənt. ðət wɑz nɔɹməl ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd.

The place was empty. Eerie, almost too silent. That was normal in Tel'aran'rhiod.

ɛɡwin ɹɪmeɪn fʊl ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ, bʌt muv bæk tə ði ʌðɝ tu. ʃi hæd klɛnz ðə waɪt taʊɝ, bʌɾ ən ɪnfɛsteɪʃən ɹɪmeɪnd, haɪɾɪŋ əɾ ɪts hɑɹt.

Egwene remained full of the One Power, but moved back to the other two. She had cleansed the White Tower, but an infestation remained, hiding at its heart.

əl faɪn ju, mɛsænə, ɛɡwin θɔt, ðən weɪv fəɹ ði ʌðɝz tə dʒɔɪn hɝ. ðeɪ muv tə ðə hɪlsaɪd wɛɹ ʃid bɪn ɝliɝ, ə pleɪs wɛɹ ʃi kəd ɡɪv ə mɔɹ dɪteɪld ɛkspləneɪʃən ʌv ɪvɛns ðeɪd mɪst.

I will find you, Mesaana, Egwene thought, then waved for the others to join her. They moved to the hillside where she'd been earlier, a place where she could give a more detailed explanation of events they'd missed.


tʃæptɝ fɪftin


CHAPTER 15

juz ə pɛbəl


Use a Pebble

nɪneɪiv heɪsən θɹu ðə peɪv stʃɹits ə tɛɹ, ði æʃəmən nf əɾ əɹ saɪd. ʃi kəd stɪl fil ðət stɔɹm tə ðə nɔɹθ, dɪstən bʌt tɛɹəbəl. ənnætʃɹəl. ən ɪt wɑz muvɪŋ saʊθwɝd. læn wɑz ʌp ðɛɹ. "laɪt pɹətɛk hɪm," ʃi wɪspɝd. "wʌt wɑz ðæt, nɪneɪiv sədaɪ?" nf æskt.

Nynaeve hastened through the paved streets of Tear, the Asha'man Naeff at her side. She could still feel that storm to the north, distant but terrible. Unnatural. And it was moving southward. Lan was up there. "Light protect him," she whispered. "What was that, Nynaeve Sedai?" Naeff asked.

"nʌθɪŋ." nɪneɪiv wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ juz tə hævɪŋ ðə blæk-koʊɾəd mɛn ɝaʊnd. ʃi dɪd nɑt fil ən ənkʌmftəɹbəl tʃɪl wən ʃi lʊkt ət nf. ðət wəd bi sɪli. seɪɾɪn hæd bɪn klɛnzd, wɪð əɹ oʊn hɛlp. noʊ nid tə bi ənkʌmftəɹbəl. ivən ɪf ði æʃəmən dɪd səmtaɪmz stɛɹ ɔf ɪndə nʌθɪŋ, mʌɾɝɪŋ tə ðɛmsɛlvz. laɪk nf, hu wɑz lʊkɪŋ ɪndə ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv ə nɪɹbaɪ bɪldɪŋ, hæn ɑn ɪz sɔɹd.

"Nothing." Nynaeve was getting used to having the black-coated men around. She did not feel an uncomfortable chill when she looked at Naeff. That would be silly. Saidin had been cleansed, with her own help. No need to be uncomfortable. Even if the Asha'man did sometimes stare off into nothing, muttering to themselves. Like Naeff, who was looking into the shadow of a nearby building, hand on his sword.

'kɛɹfəl, nɪneɪiv sədaɪ," hi sɛd. "ðɛɹz ənʌðɝ mɹdʒɹɑl fɑloʊɪŋ ʌs."

'Careful, Nynaeve Sedai," he said. "There's another Myrddraal following us."

"jɔɹ . . . sɝɾən, nf?"

"You're . . . certain, Naeff?"

ðə tɔl , ɹɛktæŋɡjəlɝ-feɪs mæn nɑɾəd. hi wɑz tæləntəd wɪð wivz -  pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɛɹ, wɪtʃ wɑz ənjuʒəwəl fəɹ ə mæn - ən i wɑz vɛɹi pəlaɪt tə ɛɛs sədaɪ, ənlaɪk səm ə ði ʌðɝ æʃəmən.

The tall , rectangular-faced man nodded. He was talented with weaves -  particularly Air, which was unusual for a man - and he was very polite to Aes Sedai, unlike some of the other Asha'man.

"jɛs, ɪm sɝɾən," hi sɛd. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ aɪ kən si ðɛm ən ʌðɝz kænɑt. aɪ mʌst əv ə tælən fəɹ ɪt. ðeɪ haɪɾ ɪn ʃædoʊz, skaʊts ə səm sɔɹt, aɪ θɪŋk. ðeɪ hævən stʃɹʌk jɛt; aɪ θɪŋk ðəɹ wɛɹi kəz ðeɪ noʊ aɪ kən si ðɛm."

"Yes, I'm certain," he said. "I don't know why I can see them and others cannot. I must have a Talent for it. They hide in shadows, scouts of some sort, I think. They haven't struck yet; I think they're wary because they know I can see them."

taɪ di teɪkən tə naɪt wɔks θɹu ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə mɪdʒɹɑl ðəɾ oʊnli hi kəd si.

tie d taken to night walks through the Stone of Tear, watching the Mydraal that only he could see.

hɪz mædnəs wɑznt ɡɛɾɪŋ wɝs, bʌɾ oʊld ɪnʒɝiz wʊdnt ɡoʊ əweɪ. hiɾ ɔlweɪz bɛɹ ðɪs skɑɹ.

His madness wasn't getting worse, but old injuries wouldn't go away. He'd always bear this scar.

pʊɹ mæn. ət list ɪz mædnəs wɑzn əz bæɾ əz səm ə ði ʌðɝz'.

Poor man. At least his madness wasn't as bad as some of the others'.

nɪneɪiv lʊk fɔɹwɝd, mɑɹtʃɪŋ daʊn ðə waɪd, peɪv stʃɹiɾ aɪ bɪldɪŋz pæst ɑn iðɝ saɪd, dɪzaɪn ɪn tɛɹz hæphæzɝd weɪ. ə lɑɹdʒ mænʃən, wɪð tu smɔl taʊɝz ən ə bɹɑnz, ɡætlaɪk dɔɹ sæt bɪsaɪɾ ən ɪn ʌv oʊnli mɑɾəst saɪz. əkɹɔs fɹəm əm wɑz ə ɹoʊ ʌv hoʊmz wɪð ɹɔɾ aɪɝn wɝkt ɪndə ðə dɔɹz ən wɪndoʊz, bʌɾ ə bʊtʃɝz ʃɑp hæd bɪn bɪlt ɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə laɪn.

Nynaeve looked forward, marching down the wide, paved street I Buildings passed on either side, designed in Tear's haphazard way. A large mansion, with two small towers and a bronze, gatelike door sat beside an inn of only modest size. Across from them was a row of homes with wrought iron worked into the doors and windows, but a butcher's shop had been built right in the middle of the line.

nɪneɪiv ən nf wɝ hɛɾɪŋ fəɹ ði ɔl sʌmɝz neɪbɝhʊd wɪtʃ wɑz dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə wɛstɝn wɔl. ɪt wɑzn ðə ɹɪtʃəst sɛkʃən ə tiɹ bʌɾ ɪt wɑz dɛfənətli pɹɑspɝəs. ʌv kɔɹs, ɪn tɛɹ, ðəɹ wɑz ɹɪli oʊnli wʌn dɪvɪʒən: kɑmənɝ əɹ noʊbəl. mɛni ʌv ðə noʊbəlz stɪl kənsɪɾɝd kɑmənɝz kəmplitli dɪfɹənt - ən hoʊli ɪnfɪɹiɝ - kɹitʃɝz.

Nynaeve and Naeff were heading for the All Summers neighborhood which was just inside the western wall. It wasn't the richest section of Tear but it was definitely prosperous. Of course, in Tear, there was really only one division: commoner or noble. Many of the nobles still considered commoners completely different - and wholly inferior - creatures.

ðeɪ pæst səm ə ðoʊz kɑmənɝz. mɛn ɪn lus bɹitʃɪz taɪɾ ət ði æŋkəlz, kʌlɝfəl sæʃɪz ət ðə weɪst. wɪmən ɪn haɪ-nɛk dʒɹɛsəz, peɪl eɪpɹənz hæŋɪŋ ət ðə fɹʌnt. waɪd stʃɹɔ hæts wɪð flæt tɑps wɝ kɑmən, əɹ klɔθ kæps ðət hʌŋ tə wʌn saɪd. mɛni pipəl kæɹid klɑɡz ɑn ə stʃɹɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz tə juz wʌns ðeɪ ɹɪtɝn tə ðə mɔl.

They passed some of those commoners. Men in loose breeches tied at the ankles, colorful sashes at the waist. Women in high-necked dresses, pale aprons hanging at the front. Wide straw hats with flat tops were common, or cloth caps that hung to one side. Many people carried clogs on a string over their shoulders to use once they returned to the Maule.

ðə pipəl pæsɪŋ nɪneɪiv naʊ wɔɹ wɝid feɪsəz, səm ɡlænsɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz ɪn fɪɹ.

The people passing Nynaeve now wore worried faces, some glancing over their shoulders in fear.

ə bʌbəl ʌv ivəl hæd hɪt ðə sɪɾi ɪn ðət dɝɛkʃən. laɪt sɛn ðət nɑt tu mɛni wɝ hɝt, fəɹ ʃi dɪdn əv mʌtʃ taɪm tə spɛɹ. ʃi hæd tə ɹɪtɝn tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ɪt ɡæld əɹ tə hæv tə oʊbeɪ ɛɡwin.

A bubble of evil had hit the city in that direction. Light send that not too many were hurt, for she didn't have much time to spare. She had to return to the White Tower. It galled her to have to obey Egwene.

bʌɾ oʊbeɪ ʃi wʊd, ən liv əz sun əz ɹænd ɹɪtɝnd. hid ɡɔn sʌmwɛɹ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ.

But obey she would, and leave as soon as Rand returned. He'd gone somewhere this morning.

ɪnsʌfɝəbəl mæn. ət lis hid teɪkən meɪɾənz wɪð hɪm. hid ɹɪpɔɹɾədli sɛɾ i niɾəd tə fɛtʃ sʌmθɪŋ.

Insufferable man. At least he'd taken Maidens with him. He'd reportedly said he needed to fetch something.

nɪneɪiv kwɪkən əɹ stɛp, nf əɾ əɹ saɪd, əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ nɪɹli ɹʌnɪŋ. ə ɡeɪtweɪ wʊɾə bɪn fæstɝ, bʌɾ ɪt wʊdn bi seɪf; ʃi kʊdn bi sɝɾən ðeɪ wʊdn slaɪs ɪndə sʌmwʌn.

Nynaeve quickened her step, Naeff at her side, until they were nearly running. A gateway would have been faster, but it wouldn't be safe; she couldn't be certain they wouldn't slice into someone.

wɝ ɡɹoʊɪŋ tu dɪpɛndən ɑn ðoʊz ɡeɪtweɪz, ʃi θɔt. əɹ oʊn fit hɑɹdli sim ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf ɛnimɔɹ.

We're growing too dependent on those gateways, she thought. Our own feet hardly seem good enough anymore.

ðeɪ tɝn ə kɔɹnɝ ɪndə ə stʃɹit wɛɹ ə ɡɹup ə nɝvəs dɪfɛndɝz - -wɛɹɪŋ blæk koʊts ən sɪlvɝi bɹɛstpleɪts, blæk ən ɡoʊl slivz pʌfɪŋ aʊɾ ət ðə saɪdz - stʊɾ ɪn ə laɪn. ðeɪ pɑɹɾəd fəɹ əɹ ən nf, ən waɪl ðeɪ lʊkt ɹɪliv ðət ʃiɾ ɝaɪvd, ðeɪ stɪl klʌtʃt ðɛɹ pɑlɹmz nɝvəsli.

They turned a corner into a street where a group of nervous Defenders - -wearing black coats and silvery breastplates, black and gold sleeves puffing out at the sides - stood in a line. They parted for her and Naeff, and while they looked relieved that she'd arrived, they still clutched their polearms nervously.

ðə sɪɾi bɪɑn əm lʊk feɪnli . . . blændɝ ðən ɪt ʃʊd. wɑʃt aʊt. ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz wɝ ə laɪɾɝ ʃeɪɾ ʌv ɡɹeɪ, ðə wɔlz ə ðə bɪldɪŋz ə feɪntɝ bɹaʊn əɹ ɡɹeɪ ðən ðeɪ ʃəɾ əv bɪn.

The city beyond them looked faintly . . . blander than it should. Washed out. The paving stones were a lighter shade of gray, the walls of the buildings a fainter brown or gray than they should have been.

"ju hæv mɛn ɪnsaɪd sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ wundəd?" nɪneɪiv æskt.

"You have men inside searching for wounded?" Nynaeve asked.

wʌn ə ðə dɪfɛndɝz ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "wiv bɪn kipɪŋ pipəl aʊt, ɝ, leɪɾi ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪts nɑt seɪf."

One of the Defenders shook his head. "We've been keeping people out, er, Lady Aes Sedai. It's not safe."

moʊs tɛɹənz stɪl wɝn əkʌstəm tə ʃoʊɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹɪspɛkt. əntɪl ɹisənli, tʃænəlɪŋ hæd bɪn aʊtlɔɾ ɪn ðə sɪɾi.

Most Tairens still weren't accustomed to showing Aes Sedai respect. Until recently, channeling had been outlawed in the city.

"sɛn jəɹ mɛn ɹoʊ sɝtʃ," nɪneɪiv sɛd fɝmli. "ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɪl bi əpsɛɾ ɪf jəɹ təmɪɾəti kɑsts laɪvz. stɑɹɾ ət ðə pɝɪməɾɝ. sɛn fəɹ mi ɪf jə faɪn ɛniwʌn aɪ kən hɛlp."

"Send your men ro search," Nynaeve said firmly. "The Lord Dragon ill be upset if your timidity costs lives. Start at the perimeter. Send for me if you find anyone I can help."

ðə ɡɑɹdzmɪn muvd ɔf. nɪneɪiv tɝn tə nf, ən i nɑɾəd, ʃi tɝn ən tʊk ə stɛp ɪndə ði əfɛktəd sɛkʃən ə taʊn. wən əɹ fʊt hɪt ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊn, ðə stoʊn tɝn tə dʌst. hɝ fud sæŋk θɹu ðə ʃæɾɝd peɪvɪŋ stoʊn ən hɪt pækt ɝθ.

The guardsmen moved off. Nynaeve turned to Naeff, and he nodded, She turned and took a step into the affected section of town. When her foot hit the paving stone, the stone turned to dust. Her food sank through the shattered paving stone and hit packed earth.

ʃi lʊk daʊn, filɪŋ ə tʃɪl. ʃi kəntɪnjud fɔɹwɝd, ən ðə stoʊnz fɛl tə paʊɾɝ əz ʃi tʌtʃt ðɛm. ʃi ən nf meɪd ðɛɹ weɪ tə ə nɪɹbaɪ bɪldɪŋ, livɪŋ ə tʃɹeɪl ə paʊɾɝd ɹɑk bɪhaɪnd. ðə bɪldɪŋ wɑz ən ɪn wɪð naɪs bælkəniz ɑn ðə sɛkən flɔɹ, dɛləkəɾ aɪɝnwɝk pæɾɝnz ɑn ðə ɡlæs wɪndoʊz, ən ə dɑɹkli steɪn pɔɹtʃ. ðə dɔɹ wɑz oʊpən, ən əz ʃi lɪftəɾ əɹ fʊɾ ʌp tə stɛp ɑntu ðə loʊ pɔɹtʃ, ðə bɔɹdz ɔlsoʊ tɝn tə paʊɾɝ. ʃi fɹoʊz, lʊkɪŋ daʊn. nf stɛpt ʌp bɪsaɪd hɝ, ðən nɛl daʊn, pɪntʃɪŋ ðə dʌs bɪtwin ɪz fɪŋɡɝz.

She looked down, feeling a chill. She continued forward, and the stones fell to powder as she touched them. She and Naeff made their way to a nearby building, leaving a trail of powdered rock behind. The building was an inn with nice balconies on the second floor, delicate ironwork patterns on the glass windows, and a darkly stained porch. The door was open, and as she lifted her foot up to step onto the low porch, the boards also turned to powder. She froze, looking down. Naeff stepped up beside her, then knelt down, pinching the dust between his fingers.

"ɪts sɑft," hi sɛd kwaɪətli, "æz faɪn ə paʊɾɝ əz aɪv ɛvɝ tʌtʃt."

"It's soft," he said quietly, "as fine a powder as I've ever touched."

ði ɛɹ smɛld ənnətʃɝəli fɹɛʃ, kəntʃɹæstɪŋ stʃɹeɪnʒli wɪð ðə saɪlən stʃɹit. nɪneɪiv tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ðən wɛn ɪndə ði ɪn. ʃi hæd tə pʊʃ fɔɹwɝd, wɔkɪŋ wɪð ðə wʊɾən flɔɹ əɾ əɹ niz, ðə bɔɹdz dɪsɪntəɡɹeɪɾɪŋ əz ʃi tʌtʃt ðɛm.

The air smelled unnaturally fresh, contrasting strangely with the silent street. Nynaeve took a deep breath, then went into the inn. She had to push forward, walking with the wooden floor at her knees, the boards disintegrating as she touched them.

ði ɪnsaɪd wɑz dɪm. ðə stænd-læmps noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bɝnd. pipəl sæɾ əbaʊt ðə ɹum, fɹoʊzən ɪn mɪdmoʊʃən. moʊst wɝ noʊbəlz wɪð faɪn kloʊðɪŋ, ðə mɛn wɛɹɪŋ bɪɹdz ɔɪl tə ə pɔɪnt. wʌn sæɾ əɾ ə nɪɹbaɪ tɔl teɪbəl wɪð lɔŋ-lɛɡəd tʃɛɹz. hi hæɾ ə mʌɡ ʌv mɔɹnɪŋ eɪl hæfweɪ tə hɪz lɪps. hi wɑz moʊʃənləs, hɪz maʊθ oʊpən tə æksɛp ðə dʒɹɪŋk.

The inside was dim. The stand-lamps no longer burned. People sat about the room, frozen in midmotion. Most were nobles with fine clothing, the men wearing beards oiled to a point. One sat at a nearby tall table with long-legged chairs. He had a mug of morning ale halfway to his lips. He was motionless, his mouth open to accept the drink.

nfs feɪs wɑz ɡɹɪm, ɔlðoʊ lɪɾəl sim tə sɝpɹaɪz əɹ ənsɛɾəl æʃəmən. əz i tʊk ənʌðɝ stɛp fɔɹwɝd, nɪneɪiv lʌnʒd ən ɡɹæbd ɪz ɑɹm. hi fɹaʊn ət hɝ, ən ʃi pɔɪntəd daʊn. ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm - bɛɹli vɪzəbəl bɪniθ ðə stɪl-hoʊl flɔɹbɔɹdz ɹaɪɾ əhɛɾ ə ðɛm- - ðə ɡɹaʊn fɛl əweɪ. hid bɪn əbaʊt tə stɛp ɪndə ði ɪnz sɛlɝ.

Naeff's face was grim, although little seemed to surprise or unsettle Asha'man. As he took another step forward, Nynaeve lunged and grabbed his arm. He frowned at her, and she pointed down. Right in front of him - barely visible beneath the still-whole floorboards right ahead of them- - the ground fell away. He'd been about to step into the inn's cellar.

laɪt," nf sɛd, stɛpɪŋ bæk. hi nɛl daʊn, ðən tæp ðə bɔɹɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. ɪt fɛl tə dʌst, ʃaʊɝɪŋ daʊn ɪndə ðə dɑɹk sɛlɝ bɪloʊ.

Light," Naeff said, stepping back. He knelt down, then tapped the board in front of him. It fell to dust, showering down into the dark cellar below.

nɪneɪiv woʊv spɪɹət, ɛɹ ən wɔɾɝ tə dɛlv ðə mæn sɪɾɪŋ ət ðə tʃɛɹ hɝ. nɔɹməli ʃi wəd tʌtʃ sʌmwʌn tə dɛlv ðɛm, bʌt ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ðɪs taɪm. ɪt wəd wɝk wɪθaʊt tʌtʃ, bʌt wəd nɑt bi əz ɪfɛktɪv fəɹ hilɪŋ.

Nynaeve wove Spirit, Air and Water to Delve the man sitting at the chair her. Normally she would touch someone to Delve them, but she hesitated this time. It would work without touch, but would not be as effective for Healing.

hɝ dɛlvɪŋ faʊnd nʌθɪŋ. noʊ laɪf, noʊ sɛns ðəɾ i hæɾ ɛvɝ əlaɪv. hɪz bɑɾi wɑzn ivən flɛʃ.

Her Delving found nothing. No life, no sense that he had ever alive. His body wasn't even flesh.

wɪð ə sɪŋkɪŋ filɪŋ, ʃi dɛlvd ʌðɝ pipəl ɪn ðə dɑɹkən ɹum. ə sɝvɪŋ meɪd kæɹiɪŋ bɹɛkfəs toʊɛɹi θɹi ændɔɝən mɝtʃəns. ə kɔɹpjələn ɪnkipɝ, hu mʌst əv hæd tʃɹʌbəl nævəɡeɪɾɪŋ bɪtwin ðə kloʊs-sɛt teɪbəlz. ə wʊmən ɪn ə ɹɪtʃ dʒɹə$ sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə vɛɹi bæk ə ðə ɹum, pɹɪmli ɹiɾɪŋ ə smɔl bʊk.

With a sinking feeling, she Delved other people in the darkened room. A serving maid carrying breakfast towari three Andoran merchants. A corpulent innkeeper, who must have had trouble navigating between the close-set tables. A woman in a rich dre$ sitting in the very back of the room, primly reading a small book.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ laɪf ɪn ɛni ʌv ðɛm. ðiz wɝn kɔɹpsəz; ðeɪ wɝ hʌsks. fɪŋɡɝz tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ, nɪneɪiv ɹitʃt aʊɾ ən bɹʌʃt ðə ʃoʊldɝ ə ðə mæn ət ðə haɪ teɪbəl. hi ɪmiɾiətli fɛl tə paʊɾɝ, dʌst ʃaʊɝɪŋ daʊnwɝɾ ɪn ə pʌf. ðə tʃɛɹ ən flɔɹbɔɹdz ʌndɝniθ dɪd nɑt dɪzɑlv.

There was no life in any of them. These weren't corpses; they were husks. Fingers trembling, Nynaeve reached out and brushed the shoulder of the man at the high table. He immediately fell to powder, dust showering downward in a puff. The chair and floorboards underneath did not dissolve.

"ðɛɹ ɪz noʊbɑdi hɪɹ tə seɪv," nɪneɪiv sɛd.

"There is nobody here to save," Nynaeve said.

"pʊɹ pipəl," nf sɛd. "laɪt ʃɛltɝ ðɛɹ soʊlz."

"Poor people," Naeff said. "Light shelter their souls."

nɪneɪiv ɔfən hæd tʃɹʌbəl filɪŋ pɪɾi fəɹ ðə tɛɹən noʊbəlz - -ʌv ɔl ðə pipəl ʃi hæd mɛt, ðeɪ simd əmʌŋ ðə moʊst ɛɹəɡənt. bʌt noʊbɑdi dɪzɝv ðɪs. bɪsaɪdz, ə lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝ ə kɑmənɝz hæd bɪn kɑɾ ɪn ðɪs bʌbəl əz wɛl.

Nynaeve often had trouble feeling pity for the Tairen nobles - -of all the people she had met, they seemed among the most arrogant. But nobody deserved this. Besides, a large number of commoners had been caught in this bubble as well.

ʃi ən nf meɪd ðɛɹ weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə bɪldɪŋ, nɪneɪivz fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən maʊntɪŋ əz ʃi tʌɡd ɑn əɹ bɹeɪd. ʃi heɪɾəd filɪŋ hɛlpləs. laɪk wɪð ðə pʊɹ ɡɑɹɾ u hæd stɑɹɾəd ðə faɪɝ bæk ət ðə mænɝ haʊs ɪn ɑɹæd dumən, əɹ ðə pipəl u wɝ stʃɹʌk daʊn baɪ stʃɹeɪnʒ dɪzizəz. ðə dʌsti hʌsks ðɪs deɪ. wʌt wɑz ðə ɡʊɾ ə lɝnɪŋ tə hil ɪf ʃi kʊdn hɛlp pipəl?

She and Naeff made their way out of the building, Nynaeve's frustration mounting as she tugged on her braid. She hated feeling helpless. Like with the poor guard who had started the fire back at the manor house in Arad Doman, or the people who were struck down by strange diseases. The dusty husks this day. What was the good of learning to Heal if she couldn't help people?

ən naʊ ʃi hæd tə liv. ɡoʊ bæk tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ɪt fɛlt laɪk ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ. ʃi tɝn tə nf. "wɪnd," ʃi sɛd.

And now she had to leave. Go back to the White Tower. It felt like running away. She turned to Naeff. "Wind," she said.

"nɪneɪiv sədaɪ?"

"Nynaeve Sedai?"

"ɡɪv ðə bɪldɪŋ ə ɡʌst ʌv wɪnd, nf," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ wɑnə si wʌt hæpənz."

"Give the building a gust of wind, Naeff," she said. "I want to see what happens."

ði æʃəmən dɪɾ əz ʃi æskt, hɪz ɪnvɪzəbəl wivz bloʊɪŋ ə dʒɛɾ ʌv ɛɹ. ði ɪntaɪɝ bɪldɪŋ bɝst, ʃæɾɝɪŋ ɪndə dʌs ðət blu əweɪ, laɪk ðə waɪt sidz ʌv ə dændəlaɪən. nf tɝn tə hɝ.

The Asha'man did as she asked, his invisible weaves blowing a jet of air. The entire building burst, shattering into dust that blew away, like the white seeds of a dandelion. Naeff turned to her.

"haʊ waɪd dɪd ðeɪ seɪ ðɪs bʌbəl wɑz?" ʃi æskt.

"How wide did they say this bubble was?" she asked.

"əbaʊt tu stʃɹits waɪɾ ɪn ɔl dɝɛkʃənz."

"About two streets wide in all directions."

"wi nid mɔɹ wɪnd," ʃi sɛd, bɪɡɪnɪŋ ə wiv. "kɹieɪɾ ə ɡʌst əz lɑɹdʒ əz jə kæn. ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ɛniwʌn wundəɾ ɪn hɪɹ, wɪl faɪn əm ðɪs weɪ."

"We need more wind," she said, beginning a weave. "Create a gust as large as you can. If there is anyone wounded in here, we'll find them this way."

nf nɑɾəd. ðə tu ʌv əm stʃɹoʊd fɔɹwɝd, kɹieɪɾɪŋ wɪnd. ðeɪ ʃæɾɝd bɪldɪŋz, kɑzɪŋ əm tə bɝst ən fɔl. nf wɑz fɑɹ mɔɹ skɪld ət ðə pɹɑsɛs ðən ʃi, bʌt nɪneɪiv wɑz stʃɹɔŋɝ ɪn ðə wʌn paʊɝ. təɡɛðɝ, ðeɪ swɛp ðə kɹʌmbəlɪŋ bɪldɪŋz, stoʊnz ən hʌsks bɪfɔɹ əm ɪn ə dʌst stɔɹm.

Naeff nodded. The two of them strode forward, creating wind. They shattered buildings, causing them to burst and fall. Naeff was far more skilled at the process than she, but Nynaeve was stronger in the One Power. Together, they swept the crumbling buildings, stones and husks before them in a dust storm.

ɪt wɑz ɪɡzɔstɪŋ wɝk, bʌt ðeɪ kɛpt əɾ ɪt. ʃi hoʊpt - əɡɛnst ɹizən -__ðæt ʃi maɪt faɪn sʌmwʌn tə hɛlp. bɪldɪŋz fɛl bɪfɔɹ əɹ ən nf, ðə dʌs kɑɾ ɪn swɝlɪŋ ɛɹ. ðeɪ pʊʃt ðə dʌst ɪn ə sɝkəl muvɪŋ ɪnwɝd. laɪk ə wʊmən swipɪŋ ðə flɔɹ.

It was exhausting work, but they kept at it. She hoped - against reason -__that she might find someone to help. Buildings fell before her and Naeff, the dust caught in swirling air. They pushed the dust in a circle moving inward. Like a woman sweeping the floor.

ðeɪ pæs pipəl fɹoʊzən ɑn ðə stʃɹits ɪn mɪdstʃɹaɪd. ɑksən pʊlɪŋ ə kɑɹt. hɑɹt-ɹɛntʃɪŋli, səm tʃɪlʒɹən pleɪɪŋ ɪn ən æli. ɔl fɛl tə dʌst.

They passed people frozen on the streets in midstride. Oxen pulling a cart. Heart-wrenchingly, some children playing in an alley. All fell to dust.

ðeɪ faʊnd noʊbɑdi əlaɪv. ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ʃi ən nf hæd dɪzɑlvd ɔl ɛf ðə bɹoʊkən pɑɹɾ ə ðə sɪɾi ən bloʊn ðə dʌst ɪndə ðə sɛntɝ. nɪneɪiv lʊkt əɾ ɪt, kɛp swɝlɪŋ ɪn pleɪs baɪ ə smɔl sɪkloʊn nf hæd woʊvən.

They found nobody alive. Eventually, she and Naeff had dissolved all f the broken part of the city and blown the dust into the center. Nynaeve looked at it, kept swirling in place by a small cyclone Naeff had woven.

kjʊɹiəs, nɪneɪiv tʃænəld ə tʌŋ ə faɪɝ ɪndə ðə sɪkloʊn, ən ðə dʌs kɑɾ əlaɪt.

Curious, Nynaeve channeled a tongue of Fire into the cyclone, and the dust caught alight.

nɪneɪiv ɡæspt; ðət dʌst wɛn ʌp laɪk dʒɹaɪd peɪpɝ θɹoʊn ɪndə ə faɪɝ, kɹieɪɾɪŋ ə ɹɔɹɪŋ tɛmpəst ə fleɪmz. ʃi ən nf bækt əweɪ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz oʊvɝ ɪn ə flæʃ. ɪt dɪdn liv ɛni æʃ bɪhaɪnd.

Nynaeve gasped; that dust went up like dried paper thrown into a fire, creating a roaring tempest of flames. She and Naeff backed away, but it was over in a flash. It didn't leave any ash behind.

ɪf wi hædnt ɡæðɝɾ ɪt, ʃi θɔt, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə faɪɝ feɪɾ əweɪ, sʌmwʌn maɪɾ əv dʒɹɑpt ə kændəl ɑn ɪt. ə faɪɝ laɪk ðæt. . .

If we hadn't gathered it, she thought, watching the fire fade away, someone might have dropped a candle on it. A fire like that. . .

nf stɪld ɪz wɪnz. ðə tu ʌv əm stʊɾ ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ʌv ən oʊpən sɝkəl ə bɛɹ ɝθ wɪð pɪɹiɑɾɪk hoʊlz fəɹ sɛlɝz. ɑn ði ɛdʒəz, bɪldɪŋz hæd bɪn slaɪst ɪntu, ɹumz oʊpən tə ði ɛɹ, səm stʃɹʌktʃɝz hævɪŋ kəlæpst. ɪt wɑz ɪɹi, tə si ðɪs hɑloʊ ɛɹiə. laɪk ə ɡaʊdʒd-aʊɾ aɪ sɑkəɾ ɪn ən ʌðɝwaɪz hɛlθi feɪs.

Naeff stilled his winds. The two of them stood in the center of an open circle of bare earth with periodic holes for cellars. On the edges, buildings had been sliced into, rooms open to the air, some structures having collapsed. It was eerie, to see this hollow area. Like a gouged-out eye socket in an otherwise healthy face.

sɛvɹəl ɡɹups ə dɪfɛndɝz stʊɾ ət ðə pɝɪməɾɝ. ʃi nɑɾəd tə nf, ən ðeɪ wɔk tə ðə lɑɹdʒəst ɡɹup. "ju dɪdn faɪn ɛniwʌn?" ʃi dɪmændəd.

Several groups of Defenders stood at the perimeter. She nodded to Naeff, and they walked to the largest group. "You didn't find anyone?" she demanded.

"noʊ, leɪɾi ɛɛs sədaɪ," ə mæn sɛd. "ɝ . . . wɛl, wi dɪd faɪn ə fju, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ dɛɾ ɔlɹɛɾi."

"No, Lady Aes Sedai," a man said. "Er . . . well, we did find a few, but they were dead already."

ənʌðɝ mæn nɑɾəd, ə bæɹəl-laɪk fɛloʊ huz junəfɔɹm wɑz vɛɹi taɪt. "simz ɛniwʌn u hæɾ ivən ə toʊ ɪnsaɪɾ ə ðət ɹɪŋ fɛl dɛd. faʊn ə fju ʌv əm mɪsɪŋ oʊnli ə fʊɾ əɹ pɑɹɾ ə ðɛɹ ɑɹm.

Another man nodded, a barrel-like fellow whose uniform was very tight. "Seems anyone who had even a toe inside of that ring fell dead. Found a few of them missing only a foot or part of their arm.

bʌt ðeɪ wɝ dɛɾ ɛniweɪ." ðə mæn ʃʌɾɝəd vɪzəbli.

But they were dead anyway." The man shuddered visibly.

nɪneɪiv kloʊzd əɹ aɪz. ði ɪntaɪɝ wɝld wɑz fɔlɪŋ əpɑɹt, ən ʃi wɑz paʊɝləs tə hil ɪt.

Nynaeve closed her eyes. The entire world was falling apart, and she was powerless to Heal it.

ʃi fɛl sɪk ən æŋɡɹi.

She felt sick and angry.

meɪbi ðeɪ kɑzd ɪt," nf sɛd sɔfli. ʃi oʊpən əɹ aɪz tə si hɪm nɑɾɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ʃædoʊz ʌv ə bɪldɪŋ nɪɹbaɪ. "ðə feɪdz. ðəɹ ɑɹ θɹi ʌv əm ðɛɹ, nɪneɪiv sədaɪ, wɑtʃɪŋ ʌs."

Maybe they caused it," Naeff said softly. She opened her eyes to see him nodding toward the shadows of a building nearby. "The Fades. There are three of them there, Nynaeve Sedai, watching us."

nf. . ." ʃi sɛd, fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd. tɛlɪŋ ɪm ðə feɪdz wɝn ɹil dɪdn hɛlp. aɪ hæv tə də sʌmθɪŋ, ʃi θɔt. hɛlp sʌmwʌn. "nf, stæn stɪl. ʃi tʊk hoʊld ə hɪz ɑɹm ən dɛlv hɪm.

Naeff. . ." she said, frustrated. Telling him the Fades weren't real didn't help. I have to do something, she thought. Help someone. "Naeff, stand still. She took hold of his arm and Delved him.

hi lʊkt ət hɝ, sɝpɹaɪzd, bʌt dɪdn əbdʒɛkt.

He looked at her, surprised, but didn't object.

ʃi kəd si ðə mædnəs, laɪk ə dɑɹk nɛtwɝk ə veɪnz dɪɡɪŋ ɪndə hɪz maɪnd. ɪt sim tə pʌls, laɪk ə smɔl biɾɪŋ hɑɹt. ʃid faʊn sɪməlɝ kɝʌpʃən ɹisənli ɪn ʌðɝ æʃəmən. hɝ skɪl wɪð dɛlvɪŋ wɑz ɪmpɹɑv-ɪŋ, hɝ wivz mɔɹ ɹəfaɪnd, ən ʃi kəd faɪn θɪŋz wʌns hɪɾən tə hɝ ʃi hæd noʊ aɪdiə haʊ tə fɪks wʌt wɑz ɹɔŋ, ðoʊ.

She could see the madness, like a dark network of veins digging into his mind. It seemed to pulse, like a small beating heart. She'd found similar corruption recently in other Asha'man. Her skill with Delving was improv-ing, her weaves more refined, and she could find things once hidden to her She had no idea how to fix what was wrong, though.

ɛniθɪŋ ʃəd bi hiləbəl, ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf. ɛniθɪŋ bʌt dɛθ ɪtsɛlf. ʃi kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd, wivɪŋ ɔl faɪv paʊɝz, ən kɛɹfəli pɹɑɾɪd ət ðə mæd-nɛs, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ wʌt hæd hæpənd wən ʃid ɹimuv ðə kəmpʌlʃən fɹəm ɡɹeɪndəlz ənfɔɹtʃənət sɝvənt. nf wɑz bɛɾɝ ɔf wɪð ðɪs mædnəs ðən i wəd bi ɪf ʃi dæmədʒd ɪz maɪn fɝðɝ.

Anything should be Healable, she told herself. Anything but death itself. She concentrated, weaving all Five Powers, and carefully prodded at the mad-ness, remembering what had happened when she'd removed the Compulsion from Graendal's unfortunate servant. Naeff was better off with this madness than he would be if she damaged his mind further.

ɑdli, ðə dɑɹknəs dɪd sim sɪməlɝ tə kəmpʌlʃən. wɑz ðət wʌt ðə teɪn hæd dʌn? bɛn ðə mɛn u juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ wɪð ðə dɑɹk wʌnz oʊn kəmpʌlʃən?

Oddly, the darkness did seem similar to Compulsion. Was that what the taint had done? Bent the men who used the One Power with the Dark One's own Compulsion?

ʃi kɛɹfəli woʊv ə kaʊntɝwiv ɑpəzət ðə mædnəs, ðən leɪɾ ɪɾ oʊvɝ nfs maɪnd. ðə wiv dʒʌs feɪɾəd əweɪ, duɪŋ nʌθɪŋ.

She carefully wove a counterweave opposite the madness, then laid it over Naeff's mind. The weave just faded away, doing nothing.

ʃi ɡɹɪɾɪd əɹ tiθ. ðət ʃəɾ əv wɝkt. bʌt, əz sim soʊ kɑmən leɪtli, ɪt hæd feɪld.

She gritted her teeth. That should have worked. But, as seemed so common lately, it had failed.

noʊ, ʃi θɔt. noʊ, aɪ kæn dʒʌst sɪt bæk. ʃi dɛlv dipɝ. ðə dɑɹknəs hæd taɪni, θɔɹnlaɪk pɹədʒɛkʃənz stʌk ɪndə nfs maɪnd. ʃi ɪɡnɔɹd ðə pipəl ɡæðɝɪŋ ɝaʊn hɝ, ən ɪnspɛktɪd ðoʊz θɔɹnz. ʃi kɛɹfəli juzd wivz ə spɪɹət tə pɹaɪ wʌn fɹi.

No, she thought. No, I can't just sit back. She Delved deeper. The darkness had tiny, thornlike projections stuck into Naeff's mind. She ignored the people gathering around her, and inspected those thorns. She carefully used weaves of Spirit to pry one free.

ɪt keɪm aʊt wɪð səm ɹɪzɪstəns, ən ʃi kwɪkli hil ðə spɑt wɛɹ ɪt hæd pʌŋktʃɝd nfs flɛʃ. ðə bɹeɪn sim tə pʌls, lʊkɪŋ mɔɹ hɛlθi. wʌn baɪ wʌn, ʃi pɹaɪd ði ʌðɝz fɹi. ʃi wɑz fɔɹs tə meɪnteɪn əɹ wivz, hoʊldɪŋ ðə bɑɹbz bæk, lɛs ðeɪ plʌnʒ daʊn əɡɛn. ʃi bɪɡæn tə swɛt. ʃi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi taɪɝd fɹəm swipɪŋ ði ɛɹiə klin, ən noʊ lɔŋɡɝ kəd spɛɹ kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən tə kip ðə hiɾ ɔf hɝ. tiɹ wɑz soʊ mʌɡi.

It came out with some resistance, and she quickly Healed the spot where it had punctured Naeff's flesh. The brain seemed to pulse, looking more healthy. One by one, she pried the others free. She was forced to maintain her weaves, holding the barbs back, lest they plunge down again. She began to sweat. She was already tired from sweeping the area clean, and no longer could spare concentration to keep the heat off her. Tear was so muggy.

ʃi kəntɪnjud wɝkɪŋ, pɹipɛɹɪŋ ənʌðɝ kaʊntɝwiv. wʌns ʃi hæd pɹaɪɾ ʌp itʃ ən ɛvɹi θɔɹn, ʃi ɹilist əɹ nu wiv. ðə dɑɹk pætʃ ənʒəleɪtɪd ən ʃʊk, laɪk sʌmθɪŋ əlaɪv.

She continued working, preparing another counterweave. Once she had pried up each and every thorn, she released her new weave. The dark patch undulated and shook, like something alive.

ðən ɪt vænɪʃt.

Then it vanished.

nɪneɪiv stʌmbəl bæk, dʒɹeɪnd nɪɹ tə ɪɡzɔstʃən. nf blɪŋkt, ðən lʊkt ɝaʊnd. hi ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə hɪz hɛd.

Nynaeve stumbled back, drained near to exhaustion. Naeff blinked, then looked around. He raised a hand to his head.

laɪt! ʃi θɔt. dɪɾ aɪ hɝt hɪm? aɪ ʃʊdn əv bæɹəld ɪndə ðæt. aɪ kəɾ əv -  "ðeɪɹ ɡɔn," nf sɛd. "ðə feɪdz ... aɪ kæn si ðɛm ɛnimɔɹ. hi blɪŋkt. "waɪ wəd feɪdz bi haɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz ɛniweɪ? ɪf aɪ kəd si ðɛm, ðeɪɾ əv kɪl mi, ən - " hi lʊkt ət hɝ, foʊkəsɪŋ-"wʌt dɪd jə du?"

Light! she thought. Did I hurt him? I shouldn't have barreled into that. I could have -  "They're gone," Naeff said. "The Fades ... I can't see them anymore. He blinked. "Why would Fades be hiding in the shadows anyway? If I could see them, they'd have killed me, and - " He looked at her, focusing-"What did you do?"

"aɪ... aɪ θɪŋk aɪ dʒʌs hil jəɹ mædnəs." wɛl, ʃid dʌn sʌm- θɪŋ tə ɪt. wʌt ʃid dʌn hædn bɪn ɛni stændɝd hilɪŋ, ən hædn ivən juz hilɪŋ wivz. bʌɾ ɪt hæd wɝkt, ɪt simd.

"I... I think I just Healed your madness." Well, she'd done some- thing to it. What she'd done hadn't been any standard Healing, and hadn't even used Healing weaves. But it had worked, it seemed.

nf smaɪl dipli, simɪŋ bɪwɪldɝd. hi tʊk əɹ hænd wɪð boʊθ ə hɪz ðən nɛl bɪfɔɹ hɝ, ɡɹoʊɪŋ tɪɹi-aɪd. "fɔɹ mʌnθs, aɪ hæv fɛlt əz ɪf aɪ wɝ ɔlweɪz biɪŋ wɑtʃt. əz ɪf aɪ wəd bi mɝɾɝd ðə moʊmən aɪ tɝn bæk ɑn ðə ʃædoʊz. naʊ aɪ. . . θæŋk ju. aɪ nid tə ɡoʊ faɪnd nəlɑvɛɹ."

Naeff smiled deeply, seeming bewildered. He took her hand with both of his then knelt before her, growing teary-eyed. "For months, I have felt as if I were always being watched. As if I would be murdered the moment I turned back on the shadows. Now I. . . Thank you. I need to go find Nelavaire."

"ɔf wɪð ju, ðɛn," nɪneɪiv sɛd. nf lɛft əɹ ɪn ə dæʃ, ɹʌnɪŋ bæk təwɔɹd ðə stoʊn tə sɝtʃ aʊɾ ɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ.

"Off with you, then," Nynaeve said. Naeff left her in a dash, running back toward the Stone to search out his Aes Sedai.

aɪ kæn lɛt maɪsɛlf bɪɡɪn tə θɪŋk ðət nʌθɪŋ aɪ də mæɾɝz. ðæts wʌt ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɑns. əz ʃi wɑtʃt nf heɪsən əweɪ, ʃi noʊɾəst ðət ðə klaʊdz əbʌv wɝ bɹeɪkɪŋ. ɹænd hæd ɹɪtɝnd.

I can't let myself begin to think that nothing I do matters. That's what the Dark One wants. As she watched Naeff hasten away, she noticed that the clouds above were breaking. Rand had returned.

wɝkɝz bɪɡæn klɪɹɪŋ əweɪ ðə ɹʌbəl ə bɪldɪŋz ðət hæd hæf tɝn tə dʌst, ən nɪneɪiv ɛndəɾ ʌp spikɪŋ suðɪŋli tə ðə wɝid tɛɹənz u bɪɡæn tə klʌstɝ ɝaʊn ðə pɝɪməɾɝ. ʃi dɪdnt wɑn ðəɹ tə bi ə pænɪk; ʃi əʃʊɹɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ðət ðə deɪnʒɝ wɑz pæst, ən ðən ʃi æsk tə mit wɪð ɛni fæmliz u hæd lɔst sʌmwʌn.

Workers began clearing away the rubble of buildings that had half turned to dust, and Nynaeve ended up speaking soothingly to the worried Tairens who began to cluster around the perimeter. She didn't want there to be a panic; she assured everyone that the danger was past, and then she asked to meet with any families who had lost someone.

ʃi wɑz stɪl duɪŋ ðɪs - tɔkɪŋ sɔfli wɪð ə θɪn, wɝid wʊmən -  wən ɹænd faʊn hɝ. ðə wʊmən wɑz ə kɑmənɝ, wɛɹɪŋ ə haɪ-nɛk dʒɹɛs wɪð θɹi eɪpɹənz ən ə stʃɹɔ hæt. hɝ hʌzbən hæd wɝkt ɪn ði ɪn nɪneɪiv hæɾ ɛntɝd. ðə wʊmən kɛpt ɡlænsɪŋ ət ðə hoʊl ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊn ðət hæd bɪn ðə sɛlɝ.

She was still doing this - talking softly with a thin, worried woman -  when Rand found her. The woman was a commoner, wearing a high-necked dress with three aprons and a straw hat. Her husband had worked in the inn Nynaeve had entered. The woman kept glancing at the hole in the ground that had been the cellar.

æftɝ ə moʊmənt, nɪneɪiv noʊɾəst ɹænd, wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ ən stændɪŋ wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk, hæn klæspɪŋ ɪz stʌmp. tu meɪɾənz ɡɑɹɾəd hɪm, ə pɛɹ ʌv wɪmən neɪm sɑmə ən kænɑɹə.

After a moment, Nynaeve noticed Rand, watching her and standing with his arms behind his back, hand clasping his stump. Two Maidens guarded him, a pair of women named Somma and Kanara.

nɪneɪiv fɪnɪʃt spikɪŋ wɪð ðə tɛɹən, bʌt ðə wʊmənz tɪɹfəl aɪz ɹɛntʃt əɹ hɑɹt. haʊ wəd ʃi ɹiækt, ɪf ʃi lɔs læn?

Nynaeve finished speaking with the Tairen, but the woman's tearful eyes wrenched her heart. How would she react, if she lost Lan?

laɪt pɹətɛk hɪm. pliz, pliz pɹətɛk hɪm, ʃi pɹeɪd. ʃi ənhʊkt əɹ kɔɪn paʊtʃ ən sɛn ðə wʊmən ɔf wɪð ɪt. pɝhæps ðət wəd hɛlp. ɹænd stɛpt ʌp tə nɪneɪiv. "ju kɛɹ fəɹ maɪ pipəl. θæŋk ju." aɪ kɛɹ fəɹ ɛni hu niɾ ɪt," nɪneɪiv sɛd.

Light protect him. Please, please protect him, she prayed. She unhooked her coin pouch and sent the woman off with it. Perhaps that would help. Rand stepped up to Nynaeve. "You care for my people. Thank you." I care for any who need it," Nynaeve said.

əz juv ɔlweɪz dʌn," ɹænd sɛd. "əlɔŋ wɪð kɛɹɪŋ fəɹ səm u doʊnt niɾ ɪt."

As you've always done," Rand said. "Along with caring for some who don't need it."

laɪk ju?" ʃi sɛd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ən aɪbɹaʊ. noʊ, aɪv ɔlweɪz niɾəd ɪt. ðəɾ ən mɔɹ."

Like you?" she said, raising an eyebrow. No, I've always needed it. That and more."

nɪneɪiv hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ðət wɑzn sʌmθɪŋ ʃiɾ ɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪm tə ədmɪt. waɪ hædn i ɡɑɾən ɹɪɾ ə ðəɾ oʊl kloʊk? ɪt wɑz feɪɾəd ən dʌl. ðɪs ɪz maɪ fɔlt," ɹænd sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə hoʊl ɪn ðə sɪɾi. ɹænd, doʊn bi ə ful."

Nynaeve hesitated. That wasn't something she'd ever expected him to admit. Why hadn't he gotten rid of that old cloak? It was faded and dull. This is my fault," Rand said, nodding toward the hole in the city. Rand, don't be a fool."

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf ɛniwʌn kən əvɔɪd biɪŋ ə ful ət taɪmz," hi sɛd "bækslæʃ bleɪm maɪsɛlf kəz ə maɪ dɪleɪz. wiv bɪn pʊɾɪŋ ɔf ðə kənfɹʌnt ʃən wɪð ɪm fəɹ tu lɔŋ. wʌt hæpən hɪɹ tədeɪ?

"I don't know if anyone can avoid being a fool at times," he said "\ blame myself because of my delays. We've been putting off the confront tion with him for too long. What happened here today?

ðə bɪldɪn tɝn tə dʌst?"

The buildin turned to dust?"

"jɛs," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ðɛɹ sʌbstəns wɑz ɹimuvd. ɛvɹiθɪŋ kɹʌm-blɛd ðə moʊmənt wi tʌtʃt ɪt."

"Yes," Nynaeve said. "Their substance was removed. Everything crum-bled the moment we touched it."

"hi wəd də ðɪs tə ði ɪntaɪɝ wɝld," ɹænd sɛd, hɪz vɔɪs ɡɹoʊɪŋ sɑft. "hi stɝz. ðə lɔŋɡɝ wi weɪt - hoʊldɪŋ ɑn baɪ əɹ fɪŋɡɝneɪlz__ðə mɔɹ i dɪstʃɹɔɪz wʌt ɹɪmeɪnz. wi kən dɪleɪ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ."

"He would do this to the entire world," Rand said, his voice growing soft. "He stirs. The longer we wait - holding on by our fingernails__the more he destroys what remains. We can delay no longer."

nɪneɪiv fɹaʊnd. "bʌt ɹænd, ɪf jə lɛɾ ɪm fɹi, woʊn ðət meɪk ɪɾ ivən wɝs?"

Nynaeve frowned. "But Rand, if you let him free, won't that make it even worse?"

"pɝhæps fəɹ ə ʃɔɹt bɝst," ɹænd sɛd. "oʊpənɪŋ ðə bɔɹ wɪl nɑt fɹi hɪm ɪmiɾiətli, ðoʊ ɪɾəl ɡɪv ɪm mɔɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ. ɪt mʌs bi dʌn ɹəɡɑɹdləs. θɪŋk ʌv əɹ tæsk əz klaɪmɪŋ ə tɔl stoʊn wɔl. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, wəɹ dɪleɪɪŋ, ɹʌnɪŋ læps bɪfɔɹ ətɛmptɪŋ ðə klaɪm. itʃ stɛp taɪɝz əs fəɹ ðə faɪt tə kʌm. wi mʌs feɪs ɪm waɪl stɪl stʃɹɔŋ. ðəɾ ɪz waɪ aɪ mʌs bɹeɪk ðə silz."

"Perhaps for a short burst," Rand said. "Opening the Bore will not free him immediately, though it will give him more strength. It must be done regardless. Think of our task as climbing a tall stone wall. Unfortunately, we are delaying, running laps before attempting the climb. Each step tires us for the fight to come. We must face him while still strong. That is why I must break the seals."

"aɪ . . ." nɪneɪiv sɛd. "aɪ θɪŋk aɪ æktʃəli  bɪliv ju." ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə ɹilaɪz ɪt.

"I . . ." Nynaeve said. "I think I actually believe you." She was surprised to realize it.

"du ju, nɪneɪiv?" hi æskt, saʊndɪŋ ɑdli ɹɪlivd. "du jə ɹɪli?"

"Do you, Nynaeve?" he asked, sounding oddly relieved. "Do you really?"

"aɪ du."

"I do."

"ðɛn tʃɹaɪ tə kənvɪns ɛɡwin. ʃɪl stɑp mi, ɪf ʃi kæn."

"Then try to convince Egwene. She will stop me, if she can."

"ɹænd . . . ʃiz kɔl mi bæk tə ðə taʊɝ. əl nid tə ɡoʊ tədeɪ."

"Rand . . . she has called me back to the Tower. I'll need to go today."

ɹænd lʊk sæɾənd. "wɛl, aɪ səspɛktəd ðət ʃi maɪt də ðəɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli." hi tʊk nɪneɪiv baɪ ðə ʃoʊldɝ ɪn ən ɑd dʒɛstʃɝ. "doʊn lɛɾ əm ɹuən ju, nɪneɪiv. ðəl tʃɹaɪ."

Rand looked saddened. "Well, I suspected that she might do that eventually." He took Nynaeve by the shoulder in an odd gesture. "Don't let them ruin you, Nynaeve. They'll try."

"ɹuən mi?"

"Ruin me?"

"jɔɹ pæʃən ɪz pɑɹɾ ə ju," ɹænd sɛd. "aɪ tʃɹaɪd tə bi laɪk ðɛm, ðoʊ aɪ wʊdn əv ədmɪɾəd ɪt. koʊld. ɔlweɪz ɪn kəntʃɹoʊl. ɪt nɪɹli dɪstʃɹɔɪd mi. ðəɾ ɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ tə sʌm, bʌɾ ɪts nɑt ði oʊnli taɪp ə stʃɹɛŋkθ. pɝhæps jə kəd lɝn tə kəntʃɹoʊl jɝsɛlf ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ, bʌɾ aɪ laɪk jə əz jə ɑɹ. ɪt meɪks jə dʒɛnjəwən. aɪ wəd nɑt si jə bɪkʌm ənʌðɝ 'pɝfəkt' ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð ə peɪntəd mæsk ʌv ə feɪs ən noʊ kɛɹ fəɹ ðə filɪŋz ən ɪmoʊʃənz ʌv ʌðɝz."

"Your passion is part of you," Rand said. "I tried to be like them, though I wouldn't have admitted it. Cold. Always in control. It nearly destroyed me. That is strength to some, but it is not the only type of strength. Perhaps you could learn to control yourself a little more, but I like you as you are. It makes you genuine. I would not see you become another 'perfect' Aes Sedai with a painted mask of a face and no care for the feelings and emotions of others."

"tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪz tə bi kɑm," nɪneɪiv ɹɪplaɪd.

"To be Aes Sedai is to be calm," Nynaeve replied.

"tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪz tə bi wʌt jə dɪsaɪɾ ɪɾ ɪz," ɹænd sɛd, hɪz stʌmp stɪl hɛl bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk.

"To be Aes Sedai is to be what you decide it is," Rand said, his stump still held behind his back.

"mɔɪɹeɪn kɛɹd. jə kəd si ɪɾ ɪn hɝ, ivən wən ʃi wɑz kɑm. ðə bɛst ɛɛs sədaɪ aɪv noʊn ɑɹ ðə wʌnz u ʌðɝ kəmpleɪn ɑɹənt wʌɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃəd bi."

"Moiraine cared. You could see it in her, even when she was calm. The best Aes Sedai I've known are the ones who other complain aren't what an Aes Sedai should be."

nɪneɪiv faʊn hɝsɛlf nɑɾɪŋ, ðən wɑz ənɔɪɾ ət hɝsɛlf. ʃi wɑz teɪkɪŋ ædvaɪs fɹəm ɹænd ælθɹ?

Nynaeve found herself nodding, then was annoyed at herself. She was taking advice from Rand alThor?

ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ dɪfɹən əbaʊt ɹænd naʊ. kwaɪəɾ ɪntɛnsəɾi ən kɛɹfəl wɝdz. hi wɑz ə mæn jə kəd teɪk ædvaɪs fɹəm wɪθaʊt filɪŋ i spikɪŋ daʊn tə ju. laɪk ɪz fɑðɝ, æktʃəli . nɑt ðət ʃiɾ ɛvɝ ədmɪt ðət tə iðɝ wʌn ə ðɛm.

There was something different about Rand now. Quiet intensity and careful words. He was a man you could take advice from without feeling he speaking down to you. Like his father, actually. Not that she'd ever admit that to either one of them.

"ɡoʊ tə ɛɡwin," ɹænd sɛd, ɹilisɪŋ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. "bʌt wən jə kæn, aɪ wəd laɪk ɪt vɛɹi mʌtʃ ɪf jə ɹɪtɝn tə mi. əl nid jəɹ kaʊnsəl ɡeɪn. ət ðə vɛɹi list, aɪ wəd laɪk jə baɪ maɪ saɪɾ əz aɪ ɡoʊ tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl. aɪ kænɑt dɪfiɾ ɪm wɪð seɪɾɪn əloʊn, ən ɪf wəɹ gɑnə juz kæl-lændɝ, əl nid tu wɪmən aɪ tʃɹʌst ɪn ðə sɝkəl wɪð mi. aɪ hæv nɑt dɪsaɪɾɪd əpɑn ði ʌðɝ. eɪvinhə əɹ ɪleɪn, pɝhæps. bʌt jə fəɹ sɝɾən."

"Go to Egwene," Rand said, releasing her shoulder. "But when you can, I would like it very much if you returned to me. I will need your counsel gain. At the very least, I would like you by my side as I go to Shayol Ghul. I cannot defeat him with saidin alone, and if we are going to use Cal-landor, I will need two women I trust in the circle with me. I have not decided upon the other. Aviendha or Elayne, perhaps. But you for certain."

"aɪ wɪl bi ðɛɹ, ɹænd." ʃi fɛlt ɑdli pɹaʊd. "hoʊl stɪl fəɹ ə moʊmənt. aɪ woʊn hɝt ju. aɪ pɹɑməs."

"I will be there, Rand." She felt oddly proud. "Hold still for a moment. I won't hurt you. I promise."

hi ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ, bʌt dɪd nʌθɪŋ əz ʃi dɛlv hɪm. ʃi wɑz soʊ taɪɝd, bʌɾ ɪf ʃi wɑz gɑnə liv hɪm, ʃi niɾəd tə teɪk ðɪs ɑpɝtunəɾi tə hil ɪz mædnəs. ɪt simd, sʌɾənli, ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ ʃi kəd də fəɹ hɪm. ən fəɹ ðə wɝld.

He raised an eyebrow, but did nothing as she Delved him. She was so tired, but if she was going to leave him, she needed to take this opportunity to Heal his madness. It seemed, suddenly, the most important thing she could do for him. And for the world.

ʃi dɛlvd, steɪɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə wunz əɾ ɪz saɪd, wɪtʃ wɝ pɪts ə dɑɹknəs ðət sim tə tʃɹaɪ tə sʌk ɪn əɹ ɛnɝdʒi. ʃi kɛpt əɹ ətɛnʃən ɑn ɪz maɪnd. wɛɹ wɑz ðə -  ʃi stɪfənd. ðə dɑɹknəs wɑz ɪnɔɹməs, kʌvɝɪŋ ði ɪntaɪɝɾi ʌv ɪz maɪnd. θaʊzənz əpɑn θaʊzənz ə ðə taɪni blæk θɔɹnz pɹɪkt ɪndə hɪz bɹeɪn, bʌt bɪniθ əm wɑz ə bɹɪljənt waɪt lɑsɪŋ ə sʌmθɪŋ. ə waɪt ɹeɪdʒjəns, laɪk lɪkwəd paʊɝ. laɪt ɡɪvən fɔɹm ən laɪf. ʃi ɡæspt. ɪt koʊɾəd itʃ ə ðə dɑɹk taɪnz, dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ɪndə hɪz maɪn əlɔŋsaɪd ðɛm. wʌɾ ɪt min?

She Delved, staying away from the wounds at his side, which were pits of darkness that seemed to try to suck in her energy. She kept her attention on his mind. Where was the -  She stiffened. The darkness was enormous, covering the entirety of his mind. Thousands upon thousands of the tiny black thorns pricked into his brain, but beneath them was a brilliant white lacing of something. A white radiance, like liquid Power. Light given form and life. She gasped. It coated each of the dark tines, driving into his mind alongside them. What did it mean?

ʃi dɪdn əv ɛni aɪdiə haʊ tə bɪɡɪn wɝkɪŋ ɑn ðɪs. ðəɹ wɝ soʊ mɛni bɑɹbz. haʊ kəɾ i ivən θɪŋk wɪð ðət mʌtʃ dɑɹknəs pɹɛsɪŋ əɡɛnst ɪz bɹeɪn? ən wʌt hæd kɹieɪɾəd ðə waɪtnəs?

She didn't have any idea how to begin working on this. There were so many barbs. How could he even think with that much darkness pressing against his brain? And what had created the whiteness?

ʃid hild ɹænd bɪfɔɹ, ən hædnt noʊɾəst ɪt ðɛn. ʌv kɔɹs, ʃid nɛvɝ sin ðə dɑɹknəs əntɪl ɹisənli. hɝ pɹæktəs wɪð dɛlvɪŋ wɑz laɪkli ðə ɹizən. ʃi ɹɪlʌktənli wɪθdʒɹu. "aɪm sɑɹi," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ kæn hil ju." mɛni hæv tʃɹaɪɾ ɑn ðoʊz wunz - jə jɝsɛlf ɪnkluɾəd. ðeɪ ɑɹ sɪmpli ənhiləbəl. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ɑn əm mʌtʃ, ðiz deɪz."

She'd Healed Rand before, and hadn't noticed it then. Of course, she'd never seen the darkness until recently. Her practice with Delving was likely the reason. She reluctantly withdrew. "I'm sorry," she said. "I can't Heal you." Many have tried on those wounds - you yourself included. They are simply unhealable. I don't think on them much, these days."

"nɑt ðə wunz ɪn jəɹ saɪd," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ðə mædnəs. aɪ . . ." jə kən hil mædnəs?" "aɪ θɪŋk aɪ dɪd soʊ ɪn nf."

"Not the wounds in your side," Nynaeve said. "The madness. I . . ." You can Heal madness?" "I think I did so in Naeff."

ɹænd ɡɹɪnd waɪdli. "ju nɛvɝ sis tə . . . nɪneɪiv, dʒju ɹilaɪz ðət ðə moʊs tæləntəɾ ə hilɝz dʊɹɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz hæd dɪfəkəlti wɪð dɪzizəz ə ðə maɪnd? mɛni bɪlivd ɪt wɑz nɑt pɑsəbəl tə hil mæd-nɛs wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ."

Rand grinned widely. "You never cease to . . . Nynaeve, do you realize that the most Talented of Healers during the Age of Legends had difficulty with diseases of the mind? Many believed it was not possible to Heal mad-ness with the One Power."

"aɪl hil ði ʌðɝz," ʃi sɛd. "nɛɹɪʃmə, flɪn ət ðə list, bɪfɝ ɡoʊ. ɔl ə ði æʃəmən pɹɑbli hæv ət list ə hɪn ə ðɪs teɪn əpɑn ðɛɹ maɪnz. aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf əl bi eɪbəl tə ɡɛt tə ðə blæk taʊɝ." əɹ ɪf aɪ wɑnə ɡoʊ ðɛɹ.

"I'll Heal the others," she said. "Narishma, Flinn at the least, befor go. All of the Asha'man probably have at least a hint of this taint upon their minds. I don't know if I'll be able to get to the Black Tower." Or if I want to go there.

"θæŋk ju," ɹænd sɛd, lʊkɪŋ nɔɹθwɝd. "bʌt noʊ, jə ʃʊdnt ɡoʊ tə ðə blæk taʊɝ. əl nid tə sɛn sʌmwʌn ðɛɹ, bʌɾ ɪɾəl bi hændəl kɛɹfəli. sʌmθɪŋz hæpənɪŋ wɪð ðɛm. bʌɾ aɪ hæv soʊ mʌtʃ tə də hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ðən lʊk tə hɝ. "ðæɾ ɪz wʌn pɪɾ aɪ kænɑt kɹɔs ət ðə moʊmənt. spik wɛl ə mi tə ɛɡwin. aɪ niɾ əɹ tə bi ən ælaɪ."

"Thank you," Rand said, looking northward. "But no, you shouldn't go to the Black Tower. I will need to send someone there, but it will be handled carefully. Something's happening with them. But I have so much to do He shook his head, then looked to her. "That is one pit I cannot cross at the moment. Speak well of me to Egwene. I need her to be an ally."

nɪneɪiv nɑɾəd, ðən - filɪŋ fulɪʃ - ɡeɪv ɪm ə hʌɡ bɪfɔɹ hɝiɪŋ ɔf tə sik aʊt nɛɹɪʃmə ən flɪn. ə hʌɡ. fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ʃi wɑz tɝnɪŋ əz sɪli əz ɪleɪn. ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, θɪŋkɪŋ ðət pɝhæps səm taɪm ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ wəd hɛlp əɹ ɹɪɡeɪn əɹ lɛvlhɛɾədnəs.

Nynaeve nodded, then - feeling foolish - gave him a hug before hurrying off to seek out Narishma and Flinn. A hug. For the Dragon Reborn. She was turning as silly as Elayne. She shook her head, thinking that perhaps some time in the White Tower would help her regain her levelheadedness.

ðə klaʊdz hæd ɹɪtɝnd.

The clouds had returned.

ɛɡwin stʊɾ ət ðə vɛɹi eɪpɛks ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ɑn ðə flæt, sɝkjəlɝ ɹuf, hoʊldɪŋ tə ðə weɪst- haɪ wɔl. laɪk ə kɹipɪŋ fʌŋɡəs - laɪk ɪnsɛks ɪn ə swɔɹm - ðə klaʊdz hæd kloʊzd ʌp əbʌv tɑɹ vəlɑn. ðə sʌnlaɪts vɪzət hæd bɪn wɛlkəm, bʌt bɹif.

Egwene stood at the very apex of the White Tower, on the flat, circular roof, holding to the waist- high wall. Like a creeping fungus - like insects in a swarm - the clouds had closed up above Tar Valon. The sunlights visit had been Welcome, but brief.

ðə ti wɑz bæk tə teɪstɪŋ steɪl əɡɛn. ðə ɡɹeɪn stɔɹz ðeɪd dɪskʌvɝd wɝ ɹʌnɪŋ aʊt, ən ðə nɛkst sæks tə kʌm ɪn hæd bɪn fɪld wɪð wivəlz. ðə læn ɪz wʌn wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən.

The tea was back to tasting stale again. The grain stores they'd discovered were running out, and the next sacks to come in had been filled with weevils. The Land is One with the Dragon.

ʃi bɹiðd ɪn, smɛlɪŋ ðə nu ɛɹ, lʊkɪŋ aʊɾ oʊvɝ tɑɹ vəlɑn. hɝ tɑɹ vəlɑn.

She breathed in, smelling the new air, looking out over Tar Valon. Her Tar Valon.

sɹɪn, jukɪɝi ən sin - θɹi ʌv ðə sɪstɝz u hæd bɪn ði ɝɪdʒənəl hʌntɝz fəɹ ðə blæk ədʒɑ ɪn ðə taʊɝ - weɪɾəd peɪʃənli bɪhaɪn hɝ. ðeɪ wɝ əmʌŋ əɹ moʊst ɑɹɾənt səpɔɹɾɝz naʊ, ən əɹ moʊs jusfəl. ɛvɹiwʌn ɪkspɛktəɾ ɛɡwin tə feɪvɝ ðə wɪmən u hæd bɪn əmʌŋ ðoʊz u splɪt fɹəm ɪleɪɾə, soʊ biɪŋ sin spɛndɪŋ taɪm wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæd steɪɾ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɑz hɛlpfəl.

Saerin, Yukiri and Seaine - three of the sisters who had been the original hunters for the Black Ajah in the Tower - waited patiently behind her. They were among her most ardent supporters now, and her most useful. Everyone expected Egwene to favor the women who had been among those who split from Elaida, so being seen spending time with Aes Sedai who had stayed in the White Tower was helpful.

"wʌɾ əv jə dɪskʌvɝd?" ɛɡwin æskt.

"What have you discovered?" Egwene asked.

sɹɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, dʒɔɪnɪŋ ɛɡwin ət ðə wɔl. ðə skɑɹ ɑn əɹ tʃik ən ðə waɪɾ əɾ əɹ tɛmpəlz meɪd ði ɑləv-skɪn ən blʌnt-feɪs bɹaʊn lʊk laɪk ən eɪdʒɪŋ dʒɛnɝəl. "sʌm ə ði ɪnfɝmeɪʃən jə ɹɪkwɛst wɑz ənsɝɾən ivən θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz əɡoʊ, mʌðɝ."

Saerin shook her head, joining Egwene at the wall. The scar on her cheek and the white at her temples made the olive-skinned and blunt-faced Brown look like an aging general. "Some of the information you requeste was uncertain even three thousand years ago, Mother."

"wʌtɛvɝ jə kən ɡɪmi wɪl hɛlp, dɔɾɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "soʊ lɔŋ əz wi də nɑt dɪpɛn ɑn ðə fæks ɪntaɪɝli, ɪnkəmplit nɑlədʒ ɪz bɛɾɝ ðən kəmpliɾ ɪɡnɝəns."

"Whatever you can give me will help, daughter," Egwene said. "So long as we do not depend on the facts entirely, incomplete knowledge is better than complete ignorance."

sɹɪn snɔɹɾɪd sɔfli, bʌɾ ɑbviəsli ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə kwoʊt fɹəm jɑsɪkə sɛlɪk, ən eɪntʃən bɹaʊn skɑlɝ.

Saerin snorted softly, but obviously recognized the quote from Yasicca Cellaech, an ancient Brown scholar.

"æn jə tu?" ɛɡwin æsk jukɪɝi ən sin.

"And you two?" Egwene asked Yukiri and Seaine.

"wɝ lʊkɪŋ," jukɪɝi sɛd. "sin əz ə lɪst ə pɑsəbɪləɾiz. səm ɑɹ æktʃəli  ɹizənəbəl."

"We're looking," Yukiri said. "Seaine has a list of possibilities. Some are actually reasonable."

ɛɡwin ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ. æskɪŋ ə waɪt fəɹ θɪɹiz wɑz ɔlweɪz ntʃɹəstɪŋ, bʌt nɑɾ ɔlweɪz jusfəl. ðeɪ hæɾ ə tɛndənsi tə ɪɡnɔɹ wʌt wɑz plɔzəbəl, foʊkəsɪŋ ɑn ɹɪmoʊt pɑsəbɪləɾiz.

Egwene raised an eyebrow. Asking a White for theories was always nteresting, but not always useful. They had a tendency to ignore what was plausible, focusing on remote possibilities.

"lɛɾ əs bɪɡɪn ðɛɹ, ðɛn," ɛɡwin sɛd. "sin?"

"Let us begin there, then," Egwene said. "Seaine?"

"wɛl," sin sɛd, "aɪ wɪl bɪɡɪn baɪ seɪɪŋ ðət wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən əndaʊɾɪdli hæz nɑlədʒ ðət wi kænt ɡɛs æt. soʊ ðəɹ meɪ bi noʊ weɪ tə æsɝteɪn haʊ ʃi dɪfiɾəd ði oʊθ ɹɑd. fəɹ ɪnstəns, ðəɹ maɪt bi ə weɪ tə dɪseɪbəl ɪt fəɹ ə ʃɔɹt taɪm, əɹ pɝhæps ðəɹ ɑɹ spɛʃəl wɝdz ðət kən bi juz tə ɪveɪɾ ɪts ɪfɛks. ðə ɹɑɾ ɪz ə θɪŋ ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, ən ðoʊ wiv juzd ɪt fəɹ məlɛniə, wi doʊn ɹɪli ʌndɝstæn ɪt. noʊ mɔɹ ðən wi də moʊs tɛɹæŋɡɹil."

"Well," Seaine said, "I will begin by saying that one of the Forsaken undoubtedly has knowledge that we can't guess at. So there may be no way to ascertain how she defeated the Oath Rod. For instance, there might be a way to disable it for a short time, or perhaps there are special words that can be used to evade its effects. The rod is a thing of the Age of Legends, and though we've used it for millennia, we don't really understand it. No more than we do most ter'angreal."

"vɛɹi wɛl," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"Very well," Egwene said.

"bʌt," sin sɛd, ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə ʃiɾ ə peɪpɝ, "ðæt teɪkən ɪndə əkaʊnt, aɪ hæv θɹi θɪɹiz ɑn haʊ wʌn maɪt dɪfit swɛɹɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹɑd. fɝst, ɪts pɑsəbəl ðət ðə wʊmən əz ənʌðɝ oʊθ ɹɑd.

"But," Seaine said, getting out a sheet of paper, "that taken into account, I have three theories on how one might defeat swearing on the rod. First, it is possible that the woman has another Oath Rod.

ʌðɝz wɝ wʌns sɛd tə ɪɡzɪst, ən ɪts plɔzəbəl ðət wʌn ɹɑd kəd ɹilis jə fɹəm ði oʊðz ʌv ənʌðɝ. mɛsænə cʊɾə bɪn hoʊldɪŋ wʌn sikɹɪtli. ʃi cʊɾə teɪkən ðə θɹi oʊðz waɪl hoʊldɪŋ əɹ ɹɑd, ðən sʌmhaʊ juz ði ʌðɝ tə nɪɡeɪt ðoʊz oʊðz bɪfɔɹ swɛɹɪŋ ðət ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd."

Others were once said to exist, and it's plausible that one rod could release you from the oaths of another. Mesaana could have been holding one secretly. She could have taken the Three Oaths while holding our rod, then somehow used the other to negate those oaths before swearing that she was not a Darkfriend."

tɛnjəwəs," ɛɡwin sɛd. "haʊ wəd ʃi hæv ɹilis hɝsɛlf wɪθaʊɾ əs noʊɪŋ? ɪt ɹikwaɪɝz tʃænəlɪŋ spɪɹət."

Tenuous," Egwene said. "How would she have released herself without us knowing? It requires channeling Spirit."

"aɪ kənsɪɾɝd ðæt," sin sɛd.

"I considered that," Seaine said.

"nɑt sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ," jukɪɝi sɛd.

"Not surprising," Yukiri said.

sin aɪd hɝ, ðən kəntɪnjud. "ðɪs ɪz ðə ɹizən mɛsænə wʊɾə niɾəd ə sɛkən oʊθ ɹɑd. ʃi cʊɾə tʃænəl spɪɹəɾ ɪndə ɪt, ðən ɪnvɝɾɪd ðə wiv, livɪŋ əɹ lɪŋk tə ɪt."

Seaine eyed her, then continued. "This is the reason Mesaana would have needed a second Oath Rod. She could have channeled Spirit into it, then inverted the weave, leaving her linked to it."

ɪt simz ɪmpɹɑbəbəl," ɛɡwin sɛd.

It seems improbable," Egwene said.

"ɪmpɹɑbəbəl?" sɹɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "ɪt simz ɹɪdɪkjələs. aɪ θɔt jə sɛd səm ə ðiz wɝ plɔzəbəl, jukɪɝi."

"Improbable?" Saerin replied. "It seems ridiculous. I thought you said some of these were plausible, Yukiri."

"ðɪs wʌn ɪz ðə lis laɪkli ʌv ðə θɹi," sin sɛd. "ðə sɛkən mɛθəd wəd bi iziɝ. mɛsænə cʊɾə sɛn ə lʊk-əlaɪk wɛɹɪŋ ðə mɪɹɝ ə mɪsts. səm ənfɔɹtʃənət sɪstɝ - əɹ nɑvəs, əɹ ivən səm ʌn-tʃɹeɪnd wʊmən u kəd tʃænəl - ʌndɝ hɛvi kəmpʌlʃən. ðɪs wʊmən cʊɾə bɪn fɔɹs tə teɪk ði oʊðz ɪn mɛsænəz pleɪs. ðɛn, sɪns ðɪs pɝsən wʊdn bi ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, ʃi kəd spik tʃɹuθfəli ðət ʃi wɑznt."

"This one is the least likely of the three," Seaine said. "The second method would be easier. Mesaana could have sent a look-alike wearing the Mirror of Mists. Some unfortunate sister - or novice, or even some un-trained woman who could channel - under heavy Compulsion. This woman could have been forced to take the oaths in Mesaana's place. Then, since this person wouldn't be a Darkfriend, she could speak truthfully that she wasn't."

ɛɡwin nɑɾəd θɔtfəli. "ðæt wʊɾə teɪkən ə lɑɾ ə pɹipə-ɹæʃən."

Egwene nodded thoughtfully. "That would have taken a lot of prepa-ration."

"fɹʌm wʌɾ aɪv bɪn eɪbəl tə lɝn əbaʊt hɝ," sɹɪn sɛd, "mɛsən wɑz ɡʊɾ ət pɹɛpɝeɪʃən. ʃi ɪksɛld əɾ ɪt."

"From what I've been able to learn about her," Saerin said, "Mesaan was good at preparation. She excelled at it."

sɹɪnz tæsk hæd bɪn tə dɪskʌvɝ wʌtɛvɝ ʃi kəɾ əbaʊt mɛsænəz tʃɹu neɪtʃɝ. ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl hɝd ðə stɔɹiz - hu dɪdnt noʊ ðə neɪmz ʌv itʃ ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən, ən ðɛɹ moʊs tɛɹəbəl didz, baɪ hɑɹt? bʌɾ ɛɡwin pʊt lɪɾəl feɪθ ɪn stɔɹiz; ʃi wɑntəd sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ hɑɹdfæst, ɪf ʃi kəd ɡɛɾ ɪt.

Saerin's task had been to discover whatever she could about Mesaana's true nature. They had all heard the stories - who didn't know the names of each of the Forsaken, and their most terrible deeds, by heart? But Egwene put little faith in stories; she wanted something more hardfast, if she could get it.

"ju sɛd ðəɹ wɑz ə θɝd pɑsəbɪləɾi?" ɛɡwin æskt.

"You said there was a third possibility?" Egwene asked.

"jɛs," sin sɛd. "wi noʊ ðət səm wivz pleɪ wɪð saʊnd. vɛɹieɪʃənz ɑn voʊkəl wivz ɑɹ juz tə ɛnhæns ə vɔɪs tə pɹədʒɛk tə ə kɹaʊd, ən ɪn ðə wɔɹɾ əɡɛnst ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ - ɪndid, ðəɹ juzd ɪn ðə vɛɹiəs tʃɹɪks juz tə lɪsən ɪn ɑn wʌɾ ɪz biɪŋ sɛd nɪɹbaɪ. kɑmplɛks jusəz ə ðə mɪɹɝ ə mɪsts kən tʃeɪnʒ ə pɝsənz vɔɪs. wɪð səm pɹæktəs, dʌsin ən aɪ wɝ eɪbəl tə fæbɹəkeɪɾ ə vɛɹieɪʃən ɑn ə wiv ðət wəɾ ɔltɝ ðə wɝdz wi spoʊk. ɪn ɪfɛkt, wi sɛd wʌn θɪŋ, bʌt ði ʌðɝ pɝsən hɝɾ ənʌðɝ θɪŋ ɪntaɪɝli."

"Yes," Seaine said. "We know that some weaves play with sound. Variations on vocal weaves are used to enhance a voice to project to a crowd, and in the ward against eavesdropping - indeed, they're used in the various tricks used to listen in on what is being said nearby. Complex uses of the Mirror of Mists can change a person's voice. With some practice, Doesine and I were able to fabricate a variation on a weave that would alter the words we spoke. In effect, we said one thing, but the other person heard another thing entirely."

"deɪnʒɝəs ɡɹaʊn tə wɔk, sin," sɹɪn sɛd, hɝ vɔɪs ɡɹʌf. "ðæɾ ɪz ðə kaɪndə wiv ðət kəd bi juz fəɹ ɪl pɝpəsəz."

"Dangerous ground to walk, Seaine," Saerin said, her voice gruff. "That is the kind of weave that could be used for ill purposes."

"aɪ kʊdn juz ɪt tə laɪ," sin sɛd. "aɪ tʃɹaɪd. ði oʊðz hoʊld - soʊ lɔŋ əz ðə wiv wɑz ðɛɹ, aɪ kʊdn spik wɝdz ðəɾ aɪ nu ənʌðɝ wəd hɪɹ əz laɪz, ivən ɪf ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹuθ wən ðeɪ lɛf maɪ lɪps. ɹəɡɑɹdləs, ɪt wɑz ən izi wiv tə dɪvɛləp. taɪɾ ɔf ən ɪnvɝɾɪd, ɪt hʌŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə mi ən ɔltɝd maɪ wɝdz ɪn ə weɪ aɪɾ ɪndəkeɪɾəd.

"I couldn't use it to lie," Seaine said. "I tried. The oaths hold - so long as the weave was there, I couldn't speak words that I knew another would hear as lies, even if they were truth when they left my lips. Regardless, it was an easy weave to develop. Tied off and inverted, it hung in front of me and altered my words in a way I'd indicated.

"θiɝɛɾɪkəli, ɪf mɛsænə hæd ðɪs wiv ɪn fɔɹs, ʃi cʊɾə teɪkən ʌp ði oʊθ ɹɑɾ ən swɔɹn wʌtɛvɝ ʃi wɪʃt. 'aɪ vaʊ ðəɾ əl laɪ wɛnɛvɝ aɪ fil laɪk ɪt' fəɹ ɪnstəns. ði oʊθ ɹɑd wʊɾə baʊn əɹ wɪð ðət vaʊ, bʌt ðə wivz wʊɾə tʃeɪnʒd ðə saʊnz ɪn ði ɛɹ əz ðeɪ pæst əɹ lɪps. wiɾ əv hɝɾ əɹ seɪɪŋ ðə pɹɑpɝ oʊðz.

"Theoretically, if Mesaana had this weave in force, she could have taken up the Oath Rod and sworn whatever she wished. 'I vow that I will lie whenever I feel like it' for instance. The Oath Rod would have bound her with that vow, but the weaves would have changed the sounds in the air as they passed her lips. We'd have heard her saying the proper oaths.

ɛɡwin ɡɹɪɾɪd əɹ tiθ. ʃiɾ əsum ðət dɪfiɾɪŋ ði oʊθ ɹɑd wəd bi dɪfəkəlt. ən jɛt hɪɹ wɑz ə sɪmpəl wiv keɪpəbəl ə ðə fit. ʃi ʃʊɾə noʊn - nɛvɝ juz ə boʊldɝ wən ə pɛbəl wɪl du, əz əɹ mʌðɝ hæɾ ɔfən sɛd.

Egwene gritted her teeth. She'd assumed that defeating the Oath Rod would be difficult. And yet here was a simple weave capable of the feat. She should have known - never use a boulder when a pebble will do, as her mother had often said.

"wɪð ðɪs," ɛɡwin sɛd, "ðeɪ cʊɾə bɪn slɪpɪŋ dɑɹkfɹɛnz . ɪndə ɹæŋks ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ jɪɹz."

"With this," Egwene said, "they could have been slipping Darkfriends . into ranks of the Aes Sedai for years."

"ənlaɪkli," sɹɪn sɛd. "nʌn ə ðə blæk sɪstɝz wi kæptʃɝd nu ʌv ðɪs weɪv. ɪf ðeɪ hæd, ðən ðeɪɾ əv tʃɹaɪd tə juz ɪt wən wi meɪd hɛm ɹɛswɛɹ ði oʊðz. aɪ səspɛk ðəɾ ɪf mɛsænə dʌz noʊ ðɪs tʃɹɪk, ʃi eɪtʃ kɛpt ɪt tə hɝsɛlf. ðə jusfəlnəs ʌv ɪt wəd vænɪʃ wʌns tu mɛni pipəl bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ʌv ɪt."

"Unlikely," Saerin said. "None of the Black sisters we captured knew of this wave. If they had, then they'd have tried to use it when we made hem reswear the oaths. I suspect that if Mesaana does know this trick, she h kept it to herself. The usefulness of it would vanish once too many people became aware of it."

"stɪl," ɛɡwin sɛd. "wʌt də wi du? noʊɪŋ ə ðə wiv, wi kəd pɹɑbli faɪn ə weɪ tə tʃɛk fəɹ ɪt - bʌɾ aɪ daʊt ðət ðə sɪstɝz wəd bi wɪlɪŋ tə ɡoʊ θɹu ðə ɹɛswɛɹɪŋ pɹɑsɛs əɡɛn."

"Still," Egwene said. "What do we do? Knowing of the weave, we could probably find a way to check for it - but I doubt that the sisters would be willing to go through the reswearing process again."

"æn ɪf ɪt wɝ tə kætʃ wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən?" jukɪɝi æskt. "ɪt maɪt bi wɝθ ɹʌfəlɪŋ ə fju fɛðɝz tə kætʃ ðə fɑks haɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə hɛnhaʊs."

"And if it were to catch one of the Forsaken?" Yukiri asked. "It might be worth ruffling a few feathers to catch the fox hiding in the henhouse."

"ʃi wʊdn bi kɑt," ɛɡwin sɛd. "bɪsaɪdz, wi doʊnt noʊ ɪf ʃiz juzɪŋ wʌn ə ðiz mɛθədz. sinz lɑdʒɪk sədʒɛsts ðəɾ ɪt maɪt bi pɑsəbəl - wɪθaʊt tu mʌtʃ tʃɹʌbəl - tə dɪfit ði oʊθ ɹɑd. ði æktʃəwəl mɛθəd mɛsænə juzd ɪz lɛs ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ʌv ði ækt."

"She wouldn't be caught," Egwene said. "Besides, we don't know if she's using one of these methods. Seaine's logic suggests that it might be possible - without too much trouble - to defeat the Oath Rod. The actual method Mesaana used is less important than the possibility of the act."

sin ɡlænst ət jukɪɝi. nʌn ə ðə θɹi hæd kwɛstʃən ɛɡwinz nɑlədʒ ðət wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən wɑz ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, bʌt ʃi nu ðeɪd bɪn skɛptəkəl. wɛl, ət lis ðeɪ naʊ ʌndɝstʊd ðəɾ ɪt maɪt bi pɑsəbəl tə dɪfit ði oʊθ ɹɑd.

Seaine glanced at Yukiri. None of the three had questioned Egwene's knowledge that one of the Forsaken was in the White Tower, but she knew they'd been skeptical. Well, at least they now understood that it might be possible to defeat the Oath Rod.

"aɪ wɑn jə tə kəntɪnju jəɹ wɝk," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ju ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ ɪfɛktɪv ət kæptʃɝɪŋ sɛvɹəl blæk sɪstɝz ən ənɝθəŋ ðə fɛɹəts. ðɪs ɪz mʌtʃ ðə seɪm θɪŋ." mɪɹli fɑɹ, fɑɹ mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs.

"I want you to continue your work," Egwene said. "You and the others were effective at capturing several Black sisters and unearthing the ferrets. This is much the same thing." Merely far, far more dangerous.

"wil tʃɹaɪ, mʌðɝ," jukɪɝi sɛd. "bʌt wʌn sɪstɝ əmʌŋ hʌnʒɹədz? wʌn ə ðə moʊs kɹæfti ən ivəl kɹitʃɝz ɛvɝ tə hæv lɪvd? aɪ daʊt ʃɪl liv mɛni kluz. əɹ ɪnvɛstəɡeɪʃənz ɪndə ðə mɝɾɝz hæv, soʊ fɑɹ, jildəd vɛɹi lɪɾəl ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv ɹɪzʌls."

"We'll try, Mother," Yukiri said. "But one sister among hundreds? One of the most crafty and evil creatures ever to have lived? I doubt she will leave many clues. Our investigations into the murders have, so far, yielded very little in the way of results."

"kip əɾ ɪɾ ɛniweɪ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "sɹɪn, wʌɾ əv jə tə ɹipɔɹt?"

"Keep at it anyway," Egwene said. "Saerin, what have you to report?"

"teɪlz, ɹumɝz ən wɪspɝz, mʌðɝ," sɹɪn sɛd wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs. "ju laɪkli noʊ ðə moʊs feɪməs stɔɹiz ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ mɛsænə - haʊ ʃi ɹæn ðə skulz ɪn lænz kɑŋkɝd baɪ ðə ʃædoʊ dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə paʊɝ. soʊ fɑɹ əz aɪ kən tɛl, ðoʊz lɛdʒənz ɑɹ kwaɪt tʃɹu. mɑɹsɪm ə meɪnɛðɝən spiks ə ðəɾ ɪn dɪteɪl ɪn əɹ ænəlz ə ðə faɪnəl naɪts, ən ʃiz ɔfən ə ɹɪlaɪəbəl sɔɹs. ɔlɹəm ɡæðɝd kwaɪɾ ə fʊl ɹipɔɹɾ ə lɪvɪŋ θɹu wʌn ə ðoʊz skulz, ən fɹæɡməns ʌv ɪɾ əv sɝvaɪvd.

"Tales, rumors and whispers, Mother," Saerin said with a grimace. "You likely know the most famous stories regarding Mesaana - how she ran the schools in lands conquered by the Shadow during the War of Power. So far as I can tell, those legends are quite true. Marsim of Manetheren speaks of that in detail in her Annals of the Final Nights, and she's often a reliable source. Alrom gathered quite a full report of living through one of those schools, and fragments of it have survived.

mɛsænə wɪʃt tə bi ə ɹisɝtʃɝ, bʌt wɑz ɹɪdʒɛktɪd. ðə dɪteɪlz ɑɹ nɑt klɪɹ. ʃi ɔlsoʊ ɡʌvɝn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hu wɛn tə ðə ʃædoʊ, lɛd-ɪŋ əm ɪn bæɾəl ət taɪmz, ɪf ɔlɹəmz ɹipɔɹɾ ɪz tə bi bɪlivd. ɪm nɑt kənvɪnst ɪɾ ɪz; aɪ θɪŋk ɪt laɪkli mɛsænəz liɾɝʃɪp wɑz mɔɹ fɪɡjɝəɾɪv."

Mesaana wished to be a researcher, but was rejected. The details are not clear. She also governed the Aes Sedai who went to the Shadow, lead-ing them in battle at times, if Alrom's report is to be believed. I'm not convinced it is; I think it likely Mesaana's leadership was more figurative."

ɛɡwin nɑɾəd sloʊli. "bʌt wʌɾ ə hɝ pɝsənælɪɾi? hu ɪz ʃi?"

Egwene nodded slowly. "But what of her personality? Who is she?"

sɹɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑɹ mɔɹ mɑnstɝz ɪn ðə naɪt ðən ɹil 'pɝsənælɪɾiz' tə moʊst, mʌðɝ, ən mʌtʃ əz bɪn lɔst əɹ mɪs-kwoʊɾəd. fɹəm wʌɾ aɪ kən tɛl, əmʌŋ ðə fɔɹseɪkən jə kəd θɪŋk ə hɝ əz ðə ɹilɪst - ðə wʌn hu, ɹæðɝ ðən sɪɾɪŋ haɪ ɑn ə θɹoʊn, stɛps ɪn ən ɡɛts əɹ hænz dɝɾi. ilænʒɹiə bɔɹndæts siɪŋ θɹu ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ɪnsɪsts ðæt, ənlaɪk mɑɡiɾin ən ɡɹeɪndəl, mɛsænə wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə teɪk ðə ɹeɪnz dɝɛkli.

Saerin shook her head. "The Forsaken are more monsters in the night than real 'personalities' to most, Mother, and much has been lost or mis-quoted. From what I can tell, among the Forsaken you could think of her as the realist - the one who, rather than sitting high on a throne, steps in and gets her hands dirty. Elandria Borndat's Seeing Through the Breaking insists that, unlike Moghedien and Graendal, Mesaana was willing to take the reins directly.

"ʃi wɑz nɛvɝ noʊn əz ðə moʊst skɪld əɹ paʊɝfəl ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən bʌt ʃi wɑz ɪkstʃɹimli keɪpəbəl. ilænʒɹiə ɪkspleɪnz ðət ʃi dɪd wʌt niɾəd tə bi dʌn. wən ʌðɝz wəd bi skimɪŋ, ʃi wəd bi kɛɹfəli bɪldɪŋ ʌp dɪfɛnsəz ən tʃɹeɪnɪŋ nu ɹəkɹuts." sɹɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "ʃi . . . wɛl, ʃi saʊnz mʌtʃ laɪk ən æmɪɝlɪn, mʌðɝ. ðə ʃædoʊz æmɪɝlɪn."

"She was never known as the most skilled or powerful of the Forsaken but she was extremely capable. Elandria explains that she did what needed to be done. When others would be scheming, she would be carefully building up defenses and training new recruits." Saerin hesitated. "She . . . well, she sounds much like an Amyrlin, Mother. The Shadow's Amyrlin."

"laɪt," jukɪɝi sɛd. "lɪɾəl wʌndɝ ʃi sɛɾ ʌp hɪɹ." ðə ɡɹeɪ sim vɛɹi ənsɛɾəld baɪ ðæt.

"Light," Yukiri said. "Little wonder she set up here." The Gray seemed very unsettled by that.

"ði oʊnli ʌðɝ θɪŋ aɪ kəd faɪn ə ɹɛləvəns, mʌðɝ," sɹɪn sɛd, "wɑz ə kjʊɹiəs ɹɛfɝəns fɹəm ðə blu skɑlɝ lænɪs, hu ɪndəkeɪɾəd ðət mɛsænə wɑz sɛkən oʊnli tə dɪmɑndɝɾ ɪn ʃɪɹ æŋɡɝ."

"The only other thing I could find of relevance, Mother," Saerin said, "was a curious reference from the Blue scholar Lannis, who indicated that Mesaana was second only to Demandred in sheer anger."

ɛɡwin fɹaʊnd. "aɪɾ əsum ðəɾ ɔl ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑɹ fʊl ə heɪt."

Egwene frowned. "I'd assume that all of the Forsaken are full of hate."

"nɑt heɪt," sɹɪn sɛd. "æŋɡɝ. lænɪs θɔt mɛsænə wɑz æŋɡɹi - ət hɝsɛlf, ət ðə wɝld, ət ði ʌðɝ fɔɹseɪkən - kəz ʃi wɑznt wʌn ə ðoʊz æt/ ðə fɔɹfɹʌnt. ðət kəd meɪk əɹ vɛɹi deɪnʒɝəs."

"Not hate," Saerin said. "Anger. Lannis thought Mesaana was angry - at herself, at the world, at the other Forsaken - because she wasn't one of those at/ the forefront. That could make her very dangerous."

ɛɡwin nɑɾəd sloʊli. ʃiz ən ɔɹɡənaɪzɝ, ʃi θɔt. ən ədmɪnəstʃɹeɪɾɝ u heɪts biɪŋ ɹɛləɡeɪɾɪd tə ðət pəzɪʃən.

Egwene nodded slowly. She's an organizer, she thought. An administrator who hates being relegated to that position.

wɑz ðət waɪ ʃid steɪɾ ɪn ðə taʊɝ æftɝ ðə blæk sɪstɝz hæd bɪn faʊnd? dɪd ʃi dɪzaɪɝ tə bɹɪŋ səm ɡɹeɪɾ əkɑmplɪʃmən tə ðə dɑɹk wʌn? vɛɹɪn hæd sɛd ðət ðə fɔɹseɪkən ʃɛɹd wʌn junəfaɪɪŋ tʃɹeɪt: ðɛɹ sɛlfɪʃnəs.

Was that why she'd stayed in the Tower after the Black sisters had been found? Did she desire to bring some great accomplishment to the Dark One? Verin had said that the Forsaken shared one unifying trait: their selfishness.

ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə dɪlɪvɝ ə bɹoʊkən waɪt taʊɝ, ɛɡwin θɔt. bʌt ðəɾ əz feɪld. ʃi wɑz pɹɑbli pɑɹɾ ə ði ətɛmp tə kɪdnæp ɹænd əz wɛl. ənʌðɝ fiæskoʊ. ən ðə wɪmən sɛn tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðə blæk taʊɝ?

She tried to deliver a broken White Tower, Egwene thought. But that has failed. She was probably part of the attempt to kidnap Rand as well. Another fiasco. And the women sent to destroy the Black Tower?

mɛsænə wəd nid sʌmθɪŋ ɡɹæn tə ɔfsɛt soʊ mɛni feɪljɝz. kɪlɪŋ ɛɡwin wəd wɝk.

Mesaana would need something grand to offset so many failures. Killing Egwene would work.

ðət maɪt sɛn ðə waɪt taʊɝ bæk ɪndə dɪvɪʒən.

That might send the White Tower back into division.

ɡɔɪn hæd bɪn mɔɹɾəfaɪd wən ʃid sɛd ʃi maɪt juz hɝsɛlf əz beɪt. dɛɹd ʃi də soʊ? ʃi ɡɹɪp ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ, stændɪŋ əbʌv ðə taʊɝ, əbʌv ðə sɪɾi ðət dɪpɛndəɾ ɑn hɝ, lʊkɪŋ aʊɾ ɑn ə wɝl ðət niɾəd hɝ.

Gawyn had been mortified when she'd said she might use herself as bait. Dared she do so? She gripped the railing, standing above the Tower, above the city that depended on her, looking out on a world that needed her.

sʌmθɪŋ hæd tə bi dʌn; mɛsænə hæd tə bi dʒɹɔn aʊt. ɪf wʌt sɹɪn sɛd wɑz tʃɹu, ðən ðə wʊmən wəd bi wɪlɪŋ tə faɪt dɝɛkli - ʃi wʊdn haɪɾ ən poʊk fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz. ɛɡwinz tæsk, ðɛn, wɑz tə tɛmpt əɹ wɪð ən ɑpɝtunəɾi, wʌn ðət dɪdn sim ɑbviəs, wʌn ʃi kʊdn ɹɪzɪst.

Something had to be done; Mesaana had to be drawn out. If what Saerin said was true, then the woman would be willing to fight directly - she wouldn't hide and poke from the shadows. Egwene's task, then, was to tempt her with an opportunity, one that didn't seem obvious, one she couldn't resist.

"kʌm " ɛɡwin sɛd, wɔkɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ɹæmp bæk daʊn ɪndə ði "aɪ hæv səm pɹɛpɝeɪʃənz tə meɪk."

"Come " Egwene said, walking toward the ramp back down into the "I have some preparations to make."


tʃæptɝ sɪkstin


CHAPTER 16

ʃænəhɑɹ


Shanna'har

feɪl wɔk ðə kæmp ɪn ðə weɪnɪŋ ivnɪŋ laɪt, meɪkɪŋ əɹ weɪ təwɔɹd ðə kɔɹɾɝmæstɝz tɛnt. pɛɹɪn hæd sɛn ðɛɹ ɡɹup ə skaʊts θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ tə kɛɹhin; ðeɪd ɹɪtɝn ðə nɛks mɔɹnɪŋ.

Faile walked the camp in the waning evening light, making her way toward the quartermaster's tent. Perrin had sent their group of scouts through the gateway to Cairhien; they'd return the next morning.

pɛɹɪn wɑz stɪl bɹuɾɪŋ əbaʊt ðə waɪtkloʊks. oʊvɝ ðə læst sɛvɹəl deɪz, ðə tu ɑɹmiz hæɾ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd sɛvɹəl lɛɾɝz, pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə mənuvɝ fəɹ ə sɛkənd, mɔɹ fɔɹməl pɑɹli waɪl ðə waɪtkloʊks ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn ə bæɾəl. feɪl hæd ɡɪvən pɛɹɪn tʃɔɪs wɝdz əbaʊt snikɪŋ ɔf tə mit wɪð ðə waɪtkloʊks wɪθaʊt hɝ.

Perrin was still brooding about the Whitecloaks. Over the last several days, the two armies had exchanged several letters, Perrin trying to maneuver for a second, more formal parley while the Whitecloaks insisted on a battle. Faile had given Perrin choice words about sneaking off to meet with the Whitecloaks without her.

pɛɹɪn wɑz stɔlɪŋ əz i lɛɾ ɛlaɪəs ən ði il skaʊt ðə waɪtkloʊks tə tʃɹaɪ tə faɪn ə weɪ tə snik ðɛɹ pipəl aʊt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ənlaɪkli tə bi ən ɑpʃən. hid səksiɾəd bæk ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, bʌt ðəɹ hæd bɪn oʊnli ə hændfʊl ə kæptɪvz ðɛn. naʊ ðəɹ wɝ hʌnʒɹədz.

Perrin was stalling as he let Elyas and the Aiel scout the Whitecloaks to try to find a way to sneak their people out, but it was unlikely to be an option. He'd succeeded back in the Two Rivers, but there had been only a handful of captives then. Now there were hundreds.

pɛɹɪn wɑz nɑt dilɪŋ wɛl wɪð ɪz ɡɪlt. wɛl, feɪl wəd tɔk wɪð ɪm ʃɔɹtli. ʃi kəntɪnjud θɹu ðə kæmp, pæsɪŋ ðə minɝ sɛkʃən tə hɝ lɛft, wɪð bænɝz flaɪɪŋ haɪ.

Perrin was not dealing well with his guilt. Well, Faile would talk with him shortly. She continued through the camp, passing the Mayener section to her left, with banners flying high.

əl əv tə dil wɪð ðət wʌn sun əz wɛl, feɪl θɔt, lʊkɪŋ ʌp ət bɹəleɪnz bænɝ. ðə ɹumɝz əbaʊɾ əɹ ən pɛɹɪn wɝ pɹɑbləmæɾɪk. ʃid səspɛktəd ðət bɹəleɪn maɪt tʃɹaɪ sʌmθɪŋ ɪn feɪlz æbsəns, bʌt teɪkɪŋ ɪm ɪndə hɝ tɛn ət naɪt sim pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli fɔɹwɝd.

I will have to deal with that one soon as well, Faile thought, looking up at Berelain's banner. The rumors about her and Perrin were problematic. She'd suspected that Berelain might try something in Faile's absence, but taking him into her tent at night seemed particularly forward.

feɪlz nɛkst stɛps wəɾ əv tə bi teɪkən wɪð ɪkstʃɹim kɛɹ. hɝ hʌzbənd, hɪz pipəl, ən ɪz ælaɪz wɝ ɔl bæləns pɹɪkɛɹiəsli. feɪl faʊn hɝsɛlf wɪʃɪŋ ʃi kəɾ æsk əɹ mʌðɝ fəɹ ædvaɪs.

Faile's next steps would have to be taken with extreme care. Her husband, his people, and his allies were all balanced precariously. Faile found herself wishing she could ask her mother for advice.

ðət ʃɑk hɝ, ən ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, stɑpɪŋ ɑn ðə wɔɹn pæθweɪ ʌv tʃɹæmpəl jɛloʊ ɡɹæs ən mʌd. laɪt, feɪl θɔt. lʊk wʌɾ əz hæpən tə mi.

That shocked her, and she hesitated, stopping on the worn pathway of trampled yellow grass and mud. Light, Faile thought. Look what has happened to me.

tu jɪɹz əɡoʊ, feɪl - ðən kɔl zɑɹin - hæd ɹʌn fɹəm əɹ hoʊm ɪn sɑldɑiə tə bɪkʌm ə hʌntɝ fəɹ ðə hɔɹn. ʃid ɹɪbɛld əɡɛnst əɹ duɾiz əz ði ɛldəst, ən ðə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ əɹ mʌðɝ hæɾ ɪnsɪstəd ʃi ʌndɝɡoʊ.

Two years ago, Faile - then called Zarine - had run from her home in Saldaea to become a Hunter for the Horn. She'd rebelled against her duties as the eldest, and the training her mother had insisted she undergo.

ʃi hædn ɹʌn kəz ʃid heɪɾəd ðə wɝk; ɪndid, ʃid pɹuvən æd-ɛpt əɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɹikwaɪɝɾ ə hɝ. soʊ waɪ hæd ʃi ɡɔn? ɪn pɑɹt fəɹ ædvɛntʃɝ. bʌɾ ɪn pɑɹt - ʃi ədmɪɾəd tə hɝsɛlf oʊnli naʊ -  kəz ʌv ɔl ði əsʌmpʃənz. ɪn sɑldɑiə, jə ɔlweɪz dɪd wʌt wɑz ɪkspɛktəɾ ə ju. noʊbɑdi wʌndɝɾ ɪf jə wəd də jəɹ duɾi, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɪf jə wɝ ə ɹɛləɾɪv ə ðə kwin hɝsɛlf.

She hadn't run because she'd hated the work; indeed, she'd proven ad-ept at everything required of her. So why had she gone? In part for adventure. But in part - she admitted to herself only now -  because of all the assumptions. In Saldaea, you always did what was expected of you. Nobody wondered if you would do your duty, particularly if you were a relative of the Queen herself.

ən soʊ . . . ʃid lɛft. nɑt kəz ʃid heɪɾəd wʌt ʃi wəd bɪkʌm, bʌt kəz ʃi hæd heɪɾəd ðə fæk ðəɾ ɪt hæd sim soʊ ɪnɛvəɾəbəl. naʊ hɪɹ ʃi wɑz, juzɪŋ ɔl ə ðə θɪŋz əɹ mʌðɝ hæɾ ɪnsɪstəd ʃi lɝn.

And so . . . she'd left. Not because she'd hated what she would become, but because she had hated the fact that it had seemed so inevitable. Now here she was, using all of the things her mother had insisted she learn.

ɪt wɑz nɪɹli ɪnʌf tə meɪk feɪl læf. ʃi kəd tɛl ə hoʊst ə θɪŋz əbaʊt ðə kæmp fɹəm ə mɪɹ ɡlæns. ðeɪd nid tə faɪn səm ɡʊd lɛðɝ fəɹ ðə kɑblɝz sun. wɔɾɝ wɑzn ə pɹɑbləm, əz ɪt hæd bɪn ɹeɪnɪŋ laɪt spɹɪŋkəlz ɔfən oʊvɝ ðə læs fju deɪz, bʌt dʒɹaɪ wʊd fəɹ kæmpfaɪɝz wɑz ən ɪʃu. wʌn ɡɹup ə ɹɛfjudʒiz - ə kəlɛkʃən ə fɔɹmɝ wɛtləndɝ ɡeɪʃeɪn u wɑtʃt pɛɹɪnz il wɪð aʊtʃɹaɪt hɑstɪləɾi - wəd niɾ ətɛnʃən. əz ʃi wɔkt, ʃi wɑtʃt tə meɪk sɝɾən ðə kæmp hæd pɹɑpɝ sænəteɪʃən, ən ðət ðə soʊlʒɝz wɝ kɛɹɪŋ fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz. səm mɛn wəd ʃoʊ ʌtmoʊs kənsɝn fəɹ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, ðən fɝɡɛt tə iɾ ɛniθɪŋ pɹɑpɝ - əɹ ət lis hɛlθi. nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðɛɹ hæbəɾ ə spɛndɪŋ hæf ðə naɪt ɡɑsəpɪŋ baɪ ðə kæmpfaɪɝz.

It was nearly enough to make Faile laugh. She could tell a host of things about the camp from a mere glance. They'd need to find some good leather for the cobblers soon. Water wasn't a problem, as it had been raining light sprinkles often over the last few days, but dry wood for campfires was an issue. One group of refugees - a collection of former wetlander gai'shain who watched Perrin's Aiel with outright hostility - would need attention. As she walked, she watched to make certain the camp had proper sanitation, and that the soldiers were caring for themselves. Some men would show utmost concern for their horses, then forget to eat anything proper - or at least healthy. Not to mention their habit of spending half the night gossiping by the campfires.

ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ən kəntɪnjud wɔkɪŋ, ɛntɝɪŋ ðə səplaɪ ɹɪŋ, wɛɹ fud wæɡənz hæd bɪn ənloʊɾəd fəɹ ðə hɔɹɾ ə kʊks ən sɝvɪŋ meɪdz. ðə səplaɪ ɹɪŋ wɑz ɔlmoʊst ə vɪlədʒ ɪtsɛlf, wɪð hʌnʒɹədz ə pipəl kwɪkli wɛɹɪŋ pæθweɪz ɪn ðə mʌɾi ɡɹæs. ʃi pæst ə ɡɹup ə dɝɾi-ɹeɪst juðz dɪɡɪŋ pɪts ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ðən ə pætʃ ʌv wɪmən tʃæɾɝɪŋ ən hʌmɪŋ əz ðeɪ pil pəteɪɾoʊz, tʃɪlʒɹən ɡæðɝɪŋ ðə ɹaɪnz ən θɹoʊɪŋ əm ɪndə ðə pɪts. ðəɹ wɝn mɛni ʌv ðoʊz tʃɪlʒɹən, bʌɾ ɛɹɪnz fɔɹs hæd ɡæðɝɾ ə nʌmbɝ ə fæmliz fɹəm ɝaʊn ðə kʌntʃɹi-saɪɾ u -  stɑɹvɪŋ - hæd bɛɡd tə dʒɔɪn.

She shook her head and continued walking, entering the supply ring, where food wagons had been unloaded for the horde of cooks and serving maids. The supply ring was almost a village itself, with hundreds of people quickly wearing pathways in the muddy grass. She passed a group of dirty-raced youths digging pits in the ground, then a patch of women chattering and humming as they peeled potatoes, children gathering the rinds and throwing them into the pits. There weren't many of those children, but errins force had gathered a number of families from around the country-Side who -  starving - had begged to join.

sɝvɪŋ mɛn ɹæn bæskəts ə pil pəteɪɾoʊz tə kʊkɪŋ pɑts, wɪtʃ wɝ sloʊli biɪŋ fɪld wɪð wɔɾɝ baɪ jʌŋ wɪmən meɪkɪŋ tʃɹɪps tə ðə stʃɹim. dʒɝnimæn kʊks pɹipɛɹd koʊlz fəɹ ɹoʊstɪŋ ən oʊldɝ kʊks wɝ mɪksɪŋ spaɪsəz ɪndə sɔsəz ðət kəd bi pɔɹɾ oʊvɝ ʌðɝ fudz, wɪtʃ wɑz ɹɪli ði oʊnli weɪ tə ɡɪv fleɪvɝ tə sətʃ mæs kwɑntəɾiz.

Serving men ran baskets of peeled potatoes to cooking pots, which were slowly being filled with water by young women making trips to the stream. Journeyman cooks prepared coals for roasting and older cooks were mixing spices into sauces that could be poured over other foods, which was really the only way to give flavor to such mass quantities.

ɛldɝli wɪmən - ðə fju ɪn ðə kæmp - ʃʌfəl pæst wɪð bɛn bæks ən laɪt wɪkɝ bæskəts bɛɹɪŋ ɝbz klʌtʃt ɑn θɪn ɑɹmz, ðɛɹ ʃɔlz ɹɪpəlɪŋ əz ðeɪ tʃæɾəd wɪð kɹæklɪŋ vɔɪsəz.

Elderly women - the few in the camp - shuffled past with bent backs and light wicker baskets bearing herbs clutched on thin arms, their shawls rippling as they chatted with crackling voices.

soʊlʒɝz hɝiɾ ɪn ən aʊt, kæɹiɪŋ ɡeɪm. bɔɪz bɪtwin tʃaɪldhʊɾ ən mænhʊd ɡæðɝd stɪks fəɹ tɪndɝ; ʃi pæst ə smɔl ɡæɡəl ə ðiz u hæd ɡɹoʊn dɪstʃɹæktəd kæp-tʊɹɪŋ spaɪɾɝz.

Soldiers hurried in and out, carrying game. Boys between childhood and manhood gathered sticks for tinder; she passed a small gaggle of these who had grown distracted cap-turing spiders.

ɪt wɑz ə tɛmpəst ə kənfjuʒən ən ɔɹɾɝ koʊɪɡzɪstɪŋ, laɪk tu saɪdz ʌv ə kɔɪn. stʃɹeɪnʒ haʊ wɛl feɪl fɪɾ ɪn hɪɹ. lʊkɪŋ bæk ət hɝsɛlf oʊnli ə fju jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ, ʃi wɑz əmeɪz tə ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi sɔ ə spɔɪld, sɛlf-sɛntɝd tʃaɪld. livɪŋ ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz tə bɪkʌm ə hʌntɝ fəɹ ðə hɔɹn? ʃiɾ əbændən duɾiz, hoʊm ən fæmli. wʌt hæd ʃi bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ?

It was a tempest of confusion and order coexisting, like two sides of a coin. Strange how well Faile fit in here. Looking back at herself only a few years before, she was amazed to realize that she saw a spoiled, self-centered child. Leaving the Borderlands to become a Hunter for the Horn? She'd abandoned duties, home and family. What had she been thinking?

ʃi pæst səm wɪmən mɪlɪŋ ɡɹeɪn, ðən wɔkt ɝaʊn ə fɹɛʃ bætʃ ʌv waɪl skæljənz laɪɪŋ ɑn ə blæŋkət bɪsaɪd ðɛm, weɪɾɪŋ tə bi meɪɾ ɪndə sup. ʃi wɑz ɡlæd ʃid lɛft ən mɛt pɛɹɪn, bʌt ðət dɪdn ɪkskjuz əɹ ækʃənz. wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs, ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd fɔɹsɪŋ pɛɹɪn tə tʃɹævəl ðə weɪz ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs, əloʊn. ʃi dɪdn ivən ɹikɔl wʌt hid dʌn tə sɛɾ əɹ ɔf, ðoʊ ʃid nɛvɝ ədmɪt ðət tə hɪm.

She passed some women milling grain, then walked around a fresh batch of wild scallions lying on a blanket beside them, waiting to be made into soup. She was glad she'd left and met Perrin, but that didn't excuse her actions. With a grimace, she remembered forcing Perrin to travel the Ways in the darkness, alone. She didn't even recall what he'd done to set her off, though she'd never admit that to him.

hɝ mʌðɝ hæd wʌns kɔld əɹ spɔɪld, ən ʃid bɪn ɹaɪt. hɝ mʌðɝ hæɾ ɔlsoʊ ɪnsɪstəd ðət feɪl lɝn tə ɹʌn ði ɪsteɪts, ən ɔl ðə waɪl feɪl hæd dʒɹimd ə mɛɹiɪŋ ə hʌntɝ fəɹ ðə hɔɹn ən spɛndɪŋ əɹ laɪf fɑɹ əweɪ fɹəm ɑɹmiz ən ðə bɔɹɪŋ duɾiz ə lɔɹdz.

Her mother had once called her spoiled, and she'd been right. Her mother had also insisted that Faile learn to run the estates, and all the while Faile had dreamed of marrying a Hunter for the Horn and spending her life far away from armies and the boring duties of lords.

laɪt blɛs ju, mʌðɝ, feɪl θɔt. wʌt wəd ʃi, əɹ pɛɹɪn, hæv dʌn wɪθaʊt ðət tʃɹeɪnɪŋ? wɪθaʊɾ əɹ mʌðɝz titʃɪŋz, feɪl wʊɾə bɪn jusləs. ædmɪnɪstʃɹeɪʃən ə ði ɪntaɪɝ kæmp wʊɾə ɹɛstəɾ ɑn ɝɑvinz ʃoʊldɝz. keɪpəbəl ðoʊ ðə wʊmən wɑz əz pɛɹɪnz kæmp stuɝd, ʃi kʊdn əv mænədʒ ðɪs ɔl ɑn əɹ oʊn. nɔɹ ʃəd ʃi hæv bɪn ɪkspɛktəd tə.

Light bless you, Mother, Faile thought. What would she, or Perrin, have done without that training? Without her mother's teachings, Faile would have been useless. Administration of the entire camp would have rested on Aravine's shoulders. Capable though the woman was as Perrin's camp steward, she couldn't have managed this all on her own. Nor should she have been expected to.

feɪl ɹitʃt ðə kɔɹɾɝmæstɝz steɪʃən, ə smɔl pəvɪljən ət ðə vɛɹi hɑɹɾ ə ðə kʊkɪŋ pɪts.

Faile reached the quartermaster's station, a small pavilion at the very heart of the cooking pits.

ðə bɹiz bɹɔɾ ən əmælɡəmeɪʃən ə sɛns: fæt sɪɹd baɪ fleɪmz, pəteɪɾoʊz bɔɪlɪŋ, pɛpɝd sɔsəz spaɪst wɪð ɡɑɹlɪk, ðə wɛt, stɪki sɛn ə pəteɪtoʊ piilɪŋz biɪŋ kæɹid tə ðə smɔl hɝɾ əɹ hɑɡz ðeɪd mænədʒ tə bɹɪŋ aʊɾ ə meɪɾən.

The breeze brought an amalgamation of scents: fat seared by flames, potatoes boiling, peppered sauces spiced with garlic, the wet, sticky scent of potato peelings being carried to the small herd or hogs they'd managed to bring out of Maiden.

ðə kɔɹɾɝmæstɝ, beɪvɪn ɹɑkʃɔ, wɑz ə peɪl-feɪs kɛɹhinɪn wɪð blɑn spɛkəl θɹu hɪz ɡɹeɪɪŋ bɹaʊn hɛɹ, laɪk ðə fɝ ɑn ə mɪkst-bɹid dɔɡ. hi wɑz spɪnli θɹu ði ɑɹmz, lɛɡz ən tʃɛst, jɛt hæɾ ən ɔlmoʊs pɝfəkli ɹaʊn pɔntʃ. hi hæɾ əpɛɹənli wɝkt ət dʒeɪ kɔɹɾɝmæstɝɪŋ əz fɑɹ bæk əz ði il wɔɹ, ən wɑz ən ɛkspɝt - ə mæstɝ əz pɹæktəst ɪn oʊvɝsiɪŋ səplaɪ ɑpɝeɪʃənz əz ə mæstɝ kɑɹpəntɝ wɑz ət wʊdwɝkɪŋ.

The quartermaster, Bavin Rockshaw, was a pale-faced Cairhienin with blond speckled through his graying brown hair, like the fur on a mixed-breed dog. He was spindly through the arms, legs and chest, yet had an almost perfectly round paunch. He had apparently worked at j quartermastering as far back as the Aiel War, and was an expert - a master as practiced in overseeing supply operations as a master carpenter was at woodworking.

ðæt, ʌv kɔɹs, mɛn ðəɾ i wɑz ən ɛkspɝɾ ət teɪkɪŋ bɹaɪbz. wən sɔ feɪl, hi smaɪld ən baʊd stɪfli ɪnʌf tə bi fɔɹməl, bʌt wɪθaʊt mɛnteɪʃən. "ɪm ə sɪmpəl soʊlʒɝ, duɪŋ ɪz duɾi," ðət baʊ sɛd.

That, of course, meant that he was an expert at taking bribes. When saw Faile, he smiled and bowed stiffly enough to be formal, but without mentation. "I'm a simple soldier, doing his duty," that bow said.

"leɪɾi feɪl!" hi ɪkskleɪmd, weɪvɪŋ oʊvɝ səm ə hɪz sɝvɪŋ mɛn. "hɪɹ tə ɪnspɛk ðə lɛdʒɝz, aɪ əsum?"

"Lady Faile!" he exclaimed, waving over some of his serving men. "Here to inspect the ledgers, I assume?"

"jɛs, beɪvɪn," ʃi sɛd, ðoʊ ʃi nu ðəɹ wəd bi nʌθɪŋ səspɪʃəs ɪn ðɛm. hi wɑz fɑɹ tu kɛɹfəl. stɪl, ʃi meɪɾ ə kɝsɝi moʊʃən ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ θɹu ðə ɹɛkɝdz. wʌn ə ðə mɛn bɹɔɾ əɹ ə stul, ənʌðɝ ə teɪbəl əpɑn wɪtʃ tə pleɪs ðə lɛdʒɝz, ən jɛɾ ənʌðɝ ə kʌp ə ti. ʃi wɑz ɪmpɹɛst ət haʊ nitli ðə kɑl-ʌmz æɾəd ʌp. hɝ mʌðɝ hæɾ ɪkspleɪn ðəɾ ɔfən, ə kɔɹɾɝmæstɝ wəd meɪk mɛni mɛsi noʊteɪʃənz, ɹɛfɝənsɪŋ ʌðɝ peɪdʒəz əɹ ʌðɝ lɛdʒɝz, sɛpɝeɪɾɪŋ dɪfɹən taɪps ə səplaɪz ɪndə dɪfɹən bʊks, ɔl tə meɪk ɪt mɔɹ dɪfəkəl tə tʃɹæk wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. ə liɾɝ u wɑz bɪfʌɾəld baɪ ðə noʊteɪʃənz wəɾ əsum ðət ðə kɔɹɾɝmæstɝ mʌs bi duɪŋ ɪz dʒɑb.

"Yes, Bavin," she said, though she knew there would be nothing suspicious in them. He was far too careful. Still, she made a cursory motion of going through the records. One of the men brought her a stool, another a table upon which to place the ledgers, and yet another a cup of tea. She was impressed at how neatly the col-umns added up. Her mother had explained that often, a quartermaster would make many messy notations, referencing other pages or other ledgers, separating different types of supplies into different books, all to make it more difficult to track what was going on. A leader who was befuddled by the notations would assume that the quartermaster must be doing his job.

ðəɹ wɑz nʌn ə ðət hɪɹ. wʌtɛvɝ tʃɹɪks ə nʌmbɝɪŋ beɪvɪn wɑz juzɪŋ tə əbskjʊɹ ɪz θivɝi, ðeɪ wɝ nʌθɪŋ ʃɔɹɾ ə mædʒɪkəl. ən i wɑz stilɪŋ, əɹ ət lis biɪŋ kɹieɪɾɪv ɪn haʊ hi doʊld aʊɾ ɪz fudstʌfs. ðət wɑz ɪnɛvəɾəbəl. moʊs kɔɹɾɝmæstɝz dɪdn ɹɪli kənsɪɾɝ ɪt θivɝi;

There was none of that here. Whatever tricks of numbering Bavin was using to obscure his thievery, they were nothing short of magical. And he was stealing, or at least being creative in how he doled out his foodstuffs. That was inevitable. Most quartermasters didn't really consider it thievery;

hi wɑz ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ ə hɪz səplaɪz, ən ðət wɑz ðæt.

he was in charge of his supplies, and that was that.

"haʊ ɑɾ ɪɾ ɪz," feɪl sɛɾ əz ʃi lif θɹu ðə lɛdʒɝ. "ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ twɪsts ə feɪt."

"How odd it is," Faile said as she leafed through the ledger. "The strange twists of fate."

"maɪ leɪɾi?" beɪvɪn æskt.

"My Lady?" Bavin asked.

"m? oʊ, ɪts nʌθɪŋ. oʊnli ðət tɔɹvən ɹɪkʃənz kæmp əz ɹəsiv ðɛɹ milz itʃ ivnɪŋ ə ɡʊɾ aʊɝ əhɛɾ ə ði ʌðɝ kæmps. aɪm sɝɾən ðæts dʒʌs baɪ tʃæns."

"Hmm? Oh, it is nothing. Only that Torven Rikshan's camp has received their meals each evening a good hour ahead of the other camps. I'm certain that's just by chance."

beɪvɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "əndaʊɾɪdli, maɪ leɪɾi."

Bavin hesitated. "Undoubtedly, my Lady."

ʃi kəntɪnjud tə lif θɹu ðə lɛdʒɝz. tɔɹvən ɹɪkʃən wɑz ə kɛɹhinɪn lɔɹd, ən hæd bɪn pleɪst ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ ʌv wʌn ə ðə twɛnti kæmps wɪðɪn ðə lɑɹdʒɝ mæs ə ɹɛfjudʒiz. hi hæɾ ən juʒəwəli lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝ ə noʊbəlz ɪn ɪz pɝtɪkjəlɝ kæmp. ɝɑvin hæd bɹɔt ðɪs tə feɪlz ətɛnʃən; ʃi wɑzn sɝɾən wʌt tɔɹvən hæd ɡɪvən tə ɹəsiv səplaɪz fəɹ milz mɔɹ kwɪkli, bʌɾ ɪt wʊdn du. ði ʌðɝ kæmps maɪt fil ðət pɛɹɪn wɑz feɪvɝɪŋ wʌn oʊvɝ ənʌðɝ.

She continued to leaf through the ledgers. Torven Rikshan was a Cairhienin lord, and had been placed in charge of one of the twenty camps within the larger mass of refugees. He had an usually large number of nobles in his particular camp. Aravine had brought this to Faile's attention; she wasn't certain what Torven had given to receive supplies for meals more quickly, but it wouldn't do. The other camps might feel that Perrin was favoring one over another.

jɛs," feɪl sɛd, læfɪŋ laɪtli. "mɪɹli koʊɪnsɪɾəns. ðiz θɪŋz hæpən ɪn ə kæmp soʊ lɑɹdʒ.

Yes," Faile said, laughing lightly. "Merely coincidence. These things happen in a camp so large.

waɪ, dʒʌs ði ʌðɝ deɪ vɑɹkəl ʃiəs wɑz kəmpleɪnɪŋ tə mi ðəɾ i hæd pʊɾ ɪn ə ɹɛkwəzɪʃən fəɹ kænvəs tə ɹɪpɛɹ tɔɹn tɛns, bʌt hæzən hæɾ ɪz kænvəs fəɹ nɪɹli ə wik naʊ. jɛɾ aɪ noʊ fəɹ ə fæk ðət sɔfi mɔɹəɾən ɹɪpt əɹ tɛn dʊɹɪŋ ðə stʃɹim kɹɔsɪŋ bʌt hæɾ ɪt ɹɪpɛɹd baɪ ðəɾ ivnɪŋ."

Why, just the other day Varkel Tius was complaining to me that he had put in a requisition for canvas to repair torn tents, but hasn't had his canvas for nearly a week now. Yet I know for a fact that Soffi Moraton ripped her tent during the stream crossing but had it repaired by that evening."

beɪvɪn wɑz saɪlənt.

Bavin was silent.

feɪl meɪd noʊ ækjəzeɪʃənz. hɝ mʌðɝ hæd kɑʃən ðəɾ ə ɡʊd kɔɹɾɝmæstɝ wɑz tu væljəbəl tə tɔs ɪndə pɹɪzən, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli wən ðə nɛks mæn wɑz laɪkli tə bi hæf əz keɪpəbəl ən ikwəli kɝʌpt. feɪlz duɾi wɑz nɑt tə ɪkspoʊz əɹ ɪmbɛɹəs beɪvɪn. ɪt wɑz tə meɪk ɪm wɝiɾ ɪnʌf ðəɾ i kɛp hɪmsɛlf ɪn tʃɛk. "pɝhæps jə kən də sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðiz ɪɹɛɡjəlɛɹəɾiz, beɪvɪn," ʃi sɛd, kloʊzɪŋ ðə lɛdʒɝ. "aɪ loʊð tə bɝɾən jə wɪð sɪli mæɾɝz, bʌt ðə pɹɑbləmz mʌs nɑt ɹitʃ maɪ hʌzbənz ɪɹz. jə noʊ haʊ hiz wən ɛnɹeɪdʒd."

Faile made no accusations. Her mother had cautioned that a good quartermaster was too valuable to toss into prison, particularly when the next man was likely to be half as capable and equally corrupt. Faile's duty was not to expose or embarrass Bavin. It was to make him worried enough that he kept himself in check. "Perhaps you can do something about these irregularities, Bavin," she said, closing the ledger. "I loathe to burden you with silly matters, but the problems must not reach my husband's ears. You know how he is when enraged."

æktʃəli , pɛɹɪn wɑz əbaʊɾ əz laɪkli tə hɝɾ ə mæn laɪk beɪvɪn əz feɪl wɑz tə flæp əɹ ɑɹmz ən flaɪ əweɪ. bʌt ðə kæmp dɪdn si ɪt ðət weɪ. ðeɪ hɝd ɹɪpɔɹts ə pɛɹɪnz fjʊɹi ɪn bæɾəl, əlɔŋ wɪð əɹ əkeɪʒənəl ɑɹɡjəməns wɪð ɪm - pɹəvoʊk baɪ feɪl soʊ ðət ðeɪ kəɾ əv ə pɹɑpɝ dɪskʌʃən- ən əsumd i hæɾ ə tɛɹəbəl tɛmpɝ. ðət wɑz ɡʊd, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ θɔɾ ə hɪm əz ɑnɝəbəl ən kaɪnd. pɹətɛktɪv ə hɪz pipəl, jɛt fɪld wɪð ɹeɪdʒ ət ðoʊz u kɹɔs hɪm.

Actually, Perrin was about as likely to hurt a man like Bavin as Faile was to flap her arms and fly away. But the camp didn't see it that way. They heard reports of Perrin's fury in battle, along with her occasional arguments with him - provoked by Faile so that they could have a proper discussion- and assumed he had a terrible temper. That was good, so long as they also thought of him as honorable and kind. Protective of his people, yet filled with rage at those who crossed him.

ʃi ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə stul, hændɪŋ ðə lɛdʒɝz tə wʌn ə ðə mɛn, kɝli-hɛɹɾ ən wɪð ɪŋk steɪnz ɑn ɪz fɪŋɡɝz ən dʒɝkɪn. ʃi smaɪld ət beɪvɪn, ðən meɪd hɛt weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə səplaɪ ɹɪŋ. ʃi noʊɾəd wɪð dɪsplɛʒɝ ðət ðə bʌntʃ ɑpwaɪl skæljənz bɪsaɪd ðə pæθweɪ hæd spɔɪld ɪn ðə moʊməns sɪns ʃid sin əm læst, ðɛɹ stɔks mɛltəɾ ən ɹʌni, əz ɪf ðeɪd bɪn ɹɑɾɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌn fəɹ wiks. ðiz spɔɪlɪŋz hæd bɪɡʌn oʊnli ɹisənli ɪnsaɪɾ ə kæmp, bʌt baɪ ɹɪpɔɹts, ɪt hæpən fɑɹ mɔɹ fɹikwənli aʊɾ ɪn ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd.

She rose from the stool, handing the ledgers to one of the men, curly-haired and with ink stains on his fingers and jerkin. She smiled at Bavin, then made het way out of the supply ring. She noted with displeasure that the bunch oPwild scallions beside the pathway had spoiled in the moments since she'd seen them last, their stalks melted and runny, as if they'd been rotting in the sun for weeks. These spoilings had begun only recently inside of camp, but by reports, it happened far more frequently out in the countryside.

ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə tɛl ði aʊɝ wɪð ðə skaɪ soʊ fʊl ə klaʊdz, bʌɾ ɪt sim fɹəm ðə dɑɹkənɪŋ hɝaɪzən ðəɾ əɹ taɪm tə mit wɪð pɛɹɪn hæd kʌm. feɪl smaɪld. hɝ mʌðɝ hæd wɔɹn əɹ wʌt wəd hæpən tə hɝ, hæd toʊld əɹ wʌt wɑz ɪkspɛktəɾ ə hɝ, ən feɪl hæd wɝid ðət ʃi wəd fil tʃɹæp baɪ laɪf.

It was hard to tell the hour with the sky so full of clouds, but it seemed from the darkening horizon that her time to meet with Perrin had come. Faile smiled. Her mother had warned her what would happen to her, had told her what was expected of her, and Faile had worried that she would feel trapped by life.

bʌt wʌt dʒɹə hædn mɛnʃənd wɑz haʊ fʊlfɪlɪŋ ɪt wəd bi. pɛɹɪn meɪd ðə dɪfɝəns. ɪt wɑz noʊ tʃɹæp əɾ ɔl tə bi kɑt wɪð hɪm.

But what Deira hadn't mentioned was how fulfilling it would be. Perrin made the difference. It was no trap at all to be caught with him.

pɛɹɪn stʊd wɪð wʌn fʊɾ ʌp ɑn ðə stʌmp ʌv ə fɛl tʃɹi, feɪsɪŋ nɔɹθ. ðə hɪltɑp lɛɾ ɪm lʊk aʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə pleɪnz təwɔɹd ðə klɪfs ʌv ɡæɹənz wɔl ɹaɪzɪŋ laɪk ðə nʌkəlz ʌv ə slʌmbɝɪŋ dʒaɪənt.

Perrin stood with one foot up on the stump of a felled tree, facing north. The hilltop let him look out over the plains toward the cliffs of Garens Wall rising like the knuckles of a slumbering giant.

hi oʊpən ɪz maɪnd, kwɛstɪŋ aʊt fəɹ wʊlvz. ðəɹ wɝ səm ɪn ðə dɪstəns, ɔlmoʊs tu feɪn tə fil. wʊlvz steɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm lɑɹdʒ ɡæðɝɪŋz ə mɛn.

He opened his mind, questing out for wolves. There were some in the distance, almost too faint to feel. Wolves stayed away from large gatherings of men.

ðə kæmp spɹɛɾ aʊt bɪhaɪn hɪm, wɑtʃfaɪɝz flʌɾɝɪŋ əɾ ɪts baʊndɝiz.

The camp spread out behind him, watchfires fluttering at its boundaries.

ðɪs hɪlsaɪd wɑz fɑɹ ɪnʌf əweɪ tə bi sɪkluɾɪd, bʌt nɑt soʊ dɪstən əz tə bi sɑlətɛɹi hi wɑzn sɝɾən waɪ feɪl hæɾ æskt ɪm tə miɾ əɹ hɪɹ ət dʌsk, ʃid smɛld ɪksaɪɾəd, soʊ hi hædn pɹaɪd. wɪmən laɪk ðɛɹ sikɹəts.

This hillside was far enough away to be secluded, but not so distant as to be solitary He wasn't certain why Faile had asked him to meet her here at dusk, she'd smelled excited, so he hadn't pried. Women liked their secrets.

hi hɝd feɪl kʌmɪŋ ʌp ðə saɪɾ ə ðə hɪl, stɛpɪŋ sɔfli ɑn ðə wɛt ɡɹæs. ʃi wɑz ɡʊɾ ət biɪŋ kwaɪət - nɑt nɪɹli əz ɡʊɾ əz ɛlaɪəs əɹ wʌn ə ði il, bʌt bɛɾɝ ðən wʌn maɪt θɪŋk ə hɝ. bʌɾ i kəd smɛl əɹ sɛnt, soʊp wɪð lævəndɝ. ʃi juz ðət pɝtɪkjəlɝ soʊp oʊnli ɑn deɪz ʃi dim spɛʃəl.

He heard Faile coming up the side of the hill, stepping softly on the wet grass. She was good at being quiet - not nearly as good as Elyas or one of the Aiel, but better than one might think of her. But he could smell her cent, soap with lavender. She used that particular soap only on days she deemed special.

ʃi stɛpt ətɑp ðə hɪlsaɪd, bjuɾəfəl, ɪmpɹɛsɪv. ʃi wɔɹ ə vaɪəlɪt vɛst oʊvɝ ə lɔŋ sɪlk blaʊs ʌv ə laɪɾɝ ʃeɪd. wɛɹ hæd ʃi ɡɑɾən ðə kloʊðɪŋ? hi hædn sin əɹ ɪn ðɪs faɪn aʊtfɪt bɪfɔɹ.

She stepped atop the hillside, beautiful, impressive. She wore a violet vest over a long silk blouse of a lighter shade. Where had she gotten the clothing? He hadn't seen her in this fine outfit before.

"maɪ hʌzbənd," ʃi sɛd, stɛpɪŋ ʌp tə hɪm. hi kəd feɪnli hɪɹ əθ-' ɝz nɪɹ ðə fʊɾ ə ðə hɪl  - pɹɑbli tʃɑ feɪl. ʃid lɛft əm bɪhaɪnd. "ju lʊk kənsɝnd."

"My husband," she said, stepping up to him. He could faintly hear oth-' ers near the foot of the hill  - probably Cha Faile. She'd left them behind. "You look concerned."

"ɪts maɪ fɔl ðət ɡɪl ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ kæptʃɝd, feɪl," hi sɛd. "maɪ feɪljɝz kəntɪnju tə maʊnt. ɪts ə wʌndɝ ɛniwʌn fɑloʊz mi."

"It's my fault that Gill and the others were captured, Faile," he said. "My failures continue to mount. It's a wonder anyone follows me."

"pɛɹɪn," ʃi sɛd, leɪɪŋ ə hæn ɑn ɪz ɑɹm. "wiv spoʊkən ə ðɪs. jə mʌsnt seɪ sətʃ θɪŋz."

"Perrin," she said, laying a hand on his arm. "We've spoken of this. You mustn't say such things."

"waɪ?"

"Why?"

"bɪkɔz aɪv nɛvɝ noʊn jə tə bi ə laɪɝ," ʃi sɛd wɪð ə sɔfli tʃaɪɾɪŋ toʊn.

"Because I've never known you to be a liar," she said with a softly chiding tone.

hi lʊkt ət hɝ. ɪt wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ dɑɹk, ðoʊ hi kəd stɪl meɪk aʊt dɪteɪlz. ʃiɾ əv ə hɑɹɾɝ taɪm siɪŋ ðɛm.

He looked at her. It was growing dark, though he could still make out details. She'd have a harder time seeing them.

"waɪ dʒju kəntɪnju tə faɪt ðɪs?" ʃi æskt. "ju ɑɹ ə ɡʊd liɾɝ, pɛɹɪn."

"Why do you continue to fight this?" she asked. "You are a good leader, Perrin."

"aɪ wʊdn əv ɡɪvən maɪsɛlf ʌp fəɹ ðɛm," hi sɛd.

"I wouldn't have given myself up for them," he said.

ʃi fɹaʊnd. "wʌt dʌz ðəɾ əv tə - "

She frowned. "What does that have to - "

"bæk ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz," pɛɹɪn sɛd, tɝnɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm hɝ, lʊkɪŋ nɔɹθ əɡɛn, "aɪ wɑz ɹɛɾi tə də ɪt. wən ðə waɪtkloʊks hæd mæts fæmli ən ðə luhənz, aɪɾ əv ɡɪvən maɪsɛlf ʌp. ðɪs taɪm, aɪ wʊdn hæv. ivən wən aɪ spoʊk tə ðɛɹ liɾɝ, æskɪŋ ɪz pɹaɪs, aɪ nu aɪ wʊdnt ɡɪv maɪsɛlf ʌp."

"Back in the Two Rivers," Perrin said, turning away from her, looking north again, "I was ready to do it. When the Whitecloaks had Mat's family and the Luhhans, I'd have given myself up. This time, I wouldn't have. Even when I spoke to their leader, asking his price, I knew I wouldn't give myself up."

jəɹ bɪkʌmɪŋ ə bɛɾɝ liɾɝ."

You're becoming a better leader."

haʊ kən jə seɪ ðæt? aɪm ɡɹoʊɪŋ kæləs, feɪl. ɪf jə nu ðə θɪŋz aɪ dɪd tə ɡɛt jə bæk, ðə θɪŋz aɪ wʊɾə dʌn . . ." hi fɪŋɡɝd ðə hæmɝ əɾ ɪz saɪd. ðə tuθ əɹ ðə klɔ, jʌŋ bʊl, ɪt mæɾɝz nɑt. hid θɹoʊn əweɪ ði æks, bʌt kəɾ i bleɪm ɪt fəɹ ɪz bɹutæləɾi? ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə tul. hi kəd juz ðə hæmɝ tə də ðə seɪm tɛɹəbəl θɪŋz.

How can you say that? I'm growing callous, Faile. If you knew the things I did to get you back, the things I would have done . . ." He fingered the hammer at his side. The tooth or the claw, Young Bull, it matters not. He'd thrown away the axe, but could he blame it for his brutality? It was only a tool. He could use the hammer to do the same terrible things.

ɪts nɑt kæləs," feɪl sɛd, "ɔɹ sɛlfɪʃ. jəɹ ə lɔɹd naʊ, ən jə kæn lɛɾ ɪt bi noʊn ðət kæptʃɝɪŋ jəɹ sʌbʒɪkts wɪl ʌndɝmaɪn jəɹ ɹul. dʒju θɪŋk kwin mɔɹɡeɪs wəɾ æbdəkeɪt tə taɪɹəns u kɪdnæpt əɹ səbdʒɛks? noʊ liɾɝ kəd ɹul ðət weɪ. jəɹ ɪnəbɪlɪɾi tə stɑp ivəl mɛn dʌz nɑt meɪk jə ivəl jɝsɛlf."

Its not callous," Faile said, "or selfish. You're a lord now, and you can't let it be known that capturing your subjects will undermine your rule. Do you think Queen Morgase would abdicate to tyrants who kidnapped her subjects? No leader could rule that way. Your inability to stop evil men does not make you evil yourself."

"aɪ doʊnt wɑn ðɪs mæntəl, feɪl. aɪ nɛvɝ hæv."

"I don't want this mantle, Faile. I never have."

"aɪ noʊ."

"I know."

"səmtaɪmz aɪ wɪʃ aɪd nɛvɝ lɛf ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. aɪ wɪʃ aɪd lɛt ɹæn ɹʌn ɔf tə hɪz dɛstəni, livɪŋ ɹɛɡjəlɝ foʊk bɪhaɪn tə lɪv ðɛɹ laɪvz."

"Sometimes I wish I'd never left the Two Rivers. I wish I'd let Ran run off to his destiny, leaving regular folk behind to live their lives."

hi kɑɾ ə sɛn ʌv ənɔɪəns fɹəm hɝ.

He caught a scent of annoyance from her.

"bʌɾ ɪf aɪd steɪd," hi æɾəd heɪstəli, "aɪd nɛvɝ əv mɛt ju. soʊ aɪm ɡlæɾ aɪ lɛft. aɪm dʒʌst seɪɪŋ əl bi ɡlæd wən ðɪs ɪz ɔl θɹu ən fɪnɪʃt ən aɪ kən ɡoʊ bæk tə sʌmpleɪs sɪmpəl."

"But if I'd stayed," he added hastily, "I'd never have met you. So I'm glad I left. I'm just saying I'll be glad when this is all through and finished and I can go back to someplace simple."

"ju θɪŋk ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɪl ɛvɝ ɡoʊ bæk tə biɪŋ ðə weɪ jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪt?"

"You think the Two Rivers will ever go back to being the way you remember it?"

hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt - wən ðeɪd ɡɔn, ɪt hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn ʃoʊɪŋ saɪnz ə tʃeɪnʒ.

He hesitated. She was right - when they'd gone, it had already been showing signs of change.

ɹɛfjudʒiz fɹəm əkɹɔs ðə maʊntənz muvɪŋ ɪn, ðə vɪlədʒəz swɛlɪŋ. naʊ, wɪð soʊ mɛni mɛn dʒɔɪnɪŋ ɪm ɪn wɔɹ, ɡɛɾɪŋ aɪdiəz ɪndə ðɛɹ hɛdz əbaʊt hævɪŋ ə lɔɹd . . .

Refugees from across the mountains moving in, the villages swelling. Now, with so many men joining him in war, getting ideas into their heads about having a lord . . .

"aɪ kəd faɪn sʌmpleɪs ɛls," hi sɛd, filɪŋ stʌbɝn. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝ vɪlədʒəz. ðeɪ woʊn ɔl tʃeɪnʒ."

"I could find someplace else," he said, feeling stubborn. "There are other villages. They won't all change."

"æn jud dʒɹæɡ mi ɔf tə wʌn ə ðiz vɪlədʒəz, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə?" ʃi sɛd.

"And you'd drag me off to one of these villages, Perrin Aybara?" she said.

"aɪ . . ." wʌt wəd hæpən ɪf feɪl, hɪz bjuɾəfəl feɪl, wɝ kənfaɪn tə ə slipi vɪlədʒ? hi ɔlweɪz ɪnsɪstəd ðəɾ i wɑz oʊnli ə blæksmɪθ. bʌt wɑz feɪl ə blæksmɪθs waɪf? "aɪ wəd nɛvɝ fɔɹs jə tə də ɛniθɪŋ, feɪl," hi sɛd, kʌpɪŋ əɹ feɪs ɪn ɪz hænd. hi ɔlweɪz fɛlt ɑkwɝd wən tʌtʃɪŋ əɹ sæɾən tʃiks wɪð ɪz θɪk, kælʌz fɪŋɡɝz.

"I . . ." What would happen if Faile, his beautiful Faile, were confined to a sleepy village? He always insisted that he was only a blacksmith. But was Faile a blacksmith's wife? "I would never force you to do anything, Faile," he said, cupping her face in his hand. He always felt awkward when touching her satin cheeks with his thick, callused fingers.

"aɪd ɡoʊ, ɪf jə ɹɪli wɑntəd mi tə," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd. ðət wɑz ɑd. hid nɔɹməli ɪkspɛkt ə snæp fɹəm əɹ əɾ ɪz ɑkwɝd tʌŋ. "bʌɾ ɪz ɪt wʌt jə wɑnt? ɪz ɪt ɹɪli?"

"I'd go, if you really wanted me to," she replied. That was odd. He'd normally expect a snap from her at his awkward tongue. "But is it what you want? Is it really?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ aɪ wɑnt," hi sɛd fɹæŋkli. noʊ, hi dɪdnt wɑnə dʒɹæɡ feɪl ɔf tə ə vɪlədʒ.

"I don't know what I want," he said frankly. No, he didn't want to drag Faile off to a village.

"meɪbi . . . laɪf əz ə blæksmɪθ ɪn ə sɪɾi, sʌmwɛɹ?

"Maybe . . . life as a blacksmith in a city, somewhere?

"ɪf jə wɪʃ ɪt," ʃi ɹɪpiɾɪd. "ʌv kɔɹs, ðət wəd liv ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɪθaʊɾ ə lɔɹd. ðeɪɾ əv tə faɪn sʌmwʌn ɛls."

"If you wish it," she repeated. "Of course, that would leave the Two Rivers without a lord. They'd have to find someone else."

"noʊ. ðeɪ doʊnt niɾ ə lɔɹd. ðæts waɪ aɪ hæv tə stɑp əm tʃɹiɾɪŋ mi laɪk wʌn."

"No. They don't need a lord. That's why I have to stop them treating me like one."

"æn jə θɪŋk ðeɪd ɡɪv ʌp ɑn ði aɪdiə ðət kwɪkli?" feɪl æskt, smɛlɪŋ əmjuzd. "æftɝ ðeɪv sin haʊ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls dʌz ɪt? æftɝ ðə weɪ ðeɪ fɔn oʊvɝ ðət ful luk? æftɝ wɛlkəmɪŋ ɪn ɔl ə ðoʊz pipəl fɹəm ɑlməθ pleɪn, hu ɑɹ juz tə lɔɹdz?"

"And you think they'd give up on the idea that quickly?" Faile asked, smelling amused. "After they've seen how everyone else does it? After the way they fawned over that fool Luc? After welcoming in all of those people from Almoth Plain, who are used to lords?"

wʌt wəd ðə tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk də ɪf i stɛp daʊn əz ðɛɹ lɔɹd.

What would the Two Rivers folk do if he stepped down as their lord.

ɪn ə sɪŋkɪŋ moʊmən ə ɹiləzeɪʃən, hi nu ðət feɪl wɑz ɹaɪt. ʃʊɹli ðeɪd pɪk sʌmwʌn hud də ə bɛɾɝ dʒɑb ʌv ɪt ðən mi, hi θɔt. meɪbi mæstɝ ælvɪɹ.

In a sinking moment of realization, he knew that Faile was right. Surely they'd pick someone who'd do a better job of it than me, he thought. Maybe Master al'Vere.

bʌt kəd pɛɹɪn tʃɹʌs ðæt? mɛn laɪk mæstɝ ælvɪɹ əɹ tɑɹn maɪt daʊn ðə pəzɪʃən. maɪt ðeɪ ɛn ʌp pɪkɪŋ sʌmwʌn laɪk oʊl sɛn bui? wəd ðeɪv ə tʃɔɪs? ɪf pɛɹɪn stɛpt əsaɪd, maɪt səm pɝsən u fɪɡjɝd hɪmsɛlf haɪbɹn siz paʊɝ?

But could Perrin trust that? Men like Master al'Vere or Tarn might down the position. Might they end up picking someone like old Cenn Buie? Would they have a choice? If Perrin stepped aside, might some person who figured himself highborn seize power?

pɑn bi ə ful, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə, hi θɔt. ɔlmoʊst ɛniwʌn wəd bi bɛɾɝ ðən ju.

pon't be a fool, Perrin Aybara, he thought. Almost anyone would be better than you.

stɪl, ðə θɔɾ ə sʌmwʌn ɛls teɪkɪŋ kəntʃɹoʊl - sʌmwʌn ɛls biɪŋ lɔɹd-fɪld ɪm wɪð ɪntɛns æŋzaɪəɾi. ən ə sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ əmaʊn ə sædnəs.

Still, the thought of someone else taking control - someone else being lord-filled him with intense anxiety. And a surprising amount of sadness.

"naʊ," feɪl sɛd, "stɑp jəɹ bɹuɾɪŋ. aɪ hæv ɡɹæn ɪntɛntʃənz fəɹ ðɪs ivnɪŋ." ʃi klæpt əɹ hænz laʊdli θɹi taɪmz, ən muvməns bɪɡæn bɪloʊ. sun, sɝvəns kɹɛstəd ðə hɪlsaɪd. pɛɹɪn ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd əm əz pipəl ʃiɾ əpɹoʊpɹieɪɾɪd fɹəm əmʌŋ ðə ɹɛfjudʒiz, ə ɡɹup əz lɔɪəl tə hɝ əz tʃɑ feɪl.

"Now," Faile said, "stop your brooding. I have grand intentions for this evening." She clapped her hands loudly three times, and movements began below. Soon, servants crested the hillside. Perrin recognized them as people she'd appropriated from among the refugees, a group as loyal to her as Cha Faile.

ðeɪ kæɹid kænvəs, wɪtʃ ðeɪ spɹɛɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ðən ðeɪ kʌvɝd ðət wɪð ə blæŋkət. ən wʌt wɑz ðəɾ i smɛl kʌmɪŋ ʌp fɹəm bɪloʊ? hæm?

They carried canvas, which they spread on the ground. Then they covered that with a blanket. And what was that he smelled coming up from below? Ham?

"wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs, feɪl?" hi æskt.

"What is this, Faile?" he asked.

"æt fɝst," ʃi sɛd, "aɪ əsum ðət jə hæd sʌmθɪŋ spɛʃəl plæn fəɹ əɹ ʃænəhɑɹ. aɪ ɡɹu nɝvəs wən jə dɪdn mɛnʃən ɪt, haʊɛvɝ, ən soʊ aɪ æskt. ɪɾ əpɪɹz ðət jə də nɑt sɛləbɹeɪɾ ɪɾ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ɑd ðoʊ ðəɾ ɪz."

"At first," she said, "I assumed that you had something special planned for our shanna'har. I grew nervous when you didn't mention it, however, and so I asked. It appears that you do not celebrate it in the Two Rivers, odd though that is."

"ʃænəhɑɹ?" pɛɹɪn æskt, skɹætʃɪŋ ɪz hɛd.

"Shanna'har?" Perrin asked, scratching his head.

"ɪn ðə kʌmɪŋ wiks," feɪl sɛd, "wi wɪl əv bɪn mɛɹid wʌn jɪɹ. ðɪs ɪz əɹ fɝst ʃænəhɑɹ, əɹ mɛɹɪdʒ sɛləbɹeɪʃən." ʃi foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz, wɑtʃɪŋ əz əɹ sɝvəns ɝeɪnʒd ə mil ɑn ðə blæŋkət. "ɪn sɑldɑiə, wi sɛləbɹeɪt ðə ʃænəhɑɹ itʃ jɪɹ ɪn ði ɝli sʌmɝ. ɪts ə fɛstəvəl tə mɑɹk ənʌðɝ jɪɹ təɡɛðɝ, ənʌðɝ jɪɹ wɪð niðɝ hʌzbənd nɔɹ waɪf fɔlən tə ðə tʃɹɑləks.

"In the coming weeks," Faile said, "we will have been married one year. This is our first shanna'har, our marriage celebration." She folded her arms, watching as her servants arranged a meal on the blanket. "In Saldaea, we celebrate the shanna'har each year in the early summer. It is a festival to mark another year together, another year with neither husband nor wife fallen to the Trollocs.

jʌŋ kʌpəlz ɑɹ toʊl tə seɪvɝ ðɛɹ fɝst ʃænəhɑɹ, mʌtʃ əz wʌn seɪvɝz ðə fɝs teɪst ʌv ə sʌkjəlɪn mil. əɹ mɛɹɪdʒ wɪl oʊnli bi nu tə əs wʌns." ðə sɝvəns leɪɾ aʊɾ ə mil, ɪnkluɾɪŋ sɛvɹəl ɡlæs boʊlz wɪð kændəlz ɪn ðɛm. feɪl dɪsmɪs ðə sɝvəns wɪð ə smaɪl ən ə weɪv, ən ðeɪ ɹitʃɹiɾəd daʊn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə hɪl. feɪl hæɾ ɑbviəsli teɪkən kɛɹ tə meɪk ðə mil lʊk lævɪʃ. ðə blæŋkət wɑz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd, pɝhæps teɪkən fɹəm ʃeɪɾoʊ spɔɪlz. ðə mil wɑz sɝvd ɑn sɪlvɝ pleɪts ən plæɾɝz, hæm ə bɛɾ ə bɔɪl bɑɹli ən keɪpɝz əkɹɔs ðə tɑp. ðəɹ wɑz ivən waɪn. feɪl stɛp kloʊsɝ tə hɪm. "aɪ ɹilaɪz ðət ðəɹ əz bɪn mʌtʃ, ðɪs jɪɹ, ðəɾ ɪz nɑt wɝθ seɪvɝɪŋ.

Young couples are told to savor their first shanna'har, much as one savors the first taste of a succulent meal. Our marriage will only be new to us once." The servants laid out a meal, including several glass bowls with candles in them. Faile dismissed the servants with a smile and a wave, and they retreated down the side of the hill. Faile had obviously taken care to make the meal look lavish. The blanket was embroidered, perhaps taken from Shaido spoils. The meal was served on silver plates and platters, ham a bed of boiled barley and capers across the top. There was even wine. Faile stepped closer to him. "I realize that there has been much, this year, that is not worth savoring.

meɪɾən, ðə pɹɑfət, ðət hɑɹʃ wɪntɝ. bʌɾ ɪf ðiz θɪŋz ɑɹ ðə kɑs fəɹ biɪŋ wɪð ju, pɛɹɪn, ðən aɪ wəd peɪ ðɛm fɹili ə dʌzən taɪmz oʊvɝ.

Maiden, the Prophet, that harsh winter. But if these things are the cost for being with you, Perrin, then I would pay them freely a dozen times over.

"ɪf ɔl wɝ wɛl, wi wəd spɛn ðɪs nɛks mʌnθ ɡɪvɪŋ ɡɪfs tə ɑn ənʌðɝ, əfɝmɪŋ əɹ lʌv, sɛləbɹeɪɾɪŋ əɹ fɝst sʌmɝ əz hʌzbən ən waɪf. aɪ daʊt wɪl əv ðə mʌnθ ʌv iz ðəɾ ɪz əɹ ɹaɪt, bʌɾ ət list wi ʃəd spɛn ən ɛndʒɔɪ ðɪs ivnɪŋ təɡɛðɝ."

"If all were well, we would spend this next month giving gifts to on another, affirming our love, celebrating our first summer as husband and wife. I doubt we will have the month of ease that is our right, but at least we should spend and enjoy this evening together."

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf aɪ kæn, feɪl," hi sɛd. "ðə waɪtkloʊks, ðə skaɪ laɪt! ðə læs bæɾəl ɪtsɛlf ɪz ɔlmoʊs hɪɹ. ðə læs bæɾəl, feɪl! haʊ kən aɪ fist waɪl maɪ pipəl ɑɹ biɪŋ hɛld ʌndɝ θɹɛɾ ʌv ɛksəkjuʃən ən waɪl ðə wɝld ɪtsɛlf meɪ daɪ?"

"I don't know if I can, Faile," he said. "The Whitecloaks, the sky Light! The Last Battle itself is almost here. The Last Battle, Faile! How can I feast while my people are being held under threat of execution and while the world itself may die?"

"ɪf ðə wɝld ɪtsɛlf ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ tə daɪ," feɪl sɛd, "ɪz ðɪs nɑt ðə taɪm wən ə mæn mʌs teɪk taɪm tə əpɹiʃieɪt wʌɾ i hæz? bɪfɔɹ ɪts ɔl teɪkən?"

"If the world itself is going to die," Faile said, "is this not the time when a man must take time to appreciate what he has? Before it is all taken?"

pɛɹɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ʃi leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn ɪz ɑɹm, hɝ tʌtʃ soʊ sɑft. ʃi hædn ɹeɪzd əɹ vɔɪs. dɪd ʃi wɑn ɪm tə jɛl? ɪt wɑz soʊ hɑɹd tə tɛl wən ʃi wɑntəɾ ən ɑɹɡjəmən ən wən ʃi dɪdnt. meɪbi ɛlaɪəs wəɾ əv ædvaɪs fəɹ hɪm.

Perrin hesitated. She laid a hand on his arm, her touch so soft. She hadn't raised her voice. Did she want him to yell? It was so hard to tell when she wanted an argument and when she didn't. Maybe Elyas would have advice for him.

"pliz," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "tʃɹaɪ tə ɹɪlæks fəɹ wʌn ivnɪŋ. fəɹ mi."

"Please," she said softly. "Try to relax for one evening. For me."

"ɔl ɹaɪt," hi sɛd, leɪɪŋ ɪz hæn ɑn hɝz.

"All right," he said, laying his hand on hers.

ʃi lɛɾ ɪm tə ðə blæŋkəɾ ən ðeɪ sɛɾəld daʊn, saɪd baɪ saɪd bɪfɔɹ ði ɝeɪ ʌv sɪlvɝ dɪʃəz.

She led him to the blanket and they settled down, side by side before the array of silver dishes.

feɪl lɪt mɔɹ kændəlz ɔf ə ðə lɪt wʌnz ðə sɝvəns hæd lɛft. ðə naɪt wɑz tʃɪli - ðə klaʊdz sim tə dʒɹɔ sʌmɝ wɔɹmθ əweɪ. "waɪ də ðɪs aʊtsaɪd?" pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ænd nɑɾ ɪn əɹ tɛnt?"

Faile lit more candles off of the lit ones the servants had left. The night was chilly - the clouds seemed to draw summer warmth away. "Why do this outside?" Perrin said. "And not in our tent?"

"aɪ æsk tɑɹn wʌt jə də ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz fəɹ ʃænəhɑɹ" ʃi sɛd. "æn əz aɪ fɪɹd, aɪ lɝn ðət jə doʊn sɛləbɹeɪɾ ɪt. ðəɾ ɪz ɹɪli kwaɪt bækwɝd, jə ɹilaɪz - wɪl nid tə tʃeɪnʒ ðə kʌstəm, wʌns θɪŋz sɛɾəl daʊn. ɹəɡɑɹdləs, tæm sɛd ðət ðə kloʊsəs ðeɪ hæd wɑz sʌmθɪŋ i ən ɪz waɪf dɪd. wʌns ə jɪɹ, ðeɪ wəd pæk ʌp ə fʊl mil - əz ɪkstʃɹævəɡən əz ðeɪ kəɾ əfɔɹd - ən haɪk tə ə nu pleɪs ɪn ðə wʊdz. ðeɪ wəd daɪn ðəɹ ən spɛn ðə deɪ wɪð wʌn ənʌðɝ." ʃi snʌɡəld ʌp əɡɛns hɪm. "aʊɝ wɛɾɪŋ wɑz dʌn ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz fæʃən, soʊ aɪ wɪʃt ðɪs deɪ tə bi æftɝ ðət fæʃən əz wɛl."

"I asked Tarn what you do in the Two Rivers for shannahar" she said. "And as I feared, I learned that you don't celebrate it. That is really quite backward, you realize - we'll need to change the custom, once things settle down. Regardless, Tam said that the closest they had was something he and his wife did. Once a year, they would pack up a full meal - as extravagant as they could afford - and hike to a new place in the woods. They would dine there and spend the day with one another." She snuggled up against him. "Our wedding was done in the Two Rivers fashion, so I wished this day to be after that fashion as well."

hi smaɪld. dɪspaɪɾ ɪz ɝliɝ əbdʒɛkʃənz ɪz tɛnʃən wɑz izɪŋ. ðə fud smɛld ɡʊd, ən ɪz stʌmək ɡɹaʊld, pɹɑmptɪŋ feɪl tə sɪɾ ʌp ən teɪk ɪz pleɪɾ ən hæn ɪt tə hɪm.

He smiled. Despite his earlier objections his tension was easing. The food smelled good, and his stomach growled, prompting Faile to sit up and take his plate and hand it to him.

hi dʌɡ ɪn. hi tʃɹaɪd tə kip ɪz mænɝz, bʌt ðə fud wɑz ɛksələnt, ən ɪt hæd bɪn ə lɔŋ deɪ.

He dug in. He tried to keep his manners, but the food was excellent, and it had been a long day.

hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɹɪpɪŋ ɪndə ðə hæm wɪð fɝɑsəɾi, ðoʊ hi tʃɹaɪd tə teɪk kɛɹ nɑt tə dʒɹɪp ɑn ðə fænsi blæŋkət.

He found himself ripping into the ham with ferocity, though he tried to take care not to drip on the fancy blanket.

feɪl eɪt mɔɹ sloʊli, ðə sɛn ʌv əmjuzmən mɪksɪŋ wɪð ðəɾ ə hɝ soʊp.

Faile ate more slowly, the scent of amusement mixing with that of her soap.

"wʌt?" pɛɹɪn æskt, waɪpɪŋ ɪz maʊθ. ʃi wɑz lɪɾ oʊnli baɪ ðə kæn-dlz ðət ðə sʌn wɑz fʊli daʊn. "ðɛɹz mʌtʃ ə ðə wʊlf ɪn ju, maɪ hʌzbənd."

"What?" Perrin asked, wiping his mouth. She was lit only by the can-dles that the sun was fully down. "There's much of the wolf in you, my husband."

hi fɹoʊz, noʊɾɪsɪŋ ðət hid bɪn lɪkɪŋ ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. hi ɡɹaʊld ət sɛlf waɪpɪŋ əm ɪnstɛɾ ɑn ə næpkɪn. əz mʌtʃ əz i laɪkt wʊlvz, hi waʊdn ɪnvaɪɾ əm tə ðə dɪnɝ teɪbəl wɪð hɪm. "tu mʌtʃ ə ðə wʊlf ɪn mi," hi sɛd.

He froze, noticing that he'd been licking his fingers. He growled at self wiping them instead on a napkin. As much as he liked wolves, he woudn't invite them to the dinner table with him. "Too much of the wolf in me," he said.

"ju ɑɹ wʌt jə ɑɹ, maɪ hʌzbənd. ən aɪ hæpən tə lʌv wʌt jə ɑɹ, soʊ ðəɾ ɪz wɛl."

"You are what you are, my husband. And I happen to love what you are, so that is well."

hi kəntɪnjud tə tʃu ɑn ɪz kʌɾ ə ðə hæm. ðə naɪt wɑz kwaɪət, ðə sɝvəns hævɪŋ ɹitʃɹiɾəd fɑɹ ɪnʌf əweɪ ðəɾ i kʊdn smɛl əɹ hɪɹ ðɛm. laɪkli feɪl hæd lɛft ɔɹɾɝz ðət ðeɪ wɝn tə bi dɪstɝbd, ən wɪð ðə tʃɹiz ət ðə beɪs ə ðə hɪlsaɪd, ðeɪ wʊdn əv tə wɝi əbaʊt biɪŋ əbzɝvd.

He continued to chew on his cut of the ham. The night was quiet, the servants having retreated far enough away that he couldn't smell or hear them. Likely Faile had left orders that they weren't to be disturbed, and with the trees at the base of the hillside, they wouldn't have to worry about being observed.

"feɪl," hi sɛd sɔfti, "ju nid tə noʊ wʌɾ aɪ dɪd waɪl jə wɝ kæptɪv. aɪ dɪd θɪŋz aɪ wɝid wəd tɝn mi ɪndə sʌmwʌn jə wəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wɑnt. ɪt wɑzn oʊnli ðə dil wɪð ðə sintʃæn. ðəɹ wɝ pipəl ɪn ə sɪɾi, soʊ hæbɝ, ðəɾ aɪ kæn stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv. pipəl ðət meɪbi aɪ ʃəɾ əv hɛlpt. ən ðəɹ wɑz ə ʃeɪɾoʊ, wɪð ɪz hænd - "

"Faile," he said softy, "you need to know what I did while you were captive. I did things I worried would turn me into someone you would no longer want. It wasn't only the deal with the Seanchan. There were people in a city, So Habor, that I can't stop thinking of. People that maybe I should have helped. And there was a Shaido, with his hand - "

"aɪ hɝɾ əbaʊt ðæt. ɪt simz ðət jə dɪd wʌt jə hæd tə."

"I heard about that. It seems that you did what you had to."

"aɪɾ əv ɡɔn mʌtʃ fɑɹðɝ," pɛɹɪn ədmɪɾəd. "heɪɾɪŋ maɪsɛlf ɔl ðə weɪ. jə spoʊk ʌv ə lɔɹd biɪŋ stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɹɪzɪs lɛɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf bi mənɪpjəleɪɾɪd. wɛl, əl nɛvɝ bi ðət stʃɹɔŋ. nɑɾ ɪf jəɹ teɪkən."

"I'd have gone much farther," Perrin admitted. "Hating myself all the way. You spoke of a lord being strong enough to resist letting himself be manipulated. Well, I'll never be that strong. Not if you're taken."

"wi ʃæl əv tə meɪk sɝɾən aɪ doʊnt ɡɛt teɪkən."

"We shall have to make certain I don't get taken."

"ɪt kəd ɹuən mi, feɪl," hi sɛd sɔfli. "ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, aɪ θɪŋk aɪ kəd hændəl. bʌɾ ɪf jə ɑɹ juzd əɡɛns mi, nʌθɪŋ wɪl mæɾɝ. aɪd də ɛniθɪŋ tə pɹətɛk ju, feɪl. ɛniθɪŋ."

"It could ruin me, Faile," he said softly. "Anything else, I think I could handle. But if you are used against me, nothing will matter. I'd do anything to protect you, Faile. Anything."

"pɝhæps jə ʃəd ɹæp mi ʌp ɪn sɑf klɔθ, ðɛn," ʃi sɛd dʒɹaɪli, ən tʌk mi əweɪ ɪn ə lɑkt ɹum." ɑdli, hɝ sɛnt wɑz nɑɾ əfɛndəd.

"Perhaps you should wrap me up in soft cloth, then," she said dryly, and tuck me away in a locked room." Oddly, her scent was not offended.

"aɪ wʊdn də ðæt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ju noʊ aɪ wʊdnt. bʌt ðɪs minz aɪ hæv ə wiknəs, ə tɛɹəbəl wʌn. ðə taɪp ə liɾɝ kæn hæv."

"I wouldn't do that," Perrin said. "You know I wouldn't. But this means I have a weakness, a terrible one. The type a leader can't have."

ʃi snɔɹɾɪd. "ju θɪŋk ʌðɝ liɾɝz doʊn əv wiknəsəz, pɛɹɪn? ɛvɹi kɪŋ əɹ kwin ə sɑldɑiə hæz hæd ðɛɹ oʊn. nɪkiɔl daɪænætkə wɑz ə dʒɹʌŋkɝd, dɪspaɪt biɪŋ noʊn əz wʌn ʌv əɹ ɡɹeɪɾəst kɪŋz, ən bəlɛɹə mɛɹiɾ ən pʊɾ əɹ hʌzbən əweɪ fɔɹ taɪmz. hɝ hɑɹɾ ɔlweɪz dɪd lɛɾ əɹ tə tʃɹʌbəl. dʒoʊnəsim hæɾ ə sʌn huz ɡæmbəlɪŋ weɪz nɪɹli bɹɔɾ əɹ haʊs tə ɹuən, ən laɪənfɝd kʊdn kip ɪz tɛmpɝ ɪf tʃælənʒd. itʃ ən ɛvɹi wʌn wɑz ə ɡɹeɪt mɑnɑɹk. ən ɔl hæd ðɛɹ ʃɛɹ ʌv wiknəsəz."

She snorted. "You think other leaders don't have weaknesses, Perrin? every King or Queen of Saldaea has had their own. Nikiol Dianatkhah was a drunkard, despite being known as one of our greatest kings, and Belairah married and put her husband away four times. Her heart always did lead her to trouble. Jonasim had a son whose gambling ways nearly brought her House to ruin, and Lyonford couldn't keep his temper if challenged. Each and every one was a great monarch. And all had their share of Weaknesses."

pɛɹɪn kəntɪnjud tə tʃu ɑn ɪz fud, θɔtfəl.

Perrin continued to chew on his food, thoughtful.

"ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz," feɪl sɛd, "wi hæv ə seɪɪŋ. 'ə pɑlɪʃt sɔɹd ɹɪflɛks ðə tʃɹuθ.' ə mæn kən kleɪm tə bi dɪlɪdʒən ɪn ɪz duɾiz, bʌɾ ɪf ɪz sɔɹɾ ɪzən pɑlɪʃt, jə noʊ ðət hiz bɪn aɪɾəl.

"In the Borderlands," Faile said, "we have a saying. 'A polished sword reflects the truth.' A man can claim to be diligent in his duties, but if his sword isn't polished, you know that he's been idle.

"wɛl, jəɹ sɔɹɾ ɪz bɹaɪt, maɪ hʌzbənd. ðiz læs fju wiks, jə kip seɪɪŋ ðət jə lɛd pʊɹli dʊɹɪŋ maɪ kæptɪvəɾi. juɾ əv mi bɪliv ðət jə lɛd ði ɪntaɪɝ kæmp tə ɹuən ən dʌst! bʌt ðæts nɑt tʃɹu əɾ ɔl jə kɛpt əm foʊkəst; jə ɪnspaɪɝd ðɛm, meɪnteɪn ə stʃɹɔŋ pɹɛzəns ən kɛp ði ɛɹ ʌv ə lɔɹd."

"Well, your sword is bright, my husband. These last few weeks, you keep saying that you led poorly during my captivity. You'd have me believe that you led the entire camp to ruin and dust! But that's not true at all You kept them focused; you inspired them, maintained a strong presence and kept the air of a lord."

"bɹəleɪnz bɪhaɪn səm ə ðæt," hi sɛd. "aɪ hæf θɪŋk ðə wʊmən wʊɾə beɪð mi hɝsɛlf ɪf aɪd ɡɔn ənʌðɝ deɪ wɪθaʊt."

"Berelain's behind some of that," he said. "I half think the woman would have bathed me herself if I'd gone another day without."

"aɪm sɝɾən ðət wʊdn əv bɪn ɡʊd fəɹ ðə ɹumɝz," feɪl noʊɾəd dʒɹaɪli.

"I'm certain that wouldn't have been good for the rumors," Faile noted dryly.

"feɪl, aɪ - "

"Faile, I - "

"aɪl dil wɪð bɹəleɪn," feɪl sɛd. hɝ vɔɪs saʊndəd deɪnʒɝəs. "ðæts wʌn duɾi jə nidn dɪstʃɹæk jɝsɛlf wɪð."

"I'll deal with Berelain," Faile said. Her voice sounded dangerous. "That's one duty you needn't distract yourself with."

"bʌt - "

"But - "

"aɪl dil wɪð hɝ," feɪl sɛd, hɝ vɔɪs mɔɹ fɝm. ɪt wɑz nɑt waɪz tə tʃælənʒ əɹ wən ʃi smɛl ðət weɪ, nɑɾ ənlɛs i wɑntəd tə stɑɹɾ ə fʊl ɑɹɡjəmənt. ʃi sɔfənd, teɪkɪŋ ənʌðɝ baɪɾ ə bɑɹli. "wɛn aɪ sɛd jə wɝ laɪk ə wʊlf, maɪ hʌzbənd, aɪ wɑzn tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə weɪ jə it. aɪ wɑz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə weɪ jə ɡɪv jəɹ ətɛnʃən. jə ɑɹ dʒɹɪvən. ɡɪvən ə pɹɑbləm tə sɑlv, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ɡɹænd, ən jəl si ɪt dʌn.

"I'll deal with her," Faile said, her voice more firm. It was not wise to challenge her when she smelled that way, not unless he wanted to start a full argument. She softened, taking another bite of barley. "When I said you were like a wolf, my husband, I wasn't talking about the way you eat. I was talking about the way you give your attention. You are driven. Given a problem to solve, no matter how grand, and you will see it done.

"kæn jə ʌndɝstænd? ðæts ə wʌndɝfəl tʃɹeɪɾ ɪn ə liɾɝ- ɪts ɪɡzækli wʌt ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɪl nid. əsumɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs, ðət juv ə waɪf tə kɛɹ fəɹ səm ə ðə smɔlɝ ɪʃuz." ʃi fɹaʊnd.

"Can't you understand? That's a wonderful trait in a leader- It is exactly what the Two Rivers will need. Assuming, of course, that you have a wife to care for some of the smaller issues." She frowned.

"aɪ wɪʃ jud spoʊkən tə mi əbaʊt ðə bænɝ bɪfɔɹ bɝnɪŋ ɪt. ɪɾəl bi dɪfəkəl tə ɹeɪz ɪɾ əɡɛn wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ fulɪʃ."

"I wish you'd spoken to me about the banner before burning it. It will be difficult to raise it again without looking foolish."

"aɪ doʊnt wɑnə ɹeɪz ɪɾ əɡɛn," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðæts waɪ aɪ hæɾ əm bɝn ɪt."

"I don't want to raise it again," Perrin said. "That's why I had them burn it."

"bʌt waɪ?"

"But why?"

hi tʊk ənʌðɝ baɪɾ ə hɪz hæm, pɔɪntɪdli nɑt wɑtʃɪŋ hɝ. ʃi smɛl kjʊɹiəs, ɔlmoʊs dɛspɝətli soʊ.

He took another bite of his ham, pointedly not watching her. She smelled curious, almost desperately so.

aɪ kæn lid ðɛm, hi θɔt. nɑɾ əntɪl aɪ noʊ ɪf aɪ kən mæstɝ ðə wʊlf haʊ kəɾ i ɪkspleɪn?

I can't lead them, he thought. Not until I know if I can master the wolf How could he explain?

ɪkspleɪn ðəɾ i fɪɹd ðə weɪ ɪt tʊk kəntʃɹoʊl wən i fɔt, wən i wɑntəd sʌmθɪŋ tu bædli?

Explain that he feared the way it took control when he fought, when he wanted something too badly?

hi wəd nɑt ɹɪd hɪmsɛlf ə ðə wʊlvz; ðeɪ hæd bɪkʌm tu mʌtʃ ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm. bʌt wɛɹ wəɾ i liv ɪz pipəl, wɛɹ wəɾ i liv feɪl, ɪf i lɔs hɪmsɛlf tə wʌt wɑz ɪnsaɪɾ ə hɪm?

He would not rid himself of the wolves; they had become too much a part of him. But where would he leave his people, where would he leave Faile, if he lost himself to what was inside of him?

hi əɡɛn ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ə dɝɾi kɹitʃɝ, wʌns ə mæn, lɑkt ɪn ə keɪdʒ-ðɛɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ lɛft ɪn ðɪs wʌn ðət ɹɪmɛmbɝz biɪŋ ə mæn . . .

He again remembered a dirty creature, once a man, locked in a cage-There is nothing left in this one that remembers being a man . . .

"maɪ hʌzbənd," feɪl sɛd, ɹɛstɪŋ ə hæn ɑn ɪz ɑɹm. "pliz." ʃi smɛld ə peɪn. ðət twɪstəɾ ɪz hɑɹɾ əbaʊt. "ɪɾ əz tə də wɪð ðoʊz waɪtkloʊks," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "wʌt? pɛɹɪn, aɪ θɔɾ aɪ sɛd - "

"My husband," Faile said, resting a hand on his arm. "Please." She smelled of pain. That twisted his heart about. "It has to do with those Whitecloaks," Perrin said. "What? Perrin, I thought I said - "

"ɪɾ əz tə du," pɛɹɪn sɛd fɝmli, "wɪð wʌt hæpən tə mi ðə fɝs taɪm aɪ mɛt wɪð ðɛm. ən wʌɾ aɪd bɪɡʌn tə dɪskʌvɝ ɪn ðə deɪz bɪfɔɹ." feɪl fɹaʊnd. "aɪv toʊl jə ðəɾ aɪ kɪl tu waɪtkloʊks," hi sɛd. "bɪfɔɹ aɪ mɛt ju."

"It has to do," Perrin said firmly, "with what happened to me the first time I met with them. And what I'd begun to discover in the days before." Faile frowned. "I've told you that I killed two Whitecloaks," he said. "Before I met you."

"jɛs."

"Yes."

"sɛɾəl bæk," hi sɛd. "ju nid tə noʊ ðə hoʊl stɔɹi." ən soʊ hi toʊl hɝ. hɛzɪɾəntli ət fɝst, bʌt ðə wɝdz sun ɡɹu iziɝ. hi spoʊk ə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, ən ə ðɛɹ ɡɹup biɪŋ skæɾɝd. ʌv ɛɡwin lɛɾɪŋ ɪm teɪk ðə lɛd, pɝhæps ðə fɝs taɪm hid bɪn fɔɹs tə də ðæt.

"Settle back," he said. "You need to know the whole story." And so he told her. Hesitantly at first, but the words soon grew easier. He spoke of Shadar Logoth, and of their group being scattered. Of Egwene letting him take the lead, perhaps the first time he'd been forced to do that.

hiɾ ɔlɹɛɾi toʊld əɹ ə hɪz miɾɪŋ wɪð ɛlaɪəs. ʃi nu mʌtʃ əbaʊt pɛɹɪn, θɪŋz ðət hid nɛvɝ toʊld ɛniwʌn ɛls, θɪŋz hid nɛvɝ ivən spoʊkən ʌv wɪð ɛlaɪəs. ʃi nu əbaʊt ðə wʊlf. ʃi nu ðəɾ i fɪɹd hid luz hɪmsɛlf.

He'd already told her of his meeting with Elyas. She knew much about Perrin, things that he'd never told anyone else, things he'd never even spoken of with Elyas. She knew about the wolf. She knew that he feared he'd lose himself.

bʌt ʃi dɪdnt noʊ wʌɾ i fɛlt ɪn bæɾəl. ʃi dɪdnt noʊ wʌɾ ɪt hæd fɛlt laɪk tə kɪl ðoʊz waɪtkloʊks, tə teɪs ðɛɹ blʌd - iðɝ ɪn ɪz oʊn maʊθ, əɹ θɹu hɪz lɪŋk wɪð ðə wʊlvz. ʃi dɪdnt noʊ wʌɾ ɪt hæd bɪn laɪk tə bi kənsum baɪ æŋɡɝ, fɪɹ ən dɛspɝeɪʃən wən ʃid bɪn teɪkən. ðiz wɝ ðə θɪŋz i hɔltɪŋli ɪkspleɪnd.

But she didn't know what he felt in battle. She didn't know what it had felt like to kill those Whitecloaks, to taste their blood - either in his own mouth, or through his link with the wolves. She didn't know what it had been like to be consumed by anger, fear and desperation when she'd been taken. These were the things he haltingly explained.

hi toʊld əɹ ə ðə fɹɛnzi hid ɡɔn ɪndə wən sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ əɹ ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. hi spoʊk ə noʊm ən wʌɾ i fɪɹd wəd hæpən tə hɪm. ən ə haʊ ɪt ɹɪleɪɾɪd tə haʊ hi æktəd wən i fɔt.

He told her of the frenzy he'd gone into when searching for her in the wolf dream. He spoke of Noam and what he feared would happen to him. And of how it related to how he acted when he fought.

feɪl lɪsənd, sɪɾɪŋ kwaɪətli ətɑp ðə hɪltɑp, ɑɹmz ɹæpt ɝaʊn əɹ lɛɡz, lɪt baɪ kændəllaɪt.

Faile listened, sitting quietly atop the hilltop, arms wrapped around her legs, lit by candlelight.

hɝ sɛns wɝ səbdud. pɝhæps i ʃʊɾə hɛl səm θɪŋz bæk. noʊ wʊmən wɑntəd tə noʊ wʌɾ ə bist əɹ hʌzbən bɪkeɪm wən i kɪld, dɪd ʃi? bʌt naʊ ðəɾ i wɑz spikɪŋ, hi wɑntəd tə bi ɹɪɾ ə hɪz sikɹəts. hi wɑz taɪɝɾ ə ðɛm.

Her scents were subdued. Perhaps he should have held some things back. No woman wanted to know what a beast her husband became when he killed, did she? But now that he was speaking, he wanted to be rid of his secrets. He was tired of them.

itʃ wɝd spoʊkən meɪɾ ɪm ɹɪlæks mɔɹ. ɪt dɪd wʌt ðə mil -  tʌtʃɪŋ ðoʊ ɪt hæd bɪn -  hædn bɪn eɪbəl tə. ɪn tɛlɪŋ əɹ ə hɪz stʃɹʌɡəlz, hi fɛl səm ə hɪz bɝɾən lɪft.

Each word spoken made him relax more. It did what the meal -  touching though it had been -  hadn't been able to. In telling her of his struggles, he felt some of his burden lift.

hi fɪnɪʃt baɪ spikɪŋ ə hɑpɝ. hi wɑzn sɝɾən waɪ hid seɪv ðə wʊlf fəɹ læst; hɑpɝ wɑz pɑɹɾ ə mʌtʃ pɛɹɪn hæd toʊl bɪfɔɹ - ðə waɪtkloʊks, ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. bʌɾ ɪt fɛlt ɹaɪt tə ɹɪzɝv hɑpɝ əntɪl ði ɛnd, soʊ hi dɪd.

He finished by speaking of Hopper. He wasn't certain why he'd saved the wolf for last; Hopper was part of much Perrin had told before - the Whitecloaks, the wolf dream. But it felt right to reserve Hopper until the end, so he did.

əz i fɪnɪʃt, hi stɛɹɾ ət ðə fleɪm ʌv wʌn ə ðə kændəlz. tu ʌv əm hæd ɡɔn aʊt, livɪŋ ʌðɝz stɪl tə flɪkɝ. ðət wɑzn dɪm laɪt tə hɪz aɪz. hi hæd tʃɹʌbəl ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ wʌt ðə deɪz hæd bɪn laɪk wən ɪz sɛnsɪz hæd bɪn əz wik əz ən ɔɹɾənɛɹi mænz.

As he finished, he stared at the flame of one of the candles. Two of them had gone out, leaving others still to flicker. That wasn't dim light to his eyes. He had trouble remembering what the days had been like when his senses had been as weak as an ordinary man's.

feɪl lin əɡɛns hɪm, ɹæpɪŋ ɪz ɑɹm ɝaʊn hɝ. "θæŋk ju" ʃi sɛd.

Faile leaned against him, wrapping his arm around her. "Thank you" she said.

hi lɛɾ aʊɾ ə dip saɪ, linɪŋ bæk əɡɛns ðə stʌmp bɪhaɪn hɪm, filɪŋ əɹ wɔɹmθ.

He let out a deep sigh, leaning back against the stump behind him, feeling her warmth.

"aɪ wɑnə tɛl jə əbaʊt meɪɾən," ʃi sɛd.

"I want to tell you about Maiden," she said.

"ju doʊn əv tə," hi sɛd. "dʒʌs kəz aɪ - "

"You don't have to," he said. "Just because I - "

"hʌʃ. aɪ wɑz kwaɪət waɪl jə spoʊk. ɪts maɪ tɝn."

"Hush. I was quiet while you spoke. It's my turn."

"ɔl ɹaɪt."

"All right."

ɪt ʃʊɾə bɪn wɝiɪŋ fəɹ ɪm tə hɪɹ əbaʊt meɪɾən. hi leɪ wɪð ɪz bæk tə ðə stʌmp, skaɪ kɹæklɪŋ wɪð ɛnɝdʒi əbʌv, ðə pæɾɝn ɪtsɛlf ɪn deɪnʒɝ ʌv ənɹævəlɪŋ, waɪl ɪz waɪf spoʊk ə biɪŋ kæptʃɝɾ ən biɾən. jɛɾ ɪt wɑz wʌn ə ðə moʊst ɑdli ɹɪlæksɪŋ θɪŋz hiɾ ɛvɝ ɪkspɪɹiənst.

It should have been worrying for him to hear about Maiden. He lay with his back to the stump, sky crackling with energy above, the Pattern itself in danger of unraveling, while his wife spoke of being captured and beaten. Yet it was one of the most oddly relaxing things he'd ever experienced.

ði ɪvɛns ɪn ðət sɪɾi hæd bɪn ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə hɝ, meɪbi ivən ɡʊd fəɹ hɝ. ðoʊ hi wɑz æŋɡɝɾ ət hɪɹɪŋ haʊ sɪvænə hæd tʃɹʌs feɪl ʌp neɪkəɾ ən lɛft əɹ oʊvɝnaɪt. sʌmdeɪ hid hʌn ðət wʊmən daʊn.

The events in that city had been important to her, maybe even good for her. Though he was angered at hearing how Sevanna had trussed Faile up naked and left her overnight. Someday he'd hunt that woman down.

nɑt tədeɪ, haʊɛvɝ. tədeɪ hi hæɾ ɪz waɪf ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz, ən əɹ stʃɹɔŋ vɔɪs wɑz ə kʌmfɝt. hi ʃʊɾə ɹilaɪzd ʃi wʊɾə plæn əɹ oʊn ɪskeɪp. ɪn fækt, lɪsnɪŋ tə hɝ kɛɹfəl pɹɛpɝeɪʃən, hi bɪɡæn tə fil ə ful. ʃid bɪn wɝid ðət hid ɡɛt hɪmsɛlf kɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹɛskju hɝ -  ʃi dɪdn seɪ ɪt, bʌɾ i kəɾ ɪnfɝ ɪt. haʊ wɛl ʃi nu hɪm.

Not today, however. Today he had his wife in his arms, and her strong voice was a comfort. He should have realized she would have planned her own escape. In fact, listening to her careful preparation, he began to feel a fool. She'd been worried that he'd get himself killed trying to rescue her -  she didn't say it, but he could infer it. How well she knew him.

feɪl lɛf səm θɪŋz aʊt. hi dɪdn maɪnd. feɪl wəd bi laɪk ə pɛn ən keɪdʒd ænəməl wɪθaʊɾ əɹ sikɹəts. hi ɡɑɾ ə ɡʊd hɪn ʌv wʌt ʃi wɑz haɪɾɪŋ, ðoʊ. ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðət bɹʌðɝləs u hæd kæptʃɝd hɝ, sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt feɪlz plænz tə tʃɹɪk ðə mæn ən ɪz fɹɛnz ɪndə hɛlpɪŋ əɹ ɪskeɪp. pɝhæps ʃid fɛlt ə fɑndnəs fəɹ hɪm, ən dɪdnt wɪʃ pɛɹɪn tə ɹəɡɹɛt kɪlɪŋ hɪm.

Faile left some things out. He didn't mind. Faile would be like a penned and caged animal without her secrets. He got a good hint of what she was hiding, though. It was something to do with that Brotherless who had captured her, something about Faile's plans to trick the man and his friends into helping her escape. Perhaps she'd felt a fondness for him, and didn't wish Perrin to regret killing him.

ðət wɑznt nɛsəsɛɹi. ðoʊz bɹʌðɝləs hæd bɪn wɪð ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, ən ðeɪ hæɾ ətækt ən kɪl mɛn ʌndɝ pɛɹɪnz pɹətɛkʃən. noʊ ækt ə kaɪndnəs wəd ɹɪdim ðæt. ðeɪ dɪzɝv ðɛɹ dɛθs.

That wasn't necessary. Those Brotherless had been with the Shaido, and they had attacked and killed men under Perrin's protection. No act of kindness would redeem that. They deserved their deaths.

ðət ɡeɪv ɪm pɔz. ðə waɪtkloʊks pɹɑbli sɛd vɛɹi sɪməlɝ θɪŋz əbaʊt hɪm. bʌt ðə waɪtkloʊks hæɾ ətæk fɝst.

That gave him pause. The Whitecloaks probably said very similar things about him. But the Whitecloaks had attacked first.

ʃi fɪnɪʃt. ɪt wɑz vɛɹi leɪt, naʊ, ən pɛɹɪn ɹitʃt oʊvɝ tə ə bʌndəl ðət feɪlz sɝvəns hæd bɹɔɾ ʌp, pʊlɪŋ aʊɾ ə blæŋkət.

She finished. It was very late, now, and Perrin reached over to a bundle that Faile's servants had brought up, pulling out a blanket.

"wɛl?" feɪl æskt əz i sɛɾəld bæk, pʊɾɪŋ ɪz ɑɹm ɝaʊn əɹ əɡɛn.

"Well?" Faile asked as he settled back, putting his arm around her again.

"aɪm sɝpɹaɪz ðət jə dɪdnt ɡɪmi ən ɪɹfəl fəɹ bæɹəlɪŋ ɪn laɪk ə waɪl bʊl ən stɑmpɪŋ ɔl oʊvɝ jəɹ plænz."

"I'm surprised that you didn't give me an earful for barreling in like a wild bull and stomping all over your plans."

ðət meɪɾ əɹ smɛl sæɾəsfaɪd. ɪt wɑzn ði ɪmoʊʃən hiɾ ɪkspɛktəd, bʌt hid lɔŋ əɡoʊ stɑp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪsaɪfɝ ðə weɪz ʌv wɪmənz θɔt.

That made her smell satisfied. It wasn't the emotion he'd expected, but he'd long ago stopped trying to decipher the ways of women's thought.

"aɪ ɔlmoʊs bɹɔt ðə mæɾɝ ʌp tənaɪt," feɪl sɛd, "soʊ ðət wi kəɾ əv ə pɹɑpɝ ɑɹɡjəmən ən ə pɹɑpɝ ɹɛkənsɪlieɪʃən."

"I almost brought the matter up tonight," Faile said, "so that we could have a proper argument and a proper reconciliation."

"waɪ dɪdn ju?"

"Why didn't you?"

"aɪ dɪsaɪɾɪd ðət ðɪs naɪt ʃəd bi dʌn ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz weɪ."

"I decided that this night should be done in the Two Rivers way."

"æn jə θɪŋk hʌzbənz ən waɪvz doʊn ɑɹɡju ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz?" hi æskt, əmjuzd.

"And you think husbands and wives don't argue in the Two Rivers?" he asked, amused.

"wɛl, pɝhæps ðeɪ du. bʌt ju, hʌzbənd, ɔlweɪz sim ənkʌmftəɹbəl wən wi jɛl. aɪm vɛɹi ɡlæd juv bɪɡʌn tə stæn ʌp fəɹ jɝsɛlf, əz ɪz pɹɑpɝ. bʌɾ aɪ hæv æsk mʌtʃ fɹəm jə tə ədæp tə maɪ weɪz. aɪ θɔt, tənaɪt, aɪ wəd tʃɹaɪ tə ədæp tə jʊɹz."

"Well, perhaps they do. But you, husband, always seem uncomfortable when we yell. I'm very glad you've begun to stand up for yourself, as is proper. But I have asked much from you to adapt to my ways. I thought, tonight, I would try to adapt to yours."

ðoʊz wɝ wɝdz ðəɾ i hæd nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd tə hɪɹ fɹəm feɪl. ɪt sim ðə moʊs pɝsənəl θɪŋ ʃi kəɾ ɛvɝ əv ɡɪvən hɪm. ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋli, hi fɛl tɪɹz ɪn ɪz aɪz, ən i pʊld əɹ taɪt.

Those were words that he had never expected to hear from Faile. It seemed the most personal thing she could ever have given him. Embarrassingly, he felt tears in his eyes, and he pulled her tight.

"naʊ," ʃi sɛd, "aɪm nɑɾ ə dɑsəl ʃip, maɪn ju."

"Now," she said, "I'm not a docile sheep, mind you."

"aɪ wəd nɛvɝ θɪŋk ðæt," hi sɛd. "nɛvɝ."

"I would never think that," he said. "Never."

ʃi smɛl sæɾəsfaɪd.

She smelled satisfied.

"aɪm sɑɹi aɪ dɪdnt ɡɪv mʌtʃ θɔt tə jə ɪskeɪpɪŋ ɑn jəɹ oʊn," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"I'm sorry I didn't give much thought to you escaping on your own," Perrin said.

"aɪ fɝɡɪv ju."

"I forgive you."

hi lʊk daʊn ət hɝ, ðoʊz bjuɾəfəl dɑɹk aɪz ɹəflɛktɪŋ ðə kændəllaɪt. "dʌz ðɪs min wi kən əv ðə ɹɛkənsɪlieɪʃən wɪθaʊt ði ɑɹɡjəmənt?"

He looked down at her, those beautiful dark eyes reflecting the candlelight. "Does this mean we can have the reconciliation without the argument?"

ʃi smaɪld. "aɪ wɪl əlaʊ ɪt, ðɪs wʌns. ænd, ʌv kɔɹs, ðə sɝvəns əv stʃɹɪkt ɔɹɾɝz tə ɛnʃʊɹ əɹ sɑlətud."

She smiled. "I will allow it, this once. And, of course, the servants have strict orders to ensure our solitude."

hi kɪs hɝ. ɪt fɛl soʊ vɛɹi ɹaɪt, ən i nu ðət ðə wɝiz hid hæd - ən ði ɔkwɝdnəs ðət hæd bɪn bɪtwin əm sɪns meɪɾən -  wɝ ɡɔn. wɛðɝ ɪt hæd bɪn sʌmθɪŋ ɹil əɹ sʌmθɪŋ i ɪmædʒənd, ɪt hæd pæst.

He kissed her. It felt so very right, and he knew that the worries he'd had - and the awkwardness that had been between them since Maiden -  were gone. Whether it had been something real or something he imagined, it had passed.

hi hæd feɪl bæk, tʃɹuli ən kəmplitli.

He had Faile back, truly and completely.


tʃæptɝ pɑɹɾɪŋz, ən ə miɾɪŋ



CHAPTER Partings, and a Meeting

ðə mɔɹnɪŋ æftɝ ðə ɡoʊləm ətæk, mæt woʊk fɹəm dʒɹimz ɹɑɾən əz læs mʌnθs ɛɡz, filɪŋ stɪf ən eɪkɪŋ. hi hæd spɛn ðə naɪt slipɪŋ ɪn ə hɑloʊ hid faʊn bɪniθ ɑlʌdʒɹəz səplaɪ wæɡən. hi hæd tʃoʊzən ðə loʊkeɪʃən baɪ ɹændəm tʃæns, juzɪŋ ɪz daɪs.

The morning after the gholam attack, Mat woke from dreams rotten as last month's eggs, feeling stiff and aching. He had spent the night sleeping in a hollow he'd found beneath Aludra's supply wagon. He had chosen the location by random chance, using his dice.

hi klaɪmd aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ ðə wæɡən, stændɪŋ ən ɹoʊlɪŋ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, filɪŋ ɪt pɑp. blʌɾi æʃəz. wʌn ə ðə bɛs θɪŋz əbaʊt hævɪŋ mʌni wɑz nɑt hævɪŋ tə slip ɪn dɪtʃəz. ðəɹ wɝ bɛɡɝz u spɛnt naɪts bɛɾɝ ðən ðɪs.

He climbed out from under the wagon, standing and rolling his shoulder, feeling it pop. Bloody ashes. One of the best things about having money was not having to sleep in ditches. There were beggars who spent nights better than this.

ðə wæɡən smɛld ə sʌlfɝ ən paʊɾɝz. hi wɑz tɛmptəd tə pik ʌndɝ ði ɔɪl tɑɹp ðət stʃɹɛtʃt oʊvɝ ðə bæk ʌv, bʌt ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ pɔɪnt. ɑlʌdʒɹə ən əɹ paʊɾɝz wɝ ɪŋkɑmpɹəhɛnsɪbəl. soʊ lɔŋ əz ðə dʒɹæɡənz pɝfɔɹmd, mæt dɪd nɑt maɪnd nɑt noʊɪŋ haʊ ðeɪ wɝkt. wɛl, hi dɪd nɑt maɪn ɪt mʌtʃ. nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə ɹɪsk ɪɹəteɪɾɪŋ hɝ.

The wagon smelled of sulphur and powders. He was tempted to peek under the oiled tarp that stretched over the back of, but there would be no point. Aludra and her powders were incomprehensible. So long as the dragons performed, Mat did not mind not knowing how they worked. Well, he did not mind it much. Not enough to risk irritating her.

ʃi wɑz nɑt ðəɹ ət ðə wæɡən, fɔɹtʃənətli fəɹ mæt. ʃi wəd kəmpleɪn əɾ ɪm əɡɛn fəɹ nɑt hævɪŋ ɡɑɾən əɹ ə bɛlfndɝ. ʃi sim tə θɪŋk ɪm əɹ oʊn pɝsənəl mɛsənʒɝ bɔɪ. ən ənɹuli wʌn, hu ɹəfjuz tə də hɪz dʒɑb pɹɑpɝli. moʊst wɪmən hæd moʊməns laɪk ðæt.

She was not there at the wagon, fortunately for Mat. She would complain at him again for not having gotten her a bellfounder. She seemed to think him her own personal messenger boy. An unruly one, who refused to do his job properly. Most women had moments like that.

hi wɔk θɹu kæmp, bɹʌʃɪŋ bɪts ə stʃɹɔ fɹəm ɪz hɛɹ. hi ɔlmoʊst wɛn sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ləpɪn tə hæv ɪm dʒɹɔ ə bæθ, əntɪl i ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət ləpɪn wɑz dɛd. blʌɾi æʃəz! pʊɹ mæn.

He walked through camp, brushing bits of straw from his hair. He almost went searching for Lopin to have him draw a bath, until he remembered that Lopin was dead. Bloody ashes! Poor man.

θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt pʊɹ ləpɪn pʊt mæt ɪn ən ivən mɔɹ daʊɝ muɾ əz i aɪk təwɔɹd wɛɹ hid faɪn səm bɹɛkfəst. dʒulɪn faʊn ɪm fɝst. ðə ʃɔɹt tɛɹən θif-kætʃɝ wɔɹ ɪz flæt-tɑp kɑnɪkəl hæɾ ən dɑɹk blu "mæt," hi sɛd. "ɪz ɪt tʃɹu? juv ɡɪvən pɝmɪʃən fəɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ɡoʊ bæk tə ðə taʊɝ?"

Thinking about poor Lopin put Mat in an even more dour mood as he Iked toward where he'd find some breakfast. Juilin found him first. The short Tairen thief-catcher wore his flat-topped conical hat and dark blue "Mat," he said. "Is it true? You've given permission for the Aes Sedai to go back to the Tower?"

"ðeɪ dɪdnt nid maɪ pɝmɪʃən," mæt sɛd, wɪnsɪŋ. ɪf ðə wɪmən hɝɾ ɪt sɛd ðət weɪ, ðeɪ wəd tæn ɪz haɪɾ ən meɪk sæɾəl lɛðɝ fɹəm ɪt. "aɪm plænɪŋ tə ɡɪv əm hɔɹsəz, ðoʊ."

"They didn't need my permission," Mat said, wincing. If the women heard it said that way, they would tan his hide and make saddle leather from it. "I'm planning to give them horses, though."

"ðeɪ hæv əm ɔlɹɛɾi," dʒulɪn sɛd, lʊkɪŋ ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðə pɪkət laɪnz. "sɛd jə ɡeɪv əm pɝmɪʃən."

"They have them already," Juilin said, looking in the direction of the picket lines. "Said you gave them permission."

mæt saɪd. hɪz stʌmək ɡɹaʊld, bʌt fud wəɾ əv tə weɪt. hi wɔk təwɔɹd ðə pɪkət laɪnz; hi wəd nid tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd nɑt meɪk ɔf wɪð ɪz bɛst stɑk.

Mat sighed. His stomach growled, but food would have to wait. He walked toward the picket lines; he would need to make sure the Aes Sedai did not make off with his best stock.

"aɪv bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ aɪ maɪt ɡoʊ wɪð ðɛm," dʒulɪn sɛd, dʒɔɪnɪŋ mæt. "teɪk θɛɹə tə tɑɹ vəlɑn."

"I've been thinking I might go with them," Juilin said, joining Mat. "Take Thera to Tar Valon."

"jɔɹ wɛlkəm tə liv ɛni taɪm," mæt sɛd. "aɪ woʊn hoʊl jə hɪɹ." dʒulɪn wɑz ə ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf fɛloʊ. ə lɪɾəl stɪf ət taɪmz. wɛl, vɛɹi stɪf. dʒulɪn kəd meɪk ə waɪtkloʊk lʊk ɹɪlækst. hi wɑz nɑt ðə taɪp jə wɑntəd tə teɪk wɪð jə dɪsɪŋ; hi wəd spɛn ðə naɪt skaʊlɪŋ əɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə tævɝn ən mʌɾɝɪŋ əbaʊt ðə kɹaɪmz ðeɪ hæd sɝɾənli kəmɪɾəd. bʌɾ i wɑz ɹɪlaɪəbəl, ən ə ɡʊd hæn tə hæv ɪn ə pɪntʃ.

"You're welcome to leave any time," Mat said. "I won't hold you here." Juilin was a good enough fellow. A little stiff at times. Well, very stiff. Juilin could make a Whitecloak look relaxed. He was not the type you wanted to take with you dicing; he would spend the night scowling at everyone in the tavern and muttering about the crimes they had certainly committed. But he was reliable, and a good hand to have in a pinch.

"aɪ wɑnə ɡɛt bæk tə tɛɹ," dʒulɪn sɛd. "bʌt ðə sintʃæn wəd bi soʊ kloʊz, ən θɛɹə ... ɪt wɝiz hɝ. ʃi dʌzn mʌtʃ laɪk ði aɪdiə ʌv tɑɹ vəlɑn iðɝ, bʌt wi doʊn əv mɛni tʃɔɪsəz, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pɹɑməs ðəɾ ɪf aɪ keɪm wɪð ðɛm, ðeɪd ɡɛt mi wɝk ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn."

"I want to get back to Tear," Juilin said. "But the Seanchan would be so close, and Thera ... It worries her. She doesn't much like the idea of Tar Valon either, but we don't have many choices, and the Aes Sedai promised that if I came with them, they'd get me work in Tar Valon."

"soʊ, ðɪs ɪz pɑɹɾɪŋ, ðɛn?" mæt sɛd, stɑpɪŋ ən tɝnɪŋ tə hɪm.

"So, this is parting, then?" Mat said, stopping and turning to him.

"fɔɹ naʊ," dʒulɪn sɛd. hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən hɛld aʊɾ ɪz hænd. mæt tʊk ɪɾ ən ʃʊk, ən ðən ðə θif-kætʃɝ wɑz ɔf tə ɡæðɝ ɪz θɪŋz ən ɪz wʊmən.

"For now," Juilin said. He hesitated, then held out his hand. Mat took it and shook, and then the thief-catcher was off to gather his things and his woman.

mæt θɔt fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən tʃeɪnʒd ɪz maɪn ən hɛɾəd fəɹ ðə kʊk tɛnt. dʒulɪn wəd sloʊ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, pɹɑbli, ən i wɑntəd tə fɛtʃ sʌmθɪŋ.

Mat thought for a moment, then changed his mind and headed for the cook tent. Juilin would slow the Aes Sedai, probably, and he wanted to fetch something.

ə ʃɔɹt taɪm leɪɾɝ, hi ɝaɪvd ət ðə pɪkət laɪnz fɛɾ ən kæɹiɪŋ ə klɔθ-ɹæp bʌndəl ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹm. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd, ʌv kɔɹs, kɹieɪɾəd ən ɪnɔɹɾənətli lɑɹdʒ kæɹəvæn aʊɾ ə səm ə hɪz bɛs hɔɹsəz. tɛslɪn ən dʒoʊlin ɔlsoʊ sim tə hæv dɪsaɪɾɪd ðeɪ kəd kəmændɪɹ səm pæk ɑni-mælz ən səm soʊlʒɝz tə də ðə loʊɾɪŋ. mæt saɪɾ ən wɔkt ɪndə ðə mɛs, tʃɛkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə hɔɹsəz.

A short time later, he arrived at the picket lines fed and carrying a cloth-wrapped bundle under his arm. The Aes Sedai had, of course, created an inordinately large caravan out of some of his best horses. Teslyn and Joline also seemed to have decided they could commandeer some pack ani-mals and some soldiers to do the loading. Mat sighed and walked into the mess, checking over the horses.

dʒoʊlin sæɾ ɑn mʊŋɡloʊ, ə mɛɹ ə tɛɹən stɑk ðət hæd bɪlɔŋ tə wʌn ə ðə mɛn mæt hæd lɔst ɪn ðə faɪɾɪŋ tə ɪskeɪp ðə sintʃæn. ðə mɔɹ ɹɪzɝvd idɛzinə hæd maʊntəd faɪɹɪsp, ən wɑz ɡlænsɪŋ əkeɪʒən-ælaɪ ət tu wɪmən u stʊd tə ðə saɪd. dɑɹk-skɪn bɛθəmən ən peɪl, jɛloʊ-hɛɹd sɛɾə wɝ fɔɹmɝ sʌldəm.

Joline sat on Moonglow, a mare of Tairen stock that had belonged to one of the men Mat had lost in the fighting to escape the Seanchan. The more reserved Edesina had mounted Firewisp, and was glancing occasion-ally at two women who stood to the side. Dark-skinned Bethamin and pale, yellow-haired Seta were former sul'dam.

ðə sintʃæn wɪmən tʃɹaɪd vɛɹi hɑɹd tə lʊk əluf əz ðə ɡɹup ɡæθ-ɛɝɛd. mæt sɔntɝɾ ʌp tə ðɛm.

The Seanchan women tried very hard to look aloof as the group gath-ered. Mat sauntered up to them.

"haɪnəs," sɛɾə sɛd, "ɪɾ ɪz tʃɹu? jəɹ gɑnə əlaʊ ðiz tə ɹoʊm fɹi ʌv ju?"

"Highness," Seta said, "it is true? You're going to allow these to roam free of you?"

"bɛs tə bi ɹɪɾ ə ðɛm," mæt sɛd, wɪnsɪŋ əɾ əɹ tʃɔɪs ə taɪɾəlz fəɹ hɪm. dɪd ðeɪv tə θɹoʊ ɝaʊn sətʃ wɝdz ðət laɪk ðeɪ wɝ wʊɾən pɛniz? ɛniweɪ, ðə tu sintʃæn wɪmən hæd tʃeɪnʒd ə ɡɹeɪt dil sɪns bɪɡɪnɪŋ wɪð ðə ɡɹup, bʌt ðeɪ stɪl sim tə faɪn ɪɾ ɑd ðət mæt dɪd nɑt wɪʃ tə juz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əz wɛpənz. "du jə wɑnə ɡoʊ, əɹ dʒju wɑnə steɪ?"

"Best to be rid of them," Mat said, wincing at her choice of titles for him. Did they have to throw around such words that like they were wooden pennies? Anyway, the two Seanchan women had changed a great deal since beginning with the group, but they still seemed to find it odd that Mat did not wish to use the Aes Sedai as weapons. "Do you want to go, or do you want to stay?"

"wi wɪl ɡoʊ," bɛθəmən sɛd fɝmli. ʃi wɑz dɪtɝmən tə lɝn, ɪt simd, "jɛs,' sɛɾə sɛd, "ðoʊ aɪ səmtaɪmz θɪŋk ɪt maɪt bi bɛɾɝ tə sɪmpli lɛɾ əs daɪ, əz əpoʊz tə . .

"We will go," Bethamin said firmly. She was determined to learn, it seemed, "Yes,' Seta said, "though I sometimes think it might be better to simply let us die, as opposed to . .

. wɛl, wʌt wi ɑɹ, wʌt wi ɹɛpɹəzɛnt, minz ðət wəɹ ə deɪnʒɝ tə ði ɛmpaɪɝ."

. Well, what we are, what we represent, means that we are a danger to the Empire."

mæt nɑɾəd. "tuɑn ɪz ə sʌldəm" hi sɛd.

Mat nodded. "Tuon is a sul'dam" he said.

ðə tu wɪmən lʊk daʊn.

The two women looked down.

"ɡoʊ wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ," mæt sɛd. "aɪl ɡɪv jə jəɹ oʊn hɔɹsəz, soʊ jə doʊn əv tə ɹɪlaɪ ɑn ðɛm. lɝn tə tʃænəl. ðæɾəl bi mɔɹ juz ðən daɪɪŋ. meɪbi sʌmdeɪ jə tu kən kənvɪns tuɑn ə ðə tʃɹuθ. hɛlp mi faɪn ə weɪ tə fɪks ðɪs wɪθaʊt kɑzɪŋ ði ɛmpaɪɝ tə kəlæps."

"Go with the Aes Sedai," Mat said. "I'll give you your own horses, so you don't have to rely on them. Learn to channel. That'll be more use than dying. Maybe someday you two can convince Tuon of the truth. Help me find a way to fix this without causing the Empire to collapse."

ðə tu wɪmən lʊk tə hɪm, mɔɹ fɝm ən kɑnfəɾənt, sʌɾənli. "jɛs, haɪnəs," bɛθəmən sɛd. "ɪɾ ɪz ə ɡʊd pɝpəs fəɹ əs tə hæv. θæŋk ju, haɪnəs."

The two women looked to him, more firm and confident, suddenly. "Yes, Highness," Bethamin said. "It is a good purpose for us to have. Thank you, Highness."

sɛɾə æktʃəli  ɡɑt tɪɹz ɪn əɹ aɪz! wʌd dɪd ðeɪ θɪŋk i hæd dʒʌs pɹɑməs ðɛm? mæt ɹitʃɹiɾəd bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd ɡɛɾ ɛni mɔɹ ɑɾ aɪdiəz ɪn ðɛɹ hɛdz. fleɪmɪŋ wɪmən. stɪl, hi kəd nɑt hɛlp filɪŋ sɑɹi fəɹ ðɛm. lɝnɪŋ ðət ðeɪ kəd tʃænəl, wɝiɪŋ ðeɪ maɪt bi ə deɪnʒɝ tə ɛvɹiwʌn ɝaʊn ðɛm.

Seta actually got tears in her eyes! Light, what did they think he had just promised them? Mat retreated before they could get any more odd ideas in their heads. Flaming women. Still, he could not help feeling sorry for them. Learning that they could channel, worrying they might be a danger to everyone around them.

ðæts baʊ ɹænd fɛlt, mæt θɔt. pʊɹ ful. əz ɔlweɪz, ðə kʌlɝz swɝld wən i θɔɾ ə ɹænd. hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə də ɪt tu ɔfən, ən bɪfɔɹ i kəd bænɪʃ ðoʊz kʌlɝz, hi kɑɾ ə ɡlɪmps ə ɹænd ʃeɪvɪŋ ɪn ə faɪn, ɡɪldɪd mɪɹɝ hæŋɪŋ ɪn ə bjuɾəfəl beɪðɪŋ tʃeɪmbɝ.

That's bow Rand felt, Mat thought. Poor fool. As always, the colors swirled when he thought of Rand. He tried not to do it too often, and before he could banish those colors, he caught a glimpse of Rand shaving in a fine, gilded mirror hanging in a beautiful bathing chamber.

mæt ɡeɪv səm ɔɹɾɝz tə ɡɛt ðə sʌldəm hɔɹsəz, ðən i wɔkt oʊvɝ təwɔɹd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. tɑm hæɾ ɝaɪvd ən i stʃɹoʊld oʊvɝ. "laɪt, mæt," hi sɛd. "ju lʊk laɪk jə tæŋɡəld wɪð ə bɹaɪɹstɪtʃ pætʃ ən keɪm aʊt sɔɹ.

Mat gave some orders to get the sul'dam horses, then he walked over toward the Aes Sedai. Thom had arrived and he strolled over. "Light, Mat," he said. "You look like you tangled with a briarstitch patch and came out sore.

mæt ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə hɪz hɛɹ, wɪtʃ wɑz pɹɑbli ə ɹil saɪt. "aɪ lɪv ðə naɪt, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ livɪŋ. aɪv hæf ə maɪn tə dæns ə dʒɪɡ ət ðæt." 'θɔɹn snɔɹɾɪd. "dɪd jə noʊ ðoʊz tu wɝ gɑnə bi hɪɹ?"

Mat raised a hand to his hair, which was probably a real sight. "I lived the night, and the Aes Sedai are leaving. I've half a mind to dance a jig at that." 'Thorn snorted. "Did you know those two were going to be here?"

"ðə sʌldəm? aɪ fɪɡjɝd."

"The sul'dam? I figured."

"noʊ, ðoʊz tu." hi pɔɪntəd.

"No, those two." He pointed.

mæt tɝnd, fɹaʊnɪŋ əz i faʊn laɪlwɪn ən beɪl doʊmən ɹaɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ pəzɛʃənz wɝ ɹoʊld ʌp ɑn ðə bæks ə ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz. laɪlwɪn - ðən noʊn əz ɛdʒiənɪn - hæd wʌns bɪn ə sintʃæn noʊbəlwʊmən, bʌt tuɑn hæd stʃɹɪpt əɹ neɪm əweɪ. ʃi wɔɹ ə dʒɹɛs wɪð dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts ə mjuɾɪd ɡɹeɪ. hɝ ʃɔɹt dɑɹk hɛɹ hæd ɡɹoʊn aʊt, ən hʌŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ɪɹz.

Mat turned, frowning as he found Leilwin and Bayle Domon riding Their possessions were rolled up on the backs of their horses. Leilwin - then known as Egeanin - had once been a Seanchan noblewoman, but Tuon had stripped her name away. She wore a dress with divided skirts of muted gray. Her short dark hair had grown out, and hung over her ears.

ʃi klaɪm fɹəm əɹ sæɾəl ən stɔkt ɪn mæts dɝɛkʃən.

She climbed from her saddle and stalked in Mat's direction.

"bɝn mi," mæt sɛd tə θɔɹn, "ɪf aɪ kən bi ɹɪɾ ə hɝ, tu, əl ɔlmoʊst stɑɹt θɪŋkɪŋ ðət laɪf əz tɝn fɛɹ ɑn mi."

"Burn me," Mat said to Thorn, "if I can be rid of her, too, I'll almost start thinking that life has turned fair on me."

doʊmən fɑloʊɾ əɹ əz ðeɪ əpɹoʊtʃt. hi wɑz əɹ sɔɪhɪn. əɹ . . . kəɾ i stɪl bi sɔɪhɪn, naʊ ðət ʃi hæd noʊ taɪɾəl? wɛl, iðɝ weɪ, hi wɑz əɹ hʌzbənd. ði ɪliɑnɝ wɑz θɪk ʌv ɡɝθ, ən stʃɹɔŋ.

Domon followed her as they approached. He was her so'jhin. Or . . . could he still be so'jhin, now that she had no title? Well, either way, he was her husband. The Illianer was thick of girth, and strong.

hi wɑz nɑt tu bæɾ ə fɛloʊ, ɪksɛpt wən i wɑz ɝaʊn laɪlwɪn. wɪtʃ wɑz ɔlweɪz.

He was not too bad a fellow, except when he was around Leilwin. Which was always.

"kɔθən," ʃi sɛd, stɛpɪŋ ʌp tə hɪm.

"Cauthon," she said, stepping up to him.

"laɪlwɪn," hi ɹɪplaɪd. "jɔɹ livɪŋ?"

"Leilwin," he replied. "You're leaving?"

"jɛs."

"Yes."

mæt smaɪld. hi ɹɪli wɑz gɑnə də ðət dæns!

Mat smiled. He really was going to do that dance!

"aɪ ɔlweɪz ɪntɛndəd tə meɪk maɪ weɪ tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ," ʃi kəntɪnjud. "aɪ sɛt maɪ maɪn ðəɹ ɑn ðə deɪ aɪ lɛft ɛbu dɑɹ. ɪf ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ livɪŋ, əl ɡoʊ wɪð ðɛm. ə ʃɪp ɪz ɔlweɪz waɪz tə dʒɔɪn ə kɑnvɔɪ, wən ðə ɹaɪɾ ɑpɝtunəɾi ɪz pɹizɛntəd."

"I always intended to make my way to the White Tower," she continued. "I set my mind there on the day I left Ebou Dar. If the Aes Sedai are leaving, I will go with them. A ship is always wise to join a convoy, when the right opportunity is presented."

"tu bæd tə si jə ɡoʊ," mæt laɪd, tɪpɪŋ ɪz hæt tə hɝ. laɪlwɪn wɑz əz tʌf əz ə hʌnʒɹəd-jɪɹ oʊk stʌk wɪð bɪts ʌv æks lɛft oʊvɝ fɹəm ðə mɛn fulɪʃ ɪnʌf tə tʃɹaɪ tə tʃɑp ɪt daʊn. ɪf əɹ hɔɹs θɹu ə ʃu ɑn ðə ɹoʊd tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ʃi wəd laɪkli slɪŋ ði ænəməl oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ən kæɹi ɪt ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ.

"Too bad to see you go," Mat lied, tipping his hat to her. Leilwin was as tough as a hundred-year oak stuck with bits of axe left over from the men foolish enough to try to chop it down. If her horse threw a shoe on the road to Tar Valon, she would likely sling the animal over her shoulder and carry it the rest of the way.

bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk mæt, fəɹ ɔl i hæd dʌn tə seɪv əɹ skɪn. meɪbi ɪt wɑz kəz i hæd nɑt lɛɾ əɹ teɪk tʃɑɹdʒ, əɹ meɪbi kəz ʃi hæd bɪn fɔɹst æk laɪk ɪz lʌvɝ. wɛl, hi hæd nɑɾ ɛndʒɔɪd ðət pɑɹɾ iðɝ. ɪt hæd bɪn laɪk hoʊldɪŋ ə sɔɹd baɪ ðə bleɪɾ ən pɹitɛndɪŋ ðəɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt stɪŋ.

But she did not like Mat, for all he had done to save her skin. Maybe it was because he had not let her take charge, or maybe because she had been forced act like his lover. Well, he had not enjoyed that part either. It had been like holding a sword by the blade and pretending that it did not sting.

ðoʊ ɪt hæd bɪn fʌn tə wɑtʃ əɹ skwɝm.

Though it had been fun to watch her squirm.

"bi wɛl, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən," laɪlwɪn sɛd. "aɪ doʊn ɛnvi ðə pleɪs juv pʊt jɝsɛlf ɪn. ɪn səm weɪz, aɪ θɪŋk ðə wɪnz ðət kæɹi jə meɪ æktu-ælaɪ bi ɹʌfɝ ðən ðə wʌnz wɪtʃ əv bəfeɪd mi, ɹisənli." ʃi nɑɾəd tə hɪm, ðən tɝn tə ɡoʊ.

"Be well, Matrim Cauthon," Leilwin said. "I don't envy the place you've put yourself in. In some ways, I think the winds that carry you may actu-ally be rougher than the ones which have buffeted me, recently." She nodded to him, then turned to go.

doʊmən ɹitʃt oʊvɝ, leɪɪŋ ə hæn ɑn mæts ɑɹm. "ju dɪd də əz jə sɛd. baɪ maɪ eɪdʒd ɡɹændmʌðɝ! jə ɡeɪv ə bʌmpi ɹaɪɾ ʌv ɪt, bʌt jə dɪd də əz jə sɛd. maɪ θæŋks."

Domon reached over, laying a hand on Mat's arm. "You did do as you said. By my aged grandmother! You gave a bumpy ride of it, but you did do as you said. My thanks."

ðə tu ʌv əm muvd ɔf. mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, weɪvɪŋ tə tɑm ən stʃɹoʊlɪŋ oʊvɝ tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. "tɛslɪn," mæt sɛd. "idɛzinə. dʒoʊlin. ɔl ' wɛl?"

The two of them moved off. Mat shook his head, waving to Thom and strolling over to the Aes Sedai. "Teslyn," Mat said. "Edesina. Joline. All ' well?"

"ɪɾ ɪz," dʒoʊlin sɛd.

"It is," Joline said.

"ɡʊd, ɡʊd," mæt sɛd. "ju hæv səfɪʃən pæk ænəməlz?"

"Good, good," Mat said. "You have sufficient pack animals?"

"ðeɪ wɪl du, mæstɝ kɔθən," dʒoʊlin sɛd. ðɛn, kʌvɝɪŋ ə wɪns ʃi æɾəd, "θæŋk jə fəɹ ɡɪvɪŋ əm tə ʌs."

"They will do, Master Cauthon," Joline said. Then, covering a wince she added, "Thank you for giving them to us."

mæt smaɪl bɹɔdli. maɪ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz əmjuzɪŋ tə hɪɹ əɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əkɝ ɹɪspɛkfəl! ʃi hæɾ ɑbviəsli ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪleɪn tə wɛlkəm əɹ ən ði ʌðɝz wɪð oʊpən ɑɹmz, nɑt tɝn əm əweɪ fɹəm ðə pæləs wɪθaʊɾ ən ɑɾiəns.

Mat smiled broadly. My, but it was amusing to hear her trying to acr respectful! She had obviously expected Elayne to welcome her and the others with open arms, not turn them away from the palace without an audience.

dʒoʊlin aɪd mæt, lʌʃ lɪps pɹɛs təɡɛðɝ. "aɪ wəd laɪk tə hæv teɪm ju, kɔθən," ʃi sɛd.

Joline eyed Mat, lush lips pressed together. "I would liked to have tamed you, Cauthon," she said.

"aɪv stɪl hæf ə maɪn tə ɹɪtɝn sʌmdeɪ ən si ðə dʒɑb dʌn pɹɑpɝli."

"I've still half a mind to return someday and see the job done properly."

"aɪl weɪt bɹɛθləsli fəɹ ðæt, ðɛn," hi sɛd, teɪkɪŋ ðə klɔθ-ɹæpt pækədʒ fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹm. hi hændəɾ ɪɾ ʌp tə hɝ.

"I'll wait breathlessly for that, then," he said, taking the cloth-wrapped package from under his arm. He handed it up to her.

"wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs?" ʃi æskt, nɑt ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ ɪt.

"What is this?" she asked, not reaching for it.

mæt ʃʊk ðə bʌndəl. "pɑɹɾɪŋ ɡɪft," hi sɛd. "wɛɹ aɪ kʌm fɹʌm, jə nɛvɝ lɛɾ ə tʃɹævəlɝ dɪpɑɹt wɪθaʊt ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ ðə ɹoʊd. ɪt wəd bi ɹud."

Mat shook the bundle. "Parting gift," he said. "Where I come from, you never let a traveler depart without giving her something for the road. It would be rude."

ɹɪlʌktənli, ʃi æksɛptɪɾ ɪɾ ən pikt ɪnsaɪd. ʃi wɑz ɑbviəsli sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ðəɾ ɪt kənteɪn ə kəlɛkʃən ʌv əbaʊɾ ə dʌzən paʊɾɝd switbənz. "θæŋk ju," ʃi sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ.

Reluctantly, she accepted it and peeked inside. She was obviously surprised to find that it contained a collection of about a dozen powdered sweetbuns. "Thank you," she said, frowning.

"aɪm sɛndɪŋ soʊlʒɝz wɪð ju," mæt sɛd. "ðeɪl bɹɪŋ maɪ hɔɹsəz bæk wʌns jə ɝaɪv ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn."

"I'm sending soldiers with you," Mat said. "They'll bring my horses back once you arrive in Tar Valon."

dʒoʊlin oʊpən əɹ maʊθ əz ɪf tə kəmpleɪn, bʌt ðən kloʊzd ɪt. wʌɾ ɑɹɡjəmən kəd ʃi meɪk?

Joline opened her mouth as if to complain, but then closed it. What argument could she make?

"ðæt wɪl bi æksɛptəbəl, kɔθən," tɛslɪn sɛd, muvɪŋ əɹ blæk ɡɛldɪŋ kloʊsɝ.

"That will be acceptable, Cauthon," Teslyn said, moving her black gelding closer.

"aɪl ɡɪv əm ɔɹɾɝz tə də əz jə seɪ," mæt sɛd, tɝnɪŋ tə hɝ. "soʊ jəl əv pipəl tə kəmæn əbaʊɾ ən meɪk sɛɾ ʌp jəɹ tɛns. bʌt ðɛɹz ə kəndɪʃən ətætʃt."

"I'll give them orders to do as you say," Mat said, turning to her. "So you'll have people to command about and make set up your tents. But there's a condition attached."

tɛslɪn ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ.

Teslyn raised an eyebrow.

"aɪ wɑn jə tə tɛl ði æmɪɝlɪn sʌmθɪŋ," hi sɛd. "ɪf ɪts ɛɡwin, ðɪs ʃəd bi izi. bʌɾ ivən ɪf ɪɾ ɪzənt, jə tɛl hɝ. ðə waɪt taʊɝ əz sʌmθɪŋ ə maɪn, ən ɪts nɪɹli taɪm ðəɾ aɪ ɹikleɪmd ɪt.

"I want you to tell the Amyrlin something," he said. "If it's Egwene, this should be easy. But even if it isn't, you tell her. The White Tower has something of mine, and it's nearly time that I reclaimed it.

aɪ doʊnt wɑn tə, bʌt wʌɾ aɪ wɑnt nɛvɝ simz tə mæɾɝ ə wɪskɝ, ðiz deɪz. soʊ əl bi kʌmɪŋ, ən aɪ doʊn min tə bi blʌɾi tɝn əweɪ. " hi smaɪld. "jus ðəɾ ɪɡzæk læŋɡwədʒ."

I don't want to, but what I want never seems to matter a whisker, these days. So I'll be coming, and I don't mean to be bloody turned away. " He smiled. "Use that exact language."

tɛslɪn, tə hɝ kɹɛɾət, tʃʌkəl sɔfli. "aɪl si ɪt dʌn, ðoʊ aɪ daʊt ɹumɝz ɑɹ tʃɹu. ɪleɪɾə wəd nɑɾ əv ɡɪvən ʌp ði æmɪɝlɪn sit."

Testlyn, to her credit, chuckled softly. "I'll see it done, though I doubt rumors are true. Elaida would not have given up the Amyrlin Seat."

"ju maɪt bi sɝpɹaɪzd." mæt ʃʊɹli hæd bɪn, wən i hæd dɪskʌvɝd wɪmən kɔlɪŋ ɛɡwin æmɪɝlɪn. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt hæd hæpn ʌp ət ðə waɪt taʊɝ, bʌɾ i hæɾ ə sɪŋkɪŋ filɪŋ ðət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd ɹæpt pʊɹ ɛɡwin ʌp ɪn ðɛɹ skimz soʊ saʊnli ðət ʃi wəd nɛvɝ ɪskeɪp. hi hæd hæf ə maɪn tə ɹaɪɾ ʌp ðəɹ hɪmsɛlf ən si ɪf i kəd ɡɛɾ əɹ aʊt. bʌɾ i hæɾ ʌðɝ tæsks. ɛɡwin wəɾ əv tə si tə hɝsɛlf fəɹ naʊ. ʃi wɑz ə keɪpəbəl ɡɝl; ʃi kəd pɹɑbli hændəl ɪt wɪθaʊɾ ɪm fəɹ ə waɪl.

"You might be surprised." Mat surely had been, when he had discovered women calling Egwene Amyrlin. He did not know what had hapned up at the White Tower, but he had a sinking feeling that the Aes Sedai had wrapped poor Egwene up in their schemes so soundly that she would never escape. He had half a mind to ride up there himself and see if he could get her out. But he had other tasks. Egwene would have to see to herself for now. She was a capable girl; she could probably handle it without him for a while.

θɔɹn stʊd tə hɪz saɪd, lʊkɪŋ θɔtfəl. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ fəɹ ʃʊɹ ðət mæt hæd bloʊn ðə hɔɹn  - ət list, mæt hæd nɛvɝ toʊl hɪm. hi tʃɹaɪd tə fɝɡɛɾ əbaʊt ðə blʌɾi θɪŋ. bʌt θɔɹn hæd pɹɑbli ɡɛst.

Thorn stood to his side, looking thoughtful. He did not know for sure that Mat had blown the Horn  - at least, Mat had never told him. He tried to forget about the bloody thing. But Thorn had probably guessed.

"wɛl, aɪ səpoʊz jə ʃəd bi ɡoʊɪŋ," mæt sɛd. "wɛɹz sɛɾəl?"

"Well, I suppose you should be going," Mat said. "Where's Setalle?"

"ʃil bi steɪɪŋ hɪɹ," tɛslɪn sɛd. "ʃi sɛd ðət ʃi wɑntəd tə kip jə fɹəm meɪkɪŋ tu mɛni mɪsstɛps." ʃi ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ, ən dʒoʊlin ən idɛzinə nɑɾəd sɑɡæʃəsli. ðeɪ ɔl əsum ðət sɛɾəl wɑz ə fɔɹmɝ ɹʌnəweɪ sɝvən fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ, pɝhæps hævɪŋ flɛɾ əz ə ɡɝl kəz ʌv ə mɪsdid.

"She'll be staying here," Teslyn said. "She said that she wanted to keep you from making too many missteps." She raised an eyebrow, and Joline and Edesina nodded sagaciously. They all assumed that Setalle was a former runaway servant from the White Tower, perhaps having fled as a girl because of a misdeed.

wɛl, ðət mɛn i wʊdn bi ɹɪɾ ə ði ɪntaɪɝ ɡɹup. stɪl, ɪf i hæd tə pɪk wʌn tə steɪ, ɪt wəd bi mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən. ʃi wəd pɹɑbli bi wɑntɪŋ tə faɪn ə weɪ tə miɾ ʌp wɪð əɹ hʌzbən ən fæmli, hu hæd flɛɾ ɛbu dɑɹ baɪ ʃɪp.

Well, that meant he wouldn't be rid of the entire group. Still, if he had to pick one to stay, it would be Mistress Anan. She would probably be wanting to find a way to meet up with her husband and family, who had fled Ebou Dar by ship.

dʒulɪn wɔkt ʌp, liɾɪŋ θɛɹə. hæd ðət fɹaɪɾənd wɪsp ʌv ə wʊmən ɹɪli bɪn ðə pɑnɑɹtʃ ə tæɹɑbən? mæt hæd sin maɪs ðət wɝ lɛs tɪmɪd. mæts soʊlʒɝz bɹɔɾ aʊt hɔɹsəz fəɹ ðə tu ʌv ðɛm. ɔl ɪn ɔl, ðɪs ɛkspədɪʃən wɑz kɔstɪŋ ɪm səm fɔɹɾi ænəməlz ən ə faɪl ə soʊlʒɝz. bʌɾ ɪt wəd bi wɝθ ɪt. bɪsaɪdz, hi ɪntɛndəd tə ɹɪtʃɹiv boʊθ mɛn ən hɔɹsəz - əlɔŋ wɪð ɪnfɝmeɪʃən əbaʊt wʌt wɑz ɹɪli hæpənɪŋ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn.

Juilin walked up, leading Thera. Had that frightened wisp of a woman really been the Panarch of Tarabon? Mat had seen mice that were less timid. Mat's soldiers brought out horses for the two of them. All in all, this expedition was costing him some forty animals and a file of soldiers. But it would be worth it. Besides, he intended to retrieve both men and horses - along with information about what was really happening in Tar Valon.

hi nɑɾəd tə veɪnɪn. ðə θɪk-weɪstɪd hɔɹs θif hæd nɑt bɪn tu plizd wən mæt hæɾ ɔɹɾɝd ɪm tə ɡoʊ əlɔŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn ən ɡæðɝ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən. mæt hæd fɪɡjɝɾ i wəd bi ɛkstæɾɪk, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ haʊ hi dɑɾɪd ɑn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. wɛl, hi wəd bi ivən lɛs hæpi wən i faʊn dʒulɪn wɑz əlɔŋ; veɪnɪn tɛndəd tə stɛp laɪtli ɝaʊn ðə θif-kætʃɝ.

He nodded to Vanin. The thick-waisted horse thief had not been too pleased when Mat had ordered him to go along to Tar Valon and gather information. Mat had figured he would be ecstatic, considering how he doted on the Aes Sedai. Well, he would be even less happy when he found Juilin was along; Vanin tended to step lightly around the thief-catcher.

veɪnɪn maʊntəɾ ə beɪ ɡɛldɪŋ. əz fɑɹ əz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ nu, hi wɑz ə sinjɝ ɹɛdɑɹm ən wʌn ə mæts fil skaʊts, bʌt noʊbɑdi tə bi səspɪʃəs ʌv. wi dɪd nɑt lʊk vɛɹi θɹɛɾənɪŋ, ɪksɛp meɪbi əz ə deɪnʒɝ tə ə boʊl ə bɔɪl pəteɪɾoʊz. ðət maɪt bi waɪ hi wɑz soʊ ɡʊɾ ət wʌɾ i dɪd. mæt dɪd nɑt niɾ ɛni hɔɹsəz stoʊlən, bʌt veɪnɪnz tæləns kəd bi əplaɪd tə ʌðɝ tæsks.

Vanin mounted a bay gelding. As far as the Aes Sedai knew, he was a senior Redarm and one of Mat's field scouts, but nobody to be suspicious of. We did not look very threatening, except maybe as a danger to a bowl of boiled potatoes. That might be why he was so good at what he did. Mat did not need any horses stolen, but Vanin's talents could be applied to other tasks.

"wɛl," mæt sɛd, tɝnɪŋ bæk tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, "aɪ woʊn kip jə fɝðɝ, ðɛn." hi stɛp bæk, əvɔɪɾɪŋ lʊkɪŋ ət dʒoʊlin - hu hæɾ ə pɹɛɾətɔɹi kæs tə hɝ aɪz ðət ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm ɔl tu mʌtʃ ə taɪlɪn. tɛslɪn weɪvd ænd, kjʊɹiəsli, idɛzinə nɑɾəd tə hɪm ɪn ɹɪspɛkt. dʒulɪn hæɾ ə weɪv fəɹ ɪm ən θɔɹn, ən mæt ɡɑɾ ə nɑd fɹəm laɪlwɪn. ðə wʊmən tʃud ɹɑks fəɹ bɹɛkfəst ən neɪlz fəɹ sʌpɝ, bʌt ʃi wɑz fɛɹ. meɪbi hi kəd tɔk tə tuɑn, ɡɛɾ əɹ ɹiɪnsteɪɾɪd əɹ sʌmθɪŋ.

"Well," Mat said, turning back to the Aes Sedai, "I won't keep you further, then." He stepped back, avoiding looking at Joline - who had a predatory cast to her eyes that reminded him all too much of Tylin. Teslyn waved and, curiously, Edesina nodded to him in respect. Juilin had a wave for him and Thorn, and Mat got a nod from Leilwin. The woman chewed rocks for breakfast and nails for supper, but she was fair. Maybe he could talk to Tuon, get her reinstated or something.

doʊn bi ə ful, hi θɔt, ɡɪvɪŋ ə weɪv tə beɪl doʊmən. fɝs jəl nid tə kənvɪns tuɑn nɑt tə meɪk jə dækoʊvæl. hi wɑz hæf kənvɪnst ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə si hɪm əz əɹ sɝvənt, hʌzbən əɹ nɑt.

Don't be a fool, he thought, giving a wave to Bayle Domon. First you'll need to convince Tuon not to make you da'covale. He was half convinced she intended to see him as her servant, husband or not.

θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ðət meɪɾ ɪm swɛɾ ɝaʊn ðə kɑlɝ.

Thinking about that made him sweat around the collar.

bɪfɔɹ lɔŋ, ðeɪ wɝ meɪkɪŋ dʌst əlɔŋ ðə ɹoʊd. θɔɹn stɛpt ʌp bɪsaɪd mæt, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə ɹaɪɾɝz. "switbənz?"

Before long, they were making dust along the road. Thorn stepped up beside Mat, watching the riders. "Sweetbuns?"

"tʃɹədɪʃən əmʌŋ əs tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk."

"Tradition among us Two Rivers folk."

"nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə ðət tʃɹədɪʃən."

"Never heard of that tradition."

"ɪts vɛɹi əbskjʊɹ."

"It's very obscure."

"ɑ, aɪ si. ən wʌd jə də tə ðoʊz bʌnz?"

"Ah, I see. And what did you do to those buns?"

"spɹɪŋklwɝt," mæt sɛd. "ɪɾəl tɝn əɹ maʊθ blu fəɹ ə wik, meɪbi tu. ən ʃi woʊnt ʃɛɹ ðə switbənz wɪð ɛniwʌn, ɪksɛp meɪbi hɝ wɔɹɾɝz. dʒoʊlin ɪz ədɪktəd tə ðə θɪŋz. ʃi mʌst əv iɾən sɛvən əɹ eɪt bæɡz' wɝθ sɪns wi ɡɑt tə keɪɛmlɪn."

"Sprinklewort," Mat said. "It'll turn her mouth blue for a week, maybe two. And she won't share the sweetbuns with anyone, except maybe her Warders. Joline is addicted to the things. She must have eaten seven or eight bags' worth since we got to Caemlyn."

"naɪs," θɔɹn sɛd, nʌklɪŋ ɪz mʌstæʃ. "tʃaɪldɪʃ, ðoʊ."

"Nice," Thorn said, knuckling his mustache. "Childish, though."

"aɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛt bæk tə maɪ beɪsɪk ɹuts," mæt sɛd. "ju noʊ, ɹikæptʃɝ səm ə maɪ lɔs juθ."

"I'm trying to get back to my basic roots," Mat said. "You know, recapture some of my lost youth."

"jɔɹ bɛɹli twɛnti wɪntɝz oʊld!"

"You're barely twenty winters old!"

"ʃʊɹ, bʌɾ aɪ dɪɾ ə lɑɾ ə lɪvɪŋ wən aɪ wɑz jʌŋɡɝ. kʌm ɑn. mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən ɪz steɪɪŋ, ən ðət ɡɪvz mi ən aɪdiə."

"Sure, but I did a lot of living when I was younger. Come on. Mistress Anan is staying, and that gives me an idea."

"ju niɾ ə ʃeɪv, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən." mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz əz ʃi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd hɪm.

"You need a shave, Matrim Cauthon." Mistress Anan folded her arms as she regarded him.

hi ɹitʃt ʌp, tʌtʃɪŋ ɪz feɪs. ləpɪn hæɾ ɔlweɪz dʌn ðæt, itʃ mɔɹnɪŋ. ðə mæn ɡɑɾ əz sʌlki əz ə dɔɡ ɪn ðə ɹeɪn wən mæt dɪd nɑt lɛɾ ɪm də sətʃ θɪŋz, ðoʊ leɪtli mæt hæd bɪn ɡɹoʊɪŋ aʊɾ ɪz bɪɹd tə əvɔɪd noʊɾəs. ɪt stɪl ɪtʃt laɪk ə wik-oʊl skæb.

He reached up, touching his face. Lopin had always done that, each morning. The man got as sulky as a dog in the rain when Mat did not let him do such things, though lately Mat had been growing out his beard to avoid notice. It still itched like a week-old scab.

hi hæd faʊn sɛɾəl ət ðə səplaɪ tɛns, oʊvɝsiɪŋ ðə mɪddeɪ mil-soʊlʒɝz fɹəm ðə bæn hʌŋkɝd daʊn, tʃɑpɪŋ vɛdʒtəbəlz ən stuɪŋ binz wɪð ðə fɝɾɪv ɪkspɹɛʃən ə mɛn u hæd bɪn ɡɪvən fɝm ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz. sɛɾəl wɑz nɑt niɾəd hɪɹ; ðə bænz kʊks hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn eɪbəl tə pɹipɛɹ milz wɪθaʊt hɝ. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ə wʊmən laɪk bɛɾɝ ðən faɪndɪŋ mɛn u wɝ ɹɪlæksɪŋ, ðən ɡɪvɪŋ əm ɔɹɾɝz. bɪsaɪdz, sɛɾəl wɑz ə fɔɹmɝ ɪnkipɝ ən - ɹɪmɑɹkəbli - ə fɔɹmɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. mæt ɔfən faʊn əɹ supɝvaɪzɪŋ θɪŋz ðət dɪd nɑt nid supɝvaɪzɪŋ.

He had found Setalle at the supply tents, overseeing the midday meal-Soldiers from the Band hunkered down, chopping vegetables and stewing beans with the furtive expression of men who had been given firm instructions. Setalle was not needed here; the Band's cooks had always been able to prepare meals without her. But there was nothing a woman liked better than finding men who were relaxing, then giving them orders. Besides, Setalle was a former innkeeper and - remarkably - a former Aes Sedai. Mat often found her supervising things that did not need supervising.

nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, hi wɪʃt tuɑn wɝ stɪl tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð hɪm. sɛɾəl hæd juʒəwəli teɪkən tuɑnz saɪd, bʌt steɪɪŋ wɪð ðə dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪn munz hæɾ ɔfən kɛpt əɹ bɪzi. nʌθɪŋ wɑz mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs fəɹ ðə sænəɾi ʌv mɛn ðən ə wʊmən wɪð tu mʌtʃ taɪm ɑn əɹ hænz.

Not for the first time, he wished Tuon were still traveling with him. Setalle had usually taken Tuon's side, but staying with the Daughter of the Nine Moons had often kept her busy. Nothing was more dangerous for the sanity of men than a woman with too much time on her hands.

sɛɾəl stɪl wɔɹ kloʊðɪŋ ə ði ɛbu dɑɹi staɪl, wɪtʃ mæt faʊn plɛzənt, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðə plʌnʒɪŋ nɛklaɪn. ðət kaɪndə aʊtfɪt wɝk pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli wɛl ɑn ə wʊmən əz bʌksəm əz sɛɾəl. nɑt ðəɾ i noʊɾəst. ʃi hæd ɡoʊldən hups ɪn əɹ ɪɹz, ə steɪtli dɪminɝ ən ɡɹeɪ ɪn əɹ hɛɹ. ðə dʒuəld wɛɾɪŋ naɪf wɔɹn ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk sim sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ə wɔɹnɪŋ, ðə weɪ ɪt nɛsəld ɪn əɹ klivədʒ. nɑt ðət mæt noʊɾəst ðæt, iðɝ.

Setalle still wore clothing of the Ebou Dari style, which Mat found pleasant, considering the plunging neckline. That kind of outfit worked particularly well on a woman as buxom as Setalle. Not that he noticed. She had golden hoops in her ears, a stately demeanor and gray in her hair. The jeweled wedding knife worn around her neck seemed something of a warning, the way it nestled in her cleavage. Not that Mat noticed that, either.

"aɪv bɪn ɡɹoʊɪŋ ðə bɪɹɾ ɪntɛnʃənəli," mæt sɛd tə hɝ steɪtmənt. "aɪ wɑnə - "

"I've been growing the beard intentionally," Mat said to her statement. "I want to - "

"jɔɹ koʊɾ ɪz dɝɾi," ʃi sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ tə ə soʊlʒɝ u bɹɔɾ əɹ səm ʌnjənz i hæd pild.

"Your coat is dirty," she said, nodding to a soldier who brought her some onions he had peeled.

hi ʃipɪʃli pɔɹɾ əm ɪndə ə pɑt, nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət mæt. "æn jəɹ hɛɹ ə mɛs. jə lʊk laɪk juv bɪn ɪn ə bɹɔl, ən ɪts nɑt jɛt nun."

He sheepishly poured them into a pot, not looking at Mat. "And your hair a mess. You look like you've been in a brawl, and it's not yet noon."

"aɪm faɪn," mæt sɛd. "aɪl klin ʌp leɪɾɝ. jə dɪdnt ɡoʊ wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"I'm fine," Mat said. "I'll clean up later. You didn't go with the Aes Sedai."

"itʃ stɛp təwɔɹd tɑɹ vəlɑn wəd teɪk mi fɑɹðɝ fɹəm wɛɹ aɪ nid tə bi. aɪ nid tə sɛnd wɝd tə maɪ hʌzbənd. wən wi pɑɹɾəd, aɪ dɪdn səspɛk ðəɾ aɪɾ ɛn ʌp ɪn ændɝ ʌv ɔl pleɪsəz."

"Each step toward Tar Valon would take me farther from where I need to be. I need to send word to my husband. When we parted, I didn't suspect that I'd end up in Andor of all places."

"aɪm θɪŋkɪŋ aɪ maɪt bi ɡɛɾɪŋ æksɛs tə sʌmwʌn u kən meɪk ɡeɪtweɪz hɪɹ sun," mæt sɛd.

"I'm thinking I might be getting access to someone who can make gateways here soon," Mat said.

"æn aɪ . . ." hi fɹaʊn əz ənʌðɝ ɡɹup ə soʊlʒɝz əpɹoʊtʃt, kæɹiɪŋ ə fju ʌndɝsaɪz kweɪl ðeɪd hʌntəd. ðə soʊlʒɝz lʊkt əʃeɪmd ə ðə tɛɹəbəl kætʃ.

"And I . . ." He frowned as another group of soldiers approached, carrying a few undersized quail they'd hunted. The soldiers looked ashamed of the terrible catch.

sɛɾəl ɔɹɾɝd əm tə plʌk ðə bɝdz wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə ɡlæns təwɔɹd mæt. laɪt, hi niɾəd tə ɡɛɾ əɹ aʊɾ ə hɪz kæmp. θɪŋz wəd nɑt bi nɔɹməl hɪɹ əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ɡɔn.

Setalle ordered them to pluck the birds without so much as a glance toward Mat. Light, he needed to get her out of his camp. Things would not be normal here until they were all gone.

"doʊn lʊk ət mi laɪk ðæt, lɔɹd mæt," sɛɾəl sɛd. "nɔɹæm wɛn ɪndə ðə sɪɾi tə si wʌt kaɪndə pɹəvɪʒənz i kəd faɪnd. aɪv noʊɾəd ðət wɪθaʊt ðə kʊk hɪmsɛlf hɪɹ tə pɹɑd ðə mɛn, milz doʊnt ɡɛt dʌn əɾ ɛni ɹizənəbəl spid. nɑɾ ɔl ʌv əs laɪk tə teɪk lʌntʃ wən ðə sʌn ɪz sɛɾɪŋ." aɪ dɪdn seɪ ə θɪŋ," mæt sɛd, kipɪŋ ɪz vɔɪs ivən. hi nɑɾəd tə ðə saɪd. "kæn wi tɔk fəɹ ə moʊmənt?"

"Don't look at me like that, Lord Mat," Setalle said. "Noram went into the city to see what kind of provisions he could find. I've noted that without the cook himself here to prod the men, meals don't get done at any reasonable speed. Not all of us like to take lunch when the sun is setting." I didn't say a thing," Mat said, keeping his voice even. He nodded to the side. "Can we talk for a moment?"

sɛɾəl hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən nɑɾəd ən stɛpt əweɪ fɹəm ði ʌðɝz wɪð hɪm. "wʌts ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn ɹɪli?" ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "ju lʊk laɪk jə slɛpt ʌndɝ ə heɪ paɪl."

Setalle hesitated, then nodded and stepped away from the others with him. "What's going on really?" she said softly. "You look like you slept under a hay pile."

"aɪ slɛpt ʌndɝ ə wæɡən, æktʃəli . ən maɪ tɛns steɪnd wɪð blʌd nɑt ɹɪli lʊkɪŋ fɔɹwɝd tə ɡoʊɪŋ ðəɹ tə tʃeɪnʒ kloʊðɪŋ ɹaɪt naʊ"

"I slept under a wagon, actually. And my tent's stained with blood Not really looking forward to going there to change clothing right now"

hɝ ɡeɪz sɔfənd. "aɪ ʌndɝstæn jəɹ lɔs. bʌt ðæts noʊ ɪkskjus tə ɡoʊ ɝaʊn lʊkɪŋ laɪk juv bɪn lɪvɪŋ ɪn ən æliweɪ. jəl nid tə haɪɝ ənʌðɝ sɝvɪŋ mæn."

Her gaze softened. "I understand your loss. But that's no excuse to go around looking like you've been living in an alleyway. You'll need to hire another serving man."

mæt skaʊld. "aɪ nɛvɝ niɾəd wʌn ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs. aɪ kən teɪk kɛɹ ə maɪsɛlf. lʊk, aɪ hæv ə feɪvɝ tə æsk ə ju. aɪ wɑn jə tə wɑtʃ æftɝ oʊlvɝ fəɹ ə lɪɾəl waɪl."

Mat scowled. "I never needed one in the first place. I can take care of myself. Look, I have a favor to ask of you. I want you to watch after Olver for a little while."

"fɔɹ wʌt pɝpəs?"

"For what purpose?"

"ðæt θɪŋ maɪt kʌm bæk," mæt sɛd. "æn ɪt kəd tʃɹaɪ tə hɝt hɪm. bɪsaɪdz, aɪm gɑnə bi livɪŋ wɪð θɔɹn ʃɔɹtli. aɪ maɪt bi bæk aɪ ʃəd bi bæk. bʌɾ ɪf aɪ doʊnt, aɪ . . . wɛl, aɪ wəd ɹæðɝ i nɑt bi lɛft əloʊn."

"That thing might come back," Mat said. "And it could try to hurt him. Besides, I'm going to be leaving with Thorn shortly. I might be back I should be back. But if I don't, I . . . Well, I would rather he not be left alone."

ʃi stʌɾid hɪm. "hi wəd nɑt bi əloʊn. ðə mɛn ɪn kæmp sim tə hæv ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə fɑndnəs fəɹ ðə tʃaɪld."

She studied him. "He would not be alone. The men in camp seem to have a great deal of fondness for the child."

"ʃʊɹ, bʌɾ aɪ doʊn laɪk ðə θɪŋz ðəɹ titʃɪŋ hɪm. ðə bɔɪ nidz bɛɾɝ ɪɡzæmpəlz ðən ðət lɑt."

"Sure, but I don't like the things they're teaching him. The boy needs better examples than that lot."

ʃi simd əmjuz baɪ ðət fəɹ səm ɹizən. "aɪv ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡʌn ɪnstʃɹʌktɪŋ ðə tʃaɪld ɪn lɛɾɝz. aɪ səpoʊz aɪ kən wɑtʃ æftɝ ɪm fəɹ ə taɪm, ɪf nid bi."

She seemed amused by that for some reason. "I've already begun instructing the child in letters. I suppose I can watch after him for a time, if need be."

"ɡɹeɪt. wʌndɝfəl." mæt lɛɾ aʊɾ ə ɹɪliv saɪ. wɪmən wɝ ɔlweɪz hæpi fəɹ ə tʃæns tə ɛdʒəkeɪɾ ə bɔɪ wən i wɑz jʌŋ; mæt θɔt ðeɪ əsum ðeɪ kəɾ ɛdʒəkeɪɾ ɪm aʊɾ ə bɪkʌmɪŋ ə mæn ɪf ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf. "aɪl ɡɪv jə səm mʌni. jə kən ɡoʊ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi ən faɪn ən ɪn."

"Great. Wonderful." Mat let out a relieved sigh. Women were always happy for a chance to educate a boy when he was young; Mat thought they assumed they could educate him out of becoming a man if they tried hard enough. "I'll give you some money. You can go into the city and find an inn."

"aɪv bɪn ɪndə ðə sɪɾi," sɛɾəl sɛd. "ɛvɹi ɪn ɪn ðə pleɪs simz pæk tə ðə wɔlz ɔlɹɛɾi."

"I've been into the city," Setalle said. "Every inn in the place seems packed to the walls already."

"aɪl faɪn ə pleɪs fəɹ ju," mæt pɹɑməst. "dʒʌs kip oʊlvɝ seɪf. wən ðə taɪm kʌmz, ən aɪ hæv sʌmwʌn tə meɪk ɡeɪtweɪz, əl əv əm sɛn jə tə ɪljən soʊ jə kən faɪn jəɹ hʌzbənd."

"I'll find a place for you," Mat promised. "Just keep Olver safe. When the time comes, and I have someone to make gateways, I'll have them send you to Illian so you can find your husband."

"ə dil," sɛɾəl sɛd. ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ɡlænsɪŋ nɔɹθwɝd. "ði . . . ʌðɝz ɑɹ ɡɔn, ðɛn?"

"A deal," Setalle said. She hesitated, glancing northward. "The . . . others are gone, then?"

"jɛs." ɡʊd ɹɪɾəns.

"Yes." Good riddance.

ʃi nɑɾəd, lʊkɪŋ ɹɪɡɹɛtfəl. meɪbi ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn ɔɹɾɝɪŋ ɪz mɛn əbaʊt fəɹ lʌntʃ kəz ʃi hæd bɪn əfɛndəɾ ət siɪŋ əm ɹɪlæks. meɪbi ʃi hæd bɪn lʊkɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ tə bɪzi hɝsɛlf æt.

She nodded, looking regretful. Maybe she had not been ordering his men about for lunch because she had been offended at seeing them relax. Maybe she had been looking for something to busy herself at.

"aɪm sɑɹi," mæt sɛd. "əbaʊt wʌtɛvɝ hæpən tə ju."

"I'm sorry," Mat said. "About whatever happened to you."

"ðə pæst ɪz ɡɔn," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd. "æn aɪ nid tə liv ɪt bi. aɪ ʃoʊl" nɛvɝ əv ivən æsk tə si ði aɪɾəm jə wɛɹ. ðiz læs fju wiks əv meɪd mi fɝɡɛt maɪsɛlf."

"The past is gone," she replied. "And I need to leave it be. I shoal" never have even asked to see the item you wear. These last few weeks have made me forget myself."

mæt nɑɾəd, pɑɹɾɪŋ wɪð hɝ, ðən wɛn sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ oʊlvɝ. ən æftɝ ðæt, hi ɹɪli ʃəd ɡɛɾ ɝaʊn tə tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɪz koʊt. ən bɝn hɪm, hi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə ʃeɪv, tu.

Mat nodded, parting with her, then went searching for Olver. And after that, he really should get around to changing his coat. And burn him, he was going to shave, too.

ðə mɛn lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ɪm kəd blʌɾi kɪl ɪm ɪf ðeɪ wɑntəd. ə slɪt θɹoʊt wəd bi bɛɾɝ ðən ðɪs ɪtʃɪŋ.

The men looking for him could bloody kill him if they wanted. A slit throat would be better than this itching.

ɪleɪn stʃɹoʊl θɹu ðə pæləsəz sʌnɹaɪz ɡɑɹɾən. ðɪs smɔlɝ ɡɑɹɾən hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ə feɪvɝd loʊkeɪʃən ə hɝ mʌðɝz, sɛɾ ətɑp ðə ɹuf ə ðə leɪsəz istɝn wɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ɹɪm baɪ ən oʊvəl ʌv waɪt stoʊnwɝk, wɪð ə lɑɹdʒɝ, kɝvd wɔl ət ðə bæk.

Elayne strolled through the palace's Sunrise Garden. This smaller garden had always been a favored location of her mother's, set atop the roof of the lace's eastern wing. It was rimmed by an oval of white stonework, with a larger, curved wall at the back.

ɪleɪn hæɾ ə fʊl vju ʌv ðə sɪɾi bɪloʊ. ɪn ɝliɝ jɪɹz, ʃi hæd laɪk ðə loʊɝ ɡɑɹɾənz pɹɪsaɪsli kəz ðeɪ wɝ ə ɹitʃɹit. ɪt wɑz ɪn ðoʊz ɡɑɹɾənz ðət ʃi hæd fɝs mɛt ɹænd. ʃi pɹɛst ə hæn tə hɝ bɛli. ðoʊ ʃi fɛlt ɪnɔɹməs, ðə pɹɛɡnənsi wɑz oʊnli dʒʌs bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ʃoʊ.

Elayne had a full view of the city below. In earlier years, she had liked the lower gardens precisely because they were a retreat. It was in those gardens that she had first met Rand. She pressed a hand to her belly. Though she felt enormous, the pregnancy was only just beginning to show.

ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ʃid hæd tə kəmɪʃən ən ɪntaɪɝli nu sɛɾ ʌv ɡaʊnz. ʃi wəd pɹɑbli hæv tə də soʊ əɡɛn ɪn ðə kʌmɪŋ mʌnθs. wʌɾ ə bɑðɝ.

Unfortunately, she'd had to commission an entirely new set of gowns. She would probably have to do so again in the coming months. What a bother.

ɪleɪn kəntɪnjud tə wɔk ðə ɹuf ɡɑɹɾən. pɪŋk dʒʌmpʌps ən waɪt mɔɹnɪŋstɑɹz blumd ɪn plæntɝz. ðə blɑsəmz wɝnt nɪɹli əz lɑɹdʒ əz ðeɪ ʃəɾ əv bɪn, ən ɔlɹɛɾi ðeɪ wɝ wɪltɪŋ. ðə ɡɑɹɾənɝz kəmpleɪn ðət nʌθɪŋ hɛlpt. aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi, ɡɹæs ən widz wɝ daɪɪŋ ɪn swɑθs, ən ðə pætʃwɝk kwɪlt ə filz ən kɹɑps lʊk dɪpɹɛsɪŋli bɹaʊn. ɪts kʌmɪŋ, ɪleɪn θɔt. ʃi kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn əɹ weɪ, wɔkɪŋ ə pæθ meɪɾ ə spɹɪŋi ɡɹæs, mænɪkjɝɾ ən kɛpt ʃɔɹt. ðə ɡɑɹɾənɝz' ɛfɝts wɝnt wɪθaʊt səm ɹɪzʌls. ðə ɡɹæs hɪɹ wɑz moʊsli ɡɹin, ən ði ɛɹ smɛld ə ðə ɹoʊzɪz ðət woʊv ðɛɹ weɪ ʌp ðə saɪdz ə ðə wɔl. ðoʊz hæd bɹaʊn spɑts ɑn ðɛm, bʌt ðeɪ hæd blumd.

Elayne continued to walk the roof garden. Pink jumpups and white morningstars bloomed in planters. The blossoms weren't nearly as large as they should have been, and already they were wilting. The gardeners complained that nothing helped. Outside the city, grass and weeds were dying in swaths, and the patchwork quilt of fields and crops looked depressingly brown. It is coming, Elayne thought. She continued on her way, walking a path made of springy grass, manicured and kept short. The gardeners' efforts weren't without some results. The grass here was mostly green, and the air smelled of the roses that wove their way up the sides of the wall. Those had brown spots on them, but they had bloomed.

ə tɪŋkəlɪŋ stʃɹim ɹæn θɹu ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɡɑɹɾən, laɪn ɪn kɛɹfəli pleɪst ɹɪvɝ stoʊnz. ðət stʃɹim ɹæn oʊnli wən ʃi vɪzəɾəd; wɔɾɝ hæd tə bi kæɹiɾ ʌp tə ðə sɪstɝn.

A tinkling stream ran through the middle of the garden, lined in carefully placed river stones. That stream ran only when she visited; water had to be carried up to the cistern.

ɪleɪn pɔzd əɾ ənʌðɝ væntədʒ pɔɪnt. eɪ kwin kʊdn tʃuz sɪkluʒən ðə weɪ ə dɔɾɝ- ɛɹ kʊd. bɝdʒɪt wɔkt ʌp bɪsaɪd hɝ. ʃi ɹeɪɾɪd əɹ ɑɹmz əkɹɔs əɹ ɹɛd-koʊɾəd tʃɛst, aɪɪŋ ɪleɪn. "wʌt?" ɪleɪn æskt.

Elayne paused at another vantage point. A Queen couldn't choose seclusion the way a Daughter- Heir could. Birgitte walked up beside her. She raided her arms across her red-coated chest, eyeing Elayne. "What?" Elayne asked.

jəɹ ɪn fʊl vju," bɝdʒɪt sɛd. "ɛniwʌn daʊn ðəɹ wɪð ə baʊ ən ə ɡʊɾ aɪ kəd θɹoʊ ðə neɪʃən ɹaɪt bæk ɪndə ə səksɛʃən wɔɹ."

You're in full view," Birgitte said. "Anyone down there with a bow and a good eye could throw the nation right back into a Succession war."

ɪleɪn ɹoʊld əɹ aɪz. "aɪm seɪf, bɝdʒɪt. nʌθɪŋ wɪl hæpən tə mi." oʊ, wɛl, aɪ əpɑlədʒaɪz,"

Elayne rolled her eyes. "I'm safe, Birgitte. Nothing will happen to me." Oh, well, I apologize,"

bɝdʒɪt sɛd flætli. "ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑɹ lus ən æŋɡɹi wɪð ju, ðə blæk ədʒɑ ɑɹ əndaʊɾɪdli fjʊɹiəs ðət juv kæp-tɝn ðɛɹ eɪdʒəns, ən juv hjumɪlieɪɾɪd vɛɹiəs noʊbəlz u tʃɹaɪd tə siz ðə θɹoʊn fɹəm ju. ɑbviəsli jəɹ ɪn noʊ deɪnʒɝ wʌtsoʊɛvɝ. əl ɹʌn əlɔŋ ən teɪk lʌntʃ, ðɛn."

Birgitte said flatly. "The Forsaken are loose and angry with you, the Black Ajah are undoubtedly furious that you've cap-turned their agents, and you've humiliated various nobles who tried to seize the throne from you. Obviously you're in no danger whatsoever. I'll run along and take lunch, then."

"ju maɪɾ əz wɛl," ɪleɪn snæpt. "bɪkɔz aɪm seɪf. mɪn hæɾ ə vjuɪŋ. maɪ beɪbz wɪl bi bɔɹn hɛlθi. mɪn ɪz nɛvɝ ɹɔŋ, bɝdʒɪt."

"You might as well," Elayne snapped. "Because I am safe. Min had a viewing. My babes will be born healthy. Min is never wrong, Birgitte."

"mɪn sɛd jəɹ beɪbiz wəd bi stʃɹɔŋ ən hɛlθi," bɝdʒɪt sɛd. "nɑt ðət jə wəd bi hɛlθi wən ðeɪ ɝaɪvd."

"Min said your babies would be strong and healthy," Birgitte said. "Not that you would be healthy when they arrived."

"haʊ ɛls wəd ðeɪ kʌm?"

"How else would they come?"

"aɪv sin pipəl nɑkt ɪn ðə hɛd soʊ hɑɹd ðət ðəɹ nɛvɝ ðə seɪm, ɡɝl," bɝdʒɪt sɛd.

"I've seen people knocked in the head so hard that they're never the same, girl," Birgitte said.

"sʌm lɪv fəɹ jɪɹz, bʌt nɛvɝ spik ənʌðɝ wɝɾ ən əv tə bi fɛd bɹɔθ ən lɪv wɪð ə bɪdpæn.

"Some live for years, but never speak another word and have to be fed broth and live with a bedpan.

jə kəd luz ən ɑɹm əɹ tu ən stɪl bɛɹ hɛlθi tʃɪlʒɹən. ən wʌɾ əbaʊt ðə pipəl ɝaʊn ju?

You could lose an arm or two and still bear healthy children. And what about the people around you?

ɡɪv jə noʊ θɔt tə ðə deɪnʒɝ jə kəd kɑz ðɛm?"

Give you no thought to the danger you could cause them?"

"aɪ fil bæd fəɹ vændin ən sɝaɪðə," ɪleɪn sɛd. "æn fəɹ ðoʊz mɛn u daɪd tə ɹɛskju mi.

"I feel bad for Vandene and Sareitha," Elayne said. "And for those men who died to rescue me.

doʊn dɛɹ ɪmplaɪ ðəɾ aɪ fil noʊ ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi fəɹ ðɛm! bʌɾ ə kwin mʌs bi wɪlɪŋ tə æksɛp ðə bɝɾən ə lɛɾɪŋ ʌðɝz daɪ ɪn əɹ neɪm. wi dɪskʌs ðɪs, bɝdʒɪt. wi dɪsaɪɾɪd ðət ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ aɪ cʊɾə noʊn ðət tʃɛzməl ən ði ʌðɝz wəɾ ɝaɪv əz ðeɪ dɪd."

Don't dare imply that I feel no responsibility for them! But a queen must be willing to accept the burden of letting others die in her name. We discussed this, Birgitte. We decided that there was no way I could have known that Chesmal and the others would arrive as they did."

"wi dɪsaɪɾɪd" bɝdʒɪt sɛd θɹu klɛntʃt tiθ, "ðæt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ jus ɑɹɡjuɪŋ ɛni fɝðɝ. bʌɾ aɪ wɑn jə tə kip ɪn maɪn ðəɾ ɛni nʌmbɝ ə θɪŋz kəd stɪl ɡoʊ ɹɔŋ."

"We decided" Birgitte said through clenched teeth, "that there was no use arguing any further. But I want you to keep in mind that any number of things could still go wrong."

"ðeɪ woʊnt," ɪleɪn sɛd, lʊkɪŋ aʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə sɪɾi. "maɪ tʃɪlʒɹən wɪl bi seɪf, ən ðət minz əl bi, tu. wɪv əntɪl ðɛɹ bɝθ."

"They won't," Elayne said, looking out over the city. "My children will be safe, and that means I will be, too. We have until their birth."

bɝdʒɪt lɛɾ aʊɾ ən ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd saɪ. "fulɪʃ, stʌbɝn . . . ." ʃi tʃɹeɪld ɔf əz wʌn ə ðə nɪɹbaɪ ɡɑɹdzwɪmən weɪv tə ɡɛɾ əɹ ətɛnʃən. tu ʌv ðə kɪn stɛpt ɑntu ðə ɹuf. ɪleɪn hæɾ æskt əm tə kʌm mit wɪð hɝ.

Birgitte let out an exasperated sigh. "Foolish, stubborn . . . ." She trailed off as one of the nearby Guardswomen waved to get her attention. Two of the Kin stepped onto the roof. Elayne had asked them to come meet with her.

bɝdʒɪt tʊk ʌp ə pəzɪʃən bɪsaɪd wʌn ə ðə ʃɔɹt tʃɛɹi tʃɹiz, hɝ ɑɹmz foʊldəd. ðə tu kɪnswɪmən wɔɹ ʌnədɔɹn dʒɹɛsəz, sumeɪkoʊ ɪn jɛloʊ, æləz ɪn blu. æləz wɑz ðə ʃɔɹɾɝ ə ðə tu, wɪð ɡɹeɪ stʃɹikɪŋ əɹ bɹaʊn hɛɹ, ən ʃi wɑz wikɝ ɪn ðə paʊɝ, soʊ ʃi hædn sloʊɾ ɪn eɪdʒɪŋ əz mʌtʃ əz sumeɪkoʊ.

Birgitte took up a position beside one of the short cherry trees, her arms folded. The two Kinswomen wore unadorned dresses, Sumeko in yellow, Alise in blue. Alise was the shorter of the two, with gray streaking her brown hair, and she was weaker in the Power, so she hadn't slowed in aging as much as Sumeko.

boʊθ wɪmən hæd ɡɹoʊn mɔɹ fɝm ə stɛp leɪtli. noʊ fɝðɝ kɪnswɪmən hæd dɪsəpɪɹɾ əɹ bɪn mɝɾɝd; kɛɝin hæd bɪn bɪhaɪn ðə kɪlɪŋz ɔl əlɔŋ. ə mɛmbɝ ə ðə blæk, haɪɾɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛm.

Both women had grown more firm of step lately. No further Kinswomen had disappeared or been murdered; Careane had been behind the killings all along. A member of the Black, hiding among them.

laɪt, bʌt θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɪt meɪɾ ɪleɪn ɛs skɪn kɹɔlbækslæʃ "jɔɹ mædʒəsti," æləz sɛd, kɝtsiɪŋ. ʃi spoʊk wɪð ə kɑm, smuð vɔɪs ən ə feɪn tæɹɑbənɝ æksɛnt.

Light, but thinking of it made Elayne s skin crawl\ "Your Majesty," Alise said, curtsying. She spoke with a calm, smooth voice and a faint Taraboner accent.

"jɔɹ mædʒəsti," sumeɪkoʊ sɛɾ əz wɛl, mɪmɪkɪŋ əɹ kəmpænjənz kɝtsi. ðə tu wɝ dɛfɝɛntʃəl - mɔɹ soʊ tə ɪleɪn ðən ðeɪ wɝ tə ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ðiz deɪz. nɪneɪiv hæd ɡɪvən ðə kɪn ɪn dʒɛnɝəl ə bækboʊn ɪn ɹɪɡɑɹdz tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ðoʊ æləz hædn ɛvɝ stʃɹʌk ɪleɪn əz niɾɪŋ ɪt.

"Your Majesty," Sumeko said as well, mimicking her companions curtsy. The two were deferential - more so to Elayne than they were to other Aes Sedai these days. Nynaeve had given the Kin in general a backbone in regards to the Aes Sedai and the White Tower, though Alise hadn't ever struck Elayne as needing it.

dʊɹɪŋ ðə sidʒ, ɪleɪn hæd stɑɹɾəd tə ɹəɡɑɹd ðə kɪnswɪmənz æɾətudz wɪð ənɔɪəns.

During the siege, Elayne had started to regard the Kinswomen's attitudes with annoyance.

ɹisənli, haʊɛvɝ, ʃid bɪn wʌndɝɪŋ. ðeɪ hæɾ ɪkstʃɹimli jusfəl tə hɝ. haʊ haɪ wəd ðɛɹ nufaʊn boʊlnəs lɛɾ ɪleɪn nɑɾəd tə itʃ ə ðə kɪn ɪn tɝn, ðən dʒɛstʃɝd təwɔɹɾ ə tʃɹioʊ ʌv tʃɛɹz ðət hæd bɪn pleɪst ɪn ðə ʃeɪɾ ə ðə dʒɹupɪŋ tʃɛɹi tʃɹiz.

Recently, however, she'd been wondering. They had extremely useful to her. How high would their newfound boldness lead Elayne nodded to each of the Kin in turn, then gestured toward a trio of chairs that had been placed in the shade of the drooping cherry trees.

ðə θɹi siɾəd ðɛmsɛlvz, ðə stʃɹim waɪndɪŋ ɪts kəntʃɹaɪvd weɪ pæst əm tə ðə lɛft. ðəɹ wɑz mɪn ti. ði ʌðɝ tu tʊk ə kʌp itʃ, bʌt wɝ kɛɹfəl tə æd dʒɛnɝəs əmaʊns ə hʌni. ti teɪstəd tɛɹəbəl ðiz deɪz wɪθaʊɾ ɪt.

The three seated themselves, the stream winding its contrived way past them to the left. There was mint tea. The other two took a cup each, but were careful to add generous amounts of honey. Tea tasted terrible these days without it.

"haʊ ɑɹ ðə kɪn?" ɪleɪn æskt.

"How are the Kin?" Elayne asked.

ðə tu wɪmən ɡlænst əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ. blæst. ɪleɪn wɑz biɪŋ tu fɔɹməl wɪð ðɛm. ðeɪ nu sʌmθɪŋ wɑz ʌp.

The two women glanced at each other. Blast. Elayne was being too formal with them. They knew something was up.

"wi ɑɹ wɛl, jəɹ mædʒəsti," æləz sɛd. "ðə fɪɹ simz tə bi livɪŋ moʊst ə ðə wɪmən. ət list, ðoʊz u hæɾ ɪnʌf sɛns tə fil ɪɾ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs. aɪ səpoʊz ðoʊz u dɪdnt wɝ ðə wʌnz u wɛn ɔf ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn ən faʊn ðɛmsɛlvz dɛd."

"We are well, Your Majesty," Alise said. "The fear seems to be leaving most of the women. At least, those who had enough sense to feel it in the first place. I suppose those who didn't were the ones who went off on their own and found themselves dead."

"ɪɾ ɪz ɡʊd nɑt tə hæv tə spɛn soʊ mʌtʃ taɪm hilɪŋ, iðɝ," sumeɪkoʊ noʊɾəd. "ɪt wɑz bɪkʌmɪŋ vɛɹi fətiɡɪŋ. soʊ mɛni wundəd, deɪ æftɝ deɪ." ʃi ɡɹɪməst.

"It is good not to have to spend so much time Healing, either," Sumeko noted. "It was becoming very fatiguing. So many wounded, day after day." She grimaced.

æləz wɑz meɪɾ ə staʊɾɝ mətɪɹiəl. ʃi sɪpt əɹ ti, feɪs maɪld. nɑt kɑm ən fɹoʊzən, laɪk ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. θɔtfəl ən wɔɹm, jɛt ɹɪzɝvd. ðət wɑz ən ædvæntɪdʒ ðiz wɪmən hæd ðət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd nɑt - ðeɪ kəd bi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd wɪθaʊɾ əz mʌtʃ səspɪʃən, əz ðeɪ wɝ nɑt taɪd dɝɛkli tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. bʌt ðeɪ dɪdn əv ɪts əθɔɹəɾi, iðɝ.

Alise was made of stouter material. She sipped her tea, face mild. Not calm and frozen, like an Aes Sedai. Thoughtful and warm, yet reserved. That was an advantage these women had that the Aes Sedai did not - they could be regarded without as much suspicion, as they were not tied directly to the White Tower. But they didn't have its authority, either.

"ju kən sɛns ðəɾ aɪ hæv sʌmθɪŋ tə æsk ə ju," ɪleɪn sɛd, miɾɪŋ æləzəz aɪz.

"You can sense that I have something to ask of you," Elayne said, meeting Alise's eyes.

"wi kæn?" sumeɪkoʊ æskt, saʊndɪŋ sɝpɹaɪzd. pɝhæps ɪleɪn hæd ɡɪvən əɹ tu mʌtʃ kɹɛɾət.

"We can?" Sumeko asked, sounding surprised. Perhaps Elayne had given her too much credit.

æləz nɑɾəd ɪn ə meɪtʃɹənli weɪ. "juv æsk mʌtʃ ʌv əs waɪl wiv bɪn hɪɹ, jəɹ mædʒəsti.

Alise nodded in a matronly way. "You've asked much of us while we've been here, Your Majesty.

noʊ mɔɹ ðən aɪ fɛl jə hæɾ ə ɹaɪt tə æsk. soʊ fɑɹ." aɪ hæv tʃɹaɪd tə wɛlkəm jə ɪn keɪɛmlɪn," ɪleɪn sɛd. "æz aɪ ɹilaɪz jə kən nɛvɝ ɹɪtɝn hoʊm, nɑt waɪl ðə sintʃæn ɹul ɛbu dɑɹ."

No more than I felt you had a right to ask. So far." I have tried to welcome you in Caemlyn," Elayne said. "As I realize you can never return home, not while the Seanchan rule Ebou Dar."

ðəɾ ɪz tʃɹu," æləz əɡɹid. "bʌt wʌn kən hɑɹdli kɔl ɛbu dɑɹ əɹ hoʊm. ɪt wɑz mɪɹli ə pleɪs wɛɹ wi faʊn aʊɝsɛlvz. lɛs ə hoʊm, mɔɹ ə nəsɛsəɾi. mɛni ʌv əs ɹoʊteɪɾɪd ɪn ən aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi ɛniweɪ, tə əvɔɪd noʊɾəs."

That is true," Alise agreed. "But one can hardly call Ebou Dar our home. It was merely a place where we found ourselves. Less a home, more a necessity. Many of us rotated in and out of the city anyway, to avoid notice."

"hæv jə kənsɪɾɝd wɛɹ jəl steɪ naʊ?"

"Have you considered where you will stay now?"

"wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn," sumeɪkoʊ sɛd kwɪkli. "nɪneɪiv sədaɪ sɛd - "

"Were going to Tar Valon," Sumeko said quickly. "Nynaeve Sedai said - "

"aɪm sɝɾən ðəɹ wɪl bi ə pleɪs fəɹ səm ə jə ðɛɹ," ɪleɪn ɪntɝ- dʒɛktɪd. "ðoʊz u wɪʃ tə bɪkʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɛɡwin wɪl bi iɡɝ tə ɡɪv ə sɛkən tʃæns tə ɛni kɪn u wɪʃ tə tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn fəɹ ðə ʃɔl. bʌt wʌɾ ə ðə ɹɛst ə ju?"

"I'm certain there will be a place for some of you there," Elayne inter- jected. "Those who wish to become Aes Sedai. Egwene will be eager to give a second chance to any Kin who wish to try again for the shawl. But what of the rest of you?"

"wi spoʊk ə ðɪs," æləz sɛd kɛɹfəli, aɪz nɛɹoʊɪŋ. "wi wɪl bi kʌm əsoʊsieɪɾəd wɪð ðə taʊɝ, ə pleɪs fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ɹɪtaɪɹ."

"We spoke of this," Alise said carefully, eyes narrowing. "We will b come associated with the Tower, a place for Aes Sedai to retire."

"ʃʊɹli jəl nɑt muv tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ðoʊ. wʌt ɡʊd wəd tieɪtʃ kɪn bi əz ə pleɪs tə ɹɪtaɪɹ fɹəm ɛɛs sədaɪ pɑlətɪks ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ soʊ nɪɹ tieɪtʃ waɪt taʊɝ?"

"Surely you will not move to Tar Valon, though. What good would th Kin be as a place to retire from Aes Sedai politics if they are so near th White Tower?"

"wi hæɾ əsumd wi wəd ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ," æləz sɛd.

"We had assumed we would remain here," Alise said.

"ðæt wɑz maɪ əsʌmpʃən əz wɛl," ɪleɪn sɛd kɛɹfəli. "bʌɾ əsəmp-. ʃənz ɑɹ wik. aɪ wɪʃ tə ɡɪv jə pɹɑməsəz ɪnstɛd. æftɝ ɔl, ɪf jə wɝ tə ɹɪmeɪn ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, aɪ si noʊ ɹizən tə nɑɾ ɔfɝ jə səpɔɹt dɝɛkli fɹəm ðə kɹaʊn."

"That was my assumption as well," Elayne said carefully. "But assump-. tions are weak. I wish to give you promises instead. After all, if you were to remain in Caemlyn, I see no reason to not offer you support directly from the Crown."

"æt wʌt kɑst?" æləz æskt. sumeɪkoʊ wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ wɪð ə kənfjuz fɹaʊn.

"At what cost?" Alise asked. Sumeko was watching with a confused frown.

"nɑt mʌtʃ ʌv wʌn," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ɹɪli, nɑɾ ə kɑst əɾ ɔl. ən əkeɪʒənəl feɪvɝ, əz juv dʌn ðə kɹaʊn ɪn ðə pæst."

"Not much of one," Elayne said. "Really, not a cost at all. An occasional favor, as you have done the Crown in the past."

ðə ɡɑɹɾən fɛl stɪl. feɪn kɔlz fɹəm ðə sɪɾi bɪloʊ ɹoʊz ʌp ɪndə ði ɛɹ, ən ðə bɹæntʃəz ʃɪvɝɾ ɪn ðə wɪnd, dʒɹɑpɪŋ ə fju bɹaʊn livz bɪtwin ɪleɪn ən ðə kɪn.

The garden fell still. Faint calls from the city below rose up into the air, and the branches shivered in the wind, dropping a few brown leaves between Elayne and the Kin.

"ðæt saʊnz deɪnʒɝəs," æləz sɛd, teɪkɪŋ ə sɪp ə hɝ ti. "ʃʊɹli jəɹ nɑt sədʒɛstɪŋ ðət wi sɛɾ ʌp ə ɹaɪvəl waɪt taʊɝ hɪɹ, ɪn keɪɛmlɪn."

"That sounds dangerous," Alise said, taking a sip of her tea. "Surely you're not suggesting that we set up a rival White Tower here, in Caemlyn."

"nʌθɪŋ ə ðə sɔɹt," ɪleɪn sɛd kwɪkli. "aɪ æm ɛɛs sədaɪ maɪsɛlf, æftɝ ɔl. ən ɛɡwin əz spoʊkən ə lɛɾɪŋ ðə kɪn kəntɪnju əz ðeɪv bɪfɔɹ, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ æksɛpt əɹ əθɔɹəɾi."

"Nothing of the sort," Elayne said quickly. "I am Aes Sedai myself, after all. And Egwene has spoken of letting the Kin continue as they have before, so long as they accept her authority."

"aɪm nɑt sɝɾən wi wɑnə 'kəntɪnju əz wɪv bɪfɔɹ,'" æləz sɛd. "ðə waɪt taʊɝ lɛft əs tə lɪv əɹ laɪvz ɪn tɛɹɝ ðət wi wəd bi dɪskʌvɝd. bʌɾ ɔl ðə waɪl, ðeɪ wɝ juzɪŋ ʌs. ðə mɔɹ wi kənsɪɾɝ ðæt, ðə lɛs . . . əmjuz ðət meɪks ʌs."

"I'm not certain we want to 'continue as we have before,'" Alise said. "The White Tower left us to live our lives in terror that we would be discovered. But all the while, they were using us. The more we consider that, the less . . . amused that makes us."

"spik fəɹ jɝsɛlf, æləz," sumeɪkoʊ sɛd. "aɪ ɪntɛn tə bi tɛstəɾ ən ɹɪtɝn tə ðə taʊɝ. əl dʒɔɪn ðə jɛloʊ, mɑɹk maɪ wɝdz."

"Speak for yourself, Alise," Sumeko said. "I intend to be tested and return to the Tower. I will join the Yellow, mark my words."

"pɝhæps, bʌt ðeɪ woʊn əv mi," æləz sɛd. "aɪm tu wik ɪn ðə paʊɝ. aɪ woʊn æksɛp səm hæfweɪ mɛʒɝ, fɔɹs tə skɹeɪp ən baʊ ɛvɹi taɪm ə sɪstɝ kʌmz əlɔŋ ən wɑns mi tə wɑʃ əɹ kloʊðɪŋ. bʌɾ aɪ woʊn stɑp tʃænəlɪŋ, iðɝ. aɪ woʊnt ɡɪv ɪɾ ʌp. ɛɡwin sədaɪ hæz spoʊkən ə lɛɾɪŋ ðə kɪn kəntɪnju, bʌɾ ɪf wi du, wəd bi wi bi eɪbəl tə wɝk ðə wʌn paʊɝ oʊpənli?"

"Perhaps, but they won't have me," Alise said. "I'm too weak in the Power. I won't accept some halfway measure, forced to scrape and bow every time a sister comes along and wants me to wash her clothing. But I won't stop channeling, either. I won't give it up. Egwene Sedai has spoken of letting the Kin continue, but if we do, would be we be able to work the One Power openly?"

"aɪ əsum jə wəd bi eɪbəl tə," ɪleɪn sɛd. "mʌtʃ ə ðɪs wɑz ɛɡwinz aɪdiə. ʃi sɝɾənli wʊdn sɛn ɛɛs sədaɪ tə jə tə ɹɪtaɪɹ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ tə bi fɔɹbɪɾən tə tʃænəl. noʊ, ðə deɪz ʌv wɪmən aʊtsaɪd ðə taʊɝ tʃænəlɪŋ ɪn sikɹəɾ əv pæst. ðə wɪndfɪndɝz, ði il waɪz wʌnz, hæv pɹuvən ðət taɪmz mʌs tʃeɪnʒ."

"I assume you would be able to," Elayne said. "Much of this was Egwene's idea. She certainly wouldn't send Aes Sedai to you to retire if they were to be forbidden to channel. No, the days of women outside the Tower channeling in secret have passed. The Windfinders, the Aiel Wise Ones, have proven that times must change."

"pɝhæps," æləz sɛd. "bʌt ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ sɝvəsəz tə ðə kɹaʊn ʌv ændɝ ɪz ə vɛɹi dɪfɹən mæɾɝ."

"perhaps," Alise said. "But giving our services to the Crown of Andor is a very different matter."

"wi wəd meɪk sɝɾən nɑt tə kəmpit wɪð ðə taʊɝz ɪntʃɹəsts," flævn sɛd. "æn jə wəɾ æksɛp ði eɪmɹlɪnz əθɔɹəɾi. soʊ wʌɾ ɪz ðə ɹɑbləm? ɛɛs sədaɪ pɹəvaɪd sɝvəs tə mɑnɑɹks əkɹɔs ðə lænd."

"We would make certain not to compete with the Tower's interests," Flavne said. "And you would accept the Aymrlin's authority. So what is the roblem? Aes Sedai provide service to monarchs across the land."

æləz sɪpt əɹ ti. "jɔɹ ɔfɝ əz mɛɹət. bʌɾ ɪt dɪpɛnz ɑn ðə neɪtʃɝ ə ðə feɪvɝz ɹikwaɪɝd baɪ ðə kɹaʊn ʌv ændɝ."

Alise sipped her tea. "Your offer has merit. But it depends on the nature of the favors required by the Crown of Andor."

"aɪ wəɾ oʊnli æsk tu θɪŋz ə ju," ɪleɪn sɛd. "tʃɹævlɪŋ ən hilɪŋ. jə nid nɑɾ ɛntɝ əɹ kɑnflɪks, jə nid nɑt bi pɑɹɾ ʌv əɹ pɑlətɪks. sɪmpli əɡɹi tə hil maɪ pipəl u ɑɹ sɪk, ən tə əsaɪn ə ɡɹup ʌv wɪmən itʃ deɪ tə kɹieɪt ɡeɪtweɪz wən ðə kɹaʊn wɪʃɪz."

"I would only ask two things of you," Elayne said. "Traveling and Healing. You need not enter our conflicts, you need not be part of our politics. Simply agree to Heal my people who are sick, and to assign a group of women each day to create gateways when the crown wishes."

"ðæt stɪl saʊnz ən ɑfəl lɑt laɪk jəɹ oʊn waɪt taʊɝ," æləz sɛd. sumeɪkoʊ wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ.

"That still sounds an awful lot like your own White Tower," Alise said. Sumeko was frowning.

"noʊ, noʊ," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ðə waɪt taʊɝ minz əθɔɹəɾi, pɑlətɪks. jə wəd bi sʌmθɪŋ ɛls ɪntaɪɝli. ɪmædʒən ə pleɪs ɪn keɪɛmlɪn wɛɹ ɛni pɝsən kən kʌm tə ɹəsiv hilɪŋ, fɹi ʌv tʃɑɹdʒ.

"No, no," Elayne said. "The White Tower means authority, politics. You would be something else entirely. Imagine a place in Caemlyn where any person can come to receive Healing, free of charge.

ɪmædʒən ə sɪɾi fɹi ʌv dɪziz. ɪmædʒən ə wɝld wɛɹ fud kən tʃɹævəl ɪnstənli tə ðoʊz u niɾ ɪt."

Imagine a city free of disease. Imagine a world where food can travel instantly to those who need it."

"æn ə kwin u kən sɛn tʃɹups wɛɹɛvɝ ʃi nidz," æləz sɛd. "huz soʊlʒɝz kən faɪt wʌn deɪ, ðən bi fɹi ʌv wunz ðə nɛkst. ə kwin u kən ɝn ə taɪɾi pɹɑfət baɪ tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ mɝtʃəns fəɹ æksɛs tə hɝ ɡeɪtweɪz." ʃi tʊk ə sɪp ə hɝ ti.

"And a queen who can send troops wherever she needs," Alise said. "Whose soldiers can fight one day, then be free of wounds the next. A queen who can earn a tidy profit by charging merchants for access to her gateways." She took a sip of her tea.

"jɛs," ɪleɪn ədmɪɾəd. ðoʊ ʃi wɑzn sɝɾən haʊ ʃi wɑz gɑnə kənvɪns ɛɡwin tə lɛɾ əɹ də ðət pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt.

"Yes," Elayne admitted. Though she wasn't certain how she was going to convince Egwene to let her do that part of it.

"wi wɪl wɑn hæf," æləz sɛd. "hæf ʌv ɛniθɪŋ jə tʃɑɹdʒ fəɹ tʃɹævlɪŋ əɹ hilɪŋ."

"We will want half," Alise said. "Half of anything you charge for Traveling or Healing."

hilɪŋ ɪz fɹi," ɪleɪn sɛd fɝmli. "fɔɹ ɛniwʌn u kʌmz, ɹəɡɑɹdləs əɹ steɪʃən. pipəl ɑɹ tʃɹiɾəd ɪn ɔɹɾɝ ə ðə sɪvɛɹɪɾi ʌv ðɛɹ eɪlmənt, nɑɾ ɪn ɔɹɾɝ ə ðɛɹ ɹæŋk."

Healing is free," Elayne said firmly. "For anyone who comes, regardless or station. People are treated in order of the severity of their ailment, not in order of their rank."

"aɪ kəɾ əɡɹi tə ðɪs," æləz sɛd.

"I could agree to this," Alise said.

sumeɪkoʊ tɝn tə hɝ, aɪz waɪd. "ju kænɑt spik fəɹ ʌs. jə jɝsɛlf θɹu ɪn maɪ feɪs ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl hævɪŋ dɪzɑlvd, naʊ ðət wɪv lɛft ɛbu dɑɹ. bɪsaɪdz, baɪ ðə ɹul - "aɪ spik oʊnli fəɹ maɪsɛlf, sumeɪkoʊ," æləz sɛd. "æn ðoʊz u wəd mi. ðə kɪn əz wi nu ðɛm ɑɹ noʊ mɔɹ. wi wɝ dɑməneɪɾəd baɪ əɹ nid tə ɹɪmeɪn sikɹət, ən ðəɾ ɪz ɡɔn naʊ."

Sumeko turned to her, eyes wide. "You cannot speak for us. You yourself threw in my face the Knitting Circle having dissolved, now that we have left Ebou Dar. Besides, by the Rule - "I speak only for myself, Sumeko," Alise said. "And those who would me. The Kin as we knew them are no more. We were dominated by our need to remain secret, and that is gone now."

sumeɪkoʊ ɡɹu saɪlənt.

Sumeko grew silent.

"ju min tə dʒɔɪn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, maɪ fɹɛnd," æləz sɛd, leɪɪŋ ə hæn ɑn əɹ ɑɹm. "bʌt ðəl nɑɾ əv mi, nɔɹ wɪl aɪ hæv ðɛm. aɪ nid sɔɹn θɪŋ ɛls, ən ʌðɝz wɪl əz wɛl."

"You mean to join the Aes Sedai, my friend," Alise said, laying a hand on her arm. "But they will not have me, nor will I have them. I need sorn thing else, and others will as well."

"bʌt tə taɪ jʊɹsɛlvz tə ðə kɹaʊn ʌv ændɝ. . . ."

"But to tie yourselves to the Crown of Andor. . . ."

"wi taɪ aʊɝsɛlvz tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ," æləz sɛd. "bʌt lɪv ɪn keɪɛm-lɪn. boʊθ əv ðɛɹ bɛnəfɪts. wi ɑɹən stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə stæn ɑn əɹ oʊn ændɝ ɪz əz ɡʊɾ ə pleɪs əz ɛni. ɪts ðə feɪvɝ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən ðə feɪvɝ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. moʊsli, ɪts hɪɹ, ən soʊ ɑɹ wi."

"We tie ourselves to the White Tower," Alise said. "But live in Caem-lyn. Both have their benefits. We aren't strong enough to stand on our own Andor is as good a place as any. It has the favor of the White Tower, and the favor of the Dragon Reborn. Mostly, it is here, and so are we."

"ju kən ɹiɔɹɡənaɪz," ɪleɪn sɛd, ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɪksaɪɾəd. "ðə ɹul kən bi kɹæftɪɾ ənu. jə kən dɪsaɪd tə lɛt kɪn mɛɹi naʊ, ɪf jə wɪʃ. aɪ θɪŋk ðət wəd bi fəɹ ðə bɛst."

"You can reorganize," Elayne said, growing excited. "The Rule can be crafted anew. You can decide to let Kin marry now, if you wish. I think that would be for the best."

"waɪ?" æləz æskt.

"Why?" Alise asked.

"bɪkɔz ɪɾəl taɪ ðɛm daʊn," ɪleɪn ɪkspleɪnd. "ðæt wɪl meɪk əm lɛs ʌv ə θɹɛt tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ɪɾəl hɛlp dɪfɝɛnʃieɪt ju. ɪts sʌmθɪŋ ðət fju wɪmən ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ du, ən ɪt ɡɪvz jə sʌmθɪŋ tə meɪk ðə kɪn mɔɹ ətʃɹæktɪv əz ən ɑpʃən."

"Because it will tie them down," Elayne explained. "That will make them less of a threat to the White Tower. It will help differentiate you. It is something that few women in the White Tower do, and it gives you something to make the Kin more attractive as an option."

æləz nɑɾəd, θɔtfəl; sumeɪkoʊ sim tə bi kʌmɪŋ ɝaʊnd. ɪleɪn wɑz sɑɹi tə ədmɪt ðət ʃi wʊdn mɪs ðə wʊmən wən ʃi lɛft. ɪleɪn ɪntɛndəd tə pʊʃ əm tə ɹistʃɹʌktʃɝ haʊ ðeɪ tʃoʊz liɾɝz. ɪt wəd bi mʌtʃ mɔɹ kənvinjən ɪf ʃi kəd wɝk wɪð wʌn laɪk æləz, əz əpoʊz tə humɛvɝ hæpən tə bi ði oʊldəst əmʌŋ ðɛm.

Alise nodded, thoughtful; Sumeko seemed to be coming around. Elayne was sorry to admit that she wouldn't miss the woman when she left. Elayne intended to push them to restructure how they chose leaders. It would be much more convenient if she could work with one like Alise, as opposed to whomever happened to be the oldest among them.

"aɪ stɪl wɝi əbaʊt ði æmɪɝlɪn," æləz sɛd. "ɛɛs sədaɪ də nɑt tʃɑɹdʒ fəɹ sɝvəsəz. wʌt wɪl ʃi seɪ ɪf wi stɑɹt duɪŋ soʊ?"

"I still worry about the Amyrlin," Alise said. "Aes Sedai do not charge for services. What will she say if we start doing so?"

"aɪ wɪl spik wɪð ɛɡwin," ɪleɪn ɹɪpiɾɪd. "aɪm sɝɾən aɪ kən kənvɪns əɹ ðət ðə kɪn, ən ændɝ, ɑɹ noʊ θɹɛt tə hɝ."

"I will speak with Egwene," Elayne repeated. "I'm certain I can convince her that the Kin, and Andor, are no threat to her."

hoʊpfəli. ðəɹ wɑz ə tʃæns fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl ɪn ðə kɪn, ə tʃæns fəɹ ændɝ tə hæv kɑnstən ən ɪnɪkspɛnsɪv æksɛs tə ɡeɪtweɪz. ðət wəd pʊɾ əɹ ɑn nɪɹli ikwəl ɡɹaʊnd wɪð ðə sintʃæn.

Hopefully. There was a chance for something incredible in the Kin, a chance for Andor to have constant and inexpensive access to gateways. That would put her on nearly equal ground with the Seanchan.

ʃi spoʊk wɪð ðə wɪmən fəɹ ə taɪm lɔŋɡɝ, meɪkɪŋ sɝɾən ðeɪ fɛlt ʃi wɑz ɡɪvɪŋ əm du ətɛnʃən. ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ʃi dɪsmɪs ðɛm, bʌt faʊn hɝsɛlf lɪŋɡɝɪŋ ɪn ðə ɡɑɹɾən, stændɪŋ bɪtwin tu plæntɝz hoʊldɪŋ bluɪbɛlz, ðɛɹ klʌstɝz ə taɪni, væsəlaɪk blɑsəmz dʒɹupɪŋ ən wɪɡəlɪŋ ɪn ðə bɹiz. ʃi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə lʊk ət ðə plæntɝ bɪsaɪd ðɛm, wɪtʃ wɑz ɛmpti. ðə bluɪbɛlz ðəɹ hæd flaʊɝɾ ɪn ðə kʌlɝ ə blʌd, ən hæɾ æktʃəli  blɛd sʌmθɪŋ ɹɛd wən kʌt. ðə ɡɑɹɾənɝz hæd pʊld əm aʊt.

She spoke with the women for a time longer, making certain they felt she was giving them due attention. Eventually, she dismissed them, but found herself lingering in the garden, standing between two planters holding bluebells, their clusters of tiny, vaselike blossoms drooping and wiggling in the breeze. She tried not to look at the planter beside them, which was empty. The bluebells there had flowered in the color of blood, and had actually bled something red when cut. The gardeners had pulled them out.

ðə sintʃæn wəd kʌm fəɹ ændɝ ɪvɛntʃəwəli. baɪ ðɛn, ɹændz ɑɹmiz wəd laɪkli bi wikən ən bɹoʊkən fɹəm ðə faɪɾɪŋ, ðɛɹ liɾɝ pɑsəbli dɛd. əɡɛn, ɪt meɪɾ əɹ hɑɹt twɪs tə kənsɪɾɝ ðæt, bʌt ʃi kʊdnt ʃaɪ əweɪ fɹəm ðə tʃɹuθ.

The Seanchan would come for Andor eventually. By then, Rands armies would likely be weakened and broken from the fighting, their leader possibly dead. Again, it made her heart twist to consider that, but she couldn't shy away from the truth.

ændɝ wəd bi ə pɹaɪz tə ðə sintʃæn. ðə maɪnz ən ɹɪtʃ lænz ɑɾ əɹ ɹɛlm wəd tɛmp ðɛm, əz wəd ðə pɹɑksɪməɾi tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. bɪɑn ðæt, ʃi səspɛktəd ðət ðoʊz u kleɪm tə bi ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz sʌk-sɛsɝz wəd nɛvɝ bi sæɾəsfaɪd əntɪl ðeɪ hɛld ɔl ðət hæd wʌns bɪlɔŋ tə ðɛɹ ænsɛstɝ.

Andor would be a prize to the Seanchan. The mines and rich lands ot her realm would tempt them, as would the proximity to Tar Valon. Beyond that, she suspected that those who claimed to be Artur Hawkwing's suc-cessors would never be satisfied until they held all that had once belonged to their ancestor.

ɪleɪn lʊkt aʊɾ oʊvɝ əɹ neɪʃən. hɝ neɪʃən. fʊl ə ðoʊz u tʃɹʌstɪɾ ɪn əɹ tə pɹətɛkt ən dɪfɛn ðɛm. mɛni hu hæd səpɔɹɾəd əɹ kleɪm tə ðə θɹoʊn hæd hæd lɪɾəl feɪθ ɪn hɝ. bʌt ʃi wɑz ðɛɹ bɛst ɑp-ʃən ðɛɹ oʊnli ɑpʃən. ʃi wəd ʃoʊ ðɛm ðə wɪzdəm ə ðɛɹ tʃɔɪs.

Elayne looked out over her nation. Her nation. Full of those who trusted in her to protect and defend them. Many who had supported her claim to the throne had had little faith in her. But she was their best op-tion their only option. She would show them the wisdom of their choice.

sɪkjʊɹɪŋ ðə kɪn wəd bi wʌn stɛp. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ðə sintʃæn wəd bi eɪbəl tə tʃɹævəl. ɔl ðeɪ niɾəd tə də wɑz kæptʃɝ wʌn wʊmən u nu ðə wivz, ən sun itʃ ən ɛvɹi deɪmeɪn wɪð ðə ɹɛkwəzət stʃɹɛŋkθ wəd bi eɪbəl tə kɹieɪt ðə pɔɹɾəlz. ɪleɪn niɾəd æksɛs tə ðɛm əz wɛl.

Securing the Kin would be one step. Sooner or later, the Seanchan would be able to Travel. All they needed to do was capture one woman who knew the weaves, and soon each and every damane with the requisite strength would be able to create the portals. Elayne needed access to them as well.

wʌt ʃi dɪdn hæv, haʊɛvɝ, wɝ tʃænlɝz tə juz ɪn bæɾəl. ʃi nu ʃi kʊdn æsk ðɪs ə ðə kɪn. ðeɪd nɛvɝ əɡɹi tə ɪt, nɔɹ wəɾ ɛɡwin. nɔɹ wəɾ ɪleɪn hɝsɛlf. fɔɹsɪŋ ə wʊmən tə juz ðə paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən wəd meɪk əɹ noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən ðə sintʃæn ðɛmsɛlvz.

What she didn't have, however, were channelers to use in battle. She knew she couldn't ask this of the Kin. They'd never agree to it, nor would Egwene. Nor would Elayne herself. Forcing a woman to use the Power as a weapon would make her no better than the Seanchan themselves.

ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ɪleɪn nu fʊl wɛl ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən wɪmən juzɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ kəd kɑz.

Unfortunately, Elayne knew full well the destruction women using the One Power could cause.

ʃid bɪn baʊn ɪn ə wæɡən waɪl bɝdʒɪt lɛd ði ətæk ɑn ðə blæk ədʒɑ hu hæd kɪdnæpt əɹ hɪɹ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, bʌt ʃid sin ɪts æftɝmæθ. hʌnʒɹədz dɛd, hʌnʒɹədz mɔɹ wundəd, dʌzənz bɝn əweɪ. smoʊkɪŋ, twɪstəd kɔɹpsəz.

She'd been bound in a wagon while Birgitte led the attack on the Black Ajah who had kidnapped her here in Caemlyn, but she'd seen its aftermath. Hundreds dead, hundreds more wounded, dozens burned away. Smoking, twisted corpses.

ʃi niɾəd sʌmθɪŋ. ən ɛdʒ əɡɛns ðə sintʃæn. sʌmθɪŋ tə bæləns ðɛɹ tʃænlɝz ɪn kɑmbæt. ði oʊnli θɪŋ ʃi kəd θɪŋk ʌv wɑz ðə blæk taʊɝ. ɪt wɑz ɑn ændɝz sɔɪl. ʃid toʊld əm ðət ʃi kənsɪɾɝd əm pɑɹɾ ə hɝ neɪʃən, bʌt soʊ fɑɹ ʃid ɡɔn noʊ fɝðɝ ðən sɛndɪŋ ɪnspɛkʃən pɑɹɾiz.

She needed something. An edge against the Seanchan. Something to balance their channelers in combat. The only thing she could think of was the Black Tower. It was on Andor's soil. She'd told them that she considered them part of her nation, but so far she'd gone no further than sending inspection parties.

wʌt wəd hæpən tə ðɛm ɪf ɹænd daɪd? dɛɹd ʃi tʃɹaɪ tə kleɪm ðɛm? dɛɹd ʃi weɪt fəɹ sʌmwʌn ɛls tə?

What would happen to them if Rand died? Dared she try to claim them? Dared she wait for someone else to?


tʃæptɝ eɪtin


CHAPTER 18

ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ə ðɪs pleɪs


The Strength of This Place

pɛɹɪn ɹæn θɹu ðə dɑɹknəs. tʃɹeɪlz ʌv wɔɾɝi mɪs bɹʌʃt ɪz feɪs ən kəndɛnst ɪn ɪz bɪɹd. hɪz maɪnd wɑz fɑɡi, dɪstənt. wɛɹ wɑz i ɡoʊɪŋ? wʌt wɑz i duɪŋ? waɪ wɑz i ɹʌnɪŋ?

Perrin ran through the darkness. Trails of watery mist brushed his face and condensed in his beard. His mind was foggy, distant. Where was he going? What was he doing? Why was he running?

hi ɹɔɹɾ ən tʃɑɹdʒd, ɹɪpɪŋ θɹu ðə veɪl dɑɹknəs ən bɝstɪŋ ɪndə oʊpən ɛɹ. hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən lændəɾ ɑn ðə tɑp ʌv ə stip hɪl kʌvɝd wɪð ʃɔɹt, pætʃi ɡɹæs, wɪð ə ɹɪŋ ə tʃɹiz əɾ ɪts beɪs. ðə skaɪ ɹʌmbəld ən tʃɝnd wɪð klaʊdz, laɪk ə bɔɪlɪŋ pɑɾ ə tɑɹ.

He roared and charged, ripping through the veiled darkness and bursting into open air. He took a deep breath and landed on the top of a steep hill covered with short, patchy grass, with a ring of trees at its base. The sky rumbled and churned with clouds, like a boiling pot of tar.

hi wɑz ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. hɪz bɑɾi slʌmbɝɾ ɪn ðə ɹil wɝld, ɑn ðɪs hɪltɑp, wɪð feɪl. hi smaɪld, bɹiðɪŋ dipli. hɪz pɹɑbləmz hæd nɑt dɪmɪnɪʃt. ɪn fækt, wɪð ðə waɪtkloʊk ʌltəmeɪɾəm, ðeɪ simd mæɡnəfaɪd. bʌɾ ɔl wɑz wɛl wɪð feɪl. ðət sɪmpəl fæk tʃeɪnʒd soʊ mʌtʃ. wɪð əɹ əɾ ɪz saɪd, hi kəd də ɛniθɪŋ.

He was in the wolf dream. His body slumbered in the real world, on this hilltop, with Faile. He smiled, breathing deeply. His problems had not diminished. In fact, with the Whitecloak ultimatum, they seemed magnified. But all was well with Faile. That simple fact changed so much. With her at his side, he could do anything.

hi lɛp daʊn fɹəm ðə hɪlsaɪɾ ən kɹɔs ði oʊpən ɛɹiə wɛɹ ɪz ɑɹmi kæmpt. ðeɪ hæd bɪn hɪɹ lɔŋ ɪnʌf ðət saɪnz hæɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. tɛns ɹəflɛktəd ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld, ðoʊ ðɛɹ flæps wɝ ɪn ə dɪfɹən pəzɪʃən itʃ taɪm i lʊkt ət ðɛm. kʊk-faɪɝ pɪts ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɹʌts ɪn ðə pæθweɪz, əkeɪʒənəl bɪts ə ɹɛfjus əɹ dɪskɑɹɾɪd tulz. ðiz wəd pɑp ɪndə ɛɡzɪstəns, ðən vænɪʃ.

He leaped down from the hillside and crossed the open area where his army camped. They had been here long enough that signs had appeared in the wolf dream. Tents reflected the waking world, though their flaps were in a different position each time he looked at them. Cook-fire pits in the ground, ruts in the pathways, occasional bits of refuse or discarded tools. These would pop into existence, then vanish.

hi muv kwɪkli θɹu ðə kæmp, itʃ stɛp teɪkɪŋ ɪm tɛn peɪsɪz. wʌns i maɪɾ əv faʊn ðə læk ə pipəl ɪn ðə kæmp ɪɹi, bʌɾ i wɑz əkʌstəm tə ðə wʊlf dʒɹim naʊ. ðɪs wɑz nætʃɹəl.

He moved quickly through the camp, each step taking him ten paces. Once he might have found the lack of people in the camp eerie, but he was accustomed to the wolf dream now. This was natural.

pɛɹɪn əpɹoʊtʃt ðə stætʃu ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə kæmp, ðən lʊkt ʌp ət ði eɪdʒ-pɑk stoʊn, oʊvɝɡɹoʊn wɪð laɪkən ə blæk, ɔɹənʒ ən ɡɹin. ðə stætʃu mʌst əv bɪn poʊzd ɑdli, ɪf ɪt hæd fɔlən ɪn sətʃ ə weɪ. ɪɾ ɔlmoʊs lʊkt əz ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn kɹieɪɾəd ðɪs weɪ - ən ɪnɔɹməs ɑɹm bɝstɪŋ fɹəm ðə loʊm.

Perrin approached the statue at the side of the camp, then looked up at the age-pocked stone, overgrown with lichen of black, orange and green. The statue must have been posed oddly, if it had fallen in such a way. It almost looked as if it had been created this way - an enormous arm bursting from the loam.

pɛɹɪn tɝn tə ðə saʊθist, təwɔɹd wɛɹ ðə waɪtkloʊk kæmp wəd bi faʊnd. hi hæd tə dil wɪð ðɛm. hi wɑz ɪnkɹisɪŋli sɝɾən -  nfɪɾənt, ivən - ðəɾ i kəd nɑt kəntɪnju əntɪl i hæd kənfɹʌntəd ðiz ʃædoʊz fɹəm ðə pæst.

Perrin turned to the southeast, toward where the Whitecloak camp would be found. He had to deal with them. He was increasingly certain -  nfident, even - that he could not continue until he had confronted these shadows from the past.

ðəɹ wɑz wʌn weɪ tə dil wɪð əm fəɹ sɝɾən. ə kɛɹfəl tʃɹæp juzɪŋ ði æʃəmən ən waɪz wʌnz, ən pɛɹɪn kəd hɪt ðə tʃɪlʒɹən soʊ hɑɹd ðət ðeɪ ʃæɾɝd. hi kəd meɪbi ivən dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðɛm pɝmənənli əz ə ɡɹup.

There was one way to deal with them for certain. A careful trap using the Asha'man and Wise Ones, and Perrin could hit the Children so hard that they shattered. He could maybe even destroy them permanently as a group.

hi hæd ðə minz, ði ɑpɝtunəɾi, ən ðə moʊɾəveɪʃən. noʊ mɔɹ fɪɹ ɪn ðə lænd, noʊ mɔɹ waɪtkloʊk mɑk tʃɹaɪəlz. hi lɛp fɔɹwɝd, sɔɹɪŋ θɝɾi fiɾ ən fɔlɪŋ laɪtli tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ðən i tʊk ɔf, ɹʌnɪŋ saʊθist əlɔŋ ðə ɹoʊd.

He had the means, the opportunity, and the motivation. No more fear in the land, no more Whitecloak mock trials. He leaped forward, soaring thirty feet and falling lightly to the ground. Then he took off, running southeast along the road.

hi faʊn ðə waɪtkloʊk kæmp ɪn ə fɔɹəstəd hɑloʊ, θaʊzənz ʌv waɪt tɛns sɛɾ ʌp ɪn taɪt ɹɪŋz.

He found the Whitecloak camp in a forested hollow, thousands of white tents set up in tight rings.

ðə tɛns ə səm tɛn θaʊzən tʃɪlʒɹən, əlɔŋ wɪð ənʌðɝ tɛn θaʊzən mɝsənɛɹiz ən ʌðɝ soʊlʒɝz. beɪlwɝ ɛstəmeɪɾəd ðət ðɪs wɑz ðə bʌlk ə ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ tʃɪlʒɹən, ðoʊ hi hæd bɪn ənklɪɹ ɑn haʊ hid ɡɑɾən ðət nɑlədʒ. hoʊpfəli ðə dʌsti mænz heɪtʃɹəɾ ə ðə waɪtkloʊks wɑzn klaʊɾɪŋ ɪz dʒʌdʒmənt.

The tents of some ten thousand Children, along with another ten thousand mercenaries and other soldiers. Balwer estimated that this was the bulk of the remaining Children, though he had been unclear on how he'd gotten that knowledge. Hopefully the dusty man's hatred of the Whitecloaks wasn't clouding his judgment.

pɛɹɪn muvd əmʌŋ ðə tɛns, lʊkɪŋ tə si ɪf i kəd dɪskʌvɝ ɛniθɪŋ ðəɾ ɛlaɪəs ən ði il hæd nɑt. ɪt wɑz ənlaɪkli, bʌɾ i fɪɡjɝɾ ɪt wɑz wɝθ ən ətɛmpt, waɪl i wɑz hɪɹ. bɪsaɪdz, hi wɑntəd tə si ðə pleɪs wɪð ɪz oʊn aɪz. hi lɪftəd flæps, muv bɪtwin ɡɹupɪŋz ə tɛns, ɪnspɛktɪŋ ðə pleɪs ən ɡɛɾɪŋ ə fil fəɹ ɪɾ ən ɪts ɑkjəpəns. ðə kæmp wɑz ɝeɪnʒd ɪn ə vɛɹi ɔɹɾɝli mænɝ. ði ɪnsaɪdz wɝ lɛs steɪbəl ðən ðə tɛns ðɛmsɛlvz, bʌt wʌɾ i sɔ wɑz ɔlsoʊ kɛpt ɔɹɾɝli.

Perrin moved among the tents, looking to see if he could discover anything that Elyas and the Aiel had not. It was unlikely, but he figured it was worth an attempt, while he was here. Besides, he wanted to see the place with his own eyes. He lifted flaps, moved between groupings of tents, inspecting the place and getting a feel for it and its occupants. The camp was arranged in a very orderly manner. The insides were less stable than the tents themselves, but what he saw was also kept orderly.

ðə waɪtkloʊks laɪk θɪŋz nit, taɪɾi ən kɛɹfəli foʊldəd. ən ðeɪ laɪk tə pɹitɛn ði ɪntaɪɝ wɝl kəd bi pɑlɪʃt ʌp ən klin ðə seɪm weɪ, pipəl dɪfaɪn ən ɪkspleɪn ɪn wʌn əɹ tu wɝdz.

The Whitecloaks liked things neat, tidy and carefully folded. And they liked to pretend the entire world could be polished up and cleaned the same way, people defined and explained in one or two words.

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, meɪkɪŋ ɪz weɪ tə ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmænd-ɝz tɛnt. ði ɔɹɡənəzeɪʃən ə ðə tɛns lɛɾ ɪm tə ɪɾ izəli, ət ðə sɛntɝ ɹɪŋ, ɪt wɑzn mʌtʃ lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ði ʌðɝ tɛns, ən pɛɹɪn dʌkt ɪnsaɪd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə si ɪf i kəd faɪn ɛniθɪŋ ə jus. ɪt wɑz fɝnɪʃt sɪmpli, wɪð ə bɛd-ðæt wɑz ɪn ə dɪfɹən pəzɪʃən itʃ taɪm pɛɹɪn lʊkt əɾ ɪt, əlɔŋ wɪð ə teɪbəl hoʊldɪŋ ɑbʒɛkts ðət vænɪʃt ən əpɪɹɾ ət ɹændəm.

Perrin shook his head, making his way to the Lord Captain Command-er's tent. The organization of the tents led him to it easily, at the center ring, It wasn't much larger than the other tents, and Perrin ducked inside, trying to see if he could find anything of use. It was furnished simply, with a bed-that was in a different position each time Perrin looked at it, along with a table holding objects that vanished and appeared at random.

pɛɹɪn stɛpt ʌp tə ɪt, pɪkɪŋ ʌp sʌmθɪŋ ðəɾ əpɪɹd ðɛɹ. ə sɪɡnɪt ɹɪŋ. hi dɪdn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə sɪɡnɪt, ə wɪŋ dæɡɝ, bʌt mɛmoʊ- ɹaɪzd ɪt dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ðə ɹɪŋ vænɪʃt fɹəm ɪz fɪŋɡɝz, tu tʃɹænʒən tə steɪ lɔŋ ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. ðoʊ hid mɛt wɪð ðə waɪtkloʊk liɾɝ, ən kɔɹəspɑndɪd wɪð ðə mæn, hi dɪdnt noʊ mʌtʃ əbaʊt ðə mænz pæs pɝhæps ðɪs wəd hɛlp.

Perrin stepped up to it, picking up something that appeared there. A signet ring. He didn't recognize the signet, a winged dagger, but memo- rised it just before the ring vanished from his fingers, too transient to stay long in the wolf dream. Though he'd met with the Whitecloak leader, and corresponded with the man, he didn't know much about the man's past Perhaps this would help.

hi sɝtʃt θɹu ðə tɛn ə waɪl lɔŋɡɝ, faɪndɪŋ nʌθɪŋ ə jus, ðən wɛn tə ðə lɑɹdʒ tɛnt wɛɹ ɡɔl hæɾ ɪkspleɪn ðət mɛni ʌv ðə kæptɪvz wɝ biɪŋ kɛpt. hɪɹ, hi sɔ mæstɝ ɡɪlz hæɾ əpɪɹ fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən vænɪʃ.

He searched through the tent a while longer, finding nothing of use, then went to the large tent where Gaul had explained that many of the captives were being kept. Here, he saw Master Gill's hat appear for a moment, then vanish.

sæɾəsfaɪd, pɛɹɪn wɔk bæk aʊɾ ə ðə tɛnt. əz i dɪd soʊ, hi faʊn sʌmθɪŋ bɑðɝɪŋ hɪm.

Satisfied, Perrin walked back out of the tent. As he did so, he found something bothering him.

ʃʊdn i hæv tʃɹaɪd sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðɪs wən feɪl wɑz kɪdnæpt? hid sɛnt numɝəs skaʊts tə meɪɾən. laɪt hid hæd tə ɹistʃɹeɪn hɪmsɛlf fɹəm mɑɹtʃɪŋ ɔf tə faɪn feɪl ɑn ɪz oʊn.' bʌt hid nɛvɝ tʃɹaɪd vɪzəɾɪŋ ðə pleɪs ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim.

Shouldn't he have tried something like this when Faile was kidnapped? He'd sent numerous scouts to Maiden. Light he'd had to restrain himself from marching off to find Faile on his own.' But he'd never tried visiting the place in the wolf dream.

pɝhæps ɪt wʊɾə bɪn jusləs. bʌɾ i hædn kənsɪɾɝd ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi, ən ðət tʃɹʌbəl hɪm.

Perhaps it would have been useless. But he hadn't considered the possibility, and that troubled him.

hi fɹoʊz, pæsɪŋ ə kɑɹt pɑɹk bɪsaɪd wʌn ə ðə waɪtkloʊk tɛns. ðə bæk wɑz oʊpən, ən ə ɡɹɪzəl sɪlvɝ wʊlf leɪ ðɛɹ, wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm.

He froze, passing a cart parked beside one of the Whitecloak tents. The back was open, and a grizzled silver wolf lay there, watching him.

"aɪ də lɛt maɪ ətɛnʃən ɡɹoʊ tu nɛɹoʊ, hɑpɝ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "wɛn aɪ ɡɛt kənsum baɪ ə ɡoʊl, ɪt kən meɪk mi kɛɹləs. ðət kən bi deɪnʒɝəs. əz ɪn bæɾəl, wən kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ɑn ði ædvɝsɛɹi ɪn fɹʌn ə jə kən ɪkspoʊz jə tə ði ɑɹtʃɝ ɑn ðə saɪd."

"I do let my attention grow too narrow, Hopper," Perrin said. "When I get consumed by a goal, it can make me careless. That can be dangerous. As in battle, when concentrating on the adversary in front of you can expose you to the archer on the side."

hɑpɝ kɹækt ɪz maʊθ oʊpən, smaɪlɪŋ æftɝ ðə weɪ ʌv wʊlvz. hi hɑp fɹəm ðə kɑɹt. pɛɹɪn kəd sɛns ʌðɝ wʊlvz nɪɹbaɪ - ði ʌðɝz ə ðə pæk i hæd ɹʌn wɪð bɪfɔɹ. oʊk dænsɝ, spɑɹks ən baʊnləs.

Hopper cracked his mouth open, smiling after the way of wolves. He hopped from the cart. Perrin could sense other wolves nearby - the others of the pack he had run with before. Oak Dancer, Sparks and Boundless.

"ɔl ɹaɪt," hi sɛd tə hɑpɝ. "aɪm ɹɛɾi tə lɝn."

"All right," he said to Hopper. "I'm ready to learn."

hɑpɝ sæt daʊn ɑn ɪz hɔntʃɪz, ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ pɛɹɪn. fɑloʊ, ðə wʊlf sɛnt.

Hopper sat down on his haunches, regarding Perrin. Follow, the wolf sent.

ðən vænɪʃt.

Then vanished.

pɛɹɪn kɝst, lʊkɪŋ əbaʊt. wɛɹ hæd ðə wʊlf ɡɔn? hi muv θɹu ðə kæmp, sɝtʃɪŋ, bʌt kʊdn sɛns hɑpɝ ɛniwɛɹ. hi ɹitʃt aʊt wɪð ɪz maɪnd. nʌθɪŋ.

Perrin cursed, looking about. Where had the wolf gone? He moved through the camp, searching, but couldn't sense Hopper anywhere. He reached out with his mind. Nothing.

jʌŋ bʊl. sʌɾənli hɑpɝ wɑz bɪhaɪn hɪm. fɑloʊ. hi vænɪʃt əɡɛn.

Young Bull. Suddenly Hopper was behind him. Follow. He vanished again.

pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld, ðən muvd əbaʊt ðə kæmp ɪn ə flæʃ. wən i dɪdnɝ faɪn ðə wʊlf, hi ʃɪftəd tə ðə fild ʌv ɡɹeɪn wɛɹ hid mɛt hɑpɝ læs taɪm. ðə wʊlf wɑzn ðɛɹ. pɛɹɪn stʊɾ əmʌŋ ðə bloʊɪŋ ɡɹeɪn, fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd.

Perrin growled, then moved about the camp in a flash. When he didn'r find the wolf, he shifted to the field of grain where he'd met Hopper last time. The wolf wasn't there. Perrin stood among the blowing grain, frustrated.

hɑpɝ faʊn ɪm ə fju mɪnəts leɪɾɝ. ðə wʊlf smɛl dɪsæɾəsfaɪd. fɑloʊ! hi sɛnt.

Hopper found him a few minutes later. The wolf smelled dissatisfied. Follow! he sent.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "hɑpɝ, aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɛɹ jəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ."

"I don't know how," Perrin said. "Hopper, I don't know where you're going."

ðə wʊlf sæt daʊn. hi sɛn ən ɪmədʒ ʌv ə wʊlf pʌp, dʒɔɪnɪŋ ʌðɝz ə ðə pæk. ðə pʌp wɑtʃt ɪz ɛldɝz ən dɪd wʌt ðeɪ dɪd.

The wolf sat down. He sent an image of a wolf pup, joining others of the pack. The pup watched his elders and did what they did.

"aɪm nɑɾ ə wʊlf, hɑpɝ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪ doʊn lɝn ðə weɪ jə du.

"I'm not a wolf, Hopper," Perrin said. "I don't learn the way you do.

jə mʌst ɪkspleɪn tə mi wʌt jə wɑn mi tə du."

You must explain to me what you want me to do."

fɑloʊ hɪɹ. ðə wʊlf sɛn ən ɪmədʒ ʌv, ɑdli, ɛmənz fild. ðən i pɛɹɪn fɑloʊd, əpɪɹɪŋ ɑn ə fəmɪljɝ ɡɹin. ə ɡɹup ə bɪldɪŋz laɪn ɪt, wɪtʃ fɛlt ɹɔŋ. ɛmənz fild ʃʊɾə bɪn ə lɪɾəl vɪl- nɑɾ ə taʊn wɪð ə stoʊn wɔl ən ə ɹoʊd ɹʌnɪŋ pæs ðə meɪɝz ɪn, peɪvd wɪð stoʊnz. mʌtʃ hæd tʃeɪnʒd ɪn ðə ʃɔɹt taɪm i hæd bɪn əweɪ.

Follow here. The wolf sent an image of, oddly, Emond's Field. Then he perrin followed, appearing on a familiar green. A group of buildings lined it, which felt wrong. Emond's Field should have been a little vil- not a town with a stone wall and a road running past the mayor's inn, paved with stones. Much had changed in the short time he had been away.

"waɪ hæv wi kʌm hɪɹ?" pɛɹɪn æskt. dɪstɝbɪŋli, ðə wʊlfhɛd bænɝ stɪl flu ɑn ðə poʊl əbʌv ðə ɡɹin. ɪt cʊɾə bɪn ə tʃɹɪk ə ðə wʊlf dʒɹim, bʌɾ i daʊɾɪd ɪt. hi nu ɔl tu wɛl haʊ iɡɝli ðə pipəl ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz flu ðə stændɝɾ ʌv "pɛɹɪn ɡoʊldeɪniz."

"Why have we come here?" Perrin asked. Disturbingly, the wolfhead banner still flew on the pole above the green. It could have been a trick of the wolf dream, but he doubted it. He knew all too well how eagerly the people of the Two Rivers flew the standard of "Perrin Goldeneyes."

mɛn ɑɹ stʃɹeɪnʒ, hɑpɝ sɛnt.

Men are strange, Hopper sent.

pɛɹɪn tɝn tə ði oʊld wʊlf.

Perrin turned to the old wolf.

mɛn θɪŋk stʃɹeɪnʒ θɔts, hɑpɝ sɛd. wi də nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə ʌndɝstæn ðɛm. waɪ dʌz ðə stæɡ fli, ðə spɛɹoʊ flaɪ, ðə tʃɹi ɡɹoʊ? ðeɪ du. ðəɾ ɪz ɔl.

Men think strange thoughts, Hopper said. We do not try to understand them. Why does the stag flee, the sparrow fly, the tree grow? They do. That is all.

"vɛɹi wɛl," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Very well," Perrin said.

aɪ kænɑt titʃ ə spɛɹoʊ tə hʌnt, hɑpɝ kəntɪnjud. ən ə spɛɹoʊ dʌz nɑt titʃ ə wʊlf tə flaɪ.

I cannot teach a sparrow to hunt, Hopper continued. And a sparrow does not teach a wolf to fly.

"bʌt hɪɹ, jə kən flaɪ," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"But here, you can fly," Perrin said.

jɛs. ən aɪ wɑz nɑt tɔt. aɪ noʊ. hɑpɝz sɛnt wɑz fʊl ʌv ɪmoʊʃən ən kənfjuʒən. wʊlvz ɔl ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət wʌn ə ðɛɹ kaɪnd nu. hɑpɝ wɑz fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd kəz i wɑntəd tə titʃ pɛɹɪn, bʌt wɑzn əkʌstəm tə duɪŋ θɪŋz ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv pipəl.

Yes. And I was not taught. I know. Hopper's scent was full of emotion and confusion. Wolves all remembered everything that one of their kind knew. Hopper was frustrated because he wanted to teach Perrin, but wasn't accustomed to doing things in the way of people.

"pliz," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "tʃɹaɪ tə ɪkspleɪn tə mi wʌt jə min. jə ɔlweɪz tɛl mi aɪm hɪɹ 'tu stʃɹɔŋli.' ɪts deɪnʒɝəs, jə seɪ. waɪ?"

"Please," Perrin said. "Try to explain to me what you mean. You always tell me I'm here 'too strongly.' It's dangerous, you say. Why?"

jə slʌmbɝ, hɑpɝ sɛd. ði ʌðɝ ju. jə kænɑt steɪ hɪɹ tu lɔŋ. jə mʌst ɔlweɪz ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət jə ɑɹ ənnætʃɹəl hɪɹ. ðɪs ɪz nɑt jəɹ dɛn.

You slumber, Hopper said. The other you. You cannot stay here too long. You must always remember that you are unnatural here. This is not your den.

hɑpɝ tɝn təwɔɹd ðə haʊsəz ɝaʊn ðɛm. ðɪs ɪz jəɹ dɛn, ðə dɛn ə jəɹ saɪɝ. ðɪs pleɪs.

Hopper turned toward the houses around them. This is your den, the den of your sire. This place.

ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪt. ɪɾəl kip jə fɹəm biɪŋ lɔst. ðɪs wɑz haʊ jəɹ kaɪnd wʌns dɪɾ ɪt. jə ʌndɝstænd.

Remember it. It will keep you from being lost. This was how your kind once did it. You understand.

ɪt wɑzn ə kwɛstʃən, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ə pli. hɑpɝ wɑzn sɝɾən haʊ tə ɪkspleɪn fɝðɝ.

It wasn't a question, though it was something of a plea. Hopper wasn't certain how to explain further.

aɪ kən tʃɹaɪ," pɛɹɪn θɔt, ɪntɝpɹɛɾɪŋ ðə sɛndɪŋ əz bɛst i kʊd. bʌt hɑpɝ wɑz ɹɔŋ. ðɪs pleɪs wɑzn ɪz hoʊm. pɛɹɪnz hoʊm wɑz wɪð feɪl. hi niɾəd tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt, sʌmhaʊ, tə kip hɪmsɛlf fɹəm ɡɛɾɪŋ dʒɹɔn ɪndə ðə wʊlf dʒɹim tu stʃɹɔŋli.

I can try," Perrin thought, interpreting the sending as best he could. But Hopper was wrong. This place wasn't his home. Perrin's home was with Faile. He needed to remember that, somehow, to keep himself from getting drawn into the wolf dream too strongly.

aɪ hæv sin jəɹ ʃi ɪn jəɹ maɪnd, jʌŋ bʊl, hɑpɝ sɛnt, kɑkɪŋ ɪz hɛd. ʃiz laɪk ə haɪv ə biz, wɪð swit hʌni ən ʃɑɹp stɪŋz. hɑpɝz ɪmədʒ ə feɪl wɑz ðəɾ ʌv ə vɛɹi kənfjuzɪŋ fimeɪl wʊlf. wʌn u wəd pleɪfəli nɪp əɾ ɪz noʊz wʌn moʊmənt, ðən ɡɹaʊl əɾ ɪm ðə nɛkst, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə ʃɛɹ əɹ mit.

I have seen your she in your mind, Young Bull, Hopper sent, cocking his head. She is like a hive of bees, with sweet honey and sharp stings. Hopper's image of Faile was that of a very confusing female wolf. One who would playfully nip at his nose one moment, then growl at him the next, refusing to share her meat.

pɛɹɪn smaɪld.

Perrin smiled.

ðə mɛmɹi ɪz pɑɹt, hɑpɝ sɛnt. bʌt ði ʌðɝ pɑɹɾ ɪz ju. jə mʌst steɪ əz jʌŋ bʊl. ə wʊlfs ɹəflɛkʃən ɪn ðə wɔɾɝ, ʃɪmɝɪŋ ən ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɪn-dɪstɪŋkt əz ɹɪpəlz kɹɔst ɪt.

The memory is part, Hopper sent. But the other part is you. You must stay as Young Bull. A wolfs reflection in the water, shimmering and growing in-distinct as ripples crossed it.

"aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd."

"I don't understand."

ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ə ðɪs pleɪs, hɑpɝ sɛn ən ɪmədʒ ʌv ə wʊlf kɑɹvd ə stoʊn ɪz ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ə ju.

The strength of this place, Hopper sent an image of a wolf carved of stone is the strength of you.

ðə wʊlf θɔt fəɹ ə moʊmənt. stænd. ɹɪmeɪn. bi jə wɪð ðæt, ðə wʊlf stʊɾ ən bækt ʌp, əz ɪf pɹipɛɹɪŋ tə ɹʌn ət pɛɹɪn.

The wolf thought for a moment. Stand. Remain. Be you With that, the wolf stood and backed up, as if preparing to run at Perrin.

kənfjuzd, pɛɹɪn ɪmædʒən hɪmsɛlf əz i wɑz, hoʊldɪŋ ðəɾ ɪmədʒ ɪn ɪz hɛɾ əz stʃɹɔŋli əz i kʊd.

Confused, Perrin imagined himself as he was, holding that image in his head as strongly as he could.

hɑpɝ ɹæn ən dʒʌmpt ət hɪm, slæmɪŋ ɪz bɑɾi ɪndə pɛɹɪn. hid dʌn ðɪs bɪfɔɹ, sʌmhaʊ fɔɹsɪŋ pɛɹɪn aʊɾ ə ðə wʊlf dʒɹim.

Hopper ran and jumped at him, slamming his body into Perrin. He'd done this before, somehow forcing Perrin out of the wolf dream.

ðɪs taɪm, haʊɛvɝ, pɛɹɪn wɑz sɛɾ ən weɪɾɪŋ. ɪnstɪŋktɪvli, pɛɹɪn pʊʃt bæk. ðə wʊlf dʒɹim weɪvɝɾ ɝaʊn hɪm, bʌt ðən ɡɹu fɝm əɡɛn. hɑpɝ ɹɪbaʊndɪɾ ɔf hɪm, ðoʊ ðə hɛvi wʊlf ʃʊɾə nɑk pɛɹɪn tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

This time, however, Perrin was set and waiting. Instinctively, Perrin pushed back. The wolf dream wavered around him, but then grew firm again. Hopper rebounded off him, though the heavy wolf should have knocked Perrin to the ground.

hɑpɝ ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, əz ɪf deɪzd. ɡʊd, hi sɛnt, plizd. ɡʊd. jə lɝn. əɡɛn.

Hopper shook his head, as if dazed. Good, he sent, pleased. Good. You learn. Again.

pɛɹɪn stɛɾid hɪmsɛlf dʒʌst ɪn taɪm tə ɡɛt slæm baɪ hɑpɝ ə sɛkən taɪm. pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld, bʌt hɛl stɛɾi.

Perrin steadied himself just in time to get slammed by Hopper a second time. Perrin growled, but held steady.

hɪɹ, hɑpɝ sɛnt, ɡɪvɪŋ ən ɪmədʒ ə ðə fild ʌv ɡɹeɪn. hɑpɝ vænɪʃt, ən pɛɹɪn fɑloʊd.

Here, Hopper sent, giving an image of the field of grain. Hopper vanished, and Perrin followed.

əz sun əz i əpɪɹd, ðə wʊlf slæmd ɪndə hɪm, maɪn ən bɑɾi.

As soon as he appeared, the wolf slammed into him, mind and body.

pɛɹɪn fɛl tə ðə ɡɹaʊn ðɪs taɪm, ɛvɹiθɪŋ weɪvɝɪŋ ən ʃɪmɝɪŋ. hi fɛl hɪmsɛlf biɪŋ pʊʃt əweɪ, fɔɹst aʊɾ ə ðə wʊlf dʒɹim ən ɪndə hɪz ɔɹɾənɛɹi dʒɹimz.

Perrin fell to the ground this time, everything wavering and shimmering. He felt himself being pushed away, forced out of the wolf dream and into his ordinary dreams.

noʊ/ hi θɔt, hoʊldɪŋ tə ən ɪmədʒ ə hɪmsɛlf nilɪŋ əmʌŋ ðoʊz filz ʌv ɡɹeɪn. hi wɑz ðɛɹ.

No/ he thought, holding to an image of himself kneeling among those fields of grain. He was there.

hi ɪmædʒən ɪt, sɑləɾ ən ɹil. hi smɛl ði oʊts, ðə hjuməɾ ɛɹ, əlaɪv wɪð ðə sɛns ə dɝɾ ən fɔlən livz.

He imagined it, solid and real. He smelled the oats, the humid air, alive with the scents of dirt and fallen leaves.

ðə lændskeɪp koʊəlɛst. hi pæntɪd, nilɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, bʌɾ i wɑz stɪl ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim.

The landscape coalesced. He panted, kneeling on the ground, but he was still in the wolf dream.

ɡʊd, hɑpɝ sɛnt. jə lɝn kwɪkli.

Good, Hopper sent. You learn quickly.

"ðɛɹz noʊ ʌðɝ ɑpʃən," pɛɹɪn sɛd, klaɪmɪŋ tə hɪz fit.

"There's no other option," Perrin said, climbing to his feet.

ðə læs hʌn kʌmz, hɑpɝ əɡɹid, sɛndɪŋ ən ɪmədʒ ə ðə waɪt-kloʊk kæmp.

The Last Hunt comes, Hopper agreed, sending an image of the White-cloak camp.

pɛɹɪn fɑloʊd, bɹeɪsɪŋ hɪmsɛlf. noʊ ətæk keɪm. hi lʊkt ɝaʊn fəɹ ðə wʊlf.

Perrin followed, bracing himself. No attack came. He looked around for the wolf.

sʌmθɪŋ slæmd ɪndə hɪz maɪnd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ moʊʃən, oʊnli ðə mɛntəl ətæk. ɪt wɑzn əz stʃɹɔŋ əz bɪfɔɹ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ʌnɪkspɛktɪd. pɛɹɪn bɑɹli mænədʒ tə faɪɾ ɪɾ ɔf.

Something slammed into his mind. There was no motion, only the mental attack. It wasn't as strong as before, but it was unexpected. Perrin barly managed to fight it off.

hɑpɝ fɛl fɹəm ði ɛɹ, lændɪŋ ɡɹeɪsfəli ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ɔlweɪz bi ɹɛɾi, ðə wʊlf sɛnt. ɔlweɪz, bʌɾ ɪspɛʃli wən jə muv. ən ɪmədʒ ʌv ə kɛɹ-fʊl wʊlf, tɛstɪŋ ði ɛɹ bɪfɔɹ muvɪŋ aʊɾ ɪndə ən oʊpən pæstʃɝ.

Hopper fell from the air, landing gracefully on the ground. Always be ready, the wolf sent. Always, but especially when you move. An image of a care-ful wolf, testing the air before moving out into an open pasture.

"aɪ ʌndɝstænd."

"I understand."

bʌt də nɑt kʌm tu stʃɹɔŋli, hɑpɝ tʃaɪɾɪd.

But do not come too strongly, Hopper chided.

ɪmiɾiətli, pɛɹɪn fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ feɪl ən ðə pleɪs wɛɹ i slɛpt. hɪz hoʊm. hi . . . feɪɾəd slaɪtli. hɪz skɪn dɪdnt ɡɹoʊ tʃɹænslusənt, ən ðə wʊlf dʒɹim steɪd ðə seɪm, bʌɾ i fɛl mɔɹ ɪkspoʊzd.

Immediately, Perrin forced himself to remember Faile and the place where he slept. His home. He . . . faded slightly. His skin didn't grow translucent, and the wolf dream stayed the same, but he felt more exposed.

ɡʊd, hɑpɝ sɛnt. ɔlweɪz ɹɛɾi, bʌt nɛvɝ hoʊldɪŋ ɑn tu stʃɹɔŋ. laɪk kæɹiɪŋ ə pʌp ɪn jəɹ dʒɔz.

Good, Hopper sent. Always ready, but never holding on too strong. Like carrying a pup in your jaws.

"ðæts nɑt gɑnə bi ən izi bæləns," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"That's not going to be an easy balance," Perrin said.

hɑpɝ ɡeɪv ə slaɪtli kənfjuz sɛnt. ʌv kɔɹs ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəlt.

Hopper gave a slightly confused scent. Of course it was difficult.

pɛɹɪn smaɪld. "wʌt naʊ?"

Perrin smiled. "What now?"

ɹʌnɪŋ, hɑpɝ sɛnt. ðən mɔɹ pɹæktəs.

Running, Hopper sent. Then more practice.

ðə wʊlf dæʃt əweɪ, zɪpɪŋ ɪn ə blɝ ʌv ɡɹeɪ ən sɪlvɝ ɔf təwɔɹd ðə ɹoʊd. pɛɹɪn fɑloʊd.

The wolf dashed away, zipping in a blur of gray and silver off toward the road. Perrin followed.

hi sɛns dɪtɝməneɪʃən fɹəm hɑpɝ - ə sɛn ðət wɑz ɑdli sɪməlɝ tə ðə weɪ tɑɹn smɛld wən tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ðə ɹɛfjudʒiz tə faɪt. ðət meɪd pɛɹɪn smaɪl.

He sensed determination from Hopper - a scent that was oddly similar to the way Tarn smelled when training the refugees to fight. That made Perrin smile.

ðeɪ ɹæn daʊn ðə ɹoʊd, ən pɛɹɪn pɹæktəs ðə bæləns ə nɑt biɪŋ ɪn ðə dʒɹim tu stʃɹɔŋli, jɛt biɪŋ ɹɛɾi tə səlɪɾəfaɪ hɪz sɛns ə sɛlf əɾ ɛni moʊmənt. əkeɪʒənəli hɑpɝ wəɾ ətæk hɪm, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə θɹoʊ hɪm fɹəm ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. ðeɪ kəntɪnjuɾ əntɪl hɑpɝ - sʌɾənli - stɑpt ɹʌnɪŋ.

They ran down the road, and Perrin practiced the balance of not being in the dream too strongly, yet being ready to solidify his sense of self at any moment. Occasionally Hopper would attack him, trying to throw him from the wolf dream. They continued until Hopper - suddenly - stopped running.

pɛɹɪn tʊk ə fju ɛkstʃɹə stɛps, sɝdʒɪŋ əhɛɾ ə ðə wʊlf, bɪfɔɹ stɑpɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. ə tʃɹænslusən vaɪəlɪt wɔl ðət kʌt dɝɛkli θɹu ðə ɹoʊdweɪ. ɪɾ ɪkstɛndəɾ ʌp ɪndə ðə skaɪ ən dɪstənli tə boʊθ ðə ɹaɪɾ ən ðə lɛft.

Perrin took a few extra steps, surging ahead of the wolf, before stopping. There was something in front of him. A translucent violet wall that cut directly through the roadway. It extended up into the sky and distantly to both the right and the left.

"hɑpɝ?" pɛɹɪn æskt. "wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs?"

"Hopper?" Perrin asked. "What is this?"

ɹɔŋɡnəs, hɑpɝ sɛnt. ɪt ʃəd nɑt bi hɪɹ. ðə wʊlf smɛld æŋɡɹi.

Wrongness, Hopper sent. It should not be here. The wolf smelled angry.

pɛɹɪn stɛp fɔɹwɝɾ ən ɹeɪzd ə hæn təwɔɹd ðə sɝfəs, bʌt hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ɪt lʊk laɪk ɡlæs.

Perrin stepped forward and raised a hand toward the surface, but hesitated. It looked like glass.

hid nɛvɝ sin ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ðɪs ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. maɪɾ ɪt bi laɪk ðə bʌbəlz ʌv ivəl? hi lʊkt ʌp ət ðə skaɪ.

He'd never seen anything like this in the wolf dream. Might it be like the bubbles of evil? He looked up at the sky.

ðə wɔl flæʃt sʌɾənli ən wɑz ɡɔn. pɛɹɪn blɪŋkt, stʌmbəlɪŋ bæk. hi ɡlænst ət hɑpɝ.

The wall flashed suddenly and was gone. Perrin blinked, stumbling back. He glanced at Hopper.

ðə wʊlf sæɾ ɑn ɪz hɔntʃɪz, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə pleɪs wɛɹ ðə wɔl hæd bɪn. kʌm, jʌŋ bʊl, ðə wʊlf faɪnəli sɛnt, stændɪŋ. wɪl pɹæktəs ɪn ənʌðɝ pleɪs.

The wolf sat on his haunches, staring at the Place where the wall had been. Come, Young Bull, the wolf finally sent, standing. We will practice in another place.

hi loʊpt əweɪ. pɛɹɪn lʊk bæk daʊn ðə ɹoʊd. wʌtɛvɝ ðə wɔl hæd bɪn, ɪt hæd lɛf noʊ vɪzəbəl saɪn ʌv ɪts ɛɡzɪstəns. tʃɹʌbəld, pɛɹɪn fɑloʊɾ æftɝ hɑpɝ.

He loped away. Perrin looked back down the road. Whatever the wall had been, it had left no visible sign of its existence. Troubled, Perrin followed after Hopper.

"bɝn mi, wɛɹ ɑɹ ðoʊz ɑɹtʃɝz!" ɹoʊɾəl ɪɾɝɑldi klaɪmd ʌp tə ðə tʌn ə ðə hɪlsaɪd. "aɪ wɑntəɾ əm fɔɹmd ʌp ɑn ðə fɔɹwɝd taʊɝz ən aʊɝ əɡoʊ tə ɹɪliv ðə kɹɔsboʊmən!"

"Burn me, where are those archers!" Rodel Ituralde climbed up to the ton of the hillside. "I wanted them formed up on the forward towers an hour ago to relieve the crossbowmen!"

bɪfɔɹ hɪm, ðə bæɾəl klæŋd ən skɹimd ən ɡɹʌntɪɾ ən θʌmpt ən ɹɔɹd. ə bæn ə tʃɹɑləks hæd sɝdʒd əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ, kɹɔsɪŋ ɑn fɔɹd ɹæfs əɹ ə kɹud floʊɾɪŋ bɹɪdʒ fæʃən fɹəm lɔɡ ɹæfs. tʃɹɑləks heɪɾəd kɹɔsɪŋ wɔɾɝ. ɪt tʊk ə lɑt tə ɡɛɾ əm oʊvɝ.

Before him, the battle clanged and screamed and grunted and thumped and roared. A band of Trollocs had surged across the river, crossing on ford rafts or a crude floating bridge fashioned from log rafts. Trollocs hated crossing water. It took a lot to get them over.

wɪtʃ wɑz waɪ ðɪs fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃən wɑz soʊ jusfəl. ðə hɪlsaɪd sləp dɝɛkli daʊn tə ði oʊnli fɔɹɾ ə ɹizənəbəl saɪz ɪn liɡz. tə ðə nɔɹθ tʃɹɑləks bɔɪl θɹu ə pæs aʊɾ ə ðə blaɪɾ ən ɹæn ɹaɪɾ ɪndə ðə ɹɪvɝ ɑɹɪnɛl. wən ðeɪ kəd bi fɔɹst əkɹɔs, ðeɪ feɪs ðə hɪlsaɪd, wɪtʃ hæd bɪn dʌɡ wɪð tʃɹɛntʃɪz, paɪld wɪð bəlwɹks ən sɛt wɪð ɑɹtʃɝ taʊɝz ət ðə tɑp. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə ɹitʃ ðə sɪɾi ʌv mɛɹədɑn fɹəm ðə blaɪɾ ɪksɛp baɪ pæsɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɪs hɪl.

Which was why this fortification was so useful. The hillside sloped directly down to the only ford of reasonable size in leagues. To the north Trollocs boiled through a pass out of the Blight and ran right into the River Arinelle. When they could be forced across, they faced the hillside, which had been dug with trenches, piled with bulwarks and set with archer towers at the top. There was no way to reach the city of Maradon from the Blight except by passing over this hill.

ɪt wɑz ən aɪdil pəzɪʃən fəɹ hoʊldɪŋ bæk ə mʌtʃ lɑɹdʒɝ fɔɹs, bʌɾ ivən ðə bɛs fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃənz kəd bi oʊvɝɹʌn, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli wən jəɹ mɛn wɝ taɪɝd fɹəm wiks ə faɪɾɪŋ. ðə tʃɹɑləks hæd kɹɔst ən fɔt ðɛɹ weɪ ʌp ðə sloʊp ʌndɝ ə heɪl ʌv æɹoʊz, fɔlɪŋ ɪndə ðə tʃɹɛntʃɪz, hævɪŋ dɪfəkəlti sɝmaʊntɪŋ ðə haɪ bəlwɹks.

It was an ideal position for holding back a much larger force, but even the best fortifications could be overrun, particularly when your men were tired from weeks of fighting. The Trollocs had crossed and fought their way up the slope under a hail of arrows, falling into the trenches, having difficulty surmounting the high bulwarks.

ðə hɪlsaɪd hæɾ ə flæɾ ɛɹiə ət ðə tɑp, wɛɹ ɪɾɝɑldi hæɾ ɪz kəmæn pəzɪʃən, ɪn ði ʌpɝ kæmp. hi kɔld ɔɹɾɝz əz i lʊk daʊn ɑn ðə woʊvən mæs ə tʃɹɛntʃɪz, bəlwɹks ən taʊɝz. ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ daɪɪŋ tə pɪkmɛn bɪhaɪnd wʌn ə ðə bəlwɹks. ɪɾɝɑldi wɑtʃt əntɪl ðə læs tʃɹɑlɑk -  ən ɪnɔɹməs, ɹæm-feɪs bist - ɹɔɹɾ ən daɪd wɪð θɹi paɪks ɪn ɪts ɡʌt.

The hillside had a flat area at the top, where Ituralde had his command position, in the upper camp. He called orders as he looked down on the woven mass of trenches, bulwarks and towers. The Trollocs were dying to pikemen behind one of the bulwarks. Ituralde watched until the last Trolloc -  an enormous, ram-faced beast - roared and died with three pikes in its gut.

ɪt lʊkt əz ɪf ənʌðɝ sɝdʒ wɑz kʌmɪŋ, ðə mɹdʒɹɑl dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ənʌðɝ mæs ə tʃɹɑləks θɹu ðə pæs. ɪnʌf bɑɾiz hæd fɔlən ɪn ðə ɹɪvɝ ðəɾ ɪt wɑz klɔɡd fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, ɹʌnɪŋ ɹɛd, ðə kɑɹkəsɪz pɹəvaɪɾɪŋ ə fʊɾɪŋ fəɹ ðoʊz ɹʌnɪŋ ʌp bɪhaɪnd.

It looked as if another surge was coming, the Myrddraal driving another mass of Trollocs through the pass. Enough bodies had fallen in the river that it was clogged for the moment, running red, the carcasses providing a footing for those running up behind.

"ɑɹtʃɝz!" ɪɾɝɑldi bɛloʊd. "wɛɹ ɑɹ ðoʊz blʌɾi - "

"Archers!" Ituralde bellowed. "Where are those bloody - "

ə kʌmpəni ʌv ɑɹtʃɝz faɪnəli ɹæn pæst, səm ə ðə ɹɪzɝvz hid hɛl bæk. moʊst ə ðɛm hæd ðə kɑpɝi skɪn ə dəmɑni, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɝ ə fju stʃɹeɪ tæɹɑbənɝz mɪkst ɪn. ðeɪ kæɹiɾ ə waɪd vɝaɪəɾi ʌv baʊz: nɛɹoʊ dəmɑni lɔŋboʊz, sɝpəntaɪn sɑldəiən ʃɔɹtbaʊz skævənʒd fɹəm ɡɑɹd poʊsts əɹ vɪlədʒəz, ivən ə fju tɔl tu ɹɪvɝz lɔŋboʊz.

A company of archers finally ran past, some of the reserves he'd held back. Most of them had the coppery skin of Domani, though there were a few stray Taraboners mixed in. They carried a wide variety of bows: narrow Domani longbows, serpentine Saldaean shortbows scavenged from guard posts or villages, even a few tall Two Rivers longbows.

"lɪdʒɹɪn," ɪɾɝɑldi kɔld. ðə jʌŋ, hɑɹd-aɪɾ ɔfəsɝ hɝiɾ əkɹɔs ðə hɪlsaɪd tə hɪm. lɪdʒɹɪnz bɹaʊn junəfɔɹm wɑz ɹɪŋkəld ən dɝɾi ət ðə niz, nɑt kəz i wɑz əndɪsɪplɪnd, bʌt kəz ðəɹ wɝ tɪmz wən ɪz mɛn niɾəd ɪm mɔɹ ðən ɪz lɔnʒɹi dɪd.

"Lidrin," Ituralde called. The young, hard-eyed officer hurried across the hillside to him. Lidrin's brown uniform was wrinkled and dirty at the knees, not because he was undisciplined, but because there were tims when his men needed him more than his laundry did.

"ɡoʊ wɪð ðoʊz ɑɹtʃɝz tə ðə taʊɝz," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd. "ðoʊz tʃɹɑləks ɑɹ gɑnə tʃɹaɪ ənʌðɝ pʊʃ. aɪ də nɑt wɑn ənʌðɝ fɪs bɹeɪkɪŋ θɹu tə ðə tɑp, hɪɹ mi? ɪf ðeɪ siz əɹ pəzɪʃən ən juz ɪɾ əɡɛnst ʌs, aɪm gɑnə hæv ə ɹɑɾən mɔɹnɪŋ."

"Go with those archers to the towers," Ituralde said. "Those Trollocs are going to try another push. I do not want another fist breaking through to the top, hear me? If they seize our position and use it against us, I'm going to have a rotten morning."

lɪdʒɹɪn dɪdn smaɪl ət ðə kɑmɛnt, əz i wʌns maɪt hæv. hi dɪdn smaɪl mʌtʃ əɾ ɔl ɛnimɔɹ;

Lidrin didn't smile at the comment, as he once might have. He didn't smile much at all anymore;

juʒəwəli oʊnli wən i ɡɑt tə kɪl ə tʃɹɑlɑk. hi səluɾəd, tɝnɪŋ tə dʒɑɡ æftɝ ði ɑɹtʃɝz.

usually only when he got to kill a Trolloc. He saluted, turning to jog after the archers.

ɪɾɝɑldi tɝn lʊk daʊn ðə bæksaɪɾ ə ðə hɪl. ðə loʊɝ kæmp wɑz sɛɾ ʌp ðɛɹ, ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv ðə stip hɪlsaɪd. ðɪs hɪl hæd bɪn ə nætʃɹəl fɔɹmeɪʃən, wʌns, bʌt ðə sɑldəiənz hæd bɪlt ɪɾ ʌp oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz wɪð wʌn lɔŋ sloʊp ɪkstɛndɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ɹɪvɝ ən ə stipɝ wʌn ɑn ði ɑpəzət saɪd. ɪn ðə loʊɝ kæmp, hɪz tʃɹups kəd slip ən it, ən ðɛɹ səplaɪz kəd bi pɹətɛktəd, ɔl ʃɛltɝd fɹəm ɛnəmi æɹoʊz baɪ ðə stip hɪlsaɪɾ əpɑn wɪtʃ ɪɾɝɑldi naʊ stʊd.

Ituralde turned looked down the backside of the hill. The lower camp was set up there, in the shadow of the steep hillside. This hill had been a natural formation, once, but the Saldaeans had built it up over the years with one long slope extending toward the river and a steeper one on the opposite side. In the lower camp, his troops could sleep and eat, and their supplies could be protected, all sheltered from enemy arrows by the steep hillside upon which Ituralde now stood.

boʊθ ə hɪz kæmps, ʌpɝ ən loʊɝ, wɝ pætʃwɝk θɪŋz. səm ə ðə tɛns hæd bɪn pɝtʃəs fɹəm sɑldəiən vɪlədʒəz, səm wɝ ə dəmɑni meɪk, ən dʌzənz hæd bɪn bɹɔɾ ɪn baɪ ɡeɪtweɪ fɹəm ɔl oʊvɝ ðə lænd. ə lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝ ə ðɛm wɝ ɪnɔɹməs kɛɹhinɪn θɪŋz wɪð stʃɹaɪpt pæɾɝnz. ðeɪ kɛp ðə ɹeɪn ɔf ɪz mɛn, ən ðət wɑz ɪnʌf.

Both of his camps, upper and lower, were patchwork things. Some of the tents had been purchased from Saldaean villages, some were of Domani make, and dozens had been brought in by gateway from all over the land. A large number of them were enormous Cairhienin things with striped patterns. They kept the rain off his men, and that was enough.

ðə sɑldəiənz sɝɾənli nu haʊ tə bɪl fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃənz. ɪf oʊnli ɪɾɝɑldi hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə pɝsweɪɾ əm tə liv ðɛɹ haɪɾɪŋ pleɪs ɪn ðə sɪɾi ʌv mɛɹədɑn ən kʌm hɛlp.

The Saldaeans certainly knew how to build fortifications. If only Ituralde had been able to persuade them to leave their hiding place in the city of Maradon and come help.

"naʊ," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd, "wɛɹ ɪn - "

"Now," Ituralde said, "where in - "

hi kʌɾ ɔf əz sʌmθɪŋ dɑɹkən ðə skaɪ. hi bɛɹli hæd taɪm tə kɝs ən dʌk əweɪ əz ə ɡɹup ə lɑɹdʒ ɑbʒɛkts ɹeɪn daʊn, ɑɹsɪŋ haɪ tə fɔl ɑn ði ʌpɝ kæmp, ɪlɪsəɾɪŋ haʊlz ə peɪn ən kənfjuʒən. ðoʊz wɝn boʊldɝz: ðeɪ wɝ kɔɹpsəz. ðə hʌlkɪŋ bɑɾiz ə dɛd tʃɹɑləks. ðə ʃæd-oʊzpɔn ɑɹmi hæd faɪnəli sɛɾ ʌp ðɛɹ tʃɹibətʃəts.

He cut off as something darkened the sky. He barely had time to curse and duck away as a group of large objects rained down, arcing high to fall on the upper camp, eliciting howls of pain and confusion. Those weren't boulders: they were corpses. The hulking bodies of dead Trollocs. The Shad-owspawn army had finally set up their trebuchets.

ə pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪɾɝɑldi wɑz ɪmpɹɛs ðət hid dʒɹɪvən əm tə ɪt. ðə sidʒ ɪkwɪpmən hæɾ əndaʊɾɪdli bɪn bɹɔt tə əsɔl mɛɹədɑn, wɪtʃ wɑz ə lɪɾəl tə ðə saʊθ. sɛɾɪŋ ʌp ðə tʃɹibətʃəts əkɹɔs ðə fɔɹd tə əsɔlt ɪɾɝɑldiz laɪnz ɪnstɛd nɑɾ oʊnli wəd sloʊ ðə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, bʌt wəɾ ɪkspoʊz ðɛɹ tʃɹibətʃəts tə hɪz kaʊntɝfaɪɝ.

A part of Ituralde was impressed that he'd driven them to it. The siege equipment had undoubtedly been brought to assault Maradon, which was a little to the south. Setting up the trebuchets across the ford to assault Ituralde's lines instead not only would slow the Shadowspawn, but would expose their trebuchets to his counterfire.

hi hædn ɪkspɛktəɾ əm tə hɝl kɑɹkəsɪz. hi kɝst əz ðə skaɪ dɑɹkən əɡɛn, mɔɹ bɑɾiz fɔlɪŋ, nɑkɪŋ daʊn tɛns, kɹʌʃɪŋ soʊlʒɝz.

He hadn't expected them to hurl carcasses. He cursed as the sky darkened again, more bodies falling, knocking down tents, crushing soldiers.

"hilɝz!" ɪɾɝɑldi bɛloʊd. "wɛɹ ɑɹ ðoʊz æʃəmən?" hid pʊʃt ði æʃəmən hɑɹd, sɪns ðɪs sidʒ hæd bɪɡʌn. tə ðə bɹɪŋk ʌv ɪɡzɔstʃən. naʊ hi hɛld əm bæk, juzɪŋ əm oʊnli wən tʃɹɑlɑk æz- sɔls ɡɑt tu kloʊs tə ði ʌpɝ kæmp.

"Healers!" Ituralde bellowed. "Where are those Asha'man?" He'd pushed the Asha'man hard, since this siege had begun. To the brink of exhaustion. Now he held them back, using them only when Trolloc as- saults got too close to the upper camp.

"sɝ!" ə jʌŋ mɛsənʒɝ wɪð dɝɾ ʌndɝ ɪz fɪŋɡɝneɪlz skɹæmbəld ʌp fɹəm fɹʌn laɪnz. hɪz dəmɑni feɪs wɑz æʃən, ən i wɑz stɪl tu jʌŋ tə ɡɹoʊ ə pɹɑpɝ mʌstæʃ. "kæptən fɪnsəs ɹɪpɔɹts ðə ʃædoʊ- spɑn ɑɹmi muvɪŋ tʃɹibətʃəts ɪndə ɹeɪnʒ. ðəɹ ɑɹ sɪkstin baɪ hɪz kaʊnt."

"Sir!" A young messenger with dirt under his fingernails scrambled up from front lines. His Domani face was ashen, and he was still too young to grow a proper mustache. "Captain Finsas reports the Shadow- spawn army moving trebuchets into range. There are sixteen by his count."

"lɛt kæptən fɪnsəs noʊ ðəɾ ɪz blʌɾi taɪmɪŋ kəd bi bɛɾɝ," ɪɾɝɑldi ɡɹaʊld.

"Let Captain Finsas know that his bloody timing could be better," Ituralde growled.

"aɪm sɑɹi, maɪ lɔɹd. ðeɪ ɹoʊld əm daʊn θɹu ðə pæs bɪfɔɹ wi fɪɡjɝɾ aʊt wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. ði ɪnɪʃəl vɑli hɪɾ əɹ wɑtʃpoʊst. lɔɹd fɪnsəs hɪmsɛlf wɑz wundəd."

"I'm sorry, my Lord. They rolled them down through the pass before we figured out what was going on. The initial volley hit our watchpost. Lord Finsas himself was wounded."

ɪɾɝɑldi nɑɾəd; ɹədʒɑbi wɑz ɝaɪvɪŋ tə teɪk kəmæn ə ði ʌpɝ kæmp ən ɔɹɡənaɪz ðə wundəd. bɪloʊ, ə lɑɾ ə bɑɾiz hæd hɪt ðə loʊɝ kæmp, tu. ðə tʃɹibətʃəts kəd ɡɛt ðə haɪɾ ən ɹeɪnʒ tə lɔntʃ oʊvɝ ðə hɪl ən fɔl daʊn ɑn ɪz mɛn ɪn ðɛɹ pɹiviəsli ʃɛltɝɾ ɛɹiə. hiɾ əv tə pʊl ðə loʊɝ kæmp bæk, fɑɹðɝ əkɹɔs ðə pleɪn təwɔɹd mɛɹədɑn, wɪtʃ wəd dɪleɪ ɹɪspɑns taɪmz. blʌɾi æʃəz.

Ituralde nodded; Rajabi was arriving to take command of the upper camp and organize the wounded. Below, a lot of bodies had hit the lower camp, too. The trebuchets could get the height and range to launch over the hill and fall down on his men in their previously sheltered area. He'd have to pull the lower camp back, farther across the plain toward Maradon, which would delay response times. Bloody ashes.

/ nɛvɝ juz tə swɛɹ ðɪs mʌtʃ, ɪɾɝɑldi θɔt. ɪt wɑz ðət bɔɪ, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ɹænd ælθɹ hæd ɡɪvən ɪɾɝɑldi pɹɑməsəz, səm spoʊkən, səm ɪmplaɪd. pɹɑməsəz tə pɹətɛkt ɑɹæd dumən fɹəm ðə sintʃæn. pɹɑməsəz ðəɾ ɪɾɝɑldi kəd lɪv, ɹæðɝ ðən daɪ tʃɹæp baɪ ðə sintʃæn.

/ never used to swear this much, Ituralde thought. It was that boy, the Dragon Reborn. Rand al'Thor had given Ituralde promises, some spoken, some implied. Promises to protect Arad Doman from the Seanchan. Promises that Ituralde could live, rather than die trapped by the Seanchan.

pɹɑməsəz tə ɡɪv ɪm sʌmθɪŋ tə du, sʌmθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt, sʌmθɪŋ vaɪɾəl. sʌmθɪŋ ɪmpɑsəbəl.

Promises to give him something to do, something important, something vital. Something impossible.

hoʊl bæk ðə ʃædoʊ. faɪɾ əntɪl hɛlp ɝaɪvd.

Hold back the Shadow. Fight until help arrived.

ðə skaɪ dɑɹkən əɡɛn, ən ɪɾɝɑldi dʌkt ɪndə ðə kəmæn pəvɪljən, wɪtʃ hæɾ ə wʊɾən ɹuf əz ə pɹikɔʃən əɡɛnst sidʒ wɛpənz. hid fɪɹd spɹeɪʃɑɾ ə smɔlɝ ɹɑks, nɑt kɑɹkəsɪz.

The sky darkened again, and Ituralde ducked into the command pavilion, which had a wooden roof as a precaution against siege weapons. He'd feared sprayshot of smaller rocks, not carcasses.

ðə mɛn skæɾɝd tə hɛlp pʊl ðə wundəd daʊn tə ðə ɹɛləɾɪv seɪfti ʌv ðə loʊɝ kæmp, ən fɹəm ðəɹ əkɹɔs ðə pleɪn təwɔɹd mɛɹədɑn. ɹədʒɑbi lɛd ði ɛfɝt. ðə lʌmbɝɪŋ mæn hæɾ ə nɛk əz θɪk əz ə tɛn-jɪɹ-ɡɹoʊn æʃ ən ɑɹmz nɪɹli əz waɪd. hi naʊ hɑbəld əz i wɔkt, hɪz lɛf lɛɡ hɝɾ ɪn ðə faɪɾɪŋ ən æmpjəteɪɾɪd bɪniθ ðə ni. ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd hild ɪm əz bɛst i kʊd, ən i wɔkt ɑn ə pɛɡ. hid ɹəfjuz tə ɹɪtaɪɹ θɹu ɡeɪtweɪz wɪð ðə bædli ɪnʒɝd, ən ɪɾɝɑldi hædn fɔɹs hɪm. jə dɪdn θɹoʊ əweɪ ə ɡʊɾ ɔfəsɝ kəz ʌv wʌn waʊnd.

The men scattered to help pull the wounded down to the relative safety of the lower camp, and from there across the plain toward Maradon. Rajabi led the effort. The lumbering man had a neck as thick as a ten-year-grown ash and arms nearly as wide. He now hobbled as he walked, his left leg hurt in the fighting and amputated beneath the knee. Aes Sedai had Healed him as best he could, and he walked on a peg. He'd refused to retire through gateways with the badly injured, and Ituralde hadn't forced him. You didn't throw away a good officer because of one wound.

ə jʌŋ ɔfəsɝ wɪnst əz ə bloʊɾɪd kɑɹkəs θʌmpt əɡɛns ðə tɑp ə ðə pəvɪljən. ði ɔfəsɝ  - zɛl - dɪdn əv ðə kɑpɝi skɪn ʌv ə dəmɑni, ðoʊ hi wɔɹ ə vɛɹi dəmɑni mʌstæʃ ən ə bjuɾi mɑɹk ɑn ɪz tʃik ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ən æɹoʊ.

A young officer winced as a bloated carcass thumped against the top of the pavilion. The officer  - Zhell - didn't have the coppery skin of a Domani, though he wore a very Domani mustache and a beauty mark on his cheek in the shape of an arrow.

ðeɪ kəd nɑt hoʊld əɡɛns tʃɹɑləks hɪɹ fəɹ mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ, nɑt wɪð ðə nʌmbɝz ðeɪ wɝ fildɪŋ. ɪɾɝɑldi wəɾ əv tə fɔl bæk, pɔɪn keɪ pɔɪnt, fɑɹðɝ ɪndə sɑldɑiə, fɑɹðɝ təwɔɹɾ ɑɹæd dumən. ɑd, haʊ hi wɑz ɔlweɪz ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ɪz hoʊmlænd. fɝs fɹəm ðə saʊθ, naʊ fɹəm ðə nɔɹθist.

They could not hold against Trollocs here for much longer, not with the numbers they were fielding. Ituralde would have to fall back, point k point, farther into Saldaea, farther toward Arad Doman. Odd, how he was always retreating toward his homeland. First from the south, now from the northeast.

ɑɹæd dumən wəd bi kɹʌʃt bɪtwin ðə sintʃæn ən ðə tʃɹoʊl-aɪɑks. jud bɛɾɝ kip jəɹ wɝd, bɔɪ.

Arad Doman would be crushed between the Seanchan and the Trol-Iocs. You'd better keep your word, boy.

hi kʊdn ɹitʃɹiɾ ɪndə mɛɹədɑn, ənfɔɹtʃənətli. ðə sɑldəiənz ðəɹ hæd meɪɾ ɪt kwaɪt klɪɹ ðeɪ kənsɪɾɝd ɪɾɝɑldi - ən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn - tə bi ɪnveɪɾɝz. blʌɾi fulz. ət list i hæɾ ə tʃæns tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðoʊz sidʒ ɛnʒənz.

He couldn't retreat into Maradon, unfortunately. The Saldaeans there had made it quite clear they considered Ituralde - and the Dragon Reborn - to be invaders. Bloody fools. At least he had a chance to destroy those siege engines.

ənʌðɝ bɑɾi hɪt ðə tɑp ə ðə kəmæn pəvɪljən, bʌt ðə ɹuf hɛl fɹəm ðə stɪŋk - ænd, ɪn səm keɪsəz, splæʃ - ʌv ðoʊz dɪsis tʃɹɑləks ðeɪd nɑt tʃoʊzən ðə nuli dɛd fəɹ ðɪs əsɔlt.

Another body hit the top of the command pavilion, but the roof held From the stink - and, in some cases, splash - of those deceased Trollocs they'd not chosen the newly dead for this assault.

kɑnfəɾənt ðəɾ ɪz ɔfəsɝz wɝ siɪŋ tə ðɛɹ duɾiz - naʊ wɑz nɑt ðə taɪm tə ɪntɝfɪɹ-ɪɾɝɑldi klæspt ɪz hænz bɪhaɪn hɪm. siɪŋ hɪm, soʊlʒɝz boʊθ ɪnsaɪɾ ən aʊɾ ə ðə pəvɪljən stʊɾ ə lɪɾəl stʃɹeɪɾɝ. ðə bɛst ə plænz læstəɾ oʊnli əntɪl ðə fɝst æɹoʊ hɪt, bʌɾ ə dɪtɝmənd, ənjildɪŋ kəmændɝ kəd bɹɪŋ ɔɹɾɝ tə keɪɑs baɪ ðə weɪ hi hɛl hɪmsɛlf.

Confident that his officers were seeing to their duties - now was not the time to interfere-Ituralde clasped his hands behind him. Seeing him, soldiers both inside and out of the pavilion stood a little straighter. The best of plans lasted only until the first arrow hit, but a determined, unyielding commander could bring order to chaos by the way he held himself.

oʊvɝhɛd, ðə stɔɹm bɔɪld, klaʊdz ə sɪlvɝ ən blæk laɪk ə blækən pɑt hæŋɪŋ əbʌv ə kʊk faɪɝ, bɪts ə stil ʃaɪnɪŋ θɹu ət ði ɛdʒəz ə ðə kɹʌstɪd sʊt. ɪt wɑz ənnætʃɹəl. lɛɾ ɪz mɛn si ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt fɪɹ ɪt, ivən wən ɪt heɪl kɔɹpsəz əpɑn ðɛm.

Overhead, the storm boiled, clouds of silver and black like a blackened pot hanging above a cook fire, bits of steel shining through at the edges of the crusted soot. It was unnatural. Let his men see that he did not fear it, even when it hailed corpses upon them.

wundəd wɝ kæɹiɾ əweɪ, ən mɛn ɪn ðə loʊɝ kæmp bɪɡæn tə bɹeɪk ɪt daʊn, pɹipɛɹɪŋ tə muv ɪt fɑɹðɝ bæk. hi kɛpt ɪz ɑɹtʃɝz ən kɹɔsboʊmən faɪɹɪŋ, pɪkmɛn ɹɛɾi əlɔŋ ðə bəlwɹks.

Wounded were carried away, and men in the lower camp began to break it down, preparing to move it farther back. He kept his archers and crossbowmen firing, pikemen ready along the bulwarks.

hi hæɾ ə saɪzəbəl kævəlɹi, bʌt kʊdn juz əm hɪɹ.

He had a sizable cavalry, but couldn't use them here.

ðoʊz tʃɹibətʃəts, ɪf lɛft əloʊn, wəd wɛɹ ɪz mɛn daʊn wɪð boʊldɝz ən spɹeɪʃɑt - bʌɾ ɪɾɝɑldi ɪntɛndəd tə si ðɛm bɝn fɝst, juzɪŋ ən æʃəmən əɹ ə stʃɹaɪk fɔɹs wɪð fleɪmɪŋ æɹoʊz θɹu ə ɡeɪtweɪ.

Those trebuchets, if left alone, would wear his men down with boulders and sprayshot - but Ituralde intended to see them burned first, using an Asha'man or a strike force with flaming arrows through a gateway.

ɪf oʊnli aɪ kəd ɹitʃɹiɾ ɪndə mɛɹədɑn. bʌt ðə sɑldəiən lɔɹd ðəɹ wʊdn lɛɾ ɪm ɪn; ɪf ɪɾɝɑldi fɛl bæk tə ðə sɪɾi, hid ɡɛt smæʃt əɡɛns ðoʊz wɔlz baɪ ðə tʃɹɑləks.

If only I could retreat into Maradon. But the Saldaean lord there wouldn't let him in; if Ituralde fell back to the city, he'd get smashed against those walls by the Trollocs.

blʌɾi, blʌɾi fulz. wʌt kaɪndə ɪɾiəts dɪnaɪd mɛn ɹɛfjudʒ wən ən ɑɹmi ʌv ʃæɾoʊzpɔn wɑz nɑkɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ ɡeɪts?

Bloody, bloody fools. What kind of idiots denied men refuge when an army of Shadowspawn was knocking on their gates?

"aɪ wɑn dæmədʒ əsɛsməns," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd tə lutɛnənt nɪlz. "pɹipɛɹ ði ɑɹtʃɝz fəɹ ən ətæk ɑn ðoʊz sidʒ ɛnʒənz, ən bɹɪŋ tu ʌv ði æʃəmən u ɑɹ ɑn duɾi. tɛl kæptən kɹiɾɪn tə wɑtʃ ðət tʃɹɑlɑk əsɔlt əkɹɔs ðə fɔɹd. ðəl ɹidʌbəl ðɛɹ ɛfɝts fɑloʊɪŋ ðɪs bɝɑʒ, əz ðəl pɹɪzum əs dɪsɔɹɾɝd."

"I want damage assessments," Ituralde said to Lieutenant Nils. "Prepare the archers for an attack on those siege engines, and bring two of the Asha'man who are on duty. Tell Captain Creedin to watch that Trolloc assault across the ford. They'll redouble their efforts following this barrage, as they'll presume us disordered."

ðə jʌŋ mæn nɑɾəd ən heɪsən ɔf əz ɹədʒɑbi lɪmpt ɪndə ðə pəvɪljən, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz bɹɔd tʃɪn. "ju ɡɛst ɹaɪɾ əɡɛn əbaʊt ðoʊz tʃɹibətʃəts. ðeɪ dɪd sɛɾ əm ʌp tə ətæk ʌs."

The young man nodded and hastened off as Rajabi limped into the pavilion, rubbing his broad chin. "You guessed right again about those trebuchets. They did set them up to attack us."

"aɪ tʃɹaɪ tə ɔlweɪz ɡɛs ɹaɪt," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd. "wɛn aɪ doʊnt, wi luz."

"I try to always guess right," Ituralde said. "When I don't, we lose."

ɹədʒɑbi ɡɹʌntɪd. oʊvɝhɛd, ðət stɔɹm bɔɪld. ɪn ðə dɪstəns, ɪɾɝɑldi kəd hɪɹ tʃɹɑləks kɔlɪŋ.

Rajabi grunted. Overhead, that storm boiled. In the distance, Ituralde could hear Trollocs calling.

wɔɹ dʒɹʌmz biɾɪŋ. mɛn ʃaʊɾɪŋ.

War drums beating. Men shouting.

"sʌmθɪŋz ɹɔŋ," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd.

"Something's wrong," Ituralde said.

"ðɪs hoʊl blʌɾi wɔɹ ɪz ɹɔŋ," ɹədʒɑbi sɛd. "wi ʃʊdn bi hɪɹ; ɪt ʃəd bi ðə sɑldəiənz. ðɛɹ hoʊl ɑɹmi, nɑɾ oʊnli ðə fju hɔɹsmən ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɡeɪv ʌs."

"This whole bloody war is wrong," Rajabi said. "We shouldn't be here; it should be the Saldaeans. Their whole army, not only the few horsemen the Lord Dragon gave us."

"mɔɹ ðən ðæt," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd, skænɪŋ ðə skaɪ. "waɪ kɑɹkəsɪz, ɹədʒɑbi?"

"More than that," Ituralde said, scanning the sky. "Why carcasses, Rajabi?"

"tə dɪmɔɹəlaɪz ʌs."

"To demoralize us."

ɪt wɑz ə nɑt-ənhɝd-ʌv tæktɪk. bʌt ðə fɝs vɑliz? waɪ nɑt juz stoʊnz wən ðeɪd də ðə moʊs dæmədʒ, ən ðən muv tə bɑɾiz wʌns sɝpɹaɪz hæd bɪn ɪkspɛndɪd? ðə tʃɹɑləks hædn ə maɪn fəɹ tæktɪks, bʌt ðə feɪdz . . . ðeɪ kəd bi kɹæfti. hid lɝn ðət fɝsthænd.

It was a not-unheard-of tactic. But the first volleys? Why not use stones when they'd do the most damage, and then move to bodies once surprise had been expended? The Trollocs hadn't a mind for tactics, but the Fades . . . they could be crafty. He'd learned that firsthand.

əz ɪɾɝɑldi stɛɹɾ ət ðə skaɪ, ənʌðɝ mæsɪv vɑli fɛl, əz ɪf spɔn baɪ ðə dɑɹk klaʊdz. laɪt, wɛɹ hæd ðeɪ ɡɑɾən ðət mɛni tʃɹibətʃəts? ɪnʌf tə θɹoʊ hʌnʒɹədz ə dɛd bɑɾiz.

As Ituralde stared at the sky, another massive volley fell, as if spawned by the dark clouds. Light, where had they gotten that many trebuchets? Enough to throw hundreds of dead bodies.

ðəɹ ɑɹ sɪkstin baɪ hɪz kaʊnt, ðə bɔɪ hæd sɛd. nɑt nɪɹli ɪnʌf. wɝ səm ə ðoʊz kɑɹkəsɪz fɔlɪŋ tu ivənli?

There are sixteen by his count, the boy had said. Not nearly enough. Were some of those carcasses falling too evenly?

ɪt hɪɾ ɪm laɪk ə bɝst ə fɹoʊzən ɹeɪn. ðoʊz klɛvɝ blʌɾi mɑnstɝz!

It hit him like a burst of frozen rain. Those clever bloody monsters!

"ɑɹtʃɝz!" ɪɾɝɑldi skɹimd. "ɑɹtʃɝz, wɑtʃ ðə skaɪz! ðoʊz ɑɹən bɑɾiz!"

"Archers!" Ituralde screamed. "Archers, watch the skies! Those aren't bodies!"

ɪt wɑz tu leɪt. əz i jɛld, ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ ənfɝl ðɛɹ wɪŋz; wɛl oʊvɝ hæf ə ðə "kɑɹkəsɪz"

It was too late. As he yelled, the Draghkar unfurled their wings; well over half of the "carcasses"

ɪn ðɪs vɑli wɝ lɪvɪŋ ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, haɪɾɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə fɔlɪŋ bɑɾiz. æftɝ ðə fɝs dʒɹæɡkɝ ətæk ɑn ɪz ɑɹmi ə fju deɪz bæk, hid lɛft ɑɹtʃɝz ɑn pɝmənən ɹoʊteɪʃən wɑtʃɪŋ ðə skaɪz deɪ ən naɪt.

in this volley were living Shadowspawn, hiding among the falling bodies. After the first Draghkar attack on his army a few days back, he'd left archers on permanent rotation watching the skies day and night.

bʌt ði ɑɹtʃɝz dɪdn əv ɔɹɾɝz tə faɪɝ ɑn fɔlɪŋ bɑɾiz. ɪɾɝɑldi kəntɪnjud tə bɛloʊ əz i lɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə pəvɪljən ən wɪpt ɪz sɔɹd fɹəm ɪts skæbɝd. ði ʌpɝ kæmp bɪkeɪm keɪɑs əz dʒɹæɡkɝ dʒɹɑpt əmɪd ðə soʊlʒɝz. ə lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝ ə ðɛm fɛl ɝaʊn ðə kəmæn pəvəl-aɪən, ðɛɹ tu-lɑɹdʒ blæk aɪz ʃaɪnɪŋ, dʒɹɔɪŋ mɛn təwɔɹɾ əm wɪð ðɛɹ swit sɔŋz.

But the archers didn't have orders to fire on falling bodies. Ituralde continued to bellow as he leaped out of the pavilion and whipped his sword from its scabbard. The upper camp became chaos as Draghkar dropped amid the soldiers. A large number of them fell around the command pavil-ion, their too-large black eyes shining, drawing men toward them with their sweet songs.

ɪɾɝɑldi skɹimd əz laʊɾ əz i kʊd, fɪlɪŋ ɪz ɪɹz wɪð ðə saʊn ə hɪz oʊn vɔɪs. wʌn ə ðə bists keɪm fəɹ hɪm, bʌɾ ɪz jɛl pɹɪvɛntɪɾ ɪm fɹəm hɪɹɪŋ ɪts kɹun. ɪt lʊk sɝpɹaɪzd - əz sɝpɹaɪzd əz sʌm- θɪŋ soʊ ɪnhjumən kəd lʊk - əz i stʌmbəl təwɔɹɾ ɪt, pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi dʒɹɔn, ðən stʃɹʌk ən ɛkspɝt θɹʌs θɹu ɪts nɛk. dɑɹk blʌd dʒɹɪbəl daʊn əkɹɔs mɪlki waɪt skɪn əz ɪɾɝɑldi jæŋkt ɪz bleɪd fɹi, stɪl skɹimɪŋ.

Ituralde screamed as loud as he could, filling his ears with the sound of his own voice. One of the beasts came for him, but his yell prevented him from hearing its croon. It looked surprised - as surprised as some- thing so inhuman could look - as he stumbled toward it, pretending to be drawn, then struck an expert thrust through its neck. Dark blood dribbled down across milky white skin as Ituralde yanked his blade free, still screaming.

hi sɔ ɹədʒɑbi stʌmbəl ən fɔl tə ðə ɡɹaʊn əz wʌn ə ðə ʃædoʊ-spɑn lɛpt ɑn hɪm.

He saw Rajabi stumble and fall to the ground as one of the Shadow-spawn leaped on him.

ɪɾɝɑldi kʊdnt ɡoʊ tə hɪm - hi wɑz kənfɹʌntəd baɪ ənʌðɝ ə ðə mɑnstɝz hɪmsɛlf. ɪn ə blɛsɪd moʊmənt, hi noʊɾəst bɔlz ə faɪɝ stʃɹaɪkɪŋ daʊn dʒɹæɡkɝ ɪn ði ɛɹ - ði æʃəmən.

Ituralde couldn't go to him - he was confronted by another of the monsters himself. In a blessed moment, he noticed balls of fire striking down Draghkar in the air - the Asha'man.

bʌɾ ət ðə seɪm taɪm, ɪn ðə dɪstəns, hi hɝd ðə wɔɹ dʒɹʌmz ɡɹoʊ laʊɾɝ. əz hid pɹɪdɪktɪd, ðə tʃɝnɪŋ fɔɹs ə tʃɹɑləks wəd bi stʃɹaɪkɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə fɔɹd wɪð əz mʌtʃ stʃɹɛŋkθ əz ðeɪ ɛvɝ hæd.

But at the same time, in the distance, he heard the war drums grow louder. As he'd predicted, the churning force of Trollocs would be striking across the ford with as much strength as they ever had.

laɪt, bʌt səmtaɪmz i heɪɾəd biɪŋ ɹaɪt.

Light, but sometimes he hated being right.

jud bɛɾɝ kip jəɹ pɹɑməs tə sɛn mi hɛlp, bɔɪ, ɪɾɝɑldi θɔɾ əz i fɔt ðə sɛkən dʒɹæɡkɝ, hɪz skɹimɪŋ ɡɹoʊɪŋ hɔɹs. laɪt, bʌt jud bɛɾɝ!

You'd better keep your promise to send me help, boy, Ituralde thought as he fought the second Draghkar, his screaming growing hoarse. Light, but you'd better!

feɪl stʃɹoʊd θɹu pɛɹɪnz kæmp, ði ɛɹ ɹɪŋɪŋ wɪð tʃæɾɝɪŋ vɔɪsəz, ɡɹʌns ʌv ɪɡzɝʃən ən kɔlz ə mɛn ɡɪvɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz. pɛɹɪn hæd sɛnt wʌn læst ɹɪkwɛs tə ðə waɪtkloʊks fəɹ pɑɹli, ən ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ ɹɪplaɪ jɛt.

Faile strode through Perrin's camp, the air ringing with chattering voices, grunts of exertion and calls of men giving orders. Perrin had sent one last request to the Whitecloaks for parley, and there had been no reply yet.

feɪl fɛlt ɹifɹɛʃt. ʃid spɛn ði ɪntaɪɝ naɪt nʌzəld əɡɛns pɛɹɪn ətɑp ðɛɹ hɪl. ʃid bɹɔt plɛnti ʌv bɛɾɪŋ ən blæŋkəts. ɪn səm weɪz, ðə ɡɹæsi hɪltɑp hæd bɪn mɔɹ kʌmftəɹbəl ðən ðɛɹ tɛnt.

Faile felt refreshed. She'd spent the entire night nuzzled against Perrin atop their hill. She'd brought plenty of bedding and blankets. In some ways, the grassy hilltop had been more comfortable than their tent.

ðə skaʊts hæd ɹɪtɝn fɹəm kɛɹhin ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ; ðɛɹ ɹipɔɹt wəd kʌm sun. fəɹ naʊ, feɪl hæd beɪðd ən iɾən.

The scouts had returned from Cairhien this morning; their report would come soon. For now, Faile had bathed and eaten.

ɪt wɑz taɪm tə də sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt bɹəleɪn.

It was time to do something about Berelain.

ʃi kɹɔs ðə tʃɹæmpəld ɡɹæs təwɔɹd ðə minɝ sɛkʃən ə kæmp, filɪŋ əɹ æŋɡɝ ɹaɪz.

She crossed the trampled grass toward the Mayener section of camp, feeling her anger rise.

bɹəleɪn hæd ɡɔn tu fɑɹ. pɛɹɪn kleɪm ðət ðə ɹumɝz keɪm fɹəm bɹəleɪnz meɪdz, nɑt ðə wʊmən hɝsɛlf, bʌt feɪl sɔ ðə tʃɹuθ. ðə fɝst wɑz ə mæstɝ ə mənɪpjəleɪɾɪŋ ən kəntʃɹoʊlɪŋ ɹumɝ. ðət wɑz wʌn ə ðə bɛst weɪz tə ɹul fɹəm ə pəzɪʃən ə ɹɛləɾɪv wiknəs. ðə fɝs dɪd soʊ ɪn min, ən ʃi dɪd ðə seɪm hɪɹ ɪn kæmp, wɛɹ feɪl wɑz ðə stʃɹɔŋɝ pɑɹɾi əz pɛɹɪnz waɪf.

Berelain had gone too far. Perrin claimed that the rumors came from Berelain's maids, not the woman herself, but Faile saw the truth. The First was a master of manipulating and controlling rumor. That was one of the best ways to rule from a position of relative weakness. The First did so in Mayene, and she did the same here in camp, where Faile was the stronger party as Perrin's wife.

ə pɛɹ ʌv wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz stʊɾ ət ði ɛntʃɹəns tə ðə minɝ sɛkʃən, ðɛɹ bɹɛstpleɪts peɪntəd kɹɪmzən, wɪŋ hɛlməts ʃeɪp laɪk pɑts ən ɪkstɛndɪŋ daʊn ðə bæks ə ðɛɹ nɛks. ðeɪ stʊɾ ʌp tɔlɝ əz feɪl nɪɹd, hoʊldɪŋ lænsɪz ðət wɝ moʊsli ɔɹnəmɛntəl, pɛnənz flæpɪŋ wɪð ðə ɡoʊldən hɔk ɪn flaɪt stɛnsɪld ɑn ðɛɹ blu lɛŋθs.

A pair of Winged Guards stood at the entrance to the Mayener section, their breastplates painted crimson, winged helmets shaped like pots and extending down the backs of their necks. They stood up taller as Faile neared, holding lances that were mostly ornamental, pennons flapping with the golden hawk in flight stenciled on their blue lengths.

feɪl hæd tə kɹeɪn tə mit ðɛɹ aɪz. "ɛskɔɹt mi tə jəɹ leɪɾi," ʃi ɔɹɾɝd.

Faile had to crane to meet their eyes. "Escort me to your lady," she ordered.

ðə ɡɑɹdz nɑɾəd, wʌn hoʊldɪŋ ʌp ə ɡɔntələɾəd hæn ən weɪvɪŋ fəɹ tu ʌðɝ mɛn fɹəm ɪnsaɪd ðə kæmp tə teɪk ʌp ðə wɑtʃ. "wi wɝ toʊl tə ɪkspɛk ju," ðə ɡɑɹd toʊl feɪl ɪn ə dip vɔɪs.

The guards nodded, one holding up a gauntleted hand and waving for two other men from inside the camp to take up the watch. "We were told to expect you," the guard told Faile in a deep voice.

feɪl ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ. "tədeɪ?"

Faile raised an eyebrow. "Today?"

"noʊ. ðə fɝst sɪmpli sɛd ðət ʃəd jə kʌm, jə wɝ tə bi oʊbeɪd."

"No. The First simply said that should you come, you were to be obeyed."

"ʌv kɔɹs aɪm tə bi oʊbeɪd. ðɪs ɪz maɪ hʌzbənz kæmp."

"Of course I'm to be obeyed. This is my husband's camp."

ðə ɡɑɹdz dɪd nɑɾ ɑɹɡju wɪð hɝ, ðoʊ ðeɪ pɹɑbli dɪsəɡɹid.

The guards did not argue with her, though they probably disagreed.

bɹəleɪn hæd bɪn sɛn tə əkʌmpəni pɛɹɪn, bʌɾ i hæd nɑt bɪn ɡɪvən ɪkspɹɛs kəmæn oʊvɝ əɹ əɹ əɹ tʃɹups.

Berelain had been sent to accompany Perrin, but he had not been given express command over her or her troops.

feɪl fɑloʊd ðə mɛn. ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɑz, baɪ ə mɪɹəkəl, æktʃəli  stɑɹt-ɪŋ tə dʒɹaɪ aʊt. feɪl hæd toʊl pɛɹɪn ðət ʃi wɑzn bɑðɝd baɪ ðə ɹu-mɔɹz bʌt ʃi wɑz fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd baɪ bɹəleɪnz boʊlnəs. ðət wʊmən, feɪl θɔt. haʊ dɛɹ ʃi -  noʊ. noʊ, feɪl kʊdn kəntɪnju daʊn ðət pæθ. ə ɡʊd ʃaʊɾɪŋ mætʃ wəd meɪk əɹ fil bɛɾɝ, bʌɾ ɪt wəd ɹiɪnfɔɹs ðə ɹumɝz. wʌɾ ɛls wəd pipəl sɝmaɪz ɪf ðeɪ sɔ hɝ stɔk tə ðə fɝsts tɛnt, ðən skɹim ət hɝ? feɪl hæd tə bi kɑm. ðət wəd bi dɪfəkəlt.

Faile followed the men. The ground was, by a miracle, actually start-ing to dry out. Faile had told Perrin that she wasn't bothered by the ru-mors but she was frustrated by Berelain's boldness. That woman, Faile thought. How dare she -  No. No, Faile couldn't continue down that path. A good shouting match would make her feel better, but it would reinforce the rumors. What else would people surmise if they saw her stalk to the First's tent, then scream at her? Faile had to be calm. That would be difficult.

ðə minɝ kæmp wɑz ɝeɪnʒd wɪð laɪnz ə mɛn ɹeɪɾieɪtɪŋ fɹəm ə sɛntʃɹəl tɛn laɪk spoʊks ɑn ə wil. ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹd dɪdn əv tɛns -  ðoʊz wɝ wɪð mæstɝ ɡɪl - bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə vɛɹi ɔɹɾɝli ɝeɪnʒmənt tə ðə ɡɹupɪŋz. ðeɪ ɔlmoʊst sim tu lɛvəl, ðə foʊldəd blæŋkəts, ðə paɪlz ə lænsɪz, ðə hɔɹs poʊlz ən ðə pɪɹiɑɾɪk faɪɹɛpɪts. bɹəleɪnz sɛntʃɹəl pəvɪljən wɑz lævəndɝ ən mɝun  - sælvədʒ fɹəm meɪɾən. feɪl meɪnteɪn əɹ kəmpoʊʒɝ əz ðə tu taʊɝɪŋ ɡɑɹdz lɛɾ əɹ ʌp tə ðə tɛnt. wʌn nɑkt ɑn ðə poʊst aʊtsaɪd fəɹ pɝmɪʃən tə ɛntɝ.

The Mayener camp was arranged with lines of men radiating from a central tent like spokes on a wheel. The Winged Guard didn't have tents -  those were with Master Gill - but there was a very orderly arrangement to the groupings. They almost seemed too level, the folded blankets, the piles of lances, the horse poles and the periodic firepits. Berelain's central pavilion was lavender and maroon  - salvage from Maiden. Faile maintained her composure as the two towering guards led her up to the tent. One knocked on the post outside for permission to enter.

bɹəleɪnz tʃɹæŋkwəl vɔɪs ɹɪspɑndɪd, ən ðə ɡɑɹd pʊʃt bæk ði ɛntʃɹəns flæp fəɹ feɪl. əz ʃi muv tə ɛntɝ, ɹʌslɪŋ ɪnsaɪd meɪɾ əɹ stɛp bæk, ən ənʊɹə keɪm aʊt. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ nɑɾəd tə feɪl, ði oʊvɝlæpɪŋ bɹeɪdz ɝaʊn əɹ feɪs swɪŋɪŋ. ʃi sim dɪsplizd; ʃi hædn ɹiɡeɪn əɹ mɪstʃɹəsəz feɪvɝ jɛt.

Berelain's tranquil voice responded, and the guard pushed back the entrance flap for Faile. As she moved to enter, rustling inside made her step back, and Annoura came out. The Aes Sedai nodded to Faile, the overlapping braids around her face swinging. She seemed displeased; she hadn't regained her mistress's favor yet.

feɪl tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ðən stɛpt ɪndə ðə pəvɪljən. ɪt wɑz kul ɪnsaɪd. ðə flɔɹ wɑz kʌvɝd wɪð ə mɝun ən ɡɹin ɹʌɡ ʌv ə twɪstɪŋ aɪvi pæɾɝn. ðoʊ ðə pəvɪljən lʊkt ɛmpti wɪθaʊt bɹəleɪnz juʒəwəl tʃɹævəl fɝnɪtʃɝ, ʃi dɪɾ əv ə pɛɹ ə stɝɾi oʊk tʃɛɹz ən ə laɪt teɪbəl fɹəm meɪɾən.

Faile took a deep breath, then stepped into the pavilion. It was cool inside. The floor was covered with a maroon and green rug of a twisting ivy pattern. Though the pavilion looked empty without Berelain's usual travel furniture, she did have a pair of sturdy oak chairs and a light table from Maiden.

ðə fɝst ɹoʊz. "leɪɾi feɪl," ʃi sɛd kɑmli. tədeɪ, ʃi wɔɹ ðə daɪədɛm ə min. ðə θɪn kɹaʊn hæɾ ə sɪmpəl ɡɹænduɹ əbaʊɾ ɪt, ənɔɹnə-mɛntɪd seɪv fəɹ ðə ɡoʊldən hɔk teɪkɪŋ flaɪɾ əz ɪf lipɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə sʌnlaɪt stʃɹimɪŋ ɪn pætʃəz θɹu ðə tɛn silɪŋ. flæps hæd bɪn ɹimuv ðəɹ tə lɛɾ ɪn ðə laɪt. ðə fɝsts dʒɹɛs wɑz ɡoʊld ən ɡɹin, ə vɛɹi sɪmpəl bɛlt əɾ əɹ weɪst, ðə nɛklaɪn plʌnʒɪŋ.

The First rose. "Lady Faile," she said calmly. Today, she wore the diadem of Mayene. The thin crown had a simple grandeur about it, unorna-mented save for the golden hawk taking flight as if leaping toward the sunlight streaming in patches through the tent ceiling. Flaps had been removed there to let in the light. The First's dress was gold and green, a very simple belt at her waist, the neckline plunging.

feɪl sæɾ ɪn wʌn ə ðə tʃɛɹz. ðɪs kɑnvɝseɪʃən wɑz deɪnʒɝəs; ɪt kəd lid tə dɪzæstɝ. bʌɾ ɪt hæd tə bi dʌn.

Faile sat in one of the chairs. This conversation was dangerous; it could lead to disaster. But it had to be done.

"aɪ tʃɹʌs jə ɑɹ wɛl?" bɹəleɪn sɛd. "ðə ɹeɪnz ə ðə læs fju deɪz əv nɑt bɪn oʊvɝli tæksɪŋ?"

"I trust you are well?" Berelain said. "The rains of the last few days have not been overly taxing?"

"ðə ɹeɪnz əv bɪn dʒɹɛdfəl, bɹəleɪn," feɪl sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪm nɑt hɪɹ tə tɔk əbaʊt ðɛm."

"The rains have been dreadful, Berelain," Faile said. "But I'm not here to talk about them."

bɹəleɪn pɝs pɝfək lɪps. laɪt, bʌt ðə wʊmən wɑz bjuɾəfəl! feɪl fɛl daʊnɹaɪt dɪnʒi baɪ kəmpɛɹəsən, hɝ noʊz tu lɑɹdʒ, hɝ bʊzəm tu smɔl. hɝ vɔɪs wɑznt nɪɹli əz məlɑɾɪk əz bɹəleɪnz. waɪ hæd ðə kɹ-ɛɾɝ meɪd pipəl əz pɝfəkt əz bɹəleɪn? wɑz ɪt mɑkɝi ʌv ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm?

Berelain pursed perfect lips. Light, but the woman was beautiful! Faile felt downright dingy by comparison, her nose too large, her bosom too small. Her voice wasn't nearly as melodic as Berelain's. Why had the Cre-ator made people as perfect as Berelain? Was it mockery of the rest of them?

bʌt pɛɹɪn dɪdn lʌv bɹəleɪn. hi lʌv feɪl. ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt.

But Perrin didn't love Berelain. He loved Faile. Remember that.

"vɛɹi wɛl," bɹəleɪn sɛd. "aɪ əsum ðɪs dɪskʌʃən wəd kʌm. lemi pɹɑməs jə ðət ðə ɹumɝz ɑɹ æbsəlutli fɔls; nʌθɪŋ ɪnəpɹoʊpɹiɪt hæpən bɪtwin maɪsɛlf ən jəɹ hʌzbənd."

"Very well," Berelain said. "I assumed this discussion would come. Let me promise you that the rumors are absolutely false; nothing inappropriate happened between myself and your husband."

"hi hæz toʊl mi ðəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi," feɪl sɛd, "æn aɪ tʃɹʌst ɪz wɝɾ oʊvɝ jʊɹz."

"He has told me that already," Faile said, "and I trust his word over yours."

ðɪs meɪd bɹəleɪn fɹaʊn. ʃi wɑz ə mæstɝ ə pəlɪɾəkəl ɪntɝækʃənz, pəzɛsɪŋ ə skɪl ən sʌɾəlti ðət feɪl ɛnvid. dɪspaɪɾ əɹ juθ, bɹəleɪn hæd kɛpt əɹ taɪni sɪɾi-steɪt fɹi fɹəm ðə mʌtʃ lɑɹdʒɝ ən paʊɝfəl tɛɹ. feɪl kəɾ oʊnli ɡɛs haʊ mʌtʃ dʒʌɡəlɪŋ, pəlɪɾəkəl dʌbəl-dilɪŋ ən ʃɪɹ klɛvɝnəs ðət mʌst əv ɹikwaɪɝd.

This made Berelain frown. She was a master of political interactions, possessing a skill and subtlety that Faile envied. Despite her youth, Berelain had kept her tiny city-state free from the much larger and powerful Tear. Faile could only guess how much juggling, political double-dealing and sheer cleverness that must have required.

"soʊ waɪ hæv jə kʌm tə mi?" bɹəleɪn æskt, sɪɾɪŋ daʊn. "ɪf jəɹ hɑɹɾ ɪz əɾ iz, ðən ðəɹ ɪz noʊ pɹɑbləm."

"So why have you come to me?" Berelain asked, sitting down. "If your heart is at ease, then there is no problem."

"wi boʊθ noʊ ðət wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt jə slɛpt wɪð maɪ hʌzbən ɪz nɑɾ ən ɪʃu hɪɹ," feɪl sɛd, ən bɹəleɪnz aɪz waɪɾənd. "ɪɾ ɪzənt wʌt hæpənd, bʌt wʌɾ ɪz pɹəzumd, ðəɾ æŋɡɝz mi."

"We both know that whether or not you slept with my husband is not an issue here," Faile said, and Berelain's eyes widened. "It isn't what happened, but what is presumed, that angers me."

"ɹumɝz kən bi faʊn ɪn ɛni pleɪs wɛɹ pipəl ɑɹ ɡæðɝd," bɹəleɪn sɛd. "pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli wɛɹ mɛn ɡɑsəp."

"Rumors can be found in any place where people are gathered," Berelain said. "Particularly where men gossip."

"sʌtʃ stʃɹɔŋ, pɝsɪstən ɹumɝz ɑɹ ənlaɪkli tə hæv hæpənd wɪθaʊɾ ɛnkɝɪdʒmənt," feɪl sɛd.

"Such strong, persistent rumors are unlikely to have happened without encouragement," Faile said.

"naʊ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə kæmp - ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðə ɹɛfjudʒiz swɔɹn tə mi - əsumz ðət jə bɛɾəd maɪ hʌzbənd waɪl aɪ wɑz əweɪ. ðɪs nɑɾ oʊnli meɪks mi lʊk laɪk ə ful, bʌt kæsts ə ʃædoʊ əpɑn pɛɹɪnz ɑnɝ. hi kænɑt liɾ ɪf pipəl teɪk ɪm fəɹ ðə taɪp ə mæn u wɪl ɹʌn tə ði ɑɹmz ʌv ənʌðɝ wʊmən ðə moʊmən ɪz waɪf ɪz əweɪ."

"Now everyone in the camp - including the refugees sworn to me - assumes that you bedded my husband while I was away. This not only makes me look like a fool, but casts a shadow upon Perrin's honor. He cannot lead if people take him for the type of man who will run to the arms of another woman the moment his wife is away."

"ʌðɝ ɹulɝz əv oʊvɝkʌm sətʃ ɹumɝz," bɹəleɪn sɛd, "æn fəɹ mɛni ʌv ðɛm, ðə ɹumɝz wɝn ənfaʊndɪd. mɑnɑɹkiz sɝvaɪv ɪnfɪdɛlɪɾi."

"Other rulers have overcome such rumors," Berelain said, "and for many of them, the rumors weren't unfounded. Monarchies survive infidelity."

"pɝhæps ɪn ɪljən əɹ tɛɹ," feɪl sɛd, "bʌt sɑldɑiə ɪkspɛks bɛɾɝ ʌv ɪts mɑnɑɹks. əz də ðə pipəl ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. pɛɹɪn ɪz nɑt laɪk ʌðɝ ɹulɝz. ðə weɪ hɪz mɛn lʊk əɾ ɪm ɹɪps ɪm əpɑɹɾ ɪnsaɪd."

"Perhaps in Illian or Tear," Faile said, "but Saldaea expects better of its monarchs. As do the people of the Two Rivers. Perrin is not like other rulers. The way his men look at him rips him apart inside."

"aɪ θɪŋk jə ʌndɝɛstəmeɪt hɪm," bɹəleɪn sɛd. "hi wɪl oʊvɝkʌm ən hɪl lɝn tə juz ɹumɝ fəɹ ɪz ɡeɪn. ðət wɪl meɪk ɪm stʃɹɔŋɝ əz ə mæn ən ə ɹulɝ."

"I think you underestimate him," Berelain said. "He will overcome and he will learn to use rumor for his gain. That will make him stronger as a man and a ruler."

feɪl stʌɾid ðə wʊmən. "ju doʊn ʌndɝstæn ɪm əɾ ɔl, də ju?

Faile studied the woman. "You don't understand him at all, do you?

bɹəleɪn ɹiæktəɾ əz ɪf ʃid bɪn slæpt, pʊlɪŋ bæk. ʃi ɑbviəsli dɪdn laɪk ðə blʌntnəs ə ðɪs kɑnvɝseɪʃən. ðət maɪt ɡɪv feɪl səm slaɪɾ ædvæntɪdʒ.

Berelain reacted as if she'd been slapped, pulling back. She obviously didn't like the bluntness of this conversation. That might give Faile some slight advantage.

"aɪ ʌndɝstæn mɛn, leɪɾi feɪl," bɹəleɪn sɛd koʊldli. "æn jəɹ hʌzbən ɪz noʊ ɪksɛpʃən. sɪns juv dɪsaɪɾɪd tə bi kændəd, əl ɹɪtɝn ɪn kaɪnd. jə wɝ klɛvɝ tə teɪk eɪbɑɹə wən jə dɪd, wɛldɪŋ sɑldɑiə tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, bʌt də nɑt θɪŋk ðət hɪl ɹɪmeɪn jʊɹz wɪθaʊt kɑntɛst."

"I understand men, Lady Faile," Berelain said coldly. "And your husband is no exception. Since you have decided to be candid, I will return in kind. You were clever to take Aybara when you did, welding Saldaea to the Dragon Reborn, but do not think that he will remain yours without contest."

feɪl tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. ɪt wɑz taɪm tə meɪk əɹ pleɪ. "pɛɹɪnz ɹɛpjəteɪʃən əz bɪn səvɪɹli dæmədʒ baɪ wʌt juv dʌn, maɪ leɪɾi fɝst. fəɹ maɪ oʊn dɪsɑnɝ, aɪ maɪɾ əv bɪn eɪbəl tə fɝɡɪv ju. bʌt nɑt fəɹ hɪz."

Faile took a deep breath. It was time to make her play. "Perrin's reputation has been severely damaged by what you have done, my Lady First. For my own dishonor, I might have been able to forgive you. But not for his."

"aɪ doʊn si wʌt kən bi dʌn."

"I don't see what can be done."

"aɪ du," feɪl sɛd. "æn aɪm pɹɪɾi sɝɾən wʌn ʌv əs ɪz gɑnə hæv tə daɪ."

"I do," Faile said. "And I'm pretty certain one of us is going to have to die."

bɹəleɪn ɹɪmeɪn ɪmpæsɪv. "ɪkskjus mi?"

Berelain remained impassive. "Excuse me?"

"ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, ɪf ə wʊmən faɪnz ðəɾ ənʌðɝ əz bɪn bɛɾɪŋ əɹ hʌzbənd, ʃiz ɡɪvən ði ɑpʃən ə naɪf kɑmbæt." ðət wɑz tʃɹu, ðoʊ ðə tʃɹədɪʃən wɑz ən oʊld wʌn, ɹɛɹli əbzɝvd ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. "ði oʊnli weɪ tə klɪɹ maɪ neɪm ɪz fəɹ jə ən mi tə faɪt."

"In the Borderlands, if a woman finds that another has been bedding her husband, she is given the option of knife combat." That was true, though the tradition was an old one, rarely observed any longer. "The only way to clear my name is for you and me to fight."

"wʌt wəd ðət pɹuv?"

"What would that prove?"

"ɪf nʌθɪŋ ɛls, ɪf jə wɝ dɛd, ɪt wəd stɑp ɛniwʌn fɹəm θɪŋkɪŋ ðət jə ɑɹ stɪl slipɪŋ wɪð maɪ hʌzbən bɪhaɪn maɪ bæk."

"If nothing else, if you were dead, it would stop anyone from thinking that you are still sleeping with my husband behind my back."

"ɑɹ jə æktʃəli  θɹɛɾənɪŋ mi ɪn maɪ oʊn tɛnt?"

"Are you actually threatening me in my own tent?"

"ðɪs ɪz nɑɾ ə θɹɛt," feɪl sɛd, ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ fɝm. laɪt, ʃi hoʊp ðɪs wɛn ðə ɹaɪt weɪ. "ðɪs ɪz ə tʃælənʒ."

"This is not a threat," Faile said, remaining firm. Light, she hoped this went the right way. "This is a challenge."

bɹəleɪn stʌɾid hɝ, aɪz kælkjəleɪɾɪŋ. "aɪ wɪl meɪk ə pʌblɪk steɪtmənt. əl pʌblɪkli tʃæstaɪz maɪ meɪdz fəɹ ðɛɹ ɹumɝz, ən wɪl tɛl ðə kæmp ðət nʌθɪŋ hæpənd."

Berelain studied her, eyes calculating. "I will make a public statement. I will publicly chastise my maids for their rumors, and will tell the camp that nothing happened."

"du jə ɹɪli θɪŋk ðət wəd stɑp ðə ɹumɝz? jə dɪdn əbdʒɛk tə ðɛm bɪfɔɹ maɪ ɹɪtɝn; ðəɾ ɪz sin əz pɹuf. ænd, ʌv kɔɹs, naʊ jə wəd bi ɪkspɛktəd tə ækt əz ɪf nʌθɪŋ hæpənd."

"Do you really think that would stop the rumors? You didn't object to them before my return; that is seen as proof. And, of course, now you would be expected to act as if nothing happened."

'ju kæn bi sɪɹiəs əbaʊt ðɪs . . . tʃælənʒ."

'You can't be serious about this . . . challenge."

ɪn ɹɪɡɑɹdz tə maɪ hʌzbənz ɑnɝ, bɹəleɪn, aɪm ɔlweɪz sɪɹiəs." ʃi mɛt ðə wʊmənz aɪz, ən sɔ kənsɝn ðɛɹ. bɹəleɪn dɪdnt wɑnə faɪt hɝ. ænd, ʌv kɔɹs, feɪl dɪdnt wɑnə faɪt bɹəleɪn, ən nɑt dʒʌs kəz ʃi wɑzn sɝɾən ɪf ʃi kəd wɪn əɹ nɑt. ðoʊ ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz wɑntəd tə ɡɛt ɹivɛnʒ ɑn ðə fɝs fəɹ ðət taɪm wən bɹəleɪn hæd teɪkən əɹ naɪf fɹəm hɝ.

In regards to my husband's honor, Berelain, I am always serious." She met the woman's eyes, and saw concern there. Berelain didn't want to fight her. And, of course, Faile didn't want to fight Berelain, and not just because she wasn't certain if she could win or not. Though she had always wanted to get revenge on the First for that time when Berelain had taken her knife from her.

"aɪ wɪl meɪk ðə tʃælənʒ fɔɹməli ðɪs ivnɪŋ, bɪfɔɹ ði ɪntaɪɝ kæmp," feɪl sɛd, kipɪŋ əɹ vɔɪs ivən. "ju wɪl əv wʌn deɪ tə ɹɪspɑn əɹ liv."

"I will make the challenge formally this evening, before the entire camp," Faile said, keeping her voice even. "You will have one day to respond or leave."

"aɪ wɪl nɑt bi ə pɑɹɾi tə ðɪs fulɪʃnəs."

"I will not be a party to this foolishness."

"ju ɔlɹɛɾi ɑɹ," feɪl sɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ. "ðɪs ɪz wʌt jə sɛɾ ɪn moʊʃən ðə moʊmən jə lɛt ðoʊz ɹumɝz bɪɡɪn."

"You already are," Faile said, rising. "This is what you set in motion the moment you let those rumors begin."

feɪl tɝn tə wɔk fɹəm ðə tɛnt. ʃi hæd tə wɝk hɑɹd tə haɪɾ əɹ nɝvəsnəs. hæd bɹəleɪn sin haʊ hɝ bɹaʊ pɹɪkəld wɪð swɛt? feɪl fɛlt əz ɪf ʃi wɔkt ɑn ðə vɛɹi ɛdʒ ʌv ə sɔɹd.

Faile turned to walk from the tent. She had to work hard to hide her nervousness. Had Berelain seen how her brow prickled with sweat? Faile felt as if she walked on the very edge of a sword.

ʃəd wɝɾ ə ðɪs tʃælənʒ ɡɛt tə pɛɹɪn, hi wəd bi fjʊɹiəs. ʃi hæd tə hoʊp ðət -  "leɪɾi feɪl," bɹəleɪn sɛd fɹəm bɪhaɪnd. ðə fɝsts vɔɪs wɑz ɛdʒd wɪð kənsɝn. "ʃʊɹli wi kən kʌm tə ənʌðɝ əkɑmədeɪʃən. də nɑt fɔɹs ðɪs."

Should word of this challenge get to Perrin, he would be furious. She had to hope that -  "Lady Faile," Berelain said from behind. The First's voice was edged with concern. "Surely we can come to another accommodation. Do not force this."

feɪl stɑpt, hɑɹt θʌmpɪŋ. ʃi tɝn bæk. ðə fɝs lʊk dʒɛnjəwənli wɝid. jɛs, ʃi bɪliv ðət feɪl wɑz blʌdθɝsti ɪnʌf tə meɪk ðɪs tʃælənʒ.

Faile stopped, heart thumping. She turned back. The First looked genuinely worried. Yes, she believed that Faile was bloodthirsty enough to make this challenge.

"aɪ wɑn jə aʊɾ ə pɛɹɪnz laɪf, bɹəleɪn," feɪl sɛd. "aɪ wɪl əv ðæt, wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ."

"I want you out of Perrin's life, Berelain," Faile said. "I will have that, one way or another."

"ju wɪʃ mi tə liv?" bɹəleɪn æskt. "ðə tæsks ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɡeɪv mi ɑɹ fɪnɪʃt. aɪ səpoʊz aɪ kəd teɪk maɪ mɛn ən mɑɹtʃ ənʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən."

"You wish me to leave?" Berelain asked. "The tasks the Lord Dragon gave me are finished. I suppose I could take my men and march another direction."

noʊ, feɪl dɪdnt wɑn əɹ tə ɡoʊ. ðə dɪsəpɪɹəns ə hɝ tʃɹups wəd bi ə bloʊ, ɪn ðə feɪs ə ðət lumɪŋ waɪtkloʊk ɑɹmi. ən pɛɹɪn wəɾ əv niɾ ə ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹɾ əɡɛn, feɪl səspɛktəd.

No, Faile didn't want her to go. The disappearance of her troops would be a blow, in the face of that looming Whitecloak army. And Perrin would have need of the Winged Guard again, Faile suspected.

"noʊ," feɪl sɛd. "livɪŋ wɪl də nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ðə ɹumɝz, bɹəleɪn."

"No," Faile said. "Leaving will do nothing for the rumors, Berelain."

"ɪt wɪl də əz mʌtʃ əz kɪlɪŋ mi wʊd," ðə wʊmən sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "ɪf wi faɪt, ən jə sʌmhaʊ mænədʒ tə kɪl mi, ɔl ðət wəd bi sɛɾ ɪz ðət jə dɪskʌvɝd jəɹ hʌzbənz ɪnfɪdɛlɪɾi ən bɪkeɪm ɛnɹeɪdʒd. aɪ feɪl tə si haʊ ðət wəd hɛlp jəɹ pəzɪʃən. ɪt wəɾ oʊnli ɛnkɝɪdʒ ðə ɹumɝz."

"It will do as much as killing me would," the woman said dryly. "If we fight, and you somehow managed to kill me, all that would be said is that you discovered your husband's infidelity and became enraged. I fail to see how that would help your position. It would only encourage the rumors."

"ju si maɪ pɹɑbləm, ðɛn," feɪl sɛd, lɛɾɪŋ əɹ ɛksæspɝeɪʃən ʃoʊ θɹu. "ðɛɹ simz tə bi noʊ weɪ tə bi ɹɪɾ ə ðiz ɹumɝz."

"You see my problem, then," Faile said, letting her exasperation show through. "There seems to be no way to be rid of these rumors."

bɹəleɪn stʌɾid hɝ. ðə wʊmən hæd wʌns pɹɑməst ʃi wəd teɪk pɛɹɪn. hæɾ ɔl bʌt vaʊɾ ɪt.

Berelain studied her. The woman had once promised she would take Perrin. Had all but vowed it.

ʃi sim tə hæv bækt ɔf ɑn ðæt, ɪn pɑɹt, ɹisənli. ən əɹ aɪz ʃoʊd hɪns ʌv wɝi.

She seemed to have backed off on that, in part, recently. And her eyes showed hints of worry.

ʃi ɹiəlaɪzɪz ðət ʃi lɛt ðɪs ɡoʊ tu fɑɹ, feɪl θɔt, ʌndɝstændɪŋ. əɹ kɔɹs. bɹəleɪn hædn ɪkspɛktəd feɪl tə ɹɪtɝn fɹəm meɪɾən. ðət wɑz waɪ ʃid meɪd sətʃ ə boʊl muv.

She realizes that she let this go too far, Faile thought, understanding. Or course. Berelain hadn't expected Faile to return from Maiden. That was why she'd made such a bold move.

naʊ ʃi ɹilaɪzd ʃiɾ oʊvɝɪkstɛndəd hɝsɛlf. ən ʃi lədʒɪɾəmətli θɔt feɪl ənhɪnʒd ɪnʌf tə duəl əɹ ɪn pʌblɪk.

Now she realized she'd overextended herself. And she legitimately thought Faile unhinged enough to duel her in public.

"aɪ nɛvɝ wɑntəd ðɪs, bɹəleɪn," feɪl sɛd, wɔkɪŋ bæk ɪndə ðə tɛnt. "ænd niðɝ dɪd pɛɹɪn.

"I never wanted this, Berelain," Faile said, walking back into the tent. "And neither did Perrin.

jəɹ ətɛnʃənz ɑɹ ən ənɔɪəns tə əs boʊθ."

Your attentions are an annoyance to us both."

"jɔɹ hʌzbən dɪd lɪɾəl tə dɪsweɪd mi," bɹəleɪn sɛd, ɑɹmz foʊldəd. "dʊɹɪŋ jəɹ æbsəns, ðəɹ wɝ pɔɪns wɛɹ i dɝɛkli ɛnkɝɪdʒ mi."

"Your husband did little to dissuade me," Berelain said, arms folded. "During your absence, there were points where he directly encouraged me."

"ju ʌndɝstæn ɪm soʊ lɪɾəl, bɹəleɪn." ɪt wɑz əmeɪzɪŋ haʊ ðə mæn kəd bi soʊ blaɪnd waɪl biɪŋ soʊ klɛvɝ ɪn ʌðɝ weɪz.

"You understand him so little, Berelain." It was amazing how the man could be so blind while being so clever in other ways.

"soʊ jə kleɪm," bɹəleɪn sɛd.

"So you claim," Berelain said.

"ju hæv tu tʃɔɪsəz ɹaɪt naʊ, bɹəleɪn," feɪl sɛd, stɛpɪŋ ʌp tə hɝ. "ju kən faɪt mi, ən wʌn ʌv əs wɪl daɪ. jəɹ ɹaɪt, ðət wʊdnt n ðə ɹumɝz. bʌɾ ɪt wəɾ ɛn jəɹ tʃænsəz ət pɛɹɪn. iðɝ jud bi dɛɾ əɹ jud bi ðə wʊmən u kɪld ɪz waɪf.

"You have two choices right now, Berelain," Faile said, stepping up to her. "You can fight me, and one of us will die. You're right, that wouldn't nd the rumors. But it would end your chances at Perrin. Either you'd be dead or you'd be the woman who killed his wife.

"jɔɹ ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs," feɪl sɛd, miɾɪŋ bɹəleɪnz aɪz, "ɪz tə kʌm ʌp wɪð ə weɪ tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðiz ɹumɝz wʌns ən fəɹ ɔl. jə kɑz ðɪs mɛs.

"Your other choice," Faile said, meeting Berelain's eyes, "is to come up with a way to destroy these rumors once and for all. You caused this mess.

jəl fɪks ɪt."

You will fix it."

ən ðəɹ wɑz əɹ ɡæmbəl. feɪl kʊdn θɪŋk ʌv ə weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən, bʌt bɹəleɪn wɑz mʌtʃ mɔɹ əkɑmplɪʃt ɪn ðɪs ɹəɡɑɹd ðən ʃi wɑz. soʊ feɪl keɪm, pɹipɛɹd tə mənɪpjəleɪt bɹəleɪn ɪndə θɪŋkɪŋ ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə də sʌmθɪŋ ənɹiznəbəl. ðən lɛt ðə wʊmənz ɪmpɹɛsɪv pəlɪɾəkəl əkjumən ətæk ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən.

And there was her gamble. Faile couldn't think of a way out of the situation, but Berelain was much more accomplished in this regard than she was. So Faile came, prepared to manipulate Berelain into thinking she was ready to do something unreasonable. Then let the woman's impressive political acumen attack the situation.

wəɾ ɪt wɝk?

Would it work?

feɪl mɛt bɹəleɪnz aɪz, ən əlaʊd hɝsɛlf tə fil əɹ æŋɡɝ. hɝ aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ ət wʌt hæd hæpənd. ʃi wɑz biɪŋ biɾən, fɹoʊzən ən hjumɪlieɪɾɪd baɪ ðɛɹ kɑmən ɛnəmi. ən dʊɹɪŋ ðæt, bɹəleɪn hæd ðə ɡɔl tə də sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðɪs?

Faile met Berelain's eyes, and allowed herself to feel her anger. Her outrage at what had happened. She was being beaten, frozen and humiliated by their common enemy. And during that, Berelain had the gall to do something like this?

ʃi hɛl ðə fɝsts aɪz. noʊ, feɪl dɪd nɑɾ əv əz mʌtʃ pəlɪɾəkəl ɪkspɪɹiəns əz bɹəleɪn. bʌt ʃi hæd sʌmθɪŋ ðə wʊmən dɪdnt. ʃi lʌv pɛɹɪn. dipli, tʃɹuli. ʃi wəd də ɛniθɪŋ tə kip ɪm fɹəm biɪŋ hɝt.

She held the First's eyes. No, Faile did not have as much political experience as Berelain. But she had something the woman didn't. She loved Perrin. Deeply, truly. She would do anything to keep him from being hurt.

ðə fɝst stʌɾid hɝ. "vɛɹi wɛl," ʃi sɛd. "soʊ bi ɪt. bi pɹaʊɾ ə jɝsɛlf, feɪl. ɪts . . . ɹɛɹ ðəɾ aɪ teɪk maɪsɛlf ɔf ə pɹaɪz aɪ hæv lɔŋ dɪzaɪɝd."

The First studied her. "Very well," she said. "So be it. Be proud of yourself, Faile. It is . . . rare that I take myself off a prize I have long desired."

"ju hævən sɛd haʊ wi kəd ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ə ðə ɹumɝz." "ðɛɹ meɪ bi ə mɛθəd," bɹəleɪn sɛd.

"You haven't said how we could get rid of the rumors." "There may be a method," Berelain said.

"bʌɾ ɪɾəl bi dɪsteɪsfəl." feɪl ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ.

"But it will be distasteful." Faile raised an eyebrow.

wɪl nid tə bi sin əz fɹɛnz," bɹəleɪn ɪkspleɪnd. "faɪɾɪŋ, biɪŋ əɾ ɑdz, ðɪs wɪl fjuəl ðə ɹumɝz. bʌɾ ɪf wəɹ sin spɛndɪŋ taɪm wɪð wʌn ənʌðɝ, ɪɾəl dɪsɑɹm ðɛm. ðæt, mɪkst wɪð ə fɔɹməl ɹɪnʌnsieɪʃən ɑn maɪ pɑɹɾ ə ðə ɹumɝz, wɪl laɪkli bi ɪnʌf."

We will need to be seen as friends," Berelain explained. "Fighting, being at odds, this will fuel the rumors. But if we are seen spending time with one another, it will disarm them. That, mixed with a formal renunciation on my part of the rumors, will likely be enough."

feɪl sæt daʊn ɪn ðə tʃɛɹ ʃi hæd bɪn juzɪŋ ɝliɝ. fɹɛnz? ʃi dɪtɛstɪd ðɪs wʊmən.

Faile sat down in the chair she had been using earlier. Friends? She detested this woman.

ɪt wəɾ əv tə bi ə bəlivəbəl ækt," bɹəleɪn sɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ ən wɔkɪŋ oʊvɝ tə ðə sɝvɪŋ stæn ət ðə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə tɛnt. ʃi pɔɹd hɝsɛlf səm tʃɪld waɪn. "oʊnli ðət wəd wɝk."

It would have to be a believable act," Berelain said, rising and walking over to the serving stand at the corner of the tent. She poured herself some chilled wine. "Only that would work."

"jul faɪn ənʌðɝ mæn, əz wɛl," feɪl sɛd. "sʌmwʌn jə kən ɡɪv jəɹ ətɛnʃənz tə, fəɹ ə taɪm ət list. tə pɹuv ðət jə ɑɹ nɑɾ ɪntɪɹ ɪn pɛɹɪn."

"You'll find another man, as well," Faile said. "Someone you can give your attentions to, for a time at least. To prove that you are not intere in Perrin."

bɹəleɪn ɹeɪz ðə kʌp. "jɛs," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ səspɛk ðət wəd hɛlp tu.

Berelain raised the cup. "Yes," she said. "I suspect that would help too.

kən jə pʊɾ ɑn sətʃ ən ækt, feɪl ni bæʃɪɹ teɪbɑɹə?"

Can you put on such an act, Faile ni Bashere t'Aybara?"

jə bɪlivd aɪ wɑz ɹɛɾi tə kɪl jə oʊvɝ ðɪs, dɪdn ju, feɪl θɔt, "aɪ pɹɑməs ɪt."

You believed I was ready to kill you over this, didn't you, Faile thought, "I promise it."

bɹəleɪn pɔzd, waɪnkʌp hæfweɪ tə hɝ lɪps. ðən ʃi smaɪld, ən dʒɹæŋk. "wi ʃæl si, ðɛn," ʃi sɛd, loʊɝɪŋ ðə kʌp, "wʌt kʌmz ə ðɪs"

Berelain paused, winecup halfway to her lips. Then she smiled, and drank. "We shall see, then," she said, lowering the cup, "what comes of this"


tʃæptɝ naɪntin


CHAPTER 19

tɔk ə dʒɹæɡənz


Talk of Dragons

mæt tʌɡd ɑn ə stɝɾi bɹaʊn koʊt. ðə bʌɾənz wɝ bɹæs, bʌɾ ʌðɝ ðən ðæt, ɪt wɑz fɹi ʌv ɔɹnəmɛnteɪʃən. meɪɾ ʌv ə θɪk wʊl, ɪt hæɾ ə fju hoʊlz fɹəm æɹoʊz ðət ɹɪli ʃʊɾə kɪl hɪm. wʌn ə ðə hoʊlz hæɾ ə blʌdsteɪn ɝaʊn ɪt, bʌt ðət hæd moʊsli bɪn wɑʃt aʊt. ɪt wɑz ə naɪs koʊt. hi wʊɾə peɪd ɡʊd kɔɪn fəɹ ə koʊt laɪk ðɪs wʌn, wən i lɪv bæk ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz.

Mat tugged on a sturdy brown coat. The buttons were brass, but other than that, it was free of ornamentation. Made of a thick wool, it had a few holes from arrows that really should have killed him. One of the holes had a bloodstain around it, but that had mostly been washed out. It was a nice coat. He would have paid good coin for a coat like this one, when he lived back in the Two Rivers.

hi ɹʌbd ɪz feɪs, lʊkɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪɹɝ ə hɪz nu tɛnt. hi hæd ʃeɪvd ɔf ðət blʌɾi bɪɹd, faɪnəli. haʊ dɪd pɛɹɪn mænədʒ ðət blʌɾi ɪtʃɪŋ? ðə mæn mʌst əv sændpeɪpɝ fəɹ skɪn. wɛl, mæt wəd faɪn ənʌðɝ weɪ tə dɪsɡaɪz hɪmsɛlf, wən niɾəd.

He rubbed his face, looking in the mirror of his new tent. He had shaved off that bloody beard, finally. How did Perrin manage that bloody itching? The man must have sandpaper for skin. Well, Mat would find another way to disguise himself, when needed.

hi hæd nɪk hɪmsɛlf ə fju taɪmz waɪl ʃeɪvɪŋ. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əz ɪf i hæd fɝɡɑɾən haʊ tə teɪk kɛɹ ə hɪmsɛlf. hi dɪd nɑt niɾ ə mænsɝvən tə də wʌɾ i kəd mænədʒ ɑn ɪz oʊn. nɑɾɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf, hi pʊld ɑn ɪz hæɾ ən ɡɹæbd ɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə tɛnt; ðə ɹeɪvənz ɑn ðə bleɪd sim tə pɝtʃ ɪksaɪɾədli ɪn æntɪsəpeɪʃən ə bæɾəlz tə kʌm. "blʌɾi ɹaɪt jə du," mæt sɛd, ɹɛstɪŋ ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ əz i wɔkt aʊɾ əɹ ðə tɛnt. hi ɡɹæbd ɪz pæk ən slʌŋ ɪɾ oʊvɝ ɪz ʌðɝ ʃoʊldɝ, stɑɹɾɪŋ tənaɪt, hi wəd bi spɛndɪŋ naɪts ɪn ðə sɪɾi.

He had nicked himself a few times while shaving. But it was not as if he had forgotten how to take care of himself. He did not need a manservant to do what he could manage on his own. Nodding to himself, he pulled on his hat and grabbed his ashandarei from the corner of the tent; the ravens on the blade seemed to perch excitedly in anticipation of battles to come. "Bloody right you do," Mat said, resting the ashandarei on his shoulder as he walked out or the tent. He grabbed his pack and slung it over his other shoulder, Starting tonight, he would be spending nights in the city.

hi stʃɹoʊd θɹu kæmp, nɑɾɪŋ tə ə ɡɹup ə pæsɪŋ ɹɛdʒɹmz. hi hæd dʌbəl ðə wɑtʃ. hi wɑz wɝiɾ əbaʊt ðə ɡoʊləm, bʌɾ ɔlsoʊ əbaʊt ðə mɛni mɪlətɛɹi kæmps ɪn ði ɛɹiə. hæf wɝ mɝsənɛɹiz, hæf wɝ ðə ɹɪteɪnɝz ə ðɪs maɪnɝ lɔɹɾ əɹ ðæt, kʌmɪŋ tə peɪ ɹɪspɛks tə ðə kwin səspɪʃəsli ɝaɪvɪŋ æftɝ ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ wɑz dʌn.

He strode through camp, nodding to a group of passing Redarms. He had doubled the watch. He was worried about the gholam, but also about the many military camps in the area. Half were mercenaries, half were the retainers of this minor lord or that, coming to pay respects to the Queen suspiciously arriving after the righting was done.

noʊ daʊɾ itʃ ən ɛvɹi wʌn wɑz pɹəfɛsɪŋ ɪz hɑɹtfɛlt əlidʒəns tə ɪleɪn, ɪkspleɪnɪŋ ðəɾ ɪz mɛn səpɔɹɾəd əɹ ɔl əlɔŋ. ðɛɹ wɝdz pɹɑb-eɪbli fɛl ə lɪɾəl flæt, sɪns mæt hæɾ ɪɾ ɑn ɡʊɾ əθɔɹəɾi fɹəm θɹi sɛpɹət dʒɹʌŋks ɪn tævɝnz ðəɾ ɪleɪn hæd juz tʃɹævlɪŋ ɪkstɛnsɪvli ɪn ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ əɹ dɪfɛns. ɪt wɑz iziɝ tə feɪn ə dɪleɪɾ ɝaɪvəl wən jə wɝ ɹɪspɑndɪŋ tə ə ɹɪɾən mɛsədʒ.

No doubt each and every one was professing his heartfelt allegiance to Elayne, explaining that his men supported her all along. Their words prob-ably fell a little flat, since Mat had it on good authority from three separate drunks in taverns that Elayne had used Traveling extensively in recruiting her defense. It was easier to feign a delayed arrival when you were responding to a written message.

"mæt! mæt!"

"Mat! Mat!"

mæt stɑpt ɑn ðə pæθweɪ aʊtsaɪɾ ɪz tɛn əz oʊlvɝ keɪm ɹeɪsɪŋ ʌp ðə bɔɪ hæd teɪkən tə wɛɹɪŋ ə ɹɛd bæn ɝaʊn ɪz ɑɹm, mʌtʃ əz ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz dɪd, bʌɾ i stɪl wɔɹ ɪz bɹaʊn tʃɹaʊzɝz ən koʊt. hi wɑz kæɹiɪŋ ɪz ɹoʊld-ʌp klɔθ fəɹ sneɪks ən fɑksəz ʌndɝ wʌn ɑɹm ən ə pæk slʌŋ oʊvɝ ði ʌðɝ.

Mat stopped on the pathway outside his tent as Olver came racing up The boy had taken to wearing a red band around his arm, much as the Redarms did, but he still wore his brown trousers and coat. He was carrying his rolled-up cloth for Snakes and Foxes under one arm and a pack slung over the other.

sɛɾəl stʊɾ ɪn ðə nɪɹ dɪstəns, əlɔŋ wɪð lʌsɪn ən ɛɾɝ, tu ɹɛdʒɹmz ðət mæt hæɾ əsaɪn tə wɑtʃ oʊvɝ əɹ ən ðə bɔɪ. ðeɪd bi dɪpɑɹɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə sɪɾi sun.

Setalle stood in the near distance, along with Lussin and Edder, two Redarms that Mat had assigned to watch over her and the boy. They'd be departing for the city soon.

"mæt," oʊlvɝ sɛd, pæntɪŋ. "jɔɹ livɪŋ?"

"Mat," Olver said, panting. "You're leaving?"

"aɪ doʊn əv taɪm tə pleɪ wɪð jə naʊ, oʊlvɝ," mæt sɛd, loʊɝɪŋ ɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ tə ðə kɹʊk ə hɪz ɑɹm. "aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ mit wɪð ə kwin."

"I don't have time to play with you now, Olver," Mat said, lowering his ashandarei to the crook of his arm. "I have to go meet with a Queen."

"aɪ noʊ," oʊlvɝ sɛd. "aɪ fɪɡjɝd ðət sɪns wɝ boʊθ ɡoʊɪŋ tə taʊn, wi kəd ɹaɪd təɡɛðɝ ən plæn. aɪ hæv səm aɪdiəz əbaʊt haʊ tə dɪfit ðə sneɪks ən ðə fɑksəz! wɝ gɑnə ʃoʊ ðɛm, mæt.

"I know," Olver said. "I figured that since we're both going to town, we could ride together and plan. I have some ideas about how to defeat the snakes and the foxes! We're going to show them, Mat.

bɝn mi, bʌt wi blʌɾi wɪl!"

Burn me, but we bloody will!"

"hu tɔt jə ðət læŋɡwədʒ?"

"Who taught you that language?"

"mæt," hi sɛd. "ðɪs ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt! wɪv tə plæn! wi hævən tɔkt əbaʊt wʌt wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə du."

"Mat," he said. "This is important! We have to plan! We haven't talked about what we're going to do."

saɪlənli, mæt kɝs hɪmsɛlf fəɹ dɪskʌsɪŋ ðə kwɛs tə ɹɛskju mwɑ-ɹeɪn wɛɹ oʊlvɝ kəd hɪɹ.

Silently, Mat cursed himself for discussing the quest to rescue Moi-raine where Olver could hear.

ðə bɔɪ wɑz nɑt gɑnə teɪk ɪt wɛl wən i wɑz lɛf bɪhaɪnd.

The boy was not going to take it well when he was left behind.

"aɪ nid tə θɪŋk əbaʊt wʌɾ aɪm gɑnə seɪ tə ðə kwin," mæt sɛd, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz tʃɪn. "bʌɾ aɪ ɡɛs jəɹ ɹaɪt, plænɪŋ ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. waɪ doʊn jə ɡoʊ tɛl noʊl əbaʊt jəɹ aɪdiəz?"

"I need to think about what I'm going to say to the Queen," Mat said, rubbing his chin. "But I guess you're right, planning is important. Why don't you go tell Noal about your ideas?"

"aɪ ɔlɹɛɾi dɪd," oʊlvɝ sɛd. "æn θɔɹn tu. ən tælmɑnz."

"I already did," Olver said. "And Thorn too. And Talmanes."

tælmɑnz? hi wɑz nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ wɪð əm ɪndə ðə taʊɝ! laɪt, haʊ mʌtʃ hæɾ oʊlvɝ bɪn spɹɛɾɪŋ ðə nuz ɝaʊnd?

Talmanes? He was not going with them into the Tower! Light, how much had Olver been spreading the news around?

"oʊlvɝ," mæt sɛd, skwɑɾɪŋ daʊn tə bi ɑn aɪ lɛvəl wɪð ðə bɔɪ, "ju nid tə kip kwaɪəɾɝ. wi doʊnt wɑn tu mɛni pipəl noʊɪŋ wʌt wɝ duɪŋ."

"Olver," Mat said, squatting down to be on eye level with the boy, "you need to keep quieter. We don't want too many people knowing what we're doing."

"aɪ dɪdn tɛl noʊbɑdi wi doʊn tʃɹʌst, mæt," oʊlvɝ sɛd. "doʊnt wɝi, moʊst wɝ ɹɛdʒɹmz."

"I didn't tell nobody we don't trust, Mat," Olver said. "Don't worry, Most were Redarms."

ɡɹeɪt, mæt θɔt. wʌt wəd ðə soʊlʒɝz θɪŋk ə ðɛɹ kəmændɝ plænɪŋ tə ɡoʊ ɔf ən faɪɾ ə bʌntʃ ə kɹitʃɝz fɹəm tʃɪlʒɹənz stɔɹiz? hoʊpfəli ðeɪ wəd si oʊlvɝz kɑmɛns əz ðə fænsiz ʌv ə jʌŋ bɔɪ.

Great, Mat thought. What would the soldiers think of their commander planning to go off and fight a bunch of creatures from children's stories? Hopefully they would see Olver's comments as the fancies of a young boy.

"dʒʌs bi kɛɹfəl," mæt sɛd. "aɪl kʌm stɑp baɪ jəɹ ɪn təmɑɹoʊ, ən kən pleɪ ə ɡeɪm ðən ən tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt. ɔl ɹaɪt?"

"Just be careful," Mat said. "I'll come stop by your inn tomorrow, and can play a game then and talk about it. All right?"

oʊlvɝ nɑɾəd. "ɔl ɹaɪt, mæt. bʌt . . . blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz!" hi tɝn ən wɔkt əweɪ.

Olver nodded. "All right, Mat. But . . . blood and bloody ashes!" He turned and walked away.

"æn stɑp swɛɹɪŋ!" mæt kɔld æftɝ hɪm, ðən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. blʌɾi soʊlʒɝz wəɾ əv oʊlvɝ kɝʌptɪd baɪ ðə taɪm i wɑz twɛlv.

"And stop swearing!" Mat called after him, then shook his head. Bloody soldiers would have Olver corrupted by the time he was twelve.

mæt kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn ɪz weɪ, linɪŋ ɪz spɪɹ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ əɡɛn. hi faʊn θɔɹn ən tælmɑnz maʊntəɾ ət ðə fɹʌn ə ðə kæmp əlɔŋ wɪð ə fɔɹs ə fɪfti ɹɛdʒɹmz. θɔɹn wɔɹ ən ɪkstʃɹævəɡənt waɪn-ɹɛd koʊɾ ən tʃɹaʊzɝz, ɡoʊld wɝk ət ði ɑɹmz, wɪð ə ʃɝt bɛɹɪŋ waɪt leɪs ət ðə kʌfs ən ə sɪlkən kɹævæt taɪɾ ət ðə nɛk. ðə bʌɾənz wɝ ʌv ɡlimɪŋ ɡoʊld. hɪz mʌstæʃɪz hæd bɪn tʃɹɪmd ən nitli koʊmd. ði ɪntaɪɝ aʊtfɪt wɑz nu, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðə blæk kloʊk, ɪts ɪnɝ laɪnɪŋ ʌv ɡoʊld.

Mat continued on his way, leaning his spear on his shoulder again. He found Thorn and Talmanes mounted at the front of the camp along with a force of fifty Redarms. Thorn wore an extravagant wine-red coat and trousers, gold work at the arms, with a shirt bearing white lace at the cuffs and a silken cravat tied at the neck. The buttons were of gleaming gold. His mustaches had been trimmed and neatly combed. The entire outfit was new, including the black cloak, its inner lining of gold.

mæt fɹoʊz ɪn pleɪs. haʊ hæd ðə mæn soʊ pɝfəkli tʃɹænsfɔɹm fɹəm ən oʊl skæmp ʌv ə ɡlimən ɪndə ə ɹɔɪəl kɔɹɾiɝ? laɪt!

Mat froze in place. How had the man so perfectly transformed from an old scamp of a gleeman into a royal courtier? Light!

"aɪ si fɹəm jəɹ ɹiækʃən ðət ðə pɹɛzənteɪʃən ɪz ɪfɛktɪv," θɔɹn sɛd.

"I see from your reaction that the presentation is effective," Thorn said.

"blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz!" mæt ɪkskleɪmd. "wʌt hæpənd? dɪd jə teɪk ɪl fɹəm ə bæd sɔsədʒ ət bɹɛkfəst?"

"Blood and bloody ashes!" Mat exclaimed. "What happened? Did you take ill from a bad sausage at breakfast?"

θɔɹn wɪpt ɪz kloʊk bæk, ɹɪvilɪŋ ðəɾ i hæɾ ɪz hɑɹp aʊɾ ən əɾ ɪz saɪd. hi lʊk laɪk ə kɔɹt-bɑɹd! "aɪ fɪɡjɝd ðəɾ ɪf - æftɝ ɔl ə ðiz jɪɹz - aɪ wɑz gɑnə meɪk ən əpɪɹəns ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, aɪ ʃəd lʊk ðə pɑɹt."

Thorn whipped his cloak back, revealing that he had his harp out and at his side. He looked like a court-bard! "I figured that if - after all of these years - I was going to make an appearance in Caemlyn, I should look the part."

"noʊ wʌndɝ juv bɪn sɪŋɪŋ fəɹ kɔɪn ɛvɹi deɪ," mæt sɛd. "ðə pipəl ɪn ðoʊz tævɝnz əv weɪ tu mʌtʃ mʌni."

"No wonder you've been singing for coin every day," Mat said. "The people in those taverns have way too much money."

tælmɑnz ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ - əz ɡʊɾ əz ə ɡɹɪn, fɹəm ðət mæn. ət taɪmz, hi sim soʊ daʊɝ əz tə meɪk θʌndɝklaʊdz fil tʃɪɹfəl. hi ɔlsoʊ wɔɹ ə faɪn aʊtfɪt, hɪz ə dip koʊbɔlt ən sɪlvɝ. mæt fɛlt əɾ ɪz kʌfs. hi cʊɾə juz səm leɪs. ɪf ləpɪn hæd bɪn hɪɹ, hi wʊɾə sɛɾ aʊt ðə pɹɑpɝ aʊtfɪt wɪθaʊt mæt ivən æskɪŋ. ə lɪɾəl leɪs wɑz ɡʊd fəɹ ə mæn. meɪɾ ɪm lʊk pɹəzɛntəbəl.

Talmanes raised an eyebrow - as good as a grin, from that man. At times, he seemed so dour as to make thunderclouds feel cheerful. He also wore a fine outfit, his of deep cobalt and silver. Mat felt at his cuffs. He could have used some lace. If Lopin had been here, he would have set out the proper outfit without Mat even asking. A little lace was good for a man. Made him look presentable.

ɪz ðət wʌt jəɹ wɛɹɪŋ tə vɪzət ðə kwin, mæt?" tælmɑnz æskt. "ʌv kɔɹs ɪɾ ɪz." ðə wɝdz lɛft ɪz maʊθ bɪfɔɹ i hæɾ ə tʃæns tə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðɛm. "ɪts ə ɡʊd koʊt." hi wɔkt oʊvɝ tə teɪk pɪps' ɹeɪnz, "ɡʊd fəɹ spɑɹɪŋ ɪn, meɪbi," tælmɑnz sɛd.

Is that what you're wearing to visit the Queen, Mat?" Talmanes asked. "Of course it is." The words left his mouth before he had a chance to think about them. "It's a good coat." He walked over to take Pips' reins, "Good for sparring in, maybe," Talmanes said.

"ɪleɪn ɪz ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ naʊ, mæt," θɔɹn sɛd. "æn kwinz ɑɹ ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ lɑt. jə ʃəd ʃoʊ hɝ ɹɪspɛkt."

"Elayne is the Queen of Andor now, Mat," Thorn said. "And queens are a particular lot. You should show her respect."

"aɪ æm ʃoʊɪŋ əɹ blʌɾi ɹɪspɛkt," mæt sɛd, hændɪŋ ɪz spɪɹ tə wʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz, ðən klaɪmɪŋ ɪndə ðə sæɾəl. hi tʊk ðə spɪɹ bæk, ðən tɝn pɪps soʊ hi kəd ɹəɡɑɹd θɔɹn. "ðɪs ɪz ə ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf koʊt fəɹ ə fɑɹmɝ."

"I am showing her bloody respect," Mat said, handing his spear to one of the soldiers, then climbing into the saddle. He took the spear back, then turned Pips so he could regard Thorn. "This is a good enough coat for a farmer."

"jɔɹ nɑɾ ə fɑɹmɝ ɛnimɔɹ, mæt," tælmɑnz sɛd.

"You're not a farmer anymore, Mat," Talmanes said.

"aɪ æm tu," mæt sɛd stʌbɝnli.

"I am too," Mat said stubbornly.

"bʌt mjuzənʒ kɔl jə - " θɔɹn bɪɡæn.

"But Musenge called you - " Thorn began.

"hi wɑz mɪsteɪkən," mæt sɛd. "dʒʌs kəz ə mæn mɛɹiz sʌmwʌn dʌzn min i sʌɾənli bɪkʌmz blʌɾi noʊbɪləɾi."

"He was mistaken," Mat said. "Just because a man marries someone doesn't mean he suddenly becomes bloody nobility."

θɔɹn ən tælmɑnz ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ə lʊk.

Thorn and Talmanes exchanged a look.

"mæt," θɔɹn sɛd. "ðæts æktʃəli  ɪɡzækli haʊ ɪt wɝks. ɪts pɹɪɾi mʌtʃ wʌn ə ði oʊnli weɪz tə bɪkʌm noʊbɪləɾi."

"Mat," Thorn said. "That's actually exactly how it works. It's pretty much one of the only ways to become nobility."

"ðæts ðə weɪ wi də ɪt hɪɹ, meɪbi," mæt sɛd. "bʌt tuɑn ɪz fɹəm sintʃæn. hu noʊz wʌt ðeɪ də ðɛɹ? wi ɔl noʊ haʊ stʃɹeɪnʒ ðeɪ kən bi. wi kænt noʊ ɛniθɪŋ əntɪl wi tɔk tə hɝ."

"That's the way we do it here, maybe," Mat said. "But Tuon is from Seanchan. Who knows what they do there? We all know how strange they can be. We can't know anything until we talk to her."

θɔɹn fɹaʊnd. "aɪm sɝɾən, fɹəm θɪŋz ʃi sɛd, ðət - "

Thorn frowned. "I'm certain, from things she said, that - "

"wi kænt noʊ ɛniθɪŋ əntɪl wi tɔk tə tuɑn," mæt ɹɪpiɾɪd, laʊɾɝ ðɪs taɪm. "əntɪl ðɛn, aɪm mæt. nʌn ə ðɪs pɹɪns ʌv wʌtɛvɝ nɑnsɛns."

"We can't know anything until we talk to Tuon," Mat repeated, louder this time. "Until then, I'm Mat. None of this Prince of Whatever nonsense."

θɔɹn lʊkt kənfjuzd, bʌt tælmɑnz' lɪps tɝn ɛvɝ soʊ slaɪtli ʌp ət ðə saɪd. bɝn ðət mæn.

Thorn looked confused, but Talmanes' lips turned ever so slightly up at the side. Burn that man.

mæt wɑz ɪnklaɪn tə θɪŋk ɪz sɑləm neɪtʃɝ wɑz ɔl ən ækt. wɑz i sikɹɪtli læfɪŋ ɪnsaɪd?

Mat was inclined to think his solemn nature was all an act. Was he secretly laughing inside?

"wɛl, mæt," tælmɑnz sɛd, "ju nɛvɝ əv meɪɾ ɛni sɛns, soʊ waɪ ʃəd wi ɪkspɛk jə tə naʊ? ɔnwɝd, ðɛn, tə mit ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ. sɝɾən jə doʊnt wɑnə ɹoʊl ɪn ðə mʌd fɝst?"

"Well, Mat," Talmanes said, "you never have made any sense, so why should we expect you to now? Onward, then, to meet the Queen of Andor. Certain you don't want to roll in the mud first?"

"aɪl bi faɪn," mæt sɛd dʒɹaɪli, pʊlɪŋ ɪz hæt daʊn əz ə soʊlʒɝ taɪɾ ɪz pæk tə ðə bæk ə hɪz sæɾəl.

"I'll be fine," Mat said dryly, pulling his hat down as a soldier tied his pack to the back of his saddle.

hi kɪk pɪps ɪndə moʊʃən, ən ðə pɹəsɛʃən bɪɡæn ðə naʊ-fəmɪljɝ ɹaɪd tə keɪɛmlɪn. mæt spɛn moʊst ə ðə taɪm ɡoʊɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz plæn ɪn ɪz hɛd. hi hæɾ ɑlʌdʒɹəz peɪpɝz tʌkt ɪndə ə lɛðɝ foʊldɝ, ən ðeɪ ɪnkluɾəd əɹ dɪmænz. ɛvɹi bɛlfndɝ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, lɑɹdʒ kwɑntəɾiz əɹ bɹɑnz ən aɪɝn, ən paʊɾɝz wɝθ θaʊzənz ə kɹaʊnz. ən ʃi kleɪm ðət wɑz ðə mɪnəməm ʌv wʌt ʃi niɾəd.

He kicked Pips into motion, and the procession began the now-familiar ride to Caemlyn. Mat spent most of the time going over his plan in his head. He had Aludra's papers tucked into a leather folder, and they included her demands. Every bellfounder in Caemlyn, large quantities or bronze and iron, and powders worth thousands of crowns. And she claimed that was the minimum of what she needed.

haʊ ʌndɝ ðə laɪt wɑz mæt gɑnə ɡɛt blʌɾi ɪleɪn tʃɹəkən tə ɡɪv ɪm ɔl ðæt? hi wəɾ əv tə də ə lɑɾ ə smaɪlɪŋ. bʌɾ ɪleɪn hæd pɹuvən ɹɪzɪstən tə hɪz smaɪlz bɪfɔɹ, ən kwinz wɝ nɑt laɪk ɔɹɾənɛɹi foʊk. moʊst wɪmən, ðeɪ wəd smaɪl bæk əɹ ðeɪ wəd skaʊl ət ju, soʊ jə nu wɛɹ jə stʊd. ɪleɪn sim ðə taɪp tə smaɪl ət ju, ðən tɔs jə ɪn pɹɪzən ɔl ðə seɪm.

How under the Light was Mat going to get bloody Elayne Trakand to give him all that? He would have to do a lot of smiling. But Elayne had proven resistant to his smiles before, and Queens were not like ordinary folk. Most women, they would smile back or they would scowl at you, so you knew where you stood. Elayne seemed the type to smile at you, then toss you in prison all the same.

fəɹ wʌns, ɪt wəd bi naɪs ɪf ɪz lʌk kəd si hɪm ɔf sʌmwɛɹ ɛndʒɔɪ-paɪp ən ə ɡeɪm ə daɪs, wɪð ə pɹɪɾi sɝvɪŋ ɡɝl ɑn ɪz ni ən noʊ bɪɑn ɪz nɛks θɹoʊ. ɪnstɛd, hi wɑz mɛɹid tə ə sintʃæn haɪ blʌɾ ən wɑz ɔf tə bɛɡ ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ fəɹ əɹ hɛlp. haʊ dɪɾ i ɡɛt ðiz sɪtʃueɪʃənz? səmtaɪmz i θɔt ðət ðə kɹieɪɾɝ mʌs bi laɪk tælmɑnz. stʃɹeɪɾ ə feɪs, bʌt sikɹɪtli hævɪŋ ə ɡɹæn taɪm læfɪŋ ət mæt.

For once, it would be nice if his luck could see him off somewhere enjoy-pipe and a game of dice, with a pretty serving girl on his knee and no beyond his next throw. Instead, he was married to a Seanchan High Blood and was off to beg the Queen of Andor for her help. How did he get these situations? Sometimes he thought that the Creator must be like Talmanes. Straight of face, but secretly having a grand time laughing at Mat.

hɪz pɹəsɛʃən pæs numɝəs kæmps ɑn ði oʊpən pleɪnz ɝaʊn keɪɛmlɪn. ɔl mɝsənɛɹiz wɝ ɹikwaɪɝd tə steɪ ət list ə liɡ əweɪ, bʌt ðə fɔɹsɪz ə ðə lɔɹdz kəd kæmp kloʊsɝ. ðət pʊt mæt ɪn ə ɹʌf pleɪs. ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz tɛnʃən bɪtwin sɛl-sɔɹdz ən lɔɪəl ɑɹmmɪn, ən wɪð ðə mɝsənɛɹiz soʊ fɑɹ fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn, faɪts wɝ kɑmən. ðə bænd wɑz ɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ɪt.

His procession passed numerous camps on the open plains around Caemlyn. All mercenaries were required to stay at least a league away, but the forces of the lords could camp closer. That put Mat in a rough place. There was always tension between sell-swords and loyal armsmen, and with the mercenaries so far from Caemlyn, fights were common. The Band was right in the middle of it.

hi dɪd səm kwɪk fɪɡjɝɪŋ beɪst ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪlz ə kæmpfaɪɝ smoʊk i sɔ twɪstɪŋ ɪndə ði ɛɹ.

He did some quick figuring based on the trails of campfire smoke he saw twisting into the air.

ðəɹ wɝ ət lis tɛn θaʊzən mɝsənɛɹiz ɪn ði ɛɹiə. dɪɾ ɪleɪn noʊ wʌɾ ə bʌbəlɪŋ kɛɾəl ʃi wɑz bɹuɪŋ hɪɹ? tu mʌtʃ hit, ən ðə hoʊl blʌɾi θɪŋ wəd bɔɪl oʊvɝ!

There were at least ten thousand mercenaries in the area. Did Elayne know what a bubbling kettle she was brewing here? Too much heat, and the whole bloody thing would boil over!

mæts pɹəsɛʃən dʒɹu ətɛnʃən. hi hæd wʌn ə ðə mɛn flaɪɪŋ ðə bænɝ ə ðə bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hænd, ən ɪz mɛn wɝ dɪvɛləpɪŋ ə ɹɛpjəteɪʃən. baɪ mæts kaʊnt, ðeɪ wɝ ðə lɑɹdʒəst sɪŋɡəl ɡɹup -  mɝsənɛɹi əɹ lɔɹdz fɔɹs - aʊtsaɪd keɪɛmlɪnz wɔlz. ðeɪ wɝ əz ɔɹɡənaɪzd ən dɪsəplən əz ə ɹɛɡjəlɝ ɑɹmi, ən wɝ ʌndɝ ðə liɾɝʃɪp ʌv ə pɝsənəl fɹɛn ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. hɪz mɛn kəd nɑt hɛlp bɹæɡɪŋ əbaʊt ðæt, ðoʊ mæt wəd mʌtʃ ɹæðɝ ðət ðeɪ hæd kɛp kwaɪət.

Mat's procession drew attention. He had one of the men flying the banner of the Band of the Red Hand, and his men were developing a reputation. By Mat's count, they were the largest single group -  mercenary or lord's force - outside Caemlyn's walls. They were as organized and disciplined as a regular army, and were under the leadership of a personal friend of the Dragon Reborn. His men could not help bragging about that, though Mat would much rather that they had kept quiet.

ðeɪ pæst ɡɹups ə mɛn weɪɾɪŋ baɪ ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ɹoʊd, kjʊɹiəs tə kætʃ ə ɡlɪmps ʌv "lɔɹd mæt." hi kɛpt ɪz aɪz fɔɹwɝd. ɪf ðeɪ hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd səm fɑp ɪn ə ɹɪtʃ koʊt, ðən ðeɪ wəd bi dɪsəpɔɪntɪd! ðoʊ pɝhæps i cʊɾə tʃoʊzən ə bɛɾɝ koʊt. ðɪs wʌn wɑz stɪf, ən ðə kɑlɝ ɪtʃt.

They passed groups of men waiting by the side of the road, curious to catch a glimpse of "Lord Mat." He kept his eyes forward. If they had expected some fop in a rich coat, then they would be disappointed! Though perhaps he could have chosen a better coat. This one was stiff, and the collar itched.

ʌv kɔɹs, mɔɹ ðən ə fju sim tə θɪŋk tælmɑnz wɑz "lɔɹd mæt" fɹəm ðə weɪ ðeɪ pɔɪntəd, pɹɑbli kəz ə haʊ hi wɑz dʒɹɛst. blʌɾi æʃəz!

Of course, more than a few seemed to think Talmanes was "Lord Mat" from the way they pointed, probably because of how he was dressed. Bloody ashes!

ðɪs kɑnvɝseɪʃən wɪð ɪleɪn wɑz gɑnə bi tʌf. bʌt mæt hæɾ ə hɪɾən kɑɹd, wʌn i hoʊpt wəd bi ɪnʌf tə ɡɛɾ əɹ tə lʊk pæs ði ɪkspɛns ʌv ɑlʌdʒɹəz pɹəpoʊzəl. ðoʊ hi wɑz mɔɹ əfɹeɪd ʃi wəd si wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ ən wɑnə teɪk pɑɹɾ ɪn ɪt. ən wən ə wʊmən wɑntəd tə bi pɑɹt"

This conversation with Elayne was going to be tough. But Mat had a hidden card, one he hoped would be enough to get her to look past the expense of Aludra's proposal. Though he was more afraid she would see what he was doing and want to take part in it. And when a woman wanted to be part"

ʌv sʌmθɪŋ, ðət mɛnt ʃi wɑntəd tə bi ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ.

of something, that meant she wanted to be in charge.

ðeɪ əpɹoʊtʃt ðə ɡeɪɾ ɪn keɪɛmlɪnz waɪt-ɡɹeɪ wɔlz, pæsɪŋ ðə ɡɹoʊɪŋ aʊɾɝ sɪɾi. ðə soʊlʒɝz weɪvd ɪm ɑn. mæt ɡeɪv əm ə tɪp ə ðə hæt, ən tɑm ɡeɪv ə flɝɪʃɪŋ weɪv tə ðə smɔl kɹaʊd ɡæðɝd hɪɹ. ðeɪ tʃɪɹd. ɡɹeɪt. dʒʌs blʌɾi ɡɹeɪt.

They approached the gate in Caemlyn's white-gray walls, passing the growing outer city. The soldiers waved him on. Mat gave them a tip of the hat, and Thom gave a flourishing wave to the small crowd gathered here. They cheered. Great. Just bloody great.

ðə mɑɹtʃ θɹu ðə nu sɪɾi wɑz ʌnivɛnfəl seɪv fəɹ mɔɹ kɹaʊdz wɑtʃɪŋ. wəd sʌmwʌn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ɪz feɪs fɹəm ðoʊz dʒɹɔɪŋz? mæt wɑntəd tə ɡɛɾ ɔf ðə meɪn θɝoʊfɛɹz, bʌt keɪɛmlɪnz nɛɹoʊ stʃɹits wɝ ə twɪstɪŋ mɛs. ə fɔɹs ə fɪfti hɔɹsmən wɑz tu lɑɹdʒ tə muv tfɪɹaʊ ðoʊz stʃɹits.

The march through the New City was uneventful save for more crowds watching. Would someone recognize his face from those drawings? Mat wanted to get off the main thoroughfares, but Caemlyn's narrow streets were a twisting mess. A force of fifty horsemen was too large to move tfirough those streets.

ðeɪ ɪvɛntʃəwəli pæs θɹu ðə bɹɪljənt waɪt wɔlz ə ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi, wɛɹ ðə ɹoʊdz wɝ waɪɾɝ, ði oʊɡiɝ-bɪl bɪldɪŋz lɛs kɹæmpt, ən ðə pɑpjəleɪʃən θɪnɝ. hɪɹ, ðeɪ pæs mɔɹ ɡɹups ʌv ɑɹmd mɛn,' ɪnkluɾɪŋ ɡɑɹdzmɪn ɪn waɪɾ ən ɹɛd. mæt kəd meɪk ðɛɹ kæmp aʊɾ əhɛd, kʌvɝɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪ peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz ə ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd wɪð ðɛɹ tɛns ən hɔɹslaɪnz.

They eventually passed through the brilliant white walls of the Inner City, where the roads were wider, the Ogier-built buildings less cramped, and the population thinner. Here, they passed more groups of armed men,' including Guardsmen in white and red. Mat could make their camp out ahead, covering the gray paving stones of the courtyard with their tents and horselines.

ðə keɪɛmlɪn pæləs wɑz laɪk ənʌðɝ lɪɾəl sɪɾi wɪðɪn ðə sɪɾi ɪnsaɪd ðə sɪɾi. ɪt hæɾ ə loʊ fɔɹɾəfaɪd wɔl, ən waɪl ɪts piks ən spaɪɹz ɹoʊz ɪndə ði ɛɹ, ɪt hæd mɔɹ ə ðə lʊk ʌv ə wɔɹ bʌŋkɝ ðən ðə sʌn pæləs dɪd. ɑd, haʊ hi hæd nɛvɝ noʊɾəst ðət wən i wɑz jʌŋɡɝ. ɪf keɪɛmlɪn fɛl ðɪs pæləs kəd hoʊld ɑn ɪts oʊn. ðeɪ niɾəd mɔɹ bæɹəks, ðoʊ, wɪðɪn ðət wɔl. ðɪs kæmpɪŋ aʊɾ ɪn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd wɑz ɹɪdɪkjələs.

The Caemlyn palace was like another little city within the city inside the city. It had a low fortified wall, and while its peaks and spires rose into the air, it had more of the look of a war bunker than the Sun Palace did. Odd, how he had never noticed that when he was younger. If Caemlyn fell this palace could hold on its own. They needed more barracks, though, within that wall. This camping out in the courtyard was ridiculous.

mæt tʊk tælmɑnz, θɔɹn ən ə fɔɹs ə tɛn ɹɛdʒɹmz əz ən ɛskɔɹt. ə tɔl mæn ɪn ə bɝnɪʃt bɹɛstpleɪt, θɹi ɡoʊldən nɑts ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ ə hɪz kloʊk, weɪɾəd ət ðə pæləs ɛntʃɹəns. hi wɑz ə jʌŋ mæn, bʌt ðə weɪ hi stʊd - ɹɪlækst, jɛt pɔɪzd, hæn ɑn ðə pɑməl ə hɪz sɔɹd -  ɪndəkeɪɾəd i wɑz ə pɹæktəst soʊlʒɝ. tu bæɾ i hæd sətʃ ə pɹɪɾi feɪs. ə laɪf ɪn ðə mɪlətɛɹi wəd pɹɑbli ɛn ʌp ɹɛkɪŋ ðæt.

Mat took Talmanes, Thorn and a force of ten Redarms as an escort. A tall man in a burnished breastplate, three golden knots on the shoulder of his cloak, waited at the palace entrance. He was a young man, but the way he stood - relaxed, yet poised, hand on the pommel of his sword -  indicated he was a practiced soldier. Too bad he had such a pretty face. A life in the military would probably end up wrecking that.

ðə mæn nɑɾəd tə mæt, θɔɹn ən tælmɑnz. "lɔɹd kɔθən?" hi æsk mæt.

The man nodded to Mat, Thorn and Talmanes. "Lord Cauthon?" he asked Mat.

"dʒʌs mæt."

"Just Mat."

ðə mæn ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ, bʌt sɛd nʌθɪŋ. "maɪ neɪm ɪz ɑɹlz ɡaɪbɑn. əl lɛd jə tə hɝ mædʒəsti."

The man raised an eyebrow, but said nothing. "My name is Charlz Guybon. I'll lead you to Her Majesty."

ʃi hæd sɛnt ɡaɪbɑn hɪmsɛlf tə ɛskɔɹt mæt. hi wɑz haɪ-ɹæŋkɪŋ, sɛkənd-ɪn-kəmæn ə ði ɑɹmiz. ðət wɑz ʌnɪkspɛktɪd. wɑz ɪleɪn əfɹeɪɾ ə hɪm, əɹ wɑz ʃi wɑz ɑnɝɪŋ hɪm? meɪbi ɡaɪbɑn hæd wɑntəd tə si mæt fəɹ hɪmsɛlf. ʃi wəd nɑɾ ɑnɝ mæt, nɑɾ æftɝ meɪkɪŋ ɪm weɪt soʊ lɔŋ tə ɡɛɾ ən ɑɾiəns! ə faɪn ɡɹiɾɪŋ fəɹ ən oʊl fɹɛnd. hɪz səspɪʃənz wɝ kənfɝmd wən ɡaɪbɑn dɪd nɑt lɛɾ əm tə ðə ɡɹæn hɔl, bʌt daʊn tə ə kwaɪəɾ ɛɹiə ʌv ðə pæləs.

She had sent Guybon himself to escort Mat. He was high-ranking, second-in-command of the armies. That was unexpected. Was Elayne afraid of him, or was she was honoring him? Maybe Guybon had wanted to see Mat for himself. She would not honor Mat, not after making him wait so long to get an audience! A fine greeting for an old friend. His suspicions were confirmed when Guybon did not lead them to the Grand Hall, but down to a quiet area of the Palace.

"aɪv hɝd mʌtʃ əbaʊt ju, mæstɝ kɔθən," ɡaɪbɑn sɛd. hi sim laɪk wʌn ə ðoʊz stɪf soʊlʒɝz. sɑləd, bʌt meɪbi ə lɪɾəl tu sɑləd-laɪk ə baʊ wɪθaʊɾ ɪnʌf spɹɪŋ tə ɪt.

"I've heard much about you, Master Cauthon," Guybon said. He seemed like one of those stiff soldiers. Solid, but maybe a little too solid-Like a bow without enough spring to it.

"fɹʌm hu?" mæt æskt. "ɪleɪn?"

"From who?" Mat asked. "Elayne?"

"moʊsli ɹumɝz ɝaʊn ðə sɪɾi. pipəl laɪk tə tɔk əbaʊt ju."

"Mostly rumors around the city. People like to talk about you."

ðeɪ du? mæt θɔt. "aɪ dɪdn də hæf ʌv wʌt ðeɪ seɪ," hi ɡɹʌmbəld, ən ði ʌðɝ hæf wɑzn maɪ blʌɾi fɔlt." ɡaɪbɑn læft. "wʌɾ ə ðə stɔɹi ʌv jə hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ə tʃɹi fəɹ naɪn deɪz?"

They do? Mat thought. "I didn't do half of what they say," he grumbled, and the other half wasn't my bloody fault." Guybon laughed. "What of the story of you hanging from a tree for nine days?"

"dɪdn hæpən," mæt sɛd, ɹɪzɪstɪŋ ði ɝdʒ tə tʌɡ ət ðə skɑɹf ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk. naɪn deɪz? wɛɹ dɪd ðət kʌm fɹʌm? hi hæd nɑɾ ivən hʌŋ fəɹ naɪn blʌɾi mɪnəts! naɪn sɛkənz hæd bɪn tu lɔŋ.

"Didn't happen," Mat said, resisting the urge to tug at the scarf around his neck. Nine days? Where did that come from? He had not even hung for nine bloody minutes! Nine seconds had been too long.

"ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ seɪ," ɡaɪbɑn kəntɪnjud, "ðæt jə nɛvɝ luz ət daɪs əɹ ət lʌv, ən ðət jəɹ spɪɹ nɛvɝ mɪsəz ɪts tɑɹɡət."

"They also say," Guybon continued, "that you never lose at dice or at love, and that your spear never misses its target."

"wɪʃ ðoʊz sɛkən tu wɝ tʃɹu. bɝn mi, bʌɾ aɪ wɪʃ ðeɪ wɝ."

"Wish those second two were true. Burn me, but I wish they were."

"bʌt jə də ɔlweɪz wɪn ət daɪs?"

"But you do always win at dice?"

"nɪɹ ɪnʌf," mæt sɛd, tʌɡɪŋ daʊn ðə bɹɪm ə hɪz hæt. "bʌt doʊn spɹɛd ðət wʌn, əɹ əl nɛvɝ faɪn ə ɡeɪm."

"Near enough," Mat said, tugging down the brim of his hat. "But don't spread that one, or I'll never find a game."

"ðeɪ seɪ jə slu wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən," ɡaɪbɑn noʊɾəd.

"They say you slew one of the Forsaken," Guybon noted.

"nɑt tʃɹu," mæt sɛd. wɛɹ hæd ðət wʌn kʌm fɹʌm?

"Not true," Mat said. Where had that one come from?

"æn ðə stɔɹiz ə jə dulɪŋ ðə kɪŋ ə ði il ɪnveɪɾɝz ɪn ə bæɾəl ʌv ɑnɝ? dɪd jə ɹɪli wɪn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ðə lɔɪəlti ʌv ði il?"

"And the stories of you dueling the King of the Aiel invaders in a battle of honor? Did you really win the Dragon Reborn the loyalty of the Aiel?"

"blʌɾi æʃəz," mæt sɛd. "aɪ kɪl kaʊulɑɾɪn, bʌɾ ɪt dɪdn hæpən ɪn ɛni kaɪndə duəl! aɪ ɹæn ɪndə hɪm ɑn ðə bæɾəlfild, ən wʌn ʌv əs hæd tə daɪ. ɪt wɑzn blʌɾi wɛl gɑnə bi mi."

"Bloody ashes," Mat said. "I killed Couladin, but it didn't happen in any kind of duel! I ran into him on the battlefield, and one of us had to die. It wasn't bloody well going to be me."

"ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ," ɡaɪbɑn sɛd. "aɪ θɔt ðət wʌn maɪt bi tʃɹu. ət list, ɪts wʌn ə ðə fju ðət kəɾ əv hæpənd. ənlaɪk. . . ." hi tʃɹeɪld ɔf.

"Interesting," Guybon said. "I thought that one might be true. At least, it's one of the few that could have happened. Unlike. . . ." He trailed off.

"wʌt?" mæt sɛd. ðeɪ pæst ən ɪntɝsɛkʃən ə hɔlz wɛɹ sɝvəns ɡɹupt, wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm ən ði ʌðɝ pæs ən wɪspɝɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz.

"What?" Mat said. They passed an intersection of halls where servants grouped, watching him and the other pass and whispering among themselves.

ɡaɪbɑn lʊk hɛzɪɾənt. "aɪm ʃʊɹ juv hɝd."

Guybon looked hesitant. "I'm sure you've heard."

"daʊtfəl." bɝn hɪm! wʌt wɑz nɛkst? hæd ðə mɛmbɝz ə ðə bæn bɪn spɹɛɾɪŋ ðiz ɹumɝz? ivən ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ əbaʊt səm ə ðoʊz θɪŋz!

"Doubtful." Burn him! What was next? Had the members of the Band been spreading these rumors? Even they did not know about some of those things!

wɛl, ðɛɹz ðɪs ɹumɝ ðət sɛz jə stɛpt ɪndə dɛθs doʊmeɪn tə tʃælənʒ ɪm ən dɪmæn ænsɝz tə jəɹ kwɛstʃənz," ɡaɪbɑn sɛd, lʊk-ɪŋ mɔɹ ɪmbɛɹəst. "æn ðəɾ i ɡeɪv jə ðət spɪɹ jə hoʊld ən fɔɹtoʊl tə jə jəɹ oʊn dɛθ."

Well, there's this rumor that says you stepped into death's domain to challenge him and demand answers to your questions," Guybon said, look-ing more embarrassed. "And that he gave you that spear you hold and foretold to you your own death."

mæt fɛlt ə tʃɪl. ðət wʌn wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf tə ðə tʃɹuθ tə bi fɹaɪɾənɪŋ. sɪli, aɪ noʊ," ɡaɪbɑn sɛd.

Mat felt a chill. That one was close enough to the truth to be frightening. Silly, I know," Guybon said.

ʃʊɹ," mæt sɛd. "sɪli." hi tʃɹaɪd tə læf, bʌɾ ɪt keɪm aʊɾ əz ə kɑf. ɡaɪbɑn ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ɪm kjʊɹiəsli.

Sure," Mat said. "Silly." He tried to laugh, but it came out as a cough. Guybon regarded him curiously.

laɪt, mæt ɹilaɪzd, hi θɪŋks aɪm dɑdʒɪŋ ðə kwɛstʃən! "oʊnli ɹumɝz, ʌv kɔɹs, mæt sɛd kwɪkli.

Light, Mat realized, he thinks I'm dodging the question! "Only rumors, of course, Mat said quickly.

tu kwɪkli, meɪbi. blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz!

Too quickly, maybe. Blood and bloody ashes!

ɡaɪbɑn nɑɾəd, lʊkɪŋ θɔtfəl.

Guybon nodded, looking thoughtful.

mæt wɑntəd tə tʃeɪnʒ ðə tɑpɪk, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt tʃɹʌs hɪmsɛlf tə oʊpən ɪz blʌɾi maʊθ. hi kəd si ðət mɔɹ ən mɔɹ pæləs sɝvəns hæd stɑp tə wɑtʃ ðə pɹəsɛʃən. hi fɛlt laɪk kɝsɪŋ səm mɔɹ ət θɑɹ bʌt ðən noʊɾəst ðət mɛni ʌv əm sim foʊkəst ɑn θɔɹn.

Mat wanted to change the topic, but he did not trust himself to open his bloody mouth. He could see that more and more palace servants had stopped to watch the procession. He felt like cursing some more at thar but then noticed that many of them seemed focused on Thorn.

θɔɹn hæd bɪn kɔɹt-bɑɹd ɹaɪt hɪɹ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. hi dɪd nɑt tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt, bʌt mæt nu hi hæd sʌfɝɾ ə fɔlɪŋ-aʊt wɪð ðə kwin θɔɹn hæd bɪn ɪn vɝtʃuəl ɛɡzaɪl ɛvɝ sɪns, kʌmɪŋ tə keɪɛmlɪn oʊnli wən pɹɛst.

Thorn had been court-bard right here in Caemlyn. He did not talk about it, but Mat knew he had suffered a falling-out with the Queen Thorn had been in virtual exile ever since, coming to Caemlyn only when pressed.

mɔɹɡeɪs wɑz dɛd naʊ, soʊ ðɪs wɑz θɔɹn ɹɪtɝnɪŋ fɹəm ɪz ɛɡzaɪl ɪt simd. ðət wɑz pɹɑbli waɪ hi hæd dʒɹɛst soʊ faɪnli. mæt lʊk daʊn əɾ ɪz koʊɾ əɡɛn. bɝn mi, aɪ ʃʊɾə wɔɹn sʌmθɪŋ naɪsɝ.

Morgase was dead now, so this was Thorn returning from his exile it seemed. That was probably why he had dressed so finely. Mat looked down at his coat again. Burn me, I should have worn something nicer.

ɡaɪbɑn lɛɾ əm tə ə kɑɹvd wʊɾən dɔɹ, bɛɹɪŋ ðə ɹɔɹɪŋ laɪən ʌv ændɝ. hi nɑk sɔfli, ɹəsiv ðə kɔl tə ɛntɝ, ðən dʒɛstʃɝd mæt təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ. "ðə kwin wɪl ɹəsiv jə ɪn əɹ sɪɾɪŋ ɹum."

Guybon led them to a carved wooden door, bearing the roaring Lion of Andor. He knocked softly, received the call to enter, then gestured Mat toward the door. "The Queen will receive you in her sitting room."

"θɔɹn, jəɹ wɪð mi," mæt sɛd. "tælmɑnz, jə wɑtʃ ðə soʊlʒɝz." ðə noʊbəlmən lʊkt kɹɛstfɔlən, bʌɾ ɪleɪn wɑz əndaʊɾɪdli gɑnə ɪmbɛɹəs mæt, ən i dɪd nɑt wɑn tælmɑnz ðəɹ tə si. "aɪl ɪntʃɹədus jə leɪɾɝ," mæt pɹɑməst. blʌɾi noʊbəlmən. ðeɪ θɔɾ ɛvɹi sɛkən θɪŋ wɑz ən əfɹʌn tə ðɛɹ ɑnɝ. mæt wʊɾə bɪn hæpi tə weɪɾ aʊtsaɪd!

"Thorn, you're with me," Mat said. "Talmanes, you watch the soldiers." The nobleman looked crestfallen, but Elayne was undoubtedly going to embarrass Mat, and he did not want Talmanes there to see. "I'll introduce you later," Mat promised. Bloody noblemen. They thought every second thing was an affront to their honor. Mat would have been happy to wait outside!

mæt stɛpt ʌp tə ðə dɔɹ, teɪkɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ. hi hæd fɔɾ ɪn dʌzənz ə skɝmɪʃɪz ən bæɾəlz wɪθaʊt ɡɹoʊɪŋ nɝvəs. naʊ hɪz hænz wɝ ʃeɪkɪŋ. waɪ dɪɾ i fil əz ɪf i wɝ wɔkɪŋ dɝɛkli ɪndə ən æmbʊʃ wɪθaʊɾ ə skɹæp ʌv ɑɹmɝ ɑn?

Mat stepped up to the door, taking a deep breath. He had fought in dozens of skirmishes and battles without growing nervous. Now his hands were shaking. Why did he feel as if he were walking directly into an ambush without a scrap of armor on?

ɪleɪn. əz kwin. bɝn hɪm, bʌt ðɪs wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə hɝt. hi oʊpən ðə dɔɹ ən stʃɹoʊɾ ɪn.

Elayne. As Queen. Burn him, but this was going to hurt. He opened the door and strode in.

hɪz aɪz faʊn ɪleɪn ɪmiɾiətli. ʃi sæt bɪsaɪɾ ə hɑɹθ, hoʊldɪŋ ə kʌp ʌv wʌɾ əpɪɹd tə bi mɪlk. ʃi lʊkt ɹeɪɾiənt ɪn ə ɡaʊn ə dip ɹɛɾ ən ɡoʊld. bjuɾəfəl, fʊl ɹɛd lɪps ðət mæt wəd nɑɾ əv maɪndəd kɪsɪŋ, ɪf i hæd nɑt bɪn ə mɛɹid mæn. hɝ ɹɛd-ɡoʊl hɛɹ sim tə ʃɪmɝ ɪn ðə hɑɹθlaɪt, ən əɹ tʃiks wɝ fʊl ə kʌlɝ. ʃi sim tə hæv ɡeɪn ə lɪɾəl weɪt. bɛs nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðæt. əɹ ʃəd hi? səmtaɪmz wɪmən ɡɑɾ æŋɡɹi wən jə mɛnʃən ðət ðeɪ lʊk dɪfɹənt, ən səmtaɪmz ðeɪ ɡɑɾ æŋɡɹi ɪf jə dɪd nɑt noʊɾəs.

His eyes found Elayne immediately. She sat beside a hearth, holding a cup of what appeared to be milk. She looked radiant in a gown of deep red and gold. Beautiful, full red lips that Mat would not have minded kissing, if he had not been a married man. Her red-gold hair seemed to shimmer in the hearthlight, and her cheeks were full of color. She seemed to have gained a little weight. Best not to mention that. Or should he? Sometimes women got angry when you mentioned that they looked different, and sometimes they got angry if you did not notice.

ʃi wɑz ə pɹɪɾi θɪŋ. nɑɾ əz pɹɪɾi əz tuɑn, ʌv kɔɹs. ɪleɪn wɑz fɑɹ tu peɪl, ən tu tɔl, ən hæd tu mʌtʃ hɛɹ. ɪt wɑz dɪstʃɹæktɪŋ. stɪl, ʃi wɑz pɹɪɾi. simd ə weɪst əz ə kwin. ʃi wʊɾə meɪɾ ən ɛksələn sɝvɪŋ ɡɝl. ɑ wɛl. sʌmbɑɾi hæd tə bi kwin.

She was a pretty thing. Not as pretty as Tuon, of course. Elayne was far too pale, and too tall, and had too much hair. It was distracting. Still, she was pretty. Seemed a waste as a queen. She would have made an excellent serving girl. Ah well. Somebody had to be Queen.

mæt ɡlænst ət bɝdʒɪt, hu wɑz ði oʊnli ʌðɝ wʌn ɪn ðə ɹum. ʃi lʊk ðə seɪm. ɔlweɪz dɪd, wɪð ðət ɡoʊldən bɹeɪɾ ən haɪ buts, laɪk ðə hɪɹoʊ fɹəm ðə blʌɾi stɔɹiz. wɪtʃ wɑz ɪɡzækli wʌt ʃi wɑz. ɪt wɑz ɡʊd tə si hɝ əɡɛn;

Mat glanced at Birgitte, who was the only other one in the room. She looked the same. Always did, with that golden braid and high boots, like the hero from the bloody stories. Which was exactly what she was. It was good to see her again;

ʃi wɑz wʌn wʊmən i nu hu wəd nɑt snæp əɾ ɪm fəɹ spikɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ.

she was one woman he knew who would not snap at him for speaking the truth.

θɔɹn stɛpt ɪn bɪsaɪd hɪm, ən mæt klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. ʃi wəɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪm tə bi fɔɹməl.

Thorn stepped in beside him, and Mat cleared his throat. She would expected him to be formal.

wɛl, hi wɑz nɑt gɑnə baʊ əɹ skɹeɪp, ən ɪleɪn lɛpt aʊɾ ə hɝ tʃɛɹ. ʃi ɹæn əkɹɔs ðə ɹum əz bɝdʒɪt kloʊz ðə dɔɹ. "θɔɹn, aɪm soʊ ɡlæd ðət jəɹ ɔl ɹaɪt!" ɪleɪn ɡɹæbd ɪm ɪn ən ɛmbɹeɪs.

Well, he was not going to bow or scrape, and Elayne leaped out of her chair. She ran across the room as Birgitte closed the door. "Thorn, I'm so glad that you're all right!" Elayne grabbed him in an embrace.

"həloʊ, dɪɹ wʌn," θɔɹn sɛd fɑnli. "aɪ hɪɹ juv dʌn wɛl fəɹ jɝsɛlf ən fəɹ ændɝ."

"Hello, dear one," Thorn said fondly. "I hear you've done well for yourself and for Andor."

ɪleɪn wɑz kɹaɪɪŋ! mæt pʊld ɔf ɪz hæt, bɪfʌɾəld. ʃʊɹ, θɔɹn ən ɪleɪn hæd bɪn kloʊz, bʌɾ ɪleɪn wɑz kwin naʊ. ɪleɪn tɝn təwɔɹd mæt. "ɪts ɡʊd tə si ju, mæt. də nɑt θɪŋk ðət ðə kɹaʊn əz fɝɡɑɾən jəɹ sɝvəs tə mi. bɹɪŋɪŋ θɔɹn bæk tə ændɝ ɪz ənʌðɝ dɛt wi oʊ ju."

Elayne was crying! Mat pulled off his hat, befuddled. Sure, Thorn and Elayne had been close, but Elayne was Queen now. Elayne turned toward Mat. "It's good to see you, Mat. Do not think that the Crown has forgotten your service to me. Bringing Thorn back to Andor is another debt we owe you."

"wɛl, ʌm," mæt sɛd. "ɪt ɹɪli wɑzn ɛniθɪŋ, jə noʊ, ɪleɪn. bɝn mi. jəɹ kwin!

"Well, um," Mat said. "It really wasn't anything, you know, Elayne. Burn me. You're Queen!

haʊz ðət fil?"

How's that feel?"

ɪleɪn læft, faɪnəli ɹilisɪŋ tɑm. "sʌtʃ ə weɪ wɪð wɝdz jə hæv, mæt."

Elayne laughed, finally releasing Thom. "Such a way with words you have, Mat."

"aɪm nɑt gɑnə baʊ tə jə əɹ ɛniθɪŋ," hi wɔɹnd. "ɔɹ bɑðɝ wɪð ðət 'jɔɹ mædʒəsti'

"I'm not going to bow to you or anything," he warned. "Or bother with that 'Your Majesty'

nɑnsɛns."

nonsense."

"aɪ wʊdn ɪkspɛkt ɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ənlɛs wɝ ɪn pʌblɪk, ʌv kɔɹs. aɪ min, aɪ hæv tə kip ʌp əpɪɹənsəz fəɹ ðə pipəl."

"I wouldn't expect it," Elayne said. "Unless we're in public, of course. I mean, I have to keep up appearances for the people."

"aɪ səpoʊz ðæts tʃɹu," mæt əɡɹid. ɪt dɪd meɪk sɛns. hi hɛld aʊɾ ə hæn tə bɝdʒɪt, bʌt ʃi tʃʌkəld ən ɡeɪv ɪm ə hʌɡ, slæpɪŋ ɪm ɑn ðə bæk laɪk ən oʊl pæl miɾɪŋ fəɹ ə mʌɡ ʌv eɪl. ænd, wɛl, pɝhæps ðət wɑz wʌt ðeɪ wɝ. wɪθaʊt ði eɪl.

"I suppose that's true," Mat agreed. It did make sense. He held out a hand to Birgitte, but she chuckled and gave him a hug, slapping him on the back like an old pal meeting for a mug of ale. And, well, perhaps that was what they were. Without the ale.

hi cʊɾə juz səm eɪl.

He could have used some ale.

"kʌm, sɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə tʃɛɹz baɪ ðə faɪɝ. "aɪm sɑɹi tə meɪk jə weɪt soʊ lɔŋ, mæt."

"Come, sit," Elayne said, gesturing toward the chairs by the fire. "I'm sorry to make you wait so long, Mat."

"ɪts nʌθɪŋ," hi sɛd. "jɔɹ bɪzi."

"It's nothing," he said. "You're busy."

ɪts ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ," ʃi sɛd. "wʌn ə maɪ stuɝdz lʌmp jə wɪð ðə mɝsənɛɹi ɡɹups. ɪts soʊ hɑɹd tə kip tʃɹæk ə ðɛm ɔl! ɪf jə wɪʃ, əl ɡɪv jə liv tə kæmp kloʊsɝ tə ðə sɪɾi. ðɛɹz nɑt ɹum ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz fəɹ ðə bænd, aɪm əfɹeɪd."

It's embarrassing," she said. "One of my stewards lumped you with the mercenary groups. It's so hard to keep track of them all! If you wish, I'll give you leave to camp closer to the city. There's not room inside the walls for the Band, I'm afraid."

ðət woʊn bi niɾəd," mæt sɛd, teɪkɪŋ wʌn ə ðə sits. "lɛɾɪŋ əs muv kloʊsɝ ɪz kaɪn ɪnʌf.

That won't be needed," Mat said, taking one of the seats. "Letting us move closer is kind enough.

θæŋk ju." tɑm sæt, ən bɝdʒɪt pɹəfɝd tə stænd, ðoʊ ʃi dɪd dʒɔɪn əm baɪ ðə hɑɹθ, linɪŋ bæk əɡɛns ðə stoʊnz.

Thank you." Thom sat, and Birgitte preferred to stand, though she did join them by the hearth, leaning back against the stones.

"ju lʊk wɛl, ɪleɪn,"

"You look well, Elayne,"

θɔɹn sɛd.

Thorn said.

"ɪz ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɡoʊɪŋ wɛl wɪð ðə tʃaɪld?"

"Is everything going well with the child?"

"tʃɪlʒɹən," ɪleɪn kɝɛktəd. "ðɛɹ wɪl bi twɪnz. ən jɛs, ɛvɹi-θɪŋ ɪz wɛl. seɪv fəɹ mi hævɪŋ tə bi poʊkt ən pɹɑɾɪd ət nɪɹli ɛvɹi ɑpɝtunəɾi."

"Children," Elayne corrected. "There will be twins. And yes, every-thing is well. Save for me having to be poked and prodded at nearly every opportunity."

"weɪt," mæt sɛd. "wʌt?" hi ɡlænst əɡɛn əɾ ɪleɪnz stʌmək.

"Wait," Mat said. "What?" He glanced again at Elayne's stomach.

tɑm ɹoʊld ɪz aɪz. "doʊn jə ɛvɝ lɪsən wən jəɹ ɪn ðə sɪɾi ɡæmbəlɪŋ?"

Thom rolled his eyes. "Don't you ever listen when you're in the city gambling?"

"aɪ lɪsən," mæt mʌɾɝd. "juʒəwəli." hi lʊkt əkjuzɪŋli əɾ ɪleɪn. "dʌz ɹænd noʊ əbaʊt ðɪs?"

"I listen," Mat muttered. "Usually." He looked accusingly at Elayne. "Does Rand know about this?"

ʃi læft. "aɪ ʃəd hoʊp i ɪzən tu sɝpɹaɪzd."

She laughed. "I should hope he isn't too surprised."

"bɝn mi!" mæt sɛd. "hiz ðə fɑðɝ!"

"Burn me!" Mat said. "He's the father!"

"ðə fɑðɝ ə maɪ tʃɪlʒɹən ɪz ə mæɾɝ ə səm spɛkjəleɪʃən ɪn ðə sɪɾi," ɪleɪn sɛd sɔləmli.

"The father of my children is a matter of some speculation in the city," Elayne said solemnly.

"æn ðə kɹaʊn pɹəfɝz ðəɹ tə bi spɛkjəleɪʃən, fəɹ ðə taɪm. bʌɾ ɪnʌf əbaʊt mi! tɑm, juv tə tɛl mi ɛvɹiθɪŋ. haʊ dɪd jə ɪskeɪp ɛbu dɑɹ?"

"And the Crown prefers there to be speculation, for the time. But enough about me! Thom, you have to tell me everything. How did you escape Ebou Dar?"

"fɝɡɛɾ ɛbu dɑɹ," bɝdʒɪt snæpt. "haʊz oʊlvɝ? dɪd jə faɪn hɪm?"

"Forget Ebou Dar," Birgitte snapped. "How's Olver? Did you find him?"

"wi dɪd," tɑm sɛd. "æn hiz wɛl, ðoʊ aɪ fɪɹ ðə læɾ ɪz dɛstɪn fəɹ laɪf əz ə pɹəfɛʃənəl soʊlʒɝ."

"We did," Thom said. "And he is well, though I fear the lad is destined for life as a professional soldier."

"nɑɾ ə bæd laɪf," bɝdʒɪt sɛd. "ɛ, mæt?"

"Not a bad life," Birgitte said. "Eh, Mat?"

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ wɝs," hi sɛd, stɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ ɪz lɛɡz ʌndɝniθ hɪm. haʊ hæd bɪkʌmɪŋ kwin meɪɾ ɪleɪn lɛs haɪ-ænd-maɪɾi? hæɾ i mɪst sʌmθɪŋ? ʃi æktʃəli  simd əɡɹiəbəl naʊ!

"There are worse," he said, still trying to get his legs underneath him. How had becoming Queen made Elayne less high-and-mighty? Had he missed something? She actually seemed agreeable now!

wɛl, ðət wɑz ənfɛɹ. ðəɹ wɝ taɪmz wən ʃi hæd bɪn əɡɹiəbəl bɪfɔɹ. ðeɪ hæd mɪɹli bɪn mɪks bɪtwin taɪmz wən ʃi hæd bɪn ɔɹɾɝɪŋ mæt ɝaʊnd. hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf smaɪlɪŋ əz tɑm ɹɪleɪɾɪd ðə dɪteɪlz ə ðɛɹ ɪskeɪp ən ðə kæptʃɝ ə tuɑn, fɑloʊd baɪ ðɛɹ tʃɹævəlz wɪð mæstɝ lukəz mənædʒɝi. dʒɹɔn fɹəm ðə kwɪvɝ ʌv ə stɔɹitɛlɝ, ðə teɪl saʊndəɾ ə hoʊl lɑt mɔɹ ɪmpɹɛsɪv ðən ɪt hæd bɪn tə lɪv. mæt ɔlmoʊs θɔt hɪmsɛlf ə hɪɹoʊ, lɪsnɪŋ tə tɑm.

Well, that was unfair. There were times when she had been agreeable before. They had merely been mixed between times when she had been ordering Mat around. He found himself smiling as Thom related the details of their escape and the capture of Tuon, followed by their travels with Master Luca's menagerie. Drawn from the quiver of a storyteller, the tale sounded a whole lot more impressive than it had been to live. Mat almost thought himself a hero, listening to Thom.

ɹaɪt bɪfɔɹ tɑm ɡɑt tə ðə pɑɹɾ əbaʊt tuɑnz mɛɹɪdʒ wɝdz, haʊɛvɝ, mæt kɔft ən kʌɾ ɪn.

Right before Thom got to the part about Tuon's marriage words, however, Mat coughed and cut in.

"ænd wi bit ðə sintʃæn, flɛɾ ɪndə mu-ɹændi, ən ɪvɛntʃəwəli faʊn ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ɡɛɾ əs hɪɹ θɹu ə ɡeɪtweɪ. baɪ ðə weɪ, hæv jə sin vɛɹɪn leɪtli?"

"And we beat the Seanchan, fled into Mu-randy, and eventually found an Aes Sedai to get us here through a gateway. By the way, have you seen Verin lately?"

"noʊ," ɪleɪn sɛd. tɑm aɪd mæt wɪð əmjuzmənt.

"No," Elayne said. Thom eyed Mat with amusement.

"blæst," mæt sɛd. wɛl, ðəɹ wɛn ɪz tʃæns tə juz əɹ fəɹ ə ɡeɪtweɪ tə ðə taʊɝ ʌv ɡɛndʒeɪaɪ.

"Blast," Mat said. Well, there went his chance to use her for a gateway to the Tower of Ghenjei.

hi wəd wɝi əbaʊt ðət leɪɾɝ. hi tʊk ðə lɛðɝ ɛnvəloʊp fɹəm ɪz bɛlt, ðən oʊpən ɪt, teɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ɑlʌdʒɹəz peɪpɝz. "ɪleɪn," hi sɛd, "aɪ nid tə tɔk tə ju."

He would worry about that later. He took the leather envelope from his belt, then opened it, taking out Aludra's papers. "Elayne," he said, "I need to talk to you."

"jɛs, jə mɛnʃənd 'bɛlfndɝz' ɪn jəɹ lɛɾɝ. wʌt tʃɹʌbəl əv jə ɡɑɾən jɝsɛlf ɪntu, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən?"

"Yes, you mentioned 'bellfounders' in your letter. What trouble have you gotten yourself into, Matrim Cauthon?"

"ðæts nɑt fɛɹ əɾ ɔl," hi sɛd, spɹɛɾɪŋ aʊt ðə ʃits. "aɪm nɑt ðə wʌn u ɡɛts ɪndə tʃɹʌbəl. ɪf aɪ  - "

"That's not fair at all," he said, spreading out the sheets. "I'm not the one who gets into trouble. If I  - "

"jɔɹ nɑt gɑnə mɛnʃən maɪ ɡɛɾɪŋ kæptʃɝɾ ɪn ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ əɡɛn ɑɹ ju?" ʃi æskt wɪð ə ɹoʊl ə hɝ aɪz. hi stɑpt. "ʌv kɔɹs nɑt. ðət hæpən eɪdʒəz əɡoʊ. aɪ bɛɹli ɹɪmɛmbɝ ʃi læft, ðə pɹɪɾi saʊn ɹɪŋɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹum. hi fɛl hɪmsɛlf blʌʃɪŋ. "ɛniweɪ, aɪm nɑɾ ɪn tʃɹʌbəl. aɪ dʒʌs nid səm ɹisɔɹsɪz."

"You're not going to mention my getting captured in the Stone of Tear again are you?" she asked with a roll of her eyes. He stopped. "Of course not. That happened ages ago. I barely remember She laughed, the pretty sound ringing in the room. He felt himself blushing. "Anyway, I'm not in trouble. I just need some resources."

"wʌt kaɪndə ɹisɔɹsɪz?" ɪleɪn æskt, ɡɹoʊɪŋ kjʊɹiəs əz i spɹɛɾ aʊt ðə peɪpɝz ɑn ðə teɪbəl nɛks tə hɝ tʃɛɹ. bɝdʒɪt lin daʊn.

"What kind of resources?" Elayne asked, growing curious as he spread out the papers on the table next to her chair. Birgitte leaned down.

"wɛl," mæt sɛd, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz tʃɪn. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ θɹi bɛlfndɝz ɪn ðə sɪɾi; əl nid ðoʊz. ən wɝ gɑnə nid səm paʊɾɝz. ðəɹ lɪstəɾ ɑn ðɪs peɪdʒ. ən . . . wɪl niɾ ə lɪɾəl bɪɾ ə mɛɾəl." hi wɪnst ən hændəɾ əɹ wʌn ʌv ɑlʌdʒɹəz lɪsts.

"Well," Mat said, rubbing his chin. "There are three bellfounders in the city; I'll need those. And we're going to need some powders. They're listed on this page. And . . . we'll need a little bit of metal." He winced and handed her one of Aludra's lists.

ɪleɪn ɹɛd ðə peɪdʒ, ðən blɪŋkt. "ɑɹ jə mæd?"

Elayne read the page, then blinked. "Are you mad?"

"səmtaɪmz aɪ θɪŋk aɪ maɪt bi," hi sɛd. "bʌt bɝn mi, aɪ θɪŋk ðɪs wɪl bi wɝθ ðə kɑst."

"Sometimes I think I might be," he said. "But burn me, I think this will be worth the cost."

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?" ɪleɪn æskt əz bɝdʒɪt lʊkt oʊvɝ wʌn ə ðə ʃits, ðən hændəɾ ɪt tə ɪleɪn.

"What is it?" Elayne asked as Birgitte looked over one of the sheets, then handed it to Elayne.

"ɑlʌdʒɹə kɔlz əm dʒɹæɡənz," mæt sɛd. "θɔɹn sɛz jə nu hɝ?"

"Aludra calls them dragons," Mat said. "Thorn says you knew her?"

"jɛs, aɪ dɪd," ɪleɪn sɛd.

"Yes, I did," Elayne said.

"wɛl, ðiz ɑɹ lɔntʃɪŋ tubz, laɪk ðə wʌnz fəɹ əɹ faɪɹwɝks. oʊnli ðəɹ meɪɾ ə mɛɾəl, ən ðəɹ bɪɡ. ən ɪnstɛɾ ə lɔntʃɪŋ naɪtfloʊ-ɝz, ðeɪ lɔntʃ ðiz hɛd-saɪz tʃʌŋks ʌv aɪɝn."

"Well, these are launching tubes, like the ones for her fireworks. Only they're made of metal, and they're big. And instead of launching nightflow-ers, they launch these head-sized chunks of iron."

"waɪ wəd jə wɑnə lɔntʃ tʃʌŋks ʌv aɪɝn ʌp ɪndə ði ɛɹ?" ɪleɪn sɛd, fɹaʊn dipənɪŋ.

"Why would you want to launch chunks of iron up into the air?" Elayne said, frown deepening.

jə doʊnt" bɝdʒɪt sɛd, aɪz oʊpənɪŋ waɪd. "ju lɔntʃ əm ət sʌmwʌn ɛlsəz ɑɹmi."

You don't" Birgitte said, eyes opening wide. "You launch them at someone else's army."

mæt nɑɾəd. "ɑlʌdʒɹə kleɪmz ðət wʌn ə ðiz dʒɹæɡənz kəd lɔntʃ ən aɪɝn bɔl əz fɑɹ əz ə maɪl."

Mat nodded. "Aludra claims that one of these dragons could launch an iron ball as far as a mile."

mʌðɝz mɪlk ɪn ə kʌp!" bɝdʒɪt sɛd. "ju kæn bi sɪɹiəs."

Mother's milk in a cup!" Birgitte said. "You can't be serious."

ʃi ɪz," mæt sɛd. "æn aɪ bɪliv hɝ. jə ʃəd si wʌt ʃiz kɹieɪɾəd ɔlɹɛɾi, ən ʃi kleɪmz ðiz wɪl bi hɝ mæstɝpis. lʊk, ʃi ʃoʊz hɪɹ ðə dʒɹæɡənz faɪɹɪŋ ɑn ə sɪɾi wɔl fɹəm ə maɪl əweɪ. wɪð fɪfti dʒɹæɡənz ən tu hʌnʒɹəd ən fɪfti sɑldɝz ʃi kəd nɑk daʊn ə wɔl laɪk ðə wʌn ɝaʊn keɪɛmlɪn ɪn ə fju aʊɝz."

She is," Mat said. "And I believe her. You should see what she's created already, and she claims these will be her masterpiece. Look, she shows here the dragons firing on a city wall from a mile away. With fifty dragons and two hundred and fifty solders she could knock down a wall like the one around Caemlyn in a few hours."

ɪleɪn lʊk peɪl. dɪd ʃi bɪliv hɪm? wəd ʃi bi æŋɡɹi əɾ ɪm fəɹ weɪstɪŋ əɹ taɪm?

Elayne looked pale. Did she believe him? Would she be angry at him for wasting her time?

"aɪ noʊ ðət woʊn bi ʌv mʌtʃ jus ɪn ðə læs bæɾəl," mæt sɛd kwɪkli. "tʃɹɑləks doʊn əv wɔlz.

"I know that won't be of much use in the Last Battle," Mat said quicly. "Trollocs don't have walls.

bʌt lʊk hɪɹ. aɪ hæɾ əɹ dɪzaɪn ə spɹɛɾɪŋ ʃɑt. faɪɝ ɪɾ ɑn ə laɪn ə tʃɹɑləks fɹəm fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz, ən wʌn ə ðiz dʒɹæɡənz wɪl də ðə wɝk ə fɪfti boʊmən. bɝn mi, ɪleɪn, bʌt wɝ gɑnə bi əɾ ə dɪsədvæntɪdʒ. ðə ʃædoʊ kən ɔlweɪz tɔs mɔɹ tʃɹɑləks əɾ əs ðən wɪv soʊlʒɝz, ən ðə blʌɾi θɪŋz ɑɹ twaɪs əz hɑɹd tə kɪl əz ə mæn. wi niɾ ən ædvæntɪdʒ. aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ - "

But look here. I had her design a spreading shot. Fire it on a line of Trollocs from four hundred paces, and one of these dragons will do the work of fifty bowmen. Burn me, Elayne, but we're going to be at a disadvantage. The Shadow can always toss more Trollocs at us than we have soldiers, and the bloody things are twice as hard to kill as a man. We need an advantage. I remember - "

hi kʌt hɪmsɛlf ɔf. hi hæd bɪn əbaʊt tə seɪ hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə tʃɹoʊl-lɑk wɔɹz, wɪtʃ wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn ə ɡʊɾ aɪdiə. ə mæn kəd stɑɹt səm ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ ɹumɝz ðət weɪ. "lʊk," hi sɛd. "aɪ noʊ ðɪs saʊnz aʊtʃɹeɪdʒəs, bʌt juv tə ɡɪv ɪɾ ə tʃæns."

He cut himself off. He had been about to say he remembered the Trol-loc Wars, which would not have been a good idea. A man could start some embarrassing rumors that way. "Look," he said. "I know this sounds outrageous, but you have to give it a chance."

ʃi lʊkt ʌp ət hɪm, ən . . . wɑz ʃi kɹaɪɪŋ əɡɛn? wʌt hæɾ i dʌn?

She looked up at him, and . . . was she crying again? What had he done?

"mæt, aɪ kəd kɪs ju," ʃi dɪklɛɹd. "ðɪs ɪz ɪɡzækli wʌɾ aɪ niɾəd!"

"Mat, I could kiss you," she declared. "This is exactly what I needed!"

mæt blɪŋkt. wʌt?

Mat blinked. What?

bɝdʒɪt tʃʌkəld. "fɝs nɔɹi, naʊ mæt. jəl əv tə wɑtʃ jɝsɛlf, ɪleɪn. ɹænd wɪl bi dʒɛləs."

Birgitte chuckled. "First Norry, now Mat. You'll have to watch yourself, Elayne. Rand will be jealous."

ɪleɪn snɔɹɾɪd, lʊkɪŋ daʊn ət ðə plænz. "ðə bɛlfndɝz ɑɹən gɑnə laɪk ðɪs. moʊst ə ðə kɹæfsmən wɝ lʊkɪŋ fɔɹwɝd tə ɡɛɾɪŋ bæk tə deɪli wɝk, fɑloʊɪŋ ðə sidʒ."

Elayne snorted, looking down at the plans. "The bellfounders aren't going to like this. Most of the craftsmen were looking forward to getting back to daily work, following the siege."

"oʊ, aɪ doʊnt noʊ əbaʊt ðæt, ɪleɪn," bɝdʒɪt sɛd. "aɪv noʊn ə kɹæfsmən əɹ tu ɪn maɪ taɪm.

"Oh, I don't know about that, Elayne," Birgitte said. "I've known a craftsman or two in my time.

tə ə pɝsən, ðeɪ kəmpleɪn əbaʊt ɹɔɪəl pɹɪvlədʒ dʊɹɪŋ wɔɹ, bʌɾ əz lɔŋ əz ðə kɹaʊn kɑmpənseɪts ðɛm, ðəɹ sikɹɪtli hæpi. stɛɾi wɝk ɪz ɔlweɪz əpɹiʃieɪɾɪd. bɪsaɪdz, sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðɪs wɪl meɪk əm kjʊɹiəs."

To a person, they complain about royal privilege during war, but as long as the Crown compensates them, they're secretly happy. Steady work is always appreciated. Besides, something like this will make them curious."

"wil əv tə kip ɪt sikɹət," ɪleɪn sɛd.

"We'll have to keep it secret," Elayne said.

"soʊ jəl də ɪt?" mæt æskt, sɝpɹaɪzd. hi hæd nɑt niɾəd ɪz sikɹət bɹaɪb tə dɪstʃɹæk hɝ!

"So you'll do it?" Mat asked, surprised. He had not needed his secret bribe to distract her!

"wil nid pɹuf ʌv wʌn wɝkɪŋ fɝst, ʌv kɔɹs," ɪleɪn sɛd. "bʌɾ ɪf ðiz dɪvaɪsəz, ðiz dʒɹæɡənz, wɝk hæf əz wɛl əz ɑlʌdʒɹə kleɪmz . .  wɛl, aɪd bi ə ful nɑt tə pʊɾ ɛvɹi mæn ɑn əm wi kæn!"

"We'll need proof of one working first, of course," Elayne said. "But if these devices, these dragons, work half as well as Aludra claims . .  well, I'd be a fool not to put every man on them we can!"

"ðæts ɹaɪt dʒɛnɝəs ə ju," mæt sɛd, skɹætʃɪŋ ɪz hɛd.

"That's right generous of you," Mat said, scratching his head.

ɪleɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "dʒɛnɝəs?"

Elayne hesitated. "Generous?"

"bɪldɪŋ ðiz fəɹ ðə bænd."

"Building these for the Band."

"fɔɹ ðə bænd . . . mæt, ðiz wɪl bi fəɹ ændɝ!"

"For the Band . . . Mat, these will be for Andor!"

"hɪɹ naʊ," mæt sɛd. "ðiz ɑɹ maɪ plænz."

"Here now," Mat said. "These are my plans."

"æn maɪ ɹisɔɹsɪz!" ɪleɪn sɛd. ʃi sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪt, sʌɾənli bɪkʌmɪŋ mɔɹ pɔɪzd. "ʃʊɹli jə si ðət ðə kɹaʊn kəɾ ɔfɝ ə mɔɹ steɪbəl ən jusfəl kəntʃɹoʊl fəɹ ðə dɪplɔɪmən ə ðiz wɛpənz."

"And my resources!" Elayne said. She sat up straight, suddenly becoming more poised. "Surely you see that the Crown could offer a more stable and useful control for the deployment of these weapons."

tə ðə saɪd, θɔɹn wɑz ɡɹɪnɪŋ.

To the side, Thorn was grinning.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə soʊ hæpi əbaʊt?" mæt dɪmændəd.

"What are you so happy about?" Mat demanded.

"nʌθɪŋ," θɔɹn sɛd. "ju də jəɹ mʌðɝ pɹaʊd, ɪleɪn."

"Nothing," Thorn said. "You do your mother proud, Elayne."

"θæŋk ju, θɔɹn," ʃi sɛd, feɪvɝɪŋ ɪm wɪð ə smaɪl.

"Thank you, Thorn," she said, favoring him with a smile.

"huz saɪɾ ɑɹ jə ɑn?" mæt sɛd.

"Whose side are you on?" Mat said.

"ɛvɹiwʌnz," θɔɹn sɛd.

"Everyone's," Thorn said.

"ðæts nɑɾ ə blʌɾi saɪd," mæt sɛd, ðən lʊk bæk tə ɪleɪn. "aɪ pʊɾ ə lɑɾ ʌv ɛfɝɾ ən θɔɾ ɪndə ɡɛɾɪŋ ðiz plænz aʊɾ ʌv ɑlʌdʒɹə. aɪv nʌθɪŋ ɪnst ændɝ, bʌɾ aɪ doʊn tʃɹʌst ɛniwʌn wɪð ðiz wɛpənz u ɪzən mi."

"That's not a bloody side," Mat said, then looked back to Elayne. "I put a lot of effort and thought into getting these plans out of Aludra. I've nothing inst Andor, but I don't trust anyone with these weapons who isn't me."

"æn ɪf ðə bænd wɝ pɑɹɾ ʌv ændɝ?" ɪleɪn æskt. ʃi ɹɪli dɪd saʊn laɪk ə kwin ɔl ʌv ə sʌɾən.

"And if the Band were part of Andor?" Elayne asked. She really did sound like a queen all of a sudden.

"ðə bæn ɪz bɪhoʊldən tə noʊbɑdi," mæt sɛd.

"The Band is beholden to nobody," Mat said.

"ðæɾ ɪz ædmɝəbəl, mæt," ɪleɪn sɛd, "bʌɾ ɪt meɪks jə mɝsənɛɹiz. aɪ θɪŋk ðət ðə bæn dɪzɝvz sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ, sʌmθɪŋ bɛɾɝ. wɪð əfɪʃəl bækɪŋ, jə wəɾ əv æksɛs tə ɹisɔɹsɪz ən əθɔɹəɾi. wi kəd ɡɪv jə ə kəmɪʃən ɪn ændɝ, wɪð jəɹ oʊn kəmæn stʃɹʌktʃɝ."

"That is admirable, Mat," Elayne said, "but it makes you mercenaries. I think that the Band deserves something more, something better. With official backing, you would have access to resources and authority. We could give you a commission in Andor, with your own command structure."

ɪt wɑz æktʃəli  tɛmptɪŋ. dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl. bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪleɪn wəd bi hæpi tə hæv ɪm ɪn əɹ ɹɛlm wʌns ʃi nu ʌv ɪz ɹileɪʃənʃɪp wɪð ðə sintʃæn. hi mɛn tə ɹɪtɝn tə tuɑn ɪvɛntʃəwəli, sʌmhaʊ. ɪf oʊnli tə wɝk aʊt wʌt ʃi ɹɪli fɛlt əbaʊt hɪm.

It was actually tempting. Just a little. But it did not matter. He did not think Elayne would be happy to have him in her realm once she knew of his relationship with the Seanchan. He meant to return to Tuon eventually, somehow. If only to work out what she really felt about him.

hi hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ʌv ɡɪvɪŋ ðə sintʃæn æksɛs tə ðiz dʒɹæɡənz, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt fænsi ɡɪvɪŋ əm tə ændɝ, iðɝ. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, hi hæd tə ədmɪt ðət ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ hi wɑz gɑnə hæv ændɝ bɪld əm wɪθaʊt ɡɪvɪŋ ðə wɛpənz tə ðə neɪʃən, tu.

He had no intention of giving the Seanchan access to these dragons, but he did not fancy giving them to Andor, either. Unfortunately, he had to admit that there was no way he was going to have Andor build them without giving the weapons to the nation, too.

"aɪ doʊnt wɑn ə kəmɪʃən fəɹ ðə bænd," mæt sɛd. "wɝ fɹi mɛn, ən ðæts haʊ wi laɪk ɪt."

"I don't want a commission for the Band," Mat said. "We're free men, and that's how we like it."

ɪleɪn lʊk tʃɹʌbəld.

Elayne looked troubled.

"bʌɾ aɪd bi wɪlɪŋ tə splɪt ðə dʒɹæɡənz wɪð ju," mæt sɛd. "sʌm fəɹ ʌs, səm fəɹ ju."

"But I'd be willing to split the dragons with you," Mat said. "Some for us, some for you."

"wʌɾ ɪf" ɪleɪn sɛd, "aɪ bɪlt ɔl ə ðə dʒɹæɡənz ən oʊn ɔl ə ðɛm - bʌt pɹɑməs ðəɾ oʊnli ðə bæn kəd juz ðɛm? noʊ ʌðɝ fɔɹsɪz wəɾ əv æksɛs tə ðɛm."

"What if" Elayne said, "I built all of the dragons and owned all of them - but promised that only the Band could use them? No other forces would have access to them."

"ðæt wəd bi kaɪndə ju," mæt sɛd. "səspɪʃəs, ðoʊ. noʊ əfɛns."

"That would be kind of you," Mat said. "Suspicious, though. No offense."

ɪt wəd bi bɛɾɝ fəɹ mi ɪf ðə noʊbəl haʊsəz dɪdn əv ðiz, ət lis nɑɾ ət fɝst. ðəl spɹɛɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli. wɛpənz ɔlweɪz du. aɪ bɪld əm ən pɹɑməs tə ɡɪv əm tə ðə bænd. noʊ kəmɪʃən, dʒʌst ə kɑn- tʃɹækt, haɪɹɪŋ jə fəɹ ə lɔŋ tɝm. jə kən ɡoʊ əɾ ɛni taɪm. bʌɾ ɪf jə du, jə liv ðə dʒɹæɡənz bɪhaɪnd."

It would be better for me if the noble Houses didn't have these, at least not at first. They will spread eventually. Weapons always do. I build them and promise to give them to the Band. No commission, just a con- tract, hiring you for a long term. You can go at any time. But if you do, you leave the dragons behind."

mæt fɹaʊnd. "filz laɪk jəɹ ɹæpɪŋ ə tʃeɪn ɝaʊn maɪ nɛk, ɪleɪn."

Mat frowned. "Feels like you're wrapping a chain around my neck, Elayne."

"aɪm oʊnli sədʒɛstɪŋ ɹizənəbəl səluʃənz."

"I'm only suggesting reasonable solutions."

"ðə deɪ jə bɪkʌm ɹizənəbəl ɪz ðə deɪ aɪ it maɪ hæt," mæt sɛd. "noʊ əfɛns."

"The day you become reasonable is the day I eat my hat," Mat said. "No offense."

ɪleɪn ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ ət hɪm. jɛs, ʃi hæd bɪkʌm ə kwin. dʒʌs laɪk ðæt.

Elayne raised an eyebrow at him. Yes, she had become a queen. Just like that.

"aɪ wɑn ðə ɹaɪt tə kip ə fju ʌv ðiz dʒɹæɡənz," mæt sɛd, "ɪf wi liv. wʌn-kɔɹɾɝ tə ʌs, θɹi- kɔɹɾɝz tə ju. bʌt wɪl teɪk jəɹ kɑntʃɹækt, ən waɪl wɝ ɪn jəɹ ɛmplɔɪ, oʊnli wi juz ðɛm. əz jə sɛd."

"I want the right to keep a few of these dragons," Mat said, "if we leave. One-quarter to us, three- quarters to you. But we'll take your contract, and while we're in your employ, only we use them. As you said."

hɝ fɹaʊn dipənd. bɝn hɪm, bʌt ʃi; hæd ɡɹæsp ðə paʊɝ ə ðoʊz dʒɹæɡənz kwɪkli. hi kəd nɑt lɛɾ əɹ hɛzəteɪt naʊ. ðeɪ niɾəd ðə dʒɹæɡənz tə ɡoʊ ɪndə pɹədʌkʃən ɪmiɾiətli. ən i wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə lɛt ðə tʃæns ə hævɪŋ əm pæs ðə bæn baɪ.

Her frown deepened. Burn him, but she; had grasped the power of those dragons quickly. He could not let her hesitate now. They needed the dragons to go into production immediately. And he was not about to let the chance of having them pass the Band by.

saɪɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf, mæt ɹitʃt ʌp ən əndɪd ðə stʃɹæp ət ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk, ðən pʊl ðə fəmɪljɝ fɑkshɛd mədæljən aʊɾ ə hɪz ʃɝt. ðə sɛkən i ɹimuvd ɪt, hi fɛl mɔɹ neɪkəd ðən ɪf i hæd stʃɹɪp bɛɹ. hi sɛɾ ɪɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl.

Sighing to himself, Mat reached up and undid the strap at the back of his neck, then pulled the familiar foxhead medallion out of his shirt. The second he removed it, he felt more naked than if he had stripped bare. He set it on the table.

ɪleɪn ɡlænst əɾ ɪt, ən i kəd si ə flæʃ ə dɪzaɪɝ ɪn əɹ aɪz. "wʌɾ ɪz ðət fɔɹ?"

Elayne glanced at it, and he could see a flash of desire in her eyes. "What is that for?"

"ɪts ə swiɾənɝ," mæt sɛd, linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, ɛlboʊz ɑn niz. "ju ɡɛɾ ɪt fəɹ wʌn deɪ ɪf jə əɡɹi tə stɑɹt pɹədʌkʃən ɑn ə pɹoʊɾətaɪp dʒɹæɡən ðɪs ivnɪŋ. aɪ doʊn kɛɹ wʌt jə də wɪð ðə mədæljən - stʌɾi ɪt, ɹaɪɾ ə blʌɾi bʊk əbaʊɾ ɪt, wɛɹ ɪɾ əbaʊt. bʌt jə ɹɪtɝn ɪt təmɑɹoʊ. jəɹ wɝɾ ɑn ɪt."

"It's a sweetener," Mat said, leaning forward, elbows on knees. "You get it for one day if you agree to start production on a prototype dragon this evening. I don't care what you do with the medallion - study it, write a bloody book about it, wear it about. But you return it tomorrow. Your word on it."

bɝdʒɪt wɪsəl sloʊli. ɪleɪn hæd wɑntəd tə ɡɛɾ əɹ hænz ɑn ðət mədæljən ðə moʊmənt ʃi dɪskʌvɝɾ i hæɾ ɪt. ʌv kɔɹs, soʊ hæɾ ɛvɹi ʌðɝ blʌɾi ɛɛs sədaɪ ðət mæt hæd mɛt.

Birgitte whistled slowly. Elayne had wanted to get her hands on that medallion the moment she discovered he had it. Of course, so had every other bloody Aes Sedai that Mat had met.

"aɪ ɡɛt ðə bæn ɪn ət list ə wʌn-jɪɹ kɑntʃɹækt," ɪleɪn sɛd, "ɹinuəbəl. wɪl peɪ jə wʌtɛvɝ jə wɝ ɝnɪŋ ɪn mʊɹændi."

"I get the Band in at least a one-year contract," Elayne said, "renewable. We'll pay you whatever you were earning in Murandy."

haʊ dɪd ʃi noʊ əbaʊt ðæt?

How did she know about that?

"ju kən kænsəl," ʃi kəntɪnjud, "æz lɔŋ əz jə pɹəvaɪɾ ə mʌnθs wɔɹnɪŋ - bʌɾ aɪ kip fɔɹ dʒɹæɡənz aʊɾ ə faɪv. ən ɛni mɛn u wɪʃ tə dʒɔɪn ði ændɔɝən mɪlətɛɹi mʌs bi ɡɪvən ðə tʃæns."

"You can cancel," she continued, "as long as you provide a month's warning - but I keep four dragons out of five. And any men who wish to join the Andoran military must be given the chance."

"aɪ wɑnt wʌn aʊɾ ə fɔɹ," mæt sɛd. "æn ə nu sɝvɪŋ mæn."

"I want one out of four," Mat said. "And a new serving man."

"ə wʌt?" ɪleɪn sɛd.

"A what?" Elayne said.

"ə sɝvɪŋ mæn," mæt sɛd. "ju noʊ, tə teɪk kɛɹ ə maɪ kloʊðɪŋ. jud də ə bɛɾɝ dʒɑb ə pɪkɪŋ ðən aɪ wʊd."

"A serving man," Mat said. "You know, to take care of my clothing. You'd do a better job of picking than I would."

ɪleɪn lʊkt əɾ ɪz koʊt, ðən ʌp əɾ ɪz hɛɹ. "ðæt," ʃi sɛd, "aɪl ɡɪv jə ɹəɡɑɹdləs ə haʊ ði ʌðɝ nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz ɡoʊ."

Elayne looked at his coat, then up at his hair. "That," she said, "I'll give you regardless of how the other negotiations go."

"wʌn aʊɾ ə fɔɹ?" mæt sɛd.

"One out of four?" Mat said.

"aɪ ɡɛt ðə mədæljən fəɹ θɹi deɪz."

"I get the medallion for three days."

hi ʃɪvɝd. θɹi deɪz, wɪð ðə ɡoʊləɛn ɪn taʊn. ʃi wəɾ əv ɪm dɛd. ɪt wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ə ɡæmbəl tə ɡɪv ɪt tə hɝ fəɹ ə deɪ. bʌɾ i kəd nɑt θɪŋk ʌv ɛniθɪŋ ɛls i kəɾ ɔfɝ. "wʌt dʒju ivən θɪŋk jə kən də wɪð ðə θɪŋ?" hi æskt.

He shivered. Three days, with the ghola?n in town. She would have him dead. It was already a gamble to give it to her for a day. But he could not think of anything else he could offer. "What do you even think you can do with the thing?" he asked.

"kɑpi ɪt," ɪleɪn sɛɾ æbsənli, "ɪf aɪm lʌki."

"Copy it," Elayne said absently, "if I'm lucky."

"ɹɪli?"

"Really?"

"aɪ woʊnt noʊ əntɪl aɪ stʌɾi ɪt."

"I won't know until I study it."

mæt sʌɾənli hæd ðə hɔɹəfaɪɪŋ ɪmədʒ ʌv ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə wɝld ɹɪŋ wʌn ə ðoʊz mədæljənz. hi ʃɛɹɾ ə lʊk wɪð θɔɹn, hu simd ikwəli sɝpɹaɪz tə hɪɹ ðɪs.

Mat suddenly had the horrifying image of every Aes Sedai in the world earing one of those medallions. He shared a look with Thorn, who seemed equally surprised to hear this.

bʌt wʌd ðət mæɾɝ? mæt kəd nɑt tʃænəl. bɪfɔɹ, hi hæd wɝid ðət - ɪf ʃi stʌɾid ɪt -  ɪleɪn maɪt fɪɡjɝ ə weɪ tə tʌtʃ ɪm wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ wən i wɑz wɛɹɪŋ ɪt. bʌɾ ɪf ʃi dʒʌst wɑntəd tə kɑpi ɪt wɛl, hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɹɪlivd. ən ɪntʃɹiɡd.

But what did that matter? Mat could not channel. Before, he had worried that - if she studied it -  Elayne might figure a way to touch him with the One Power when he was wearing it. But if she just wanted to copy it well, he found himself relieved. And intrigued.

"ðɛɹz bɪn sʌmθɪŋ aɪv bɪn minɪŋ tə mɛnʃən, ɪleɪn," hi sɛd. "ðə ɡoʊləm ɪz hɪɹ. ɪn taʊn. ɪts bɪn kɪlɪŋ pipəl."

"There's been something I've been meaning to mention, Elayne," he said. "The gholam is here. In town. It's been killing people."

ɪleɪn ɹɪmeɪn kɑm, bʌɾ i kəd tɛl fɹəm ðə weɪ ʃi wɑz ivən mɔɹ fɔɹməl wən ʃi spoʊk ðət ðə nuz wɝid hɝ. "ðɛn əl bi sɝɾən tə ɹɪtɝn ðə mədæljən tə jə ɑn taɪm."

Elayne remained calm, but he could tell from the way she was even more formal when she spoke that the news worried her. "Then I will be certain to return the medallion to you on time."

hi ɡɹɪməst. "ɔl ɹaɪt," hi sɛd. "θɹi deɪz."

He grimaced. "All right," he said. "Three days."

"vɛɹi wɛl," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ wɑn ðə bæn tə stɑɹɾ ɪmiɾiətli. əl bi tʃɹævlɪŋ tə kɛɹhin sun, ən aɪ hæv ə filɪŋ ðeɪ wəd bi ə bɛɾɝ səpɔɹt fɔɹs ðəɹ ðən ðə kwinz ɡɑɹd."

"Very well," she said. "I want the Band to start immediately. I'll be Traveling to Cairhien soon, and I have a feeling they would be a better support force there than the Queen's Guard."

soʊ ðət wɑz wʌt ðɪs wɑz əbaʊt! ɪleɪn wɑz muvɪŋ ɑn ðə sʌn θɹoʊn. wɛl, ðət simd ə ɡʊd jus fəɹ ðə mɛn, ət list əntɪl mæt niɾəd ðɛm. bɛɾɝ ðən lɛɾɪŋ əm sɪɾ ɝaʊnd ɡɛɾɪŋ leɪzi ən pɪkɪŋ faɪts wɪð sɛl-sɔɹdz.

So that was what this was about! Elayne was moving on the Sun Throne. Well, that seemed a good use for the men, at least until Mat needed them. Better than letting them sit around getting lazy and picking fights with sell-swords.

"aɪ əɡɹi tə ðæt," mæt sɛd, "bʌɾ ɪleɪn, ðə bæn əz tə bi fɹi tə faɪɾ ɪn ðə læs bæɾəl, haʊɛvɝ ɹænd wɑns. ən ɑlʌdʒɹə hæz tə supɝvaɪz ðə dʒɹæɡənz. aɪ hæv ə filɪŋ ðət ʃɪl ɪnsɪs ðət ʃi ɹɪmeɪn wɪð jə ɪf ðə bæn bɹeɪks ɔf fɹəm ændɝ."

"I agree to that," Mat said, "but Elayne, the Band has to be free to fight in the Last Battle, however Rand wants. And Aludra has to supervise the dragons. I have a feeling that she'll insist that she remain with you if the Band breaks off from Andor."

"aɪ hæv noʊ ɪʃuz wɪð ðæt," ɪleɪn sɛd, smaɪlɪŋ.

"I have no issues with that," Elayne said, smiling.

aɪ fɪɡjɝd jə wʊdnt. bʌt, dʒʌst soʊ wɝ klɪɹ, ðə bæn əz kəntʃɹoʊl ə ðə dʒɹæɡənz əntɪl wi liv. jə kæn sɛl ðə tɛknɑlədʒi tə ʌðɝz."

I figured you wouldn't. But, just so we're clear, the Band has control of the dragons until we leave. You can't sell the technology to others."

"sʌmwʌn wɪl ɹɛpləkeɪɾ ɪt, mæt," ʃi sɛd.

"Someone will replicate it, Mat," she said.

kɑpiz woʊn bi əz ɡʊɾ əz ɑlʌdʒɹəz," mæt sɛd. "aɪ pɹɑməs jə ðæt."

Copies won't be as good as Aludra's," Mat said. "I promise you that."

ɪleɪn stʌɾid hɪm, blu aɪz weɪɪŋ hɪm, dʒʌdʒɪŋ hɪm. "aɪd stɪl ɹæðɝ əv ðə bæn əz ə fʊli kəmɪʃən ændɔɝən fɔɹs."

Elayne studied him, blue eyes weighing him, judging him. "I'd still rather have the Band as a fully commissioned Andoran force."

"wɛl, aɪ wɪʃ aɪ hæɾ ə hæt meɪɾ ɔl ʌv ɡoʊld, ə tɛn ðət kəd flaɪ ən ə nɔɹs ðət livz dʒɹɑpɪŋz ə daɪmənz. bʌt wɪl boʊθ əv tə sɛɾəl wɪð wʌts ɹizənəbəl, woʊnt wi?"

"Well, I wish I had a hat made all of gold, a tent that could fly and a norse that leaves droppings of diamonds. But we'll both have to settle with what's reasonable, won't we?"

"ɪt wʊdn bi ənɹiznəbəl tə - "

"It wouldn't be unreasonable to - "

"wiɾ əv tə də wʌt jə sɛd, ɪleɪn," mæt ɹɪplaɪd. "aɪ woʊn əv ɪt səm bæɾəlz ɑɹənt wɝθ faɪɾɪŋ, ən aɪm gɑnə dɪsaɪd wən maɪ mɛn pʊt ðɛmsɛlvz ət ɹɪsk. ðæts ðæt."

"We'd have to do what you said, Elayne," Mat replied. "I won't have it Some battles aren't worth fighting, and I'm going to decide when my men put themselves at risk. That's that."

"aɪ doʊn laɪk hævɪŋ mɛn u kəd liv mi əɾ ɛni taɪm."

"I don't like having men who could leave me at any time."

"ju noʊ aɪ woʊn hoʊld əm bæk mɪɹli tə spaɪt ju," mæt sɛd. "aɪl də wʌts ɹaɪt."

"You know I won't hold them back merely to spite you," Mat said. "I'll do what's right."

"wʌt jə si əz biɪŋ ɹaɪt," ʃi kɝɛktəd.

"What you see as being right," she corrected.

"ɛvɹi mæn ʃəɾ əv ðəɾ ɑpʃən," hi ɹɪplaɪd, "fju mɛn juz ɪt waɪzli."

"Every man should have that option," he replied, "Few men use it wisely."

"wi wɑn ɪɾ ɛniweɪ," mæt sɛd. "wi dɪmæn ɪt."

"We want it anyway," Mat said. "We demand it."

ʃi ɡlænst - ɔlmoʊst ɪmpɝsɛptɪbli - təwɔɹd ðə plænz ən ðə mədæljən ɑn ðə teɪbəl. "ju hæv ɪt," ʃi sɛd.

She glanced - almost imperceptibly - toward the plans and the medallion on the table. "You have it," she said.

"dil," hi sɛd, stændɪŋ ʌp, spɪɾɪŋ ɪn ɪz hænd, ən hoʊldɪŋ ɪɾ aʊt.

"Deal," he said, standing up, spitting in his hand, and holding it out.

ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, stʊɾ ən spæɾ ɪn əɹ hænd, ðən hɛld ɪɾ aʊt tə hɪm. hi smaɪld ən ʃʊk ɪt.

She hesitated, stood and spat in her hand, then held it out to him. He smiled and shook it.

"dɪd jə noʊ ðəɾ aɪ maɪɾ æsk jə tə teɪk ɑɹmz əɡɛns ðə tu ɹɪvɝz?" ʃi æskt. "ɪz ðət waɪ jə dɪmændəd ðə ɹaɪt tə liv ɪf jə wɑnt?"

"Did you know that I might ask you to take arms against the Two Rivers?" she asked. "Is that why you demanded the right to leave if you want?"

əɡɛns ðə tu ɹɪvɝz? waɪ ʌndɝ ðə laɪt wəd ʃi wɑnə də ðæt? "ju doʊnt nid tə faɪt ðɛm, ɪleɪn."

Against the Two Rivers? Why under the Light would she want to do that? "You don't need to fight them, Elayne."

"wi ʃæl si wʌt pɛɹɪn fɔɹsɪz mi tə du," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd. "bʌt lɛts nɑt dɪskʌs ðət ɹaɪt naʊ." ʃi ɡlænst ət θɔɹn, ðən ɹitʃt ʌndɝ əɹ teɪbəl ən pʊld aʊɾ ə ɹoʊl pis ə peɪpɝ wɪð ə ɹɪbən əbaʊɾ ɪt. "pliz. aɪ wɑnə hɪɹ mɔɹ ʌv wʌt hæpən dʊɹɪŋ jəɹ tʃɹɪp aʊɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ. wɪl jə teɪk dɪnɝ wɪð mi ðɪs ivnɪŋ?"

"We shall see what Perrin forces me to do," she replied. "But let's not discuss that right now." She glanced at Thorn, then reached under her table and pulled out a rolled piece of paper with a ribbon about it. "Please. I want to hear more of what happened during your trip out of Ebou Dar. Will you take dinner with me this evening?"

"wid bi dɪlaɪɾəd," θɔɹn sɛd, stændɪŋ. "wʊdnt wi, mæt?"

"We'd be delighted," Thorn said, standing. "Wouldn't we, Mat?"

"aɪ səpoʊz," mæt sɛd. "ɪf tælmɑnz kən kʌm. hɪl tɛɹ maɪ θɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ɪf aɪ doʊn ət lis lɛɾ ɪm mit ju, ɪleɪn. teɪkɪŋ dɪnɝ wɪð jəl əv ɪm dænsɪŋ ɔl ðə weɪ bæk tə ðə kæmp."

"I suppose," Mat said. "If Talmanes can come. He'll tear my throat out if I don't at least let him meet you, Elayne. Taking dinner with you will have him dancing all the way back to the camp."

ɪleɪn tʃʌkəld. "æz jə wɪʃ. əl əv sɝvəns ʃoʊ jə tə səm ɹumz wɛɹ jə kən ɹɛst əntɪl ðə taɪm ɝaɪvz." ʃi hændəd θɔɹn ðə ɹoʊld-ʌp peɪpɝ. "ðɪs wɪl bi pɹoʊkleɪm təmɑɹoʊ, ɪf jəl ɪt."

Elayne chuckled. "As you wish. I'll have servants show you to some rooms where you can rest until the time arrives." She handed Thorn the rolled-up paper. "This will be proclaimed tomorrow, if you will it."

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?" tɑm æskt, fɹaʊnɪŋ.

"What is it?" Thom asked, frowning.

"ðə kɔɹɾ ʌv ændɝ læks ə pɹɑpɝ kɔɹt-bɑɹd," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ θɔt jə maɪt bi ɪntʃɹəstəd."

"The court of Andor lacks a proper court-bard," she said. "I thought you might be interested."

tɑm hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "ju ɑnɝ mi, bʌɾ aɪ kæn æksɛp ðæt. ðəɹ ɑɹ θɪŋz aɪ nid tə də ɪn ðə nɛks lɪɾəl waɪl, ən aɪ kæn bi taɪd tə ðə kɔɹt."

Thom hesitated. "You honor me, but I can't accept that. There are things I need to do in the next little while, and I can't be tied to the court."

"ju nidn bi taɪd tə ðə kɔɹt," ɪleɪn sɛd. "jul əv fɹiɾəm tə liv ən ɡoʊ wɛɹ jə wɪʃ. bʌt wən jə ɑɹ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, aɪɾ əv jə bi noʊn fəɹ u jə ɑɹ."

"You needn't be tied to the court," Elayne said. "You'll have freedom to leave and go where you wish. But when you are in Caemlyn, I'd have you be known for who you are."

"aɪ..." hi tʊk ðə ɹoʊl ə peɪpɝ. "aɪl kənsɪɾɝ ɪt, ɪleɪn."

"I..." He took the roll of paper. "I'll consider it, Elayne."

"ɛksələnt." ʃi ɡɹɪməst. "aɪm əfɹeɪɾ aɪ hæv ən əpɔɪnmənt wɪð maɪ mɪdwaɪf naʊ, bʌɾ əl si jə ət dɪnɝ. aɪ hævən jɛɾ æskt wʌt meɪtʃɹim mɛn baɪ kɔlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ə mɛɹid mæn ɪn ɪz lɛɾɝ. aɪ ɪkspɛkt ə fʊl ɹipɔɹt! noʊ ɪkspɝɡeɪʃənz!" ʃi aɪd mæt, smaɪlɪŋ slaɪli. "ɪkspɝɡeɪʃən minz 'pɑɹts kʌɾ aʊt,' mæt. ɪn keɪs jə wɝn blʌɾi əwɛɹ."

"Excellent." She grimaced. "I'm afraid I have an appointment with my midwife now, but I will see you at dinner. I haven't yet asked what Matrim meant by calling himself a married man in his letter. I expect a full report! No expurgations!" She eyed Mat, smiling slyly. "Expurgation means 'parts cut out,' Mat. In case you weren't bloody aware."

hi pʊɾ ɪz hæɾ ɑn. "aɪ nu ðæt." wʌt hæd ðət wɝd bɪn əɡɛn? ɛkspɝeɪʃənz? laɪt, waɪ hæɾ i mɛnʃən ɪz mɛɹɪdʒ ɪn ðət lɛɾɝ? hi hæd hoʊpt ɪt wəd meɪk ɪleɪn kjʊɹiəs ɪnʌf tə si hɪm.

He put his hat on. "I knew that." What had that word been again? Expirations? Light, why had he mentioned his marriage in that letter? He had hoped it would make Elayne curious enough to see him.

ɪleɪn læft, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ əm təwɔɹd ði ɛɡzɪt. tɑm spɛɹɾ ə pətɝnəl kɪs fəɹ əɹ tʃik bɪfɔɹ pɑɹɾɪŋ - ɡʊd ðəɾ ɪt wɑz pətɝnəl! mæt hæd hɝd səm θɪŋz əbaʊt ðoʊz tu ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt wɑnə bɪliv. wɪð tɑm oʊld ɪnʌf tə bi hɝ ɡɹændfɑðɝ, noʊ lɛs.

Elayne laughed, gesturing them toward the exit. Thom spared a paternal kiss for her cheek before parting - good that it was paternal! Mat had heard some things about those two that he did not want to believe. With Thom old enough to be her grandfather, no less.

mæt pʊld oʊpən ðə dɔɹ, muvɪŋ tə liv.

Mat pulled open the door, moving to leave.

"æn mæt," ɪleɪn æɾəd. "ɪf jə nid tə bɑɹoʊ mʌni tə baɪ ə nu koʊt, ðə kɹaʊn kən lɛn jə sʌm. kənsɪɾɝɪŋ jəɹ steɪʃən, jə ɹɪli ʃəd dʒɹɛs mɔɹ naɪsli."

"And Mat," Elayne added. "If you need to borrow money to buy a new coat, the Crown can lend you some. Considering your station, you really should dress more nicely."

"ɪm noʊ blʌɾi noʊbəlmən!" hi sɛd, tɝnɪŋ.

"I'm no bloody nobleman!" he said, turning.

"nɑt jɛt," ʃi sɛd. "ju doʊn əv pɛɹɪnz ɑdæsəɾi ɪn neɪmɪŋ jɝsɛlf tə ə taɪɾəl. əl si ðət jə ɡɛt wʌn."

"Not yet," she said. "You don't have Perrin's audacity in naming yourself to a title. I'll see that you get one."

"ju wʊdn dɛɹ," hi sɛd.

"You wouldn't dare," he said.

"bʌt - "

"But - "

"si hɪɹ," hi sɛɾ əz tɑm dʒɔɪn ɪm ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ. "aɪm pɹaʊɾ ə hu aɪ æm. ən aɪ laɪk ðɪs koʊt. ɪts kʌmftəɹbəl." hi klɛntʃt ɪz hænz ɪndə fɪsts, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə skɹætʃ əɾ ɪz kɑlɝ.

"See here," he said as Thom joined him in the hallway. "I'm proud of who I am. And I like this coat. It's comfortable." He clenched his hands into fists, refusing to scratch at his collar.

"ɪf jə seɪ soʊ," ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪ wɪl si jə ət dɪnɝ. əl əv tə bɹɪŋ daɪɛlɪn. ʃiz vɛɹi kjʊɹiəs tə mit ju."

"If you say so," Elayne said. "I will see you at dinner. I'll have to bring Dyelin. She's very curious to meet you."

wɪð ðæt, ʃi hæd bɝdʒɪt kloʊz ðə dɔɹ. mæt stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪt vɛnɡfəli fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən tɝn təwɔɹd tɑm. tælmɑnz ən ðə soʊlʒɝz weɪɾəd ə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ, aʊɾ ə hɪɹɪŋ ɹeɪnʒ. ðeɪ wɝ biɪŋ ɡɪvən wɔɹm ti baɪ səm pæləs sɝvəns.

With that, she had Birgitte close the door. Mat stared at it vengefully for a moment, then turned toward Thom. Talmanes and the soldiers waited a short distance down the hallway, out of hearing range. They were being given warm tea by some palace servants.

ðət wɛnt wɛl," mæt dɪsaɪɾɪd, hænz ɑn hɪps. "aɪ wɝid ʃi wʊdn baɪt, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk aɪ ɹild əɹ ɪn pɹɪɾi wɛl." ðoʊ ðə blʌɾi daɪs wɝ stɪl ɹoʊlɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd.

That went well," Mat decided, hands on hips. "I worried she wouldn't bite, but I think I reeled her in pretty well." Though the bloody dice were still rolling in his head.

tɑm læft, klæpɪŋ ɪm ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ.

Thom laughed, clapping him on the shoulder.

"wʌt?" mæt dɪmændəd.

"What?" Mat demanded.

tɑm dʒʌs tʃʌkəld, ðən ɡlæns daʊn ət ðə skɹoʊl ɪn ɪz ʌðɝ hænd. "æn ðɪs wɑz ʌnɪkspɛktɪɾ əz wɛl."

Tom just chuckled, then glanced down at the scroll in his other hand. "And this was unexpected as well."

"wɛl, ændɝ dʌzn əv ə kɔɹt-bɑɹd," mæt sɛd.

"Well, Andor doesn't have a court-bard," Mat said.

"jɛs," θɔɹn sɛd, lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə skɹoʊl. "bʌt ðɛɹz ə pɑɹɾən ɹɪɾən ɪn hɪɹ tu, fəɹ ɛni ən ɔl kɹaɪmz - noʊn ən ənnoʊn - aɪ meɪ hæv kəmɪɾəd ɪn ændɝ əɹ kɛɹhin. aɪ wʌndɝ u toʊl hɝ. . . ."

"Yes," Thorn said, looking over the scroll. "But there's a pardon written in here too, for any and all crimes - known and unknown - I may have committed in Andor or Cairhien. I wonder who told her. . . ."

"toʊld əɹ wʌt?"

"Told her what?"

"nʌθɪŋ, mæt. nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl. wɪv ə fju aʊɝz əntɪl dɪnɝ wɪð ɪleɪn. wʌt dʒju seɪ wi ɡoʊ baɪ jə ə nu koʊt?"

"Nothing, Mat. Nothing at all. We have a few hours until dinner with Elayne. What do you say we go buy you a new coat?"

"ɔl ɹaɪt," mæt sɛd. "ju θɪŋk aɪ kəd ɡɛt wʌn ə ðoʊz pɑɹɾənz, tu ɪf aɪ æsk fəɹ ɪt?"

"All right," Mat said. "You think I could get one of those pardons, too if I asked for it?"

"du jə nid wʌn?"

"Do you need one?"

mæt ʃɹʌɡd, wɔkɪŋ daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ wɪð hɪm. "kæn hɝt tə bi seɪf. wʌt kaɪndə koʊɾ ɑɹ jə gɑnə baɪ mi, ɛniweɪ?"

Mat shrugged, walking down the hallway with him. "Can't hurt to be safe. What kind of coat are you going to buy me, anyway?"

"aɪ dɪdn seɪ aɪd peɪ."

"I didn't say I'd pay."

"doʊn bi soʊ stɪnʒi," mæt sɛd. "aɪl peɪ fəɹ dɪnɝ." ən blʌɾi æʃəz, sʌmhaʊ, mæt nu, hi wʊd.

"Don't be so stingy," Mat said. "I'll pay for dinner." And bloody ashes, somehow, Mat knew, he would.


tʃæptɝ twɛnti


CHAPTER 20

eɪ tʃɔɪs


A Choice

"ju mʌs nɑt spik," ɹɑsɪl sɛd tə nɪneɪiv. ðə slɛndɝ, lɔŋnɛkt wʊmən wɔɹ ən ɔɹənʒ dʒɹɛs slæʃt wɪð jɛloʊ. "æt list, spik oʊnli wən spoʊkən tə. jə noʊ ðə sɛɹəmoʊni?"

"You must not speak," Rosil said to Nynaeve. The slender, longnecked woman wore an orange dress slashed with yellow. "At least, speak only when spoken to. You know the ceremony?"

nɪneɪiv nɑɾəd, hɝ hɑɹt biɾɪŋ tʃɹɛtʃɝəsli əz ðeɪ wɔkt ɪndə ðə dʌndʒɑnlaɪk dɛpθs ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ɹɑsɪl wɑz ðə nu mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz, ən ə mɛmbɝ ə ðə jɛloʊ ədʒɑ baɪ koʊɪnsɪɾəns.

Nynaeve nodded, her heart beating treacherously as they walked into the dungeonlike depths of the White Tower. Rosil was the new Mistress of Novices, and a member of the Yellow Ajah by coincidence.

"ɛksələnt, ɛksələnt," ɹɑsɪl sɛd. "maɪɾ aɪ sədʒɛs jə muv ðə ɹɪŋ tə ðə θɝd fɪŋɡɝ ə jəɹ lɛf hænd?"

"Excellent, excellent," Rosil said. "Might I suggest you move the ring to the third finger of your left hand?"

"ju meɪ sədʒɛst ɪt," nɪneɪiv sɛd, bʌt dɪd nɑt muv ðə ɹɪŋ. ʃi hæd bɪn neɪmd ɛɛs sədaɪ.

"You may suggest it," Nynaeve said, but did not move the ring. She had been named Aes Sedai.

ʃi wəd nɑt ɡɪv ɪn ɑn ðət pɔɪnt.

She would not give in on that point.

ɹɑsɪl pɝst əɹ lɪps, bʌt sɛd nʌθɪŋ fɝðɝ. ðə wʊmən hæd ʃoʊn nɪneɪiv ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl kaɪndnəs dʊɹɪŋ əɹ ʃɔɹt taɪm ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ -  wɪtʃ hæd bɪn ə ɹɪlif. nɪneɪiv hæd ɡɹoʊn tə ɪkspɛk ðəɾ ɛvɹi jɛloʊ sɪstɝ wəd ɹəɡɑɹɾ əɹ wɪð dɪsdeɪn, əɹ ət list ɪndɪfɝəns. oʊ, ðeɪ θɔt ʃi wɑz tæləntəd, ən mɛni ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn biɪŋ tʃɹeɪn baɪ hɝ. bʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ə hɝ əz wʌn ə ðɛm. nɑt jɛt.

Rosil pursed her lips, but said nothing further. The woman had shown Nynaeve remarkable kindness during her short time in the White Tower -  which had been a relief. Nynaeve had grown to expect that every Yellow sister would regard her with disdain, or at least indifference. Oh, they thought she was talented, and many insisted on being trained by her. But they did not think of her as one of them. Not yet.

ðɪs wʊmən wɑz dɪfɹənt, ən biɪŋ ə bɝ ɪn əɹ sændəl wɑz nɑɾ ə ɡʊd ɹipeɪmənt. "ɪɾ ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə mi, ɹɑsɪl," nɪneɪiv ɪkspleɪnd, "ðæt wʌn nɑt ɡɪv ɛni ɪndəkeɪʃən ə dɪsɹɪspɛk fəɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn. ʃi neɪmd mi ɛɛs sədaɪ. tə ækt əz ɪf aɪ wɝ mɪɹli æksɛptɪd wəd bi tə ʌndɝmaɪn əɹ wɝdz. ðɪs tɛst ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt - wən ði æmɪɝlɪn ɹeɪz mi, ʃi nɛvɝ sɛd ðəɾ aɪ nid nɑt bi tɛstəd.

This woman was different, and being a burr in her sandal was not a good repayment. "It is important to me, Rosil," Nynaeve explained, "that 1 not give any indication of disrespect for the Amyrlin. She named me Aes Sedai. To act as if I were merely Accepted would be to undermine her words. This test is important - when the Amyrlin raised me, she never said that I need not be tested.

bʌɾ aɪm ɛɛs sədaɪ."

But I am Aes Sedai."

ɹɑsɪl kɑkt əɹ hɛd, ðən nɑɾəd. "jɛs. aɪ si. jə ɑɹ kɝɛkt."

Rosil cocked her head, then nodded. "Yes. I see. You are correct."

nɪneɪiv stɑpt ɪn ðə dɪm kɔɹəɾɝ. "aɪ wɑnə θæŋk ju, ən ði ʌðɝz u hæv wɛlkəmd mi ðiz læs deɪz - nɪɛɹ ən mɹəmɝ. aɪ hæd nɑɾ əsumd aɪ wəd faɪn æksɛptəns hɪɹ əmʌŋ ju."

Nynaeve stopped in the dim corridor. "I want to thank you, and the others who have welcomed me these last days - Niere and Meramor. I had not assumed I would find acceptance here among you."

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ səm u ɹɪzɪs tʃeɪnʒ, dɪɹ," ɹɑsɪl sɛd. "ɪt wɪl ɛvɝ bi soʊ bʌt jəɹ nu wivz ɑɹ ɪmpɹɛsɪv. mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾəntli, ðəɹ ɪfɛktɪv ðəɾ ɝnz jə ə wɔɹm wɛlkəm fɹəm mi."

"There are some who resist change, dear," Rosil said. "It will ever be so But your new weaves are impressive. More importantly, they're effective That earns you a warm welcome from me."

nɪneɪiv smaɪld.

Nynaeve smiled.

"naʊ," ɹɑsɪl sɛd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝ. "ju maɪt bi ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ði aɪz ə ði æmɪɝlɪn ən ðə taʊɝ, bʌt tʃɹədɪʃən stɪl hoʊlz. noʊ spikɪŋ fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə sɛɹəmoʊni, pliz."

"Now," Rosil said, raising a finger. "You might be Aes Sedai in the eyes of the Amyrlin and the Tower, but tradition still holds. No speaking for the rest of the ceremony, please."

ðə læŋki wʊmən kəntɪnjud liɾɪŋ ðə weɪ. nɪneɪiv fɑloʊd, baɪɾɪŋ ɔf ə ɹitɔɹt. ʃi wʊdn lɛɾ əɹ nɝvz ɹul hɝ.

The lanky woman continued leading the way. Nynaeve followed, biting off a retort. She wouldn't let her nerves rule her.

dipɝ ɪndə ðə taʊɝ ðeɪ waʊnd, ən dɪspaɪɾ əɹ dɪtɝməneɪʃən tə bi kɑm, ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf ɪnkɹisɪŋli nɝvəs. ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ʃi wəd pæs ðɪs tɛst. ʃid mæstɝd ðə hʌnʒɹəd wivz. ʃi dɪdnt nid tə wɝi.

Deeper into the Tower they wound, and despite her determination to be calm, she found herself increasingly nervous. She was Aes Sedai, and she would pass this test. She'd mastered the hundred weaves. She didn't need to worry.

ɪksɛpt, səm wɪmən nɛvɝ ɹɪtɝn fɹəm ðə tɛst.

Except, some women never returned from the test.

ðiz sɛlɝz hæɾ ə ɡɹæn bjuɾi tə ðɛm. ðə smuð stoʊn flɔɹ wɑz lɛvəl kɛɹfəli. læmps bɝn haɪ ɑn ðə wɔlz; laɪkli, ðoʊz hæd ɹikwaɪɝɾ ə sɪstɝ əɹ æksɛptɪd tə laɪɾ əm wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ. fju pipəl keɪm daʊn hɪɹ, ən moʊst ə ðə ɹumz wɝ juz fəɹ stɔɹədʒ. ɪt simd ə weɪs tə hɝ tə pʊt sətʃ kɛɹ ɪn ə pleɪs ɹɛɹli vɪzəɾəd.

These cellars had a grand beauty to them. The smooth stone floor was leveled carefully. Lamps burned high on the walls; likely, those had required a sister or Accepted to light them with the One Power. Few people came down here, and most of the rooms were used for storage. It seemed a waste to her to put such care in a place rarely visited.

ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ðeɪ ɝaɪvd əɾ ə pɛɹ ə dɔɹz soʊ lɑɹdʒ ðət ɹɑsɪl hæd tə juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ tə oʊpən ðɛm. ɪts ən ɪndəkeɪʃən, nɪneɪiv θɔt, foʊldɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz. ðə vɔltəd hɔlweɪz, ði ɪnɔɹməs dɔɹ.

Eventually, they arrived at a pair of doors so large that Rosil had to use the One Power to open them. It's an indication, Nynaeve thought, folding her arms. The vaulted hallways, the enormous door.

ðɪs ɪz hɪɹ tə ʃoʊ æksɛptɪd ði ɪmpɔɹɾəns ʌv wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ əbaʊt tə du.

This is here to show Accepted the importance of what they are about to do.

ði ɪnɔɹməs, ɡætlaɪk dɔɹz swʌŋ oʊpən, ən nɪneɪiv fɔɹs hɝsɛlf tə mæstɝ əɹ dʒɪɾɝz. ðə læs bæɾəl wɑz lumɪŋ. ʃi wəd pæs ðɪs tɛst. ʃi hæɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt wɝk tə bi əbaʊt.

The enormous, gatelike doors swung open, and Nynaeve forced herself to master her jitters. The Last Battle was looming. She would pass this test. She had important work to be about.

hɛd ɹeɪz haɪ, ʃi ɛntɝd ðə tʃeɪmbɝ. ɪt wɑz doʊmd, wɪð stænd-læmps ɝaʊn ðə pɝɪməɾɝ.

Head raised high, she entered the chamber. It was domed, with stand-lamps around the perimeter.

ə lɑɹdʒ tɛɹæŋɡɹil dɑməneɪɾəd ðə sɛntɝ. ɪt wɑz ən oʊvəl, nɛɹoʊɾ ət ðə tɑp ən bɑɾəm, ðət sæɾ ənsəpɔɹɾɪd.

A large ter'angreal dominated the center. It was an oval, narrowed at the top and bottom, that sat unsupported.

mɛni tɛɹæŋɡɹil lʊkt ɔɹɾənɛɹi. ðət wɑz nɑt ðə keɪs hɪɹ: ðɪs oʊvəl wɑz ɑbviəsli sʌmθɪŋ wɝk baɪ ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ɪt wɑz meɪɾ ə mɛɾəl, bʌt ðə laɪt tʃeɪnʒd kʌlɝz əz ɪt ɹəflɛktəɾ ɔf ðə sɪlvɝi saɪdz, meɪkɪŋ ðə θɪŋ sim tə ɡloʊ ən ʃɪft.

Many ter'angreal looked ordinary. That was not the case here: this oval was obviously something worked by the One Power. It was made of metal, but the light changed colors as it reflected off the silvery sides, making the thing seem to glow and shift.

"ətɛnd," ɹɑsɪl sɛd fɔɹməli.

"Attend," Rosil said formally.

ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə ɹum. wʌn fɹəm itʃ ədʒɑ, ɪnkluɾɪŋ -  ənfɔɹtʃənətli - ðə ɹɛd. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl sɪɾɝz, ən ɑɾəti, pɝhæps kəz ə naɪeɪivz noʊɾɝaɪəti ɪn ðə taʊɝ. sɹɪn fɹəm ðə bɹaʊn, jukɪɝi ʌv ðə ɡɹeɪ, bɑɹɑsin fɹəm ðə ɹɛd. noʊɾəbli, ɹoʊmændə fɹəm ðə jɛloʊ wɑz ðɛɹ; ʃi hæɾ ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn teɪkɪŋ pɑɹt. ʃi hæd bɪn hɑɹd wɪð nɪneɪiv soʊ fɑɹ. ɛɡwin hɝsɛlf hæd kʌm. wʌn mɔɹ ðən nɔɹməl, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn əz wɛl. nɪneɪiv mɛt ði æmɪɝlɪnz aɪz, ən ɛɡwin nɑɾəd. ənlaɪk ðə tɛs toʊb ɹeɪz tə æksɛptɪd - wɪtʃ wɑz meɪɾ ɪntaɪɝli baɪ ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil - hɪz tɛst ɪnvɑlv ðə sɪstɝz æktɪvli wɝkɪŋ tə meɪk nɪneɪiv pɹuv hɝsɛlf ən ɛɡwin wəd bi əmʌŋ ðə moʊs hɑɹʃ. tə ʃoʊ ðət ʃi hæd bɪn ɹaɪɾ ɪn ɹeɪzɪŋ nɪneɪiv.

There were other Aes Sedai in the room. One from each Ajah, including -  unfortunately - the Red. They were all Sitters, an oddity, perhaps because of Nyaeve's notoriety in the Tower. Saerin from the Brown, Yukiri of the Gray, Barasine from the Red. Notably, Romanda from the Yellow was there; she had insisted on taking part. She had been hard with Nynaeve so far. Egwene herself had come. One more than normal, and the Amyrlin as well. Nynaeve met the Amyrlin's eyes, and Egwene nodded. Unlike the test tobe raised to Accepted - which was made entirely by the ter'angreal - his test involved the sisters actively working to make Nynaeve prove herself And Egwene would be among the most harsh. To show that she had been right in raising Nynaeve.

"ju kʌm ɪn ɪɡnɝəns, nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə," ɹɑsɪl sɛd. "haʊ wɪl jə dɪpɑɹt?"

"You come in ignorance, Nynaeve al'Meara," Rosil said. "How will you depart?"

"ɪn nɑlədʒ ə maɪsɛlf," nɪneɪiv sɛd.

"In knowledge of myself," Nynaeve said.

"fɔɹ wʌt ɹizən əv jə bɪn sʌmən hɪɹ?"

"For what reason have you been summoned here?"

"tə bi tʃɹaɪd."

"To be tried."

"fɔɹ wʌt ɹizən ʃəd jə bi tʃɹaɪd?"

"For what reason should you be tried?"

"tə ʃoʊ ðəɾ aɪm wɝði," nɪneɪiv sɛd.

"To show that I am worthy," Nynaeve said.

sɛvɹəl ə ðə wɪmən fɹaʊnd, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ɛɡwin. ðoʊz wɝn ðə ɹaɪt wɝdz - nɪneɪiv wɑz səpoʊz tə seɪ ðət ʃi wɑntəd tə lɝn wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ʃi wɑz wɝði. bʌt ʃi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɛɛs sədaɪ, soʊ baɪ dɛfənɪʃən ʃi wɑz wɝði. ʃi dʒʌs hæd tə pɹuv ɪt tə ði ʌðɝz.

Several of the women frowned, including Egwene. Those weren't the right words - Nynaeve was supposed to say that she wanted to learn whether or not she was worthy. But she was already Aes Sedai, so by definition she was worthy. She just had to prove it to the others.

ɹɑsɪl stʌmbəld, bʌt kəntɪnjud. "ænd ... fəɹ wʌt wəd jə bi faʊnd wɝði?"

Rosil stumbled, but continued. "And ... for what would you be found worthy?"

"tə wɛɹ ðə ʃɔl aɪ hæv bɪn ɡɪvən," nɪneɪiv sɛd. ʃi dɪdn seɪ ɪt tə bi ɛɹəɡənt. wʌns əɡɛn, ʃi sɪmpli steɪɾəd ðə tʃɹuθ, əz ʃi sɔ ɪt. ɛɡwin hæd ɹeɪz hɝ. ʃi wɔɹ ðə ʃɔl ɔlɹɛɾi.

"To wear the shawl I have been given," Nynaeve said. She didn't say it to be arrogant. Once again, she simply stated the truth, as she saw it. Egwene had raised her. She wore the shawl already.

waɪ pɹitɛn ðət ʃi dɪdnt?

Why pretend that she didn't?

ðɪs tɛst wɑz ədmɪnəstɝd klæɾ ɪn ðə laɪt. ʃi bɪɡæn teɪkɪŋ ɔf əɹ dʒɹɛs.

This test was administered clad in the Light. She began taking off her dress.

"aɪ wɪl ɪnstʃɹʌk ju," ɹɑsɪl sɛd. "ju wɪl si ðɪs saɪn əpɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd." ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ fɪŋɡɝz, fɔɹmɪŋ wivz ðət meɪɾ ə ɡloʊɪŋ sɪmbəl ɪn ði ɛɹ. ə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ, tu oʊvɝlæpɪŋ tʃɹaɪæŋɡəlz.

"I will instruct you," Rosil said. "You will see this sign upon the ground." She raised her fingers, forming weaves that made a glowing symbol in the air. A six-pointed star, two overlapping triangles.

sɹɪn ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs ən woʊv ə wiv ə spɪɹət. nɪneɪiv səpɹɛs ði ɝdʒ tə ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs hɝsɛlf.

Saerin embraced the source and wove a weave of Spirit. Nynaeve suppressed the urge to embrace the Source herself.

oʊnli ə lɪɾəl lɔŋɡɝ, ʃi θɔt. ən ðən noʊbɑdi wɪl bi eɪbəl tə daʊt mi.

Only a little longer, she thought. And then nobody will be able to doubt me.

sɹɪn tʌtʃt əɹ wɪð ðə wiv ə spɪɹət. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌt mʌs bi ɹɪmɛmbɝd," ʃi mɝmɝd.

Saerin touched her with the weave of Spirit. "Remember what must be remembered," she murmured.

ðət wiv hæd sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð mɛmɹi. wʌt wɑz ɪts pɝpəs? ðə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ hʌvɝɾ ɪn nɪneɪivz vɪʒən.

That weave had something to do with memory. What was its purpose? The six-pointed star hovered in Nynaeve's vision.

"wɛn jə si ðət saɪn, jəl ɡoʊ tə ɪɾ ɪmiɾiətli," ɹɑsɪl sɛd, "ɡoʊ əɾ ə stɛɾi peɪs, niðɝ hɝiɪŋ nɔɹ hæŋɪŋ bæk. oʊnli wən jə ɹitʃ ɪt meɪ jə ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs. ðə wivɪŋ ɹikwaɪɝd mʌs bɪɡɪn ɪmiɾiətli, ən jə meɪ nɑt liv ðət saɪn əntɪl ɪts kəmpliɾəd."

"When you see that sign, you will go to it immediately," Rosil said, "Go at a steady pace, neither hurrying nor hanging back. Only when you reach it may you embrace the Source. The weaving required must begin immediately, and you may not leave that sign until it is completed."

"ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌt mʌs bi ɹɪmɛmbɝd," sɹɪn sɛɾ əɡɛn.

"Remember what must be remembered," Saerin said again.

"wɛn ðə wiv ɪz kəmplit," ɹɑsɪl sɛd, "ju wɪl si ðət saɪn əɡɛn, mɑɹkɪŋ ðə weɪ jə mʌst ɡoʊ, əɡɛn əɾ ə stɛɾi peɪs, wɪθaʊt hɛzəteɪʃən."

"When the weave is complete," Rosil said, "you will see that sign again, marking the way you must go, again at a steady pace, without hesitation."

"ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌt mʌs bi ɹɪmɛmbɝd."

"Remember what must be remembered."

"wʌn hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz jəl wiv, ɪn ði ɔɹɾɝ ðət juv bɪn ɡɪvən ən ɪn pɝfəkt kəmpoʊʒɝ."

"One hundred times you will weave, in the order that you have been given and in perfect composure."

"ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌt mʌs bi ɹɪmɛmbɝd," sɹɪn sɛd wʌn faɪnəl taɪm.

"Remember what must be remembered," Saerin said one final time.

nɪneɪiv fɛl ðə wivɪŋ ə spɪɹət sɛɾəl ɪndə hɝ. ɪt wɑz ɹæðɝ laɪk hilɪŋ. ʃi ɹimuvd əɹ dʒɹɛs ən ʃɪft əz ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz nɛl bɪsaɪd ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, pɝfɔɹmɪŋ kɑmplɛks wivz ʌv ɔl faɪv paʊɝz. ðeɪ kɑzd ɪt tə ɡloʊ bɹaɪtli, ðə kʌlɝz ɑn ɪts sɝfəs ʃɪftɪŋ ən tʃeɪnʒɪŋ. ɹɑsɪl klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊt, ən nɪneɪiv blʌʃt, hændɪŋ əɹ ðə paɪl ʌv ɡɑɹməns, ðən tʊk ɔf əɹ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ən pleɪst ɪɾ ɑn tɑp, fɑloʊd baɪ lænz ɹɪŋ - wɪtʃ ʃi nɔɹməli wɔɹ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk.

Nynaeve felt the weaving of Spirit settle into her. It was rather like Healing. She removed her dress and shift as the other sisters knelt beside the ter'angreal, performing complex weaves of all Five Powers. They caused it to glow brightly, the colors on its surface shifting and changing. Rosil cleared her throat, and Nynaeve blushed, handing her the pile of garments, then took off her Great Serpent ring and placed it on top, followed by Lan's ring - which she normally wore around her neck.

ɹɑsɪl tʊk ðə kloʊðɪŋ. ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz wɝ kəmplitli əbzɔɹbd ɪn ðɛɹ wɝk. ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil bɪɡæn ɡloʊɪŋ ə pjʊɹ waɪɾ ɪn ðə sɛntɝ, ðən stɑɹɾəd tə ɹivɑlv sloʊli, ɡɹaɪndɪŋ əɡɛns ðə stoʊn.

Rosil took the clothing. The other sisters were completely absorbed in their work. The ter'angreal began glowing a pure white in the center, then started to revolve slowly, grinding against the stone.

nɪneɪiv tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. ʃi pɔz bɪfɔɹ ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, stɛp θɹu ən . . .

Nynaeve took a deep breath, striding forward. She paused before the ter'angreal, stepped through and . . .

. . . ən wɛɹ wɑz ʃi? nɪneɪiv fɹaʊnd. ðɪs dɪdn lʊk laɪk ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ʃi stʊɾ ɪn ə vɪlədʒ meɪɾ ə hʌts. weɪvz læpt əɡɛnst ə sændi bitʃ tə hɝ lɛft, ən ðə vɪlədʒ ɹæn ʌp ə sloʊp təwɔɹɾ ə ɹɑki ʃɛlf tə hɝ ɹaɪt. ə dɪstən maʊntən taʊɝɾ əbʌv.

. . . and where was she? Nynaeve frowned. This didn't look like the Two Rivers. She stood in a village made of huts. Waves lapped against a sandy beach to her left, and the village ran up a slope toward a rocky shelf to her right. A distant mountain towered above.

ən aɪlən ə səm sɔɹt. ði ɛɹ wɑz hjuməd, ðə bɹiz kɑm. pipəl wɔk bɪtwin hʌts, kɔlɪŋ ɡʊd-neɪtʃɝdli tə wʌn ənʌðɝ. ə fju stɑp tə stɛɹ ət hɝ. ʃi lʊk daʊn ət hɝsɛlf, ɹilaɪzɪŋ fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ðət ʃi wɑz neɪkəd. ʃi blʌʃt fjʊɹiəsli. hu hæd teɪkən əɹ kloʊðɪŋ? wən ʃi faʊn ðə pɝsən ɹispɑnsəbəl ʃid swɪtʃ əm soʊ saʊnli, ðeɪ wʊdn bi eɪbəl tə sɪt fəɹ wiks!

An island of some sort. The air was humid, the breeze calm. People walked between huts, calling good-naturedly to one another. A few stopped to stare at her. She looked down at herself, realizing for the first time that she was naked. She blushed furiously. Who had taken her clothing? When she found the person responsible she'd switch them so soundly, they wouldn't be able to sit for weeks!

ə ɹoʊb wɑz hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ə nɪɹbaɪ kloʊðəzlaɪn. ʃi fɔɹs hɝsɛlf tə ɹɪmeɪn kɑm əz ʃi wɔkt oʊvɝ ən pʊld ɪt fɹi. ʃi wəd faɪn ɪts oʊnɝ ən peɪ ðɛm. ʃi kʊdn vɛɹi wɛl wɔk əbaʊt wɪθaʊɾ ə stɪtʃ. ʃi θɹu ðə ɹoʊb ɑn oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd.

A robe was hanging from a nearby clothesline. She forced herself to remain calm as she walked over and pulled it free. She would find its owner and pay them. She couldn't very well walk about without a stitch. She threw the robe on over her head.

ðə ɡɹaʊnd ʃʊk, sʌɾənli. ðə dʒɛntəl weɪvz ɡɹu laʊɾɝ, kɹæʃɪŋ əɡɛns ðə bitʃ. nɪneɪiv ɡæspt, stɛɾiɪŋ hɝsɛlf əɡɛns ðə kloʊðəzlaɪn poʊl. əbʌv, ðə maʊntən bɪɡæn spɝɾɪŋ smoʊk ən æʃəz.

The ground shook, suddenly. The gentle waves grew louder, crashing against the beach. Nynaeve gasped, steadying herself against the clothesline pole. Above, the mountain began spurting smoke and ashes.

nɪneɪiv klʌtʃt ðə poʊl əz ðə ɹɑki ʃɛlf nɪɹbaɪ bɪɡæn tə bɹeɪk əpɑɹt, boʊldɝz tʌmbəlɪŋ daʊn ði ɪnklaɪn. pipəl jɛld. ʃi hæd tə də sʌmθɪŋ! əz ʃi lʊkt əbaʊt, ʃi sɔ ə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ kɑɹvd ɪndə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ʃi wɑntəd tə ɹʌn fəɹ ɪt, bʌt ʃi nu ʃi niɾəd tə wɔk kɛɹfəli.

Nynaeve clutched the pole as the rocky shelf nearby began to break apart, boulders tumbling down the incline. People yelled. She had to do something! As she looked about, she saw a six-pointed star carved into the ground. She wanted to run for it, but she knew she needed to walk carefully.

kipɪŋ kɑm wɑz dɪfəkəlt. əz ʃi wɔkt, hɝ hɑɹt flʌɾɝd wɪð ɹɔɝ. ʃi wɑz gɑnə bi kɹʌʃt! ʃi ɹitʃt ðə stɑɹ pæɾɝn dʒʌst əz ə lɑɹdʒ ʃaʊɝ ə stoʊnz ɹʌmbəl təwɔɹd hɝ, smæʃɪŋ hʌts. dɪspaɪɾ əɹ fɪɹ nɪneɪiv kwɪkli fɔɹm ðə kɝɛkt wiv - ə wiv ʌv ɛɹ ðət fɔɹmd ə wɔl. ʃi sɛɾ ɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝsɛlf, ən ðə stoʊnz θʌddɪɾ əɡɛns ði ɛɹ, fɔɹs bæk.

Keeping calm was difficult. As she walked, her heart fluttered with rror. She was going to be crushed! She reached the star pattern just as a large shower of stones rumbled toward her, smashing huts. Despite her fear Nynaeve quickly formed the correct weave - a weave of Air that formed a wall. She set it in front of herself, and the stones thudded against the air, forced back.

ðəɹ wɝ hɝt pipəl ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ. ʃi tɝn fɹəm ðə stɑɹ pæɾɝn tə hɛlp, bʌɾ əz ʃi dɪd, ʃi sɔ ðə seɪm sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ woʊvən ɪn ɹidz ən hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ðə dɔɹ ʌv ə nɪɹbaɪ hʌt. ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd.

There were hurt people in the village. She turned from the star pattern to help, but as she did, she saw the same six-pointed star woven in reeds and hanging from the door of a nearby hut. She hesitated.

ʃi kəd nɑt feɪl. ʃi wɔk tə ðə hʌɾ ən pæs θɹu ðə dɔɹweɪ.

She could not fail. She walked to the hut and passed through the doorway.

ðən ʃi fɹoʊz. wʌt wɑz ʃi duɪŋ ɪn ðɪs dɑɹk, koʊl kævɝn? ən waɪ wɑz ʃi wɛɹɪŋ ðɪs ɹoʊb ə θɪk, skɹætʃi faɪbɝz?

Then she froze. What was she doing in this dark, cold cavern? And why was she wearing this robe of thick, scratchy fibers?

ʃi hæd kəmpliɾəd ðə fɝst ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd wivz. ʃi nu ðɪs, bʌt nʌθɪŋ ɛls. fɹaʊnɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf, ʃi wɔk θɹu ðə kævɝn. laɪt ʃoʊn θɹu kɹæks ɪn ðə silɪŋ, ən ʃi sɔ ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ pul ʌv ɪɾ əhɛd. ðə weɪ aʊt.

She had completed the first of the hundred weaves. She knew this, but nothing else. Frowning to herself, she walked through the cavern. Light shone through cracks in the ceiling, and she saw a greater pool of it ahead. The way out.

ʃi wɔk fɹəm ðə kævɝn tə faɪn ðət ʃi wɑz ɪn ðə weɪst. ʃi ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə ʃeɪɾ əɹ aɪz fɹəm ðə bɹaɪt sʌnlaɪt. ðəɹ wɑzn ə soʊl ɪn saɪt. ʃi wɔk fɔɹwɝd, fit kɹʌntʃɪŋ ɑn widz ən skɔldɪd baɪ hɑt stoʊnz.

She walked from the cavern to find that she was in the Waste. She raised a hand to shade her eyes from the bright sunlight. There wasn't a soul in sight. She walked forward, feet crunching on weeds and scalded by hot stones.

ðə hit wɑz oʊvɝwɛlmɪŋ. sun itʃ stɛp wɑz ɪɡzɔstɪŋ. fɔɹtʃənətli, səm ɹuənz leɪ əhɛd.

The heat was overwhelming. Soon each step was exhausting. Fortunately, some ruins lay ahead.

ʃeɪd! ʃi wɑntəd tə ɹʌn fəɹ ɪt, bʌt ʃi hæd tə ɹɪmeɪn kɑm. ʃi wɔkt ʌp tə ðə stoʊnz, ən əɹ fit fɛl ɑn ɹɑk ʃeɪɾɪd baɪ ə bɹoʊkən wɔl. ɪt wɑz soʊ kul, ʃi saɪɾ ɪn ɹɪlif.

Shade! She wanted to run for it, but she had to remain calm. She walked up to the stones, and her feet fell on rock shaded by a broken wall. It was so cool, she sighed in relief.

ə pæɾɝn ə bɹɪks leɪ nɪɹbaɪ ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ən ðeɪ meɪɾ ə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ðət stɑɹ wɑz bæk aʊɾ ɪn ðə sʌnlaɪt. ʃi ɹɪlʌktənli lɛf ðə ʃeɪɾ ən wɔk təwɔɹd ðə pæɾɝn.

A pattern of bricks lay nearby in the ground, and they made a six-pointed star. Unfortunately, that star was back out in the sunlight. She reluctantly left the shade and walked toward the pattern.

dʒɹʌmz θʌmpt ɪn ðə dɪstəns. nɪneɪiv spʌn. dɪsɡʌstɪŋ bɹaʊn-fɝd kɹitʃɝz bɪɡæn tə klaɪm oʊvɝ ə nɪɹbaɪ hɪl, kæɹiɪŋ æksiz ðət dʒɹɪpt wɪð ɹɛd blʌd. ðə tʃɹɑləks lʊkt ɹɔŋ tə hɝ.

Drums thumped in the distance. Nynaeve spun. Disgusting brown-furred creatures began to climb over a nearby hill, carrying axes that dripped with red blood. The Trollocs looked wrong to her.

ʃid sin tʃɹɑləks bɪfɔɹ, ðoʊ ʃi dɪdn ɹɪmɛmbɝ wɛɹ. ðiz wɝ dɪfɹənt. ə nu bɹid, pɝhæps? wɪð θɪkɝ fɝ, aɪz hɪɾən ɪn ðə ɹisɛsəz ə ðɛɹ feɪsəz.

She'd seen Trollocs before, though she didn't remember where. These were different. A new breed, perhaps? With thicker fur, eyes hidden in the recesses of their faces.

nɪneɪiv wɔk fæstɝ, bʌt dɪd nɑt bɹeɪk ɪndə ə ɹʌn. ɪt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə kip əɹ kɑm. ðət wɑz kəmplitli stupəd. waɪ wəd ʃi nid tə - əɹ wɑnə - kip hɝsɛlf fɹəm ɹʌnɪŋ wən ðəɹ wɝ tʃɹɑləks nɪɹbaɪ? ɪf ʃi daɪd kəz ʃi wɑznt wɪlɪŋ tə heɪsən əɹ stɛp, ɪt wəd bi hɝ oʊn fɔlt.

Nynaeve walked faster, but did not break into a run. It was important to keep her calm. That was completely stupid. Why would she need to - or want to - keep herself from running when there were Trollocs nearby? If she died because she wasn't willing to hasten her step, it would be her own fault.

kip kəmpoʊʒɝ. doʊn muv tu kwɪkli.

Keep composure. Don't move too quickly.

ʃi meɪnteɪn əɹ stɛɾi peɪs, ɹitʃɪŋ ðə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ əz ðə tʃɹɑləks dʒɹu kloʊs. ʃi bɪɡæn ðə wiv ʃi wɑz ɹikwaɪɝd tə meɪk ən splɪɾ ɔf ə θɹɛɾ ə faɪɝ. ʃi sɛn ən ɪnɔɹməs spɹeɪ ʌv hiɾ əweɪ fɹəm hɝ, bɝnɪŋ ðə nɪɹəst ə ðə bists tə sɪndɝz.

She maintained her steady pace, reaching the six-pointed star as the Trollocs drew close. She began the weave she was required to make and split off a thread of Fire. She sent an enormous spray of heat away from her, burning the nearest of the beasts to cinders.

dʒɔ sɛɾ əɡɛnst əɹ fɪɹ, ʃi kɹæftɪd ðə ɹɛst ə ðə ɹikwaɪɝd wiv. ʃi splɪɾ əɹ wivz ə hæf- dʌzən taɪmz ən fɪnɪʃt ðə kɑmpləkeɪɾəd θɪŋ ɪn mɪɹ moʊməns.

Jaw set against her fear, she crafted the rest of the required weave. She split her weaves a half- dozen times and finished the complicated thing in mere moments.

ʃi sɛɾ ɪɾ ɪn pleɪs, ðən nɑɾəd. ðɛɹ. ʌðɝ tʃɹɑləks wɝ kʌmɪŋ ən ʃi bɝn əm əweɪ wɪð ə weɪv ə hɝ hænd.

She set it in place, then nodded. There. Other Trollocs were coming and she burned them away with a wave of her hand.

ðə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ wɑz kɑɹvd ɪndə ðə saɪɾ ʌv ən ɑɹtʃweɪ ʌv stoʊn. ʃi wɔk təwɔɹɾ ɪt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip fɹəm lʊkɪŋ nɝvəsli oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. mɔɹ tʃɹɑləks wɝ kʌmɪŋ. mɔɹ ðən ʃi kəd pɑsəbli kɪl.

The six-pointed star was carved into the side of an archway of stone. She walked toward it, trying to keep from looking nervously over her shoulder. More Trollocs were coming. More than she could possibly kill.

ʃi ɹitʃt ði ɑɹtʃweɪ ən stɛp θɹu.

She reached the archway and stepped through.

nɪneɪiv fɪnɪʃt ðə fɔɹɾi-sɛvənθ wiv, wɪtʃ kɑz ðə saʊnz ə bɛlz ɪn ði ɛɹ. ʃi wɑz ɪɡzɔstəd. ʃid hæd tə meɪk ðɪs wiv waɪl stændɪŋ ɑn tɑp ʌv ən ɪmpɑsəbli nɛɹoʊ taʊɝ hʌnʒɹədz ə fiɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ. wɪn bəfeɪd hɝ, θɹɛɾənɪŋ tə bloʊ hɝ fɹi.

Nynaeve finished the forty-seventh weave, which caused the sounds of bells in the air. She was exhausted. She'd had to make this weave while standing on top of an impossibly narrow tower hundreds of feet in the air. Wind buffeted her, threatening to blow her free.

ən ɑɹtʃweɪ əpɪɹd bɪloʊ, ɪn ðə dɑɹk naɪɾ ɛɹ. ɪt sim tə ɡɹoʊ ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə pɪlɝz saɪɾ ə dʌzən fit bɪloʊ hɝ, pɛɹəlɛl tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɪts oʊpənɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə skaɪ. ɪt hɛl ðə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ.

An archway appeared below, in the dark night air. It seemed to grow right out of the pillar's side a dozen feet below her, parallel to the ground, its opening toward the sky. It held the six-pointed star.

ɡɹɪɾɪŋ əɹ tiθ, ʃi lɛpt ɔf ðə spaɪɹ ən fɛl θɹu ði ɑɹtʃweɪ.

Gritting her teeth, she leaped off the spire and fell through the archway.

ʃi lændəɾ ɪn ə pʌɾəl. hɝ kloʊðɪŋ wɑz ɡɔn. wʌt hæd hæpən tə ɪt? ʃi stʊɾ ʌp, ɡɹoʊlɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf. ʃi wɑz æŋɡɹi. ʃi dɪdnt noʊ waɪ, bʌt sʌmwʌn hæd dʌn . . . sʌmθɪŋ tə hɝ.

She landed in a puddle. Her clothing was gone. What had happened to it? She stood up, growling to herself. She was angry. She didn't know why, but someone had done . . . something to her.

ʃi wɑz soʊ taɪɝd. ðət wɑz ðɛɹ fɔlt, huɛvɝ ðeɪ wɝ. əz ʃi foʊkəst ɑn ðət θɔt, ɪt bɪkeɪm mɔɹ klɪɹ tə hɝ. ʃi kʊdn ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌt ðeɪd dʌn, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ dɛfənətli tə bleɪm.

She was so tired. That was their fault, whoever they were. As she focused on that thought, it became more clear to her. She couldn't remember what they'd done, but they were definitely to blame.

ʃi hæd kʌts əkɹɔs boʊθ ə hɝ ɑɹmz. hæd ʃi bɪn wɪpt? ðə kʌts hɝt sʌmθɪŋ fɪɹs.

She had cuts across both of her arms. Had she been whipped? The cuts hurt something fierce.

dʒɹɪpɪŋ wɛt, ʃi lʊkt ɝaʊnd. ʃid kəmpliɾəd fɔɹɾi-sɛvən ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd wivz. ʃi nu ðæt, bʌt nʌθɪŋ ɛls. ʌðɝ ðən ðə fæk ðət sʌmbɑɾi vɛɹi bædli wɑntəɾ əɹ tə feɪl.

Dripping wet, she looked around. She'd completed forty-seven of the hundred weaves. She knew that, but nothing else. Other than the fact that somebody very badly wanted her to fail.

ʃi wɑzn gɑnə lɛɾ əm wɪn. ʃi ɹoʊz aʊɾ ə ðə pʌɾəl, dɪtɝmən tə bi kɑm, ən faʊn səm kloʊðɪŋ nɪɹbaɪ. ɪt wɑz ɡɛɹɪʃli kʌlɝd, bɹaɪt pɪŋk ən jɛloʊ wɪð ə dʒɛnɝəs hɛlpɪŋ ə ɹɛd.

She wasn't going to let them win. She rose out of the puddle, determined to be calm, and found some clothing nearby. It was garishly colored, bright pink and yellow with a generous helping of red.

ɪt simd ən ɪnsəlt. ʃi pʊɾ ɪɾ ɑn ɛniweɪ.

It seemed an insult. She put it on anyway.

ʃi wɔk daʊn ə pæθ ɪn ðə bɑɡ, stɛpɪŋ ɝaʊn sɪŋkhoʊlz ən pulz ə stæɡnənt wɔɾɝ, əntɪl ʃi faʊn ə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ dʒɹɔn ɪn ðə mʌd. ʃi bɪɡæn ðə nɛkst wiv, wɪtʃ wəd meɪk ə bɝnɪŋ blu stɑɹ ʃuɾ ɪndə ði ɛɹ.

She walked down a path in the bog, stepping around sinkholes and pools of stagnant water, until she found a six-pointed star drawn in the mud. She began the next weave, which would make a burning blue star shoot into the air.

sʌmθɪŋ bɪɾ əɾ əɹ nɛk. ʃi slæpt əɹ hæn əɾ ɪt, kɪlɪŋ ə blæk-flaɪ. wɛl, noʊ sɝpɹaɪz ðət ʃid faɪn ðoʊz ɪn ðɪs dæŋk swɑmp. ʃi wəd bi ɡlæd tə -  ənʌðɝ baɪɾ ɑn əɹ ɑɹm. ʃi slæpt əɾ ɪt. ðə vɛɹi ɛɹ stɑɹɾəd tə bʌz, flaɪz zɪpɪŋ ɝaʊn hɝ.

Something bit at her neck. She slapped her hand at it, killing a black-fly. Well, no surprise that she'd find those in this dank swamp. She would be glad to -  Another bite on her arm. She slapped at it. The very air started to buzz, flies zipping around her.

nɪneɪiv ɡɹɪɾɪd əɹ tiθ, kəntɪnjuɪŋ ðə wiv. mɔɹ ən mɔɹ baɪts pɹɪkəld ɑn əɹ ɑɹmz. ʃi kʊdn kɪl əm ɔl. kəd ʃi ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ə ðə flaɪz wɪð ə wiv? ʃi bɪɡæn ə wiv ʌv ɛɹ tə kɹieɪɾ ə bɹiz ɝaʊn hɝ, bʌt wɑz ɪntɝʌptɪɾ əz ʃi hɝd skɹimz.

Nynaeve gritted her teeth, continuing the weave. More and more bites prickled on her arms. She couldn't kill them all. Could she get rid of the flies with a weave? She began a weave of Air to create a breeze around her, but was interrupted as she heard screams.

ɪt wɑz feɪn oʊvɝ ðə bʌzɪŋ ə ðə flaɪz, bʌɾ ɪt saʊndəd laɪk ə tʃaɪl tʃɹæpt ɪn ðə bɑɡ! nɪneɪiv tʊk ə stɛp təwɔɹd ðə saʊnz ən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə kɔl, bʌt blækfliz swɔɹmd ɪndə hɝ maʊθ, tʃoʊkɪŋ hɝ. ðeɪ ɡɑɾ əɾ əɹ aɪz, ən ʃi hæd tə skwiz əm ʃʌt.

It was faint over the buzzing of the flies, but it sounded like a child trapped in the bog! Nynaeve took a step toward the sounds and opened her mouth to call, but blackflies swarmed into her mouth, choking her. They got at her eyes, and she had to squeeze them shut.

ðət bʌzɪŋ. ðə skɹimz. ðə baɪɾɪŋ. laɪt, ðeɪ wɝ ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt! ɪn əɹ lʌŋz!

That buzzing. The screams. The biting. Light, they were in her throat! In her lungs!

fɪnɪʃ ðə wiv. jə mʌs fɪnɪʃ ðə wiv.

Finish the weave. You must finish the weave.

ʃi kəntɪnjud, sʌmhaʊ, dɪspaɪt ðə peɪn. ðə saʊn ə ði ɪnsɛks wɑz soʊ laʊd ðət ʃi kəd bɛɹli hɪɹ ðə wuʃ ə ðə faɪɝi stɑɹ əz ɪt blæstəɾ ɪndə ði ɛɹ. ʃi kwɪkli woʊv ə wiv tə bloʊ ðə flaɪz əweɪ, ən wʌns ʃi dɪd, ʃi lʊkt əbaʊt. ʃi kɔft ən tʃɹɛmbəld. ʃi kəd fil ðə flaɪz stɪkɪŋ tə ði ɪnsaɪɾ ə hɝ θɹoʊt. ʃi dɪdn si ɛni tʃaɪld ɪn deɪnʒɝ. hæɾ ɪt bɪn ə tʃɹɪk ə hɝ ɪɹz?

She continued, somehow, despite the pain. The sound of the insects was so loud that she could barely hear the whoosh of the fiery star as it blasted into the air. She quickly wove a weave to blow the flies away, and once she did, she looked about. She coughed and trembled. She could feel the flies sticking to the inside of her throat. She didn't see any child in danger. Had it been a trick of her ears?

ʃi dɪd si ənʌðɝ sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ, əbʌv ə dɔɹ kɑɹvd ɪndə ə tʃɹi. ʃi wɔk təwɔɹɾ ɪɾ əz ðə flaɪz bʌzd ɝaʊn əɹ əɡɛn. kɑm. ʃi hæd tə bi kɑm! waɪ? ɪt meɪd noʊ sɛns! ʃi dɪɾ ɪɾ ɛniweɪ, wɔkɪŋ wɪð aɪz kloʊzd əz ðə flaɪz swɔɹm hɝ. ʃi ɹitʃt aʊt, filɪŋ fəɹ ðə dɔɹ ən pʊlɪŋ ɪɾ oʊpən. ʃi stɛp θɹu.

She did see another six-pointed star, above a door carved into a tree. She walked toward it as the flies buzzed around her again. Calm. She had to be calm! Why? It made no sense! She did it anyway, walking with eyes closed as the flies swarmed her. She reached out, feeling for the door and pulling it open. She stepped through.

ʃi pʊl tə ə stɑp ɪnsaɪd ðə bɪldɪŋ, wʌndɝɪŋ waɪ ʃi wɑz kɑfɪŋ soʊ mʌtʃ. wɑz ʃi ɪl?

She pulled to a stop inside the building, wondering why she was coughing so much. Was she ill?

ʃi lin əɡɛns ðə wɔl, ɪɡzɔstəd, æŋɡɹi. hɝ iɛɡz wɝ kʌvɝɾ ɪn skɹeɪps, ən əɹ ɑɹmz ɪtʃt wɪð səm kaɪndə ɪnsɛk baɪts. ʃi ɡɹoʊnd, lʊkɪŋ daʊn əɾ əɹ ɡɛɹɪʃ kloʊðɪŋ. wʌt kəd pɑsəbli hæv pəzɛst əɹ tə wɛɹ ɹɛd, jɛloʊ ən pɪŋk təɡɛðɝ?

She leaned against the wall, exhausted, angry. Her iegs were covered in scrapes, and her arms itched with some kind of insect bites. She groaned, looking down at her garish clothing. What could possibly have possessed her to wear red, yellow and pink together?

ʃi stʊɾ ʌp wɪð ə saɪ ən kəntɪnjud daʊn ðə ɹɪkəɾi hɔlweɪ. ðə plæŋks ðət meɪɾ ʌp ðə flɔɹ ɹæɾəld əz ʃi wɔkt, ən ðə plæstɝ ɑn ðə wɔlz wɑz bɹoʊkən ən kɹʌmbəlɪŋ.

She stood up with a sigh and continued down the rickety hallway. The planks that made up the floor rattled as she walked, and the plaster on the walls was broken and crumbling.

ʃi ɹitʃt ə dɔɹweɪ ən pikt ɪn. ðə smɔl tʃeɪmbɝ kənteɪn fɔɹ smɔl bɹæs bɛdz; ðə mætʃɹəsəz hæd stʃɹɔ pikɪŋ fɹəm ðə simz.

She reached a doorway and peeked in. The small chamber contained four small brass beds; the mattresses had straw peeking from the seams.

itʃ bɛd bɔɹ ə jʌŋ tʃaɪl klʌtʃɪŋ ə ɹæɾi blæŋkət. tu ʌv əm wɝ kɑfɪŋ, ən ɔl fɔɹ lʊk peɪl ən sɪkli.

Each bed bore a young child clutching a ratty blanket. Two of them were coughing, and all four looked pale and sickly.

nɪneɪiv ɡæspt, hɝiɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɹum. ʃi nɛl bɪsaɪd ðə fɝs tʃaɪld, ə bɔɪ ʌv pɝhæps fɔɹ jɪɹz. ʃi tʃɛkt ɪz aɪz, ðən toʊld ɪm tə kɑf əz ʃi lɪsən əɾ ɪz tʃɛst. hi hæd ðə kɹipɪŋ sɪknəs.

Nynaeve gasped, hurrying into the room. She knelt beside the first child, a boy of perhaps four years. She checked his eyes, then told him to cough as she listened at his chest. He had the creeping sickness.

"hu ɪz kɛɹɪŋ fəɹ ju?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd.

"Who is caring for you?" Nynaeve demanded.

"mɪstʃɹəs mɑlə ɹʌnz ði ɔɹfənədʒ," ðə tʃaɪl sɛɾ ɪn ə wik vɔɪs. "wi hævən sin əɹ ɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm."

"Mistress Mala runs the orphanage," the child said in a weak voice. "We haven't seen her in a long time."

"pliz," ə jʌŋ ɡɝl sɛd fɹəm ðə nɛks bɛd. ʃi hæd blʌdʃɑɾ aɪz, hɝ skɪn soʊ peɪl ɪt wɑz pɹæktəkli waɪt. "sʌm wɔɾɝ? kəɾ aɪ hæv səm wɔɾɝ?" ʃi tʃɹɛmbəld.

"Please," a young girl said from the next bed. She had bloodshot eyes, her skin so pale it was practically white. "Some water? Could I have some water?" She trembled.

ði ʌðɝ tu wɝ kɹaɪɪŋ. pɪɾəfəl, wik saʊnz. laɪt! ðəɹ wɑzn ə sɪŋɡəl wɪndoʊ ɪn ðə ɹum, ən nɪneɪiv sɔ ɹoʊtʃɪz skʌɾəlɪŋ ʌndɝ ðə bɛdz. hu wəd liv tʃɪlʒɹən ɪn sətʃ kəndɪʃənz?

The other two were crying. Pitiful, weak sounds. Light! There wasn't a single window in the room, and Nynaeve saw roaches scuttling under the beds. Who would leave children in such conditions?

"hʌʃ," ʃi sɛd. "aɪm hɪɹ naʊ. əl kɛɹ fəɹ ju."

"Hush," she said. "I'm here now. I'll care for you."

ʃid nid tə tʃænəl tə hil ðɛm. ðən . . .

She'd need to channel to Heal them. Then . . .

noʊ, ʃi θɔt. / kæn də ðæt. aɪ kæn tʃænəl əntɪl aɪ ɹitʃ ðə stɑɹ.

No, she thought. / can't do that. I can't channel until I reach the star.

ʃi wəd bɹu dʒɹæfs, ðɛn. wɛɹ wɑz əɹ ɝb paʊtʃ? ʃi lʊkt ɝaʊn ðə ɹum, sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ə sɔɹs ʌv wɔɾɝ.

She would brew draughts, then. Where was her herb pouch? She looked around the room, searching for a source of water.

ʃi fɹoʊz; ðəɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ ɹum əkɹɔs ðə hɔlweɪ. hæd ðət bɪn ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ? ə ɹʌɡ ɑn ɪts flɔɹ bɔɹ ðə sɪmbəl ə ðə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ. ʃi ɹoʊz. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən wɪmpɝd.

She froze; there was another room across the hallway. Had that been there before? A rug on its floor bore the symbol of the six-pointed star. She rose. The children whimpered.

"aɪl ɹɪtɝn," nɪneɪiv sɛd, stɛpɪŋ təwɔɹd ðət ɹum. itʃ stɛp twɪstəɾ əɹ hɑɹt. ʃi wɑz əbændənɪŋ ðɛm. bʌt noʊ, ʃi wɑz oʊnli wɔkɪŋ ɪndə ðə nɛkst ɹum. wɑznt ʃi?

"I'll return," Nynaeve said, stepping toward that room. Each step twisted her heart. She was abandoning them. But no, she was only walking into the next room. Wasn't she?

ʃi ɹitʃt ðə ɹʌɡ ən bɪɡæn tə wiv. dʒʌs ðɪs wʌn kwɪk wivɪŋ, ðən ʃi kəd hɛlp. ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf kɹaɪɪŋ əz ʃi wɝkt.

She reached the rug and began to weave. Just this one quick weaving, then she could help. She found herself crying as she worked.

aɪv bɪn hɪɹ bɪfɔɹ, ʃi θɔt. əɹ ə pleɪs laɪk ɪt. ə sɪtʃueɪʃən sətʃ əz ðɪs.

I've been here before, she thought. Or a place like it. A situation such as this.

ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf mɔɹ ən mɔɹ æŋɡɹi. haʊ kəd ʃi tʃænəl wɪð ðoʊz tʃɪlʒɹən kɔlɪŋ fəɹ hɝ? ðeɪ wɝ daɪɪŋ.

She found herself more and more angry. How could she channel with those children calling for her? They were dying.

ʃi kəmpliɾəd ðə wiv, ðən wɑtʃt ɪt bloʊ aʊt dʒɛts ʌv ɛɹ, ɹʌfəlɪŋ əɹ dʒɹɛs. ʃi ɹitʃt fəɹ əɹ bɹeɪɾ ən hɛld ɪɾ əz ə dɔɹ əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum. ə smɔl ɡlæs wɪndoʊ wɑz sɛɾ ɪndə ðə tɑp, ən ɪt bɔɹ ðə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ.

She completed the weave, then watched it blow out jets of air, ruffling her dress. She reached for her braid and held it as a door appeared on the side of the room. A small glass window was set into the top, and it bore the six-pointed star.

ʃi hæd tə kəntɪnju. ʃi hɝd ðə wipɪŋ tʃɪlʒɹən. tɪɹz ɪn əɹ aɪz, hɑɹt bɹeɪkɪŋ, ʃi wɔk tə ðə dɔɹ.

She had to continue. She heard the weeping children. Tears in her eyes, heart breaking, she walked to the door.

ɪt ɡɹu wɝs. ʃi lɛf pipəl tə bi dʒɹaʊnd, bɪhɛɾɪd ən bɛɹiɾ əlaɪv-wʌn ə ðə wɝst wɑz wən ʃi hæd tə fɔɹm ə wiv waɪl vɪlɪdʒɝz wɝ kənsum baɪ ɪnɔɹməs spaɪɾɝz wɪð bɹaɪt ɹɛd fɝ ən kɹɪstəlaɪn aɪz. ʃi heɪɾəd spaɪɾɝz.

It grew worse. She left people to be drowned, beheaded and buried alive-One of the worst was when she had to form a weave while villagers were consumed by enormous spiders with bright red fur and crystalline eyes. She hated spiders.

səmtaɪmz ʃi wəɾ əpɪɹ neɪkəd. ðət stɑp bɑðɝɪŋ hɝ. ðoʊ ʃi kʊdn ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛniθɪŋ spəsɪfɪk bʌt ðə nʌmbɝ ə ðə wiv ʃi wɑz ɑn, ʃi ʌndɝstʊd - sʌmhaʊ - ðət nuɾɪti wɑz nʌθɪŋ kəmpɛɹɛ tə ðə tɛɹɝz ʃid sin.

Sometimes she would appear naked. That stopped bothering her. Though she couldn't remember anything specific but the number of the weave she was on, she understood - somehow - that nudity was nothing comparedd to the terrors she'd seen.

ʃi stʌmbəl θɹu ə stoʊn ɑɹtʃweɪ, mɛmɹiz ʌv ə haʊs ɑn faɪɝ feɪɾɪŋ fɹəm əɹ maɪnd. ðɪs wɑz ði eɪɾi-fɝst wiv. ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðæt. ðəɾ ən əɹ fjʊɹi.

She stumbled through a stone archway, memories of a house on fire fading from her mind. This was the eighty-first weave. She remembered that. That and her fury.

ʃi wɔɹ ə sɪŋʒd dʒɹɛs ə sæklɔθ. haʊ hæd ʃi bɝn ɪt? ʃi stʊɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪt, hoʊldɪŋ əɹ hɛd, ɑɹmz θɹɑbɪŋ, bæk filɪŋ wɪpt, lɛɡz ən toʊz bɛɹɪŋ kʌts ən skɹætʃəz. ʃi wɑz ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ɪksɛpt, ɪt wɑzn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. nɑɾ əz ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪt. səm ə ðə bɪldɪŋz smoʊldɝd, stɪl bɝnɪŋ.

She wore a singed dress of sackcloth. How had she burned it? She stood up straight, holding her head, arms throbbing, back feeling whipped, legs and toes bearing cuts and scratches. She was in the Two Rivers. Except, it wasn't the Two Rivers. Not as she remembered it. Some of the buildings smoldered, still burning.

"ðeɪɹ kʌmɪŋ əɡɛn!" ə vɔɪs jɛld. mæstɝ ælvɪɹ. waɪ wɑz i hoʊldɪŋ ə sɔɹd? pipəl ʃi nu, pipəl dɪɹ tə hɝ - pɛɹɪn, mæstɝ ælvɪɹ, mɪstʃɹəs ɑldənəl, ɪɹi bɑɾɪɡɝ - stʊd bɪsaɪɾ ə loʊ wɔl, ɔl hoʊldɪŋ wɛpənz. səm weɪv tə hɝ.

"They're coming again!" a voice yelled. Master al'Vere. Why was he holding a sword? People she knew, people dear to her - Perrin, Master al'Vere, Mistress al'Donel, Aerie Botteger - stood beside a low wall, all holding weapons. Some waved to her.

"nɪneɪiv!" pɛɹɪn kɔld. "ʃæɾoʊzpɔn! wi nid jəɹ hɛlp!"

"Nynaeve!" Perrin called. "Shadowspawn! We need your help!"

ɪnɔɹməs ʃædoʊz muvd ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə wɔl. ʃæɾoʊzpɔn ə tɛɹəbəl saɪz - nɑt tʃɹɑləks, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ fɑɹ wɝs. ʃi kəd hɪɹ ɹɔɹz.

Enormous shadows moved on the other side of the wall. Shadowspawn of terrible size - not Trollocs, but something far worse. She could hear roars.

ʃi hæd tə hɛlp! ʃi muv təwɔɹd pɛɹɪn, bʌt fɹoʊz əz ʃi sɔ -  əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹin ɪn ði ʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən - ə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ peɪntəɾ ɑn ə hɪlsaɪd.

She had to help! She moved toward Perrin, but froze as she saw -  across the Green in the other direction - a six-pointed star painted on a hillside.

"nɪneɪiv!" pɛɹɪn saʊndəd dɛspɹɪt. hi bɪɡæn stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ət sʌmθɪŋ ðət ɹitʃt oʊvɝ ðə wɔl, tɛntəkəlz ə mɪdnaɪt blæk. pɛɹɪn tʃɑpt əɾ əm wɪð ən æks əz wʌn snætʃt ʌp ɪɹi ən pʊld ɪm - skɹimɪŋ -  ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs.

"Nynaeve!" Perrin sounded desperate. He began striking at something that reached over the wall, tentacles of midnight black. Perrin chopped at them with an axe as one snatched up Aerie and pulled him - screaming -  into the darkness.

nɪneɪiv bɪɡæn tə wɔk təwɔɹd ðə stɑɹ. kɑm. mɛʒɝd.

Nynaeve began to walk toward the star. Calm. Measured.

ðət wɑz stupəd. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd tə bi kɑm. ʃi nu ðæt. bʌɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔlsoʊ niɾəd tə bi eɪbəl tə ækt, tə də wʌt wɑz niɾəd tə hɛlp ðoʊz u niɾəd ɪt. ɪt dɪdn mæɾɝ wʌɾ ɪt kɑst əɹ pɝsənəli. ðiz pipəl niɾəd hɝ.

That was stupid. An Aes Sedai had to be calm. She knew that. But an Aes Sedai also needed to be able to act, to do what was needed to help those who needed it. It didn't matter what it cost her personally. These people needed her.

soʊ ʃi stɑɹɾəd tə ɹʌn.

So she started to run.

ivən ðət dɪdn fil laɪk ɪnʌf. ʃi ɹæn tə ɡɛt tə ðə stɑɹ, bʌt stɪl ʃi lɛf pipəl ʃi lʌv tə faɪɾ əloʊn. ʃi nu ʃi kʊdn tʃænəl əntɪl ʃi ɹitʃt ðə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ. ðət meɪɾ æbsəlutli noʊ sɛns. ʃæɾoʊzpɔn wɝ ətækɪŋ. ʃi hæd tə tʃænəl!

Even that didn't feel like enough. She ran to get to the star, but still she left people she loved to fight alone. She knew she couldn't channel until she reached the six-pointed star. That made absolutely no sense. Shadowspawn were attacking. She had to channel!

ʃi ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs, ən sʌmθɪŋ sim tə tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp hɝ. sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ə ʃild. ʃi pʊʃt ɪɾ əsaɪd wɪð dɪfəkəlti ən paʊɝ flʌɾəd hɝ. ʃi bɪɡæn flɪŋɪŋ faɪɝ ət ðə mɑnstɝ, bɝnɪŋ ɔf ə tɛntəkəl əz ɪt ɡɹæb fəɹ pɛɹɪn.

She embraced the Source, and something seemed to try to stop her. Something like a shield. She pushed it aside with difficulty and Power flooded her. She began flinging fire at the monster, burning off a tentacle as it grabbed for Perrin.

nɪneɪiv kəntɪnjud θɹoʊɪŋ faɪɝ əntɪl ʃi ɹitʃt ðə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ. ðɛɹ, ʃi woʊv ði eɪɾi-fɝst wiv, wɪtʃ kɹieɪɾəd θɹi ɹɪŋz ə faɪɝ ɪn ði ɛɹ.

Nynaeve continued throwing fire until she reached the six-pointed star. There, she wove the eighty-first weave, which created three rings of Fire in the air.

ʃi wɝk fjʊɹiəsli, ətækɪŋ ət ðə seɪm taɪm. ʃi dɪdnt noʊ ðə pɔɪn ə kɹieɪɾɪŋ ðɪs wiv, bʌt ʃi nu ʃi hæd tə fɪnɪʃ ɪt. soʊ ʃi ɪn-kɹis ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ə ðə wiv, meɪkɪŋ ðə bɝnɪŋ ɹɪŋz ɪkstʃɹimli lɑɹdʒ. ðən ʃi bɪɡæn hɝlɪŋ əm ət ðə kɹitʃɝz. mæsɪv heɪloʊz ʌv) fleɪm kɹæʃt ɪndə ðə dɑɹk θɪŋz, kɪlɪŋ ðɛm.

She worked furiously, attacking at the same time. She didn't know the point of creating this weave, but she knew she had to finish it. So she in-creased the strength of the weave, making the burning rings extremely large. Then she began hurling them at the creatures. Massive halos of) flame crashed into the dark things, killing them.

ðəɹ wɑz ə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ ɑn ðə ɹuf ə mæstɝ æl 'viɹz ɪn. hæɾ ɪt bɪn bɝn ðɛɹ?

There was a six-pointed star on the roof of Master al 'Veres inn. Had it been burned there?

nɪneɪiv ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪt, vɛntɪŋ əɹ æŋɡɝ ət ðə θɪŋz wɪð tɛntəkəlz.

Nynaeve ignored it, venting her anger at the things with tentacles.

noʊ. ðɪs ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ ɑn.

No. This is important. More important than the Two Rivers. I must go on.

filɪŋ laɪk ən ʌɾɝ kaʊɝd - bʌt noʊɪŋ ɪt wɑz ðə ɹaɪt θɪŋ tə də - ʃi ɹæn tə ði ɪn, pæsɪŋ θɹu ðə dɔɹweɪ.

Feeling like an utter coward - but knowing it was the right thing to do - she ran to the inn, passing through the doorway.

nɪneɪiv leɪ wipɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪsaɪɾ ə bɹoʊkən ɑɹtʃweɪ. ʃi wɑz ɑn ðə læst ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd wivz.

Nynaeve lay weeping on the ground beside a broken archway. She was on the last of the hundred weaves.

ʃi kəd bɛɹli muv. hɝ feɪs wɑz stʃɹikt wɪð tɪɹz. ʃi hæd hɑloʊ mɛmɹiz ə fliɪŋ bæɾəlz, ʌv livɪŋ tʃɪlʒɹən tə daɪ. ʌv nɛvɝ biɪŋ eɪbəl tə də ɪnʌf.

She could barely move. Her face was streaked with tears. She had hollow memories of fleeing battles, of leaving children to die. Of never being able to do enough.

hɝ ʃoʊldɝ blɛd. ə wʊlfs baɪt. hɝ lɛɡz wɝ fleɪd, əz ɪf ʃid wɔk θɹu ə lɔŋ pætʃ ə θɔɹnz. ɔl əkɹɔs əɹ bɑɾi wɝ bɝnz ən blɪstɝz. ʃi wɑz neɪkəd.

Her shoulder bled. A wolf's bite. Her legs were flayed, as if she'd walked through a long patch of thorns. All across her body were burns and blisters. She was naked.

ʃi ɹoʊz tə hɝ niz, wɪtʃ wɝ skɹeɪpt ən bliɾɪŋ. hɝ bɹeɪɾ ɛndəɾ ɪn ə smoʊldɝɪŋ stʌmp əbaʊɾ ə hændspæn bɪloʊ hɝ ʃoʊldɝz. ʃi ɹɛtʃt tə ðə saɪd, ʃɪvɝɪŋ.

She rose to her knees, which were scraped and bleeding. Her braid ended in a smoldering stump about a handspan below her shoulders. She retched to the side, shivering.

soʊ sɪk, soʊ wik. haʊ kəd ʃi kəntɪnju?

So sick, so weak. How could she continue?

noʊ. ðəl nɑt bit mi.

No. They will not beat me.

ʃi sloʊli ɹeɪz hɝsɛlf tə hɝ fit. ʃi wɑz ɪn ə smɔl ɹum, hɑɹʃ sʌnlaɪt likɪŋ θɹu kɹæks bɪtwin ðə wɔlbɔɹdz. ə bʌndəl ʌv waɪt klɔθ leɪ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ʃi pɪkt ɪɾ ʌp, ənfoʊldɪŋ ɪt. ɪt wɑz ə waɪt dʒɹɛs wɪð ðə kʌlɝz ə ði ədʒəz bændɪɾ ət ðə bɑɾəm. ðə kloʊðɪŋ ʌv ən æksɛptɪɾ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ.

She slowly raised herself to her feet. She was in a small room, harsh sunlight leaking through cracks between the wallboards. A bundle of white cloth lay on the ground. She picked it up, unfolding it. It was a white dress with the colors of the Ajahs banded at the bottom. The clothing of an Accepted in the White Tower.

ʃi dʒɹɑpt ɪt. "aɪ æm ɛɛs sədaɪ," ʃi sɛd, stɛpɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə ɹoʊb ən pʊʃɪŋ oʊpən ðə dɔɹ.

She dropped it. "I am Aes Sedai," she said, stepping over the robe and pushing open the door.

bɛɾɝ tə ɡoʊ neɪkəd ðən tə ɡɪv ɪn tə ðət laɪ.

Better to go naked than to give in to that lie.

aʊtsaɪd ðə dɔɹ, ʃi faʊn ənʌðɝ dʒɹɛs, ðɪs taɪm jɛloʊ. ðət wɑz mɔɹ pɹɑpɝ. ʃi əlaʊd hɝsɛlf ðə taɪm tə pʊɾ ɪɾ ɑn, ðoʊ ʃi kʊdn stɑp tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ, ən əɹ fɪŋɡɝz wɝ soʊ taɪɝd ʃi kəd bɛɹli meɪk əm wɝk. hɝ blʌd steɪn ðə klɔθ.

Outside the door, she found another dress, this time yellow. That was more proper. She allowed herself the time to put it on, though she couldn't stop trembling, and her fingers were so tired she could barely make them work. Her blood stained the cloth.

dʒɹɛs ɑn, ʃi ɪnspɛktɪɾ əɹ sɝaʊndɪŋz. ʃi wɑz ɑn ə hɪlsaɪɾ ɪn ðə blaɪt, ðə ɡɹaʊn kʌvɝɾ ɪn widz ðət bɔɹ ðə dɪstɪŋktɪv dɑɹk mɑɹks. waɪ wɑz ðəɹ ə ʃæk ɪn ðə blaɪt, ən waɪ hæd ʃi bɪn ɪnsaɪɾ ʌv ɪt?

Dress on, she inspected her surroundings. She was on a hillside in the Blight, the ground covered in weeds that bore the distinctive dark marks. Why was there a shack in the Blight, and why had she been inside of it?

ʃi fɛl soʊ taɪɝd. ʃi wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ bæk ɪndə ðə ʃæk ən slip.

She felt so tired. She wanted to go back into the shack and sleep.

noʊ. ʃi wəd kəntɪnju. ʃi tʃɹʌdʒd ʌp ðə hɪl. əɾ ɪts tɑp, ʃi lʊk daʊn ɑn ə læn kʌvɝɾ ɪn bɹoʊkən ɹʌbəl ən pɑkəts ə dɑɹknəs. leɪks, ɪf ðeɪ kəd bi kɔl ðæt. ðə lɪkwəd lʊk θɪk ən ɔɪli. dɑɹk ʃeɪps muvd wɪðɪn ðɛm. mɔlkiɝ, ʃi θɔt, stʌn ðət ʃi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə pleɪs.

No. She would continue. She trudged up the hill. At its top, she looked down on a land covered in broken rubble and pockets of darkness. Lakes, if they could be called that. The liquid looked thick and oily. Dark shapes moved within them. Malkier, she thought, stunned that she recognized the place.

ðə sɛvən taʊɝz, oʊnli ɹʌbəl naʊ. ðə θaʊzən leɪks kɝʌptɪd. ðə pleɪs ə lænz hɛɹəɾədʒ.

The Seven Towers, only rubble now. The Thousand Lakes corrupted. The place of Lan's heritage.

ʃi stɛp fɔɹwɝd, bʌɾ əɹ toʊ hɪt sʌmθɪŋ. ə stoʊn bɪniθ əɹ fit hæd bɪn kɑɹvd wɪð ə smɔl sɪmbəl. ðə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ.

She stepped forward, but her toe hit something. A stone beneath her feet had been carved with a small symbol. The six-pointed star.

ʃi saɪɾ ɪn ɹɪlif. ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊs θɹu. ʃi bɪɡæn ðə faɪnəl wiv.

She sighed in relief. It was almost through. She began the final weave.

bɪloʊ, ə mæn stʌmbəld aʊt fɹəm bɪhaɪn ə maʊn ə ɹʌbəl, swɪŋɪŋ ɛkspɝtli wɪð ɪz sɔɹd.

Below, a man stumbled out from behind a mound of rubble, swinging expertly with his sword.

ʃi nu hɪm ivən əɾ ə dɪstəns. ðət stʃɹɔŋ fɪɡjɝ, skwɛɹ feɪs, kʌlɝ-ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊk ən deɪnʒɝəs weɪ ʌv wɔkɪŋ.

She knew him even at a distance. That strong figure, square face, color-shifting cloak and dangerous way of walking.

"læn!" ʃi skɹimd.

"Lan!" she screamed.

hi wɑz sɝaʊndəd baɪ bists ðət lʊk laɪk wʊlvz, bʌt tu lɑɹdʒ. ðeɪ hæd dɑɹk fɝ, ən ðɛɹ tiθ flæʃt əz ðeɪ lʌnʒd təwɔɹd læn. dɑɹkhaʊnz, ən ɪntaɪɝ pæk.

He was surrounded by beasts that looked like wolves, but too large. They had dark fur, and their teeth flashed as they lunged toward Lan. Darkhounds, an entire pack.

nɪneɪiv fɪnɪʃt ðə hʌnʒɹədθ wiv wɪð ə stɑɹt; ʃi hædn ɹilaɪzd ʃid kəntɪnjuɾ ɪt. ə ʃaʊɝ ə kʌlɝfəl spɛks bɝst ɪndə ði ɛɹ ɝaʊn hɝ. ʃi wɑtʃt əm fɔl, filɪŋ juzd. ʃi hɝɾ ə saʊn oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, bʌt wən ʃi ɡlænst, ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ðɛɹ. dʒʌs ðə ʃæk.

Nynaeve finished the hundredth weave with a start; she hadn't realized she'd continued it. A shower of colorful specks burst into the air around her. She watched them fall, feeling used. She heard a sound over her shoulder, but when she glanced, there was nothing there. Just the shack.

ðə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ hʌŋ oʊvɝ ə dɔɹ ðɛɹ, ðə sɪmbəl meɪɾ ə bɪts ə dʒɛmstoʊnz. ðət dɔɹ hædn bɪn ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ. ʃi tʊk ə stɛp təwɔɹd ðə ʃæk, ðən lʊk bæk.

The six-pointed star hung over a door there, the symbol made of bits of gemstones. That door hadn't been there before. She took a step toward the shack, then looked back.

læn swʌŋ əbaʊɾ ɪm wɪð ɪz sɔɹd, fɔɹsɪŋ ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz əweɪ. wʌn bɪɾ ə səlaɪvə fɹəm ðoʊz bists wəd kɪl hɪm.

Lan swung about him with his sword, forcing the Darkhounds away. One bit of saliva from those beasts would kill him.

"læn," ʃi skɹimd. "ɹʌn!"

"Lan," she screamed. "Run!"

hi dɪdn hɪɹ hɝ. ðə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ. ʃi niɾəd tə wɔk tə ɪt!

He didn't hear her. The six-pointed star. She needed to walk to it!

ʃi blɪŋkt, ðən lʊk daʊn əɾ əɹ hænz. ɪn ðə dɝɛk sɛntɝ ʌv itʃ pɑm wɑz ə taɪni skɑɹ.

She blinked, then looked down at her hands. In the direct center of each palm was a tiny scar.

ɔlmoʊst ənnɑɾəsəbəl. siɪŋ əm spɑɹkt ə mɛmɹi ɪn hɝ.

Almost unnoticeable. Seeing them sparked a memory in her.

nɪneɪiv . . . aɪ lʌv jə . . .

Nynaeve . . . I love you . . .

ðɪs wɑz ə tɛst. ʃi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət naʊ. ɪt wɑz ə tɛs tə fɔɹs əɹ tə tʃuz bɪtwin ɪm ən ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ʃid meɪd ðət tʃɔɪs wʌns, bʌt ʃid noʊn ɪt wɑzn ɹil.

This was a test. She could remember that now. It was a test to force her to choose between him and the White Tower. She'd made that choice once, but she'd known it wasn't real.

ðɪs wɑzn ɹil iðɝ, wɑz ɪt? ʃi ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə hɝ hɛd, maɪn klaʊɾi. ðəɾ ɪz maɪ hʌzbən daʊn ðɛɹ, ʃi θɔt. noʊ. əl nɑt pleɪ ðɪs ɡeɪm!

This wasn't real either, was it? She raised a hand to her head, mind cloudy. That is my husband down there, she thought. No. I will not play this game!

ʃi skɹimd, wivɪŋ faɪɝ ən θɹoʊɪŋ ɪt təwɔɹd wʌn ə ðə dɑɹk-haʊnz. ðə kɹitʃɝ bɝst ɪndə fleɪmz, bʌt ðə faɪɝ dɪdn sim tə hɝɾ ɪt. nɪneɪiv stɛp fɔɹwɝd, θɹoʊɪŋ mɔɹ faɪɝ. jusləs!

She screamed, weaving Fire and throwing it toward one of the Dark-hounds. The creature burst into flames, but the fire didn't seem to hurt it. Nynaeve stepped forward, throwing more fire. Useless!

ðə haʊnz dʒʌs kɛpt ətækɪŋ.

The hounds just kept attacking.

ʃi ɹəfjuz tə ɡɪv ɪn tə hɝ ɪɡzɔstʃən. ʃi bænɪʃt ɪt, ɡɹoʊɪŋ kɑm kəntʃɹoʊld. aɪs. ðeɪ wɑntəd tə pʊʃ hɝ, si wʌt ʃi kəd du? wɛl, lɛɾ ɪt bi. ʃi ɹitʃt aʊt, dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪn ən ɪmɛns əmaʊn ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ.

She refused to give in to her exhaustion. She banished it, growing calm controlled. Ice. They wanted to push her, see what she could do? Well, let it be. She reached out, drawing in an immense amount of the One Power.

ðən ʃi woʊv bɑlfaɪɝ.

Then she wove balefire.

ðə laɪn ə pjʊɹ laɪt spɹæŋ fɹəm əɹ fɪŋɡɝz, wɔɹpɪŋ ði ɛɹ ɝaʊn ɪt. ʃi hɪt wʌn ə ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz ən sim tə pʌŋktʃɝ ɪt, ðə laɪt kəntɪnjuɪŋ ɑn ɪndə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ði ɪntaɪɝ lændskeɪp ɹʌmbəld, ən nɪneɪiv stʌmbəld. læn fɛl tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ðə dɑɹkhaʊnz lɛpt ət hɪm.

The line of pure light sprang from her fingers, warping the air around it. She hit one of the Darkhounds and seemed to puncture it, the light continuing on into the ground. The entire landscape rumbled, and Nynaeve stumbled. Lan fell to the ground. The Darkhounds leaped at him.

noʊ! nɪneɪiv θɔt, ɹaɪɾɪŋ hɝsɛlf, wivɪŋ bɑlfaɪɝ əɡɛn. ʃi blæstəɾ ənʌðɝ haʊnd, ðən ənʌðɝ. mɔɹ ə ðə mɑnstɝz lɛp fɹəm bɪhaɪn ɹɑk fɔɹmeɪʃənz. wɛɹ wɝ ðeɪ ɔl kʌmɪŋ fɹʌm? nɪneɪiv stʃɹoʊd fɔɹwɝd, blæstɪŋ wɪð ðə fɔɹbɪɾən wiv.

NO! Nynaeve thought, righting herself, weaving balefire again. She blasted another hound, then another. More of the monsters leaped from behind rock formations. Where were they all coming from? Nynaeve strode forward, blasting with the forbidden weave.

itʃ stʃɹaɪk meɪd ðə ɡɹaʊn tʃɹɛmbəl, əz ɪf ɪn peɪn. ðə bɑlfaɪɝ ʃʊdn pʌŋktʃɝ ðə ɡɹaʊn laɪk ðæt. sʌmθɪŋ wɑz ɹɔŋ.

Each strike made the ground tremble, as if in pain. The balefire shouldn't puncture the ground like that. Something was wrong.

ʃi ɹitʃt lænz saɪd. hi hæd bɹoʊkən ɪz lɛɡ. "nɪneɪiv!" hi sɛd. "ju mʌst ɡoʊ!"

She reached Lan's side. He had broken his leg. "Nynaeve!" he said. "You must go!"

ʃi ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪz wɝdz, nilɪŋ daʊn ən wivɪŋ bɑlfaɪɝ əz ənʌðɝ haʊn ɹaʊndəd ðə ɹʌbəl.

She ignored his words, kneeling down and weaving balefire as another hound rounded the rubble.

ðɛɹ nʌmbɝ wɑz ɪnkɹisɪŋ, ən ʃi wɑz soʊ taɪɝd. itʃ taɪm ʃi tʃænəld, ʃi fɛlt ɪt wəd ʃʊɹli bi hɝ læst.

Their number was increasing, and she was so tired. Each time she channeled, she felt it would surely be her last.

bʌɾ ɪt kəd nɑt bi. nɑt wɪð læn ɪn deɪnʒɝ. ʃi woʊv ə kɑmplɛks hilɪŋ, pʊɾɪŋ ɛvɹi bɪɾ ə stʃɹɛŋkθ ʃi hæd lɛft ɪndə ɪt, mɛndɪŋ ɪz lɛɡ. hi skɹæmbəld ʌp ən ɡɹæbd ɪz sɔɹd, tɝnɪŋ tə fɛn ɔf ə dɑɹkhaʊnd.

But it could not be. Not with Lan in danger. She wove a complex Healing, putting every bit of strength she had left into it, mending his leg. He scrambled up and grabbed his sword, turning to fend off a Darkhound.

ðeɪ fɔt təɡɛðɝ, hɝ wɪð bɑlfaɪɝ, hɪm wɪð stil. bʌɾ ɪz swɪŋz wɝ ləθɑɹdʒɪk, ən ɪt tʊk əɹ ə fju hɑɹtbits lɔŋɡɝ itʃ taɪm ʃi meɪd ðə bɑlfaɪɝ. ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɑz ʃeɪkɪŋ ən ɹʌmbəlɪŋ, ɹuənz kɹæʃɪŋ tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

They fought together, her with balefire, him with steel. But his swings were lethargic, and it took her a few heartbeats longer each time she made the balefire. The ground was shaking and rumbling, ruins crashing to the ground.

"læn!" ʃi sɛd. "bi ɹɛɾi tə ɹʌn!"

"Lan!" she said. "Be ready to run!"

"wʌt?"

"What?"

wɪð əɹ læst aʊns ə stʃɹɛŋkθ, ʃi woʊv bɑlfaɪɝ ən eɪmd ɪt dɝɛkli daʊnwɝɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm. ðə ɡɹaʊn ənʒəleɪtɪd ɪn æɡəni, ɔlmoʊs laɪk ə lɪvɪŋ θɪŋ. ði ɝθ splɪt nɪɹbaɪ, dɑɹkhaʊnz tʌmbəlɪŋ ɪn. nɪneɪiv kəlæpst, ðə wʌn paʊɝ slɪpɪŋ fɹəm hɝ. ʃi wɑz tu taɪɝd tə tʃænəl.

With her last ounce of strength, she wove balefire and aimed it directly downward in front of them. The ground undulated in agony, almost like a living thing. The earth split nearby, Darkhounds tumbling in. Nynaeve collapsed, the One Power slipping from her. She was too tired to channel.

læn ɡɹæbd əɹ ɑɹm. "wi mʌst ɡoʊ!"

Lan grabbed her arm. "We must go!"

ʃi hɔl hɝsɛlf tə hɝ fit, teɪkɪŋ ɪz hænd. təɡɛðɝ, ðeɪ ɹæn ʌp ðə ɹʌmbəlɪŋ hɪlsaɪd.

She hauled herself to her feet, taking his hand. Together, they ran up the rumbling hillside.

dɑɹkhaʊnz haʊl bɪhaɪnd, səm ə ðə pæk lipɪŋ ðə ɹɪft.

Darkhounds howled behind, some of the pack leaping the rift.

nɪneɪiv ɹæn fəɹ ɔl ʃi wɑz wɝθ, klɪŋɪŋ tə lænz hænd. ðeɪ kɹɛstəd ðə hɪl. ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɑz ʃeɪkɪŋ soʊ tɛɹəbli, ʃi kʊdn bɪliv ðə ʃæk stɪl stændɪŋ. ʃi stʌmbəl daʊn ðə hɪl təwɔɹɾ ɪt, læn wɪð hɝ.

Nynaeve ran for all she was worth, clinging to Lan's hand. They crested the hill. The ground was shaking so terribly, she couldn't believe the shack still standing. She stumbled down the hill toward it, Lan with her.

hi tʃɹɪpt, kɹaɪɪŋ aʊɾ ɪn peɪn. hɪz hæn slɪp fɹəm əɹ fɪŋɡɝz.

He tripped, crying out in pain. His hand slipped from her fingers.

ʃi spʌn. bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ə flʌɾ ə dɑɹkhaʊnz kɹɛstəd ðə hɪltɑp, snɑɹlɪŋ, tiθ flæʃɪŋ ən spɪɾəl flaɪɪŋ fɹəm ðɛɹ maʊðz. læn weɪv fəɹ əɹ tə ɡoʊ, hɪz aɪz waɪd.

She spun. Behind them, a flood of Darkhounds crested the hilltop, snarling, teeth flashing and spittle flying from their mouths. Lan waved for her to go, his eyes wide.

"noʊ." ʃi ɡɹæbd ɪm baɪ ði ɑɹm ænd, hivɪŋ, hɔld ɪm daʊn ðə sloʊp. təɡɛðɝ, ðeɪ tʌmbəl θɹu ðə dɔɹweɪ, ən . . .

"No." She grabbed him by the arm and, heaving, hauled him down the slope. Together, they tumbled through the doorway, and . . .

ən ɡæspɪŋ, nɪneɪiv fɛl fɹəm ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil. ʃi kəlæpst əloʊn ɑn ðə koʊl flɔɹ, neɪkəd, ʃeɪkɪŋ. ɪn ə flʌd, ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪɾ ɔl. itʃ ən ɛvɹi hɔɹəbəl moʊmən ə ðə tɛst. itʃ bɪtʃɹeɪəl, itʃ fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾɪŋ wiv. ði ɪmpəɾəns, ðə skɹimz ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən, ðə dɛθs ə pipəl ʃi nu ən lʌvd. ʃi wɛpt əɡɛns ðə flɔɹ, kɝlɪŋ ʌp.

and gasping, Nynaeve fell from the ter'angreal. She collapsed alone on the cold floor, naked, shaking. In a flood, she remembered it all. Each and every horrible moment of the test. Each betrayal, each frustrating weave. The impotence, the screams of the children, the deaths of people she knew and loved. She wept against the floor, curling up.

hɝ ɪntaɪɝ bɑɾi wɑz əfaɪɹ wɪð peɪn. hɝ ʃoʊldɝ, lɛɡz, ɑɹmz ən bæk stɪl blɛd. ʃi wɑz bɝn tə blɪstɝz ɪn swɑθs əkɹɔs əɹ bɑɾi, ən ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ pɑɹɾ ə hɝ bɹeɪd wɑz ɡɔn. hɝ ənɹævəl hɛɹ fɛl əkɹɔs əɹ feɪs əz ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə bænɪʃ ðə mɛmɹiz ʌv wʌt ʃi hæd dʌn.

Her entire body was afire with pain. Her shoulder, legs, arms and back still bled. She was burned to blisters in swaths across her body, and the greater part of her braid was gone. Her unraveled hair fell across her face as she tried to banish the memories of what she had done.

ʃi hɝd ɡɹoʊnz fɹəm nɪɹbaɪ, ən θɹu blɪɹi aɪz ʃi sɔ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə sɝkəl bɹeɪk ɔf ðɛɹ wivz ən slʌmp. ʃi heɪɾəd ðɛm. ʃi heɪɾəd itʃ ən ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm.

She heard groans from nearby, and through bleary eyes she saw the Aes Sedai in the circle break off their weaves and slump. She hated them. She hated each and every one of them.

"laɪt!" sɹɪnz vɔɪs. "sʌmwʌn hil hɝ!"

"Light!" Saerin's voice. "Someone Heal her!"

ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ blɝi. vɔɪsəz ɡɹu mʌɾəld. laɪk saʊnz ʌndɝ wɔɾɝ. pisfəl saʊnz . . .

Everything was growing blurry. Voices grew muddled. Like sounds under water. Peaceful sounds . . .

sʌmθɪŋ koʊld wɑʃt oʊvɝ hɝ. ʃi ɡæspt, hɝ aɪz oʊpənɪŋ waɪɾ ət ði aɪsi ʃɑk ə ðə hilɪŋ. ɹɑsɪl nɛl bɪsaɪd hɝ. ðə wʊmən lʊkt wɝid.

Something cold washed over her. She gasped, her eyes opening wide at the icy shock of the Healing. Rosil knelt beside her. The woman looked worried.

ðə peɪn lɛf nɪneɪivz bɑɾi, bʌɾ əɹ ɪɡzɔstʃən ɪnkɹis tɛnfoʊld. ən ðə peɪn ɪnsaɪd ... ɪt ɹɪmeɪnd. oʊ, laɪt. ʃi kəd hɪɹ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən skɹimɪŋ.

The pain left Nynaeve's body, but her exhaustion increased tenfold. And the pain inside ... it remained. Oh, Light. She could hear the children screaming.

"wɛl," sɹɪn sɛd fɹəm nɪɹbaɪ, "simz ðət ʃɪl lɪv. naʊ, wəd sʌmwʌn pliz tɛl mi wʌɾ ɪn ðə neɪm ə kɹieɪʃən ɪtsɛlf ðət wɑz?" ʃi saʊndəd fjʊɹiəs. "aɪv bɪn ə pɑɹɾ ə mɛni ə ɹeɪzɪŋ, ivən wʌn wɛɹ ðə wʊmən dɪdn sɝvaɪv. bʌɾ aɪ hæv nɛvɝ, ɪn ɔl ə maɪ deɪz, sin ə wʊmən pʊt θɹu wʌt ðɪs wʌn dʒʌst sʌfɝd."

"Well," Saerin said from nearby, "seems that she'll live. Now, would someone please tell me what in the name of creation itself that was?" She sounded furious. "I've been a part of many a raising, even one where the woman didn't survive. But I have never, in all of my days, seen a woman put through what this one just suffered."

ʃi hæd tə bi tɛstəd pɹɑpɝli," ɹubɪn sɛd.

She had to be tested properly," Rubinde said.

pɹɑpɝli?" sɹɪn dɪmændəd, lɪvɪd.

Properly?" Saerin demanded, livid.

nɪneɪiv dɪdn əv ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ tə lʊk ət ðɛm. ʃi leɪ, bɹiðɪŋ ɪn ən aʊt.

Nynaeve didn't have the strength to look at them. She lay, breathing in and out.

"pɹɑpɝli?" sɹɪn ɹɪpiɾɪd. "ðæt wɑzn pɹɑpɝ. ðət wɑz daʊnɹaɪt, vɛnʒfəl, ɹubɪnd!

"Properly?" Saerin repeated. "That wasn't proper. That was downright, vengeful, Rubinde!

ɔlmoʊst ɛni wʌn ə ðoʊz tɛsts wɑz bɪɑnd wʌɾ aɪv sin dɪmændəɾ ʌv ʌðɝ wɪmən. jə ʃəd bi əʃeɪmd. ɔl ə ju. laɪt, lʊk wʌt juv dʌn tə ðə ɡɝl!"

Almost any one of those tests was beyond what I've seen demanded of other women. You should be ashamed. All of you. Light, look what you've done to the girl!"

"ɪɾ ɪz ənɪmpɔɹɾənt," bɑɹɑsin ðə ɹɛd sɛɾ ɪn ə koʊl vɔɪs. "ʃi feɪl ðə tɛst."

"It is unimportant," Barasine the Red said in a cold voice. "She failed the test."

"wʌt?" nɪneɪiv kɹoʊkt, faɪnəli lʊkɪŋ ʌp. ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil hæd fɔlən dɪm, ən ɹɑsɪl hæd fɛtʃt ə blæŋkəɾ ən nɪneɪivz kloʊðɪŋ. ɛɡwin stʊd tə ðə saɪd, ɑɹmz klæsp bɪfɔɹ hɝ. hɝ feɪs wɑz sɝin əz ʃi lɪsən tə ði ʌðɝz. ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv ə voʊt, bʌt ði ʌðɝz wʊd, ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ wɛðɝ nɪneɪiv hæd pæs ðə tɛst əɹ nɑt.

"What?" Nynaeve croaked, finally looking up. The ter'angreal had fallen dim, and Rosil had fetched a blanket and Nynaeve's clothing. Egwene stood to the side, arms clasped before her. Her face was serene as she listened to the others. She would not have a vote, but the others would, regarding whether Nynaeve had passed the test or not.

"ju feɪld, tʃaɪld" bɑɹɑsin sɛd, ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ nɪneɪiv wɪð ən ɪmoʊʃənləs stɛɹ. "ju dɪd nɑt ʃoʊ pɹɑpɝ dɪkɔɹəm."

"You failed, child" Barasine said, regarding Nynaeve with an emotionless stare. "You did not show proper decorum."

ləleɪn ə ðə blu nɑɾəd, lʊkɪŋ ənɔɪd tə bi əɡɹiɪŋ wɪð ə ɹɛd. "ðɪs wɑz tə tɛs jəɹ əbɪləɾi tə bi kɑm əz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. jə dɪd nɑt ʃoʊ ðæt."

Lelaine of the Blue nodded, looking annoyed to be agreeing with a Red. "This was to test your ability to be calm as an Aes Sedai. You did not show that."

ði ʌðɝz lʊkt ənkʌmftəɹbəl. jə wɝn səpoʊz tə spik ə ðə spɪsɪfɪks ʌv ə tɛstɪŋ.

The others looked uncomfortable. You weren't supposed to speak of the specifics of a testing.

nɪneɪiv nu ðət mʌtʃ. ʃi ɔlsoʊ nu ðət moʊst ə ðə taɪm, feɪlɪŋ ən daɪɪŋ wɝ ðə seɪm θɪŋ.

Nynaeve knew that much. She also knew that most of the time, failing and dying were the same thing.

ðoʊ ʃi wɑzn tɛɹəbli sɝpɹaɪz tə hɪɹ kleɪmz ðət ʃid feɪld, naʊ ðət ʃi θɔɾ əbaʊɾ ɪt.

Though she wasn't terribly surprised to hear claims that she'd failed, now that she thought about it.

ʃi hæd bɹoʊkən ðə ɹulz ə ðə tɛst. ʃid ɹʌn ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə seɪv pɛɹɪn ən ʌðɝz. ʃid tʃænəl bɪfɔɹ ʃi ʃəd hæv. ʃi hæd tʃɹʌbəl sʌmənɪŋ ɹəɡɹɛt. ɛvɹi ʌðɝ ɪmoʊʃən wɑz, fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, kənsum baɪ ðə hɑloʊ lɔs ʃi fɛlt.

She had broken the rules of the test. She'd run in order to save Perrin and others. She'd channeled before she should have. She had trouble summoning regret. Every other emotion was, for the moment, consumed by the hollow loss she felt.

"bɑɹɑsin dʌz əv ə pɔɪnt," sin sɛd, ɹɪlʌktənt. "baɪ ði ɛnd, jə wɝ oʊpənli fjʊɹiəs, ən jə ɹæn tə ɹitʃ mɛni ʌv ðə mɑɹkɝz. ən ðən ðəɹ ɪz ðə mæɾɝ ə ðə fɔɹbɪɾən wiv. moʊs tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ. aɪ də nɑt seɪ jə ʃəd feɪl, bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ ɪɹɛɡjəlɛɹəɾiz."

"Barasine does have a point," Seaine said, reluctant. "By the end, you were openly furious, and you ran to reach many of the markers. And then there is the matter of the forbidden weave. Most troubling. I do not say you should fail, but there are irregularities."

nɪneɪiv tʃɹaɪd tə klaɪm tə hɝ fit. ɹɑsɪl pleɪst ə hæn ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ tə fɝbɪd hɝ, bʌt nɪneɪiv tʊk ði ɑɹm ən juzd ɪɾ əz səpɔɹt, pʊlɪŋ hɝsɛlf ʌp ɑn ənstɛɾi lɛɡz. ʃi tʊk ðə blæŋkəɾ ən ɹæpt ɪɾ ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, hoʊldɪŋ ɪt kloʊzd ət ðə fɹʌnt.

Nynaeve tried to climb to her feet. Rosil placed a hand on her shoulder to forbid her, but Nynaeve took the arm and used it as support, pulling herself up on unsteady legs. She took the blanket and wrapped it around her shoulders, holding it closed at the front.

ʃi fɛl soʊ dʒɹeɪnd. "aɪ dɪd wʌɾ aɪ hæd tə. hu əmʌŋ jə wəd nɑt ɹʌn ɪf jə sɔ pipəl ɪn deɪnʒɝ? hu əmʌŋ jə wəd fɝbɪd hɝsɛlf tə tʃænəl ɪf ʃi sɔ ʃæɾoʊzpɔn ətækɪŋ? aɪ æktəɾ əz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃʊd.

She felt so drained. "I did what I had to. Who among you would not run if you saw people in danger? Who among you would forbid herself to channel if she saw Shadowspawn attacking? I acted as an Aes Sedai should.

"ðɪs tɛst," bɑɹɑsin sɛd, "ɪz mɛn tə ɛnʃʊɹ ðəɾ ə wʊmən ɪz keɪpəbəl ə dɛɾɪkeɪtɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ tæsk. tə si ðət ʃi kən ɪɡnɔɹ ðə dɪstʃɹækʃənz ə ðə moʊmən ən sik ə haɪɝ ɡʊd."

"This test," Barasine said, "is meant to ensure that a woman is capable of dedicating herself to a greater task. To see that she can ignore the distractions of the moment and seek a higher good."

nɪneɪiv snɪft. "aɪ kəmpliɾəd ðə wivz aɪ niɾəd tə. aɪ meɪnteɪn maɪ foʊkəs. jɛs, aɪ bɹoʊk maɪ kɑm - bʌɾ aɪ kɛpt ə kul ɪnʌf hɛd tə kɑm- plit maɪ tæsks. wʌn ʃəd nɑt dɪmæn kɑmnəs fəɹ ðə mɪɹ seɪk ə kɑmnəs, ən ə pɹoʊəbɪʃən ɑn ɹʌnɪŋ wən ðəɹ ɑɹ pipəl jə nid tə seɪv ɪz fulɪʃ.

Nynaeve sniffed. "I completed the weaves I needed to. I maintained my focus. Yes, I broke my calm - but I kept a cool enough head to com- plete my tasks. One should not demand calmness for the mere sake of calmness, and a prohibition on running when there are people you need to save is foolish.

"maɪ ɡoʊl ɪn ðɪs tɛst wɑz tə pɹuv ðəɾ aɪ dɪzɝv tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ. wɛl, ðən aɪ kəɾ ɑɹɡju ðət ðə laɪvz ə ðə pipəl aɪ sɔ wɝ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən ɡeɪnɪŋ ðət taɪɾəl. ɪf luzɪŋ maɪ taɪɾəl ɪz wʌt wəd bi ɹikwaɪɝd tə seɪv sʌmwʌnz laɪf - ən ɪf ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ʌðɝ kɑnsəkwɛnsəz - aɪd də ɪt. ɛvɹi taɪm. nɑt seɪvɪŋ əm wʊdn bi sɝvɪŋ ə haɪɝ ɡʊd; ɪt wəd dʒʌs bi sɛlfɪʃ."

"My goal in this test was to prove that I deserve to be Aes Sedai. Well, then I could argue that the lives of the people I saw were more important than gaining that title. If losing my title is what would be required to save someone's life - and if there were no other consequences - I'd do it. Every time. Not saving them wouldn't be serving a higher good; it would just be selfish."

bɑɹɑsinz aɪz oʊpənd waɪd wɪð æŋɡɝ. nɪneɪiv tɝn tə wɔk -  wɪð səm dɪfəkəlti - tə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum, wɛɹ ʃi kəd sɪɾ ɑn ə bɛntʃ ən ɹɛst. ðə wɪmən ɡæðɝd təɡɛðɝ tə spik sɔfli, ən ɛɡwin wɔkt - stɪl sɝin - oʊvɝ tə nɪneɪiv. ði æmɪɝlɪn sæt daʊn bɪsaɪd hɝ.

Barasine's eyes opened wide with anger. Nynaeve turned to walk -  with some difficulty - to the side of the room, where she could sit on a bench and rest. The women gathered together to speak softly, and Egwene walked - still serene - over to Nynaeve. The Amyrlin sat down beside her.

ðoʊ ʃi hæd bɪn əlaʊd tə pɑɹtɪsəpeɪɾ ɪn ðə tɛst, ən kɹieɪt səm ə ði ɪkspɪɹiənsɪz ðət tɛstəd nɪneɪiv, ðə tʃɔɪs ə ðə ɹeɪzɪŋ wəd bi ʌp tə ði ʌðɝz.

Though she had been allowed to participate in the test, and create some of the experiences that tested Nynaeve, the choice of the raising would be up to the others.

"juv æŋɡɝd ðɛm," ɛɡwin sɛd. "æn kənfjuz ðɛm."

"You've angered them," Egwene said. "And confused them."

"aɪ spoʊk ðə tʃɹuθ," nɪneɪiv ɡɹʌmbəld.

"I spoke the truth," Nynaeve grumbled.

"pɝhæps," ɛɡwin sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ wɑzn spikɪŋ ə jəɹ aʊtbɝst. dʊɹɪŋ ðə tɛst, jə flaʊɾɪd ði ɔɹɾɝz jə wɝ ɡɪvən."

"Perhaps," Egwene said. "But I wasn't speaking of your outburst. During the test, you flouted the orders you were given."

"aɪ kʊdn flaʊt ðɛm. aɪ dɪdn ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðəɾ aɪd bɪn ɡɪvən ðɛm. aɪ. . . wɛl, æktʃəli  aɪ kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌɾ aɪ wɑz səpoʊz tə du, bʌt nɑt ðə ɹizənz." nɪneɪiv ɡɹɪməst. "ðæts waɪ aɪ bɹoʊk ðə ɹulz. aɪ θɔt ðeɪ wɝ dʒʌst ɑɹbətʃɹɛɹi. aɪ kʊdn ɹɪmɛmbɝ waɪ aɪ wɑzn səpoʊz tə ɹʌn, soʊ ɪn ðə feɪs ə siɪŋ pipəl daɪ, ɪt sim sɪli tə wɔk."

"I couldn't flout them. I didn't remember that I'd been given them. I. . . well, actually I could remember what I was supposed to do, but not the reasons." Nynaeve grimaced. "That's why I broke the rules. I thought they were just arbitrary. I couldn't remember why I wasn't supposed to run, so in the face of seeing people die, it seemed silly to walk."

"ðə ɹulz ɑɹ səpoʊz tə hoʊl stʃɹɔŋli, ivən ðoʊ jə doʊn ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðɛm," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"The rules are supposed to hold strongly, even though you don't remember them," Egwene said.

"æn jə ʃəd nɑɾ əv bɪn eɪbəl tə tʃænəl bɪfɔɹ ɹitʃɪŋ ðə mɑɹkɝ. ðəɾ ɪz ɪn ðə vɛɹi neɪtʃɝ ə ðə tɛst."

"And you should not have been able to channel before reaching the marker. That is in the very nature of the test."

nɪneɪiv fɹaʊnd. "ðɛn haʊ - "

Nynaeve frowned. "Then how - "

juv spɛn tu mʌtʃ taɪm ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. ðɪs tɛst ... ɪt simz tə fʌŋkʃən mʌtʃ ɪn ðə seɪm weɪ əz ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz. wʌt wi kɹieɪɾ ɪn əɹ maɪnz bɪkeɪm jəɹ sɝaʊndɪŋz." ɛɡwin klɪkt əɹ tʌŋ, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd. "aɪ wɔɹn əm ðət ðɪs maɪt bi ə deɪnʒɝ. jəɹ pɹæktəs ɪn ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz meɪd jə ɪnətli eɪbəl tə bɹeɪk ðə tɛst."

You've spent too much time in Tel'aran'rhiod. This test ... it seems to function much in the same way as the World of Dreams. What we create in our minds became your surroundings." Egwene clicked her tongue, shaking her head. "I warned them that this might be a danger. Your practice in the World of Dreams made you innately able to break the test."

nɪneɪiv dɪdn ɹɪplaɪ tə ðæt, filɪŋ sɪk. wʌɾ ɪf ʃi dɪd feɪl? biɪŋ kæst aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ naʊ, æftɝ ɡɛɾɪŋ soʊ kloʊs?

Nynaeve didn't reply to that, feeling sick. What if she did fail? Being cast out of the Tower now, after getting so close?

"aɪ θɪŋk jəɹ ɪnfɹækʃənz maɪt hɛlp ju, haʊɛvɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd sɔfli.

"I think your infractions might help you, however," Egwene said softly.

"wʌt?"

"What?"

"jɔɹ tu ɪkspɪɹiəns tə hæv bɪn ɡɪvən ðɪs tɛst," ɛɡwin ɛks-pleɪnd. "ɪn ə weɪ, wʌt hæpən ɪz pɹuf ðət jə dɪzɝv ðə ʃɔl wən aɪ ɡɹæntəɾ ɪt tə ju. jə pɝfɔɹmd itʃ ə ðə wivz ɛkspɝtli, wɪð spiɾ ən skɪl. aɪ pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli laɪk ðə weɪ jə juzd 'jusləs' wivz, ɑn əkeɪʒən, tə ətæk ðə θɪŋz jə sɔ."

"You're too experienced to have been given this test," Egwene ex-plained. "In a way, what happened is proof that you deserved the shawl when I granted it to you. You performed each of the weaves expertly, with speed and skill. I particularly liked the way you used 'useless' weaves, on occasion, to attack the things you saw."

"ðə faɪɾ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ðæt wʌn wɑz ju, wɑzn ɪt? ði ʌðɝz doʊnt noʊ ðə pleɪs wɛl ɪnʌf tə kɹieɪɾ ɪt."

"The fight in the Two Rivers," Nynaeve said. "That one was you, wasn't it? The others don't know the place well enough to create it."

"ju kən səmtaɪmz kɹieɪt vɪʒənz ən sɪtʃueɪʃənz beɪst ɑn ðə maɪn ə ðə wʊmən biɪŋ tɛstəd,"

"You can sometimes create visions and situations based on the mind of the woman being tested,"

ɛɡwin sɛd. "ɪɾ ɪz ən ɑɾ ɪkspɪɹiəns, juzɪŋ ðɪs tɛɹæŋɡɹil. wʌn ðəɾ aɪm nɑt sɝɾən aɪ ʌndɝstænd."

Egwene said. "It is an odd experience, using this ter'angreal. One that I am not certain I understand."

"bʌt ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɑz ju."

"But the Two Rivers was you."

"jɛs," ɛɡwin ədmɪɾəd.

"Yes," Egwene admitted.

"æn ðə læst wʌn. wɪð læn?"

"And the last one. With Lan?"

ɛɡwin nɑɾəd. "aɪm sɑɹi. aɪ θɔt ðəɾ ɪf aɪ dɪdn də ɪt, noʊbɑdi wəd - "

Egwene nodded. "I'm sorry. I thought that if I didn't do it, nobody would - "

"aɪ æm ɡlæd ðət jə dɪd," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ɪt ʃoʊd mi sʌmθɪŋ."

"I am glad that you did," Nynaeve said. "It showed me something."

"ɪt dɪd?"

"It did?"

nɪneɪiv nɑɾəd, bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl, hoʊldɪŋ ðə blæŋkəɾ ɪn pleɪs ən kloʊzɪŋ əɹ aɪz. "aɪ ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɪf aɪ hæd tə tʃuz bɪtwin bɪkʌmɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ɡoʊɪŋ wɪð læn, aɪd tʃuz læn.

Nynaeve nodded, back against the wall, holding the blanket in place and closing her eyes. "I realized that if I had to choose between becoming an Aes Sedai and going with Lan, I'd choose Lan.

wʌt pipəl kɔl mi dʌzn tʃeɪnʒ ɛniθɪŋ ɪnsaɪɾ ə mi. læn, haʊɛvɝ ... hiz mɔɹ ðən ə taɪɾəl. aɪ kən stɪl tʃænəl - aɪ kən stɪl bi mi - ɪf aɪ nɛvɝ bɪkʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ. bʌɾ aɪ wəd nɛvɝ bi maɪsɛlf əɡɛn ɪf aɪ əbændən hɪm. ðə wɝl tʃeɪnʒd wən aɪ mɛɹid hɪm."

What people call me doesn't change anything inside of me. Lan, however ... he is more than a title. I can still channel - I can still be me - if I never become Aes Sedai. But I would never be myself again if I abandoned him. The world changed when I married him."

ʃi fɛlt. . . fɹid, sʌmhaʊ, ɹilaɪzɪŋ ɪɾ ən seɪɪŋ ɪt.

She felt. . . freed, somehow, realizing it and saying it.

"pɹeɪ ði ʌðɝz doʊn ɹilaɪz ðæt," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ɪt wəd nɑt bi ɡʊd fəɹ əm tə dətɝmən ðət jə wəd pleɪs ɛniθɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə waɪt taʊɝ."

"Pray the others don't realize that," Egwene said. "It would not be good for them to determine that you would place anything before the White Tower."

"aɪ wʌndɝ ɪf," nɪneɪiv sɛd, "wi səmtaɪmz pʊt ðə waɪt taʊɝ - əz ən ɪnstɪtuʃən - bɪfɔɹ ðə pipəl wi sɝv. aɪ wʌndɝ ɪf wi lɛɾ ɪt bɪkʌm ə ɡoʊl ɪn ɪtsɛlf, ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə minz tə hɛlp əs ətʃiv ɡɹeɪɾɝ ɡoʊlz."

"I wonder if," Nynaeve said, "we sometimes put the White Tower - as an institution - before the people we serve. I wonder if we let it become a goal in itself, instead of a means to help us achieve greater goals."

"dɪvoʊʃən ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt, nɪneɪiv. ðə waɪt taʊɝ pɹətɛks ən ɡaɪdz ðə wɝld."

"Devotion is important, Nynaeve. The White Tower protects and guides the world."

"æn jɛt, soʊ mɛni ʌv əs də ɪt wɪθaʊt fæmliz," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "wɪθaʊt lʌv, wɪθaʊt pæʃən bɪɑn əɹ oʊn pɝtɪkjəlɝ ɪntʃɹəsts. soʊ ivən waɪl wi tʃɹaɪ tə ɡaɪd ðə wɝld, wi sɛpɹəɾ aʊɝsɛlvz fɹəm ɪt. wi ɹɪsk ɛɹəɡəns, ɛɡwin. wi ɔlweɪz əsum wi noʊ bɛst, bʌt ɹɪsk meɪkɪŋ aʊɝsɛlvz əneɪbəl tə fæðəm ðə pipəl wi kleɪm tə sɝv."

"And yet, so many of us do it without families," Nynaeve said. "Without love, without passion beyond our own particular interests. So even while we try to guide the world, we separate ourselves from it. We risk arrogance, Egwene. We always assume we know best, but risk making ourselves unable to fathom the people we claim to serve."

ɛɡwin sim tʃɹʌbəld. "doʊn vɔɪs ðoʊz aɪdiəz tu mʌtʃ, ət lis nɑt tədeɪ. ðəɹ ɔlɹɛɾi fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd ɪnʌf wɪð ju. bʌt ðɪs tɛstɪŋ wɑz bɹuɾəl, nɪneɪiv. aɪm sɑɹi. aɪ kʊdn bi sin feɪvɝɪŋ ju, bʌt pɝhæps aɪ ʃoʊwəɾ əv pʊɾ ə stɑp tə ɪt. jə dɪd wʌt jə wɝn səpoʊz tə, ən ðət dʒɹoʊv ði ʌðɝz tə bi ɪnkɹisɪŋli səvɪɹ. ðeɪ sɔ ðət sɪk tʃɪlʒɹən hɝt ju, soʊ ðeɪ pʊt mɔɹ ən mɔɹ ə ðɛm ɪndə ðə tɛst. mɛni sim tə kənsɪɾɝ jəɹ vɪktɝiz ə pɝsənəl əfɹʌnt, ə kɑntɛst ʌv wɪlz. ðət dʒɹoʊv əm tə bi hɑɹʃ. kɹuəl, ivən."

Egwene seemed troubled. "Don't voice those ideas too much, at least not today. They're already frustrated enough with you. But this testing was brutal, Nynaeve. I'm sorry. I couldn't be seen favoring you, but perhaps I shouId have put a stop to it. You did what you weren't supposed to, and that drove the others to be increasingly severe. They saw that sick children hurt you, so they put more and more of them into the test. Many seemed to consider your victories a personal affront, a contest of wills. That drove them to be harsh. Cruel, even."

"aɪ sɝvaɪvd," nɪneɪiv sɛd, aɪz kloʊzd. "æn aɪ lɝn ə ɡɹeɪt dil. əbaʊt mi. ən əbaʊɾ ʌs."

"I survived," Nynaeve said, eyes closed. "And I learned a great deal. About me. And about us."

ʃi wɑntəd tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ, fʊli ən tʃɹuli ɛmbɹeɪst. ʃi wɑntəɾ ɪt bædli. bʌɾ ɪn ði ɛnd, ɪf ðiz pipəl tʃoʊz tə ɹəfjuz əɹ ðɛɹ əpɹuvəl, ʃi nu ʃi kəd kəntɪnju ɑn ən də wʌt ʃi niɾəd tə də ɛniweɪ.

She wanted to be Aes Sedai, fully and truly embraced. She wanted it badly. But in the end, if these people chose to refuse her their approval, she knew she could continue on and do what she needed to do anyway.

ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ðə sɪɾɝz - tʃɹeɪl baɪ ɹɑsɪl - wɔkt ʌp. nɪneɪiv hɔl hɝsɛlf tə hɝ fit tə bi ɹɪspɛkfəl.

Eventually, the Sitters - trailed by Rosil - walked up. Nynaeve hauled herself to her feet to be respectful.

"wi mʌs dɪskʌs ðə fɔɹbɪɾən wiv jə juzd," sɹɪn sɛd, stɝn.

"We must discuss the forbidden weave you used," Saerin said, stern.

"ɪɾ ɪz ði oʊnli weɪ aɪ noʊ tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ dɑɹkhaʊnz," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ɪt wɑz niɾəd."

"It is the only way I know to destroy Darkhounds," Nynaeve said. "It was needed."

"ju də nɑɾ əv ðə ɹaɪt tə dɪsaɪd ðæt," sɹɪn sɛd. "wʌt jə dɪd dɪsteɪbəlaɪz ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil.

"You do not have the right to decide that," Saerin said. "What you did destabilized the ter'angreal.

jə cʊɾə dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ɪt, kɪlɪŋ jɝsɛlf ən pɝhæps ʌs. wi wɑn jə tə swɛɹ ðət jəl nɛvɝ jus ðət wiv əɡɛn."

You could have destroyed it, killing yourself and perhaps us. We want you to swear that you will never use that weave again."

"aɪ woʊn də ðæt," nɪneɪiv sɛd taɪɹədli.

"I won't do that," Nynaeve said tiredly.

"æn ɪf ɪt minz ðə dɪfɝəns bɪtwin ɡeɪnɪŋ ðə ʃɔl əɹ luzɪŋ ɪt fɝɛvɝ?"

"And if it means the difference between gaining the shawl or losing it forever?"

"ɡɪvɪŋ ən oʊθ laɪk ðət wəd bi fulɪʃ," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "aɪ kəd faɪn maɪsɛlf ɪn ə sɪtʃueɪʃən wɛɹ pipəl wəd daɪ ɪf aɪ dɪdn juz ɪt. laɪt! əl bi faɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə læs bæɾəl əlɔŋsaɪd ɹænd.

"Giving an oath like that would be foolish," Nynaeve said. "I could find myself in a situation where people would die if I didn't use it. Light! I'll be fighting in the Last Battle alongside Rand.

wʌɾ ɪf aɪ wɝ tə ɡɛt tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl ən dɪskʌvɝ ðæt, wɪθaʊt bɑlfaɪɝ, aɪ kəd nɑt hɛlp ðə dʒɹæɡən stɑp ðə dɑɹk wʌn? wəd juv mi tʃuz bɪtwin ə fulɪʃ oʊθ ən ðə feɪɾ ə ðə wɝld?"

What if I were to get to Shayol Ghul and discover that, without balefire, I could not help the Dragon stop the Dark One? Would you have me choose between a foolish oath and the fate of the world?"

"ju θɪŋk jəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl?" ɹubɪn æskt, ɪnkɹɛdʒələs.

"You think you're going to Shayol Ghul?" Rubinde asked, incredulous.

aɪm gɑnə bi ðɛɹ," nɪneɪiv sɛd sɔfli. "ɪɾ ɪz nɑɾ ə kwɛstʃən. ɹænd əz æskt ɪɾ ə mi, ðoʊ aɪ wʊɾə ɡɔn ɪf i hædnt."

I'm going to be there," Nynaeve said softly. "It is not a question. Rand has asked it of me, though I would have gone if he hadn't."

ðeɪ ʃɛɹɾ ə lʊk, simɪŋ tʃɹʌbəld.

They shared a look, seeming troubled.

ɪf jəɹ gɑnə ɹeɪz mi," nɪneɪiv sɛd, "ðɛn jəl dʒʌst əv tə tʃɹʌs maɪ dʒʌdʒmən ɑn bɑlfaɪɝ.

If you're going to raise me," Nynaeve said, "then you'll just have to trust my judgment on balefire.

ɪf jə doʊn tʃɹʌs mi tə noʊ wən tə juz ə vɛɹi deɪnʒɝəs wiv ən wən nɑt tə, ðən aɪd ɹæðɝ jə nɑt ɹeɪz mi."

If you don't trust me to know when to use a very dangerous weave and when not to, then I'd rather you not raise me."

aɪ wəd bi kɛɹfəl," ɛɡwin sɛd tə ðə wɪmən. "ɹəfjuzɪŋ ðə ʃɔl tə ðə wʊmən u hɛlp klɛnz ðə teɪn fɹəm seɪɾɪn - ðə wʊmən u dɪfiɾəd mɑɡiɾin hɝsɛlf ɪn bæɾəl, ðə wʊmən mɛɹid tə ðə kɪŋ ə mɔlkiɝ - wəd sɛɾ ə vɛɹi deɪnʒɝəs pɹɛsɪɾənt."

I would be careful," Egwene said to the women. "Refusing the shawl to the woman who helped cleanse the taint from saidin - the woman who defeated Moghedien herself in battle, the woman married to the King of Malkier - would set a very dangerous precedent."

sɹɪn lʊkt ət ði ʌðɝz. θɹi nɑdz. jukɪɝi, sin ænd-sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli - ɹoʊmændə. θɹi ʃeɪks ə ðə hɛd. ɹubɪnd, bɑɹɑsin, ləleɪn. ðət lɛft oʊnli sɹɪn. ðə dəsaɪɾɪŋ voʊt.

Saerin looked at the others. Three nods. Yukiri, Seaine and-surprisingly - Romanda. Three shakes of the head. Rubinde, Barasine, Lelaine. That left only Saerin. The deciding vote.

ðə bɹaʊn tɝn bæk tə hɝ. "nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə, aɪ dɪklɛɹ ðət juv pæs ðɪs tɛst.

The Brown turned back to her. "Nynaeve al'Meara, I declare that you have passed this test.

nɛɹoʊli."

Narrowly."

tə ðə saɪd, ɛɡwin lɛɾ aʊɾ ə sɑft - ɔlmoʊst ɪnɔɾəbəl - saɪ ʌv ɹɪlif nɪneɪiv ɹilaɪzd ʃid bɪn hoʊldɪŋ əɹ oʊn bɹɛθpɔɪnsɛvən

To the side, Egwene let out a soft - almost inaudible - sigh of relief Nynaeve realized she'd been holding her own breath.7

"ɪɾ ɪz dʌn!" ɹɑsɪl sɛd, klæpɪŋ əɹ hænz təɡɛðɝ. "lɛt noʊ wʌn ɛvɝ spik ʌv wʌɾ əz pæs hɪɹ. ɪts fəɹ əs tə ʃɛɹ ɪn saɪləns wɪð ʃi hu ɪkspɪɹiənst ɪt. ɪts dʌn."

"It is done!" Rosil said, clapping her hands together. "Let no one ever speak of what has passed here. It is for us to share in silence with she who experienced it. It is done."

ðə wɪmən nɑɾəd ɪn əɡɹimənt, ivən ðoʊz u hæd voʊɾəd əɡɛns nɪneɪiv. noʊbɑdi wəd noʊ ðət nɪneɪiv hæd nɪɹli feɪld. ðeɪ hæd pɹɑbli kənfɹʌntəɾ əɹ əbaʊt ðə bɑlfaɪɝ dɝɛkli -  ɹæðɝ ðən sikɪŋ fɔɹməl pʌnɪʃmənt - kəz ə ðə tʃɹədɪʃən ə nɑt spikɪŋ ʌv wʌt hæpən ɪn ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil.

The women nodded in agreement, even those who had voted against Nynaeve. Nobody would know that Nynaeve had nearly failed. They had probably confronted her about the balefire directly -  rather than seeking formal punishment - because of the tradition of not speaking of what happened in the ter'angreal.

ɹɑsɪl klæpt əɡɛn. "nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə, jəl spɛn ðə naɪɾ ɪn pɹɛɹ ən kɑntəmpleɪʃən ə ðə bɝɾənz jəl teɪk ʌp ɑn ðə mɑɹoʊ, wən jə dɑn ðə ʃɔl ʌv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪts dʌn." ʃi klæpt ə θɝɾ ən faɪnəl taɪm.

Rosil clapped again. "Nynaeve al'Meara, you will spend the night in prayer and contemplation of the burdens you will take up on the morrow, when you don the shawl of an Aes Sedai. It is done." She clapped a third and final time.

"θæŋk ju," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ ɔlɹɛɾi hæv maɪ ʃɔl ən - "

"Thank you," Nynaeve said. "But I already have my shawl and - "

ʃi kʌɾ ɔf əz ɛɡwin ɡeɪv əɹ ə ɡlɛɹ. ə sɝin ɡlɛɹ, bʌɾ ə ɡlɛɹ nʌnðəlɛs. pɝhæps nɪneɪiv hæd pʊʃt θɪŋz fɑɹ ɪnʌf tənaɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi.

She cut off as Egwene gave her a glare. A serene glare, but a glare nonetheless. Perhaps Nynaeve had pushed things far enough tonight already.

" - əl bi hæpi tə fɑloʊ tʃɹədɪʃən," nɪneɪiv kəntɪnjud, dɪskɑɹɾɪŋ əɹ əbdʒɛkʃən. "soʊ lɔŋ əz aɪm əlaʊd tə də wʌn vɛɹi ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ fɝst. ðən əl ɹɪtɝn ən fʊlfɪl tʃɹədɪʃən."

" - I will be happy to follow tradition," Nynaeve continued, discarding her objection. "So long as I am allowed to do one very important thing first. Then I will return and fulfill tradition."

nɪneɪiv niɾəd ə ɡeɪtweɪ tə ɡɛt wɛɹ ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ. ʃi hædn spəsɪfɪkli toʊl ði ʌðɝz ʃid bi livɪŋ ðə taʊɝ tə si tə hɝ tæsk. bʌt ʃi hædn sɛd ʃi wʊdnt, iðɝ.

Nynaeve needed a gateway to get where she was going. She hadn't specifically told the others she'd be leaving the Tower to see to her task. But she hadn't said she wouldn't, either.

ʃi hʌsəl θɹu ðə dɑɹk kæmp ə tɛns wɪtʃ sæt dʒʌst aʊtsaɪɾ ə pɑɹʃəli bɪlt wɔl. ðə naɪt skaɪ wɑz dɪm, wɪð ðoʊz klaʊdz kʌvɝɪŋ ɪt, ən faɪɝz bɝn ət ðə pɝɪməɾɝ ə ðə kæmp. pɝhæps tu mɛni faɪɝz. ðoʊz hɪɹ wɝ biɪŋ ɪkstʃɹimli kɔʃəs. fɔɹtʃənətli, ðə ɡɑɹdz hæɾ əlaʊɾ əɹ ɪndə ðə kæmp wɪθaʊt kɑmɛnt; ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ wɝkt wʌndɝz, wən əplaɪɾ ɪn ðə ɹaɪt loʊkeɪʃənz. ðeɪɾ ivən toʊld əɹ wɛɹ tə faɪn ðə wʊmən ʃi sɔt.

She hustled through the dark camp of tents which sat just outside a partially built wall. The night sky was dim, with those clouds covering it, and fires burned at the perimeter of the camp. Perhaps too many fires. Those here were being extremely cautious. Fortunately, the guards had allowed her into the camp without comment; the Great Serpent ring worked wonders, when applied in the right locations. They'd even told her where to find the woman she sought.

ɪn tʃɹuθ, nɪneɪiv hæd bɪn sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ðiz tɛns aʊtsaɪd, ɹæðɝ ðən ɪnsaɪd, ðə wɔlz ə ðə blæk taʊɝ. ðiz wɪmən hæd bɪn sɛn tə bɑn æʃəmən, əz ɹænd hæɾ ɔfɝd. bʌɾ əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə ɡɑɹdz, ɛɡwin ɛs ɛnvɔɪ hæd bɪn meɪd tə weɪt. ði æʃəmən hæd sɛd ðət "ʌðɝz hæd ðə fɝs tʃɔɪs," wʌtɛvɝ ðət mɛnt. ɛɡwin pɹɑbli nu mɔɹ; ʃid sɛn mɛsənʒɝz bæk ən fɔɹθ wɪð ðə wɪmən hɪɹ, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli tə wɔɹn əm əbaʊt blæk sɪstɝz u maɪt bi əmʌŋ ðɛm. ðoʊz ðeɪd noʊn ə hæd vænɪʃt bɪfɔɹ ðə fɝs mɛsənʒɝz ɝaɪvd.

In truth, Nynaeve had been surprised to find these tents outside, rather than inside, the walls of the Black Tower. These women had been sent to bond Asha'man, as Rand had offered. But according to the guards, Egwene s envoy had been made to wait. The Asha'man had said that "others had the first choice," whatever that meant. Egwene probably knew more; she'd sent messengers back and forth with the women here, particularly to warn them about Black sisters who might be among them. Those they'd known of had vanished before the first messengers arrived.

vneɪiv hædn ðə maɪn tə æsk mɔɹ dɪteɪlz ət ðə moʊmənt. ʃi hæɾ ənʌðɝ tæsk. ʃi stɛpt ʌp tə ðə pɹɑpɝ tɛnt, filɪŋ soʊ taɪɝd fɹəm ðə tɛstɪŋ ðət ʃi fɛlt ʃi wəd sun tʌmbəl tə ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪn ə flɝi ʌv jɛloʊ klɔθ. ə fju wɔɹɾɝz pæs θɹu ðə kæmp nɪɹbaɪ, wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ wɪð kɑm ɪkspɹɛʃənz.

Nvnaeve hadn't the mind to ask more details at the moment. She had another task. She stepped up to the proper tent, feeling so tired from the testing that she felt she would soon tumble to the ground in a flurry of yellow cloth. A few Warders passed through the camp nearby, watching her with calm expressions.

ðə tɛn bɪfɔɹ əɹ wɑz ə sɪmpəl ɡɹeɪ θɪŋ. ɪt wɑz lɪt wɪð ə feɪnt ɡloʊ, ən ʃædoʊz muvd ɪnsaɪd. "maɪɹɛl," nɪneɪiv sɛd laʊdli. "aɪ wəd spik wɪð ju." ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd ət haʊ stʃɹɔŋ əɹ vɔɪs saʊndəd. ʃi dɪdn fil ðət ʃi hæd mʌtʃ stʃɹɛŋkθ ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ.

The tent before her was a simple gray thing. It was lit with a faint glow, and shadows moved inside. "Myrelle," Nynaeve said loudly. "I would speak with you." She was surprised at how strong her voice sounded. She didn't feel that she had much strength remaining.

ðə ʃædoʊz pɔzd, ən ðən muvd əɡɛn. ðə tɛn flæps ɹʌsəld, ən ə kənfjuz feɪs pɪɹɾ aʊt. maɪɹɛl wɔɹ ə blu naɪtɡaʊn ðət wɑz ɔlmoʊs tʃɹænslusənt, ən wʌn ə hɝ wɔɹɾɝz - ə bɛɹ ʌv ə mæn wɪð ə θɪk blæk bɪɹɾ æftɝ ði ɪliɑnɝ fæʃən - sæt ʃɝtləs ɑn ðə tɛn flɔɹ ɪnsaɪd.

The shadows paused, and then moved again. The tent flaps rustled, and a confused face peered out. Myrelle wore a blue nightgown that was almost translucent, and one of her Warders - a bear of a man with a thick black beard after the Illianer fashion - sat shirtless on the tent floor inside.

"tʃaɪld?" maɪɹɛl sɛd, saʊndɪŋ sɝpɹaɪzd. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ hɪɹ?" ʃi wɑz ən ɑləv-skɪn bjuɾi, wɪð lɔŋ blæk hɛɹ ən ɹaʊndəd kɝvz. nɪneɪiv hæd tə stɑp hɝsɛlf fɹəm ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ əɹ bɹeɪd. ɪt wɑz tu ʃɔɹt naʊ tə tʌɡ. ðət wɑz gɑnə teɪk ə lɑɾ ʌv ɡɛɾɪŋ juz tə.

"Child?" Myrelle said, sounding surprised. "What are you doing here?" She was an olive-skinned beauty, with long black hair and rounded curves. Nynaeve had to stop herself from reaching for her braid. It was too short now to tug. That was going to take a lot of getting used to.

"ju hæv sʌmθɪŋ ðət bɪlɔŋz tə mi," nɪneɪiv sɛd.

"You have something that belongs to me," Nynaeve said.

"m . . . ðət dɪpɛnz ɑn əpɪnjən, tʃaɪld." maɪɹɛl fɹaʊnd.

"Hmm . . . That depends on opinion, child." Myrelle frowned.

"aɪ wɑz ɹeɪz tədeɪ," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "fɔɹməli. aɪ pæs ðə tɛstɪŋ. wəɹ ikwəlz naʊ, maɪɹɛl." ʃi lɛf ðə sɛkən pɑɹɾ ənsɛd - ðət nɪneɪiv wɑz ðə stʃɹɔŋɝ ə ðə tu. nɑt tʃɹuli ikwəlz, ðɛn.

"I was raised today," Nynaeve said. "Formally. I passed the testing. We are equals now, Myrelle." She left the second part unsaid - that Nynaeve was the stronger of the two. Not truly equals, then.

"ɹɪtɝn təmɑɹoʊ," maɪɹɛl sɛd. "aɪ æm ɑkjəpaɪd." ʃi muv tə tɝn bæk ɪndə ðə tɛnt.

"Return tomorrow," Myrelle said. "I am occupied." She moved to turn back into the tent.

nɪneɪiv kɑt ðə wʊmənz ɑɹm. "aɪ hæv nɛvɝ θæŋk ju," ʃi sɛd, ðoʊ ʃi hæd tə ɡɹɪɾ əɹ tiθ tə ɡɛt ðə wɝdz aʊt. "aɪ də soʊ naʊ. hi lɪvz kəz ə ju. aɪ ɹilaɪz ðæt. haʊɛvɝ, maɪɹɛl, ðɪs ɪz nɑɾ ə taɪm tə pʊʃ mi. tədeɪ, aɪ hæv sin pipəl aɪ lʌv slɔɾɝd, aɪ hæv bɪn fɔɹs tə kənsaɪn tʃɪlʒɹən tə lɪvɪŋ tɔɹmɛnt. aɪ hæv bɪn bɝnd, skaʊɝdʒd ən hɛɹɹoʊd.

Nynaeve caught the woman's arm. "I have never thanked you," she said, though she had to grit her teeth to get the words out. "I do so now. He lives because of you. I realize that. However, Myrelle, this is not a time to push me. Today, I have seen people I love slaughtered, I have been forced to consign children to living torment. I have been burned, scourged and harrowed.

wʌn swɛɹ tə ju, wʊmən, ɪf jə də nɑt pæs mi lænz bɑn ðɪs vɛɹi moʊ-mɛnt, əl stɛp ɪndə ðət tɛn ən titʃ jə ðə minɪŋ ʌv oʊbiɾiəns. də nɑt pɹɛs mi. ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, aɪ swɛɹ ðə θɹi oʊðz. aɪm fɹi ʌv əm fəɹ wʌn mɔɹ naɪt."

1 swear to you, woman, if you do not pass me Lan's bond this very mo-ment, I will step into that tent and teach you the meaning of obedience. Do not press me. In the morning, I swear the Three Oaths. I'm free of them for one more night."

maɪɹɛl fɹoʊz. ðən ʃi saɪɾ ən stɛp bæk aʊɾ ə ðə tɛnt. "soʊ bi ɪt. ʃi kloʊzd əɹ aɪz, wivɪŋ spɪɹəɾ ən sɛndɪŋ ðə wivz ɪndə nɪneɪiv.

Myrelle froze. Then she sighed and stepped back out of the tent. "So be it. She closed her eyes, weaving Spirit and sending the weaves into Nynaeve.

ɪt fɛlt laɪk ən ɑbʒɛkt biɪŋ ʃʌv fɪzɪkəli ɪndə hɝ maɪnd. nɪneɪiv ɡæspt, hɝ sɝaʊndɪŋz spɪnɪŋi maɪɹɛl tɝn ən slɪp bæk ɪndə hɝ tɛnt. nɪneɪiv slɪd daʊn əntɪl ʃi wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. sʌmθɪŋ wɑz blɑsəmɪŋ ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ maɪn ən əwɛɹnəs. bjuɾəfəl, wʌndɝfəl.

It felt like an object being shoved physically into her mind. Nynaeve gasped, her surroundings spinning.e Myrelle turned and slipped back into her tent. Nynaeve slid down until she was sitting on the ground. Something was blossoming inside her mind An awareness. Beautiful, wonderful.

ɪt wɑz hɪm. ən i wɑz stɪl əlaɪv.

It was him. And he was still alive.

blɛsɪd laɪt, ʃi θɔt, aɪz kloʊzd. θæŋk ju.

Blessed Light, she thought, eyes closed. Thank you.


tʃæptɝ twɛntiwʌn


CHAPTER 21

ən oʊpən ɡeɪt


An Open Gate

wi θɔɾ ɪt bɛst," siɑnɪd sɛd, "tə lɛt wʌn ʌv əs ɡɪv ðə fʊl ɹipɔɹt. aɪ hæv ɡæðɝɾ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən fɹəm ði ʌðɝz fəɹ pɹɛzənteɪʃən."

We thought it best," Seonid said, "to let one of us give the full report. I have gathered information from the others for presentation."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd æbsənli. hi sæɾ ɑn kʊʃənz ɪn ðə miɾɪŋ pəvɪljən, feɪl əɾ ɪz saɪd. ɪt wɑz kɹæm fʊl ə pipəl əɡɛn.

Perrin nodded absently. He sat on cushions in the meeting pavilion, Faile at his side. It was crammed full of people again.

"kɛɹhin ɪz stɪl ɪn ə mɛs, ʌv kɔɹs," siɑnɪd bɪɡæn. ðə bɪznɪslaɪk ɡɹin wɑz ə kɝt wʊmən.

"Cairhien is still in a mess, of course," Seonid began. The businesslike Green was a curt woman.

nɑt min əɹ dɪsəɡɹiəbəl, bʌɾ ivən əɹ ɪntɝækʃənz wɪð əɹ wɔɹɾɝz sim laɪk ðoʊz ʌv ə pɹɑspɝəs fɑɹmɝ wɪð ɪz wɝkɝz. "ðə sʌn θɹoʊn əz ɹɪmeɪn ənɑkjəpaɪd fəɹ fɑɹ tu lɔŋ. ɔl noʊ ðət ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən əz pɹɑməs ðə θɹoʊn tə ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd, bʌt ʃiz bɪn stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə sɪkjʊɹ əɹ oʊn θɹoʊn. ʃiz faɪnəli dʌn soʊ, baɪ ɹɪpɔɹts."

Not mean or disagreeable, but even her interactions with her Warders seemed like those of a prosperous farmer with his workers. "The Sun Throne has remained unoccupied for far too long. All know that the Lord Dragon has promised the throne to Elayne Trakand, but she has been struggling to secure her own throne. She has finally done so, by reports."

ʃi lʊk tə pɛɹɪn fəɹ kɑmɛnt, smɛlɪŋ sæɾəsfaɪd. hi skɹætʃt əɾ ɪz bɪɹd. ðɪs wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt, ən i niɾəd tə peɪ ətɛnʃən. bʌt θɔts ə hɪz tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim kɛp dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪz maɪnd. "soʊ ɪleɪn ɪz kwin. ðət mʌs meɪk ɹænd hæpi."

She looked to Perrin for comment, smelling satisfied. He scratched at his beard. This was important, and he needed to pay attention. But thoughts of his training in the wolf dream kept drawing his mind. "So Elayne is Queen. That must make Rand happy."

ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡənz ɹiækʃən ɪz ənnoʊn," siɑnɪd kəntɪnjud, əz ɪf tʃɛkɪŋ ɔf ənʌðɝ aɪɾəm ɑn ə lɪst. ðə waɪz wʌnz meɪd noʊ kɑmɛns ən æsk noʊ kwɛstʃənz; ðeɪ sæɾ ɑn ðɛɹ kʊʃənz ɪn ə lɪɾəl klʌstɝ, laɪk ɹɪvəts ɑn ə hɪnʒ. laɪkli, ðə meɪɾənz hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi toʊld əm ɔl ə ðɪs.

The Lord Dragon's reaction is unknown," Seonid continued, as if checking off another item on a list. The Wise Ones made no comments and asked no questions; they sat on their cushions in a little cluster, like rivets on a hinge. Likely, the Maidens had already told them all of this.

"aɪ æm ɹizənəbli sɝɾən ðət ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɪz ɪn ɑɹæd dumən," siɑnɪd kəntɪnjud. "sɛvɹəl ɹumɝz spik ə ðɪs - ðoʊ, ʌv kɔɹs, ðəɹ ɑɹ ɹumɝz pleɪsɪŋ ɪm ɪn mɛni pleɪsəz. bʌɾ ɑɹæd dumən meɪks sɛns ɛfzɪɹoʊ aɪ hɪm əz ə tæktɪkəl kɑŋkwɛst, ən ði ənɹɛs ðəɹ θɹɛɾənz tə dɪsteɪbiliɾu ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. aɪm nɑt sɝɾən ɪf ɪts tʃɹu ðəɾ i sɛn ði il ðəɹ oʊ nɑt."

"I am reasonably certain that the Lord Dragon is in Arad Doman," Seonid continued. "Several rumors speak of this - though, of course, there are rumors placing him in many places. But Arad Doman makes sense f0 I him as a tactical conquest, and the unrest there threatens to destabili2 the Borderlands. I'm not certain if it's true that he sent the Aiel there o not."

"hi dɪd," ɛdʒɹə sɛd sɪmpli. ʃi ɔfɝd noʊ fɝðɝ ɛkspləneɪʃən.

"He did," Edarra said simply. She offered no further explanation.

"jɛs," siɑnɪd sɛd. "wɛl, mɛni ʌv ðə ɹumɝz seɪ ðət hiz plænɪŋ tə mit ðə sintʃæn ɪn ɑɹæd dumən. aɪ səspɛkt i wəd wɑn ðə klænz ðəɹ tə eɪd hɪm."

"Yes," Seonid said. "Well, many of the rumors say that he is planning to meet the Seanchan in Arad Doman. I suspect he would want the clans there to aid him."

ðət bɹɔɾ ʌp θɔts ə meɪɾən. pɛɹɪn ɪmædʒən deɪmeɪn ən waɪz wʌnz ət wɔɹ, ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɹɪpɪŋ θɹu ɹæŋks ə soʊlʒɝz, blʌɾ ɝθ ən faɪɝ spɪnɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ. ɪt wəd bi laɪk dəməaɪz wɛlz, oʊnli wɝs. hi ʃɪvɝd. ɛniweɪ, fɹəm ðə vɪʒənz - ən ðeɪ əpɪɹɾ əz siɑnɪd spoʊk - hi nu ðət ɹænd wɑz wɛɹ ʃi sɛd.

That brought up thoughts of Maiden. Perrin imagined damane and Wise Ones at war, the One Power ripping through ranks of soldiers, blood earth and fire spinning in the air. It would be like Dumai's Wells, only worse. He shivered. Anyway, from the visions - and they appeared as Seonid spoke - he knew that Rand was where she said.

siɑnɪd kəntɪnjud, spikɪŋ ə tʃɹeɪɾ ən fud ɹisɔɹsɪz ɪn kɛɹhin. pɛɹɪn faʊn hɪmsɛlf θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ðət stʃɹeɪnʒ vaɪəlɪt wɔl hid sin ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. ɪɾiət, hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf stɝnli. kip lɪsnɪŋ. laɪt! hi ɹɪli wɑz ə bæd ɹulɝ. hid hæd noʊ tʃɹʌbəl ɹʌnɪŋ ət ðə fɹʌn ə ðə wʊlvz wən ðeɪd lɛɾ ɪm hʌnt. waɪ kʊdn i də ðə seɪm fəɹ ɪz oʊn pipəl?

Seonid continued, speaking of trade and food resources in Cairhien. Perrin found himself thinking about that strange violet wall he'd seen in the wolf dream. Idiot, he told himself sternly. Keep listening. Light! He really was a bad ruler. He'd had no trouble running at the front of the wolves when they'd let him hunt. Why couldn't he do the same for his own people?

"tiɹ ɪz ɹæliɪŋ tʃɹups," siɑnɪd sɛd. "ɹumɝz seɪ ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən kəmændəd kɪŋ dɑɹlɪn tə ɡæðɝ mɛn fəɹ wɔɹ. ðəɹ ɪz əpɛɹənli ə kɪŋ ɪn tɛɹ naʊ, baɪ ðə weɪ. ə kjʊɹiəs ɪvɛnt. səm seɪ ðət dɑɹlɪn wɪl mɑɹtʃ fəɹ ɑɹæd dumən, ðoʊ ʌðɝz seɪ ɪt mʌs bi fəɹ ðə læs bæɾəl. stɪl ʌðɝz ɪnsɪs ðəɾ ælθɹ ɪntɛnz tə dɪfit ðə sintʃæn fɝst. ɔl θɹi ɑpʃənz sim plɔzəbəl, ən aɪ kænt ɡɪv mɔɹ wɪθaʊɾ ə tʃɹɪp tə tɛɹ maɪsɛlf." ʃi aɪd pɛɹɪn, smɛlɪŋ hoʊpfəl.

"Tear is rallying troops," Seonid said. "Rumors say the Lord Dragon commanded King Darlin to gather men for war. There is apparently a king in Tear now, by the way. A curious event. Some say that Darlin will march for Arad Doman, though others say it must be for the Last Battle. Still others insist that al'Thor intends to defeat the Seanchan first. All three options seem plausible, and I can't give more without a trip to Tear myself." She eyed Perrin, smelling hopeful.

"noʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "nɑt jɛt. ɹænd ɪzən ɪn kɛɹhin, bʌɾ ændɝ simz steɪbəl. ɪt meɪks ðə moʊst sɛns fəɹ mi tə hɛd ðəɹ ən tɔk tə ɪleɪn. ʃɪl əv ɪnfɝmeɪʃən fəɹ ʌs."

"No," Perrin said. "Not yet. Rand isn't in Cairhien, but Andor seems stable. It makes the most sense for me to head there and talk to Elayne. She'll have information for us."

feɪl smɛld wɝid.

Faile smelled worried.

"lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹə," siɑnɪd sɛd, "du jə θɪŋk ðə kwin wɪl wɛlkəm ju? wɪð ðə flæɡ ʌv meɪnɛðɝən, ən jəɹ sɛlf-ɛndaʊd taɪɾəl ə lɔɹd . . 

"Lord Aybara," Seonid said, "do you think the Queen will welcome you? With the flag of Manetheren, and your self-endowed title of Lord . . 

pɛɹɪn skaʊld. "boʊθ ə ðoʊz ful bænɝz ɑɹ daʊn naʊ, ən ɪleɪn wɪl si θɪŋz ɹaɪt, wʌns aɪ ɪkspleɪn əm tə hɝ."

Perrin scowled. "Both of those fool banners are down now, and Elayne will see things right, once I explain them to her."

"æn maɪ soʊlʒɝz?" æliændɝ sɛd. "ju wɪl pɹɑbli wɑnə æsk bɪfɔɹ muvɪŋ fɔɹən tʃɹups ɑntu ændɔɝən sɔɪl."

"And my soldiers?" Alliandre said. "You will probably want to ask before moving foreign troops onto Andoran soil."

"ju woʊn bi kʌmɪŋ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪv sɛɾ ɪt bɪfɔɹ, æliændɝ. jəl bi ɪn dʒəhænə. wɪl ɡɛt jə ðəɹ əz sun əz wi dil wɪð ðə waɪtkloʊks."

"You won't be coming," Perrin said. "I've said it before, Alliandre. You'll be in Jehannah. We'll get you there as soon as we deal with the Whitecloaks."

"hæz ə dɪsɪʒən bɪn meɪɾ əbaʊt ðɛm, ðɛn?" ɑɹɡændə æskt, linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, iɡɝ ən ɪksaɪɾəd.

"Has a decision been made about them, then?" Arganda asked, leaning forward, eager and excited.

"ðeɪv dɪmændəɾ ə bæɾəl," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "æn ðeɪ ɪɡnɔɹ maɪ ɹɪkwɛsts fəɹ fɝðɝ pɑɹli. aɪv ə maɪn tə ɡɪv əm ə faɪt." ðeɪ bɪɡæn tɔkɪŋ ə ðæt, ðoʊ ɪt sun bɪkeɪm ə dɪskʌʃən ʌv wʌɾ ɪt mɛn tə hæv ə kɪŋ ɪn tɛɹ. ɪvɛntʃəwəli, siɑnɪd klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊɾ ən stɝd ðə kɑnvɝseɪʃən bæk tə hɝ ɹipɔɹt.

"They've demanded a battle," Perrin said. "And they ignore my requests for further parley. I've a mind to give them a fight." They began talking of that, though it soon became a discussion of what it meant to have a king in Tear. Eventually, Seonid cleared her throat and stered the conversation back to her report.

"ðə sintʃæn ɑɹ ə mæɾɝ ʌv ɡɹeɪt dɪskʌʃən ɪn kɛɹhin," siɑnɪd sɛd "ði ɪnveɪɾɝz sim tə bi foʊkəsɪŋ ɑn sɪkjʊɹɪŋ ðɛɹ lænz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ɔltɑɹə. ðeɪ ɑɹ stɪl ɪkspændɪŋ ɪn ðə wɛst, haʊɛvɝ, ən ðəɹ ɑɹ pɪtʃt bæɾəlz ɑn ɑlməθ pleɪn."

"The Seanchan are a matter of great discussion in Cairhien," Seonid said "The invaders seem to be focusing on securing their lands, including Altara. They are still expanding in the west, however, and there are pitched battles on Almoth Plain."

"ɪkspændɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ɑɹæd dumən," ɑɹɡændə sɛd. "ðɛɹ ɪz ə bæɾəl bɹuɪŋ ðɛɹ."

"Expanding toward Arad Doman," Arganda said. "There is a battle brewing there."

"moʊs laɪkli," siɑnɪd sɛd.

"Most likely," Seonid said.

"ɪf ðə læs bæɾəl kʌmz," ənʊɹə sɛd, "ðɛn ɪt wəd bi ædvənteɪdʒəs tə hæv ən əlaɪəns wɪð ðə sintʃæn." ʃi sim θɔtfəl, lɛɡz kɹɔst əz ʃi sæɾ ɑn əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd blu ən jɛloʊ sɪlk pɪloʊ.

"If the Last Battle comes," Annoura said, "then it would be advantageous to have an alliance with the Seanchan." She seemed thoughtful, legs crossed as she sat on her embroidered blue and yellow silk pillow.

"ðeɪ hæv tʃeɪnd waɪz wʌnz," ɛdʒɹə sɛd, hɝ tu-jʌŋ feɪs ɡɹoʊɪŋ dɑɹk. ʃi smɛl deɪnʒɝəs. æŋɡɹi bʌt koʊld, laɪk ðə smɛl bɪfɔɹ ə pɝsən plæn tə kɪl. "nɑt dʒʌst ʃeɪɾoʊ, hu dɪzɝv ðɛɹ feɪt. ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ən əlaɪəns wɪð ðə sintʃæn, ɪɾəl ɛn əz sun əz ðə kɑɹəkɑɹnz wɝk ɪz fɪnɪʃt. ɔlɹɛɾi, mɛni ʌv maɪ pipəl spik ʌv ə blʌd fjud wɪð ðiz ɪnveɪɾɝz."

"They have chained Wise Ones," Edarra said, her too-young face growing dark. She smelled dangerous. Angry but cold, like the smell before a person planned to kill. "Not just Shaido, who deserve their fate. If there is an alliance with the Seanchan, it will end as soon as the Car'a'carn's work is finished. Already, many of my people speak of a blood feud with these invaders."

"aɪ daʊt ɹænd wɑns ə wɔɹ bɪtwin ju," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"I doubt Rand wants a war between you," Perrin said.

"ə jɪɹ ən ə deɪ," ɛdʒɹə sɛd sɪmpli. "waɪz wʌnz kænɑt bi teɪkən ɡeɪʃeɪn, bʌt pɝhæps ðə sintʃæn weɪz ɑɹ dɪfɹənt. ɹəɡɑɹdləs, wɪl ɡɪv əm ə jɪɹ ən ə deɪ. ɪf ðeɪ də nɑt ɹilis ðɛɹ kæptɪvz wən wi dɪmæn əm æftɝ ðət taɪm, ðəl noʊ əɹ spɪɹz. ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn kænɑt dɪmæn ɛni mɔɹ fɹəm ʌs."

"A year and a day," Edarra said simply. "Wise Ones cannot be taken gai'shain, but perhaps the Seanchan ways are different. Regardless, we will give them a year and a day. If they do not release their captives when we demand them after that time, they will know our spears. The Car'a'carn cannot demand any more from us."

ðə pəvɪljən ɡɹu stɪl.

The pavilion grew still.

"ɛniweɪ," siɑnɪd sɛd, klɪɹɪŋ əɹ θɹoʊt. "wʌns fɪnɪʃt wɪð kɛɹhin, wi mɛɾ ʌp wɪð ðoʊz u hæd ɡɔn tə ændɝ tə tʃɛk ɑn ɹumɝz ðɛɹ."

"Anyway," Seonid said, clearing her throat. "Once finished with Cairhien, we met up with those who had gone to Andor to check on rumors there."

"weɪt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ændɝ?"

"Wait," Perrin said. "Andor?"

"ðə waɪz wʌnz dɪsaɪɾɪd tə sɛn meɪɾənz ðɛɹ."

"The Wise Ones decided to send Maidens there."

"ðæt wɑzn ðə plæn," pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld, lʊkɪŋ ət ðə waɪz wʌnz. jə doʊn kəntʃɹoʊl ʌs, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," ɛdʒɹə sɛd kɑmli. "wi niɾəd tə noʊ ɪf ðəɹ wɝ stɪl il ɪn ðə sɪɾi əɹ nɑt, ən ɪf ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn wɑz ðɛɹ. jəɹ æʃəmən kəmplaɪd wən wi æskt əm fəɹ ðə ɡeɪtweɪ."

"That wasn't the plan," Perrin growled, looking at the Wise Ones. You don't control us, Perrin Aybara," Edarra said calmly. "We needed to know if there were still Aiel in the city or not, and if the Car'a'carn was there. Your Asha'man complied when we asked them for the gateway."

ðə meɪɾənz cʊɾə bɪn sin," hi ɡɹʌmbəld. wɛl, hi hæd toʊld ɡɹeɪɾi tə də ðə ɡeɪtweɪz əz ði il æsk hɪm, ðoʊ hid bɪn ɹəfɝ-ɹɪŋ tə ðə taɪmɪŋ ə ðə dɪpɑɹtʃɝ ən ðə ɹɪtɝn. hi ʃʊɾə bɪn mɔɹ pɹɪsaɪs.

The Maidens could have been seen," he grumbled. Well, he had told Grady to do the gateways as the Aiel asked him, though he'd been refer-ring to the timing of the departure and the return. He should have been more precise.

"wɛl, ðeɪ wɝn sin," siɑnɪd saʊndəɾ ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd, laɪk wʌn tɔk ɪŋ wɪð ə fulɪʃ tʃaɪld. "æt lis nɑt baɪ ɛniwʌn ðeɪ dɪdn ɪntɛn tə spɝək wɪð." laɪt! wɑz ɪt hɪm, əɹ wɑz ʃi bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə sim ə lɑt laɪk ə waɪz wʌn? wɑz ðət wʌt siɑnɪɾ ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ duɪŋ ɪn ði il kæmp? lɝnɪŋ tə bɪkʌm mɔɹ stʌbɝn? laɪt hɛlp əm ɔl.

"Well, they weren't seen," Seonid sounded exasperated, like one talk ing with a foolish child. "At least not by anyone they didn't intend to sperak with." Light! Was it him, or was she beginning to seem a lot like a Wise One? Was that what Seonid and the others were doing in the Aiel camp? Learning to become more stubborn? Light help them all.

"ɹəɡɑɹdləs," siɑnɪd kəntɪnjud, "ɪt wɑz waɪz ʌv əs tə vɪzət keɪɛmlɹi ɹumɝ kænɑt bi tʃɹʌstɪd, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli nɑt wən wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən wɑz sɛd tə bi ɑpɝeɪɾɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹiə."

"Regardless," Seonid continued, "it was wise of us to visit Caemlyri Rumor cannot be trusted, particularly not when one of the Forsaken was said to be operating in the area."

"wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən?" ɡælɛn æskt. "ɪn ændɝ?"

"One of the Forsaken?" Gallenne asked. "In Andor?"

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd, weɪvɪŋ fəɹ ənʌðɝ kʌp ʌv wɔɹm ti. "ɹæn sɛɾ ɪt wɑz ɹɑvɪn, ðoʊ aɪ wɑz ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wən ðə bæɾəl hæpənd." ðə kʌlɝz swɝld ɪn pɛɹɪnz hɛd. "ɹɑvɪn wɑz ɪmpɝsəneɪɾɪŋ wʌn ə ðə loʊkəl noʊbəlmən, ə mæn neɪmd ɡɑbɹəl əɹ ɡɑbəl əɹ səm sʌtʃ. hi juz ðə kwin__- meɪɾ əɹ fɔl ɪn lʌv wɪð hɪm, əɹ sʌmθɪŋ - ən ðən kɪl hɝ."

Perrin nodded, waving for another cup of warmed tea. "Rand said it was Rahvin, though I was in the Two Rivers when the battle happened." The colors swirled in Perrin's head. "Rahvin was impersonating one of the local noblemen, a man named Gabral or Gabil or some such. He used the Queen__- made her fall in love with him, or something - and then killed her."

ə sɝvɪŋ tʃɹeɪ hɪt ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɪð ə mjuɾɪd pil.

A serving tray hit the ground with a muted peal.

pɔɹsələn kʌps ʃæɾɝd, ti spɹeɪɪŋ ɪndə ði ɛɹ. pɛɹɪn spʌn, kɝsɪŋ, ən sɛvɹəl ə ðə meɪɾənz lɛp tə ðɛɹ fit, klʌtʃɪŋ bɛl naɪvz.

Porcelain cups shattered, tea spraying into the air. Perrin spun, cursing, and several of the Maidens leaped to their feet, clutching belt knives.

meɪaɪɡdɪn stʊd, lʊkɪŋ stʌnd, ɑɹmz əɾ əɹ saɪdz. ðə fɔlən tʃɹeɪ leɪ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪfɔɹ hɝ.

Maighdin stood, looking stunned, arms at her sides. The fallen tray lay on the ground before her.

"meɪaɪɡdɪn!" feɪl sɛd. "ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt?"

"Maighdin!" Faile said. "Are you all right?"

ðə sʌn-hɛɹd sɝvɪŋ wʊmən tɝn tə pɛɹɪn, lʊkɪŋ deɪzd. "ɪf jə pliz, maɪ lɔɹd, wɪl jə ɹɪpit wʌt jə sɛd?"

The sun-haired serving woman turned to Perrin, looking dazed. "If you please, my Lord, will you repeat what you said?"

"wʌt?" pɛɹɪn æskt. "wʊmən, wʌts ɹɔŋ?"

"What?" Perrin asked. "Woman, what's wrong?"

"ju sɛd wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən hæd teɪkən ʌp ɹɛzəɾəns ɪn ændɝ," meɪaɪɡdɪn sɛd, vɔɪs kɑm. ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm əz ʃɑɹp ə lʊk əz hid ɡɑɾən fɹəm ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ. "ɑɹ jə sɝɾən ʌv wʌt jə hɝd?"

"You said one of the Forsaken had taken up residence in Andor," Maighdin said, voice calm. She gave him as sharp a look as he'd gotten from any Aes Sedai. "Are you certain of what you heard?"

pɛɹɪn sɛɾəld bæk ɑn ɪz kʊʃən, skɹætʃɪŋ ɪz tʃɪn. "ʃʊɹ əz aɪ kən bi. ɪts bɪn səm taɪm, naʊ, bʌɾ aɪ noʊ ɹænd wɑz kənvɪnst. hi fɔt sʌmwʌn wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪn ði ændɔɝən pæləs."

Perrin settled back on his cushion, scratching his chin. "Sure as I can be. It's been some time, now, but I know Rand was convinced. He fought someone with the One Power in the Andoran palace."

"hɪz neɪm wɑz ɡeɪbɹəl," səlɪn sɛd. "aɪ wɑz ðɛɹ. laɪtnɪŋ stʃɹʌk fɹəm ən oʊpən skaɪ, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ daʊɾ ɪt wɑz ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ɪt wɑz wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən."

"His name was Gaebril," Sulin said. "I was there. Lightning struck from an open sky, and there was no doubt it was the One Power. It was one of the Forsaken."

"ðɛɹ wɝ səm ɪn ændɝ u kleɪm ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn spoʊk ə ðɪs, ɛdʒɹə æɾəd. "hi sɛd ðət ðɪs ɡeɪbɹəl hæd bɪn juzɪŋ fɔɹbɪɾən wivz ɑn wɛtləndɝz ɪn ðə pæləs, twɪstɪŋ ðɛɹ maɪnz, meɪkɪŋ əm θɪŋk ən də əz i wɪʃt."

"There were some in Andor who claimed the Car'a'carn spoke of this, Edarra added. "He said that this Gaebril had been using forbidden weaves on wetlanders in the palace, twisting their minds, making them think and do as he wished."

"meɪaɪɡdɪn, wʌts ɹɔŋ?" pɛɹɪn æskt. "laɪt, wʊmən, hiz dɛd naʊ! jə nidn fɪɹ."

"Maighdin, what's wrong?" Perrin asked. "Light, woman, he's dead now! You needn't fear."

"aɪ mʌs bi ɪkskjuzd," meɪaɪɡdɪn sɛd. ʃi wɔk fɹəm ðə pəvɪljən, livɪŋ ðə tʃɹeɪ ən bɹoʊkən pɔɹsələn, boʊn waɪt, skæɾɝd ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

"I must be excused," Maighdin said. She walked from the pavilion, leaving the tray and broken porcelain, bone white, scattered on the ground.

"aɪ wɪl si tə hɝ leɪɾɝ," feɪl sɛd, ɪmbɛɹəst. "ʃi ɪz dɪstʃɹɔt tə faɪn ðət ʃid lɪv soʊ kloʊs tə wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən. ʃiz fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn, jə noʊ."

"I will see to her later," Faile said, embarrassed. "She is distraught to find that she'd lived so close to one of the Forsaken. She's from Caemlyn, you know."

ði ʌðɝz nɑɾəd, ən ʌðɝ sɝvəns muv fɔɹwɝd tə klin ʌp ðə mɛs. pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪzd i wɑzn gɑnə bi ɡɛɾɪŋ ɛni mɔɹ ti. ful mæn, hi θɔt. jə lɪv moʊs jəɹ laɪf wɪθaʊt biɪŋ eɪbəl tə ɔɹɾɝ ti ɑn kəmænd. jə woʊn daɪ naʊ ðət jə kænt ɡɛɾ ə ɹifɪl baɪ weɪvɪŋ jəɹ hænd.

The others nodded, and other servants moved forward to clean up the mess. Perrin realized he wasn't going to be getting any more tea. Fool man, he thought. You lived most your life without being able to order tea on command. You won't die now that you can't get a refill by waving your hand.

"lɛts muv ɑn," hi sɛd, sɛɾəlɪŋ ɑn ɪz kʊʃənz. hi kəd nɛvɝ kwaɪt ɡɛt kʌmftəɹbəl ɑn ðə blæstəd θɪŋz.

"Let's move on," he said, settling on his cushions. He could never quite get comfortable on the blasted things.

"maɪ ɹipɔɹɾ ɪz fɪnɪʃt," siɑnɪd sɛd, pɔɪntɪdli ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə sɝvən u wɑz klinɪŋ ʌp pɔɹsələn ʃɑɹdz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ.

"My report is finished," Seonid said, pointedly ignoring the servant who was cleaning up porcelain shards in front of her.

"aɪ stæn baɪ maɪ ɝliɝ dɪsɪʒən," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "dilɪŋ wɪð ðə waɪt-kloʊks ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. æftɝ ðət wɪl ɡoʊ tə ændɝ, ən əl tɔk tə ɪleɪn. ɡɹeɪɾi, haʊ ɑɹ jə mænɪdʒɪŋ?"

"I stand by my earlier decision," Perrin said. "Dealing with the White-cloaks is important. After that we'll go to Andor, and I'll talk to Elayne. Grady, how are you managing?"

ðə wɛðɝɾ æʃəmən lʊkt ʌp fɹəm wɛɹ i sæɾ ɪn ɪz blæk koʊt. "aɪm fʊli ɹəkʌvɝd fɹəm maɪ sɪknəs, maɪ lɔɹd, ən nild ɔlmoʊst ɪz əz wɛl."

The weathered Asha'man looked up from where he sat in his black coat. "I'm fully recovered from my sickness, my Lord, and Neald almost is as well."

"ju stɪl lʊk taɪɝd," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"You still look tired," Perrin said.

"aɪ æm," ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd, "bʌt bɝn mi, aɪm bɛɾɝ ðən aɪ wɑz mɛni ə deɪ ɪn ðə fil bɪfɔɹ aɪ wɛn tə ðə blæk taʊɝ."

"I am," Grady said, "but burn me, I'm better than I was many a day in the field before I went to the Black Tower."

"ɪts taɪm tə stɑɹt sɛndɪŋ səm ə ðiz ɹɛfjudʒiz wɛɹ ðeɪ bɪlɔŋ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "wɪð ðoʊz sɝkəlz, jə kən kip ə ɡeɪtweɪ oʊpən lɔŋɡɝ?"

"It's time to start sending some of these refugees where they belong," Perrin said. "With those circles, you can keep a gateway open longer?"

"aɪm nɑt ɹaɪt ʃʊɹ. biɪŋ ɪn ə sɝkəl ɪz stɪl taɪɹɪŋ. meɪbi mɔɹ soʊ. bʌɾ aɪ kən meɪk mʌtʃ lɑɹdʒɝ ɡeɪtweɪz wɪð ðə hɛlp ə ðə wɪmən, waɪɾ ɪnʌf tə dʒɹaɪv tu wæɡənz θɹu."

"I'm not right sure. Being in a circle is still tiring. Maybe more so. But I can make much larger gateways with the help of the women, wide enough to drive two wagons through."

"ɡʊd. wɪl stɑɹt baɪ sɛndɪŋ ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi foʊk hoʊm. itʃ pɝsən wi si bæk wɛɹ ðeɪ bɪlɔŋ wɪl bi ə stoʊn ɔf maɪ bæk."

"Good. We'll start by sending the ordinary folk home. Each person we see back where they belong will be a stone off my back."

"æn ɪf ðeɪ doʊnt wɑnə ɡoʊ?" tɑɹn æskt. "ə lɑɾ ə ðɛm əv stɑɹɾəd ðə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ, pɛɹɪn. ðeɪ noʊ wʌts kʌmɪŋ, ən ðeɪd ɹæðɝ feɪs ɪt hɪɹ - wɪð jə - ðən kaʊɝ ɪn ðɛɹ hoʊmz."

"And if they don't want to go?" Tarn asked. "A lot of them have started the training, Perrin. They know what's coming, and they'd rather face it here - with you - than cower in their homes."

laɪt! wɝ ðəɹ noʊ pipəl ɪn ðɪs kæmp u wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ bæk tə ðɛɹ fæmliz? "ʃʊɹli ðəɹ ɑɹ səm ə ðɛm u wɑnə ɡoʊ bæk."

Light! Were there no people in this camp who wanted to go back to their families? "Surely there are some of them who want to go back."

"sʌm," tɑɹn sɛd.

"Some," Tarn said.

ɹɪmɛmbɝ," feɪl sɛd, "ðə wik ən ði eɪdʒɪd wɝ sɛn əweɪ baɪ ði il."

Remember," Faile said, "the weak and the aged were sent away by the Aiel."

ɑɹɡændə nɑɾəd. "aɪv lʊkt ɪn ɑn ðiz tʃɹups. mɔɹ ən mɔɹ ə ðə ɡætʃeɪn ɑɹ kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ stupɝ, ən wən ðeɪ du, ðəɹ hɑɹd. hɑɹɾ əz mɛni soʊlʒɝz aɪv noʊn."

Arganda nodded. "I've looked in on these troops. More and more of the gat'shain are coming out of their stupor, and when they do, they're hard. Hard as many soldiers I've known."

səm wɪl wɑnə tʃɛk ɑn fæmli," tɑɹn sɛd, "bʌɾ oʊnli ɪf jəl lɛɾ əm bæk. ðeɪ kən si ðət skaɪ. ðeɪ noʊ wʌts kʌmɪŋ."

Some will want to check on family," Tarn said, "but only if you'll let them back. They can see that sky. They know what's coming."

"fɔɹ naʊ, wɪl sɛn bæk ðə wʌnz ðət wɑnə ɡoʊ ən ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðɛɹ hoʊmz," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪ kæn dil wɪð ði ʌðɝz əntɪl æftɝ aɪm dʌn wɪð ðə waɪtkloʊks."

"For now, we'll send back the ones that want to go and remain in their homes," Perrin said. "I can't deal with the others until after I'm done with the Whitecloaks."

"ɛksələnt," ɡælɛn sɛɾ iɡɝli. "ju hæv ə plæn ʌv ətæk?"

"Excellent," Gallenne said eagerly. "You have a plan of attack?"

"wɛl," pɛɹɪn sɛd, "aɪ fɪɡjɝ ðəɾ ɪf ðəɹ gɑnə bi kəmpænjənəbəl ɪnʌf tə laɪn ʌp, wɪl əv əɾ əm wɪð maɪ ɑɹtʃɝz ən tʃænlɝz ən dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðɛm."

"Well," Perrin said, "I figure that if they're going to be companionable enough to line up, we'll have at them with my archers and channelers and destroy them."

"aɪ əpɹuv ə ðɪs plæn," ɡælɛn sɛd, "soʊ lɔŋ əz maɪ mɛn kən tʃɑɹdʒ tə dil wɪð ðə ɹæbəl lɛft ət ði ɛnd."

"I approve of this plan," Gallenne said, "so long as my men can charge to deal with the rabble left at the end."

"beɪlwɝ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɹaɪt ðə waɪtkloʊks. tɛl əm wɪl faɪɾ ən ðət ðeɪ ʃəd pɪk ə pleɪs."

"Balwer," Perrin said. "Write the Whitecloaks. Tell them we'll fight and that they should pick a place."

əz i sɛd ðə wɝdz, hi fɛlt ə stʃɹeɪnʒ ɹɪlʌktəns. ɪt sim sətʃ ə weɪs tə kɪl soʊ mɛni hu kəd faɪɾ əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ. bʌɾ i dɪdn si ə weɪ ɝaʊn ɪt.

As he said the words, he felt a strange reluctance. It seemed such a waste to kill so many who could fight against the Shadow. But he didn't see a way around it.

beɪlwɝ nɑɾəd, smɛlɪŋ fɪɹs. wʌt hæd ðə waɪtkloʊks dʌn tə beɪlwɝ? ðə dʌsti sɛkɹətɛɹi wɑz fæsəneɪɾəd wɪð ðɛm.

Balwer nodded, smelling fierce. What had the Whitecloaks done to Balwer? The dusty secretary was fascinated with them.

ðə miɾɪŋ bɪɡæn tə bɹeɪk ʌp. pɛɹɪn stɛp tə ðə tɛns oʊpən saɪɾ ən wɑtʃt ðə sɛpɹət ɡɹups liv, æliændɝ ən ɑɹɡændə muvɪŋ təwɔɹd ðɛɹ sɛkʃən ə ðə kæmp. feɪl wɔk bɪsaɪd bɹəleɪn; ɑdli, ðə tu wɝ tʃæɾɪŋ təɡɛðɝ. ðɛɹ sɛns sɛd ðeɪ wɝ æŋɡɹi, bʌt ðɛɹ wɝdz saʊndəd kəmpænjənəbəl. wʌt wɝ ðoʊz tu ʌp tə?

The meeting began to break up. Perrin stepped to the tent's open side and watched the separate groups leave, Alliandre and Arganda moving toward their section of the camp. Faile walked beside Berelain; oddly, the two were chatting together. Their scents said they were angry, but their words sounded companionable. What were those two up to?

oʊnli ə fju wɛt steɪnz ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪnsaɪd ðə tɛn ɹɪmeɪn ə ðə dʒɹɑp tʃɹeɪ. wʌt wɑz ɹɔŋ wɪð meɪaɪɡdɪn? ɪɹæɾɪk bɪheɪvjɝ laɪk ðət wɑz dɪstɝbɪŋ; ɔl tu ɔfən, ɪt wɑz fɑloʊd baɪ səm mænəfɛsteɪʃən ə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz paʊɝ.

Only a few wet stains on the ground inside the tent remained of the dropped tray. What was wrong with Maighdin? Erratic behavior like that was disturbing; all too often, it was followed by some manifestation of the Dark One's power.

"maɪ lɔɹd?" ə vɔɪs æskt, pɹɪsiɾɪd baɪ ə kwaɪət kɑf. pɛɹɪn tɝnd, ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðət beɪlwɝ wɑz weɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm. ðə sɛkɹətɛɹi stʊd wɪð hænz klæsp bɪfɔɹ hɪm, lʊkɪŋ laɪk ə paɪl ə stɪks ðət tʃɪlʒɹən hæd dʒɹɛst ʌp ɪn ən oʊld ʃɝɾ ən koʊt.

"My Lord?" a voice asked, preceded by a quiet cough. Perrin turned, realizing that Balwer was waiting behind him. The secretary stood with hands clasped before him, looking like a pile of sticks that children had dressed up in an old shirt and coat.

"jɛs?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"Yes?" Perrin asked.

"aɪ hæpən tə oʊvɝhɪɹ sɛvɹəl aɪɾəmz ʌv, ɑ, səm ɪntʃɹəst waɪl vɪzəɾɪŋ ðə skɑlɝz ə kɛɹhin."

"I happened to overhear several items of, ah, some interest while visiting the scholars of Cairhien."

"ju faʊn ðə səplaɪz, ɹaɪt?"

"You found the supplies, right?"

"jɛs, jɛs. aɪm kwaɪt wɛl stɑkt. pliz, ə moʊmənt. aɪ də bɪliv jəl bi ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn wʌɾ aɪ oʊvɝhɝd."

"Yes, yes. I am quite well stocked. Please, a moment. I do believe you'll be interested in what I overheard."

"ɡoʊ əhɛd, ðɛn," pɛɹɪn sɛd, wɔkɪŋ bæk ɪndə ðə pəvɪljən. ðə læst ə ði ʌðɝz hæd lɛft.

"Go ahead, then," Perrin said, walking back into the pavilion. The last of the others had left.

beɪlwɝ spoʊk ɪn ə sɑf vɔɪs. "fɝst ɔf, maɪ lɔɹd, ɪɾ əpɪɹz ðət ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪɾ ɑɹ ɪn liɡ wɪð ðə sintʃæn. ɪts kɑmən nɑlədʒ naʊ, ən aɪ wɝi ðət ðə fɔɹs əhɛɾ ʌv əs wɑz plæntəd tə - -'

Balwer spoke in a soft voice. "First off, my Lord, it appears that the Children of the Light are in league with the Seanchan. It is common knowledge now, and I worry that the force ahead of us was planted to - -'

"beɪlwɝ," pɛɹɪn ɪntɝʌptɪd, "aɪ noʊ jə heɪt ðə waɪtkloʊks, bʌt juv ɔlɹɛɾi toʊl mi ðət nuz ə hæf-dʌzən taɪmz oʊvɝ." "jɛs, bʌt - "

"Balwer," Perrin interrupted, "I know you hate the Whitecloaks, but you've already told me that news a half-dozen times over." "Yes, but - "

"nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ əbaʊt ðə waɪtkloʊks," pɛɹɪn sɛd, hoʊldɪŋ ʌp ə hænd. "ənlɛs ɪts spəsɪfɪk nuz əbaʊt ðɪs fɔɹs əhɛɾ ʌv ʌs. juv ɛni ʌv ðæt?"

"Nothing more about the Whitecloaks," Perrin said, holding up a hand. "Unless it's specific news about this force ahead of us. Do you have any of that?"

"noʊ, maɪ lɔɹd."

"No, my Lord."

"ɔl ɹaɪt, ðɛn. wɑz ðəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls jə wɑntəd tə tɛl mi?"

"All right, then. Was there anything else you wanted to tell me?"

beɪlwɝ ʃoʊd noʊ saɪnz ʌv ənɔɪəns, bʌt pɛɹɪn kəd smɛl dɪsæɾɪsfækʃən. laɪt nu ðət ðə waɪtkloʊks hæd plɛnti tə ænsɝ fɔɹ, ən pɛɹɪn dɪdn bleɪm beɪlwɝ fəɹ ɪz heɪtʃɹəd, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd ɡɹoʊ wiɹiɪŋ.

Balwer showed no signs of annoyance, but Perrin could smell dissatisfaction. Light knew that the Whitecloaks had plenty to answer for, and perrin didn't blame Balwer for his hatred, but it did grow wearying.

"wɛl, maɪ lɔɹd," beɪlwɝ kəntɪnjud, "aɪ wəd hæzɝd ðət ðə teɪlz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɑntɪŋ ə tʃɹus wɪð ðə sintʃæn ɑɹ mɔɹ ðən aɪɾəl hɪɹseɪ. sɛvɹəl sɔɹsəz ɪndəkeɪt ðət hiz sud ðɛɹ liɾɝ fəɹ pis."

"Well, my Lord," Balwer continued, "I would hazard that the tales of the Dragon Reborn wanting a truce with the Seanchan are more than idle hearsay. Several sources indicate that he has sued their leader for peace."

"bʌt wʌɾ i də tə hɪz hænd?" pɛɹɪn æskt, dɪspɛlɪŋ jɛɾ ənʌðɝ ɪmədʒ ə ɹænd fɹəm ɪz vɪʒən.

"But what did he do to his hand?" Perrin asked, dispelling yet another image of Rand from his vision.

"wʌt wɑz ðæt, maɪ lɔɹd?"

"What was that, my Lord?"

"nʌθɪŋ," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Nothing," Perrin said.

"ɪn ədɪʃən," beɪlwɝ sɛd, ɹitʃɪŋ ɪndə hɪz sliv, "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ən əlɑɹmɪŋ nʌmbɝ ə ðiz tʃɹævlɪŋ əmʌŋ kʌtpɝsɪz, slɪpfɪŋɝz ən fʊtpædz ɪn kɛɹhin." hi pʊld aʊɾ ə ʃiɾ ə peɪpɝ wɪð ə skɛtʃ ə pɛɹɪnz feɪs ɑn ɪt. ðə laɪknəs wɑz əlɑɹmɪŋli ɡʊd. pɛɹɪn tʊk ðə peɪpɝ, fɹaʊnɪŋ.

"In addition," Balwer said, reaching into his sleeve, "there are an alarming number of these traveling among cutpurses, slipfingers and footpads in Cairhien." He pulled out a sheet of paper with a sketch of Perrin's face on it. The likeness was alarmingly good. Perrin took the paper, frowning.

ðəɹ wɝ noʊ wɝdz ɑn ɪt. beɪlwɝ hændəɾ ɪm ə sɛkənd wʌn, aɪdɛntɪkəl tə ðə fɝst. ə θɝd peɪpɝ fɑloʊd, ðɪs wʌn wɪð ə pɪktʃɝ ə mæt.

There were no words on it. Balwer handed him a second one, identical to the first. A third paper followed, this one with a picture of Mat.

"wɛɹ dɪd jə ɡɛt ðiz?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"Where did you get these?" Perrin asked.

"æz aɪ sɛd, maɪ lɔɹd," beɪlwɝ kəntɪnjud, "ðeɪ ɑɹ biɪŋ pæst ɝaʊn ɪn sɝɾən sɝkəlz.

"As I said, my Lord," Balwer continued, "they are being passed around in certain circles.

əpɛɹənli ðəɹ ɑɹ vɛɹi lɑɹdʒ sʌmz ə mʌni pɹɑməs tə ɛniwʌn u kən pɹədus jəɹ kɔɹps, ðoʊ aɪ kəd nɑt dətɝmən u wəd bi duɪŋ ðə peɪɪŋ."

Apparently there are very large sums of money promised to anyone who can produce your corpse, though I could not determine who would be doing the paying."

"æn jə dɪskʌvɝd ðiz waɪl vɪzəɾɪŋ ðə skɑlɝz ət ɹændz skul?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"And you discovered these while visiting the scholars at Rand's school?" Perrin asked.

ðə pɪntʃ-feɪst skɹaɪb dɪspleɪd noʊ ɪmoʊʃən.

The pinch-faced scribe displayed no emotion.

"hu ɑɹ jə ɹɪli, beɪlwɝ?"

"Who are you really, Balwer?"

ə sɛkɹətɛɹi. wɪð səm mɛʒɝ ə skɪl ɪn faɪndɪŋ sikɹəts." səm mɛʒɝ? beɪlwɝ, aɪ hævən æskt æftɝ jəɹ pæst. aɪ fɪɡjɝ ə mæn dɪzɝvz tə bi eɪbəl tə stɑɹt fɹɛʃ. bʌt naʊ ðə waɪtkloʊks ɑɹ hɪɹ, ən juv səm kənɛkʃən tə ðɛm. aɪ nid tə noʊ wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz."

A secretary. With some measure of skill in finding secrets." Some measure? Balwer, I haven't asked after your past. I figure a man deserves to be able to start fresh. But now the Whitecloaks are here, and you have some connection to them. I need to know what it is."

beɪlwɝ stʊd saɪlənli fəɹ ə taɪm. ðə ɹeɪzd wɔlz ə ðə pəvɪljən ɹʌsəld.

Balwer stood silently for a time. The raised walls of the pavilion rustled.

"maɪ pɹiviəs ɛmplɔɪɝ wɑz ə mæn aɪ ɹɪspɛktɪd, maɪ lɔɹd," beɪlwɝ sɛd.

"My previous employer was a man I respected, my Lord," Balwer said.

"hi wɑz kɪl baɪ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. səm əmʌŋ əm meɪ ɹɛk-ɑɡnaɪz mi."

"He was killed by the Children of the Light. Some among them may rec-ognize me."

"ju wɝ ə spaɪ fəɹ ðɪs pɝsən?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"You were a spy for this person?" Perrin asked.

beɪlwɝz lɪps tɝn daʊn dɪstɪŋkli. hi spoʊk mɔɹ sɔfli. "aɪ mɪɹli hæv ə maɪn fəɹ ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ fæks, maɪ lɔɹd."

Balwer's lips turned down distinctly. He spoke more softly. "I merely have a mind for remembering facts, my Lord."

"jɛs, juv ɡɑɾ ə vɛɹi ɡʊd maɪn fəɹ ɪt. jəɹ sɝvəs ɪz jusfəl tə mi, beɪlwɝ. aɪm oʊnli tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tɛl jə ðæt. aɪm ɡlæd jəɹ hɪɹ."

"Yes, you've got a very good mind for it. Your service is useful to me, Balwer. I'm only trying to tell you that. I'm glad you're here."

ðə mæn smɛl plizd. "ɪf aɪ meɪ seɪ, maɪ lɔɹd, ɪts ɹɪfɹɛʃɪŋ tə wɝk fəɹ sʌmwʌn u dʌzn si maɪ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən əz sɪmpli ə minz ə bɪtʃɹeɪɪŋ əɹ kɑmpɹəmaɪzɪŋ ðoʊz ɝaʊn hɪm."

The man smelled pleased. "If I may say, my Lord, it is refreshing to work for someone who doesn't see my information as simply a means of betraying or compromising those around him."

"wɛl, bi ðəɾ əz ɪt meɪ, aɪ ʃəd pɹɑbli stɑɹt peɪɪŋ jə bɛɾɝ" pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Well, be that as it may, I should probably start paying you better" Perrin said.

ðət ɡeɪv beɪlwɝ ə pænɪk sɛnt. "ðæt woʊn bi nɛsəsɛɹi."

That gave Balwer a panicked scent. "That won't be necessary."

"ju kəd dɪmæn haɪ weɪdʒəz fɹəm ɛni nʌmbɝ ə lɔɹdz əɹ mɝtʃəns!"

"You could demand high wages from any number of lords or merchants!"

"pɛɾi mɛn ə noʊ kɑnsəkwəns," beɪlwɝ sɛd wɪð ə twɪtʃ ə hɪz fɪŋɡɝz.

"Petty men of no consequence," Balwer said with a twitch of his fingers.

"jɛs, bʌɾ aɪ stɪl θɪŋk jə ʃəd bi peɪd mɔɹ. ɪts sɪmpəl sɛns. ɪf jə haɪɝ ən əpɹɛntəs blæksmɪθ fəɹ jəɹ fɔɹdʒ ən doʊn peɪ hɪm wɛl ɪnʌf, hɪl ɪmpɹɛs jəɹ ɹɛɡjəlɝ kʌstəmɝz, ðən oʊpən ə nu fɔɹdʒ əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹit ðə moʊmən i kən əfɔɹd tə."

"Yes, but I still think you should be paid more. It's simple sense. If you hire an apprentice blacksmith for your forge and don't pay him well enough, he'll impress your regular customers, then open a new forge across the street the moment he can afford to."

"ɑ, bʌt jə də nɑt si, maɪ lɔɹd," beɪlwɝ sɛd. "mʌni minz nʌθɪŋ tə mi. ði ɪnfɝmeɪʃən -  ðəɾ ɪz wʌɾ ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. fæks ən dɪskʌvɝiz . . . ðeɪ ɑɹ laɪk nʌɡəts ʌv ɡoʊld. aɪ kəd ɡɪv ðət ɡoʊl tə ə kɑmən bæŋkɝ tə meɪk kɔɪnz, bʌɾ aɪ pɹəfɝ tə ɡɪv ɪt tə ðə mæstɝ kɹæfsmən tə meɪk sʌmθɪŋ ə bjuɾi.

"Ah, but you do not see, my Lord," Balwer said. "Money means nothing to me. The information -  that is what is important. Facts and discoveries . . . they are like nuggets of gold. I could give that gold to a common banker to make coins, but I prefer to give it to the master craftsman to make something of beauty.

"pliz, maɪ lɔɹd, lemi ɹɪmeɪn ə sɪmpəl sɛkɹətɛɹi. jə si, wʌn ə ði iziəst weɪz tə tɛl ɪf sʌmwʌn ɪz nɑt wʌɾ i simz ɪz tə tʃɛk ɪz weɪdʒəz." hi tʃʌkəld. "aɪv ənkʌvɝd mɔɹ ðən wʌn əsæsən əɹ spaɪ ðət weɪ, jɛs aɪ hæv. noʊ peɪ ɪz niɾəd. ði ɑpɝtunəɾi tə wɝk wɪð jə ɪz ɪts oʊn peɪmənt."

"Please, my Lord, let me remain a simple secretary. You see, one of the easiest ways to tell if someone is not what he seems is to check his wages." He chuckled. "I've uncovered more than one assassin or spy that way, yes I have. No pay is needed. The opportunity to work with you is its own payment."

pɛɹɪn ʃɹʌɡd, bʌt nɑɾəd, ən beɪlwɝ wɪθdʒɹu. pɛɹɪn stɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə pəvɪljən, stoʊɪŋ ðə pɪktʃɝz ɪn ɪz pɑkət. ðeɪ dɪstɝb hɪm. hid bɛt ðiz pɪktʃɝz wɝ ɪn ændɝ, tu, pleɪs baɪ ðə fɔɹseɪkən.

Perrin shrugged, but nodded, and Balwer withdrew. Perrin stepped out of the pavilion, stowing the pictures in his pocket. They disturbed him. He'd bet these pictures were in Andor, too, placed by the Forsaken.

fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf i wɑz gɑnə niɾ ən ɑɹmi tə kip hɪmsɛlf seɪf. ɪt wɑz ə dɪstɝbɪŋ θɔt.

For the first time, he found himself wondering if he was going to need an army to keep himself safe. It was a disturbing thought.

ðə weɪv ə bɛstʃəl tʃɹɑləks sɝdʒd oʊvɝ ðə tɑp ə ðə hɪl, oʊvɝɹʌnɪŋ ðə læst ə ðə fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃənz. ðeɪ ɡɹʌntɪɾ ən haʊld, θɪk-fɪŋɡɝd hænz tɛɹɪŋ ət ðə dɑɹk sɑldəiən sɔɪl ən klʌtʃɪŋ sɔɹdz, hʊk spɪɹz, hæmɝz, klʌbz ən ʌðɝ wɪkəd wɛpənz. spɪɾəl dʒɹɪp fɹəm tʌsk lɪps ɑn sʌm, waɪl ɑn ʌðɝz waɪd, tu-hjumən aɪz stɛɹɾ aʊt fɹəm bi-.haɪnd wɪkəd biks.

The wave of bestial Trollocs surged over the top of the hill, overrunning the last of the fortifications. They grunted and howled, thick-fingered hands tearing at the dark Saldaean soil and clutching swords, hooked spears, hammers, clubs and other wicked weapons. Spittle dripped from tusked lips on some, while on others wide, too-human eyes stared out from be-.hind wicked beaks.

ðɛɹ blæk ɑɹmɝ wɑz dɛkɝeɪɾəd wɪð spaɪks.

Their black armor was decorated with spikes.

ɪɾɝɑldiz mɛn stʊd stʃɹɔŋ wɪð ɪm ət ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə bæk sloʊp ə ðə hɪlsaɪd. hi hæɾ ɔɹɾɝd ðə loʊɝ kæmp tə dɪsbæn ən ɹitʃɹiɾ əz fɑɹ əz ðeɪ kəd tə ðə saʊθ əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk. minwaɪl, ði ɑɹmi hæd ɹitʃɹiɾəd fɹəm ðə fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃənz. hi heɪɾəd tə sɝɛndɝ ðə haɪ ɡɹaʊnd, bʌt ɡɛɾɪŋ pʊʃt daʊn ðət stip hɪl dʊɹɪŋ ən əsɔlt wʊɾə bɪn dɛdli. hi hæd ɹum tə fɔl bæk, soʊ hid juz ɪt, naʊ ðət ðə fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃənz wɝ lɔst. hi pəzɪʃən ɪz fɔɹsɪz dʒʌst ət ðə beɪs ə ðə hɪl, nɪɹ wɛɹ ðə loʊɝ kæmp hæd wʌns bɪn. ðə dəmɑni soʊlʒɝz wɔɹ stil kæps ən hæd sɛt ðɛɹ fɔɹtin-fʊt paɪks wɪð bʌts ɪn ðə dɝt, hoʊldɪŋ əm fəɹ mɔɹ stəbɪlɪɾi, stil pɔɪns təwɔɹd ðə taʊɝɪŋ weɪv ə tʃɹɑləks. ə klæsɪk dɪfɛnsɪv pəzɪʃən: θɹi ɹæŋks ə pɪkmɛn ən ʃilmən, paɪks slæntəd təwɔɹd ðə tɑp ə ðə sloʊp.

Ituralde's men stood strong with him at the bottom of the back slope of the hillside. He had ordered the lower camp to disband and retreat as far as they could to the south along the riverbank. Meanwhile, the army had retreated from the fortifications. He hated to surrender the high ground, but getting pushed down that steep hill during an assault would have been deadly. He had room to fall back, so he'd use it, now that the fortifications were lost. He positioned his forces just at the base of the hill, near where the lower camp had once been. The Domani soldiers wore steel caps and had set their fourteen-foot pikes with butts in the dirt, holding them for more stability, steel points toward the towering wave of Trollocs. A classic defensive position: three ranks of pikemen and shieldmen, pikes slanted toward the top of the slope.

wən ðə fɝst ɹæŋk ə paɪks kɪld ə tʃɹɑliɑk, ðeɪd fɔl bæk ən pʊl ðɛɹ wɛpənz fɹi, lɛɾɪŋ ðə sɛkən ɹæŋk stɛp fɔɹwɝd tə kɪl. ə sloʊ, kɛɹfəl ɹitʃɹit, ɹæŋk baɪ ɹæŋk. ə dʌbəl ɹoʊ ʌv ɑɹtʃɝz bɪhaɪn bɪɡæn lusɪŋ æɹoʊz, slæmɪŋ weɪv æftɝ weɪv ʌp ɪndə ðə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, dʒɹɑpɪŋ bɑɾiz daʊn ðə sloʊp. ðoʊz ɹoʊld, səm stɪl skɹimɪŋ, spɹeɪɪŋ dɑɹk blʌd. ə lɑɹdʒɝ nʌmbɝ kəntɪnjud daʊn, oʊvɝ ðɛɹ bɹʌðɝz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ ət ðə pɪkmɛn.

When the first rank of pikes killed a Trolioc, they'd fall back and pull their weapons free, letting the second rank step forward to kill. A slow, careful retreat, rank by rank. A double row of archers behind began loosing arrows, slamming wave after wave up into the Shadowspawn, dropping bodies down the slope. Those rolled, some still screaming, spraying dark blood. A larger number continued down, over their brothers, trying to get at the pikemen.

ən iɡəl-hɛɾəd tʃɹɑliɑk daɪɾ ɑn ə paɪk ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɪɾɝɑldi. ðəɹ wɝ tʃɪps əlɔŋ ði ɛdʒəz ə ðə θɪŋz bik, ən ɪts hɛd - sɛt wɪð pɹɛɾətɔɹi aɪz - sæɾ ətɑp ə bʊl-laɪk nɛk, ði ɛdʒ ə ðə fɛðɝz koʊɾəd wɪð səm kaɪndə dɑɹk, ɔɪli sʌbstəns. ðə mɑnstɝ skɹitʃt əz ɪt daɪd, vɔɪs loʊ ən oʊnli feɪnli eɪviən, sʌmhaʊ fɔɹmɪŋ ɡʌɾɝəl saʊnz ɪn ðə tʃɹɑliɑk læŋɡwədʒ.

An eagle-headed Trolioc died on a pike in front of Ituralde. There were chips along the edges of the thing's beak, and its head - set with predatory eyes - sat atop a bull-like neck, the edge of the feathers coated with some kind of dark, oily substance. The monster screeched as it died, voice low and only faintly avian, somehow forming guttural sounds in the Trolioc language.

"hoʊld!" ɪɾɝɑldi kɔld, tɝnɪŋ ən tʃɹɑɾɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs daʊn ðə laɪn ə pɪkmɛn. "kip ðə fɔɹmeɪʃən, bɝn ju!"

"Hold!" Ituralde called, turning and trotting his horse down the line of pikemen. "Keep the formation, burn you!"

ðə tʃɹɑləks sɝdʒ daʊn ðə hɪlsaɪd, daɪɪŋ ɑn ðoʊz paɪks. ɪt wəd bi ə tɛmpɝɛɹi ɹipɹiv.

The Trollocs surged down the hillside, dying on those pikes. It would be a temporary reprieve.

ðəɹ wɝ tu mɛni tʃɹɑləks, ən ivən ə ɹoʊteɪɾɪŋ tʃɹɪpəl paɪk laɪn wəd bi oʊvɝwɛlmd. ðɪs wɑz ə dɪleɪɪŋ tæktɪk. bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ðə ɹɛst ə hɪz tʃɹups bɪɡæn ðɛɹ ɹitʃɹit. wʌns ðə laɪnz hæd wikənd, ði æʃəmən wəɾ əsum ðə bɝɾən ə dɪfɛns, baɪɪŋ taɪm fəɹ ðə pɪkmɛn tə ɹitʃɹit.

There were too many Trollocs, and even a rotating triple pike line would be overwhelmed. This was a delaying tactic. Behind them, the rest of his troops began their retreat. Once the lines had weakened, the Asha'man would assume the burden of defense, buying time for the pikemen to retreat.

ɪf ði æʃəmən kəd mænədʒ ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ. hid pʊʃt əm hɑɹd. meɪbi tu hɑɹd. hi dɪdnt noʊ ðɛɹ lɪməts ðə weɪ hi dɪd fəɹ ɔɹɾənɛɹi tʃɹups. ɪf ðeɪ wɝ eɪbəl tə bɹeɪk ðə tʃɹɑliɑk ədvæns, hɪz ɑɹmi wəd fɔl bæk saʊθwɝd. ðət ɹitʃɹit wəd teɪk əm pæs ðə seɪfti ʌv mɛɹədɑn, bʌt ðeɪ wəd nɑt bi əlaʊɾ ɪn. ðoʊz ɪnsaɪd hæd ɹɪbʌft ɔl ɪɾɝɑldiz ətɛmps ət kəmjunəkeɪʃən. "wi də nɑɾ əbɛɾ ɪnveɪɾɝz" hæd bɪn ðə ɹɪplaɪ itʃ taɪm. blʌɾi fulz.

If the Asha'man could manage the strength. He'd pushed them hard. Maybe too hard. He didn't know their limits the way he did for ordinary troops. If they were able to break the Trolioc advance, his army would fall back southward. That retreat would take them past the safety of Maradon, but they would not be allowed in. Those inside had rebuffed all Ituralde's attempts at communication. "We do not abet invaders" had been the reply each time. Bloody fools.

wɛl, ðə tʃɹɑləks wəd laɪkli fɔɹm ʌp ɝaʊn mɛɹədɑn fəɹ ə səsteɪn sidʒ, ɡɪvɪŋ ɪɾɝɑldi ən ɪz mɛn taɪm tə fɔl bæk tə ə mɔɹ dɪfɛnsəbəl pəzɪʃən.

Well, the Trollocs would likely form up around Maradon for a sustained siege, giving Ituralde and his men time to fall back to a more defensible position.

"hoʊld!" ɪɾɝɑldi kɔld əɡɛn, ɹaɪɾɪŋ pæst ən ɛɹiə wɛɹ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk pɹɛs wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ʃoʊ ɹɪzʌls. ətɑp wʌn ə ðə hɪltɑp fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃənz ə pæk ʌv wʊlf-hɛɾəd tʃɹɑləks lɝkt, wɛɹi, waɪl ðɛɹ kəmpænjənz tʃɑɹdʒ daʊn bɪfɔɹ ðɛm. "ɑɹtʃɝz!" ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd, pɔɪntɪŋ.

"Hold!" Ituralde called again, riding past an area where the Trolloc press was beginning to show results. Atop one of the hilltop fortifications a pack of wolf-headed Trollocs lurked, wary, while their companions charged down before them. "Archers!" Ituralde said, pointing.

ə vɑli ʌv æɹoʊz fɑloʊd, spɹeɪɪŋ ðə wʊlf-hɛɾəd tʃɹɑləks, əɹ "maɪnz" əz ðə dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn ɪn ɪɾɝɑldiz ɑɹmi hæd stɑɹɾəd kɔlɪŋ ðɛm. tʃɹɑləks hæd ðɛɹ oʊn bænz ən ɔɹɡənəzeɪʃən, bʌɾ ɪz mɛn ɔfən ɹəfɝd tə ɪndəvɪdʒəwəlz baɪ ðə fitʃɝz ðeɪ dɪspleɪd. "hɔɹnz" fəɹ ɡoʊts, "biks" fəɹ hɔks, "ɑɹmz" fəɹ bɛɹz. ðoʊz wɪð ðə hɛdz ʌv wʊlvz wɝ ɔfən əmʌŋ ðə mɔɹ ɪntɛlədʒənt;

A volley of arrows followed, spraying the wolf-headed Trollocs, or "Minds" as the Dragonsworn in Ituralde's army had started calling them. Trollocs had their own bands and organization, but his men often referred to individuals by the features they displayed. "Horns" for goats, "Beaks" for hawks, "Arms" for bears. Those with the heads of wolves were often among the more intelligent;

səm sɑldəiənz kleɪm tə hæv hɝɾ əm spikɪŋ ðə hjumən læŋɡwədʒ tə bɑɹɡən wɪð əɹ tʃɹɪk ðɛɹ əpoʊnəns.

some Saldaeans claimed to have heard them speaking the human language to bargain with or trick their opponents.

ɪɾɝɑldi nu mʌtʃ əbaʊt tʃɹɑləks naʊ. jə niɾəd tə noʊ jəɹ ɛnəmi. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ðəɹ wɑz hjudʒ vɝaɪəɾi ɪn tʃɹɑlɑk ɪntɛlədʒəns ən pɝsənælɪɾi. ən ðəɹ wɝ mɛni tʃɹɑləks u ʃɛɹd fɪzɪkəl ætʃɹəbjuts fɹəm vɛɹiəs ɡɹups. ɪɾɝɑldi swɔɹ hid sin wʌn twɪstəɾ əbɑməneɪʃən wɪð ðə fɛðɝz ʌv ə hɔk bʌt ðə hɔɹnz ʌv ə ɡoʊt.

Ituralde knew much about Trollocs now. You needed to know your enemy. Unfortunately, there was huge variety in Trolloc intelligence and personality. And there were many Trollocs who shared physical attributes from various groups. Ituralde swore he'd seen one twisted abomination with the feathers of a hawk but the horns of a goat.

ðə tʃɹɑləks ətɑp ðə fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃən tʃɹaɪd tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ ʌv ði æɹoʊz. ə lɑɹdʒ pæk ə hʌlkɪŋ bists bɪhaɪnd ʃʌvd əm daʊn ðə hɪl wɪð ə ɹɔɹ. tʃɹɑləks wɝ kaʊɝdli θɪŋz, nɔɹməli, ənlɛs hʌŋɡɹi, bʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ wɪpt ɪndə ə fɹɛnzi, ðeɪ fɔt wɛl.

The Trollocs atop the fortification tried to get out of the way of the arrows. A large pack of hulking beasts behind shoved them down the hill with a roar. Trollocs were cowardly things, normally, unless hungry, but if they were whipped into a frenzy, they fought well.

ðə feɪdz wəd fɑloʊ ðɪs ɪnɪʃəl weɪv. wʌns ði ɑɹtʃɝz wɝ aʊɾ ʌv æɹoʊz, ən tʃɹɑləks hæd sɔfən ðə mɛn bɪloʊ. ɪɾɝɑldi dɪdn lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə ðæt.

The Fades would follow this initial wave. Once the archers were out of arrows, and Trollocs had softened the men below. Ituralde didn't look forward to that.

laɪt, ɪɾɝɑldi θɔt. aɪ hoʊp aɪv kən aʊtʃɹʌn ðɛm. ði æʃəmən weɪɾəd ɪn ðə dɪstəns fəɹ ɪz ɔɹɾɝ. hi wɪʃt i hæɾ əm kloʊsɝ. bʌɾ i kʊdn ti ɹɪsk ɪt. ðeɪ wɝ tu ɪmpɔɹɾənt ən æsɛt tə luz tə ə stʃɹeɪ æɹoʊ.

Light, Ituralde thought. I hope ive can outrun them. The Asha'man waited in the distance for his order. He wished he had them closer. But he couldn t risk it. They were too important an asset to lose to a stray arrow.

hoʊpfəli, ðə fɹʌn ɹæŋks ə tʃɹɑləks wəd bi səvɪɹli bæɾɝd baɪ ðə pɪkmɛn, ðɛɹ kɑɹkəsɪz twɪstəɾ ən bæŋkt əɡɛns ðə paɪks - -æn ðə tʃɹɑləks bɪhaɪn stʌmbəlɪŋ ən fɔlɪŋ əɡɛns ðɛɹ oʊn blʌɾi ɹɛmnəns. ɪɾɝɑldiz ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ sɑldəiənz wəd ɹaɪɾ əz ə hæɹiɪŋ fɔɹs əɾ ɛni hu ɡɑt θɹu ði æʃəmən blæsts. ðən ðə pɪkmɛn ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə dʒɹɔ bæk ən fɑloʊ ðə ɹɛst ə ði ɑɹmi ɪn ɹitʃɹit. wʌns pæs mɛɹədɑn, ðeɪ kəd juz ɡeɪtweɪz tə fɔl bæk tə hɪz nɛks tʃoʊzən pəzɪʃən, ə fɔɹəstəd pæs səm tɛn liɡz saʊθ.

Hopefully, the front ranks of Trollocs would be severely battered by the pikemen, their carcasses twisted and banked against the pikes - -and the Trollocs behind stumbling and falling against their own bloody remnants. Ituralde's remaining Saldaeans would ride as a harrying force at any who got through the Asha'man blasts. Then the pikemen should be able to draw back and follow the rest of the army in retreat. Once past Maradon, they could use gateways to fall back to his next chosen position, a forested pass some ten leagues south.

hɪz mɛn ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə ɪskeɪp. ʃʊd. laɪt, bʌɾ i heɪɾəd biɪŋ fɔɹs tə kəmæn ə tu-fæst ɹitʃɹit laɪk ðɪs.

His men should be able to escape. Should. Light, but he hated being forced to command a too-fast retreat like this.

steɪ fɝm, hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf, kəntɪnjuɪŋ tə ɹaɪɾ ən kɔl aʊt ði ɔɹɾɝ tə hoʊld. ɪt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðət ðeɪ hɪɹ ɪz vɔɪs. ðət bɔɪ ɪz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, hɪl kip bɪs pɹɑməsəz.

Stay firm, he told himself, continuing to ride and call out the order to hold. It was important that they hear his voice. That boy is the Dragon Reborn, He'll keep bis promises.

"maɪ lɔɹd!" ə vɔɪs kɔld. ɪɾɝɑldiz ɡɑɹd splɪt tə lɛɾ ə jʌŋ bɔɪ ɹaɪɾ ʌp, pæntɪŋ. "maɪ lɔɹd, ɪts lutɛnən lɪdʒɹɪn!"

"My Lord!" a voice called. Ituralde's guard split to let a young boy ride up, panting. "My Lord, it's Lieutenant Lidrin!"

"hiz fɔlən?" ɪɾɝɑldi dɪmændəd.

"He's fallen?" Ituralde demanded.

"noʊ, maɪ lɔɹd. hiz . . ." ðə bɔɪ lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ɪn ðə paɪk laɪn nɪɹbaɪ, ðə soʊlʒɝz wɝ bʌlʒɪŋ fɔɹwɝd təwɔɹd ðə tʃɹɑlɑk weɪv, ɹæðɝ ðən fɔlɪŋ bæk.

"No, my Lord. He's . . ." The boy looked over his shoulder. In the pike line nearby, the soldiers were bulging forward toward the Trolloc wave, rather than falling back.

"wʌɾ ɪn ðə laɪt?" ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd, hilɪŋ dɔnwiv ɪndə moʊʃən. ðə waɪt ɡɛldɪŋ ɡæləp fɔɹwɝd, ɪɾɝɑldiz ɡɑɹɾ ən ðə jʌŋ mɛsənʒɝ dʒɔɪnɪŋ ɪm ɪn ə θʌndɝ ə hʊvz.

"What in the Light?" Ituralde said, heeling Dawnweave into motion. The white gelding galloped forward, Ituralde's guard and the young messenger joining him in a thunder of hooves.

hi kəd hɪɹ lɪdʒɹɪnz jɛlz dɪspaɪt ðə ɹɔɹ ə ðə bæɾəlfild. ðə jʌŋ dəmɑni ɔfəsɝ wɑz aʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə paɪk laɪnz, ətækɪŋ ðə tʃɹoʊl-lɑks wɪð sɔɹɾ ən ʃild, bɛloʊɪŋ. lɪdʒɹɪnz mɛn hæd pʊʃt θɹu tə dɪfɛn hɪm, livɪŋ ðə pɪkmɛn kənfjuzd ən dɪsɔɹiɛntɪd.

He could hear Lidrin's yells despite the roar of the battlefield. The young Domani officer was out in front of the pike lines, attacking the Trol-locs with sword and shield, bellowing. Lidrin's men had pushed through to defend him, leaving the pikemen confused and disoriented.

"lɪdʒɹɪn, jə ful." ɪɾɝɑldi ɹeɪn ɪz hɔɹs tə ə hɔlt.

"Lidrin, you fool." Ituralde reined his horse to a halt.

"kʌm!" lɪdʒɹɪn bɛloʊd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz sɔɹɾ ʌp bɪfɔɹ ðə tʃɹɑləks. hi læf laʊdli, vɔɪs hæf-mæd, feɪs splæɾɝd wɪð blʌd. "kʌm! əl feɪs jə ɔl! maɪ sɔɹd θɝsts!"

"Come!" Lidrin bellowed, raising his sword up before the Trollocs. He laughed loudly, voice half-mad, face splattered with blood. "Come! I will face you all! My sword thirsts!"

"lɪdʒɹɪn!" ɪɾɝɑldi skɹimd. "lɪdʒɹɪn!"

"Lidrin!" Ituralde screamed. "Lidrin!"

ðə mæn ɡlænst oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. hɪz aɪz wɝ waɪd wɪð ə kɹeɪz kaɪndə ɡli. ɪɾɝɑldi hæd sin ɪt bɪfɔɹ, ɪn ði aɪz ə soʊlʒɝz u fɔt tu lɔŋ, tu hɑɹd. "wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə daɪ, ɹoʊɾəl,"

The man glanced over his shoulder. His eyes were wide with a crazed kind of glee. Ituralde had seen it before, in the eyes of soldiers who fought too long, too hard. "We're going to die, Rodel,"

lɪdʒɹɪn kɔld. "ðɪs weɪ, aɪ ɡɛt tə teɪk əm wɪð mi! wʌn əɹ tu ət list! dʒɔɪn mi!"

Lidrin called. "This way, I get to take them with me! One or two at least! Join me!"

"lɪdʒɹɪn, ɡɛt bæk hɪɹ ən - "

"Lidrin, get back here and - "

ðə mæn ɪɡnɔɹd hɪm, tɝnɪŋ bæk ən pɹɛsɪŋ fɔɹwɝd.

The man ignored him, turning back and pressing forward.

'ɡɛɾ ɪz mɛn bæk hɪɹ," ɪɾɝɑldi jɛld, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ. "kloʊz ðə paɪk ɹæŋks! kwɪkli. wi kænt . . ."

'Get his men back here," Ituralde yelled, gesturing. "Close the pike ranks! Quickly. We can't . . ."

ðə tʃɹɑləks sɝdʒ fɔɹwɝd. lɪdʒɹɪn fɛl ɪn ə spɹeɪ ʌv blʌd, læfɪŋ. hɪz mɛn wɝ tu stʃɹɔŋli pɹɛst, ən ðeɪ splɪt daʊn ðə mɪɾəl. ðə pɪkmɛn ɹisɛt ðɛmsɛlvz, bʌɾ ə fɪst ə tʃɹɑləks kɹæʃt ɪndə ðɛm. səm tʃɹɑləks fɛl.

The Trollocs surged forward. Lidrin fell in a spray of blood, laughing. His men were too strongly pressed, and they split down the middle. The pikemen reset themselves, but a fist of Trollocs crashed into them. Some Trollocs fell.

moʊs dɪdnt.

Most didn't.

ðə nɪɹbaɪ kɹitʃɝz skɹitʃt ən haʊld ət siɪŋ ðə hoʊl ɪn ðə dɪfɛnsəz. ðeɪ keɪm, skɹæmbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ bɑɾiz ət ðə beɪs ə ðə hɪl, θɹoʊɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ət ðə pɪkmɛn.

The nearby creatures screeched and howled at seeing the hole in the defenses. They came, scrambling over bodies at the base of the hill, throwing themselves at the pikemen.

ɪɾɝɑldi kɝst, ðən pʊʃt dɔnwiv fɔɹwɝd. ɪn wɔɹ, əz ɪn fɑɹm-ɪŋ, jə səmtaɪmz hæd tə stɛp ɪn ən ɡɛt ni-dip ɪn ðə mʌk. hi bɛloʊɾ əz i kɹæʃt ɪndə ðə tʃɹɑləks. hɪz ɡɑɹd ɹoʊɾ ɪn ɝaʊn hɪm, kloʊzɪŋ ðə ɡæp. ði ɛɹ bɪkeɪm ə kɹæʃɪŋ tɛmpəst ə mɛɾəl ɑn mɛɾəl ən ɡɹʌns ə peɪn.

Ituralde cursed, then pushed Dawnweave forward. In war, as in farm-ing, you sometimes had to step in and get knee-deep in the muck. He bellowed as he crashed into the Trollocs. His guard rode in around him, closing the gap. The air became a crashing tempest of metal on metal and grunts of pain.

dɔnwiv snɔɹɾɪd ən dænst əz ɪɾɝɑldi læʃt aʊt wɪð ɪz sɔɹd. ðə wɔɹhɔɹs dɪslaɪk biɪŋ soʊ kloʊs tə ðə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, bʌɾ i wɑz wɛl tʃɹeɪnd, ə ɡɪft fɹəm wʌn ə bæʃɪɹz mɛn. hi hæd kleɪm ðəɾ ə dʒɛnɝəl ɑn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz niɾəd ən ænəməl u hæd fɔt tʃɹɑləks bɪfɔɹ.

Dawnweave snorted and danced as Ituralde lashed out with his sword. The warhorse disliked being so close to the Shadowspawn, but he was well trained, a gift from one of Bashere's men. He had claimed that a general on the Borderlands needed an animal who had fought Trollocs before.

ɪɾɝɑldi blɛsɪd ðət soʊlʒɝ naʊ.

Ituralde blessed that soldier now.

ðə faɪɾɪŋ wɑz bɹuɾəl. ðə liɾɪŋ ɹæŋk ə pɪkmɛn, ən ðoʊz bɪhaɪnd, bɪɡæn bʌklɪŋ. ɪɾɝɑldi bɹifli hɝɾ æŋkɑɹz vɔɪs teɪkɪŋ kəmænd, skɹimɪŋ ət ðə mɛn tə ɡɛt bæk ɪndə laɪn. hi saʊndəd fɹæntɪk. ðət wɑz bæd.

The fighting was brutal. The leading rank of pikemen, and those behind, began buckling. Ituralde briefly heard Ankaer's voice taking command, screaming at the men to get back into line. He sounded frantic. That was bad.

ɪɾɝɑldi swʌŋ, duɪŋ hɛɹən ɑn ðə stʌmp - ə hɔɹsbæk sɔɹd fɔɹm - ən teɪkɪŋ ə bʊl-hɛɾəd tʃɹɑlɑk əkɹɔs ðə θɹoʊt. ə spɹeɪ ʌv fɛɾəd bɹaʊnɪʃ blʌd spɝɾɪd fɔɹθ, ən ðə kɹitʃɝ fɛl bæk əɡɛnst ə bɔɹ-hɛɾəd mɑnstɝ. ə lɑɹdʒ ɹɛd stændɝd - dɪpɪktɪŋ ə ɡoʊts skʌl wɪð ə faɪɝ bɝnɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪt - ɹoʊz ətɑp ðə hɪl. ðə sɪmbəl ə ðə ɡɑblɪn bænd.

Ituralde swung, doing Heron on the Stump - a horseback sword form - and taking a bull-headed Trolloc across the throat. A spray of fetid brownish blood spurted forth, and the creature fell back against a boar-headed monster. A large red standard - depicting a goat's skull with a fire burning behind it - rose atop the hill. The symbol of the Ghob'hlin Band.

ɪɾɝɑldi tɝn ɪz hɔɹs, dænsɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ ʌv ə wɪkəɾ æks bloʊ, ðən ɝdʒd ɪz maʊn fɔɹwɝd, dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ɪz sɔɹɾ ɪndə ðə tʃɹɑləks saɪd. ɝaʊn hɪm, wɛlbɝn ən lɛhaɪnən - tu ʌv ɪz bɛst - daɪɾ əz ðeɪ dɪfɛndəɾ ɪz flæŋk. laɪt bɝn ðə tʃɹɑləks!

Ituralde turned his horse, dancing out of the way of a wicked axe blow, then urged his mount forward, driving his sword into the Trollocs side. Around him, Whelborn and Lehynen - two of his best - died as they defended his flank. Light burn the Trollocs!

ði ɪntaɪɝ laɪn wɑz bɹeɪkɪŋ əpɑɹt. hi ən ɪz mɛn wɝ tu fju, bʌt moʊst ə hɪz fɔɹsɪz hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi pʊl bæk. noʊ, noʊ, noʊ! ɪɾɝɑldi θɔt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɛkstʃɹəkeɪt hɪmsɛlf fɹəm ðə bæɾəl ən teɪk oʊvɝ ðə kəmænd. bʌɾ ɪf i pʊl bæk, ðə tʃɹɑləks wəd bɹeɪk θɹu.

The entire line was breaking apart. He and his men were too few, but most of his forces had already pulled back. No, no, no! Ituralde thought, trying to extricate himself from the battle and take over the command. But if he pulled back, the Trollocs would break through.

hiɾ əv tə ɹɪsk ɪt. hi wɑz ɹɛɾi fəɹ pɹɑbləmz laɪk ðɪs.

He'd have to risk it. He was ready for problems like this.

ə tʃɹʌmpət saʊndəd ɹitʃɹit.

A trumpet sounded retreat.

ɪɾɝɑldi fɹoʊz, lɪsnɪŋ wɪð hɔɹɝ tə ðə hɔntəd saʊn ɹoʊlɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə bæɾəlfild. ðə hɔɹnz wɝn səpoʊz tə bloʊ ənlɛs hi, əɹ ə mɛmbɝ ə hɪz ɡɑɹd, ɡeɪv ði ɔɹɾɝ pɝsənəli! ɪt wɑz tu sun, fɑɹ tu sun.

Ituralde froze, listening with horror to the haunted sound rolling across the battlefield. The horns weren't supposed to blow unless he, or a member of his guard, gave the order personally! It was too soon, far too soon.

səm ə ði ʌðɝ tʃɹʌmpəɾɝz hɝd ðə kɔl ən tʊk ɪɾ ʌp, ðoʊ ʌðɝz dɪd nɑt. ðeɪ kəd si ðəɾ ɪt wɑz fɑɹ tu sun. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ðət wɑz wɝs. ɪt mɛn ðət hæf ə ðə pɪkmɛn bɪɡæn tə pʊl bæk waɪl ði ʌðɝ hæf hɛl ðɛɹ pəzɪʃən.

Some of the other trumpeters heard the call and took it up, though others did not. They could see that it was far too soon. Unfortunately, that was worse. It meant that half of the pikemen began to pull back while the other half held their position.

ðə laɪnz ɝaʊn ɪɾɝɑldi bɝst, mɛn skæɾɝɪŋ əz ðə tʃɹɑləks swɔɹmd oʊvɝ ðɛm. ɪt wɑz ə dɪzæstɝ, əz bæɾ ə dɪzæstɝ əz ɪɾɝɑldi hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn pɑɹɾ ʌv. hɪz fɪŋɡɝz fɛlt lɪmp.

The lines around Ituralde burst, men scattering as the Trollocs swarmed over them. It was a disaster, as bad a disaster as Ituralde had ever been part of. His fingers felt limp.

ɪf wi fɔl, ʃæɾoʊzpɔn dɪstʃɹɔɪ ɑɹæd dumən. ɪɾɝɑldi ɹɔɹd, jæŋkɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz ə hɪz hɔɹs ən ɡæləpɪŋ bæk əweɪ fɹəm ðə sɝdʒɪŋ tʃɹɑləks. ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ mɛmbɝz ə hɪz ɡɑɹd fɑloʊd.

If we fall, Shadowspawn destroy Arad Doman. Ituralde roared, yanking on the reins of his horse and galloping back away from the surging Trollocs. The remaining members of his guard followed.

"hɛlmk ən kjutʃɹɪs," ɪɾɝɑldi jɛl tə tu ʌv ɪz mɛn, stɝɾi, lɔŋɡlɪm dəmɑni. "ɡɛt tə dɝəmz kævəlɹi ən tɛl əm tə ətæk ðə sɛntɝ əz sun əz ən oʊpənɪŋ əpɪɹz! kɑpɝ, hɛd tə əlɪnz kævəlɹi. ɔɹɾɝ ɪm tə əsɔl ðə tʃɹɑləks ɑn ði istɝn flæŋk. sɔɹɛntɪn, ɡoʊ tə ðoʊz æʃəmən! aɪ wɑn ðə tʃɹɑləks tə ɡoʊ ʌp ɪn fleɪm!"

"Helmke and Cutaris," Ituralde yelled to two of his men, sturdy, longlimbed Domani. "Get to Durhem's cavalry and tell them to attack the center as soon as an opening appears! Kappre, head to Alin's cavalry. Order him to assault the Trollocs on the eastern flank. Sorrentin, go to those Asha'man! I want the Trollocs to go up in flame!"

ðə hɔɹsmən ɡæləpt ɔf. ɪɾɝɑldi ɹoʊd wɛstwɝd, tə ðə pleɪs wɛɹ ðə pɪkmɛn wɝ stɪl hoʊldɪŋ. hi stɑɹɾəd tə ɹæli wʌn ə ðə bæk ɹæŋks ən bɹɪŋ ɪt tə ðə bʌlʒɪŋ sɛkʃən. hi ɔlmoʊs hæɾ ɪt wɝkɪŋ. bʌt ðən ðə mɹdʒɹɑl keɪm, slaɪɾɪŋ θɹu ðə tʃɹɑlɑk ɹæŋks laɪk sneɪks, stʃɹaɪkɪŋ wɪð ɔɪli spid, ən ə flaɪɾ ə dʒɹæɡkɝ dɪsɛndəd.

The horsemen galloped off. Ituralde rode westward, to the place where the pikemen were still holding. He started to rally one of the back ranks and bring it to the bulging section. He almost had it working. But then the Myrddraal came, sliding through the Trolloc ranks like snakes, striking with oily speed, and a flight of Draghkar descended.

ɪɾɝɑldi faʊn hɪmsɛlf faɪɡɹɪŋ fəɹ ɪz laɪf.

Ituralde found himself fighring for his life.

ɝaʊn hɪm, ðə bæɾəlfild wɑz ə tɛɹəbəl mɛs: ɹæŋks dɪstʃɹɔɪd, tʃɹɑləks ɹoʊmɪŋ fɹili fəɹ izi kɪlz, mɹdʒɹɑl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə wɪp əm ɪndə ətækɪŋ ðə fju ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ paɪk fɔɹmeɪʃənz ɪnstɛd.

Around him, the battlefield was a terrible mess: ranks destroyed, Trollocs roaming freely for easy kills, Myrddraal trying to whip them into attacking the few remaining pike formations instead.

faɪɝz flu ɪn ði ɛɹ əz ði æʃəmən eɪm fəɹ ðə tʃɹɑləks, bʌt ðɛɹ faɪɝz wɝ smɔlɝ, wikɝ ðən ðeɪ hæd bɪn deɪz əɡoʊ. mɛn skɹimd, wɛpənz klæŋd, ən bists ɹɔɹɾ ɪn ðə smoʊk bɪniθ ə skaɪ ʌv tu-blæk klaʊdz.

Fires flew in the air as the Asha'man aimed for the Trollocs, but their fires were smaller, weaker than they had been days ago. Men screamed, weapons clanged, and beasts roared in the smoke beneath a sky of too-black clouds.

ɪɾɝɑldi wɑz bɹiðɪŋ hɑɹd. hɪz ɡɑɹdz hæd fɔlən. ət list i hæd sin steɪvən ən ɹɛt daɪ. wʌɾ ə ði ʌðɝz? hi dɪdn si ðɛm. soʊ mɛni daɪɪŋ. soʊ mɛni. ðəɹ wɑz swɛɾ ɪn ɪz aɪz.

Ituralde was breathing hard. His guards had fallen. At least he had seen Staven and Rett die. What of the others? He didn't see them. So many dying. So many. There was sweat in his eyes.

laɪt, hi θɔt. ət list wi ɡeɪv əm ə faɪt. hɛld aʊt lɔŋɡɝ ðən aɪ θɔt pɑsəbəl.

Light, he thought. At least we gave them a fight. Held out longer than I thought possible.

ðəɹ wɝ kɑləmz ə smoʊk tə ðə nɔɹθ. wɛl, wʌn θɪŋ hæd ɡɔn wɛl - ðəɾ æʃəmən taɪməθ hæd dʌn ɪz dʒɑb. ðə sɛkən sɛɾ ə sidʒ ɪkwɪpmənt wɑz bɝnɪŋ. səm ə hɪz ɔfəsɝz hæd kɔld ɪt mædnəs tə sɛn əweɪ wʌn ə hɪz æʃəmən, bʌt wʌn mɔɹ tʃænlɝ wʊdn əv mæɾɝd ɪn ðɪs dɪzæstɝ. ən wən ðə tʃɹɑləks ətæk mɛɹədɑn, ðə læk ə ðoʊz kæɾəpəlts wəd meɪk ə bɪɡ dɪfɝəns.

There were columns of smoke to the north. Well, one thing had gone well - that Asha'man Tymoth had done his job. The second set of siege equipment was burning. Some of his officers had called it madness to send away one of his Asha'man, but one more channeler wouldn't have mattered in this disaster. And when the Trollocs attacked Maradon, the lack of those catapults would make a big difference.

dɔnwiv fɛl. eɪ tʃɹɑlɑk dʒævələn ðət hæd bɪn mɛn fəɹ ɪɾɝɑldi hæd fɔlən loʊ. ðə hɔɹs skɹimd wɪð ðə wɛpən lɑdʒd ɪn ɪts nɛk, blʌd pʌlsɪŋ daʊn ɪts swɛt-fɹʌθ skɪn. ɪɾɝɑldi hæd lɔs maʊns bi-fɔɹ, ən i nu tə ɹoʊl tə ðə saɪd, bʌt wɑz tu ɔf-bæləns ðɪs taɪm. hi hɝɾ ɪz lɛɡ snæp əz i hɪt.

Dawnweave fell. A Trolloc javelin that had been meant for Ituralde had fallen low. The horse screamed with the weapon lodged in its neck, blood pulsing down its sweat-frothed skin. Ituralde had lost mounts be-fore, and he knew to roll to the side, but was too off-balance this time. He heard his leg snap as he hit.

hi ɡɹɪɾɪd ɪz tiθ, dɪtɝmənd nɑt tə daɪ ɑn ɪz bæk, ən fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf ʌp ɪndə ə sɪɾɪŋ pəzɪʃən. hi dʒɹɑpt ɪz sɔɹd - hɛɹən-mɑɹk ðoʊ ɪt wɑz - ən lɪftəɾ ʌp ə bɹoʊkən, dɪskɑɹɾɪd paɪk ɪn ə fluəd moʊʃən ən ɹæmd ɪt θɹu ðə tʃɛst ʌv ən əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ tʃɹɑlɑk. dɑɹk, stɪŋkɪŋ blʌd koʊɾəd ðə ʃæft, spɝɾɪŋ daʊn ɑntu ɪɾɝɑldiz hænz əz ðə tʃɹɑlɑk skɹimd ən daɪd.

He gritted his teeth, determined not to die on his back, and forced himself up into a sitting position. He dropped his sword - heron-mark though it was - and lifted up a broken, discarded pike in a fluid motion and rammed it through the chest of an approaching Trolloc. Dark, stinking blood coated the shaft, spurting down onto Ituralde's hands as the Trolloc screamed and died.

ðəɹ wɑz θʌndɝ ɪn ði ɛɹ. ðət wɑzn ɑd - ðəɹ wɑz ɔfən θʌndɝ fɹəm ðoʊz klaʊdz, ɔfən ɪɹəli dɪsdʒɔɪntɪd fɹəm ðə bɝsts ə laɪtnɪŋ.

There was thunder in the air. That wasn't odd - there was often thunder from those clouds, often eerily disjointed from the bursts of lightning.

ɪɾɝɑldi hivd, pʊʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk tə ðə saɪd baɪ lɛvɝɪŋ ðə paɪk. ðən ə mɹdʒɹɑl sɔ hɪm.

Ituralde heaved, pushing the Trolloc to the side by levering the pike. Then a Myrddraal saw him.

ɪɾɝɑldi ɹitʃt fəɹ ɪz sɔɹd, ɡɹɪɾɪŋ ɪz tiθ, bʌt nu hi hæd dʒʌst sin ɪz kɪlɝ. wʌn ə ðoʊz θɪŋz kəd fɛl ə dʌzən mɛn. feɪsɪŋ ɪt wɪð ə bɹoʊkən lɛɡ . . .

Ituralde reached for his sword, gritting his teeth, but knew he had just seen his killer. One of those things could fell a dozen men. Facing it with a broken leg . . .

hi tʃɹaɪd tə stʌmbəl tə hɪz fiɾ ɛniweɪ. hi feɪld, fɔlɪŋ bækwɝd kɝsɪŋ. hi ɹeɪzd ɪz sɔɹd, pɹipɛɹd tə daɪ əz ðə θɪŋ slʌŋk fɔɹwɝd, muvməns laɪk lɪkwəd.

He tried to stumble to his feet anyway. He failed, falling backward cursing. He raised his sword, prepared to die as the thing slunk forward, movements like liquid.

ə dʌzən æɹoʊz slæmd ɪndə ðə feɪd.

A dozen arrows slammed into the Fade.

ɪɾɝɑldi blɪŋkt əz ðə kɹitʃɝ stʌmbəld. ðə θʌndɝ wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ laʊɾɝ. ɪɾɝɑldi pɹɑp hɪmsɛlf ʌp, ən wɑz əmeɪz tə si θaʊzənz ʌv ʌnfəmɪljɝ hɔɹsmən tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ ɪn fɔɹmeɪʃən θɹu ðə tʃɹɑlɑk ɹæŋks, swipɪŋ ðə kɹitʃɝz bɪfɔɹ ðɛm.

Ituralde blinked as the creature stumbled. The thunder was getting louder. Ituralde propped himself up, and was amazed to see thousands of unfamiliar horsemen charging in formation through the Trolloc ranks, sweeping the creatures before them.

ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn! hi keɪm!

The Dragon Reborn! He came!

bʌt noʊ. ðiz mɛn flu ðə sɑldəiən flæɡ. hi lʊk bæk. ðə ɡeɪts ə mɛɹədɑn wɝ oʊpən, ən ɪɾɝɑldiz taɪɝd sɝvaɪvɝz wɝ biɪŋ əlaʊd tə lɪmp ɪnsaɪd. faɪɝ wɑz flaɪɪŋ fɹəm ðə bæɾəlmənts -  hɪz æʃəmən hæd bɪn əlaʊɾ ʌp tɑp tə ɡɛɾ ə væntədʒ ɑn ðə bæɾəlfild.

But no. These men flew the Saldaean flag. He looked back. The gates of Maradon were open, and Ituralde's tired survivors were being allowed to limp inside. Fire was flying from the battlements -  his Asha'man had been allowed up top to get a vantage on the battlefield.

ə fɔɹs ə twɛnti hɔɹsmən bɹoʊk ɔf ən ɹæn daʊn ðə mɹdʒɹɑl, tʃɹæmplɪŋ ɪt. ðə læs mæn ɪn ðə ɡɹup lɛp fɹi ʌv ɪz sæɾəl ən hækt ət ðə kɹitʃɝ wɪð ə hæn æks. ɔl əkɹɔs ðə bæɾəlfild, ðə tʃɹoʊl-lɑks wɝ ɹʌn daʊn, ʃɑɾ əɹ lænst.

A force of twenty horsemen broke off and ran down the Myrddraal, trampling it. The last man in the group leaped free of his saddle and hacked at the creature with a hand axe. All across the battlefield, the Trol-locs were run down, shot or lanced.

ɪt wʊdn læst. mɔɹ ən mɔɹ tʃɹɑləks wɝ ɹoʊlɪŋ θɹu ɪɾɝɑldiz fɔɹmɝ fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃənz ən ləpɪŋ daʊn ðə sloʊp. bʌt ðə sɑldəiən ɹɪlif wəd bi ɪnʌf, wɪð ðoʊz ɡeɪts oʊpən, ən wɪð ði æʃəmən blæstɪŋ ɹikɪŋ dɪstʃɹʌkʃən. ðə ɹɛmnəns ʌv ɪɾɝɑldiz fɔɹs wɝ fliɪŋ tə seɪfti. hi wɑz pɹaʊd tə si bæɹɛɾəl ən kənəl - ðə læst ə hɪz ɡɑɹd -  stʌmbəlɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə fil təwɔɹɾ ɪm ɑn fʊt, ðɛɹ maʊns noʊ daʊt dɛd, ðɛɹ junəfɔɹmz blʌɾid.

It wouldn't last. More and more Trollocs were rolling through Ituralde's former fortifications and loping down the slope. But the Saldaean relief would be enough, with those gates open, and with the Asha'man blasting wreaking destruction. The remnants of Ituralde's force were fleeing to safety. He was proud to see Barettal and Connel - the last of his guard -  stumbling across the field toward him on foot, their mounts no doubt dead, their uniforms bloodied.

hi slɪɾ ɪz sɔɹɾ ɪndə ɪts skæbɝɾ ən pʊl ðə dʒævələn fɹəm dɔn-wivz nɛk. səpɔɹɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɑn ɪt, hi mænədʒ tə stænd. ə ɹaɪɾɝ fɹəm ðə sɑldəiən fɔɹs tʃɹɑɾəd ʌp tə hɪm, ə mæn wɪð ə lin feɪs, ə hʊk noʊz, ən ə sɛɾ ə bʊʃi blæk aɪbɹaʊz. hi wɔɹ ə ʃɔɹt, tʃɹɪm bɪɹd, ən i ɹeɪzd ə blʌɾid sɔɹd tə ɪɾɝɑldi. "ju lɪv."

He slid his sword into its scabbard and pulled the javelin from Dawn-weave's neck. Supporting himself on it, he managed to stand. A rider from the Saldaean force trotted up to him, a man with a lean face, a hooked nose, and a set of bushy black eyebrows. He wore a short, trimmed beard, and he raised a bloodied sword to Ituralde. "You live."

"aɪ du," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛɾ əz ɪz tu ɡɑɹdz ɝaɪvd. "ju kəmæn ðɪs fɔɹs?"

"I do," Ituralde said as his two guards arrived. "You command this force?"

"fɔɹ naʊ," ðə mæn sɛd. "aɪ æm joʊli. kən jə ɹaɪd?"

"For now," the man said. "I am Yoeli. Can you ride?"

"bɛɾɝ ðət ðən steɪɪŋ hɪɹ."

"Better that than staying here."

joʊli ɹitʃt aʊɾ ə hæn ən pʊld ɪɾɝɑldi ɪndə hɪz sæɾəl bɪhaɪn ɪm ɪɾɝɑldiz lɛɡ pɹətɛstəd wɪð ə flɛɹ ə peɪn, bʌt ðəɹ wɑzn taɪm tə weɪt fəɹ ə stʃɹɛtʃɝ.

Yoeli reached out a hand and pulled Ituralde into his saddle behind him Ituralde's leg protested with a flare of pain, but there wasn't time to wait for a stretcher.

tu ʌðɝ hɔɹsmən tʊk ɪɾɝɑldiz ɡɑɹdz ɑntu ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, ən sun ðeɪ θɹi wɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə sɪɾi əɾ ə ɡæləp.

Two other horsemen took Ituralde's guards onto their horses, and soon they three were riding for the city at a gallop.

"blɛs ju," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd. "ɪt tʊk jə lɔŋ ɪnʌf, ðoʊ."

"Bless you," Ituralde said. "It took you long enough, though."

"aɪ noʊ." joʊliz vɔɪs saʊndəɾ ɑdli ɡɹɪm. "aɪ hoʊp jə ɑɹ wɝθ ðɪs, ɪnveɪɾɝ, fəɹ maɪ ækʃənz ðɪs deɪ wɪl laɪkli kɑs maɪ laɪf."

"I know." Yoeli's voice sounded oddly grim. "I hope you are worth this, invader, for my actions this day will likely cost my life."

"wʌt?"

"What?"

ðə mæn dɪdn ɹɪplaɪ. hi sɪmpli bɔɹ ɪɾɝɑldi ɑn θʌndɝɪŋ hʊvz ɪndə ðə seɪfti ʌv ðə sɪɾi -  sətʃ əz ðət seɪfti wɑz, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðə sɪɾi wɑz naʊ bɪsidʒ baɪ ə fɔɹs ə sɛvɹəl hʌnʒɹəd θaʊzənd ʃæɾoʊzpɔn.

The man didn't reply. He simply bore Ituralde on thundering hooves into the safety of the city -  such as that safety was, considering the city was now besieged by a force of several hundred thousand Shadowspawn.

mɔɹɡeɪs wɔkt aʊɾ ə ðə kæmp. noʊbɑdi stɑp hɝ, ðoʊ səm dɪd ɡɪv əɹ ɑd lʊks. ʃi pæs ðə wʊɾɪd nɔɹðɝn ɹɪm. ðə tʃɹiz wɝ bɝloʊk, speɪst əpɑɹt tə əlaʊ fəɹ ðɛɹ ɡɹeɪt, spɹɛɾɪŋ ɑɹmz. ʃi muv bɪniθ ðə baʊz, bɹiðɪŋ dipli ʌv ðə hjuməɾ ɛɹ.

Morgase walked out of the camp. Nobody stopped her, though some did give her odd looks. She passed the wooded northern rim. The trees were burloak, spaced apart to allow for their great, spreading arms. She moved beneath the boughs, breathing deeply of the humid air.

ɡeɪbɹəl hæd bɪn wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən.

Gaebril had been one of the Forsaken.

ʃi ɪvɛntʃəwəli faʊn ə pleɪs wɛɹ ə taɪni haɪlən stʃɹim fɪld ə klf bɪtwin tu ɹɑks ən kɹieɪɾəd ə stɪl, klɪɹ pul. ðə tɔl ɹɑks ɝaʊn ɪt klʌstɝd laɪk ən eɪntʃənt, bɹoʊkən θɹoʊn bɪl fəɹ ə dʒaɪən fɪftin spænz tɔl.

She eventually found a place where a tiny highland stream filled a cleft between two rocks and created a still, clear pool. The tall rocks around it clustered like an ancient, broken throne built for a giant fifteen spans tall.

ðə tʃɹiz bɔɹ livz əbʌv, ðoʊ mɛni lʊk sɪkli. ə θɪnɝ pætʃ ə klaʊdz blu pæst, əlaʊɪŋ fɪŋɡɝz ə sʌnlaɪt tə ɹitʃ daʊn fɹəm ði oʊvɝkæst skaɪ. ðət splɪntɝd laɪt ʃoʊn ɪn ɹeɪz θɹu ðə klɪɹ wɔɾɝ, meɪkɪŋ pætʃəz ə laɪɾ ɑn ðə pulz bɑɾəm. mɪnoʊz dɑɹɾɪd bɪtwin ðə pætʃəz, əz ɪf ɪnvɛstəɡeɪɾɪŋ ðə laɪt.

The trees bore leaves above, though many looked sickly. A thinner patch of clouds blew past, allowing fingers of sunlight to reach down from the overcast sky. That splintered light shone in rays through the clear water, making patches of light on the pool's bottom. Minnows darted between the patches, as if investigating the light.

mɔɹɡeɪs ɹaʊndəd ðə pul, ðən sɛɾəld ətɑp ə flæt boʊldɝ. ðə saʊnz ə ðə kæmp kəd bi hɝɾ ɪn ðə dɪstəns. kɔlɪŋ, poʊsts biɪŋ dʒɹɪvən ɪndə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, kɑɹts ɹætlɪŋ ɑn pæθweɪz.

Morgase rounded the pool, then settled atop a flat boulder. The sounds of the camp could be heard in the distance. Calling, posts being driven into the ground, carts rattling on pathways.

ʃi stɛɹɾ ɪndə ðə pul. wɑz ðəɹ ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ heɪtfəl ðən biɪŋ meɪd ðə pɔn ʌv ənʌðɝ? ʌv biɪŋ fɔɹs tə dæns əpɑn ðɛɹ stʃɹɪŋz laɪk ə wʊɾən pʌpət? ɪn əɹ juθ, ʃid ɡɹoʊn wɛl əkweɪntəd wɪð boʊɪŋ bɛɹɔɹ ðə wɪmz ʌv ʌðɝz. ðət hæd bɪn ði oʊnli weɪ fəɹ əɹ tə steɪbəlaɪz əɹ ɹul.

She stared into the pool. Was there anything more hateful than being made the pawn of another? Of being forced to dance upon their strings like a wooden puppet? In her youth, she'd grown well acquainted with bowing berore the whims of others. That had been the only way for her to stabilize her rule.

tɑɹɪŋɡeɪl hæd tʃɹaɪd tə mənɪpjəleɪt hɝ. ɪn tʃɹuθ, hid bɪn səksɛsfəl mʌtʃ ə ðə taɪm. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ʌðɝz, tu. soʊ mɛni hu hæd pʊʃt əɹ ðɪs weɪ əɹ ðæt. ʃid spɛn tɛn jɪɹz pændɝɪŋ tə wɪtʃɛvɝ fækʃən wɑz ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst. tɛn jɪɹz sloʊli bɪldɪŋ əlaɪənsəz. ɪt hæd wɝkt. ʃiɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli bɪn eɪbəl tə mənuvɝ ɑn əɹ oʊn. wən tɑɹɪŋɡeɪl hæd daɪd hʌntɪŋ, mɛni hæd wɪspɝd ðəɾ ɪz pæsɪŋ ɹilis hɝ, bʌt ðoʊz kloʊs tə hɝ hæd noʊn ðət ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɔn ə lɔŋ weɪ təwɔɹɾ ənsiɾɪŋ ɪz əθɔɹəɾi.

Taringail had tried to manipulate her. In truth, he'd been successful much of the time. There had been others, too. So many who had pushed her this way or that. She'd spent ten years pandering to whichever faction was the strongest. Ten years slowly building alliances. It had worked. She'd eventually been able to maneuver on her own. When Taringail had died hunting, many had whispered that his passing released her, but those close to her had known that she had already gone a long way toward unseating his authority.

ʃi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə vɛɹi deɪ wən ʃid kæst ɔf ðə læst ə ðoʊz u hæd pɹəzum tə bi ðə ɹil paʊɝ bɪhaɪn ðə θɹoʊn. ðət wɑz ðə deɪ ðæt, ɪn əɹ hɑɹt, ʃid tʃɹuli bɪkʌm kwin. ʃid swɔɹn ðət ʃid nɛvɝ lɛɾ ənʌðɝ mənɪpjəleɪɾ əɹ əɡɛn.

She could remember the very day when she'd cast off the last of those who had presumed to be the real power behind the throne. That was the day that, in her heart, she'd truly become Queen. She'd sworn that she'd never let another manipulate her again.

ən ðɛn, jɪɹz leɪɾɝ, ɡeɪbɹəl hæɾ ɝaɪvd. æftɝ ðæt, vɑldə, hu hæd bɪn wɝs. ət list wɪð ɡeɪbɹəl, ʃi hædn ɹilaɪzd wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ. ðət hæd nʌm ðə wunz.

And then, years later, Gaebril had arrived. After that, Valda, who had been worse. At least with Gaebril, she hadn't realized what was happening. That had numbed the wounds.

fʊtstɛps ɑn fɔlən twɪɡz ənaʊnst ə vɪzəɾɝ. ðə laɪt fɹəm əbʌv dɪmd, ðə θɪnɝ klaʊdz muvɪŋ ɑn. ðə ʃæfs ə laɪt feɪɾəd, ən ðə mɪnoʊz skæɾɝd.

Footsteps on fallen twigs announced a visitor. The light from above dimmed, the thinner clouds moving on. The shafts of light faded, and the minnows scattered.

ðə fʊtstɛps stɑp bɪsaɪɾ əɹ stoʊn. "aɪm livɪŋ," tɑlænvɝz vɔɪs sɛd. "eɪbɑɹə hæz ɡɪvən liv fəɹ ɪz æʃəmən tə meɪk ɡeɪtweɪz, stɑɹɾɪŋ wɪð səm ə ðə dɪstən sɪɾiz. aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɛɹ.

The footsteps stopped beside her stone. "I'm leaving," Tallanvor's voice said. "Aybara has given leave for his Asha'man to make gateways, starting with some of the distant cities. I'm going to Tear.

ɹumɝz seɪ ðɛɹz ə kɪŋ ðəɹ əɡɛn. hiz ɡæðɝɪŋ ən ɑɹmi tə faɪɾ ɪn ðə læs bæɾəl. aɪ wɑnə bi wɪð ɪt."

Rumors say there's a king there again. He's gathering an army to fight in the Last Battle. I want to be with it."

mɔɹɡeɪs lʊkt ʌp, stɛɹɪŋ əhɛd θɹu ðə tʃɹiz. ɪt wɑzn ɹɪli ə fɔɹəst. "ðeɪ seɪ jə wɝ əz sɪŋɡəl-maɪndəɾ əz ɡoʊldeɪniz," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "ðæt jə wəd nɑt ɹɛst, ðət jə bɛɹli tʊk taɪm tə it, ðət jə spɛn ɛvɹi moʊmən sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ə weɪ tə fɹi mi."

Morgase looked up, staring ahead through the trees. It wasn't really a forest. "They say you were as single-minded as Goldeneyes," she said softly. "That you would not rest, that you barely took time to eat, that you spent every moment searching for a way to free me."

tɑlænvɝ sɛd nʌθɪŋ.

Tallanvor said nothing.

"aɪv nɛvɝ hæɾ ə mæn də ðət fəɹ mi," ʃi kəntɪnjud. "tɑɹɪŋɡeɪl sɔ mi əz ə pɔn, θɔɹn əz ə bjuɾi tə bi hʌntəɾ ən ɹoʊmænst, ən ɡɛɹɪθ əz ə kwin tə bi sɝvd. bʌt nʌn ə ðɛm meɪd mi ðɛɹ ɪntaɪɝ laɪf, ðɛɹ hɑɹt. aɪ θɪŋk θɔɹn ən ɡɛɹɪθ lʌv mi, bʌɾ əz sʌmθɪŋ tə bi hɛld ən kɛɹd fɔɹ, ðən ɹilist. aɪ dɪdn θɪŋk juɾ ɛvɝ lɛt ɡoʊ."

"I've never had a man do that for me," she continued. "Taringail saw me as a pawn, Thorn as a beauty to be hunted and romanced, and Gareth as a queen to be served. But none of them made me their entire life, their heart. I think Thorn and Gareth loved me, but as something to be held and cared for, then released. I didn't think you'd ever let go."

"aɪ woʊnt," tɑlænvɝ sɛd sɔfli.

"I won't," Tallanvor said softly.

"ju ɡoʊ tə tɛɹ. jɛt jə sɛd jud nɛvɝ liv."

"You go to Tear. Yet you said you'd never leave."

"maɪ hɑɹt steɪz hɪɹ," hi sɛd. "aɪ noʊ wɛl wʌɾ ɪts tə lʌv fɹəm əfɑɹ, mɔɹɡeɪs. aɪd dʌn ɪt fəɹ jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ ðɪs fulz tʃɹɪp bɪɡæn, ən əl də ɪt fəɹ jɪɹz jɛt. maɪ hɑɹɾ ɪz ə tʃɹeɪɾɝ. pɝhæps səm tʃɹɑlɑk wɪl də mi ə feɪvɝ ən ɹɪp ɪt fɹi ʌv maɪ tʃɛst."

"My heart stays here," he said. "I know well what it is to love from afar, Morgase. I'd done it for years before this fool's trip began, and I will do it for years yet. My heart is a traitor. Perhaps some Trolloc will do me a favor and rip it free of my chest."

"soʊ bɪɾɝ," ʃi wɪspɝd.

"So bitter," she whispered.

"ju hæv meɪɾ ɪɾ æmpli klɪɹ ðət maɪ ətɛnʃənz ɑɹ nɑt wɑntəd. ə in ən ə sɪmpəl ɡɑɹdzmæn.

"You have made it amply clear that my attentions are not wanted. A een and a simple guardsman.

pjʊɹ fulɪʃnəs."

Pure foolishness."

"ə kwin noʊ lɔŋɡɝ," ʃi sɛd.

"A queen no longer," she said.

"nɑɾ ɪn neɪm, mɔɹɡeɪs. dʒʌst ɪn maɪnd."

"Not in name, Morgase. Just in mind."

ə lif fɛl fɹəm əbʌv ən stʃɹʌk ðə pul. wɪð ə loʊb mɑɹdʒən ən vɝɾənt ɹɪtʃnəs, ɪt ʃʊɾə hæɾ ə lɔŋ laɪf jɛt.

A leaf fell from above and struck the pool. With a lobed margin and verdant richness, it should have had a long life yet.

"du jə noʊ ðə wɝs pɑɹɾ ə ðɪs?" tɑlænvɝ æskt. "ɪts ðə hoʊp. ðə hoʊp aɪ lɛt maɪsɛlf fil.

"Do you know the worst part of this?" Tallanvor asked. "It's the hope. The hope I let myself feel.

tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð ju, pɹətɛktɪŋ ju, aɪ θɔt meɪbi jə wəd si. meɪbi jə wəd kɛɹ. ən fɝɡɛɾ əbaʊt hɪm"

Traveling with you, protecting you, I thought maybe you would see. Maybe you would care. And forget about him"

"hɪm?"

"Him?"

"ɡeɪbɹəl," tɑlænvɝ snæpt. "aɪ kən si ðət jə stɪl θɪŋk ə hɪm. ivən æftɝ wʌɾ i dɪd tə ju.

"Gaebril," Tallanvor snapped. "I can see that you still think of him. Even after what he did to you.

aɪ liv maɪ hɑɹt hɪɹ, bʌt jə lɛf jʊɹz ɪn keɪɛmlɪn." fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ, ʃi kəd si hɪm tɝn əweɪ. "wʌtɛvɝ ɪts jə sɔ ɪn hɪm, aɪ doʊn əv ɪt. aɪm oʊnli ə sɪmpəl, kɑmən, ɪɾiət ʌv ə ɡɑɹdzmæn u kæn seɪ ðə ɹaɪt wɝdz. jə fɔn oʊvɝ ɡeɪbɹəl, ən i ɔl bʌɾ ɪɡnɔɹd ju.

I leave my heart here, but you left yours in Caemlyn." From the corner of her eye, she could see him turn away. "Whatever it is you saw in him, I don't have it. I'm only a simple, common, idiot of a Guardsman who can't say the right words. You fawned over Gaebril, and he all but ignored you.

ðæts haʊ lʌv ɪz. blʌɾi æʃəz, aɪv ɔl bʌt dʌn ðə seɪm θɪŋ wɪð ju."

That's how love is. Bloody ashes, I've all but done the same thing with you."

ʃi sɛd nʌθɪŋ.

She said nothing.

"wɛl," hi sɛd, "ðæts waɪ aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ. jəɹ seɪf naʊ, ən ðæts ɔl ðət mæɾɝz. laɪt hɛlp mi, bʌt ðæts stɪl ɔl ðəɾ aɪ kɛɹ əbaʊt!"

"Well," he said, "that's why I have to go. You're safe now, and that's all that matters. Light help me, but that's still all that I care about!"

hi bɪɡæn tə wɔk əweɪ, fit kɹʌntʃɪŋ twɪɡz.

He began to walk away, feet crunching twigs.

"ɡeɪbɹəl wɑz wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən," ʃi sɛd.

"Gaebril was one of the Forsaken," she said.

ðə kɹʌntʃɪŋ twɪɡz stɑpt.

The crunching twigs stopped.

"hi wɑz ɹɪli ɹɑvɪn," ʃi kəntɪnjud. "hi tʊk oʊvɝ ændɝ θɹu jus ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ, fɔɹsɪŋ pipəl tə də əz i sɛd."

"He was really Rahvin," she continued. "He took over Andor through use of the One Power, forcing people to do as he said."

tɑlænvɝ hɪst, twɪɡz kɹʌntʃɪŋ əz i heɪsən bæk tə hɝ. "ɑɹ jə sɝɾən?"

Tallanvor hissed, twigs crunching as he hastened back to her. "Are you certain?"

"sɝɾən? noʊ. bʌɾ ɪt dʌz meɪk sɛns. wi kæn ɪɡnɔɹ wʌɾ ɪz hæpənɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝld, tɑlænvɝ.

"Certain? No. But it does make sense. We can't ignore what is happening in the world, Tallanvor.

ðə wɛðɝ, ðə weɪ fud spɔɪlz ɪn ə hɑɹtbit, ðə muvməns ə ðɪs ɹænd ælθɹ. hiz noʊ fɔls dʒɹæɡən. ðə fɔɹseɪkən mʌs bi lus əɡɛn.

The weather, the way food spoils in a heartbeat, the movements of this Rand al'Thor. He is no false Dragon. The Forsaken must be loose again.

wʌt wəd jə du, ɪf jə wɝ wʌn ə ðɛm? ɹeɪz ʌp ən ɑɹmi ən kɑŋkɝ? əɹ sɪmpli stʃɹoʊl ɪndə ə pæləs ən teɪk ðə kwin əz jəɹ kɑnsɔɹt? twɪst əɹ maɪn soʊ ðət ʃi lɛts jə də əz jə wɪʃ.

What would you do, if you were one of them? Raise up an army and conquer? Or simply stroll into a palace and take the Queen as your consort? Twist her mind so that she lets you do as you wish.

jud ɡeɪn ðə ɹisɔɹsɪz ʌv ən ɪntaɪɝ neɪʃən, ɔl wɪð mɪnəməl ɛfɝt. bɛɹli ə fɪŋɡɝ ɹeɪzd . . ."

You'd gain the resources of an entire nation, all with minimal effort. Barely a finger raised . . ."

ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ hɛɾ ən stɛɹɾ ɔf ɪndə ðə dɪstəns. nɔɹθwɝd. təwɔɹɾ ændɝ. "ðeɪ kɔl ɪt kəmpʌlʃən. ə dɑɹk, faʊl wiv ðət ɹimuvz ðə wɪl fɹəm jəɹ sʌbʒɪkt. aɪm nɑt səpoʊz tə noʊ ðəɾ ɪɾ ɪɡzɪsts.

She raised her head and stared off into the distance. Northward. Toward Andor. "They call it Compulsion. A dark, foul weave that removes the will from your subject. I'm not supposed to know that it exists.

"ju seɪ ðəɾ aɪ θɪŋk ə hɪm. ðəɾ ɪz tʃɹu. aɪ θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪm ən heɪt hɪm. heɪt maɪsɛlf fəɹ wʌɾ aɪ lɛɾ ɪm du. ən ə pɑɹɾ ə maɪ hɑɹt noʊz ðəɾ ɪf i wɝ tə əpɪɹ hɪɹ ən dɪmæn sʌmθɪŋ fɹəm mi, aɪd ɡɪv ɪt. aɪ kʊdn hɛlp maɪsɛlf. bʌt ðɪs θɪŋ aɪ fil fəɹ ɪm - ðɪs θɪŋ ðət blɛnz maɪ dɪzaɪɝ ən maɪ heɪtʃɹəd laɪk tu lɑks ɪn ə bɹeɪd - ɪts nɑt lʌv."

"You say that I think of him. That is true. I think about him and hate him. Hate myself for what I let him do. And a part of my heart knows that if he were to appear here and demand something from me, I'd give it. I couldn't help myself. But this thing I feel for him - this thing that blends my desire and my hatred like two locks in a braid - it is not love."

ʃi tɝn ən lʊk daʊn ət tɑlænvɝ. "aɪ noʊ lʌv, tɑlænvɝ, ən ɡeɪbɹəl nɛvɝ hæɾ ɪt fɹəm mi. aɪ daʊt ðəɾ ə kɹitʃɝ laɪk ɪm kəd kɑmpɹihɛn lʌv."

She turned and looked down at Tallanvor. "I know love, Tallanvor, and Gaebril never had it from me. I doubt that a creature like him could comprehend love."

tɑlænvɝ mɛɾ əɹ aɪz. hɪz wɝ dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ, sɑft ən pjʊɹ. "wʊmən jə ɡɪmi ðət mɑnstɝ hoʊp əɡɛn. bi wɛɹi ʌv wʌt laɪz ət jəɹ fit."

Tallanvor met her eyes. His were dark gray, soft and pure. "Woman you give me that monster hope again. Be wary of what lies at your feet."

"aɪ nid taɪm tə θɪŋk. wəd jə ɹɪfɹeɪn, fəɹ naʊ, fɹəm ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɛɹ?"

"I need time to think. Would you refrain, for now, from going to Tear?"

hi baʊd. "mɔɹɡeɪs, ɪf jə wɑn ɛniθɪŋ fɹəm mi - ɛniθɪŋ - ɔl jə ɛvɝ nid tə də ɪz æsk. aɪ θɔɾ aɪ meɪd ðət klɪɹ. əl ɹimuv maɪ neɪm fɹəm ðə lɪst."

He bowed. "Morgase, if you want anything from me - anything - all you ever need to do is ask. I thought I made that clear. I'll remove my name from the list."

hi wɪθdʒɹu. mɔɹɡeɪs wɑtʃt hɪm, hɝ maɪn ə tɛmpəs dɪspaɪt ðə stɪlnəs ə ðə tʃɹiz ən pɑn bɪfɔɹ hɝ.

He withdrew. Morgase watched him, her mind a tempest despite the stillness of the trees and pond before her.


tʃæptɝ twɛntiɾu


CHAPTER 22

ði ɛn ʌv ə lɛdʒənd


The End of a Legend

ət naɪt, ɡɔɪn kʊdn si ðə waɪt taʊɝz wunz. ɪn dɑɹknəs, wʌn kʊdn tɛl ðə dɪfɝəns bɪtwin ə bjuɾəfli ɪntʃɹəkət mjʊɹəl ən ə wɔl fʊl ə mɪsmætʃt taɪlz. ət naɪt, ðə moʊs bjuɾəfəl ə tɑɹ vəlɑnz bɪldɪŋz bɪkeɪm ənʌðɝ dɑɹk lʌmp.

At night, Gawyn couldn't see the White Tower's wounds. In darkness, one couldn't tell the difference between a beautifully intricate mural and a wall full of mismatched tiles. At night, the most beautiful of Tar Valon's buildings became another dark lump.

ən ət naɪt, ðə hoʊlz ən skɑɹz ɑn ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɝ pætʃt wɪð ə bændɪdʒ ə dɑɹknəs.

And at night, the holes and scars on the White Tower were patched with a bandage of darkness.

ʌv kɔɹs, ɑn ə naɪɾ əz dɑɹk əz ðiz klaʊdz kɑzd, wʌn ɔlsoʊ kʊdn tɛl ðə taʊɝz kʌlɝ. waɪɾ əɹ blæk; ət naɪt, ɪt dɪdn ɹɪli mæɾɝ.

Of course, on a night as dark as these clouds caused, one also couldn't tell the Tower's color. White or black; at night, it didn't really matter.

ɡɔɪn wɔk ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz, wɛɹɪŋ stɪf tʃɹaʊzɝz ən koʊɾ ə ɹɛɾ ən ɡoʊld. laɪk ə junəfɔɹm, bʌɾ ə noʊ spəsɪfɪk əlidʒəns. hi dɪdn sim tə hæv ə spəsɪfɪk əlidʒəns ðiz deɪz.

Gawyn walked the White Tower grounds, wearing stiff trousers and coat of red and gold. Like a uniform, but of no specific allegiance. He didn't seem to have a specific allegiance these days.

ɔlmoʊst ʌnkɑnʃəsli, hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf wɔkɪŋ təwɔɹd ði istɝn taʊɝ ɛntʃɹəns əz ɪf tə klaɪm ʌp tə ɛɡwinz slipɪŋ tʃeɪmbɝz. hi sɛɾ ɪz dʒɔ, tɝnɪŋ ði ʌðɝ weɪ.

Almost unconsciously, he found himself walking toward the eastern tower entrance as if to climb up to Egwene's sleeping chambers. He set his jaw, turning the other way.

hi ʃʊɾə bɪn slipɪŋ. bʌɾ æftɝ nɪɹli ə wik ʌv ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ɛɡwinz dɔɹ ət naɪt, hi wɑz  - əz soʊlʒɝz laɪk tə seɪ - ɑn ə mɪdnaɪt lʌntʃ. pɝhæps i cʊɾə steɪɾ ɪn ɪz ɹumz tə ɹɪlæks, bʌɾ ɪz kɔɹɾɝz ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝz bæɹəks fɛl kənfaɪnɪŋ.

He should have been sleeping. But after nearly a week of guarding Egwene's door at night, he was  - as soldiers liked to say - on a midnight lunch. Perhaps he could have stayed in his rooms to relax, but his quarters in the White Tower's barracks felt confining.

nɪɹbaɪ, tu smɔl fɛɹəl kæts stɔk θɹu tʌfs ʌv ɡɹæs, aɪz ɹəflɛktɪŋ ðə tɔɹtʃlaɪɾ ʌv ə ɡɑɹd poʊst. ðə kæts hʌŋkɝd loʊ, wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm əz ɪf kənsɪɾɝɪŋ - fəɹ ə bɹif moʊmənt - wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt hid bi wɝθ ətæk-ɪŋ. ən ənsin aʊl kɹuzd ɪn ði ɛɹ əbʌv, ði oʊnli ɛvəɾəns ʌv ɪts pæs-ɪŋ ə sɑlətɛɹi fɛðɝ ðət floʊɾəd daʊn. ɪt wɑz iziɝ tə pɹitɛn ət naɪt.

Nearby, two small feral cats stalked through tufts of grass, eyes reflecting the torchlight of a guard post. The cats hunkered low, watching him as if considering - for a brief moment - whether or not he'd be worth attack-ing. An unseen owl cruised in the air above, the only evidence of its pass-ing a solitary feather that floated down. It was easier to pretend at night.

səm mɛn lɪv ðɛɹ ɪntaɪɝ lɪvz ðət weɪ, pɹɪfɝɪŋ ðə kɝɾənz ə dɑɹk-nɛs tə ði oʊpən wɪndoʊz ə deɪlaɪt, kəz ðeɪ lɛɾ əm si ðə wɝld ɔl ɪn ʃædoʊ.

Some men lived their entire lives that way, preferring the curtains of dark-ness to the open windows of daylight, because they let them see the world all in shadow.

ɪt wɑz sʌmɝ naʊ, bʌt ðoʊ ðə deɪ hæd bɪn hɑt, ðə naɪt wɑz stʃɹeɪnʒli koʊld. hi ʃɪvɝɾ əɾ ə pæsɪŋ bɹiz. ðəɹ hædn bɪn ɛni mɝɾɝz sɪns ðə dɛθ ə ðəɾ ənfɔɹtʃənət waɪt. wən wəd ðə kɪlɝ stʃɹaɪk əɡɛn? hi - əɹ ʃi - kəd bi muvɪŋ θɹu ðə hɔlweɪz ət ðɪs moʊmənt, sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ə sɑlətɛɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ əz ðoʊz kæts sɝtʃt fəɹ maɪs ɛɡwin hæd sɛn ɪm əweɪ fɹəm əɹ dɔɹ, bʌt ðət dɪdn min i kʊdn bi ɑn ðə wɑtʃ. wʌt ɡʊd wɑz ɪt tə wɔk ðə ɡɹaʊnz? hi ʃəd bi ɪndɔɹz, wɛɹ i hæɾ ə tʃæns ə duɪŋ səm ɡʊd. ɡɔɪn meɪɾ ɪz weɪ tə wʌn ə ðə sɝvən ɛntʃɹənsəz.

It was summer now, but though the day had been hot, the night was strangely cold. He shivered at a passing breeze. There hadn't been any murders since the death of that unfortunate White. When would the killer strike again? He - or she - could be moving through the hallways at this moment, searching for a solitary Aes Sedai as those cats searched for mice Egwene had sent him away from her door, but that didn't mean he couldn't be on the watch. What good was it to walk the grounds? He should be indoors, where he had a chance of doing some good. Gawyn made his way to one of the servant entrances.

ðə loʊ-silɪŋɡd hɔlweɪ ɪnsaɪd wɑz klin ən wɛl lɪt, laɪk ðə ɹɛst ə ðə taʊɝ, ðoʊ ðə flɔɹ wɑz sɛt wɪð dʌl ɡɹeɪ sleɪɾ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɡleɪz taɪlz. ən oʊpən ɹum tə hɪz ɹaɪt ɹisaʊndɪd wɪð læftɝ ən tʃæɾɪŋ, ɔf-duɾi ɡɑɹdzmɪn ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ taɪm wɪð ðɛɹ kɑmɹædz. ɡɔɪn ɡeɪv əm bɛɹli ə ɡlæns, bʌt ðən fɹoʊz.

The low-ceilinged hallway inside was clean and well lit, like the rest of the Tower, though the floor was set with dull gray slate instead of glazed tiles. An open room to his right resounded with laughter and chatting, off-duty guardsmen enjoying time with their comrades. Gawyn gave them barely a glance, but then froze.

hi lʊk bæk ɪn, ɹɛkəɡnaɪzɪŋ səm ə ðə mɛn. "mɑzoʊni? sɛlɑɹk? zæŋ? wʌɾ ɑɹ jə mɛn əbaʊt?"

He looked back in, recognizing some of the men. "Mazone? Celark? Zang? What are you men about?"

ðə θɹi lʊkt ʌp wɪð əlɑɹm, ðən ʃəɡɹɪn. ðeɪ wɝ əmʌŋ əbaʊɾ ə dʌzən jʌŋɡəlɪŋz u wɝ dɪsɪŋ ən smoʊkɪŋ paɪps wɪð ði ɔf-duɾi taʊɝ ɡɑɹdzmɪn. ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz stʌmbəl tə ðɛɹ fiɾ ən ɡeɪv səluts, ðoʊ hi wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ðɛɹ kəmændɝ. ðeɪ dɪdn sim tə ɹilaɪz ðæt.

The three looked up with alarm, then chagrin. They were among about a dozen Younglings who were dicing and smoking pipes with the off-duty Tower guardsmen. The Younglings stumbled to their feet and gave salutes, though he was no longer their commander. They didn't seem to realize that.

sɛlɑɹk, fɔɹmoʊst əmʌŋ ðɛm, heɪsən oʊvɝ tə ɡɔɪn. hi wɑz ə lin fɛloʊ wɪð laɪt bɹaʊn hɛɹ ən θɪk fɪŋɡɝz. "maɪ lɔɹd," hi sɛd. "nʌθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt, maɪ lɔɹd. dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl hɑɹmləs fʌn."

Celark, foremost among them, hastened over to Gawyn. He was a lean fellow with light brown hair and thick fingers. "My Lord," he said. "Nothing important, my Lord. Just a little harmless fun."

"ðə wɔɹɾɝz doʊn laɪk ðɪs kaɪndə bɪheɪvjɝ," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "ju noʊ ðæt, sɛlɑɹk. ɪf ɪt ɡɛts ɝaʊn ðət jəɹ steɪɪŋ ʌp ðɪs leɪt dɪsɪŋ, jəl nɛvɝ kənvɪns ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tə teɪk ju."

"The Warders don't like this kind of behavior," Gawyn said. "You know that, Celark. If it gets around that you're staying up this late dicing, you'll never convince an Aes Sedai to take you."

sɛlɑɹk ɡɹɪməst. "jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd."

Celark grimaced. "Yes, my Lord."

ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɹɪlʌktən ɪn ðət ɡɹɪmɑs. "wʌt?" ɡɔɪn sɛd. "aʊt wɪð ɪt, mæn."

There was something reluctant in that grimace. "What?" Gawyn said. "Out with it, man."

"wɛl, maɪ lɔɹd," sɛlɑɹk sɛd. "ɪts ðət səm ʌv ʌs, wi ɑɹən soʊ ʃʊɹ ðət wi wɑnə bi wɔɹɾɝz.

"Well, my Lord," Celark said. "It's that some of us, we aren't so sure that we want to be Warders.

nɑɾ ɔl ʌv əs keɪm hɪɹ fəɹ ðæt, jə noʊ. səm wɝ laɪk ju, wɑntɪŋ tə tʃɹeɪn wɪð ðə bɛst. ən ðə ɹɛst ʌv əs . .  wɛl, θɪŋz əv tʃeɪnʒd naʊ."

Not all of us came here for that, you know. Some were like you, wanting to train with the best. And the rest of us . .  well, things have changed now."

"wʌt θɪŋz?" ɡɔɪn æskt.

"What things?" Gawyn asked.

"fulɪʃ θɪŋz, maɪ lɔɹd," ðə mæn sɛd, lʊkɪŋ daʊn. "jɔɹ ɹaɪt, ʌv kɔɹs. ðɛɹz ɝli spɑɹɪŋ təmɑɹoʊ. bʌt, wɛl, wiv sin wɔɹ. wɝ soʊlʒɝz naʊ. biɪŋ ə wɔɹɾɝ, ɪts ɔl ə mæn ʃəɾ əspaɪɹ tə. bʌt səm ʌv ʌs, wid ɹæðɝ nɑt si wʌt wɪv naʊ ɛnd. jə noʊ?" ɡɔɪn nɑɾəd sloʊli. "wɛn aɪ fɝs keɪm tə ðə taʊɝ,"

"Foolish things, my Lord," the man said, looking down. "You're right, of course. There's early sparring tomorrow. But, well, we've seen war. We're soldiers now. Being a Warder, it's all a man should aspire to. But some of us, we'd rather not see what we have now end. You know?" Gawyn nodded slowly. "When I first came to the Tower,"

sɛlɑɹk sɛd, "aɪ wɑntəd nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən tə bi ə wɔɹɾɝ. naʊ aɪ doʊnt noʊ ðəɾ aɪ wɑnə spɛn maɪ laɪf pɹətɛkt-ɪŋ wʌn wʊmən, sɑlətɛɹi, ɹoʊvɪŋ əbaʊt ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd."

Celark said, "I wanted nothing more than to be a Warder. Now I don't know that I want to spend my life protect-ing one woman, solitary, roving about the countryside."

"ju kəd bi wɔɹɾɝ tə ə bɹaʊn əɹ waɪt," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "æn steɪ ɪn ðə taʊɝ."

"You could be Warder to a Brown or White," Gawyn said. "And stay in the Tower."

sɛlɑɹk fɹaʊnd. "wɪð ɔl ɹɪspɛkt, maɪ lɔɹd, aɪ θɪŋk ðət maɪt bi dʒʌst əz bæd. wɔɹɾɝz . . . ðeɪ doʊn laɪv laɪk ʌðɝ mɛn."

Celark frowned. "With all respect, my Lord, I think that might be just as bad. Warders . . . they don't live like other men."

"ðæts fəɹ sɝɾən," ɡɔɪn sɛd, aɪz lɪftɪŋ ʌpwɝd, təwɔɹɾ ɛɡwinz dɪstən kɔɹɾɝz. hi wəd nɑt ɡoʊ sikɪŋ ðət dɔɹ. hi fɔɹst ɪz ɡeɪz bæk daʊn tə sɛlɑɹk. "ðɛɹz noʊ ʃeɪm ɪn tʃuzɪŋ ə dɪfɹən pæθ."

"That's for certain," Gawyn said, eyes lifting upward, toward Egwene's distant quarters. He would not go seeking that door. He forced his gaze back down to Celark. "There's no shame in choosing a different path."

"ði ʌðɝz meɪk ɪt saʊn laɪk ðəɹ ɪz."

"The others make it sound like there is."

"ði ʌðɝz ɑɹ ɹɔŋ," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "ɡæðɝ ðoʊz ə jə hu wɑnə ɹɪmeɪn wɪð ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz ən ɹipɔɹt tə kæptən tʃʌbn təmɑɹoʊ. əl spik wɪð hɪm. əl weɪdʒɝ i kəd juz jə əz ə dɪvɪʒən ɪn ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹd. hi lɔst ə lɑɾ ə mɛn ɪn ðə sintʃæn ətæk."

"The others are wrong," Gawyn said. "Gather those of you who want to remain with the Younglings and report to Captain Chubain tomorrow. I'll speak with him. I'll wager he could use you as a division in the Tower Guard. He lost a lot of men in the Seanchan attack."

sɛlɑɹk ɹɪlæks vɪzəbli. "jud də ðæt, maɪ lɔɹd?"

Celark relaxed visibly. "You'd do that, my Lord?"

"ʌv kɔɹs. ɪt wɑz ən ɑnɝ tə lid jə mɛn."

"Of course. It was an honor to lead you men."

"du jə θɪŋk . . . meɪbi jə kəd dʒɔɪn wɪð ʌs?" ðə juθs vɔɪs wɑz hoʊpfəl.

"Do you think . . . maybe you could join with us?" The youth's voice was hopeful.

ɡɔɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪv ənʌðɝ pæθ tə teɪk. bʌt, ðə laɪt wɪlɪŋ, əl ɛn ʌp kloʊs ɪnʌf tə kip ən aɪ ɑn ju." hi nɑɾəd təwɔɹd ðə ɹum. "ɡoʊ bæk tə jəɹ ɡeɪmz. əl spik tə mækzim fəɹ jə əz wɛl." mækzim wɑz ðə stɝn, θɪk-ɑɹmd wɔɹɾɝ kɝənli liɾɪŋ ðə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ sɛʃənz.

Gawyn shook his head. "I've another path to take. But, the Light willing, I'll end up close enough to keep an eye on you." He nodded toward the room. "Go back to your games. I'll speak to Makzim for you as well." Makzim was the stern, thick-armed Warder currently leading the training sessions.

sɛlɑɹk nɑɾəd ɡɹeɪtfəli, hɝiɪŋ bæk tə ði ʌðɝz. ɡɔɪn kəntɪnjud daʊn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, wɪʃɪŋ ɪz tʃɔɪsəz wɝ əz izi əz ðoʊz ə hɪz mɛn.

Celark nodded gratefully, hurrying back to the others. Gawyn continued down the corridor, wishing his choices were as easy as those of his men.

lɔst ɪn θɔt, hid klaɪm hæfweɪ tə ɛɡwinz ɹumz bɪfɔɹ i stɑp tə ɹilaɪz wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ. / nid sʌmθɪŋ tə dɪstʃɹæk mi. ði aʊɝ wɑzn tu leɪt. pɝhæps i kəd faɪn bɹaɪn ən tʃæt.

Lost in thought, he'd climbed halfway to Egwene's rooms before he stopped to realize what he was doing. / need something to distract me. The hour wasn't too late. Perhaps he could find Bryne and chat.

ɡɔɪn meɪɾ ɪz weɪ tə bɹaɪnz ɹumz. ɪf ɡɔɪn hæɾ ə stʃɹeɪnʒ pəzɪʃən əmʌŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, bɹaɪnz wɑz nɪɹli əz ɑd: wɔɹɾɝ tə ðə fɔɹmɝ æmɪɝlɪn, dʒɛnɝəl ʌv ɛɡwinz kɑŋkɝɪŋ ɑɹmi, ən ɹɪnaʊnd ɡɹeɪt kæptən. bɹaɪnz dɔɹ wɑz oʊpən ə kɹæk, ɪmɪɾɪŋ ə laɪn ə laɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə blu-taɪl kɔɹəɾɝ. ðət wɑz ɪz hæbət wən i wɑz ɪn ən əweɪk, ʃəd wʌn ə hɪz ɔfəsɝz nid hɪm. mɛni naɪts bɹaɪn wɑz əweɪ, steɪɪŋ ət wʌn ə hɪz kəmæn sɛntɝz ɝaʊn ði aɪlən əɹ ɪn ə nɪɹbaɪ vɪlədʒ.

Gawyn made his way to Bryne's rooms. If Gawyn had a strange position among the Aes Sedai, Bryne's was nearly as odd: Warder to the former Amyrlin, general of Egwene's conquering army, and renowned great captain. Bryne's door was open a crack, emitting a line of light across the blue-tiled corridor. That was his habit when he was in and awake, should one of his officers need him. Many nights Bryne was away, staying at one of his command centers around the island or in a nearby village.

ɡɔɪn nɑk sɔfli.

Gawyn knocked softly.

"kʌm." bɹaɪnz vɔɪs wɑz fɝm ən fəmɪljɝ. ɡɔɪn slɪpt ɪn, ðən ɹɪtɝn ðə dɔɹ tə ɪts kɹæk pəzɪʃən. bɹaɪn sæɾ əɾ ə ɹɪkəɾi-lʊkɪŋ dɛsk, wɝkɪŋ ɑn ə lɛɾɝ. hi ɡlænst ət ɡɔɪn. "dʒʌst ə moʊmənt."

"Come." Bryne's voice was firm and familiar. Gawyn slipped in, then returned the door to its cracked position. Bryne sat at a rickety-looking desk, working on a letter. He glanced at Gawyn. "Just a moment."

ɡɔɪn weɪɾəd. ðə wɔlz wɝ peɪpɝd wɪð mæps ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ændɝ, kɛɹhin ən sɝaʊndɪŋ ɹidʒənz. mɛni bɔɹ ɹisənt noʊteɪʃənz ɪn ɹɛd tʃɑk. bɹaɪn wɑz pɹipɛɹɪŋ fəɹ wɔɹ. ðə noʊteɪʃənz meɪɾ ɪt klɪɹ i fɛl hiɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli hæv tə dɪfɛn tɑɹ vəlɑn ɪtsɛlf əɡɛns tʃɹɑləks.

Gawyn waited. The walls were papered with maps of Tar Valon, Andor, Cairhien and surrounding regions. Many bore recent notations in red chalk. Bryne was preparing for war. The notations made it clear he felt he'd eventually have to defend Tar Valon itself against Trollocs.

sɛvɹəl mæps ʃoʊd vɪlədʒəz əkɹɔs ðə nɔɹðɝn pɑɹɾ ə ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd, lɪstɪŋ ðɛɹ fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃənz -  ɪf ɛni - ən ðɛɹ lɔɪəlti tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ðeɪd bi juz fəɹ səplaɪ dʌmps ən fɔɹwɝd pəzɪʃənz.

Several maps showed villages across the northern part of the countryside, listing their fortifications -  if any - and their loyalty to Tar Valon. They'd be used for supply dumps and forward positions.

ənʌðɝ mæp hæd sɝkəlz pɔɪntɪŋ aʊɾ eɪntʃənt wɑtʃtaʊɝz, fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃənz ən ɹuənz.

Another map had circles pointing out ancient watchtowers, fortifications and ruins.

ðəɹ wɑz ə məθɑɾəkəl ɪnɛvɪɾəbɪlɪti tə bɹaɪnz kælkjəleɪʃənz, ən ə sɛns ə ɝdʒənsi. hi wɑzn lʊkɪŋ tə bɪl fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃənz, bʌt tə juz ðoʊz ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn pleɪs. hi wɑz muvɪŋ tʃɹups ɪndə ðə vɪlədʒəz i fɛl moʊs jusfəl; ənʌðɝ mæp ʃoʊd pɹɑɡɹɛs ɪn æktɪv ɹəkɹutmənt.

There was a methodical inevitability to Bryne's calculations, and a sense of urgency. He wasn't looking to build fortifications, but to use those already in place. He was moving troops into the villages he felt most useful; another map showed progress in active recruitment.

ɪt wɑzn əntɪl ɡɔɪn stʊd ðəɹ - smɛlɪŋ ðə mʌsti sɛn ʌv oʊl peɪpɝ ən bɝnɪŋ kændəlz -  ðəɾ i fɛl ðə ɹiæləɾi ʌv ði ɪmpɛndɪŋ wɔɹ. ɪt wɑz kʌmɪŋ sun. ðə dʒɹæɡən wəd bɹeɪk ðə silz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən. ðə pleɪs i hæd toʊld ɛɡwin tə mit hɪm, ðə fild ə mɛɹɪlɝ, wɑz mɑɹkt ɪn bɹaɪt ɹɛɾ ɑn ðə mæps. ɪt wɑz nɔɹθ, ɑn ðə bɔɹɾɝ ə ʃaɪnɝ.

It wasn't until Gawyn stood there - smelling the musty scent of old paper and burning candles -  that he felt the reality of the impending war. It was coming soon. The Dragon would break the seals of the Dark One's prison. The place he had told Egwene to meet him, the Field of Merrilor, was marked in bright red on the maps. It was north, on the border of Shienar.

ðə dɑɹk wʌn. lus əpɑn ðə wɝld. laɪt! ɪt meɪd ɡɔɪnz oʊn pɹɑbləmz ɪnsɪɡnjɪfɪkənt.

The Dark One. Loose upon the world. Light! It made Gawyn's own problems insignificant.

bɹaɪn fɪnɪʃt ɪz lɛɾɝ, sændɪŋ ðə peɪpɝ, foʊldɪŋ ɪt, ən ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ ɪz wæks ən sil. "ɪts ə lɪɾəl leɪt fəɹ kɔlɪŋ ɑn pipəl, sʌn."

Bryne finished his letter, sanding the paper, folding it, and reaching for his wax and seal. "It's a little late for calling on people, son."

"aɪ noʊ, bʌɾ aɪ θɔt jə maɪt bi ʌp."

"I know, but I thought you might be up."

"æn soʊ aɪ æm." bɹaɪn dʒɹɪbəld wæks ɑntu ðə lɛɾɝ. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt jə nid?"

"And so I am." Bryne dribbled wax onto the letter. "What is it you need?"

"ædvaɪs," ɡɔɪn sɛd, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ə stul.

"Advice," Gawyn said, sitting on a stool.

"ənlɛs ɪts əbaʊt ðə bɛst weɪ tə kɔɹɾɝ ə ɡɹup ə mɛn əɹ haʊ tə fɔɹɾɪfaɪ ə hɪltɑp, jəl faɪn maɪ ædvaɪs lækɪŋ. bʌt wʌɾ ɪz ɪt jə wɑnə tɔk əbaʊt?"

"Unless it's about the best way to quarter a group of men or how to fortify a hilltop, you'll find my advice lacking. But what is it you want to talk about?"

"ɛɡwin fɝbeɪd mi tə pɹətɛk hɝ."

"Egwene forbade me to protect her."

"aɪm sɝɾən ði æmɪɝlɪn hæɾ əɹ ɹizənz," bɹaɪn sɛd, kɑmli silɪŋ ðə lɛɾɝ.

"I'm certain the Amyrlin had her reasons," Bryne said, calmly sealing the letter.

"fulɪʃ wʌnz," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "ʃi hæz noʊ wɔɹɾɝ, ən ðəɹ ɪz ə kɪlɝ ɪn ðə taʊɝ." wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən, hi θɔt.

"Foolish ones," Gawyn said. "She has no Warder, and there is a killer in the Tower." One of the Forsaken, he thought.

"boʊθ tʃɹu," bɹaɪn sɛd. "bʌt wʌt dʌz ðəɾ əv tə də wɪð ju?"

"Both true," Bryne said. "But what does that have to do with you?"

"ʃi nidz maɪ pɹətɛkʃən."

"She needs my protection."

"dɪd ʃi æsk fəɹ jəɹ pɹətɛkʃən?"

"Did she ask for your protection?"

"noʊ"

"No"

"ɪndid. əz aɪ ɹikɔl, ʃi dɪdn æsk jə tə kʌm wɪð əɹ ɪndə ðə taʊɝ iðɝ nɔɹ dɪd ʃi æsk fəɹ jə tə bɪɡɪn fɑloʊɪŋ əɹ əbaʊt laɪk ə haʊn ðəɾ əz lɔst ɪz mæstɝ."

"Indeed. As I recall, she didn't ask you to come with her into the Tower either nor did she ask for you to begin following her about like a hound that has lost his master."

"bʌt ʃi nidz mi!" ɡɔɪn sɛd.

"But she needs me!" Gawyn said.

"ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ. ðə læs taɪm jə θɔt ðæt, jə - wɪð maɪ hɛlp -  ʌpsɛt wiks' wɝθ ə hɝ wɝk tə ɹiunaɪt ðə waɪt taʊɝ. səmtaɪmz, sʌn, əɹ hɛlp ɪz nɑt niɾəd. noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ fɹili ɔfɝd, əɹ haʊ ɝdʒən ðət hɛlp meɪ sim."

"Interesting. The last time you thought that, you - with my help -  upset weeks' worth of her work to reunite the White Tower. Sometimes, son, our help is not needed. No matter how freely offered, or how urgent that help may seem."

ɡɔɪn foʊldəɾ ɪz ɑɹmz, əneɪbəl tə lin əɡɛns ðə wɔl, lɛst i dɪstɝb ə mæp ʃoʊɪŋ ɔɹtʃɝdz əkɹɔs ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ kʌntʃɹisaɪd. wʌn vɪlədʒ nɪɹ dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt wɑz sɝkəl fɔɹ taɪmz, fəɹ səm ɹizən. "soʊ jəɹ ædvaɪs ɪz tə lɛɾ əɹ ɹɪmeɪn ɪkspoʊzd, pɝhæps tə teɪk ə naɪf ɪn ðə bæk."

Gawyn folded his arms, unable to lean against the wall, lest he disturb a map showing orchards across the surrounding countryside. One village near Dragonmount was circled four times, for some reason. "So your advice is to let her remain exposed, perhaps to take a knife in the back."

"aɪ hævənt ɡɪvən ɛni ædvaɪs," bɹaɪn sɛd, lifɪŋ θɹu səm ɹɪpɔɹts ɑn ɪz dɛsk, hɪz fɝm feɪs lɪt baɪ flɪkɝɪŋ kændəllaɪt. "aɪ hæv oʊnli meɪɾ ɑbzɝveɪʃənz, ðoʊ aɪ θɪŋk ɪt kjʊɹiəs ðət jə kənklud ðət jə ʃəd liv əɹ əloʊn."

"I haven't given any advice," Bryne said, leafing through some reports on his desk, his firm face lit by flickering candlelight. "I have only made observations, though I think it curious that you conclude that you should leave her alone."

"aɪ . . . bɹaɪn, ʃi dʌzn meɪk sɛnsəl"

"I . . . Bryne, she doesn't make sensel"

ðə kɔɹnɝ ə bɹaɪnz maʊθ ɹeɪzd ɪn ə ɹaɪ smaɪl. hi loʊɝɾ ɪz peɪpɝz, tɝnɪŋ tə ɡɔɪn. "aɪ wɔɹn jə ðət maɪ ædvaɪs wəd bi ʌv lɪɾəl jus. aɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪf ðəɹ ɑɹ ænsɝz ðət wɪl sut ju.

The corner of Bryne's mouth raised in a wry smile. He lowered his papers, turning to Gawyn. "I warned you that my advice would be of little use. I'm not sure if there are answers that will suit you.

bʌt lemi æsk ðɪs: wʌɾ ɪz ɪt jə wɑnt, ɡɔɪn tʃɹəkənd?"

But let me ask this: What is it you want, Gawyn Trakand?"

"ɛɡwin," hi sɛɾ ɪmiɾiətli. "aɪ wɑnə bi hɝ wɔɹɾɝ."

"Egwene," he said immediately. "I want to be her Warder."

"wɛl, wɪtʃ ɪz ɪt?"

"Well, which is it?"

ɡɔɪn fɹaʊnd.

Gawyn frowned.

"du jə wɑn ɛɡwin, əɹ dʒju wɑnə bi hɝ wɔɹɾɝ?"

"Do you want Egwene, or do you want to be her Warder?"

"tə bi hɝ wɔɹɾɝ, ʌv kɔɹs. ən . . . ænd, wɛl, tə mɛɹi hɝ. aɪ lʌv hɝ, bɹaɪn."

"To be her Warder, of course. And . . . and, well, to marry her. I love her, Bryne."

"ɪt simz tə mi ðət ðoʊz ɑɹ tu dɪfɹən θɪŋz. sɪməlɝ, bʌt sɛpɹət. bʌt, ʌðɝ ðən θɪŋz tə də wɪð ɛɡwin, wʌɾ ɪz ɪt ðət jə wɑnt?"

"It seems to me that those are two different things. Similar, but separate. But, other than things to do with Egwene, what is it that you want?"

nʌθɪŋ," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "ʃiz ɛvɹiθɪŋ."

Nothing," Gawyn said. "She's everything."

"wɛl, ðɛɹz jəɹ pɹɑbləm."

"Well, there's your problem."

"haʊ ɪz ðəɾ ə pɹɑbləm? aɪ lʌv hɝ."

"How is that a problem? I love her."

soʊ jə sɛd." bɹaɪn ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ɡɔɪn, wʌn ɑɹm ɑn ðə teɪbəl, ði ʌðɝ ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn ɪz lɛɡ. ɡɔɪn ɹɪzɪstɪd ði ɝdʒ tə skwɝm bɪniθ ðət ɡeɪz. "ju ɔlweɪz wɝ ðə pæʃənət wʌn, ɡɔɪn. laɪk jəɹ mʌðɝ ən jəɹ sɪstɝ. ɪmpʌlsɪv, nɛvɝ kælkjəleɪɾɪŋ laɪk jəɹ bɹʌðɝ."

So you said." Bryne regarded Gawyn, one arm on the table, the other resting on his leg. Gawyn resisted the urge to squirm beneath that gaze. "You always were the passionate one, Gawyn. Like your mother and your sister. Impulsive, never calculating like your brother."

ɡɑləd dʌzn kælkjəleɪt," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "hi dʒʌst æks."

Galad doesn't calculate," Gawyn said. "He just acts."

noʊ," bɹaɪn sɛd. "pɝhæps aɪ spoʊk ɹɔŋ - ɡɑləd meɪ nɑt bi kælkju-lɑɾɪŋ, bʌɾ i ɪzən ɪmpʌlsɪv.

No," Bryne said. "Perhaps I spoke wrong - Galad may not be calcu-lating, but he isn't impulsive.

tə bi ɪmpʌlsɪv ɪz tə ækt wɪθaʊt kɛɹfəl θɔt; ɡɑləɾ əz ɡɪvən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə θɔt. hiz wɝkt aʊɾ ɪz koʊɾ ə mɝæləɾi ðət weɪ. hi kən ækt kwɪkli ən dɪsaɪsɪvli bi-kɑz hiz ɔlɹɛɾi dɪtɝmənd wʌt tə du.

To be impulsive is to act without careful thought; Galad has given everything a great deal of thought. He's worked out his code of morality that way. He can act quickly and decisively be-cause he's already determined what to do.

"ju ækt wɪð pæʃən. jə doʊn ækt kəz ə ðə weɪ jə θɪŋk, bʌt kəz ə ðə weɪ jə fil. ɪn ə ɹʌʃ, wɪð ə snæp ʌv ɪmoʊʃən. ðət ɡɪvz jə stʃɹɛŋkθ. jə kən ækt wən jə nid tə, ðən sɔɹt θɹu ðə ɹæməfəkeɪʃənz leɪɾɝ. jəɹ ɪnstɪŋks ɑɹ juʒəwəli ɡʊd, dʒʌs laɪk jəɹ mʌðɝz wɝ. bʌt kəz ə ðæt, juv nɛvɝ hæd tə feɪs wʌt tə də wən jəɹ ɪnstɪŋks lɛd jə ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ dɝɛkʃən."

"You act with passion. You don't act because of the way you think, but because of the way you feel. In a rush, with a snap of emotion. That gives you strength. You can act when you need to, then sort through the ramifications later. Your instincts are usually good, just like your mother's were. But because of that, you've never had to face what to do when your instincts lead you in the wrong direction."

ɡɔɪn faʊn hɪmsɛlf nɑɾɪŋ.

Gawyn found himself nodding.

"bʌt sʌn," bɹaɪn sɛd, linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. "ə mæn ɪz mɔɹ ðən wʌn dʒɹaɪv wʌn ɡoʊl. noʊ wʊmən wɑns ðəɾ ɪn ə mæn. ɪt simz tə mi ðət mɛn u spɛn taɪm meɪkɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ə ðɛmsɛlvz - ɹæðɝ ðən pɹəfɛsɪŋ ðɛɹ dɪvoʊʃən - ɑɹ ðə wʌnz u ɡɛt sʌmwɛɹ. boʊθ wɪð wɪmən, ən wɪð laɪf ɪtsɛlf." bɹaɪn ɹʌbd ɪz tʃɪn. "soʊ, ɪf aɪ hæv ædvaɪs fəɹ ju, ɪts ðɪs: faɪn aʊɾ u jə wəd bi wɪθaʊɾ ɛɡwin, ən ðən fɪɡjɝ aʊt haʊ tə fɪɾ əɹ ɪndə ðæt. aɪ θɪŋk ðæts wʌɾ ə wʊmən - "

"But son," Bryne said, leaning forward. "A man is more than one drive one goal. No woman wants that in a man. It seems to me that men who spend time making something of themselves - rather than professing their devotion - are the ones who get somewhere. Both with women, and with life itself." Bryne rubbed his chin. "So, if I have advice for you, it's this: Find out who you would be without Egwene, and then figure out how to fit her into that. I think that's what a woman - "

"jɔɹ ən ɛkspɝɾ ɑn wɪmən naʊ?" ə nu vɔɪs æskt.

"You're an expert on women now?" a new voice asked.

ɡɔɪn tɝnd, sɝpɹaɪzd, tə faɪn sɪuən sɑntʃ pʊʃɪŋ oʊpən ðə dɔɹ.

Gawyn turned, surprised, to find Siuan Sanche pushing open the door.

bɹaɪn dɪdn mɪs ə bit. "juv bɪn ðəɹ lɪsnɪŋ lɔŋ ɪnʌf, sɪuən, tə noʊ ðæts nɑt wʌt ðə kɑnvɝseɪʃən wɑz əbaʊt."

Bryne didn't miss a beat. "You've been there listening long enough, Siuan, to know that's not what the conversation was about."

sɪuən snɔɹɾɪd, bʌsəlɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɹum wɪð ə pɑɾ ə ti. "ju ʃəd bi ɪn bɛd," ʃi sɛd, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ɡɔɪn æftɝ ə kɝsɝi ɡlæns.

Siuan snorted, bustling into the room with a pot of tea. "You should be in bed," she said, ignoring Gawyn after a cursory glance.

"vɛɹi tʃɹu," bɹaɪn sɛd kæʒəwəli. "ɑdli, ðə nidz ə ðə læn doʊn səbmɪt tə maɪ wɪmz."

"Very true," Bryne said casually. "Oddly, the needs of the land don't submit to my whims."

"mæps kən bi stʌɾid ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ."

"Maps can be studied in the morning."

"æn ðeɪ kən bi stʌɾid ət naɪt. ən dʊɹɪŋ ði æftɝnun. ɛvɹi aʊɝ aɪ spɛn kəd min liɡz ʌv ɡɹaʊn dɪfɛndəɾ ɪf tʃɹɑləks bɹeɪk θɹu."

"And they can be studied at night. And during the afternoon. Every hour I spend could mean leagues of ground defended if Trollocs break through."

sɪuən saɪd laʊdli, hændɪŋ ɪm ə kʌp, ðən pɔɹɪŋ ðə ti, wɪtʃ smɛld ə klaʊdbɛɹi. ɪt wɑz dɪsaɪɾədli ɑd tə si sɪuən - hu, kəz ə hɝ stɪlɪŋ, lʊk laɪk ə wʊmən ɡɔɪnz eɪdʒ -  mʌðɝɪŋ ðə ɡɹɪzəl dʒɛnɝəl bɹaɪn.

Siuan sighed loudly, handing him a cup, then pouring the tea, which smelled of cloudberry. It was decidedly odd to see Siuan - who, because of her stilling, looked like a woman Gawyn's age -  mothering the grizzled General Bryne.

sɪuən tɝn tə ɡɔɪn əz bɹaɪn æksɛptɪɾ ɪz dʒɹɪŋk. "æn ju, ɡɔɪn tʃɹəkənd," ʃi sɛd. "aɪv bɪn minɪŋ tə spik tə ju. ɡɪvɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz tə ði æmɪɝlɪn, tɛlɪŋ əɹ wʌt ʃi ʃəd du? ɑnəsli.

Siuan turned to Gawyn as Bryne accepted his drink. "And you, Gawyn Trakand," she said. "I've been meaning to speak to you. Giving orders to the Amyrlin, telling her what she should do? Honestly.

mɛn sim tə θɪŋk ðət wɪmən ɑɹ nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ðɛɹ pɝsənəl mɛsənʒɝz, səmtaɪmz. jə dʒɹim ʌp ɔl sɔɹts ə ɹɪdɪkjələs skimz, ðən ɪkspɛkt əs tə sʌmhaʊ kæɹi ðɛm aʊt."

Men seem to think that women are nothing more than their personal messengers, sometimes. You dream up all sorts of ridiculous schemes, then expect us to somehow carry them out."

ʃi aɪd hɪm, nɑt lʊkɪŋ laɪk ʃi ɪkspɛktəɾ ɛni ɹɪspɑns ʌðɝ ðən ən əʃeɪm loʊɝɪŋ ə ði aɪz. ɡɔɪn ɡeɪv ðəɾ ən ðən meɪɾ ə heɪsti ɛɡzɪt tə əvɔɪd fɝðɝ bʊliɪŋ.

She eyed him, not looking like she expected any response other than an ashamed lowering of the eyes. Gawyn gave that and then made a hasty exit to avoid further bullying.

hi wɑzn sɝpɹaɪz baɪ ɛniθɪŋ bɹaɪn hæd sɛd. ðə mæn wɑz nɑθ- ɪŋ ɪf nɑt kənsɪstənt, ən i hæd ɹɪpiɾɪd ðə seɪm θimz tə ɡɔɪn bi- fɔɹ. θɪŋk ɪnstɛɾ ə biɪŋ ɪmpʌlsɪv; bi dɪlɪbɝeɪt. bʌt hid spɛnt wiks θɪŋkɪŋ, hɪz aɪdiəz tʃeɪsɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn sɝkəlz laɪk flaɪz tʃɹæpt ɪn ə dʒɑɹ.

He wasn't surprised by anything Bryne had said. The man was noth- ing if not consistent, and he had repeated the same themes to Gawyn be- fore. Think instead of being impulsive; be deliberate. But he'd spent weeks thinking, his ideas chasing one another in circles like flies trapped in a jar.

hid ɡɑɾən noʊwɛɹ.

He'd gotten nowhere.

ɡɔɪn wɔk ðə hɔlweɪz, noʊɾɪŋ tʃʌbnz ɡɑɹdz poʊstɪɾ ət ɹɛɡjəlɝ ɪntɝvəlz. hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf i wɑzn klaɪmɪŋ tə ɛɡwin; hi wɑz mɪɹli tʃɛkɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɑɹdz. ən jɛt, hi sun faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɪn ə hɔlweɪ nɪɹ ði æmɪɝlɪnz kɔɹɾɝz. dʒʌst wʌn hɔlweɪ oʊvɝ. hid tʃɛk ɑn əɹ kwɪkli ən . . .

Gawyn walked the hallways, noting Chubain's guards posted at regular intervals. He told himself he wasn't climbing to Egwene; he was merely checking on the guards. And yet, he soon found himself in a hallway near the Amyrlin's quarters. Just one hallway over. He'd check on her quickly and . . .

ɡɔɪn fɹoʊz. wʌɾ æm aɪ duɪŋ? hi θɔt.

Gawyn froze. What am I doing? he thought.

ə lɑɾ ə hɪz nɝvəsnəs tənaɪt keɪm fɹəm nɑt noʊɪŋ ɪf ɛɡwin wɑz pɹɑpɝli ɡɑɹɾəd əɹ nɑt.

A lot of his nervousness tonight came from not knowing if Egwene was properly guarded or not.

hi wʊdn bi eɪbəl tə slip əntɪl -  noʊ, hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf fɔɹsfəli. ðɪs taɪm, əl də əz ʃi æsks. hi tɝn tə ɡoʊ.

He wouldn't be able to sleep until -  No, he told himself forcefully. This time, I'll do as she asks. He turned to go.

ə saʊn meɪɾ ɪm hɛzəteɪt, ɡlænsɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. fʊtfɔlz ən kloʊðɪŋ ɹʌslɪŋ. ɪt wɑz tu leɪt fəɹ nɑvəsɪz, bʌt sɝvəns maɪt wɛl bi dɪlɪvɝɪŋ leɪt milz. bɹaɪn ən ɡɔɪn wɝn ði oʊnli wʌnz u kɛpt ənjuʒəwəl aʊɝz ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ.

A sound made him hesitate, glancing over his shoulder. Footfalls and clothing rustling. It was too late for novices, but servants might well be delivering late meals. Bryne and Gawyn weren't the only ones who kept unusual hours in the White Tower.

ɪt keɪm əɡɛn. soʊ sɑft, bɛɹli ɑɾəbəl. fɹaʊnɪŋ, ɡɔɪn slɪpt ɔf ɪz buts, ðən snik fɔɹwɝd tə ɡlæns ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ.

It came again. So soft, barely audible. Frowning, Gawyn slipped off his boots, then sneaked forward to glance around the corner.

ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ. ɛɡwinz dɔɹ - ɪnleɪd wɪð ɡoʊld ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə - sæt kloʊzd, ðə hɔlweɪ ɛmpti. saɪɪŋ, ɡɔɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, linɪŋ bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl tə slɪp ɪz buts bæk ɑn. hi wɪʃt ɛɡwin wəɾ ət lis lɛt tʃʌbn sɛt ɡɑɹdz əɾ əɹ ɹum. livɪŋ ɪɾ ʌn-wɑtʃt wɑz  -  sʌmθɪŋ muvd ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ dʒʌs daʊn fɹəm ɛɡwinz dɔɹweɪ. ɡɔɪn fɹoʊz. ðəɹ wɑzn mʌtʃ ʌv ə dɑɹk pætʃ ðɛɹ, oʊnli ə ʃædoʊ ə fju ɪntʃəz waɪd meɪd baɪ ən ælkoʊv, bʌɾ əz i stʌɾid ðət pætʃ, hi hæd tʃɹʌbəl kipɪŋ ɪz aɪz ɑn ɪt. hɪz ɡeɪz slɪd fɹi, laɪk ə dɑləp ə bʌɾɝ ɑn ə hɑt tɝnəp.

There was nothing. Egwene's door - inlaid with gold in the shape of Avendesora - sat closed, the hallway empty. Sighing, Gawyn shook his head, leaning back against the wall to slip his boots back on. He wished Egwene would at least let Chubain set guards at her room. Leaving it un-watched was  -  Something moved in the shadow just down from Egwene's doorway. Gawyn froze. There wasn't much of a dark patch there, only a shadow a few inches wide made by an alcove, But as he studied that patch, he had trouble keeping his eyes on it. His gaze slid free, like a dollop of butter on a hot turnip.

ɪt simd ... ɪt sim ðət ðə dɑɹknəs wɑz lɑɹdʒɝ ðən i hæɾ ɝɪdʒənəli θɔt. waɪ kʊdn i lʊk stʃɹeɪɾ əɾ ɪt?

It seemed ... it seemed that the darkness was larger than he had originally thought. Why couldn't he look straight at it?

ðəɹ wɑz ə flæʃ ə muvmənt, ən sʌmθɪŋ spʌn ɪn ði ɛɹ. ɡɔɪn θɹu hɪmsɛlf tə ðə saɪd, ən stil stʃɹʌk stoʊn. wʌn buɾ ɑn, hi dʒɹɑp ði ʌðɝ əz i pʊld ɪz sɔɹd fɹi. ðə naɪf ðət hæd bɪn θɹoʊn fəɹ ɪz hɑɹt skɪɾəd əkɹɔs ðə taɪl flɔɹ.

There was a flash of movement, and something spun in the air. Gawyn threw himself to the side, and steel struck stone. One boot on, he dropped the other as he pulled his sword free. The knife that had been thrown for his heart skidded across the tiled floor.

ɡɔɪn pɪɹd ɹaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ, tɛns. sʌmwʌn wɑz fliɪŋ daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ. sʌmwʌn wɛɹɪŋ ɔl blæk, ə hʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə hɛd.

Gawyn peered round the corner, tense. Someone was fleeing down the hallway. Someone wearing all black, a hood over the head.

ɡɔɪn tʊk ɔf æftɝ ðə pɝsən, sɔɹd hɛl bɪfɔɹ hɪm, ɑɹmz pʌmp-ɪŋ, ɡeɪɾ ɑkwɝɾ əz ɪz ənbuɾɪd fʊt hɪɾ ɑpəzəɾ ɪz buɾɪd wʌn. ði əsæsən wɑz ɪkstʃɹimli fæst. ɡɔɪn bɛloʊd ði əlɑɹm, hɪz vɔɪs ɛkoʊɪŋ θɹu ðə saɪlən hɔlz ə ðə taʊɝ; ðən i kʌt lɛft. ði əsæsən wəɾ əv tə tɝn ən kʌm ʌp ðə hɔlweɪ hɪɹ tə ðə ɹaɪt.

Gawyn took off after the person, sword held before him, arms pump-ing, gait awkward as his unbooted foot hit opposite his booted one. The assassin was extremely fast. Gawyn bellowed the alarm, his voice echoing through the silent halls of the Tower; then he cut left. The assassin would have to turn and come up the hallway here to the right.

ɡɔɪn bɝst ɪndə ənʌðɝ hɔlweɪ, tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ ɑn ə hɛɾɪŋ ðət wəd kʌɾ ɔf ði əsæsən. hi skɪɾəd ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ.

Gawyn burst into another hallway, charging on a heading that would cut off the assassin. He skidded around the corner.

ðə hɔlweɪ wɑz ɛmpti. hæd ði əsæsən dʌbəl bæk? ɡɔɪn kɝst əz i ɹæn fɔɹwɝɾ ən ɹitʃt ði ɝɪdʒənəl hɔlweɪ ət ði ʌðɝ ɛnd. ɪt wɑz ɛmpti. ə dɔɹweɪ, pɝhæps? ɔl wəd bi dɛɾ ɛnz. ɪf ɡɔɪn weɪɾəd əntɪl hɛlp keɪm . . .

The hallway was empty. Had the assassin doubled back? Gawyn cursed as he ran forward and reached the original hallway at the other end. It was empty. A doorway, perhaps? All would be dead ends. If Gawyn waited until help came . . .

noʊ, ɡɔɪn θɔt, spɪnɪŋ. dɑɹknəs. lʊk fəɹ dɑɹknəs. ðəɹ wɑz ə dip pætʃ ʌv ɪt baɪ ə dɔɹfɹeɪm tə hɪz lɛft. fɑɹ tu smɔl tə hoʊld ɛniwʌn, bʌɾ i hæd ðət seɪm sɛns ə dɪsɔɹiənteɪʃən əz i lʊkt əɾ ɪt.

No, Gawyn thought, spinning. Darkness. Look for darkness. There was a deep patch of it by a doorframe to his left. Far too small to hold anyone, but he had that same sense of disorientation as he looked at it.

ə pɝsən lɛpt aʊt, swɪŋɪŋ ə sɔɹd fəɹ ɡɔɪnz hɛd. hi wɪpt ɪz bleɪɾ ɪndə kʌɾɪŋ ðə ɹidz, nɑkɪŋ əsaɪd ði ətæk. ði əsæsən wɑz mʌtʃ ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ɡɔɪn, soʊ hi ʃʊɾə hæɾ ə stʃɹɔŋ ædvæntɪdʒ ɪn ɹitʃ. jɛt ði əsæsən muvd wɪð ə blɝɪŋ spid, sɔɹd dɑɹɾɪŋ ət ɡɔɪn ɪn ə sɪɹiz ə θɹʌsts, nɑt juzɪŋ ɛni sɔɹd fɔɹmz ɡɔɪn ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd.

A person leaped out, swinging a sword for Gawyn's head. He whipped his blade into Cutting the Reeds, knocking aside the attack. The assassin was much shorter than Gawyn, so he should have had a strong advantage in reach. Yet the assassin moved with a blurring speed, sword darting at Gawyn in a series of thrusts, not using any sword forms Gawyn recognized.

ɡɔɪn fɛl ɪndə twɪstɪŋ ðə wɪnd, əz i wɑz fɔɹs tə ækt əz ɪf i wɝ sɝaʊndəd. hi bɛɹli kɛp ði ətækɝ ət beɪ. hi kəd hɪɹ jɛlz ɪn ðə dɪstəns - ɡɑɹdz ɹɪspɑndɪŋ tə hɪz kɔl. hi ʃaʊɾəd əɡɛn.

Gawyn fell into Twisting the Wind, as he was forced to act as if he were surrounded. He barely kept the attacker at bay. He could hear yells in the distance - guards responding to his call. He shouted again.

hi kəd sɛns fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən ɪn ði ətækɝz muvz; ði əsæsən hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd tə dɪfit ɡɔɪn kwɪkli. wɛl, ɡɔɪn hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd ðə seɪm, bʌt foʊkəsɪŋ ɑn ðɪs əpoʊnənt wɑz vɛɹi dɪfəkəlt.

He could sense frustration in the attacker's moves; the assassin had expected to defeat Gawyn quickly. Well, Gawyn had expected the same, but focusing on this opponent was very difficult.

ɡɔɪnz bloʊz - wən i kəd meɪk əm - hɪɾ ɛɹ wən ðeɪ ʃʊɾə lændəɾ ɑn flɛʃ. ɡɔɪn twɪstəd tə ðə saɪd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz bleɪd fəɹ bɔɹ ɹʌʃəz daʊn ðə maʊntən. bʌt ðət ɡeɪv ði əsæsən ən oʊpənɪŋ; hi flʌŋ ənʌðɝ naɪf ət ɡɔɪn, fɔɹsɪŋ ɪm tə ðə saɪd.

Gawyn's blows - when he could make them - hit air when they should have landed on flesh. Gawyn twisted to the side, raising his blade for Boar Rushes Down the Mountain. But that gave the assassin an opening; he flung another knife at Gawyn, forcing him to the side.

ðə naɪf klæŋd əɡɛns ðə wɔl, ən ði əsæsən flɛd daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ. ɡɔɪn ɹʌʃt æftɝ, bʌɾ i kʊdn kip ʌp. sun ði əsæsən wɑz fɑɹ əweɪ, dɑɹɾɪŋ tə ðə lɛft. ðət dɝɛkʃən lɛd tə ə sɪɹiz ʌv ɪntɝsɛkʃənz.

The knife clanged against the wall, and the assassin fled down the hallway. Gawyn rushed after, but he couldn't keep up. Soon the assassin was far away, darting to the left. That direction led to a series of intersections.

sətʃ spid, ɡɔɪn θɔt, stɑpɪŋ, bɹiðɪŋ ɪn ən aʊɾ ɪn ɡæsps, hænz ɑn niz. ɪɾ ɪzənt nætʃɹəl. tu ʌv tʃʌbnz ɡɑɹdz ɝaɪvd ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ, sɔɹdz ət ðə ɹɛɾi. ɡɔɪn pɔɪntəd.

Such speed, Gawyn thought, stopping, breathing in and out in gasps, hands on knees. It isn't natural. Two of Chubain's guards arrived a moment later, swords at the ready. Gawyn pointed.

"əsæsən. lɪsnɪŋ əɾ ɛɡwinz dɔɹ. wɛn ðət weɪ."

"Assassin. Listening at Egwene's door. Went that way."

wʌn ɹæn wɛɹ i pɔɪntəd. ði ʌðɝ wɛn tə ɹeɪz ðə dʒɛnɝəl əlɑɹm.

One ran where he pointed. The other went to raise the general alarm.

laɪt! ɡɔɪn θɔt. wʌɾ ɪf aɪ dɪdn ɪntɝʌpt ɪm lɪsnɪŋ? wʌɾ ɪf aɪ ɪntɝʌptɪɾ ɪm ɑn ɪz weɪ aʊt?

Light! Gawyn thought. What if I didn't interrupt him listening? What if I interrupted him on his way out?

ɡɔɪn dæʃt tə ɛɡwinz dɔɹ, fətiɡ ɪvæpɝeɪɾɪŋ. sɔɹɾ aʊt, hi tɛstəd ðə dɔɹ. ɪt wɑz ənlɑkt!

Gawyn dashed to Egwene's door, fatigue evaporating. Sword out, he tested the door. It was unlocked!

"ɛɡwin!" hi kɹaɪd, θɹoʊɪŋ ðə dɔɹ oʊpən ən lipɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɹum.

"Egwene!" he cried, throwing the door open and leaping into the room.

ðəɹ wɑz ə sʌɾən ɪksploʊʒən ə laɪɾ ən ə kɹæʃɪŋ saʊnd. ɡɔɪn faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɹæpt ʌp ɪn sʌmθɪŋ stʃɹɔŋ: ɪnvɪzəbəl kɔɹdz, toʊɪŋ ɪm ɪndə ði ɛɹ. hɪz sɔɹd fɛl tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ən ɪz maʊθ fɪld wɪð ən ənsin fɔɹs.

There was a sudden explosion of light and a crashing sound. Gawyn found himself wrapped up in something strong: invisible cords, towing him into the air. His sword fell to the ground, and his mouth filled with an unseen force.

ən soʊ ɪt wɑz ðəɾ i faʊn hɪmsɛlf hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ðə silɪŋ, dɪsɑɹmd, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ, əz ði æmɪɝlɪn hɝsɛlf wɔk fɹəm əɹ bɛdʒɹum. ʃi wɑz əlɝɾ ən fʊli dʒɹɛst ɪn ə kɹɪmzən dʒɹɛs tʃɹɪmd wɪð ɡoʊld. ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk plizd.

And so it was that he found himself hanging from the ceiling, disarmed, struggling, as the Amyrlin herself walked from her bedroom. She was alert and fully dressed in a crimson dress trimmed with gold. She did not look pleased.

mæt sæt bɪsaɪd ði ɪnz hɑɹθ, wɪʃɪŋ ðə faɪɝ wɝ ə lɪɾəl lɛs wɔɹm. hi kəd fil ɪts hit θɹu ðə leɪɝz ə hɪz ɹæɡəd dʒækəɾ ən waɪt ʃɝt, mætʃt baɪ ə pɛɹ ʌv wɝkmənz θɪk tʃɹaʊzɝz.

Mat sat beside the inn's hearth, wishing the fire were a little less warm. He could feel its heat through the layers of his ragged jacket and white shirt, matched by a pair of workman's thick trousers.

ðə buts ɑn ɪz fit hæd ɡʊd soʊlz, bʌt ðə saɪdz wɝ wɔɹn. hi dɪd nɑt wɛɹ ɪz hæt, ən ɪz skɑɹf wɑz pʊld ʌp ɝaʊn ðə bɑɾəm hæf ə hɪz feɪs əz i lin bæk ɪn ðə maʊntən oʊk tʃɛɹ.

The boots on his feet had good soles, but the sides were worn. He did not wear his hat, and his scarf was pulled up around the bottom half of his face as he leaned back in the mountain oak chair.

ɪleɪn stɪl hæɾ ɪz mədæljən. hi fɛl neɪkəd wɪθaʊɾ ɪt. hi hæɾ ə ʃɔɹtsɔɝd sɪɾɪŋ baɪ hɪz tʃɛɹ, bʌt ðət wɑz moʊsli fəɹ ʃoʊ. ə wɔkɪŋ stæf lin ɪnəsənli bɪsaɪɾ ɪt; hi wəd ɹæðɝ jus ðæt, əɹ ðə naɪvz hɪɾən ɪn ɪz koʊt. bʌɾ ə sɔɹd wɑz mɔɹ vɪzəbəl, ən wəd meɪk ðə fʊtpædz u sɔntɝd θɹu ðə stʃɹits ə loʊ keɪɛmlɪn θɪŋk twaɪs.

Elayne still had his medallion. He felt naked without it. He had a shortsword sitting by his chair, but that was mostly for show. A walking staff leaned innocently beside it; he would rather use that, or the knives hidden in his coat. But a sword was more visible, and would make the footpads who sauntered through the streets of Low Caemlyn think twice.

"aɪ noʊ waɪ jəɹ æskɪŋ æftɝ hɪm," tʃɛt sɛd. ðəɹ wɑz ə mæn laɪk tʃɛɾ ɪn nɪɹli ɛvɹi tævɝn. oʊld ɪnʌf tə hæv sin mɛn laɪk mæt bi bɔɹn, ɡɹoʊ ʌp, ən daɪ, ən wɪlɪŋ tə tɔk ʌv ɔl ðoʊz jɪɹz ɪf jə ɡɑɾ ɪnʌf dʒɹɪŋk ɪn ðɛm. əɹ ɔfən ɪf jə dɪdnt.

"I know why you're asking after him," Chet said. There was a man like Chet in nearly every tavern. Old enough to have seen men like Mat be born, grow up, and die, and willing to talk of all those years if you got enough drink in them. Or often if you didn't.

ðə stʌbəl ɑn tʃɛts lɔŋ feɪs wɑz dæpəl sɪlvɝ, ən i wɔɹ ə lɑpsaɪɾɪd kæp. hɪz pætʃt koʊt hæd wʌns bɪn blæk, ən ðə ɹɛd-ænd-waɪɾ ɪnsɪɡniə ɑn ɪz pɑkət wɑz tu feɪɾəd tə ɹid. ɪt wɑz veɪɡli mɪlətɛɹi, ən wʌn dɪd nɑt juʒəwəli ɡɛt skɑɹz laɪk ðə θɪk, æŋɡɹi wʌn ɑn ɪz tʃik ən nɛk fɹəm ə bɑɹ faɪt.

The stubble on Chet's long face was dappled silver, and he wore a lopsided cap. His patched coat had once been black, and the red-and-white insignia on his pocket was too faded to read. It was vaguely military, and one did not usually get scars like the thick, angry one on his cheek and neck from a bar fight.

"aɪ," tʃɛt kəntɪnjud, "mɛni ɑɹ əskɪn' æftɝ ðə liɾɝ ə ðət bænd.

"Aye," Chet continued, "many are askin' after the leader of that Band.

wɛl, ðɪs mʌɡ ʌv eɪl ɪz əpɹiʃieɪɾɪd, soʊ lemi ɡɪv jə səm ædvaɪs. jə wɔk laɪk jə noʊ wɪtʃ ɛn ə ðət sɔɹd minz bɪznəs, bʌt jud bi ə ful tə tʃælənʒ ðət wʌn. pɹɪns ə ɹeɪvənz, lɔɹɾ ə lʌk. hi feɪst oʊl dɛθ hɪmsɛlf ən daɪs fəɹ ɪz fjutʃɝ, hi dɪd. eɪnt nɛvɝ lɔst ə faɪt."

Well, this mug of ale is appreciated, so let me give you some advice. You walk like you know which end of that sword means business, but you'd be a fool to challenge that one. Prince of Ravens, Lord of Luck. He faced old death himself and diced for his future, he did. Ain't never lost a fight."

mæt sɛd nʌθɪŋ. hi lin bæk ɪn ɪz tʃɛɹ. ðɪs wɑz ɪz fɔɹθ tæf-ɝn ðɪs naɪt, ən ɪn θɹi ʌv əm i hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə faɪn ɹumɝz əbaʊt meɪtʃɹim kɔθən. bɛɹli ə lɪk ə tʃɹuθ tə ðɛm. blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz'

Mat said nothing. He leaned back in his chair. This was his fourth tav-ern this night, and in three of them he had been able to find rumors about Matrim Cauthon. Barely a lick of truth to them. Blood and bloody ashes'

oʊ, ʃʊɹ, ðəɹ wɝ teɪlz ʌv ʌðɝ pipəl, tu. moʊst əbaʊt ɹænd, itʃ wʌn meɪkɪŋ ðə kʌlɝz swɝl wən i hɝd ðɛm. tiɹ hæd fɔlən tə ðə sintʃæn, noʊ ɪljən, noʊ ɹænd hæd dɪfiɾəd əm ɔl ən wɑz faɪɾɪŋ ðə læs bæɾəl ɹaɪt naʊ. noʊ! hi vɪzəɾəd wɪmən ɪn ðɛɹ slip, ɡɛɾɪŋ əm wɪð tʃaɪld. noʊ, ðət wɑz ðə dɑɹk wʌn. noʊ, mæt wɑz ðə dɑɹk wʌn!

Oh, sure, there were tales of other people, too. Most about Rand, each one making the colors swirl when he heard them. Tear had fallen to the Seanchan, no Illian, no Rand had defeated them all and was fighting the Last Battle right now. No! He visited women in their sleep, getting them with child. No, that was the Dark One. No, Mat was the Dark One!

blʌɾi stɔɹiz. ðeɪ wɝ səpoʊz liv mæt əloʊn. səm i kəd tʃɹeɪs bæk tə ðə bænd -  laɪk ðə stɔɹi ʌv ə sɪɾi fʊl ə ðə dɛɾ əweɪkənɪŋ bʌt mɛni ʌv ðə pipəl kleɪm ðət ðə stɔɹiz hæd kʌm fɹəm ðɛɹ ʌŋkəl əɹ kʌzən, əɹ nɛfju.

Bloody stories. They were supposed leave Mat alone. Some he could trace back to the Band -  like the story of a city full of the dead awakening But many of the people claimed that the stories had come from their uncle or cousin, or nephew.

mæt flɪk tʃɛɾ ə kɑpɝ. ðə mæn tɪpt ɪz hæt pəlaɪtli ən wɛn tə ɡɛt hɪmsɛlf ənʌðɝ dʒɹɪŋk.

Mat flicked Chet a copper. The man tipped his hat politely and went to get himself another drink.

mæt dɪd nɑt fil laɪk dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ. hi hæɾ ə səspɪʃən ðət ðoʊz pɪktʃɝz ə hɪm wɝ pɑɹɾ ʌv waɪ ðə stɔɹiz wɝ spɹɛɾɪŋ soʊ kwɪkli. ɪn ðə læs tævɝn i hæd vɪzəɾəd, sʌmwʌn hæɾ æktʃəli  pʊld aʊɾ ə kɑpi ʌv ðə skɛtʃ - foʊldəɾ ən ɹɪŋkəld - ən ʃoʊn ɪt tə hɪm. noʊbɑdi hæd ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ɪm soʊ fɑɹ, ðoʊ.

Mat did not feel like drinking. He had a suspicion that those pictures of him were part of why the stories were spreading so quickly. In the last tavern he had visited, someone had actually pulled out a copy of the sketch - folded and wrinkled - and shown it to him. Nobody had recognized him so far, though.

ðə hɑɹθfaɪɝ kəntɪnjud tə kɹækəl. loʊ keɪɛmlɪn wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ, ən ɛntɝpɹaɪzɪŋ mɛn hæd ɹilaɪz ðət pɹəvaɪɾɪŋ ɹumz ən dʒɹɪŋks fəɹ ðə tʃɹænziəns kəd meɪk ə hɛlθi pɹɑfət. soʊ ʃæntiz hæd stɑɹɾəd tə bɪkʌm tævɝnz, ən ðoʊz hæd bɪɡʌn tə ɡɹoʊ ɪndə fʊl ɪnz.

The hearthfire continued to crackle. Low Caemlyn was growing, and enterprising men had realized that providing rooms and drinks for the transients could make a healthy profit. So shanties had started to become taverns, and those had begun to grow into full inns.

wʊd wɑz ɪn haɪ dɪmænd, ən mɛni ʌv ðə mɝsənɛɹi bænz hæd teɪkən tə wʊdkʌɾɪŋ. səm wɝkt ɑnəsli, peɪɪŋ ðə kwinz lɛvi fəɹ kleɪmz. ʌðɝz wɝk lɛs liɡəli. ðəɹ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn hæŋʒɪŋz fəɹ ɪt. hu wəɾ əv θɔt? mɛn hæŋɪŋ fəɹ poʊtʃɪŋ tʃɹiz? wʌt nɛkst? mɛn hæŋɪŋ fəɹ stilɪŋ dɝt?

Wood was in high demand, and many of the mercenary bands had taken to woodcutting. Some worked honestly, paying the Queen's levy for claims. Others worked less legally. There had already been hangings for it. Who would have thought? Men hanging for poaching trees? What next? Men hanging for stealing dirt?

loʊ keɪɛmlɪn hæd tʃeɪnʒd dʒɹæstɪkli, ɹoʊdz spɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp, bɪldɪŋz biɪŋ ɛnlɑɹdʒd. ə fju jɪɹz, ən loʊ keɪɛmlɪn wəd bi ə sɪɾi ɪtsɛlf! ðeɪɾ əv tə bɪld ənʌðɝ wɔl tə kloʊz ɪɾ ɪn.

Low Caemlyn had changed drastically, roads springing up, buildings being enlarged. A few years, and Low Caemlyn would be a city itself! They'd have to build another wall to close it in.

ðə ɹum smɛld ə dɝɾ ən swɛt, bʌt noʊ mɔɹ soʊ ðən ʌðɝ tævɝnz. spɪlz wɝ kwɪkli klin ʌp ən ðə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz lʊkt iɡɝ tə hæv wɝk. wʌn ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ ɡeɪv ɪm ə kwaɪət smaɪl, ɹifɪlɪŋ ɪz mʌɡ ən ʃoʊɪŋ səm æŋkəl. mæt meɪd ʃʊɹ tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ hɝ; ʃi wəd bi ɡʊd fəɹ tælmɑnz.

The room smelled of dirt and sweat, but no more so than other taverns. Spills were quickly cleaned up and the serving girls looked eager to have work. One in particular gave him a quiet smile, refilling his mug and showing some ankle. Mat made sure to remember her; she would be good for Talmanes.

mæt lɪftəɾ ʌp ɪz skɑɹf ɪnʌf tə dʒɹɪŋk. hi fɛlt laɪk ə ful wɛɹɪŋ ðə skɑɹf ðɪs weɪ. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz tu hɑt fəɹ ə hʊɾɪd kloʊk, ən ðə bɪɹd hæd bɪn tɔɹtʃɝ. ivən wɪð ðə skɑɹf ɑn ɪz feɪs, hi dɪd nɑt stæn aʊt tu mʌtʃ ɪn loʊ keɪɛmlɪn; hi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli tʌf wɔkɪŋ ɝaʊnd wɪð ɪz feɪs ɑb-skjʊɹd. hi ɪkspleɪn ðəɾ i hæɾ ə bæd skɑɹ i wɑntəd tə kʌvɝ; ʌðɝz æz-sumd i hæɾ ə baʊnti ɑn ɪz hɛd. boʊθ wɝ æktʃəli  tʃɹu, ənfɔɹtʃənətli.

Mat lifted up his scarf enough to drink. He felt like a fool wearing the scarf this way. But it was too hot for a hooded cloak, and the beard had been torture. Even with the scarf on his face, he did not stand out too much in Low Caemlyn; he was not the only tough walking around with his face ob-scured. He explained that he had a bad scar he wanted to cover; others as-sumed he had a bounty on his head. Both were actually true, unfortunately.

hi sæt fəɹ ə taɪm, stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə dænsɪŋ fleɪmz ə ðə hɑɹθ. tʃɛts wɔɹnɪŋ kɑzd ən ənkʌmftəɹbəl pɪt tə oʊpən ɪn mæts stʌmək. ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ ɪz ɹɛpjəteɪʃən ɡɹu, ðə mɔɹ laɪkli hi wəd bi tʃælənʒd. ðəɹ wəd bi ɡɹeɪt noʊɾɝaɪəti ɪn kɪlɪŋ ðə pɹɪns ə ðə ɹeɪvənz. wɛɹ hæd ðeɪ ɡɑɾən ðət neɪm? blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz!

He sat for a time, staring into the dancing flames of the hearth. Chet's warning caused an uncomfortable pit to open in Mat's stomach. The greater his reputation grew, the more likely he would be challenged. There would be great notoriety in killing the Prince of the Ravens. Where had they gotten that name? Blood and bloody ashes!

ə fɪɡjɝ dʒɔɪn ɪm ət ðə faɪɝ. læŋki ən boʊni, noʊl lʊk laɪk ə skɑɹɛkɹoʊ hu hæd dʌstɪd hɪmsɛlf ɔf ən dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ɡoʊ tə taʊn. dɪspaɪɾ ɪz waɪt hɛɹ ən lɛðɝi feɪs, noʊl wɑz əz spɹaɪ əz mɛn hæf ɪz eɪdʒ. wən i wɑz hænlɪŋ ə wɛpən, ɛniweɪ. ʌðɝ taɪmz i simd əz klʌmzi əz ə mjul ɪn ə daɪnɪŋ pɑɹlɝ.

A figure joined him at the fire. Lanky and bony, Noal looked like a scarecrow who had dusted himself off and decided to go to town. Despite his white hair and leathery face, Noal was as spry as men half his age. When he was handling a weapon, anyway. Other times he seemed as clumsy as a mule in a dining parlor.

"jɔɹ kwaɪt ðə noʊɾəbəl mæn," noʊl sɛd tə mæt, hoʊldɪŋ aʊɾ ɪz pɑmz tə ðə faɪɝ. "wɛn jə stʌmbəld əkɹɔs mi ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, aɪ hæd noʊ aɪdiə wʌɾ ɪlʌstʃɹiəs kʌmpəni aɪd faɪn maɪsɛlf ɪn. ɡɪv ðɪs ə fju mɔɹ mʌnθs ən jəl bi mɔɹ feɪməs ðən dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ."

"You're quite the notable man," Noal said to Mat, holding out his palms to the fire. "When you stumbled across me in Ebou Dar, I had no idea what illustrious company I'd find myself in. Give this a few more months and you'll be more famous than Jain Farstrider."

mæt hʌŋkɝd daʊn fɑɹðɝ ɪndə hɪz tʃɛɹ.

Mat hunkered down farther into his chair.

"mɛn ɔlweɪz θɪŋk ɪt wəd bi ə ɡɹæn tə bi noʊn ɪn ɛvɹi tævɝn ən ɛvɹi sɪɾi," noʊl sɛd sɔfli. "bʌt bɝn mi ɪf ɪɾ ɪzən dʒʌst ə hɛdeɪk."

"Men always think it would be a grand to be known in every tavern and every city," Noal said softly. "But burn me if it isn't just a headache."

"wʌt dʒju noʊ ʌv ɪt?"

"What do you know of it?"

"dʒaɪn kəmpleɪn əbaʊɾ ɪt," noʊl sɛd sɔfli.

"Jain complained about it," Noal said softly.

mæt ɡɹʌntɪd. θɔɹn ɝaɪv nɛkst. hi wɑz dʒɹɛst əz ə mɝtʃəns sɝvənt, wɛɹɪŋ ə blu aʊtfɪt ðət wɑz nɑt tu faɪn, bʌɾ ɔlsoʊ nɑɾ ɪn dɪsɹɪpɛɹ. hi wɑz kleɪmɪŋ tə hæv kʌm tə loʊ keɪɛmlɪn tə dətɝmən wɛðɝ ɪz mæstɝ wəd bi wɛl ædvaɪz tə pʊɾ ə ʃoʊpfɹʌn hɪɹ.

Mat grunted. Thorn arrived next. He was dressed as a merchant's servant, wearing a blue outfit that was not too fine, but also not in disrepair. He was claiming to have come to Low Caemlyn to determine whether his master would be well advised to put a shopfront here.

θɔɹn pʊld ɔf ðə dɪsɡaɪz wɪð əplɑm, wæksɪŋ ɪz mʌstæʃɪz tə pɔɪns ən spikɪŋ wɪð ə feɪn mʊɹændiən æksɛnt. mæt hæɾ ɔfɝd tə kʌm ʌp wɪð ə bækstɔɹi fəɹ ɪz ækt, bʌt θɔɹn hæd kɔft ən sɛd ðəɾ i ɔlɹɛɾi hæd wʌn wɝkt aʊt. fleɪmɪŋ laɪɝ ʌv ə ɡlimən.

Thorn pulled off the disguise with aplomb, waxing his mustaches to points and speaking with a faint Murandian accent. Mat had offered to come up with a backstory for his act, but Thorn had coughed and said that he already had one worked out. Flaming liar of a gleeman.

θɔɹn pʊld ʌp ə tʃɛɹ, siɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf dɛləkətli, əz ɪf i wɝ ə sɝvən u θɔt haɪli ʌv hɪmsɛlf. "ɑ, wʌɾ ə weɪst ə maɪ taɪm ðɪs wɑz! maɪ mæstɝ ɪnsɪsts ðəɾ aɪ əsoʊsiət wɪð sətʃ ɹæbəl əz ðɪs! ən hɪɹ aɪ faɪn ðə wɝst ə ðə lɑt."

Thorn pulled up a chair, seating himself delicately, as if he were a servant who thought highly of himself. "Ah, what a waste of my time this was! My master insists that I associate with such rabble as this! And here I find the worst of the lot."

noʊl tʃʌkəl sɔfli.

Noal chuckled softly.

"ɪf oʊnli," θɔɹn sɛd dʒɹəmæɾɪkli, "aɪ hæd bɪn ɪnstɛd sɛn tə ðə kæmp ə ðə mədʒɛstɪk, əmeɪzɪŋ, ɪndəstʃɹʌktɪbəl, feɪməs meɪtʃɹim kɔθən! ðən aɪ wəd sɝɾənli hæv - "

"If only," Thorn said dramatically, "I had been instead sent to the camp of the majestic, amazing, indestructible, famous Matrim Cauthon! Then I would certainly have - "

bɝn mi, θɔɹn," mæt sɛd. "lɛɾ ə mæn sʌfɝ ɪn pis."

Burn me, Thorn," Mat said. "Let a man suffer in peace."

θɔɹn læft, weɪvɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝl ən baɪɪŋ dʒɹɪŋks fəɹ ðə θɹi ʌv ðɛm. hi ɡeɪv əɹ ən ɛkstʃɹə kɔɪn ən kwaɪətli æskt əɹ tə kip kɑ-swəl ɪɹz fɹəm ɡɛɾɪŋ tu kloʊs tə ðə hɑɹθ.

Thorn laughed, waving over the serving girl and buying drinks for the three of them. He gave her an extra coin and quietly asked her to keep ca-sual ears from getting too close to the hearth.

'ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ jə wɑnə mit hɪɹ?" noʊl æskt.

'Are you sure you want to meet here?" Noal asked.

"ɪɾəl du," mæt sɛd. hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə bi sin bæk ɪn kæmp, lɛs ðə ɡoʊləm lʊk ðəɹ fəɹ hɪm.

"It'll do," Mat said. He did not want to be seen back in camp, lest the gholam look there for him.

"ɔl ɹaɪt, ðɛn," noʊl sɛd. "wi noʊ wɛɹ ðə taʊɝ ɪz, ən kən ɡɛt ðɛɹ, əsumɪŋ mæt pɹoʊkjʊɹz əs ə ɡeɪtweɪ."

"All right, then," Noal said. "We know where the tower is, and can get there, assuming Mat procures us a gateway."

"aɪ wɪl," mæt sɛd.

"I will," Mat said.

"aɪ hævən bɪn eɪbəl tə faɪn ɛniwʌn u hæz ɡɔn ɪnsaɪd," noʊl kəntɪnjud "sʌm seɪ ɪts hɔntəd," θɔɹn sɛd, teɪkɪŋ ə slɝp fɹəm ɪz mʌɡ. "ʌðɝz seɪ ɪts ə ɹɛlɪk fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ðə saɪdz ɑɹ sɛd tə bi ʌv smuð stil, wɪθaʊɾ ən oʊpənɪŋ. aɪ dɪd faɪn ə kæptənz wɪɾoʊz jʌŋɡɝ sʌn u wʌns hɝɾ ə stɔɹi ʌv sʌmwʌn u faʊnd ɡɹeɪt tʃɹɛʒɝz ɪn ðə taʊɝ. hi dɪdn seɪ haʊ ðə læd hæd ɡɑɾən ɪn, ðoʊ."

"I haven't been able to find anyone who has gone inside," Noal continued "Some say it's haunted," Thorn said, taking a slurp from his mug. "Others say it's a relic from the Age of Legends. The sides are said to be of smooth steel, without an opening. I did find a captain's widow's younger son who once heard a story of someone who found great treasures in the tower. He didn't say how the lad had gotten in, though."

"wi noʊ haʊ tə ɡɛɾ ɪn," mæt sɛd.

"We know how to get in," Mat said.

"oʊlvɝz stɔɹi?" noʊl æsk skɛptɪkəli.

"Olver's story?" Noal asked skeptically.

"ɪts ðə bɛst wi hæv," mæt sɛd. "lʊk, ðə ɡeɪm ən ðə ɹaɪm ɑɹ əbaʊt ði æɛlfɪn ən ɛlfɪn. pipəl nu əbaʊɾ əm wʌns. ðoʊz blʌɾi ɑɹtʃweɪz ɑɹ pɹuf ə ðæt. soʊ ðeɪ lɛf ðə ɡeɪm ən ðə ɹaɪm əz wɔɹnɪŋ."

"It's the best we have," Mat said. "Look, the game and the rhyme are about the Aelfinn and Eelfinn. People knew about them once. Those bloody archways are proof of that. So they left the game and the rhyme as warning."

"ðæt ɡeɪm kæn bi wʌn, mæt," noʊl sɛd, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz lɛðɝi tʃɪn.

"That game can't be won, Mat," Noal said, rubbing his leathery chin.

"æn ðæts ðə pɔɪn ʌv ɪt. jə nid tə tʃit."

"And that's the point of it. You need to cheat."

"bʌt meɪbi wi ʃəd tʃɹaɪ ə dil," θɔɹn sɛd, pleɪɪŋ wɪð ðə wæks tɪp ʌv ə mʌstæʃ. "ðeɪ dɪd ɡɪv jə ænsɝz tə jəɹ kwɛstʃənz."

"But maybe we should try a deal," Thorn said, playing with the waxed tip of a mustache. "They did give you answers to your questions."

"blʌɾi fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾɪŋ wʌnz," mæt sɛd. hi hæd nɑt wɑntəd tə tɛl θɔɹn ən noʊl əbaʊɾ ɪz kwɛstʃənz  - hi stɪl hæd nɑt toʊld əm wʌɾ i hæɾ æskt.

"Bloody frustrating ones," Mat said. He had not wanted to tell Thorn and Noal about his questions  - he still had not told them what he had asked.

"bʌt ðeɪ dɪɾ ænsɝ," θɔɹn sɛd. "ɪt saʊnz laɪk ðeɪ hæd səm kaɪndə dil wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

"But they did answer," Thorn said. "It sounds like they had some kind of deal with the Aes Sedai.

ɪf wi nu wʌɾ ɪt wɑz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd ðət ðə sneɪks ən fɑksəz wɑntəd - ðə ɹizən ðeɪ wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə bɑɹɡən- -  ðən meɪbi wi kəd tʃɹeɪɾ ɪt tə ðɛm fəɹ mɔɪɹeɪn."

If we knew what it was the Aes Sedai had that the snakes and foxes wanted - the reason they were willing to bargain- -  then maybe we could trade it to them for Moiraine."

"ɪf ʃiz stɪl əlaɪv," noʊl sɛd ɡɹɪmli.

"If she's still alive," Noal said grimly.

"ʃi ɪz," θɔɹn sɛd, stɛɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd. "laɪt sɛn ɪt. ʃiz tə bi əlaɪv."

"She is," Thorn said, staring straight ahead. "Light send it. She has to be alive."

"wi noʊ wʌt ðeɪ wɑnt." mæt ɡlænst ət ðoʊz fleɪmz.

"We know what they want." Mat glanced at those flames.

"wʌt?" noʊl æskt.

"What?" Noal asked.

"ʌs," mæt ɹɪplaɪd. "lʊk, ðeɪ kən si wʌts ɡoʊɪŋ tə hæpən. ðeɪ dɪɾ ɪt tə mi, ðeɪ dɪɾ ɪt tə mɔɪɹeɪn, ɪf ðət lɛɾɝ ɪz ɛni klu. ðeɪ nu ʃi wəd liv ə lɛɾɝ fəɹ ju, θɔɹn. ðeɪ nu ɪt.

"Us," Mat replied. "Look, they can see what's going to happen. They did it to me, they did it to Moiraine, if that letter is any clue. They knew she would leave a letter for you, Thorn. They knew it.

ən ðeɪ stɪl ænsɝɾ əɹ kwɛstʃənz."

And they still answered her questions."

"meɪbi ðeɪ hæd tə," θɔɹn sɛd.

"Maybe they had to," Thorn said.

"jɛs, bʌt ðeɪ doʊn əv tə ænsɝ stʃɹeɪtfɔɹwɝdli," mæt sɛd. "ðeɪ dɪdnt wɪð mi. ðeɪ ænsɝd noʊɪŋ ʃi wəd kʌm bæk tə ðɛm, ən ðeɪ ɡeɪv mi wʌt ðeɪ dɪd noʊɪŋ aɪd ɡɛt pʊl bæk, tu. ðeɪ wɑn mi. ðeɪ wɑn ʌs."

"Yes, but they don't have to answer straightforwardly," Mat said. "They didn't with me. They answered knowing she would come back to them, And they gave me what they did knowing I'd get pulled back, too. They want me. They want us."

"ju doʊnt noʊ ðət fəɹ sɝɾən, mæt." tɑm sɛɾ ɪz mʌɡ ʌv eɪl ɑn ðə flɔɹ bɪtwin ɪz fiɾ ən ɡɑɾ aʊɾ ɪz paɪp. tə mæts ɹaɪt, mɛn tʃɪɹɾ ə daɪs ɡeɪm. "ðeɪ kən ænsɝ kwɛstʃənz, bʌt ðət dʌzn min ðeɪ noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. kəd bi laɪk ɛɛs sədaɪ fɔɹtɛlɪŋz."

"You don't know that for certain, Mat." Thom set his mug of ale on the floor between his feet and got out his pipe. To Mat's right, men cheered a dice game. "They can answer questions, but that doesn't mean they know everything. Could be like Aes Sedai foretellings."

mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. ðə kɹitʃɝz pʊt mɛmɹiz ɪndə hɪz hɛd. hi fɪɡjɝd ðeɪ wɝ ðə mɛmɹiz ə pipəl u hæd tʌtʃt ðə taʊɝ əɹ bɪn ɪndə ɪt. ði æɛlfɪn ən ði ɛlfɪn hæd ðoʊz mɛmɹiz, ən bɝn ɪm ðeɪ pɹɑbli hæd hɪz, tu. kəd ðeɪ wɑtʃ hɪm, si θɹu hɪz aɪz?

Mat shook his head. The creatures put memories into his head. He figured they were the memories of people who had touched the tower or been into it. The Aelfinn and the Eelfinn had those memories, and burn him they probably had his, too. Could they watch him, see through his eyes?

hi wɪʃt əɡɛn fəɹ ɪz mədæljən, ðoʊ ɪt wəd də noʊ ɡʊɾ əɡɛns ðɛm. ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ; ðeɪ wəd nɑt juz tʃænəlɪŋ. "ðeɪ də noʊ θɪŋz, tɑm," mæt sɛd. "ðeɪɹ wɑtʃɪŋ. wi woʊn sɝpɹaɪz ðɛm."

He wished again for his medallion, though it would do no good against them. They were not Aes Sedai; they would not use channeling. "They do know things, Thom," Mat said. "They're watching. We won't surprise them."

"meɪks əm hɑɹd tə dɪfit, ðɛn," tɑm sɛd, laɪɾɪŋ ə tɪndɝ twɪɡ wɪð ðə faɪɝ, ðən juzɪŋ ɪt tə laɪɾ ɪz paɪp. "wi kænt wɪn."

"Makes them hard to defeat, then," Thom said, lighting a tinder twig with the fire, then using it to light his pipe. "We can't win."

"ənlɛs wi bɹeɪk ðə ɹulz," mæt ɹɪpiɾɪd.

"Unless we break the rules," Mat repeated.

"bʌt ðəl noʊ wʌt wɝ duɪŋ," tɑm sɛd, "ɪf wʌt jə seɪ ɪz tʃɹu. soʊ wi ʃəd tʃɹeɪd wɪð ðɛm."

"But they'll know what we're doing," Thom said, "if what you say is true. So we should trade with them."

"ænd wʌd mɔɪɹeɪn seɪ, tɑm?" mæt sɛd. "ɪn ðət lɛɾɝ jə ɹɛɾ ɛvɹi naɪt."

"And what did Moiraine say, Thom?" Mat said. "In that letter you read every night."

tɑm pʌft ɑn ɪz paɪp, ɹeɪzɪŋ ən æbsən hæn tə hɪz bɹɛs pɑkət, wɛɹ i kɛp ðə lɛɾɝ.

Thom puffed on his pipe, raising an absent hand to his breast pocket, where he kept the letter.

"ʃi sɛd tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌt wi nu ʌv ðə ɡeɪm."

"She said to remember what we knew of the game."

"ʃi noʊz ðɛɹz noʊ weɪ tə wɪn wən dilɪŋ wɪð ðɛm," mæt sɛd. noʊ tʃɹeɪdz, tɑm, noʊ bɑɹɡənz. wi ɡoʊ ɪn faɪɾɪŋ ən wi doʊn liv əntɪl wɪv hɝ."

"She knows there's no way to win when dealing with them," Mat said. No trades, Thom, no bargains. We go in fighting and we don't leave until we have her."

tɑm hɛzɪteɪɾɪd fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən nɑɾəd, hɪz paɪp bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə pʌf.

Thom hesitated for a moment, then nodded, his pipe beginning to puff.

kɝədʒ tə stʃɹɛŋθən," noʊl sɛd. "wɛl, wɪv ɪnʌf ə ðæt, wɪð mæts lʌk."

Courage to strengthen," Noal said. "Well, we have enough of that, with Mat's luck."

jə doʊn əv tə bi pɑɹɾ ə ðɪs, jə noʊ, noʊl," mæt sɛd. "ju hæv noʊ ɹizən tə ɹɪsk jɝsɛlf ɑn ðɪs."

You don't have to be part of this, you know, Noal," Mat said. "You have no reason to risk yourself on this."

"aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ," noʊl sɛd. "aɪv sin ə lɑɾ ə pleɪsəz. moʊs pleɪsəz, æktʃəli . bʌt nɛvɝ ðɪs wʌn." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "ɪts sʌmθɪŋ aɪ nid tə du. ən ðæts ði ɛn ʌv ɪt."

"I'm going," Noal said. "I've seen a lot of places. Most places, actually. But never this one." He hesitated. "It's something I need to do. And that's the end of it."

"vɛɹi wɛl," mæt sɛd.

"Very well," Mat said.

"faɪɝ tə blaɪnd," noʊl sɛd. "wʌt də wi hæv?"

"Fire to blind," Noal said. "What do we have?"

"læntɝnz ən tɔɹtʃɪz," mæt sɛd, nɑkɪŋ ɪz fʊɾ əɡɛns ðə sæk bɪsaɪɾ ɪz tʃɛɹ. "æn səm ə ðoʊz faɪɹstɪks fɹəm ɑlʌdʒɹə, soʊ wi kən laɪt ðɛm. ə fju sɝpɹaɪzəz fɹəm hɝ, tu."

"Lanterns and torches," Mat said, knocking his foot against the sack beside his chair. "And some of those firesticks from Aludra, so we can light them. A few surprises from her, too."

"faɪɹwɝks?" noʊl æskt.

"Fireworks?" Noal asked.

"æn ə fju ʌv ðoʊz ɪksploʊɾɪŋ sɪləndɝz wi juzd əɡɛns ðə sintʃæn. ʃi kɔlz əm ɹɔɹstɪks."

"And a few of those exploding cylinders we used against the Seanchan. She calls them roarsticks."

θɔɹn wɪsəld. "ʃi lɛt juv sʌm?"

Thorn whistled. "She let you have some?"

"tu. wən aɪ pɹizɛntəɾ əɹ wɪð ɪleɪnz əɡɹimənt, ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə lemi hæv ɔlmoʊst ɛniθɪŋ aɪ æsk fɔɹ." mæt ɡɹɪməst. "ʃi wɑntəd tə kʌm əlɔŋ tə laɪt ðɛm. hɝsɛlf! bɝn mi, bʌt ðət wɑz ə tʌf ɑɹɡjəmən tə ɛnd. bʌt wiv ɡɑɾ ə hoʊl lɑɾ ə naɪtfloʊɝz." hi tæp ðə sæk bɪsaɪɾ ɪz tʃɛɹ wɪð ði ɛdʒ ə hɪz fʊt.

"Two. When I presented her with Elayne's agreement, she was ready to let me have almost anything I asked for." Mat grimaced. "She wanted to come along to light them. Herself! Burn me, but that was a tough argument to end. But we've got a whole lot of nightflowers." He tapped the sack beside his chair with the edge of his foot.

"ju bɹɔt ðɛm?" θɔɹn æskt.

"You brought them?" Thorn asked.

"aɪ wɑntəd tə kip əm kloʊs," mæt sɛd. "ænd ʃi oʊnli ɡeɪv əm tə mi tədeɪ. ðəɹ nɑt gɑnə ɪksploʊd baɪ æksəɾənt, θɔɹn. ðət dʌzn hæpən vɛɹi ɔfən."

"I wanted to keep them close," Mat said. "And she only gave them to me today. They're not going to explode by accident, Thorn. That doesn't happen very often."

"wɛl ət lis muv əm bæk fɹəm ðə hɑɹθ!" θɔɹn sɛd. hi ɡlænst əɾ ɪz paɪp ən kɝst, ðən skuɾɪd ɪz tʃɛɹ ə fju ɪntʃəz fɹəm mæt.

"Well at least move them back from the hearth!" Thorn said. He glanced at his pipe and cursed, then scooted his chair a few inches from Mat.

"nɛkst," noʊl sɛd, "mjuzɪk tə dæzəl."

"Next," Noal said, "music to dazzle."

"aɪ ɡɑɾ əs ə vɝaɪəɾi," θɔɹn sɛd. "aɪl bɹɪŋ maɪ hɑɹp ən flut, bʌɾ aɪ faʊn əs səm hæn dʒɹʌmz ən hæn sɪmbəlz. ðeɪ kən bi stʃɹæp tə ðə saɪɾ ə jəɹ lɛɡ ən hɪt wɪð wʌn hænd. aɪ ɔlsoʊ bɑɾ ən ɛkstʃɹə flut." hi aɪd mæt. "ə sɪmpəl wʌn, dɪzaɪn fəɹ ðoʊz wɪð θɪk, sloʊ fɪŋɡɝz."

"I got us a variety," Thorn said. "I'll bring my harp and flute, but I found us some hand drums and hand cymbals. They can be strapped to the side of your leg and hit with one hand. I also bought an extra flute." He eyed Mat. "A simple one, designed for those with thick, slow fingers."

mæt snɔɹɾɪd.

Mat snorted.

"æn faɪnəli, aɪɝn tə baɪnd," noʊl sɛd, slaɪɾɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ ə pæk ə hɪz oʊn. ɪt klɪŋk feɪnli əz i əntaɪd ðə tɑp, ðə kɑntɛns ɹəflɛktɪŋ ðə dip ɔɹənʒ hɑɹθlaɪt. "ə sɛɾ ə θɹoʊɪŋ naɪvz fəɹ itʃ ʌv əs ən tu ʃɔɹtsɝdz. itʃ ə pjʊɹ aɪɝn, noʊ stil. aɪ ɡɑɾ əs səm tʃeɪnz, tu, ən ə bæn ʌv aɪɝn tə klɪp ɝaʊn ðə bʌɾ ə mæts spɪɹ. ɪt maɪt θɹoʊ ðə weɪɾ ɔf, ðoʊ."

"And finally, iron to bind," Noal said, sliding forward a pack of his own. It clinked faintly as he untied the top, the contents reflecting the deep orange hearthlight. "A set of throwing knives for each of us and two shortswords. Each of pure iron, no steel. I got us some chains, too, and a band of iron to clip around the butt of Mat's spear. It might throw the weight off, though."

"aɪl teɪk ɪt," mæt sɛd.

"I'll take it," Mat said.

noʊl dɪɾ ʌp ɪz pæk əɡɛn, ən ðə θɹi ʌv əm sæt bɪfɔɹ ðə hɑɹθ fəɹ ə taɪm. ɪn ə weɪ, ðiz θɪŋz ðeɪd ɡæðɝd wɝ ən ɪluʒən. ə weɪ tə ɹiəʃʊɹ ðɛmsɛlvz ðət ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ tə pɹipɛɹ.

Noal did up his pack again, and the three of them sat before the hearth for a time. In a way, these things they'd gathered were an illusion. A way to reassure themselves that they were doing something to prepare.

bʌt mæt ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðoʊz twɪstəd pleɪsəz bɪɑn ðə ɡeɪtweɪz, ði æŋɡəlz ðət wɝ nɑt ɹaɪt, ði ənnætʃɹəl lændskeɪp. ðə kɹitʃɝz kɔl sneɪks ən fɑksəz kəz ðeɪ dɪfaɪd stændɝd dɪskɹɪpʃən.

But Mat remembered those twisted places beyond the gateways, the angles that were not right, the unnatural landscape. The creatures called snakes and foxes because they defied standard description.

ðət pleɪs wɑz ənʌðɝ wɝld. ðə pɹɛpɝeɪʃənz i dɪd wɪð θɔɹn ən noʊl maɪt hɛlp' bʌt ðeɪ maɪɾ ɔlsoʊ bi jusləs. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tɛlɪŋ əntɪl ðeɪ stɛpt ɪndə ðət taʊɝ. ɪt fɛlt laɪk nɑt noʊɪŋ ɪf jə hæd ðə ɹaɪɾ æntɪdoʊɾ əntɪl æftɝ ðə sneɪks tiθ wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi klæmp daʊn ɑn jəɹ ɪvɛntʃəwəli, hi beɪd ði ʌðɝ tu ə ɡʊd naɪt. noʊl wɑntəd tə hɛd bæk tə ðə bænz kæmp, wɪtʃ wɑz naʊ oʊnli ə tɛn-mɪnət ɹaɪd fɹəm ðə sɪɾi. θɔɹn əɡɹid tə ɡoʊ wɪð hɪm, ən ðeɪ tʊk mæts pæk fʊl ə naɪtfloʊɝz - ðoʊ boʊθ mɛn lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ wəd ɹæðɝ bi kæɹiɪŋ ə sæk fʊl ə spaɪɾɝz.

That place was another world. The preparations he did with Thorn and Noal might help' but they might also be useless. There was no telling until they stepped into that tower. It felt like not knowing if you had the right antidote until after the snake's teeth were already clamped down on your Eventually, he bade the other two a good night. Noal wanted to head back to the Band's camp, which was now only a ten-minute ride from the city. Thorn agreed to go with him, and they took Mat's pack full of nightflowers - though both men looked as if they would rather be carrying a sack full of spiders.

mæt bɛltəɾ ɪz sɔɹɾ ɑn oʊvɝ ɪz koʊt, tʊk ʌp ɪz stæf, ðən hɛɾəd bæk təwɔɹɾ ɪz ɪn. hi dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ dɝɛkli ðɛɹ, ðoʊ, ən ɪnstɛd faʊn hɪmsɛlf tʃɹeɪlɪŋ θɹu ði æliz ən stʃɹits. ʃæntiz ən tɛns hæd spɹʌŋ ʌp bɪsaɪd sɑləd bɪldɪŋz əz ðə sɪɾi-aʊtsaɪd-ðə-sɪti spɹɛɾ əlɔŋ ðə wɔlz, laɪk moʊld ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɑn ə loʊf ə bɹɛd.

Mat belted his sword on over his coat, took up his staff, then headed back toward his inn. He did not go directly there, though, and instead found himself trailing through the alleys and streets. Shanties and tents had sprung up beside solid buildings as the city-outside-the-city spread along the walls, like mold growing on a loaf of bread.

ðə skaɪ wɑz dɑɹk, bʌt ðə naɪt wɑz stɪl bɪzi, taʊts kɔlɪŋ fɹəm wɪðɪn ðə lɪt dɔɹweɪz ʌv ɪnz.

The sky was dark, but the night was still busy, touts calling from within the lit doorways of inns.

mæt meɪd ʃʊɹ ðə ʃɔɹtsɔɝd wɑz vɪzəbəl. ðəɹ wɝ mɛni hu wəd θɪŋk tə ɪksplɔɪɾ ə loʊn wɑndɝɝ ət naɪt, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi wɔlz, wɛɹ ði ɑɹm ə ðə lɔ wɑz ə lɪɾəl ɑn ðə flæbi saɪd.

Mat made sure the shortsword was visible. There were many who would think to exploit a lone wanderer at night, particularly outside the city walls, where the arm of the law was a little on the flabby side.

ði ɛɹ smɛld ʌv ɪmpɛndɪŋ ɹeɪn, bʌɾ ɪɾ ɔfən dɪd ðiz deɪz. hi wɪʃt ɪt wəd ɡoʊ ɑn ən stɔɹm əɹ blʌɾi klɪɹ ʌp. ɪt fɛlt əz ɪf ði ɛɹ wɝ hoʊldɪŋ ɪts bɹɛθ, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ. ə bloʊ ðət nɛvɝ fɛl, ə bɛl ðət nɛvɝ ɹæŋ, ə sɛɾ ə daɪs ðət nɛvɝ stɑp spɪnɪŋ. dʒʌs laɪk ðə wʌnz ðət θʌndɝɾ ɪn ɪz hɛd.

The air smelled of impending rain, but it often did these days. He wished it would go on and storm or bloody clear up. It felt as if the air were holding its breath, waiting for something. A blow that never fell, a bell that never rang, a set of dice that never stopped spinning. Just like the ones that thundered in his head.

hi fɛlt ət ðə lɛɾɝ fɹəm vɛɹɪn ɪn ɪz pɑkət. wəd ðə daɪs stɑp ɪf i oʊpən ɪt? meɪbi ɪt wɑz əbaʊt ðə ɡboʊləm. ɪf i dɪd nɑt ɹɪtʃɹiv ɪz mədæljən fɹəm ɪleɪn sun, ðə θɪŋ wɑz laɪkli tə faɪn ɪm ən ɹɪp ɪz ɪnsaɪdz aʊt.

He felt at the letter from Verin in his pocket. Would the dice stop if he opened it? Maybe it was about the gbolam. If he did not retrieve his medallion from Elayne soon, the thing was likely to find him and rip his insides out.

blʌɾi æʃəz. hi fɛlt laɪk ɡoʊɪŋ dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ, fɝɡɛɾɪŋ u hi wɑz -  ən u pipəl θɔɾ i wɑz - fəɹ ə waɪl. bʌɾ ɪf i ɡɑt dʒɹʌŋk, hi wɑz laɪkli tə lɛɾ ɪz feɪs ʃoʊ baɪ æksəɾənt. pɝhæps bɪɡɪn tə tɔk əbaʊɾ u hi ɹɪli wɑz. jə nɛvɝ kəd tɛl wʌɾ ə mæn wəd də wən i wɑz dʒɹʌŋk, ivən ɪf ðət mæn wɑz jəɹ oʊn sɛlf.

Bloody ashes. He felt like going drinking, forgetting who he was -  and who people thought he was - for a while. But if he got drunk, he was likely to let his face show by accident. Perhaps begin to talk about who he really was. You never could tell what a man would do when he was drunk, even if that man was your own self.

hi meɪɾ ɪz weɪ θɹu ðə sɪɾi ɡeɪts ən ɪndə ðə nu sɪɾi. ði ɛɹ bɪɡæn tə mɪst wɪð sʌmθɪŋ ðət wɑz nɑt kwaɪt ɹeɪn, əz ɪf ðə skaɪ hæd lɪsən tə hɪz ɹæn ən hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə əlaʊ ə lɪɾəl sniz tə spɹeɪ daʊn ɑn hɪm.

He made his way through the city gates and into the New City. The air began to mist with something that was not quite rain, as if the sky had listened to his rant and had decided to allow a little sneeze to spray down on him.

wʌndɝfəl, hi θɔt, blʌɾi wʌndɝfəl.

Wonderful, he thought, bloody wonderful.

ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz sun ɡɹu wɛt fɹəm ðə nɑt-ɹeɪn, ən ðə stʃɹitlɑmps ɡloʊd wɪð bɔlz ə veɪpɝəs heɪz. mæt hʌŋkɝd daʊn, skɑɹf stɪl kʌvɝɪŋ ɪz feɪs əz ɪf i wɝ ə blʌɾi ilmən. hæɾ i nɑt bɪn tu hɑɾ oʊnli ə lɪɾəl bɪɾ əɡoʊ?

The paving stones soon grew wet from the not-rain, and the streetlamps glowed with balls of vaporous haze. Mat hunkered down, scarf still covering his face as if he were a bloody Aielman. Had he not been too hot only a little bit ago?

hi wɑz əz iɡɝ əz tɑm tə muv ɑn ən faɪn mɔɪɹeɪn. ʃi hæd meɪɾ ə mɛs ə hɪz laɪf, bʌt mæt səpoʊzd i oʊɾ əɹ fəɹ ðæt. bɛɾɝ tə lɪv ɪn ðɪs mɛs ðən tə bi tʃɹæp bæk ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, lɪvɪŋ ə bɔɹɪŋ laɪf wɪθaʊt ɹilaɪzɪŋ haʊ bɔɹɪŋ ɪt wɑz. mæt wɑz nɑt laɪk pɛɹɪn, hu hæd mun oʊvɝ livɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ hæɾ ivən ɡɑɾən tə bɛɹ-aɪən. ən ɪmədʒ ə pɛɹɪn flæʃt ɪn ɪz hɛd, ən mæt bænɪʃt ɪt.

He was as eager as Thom to move on and find Moiraine. She had made a mess of his life, but Mat supposed he owed her for that. Better to live in this mess than to be trapped back in the Two Rivers, living a boring life without realizing how boring it was. Mat was not like Perrin, who had mooned over leaving the Two Rivers before they had even gotten to Baer-Ion. An image of Perrin flashed in his head, and Mat banished it.

ən wʌɾ ə ɹænd? mæt sɔ hɪm sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ə faɪn tʃɛɹ, stɛɹɪŋ daʊn ət ðə flɔɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪmsɛlf ɪn ə dɑɹk ɹum, ə sɪŋɡəl læmp flɪkɝɪŋ. hi lʊkt wɔɹn ən ɪɡzɔstəd, hɪz aɪz waɪd, hɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən ɡɹɪm. mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd tə dɪspɛl ðəɾ ɪmədʒ əz wɛl. pʊɹ ɹænd. ðə mæn pɹɑbli θɔɾ i wɑz ə blʌɾi blækfɹəɾ əɹ sʌmθɪŋ baɪ naʊ, nɔɪŋ ɑn pɪnəkoʊnz. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz laɪkli ə blækfɹət ðət wɑntəd tə lɪv bæk ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz.

And what of Rand? Mat saw him sitting on a fine chair, staring down at the floor in front of himself in a dark room, a single lamp flickering. He looked worn and exhausted, his eyes wide, his expression grim. Mat shook his head to dispel that image as well. Poor Rand. The man probably thought he was a bloody blackferret or something by now, gnawing on pinecones. But it was likely a blackferret that wanted to live back in the Two Rivers.

noʊ, mæt dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɡoʊ bæk. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tuɑn bæk ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. laɪt, wɛl, hi wəɾ əv tə fɪɡjɝ aʊt wʌt tə də wɪð tuɑn. bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt wɑnə bi ɹɪɾ ə hɝ. ɪf ʃi wɝ stɪl wɪð hɪm, hi wəd lɛɾ əɹ kɔl ɪm tɔɪ wɪθaʊt kəmpleɪnɪŋ. wɛl, nɑt mʌtʃ ɛniweɪ.

No, Mat did not want to go back. There was no Tuon back in the Two Rivers. Light, well, he would have to figure out what to do with Tuon. But he did not want to be rid of her. If she were still with him, he would let her call him Toy without complaining. Well, not much anyway.

mɔɪɹeɪn fɝst. hi wɪʃt i nu mɔɹ əbaʊt ði æɛlfɪn ən ɛlfɪn ən ðɛɹ blʌɾi taʊɝ.

Moiraine first. He wished he knew more about the Aelfinn and Eelfinn and their bloody tower.

noʊbɑdi nu əbaʊɾ ɪt, noʊbɑdi spoʊk mɔɹ ðən lɛdʒənz, noʊbɑdi hæɾ ɛniθɪŋ jusfəl tə seɪ. . . .

Nobody knew about it, nobody spoke more than legends, nobody had anything useful to say. . . .

. . . noʊbɑdi bʌt bɝdʒɪt. mæt stɑpt ɪn ðə stʃɹit. bɝdʒɪt. ʃi hæd bɪn ðə wʌn tə tɛl oʊlvɝ haʊ tə ɡɛɾ ɪndə ðə taʊɝ. haʊ hæd ʃi noʊn?

. . . nobody but Birgitte. Mat stopped in the street. Birgitte. She had been the one to tell Olver how to get into the Tower. How had she known?

kɝsɪŋ hɪmsɛlf fəɹ ə ful, hi tɝn təwɔɹd ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi. ðə stʃɹits wɝ ɛmptiɪŋ ə ðə tʃɹæfɪk ðət hæd bɝɾənd əm bɪfɔɹ ði ɔlmoʊst-ɹeɪn bɪɡæn. sun mæt fɛlt i hæd ðə hoʊl sɪɾi tə hɪmsɛlf; ivən ðə kʌt-pɝsɪz ən bɛɡɝz wɪθdʒɹu.

Cursing himself for a fool, he turned toward the Inner City. The streets were emptying of the traffic that had burdened them before the almost-rain began. Soon Mat felt he had the whole city to himself; even the cut-purses and beggars withdrew.

fəɹ səm ɹizən, ðət pʊɾ ɪm ɑn ɛdʒ mɔɹ ðən biɪŋ stɛɹɾ æt. ɪt wɑz nɑt nætʃɹəl. sʌmwʌn ʃʊɾə tʃɹaɪɾ ət lis tə blʌɾi ʃædoʊ hɪm tə si ɪf i wɑz wɝθ pɪkɪŋ ɔf. wʌns əɡɛn, hi lɔŋ fəɹ ɪz mədæljən. hi hæd bɪn ən ɪɾiət tə ɡɪv ðəɾ əweɪ. bɛɾɝ tə hæv kʌɾ ɔf ɪz oʊn blʌɾi hæn ən ɔfɝd ðət tə ɪleɪn əz peɪmənt! wɑz ðə ɡoʊləm ðɛɹ, ɪn ðət dɑɹknəs, sʌmwɛɹ?

For some reason, that put him on edge more than being stared at. It was not natural. Someone should have tried at least to bloody shadow him to see if he was worth picking off. Once again, he longed for his medallion. He had been an idiot to give that away. Better to have cut off his own bloody hand and offered that to Elayne as payment! Was the gholam there, in that darkness, somewhere?

ðəɹ ʃʊɾə bɪn tʌfs ɑn ðə stʃɹit. sɪɾiz wɝ fʊl ə ðɛm. ðət wɑz pɹæktəkli wʌn ə ðə blʌɾi ɹɪkwaɪɹməns fəɹ ə sɪɾi. ə taʊn hɔl, ə fju ɪnz ən ə tævɝn, ən sɛvɹəl blʌnt-feɪs fɛloʊz huz oʊnli dɪzaɪɝ wɑz tə paʊn jə ɪndə ðə mʌɾ ən spɛn jəɹ kɔɪn ɑn dʒɹɪŋk ən wɪmən- hi pæst ə kɔɹtʃjɑɹɾ ən hɛɾəd θɹu ðə meɪsənz ɡeɪɾ ɪndə ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi, ðə waɪɾ ɑɹtʃweɪ ɔlmoʊst simɪŋ tə ɡloʊ, ɹeɪn-slɪk ɪn ðə fæntəm laɪɾ ə ðə klaʊɾəd mun. mæts kɔɹɾɝstæf nɑkt əɡɛns ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz. ðə ɡeɪt ɡɑɹdz wɝ hʌɾəld ən kwaɪəɾ ɪn ðɛɹ kloʊks, laɪk stætʃuz, nɑt mɛn əɾ ɔl. ði ɪntaɪɝ pleɪs fɛlt laɪk ə tum. ə weɪz pæs ðə ɡeɪt, hi pæst ən æliweɪ, ən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. hi θɔɾ i kəd si ə ɡɹup ə ʃæɾoʊi fɔɹmz ɪnsaɪd. tɔl bɪldɪŋz ɹoʊz ɑn iðɝ saɪd, ɡɹæn oʊɡiɝ meɪsənɹi. ə ɡɹʌn saʊndəd fɹəm ɪnsaɪd ði æliweɪ. "ə ɹɑbɝi?" mæt sɛd wɪð ɹɪlif.

There should have been toughs on the street. Cities were full of them. That was practically one of the bloody requirements for a city. A town hall, a few inns and a tavern, and several blunt-faced fellows whose only desire was to pound you into the mud and spend your coin on drink and women- He passed a courtyard and headed through the Mason's Gate into the Inner City, the white archway almost seeming to glow, rain-slick in the phantom light of the clouded moon. Mat's quarterstaff knocked against the paving stones. The gate guards were huddled and quiet in their cloaks, Like statues, not men at all. The entire place felt like a tomb. A ways past the gate, he passed an alleyway, and hesitated. He thought he could see a group of shadowy forms inside. Tall buildings rose on either side, grand Ogier masonry. A grunt sounded from inside the alleyway. "A robbery?" Mat said with relief.

ə hʌlkɪŋ fɪɡjɝ lʊk bæk aʊɾ ə ði æliweɪ. munlaɪt ɹɪvil fɛloʊ wɪð dɑɹk aɪz ən ə lɔŋ kloʊk. hi sim stʌn tə faɪn mæt ndɪŋ ðɛɹ. hi pɔɪntəd wɪð ə θɪk-fɪŋɡɝd hænd, ən θɹi ʌv ɪz kəmpænjənz meɪd fəɹ mæt.

A hulking figure looked back out of the alleyway. Moonlight revealed fellow with dark eyes and a long cloak. He seemed stunned to find Mat nding there. He pointed with a thick-fingered hand, and three of his companions made for Mat.

mæt ɹɪlækst, waɪpɪŋ ɪz bɹaʊ fɹi ʌv ɹeɪnwɔɾɝ. soʊ ðəɹ wɝ fʊtpædz aʊt ðɪs naɪt. wʌɾ ə ɹɪlif. hi hæd bɪn dʒʌmpɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ!

Mat relaxed, wiping his brow free of rainwater. So there were footpads out this night. What a relief. He had been jumping at nothing!

ə θʌɡ swʌŋ ɪz kʌdʒəl ət mæt. mæt hæd wɔɹn ðə ʃɔɹtsɔɝɾ ɑn ðə ɹaɪt saɪɾ ɪntɛnʃənəli; ðə θʌɡ tʊk ðə beɪt, əsumɪŋ ðət mæt wəd muv tə dʒɹɔ ðə wɛpən.

A thug swung his cudgel at Mat. Mat had worn the shortsword on the right side intentionally; the thug took the bait, assuming that Mat would move to draw the weapon.

ɪnstɛd, mæt bɹɔɾ ʌp ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf swɪfli, snæpɪŋ ðə bʌɾ əɡɛns ðə mænz lɛɡ. ðə fʊtpæd stʌmbəld, ən mæt swʌŋ ɪndə ðə mænz hɛd. ðə dʒɹɪzəl, wɪtʃ wɑz nɪɹli ə pɹɑpɝ ɹeɪn baɪ naʊ, spɹeɪɾ ɔf ðə kʌtpɝs əz i fɛl, tʃɹɪpɪŋ wʌn ə hɪz kəmpænjənz.

Instead, Mat brought up the quarterstaff swiftly, snapping the butt against the man's leg. The footpad stumbled, and Mat swung into the man's head. The drizzle, which was nearly a proper rain by now, sprayed off the cutpurse as he fell, tripping one of his companions.

mæt stɛp bæk ən slæm ðə tɑp ə ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf daʊn ɑn ðə hɛɾ ə ðə tʃɹɪpɪŋ θʌɡ.

Mat stepped back and slammed the top of the quarterstaff down on the head of the tripping thug.

hi wɛn daʊn ɑn tɑp ə hɪz kəmpænjən. ðə θɝd mæn lʊk bæk təwɔɹɾ ɪz liɾɝ, hu hɛl tə ðə kɑlɝ ʌv ə ɡæŋli mæn mæt kəd bɛɹli meɪk aʊɾ ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz. mæt tʊk ði ɑpɝtunəɾi tə lip oʊvɝ ðə smɔl paɪl ʌv ʌnkɑnʃəs θʌɡz, swɪŋɪŋ ət ðə θɝd mæn. ðə fʊtpæd bɹɔɾ ɪz kʌdʒəl ʌp tə pɹətɛkt ɪz hɛd, soʊ mæt slæmd ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf ɪndə ðə mænz fʊt. hi ðən swʌŋ ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf, nɑkɪŋ əsaɪd ðə θɝd mænz wik pɛɹi, ən dʒɹɑpt ɪm wɪð ə bloʊ tə ðə feɪs.

He went down on top of his companion. The third man looked back toward his leader, who held to the collar of a gangly man Mat could barely make out in the shadows. Mat took the opportunity to leap over the small pile of unconscious thugs, swinging at the third man. The footpad brought his cudgel up to protect his head, so Mat slammed his quarterstaff into the man's foot. He then swung the quarterstaff, knocking aside the third man's weak parry, and dropped him with a blow to the face.

mæt kæʒəwəli flɪpt ə naɪf təwɔɹd ðə liɾɝ ə ðə ɡæŋ, hu wɑz tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. ðə liɾɝ ɡɝɡəld, stʌmbəld ɪn ðə dʒɹɪzəl, klɔɪŋ ət ðə naɪf ɪn ɪz nɛk. ði ʌðɝz mæt wəd liv ʌnkɑnʃəs - pʊɹ fulz, meɪbi ðeɪ wəd teɪk ðɪs wɔɹnɪŋ ən ɹəfɔɹm.

Mat casually flipped a knife toward the leader of the gang, who was charging forward. The leader gurgled, stumbled in the drizzle, clawing at the knife in his neck. The others Mat would leave unconscious - poor fools, maybe they would take this warning and reform.

mæt stɛp tə ðə saɪɾ əz ðə liɾɝ stʌmbəl pæst, ðən faɪnəli kɑl-læpst ɑn tɑp ə hɪz θɹi kəmpænjənz. mæt kɪkt ɪm oʊvɝ, pʊld aʊt ðə naɪf, ðən klin ɪt. faɪnəli, hi ɡlænst ət ðə vɪktəm ə ðə ɹɑbɝi. "ʃʊɹ æm ɡlæd tə si ju," mæt sɛd. "ju . . . jə ɑɹ?" ðə mæn æskt.

Mat stepped to the side as the leader stumbled past, then finally col-lapsed on top of his three companions. Mat kicked him over, pulled out the knife, then cleaned it. Finally, he glanced at the victim of the robbery. "Sure am glad to see you," Mat said. "You . . . you are?" the man asked.

"ʃʊɹ æm," mæt sɛd, stændɪŋ ʌp stʃɹeɪt. "aɪ θɔt ðə θivz wɝ nɑɾ aʊt tənaɪt. ə sɪɾi wɪθaʊt kʌtpɝsɪz, wɛl, ðæts laɪk ə fild wɪθaʊt widz. ən ɪf ðəɹ wɝ noʊ widz, wʌt wəd jə niɾ ə fɑɹmɝ fɔɹ? blʌɾi ɪnhɑspəɾəbəl, aɪ tɛl ju."

"Sure am," Mat said, standing up straight. "I thought the thieves were not out tonight. A city without cutpurses, well, that's like a field without weeds. And if there were no weeds, what would you need a farmer for? Bloody inhospitable, I tell you."

ðə ɹɛskjud mæn stʌmbəl fɔɹwɝɾ ɑn ʃeɪki fit. hi sim kɑn-fjuz baɪ wʌt mæt hæd sɛd, bʌɾ i skɹæmbəld ʌp, teɪkɪŋ mæts hænd "θæŋk ju!" ðə mæn hæɾ ə neɪzəl vɔɪs. "θæŋk jə soʊ, soʊ mʌtʃ." ɪn ðə feɪn munlaɪt, mæt kəd bɛɹli meɪk aʊɾ ə waɪd feɪs wɪð bʌk tiθ ətɑp ən ɔkwɝdli θɪn bɑɾi.

The rescued man stumbled forward on shaky feet. He seemed con-fused by what Mat had said, but he scrambled up, taking Mat's hand "Thank you!" The man had a nasal voice. "Thank you so, so much." In the faint moonlight, Mat could barely make out a wide face with buck teeth atop an awkwardly thin body.

mæt ʃɹʌɡd, sɛɾɪŋ əsaɪɾ ɪz stæf ən ənwaɪndɪŋ ɪz skɑɹf__-wɪtʃ wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ sɑɾən - ən bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ɹɪŋ ɪt fɹi. "aɪd steɪ əweɪ fɹəm tʃɹævlɪŋ baɪ jɝsɛlf ət naɪt, ɪf aɪ wɝ ju, fɹɛnd."

Mat shrugged, setting aside his staff and unwinding his scarf__-which was getting sodden - and beginning to wring it free. "I'd stay away from traveling by yourself at night, if I were you, friend."

ðə mæn skwɪntɪɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. "ju!" hi sɛd, vɔɪs nɪɹli ə skwik.

The man squinted in the darkness. "You!" he said, voice nearly a squeak.

mæt ɡɹoʊnd. "blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz! kæn aɪ ɡoʊ ɛniwɛɹ wɪθaʊt__"

Mat groaned. "Blood and bloody ashes! Can't I go anywhere without__"

hi kʌɾ ɔf əz ðə mæn lʌnʒd, ə dæɡɝ flæʃɪŋ ɪn ðə feɪn munlaɪt. mæt kɝst, ən snæpt ɪz skɑɹf ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. ðə dæɡɝ hɪt ðə klɔθ ɪnstɛɾ ə mæts ɡʌt, ən mæt kwɪkli twɪstəɾ ɪz hænz, taɪɪŋ ði əsæsənz dæɡɝ ɪn lɛŋθs ə klɔθ.

He cut off as the man lunged, a dagger flashing in the faint moonlight. Mat cursed, and snapped his scarf in front of him. The dagger hit the cloth instead of Mat's gut, and Mat quickly twisted his hands, tying the assassin's dagger in lengths of cloth.

ðə mæn jɛlpt, ən mæt ɹilis ðə skɑɹf ən pʊld aʊɾ ə pɛɹ ə naɪvz, wʌn ɪn itʃ hænd, ɹilisɪŋ əm baɪ ɹiflɛks. ðeɪ tʊk ði əsæsən ɪn ði aɪz. wʌn ɪn itʃ aɪ. laɪt! mæt hæd nɑt bɪn eɪmɪŋ fəɹ ði aɪz.

The man yelped, and Mat released the scarf and pulled out a pair of knives, one in each hand, releasing them by reflex. They took the assassin in the eyes. One in each eye. Light! Mat had not been aiming for the eyes.

ðə mæn kəlæps tə ðə wɛt peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz.

The man collapsed to the wet paving stones.

mæt stʊd bɹiðɪŋ ɪn ən aʊt. "mʌðɝz mɪlk ɪn ə kʌp! mʌðɝz blʌɾi mɪlk!" hi ɡɹæbd ɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf, ɡlænsɪŋ əbaʊt hɪm, bʌt ðə ɡlumi stʃɹit wɑz ɛmpti. "aɪ ɹɛskjud ju. aɪ ɹɛskjud ju, ən jə tʃɹaɪ tə stæb mi?"

Mat stood breathing in and out. "Mother's milk in a cup! Mother's bloody milk!" He grabbed his quarterstaff, glancing about him, but the gloomy street was empty. "I rescued you. I rescued you, and you try to stab me?"

mæt nɛl daʊn bɪsaɪd ðə kɔɹps. ðɛn, ɡɹɪmli sɝɾən wʌɾ i wəd faɪnd, hi fɪʃt ɪn ðə mænz paʊtʃ. hi keɪm aʊt wɪð ə kʌpəl ə kɔɪnz -  ɡoʊl kɔɪnz - ən ə foʊldəd-ʌp pis ə peɪpɝ. munlaɪt ɹɪvil mæts feɪs ɑn ɪt. hi kɹɪŋkəl ðə peɪpɝ ən ʃʌvd ɪɾ ɪn ɪz pɑkət.

Mat knelt down beside the corpse. Then, grimly certain what he would find, he fished in the man's pouch. He came out with a couple of coins -  gold coins - and a folded-up piece of paper. Moonlight revealed Mat's face on it. He crinkled the paper and shoved it in his pocket.

wʌn ɪn itʃ blʌɾi aɪ. bɛɾɝ ðən ðə mæn dɪzɝvd. mæt ɹɛtaɪɾ ɪz skɑɹf, ɡɹæbd ɪz naɪvz, ðən wɔkt aʊɾ ɑntu ðə stʃɹit, wɪʃɪŋ i hæd lɛf ði əsæsən tə hɪz feɪt.

One in each bloody eye. Better than the man deserved. Mat retied his scarf, grabbed his knives, then walked out onto the street, wishing he had left the assassin to his fate.

bɝdʒɪt foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz, linɪŋ əɡɛnst ə mɑɹbəl pɪlɝ ən wɑtʃɪŋ əz ɪleɪn sæɾ ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ ən ivnɪŋ pɹɛzənteɪʃən ʌv "pleɪɝz." ɡɹups laɪk ðɪs -  æktɪŋ aʊt stɔɹiz - hæd bɪkʌm vɛɹi pɑpjəlɝ ɪn kɛɹhin, ən wɝ naʊ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ətʃiv ðə seɪm səksɛs ɪn ændɝ. wʌn ə ðə pæləs hɔlz, wɛɹ bɑɹdz pɝfɔɹmd, hæd bɪn ədæptəd tə əlaʊ ðə pleɪɝz tə ækt aʊt ðɛɹ stɔɹiz.

Birgitte folded her arms, leaning against a marble pillar and watching as Elayne sat enjoying an evening presentation of "players." Groups like this -  acting out stories - had become very popular in Cairhien, and were now trying to achieve the same success in Andor. One of the palace halls, where bards performed, had been adapted to allow the players to act out their stories.

bɝdʒɪt ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. wʌt wɑz ðə ɡʊɾ ʌv æktɪŋ aʊt feɪk stɔɹiz.

Birgitte shook her head. What was the good of acting out fake stories.

waɪ nɑt ɡoʊ lɪv ə fju stɔɹiz ə jəɹ oʊn? bɪsaɪdz, ʃid pɹəfɝ ə bɑɹɾ ɛni deɪ. hɛlpfəli ðɪs fæʃən ə siɪŋ "pleɪɝz" wəd daɪ kwɪkli. ðɪs pɝtɪkjəlɝ stɔɹi wɑz ə ɹitɛlɪŋ ə ðə tʃɹædʒɪk mɛɹɪdʒ ən dɛθ ə ðə pɹɪnsɛs wælɪʃən, sleɪn baɪ bists ə ðə ʃædoʊ. bɝdʒɪt wɑz fəmɪljɝ wɪð ðə bæləd ðət ðə pleɪɝz hæɾ ədæptəd tə fɔɹm ðɛɹ stɔɹi. ɪn fækt, ðeɪ sæŋ pɑɹts ʌv ɪt dʊɹɪŋ ðə pɝfɔɹməns. ɪt wɑz ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl haʊ lɪɾəl ðət sɔŋ hæd tʃeɪnʒd oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz. səm dɪfɹənt neɪmz, ə fju dɪfɹənt noʊts, bʌt ðə seɪm oʊvɝɔl. mʌtʃ laɪk əɹ oʊn laɪvz. ɹɪpiɾɪd oʊvɝ ən oʊvɝ, bʌt wɪð lɪɾəl vɛɹieɪʃənz. səmtaɪmz ʃi wɑz ə soʊlʒɝ. səmtaɪmz ʃi wɑz ə fɔɹəst wʊmən, wɪð noʊ fɔɹməl mɪlətɛɹi tʃɹeɪnɪŋ. ʃid bɪn ə dʒɛnɝəl wʌns əɹ twaɪs, ənfɔɹtʃənətli. ʃid ɹæðɝ liv ðət pɝtɪkjəlɝ dʒɑb fəɹ sʌmwʌn ɛls.

Why not go live a few stories of your own? Besides, she'd prefer a bard any day. Helpfully this fashion of seeing "players" would die quickly. This particular story was a retelling of the tragic marriage and death of the Princess Walishen, slain by beasts of the Shadow. Birgitte was familiar with the ballad that the players had adapted to form their story. In fact, they sang parts of it during the performance. It was remarkable how little that song had changed over the years. Some different names, a few different notes, but the same overall. Much like her own lives. Repeated over and over, but with little variations. Sometimes she was a soldier. Sometimes she was a forest woman, with no formal military training. She'd been a general once or twice, unfortunately. She'd rather leave that particular job for someone else.

ʃid bɪn ə ɡɑɹd, ə noʊbəl θif, ə leɪɾi, ə pɛzənt, ə kɪlɝ ən ə seɪvjɝ. bʌt ʃi hæd nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ bɪn ə wɔɹɾɝ. ði ʌnfəmɪljɛɹəɾi dɪdn bɑðɝ hɝ; ɪn moʊst ə hɝ lɪvz, ʃi hæd noʊ nɑlədʒ ʌv wʌt hæd kʌm bɪfɔɹ. wʌt ʃi kəd dʒɹɔ fɹəm əɹ pɹiviəs laɪvz naʊ wɑz ə bun, jɛs, bʌt ʃi hæd noʊ ɹaɪt tə ðoʊz mɛmɹiz.

She'd been a guard, a noble thief, a lady, a peasant, a killer and a savior. But she had never before been a Warder. The unfamiliarity didn't bother her; in most of her lives, she had no knowledge of what had come before. What she could draw from her previous lives now was a boon, yes, but she had no right to those memories.

ðət dɪdn stɑp əɹ hɑɹt fɹəm twɪstɪŋ itʃ taɪm wʌn ə ðoʊz mɛmɹiz feɪɾəd. laɪt! ɪf ʃi kʊdn bi wɪð ɡeɪɾəl ðɪs taɪm ɝaʊnd, kʊdnt ʃi ət list ɹɪmɛmbɝ hɪm? ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ðə pæɾɝn dɪdnt noʊ wʌt tə də wɪð hɝ. ʃid bɪn fɔɹst ɪndə ðɪs laɪf, ʃʌvɪŋ ʌðɝ θɹɛdz əsaɪd, teɪkɪŋ ən ʌnɪkspɛktɪd pleɪs. ðə pæɾɝn wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə wiv əɹ ɪn. wʌt wəd hæpən wən ɔl ə ðə mɛmɹiz feɪɾəd? wəd ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝ weɪkɪŋ ʌp əz ən ədʌlt wɪð noʊ hɪstɝi? ðə θɔt tɛɹəfaɪɾ əɹ əz noʊ bæɾəlfild ɛvɝ hæd.

That didn't stop her heart from twisting each time one of those memories faded. Light! If she couldn't be with Gaidal this time around, couldn't she at least remember him? It was as if the Pattern didn't know what to do with her. She'd been forced into this life, shoving other threads aside, taking an unexpected place. The Pattern was trying to weave her in. What would happen when all of the memories faded? Would she remember waking up as an adult with no history? The thought terrified her as no battlefield ever had.

ʃi nɑɾəd tə wʌn ə hɝ ɡɑɹdzwɪmən, keɪlə bɛnt, hu pæs baɪ ðə bæk ɹoʊ ʌv ðə meɪkʃɪf θiəɾɝ ən səluɾəd.

She nodded to one of her Guardswomen, Kaila Bent, who passed by the back row of the makeshift theater and saluted.

"wɛl?" bɝdʒɪɾ æskt, stɛpɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ tə spik wɪð keɪlə. "nʌθɪŋ tə ɹipɔɹt," keɪlə sɛd. "ɔl ɪz wɛl." ʃi wɑz ə læŋki faɪɝ-hɛɹd wʊmən, ən hæd teɪkən vɛɹi izəli tə wɛɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹaʊzɝz ən koʊɾ ʌv ə ɡɑɹdzwʊmən. "ɔɹəɡən, ɔl ɪz əz wɛl əz ɪt kəd bi waɪl hævɪŋ tə sʌfɝ θɹu ðə dɛθ ə pɹɪnsɛs wælɪʃən'.'

"Well?" Birgitte asked, stepping around the corner to speak with Kaila. "Nothing to report," Kaila said. "All is well." She was a lanky fire-haired woman, and had taken very easily to wearing the trousers and coat of a Guardswoman. "Or, all is as well as it could be while having to suffer through The Death of Princess Walishen'.'

stɑp kəmpleɪnɪŋ," bɝdʒɪt sɛd, səpɹɛsɪŋ ə wɪns əz ðə divə - soʊ ðə pleɪɝz kɔld əɹ -  bɪɡæn ə pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ʃɹɪl ɑɹiə - soʊ ðeɪ kɔld ə sɔŋ baɪ jɝsɛlf. waɪ dɪd ðə pleɪɝz nid soʊ mɛni nu neɪmz fəɹ θɪŋz? "ju kəd bi aʊt pətʃɹoʊlɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹeɪn."

Stop complaining," Birgitte said, suppressing a wince as the diva - so the players called her -  began a particularly shrill aria - so they called a song by yourself. Why did the players need so many new names for things? "You could be out patrolling in the rain."

"aɪ kʊd?" keɪlə æskt, saʊndɪŋ iɡɝ. "waɪ dɪdn jə seɪ soʊ sunɝ? meɪbi əl ɡɛt stʃɹʌk baɪ laɪtnɪŋ. ðət maɪt bi pɹɛfɝəbəl." bɝdʒɪt snɔɹɾɪd. "ɡɛt bæk tə jəɹ ɹaʊnz." keɪlə səluɾəd ən lɛft. bɝdʒɪt tun bæk ɪndə ðə θiəɾɝ, linɪŋ əɡɛns ðə pɪlɝ. pɝhæps ʃi ʃʊɾə bɹɔt səm wæks tə stʌf ɪn əɹ ɪɹz. ʃi ɡlænst oʊvɝ əɾ ɪleɪn. ðə kwin sæt wɪð ə kɑm dɪminɝ, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə pleɪ. ət taɪmz, bɝdʒɪt fɛl mɔɹ laɪk ə nɝsmeɪd ðən ə bɑɾiɡɑɹd. haʊ dɪd jə pɹətɛkt ə wʊmən u simd, ət taɪmz, soʊ dɪtɝ- maɪn tə si hɝsɛlf dɛd?

"I could?" Kaila asked, sounding eager. "Why didn't you say so sooner? Maybe I'll get struck by lightning. That might be preferable." Birgitte snorted. "Get back to your rounds." Kaila saluted and left. Birgitte tuned back into the theater, leaning against the pillar. Perhaps she should have brought some wax to stuff in her ears. She glanced over at Elayne. The Queen sat with a calm demeanor, watching the play. At times, Birgitte felt more like a nursemaid than a bodyguard. How did you protect a woman who seemed, at times, so deter- mined to see herself dead?

ən jɛt, ɪleɪn wɑz ɔlsoʊ soʊ vɛɹi keɪpəbəl. laɪk tənaɪt; ʃid sʌmhaʊ kənvɪnst əɹ moʊs bɪɾɝ ɹaɪvəl tə ətɛn ðɪs pleɪ. ðət wɑz ɛlɹin sɪt-tɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪn ði istɝn ɹoʊ; ðə wʊmənz læs pɑɹɾɪŋ fɹəm ðə pæləs hæd bɪn soʊ bɪɾɝ ðət bɝdʒɪt hædn ɪkspɛktəɾ əɹ tə ɹɪtɝn ənlɛs ʃi wɑz ɪn tʃeɪnz.

And yet, Elayne was also so very capable. Like tonight; she'd somehow convinced her most bitter rival to attend this play. That was Ellorien sit-ting over in the eastern row; the woman's last parting from the palace had been so bitter that Birgitte hadn't expected her to return unless she was in chains.

jɛt hɪɹ ʃi wɑz. ɪt wɪspɝɾ ʌv ə pəlɪɾəkəl mənuvɝ baɪ ɪleɪn ðət wɑz θɝtin stɛps mɔɹ sʌɾəl ðən bɝdʒɪt hæɾ ə maɪn fɔɹ.

Yet here she was. It whispered of a political maneuver by Elayne that was thirteen steps more subtle than Birgitte had a mind for.

ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. ɪleɪn wɑz ə kwin. vɑlətɪləɾi ən ɔl. ʃid bi ɡʊd fəɹ ændɝ. əsumɪŋ bɝdʒɪt kəd kip ðət ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd hɛd fɹəm biɪŋ lɑpt ɔf ɪts nɛk.

She shook her head. Elayne was a queen. Volatility and all. She'd be good for Andor. Assuming Birgitte could keep that golden-haired head from being lopped off its neck.

æftɝ səm taɪm sʌfɝɪŋ θɹu ðə sɪŋɪŋ, keɪlə əpɹoʊtʃt əɡɛn. bɝdʒɪt stʊɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪt, kjʊɹiəs ət ðə wʊmənz kwɪk peɪs. "wʌt?" ʃi æskt kwaɪətli.

After some time suffering through the singing, Kaila approached again. Birgitte stood up straight, curious at the woman's quick pace. "What?" she asked quietly.

"ju lʊk bɔɹd," keɪlə wɪspɝd, "soʊ aɪ θɔɾ aɪd bɹɪŋ ðɪs tə ju. dɪstɝbəns ət ðə plʌm ɡeɪt." ðət wɑz ðə saʊθistɝn ɛntʃɹəns tə ðə pæləs ɡɹaʊnz. "sʌmwʌn tʃɹaɪd tə snik θɹu."

"You looked bored," Kaila whispered, "so I thought I'd bring this to you. Disturbance at the Plum Gate." That was the southeastern entrance to the palace grounds. "Someone tried to sneak through."

"ənʌðɝ bɛɡɝ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ skɹæps? əɹ ə spaɪ fəɹ wʌn ə ðə lɔɹɾəlɪŋz, hoʊpɪŋ tə lɪsən ɪn?"

"Another beggar looking for scraps? Or a spy for one of the lordlings, hoping to listen in?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ," keɪlə sɛd. "aɪ hɝd ðə nuz θɝdhæn fɹəm kɑlɪsən əz wi pæst ɑn pətʃɹoʊl. hi sɛd ðə ɡɑɹdzmɪn əv ði ɪntʃɹuɾɝ ɪn kʌstəɾi ət ðə ɡeɪt."

"I don't know," Kaila said. "I heard the news thirdhand from Calison as we passed on patrol. He said the Guardsmen have the intruder in custody at the gate."

bɝdʒɪt ɡlæns tə ðə saɪd. ɪt lʊk laɪk ənʌðɝ soʊloʊ wɑz əbaʊt tə bɪɡɪn. "ju hæv kəmæn hɪɹ; hoʊl ðɪs poʊst ən teɪk ɹɪpɔɹts. əl ɡoʊ stʃɹɛtʃ maɪ lɛɡz ən tʃɛk ɑn ðɪs dɪstɝbəns."

Birgitte glanced to the side. It looked like another solo was about to begin. "You have command here; hold this post and take reports. I'll go stretch my legs and check on this disturbance."

"bɹɪŋ mi səm wæks fəɹ maɪ ɪɹz wən jə kʌm bæk, wəd ju?"

"Bring me some wax for my ears when you come back, would you?"

bɝdʒɪt tʃʌkəld, livɪŋ ðə θiəɾɝ ən stɛpɪŋ ɪndə ə waɪt-ænd-ɹɛd pæləs hɔlweɪ. ðoʊ ʃi hæd ɡɑɹdzwɪmən ən mɛn wɪð ɛkstʃɹə baʊz ət ðə hɔlweɪz, bɝdʒɪt hɝsɛlf kæɹiɾ ə sɔɹd, fəɹ ən əsæsəneɪʃən ətɛmpt wəd moʊs laɪkli tɝn tə kloʊz-kɔɹɾɝz faɪɾɪŋ.

Birgitte chuckled, leaving the theater and stepping into a white-and-red palace hallway. Though she had Guardswomen and men with extra bows at the hallways, Birgitte herself carried a sword, for an assassination attempt would most likely turn to close-quarters fighting.

bɝdʒɪt tʃɹɑɾəd daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ, ɡlænsɪŋ aʊɾ ə wɪndoʊ wən ʃi pæst. ðə skaɪ likt ə stʃɹɛŋθənɪŋ dʒɹɪzəl. ʌɾɝli dʒɹɪɹi. ɡeɪɾəl wʊɾə laɪk ðɪs wɛðɝ. hi lʌv ðə ɹeɪn. ɑn əkeɪʒən, ʃid dʒoʊk ðət dʒɹɪzəl suɾəd ɪz feɪs bɛɾɝ, meɪkɪŋ ɪm lɛs laɪkli tə fɹaɪɾən tʃɪlʒɹən.

Birgitte trotted down the hallway, glancing out a window when she passed. The sky leaked a strengthening drizzle. Utterly dreary. Gaidal would have liked this weather. He loved the rain. On occasion, she'd joked that drizzle suited his face better, making him less likely to frighten children.

laɪt, bʌt ʃi mɪs ðət mæn.

Light, but she missed that man.

ðə moʊs dɝɛkt ɹut tə ðə plʌm ɡeɪt tʊk əɹ θɹu ðə sɝvəns kɔɹɾɝz. ɪn mɛni pæləsəz, ðɪs wʊɾə mɛn ɛntɝɪŋ ə sɛkʃən ə ðə bɪldɪŋ ðət wɑz mɔɹ dʒɹæb, mɛn fəɹ lɛs ɪmpɔɹɾənt pipəl. bʌt ðɪs bɪldɪŋ hæd bɪn oʊɡiɝ bɪlt, ən ðeɪ hæd pɝtɪkjəlɝ vjuz əbaʊt sətʃ θɪŋz. ðə mɑɹbəl stoʊnwɝk hɪɹ wɑz əz ɡɹæn əz ɪt wɑz ɛlswɛɹ, wɪð taɪl moʊzeɪɪks ə ɹɛɾ ən waɪt. ðə ɹumz, waɪl smɔl baɪ ɹɔɪəl stændɝdz, wɝ itʃ lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə hoʊld ən ɪntaɪɝ fæmli. bɝdʒɪt dʒɛnɝəli pɹəfɝd tə teɪk əɹ milz ɪn ðə sɝvəns' lɑɹdʒ, oʊpən daɪnɪŋ hɔl. fɔɹ sɛpɹət hɑɹθs kɹækəl hɪɹ ɪn dɪfaɪəns ə ðə dʒɹɪɹi naɪt, ən ɔf-duɾi sɝvəns ən ɡɑɹdz læft ən tʃæɾəd. səm sɛd jə kəd dʒʌdʒ ə mɑnɑɹk baɪ ðə weɪ hi tʃɹiɾəd ðoʊz u sɝv hɪm. ɪf ðət wɝ ðə keɪs, ðən ði ændɔɝən pæləs hæd bɪn dɪzaɪn ɪn ə weɪ tə ɛnkɝɪdʒ ðə bɛst ɪn ɪts kwinz.

The most direct route to the Plum Gate took her through the servants quarters. In many palaces, this would have meant entering a section of the building that was more drab, meant for less important people. But this building had been Ogier built, and they had particular views about such things. The marble stonework here was as grand as it was elsewhere, with tiled mosaics of red and white. The rooms, while small by royal standards, were each large enough to hold an entire family. Birgitte generally preferred to take her meals in the servants' large, open dining hall. Four separate hearths crackled here in defiance of the dreary night, and off-duty servants and Guards laughed and chatted. Some said you could judge a monarch by the way he treated those who served him. If that were the case, then the Andoran palace had been designed in a way to encourage the best in its queens.

bɝdʒɪt ɹɪlʌktənli pæs baɪ ði ɪnvaɪɾɪŋ sɛns ə fuɾ ən ɪnstɛd pʊʃɪŋ əɹ weɪ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə koʊl sʌmɝ stɔɹm. ðə tʃɪl wɑzn baɪɾɪŋ. dʒʌst ənkʌmftəɹbəl. ʃi pʊld ʌp ðə hʊɾ ə hɝ kloʊk ən kɹɔs ðə slɪk peɪvɪŋ daʊn tə ðə plʌm ɡeɪt. ðə ɡɑthaʊs wɑz əlaɪt wɪð ən ɔɹənʒ ɡloʊ, ən ðə ɡɑɹdzmɪn ɑn wɑtʃ stʊɾ aʊtsaɪɾ ɪn wɛt kloʊks, hælbɝdz hɛl tə ðə saɪd.

Birgitte reluctantly passed by the inviting scents of food and instead pushing her way out into the cold summer storm. The chill wasn't biting. Just uncomfortable. She pulled up the hood of her cloak and crossed the slick paving down to the Plum Gate. The gatehouse was alight with an orange glow, and the Guardsmen on watch stood outside in wet cloaks, halberds held to the side.

bɝdʒɪt mɑɹtʃt ʌp tə ðə ɡɑthaʊs, wɔɾɝ dʒɹɪpɪŋ fɹəm ðə lɪp ə hɝ hʊd, ðən paʊndɪɾ ɑn ðə θɪk oʊk dɔɹ. ɪɾ oʊpənd, ɹɪvilɪŋ ðə bɔld-hɛɾəd, mʌstæʃt feɪs ə ɹɪnəl məsɝ, sɑɹdʒən ɑn duɾi. ə staʊt mæn, hi hæd waɪd hænz ən ə kɑm tɛmpɹəmənt. ʃi ɔlweɪz θɔɾ i ʃəd bi ɪn ə ʃɑp sʌmwɛɹ meɪkɪŋ ʃuz, bʌt ðə ɡɑɹd tʊk ɔl taɪps, ən dɪpɛndəbɪlɪɾi wɑz ɔfən mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən skɪl wɪð ðə sɔɹd.

Birgitte marched up to the gatehouse, water dripping from the lip of her hood, then pounded on the thick oak door. It opened, revealing the bald-headed, mustached face of Renald Macer, sergeant on duty. A stout man, he had wide hands and a calm temperament. She always thought he should be in a shop somewhere making shoes, but the Guard took all types, and dependability was often more important than skill with the sword.

"kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl!" hi ɪkskleɪmd. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ hɪɹ?"

"Captain-General!" he exclaimed. "What are you doing here?"

"ɡɛɾɪŋ ɹeɪn ɑn," ʃi snæpt.

"Getting rained on," she snapped.

"oʊ, maɪ!" hi stɛp bæk, meɪkɪŋ weɪ fəɹ əɹ tə ɛntɝ ðə ɡɑthaʊs. ɪt hæɾ ə sɪŋɡəl kɹaʊɾəd ɹum. ðə soʊlʒɝz wɝ ɑn stɔɹm ʃɪft -  minɪŋ twaɪs əz mɛni mɛn wəd wɝk ðə ɡeɪɾ əz juʒəwəl, bʌt ðeɪ wəɾ oʊnli hæv tə stæn aʊtsaɪɾ ən aʊɝ bɪfɔɹ ɹoʊteɪɾɪŋ wɪð ðə mɛn wɔɹmɪŋ ɪnsaɪd ðə ɡɑthaʊs.

"Oh, my!" He stepped back, making way for her to enter the gatehouse. It had a single crowded room. The soldiers were on storm shift -  meaning twice as many men would work the gate as usual, but they would only have to stand outside an hour before rotating with the men warming inside the gatehouse.

θɹi ɡɑɹdzmɪn sæɾ əɾ ə teɪbəl, θɹoʊɪŋ daɪs ɪndə ə dɪsɪŋ bɑks waɪl ən oʊpən-fɹʌntɪɾ aɪɝn stoʊv kənsum lɔɡz ən wɔɹm ti. dɪsɪŋ wɪð ðə tʊɹ soʊlʒɝz wɑz ə wɪɹi mæn wɪð ə blæk skɑɹf ɹæpt ɝaʊn ðə bɑɾəm ə hɪz feɪs. hɪz kloʊðɪŋ wɑz skɹʌfi, hɪz hɛd tɑp baɪ ə mɑp ʌv wɛt bɹaʊn hɛɹ kɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ɪn ɔl dɝɛkʃənz. bɹaʊn aɪz ɡlænst ət bɝdʒɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə tɑp ə ðə skɑɹf, ən ðə mæn sæŋk daʊn ə lɪɾəl ɪn ɪz sit.

Three Guardsmen sat at a table, throwing dice into a dicing box while an open-fronted iron stove consumed logs and warmed tea. Dicing with the tour soldiers was a wiry man with a black scarf wrapped around the bottom of his face. His clothing was scruffy, his head topped by a mop of wet brown hair kicking out in all directions. Brown eyes glanced at Birgitte over the top of the scarf, and the man sank down a little in his seat.

bɝdʒɪt tʊk ɔf əɹ kloʊk ən ʃʊk ɪt fɹi ʌv ɹeɪnwɔɾɝ. "ðɪs ɪz jəɹ ɪntʃɹuɾɝ, aɪ əsum?"

Birgitte took off her cloak and shook it free of rainwater. "This is your intruder, I assume?"

"waɪ, jɛs," ðə sɑɹdʒən sɛd. "haʊ dɪd jə hɪɹ əbaʊt ðæt?"

"Why, yes," the sergeant said. "How did you hear about that?"

ʃi aɪd ði ɪntʃɹuɾɝ. "hi tʃɹaɪd tə snik ɑntu ðə pæləs ɡɹaʊnz, ən naʊ jə ɹeɪ dɪsɪŋ wɪð hɪm?"

She eyed the intruder. "He tried to sneak onto the palace grounds, and now you re dicing with him?"

ðə sɑɹdʒən ən ði ʌðɝ mɛn lʊkt ʃipɪʃ. "wɛl, maɪ leɪɾi-"

The sergeant and the other men looked sheepish. "Well, my Lady-"

"ɪm noʊ leɪɾi." nɑt ðɪs taɪm ət list. "aɪ wɝk fəɹ ə lɪvɪŋ."

"I'm no lady." Not this time at least. "I work for a living."

"ɝ, jɛs," məsɝ kəntɪnjud. "wɛl, hi ɡeɪv ʌp ɪz sɔɹd ɹɛɾəli, ən i dʌzn sim ðət deɪnʒɝəs. dʒʌst ənʌðɝ bɛɡɝ wɑntɪŋ skɹæps fɹəm ðə kɪtʃənz. ɹaɪt naɪs fɛloʊ. θɔt wid ɡɛɾ ɪm wɔɹm bɪfɔɹ sɛndɪŋ ɪm aʊɾ ɪndə ðət wɛðɝ əɡɛn."

"Er, yes," Macer continued. "Well, he gave up his sword readily, and he doesn't seem that dangerous. Just another beggar wanting scraps from the kitchens. Right nice fellow. Thought we'd get him warm before sending him out into that weather again."

"ə bɛɡɝ," ʃi sɛd. "wɪð ə sɔɹd?"

"A beggar," she said. "With a sword?"

sɑɹdʒən məsɝ skɹætʃt ɪz hɛd. "aɪ ɡɛs ðəɾ ɪz kaɪndə ɑd."

Sergeant Macer scratched his head. "I guess that is kind of odd."

"ju kəd tʃɑɹm ðə hɛlməɾ ɔf ə dʒɛnɝəl ɑn ə bæɾəlfild, kʊdn ju, mæt?" ʃi sɛd.

"You could charm the helmet off a general on a battlefield, couldn't you, Mat?" she said.

"mæt?" ðə mæn æskt ɪn ə fəmɪljɝ vɔɪs. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt jə min, maɪ ɡʊd wʊmən. maɪ neɪm ɪz ɡɝɑɹd, ə sɪmpəl bɛɡɝ u hæz ə kwaɪɾ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ pæst, ɪf jə kɛɹ tə lɪsən tə ɪt - "

"Mat?" the man asked in a familiar voice. "I don't know what you mean, my good woman. My name is Garard, a simple beggar who has a quite interesting past, if you care to listen to it - "

ʃi aɪɾ ɪm wɪð ə fɝm ɡeɪz.

She eyed him with a firm gaze.

"oʊ, blʌɾi æʃəz, bɝdʒɪt," hi kəmpleɪnd, teɪkɪŋ ɔf ðə skɑɹf "aɪ oʊnli wɑntəd tə ɡɛt wɔɹm fəɹ ə spɛl."

"Oh, bloody ashes, Birgitte," he complained, taking off the scarf "I only wanted to get warm for a spell."

"ænd wɪn ðə kɔɪn ɔf maɪ mɛn."

"And win the coin off my men."

"ə fɹɛnli ɡeɪm nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə mæn," mæt sɛd.

"A friendly game never hurt a man," Mat said.

"ənlɛs ɪt wɑz əɡɛns ju. lʊk, waɪ ɑɹ jə snikɪŋ ɪndə ðə pæləs?"

"Unless it was against you. Look, why are you sneaking into the palace?"

"ɪt tʊk tu mʌtʃ blʌɾi wɝk tə ɡɛɾ ɪn læs taɪm," mæt sɛd, sɪɾɪŋ bæk ɪn ɪz tʃɛɹ. "θɔɾ aɪ maɪt pæs ðəɾ ʌp ðɪs taɪm."

"It took too much bloody work to get in last time," Mat said, sitting back in his chair. "Thought I might pass that up this time."

sɑɹdʒən məsɝ ɡlænst ət bɝdʒɪt. "ju noʊ ðɪs mæn?"

Sergeant Macer glanced at Birgitte. "You know this man?"

"ənfɔɹtʃənətli," ʃi sɛd. "ju kən ɹilis ɪm tə maɪ kʌstəɾi, sɑɹdʒənt. əl si ðət mæstɝ kɔθən ɪz pɹɑpɝli teɪkən kɛɹ ʌv."

"Unfortunately," she said. "You can release him to my custody, Sergeant. I'll see that Master Cauthon is properly taken care of."

"mæstɝ kɔθən?" wʌn ə ðə mɛn sɛd. "ju min ðə ɹeɪvən pɹɪns?"

"Master Cauthon?" one of the men said. "You mean the Raven Prince?"

"oʊ, fəɹ blʌɾi . . ." mæt sɛd, əz i stʊɾ ən pɪkt ʌp ɪz wɔkɪŋ stæf. "θæŋks," hi sɛd dʒɹaɪli tə bɝdʒɪt, θɹoʊɪŋ ɑn ɪz koʊt.

"Oh, for bloody . . ." Mat said, as he stood and picked up his walking staff. "Thanks," he said dryly to Birgitte, throwing on his coat.

ʃi pʊɾ əɹ kloʊk bæk ɑn, ðən pʊʃt oʊpən ðə dɔɹ əz wʌn ə ðə ɡɑɹdz hændəd mæt ɪz sɔɹd, bɛl stɪl ətætʃt. sɪns wən hæd mæt kæɹiɾ ə ʃɔɹts wɝd? pɹɑbli ə dəkɔɪ əweɪ fɹəm ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf.

She put her cloak back on, then pushed open the door as one of the Guards handed Mat his sword, belt still attached. Since when had Mat carried a shorts word? Probably a decoy away from the quarterstaff.

ðə tu stɛpt aʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹeɪn əz mæt taɪɾ ɑn ðə bɛlt. "ɹeɪvən pɹɪns?" ʃi æskt.

The two stepped out into the rain as Mat tied on the belt. "Raven Prince?" she asked.

"aɪ doʊnt wɑnə tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt."

"I don't want to talk about it."

"waɪ nɑt?"

"Why not?"

"bɪkɔz aɪm ɡɛɾɪŋ tu blʌɾi feɪməs fəɹ maɪ oʊn ɡʊd, ðæts waɪ.

"Because I'm getting too bloody famous for my own good, that's why.

"weɪɾ əntɪl ɪt tʃɹæks jə əkɹɔs dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz," ʃi sɛd, ɡlænsɪŋ ʌp ət ðə skaɪ, blɪŋkɪŋ əz ə ɹeɪndʒɹɑp hɪɾ əɹ skwɛɹ ɪn ði aɪ.

"Wait until it tracks you across generations," she said, glancing up at the sky, blinking as a raindrop hit her square in the eye.

"kʌm ɑn, lɛts ɡoʊ ɡɹæb ə dʒɹɪŋk," mæt sɛd, wɔkɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ɡeɪt.

"Come on, let's go grab a drink," Mat said, walking toward the gate.

"weɪt," ʃi sɛd. "doʊn jə wɑnə ɡoʊ si ɪleɪn?"

"Wait," she said. "Don't you want to go see Elayne?"

"ɪleɪn?" mæt sɛd. "blʌɾ ən æʃəz, bɝdʒɪt, aɪm hɪɹ tə tɔk tə ju. waɪ dʒju θɪŋk aɪ lɛt ðoʊz ɡɑɹdz kætʃ mi? jə wɑn ə dʒɹɪŋk əɹ nɑt?"

"Elayne?" Mat said. "Blood and ashes, Birgitte, I'm here to talk to you. Why do you think I let those Guards catch me? You want a drink or not?"

ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən ʃɹʌɡd. baɪ pʊɾɪŋ keɪlə ɑn duɾi ɪn əɹ pleɪs, bɝdʒɪt hæɾ əfɪʃəli ɡɔn ɑn bɹeɪk. ʃi nu ə fɛɹli disən tævɝn oʊnli tu stʃɹits fɹəm ðə pæləs.

She hesitated, then shrugged. By putting Kaila on duty in her place, Birgitte had officially gone on break. She knew a fairly decent tavern only two streets from the Palace.

"ɔl ɹaɪt," ʃi sɛd, weɪvɪŋ tə ðə ɡɑɹdz ən liɾɪŋ mæt ɑntu ðə ɹeɪni stʃɹit. "bʌɾ əl nid tə hæv mɪlk əɹ ti ɪnstɛɾ ʌv eɪl. wi ɑɹənt ʃʊɹ ɪf əɹ wɔɹɾɝ dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ wəd bi bæd fəɹ ðə beɪbiz əɹ nɑt." ʃi smaɪld, θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ə dʒɹʌŋk ɪleɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tɔk tə hɝ ælaɪz æftɝ ðə pleɪ. "ðoʊ ɪf aɪ meɪk əɹ tɪpsi, ɪt maɪt bi ɡʊd ɹivɛnʒ fəɹ səm ə ðə θɪŋz ʃiz dʌn tə mi."

"All right," she said, waving to the Guards and leading Mat onto the rainy street. "But I'll need to have milk or tea instead of ale. We aren't sure if her Warder drinking would be bad for the babies or not." She smiled, thinking of a drunk Elayne trying to talk to her allies after the play. "Though if I make her tipsy, it might be good revenge for some of the things she's done to me."

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ jə lɛɾ əɹ bɑn jə ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs," mæt sɛd. ðə stʃɹit wɑz nɪɹli ɛmpti ɝaʊn ðɛm, ðoʊ ðə tævɝn ʌp əhɛd lʊkt ɪnvaɪɾɪŋ, ɪts jɛloʊ laɪt spɪlɪŋ ɪndə ðə stʃɹit.

"I don't know why you let her bond you in the first place," Mat said. The street was nearly empty around them, though the tavern up ahead looked inviting, its yellow light spilling into the street.

"aɪ dɪdn əv ə seɪ ɪn ðə mæɾɝ," ʃi sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ doʊn ɹəɡɹɛɾ ɪt. dɪd jə ɹɪli snik ɪndə ðə pæləs tə mit wɪð mi?"

"I didn't have a say in the matter," she said. "But I don't regret it. Did you really sneak into the palace to meet with me?"

mæt ʃɹʌɡd. "aɪ hæv səm kwɛstʃənz."

Mat shrugged. "I have some questions."

"əbaʊt wʌt?"

"About what?"

hi ɹipleɪs ðət ɹɪdɪkjələs skɑɹf, wɪtʃ ʃi noʊɾəst hæɾ ə ɹɪp ɪn ðə mɪɾəl. "ju noʊ," hi sɛd.

He replaced that ridiculous scarf, which she noticed had a rip in the middle. "You know," he said.

"θɪŋz."

"Things."

mæt wɑz wʌn ə ðə fju hu nu hu ʃi ɹɪli wɑz. hi kʊdn min. . . . "noʊ," ʃi sɛd, tɝnɪŋ, "aɪ doʊnt wɑnə tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt."

Mat was one of the few who knew who she really was. He couldn't mean. . . . "No," she said, turning, "I don't want to talk about it."

"blʌɾi æʃəz, bɝdʒɪt! aɪ nid jəɹ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən. kʌm ɑn, fəɹ ən oʊl fɹɛnd."

"Bloody ashes, Birgitte! I need your information. Come on, for an old friend."

"wi əɡɹid tə kip itʃ ʌðɝz sikɹəts."

"We agreed to keep each other's secrets."

"æn aɪm nɑɾ aʊt blæbɪŋ jʊɹz," mæt sɛd kwɪkli. "bʌt, si, ðɛɹz ðɪs ɪʃu."

"And I'm not out blabbing yours," Mat said quickly. "But, see, there's this issue."

"wʌɾ ɪʃu?" "ðə taʊɝ ʌv ɡɛndʒeɪaɪ."

"What issue?" "The Tower of Ghenjei."

ðæts nɑɾ ən ɪʃu," ʃi sɛd. "ju steɪ əweɪ fɹəm ɪt." "aɪ kænt."

That's not an issue," she said. "You stay away from it." "I can't."

ʌv kɔɹs jə kæn. ɪts ə fleɪmɪŋ bɪldɪŋ, mæt. ɪt kæn ɪɡzækli tʃeɪs jə daʊn."

Of course you can. It's a flaming building, Mat. It can't exactly chase you down."

vɛɹi əmjuzɪŋ. lʊk, wɪl jə ət lis hɪɹ mi aʊt, oʊvɝ ə mʌɡ? ʌv, ɝ, mɪlk. əl baɪ."

Very amusing. Look, will you at least hear me out, over a mug? Of, er, milk. I'll buy."

ʃi stɑp fəɹ ə moʊmənt. ðən ʃi saɪd. "blʌɾi ɹaɪt, jəl baɪ,"

She stopped for a moment. Then she sighed. "Bloody right, you'll buy,"

ʃi mʌɾɝd, weɪvɪŋ ɪm ɔnwɝd. ðeɪ ɛntɝd ði ɪn, noʊn əz ðə ɡɹæn haɪk, wɪtʃ wɑz kɹaʊɾəd bɪɑn juʒəwəl kəz ə ðə ɹeɪn. ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz ə fɹɛn ə bɝdʒɪts, haʊɛvɝ, ən i hæd ðə baʊnsɝ tɔs aʊɾ ə dʒɹʌŋkɝd slipɪŋ ɪn wʌn ə ðə buθs tə meɪk ɹum fəɹ hɝ.

she muttered, waving him onward. They entered the inn, known as The Grand Hike, which was crowded beyond usual because of the rain. The innkeeper was a friend of Birgitte's, however, and he had the bouncer toss out a drunkard sleeping in one of the booths to make room for her.

ʃi tɔst ɪm ə kɔɪn ɪn θæŋks, ən i nɑɾəd ɪz ʌɡli hɛd tə hɝ - hi wɑz mɪsɪŋ sɛvɹəl tiθ, wʌn aɪ, ən moʊst ə hɪz hɛɹ. bɛst- lʊkɪŋ mæn ɪn ðə pleɪs. bɝdʒɪt hɛld ʌp tu fɪŋɡɝz tə ɔɹɾɝ dʒɹɪŋks - hi nu ðət ʃi tʊk mɪlk ðiz deɪz - ən ʃi weɪv mæt tə ðə buθ.

She tossed him a coin in thanks, and he nodded his ugly head to her - he was missing several teeth, one eye, and most of his hair. Best- looking man in the place. Birgitte held up two fingers to order drinks - he knew that she took milk these days - and she waved Mat to the booth.

"wʌn doʊn ɹaɪtli θɪŋk aɪv ɛvɝ sin ən ʌɡliɝ mæn ðən ðəɾ ɪnkipɝ," mæt sɛɾ əz ðeɪ sæt.

"1 don't rightly think I've ever seen an uglier man than that innkeeper," Mat said as they sat.

"ju hævən bɪn əlaɪv lɔŋ ɪnʌf," ʃi sɛd, linɪŋ bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl ən pʊɾɪŋ əɹ buɾɪd fiɾ ʌp ɑn ðə teɪbəl. ðəɹ wɑz dʒʌst ɹum ɪnʌf fəɹ əɹ tə də soʊ, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə bɛntʃ ə ðə buθ lɛŋθwaɪz. "ɪf oʊl snɝt wɝ ə fju jɪɹz jʌŋɡɝ, ən ɪf sʌmwʌn θɔt tə bɹeɪk ɪz noʊz ɪn ə fju pleɪsəz, aɪ maɪt kənsɪɾɝ hɪm. hiz ɡɑɾ ə faɪn tʃɛst, naɪs ən fʊl ə kɝli hɛɹ tə ɡɛt jəɹ fɪŋɡɝz ɪn."

"You haven't been alive long enough," she said, leaning back against the wall and putting her booted feet up on the table. There was just room enough for her to do so, sitting on the bench of the booth lengthwise. "If Old Snert were a few years younger, and if someone thought to break his nose in a few places, I might consider him. He's got a fine chest, nice and full of curly hair to get your fingers in."

mæt ɡɹɪnd. "hæv aɪ ɛvɝ mɛnʃən haʊ ɑɾ ɪts tə ɡoʊ dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ wɪð ə wʊmən u tɔks əbaʊt mɛn laɪk ðæt?"

Mat grinned. "Have I ever mentioned how odd it is to go drinking with a woman who talks about men like that?"

ʃi ʃɹʌɡd. "ɡɛndʒeɪaɪ. waɪ ɪn ðə neɪm ə nɔɹməɾ ɛs ɪɹz ɑɹ jə wɑntɪŋ tə ɡoʊ ðɛɹ?"

She shrugged. "Ghenjei. Why in the name of Normad s Ears are you wanting to go there?"

"huz ɪɹz?" mæt æskt.

"Whose ears?" Mat asked.

"ænsɝ mi."

"Answer me."

mæt saɪd, ðən æbsənli æksɛptɪɾ ɪz mʌɡ əz ðə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝl dɪlɪvɝɾ ɪt. ʌnkɛɹɪktɝɪstɪkli, hi dɪdn slæp əɹ bæksaɪd, ðoʊ hi dɪd ɡɪv əɹ ə ɡʊd lɪɹ əz ʃi wɔkt əweɪ. "ðə blʌɾi sneɪks ən fɑksəz əv ə fɹɛn ə maɪn," hi sɛd, loʊɝɪŋ ɪz skɑɹf ən teɪkɪŋ ə pʊl ɑn ɪz dʒɹɪŋk.

Mat sighed, then absently accepted his mug as the serving girl delivered it. Uncharacteristically, he didn't slap her backside, though he did give her a good leer as she walked away. "The bloody snakes and foxes have a friend of mine," he said, lowering his scarf and taking a pull on his drink.

"liv hɪm. jə kæn seɪv hɪm, mæt. ɪf i wɑz fulɪʃ ɪnʌf tə ɡoʊ ɪndə ðɛɹ ɹɛlm, hi dɪzɝvz wʌɾ i ɡɑt."

"Leave him. You can't save him, Mat. If he was foolish enough to go into their realm, he deserves what he got."

"ɪts ə wʊmən," mæt sɛd.

"It's a woman," Mat said.

ɑ. bɝdʒɪt θɔt. blʌɾi ful. hɪɹoʊɪk, bʌt stɪl ə ful.

Ah. Birgitte thought. Bloody fool. Heroic, but still a fool.

"aɪ kæn liv hɝ," mæt kəntɪnjud. "aɪ oʊ hɝ. bɪsaɪdz, ə ɡʊd fɹɛn ə maɪn ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ ɪn wɛðɝ aɪ wɑn ɪm tə əɹ nɑt. aɪ hæv tə hɛlp."

"I can't leave her," Mat continued. "I owe her. Besides, a good friend of mine is going in whether I want him to or not. I have to help."

"ðɛn ðəl əv ɔl θɹi ʌv ju," bɝdʒɪt sɛd. "lʊk, ɪf jə ɡoʊ ɪn θɹu ðə pɔɹɾəlz, ðən jəɹ lɑkt ɪndə ðə tʃɹiɾiz. ðeɪ pɹətɛk jə tə ən ɪkstɛnt, bʌt ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ ɹistʃɹɪk ju. jəl nɛvɝ ɡɛɾ ɛniwɛɹ jusfəl æftɝ ɛntɝɪŋ baɪ wʌn ə ði ɑɹtʃweɪz."

"Then they'll have all three of you," Birgitte said. "Look, if you go in through the portals, then you're locked into the treaties. They protect you to an extent, but they also restrict you. You'll never get anywhere useful after entering by one of the archways."

"æn ɪf jə ɡoʊ ɪn ði ʌðɝ weɪ?" mæt æskt. "ju toʊld oʊlvɝ haʊ tə oʊpən ðə taʊɝ."

"And if you go in the other way?" Mat asked. "You told Olver how to open the Tower."

"bɪkɔz aɪ wɑz tɛlɪŋ ɪm ə bɛdtaɪm stɔɹi! laɪt, aɪ nɛvɝ θɔt wʌn ə jə sæp-fɔɹ-bɹeɪnz wəɾ æktʃəli  tʃɹaɪ tə ɡɛɾ ɪn!"

"Because I was telling him a bedtime story! Light, I never thought one of you sap-for-brains would actually try to get in!"

"bʌɾ ɪf wi ɡoʊ ɪn ðət weɪ, kən wi faɪn hɝ?"

"But if we go in that way, can we find her?"

"maɪeɪb," bɝdʒɪt sɛd, "bʌt jə woʊnt. ðə tʃɹiɾiz woʊn bi ɪn ɪfɛkt, soʊ ði ɛln ən ɛlfɪn kən dʒɹɔ blʌd. nɔɹməli, jə oʊnli hæv tə wɝi əbaʊt tʃɹɪks wɪð pɪts əɹ ɹoʊps, sɪns ðeɪ kænt. . . ." ʃi tʃɹeɪld ɔf, ɡlænsɪŋ ət hɪm. "haʊ dɪd jə ɡɛt hæŋd, ɛniweɪ?"

"Mayaybe," Birgitte said, "but you won't. The treaties won't be in effect, so the Aelnnn and Eelfinn can draw blood. Normally, you only have to worry about tricks with pits or ropes, since they can't. . . ." She trailed off, glancing at him. "How did you get hanged, anyway?"

hi flʌʃt, lʊkɪŋ daʊn ɪndə hɪz dʒɹɪŋk. "ðeɪ ʃəd poʊst ə fleɪmɪŋ ɛkspləneɪʃən ɑn ðoʊz ɑɹtʃweɪz. 'stɛp θɹu hɪɹ ən ðeɪ kən blʌɾi hæŋ ju-.æn ðeɪ wɪl. ɪɾiət.'"

He flushed, looking down into his drink. "They should post a flaming explanation on those archways. 'Step through here and they can bloody hang you-.And they will. Idiot.'"

bɝdʒɪt snɔɹɾɪd. ðeɪd tɔkt əbaʊt ðə mɛmɹiz i hæd. ʃi ʃʊɾə pʊɾ ɪt təɡɛðɝ. "ɪf jə ɡoʊ ɪn ði ʌðɝ weɪ, ðəl pɹɑbli tʃɹaɪ ðəɾ əz wɛl. ʃɛɾɪŋ blʌɾ ɪn ðɛɹ kɪŋdəm kən əv stʃɹeɪnʒ ɪfɛks. ðəl tʃɹaɪ tə bɹeɪk jəɹ boʊnz wɪð ə fɔl əɹ dʒɹʌɡ jə tə slip. ən ðəl wɪn, mæt. ɪts ðɛɹ wɝld."

Birgitte snorted. They'd talked about the memories he had. She should have put it together. "If you go in the other way, they'll probably try that as well. Shedding blood in their kingdom can have strange effects. They'll try to break your bones with a fall or drug you to sleep. And they will win, Mat. It's their world."

"æn ɪf wi tʃit?" mæt æskt. "aɪɝn, mjuzɪk, faɪɝ."

"And if we cheat?" Mat asked. "Iron, music, fire."

"ðæts nɑt tʃiɾɪŋ. ðæts biɪŋ smɑɹt. ɛvɹiwʌn wɪð hæf ə wɪɾ u ɛntɝz θɹu ðə taʊɝ kæɹiz ðoʊz θɪŋz. bʌɾ oʊnli wʌn aʊɾ ʌv ə θaʊzən meɪks ɪt bæk aʊt, mæt."

"That's not cheating. That's being smart. Everyone with half a wit who enters through the tower carries those things. But only one out of a thousand makes it back out, Mat."

hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən fɪʃt ə smɔl hændfʊl ə kɔɪnz aʊɾ ə hɪz pɑkət. "wʌt dʒju θɪŋk ði ɑdz ɑɹ ðəɾ ɪf aɪ tɔs ðiz ɪndə ði ɛɹ, ðəl ɔl kʌm ʌp hɛdz? wʌn ɪn ə θaʊzənd?"

He hesitated, then fished a small handful of coins out of his pocket. "What do you think the odds are that if I toss these into the air, they will all come up heads? One in a thousand?"

"mæt . . ."

"Mat . . ."

hi tɔst əm əbʌv ðə teɪbəl. ðeɪ keɪm daʊn ɪn ə spɹeɪ, hɪɾɪŋ ðə teɪbəltɑp. nɑɾ ə sɪŋɡəl wʌn ə ðɛm baʊnst əɹ ɹoʊl fɹəm ðə teɪbəl ɑntu ðə flɔɹ.

He tossed them above the table. They came down in a spray, hitting the tabletop. Not a single one of them bounced or rolled from the table onto the floor.

mæt dɪdn lʊk daʊn ət ðə kɔɪnz. hi mɛɾ əɹ aɪz əz ðeɪ ɔl ɹoʊld ən vaɪbɹeɪɾɪd tə ə stɑp. ʃi ɡlænst ət ðɛm. tu dʌzən kɔɪnz. itʃ hæd lændəd feɪs ʌp.

Mat didn't look down at the coins. He met her eyes as they all rolled and vibrated to a stop. She glanced at them. Two dozen coins. Each had landed face up.

"wʌn ɪn ə θaʊzən ɪz ɡʊɾ ɑdz," hi sɛd. "fɔɹ mi."

"One in a thousand is good odds," he said. "For me."

"blʌɾi æʃəz. jəɹ əz bæɾ əz ɪleɪn! doʊn jə si? ɔl ɪt teɪks ɪz wʌn ɹɔŋ θɹoʊ. ivən jə mɪs wʌns ɪn ə waɪl."

"Bloody ashes. You're as bad as Elayne! Don't you see? All it takes is one wrong throw. Even you miss once in a while."

"aɪl teɪk ðə tʃæns. bɝn mi, bɝdʒɪt, aɪ noʊ ɪts stupəd, bʌɾ aɪm du-ɪŋ ɪt. haʊ dʒju noʊ soʊ mʌtʃ əbaʊt ðə taʊɝ ɛniweɪ? juv bɪn ɪndə ɪt, hævən ju?"

"I'll take the chance. Burn me, Birgitte, I know it's stupid, but I'm do-ing it. How do you know so much about the Tower anyway? You've been into it, haven't you?"

"aɪ hæv," ʃi ədmɪɾəd.

"I have," she admitted.

mæt lʊk smʌɡ. "wɛl jə ɡɑt bæk aʊt! haʊd jə mænədʒ ɪt?"

Mat looked smug. "Well you got back out! How'd you manage it?"

ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən faɪnəli tʊk ʌp əɹ mʌɡ ʌv mɪlk. "ðæt lɛdʒən dɪdn sɝvaɪv, aɪm əsumɪŋ?" "aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪt," mæt sɛd. "aɪ wɛn ɪn tə æsk əm tə seɪv ðə laɪf ə maɪ lʌv," ʃi sɛd. "ɪt keɪm æftɝ ðə bæɾəl ə lɑpɔɪn hɪlz, wɛɹ wi lɛd ðə bjukənɝ ɹɪbɛljən.

She hesitated, then finally took up her mug of milk. "That legend didn't survive, I'm assuming?" "I don't know it," Mat said. "I went in to ask them to save the life of my love," she said. "It came after the battle of Lahpoint Hills, where we led the Buchaner rebellion.

ɡeɪɾəl wɑz wundəd hɔɹəbli; ə bloʊ tə ðə hɛd ðət meɪɾ ɪm əneɪbəl tə θɪŋk stʃɹeɪt. hi fɝɡɑɾ u aɪ wɑz, səm ə ðə taɪm. ɪt tɔɹ maɪ hɑɹt, soʊ aɪ tʊk ɪm tə ðə taʊɝ tə bi hild."

Gaidal was wounded horribly; a blow to the head that made him unable to think straight. He forgot who I was, some of the time. It tore my heart, so I took him to the Tower to be Healed."

"æn haʊd jə ɡɛɾ aʊt?" mæt æskt. "haʊd jə ful ðɛm?"

"And how'd you get out?" Mat asked. "How'd you fool them?"

"aɪ dɪdnt," bɝdʒɪt sɛd sɔfli. mæt fɹoʊz. "ði ɛlfɪn nɛvɝ hil hɪm," ʃi kəntɪnjud. "ðeɪ kɪld əs boʊθ aɪ dɪdn sɝvaɪv, mæt. ðəɾ ɪz ði ɛn ə ðət pɝtɪkjəlɝ lɛdʒənd."

"I didn't," Birgitte said softly. Mat froze. "The Eelfinn never Healed him," she continued. "They killed us both I didn't survive, Mat. That is the end of that particular legend."

hi fɛl saɪlənt. "oʊ," hi faɪnəli sɛd. "wɛl, ðæts kaɪndə ə sæd stɔɹi, ðɛn."

He fell silent. "Oh," he finally said. "Well, that's kind of a sad story, then."

"ðeɪ kæn ɔl ɛn ɪn vɪktɝi. ɡeɪɾəl ən aɪ doʊn dil wɛl wɪð hæpi ɛndɪŋz ɛniweɪ. bɛɾɝ fəɹ əs tə bɝn aʊɾ ɪn ɡlɔɹi." ʃi ɡɹɪməst, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ wʌn ɪnkɑɹneɪʃən wən ʃi ən i hæd bɪn fɔɹs tə ɡɹoʊ oʊl təɡɛðɝ, pisfəli. moʊs bɔɹɪŋ laɪf ʃiɾ ɛvɝ noʊn, ðoʊ ət ðə taɪm - ɪɡnɝən ə hɝ ɡɹændɝ pɑɹɾ ɪn ðə pæɾɝn - ʃid bɪn hæpi wɪð ɪt.

"They can't all end in victory. Gaidal and I don't deal well with happy endings anyway. Better for us to burn out in glory." She grimaced, remembering one incarnation when she and he had been forced to grow old together, peacefully. Most boring life she'd ever known, though at the time - ignorant of her grander part in the Pattern - she'd been happy with it.

"wɛl ɪm stɪl ɡoʊɪŋ," mæt sɛd. ʃi saɪd. "aɪ kænt ɡoʊ wɪð ju, mæt. nɑɾ ən liv ɪleɪn. ʃiz ə dɛθ wɪʃ ðə saɪz ə jəɹ pɹaɪd, ən aɪ min tə si ʃi sɝvaɪvz."

"Well I'm still going," Mat said. She sighed. "I can't go with you, Mat. Not and leave Elayne. She has a death wish the size of your pride, and I mean to see she survives."

"aɪ doʊn ɪkspɛk jə tə ɡoʊ," mæt sɛd kwɪkli. "bɝn mi, ðæts nɑt wʌɾ aɪm æskɪŋ. ən . . ." hi fɹaʊnd. "ə dɛθ wʌt ðə saɪz ə maɪ wʌt!"

"I don't expect you to go," Mat said quickly. "Burn me, that's not what I'm asking. And . . ." He frowned. "A death what the size of my what!"

"nɛvɝ maɪnd," ʃi sɛd, dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ əɹ mɪlk. ʃi hæɾ ə sɑf spɑt fəɹ mɪlk, ðoʊ ʃi dɪdn tɛl pipəl ʌv ɪt. ʌv kɔɹs, ʃid bi hæpi wən ʃi kəd dʒɹɪŋk əɡɛn; ʃi mɪst oʊl snɝts jisti dʒɹɪŋks. ʃi laɪkt ʌɡli bɪɹ əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi laɪkt ʌɡli mɛn. "aɪ keɪm tə jə kəz aɪ nid hɛlp," mæt sɛd. "wʌt mɔɹ ɪz ðəɹ tə seɪ? jəɹ teɪkɪŋ aɪɝn, faɪɝ, ən mjuzɪk. aɪɝn wɪl hɝt ðɛm, wɔɹd ðɛm, ən hoʊl ðɛm. faɪɝ wɪl skɛɹ əm ən kɪl ðɛm. mjuzɪk wɪl ɛntʃɹɑns ðɛm. bʌt jəl faɪn ðət boʊθ faɪɝ ən mjuzɪk ɡɹoʊ lɛs ən lɛs ɪfɛktɪv ðə lɔŋɡɝ jə juz ðɛm.

"Never mind," she said, drinking her milk. She had a soft spot for milk, though she didn't tell people of it. Of course, she'd be happy when she could drink again; she missed Old Snert's yeasty drinks. She liked ugly beer as much as she liked ugly men. "I came to you because I need help," Mat said. "What more is there to say? You're taking iron, fire, and music. Iron will hurt them, ward them, and hold them. Fire will scare them and kill them. Music will entrance them. But you'll find that both fire and music grow less and less effective the longer you use them.

"ðə taʊɝ ɪzən ə pleɪs, ɪts ə pɔɹɾəl. ə kaɪndə ɡeɪt tə ðə kɹɔsɹoʊdz bɪtwin ðɛɹ ɹɛlmz.

"The tower isn't a place, it's a portal. A kind of gate to the crossroads between their realms.

jəl faɪn boʊθ ə ðɛm ðɛɹ, æɛlfɪn sneɪks ən ɛlfɪn fɑksəz. əsumɪŋ ðəɹ wɝkɪŋ təɡɛðɝ kɝənli. ðeɪv ə stʃɹeɪnʒ ɹileɪʃənʃɪp."

You'll find both of them there, Aelfinn snakes and Eelfinn foxes. Assuming they're working together currently. They have a strange relationship."

"bʌt wʌt də ðeɪ wɑnt?" mæt æskt. "fɹʌm ʌs, aɪ min. waɪ də ðeɪ kɛɹ?"

"But what do they want?" Mat asked. "From us, I mean. Why do they care?"

"ɪmoʊʃən," bɝdʒɪt sɛd. "ðæts waɪ ðeɪ bɪl pɔɹɾəlz ɪndə əɹ wɝld, ðæts waɪ ðeɪ ɪntaɪs əs ɪn. ðeɪ fiɾ ɔf wʌt wi fil. ðeɪ laɪk ɛɛs saʊθist-daɪ ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ, fəɹ səm ɹizən. pɝhæps ðoʊz wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ teɪs laɪk ə stʃɹɔŋ eɪl."

"Emotion," Birgitte said. "That's why they built portals into our world, that's why they entice us in. They feed off what we feel. They like Aes Se-dai in particular, for some reason. Perhaps those with the One Power taste like a strong ale."

mæt ʃɪvɝd vɪzəbli.

Mat shivered visibly.

"ði ɪnsaɪd wɪl bi kənfjuzɪŋ," bɝdʒɪt sɛd. "ɡɛɾɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ spəsɪfɪk ɪn ðəɹ ɪz dɪfəkəlt.

"The inside will be confusing," Birgitte said. "Getting anywhere specific in there is difficult.

ɡoʊɪŋ ɪn θɹu ðə taʊɝ ɪnstɛɾ ə ði ɑɹtʃweɪz pʊt mi ɪn deɪnʒɝ, bʌɾ aɪ nu ðəɾ ɪf aɪ kəd ɹitʃ ðət ɡɹæn hɔl, aɪd bi eɪbəl tə meɪk ə dil. jə doʊnt ɡɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ fɹi ɪf jə ɡoʊ ɪn ðə taʊɝ, baɪ ðə weɪ. ðəl æsk fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ, sʌmθɪŋ dɪɹ tə ju.

Going in through the tower instead of the archways put me in danger, but I knew that if I could reach that grand hall, I'd be able to make a deal. You don't get anything free if you go in the tower, by the way. They'll ask for something, something dear to you.

"ɛniweɪ, aɪ fɪɡjɝɾ aʊɾ ə mɛθəd tə faɪn ðə ɡɹæn hɔl. aɪɝn dʌst, lɛf bɪhaɪn mi ɪn ði ɪntɝsɛkʃənz wɛɹ aɪd pæst soʊ ðəɾ aɪ nu wɪtʃ weɪz aɪd ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ. ðeɪ kʊdn tʌtʃ ɪt, jə si, ən ... ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ juv nɛvɝ hɝd ðɪs stɔɹi?"

"Anyway, I figured out a method to find the grand hall. Iron dust, left behind me in the intersections where I'd passed so that I knew which ways I'd gone before. They couldn't touch it, you see, and ... are you sure you've never heard this story?"

mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ɪt juz tə bi pɑpjəlɝ ɝaʊn ðiz pɑɹts," ʃi sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz əɡoʊ əɹ soʊ."

Mat shook his head. "It used to be popular around these parts," she said, frowning. "A hundred years ago or so."

"ju saʊn əfɛndəd."

"You sound offended."

"ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊd stɔɹi," ʃi sɛd.

"It was a good story," she said.

"ɪf aɪ sɝvaɪv, əl əv θɔɹn kəmpoʊz ə blʌɾi bæləɾ əbaʊɾ ɪt, bɝdʒɪt. tɛl mi əbaʊt ðə dʌst.

"If I survive, I'll have Thorn compose a bloody ballad about it, Birgitte. Tell me about the dust.

dɪd jəɹ plæn wɝk?" ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "aɪ stɪl ɡɑt lɔst. aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf ðeɪ blu əweɪ ðə dʌst sʌmhaʊ, əɹ ɪf ðə pleɪs ɪz soʊ hjudʒ ðəɾ aɪ nɛvɝ ɹɪpiɾɪd maɪsɛlf. aɪ ɛndəɾ ʌp kɔɹnɝd, maɪ faɪɝ ɡoʊɪŋ aʊt, maɪ laɪɹ bɹoʊkən, maɪ bɑstʃɹɪŋ snæpt, ɡeɪɾəl ʌnkɑnʃəs bɪhaɪn mi. hi kəd wɔk səm ə ðə deɪz ɪn ðɛɹ, bʌt wɑz tu dɪzi ɑn ʌðɝz, soʊ aɪ pʊld ɪm ɑn ðə lɪɾɝ aɪd bɹɔt."

Did your plan work?" She shook her head. "I still got lost. I don't know if they blew away the dust somehow, or if the place is so huge that I never repeated myself. I ended up cornered, my fire going out, my lyre broken, my bowstring snapped, Gaidal unconscious behind me. He could walk some of the days in there, but was too dizzy on others, so I pulled him on the litter I'd brought."

"sʌm ə ðə deɪz?" mæt sɛd. "haʊ lɔŋ wɝ jə ɪn ðɛɹ?"

"Some of the days?" Mat said. "How long were you in there?"

"aɪ hæd pɹəvɪʒənz fəɹ tu mʌnθs," bɝdʒɪt sɛd, ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ. "doʊnt noʊ haʊ lɔŋ wi læstəɾ æftɝ ðoʊz ɹæn aʊt."

"I had provisions for two months," Birgitte said, grimacing. "Don't know how long we lasted after those ran out."

"blʌɾi æʃəz!" mæt sɛd, ðən tʊk ə lɔŋ swɪɡ ʌv ɪz eɪl.

"Bloody ashes!" Mat said, then took a long swig of his ale.

"aɪ toʊl jə nɑt tə ɡoʊ ɪn," bɝdʒɪt sɛd. "əsumɪŋ jə də ɹitʃ jəɹ fɹɛnd, jəl nɛvɝ ɡɛt bæk aʊt. jə kən wɑndɝ fəɹ wiks ɪn ðət pleɪs ən nɛvɝ tɝn ɹaɪɾ əɹ lɛft, kip ɡoʊɪŋ stʃɹeɪt, pæsɪŋ hɔlweɪ æftɝ hɔlweɪ. ɔl ðə seɪm. ðə ɡɹæn hɔl kəd bi mɪnəts əweɪ, ɪf jə nu wɪtʃ dɝɛkʃən tə teɪk. bʌt jəl kip mɪsɪŋ ɪt."

"I told you not to go in," Birgitte said. "Assuming you do reach your friend, you'll never get back out. You can wander for weeks in that place and never turn right or left, keep going straight, passing hallway after hallway. All the same. The grand hall could be minutes away, if you knew which direction to take. But you'll keep missing it."

mæt stɛɹɾ ɪndə hɪz mʌɡ, pɝhæps wɪʃɪŋ hiɾ ɔɹɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ poʊɾənt.

Mat stared into his mug, perhaps wishing he'd ordered something more potent.

"ju ɹikənsɪɾɝɪŋ?" ʃi æskt. ''noʊ," hi sɛd. "bʌt wən wi ɡɛɾ aʊt, mɔɪɹeɪn bɛɾɝ blʌɾi əpɹiʃieɪt ðɪs! tu mʌnθs?" hi fɹaʊnd. "weɪt. ɪf jə boʊθ daɪɾ ɪn ðɛɹ, haʊ dɪd ðə stɔɹi ɡɛɾ aʊt?"

"You reconsidering?" she asked. ''No," he said. "But when we get out, Moiraine better bloody appreciate this! Two months?" He frowned. "Wait. If you both died in there, how did the story get out?"

ʃi ʃɹʌɡd. "nɛvɝ dɪd faɪn aʊt. pɝhæps wʌn ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ juz ðɛɹ kwɛstʃənz tə æsk.

She shrugged. "Never did find out. Perhaps one of the Aes Sedai used their questions to ask.

ɛvɹiwʌn nu aɪd ɡɔn ɪn. aɪ wɑz kɔl dʒɛθɑɹi mundənsɝ ðɛn. jəɹ ʃʊɹ juv nɛvɝ hɝd ðə stɔɹi?" hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ əɡɛn. ʃi saɪd, sɛɾəlɪŋ bæk. wɛl, nɑɾ ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðə teɪlz əbaʊɾ əɹ kəd lɪv ɑn fɝɛvɝ, bʌt ʃid θɔt ðət wʌn wəd stæn fəɹ ə fju mɔɹ dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz. ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ mʌɡ tə dʒɹɪŋk ðə læst ə hɝ mɪlk. ðə mʌɡ nɛvɝ ɡɑt ðɛɹ. ʃi fɹoʊz wən ʃi fɛlt ə dʒoʊlt ʌv ɪmoʊʃən fɹəm ɪleɪn. æŋɡɝ, fjʊɹi, peɪn.

Everyone knew I'd gone in. I was called Jethari Moondancer then. You're sure you've never heard the story?" He shook his head again. She sighed, settling back. Well, not every one of the tales about her could live on forever, but she'd thought that one would stand for a few more generations. She raised her mug to drink the last of her milk. The mug never got there. She froze when she felt a jolt of emotion from Elayne. Anger, fury, pain.

bɝdʒɪt slæm ðə mʌɡ daʊn ɑn ðə teɪbəl, ðən θɹu kɔɪnz daʊn ən stʊɾ ʌp, kɝsɪŋ.

Birgitte slammed the mug down on the table, then threw coins down and stood up, cursing.

"wʌt?" mæt sɛd, ɑn ɪz fiɾ ɪn ən aɪɛblɪŋk. "ɪleɪn. ɪn tʃɹʌbəl. əɡɛn. ʃiz hɝt."

"What?" Mat said, on his feet in an eyeblink. "Elayne. In trouble. Again. She's hurt."

"blʌɾi æʃəz," mæt snæpt, ɡɹæbɪŋ ɪz koʊɾ ən stæf əz ðeɪ ɹæn fəɹ ði ɛɡzɪt.

"Bloody ashes," Mat snapped, grabbing his coat and staff as they ran for the exit.


tʃæptɝ twɛntiθɹi


CHAPTER 23

fɑkshɛdz


Foxheads

ɪleɪn tɝn ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ mədæljən ɝaʊn ɪn əɹ fɪŋɡɝz, tʃɹeɪsɪŋ ðə fɑksəz hɛd wɝkt ɪndə ðə fɹʌnt. əz wɪð mɛni tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl tə tɛl ɪɡzækli wʌt kaɪndə mɛɾəl hæd bɪn juz tə kɹieɪɾ ɪɾ ɝɪdʒənəli. ʃi səspɛktəd sɪlvɝ, wɪð ðə sɛnsɪz ə hɝ tælənt. haʊɛvɝ, ðə mədæljən wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ sɪlvɝ. ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, sʌmθɪŋ nu.

Elayne turned the strange medallion around in her fingers, tracing the fox's head worked into the front. As with many ter'angreal, it was difficult to tell exactly what kind of metal had been used to create it originally. She suspected silver, with the senses of her Talent. However, the medallion was no longer silver. It was something else, something new.

ðə sɔŋməstʃɹəs ə ðə lʌki mænz θiəɾɝ tʃɹup kəntɪnjuɾ əɹ sɔŋ. ɪt wɑz bjuɾəfəl, pjʊɹ ən haɪ. ɪleɪn sæɾ ɑn ə kʊʃən tʃɛɹ ɑn ðə ɹaɪt saɪɾ ə ðə hɔl, wɪtʃ hæd bɪn ɹipɝpoʊzd wɪð ə ɹeɪzd ɛɹiə ət ðə fɹʌn fəɹ ðə pleɪɝz. ə pɛɹ ə bɝdʒɪts ɡɑɹdz stʊd bɪhaɪn hɝ.

The songmistress of the Lucky Man's Theater Troop continued her song. It was beautiful, pure and high. Elayne sat on a cushioned chair on the right side of the hall, which had been repurposed with a raised area at the front for the players. A pair of Birgitte's Guards stood behind her.

ðə ɹum wɑz dɪm, lɪɾ oʊnli baɪ ə laɪn ə smɔl flɪkɝɪŋ læmps sɛt bɪhaɪn blu ɡlæs ɪn ælkoʊvz ɑn ðə wɔlz. ðə blu laɪt wɑz oʊvɝwɛlm baɪ ðə bɝnɪŋ jɛloʊ læntɝnz sɛɾ ɝaʊn ðə fɹʌn ə ðə plætfɔɹm.

The room was dim, lit only by a line of small flickering lamps set behind blue glass in alcoves on the walls. The blue light was overwhelmed by the burning yellow lanterns set around the front of the platform.

ɪleɪn wɑz bɛɹli peɪɪŋ ətɛnʃən. ʃi hæɾ ɔfən lɪsən tə "ðə dɛθ ə pɹɪnsɛs wælɪʃən"

Elayne was barely paying attention. She had often listened to "The Death of Princess Walishen"

əz ə bæləd, ən dɪdn ɹɪli si ðə pɔɪn ʌv æɾɪŋ wɝdz tə ɪɾ ən dɪfɹən pleɪɝz, ɪnstɛɾ ə dʒʌs hævɪŋ wʌn bɑɹd də ði ɪntaɪɝ θɪŋ. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɛlɹinz feɪvɹɪt bæləd, ən ðə feɪvɝəbəl nuz aʊɾ ə kɛɹhin əbaʊt ðiz pleɪɝz - wɪtʃ noʊbəlz ðəɹ hæd ɹisənli dɪskʌvɝd - hæd mɛni ʌv ðə noʊbəlz ɪn ændɝ bʌzɪŋ. hɛns ðɪs ivnɪŋ. ɛlɹin hæd kʌm əɾ ɪleɪnz ɪnvɪteɪʃən; laɪkli ʃi wɑz ɪntʃɹiɡd. waɪ hæɾ ɪleɪn bɪn soʊ ɑdeɪʃəs əz tə ɪnvaɪt hɝ? sun, in wəd teɪk ædvæntɪdʒ ə hævɪŋ ɛlɹin hɪɹ. bʌt nɑt kwaɪt jɛt. lɛt ðə wɝnən ɛndʒɔɪ ðə pɹədʌkʃən fɝst. ʃid bi ɪkspɛktɪŋ ə pəlɪɾəkəl æmbʊʃ.

as a ballad, and didn't really see the point of adding words to it and different players, instead of just having one bard do the entire thing. But it was Ellorien's favorite ballad, and the favorable news out of Cairhien about these players - which nobles there had recently discovered - had many of the nobles in Andor buzzing. Hence this evening. Ellorien had come at Elayne's invitation; likely she was intrigued. Why had Elayne been so audacious as to invite her? Soon, Eayne would take advantage of having Ellorien here. But not quite yet. Let the wornan enjoy the production first. She'd be expecting a political ambush.

ʃid weɪt fəɹ ɪleɪn tə wɔk oʊvɝ ən sɪɾ ɪn wʌn ðə sits nɪɹ hɝ, əɹ pɝ-hæps sɛn ə sɝvənt wɪð ən ɔfɝɪleɪn dɪd niðɝ, ɪnstɛd sɪɾɪŋ ən ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə fɑkshɛd tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ɪt wɑz ə kɑmplɛks wɝk ʌv ɑɹt, dɪspaɪt biɪŋ oʊnli ə sɪŋɡəl, sɑləd pis ə mɛɾəl. ʃi kəd fil ðə wivz ðət hæd bɪn juz tə kɹieɪɾ ɪt. ɪts ɪntʃɹi-keɪsi wɑz fɑɹ bɪɑn ðə sɪmplɪsəɾi ʌv ðə twɪstəd dʒɹim ɹɪŋz. ʃi wɑz duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ ɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹipɹədus ðə mədæljən. ʃi kæɹiɾ ɪn əɹ paʊtʃ wʌn ə hɝ feɪld ətɛmps. ʃid hæd kɑpiz kæs fəɹ hɝ, əz pɹɪsaɪs ɪn dɪteɪl əz əɹ sɪlvɝsmɪθs kəd kɹieɪt, ðoʊ ʃi sʌs-pɛktɪd ðə fɔɹm wɑz nɑɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt. ði əmaʊn ə sɪlvɝ sim tə bi, fəɹ səm ɹizən, bʌt nɑt ðə ʃeɪp ðət sɪlvɝ tʊk.

She'd wait for Elayne to walk over and sit in one the seats near her, or per-haps send a servant with an offer.Elayne did neither, instead sitting and regarding the foxhead ter'angreal, It was a complex work of art, despite being only a single, solid piece of metal. She could feel the weaves that had been used to create it. Its intri-cacy was far beyond the simplicity of the twisted dream rings. She was doing something wrong in trying to reproduce the medallion. She carried in her pouch one of her failed attempts. She'd had copies cast for her, as precise in detail as her silversmiths could create, though she sus-pected the form was not important. The amount of silver seemed to be, for some reason, but not the shape that silver took.

ʃid ɡɑɾən kloʊz. ðə kɑpi ɪn əɹ paʊtʃ dɪdnt wɝk pɝfəkli. lɛs paʊɝfəl wivz slɪɾ ɔf ɛniwʌn hoʊldɪŋ ɪt, bʌt vɛɹi paʊɝfəl wʌnz kəd nɑt bi dɪflɛktɪd fəɹ səm ɹizən. ænd, mɔɹ pɹɑbləmæɾɪk, ɪt wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl tə tʃænəl waɪl tʌtʃɪŋ ðə kɑpi.

She'd gotten close. The copy in her pouch didn't work perfectly. Less powerful weaves slid off anyone holding it, but very powerful ones could not be deflected for some reason. And, more problematic, it was impossible to channel while touching the copy.

ʃi kəd tʃænəl waɪl hoʊldɪŋ ði ɝɪdʒənəl. ɪndid, ʃid bɪn ɡɪɾi wən ʃid dɪskʌvɝd ðət hoʊldɪŋ ðə mədæljən dɪdn ɪntɝfɪɹ wɪð əɹ wivz əɾ ɔl. biɪŋ pɹɛɡnən dɪd - ðət wɑz stɪl ə sɔɹs ə fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən tə hɝ - bʌɾ ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl tə hoʊl ðə fɑkshɛɾ ən tʃænəl.

She could channel while holding the original. Indeed, she'd been giddy when she'd discovered that holding the medallion didn't interfere with her weaves at all. Being pregnant did - that was still a source of frustration to her - but it was possible to hold the foxhead and channel.

bʌt nɑt ðə kɑpi. ʃi hædnt ɡɑɾən ɪt kwaɪt ɹaɪt. ænd, ənfɔɹtʃənətli, hɝ taɪm wɑz slɪm. mæt wəd niɾ ɪz mədæljən bæk sun.

But not the copy. She hadn't gotten it quite right. And, unfortunately, her time was slim. Mat would need his medallion back soon.

ʃi tʊk aʊt ðə feɪk ən sɛɾ ɪɾ ɑn ðə sit bɪsaɪd hɝ, ðən ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs ən woʊv spɪɹət.

She took out the fake and set it on the seat beside her, then embraced the Source and wove Spirit.

sɛvɹəl ə ðə kɪn, ə ɡɹup ə hum wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ ðə pɹədʌkʃən səm sits tə ðə saɪd, ɡlænst ʌp əɾ əɹ əz ʃi dɪd soʊ. moʊst wɝ tu dɪstʃɹæktəd baɪ ðə sɔŋ.

Several of the Kin, a group of whom were watching the production some seats to the side, glanced up at her as she did so. Most were too distracted by the song.

ɪleɪn ɹitʃt oʊvɝ ən tʌtʃt ðə mədæljən. ɪmiɾiətli, hɝ wivz ənɹævəld ən ðə sɔɹs wɪŋkt əweɪ fɹəm hɝ. mʌtʃ əz ɪf ə ʃil hæd bɪn pleɪst oʊvɝ hɝ.

Elayne reached over and touched the medallion. Immediately, her weaves unraveled and the source winked away from her. Much as if a shield had been placed over her.

ʃi saɪɾ əz ðə sɔŋ ɹitʃt ɪts haɪts. ðə kɑpi wɑz soʊ kloʊz, jɛt soʊ fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ət ðə seɪm taɪm. ʃid nɛvɝ wɛɹ sʌmθɪŋ ðət pɹɪvɛntɪɾ əɹ fɹəm tʌtʃɪŋ ðə sɔɹs, nɑɾ ivən fəɹ ðə pɹətɛkʃən ɪɾ ɔfɝd.

She sighed as the song reached its heights. The copy was so close, yet so frustrating at the same time. She'd never wear something that prevented her from touching the Source, not even for the protection it offered.

stɪl, ɪt wɑz nɑt kəmplitli jusləs. ʃi kəd ɡɪv ə kɑpi tə bɝdʒɪt, pɝhæps, ən ə fju ʌv ðə ɡɑɹdzmɪn kæptənz. ɪt wʊdn də fəɹ əɹ tə kɹieɪt tu mɛni ʌv ðiz. nɑt wən ðeɪ kəd bi juz soʊ ɪfɛktɪvli əɡɛnst ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Still, it was not completely useless. She could give a copy to Birgitte, perhaps, and a few of the Guardsmen captains. It wouldn't do for her to create too many of these. Not when they could be used so effectively against Aes Sedai.

kəd ʃi, pɝhæps, ɡɪv wʌn ə ðə kɑpiz tə mæt? hid nɛvɝ noʊ, sɪns i kʊdn tʃænəl hɪmsɛlf. . . .

Could she, perhaps, give one of the copies to Mat? He'd never know, since he couldn't channel himself. . . .

noʊ, ʃi θɔt, skwɑʃɪŋ ðət tɛmteɪʃən bɪfɔɹ ɪt kəd flaɪ tu haɪ.

No, she thought, squashing that temptation before it could fly too high.

ʃi hæd pɹɑməs tə ɹɪtɝn mæts mədæljən, ən ʃi wʊd. nɑt səm kɑpi ðət dɪdnt wɝk əz wɛl. ʃi tʌk boʊθ mədæljənz ɪndə hɝ dʒɹɛs pɑkt. naʊ ðət ʃi nu ʃi kəd ɡɛt mæt tə pɑɹt wɪð ɪz mədæljən, pɝhæps ʃi kəd bʊli hɪm ɪndə ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ mɔɹ taɪm. ðoʊ ðə pɹɛz-ɛns ə ðə ɡoʊlɑɹn dɪd wɝi hɝ. haʊ tə dil wɪð ðə θɪŋ? pɝhæps kɑpiz ə ðə mədæljən fəɹ ɔl əɹ ɡɑɹdz wʊdn bi ə bæɾ aɪdiə æftɝ ɔl.

She had promised to return Mat's medallion, and she would. Not some copy that didn't work as well. She tucked both medallions into her dress pocked. Now that she knew she could get Mat to part with his medallion, perhaps she could bully him into giving her more time. Though the pres-ence of the gholarn did worry her. How to deal with the thing? Perhaps copies of the medallion for all her guards wouldn't be a bad idea after all.

ðə sɔŋ fɪnɪʃt, ðə faɪnəl, haɪ-pɪtʃt noʊt dwɪndəlɪŋ laɪk ə kændəl ɹʌnɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv wɪk. ði ɛn ə ðə pleɪ keɪm ʃɔɹtli æftɝwɝd, mɛn ɪn waɪt mæsks dʒʌmpɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə dɑɹknəs. ə bɹɪljən laɪt flæʃt, sʌmθɪŋ θɹoʊn ɪndə wʌn ə ðə læntɝnz, ən wən ɪt feɪɾəd əɡɛn, wælɪʃən leɪ dɛɾ ɑn ðə steɪdʒ, ðə bɛl ə hɝ ɹɛd dʒɹɛs spleɪɾ ɝaʊn əɹ laɪk spɪl blʌd.

The song finished, the final, high-pitched note dwindling like a candle running out of wick. The end of the play came shortly afterward, men in white masks jumping out of the darkness. A brilliant light flashed, something thrown into one of the lanterns, and when it faded again, Walishen lay dead on the stage, the bell of her red dress splayed around her like spilled blood.

ði ɑɾiəns stʊd tə klæp. moʊst ə ðɛm wɝ kɪn, ðoʊ nɑɾ ə fju wɝ ətɛndəns ə ði ʌðɝ haɪ sits u hæd bɪn ɪnvaɪɾəd. ɔl ə ðoʊz wɝ səpɔɹɾɝz ə hɝz. daɪɛlɪn, ʌv kɔɹs, ən jʌŋ kɑneɪl nɔɹθən ən ði ikwəli jʌŋ - bʌt twaɪs əz pɹaʊd - kæɾəlɪn hɛvɪn.

The audience stood to clap. Most of them were Kin, though not a few were attendants of the other High Seats who had been invited. All of those were supporters of hers. Dyelin, of course, and young Conail Northan and the equally young - but twice as proud - Catalyn Haevin.

ðə faɪnəl noʊbəl hɪɹ wɑz sɪivɑz kɝən. wʌt tə meɪk ə hɝ? ɪleɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, slɪpɪŋ ðə feɪk fɑkshɛɾ ɪndə hɝ paʊtʃ ən lɛndɪŋ ə dɪmjʊɹ klæp tə ði ʌðɝ ækəleɪdz. ðə pleɪɝz wəd bi foʊkəst oʊnli ɑn hɝ. ɪf ʃi dɪdnt ɡɪv səm saɪn ʌv əpɹuvəl, ðeɪd fɹɛt ði ɪntaɪɝ naɪt.

The final noble here was Syivase Caeren. What to make of her? Elayne shook her head, slipping the fake foxhead into her pouch and lending a demure clap to the other accolades. The players would be focused only on her. If she didn't give some sign of approval, they'd fret the entire night.

ðət dʌn, ɪleɪn meɪɾ əɹ weɪ aʊt tə ə nɪɹbaɪ sɪɾɪŋ ɹum, wɪtʃ wɑz fɝnɪʃt wɪð pæɾəd, θɪk-ɑɹm tʃɛɹz fəɹ ɹɪlæks kɑnvɝseɪʃən. ðəɹ wɑz ə bɑɹ ət ðə saɪd, mæn baɪ ə sɝvɪŋ mæn ɪn ə kɹɪsp ɹɛɾ ən waɪt junəfɔɹm. hi stʊd wɪð hænz bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk, weɪɾɪŋ ɹɪspɛkfəli əz pipəl æmbəld ɪn. ɛlɹin wɑzn ðɛɹ, ʌv kɔɹs - ɪt wɑz beɪsɪk kɝɾəsi fəɹ ə ɡɛs tə weɪt fəɹ ðə hoʊs tə wɪðdʒɹɔ fɝst. ðoʊ ɛlɹin ən ɪleɪn wɝn ɑn ðə bɛst ə tɝmz, ɪt wʊdn də tə ʃoʊ pʊɹ mænɝz.

That done, Elayne made her way out to a nearby sitting room, which was furnished with padded, thick-armed chairs for relaxed conversation. There was a bar at the side, manned by a serving man in a crisp red and white uniform. He stood with hands behind his back, waiting respectfully as people ambled in. Ellorien wasn't there, of course - it was basic courtesy for a guest to wait for the host to withdraw first. Though Ellorien and Elayne weren't on the best of terms, it wouldn't do to show poor manners.

sun æftɝ ɪleɪn ɝaɪvd, ɛlɹin tʃɹeɪld ɪn. ðə plʌmp wʊmən wɑz tʃæɾɪŋ wɪð wʌn ə ðə kɪnswɪmən, pɔɪntɪdli ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə haɪ sits u wɔk nɪɹ hɝ. hɝ kɑnvɝseɪʃən saʊndəd fɔɹst. ʃi pɹɑbli cʊɾə bɪn ɪkspɛktəd tə əvɔɪd ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum ɪntaɪɝli, bʌɾ ɪleɪn nu ðət ðə wʊmən wəd wɑnə meɪk sɝɾən tə ɪkspɹɛs ðət ʃi hæd nɑt tʃeɪnʒd əɹ maɪn əbaʊt haʊs tʃɹəkənd.

Soon after Elayne arrived, Ellorien trailed in. The plump woman was chatting with one of the Kinswomen, pointedly ignoring the High Seats who walked near her. Her conversation sounded forced. She probably could have been expected to avoid the sitting room entirely, but Elayne knew that the woman would want to make certain to express that she had not changed her mind about House Trakand.

ɪleɪn smaɪld, bʌt dɪd nɑɾ əpɹoʊtʃ ðə wʊmən, ɪnstɛd tɝnɪŋ təwɔɹd sɪivɑz əz ʃi ɛntɝd. ʌv miɾiəm bɪld, ðə blu-aɪd ɡɝl maɪɾ əv bɪn pɹɪɾi, seɪv fəɹ ðəɾ ɪkspɹɛʃənləs lʊk ɑn əɹ feɪs. nɑɾ ɪmoʊʃənləs, laɪk ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. kəmplitli ɪkspɹɛʃənləs. ɪt səmtaɪmz sim laɪk sɪivɑz wɑz ə dʒɹɛsɪŋ dʌmi sɛɾ ʌp fəɹ dɪspleɪ. bʌt ðɛn, ɑn ʌðɝ əkeɪʒənz, ʃid ʃoʊ ə hɪɾən dɛpθ, ə kʌnɪŋ dip daʊn.

Elayne smiled, but did not approach the woman, instead turning toward Syivase as she entered. Of medium build, the blue-eyed girl might have been pretty, save for that expressionless look on her face. Not emotionless, like an Aes Sedai. Completely expressionless. It sometimes seemed like Syivase was a dressing dummy set up for display. But then, on other occasions, she'd show a hidden depth, a cunning deep down.

θæŋk jə fəɹ ði ɪnvɪteɪʃən, jəɹ mædʒəsti," sɪivɑz sɛɾ ivənli, hɝ vɔɪs ə feɪnli ɪɹi mɑnətoʊn. "ɪt wɑz moʊst ɛnlaɪɾənɪŋ."

Thank you for the invitation, Your Majesty," Syivase said evenly, her voice a faintly eerie monotone. "It was most enlightening."

ɛnlaɪɾənɪŋ?" ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪ ʃəd hoʊp ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ɛndʒɔɪəbəl."

Enlightening?" Elayne said. "I should hope that it was enjoyable."

sɪivɑz sɛd nʌθɪŋ. ʃi ɡlænst əɾ ɛlɹin, ən hɪɹ ʃi faɪnəli ʃoʊd səm ɪmoʊʃən. ən aɪsi kaɪndə dɪslaɪk, ðə kaɪn ðət ɡeɪv jə ə ʃɪvɝ. "waɪ ɪnvaɪt hɝ, jəɹ mædʒəsti?"

Syivase said nothing. She glanced at Ellorien, and here she finally showed some emotion. An icy kind of dislike, the kind that gave you a shiver. "Why invite her, Your Majesty?"

"haʊs kɝən wɑz əɾ ɑdz wɪð tʃɹəkənd wʌns, tu," ɪleɪn sɛd, "ʌv tɛn, ðoʊz huz lɔɪəlti ɪz moʊs dɪfəkəl tə wɪn ɑɹ ðə moʊs væljəbəl wʌns ɪts jʊɹz."

"House Caeren was at odds with Trakand once, too," Elayne said, "Of ten, those whose loyalty is most difficult to win are the most valuable once it is yours."

"ʃi wɪl nɑt səpɔɹt ju, jəɹ mædʒəsti," sɪlveɪs sɛd, hɝ vɔɪs stɪl tu kɑm. "nɑɾ æftɝ wʌt jəɹ mʌðɝ dɪd."

"She will not support you, Your Majesty," Sylvase said, her voice still too calm. "Not after what your mother did."

"wɛn maɪ mʌðɝ tʊk ðə θɹoʊn jɪɹz əɡoʊ," ɪleɪn sɛd, ɡlænsɪŋ oʊvɝ əɾ ɛlɹin, "ðɛɹ wɝ səm haʊsəz ɪt wɑz sɛd ʃid nɛvɝ wɪn oʊvɝ ən jɛt ʃi dɪd."

"When my mother took the throne years ago," Elayne said, glancing over at Ellorien, "there were some Houses it was said she'd never win over And yet she did."

"soʊ? jə ɔlɹɛɾi hæv ɪnʌf səpɔɹt, jəɹ mædʒəsti. juv hæd jəɹ vɪktɝi."

"So? You already have enough support, Your Majesty. You've had your victory."

"wʌn ə ðɛm."

"One of them."

ʃi lɛf ðə ɹɛst ənsɛd. ðəɹ wɑz ə dɛɾ ʌv ɑnɝ oʊd tə haʊs tʃɹæmən. kɔɹɾɪŋ ɛlɹinz əpɹuvəl wɑzn mɪɹli əbaʊt stʃɹɛŋθənɪŋ ðə laɪən θɹoʊn. ɪt wɑz əbaʊt ɹɪpɛɹɪŋ ɹɪfs kɑz baɪ ɪleɪnz mʌðɝ waɪl ʌndɝ ði ɪnfluəns ʌv ɡeɪbɹəl. ɪt wɑz əbaʊt ɹəkʌvɝɪŋ əɹ haʊsəz ɹɛpjəteɪʃən, əbaʊɾ ənduɪŋ ðə ɹɔŋz ðət kəd bi əndʌn.

She left the rest unsaid. There was a debt of honor owed to House Traemane. Courting Ellorien's approval wasn't merely about strengthening the Lion Throne. It was about repairing rifts caused by Elayne's mother while under the influence of Gaebril. It was about recovering her House's reputation, about undoing the wrongs that could be undone.

sɪlveɪs wəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðæt. ɪleɪn hæd lɝn əbaʊt ðə pʊɹ ɡɝlz tʃaɪldhʊd; ðɪs wʌn wəd nɑt pʊt mʌtʃ stɑk ɪn ði ɑnɝ ʌv ə haɪ sit. sɪlveɪs sim tə bɪliv ɪn oʊnli tu θɪŋz:

Sylvase would not understand that. Elayne had learned about the poor girl's childhood; this one would not put much stock in the honor of a High Seat. Sylvase seemed to believe in only two things:

paʊɝ ən vɛnʒəns. soʊ lɔŋ əz ʃi səpɔɹɾəd ɪleɪn ən kəd bi ɡaɪɾəd, ʃi wəd nɑt bi ə laɪəbɪlɪɾi. bʌt ʃi wəd nɛvɝ bi ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ tə haʊs tʃɹəkən ðət sʌmwʌn laɪk daɪɛlɪn wɑz.

power and vengeance. So long as she supported Elayne and could be guided, she would not be a liability. But she would never be the strength to House Trakand that someone like Dyelin was.

"haʊ ɪz maɪ sɛkɹətɛɹi sɝvɪŋ jəɹ nidz, jəɹ mædʒəsti?" sɪlveɪs æskt.

"How is my secretary serving your needs, Your Majesty?" Sylvase asked.

"wɛl ɪnʌf, aɪ səpoʊz," ɪleɪn sɛd. soʊ fɑɹ, hi hædn pɹədust ɛniθɪŋ ə vælju, ðoʊ ɪleɪn hædnt ɡɪvən ɪm liv tə də ɛniθɪŋ tu dʒɹæstɪk dʊɹɪŋ ɪz kwɛstʃənɪŋ. ʃi wɑz tʃɹæpt ɪn ə kənʌnʒɹəm. ʃid bɪn hʌntɪŋ ðɪs ɡɹup ə blæk ədʒɑ fəɹ wʌt sim laɪk fɝɛvɝ. ʃi faɪnəli hæɾ əm . . . bʌt wʌd ʃi də wɪð ðɛm?

"Well enough, I suppose," Elayne said. So far, he hadn't produced anything of value, though Elayne hadn't given him leave to do anything too drastic during his questioning. She was trapped in a conundrum. She'd been hunting this group of Black Ajah for what seemed like forever. She finally had them . . . but what did she do with them?

bɝdʒɪt hæd teɪkən ðə kæptɪvz əlaɪv ɑstɛnsəbli soʊ ðət ðeɪ kəd bi kwɛstʃənd, ðən tʃɹaɪd baɪ ðə waɪt taʊɝ. bʌt ðət mɛn ðeɪ hæd noʊ ɹizən tə spik; ðeɪ nu ðɛɹ ʌltəməɾ ɛnd wəd bi ɛksəkjuʃən. soʊ ɪleɪn iðɝ hæd tə bi wɪlɪŋ tə bɑɹɡən wɪð ðɛm, əɹ ʃi hæd tə lɛt ðə kwɛstʃənɝ teɪk ɪkstʃɹim mɛʒɝz.

Birgitte had taken the captives alive ostensibly so that they could be questioned, then tried by the White Tower. But that meant they had no reason to speak; they knew their ultimate end would be execution. So Elayne either had to be willing to bargain with them, or she had to let the questioner take extreme measures.

ə kwin hæd tə bi hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə əlaʊ ðiz θɪŋz. əɹ ðət wɑz wʌɾ əɹ titʃɝz ən tuɾɝz hæɾ ɪkspleɪnd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ kwɛstʃən əz tə ðə ɡɪlt ə ðiz wɪmən, ən ðeɪ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi dʌn ɪnʌf tə ɝn ðɛmsɛlvz dɛθ ə dʌzən taɪmz oʊvɝ. ɪleɪn wɑzn sɝɾən haʊ fɑɹ ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə dɪsɛnd, haʊɛvɝ, tə pɹaɪ ðɛɹ sikɹəts fɹi.

A queen had to be hard enough to allow these things. Or that was what her teachers and tutors had explained. There was no question as to the guilt of these women, and they had already done enough to earn themselves death a dozen times over. Elayne wasn't certain how far she herself was willing to descend, however, to pry their secrets free.

bɪsaɪdz, wəd ðəɾ æktʃəli  də ɛni ɡʊd? ɪspæn hæd hæd kaɪndə ə kəmpʌlʃən əɹ oʊðz baɪndɪŋ hɝ; ðiz wɝ laɪkli tə hæv ðə seɪm. wəd ðeɪ bi eɪbəl tə ɹɪvil ɛniθɪŋ jusfəl? ɪf oʊnli ðəɹ wɝ ə weɪ tə...

Besides, would that actually do any good? Ispan had had some kind of Compulsion or oaths binding her; these were likely to have the same. Would they be able to reveal anything useful? If only there were a way to...

ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, mɪsɪŋ sɪlveɪsəz nɛks kɑmɛn əz ə θɔɾ əkɝd tə hɝ. bɝdʒɪt wʊdn laɪk ɪt, ʌv kɔɹs. bɝdʒɪt dɪdn laɪk ɛniθɪŋ. bʌɾ ɪleɪn hæd fɛl bɝdʒɪt muv ɔf aʊɾ ə ðə pæləs sʌmwɛɹ, pɝhæps duɪŋ ɹaʊnz ə ðə ɡɑɹd poʊsts aʊtsaɪd.

She hesitated, missing Sylvase's next comment as a thought occurred to her. Birgitte wouldn't like it, of course. Birgitte didn't like anything. But Elayne had felt Birgitte move off out of the Palace somewhere, perhaps doing rounds of the guard posts outside.

"ɪkskjus mi, sɪlveɪs," ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪ dʒʌst ɹɪkɔl sʌmθɪŋ ðəɾ aɪ æbsəlutli mʌs du."

"Excuse me, Sylvase," Elayne said. "I just recalled something that I absolutely must do."

"ʌv kɔɹs, jəɹ mædʒəsti," ðə ɡɝl sɛɾ ɪn ə flæt, ɔlmoʊst ɪnhjumən vɔɪs.

"Of course, Your Majesty," the girl said in a flat, almost inhuman voice.

ɪleɪn muv fɹəm hɝ, ðən kwɪkli ɡɹiɾəd - ən beɪd ɡʊɾ iv- nɪŋ. - tə ði ʌðɝz. kɑneɪl lʊk bɔɹd. hid kʌm kəz ɪt hæd bɪn ɪkspɛktəɾ ə hɪm. daɪɛlɪn wɑz əɹ juʒəwəl plɛzənt, jɛt kɛɹfəl, sɛlf. ɪleɪn əvɔɪɾəd ɛlɹin. ʃi ɡɹiɾəd ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls ɪn ðə ɹum ə noʊt. wʌns fɪnɪʃt, ʃi bɪɡæn tə wɔk təwɔɹd ði ɛɡzɪt.

Elayne moved from her, then quickly greeted - and bade good eve- ning. - to the others. Conail looked bored. He'd come because it had been expected of him. Dyelin was her usual pleasant, yet careful, self. Elayne avoided Ellorien. She greeted everyone else in the room of note. Once finished, she began to walk toward the exit.

"ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd," ɛlɹin kɔld aʊt.

"Elayne Trakand," Ellorien called out.

ɪleɪn pɔzd, smaɪlɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf. ʃi tɝnd, waɪpɪŋ əɹ feɪs ʌv ɛniθɪŋ ʌðɝ ðən kælkjəleɪɾəd kjʊɹiɑsəɾi. "jɛs, leɪɾi ɛlɹin?"

Elayne paused, smiling to herself. She turned, wiping her face of anything other than calculated curiosity. "Yes, Lady Ellorien?"

"hæv jə ɪnvaɪɾəd mi hɪɹ oʊnli tə ɪɡnɔɹ mi?" ðə wʊmən dɪmændəd fɹəm əkɹɔs ðə ɹum. ʌðɝ kɑnvɝseɪʃənz ɡɹu kwaɪət.

"Have you invited me here only to ignore me?" the woman demanded from across the room. Other conversations grew quiet.

"nɑɾ əɾ ɔl," ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪ wɑz mɪɹli ʌndɝ ði ɪmpɹɛʃən ðət jə wəɾ əv ə mɔɹ plɛzən taɪm ɪf aɪ dɪd nɑt fɔɹs jə tə ɪntɝækt wɪð mi. ðɪs ivnɪŋ wɑz nɑɾ ɪntɛndəd fəɹ pəlɪɾəkəl pɝpəsəz."

"Not at all," Elayne said. "I was merely under the impression that you would have a more pleasant time if I did not force you to interact with me. This evening was not intended for political purposes."

ɛlɹin fɹaʊnd. "wɛl wʌt wɑz ɪt fɔɹ, ðɛn?"

Ellorien frowned. "Well what was it for, then?"

"tə ɛndʒɔɪ ə ɡʊd bæləd, leɪɾi ɛlɹin," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ænd, pɝhæps, tə ɹimaɪn jə ʌv deɪz wən jə ɔfən ɛndʒɔɪɾ ɛntɝteɪnmən ɪn ðə kʌmpəni ʌv haʊs tʃɹəkənd." ʃi smaɪld ən nɑɾəd slaɪtli, ðən lɛft.

"To enjoy a good ballad, Lady Ellorien," Elayne said. "And, perhaps, to remind you of days when you often enjoyed entertainment in the company of House Trakand." She smiled and nodded slightly, then left.

lɛɾ əɹ θɪŋk əbaʊt ðæt, ɪleɪn θɔt wɪð sæɾəsfækʃən. ɛlɹin hæd noʊ daʊt hɝd ðət ɡeɪbɹəl hæd bɪn wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən. ðə wʊmən maɪt nɑt bɪliv ɪt, bʌt pɝhæps ʃi wəd ɹikɔl ðə jɪɹz ə ɹɪspɛkt ʃi ən mɔɹɡeɪs hæd ʃoʊn wʌn ənʌðɝ. ʃəɾ ə fju ʃɔɹt mʌnθs bi kɑz tə fɝɡɛt jɪɹz ə fɹɛndʃɪp?

Let her think about that, Elayne thought with satisfaction. Ellorien had no doubt heard that Gaebril had been one of the Forsaken. The woman might not believe it, but perhaps she would recall the years of respect she and Morgase had shown one another. Should a few short months be cause to forget years of friendship?

ət ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə stɛps aʊɾ ə ðə laʊnʒ, ɪleɪn faʊn keɪlə bɛnt, wʌn ə bɝdʒɪts ɡɑɹdzwʊmən kæptənz. ðə læŋki faɪɝ-hɛɹd wʊmən wɑz tʃæɾɪŋ eɪmiəbli wɪð ə pɛɹ ʌv ɡɑɹdzmɪn, boʊθ ə hum sim kwaɪɾ iɡɝ tə ɡeɪn əɹ feɪvɝ. ɔl θɹi snæp tə ətɛnʃən wən ðeɪ noʊɾəst ɪleɪn.

At the bottom of the steps out of the lounge, Elayne found Kaila Bent, one of Birgitte's Guardswoman captains. The lanky fire-haired woman was chatting amiably with a pair of Guardsmen, both of whom seemed quite eager to gain her favor. All three snapped to attention when they noticed Elayne.

"wɛɹ dɪd bɝdʒɪt ɡoʊ?" ɪleɪn æskt.

"Where did Birgitte go?" Elayne asked.

"ʃi wɛn tə ɪnvɛstəɡeɪɾ ə dɪstɝbəns ət ðə ɡeɪts, jəɹ mædʒəsti,"

"She went to investigate a disturbance at the gates, Your Majesty,"

keɪlə sɛd. "aɪv hæd wɝd ðəɾ ɪt wɑz nʌθɪŋ. ðət mɝsənɛɹi kæptən u keɪm tə vɪzət jə ɝliɝ tʃɹaɪd tə snik ɑntu ðə pæləs ɡɹaʊnz. kæp-teɪn bɝdʒɪɾ ɪz kwɛstʃənɪŋ hɪm."

Kaila said. "I've had word that it was nothing. That mercenary captain who came to visit you earlier tried to sneak onto the palace grounds. Cap-tain Birgitte is questioning him."

ɪleɪn ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ. "ju min meɪtʃɹim kɔθən?"

Elayne raised an eyebrow. "You mean Matrim Cauthon?"

ðə wʊmən nɑɾəd.

The woman nodded.

"ʃiz 'kwɛstʃənɪŋ' hɪm?" "ðæts wʌɾ aɪ hɝd, jəɹ mædʒəsti," keɪlə ɹɪplaɪd.

"She's 'questioning' him?" "That's what I heard, Your Majesty," Kaila replied.

"ðæt minz ðə tu ʌv əm əv ɡɔn aʊt fəɹ dʒɹɪŋks," ɪleɪn sɛd wɪð ə saɪ. laɪt, ðɪs wɑz ə bæd taɪm fəɹ ɪt.

"That means the two of them have gone out for drinks," Elayne said with a sigh. Light, this was a bad time for it.

əɹ wɑz ɪɾ ə ɡʊd taɪm? bɝdʒɪt kʊdn əbdʒɛk tə ɪleɪnz plæn fəɹ ðə blæk ədʒɑ ɪf ʃi wɑz aʊt wɪð mæt. ɪleɪn faʊn hɝsɛlf smaɪlɪŋ. "kæptən bɛnt, jə ɑɹ wɪð mi." ʃi lɛf ðə θiəɾɝ ɹumz ən ɛntɝd ðə pæləs pɹɑpɝ. ðə wʊmən fɑloʊd, weɪvɪŋ fəɹ ðə skwɑɾ ʌv ɡɑɹdzwɪmən stændɪŋ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ tə fɑloʊ.

Or was it a good time? Birgitte couldn't object to Elayne's plan for the Black Ajah if she was out with Mat. Elayne found herself smiling. "Captain Bent, you are with me." She left the theater rooms and entered the Palace proper. The woman followed, waving for the squad of Guardswomen standing in the hallway to follow.

smaɪlɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf, ɪleɪn bɪɡæn ɡɪvɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz. wʌn ə ðə ɡɑɹdz-wɪmən ɹæn ɔf tə dɪlɪvɝ ðɛm, ðoʊ ʃi lʊkt kənfjuzd ət ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ lɪst ə kəmænz. ɪleɪn meɪɾ əɹ weɪ tə hɝ ɹumz, ðən sæt daʊn, θɪŋkɪŋ. ʃi wəɾ əv tə muv kwɪkli. bɝdʒɪt wɑz ɪn ə sɝli mud; ɪleɪn kəd tɛl ðət θɹu ðə bɑnd.

Smiling to herself, Elayne began giving orders. One of the Guards-women ran off to deliver them, though she looked confused at the strange list of commands. Elayne made her way to her rooms, then sat down, thinking. She would have to move quickly. Birgitte was in a surly mood; Elayne could tell that through the bond.

ə sɝvən sun ɝaɪvd, kæɹiɪŋ ən ɪnvɛləpɪŋ blæk kloʊk. ɪleɪn dʒʌmpt ʌp ən slɪpt ɪɾ ɑn, ðən ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs. ɪt tʊk əɹ θɹi tʃɹaɪz! blʌɾi æʃəz, bʌt biɪŋ pɹɛɡnənt wɑz fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾɪŋ səmtaɪmz.

A servant soon arrived, carrying an enveloping black cloak. Elayne jumped up and slipped it on, then embraced the Source. It took her three tries! Bloody ashes, but being pregnant was frustrating sometimes.

ʃi spʌn wivz ə faɪɝ ən ɛɹ ɝaʊn hɝ, juzɪŋ ðə mɪɹɝ ə mɪsts tə meɪk hɝsɛlf lʊk tɔlɝ, mɔɹ ɪmpoʊzɪŋ. ʃi fɛtʃt əɹ dʒuəlɹi tʃɛst ən fɪʃt aʊɾ ə smɔl aɪvɝi kɑɹvɪŋ ʌv ə siɾəd wʊmən ʃɹaʊɾɪd ɪn əɹ oʊn hɛɹ. ʃi juz ði æŋɡɹil tə pʊl əz mʌtʃ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪndə hɝ əz ʃi dɛɹd. tə ɛniwʌn wɑtʃɪŋ u kəd tʃænəl, ʃid lʊk ɪmpoʊzɪŋ ɪndid.

She spun weaves of Fire and Air around her, using the Mirror of Mists to make herself look taller, more imposing. She fetched her jewelry chest and fished out a small ivory carving of a seated woman shrouded in her own hair. She used the angreal to pull as much of the One Power into her as she dared. To anyone watching who could channel, she'd look imposing indeed.

ʃi ɡlæns bæk ət ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən. ðeɪ wɝ kənfjuzd, ɑbviəsli, ən stʊd wɪð ðɛɹ hænz ʌnkɑnʃəsli ɑn ðɛɹ sɔɹdz. "jɔɹ mædʒəsti?' keɪlə æskt.

She glanced back at the Guardswomen. They were confused, obviously, and stood with their hands unconsciously on their swords. "Your Majesty?' Kaila asked.

"haʊ də aɪ lʊk?" ɪleɪn sɛd, twikɪŋ əɹ wivz tə meɪk əɹ vɔɪs dipɝ.

"How do I look?" Elayne said, tweaking her weaves to make her voice deeper.

keɪləz aɪz oʊpənd waɪɾɝ. "laɪk ə θʌndɝhɛd ɡɪvən laɪf, jəɹ mædʒəsti."

Kaila's eyes opened wider. "Like a thunderhead given life, Your Majesty."

"ɪmpoʊzɪŋ, ðɛn?" ɪleɪn æskt, dʒʌmpɪŋ slaɪtli ət ðə deɪnʒɝəs, ɔlmoʊst ɪnhjumən saʊn ə hɝ vɔɪs. pɝfəkt!

"Imposing, then?" Elayne asked, jumping slightly at the dangerous, almost inhuman sound of her voice. Perfect!

"aɪd seɪ soʊ," ðə læŋki ɡɑɹdzwʊmən sɛd, ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ tʃɪn wɪð wʌn hænd. "ðoʊ ðə slɪpɝz də spɔɪl ði ɪfɛkt."

"I'd say so," the lanky Guardswoman said, rubbing her chin with one hand. "Though the slippers do spoil the effect."

ɪleɪn ɡlæns daʊn, kɝsɪŋ ət ðə pɪŋk sɪlk. ʃi woʊv səm mɔɹ, meɪkɪŋ əɹ slɪpɝd fit vænɪʃ. ðə wiv wəd meɪk ɪɾ əpɪɹ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ floʊɾɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, ɹæpt ɪn ə pʌlsɪŋ ʃɹaʊɾ ə dɑɹknəs, kloʊk ən stʃɹæps ə blæk klɔθ flʌɾɝɪŋ ɹaʊn hɝ. hɝ feɪs wɑz hɪɾən kəmplitli ɪn blæknəs. əz ən æɾəd tʌtʃ, ʃi kɹieɪɾəd tu feɪnli ɡloʊɪŋ pɪks ə ɹɛd wɛɹ ði aɪz ʃəd bi. laɪk koʊlz ɹeɪɾieɪtɪŋ wɪð ə dip kɹɪmzən laɪt.

Elayne glanced down, cursing at the pink silk. She wove some more, making her slippered feet vanish. The weave would make it appear as if she were floating in the air, wrapped in a pulsing shroud of darkness, cloak and straps of black cloth fluttering round her. Her face was hidden completely in blackness. As an added touch, she created two faintly glowing picks of red where the eyes should be. Like coals radiating with a deep crimson light.

"laɪt pɹəzɝv ʌs," wʌn ə ðə ɡɑɹdz wɪspɝd. ɪleɪn nɑɾəd tə hɝsɛlf, hɝ hɑɹt kwɪkənɪŋ ɪn ɪksaɪtmənt. ʃi wɑznt wɝid. ʃid bi seɪf. mɪnz vjuɪŋ pɹɑməs ðæt. ʃi ɹæn θɹu hɝ plænz əɡɛn. ðeɪ wɝ sɑləd. bʌt ðəɹ wəd bi oʊnli wʌn weɪ tə tɛst əm fəɹ sɝɾən.

"Light preserve us," one of the Guards whispered. Elayne nodded to herself, her heart quickening in excitement. She wasn't worried. She'd be safe. Min's viewing promised that. She ran through her plans again. They were solid. But there would be only one way to test them for certain.

ɪleɪn ɪnvɝɾɪd əɹ wivz ən taɪɾ əm ɔf. ðən ʃi tɝn tə ðə ɡɑɹdz. "tɝn aʊt ðə laɪts,"

Elayne inverted her weaves and tied them off. Then she turned to the Guards. "Turn out the lights,"

ʃi sɛd tə ðɛm, "æn ɹɪmeɪn pɝfəkli stɪl. əl ɹɪtɝn ʃɔɹtli."

she said to them, "and remain perfectly still. I will return shortly."

"bʌt - " keɪlə sɛd.

"But - " Kaila said.

"ðæɾ ɪz ən ɔɹɾɝ, ɡɑɹdzwʊmən," ɪleɪn sɛd fɝmli. "ju hæd bɛst oʊbeɪ ɪt."

"That is an order, Guardswoman," Elayne said firmly. "You had best obey it."

ðə wʊmən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ʃi laɪkli nu ðət bɝdʒɪt wəd nɛvɝ lɛt ðɪs hæpən. bʌt keɪlə wɑz nɑt bɝdʒɪt, θæŋkfəli. ʃi ɹɪlʌktənli ɡeɪv ði ɔɹɾɝ ən ðə laɪts ɪn ðə ɹum wɝ daʊst.

The woman hesitated. She likely knew that Birgitte would never let this happen. But Kaila was not Birgitte, thankfully. She reluctantly gave the order and the lights in the room were doused.

ɪleɪn ɹitʃt ɪndə hɝ pɑkəɾ ən tʊk aʊt ðə fɑkshɛd mədæljən, ðə ɹil wʌn, ən hɛld ɪt hɪɾən ən tʌkt ɪn əɹ hænd. ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ðən kɹieɪɾəd ə ɡeɪtweɪ. ðə ɹɪbən ə laɪt wɑz bɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə blækən ɹum, ɡloʊɪŋ ən beɪðɪŋ əm ɪn ə peɪl ɡloʊ, laɪk munlaɪt. ɪɾ oʊpən ɪndə ə ɹum ðət wɑz sɪməlɝli dɑɹk.

Elayne reached into her pocket and took out the foxhead medallion, the real one, and held it hidden and tucked in her hand. She took a deep breath, then created a gateway. The ribbon of light was bright in the blackened room, glowing and bathing them in a pale glow, like moonlight. It opened into a room that was similarly dark.

ɪleɪn stɛp θɹu ən faʊn hɝsɛlf ɪn ðə pæləs dʌnʒənz, ɪn wʌn ə ðə sɛlz. ə wʊmən nɛlt ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ðə sɛl, bɪsaɪd ðə stɝɾi dɔɹ wɪð ə smɔl wɪndoʊ ət ðə tɑp, slɑɾɪd wɪð bɑɹz, ðət lɛɾ ɪn ði oʊnli laɪɾ ɪn ðə dæŋk sɛl. ðəɹ wɑz ə smɔl kɑt tə ɪleɪnz ɹaɪɾ ən ə bʌkət fəɹ ə tʃeɪmbɝ pɑt tə hɝ lɛft. ðə taɪni ɹum smɛld ə moʊld ən hjumən weɪst, ən ʃi kəd klɪɹli hɪɹ ðə skɹætʃɪŋ ə ɹæts nɪɹbaɪ. ɪt stɪl sim tu lævɪʃ kɔɹɾɝz fəɹ ðə wʊmən ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ.

Elayne stepped through and found herself in the Palace dungeons, in one of the cells. A woman knelt on the far side of the cell, beside the sturdy door with a small window at the top, slotted with bars, that let in the only light in the dank cell. There was a small cot to Elayne's right and a bucket for a chamber pot to her left. The tiny room smelled of mold and human waste, and she could clearly hear the scratching of rats nearby. It still seemed too lavish quarters for the woman in front of her.

ɪleɪn hæd tʃoʊzən tʃɛzməl wɪð kælkjəleɪʃən. ðə wʊmən hæd sim tə hæv səm əθɔɹəɾi əmʌŋ ðə blæk, ən ʃi wɑz paʊɝfəl ɪnʌf ðət moʊst ə ði ʌðɝz wəd baʊ tə hɝ. bʌt ʃi ɔlsoʊ hæd simd mɔɹ pæʃənət ðən lɑdʒɪkəl, wən ɪleɪn hæd læst ɪnkaʊntɝd hɝ. ðət wəd bi ɪmpɔɹɾənt.

Elayne had chosen Chesmal with calculation. The woman had seemed to have some authority among the Black, and she was powerful enough that most of the others would bow to her. But she also had seemed more passionate than logical, when Elayne had last encountered her. That would be important.

ðə tɔl, hænsəm wʊmən spʌn əz sun əz ɪleɪn ɛntɝd ðə sɛl. ɪleɪn hɛld əɹ bɹɛθ.

The tall, handsome woman spun as soon as Elayne entered the cell. Elayne held her breath.

blɛsədli, ði ækt wɝkt. tʃɛzməl θɹu hɝsɛlf tə ðə stʃɹɔ-kʌvɝd flɔɹ ə ðə sɛl.

Blessedly, the act worked. Chesmal threw herself to the straw-covered floor of the cell.

'ɡɹeɪt wʌn," ðə wʊmən hɪst. "aɪ hæd - " "saɪləns!" ɪleɪn ʃaʊɾəd, hɝ vɔɪs bumɪŋ.

'Great One," the woman hissed. "I had - " "Silence!" Elayne shouted, her voice booming.

tʃɛzməl kɹɪnʒd, ðən ɡlæns tə ðə saɪd, əz ɪf weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə ɡɑɹdz aʊtsaɪd tə pik ɪn. ðəɹ wəd bi kɪnswɪmən ðəɹ tə hoʊl tʃɛzməlz ʃild; ɪleɪn kəd fil ðɛm. noʊbɑdi keɪm, dɪspaɪt ðə saʊnd. ðə kɪn wɝ fɑloʊɪŋ ɪleɪnz ɔɹɾɝz, ɑd ðoʊ ðoʊz ɔɹɾɝz wɝ.

Chesmal cringed, then glanced to the side, as if waiting for the Guards outside to peek in. There would be Kinswomen there to hold Chesmal's shield; Elayne could feel them. Nobody came, despite the sound. The Kin were following Elayne's orders, odd though those orders were.

"ju ɑɹ lɛs ðən ə ɹæt," ɪleɪn sɛd wɪð əɹ dɪsɡaɪz vɔɪs. "ju wɝ sɛn tə si tə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz ɡlɔɹi, bʌt wʌɾ əv jə dʌn? əlaʊd jɝsɛlf tə bi kæptʃɝd baɪ ðiz fulz, ðiz tʃɪlʒɹən?"

"You are less than a rat," Elayne said with her disguised voice. "You were sent to see to the Great Lord's glory, but what have you done? Allowed yourself to be captured by these fools, these children?"

tʃɛzməl weɪld, boʊɪŋ hɝsɛlf fɝðɝ. "aɪ æm dʌst, ɡɹeɪt wʌn. aɪm nʌθɪŋ! wɪv feɪl ju.

Chesmal wailed, bowing herself further. "I am dust, Great One. I am nothing! We have failed you.

pliz, də nɑt dɪstʃɹɔɪ mi!"

Please, do not destroy me!"

"ænd waɪ ʃʊdn aɪ?" ɪleɪn bɑɹkt. "ðə wɝk ə jəɹ pɝtɪkjəlɝ ɡɹup əz bɪn mɑɹkt wɪð feɪljɝ æftɝ feɪljɝ! wʌɾ əv jə dʌn ðət wəd pɑsəbli pɝsweɪd mi tə əlaʊ jə tə lɪv?"

"And why shouldn't I?" Elayne barked. "The work of your particular group has been marked with failure after failure! What have you done that would possibly persuade me to allow you to live?"

"wi hæv kɪl mɛni ʌv ðiz fulz u wɝk əɡɛns ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd!" tʃɛzməl weɪld.

"We have killed many of these fools who work against the Great Lord!" Chesmal wailed.

ɪleɪn wɪnst, ðɛn, stilɪŋ hɝsɛlf, kɹieɪɾəd ə wɪp ʌv ɛɹ ən læʃt ɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə wʊmənz bæk. ɪt wɑz noʊ mɔɹ ðən tʃɛzməl dɪzɝvd. "ju?" ɪleɪn sɛd. "ju hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðɛɹ dɛθs! dʒju θɪŋk mi stupəd? dʒju θɪŋk mi ɪɡnɝənt!"

Elayne winced, then, steeling herself, created a whip of Air and lashed it across the woman's back. It was no more than Chesmal deserved. "You?" Elayne said. "You had nothing to do with their deaths! Do you think me stupid? Do you think me ignorant!"

"noʊ, ɡɹeɪt wʌn," tʃɛzməl weɪld, kɝlɪŋ ʌp fɝðɝ. "pliz!"

"No, Great One," Chesmal wailed, curling up further. "Please!"

"ðɛn ɡɪmi ɹizən tə lɛt jə lɪv."

"Then give me reason to let you live."

"aɪ hæv ɪnfɝmeɪʃən, ɡɹeɪt wʌn," tʃɛzməl sɛd kwɪkli. "wʌn ə ðoʊz wi wɝ toʊl tə sik, ðə tu mɛn ðət mʌs bi kɪld əɾ ɔl kɑsts . . . wʌn ɪz hɪɹ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn!"

"I have information, Great One," Chesmal said quickly. "One of those we were told to seek, the two men that must be killed at all costs . . . one is here in Caemlyn!"

wʌts ðɪs? ɪleɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "tɛl mi mɔɹ."

What's this? Elayne hesitated. "Tell me more."

"hi ɹaɪdz wɪð ə mɝsənɛɹi ɡɹup," tʃɛzməl sɛd, saʊndɪŋ ɹɪliv tə hæv ɪnfɝmeɪʃən ðət wɑz wɑntəd. "hi ɪz ðə mæn wɪð ðə kin aɪz u wɛɹz ðə hæɾ ən kæɹiz ðə spɪɹ mɑɹk baɪ ɹeɪvənz!"

"He rides with a mercenary group," Chesmal said, sounding relieved to have information that was wanted. "He is the man with the keen eyes who wears the hat and carries the spear marked by ravens!"

mæt? ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz wɝ hʌntɪŋ mæt? hi wɑz fɹɛnz wɪð ɹænd, tʃɹu, ən tɑvɝən. bʌt wʌt hæd mæt dʌn tə ɡeɪn ði aɪɹ ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən ðɛmsɛlvz? mɔɹ dɪstɝbɪŋ wɑz ðət tʃɛzməl nu ʌv mæts pɹɛzəns ɪn ðə sɪɾi. hi hædn ɝaɪvd əntɪl æftɝ ðə blæk sɪstɝz hæd bɪn kæptʃɝd! ðət mɛnt. . . .

Mat? The Darkfriends were hunting Mat? He was friends with Rand, true, and ta'veren. But what had Mat done to gain the ire of the Forsaken themselves? More disturbing was that Chesmal knew of Mat's presence in the city. He hadn't arrived until after the Black sisters had been captured! That meant. . . .

ðət mɛn tʃɛzməl ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ ɪn kɑntækt wɪð ʌðɝ dɑɹk-fɹɛnz. bʌt hu? "æn haʊ dɪd jə dɪskʌvɝ ðɪs? waɪ wɑz ðɪs nɑt ɹipɔɹɾəd ɝliɝ?"

That meant Chesmal and the others were in contact with other Dark-friends. But who? "And how did you discover this? Why was this not reported earlier?"

"aɪ ɡɑt nuz ðɪs vɛɹi deɪ, ɡɹeɪt wʌn," tʃɛzməl sɛd, saʊndɪŋ mɔɹ sɛlf-əʃʊɹd naʊ. "wi ɑɹ plænɪŋ ən əsæsəneɪʃən."

"I got news this very day, Great One," Chesmal said, sounding more self-assured now. "We are planning an assassination."

"æn haʊ kən jə də ðət waɪl ɪmpɹɪzənd?" ɪleɪn dɪmændəd.

"And how can you do that while imprisoned?" Elayne demanded.

tʃɛzməl lʊkt ʌp bɹifli, hɝ skwɛɹ feɪs ʃoʊɪŋ kənfjuʒən. ʃi sɛd nʌθɪŋ.

Chesmal looked up briefly, her square face showing confusion. She said nothing.

aɪv tɪpt əɹ ɔf ðəɾ aɪ doʊnt noʊ əz mʌtʃ əz aɪ ʃʊd. ɪleɪn ɡɹɪɾɪd əɹ tiθ bɪhaɪn əɹ mæsk ə ʃædoʊz.

I've tipped her off that I don't know as much as I should. Elayne gritted her teeth behind her mask of shadows.

"ɡɹeɪt wʌn," tʃɛzməl sɛd. "aɪ hæv bɪn fɑloʊɪŋ maɪ ɔɹɾɝz kɛɹfəli. wəɹ ɔlmoʊst ɪn ə pəzɪʃən tə bɪɡɪn ði ɪnveɪʒən, əz kəmændəd. sun, ændɝ wɪl bi əwɑʃ wɪð ðə blʌɾ ʌv əɹ ɛnəmiz ən ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd ʃæl ɹeɪn ɪn faɪɝ ən æʃ.

"Great One," Chesmal said. "I have been following my orders carefully. We are almost in a position to begin the invasion, as commanded. Soon, Andor will be awash with the blood of our enemies and the Great Lord shall reign in fire and ash.

wɪl si ɪt dʌn."

We will see it done."

wʌt wɑz ðɪs? ən ɪnveɪʒən, ʌv ændɝ? ɪmpɑsəbəl! haʊ wəɾ ɪt hæp-pɛn? haʊ kəɾ ɪt hæpən? ən jɛt, dɛɹd ʃi æsk ðə kwɛstʃənz? tʃɛzməl sim tə səspɛk ðət sʌmθɪŋ wɑz ɹɔŋ.

What was this? An invasion, of Andor? Impossible! How would it hap-pen? How could it happen? And yet, dared she ask the questions? Chesmal seemed to suspect that something was wrong.

"ju ɑɹ nɑt ðə tʃoʊzən u vɪzəɾəd mi bɪfɔɹ, ɑɹ ju, ɡɹeɪt wʌn?" tʃɛzməl æskt.

"You are not the Chosen who visited me before, are you, Great One?" Chesmal asked.

"aʊɝ weɪz ɑɹ nɑt tə bi kwɛstʃən baɪ wʌn sətʃ əz ju," ɪleɪn ɡɹaʊld, pʌŋktʃueɪɾɪŋ ðə ɹɪmɑɹk wɪð ənʌðɝ swɪtʃ ʌv ɛɹ əkɹɔs ðə wʊmənz bæk. "aɪ nid tə noʊ haʊ mʌtʃ juv bɪn toʊld.

"Our ways are not to be questioned by one such as you," Elayne growled, punctuating the remark with another switch of Air across the woman's back. "I need to know how much you have been told.

soʊ ðəɾ aɪ kən dʒʌdʒ ðə ɡæps ɪn jəɹ ʌndɝstændɪŋ. ɪf jə ɑɹ ɪɡnɝən ʌv. . . . wɛl, ðəɾ ɪz tə bi sin.

So that I can judge the gaps in your understanding. If you are ignorant of. . . . Well, that is to be seen.

fɝst, ɪkspleɪn tə mi haʊ mʌtʃ jə noʊ ʌv ði ɪnveɪʒən."

First, explain to me how much you know of the invasion."

"aɪ noʊ ðət ðə dɛdlaɪn nɪɹz, ɡɹeɪt wʌn," tʃɛzməl sɛd. "ɪf wi hæd lɔŋɡɝ, pɝhæps wi kəd plæn mɔɹ ɪkstɛnsɪvli. ɪf jə kəd si mi fɹid fɹəm ðiz kɑnfaɪnz, ðən aɪ kəd . . ."

"I know that the deadline nears, Great One," Chesmal said. "If we had longer, perhaps we could plan more extensively. If you could see me freed from these confines, then I could . . ."

ʃi tʃɹeɪld ɔf, ɡlænsɪŋ tə ðə saɪd.

She trailed off, glancing to the side.

dɛdlaɪn. ɪleɪn oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə dɪmæn mɔɹ, bʌt hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. wʌt? ʃi kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ fil ðə kɪn aʊtsaɪd. hæd ðeɪ ɹitʃɹiɾəd? ən wʌɾ ə tʃɛzməlz ʃild?

Deadline. Elayne opened her mouth to demand more, but hesitated. What? She could no longer feel the Kin outside. Had they retreated? And what of Chesmal's shield?

ðə dɔɹ ɹæɾəld, ðə lɑk spʌn, ðən ðə dɔɹ flu oʊpən, ɹɪvilɪŋ ə ɡɹup ə pipəl ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. ən ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ðə ɡɹup ʌv ɡɑɹdz ɪleɪn hæd bɪn ɪkspɛktɪŋ. ət ðɛɹ hɛd wɑz ə mæn wɪð ʃɔɹt blæk hɛɹ, θɪnɪŋ ət ðə saɪdz, ən hjudʒ mʌstæʃɪz. hi wɔɹ bɹaʊn tʃɹaʊzɝz ən ə blæk ʃɝt, hɪz koʊt lɔŋ, ɔlmoʊst ən oʊpən-fɹʌntɪd ɹoʊb.

The door rattled, the lock spun, then the door flew open, revealing a group of people on the other side. And they were not the group of Guards Elayne had been expecting. At their head was a man with short black hair, thinning at the sides, and huge mustaches. He wore brown trousers and a black shirt, his coat long, almost an open-fronted robe.

sɪlveɪsəz sɛkɹətɛɹi! bɪhaɪn ɪm wɝ tu wɪmən. təmeɪl ən ɛlʒɹɪθ. boʊθ ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ.

Sylvase's secretary! Behind him were two women. Temaile and Eldrith. Both of the Black Ajah.

boʊθ hoʊldɪŋ tə ðə sɔɹs. laɪt!

Both holding to the Source. Light!

ɪleɪn staɪfəld əɹ sɝpɹaɪz, miɾɪŋ ðɛɹ ɡeɪz ən nɑt ɡɪvɪŋ ɡɹaʊnd. ɪf ʃi kəd kənvɪns wʌn blæk sɪstɝ ðət ʃi wɑz ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən, ðən pɝhæps ʃi kəd kənvɪns θɹi. təmeɪlz aɪz oʊpənd waɪd, ən ʃi θɹu hɝsɛlf tə hɝ niz, əz dɪd ðə sɛkɹətɛɹi. ɛlʒɹɪθ, haʊɛvɝ, hɛzɪteɪɾɪd.

Elayne stifled her surprise, meeting their gaze and not giving ground. If she could convince one Black sister that she was of the Forsaken, then perhaps she could convince three. Temaile's eyes opened wide, and she threw herself to her knees, as did the secretary. Eldrith, however, hesitated.

ɪleɪn kʊdn bi sɝɾən ɪf ɪt wɑz əɹ stæns, hɝ dɪsɡaɪz, əɹ əɹ ɹiækʃən tə siɪŋ ðə θɹi nukʌmɝz. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls ɪntaɪɝli. iðɝ weɪ, ɛldɪɹɪθ wɑzn teɪkən ɪn. ðə ɹaʊnd- feɪst wʊmən bɪɡæn tə tʃænəl.

Elayne couldn't be certain if it was her stance, her disguise, or her reaction to seeing the three newcomers. Perhaps it was something else entirely. Either way, Eldirith wasn't taken in. The round- faced woman began to channel.

ɪleɪn kɝs tə hɝsɛlf, fɔɹmɪŋ wivz ə hɝ oʊn. ʃi slæmd ə ʃild əɾ ɛlʒɹɪθ ɹaɪɾ əz ʃi fɛlt wʌn kʌm fəɹ hɝ. fɔɹtʃənətli, ʃi wɑz hoʊldɪŋ mæts tɛɹæŋɡɹil. ðə wiv ənɹævəld, ən ðə mədæljən ɡɹu koʊld ɪn ɪleɪnz hænd. ɪleɪnz oʊn wiv slɪɾ ivənli bɪtwin ɛlʒɹɪθ ən ðə sɔɹs, kʌɾɪŋ əɹ ɔf. ðə ɡloʊ ʌv ðə paʊɝ wɪŋkt aʊɾ ɝaʊn hɝ.

Elayne cursed to herself, forming weaves of her own. She slammed a shield at Eldrith right as she felt one come for her. Fortunately, she was holding Mat's ter'angreal. The weave unraveled, and the medallion grew cold in Elayne's hand. Elayne's own weave slid evenly between Eldrith and the Source, cutting her off. The glow of the Power winked out around her.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ, jə ɪɾiət!" tʃɛzməl skɹitʃt. "ju tʃɹaɪ tə oʊvɝ-θɹoʊ wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən?

"What are you doing, you idiot!" Chesmal screeched. "You try to over-throw one of the Chosen?

jəl si əs ɔl dɛd!"

You'll see us all dead!"

"ðæts nɑt wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən," ɛlʒɹɪθ jɛl bæk. ɪleɪn bɪleɪɾədli θɔt tə wiv ə ɡæɡ ʌv ɛɹ. "juv bɪn dupt! ɪt - "

"That's not one of the Chosen," Eldrith yelled back. Elayne belatedly thought to weave a gag of Air. "You've been duped! It - "

ɪleɪn ɡɑt ðə ɡæɡ ɪn əɹ maʊθ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz tu leɪt. təmeɪl - hu hæɾ ɔlweɪz lʊk tu dɛləkət tə bi ə blæk sɪstɝ - ɛmbɹeɪs ðə su ɹs ən lʊkt ʌp.

Elayne got the gag in her mouth, but it was too late. Temaile - who had always looked too delicate to be a Black sister - embraced the Sou rce and looked up.

tʃɛzməl ɛs ɪkspɹɛʃən tɝn fɹəm hɔɹɝ tə æŋɡɝ.

Chesmal s expression turned from horror to anger.

ɪleɪn kwɪkli taɪɾ ɔf ɛlʒɹɪθs ʃild ən bɪɡæn wivɪŋ ənʌðɝ wʌn ə wiv ʌv ɛɹ hɪt hɝ.

Elayne quickly tied off Eldrith's shield and began weaving another one A weave of Air hit her.

ðə fɑkshɛd mədæljən ɡɹu koʊld, ən - blɛsɪŋ mæt fəɹ ɪz taɪmli loʊn - ɪleɪn pleɪst ə ʃil bɪtwin tʃɛzməl ən ðə sɔɹs.

The foxhead medallion grew cold, and - blessing Mat for his timely loan - Elayne placed a shield between Chesmal and the Source.

təmeɪl ɡeɪpt əɾ ɪleɪn, ɑbviəsli stʌn tə si hɝ wivz feɪl. sɪl-veɪs ɛs sɛkɹətɛɹi wɑzn soʊ sloʊ, haʊɛvɝ. hi θɹu hɪmsɛlf fɔɹwɝɾ ʌnɪkspɛktɪdli, ɹæmɪŋ ɪleɪn bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl wɪð ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə fɔɹs.

Temaile gaped at Elayne, obviously stunned to see her weaves fail. Syl-vase s secretary wasn't so slow, however. He threw himself forward unexpectedly, ramming Elayne back against the wall with a great deal of force.

peɪn leɪst aʊt fɹəm əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ən ʃi fɛl sʌmθɪŋ kɹæk. hɝ ʃoʊldɝ boʊn? ðə beɪbz!

Pain laced out from her shoulder, and she felt something crack. Her shoulder bone? The babes!

ʃi θɔɾ ɪmiɾiətli. ɪt wɑz ə pɹaɪməl flæʃ ə hɔɹɝ ən ɪnstən tɛɹɝ ðət dɪfaɪɾ ɔl θɔts əbaʊt mɪn ən vjuɪŋz. ɪn əɹ sɝpɹaɪz, ʃi lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv ðə ɡeɪtweɪ liɾɪŋ bæk tə hɝ ɹum əbʌv. ɪt wɪŋkt aʊt.

she thought immediately. It was a primal flash of horror and instant terror that defied all thoughts about Min and viewings. In her surprise, she let go of the gateway leading back to her room above. It winked out.

"ʃi hæz ə tɛɹæŋɡɹiaɪ ɑsoʊm kaɪnd," təmeɪl kɹaɪd. "wivz fɔl ɔf hɝ."

"She has a ter'angreai osome kind," Temaile cried. "Weaves fall off her."

ɪleɪn skɹæmbəld, pʊʃɪŋ əɡɛns ðə sɛkɹətɛɹi ən bɪɡɪnɪŋ ə wiv ʌv ɛɹ tə θɹʌst ɪm bæk.

Elayne scrambled, pushing against the secretary and beginning a weave of Air to thrust him back.

əz ʃi dɪd, haʊɛvɝ, hi klɔɾ əɾ əɹ hænd, pɝhæps hævɪŋ noʊɾəst ə flæʃ ə sɪlvɝi mɛɾəl ðɛɹ.

As she did, however, he clawed at her hand, perhaps having noticed a flash of silvery metal there.

ðə sɛkɹətɛɹi ɡɑɾ ɪz lɔŋ fɪŋɡɝz ɝaʊn ðə mədæljən dʒʌst əz ɪleɪnz bɝst ʌv ɛɹ hɪt hɪm.

The secretary got his long fingers around the medallion just as Elayne's burst of Air hit him.

ðə sɛkɹətɛɹi flu bækwɝd, klɪŋɪŋ tə ðə mədæljən. ɪleɪn ɡɹaʊld, stɪl fjʊɹiəs. təmeɪl ɡɹɪn məlɪʃɪsli, ən wivz ʌv ɛɹ spɹæŋ ʌp ɝaʊn hɝ. ʃi θɹu ðɛm fɔɹwɝd, bʌɾ ɪleɪn mɛɾ əm wɪð əɹ oʊn.

The secretary flew backward, clinging to the medallion. Elayne growled, still furious. Temaile grinned maliciously, and weaves of Air sprang up around her. She threw them forward, but Elayne met them with her own.

ðə tu wivz ʌv ɛɹ slæmd əɡɛnst wʌn ənʌðɝ, kɑzɪŋ ði ɛɹ tə tʃɝn ɪn ðə smɔl ɹum.

The two weaves of Air slammed against one another, causing the air to churn in the small room.

bɪts ə stʃɹɔ blu ʌp ɪn ə flɝi. ɪleɪnz ɪɹz pɹətɛstəd ðə sʌɾən pɹɛʃɝ. ðə dɑɹk-hɛɹd sɛkɹətɛɹi skɹæmbəl bæk fɹəm ðə bæɾəl, klʌtʃɪŋ ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹiaɪ. ɪleɪn ɹitʃt ə wiv təwɔɹɾ ɪm - bʌɾ ɪɾ ənɹævəld.

Bits of straw blew up in a flurry. Elayne's ears protested the sudden pressure. The dark-haired secretary scrambled back from the battle, clutching the ter'angreai. Elayne reached a weave toward him - but it unraveled.

ɪleɪn jɛld ɪn æŋɡɝ, peɪn θɹɑbɪŋ ɪn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ wɛɹ ʃid hɪt ðə wɔl. ðə smɔl ɹum wɑz kɹæmpt wɪð soʊ mɛni pipəl ɪn ɪt, ən təmeɪl stʊɾ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ, ʌnɪntɛnʃənəli blɑkɪŋ ðə sɛkɹətɛɹi fɹəm ɡɛɾɪŋ əweɪ. əɹ meɪbi ɪt wɑz ɪntɛnʃənəl; ʃi pɹɑbli wɑntəd ðət mədæljən.

Elayne yelled in anger, pain throbbing in her shoulder where she'd hit the wall. The small room was cramped with so many people in it, and Temaile stood in the doorway, unintentionally blocking the secretary from getting away. Or maybe it was intentional; she probably wanted that medallion.

ði ʌðɝ tu blæk sɪstɝz hʌŋkɝd daʊn, ɛɹ blæstɪŋ ɝaʊn ðɛm, stɪl ʃildɪd.

The other two Black sisters hunkered down, air blasting around them, still shielded.

ɪleɪn dʒɹu əz mʌtʃ θɹu ði æŋɡɹil əz ʃi dɛɹd, fɔɹsɪŋ əɹ wiv ʌv ɛɹ fɔɹwɝd, ʃʌvɪŋ əsaɪd ðə wʌn təmeɪl wɑz juzɪŋ tə pʊʃ. ðə tu hɛl fəɹ ə moʊmənt; ðən ɪleɪnz bɝs θɹu, kɹæʃɪŋ ɪndə təmeɪl ən tɔsɪŋ əɹ aʊɾ ə ðə sɛl ən əɡɛns ðə stoʊn wɔl aʊtsaɪd. ɪleɪn fɑloʊd wɪð ə ʃild, ðoʊ ɪɾ əpɪɹd ðət təmeɪl hæd bɪn nɑkt ʌnkɑnʃəs baɪ ðə blæst. ðə sɛkɹətɛɹi boʊltəd fəɹ ðə nɪɹbaɪ dɔɹweɪ. ɪleɪn fɛlt ə stæb ə pænɪk, ʃi dɪd ði oʊnli θɪŋ ʃi kəd θɪŋk ʌv. ʃi pɪkt ʌp tʃɛzməl ɪn ə wiv ʌv ɛɹ ən θɹu hɝ ət ðə sɛkɹətɛɹi.

Elayne drew as much through the angreal as she dared, forcing her weave of Air forward, shoving aside the one Temaile was using to push. The two held for a moment; then Elayne's burst through, crashing into Temaile and tossing her out of the cell and against the stone wall outside. Elayne followed with a shield, though it appeared that Temaile had been knocked unconscious by the blast. The secretary bolted for the nearby doorway. Elayne felt a stab of panic, She did the only thing she could think of. She picked up Chesmal in a weave of Air and threw her at the secretary.

boʊθ wɛn daʊn ɪn ə hip. ə mətælɪk pɪŋ saʊndəɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ əz ðə fɑkshɛd mədæljən slɪp fɹi ən hɪt ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɹoʊlɪŋ θɹu ðə dɔɹ.

Both went down in a heap. A metallic ping sounded in the air as the foxhead medallion slipped free and hit the ground, rolling through the door.

ɪleɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, peɪn flɛɹɪŋ əkɹɔs əɹ tʃɛst, hɝ ɑɹm fɔlɪŋ slæk. ʃi kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ hoʊld ɪɾ ʌp pɹɑpɝli. ʃi kɹæɾəld ɪɾ ɪn əɹ ʌðɝ ɑɹm, æŋɡɹi, klɪŋɪŋ tə ðə sɔɹs. ðə switnəs ə seɪaɪdɑɹ wɑz ə kʌmfɝt.

Elayne took a deep breath, pain flaring across her chest, her arm falling slack. She could no longer hold it up properly. She cradled it in her other arm, angry, clinging to the Source. The sweetness of saidar was a comfort.

ʃi woʊv ɛɹ ən taɪɾ ʌp tʃɛzməl, ðə sɛkɹətɛɹi ən ɛlʒɹɪθ, hu hæd bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɹɔl təwɔɹɾ ɪleɪn ʌnəbtʃɹusɪvli.

She wove Air and tied up Chesmal, the secretary and Eldrith, who had been trying to crawl toward Elayne unobtrusively.

kɑmɪŋ hɝsɛlf, ɪleɪn pʊʃt pæst əm aʊɾ ə ðə smɔl sɛl tə tʃɛk ɑn təmeɪl ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ aʊtsaɪd. ðə wʊmən wɑz stɪl bɹiðɪŋ, bʌt wɑz ɪndiɾ ʌnkɑnʃəs. ɪleɪn taɪɾ əɹ ɪn ɛɹ, tu, tə bi sɝɾən, ðən kɛɹfəli pɪkt ʌp ðə fɑkshɛd mədæljən. ʃi wɪnst ət ðə peɪn ə hɝ ʌðɝ ɑɹm.

Calming herself, Elayne pushed past them out of the small cell to check on Temaile in the hallway outside. The woman was still breathing, but was indeed unconscious. Elayne tied her in Air, too, to be certain, then carefully picked up the foxhead medallion. She winced at the pain of her other arm.

jɛs, ʃid bɹoʊkən ə boʊn fəɹ sɝɾən.

Yes, she'd broken a bone for certain.

ðə dɑɹk hɔlweɪ wɑz ɛmpti, sɛt wɪð fɔɹ dɔɹweɪz fəɹ sɛlz, lɪt baɪ oʊnli ə sɪŋɡəl stænd-læmp.

The dark hallway was empty, set with four doorways for cells, lit by only a single stand-lamp.

wɛɹ wɝ ðə ɡɑɹdz ən kɪn? ʃi ɹɪlʌktənli ɹilis ðə wivz ðət fɔɹmd əɹ dɪsɡaɪz - ʃi wʊdnt wɑn ɛni soʊlʒɝz ɝaɪvɪŋ ən mɪsteɪkɪŋ əɹ fəɹ wʌn ə ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz. sɝɾənli sʌmwʌn hæd hɝd səm ə ðət ɹækɪt! ɪn ðə bæk ə hɝ maɪnd, ʃi kəd sɛns kənsɝn fɹəm bɝdʒɪt, hu wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ kloʊsɝ. ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæɾ əndaʊɾɪdli fɛlt ɪleɪnz ɪnʒɝi.

Where were the Guards and Kin? She reluctantly released the weaves that formed her disguise - she wouldn't want any soldiers arriving and mistaking her for one of the Darkfriends. Certainly someone had heard some of that racket! In the back of her mind, she could sense concern from Birgitte, who was getting closer. The Warder had undoubtedly felt Elayne's injury.

ɔlmoʊst, ɪleɪn pɹəfɝd ðə peɪn ə hɝ ʃoʊldɝ tə ðə lɛktʃɝ ʃid ɡɛt fɹəm bɝdʒɪt. ʃi wɪnst əɡɛn, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðæt, əz ʃi tɝn ən ɪnspɛktɪɾ əɹ kæptɪvz. ʃid nid tə tʃɛk ði ʌðɝ sɛlz.

Almost, Elayne preferred the pain of her shoulder to the lecture she'd get from Birgitte. She winced again, considering that, as she turned and inspected her captives. She'd need to check the other cells.

ʌv kɔɹs əɹ beɪbz wəd bi ɔl ɹaɪt. ʃi wəd bi ɔl ɹaɪt. ʃiɾ oʊvɝɹiæktɪd tə ðə peɪn; ʃi hædn ɹɪli bɪn əfɹeɪd. stɪl, bɛs tə -  həloʊ, maɪ kwin," ə mænz vɔɪs wɪspɝɾ ɪn əɹ ɪɹ ɹaɪt bɪfɔɹ ə sɛkən peɪn blɑsəmd ɪn əɹ saɪd. ʃi ɡæspt, stʌmbəlɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. ə hæn ɹitʃt aʊɾ ən jæŋk ðə mədæljən fɹəm əɹ fɪŋɡɝz.

Of course her babes would be all right. She would be all right. She'd overreacted to the pain; she hadn't really been afraid. Still, best to -  Hello, my Queen," a man's voice whispered in her ear right before a second pain blossomed in her side. She gasped, stumbling forward. A hand reached out and yanked the medallion from her fingers.

ɪleɪn spʌn, ən ðə ɹum sim blɝi. sʌmθɪŋ wɔɹm ɹæn daʊn əɹ saɪd. ʃi wɑz bliɾɪŋ!

Elayne spun, and the room seemed blurry. Something warm ran down her side. She was bleeding!

ʃi wɑz soʊ stʌnd, ʃi fɛl ðə sɔɹs slɪp əweɪ fɹəm hɝ.

She was so stunned, she felt the Source slip away from her.

dɔɪlɪn mɛlɝ stʊd bɪhaɪn əɹ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ, hoʊldɪŋ ə blʌɾid naɪf ɪn ɪz ɹaɪt hænd, hɛftɪŋ ðə mədæljən ɪn ɪz lɛft. hɪz hætʃətlaɪk feɪs wɑz bɹoʊkən baɪ ə dip smaɪl, ɔlmoʊst ə lɪɹ. ðoʊ hi wɔɹ oʊnli ɹæɡz, hi lʊkt əz sɛlf-əʃʊɹɾ əz ə kɪŋ ɑn ɪz θɹoʊn.

Doilin Mellar stood behind her in the hallway, holding a bloodied knife in his right hand, hefting the medallion in his left. His hatchetlike face was broken by a deep smile, almost a leer. Though he wore only rags, he looked as self-assured as a king on his throne.

ɪleɪn hɪst ən ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə sɔɹs. bʌt nʌθɪŋ hæpənd. ʃi hɝd tʃʌklɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ.

Elayne hissed and reached for the Source. But nothing happened. She heard chuckling behind her.

ʃid hædn taɪɾ ɔf tʃɛzməlz ʃild! əz sun əz ɪleɪn ɹilis ðə sɔɹs, ɹə wivz wəɾ əv vænɪʃt. ʃʊɹ ɪnʌf, ɪleɪn ɡlænst ən faʊnd wivz kʌɾɪŋ əɹ ɔf fɹəm ðə sɔɹs.

She'd hadn't tied off Chesmal's shield! As soon as Elayne released the Source, rhe weaves would have vanished. Sure enough, Elayne glanced and found weaves cutting her off from the Source.

tʃɛzməl, hænsəm feɪs flʌʃt, smaɪld ət hɝ. laɪt! ðəɹ wɑz blʌd pulɪŋ əɾ ɪleɪnz fit.

Chesmal, handsome face flushed, smiled at her. Light! There was blood pooling at Elayne's feet.

soʊ mʌtʃ ʌv ɪt.

So much of it.

ʃi stʌmbəl bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl ə ðə hɔlweɪ, mɛlɝ tə wʌn saɪd, tʃɛzməl ði ʌðɝ.

She stumbled back against the wall of the hallway, Mellar to one side, Chesmal the other.

ʃi kʊdn daɪ. mɪn hæd sɛd . . . wi kəd bi mɪsɪntɝpɹəɾɪŋ. bɝdʒɝts vɔɪs ɹɪtɝn tə hɝ.

She couldn't die. Min had said . . . We could be misinterpreting. Birgirte's voice returned to her.

ɛni nʌmbɝ ə θɪŋz kəd stɪl ɡoʊ ɹɔŋ.

Any number of things could still go wrong.

"hil hɝ," mɛlɝ sɛd.

"Heal her," Mellar said.

"wʌt?" tʃɛzməl dɪmændəd. bɪhaɪn hɝ, ɛlʒɹɪθ wɑz dʌstɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɔf ɪnsaɪd ðə sɛl dɔɹweɪ.

"What?" Chesmal demanded. Behind her, Eldrith was dusting herself off inside the cell doorway.

ʃid fɔlən tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd wən ɪleɪnz wiv-ɪŋz ʌv ɛɹ dɪsəpeɪɾɪd, bʌɾ əɹ ʃild wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ.

She'd fallen to the ground when Elayne's weav-ings of Air dissipated, but her shield was still there.

ðət wʌn ɪleɪn hæd taɪɾ ɪn pleɪs.

That one Elayne had tied in place.

θɪŋk, ɪleɪn toʊl hɝsɛlf, blʌd dʒɹɪbəlɪŋ bɪtwin əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. ðəɹ əz tə bi ə weɪ aʊt. ðəɹ əz tə bi! oʊ, laɪt! bɝdʒɪt, hɝi!

Think, Elayne told herself, blood dribbling between her fingers. There has to be a way out. There has to be! Oh, Light! Birgitte, hurry!

"hil hɝ," mɛlɝ sɛɾ əɡɛn. "ðə naɪf waʊnd wɑz tə meɪk əɹ dʒɹɑp ju."

"Heal her," Mellar said again. "The knife wound was to make her drop you."

"ful," tʃɛzməl sɛd. "ɪf ðə wivz hæd bɪn taɪɾ ɔf, ə waʊnd wʊdn əv ɹilist ʌs!"

"Fool," Chesmal said. "If the weaves had been tied off, a wound wouldn't have released us!"

"ðɛn ʃi wəɾ əv daɪd," mɛlɝ sɛd, ʃɹʌɡɪŋ. hi aɪɾ ɪleɪn; ðoʊz hænsəm aɪz ə hɪz ʃoʊn wɪð lʌst. "æn ðət wʊɾə bɪn ə pɪɾi. fəɹ ʃi wɑz pɹɑməs tə mi, ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ woʊn əv əɹ daɪ hɪɹ ɪn ðɪs dʌnʒən. ʃi dʌzn daɪ əntɪl aɪ hæv hæd taɪm tə . . . ɛndʒɔɪ hɝ." hi lʊkt ət ðə blæk sɪstɝ. "bɪsaɪdz, jə θɪŋk ðoʊz hum wi sɝv wəd bi plizd ɪf ðeɪ nu jud lɛt ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ daɪ wɪθaʊt jildɪŋ əɹ sikɹəts?"

"Then she would have died," Mellar said, shrugging. He eyed Elayne; those handsome eyes of his shone with lust. "And that would have been a pity. For she was promised to me, Aes Sedai. I won't have her die here in this dungeon. She doesn't die until I have had time to . . . enjoy her." He looked at the Black sister. "Besides, you think those whom we serve would be pleased if they knew you'd let the Queen of Andor die without yielding her secrets?"

tʃɛzməl lʊk dɪsæɾəsfaɪd, bʌt ʃi əpɛɹənli sɔ ðə wɪzdəm ɪn ɪz wɝdz. bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ðə sɛkɹətɛɹi slɪpt aʊɾ ə ðə sɛl ən - æftɝ ɡlænsɪŋ boʊθ weɪz - slʌŋk daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ təwɔɹd ðə stɛps ən hɝiɾ ʌp ðɛm. tʃɛzməl kɹɔs ðə hɔlweɪ təwɔɹɾ ɪleɪn. blɛsədli. ɪleɪn wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ fʌzi-hɛɾəd. ʃi ɹɛstəɾ əɹ bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl, bɛɹli filɪŋ ðə peɪn ə hɝ bɹoʊkən ʃoʊldɝ, ən slɪd daʊn əntɪl ʃi wɑz sɪɾɪŋ.

Chesmal looked dissatisfied, but she apparently saw the wisdom in his words. Behind them, the secretary slipped out of the cell and - after glancing both ways - slunk down the hallway toward the steps and hurried up them. Chesmal crossed the hallway toward Elayne. Blessedly. Elayne was getting fuzzy-headed. She rested her back against the wall, barely feeling the pain of her broken shoulder, and slid down until she was sitting.

"ɪɾiət ɡɝl," tʃɛzməl sɛd. "aɪ sɔ θɹu jəɹ plɔɪ, ʌv kɔɹs. aɪ wɑz liɾɪŋ jə ɑn, noʊɪŋ ðət hɛlp wɑz kʌmɪŋ."

"Idiot girl," Chesmal said. "I saw through your ploy, of course. I was leading you on, knowing that help was coming."

ðə wɝdz wɝ hɑloʊ; ʃi wɑz laɪɪŋ fəɹ ðə bɛnəfɪɾ ə ði ʌðɝz. ðə hilɪŋ. ɪleɪn niɾəd .

The words were hollow; she was lying for the benefit of the others. The Healing. Elayne needed .

. . ðət . . . hilɪŋ. hɝ maɪnd wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ dʌl, hɝ vɪʒən dɑɹkənɪŋ. ʃi hɛld əɹ hæn tə hɝ saɪd, tɛɹəfaɪd fəɹ hɝsɛlf, fəɹ əɹ tʃɪlʒɹən.

. . that . . . Healing. Her mind was growing dull, her vision darkening. She held her hand to her side, terrified for herself, for her children.

hɝ hæn slɪpt. ʃi fɛl sʌmθɪŋ θɹu ðə fæbɹɪk ɪn ðə pɑkəɾ ə hɝ dʒɹɛs. ðə fɑkshɛd mədæljən kɑpi.

Her hand slipped. She felt something through the fabric in the pocket of her dress. The foxhead medallion copy.

tʃɛzməl pʊɾ əɹ hænz ɑn ɪleɪnz hɛd, kɹæftɪŋ hilɪŋ wivz. ɪleɪnz veɪnz bɪkeɪm aɪs wɔɾɝ, hɝ bɑɾi oʊvɝwɛlm baɪ ə weɪv ə paʊɝ. ʃi dʒɹu ɪn ə dip bɹɛθ, ði æɡəni ɪn əɹ saɪɾ ən ʃoʊldɝ vænɪʃɪŋ.

Chesmal put her hands on Elayne's head, crafting Healing weaves. Elayne's veins became ice water, her body overwhelmed by a wave of Power. She drew in a deep breath, the agony in her side and shoulder vanishing.

"ðɛɹ," tʃɛzməl sɛd. "naʊ, kwɪkli, wi nid tə - "

"There," Chesmal said. "Now, quickly, we need to - "

ɪleɪn wɪp fɹi ði ʌðɝ mədæljən ən hɛld ɪɾ ʌp. baɪ ɹiflɛks, tʃɛzməl ɡɹæbd ɪt. ðət meɪd ðə wʊmən əneɪbəl tə tʃænəl. hɝ wivz vænɪʃt, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ɪleɪnz ʃild.

Elayne whipped free the other medallion and held it up. By reflex, Chesmal grabbed it. That made the woman unable to channel. Her weaves vanished, including Elayne's shield.

tʃɛzməl kɝst, dʒɹɑpɪŋ ðə mədæljən. ɪt hɪɾ ən ɹoʊld əz tʃɛzməl woʊv ə ʃild.

Chesmal cursed, dropping the medallion. It hit and rolled as Chesmal wove a shield.

ɪleɪn dɪdn bɑðɝ wɪð ə ʃild. ðɪs taɪm, ʃi woʊv faɪɝ. sɪmpəl, dɝɛkt, deɪnʒɝəs. ðə dɑɹk sɪstɝz kloʊðɪŋ bɝst ɪndə fleɪm bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd fɪnɪʃ wivɪŋ, ən ʃi kɹaɪɾ aʊt.

Elayne didn't bother with a shield. This time, she wove Fire. Simple, direct, dangerous. The Dark sister's clothing burst into flame before she could finish weaving, and she cried out.

ɪleɪn hɔl hɝsɛlf tə hɝ fit. ðə hɔlweɪ ʃʊk ən spʌn - ðə hilɪŋ hæd teɪkən ə lɑɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ - bʌt bɪfɔɹ θɪŋz stɑp spɪnɪŋ, ʃi woʊv ənʌðɝ θɹɛɾ ə faɪɝ, læʃɪŋ ɪɾ ət mɛlɝ. hi hæd ɹɪsk ðə laɪf ə hɝ tʃɪlʒɹən! hi hæd stæb hɝ! hi . . .

Elayne hauled herself to her feet. The hallway shook and spun - the Healing had taken a lot out of her - but before things stopped spinning, she wove another thread of Fire, lashing it at Mellar. He had risked the life of her children! He had stabbed her! He . . .

ðə wivz ənɹævəl ðə moʊmən ðeɪ tʌtʃt hɪm. hi smaɪld ʌp ət hɝ, stɑpɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ wɪð ɪz fʊt. ðə sɛkən mədæljən. "hɪɹ naʊ," hi sɛd, skupɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp. "ənʌðɝ wʌn? ɪf aɪ ʃeɪk ju, wɪl ə θɝd fɔl fɹi?"

The weaves unraveled the moment they touched him. He smiled up at her, stopping something with his foot. The second medallion. "Here now," he said, scooping it up. "Another one? If I shake you, will a third fall free?"

ɪleɪn hɪst. tʃɛzməl wɑz stɪl skɹimɪŋ, əfaɪɹ. ʃi fɛl tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, kɪkɪŋ, ðə hɔlweɪ ɡɹoʊɪŋ pʌnʒənt wɪð ðə sɛn ə bɝn flɛʃ. laɪt! ɪleɪn hædn mɛn tə kɪl hɝ. bʌt ðəɹ wɑzn taɪm tə spɛɹ. ʃi woʊv ɛɹ, snætʃɪŋ ʌp ɛlʒɹɪθ əɡɛn bɪfɔɹ ðə wʊmən kəɾ ɪskeɪp. ɪleɪn pʊʃt əɹ fɔɹwɝd, bɪtwin hɝsɛlf ən mɛlɝ, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs. hi wɑtʃt wɪð kin aɪz, ɛdʒɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, hoʊldɪŋ ðə tu mədæljənz ɪn wʌn hæn ən ɪz dæɡɝ ɪn ði ʌðɝ. ɪt stɪl ɡlɪsənd wɪð ɪleɪnz blʌd. "wi ɑɹən fɪnɪʃt, maɪ kwin," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə sɑf vɔɪs. "ðiz ʌðɝz wɝ pɹɑməs paʊɝ. bʌt maɪ ɹɪwɔɹd wɑz ɔlweɪz tə bi ju. aɪ ɔlweɪz kʌlɛkt wʌɾ aɪm oʊd." hi wɑtʃt ɪleɪn wɪð kɛɹ, ɪkspɛktɪŋ səm tʃɹɪk.

Elayne hissed. Chesmal was still screaming, afire. She fell to the ground, kicking, the hallway growing pungent with the scent of burned flesh. Light! Elayne hadn't meant to kill her. But there wasn't time to spare. She wove Air, snatching up Eldrith again before the woman could escape. Elayne pushed her forward, between herself and Mellar, just in case. He watched with keen eyes, edging forward, holding the two medallions in one hand and his dagger in the other. It still glistened with Elayne's blood. "We aren't finished, my Queen," he said in a soft voice. "These others were promised power. But my reward was always to be you. I always collect what I am owed." He watched Elayne with care, expecting some trick.

ɪf oʊnli ʃi hæd wʌn! ʃi kəd bɛɹli stæn əpɹaɪt. hoʊldɪŋ ðə sɔɹs wɑz dɪfəkəlt. ʃi bækt əweɪ, kipɪŋ ɛlʒɹɪθ bɪtwin hɝsɛlf ən mɛlɝ. hɪz aɪz flɪk tə ðə stætʃuɛsk wʊmən; ʃi stʊd wɪð ɑɹmz taɪd tə hɝ saɪdz baɪ ɛɹ, floʊɾɪŋ ən ɪntʃ əbʌv ðə ɡɹaʊnd. wɪð ə dʒɝkɪŋ moʊʃən, hi dʒʌmp fɔɹwɝɾ ən slɪɾ ɛlʒɹɪθs θɹoʊt. ɪleɪn stɑɹɾəd, skɹæmbəlɪŋ bækwɝd.

If only she had one! She could barely stand upright. Holding the Source was difficult. She backed away, keeping Eldrith between herself and Mellar. His eyes flicked to the statuesque woman; she stood with arms tied to her sides by Air, floating an inch above the ground. With a jerking motion, he jumped forward and slit Eldrith's throat. Elayne started, scrambling backward.

"sɑɹi," mɛlɝ sɛd, ən ɪt tʊk ɪleɪn ə moʊmən tə ɹilaɪz i wɑz æd-dʒɹɛsɪŋ ɛlʒɹɪθ. "bʌɾ ɔɹɾɝz ɑɹ ɔɹɾɝz." wɪð ðæt, hi dʌkt, plʌnʒɪŋ ɪz dæɡɝ ɪndə təmeɪlz ʌnkɑnʃəs bɑɾi.

"Sorry," Mellar said, and it took Elayne a moment to realize he was ad-dressing Eldrith. "But orders are orders." With that, he ducked, plunging his dagger into Temaile's unconscious body.

hi kʊdn ɪskeɪp wɪð ðə mədæljənz! wɪð ə sɝdʒ ə stʃɹɛŋkθ, ɪleɪn dʒɹu ɪn ðə wʌn paʊɝ ən woʊv ɝθ. ʃi pʊld ət ðə silɪŋ əbʌv mɛlɝ əz i stʊɾ ʌp. stoʊnz ʃæɾɝd, blɑks fɔlɪŋ daʊnwɝd, kɑzɪŋ ɪm tə jɛl ən kʌvɝ ɪz hɛɾ əz i dʌkt əweɪ. sʌmθɪŋ ɹæŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ. mɛɾəl ɑn stoʊn.

He couldn't escape with the medallions! With a surge of strength, Elayne drew in the One Power and wove Earth. She pulled at the ceiling above Mellar as he stood up. Stones shattered, blocks falling downward, causing him to yell and cover his head as he ducked away. Something rang in the air. Metal on stone.

ðə hɔlweɪ ʃʊk, ən dʌst spɹeɪɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ. ðə ɹeɪn ə ɹɑks dʒɹoʊv mɛlɝ əweɪ, bʌt kɛpt əɹ fɹəm tʃeɪsɪŋ. hi vænɪʃt ʌp ðə stɛɹwɛl tə ðə ɹaɪt. ɪleɪn sæŋk daʊn tə hɝ niz, filɪŋ dʒɹeɪnd. bʌt ðən ʃi sɔ sʌmθɪŋ ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə ɹʌbəl ə ðə silɪŋ blɑks ʃid pʊl daʊn. ə bɪɾ ə sɪlvɝi mɛɾəl. wʌn ə ðə mədæljənz.

The hallway shook, and dust sprayed in the air. The rain of rocks drove Mellar away, but kept her from chasing. He vanished up the stairwell to the right. Elayne sank down to her knees, feeling drained. But then she saw something glittering among the rubble of the ceiling blocks she'd pulled down. A bit of silvery metal. One of the medallions.

hoʊldɪŋ əɹ bɹɛθ, ʃi ɡɹæbd ɪt. blɛsədli, ðə sɔɹs dɪdn liv hɝ. mɛlɝ hæɾ ɪskeɪpt wɪð ðə kɑpi, ɪt simd, bʌt ʃi stɪl hæd ði ɝɪdʒənəl.

Holding her breath, she grabbed it. Blessedly, the Source didn't leave her. Mellar had escaped with the copy, it seemed, but she still had the original.

ʃi saɪd, əlaʊɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə sɪt bæk əɡɛns ðə koʊl stoʊn wɔl. ʃi wɑntəd tə læps ɪndə ʌnkɑnʃəsnəs, bʌt fɔɹs hɝsɛlf tə tʌk əweɪ ðə mədæljən, ðən ɹɪmeɪn əweɪk əntɪl bɝdʒɪɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ. ðə wɔɹɾɝ pæntɪd hɛvəli fɹəm hævɪŋ ɹʌn, hɝ ɹɛd koʊɾ ən ɡoʊldən bɹeɪd wɛt wɪð ɹeɪnwɔɾɝ.

She sighed, allowing herself to sit back against the cold stone wall. She wanted to lapse into unconsciousness, but forced herself to tuck away the medallion, then remain awake until Birgitte appeared in the hallway. The Warder panted heavily from having run, her red coat and golden braid wet with rainwater.

mæt stɛp daʊn ɪndə ðə hɔlweɪ æftɝ hɝ, wɛɹɪŋ ə skɑɹf ʌp ɝaʊn ɪz feɪs, hɪz wɛt bɹaʊn hɛɹ plæstɝd tə hɪz hɛd. hɪz aɪz dɑɹɾɪd fɹəm saɪd tə saɪd, ə kɔɹɾɝstæf hɛld ət ɡɑɹd.

Mat stepped down into the hallway after her, wearing a scarf up around his face, his wet brown hair plastered to his head. His eyes darted from side to side, a quarterstaff held at guard.

bɝdʒɪt nɛl baɪ ɪleɪnz saɪd. "ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt?" ʃi æskt ɝdʒənli.

Birgitte knelt by Elayne's side. "Are you all right?" she asked urgently.

ɪleɪn nɑɾəd ɪn ɪɡzɔstʃən. "aɪ ɡɑt maɪsɛlf aʊɾ ə ðɪs wʌn." ɪn ə weɪ. "dɪd jə hæpən tə də ðə wɝld ə feɪvɝ ən kɪl mɛlɝ ɑn jəɹ weɪ ɪn?"

Elayne nodded in exhaustion. "I got myself out of this one." In a way. "Did you happen to do the world a favor and kill Mellar on your way in?"

"mɛlɝ?" bɝdʒɪɾ æskt, əlɑɹmd. "noʊ. ɪleɪn, ðɛɹz blʌɾ ɑn jəɹ dʒɹɛs!"

"Mellar?" Birgitte asked, alarmed. "No. Elayne, there's blood on your dress!"

"aɪm faɪn," ʃi sɛd. "ɹɪli, aɪv bɪn hild."

"I'm fine," she said. "Really, I've been Healed."

soʊ mɛlɝ wɑz fɹi. "kwɪkli," ʃi sɛd. "sɝtʃ ðə hɔlweɪz. ðə ɡɑɹdz ən ðə kɪn u wɝ ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðɪs pleɪs - "

So Mellar was free. "Quickly," she said. "Search the hallways. The Guards and the Kin who were guarding this place - "

"wi faʊn ðɛm," bɝdʒɪt sɛd. "stʌft ɪndə ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə stɛɹwɛl. dɛd. ɪleɪn, wʌt hæpənd?" tə ðə saɪd, mæt poʊkt ət təmeɪlz kɔɹps, noʊɾɪŋ ðə dæɡɝ waʊn ɪn əɹ tʃɛst.

"We found them," Birgitte said. "Stuffed into the bottom of the stairwell. Dead. Elayne, what happened?" To the side, Mat poked at Temailes corpse, noting the dagger wound in her chest.

ɪleɪn pɹɛst əɹ hænz tə hɝ æbdoʊmən. hɝ beɪbz wəd bi ɔl ɹaɪt, wʊdn ðeɪ? "aɪ dɪd sʌmθɪŋ vɛɹi ɹæʃ, bɝdʒɪt, ən aɪ noʊ ðət jə ɑɹ gɑnə skɹim ət mi fəɹ ɪt. bʌt wəd jə fɝs pliz teɪk mi tə maɪ ɹumz? aɪ θɪŋk wi ʃəɾ əv mɛlfən lʊk ət mi. dʒʌst ɪn keɪs."

Elayne pressed her hands to her abdomen. Her babes would be all right, wouldn't they? "I did something very rash, Birgitte, and I know that you are going to scream at me for it. But would you first please take me to my rooms? I think we should have Melfane look at me. Just in case."

* * * ən aʊɝ æftɝ ðə feɪld əsæsəneɪʃən ətɛmpt ɑn ɛɡwin, ɡɔɪn stʊɾ əloʊn ɪn ə smɔl ɹum ðət wɑz pɑɹɾ ə ði æmɪɝlɪnz tʃeɪmbɝz. hid bɪn ɹilis fɹəm ðə wivz ðət hæd hɛl hɪm, ðən toʊl tə steɪ pʊt. ɛɡwin faɪnəli stʃɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹum. "sɪt," ʃi sɛd.

* * * An hour after the failed assassination attempt on Egwene, Gawyn stood alone in a small room that was part of the Amyrlin's chambers. He'd been released from the weaves that had held him, then told to stay put. Egwene finally strode into the room. "Sit," she said.

hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, bʌɾ əɹ fɪɹs aɪz cʊɾə sɛt kændəlz əfleɪm. hi sæt daʊn ɑn ðə stul. ðɪs smɔl ɹum hɛl sɛvɹəl dʒɹɛsɝz ən tʃɹʌŋks fəɹ kloʊðɪŋ. ðə dɔɹweɪ lɛɾ aʊt tə ðə lɑɹdʒɝ sɪɾɪŋ ɹum wɛɹ hid bɪn kæptʃɝɾ ɪn wivz; ə dɔɹweɪ ɔf ə ðət ɹum lɛd tə ɛɡwinz bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ.

He hesitated, but her fierce eyes could have set candles aflame. He sat down on the stool. This small room held several dressers and trunks for clothing. The doorway led out to the larger sitting room where he'd been captured in weaves; a doorway off of that room led to Egwene's bedchamber.

ɛɡwin ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ, sɪkwɛstɝɪŋ ðə tu ʌv əm fɹəm ðə mɛni ɡɑɹdz, wɔɹɾɝz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ mɪlɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪn ðə ɹumz aʊtsaɪd. ðɛɹ kɑnvɝseɪʃənz meɪɾ ə loʊ hʌm θɹu ðə dɔɹ. ɛɡwin stɪl wɔɹ ɹɛɾ ən ɡoʊld ən ʃi hæd ɡoʊldən θɹɛdz woʊvən ɪndə hɝ dɑɹk hɛɹ. hɝ tʃiks wɝ flʌʃt wɪð æŋɡɝ ət hɪm. ðət meɪɾ əɹ ivən mɔɹ bjuɾəfəl ðən juʒəwəl.

Egwene shut the door, sequestering the two of them from the many guards, Warders and Aes Sedai milling about in the rooms outside. Their conversations made a low hum through the door. Egwene still wore red and gold and she had golden threads woven into her dark hair. Her cheeks were flushed with anger at him. That made her even more beautiful than usual.

"ɛɡwin, aɪ - "

"Egwene, I - "

"du jə ɹilaɪz wʌt juv dʌn?"

"Do you realize what you have done?"

"aɪ tʃɛk tə si ɪf ðə wʊmən aɪ lʌv wɑz seɪf, fɑloʊɪŋ ðə dɪskʌvɝi ʌv ən əsæsən aʊtsaɪɾ əɹ dɔɹ."

"I checked to see if the woman I love was safe, following the discovery of an assassin outside her door."

ʃi foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts. hi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fil ðə hiɾ ə hɝ æŋɡɝ. "jɔɹ jɛlɪŋ əz dʒɹɔn hæf ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ðeɪ sɔ jə kæptʃɝd. ði əsæsən pɹɑbli noʊz, naʊ, əbaʊt maɪ wivz."

She folded her arms beneath her breasts. He could almost feel the heat of her anger. "Your yelling has drawn half of the White Tower. They saw you captured. The assassin probably knows, now, about my weaves."

"laɪt, ɛɡwin! jə tɔk əz ɪf aɪ dɪɾ ɪɾ ɑn pɝpəs. aɪ wɑz oʊnli tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɹətɛk ju."

"Light, Egwene! You talk as if I did it on purpose. I was only trying to protect you."

"aɪ dɪdn æsk fəɹ jəɹ pɹətɛkʃən! aɪ æsk fəɹ jəɹ oʊbiɾiəns! ɡɔɪn, doʊn jə si ði ɑpɝtunəɾi wiv mɪst? ɪf jə hædn skɛɹd mɛsænə əweɪ, ʃiɾ əv wɔkt ɪndə maɪ tʃɹæps!"

"I didn't ask for your protection! I asked for your obedience! Gawyn, don't you see the opportunity we've missed? If you hadn't scared Mesaana away, she'd have walked into my traps!"

"ɪt wɑznt wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "ɪt wɑz ə mæn."

"It wasn't one of the Forsaken," Gawyn said. "It was a man."

"ju sɛd jə kʊdn si ðə feɪs əɹ meɪk aʊt ðə fɪɡjɝ kəz ɪt wɑz blɝd."

"You said you couldn't see the face or make out the figure because it was blurred."

"wɛl, jɛs," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "bʌɾ i fɔt wɪð ðə sɔɹd."

"Well, yes," Gawyn said. "But he fought with the sword."

ən ə wʊmən kʊdn juz ə sɔɹd? ðə saɪz ə ðə pɝsən jə sɔ ɪndəkeɪɾəd ə wʊmən."

And a woman couldn't use a sword? The size of the person you saw indicated a woman."

meɪbi, bʌt wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən? laɪt, ɛɡwin, ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn mi-sænə, ðən ʃiɾ əv juz ðə paʊɝ tə bɝn mi tə dʌst!"

Maybe, but one of the Forsaken? Light, Egwene, if it had been Me-saana, then she'd have used the Power to burn me to dust!"

ənʌðɝ ɹizən," ɛɡwin sɛd, "ðæt jə ʃəd nɑɾ əv dɪsoʊbeɪd mi. pɝhæps jəɹ ɹaɪt - pɝhæps ðɪs wɑz wʌn ə mɛsænəz mɪnjənz. eɪ dɑɹkfɹɛn əɹ ɡɹeɪ mæn. ɪf ðət wɝ ðə keɪs, aɪɾ əv əm kæptɪv ən bi eɪbəl tə lɝn əbaʊt mɛsænəz plɑts. ən ɡɔɪn, wʌɾ ɪf jə hæd faʊn mɛsænə? wʌt kəd juv dʌn?"

Another reason," Egwene said, "that you should not have disobeyed me. Perhaps you're right - perhaps this was one of Mesaana's minions. A Darkfriend or Gray Man. If that were the case, I'd have them captive and be able to learn about Mesaana's plots. And Gawyn, what if you had found Mesaana? What could you have done?"

hi lʊk daʊn ət ðə flɔɹ.

He looked down at the floor.

"aɪ toʊl jə ðəɾ aɪ hæd teɪkən pɹikɔʃənz," ʃi kəntɪnjud. 'æn stɪl jə dɪsoʊbeɪd! ən naʊ, kəz ʌv wʌt juv dʌn, ðə mɝɾɝɝ noʊz ðəɾ aɪ wɑz æntɪsəpeɪɾɪŋ hɝ. ʃɪl bi mɔɹ kɛɹfəl nɛks taɪm. haʊ mɛni laɪvz dʒju θɪŋk jə dʒʌs kɑst ʌs?"

"I told you that I had taken precautions," she continued. 'And still you disobeyed! And now, because of what you've done, the murderer knows that I was anticipating her. She'll be more careful next time. How many lives do you think you just cost us?"

ɡɔɪn kɛpt ɪz hænz ɪn ɪz læp, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə haɪd ðə fɪsts ðət ðeɪ hæd fɔɹmd. hi ʃʊɾə fɛlt əʃeɪmd, bʌɾ ɔl i kəd fil wɑz æŋɡɝ. ə ɹeɪdʒ i kʊdn ɪkspleɪn - fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən ət hɪmsɛlf, bʌt moʊsli əɾ ɛɡwin fəɹ tɝnɪŋ ən ɑnəs mɪsteɪk ɪndə ə pɝsənəl əfɹʌnt.

Gawyn kept his hands in his lap, trying to hide the fists that they had formed. He should have felt ashamed, but all he could feel was anger. A rage he couldn't explain - frustration at himself, but mostly at Egwene for turning an honest mistake into a personal affront.

"ɪt simz tə mi," hi sɛd, "ðæt jə doʊnt wɑn ə wɔɹɾɝ əɾ ɔl. kəz əl tɛl ju, ɛɡwin, ɪf jə kæn stæn biɪŋ lʊkt æftɝ, ðən noʊ mæn wɪl du."

"It seems to me," he said, "that you don't want a Warder at all. Because I'll tell you, Egwene, if you can't stand being looked after, then no man will do."

"pɝhæps jə ɑɹ ɹaɪt," ʃi sɛd kɝtli. hɝ skɝts ɹʌsəld əz ʃi pʊld oʊpən ðə dɔɹ tə ðə hɔl, wɛn aʊɾ ən ðən pʊld ɪt kloʊz bɪhaɪn hɝ. nɑt kwaɪɾ ə slæm.

"Perhaps you are right," she said curtly. Her skirts rustled as she pulled open the door to the hall, went out and then pulled it closed behind her. Not quite a slam.

ɡɔɪn stʊɾ ʌp ən wɑntəd tə kɪk ðə dɔɹ. laɪt, wʌɾ ə mɛs ðɪs hæd bɪkʌm!

Gawyn stood up and wanted to kick the door. Light, what a mess this had become!

hi kəd hɪɹ ɛɡwin θɹu ðə dɔɹ, sɛndɪŋ ðə ɡɔkɝz bæk tə ðɛɹ bɛdz, ɔɹɾɝɪŋ ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹd tə bi ɛkstʃɹə vɪdʒələn tənaɪt. ðət wɑz laɪkli fəɹ ʃoʊ. ʃi nu ðət ði əsæsən wʊdn tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn soʊ sun.

He could hear Egwene through the door, sending the gawkers back to their beds, ordering the Tower Guard to be extra vigilant tonight. That was likely for show. She knew that the assassin wouldn't try again so soon.

ɡɔɪn slɪpt aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum ən lɛft. ʃi noʊɾəd ɪz dɪpɑɹtʃɝ, bʌt sɛd nʌθɪŋ tə hɪm, ɪnstɛd tɝnɪŋ tə spik sɔfli wɪð sɪlviænə. ðə ɹɛd hæɾ ə ɡlɛɹ fəɹ ɡɔɪn ðət wʊɾə meɪɾ ə boʊldɝ wɪns.

Gawyn slipped out of the room and left. She noted his departure, but said nothing to him, instead turning to speak softly with Silviana. The Red had a glare for Gawyn that would have made a boulder wince.

ɡɔɪn pæst sɛvɹəl ɡɑɹdz u - fəɹ ðɛɹ pɑɹts - simd ɹɪspɛkfəl ʌv ɡɔɪn. əz fɑɹ əz ðeɪ nu, hid fɔɪld ən ətɛmpt ɑn ði æmɪɝlɪnz laɪf. ɡɔɪn nɑɾəd tə ðɛɹ sælɹz. tʃʌbn stʊd nɪɹbaɪ, ɪnspɛktɪŋ ðə naɪf ðət hæd nɪɹli teɪkən ɡɔɪn ɪn ðə tʃɛst.

Gawyn passed several guards who - for their parts - seemed respectful of Gawyn. As far as they knew, he'd foiled an attempt on the Amyrlin's life. Gawyn nodded to their salures. Chubain stood nearby, inspecting the knife that had nearly taken Gawyn in the chest.

tʃʌbn hɛld ʌp ðə naɪf tə hɪm. "hæv jə ɛvɝ sin ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ðɪs?"

Chubain held up the knife to him. "Have you ever seen anything like this?"

ɡɔɪn tʊk ðə nɛɹoʊ, slik naɪf. ɪt wɑz bæləns fəɹ θɹoʊɪŋ, wɪð ə faɪn stil bleɪd ðət lʊk sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ən ɪlɔŋɡeɪɾəd kændəlz fleɪm. sɛɾ ɪndə ðə sɛntɝ wɝ θɹi bɪts ə blʌd- kʌlɝd ɹɑk, "wʌt kaɪndə stoʊn ɪz ðæt?" ɡɔɪn æskt, hoʊldɪŋ ðə naɪf ʌp tə ðə laɪt.

Gawyn took the narrow, sleek knife. It was balanced for throwing, with a fine steel blade that looked something like an elongated candle's flame. Set into the center were three bits of blood- colored rock, "What kind of stone is that?" Gawyn asked, holding the knife up to the light.

"aɪv nɛvɝ sin ɪt bɪfɔɹ."

"I've never seen it before."

ɡɔɪn tɝn ðə naɪf oʊvɝ ə fju taɪmz. ðəɹ wɝn ɛni ɪnskɹɪpʃənz əɹ kɑɹvɪŋz. "ðɪs keɪm wɪðɪn hæf ə bɹɛθ ə kleɪmɪŋ maɪ laɪf."

Gawyn turned the knife over a few times. There weren't any inscriptions or carvings. "This came within half a breath of claiming my life."

"ju kən teɪk ɪt, ɪf jə wɪʃ," tʃʌbn sɛd. "meɪbi jə kən æsk bɹaɪnz mɛn ɪf ðeɪv ɛvɝ sin wʌn laɪk ɪt. wɪv ə sɛkənd wʌn wi faʊn daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ."

"You can take it, if you wish," Chubain said. "Maybe you can ask Bryne's men if they've ever seen one like it. We have a second one we found down the hallway."

"ɪt wɑz ɔlsoʊ ɪntɛndəd fəɹ maɪ hɑɹt," ɡɔɪn sɛd, tʌkɪŋ ðə naɪf ɪndə hɪz bɛlt. "θæŋk ju. aɪ hæv ə ɡɪft fəɹ jə ɪn ɹɪtɝn."

"It was also intended for my heart," Gawyn said, tucking the knife into his belt. "Thank you. I have a gift for you in return."

tʃʌbn ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ.

Chubain raised an eyebrow.

"juv bɪn kəmpleɪnɪŋ ə ðə mɛn jə lɔst," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "wɛl, aɪv ə ɡɹup ə soʊlʒɝz aɪ kən ɹɛkəmɛn stʃɹɔŋli."

"You've been complaining of the men you lost," Gawyn said. "Well, I've a group of soldiers I can recommend strongly."

"fɹʌm bɹaɪnz ɑɹmi?" tʃʌbn æskt, lɪps daʊntɝnd. laɪk mɛni ʌv ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹd, hi stɪl ɹəɡɑɹɾəd bɹaɪnz ɑɹmi əz ə ɹaɪvəl fɔɹs.

"From Bryne's army?" Chubain asked, lips downturned. Like many of the Tower Guard, he still regarded Bryne's army as a rival force.

"noʊ," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "mɛn lɔɪəl tə ðə taʊɝ. səm ə ðoʊz u tʃɹeɪn tə bi wɔɹɾɝz ən u fɔt wɪð mi ɑn ɪleɪɾəz saɪd. ðəɹ filɪŋ dɪspleɪs naʊ, ən ðeɪ wəd ɹæðɝ bi soʊlʒɝz ðən wɔɹɾɝz. aɪɾ əpɹiʃieɪɾ ɪɾ ɪf jud ɡɪv əm ə hoʊm. ðəɹ sɑləd mɛn ən ɛksələnt wɔɹiɝz."

"No," Gawyn said. "Men loyal to the Tower. Some of those who trained to be Warders and who fought with me on Elaida's side. They're feeling displaced now, and they would rather be soldiers than Warders. I'd appreciate it if you'd give them a home. They're solid men and excellent warriors."

tʃʌbn nɑɾəd. "sɛn əm tə mi."

Chubain nodded. "Send them to me."

"ðeɪl kʌm tə jə təmɑɹoʊ," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "aɪ oʊnli æsk wʌn θɪŋ. tʃɹaɪ nɑt tə bɹeɪk ðə ɡɹup əpɑɹt. ðeɪv bɪn θɹu mʌtʃ təɡɛðɝ. ðɛɹ bɑnd ɡɪvz əm stʃɹɛŋkθ."

"They'll come to you tomorrow," Gawyn said. "I only ask one thing. Try not to break the group apart. They've been through much together. Their bond gives them strength."

"ʃʊdn bi dɪfəkəlt," tʃʌbn sɛd. "ðə tɛnθ taʊɝ kʌmpəni wɑz dɪstʃɹɔɪd nɪɹli tə ə mæn baɪ ðoʊz fleɪmɪŋ sintʃæn. əl sɛt səm vɛɾɝən ɔfəsɝz oʊvɝ jəɹ lædz ən fɔɹm ðə nu kʌmpəni aʊɾ ə ðɛm."

"Shouldn't be difficult," Chubain said. "The Tenth Tower Company was destroyed nearly to a man by those flaming Seanchan. I'll set some veteran officers over your lads and form the new company out of them."

"θæŋk ju," ɡɔɪn sɛd. hi nɑɾəd təwɔɹɾ ɛɡwinz kɔɹɾɝz. "wɑtʃ oʊvɝ əɹ fəɹ mi, tʃʌbn. aɪ θɪŋk ʃiz dɪtɝmən tə si hɝsɛlf dɛd."

"Thank you," Gawyn said. He nodded toward Egwene's quarters. "Watch over her for me, Chubain. I think she's determined to see herself dead."

"ɪɾ ɪz ɛvɝ maɪ duɾi tə dɪfɛn ən əphoʊl ði æmɪɝlɪn. bʌt wɛɹ wɪl jə bi?"

"It is ever my duty to defend and uphold the Amyrlin. But where will you be?"

"ʃi meɪɾ ɪt klɪɹ ðət ʃi wɑns noʊ wɔɹɾɝ," ɡɔɪn sɛd, hɪz maɪn dʒɹɪftɪŋ bæk tə ðə θɪŋz bɹaɪn hæd sɛd tə hɪm ɝliɝ. wʌɾ i wɑnt, əsaɪd fɹəm ɛɡwin? pɝhæps ɪt wɑz taɪm tə faɪn aʊt.

"She made it clear that she wants no Warder," Gawyn said, his mind drifting back to the things Bryne had said to him earlier. What did he want, aside from Egwene? Perhaps it was time to find out.

"aɪ θɪŋk ɪts pæs taɪm aɪ wɛn tə vɪzət maɪ sɪstɝ."

"I think it's past time I went to visit my sister."

tʃʌbn nɑɾəd, ən ɡɔɪn tʊk ɪz liv. hi vɪzəɾəd ðə bæɹəks ən ɡæðɝɾ ɪz pəzɛʃənz  - lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ə tʃeɪnʒ ə kloʊðɪŋ ən ə wɪntɝ kloʊk - ðən meɪɾ ɪz weɪ tə ðə steɪbəlz ən sæɾəld tʃælənʒ.

Chubain nodded, and Gawyn took his leave. He visited the barracks and gathered his possessions  - little more than a change of clothing and a winter cloak - then made his way to the stables and saddled Challenge.

ðən i lɛd ðə hɔɹs tə ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ ɡɹaʊnd. ɛɡwin meɪnteɪn ə sɪstɝ ɑn duɾi ðəɹ əɾ ɔl taɪmz. tənaɪts ɛɛs sədaɪ - ə pətit, dʒɹaʊzi-aɪd ɡɹin neɪm naɪmɹi - dɪdn kwɛstʃən hɪm. ʃi meɪɾ ɪm ə ɡeɪtweɪ tə ə hɪlsaɪɾ əbaʊɾ ən aʊɝz tʃɹævəl fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn.

Then he led the horse to the Traveling ground. Egwene maintained a sister on duty there at all times. Tonight's Aes Sedai - a petite, drowsy-eyed Green named Nimri - didn't question him. She made him a gateway to a hillside about an hour's travel from Caemlyn.

ən soʊ hi lɛf tɑɹ vəlɑn - ən ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ - bɪhaɪnd.

And so he left Tar Valon - and Egwene al'Vere - behind.

wʌɾ ɪz ðæt?" læn dɪmændəd.

What is that?" Lan demanded.

ði eɪdʒɪd nɑzɑɹ lʊkt ʌp fɹəm ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz, lɛðɝ hædɔɹi hoʊldɪŋ daʊn ɪz paʊɾɝi waɪt hɛɹ. ə smɔl stʃɹim ɡɝɡəl nɪɹ ðɛɹ kæmp ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə fɔɹəst ə haɪlən paɪnz. ðoʊz paɪnz ʃʊdn əv bɔɹn hæf soʊ mɛni bɹaʊn niɾəlz.

The aged Nazar looked up from his saddlebags, leather hadori holding down his powdery white hair. A small stream gurgled near their camp in the middle of a forest of highland pines. Those pines shouldn't have borne half so many brown needles.

nɑzɑɹ hæd bɪn tʌkɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ɪndə hɪz sæɾəlbæɡz, ən læn hæd hæpən tə spɑɾ ə bɪɾ ʌv ɡoʊl pikɪŋ aʊt. "ðɪs?" nɑzɑɹ æskt. hi pʊl ðə klɔθ aʊt: ə bɹɪljənt waɪt flæɡ wɪð ə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɪn ðə sɛntɝ. ɪt wɑz ə faɪn wɝk, wɪð bjuɾəfəl stɪtʃɪŋ. læn nɪɹli ɡɹæbd ɪɾ aʊɾ ə nɑzɑɹz fɪŋɡɝz ən ɹɪpt ɪɾ ɪn hæf.

Nazar had been tucking something into his saddlebags, and Lan had happened to spot a bit of gold peeking out. "This?" Nazar asked. He pulled the cloth out: a brilliant white flag with a golden crane embroidered in the center. It was a fine work, with beautiful stitching. Lan nearly grabbed it out of Nazar's fingers and ripped it in half.

"naʊ, aɪ si ðəɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn jəɹ feɪs, læn mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən," nɑzɑɹ sɛd. "waɪl, doʊn jə bi ɡɛɾɪŋ ɔl sɛlf-sɛntɝɾ əbaʊt ðɪs. ə mæn əz ə ɹaɪt tə kæɹi hɪz kɪŋdəmz flæɡ wɪð hɪm."

"Now, I see that expression on your face, Lan Mandragoran," Nazar said. "Weil, don't you be getting all self-centered about this. A man has a right to carry his kingdom's flag with him."

"jɔɹ ə beɪkɝ, nɑzɑɹ."

"You're a baker, Nazar."

"ɪm ə bɔɹɾɝləndɝ fɝst, sʌn," ðə mæn sɛd, tʌkɪŋ ðə bænɝ əweɪ "ðɪs ɪz maɪ hɛɹəɾədʒ."

"I'm a Borderlander first, son," the man said, tucking the banner away "This is my heritage."

"bɑ!" læn sɛd, tɝnɪŋ əweɪ. ði ʌðɝz wɝ bɹeɪkɪŋ ʌp kæmp. hid ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli əlaʊd ðə θɹi nukʌmɝz tə dʒɔɪn ɪm - ðeɪ wɝ stʌbɝn əz bɔɹz, ən ɪn ði ɛnd, hi hæd hæd tə səkʌm tə hɪz oʊθ. hid pɹɑməs ðət hiɾ æksɛp fɑloʊɝz. ðiz mɛn, tɛknɪkəli, hædn æsk tə ɹaɪd wɪð ɪm - ðeɪd sɪmpli stɑɹɾəd duɪŋ ɪt. ðət wɑz ɪnʌf. bɪsaɪdz, ɪf ðeɪ wɝ gɑnə tʃɹævəl ɪn ðə seɪm dɝɛkʃən, ðən ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl sɛns ɪn meɪkɪŋ tu kæmps.

"Bah!" Lan said, turning away. The others were breaking up camp. He'd grudgingly allowed the three newcomers to join him - they were stubborn as boars, and in the end, he had had to succumb to his oath. He'd promised that he'd accept followers. These men, technically, hadn't asked to ride with him - they'd simply started doing it. That was enough. Besides, if they were going to travel in the same direction, then there was little sense in making two camps.

læn kəntɪnjud tə waɪp ɪz feɪs dʒɹaɪ fɹəm ðə mɔɹnɪŋz wɑʃɪŋ. bʌlən wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ bɹɛd ɹɛɾi fəɹ bɹɛkfəst. ðɪs ɡɹoʊv ə paɪnz wɑz ɪn istɝn kændɝ; ðeɪ wɝ ɡɛɾɪŋ kloʊz tə ðə bɔɹɾɝ ɪndə ɝæfəl. pɝhæps i kəd -  hi fɹoʊz. ðəɹ wɝ sɛvɹəl nu tɛns ɪn ðɛɹ kæmp. ə ɡɹup ʌv eɪt mɛn wɝ tʃæɾɪŋ wɪð ændɪɹ. θɹi ʌv əm lʊk plʌmp ɝaʊn ðə weɪst - nɑt wɔɹiɝz, dʒʌdʒɪŋ baɪ ðɛɹ sɑf kloʊðɪŋ, ðoʊ ðeɪ dɪɾ əpɪɹ tə bi mɔlkɪɹi. ði ʌðɝ faɪv wɝ ɔl ʃaɪnɝənz, tɑpnɑts ɑn ðɛɹ hɛdz, lɛðɝ bɹeɪsɝz ɑn ðɛɹ ɑɹmz, ən hɔɹsboʊz stɔɹɾ ɪn keɪsəz ɑn ðɛɹ bæks bɪsaɪd lɔŋ, tu-hændəd sɔɹdz.

Lan continued to wipe his face dry from the morning's washing. Bulen was getting bread ready for breakfast. This grove of pines was in eastern Kandor; they were getting close to the border into Arafel. Perhaps he could -  He froze. There were several new tents in their camp. A group of eight men were chatting with Andere. Three of them looked plump around the waist - not warriors, judging by their soft clothing, though they did appear to be Malkieri. The other five were all Shienarans, topknots on their heads, leather bracers on their arms, and horsebows stored in cases on their backs beside long, two-handed swords.

"wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs?" læn dɪmændəd.

"What is this?" Lan demanded.

"wlɪn, mænəɡæn ən ɡɔɹnɛlɪn," ændɪɹ sɛd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ tə ðə mɔlkɪɹi. "ðiz ʌðɝz ɑɹ ki, dʒoʊoʊ, mɹɪkəl, iænɝ, kun - "

"Weilin, Managan and Gorenellin," Andere said, gesturing to the Malkieri. "These others are Qi, Joao, Merekel, Ianor, Kuehn - "

"aɪ dɪdn æsk hu," læn sɛd, vɔɪs koʊld. "aɪ æskt wʌt. wʌɾ əv jə dʌn?"

"I didn't ask who," Lan said, voice cold. "I asked what. What have you done?"

ændɪɹ ʃɹʌɡd. "wi mɛɾ əm bɪfɔɹ ɹʌnɪŋ ɪndə ju. wi toʊld əm tə weɪɾ əlɔŋ ðə sʌðɝn ɹoʊdweɪ fəɹ ʌs. ɹɑkim fɛtʃt əm læs naɪt, waɪl jə wɝ slipɪŋ."

Andere shrugged. "We met them before running into you. We told them to wait along the southern roadway for us. Rakim fetched them last night, while you were sleeping."

"ɹɑkim wɑz səpoʊz tə bi ɑn wɑtʃ!" læn sɛd.

"Rakim was supposed to be on watch!" Lan said.

"aɪ wɑtʃt ɪn ɪz stɛd," ændɪɹ sɛd. "aɪ fɪɡjɝd wid wɑn ðiz fɛl-loʊz."

"I watched in his stead," Andere said. "I figured we'd want these fel-lows."

ɔl θɹi ʌv ðə plʌmp mɝtʃəns lʊk tə læn, ðən wɛn daʊn ɑn ðɛɹ niz. wʌn wɑz wipɪŋ oʊpənli. "teɪʃɝ mɔlkiɝ." ðə faɪv ʃaɪnɝənz səluɾəd læn. "daɪ ʃæn," wʌn sɛd. "wi hæv bɹɔt wʌt wi kəd tə ðə kɑz ə ðə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn," ənʌðɝ ə ðə mɝtʃəns æɾəd. "ɔl ðət wi kəd ɡæðɝ ɪn ə lɪɾəl taɪm." "ɪɾ ɪz nɑt mʌtʃ," sɛd ðə θɝd. "bʌt wi lɛn jə əɹ sɔɹdz əz wɛl. wi meɪ lʊk tə hæv ɡɹoʊn sɑft, bʌt wi kən faɪt. wɪl faɪt." "aɪ doʊnt nid wʌt jə bɹɔt," læn sɛd, ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd. "aɪ - " "bɪfɔɹ jə seɪ tu mʌtʃ mɔɹ, oʊl fɹɛnd," ændɪɹ sɛd, leɪɪŋ ə hæn ɑn lænz ʃoʊldɝ, "pɝhæps jə ʃəɾ əv ə lʊk ət ðæt." hi nɑɾəd tə ðə saɪd.

All three of the plump merchants looked to Lan, then went down on their knees. One was weeping openly. "Tai'shar Malkier." The five Shienarans saluted Lan. "Dai Shan," one said. "We have brought what we could to the cause of the Golden Crane," another of the merchants added. "All that we could gather in a little time." "It is not much," said the third. "But we lend you our swords as well. We may look to have grown soft, but we can fight. We will fight." "I don't need what you brought," Lan said, exasperated. "I - " "Before you say too much more, old friend," Andere said, laying a hand on Lan's shoulder, "perhaps you should have a look at that." He nodded to the side.

læn fɹaʊnd, hɪɹɪŋ ə ɹætlɪŋ saʊnd. hi stɛpt pæst ə pætʃ ə tʃɹiz tə lʊk əpɑn ðə pæθ tə ðə kæmp. tu dʌzən wæɡənz wɝ əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ, itʃ paɪl haɪ wɪð səplaɪz - wɛpənz, sæks ʌv ɡɹeɪn, tɛns. læn oʊpən ɪz aɪz waɪd. ə ɡʊd dʌzən wɔɹhɔɹsɪz wɝ hɪtʃt ɪn ə laɪn, ən stʃɹɔŋ ɑksən pʊl ðə wæɡənz. timstɝz ən sɝvəns wɔkt əlɔŋsaɪd ðɛm.

Lan frowned, hearing a rattling sound. He stepped past a patch of trees to look upon the path to the camp. Two dozen wagons were approaching, each piled high with supplies - weapons, sacks of grain, tents. Lan opened his eyes wide. A good dozen warhorses were hitched in a line, and strong oxen pulled the wagons. Teamsters and servants walked alongside them.

"wɛn ðeɪ sɛd ðeɪ soʊld wʌt ðeɪ kəɾ ən bɹɔt səplaɪz," ændɪɹ sɛd, "ðeɪ mɛn ɪt."

"When they said they sold what they could and brought supplies," Andere said, "they meant it."

"wi wɪl nɛvɝ bi eɪbəl tə muv kwaɪətli wɪð ɔl ə ðɪs!" læn sɛd.

"We will never be able to move quietly with all of this!" Lan said.

ændɪɹ ʃɹʌɡd.

Andere shrugged.

læn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. vɛɹi wɛl. hi wəd wɝk wɪð ɪt. "muvɪŋ kwaɪətli əpɪɹz tə bi feɪlɪŋ ɛniweɪ. fɹəm naʊ ɑn, wɪl poʊz əz ə kæɹəvæn dɪlɪvɝɪŋ səplaɪz tə ʃaɪnɝ."

Lan took a deep breath. Very well. He would work with it. "Moving quietly appears to be failing anyway. From now on, we will pose as a caravan delivering supplies to Shienar."

"bʌt - "

"But - "

"ju wɪl swɛɹ tə mi," hi sɛd, tɝnɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə mɛn. "itʃ ə jəl swɛɹ nɑt tə ɹɪvil u aɪm əɹ sɛnd wɝd tə ɛniwʌn ɛls u maɪt bi lʊkɪŋ fəɹ mi. jəl swɛɹ ɪt"

"You will swear to me," he said, turning toward the men. "Each of you will swear not to reveal who I am or send word to anyone else who might be looking for me. You will swear it"

nɑzɑɹ lʊk laɪk i wəɾ əbdʒɛkt, bʌt læn saɪlənst ɪm wɪð ə stɝn lʊk. wʌn baɪ wʌn, ðeɪ swɔɹ.

Nazar looked like he would object, but Lan silenced him with a stern look. One by one, they swore.

ðə faɪv hæd bɪkʌm dʌzənz, bʌɾ ɪt wəd stɑp ðɛɹ.

The five had become dozens, but it would stop there.


tʃæptɝ twɛntifɔɹ


CHAPTER 24

tə meɪk ə stænd


To Make a Stand

bɛd ɹɛst," mɛlfən ənaʊnst, teɪkɪŋ əɹ ɪɹ fɹəm ðə wʊɾən tub ʃid pleɪst əɡɛnst ɪleɪnz tʃɛst. ðə mɪdwaɪf wɑz ə ʃɔɹt, æmpəl-tʃikt wʊmən u tədeɪ wɔɹ əɹ hɛɹ taɪd bæk baɪ ə tʃɹænslusən blu skɑɹf. hɝ nit dʒɹɛs wɑz ʌv waɪɾ ən mætʃɪŋ skaɪ-blu, əz ɪf wɔɹn ɪn dɪfaɪəns ə ðə pɝpɛtʃuəli oʊvɝkæst skaɪ.

Bed rest," Melfane announced, taking her ear from the wooden tube she'd placed against Elayne's chest. The midwife was a short, ample-cheeked woman who today wore her hair tied back by a translucent blue scarf. Her neat dress was of white and matching sky-blue, as if worn in defiance of the perpetually overcast sky.

"wʌt?" ɪleɪn æskt.

"What?" Elayne asked.

"wʌn wik," mɛlfən sɛd, wæɡɪŋ ə θɪk fɪŋɡɝ əɾ ɪleɪn. "ju ɑɹən tə bi ɑn jəɹ fit fəɹ wʌn wik."

"One week," Melfane said, wagging a thick finger at Elayne. "You aren't to be on your feet for one week."

ɪleɪn blɪŋkt, stʌnd, hɝ ɪɡzɔstʃən fliɪŋ fəɹ ðə moʊmənt. mɛlfən smaɪl tʃɪɹfəli əz ʃi kənsaɪn ɪleɪn tə ðɪs ɪmpɑsəbəl pʌnɪʃmənt. bɛd ɹɛst? fəɹ ə wik?

Elayne blinked, stunned, her exhaustion fleeing for the moment. Melfane smiled cheerfully as she consigned Elayne to this impossible punishment. Bed rest? For a week?

bɝdʒɪt stʊɾ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ, mæt ɪn ðə ɹum bɪɑnd. hid stɛpt aʊt fəɹ mɛlfənz ɪnspɛkʃən, bʌɾ ʌðɝwaɪz hid hʌvɝd nɪɹ əɹ ɔlmoʊst əz pɹoʊtɛktɪvli əz bɝdʒɪt. jud nɛvɝ noʊ ðeɪ kɛɹd fəɹ əɹ baɪ ðə weɪ ðeɪ spoʊk, haʊɛvɝ - ðə tu ʌv əm hæd bɪn ʃɛɹɪŋ kɝsɪz, itʃ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tɑp ði ʌðɝ. ɪleɪn hæd lɝn ə fju nu wʌnz. hu nu ðət hʌnʒɹəd-lɛɡz dɪd ðoʊz θɪŋz?

Birgitte stood in the doorway, Mat in the room beyond. He'd stepped out for Melfane's inspection, but otherwise he'd hovered near her almost as protectively as Birgitte. You'd never know they cared for her by the way they spoke, however - the two of them had been sharing curses, each trying to top the other. Elayne had learned a few new ones. Who knew that hundred-legs did those things?

hɝ beɪbz wɝ seɪf, soʊ fɑɹ əz mɛlfən kəd tɛl. ðət wɑz ði ɪmpɔɹɾənt pɑɹt. "bɛd ɹɛst ɪz, ʌv kɔɹs, ɪmpɑsəbəl," ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪ hæv fɑɹ tu mʌtʃ tə du."

Her babes were safe, so far as Melfane could tell. That was the important part. "Bed rest is, of course, impossible," Elayne said. "I have far too much to do."

"wɛl, ɪɾəl əv tə bi dʌn fɹəm bɛd," mɛlfən ɹɪplaɪd, hɝ vɔɪs plɛzən bʌt kəmplitli ənjildɪŋ. "jɔɹ bɑɾi ən jəɹ tʃaɪld əv ʌndɝɡɔn ə ɡɹeɪt stʃɹɛs. ðeɪ nid taɪm tə ɹɪkʌvɝ. əl bi ətɛndɪŋ jə ən meɪkɪŋ sɝɾən jə meɪnteɪn ə stʃɹɪk daɪət."

"Well, it will have to be done from bed," Melfane replied, her voice pleasant but completely unyielding. "Your body and your child have undergone a great stress. They need time to recover. I will be attending you and making certain you maintain a strict diet."

"bʌt - "

"But - "

"aɪ woʊn hɪɹ ɛni ɪkskjusɪz," mɛlfən ɪntɝʌptɪd.

"I won't hear any excuses," Melfane interrupted.

"ɪm ðə kwinəl" ɪleɪn sɛd, ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd.

"I'm the Queenl" Elayne said, exasperated.

"æn ɪm ðə kwinz mɪdwaɪf," mɛlfən ɹɪplaɪd, stɪl kɑm. "ðɛɹ ɪzən ə soʊlʒɝ əɹ ətɛndən ɪn ðɪs pæləs u woʊn hɛlp mi, ɪf aɪ dətɝmən ðət jəɹ hɛlθ- - ən ðəɾ ə jəɹ tʃaɪld - ɪz ət ɹɪsk."

"And I'm the Queen's midwife," Melfane replied, still calm. "There isn't a soldier or attendant in this palace who won't help me, if I determine that your health- - and that of your child - is at risk."

ʃi mɛɾ ɪleɪnz aɪz. "wʊd jə laɪk tə pʊt maɪ wɝdz tə ðə tɛst, jəɹ mædʒəsti?"

She met Elayne's eyes. "Would you like to put my words to the test, Your Majesty?"

ɪleɪn kɹɪnʒd, ɪmædʒənɪŋ əɹ oʊn ɡɑɹdz fɝbɪɾɪŋ əɹ ɛɡzɪt tə hɝ tʃeɪmbɝz. ɔɹ, wɝs, taɪɪŋ əɹ daʊn. ʃi ɡlænst ət bɝdʒɪt, bʌt ɹəsivd oʊnli ə sæɾəsfaɪd nɑd. "ɪts noʊ mɔɹ ðən jə dɪzɝv,"

Elayne cringed, imagining her own Guards forbidding her exit to her chambers. Or, worse, tying her down. She glanced at Birgitte, but received only a satisfied nod. "It's no more than you deserve,"

ðət nɑd sim tə seɪ.

that nod seemed to say.

ɪleɪn sæt bæk ɪn əɹ bɛd, fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd. ɪt wɑz ə mæsɪv fɔɹ-poʊstɝ, dɛkɝeɪɾəd ɪn ɹɛɾ ən waɪt.

Elayne sat back in her bed, frustrated. It was a massive four-poster, decorated in red and white.

ðə ɹum wɑz ɔɹneɪt, spɑɹklɪŋ wɪð vɛɹiəs kɹieɪʃənz ə kɹɪstəl ən ɹubi. ɪt wəd meɪk ə bjuɾəfli ɡɪldɪd pɹɪzən ɪndid. laɪt! ðɪs wɑzn fɛɹ! ʃi dɪɾ ʌp ðə fɹʌn ə hɝ ɡaʊn.

The room was ornate, sparkling with various creations of crystal and ruby. It would make a beautifully gilded prison indeed. Light! This wasn't fair! She did up the front of her gown.

"aɪ si ðət jəɹ nɑt gɑnə tʃɹaɪ maɪ wɝd," mɛlfən sɛd, stændɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ðə saɪɾ ə ðə bɛd.

"I see that you're not going to try my word," Melfane said, standing up from the side of the bed.

"ju ʃoʊ wɪzdəm." ʃi ɡlænst ət bɝdʒɪt. "aɪ wɪl əlaʊ jə ə miɾɪŋ wɪð ðə kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl tə əsɛs ði ivnɪŋz ɪvɛns. bʌt noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə hæf-aʊɝ, maɪn ju. aɪ woʊn əv jə ɪɡzɝɾɪŋ jɝsɛlf!"

"You show wisdom." She glanced at Birgitte. "I will allow you a meeting with the Captain-General to assess the evening's events. But no more than a half-hour, mind you. I won't have you exerting yourself!"

"bʌt - "

"But - "

mɛlfən wæɡd ðət fɪŋɡɝ əɾ əɹ əɡɛn. "ə hæf-aʊɝ, jəɹ mædʒəsti. jə ɑɹ ə wʊmən, nɑɾ ə plaʊ bist. jə nid ɹɛst ən kɛɹ." ʃi tɝn tə bɝdʒɪt. "du nɑɾ əpsɛɾ əɹ ənduli."

Melfane wagged that finger at her again. "A half-hour, Your Majesty. You are a woman, not a plow beast. You need rest and care." She turned to Birgitte. "Do not upset her unduly."

"aɪ wʊdn dʒɹim ʌv ɪt," bɝdʒɪt sɛd. hɝ æŋɡɝ wɑz faɪnəli bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə əbeɪt, ɹipleɪs baɪ əmjuzmənt. ɪnsʌfɝəbəl wʊmən.

"I wouldn't dream of it," Birgitte said. Her anger was finally beginning to abate, replaced by amusement. Insufferable woman.

mɛlfən wɪθdʒɹu tə ði aʊɾɝ tʃeɪmbɝ. bɝdʒɪt ɹɪmeɪnd wɛɹ ʃi wɑz, ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ ɪleɪn θɹu nɛɹoʊ aɪz. səm dɪsplɛʒɝ stɪl bɔɪld ən tʃɝn fɹəm ðə bɑnd. ðə tu ɹəɡɑɹɾəd wʌn ənʌðɝ fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmənt.

Melfane withdrew to the outer chamber. Birgitte remained where she was, regarding Elayne through narrow eyes. Some displeasure still boiled and churned from the bond. The two regarded one another for a long moment.

wʌɾ ɑɹ wi də tə wɪð ju, ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd?" bɝdʒɪt faɪnəli æskt. lɑk mi ɪn maɪ bɛdʒɹum, ɪɾ əpɪɹz," ɪleɪn snæpt. "nɑɾ ə bæd səluʃən."

What are we do to with you, Elayne Trakand?" Birgitte finally asked. Lock me in my bedroom, it appears," Elayne snapped. "Not a bad solution."

ən wəd jə kip mi hɪɹ fɝɛvɝ?" ɪleɪn æskt. "laɪk ɡɛlfinə, fɹəm ðə stɔɹiz, lɑkt əweɪ fəɹ ə θaʊzən jɪɹz ɪn ðə fɝɡɑɾən taʊɝ?" bɝdʒɪt saɪd. "noʊ. bʌt sɪks mʌnθs əɹ soʊ wəd hɛlp kip maɪ æŋzaɪəɾi lɛvəlz daʊn."

And would you keep me here forever?" Elayne asked. "Like Gelfina, from the stories, locked away for a thousand years in the forgotten tower?" Birgitte sighed. "No. But six months or so would help keep my anxiety levels down."

"wi doʊn əv taɪm fəɹ ðæt," ɪleɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "wi doʊn əv taɪm fəɹ mʌtʃ, ðiz deɪz. ɹɪsks mʌs bi teɪkən."

"We don't have time for that," Elayne replied. "We don't have time for much, these days. Risks must be taken."

"ɹɪsks ɪnvɑlvɪŋ ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ ɡoʊɪŋ əloʊn tə feɪs ə mɑb ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ? jəɹ laɪk səm blʌd-bɛsɑɾɪd ɪɾiət ɑn ðə bæɾəlfild, tʃɑɹɡ-ɪŋ əhɛɾ ə hɪz kɑmɹædz, sikɪŋ dɛθ wɪθaʊɾ ə ʃild-meɪt tə ɡɑɹd jəɹ bæk!

"Risks involving the Queen of Andor going alone to face a mob of the Black Ajah? You're like some blood-besotted idiot on the battlefield, charg-ing ahead of his comrades, seeking death without a shield-mate to guard your back!

ɪleɪn blɪŋkt ət ði æŋɡɝ ɪn ðə wʊmən.

Elayne blinked at the anger in the woman.

"doʊn jə tʃɹʌs mi, ɪleɪn?" bɝdʒɪɾ æskt. "wʊd jə bi ɹɪɾ ə mi, ɪf jə kʊd?"

"Don't you trust me, Elayne?" Birgitte asked. "Would you be rid of me, if you could?"

"wʌt? noʊ! ʌv kɔɹs aɪ tʃɹʌs ju."

"What? No! Of course I trust you."

"ðɛn waɪ woʊn jə lemi hɛlp ju? aɪm nɑt səpoʊz tə bi hɪɹ, naʊ. aɪ hæv noʊ pɝpəs ʌðɝ ðən wʌt sɝkəmstæns əz ɡɪvən mi. jə meɪd mi jəɹ wɔɹɾɝ, bʌt jə woʊn lemi pɹətɛk ju!

"Then why won't you let me help you? I'm not supposed to be here, now. I have no purpose other than what circumstance has given me. You made me your Warder, but you won't let me protect you!

haʊ kən aɪ bi jəɹ bɑɾiɡɑɹd ɪf jə woʊn tɛl mi wən jəɹ pʊɾɪŋ jɝsɛlf ɪn deɪnʒɝ?"

How can I be your bodyguard if you won't tell me when you're putting yourself in danger?"

ɪleɪn fɛlt laɪk pʊlɪŋ ðə kʌvɝz ʌp tə ʃil hɝsɛlf fɹəm ðoʊz aɪz. haʊ kəd bɝdʒɪt bi ðə wʌn u fɛl soʊ hɝt? ɪleɪn hæd bɪn ðə wʌn hud bɪn wundəd! "ɪf ɪt minz ɛniθɪŋ," ʃi sɛd, "aɪ doʊn ɪntɛn tə də ðɪs əɡɛn."

Elayne felt like pulling the covers up to shield herself from those eyes. How could Birgitte be the one who felt so hurt? Elayne had been the one who'd been wounded! "If it means anything," she said, "I don't intend to do this again."

"noʊ. jəl də sʌmθɪŋ ɛls ɹɛkləs."

"No. You'll do something else reckless."

"aɪ min, aɪ ɪntɛn tə bi mɔɹ kɛɹfəl. meɪbi jəɹ ɹaɪt, ən ðə vjuɪŋ ɪzən ə pɝfəkt ɡɛɹənti.

"I mean, I intend to be more careful. Maybe you're right, and the viewing isn't a perfect guarantee.

ɪt sɝɾənli dɪdn stɑp mi fɹəm pænɪkɪŋ wən aɪ fɛlt ə ɹil deɪnʒɝ."

It certainly didn't stop me from panicking when I felt a real danger."

"ju dɪdn fil ə ɹil deɪnʒɝ wən ðə blæk ədʒɑ lɑk jə ʌp ən tʃɹaɪd tə kɑɹt jə əweɪ?"

"You didn't feel a real danger when the Black Ajah locked you up and tried to cart you away?"

ɪleɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ʃi ʃʊɾə bɪn fɹaɪɾənd ðət taɪm, bʌt ʃi hædn bɪn. nɑɾ oʊnli kəz ə mɪnz vjuɪŋ. ðə blæk ədʒɑ wəd nɛvɝ əv kɪl hɝ, nɑɾ ʌndɝ ðoʊz sɝkəmstænsəz. ʃi wɑz tu væljəbəl.

Elayne hesitated. She should have been frightened that time, but she hadn't been. Not only because of Min's viewing. The Black Ajah would never have killed her, not under those circumstances. She was too valuable.

filɪŋ ðət naɪf ɛntɝ əɹ saɪd, pɪɹs əɹ skɪn, dɪɡ təwɔɹɾ əɹ wum . . . ðət hæd bɪn dɪfɹənt.

Feeling that knife enter her side, pierce her skin, dig toward her womb . . . that had been different.

ðə tɛɹɝ. ʃi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə wɝl blækənɪŋ ɝaʊn hɝ, hɝ hɑɹtbit θəɾɪŋ, ɡɹoʊɪŋ laʊɾɝ, laɪk ðə dʒɹʌmbits ət ði ɛn ʌv ə pɝfɔɹməns. ðə wʌnz ðət keɪm bɪfɔɹ ðə saɪləns.

The terror. She could remember the world blackening around her, her heartbeat thudding, growing louder, like the drumbeats at the end of a performance. The ones that came before the silence.

bɝdʒɪt ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ɪleɪn əpɹeɪzɪŋli. ʃi kəd fil ɪleɪnz ɪmoʊʃənz. ʃi wɑz kwin. ʃi kəd nɑɾ əvɔɪd ɹɪsks. bʌt. . . pɝhæps ʃi kəd ɹeɪn hɝsɛlf ɪn.

Birgitte regarded Elayne appraisingly. She could feel Elayne's emotions. She was Queen. She could not avoid risks. But. . . perhaps she could rein herself in.

"wɛl," bɝdʒɪt sɛd, "dɪd jə ət lis dɪskʌvɝ ɛniθɪŋ?"

"Well," Birgitte said, "did you at least discover anything?"

"aɪ dɪd," ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪ - "

"I did," Elayne said. "I - "

ət ðət moʊmənt, ə skɑɹf-ɹæp hɛɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ. mæt hæɾ ɪz aɪz kloʊzd. "ju kʌvɝɾ ʌp?"

At that moment, a scarf-wrapped head appeared in the doorway. Mat had his eyes closed. "You covered up?"

"jɛs," ɪleɪn sɛd. "æn ɪn ə fɑɹ mɔɹ fæʃənəbəl weɪ ðən ju, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən. ðət skɑɹf lʊks ɹɪdɪkjələs."

"Yes," Elayne said. "And in a far more fashionable way than you, Matrim Cauthon. That scarf looks ridiculous."

hi skaʊld, oʊpənɪŋ ɪz aɪz ən pʊlɪŋ ɔf ðə skɑɹf, ɹɪvilɪŋ ði æŋɡjəlɝ feɪs bɪniθ. "ju tʃɹaɪ muvɪŋ θɹu ðə sɪɾi wɪθaʊt biɪŋ ɹɛk-ɑɡnaɪzd," hi sɛd.

He scowled, opening his eyes and pulling off the scarf, revealing the angular face beneath. "You try moving through the city without being rec-ognized," he said.

"ɛvɹi bʊtʃɝ, ɪnkipɝ ən blʌɾi bækɹum slɪpfɪn-ɡɝ simz tə noʊ wʌɾ aɪ lʊk laɪk ðiz deɪz." "ðə blæk sɪstɝz wɝ plænɪŋ tə hæv jə əsæsəneɪɾəd," ɪleɪn sɛd.

"Every butcher, innkeeper and bloody backroom slipfin-ger seems to know what I look like these days." "The Black sisters were planning to have you assassinated," Elayne said.

"wʌt?" mæt æskt.

"What?" Mat asked.

ɪleɪn nɑɾəd. "wʌn mɛnʃən ju. ɪt saʊndəd laɪk dɑɹkfɹɛnz hæd bɪn sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ jə fəɹ səm taɪm, wɪð ði ɪntɛn ə kɪlɪŋ ju."

Elayne nodded. "One mentioned you. It sounded like Darkfriends had been searching for you for some time, with the intent of killing you."

bɝdʒɪt ʃɹʌɡd. "ðeɪɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. noʊ daʊt ðeɪ wɑn əs ɔl dɛd."

Birgitte shrugged. "They're Darkfriends. No doubt they want us all dead."

"ðɪs wɑz dɪfɹənt," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ɪt simd mɔɹ . . . ɪntɛns. aɪ sədʒɛs kipɪŋ jəɹ wɪts əbaʊt jə ðə nɛkst waɪl."

"This was different," Elayne said. "It seemed more . . . intense. I suggest keeping your wits about you the next while."

"ðæɾəl bi ə tʃɹɪk," bɝdʒɪt noʊɾəd. "siɪŋ əz tə haʊ hi dʌzn əv ɛni wɪts ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs."

"That'll be a trick," Birgitte noted. "Seeing as to how he doesn't have any wits in the first place."

mæt ɹoʊld ɪz aɪz. "dɪɾ aɪ mɪs jə ɪkspleɪnɪŋ wʌt jə wɝ duɪŋ ɪn ðə fleɪmɪŋ dʌnʒənz, sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ə pul ə jəɹ oʊn blʌd, lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ɔl ðə wɝld laɪk jud sin ðə luzɪŋ ɛn ʌv ə bæɾəlfild skɝmɪʃ?"

Mat rolled his eyes. "Did I miss you explaining what you were doing in the flaming dungeons, sitting in a pool of your own blood, looking for all the world like you'd seen the losing end of a battlefield skirmish?"

"aɪ wɑz ɪntɛɹəɡeɪɾɪŋ ðə blæk ədʒɑ," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ðə dɪteɪlz ɑɹ nʌn ə jəɹ kənsɝn. bɝdʒɪt, hæv jə ə ɹipɔɹt fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊnz?"

"I was interrogating the Black Ajah," Elayne said. "The details are none of your concern. Birgitte, have you a report from the grounds?"

"noʊbɑdi sɔ mɛlɝ liv," ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd. "ðoʊ wi faʊn ðə sɛkɹətɛɹiz bɑɾi ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn flɔɹ, stɪl wɔɹm. daɪd fɹəm ə naɪf tə ðə bæk."

"Nobody saw Mellar leave," the Warder said. "Though we found the secretary's body on the ground floor, still warm. Died from a knife to the back."

ɪleɪn saɪd. "ʃieɪn?"

Elayne sighed. "Shiaine?"

"ɡɔn," bɝdʒɪt sɛd, "əlɔŋ wɪð mɑɹilɪn ɡəmɑlfɪn ən fæljən boʊɾə."

"Gone," Birgitte said, "along with Marillin Gemalphin and Falion Bhoda."

"ðə ʃædoʊ kʊdn liv əm ɪn əɹ pəzɛʃən," ɪleɪn sɛd wɪð ə saɪ. "ðeɪ noʊ tu mʌtʃ. ðeɪ hæd tə ɛn ʌp iðɝ ɹɛskjuɾ əɹ ɛksəkjuɾəd."

"The Shadow couldn't leave them in our possession," Elayne said with a sigh. "They know too much. They had to end up either rescued or executed."

'wɛl," mæt sɛd, ʃɹʌɡɪŋ, "jɔɹ əlaɪv, ən θɹi ʌv əm ɑɹ dɛd. simz laɪk ə ɹizənəbli ɡʊɾ aʊtkʌm."

'Well," Mat said, shrugging, "you're alive, and three of them are dead. Seems like a reasonably good outcome."

bʌt ðə wʌnz u ɪskeɪpt əv ə kɑpi ʌv jəɹ mədæljən, ɪleɪn θɔt. ʃi dɪdn spik ɪt, haʊɛvɝ. ʃi ɔlsoʊ dɪdn mɛnʃən ði ɪnveɪʒən ðət tʃɛzməl hæd spoʊkən ʌv. ʃi wəd tɔk ʌv ɪt wɪð bɝdʒɪt sun, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt fɝst ʃi wɑntəd tə kənsɪɾɝ ɪt hɝsɛlf.

But the ones who escaped have a copy of your medallion, Elayne thought. She didn't speak it, however. She also didn't mention the invasion that Chesmal had spoken of. She would talk of it with Birgitte soon, of course, but first she wanted to consider it herself.

mæt hæd sɛd ðə naɪts ɪvɛns hæɾ ə "ɹizənəbli ɡʊɾ aʊtkʌm." bʌt ðə mɔɹ ɪleɪn θɔɾ əbaʊɾ ɪt, ðə mɔɹ dɪsæɾəsfaɪd ʃi wɑz. ən ɪnvə- sən ʌv ændɝ wɑz kʌmɪŋ, bʌt ʃi dɪdnt noʊ wɛn. ðə ʃædoʊ wɑntəd mæt dɛd, bʌɾ əz bɝdʒɪt hæd pɔɪntəɾ aʊt, ðət wɑz noʊ sɝpɹaɪz. ɪn fækt, ði oʊnli sɝɾən ɹɪzʌlt ə ði ivnɪŋz ædvɛntʃɝz wɑz ðə sɛns ə fətiɡ ɪleɪn fɛlt. ðəɾ ən ə wik kənfaɪn tə hɝ ɹumz.

Mat had said the night's events had a "reasonably good outcome." But the more Elayne thought about it, the more dissatisfied she was. An inva- sion of Andor was coming, but she didn't know when. The Shadow wanted Mat dead, but as Birgitte had pointed out, that was no surprise. In fact, the only certain result of the evening's adventures was the sense of fatigue Elayne felt. That and a week confined to her rooms.

"mæt," ʃi sɛd, teɪkɪŋ ɔf ɪz mədæljən. "hɪɹ, ɪts taɪm aɪ ɡeɪv ðɪs bæk. jə ʃəd noʊ ðəɾ ɪt pɹɑbli seɪv maɪ laɪf tənaɪt."

"Mat," she said, taking off his medallion. "Here, it's time I gave this back. You should know that it probably saved my life tonight."

hi wɔkt oʊvɝ ən tʊk ɪt bæk iɡɝli, ðən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "wɝ jə eɪbəl tə . . ."

He walked over and took it back eagerly, then hesitated. "Were you able to . . ."

"kɑpi ɪt? nɑt pɝfəkli. bʌt tə ən ɪkstɛnt."

"Copy it? Not perfectly. But to an extent."

hi pʊɾ ɪt bæk ɑn, lʊkɪŋ kənsɝnd. "wɛl, ðət filz ɡʊd tə hæv bæk. aɪv bɪn wɑntɪŋ tə æsk jə sʌmθɪŋ. naʊ maɪt nɑt bi ðə taɪm"

He put it back on, looking concerned. "Well, that feels good to have back. I've been wanting to ask you something. Now might not be the time"

"spik ʌv ɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd, taɪɝd. "maɪɾ əz wɛl."

"Speak of it," Elayne said, tired. "Might as well."

"wɛl, ɪts əbaʊt ðə ɡoʊləm . . ."

"Well, it's about the gholam . . ."

"ðə sɪɾi hæz bɪn ɛmptiɾ ə moʊst səvɪljənz," joʊli sɛɾ əz i ən ɪɾɝɑldi wɔk θɹu mɛɹədɑnz ɡeɪt. "wɝ kloʊs tə ðə blaɪt; ðɪs ɪz nɑt ðə fɝs taɪm wiv ɪvækjəweɪɾɪd. maɪ oʊn sɪstɝ, sɪɡɹɪl, lidz ðə læstʃɹaɪɾɝz, hu wɪl wɑtʃ fɹəm ðə ɹɪdʒ tə ðə saʊθist ən sɛnd wɝɾ ɪf wi ʃəd wi fɔl. ʃɪl əv sɛnt wɝd tə əɹ wɑtʃpoʊsts ɝaʊn sɑldɑiə, ɹɪkwɛstɪŋ eɪd. ʃɪl laɪɾ ə wɑtʃfaɪɝ tə əlɝɾ əs ɪf ðeɪ kʌm."

"The city has been emptied of most civilians," Yoeli said as he and Ituralde walked through Maradon's gate. "We're close to the Blight; this is not the first time we've evacuated. My own sister, Sigril, leads the Lastriders, who will watch from the ridge to the southeast and send word if we should we fall. She will have sent word to our watchposts around Saldaea, requesting aid. She will light a watchfire to alert us if they come."

ðə lin-feɪs mæn lʊkt əɾ ɪɾɝɑldi, hɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən ɡɹɪm. "ðɛɹ wɪl bi fju tʃɹups u kəd kʌm tə əɹ eɪd. kwin tɛnoʊbiə tʊk mɛni wɪð əɹ wən ʃi ɹoʊd tə faɪn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn."

The lean-faced man looked at Ituralde, his expression grim. "There will be few troops who could come to our aid. Queen Tenobia took many with her when she rode to find the Dragon Reborn."

ɪɾɝɑldi nɑɾəd. hi wɔkt wɪθaʊɾ ə lɪmp - ænteɪl, wʌn ə ði æʃəmən, wɑz kwaɪt skɪld wɪð hilɪŋ. hɪz mɛn meɪɾ ə heɪsti kæmp ɪn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə sɪɾi ɡeɪts. ðə tʃɹɑləks hæd teɪkən ðə tɛns ðeɪd lɛf bɪhaɪnd, ðən lɪɾ əm ɑn faɪɝ ət naɪt tə ɪlumɪnɪɾ əm fistɪŋ ɑn ðə wundəd.

Ituralde nodded. He walked without a limp - Antail, one of the Ashaman, was quite skilled with Healing. His men made a hasty camp in the courtyard just inside the city gates. The Trollocs had taken the tents they'd left behind, then lit them on fire at night to illuminate them feasting on the wounded.

ɪɾɝɑldi hæd muv səm ə hɪz tʃɹups ɪndə ði ɛmpti bɪldɪŋz, bʌɾ i wɑntəɾ ʌðɝz kloʊs tə ðə ɡeɪɾ ɪn keɪs ʌv ən əsɔlt.

Ituralde had moved some of his troops into the empty buildings, but he wanted others close to the gate in case of an assault.

ði æʃəmən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd wɝk tə hil ɪɾɝɑldiz mɛn, bʌɾ oʊnli ðə wɝs keɪsəz kəd ɡɛɾ ətɛnʃən. ɪɾɝɑldi nɑɾəd tə ænteɪl, hu wɑz wɝkɪŋ wɪð ðə wundəɾ ɪn ə ɹoʊpt-ɔf sɛkʃən ə ðə skwɛɹ. ænteɪl dɪdn si ðə nɑd. hi kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd, swɛɾɪŋ, wɝkɪŋ wɪð ə paʊɝ ɪɾɝɑldi dɪdnt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt.

The Ashaman and Aes Sedai had worked to Heal Ituralde's men, but only the worst cases could get attention. Ituralde nodded to Antail, who was working with the wounded in a roped-off section of the square. Antail didn't see the nod. He concentrated, sweating, working with a Power Ituralde didn't want to think about.

"ɑɹ jə sɝɾən jə wɑnə si ðɛm?" joʊli æskt. hi hɛld ə hɔɹsmənz lɔŋ spɪɹ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ðə tɪp taɪd wɪð ə tʃɹaɪæŋɡjəlɝ blæk ən jɛloʊ pɛndənt. ɪt wɑz kɔl ðə tʃɹeɪɾɝz bænɝ baɪ ðə sɑldəiənz hɪɹ.

"Are you certain you want to see them?" Yoeli asked. He held a horsemans long spear on his shoulder, the tip tied with a triangular black and yellow pendant. It was called the Traitor's Banner by the Saldaeans here.

ðə sɪɾi bɹɪsəld wɪð hɑstɪləɾi, dɪfɹənt ɡɹups ə sɑldəiənz ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ wɪð ɡɹɪm ɪkspɹɛʃənz. mɛni wɔɹ stʃɹɪps ə blæk klɔθ ən jɛloʊ klɔθ twɪstəɾ əbaʊt wʌn ənʌðɝ ən taɪd tə ðɛɹ sɔɹd ʃiθs. ðeɪ nɑɾəd tə joʊli.

The city bristled with hostility, different groups of Saldaeans regarding one another with grim expressions. Many wore strips of black cloth and yellow cloth twisted about one another and tied to their sword sheaths. They nodded to Yoeli.

deɪsjə ɡeɪveɪn siɹɾoʊ kwɛnʒɹ ɪeɪn kɛɹɛntɪn, ɪɾɝɑldi θɔt. ə fɹeɪz ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ. ɪt mɛnt "ə ɹɛzəlut hɑɹɾ ɪz wɝθ tɛn ɑɹɡjəməns." hi kəd ɡɛs wʌt ðət bænɝ mɛnt. səmtaɪmz ə mæn nu wʌɾ i mʌs du, ðoʊ ɪt saʊndəd ɹɔŋ. ðə tu ʌv əm wɔk fəɹ ə taɪm θɹu ðə stʃɹits. mɛɹədɑn wɑz laɪk moʊs bɔɹɾɝlənd sɪɾiz: stʃɹeɪt wɔlz, skwɛɹ bɪldɪŋz, nɛɹoʊ stʃɹits.

Desya gavane cierto cuendar isain carentin, Ituralde thought. A phrase in the Old Tongue. It meant "A resolute heart is worth ten arguments." He could guess what that banner meant. Sometimes a man knew what he must do, though it sounded wrong. The two of them walked for a time through the streets. Maradon was like most Borderland cities: straight walls, square buildings, narrow streets.

ðə haʊsəz lʊk laɪk fɔɹtʃɹəs kips, wɪð smɔl wɪndoʊz ən stɝɾi dɔɹz ðə stʃɹits waʊn ɪn ɑd weɪz, ən ðəɹ wɝ noʊ θætʃt ɹufs - oʊnli sleɪt ʃɪŋɡəlz, faɪɝpɹuf. ðə dʒɹaɪd blʌɾ ət sɛvɹəl ki ɪntɝsɛkʃənz wɑz dɪfəkəl tə meɪk aʊɾ əɡɛns ðə dɑɹk stoʊn, bʌɾ ɪɾɝɑldi nu wʌt tə lʊk fɔɹ. joʊliz ɹɛskju ʌv ɪz tʃɹups hæd kʌm æftɝ faɪɾɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə sɑldəiənz.

The houses looked like fortressed keeps, with small windows and sturdy doors The streets wound in odd ways, and there were no thatched roofs - only slate shingles, fireproof. The dried blood at several key intersections was difficult to make out against the dark stone, but Ituralde knew what to look for. Yoeli's rescue of his troops had come after fighting among the Saldaeans.

ðeɪ ɹitʃt ə nɑndɪskɹɪp bɪldɪŋ. ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ weɪ fəɹ ən aʊtsaɪɾɝ tə noʊ ðət ðɪs pɝtɪkjəlɝ dwɛlɪŋ bɪlɔŋ tə vɹæm tɔɹku-mɛn, dɪstən kʌzən tə ðə kwin, əpɔɪntəd lɔɹɾ ə ðə sɪɾi ɪn əɹ æbsəns. ðə soʊlʒɝz ət ðə dɔɹ wɔɹ jɛloʊ ən blæk. ðeɪ səluɾəd joʊli.

They reached a nondescript building. There would be no way for an outsider to know that this particular dwelling belonged to Vram Torku-men, distant cousin to the Queen, appointed lord of the city in her absence. The soldiers at the door wore yellow and black. They saluted Yoeli.

ɪnsaɪd, ɪɾɝɑldi ən joʊli ɛntɝɾ ə nɛɹoʊ stɛɹkeɪs ən klaɪm θɹi flaɪts ə stɛɹz. ðəɹ wɝ soʊlʒɝz ɪn nɪɹli ɛvɹi ɹum. ɑn ðə tɑp flɔɹ, fɔɹ mɛn wɛɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹeɪɾɝz bænɝ ɡɑɹɾəd ə lɑɹdʒ, ɡoʊld-ɪnleɪd dɔɹ. ðə hɔlweɪ wɑz dɑɹk: nɛɹoʊ wɪndoʊz, ə ɹʌɡ ʌv blæk, ɡɹin ən ɹɛd.

Inside, Ituralde and Yoeli entered a narrow staircase and climbed three flights of stairs. There were soldiers in nearly every room. On the top floor, four men wearing the Traitor's Banner guarded a large, gold-inlaid door. The hallway was dark: narrow windows, a rug of black, green and red.

"ɛniθɪŋ tə ɹipɔɹt, tɑɹən?" joʊli æskt.

"Anything to report, Tarran?" Yoeli asked.

"nɑɾ ə θɪŋ, sɝ," ðə mæn sɛd wɪð ə səlut. hi wɔɹ lɔŋ mʌstæʃɪz ən hæd ðə baʊd lɛɡz ʌv ə mæn vɛɹi kʌmftəɹbəl ɪn ðə sæɾəl.

"Not a thing, sir," the man said with a salute. He wore long mustaches and had the bowed legs of a man very comfortable in the saddle.

joʊli nɑɾəd. "θæŋk ju, tɑɹən. fəɹ ɔl jə du."

Yoeli nodded. "Thank you, Tarran. For all you do."

"aɪ stænd wɪð ju, sɝ. ən wɪl ət ði ɛnd."

"I stand with you, sir. And will at the end."

"meɪ jə kip jəɹ aɪz nɔɹθwɝd, bʌt jəɹ hɑɹt saʊθwɝd, maɪ fɹɛnd," joʊli sɛd, teɪkɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ ən pʊʃɪŋ oʊpən ðə dɔɹ. ɪɾɝɑldi fɑloʊd.

"May you keep your eyes northward, but your heart southward, my friend," Yoeli said, taking a deep breath and pushing open the door. Ituralde followed.

ɪnsaɪd ðə ɹum, ə sɑldəiən mæn ɪn ə ɹɪtʃ ɹɛd ɹoʊb sæt bɪsaɪɾ ə hɑɹθ, sɪpɪŋ ə kʌp ʌv waɪn. ə wʊmən ɪn ə faɪn dʒɹɛs dɪd niɾəlwɝk ɪn ðə tʃɛɹ əkɹɔs fɹəm hɪm. niðɝ lʊkt ʌp.

Inside the room, a Saldaean man in a rich red robe sat beside a hearth, sipping a cup of wine. A woman in a fine dress did needlework in the chair across from him. Neither looked up.

"lɔɹd tɔɹkjəmɛn," joʊli sɛd. "ðɪs ɪz ɹoʊɾəl ɪɾɝɑldi, liɾɝ ə ðə dəmɑni ɑɹmi."

"Lord Torkumen," Yoeli said. "This is Rodel Ituralde, leader of the Domani army."

ðə mæn ət ðə hɑɹθ saɪɾ oʊvɝ ɪz kʌp ʌv waɪn. "ju də nɑt nɑk, jə də nɑt weɪt fəɹ mi tə ædʒɹɛs jə fɝst, jə kʌm dʊɹɪŋ ən aʊɝ wən əv spoʊkən ə maɪ nid fəɹ kwaɪət kɑntəmpleɪʃən."

The man at the hearth sighed over his cup of wine. "You do not knock, you do not wait for me to address you first, you come during an hour when have spoken of my need for quiet contemplation."

ɹɪli, vɹæm," ðə wʊmən sɛd, "ju ɪkspɛk mænɝz fɹəm ðɪs mæn?

Really, Vram," the woman said, "you expect manners from this man?

naʊ?"

Now?"

joʊli kwaɪətli ɹɛstəɾ ɪz hæn ɑn ðə hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹd. ðə ɹum hɛld ə dʒʌmbəl ə fɝnɪtʃɝ: ə bɛɾ ɑn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum ðəɾ ɑbviəsli dɪdn bɪlɔŋ ðɛɹ, ə fju tʃɹʌŋks ən stændɪŋ wɔɹdʒɹoʊbz.

Yoeli quietly rested his hand on the hilt of his sword. The room held a jumble of furniture: a bed on the side of the room that obviously didn't belong there, a few trunks and standing wardrobes.

"soʊ," vɹæm sɛd, "ɹoʊɾəl ɪɾɝɑldi. jəɹ wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪt kæptənz. aɪ ɹilaɪz ɪt maɪt bi ɪnsʌltɪŋ tə æsk, bʌɾ aɪ mʌst əbzɝv fɔɹmæləɾiz. jə ɹilaɪz ðət baɪ bɹɪŋɪŋ tʃɹups ɑntu əɹ sɔɪl, juv ɹɪskt ə wɔɹ?"

"So," Vram said, "Rodel Ituralde. You're one of the great captains. I realize it might be insulting to ask, but I must observe formalities. You realize that by bringing troops onto our soil, you have risked a war?"

"aɪ sɝv ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd. "tɑɹmən ɡdən kʌmz ən ɔl pɹiviəs ælidʒiænsɪz, baʊndɝiz, ən lɔz ɑɹ sʌbʒɪkt tə ðə dʒɹæɡ-ɑnz wɪl."

"I serve the Dragon Reborn," Ituralde said. "Tarmon Gai'don comes and all previous allegiances, boundaries, and laws are subject to the Drag-on's will."

vɹæm klɪkt ɪz tʌŋ. "dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn. aɪ hæd ɹɪpɔɹts, ʌv kɔɹs - ən ðoʊz mɛn jə ɛmplɔɪ simd ən ɑbviəs hɪnt. bʌɾ ɪts stɪl soʊ stʃɹeɪnʒ tə hɪɹ. dʒju nɑt ɹilaɪz haʊ ʌɾɝli fulɪʃ jə saʊnd?"

Vram clicked his tongue. "Dragonsworn. I had reports, of course - and those men you employ seemed an obvious hint. But it is still so strange to hear. Do you not realize how utterly foolish you sound?"

ɪɾɝɑldi mɛt ðə mænz aɪz. hi hædn kənsɪɾɝd hɪmsɛlf dʒɹæɡən-swɔɹn, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ jus kɔlɪŋ ə hɔɹs ə ɹɑk ən ɪkspɛktɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls tə əɡɹi. "doʊn jə kɛɹ əbaʊt ði ɪnveɪɾɪŋ tʃɹɑləks?"

Ituralde met the man's eyes. He hadn't considered himself Dragon-sworn, but there was no use calling a horse a rock and expecting everyone else to agree. "Don't you care about the invading Trollocs?"

"ðɛɹ əv bɪn tʃɹɑləks bɪfɔɹ," vɹæm sɛd. "ðɛɹ əv ɔlweɪz bɪn tʃɹɑləks."

"There have been Trollocs before," Vram said. "There have always been Trollocs."

"ðə kwin - " joʊli sɛd.

"The Queen - " Yoeli said.

"ðə kwin," vɹæm ɪntɝʌptɪd, "wɪl sun ɹɪtɝn fɹəm əɹ ɛkspədɪʃən tə ənmæsk ən kæptʃɝ ðɪs fɔls dʒɹæɡən. wʌns ðət hæpənz, ʃɪl si jə ɛksəkjuɾəd, tʃɹeɪɾɝ. ju, ɹoʊɾəl ɪɾɝɑldi, wɪl laɪkli bi spɛɹd kəz ə jəɹ steɪʃən, bʌɾ aɪ ʃəd nɑt laɪk tə bi jəɹ fæmli wən ðeɪ ɹəsiv ðə ɹænsəm dɪmænd. aɪ hoʊp ðət juv wɛlθ tə əkʌmpəni jəɹ ɹɛpjəteɪʃən. ʌðɝwaɪz, jə ʃæl laɪkli spɛn mɛni ʌv ðə nɛks jɪɹz əz ə dʒɛnɝəl tə nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ðə ɹæts ə jəɹ sɛl."

"The Queen," Vram interrupted, "will soon return from her expedition to unmask and capture this false Dragon. Once that happens, she will see you executed, traitor. You, Rodel Ituralde, will likely be spared because of your station, but I should not like to be your family when they receive the ransom demand. I hope that you have wealth to accompany your reputation. Otherwise, you shall likely spend many of the next years as a general to nothing more than the rats of your cell."

"aɪ si," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd. "wɛn dɪd jə tɝn tə ðə ʃædoʊ?"

"I see," Ituralde said. "When did you turn to the Shadow?"

vɹæmz aɪz oʊpənd waɪd, ən i stʊd. "ju dɛɹ neɪm mi dɑɹk-fɹɛnd?"

Vram's eyes opened wide, and he stood. "You dare name me Dark-friend?"

"aɪv noʊn səm sɑldəiənz ɪn maɪ taɪm," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd. "aɪv kɔl səm fɹɛnz; aɪv fɔɾ əɡɛnst ʌðɝz. bʌt nɛvɝ əv aɪ noʊn wʌn u wəd wɑtʃ mɛn faɪt ʃæɾoʊzpɔn ən nɑɾ ɔfɝ tə hɛlp."

"I've known some Saldaeans in my time," Ituralde said. "I've called some friends; I've fought against others. But never have I known one who would watch men fight Shadowspawn and not offer to help."

"ɪf aɪ hæɾ ə sɔɹd . . ." vɹæm sɛd.

"If I had a sword . . ." Vram said.

"meɪ jə bɝn, vɹæm tɔɹkjəmɛn," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd. "aɪ keɪm hɪɹ tə tɛl jə ðət ðæt, ɑn bɪhæf ə ðə mɛn aɪ lɔst."

"May you burn, Vram Torkumen," Ituralde said. "I came here to tell you that that, on behalf of the men I lost."

ðə mæn simd ʃɑkt əz ɪɾɝɑldi tɝn tə ɡoʊ. joʊli dʒɔɪn hɪm, pʊlɪŋ ðə dɔɹ kloʊzd.

The man seemed shocked as Ituralde turned to go. Yoeli joined him, pulling the door closed.

"ju dɪsəɡɹi wɪð maɪ ækjəzeɪʃən?" ɪɾɝɑldi æskt, dʒɔɪnɪŋ ðə tʃɹeɪɾɝ əz ðeɪ ɹɪtɝn tə ðə stɛɹz.

"You disagree with my accusation?" Ituralde asked, joining the traitor as they returned to the stairs.

"aɪ ɑnəsli kæn dɪsaɪɾ ɪf hiz ə ful əɹ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd," joʊli sɛd. "hiɾ əv tə bi wʌn əɹ ði ʌðɝ tə nɑt pʊt təɡɛðɝ ðə tʃɹuθ fɹəm ðə wɪntɝ, ðoʊz klaʊdz ən ðə ɹumɝz ðəɾ ælθɹ əz kɑŋkɝd hæf ðə wɝld."

"I honestly can't decide if he's a fool or a Darkfriend," Yoeli said. "He'd have to be one or the other to not put together the truth from the winter, those clouds and the rumors that al'Thor has conquered half the world."

"ðɛn juv nʌθɪŋ tə fɪɹ," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd. "ju woʊn bi ɛksəkjuɾəd.

"Then you have nothing to fear," Ituralde said. "You won't be executed.

"aɪ kɪl maɪ kʌntʃɹimɪn," joʊli sɛd, "steɪdʒd ə ɹɪvoʊlt əɡɛns maɪ kwinz əpɔɪntəd liɾɝ, ən siz kəmæn ə ðə sɪɾi, ðoʊ aɪv nɑɾ ə dʒɹɑp ə noʊbəl blʌd."

"I killed my countrymen," Yoeli said, "staged a revolt against my Queen's appointed leader, and seized command of the city, though I've not a drop of noble blood."

"ðæɾəl tʃeɪnʒ ðə moʊmən tɛnoʊbiə ɹɪtɝnz, aɪ wɔɹənt," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd. "juv ɝn jɝsɛlf ə taɪɾəl fəɹ sɝɾən."

"That'll change the moment Tenobia returns, I warrant," Ituralde said. "You've earned yourself a title for certain."

joʊli stɑpt ɪn ðə dɑɹk stɛɹwɛl, lɪɾ oʊnli fɹəm əbʌv ən bɪloʊ. "aɪ si ðət jə də nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. aɪ hæv bɪtʃɹeɪd maɪ oʊðz ən kɪl fɹɛnz. əl dɪmæn ɛksəkjuʃən, əz ɪz maɪ ɹaɪt."

Yoeli stopped in the dark stairwell, lit only from above and below. "I see that you do not understand. I have betrayed my oaths and killed friends. I will demand execution, as is my right."

ɪɾɝɑldi fɛlt ə tʃɪl. blʌɾi bɔɹɾɝləndɝz, hi θɔt. "swɛɹ jɝsɛlf tə ðə dʒɹæɡən. hi supɝsidz ɔl oʊðz. də nɑt weɪs jəɹ laɪf. faɪt bɪsaɪd mi ət ðə læs bæɾəl."

Ituralde felt a chill. Bloody Borderlanders, he thought. "Swear yourself to the Dragon. He supersedes all oaths. Do not waste your life. Fight beside me at the Last Battle."

"aɪ wɪl nɑt haɪd bɪhaɪn ɪkskjusɪz, lɔɹɾ ɪɾɝɑldi," ðə mæn sɛd, kəntɪnjuɪŋ daʊn ðə stɛps. "noʊ mɔɹ ðən aɪ kəd wɑtʃ jəɹ mɛn daɪ. kʌm. lɛɾ əs si tə ðə haʊzɪŋ ə ðoʊz æʃəmən. aɪ wəd laɪk vɛɹi mʌtʃ tə si ðiz ɡeɪtweɪz' jə spik ʌv. ɪf wi kəd juz əm tə sɛn mɛsədʒəz aʊɾ ən bɹɪŋ səplaɪz ɪn, ðɪs kəd bi ə vɛɹi ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ sidʒ ɪndid."

"I will not hide behind excuses, Lord Ituralde," the man said, continuing down the steps. "No more than I could watch your men die. Come. Let us see to the housing of those Asha'man. I would like very much to see these gateways' you speak of. If we could use them to send messages out and bring supplies in, this could be a very interesting siege indeed."

ɪɾɝɑldi saɪd, bʌt fɑloʊd. ðeɪ dɪdn spik ə fliɪŋ baɪ weɪ ʌv ðə ɡeɪtweɪz. joʊli wʊdn əbændən ɪz sɪɾi. ænd, hi ɹilaɪzd, ɪɾɝɑldi wʊdn əbændən joʊli ən ɪz mɛn. nɑɾ æftɝ wʌt ðeɪd ɡɔn θɹu tə ɹɛskju hɪm.

Ituralde sighed, but followed. They didn't speak of fleeing by way of the gateways. Yoeli wouldn't abandon his city. And, he realized, Ituralde wouldn't abandon Yoeli and his men. Not after what they'd gone through to rescue him.

ðɪs wɑz əz ɡʊɾ ə pleɪs əz ɛni tə meɪk ə stænd. bɛɾɝ ðən mɛni ə sɪtʃueɪʃən hid bɪn ɪn leɪtli, ðət wɑz fəɹ sɝɾən.

This was as good a place as any to make a stand. Better than many a situation he'd been in lately, that was for certain.

pɛɹɪn ɛntɝd ðɛɹ tɛn tə faɪn feɪl bɹʌʃɪŋ əɹ hɛɹ. ʃi wɑz bjuɾəfəl. itʃ deɪ, hi stɪl fɛlt ə sɛns ʌv wʌndɝ ðət ʃi wɑz ɹɪli bæk.

Perrin entered their tent to find Faile brushing her hair. She was beautiful. Each day, he still felt a sense of wonder that she was really back.

ʃi tɝn tə hɪm ən smaɪld ɪn sæɾəsfækʃən. ʃi wɑz juzɪŋ ðə nu sɪlvɝ koʊm hid lɛft ɑn əɹ pɪloʊ - sʌmθɪŋ hid tʃɹeɪɾɪd fəɹ fɹəm ɡɔl, hu hæd faʊn ɪɾ ɪn meɪɾən. ɪf ðɪs ʃænəhɑɹ wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə hɝ, ðən pɛɹɪn ɪntɛndəd tə tʃɹiɾ ɪt ðə seɪm weɪ.

She turned to him and smiled in satisfaction. She was using the new silver comb he'd left on her pillow - something he'd traded for from Gaul, who had found it in Maiden. If this shanna'har was important to her, then Perrin intended to treat it the same way.

"ðə mɛsənʒɝz əv ɹɪtɝnd," pɛɹɪn sɛd, kloʊzɪŋ ðə flæps tə ðə tɛnt. "ðə waɪtkloʊks əv tʃoʊzən ə bæɾəlfild. laɪt, feɪl. ðəɹ gɑnə fɔɹs mi tə waɪp əm aʊt."

"The messengers have returned," Perrin said, closing the flaps to the tent. "The Whitecloaks have chosen a battlefield. Light, Faile. They're going to force me to wipe them out."

"aɪ doʊn si ðə tʃɹʌbəl wɪð ðæt," ʃi sɛd. "wil wɪn."

"I don't see the trouble with that," she said. "We'll win."

pɹɑbli," pɛɹɪn sɛd, sɪɾɪŋ daʊn ɑn ðə pɪloʊz bɪsaɪd ðɛɹ slip- ɪŋ pælət. "bʌt dɪspaɪt ði æʃəmən duɪŋ moʊst ə ðə wɝk ət fɝst, wɪl əv tə muv ɪn tə faɪt. ðət minz wɪl luz pipəl. ɡʊd mɛn wi niɾ ət ðə læs bæɾəl." hi fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə ɹɪlæks ðə fɪsts ðət hid klɛntʃt.

Probably," Perrin said, sitting down on the pillows beside their sleep- ing pallet. "But despite the Asha'man doing most of the work at first, we'll have to move in to fight. That means we'll lose people. Good men we need at the Last Battle." He forced himself to relax the fists that he'd clenched.

"ðə laɪt bɝn ðoʊz waɪtkloʊks fəɹ wʌt ðeɪv dʌn, ən fəɹ wʌt ðəɹ duɪŋ."

"The Light burn those Whitecloaks for what they've done, and for what they're doing."

"ðɛn ɪts ə wɛlkəm ɑpɝtunəɾi tə dɪfit ðɛm."

"Then it's a welcome opportunity to defeat them."

pɛɹɪn ɡɹʌntɪɾ ə ɹɪplaɪ, ən dɪdn ɪkspleɪn ðə dɛpθ ə fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən i fɛlt. hi wəd luz ðət faɪɾ əɡɛns ðə waɪtkloʊks, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt hæpənd. mɛn wəd daɪ ɑn boʊθ saɪdz. mɛn ðeɪ niɾəd.

Perrin grunted a reply, and didn't explain the depth of frustration he felt. He would lose that fight against the Whitecloaks, no matter what happened. Men would die on both sides. Men they needed.

ðə laɪtnɪŋ flæʃt aʊtsaɪd, kæstɪŋ ʃædoʊz ɑn ðə kænvəs sil-ɪŋ. feɪl wɛn oʊvɝ tə ðɛɹ tʃɹʌŋk, ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə slipɪŋ ʃɪft fəɹ hɝsɛlf ən sɛɾɪŋ əsaɪɾ ə ɹoʊb fəɹ hɪm. feɪl θɔɾ ə lɔɹd ʃəɾ əv ə ɹoʊb hændi ɪn keɪs i wɑz niɾəd ət naɪt. ʃid bɪn kɝɛkt ə kʌpəl ə taɪmz soʊ fɑɹ.

The lightning flashed outside, casting shadows on the canvas ceil-ing. Faile went over to their trunk, getting out a sleeping shift for herself and setting aside a robe for him. Faile thought a lord should have a robe handy in case he was needed at night. She'd been correct a couple of times so far.

ʃi muv pæs hɪm, smɛlɪŋ wɝid, ðoʊ hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən wɑz plɛzənt. hi hæɾ ɪkspɛndɪɾ ɔl ɑpʃənz fəɹ ə pisfəl ɹɛzəluʃən wɪð ðə waɪtkloʊks. ɪt lʊk laɪk, wɑn ɪɾ əɹ nɑt, kɪlɪŋ wəd bi hɪz lɑɾ əɡɛn vɛɹi sun.

She moved past him, smelling worried, though her expression was pleasant. He had expended all options for a peaceful resolution with the Whitecloaks. It looked like, want it or not, killing would be his lot again very soon.

hi stʃɹɪp tə hɪz smɔlkloʊðz ən leɪ daʊn, ðən stɑɹɾəd dʒɹɪftɪŋ ɔf bɪfɔɹ feɪl hæd fɪnɪʃt tʃeɪnʒɪŋ.

He stripped to his smallclothes and lay down, then started drifting off before Faile had finished changing.

hi ɛntɝd ðə wʊlf dʒɹim bɪniθ ðə ɡɹeɪt sɔɹɾ ɪmpəlɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ɪn ðə dɪstəns, hi kəd meɪk aʊt ðə hɪl ðət ɡɔl hæd neɪmd ə "faɪn wɑtʃpɔɪnt." ðə kæmpsaɪt wɑz səplaɪd fɹəm bɪhaɪn baɪ ə stʃɹim.

He entered the wolf dream beneath the great sword impaling the ground. In the distance, he could make out the hill that Gaul had named a "fine watchpoint." The campsite was supplied from behind by a stream.

pɛɹɪn tɝn ən spɛd təwɔɹd ðə waɪtkloʊk kæmp. ðeɪ sæt laɪk ə dæm ɪn ə ɹɪvɝ, stɑpɪŋ ɪm fɹəm kəntɪnjuɪŋ ɔnwɝd.

Perrin turned and sped toward the Whitecloak camp. They sat like a dam in a river, stopping him from continuing onward.

"hɑpɝ?" hi kɔld, lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə waɪtkloʊk kæmp, stɪl tɛns stændɪŋ ɑn ən oʊpən fild.

"Hopper?" he called, looking around the Whitecloak camp, still tents standing on an open field.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹɪspɑns, soʊ pɛɹɪn sɝtʃt ðə kæmp ə waɪl lɔŋɡɝ. beɪlwɝ hæd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə sil pɛɹɪn hæd dɪskɹaɪbd. hu lɛd ðiz waɪtkloʊks?

There was no response, so Perrin searched the camp a while longer. Balwer had not recognized the seal Perrin had described. Who led these Whitecloaks?

ən aʊɝ əɹ soʊ leɪɾɝ, pɛɹɪn hæd kʌm tə noʊ kənkluʒən əbaʊt ðæt. haʊɛvɝ, hi wɑz fɛɹli sɝɾən wɪtʃ tɛns ðeɪ kɛp ðɛɹ səplaɪz ɪn; ðoʊz maɪt nɑt bi əz wɛl ɡɑɹɾəd əz ðə pɹɪznɝz, ən - wɪð ɡeɪtweɪz - hi maɪt bi eɪbəl tə bɝn ðɛɹ səplaɪz.

An hour or so later, Perrin had come to no conclusion about that. However, he was fairly certain which tents they kept their supplies in; those might not be as well guarded as the prisoners, and - with gateways - he might be able to burn their supplies.

meɪbi. ðɛɹ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝz lɛɾɝz wɝ fɪld wɪð fɹeɪzəz laɪk: "aɪ æm ɡɪvɪŋ jəɹ pipəl ðə bɛnəfɪɾ ə bɪlivɪŋ ðeɪ nu nɑɾ ə jəɹ neɪtʃɝ" ən "maɪ peɪʃəns fəɹ jəɹ dɪleɪz wɛɹz θɪn" ən "ðɛɹ ɑɹ oʊnli tu ɑpʃənz. sɝɛndɝ jɝsɛlf fəɹ pɹɑpɝ tʃɹaɪəl, əɹ bɹɪŋ jəɹ ɑɹmi tə sʌfɝ ðə laɪts dʒʌdʒmənt."

Maybe. Their Lord Captain Commander's letters were filled with phrases like: "I am giving your people the benefit of believing they knew not of your nature" and "My patience for your delays wears thin" and "There are only two options. Surrender yourself for proper trial, or bring your army to suffer the Light's judgment."

ðəɹ wɑz ə stʃɹeɪnʒ sɛns ʌv ɑnɝ tə ðɪs mæn, wʌn pɛɹɪn hæd sin hɪntəɾ ət wən hid mɛt ðə mæn, bʌt kəd sɛns ivən mɔɹ θɹu ðə lɛɾɝz. bʌɾ u wɑz hi? hi saɪn itʃ lɛɾɝ oʊnli "lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt."

There was a strange sense of honor to this man, one Perrin had seen hinted at when he'd met the man, but could sense even more through the letters. But who was he? He signed each letter only "Lord Captain Commander of the Children of the Light."

pɛɹɪn muvd aʊɾ ɑntu ðə ɹoʊdweɪ. wɛɹ wɑz hɑpɝ? pɛɹɪn tʊk ɔf əɾ ə bɹɪsk ɹʌn. æftɝ ə fju moʊməns, hi muvd ɔf ɑntu ðə ɡɹæs. ði ɝθ wɑz soʊ sɑft, itʃ stɛp sim tə spɹɪŋ ɪz fʊt bæk ʌp ɪndə ði ɛɹ. hi ɹitʃt aʊɾ ən θɔɾ i sɛnst sʌmθɪŋ tə ðə saʊθ. hi ɹæn təwɔɹɾ ɪt; hi wɪʃt tə ɡoʊ fæstɝ, soʊ hi dɪd. tʃɹiz ən hɪlz zɪpt pæst. ðə wʊlvz wɝ əwɛɹ ə hɪm. ɪt wɑz oʊk dænsɝz pæk, wɪð baʊnləs, spɑɹks, mɔɹnɪŋɡlaɪt, ən ʌðɝz. pɛɹɪn kəd fil əm sɛndɪŋ tə wʌn ənʌðɝ, dɪstənt wɪspɝz ʌv ɪmədʒəz ən sɛnt. pɛɹɪn muv fæstɝ, filɪŋ ðə wɪn bɪkʌm ə ɹɔɹ ɝaʊn hɪm. ðə wʊlvz bɪɡæn tə muv əweɪ fɑɹðɝ saʊθ. weɪt! hi sɛnt. / mʌs mit wɪð ju!

Perrin moved out onto the roadway. Where was Hopper? Perrin took off at a brisk run. After a few moments, he moved off onto the grass. The earth was so soft, each step seemed to spring his foot back up into the air. He reached out and thought he sensed something to the south. He ran toward it; he wished to go faster, so he did. Trees and hills zipped past. The wolves were aware of him. It was Oak Dancer's pack, with Boundless, Sparks, Morninglight, and others. Perrin could feel them sending to one another, distant whispers of images and scent. Perrin moved faster, feeling the wind become a roar around him. The wolves began to move away farther south. Wait! he sent. / must meet with you!

ðeɪ ɹɪtɝn oʊnli əmjuzmənt. sʌɾənli, ðeɪ wɝ hɛɾɪŋ ist, ən i pʊl tə ə stɑp, ðən tɝnd. hi ɹæn əz kwɪkli əz i nu haʊ, bʌt wən i ɡɑt nɪɹ, ðeɪ wɝ sʌɾənli ɛlswɛɹ.

They returned only amusement. Suddenly, they were heading east, and he pulled to a stop, then turned. He ran as quickly as he knew how, but when he got near, they were suddenly elsewhere.

ðeɪd ʃɪftəd, vænɪʃɪŋ fɹəm ðə saʊθ ən əpɪɹɪŋ nɔɹθ ə hɪm.

They'd shifted, vanishing from the south and appearing north of him.

pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld, ən sʌɾənli hi wɑz ɑn ɔl fɔɹz. hɪz fɝ blu, hɪz maʊθ oʊpən əz i dæʃt tə ðə nɔɹθ, dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ɪn ðə hɪsɪŋ wɪnd. bʌt ðə wʊlvz steɪɾ əhɛd, dɪstənt.

Perrin growled, and suddenly he was on all fours. His fur blew, his mouth open as he dashed to the north, drinking in the hissing wind. But the wolves stayed ahead, distant.

hi haʊld. ðeɪ sɛn bæk tɔns.

He howled. They sent back taunts.

hi pʊʃt hɪmsɛlf fæstɝ, lipɪŋ fɹəm hɪltɑp tə hɪltɑp, baʊndɪŋ oʊvɝ tʃɹiz, ðə ɡɹaʊn ə blɝ. ɪn moʊməns, ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst spɹæŋ ʌp tə hɪz lɛft, ən i pæst əlɔŋ əm ɪn ə ɹʌʃ.

He pushed himself faster, leaping from hilltop to hilltop, bounding over trees, the ground a blur. In moments, the Mountains of Mist sprang up to his left, and he passed along them in a rush.

ðə wʊlvz tɝn ist. waɪ kʊdn i kætʃ ðɛm? hi kəd smɛl əm əhɛd. jʌŋ bʊl haʊld ət ðɛm, bʌt ɡɑt noʊ ɹɪspɑns.

The wolves turned east. Why couldn't he catch them? He could smell them ahead. Young Bull howled at them, but got no response.

də nɑt kʌm tu stʃɹɔŋli, jʌŋ bʊl.

Do not come too strongly, Young Bull.

jʌŋ bʊl pʊl tə ə hɔlt ən ðə wɝld lɝtʃt ɝaʊn hɪm. ðə meɪn pæk kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn tə ði ist, bʌt hɑpɝ sæɾ ɑn ɪz hɔntʃɪz bɪsaɪɾ ə lɑɹdʒ kɝvɪŋ stʃɹim. jʌŋ bʊl hæd bɪn hɪɹ bɪfɔɹ;

Young Bull pulled to a halt and the world lurched around him. The main pack continued on to the east, but Hopper sat on his haunches beside a large curving stream. Young Bull had been here before;

ɪt wɑz nɪɹ ðə dɛn ə hɪz saɪɹz. hi hæd tʃɹævəld əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪvɝ ɪtsɛlf ɑn ðə bæk ʌv wʌn ə ðə hjumənz' floʊɾɪŋ tʃɹiz. hi -  noʊ. . . noʊ . . . ɹɪmɛmbɝ feɪl!

it was near the den of his sires. He had traveled along the river itself on the back of one of the humans' floating trees. He -  No. . . no . . . remember Faile!

hɪz fɝ bɪkeɪm kloʊðɪŋ ən i faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɑn hænz ən niz. hi ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɑpɝ. "waɪ dɪd jə ɹʌn əweɪ?" pɛɹɪn dɪmændəd.

His fur became clothing and he found himself on hands and knees. He glared at Hopper. "Why did you run away?" Perrin demanded.

jə wɪʃ tə lɝn, hɑpɝ sɛnt. jə ɡɹoʊ mɔɹ skɪld. fæstɝ. jə stʃɹɛtʃ jəɹ lɛɡz ən ɹʌn.

You wish to learn, Hopper sent. You grow more skilled. Faster. You stretch your legs and run.

ðɪs ɪz ɡʊd.

This is good.

pɛɹɪn lʊk bæk ðə weɪ hi hæd kʌm, θɪŋkɪŋ ə hɪz spid. hid baʊndəd fɹəm hɪltɑp tə hɪltɑp. ɪt hæd bɪn wʌndɝfəl. "bʌɾ aɪ hæd tə bɪkʌm ðə wʊlf tə də ðæt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "æn ðət θɹɛɾənd tə meɪk mi hɪɹ 'tu stʃɹɔŋli. wʌt jus ɪz tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɪf ɪt meɪks mi də θɪŋz juv fɔɹbɪɾən?"

Perrin looked back the way he had come, thinking of his speed. He'd bounded from hilltop to hilltop. It had been wonderful. "But I had to become the wolf to do that," Perrin said. "And that threatened to make me here 'too strongly. What use is training if it makes me do things you've forbidden?"

jə ɑɹ kwɪk tə bleɪm, jʌŋ bʊl. ə jʌŋ wʊlf haʊlɪŋ ən jæpɪŋ aʊtsaɪd ðə dɛn, meɪkɪŋ ə ɹækɪt. ðɪs ɪz nɑɾ ə θɪŋ ʌv wʊlvz.

You are quick to blame, Young Bull. A young wolf howling and yapping outside the den, making a racket. This is not a thing of wolves.

hɑpɝ wɑz ɡɔn ɪn ən aɪɛblɪŋk.

Hopper was gone in an eyeblink.

pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld, lʊkɪŋ istwɝd, wɛɹ i sɛns ðə wʊlvz. hi tʊk ɔf æftɝ ðɛm, ɡoʊɪŋ mɔɹ kɔʃəsli. hi kʊdn əfɔɹd tə lɛt ðə wʊlf kənsum hɪm. hiɾ ɛn ʌp laɪk noʊm, tʃɹæpt ɪn ə keɪdʒ, hɪz hjumænɪɾi ɡɔn. waɪ wəd hɑpɝ ɛnkɝɪdʒ ɪm tə ðæt?

Perrin growled, looking eastward, where he sensed the wolves. He took off after them, going more cautiously. He couldn't afford to let the wolf consume him. He'd end up like Noam, trapped in a cage, his humanity gone. Why would Hopper encourage him to that?

ðɪs ɪz nɑɾ ə θɪŋ ʌv wʊlvz. hæɾ i mɛn ði ækjəzeɪʃənz, əɹ hæɾ i mɛnt wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ tə pɛɹɪn?

This is not a thing of wolves. Had he meant the accusations, or had he meant what was happening to Perrin?

ði ʌðɝz ɔl nu tə ɛn ðə hʌnt, jʌŋ bʊl, hɑpɝ sɛn fɹəm ə dɪs-tæns. oʊnli jə hæd tə bi stɑpt.

The others all knew to end the hunt, Young Bull, Hopper sent from a dis-tance. Only you had to be stopped.

pɛɹɪn fɹoʊz, pʊlɪŋ tə ə hɔlt ɑn ðə bæŋk ə ðə ɹɪvɝ. ðə hʌn fəɹ ðə waɪt stæɡ. hɑpɝ wɑz ðɛɹ, sʌɾənli, bɪsaɪd ðə ɹɪvɝ wɪð hɪm.

Perrin froze, pulling to a halt on the bank of the river. The hunt for the white stag. Hopper was there, suddenly, beside the river with him.

"ðɪs stɑɹɾəd wən aɪ bɪɡæn tə sɛns ðə wʊlvz," pɛɹɪn sɛnt. "ðə fɝs taɪm aɪ lɔs kəntʃɹoʊl ə maɪsɛlf wɑz wɪð ðoʊz waɪtkloʊks."

"This started when I began to sense the wolves," Perrin sent. "The first time I lost control of myself was with those Whitecloaks."

hɑpɝ leɪ daʊn, ɹɛstɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ɑn ɪz pɔz. jə ɔfən ɑɹ hɪɹ tu stʃɹɔŋli, ðə wʊlf sɛnt. // ɪz wʌt jə du.

Hopper lay down, resting his head on his paws. You often are here too strongly, the wolf sent. // is what you do.

hɑpɝ hæd toʊld ɪm ðæt, ɔf ən ɑn, sɪns hid noʊn ðə wʊlf ən ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. bʌt sʌɾənli, pɛɹɪn sɔ ə nu minɪŋ tə ɪt. ɪt wɑz əbaʊt kʌmɪŋ tə ðə wʊlf dʒɹim, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔlsoʊ əbaʊt pɛɹɪn hɪmsɛlf.

Hopper had told him that, off and on, since he'd known the wolf and the wolf dream. But suddenly, Perrin saw a new meaning to it. It was about coming to the wolf dream, but it was also about Perrin himself.

hid bɪɡʌn tə bleɪm ðə wʊlvz fəɹ wʌɾ i dɪd, ðə weɪ hi wɑz wən faɪɾɪŋ, ðə weɪ hid bɪkʌm wən sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ feɪl. bʌt wɝ ðə wʊlvz ðə kɑz ə ðæt? əɹ wɑz ɪt səm pɑɹɾ ə hɪm?

He'd begun to blame the wolves for what he did, the way he was when fighting, the way he'd become when searching for Faile. But were the wolves the cause of that? Or was it some part of him?

wɑz ɪt pɑsəbəl ðət ðət wɑz wʌt kɑzd ɪm tə bɪkʌm ə wʊlfbɹəðɝ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs?

Was it possible that that was what caused him to become a wolfbrother in the first place?

"ɪz ɪt pɑsəbəl," pɛɹɪn sɛd, "tə ɹʌn ɑn fɔɹ lɛɡz, bʌt nɑt kʌm hɪɹ tu stʃɹɔŋli?"

"Is it possible," Perrin said, "to run on four legs, but not come here too strongly?"

ʌv kɔɹs ɪɾ ɪz, hɑpɝ sɛnt, læfɪŋ æftɝ ðə weɪ ʌv wʊlvz - əz ɪf wʌt pɛɹɪn hæd dɪskʌvɝd wɑz ðə moʊst ɑbviəs θɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝld. meɪbi ɪt wɑz.

Of course it is, Hopper sent, laughing after the way of wolves - as if what Perrin had discovered was the most obvious thing in the world. Maybe it was.

pɝhæps i wɑzn laɪk ðə wʊlvz kəz i wɑz ə wʊlfbɹəðɝ. pɝhæps i wɑz ə wʊlfbɹəðɝ kəz i wɑz laɪk ðə wʊlvz. hi dɪdnt nid tə kəntʃɹoʊl ðɛm. hi niɾəd tə kəntʃɹoʊl hɪmsɛlf.

Perhaps he wasn't like the wolves because he was a wolfbrother. Perhaps he was a wolfbrother because he was like the wolves. He didn't need to control them. He needed to control himself.

"ðə pæk," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "haʊ də aɪ kætʃ ðɛm? muv mɔɹ kwɪkli?

"The pack," Perrin said. "How do I catch them? Move more quickly?

ðəɾ ɪz wʌn weɪ. ənʌðɝ ɪz tə bi wɛɹ jə wɑnt.

That is one way. Another is to be where you want.

pɛɹɪn fɹaʊnd. ðən i kloʊzd ɪz aɪz ən juz ðə dɝɛkʃən ðə wʊlvz wɝ ɹʌnɪŋ tə ɡɛs wɛɹ ðeɪ wəd bi. sʌmθɪŋ ʃɪftəd.

Perrin frowned. Then he closed his eyes and used the direction the wolves were running to guess where they would be. Something shifted.

wən i oʊpən ɪz aɪz, hi wɑz stændɪŋ ɑn ə sændi hɪlsaɪd, tʌfs ə lɔŋ-bleɪɾɪd ɡɹæs pikɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə sɔɪl. ən ɪnɔɹməs maʊntən wɪð ə bɹoʊkən tɪp - ʃæɾɝd əz ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn slæp baɪ ðə hæn ʌv ə dʒaɪənt- -  ɹoʊz tə hɪz ɹaɪt.

When he opened his eyes, he was standing on a sandy hillside, tufts of long-bladed grass peeking out of the soil. An enormous mountain with a broken tip - shattered as if it had been slapped by the hand of a giant- -  rose to his right.

ə pæk ʌv wʊlvz bɝst aʊɾ ə ðə fɔɹəst. mɛni ʌv əm wɝ læfɪŋ-jʌŋ bʊl, hʌntɪŋ wən i ʃəd sik ði ɛnd! jʌŋ bʊl, sikɪŋ ði ɛnd wən i ʃəɾ ɛndʒɔɪ ðə hʌnt! hi smaɪld, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fil ɡʊd kæptʃɝɾ əbaʊt ðə læftɝ, ðoʊ ɪn tʃɹuθ i fɛl mʌtʃ əz i hæɾ ɑn ðə deɪ ðəɾ ɪz kʌzən wɪl hæd plæntəɾ ə bʌkəɾ ʌv wɛt fɛðɝz tə dʒɹɑp ɑn pɛɹɪn.

A pack of wolves burst out of the forest. Many of them were laughing-Young Bull, hunting when he should seek the end! Young Bull, seeking the end when he should enjoy the hunt! He smiled, trying to feel good captured about the laughter, though in truth he felt much as he had on the day that his cousin Wil had planted a bucket of wet feathers to drop on Perrin.

sʌmθɪŋ flʌɾɝd ɪn ði ɛɹ. ə tʃɪkən fɛðɝ. wɛɾ ɝaʊn ði ɛdʒəz.

Something fluttered in the air. A chicken feather. Wet around the edges.

pɛɹɪn stɑɹɾəd, ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðət ðeɪ wɝ spɹɛɾ ɝaʊn ɪm ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. əz i blɪŋkt, ðeɪ vænɪʃt. ðə wʊlvz smɛld ɡɹeɪtli əmjuzd, sɛndɪŋ aɪm- eɪdʒəz ə jʌŋ bʊl dʌstɪd wɪð fɛðɝz.

Perrin started, realizing that they were spread around him on the ground. As he blinked, they vanished. The wolves smelled greatly amused, sending im- ages of Young Bull dusted with feathers.

ɡɛt lɔst ɪn dʒɹimz hɪɹ, jʌŋ bʊl, hɑpɝ sɛnt, ən ðoʊz dʒɹimz bɪkʌm ðɪs dʒɹim.

Get lost in dreams here, Young Bull, Hopper sent, and those dreams become this dream.

pɛɹɪn skɹætʃt ɪz bɪɹd, faɪɾɪŋ daʊn ɪz ɪmbɛɹəsmənt. hiɾ ɪkspɪɹiəns bɪfɔɹ ði ʌnpɹɪdɪktəbəl neɪtʃɝ ə ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. "hɑpɝ," hi sɛd, tɝnɪŋ tə ðə wʊlf. "haʊ mʌtʃ kəɾ aɪ tʃeɪnʒ əbaʊt maɪ sɝaʊndɪŋz, ɪf aɪ wɑntəd?"

Perrin scratched his beard, fighting down his embarrassment. He'd experienced before the unpredictable nature of the wolf dream. "Hopper," he said, turning to the wolf. "How much could I change about my surroundings, if I wanted?"

ɪf jə wɑntəd? hɑpɝ sɛd. ɪts nɑɾ əbaʊt wʌt jə wɑnt, jʌŋ bʊl. ɪts əbaʊt wʌt jə nid.

If you wanted? Hopper said. It's not about what you want, Young Bull. It's about what you need.

wʌt jə noʊ.

What you know.

pɛɹɪn fɹaʊnd. səmtaɪmz ðə wʊlfs minɪŋz stɪl kənfjuz hɪm.

Perrin frowned. Sometimes the wolf's meanings still confused him.

sʌɾənli, ði ʌðɝ wʊlvz ɪn ðə ɡɹup tɝnd - əz ɪf wʌn - ən lʊk tə ðə saʊθwɛst. ðeɪ vænɪʃt.

Suddenly, the other wolves in the group turned - as if one - and looked to the southwest. They vanished.

ðeɪ wɛn hɪɹ. hɑpɝ sɛn ən ɪmədʒ ʌv ə dɪstənt wʊɾɪd hɑloʊ. ðə wʊlf pɹipɛɹd tə fɑloʊ.

They went here. Hopper sent an image of a distant wooded hollow. The wolf prepared to follow.

"hɑpɝ!" pɛɹɪn sɛd, stɛpɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. "haʊ dɪd jə noʊ? wɛɹ ðeɪ wɛnt? dɪd ðeɪ tɛl ju?"

"Hopper!" Perrin said, stepping forward. "How did you know? Where they went? Did they tell you?"

noʊ. bʌɾ aɪ kən fɑloʊ.

No. But I can follow.

"haʊ?" pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"How?" Perrin said.

ɪts ə θɪŋ aɪv ɔlweɪz noʊn, hɑpɝ sɛnt. laɪk wɔkɪŋ. əɹ dʒʌmpɪŋ.

It is a thing I've always known, Hopper sent. Like walking. Or jumping.

"jɛs, bʌt haʊ?"

"Yes, but how?"

ðə wʊlf smɛl kənfjuzd. ɪts ə sɛnt, hi faɪnəli ɹɪplaɪd, ðoʊ sɛnt" wɑz mʌtʃ mɔɹ kɑmplɛks ðən ðæt. ɪt wɑz ə filɪŋ, ən ɪmpɹɛʃən, ən ə smɛl ɔl ɪn wʌn.

The wolf smelled confused. It is a scent, he finally replied, though scent" was much more complex than that. It was a feeling, an impression, and a smell all in one.

"ɡoʊ sʌmwɛɹ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "lɛt mi tʃɹaɪ tə fɑloʊ."

"Go somewhere," Perrin said. "Let me try to follow."

hɑpɝ vænɪʃt. pɛɹɪn wɔkt ʌp tə wɛɹ ðə wʊlf hæd bɪn.

Hopper vanished. Perrin walked up to where the wolf had been.

smɛl ɪt, hɑpɝ sɛn dɪstənli. hi wɑz nɪɹ ɪnʌf tə ɡɪv ə sɛndɪŋ, baɪ ɹiflɛks, pɛɹɪn ɹitʃt aʊt. hi faʊn dʌzənz ʌv wʊlvz. ɪn fækt, hi wɑz əmeɪz baɪ haʊ mɛni ʌv əm wɝ hɪɹ, ɑn ðə sloʊps ə dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt. pɛɹɪn hæd nɛvɝ fɛl soʊ mɛni ɡæðɝɾ ɪn wʌn pleɪs bɪfɔɹ. waɪ wɝ ðeɪ hɪɹ? ən dɪd ðə skaɪ lʊk mɔɹ stɔɹmi ɪn ðɪs pleɪs ðən ɪt hæɾ ɪn ʌðɝ ɛɹiəz ə ðə wʊlf dʒɹim?

Smell it, Hopper sent distantly. He was near enough to give a sending, By reflex, Perrin reached out. He found dozens of wolves. In fact, he was amazed by how many of them were here, on the slopes of Dragonmount. Perrin had never felt so many gathered in one place before. Why were they here? And did the sky look more stormy in this place than it had in other areas of the wolf dream?

hi kʊdn sɛns hɑpɝ; ðə wʊlf hæd kloʊz hɪmsɛlf ɔf, sʌmhaʊ, meɪkɪŋ pɛɹɪn əneɪbəl tə pleɪs wɛɹ i wɑz. pɛɹɪn sɛɾəld daʊn. smɛl ɪt, hɑpɝ hæd sɛnt. smɛl ɪt haʊ? pɛɹɪn kloʊzd ɪz aɪz ən lɛɾ ɪz noʊz kætʃɹi ðə sɛns ə ði ɛɹiə tə hɪm. paɪn koʊnz ən sæp, kwɪlz ən livz, lɛðɝ-lif ən hɛmlɑk.

He couldn't sense Hopper; the wolf had closed himself off, somehow, making Perrin unable to place where he was. Perrin settled down. Smell it, Hopper had sent. Smell it how? Perrin closed his eyes and let his nose catry the scents of the area to him. Pine cones and sap, quills and leaves, leather-leaf and hemlock.

ən . . . sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. jɛs, hi kəd smɛl sʌmθɪŋ. ə dɪstənt, lɪn-ɡɪɹɪŋ sɛn ðət simd aʊɾ ə pleɪs. mɛni ʌv ðə sɛns wɝ ðə seɪm-ðə seɪm fɛkən sɛns ə neɪtʃɝ, ðə seɪm wɛlθ ə tʃɹiz.

And . . . something else. Yes, he could smell something. A distant, lin-gering scent that seemed out of place. Many of the scents were the same-the same fecund sense of nature, the same wealth of trees.

bʌt ðoʊz wɝ mɪkst wɪð ðə sɛns ə mɔs ən ʌv wɛt stoʊn. ði ɛɹ wɑz dɪfɹənt. pɔl-lɛn ən flaʊɝz.

But those were mixed with the scents of moss and of wet stone. The air was different. Pol-len and flowers.

pɛɹɪn skwizd ɪz aɪz taɪt, bɹiðɪŋ ɪn dipli. sʌmhaʊ, hi bɪlt ə pɪktʃɝ ɪn ɪz maɪn fɹəm ðoʊz sɛns. ðə pɹɑsɛs wɑz nɑɾ ənlaɪk ðə weɪ ə wʊlf sɛndɪŋ tʃɹænzleɪɾəd ɪndə wɝdz.

Perrin squeezed his eyes tight, breathing in deeply. Somehow, he built a picture in his mind from those scents. The process was not unlike the way a wolf sending translated into words.

ðɛɹ, hi θɔt. sʌmθɪŋ ʃɪftəd.

There, he thought. Something shifted.

hi oʊpən ɪz aɪz. hi wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ə stoʊn aʊtkɹɑpɪŋ əmɪd paɪnz; hi wɑz ɑn ðə saɪɾ ə dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt, sɛvɹəl aʊɝz' haɪk ʌp fɹəm wɛɹ i hæd bɪn. ðə stoʊn aʊtkɹɑpɪŋ wɑz kʌvɝɾ ɪn laɪkən, ən ɪt dʒʌɾɪd aʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə tʃɹiz spɹɛɾɪŋ bɪloʊ. ə pætʃ ə vaɪəlɪt spɹɪŋbɹθ ɡɹu hɪɹ, wɛɹ sʌnlaɪt kəd ɹitʃ ðə blɑsəmz. ɪt wɑz ɡʊd tə si flaʊɝz ðət wɝnt wɪltɪɾ əɹ daɪɪŋ, ɪf oʊnli ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim.

He opened his eyes. He was sitting on a stone outcropping amid pines; he was on the side of Dragonmount, several hours' hike up from where he had been. The stone outcropping was covered in lichen, and it jutted out over the trees spreading below. A patch of violet springbreath grew here, where sunlight could reach the blossoms. It was good to see flowers that weren't wilted or dying, if only in the wolf dream.

kʌm, hɑpɝ sɛnt. fɑloʊ.

Come, Hopper sent. Follow.

ən i wɑz ɡɔn.

And he was gone.

pɛɹɪn kloʊzd ɪz aɪz, bɹiðɪŋ ɪn. ðə pɹɑsɛs wɑz iziɝ ðɪs taɪm. oʊk ən ɡɹæs, mʌɾ ən hjumɪɾəti. ɪt simd itʃ pleɪs hæɾ ɪts oʊn spəsɪfɪk sɛnt.

Perrin closed his eyes, breathing in. The process was easier this time. Oak and grass, mud and humidity. It seemed each place had its own specific scent.

pɛɹɪn ʃɪftəd, ðən oʊpən ɪz aɪz. hi kɹaʊtʃt ɪn ə fil nɪɹ ðə dʒi-hænə ɹoʊd. ðɪs wɑz wɛɹ oʊk dænsɝz pæk hæd ɡɔn ɝliɝ, ən hɑpɝ muvd əbaʊt ðə mɛdoʊ, smɛlɪŋ kjʊɹiəs.

Perrin shifted, then opened his eyes. He crouched in a field near the Je-hannah Road. This was where Oak Dancer's pack had gone earlier, and Hopper moved about the meadow, smelling curious.

ðə pæk hæd muvd ɑn, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ stɪl kloʊz.

The pack had moved on, but they were still close.

"kæn aɪ ɔlweɪz də ðæt?" pɛɹɪn æsk hɑpɝ. "smɛl wɛɹ ə wʊlf wɛn ɪn ðə dʒɹim?"

"Can I always do that?" Perrin asked Hopper. "Smell where a wolf went in the dream?"

ɛniwʌn kæn, hɑpɝ sɛd. ɪf ðeɪ kən smɛl əz ə wʊlf dʌz. hi ɡɹɪnd.

Anyone can, Hopper said. If they can smell as a wolf does. He grinned.

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd θɔtfəli.

Perrin nodded thoughtfully.

hɑpɝ loʊp bæk əkɹɔs ðə mɛdoʊ təwɔɹd hɪm. wi mʌs pɹæktəs, jʌŋ bʊl jə ɑɹ stɪl ə kʌb wɪð ʃɔɹt lɛɡz ən sɑft fɝ. wi -  hɑpɝ fɹoʊz sʌɾənli.

Hopper loped back across the meadow toward him. We must practice, Young Bull You are still a cub with short legs and soft fur. We -  Hopper froze suddenly.

"wʌt?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"What?" Perrin asked.

ə wʊlf sʌɾənli haʊld ɪn peɪn. pɛɹɪn spʌn. ɪt wɑz mɔɹnɪŋɡlaɪt. ðə haʊl kʌɾ ɔf, ən ðə wʊlfs maɪnd wɪŋkt aʊt, vænɪʃɪŋ.

A wolf suddenly howled in pain. Perrin spun. It was Morninglight. The howl cut off, and the wolf's mind winked out, vanishing.

hɑpɝ ɡɹaʊld, hɪz sɛns pænɪkt, æŋɡɹi, ən sɑɹoʊfəl.

Hopper growled, his scents panicked, angry, and sorrowful.

"wʌt wɑz ðæt?" pɛɹɪn dɪmændəd.

"What was that?" Perrin demanded.

wəɹ hʌntəd. ɡoʊ, jʌŋ bʊl! wi mʌst ɡoʊ.

We are hunted. Go, Young Bull! We must go.

ðə maɪnz ə ði ʌðɝ mɛmbɝz ə ðə pæk lɛpt əweɪ. pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld. wən ə wʊlf daɪɾ ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim, ɪt wɑz fɝɛvɝ. noʊ ɹibɝθ, noʊ ɹʌnɪŋ wɪð noʊz tə ðə wɪnd. oʊnli wʌn θɪŋ hʌntəd ðə spɪɹəts ə ðə wʊlvz. sleɪɝ.

The minds of the other members of the pack leaped away. Perrin growled. When a wolf died in the wolf dream, it was forever. No rebirth, no running with nose to the wind. Only one thing hunted the spirits of the wolves. Slayer.

jʌŋ bʊl! hɑpɝ sɛnt. wi mʌst ɡoʊ!

Young Bull! Hopper sent. We must go!

pɛɹɪn kəntɪnjud tə ɡɹaʊl. mɔɹnɪŋɡlaɪt hæd sɛnt wʌn læs bɝst ə supɹaɪz ən peɪn, hɝ læs vɪʒən ə ðə wɝld. pɛɹɪn fɔɹmd ən ɪmədʒ fɹəm ðət dʒʌmbəl. ðən kloʊzd ɪz aɪz.

Perrin continued to growl. Morninglight had sent one last burst of suprise and pain, her last vision of the world. Perrin formed an image from that jumble. Then closed his eyes.

jʌŋ bʊl! noʊ! hi -  ʃɪft. pɛɹɪn snæpt ɪz aɪz oʊpən tə faɪn hɪmsɛlf ɪn ə smɔl ɡleɪd nɪɹ wɛɹ - ɪn ðə ɹil wɝld - hɪz pipəl meɪd kæmp. ə mʌskjəlɝ, tæn mæn wɪð dɑɹk hɛɹ ən blu aɪz skwɑɾɪd ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə ɡleɪd, ə wʊlfs kɔɹps əɾ ɪz fit.

Young Bull! No! He -  Shift. Perrin snapped his eyes open to find himself in a small glade near where - in the real world - his people made camp. A muscular, tanned man with dark hair and blue eyes squatted in the center of the glade, a wolf's corpse at his feet.

sleɪɝ wɑz ə θɪk-ɑɹmd mæn, ən ɪz sɛnt wɑz feɪnli ɪnhjumən, laɪk ə mæn mɪkst wɪð stoʊn. hi wɔɹ dɑɹk kloʊðɪŋ; lɛðɝ ən blæk wʊl. əz pɛɹɪn wɑtʃt, sleɪɝ bɪɡæn tə skɪn ðə kɔɹps.

Slayer was a thick-armed man, and his scent was faintly inhuman, like a man mixed with stone. He wore dark clothing; leather and black wool. As Perrin watched, Slayer began to skin the corpse.

pɛɹɪn tʃɑɹdʒ fɔɹwɝd. sleɪɝ lʊkt ʌp ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. hi ɹɪzɛmbəld læn ɪn ən ɔlmoʊst ɪɹi fæʃən, hɪz hɑɹd feɪs ɔl æŋɡəlz ən ʃɑɹp laɪnz. pɛɹɪn ɹɔɹd, hæmɝ sʌɾənli ɪn ɪz hænz.

Perrin charged forward. Slayer looked up in surprise. He resembled Lan in an almost eerie fashion, his hard face all angles and sharp lines. Perrin roared, hammer suddenly in his hands.

sleɪɝ vænɪʃt ɪn ə blɪŋk ʌv ən aɪ, ən pɛɹɪnz hæmɝ pæs θɹu ɛmpti ɛɹ. pɛɹɪn bɹið dipli. ðə sɛns wɝ ðɛɹ! bɹaɪn, ən wʊd, wɛt wɪð wɔɾɝ. siɡulz ən ðɛɹ dʒɹɑpɪŋz. pɛɹɪn juzd ɪz nufaʊn skɪl tə hɝl hɪmsɛlf ət ðət dɪstən loʊkeɪʃən.

Slayer vanished in a blink of an eye, and Perrin's hammer passed through empty air. Perrin breathed deeply. The scents were there! Brine, and wood, wet with water. Seagulls and their droppings. Perrin used his newfound skill to hurl himself at that distant location.

ʃɪft.

Shift.

pɛɹɪn əpɪɹɾ ɑn ən ɛmpti dɑk ɪn ə sɪɾi hi dɪdn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz. sleɪɝ stʊd nɪɹbaɪ, ɪnspɛktɪŋ ɪz baʊ.

Perrin appeared on an empty dock in a city he didn't recognize. Slayer stood nearby, inspecting his bow.

pɛɹɪn ətækt. sleɪɝ bɹɔɾ ɪz hɛɾ ʌp, aɪz waɪɾənɪŋ, hɪz sɛnt ɡɹoʊɪŋ əmeɪzd. hi ɹeɪz ðə baʊ tə blɑk, bʌt pɛɹɪnz swɪŋ ʃæɾɝd ɪt.

Perrin attacked. Slayer brought his head up, eyes widening, his scent growing amazed. He raised the bow to block, but Perrin's swing shattered it.

wɪð ə ɹɔɹ, pɛɹɪn pʊld ɪz wɛpən bæk ən swʌŋ əɡɛn, ðɪs taɪm fəɹ sleɪɝz hɛd. ɑdli, sleɪɝ smaɪld, dɑɹk aɪz ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ wɪð əmjuzmənt. hi smɛld iɡɝ, sʌɾənli. iɡɝ tə kɪl. ə sɔɹɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ɪz ɹeɪz hænd, ən i twɪstəɾ ɪt tə blɑk pɛɹɪnz bloʊ.

With a roar, Perrin pulled his weapon back and swung again, this time for Slayer's head. Oddly, Slayer smiled, dark eyes glittering with amusement. He smelled eager, suddenly. Eager to kill. A sword appeared in his raised hand, and he twisted it to block Perrin's blow.

ðə hæmɝ baʊnst ɔf tu hɑɹd, əz ɪf ɪt hæd hɪt stoʊn. pɛɹɪn stʌmbəld, ən sleɪɝ ɹitʃt aʊt, pleɪsɪŋ ə hæn əɡɛns pɛɹɪnz ʃoʊldɝ. hi ʃʌvd.

The hammer bounced off too hard, as if it had hit stone. Perrin stumbled, and Slayer reached out, placing a hand against Perrin's shoulder. He shoved.

hɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ wɑz ɪmɛns. ðə ʃʌv tɔs pɛɹɪn bækwɝd tə ðə dɑk, bʌt ðə wʊd dɪsəpɪɹɾ əz i hɪt. pɛɹɪn pæs θɹu ɛmpti ɛɹ ən splæʃt ɪndə ðə wɔɾɝ bɪniθ. hɪz bɛloʊ bɪkeɪm ə ɡɝɡəl; dɑɹk lɪkwəd sɝaʊndəd hɪm.

His strength was immense. The shove tossed Perrin backward to the dock, but the wood disappeared as he hit. Perrin passed through empty air and splashed into the water beneath. His bellow became a gurgle; dark liquid surrounded him.

hi stʃɹʌɡəl tə swɪm ʌpwɝd, dʒɹɑpɪŋ ɪz hæmɝ, bʌt faʊn ðət ðə sɝfəs ɪnɪksplɪkəbli bɪkeɪm aɪs. ɹoʊps sneɪkt ʌp fɹəm ðə dɛpθs, wɪpɪŋ ʌp ɝaʊn pɛɹɪnz ɑɹmz, jæŋkɪŋ ɪm daʊnwɝd. θɹu ðə fɹoʊzən sɝfəs əbʌv, hi kəd si ə ʃædoʊ muvɪŋ. sleɪɝ, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz ɹeɪ- fɔɹm baʊ.

He struggled to swim upward, dropping his hammer, but found that the surface inexplicably became ice. Ropes snaked up from the depths, whipping up around Perrin's arms, yanking him downward. Through the frozen surface above, he could see a shadow moving. Slayer, raising his re- formed bow.

ði aɪs vænɪʃt ən ðə wɔɾɝ pɑɹɾəd. wɔɾɝ stʃɹimd ɔf pɛɹɪn, ən i faʊn hɪmsɛlf stɛɹɪŋ ʌp əɾ æɹoʊ pɔɪntəd dɝɛkli əɾ ɪz hɑɹt.

The ice vanished and the water parted. Water streamed off Perrin, and he found himself staring up at arrow pointed directly at his heart.

sleɪɝ ɹilist.

Slayer released.

pɛɹɪn wɪl hɪmsɛlf əweɪ.

Perrin willed himself away.

ʃɪft. hi ɡæspt, hɪɾɪŋ ðə stoʊn aʊtkɹɑpɪŋ wɛɹ i hæd bɪn wɪð hɑpɝ. pɛɹɪn fɛl tə hɪz niz, siwɑɾɝ stʃɹimɪŋ fɹəm ɪz bɑɾi hi spʌɾɝd, waɪpɪŋ ɪz feɪs, hɑɹt paʊndɪŋ.

Shift. He gasped, hitting the stone outcropping where he had been with Hopper. Perrin fell to his knees, seawater streaming from his body He sputtered, wiping his face, heart pounding.

hɑpɝ əpɪɹd bɪsaɪd hɪm, pæntɪŋ, hɪz sɛn æŋɡɹi. fulɪʃ kʌb! stupəd kʌb! tʃeɪs daʊn ə laɪən wən jəɹ bɛɹli wind?

Hopper appeared beside him, panting, his scent angry. Foolish cub! Stupid cub! Chase down a lion when you're barely weaned?

pɛɹɪn ʃɪvɝɾ ən sæɾ ʌp. wəd sleɪɝ fɑloʊ? kəd hi? əz mɪnəts stʃɹɛtʃt ən noʊbɑdi əpɪɹd, pɛɹɪn bɪɡæn tə ɹɪlæks. ði ɪkstʃeɪnʒ wɪð sleɪɝ hæd hæpən soʊ kwɪkli ðəɾ ɪt fɛlt laɪk ə blɝ. ðət stʃɹɛŋkθ ... ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɛni mæn kəd hæv. ən ði aɪs, ðə ɹoʊps . . .

Perrin shivered and sat up. Would Slayer follow? Could he? As minutes stretched and nobody appeared, Perrin began to relax. The exchange with Slayer had happened so quickly that it felt like a blur. That strength ... it was more than any man could have. And the ice, the ropes . . .

"hi tʃeɪnʒd θɪŋz," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "meɪd ðə dɑk vænɪʃ bɪniθ mi, kɹieɪɾəd ɹoʊps tə baɪn mi, pʊʃt ðə wɔɾɝ bæk soʊ ðəɾ i kəd ɡɛɾ ə klɪɹ ʃɑɾ ət mi."

"He changed things," Perrin said. "Made the dock vanish beneath me, created ropes to bind me, pushed the water back so that he could get a clear shot at me."

hiz ə laɪən. hi kɪlz. deɪnʒɝəs.

He is a lion. He kills. Dangerous.

"aɪ nid tə lɝn. aɪ mʌs feɪs hɪm, hɑpɝ."

"I need to learn. I must face him, Hopper."

jə ɑɹ tu jʌŋ. ðiz θɪŋz ɑɹ bɪɑn ju.

You are too young. These things are beyond you.

"tu jʌŋ?" pɛɹɪn sɛd, stændɪŋ. "hɑpɝ, ðə læs hʌn ɪz nɪɹli əpɑn ʌs!"

"Too young?" Perrin said, standing. "Hopper, the Last Hunt is nearly upon us!"

hɑpɝ leɪ daʊn, hɛɾ ɑn pɔz.

Hopper lay down, head on paws.

"ju ɔlweɪz tɛl mi ðəɾ aɪm tu jʌŋ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɔɹ ðəɾ aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ aɪm duɪŋ. wɛl, wʌɾ ɪz ðə pɔɪn ə titʃɪŋ mi, ɪf nɑt tə ʃoʊ mi haʊ tə faɪt mɛn laɪk sleɪɝ?"

"You always tell me that I'm too young," Perrin said. "Or that I don't know what I'm doing. Well, what is the point of teaching me, if not to show me how to fight men like Slayer?"

wɪl si, hɑpɝ sɛnt. fəɹ tənaɪt, jəl ɡoʊ. wəɹ dʌn.

We will see, Hopper sent. For tonight, you will go. We are done.

pɛɹɪn sɛnst ə mɔɹnfəl kæs tə ðə sɛndɪŋ, ən ɔlsoʊ ə faɪnæləɾi. tənaɪt, oʊk dænsɝz pæk ən hɑpɝ wəd ɡɹiv fəɹ mɔɹnɪŋɡlaɪt.

Perrin sensed a mournful cast to the sending, and also a finality. Tonight, Oak Dancer's pack and Hopper would grieve for Morninglight.

saɪɪŋ, pɛɹɪn sæt wɪð ɪz lɛɡz kɹɔst. hi kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd, ən mænədʒ tə ɪməteɪt ðə θɪŋz ðət hɑpɝ hæd dʌn ɪn tɔsɪŋ ɪm fɹəm ðə dʒɹim.

Sighing, Perrin sat with his legs crossed. He concentrated, and managed to imitate the things that Hopper had done in tossing him from the dream.

ɪt feɪɾəd ɝaʊn hɪm.

It faded around him.

hi woʊk ɑn ðə pæləɾ ɪn ɪz dɑɹkən tɛnt, feɪl snʌɡəld ʌp bɪsaɪd hɪm-pɛɹɪn leɪ fəɹ ə taɪm, stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ət ðə kænvəs. ðə dɑɹknəs ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm ə ðə tɛmpɛstʃuəs skaɪ ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. slip simd əz fɑɹ ɔf əz keɪɛmlɪn- ɪvɛntʃəwəli hi ɹoʊz - kɛɹfəli ɪkstʃɹəkeɪɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf fɹəm feɪl -  ən pʊld ɑn ɪz tʃɹaʊzɝz ən ʃɝt.

He woke on the pallet in his darkened tent, Faile snuggled up beside him-Perrin lay for a time, staring up at the canvas. The darkness reminded him of the tempestuous sky in the wolf dream. Sleep seemed as far off as Caemlyn- Eventually he rose - carefully extricating himself from Faile -  and pulled on his trousers and shirt.

ðə kæmp wɑz dɑɹk aʊtsaɪd, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ɪnʌf laɪt fəɹ ɪz aɪz. hi nɑɾəd tə kɛnli mɹɪn ən dʒeɪm dɔtʃɹi, ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn u ɡɑɹɾəd ɪz tɛn tənaɪt.

The camp was dark outside, but there was enough light for his eyes. He nodded to Kenly Maerin and Jaim Dawtry, the Two Rivers men who guarded his tent tonight.

"wʌts ðə taɪm?" hi æskt wʌn ə ðɛm.

"What's the time?" he asked one of them.

"æftɝ mɪdnaɪt, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn," dʒeɪm sɛd.

"After midnight, Lord Perrin," Jaim said.

pɛɹɪn ɡɹʌntɪd. dɪstən laɪtnɪŋ lɪt ðə lændskeɪp. hi wɔkt ɔf, ən ðə mɛn stɑɹɾəd tə fɑloʊ.

Perrin grunted. Distant lightning lit the landscape. He walked off, and the men started to follow.

"aɪl bi faɪn wɪθaʊt ɡɑɹdz," hi toʊl ðɛm. "wɑtʃ oʊvɝ maɪ tɛnt - leɪɾi feɪl stɪl slips."

"I'll be fine without guards," he told them. "Watch over my tent - Lady Faile still sleeps."

hɪz tɛnt wɑz nɪɹ ði ɛdʒ ə kæmp. hi laɪk ðæt; ɪt ɡeɪv ɪm ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ sɛns ə sɪkluʒən, nɛsəl nɪɹ ðə hɪlsaɪɾ ət ðə wɛstɝn saɪɾ ə ðə kæmp. ðoʊ ɪt wɑz leɪt, hi pæst ɡɔl ʃɑɹpənɪŋ ɪz spɪɹ nɪɹ ə fɔlən lɔɡ. ðə tɔl stoʊn dɔɡ stʊɾ ʌp ən bɪɡæn tə fɑloʊ, ən pɛɹɪn dɪdn dɪsmɪs hɪm. ɡɔl fɛlt i hædn bɪn fʊlfɪlɪŋ ɪz sɛlf-əpɔɪntəd duɾi ʌv wɑtʃɪŋ æftɝ pɛɹɪn leɪtli, ən hæd stɛpt ʌp ɪz ɛfɝts. pɛɹɪn θɔɾ i ɹɪli dʒʌst wɑntəɾ ən ɪkskjus tə steɪ əweɪ fɹəm ɪz oʊn tɛn ən ðə pɛɹ ʌv ɡeɪʃeɪn wɪmən u hæd teɪkən ʌp ɹɛzəɾəns ðɛɹ.

His tent was near the edge of camp. He liked that; it gave him a little more sense of seclusion, nestled near the hillside at the western side of the camp. Though it was late, he passed Gaul sharpening his spear near a fallen log. The tall Stone Dog stood up and began to follow, and Perrin didn't dismiss him. Gaul felt he hadn't been fulfilling his self-appointed duty of watching after Perrin lately, and had stepped up his efforts. Perrin thought he really just wanted an excuse to stay away from his own tent and the pair of gai'shain women who had taken up residence there.

ɡɔl kɛpt ɪz dɪstəns, ən pɛɹɪn wɑz ɡlæd. wɑz ðɪs haʊ ɔl liɾɝz fɛlt? noʊ wʌndɝ soʊ mɛni neɪʃənz ɛndəɾ ʌp ət wɔɹ wɪð wʌn ənʌðɝ - ðɛɹ liɾɝz nɛvɝ hæɾ ɛni taɪm tə θɪŋk baɪ ðɛmsɛlvz, ən pɹɑbli ətæk tə ɡɛt pipəl tə stɑp pɛstɝɪŋ ðɛm!

Gaul kept his distance, and Perrin was glad. Was this how all leaders felt? No wonder so many nations ended up at war with one another - their leaders never had any time to think by themselves, and probably attacked to get people to stop pestering them!

ə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns əweɪ, hi ɛntɝɾ ə stæn ə tʃɹiz wɪð ə smɔl paɪl ə lɔɡz. dɛntən - hɪz sɝvɪŋ mæn əntɪl ðeɪ ɡɑt læmɡwɪn bæk - hæd fɹaʊnd wən pɛɹɪn hæɾ æsk fəɹ ðɛm. wʌns ə maɪnɝ lɔɹɾ ə kɛɹhin, dɛntən hæd ɹəfjuz tə ɹɪtɝn tə hɪz steɪʃən. hi θɔɾ ə hɪmsɛlf əz ə sɝvənt naʊ, ən wəd nɑt lɛɾ ɛniwʌn kənvɪns ɪm ʌðɝwaɪz.

A short distance away, he entered a stand of trees with a small pile of logs. Denton - his serving man until they got Lamgwin back - had frowned when Perrin had asked for them. Once a minor lord of Cairhien, Denton had refused to return to his station. He thought of himself as a servant now, and would not let anyone convince him otherwise.

ðəɹ wɑz ən æks. nɑt ðə dɛdli hæf-mun bleɪɾ i hæd wʌns kæɹid tə bæɾəl, bʌɾ ə stɝɾi wʊdzmənz æks wɪð ə faɪn stil hɛɾ ən ə hæf smuð baɪ ðə swɛɾi hænz ʌv wɝkɝz. pɛɹɪn ɹoʊld ʌp ɪz slivz, ðən spæɾ ɑn ɪz hænz ən pɪkt ʌp ði æks. ɪt fɛlt ɡʊd tə hoʊl ðə wɝkt wʊɾ ɪn ɪz hænz. hi ɹeɪzd ɪt tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝ, stʊd ðə fɝs lɔɡ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, ðən stɛp bæk ən swʌŋ.

There was an axe. Not the deadly half-moon blade he had once carried to battle, but a sturdy woodsman's axe with a fine steel head and a haft smoothed by the sweaty hands of workers. Perrin rolled up his sleeves, then spat on his hands and picked up the axe. It felt good to hold the worked wood in his hands. He raised it to his shoulder, stood the first log in front of him, then stepped back and swung.

hi hɪt ðə lɔɡ stʃɹeɪɾ ɑn, splɪntɝz flɪpɪŋ ɪndə ðə dɑɹk naɪɾ ɛɹ, ðə lɔɡ ɹeɪlɪŋ ɪndə tu pisəz. hi splɪt wʌn ə ðə hævz nɛkst. ɡɔl tʊk ə sit bɪsaɪɾ ə tʃɹi, ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə spɪɹ ən kəntɪnjuɪŋ tə ʃɑɹpən ɪts hɛd. ðə ɹæspɪŋ ə mɛɾəl əɡɛns mɛɾəl əkʌmpənid pɛɹɪnz θʌŋk ʌv æks əɡɛnst wʊd.

He hit the log straight on, splinters flipping into the dark night air, the log railing into two pieces. He split one of the halves next. Gaul took a seat beside a tree, getting out a spear and continuing to sharpen its head. The rasping of metal against metal accompanied Perrin's thunk of axe against wood.

ɪt fɛlt ɡʊd. waɪ wɑz ɪt ðəɾ ɪz maɪnd wɝk soʊ mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ wən i wɑz duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ? lɔɪəl spoʊk mʌtʃ ə sɪɾɪŋ ən θɪŋkɪŋ. pɛɹɪn dɪdn θɪŋk i hɪmsɛlf kəd fɪɡjɝ ɛniθɪŋ aʊt ðət weɪ.

It felt good. Why was it that his mind worked so much better when he was doing something? Loial spoke much of sitting and thinking. Perrin didn't think he himself could figure anything out that way.

hi splɪɾ ənʌðɝ lɔɡ, ði æks kʌɾɪŋ klɪɹ. wɑz ɪt ɹɪli tʃɹu? kəɾ ɪz oʊn neɪtʃɝ bi tə bleɪm fəɹ ðə weɪ hi æktəd, nɑt ðə wʊlvz? hid nɛvɝ æktəd laɪk ðət bæk ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz.

He split another log, the axe cutting clear. Was it really true? Could his own nature be to blame for the way he acted, not the wolves? He'd never acted like that back in the Two Rivers.

hi splɪɾ ənʌðɝ lɔɡ. / ɔlweɪz aɪvəz ɡʊɾ ət kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ maɪ ətɛnʃən. ðət wɑz pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌt hæɾ ɪmpɹɛs mæstɝ luhən. ɡɪv pɛɹɪn ə pɹɑdʒɛkt ən hid kip wɝkɪŋ ɑn ɪɾ əntɪl i wɑz dʌn.

He split another log. / always ivas good at concentrating my attention. That was part of what had impressed Master Luhhan. Give Perrin a project and he'd keep working on it until he was done.

hi splɪt ðə hævz ə ðət lɔɡ.

He split the halves of that log.

meɪbi ðə tʃeɪnʒəz ɪn ɪm wɝ ə ɹɪzʌlt ʌv ɛnkaʊntɝɪŋ ði aʊtsaɪd wɝld. hid bleɪm ðə wʊlvz fəɹ mɛni θɪŋz, ən i hæd pleɪst ənnætʃɹəl dɪmænz ɑn hɑpɝ. wʊlvz wɝn stupəɾ əɹ sɪmpəl, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt kɛɹ əbaʊt θɪŋz ðət hjumənz dɪd. ɪt mʌst əv bɪn vɛɹi hɑɹd fəɹ hɑpɝ tə titʃ ɪn ə weɪ ðət pɛɹɪn wəɾ ʌndɝstænd.

Maybe the changes in him were a result of encountering the outside world. He'd blamed the wolves for many things, and he had placed unnatural demands on Hopper. Wolves weren't stupid or simple, but they did not care about things that humans did. It must have been very hard for Hopper to teach in a way that Perrin would understand.

wʌd ðə wʊlf oʊ hɪm? hɑpɝ hæd daɪd dʊɹɪŋ ðət feɪtfəl naɪt, soʊ lɔŋ əɡoʊ. ðə naɪt wən pɛɹɪn hæd fɝs kɪld ə mæn, ðə naɪt pɛɹɪn hæd fɝs lɔs kəntʃɹoʊl ə hɪmsɛlf ɪn ə bæɾəl. hɑpɝ dɪdn oʊ pɛɹɪn ɛniθɪŋ, bʌɾ i hæd seɪv pɛɹɪn ɑn sɛvɹəl əkeɪʒənz - ɪn fækt, pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪz ðət hɑpɝz ɪntɝvɛntʃən hæd hɛlp tə kip ɪm fɹəm luzɪŋ hɪmsɛlf əz ə wʊlf.

What did the wolf owe him? Hopper had died during that fateful night, so long ago. The night when Perrin had first killed a man, the night Perrin had first lost control of himself in a battle. Hopper didn't owe Perrin anything, but he had saved Perrin on several occasions - in fact, Perrin realized that Hopper's intervention had helped to keep him from losing himself as a wolf.

hi swʌŋ əɾ ə lɔɡ, ə ɡlænsɪŋ bloʊ ðət nɑkt ɪt tə ðə saɪd. hi ɹipəzɪʃən ən kəntɪnjud, ɡɔlz kwaɪət ʃɑɹpənɪŋ suðɪŋ hɪm. hi splɪɾ ɪt.

He swung at a log, a glancing blow that knocked it to the side. He repositioned and continued, Gaul's quiet sharpening soothing him. He split it.

pɛɹɪn ɡɹu kɑɾ ʌp ɪn wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ, meɪbi tu mʌtʃ. ðət wɑz tʃɹu.

Perrin grew caught up in what he was doing, maybe too much. That was true.

bʌɾ ət ðə seɪm taɪm, ɪf ə mæn wɑntəd tə ɡɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ dʌn, hi hæd tə wɝk ɑn wʌn pɹɑdʒɛkt əntɪl ɪt wɑz kəmplit. pɛɹɪn hæd noʊn mɛn u nɛvɝ sim tə fɪnɪʃ ɛniθɪŋ, ən ðɛɹ fɑɹmz wɝ ə mɛs. hi kʊdn lɪv laɪk ðæt.

But at the same time, if a man wanted to get anything done, he had to work on one project until it was complete. Perrin had known men who never seemed to finish anything, and their farms were a mess. He couldn't live like that.

ðəɹ hæd tə bi ə bæləns. pɛɹɪn hæd kleɪmd i hæd bɪn pʊld ɪndə ə wɝl fɪld wɪð pɹɑbləmz mʌtʃ lɑɹdʒɝ ðən i wɑz. hi hæd kleɪmd i wɑz ə sɪmpəl mæn.

There had to be a balance. Perrin had claimed he had been pulled into a world filled with problems much larger than he was. He had claimed he was a simple man.

wʌɾ ɪf i wɑz ɹɔŋ? wʌɾ ɪf i wɑz ə kɑmplɛks mæn u hæd wʌns hæpən tə lɪv ə sɪmpəl laɪf? æftɝ ɔl, ɪf i wɑz soʊ sɪmpəl, waɪ hæɾ i fɔlən ɪn lʌv wɪð sətʃ ə kɑmpləkeɪɾəd wʊmən?

What if he was wrong? What if he was a complex man who had once happened to live a simple life? After all, if he was so simple, why had he fallen in love with such a complicated woman?

ðə splɪt lɔɡz wɝ paɪlɪŋ ʌp. pɛɹɪn bɛn daʊn, ɡæðɝɪŋ ʌp kɔɹɾɝz, ðɛɹ ɡɹeɪn ɹʌf əɡɛnst ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. kælʌz fɪŋɡɝz; hi wəd nɛvɝ bi ə lɔɹd laɪk ðoʊz mɪlk-fɛd kɹitʃɝz fɹəm kɛɹhin.

The split logs were piling up. Perrin bent down, gathering up quarters, their grain rough against his fingers. Callused fingers; he would never be a lord like those milk-fed creatures from Cairhien.

bʌt ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝ kaɪnz ə lɔɹdz, mɛn laɪk feɪlz oʊn fɑðɝ. əɹ mɛn laɪk læn, hu simd mɔɹ wɛpən ðən mæn.

But there were other kinds of lords, men like Faile's own father. Or men like Lan, who seemed more weapon than man.

pɛɹɪn stæk ðə wʊd. hi ɛndʒɔɪd liɾɪŋ ðə wʊlvz ɪn ɪz dʒɹim, bʌt wʊlvz dɪdn ɪkspɛk jə tə pɹətɛk ðɛm, əɹ tə pɹəvaɪd fəɹ ðɛm, əɹ tə meɪk lɔz fəɹ ðɛm. ðeɪ dɪdn kɹaɪ tə jə wən ðɛɹ lʌvd wʌnz daɪd bɪniθ jəɹ kəmænd.

Perrin stacked the wood. He enjoyed leading the wolves in his dream, but wolves didn't expect you to protect them, or to provide for them, or to make laws for them. They didn't cry to you when their loved ones died beneath your command.

ɪt wɑzn ðə liɾɝʃɪp ðət wɝid hɪm. ɪt wɑz ɔl ðə θɪŋz ðət keɪm wɪð ɪt.

It wasn't the leadership that worried him. It was all the things that came with it.

hi kəd smɛl ɛlaɪəs əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ. wɪð ɪz loʊmi, nætʃɹəl ɝθən sɛn i smɛld laɪk ə wʊlf.

He could smell Elyas approaching. With his loamy, natural earthen scent he smelled like a wolf.

ɔlmoʊst.

Almost.

"jɔɹ ʌp leɪt," ɛlaɪəs sɛd, stɛpɪŋ ʌp. pɛɹɪn hɝd ɡɔl ɹʌslɪŋ, slɪpɪŋ ɪz spɪɹ bæk ɪndə ɪts pleɪs ɑn ɪz boʊkeɪs, ðən wɪθdʒɹɔɪŋ wɪð ðə saɪləns ʌv ə spɛɹoʊ stʃɹikɪŋ ɔf ɪndə ðə skaɪ.

"You're up late," Elyas said, stepping up. Perrin heard Gaul rustling, slipping his spear back into its place on his bowcase, then withdrawing with the silence of a sparrow streaking off into the sky.

hi wəd steɪ kloʊs, bʌt wəd nɑt lɪsən ɪn.

He would stay close, but would not listen in.

pɛɹɪn lʊkt ʌp ət ðə dɑɹk skaɪ, ɹɛstɪŋ ði æks ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "səmtaɪmz aɪ fil mɔɹ əweɪk ət naɪt ðən dʊɹɪŋ ðə deɪ."

Perrin looked up at the dark sky, resting the axe on his shoulder. "Sometimes I feel more awake at night than during the day."

ɛlaɪəs smaɪld. pɛɹɪn dɪdn si ɪt, bʌɾ i kəd smɛl ði əmjuzmənt.

Elyas smiled. Perrin didn't see it, but he could smell the amusement.

"dɪd jə ɛvɝ tʃɹaɪ tə əvɔɪɾ ɪt, ɛlaɪəs?" pɛɹɪn æskt. "ɪɡnɔɹ ðɛɹ vɔɪsəz, pɹitɛn ðət nʌθɪŋ əbaʊt jə hæd tʃeɪnʒd?"

"Did you ever try to avoid it, Elyas?" Perrin asked. "Ignore their voices, pretend that nothing about you had changed?"

"aɪ dɪd," ɛlaɪəs sɛd. hi hæɾ ə sɑf loʊ vɔɪs, wʌn ðət sʌmhaʊ sədʒɛstəd ði ɝθ ɪn moʊʃən.

"I did," Elyas said. He had a soft low voice, one that somehow suggested the earth in motion.

dɪstən ɹʌmbəlz. "aɪ wɑntəd tə, bʌt ðən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑntəd tə dʒɛntəl mi. aɪ hæd tə fli."

Distant rumbles. "I wanted to, but then the Aes Sedai wanted to gentle me. I had to flee."

"du jə mɪs jəɹ oʊld laɪf?"

"Do you miss your old life?"

ɛlaɪəs ʃɹʌɡd - pɛɹɪn kəd hɪɹ ðə moʊʃən, ðə kloʊðɪŋ skɹeɪpɪŋ əɡɛnst ɪtsɛlf. "noʊ wɔɹɾɝ wɑns tə əbændən ɪz duɾi. səmtaɪmz, ʌðɝ θɪŋz ɑɹ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt. əɹ . . . wɛl, meɪbi ðeɪ ɑɹ dʒʌs mɔɹ dɪmændɪŋ. aɪ doʊn ɹəɡɹɛt maɪ tʃɔɪsəz."

Elyas shrugged - Perrin could hear the motion, the clothing scraping against itself. "No Warder wants to abandon his duty. Sometimes, other things are more important. Or . . . well, maybe they are just more demanding. I don't regret my choices."

"aɪ kæn liv, ɛlaɪəs. aɪ woʊnt"

"I can't leave, Elyas. I won't"

"aɪ lɛf maɪ laɪf fəɹ ðə wʊlvz. ðət dʌzn min juv tə."

"I left my life for the wolves. That doesn't mean you have to."

"noʊm hæd tə," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Noam had to," Perrin said.

"dɪɾ i hæv tə?" ɛlaɪəs sɛd.

"Did he have to?" Elyas said.

"ɪt kənsum hɪm. hi stɑp biɪŋ hjumən."

"It consumed him. He stopped being human."

hi kɑɾ ə sɛn ʌv wɝi. ɛlaɪəs hæd noʊ ænsɝz.

He caught a scent of worry. Elyas had no answers.

"du jə ɛvɝ vɪzət wʊlvz ɪn jəɹ dʒɹimz, ɛlaɪəs?" pɛɹɪn æskt. "ə pleɪs wɛɹ dɛd wʊlvz ɹʌn ən lɪv əɡɛn?"

"Do you ever visit wolves in your dreams, Elyas?" Perrin asked. "A place where dead wolves run and live again?"

ɛlaɪəs tɝnd, aɪɪŋ hɪm. "ðæt pleɪs ɪz deɪnʒɝəs, pɛɹɪn. ɪts ənʌðɝ wɝld, ɔlðoʊ taɪd tə ðɪs wʌn sʌmhaʊ. lɛdʒənz seɪ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv oʊl kəd ɡoʊ ðɛɹ."

Elyas turned, eyeing him. "That place is dangerous, Perrin. It's another world, although tied to this one somehow. Legends say the Aes Sedai of old could go there."

ən ʌðɝ pipəl, tu," pɛɹɪn sɛd, θɪŋkɪŋ ə sleɪɝ.

And other people, too," Perrin said, thinking of Slayer.

bi kɛɹfəl ɪn ðə dʒɹim. aɪ steɪ əweɪ fɹəm ɪt." hɪz sɛnt wɑz wɛɹi.

Be careful in the dream. I stay away from it." His scent was wary.

dʒju ɛvɝ əv tʃɹʌbəl?" pɛɹɪn æskt. "sɛpɝeɪɾɪŋ jɝsɛlf fɹəm ðə wʊlf?"

Do you ever have trouble?" Perrin asked. "Separating yourself from the wolf?"

"aɪ juz tə."

"I used to."

"bʌt nɑɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ?"

"But not any longer?"

"aɪ faʊn ə bæləns," ɛlaɪəs sɛd.

"I found a balance," Elyas said.

"haʊ?"

"How?"

ði oʊldɝ mæn fɛl stɪl fəɹ ə moʊmənt. "aɪ wɪʃ aɪ nu. ɪt wɑz dʒʌst sʌm-θɪŋ aɪ lɝnd, pɛɹɪn.

The older man fell still for a moment. "I wish I knew. It was just some-thing I learned, Perrin.

sʌmθɪŋ jəl əv tə lɝn."

Something you'll have to learn."

əɹ ɛn ʌp laɪk noʊm. pɛɹɪn mɛɾ ɛlaɪəs' ɡoʊldən aɪz, ðən nɑɾəd "θæŋk ju."

Or end up like Noam. Perrin met Elyas' golden eyes, then nodded "Thank you."

"fɔɹ ði ædvaɪs?"

"For the advice?"

"noʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "fɔɹ kʌmɪŋ bæk. fəɹ ʃoʊɪŋ mi ðət wʌn ʌv əs ət list, kən lɪv wɪð ðə wʊlvz ən nɑt luz hɪmsɛlf."

"No," Perrin said. "For coming back. For showing me that one of us at least, can live with the wolves and not lose himself."

"ɪts nʌθɪŋ," ɛlaɪəs sɛd. "aɪ hæd fɝɡɑɾən ðəɾ ɪt kəd bi naɪs tə bi ɝaʊn pipəl fəɹ ə tʃeɪnʒ. aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ lɔŋ aɪ kən steɪ, ðoʊ. ðə læs hʌn ɪz ɔlmoʊs hɪɹ."

"It's nothing," Elyas said. "I had forgotten that it could be nice to be around people for a change. I don't know how long I can stay, though. The Last Hunt is almost here."

pɛɹɪn lʊkt ʌp ət ðə skaɪ əɡɛn. "ðæɾ ɪɾ ɪz. pæs ðə wɝɾ ɑn tə tæm ən ði ʌðɝz fəɹ mi. aɪv meɪd maɪ dɪsɪʒən. ðə waɪtkloʊks əv pɪkt ə pleɪs tə faɪt. aɪv dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ɡoʊ əhɛɾ ən miɾ əm təmɑɹoʊ."

Perrin looked up at the sky again. "That it is. Pass the word on to Tam and the others for me. I've made my decision. The Whitecloaks have picked a place to fight. I've decided to go ahead and meet them tomorrow."

"ɔl ɹaɪt," ɛlaɪəs sɛd. "ju doʊn smɛl laɪk jə wɑnə də ɪt, ðoʊ."

"All right," Elyas said. "You don't smell like you want to do it, though."

"ɪt nidz tə bi dʌn," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "æn ðæts ðæt." ɛvɹiwʌn wɑntəɾ ɪm tə bi ə lɔɹd. wɛl, ðɪs wɑz ðə sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ lɔɹdz dɪd. meɪd dɪsɪʒənz ðət noʊbɑdi wɑntəd tə meɪk.

"It needs to be done," Perrin said. "And that's that." Everyone wanted him to be a lord. Well, this was the sort of thing lords did. Made decisions that nobody wanted to make.

ɪt wəd stɪl sɪkən ɪm tə ɡɪv ði ɔɹɾɝ. hid sin ə vɪʒən ə ðoʊz wʊlvz ɹʌnɪŋ ʃip təwɔɹɾ ə bist. ɪt sim tə hɪm ðət meɪbi ðət wɑz wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ, ɹʌnɪŋ ðə waɪtkloʊks təwɔɹd dɪstʃɹʌkʃən. ðeɪ sɝɾənli wɔɹ ðə kʌlɝ ə ʃips wʊl.

It would still sicken him to give the order. He'd seen a vision of those wolves running sheep toward a beast. It seemed to him that maybe that was what he was doing, running the Whitecloaks toward destruction. They certainly wore the color of sheep's wool.

bʌt wʌt tə meɪk ə ðə vɪʒən ə feɪl ən ði ʌðɝz, əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ə klɪf? ɛlaɪəs muvd ɔf, livɪŋ pɛɹɪn wɪð ði æks stɪl ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. hi fɛlt əz ɪf i hædn bɪn tʃɑpɪŋ lɔɡz, bʌt bɑɾiz.

But what to make of the vision of Faile and the others, approaching a cliff? Elyas moved off, leaving Perrin with the axe still on his shoulder. He felt as if he hadn't been chopping logs, but bodies.


tʃæptɝ twɛntifaɪv


CHAPTER 25

ɹɪtɝn tə bændɑɹ ɛbən


Return to Bandar Eban

ɹænd ən mɪn dɪd nɑɾ ənaʊns ðɛmsɛlvz əz ðeɪ keɪm tə bændɑɹ ɛbən. ðeɪ stɛp θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ ɪndə ə smɔl æli, ɡɑɹɾəd baɪ tu meɪɾənz - lɹiən ən haɪɾiə - əlɔŋ wɪð nf, ðə tɔl, skwɛɹ-tʃɪn æʃəmən.

Rand and Min did not announce themselves as they came to Bandar Eban. They stepped through the gateway into a small alley, guarded by two Maidens - Lerian and Heidia - along with Naeff, the tall, square-chinned Asha'man.

ðə meɪɾənz skaʊɾəd tə ði ɛn ə ði æliweɪ, piɹɪŋ səspɪʃəsli ət ðə sɪɾi. ɹænd stɛp fɔɹwɝɾ ən leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn haɪɾiəz ʃoʊldɝ, kɑmɪŋ ðə slɛndɝ wʊmən, hu simd æŋkʃəs ət ɹændz ɡɑɹd biɪŋ soʊ fju. hi wɔɹ ɪz bɹaʊn kloʊk.

The Maidens scouted to the end of the alleyway, peering suspiciously at the city. Rand stepped forward and laid a hand on Heidias shoulder, calming the slender woman, who seemed anxious at Rand's guard being so few. He wore his brown cloak.

oʊvɝhɛd, ðə klaʊdz bɹoʊk, mɛltɪŋ əweɪ əbʌv ðə sɪɾi ɪn ɹɪspɑns tə ɹændz ɝaɪvəl. mɪn lʊkt ʌpwɝd, filɪŋ ðə wɔɹmθ ʃaɪn ɑn əɹ feɪs. ði æli smɛl tɛɹəbəl - ʌv ɹɛfjus ən weɪst  - bʌɾ ə wɔɹm bɹiz blu θɹu, kæɹiɪŋ ðə stɛntʃɪz əweɪ.

Overhead, the clouds broke, melting away above the city in response to Rand's arrival. Min looked upward, feeling the warmth shine on her face. The alley smelled terrible - of refuse and waste  - but a warm breeze blew through, carrying the stenches away.

"maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," nf sɛd. "aɪ doʊn laɪk ðɪs. jə ʃəɾ əv ɡtiɾɝ pɹətɛkʃən. lɛɾ əs ɹɪtɝn ən ɡæðɝ - "

"My Lord Dragon," Naeff said. "I don't like this. You should have gteater protection. Let us return and gather - "

"ɪt wɪl bi faɪn, nf," ɹænd sɛd. hi tɝn tə mɪn ən hɛld aʊɾ ɪz hænd.

"It will be fine, Naeff," Rand said. He turned to Min and held out his hand.

ʃi tʊk ɪt, dʒɔɪnɪŋ hɪm. nf ən ðə meɪɾənz hæɾ ɔɹɾɝz tə fɑloʊ bɪhaɪn əɾ ə dɪstəns; ðeɪ wəd dʒɹɔ ətɛnʃən.

She took it, joining him. Naeff and the Maidens had orders to follow behind at a distance; they would draw attention.

əz mɪn ən ɹænd stɛpt aʊɾ ɑntu wʌn ə ðə dəmɑni kæpəɾəlz mɛni bɔɹdwɔks, ʃi ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə hɝ maʊð. ɪt hæɾ oʊnli bɪn ə ʃɔɹt taɪm sɪns ɹændz dɪpɑɹtʃɝ. haʊ hæd ðə sɪɾi tʃeɪnʒd soʊ kwɪkli?

As Min and Rand stepped out onto one of the Domani capital's many boardwalks, she raised a hand to her mouth. It had only been a short time since Rand's departure. How had the city changed so quickly?

ðə stʃɹit wɑz fʊl ə sɪkli, dɝɾi pipəl, kɹaʊɾəd əlɔŋsaɪd wɔlz, hʌɾəld ɪn blæŋkəts. ðəɹ wɑzn ɹum tə muv ɑn ðə bɔɹdwɔks; mɪn ən ɹænd hæd tə stɛp daʊn ɪndə ðə mʌd tə kəntɪnju.

The street was full of sickly, dirty people, crowded alongside walls, huddled in blankets. There wasn't room to move on the boardwalks; Min and Rand had to step down into the mud to continue.

pipəl kɔft ən moʊnd, ən ʃi ɹilaɪz ðə stɛntʃɪz wɝn kənfaɪn tə ði æli. ði ɪntaɪɝ sɪɾi sim tə stɪŋk. wʌns, bænɝz hæd hʌŋ fɹəm mɛni ʌv ðiz bɪldɪŋz, bʌt ðeɪd bɪn pʊl daʊn ən ɹɪpt əpɑɹt fəɹ blæŋkəts əɹ fjuəl.

People coughed and moaned, and she realized the stenches weren't confined to the alley. The entire city seemed to stink. Once, banners had hung from many of these buildings, but they'd been pulled down and ripped apart for blankets or fuel.

moʊst ə ðə bɪldɪŋz hæd bɹoʊkən wɪndoʊz, wɪð ɹɛfjudʒiz klɑɡɪŋ ðə dɔɹweɪz ən flɔɹz ɪnsaɪd. əz mɪn ən ɹænd wɔkt, ðə pipəl ɝaʊn əm tɝn tə wɑtʃ. səm lʊk dɪlɪɹiəs.

Most of the buildings had broken windows, with refugees clogging the doorways and floors inside. As Min and Rand walked, the people around them turned to watch. Some looked delirious.

ʌðɝz lʊk hʌŋɡɹi. ən deɪnʒɝəs. mɛni wɝ dəmɑni, bʌt ðəɹ sim tə bi əz mɛni pəlɝ- skɪn pipəl. ɹɛfjudʒiz fɹəm ɑlməθ pleɪn əɹ sɑldɑiə, pɝhæps. mɪn lusən ə naɪf ɪn əɹ sliv əz ðeɪ pæst ə ɡɹup ə jʌŋ tʌfs laʊnʒɪŋ əɾ ən æli weɪ ɛs maʊθ. pɝhæps nf hæd bɪn ɹaɪt. ðɪs dɪdn fil seɪf.

Others looked hungry. And dangerous. Many were Domani, but there seemed to be as many paler- skinned people. Refugees from Almoth Plain or Saldaea, perhaps. Min loosened a knife in her sleeve as they passed a group of young toughs lounging at an alley way s mouth. Perhaps Naeff had been right. This didn't feel safe.

"aɪ wɔk θɹu ɛbu dɑɹ laɪk ðɪs," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli. sʌɾənli, ʃi wɑz əwɛɹ ə hɪz peɪn. ə kɹʌʃɪŋ ɡɪlt, mɔɹ hɝtfəl ðən ðə wunz ɪn ɪz saɪd. "ðæt wɑz pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌt meɪd mi tʃeɪnʒ. ðə pipəl ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ wɝ hæpi ən wɛl-fɛd. ðeɪ dɪdn lʊk laɪk ðiz. ðə sintʃæn ɹul bɛɾɝ ðən aɪ."

"I walked through Ebou Dar like this," Rand said softly. Suddenly, she was aware of his pain. A crushing guilt, more hurtful than the wounds in his side. "That was part of what made me change. The people in Ebou Dar were happy and well-fed. They didn't look like these. The Seanchan rule better than I."

"ɹænd, jə ɑɹən ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ ðɪs," mɪn sɛd. "ju wɝn hɪɹ tə . . ."

"Rand, you aren't responsible for this," Min said. "You weren't here to . . ."

hɪz peɪn ɪnkɹist, ən ʃi ɹilaɪzd ʃid sɛd ðə ɹɔŋ θɪŋ. "jɛs," hi ɹɪplaɪd sɔfli, "aɪ wɑzn hɪɹ. aɪ əbændən ðɪs sɪɾi wən aɪ sɔ ðəɾ aɪ kəd nɑt juz ɪɾ əz ðə tul aɪ wɪʃt ɪt tə bi. aɪ fɝɡɑt, mɪn. aɪ fɝɡɑt wʌt ðɪs wɑz ɔl əbaʊt. tɑɹn wɑz soʊ vɛɹi ɹaɪt. ə mæn mʌs noʊ waɪ hiz faɪɾɪŋ."

His pain increased, and she realized she'd said the wrong thing. "Yes," he replied softly, "I wasn't here. I abandoned this city when I saw that I could not use it as the tool I wished it to be. I forgot, Min. I forgot what this was all about. Tarn was so very right. A man must know why he is fighting."

ɹænd hæd sɛn ɪz fɑðɝ - əlɔŋ wɪð wʌn ə ði æʃəmən - tə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz tə pɹipɛɹ ən ɡæðɝ əm fəɹ ðə læs bæɾəl.

Rand had sent his father - along with one of the Ashaman - to the Two Rivers to prepare and gather them for the Last Battle.

ɹænd stʌmbəld əz i wɔkt, sʌɾənli lʊkɪŋ vɛɹi taɪɝd. hi sæt daʊn ɑn ə nɪɹbaɪ bɑks. ə kɑpɝ-skɪn ɝtʃən wɑtʃt ɪm kinli fɹəm ə nɪɹbaɪ dɔɹweɪ. əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹit, ə ɹoʊdweɪ bɹæntʃt ɔf ðə meɪn θɝoʊfɛɹ. ðət wʌn wɑzn klɔɡd wɪð pipəl; bɹuɾɪʃ-lʊkɪŋ mɛn wɪð kʌdʒəlz stʊɾ əɾ ɪts maʊθ.

Rand stumbled as he walked, suddenly looking very tired. He sat down on a nearby box. A copper-skinned urchin watched him keenly from a nearby doorway. Across the street, a roadway branched off the main thoroughfare. That one wasn't clogged with people; brutish-looking men with cudgels stood at its mouth.

"ðeɪ bɹeɪk ɪndə ɡæŋz," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli, ʃoʊldɝz boʊɪŋ. "ðə ɹɪtʃ haɪɝ ðə stʃɹɔŋ tə pɹətɛk ðɛm, tə faɪɾ əweɪ ðoʊz u kʌm sikɪŋ ðɛɹ wɛlθ. bʌɾ ɪts nɑɾ ə wɛlθ ʌv ɡoʊld əɹ dʒuəlɹi. ɪts əbaʊt fud, naʊ."

"They break into gangs," Rand said softly, shoulders bowing. "The rich hire the strong to protect them, to fight away those who come seeking their wealth. But it's not a wealth of gold or jewelry. It's about food, now."

"ɹænd," ʃi sɛd, ɡoʊɪŋ tə wʌn ni bɪsaɪd hɪm. "ju kænt - "

"Rand," she said, going to one knee beside him. "You can't - "

"aɪ noʊ aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ ɑn," ɹænd sɛd, "bʌɾ ɪt hɝts tə noʊ ðə θɪŋz ðəɾ aɪv dʌn, mɪn. baɪ tɝnɪŋ maɪsɛlf tə stil, aɪ pʊʃt aʊɾ ɔl ə ðiz ɪmoʊʃənz. baɪ əlaʊɪŋ maɪsɛlf tə kɛɹ əɡɛn, tə læf əɡɛn, aɪv hæd tə oʊpən maɪsɛlf tə maɪ feɪljɝz, tu."

"I know I must go on," Rand said, "but it hurts to know the things that I've done, Min. By turning myself to steel, I pushed out all of these emotions. By allowing myself to care again, to laugh again, I've had to open myself to my failures, too."

"ɹænd, aɪ si sʌnlaɪɾ ɝaʊn ju."

"Rand, I see sunlight around you."

hi lʊkt ʌp ət hɝ, ðən ɡlænst ət ðə skaɪ.

He looked up at her, then glanced at the sky.

"nɑt ðət sʌnlaɪt," mɪn wɪspɝd. "ə vjuɪŋ. aɪ si dɑɹk klaʊdz, pʊʃt əweɪ baɪ ðə sʌnlaɪts wɔɹmθ. aɪ si ju, ə bɹɪljənt waɪt sɔɹd hɛld ɪn jəɹ hænd, wildɪɾ əɡɛnst wʌn ə blæk, hɛl baɪ ə feɪsləs dɑɹknəs. aɪ si tʃɹiz, ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɡɹin əɡɛn, bɛɹɪŋ fɹut. aɪ si ə fild, ðə kɹɑps hɛlθi ən fʊl." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "aɪ si ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ɹænd. aɪ si ən ɪn ðəɹ wɪð ðə mɑɹk ə ðə dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ ɪnleɪɾ ɑn ɪts dɔɹ. noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bi ə sɪmbəl ə dɑɹknəs əɹ heɪt. ə saɪn ə vɪktɝi ən hoʊp."

"Not that sunlight," Min whispered. "A viewing. I see dark clouds, pushed away by the sunlight's warmth. I see you, a brilliant white sword held in your hand, wielded against one of black, held by a faceless darkness. I see trees, growing green again, bearing fruit. I see a field, the crops healthy and full." She hesitated. "I see the Two Rivers, Rand. I see an inn there with the mark of the Dragon's Fang inlaid on its door. No longer be a symbol of darkness or hate. A sign of victory and hope."

hi lʊk tə hɝ.

He looked to her.

mɪn kɑt sʌmθɪŋ fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ. ʃi tɝn təwɔɹd ðə pipəl sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə stʃɹit, ən ɡeɪpt. ɛvɹi sɪŋɡəl wʌn hæɾ ən ɪmədʒ əbʌv ðɛm. ɪt wɑz ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl tə si soʊ mɛni vjuɪŋz, ɔl ət wʌns, flɛɹɪŋ tə laɪɾ əbʌv ðə hɛdz ə ðə sɪkli, ðə wik, ən ði əbændənd.

Min caught something from the corner of her eye. She turned toward the people sitting on the street, and gaped. Every single one had an image above them. It was remarkable to see so many viewings, all at once, flaring to light above the heads of the sickly, the weak, and the abandoned.

"aɪ si ə sɪlvɝ æks əbʌv ðət mænz hɛd," ʃi sɛd, pɔɪntɪŋ tə ə bɪɹɾəd bɛɡɝ, hu leɪ əɡɛnst ə wɔl, hɪz tʃɪn daʊn əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst. "hi wɪl bi ə liɾɝ ɪn ðə læs bæɾəl. ðət wʊmən ðəɹ -  ðə wʌn sʌlkɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz - ʃɪl bi tʃɹeɪn baɪ ðə waɪt taʊɝ ən bɪkʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ kən si ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn bɪsaɪd hɝ, ən aɪ noʊ wʌɾ ɪt minz. ðət mæn oʊvɝ ðəɹ u lʊks laɪk ə sɪmpəl stʃɹit tʌf? hɪl seɪv əɹ laɪf. aɪ noʊ hi dʌzn lʊk laɪk ɪt, bʌt hɪl faɪt. ɔl ə ðɛm wɪl. aɪ kən si ɪt!"

"I see a silver axe above that man's head," she said, pointing to a bearded beggar, who lay against a wall, his chin down against his chest. "He will be a leader in the Last Battle. That woman there -  the one sulking in the shadows - she will be trained by the White Tower and become Aes Sedai. I can see the Flame of Tar Valon beside her, and I know what it means. That man over there who looks like a simple street tough? He will save her life. I know he doesn't look like it, but he will fight. All of them will. I can see it!"

ʃi lʊkt ət ɹænd ən tʊk ɪz hænd. "ju wɪl bi stʃɹɔŋ, ɹænd. jəl də ðɪs. jəl lɛd ðɛm. aɪ noʊ ɪt."

She looked at Rand and took his hand. "You will be strong, Rand. You'll do this. You'll lead them. I know it."

"ju sɔ ðæt?" hi æskt. "ɪn ə vjuɪŋ?"

"You saw that?" he asked. "In a viewing?"

ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "aɪ doʊnt nid tə. aɪ bɪliv ɪn ju." aɪ ɔlmoʊs kɪl ju," hi wɪspɝd. "wɛn jə lʊk ət mi, jə si ə mɝɾɝɝ. jə fil maɪ hæn ət jəɹ θɹoʊt."

She shook her head. "I don't need to. I believe in you." I almost killed you," he whispered. "When you look at me, you see a murderer. You feel my hand at your throat."

"wʌt? ʌv kɔɹs aɪ doʊnt! ɹænd, mit maɪ aɪz. jə kən sɛns mi θɹu ðə bɑnd. dʒju fil ə slɪvɝ ə hɛzəteɪʃən əɹ fɪɹ fɹəm mi?"

"What? Of course I don't! Rand, meet my eyes. You can sense me through the bond. Do you feel a sliver of hesitation or fear from me?"

hi sɝtʃt əɹ aɪz wɪð ɪz oʊn, soʊ dip. ʃi dɪdn bæk daʊn. ʃi kəd mit ði aɪz ə ðɪs ʃifɝɾɝ.

He searched her eyes with his own, so deep. She didn't back down. She could meet the eyes of this sheepherder.

hi sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪɾɝ. "oʊ, mɪn. wʌt wəɾ aɪ də wɪθaʊt ju?"

He sat up straighter. "Oh, Min. What would I do without you?"

ʃi snɔɹɾɪd. "ju hæv kɪŋz ən il tʃifs fɑloʊɪŋ ju. ɛɛs sədaɪ, æʃəmən, ən tɑvɝən.

She snorted. "You have kings and Aiel chiefs following you. Aes Sedai, Asha'man, and ta'veren.

aɪm sɝɾən jud ɡɛɾ əlɔŋ."

I'm certain you'd get along."

"noʊ," ɹænd sɛd. "jɔɹ mɔɹ vaɪɾəl ðən əm ɔl. jə ɹimaɪn mi hu aɪ æm. bɪsaɪdz, jə θɪŋk mɔɹ klɪɹli ðən moʊst ə ðoʊz u kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz maɪ kaʊnsəlɝz.

"No," Rand said. "You're more vital than them all. You remind me who I am. Besides, you think more clearly than most of those who call themselves my counselors.

jə kəd bi ə kwin, ɪf jə wɪʃt ɪt."

You could be a queen, if you wished it."

"ɔl aɪ wɪʃ fəɹ ɪz ju, stupəd lubi."

"All I wish for is you, stupid looby."

"θæŋk ju." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "ðoʊ aɪ kəd mænədʒ wɪθaʊt kwaɪt soʊ mʌtʃ neɪm kɔlɪŋ."

"Thank you." He hesitated. "Though I could manage without quite so much name calling."

"laɪfs tʌf, ɪzən ɪt?"

"Life's tough, isn't it?"

hi smaɪld. ðən i stʊd, teɪkɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ. hɪz ɡɪlt wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ, bʌɾ i mænədʒd ɪt naʊ, əz i mænədʒ ðə peɪn. nɪɹbaɪ, ðə ɹɛfjudʒiz pɝkt ʌp. ɹænd tɝn təwɔɹd ðə bɪɹɾəd ɹɛtʃ mɪn hæɾ ɪndəkeɪɾəd ɝliɝ; ðə mæn sæt wɪð ɪz fiɾ ɪn ðə mʌd.

He smiled. Then he stood, taking a deep breath. His guilt was still there, but he managed it now, as he managed the pain. Nearby, the refugees perked up. Rand turned toward the bearded wretch Min had indicated earlier; the man sat with his feet in the mud.

"ju," ðə mæn sɛd tə ɹænd, "jɔɹ hɪm. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn."

"You," the man said to Rand, "you're him. The Dragon Reborn."

"jɛs," ɹænd sɛd. "ju wɝ ə soʊlʒɝ?"

"Yes," Rand said. "You were a soldier?"

"aɪ. . ." ðə mænz aɪz ɡɹu dɪstənt. "ənʌðɝ laɪf. aɪ wɑz ɪn ðə kɪŋz ɡɑɹd, bɪfɔɹ i wɑz teɪkən, bɪfɔɹ wi wɝ siz baɪ leɪɾi tʃædmɑɝ, ðən dɪsbændɪd." ðə fətiɡ sim tə blid fɹəm ɪz aɪz əz i θɔɾ ə ɝliɝ deɪz.

"I. . ." The man's eyes grew distant. "Another life. I was in the King's Guard, before he was taken, before we were seized by Lady Chadmar, then disbanded." The fatigue seemed to bleed from his eyes as he thought of earlier days.

"ɛksələnt," ɹænd sɛd. "wi nid tə ɹɪstɔɹ ðɪs sɪɾi, kæptən."

"Excellent," Rand said. "We need to restore this city, Captain."

"kæptən?" ðə mæn sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ. . ." hi kɑkt ɪz hɛd. ðən i stʊɾ ʌp ən bɹʌʃt hɪmsɛlf ɔf. hi sʌɾənli hæɾ ə feɪnli mɪlətɛɹi ɛɹ əbaʊt hɪm, dɪspaɪt ðə ɹɪp kloʊðɪŋ ən ðə snɑɹəl bɪɹd. "wɛl, aɪ səpoʊz jəɹ ɹaɪt. bʌɾ aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ɪɾəl bi izi. ðə pipəl ɑɹ stɑɹvɪŋ."

"Captain?" the man said. "But I. . ." He cocked his head. Then he stood up and brushed himself off. He suddenly had a faintly military air about him, despite the ripped clothing and the snarled beard. "Well, I suppose you're right. But I don't think it'll be easy. The people are starving."

"aɪ wɪl si tə ðæt," ɹænd sɛd. "aɪ nid jə tə ɡæðɝ jəɹ soʊlʒɝz."

"I will see to that," Rand said. "I need you to gather your soldiers."

"aɪ doʊn si mɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝ lædz hɪɹ. . . . noʊ, weɪt. ðɛɹz voʊɾəbɛk ən ɹɛdbɔɹd." hi weɪv tə ə pɛɹ ə ðə tʌfs mɪn hæd noʊɾəst ɝliɝ. ðeɪ hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən wɔkt oʊvɝ.

"I don't see many of the other lads here. . . . No, wait. There's Votabek and Redbord." He waved to a pair of the toughs Min had noticed earlier. They hesitated, then walked over.

"dɝnəm?" wʌn ə ðɛm æskt. "wʌts ðɪs?"

"Durnham?" one of them asked. "What's this?"

"ɪts taɪm fəɹ ðə lɔləsnəs ɪn ðə sɪɾi tə ɛnd," dɝnəm sɛd. "wɝ gɑnə ɔɹɡənaɪz θɪŋz, klin ɪɾ ʌp. ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən əz ɹɪtɝnd."

"It's time for the lawlessness in the city to end," Durnham said. "We're going to organize things, clean it up. The Lord Dragon has returned."

wʌn ə ðɛm spæt tə ðə saɪd. hi wɑz ə bɝli mæn wɪð kɝli blæk hɛɹ, dəmɑni skɪn, ən ə θɪn mʌstæʃ. "bɝn hɪm. hi lɛft ʌs. aɪ - " hi kʌɾ ɔf əz sɔ ɹænd.

One of them spat to the side. He was a burly man with curly black hair, Domani skin, and a thin mustache. "Burn him. He left us. I - " He cut off as saw Rand.

"aɪm sɑɹi," ɹænd sɛd, miɾɪŋ ðə mænz aɪz. "aɪ feɪl ju. əl nɑt də soʊ əɡɛn."

"I'm sorry," Rand said, meeting the man's eyes. "I failed you. I will not do so again."

ðə mæn ɡlænst əɾ ɪz kəmpænjən, hu ʃɹʌɡd. "leɪnz nɛvɝ gɑnə peɪ ʌs. maɪɾ əz wɛl si wʌt wi kən də hɪɹ."

The man glanced at his companion, who shrugged. "Lain's never going to pay us. Might as well see what we can do here."

"nf," ɹænd kɔld, weɪvɪŋ ði æʃəmən fɔɹwɝd. hi ən ðə meɪɾənz stɛpt ʌp fɹəm wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪn wɑtʃɪŋ. "meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ bæk tə ðə stoʊn. aɪ wɑnt wɛpənz, ɑɹmɝ ən junəfɔɹmz."

"Naeff," Rand called, waving the Asha'man forward. He and the Maidens stepped up from where they had been watching. "Make a gateway back to the Stone. I want weapons, armor and uniforms."

"aɪl də ɪɾ ɪmiɾiətli," nf sɛd. "wil əv soʊlʒɝz bɹɪŋ əm -  "noʊ," ɹænd sɛd. "pæs ðə səplaɪz θɹu, ɪndə ðɪs bɪldɪŋ hɪɹ.

"I'll do it immediately," Naeff said. "We'll have soldiers bring them -  "No," Rand said. "Pass the supplies through, into this building here.

əl klɪɹ ə pleɪs fəɹ ðə ɡeɪtweɪ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪt. bʌt noʊ soʊlʒɝz ɑɹ tə kʌm."

I'll clear a place for the gateway inside it. But no soldiers are to come."

ɹænd ɹeɪzd ɪz aɪz, lʊkɪŋ ət ðə stʃɹit. "bændɑɹ ɛbən əz sʌfɝɾ ɪnʌf bɪniθ ðə hænz ʌv aʊtsaɪɾɝz. tədeɪ, ʃɪl nɑt noʊ ðə hæn ʌv ə kɑŋkɝɝ."

Rand raised his eyes, looking at the street. "Bandar Eban has suffered enough beneath the hands of outsiders. Today, she will not know the hand of a conqueror."

mɪn stɛp bæk, ən wɑtʃt wɪð wʌndɝ. ðə θɹi soʊlʒɝz hæz-tɛn ɪndə ðə bɪldɪŋ ən klɪɹɾ aʊt ði ɝtʃənz. wən ɹænd sɔ ðɛm i æskt əm tə bi mɛsənʒɝz tə ɹʌn ɛɹənz. ðeɪ ɹɪspɑndɪd. ɛvɹiwʌn ɹɪspɑndɪd tə ɹænd, wən ðeɪ tʊk taɪm tə lʊk ət hɪm.

Min stepped back, and watched with wonder. The three soldiers has-tened into the building and cleared out the urchins. When Rand saw them he asked them to be messengers to run errands. They responded. Everyone responded to Rand, when they took time to look at him.

pɝhæps ənʌðɝ maɪɾ əv θɔɾ ɪt səm fɔɹm ə kəmpʌlʃən, bʌt mɪn sɔ ðɛɹ feɪsəz tʃeɪnʒ, sɔ hoʊp ɹɪtɝn əz ə ɡlɪmɝ ɪn ðɛɹ aɪz. ðeɪ sɔ sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ɹænd ðeɪ kəd tʃɹʌst.

Perhaps another might have thought it some form of Compulsion, but Min saw their faces change, saw hope return as a glimmer in their eyes. They saw something about Rand they could trust.

sʌmθɪŋ, ət list, ðeɪ hoʊp ðeɪ kəd tʃɹʌst.

Something, at least, they hoped they could trust.

ðə θɹi soʊlʒɝz sɛn ə fju ʌv ðə mɛsənʒɝ bɔɪz ən ɡɝlz tə fɛtʃ ʌðɝ fɔɹmɝ soʊlʒɝz. nf meɪɾ ɪz ɡeɪtweɪ. ɪn mɪnəts, ði ɝɪdʒənəl θɹi soʊlʒɝz stɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə bɪldɪŋ, wɛɹɪŋ sɪlvɝi bɹɛstpleɪts ən sɪmpəl, klin kloʊðɪŋ ʌv ɡɹin. ðə mɛn hæd koʊm ðɛɹ bɪɹdz ən hɛɹ ən faʊn səm wɔɾɝ tə wɑʃ ðɛɹ feɪsəz əz kwɪkli əz ðæt, ðeɪ stɑp lʊkɪŋ laɪk bɛɡɝz ən bɪkeɪm soʊlʒɝz. ə bɪt smɛli, bʌt soʊlʒɝz nʌnðəlɛs.

The three soldiers sent a few of the messenger boys and girls to fetch other former soldiers. Naeff made his gateway. In minutes, the original three soldiers stepped out of the building, wearing silvery breastplates and simple, clean clothing of green. The men had combed their beards and hair and found some water to wash their faces As quickly as that, they stopped looking like beggars and became soldiers. A bit smelly, but soldiers nonetheless.

ðə wʊmən mɪn hæd noʊɾəd ɝliɝ - ðə wʌn ʃi wɑz sɝɾən kəd lɝn tə tʃænəl - keɪm oʊvɝ tə spik wɪð ɹænd. æftɝ ə bɪt, ʃi nɑɾəd, ən sun hæd ɡæðɝd wɪmən ən mɛn tə fɪl bʌkəts fɹəm ðə wɛl. mɪn fɹaʊn ət ðəɾ əntɪl ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd waɪpɪŋ klin ðə feɪsəz ən hænz ə ðoʊz u əpɹoʊtʃt.

The woman Min had noted earlier - the one she was certain could learn to channel - came over to speak with Rand. After a bit, she nodded, and soon had gathered women and men to fill buckets from the well. Min frowned at that until they started wiping clean the faces and hands of those who approached.

pipəl bɪɡæn tə ɡæðɝ ɝaʊnd. səm kjʊɹiəs, ʌðɝz hɑstəl, stɪl ʌðɝz mɪɹli kɑɾ ɪn ðə floʊ. ðə wʊmən ən əɹ tim bɪɡæn sɔɹɾɪŋ θɹu ðɛm ən sɛɾɪŋ əm tə wɝk. səm tə sik aʊt ðə wundəɾ əɹ sɪkli, ʌðɝz tə teɪk ʌp sɔɹdz ən junəfɔɹmz. ənʌðɝ wʊmən bɪɡæn ɪntɛɹəɡeɪɾɪŋ ði ɝtʃənz, dɪskʌvɝɪŋ wɛɹ ðɛɹ pɛɹəns wɝ, ɪf ðeɪ hæɾ ɛni.

People began to gather around. Some curious, others hostile, still others merely caught in the flow. The woman and her team began sorting through them and setting them to work. Some to seek out the wounded or sickly, others to take up swords and uniforms. Another woman began interrogating the urchins, discovering where their parents were, if they had any.

mɪn sæt daʊn ɑn ðə bɑks ðət ɹænd hæd bɪn sɪɾɪŋ ɑn. wɪðɪn ði aʊɝ, hi hæɾ ə ɡɹup ə soʊlʒɝz faɪv hʌnʒɹəd stʃɹɔŋ, lɛd baɪ kæptən dɝn-hæm ən ɪz tu lutɛnəns. mɛni ʌv ðoʊz faɪv hʌnʒɹəd kɛpt ɡlænsɪŋ daʊn ət ðɛɹ klin kloʊðɪŋ ən sɪlvɝi bɹɛstpleɪts əz ɪf əmeɪzd.

Min sat down on the box that Rand had been sitting on. Within the hour, he had a group of soldiers five hundred strong, led by Captain Durn-ham and his two lieutenants. Many of those five hundred kept glancing down at their clean clothing and silvery breastplates as if amazed.

ɹænd spoʊk wɪð mɛni ʌv ðɛm, əpɑlədʒaɪzɪŋ dɝɛkli. əz i wɑz spik-ɪŋ tə wʌn wʊmən, ðə kɹaʊd bɪhaɪn bɪɡæn tə ʃʌfəl ən muv. ɹænd tɝn tə si ən eɪdʒɪd mæn əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ, hɪz skɪn bɹoʊkən baɪ tɛɹəbəl liʒənz. ðə kɹaʊd kɛpt ɪts dɪstəns.

Rand spoke with many of them, apologizing directly. As he was speak-ing to one woman, the crowd behind began to shuffle and move. Rand turned to see an aged man approaching, his skin broken by terrible lesions. The crowd kept its distance.

"nf," ɹænd kɔld.

"Naeff," Rand called.

"maɪ lɔɹd?"

"My Lord?"

"bɹɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ θɹu," ɹænd sɛd. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ pipəl u ɹeɪ-kwaɪɹ hilɪŋ." ðə wʊmən u hæd ɡɑɾən pipəl tə fɪl wɔɾɝ bʌkəts lɛd ði oʊl mæn tə wʌn saɪd.

"Bring the Aes Sedai through," Rand said. "There are people who re-quire Healing." The woman who had gotten people to fill water buckets led the old man to one side.

"maɪ lɔɹd," kæptən dɝnəm sɛd, mɑɹtʃɪŋ ʌp. mɪn blɪŋkt. ðə mæn hæd faʊn ə ɹeɪzɝ sʌmwɛɹ ən ʃeɪvd ɔf ɪz bɪɹd, ɹɪvilɪŋ ə stʃɹɔŋ tʃɪn. hid lɛft ə dəmɑni mʌstæʃ. fɔɹ mɛn fɑloʊɾ ɪm əz ə ɡɑɹd.

"My Lord," Captain Durnham said, marching up. Min blinked. The man had found a razor somewhere and shaved off his beard, revealing a strong chin. He'd left a Domani mustache. Four men followed him as a guard.

"wɝ gɑnə nid mɔɹ ɹum, maɪ lɔɹd," dɝnəm sɛd. "ðæt bɪldɪŋ jə tʃoʊz ɪz oʊvɝfloʊɪŋ, ən mɔɹ ən mɔɹ ɑɹ kʌmɪŋ, fɪlɪŋ ðə stʃɹit."

"We're going to need more room, my Lord," Durnham said. "That building you chose is overflowing, and more and more are coming, filling the street."

"wʌt dʒju sədʒɛst?" ɹænd æskt.

"What do you suggest?" Rand asked.

"ðə dɑks," dɝnəm ɹɪplaɪd. "ðeɪ ɑɹ hɛl baɪ wʌn ə ðə sɪɾi mɝtʃəns. əl weɪdʒɝ wi kən faɪn səm nɪɹ-ɛmpti wɛɹhaʊzɪz tə juz. ðoʊz wʌns hɛl fud bʌt . . . wɛl, ðəɹ ɪzən ɛni lɛft."

"The docks," Durnham replied. "They are held by one of the city merchants. I'll wager we can find some near-empty warehouses to use. Those once held food but . . . well, there isn't any left."

"æn ðə mɝtʃən u hoʊlz ðə pleɪs?" ɹænd æskt.

"And the merchant who holds the place?" Rand asked.

"maɪ lɔɹd," kæptən dɝnəm sɛd, "nʌθɪŋ jə kæn dil wɪð."

"My Lord," Captain Durnham said, "nothing you can't deal with."

ɹænd smaɪld, ðən weɪv fəɹ dɝnəm tə lid ðə weɪ. ɹænd hɛld ɪz hæn aʊt tə mɪn.

Rand smiled, then waved for Durnham to lead the way. Rand held his hand out to Min.

"ɹænd," ʃi sɛd, dʒɔɪnɪŋ hɪm, "ðeɪl nid fud."

"Rand," she said, joining him, "they'll need food."

"jɛs," hi əɡɹid. hi lʊk saʊθwɝd, təwɔɹd ðə nɪɹbaɪ dɑks. "wil faɪn ɪt ðɛɹ."

"Yes," he agreed. He looked southward, toward the nearby docks. "We'll find it there."

"woʊn ɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hæv bɪn iɾən?"

"Won't it already have been eaten?"

ɹænd dɪdn ɹɪplaɪ. ðeɪ dʒɔɪn ðə nuli fɔɹm sɪɾi ɡɑɹd, wɔkɪŋ ət ðə hɛɾ ʌv ə fɔɹs ɪn ɡɹin ən sɪlvɝ. bɪhaɪn əm tʃɹeɪld ə ɡɹoʊɪŋ θɹɔŋ ə hoʊpfəl ɹɛfjudʒiz.

Rand didn't reply. They joined the newly formed city guard, walking at the head of a force in green and silver. Behind them trailed a growing throng of hopeful refugees.

ði ɪnɔɹməs dɑks ə bændɑɹ ɛbən wɝ səm ə ðə moʊst ɪmpɹɛsɪv ɪn ðə wɝld. ðeɪ leɪ ɪn ə hæf-mun ət ðə beɪs ə ðə sɪɾi. mɪn wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə si haʊ mɛni ʃɪps wɝ ðɛɹ, moʊst ə ðɛm si foʊk vɛsəlz.

The enormous docks of Bandar Eban were some of the most impressive in the world. They lay in a half-moon at the base of the city. Min was surprised to see how many ships were there, most of them Sea Folk vessels.

ðæts ɹaɪt, mɪn θɔt. ɹænd hæɾ əm bɹɪŋ fud tə ðə sɪɾi. bʌɾ ɪt hæd spɔɪld. əz ɹænd hæd lɛf ðə sɪɾi, hid ɡɑɾən wɝd ðəɾ ɔl ə ðə fuɾ ɑn ðoʊz ʃɪps hæd fɔlən tə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz tʌtʃ.

That's right, Min thought. Rand had them bring food to the city. But it had spoiled. As Rand had left the city, he'd gotten word that all of the food on those ships had fallen to the Dark One's touch.

sʌmwʌn hæd sɛɾ ʌp blɑkeɪdz ət ðə beɪs ə ðə ɹoʊdweɪ. ʌðɝ ɹoʊdz tə ðə dɑks lʊk sɪməlɝli ɪnhɪbəɾɪd. junəfɔɹm soʊlʒɝz pikt aʊt nɝvəsli fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðə bæɹəkeɪɾ əz ɹændz fɔɹs wɔkt ʌp.

Someone had set up blockades at the base of the roadway. Other roads to the docks looked similarly inhibited. Uniformed soldiers peeked out nervously from behind the barricade as Rand's force walked up.

"stɑp ɹaɪt ðɛɹ!" ə vɔɪs kɔld. "wi doʊnt - "

"Stop right there!" a voice called. "We don't - "

ɹænd lɪftəɾ ɪz hænd, ðən weɪvd ɪt kæʒəwəli. ðə bæɹəkeɪd - fɔɹmd ə fɝnɪtʃɝ ən plæŋks -  ɹʌmbəld, ðən slɪd tə ðə saɪd wɪð ə ɡɹaɪndɪŋ ʌv wʊd. mɛn kɹaɪɾ aʊt fɹəm bɪhaɪnd, skɹæmbəlɪŋ əweɪ.

Rand lifted his hand, then waved it casually. The barricade - formed of furniture and planks -  rumbled, then slid to the side with a grinding of wood. Men cried out from behind, scrambling away.

ɹænd lɛf ðə bæɹəkeɪd slʌmpt ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ɹoʊd. hi stɛp fɔɹwɝd, ən mɪn kəd sɛns pis ɪnsaɪɾ ə hɪm. ə ɹæɡəd-lʊkɪŋ ɡɹup ə mɛn wɪð kʌdʒəlz stʊɾ ɪn ðə ɹoʊd, aɪz waɪd. ɹænd pɪkt wʌn ət ðə fɹʌnt. "hu ɪz ɪt ðət blɑks maɪ pipəl fɹəm ðiz dɑks ən siks tə hɔɹd fud fəɹ hɪmsɛlf? aɪ wəd . . . spik wɪð ðɪs pɝsən."

Rand left the barricade slumped at the side of the road. He stepped forward, and Min could sense peace inside of him. A ragged-looking group of men with cudgels stood in the road, eyes wide. Rand picked one at the front. "Who is it that blocks my people from these docks and seeks to hoard food for himself? I would . . . speak with this person."

"maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən?" ə sɝpɹaɪz vɔɪs æskt.

"My Lord Dragon?" a surprised voice asked.

mɪn ɡlæns tə ðə saɪd. ə tɔl, lin mæn ɪn ə ɹɛd dəmɑni koʊt hʌsəl təwɔɹɾ əm fɹəm ðə dɑks. hɪz ʃɝt hæd wʌns bɪn faɪn ən ɹʌfəld, bʌt wɑz naʊ ɹɪŋkəld ən ənkɛmpt. hi lʊkt ɪɡzɔstəd.

Min glanced to the side. A tall, lean man in a red Domani coat hustled toward them from the docks. His shirt had once been fine and ruffled, but was now wrinkled and unkempt. He looked exhausted.

wʌt wɑz ɪz neɪm? mɪn θɔt. aɪɹlɪn. ðæts ɪt. mæstɝ ə ðə dɑks.

What was his name? Min thought. Iralin. That's it. Master of the docks.

"aɪɹlɪn?" ɹænd æskt. "wʌɾ ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn hɪɹ? wʌɾ əv jə dʌn?"

"Iralin?" Rand asked. "What is going on here? What have you done?"

"wʌɾ əv / dʌn?" ðə mæn dɪmændəd. "aɪv bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ɛvɹiwʌn fɹəm ɹʌʃɪŋ ðoʊz ʃɪps fəɹ ðə spɔɪl fud! ɛniwʌn u its ɪt ɡɛts sɪk ən daɪz. ðə pipəl woʊn lɪsən. sɛvɹəl ɡɹups tʃɹaɪd tə stɔɹm ðə dɑks fəɹ ðə fud, soʊ aɪ dɪsaɪɾɪd nɑt tə lɛɾ əm kɪl ðɛmsɛlvz iɾɪŋ ɪt."

"What have / done?" the man demanded. "I've been trying to keep everyone from rushing those ships for the spoiled food! Anyone who eats it gets sick and dies. The people won't listen. Several groups tried to storm the docks for the food, so I decided not to let them kill themselves eating it."

ðə mænz vɔɪs hæd nɛvɝ bɪn ðəɾ æŋɡɹi bɪfɔɹ. mɪn ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪm əz pisəbəl.

The man's voice had never been that angry before. Min remembered him as peaceable.

"leɪɾi tʃædmɑɝ flɛɾ ən aʊɝ æftɝ jə lɛft," aɪɹlɪn kəntɪnjud. "ði ʌðɝ mɛmbɝz ə ðə kaʊnsəl ə mɝtʃəns ɹæn wɪðɪn ðə deɪ. ðoʊz bɝnɪŋ si foʊk kleɪm ðeɪ woʊn seɪl əweɪ əntɪl ðeɪv ənloʊɾəd ðɛɹ wɛɹz - əɹ əntɪl aɪ ɡɪv əm peɪmən tə də sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. soʊ aɪv bɪn weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə sɪɾi tə stɑɹv ɪtsɛlf, it ðət fuɾ ən daɪ, əɹ ɡoʊ ʌp ɪn ənʌðɝ ɹaɪəɾ ə fleɪm ən dɛθ. ðæts wʌɾ aɪv bɪn duɪŋ hɪɹ. wʌɾ əv jə bɪn duɪŋ, lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən?"

"Lady Chadmar fled an hour after you left," Iralin continued. "The other members of the Council of Merchants ran within the day. Those burning Sea Folk claim they won't sail away until they've unloaded their wares - or until I give them payment to do something else. So I've been waiting for the city to starve itself, eat that food and die, or go up in another riot of flame and death. That's what I've been doing here. What have you been doing, Lord Dragon?"

ɹænd kloʊzd ɪz aɪz ən saɪd. hi dɪd nɑɾ əpɑlədʒaɪz tə aɪɹlɪn əz i hæd ði ʌðɝz; pɝhæps i sɔ ðəɾ ɪt wəd nɑɾ əv mɛn ɛniθɪŋ.

Rand closed his eyes and sighed. He did not apologize to Iralin as he had the others; perhaps he saw that it would not have meant anything.

mɪn ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ aɪɹlɪn. "hi hæz weɪts əpɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, mɝtʃənt. hi kænɑt wɑtʃ oʊvɝ itʃ ən ɛvɹi - "

Min glared at Iralin. "He has weights upon his shoulders, merchant. He cannot watch over each and every - "

"ɪɾ ɪz ɔl ɹaɪt, mɪn," ɹænd sɛd, leɪɪŋ ɪz hæn ɑn əɹ ɑɹm ən oʊpənɪŋ ɪz aɪz. "ɪɾ ɪz noʊ mɔɹ ðən aɪ dɪzɝv. aɪɹlɪn. bɪfɔɹ aɪ lɛf ðə sɪɾi, jə toʊl mi ðət ðə fuɾ ɑn ðoʊz ʃɪps hæd spɔɪld. dɪd jə tʃɛk ɛvɹi bæɹəl ən sæk?"

"It is all right, Min," Rand said, laying his hand on her arm and opening his eyes. "It is no more than I deserve. Iralin. Before I left the city, you told me that the food on those ships had spoiled. Did you check every barrel and sack?"

"aɪ tʃɛkt ɪnʌf," aɪɹlɪn sɛd, stɪl hɑstəl. "ɪf jə oʊpən ə hʌnʒɹəd sæks ən jə faɪn ðə seɪm θɪŋ ɪn ɛvɹi wʌn, jə fɪɡjɝ aʊt ðə pæɾɝn. maɪ waɪf əz bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɪɡjɝ aʊɾ ə seɪf mɛθəɾ ə sɪftɪŋ ðə ɹɑɾɪd ɡɹeɪn fɹəm ðə seɪf ɡɹeɪn. ɪf ðɛɹz ɛni seɪf ɡɹeɪn tə bi hæd."

"I checked enough," Iralin said, still hostile. "If you open a hundred sacks and you find the same thing in every one, you figure out the pattern. My wife has been trying to figure out a safe method of sifting the rotted grain from the safe grain. If there's any safe grain to be had."

ɹænd bɪɡæn wɔkɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ʃɪps. aɪɹlɪn fɑloʊd, lʊkɪŋ kənfjuzd, pɝhæps kəz ɹænd hædn jɛld ət hɪm. mɪn dʒɔɪn ðɛm. ɹænd əpɹoʊtʃt ə si foʊk vɛsəl sɪɾɪŋ loʊ ɪn ðə wɔɾɝ, mʊɹd baɪ ɹoʊps. ə ɡɹup ə si foʊk laʊnʒd ətɑp ɪt.

Rand began walking toward the ships. Iralin followed, looking confused, perhaps because Rand hadn't yelled at him. Min joined them. Rand approached a Sea Folk vessel sitting low in the water, moored by ropes. A group of Sea Folk lounged atop it.

"wʌn wəd spik wɪð jəɹ seɪlməstʃɹəs," ɹænd kɔld.

"1 would speak with your Sailmistress," Rand called.

"aɪ æm ʃi," sɛd wʌn ə ðə si foʊk, ə wʊmən wɪð waɪɾ ɪn əɹ stʃɹeɪt blæk hɛɹ ən ə pæɾɝn ə tætuz əkɹɔs əɹ ɹaɪt hænd. "maɪlɪs dɪn ʃəlɑɾə θɹi stɑɹz."

"I am she," said one of the Sea Folk, a woman with white in her straight black hair and a pattern of tattoos across her right hand. "milis din Shalada Three Stars."

"aɪ meɪɾ ə dil," ɹænd kɔld ʌp, "fɔɹ fud tə bi dɪlɪvɝd hɪɹ."

"I made a deal," Rand called up, "for food to be delivered here."

"ðæt wʌn dʌznt wɑn ɪt dɪlɪvɝd," maɪlɪs sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ tə aɪɹlɪn. "hi woʊn lɛɾ əs ənloʊd; sɛz ðəɾ ɪf wi du, hɪl əv ɪz ɑɹtʃɝz lus ɑn ʌs."

"That one doesn't want it delivered," Milis said, nodding to Iralin. "He won't let us unload; says that if we do, he'll have his archers loose on us."

"aɪ wʊdn bi eɪbəl tə hoʊl ðə pipəl bæk," aɪɹlɪn sɛd. "aɪv hæd tə spɹɛd ɹumɝz ɪn taʊn ðət ðə si foʊk ɑɹ hoʊldɪŋ ðə fud hɑstɪdʒ."

"I wouldn't be able to hold the people back," Iralin said. "I've had to spread rumors in town that the Sea Folk are holding the food hostage."

"ju si wʌt wi sʌfɝ fəɹ ju?" maɪlɪs sɛd tə ɹænd. "aɪ bɪɡɪn tə wʌndɝ əbaʊɾ əɹ bɑɹɡən wɪð ju, ɹænd ælθɹ."

"You see what we suffer for you?" Milis said to Rand. "I begin to wonder about our Bargain with you, Rand al'Thor."

"du jə dɪnaɪ ðəɾ aɪm ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ?" ɹænd æskt, miɾɪŋ əɹ aɪz. ʃi sim tə hæv tʃɹʌbəl lʊkɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm hɪm.

"Do you deny that I am the Coramoor?" Rand asked, meeting her eyes. She seemed to have trouble looking away from him.

"noʊ," maɪlɪs sɛd. "noʊ, ɡɛs ðəɾ aɪ də nɑt. jəl wɑnə bɔɹd ðə waɪtkæp, aɪ səpoʊz."

"No," Milis said. "No, guess that I do not. You will want to board the Whitecap, I suppose."

"ɪf aɪ meɪ."

"If I may."

"ʌp wɪð ju, ðɛn," ʃi sɛd.

"Up with you, then," she said.

wʌns ðə ɡæŋplæŋk wɑz ɪn pleɪs, ɹænd stʃɹoʊɾ ʌp ɪt, fɑloʊd baɪ mɪn wɪð nf ən ðə tu meɪɾənz. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, aɪɹlɪn keɪm, tu, fɑloʊd baɪ ðə kæptən ən səm ə hɪz soʊlʒɝz.

Once the gangplank was in place, Rand strode up it, followed by Min with Naeff and the two Maidens. After a moment, Iralin came, too, followed by the captain and some of his soldiers.

maɪlɪs lɛɾ əm tə ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə dɛk, wɛɹ ə hætʃ ən læɾɝ lɛd daʊn tə ðə ʃɪps hoʊld.

Milis led them to the center of the deck, where a hatch and ladder led down to the ship's hold.

ɹænd klaɪm daʊn fɝst, muvɪŋ ɔkwɝdli, biɪŋ wʌn-hændəd. mɪn fɑloʊd.

Rand climbed down first, moving awkwardly, being one-handed. Min followed.

bɪniθ, laɪt pik θɹu slɑts ɪn ðə dɛk, ɪluməneɪɾɪŋ sæk əpɑn sæk ʌv ɡɹeɪn. ði ɛɹ smɛl dʌsti ən θɪk.

Beneath, light peeked through slots in the deck, illuminating sack upon sack of grain. The air smelled dusty and thick.

"wil bi ɡlæd tə hæv ðɪs kɑɹɡoʊ ɡɔn," maɪlɪs sɛd sɔfli, kʌmɪŋ daʊn nɛkst. "ɪts bɪn kɪlɪŋ ðə ɹæts."

"We'll be glad to have this cargo gone," Milis said softly, coming down next. "It's been killing the rats."

"aɪ wəd θɪŋk juɾ əpɹiʃieɪt ðæt," mɪn sɛd.

"I would think you'd appreciate that," Min said.

"ə ʃɪp wɪθaʊt ɹæts ɪz laɪk ən oʊʃən wɪθaʊt stɔɹmz," maɪlɪs sɛd. "wi kəmpleɪn əbaʊt boʊθ, bʌt maɪ kɹu mʌɾɝz ɛvɹi taɪm ðeɪ faɪnd wʌn ə ðə vɝmɪn dɛd."

"A ship without rats is like an ocean without storms," Milis said. "We complain about both, but my crew mutters every time they find one of the vermin dead."

ðəɹ wɝ sɛvɹəl oʊpən sæks ʌv ɡɹeɪn nɪɹbaɪ, tɝn ɑn ðɛɹ saɪdz, spɪlɪŋ dɑɹk kɑntɛns əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ. aɪɹlɪn hæd spoʊkən ə tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə sɪf ðə bæd fɹəm ðə ɡʊd, bʌt mɪn dɪdn si ɛni ɡʊd.

There were several open sacks of grain nearby, turned on their sides, spilling dark contents across the floor. Iralin had spoken of trying to sift the bad from the good, but Min didn't see any good.

dʒʌst ʃɹɪvəld, dɪskʌlɝd ɡɹeɪnz.

Just shriveled, discolored grains.

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət ði oʊpən sæks əz aɪɹlɪn keɪm daʊn ɪndə ðə hoʊld. kæptən dɝnəm ʃʌfəl daʊn ðə læɾɝ læst wɪð ɪz mɛn.

Rand stared at the open sacks as Iralin came down into the hold. Captain Durnham shuffled down the ladder last with his men.

"nʌθɪŋ steɪz ɡʊɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ," aɪɹlɪn sɛd. "ɪts nɑt dʒʌs ðɪs ɡɹeɪn-pipəl bɹɔt wɪntɝ stɔɹz fɹəm ðə fɑɹmz wɪð ðɛm. ðəɹ ɔl ɡɔn.

"Nothing stays good any longer," Iralin said. "It's not just this grain-People brought winter stores from the farms with them. They're all gone.

wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə daɪ, ən ðæts ðæt. wi woʊn ɹitʃ ðə blʌɾi læs bæɾəl. wi-"

We're going to die, and that's that. We won't reach the bloody Last Battle. We-"

"pis, aɪɹlɪn," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli. "ɪɾ ɪz nɑt soʊ bæɾ əz jə θɪŋk." hi stɛp fɔɹwɝɾ ən jæŋk fɹi ðə taɪ ɑn ðə tɑp ʌv ə sæk. ɪt fɛl tə ðə saɪd, ən ɡoʊldən bɑɹli spɪl fɹəm ɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ ə ðə hoʊld, nɑɾ ə sɪŋɡəl spɛk ə dɑɹknəs ɑn ɪt. ðə bɑɹli lʊkt əz ɪf ɪt hæd dʒʌs bɪn hɛɹiɛstəd, itʃ ɡɹeɪn plʌmp ən fʊl.

"Peace, Iralin," Rand said softly. "It is not so bad as you think." He stepped forward and yanked free the tie on the top of a sack. It fell to the side, and golden barley spilled from it across the floor of the hold, not a single speck of darkness on it. The barley looked as if it had just been haryested, each grain plump and full.

mɪlz ɡæspt. "wʌt dɪd jə də tə ɪt?"

Mills gasped. "What did you do to it?"

"nʌθɪŋ," ɹænd sɛd. "ju mɪɹli oʊpən ðə ɹɔŋ sæks. ðə ɹɛst ɑɹ ɔl ɡʊd."

"Nothing," Rand said. "You merely opened the wrong sacks. The rest are all good."

"mɪɹli . . ." aɪɹlɪn sɛd. "wi hæpən tə oʊpən ði ɪɡzæk nʌmbɝ ə bæd sæks wɪθaʊt ɹitʃɪŋ wʌn ə ðə ɡʊd wʌnz? ðæts ɹɪdɪkjələs."

"Merely . . ." Iralin said. "We happened to open the exact number of bad sacks without reaching one of the good ones? That's ridiculous."

"nɑt ɹɪdɪkjələs," ɹænd sɛd, leɪɪŋ ɪz hæn aɪɹlɪnz ʃoʊldɝ. "sɪmpli ɪmplɔzəbəl. jə dɪd wɛl hɪɹ, aɪɹlɪn. aɪm sɑɹi tə hæv lɛf jə ɪn sətʃ ə pɹɪdɪkəmənt. aɪm neɪmɪŋ jə tə ðə mɝtʃən kaʊnsəl."

"Not ridiculous," Rand said, laying his hand Iralin's shoulder. "Simply implausible. You did well here, Iralin. I'm sorry to have left you in such a predicament. I'm naming you to the Merchant Council."

ɪɹaɪlɪn ɡeɪpt.

Irilin gaped.

tə ðə saɪd, kæptən dɝnəm pʊld oʊpən ənʌðɝ sæk. "ðɪs wʌnz ɡʊd."

To the side, Captain Durnham pulled open another sack. "This one's good."

"soʊz ðɪs wʌn," sɛd wʌn ə hɪz mɛn.

"So's this one," said one of his men.

"pəteɪɾoʊz hɪɹ," ənʌðɝ soʊlʒɝ sɛd fɹəm bɪsaɪɾ ə bæɹəl. "lʊk əz ɡʊɾ əz ɛni aɪv hæd. bɛɾɝ ðən moʊst, æktʃəli . nɑt dʒɹaɪɾ ʌp, laɪk juɾ ɪkspɛk fɹəm wɪntɝ lɛftoʊvɝz."

"Potatoes here," another soldier said from beside a barrel. "Look as good as any I've had. Better than most, actually. Not dried up, like you'd expect from winter leftovers."

"spɹɛd ðə wɝd," ɹænd sɛd tə ðə soʊlʒɝz. "ɡæðɝ jəɹ mɛn tə sɛɾ ʌp dɪstʃɹəbjuʃən ɪn wʌn ə ðə wɛɹhaʊzɪz. aɪ wɑn ðɪs ɡɹeɪn wɛl ɡɑɹɾəd; aɪɹlɪn wɑz waɪz tə wɝi ðət ðə pipəl wəd ɹʌʃ ðə dɑks. doʊnt ɡɪv aʊɾ ʌnkʊkt ɡɹeɪn - ðət wɪl tɝn pipəl tə hɔɹɾɪŋ ən bɑɹɾɝɪŋ wɪð ɪt. wɪl nid kɔlʒɹənz ən faɪɝz tə kʊk səm ʌv ɪt. muv ðə ɹɛs tə stɔɹz. hɝi, naʊ."

"Spread the word," Rand said to the soldiers. "Gather your men to set up distribution in one of the warehouses. I want this grain well guarded; Iralin was wise to worry that the people would rush the docks. Don't give out uncooked grain - that will turn people to hoarding and bartering with it. We'll need cauldrons and fires to cook some of it. Move the rest to stores. Hurry, now."

"jɛs, sɝ!" kæptən dɝnəm sɛd.

"Yes, sir!" Captain Durnham said.

"ðə pipəl aɪv ɡæðɝd soʊ fɑɹ wɪl hɛlp," ɹænd sɛd. "ðeɪ woʊn stil ðə ɡɹeɪn; wi kən tʃɹʌs ðɛm. hæv əm ənloʊd ðə ʃɪps ən bɝn ðə bæd ɡɹeɪn. ðəɹ ʃəd bi θaʊzənz ə sæks ðəɾ ɑɹ stɪl ɡʊd."

"The people I've gathered so far will help," Rand said. "They won't steal the grain; we can trust them. Have them unload the ships and burn the bad grain. There should be thousands of sacks that are still good."

ɹænd lʊk tə mɪn. "kʌm. aɪ nid tə ɔɹɡənaɪz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ wɛlɪŋ." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, lʊkɪŋ ət ðə stʌn aɪɹlɪn. "lɔɹɾ aɪɹlɪn, jə ɑɹ stuɝɾ ə ðə sɪɾi fəɹ naʊ, ən dɝnəm ɪz jəɹ kəmændɝ. jəl sun əv səfɪʃən tʃɹups tə ɹɪstɔɹ ɔɹɾɝ."

Rand looked to Min. "Come. I need to organize the Aes Sedai for Wealing." He hesitated, looking at the stunned Iralin. "Lord Iralin, you are steward of the city for now, and Durnham is your commander. You will soon have sufficient troops to restore order."

stuɝɾ ə ðə sɪɾi . . ." aɪɹlɪn sɛd. "kæn jə də ðæt?"

Steward of the city . . ." Iralin said. "Can you do that?"

ɹænd smaɪld. "sʌmbɑɾi mʌst. hɝi əbaʊt jəɹ wɝk; ðəɹ ɪz mʌtʃ tə du. aɪ kən oʊnli ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ jə tə meɪk θɪŋz steɪbəl. ə deɪ əɹ soʊ."

Rand smiled. "Somebody must. Hurry about your work; there is much to do. I can only remain here long enough for you to make things stable. A day or so."

ɹænd tɝn tə klaɪm ʌp ðə læɾɝ.

Rand turned to climb up the ladder.

'ə deɪ?" aɪɹlɪn sɛd, stɪl stændɪŋ ɪn ðə hoʊld wɪð mɪn "tə ɡɛt θɪŋz steɪbəl? wi kæn pɑsəbli də ɪɾ ɪn ðət taɪm. kən wi?"

'A day?" Iralin said, still standing in the hold with Min "To get things stable? We can't possibly do it in that time. Can we?"

"aɪ θɪŋk jəl bi sɝpɹaɪz baɪ hɪm, lɔɹɾ aɪɹlɪn," mɪn sɛd, ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə læɾɝ ən stɑɹɾɪŋ tə klaɪm. "aɪ æm, itʃ deɪ."

"I think you'll be surprised by him, Lord Iralin," Min said, gripping the ladder and starting to climb. "I am, each day."


tʃæptɝ twɛntisɪks


CHAPTER 26

pɛɹɪn ɹoʊd stɛpɝ aʊɾ ə kæmp, liɾɪŋ ə lɑɹdʒ ɑɹmi. ðeɪ dɪdn flaɪ ðə wʊlfhɛd bænɝ. soʊ fɑɹ


Perrin rode Stepper out of camp, leading a large army. They didn't fly the wolfhead banner. So far

əz i nu, hɪz ɔɹɾɝ tə bɝn ðə θɪŋz hæd bɪn fɑloʊd. hi wɑz lɛs sɝɾən ə ðət dɪsɪʒən naʊ.

as he knew, his order to burn the things had been followed. He was less certain of that decision now.

ðəɹ wɑz ən ɑd sɛn ɪn ði ɛɹ. ə steɪlnəs. laɪk ði ɪnsaɪɾ ʌv ə ɹum ðət hæd bɪn lɛf lɑkt ʌp fəɹ jɪɹz. stɛpɝ tʃɹɑɾəd ɑntu ðə dʒəhænə ɹoʊd. ɡɹeɪɾi ən nil flæŋk pɛɹɪn dɝɛkli, ən ðeɪ smɛld iɡɝ.

There was an odd scent in the air. A staleness. Like the inside of a room that had been left locked up for years. Stepper trotted onto the Jehannah Road. Grady and Neald flanked Perrin directly, and they smelled eager.

"nild, jə ʃʊɹ jəɹ ɹɛɾi?" pɛɹɪn æskt əz i tɝn ði ɑɹmi tə ðə saʊθist.

"Neald, you sure you're ready?" Perrin asked as he turned the army to the southeast.

"aɪ fil əz stʃɹɔŋ əz aɪ ɛvɝ hæv, maɪ lɔɹd," nild ænsɝd. "stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə kɪl səm waɪtkloʊks. aɪv ɔlweɪz wɑntəɾ ə tʃæns tə də ðæt."

"I feel as strong as I ever have, my Lord," Neald answered. "Strong enough to kill some Whitecloaks. I've always wanted a chance to do that."

"oʊnli ə ful lʊks fəɹ ə tʃæns tə kɪl," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Only a fool looks for a chance to kill," Perrin said.

"ɹ, jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd," nil sɛd. "ðoʊ, meɪbi aɪ ʃəd mɛnʃən - "

"Br, yes, my Lord," Neald said. "Though, maybe I should mention - "

"noʊ nid tə spik ə ðæt," ɡɹeɪɾi ɪntɝʌptɪd.

"No need to speak of that," Grady interrupted.

"wʌt?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"What?" Perrin asked.

ɡɹeɪɾi lʊkt ɪmbɛɹəst. "ɪts nʌθɪŋ, aɪm ʃʊɹ." seɪ ɪt, ɡɹeɪɾi," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

Grady looked embarrassed. "It's nothing, I'm sure." Say it, Grady," Perrin said.

ði oʊldɝ mæn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "wi tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ tə sɛn ɹɛfjudʒiz bæk, ən ɪt dɪdnt wɝk. wʌn taɪm ɝliɝ, ɪt hæpənd, tu. wivz fɛl əpɑɹɾ ən ənɹævəld ɑn ʌs."

The older man took a deep breath. "We tried to make a gateway this morning to send refugees back, and it didn't work. One time earlier, it happened, too. Weaves fell apart and unraveled on us."

pɛɹɪn fɹaʊnd. "ʌðɝ wivz wɝk faɪn?"

Perrin frowned. "Other weaves work fine?"

"ðeɪ du," nil sɛd kwɪkli.

"They do," Neald said quickly.

"laɪk aɪ sɛd, maɪ lɔɹd," ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd. "aɪm ʃʊɹ ɪɾəl wɝk wən wi tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn. dʒʌs nɑɾ ɪnʌf pɹæktəs."

"Like I said, my Lord," Grady said. "I'm sure it will work when we try again. Just not enough practice."

ɪt wɑzn laɪkli ðət ðeɪd nid tʃɹævlɪŋ tə ɹitʃɹit fɹəm ðɪs bæɾəl-nɑt wɪð oʊnli tu æʃəmən ən soʊ lɑɹdʒ ə fɔɹs. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl dɪskɑn-sɝɾɪŋ tə luz ðə tʃæns. ɪt hæd bɛɾɝ nɑt hæpən wɪð ʌðɝ wivz i wɑz dɪpɛndɪŋ ɑn ɡɹeɪɾi ən nil tə kənfjuz ən dɪsɹʌp ði ɪnɪʃəl waɪtkloʊk tʃɑɹdʒ.

It wasn't likely that they'd need Traveling to retreat from this battle-not with only two Asha'man and so large a force. But it was still discon-certing to lose the chance. It had better not happen with other weaves He was depending on Grady and Neald to confuse and disrupt the initial Whitecloak charge.

meɪbi wi ʃəd tɝn bæk, pɛɹɪn θɔt, bʌt skwɛltʃt ðə θɔɾ ɪmiɾiətli. hi dɪdn laɪk hævɪŋ tə meɪk ðɪs dɪsɪʒən. ɪt meɪɾ ɪm sɪk tə θɪŋk ə faɪɾɪŋ, mæn əɡɛns mæn, wən ðɛɹ ɹil ɛnəmi wɑz ðə dɑɹk wʌn. bʌɾ ɪz hæn hæd bɪn fɔɹst.

Maybe we should turn back, Perrin thought, but squelched the thought immediately. He didn't like having to make this decision. It made him sick to think of fighting, man against man, when their real enemy was the Dark One. But his hand had been forced.

ðeɪ kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn, hɪz hæmɝ ɪn ɪts stʃɹæp əɾ ɪz saɪd. hɑpɝ hæɾ ɪmplaɪɾ ɪt wɑz noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ði æks. tə ðə wʊlf, wʌn wɛpən wɑz laɪk ənʌðɝ.

They continued on, his hammer in its strap at his side. Hopper had implied it was no different from the axe. To the wolf, one weapon was like another.

minɝ wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz ɹoʊd bɪsaɪd hɪm, ɹɛd-peɪntəd bɹɛstpleɪts ɡlimɪŋ, lʊkɪŋ laɪk ɡɹeɪsfəl hɔks ɹɛɾi tə swup. æliændɝz soʊlʒɝz, stʃɹeɪtfɔɹwɝɾ ən dɪtɝmənd, ɹoʊd bɪhaɪnd, laɪk boʊldɝz pɔɪz tə kɹʌʃ. tu ɹɪvɝz lɔŋbaʊmən, laɪk sæpəlɪŋ oʊks, wɝ nɪmbəl jɛt stɝɾi.

Mayener Winged Guards rode beside him, red-painted breastplates gleaming, looking like graceful hawks ready to swoop. Alliandre's soldiers, straightforward and determined, rode behind, like boulders poised to crush. Two Rivers longbowmen, like sapling oaks, were nimble yet sturdy.

il, laɪk æɝz wɪð ɹeɪzɝ tiθ. waɪz wʌnz, ɹɪlʌktənli dʒɹɔn əlɔŋ, ənsɝɾən θʌndɝhɛdz bɔɪlɪŋ wɪð ʌnpɹɪdɪktəbəl ɛnɝdʒi. hi dɪdnt noʊ ɪf ðeɪ wəd faɪt fəɹ hɪm.

Aiel, like adders with razor teeth. Wise Ones, reluctantly drawn along, uncertain thunderheads boiling with unpredictable energy. He didn't know if they would fight for him.

ðə ɹɛst ə hɪz ɑɹmi wɑz lɛs ɪmpɹɛsɪv. θaʊzənz ə mɛn wɪð ə ɹeɪnʒ ʌv ɪkspɪɹiəns ən eɪdʒ -  səm mɝsənɛɹiz, səm ɹɛfjudʒiz fɹəm meɪɾən, səm wɪmən u hæd sin ðə meɪɾənz ən tʃɑ feɪl ən ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn biɪŋ tʃɹeɪn əlɔŋsaɪd ðə mɛn. pɛɹɪn hædn stɑp ðɛm. ðə læs bæɾəl wɑz kʌmɪŋ. hu wɑz i tə fɝbɪd ðoʊz u wɑntəd tə faɪt?

The rest of his army was less impressive. Thousands of men with a range of experience and age -  some mercenaries, some refugees from Maiden, some women who had seen the Maidens and Cha Faile and insisted on being trained alongside the men. Perrin hadn't stopped them. The Last Battle was coming. Who was he to forbid those who wanted to fight?

hi hæd kənsɪɾɝd fɝbɪɾɪŋ feɪl tə kʌm tədeɪ, bʌt hid noʊn haʊ ðət wəd tɝn aʊt.

He had considered forbidding Faile to come today, but he'd known how that would turn out.

ɪnstɛd, hi pleɪst əɹ ət ðə bæk, sɝaʊndəd baɪ waɪz wʌnz ən tʃɑ feɪl, əkʌmpənid baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Instead, he placed her at the back, surrounded by Wise Ones and Cha Faile, accompanied by Aes Sedai.

pɛɹɪn ɡɹɪpt ɪz ɹeɪnz taɪɾɝ, lɪsnɪŋ tə ðə mɑɹtʃɪŋ fit. fju ʌv ðə ɹɛfjudʒiz hæɾ ɑɹmɝ.

Perrin gripped his reins tighter, listening to the marching feet. Few of the refugees had armor.

ɑɹɡændə hæd kɔld əm laɪɾ ɪnfəntʃɹi. pɛɹɪn hæɾ ənʌðɝ tɝm fəɹ ðɛm: "ɪnəsəns wɪð bleɪdz."

Arganda had called them light infantry. Perrin had another term for them: "innocents with blades."

waɪ dɪd ðeɪ fɑloʊ hɪm? kʊdn ðeɪ si ðət ðeɪ wəd fɔl fɝst?

Why did they follow him? Couldn't they see that they would fall first?

ðeɪ tʃɹʌstɪd hɪm. laɪt bɝn ðɛm, ðeɪ ɔl tʃɹʌstɪd hɪm! hi ɹɛstəɾ ɪz hæn ɑn ɪz hæmɝ, smɛlɪŋ ðə dæmp ɛɹ mɪkst wɪð fɪɹ ən ɪksaɪtmənt. ðə θʌndɝ ə hʊvz ən fʊtstɛps, ɹimaɪndɪŋ ɪm ə ðə dɑɹk skaɪ. θʌndɝ wɪð noʊ laɪtnɪŋ. laɪtnɪŋ wɪð noʊ θʌndɝ.

They trusted him. Light burn them, they all trusted him! He rested his hand on his hammer, smelling the damp air mixed with fear and excitement. The thunder of hooves and footsteps, reminding him of the dark sky. Thunder with no lightning. Lightning with no thunder.

ðə bæɾəlfild wɑz əhɛd, ə bɹɔd ɡɹin ɡɹæslæn laɪn ɑn ðə fɑɹ ɛn baɪ tʃɹups ɪn waɪt. ðət waɪtkloʊk ɑɹmi wɔɹ sɪlvɝ bɹɛstpleɪts ʃaɪn tə pɝfɛkʃən, ðɛɹ tɑbɝdz ən kloʊks ə pjʊɹ waɪt.

The battlefield was ahead, a broad green grassland lined on the far end by troops in white. That Whitecloak army wore silver breastplates shined to perfection, their tabards and cloaks a pure white.

ðɪs ɡɹæsi pleɪn wɑz ə ɡʊd pleɪs tə hæv ə bæɾəl. ɪt wəɾ ɔlsoʊ bi ə ɡʊd pleɪs tə plæn kɹɑps.

This grassy plain was a good place to have a battle. It would also be a good place to plant crops.

tə ʌndɝstæn ə θɪŋ, jə mʌst ʌndɝstæn ɪts pɑɹts ən ɪts pɝpəs.

To understand a thing, you must understand its parts and its purpose.

wʌt hæd bɪn ðə pɝpəs ə hɪz wɔɹ æks? tə kɪl. ðət wɑz waɪ ɪt hæd bɪn meɪd. ðət wɑz ɔl ɪt hæd bɪn ɡʊd fɔɹ.

What had been the purpose of his war axe? To kill. That was why it had been made. That was all it had been good for.

bʌt ðə hæmɝ wɑz dɪfɹənt.

But the hammer was different.

pɛɹɪn pʊl stɛpɝ ʌp ʃɑɹpli. bɪsaɪd hɪm, ði æʃəmən stɑpt, ən ði ɪntaɪɝ kɑləm ə tʃɹups stɑɹɾəd tə pʊl tə ə hɔlt. ɡɹups bʌntʃt ʌp əz ðeɪ sloʊd; jɛld ɔɹɾɝz ɹipleɪs ðə saʊnz ə mɑɹtʃɪŋ.

Perrin pulled Stepper up sharply. Beside him, the Asha'man stopped, and the entire column of troops started to pull to a halt. Groups bunched up as they slowed; yelled orders replaced the sounds of marching.

ði ɛɹ wɑz stɪl, ðə skaɪ oʊvɝhɛd dʒɹɪɹi. hi kʊdn smɛl ðə ɡɹæs əɹ ðə dɪstən tʃɹiz fəɹ ðə dʌst ɪn ði ɛɹ ən ðə mɛn swɛɾɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ ɑɹmɝ. hɔɹsəz snɔɹɾɪd, ə nʌmbɝ ə ðɛm nɪbəlɪŋ ət ðə ɡɹæs. ʌðɝz ʃʌfəld, kætʃɪŋ ðə tɛnʃən ə ðɛɹ ɹaɪɾɝz.

The air was still, the sky overhead dreary. He couldn't smell the grass or the distant trees for the dust in the air and the men sweating in their armor. Horses snorted, a number of them nibbling at the grass. Others shuffled, catching the tension of their riders.

"maɪ lɔɹd?" ɡɹeɪɾi æskt. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?"

"My Lord?" Grady asked. "What is it?"

ðə waɪtkloʊk ɑɹmi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn pəzɪʃən wɪð ə vi fɔɹmeɪʃən ə ɹaɪɾɝz ət ðə fɹʌnt. ðeɪ weɪɾəd, lænsɪz əpɹaɪt, ɹɛɾi tə bi loʊɝd tə spɪl blʌd.

The Whitecloak army was already in position with a V formation of riders at the front. They waited, lances upright, ready to be lowered to spill blood.

"ði æks oʊnli kɪlz," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "bʌt ðə hæmɝ kən iðɝ kɹieɪɾ əɹ kɪl. ðəɾ ɪz ðə dɪfɝəns."

"The axe only kills," Perrin said. "But the hammer can either create or kill. That is the difference."

ɪt meɪd sɛns tə hɪm, sʌɾənli. ðət wɑz waɪ hid niɾəd tə θɹoʊ ði æks əweɪ. hi kəd tʃuz nɑt tə kɪl. hi wəd nɑt bi pʊʃt ɪndə ðɪs.

It made sense to him, suddenly. That was why he'd needed to throw the axe away. He could choose not to kill. He would not be pushed into this.

hi tɝn tə ɡɔl, hu stʊd wɪð sɛvɹəl meɪɾənz ə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns əweɪ. "aɪ wɑn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən waɪz wʌnz ʌp hɪɹ naʊ." pɛɹɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "ɔɹɾɝ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌɾ æsk ðə waɪz wʌnz. ɔɹɾɝ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn ʌp əz wɛl."

He turned to Gaul, who stood with several Maidens a short distance away. "I want the Aes Sedai and Wise Ones up here now." Perrin hesitated. "Order the Aes Sedai, but ask the Wise Ones. Order the Two Rivers men up as well."

ɡɔl nɑɾəd ən ɹæn tə də əz æskt. pɛɹɪn tɝn bæk tə ðə waɪt-kloʊks. fəɹ ɔl ðɛɹ fɔls, ðə waɪtkloʊks kənsɪɾɝd ðɛmsɛlvz ɑnɝəbəl. ðeɪ wʊdn ətæk əntɪl pɛɹɪn wɑz ɪn pəzɪʃən.

Gaul nodded and ran to do as asked. Perrin turned back to the White-cloaks. For all their faults, the Whitecloaks considered themselves honorable. They wouldn't attack until Perrin was in position.

ðə klʌstɝ ʌv waɪz wʌnz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ dʒɔɪn ɪm ət ðə fɹʌnt. feɪl, hi noʊɾəst, ɹoʊd wɪð ðɛm.

The cluster of Wise Ones and Aes Sedai joined him at the front. Faile, he noticed, rode with them.

wɛl, hi hæd toʊld əɹ tə steɪ wɪð ðɛm. hi hɛld aʊɾ ə hæn tə hɝ, ɪnvaɪɾɪŋ əɹ nɛks tə hɪm. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn keɪm ʌp ɑn ðə flæŋk ə hɪz fɔɹs.

Well, he had told her to stay with them. He held out a hand to her, inviting her next to him. The Two Rivers men came up on the flank of his force.

"ɡɔl sɛd jə wɝ vɛɹi pəlaɪt," ɛdʒɹə noʊɾəd tə pɛɹɪn. "ðæt minz jə wɑn sʌmθɪŋ fɹəm əs ðət wɪl nɑt wɑnə du."

"Gaul said you were very polite," Edarra noted to Perrin. "That means you want something from us that we will not want to do."

pɛɹɪn smaɪld. "aɪ wɑn jə tə hɛlp mi pɹɪvɛn ðɪs bæɾəl."

Perrin smiled. "I want you to help me prevent this battle."

jə də nɑt wɪʃ tə dæns ðə spɪɹz?" ɛdʒɹə æskt. "aɪ hæv hɝd səm ʌv wʌt ðiz mɛn ɪn waɪɾ əv dʌn ɪn ðə wɛtlænz. aɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ wɛɹɹ waɪt tə haɪd wʌɾ ɪz dɑɹk ɪnsaɪɾ ə ðɛm."

You do not wish to dance the spears?" Edarra asked. "I have heard some of what these men in white have done in the wetlands. I think they wearr white to hide what is dark inside of them."

"ðeɪɹ kənfjuzd," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "wɛl, ðəɹ mɔɹ ðən kənfjuzd. ðəɹ laɪt-kɝs fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾɪŋ. bʌt wi ʃʊdn bi faɪɾɪŋ ðɛm, nɑt wɪð ðə læs bæɾəl kʌmɪŋ. ɪf wi skwɑbəl əmʌŋ aʊɝsɛlvz, wɪl luz tə ðə dɑɹk wʌn."

"They're confused," Perrin said. "Well, they're more than confused. They're Light-cursed frustrating. But we shouldn't be fighting them, not with the Last Battle coming. If we squabble among ourselves, we will lose to the Dark One."

ɛdʒɹə læft. "aɪ wəd laɪk tə si sʌmwʌn tɛl ðət tə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. ɔɹəɡən, ɹæðɝ, aɪ wəd laɪk tə hæv sin sʌmwʌn sədʒɛs ðət tə jə wən ðeɪ stɪl hɛl jəɹ waɪf!"

Edarra laughed. "I would like to see someone tell that to the Shaido, Perrin Aybara. Or, rather, I would like to have seen someone suggest that to you when they still held your wife!"

"wɛl, ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ niɾəd kɪlɪŋ," hi sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf ðiz waɪtkloʊks du. meɪbi ðeɪ oʊnli niɾ ə ɡʊd fɹaɪt. aɪ wɑn jə ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə blæs ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛɹ ɑɹmi."

"Well, the Shaido needed killing," he said. "But I don't know if these Whitecloaks do. Maybe they only need a good fright. I want you and the Aes Sedai to blast the ground in front of their army."

"ju æsk sʌmθɪŋ jə ʃəd nɑt, eɪbɑɹə," siɑnɪd sɛd stɝnli. "wi wɪl nɑt teɪk pɑɹɾ ɪn jəɹ bæɾəl. ðə dɪmɪnjəɾɪv ɡɹin mɛɾ ɪz aɪz, vɔɪs kɹɪsp ən kɝt.

"You ask something you should not, Aybara," Seonid said sternly. "We will not take part in your battle. The diminutive Green met his eyes, voice crisp and curt.

"jɔɹ nɑt teɪkɪŋ pɑɹɾ ɪn bæɾəl," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "jɔɹ pɹɪvɛntɪŋ wʌn."

"You're not taking part in battle," Perrin said. "You're preventing one."

siɑnɪd fɹaʊnd. "aɪm əfɹeɪɾ ɪt wəd bi ðə seɪm, ɪn ðɪs keɪs. ɪf wi ətæk ði ɝθ, ɪt wəd bi juzɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən. wi kəd hɝt ðoʊz mɛn. aɪm sɑɹi."

Seonid frowned. "I'm afraid it would be the same, in this case. If we attack the earth, it would be using the One Power as a weapon. We could hurt those men. I'm sorry."

pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊn ɪz tiθ, bʌt dɪd nɑt fɔɹs ðɛm. ðə waɪz wʌnz ən æʃəmən wəd pɹɑbli bi ɪnʌf. hi tɝn tə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn. "tɑɹn, tɛl ðə mɛn tə nɑk æɹoʊz ən bi ɹɛɾi tə lɔntʃ ə vɑli."

Perrin ground his teeth, but did not force them. The Wise Ones and Asha'man would probably be enough. He turned to the Two Rivers men. "Tarn, tell the men to nock arrows and be ready to launch a volley."

tɑɹn nɑɾəd, sɛndɪŋ ə ɹʌnɝ wɪð ði ɔɹɾɝ. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn laɪn ʌp. ðɪs wɑz bɪɑn ðə ɹeɪnʒ ə moʊs baʊz, bʌɾ ə ɡʊd pʊl ɑn ə tu ɹɪvɝz lɔŋboʊ kəd mænədʒ ɪt.

Tarn nodded, sending a runner with the order. The Two Rivers men lined up. This was beyond the range of most bows, but a good pull on a Two Rivers longbow could manage it.

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd tə ðə waɪz wʌnz, ðən moʊʃən təwɔɹd ði æʃəmən. bɪfɔɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls kəd bi sɛd, ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə waɪtkloʊks ɪɹʌptəd. ə ɹʌmbəl ʃʊk ðə mɛdoʊ, dɝɾ ɪksploʊɾɪŋ ɪndə ði ɛɹ. ɡɹeɪɾi ən nil muv ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz fɔɹwɝd.

Perrin nodded to the Wise Ones, then motioned toward the Asha'man. Before anything else could be said, the ground in front of the Whitecloaks erupted. A rumble shook the meadow, dirt exploding into the air. Grady and Neald moved their horses forward.

ðə waɪtkloʊks' hɔɹsəz ɹɪɹɾ ən mɛn ʃaʊɾəd ɪn tɛɹɝ. ə smɔl ɡɹup ə mɛn ət ðə vɛɹi fɹʌn dɪdn sim dɪstɝbd baɪ ði ɪksploʊʒənz, ən ðeɪ kɛp ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl. ðoʊz wəd bi ðə liɾɝz. ɪndid, pɛɹɪnz aɪz kəd meɪk aʊt ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ hɪmsɛlf sɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ.

The Whitecloaks' horses reared and men shouted in terror. A small group of men at the very front didn't seem disturbed by the explosions, and they kept their horses under control. Those would be the leaders. Indeed, Perrin's eyes could make out the Lord Captain Commander himself sitting there.

dɝt spɹeɪɾ ɪndə ði ɛɹ əɡɛn, fɔlɪŋ tə pɛl ðə tʃɹɛntʃ bɪniθ. ðə waɪz wʌnz wɔɹ ðət lʊk ə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən ðət keɪm wɪð tʃænəlɪŋ.

Dirt sprayed into the air again, falling to pelt the trench beneath. The Wise Ones wore that look of concentration that came with channeling.

"kæn wʌn ə jə ɛnhæns maɪ vɔɪs?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"Can one of you enhance my voice?" Perrin asked.

"aɪ kən də ɪt," ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd. "aɪ sɔ ðə l də ɪt wʌns."

"I can do it," Grady said. "I saw the M'Hael do it once."

"ɡʊd," pɛɹɪn sɛd, tɝnɪŋ tə tɑɹn. "wʌns ðə tʃænlɝz stɑp, tɛl ðə mɛn tə ɡɪmi ə kʌpəl ə lɔŋ vɑliz. tʃɹaɪ ən hɪt ðət tʃɹɛntʃ."

"Good," Perrin said, turning to Tarn. "Once the channelers stop, tell the men to give me a couple of long volleys. Try and hit that trench."

ə fju moʊməns leɪɾɝ, ði ɪksploʊʒənz ɛndəd. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn dʒɹu ə vɑli ən lust ɪt.

A few moments later, the explosions ended. The Two Rivers men drew a volley and loosed it.

θɪk ʃæfs ɹoʊz ɪn ən ɑɹk, ən sun ðə ɹɪf bɹɪsəld wɪð æɹoʊz. pɛɹɪn wɑtʃt ðə waɪtkloʊk ɑɹmi. ðeɪ hæd bɹoʊkən ɹæŋks, stændɪŋ ɪn dɪsɔɹɾɝ.

Thick shafts rose in an arc, and soon the rift bristled with arrows. Perrin watched the Whitecloak army. They had broken ranks, standing in disorder.

ə klæŋk ʌv ɑɹmɝ mætʃt baɪ hʊfbits ənaʊnst ɑɹɡændəz ɝaɪvəl.

A clank of armor matched by hoofbeats announced Arganda's arrival.

ðə fɝs kæptən ʌv ɡildən wɔɹ ɪz plum hɛlm, hɪz aɪz hɑɹd bɪniθ ɪt. "wʌt wɑz ðə pɔɪn ə ðæt, ɪf aɪ meɪ æsk, lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹə?" hi smɛld ɛfii "ju dʒʌst ɡeɪv əweɪ əɹ ædvæntɪdʒ! ən æmbʊʃ cʊɾə kɪl θaʊzənz ən bɹoʊkən ðɛɹ ɪnɪʃəl tʃɑɹdʒ."

The First Captain of Ghealdan wore his plumed helm, his eyes hard beneath it. "What was the point of that, if I may ask, Lord Aybara?" He smelled f;ie "You just gave away our advantage! An ambush could have killed thousands and broken their initial charge."

"jɛs " pɛɹɪn sɛd. feɪl stɪl ɹoʊɾ əɾ ɪz ʌðɝ saɪd. "æn ðeɪ noʊ ɪt. lʊk ət ðɛɹ laɪnz, ɑɹɡændə. ðəɹ wɝid. ðə waɪtkloʊks ɑɹ ɹilaɪzɪŋ wʌt ðeɪɾ əv tə ɡoʊ θɹu tə tʃɑɹdʒ ʌs.

"Yes " Perrin said. Faile still rode at his other side. "And they know it. Look at their lines, Arganda. They're worried. The Whitecloaks are realizing what they'd have to go through to charge us.

ɪf aɪ wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə ɡɪv əm ðɪs əz ə wɔɹnɪŋ bɝst, wʌt wɑz aɪ hoʊldɪŋ bæk?"

If I was willing to give them this as a warning burst, what was I holding back?"

"bʌt ðət wɑz ði ɪkstɛn ʌv wʌt wi kən du," feɪl sɛd.

"But that was the extent of what we can do," Faile said.

"ðeɪ doʊnt noʊ ðæt." pɛɹɪn ɡɹɪnd. "ɪt wəd bi stupəɾ ʌv əs tə kəmɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɪv ɪn ə wɔɹnɪŋ blæs laɪk ðæt."

"They don't know that." Perrin grinned. "It would be stupid of us to commit everything we have in a warning blast like that."

ɑɹɡændə hɛld ɪz tʌŋ, ðoʊ hi ɑbviəsli wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ ðət vɛɹi θɪŋ. hi wɑz ə soʊlʒɝ tə ðə boʊn. ən æks. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɹɔŋ wɪð ðæt, bʌt pɛɹɪn hæd tə bi ðə hæmɝ. wən i pɔɪntəd, mɛn laɪk ɑɹɡændə kɪld.

Arganda held his tongue, though he obviously was thinking that very thing. He was a soldier to the bone. An axe. There was nothing wrong with that, but Perrin had to be the hammer. When he pointed, men like Arganda killed.

"ɡɹeɪɾi," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "maɪ vɔɪs, pliz? aɪ wʊdn maɪn ɪf əɹ ɑɹmi kəd hɪɹ wʌɾ aɪ seɪ, tu."

"Grady," Perrin said. "My voice, please? I wouldn't mind if our army could hear what I say, too."

"aɪ kən mænədʒ ðæt," ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd.

"I can manage that," Grady said.

pɛɹɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ðən spoʊk. "aɪ æm pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə!" hɪz vɔɪs bumd əkɹɔs ðə pleɪn. "aɪ æm fɹɛn tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən aɪ sɝv hɪɹ əɾ ɪz kəmænd. aɪm mɑɹtʃɪŋ tə ðə læs bæɾəl.

Perrin took a deep breath, then spoke. "I am Perrin Aybara!" his voice boomed across the plain. "I am friend to the Dragon Reborn, and I serve here at his command. I am marching to the Last Battle.

lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ, jə dɪmændəɾ aɪ mit wɪð jə ɑn jəɹ tɝmz bɪfɔɹ, ən aɪ keɪm. aɪ æsk jə tə ɹɪtɝn ði ɑnɝ hɪɹ, ən miɾ əz aɪ ɹɪkwɛst. ɪf jə ɑɹ dɪtɝmən tə kɪl mi bɪfɔɹ aɪ ɹaɪɾ əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ, ət lis də mi ðə sɝvəs ʌv ɡɪvɪŋ mi wʌn læs tʃæns tə pɹɪvɛn spɪlɪŋ blʌd ðɪs deɪ!"

Lord Captain Commander, you demanded I meet with you on your terms before, and I came. I ask you to return the honor here, and meet as I request. If you are determined to kill me before I ride against the Shadow, at least do me the service of giving me one last chance to prevent spilling blood this day!"

hi nɑɾəd tə ɡɹeɪɾi, ən ðə mæn ɹilist ɪz wiv. "du wɪv ə pəvɪljən wi kəd sɛɾ ʌp fəɹ pɑɹli?"

He nodded to Grady, and the man released his weave. "Do we have a pavilion we could set up for parley?"

"bæk ət ðə kæmp," feɪl sɛd.

"Back at the camp," Faile said.

"aɪ kən tʃɹaɪ ə ɡeɪtweɪ," nil sɛd, nʌklɪŋ ɪz mʌstæʃ - ɔɹ, ət list, ðə θɪn bɪɾ ə fɝ ɑn ɪz feɪs ðəɾ i kɔld ə mʌstæʃ, wæks tə pɔɪns.

"I can try a gateway," Neald said, knuckling his mustache - or, at least, the thin bit of fur on his face that he called a mustache, waxed to points.

"tʃɹaɪ ɪt."

"Try it."

hi kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd. nʌθɪŋ hæpənd. ðə jʌŋ mæn blʌʃt fjʊɹiəsli. "dʌznt wɝk. nɑt tʃɹævlɪŋ əɹ skɪmɪŋ."

He concentrated. Nothing happened. The young man blushed furiously. "Doesn't work. Not Traveling or Skimming."

aɪ si," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "wɛl, lɛts sɛn ə ɹaɪɾɝ bæk. wi ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə hæv ðə tɛn sɛɾ ʌp hɪɹ ɪn mɪnəts. aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf ðəl əɡɹi tə mit, bʌɾ aɪ wɑnə ɡɛt ɹɛɾi, ɪn keɪs ðeɪ du. bɹɪŋ bɹəleɪn ən æliændɝ bæk əz wɛl, ən pɝhæps sʌmwʌn wɪð dʒɹɪŋks ən ðə tʃɛɹz ən teɪbəl fɹəm maɪ tɛnt."

I see," Perrin said. "Well, let's send a rider back. We should be able to have the tent set up here in minutes. I don't know if they'll agree to meet, but I want to get ready, in case they do. Bring Berelain and Alliandre back as well, and perhaps someone with drinks and the chairs and table from my tent."

ðə pɹɑpɝ ɔɹɾɝz wɝ ɡɪvən, ən ə tu ɹɪvɝz mæn - ɹɑb soʊltɝ-ɹoʊɾ ɔf, meɪɾənz tʃɹeɪlɪŋ æftɝ hɪm. ðə waɪtkloʊks sim tə bi kɑn-saɪɾɝɪŋ ɪz pɹɑpəzɪʃən. ɡʊd.

The proper orders were given, and a Two Rivers man - Robb Solter-rode off, Maidens trailing after him. The Whitecloaks seemed to be con-sidering his proposition. Good.

ɑɹɡændə ən moʊst ə ði ʌðɝz spɹɛɾ aʊt tə pæs ðə wɝɾ əbaʊt wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ, ðoʊ ðeɪ kʊdn pɑsəbli hæv mɪs pɛɹɪnz ənaʊnsmənt. ɛvɹiwʌn sim tə bi duɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ ʃʊd, soʊ pɛɹɪn sæt bæk ɪn ɪz sæɾəl tə weɪt.

Arganda and most of the others spread out to pass the word about what was happening, though they couldn't possibly have missed Perrin's announcement. Everyone seemed to be doing what they should, so Perrin sat back in his saddle to wait.

feɪl saɪɾəld əɹ hɔɹs ʌp tə hɪm. ʃi smɛld ɪntʃɹiɡd.

Faile sidled her horse up to him. She smelled intrigued.

"wʌt?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"What?" Perrin asked.

"sʌmθɪŋz tʃeɪnʒd əbaʊt ju. aɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɪɡjɝ aʊt wʌt."

"Something's changed about you. I'm trying to figure out what."

"aɪm stɔlɪŋ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪ hævən meɪɾ ɛni dɪsɪʒənz jɛt. bʌɾ aɪ doʊnt wɑnə kɪl ðiz mɛn.

"I'm stalling," Perrin said. "I haven't made any decisions yet. But I don't want to kill these men.

nɑt jɛt. nɑɾ ənlɛs aɪ hæv tə."

Not yet. Not unless I have to."

"ðeɪɹ nɑt gɑnə ɡɪv ɛni ɡɹaʊnd, hʌzbənd," feɪl sɛd. "ðeɪv ɔlɹɛɾi dʒʌdʒ ju."

"They're not going to give any ground, husband," Faile said. "They've already judged you."

"wil si," hi sɛd. hi lʊkt ʌp ət ðə skaɪ, θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ sɛn ən ðə fæk ðət ði æʃəmən ɡeɪtweɪz wɝnt wɝkɪŋ. sleɪɝ wɑz pɹaʊlɪŋ ðɪs ɛɹiə ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim ən ðəɹ wɑz ðət wɔl ʌv ɡlæs. sʌmθɪŋ fɛl vɛɹi ɹɔŋ ɑn ðə wɪnd, ən ɪz sɛnsɪz ɪtʃt ət hɪm. bi wɛɹi. bi pɹipɛɹd.

"We'll see," he said. He looked up at the sky, thinking of the strange scent and the fact that the Asha'man gateways weren't working. Slayer was prowling this area in the wolf dream and there was that wall of glass. Something felt very wrong on the wind, and his senses itched at him. Be wary. Be prepared.

ðə hæmɝ kəd kɪl əɹ kɹieɪt. hi dɪdnt noʊ wɪtʃ sɪtʃueɪʃən ðɪs wɑz jɛt. hi dɪdn ɪntɛn tə stʃɹaɪk əntɪl i dɪd.

The hammer could kill or create. He didn't know which situation this was yet. He didn't intend to strike until he did.

ɡɑləd sæɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹæsi pleɪn ðət ʃʊɾə bɪn ə fild ə bæɾəl, lʊkɪŋ ət ðə tʃɹɛntʃ tɔɹn ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, bɹɪsəlɪŋ wɪð hʌnʒɹədz ʌv æɹoʊz.

Galad sat on the grassy plain that should have been a field of battle, looking at the trench torn in the ground, bristling with hundreds of arrows.

hi wɑz pɹipɛɹd fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd nɑt hɝt sʌmwʌn ənlɛs ʃi əɹ əɹ wɔɹɾɝ wɑz ɪn deɪnʒɝ, ən ɡɑləd hæd ɡɪvən vɛɹi spəsɪfɪk ɔɹɾɝz tə hɪz pipəl nɑt tə ɛnɡeɪdʒ - əɹ ivən ɡoʊ nɪɹ  - ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪf ðə tʃɪlʒɹən sɔ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðeɪ wɝ tə stɑp ən nɑd ðɛɹ hɛdz, tɝnɪŋ ðɛɹ wɛpənz əweɪ. ɪf ɪz mɛn ʃoʊd pleɪnli ðət ðeɪ wəd nɑt hɑɹm ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðən ðə sɪstɝz ʃəd bi jusləs ɪn bæɾəl.

He was prepared for Aes Sedai. An Aes Sedai could not hurt someone unless she or her Warder was in danger, and Galad had given very specific orders to his people not to engage - or even go near  - Aes Sedai. If the Children saw Aes Sedai, they were to stop and nod their heads, turning their weapons away. If his men showed plainly that they would not harm Aes Sedai, then the sisters should be useless in battle.

mɛni ʌv ðə tʃɪlʒɹən dɪd nɑt bɪliv ðɪs. ðeɪ kɔl ðə stɔɹiz ə ðə θɹi oʊðz dɪlɪbɝɪt fæbɹɪkeɪʃənz. ðeɪ hædn lɪvd ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ɡɑləd dɪdn laɪk moʊst ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən i sɝɾənli dɪdn tʃɹʌs ðɛm, bʌɾ i nu ðət ði oʊðz dɪd hoʊld.

Many of the Children did not believe this. They called the stories of the Three Oaths deliberate fabrications. They hadn't lived in the White Tower. Galad didn't like most Aes Sedai, and he certainly didn't trust them, but he knew that the oaths did hold.

ɡɑləɾ ɛs mɛn muv bæk ɪndə laɪn, mʌɾɝɪŋ. hi ɹeɪzd ɪz lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs, ɪnspɛktɪŋ eɪbɑɹəz fɹʌn laɪn. mɛn ɪn blæk koʊts. sɛvɹəl il wɪmən, ɪnkluɾɪŋ wʌn ə ðoʊz u hæd kʌm wɪð eɪbɑɹə tə ðɛɹ fɝs miɾɪŋz. ə tʃænlɝ, noʊ daʊt. hi ɪmædʒən ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪksploʊɾɪŋ bɪniθ ɪz tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ fɔɹsɪz, nɑkɪŋ ðə kævəlɹi ɪndə ði ɛɹ, ʌðɝz fɔlɪŋ ɪndə ðə tʃɹɛntʃ waɪl ðə leɪɾɝ laɪnz stɔld ɪn kənfjuʒən, pɹeɪ tə ðoʊz aɪm-pɹɛsɪv lɔŋboʊz.

Galad s men moved back into line, muttering. He raised his looking glass, inspecting Aybara's front line. Men in black coats. Several Aiel women, including one of those who had come with Aybara to their first meetings. A channeler, no doubt. He imagined the ground exploding beneath his charging forces, knocking the cavalry into the air, others falling into the trench while the later lines stalled in confusion, prey to those im-pressive longbows.

bɔɹnhəld ɹoʊɾ ʌp tə ɡɑləd, hɪz feɪs æŋɡɹi. "wi ɑɹən ɹɪli ɡoʊɪŋ tə pɑɹli, ɑɹ wi?"

Bornhald rode up to Galad, his face angry. "We aren't really going to parley, are we?"

ɡɑləd loʊɝɾ ɪz lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs. "jɛs. aɪ θɪŋk wi ɑɹ."

Galad lowered his looking glass. "Yes. I think we are."

"bʌt wi ɔlɹɛɾi mɛt wɪð hɪm!" bɔɹnhəl sɛd. "ju sɛd jə wɑntəd tə si ðoʊz aɪz, əz pɹuf i wɑz ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, ən jə sɔ ðɛm. wʌt mɔɹ dʒju nid?"

"But we already met with him!" Bornhald said. "You said you wanted to see those eyes, as proof he was Shadowspawn, and you saw them. What more do you need?"

baɪɑɝ sɛd, nʌdʒɪŋ ɪz maʊn kloʊsɝ. hi ɔfən æktəɾ əz ə ɡɑɹd tə ɡɑləd ðiz deɪz. "hi kæn bi tʃɹʌstɪd, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ."

Byar said, nudging his mount closer. He often acted as a guard to Galad these days. "He can't be trusted, my Lord Captain Commander."

ɡɑləd nɑɾəd ət ðə tʃɹɛntʃ. "hi cʊɾə dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ əs wɪð ðəɾ ətæk."

Galad nodded at the trench. "He could have destroyed us with that attack."

"aɪ əɡɹi wɪð baɪɑɝ," bɔɹnhəl sɛd. "hi wɑns tə dʒɹɔ jə aʊt, ðən kɪl jə tə dɪmɔɹəlaɪz ʌs."

"I agree with Byar," Bornhald said. "He wants to draw you out, then kill you to demoralize us."

ɡɑləd nɑɾəd sloʊli. "ðæts pɑsəbəl." hi tɝn tə lɔɹd kæptən hɑɹnɪʃ, hu ɹoʊd nɪɹbaɪ.

Galad nodded slowly. "That's possible." He turned to Lord Captain Harnesh, who rode nearby.

"ɪf aɪ daɪ, aɪ wɑn jə tə teɪk kəmæn ən tʃɑɹdʒ. ətæk wɪθaʊt mɝsi; aɪ ɹɪpil maɪ ɔɹɾɝ tə əvɔɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ. kɪl ɛniwʌn u simz tə bi tʃænəlɪŋ. meɪk ɪɾ ə pɹaɪɔɹəɾi. ɪts pɑsəbəl ðət wi də nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd wʌɾ ɪz hæpənɪŋ hɪɹ."

"If I die, I want you to take command and charge. Attack without mercy; I repeal my order to avoid Aes Sedai. Kill anyone who seems to be channeling. Make it a priority. It's possible that we do not understand what is happening here."

"bʌt jəɹ stɪl ɡoʊɪŋ?" bɔɹnhəld æskt.

"But you're still going?" Bornhald asked.

"jɛs," ɡɑləd sɛd. hi hæd lɛt bɔɹnhəld ən baɪɑɝ ɡoʊɾ ɪm ɪndə bæɾəl, bʌt naʊ hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf hid bɪn tu heɪsti. hi hæd sin ðoʊz aɪz, ən hæd hɝd ðə tɛstəmoʊniz ə boʊθ ɪz tʃɪlʒɹən ən səm ə ðoʊz u hæd ɹɪɾən wɪð eɪbɑɹə. ɪt hæd sim klɪɹ ðəɾ ətækɪŋ wɑz ðə θɪŋ tə du.

"Yes," Galad said. He had let Bornhald and Byar goad him into battle, but now he wondered if he'd been too hasty. He had seen those eyes, and had heard the testimonies of both his Children and some of those who had ridden with Aybara. It had seemed clear that attacking was the thing to do.

bʌɾ eɪbɑɹə wɑz ɹaɪt. hi hæd kʌm tə mit wɪð ɡɑləd wən æskt. pɝhæps ðəɹ wɑz ə weɪ tə pɹɪvɛn blʌdʃɛd. ɡɑləd dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪt, bʌɾ ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ivən ə tʃæns, ðən dɪleɪɪŋ wɑz ðə ɹaɪt θɪŋ. ɪt wɑz əz sɪmpəl əz ðæt.

But Aybara was right. He had come to meet with Galad when asked. Perhaps there was a way to prevent bloodshed. Galad did not believe it, but if there was even a chance, then delaying was the right thing. It was as simple as that.

bɔɹnhəl dɪd nɑt sim plizd. hɪz æŋɡɝ ət ðə mæn u hæd kɪld ɪz fɑðɝ wɑz ʌndɝstændəbəl, bʌɾ ɪt kəd nɑt bi əlaʊd tə ɡaɪd ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. "ju meɪ kʌm wɪð mi," ɡɑləd sɛd, nʌdʒɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs fɔɹwɝd. "ðæt ɡoʊz fəɹ jə əz wɛl, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ. ðə lɔɹdz kæptən ʃəd ɹɪmeɪn bɪhaɪnd, skæɾɝd θɹu ðə mɛn, lɛst eɪbɑɹə liv əs wɪθaʊt liɾɝz."

Bornhald did not seem pleased. His anger at the man who had killed his father was understandable, but it could not be allowed to guide the Children. "You may come with me," Galad said, nudging his horse forward. "That goes for you as well, Child Byar. The Lords Captain should remain behind, scattered through the men, lest Aybara leave us without leaders."

hɑɹnɪʃ səluɾəd. bɔɹnhəld ɹɪlʌktənli fɛl ɪndə pleɪs bɪsaɪd ɡɑləd, əz dɪd baɪɑɝ, huz aɪz bɝnd wɪð ə waɪl zil ðət mætʃt bɔɹnhəld ɛs æŋɡɝ.

Harnesh saluted. Bornhald reluctantly fell into place beside Galad, as did Byar, whose eyes burned with a wild zeal that matched Bornhald s anger.

boʊθ hæɾ ɪkspɪɹiəns dɪfiɾ ən ɪndɪɡnəɾi ət ðə hænz ə ðɪs pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. ɡɑləɾ ɔlsoʊ tʊk fɪfti tʃɪlʒɹən əz ɡɑɹdz, ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn fɔɹmeɪʃən bɪhaɪn hɪm.

Both had experienced defeat and indignity at the hands of this Perrin Aybara. Galad also took fifty Children as guards, riding in formation behind him.

ə pəvɪljən wɑz sɛɾ ʌp baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ ɝaɪvd. flæt tɑpt ən sɪmpəl, ɪt hæd fɔɹ poʊlz stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ ðə bɹaʊnɪʃ ɡɹeɪ kænvəs. ðəɹ wɑz ə smɔl skwɛɹ teɪbəl ʌndɝ ɪt, əkʌmpənid baɪ tu tʃɛɹz.

A pavilion was set up by the time they arrived. Flat topped and simple, it had four poles stretching the brownish gray canvas. There was a small square table under it, accompanied by two chairs.

eɪbɑɹə sæɾ ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə teɪbəl. hi stʊɾ ʌp əz ɡɑləɾ əpɹoʊtʃt; tədeɪ, ðə lɑɹdʒ mæn wɔɹ ə ɡɹin koʊɾ ən bɹaʊn tʃɹaʊzɝz - boʊθ wɛl kɹæftɪd bʌt pleɪn - ən hæd ðət hæmɝ slʌŋ əɾ ɪz weɪst. ðə kloʊðz hæɾ ən ɝθi sɛnsɪbɪlɪɾi tə ðɛm. noʊ, ðɪs wɑz nɑɾ ə mæn ə pæləsəz bʌɾ ə mæn ə filz ən fɔɹəsts. ə wʊdzmən u hæd ɹɪzən tə bi ə lɔɹd.

Aybara sat on one side of the table. He stood up as Galad approached; today, the large man wore a green coat and brown trousers - both well crafted but plain - and had that hammer slung at his waist. The clothes had an earthy sensibility to them. No, this was not a man of palaces but a man of fields and forests. A woodsman who had risen to be a lord.

ə pɛɹ ə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn stʊɾ ət ðə bæk ə ðə pəvɪljən, hoʊldɪŋ paʊɝfəl tu ɹɪvɝz lɔŋboʊz. ðeɪ wɝ sɛd tə bi ɪndɪpɛndən fɑɹmɝz ən hɝdzmɪn ʌv oʊld, stɝɾi stɑk. ən ðeɪ hæd tʃoʊzən ðɪs pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə tə lid ðɛm.

A pair of Two Rivers men stood at the back of the pavilion, holding powerful Two Rivers longbows. They were said to be independent farmers and herdsmen of old, sturdy stock. And they had chosen this Perrin Aybara to lead them.

ɡɑləd wɔk təwɔɹd ðə pəvɪljən. baɪɑɝ ən bɔɹnhəl dʒɔɪn ɪm ðoʊ ði ʌðɝ fɪfti ɹɪmeɪn maʊntəɾ aʊtsaɪd.

Galad walked toward the pavilion. Byar and Bornhald joined him though the other fifty remained mounted outside.

ənlaɪk ðɛɹ læs miɾɪŋ, ðəɹ wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ hɪɹ, θɹi hum i kəd spɑt. ə ʃɔɹt kɛɹhinɪn wʊmən; ə slɪm, plɛzənt-lʊkɪŋ wʊmən ɪn ə sɪmpəl dʒɹɛs; ə stɑki wʊmən huz numɝəs bɹeɪdz mɛnt ʃi wɑz laɪkli fɹəm tæɹɑbən. ðeɪ stʊd wɪð ðə ɡɹup ʌv il wɪmən ɪn ʃɔlz, ɡɑɹɾəd baɪ ə hændfʊl ə meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ. wɛl, ðoʊz il dɪd ɡɪv kɹiɾəns tə ðə kleɪm ðəɾ eɪbɑɹə hæd bɪn sɛn baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

Unlike their last meeting, there were Aes Sedai here, three whom he could spot. A short Cairhienin woman; a slim, pleasant-looking woman in a simple dress; a stocky woman whose numerous braids meant she was likely from Tarabon. They stood with the group of Aiel women in shawls, guarded by a handful of Maidens of the Spear. Well, those Aiel did give credence to the claim that Aybara had been sent by the Dragon Reborn.

ɡɑləd ɹɛstəɾ ɪz hæn kæʒəwəli ɑn ðə pɑməl ə hɪz sɔɹd, lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə pəvɪljənz ʌðɝ ɑkjəpəns.

Galad rested his hand casually on the pommel of his sword, looking over the pavilion's other occupants.

ən ðən i fɹoʊz. ə stʃɹaɪkɪŋli bjuɾəfəl wʊmən stʊd bɪhaɪn eɪbə-ɹɑz tʃɛɹ. noʊ, nɑt bjuɾəfəl, ɡɔɹdʒəs. lʌstʃɹəs blæk hɛɹ stʃɹim daʊn pæst əɹ nɛk; ɪt sim tə ʃaɪn. ʃi wɔɹ ə ɹɛd ɡaʊn, θɪn ɪnʌf tə əksɛntʃueɪɾ əɹ fɔɹm ən dipli kʌɾ ɪnʌf tə ɪkspoʊz swɛlɪŋ bʊzəm.

And then he froze. A strikingly beautiful woman stood behind Ayba-ra's chair. No, not beautiful, gorgeous. Lustrous black hair streamed down past her neck; it seemed to shine. She wore a red gown, thin enough to accentuate her form and deeply cut enough to expose swelling bosom.

ən ðoʊz aɪz. soʊ dɑɹk, wɪð lɔŋ bjuɾəfəl læʃɪz. hi simd . .. pʊl təwɔɹd ðɛm. waɪ hædn ðɪs wʊmən kʌm læs taɪm?

And those eyes. So dark, with long beautiful lashes. He seemed . .. pulled toward them. Why hadn't this woman come last time?

"ju əpɪɹ sɝpɹaɪzd," eɪbɑɹə sɛɾ əz i sæt bæk daʊn. hi hæɾ ə ɡɹʌf vɔɪs. "ðə leɪɾi fɝst ɪz hɪɹ ət ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡənz kəmænd, əz wʌn eɪɛm. dɪdn jə noʊɾəs ðə flæɡ ʌv min əbʌv maɪ fɔɹsɪz?"

"You appear surprised," Aybara said as he sat back down. He had a gruff voice. "The Lady First is here at the Lord Dragon's command, as 1 am. Didn't you notice the flag of Mayene above my forces?"

"aɪ. . ." ɡɑləd snæpt ɪz maʊθ kloʊzd, ɛksəkjuɾɪŋ ə baʊ tə ðə wʊmən. bɹəleɪn sɝ pɛndʒɹæɡ pɹən? ʃi wɑz sɛd tə bi ə mɑɹvələs bjuɾi, bʌt ðoʊz teɪlz dɪɾ əɹ lɪɾəl dʒʌstəs. ɡɑləd tɔɹ ɪz aɪz fɹəm əɹ ən fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə teɪk ðə siɾ ɑpəzəɾ eɪbɑɹə. hi hæd tə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn ɪz foʊ.

"I. . ." Galad snapped his mouth closed, executing a bow to the woman. Berelain sur Paendrag Paeron? She was said to be a marvelous beauty, but those tales did her little justice. Galad tore his eyes from her and forced himself to take the seat opposite Aybara. He had to concentrate on his foe.

ðoʊz ɡoʊldən aɪz wɝ əz ənsɛɾəlɪŋ əz i ɹɪmɛmbɝd. soʊ stʃɹeɪnʒ tə lʊk ɪntu. jɛs, ðɪs mæn kʊdn bi ɛniθɪŋ ʌðɝ ðən ʃæɾoʊzpɔn.

Those golden eyes were as unsettling as he remembered. So strange to look into. Yes, this man couldn't be anything other than Shadowspawn.

waɪ wəd soʊ mɛni fɑloʊ sətʃ ə kɹitʃɝ? waɪ wəd ʃi fɑloʊ sətʃ ə kɹitʃɝ?

Why would so many follow such a creature? Why would she follow such a creature?

"θæŋk jə fəɹ kʌmɪŋ," eɪbɑɹə sɛd. "aʊɝ læs miɾɪŋ wɑz heɪsti.

"Thank you for coming," Aybara said. "Our last meeting was hasty.

wɪl də ɪt pɹɑpɝ, ðɪs taɪm. jə ʃəd bi meɪɾ əwɛɹ ðət ðɪs wʊmən bɪsaɪd mi ɪz æliændɝ mɛɹɪðə kɪɡɑɝɪn, kwin ʌv ɡildən, blɛsɪɾ ə ðə laɪt, dɪfɛndɝ ʌv ɡæɹənz wɔl." soʊ, ðət steɪtli, dɑɹk-hɛɹd wʊmən wɑz ðə kɝən kwin ʌv ɡildən. ʌv kɔɹs, wɪð ði ənɹɛs hɪɹ leɪtli, ðəɹ wɝ pɹɑbli ə hæf-dʌzən pipəl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kleɪm ðə θɹoʊn. ʃi wɑz pɹɪɾi, bʌt kəmplitli oʊvɝʃæɾoʊd baɪ bɹəleɪn.

We'll do it proper, this time. You should be made aware that this woman beside me is Alliandre Maritha Kigarin, Queen of Ghealdan, Blessed of the Light, Defender of Garen's Wall." So, that stately, dark-haired woman was the current Queen of Ghealdan. Of course, with the unrest here lately, there were probably a half-dozen people trying to claim the throne. She was pretty, but completely overshadowed by Berelain.

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd təwɔɹɾ ə θɝd wʊmən. "ðɪs ɪz feɪl ni bæʃɪɹ tævbɑɹə, maɪ waɪf ən kʌzən tə ðə kwin ə sɑldɑiə." eɪbɑɹəz waɪf ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ɡɑləd wɪð səspɪʃən. jɛs, ʃi wɑz ɑbviəsli sɑldəiən, baɪ ðət noʊz. bɔɹnhəld ən baɪɑɝ hædnt noʊn ə hɝ ɹɔɪəl kənɛkʃənz.

Perrin nodded toward a third woman. "This is Faile ni Bashere t'Avbara, my wife and cousin to the Queen of Saldaea." Aybara's wife regarded Galad with suspicion. Yes, she was obviously Saldaean, by that nose. Bornhald and Byar hadn't known of her royal connections.

tu mɑnɑɹks ɪn ðə tɛnt, ən boʊθ bɪhaɪn eɪbɑɹə. ɡɑləd ɹoʊz fɹəm ɪz siɾ ən ɡeɪv ə baʊ tə æliændɝ tə mætʃ ðə wʌn hid ɡɪvən bɹəleɪn. "jɔɹ mædʒəsti."

Two monarchs in the tent, and both behind Aybara. Galad rose from his seat and gave a bow to Alliandre to match the one he'd given Berelain. "Your Majesty."

"jɔɹ vɛɹi pəlaɪt, lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," bɹəleɪn sɛd. "æn ðoʊz wɝ ɛləɡən baʊz.

"You're very polite, Lord Captain Commander," Berelain said. "And those were elegant bows.

tɛl mi, wɛɹ dɪd jə ɹəsiv sətʃ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ?"

Tell me, where did you receive such training?"

hɝ vɔɪs wɑz laɪk mjuzɪk. "ɪn ðə kɔɹɾ ʌv ændɝ, maɪ leɪɾi. aɪm ɡɑləd dəmədʒɹd, stɛpsʌn ə ðə dɪpɑɹɾəd kwin mɔɹɡeɪs ən hæf-bɹʌðɝ ʌv ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd, ðə ɹaɪtfəl kwin."

Her voice was like music. "In the court of Andor, my Lady. I am Galad Damodred, stepson of the departed Queen Morgase and half-brother of Elayne Trakand, the rightful Queen."

"ɑ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "əbaʊt taɪm aɪ pʊɾ ə neɪm tə ju. wɪʃ jud sɛd ðət læs taɪm."

"Ah," Perrin said. "About time I put a name to you. Wish you'd said that last time."

bɹəleɪn stɛɹɾ ɪndə hɪz aɪz, ən ʃi smaɪld, lʊkɪŋ əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə stɛp fɔɹwɝd. ʃi kɑt hɝsɛlf, haʊɛvɝ. "ɡɑləd dəmədʒɹd. jɛs, aɪ θɔɾ aɪ ɹɛkəɡnaɪz sʌmθɪŋ ɪn jəɹ feɪs. haʊ ɪz jəɹ sɪstɝ?"

Berelain stared into his eyes, and she smiled, looking as if she wanted to step forward. She caught herself, however. "Galad Damodred. Yes, I thought I recognized something in your face. How is your sister?"

"aɪ hoʊp ʃiz wɛl," ɡɑləd sɛd. "aɪ hæv nɑt sin əɹ ɪn səm taɪm."

"I hope she is well," Galad said. "I have not seen her in some time."

"ɪleɪnz faɪn," pɛɹɪn sɛd ɡɹʌflaɪ. "læst aɪ hɝd - wɪtʃ wɑz oʊnli ə fju deɪz bæk - ʃid sɪkjʊɹɾ əɹ kleɪm tə ðə θɹoʊn. aɪ wʊdn bi sɝpɹaɪzd ɪf ʃiz lʊkɪŋ tə mɛɹi ɹænd baɪ naʊ. ɪf ʃi kən pʊl ɪm əweɪ fɹəm wʌtɛvɝ ɹɛlm hiz kɑŋkɝɪŋ."

"Elayne's fine," Perrin said gruffly. "Last I heard - which was only a few days back - she'd secured her claim to the throne. I wouldn't be surprised if she's looking to marry Rand by now. If she can pull him away from whatever realm he's conquering."

bɪhaɪnd ɡɑləd, baɪɑɝ hɪst sɔfli. hæɾ eɪbɑɹə ɪntɛndəɾ ɪnsəl baɪ ɪndəkeɪɾɪŋ ə ɹileɪʃənʃɪp bɪtwin ɪleɪn ən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn? ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ɡɑləd nu hɪz sɪstɝ ɔl tu wɛl. ʃi wɑz ɪmpʌlsɪv, ən ʃi hæd ʃoʊn ən ənsimli fæsəneɪʃən wɪð jʌŋ ælθɹ.

Behind Galad, Byar hissed softly. Had Aybara intended insult by indicating a relationship between Elayne and the Dragon Reborn? Unfortunately, Galad knew his sister all too well. She was impulsive, and she had shown an unseemly fascination with young al'Thor.

maɪ sɪstɝ meɪ də əz ʃi wɪʃɪz," ɡɑləd sɛd, sɝpɹaɪzd ət haʊ izəli hi kənteɪn ɪz ənɔɪəns ət boʊθ əɹ ən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. "wi ɑɹ hɪɹ tə dɪskʌs ju, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə, ən jəɹ ɑɹmi."

My sister may do as she wishes," Galad said, surprised at how easily he contained his annoyance at both her and the Dragon Reborn. "We are here to discuss you, Perrin Aybara, and your army."

eɪbɑɹə lin fɔɹwɝd, leɪɪŋ tu hænz ɑn ðə teɪbəl. "wi boʊθ noʊ ðɪs ɪzən əbaʊt maɪ ɑɹmi."

Aybara leaned forward, laying two hands on the table. "We both know this isn't about my army."

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪɾ əbaʊt, ðɛn?" ɡɑləɾ æskt.

"What is it about, then?" Galad asked.

eɪbɑɹə mɛɾ ɪz ɡeɪz wɪð ðoʊz ənnætʃɹəl aɪz ə hɪz. "ɪts əbaʊɾ ə pɛɹ ə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪɾ aɪ kɪl tu jɪɹz bæk. naʊ ɛvɹi taɪm aɪ tɝn ɝaʊnd, ɪt simz ðət ðəɹ ɪz ə ɡɹup ə jə snæpɪŋ ət maɪ hilz."

Aybara met his gaze with those unnatural eyes of his. "It's about a pair of Children of the Light I killed two years back. Now every time I turn around, it seems that there is a group of you snapping at my heels."

ɪt wɑzn ɔfən ðəɾ ə mɝɾɝɝ wɑz soʊ oʊpən əbaʊt wʌɾ i hæd dʌn. ɡɑləd hɝd ðə ɹæsp ʌv ə sɔɹd biɪŋ dʒɹɔn bɪhaɪn hɪm, ən ɹeɪzd ə hænd. "tʃaɪl bɔɹnhəld! jəl kəntʃɹoʊl jɝsɛlf!"

It wasn't often that a murderer was so open about what he had done. Galad heard the rasp of a sword being drawn behind him, and raised a hand. "Child Bornhald! You will control yourself!"

"tu tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, ʃæɾoʊzpɔn?" bɔɹnhəl spæt. "ænd wʌɾ ə maɪ fɑðɝ?"

"Two Children of the Light, Shadowspawn?" Bornhald spat. "And what of my father?"

"aɪ hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɪz dɛθ, bɔɹnhəld," eɪbɑɹə sɛd. "dʒɛəfɹæm wɑz kɪl baɪ ðə sintʃæn, ənfɔɹtʃənətli. fəɹ ə waɪtkloʊk, hi sim laɪk ə ɹizənəbəl mæn, ðoʊ hi wɑz plænɪŋ tə hæŋ mi."

"I had nothing to do with his death, Bornhald," Aybara said. "Geofram was killed by the Seanchan, unfortunately. For a Whitecloak, he seemed like a reasonable man, though he was planning to hang me."

"hi wɑz tə hæŋ jə fəɹ ðə mɝɾɝz jə dʒʌs kənfɛs tə," ɡɑləd sɛd kɑmli, ʃuɾɪŋ ə ɡlæns ət bɔɹnhəld. ðə mæn snæpt ɪz sɔɹd bæk ɪn ɪts ʃiθ, bʌɾ ɪz feɪs wɑz ɹɛd.

"He was to hang you for the murders you just confessed to," Galad said calmly, shooting a glance at Bornhald. The man snapped his sword back in its sheath, but his face was red.

"ðeɪ wɝn mɝɾɝz," eɪbɑɹə sɛd. "ðeɪ ətæk mi. aɪ fɔt bæk."

"They weren't murders," Aybara said. "They attacked me. I fought back."

"ðæɾ ɪz nɑt wʌɾ aɪ hæv hɝd," ɡɑləd sɛd. wʌt ɡeɪm wɑz ðɪs mæn pleɪɪŋ? "aɪ hæv swɔɹn tɛstəmoʊni ðət jə wɝ haɪɾɪŋ ʌndɝniθ ə klft ɪn ðə ɹɑk. wən ðə mɛn æsk jə tə kʌm aʊt, jə dʒʌmpt aʊt skɹimɪŋ ən ətækt əm wɪθaʊt pɹɑvəkeɪʃən."

"That is not what I have heard," Galad said. What game was this man playing? "I have sworn testimony that you were hiding underneath a cleft in the rock. When the men asked you to come out, you jumped out screaming and attacked them without provocation."

"oʊ, ðəɹ wɑz pɹɑvəkeɪʃən," eɪbɑɹə sɛd. "jɔɹ waɪtkloʊks kɪld ə fɹɛn ə maɪn."

"Oh, there was provocation," Aybara said. "Your Whitecloaks killed a friend of mine."

"ðə wʊmən u wɑz wɪð ju?" ɡɑləɾ æskt. "fɹʌm wʌɾ aɪ hɪɹ, ʃi ɪskeɪp seɪfli." hid bɪn ʃɑkt wən bɔɹnhəl hæd mɛnʃən ðət neɪm. ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ. ənʌðɝ wʊmən u sim tə pɹəfɝ deɪnʒɝəs kʌmpəni.

"The woman who was with you?" Galad asked. "From what I hear, she escaped safely." He'd been shocked when Bornhald had mentioned that name. Egwene al'Vere. Another woman who seemed to prefer dangerous company.

"nɑt hɝ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ə fɹɛnd neɪm hɑpɝ. ən æftɝ hɪm, ə kəmpænjən ə hɪz. ðeɪ wɝ wʊlvz."

"Not her," Perrin said. "A friend named Hopper. And after him, a companion of his. They were wolves."

ðə mæn wɑz kəndɛmɪŋ hɪmsɛlf fɝðɝ! "ju meɪk fɹɛnz ʌv wʊlvz, noʊn tə bi kɹitʃɝz ə ðə ʃædoʊ?"

The man was condemning himself further! "You make friends of wolves, known to be creatures of the Shadow?"

"wʊlvz ɑɹən ə ðə ʃædoʊ," eɪbɑɹə sɛd. "ðeɪ heɪt ʃæɾoʊzpɔn əz mʌtʃ əz ɛni mæn aɪv noʊn."

"Wolves aren't of the Shadow," Aybara said. "They hate Shadowspawn as much as any man I've known."

"æn haʊ dʒju noʊ ðɪs?"

"And how do you know this?"

eɪbɑɹə sɛd nʌθɪŋ fɝðɝ. ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ ðɛɹ. baɪɑɝ sɛd ðɪs mæn simd eɪbəl tə kəmænd wʊlvz, ɹʌn wɪð ðɛm, laɪk ə wʊlf hɪmsɛlf. ðət tɛstəmoʊni wɑz pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌt hæd pɝsweɪɾəd ɡɑləd ðət bæɾəl wɑz ði oʊnli ɹikɔɹs. ɪt sim ðət baɪɑɝz wɝdz hæd nɑt bɪn ɪɡzædʒɝeɪʃən.

Aybara said nothing further. There was more there. Byar said this man seemed able to command wolves, run with them, like a wolf himself. That testimony was part of what had persuaded Galad that battle was the only recourse. It seemed that Byar's words had not been exaggeration.

bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid, jɛt, tə dwɛl ɑn ðæt. eɪbɑɹə hæɾ ədmɪɾəd tə mɝɾɝ. "aɪ doʊn æksɛp ðə kɪlɪŋ ʌv wʊlvz əz sʌmθɪŋ tə ɪɡzɑnɝeɪt ju," ɡɑləd sɛd. "mɛni hʌntɝz sleɪ wʊlvz u ətæk ðɛɹ flɑks əɹ θɹɛɾən ðɛɹ lɪvz. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən dɪd nʌθɪŋ ɹɔŋ. jəɹ ətæk ɑn ðɛm, ðɛɹfɔɹ, wɑz ʌnpɹəvoʊk mɝɾɝ."

But there was no need, yet, to dwell on that. Aybara had admitted to murder. "I don't accept the killing of wolves as something to exonerate you," Galad said. "Many hunters slay wolves who attack their flocks or threaten their lives. The Children did nothing wrong. Your attack on them, therefore, was unprovoked murder."

"ðɛɹ wɑz fɑɹ mɔɹ tə ɪt ðən ðæt," eɪbɑɹə sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ daʊɾ əl kənvɪns jə ʌv ðæt."

"There was far more to it than that," Aybara said. "But I doubt I'll convince you of that."

"aɪ kænɑt bi kənvɪnst ə sʌmθɪŋ ðəɾ ɪzən tʃɹu," ɡɑləd sɛd.

"I cannot be convinced of something that isn't true," Galad said.

"æn jə woʊn liv mi əloʊn, iðɝ," eɪbɑɹə sɛd.

"And you won't leave me alone, either," Aybara said.

"wi ɑɹ əɾ ən ɪmpæs, ðɛn," ɡɑləd sɛd. "ju hæv kənfɛs tə kɹaɪmz ðəɾ aɪ, əz ə sɝvən ə dʒʌstəs, mʌst si ɹaɪɾɪd. aɪ kænɑt wɔk əweɪ. jə si waɪ aɪ fɛl fɝðɝ pɑɹli wɑz jusləs?"

"We are at an impasse, then," Galad said. "You have confessed to crimes that I, as a servant of justice, must see righted. I cannot walk away. You see why I felt further parley was useless?"

"wʌɾ ɪf aɪ wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə stæn tʃɹaɪəl?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"What if I were willing to stand trial?" Perrin asked.

eɪbɑɹəz boʊld-noʊzd waɪf ɹɛstəɾ ə hæn ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. hi ɹitʃt ʌp ən leɪɾ ɪz hæn ɑn ɪt, bʌt dɪd nɑt tɝn əweɪ fɹəm ɡɑləd.

Aybara's bold-nosed wife rested a hand on his shoulder. He reached up and laid his hand on it, but did not turn away from Galad.

"ɪf jəl kʌm ən æksɛpt pʌnɪʃmən fɹəm əs fəɹ wʌt juv dʌn . . " ɡɑləd sɛd. ɪt wəd min ɛksəkjuʃən. ʃʊɹli ðə kɹitʃɝ wʊdnt ɡɪv hɪmsɛlf ʌp.

"If you will come and accept punishment from us for what you've done . . " Galad said. It would mean execution. Surely the creature wouldn't give himself up.

ət ðə bæk ə ðə pəvɪljən, ə ɡɹup ə sɝvəns hæɾ ɝaɪvd ən wɝ pɹipɛɹɪŋ ti. ti. əɾ ə wɔɹ pɑɹli. ɑbviəsli eɪbɑɹə hæd lɪɾəl ɪkspɪɹiəns wɪð ðɪs kaɪndə θɪŋ.

At the back of the pavilion, a group of servants had arrived and were preparing tea. Tea. At a war parley. Obviously Aybara had little experience with this kind of thing.

"nɑt pʌnɪʃmənt," eɪbɑɹə sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "ə tʃɹaɪəl. ɪf aɪm pɹuvən ɪnəsənt, aɪ ɡoʊ fɹi ən jə - ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ - ɪnstʃɹʌk jəɹ mɛn tə stɑp haʊndɪŋ mi. ɪspɛʃli bɔɹnhəld ən ðət wʌn bɪhaɪn jə hu ɡɹaʊlz laɪk ə pʌp siɪŋ ɪz fɝs lɛpɝd."

"Not punishment," Aybara said sharply. "A trial. If I am proven innocent, I go free and you - the Lord Captain Commander - instruct your men to stop hounding me. Especially Bornhald and that one behind you who growls like a pup seeing his first leopard."

"æn ɪf jə ɑɹ pɹuvən ɡɪlti?"

"And if you are proven guilty?"

"ðæt dɪpɛnz."

"That depends."

"doʊn lɪsən tə hɪm, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ!" baɪɑɝ sɛd. "hi pɹɑməs tə ɡɪv hɪmsɛlf tə əs wʌns bɪfɔɹ, ðən bɪtʃɹeɪɾ ɪz wɝd!"

"Don't listen to him, my Lord Captain Commander!" Byar said. "He promised to give himself to us once before, then betrayed his word!"

"aɪ dɪd nɑt!" eɪbɑɹə sɛd. "ju dɪd nɑt fʊlfɪl jəɹ pɑɹɾ ə ðə bɑɹɡən!"

"I did not!" Aybara said. "You did not fulfill your part of the bargain!"

ɡɑləd slæp ðə teɪbəl. "ðɪs ɪz jusləs. ðəɹ wɪl bi noʊ tʃɹaɪəl." "waɪ nɑt?" eɪbɑɹə dɪmændəd.

Galad slapped the table. "This is useless. There will be no trial." "Why not?" Aybara demanded.

"ju tɔk ə dʒʌstəs, bʌt woʊn ɔfɝ mi ə tʃɹaɪəl?"

"You talk of justice, but won't offer me a trial?"

"æn u wəd dʒʌdʒ ɪt?" ɡɑləɾ æskt. "wʊd jə tʃɹʌs mi tə də soʊ?" ʌv kɔɹs nɑt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "bʌɾ æliændɝ kæn. ʃiz ə kwin."

"And who would judge it?" Galad asked. "Would you trust me to do so?" Of course not," Perrin said. "But Alliandre can. She's a queen."

"æn jəɹ kəmpænjən," ɡɑləd sɛd. "aɪ min əɹ noʊ ɪnsəlt, bʌɾ aɪ fɪɹ ʃi wəɾ əkwɪt jə wɪθaʊt hɪɹɪŋ ɛvəɾəns. ivən ðə leɪɾi fɝst wəd nɑt bi æɾəkwət - ðoʊ aɪ wʊd, ʌv kɔɹs, tʃɹʌst əɹ wɝd, aɪ fɪɹ ðət maɪ mɛn wəd nɑt."

"And your companion," Galad said. "I mean her no insult, but I fear she would acquit you without hearing evidence. Even the Lady First would not be adequate - though I would, of course, trust her word, I fear that my men would not."

laɪt, bʌt ðət wʊmən wɑz bjuɾəfəl! hi ɡlænst əɾ əɹ fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ən faʊn əɹ blʌʃɪŋ əz ʃi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd hɪm. ɪt wɑz feɪnt, bʌɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹ i sɔ ɪt. hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf blʌʃɪŋ əz wɛl.

Light, but that woman was beautiful! He glanced at her for a moment, and found her blushing as she regarded him. It was faint, but he was sure he saw it. He found himself blushing as well.

"ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðɛn," eɪbɑɹə sɛd.

"The Aes Sedai, then," Aybara said.

ɡɑləd tɔɹ ɪz aɪz əweɪ fɹəm bɹəleɪn ən lʊkt əɾ eɪbɑɹə, ɡɪvɪŋ ɪm ə flæt stɛɹ. "ɪf jə θɪŋk ðəɾ ə dʒʌdʒmən baɪ wʌn fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ wəd sæɾəsfaɪ maɪ mɛn, jə noʊ lɪɾəl ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪ pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə."

Galad tore his eyes away from Berelain and looked at Aybara, giving him a flat stare. "If you think that a judgment by one from the White Tower would satisfy my men, you know little of the Children of the Ligh Perrin Aybara."

eɪbɑɹəz aɪz ɡɹu hɑɹd. jɛs, hi nu ðæt. ɪt wɑz tu bæd. ə tʃɹaɪəl wʊɾə bɪn ə taɪɾi ɛn tə ðɪs. ə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən əpɹoʊtʃt ðə teɪbəl wɪð tu kʌps ə ti, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid. ðɪs sɛkən pɑɹli wɑz oʊvɝ.

Aybara's eyes grew hard. Yes, he knew that. It was too bad. A trial would have been a tidy end to this. A serving woman approached the table with two cups of tea, but there was no need. This second parley was over.

"jɔɹ ɹaɪt, ðɛn," eɪbɑɹə sɛd, lʊkɪŋ fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd. "ðɪs miɾɪŋ wɑz pɔɪnləs."

"You're right, then," Aybara said, looking frustrated. "This meeting was pointless."

"noʊ," ɡɑləd sɛd, stilɪŋ ənʌðɝ ɡlæns ət bɹəleɪn. "nɑt pɔɪnləs fəɹ mi." hi nu mɔɹ ʌv eɪbɑɹəz stʃɹɛŋkθ; ðət wəd hɛlp ɪm ɪn bæɾəl. bɪɑn ðæt, ɪt hæd bɪn ɹaɪt tə dɪleɪ faɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ə ʃɔɹt taɪm tə meɪk sɝɾən ɪt wɑz niɾəd. ðəɹ wɑz stɪl plɛnti ʌv laɪɾ ɪn ðə deɪ fəɹ ðə faɪɾɪŋ tə pɹəsid.

"No," Galad said, stealing another glance at Berelain. "Not pointless for me." He knew more of Aybara's strength; that would help him in battle. Beyond that, it had been right to delay fighting for a short time to make certain it was needed. There was still plenty of light in the day for the fighting to proceed.

bʌt . . . wʌɾ ə ðət wʊmən . . . ðə leɪɾi fɝst? hi fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə lʊk əweɪ. ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəlt.

But . . . what of that woman . . . the Lady First? He forced himself to look away. It was difficult.

ɡɑləd stʊd, ən baʊd tə æliændɝ, ðən tə bɹəleɪn. hi muv tə liv.

Galad stood, and bowed to Alliandre, then to Berelain. He moved to leave.

ðən i hɝɾ ə ɡæsp. ɑdli, ɪt keɪm fɹəm ðə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən u hæd bɹɔt ðə ti. ɡɑləd ɡlænst ət hɝ.

Then he heard a gasp. Oddly, it came from the serving woman who had brought the tea. Galad glanced at her.

ɪt wɑz mɔɹɡeɪs.

It was Morgase.

ɡɑləd fɹoʊz, kəmplitli stɪl. hid bɪn tʃɹeɪn baɪ sɔɹdmæstɝ æftɝ sɔɹdmæstɝ nɛvɝ tə lɛɾ ɪz sɝpɹaɪz oʊvɝwɛlm hɪm, bʌɾ ət ðət moʊmənt, ðɛɹ kɛɹfəl tʃɹeɪnɪŋ wɑz fəɹ nɔt. ðət wɑz ɪz stɛpmʌðɝ. ðət ɹɛd-ɡoʊl hɛɹ i hæd tʌɡd əz ə tʃaɪld. ðət feɪs, soʊ bjuɾəfəl ən stʃɹɔŋ. ðoʊz aɪz. ðoʊz wɝ əɹ aɪz.

Galad froze, completely still. He'd been trained by swordmaster after swordmaster never to let his surprise overwhelm him, but at that moment, their careful training was for naught. That was his stepmother. That red-gold hair he had tugged as a child. That face, so beautiful and strong. Those eyes. Those were her eyes.

ə ɡoʊst? hi hæd hɝd ðə stɔɹiz. mænəfɛsteɪʃənz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz ivəl ɹɪtɝnɪŋ ðə dɛd tə laɪf.

A ghost? He had heard the stories. Manifestations of the Dark One's evil returning the dead to life.

bʌt noʊbɑdi ɛls ɪn ðə pəvɪljən simd ənizi, ən ðɪs wʊmən wɑz tu ɹil. hɛzɪɾəntli, ɡɑləd ɹitʃt aʊɾ ən tʌtʃt ði æpɝɪʃən ɑn ðə tʃik. ðə skɪn wɑz wɔɹm.

But nobody else in the pavilion seemed uneasy, and this woman was too real. Hesitantly, Galad reached out and touched the apparition on the cheek. The skin was warm.

"ɡɑləd?" ʃi sɛd. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ hɪɹ? haʊ - "

"Galad?" she said. "What are you doing here? How - "

ʃi kʌɾ ɔf əz i sizd əɹ ɪn ən ɛmbɹeɪs, kɑzɪŋ ðoʊz ɝaʊn ɪm ɑn boʊθ saɪdz tə dʒʌmp ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. ʃi dʒʌmpt, tu. ʃi lɪvd! haʊ?

She cut off as he seized her in an embrace, causing those around him on both sides to jump in surprise. She jumped, too. She lived! How?

aɪ kɪl vɑldə, ɡɑləd θɔɾ ɪmiɾiətli. kɪld ɪm fəɹ ðə dɛθ ə maɪ mʌðɝ. hu ɪz nɑt dɛd. aɪ hæv dʌn ivəl.

I killed Valda, Galad thought immediately. Killed him for the death of my mother. Who is not dead. I have done evil.

noʊ. vɑldə hæd dɪzɝv tə daɪ fəɹ ði əsɔlt ɑn mɔɹɡeɪs. əɹ wɑz ðət pɑɹt tʃɹu? hi hæd spoʊkən tə tʃɪlʒɹən ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ɪt wɑz, bʌt ðeɪɾ ɔlsoʊ bɪn ʃʊɹ ʃi wɑz dɛd.

No. Valda had deserved to die for the assault on Morgase. Or was that part true? He had spoken to Children sure that it was, but they'd also been sure she was dead.

hi wəd sɔɹt ðəɾ aʊt leɪɾɝ. ɹaɪt naʊ, hi niɾəd tə stɑp ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz mɛn. hi ɹilist ɪz stɛpmʌðɝ, bʌt ʃi kɛp hoʊld ə hɪz ɑɹm. ʃi lʊk deɪzd. hi hæd ɹɛɹli sin əɹ ðət weɪ.

He would sort that out later. Right now, he needed to stop embarrassing himself in front of his men. He released his stepmother, but she kept hold of his arm. She looked dazed. He had rarely seen her that way.

pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə hæd stʊɾ ʌp ən wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ əm wɪð ə fɹaʊn. "ju noʊ meɪaɪɡdɪn?"

Perrin Aybara had stood up and was watching them with a frown. "You know Maighdin?"

"meɪaɪɡdɪn?" ɡɑləɾ æskt. ʃi wɔɹ ə sɪmpəl dʒɹɛs ən noʊ dʒuəlɹi. wɑz ʃi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə haɪɾ əz ə sɝvənt? "eɪbɑɹə, ðɪs ɪz mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkənd, dɪfɛndɝ ə ðə ɹɛlm, pɹətɛktɝ ə ðə pipəl, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs tʃɹəkənd. ʃiz jəɹ kwinəl"

"Maighdin?" Galad asked. She wore a simple dress and no jewelry. Was she trying to hide as a servant? "Aybara, this is Morgase Trakand, Defender of the Realm, Protector of the People, High Seat of House Trakand. She is your queenl"

ðət bɹɔɾ ə stɪlnəs tə ðə pəvɪljən. eɪbɑɹə skɹætʃt əɾ ɪz bɪɹd θɔtfəli. hɪz waɪf wɑtʃt mɔɹɡeɪs wɪð aɪz waɪd, iðɝ ʃɑkt əɹ æŋɡɹi.

That brought a stillness to the pavilion. Aybara scratched at his beard thoughtfully. His wife watched Morgase with eyes wide, either shocked or angry.

"meɪaɪɡdɪn," eɪbɑɹə sɛd, "ɪz ðɪs tʃɹu?"

"Maighdin," Aybara said, "is this true?"

ʃi lɪftəɾ əɹ tʃɪn, stɛɹɪŋ eɪbɑɹə ɪn ði aɪz. haʊ kəd ðeɪ nɑt si ðə kwin ɪn hɝ?

She lifted her chin, staring Aybara in the eyes. How could they not see the Queen in her?

"aɪ æm mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkənd," ʃi sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ hæv ɹɪnaʊns maɪ θɹoʊn ɪn feɪvɝ ʌv ɪleɪn. bɪfɔɹ ðə laɪt, əl nɛvɝ əɡɛn kleɪm ðə kɹaʊn."

"I am Morgase Trakand," she said. "But I have renounced my throne in favor of Elayne. Before the Light, I will never again claim the crown."

ɡɑləd nɑɾəd. jɛs. ʃi mʌst əv fɪɹd ðəɾ eɪbɑɹə wəd juz əɹ əɡɛnst ændɝ. "aɪm teɪkɪŋ jə bæk tə maɪ kæmp, mʌðɝ," ɡɑləd sɛd, stɪl wɑtʃɪŋ eɪbɑɹə. "ðɛn wi kən dɪskʌs ðə weɪ jə wɝ tʃɹiɾəd baɪ ðɪs mæn."

Galad nodded. Yes. She must have feared that Aybara would use her against Andor. "I'm taking you back to my camp, Mother," Galad said, still watching Aybara. "Then we can discuss the way you were treated by this man."

ʃi tɝn lɛvəl aɪz ɑn ɡɑləd. "æn ɔɹɾɝ, ɡɑləd? hæv aɪ noʊ seɪ ɪn ðə mæɾɝ?"

She turned level eyes on Galad. "An order, Galad? Have I no say in the matter?"

hi fɹaʊnd, linɪŋ ɪn ən spikɪŋ ɪn ə wɪspɝ. "dʌz i hæv ʌðɝz kæptɪv? wʌt lɛvɝɪdʒ dʌz i hæv oʊvɝ ju?"

He frowned, leaning in and speaking in a whisper. "Does he have others captive? What leverage does he have over you?"

ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ən ɹɪplaɪd sɔfli, "ðɪs mæn ɪz nɑt wʌt jə θɪŋk i ɪz, ɡɑləd. hiz ɹʌf- kʌt, ən aɪ sɝɾənli doʊn laɪk wʌt hiz duɪŋ tə ændɝ, bʌt hiz noʊ fɹɛn ə ðə ʃædoʊ. aɪ hæv mɔɹ tə fɪɹ fɹəm jəɹ . . . əsoʊsiɪts ðən fɹəm pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə."

She shook her head and replied softly, "This man is not what you think he is, Galad. He's rough- cut, and I certainly don't like what he's doing to Andor, but he is no friend of the Shadow. I have more to fear from your . . . associates than from Perrin Aybara."

jɛs, ʃi dɪɾ əv ɹizən tə dɪstʃɹʌs ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. ɡʊd ɹizən. "wɪl jə kʌm wɪð mi, maɪ leɪɾi? aɪ pɹɑməs jə ðət jə meɪ liv ən ɹɪtɝn tə eɪbɑɹəz kæmp əɾ ɛni taɪm. wʌtɛvɝ jə sʌfɝd fɹəm ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ɪn ðə pæst, jəl bi seɪf naʊ. aɪ vaʊ ðɪs."

Yes, she did have reason to distrust the Children. Good reason. "Will you come with me, my Lady? I promise you that you may leave and return to Aybara's camp at any time. Whatever you suffered from the Children in the past, you will be safe now. I vow this."

mɔɹɡeɪs ɡeɪv ɪm ə nɑd. "dəmədʒɹd," eɪbɑɹə sɛd, "weɪɾ ə moʊmənt."

Morgase gave him a nod. "Damodred," Aybara said, "wait a moment."

ɡɑləd tɝnd, leɪɪŋ ɪz hæn ɑn ɪz sɔɹd pɑməl əɡɛn. nɑɾ əz ə θɹɛt, bʌɾ ə ɹimaɪndɝ. mɛni ʌv ðoʊz ɪn ðə pəvɪljən hæd bɪɡʌn tə wɪspɝ. "jɛs?" ɡɑləɾ æskt.

Galad turned, laying his hand on his sword pommel again. Not as a threat, but a reminder. Many of those in the pavilion had begun to whisper. "Yes?" Galad asked.

"ju wɑntəɾ ə dʒʌdʒ," eɪbɑɹə sɛd. "wʊd jə æksɛp jəɹ mʌðɝ ɪn ðət pəzɪʃən?"

"You wanted a judge," Aybara said. "Would you accept your mother in that position?"

ɡɑləd dɪdn hɛzəteɪt. ʌv kɔɹs; ʃid bɪn ə kwin sɪns əɹ eɪtinθ neɪmdeɪ, ən i hæd sin əɹ sɪɾ ɪn dʒʌdʒmənt. ʃi wɑz fɛɹ. hɑɹʃ, bʌt fɛɹ.

Galad didn't hesitate. Of course; she'd been a queen since her eighteenth nameday, and he had seen her sit in judgment. She was fair. Harsh, but fair.

bʌt wəd ði ʌðɝ tʃɪlʒɹən æksɛp hɝ? ʃid bɪn tʃɹeɪn baɪ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðeɪd si hɝ əz wʌn ə ðɛm. ə pɹɑbləm. bʌɾ ɪf ɪt ɡeɪv ə weɪ aʊɾ ə ðɪs, pɝhæps i kəd meɪk əm si ðə tʃɹuθ.

But would the other Children accept her? She'd been trained by the Aes Sedai. They'd see her as one of them. A problem. But if it gave a way out of this, perhaps he could make them see the truth.

"aɪ wʊd," ɡɑləd sɛd. "æn ɪf aɪ vaʊtʃt fəɹ hɝ, maɪ mɛn wəɾ əz wɛl."

"I would," Galad said. "And if I vouched for her, my men would as well."

"wɛl," eɪbɑɹə sɛd, "aɪɾ æksɛp hɝ, tu."

"Well," Aybara said, "I'd accept her, too."

boʊθ mɛn tɝn tə mɔɹɡeɪs. ʃi stʊɾ ɪn əɹ sɪmpəl jɛloʊ dʒɹɛs, lʊkɪŋ mɔɹ ə kwin baɪ ðə moʊmənt. "pɛɹɪn," ʃi sɛd, "ɪf aɪ sɪɾ ɪn dʒʌdʒmənt, əl nɑt tɛmpɝ maɪ dɪsɪʒənz. jə tʊk mi ɪn wən wi niɾəd ʃɛltɝ, ən fəɹ ðəɾ aɪm əpɹiʃieɪɾɪv. bʌɾ ɪf aɪ dɪsaɪd ðət juv kəmɪɾəd mɝɾɝ, əl nɑt hoʊl bæk maɪ dɪsɪʒən."

Both men turned to Morgase. She stood in her simple yellow dress, looking more a queen by the moment. "Perrin," she said, "if I sit in judgment, I will not temper my decisions. You took me in when we needed shelter, and for that I am appreciative. But if I decide that you have committed murder, I will not hold back my decision."

"ðæt wɪl du," eɪbɑɹə sɛd. hi sim sənsɪɹ.

"That will do," Aybara said. He seemed sincere.

"maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," baɪɑɝ sɛd sɔfli ɪn ɡɑləɾ ɛs ɪɹ, saʊndɪŋ fɝvənt. "aɪ fɪɹ ðɪs wəd bi ə fɑɹs! hiz nɑt sɛɾ i wəd səbmɪt tə pʌnɪʃmənt."

"My Lord Captain Commander," Byar said softly in Galad s ear, sounding fervent. "I fear this would be a farce! He's not said he would submit to punishment."

"noʊ, aɪ hæv nɑt," eɪbɑɹə sɛd. haʊ hæɾ i hɝd ðoʊz wɪspɝz? "ɪt wəd bi minɪŋləs. jə θɪŋk mi ə dɑɹkfɹɛn ən ə mɝɾɝɝ. jə wʊdn æksɛp maɪ wɝɾ ɑn teɪkɪŋ pʌnɪʃmənt, nɑɾ ənlɛs aɪ wɑz ɪn jəɹ kʌstəɾi. wɪtʃ aɪ woʊn əlaʊ."

"No, I have not," Aybara said. How had he heard those whispers? "It would be meaningless. You think me a Darkfriend and a murderer. You wouldn't accept my word on taking punishment, not unless I was in your custody. Which I won't allow."

"si?" baɪɑɝ sɛd, mɔɹ laʊdli. "wʌɾ ɪz ðə pɔɪnt?"

"See?" Byar said, more loudly. "What is the point?"

ɡɑləd mɛɾ eɪbɑɹəz ɡoʊldən aɪz əɡɛn. "ɪt wɪl ɡɪv əs ə tʃɹaɪəl," hi sɛd, ɡɹoʊɪŋ mɔɹ sɝɾən.

Galad met Aybara's golden eyes again. "It will give us a trial," he said, growing more certain.

"æn liɡəl dʒʌstəfəkeɪʃən. aɪm bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə si, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ. wi mʌs pɹuv əɹ kleɪmz, ʌðɝwaɪz wəɹ noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən æsu-nɑwə."

"And legal justification. I'm beginning to see, Child Byar. We must prove our claims, otherwise we are no better than Asu-nawa."

"bʌt ðə tʃɹaɪəl wɪl nɑt bi fɛɹ!"

"But the trial will not be fair!"

ɡɑləd tɝn tə ðə tɔl soʊlʒɝ. "ɑɹ jə kwɛstʃənɪŋ maɪ mʌðɝz ɪmpɑɹʃiælɪɾi?"

Galad turned to the tall soldier. "Are you questioning my mother's impartiality?"

ðə ɡɔn mæn fɹoʊz, ðən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "noʊ, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ."

The gaunt man froze, then shook his head. "No, my Lord Captain Commander."

ɡɑləd tɝn bæk tə eɪbɑɹə. "aɪ æsk kwin æliændɝ tə ɡɹæn ðət ðɪs tʃɹaɪəl bi liɡəli baɪndɪŋ ɪn əɹ ɹɛlm."

Galad turned back to Aybara. "I ask Queen Alliandre to grant that this trial be legally binding in her realm."

"ɪf lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹə ɹɪkwɛsts ɪt, aɪ wɪl." ʃi saʊndəɾ ənkʌmftəɹbəl.

"If Lord Aybara requests it, I will." She sounded uncomfortable.

"aɪ də ɹɪkwɛst ɪt, æliændɝ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "bʌɾ oʊnli ɪf dəmədʒɹɾ əɡɹiz tə ɹilis ɔl ə maɪ pipəl ðət hiz hoʊldɪŋ. kip ðə səplaɪz, bʌt lɛt ðə pipəl ɡoʊ, əz jə pɹɑməs mi jə wəd bɪfɔɹ."

"I do request it, Alliandre," Perrin said. "But only if Damodred agrees to release all of my people that he's holding. Keep the supplies, but let the people go, as you promised me you would before."

"vɛɹi wɛl," ɡɑləd sɛd. "ɪt wɪl hæpən wʌns ðə tʃɹaɪəl bɪɡɪnz. aɪ pɹɑməs ɪt. wən wɪl wi mit?"

"Very well," Galad said. "It will happen once the trial begins. I promise it. When will we meet?"

"ɡɪv mi ə fju deɪz tə pɹipɛɹ."

"Give me a few days to prepare."

"ɪn θɹi deɪz, ðɛn," ɡɑləd sɛd. "wi hoʊl ðə tʃɹaɪəl hɪɹ, ɪn ðɪs pəvəl- aɪən, ɪn ðɪs pleɪs."

"In three days, then," Galad said. "We hold the trial here, in this pavil- ion, in this place."

"bɹɪŋ jəɹ wɪtnəsəz," eɪbɑɹə sɛd. "aɪl bi hɪɹ.

"Bring your witnesses," Aybara said. "I'll be here.


tʃæptɝ twɛntisɛvən


CHAPTER 27

eɪ kɔl tə stænd


A Call to Stand

aɪm nɑɾ əpoʊz tə kwɛstʃənɪŋ ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, ɛɡwin ɹɛd fɹəm ðə lɛɾɝ əz ʃi sæɾ ɪn əɹ stʌɾi. ɪndid, ðə mɔɹ æbsəluɾ ə mænz paʊɝ bɪkʌmz, ðə mɔɹ nɛsəsɛɹi kwɛstʃənɪŋ bɪkʌmz.

I am not opposed to questioning the Lord Dragon, Egwene read from the letter as she sat in her study. Indeed, the more absolute a man's power becomes, the more necessary questioning becomes.

haʊɛvɝ, noʊ ðəɾ aɪm nɑɾ ə mæn u ɡɪvz ɪz lɔɪəlti izəli, ən aɪ eɪtʃ ævənu ɡɪvən maɪ lɔɪəlti tə hɪm.

However, know that I am not a man who gives his loyalty easily, and I h ave given my loyalty to him.

nɑt kəz ə ðə θɹoʊn i pɹəvaɪɾəd mi, bʌt kəz ʌv wʌt hiz dʌn fəɹ tɛɹ. jɛs, hi ɡɹoʊz mɔɹ ɪɹæɾɪk baɪ ðə deɪ. wʌɾ ɛls ɑɹ wi tə ɪkspɛk fɹəm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn? hɪl bɹeɪk ðə wɝld. wi nu ðɪs wən wi ɡeɪv ɪm əɹ əlidʒəns, mʌtʃ əz ə seɪlɝ mʌst səmtaɪmz ɡɪv ɪz lɔɪəlti tə ðə kæptən u stɪɹz ɪz ʃɪp stʃɹeɪt fəɹ ðə stʃɹænd. wən ən ənnəvəɡəbəl tɛmpəst ɹaɪzəz bɪhaɪnd, ðə stʃɹæn ɪz ði oʊnli ɑpʃən. stɪl, jəɹ wɝdz bɹɪŋ mi kənsɝn. ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ə ðə silz ɪz nɑt sʌmθɪŋ wi ʃəɾ ʌndɝteɪk wɪθaʊt kɛɹfəl dɪskʌʃən. ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən tʃɑɹdʒ mi wɪð ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪm ən ɑɹmi, ən aɪ hæv dʌn soʊ. ɪf jə pɹəvaɪd ðə ɡeɪtweɪz juv pɹɑməst, əl bɹɪŋ səm tʃɹups tə ðɪs miɾɪŋ pleɪs, əlɔŋ wɪð ðə lɔɪəl haɪ lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz. bi wɔɹnd, haʊɛvɝ, ðət ðə sintʃæn pɹɛzəns tə maɪ wɛs kəntɪnjuz tə weɪ hɛvəli əpɑn maɪ maɪnd. ðə bʌlk ə maɪ ɑɹmiz mʌst ɹɪmeɪn bɪhaɪnd.

Not because of the throne he provided me, but because of what he has done for Tear. Yes, he grows more erratic by the day. What else are we to expect from the Dragon Reborn? He will break the world. We knew this when we gave him our allegiance, much as a sailor must sometimes give his loyalty to the captain who steers his ship straight for the strand. When an unnavigable tempest rises behind, the strand is the only option. Still, your words bring me concern. The destruction of the seals is not something we should undertake without careful discussion. The Lord Dragon charged me with raising him an army, and I have done so. If you provide the gateways you have promised, I will bring some troops to this meeting place, along with the loyal High Lords and Ladies. Be warned, however, that the Seanchan presence to my west continues to weigh heavily upon my mind. The bulk of my armies must remain behind.

haɪ lɔɹd dɑɹlɪn sɪsnɛɹə, kɪŋ ə tɛɹ bɪniθ ðə ɹul ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɹænd ælθɹ ɛɡɔwin tæp ðə ʃit wɪð wʌn fɪŋɡɝ. ʃi wɑz ɪmpɹɛst - dɑɹlɪn hæd kəmɪɾəd ɪz wɝdz tə peɪpɝ, ɹæðɝ ðən sɛndɪŋ ə mɛsənʒɝ wɪð əm mɛmɝaɪzd. ɪf ə mɛsənʒɝ fɛl ɪndə ðə ɹɔŋ hænz, hɪz wɝdz kəɾ ɔlweɪz bi dɪnaɪd. kənvɪktɪŋ ə mæn ə tʃɹizən beɪst ɑn ðə tɛstəmoʊni ʌv wʌn mɛsənʒɝ wɑz dɪfəkəlt. wɝdz ɑn peɪpɝ, haʊɛvɝ . . . boʊld. baɪ ɹaɪɾɪŋ ðɛm, dɑɹlɪn sɛd, "aɪ də nɑt kɛɹ ɪf ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən dɪskʌvɝz wʌɾ aɪ hæv ɹɪɾən. aɪ stæn baɪ ɪt."

High Lord Darlin Sisnera, King of Tear beneath the rule of the Dragon Reborn Rand al'Thor Egawene tapped the sheet with one finger. She was impressed - Darlin had committed his words to paper, rather than sending a messenger with them memorized. If a messenger fell into the wrong hands, his words could always be denied. Convicting a man of treason based on the testimony of one messenger was difficult. Words on paper, however . . . Bold. By writing them, Darlin said, "I do not care if the Lord Dragon discovers what I have written. I stand by it."

bʌt livɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðə bʌlk ə hɪz ɑɹmi? ðət wəd nɑt du. ɛɡwin ɪŋkt əɹ pɛn. kɪŋ dɑɹlɪn. jəɹ kənsɝn fəɹ jəɹ kɪŋdəm ɪz wɛl mɛʒɝd, əz ɪz jəɹ lɔɪəlti tə ðə mæn jə fɑloʊ.

But leaving behind the bulk of his army? That would not do. Egwene inked her pen. King Darlin. Your concern for your kingdom is well measured, as is your loyalty to the man you follow.

aɪ noʊ ðət ðə sintʃæn ɑɹ ə deɪnʒɝ tə tɛɹ, bʌt lɛɾ əs nɑt fɝɡɛt ðət ðə dɑɹk wʌn, nɑt ðə sintʃæn, ɪz əɹ pɹaɪmɛɹi kənsɝn dʊɹɪŋ ðiz wɝst ə deɪz. pɝhæps ɪts izi tə θɪŋk jɝsɛlf seɪf fɹəm ðə tʃɹɑləks wən soʊ dɪstən fɹəm ðə bæɾəl laɪnz, bʌt haʊ wɪl jə fil wʌns ðə kʊʃənz ɑfændɝ ən kɛɹhin əv fɔlən? jə ɑɹ sɛpɝeɪɾəd fɹəm ðə sintʃæn baɪ hʌnʒɹədz ə maɪlz.

I know that the Seanchan are a danger to Tear, but let us not forget that the Dark One, not the Seanchan, is our primary concern during these worst of days. Perhaps it is easy to think yourself safe from the Trollocs when so distant from the battle lines, but how will you feel once the cushions ofAndor and Cairhien have fallen? You are separated from the Seanchan by hundreds of miles.

ɛɡwin pɔzd. tɑɹ vəlɑn hæd bɪn sɛpɝeɪɾəd fɹəm ðə sintʃæn baɪ hʌnʒɹədz ə maɪlz, ən hæd nɪɹli bɪn dɪstʃɹɔɪd. hi wɑz ɹaɪt tə bi əfɹeɪd, ən i wɑz ə ɡʊd kɪŋ fəɹ kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ɪt. bʌt ʃi niɾəd ɪz ɑɹmi ət ðə fild ə mɛɹɪlɝ. pɝhæps ʃi kəɾ ɔfɝ ə weɪ fəɹ ɪm tə boʊθ bi seɪf ən hɛlp wɪð ɹænd.

Egwene paused. Tar Valon had been separated from the Seanchan by hundreds of miles, and had nearly been destroyed. He was right to be afraid, and he was a good king for considering it. But she needed his army at the Field of Merrilor. Perhaps she could offer a way for him to both be safe and help with Rand.

ɪljən hoʊlz fəɹ naʊ, ʃi ɹoʊt. ən ɡɪvz jə ə bʌfɝ bɪtwin ðə sintʃæn ən jɝsɛlf əl pɹəvaɪd jə wɪð ɡeɪtweɪz ən ə pɹɑməs. ɪf ðə sintʃæn muv əɡɛns tɛɹ, wʌn wɪl ɡɪv jə ɡeɪtweɪz soʊ jə kən ɹɪtɝn ɪmiɾiətli ən dɪfɛn jəɹ neɪʃən.

Illian holds for now, she wrote. And gives you a buffer between the Seanchan and yourself I will provide you with gateways and a promise. If the Seanchan move against Tear, 1 will give you gateways so you can return immediately and defend your nation.

ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. tʃænsəz wɝ ɡʊd ðət ðə sintʃæn hæd tʃɹævlɪŋ naʊ. noʊbɑdi wɑz seɪf fɹəm ðɛm, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ fɑɹ əɹ kloʊs ðeɪ maɪt bi. ɪf ðeɪ dɪsaɪɾɪd tə stʃɹaɪk fəɹ tɛɹ, ivən ɡɪvɪŋ dɑɹlɪn ɡeɪtweɪz bæk maɪt nɑt bi ɪnʌf tə hɛlp.

She hesitated. Chances were good that the Seanchan had Traveling now. Nobody was safe from them, no matter how far or close they might be. If they decided to strike for Tear, even giving Darlin gateways back might not be enough to help.

ʃi fɛlt ə ʃɪvɝ, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ əɹ oʊn taɪm wɪð ðə sintʃæn, kæptɪv əz ə deɪmeɪn. ʃi loʊðd əm wɪð ə heɪtʃɹəd ðət səmtaɪmz wɝid hɝ. bʌt dæɹɪənz səpɔɹt wɑz ɪsɛnʃəl tə hɝ plænz. ʃi ɡɹɪɾɪd əɹ tiθ ən kəntɪnjud ɹaɪɾɪŋ.

She felt a shiver, remembering her own time with the Seanchan, captive as a damane. She loathed them with a hatred that sometimes worried her. But Dariin's support was essential to her plans. She gritted her teeth and continued writing.

ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn mʌst si əɹ fʊl fɔɹsɪz mɑɹʃəl tə əpoʊz ɪz bɹæʃ ɪntɛntʃənz. ɪf i siz ðɪs əz hæfhɑɹɾɪd, wɪl nɛvɝ dɪsweɪɾ ɪm fɹəm ɪz kɔɹs. pliz kʌm wɪð ɔl ə jəɹ tʃɹups.

The Dragon Reborn must see our full forces marshaled to oppose his brash intentions. If he sees this as halfhearted, we will never dissuade him from his course. Please come with all of your troops.

ʃi sændɪd ðə lɛɾɝ, ðən foʊldəɾ ən sild ɪt. dɑɹlɪn ən ɪleɪn wɝ mɑnɑɹks ə tu ʌv ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl kɪŋdəmz. boʊθ wɝ vɛɹi ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə hɝ plænz.

She sanded the letter, then folded and sealed it. Darlin and Elayne were monarchs of two of the most powerful kingdoms. Both were very important to her plans.

nɛkst ʃi wəd ɹɪspɑn tə ə lɛɾɝ fɹəm ɡɹɛɡɹɪn dɛn lʌʃɪnoʊz ʌv ɪljən.

Next she would respond to a letter from Gregorin den Lushenos of Illian.

ʃi hædn jɛt toʊld ɪm dɝɛkli ðət ʃi hæd mæɾɪn stɛpeɪnəoʊz ət ðə waɪt taʊɝ, bʌt hæd hɪntəɾ əɾ ɪt. ʃiɾ ɔlsoʊ spoʊkən tə mæɾɪn hɪmsɛlf, lɛɾɪŋ ɪm noʊ hi wɑz fɹi tə liv, ɪf i wɪʃt. ʃi wəd nɑt bi ɪn ðə hæbəɾ ə hoʊldɪŋ mɑnɑɹks əɡɛns ðɛɹ wɪl.

She hadn't yet told him directly that she had Mattin Stepaneos at the White Tower, but had hinted at it. She'd also spoken to Mattin himself, letting him know he was free to leave, if he wished. She would not be in the habit of holding monarchs against their will.

ənfɔɹtʃənətli, mæɾɪn wɑz naʊ əfɹeɪd fəɹ ɪz laɪf, ʃəɾ i ɹɪtɝn. hid bɪn ɡɔn tu lɔŋ, ən i vjuɾ ɪljən əz biɪŋ ɪn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹeɪ-bɔɹnz pɑkət. wɪtʃ ɪt pɹɑbli wɑz. wʌɾ ə mɛs.

Unfortunately, Mattin was now afraid for his life, should he return. He'd been gone too long, and he viewed Illian as being in the Dragon Re-born's pocket. Which it probably was. What a mess.

wʌn pɹɑbləm əɾ ə taɪm. ɡɹɛɡɹɪn, ðə stuɝɾ ɪn ɪljən, wɑz vɛɹi hɛzɪɾənt tə səpɔɹɾ əɹ kɑz - hi simd mɔɹ ɪntɪmɪdeɪɾɪd baɪ ɹænd ðən dɑɹlɪn wɑz, ən ðə sintʃæn wɝ nɑɾ ə dɪstən kənsɝn fəɹ hɪm. ðeɪ wɝ pɹæktəkli paʊndɪŋ ɑn ɪz sɪɾi ɡeɪts.

One problem at a time. Gregorin, the steward in Illian, was very hesitant to support her cause - he seemed more intimidated by Rand than Darlin was, and the Seanchan were not a distant concern for him. They were practically pounding on his city gates.

ʃi ɹoʊt ɡɹɛɡɹɪn ə fɝm lɛɾɝ, ɡɪvɪŋ ə pɹɑməs laɪk ðə wʌn ʃid ɡɪvən dɑɹlɪn. pɝhæps ʃi kəɾ ɝeɪnʒ tə kip mæɾɪn əweɪ - sʌmθɪŋ boʊθ mɛn maɪt wɑnt, ðoʊ ʃi wʊdn lɛt ɡɹɛɡɹɪn noʊ ðət - ɪn ɪkstʃeɪnʒ fəɹ ɪm bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmiz nɔɹθwɝd.

She wrote Gregorin a firm letter, giving a promise like the one she'd given Darlin. Perhaps she could arrange to keep Mattin away - something both men might want, though she wouldn't let Gregorin know that - in exchange for him bringing his armies northward.

oʊblikli, ʃi ɹilaɪzd wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ. ʃi wɑz juzɪŋ ɹændz pɹɑkləmeɪʃən əz ə bikən baɪ wɪtʃ tə ɡæðɝ ən taɪ ðə mɑnɑɹks tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ðeɪ wəd kʌm tə səpɔɹɾ əɹ ɑɹɡjəməns əɡɛns bɹeɪkɪŋ ðə silz. bʌɾ ɪn ði ɛnd, ðeɪ wəd sɝv hjumənkaɪn ɪn ðə læs bæɾəl.

Obliquely, she realized what she was doing. She was using Rand's proclamation as a beacon by which to gather and tie the monarchs to the White Tower. They would come to support her arguments against breaking the seals. But in the end, they would serve humankind in the Last Battle.

ə nɑk keɪm əɾ əɹ dɔɹ. ʃi lʊkt ʌp əz sɪlviænə pikt ɪn. ðə wʊmən hɛld ʌp ə lɛɾɝ. ɪt wɑz kɝl taɪtli fɹəm hævɪŋ bɪn kæɹiɾ ɪn baɪ pɪdʒən.

A knock came at her door. She looked up as Silviana peeked in. The woman held up a letter. It was curled tightly from having been carried in by pigeon.

"jɔɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən ɪz ɡɹɪm," ɛɡwin noʊɾəd.

"Your expression is grim," Egwene noted.

"ði ɪnveɪʒən əz bɪɡʌn," ʃi sɛd. "wɑtʃtaʊɝz əkɹɔs ðə blaɪt-bɔɹɾɝ ɡoʊ saɪlənt, wʌn əɾ ə taɪm. weɪvz ə tʃɹɑləks ədvæns bɪniθ klaʊdz ðət bɔɪl blæk. kændɝ, ɝæfəl ən sɑldɑiə ɑɹ ət wɔɹ."

"The invasion has begun," she said. "Watchtowers across the Blight-border go silent, one at a time. Waves of Trollocs advance beneath clouds that boil black. Kandor, Arafel and Saldaea are at war."

"du ðeɪ hoʊld?" ɛɡwin æskt wɪð ə spaɪk ə fɪɹ.

"Do they hold?" Egwene asked with a spike of fear.

"jɛs," sɪlviænə sɛd. "bʌt nuz ɪz ənsɝɾən ən pismil. ðɪs lɛɾɝ - wɪtʃ ɪz fɹəm ən aɪz- ænd-ɪɹz aɪ tʃɹʌst - kleɪmz ðəɾ ən əsɔl ðɪs mæsɪv əz nɑt bɪn sin sɪns ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz."

"Yes," Silviana said. "But news is uncertain and piecemeal. This letter - which is from an eyes- and-ears I trust - claims that an assault this massive has not been seen since the Trolloc Wars."

ɛɡwin tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "wʌɾ ə tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp?"

Egwene took a deep breath. "What of Tarwin's Gap?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ."

"I don't know."

"faɪn aʊt. kɔl sɪuən ɪn hɪɹ. ʃi maɪɾ əv mɔɹ. ðə blu nɛtwɝk ɪz ðə moʊst ɪkstɛnsɪv."

"Find out. Call Siuan in here. She might have more. The Blue network is the most extensive."

sɪuən wʊdnt noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ʃi wəɾ əv əɹ fɪŋɡɝz ɪn ɪt.

Siuan wouldn't know everything, of course, but she would have her fingers in it.

sɪlviænə nɑɾəd kɝtli. ʃi dɪdn seɪ ði ɑbviəs - ðət ðə blu nɛtwɝk wɑz ðə blu ədʒɑz, nɑt tə bi pɹiɛmptɪd baɪ ði æmɪɝlɪn. wɛl, ðə læs bæɾəl wɑz ət hænd. səm kənsɛʃənz hæd tə bi meɪd.

Silviana nodded curtly. She didn't say the obvious - that the Blue network was the Blue Ajah's, not to be preempted by the Amyrlin. Well, the Last Battle was at hand. Some concessions had to be made.

sɪlviænə kloʊz ðə dɔɹ sɔfli, ən ɛɡwin pɪkt ʌp əɹ pɛn tə fɪnɪʃ əɹ skɹid tə ɡɹɛɡɹɪn.

Silviana closed the door softly, and Egwene picked up her pen to finish her screed to Gregorin.

ʃi wɑz ɪntɝʌptɪd baɪ ənʌðɝ nɑk, ðɪs wʌn mʌtʃ ɝnɔɹ heɪsti. sɪlviænə θɹu oʊpən ðə dɔɹ ə sɛkən leɪɾɝ.

She was interrupted by another knock, this one much rnore hasty. Silviana threw open the door a second later.

"mʌðɝ," ʃi sɛd. "ðeɪɹ miɾɪŋ. əz jə sɛd ðeɪ wʊd!"

"Mother," she said. "They're meeting. As you said they would!"

ɛɡwin fɛlt ə stæb ʌv ənɔɪəns. ʃi kɑmli pʊt daʊn əɹ pɛn ən stʊd. "lɛɾ əs bi tə ɪt, ðɛn."

Egwene felt a stab of annoyance. She calmly put down her pen and stood. "Let us be to it, then."

ʃi wɔk fɹəm əɹ stʌɾi, peɪs hɝid. ɪn ðə kipɝz æntətʃæmbɝ, ʃi pæst ə pɛɹ ʌv æksɛptɪd - nɪkoʊlə, hu hæd dʒʌs bɪn ɹeɪzd, ən nɪsə. ʃid laɪk əm boʊθ ɹeɪz tə ðə ʃɔl bɪfɔɹ ðə læs bæɾəl.

She walked from her study, pace hurried. In the Keeper's antechamber, she passed a pair of Accepted - Nicola, who had just been raised, and Nissa. She'd like them both raised to the shawl before the Last Battle.

ðeɪ wɝ jʌŋ, bʌt paʊɝfəl, ən ɛvɹi sɪstɝ wəd bi niɾəd - ivən wʌn hu, laɪk nɪkoʊlə, hæd pɹuv tə hæv tɛɹəbəl dʒʌdʒmən ɪn ðə pæst.

They were young, but powerful, and every sister would be needed - even one who, like Nicola, had proved to have terrible judgment in the past.

ðiz tu hæd bɹɔt ðə nuz əbaʊt ðə hɔl; ðə nɑvəsɪz ən æksɛptɪd wɝ əmʌŋ ðə moʊs lɔɪəl tə ɛɡwin, bʌt wɝ ɔfən ɪɡnɔɹd baɪ ðə sɪstɝz. fəɹ naʊ, ðeɪ ɹɪmeɪn bɪhaɪn əz ɛɡwin ən sɪlviænə hɝid təwɔɹd ðə hɔl.

These two had brought the news about the Hall; the novices and Accepted were among the most loyal to Egwene, but were often ignored by the sisters. For now, they remained behind as Egwene and Silviana hurried toward the Hall.

"aɪ kæn bɪliv ðeɪ wəd tʃɹaɪ ðɪs," sɪlviænə sɛd sɔfli əz ðeɪ wɔkt.

"I can't believe they would try this," Silviana said softly as they walked.

"ɪts nɑt wʌt jə θɪŋk," ɛɡwin ɡɛst. "ðeɪ woʊn tʃɹaɪ tə dɪpoʊz mi. ðə dɪvɪʒən ɪz tu fɹɛʃ ɪn ðɛɹ maɪnz."

"It's not what you think," Egwene guessed. "They won't try to depose me. The division is too fresh in their minds."

"ðɛn waɪ mit wɪθaʊt ju?"

"Then why meet without you?"

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ weɪz tə muv əɡɛnst ən æmɪɝlɪn wɪθaʊt dəpoʊzɪŋ hɝ."

"There are ways to move against an Amyrlin without deposing her."

ʃid bɪn ɪkspɛktɪŋ ðɪs fəɹ səm taɪm, bʌt ðət dɪdn meɪk ɪɾ ɛni lɛs fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾɪŋ. ɛɛs sədaɪ wʊd, ənfɔɹtʃənətli, bi ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪt hæɾ oʊnli bɪn ə mæɾɝ ə taɪm bɪfɔɹ sʌmwʌn dɪsaɪɾɪd tə tʃɹaɪ ɹɛntʃɪŋ paʊɝ fɹəm hɝ.

She'd been expecting this for some time, but that didn't make it any less frustrating. Aes Sedai would, unfortunately, be Aes Sedai. It had only been a matter of time before someone decided to try wrenching power from her.

ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə hɔl. ɛɡwin pʊʃt oʊpən ðə dɔɹz ən stɛpt ɪn. hɝ əpɪɹəns wɑz mɛt wɪð kul ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡeɪzəz. ðə sits wɝn ɔl fɪld, bʌt tu-θɝdz ə ðɛm wɝ. ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə si θɹi ɹɛd sɪɾɝz. wʌɾ ə pɛvɑɹə ən dʒəvɪnʒɹə? ɪɾ əpɪɹd ðət ðɛɹ ɪkstɛndəɾ æbsəns dʊɹɪŋ ðɪs taɪm hæd pɹɑmptəd ðə ɹɛd tə ækʃən. ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɹipleɪs baɪ ɹɛtʃɪn ən vɪɹiə kɑnɹəl. ðə sɪstɝz wɝ ði oʊnli sɪblɪŋz ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, naʊ ðət vændin ən æɾɪliz wɝ dɛd; ən ɑd tʃɔɪs, bʌt nɑɾ ʌnɪkspɛktɪd.

They reached the Hall. Egwene pushed open the doors and stepped in. Her appearance was met with cool Aes Sedai gazes. The seats weren't all filled, but two-thirds of them were. She was surprised to see three Red Sitters. What of Pevara and Javindhra? It appeared that their extended absence during this time had prompted the Red to action. They had been replaced by Raechin and Viria Connoral. The sisters were the only siblings in the White Tower, now that Vandene and Adeleas were dead; an odd choice, but not unexpected.

boʊθ ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn wɝ ɪn ətɛndəns. ðeɪ mɛɾ ɛɡwinz ɡeɪz ivənli. haʊ stʃɹeɪnʒ tə si ðɛm hɪɹ wɪð soʊ mɛni sɪstɝz u ðeɪ hæd bɪn əɾ ɑdz wɪð. ə kɑmən foʊ - ɛɡwin - kəd hil ɛni nʌmbɝ ə ɹɪfs. ʃi ʃʊɾə bɪn plizd ət ðæt, pɝhæps.

Both Romanda and Lelaine were in attendance. They met Egwene's gaze evenly. How strange to see them here with so many sisters who they had been at odds with. A common foe - Egwene - could heal any number of rifts. She should have been pleased at that, perhaps.

ləleɪn wɑz ði oʊnli blu, ən ðəɹ wɑz ɔlsoʊ oʊnli wʌn bɹaʊn: tɑkimə, hu lʊk sɪk. ði aɪvɝi-skɪn bɹaʊn wʊdn miɾ ɛɡwinz ɡeɪz. ðəɹ wɝ tu waɪts, tu jɛloʊz -  ɪnkluɾɪŋ ɹoʊmændə - tu ɡɹeɪz, ən ɔl θɹi ɡɹinz. ɛɡwin ɡɹɪɾɪd əɹ tiθ wən ʃi sɔ ðæt.

Lelaine was the only Blue, and there was also only one Brown: Takima, who looked sick. The ivory-skinned Brown wouldn't meet Egwene's gaze. There were two Whites, two Yellows -  including Romanda - two Grays, and all three Greens. Egwene gritted her teeth when she saw that.

ðət wɑz ði ədʒɑ ʃi wəɾ əv dʒɔɪnd, bʌɾ ɪt ɡeɪv əɹ ðə moʊst ɡɹif!

That was the Ajah she would have joined, but it gave her the most grief!

ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt tʃæstaɪz əm fəɹ miɾɪŋ wɪθaʊt hɝ; ʃi sɪmpli stʃɹoʊd daʊn bɪtwin ðɛm, sɪlviænə ənaʊnsɪŋ hɝ. ɛɡwin tɝn ən sæt daʊn ɑn ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, hɝ bæk tə ðə hjudʒ ɹoʊz wɪndoʊ.

Egwene did not chastise them for meeting without her; she simply strode down between them, Silviana announcing her. Egwene turned and sat down on the Amyrlin Seat, her back to the huge rose window.

ðɛɹ, ʃi sæt kwaɪətli.

There, she sat quietly.

"wɛl?" ɹoʊmændə faɪnəli æskt. hɝ ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ ʌp ɪn ə bʌn, ʃi lʊk laɪk ə mʌðɝ wʊlf sɪɾɪŋ ətɑp ðə lɛdʒ aʊt fɹʌn ə hɝ dɛn. "ɑɹ jə ɡoʊ-ɪŋ tə seɪ ɛniθɪŋ, mʌðɝ?"

"Well?" Romanda finally asked. Her gray hair up in a bun, she looked like a mother wolf sitting atop the ledge out front of her den. "Are you go-ing to say anything, Mother?"

"ju dɪd nɑɾ ɪnfɔɹm mi ʌv ðɪs miɾɪŋ," ɛɡwin sɛd, "soʊ aɪ əsum jə də nɑt wɑn maɪ wɝdz. aɪ hæv kʌm mɪɹli tə wɑtʃ."

"You did not inform me of this meeting," Egwene said, "so I assume you do not want my words. I have come merely to watch."

ðət sim tə meɪk əm mɔɹ ənkʌmftəɹbəl. sɪlviænə wɔk tə hɝ saɪd, bɹændɪʃɪŋ wʌn ə hɝ bɛst ɪkspɹɛʃənz ə dɪsplɛʒɝ.

That seemed to make them more uncomfortable. Silviana walked to her side, brandishing one of her best expressions of displeasure.

"ɔl ɹaɪt, ðɛn," ɹubɪn sɛd. "aɪ bɪliv wi wɝ gɑnə hɪɹ fɹəm sɛɝɔɪjə nɛkst."

"All right, then," Rubinde said. "I believe we were going to hear from Saroiya next."

ðə blɑki waɪt wɑz wʌn ə ðə sɪɾɝz u hæd lɛf ðə taʊɝ wən ɪleɪɾə wɑz ɹeɪzd, bʌt ʃi hæd meɪɾ əɹ ʃɛɹ ə tʃɹʌbəl ɪn sɑlədɑɹ. ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt sɝpɹaɪz tə si hɝ hɪɹ. ðə wʊmən stʊd, pɔɪntɪdli nɑt lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɛɡwin. "aɪ wɪl æd maɪ tɛstəmoʊni. dʊɹɪŋ ðə deɪz ʌv. . . ənsɝɾənti wɪðɪn ðə taʊɝ" - ðət wəd min ðə dɪvɪʒən; fju sɪstɝz laɪk tə spik ʌv ɪɾ aʊtʃɹaɪt - "ði æmɪɝlɪn dɪɾ ɪɡzækli əz ɹoʊmændə ɪndəkeɪɾəd. wi wɝ teɪkən baɪ sɝpɹaɪz wən ʃi kɔl fəɹ ə dɛklɝeɪʃən ʌv wɔɹ.

The blocky White was one of the Sitters who had left the Tower when Elaida was raised, but she had made her share of trouble in Salidar. Egwene was not surprised to see her here. The woman stood, pointedly not looking at Egwene. "I will add my testimony. During the days of. . . uncertainty within the Tower" - that would mean the division; few sisters liked to speak of it outright - "the Amyrlin did exactly as Romanda indicated. We were taken by surprise when she called for a declaration of war.

"wɪðɪn ðə lɔ, ðəɹ ɑɹ pɹəvɪʒənz ðət ɡɪv ði æmɪɝlɪn ɔlmoʊs toʊɾəl paʊɝ wən əfɪʃəl wɔɹ ɪz dɪklɛɹd. baɪ biɪŋ ɡoʊɾɪd ɪndə meɪkɪŋ wɔɹ wɪð ɪleɪɾə, wi ɡeɪv ði æmɪɝlɪn ðə minz tə səbdʒɛk ðə hɔl tə hɝ wɪl." ʃi lʊkt ɝaʊn ðə ɹum, bʌt dɪd nɑt tɝn tə ɛɡwin. "ɪɾ ɪz maɪ əpɪnjən ðət ʃɪl tʃɹaɪ sʌmθɪŋ sɪməlɝ əɡɛn. ðət mʌs bi pɹɪvɛntɪd. ðə hɔl ɪz mɛn tə bi ə bæləns əpɑn ði æmɪɝlɪnz paʊɝ."

"Within the law, there are provisions that give the Amyrlin almost total power when official war is declared. By being goaded into making war with Elaida, we gave the Amyrlin the means to subject the Hall to her will." She looked around the room, but did not turn to Egwene. "It is my opinion that she will try something similar again. That must be prevented. The Hall is meant to be a balance upon the Amyrlin's power."

ʃi sæt daʊn.

She sat down.

hɪɹɪŋ ðə wɝdz æktʃəli  ɹɪlivd ɛɡwin. wʌn kəd nɛvɝ bi sɝɾən wʌt kaɪnz ə skimɪŋ wɝ hæpənɪŋ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ðɪs miɾɪŋ mɛn əɹ plænz wɝ pɹəsiɾɪŋ əz hoʊpt, ən ðəɾ əɹ ɛnəmiz - ɔɹ, wɛl, hɝ ɹɪlʌktən ælaɪz - hædn sin wʌt ʃi wɑz ɹɪli duɪŋ. ðeɪ wɝ bɪzi ɹiæktɪŋ tə θɪŋz ʃid dʌn mʌnθs əɡoʊ.

Hearing the words actually relieved Egwene. One could never be certain what kinds of scheming were happening in the White Tower. This meeting meant her plans were proceeding as hoped, and that her enemies - or, well, her reluctant allies - hadn't seen what she was really doing. They were busy reacting to things she'd done months ago.

ðət dɪdn min ðeɪ wɝn deɪnʒɝəs. bʌt wən ə pɝsən æntɪsəpeɪɾəd deɪnʒɝ, ɪt kəd bi hændəld.

That didn't mean they weren't dangerous. But when a person anticipated danger, it could be handled.

"wʌt kən wi du?" mæɡlə æskt. ʃi ɡlænst əɾ ɛɡwin. "tə bi pɹuɾənt, aɪ min. tə meɪk sɝɾən ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ ɪz ɪn noʊ weɪ lɪməɾəd."

"What can we do?" Magla asked. She glanced at Egwene. "To be prudent, I mean. To make certain the Hall of the Tower is in no way limited."

"wi kænɑt dɪklɛɹ wɔɹ," ləleɪn sɛd fɝmli.

"We cannot declare war," Lelaine said firmly.

"æn jɛt, tə əvɔɪɾ ɪt?" vɛɹɪlɪn sɛd. "wɔɹ ɪz dɪklɛɹd bɪtwin hævz ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, bʌt nɑɾ əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ?"

"And yet, to avoid it?" Varilin said. "War is declared between halves of the White Tower, but not against the Shadow?"

"wɔɹ," tɑkimə sɛd hɛzɪɾəntli, "ɪz ɔlɹɛɾi dɪklɛɹɾ əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ.

"War," Takima said hesitantly, "is already declared against the Shadow.

nid ðəɹ bi ən əfɪʃəl pɹɑkləmeɪʃən? ɪz nɑɾ əɹ ɛɡzɪstəns ɪnʌf? ɪn-did, də nɑt ði oʊðz meɪk əɹ pəzɪʃən klɪɹ?"

Need there be an official proclamation? Is not our existence enough? In-deed, do not the oaths make our position clear?"

"bʌt wi mʌs meɪk səm kaɪndə dɛklɝeɪʃən," ɹoʊmændə sɛd. ʃi wɑz ɛldəst əmʌŋ ðɛm, ən wəd bi ðə wʌn ɹʌnɪŋ ðə miɾɪŋ. "sʌm-θɪŋ tə meɪk ðə pəzɪʃən ə ðə hɔl noʊn, tə dɪsweɪd ði æmɪɝlɪn fɹəm ən ɪmpɹuɾənt kɔl fəɹ wɔɹ."

"But we must make some kind of declaration," Romanda said. She was eldest among them, and would be the one running the meeting. "Some-thing to make the position of the Hall known, to dissuade the Amyrlin from an imprudent call for war."

ɹoʊmændə dɪdn sim ɪmbɛɹəst əɾ ɔl baɪ wʌt ðeɪ hæd dʌn hɪɹ. ʃi lʊk dɝɛkli əɾ ɛɡwin. noʊ, ʃi ən ləleɪn wəd nɑt kwɪkli fɝɡɪv ɛɡwin fəɹ tʃuzɪŋ ə ɹɛɾ əz əɹ kipɝ.

Romanda didn't seem embarrassed at all by what they had done here. She looked directly at Egwene. No, she and Lelaine would not quickly forgive Egwene for choosing a Red as her Keeper.

"bʌt haʊ wəd wi sɛn sətʃ ə mɛsədʒ?" ændaɪə æskt. "aɪ min, wʌɾ ɑɹ wi tə du? meɪk ə pɹənaʊnsmən fɹəm ðə hɔl ðət ðəɹ woʊn bi ə dɛklɝeɪʃən ʌv wɔɹ? wəd ðət nɑt saʊn ɹɪdɪkjələs?"

"But how would we send such a message?" Andaya asked. "I mean, what are we to do? Make a pronouncement from the Hall that there won't be a declaration of war? Would that not sound ridiculous?"

ðə wɪmən fɛl saɪlənt. ɛɡwin faʊn hɝsɛlf nɑɾɪŋ, ðoʊ nɑt spəsɪfɪkli tə wʌt wɑz biɪŋ sɛd. ʃi hæd bɪn ɹeɪz θɹu ʌnkənvɛnʃənəl sɝkəmstænsəz. lɛft əloʊn, ðə hɔl wəd tʃɹaɪ tə ɪstæblɪʃ ɪts paʊɝ əz ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən hɝz. ðɪs deɪ kəɾ izəli hæv mɛn ə stɛp təwɔɹd ðæt. ði æmɪɝlɪn sits stʃɹɛŋkθ hæd nɑt bɪn kɑnstən θɹu ðə sɛntʃɝiz -  wʌn kəd ɹul ɔlmoʊs toʊɾəli waɪl ənʌðɝ wɑz kəntʃɹoʊl baɪ ðə sɪɾɝz.

The women fell silent. Egwene found herself nodding, though not specifically to what was being said. She had been raised through unconventional circumstances. Left alone, the Hall would try to establish its power as greater than hers. This day could easily have meant a step toward that. The Amyrlin Seat's strength had not been constant through the centuries -  one could rule almost totally while another was controlled by the Sitters.

"aɪ bɪliv ðə hɔl æks ɪn wɪzdəm," ɛɡwin sɛd, spikɪŋ vɛɹi kɛɹfəli.

"I believe the Hall acts in wisdom," Egwene said, speaking very carefully.

ðə sɪɾɝz tɝn tə hɝ. səm lʊkt ɹɪlivd. ðoʊz u wɝ mɔɹ fəmɪljɝ wɪð hɝ, haʊɛvɝ, lʊk səspɪʃəs. wɛl, ðət wɑz ɡʊd. bɛɾɝ ðeɪ ɹəɡɑɹɾ əɹ əz ə θɹɛt ðən əz ə tʃaɪl tə bi bʊlid. ʃi hoʊp ðeɪ wəɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɹɪspɛkt əɹ əz ðɛɹ liɾɝ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli soʊ mʌtʃ ʃi kəd də wɪð ðə taɪm ɡɪvən.

The Sitters turned to her. Some looked relieved. Those who were more familiar with her, however, looked suspicious. Well, that was good. Better they regard her as a threat than as a child to be bullied. She hoped they would eventually respect her as their leader, but there was only so much she could do with the time given.

"ðə wɔɹ bɪtwin fækʃənz wɪðɪn ðə taʊɝ wɑz ə dɪfɹən taɪp ə bæɾəl," ɛɡwin kəntɪnjud.

"The war between factions within the Tower was a different type of battle," Egwene continued.

"ɪt wɑz dipli ən ɪndɪvɪdʒuəli maɪ bæɾəl, əz æmɪɝlɪn, fəɹ ðət dɪvɪʒən wɑz ɪnɪʃəli əbaʊt ði æmɪɝlɪn sit.

"It was deeply and individually my battle, as Amyrlin, for that division was initially about the Amyrlin Seat.

"bʌt ðə wɔɹ əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ ɪz mɔɹ væs ðən ɛni wʌn pɝsən. ɪts ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən jə əɹ aɪ, ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ɪts ðə wɔɹ ʌv ɔl laɪf ən kɹieɪʃən, fɹəm ðə moʊs dɛstətuɾ ə bɛɡɝz tə ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ə kwinz."

"But the war against the Shadow is more vast than any one person. It is greater than you or I, greater than the White Tower. It is the war of all life and creation, from the most destitute of beggars to the most powerful of queens."

ðə sɪɾɝz kənsɪɾɝd ðəɾ ɪn saɪləns.

The Sitters considered that in silence.

ɹoʊmændə spoʊk fɝst. "æn soʊ jə wəd nɑɾ əpoʊz ðə hɔl teɪkɪŋ oʊvɝ pɹɑsəkjuʃən ə ðə wɔɹ, mænɪdʒɪŋ dʒɛnɝəl bɹaɪnz ɑɹmiz ən ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹd?"

Romanda spoke first. "And so you would not oppose the Hall taking over prosecution of the war, managing General Bryne's armies and the Tower Guard?"

ðət dɪpɛnz," ɛɡwin sɛd, "əpɑn haʊ ðə pɹəvɪʒən wɑz wɝɾɪd." ðəɹ wɑz muvmən ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ aʊtsaɪd, ən sɹɪn bʌsəld ɪndə ðə hɔl, əkʌmpənid baɪ dʒɑnjə fɹɛnd. ðeɪ ʃɑt tɑkimə wɪðɝɪŋ ɡlænsɪz, ən ʃi ʃɹæŋk daʊn laɪk ə θɹɛɾənd bɝd. sɹɪn ən ɛɡwinz ʌðɝ səpɔɹɾɝz wʊɾə bɪn ɪnfɔɹmd ə ðɪs miɾɪŋ dʒʌst æftɝ ɛɡwin hɝsɛlf wɑz.

That depends," Egwene said, "upon how the provision was worded." There was movement in the hallway outside, and Saerin bustled into the Hall, accompanied by Janya Frende. They shot Takima withering glances, and she shrank down like a threatened bird. Saerin and Egwene's other supporters would have been informed of this meeting just after Egwene herself was.

ɹoʊmændə klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊt. "pɝhæps wi ʃəd si ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ɛni-θɪŋ ɪn ðə lɔ ʌv wɔɹ ðət kən hɛlp."

Romanda cleared her throat. "Perhaps we should see if there is any-thing in the Law of War that can help."

"aɪm sɝɾən juv stʌɾid ɪt kwaɪt θɝoʊli naʊ, ɹoʊmændə" ɛɡwin sɛd. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt jə pɹəpoʊz?"

"I'm certain you have studied it quite thoroughly now, Romanda" Egwene said. "What is it you propose?"

"ðɛɹ ɪz ə pɹəvɪʒən fəɹ ðə hɔl teɪkɪŋ ʌp pɹɑsəkjuʃən ʌv ə wɔɹ" ɹoʊmændə sɛd.

"There is a provision for the Hall taking up prosecution of a war" Romanda said.

"ðæt ɹikwaɪɝz ði æmɪɝlɪnz əsɛnt," ɛɡwin sɛɾ aɪdli. ɪf ðət wɑz ɹoʊmændəz ɡeɪm, ðən haʊ hæd ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə ɡɛɾ ɛɡwin ɛs əpɹuvəl æftɝ miɾɪŋ wɪθaʊt hɝ? pɝhæps ʃid hæɾ ə dɪfɹən plæn.

"That requires the Amyrlin's assent," Egwene said idly. If that was Romandas game, then how had she intended to get Egwene s approval after meeting without her? Perhaps she'd had a different plan.

"jɛs, ɪt wəd ɹikwaɪɝ ði æmɪɝlɪnz əɡɹimənt," sɛd ɹɛtʃɪn. ʃi wɑz ə tɔl, dɑɹk-hɛɹd wʊmən, ən laɪk tə wɛɹ əɹ hɛɹ ɪn ə kɔɪl ə bɹeɪdz ətɑp əɹ hɛd. "bʌt jə sɛd ðət jə θɔɾ əs waɪz tə teɪk ðɪs mɛʒɝ."

"Yes, it would require the Amyrlin's agreement," said Raechin. She was a tall, dark-haired woman, and liked to wear her hair in a coil of braids atop her head. "But you said that you thought us wise to take this measure."

"wɛl," ɛɡwin sɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə saʊn əz ɪf ʃi wɝ biɪŋ pɹɛst ɪndə ə kɔɹnɝ, "əɡɹiɪŋ wɪð ðə hɔl ɪz kwaɪt dɪfɹən fɹəm əlaʊɪŋ ə pɹəvɪʒən tə bæn mi fɹəm ðə deɪ-tə-deɪ wɝkɪŋz ə ði ɑɹmi. wʌɾ ɪz ði æmɪɝlɪn sit tə du, ɪf nɑt si tə ðə wɔɹ?"

"Well," Egwene said, trying to sound as if she were being pressed into a corner, "agreeing with the Hall is quite different from allowing a provision to ban me from the day-to-day workings of the army. What is the Amyrlin Seat to do, if not see to the war?"

"baɪ ɹɪpɔɹts, juv bɪn dɛɾɪkeɪtɪŋ jɝsɛlf tə ɹæŋɡəlɪŋ kɪŋz ən kwinz," ləleɪn sɛd. "ðæt simz ə faɪn tæsk fəɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn."

"By reports, you've been dedicating yourself to wrangling kings and queens," Lelaine said. "That seems a fine task for the Amyrlin."

"ðɛn jəl stæn fəɹ sətʃ ə pɹəvɪʒən?" ɛɡwin sɛd. "ðə hɔl siz tə ði ɑɹmi, waɪl aɪm ɡɪvən əθɔɹəɾi fəɹ dilɪŋ wɪð ðə mɑnɑɹks ə ðə wɝld?"

"Then you'll stand for such a provision?" Egwene said. "The Hall sees to the army, while I am given authority for dealing with the monarchs of the world?"

"aɪ. . ." ləleɪn sɛd. "jɛs, aɪd stæn fəɹ ðæt."

"I. . ." Lelaine said. "Yes, I'd stand for that."

"aɪ səpoʊz aɪ kəɾ əɡɹi," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"I suppose I could agree," Egwene said.

"ʃæl wi pʊɾ ɪt tə ə voʊt?" ɹoʊmændə sɛd kwɪkli, əz ɪf paʊnsɪŋ ɑn ðə moʊmənt.

"Shall we put it to a vote?" Romanda said quickly, as if pouncing on the moment.

"vɛɹi wɛl," ɛɡwin sɛd. "hu wɪl stæn fəɹ ðɪs moʊʃən?"

"Very well," Egwene said. "Who will stand for this motion?"

ɹubɪn ɹoʊz tə hɝ fit, ən wɑz dʒɔɪn baɪ feɪsɛl ən fɑɹnə, ði ʌðɝ ɡɹinz. ɹɛtʃɪn ən əɹ sɪstɝ stʊd kwɪkli, ðoʊ bɑɹɑsin wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ɛɡwin wɪð aɪz nɛɹoʊd. mæɡlə stʊd nɛkst, ən ɹoʊmændə ɹɪlʌktənli dʒɔɪn hɝ. fɛɹən ɹoʊz sloʊli. ləleɪn wɑz nɛkst. ʃi ən ɹoʊmændə ʃɑt dæɡɝd ɡlænsɪz ət wʌn ənʌðɝ.

Rubinde rose to her feet, and was joined by Faiselle and Farnah, the other Greens. Raechin and her sister stood quickly, though Barasine was watching Egwene with eyes narrowed. Magla stood next, and Romanda reluctantly joined her. Ferane rose slowly. Lelaine was next. She and Romanda shot daggered glances at one another.

ðət wɑz naɪn. ɛɡwinz hɑɹt bit kwɪkli əz ʃi ɡlænst ət tɑkimə. ðə wʊmən sim vɛɹi dɪstɝbd, əz ɪf tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə sɔɹt θɹu ɛɡwinz plæn. ðə seɪm wɛn fəɹ sɛɝɔɪjə. ðə kælkjəleɪɾɪŋ waɪt stʌɾid ɛɡwin, tʌɡɪŋ əɹ ɪɹ. sʌɾənli, hɝ aɪz wɛnt waɪd, ən ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə spik.

That was nine. Egwene's heart beat quickly as she glanced at Takima. The woman seemed very disturbed, as if trying to sort through Egwene's plan. The same went for Saroiya. The calculating White studied Egwene, tugging her ear. Suddenly, her eyes went wide, and she opened her mouth to speak.

ət ðət moʊmənt, dʌsin ən jukɪɝi ɝaɪvd, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɹum.

At that moment, Doesine and Yukiri arrived, striding into the room.

sɹɪn stʊɾ ɪmiɾiətli. slɪm dʌsin ɡlænst ət ðə wɪmən ɝaʊn hɝ. "wʌt moʊʃən ɑɹ wi stændɪŋ fɔɹ?"

Saerin stood immediately. Slim Doesine glanced at the women around her. "What motion are we standing for?"

"æn ɪmpɔɹɾənt wʌn," sɹɪn sɛd.

"An important one," Saerin said.

""wɛl, aɪ səpoʊz əl stæn fəɹ ɪt, ðɛn."

""Well, I suppose I'll stand for it, then."

"æz wɪl aɪ," jukɪɝi sɛd.

"As will I," Yukiri said.

"ðə lɛsɝ kənsɛnsəs ɪz ɡɪvən, ɪt simz," sɹɪn sɛd. "ðə hɔl ɪz ɡɪvən əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ ðə waɪt taʊɝz ɑɹmi, waɪl ði æmɪɝlɪn ɪz ɡɪvən əθɔɹəɾi ən ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi fəɹ dilɪŋ wɪð ðə wɝlz mɑnɑɹks."

"The lesser consensus is given, it seems," Saerin said. "The Hall is given authority over the White Tower's army, while the Amyrlin is given authority and responsibility for dealing with the world's monarchs."

"noʊ!" sɛɝɔɪjə sɛd, klaɪmɪŋ tə hɝ fit. "doʊn jə si? hiz ə kɪŋ! hi hoʊlz ðə lɔɹəl kɹaʊn. juv dʒʌst ɡɪvən ði æmɪɝlɪn soʊl ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi fəɹ dilɪŋ wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn!"

"No!" Saroiya said, climbing to her feet. "Don't you see? He is a king! He holds the Laurel Crown. You've just given the Amyrlin sole responsibility for dealing with the Dragon Reborn!"

ðəɹ wɑz saɪləns ɪn ðə hɔl.

There was silence in the Hall.

"wɛl," ɹoʊmændə sɛd, "ʃʊɹli ʃi . . ." ʃi tʃɹeɪld ɔf əz ʃi tɝnd, siɪŋ ɛɡwinz sɝin feɪs.

"Well," Romanda said, "surely she . . ." She trailed off as she turned, seeing Egwene's serene face.

"aɪ səpoʊz sʌmwʌn ʃəɾ æsk fəɹ ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ kənsɛnsəs," sɹɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "bʌt juv mænədʒ tə hæŋ jʊɹsɛlvz kwaɪɾ ɪfɪʃənli wɪð ðə lɛsɝ ɹoʊp ɔlɹɛɾi."

"I suppose someone should ask for the greater consensus," Saerin said dryly. "But you've managed to hang yourselves quite efficiently with the lesser rope already."

ɛɡwin stʊd. "aɪ mɛnt wʌɾ aɪ sɛɾ əbaʊt ðə hɔlz tʃɔɪsəz biɪŋ waɪz, ən noʊbɑdi hæz hæŋ hɝsɛlf. ɪts waɪz ə ðə hɔl tə pʊt mi ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ ə dilɪŋ wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn - hɪl niɾ ə fɝm, fəmɪljɝ hænd. jə ɑɹ ɔlsoʊ waɪz tə si ðət ðə dɪteɪlz ə mænɪdʒɪŋ ði ɑɹmi wɝ dɪmændɪŋ tu mʌtʃ ə maɪ ətɛnʃən. jəl wɑnə tʃuz sʌmwʌn əmʌŋ jə tə ɡoʊ θɹu ən əpɹuv ɔl ə dʒɛnɝəl bɹaɪnz səplaɪ ɹɪkwɛsts ən ɹəkɹutmən skimz. aɪ əʃʊɹ ju, ðəɹ ɑɹ ə mʌltətuɾ ə ðɛm.

Egwene stood. "I meant what I said about the Hall's choices being wise, and nobody has hanged herself. It is wise of the Hall to put me in charge of dealing with the Dragon Reborn - he will need a firm, familiar hand. You are also wise to see that the details of managing the army were demanding too much of my attention. You will want to choose someone among you to go through and approve all of General Bryne's supply requests and recruitment schemes. I assure you, there are a multitude of them.

"aɪ æm pliz ðət juv sin ðə nid tə eɪd ði æmɪɝlɪn, ðoʊ aɪm dipli dɪsplizd ət ðə sikɹəɾɪv neɪtʃɝ ə ðɪs miɾɪŋ. də nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə dɪnaɪ ðəɾ ɪt wɑz dʌn ɪn sikɹət, ɹoʊmændə. aɪ si jə pɹipɛɹɪŋ tə əbdʒɛkt. ɪf jə wɪʃ tə spik, noʊ ðəɾ əl pɪn jə baɪ ðə θɹi oʊðz ɪndə ænsɝɪŋ dɝɛkli."

"I am pleased that you have seen the need to aid the Amyrlin, though I am deeply displeased at the secretive nature of this meeting. Do not try to deny that it was done in secret, Romanda. I see you preparing to object. If you wish to speak, know that I will pin you by the Three Oaths into answering directly."

ðə jɛloʊ bɪɾ ɔf əɹ kɑmɛnt.

The Yellow bit off her comment.

"haʊ kən jə nɑɾ əv lɝn ðə fulɪʃnəs ʌv æks laɪk ðɪs?" ɛɡwin sɛd. "ɪz jəɹ mɛmɹi soʊ ʃɔɹt?" ʃi lʊkt ət ðə wɪmən ɪn tɝn, ən wɑz sæɾəsfaɪd baɪ ðə nʌmbɝ u wɪnst.

"How can you not have learned the foolishness of acts like this?" Egwene said. "Is your memory so short?" She looked at the women in turn, and was satisfied by the number who winced.

ɪts taɪm," ɛɡwin sɛd, "fɔɹ ə tʃeɪnʒ tə bi meɪd. aɪ pɹəpoʊz ðət ðəɹ bi noʊ fɝðɝ miɾɪŋz ə ðɪs neɪtʃɝ. aɪ pɹəpoʊz ðəɾ ɪt bi ɹɪɾən ɪndə taʊɝ lɔ ðəɾ ɪf ɛni sɪɾɝ livz ðə waɪt taʊɝ, hɝ ədʒɑ mʌst əpɔɪn ə sɝəɡət tə voʊt fəɹ əɹ waɪl æbsənt. aɪ pɹəpoʊz ðəɾ ɪt bi ɹɪɾən ɪndə taʊɝ lɔ ðət noʊ miɾɪŋ ə ðə hɔl kən bi kənvin ənlɛs ɛvɹi sɪɾɝ əɹ əɹ sɝəɡəɾ iðɝ ɪz pɹɛzənt, əɹ əz sɛnt wɝd dɝɛkli ðət ʃi kænɑɾ ətɛnd. aɪ pɹəpoʊz ðət ði æmɪɝlɪn mʌs bi ɪnfɔɹmd - ən ɡɪvən ə ɹizənəbəl əmaʊn ə taɪm tə ətɛn ɪf ʃi wɪʃɪz - ʌv ɛvɹi miɾɪŋ ə ðə hɔl, seɪv wən ʃi kænɑt bi faʊn əɹ ɪz ɪndɪspoʊzd ɪn səm weɪ."

It is time," Egwene said, "for a change to be made. I propose that there be no further meetings of this nature. I propose that it be written into Tower law that if any Sitter leaves the White Tower, her Ajah must appoint a surrogate to vote for her while absent. I propose that it be written into Tower law that no meeting of the Hall can be convened unless every Sitter or her surrogate either is present, or has sent word directly that she cannot attend. I propose that the Amyrlin must be informed - and given a reasonable amount of time to attend if she wishes - of every meeting of the Hall, save when she cannot be found or is indisposed in some way."

"boʊl tʃeɪnʒəz, mʌðɝ," sɹɪn sɛd. "ju pɹəpoʊz ɔltɝɪŋ tʃɹədɪʃənz ðəɾ əv bɪn ɪstæblɪʃt fəɹ sɛntʃɝiz."

"Bold changes, Mother," Saerin said. "You propose altering traditions that have been established for centuries."

"tʃɹədɪʃənz ðət hɪðɝtu hæv bɪn juzd oʊnli fəɹ tʃɹɛtʃɝi, bækbaɪɾɪŋ ən dɪvɪʒən," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ɪɾ ɪz taɪm fəɹ ðɪs hoʊl tə bi kloʊzd, sɹɪn. ðə læs taɪm ɪt wɑz juzd ɪfɛktɪvli, ðə blæk ədʒɑ mənɪpjəleɪɾɪd əs ɪndə kæstɪŋ daʊn ən æmɪɝlɪn, ɹeɪzɪŋ ə ful ɪn əɹ pleɪs, ən dɪvaɪɾɪŋ ðə taʊɝ. ɑɹ jə əwɛɹ ðət kændɝ, sɑldɑiə ən ɝæfəl ɑɹ swɔɹmɪŋ wɪð ʃæɾoʊzpɔn?"

"Traditions that hitherto have been used only for treachery, backbiting and division," Egwene said. "It is time for this hole to be closed, Saerin. The last time it was used effectively, the Black Ajah manipulated us into casting down an Amyrlin, raising a fool in her place, and dividing the Tower. Are you aware that Kandor, Saldaea and Arafel are swarming with Shadowspawn?"

sɛvɹəl ə ðə sɪstɝz ɡæspt. ʌðɝz nɑɾəd, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ləleɪn. soʊ ðə blu nɛtwɝk wɑz stɪl ɹɪlaɪəbəl. ɡʊd.

Several of the sisters gasped. Others nodded, including Lelaine. So the Blue network was still reliable. Good.

"ðə læs bæɾəl ɪz hɪɹ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "aɪ wɪl nɑt wɪðdʒɹɔ maɪ pɹəpoʊzəl. iðɝ jəl stænd naʊ, əɹ jəl bi noʊn - θɹu ɔl taɪm - əz wʌn ə ðoʊz u ɹəfjuzd. ət ðə dʌsk ʌv ən eɪdʒ, kən jə nɑt stæn fəɹ oʊpənnəs ən laɪt? wɪl jə nɑt - fəɹ ɔl ʌv əɹ seɪks - meɪk ɪɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl fəɹ ə miɾɪŋ ə ðə hɔl tə bi kɔld wɪθaʊt jəɹ pɹɛzəns? tə liv ɛni aʊt minz ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ðət jəl bi lɛft aʊt."

"The Last Battle is here," Egwene said. "I will not withdraw my proposal. Either you will stand now, or you will be known - through all time - as one of those who refused. At the dusk of an Age, can you not stand for openness and Light? Will you not - for all of our sakes - make it impossible for a meeting of the Hall to be called without your presence? To leave any out means the possibility that you will be left out."

ðə wɪmən wɝ saɪlənt. wʌn baɪ wʌn, ðoʊz u wɝ stændɪŋ sæt bæk daʊn tə pɹipɛɹ fəɹ ðə nu voʊt.

The women were silent. One by one, those who were standing sat back down to prepare for the new vote.

"hu wɪl stæn fəɹ ðɪs moʊʃən?" ɛɡwin æskt.

"Who will stand for this motion?" Egwene asked.

ðeɪ stʊd. blɛsədli, ðeɪ stʊd - wʌn əɾ ə taɪm, sloʊli, ɹɪlʌktənli. bʌt ðeɪ dɪɾ ɪt. ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm.

They stood. Blessedly, they stood - one at a time, slowly, reluctantly. But they did it. Every one of them.

ɛɡwin lɛɾ aʊɾ ə dip bɹɛθ. ðeɪ maɪt skwɑbəl ən skim, bʌt ðeɪ nu ɹaɪt wən ðeɪ sɔ ɪt. ðeɪ ʃɛɹd ðə seɪm ɡoʊlz. ɪf ðeɪ dɪsəɡɹid, ɪt wɑz kəz ðeɪ hæd dɪfɹən vjuz ɑn haʊ tə ɹitʃ ðoʊz ɡoʊlz. səmtaɪmz ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt.

Egwene let out a deep breath. They might squabble and scheme, but they knew right when they saw it. They shared the same goals. If they disagreed, it was because they had different views on how to reach those goals. Sometimes it was hard to remember that.

lʊkɪŋ ʃeɪkən baɪ wʌt ðeɪd dʌn, ðə sɪɾɝz əlaʊd ðə miɾɪŋ tə bɹeɪk ʌp. aʊtsaɪd, sɪstɝz hæd bɪɡʌn tə ɡæðɝ, sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ðə hɔl miɾɪŋ. ɛɡwin nɑɾəd tə sɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz ə hɝ səpɔɹɾɝz ən wɔk fɹəm ðə ɹum, sɪlviænə əɾ əɹ saɪd.

Looking shaken by what they'd done, the Sitters allowed the meeting to break up. Outside, sisters had begun to gather, surprised to find the Hall meeting. Egwene nodded to Saerin and the others of her supporters and walked from the room, Silviana at her side.

"ðæt wɑz ə vɪktɝi," ðə kipɝ sɛd wʌns ðeɪ wɝ əloʊn. ʃi saʊndəd sæɾəsfaɪd. "bʌt jə dɪd stɪl ɡɪv ʌp kəntʃɹoʊl ʌv əɹ ɑɹmiz."

"That was a victory," the Keeper said once they were alone. She sounded satisfied. "But you did still give up control of our armies."

"aɪ hæd tə," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ðeɪ cʊɾə pʊl kəmæn əweɪ fɹəm mi əɾ ɛni taɪm; ðɪs weɪ, aɪ ɡɑt sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ɹɪtɝn."

"I had to," Egwene said. "They could have pulled command away from me at any time; this way, I got something in return."

"əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn?"

"Authority over the Dragon Reborn?"

"jɛs," ɛɡwin sɛd, "bʌɾ aɪ wɑz ɹɪfɝɪŋ mɔɹ tə kloʊzɪŋ ðət luphoʊl ɪn taʊɝ lɔ. soʊ lɔŋ əz ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl fəɹ ðə hɔl tə miɾ ɪn ɹɛləɾɪv sikɹət, maɪ əθɔɹəɾi - ði əθɔɹəɾi ʌv ɛni æmɪɝlɪn -  kəd bi sɝkəmvɛntɪd. naʊ, ɪf ðeɪ wɑnə mənuvɝ, ðəl əv tə də ɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə maɪ sɪlviænə ɡeɪv ə ɹɛɹ smaɪl. "aɪ səspɛk ðət sɪns sʌmθɪŋ laɪk tədeɪ ɪz ðə ɹɪzʌlt ə sətʃ mənuvɝɪŋ, mʌðɝ, ðəl bi mɔɹ hɛzɪɾənt ɪn ðə fjutʃɝ"

"Yes," Egwene said, "but I was referring more to closing that loophole in Tower law. So long as it was possible for the Hall to meet in relative secret, my authority - the authority of any Amyrlin -  could be circumvented. Now, if they want to maneuver, they'll have to do it in front of my Silviana gave a rare smile. "I suspect that since something like today is the result of such maneuvering, Mother, they will be more hesitant in the future"

"ðæts ði aɪdiə," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ðoʊ aɪ daʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪl ɛvɝ stɑp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə mənuvɝ.

"That's the idea," Egwene said. "Though I doubt Aes Sedai will ever stop trying to maneuver.

ðeɪ sɪmpli kænɑt bi əlaʊd tə daɪs wɪð ðə læs bæɾəl əɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn."

They simply cannot be allowed to dice with the Last Battle or the Dragon Reborn."

bæk əɾ ɛɡwinz stʌɾi, nɪkoʊlə ən nɪsə stɪl weɪɾəd. "ju dɪd wɛl," ɛɡwin toʊl ðɛm. "vɛɹi wɛl. ɪn fækt, aɪm ʌv ə maɪn tə ɡɪv jə mɔɹ ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi. ɡoʊ tə ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ ɡɹaʊnd, ən ɡoʊ tə keɪɛmlɪn - ðə kwin ðəɹ wɪl bi ɪkspɛktɪŋ ju. ɹɪtɝn wɪð ði aɪɾəmz ʃi ɡɪvz ju."

Back at Egwene's study, Nicola and Nissa still waited. "You did well," Egwene told them. "Very well. In fact, I'm of a mind to give you more responsibility. Go to the Traveling ground, and go to Caemlyn - the Queen there will be expecting you. Return with the items she gives you."

"jɛs, mʌðɝ," nɪkoʊlə sɛd, ɡɹɪnɪŋ. "wʌt wɪl ʃi ɡɪv ʌs?"

"Yes, Mother," Nicola said, grinning. "What will she give us?"

"tɛɹæŋɡɹil" ɛɡwin sɛd. "juz fəɹ vɪzəɾɪŋ ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz. aɪm gɑnə bɪɡɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ju, ən səm ʌðɝz, ɪn ðɛɹ jus. də nɑt juz əm wɪθaʊt maɪ ɪkspɹɛs pɝmɪʃən, haʊɛvɝ. əl sɛn səm soʊlʒɝz wɪð ju." ðət ʃəd bi ɪnʌf tə kip ðə tu ɪn laɪn.

"Ter'angreal" Egwene said. "Used for visiting the World of Dreams. I'm going to begin training you, and some others, in their use. Do not use them without my express permission, however. I will send some soldiers with you." That should be enough to keep the two in line.

ðə tu æksɛptɪd kɝtsiɾ ən tʃɹɑɾəd əweɪ, ɪksaɪɾəd. sɪlviænə lʊkt əɾ ɛɡwin. "ju dɪdn swɛɹ əm tə saɪləns. ðeɪ ɑɹ æksɛptɪd, ən ðəl bɹæɡ əbaʊt biɪŋ tʃɹeɪnd wɪð ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil."

The two Accepted curtsied and trotted away, excited. Silviana looked at Egwene. "You didn't swear them to silence. They are Accepted, and they will brag about being trained with the ter'angreal."

"aɪm dɪpɛndɪŋ ɑn ɪt," ɛɡwin sɛd, wɔkɪŋ tə ðə stʌɾi dɔɹ.

"I'm depending on it," Egwene said, walking to the study door.

sɪlviænə ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ.

Silviana raised an eyebrow.

"aɪ doʊn ɪntɛn tə lɛt ðə ɡɝlz kʌm tə hɑɹm," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ɪn fækt, ðəl bi duɪŋ ə lɑt lɛs ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd ðən ðeɪ pɹɑbli səspɛk fɹəm wʌɾ aɪ dʒʌst sɛd. ɹɑsɪl əz bɪn liniənt wɪð mi soʊ fɑɹ, bʌt ʃɪl nɛvɝ lemi pʊɾ æksɛptɪɾ ɪn deɪnʒɝ. ðɪs ɪz dʒʌs tə stɑɹt ðə pɹɑpɝ ɹumɝz."

"I don't intend to let the girls come to harm," Egwene said. "In fact, they'll be doing a lot less in Tel'aran'rhiod than they probably suspect from what I just said. Rosil has been lenient with me so far, but she'll never let me put Accepted in danger. This is just to start the proper rumors."

"wʌt ɹumɝz?"

"What rumors?"

"ɡɔɪn skɛɹɾ ɔf ði əsæsən," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ðɛɹ hæzən bɪn ə mɝɾɝ ɪn deɪz, ən aɪ səpoʊz wi ʃəd blɛs ɪm fəɹ ðæt. bʌt ðə kɪlɝ ɪz stɪl haɪɾɪŋ, ən aɪv ɡlɪmps blæk sɪstɝz wɑtʃɪŋ mi ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. ɪf aɪ kæn kætʃ əm hɪɹ, ðən əl kætʃ əm ðɛɹ. bʌt fɝst aɪ niɾ ə weɪ tə tʃɹɪk əm ɪndə θɪŋkɪŋ ðeɪ noʊ wɛɹ tə faɪn ʌs."

"Gawyn scared off the assassin," Egwene said. "There hasn't been a murder in days, and I suppose we should bless him for that. But the killer is still hiding, and I've glimpsed Black sisters watching me in Tel'aran'rhiod. If I can't catch them here, then I will catch them there. But first I need a way to trick them into thinking they know where to find us."

"soʊ lɔŋ əz jə ɪntɛn əm tə faɪn ju, ən nɑt ðoʊz ɡɝlz," sɪlviænə sɛd, vɔɪs kɑm - bʌɾ aɪɝn.

"So long as you intend them to find you, and not those girls," Silviana said, voice calm - but iron.

ʃi hæd bɪn ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz.

She had been the Mistress of Novices.

ɛɡwin faʊn hɝsɛlf ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ, θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðə θɪŋz ðət hæd bɪn ɪkspɛktəɾ ə hɝ əz ən æksɛptɪd. jɛs, sɪlviænə wɑz ɹaɪt. ʃi wəɾ əv tə teɪk kɛɹ nɑt tə səbdʒɛk nɪkoʊlə ən nɪsə tə sɪməlɝ deɪnʒɝz. ʃi hæd sɝvaɪvd, ən wɑz stʃɹɔŋɝ fəɹ ɪt, bʌɾ æksɛptɪd ʃəd nɑt bi pʊt θɹu sətʃ tʃɹaɪəlz ənlɛs ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs.

Egwene found herself grimacing, thinking of the things that had been expected of her as an Accepted. Yes, Silviana was right. She would have to take care not to subject Nicola and Nissa to similar dangers. She had survived, and was stronger for it, but Accepted should not be put through such trials unless there was no other choice.

"aɪ wɪl teɪk kɛɹ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "aɪ sɪmpli niɾ əm tə spɹɛd ðə ɹumɝ ðəɾ aɪ hæv ə vɛɹi ɪmpɔɹɾənt miɾɪŋ kʌmɪŋ ʌp. ɪf aɪ leɪ ðə ɡɹaʊndwɝk pɹɑpɝli, əɹ fæntəm woʊn bi eɪbəl tə ɹɪzɪs kʌmɪŋ tə lɪsən ɪn."

"I will take care," Egwene said. "I simply need them to spread the rumor that I have a very important meeting coming up. If I lay the groundwork properly, our phantom won't be able to resist coming to listen in."

"boʊld."

"Bold."

"ɪsɛnʃəl," ɛɡwin sɛd. ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, hæn ɑn əɹ dɔɹ. "spikɪŋ ʌv ɡɔɪn, hæv jə faʊn aʊt wɛɹ ɪn ðə sɪɾi hiz ɹʌn ɔf tə?"

"Essential," Egwene said. She hesitated, hand on her door. "Speaking of Gawyn, have you found out where in the city he's run off to?"

"æktʃəli , mʌðɝ, aɪ hæɾ ə noʊɾ ɑn ðɪs ɝliɝ tədeɪ. ɪɾ əpɪɹz ðət wɛl, hi ɪzən ɪn ðə sɪɾi. wʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz dɪlɪvɝɪŋ jəɹ mɛsədʒəz tə ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ ɹɪtɝnd wɪð nuz ə siɪŋ ɪm ðɛɹ."

"Actually, Mother, I had a note on this earlier today. It appears that well, he isn't in the city. One of the sisters delivering your messages to the Queen of Andor returned with news of seeing him there."

ɛɡwin ɡɹoʊnd, kloʊzɪŋ əɹ aɪz. ðət mæn wɪl bi ðə dɛθ ə mi. "tɛl ɪm tə ɹɪtɝn.

Egwene groaned, closing her eyes. That man will be the death of me. "Tell him to return.

ɪnfjʊɹieɪɾɪŋ ðoʊ hi ɪz, aɪm gɑnə niɾ ɪm ɪn ðə kʌmɪŋ deɪz."

Infuriating though he is, I'm going to need him in the coming days."

"jɛs, mʌðɝ," sɪlviænə sɛd, teɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ə ʃiɾ ə peɪpɝ.

"Yes, Mother," Silviana said, taking out a sheet of paper.

ɛɡwin ɛntɝɾ əɹ stʌɾi tə kəntɪnju hɝ lɛɾɝz. taɪm wɑz ʃɔɹt. taɪm wɑz soʊ vɛɹi, vɛɹi ʃɔɹt.

Egwene entered her study to continue her letters. Time was short. Time was so very, very short.


tʃæptɝ twɛntieɪt


CHAPTER 28

ɑɾətiz


Oddities

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə plænɪŋ, hʌzbənd?" feɪl æskt. ðeɪ wɝ bæk ɪn ðɛɹ tɛnt, fɑloʊɪŋ ðə pɑɹli wɪð ðə waɪtkloʊks. pɛɹɪnz ækʃənz hæd sɝpɹaɪzd əɹ - wɪtʃ wɑz ɪnvɪɡɝeɪɾɪŋ, jɛɾ ɔlsoʊ dɪstɝbɪŋ. hi tʊk ɔf ɪz koʊt. "aɪ smɛl ə stʃɹeɪnʒnəs ɑn ðə wɪnd, feɪl. sʌmθɪŋ aɪv nɛvɝ smɛl bɪfɔɹ." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ɡlænsɪŋ ət hɝ. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ noʊ wʊlvz."

"What are you planning, husband?" Faile asked. They were back in their tent, following the parley with the Whitecloaks. Perrin's actions had surprised her - which was invigorating, yet also disturbing. He took off his coat. "I smell a strangeness on the wind, Faile. Something I've never smelled before." He hesitated, glancing at her. "There are no wolves."

"noʊ wʊlvz?"

"No wolves?"

"aɪ kæn sɛns ɛni nɪɹbaɪ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, aɪz dɪstənt. "ðɛɹ wɝ səm bɪfɔɹ. naʊ ðəɹ ɡɔn."

"I can't sense any nearby," Perrin said, eyes distant. "There were some before. Now they're gone."

"ju sɛd ðət ðeɪ doʊn laɪk biɪŋ kloʊs tə pipəl."

"You said that they don't like being close to people."

hi pʊld ɔf ɪz ʃɝt, ɪkspoʊzɪŋ ə mʌsəl tʃɛs kʌvɝɾ ɪn kɝlɪŋ bɹaʊn hɛɹ. "ðɛɹ wɝ tu fju bɝdz tədeɪ, tu fju kɹitʃɝz ɪn ði ʌndɝbɹʌʃ. laɪt bɝn ðət skaɪ. ɪz ðət kɑzɪŋ ðɪs, əɹ ɪz ɪt sʌmθɪŋ ɛls?" hi saɪd, sɪɾɪŋ daʊn ɑn ðɛɹ slipɪŋ pælət.

He pulled off his shirt, exposing a muscled chest covered in curling brown hair. "There were too few birds today, too few creatures in the underbrush. Light burn that sky. Is that causing this, or is it something else?" He sighed, sitting down on their sleeping pallet.

"jɔɹ gɑnə ɡoʊ . . . ðɛɹ?" feɪl æskt.

"You're going to go . . . there?" Faile asked.

"sʌmθɪŋz ɹɔŋ," hi ɹɪpiɾɪd. "aɪ nid tə lɝn wʌɾ aɪ kən bɪfɔɹ ðə tʃɹaɪəl. ðəɹ maɪt bi ænsɝz ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim."

"Something's wrong," he repeated. "I need to learn what I can before the trial. There might be answers in the wolf dream."

ðə tʃɹaɪəl. "pɛɹɪn, aɪ doʊn laɪk ðɪs aɪdiə." "jɔɹ æŋɡɹi əbaʊt meɪaɪɡdɪn."

The trial. "Perrin, I don't like this idea." "You're angry about Maighdin."

"ʌv kɔɹs aɪm æŋɡɹi əbaʊt meɪaɪɡdɪn," ʃi sɛd. ðeɪd bɪn θɹu mɔldən təɡɛðɝ, ən ʃi hædn toʊl feɪl ðət ʃi wɑz ðə kwin ə blʌɾi ændɝ? ɪt meɪd feɪl lʊk laɪk ə ful - laɪk ə smɔl-taʊn bɹæɡɝt, ɪkstoʊl-lɪŋ əɹ skɪl wɪð ðə sɔɹɾ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə pæsɪŋ bleɪdmæstɝ.

"Of course I'm angry about Maighdin," she said. They'd been through Malden together, and she hadn't told Faile that she was the Queen of bloody Andor? It made Faile look like a fool - like a small-town braggart, extol-ling her skill with the sword in front of a passing blademaster.

"ʃi dɪdnt noʊ ɪf ʃi kəd tʃɹʌst ʌs," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ʃi wɑz fliɪŋ wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən, ɪt simz. aɪɾ əv hɪɾən maɪsɛlf, tu."

"She didn't know if she could trust us," Perrin said. "She was fleeing one of the Forsaken, it seems. I'd have hidden myself, too."

feɪl ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɪm.

Faile glared at him.

"doʊn lʊk ət mi laɪk ðæt," hi sɛd. "ʃi dɪdn də ɪt tə meɪk jə lʊk bæd, feɪl. ʃi hæɾ əɹ ɹizənz. lɛɾ ɪt ɡoʊ."

"Don't look at me like that," he said. "She didn't do it to make you look bad, Faile. She had her reasons. Let it go."

ðət meɪɾ əɹ fil ə lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ; ɪt wɑz soʊ naɪs ðəɾ i wəd stæn ʌp fəɹ hɪmsɛlf naʊ. "wɛl, ɪt meɪks mi wʌndɝ u lini wɪl tɝn aʊt tə bi. səm sintʃæn kwin? mæstɝ ɡɪl, ðə kɪŋ ʌv ɑɹæd dumən ɪn haɪɾɪŋ?"

That made her feel a little better; it was so nice that he would stand up for himself now. "Well, it makes me wonder who Lini will turn out to be. Some Seanchan queen? Master Gill, the King of Arad Doman in hiding?"

pɛɹɪn smaɪld. "aɪ səspɛk ðəɹ əɹ ətɛndəns. ɡɪl ɪz u hi sɛz i ɪz, ət list. beɪlwɝ ɪz pɹɑbli hævɪŋ ə fɪt fəɹ nɑt hævɪŋ fɪɡjɝd ðɪs aʊt."

Perrin smiled. "I suspect they're her attendants. Gill is who he says he is, at least. Balwer is probably having a fit for not having figured this out."

"aɪ bɛɾ i dɪd fɪɡjɝ ɪɾ aʊt," feɪl sɛd, nilɪŋ bɪsaɪd hɪm. "pɛɹɪn, aɪ mɛnt wʌɾ aɪ sɛɾ əbaʊt ðɪs tʃɹaɪəl. aɪm wɝid."

"I bet he did figure it out," Faile said, kneeling beside him. "Perrin, I meant what I said about this trial. I'm worried."

"aɪ woʊn lɛt maɪsɛlf bi teɪkən," hi sɛd. "aɪ oʊnli sɛɾ aɪd sɪt θɹu ə tʃɹaɪəl ən ɡɪv əm ə tʃæns tə pɹizɛn ɛvəɾəns."

"I won't let myself be taken," he said. "I only said I'd sit through a trial and give them a chance to present evidence."

"ðɛn wʌts ðə pɔɪnt?" feɪl sɛd.

"Then what's the point?" Faile said.

"ɪt ɡɪvz mi mɔɹ taɪm tə θɪŋk," hi sɛd, "æn ɪt maɪt stɑp mi fɹəm hævɪŋ tə kɪl ðɛm. ðɛɹ kæptən, dəmədʒɹd - sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪm smɛlz bɛɾɝ ðən mɛni ʌv ðə ɹɛst. nɑt ɹæbɪd wɪð æŋɡɝ əɹ heɪt. ðɪs wɪl ɡɛɾ əɹ pipəl bæk ən lemi plid maɪ saɪd. ɪt filz ɡʊd fəɹ ə mæn tə bi eɪbəl tə hæv ɪz seɪ. meɪbi ðæts wʌɾ aɪv niɾəd, ɔl ðɪs taɪm."

"It gives me more time to think," he said, "and it might stop me from having to kill them. Their captain, Damodred - something about him smells better than many of the rest. Not rabid with anger or hate. This will get our people back and let me plead my side. It feels good for a man to be able to have his say. Maybe that's what I've needed, all this time."

"wɛl, ɔl ɹaɪt," feɪl sɛd. "bʌɾ ɪn ðə fjutʃɝ, pliz kənsɪɾɝ wɔɹnɪŋ mi ʌv jəɹ plænz."

"Well, all right," Faile said. "But in the future, please consider warning me of your plans."

"aɪ wɪl," hi sɛd, jɔnɪŋ ən laɪɪŋ bæk. "ɪn tʃɹuθ, ɪt dɪdn əkɝ tə mi əntɪl ðə læs moʊmənt."

"I will," he said, yawning and lying back. "In truth, it didn't occur to me until the last moment."

feɪl kɛpt əɹ tʌŋ wɪð səm dɪfəkəlti. ət list sʌmθɪŋ ɡʊd hæd kʌm fɹəm ðət pɑɹli.

Faile kept her tongue with some difficulty. At least something good had come from that parley.

ʃid wɑtʃt bɹəleɪn wən ʃid mɛt dəmədʒɹd, ən ʃid ɹɛɹli sin ə wʊmənz aɪz laɪɾ ʌp soʊ bɹaɪtli. feɪl maɪt bi eɪbəl tə meɪk jus ə ðæt.

She'd watched Berelain when she'd met Damodred, and she'd rarely seen a woman's eyes light up so brightly. Faile might be able to make use of that.

ʃi lʊk daʊn. pɛɹɪn wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi snɔɹɪŋ sɔfli.

She looked down. Perrin was already snoring softly.

pɛɹɪn faʊn hɪmsɛlf sɪɾɪŋ wɪð ɪz bæk əɡɛnst sʌmθɪŋ hɑɹɾ ən smuð. ðə tu-dɑɹk, ɔlmoʊst ivəl skaɪ ʌv ðə wʊlf dʒɹim bɔɪld əbʌv ðə fɔɹəst, wɪtʃ wɑz ə mɪkstʃɝ ə fɝ, oʊk ən lɛðɝlif.

Perrin found himself sitting with his back against something hard and smooth. The too-dark, almost evil sky of the wolf dream boiled above the forest, which was a mixture of fir, oak and leatherleaf.

hi stʊɾ ʌp, ðən tɝn ən lʊkt ət wʌɾ i hæd bɪn linɪŋ əɡɛnst. ə mæsɪv stil taʊɝ stʃɹɛtʃt təwɔɹd ðə tɝbjələn skaɪ. tu stʃɹeɪt, wɪð wɔlz ðət lʊk laɪk ə sɪŋɡəl pis ə simləs mɛɾəl, ðə taʊɝ ɪɡzuɾɪd ə kəmplitli ənnætʃɹəl fil.

He stood up, then turned and looked at what he had been leaning against. A massive steel tower stretched toward the turbulent sky. Too straight, with walls that looked like a single piece of seamless metal, the tower exuded a completely unnatural feel.

aɪ toʊl jə ðɪs pleɪs wɑz ivəl, hɑpɝ sɛnt, sʌɾənli sɪɾɪŋ nɛks tə pɝ-ɹɪn. fulɪʃ kʌb.

I told you this place was evil, Hopper sent, suddenly sitting next to Per-rin. Foolish cub.

"aɪ dɪdn kʌm hɪɹ baɪ tʃɔɪs," pɛɹɪn pɹətɛstəd. "aɪ woʊk hɪɹ."

"I didn't come here by choice," Perrin protested. "I woke here."

jəɹ maɪn ɪz foʊkəst ɑn ɪt, hɑpɝ sɛd. əɹ ðə maɪn ʌv wʌn tə hum jə ɑɹ kənɛktəd.

Your mind is focused on it, Hopper said. Or the mind of one to whom you are connected.

"mæt" pɛɹɪn sɛd, wɪθaʊɾ ʌndɝstændɪŋ haʊ hi nu. ðə kʌlɝz dɪdn əpɪɹ. ðeɪ nɛvɝ dɪɾ ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim.

"Mat" Perrin said, without understanding how he knew. The colors didn't appear. They never did in the wolf dream.

əz fulɪʃ ə kʌb əz jɝsɛlf?

As foolish a cub as yourself?

"meɪbi mɔɹ fulɪʃ."

"Maybe more foolish."

hɑpɝ smɛld ɪnkɹɛdʒələs, əz ɪf ənwɪlɪŋ tə bɪliv ðət wɑz pɑsəbəl. kʌm, ðə wʊlf sɛnt. ɪts ɹɪtɝnd.

Hopper smelled incredulous, as if unwilling to believe that was possible. Come, the wolf sent. It has returned.

"wʌɾ əz - "

"What has - "

hɑpɝ vænɪʃt. pɛɹɪn fɑloʊd wɪð ə fɹaʊn. hi naʊ kəɾ izəli kætʃ ðə sɛn ʌv wɛɹ hɑpɝ hæd ɡɔn. ðeɪ əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðə dʒəhænə ɹoʊd, ən ðət stʃɹeɪnʒ vaɪəlɪt ɡlæs wɔl wɑz ðəɹ əɡɛn, slaɪsɪŋ ðə ɹoʊdweɪ ɪn hæf, ɪkstɛndɪŋ haɪ ɪn ði ɛɹ ən ɪndə ðə dɪstəns ɪn iðɝ dɝɛkʃən.

Hopper vanished. Perrin followed with a frown. He now could easily catch the scent of where Hopper had gone. They appeared on the Jehannah Road, and that strange violet glass wall was there again, slicing the roadway in half, extending high in the air and into the distance in either direction.

pɛɹɪn wɔkt ʌp tə ə tʃɹi. ɪts bɛɹ bɹæntʃəz sim tʃɹæpt ɪn ðə ɡlæs, ɪmoʊbəl.

Perrin walked up to a tree. Its bare branches seemed trapped in the glass, immobile.

hɑpɝ peɪs nɪɹbaɪ. wɪv sin ðɪs θɪŋ bɪfɔɹ, hi sɛnt. lɔŋ, lɔŋ əɡoʊ. soʊ mɛni laɪvz əɡoʊ.

Hopper paced nearby. We have seen this thing before, he sent. Long, long ago. So many lives ago.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?"

"What is it?"

ə θɪŋ ə mɛn.

A thing of men.

hɑpɝz sɛndɪŋ ɪnkluɾəd kənfjuzd ɪmədʒəz. flaɪɪŋ, ɡloʊɪŋ dɪsks. ɪmpɑsəbli tɔl stʃɹʌktʃɝz ə stil. θɪŋz fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz? hɑpɝ dɪdn ʌndɝstæn ðɛɹ juz ɛni mɔɹ ðən i ʌndɝstʊd ðə jus ʌv ə hɔɹs kɑɹɾ əɹ ə kændəl.

Hopper's sending included confused images. Flying, glowing discs. Impossibly tall structures of steel. Things from the Age of Legends? Hopper didn't understand their use any more than he understood the use of a horse cart or a candle.

pɛɹɪn lʊk daʊn ðə ɹoʊdweɪ. hi dɪdn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðɪs sɛkʃən ʌv ɡildən; ɪt mʌs bi fɑɹðɝ təwɔɹd luɡɹd. ðə wɔl hæɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ə dɪfɹən pleɪs ðən ɪt hæd læs taɪm.

Perrin looked down the roadway. He didn't recognize this section of Ghealdan; it must be farther toward Lugard. The wall had appeared in a different place than it had last time.

ə θɔɾ əkɝɪŋ tə hɪm, pɛɹɪn muv daʊn ðə ɹoʊdweɪ ɪn ə fju dʒʌmpɪŋ bɝsts. ə hʌnʒɹəd ə peɪsɪz əweɪ, hi lʊk bæk ən kənfɝmd ɪz səspɪʃənz. ðət ɡlæs dɪdn meɪk ə wɔl, bʌɾ ən ɪnɔɹməs doʊm. tʃɹænslusənt, wɪð ə vaɪəlɪt tɪnt, ɪt sim tə ɪkstɛn fəɹ liɡz.

A thought occurring to him, Perrin moved down the roadway in a few jumping bursts. A hundred of paces away, he looked back and confirmed his suspicions. That glass didn't make a wall, but an enormous dome. Translucent, with a violet tint, it seemed to extend for leagues.

hɑpɝ muvd əɾ ə blɝ, kʌmɪŋ tə stæn bɪsaɪd hɪm. wi mʌst ɡoʊ.

Hopper moved at a blur, coming to stand beside him. We must go.

"hiz ɪn ðɛɹ, ɪzən hi?" pɛɹɪn æskt. hi ɹitʃt aʊt. oʊk dænsɝ, spɑɹks ən baʊnləs wɝ nɪɹ. əhɛd, ɪnsaɪd ðə doʊm. ðeɪ ɹɪspɑndɪd wɪð kwɪk, fɹæntɪk sɛndɪŋz, ət hʌn ən biɪŋ hʌntəd.

"He's in there, isn't he?" Perrin asked. He reached out. Oak Dancer, Sparks and Boundless were near. Ahead, inside the dome. They responded with quick, frantic sendings, at hunt and being hunted.

"waɪ doʊn ðeɪ fli?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"Why don't they flee?" Perrin asked.

hɑpɝ sɛn kənfjuʒən.

Hopper sent confusion.

"aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðɛm," pɛɹɪn sɛd, wɪlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf fɔɹwɝd.

"I'm going to them," Perrin said, willing himself forward.

nʌθɪŋ hæpənd.

Nothing happened.

pɛɹɪn fɛlt ə stæb ə pænɪk ɪn ɪz ɡʌt. wʌt wɑz ɹɔŋ? hi tʃɹaɪɾ əɡɛn, ðɪs taɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə sɛn hɪmsɛlf tə ðə beɪs ə ðə doʊm.

Perrin felt a stab of panic in his gut. What was wrong? He tried again, this time trying to send himself to the base of the dome.

ɪt wɝkt. hi ɝaɪvd ɪn ən aɪɛblɪŋk, ðət ɡlæslaɪk sɝfəs ɹaɪzɪŋ ɪn ə klɪf feɪs bɪfɔɹ hɪm. ɪts ðɪs doʊm, hi θɔt. ɪts blɑkɪŋ mi. sʌɾənli, hi ʌndɝstʊd ðə tʃɹæp filɪŋ ðə wʊlvz hæd sɛnt. ðeɪ kʊdnt ɡɛɾ əweɪ.

It worked. He arrived in an eyeblink, that glasslike surface rising in a cliff face before him. It's this dome, he thought. It's blocking me. Suddenly, he understood the trapped feeling the wolves had sent. They couldn't get away.

wɑz ðət ðə pɝpəs ə ðɪs doʊm, ðɛn? tə tʃɹæp wʊlvz soʊ ðət sleɪɝ kəd kɪl ðɛm? pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld, stɛpɪŋ ʌp tə ðə sɝfəs ə ðə doʊm. hi kʊdn pæs ɪn baɪ ɪmædʒənɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ðɛɹ, bʌt pɝhæps i kəɾ i ɡɛt θɹu baɪ mɔɹ məndeɪn minz. hi ɹeɪzd ə hænd, ðən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. hi dɪdnt noʊ wʌt tʌtʃɪŋ ðə sɝfəs wəd du.

Was that the purpose of this dome, then? To trap wolves so that Slayer could kill them? Perrin growled, stepping up to the surface of the dome. He couldn't pass in by imagining himself there, but perhaps he could he get through by more mundane means. He raised a hand, then hesitated. He didn't know what touching the surface would do.

ðə wʊlvz sɛn ɪmədʒəz ʌv ə mæn ɪn blæk ən lɛðɝ, wɪð ə hɑɹʃ laɪn feɪs ən ə smaɪl kɝlɪŋ ɑn ɪz lɪps əz i lɔntʃt æɹoʊz. hi smɛld ɹɔŋ, soʊ ɹɔŋ. hi ɔlsoʊ smɛld ə dɛd wʊlvz.

The wolves sent images of a man in black and leather, with a harsh lined face and a smile curling on his lips as he launched arrows. He smelled wrong, so wrong. He also smelled of dead wolves.

pɛɹɪn kʊdn liv əm ɪn ðɛɹ. noʊ mɔɹ ðən i kəd liv mæstɝ ɡɪl ən ði ʌðɝz tə ðə waɪtkloʊks. fjʊɹiəs ət sleɪɝ, hi tʌtʃt ðə sɝfəs ə ðə doʊm.

Perrin couldn't leave them in there. No more than he could leave Master Gill and the others to the Whitecloaks. Furious at Slayer, he touched the surface of the dome.

hɪz mʌsəlz sʌɾənli lɔst stʃɹɛŋkθ. ðeɪ fɛlt laɪk wɔɾɝ, hɪz lɛɡz əneɪbəl tə hoʊld ɪm ʌp. hi fɛl tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, hɑɹd. hɪz fʊt wɑz stɪl tʌtʃɪŋ ðə doʊm - pæsɪŋ θɹu ɪt. ðə doʊm əpɪɹd tə hæv noʊ sʌbstəns.

His muscles suddenly lost strength. They felt like water, his legs unable to hold him up. He fell to the ground, hard. His foot was still touching the dome - passing through it. The dome appeared to have no substance.

hɪz lʌŋz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wɝkt; ɪnfleɪɾɪŋ ɪz tʃɛst wɑz tu dɪfəkəlt. pænɪkt, hi ɪmædʒən hɪmsɛlf ɛlswɛɹ, bʌɾ ɪt dɪdnt wɝk. hi wɑz tʃɹæpt, əz ʃʊɹli əz ðə wʊlvz!

His lungs no longer worked; inflating his chest was too difficult. Panicked, he imagined himself elsewhere, but it didn't work. He was trapped, as surely as the wolves!

ə ɡɹeɪ-sɪlvɝ blɝ əpɪɹd nɛks tə hɪm. dʒɔz ɡɹæbd ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. əz hɑpɝ pʊld ɪm fɹi ʌv ðə vaɪəlɪt doʊm, pɛɹɪn ɪmiɾiətli fɛlt ɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ ɹɪtɝn. hi ɡæsp fəɹ bɹɛθ.

A gray-silver blur appeared next to him. Jaws grabbed his shoulder. As Hopper pulled him free of the violet dome, Perrin immediately felt his strength return. He gasped for breath.

fulɪʃ kʌb, hɑpɝ sɛnt.

Foolish cub, Hopper sent.

"jud liv ðɛm?" pɛɹɪn sɛd, vɔɪs ɹæɡəd.

"You'd leave them?" Perrin said, voice ragged.

nɑt fulɪʃ tə dɪɡ ɪn ðə hoʊl. fulɪʃ fəɹ nɑt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ mi ɪn keɪs hɔɹnəts keɪm aʊt. hɑpɝ tɝn təwɔɹd ðə doʊm. hɛlp mi ɪf aɪ fɔl. hi pæɾəd fɔɹwɝd, ðən tʌtʃt ɪz noʊz tə ðə doʊm.

Not foolish to dig in the hole. Foolish for not waiting for me in case hornets came out. Hopper turned toward the dome. Help me if I fall. He padded forward, then touched his nose to the dome.

hɑpɝ stʌmbəld, bʌt ɹaɪɾɪd hɪmsɛlf ən kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn sloʊli. ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd, hi kəlæpst, bʌɾ ɪz tʃɛs kəntɪnjud tə muv.

Hopper stumbled, but righted himself and continued on slowly. On the other side, he collapsed, but his chest continued to move.

"haʊ dɪd jə də ɪt?" pɛɹɪn æskt, ɹaɪzɪŋ.

"How did you do it?" Perrin asked, rising.

aɪm mi. hɑpɝ əz i sɔ hɪmsɛlf - wɪtʃ wɑz aɪdɛntɪkəl tə hu hi wɑz. ɔlsoʊ sɛns ə stʃɹɛŋkθ ən stəbɪlɪɾi.

I am me. Hopper as he saw himself - which was identical to who he was. Also scents of strength and stability.

ðə tʃɹɪk, ɪt simd, wɑz tə bi ɪn kəmplit kəntʃɹoʊl ə hu jə wɝ. laɪk mɛni θɪŋz ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim, ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ʌv wʌnz mɛntəl ɪmədʒ wɑz mɔɹ paʊɝfəl ðən ðə sʌbstəns ə ðə wɝld ɪtsɛlf.

The trick, it seemed, was to be in complete control of who you were. Like many things in the wolf dream, the strength of one's mental image was more powerful than the substance of the world itself.

kʌm, hɑpɝ sɛnt. bi stʃɹɔŋ, pæs θɹu.

Come, Hopper sent. Be strong, pass through.

"aɪ hæv ə bɛɾɝ aɪdiə," pɛɹɪn sɛd, stændɪŋ ʌp. hi tʃɑɹdʒ fɔɹwɝɾ ət fjui spid. hi hɪt ðə vaɪəlɪt doʊm ən ɪmiɾiətli wɛn lɪmp, bʌɾ ɪz moʊmɛntəm kæɹiɾ ɪm tə ði ʌðɝ saɪd, wɛɹ i ɹoʊl tə ə stɑp. hi ɡɹoʊnd, ʃoʊldɝ hɝt, ɑɹm skɹeɪpt. fulɪʃ kʌb, hɑpɝ sɛnt. jə mʌs lɝn. "naʊ ɪzən ðə taɪm," pɛɹɪn sɛd, klaɪmɪŋ tə hɪz fit. "wi hæv tə hɛlp ði ʌðɝz."

"I have a better idea," Perrin said, standing up. He charged forward at fuII speed. He hit the violet dome and immediately went limp, but his momentum carried him to the other side, where he rolled to a stop. He groaned, shoulder hurt, arm scraped. Foolish cub, Hopper sent. You must learn. "Now isn't the time," Perrin said, climbing to his feet. "We have to help the others."

æɹoʊz ɪn ðə wɪnd, θɪk, blæk, dɛdli. ðə hʌntɝz læftɝ. ðə sɛn ʌv ə mæn u wɑz steɪl.

Arrows in the wind, thick, black, deadly. The hunter's laughter. The scent of a man who was stale.

ðə kɪlɝ wɑz hɪɹ. hɑpɝ ən pɛɹɪn ɹæn daʊn ðə ɹoʊd, ən pɛɹɪn faʊn ðəɾ i kəɾ ɪnkɹis ɪz spid wɪðɪn ðə doʊm. tɛntəɾɪvli, hi tʃɹaɪd dʒʌmpɪŋ fɔɹwɝd wɪð ə θɔt, ən ɪt wɝkt. bʌt wən i tʃɹaɪd tə sɛn hɪmsɛlf aʊtsaɪd, nʌθɪŋ hæpənd.

The killer was here. Hopper and Perrin ran down the road, and Perrin found that he could increase his speed within the dome. Tentatively, he tried jumping forward with a thought, and it worked. But when he tried to send himself outside, nothing happened.

soʊ ðə doʊm wɑz ə bæɹiɝ. wɪðɪn ɪt, hi kəd muv fɹili, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt muv tə ə pleɪs aʊtsaɪɾ ɪt baɪ ɪmædʒənɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɛlswɛɹ. hi hæd tə pæs ðə doʊmz wɔl fɪzɪkəli ɪf i wɑntəɾ aʊt.

So the dome was a barrier. Within it, he could move freely, but he could not move to a place outside it by imagining himself elsewhere. He had to pass the dome's wall physically if he wanted out.

oʊk dænsɝ, baʊnləs ən spɑɹks wɝ əhɛd. ən sleɪɝ, tu. pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld - fɹæntɪk sɛndɪŋz flʌɾəd hɪm. dɑɹk wʊdz. sleɪɝ. hi sim soʊ tɔl tə ðə wʊlvz, ə dɑɹk mɑnstɝ wɪð ə feɪs tʃɪzəld əz ɪf fɹəm ɹɑk.

Oak Dancer, Boundless and Sparks were ahead. And Slayer, too. Perrin growled - frantic sendings flooded him. Dark woods. Slayer. He seemed so tall to the wolves, a dark monster with a face chiseled as if from rock.

blʌɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹæs. peɪn, æŋɡɝ, tɛɹɝ, kənfjuʒən. spɑɹks wɑz wundəd. ði ʌðɝ tu dʒʌmp bæk ən fɔɹθ, tɔntɪŋ ən dɪstʃɹæktɪŋ sleɪɝ waɪl spɑɹks kɹɔl təwɔɹd ðə bɔɹɾɝ ə ðə doʊm.

Blood on the grass. Pain, anger, terror, confusion. Sparks was wounded. The other two jumped back and forth, taunting and distracting Slayer while Sparks crawled toward the border of the dome.

kɛɹ, jʌŋ bʊl, hɑpɝ sɛnt. ðɪs mæn hʌns wɛl. hi muvz ɔlmoʊs laɪk ə wʊlf, ðoʊ hiz sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ.

Care, Young Bull, Hopper sent. This man hunts well. He moves almost like a wolf, though he is something wrong.

"aɪl dɪstʃɹæk hɪm. jə ɡɛt spɑɹks."

"I'll distract him. You get Sparks."

juv ɑɹmz. jə kæɹi. ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ tə ðə sɛndɪŋ ðən ðæt, ʌv kɔɹs: hɑpɝz eɪdʒ ən ɪkspɪɹiəns, pɛɹɪn stɪl ə pʌp.

You have arms. You carry. There was more to the sending than that, of course: Hopper's age and experience, Perrin still a pup.

pɛɹɪn ɡɹɪɾɪd ɪz tiθ, bʌt dɪdn ɑɹɡju. hɑpɝ wɑz mɔɹ ɪkspɪɹiəns ðən i wɑz. ðeɪ pɑɹɾəd, pɛɹɪn ɹitʃɪŋ aʊt fəɹ spɑɹks, faɪndɪŋ wɛɹ i wɑz - hɪɾən wɪðɪn ə pætʃ ə tʃɹiz - ən teɪkɪŋ hɪmsɛlf dɝɛkli ðɛɹ.

Perrin gritted his teeth, but didn't argue. Hopper was more experienced than he was. They parted, Perrin reaching out for Sparks, finding where he was - hidden within a patch of trees - and taking himself directly there.

ðə dɑɹk bɹaʊn wʊlf hæɾ ən æɹoʊ ɪn ɪz θaɪ, ən i wɑz wɪmpɝɪŋ sɔfli, tʃɹeɪlɪŋ blʌɾ əz i kɹɔld. pɛɹɪn nɛl kwɪkli ən pʊl ði æɹoʊ aʊt. ðə wʊlf kəntɪnjud tə wɪmpɝ, smɛlɪŋ fɹaɪɾənd. pɛɹɪn hɛl ði æɹoʊ ʌp. ɪt smɛld ivəl. dɪsɡʌstəd, hi tɔst ɪɾ əsaɪɾ ən pɪkt ʌp ðə wʊlf.

The dark brown wolf had an arrow in his thigh, and he was whimpering softly, trailing blood as he crawled. Perrin knelt quickly and pulled the arrow out. The wolf continued to whimper, smelling frightened. Perrin held the arrow up. It smelled evil. Disgusted, he tossed it aside and picked up the wolf.

sʌmθɪŋ kɹækəl nɪɹbaɪ, ən pɛɹɪn spʌn. baʊnləs lɛp bɪtwin tu tʃɹiz, smɛlɪŋ æŋkʃəs. ði ʌðɝ tu wʊlvz wɝ liɾɪŋ sleɪɝ əweɪ.

Something crackled nearby, and Perrin spun. Boundless leaped between two trees, smelling anxious. The other two wolves were leading Slayer away.

pɛɹɪn tɝn ən ɹæn təwɔɹd ðə doʊmz nɪɹəst ɛdʒ, kæɹiɪŋ spɑɹks. hi kʊdn lip dɝɛkli tə ði ɛdʒ ə ðə doʊm kəz i dɪdnt noʊ wɛɹ ɪt wɑz.

Perrin turned and ran toward the dome's nearest edge, carrying Sparks. He couldn't leap directly to the edge of the dome because he didn't know where it was.

hi bɝs fɹəm ðə tʃɹiz, hɑɹt θʌmpɪŋ. ðə wʊlf ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz sim tə ɡɹoʊ stʃɹɔŋɝ əz ðeɪ lɛf ði æɹoʊ bɪhaɪnd. pɛɹɪn ɹæn mɔɹ kwɪkli, juzɪŋ ə spid ðət fɛlt ɹɛkləs, muvɪŋ hʌnʒɹədz ə peɪsɪz wɪð blɝɪŋ spid. ðə doʊm wɔl əpɹoʊtʃt, ən i pʊl tə ə stɑp.

He burst from the trees, heart thumping. The wolf in his arms seemed to grow stronger as they left the arrow behind. Perrin ran more quicly, using a speed that felt reckless, moving hundreds of paces with blurring speed. The dome wall approached, and he pulled to a stop.

sleɪɝ wɑz sʌɾənli ðɛɹ, stændɪŋ bɪfɔɹ hɪm, baʊ dʒɹɔn. hi wɔɹ ə blæk kloʊk ðət bɪloʊɾ ɝaʊn hɪm; hi wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ smaɪlɪŋ, ən ɪz aɪz wɝ θʌndɝəs.

Slayer was suddenly there, standing before him, bow drawn. He wore a black cloak that billowed around him; he was no longer smiling, and his eyes were thunderous.

hi ɹilist. pɛɹɪn ʃɪftəɾ ən nɛvɝ sɔ wɛɹ ði æɹoʊ lændəd. hi əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə pleɪs wɛɹ hid fɝst ɛntɝd ðə doʊm; hi ʃʊɾə ɡɔn ðəɹ fɝst. hi hɝl hɪmsɛlf θɹu ðə vaɪəlɪt doʊm, kəlæpsɪŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd, sɛndɪŋ spɑɹks tʌmbəlɪŋ.

He released. Perrin shifted and never saw where the arrow landed. He appeared in the place where he'd first entered the dome; he should have gone there first. He hurled himself through the violet dome, collapsing on the other side, sending Sparks tumbling.

ðə wʊlf jɛlpt. pɛɹɪn hɪt hɑɹd.

The wolf yelped. Perrin hit hard.

jʌŋ bʊl! spɑɹks sɛn ən ɪmədʒ ə sleɪɝ, dɑɹk laɪk ə θʌndɝhɛd, stændɪŋ ɹaɪɾ ɪnsaɪd ðə bæɹiɝ wɪð baʊ dʒɹɔn.

Young Bull! Sparks sent an image of Slayer, dark like a thunderhead, standing right inside the barrier with bow drawn.

pɛɹɪn dɪdn lʊk. hi ʃɪftəd, sɛndɪŋ hɪmsɛlf tə ðə sloʊps ə dʒɹæɡən-maʊnt. wʌns ðɛɹ, hi lɛp tə hɪz fit, æŋkʃəs, hæmɝ əpɪɹɪŋ ɪn ɪz hænd. ɡɹups ə nɪɹbaɪ wʊlvz sɛnt ɡɹiɾɪŋ.

Perrin didn't look. He shifted, sending himself to the slopes of Dragon-mount. Once there, he leaped to his feet, anxious, hammer appearing in his hand. Groups of nearby wolves sent greeting.

pɛɹɪn ɪɡnɔɹɾ əm fəɹ ðə moʊmənt.

Perrin ignored them for the moment.

sleɪɝ dɪd nɑt fɑloʊ. æftɝ ə fju tɛns moʊməns, hɑpɝ əpɪɹd. "dɪd ði ʌðɝz ɡɛɾ əweɪ?"

Slayer did not follow. After a few tense moments, Hopper appeared. "Did the others get away?"

pɛɹɪn æskt.

Perrin asked.

ðeɪ ɑɹ fɹi, hi sɛnt. wɪspɝɝ ɪz dɛd. ðə sɛndɪŋ ʃoʊd ðə wʊlf -  fɹəm ðə vjupɔɪn ə ði ʌðɝz ɪn ðə pæk - biɪŋ kɪl moʊməns æftɝ ðə doʊm əpɪɹd. spɑɹks hæd teɪkən ən æɹoʊ əz i nʌzəld əɾ əɹ saɪɾ ɪn pænɪk.

They are free, he sent. Whisperer is dead. The sending showed the wolf -  from the viewpoint of the others in the pack - being killed moments after the dome appeared. Sparks had taken an arrow as he nuzzled at her side in panic.

pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld. hi nɪɹli dʒʌmpt əweɪ tə kənfɹʌn sleɪɝ əɡɛn, bʌɾ ə kɑʃən fɹəm hɑpɝ stɑp hɪm. tu sun! jə mʌs lɝn!

Perrin growled. He nearly jumped away to confront Slayer again, but a caution from Hopper stopped him. Too soon! You must learn!

"ɪts nɑɾ oʊnli hɪm," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪ nid tə lʊk ət ði ɛɹiə ɝaʊn maɪ kæmp ən ðəɾ ə ðə waɪtkloʊks. sʌmθɪŋ smɛlz ɹɔŋ ðəɹ ɪn ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld. aɪ nid tə si ɪf sʌmθɪŋ ɪz ɑd ðɛɹ."

"It's not only him," Perrin said. "I need to look at the area around my camp and that of the Whitecloaks. Something smells wrong there in the waking world. I need to see if something is odd there."

ɑd? hɑpɝ sɛn ði ɪmədʒ ə ðə doʊm.

Odd? Hopper sent the image of the dome.

"ɪɾ ɪz pɹɑbli ɹɪleɪɾɪd." ðə tu ɑɾətiz sim laɪkli tə bi mɔɹ ðən mɪɹ koʊɪnsɪɾəns.

"It is probably related." The two oddities seemed likely to be more than mere coincidence.

sɝtʃ ənʌðɝ taɪm. sleɪɝ ɪz tu stʃɹɔŋ fəɹ ju.

Search another time. Slayer is too strong for you.

pɛɹɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "aɪ hæv tə feɪs ɪm ɪvɛntʃəwəli, hɑpɝ."

Perrin took a deep breath. "I have to face him eventually, Hopper."

nɑt naʊ.

Not now.

"noʊ," pɛɹɪn əɡɹid. "nɑt naʊ. naʊ wi pɹæktəs." hi tɝn tə ðə wʊlf. "æz wɪl də ɛvɹi naɪɾ əntɪl aɪm ɹɛɾi."

"No," Perrin agreed. "Not now. Now we practice." He turned to the wolf. "As we will do every night until I am ready."

ɹoʊɾəl ɪɾɝɑldi ɹoʊld oʊvɝ ɪn ɪz kɑt, nɛk slɪk wɪð swɛt. hæd sɑldɑiə ɔlweɪz bɪn ðɪs hɑɾ ən mʌɡi? hi wɪʃt fəɹ hoʊm, ðə kul oʊʃən bɹizɪz ə bændɑɹ ɛbən.

Rodel Ituralde rolled over in his cot, neck slick with sweat. Had Saldaea always been this hot and muggy? He wished for home, the cool ocean breezes of Bandar Eban.

θɪŋz fɛlt ɹɔŋ. waɪ hædn ðə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn ətækt? ə hʌnʒɹəd pɑsəbɪləɾiz ɹæɾəld ɪn ɪz maɪnd. wɝ ðeɪ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ nu sidʒ ɛnʒənz?

Things felt wrong. Why hadn't the Shadowspawn attacked? A hundred possibilities rattled in his mind. Were they waiting for new siege engines?

wɝ ðeɪ skaʊɾɪŋ aʊt fɔɹəsts ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə bɪl ðɛm? əɹ wɝ ðɛɹ kɑm- mændɝz kɑntɛnt wɪð ə sidʒ? ði ɪntaɪɝ sɪɾi wɑz sɝaʊndəd, bʌt ðəɹ hæd tə bi ɪnʌf tʃɹɑləks aʊt ðəɹ tə oʊvɝwɛlm ɪt naʊ.

Were they scouting out forests in order to build them? Or were their com- manders content with a siege? The entire city was surrounded, but there had to be enough Trollocs out there to overwhelm it now.

ðeɪ hæd teɪkən tə biɾɪŋ dʒɹʌmz. ɔl aʊɝz. θʌmp, θʌmp, θʌmp. stɛɾi, laɪk ðə hɑɹtbiɾ ʌv ən ɪnɔɹməs ænəməl, ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɪtsɛlf, kɔɪlɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə sɪɾi.

They had taken to beating drums. All hours. Thump, thump, thump. Steady, like the heartbeat of an enormous animal, the Great Serpent itself, coiling around the city.

dɔn wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ʃaɪn aʊtsaɪd. hi hædn tɝn ɪn əntɪl wɛl æftɝ mɪdnaɪt. dɝəm - hu kəmændəd ðə mɔɹnɪŋ wɑtʃ - hæɾ ɔɹɾɝd ðəɾ ɪɾɝɑldi nɑt bi dɪstɝbd əntɪl nun. hɪz tɛnt wɑz ɪn ə ʃæɾoʊd ælkoʊv ə ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. hi hæd wɑntəd tə bi kloʊs tə ðə wɔl, ən hæd ɹəfjuzd ə bɛd.

Dawn was beginning to shine outside. He hadn't turned in until well after midnight. Durhem - who commanded the morning watch - had ordered that Ituralde not be disturbed until noon. His tent was in a shadowed alcove of the courtyard. He had wanted to be close to the wall, and had refused a bed.

ðət hæd bɪn fulɪʃ. ðoʊ ə kɑt hæd bɪn faɪn fəɹ ɪm ɪn pɹiviəs jɪɹz, hi wɑzn əz jʌŋ əz hid wʌns bɪn. təmɑɹoʊ, hid muv.

That had been foolish. Though a cot had been fine for him in previous years, he wasn't as young as he'd once been. Tomorrow, he'd move.

naʊ, hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf, slip.

Now, he told himself, sleep.

ɪt wɑzn ðəɾ izi. ði ækjəzeɪʃən ðəɾ i wɑz dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn lɛft ɪm ənsɛɾəld. ɪn ɑɹæd dumən, hid bɪn faɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪz kɪŋ, sʌmwʌn hid bɪlivd ɪn. naʊ hi wɑz faɪɾɪŋ ɪn ə fɔɹən læn fəɹ ə mæn hid mɛɾ oʊnli wʌns. ɔl kəz ʌv ə ɡʌt filɪŋ.

It wasn't that easy. The accusation that he was Dragonsworn left him unsettled. In Arad Doman, he'd been fighting for his king, someone he'd believed in. Now he was fighting in a foreign land for a man he'd met only once. All because of a gut feeling.

laɪt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz hɑt. swɛt ɹæn daʊn ɪz tʃiks, meɪkɪŋ ɪz nɛk ɪtʃ. ɪt ʃʊdn bi ðɪs hɑt soʊ ɝli ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. ɪt wɑznt nætʃɹəl. ðoʊz bɝnɪŋ dʒɹʌmz, stɪl paʊndɪŋ.

Light, but it was hot. Sweat ran down his cheeks, making his neck itch. It shouldn't be this hot so early in the morning. It wasn't natural. Those burning drums, still pounding.

hi saɪd, klaɪmɪŋ ɔf ɪz swɛt-dæmpən kɑt. hɪz lɛɡ ætʃt. ɪt hæd fəɹ deɪz naʊ.

He sighed, climbing off his sweat-dampened cot. His leg ached. It had for days now.

jəɹ ən oʊl mæn, ɹoʊɾəl, hi θɔt, stʃɹɪpɪŋ ɔf ɪz swɛɾi smɔlkloʊðz ən ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊt səm fɹɛʃli wɑʃt wʌnz. hi stʌft ɪz tʃɹaʊzɝz ɪndə ni-haɪ ɹaɪɾɪŋ buts. ə sɪmpəl waɪt ʃɝt wɪð blæk bʌɾənz wɛn ɑn nɛkst, ən ðən ɪz ɡɹeɪ koʊt, bʌtoʊnɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ ʌp tə ðə kɑlɝ.

You're an old man, Rodel, he thought, stripping off his sweaty smallclothes and getting out some freshly washed ones. He stuffed his trousers into knee-high riding boots. A simple white shirt with black buttons went on next, and then his gray coat, buttoning straight up to the collar.

hi wɑz stʃɹæpɪŋ ɑn ɪz sɔɹd wən i hɝd hɝid fʊtstɛps aʊtsaɪd, fɑloʊd baɪ wɪspɝz.

He was strapping on his sword when he heard hurried footsteps outside, followed by whispers.

ðət kɑnvɝseɪʃən ɡɹu hiɾəd, ən i stɛpt aʊtsaɪd dʒʌst əz sʌmwʌn sɛd, "lɔɹɾ ɪɾɝɑldi wɪl wɪʃ tə noʊ!"

That conversation grew heated, and he stepped outside just as someone said, "Lord Ituralde will wish to know!"

noʊ wʌt?" ɪɾɝɑldi æskt. ə mɛsənʒɝ bɔɪ wɑz ɑɹɡjuɪŋ wɪð ɪz ɡɑɹdz. ɔl θɹi tɝn təwɔɹɾ ɪm ʃipɪʃli.

Know what?" Ituralde asked. A messenger boy was arguing with his guards. All three turned toward him sheepishly.

"aɪm sɑɹi, maɪ lɔɹd," kənəl sɛd. "wi wɝ ɪnstʃɹʌktəd tə lɛt jə slip."

"I'm sorry, my Lord," Connel said. "We were instructed to let you sleep."

ə mæn u kən slip ɪn ðɪs hit mʌs bi hæf-lɪzɝd, kənəl," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd. "læd, wʌts ðə wɝd?"

A man who can sleep in this heat must be half-lizard, Connel," Ituralde said. "Lad, what's the word?"

kæptən joʊli ɪz ɑn ðə wɔl, sɝ," ðə juθ sɛd. ɪɾɝɑldi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə jʌŋ mæn - hid bɪn wɪð ɪm fɹəm nɪɹ ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ə ðɪs kæmpeɪn. "hi sɛd jə ʃəd kʌm."

Captain Yoeli is on the wall, sir," the youth said. Ituralde recognized the young man - he'd been with him from near the beginning of this campaign. "He said you should come."

ɪɾɝɑldi nɑɾəd. hi leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn kənəlz ɑɹm. "θæŋk jə fəɹ wɑtʃɪŋ mi, oʊl fɹɛnd, bʌt ðiz boʊnz ɑɹən soʊ fɹeɪl əz jə θɪŋk."

Ituralde nodded. He laid a hand on Connel's arm. "Thank you for watching me, old friend, but these bones aren't so frail as you think."

kənəl nɑɾəd, blʌʃɪŋ. ðə ɡɑɹd fɛl ɪndə pleɪs bɪhaɪn əz ɪɾɝɑldi kɹɔs ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. ðə sʌn hæd ɹɪzən. mɛni ʌv ɪz tʃɹups wɝ ʌp. tu mɛni. hi wɑzn ði oʊnli wʌn hævɪŋ dɪfəkəlti slipɪŋ.

Connel nodded, blushing. The guard fell into place behind as Ituralde crossed the courtyard. The sun had risen. Many of his troops were up. Too many. He wasn't the only one having difficulty sleeping.

ətɑp ðə wɔl, hi wɑz ɡɹiɾəd baɪ ə dɪshɑɹɾənɪŋ saɪt. ɑn ðə daɪɪŋ lænd, θaʊzən əpɑn θaʊzənz ə tʃɹɑləks kæmpt, bɝnɪŋ faɪɝz. ɪɾɝɑldi dɪdn laɪk tə θɪŋk əbaʊt wɛɹ ðə wʊd fəɹ ðoʊz faɪɝz keɪm fɹʌm. hoʊpfəli ɔl ə ðə nɪɹbaɪ hoʊmstɛɾɝz ən vɪlɪdʒɝz hæd hiɾəd ðə kɔl tə ɪvækjəeɪt.

Atop the wall, he was greeted by a disheartening sight. On the dying land, thousand upon thousands of Trollocs camped, burning fires. Ituralde didn't like to think about where the wood for those fires came from. Hopefully all of the nearby homesteaders and villagers had heeded the call to evacuate.

joʊli stʊd ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə kɹɛnəleɪɾəd stoʊn ə ðə wɔl, nɛks tə ə mæn ɪn ə blæk koʊt. dip bɑɾɝ wɑz sinjɝ əmʌŋ ði æʃəmən hum ælθɹ hæd ɡɪvən hɪm, wʌn ʌv oʊnli θɹi hu wɔɹ boʊθ ðə dʒɹæɡən ən ðə sɔɹd pɪnz ɑn ɪz kɑlɝ. ði ændɔɝən mæn hæɾ ə flæt feɪs ən blæk hɛɹ ðəɾ i wɔɹ lɔŋ. ɪɾɝɑldi hæd səmtaɪmz hɝd səm ə ðə blæk-koʊɾəd mɛn mʌmbəlɪŋ tə ðɛmsɛlvz, bʌt nɑt dip. hi sim fʊli ɪn kəntʃɹoʊl.

Yoeli stood gripping the crenelated stone of the wall, next to a man in a black coat. Deepe Bhadar was senior among the Asha'man whom al'Thor had given him, one of only three who wore both the Dragon and the sword pins on his collar. The Andoran man had a flat face and black hair that he wore long. Ituralde had sometimes heard some of the black-coated men mumbling to themselves, but not Deepe. He seemed fully in control.

joʊli kɛpt ɡlænsɪŋ ət ði æʃəmən; ɪɾɝɑldi dɪdn fil kʌmftəɹbəl. wɪð mɛn u kəd tʃænəl iðɝ. bʌt ðeɪ wɝ ən ɛksələn tul, ən ðeɪ hædn feɪl hɪm. hi pɹəfɝd tə lɛɾ ɪkspɪɹiəns, ɪnstɛɾ ə ɹumɝ, ɹul hɪm.

Yoeli kept glancing at the Asha'man; Ituralde didn't feel comfortable. with men who could channel either. But they were an excellent tool, and they hadn't failed him. He preferred to let experience, instead of rumor, rule him.

"lɔɹɾ ɪɾɝɑldi," dip sɛd. ði æʃəmən nɛvɝ səluɾəd ɪɾɝɑldi, dʒʌst ælθɹ.

"Lord Ituralde," Deepe said. The Asha'man never saluted Ituralde, just al'Thor.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?" ɪɾɝɑldi æskt, skænɪŋ ðə hɔɹdz ə tʃɹɑləks. ðeɪ dɪdn sim tə hæv tʃeɪnʒd sɪns hid bɛɾəd daʊn.

"What is it?" Ituralde asked, scanning the hordes of Trollocs. They didn't seem to have changed since he'd bedded down.

"jɔɹ mæn kleɪmz tə bi eɪbəl tɔɪw sʌmθɪŋ," joʊli sɛd. "aʊt ðɛɹ."

"Your man claims to be able toyW something," Yoeli said. "Out there."

"ðeɪ hæv tʃænlɝz, lɔɹɾ ɪɾɝɑldi," dip sɛd. "aɪ səspɛkt ət list sɪks, pɝhæps mɔɹ. mɛn, sɪns aɪ kən fil ðə paʊɝ ðəɹ wildɪŋ, duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ paʊɝfəl. ɪf aɪ skwɪn ət ðə fɑɹ kæmps, aɪ θɪŋk aɪ kən səmtaɪmz si wivz, bʌɾ ɪt meɪ bi maɪ ɪmædʒəneɪʃən."

"They have channelers, Lord Ituralde," Deepe said. "I suspect at least six, perhaps more. Men, since I can feel the Power they're wielding, doing something powerful. If I squint at the far camps, I think I can sometimes see weaves, but it may be my imagination."

ɪɾɝɑldi kɝst. "ðæts wʌt ðeɪv bɪn weɪɾɪŋ fɔɹ."

Ituralde cursed. "That's what they've been waiting for."

"wʌt?" joʊli æskt.

"What?" Yoeli asked.

"wɪð æʃəmən ə ðɛɹ oʊn - "

"With Asha'man of their own - "

"ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑɾ æʃəmən," dip sɛd fɝvənli.

"They are not Asha'man," Deepe said fervently.

"ɔl ɹaɪt, ðɛn. wɪð tʃænlɝz ə ðɛɹ oʊn, ðeɪ kən tɛɹ ðɪs wɔl daʊn izəli əz nɑkɪŋ oʊvɝ ə paɪl ə blɑks, joʊli. ðət si ʌv tʃɹɑləks wɪl sɝdʒ ɪn ən fɪl jəɹ stʃɹits."

"All right, then. With channelers of their own, they can tear this wall down easily as knocking over a pile of blocks, Yoeli. That sea of Trollocs will surge in and fill your streets."

"nɑt soʊ lɔŋ əz aɪ stænd," dip sɛd.

"Not so long as I stand," Deepe said.

"aɪ laɪk dɪtɝməneɪʃən ɪn ə soʊlʒɝ, dip," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd, "bʌt jə lʊk əz ɪɡzɔstəɾ əz aɪ fil."

"I like determination in a soldier, Deepe," Ituralde said, "but you look as exhausted as I feel."

dip ʃɑɾ ɪm ə ɡlɛɹ. hɪz aɪz wɝ ɹɛd fɹəm læk ə slip, ən i klɛntʃt ɪz tiθ, ðə mʌsəlz ɪn ɪz nɛk ən feɪs tɛns. hi mɛɾ ɪɾɝəl- di-ɛs aɪz, ðən tʊk ə lɔŋ, fɔɹs bɹɛθ.

Deepe shot him a glare. His eyes were red from lack of sleep, and he clenched his teeth, the muscles in his neck and face tense. He met Itural- de-s eyes, then took a long, forced breath.

"ju ɑɹ kɝɛkt," dip sɛd. "bʌt niðɝ ʌv əs kən də ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt ðæt." hi ɹeɪzd ɪz hænd, duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ðəɾ ɪɾɝɑldi kʊdn si. ə flæʃ ə ɹɛd laɪɾ əpɪɹɾ oʊvɝ ɪz hænd - ðə sɪɡnəl i juz tə dʒɹɔ ði ʌðɝz tə hɪm. "pɹipɛɹ jəɹ mɛn, dʒɛnɝəl, kæptən. ɪɾəl nɑt bi lɔŋ. ðeɪ kænɑt kəntɪnju tə hoʊl ðət kaɪndə paʊɝ wɪθaʊt . . .

"You are correct," Deepe said. "But neither of us can do anything about that." He raised his hand, doing something that Ituralde couldn't see. A flash of red light appeared over his hand - the signal he used to draw the others to him. "Prepare your men, General, Captain. It will not be long. They cannot continue to hold that kind of Power without . . .

kɑnsəkwɛnsəz."

consequences."

joʊli nɑɾəd, ðən hɝiɾ əweɪ. ɪɾɝɑldi tʊk dips ɑɹm, dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪz ətɛnʃən.

Yoeli nodded, then hurried away. Ituralde took Deepe's arm, drawing his attention.

"ju æʃəmən ɑɹ tu ɪmpɔɹɾənt ə ɹisɔɹs tə luz," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd. "ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛn əs hɪɹ tə hɛlp, nɑt tə daɪ. ɪf ðɪs sɪɾi fɔlz, aɪ wɑn jə tə teɪk ði ʌðɝz ən wʌtɛvɝ wundəd jə kən ən ɡɛɾ aʊt. dʒju ʌndɝstænd, soʊlʒɝ?"

"You Asha'man are too important a resource to lose," Ituralde said. "The Dragon sent us here to help, not to die. If this city falls, I want you to take the others and whatever wounded you can and get out. Do you understand, soldier?"

"mɛni ʌv maɪ mɛn wɪl nɑt laɪk ðɪs."

"Many of my men will not like this."

"bʌt jə noʊ ɪts fəɹ ðə bɛst," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd. "doʊn ju?"

"But you know it is for the best," Ituralde said. "Don't you?"

dip hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "jɛs. jə ɑɹ kɝɛkt, əz jə soʊ ɔfən ɑɹ. əl ɡɛɾ əm aʊt." hi spoʊk ɪn ə loʊɝ vɔɪs. "ðɪs ɪz ə hoʊpləs ɹɪzɪstəns, maɪ lɔɹd. wʌtɛvɝ ɪz hæpənɪŋ aʊt ðɛɹ, ɪɾəl bi dɛdli. ɪt ɡɔlz mi tə sədʒɛst ɪt . . . bʌt wʌt juv sɛɾ əbaʊt maɪ æʃəmən əplaɪz tə jəɹ soʊlʒɝz əz wɛl. lɛɾ əs fli." hi sɛd ðə wɝd "fli" wɪð bɪɾɝnəs.

Deepe hesitated. "Yes. You are correct, as you so often are. I will get them out." He spoke in a lower voice. "This is a hopeless resistance, my Lord. Whatever is happening out there, it will be deadly. It galls me to suggest it . . . but what you have said about my Asha'man applies to your soldiers as well. Let us flee." He said the word "flee" with bitterness.

"ðə sɑldəiənz wʊdn liv wɪð ʌs."

"The Saldaeans wouldn't leave with us."

"aɪ noʊ."

"I know."

ɪɾɝɑldi kənsɪɾɝd ɪt. faɪnəli, hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ɛvɹi deɪ wi dɪleɪ ʌp hɪɹ kips ðiz mɑnstɝz əweɪ fɹəm maɪ hoʊmlæn ə deɪ lɔŋɡɝ. noʊ, aɪ kænɑt ɡoʊ, dip. ðɪs ɪz stɪl ðə bɛs pleɪs tə faɪt. juv sin haʊ fɔɹɾəfaɪd ðoʊz bɪldɪŋz ɑɹ; wi kən hoʊld ɪnsaɪd fəɹ ə fju deɪz, splɪɾ əpɑɹt, kip ði ɑɹmi bɪzi."

Ituralde considered it. Finally, he shook his head. "Every day we delay up here keeps these monsters away from my homeland a day longer. No, I cannot go, Deepe. This is still the best place to fight. You've seen how fortified those buildings are; we can hold inside for a few days, split apart, keep the army busy."

"ðɛn maɪ æʃəmən kəd steɪ ən hɛlp."

"Then my Asha'man could stay and help."

"ju hæv jəɹ ɔɹɾɝz, sʌn. jə fɑloʊ ðɛm. ʌndɝstænd?"

"You have your orders, son. You follow them. Understand?"

dip snæpt ɪz dʒɔ ʃʌt, ðən nɑɾəd kɝtli. "aɪ wɪl teɪk - "

Deep snapped his jaw shut, then nodded curtly. "I will take - "

ɪɾɝɑldi dɪdn hɪɹ ðə ɹɛst. ən ɪksploʊʒən hɪt.

Ituralde didn't hear the rest. An explosion hit.

hi dɪdn fil ɪɾ ɝaɪv. hi wɑz stændɪŋ wɪð dip wʌn moʊmənt, ðən ɹaʊn hɪmsɛlf ɑn ðə flɔɹ ə ðə wɔl wɔk, ðə wɝl stʃɹeɪnʒli saɪlən ɝaʊn hɪm. hɪz hɛd skɹimd wɪð peɪn ən i kɔft, ɹeɪzɪŋ ə tʃɹɛm- bəlɪŋ hæn tə faɪn ɪz feɪs bliɾɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ɪz ɹaɪɾ aɪ;

He didn't feel it arrive. He was standing with Deepe one moment, then round himself on the floor of the wall walk, the world strangely silent around him. His head screamed with pain and he coughed, raising a trem- bling hand to find his face bleeding. There was something in his right eye;

ɪt sɪɹd wɪð peɪn wən i blɪŋkt. waɪ wɑz ɛvɹiθɪŋ soʊ kwaɪət?

it seared with pain when he blinked. Why was everything so quiet?

hi ɹoʊld oʊvɝ, kɑfɪŋ əɡɛn, ɹaɪɾ aɪ skwizd ʃʌt, ði ʌðɝ wɔɾɝɪŋ. ðə wɔl ɛndəɾ ə fju ɪntʃəz əweɪ fɹəm hɪm.

He rolled over, coughing again, right eye squeezed shut, the other watering. The wall ended a few inches away from him.

hi ɡæspt. ən ɪnɔɹməs tʃʌŋk ə ðə nɔɹðɝn wɔl wɑz sɪmpli ɡɔn.

He gasped. An enormous chunk of the northern wall was simply gone.

hi ɡɹoʊnd, lʊkɪŋ bæk ɪn ði ʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən. dip hæd bɪn stændɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ɪm . . .

He groaned, looking back in the other direction. Deepe had been standing beside him . . .

hi faʊn ði æʃəmən laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə wɔl wɔk nɪɹbaɪ, hɛd bliɾɪŋ. hɪz ɹaɪt lɛɡ ɛndəɾ ɪn ə ɹæɡəd ɹɪp ə flɛʃ ən bɹoʊkən boʊn əbʌv wɛɹ ðə ni ʃəɾ əv bɪn. ɪɾɝɑldi kɝst ən stʌmbəl fɔɹwɝd, dʒɹɔɹp-pɪŋ tə hɪz niz bɪsaɪd ðə mæn. blʌd wɑz pulɪŋ bɪniθ dip bʌɾ i wɑz stɪl twɪtʃɪŋ. əlaɪv.

He found the Ashaman lying on the wall walk nearby, head bleeding. His right leg ended in a ragged rip of flesh and broken bone above where the knee should have been. Ituralde cursed and stumbled forward, drorp-ping to his knees beside the man. Blood was pooling beneath Deepe but he was still twitching. Alive.

aɪ nid tə saʊn ði əlɑɹm . . .

I need to sound the alarm . . .

əlɑɹm? ðəɾ ɪksploʊʒən wʊɾə bɪn əlɑɹm ɪnʌf. ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔl, bɪldɪŋz wɝ dɪmɑlɪʃt, kɹʌʃt baɪ stoʊnz flaɪɪŋ ɪn ə spɹeɪ əweɪ fɹəm ðə hoʊl. aʊtsaɪd, tʃɹɑləks wɝ ləpɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, kæɹiɪŋ ɹæfs tə kɹɔs ðə moʊt.

Alarm? That explosion would have been alarm enough. Inside the wall, buildings were demolished, crushed by stones flying in a spray away from the hole. Outside, Trollocs were loping forward, carrying rafts to cross the moat.

ɪɾɝɑldi pʊl ði æʃəmənz bɛlt ɔf ən juzd ɪt tə baɪn ɪz θaɪ. ɪt wɑz ɔl i kəd θɪŋk tə du.

Ituralde pulled the Asha'man's belt off and used it to bind his thigh. It was all he could think to do.

hɪz hɛd wɑz stɪl θɹɑbɪŋ fɹəm ði ɪksploʊʒən.

His head was still throbbing from the explosion.

ðə sɪɾi ɪz lɔst. . . laɪt! ɪts lɔst, dʒʌs laɪk ðæt.

The city is lost. . . Light! It's lost, just like that.

hænz wɝ hɛlpɪŋ ɪm ʌp. deɪzədli hi ɡlænst əbaʊt. kənəl; hid sɝvaɪv ðə blæst, ðoʊ hɪz koʊt wɑz tɔɹn tə ʃɹɛdz. hi pʊld ɪɾɝɑldi əweɪ waɪl ə pɛɹ ə soʊlʒɝz tʊk dip.

Hands were helping him up. Dazedly he glanced about. Connel; he'd survived the blast, though his coat was torn to shreds. He pulled Ituralde away while a pair of soldiers took Deepe.

ðə nɛks mɪnəts wɝ ə blɝ. ɪɾɝɑldi stʌmbəl daʊn ðə stɛɹz fɹəm ðə wɔl, nɪɹli pɪtʃɪŋ hɛdfɝs fɪftin fiɾ ɑntu ðə kɑbəlz. oʊnli kɑn-nɛlz hænz kɛpt ɪm fɹəm fɔlɪŋ. ən ðən ... ə tɛnt?

The next minutes were a blur. Ituralde stumbled down the stairs from the wall, nearly pitching headfirst fifteen feet onto the cobbles. Only Con-nel's hands kept him from falling. And then ... a tent?

ə lɑɹdʒ oʊpən-saɪɾəd tɛnt? ɪɾɝɑldi blɪŋkt. ə bæɾəlfild ʃəd nɑt bi soʊ kwaɪət.

A large open-sided tent? Ituralde blinked. A battlefield should not be so quiet.

aɪsi koʊlnəs wɑʃt oʊvɝ hɪm. hi skɹimd. saʊnz əsɔltɪɾ ɪz ɪɹz ən maɪnd. skɹimz, ɹɑk bɹeɪkɪŋ, tʃɹʌmpəts saʊndɪŋ, dʒɹʌmz θɹɑbɪŋ. mɛn daɪɪŋ. ɪɾ ɔl hɪɾ ɪm ət wʌns, əz ɪf plʌɡz hæd bɪn jæŋk fɹəm ɪz ɪɹz.

Icy coldness washed over him. He screamed. Sounds assaulted his ears and mind. Screams, rock breaking, trumpets sounding, drums throbbing. Men dying. It all hit him at once, as if plugs had been yanked from his ears.

hi ʃʊk hɪmsɛlf, ɡæspɪŋ. hi wɑz ɪn ðə sɪk tɛnt. ænteɪl - ðə kwaɪət, θɪn-hɛɹɾ æʃəmən -  stʊɾ əbʌv hɪm. laɪt, bʌɾ ɪɾɝɑldi fɛlt ɪɡzɔstəd! tu lɪɾəl slip mɪkst wɪð ðə stʃɹeɪn ə biɪŋ hild. əz ðə saʊnz ə bæɾəl kənsum hɪm, hi faʊn ɪz aɪlɪdz tʃɹɛtʃɝəsli hɛvi.

He shook himself, gasping. He was in the sick tent. Antail - the quiet, thin-haired Ashaman -  stood above him. Light, but Ituralde felt exhausted! Too little sleep mixed with the strain of being Healed. As the sounds of battle consumed him, he found his eyelids treacherously heavy.

"lɔɹɾ ɪɾɝɑldi," ænteɪl sɛd, "aɪ hæv ə wiv ðət wɪl nɑt meɪk jə wɛl, bʌɾ ɪɾəl meɪk jə θɪŋk jə ɑɹ wɛl. ɪt kəd bi hɑɹmfəl tə ju. dʒju wɑn mi tə pɹəsid?"

"Lord Ituralde," Antail said, "I have a weave that will not make you well, but it will make you think you are well. It could be harmful to you. Do you want me to proceed?"

"aɪ . . ." ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd. ðə wɝd keɪm aʊɾ əz ə mʌmbəl. "ɪt . . ."

"I . . ." Ituralde said. The word came out as a mumble. "It . . ."

"blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz," ænteɪl mʌɾɝd. hi ɹitʃt fɔɹwɝd. ənʌðɝ weɪv ə paʊɝ wɑʃt θɹu ɪɾɝɑldi. ɪt wɑz laɪk ə bɹum swipɪŋ θɹu hɪm, pʊʃɪŋ əweɪ ɔl ə ðə fətiɡ ən kənfjuʒən, ɹɪstɔɹɪŋ ɪz sɛnsɪz ən meɪkɪŋ ɪm fil əz ɪf hid hæɾ ə pɝfək naɪts ɹɛst. hɪz ɹaɪɾ aɪ dɪdn hɝɾ ɛnimɔɹ.

"Blood and bloody ashes," Antail muttered. He reached forward. Another wave of Power washed through Ituralde. It was like a broom sweeping through him, pushing away all of the fatigue and confusion, restoring his senses and making him feel as if he'd had a perfect night's rest. His right eye didn't hurt anymore.

ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ lɪŋɡɝɪŋ, dip daʊn, ən ɪɡzɔstʃən ɪn ɪz boʊnz.

There was something lingering, deep down, an exhaustion in his bones.

hi kəɾ ɪɡnɔɹ ðæt. hi sæɾ ʌp, bɹiðd ɪn ən aʊt, ðən lʊk tə æn- teɪl. "naʊθəɾ ɪz ə jusfəl wiv, sʌn. jə ʃʊɾə toʊl mi jə kəd də ðɪs!"

He could ignore that. He sat up, breathed in and out, then looked to An- tail. "Nowthat is a useful weave, son. You should have told me you could do this!"

"ɪts deɪnʒɝəs," ænteɪl ɹɪpiɾɪd. "mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ðən ðə wɪmən ɛs vɝʒən aɪm toʊld. ɪn səm weɪz mɔɹ ɪfɛktɪv. jəɹ tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ əlɝtnəs naʊ fəɹ mɔɹ pɹoʊfaʊn ɪɡzɔstʃən leɪɾɝ ɑn."

"It's dangerous," Antail repeated. "More dangerous than the women s version I'm told. In some ways more effective. You're trading alertness now for more profound exhaustion later on."

"leɪɾɝ ɑn, wi woʊn bi ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə sɪɾi ðəɾ ɪz fɔlɪŋ tə ðə tʃɹoʊl-lɑks. laɪt wɪlɪŋ, ət list. dip?"

"Later on, we won't be in the middle of a city that is falling to the Trol-locs. Light willing, at least. Deepe?"

"aɪ sɔ tə hɪm fɝst," ænteɪl sɛd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ tə ði æʃəmən laɪɪŋ ɑn ə nɪɹbaɪ kɑt, hɪz kloʊðɪŋ sɪŋʒd ən ɪz feɪs blʌɾid. hɪz ɹaɪt lɛɡ ɛndəɾ ɪn ə hil stʌmp, ən i əpɪɹd tə bi bɹiðɪŋ, ðoʊ ʌnkɑnʃəs.

"I saw to him first," Antail said, gesturing to the Asha'man lying on a nearby cot, his clothing singed and his face bloodied. His right leg ended in a healed stump, and he appeared to be breathing, though unconscious.

"kənəl!" ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd.

"Connel!" Ituralde said.

"maɪ lɔɹd," ðə soʊlʒɝ sɛd, stɛpɪŋ ʌp. hid faʊn ə skwɑɾ ə soʊlʒɝz tə ækt əz ə pɝsənəl ɡɑɹd.

"My Lord," the soldier said, stepping up. He'd found a squad of soldiers to act as a personal guard.

"lɛts ɪnvɛstəɡeɪt ðɪs mɛs," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd. hi ɹæn aʊɾ ə ðə sɪk tɛnt, təwɔɹd kɝdɑmɔɹə pæləs.

"Let's investigate this mess," Ituralde said. He ran out of the sick tent, toward Cordamora Palace.

ðə sɪɾi wɑz ɪn keɪɑs, ɡɹups ə sɑldəiənz ən dəmɑni ɹʌʃɪŋ ðɪs weɪ ən ðæt. kənəl, ʃoʊɪŋ fɔɹsaɪt, sɛn ə mɛsənʒɝ tə faɪn joʊli.

The city was in chaos, groups of Saldaeans and Domani rushing this way and that. Connel, showing foresight, sent a messenger to find Yoeli.

ðə pæləs stʊd nɪɹbaɪ, dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ðə fɹʌnt ɡeɪt. ɪts wɔl hæd bɪn dæmədʒd ɪn ðə blæst, bʌt ðə bɪldɪŋ stɪl lʊk heɪl. ɪɾɝɑldi hæd bɪn juzɪŋ ɪɾ əz ə kəmæn poʊst. mɛn wəɾ ɪkspɛk tə faɪn ɪm hɪɹ. ðeɪ ɹæn ɪnsaɪd, kənəl kæɹiɪŋ ɪɾɝɑldiz sɔɹd - ðə bɛl hæd bɪn kʌt fɹi ət səm pɔɪnt.

The palace stood nearby, just before the front gate. Its wall had been damaged in the blast, but the building still looked hale. Ituralde had been using it as a command post. Men would expect to find him here. They ran inside, Connel carrying Ituralde's sword - the belt had been cut free at some point.

ðeɪ klaɪm tə ðə θɝd flɔɹ, ðən ɹæn aʊɾ ɑntu ə bælkəni ðət sɝveɪd ði ɛɹiə bɹoʊkən baɪ ðə blæst.

They climbed to the third floor, then ran out onto a balcony that surveyed the area broken by the blast.

əz hiɾ ɝɪdʒənəli fɪɹd, ðə sɪɾi wɑz lɔst. ðə swɑθ ə bɹoʊkən wɔl wɑz biɪŋ dɪfɛndəd baɪ ə heɪstəli əsɛmbəl dʒʌmbəl ə dɪfɛndɝz. ə maʊntɪŋ taɪɾ ə tʃɹɑləks wɝ θɹoʊɪŋ daʊn ɹæfs ɑn ðə moʊt, səm bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə sɝdʒ fɔɹwɝd, fɑloʊd baɪ feɪdz. mɛn ɹæn θɹu ðə stʃɹits, dɪsɔɹiɛntɪd.

As he'd originally feared, the city was lost. The swath of broken wall was being defended by a hastily assembled jumble of defenders. A mounting tide of Trollocs were throwing down rafts on the moat, some beginning to surge forward, followed by Fades. Men ran through the streets, disoriented.

ɪf hid hæd mɔɹ taɪm tə pɹipɛɹ, hi kəɾ əv hɛld, əz hid toʊl dip. nɑt naʊ. laɪt, bʌt ðɪs dɪfɛns əz bɪn wʌn dɪzæstɝ æftɝ ənʌðɝ.

If he'd had more time to prepare, he could have held, as he'd told Deepe. Not now. Light, but this defense has been one disaster after another.

ɡæðɝ ði æʃəmən," ɪɾɝɑldi ɔɹɾɝd. "æn ɛni ʌv maɪ ɔfəsɝz jə kən faɪnd. wɪl ɔɹɡənaɪz ðə mɛn ɪndə ə ɹitʃɹit θɹu ɡeɪtweɪz."

Gather the Asha'man," Ituralde ordered. "And any of my officers you can find. We will organize the men into a retreat through gateways."

jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd," kənəl sɛd.

Yes, my Lord," Connel said.

"ɪɾɝɑldi, noʊ!" joʊli bɝst aʊɾ ɑntu ðə bælkəni, junəfɔɹm dɝɾid ən ɹɪpt.

"Ituralde, no!" Yoeli burst out onto the balcony, uniform dirtied and ripped.

"ju sɝvaɪvd," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd, ɹɪlivd. "ɛksələnt. mæn, jəɹ sɪɾi ɪz lɔst. ɪm sɑɹi. bɹɪŋ jəɹ mɛn wɪð əs ən wi kən - "

"You survived," Ituralde said, relieved. "Excellent. Man, your city is lost. I'm sorry. Bring your men with us and we can - "

"lʊk!" joʊli sɛd, pʊlɪŋ ɪɾɝɑldi tə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə bælkəni, pɔɪntɪŋ tə ði ist. ə θɪk kɑləm ə smoʊk ɹoʊz ɪn ðə dɪstəns. ə vɪlədʒ ðə tʃɹɑləks hæd bɝnd?

"Look!" Yoeli said, pulling Ituralde to the side of the balcony, pointing to the east. A thick column of smoke rose in the distance. A village the Trollocs had burned?

"ðə wɑtʃfaɪɝ," joʊli kəntɪnjud. "maɪ sɪstɝ əz sin eɪd kʌmɪŋ! wi mʌst stæn əntɪl ðeɪ ɝaɪv."

"The watchfire," Yoeli continued. "My sister has seen aid coming! We must stand until they arrive."

ɪɾɝɑldi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "joʊli," hi sɛd sɔfli, "ɪf ə fɔɹs əz kʌm, ɪt kæn bi lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə stɑp ðɪs hɔɹɾ ə tʃɹɑləks. ən ðæts əsumɪŋ ɪts nɑɾ ə ɹuz. ðə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn əv pɹuvən klɛvɝ ɪn ðə pæst."

Ituralde hesitated. "Yoeli," he said softly, "if a force has come, it can't be large enough to stop this horde of Trollocs. And that's assuming it's not a ruse. The Shadowspawn have proven clever in the past."

"ɡɪv əs ə fju aʊɝz," joʊli sɛd. "hoʊl ðə sɪɾi wɪð mi ən sɛn skaʊts θɹu ðoʊz ɡeɪtweɪz ə jʊɹz tə si ɪf ə fɔɹs ɹɪli ɪz kʌmɪŋ."

"Give us a few hours," Yoeli said. "Hold the city with me and send scouts through those gateways of yours to see if a force really is coming."

"ə fju aʊɝz?" ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd. "wɪð ə hoʊl ɪn jəɹ wɔl? wɝ oʊvɝwɛlmd, joʊli."

"A few hours?" Ituralde said. "With a hole in your wall? We're overwhelmed, Yoeli."

"pliz," joʊli plɛd. "ɑɹ jə nɑt wʌn ə ðoʊz ðeɪ neɪm ɡɹeɪt kæptən? ʃoʊ mi wʌt ðət taɪɾəl minz, lɔɹd ɹoʊɾəl ɪɾɝɑldi."

"Please," Yoeli pled. "Are you not one of those they name Great Captain? Show me what that title means, Lord Rodel Ituralde."

ɪɾɝɑldi tɝnd, bæk ət ðə bɹoʊkən wɔl. bɪhaɪn hɪm, ɪn ðə pæləsəz tɑp ɹum, hi kəd hɪɹ ɪz ɔfəsɝz ɡæðɝɪŋ. ðə laɪn ət ðə wɔl wɑz fɹæɡməntɪŋ. ɪt wʊdn bi lɔŋ naʊ.

Ituralde turned, back at the broken wall. Behind him, in the palace's top room, he could hear his officers gathering. The line at the wall was fragmenting. It wouldn't be long now.

ʃoʊ mi wʌt ðət minz.

Show me what that means.

pɝhæps . . .

Perhaps . . .

"taɪməθ, ɑɹ jə hɪɹ?" ɪɾɝɑldi bɛloʊd.

"Tymoth, are you here?" Ituralde bellowed.

ə ɹɛd-hɛɹd mæn ɪn ə blæk koʊt stɛpt ɑntu ðə bælkəni. hid bi ɪn kəmæn ə ði æʃəmən naʊ ðət dip hæd fɔlən. "hɪɹ, lɔɹɾ ɪɾɝɑldi."

A red-haired man in a black coat stepped onto the balcony. He'd be in command of the Asha'man now that Deepe had fallen. "Here, Lord Ituralde."

"ɡæðɝ jəɹ mɛn," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛɾ ɝdʒənli. "teɪk kəmæn ə ðət ɡæp ən əv ðə soʊlʒɝz ðəɹ ɹitʃɹit. aɪ wɑn ði æʃəmən tə hoʊl ðə bɹitʃ. aɪ niɾ ə hæf-aʊɝ. aɪ wɑn ɔl ə jəɹ ɛnɝdʒi -  ɛvɹiθɪŋ juv ɡɑt - tə hɪt ðoʊz tʃɹɑləks. jə hɪɹ mi? ɛvɹiθɪŋ juv ɡɑt. ɪf jə kən tʃænəl ɪnʌf tə laɪɾ ə kændəl wən ðɪs ɪz dʌn, əl əv jəɹ haɪdz."

"Gather your men," Ituralde said urgently. "Take command of that gap and have the soldiers there retreat. I want the Asha'man to hold the breach. I need a half-hour. I want all of your energy -  everything you've got - to hit those Trollocs. You hear me? Everything you've got. If you can channel enough to light a candle when this is done, I'll have your hides."

"sɝ," ði æʃəmən sɛd. "aʊɝ ɹitʃɹit?"

"Sir," the Asha'man said. "Our retreat?"

"liv ænteɪl ɪn ðə hilɪŋ tɛnt," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd. "hi kən meɪk ə lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf ɡeɪtweɪ fəɹ ði æʃəmən tə ɹʌn. bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls, hoʊl ðət bɹitʃ!"

"Leave Antail in the Healing tent," Ituralde said. "He can make a large enough gateway for the Asha'man to run. But everyone else, hold that breach!"

taɪməθ dæʃt əweɪ. "joʊli," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd, "jɔɹ dʒɑb ɪz tə ɡæðɝ jəɹ fɔɹsɪz ən stɑp əm fɹəm ɹʌnɪŋ θɹu ðə sɪɾi laɪk . . ." hi pɔzd. hid bɪn əbaʊt tə seɪ, "laɪk ɪts tɑɹmən blʌɾi ɡdən." bɝn mi. ". . . laɪk ðəɹ ɪz noʊbɑdi ɪn kəmænd. ɪf wəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə hoʊld, wɪl nid tə bi ɔɹɡənaɪzd ən dɪsəplənd. aɪ nid fɔɹ kævəlɹi kʌmpəniz fɔɹmd ʌp ɪn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹɾ ɪn tɛn mɪnəts.

Tymoth dashed away. "Yoeli," Ituralde said, "your job is to gather your forces and stop them from running through the city like . . ." He paused. He'd been about to say, "like it's Tarmon bloody Gai'don." Burn me. ". . . like there is nobody in command. If we are going to hold, we will need to be organized and disciplined. I need four cavalry companies formed up in the courtyard in ten minutes.

ɡɪv ði ɔɹɾɝz."

Give the orders."

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd," joʊli sɛd, snæpɪŋ tə ɪt.

"Yes, my Lord," Yoeli said, snapping to it.

"oʊ," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd, tɝnɪŋ. "aɪm gɑnə niɾ ə kʌpəl ə kɑɹtloʊdz əɹ faɪɝwʊd, əz mɛni bæɹəlz ʌv ɔɪl əz jə kən kʌm ʌp wɪð, ən ɔl ə ðə wundəɾ ɪn iðɝ ɑɹmi hu kən stɪl ɹʌn bʌɾ u hæv feɪs əɹ ɑɹm wunz. ɔlsoʊ, ɡɛt mi ɛniwʌn ɪn ðə sɪɾi huz ɛvɝ hɛld ə baʊ. ɡoʊ!"

"Oh," Ituralde said, turning. "I'm going to need a couple of cartloads or firewood, as many barrels of oil as you can come up with, and all of the wounded in either army who can still run but who have face or arm wounds. Also, get me anyone in the city who's ever held a bow. Go!"

nɪɹli ən aʊɝ leɪɾɝ, ɪɾɝɑldi stʊd, hænz klæsp bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk, weɪt-ɪŋ. hid muvd ɪn fɹəm ðə bælkəni tə lʊk aʊɾ ə wɪndoʊ, əz tə nɑɾ ɛks-poʊz hɪmsɛlf. bʌɾ i stɪl hæɾ ə ɡʊd vju ʌv ðə faɪɾɪŋ.

Nearly an hour later, Ituralde stood, hands clasped behind his back, wait-ing. He'd moved in from the balcony to look out a window, as to not ex-pose himself. But he still had a good view of the fighting.

aʊtsaɪd ðə pæləs, ði æʃəmən laɪn wɑz faɪnəli wikənɪŋ. ðeɪd ɡɪvən ɪm ðə bɛɾɝ pɑɹɾ ʌv ən aʊɝ, blæstɪŋ bæk weɪv æftɝ weɪv ə tʃɹɑləks ɪn ən ɑsəm dɪspleɪ ʌv paʊɝ. blɛsədli, ði ɛnəmi tʃænlɝz hæd nɑɾ əpɪɹd. æftɝ ðət ʃoʊ ʌv paʊɝ, hoʊpfəli ðeɪ wɝ dʒɹeɪn ən ɪɡzɔstəd.

Outside the palace, the Asha'man line was finally weakening. They'd given him the better part of an hour, blasting back wave after wave of Trollocs in an awesome display of Power. Blessedly, the enemy channelers had not appeared. After that show of power, hopefully they were drained and exhausted.

ɪt fɛlt laɪk dʌsk, wɪð ðoʊz əpɹɛsɪv klaʊdz oʊvɝhɛɾ ən ðə mæsəz ə fɪɡjɝz dɑɹkənɪŋ ðə hɪlsaɪdz bɪɑn ðə sɪɾi. ðə tʃɹɑləks, fɔɹtʃənətli, dɪdn bɹɪŋ læɾɝz əɹ sidʒ taʊɝz. oʊnli weɪv æftɝ weɪv ət ðət bɹitʃ, wɪpt ɪndə ətæk baɪ ðə mɹdʒɹɑl.

It felt like dusk, with those oppressive clouds overhead and the masses of figures darkening the hillsides beyond the city. The Trollocs, fortunately, didn't bring ladders or siege towers. Only wave after wave at that breach, whipped into attack by the Myrddraal.

ɔlɹɛɾi, səm ə ðə blæk-koʊɾəd mɛn wɝ lɪmpɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə bɹitʃ, lʊkɪŋ ɪɡzɔstəd.

Already, some of the black-coated men were limping away from the breach, looking exhausted.

ðə læs fju θɹu ə faɪnəl blæst ə faɪɝ ən ɪɹʌptɪŋ ɝθ, ðən fɑloʊd ðɛɹ kəmpænjənz. ðeɪ lɛf ðə ɡæp kəmplitli oʊpən ən ʌndɪfɛndəd, əz ɔɹɾɝd.

The last few threw a final blast of Fire and erupting Earth, then followed their companions. They left the gap completely open and undefended, as ordered.

kʌm ɑn, ɪɾɝɑldi θɔɾ əz ðə smoʊk klɪɹd.

Come on, Ituralde thought as the smoke cleared.

ðə tʃɹɑləks pɪɹd θɹu ðə smoʊk, klaɪmɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə kɑɹkəsɪz ə ðoʊz ði æʃəmən hæd kɪld. ðə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn loʊpt ɑn hʊvz əɹ θɪk pɔz. səm snɪf ði ɛɹ.

The Trollocs peered through the smoke, climbing over the carcasses of those the Asha'man had killed. The Shadowspawn loped on hooves or thick paws. Some sniffed the air.

ðə stʃɹits ɪnsaɪd ðə ɡæp wɝ fɪld wɪð kɛɹfəli pleɪs mɛn u wɝ blʌɾid ən wundəd. ðeɪ bɪɡæn tə skɹim əz ðə tʃɹɑləks ɛntɝd, ɹʌnɪŋ əz kəmændəd. laɪkli nʌn ə ðɛɹ fɪɹ wɑz feɪnd. ðə sin lʊk mɔɹ tɛɹəbəl naʊ ðət mɛni ʌv ðə nɪɹbaɪ bɪldɪŋz wɝ smoʊldɝɪŋ, əz ɪf fɹəm ðə blæst, ɹufs ɑn faɪɝ, smoʊk pɔɹɪŋ fɹəm wɪndoʊz. ðə tʃɹɑləks wʊdnt noʊ ðət ðə sleɪt ɹufs hæd bɪn dɪzaɪnd nɑt tə bɝn, ən lɔz kɛp bɪldɪŋz fɹəm kənteɪnɪŋ tu mʌtʃ wʊd.

The streets inside the gap were filled with carefully placed men who were bloodied and wounded. They began to scream as the Trollocs entered, running as commanded. Likely none of their fear was feigned. The scene looked more terrible now that many of the nearby buildings were smoldering, as if from the blast, roofs on fire, smoke pouring from windows. The Trollocs wouldn't know that the slate roofs had been designed not to burn, and laws kept buildings from containing too much wood.

ɪɾɝɑldi hɛld ɪz bɹɛθ. ðə tʃɹɑləks bɹoʊk, ɹʌnɪŋ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi, haʊlɪŋ ən ɹɔɹɪŋ, ɡɹups bɹeɪkɪŋ əpɑɹɾ əz ðeɪ sɔ ði ɑpɝtunəɾi tə pɪlɪdʒ ən slɔɾɝ.

Ituralde held his breath. The Trollocs broke, running into the city, howling and roaring, groups breaking apart as they saw the opportunity to pillage and slaughter.

ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn ɪɾɝɑldi slæmd oʊpən, ən joʊli heɪsən ɪn. "ðə læst ɹæŋks ɑɹ pleɪst. ɪz ɪt wɝkɪŋ?"

The door behind Ituralde slammed open, and Yoeli hastened in. "The last ranks are placed. Is it working?"

ɪɾɝɑldi dɪdn ænsɝ; ðə pɹuf wɑz bɪloʊ. ðə tʃɹɑləks əsum ðɛɹ bæɾəl wʌn - ðə blæstɪŋ paʊɝ ə ði æʃəmən hæd ði ɛɹ ʌv wʌn faɪnəl stænd, ən ðə sɪɾi əpɪɹd tə bi ɪn keɪɑs. ðə tʃɹɑləks ɔl ɹæn daʊn ðə stʃɹits wɪð ɑbviəs ɡli. ivən ðə mɹdʒɹɑl u ɛntɝɾ əpɪɹɾ əɾ iz.

Ituralde didn't answer; the proof was below. The Trollocs assumed their battle won - the blasting Power of the Asha'man had the air of one final stand, and the city appeared to be in chaos. The Trollocs all ran down the streets with obvious glee. Even the Myrddraal who entered appeared at ease.

ðə tʃɹɑləks əvɔɪɾəd ðə bɝnɪŋ bɪldɪŋz ən ðə pæləs, wɪtʃ wɑz wɔld. ðeɪ muv dipɝ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi, pɝsuɪŋ ðə fliɪŋ soʊlʒɝz daʊn ə waɪɾ ævənu ɑn ði istɝn saɪɾ ə ðə sɪɾi.

The Trollocs avoided the burning buildings and the palace, which was walled. They moved deeper into the city, pursuing the fleeing soldiers down a wide avenue on the eastern side of the city.

kɛɹfəli paɪld ɹʌbəl ɛnkɝɪdʒ ðə bʌlk ə ðɛm daʊn ðɪs ævənu.

Carefully piled rubble encouraged the bulk of them down this avenue.

"du juv æspɝeɪʃənz ə biɪŋ ə dʒɛnɝəl, kæptən joʊli?" ɪɾɝɑldi æsk sɔfli.

"Do you have aspirations of being a general, Captain Yoeli?" Ituralde asked softly.

"maɪ æspɝeɪʃənz ɑɹ nɑɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt," joʊli sɛd. "bʌɾ ə mæn wəd bi ə ful nɑt tə hoʊp tə lɝn."

"My aspirations are not important," Yoeli said. "But a man would be a fool not to hope to learn."

"ðɛn peɪ ətɛnʃən tə ðɪs lɛsən, sʌn." bɪloʊ, ʃʌɾɝz ɑn wɪndoʊz wɝ flʌŋ oʊpən ɑn bɪldɪŋz əlɔŋ ði ævənu ðə tʃɹɑləks hæd teɪkən boʊmən sɝdʒd aʊɾ ɑntu bælkəniz. "ɪf jə ɛvɝ əv soʊ mʌtʃ əz ən ɪmpɹɛʃən ðət jəɹ duɪŋ wʌt jəɹ ɛnəmi ɪkspɛks jə tə du, ðən də sʌmθɪŋ ɛls."

"Then pay attention to this lesson, son." Below, shutters on windows were flung open on buildings along the avenue the Trollocs had taken Bowmen surged out onto balconies. "If you ever have so much as an impression that you're doing what your enemy expects you to do, then do something else."

ði æɹoʊz fɛl, ən tʃɹɑləks daɪd. lɑɹdʒ kɹɔsboʊz ðət ʃɑt kwɔɹəlz ɔlmoʊs ðə saɪz ə spɪɹz tɑɹɡəɾɪd ðə feɪdz, ən mɛni kəd bi sin lɝtʃɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə peɪvmənt, nɑt noʊɪŋ ðət ðeɪ wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi dɛd, əz skɔɹz ə tʃɹɑləks lɪŋk tə ðɛm fɛl. kənfjuzd, ɛnɹeɪdʒd, ðə stɪl-lɪvɪŋ kɹitʃɝz bɪɡæn tə bɛloʊ ən paʊn ɪn ðə dɔɹz ə ðə bɪldɪŋz fɪld wɪð ɑɹtʃɝz. bʌɾ əz ðeɪ dɪd soʊ, ðə θʌndɝ bɪɡæn. hʊfbits. joʊli ɛs bɛs kævəlɹi tʃɑɹdʒ daʊn ðə stʃɹits, lænsɪz fɔɹwɝd. ðeɪ tʃɹæmpəl ðə tʃɹɑləks, slɔɾɝɪŋ ðɛm.

The arrows fell, and Trollocs died. Large crossbows that shot quarrels almost the size of spears targeted the Fades, and many could be seen lurching across the pavement, not knowing that they were already dead, as scores of Trollocs linked to them fell. Confused, enraged, the still-living creatures began to bellow and pound in the doors of the buildings filled with archers. But as they did so, the thunder began. Hoofbeats. Yoeli s best cavalry charged down the streets, lances forward. They trampled the Trollocs, slaughtering them.

ðə sɪɾi bɪkeɪm ən ɪnɔɹməs æmbʊʃ. ə mæn kʊdn æsk fəɹ bɛɾɝ væntɪdʒɪz ðən ðoʊz bɪldɪŋz, ən ðə stʃɹits wɝ waɪɾ ɪnʌf tə əlaʊ ə tʃɑɹdʒ baɪ ðoʊz u nu ðə leɪaʊt. ðə tʃɹɑləks wɛn fɹəm bɛloʊɪŋ ɪn dʒɔɪ tə skɹimɪŋ ɪn peɪn, ən skɹæmbəld oʊvɝ wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn ðɛɹ heɪs tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ. ðeɪ ɛntɝd ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd baɪ ðə bɹoʊkən wɔl.

The city became an enormous ambush. A man couldn't ask for better vantages than those buildings, and the streets were wide enough to allow a charge by those who knew the layout. The Trollocs went from bellowing in joy to screaming in pain, and scrambled over one another in their haste to get away. They entered the courtyard by the broken wall.

ðə sɑldəiən hɔɹsmən fɑloʊd, ðɛɹ hʊvz ən flæŋks wɛt wɪð ðə nɑkʃəs blʌɾ ə ðə fɔlən. mɛn əpɪɹɾ ət wɪndoʊz ʌv "bɝnɪŋ" bɪldɪŋz - ðə faɪɝz kɛɹfəli kɹieɪɾəd ɪn sɛkʃənd-ɔf ɹumz - ən bɪɡæn lusɪŋ æɹoʊz daʊn ɪndə ðə lɑɹdʒ kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. ʌðɝz tɔs nu lænsɪz tə ðə hɔɹsmən, hu, ɹikwɪpt, laɪn ʌp ən ɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə tʃɹɑləks. ði æɹoʊz stɑp fɔlɪŋ, ən ðə kævəlɹi meɪɾ ə swipɪŋ tʃɑɹdʒ kɹɔs ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd.

The Saldaean horsemen followed, their hooves and flanks wet with the noxious blood of the fallen. Men appeared at windows of "burning" buildings - the fires carefully created in sectioned-off rooms - and began loosing arrows down into the large courtyard. Others tossed new lances to the horsemen, who, reequipped, lined up and rode into the Trollocs. The arrows stopped falling, and the cavalry made a sweeping charge crossed the courtyard.

hʌnʒɹədz ə tʃɹɑləks daɪd. pɝhæps θaʊzənz. ðoʊz ðət dɪdn daɪ skɹæmbəld aʊɾ ə ðə ɡæp.

Hundreds of Trollocs died. Perhaps thousands. Those that didn't die scrambled out of the gap.

moʊst ə ðə mɹdʒɹɑl flɛd. ðoʊz ðət dɪd nɑt wɝ tɑɹɡəts fəɹ ði ɑɹtʃɝz. kɪlɪŋ wʌn ə ðɛm kəd kɪl dʌzənz ə tʃɹɑləks lɪŋk tə ðɛm. ðə feɪdz wɛn daʊn - mɛni spɹaʊɾɪŋ dʌzənz ʌv æɹoʊz.

Most of the Myrddraal fled. Those that did not were targets for the archers. Killing one of them could kill dozens of Trollocs linked to them. The Fades went down - many sprouting dozens of arrows.

"aɪl ɡɪv ði ɔɹɾɝ tə junaɪɾ ən hoʊl ðə bɹitʃ əɡɛn," joʊli sɛɾ iɡɝli.

"I'll give the order to unite and hold the breach again," Yoeli said eagerly.

"noʊ.." ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd.

"No.." Ituralde said.

"bʌt - "

"But - "

"faɪɾɪŋ ət ðə bɹitʃ wɪl ɡeɪn əs nʌθɪŋ," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd. "ɡɪv ði ɔɹɾɝz fəɹ ðə mɛn tə muv tə dɪfɹən bɪldɪŋz, ən əv ði ɑɹtʃɝz teɪk dɪfɹən pəzɪʃənz. ɑɹ ðəɹ wɛɹhaʊzɪz əɹ ʌðɝ lɑɹdʒ bɪldɪŋz ðət kən haɪd ðə hɔɹsmən? muv əm ðɛɹ, kwɪkli. ən ðən wi weɪt."

"Fighting at the breach will gain us nothing," Ituralde said. "Give the orders for the men to move to different buildings, and have the archers take different positions. Are there warehouses or other large buildings that can hide the horsemen? Move them there, quickly. And then we wait."

"ðeɪ woʊn bi kɑɾ əɡɛn."

"They won't be caught again."

"noʊ," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd. "bʌt ðəl bi sloʊ ən kɔʃəs. ɪf wi faɪɾ əm hɛɾ ɑn, wi luz. ɪf wi hoʊld, baɪ taɪm, wi wɪn. ðæts ði oʊnli weɪ aʊɾ ə ðɪs joʊli. tə sɝvaɪv əntɪl hɛlp kʌmz. ɪf ɪts kʌmɪŋ."

"No," Ituralde said. "But they'll be slow and cautious. If we fight them head on, we lose. If we hold, buy time, we win. That's the only way out of this Yoeli. To survive until help comes. If it's coming."

joʊli nɑɾəd.

Yoeli nodded.

"aʊɝ nɛks tʃɹæp woʊn kɪl əz mɛni," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd, "bʌt tʃɹɑləks ɑɹ kaʊɝdz ət hɑɹt. ðə nɑlədʒ ðəɾ ɛni ɹoʊdweɪ kəd sʌɾənli tɝn ɪndə ə dɛθ tʃɹæp wɪl meɪk əm hɛzəteɪt, ən wɪl ɝn əs mɔɹ taɪm ðən wəd luzɪŋ hæf ʌv əɹ mɛn hoʊldɪŋ ðət wɔl."

"Our next trap won't kill as many," Ituralde said, "but Trollocs are cowards at heart. The knowledge that any roadway could suddenly turn into a death trap will make them hesitate, and will earn us more time than would losing half of our men holding that wall."

"ɔl ɹaɪt," joʊli sɛd. hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "bʌt . . . dʌzn ðɪs min ðət ðəɹ æntɪsəpeɪɾɪŋ ʌs? ðɪs feɪz ə ðə plæn wɪl wɝk oʊnli kəz ðeɪ ɪkspɛkt əɹ æmbʊʃɪz."

"All right," Yoeli said. He hesitated. "But . . . doesn't this mean that they're anticipating us? This phase of the plan will work only because they expect our ambushes."

"aɪ səpoʊz ðæts tʃɹu."

"I suppose that's true."

"soʊ ʃʊdnt wi də sʌmθɪŋ dɪfɹənt? jə sɛd ðəɾ ɪf wiv ɡɑɾ ə hɪn ðət ði ɛnəmi noʊz wʌt wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə du, wi ʃəd tʃeɪnʒ plænz."

"So shouldn't we do something different? You said that if we've got a hint that the enemy knows what we're going to do, we should change plans."

"jɔɹ θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt tu mʌtʃ, sʌn. ɡoʊ də əz aɪ kəmændəd."

"You're thinking about it too much, son. Go do as I commanded."

"ɝ, jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd." hi hɝiɾ əweɪ.

"Er, yes, my Lord." He hurried away.

ðɪs, ɪɾɝɑldi θɔt, ɪz waɪ aɪ ʃəd nɛvɝ titʃ tæktɪks. ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə ɪkspleɪn tə stuɾənts ðət ðəɹ wɑz ə ɹul ðət tʃɹʌmpt ɔl ə ði ʌðɝz: ɔlweɪz tʃɹʌs jəɹ ɪnstɪŋks. ðə tʃɹɑləks wəd bi əfɹeɪd. hi kəd juz ðæt. hid juz ɛniθɪŋ ðeɪ ɡeɪv hɪm.

This, Ituralde thought, is why I should never teach tactics. It was hard to explain to students that there was a rule that trumped all of the others: Always trust your instincts. The Trollocs would be afraid. He could use that. He'd use anything they gave him.

hi dɪdn laɪk tə θɪŋk tu lɔŋ əbaʊt ðət ɹul, lɛst i dwɛl ɑn ðə fæk ðət hid vaɪəleɪɾɪd ɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. kəz ɪz ɛvɹi ɪnstɪŋk skɹim ðəɾ i ʃʊɾə əbændən ðɪs sɪɾi aʊɝz əɡoʊ.

He didn't like to think too long about that rule, lest he dwell on the fact that he'd violated it already. Because his every instinct screamed that he should have abandoned this city hours ago.


tʃæptɝ twɛntinaɪn


CHAPTER 29

eɪ tɛɹəbəl filɪŋ


A Terrible Feeling

wʌɾ ɪz pɛɹɪn plɑɾɪŋ, dʒju θɪŋk?" bɹəleɪn æskt əz ʃi stʃɹoʊl bɪsaɪd feɪl ən æliændɝ.

What is Perrin plotting, do you think?" Berelain asked as she strolled beside Faile and Alliandre.

feɪl dɪdn ænsɝ. ðə leɪɾ æftɝnun wɑz sɔfli lɪt baɪ ə dɪstən sʌn ʃɹaʊɾɪd ɪn klaʊdz. sun ɪt wəd meɪk ðə hɝaɪzən bɝn əz ɪt sæŋk daʊn fəɹ ðə naɪt. ɪn tu deɪz, pɛɹɪn wəd ɡoʊ ɑn tʃɹaɪəl. hid dɪleɪd spəsɪfɪkli, ʃi nu, tə ɡeɪn mɔɹ taɪm fəɹ ði æʃəmən tə wɝk aʊt ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ pɹɑbləm wɪð ɡeɪtweɪz.

Faile didn't answer. The late afternoon was softly lit by a distant sun shrouded in clouds. Soon it would make the horizon burn as it sank down for the night. In two days, Perrin would go on trial. He'd delayed specifically, she knew, to gain more time for the Ashaman to work out the strange problem with gateways.

ðɛɹ ɑɹmi wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ, stɪl mɔɹ pipəl flʌɾɪŋ tə ðɛm. skaʊt ɹɪpɔɹts ɪndəkeɪɾəd ðət ðə waɪtkloʊk fɔɹs wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ əz wɛl. mɔɹ sloʊli, bʌt stɪl ɡɹoʊɪŋ. ɪn deɪz laɪk ðiz, ən ɑɹmi wɑz ə sɪmbəl ə stʃɹɛŋkθ ən - ət ðə vɛɹi list - fud.

Their army was growing, still more people flooding to them. Scout reports indicated that the Whitecloak force was growing as well. More slowly, but still growing. In days like these, an army was a symbol of strength and - at the very least - food.

ə stæn ə fɪŋɡɹut tʃɹiz ɡlʌɾɪd ðɛmsɛlvz ɑn ðə wɔɾɝ ə ðə stʃɹim nɪɹ pɛɹɪnz wɔɹ kæmp.

A stand of fingeroot trees glutted themselves on the water of the stream near Perrin's war camp.

sətʃ stʃɹeɪnʒ plæns ðeɪ wɝ, wɪð ðoʊz ɹuts ðət dɪpt ɪndə ðə wɔɾɝ. tʃɹʌŋks laɪk floʊɪŋ ɡlæs ðət hæd puld waɪl hɑɹɾənɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ laɪk əm ʌp ɪn sɑldɑiə. ɪt sim ðət tu ɹɔŋ stɛps hɪɹ kəd lid jə ɪndə ə swɑmp.

Such strange plants they were, with those roots that dipped into the water. Trunks like flowing glass that had pooled while hardening. There was nothing like them up in Saldaea. It seemed that two wrong steps here could lead you into a swamp.

"noʊ ænsɝ fəɹ mi?" bɹəleɪn æskt. ʃi sim dɪstʃɹæktəd ðiz deɪz. "aɪv bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ.

"No answer for me?" Berelain asked. She seemed distracted these days. "I've been thinking.

pɝhæps ɪt wəd bi ɡʊd tə sɛn ən ɛnvɔɪ tə ðə waɪtkloʊk ɑɹmi. dʒju θɪŋk pɛɹɪn wəɾ əlaʊ mi tə ɡoʊ ən spik wɪð ðɛm? pɝhæps aɪ kəd meɪk ə pɝsənəl əpil ɑn ɪz bɪhæf."

Perhaps it would be good to send an envoy to the Whitecloak army. Do you think Perrin would allow me to go and speak with them? Perhaps I could make a personal appeal on his behalf."

ʃi kɛp bɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp ðət tɑpɪk. "noʊ," feɪl sɛd. "ju noʊ hɪz maɪn ɪz meɪɾ ʌp ɑn ðɪs tʃɹaɪəl, bɹəleɪn."

She kept bringing up that topic. "No," Faile said. "You know his mind is made up on this trial, Berelain."

ðə fɝs pɝst əɹ lɪps, bʌt dɪd nɑt pɹɛs fɝðɝ. ðə θɹi kəntɪnjuɾ ɛɹ wɔk, əkʌmpənid baɪ tɛn meɪɾənz. wʌns, feɪl maɪɾ əv kəmbaɪn əbaʊt ði ətɛnʃən. ðət wɑz bɪfɔɹ ʃid bɪn teɪkən soʊ ʌnɪkspɛktɪdli, ən soʊ izəli.

The First pursed her lips, but did not press further. The three continued heir walk, accompanied by ten Maidens. Once, Faile might have combined about the attention. That was before she'd been taken so unexpectedly, and so easily.

ɪn ðə dɪstəns, ʃi sɔ ə smɔl ɡɹup ə ɹɛfjudʒiz livɪŋ ðə kæmp, wɔkɪŋ əweɪ tə ðə saʊθist, kɹɔs-kʌntʃɹi. bɪfɔɹ θɪŋz hæd ɡɔn ɹɔŋ wɪð ðə ɡeɪtweɪz, əbaʊt tɛn θaʊzən hæd bɪn sɛn tə ɹʊɹəl ɛɹiəz ɪn kɛɹhin. ɔl hæɾ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz tə ɹɪmeɪn kwaɪət. pɛɹɪn dɪdnt wɑn ɪz loʊkeɪʃən noʊn jɛt. wɪmən wəd bi stɪl, bʌɾ ə kɔɹs ðə mɛn wəd ɡɑsəp; ðeɪ ɔlweɪz dɪd.

In the distance, she saw a small group of refugees leaving the camp, walking away to the southeast, cross-country. Before things had gone wrong with the gateways, about ten thousand had been sent to rural areas in Cairhien. All had instructions to remain quiet. Perrin didn't want his location known yet. Women would be still, but of course the men would gossip; they always did.

fju nu ðət ɡeɪtweɪz feɪld; pɛɹɪn hæd toʊl ðə pipəl ðəɾ i niɾəd ði æʃəmən stʃɹɔŋ, ɪn keɪs ðəɹ wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ wɪð ðə waɪt-kloʊks. ɪt wɑz tʃɹu ɪnʌf. stɪl, səm ɹɛfjudʒiz hæɾ æsk tə liv, ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn fʊt. tə ðiz, feɪl ɡeɪv bɪts ʌv ɡoʊld əɹ ə dʒuəl fɹəm sɪvænəz stɔɹ ən wɪʃt əm ðə bɛst. ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd ət haʊ mɛni wɑntəd tə ɹɪtɝn tə hoʊmz ðət wɝ ɪn sintʃæn- kəntʃɹoʊld lænz.

Few knew that gateways failed; Perrin had told the people that he needed the Asha'man strong, in case there was righting with the White-cloaks. It was true enough. Still, some refugees had asked to leave, going on foot. To these, Faile gave bits of gold or a jewel from Sevanna's store and wished them the best. She was surprised at how many wanted to return to homes that were in Seanchan- controlled lands.

dɪspaɪt ðə dɪpɑɹtʃɝz, ðə saɪz ə pɛɹɪnz fɔɹs wɑz swɛlɪŋ deɪ baɪ deɪ. feɪl ən ði ʌðɝz pæst ə lɑɹdʒ ɡɹup pɹæktəsɪŋ wɪð sɔɹdz. ðə ɹɛfjudʒiz u hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə tʃɹeɪn wɝ naʊ səm twɛnti-faɪv θaʊzən stʃɹɔŋ. ðeɪ pɹæktəs leɪɾ ɪndə ðə deɪ, ən feɪl kəd stɪl hɪɹ bɑɹkt ɔɹɾɝz fɹəm tɑɹn.

Despite the departures, the size of Perrin's force was swelling day by day. Faile and the others passed a large group practicing with swords. The refugees who had decided to train were now some twenty-five thousand strong. They practiced late into the day, and Faile could still hear barked orders from Tarn.

"wɛl." bɹəleɪn kəntɪnjuɾ əɹ mjuzɪŋz. "wʌt wɪl pɛɹɪn du? waɪ sɛɾ ʌp ðɪs tʃɹaɪəl? hi wɑns sʌmθɪŋ fɹəm ðoʊz waɪtkloʊks." ʃi stɛpt ɝaʊn ə nɑɹl fɪŋɡɹut. ðə fɝst, laɪk soʊ mɛni ʌðɝz, ɹɛd mʌtʃ mɔɹ ɪndə pɛɹɪnz ækʃənz ðən ðəɹ wɑz tə faɪnd. hid bi əmjuzd ɪf i nu ðə plɑts ðeɪ əskɹaɪb tə hɪm.

"Well." Berelain continued her musings. "What will Perrin do? Why set up this trial? He wants something from those Whitecloaks." She stepped around a gnarled fingeroot. The First, like so many others, read much more into Perrin's actions than there was to find. He'd be amused if he knew the plots they ascribed to him.

ən ʃi kleɪmz tə ʌndɝstæn mɛn, feɪl θɔt. pɛɹɪn wɑz baɪ noʊ minz stupəd, nɔɹ wɑz i ðə sɪmpəl mæn i səmtaɪmz kleɪm tə bi. hi plænd, hi θɔt, ən i wɑz kɛɹfəl. bʌɾ i wɑz ɔlsoʊ dɝɛkt. dɪlɪbɝɪt. wən i sɛd sʌmθɪŋ, hi mɛn ɪt.

And she claims to understand men, Faile thought. Perrin was by no means stupid, nor was he the simple man he sometimes claimed to be. He planned, he thought, and he was careful. But he was also direct. Deliberate. When he said something, he meant it.

"aɪ əɡɹi wɪð bɹəleɪn," æliændɝ sɛd. "wi ʃəd dʒʌs liv, mɑɹtʃ əweɪ. əɹ ətæk ðoʊz waɪtkloʊks."

"I agree with Berelain," Alliandre said. "We should just leave, march away. Or attack those Whitecloaks."

feɪl ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ɪt bɑðɝz pɛɹɪn wən pipəl θɪŋk i dɪd sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ. əz lɔŋ əz ðə waɪtkloʊks kəntɪnju tə ɪnsɪs hiz ə mɝɾɝɝ, hɪz neɪm wɪl nɑt bi klɪɹ." hi wɑz biɪŋ bʊlhɛɾɪd ən ful-ɪʃ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə noʊbɪləɾi əbaʊɾ ɪt.

Faile shook her head. "It bothers Perrin when people think he did something wrong. As long as the Whitecloaks continue to insist he is a murderer, his name will not be clear." He was being bullheaded and fool-ish, but there was a nobility about it.

soʊ lɔŋ əz ɪt dɪdnt ɡɛɾ ɪm kɪld. haʊɛvɝ, ʃi lʌvd ɪm fəɹ ðət vɛɹi sɛns ʌv ɑnɝ. tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɪm wəd bi ɪl ædvaɪzd, soʊ ʃi hæd tə meɪk sɝɾən ʌðɝz dɪdn teɪk ædvæntɪdʒ ə hɪm.

So long as it didn't get him killed. However, she loved him for that very sense of honor. Changing him would be ill advised, so she had to make certain others didn't take advantage of him.

əz ʃi ɔlweɪz dɪd wən ðeɪ dɪskʌs ðə waɪtkloʊks, bɹəleɪn ɡɑɾ ə stʃɹeɪnʒ lʊk ɪn əɹ aɪz, ən ʃi ɡlænst - pɝhæps ʌnkɑnʃəsli - ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ðɛɹ ɑɹmi kæmpt. laɪt. ʃi wɑzn gɑnə æsk əɡɛn ɪf ʃi kəd ɡoʊ spik tə ðɛm? ʃi hæd kʌm ʌp wɪð ə dʌzən dɪfɹən ɹizənz waɪ ʃi wɑntəd tə.

As she always did when they discussed the Whitecloaks, Berelain got a strange look in her eyes, and she glanced - perhaps unconsciously - in the direction their army camped. Light. She wasn't going to ask again if she could go speak to them? She had come up with a dozen different reasons why she wanted to.

feɪl noʊɾəst ə lɑɹdʒ ɡɹup ə soʊlʒɝz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lʊk ɪŋkɑnspɪkwəs əz ðeɪ ɹaʊndəd ði ɪnsaɪɾ ə ðə kæmp, kipɪŋ peɪs wɪð feɪl ən ðɛɹ ɡɑɹdz ɑn ðɛɹ pɹɑməneɪd. pɛɹɪn wɑntəɾ əɹ wɛl pɹətɛktəd.

Faile noticed a large group of soldiers trying to look inconspicuous as they rounded the inside of the camp, keeping pace with Faile and their guards on their promenade. Perrin wanted her well protected.

"ðɪs jʌŋ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," æliændɝ sɛɾ aɪdli. "hi lʊks kwaɪt stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ɪn ðət waɪt junəfɔɹm, wʊdn jə seɪ? ɪf jə kən ɡɛt pæs ðət sʌnbɝst ɑn ɪz kloʊk. sətʃ ə bjuɾəfəl mæn."

"This young Lord Captain Commander," Alliandre said idly. "He looks quite striking in that white uniform, wouldn't you say? If you can get past that sunburst on his cloak. Such a beautiful man."

"oʊ?" bɹieɪn sɛd. sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, wɔɹm kʌlɝ ɹoʊz ɪn əɹ tʃiks.

"Oh?" Bereiain said. Surprisingly, warm color rose in her cheeks.

"aɪɾ ɔlweɪz hɝd ðət mɔɹɡeɪsəz stɛpsʌn wɑz ə hænsəm mæn," æliændɝ kəntɪnjud. "bʌɾ aɪ hædn æntɪsəpeɪɾəd ɪm biɪŋ soʊ . . . pɹɪstin."

"I'd always heard that Morgase's stepson was a handsome man," Alliandre continued. "But I hadn't anticipated him being so . . . pristine."

"laɪk ə stætʃu kɑɹv fɹəm mɑɹbəl," bɹieɪn wɪspɝd, "ə ɹɛlɪk fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ə pɝfək θɪŋ lɛf bɪhaɪnd. fəɹ əs tə wɝʃəp."

"Like a statue carved from marble," Bereiain whispered, "a relic from the Age of Legends. A perfect thing left behind. For us to worship."

"hiz pæsəbəl," feɪl sɛd wɪð ə snɪf. "aɪ pɹəfɝ ə bɪɹɾəd feɪs, maɪsɛlf."

"He's passable," Faile said with a sniff. "I prefer a bearded face, myself."

ɪt wɑzn ə laɪ - ʃi lʌvd ə bɪɹɾəd feɪs, ən pɛɹɪn wɑz hænsəm. hi hæɾ ə bɝli paʊɝ tə hɪm ðət wɑz kwaɪɾ əpilɪŋ. bʌt ðɪs ɡɑləd dəmədʒɹd wɑz . . . wɛl, ɪt wɑzn fɛɹ tə kəmpɛɹ ɪm tə pɛɹɪn. ðət wəd bi laɪk kəmpɛɹɪŋ ə steɪnd ɡlæs wɪndoʊ tə ə kæbənət meɪd baɪ ə mæstɝ kɑɹpəntɝ. boʊθ wɝ ɛksələn ɪɡzæmpəlz ə ðɛɹ kɹæft, ən ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə weɪ ðɛm əɡɛnst wʌn ənʌðɝ. bʌt ðə wɪndoʊ sɝɾənli dɪd ʃaɪn.

It wasn't a lie - she loved a bearded face, and Perrin was handsome. He had a burly power to him that was quite appealing. But this Galad Damodred was . . . well, it wasn't fair to compare him to Perrin. That would be like comparing a stained glass window to a cabinet made by a master carpenter. Both were excellent examples of their craft, and it was hard to weigh them against one another. But the window certainly did shine.

bɹəleɪnz ɪkspɹɛʃən sim dɪstənt. ʃi wɑz dɛfənətli teɪkən wɪð dəmədʒɹd. sətʃ ə ʃɔɹt taɪm fəɹ ɪt tə hæv hæpənd. feɪl toʊl bɹieɪn ðət faɪndɪŋ ənʌðɝ mæn fəɹ əɹ ətɛnʃənz wəd hɛlp wɪð ðə ɹumɝz, bʌt ðə waɪtkloʊk kəmændɝ? hæd ðə wʊmən lɔst ɔl sɛns?

Berelain's expression seemed distant. She was definitely taken with Damodred. Such a short time for it to have happened. Faile told Bereiain that finding another man for her attentions would help with the rumors, but the Whitecloak commander? Had the woman lost all sense?

"soʊ wʌt də wi du?" æliændɝ æskt əz ðeɪ ɹaʊndəd ðə saʊθ saɪɾ ə ðə kæmp, hæfweɪ tə ðə pɔɪn fɹəm wɪtʃ ðeɪd stɑɹɾəd.

"So what do we do?" Alliandre asked as they rounded the south side of the camp, halfway to the point from which they'd started.

"əbaʊt ðə waɪtkloʊks?" feɪl æskt.

"About the Whitecloaks?" Faile asked.

"əbaʊt meɪaɪɡdɪn," æliændɝ sɛd. "mɔɹɡeɪs."

"About Maighdin," Alliandre said. "Morgase."

"aɪ kæn hɛlp filɪŋ ðət ʃi tʊk ædvæntɪdʒ ə maɪ kaɪndnəs," feɪl sɛd. "æftɝ ɔl wi wɛn θɹu təɡɛðɝ, ʃi dɪdn tɛl mi hu ʃi wɑz?

"I can't help feeling that she took advantage of my kindness," Faile said. "After all we went through together, she didn't tell me who she was?

"ju sim tə bi dɪtɝmən tə ɡɪv əɹ vɛɹi lɪɾəl kɹɛɾət," bɹieɪn sɛd.

"You seem to be determined to give her very little credit," Bereiain said.

feɪl dɪdn ɹɪplaɪ. ʃid bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt wʌt pɛɹɪn sɛd, ən i wɑz pɹɑbli ɹaɪt. feɪl ʃəd nɑt bi soʊ æŋɡɹi wɪð hɝ. ɪf mɔɹɡeɪs ɹɪli hæd bɪn fliɪŋ wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən, ɪt wɑz ə mɪɹəkəl ðət ʃi wɑz stɪl əlaɪv. bɪsaɪdz, ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd laɪɾ əbaʊɾ u ʃi wɑz, wən fɝs miɾɪŋ pɛɹɪn.

Faile didn't reply. She'd been thinking about what Perrin said, and he was probably right. Faile should not be so angry with her. If Morgase really had been fleeing one of the Forsaken, it was a miracle that she was still alive. Besides, she herself had lied about who she was, when first meeting Perrin.

ɪn tʃɹuθ, hɝ æŋɡɝ wɑz kəz mɔɹɡeɪs wɑz gɑnə dʒʌdʒ pɛɹɪn. ʃi pɹəzum tə dʒʌdʒ pɛɹɪn.

In truth, her anger was because Morgase was going to judge Perrin. She presumed to judge Perrin.

meɪaɪɡdɪn ðə leɪɾiz meɪd maɪt bi ɡɹeɪtfəl, bʌt mɔɹɡeɪs ðə kwin wəd si pɛɹɪn əz ə ɹaɪvəl.

Maighdin the lady's maid might be grateful, but Morgase the Queen would see Perrin as a rival.

wəd mɔɹɡeɪs ɹɪli tʃɹit ðɪs dʒʌdʒmən fɛɹli, əɹ wəd ʃi teɪk ðə tʃæns tə dɪskɹɛɾət ə mæn u hæd ɹeɪz hɪmsɛlf ʌp əz ə lɔɹd?

Would Morgase really treat this judgment fairly, or would she take the chance to discredit a man who had raised himself up as a lord?

"aɪ fil əz jə du, maɪ leɪɾi," æliændɝ sɛd sɔfli.

"I feel as you do, my Lady," Alliandre said softly.

"æn haʊ ɪz ðæt?"

"And how is that?"

"dɪsivd," æliændɝ sɛd. "meɪaɪɡdɪn wɑz əɹ fɹɛnd. aɪ θɔɾ aɪ nu hɝ."

"Deceived," Alliandre said. "Maighdin was our friend. I thought I knew her."

"ju wʊɾə æktəɾ ɪɡzækli əz ʃi dɪɾ ɪn ðət sɪtʃueɪʃən," bɹəleɪn sɛd. "waɪ ɡɪv əweɪ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən ɪf jə doʊn əv tə?"

"You would have acted exactly as she did in that situation," Berelain said. "Why give away information if you don't have to?"

"bɪkɔz wi wɝ fɹɛnz," æliændɝ sɛd. "æftɝ wʌt wi wɛn θɹu təɡɛðɝ, ɪt tɝnz aʊt ðət ʃiz mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkənd. nɑt dʒʌst ə kwin - ðə kwin. ðə wʊmənz ə lɛdʒənd. ən ʃi wɑz hɪɹ, wɪð ʌs, sɝvɪŋ əs ti. pʊɹli."

"Because we were friends," Alliandre said. "After what we went through together, it turns out that she's Morgase Trakand. Not just a queen - the Queen. The woman's a legend. And she was here, with us, serving us tea. Poorly."

"ju hæv tə ədmɪt," feɪl sɛd θɔtfəli, "ʃi dɪd ɡɛt bɛɾɝ wɪð ðə ti."

"You have to admit," Faile said thoughtfully, "she did get better with the tea."

feɪl ɹitʃt tə hɝ θɹoʊt, tʌtʃɪŋ ðə kɔɹd ðət bɔɹ ɹoʊlənz stoʊn. ʃi dɪdnt wɛɹ ɪɾ ɛvɹi deɪ, bʌt ʃi dɪd soʊ ɔfən ɪnʌf. hæd mɔɹɡeɪs bɪn fɔls ðəɾ ɪntaɪɝ taɪm ðeɪd bɪn wɪð ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ? əɹ hæd ʃi, ɪn ə weɪ, bɪn mɔɹ tʃɹu? wɪð noʊ taɪɾəlz tə lɪv ʌp tə, ʃi hædn bɪn fɔɹs tə bi ðə "lɛdʒəndɛɹi" mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkənd. ʌndɝ sɝkəmstænsəz laɪk ðæt, wʊdn ə pɝsənz tʃɹu neɪtʃɝ bi mɔɹ laɪkli tə ʃoʊ θɹu?

Faile reached to her throat, touching the cord that bore Rolan's stone. She didn't wear it every day, but she did so often enough. Had Morgase been false that entire time they'd been with the Shaido? Or had she, in a way, been more true? With no titles to live up to, she hadn't been forced to be the "legendary" Morgase Trakand. Under circumstances like that, wouldn't a person's true nature be more likely to show through?

feɪl ɡɹɪp ðə kɔɹd. mɔɹɡeɪs wəd nɑt tɝn ðɪs tʃɹaɪəl əɡɛns pɝ-ɹɪn aʊɾ ə spaɪt. bʌt ʃi wəɾ ɔfɝ dʒʌdʒmən ɪn ɑnəsti. wɪtʃ mɛn feɪl niɾəd tə bi pɹipɛɹd, ən əv ɹɛɾi -  skɹimz saʊndəd nɪɹbaɪ.

Faile gripped the cord. Morgase would not turn this trial against Per-rin out of spite. But she would offer judgment in honesty. Which meant Faile needed to be prepared, and have ready -  Screams sounded nearby.

feɪl ɹiæktəɾ ɪmiɾiətli, spɪnɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə wʊdz. ʃi ɪnstɪŋktɪvli æntɪsəpeɪɾəd il lipɪŋ fɹəm ðə bʊʃəz tə kɪl ən kæptʃɝ, ən ʃi fɛlt ə moʊmən ə ʃɪɹ pænɪk.

Faile reacted immediately, spinning toward the woods. She instinctively anticipated Aiel leaping from the bushes to kill and capture, and she felt a moment of sheer panic.

bʌt ðə skɹimz wɝ kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ɪnsaɪd kæmp. ʃi kɝst, tɝnɪŋ əbaʊt, bʌt fɛl sʌmθɪŋ tʌɡ əɾ əɹ bɛlt. ʃi lʊk daʊn wɪð ə stɑɹt tə si hɝ bɛl naɪf pʊl ɪtsɛlf fɹəm ɪts ʃiθ ən flɪp ɪndə ði ɛɹ.

But the screams were coming from inside camp. She cursed, turning about, but felt something tug at her belt. She looked down with a start to see her belt knife pull itself from its sheath and flip into the air.

"ə bʌbəl ʌv ivəl!" bɹəleɪn sɛd, stʌmbəlɪŋ tə ðə saɪd.

"A bubble of evil!" Berelain said, stumbling to the side.

feɪl dʌkt, θɹoʊɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə ðə ɡɹaʊn əz əɹ naɪf nɪp θɹu ði ɛɹ təwɔɹɾ əɹ hɛd.

Faile ducked, throwing herself to the ground as her knife nipped through the air toward her head.

ɪt nɛɹoʊli mɪst. əz feɪl keɪm ʌp ɪn ə kɹaʊtʃ, ʃi sɔ wɪð ə stɑɹt ðət bɹəleɪn wɑz feɪsɪŋ daʊn ə dæɡɝ, wʌn ðət lʊkt - fɹəm ðə dæmədʒ tə bɹəleɪnz ʃɝt - tə hæv ɹɪpt ɪts weɪ fɹi ʌv ə hɪɾən ʃiθ ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ sliv.

It narrowly missed. As Faile came up in a crouch, she saw with a start that Berelain was facing down a dagger, one that looked - from the damage to Berelain's shirt - to have ripped its way free of a hidden sheath inside her sleeve.

bɪɑn bɹəleɪn, ðə kæmp wɑz ɪn ə tuməlt. ðə nɪɹbaɪ pɹæktəsɪŋ ɹɛfjuɡis wɝ skæɾɝɪŋ, sɔɹdz ən spɪɹz nɪpɪŋ θɹu ði ɛɹ ə ðɛɹ oʊn voʊlɪʃən. ɪt lʊkt əz ɪf ɛvɹi wɛpən ɪn ðə kæmp hæd sʌɾənli spɹʌŋ tə laɪf, ɹaɪzɪŋ ʌp tə ətæk ɪts mæstɝ.

Beyond Berelain, the camp was in a tumult. The nearby practicing refugeess were scattering, swords and spears nipping through the air of their own volition. It looked as if every weapon in the camp had suddenly sprung to life, rising up to attack its master.

moʊʃən. feɪl dɑdʒ tə ðə saɪɾ əz əɹ naɪf keɪm bæk fəɹ hɝ, bʌɾ ə waɪt-hɛɹd fɪɡjɝ ɪn bɹaʊn snætʃt ðə wɛpən fɹəm ði ɛɹ, hoʊldɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn ə taɪt ɡɹɪp. səlɪn ɹoʊld, klɪŋɪŋ tə ɪt, hɝ tiθ ɡɹɪɾɪd əz ʃi ɹɛntʃt ɪt fɹəm ði ɛɹ ən slæmd ɪt daʊn ɑntu ə stoʊn, bɹeɪkɪŋ ðə bleɪd fɹəm ðə hɪlt.

Motion. Faile dodged to the side as her knife came back for her, but a white-haired figure in brown snatched the weapon from the air, holding it in a tight grip. Sulin rolled, clinging to it, her teeth gritted as she wrenched it from the air and slammed it down onto a stone, breaking the blade from the hilt.

ɪt stɑp muvɪŋ. səlɪnz spɪɹz, haʊɛvɝ, pʊl fɹəm ðɛɹ pleɪs ɑn əɹ bæk ən spʌn ɪn ðə skaɪ, tɪps pɔɪntɪŋ təwɔɹd hɝ.

It stopped moving. Sulin's spears, however, pulled from their place on her back and spun in the sky, tips pointing toward her.

"ɹʌn!" ðə meɪɾən sɛd, tɝnɪŋ ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə feɪs ɔl θɹi spɪɹz ət wʌns.

"Run!" the Maiden said, turning and trying to face all three spears at once.

"wɛɹ?" feɪl dɪmændəd, pɪkɪŋ ʌp ə stoʊn fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊnd. "ðə wɛpənz ɑɹ ɛvɹiwɛɹ."

"Where?" Faile demanded, picking up a stone from the ground. "The weapons are everywhere."

bɹəleɪn wɑz stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ wɪð əɹ dæɡɝ. ʃid ɡɹæbd ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz faɪɾɪŋ hɝ, ɹɛntʃɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz fɹəm saɪd tə saɪd. æliændɝ wɑz sɝaʊndəd baɪ θɹi naɪvz. laɪt! feɪl sʌɾənli fɛlt lʌki fəɹ hævɪŋ wɔɹn oʊnli wʌn tədeɪ.

Berelain was struggling with her dagger. She'd grabbed it, but it was fighting her, wrenching her arms from side to side. Alliandre was surrounded by three knives. Light! Faile suddenly felt lucky for having worn only one today.

sɛvɹəl ə ðə meɪɾənz tʃɑɹdʒd ɪn tə hɛlp æliændɝ, θɹoʊɪŋ stoʊnz ət ðə naɪvz, dɑdʒɪŋ spɪɹz ðət lʌnʒd fəɹ ðɛm. bɹəleɪn wɑz əloʊn.

Several of the Maidens charged in to help Alliandre, throwing stones at the knives, dodging spears that lunged for them. Berelain was alone.

ɡɹɪɾɪŋ əɹ tiθ - filɪŋ hæf ə ful fəɹ hɛlpɪŋ ðə wʊmən ʃi heɪɾəd - feɪl dʒʌmpt ɪn ən pleɪst əɹ hænz oʊvɝ bɹəleɪnz, lɛndɪŋ əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ tə ðəɾ ə ðə fɝst. təɡɛðɝ, ðeɪ ɹɛntʃt ðə dæɡɝ tə ðə saɪd, təwɔɹd ðə ɡɹaʊnd, wɛɹ ðeɪ kəd dʒɹaɪv ɪts pɔɪn ɪndə ði ɝθ. wən ðeɪ dɪd, ɹɪmɑɹkəbli, ɪt stɑp muvɪŋ.

Gritting her teeth - feeling half a fool for helping the woman she hated - Faile jumped in and placed her hands over Berelain's, lending her strength to that of the First. Together, they wrenched the dagger to the side, toward the ground, where they could drive its point into the earth. When they did, remarkably, it stopped moving.

feɪl ɹilist ɪt hɛzɪɾəntli, ðən lʊkt ʌp ət ðə dɪʃɛvəl bɹəleɪn. ðə wʊmən pɹɛst əɹ ɹaɪt hæn tə hɝ ʌðɝ pɑm, stæntʃɪŋ ðə blʌd fɹəm ə kʌt ʃid teɪkən. ʃi nɑɾəd ət feɪl. "θæŋk ju."

Faile released it hesitantly, then looked up at the disheveled Berelain. The woman pressed her right hand to her other palm, stanching the blood from a cut she'd taken. She nodded at Faile. "Thank you."

"wʌt stɑpt ɪt?" feɪl æskt, hɑɹt θʌmpɪŋ. ʃaʊts saʊndəd fɹəm ɝaʊn ðə kæmp. kɝsɪŋ.

"What stopped it?" Faile asked, heart thumping. Shouts sounded from around the camp. Cursing.

klæŋz fɹəm wɛpənz.

Clangs from weapons.

"ðə dɝt?" bɹəleɪn æskt, nilɪŋ.

"The dirt?" Berelain asked, kneeling.

feɪl dʌɡ hɝ fɪŋɡɝz ɪndə ðə loʊm. ʃi tɝnd, noʊɾɪsɪŋ wɪð əlɑɹm ðət wʌn ə ðə meɪɾənz wɑz daʊn, ðoʊ ʌðɝz hæd fɛl sɛvɹəl ə ðə flaɪɪŋ spɪɹz. feɪl tɔst əɹ hændfʊl ə sɔɪl ət wʌn ðət wɑz stɪl wɪpɪŋ əbaʊt.

Faile dug her fingers into the loam. She turned, noticing with alarm that one of the Maidens was down, though others had felled several of the flying spears. Faile tossed her handful of soil at one that was still whipping about.

wən ðə dɝt tʌtʃt ðə spɪɹ, ðə wɛpən dʒɹɑpt. səlɪn sɔ ɪt, aɪz waɪɾənɪŋ bɪhaɪn əɹ veɪl feɪs. ʃi dʒɹɑp ðə stoʊnz ʃid bɪn wildɪŋ ən tʊk ʌp ə hændfʊl ə sɔɪl, spɹeɪɪŋ ɪɾ oʊvɝ əɹ hɛɾ əz ə spɪɹ dʒɹoʊv fəɹ əɹ hɑɹt.

When the dirt touched the spear, the weapon dropped. Sulin saw it, eyes widening behind her veiled face. She dropped the stones she'd been wielding and took up a handful of soil, spraying it over her head as a spear drove for her heart.

ðə dɝt stɑpt ɪt, ən ɪt fɛl tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. nɪɹbaɪ, ðə soʊlʒɝz u hæd bɪn fɑloʊɪŋ əlɔŋ tə ɡɑɹd feɪl ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ hævɪŋ ə wɝs taɪm ə θɪŋz. ðeɪ hæd bækt ɪndə ə sɝkəl, juzɪŋ ðɛɹ ʃilz tə blɑk ɪnkʌmɪŋ wɛpənz, hʌŋkɝd daʊn wɪð wɝiɾ ɪkspɹɛʃənz.

The dirt stopped it, and it fell to the ground. Nearby, the soldiers who had been following along to guard Faile and the others were having a worse time of things. They had backed into a circle, using their shields to block incoming weapons, hunkered down with worried expressions.

"kwɪkli!" feɪl sɛd tə ðə meɪɾənz, dɪɡɪŋ boʊθ hænz ɪndə ðə sɔɪl. "spɹɛd ðə wɝd! lɛt ði ʌðɝz noʊ haʊ tə stɑp ðə wɛpənz!" ʃi θɹu sɔɪl ət ðə dæɡɝz bɪsaɪɾ æliændɝ, dʒɹɑpɪŋ tu wɪð wʌn θɹoʊ, ðən bɪɡæn ɹʌnɪŋ fəɹ ðə nɪɹbaɪ soʊlʒɝz.

"Quickly!" Faile said to the Maidens, digging both hands into the soil. "Spread the word! Let the others know how to stop the weapons!" She threw soil at the daggers beside Alliandre, dropping two with one throw, then began running for the nearby soldiers.

"ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ nid fəɹ jə tə əpɑlədʒaɪz, ɡɑləd," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd sɔfli. "ju kʊdn əv noʊn wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ ɪn ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs ə ðə laɪt. jə wɝ liɡz ən liɡz əweɪ."

"There is no need for you to apologize, Galad," Morgase said softly. "You couldn't have known what was happening in the Fortress of the Light. You were leagues and leagues away."

ðeɪ sæɾ ɪn ɪz tɛnt, tʃɛɹz feɪsɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ, leɪt-æftɝnun laɪt ʃaɪnɪŋ ɑn ðə wɔlz. ɡɑləd sæt wɪð hænz klæsp bɪfɔɹ ɪm əz i lin fɔɹwɝd. soʊ θɔtfəl. ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ əɹ fɝst ɪmpɹɛʃənz ə hɪm, lɔŋ əɡoʊ wən ʃid mɛɹiɾ ɪz fɑðɝ. ðə jʌŋ tʃaɪl hæd sɪmpli bɪn pɑɹɾ ə ðə dil, ən waɪl mɔɹɡeɪs hæɾ ədɑptəd hɪm, ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz wɝid ðəɾ i fɛlt lɛs lʌv ðən ɪz sɪblɪŋz.

They sat in his tent, chairs facing each other, late-afternoon light shining on the walls. Galad sat with hands clasped before him as he leaned forward. So thoughtful. She remembered her first impressions of him, long ago when she'd married his father. The young child had simply been part of the deal, and while Morgase had adopted him, she had always worried that he felt less loved than his siblings.

ɡɑləd hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn soʊ sɑləm. kwɪk tə pɔɪn aʊt wən sʌmwʌn dɪd sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ. bʌɾ ənlaɪk ʌðɝ tʃɪlʒɹən - ɪleɪn ɪspɛʃli - hi hæd nɑt juzd ɪz nɑlədʒ əz ə wɛpən. ʃi ʃəɾ əv sin. ʃi ʃʊɾə ɹilaɪz hid bi ətʃɹæktəd tə ðə waɪtkloʊks fəɹ ðɛɹ vɪʒən ʌv ə wɝl ðət wɑz blæk ən waɪt. kəd ʃi hæv pɹipɛɹɾ ɪm bɛɾɝ? ʃoʊn ɪm ðət ðə wɝld wɑz nɑt blæk ən waɪt - ɪt wɑzn ivən ɡɹeɪ. ɪt wɑz fʊl ə kʌlɝz ðət səmtaɪmz dɪdn fɪɾ ɪndə ɛni spɛktʃɹəm ə mɝæləɾi.

Galad had always been so solemn. Quick to point out when someone did something wrong. But unlike other children - Elayne especially - he had not used his knowledge as a weapon. She should have seen. She should have realized he'd be attracted to the Whitecloaks for their vision of a world that was black and white. Could she have prepared him better? Shown him that the world was not black and white - it wasn't even gray. It was full of colors that sometimes didn't fit into any spectrum of morality.

hi lʊkt ʌp, hænz stɪl klæspt, aɪz tʃɹʌbəld. "aɪ əkjuz vɑldə ɹɔŋli. wən aɪ wɛn tə hɪm, aɪ sɛɾ aɪ wɑz dɪmændɪŋ tʃɹaɪəl bɪniθ ðə laɪt kəz i hæɾ əbjuz jə ən kɪl ju. hæf wɑz ɹɔŋ. aɪ hæv dʌn sʌmθɪŋ wɛɹ aɪ wɑz ɪn ɛɹɝ, ət list ɪn pɑɹt. ɹəɡɑɹdləs ə ðət fækt, aɪm pliz ðəɾ aɪ kɪl hɪm."

He looked up, hands still clasped, eyes troubled. "I accused Valda wrongly. When I went to him, I said I was demanding Trial Beneath the Light because he had abused you and killed you. Half was wrong. I have done something where I was in error, at least in part. Regardless of that fact, I'm pleased that I killed him."

hɝ bɹɛθ kɑɾ ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt. vɑldə hæd ɹɪpjuɾɪdli bɪn wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst sɔɝdzmɪn əlaɪv.

Her breath caught in her throat. Valda had reputedly been one of the greatest swordsmen alive.

ən ɡɑləd hæd bɛstɪɾ ɪm ɪn ə duəl? ðɪs juθ? bʌɾ i wɑz ə juθ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ. ɡɑləd hæd meɪɾ ɪz tʃɔɪsəz, ən ʃi hæɾ ə dɪfəkəl taɪm dʒʌdʒɪŋ ɪm fəɹ ðɛm. ɪn səm weɪz, ðeɪ simd mɔɹ ædmɝəbəl ðən əɹ oʊn tʃɔɪsəz.

And Galad had bested him in a duel? This youth? But he was a youth no longer. Galad had made his choices, and she had a difficult time judging him for them. In some ways, they seemed more admirable than her own choices.

"ju dɪd wɛl," ʃi sɛd. "vɑldə wɑz ə sneɪk. aɪm sɝɾən i wɑz bɪhaɪnd naɪlz dɛθ. ɡɑləd, jə dɪd ðə wɝld ə sɝvəs."

"You did well," she said. "Valda was a snake. I am certain he was behind Niall's death. Galad, you did the world a service."

hi nɑɾəd. "fɔɹ wʌɾ i dɪd tə ju, hi dɪzɝv dɛθ. bʌɾ aɪ ʃæl nid tə ɹilis ə steɪtmən ɛniweɪ." hi ɹoʊz, klæspɪŋ ɪz hænz bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk əz i wɔkt, hɪz waɪt kloʊðɪŋ simɪŋ tə ɡloʊ ɪn ðə laɪt. "aɪ wɪl ɪkspleɪn ðət maɪ ækjəzeɪʃən ə mɝɾɝ wɑz fɔls, bʌt ðət vɑldə stɪl dɪzɝv dɛθ fəɹ ɪz ʌðɝ əfɛnsɪz. daɪɹ əfɛnsɪz." hi stɑp fəɹ ə moʊmənt. "aɪ wɪʃ aɪ hæd noʊn."

He nodded. "For what he did to you, he deserved death. But I shall need to release a statement anyway." He rose, clasping his hands behind his back as he walked, his white clothing seeming to glow in the light. "I will explain that my accusation of murder was false, but that Valda still deserved death for his other offenses. Dire offenses." He stopped for a moment. "I wish I had known."

"ðɛɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ jə kəɾ əv dʌn, sʌn," ʃi sɛd. "maɪ kæptɪvəɾi wɑz maɪ oʊn fɔlt. fəɹ tʃɹʌstɪŋ maɪ ɛnəmiz."

"There was nothing you could have done, son," she said. "My captivity was my own fault. For trusting my enemies."

ɡɑləd weɪvd ə hænd. "ðɛɹ wɑz noʊ ɹɪzɪstɪŋ ɡeɪbɹəl, ɪf wʌt juv hɝɾ ɪz tʃɹu. əz fəɹ jəɹ kæptɪvəɾi, jə dɪd nɑt tʃɹʌs jəɹ ɛnəmiz. jə wɝ bɪtʃɹeɪd, laɪk ɔl ʌv ʌs, baɪ vɑldə. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ɑɹ nɛvɝ ði ɛnəmiz ʌv ə pɝsən u wɔks ɪn ðə laɪt."

Galad waved a hand. "There was no resisting Gaebril, if what you have heard is true. As for your captivity, you did not trust your enemies. You were betrayed, like all of us, by Valda. The Children are never the enemies of a person who walks in the Light."

"æn pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə?" ʃi æskt.

"And Perrin Aybara?" she asked.

"ʃæɾoʊzpɔn."

"Shadowspawn."

"noʊ, sʌn. aɪ doʊn laɪk səm ə ðə θɪŋz hiz duɪŋ, bʌɾ aɪ pɹɑməs ju, hiz ə ɡʊd mæn."

"No, son. I don't like some of the things he is doing, but I promise you, he is a good man."

"ðɛn ðə tʃɹaɪəl wɪl pɹuv ðæt," ɡɑləd sɛd.

"Then the trial will prove that," Galad said.

"ɡʊd mɛn kən meɪk mɪsteɪks. ɪf jə pɹoʊsid wɪð ðɪs, ɪt kəɾ ɛn ɪn ə weɪ ðət nʌn ʌv əs wɪʃ."

"Good men can make mistakes. If you proceed with this, it could end in a way that none of us wish."

ɡɑləd fɹoʊz, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "mʌðɝ, ɑɹ jə ɪmplaɪɪŋ ðəɾ i ʃəd bi əlaʊd tə ɪskeɪp ɪz kɹaɪm?"

Galad froze, frowning. "Mother, are you implying that he should be allowed to escape his crime?"

"kʌm," ʃi sɛd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ. "sɪt bæk daʊn. jəɹ dɪziɪŋ mi wɪð ðət peɪsɪŋ əbaʊt."

"Come," she said, gesturing. "Sit back down. You're dizzying me with that pacing about."

pɝhæps hid ɹɪzən tə ðə pəzɪʃən ə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ oʊnli ɹisənli, bʌɾ i ɔlɹɛɾi sim tə bɹɪsəl ət teɪkɪŋ ən ɔɹɾɝ. hi dɪd sɪt, haʊɛvɝ.

Perhaps he'd risen to the position of Lord Captain Commander only recently, but he already seemed to bristle at taking an order. He did sit, however.

ɑdli, ʃi fɛlt laɪk ə kwin əɡɛn. ɡɑləd hædn sin əɹ dʊɹɪŋ ðə hɑɹd mʌnθs. hi θɔɾ ə hɝ əz ði oʊl mɔɹɡeɪs, soʊ ɝaʊn hɪm, ʃi æktʃəli  fɛlt laɪk ði oʊl mɔɹɡeɪs. ɔlmoʊst.

Oddly, she felt like a queen again. Galad hadn't seen her during the hard months. He thought of her as the old Morgase, so around him, she actually felt like the old Morgase. Almost.

naɪl hæd hɛld əɹ əz ə pɹɪznɝ, bʌt hæd ɹɪspɛktɪd hɝ, ən ʃi hæd bɪɡʌn tə θɪŋk ðət ʃi maɪt bi eɪbəl tə ɹɪspɛkt ɪm əz wɛl. wʌt hæd hæpən tə ðə bɔɹd wɛɹ ʃi ən naɪl hæd pleɪd stoʊnz soʊ ɔfən? ʃi heɪɾəd tə θɪŋk ʌv ɪt bɹoʊkən ɪn ðə sintʃæn əsɔlt.

Niall had held her as a prisoner, but had respected her, and she had begun to think that she might be able to respect him as well. What had happened to the board where she and Niall had played stones so often? She hated to think of it broken in the Seanchan assault.

wəd ɡɑləd bɪkʌm ə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ laɪk naɪl, əɹ pɝhæps sʌmwʌn bɛɾɝ? ðə kwin ɪn hɝ, ðə kwin ɹiəweɪkənd, wɑntəd tə faɪn ə weɪ tə bɹɪŋ ɪz laɪɾ aʊɾ ən staɪfəl ðə ʃædoʊ.

Would Galad become a Lord Captain Commander like Niall, or perhaps someone better? The Queen in her, the Queen reawakened, wanted to find a way to bring his light out and stifle the shadow.

"ɡɑləd," ʃi sɛd. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ tə du?"

"Galad," she said. "What are you going to do?"

"əbaʊt ðə tʃɹaɪəl?"

"About the trial?"

"noʊ. wɪð ðɪs ɑɹmi ʌv jʊɹz."

"No. With this army of yours."

"wi wɪl faɪɾ ət ðə læs bæɾəl."

"We will fight at the Last Battle."

"ædmɝəbəl," ʃi sɛd. "bʌt dʒju noʊ wʌt ðət minz?"

"Admirable," she said. "But do you know what that means?"

"ɪt minz faɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋsaɪd ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn."

"It means fighting alongside the Dragon Reborn."

"æn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"And the Aes Sedai."

"wi kən sɝv əlɔŋsaɪd ðə wɪtʃəz fəɹ ə taɪm, ɪf ɪts ɪn ðə neɪm ə ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ ɡʊd."

"We can serve alongside the witches for a time, if it is in the name of the greater good."

ʃi kloʊzd əɹ aɪz, bɹiðɪŋ aʊt. "ɡɑləd, lɪsən tə jɝsɛlf. jə neɪm əm wɪtʃəz? jə wɛn tə tʃɹeɪn wɪð ðɛm, pɝhæps tə bɪkʌm ə wɔɹɾɝ!"

She closed her eyes, breathing out. "Galad, listen to yourself. You name them witches? You went to train with them, perhaps to become a Warder!"

"jɛs."

"Yes."

ʃi oʊpən əɹ aɪz. hi sim soʊ ɝnɪst. bʌɾ ivən ðə moʊs dɛdli ən vaɪələn ə haʊnz kəd bi ɝnɪst. "du jə noʊ wʌt ðeɪ dɪd tə ɪleɪn, mʌðɝ?" hi æskt.

She opened her eyes. He seemed so earnest. But even the most deadly and violent of hounds could be earnest. "Do you know what they did to Elayne, Mother?" he asked.

"ju min luzɪŋ hɝ?" mɔɹɡeɪs stɪl hɑɹbɝɾ æŋɡɝ oʊvɝ ðæt.

"You mean losing her?" Morgase still harbored anger over that.

"ðeɪ sɛn əɹ aʊɾ ɑn mɪʃənz," hi sɛd, vɔɪs leɪst wɪð dɪsɡʌst. '"ðeɪ ɹəfjuz tə lemi si hɝ, pɹɑbli kəz ʃi wɑz aʊt biɪŋ pʊɾ ɪndə deɪnʒɝ. aɪ mɛɾ əɹ leɪɾɝ, aʊtsaɪd ðə taʊɝ."

"They sent her out on missions," he said, voice laced with disgust. '"They refused to let me see her, probably because she was out being put into danger. I met her later, outside the Tower."

"wɛɹ wɑz ʃi?" mɔɹɡeɪs æskt, iɡɝ.

"Where was she?" Morgase asked, eager.

"hɪɹ ɪn ðə saʊθ. maɪ mɛn neɪm ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪtʃəz. səmtaɪmz, aɪ wʌndɝ haʊ fɑɹ ɔf fɹəm ðə tʃɹuθ ðəɾ ɪz."

"Here in the south. My men name the Aes Sedai witches. Sometimes, I wonder how far off from the truth that is."

"ɡɑləd . . ."

"Galad . . ."

"nɑɾ ɔl wɪmən u wil ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɑɹ ivəl ɪnhɪɹənli," hi sɛd. "ðæɾ ɪz ə mɪsteɪkən tʃɹədɪʃən ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. ðə weɪ ʌv ðə laɪt dʌzn meɪk ðət kleɪm; ɪt dʒʌst sɛz ðət ðə tɛmteɪʃən tə juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ kən kɝʌpt. aɪ bɪliv ðət ðə wɪmən u naʊ ɹʌn ðə waɪt taʊɝ əv lɛt ðɛɹ skimz ən sɛlfɪʃ plɑts blaɪn ðɛm."

"Not all women who wield the One Power are evil inherently," he said. "That is a mistaken tradition of the Children. The Way of the Light doesn't make that claim; it just says that the temptation to use the One Power can corrupt. I believe that the women who now run the White Tower have let their schemes and selfish plots blind them."

ʃi nɑɾəd, nɑt wɪʃɪŋ tə ɑɹɡju ðə pɔɪnt. θæŋk ðə laɪɾ ɪleɪɾə wɑzn hɪɹ tə hɪɹ ðət lɑdʒɪk!

She nodded, not wishing to argue the point. Thank the Light Elaida wasn't here to hear that logic!

"iðɝ weɪ," hi sɛd. "wi wɪl faɪɾ əlɔŋsaɪd ðɛm, ən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən ðɪs pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə ɪf nid bi. ðə stʃɹʌɡəl əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ aʊtweɪz ɔl ʌðɝ kənsɝnz."

"Either way," he said. "We will fight alongside them, and the Dragon Reborn, and this Perrin Aybara if need be. The struggle against the Shadow outweighs all other concerns."

"ðɛn lɛɾ əs dʒɔɪn ðət stʃɹʌɡəl," ʃi sɛd. "ɡɑləd, fɝɡɛt ðɪs tʃɹaɪəl! eɪbɑɹə ɪntɛnz tə dɪsbæn səm ə hɪz ɑɹmi ən ɡɪv ðə ɹɛs tə ælθɹ."

"Then let us join that struggle," she said. "Galad, forget this trial! Aybara intends to disband some of his army and give the rest to al'Thor."

hi mɛɾ əɹ aɪz, ðən nɑɾəd. "jɛs. aɪ kən si naʊ ðət ðə pæɾɝn əz lɛd jə tə mi. wɪl tʃɹævəl wɪð ju. æftɝ ðə tʃɹaɪəl əz fɪnɪʃt."

He met her eyes, then nodded. "Yes. I can see now that the Pattern has led you to me. We will travel with you. After the trial has finished."

ʃi saɪd.

She sighed.

"aɪ doʊn də ðɪs baɪ tʃɔɪs," ɡɑləd sɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ əɡɛn. "eɪbɑɹə hɪmsɛlf sədʒɛstəd ðəɾ i bi tʃɹaɪd.

"I don't do this by choice," Galad said, rising again. "Aybara himself suggested that he be tried.

ðə mænz kɑnʃəns weɪz əɡɛns hɪm, ən tə dɪnaɪ hɪm ðɪs ɑpɝtunəɾi wəd bi ɹɔŋ. lɛɾ ɪm pɹuv ɪz ɪnəsəns tə ʌs, ən tə hɪmsɛlf. ðən wi kən kəntɪnju." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ɹitʃɪŋ aʊɾ ən tʌtʃɪŋ ðə waɪt-skæbɑɹɾɪd sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz dʒɹɛsɪŋ teɪbəl. "æn ɪf wi kəntɪnju wɪθaʊt hɪm, ðən hɪl ɹɛst ɪn ðə laɪt, hævɪŋ peɪd fəɹ ɪz kɹaɪmz." ɡɑləd," ʃi sɛd, "ju noʊ lini wɑz əmʌŋ ðə pipəl jə tʊk fɹəm pɛɹɪnz kæmp."

The man's conscience weighs against him, and to deny him this opportunity would be wrong. Let him prove his innocence to us, and to himself. Then we can continue." He hesitated, reaching out and touching the white-scabbarded sword on his dressing table. "And if we continue without him, then he will rest in the Light, having paid for his crimes." Galad," she said, "you know Lini was among the people you took from Perrin's camp."

ʃi ʃʊɾə spoʊkən ʌp, ɹɪvil hɝsɛlf tə mi. aɪ wʊɾə sɛɾ əɹ fɹi."

She should have spoken up, revealed herself to me. I would have set her free."

ən jɛt ʃi dɪd nɑt. aɪ hæv hɝd jə ɔl bʌt θɹɛɾənd tə ɛksəkjut ðə pɹɪznɝz ɪf pɛɹɪn dɪdn kʌm tə bæɾəl. wəd juv æktʃəli  dʌn ðɪs?" ðɛɹ wʊɾə əv bɪn ɑn ɪz hɛd."

And yet she did not. I have heard you all but threatened to execute the prisoners if Perrin didn't come to battle. Would you have actually done this?" Their blood would have been on his head."

"liniz blʌd, ɡɑləd?"

"Lini's blood, Galad?"

"aɪ... aɪ wʊɾə sin əɹ əmʌŋ əm ən ɹimuvd əɹ fɹəm deɪnʒɝ.".

"I... I would have seen her among them and removed her from danger.".

"soʊ jə wʊɾə kɪl ði ʌðɝz," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "pipəl u dɪd noʊ ɹɔŋ, hu wɝ ɪnəsən ə nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən biɪŋ bɪɡaɪl baɪ eɪbɑɹə?"

"So you would have killed the others," Morgase said. "People who did no wrong, who were innocent of nothing more than being beguiled by Aybara?"

"ði ɛksəkjuʃənz wəd nɛvɝ əv əkɝd. ɪt wɑz mɪɹli ə θɹɛt"

"The executions would never have occurred. It was merely a threat"

"ə laɪ."

"A lie."

"bɑ! wʌɾ ɪz ðə pɔɪn ə ðɪs, mʌðɝ?"

"Bah! What is the point of this, Mother?"

"tə meɪk jə θɪŋk, sʌn," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "ɪn weɪz ðəɾ aɪ ʃʊɾə ɛnkɝɪdʒ bɪfɔɹ, ɹæðɝ ðən livɪŋ jə tə jəɹ sɪmpəl ɪluʒənz. laɪf ɪz nɑt soʊ izi əz ðə tɔs ʌv ə kɔɪn, wʌn saɪɾ əɹ ði ʌðɝ. hæv aɪ ɛvɝ toʊl jə ʌv ðə tʃɹaɪəl ə θæm fɛlmli?"

"To make you think, son," Morgase said. "In ways that I should have encouraged before, rather than leaving you to your simple illusions. Life is not so easy as the toss of a coin, one side or the other. Have I ever told you of the trial of Tham Felmley?"

ɡɑləd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, lʊkɪŋ ɪɹəteɪɾəd.

Galad shook his head, looking irritated.

"lɪsən tə mi. hi wɑz ə bɹɪkmeɪsən ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, ə ɹɛpjəɾəbəl wʌn. hi wɑz əkjuzd ə mɝɾɝɪŋ ɪz bɹʌðɝ ɪn ði ɝli deɪz ə maɪ ɹeɪn. hi hæɾ ɪnʌf ɹipjut, ən ðə keɪs wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪnʌf, ðəɾ aɪ dʒʌdʒd ɪt maɪsɛlf. hi hæŋd ət ði ɛn ʌv ɪt."

"Listen to me. He was a brickmason in Caemlyn, a reputable one. He was accused of murdering his brother in the early days of my reign. He had enough repute, and the case was important enough, that I judged it myself. He hanged at the end of it."

"ə fɪɾɪŋ ɛn fəɹ ə mɝɾɝɝ."

"A fitting end for a murderer."

"jɛs," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ðə mɝɾɝɝ wɛn fɹi. wʌn ə hɪz wɝkɝz hæɾ æktʃəli  dʌn ðə did. ɪt dɪdn kʌm aʊɾ əntɪl tu jɪɹz leɪɾɝ, wən ðə mæn wɑz teɪkən fəɹ ənʌðɝ mɝɾɝ. hi læft əɾ əs ðɛn, əz wi hæŋ hɪm. fɛlmli hæd bɪn ɪnəsən ɔl əlɔŋ. ðə ɹil mæn, ðə mɝɾɝɝ, wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz tə kəndɛm ɪm dʊɹɪŋ ði ɝɪdʒənəl tʃɹaɪəl."

"Yes," Morgase said. "Unfortunately, the murderer went free. One of his workers had actually done the deed. It didn't come out until two years later, when the man was taken for another murder. He laughed at us then, as we hanged him. Felmley had been innocent all along. The real man, the murderer, was one of those to condemn him during the original trial."

ɡɑləd fɛl saɪlənt.

Galad fell silent.

"ɪts ði oʊnli taɪm," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd, "wɛɹ aɪ noʊ fəɹ sɝɾən ðəɾ aɪ hæŋ sʌmwʌn baɪ mɪsteɪk. soʊ jə tɛl mi, ɡɑləd. ʃəɾ aɪ hæŋ fəɹ maɪ mɪsteɪk ɪn kəndɛmɪŋ ən ɪnəsən mæn?"

"It's the only time," Morgase said, "where I know for certain that I hanged someone by mistake. So you tell me, Galad. Should I hang for my mistake in condemning an innocent man?"

"ju dɪd jəɹ bɛst, mʌðɝ."

"You did your best, Mother."

"æn ə mæn ɪz stɪl dɛɾ u dɪd nɑt dɪzɝv ɪt."

"And a man is still dead who did not deserve it."

ɡɑləd lʊk tʃɹʌbəld.

Galad looked troubled.

"ðə tʃɪlʒɹən laɪk tə spik ə ðə laɪt pɹətɛktɪŋ ðɛm," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd, "ʌv ɡaɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ dʒʌdʒmən ən liɾɪŋ pipəl tə dʒʌstəs. ðəɾ ɪzən haʊ ɪt wɝks, ɡɑləd. vɑldə, kleɪmɪŋ ðə blɛsɪŋ ə ðə laɪt, kəd də tɛɹəbəl θɪŋz. ən aɪ, hoʊpɪŋ fəɹ ðə laɪts eɪd, hæv kɪld əndʒʌsli.

"The Children like to speak of the Light protecting them," Morgase said, "of guiding their judgment and leading people to justice. That isn't how it works, Galad. Valda, claiming the blessing of the Light, could do terrible things. And I, hoping for the Light's aid, have killed unjustly.

"aɪm nɑt seɪɪŋ ðəɾ eɪbɑɹə ɪz ɪnəsənt. aɪ hævən hɝɾ ɪnʌf iðɝ weɪ. bʌɾ aɪ wɑn jə tə ʌndɝstænd. səmtaɪmz ə ɡʊd mæn kən də ɹɔŋ. ət taɪmz, ɪts əpɹoʊpɹiət tə pʌnɪʃ hɪm. əɾ ʌðɝ taɪmz, pʌnɪʃmən sɝvz noʊbɑdi, ən ðə bɛs θɪŋ tə də ɪz tə lɛɾ ɪm kəntɪnju ən lɝn. əz aɪ kəntɪnjuɾ ən lɝnd, æftɝ meɪkɪŋ sətʃ ə pʊɹ dʒʌdʒmənt."

"I'm not saying that Aybara is innocent. I haven't heard enough either way. But I want you to understand. Sometimes a good man can do wrong. At times, it is appropriate to punish him. At other times, punishment serves nobody, and the best thing to do is to let him continue and learn. As I continued and learned, after making such a poor judgment."

ɡɑləd fɹaʊnd. ðət wɑz ɡʊd. faɪnəli, hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, hɪz feɪs klɪɹɪŋ. "wi ʃæl si wʌt ðə tʃɹaɪəl bɹɪŋz. ɪt - "

Galad frowned. That was good. Finally, he shook his head, his face clearing. "We shall see what the trial brings. It - "

ðəɹ wɑz ə nɑk ɑn ðə poʊst aʊtsaɪd. ɡɑləd tɝnd, hɪz fɹaʊn dip-ɛnɪŋ. "jɛs?"

There was a knock on the post outside. Galad turned, his frown deep-ening. "Yes?"

"maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," ə waɪtkloʊk sɛd, lɪftɪŋ ðə næp ændstɛpɪŋ ɪndə ðə tɛnt. hi wɑz ə lin mæn wɪð sʌŋkən aɪz ðət hæd dɑɹk pætʃəz bɪniθ ðɛm. "wiv dʒʌs hæd wɝd fɹəm ðə kɹitʃɝ eɪ-bɑɹəz kæmp. ðəɹ æskɪŋ tə pʊʃ bæk ðə deɪ ʌv ðə tʃɹaɪəl."

"My Lord Captain Commander," a Whitecloak said, lifting the nap andstepping into the tent. He was a lean man with sunken eyes that had dark patches beneath them. "We've just had word from the creature Ay-bara's camp. They're asking to push back the day of the trial."

ɡɑləd stʊd. "fɔɹ wʌt pɝpəs?" hi dɪmændəd.

Galad stood. "For what purpose?" he demanded.

"ə dɪstɝbəns ɪn ðɛɹ kæmp, ðeɪ kleɪm," ðə waɪtkloʊk sɛd. "sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt wundəd niɾɪŋ tɛndɪŋ. maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ ... ɪts ɑbviəsli ə plɔɪ. ə tʃɹɪk ə səm sɔɹt. wi ʃəɾ ətæk ðɛm, əɹ ət ðə vɛɹi list, dɪnaɪ ðɪs pɔɪnləs ɪkstɛnʃən."

"A disturbance in their camp, they claim," the Whitecloak said. "Something about wounded needing tending. My Lord Captain Commander ... it is obviously a ploy. A trick of some sort. We should attack them, or at the very least, deny this pointless extension."

ɡɑləd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. hi lʊkt ət mɔɹɡeɪs.

Galad hesitated. He looked at Morgase.

"ɪɾ ɪz noʊ plɔɪ, sʌn," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ kən pɹɑməs jə ðæt. ɪf eɪbɑɹə sɛz i nidz mɔɹ taɪm, hiz biɪŋ ɑnəst wɪð ju."

"It is no ploy, son," she said. "I can promise you that. If Aybara says he needs more time, he's being honest with you."

"bɑ," ɡɑləd sɛd, weɪvɪŋ ðə mɛsənʒɝ əweɪ. "aɪ ʃæl kənsɪɾɝ ɪt. əlɔŋsaɪd ðə θɪŋz juv sɛd, mʌðɝ. pɝhæps səm ɛkstʃɹə taɪm tə kənsɪɾɝ wəd bi . . . wɛlkəmd."

"Bah," Galad said, waving the messenger away. "I shall consider it. Alongside the things you have said, Mother. Perhaps some extra time to consider would be . . . welcomed."

"ðə tʃænlɝz seɪ ðeɪ ɑɹ wɝkɪŋ əz hɑɹɾ əz ðeɪ kæn," ɡɔl ɪkspleɪnd, wɔkɪŋ bɪsaɪd pɛɹɪn ðoʊ kæmp əz ðeɪ tʃɛk ðə vɛɹiəs sɛkʃənz. "bʌt ðeɪ seɪ ɪt kəd teɪk deɪz tə si tə ɛvɹiwʌn."

"The channelers say they are working as hard as they can," Gaul explained, walking beside Perrin though camp as they checked the various sections. "But they say it could take days to see to everyone."

ðə sʌn wɑz sɪŋkɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə hɝaɪzən, bʌɾ ɪt wəd pɹɑbli bi ə lɔŋ naɪt fəɹ mɛni ʌv ðɛm, tɛndɪŋ ðə wundəd. θaʊzənz hæd bɪn wundəd, ðoʊ moʊst wunz - fɔɹtʃənətli - wɝ nɑt bæd. ðeɪd lɔst səm pipəl. tu mɛni, meɪbi əz mɛni əz hæd fɔlən tə ðə sneɪk baɪts.

The sun was sinking toward the horizon, but it would probably be a long night for many of them, tending the wounded. Thousands had been wounded, though most wounds - fortunately - were not bad. They'd lost some people. Too many, maybe as many as had fallen to the snake bites.

pɛɹɪn ɡɹʌntɪd. ɡɔl hɪmsɛlf hæɾ ɪz ɑɹm ɪn ə slɪŋ; hid fɛndɪɾ ɔf ɪz spɪɹz, oʊnli tə hæv wʌn ə hɪz æɹoʊz nɪɹli kɪl hɪm. hid blɑkt ɪt wɪð ɪz fɔɹɑɹm. wən pɛɹɪn hæɾ æskt, hid læft ən sɛd ðəɾ ɪt hæd bɪn jɪɹz sɪns hid ʃɑt hɪmsɛlf wɪð ɪz oʊn æɹoʊ. il hjumɝ.

Perrin grunted. Gaul himself had his arm in a sling; he'd fended off his spears, only to have one of his arrows nearly kill him. He'd blocked it with his forearm. When Perrin had asked, he'd laughed and said that it had been years since he'd shot himself with his own arrow. Aiel humor.

"hæv wi hɝd bæk fɹəm ðə waɪtkloʊks?" pɛɹɪn æskt, tɝnɪŋ tə ɝɑvin, hu wɔkt ɑn ɪz ʌðɝ saɪd.

"Have we heard back from the Whitecloaks?" Perrin asked, turning to Aravine, who walked on his other side.

jɛs," ʃi sɛd. "bʌt nʌθɪŋ spəsɪfɪk. ðɛɹ kəmændɝ sɛd hid θɪŋk' əbaʊt ɡɪvɪŋ əs mɔɹ taɪm."

Yes," she said. "But nothing specific. Their commander said he'd think' about giving us more time."

wɛl, hiz nɑt ðə wʌn u wɪl dɪsaɪd," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ɡoʊɪŋ ɪndə ðə minɝ sɛkʃən ə kæmp tə tʃɛk ɑn bɹəleɪnz pipəl. "aɪm nɑt gɑnə ɹɪsk ə bæɾəl wɪð ə kɔɹɾɝ ə maɪ mɛn wundəɾ ən maɪ æʃəmən dɛd taɪɝd fɹəm hilɪŋ. wi ɡoʊ tə ðɪs tʃɹaɪəl wən aɪ seɪ soʊ, ən ɪf dəmədʒɹd dɪsəɡɹiz, hi kən dʒʌst ɡoʊ əhɛɾ ən ətæk ʌs."

Well, he's not the one who will decide," Perrin said, going into the Mayener section of camp to check on Berelain's people. "I'm not going to risk a battle with a quarter of my men wounded and my Asha'man dead tired from Healing. We go to this trial when I say so, and if Damodred disagrees, he can just go ahead and attack us."

ɡɔl ɡɹʌntɪɾ ɪz əɡɹimənt. hi wɔɹ ɪz spɪɹz, bʌt pɛɹɪn noʊɾəst ðeɪ wɝ stʃɹæp mɔɹ taɪtli ɪn pleɪs ðən juʒəwəl. ɝɑvin kæɹiɾ ə læn-tɝn, ðoʊ ðeɪ hædnt niɾəd tə laɪɾ ɪt jɛt. ʃi wɑz æntɪsəpeɪɾɪŋ ə leɪt naɪɾ əz wɛl.

Gaul grunted his agreement. He wore his spears, but Perrin noticed they were strapped more tightly in place than usual. Aravine carried a lan-tern, though they hadn't needed to light it yet. She was anticipating a late night as well.

"lɛt mi noʊ wən tɑɹn ən ɛlaɪəs ɡɛt bæk," pɛɹɪn sɛd tə ɡɔl. pɛɹɪn hæd sɛn itʃ wʌn sɛpɝətli tə vɪzət nɪɹbaɪ vɪlədʒəz ən meɪk sɝɾən ðə pipəl ðəɹ - ðə wʌnz u hædn dʒɔɪn ə pæsɪŋ ɑɹmi - hædn sʌfɝd fɹəm ðə bʌbəl ʌv ivəl.

"Let me know when Tarn and Elyas get back," Perrin said to Gaul. Perrin had sent each one separately to visit nearby villages and make certain the people there - the ones who hadn't joined a passing army - hadn't suffered from the bubble of evil.

bɹəleɪn hæd kəmpoʊz hɝsɛlf, hɝ hæn bændədʒd. ʃi ɡeɪv ðə ɹipɔɹt tə hɪm hɝsɛlf, fɹəm əɹ tɛnt, seɪɪŋ haʊ mɛni ʌv əɹ soʊlʒɝz hæd bɪn wundəd, ɡɪvɪŋ ðə neɪmz ə ðə mɛn ðeɪd lɔst.

Berelain had composed herself, her hand bandaged. She gave the report to him herself, from her tent, saying how many of her soldiers had been wounded, giving the names of the men they'd lost.

oʊnli sɪks fɹəm əɹ kæmp.

Only six from her camp.

pɛɹɪn jɔn əz i lɛf ðə tɛnt, sɛndɪŋ ɝɑvin tə tʃɛk ɑn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɡɔl hæd ɹʌn ɔf tə hɛlp wɪð kæɹiɪŋ səm ə ðə wundəd, ən pɛɹɪn faʊn hɪmsɛlf əloʊn əz i wɔk daʊn ðə pæθ təwɔɹɾ æliændɝz sɛkʃən ə kæmp.

Perrin yawned as he left the tent, sending Aravine to check on the Aes Sedai. Gaul had run off to help with carrying some of the wounded, and Perrin found himself alone as he walked down the path toward Alliandre's section of camp.

hɪz hæmɝ hædn tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl hɪm. soʊ fɑɹ əz i nu, ɪt wɑz ði oʊnli wɛpən ɑn ɛniwʌnz pɝsən ðət hædn ɹɪspɑndɪd tə ðə bʌbəl ʌv ivəl. wʌɾ ɪt min?

His hammer hadn't tried to kill him. So far as he knew, it was the only weapon on anyone's person that hadn't responded to the bubble of evil. What did it mean?

hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ðən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, pɔzɪŋ ɪn θɔɾ əz i hɝd sʌmwʌn dʒɑɡɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə pæθ təwɔɹd hɪm. hi kɑt tɑɹnz sɛnt, ən tɝn tə mit ðə stɝɾi mæn əz i ɝaɪvd.

He shook his head, then hesitated, pausing in thought as he heard someone jogging along the path toward him. He caught Tarn's scent, and turned to meet the sturdy man as he arrived.

"pɛɹɪn, sʌn," tæm sɛd, aʊɾ ə bɹɛθ fɹəm ɹʌnɪŋ. "sʌmθɪŋ ənjuʒəwəl dʒʌs hæpənd."

"Perrin, son," Tam said, out of breath from running. "Something unusual just happened."

"ðə bʌbəl ʌv ivəl hɪt ðə vɪlədʒ?" pɛɹɪn æskt, əlɑɹmd. "wɝ pipəl hɝt?"

"The bubble of evil hit the village?" Perrin asked, alarmed. "Were people hurt?"

"oʊ, noʊ," tæm sɛd. "nɑt ðæt. ðə vɪlədʒ wɑz faɪn. ðeɪ dɪdn ivən noʊɾəs ɛniθɪŋ wɑz ɹɔŋ.

"Oh, no," Tam said. "Not that. The village was fine. They didn't even notice anything was wrong.

ðɪs ɪz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls." tæm smɛld ɑd. θɔtfəl, wɝid.

This is something else." Tam smelled odd. Thoughtful, worried.

pɛɹɪn fɹaʊnd. "wʌt? wʌts hæpənɪŋ?"

Perrin frowned. "What? What's happening?"

"aɪ . . . wɛl, aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ, sʌn," tæm sɛd. "liv ðə kæmp. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wən əl bi bæk."

"I . . . well, I have to go, son," Tam said. "Leave the camp. I don't know when I'll be back."

"ɪz ðɪs - "

"Is this - "

"ɪɾ əz nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə waɪtkloʊks," tæm sɛd. "aɪv bɪn toʊld aɪ kæn seɪ mʌtʃ. bʌɾ ɪts əbaʊt ɹænd."

"It has nothing to do with the Whitecloaks," Tam said. "I've been told I can't say much. But it's about Rand."

ðə kʌlɝz swɝld. ɹænd wɔk ðə hɔlweɪz ə ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ. hɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən wɑz dɑɹk.

The colors swirled. Rand walked the hallways of the Stone of Tear. His expression was dark.

deɪnʒɝəs.

Dangerous.

"pɛɹɪn," tæm sɛd, "aɪ θɪŋk ðɪs ɪz sʌmθɪŋ aɪ nid tə du. ɪɾ ɪnvɑlvz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən aɪ hæv tə liv jə naʊ. aɪ kæn seɪ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. ðeɪ meɪd mi swɛɹ ɪt."

"Perrin," Tam said, "I think this is something I need to do. It involves Aes Sedai, and I have to leave you now. I can't say anything else. They made me swear it."

pɛɹɪn lʊkt ɪndə tɑɹnz aɪz ən sɔ ðə sənsɛɹəɾi ðɛɹ. hi nɑɾəd.

Perrin looked into Tarn's eyes and saw the sincerity there. He nodded.

"ɔl ɹaɪt, ðɛn. jə niɾ ɛni hɛlp? sʌmwʌn tə ɡoʊ wɪð ju, wɛɹɛvɝ jəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ?"

"All right, then. You need any help? Someone to go with you, wherever you're going?"

"aɪl bi ɔl ɹaɪt," tɑɹn sɛd. hi smɛld ɪmbɛɹəst. wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn? "aɪl tʃɹaɪ tə ɡɛt jə səm hɛlp, sʌn." hi leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn pɛɹɪnz ʃoʊldɝ. "juv dʌn wɛl hɪɹ. aɪm pɹaʊɾ ə ju, ən jəɹ fɑðɝ wəd bi tu. kip ɪɾ ʌp. əl si jə ət ðə læs bæɾəl, ɪf nɑt bɪfɔɹ."

"I'll be all right," Tarn said. He smelled embarrassed. What was going on? "I'll try to get you some help, son." He laid a hand on Perrin's shoulder. "You've done well here. I'm proud of you, and your father would be too. Keep it up. I'll see you at the Last Battle, if not before."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. tɑɹn hɝiɾ ɔf təwɔɹɾ ɪz tɛnt, pɝhæps tə pæk.

Perrin nodded. Tarn hurried off toward his tent, perhaps to pack.

ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə lʊk ɹiɡəl waɪl biɪŋ kæɹiɾ ətɑp ðə keɪɛmlɪn sɪɾi wɔl ɑn ə lɪɾɝ, bʌɾ ɪleɪn dɪɾ əɹ bɛst. səmtaɪmz ɡɛɾɪŋ wʌt jə wɑntəd wɑz mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən lʊkɪŋ ɹiɡəl.

It was hard to look regal while being carried atop the Caemlyn city wall on a litter, but Elayne did her best. Sometimes getting what you wanted was more important than looking regal.

bɛd ɹɛst! fəɹ ə kwin! wɛl, ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə kip mɛlfən fɹəm hʌvɝɪŋ oʊvɝ hɝ, ʃid ɡɪvən ən oʊθ ðət ʃi wəd steɪ ɔf əɹ fit. bʌt ʃid sɛd nʌθɪŋ əbaʊt steɪɪŋ ɪn əɹ bɛdʒɹum.

Bed rest! For a queen! Well, in order to keep Melfane from hovering over her, she'd given an oath that she would stay off her feet. But she'd said nothing about staying in her bedroom.

fɔɹ ɡɑɹdzmɪn kæɹid ðə lɪɾɝ haɪ ɑn ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ɪleɪn sæt seɪfli bɪtwin ɑɹmɹɛsts, wɛɹɪŋ ə kɹɪmzən ɡaʊn, hɛɹ kɛɹfəli bɹʌʃt, ðə ɹoʊz kɹaʊn ʌv ændɝ ətɑp əɹ hɛd.

Four Guardsmen carried the litter high on their shoulders. Elayne sat safely between armrests, wearing a crimson gown, hair carefully brushed, the Rose Crown of Andor atop her head.

ðə deɪ wɑz mʌɡi, ðə wɛðɝ tɝnɪŋ wɔɹm, ðə skaɪ stɪl dɑɹk wɪð klaʊdz. ʃi spɛɹɾ ə moʊmən tə fil ɡɪlti fəɹ meɪkɪŋ ðə pʊɹ mɛn, ɪn dʒɹɛs junəfɔɹm, kæɹi hɝ θɹu ðɪs ɝli-sʌmɝ hit. bʌt ðiz mɛn wəd ɹaɪd tə bæɾəl ɪn əɹ neɪm; ðeɪ kəd stæn ə lɪɾəl wɔɹm wɛðɝ. haʊ ɔfən dɪd ɡɑɹdzmɪn ɡɛt ði ɑnɝ ə kæɹiɪŋ ðɛɹ kwin, ɛniweɪ?

The day was muggy, the weather turning warm, the sky still dark with clouds. She spared a moment to feel guilty for making the poor men, in dress uniform, carry her through this early-summer heat. But these men would ride to battle in her name; they could stand a little warm weather. How often did Guardsmen get the honor of carrying their queen, anyway?

bɝdʒɪt stʃɹoʊɾ əlɔŋsaɪd ðə bɛd, ən ðə bɑn ɪndəkeɪɾəd ðət ʃi wɑz əmjuzd. ɪleɪn hæd fɪɹd ʃid tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp ðɪs ɪkskɝʒən, bʌɾ ɪnstɛd ʃi hæd læft! bɝdʒɪt mʌst əv dɪtɝmən ðət ðɪs deɪz æktɪvəɾiz - ðoʊ baʊn tə əpsɛt mɛlfən - wɝ noʊ ɹil ɹɪsk tə ɪleɪn əɹ əɹ beɪbz. tə ðə wɔɹɾɝ, ðət mɛn ðɪs wɑz ən ɑpɝtunəɾi tə si ɪleɪn ɡɛt pɝeɪɾɪd θɹu taʊn lʊkɪŋ fulɪʃ.

Birgitte strode alongside the bed, and the bond indicated that she was amused. Elayne had feared she'd try to stop this excursion, but instead she had laughed! Birgitte must have determined that this day's activities - though bound to upset Melfane - were no real risk to Elayne or her babes. To the Warder, that meant this was an opportunity to see Elayne get paraded through town looking foolish.

ɪleɪn wɪnst. wʌt wəd ðə pipəl seɪ? ðə kwin, ɹaɪɾɪŋ ə lɪɾɝ, biɪŋ mɑɹtʃt tə ði aʊɾɝ wɔl? wɛl, ɪleɪn wɑzn əbaʊt tə lɛt ɹumɝz kip əɹ fɹəm siɪŋ ðə tɛs fɝsthænd, ən ʃi wɑzn əbaʊt tə bi bʊlid baɪ ə tɝænɪkəl mɪdwaɪf.

Elayne winced. What would the people say? The Queen, riding a litter, being marched to the outer wall? Well, Elayne wasn't about to let rumors keep her from seeing the test firsthand, and she wasn't about to be bullied by a tyrannical midwife.

ʃi hæd kwaɪɾ ə vju fɹəm ðə wɔl. ðə filz liɾɪŋ tə ɑɹɪŋɡəl leɪ oʊpən tə hɝ lɛft; ðə sɪɾi bʌsəl tə hɝ ɹaɪt. ðoʊz filz wɝ tu bɹaʊn. ɹɪpɔɹts fɹəm ɝaʊn ðə ɹɛlm wɝ daɪɹ. naɪn filz ɪn tɛn hæd feɪld.

She had quite a view from the wall. The fields leading to Aringill lay open to her left; the city bustled to her right. Those fields were too brown. Reports from around the realm were dire. Nine fields in ten had failed.

ɪleɪnz pɔɹɾɝz kæɹiɾ əɹ ʌp tə wʌn ə ðə wɔlz taʊɝ tɝəts, ðən hɪɾ ə snæɡ əz ðeɪ ɹilaɪz ðə poʊlz ɑn ðə lɪɾɝ wɝ tu lɔŋ tə meɪk ðə tɝnz ɑn ðə stɛɹz ɪnsaɪd ðə taʊɝ; ðə dɛmənstʃɹeɪʃən wɑz səpoʊz tə hæpən ətɑp ɪt. lʌkəli, ðəɹ wɝ ɔltɝnəɾɪv ʃɔɹt hændhoʊlz fəɹ dʒʌst sətʃ sɪtʃueɪʃənz. ðeɪ ɹimuv ðə poʊlz, swɪtʃt tə ðə hændhoʊlz, ən pɹoʊ-tʃiɾəd.

Elayne's porters carried her up to one of the wall's tower turrets, then hit a snag as they realized the poles on the litter were too long to make the turns on the stairs inside the tower; the demonstration was supposed to happen atop it. Luckily, there were alternative short handholds for just such situations. They removed the poles, switched to the handholds, and pro-ceeded.

waɪl ðeɪ kæɹiɾ əɹ ʌp, ʃi dɪstʃɹæktəd hɝsɛlf baɪ θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt kɛɹhin. ðə noʊbəl haʊsəz ðəɹ ɔl kleɪm tə bi iɡɝli əweɪɾɪŋ əɹ ɑɹ-ɹaɪvəl tə teɪk ðə θɹoʊn, ən jɛt nʌn ɔfɝd mɔɹ ðən ðə moʊs flæksɪd səpɔɹt. deɪz deɪmɑɹ wɑz fʊli ɪn ɪfɛkt, ən ðə pɑstʃɝɪŋ fəɹ ɪleɪnz əsɛnt - əɹ əɹ feɪljɝ tə əsɛnd - hæd bɪɡʌn ðə moʊmən ɹænd hæd mɛnʃən ðəɾ i ɪntɛndəd ðə neɪʃən tə bi hɝz.

While they carried her up, she distracted herself by thinking about Cairhien. The noble Houses there all claimed to be eagerly awaiting her ar-rival to take the throne, and yet none offered more than the most flaccid support. Daes Dae'mar was fully in effect, and the posturing for Elayne's ascent - or her failure to ascend - had begun the moment Rand had mentioned that he intended the nation to be hers.

ɪn kɛɹhin, ə hʌnʒɹəd dɪfɹən pəlɪɾəkəl wɪnz ɔlweɪz blu ɪn ə hʌnʒɹəd dɪfɹən dɝɛkʃənz.

In Cairhien, a hundred different political winds always blew in a hundred different directions.

ʃi dɪdn əv taɪm tə lɝn ɔl ə ðə dɪfɹən fækʃənz bɪfɔɹ ʃi tʊk ðə θɹoʊn. bɪsaɪdz, ɪf ʃi wɑz sin əz pleɪɪŋ ðə ɡeɪm, ʃi kəd bi sin əz sʌmwʌn tə dɪfit. ʃi hæd tə faɪn ə weɪ tə siz ðə sʌn θɹoʊn wɪθaʊt mɪksɪŋ tu mʌtʃ ɪn ðə loʊkəl haʊs pɑlətɪks.

She didn't have time to learn all of the different factions before she took the throne. Besides, if she was seen as playing the game, she could be seen as someone to defeat. She had to find a way to seize the Sun Throne without mixing too much in the local House politics.

ɪleɪnz lɪɾɝ kɹikt ʌp ən kɹɛstəd ðə lɪp ə ðə taʊɝz tɝət. ətɑp ðə taʊɝ, ɑlʌdʒɹə stʊd wɪð wʌn ə hɝ pɹoʊɾətaɪp dʒɹæɡənz. ðə bɹɑnz tub wɑz kwaɪt lɔŋ ən sɛɾ ɪn ə fɹeɪmwɝk ʌv wʊd. ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ə dʌmi, fəɹ dɪspleɪ. ə sɛkənd, wɝkɪŋ dʒɹæɡən hæd bɪn sɛɾ ʌp ətɑp ðə nɛks taʊɝ daʊn ðə wɔl. ɪt wɑz fɑɹ ɪnʌf əweɪ ðəɾ ɪleɪn wʊdn bi ɪn deɪnʒɝ ɪf sʌmθɪŋ wɛn ɹɔŋ.

Elayne's litter creaked up and crested the lip of the tower's turret. Atop the tower, Aludra stood with one of her prototype dragons. The bronze tube was quite long and set in a framework of wood. It was just a dummy, for display. A second, working dragon had been set up atop the next tower down the wall. It was far enough away that Elayne wouldn't be in danger if something went wrong.

ðə slɛndɝ tæɹɑbənɝ wʊmən sim tə teɪk noʊ θɔt fəɹ ðə fæk ðət ʃi wɑz dɪlɪvɝɪŋ ə pətɛnʃəli wɝld-tʃeɪnʒɪŋ wɛpən tə ðə kwin ʌv ə fɔɹən kʌntʃɹi; ɔl ɑlʌdʒɹə sim tə wɑnt wɑz ə weɪ tə ɡɛt bæk ət ðə sintʃæn, əɹ soʊ mæt hæɾ ɪkspleɪnd. ɪleɪn hæd spɛn səm taɪm wɪð ðə wʊmən waɪl tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð lukəz mənædʒɝi, bʌt stɪl wɑzn sɝɾən haʊ tʃɹʌstwɝði ʃi wɑz. ʃiɾ əv mæstɝ nɔɹi kip ən aɪ ɑn hɝ.

The slender Taraboner woman seemed to take no thought for the fact that she was delivering a potentially world-changing weapon to the queen of a foreign country; all Aludra seemed to want was a way to get back at the Seanchan, or so Mat had explained. Elayne had spent some time with the woman while traveling with Luca's menagerie, but still wasn't certain how trustworthy she was. She'd have Master Norry keep an eye on her.

əsumɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs, ðə dʒɹæɡənz wɝkt. ɪleɪn spɛɹɾ ənʌðɝ ɡlæns fəɹ ðə pipəl daʊn bɪloʊ. oʊnli ðən dɪd ʃi ɹilaɪz haʊ haɪ ʌp ʃi ɹɪli wɑz. laɪt!

Assuming, of course, the dragons worked. Elayne spared another glance for the people down below. Only then did she realize how high up she really was. Light!

aɪm seɪf, ʃi ɹimaɪndəd hɝsɛlf. mɪnz vjuɪŋ. nɑt ðət ʃi sɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ðət tə bɝdʒɪt, nɑɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. ən ʃi dɪɾ ɪntɛn tə stɑp teɪkɪŋ soʊ mɛni ɹɪsks. ðɪs wɑzn ə ɹɪsk. nɑt ɹɪli.

I'm safe, she reminded herself. Min's viewing. Not that she said anything like that to Birgitte, not any longer. And she did intend to stop taking so many risks. This wasn't a risk. Not really.

ʃi tɝn əweɪ bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɡɹu dɪzi ən ɪnspɛktɪd ðə dʒɹæɡən mɔɹ kloʊsli. ɪt wɑz ʃeɪp laɪk ə lɑɹdʒ bɹɑnz bɛl, ðoʊ lɔŋɡɝ ən nɛɹoʊɝ. laɪk ən ɪnɔɹməs veɪs tɝn ɑn ɪts saɪd. ɪleɪn hæd ɹəsiv mɔɹ ðən wʌn mɪsɪv fɹəm ðə sɪɾiz aɪɹeɪt bɛlfndɝz. ɑlʌdʒɹə ɪnsɪstəd ðəɾ əɹ ɔɹɾɝz bi kæɹiɾ aʊɾ ɪɡzækli ən hæd fɔɹs ðə mɛn tə ɹikæs ðə tub θɹi taɪmz.

She turned away before she grew dizzy and inspected the dragon more closely. It was shaped like a large bronze bell, though longer and narrower. Like an enormous vase turned on its side. Elayne had received more than one missive from the city's irate bellfounders. Aludra insisted that her orders be carried out exactly and had forced the men to recast the tube three times.

leɪt ðə pɹiviəs naɪt, ə laʊd kɹæk hæd saʊndəɾ əkɹɔs ðə sɪɾi. əz ɛn stoʊn wɔl hæd fɔlən sʌmwɛɹ əɹ ə boʊlt ə laɪtnɪŋ hæd stʃɹʌk. ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ ɪleɪn hæd ɹəsivd ə noʊt fɹəm ɑlʌdʒɹə.

Late the previous night, a loud crack had sounded across the city. As n stone wall had fallen somewhere or a bolt of lightning had struck. This morning Elayne had received a note from Aludra.

fɝs tɛst ə səksɛs, ɪt hæd ɹɛd. mit mi tədeɪ ɑn sɪɾi wɔl fəɹ dɛmənstʃɹeɪʃən.

First test a success, it had read. Meet me today on city wall for demonstration.

"jɔɹ mædʒəsti," ɑlʌdʒɹə sɛd. "ju ɑɹ . . . wɛl, jɛs?"

"Your Majesty," Aludra said. "You are . . . well, yes?"

"aɪ wɪl bi faɪn, ɑlʌdʒɹə," ɪleɪn sɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪnteɪn əɹ dɪɡnəɾi. "ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪz ɹɛɾi?"

"I will be fine, Aludra," Elayne said, trying to maintain her dignity. "The dragon is ready?"

"ɪɾ ɪz," ɑlʌdʒɹə sɛd. ʃi wɔɹ ə lɔŋ bɹaʊn dʒɹɛs, hɝ blæk weɪvi hɛɹ lus, kʌmɪŋ daʊn tə hɝ weɪst. waɪ noʊ bɹeɪdz tədeɪ? ɑlʌdʒɹə dɪdn sim tə kɛɹ fəɹ dʒuəlɹi, ən ɪleɪn hæd nɛvɝ sin əɹ wɛɹ ɛni. ə ɡɹup ə faɪv mɛn fɹəm mæts bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hæn stʊd wɪð hɝ, wʌn kæɹiɪŋ wʌɾ əpɪɹd tə bi ə tʃɪmni bɹʌʃ ə səm sɔɹt. ənʌðɝ hæɾ ə mɛɾəl sfɪɹ ɪn ɪz hænz, ən ənʌðɝ kæɹiɾ ə smɔl wʊɾən kæsk.

"It is," Aludra said. She wore a long brown dress, her black wavy hair loose, coming down to her waist. Why no braids today? Aludra didn't seem to care for jewelry, and Elayne had never seen her wear any. A group of five men from Mat's Band of the Red Hand stood with her, one carrying what appeared to be a chimney brush of some sort. Another had a metal sphere in his hands, and another carried a small wooden cask.

ɪleɪn kəd si ə sɪməlɝ ɡɹup ɑn ðə nɛks taʊɝ oʊvɝ. sʌmwʌn ðəɹ ɹeɪzd ə hæɾ ɪndə ði ɛɹ ən weɪvd ət hɝ. mæt wɑntəd tə wɑtʃ fɹəm ðə taʊɝ wɪð ðə wɝkɪŋ dʒɹæɡən, ɪt simd.

Elayne could see a similar group on the next tower over. Someone there raised a hat into the air and waved at her. Mat wanted to watch from the tower with the working dragon, it seemed.

fulhɑɹɾi mæn. wʌɾ ɪf ðə θɪŋ ɪksploʊɾəd laɪk ə naɪtfloʊɝ?

Foolhardy man. What if the thing exploded like a nightflower?

"ðə dɛmənstʃɹeɪʃən, ðɛn," ɑlʌdʒɹə sɛd, "wi ʃæl bɪɡɪn. ðiz mɛn hɪɹ wɪl ʃoʊ jə wʌɾ ɪz biɪŋ dʌn ɑn ði ʌðɝ taʊɝ." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd əz ʃi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ɪleɪn. "hɝ mædʒəsti, aɪ θɪŋk wi ʃəd pɹɑp əɹ ʌp, soʊ ðət ʃi kən si ðə dɪspleɪ."

"The demonstration, then," Aludra said, "we shall begin. These men here will show you what is being done on the other tower." She hesitated as she regarded Elayne. "Her Majesty, I think we should prop her up, so that she can see the display."

ə fju mɪnəts leɪɾɝ, ðeɪd loʊkeɪɾəd səm smɔl bɑksəz tə pleɪs bɪniθ ðə lɪɾɝ ən ɛləveɪɾ ɪleɪn soʊ ðət ʃi kəd si oʊvɝ ðə taʊɝz kɹɛnələ-ʃənz. ɪɾ əpɪɹd ðət sʌmθɪŋ hæd bɪn kənstʃɹʌktəɾ ɑn ə dɪstən hɪlsaɪd, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz tu fɑɹ fəɹ ɪleɪn tə meɪk aʊt. ɑlʌdʒɹə pʊld aʊt sɛvɹəl lʊkɪŋ ɡlæsəz ən hændəd wʌn itʃ tə ɪleɪn ən bɝdʒɪt.

A few minutes later, they'd located some small boxes to place beneath the litter and elevate Elayne so that she could see over the tower's crenela-tions. It appeared that something had been constructed on a distant hillside, though it was too far for Elayne to make out. Aludra pulled out several looking glasses and handed one each to Elayne and Birgitte.

ɪleɪn ɹeɪzd əɹ ɡlæs tə hɝ aɪ. dʒɹɛsɪŋ dʌmiz. ɑlʌdʒɹə hæd sɛɾ ʌp səm fɪfti ʌv əm ɪn ɹæŋks ɑn ðə fɑɹ hɪl. laɪt! wɛɹ hæd ʃi ɡɑɾən soʊ mɛni? laɪkli, ɪleɪn wəd bi ɡɛɾɪŋ səm wɝɾi mɪsɪvz fɹəm ɡaʊnmeɪkɝz əkɹɔs ðə sɪɾi.

Elayne raised her glass to her eye. Dressing dummies. Aludra had set up some fifty of them in ranks on the far hill. Light! Where had she gotten so many? Likely, Elayne would be getting some wordy missives from gownmakers across the city.

mæt hæd pɹɑməs ðɪs wəd bi wɝθ pɹæktəkli ɛni kɑst. ʌv kɔɹs, ðət wɑz mæt. hi wɑzn ɪɡzækli ðə moʊst ɹɪlaɪəbəl pɝsən ɝaʊnd.

Mat had promised this would be worth practically any cost. Of course, that was Mat. He wasn't exactly the most reliable person around.

hi 'ɛs nɑt ðə wʌn u lɔst ən ɪnvæljəbəl tɛɹæŋɡɹil tə ðə ʃædoʊ, ʃi ɹimaɪndəd hɝsɛlf. ʃi ɡɹɪməst. ɪn əɹ paʊtʃ, ʃi kæɹiɾ ənʌðɝ ɹɛplɪkə ʌv ðə fɑkshɛd. ɪt wɑz wʌn ə θɹi ʃid kɹieɪɾəd soʊ fɑɹ. ɪf ʃi wɑz gɑnə bi kənfaɪn tə hɝ bɛd, ðən ʃi maɪɾ əz wɛl meɪk jus ə hɝ taɪm. ɪt wəd bi ə lɑt lɛs fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ɪf ʃi kəd tʃænəl kənsɪstənli.

He 's not the one who lost an invaluable ter'angreal to the Shadow, she reminded herself. She grimaced. In her pouch, she carried another replica of the foxhead. It was one of three she'd created so far. If she was going to be confined to her bed, then she might as well make use of her time. It would be a lot less frustrating if she could channel consistently.

ɔl θɹi ʌv ðə ɹɛplɪkə fɑkshɛd mədæljənz wɝkt əz ðə fɝst ɹɛplɪkə hæd. ʃi kʊdn tʃænəl waɪl wɛɹɪŋ wʌn, ən ə paʊɝfəl wiv kəɾ oʊvɝwɛlm ðɛm. ʃi ɹɪli niɾəd ðəɾ ɝɪdʒənəl bæk fəɹ fɝðɝ stʌɾi.

All three of the replica foxhead medallions worked as the first replica had. She couldn't channel while wearing one, and a powerful weave could overwhelm them. She really needed that original back for further study.

"ju kən si, jəɹ mædʒəsti," ɑlʌdʒɹə sɛɾ ɪn ə stɪf vɔɪs, əz ɪf ʌnəkəs-toʊm tə ɡɪvɪŋ ə dɛmənstʃɹeɪʃən, "ðæt wiv tʃɹaɪd tə ɹeɪ-kɹieɪt ðə kəndɪʃənz ʌndɝ wɪtʃ jə maɪt meɪk jus ə ðə dʒɹæɡənz, jɛs?"

"You can see, Your Majesty," Aludra said in a stiff voice, as if unaccus-tomed to giving a demonstration, "that we've tried to re-create the conditions under which you might make use of the dragons, yes?"

ɪksɛpt ɪnstɛɾ ə fɪfti dʒɹɛsɪŋ dʌmiz, wɪl əv ə hʌnʒɹəd θaʊzən tʃɹɑləks, ɪleɪn θɔt.

Except instead of fifty dressing dummies, we'll have a hundred thousand Trollocs, Elayne thought.

"ðə nɛks taʊɝ, jə ʃəd lʊk əɾ ɪt," ɑlʌdʒɹə sɛd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ.

"The next tower, you should look at it," Aludra said, gesturing.

ɪleɪn tɝn ðə ɡlæs tə lʊk ət ðə nɛks taʊɝ daʊn ðə wɔl. ʃi kəd si faɪv mɛmbɝz ə ðə bæn ðɛɹ, dʒɹɛst ɪn junəfɔɹmz, weɪɾɪŋ wɪð ənʌðɝ dʒɹæɡən. mæt wɑz lʊkɪŋ ɪn ðə θɪŋ, ɹaɪt daʊn ðə tub "ðiz əv tʃɹeɪn sʌmwʌɾ ɑn ðə dʒɹæɡənz," ɑlʌdʒɹə kəntɪnjud "bʌt ðeɪ də nɑɾ əv ði ɪfɪʃənsi aɪ wəd laɪk. ðəl də fəɹ naʊ jɛs?"

Elayne turned the glass to look at the next tower down the wall. She could see five members of the Band there, dressed in uniforms, waiting with another dragon. Mat was looking in the thing, right down the tube "These have trained somewhat on the dragons," Aludra continued "But they do not have the efficiency I would like. They will do for now yes?"

ɪleɪn loʊɝɾ əɹ ɡlæs əz ðə mɛn pʊl ðə dʌmi tub bæk__ɪt wɑz ɑn ə sɛɾ ʌv wilz - ən ɹoʊteɪɾɪd ɪɾ ʌp ə bɪt təwɔɹd ðə skaɪ. wʌn pɔɹd səm blæk paʊɾɝ ɪn fɹəm ɪz kæsk, ðən ənʌðɝ stʌft ɪn ə wɑɾ ə sʌmθɪŋ. ðɪs wɑz fɑloʊd baɪ ðə mæn wɪð ðə lɔŋ poʊl ɹæmɪŋ ɪt daʊn ðə tub. ðət wɑzn ə tʃɪmni bɹʌʃ i hɛld, bʌt səm kaɪndə tul juz fəɹ pækɪŋ.

Elayne lowered her glass as the men pulled the dummy tube back__it was on a set of wheels - and rotated it up a bit toward the sky. One poured some black powder in from his cask, then another stuffed in a wad of something. This was followed by the man with the long pole ramming it down the tube. That wasn't a chimney brush he held, but some kind of tool used for packing.

"ðæt lʊks laɪk ðə paʊɾɝ ɪnsaɪɾ ə naɪtfloʊɝ," bɝdʒɪt sɛd. ʃi fɛlt wɛɹi.

"That looks like the powder inside a nightflower," Birgitte said. She felt wary.

ɑlʌdʒɹə ʃɑt ðə wɔɹɾɝ ə ɡlæns. "æn haʊ dʒju noʊ wʌɾ ɪz ɪnsaɪɾ ə naɪtfloʊɝ, mɛɹiən?

Aludra shot the Warder a glance. "And how do you know what is inside a nightflower, Maerion?

jə də ɹilaɪz haʊ deɪnʒɝəs ɪts tə oʊpən wʌn ə ðoʊz, jɛs?"

You do realize how dangerous it is to open one of those, yes?"

bɝdʒɪt ʃɹʌɡd.

Birgitte shrugged.

ɑlʌdʒɹə fɹaʊnd, bʌt ɡɑt noʊ ɹɪspɑns, soʊ tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən kɑm hɝsɛlf. "ðə dɪvaɪs, ɪts pɝfəkli seɪf. wi sɛɾ ʌp ði ʌðɝ dʒɹæɡən tə də ðə faɪɹɪŋ, soʊ ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ deɪnʒɝ, jɛs? bʌt ðəɹ wəd nɑt bi deɪnʒɝ ɛniweɪ. ðə kæstɪŋ ɪz ɡʊɾ ən maɪ kælkjəleɪʃənz, ðeɪ ɑɹ pɝfəkt."

Aludra frowned, but got no response, so took a deep breath and calmed herself. "The device, it is perfectly safe. We set up the other dragon to do the firing, so there would be no danger, yes? But there would not be danger anyway. The casting is good and my calculations, they are perfect."

"ɪleɪn," bɝdʒɪt sɛd, "aɪ stɪl θɪŋk wid bi bɛɾɝ ɔf wɑtʃɪŋ fɹəm ðə wɔl daʊn bɪloʊ. ivən ɪf ðɪs wʌn bɪsaɪɾ əs ɪzən gɑnə bi lɪt."

"Elayne," Birgitte said, "I still think we'd be better off watching from the wall down below. Even if this one beside us isn't going to be lit."

"æftɝ ɔl aɪ wɛn θɹu tə ɡɛɾ ʌp hɪɹ?" ɪleɪn æskt. "noʊ θæŋk ju. ɑlʌdʒɹə, jə meɪ pɹəsid."

"After all I went through to get up here?" Elayne asked. "No thank you. Aludra, you may proceed."

ʃi ɪɡnɔɹd bɝdʒɪts ənɔɪəns. dɪɾ ɑlʌdʒɹə ɹɪli θɪŋk ʃi kəd hɪt wʌn ə ðoʊz dʒɹɛsɪŋ dʌmiz wɪð əɹ aɪɝn sfɪɹ? ðət wɑz ə lɔŋ weɪ tə ɡoʊ, ən ðə sfɪɹ wɑz soʊ smɔl, bɛɹli waɪɾɝ ðən ə mænz aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt pɑm. hæɾ ɪleɪn ɪnvɛstəɾ ɔl ə ðɪs ɛfɝt tə ɡɛt sʌmθɪŋ ðət wəd wɝk mɔɹ pʊɹli ðən ə kæɾəpʌlt? ðɪs dʒɹæɡən saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ɪt kəd θɹoʊ ɪts sfɪɹ fɑɹðɝ, bʌt ðə boʊldɝz tɔs baɪ ə kæɾəpʌlt wɝ mɛni taɪmz lɑɹdʒɝ.

She ignored Birgitte's annoyance. Did Aludra really think she could hit one of those dressing dummies with her iron sphere? That was a long way to go, and the sphere was so small, barely wider than a man's outstretched palm. Had Elayne invested all of this effort to get something that would work more poorly than a catapult? This dragon sounded as if it could throw its sphere farther, but the boulders tossed by a catapult were many times larger.

ðə mɛn fɪnɪʃt. ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ mæn tʌtʃt ə smɔl tɔɹtʃ tə ə fjuz stɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə sfɪɹ ən ɹoʊld ɪɾ ɪndə ðə tub; ðən ðeɪ tɝn ðə tub tə feɪs dɝɛkli aʊtwɝd.

The men finished. The remaining man touched a small torch to a fuse sticking out of the sphere and rolled it into the tube; then they turned the tube to face directly outward.

"ju si?" ɑlʌdʒɹə sɛd, pæɾɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən. "θɹi mɛn ɪz bɛst. fɔɹ fəɹ seɪfti, ɪn keɪs wʌn fɔlz.

"You see?" Aludra said, patting the dragon. "Three men is best. Four for safety, in case one falls.

wʌn kəd də ðə wɝk ɪf i hæd tə, bʌɾ ɪt wəd bi sloʊ."

One could do the work if he had to, but it would be slow."

ðə mɛn stɛp bæk əz ɑlʌdʒɹə ɡɑɾ aʊɾ ə ɹɛd flæɡ. ʃi hɛld ɪɾ ʌp ɪn ði ɛɹ, sɪɡnəlɪŋ ði ʌðɝ tim ɑn ðə nɛks taʊɝ daʊn ðə wɔl. ɪleɪn foʊkəst ɑn əm wɪð ðə ɡlæs. wʌn kæɹiɾ ə smɔl tɔɹtʃ. mæt wɑtʃt wɪð ə kjʊɹiəs ɪkspɹɛʃən.

The men stepped back as Aludra got out a red flag. She held it up in the air, signaling the other team on the next tower down the wall. Elayne focused on them with the glass. One carried a small torch. Mat watched with a curious expression.

ɑlʌdʒɹə loʊɝɾ əɹ flæɡ. ðə soʊlʒɝ tʌtʃt ɪz bɝnɪŋ tɔɹtʃ tə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən.

Aludra lowered her flag. The soldier touched his burning torch to the side of the dragon.

ði ɪksploʊsɪv saʊn ðət fɑloʊd wɑz soʊ paʊɝfəl ðəɾ ɪt meɪɾ ɪleɪn dʒʌmp- ðə bum wɑz əz ʃɑɹp əz ə θʌndɝklæp, ən ʃi hɝɾ ɪn ðə dɪstəns wʌt saʊndəd laɪk ən ɛkoʊ ʌv ði ɪksploʊʒən. ʃi ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə hɝ bɹɛst, ən ɹɪmɛmbɝd tə dʒɹɔ bɹɛθ.

The explosive sound that followed was so powerful that it made Elayne jump- The boom was as sharp as a thunderclap, and she heard in the distance what sounded like an echo of the explosion. She raised a hand to her breast, and remembered to draw breath.

ə pɑkəɾ ɑn ðə maʊntənsaɪɾ ɪksploʊɾəd ɪn ə mæsɪv spɹeɪ ʌv dʌst ən ɝθ. ðə ɡɹaʊn sim tə tʃɹɛmbəl! ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd tɔɹn ʌp ði ɝθ wɪð ə wiv, bʌt ðə wʌn paʊɝ hædn bɪn juzd əɾ ɔl.

A pocket on the mountainside exploded in a massive spray of dust and earth. The ground seemed to tremble! It was as if an Aes Sedai had torn up the earth with a weave, but the One Power hadn't been used at all.

ɑlʌdʒɹə sim dɪsəpɔɪntɪd. ɪleɪn ɹeɪzd əɹ lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs tə hɝ aɪ. ðə blæs hæd mɪs ðə dʒɹɛsɪŋ dʌmiz baɪ ə ɡʊd twɛnti peɪsɪz, bʌt hæd ɹɪpt ə hoʊl ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊn faɪv peɪsɪz waɪd. dɪd ðə bɔl ɪksploʊd laɪk ə naɪtfloʊɝ tə kɑz ðæt? ðɪs dɪvaɪs wɑzn mɪɹli ən ɪmpɹuv kæɾəpʌlt əɹ tʃɹibətʃɛt; ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. sʌmθɪŋ keɪpəbəl ə smæʃɪŋ ən aɪɝn sfɪɹ ɪndə ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɪð sətʃ fɔɹs ðəɾ ɪt blu oʊpən ə hoʊl, ðən pɝhæps ɪksploʊɾəd ɑn ɪts oʊn.

Aludra seemed disappointed. Elayne raised her looking glass to her eye. The blast had missed the dressing dummies by a good twenty paces, but had ripped a hole in the ground five paces wide. Did the ball explode like a nightflower to cause that? This device wasn't merely an improved catapult or trebuchet; it was something else. Something capable of smashing an iron sphere into the ground with such force that it blew open a hole, then perhaps exploded on its own.

waɪ, ʃi kəd laɪn ən ɪntaɪɝ wɔl wɪð ðiz dʒɹæɡənz! wɪð ɔl ə ðɛm faɪɹɪŋ təɡɛðɝ. . . .

Why, she could line an entire wall with these dragons! With all of them firing together. . . .

ɑlʌdʒɹə ɹeɪzd əɹ flæɡ əɡɛn; ɪleɪn wɑtʃt wɪð əɹ ɡlæs əz ðə mɛn ɑn ðə nɛks taʊɝ oʊvɝ klind, ðən ɹiloʊɾɪd, ðə tub. mæt wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ɪz ɪɹz ən skaʊlɪŋ, wɪtʃ ɡeɪv ɪleɪn ə smaɪl.

Aludra raised her flag again; Elayne watched with her glass as the men on the next tower over cleaned, then reloaded, the tube. Mat was holding his ears and scowling, which gave Elayne a smile.

hi ɹɪli ʃʊɾə wɑtʃt fɹəm əɹ taʊɝ. ðə ɹiloʊɾɪŋ pɹɑsɛs tʊk ə vɛɹi ʃɔɹt taɪm, pɝhæps θɹi mɪnəts. ən ɑlʌdʒɹə sɛd ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə si ɪt hæpən mɔɹ kwɪkli?

He really should have watched from her tower. The reloading process took a very short time, perhaps three minutes. And Aludra said she intended to see it happen more quickly?

ɑlʌdʒɹə ɹoʊɾ ə sɛɾ ʌv ɔɹɾɝz ən sɛn ɪt baɪ mɛsənʒɝ tə ðə mɛn. ðeɪ tʃeɪnʒd ðə dʒɹæɡənz pəzɪʃən slaɪtli. ʃi weɪvd əɹ flæɡ; ɪleɪn stil hɝsɛlf fəɹ ənʌðɝ ɪksploʊʒən, bʌt stɪl dʒʌmpt wən ɪt keɪm.

Aludra wrote a set of orders and sent it by messenger to the men. They changed the dragon's position slightly. She waved her flag; Elayne steeled herself for another explosion, but still jumped when it came.

ðɪs taɪm, ðə blæst wɑz dɛd-ɑn, hɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə vɛɹi sɛntɝ ə ðə ɹæŋk ə dʒɹɛsɪŋ dʌmiz. ðɛɹ tæɾɝd ɹɛmnəns spʌn θɹu ði ɛɹ. ðə bloʊ dɪstʃɹɔɪd faɪv əɹ sɪks, ən nɑk daʊn ə ɡʊd dʌzən ə ðɛm.

This time, the blast was dead-on, hitting in the very center of the rank of dressing dummies. Their tattered remnants spun through the air. The blow destroyed five or six, and knocked down a good dozen of them.

wɪð ði əbɪləɾi tə faɪɝ ɛvɹi tu mɪnəts, hɪt soʊ fɑɹ əweɪ, ən dil sətʃ dɪstʃɹʌkʃən, ðiz wɛpənz wəd bi dɛdli. əz dɛdli əz dɑmɑm, pɝhæps. bɝdʒɪt wɑz stɪl lʊkɪŋ θɹu hɝ lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs, ən waɪl əɹ feɪs wɑz ɪmpæsɪv, ɪleɪn kəd fil ðə wʊmənz əmeɪzmənt.

With the ability to fire every two minutes, hit so far away, and deal such destruction, these weapons would be deadly. As deadly as damame, perhaps. Birgitte was still looking through her looking glass, and while her face was impassive, Elayne could feel the woman's amazement.

"ðə wɛpən, jə faɪn ɪt plizɪŋ?" ɑlʌdʒɹə æskt.

"The weapon, you find it pleasing?" Aludra asked.

"aɪ faɪn ɪt plizɪŋ, ɑlʌdʒɹə," ɪleɪn sɛd, smaɪlɪŋ. "aɪ faɪn ɪt plizɪŋ ɪndid. ðə ɹisɔɹsɪz ə ði ɪntaɪɝ sɪɾi ɑɹ jʊɹz, ðə ɹisɔɹsɪz ʌv ɔl æn-dɔɹ. ðəɹ ɑɹ sɛvɹəl mɔɹ bɛlfndɝz ɪn ændɝ." ʃi ɡlænst ət ði ɪluməneɪɾɝ. "bʌt jə mʌs kip ðə plænz ən dɪzaɪnz ə sikɹət. əl sɛnd ɡɑɹdz wɪð ju. wi kæn əfɔɹd tə lɛɾ ɛni ʌv ðə bɛlfbʌndɝz kənsɪɾɝ ðə vælju ʌv livɪŋ hoʊm ən sɛlɪŋ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən tə əɹ ɛnəmiz."

"I find it pleasing, Aludra," Elayne said, smiling. "I find it pleasing indeed. The resources of the entire city are yours, the resources of all An-dor. There are several more bellfounders in Andor." She glanced at the Illuminator. "But you must keep the plans and designs a secret. I will send Guards with you. We can't afford to let any of the bellfbunders consider the value of leaving home and selling information to our enemies."

"soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ doʊn ɹitʃ ðə sintʃæn," ɑlʌdʒɹə sɛd, "aɪ kɛɹ nɑt."

"So long as they don't reach the Seanchan," Aludra said, "I care not."

"wɛl, aɪ du," ɪleɪn sɛd. "æn ɪm ðə wʌn u wɪl si ðiz θɪŋz juz pɹɑpɝli. əl niɾ ən oʊθ aʊɾ ə ju, ɑlʌdʒɹə."

"Well, I do," Elayne said. "And I'm the one who will see these things used properly. I'll need an oath out of you, Aludra."

ðə wʊmən saɪd, bʌt ɡeɪv ɪt. ɪleɪn hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə tɝnɪŋ əm əɡɛnst ɛniwʌn ʌðɝ ðən tʃɹɑləks ən sintʃæn. bʌt ʃi wəd fil mʌtʃ mɔɹ sɪkjʊɹ əbaʊɾ əɹ neɪʃən noʊɪŋ ðət ʃi hæd ðiz əɾ əɹ dɪspoʊzəl.

The woman sighed, but gave it. Elayne had no intention of turning them against anyone other than Trollocs and Seanchan. But she would feel much more secure about her nation knowing that she had these at her disposal.

ʃi smaɪld əz ʃi kənsɪɾɝd ɪt, ən faʊn ɪt dɪfəkəl tə kənteɪn əɹ ɪksaɪtmənt. bɝdʒɪt faɪnəli loʊɝɾ əɹ ɡlæs. ʃi fɛlt. . . sɑləm.

She smiled as she considered it, and found it difficult to contain her excitement. Birgitte finally lowered her glass. She felt. . . solemn.

"wʌt?" ɪleɪn æskt əz ðə ɡɑɹdz tʊk tɝnz wɪð əɹ ɡlæs, ɪnspɛktɪŋ ðə dɛvəsteɪʃən. ʃi fɛl səm ɑɾ ɪndaɪdʒɛstʃən. hæd ʃi iɾən sʌmθɪŋ bæd fəɹ lʌntʃ?

"What?" Elayne asked as the Guards took turns with her glass, inspecting the devastation. She felt some odd indigestion. Had she eaten something bad for lunch?

"ðə wɝl dʒʌs tʃeɪnʒd, ɪleɪn," bɝdʒɪt sɛd, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd, lɔŋ bɹeɪd swɪŋɪŋ slaɪtli. "ɪt dʒʌs tʃeɪnʒd ɪn ə vɛɹi lɑɹdʒ weɪ. aɪ hæv ə tɛɹəbəl filɪŋ ðəɾ ɪts oʊnli ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ."

"The world just changed, Elayne," Birgitte said, shaking her head, long braid swinging slightly. "It just changed in a very large way. I have a terrible feeling that it's only the beginning."


tʃæptɝ θɝɾi


CHAPTER 30

mɛn dʒɹim hɪɹ


Men Dream Here

ðiz waɪtkloʊks ɑɹ ə taɪt-lɪpt ɡɹup, maɪ leɪɾi," lətʃəl sɛd wɪð ə smʌɡ smaɪl, "bʌt ðəɹ stɪl mɛn. mɛn u hævən sin ə wʊmən ɪn ə waɪl, aɪ θɪŋk. ðəɾ ɔlweɪz meɪks əm luz wʌt fju bɹeɪnz ðeɪ hæv."

These Whitecloaks are a tight-lipped group, my Lady," Lacile said with a smug smile, "but they're still men. Men who haven't seen a woman in a while, I think. That always makes them lose what few brains they have."

feɪl wɔk ðə hɔɹslaɪnz, ðə skaɪ dɑɹk, læntɝn hɛl bɪfɔɹ hɝ. pɛɹɪn wɑz əslip; hid ɹɪtaɪɹɾ ɝli ðiz læs fju deɪz, sikɪŋ ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. ðə waɪtkloʊks hæd ɹɪlʌktənli əɡɹid tə dɪleɪ ðə tʃɹaɪəl, bʌt pɛɹɪn stɪl ʃʊɾə bɪn pɹipɛɹɪŋ ɪz wɝdz tə spik ðɛɹ. hi ɡɹʌmbəl ðəɾ i ɔlɹɛɾi nu wʌɾ i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə seɪ. noʊɪŋ hɪm, hid dʒʌs tɛl mɔɹ-ɡeɪz wʌt hæd hæpənd, stʃɹeɪtfɔɹwɝɾ əz juʒəwəl.

Faile walked the horselines, the sky dark, lantern held before her. Perrin was asleep; he'd retired early these last few days, seeking the wolf dream. The Whitecloaks had reluctantly agreed to delay the trial, but Perrin still should have been preparing his words to speak there. He grumbled that he already knew what he was going to say. Knowing him, he'd just tell Mor-gase what had happened, straightforward as usual.

lətʃəl ən sɛlənd wɔkt ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə feɪl. ʌðɝ mɛmbɝz ə tʃɑ feɪl wɔk bɪhaɪnd, kipɪŋ kɛɹfəl wɑtʃ fəɹ ɛniwʌn kloʊs ɪnʌf tə bi wɪðɪn ɪɹʃɑt.

Lacile and Selande walked on either side of Faile. Other members of Cha Faile walked behind, keeping careful watch for anyone close enough to be within earshot.

"aɪ θɪŋk ðə waɪtkloʊks nu wi wɝ ðəɹ tə spaɪ," sɛlən sɛd. ðə ʃɔɹt, peɪl wʊmən wɔkt wɪð hæn ɑn əɹ sɔɹd. ðə stæns dɪdn sim əz ɑkwɝɾ əz ɪt wʌns hæd; sɛlən hæd teɪkən əɹ sɔɹd tʃɹeɪnɪŋ sɪɹiəsli.

"I think the Whitecloaks knew we were there to spy," Selande said. The short, pale woman walked with hand on her sword. The stance didn't seem as awkward as it once had; Selande had taken her sword training seriously.

"noʊ, aɪ daʊt ðeɪ ɡɛst," lətʃəl ɹɪplaɪd. ʃi stɪl wɔɹ ə sɪmpəl tæn blaʊs ən dɑɹkɝ bɹaʊn skɝt. sɛlən hæd tʃeɪnʒd bæk tə bɹitʃɪz ən sɔɹɾ ɪmiɾiətli əpɑn ɹɪtɝnɪŋ - ʃi stɪl bɔɹ ə kʌɾ ɑn əɹ ɑɹm fɹəm wɛɹ ðət sɔɹd hæd tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl əɹ - bʌt lətʃəl sim tə bi seɪvɝɪŋ əɹ taɪm ɪn ðə skɝt.

"No, I doubt they guessed," Lacile replied. She still wore a simple tan blouse and darker brown skirt. Selande had changed back to breeches and sword immediately upon returning - she still bore a cut on her arm from where that sword had tried to kill her - but Lacile seemed to be savoring her time in the skirt.

'ðeɪ bɛɹli sɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ ə jus," sɛlən sɛd.

'They barely said anything of use," Selande said.

"jɛs," lətʃəl ɹɪplaɪd, "bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ðəɹ mɪɹli ɪn ðət hæbət. əɹ ɪkskjus ə tʃɛkɪŋ ɑn meɪaɪɡdɪn ən ði ʌðɝz wɑz ə ɹizənəbəl wʌn, maɪ leɪɾi. wi wɝ eɪbəl tə dɪlɪvɝ jəɹ noʊt, ðən də ə lɪɾəl tʃæɾɪŋ wɪð ðə mɛn. aɪ tizd aʊɾ ɪnʌf tə bi ʌv səm jus."

"Yes," Lacile replied, "but I think they're merely in that habit. Our excuse of checking on Maighdin and the others was a reasonable one, my Lady. We were able to deliver your note, then do a little chatting with the men. I teased out enough to be of some use."

feɪl ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ, ðoʊ lətʃəl fɛl kwaɪəɾ əz ðeɪ pæst ə ɡɹum wɝkɪŋ leɪt, bɹʌʃɪŋ daʊn wʌn ə ðə hɔɹsəz.

Faile raised an eyebrow, though Lacile fell quiet as they passed a groom working late, brushing down one of the horses.

"ðə waɪtkloʊks ɹɪspɛkt ɡɑləd," lətʃəl sɛd wʌns aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɹumz ɪɹʃɑt. "ðoʊ səm ɡɹʌmbəl əbaʊt ðə θɪŋz hiz bɪn tɛlɪŋ ðɛm"

"The Whitecloaks respect Galad," Lacile said once out of the groom's earshot. "Though some grumble about the things he's been telling them"

"wʌt θɪŋz?" feɪl æskt.

"What things?" Faile asked.

"hi wɑns əm tə əlaɪ wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ ðə læs bæɾəl," lətʃəl ɪkspleɪnd.

"He wants them to ally with the Aes Sedai for the Last Battle," Lacile explained.

"ɛniwʌn cʊɾə toʊl jə ðeɪ wəd dɪslaɪk ðəɾ aɪdiə," sɛlən sɛd. "ðeɪɹ waɪtkloʊks!"

"Anyone could have told you they would dislike that idea," Selande said. "They're Whitecloaks!"

"jɛs," feɪl sɛd, "bʌɾ ɪt minz ðət ðɪs ɡɑləɾ ɪz mɔɹ ɹizənəbəl ðən ɪz mɛn. ə jusfəl tɪp, lətʃəl."

"Yes," Faile said, "but it means that this Galad is more reasonable than his men. A useful tip, Lacile."

ðə jʌŋ wʊmən swɛld, bɹʌʃɪŋ əɹ ʃɔɹt hɛɹ bæk ɪn ə mɑɾəst dʒɛstʃɝ, θɹoʊɪŋ bæk ðə ɹɛd ɹɪbənz ʃi hæd taɪd ðɛɹ. ʃid teɪkən tə wɛɹɪŋ twaɪs əz mɛni naʊ, sɪns əɹ ʃeɪɾoʊ kæptɪvəɾi.

The young woman swelled, brushing her short hair back in a modest gesture, throwing back the red ribbons she had tied there. She'd taken to wearing twice as many now, since her Shaido captivity.

ʌp əhɛd, ə læŋki fɪɡjɝ stɛp bɪtwin tu ʌv ðə hɔɹsəz. hi hæɾ ə θɪk mʌstæʃ, tæɹɑbənɝ staɪl, ən ðoʊ hi wɑz jʌŋ, hi hæd ði ɛɹ ʌv wʌn u hæd sin mʌtʃ ɪn ɪz laɪf. dænɪl luɪn, ðə mæn ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn naʊ ðət tæm hæd mɪstɪɹiəsli dɪsaɪɾɪd tə dɪpɑɹt. laɪt sɛn ðət tæm wɑz seɪf, wɛɹɛvɝ hid ɡɔn.

Up ahead, a lanky figure stepped between two of the horses. He had a thick mustache, Taraboner style, and though he was young, he had the air of one who had seen much in his life. Dannil Lewin, the man in charge of the Two Rivers men now that Tam had mysteriously decided to depart. Light send that Tam was safe, wherever he'd gone.

"waɪ, dænɪl," feɪl sɛd, "wʌɾ ən ɑd koʊɪnsɪɾəns tə si jə hɪɹ."

"Why, Dannil," Faile said, "what an odd coincidence to see you here."

"koʊɪnsɪɾəns?" hi æskt, skɹætʃɪŋ əɾ ɪz hɛd. hi hɛld ɪz baʊ ɪn wʌn hænd, stæf-laɪk, ðoʊ hi kɛpt ɡlænsɪŋ əɾ ɪt, wɛɹi. ə lɑɾ ə pipəl dɪd ðət wɪð ðɛɹ wɛpənz naʊ. "ju æsk mi tə kʌm hɪɹ."

"Coincidence?" he asked, scratching at his head. He held his bow in one hand, staff-like, though he kept glancing at it, wary. A lot of people did that with their weapons now. "You asked me to come here."

"ɪt mʌs bi ə koʊɪnsɪɾəns nʌnðəlɛs," feɪl sɛd, "ɪn keɪs ɛniwʌn æsks. pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɪf ðət sʌmbɑɾi ɪz maɪ hʌzbənd."

"It must be a coincidence nonetheless," Faile said, "in case anyone asks. Particularly if that somebody is my husband."

"aɪ doʊn laɪk kipɪŋ θɪŋz fɹəm lɔɹd pɛɹɪn," dænɪl sɛd, fɔlɪŋ ɪndə stɛp wɪð hɝ.

"I don't like keeping things from Lord Perrin," Dannil said, falling into step with her.

"æn jud pɹəfɝ tə ɹɪsk lɛɾɪŋ ɪm bi bɪhɛɾɪd baɪ ə ɡɹup ə ɹæbɪd waɪtkloʊks?"

"And you'd prefer to risk letting him be beheaded by a group of rabid Whitecloaks?"

"noʊ. nʌn ə ðə mɛn du."

"No. None of the men do."

"juv dʌn wʌɾ aɪ æskt, ðɛn?"

"You've done what I asked, then?"

dænɪl nɑɾəd. "aɪ spoʊk tə ɡɹeɪɾi ən nild. lɔɹd pɛɹɪn əz ɔlɹɛɾi ɔɹɾɝd əm tə steɪ nɪɹbaɪ, bʌt wi tɔkt. ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd hiɾ əv wivz əɹ ɛɹ ɹɛɾi, ən wɪl ɡɹæb lɔɹd pɛɹɪn ən ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ɪf θɪŋz ɡɛɾ ʌɡli, nil kʌvɝɪŋ ðə ɹitʃɹit. aɪv tɔk tə ðə mɛn fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ə ɡɹup ʌv ɑɹtʃɝz ɪn ðə tʃɹiz wɪl bi ɹɛɾi tə pɹəvaɪɾ ə dɪstʃɹækʃən."

Dannil nodded. "I spoke to Grady and Neald. Lord Perrin has already ordered them to stay nearby, but we talked. Grady said he'd have weaves or Air ready, and will grab Lord Perrin and get out if things get ugly, Neald covering the retreat. I've talked to the men from the Two Rivers. A group of archers in the trees will be ready to provide a distraction."

feɪl nɑɾəd. niðɝ æʃəmən hæd bɪn wundəɾ ɪn ðɪs bʌbəl ʌv ivəl fɔɹtʃənətli. itʃ hæd bɪn kæɹiɪŋ ə naɪf, bʌt ɹɪpɔɹts sɛd ðeɪd lʊkt ət ðə floʊɾɪŋ wɛpənz, ðən nɑnʃəlɑnli weɪv hænz ən blæstəɾ əm fɹəm ði ɛɹ. wən mɛsənʒɝz wɪð nuz ə feɪlz ɝθ-θɹoʊɪŋ tʃɹɪk hæd ɹitʃt ðə sɛkʃən ə kæmp ði æʃəmən hæd bɪn ɪn, ðeɪd faʊn ðɪs ɛɹiə ɪn mʌtʃ lɛs keɪɑs, ɡɹeɪɾi ən nil stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ θɹu kæmp ən fɛlɪŋ wɛpənz wɛɹɛvɝ ðeɪ sɔ ðɛm.

Faile nodded. Neither Asha'man had been wounded in this bubble of evil fortunately. Each had been carrying a knife, but reports said they'd looked at the floating weapons, then nonchalantly waved hands and blasted them from the air. When messengers with news of Faile's earth-throwing trick had reached the section of camp the Asha'man had been in, they'd found this area in much less chaos, Grady and Neald striding through camp and felling weapons wherever they saw them.

pɑɹɾ ə ðə ɹizən fəɹ ðə dɪleɪ bɪfɔɹ ðə tʃɹaɪəl wɑz tə teɪk kɛɹ ə hilɪŋ. bʌɾ ənʌðɝ lɑɹdʒ ɹizən wɑz kəz pɛɹɪn wɑntəd tə ɡɪv taɪm tə ðə kæmps smɪθs ən kɹæfsmən tə meɪk ɹɪpleɪsmənt wɛpənz fəɹ ðoʊz u hæd lɔs ðɛɹz, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs ðə tʃɹaɪəl tɝn tə ə bæɾəl. ən feɪl wɑz ɪnkɹisɪŋli sɝɾən ðəɾ ɪt wʊd.

Part of the reason for the delay before the trial was to take care of Healing. But another large reason was because Perrin wanted to give time to the camp's smiths and craftsmen to make replacement weapons for those who had lost theirs, just in case the trial turned to a battle. And Faile was increasingly certain that it would.

"lɔɹd pɛɹɪn woʊn laɪk biɪŋ pʊld əweɪ fɹəm faɪɾɪŋ," dænɪl sɛd. "nɑt wʌn bɪt."

"Lord Perrin won't like being pulled away from fighting," Dannil said. "Not one bit."

"ðæt tɛn kəd tɝn ɪndə ə dɛθ tʃɹæp," feɪl sɛd. "pɛɹɪn kən lid ðə bæɾəl ɪf i wɑns, bʌt fɹəm ə seɪfɝ pəzɪʃən. jəl ɡɛɾ ɪm aʊt."

"That tent could turn into a death trap," Faile said. "Perrin can lead the battle if he wants, but from a safer position. You will get him out."

dænɪl saɪd, bʌt nɑɾəd. "jɛs, maɪ leɪɾi."

Dannil sighed, but nodded. "Yes, my Lady."

pɛɹɪn wɑz lɝnɪŋ nɑt tə fɪɹ jʌŋ bʊl.

Perrin was learning not to fear Young Bull.

stɛp baɪ stɛp, hi lɝn bæləns. ðə wʊlf wən ðə wʊlf wɑz niɾəd; ðə mæn wən ðə mæn wɑz niɾəd. hi lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi dʒɹɔn ɪndə ðə hʌnt, bʌt kɛp feɪl - hɪz hoʊm - ɪn ɪz maɪnd. hi wɔk ði ɛdʒ ə ðə sɔɹd, bʌɾ itʃ stɛp meɪɾ ɪm mɔɹ kɑnfəɾənt.

Step by step, he learned balance. The wolf when the wolf was needed; the man when the man was needed. He let himself be drawn into the hunt, but kept Faile - his home - in his mind. He walked the edge of the sword, but each step made him more confident.

tədeɪ, hi hʌntəd hɑpɝ, waɪli ən ɪkspɪɹiəns pɹeɪ. bʌt jʌŋ bʊl wɑz kwɪk tə lɝn, ən hævɪŋ ðə maɪn ʌv ə mæn ɡeɪv ɪm ædvæntɪdʒɪz. hi kəd θɪŋk laɪk sʌmθɪŋ, əɹ sʌmwʌn, ðəɾ i wɑz nɑt.

Today, he hunted Hopper, wily and experienced prey. But Young Bull was quick to learn, and having the mind of a man gave him advantages. He could think like something, or someone, that he was not.

wɑz ðɪs haʊ noʊm hæd bɪɡʌn? wɛɹ wəd ðɪs pæθ ʌv ʌndɝstændɪŋ lɛd? ðəɹ wɑz ə sikɹət tə ðɪs, ə sikɹət jʌŋ bʊl hæd tə faɪn fəɹ hɪmsɛlf.

Was this how Noam had begun? Where would this path of understanding lead? There was a secret to this, a secret Young Bull had to find for himself.

hi kəd nɑt feɪl. hi hæd tə lɝn. ɪt sim ðət - sʌmhaʊ - ðə mɔɹ kɑnfəɾənt i bɪkeɪm ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim, ðə mɔɹ kʌmftəɹbəl i bɪkeɪm wɪð hɪmsɛlf ɪn ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld.

He could not fail. He had to learn. It seemed that - somehow - the more confident he became in the wolf dream, the more comfortable he became with himself in the waking world.

jʌŋ bʊl tʃɑɹdʒ θɹu ən ʌnfəmɪljɝ fɔɹəst. noʊ, ə dʒʌŋɡəl, wɪð hæŋɪŋ vaɪnz ən waɪd- fɹɑndɪd fɝnz. ði ʌndɝbɹʌʃ wɑz soʊ θɪk ðəɾ ə ɹæt wəɾ əv tʃɹʌbəl skwizɪŋ θɹu. bʌt jʌŋ bʊl dɪmændəd ðət ðə wɝld oʊpən bɪfɔɹ hɪm. vaɪnz pʊl bæk. ʃɹʌbz bɛnt. fɝnz ɹitʃɹæktəd, laɪk mʌðɝz pʊlɪŋ ðɛɹ tʃɪlʒɹən aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ ʌv ə ɡæləpɪŋ hɔɹs.

Young Bull charged through an unfamiliar forest. No, a jungle, with hanging vines and wide- fronded ferns. The underbrush was so thick that a rat would have trouble squeezing through. But Young Bull demanded that the world open before him. Vines pulled back. Shrubs bent. Ferns retracted, like mothers pulling their children out of the way of a galloping horse.

hi kɑt ɡlɪmpsɪz ə hɑpɝ baʊndɪŋ əhɛd. hɪz pɹeɪ vænɪʃt. jʌŋ bʊl dɪdn bɹeɪk peɪs, tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ θɹu ðət spɑɾ ən kætʃɪŋ ðə sɛn ə hɑpɝz dɛstəneɪʃən. jʌŋ bʊl ʃɪftəɾ ɑntu ən oʊpən pleɪn wɪð noʊ tʃɹiz ən ən ʌnfəmɪljɝ skɹʌb pætʃɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hɪz pɹeɪ wɑz ə sɪɹiz ə stʃɹikɪŋ blɝz ɪn ðə dɪstəns. jʌŋ bʊl fɑloʊd, itʃ baʊn kæɹiɪŋ ɪm hʌnʒɹədz ə peɪsɪz.

He caught glimpses of Hopper bounding ahead. His prey vanished. Young Bull didn't break pace, charging through that spot and catching the scent of Hoppers destination. Young Bull shifted onto an open plain with no trees and an unfamiliar scrub patching the ground. His prey was a series of streaking blurs in the distance. Young Bull followed, each bound carrying him hundreds of paces.

wɪðɪn sɛkənz, ðeɪ əpɹoʊtʃt ən ɪnɔɹməs plætoʊ. hɪz pɹeɪ ɹæn dɝɛkli ʌp ðə saɪɾ ə ðə stoʊn ʃɛlf. jʌŋ bʊl fɑloʊd, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ wʌt wɑz "ɹaɪt." hi ɹæn wɪð ðə ɡɹaʊn fɑɹ bɪloʊ əɾ ɪz bæk, noʊz təwɔɹd ðət bɔɪlɪŋ si ʌv blæk klaʊdz. hi lɛpt oʊvɝ klɛfs ɪn ðə ɹɑk, ɹɪkəʃeɪəŋ bɪtwin tu saɪdz ʌv ə ɹɪft, kɹɛstɪŋ ðə tɑp ə ðə plætoʊ.

Within seconds, they approached an enormous plateau. His prey ran directly up the side of the stone shelf. Young Bull followed, ignoring what was "right." He ran with the ground far below at his back, nose toward that boiling sea of black clouds. He leaped over clefts in the rock, ricocheting between two sides of a rift, cresting the top of the plateau.

hɑpɝ ətækt. jʌŋ bʊl wɑz ɹɛɾi. hi ɹoʊld, kʌmɪŋ ʌp ɑn ɔl fɔɹz əz ɪz pɹeɪ lɛpt oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd, pæst oʊvɝ ðə klɪfs ɛdʒ, bʌt ðən vænɪʃt ɪn ə flæʃ ən wɑz bæk stændɪŋ ɑn ðə lɪp ə ðə klɪf.

Hopper attacked. Young Bull was ready. He rolled, coming up on all fours as his prey leaped over his head, passed over the cliff's edge, but then vanished in a flash and was back standing on the lip of the cliff.

jʌŋ bʊl bɪkeɪm pɛɹɪn hoʊldɪŋ ə hæmɝ meɪɾ ə sɑft wʊd. sətʃ θɪŋz wɝ pɑsəbəl ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim; ɪf ðə hæmɝ hɪt, ɪt wəd nɑt hɑɹm.

Young Bull became Perrin holding a hammer made of soft wood. Such things were possible in the wolf dream; if the hammer hit, it would not harm.

pɛɹɪn swʌŋ, ði ɛɹ kɹækɪŋ wɪð ðə sʌɾən spiɾ ə hɪz moʊʃən. bʌt hɑpɝ wɑz ikwəli fæst, dɑdʒɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ. hi ɹoʊld, ðən lɛpt ət pɛɹɪnz bæk, fæŋz ɡlɪsnɪŋ. pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld ən ʃɪftəd soʊ ðəɾ i wɑz stændɪŋ ə fju fit fɹəm wɛɹ i hæd bɪn. hɑpɝz dʒɔz snæpt oʊpən ɛɹ, ən pɛɹɪn swʌŋ ɪz hæmɝ əɡɛn.

Perrin swung, the air cracking with the sudden speed of his motion. But Hopper was equally fast, dodging out of the way. He rolled, then leaped at Perrin's back, fangs glistening. Perrin growled and shifted so that he was standing a few feet from where he had been. Hopper's jaws snapped open air, and Perrin swung his hammer again.

hɑpɝ wɑz sʌɾənli ʃɹaʊɾɪd ɪn ə dip mɪst. pɛɹɪnz hæmɝ slæm daʊn θɹu ɪt, hɪɾɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ɪt baʊnst ɔf. hi kɝst, spɪnɪŋ. ɪn ðə fɑɡ, hi kʊdn si, kʊdn kætʃ hɑpɝz sɛnt.

Hopper was suddenly shrouded in a deep mist. Perrin's hammer slammed down through it, hitting the ground. It bounced off. He cursed, spinning. In the fog, he couldn't see, couldn't catch Hopper's scent.

ə ʃædoʊ muvd ɪn ðə mɪst ən pɛɹɪn lʌnʒd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə pæɾɝn ɪn ði ɛɹ. hi spʌn ən faʊnd ʃædoʊz muvɪŋ ɔl ɝaʊn hɪm. ðə ʃeɪps ʌv wʊlvz, mɛn, ən ʌðɝ kɹitʃɝz i kʊdn si.

A shadow moved in the mist and Perrin lunged, but it was only a pattern in the air. He spun and found shadows moving all around him. The shapes of wolves, men, and other creatures he couldn't see.

meɪk ðə wɝl jʊɹz, jʌŋ bʊl, hɑpɝ sɛnt.

Make the world yours, Young Bull, Hopper sent.

pɛɹɪn foʊkəst, θɪŋkɪŋ ə dʒɹaɪ ɛɹ. ʌv ðə mʌsti sɛn ə dʌst. ðət wɑz wʌt ði ɛɹ ʃəd bi laɪk, ɪn ən æɹəd lændskeɪp laɪk ðɪs.

Perrin focused, thinking of dry air. Of the musty scent of dust. That was what the air should be like, in an arid landscape like this.

noʊ. ɪt wɑznt wʌt ði ɛɹ ʃəd bi laɪk. ɪt wɑz haʊ ði ɛɹ wɑz ɪz maɪnd, hɪz wɪl, hɪz filɪŋz slæmd əɡɛnst sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. hi pʊʃt θɹu.

No. It wasn't what the air should be like. It was how the air was\ His mind, his will, his feelings slammed against something else. He pushed through.

ðə mɪsts vænɪʃt, ɪvæpɝeɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə hit. hɑpɝ sæɾ ɑn ɪz hɔntʃɪz ə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns əweɪ.

The mists vanished, evaporating in the heat. Hopper sat on his haunches a short distance away.

ɡʊd, ðə wʊlf sɛnt. jə lɝn. hi ɡlænst saɪdweɪz, lʊkɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə nɔɹθ, simɪŋ dɪstʃɹæktəd baɪ sʌmθɪŋ. ðən i wɑz ɡɔn.

Good, the wolf sent. You learn. He glanced sideways, looking toward the north, seeming distracted by something. Then he was gone.

pɛɹɪn kɑɾ ɪz sɛn ən fɑloʊd tə ðə dʒəhænə ɹoʊd. hɑpɝ dæʃt əlɔŋ aʊtsaɪd ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ vaɪəlɪt doʊm. ðeɪ dʒʌmp bæk tə ðɪs pleɪs fɹikwənli tə si ɪf ðə doʊm ɛvɝ vænɪʃt. soʊ fɑɹ, ɪt hæd nɑt.

Perrin caught his scent and followed to the Jehannah Road. Hopper dashed along outside the strange violet dome. They jumped back to this place frequently to see if the dome ever vanished. So far, it had not.

pɛɹɪn kəntɪnjud ðə tʃeɪs. wɑz ðə doʊm mɛn tə tʃɹæp wʊlvz ɪnsaɪd?

Perrin continued the chase. Was the dome meant to trap wolves inside?

bʌɾ ɪf ðət wɑz ðə keɪs, waɪ hæd sleɪɝ nɑt spɹʌŋ ɪz tʃɹæp ət dʒɹæɡən-maʊnt, wɛɹ soʊ mɛni wʊlvz hæd fəɹ səm ɹizən ɡæðɝd?

But if that was the case, why had Slayer not sprung his trap at Dragon-mount, where so many wolves had for some reason gathered?

pɝhæps ðə doʊm hæɾ ənʌðɝ pɝpəs. pɛɹɪn mɛmɝaɪzd ə fju noʊɾəbəl ɹɑk fɔɹmeɪʃənz əlɔŋ ðə pɝɪməɾɝ ə ðə doʊm, ðən fɑloʊd hɑpɝ tə ə loʊ ʃɛlf ə ɹɑk. ðə wʊlf lɛp fɹəm ɪt, vænɪʃɪŋ ɪn mɪdɛɹ, ən pɛɹɪn fɑloʊd.

Perhaps the dome had another purpose. Perrin memorized a few notable rock formations along the perimeter of the dome, then followed Hopper to a low shelf of rock. The wolf leaped from it, vanishing in midair, and Perrin followed.

hi kɑt ðə sɛn ə hɑpɝz dɛstəneɪʃən ɪn mɪdʒəmp, ðən tʊk hɪmsɛlf ðɛɹ, stɪl ɪn moʊʃən.

He caught the scent of Hopper's destination in midjump, then took himself there, still in motion.

hi əpɪɹɾ əbaʊt tu fiɾ əbʌv ə ʃɪmɝɪŋ blu ɪkspæns. stʌnd, hi fɛl ən splæʃt ɪndə ðə wɔɾɝ.

He appeared about two feet above a shimmering blue expanse. Stunned, he fell and splashed into the water.

hi swæm fɹæntəkəli, dʒɹɑpɪŋ ɪz hæmɝ. hɑpɝ stʊɾ ɑn tɑp ə ðə wɔɾɝ, bɛɹɪŋ ə wʊlfɪʃ ɪkspɹɛʃən ə dɪsəpɹuvəl. nɑt ɡʊd, ðə wʊlf æɾəd. jə stɪl nid tə lɝn.

He swam frantically, dropping his hammer. Hopper stood on top of the water, bearing a wolfish expression of disapproval. Not good, the wolf added. You still need to learn.

pɛɹɪn spʌɾɝd.

Perrin sputtered.

ðə si ɡɹu tɛmpɛstʃuəs, bʌt hɑpɝ sæt plɑtʃədli əpɑn ðə ɹoʊlɪŋ weɪvz. əɡɛn i ɡlæns nɔɹθwɝd, bʌt ðən tɝn bæk tə pɛɹɪn. wɔɾɝ tʃɹʌbəlz ju, jʌŋ bʊl.

The sea grew tempestuous, but Hopper sat placidly upon the rolling waves. Again he glanced northward, but then turned back to Perrin. Water troubles you, Young Bull.

"aɪ wɑz dʒʌst sɝpɹaɪzd," pɛɹɪn sɛd, swɪmɪŋ hɑɹd.

"I was just surprised," Perrin said, swimming hard.

waɪ?

Why?

"bɪkɔz aɪ dɪdn ɪkspɛk ðɪs!"

"Because I didn't expect this!"

waɪ ɪkspɛkt? hɑpɝ sɛnt. wən jə fɑloʊ ənʌðɝ, jə kəɾ ɛn ʌp ɛniwɛɹ.

Why expect? Hopper sent. When you follow another, you could end up anywhere.

"aɪ noʊ." pɛɹɪn spæɾ aʊɾ ə maʊθfʊl ʌv wɔɾɝ. hi ɡɹɪɾɪd ɪz tiθ, ðən ɪmædʒən hɪmsɛlf stændɪŋ ɑn ðə wɔɾɝ laɪk hɑpɝ. blɛsədli, hi ɹoʊz aʊɾ ə ðə si tə stæn ətɑp ɪts sɝfəs. ɪt wɑz ə stʃɹeɪnʒ sɛnseɪʃən, ðə si ʌnʒəleɪtɪŋ bɪniθ hɪm.

"I know." Perrin spat out a mouthful of water. He gritted his teeth, then imagined himself standing on the water like Hopper. Blessedly, he rose out of the sea to stand atop its surface. It was a strange sensation, the sea undulating beneath him.

jəl nɑt dɪfit sleɪɝ laɪk ðɪs, hɑpɝ sɛnt.

You will not defeat Slayer like this, Hopper sent.

"ðɛn əl kip lɝnɪŋ," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Then I will keep learning," Perrin said.

ðəɹ ɪz lɪɾəl taɪm.

There is little time.

"aɪ wɪl lɝn mɔɹ kwɪkli."

"I will learn more quickly."

kən ju?

Can you?

"wi hæv noʊ ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs."

"We have no other choice."

jə kəd tʃuz nɑt tə faɪt hɪm.

You could choose not to fight him.

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "du wi ɹʌn fɹəm əɹ pɹeɪ? ɪf wi du, ðəl hʌn əs ɪnstɛd. əl feɪs hɪm, ən aɪ nid tə bi pɹipɛɹd."

Perrin shook his head. "Do we run from our prey? If we do, they'll hunt us instead. I will face him, and I need to be prepared."

ðəɹ ɪz ə weɪ. ðə wʊlf smɛld ʌv wɝi.

There is a way. The wolf smelled of worry.

"aɪl də wʌɾ aɪ hæv tə."

"I'll do what I have to."

fɑloʊ. hɑpɝ vænɪʃt, ən pɛɹɪn kɑɾ ən ʌnɪkspɛktɪd sɛnt: ɹɛfjus ən mʌd, bɝnɪŋ wʊɾ ən koʊl. pipəl.

Follow. Hopper vanished, and Perrin caught an unexpected scent: refuse and mud, burning wood and coal. People.

pɛɹɪn ʃɪftəɾ ən faʊn hɪmsɛlf ətɑp ə bɪldɪŋ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. hi hæd vɪzəɾəd ðɪs sɪɾi oʊnli wʌns, ən bɹifli, ən siɪŋ ðə bjuɾəfəl ɪnɝ sɪɾi bɪfɔɹ ɪm - eɪntʃən bɪldɪŋz, doʊmz ən spaɪɹz ɹaɪzɪŋ ətɑp ðə hɪl laɪk mədʒɛstɪk paɪnz ətɑp ə kɹaʊn maʊntən - ɡeɪv ɪm pɔz. hi wɑz nɪɹ ði oʊld wɔl, bɪɑnd wɪtʃ spɹɛd ðə nu sɪɾi.

Perrin shifted and found himself atop a building in Caemlyn. He had visited this city only once, and briefly, and seeing the beautiful Inner City before him - ancient buildings, domes and spires rising atop the hill like majestic pines atop a crowned mountain - gave him pause. He was near the old wall, beyond which spread the New City.

hɑpɝ sæɾ əɾ ɪz saɪd, lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə bjuɾəfəl sɪɾi. mʌtʃ ə ðə sɪɾi ɪtsɛlf wɑz sɛd tə bi oʊɡiɝ-bɪlt, ən pɛɹɪn kəd bɪliv ɪt, wɪð ðət mɑɹvələs bjuɾi. tɑɹ vəlɑn wɑz sɛd tə bi mɔɹ ɡɹæn ðən keɪɛmlɪn. pɛɹɪn hæd tʃɹʌbəl bɪlivɪŋ ðət wɑz pɑsəbəl.

Hopper sat at his side, looking over the beautiful city. Much of the city itself was said to be Ogier-built, and Perrin could believe it, with that marvelous beauty. Tar Valon was said to be more grand than Caemlyn. Perrin had trouble believing that was possible.

"waɪ ɑɹ wi hɪɹ?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"Why are we here?" Perrin asked.

mɛn dʒɹim hɪɹ, hɑpɝ ɹɪplaɪd.

Men dream here, Hopper replied.

ɪn ðə ɹil wɝld, ðeɪ dɪd. hɪɹ, ðə pleɪs wɑz ɛmpti. ɪt wɑz laɪɾ ɪnʌf tə bi deɪ, dɪspaɪt ðət stɔɹm oʊvɝhɛd, ən pɛɹɪn fɛl ðəɹ ʃəd bi pipəl kɹaʊɾɪŋ ðə stʃɹits. wɪmən, ɡoʊɪŋ tə ən fɹəm mɑɹkət. noʊbəlz ətɑp hɔɹsəz. wæɡənz bɛɹɪŋ bæɹəlz ʌv eɪl ən sæks ʌv ɡɹeɪn. tʃɪlʒɹən skæmpɝɪŋ, slɪpfmɡɝz sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ mɑɹks, wɝkɝz ɹɪpleɪsɪŋ peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz, ɛntɝpɹaɪzɪŋ hɔkɝz ɔfɝɪŋ mit paɪz tə ðɛm ɔl.

In the real world, they did. Here, the place was empty. It was light enough to be day, despite that storm overhead, and Perrin felt there should be people crowding the streets. Women, going to and from market. Nobles atop horses. Wagons bearing barrels of ale and sacks of grain. Children scampering, slipfmgers searching for marks, workers replacing paving stones, enterprising hawkers offering meat pies to them all.

ɪnstɛd, ðəɹ wɝ hɪns. ʃædoʊz. ə fɔlən hæŋkɝtʃɪf ɑn ðə stʃɹit. dɔɹz ðət wɝ oʊpən wʌn moʊmənt, ðən kloʊz ðə nɛkst. ə θɹoʊn hɔɹsʃu stɪkɪŋ fɹəm ðə mʌɾ ʌv ən æliweɪ. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ɔl ə ðə pipəl hæd bɪn wɪskt əweɪ, snætʃt baɪ feɪdz əɹ səm mɑnstɝ fɹəm ə ɡlimənz dɑɹk teɪl.

Instead, there were hints. Shadows. A fallen handkerchief on the street. Doors that were open one moment, then closed the next. A thrown horseshoe sticking from the mud of an alleyway. It was as if all of the people had been whisked away, snatched by Fades or some monster from a gleemans dark tale.

ə wʊmən əpɪɹd moʊməntɛɹəli bɪloʊ. ʃi wɔɹ ə bjuɾəfəl ɡɹin ən ɡoʊl dʒɹɛs. ʃi stɛɹɾ ət ðə stʃɹit, aɪz ɡleɪzd oʊvɝ, ðən wɑz ɡɔn. pipəl dɪɾ əkeɪʒənəli əpɪɹ ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. pɛɹɪn fɪɡjɝɾ ɪt mʌs hæpən tə ðɛm wən ðeɪ wɝ əslip, pɑɹɾ ə ðɛɹ nætʃɹəl dʒɹimz.

A woman appeared momentarily below. She wore a beautiful green and gold dress. She stared at the street, eyes glazed over, then was gone. People did occasionally appear in the wolf dream. Perrin figured it must happen to them when they were asleep, part of their natural dreams.

ðɪs pleɪs, hɑpɝ sɛd, ɪz nɑɾ oʊnli ə pleɪs ʌv wʊlvz. ɪts ə pleɪs ʌv ɔl.

This place, Hopper said, is not only a place of wolves. It is a place of all.

"ʌv ɔl?" pɛɹɪn æskt, sɪɾɪŋ daʊn ɑn ðə ɹuftaɪlz.

"Of all?" Perrin asked, sitting down on the rooftiles.

ɔl soʊlz noʊ ðɪs pleɪs, hɑpɝ sɛd. ðeɪ kʌm hɪɹ wən ðeɪ ɹitʃ fəɹ ɪt.

All souls know this place, Hopper said. They come here when they reach for it.

"wɛn ðəɹ dʒɹimɪŋ."

"When they're dreaming."

jɛs, hɑpɝ sɛd, laɪɪŋ daʊn bɪsaɪd hɪm. ðə fɪɹ-dʒɹimz ə mɛn ɑɹ stʃɹɔŋ. soʊ vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋ.

Yes, Hopper said, lying down beside him. The fear-dreams of men are strong. So very strong.

səmtaɪmz, ðoʊz tɛɹəbəl dʒɹimz kʌm hɪɹ. ðət sɛndɪŋ wɑz ən ɪnɔɹməs wʊlf, ðə saɪz ʌv ə bɪldɪŋ, nɑkɪŋ əsaɪd mʌtʃ smɔlɝ wʊlvz u tʃɹaɪd tə snæp ət hɪm. ðəɹ wɑz ə sɛn ə tɛɹɝ ən dɛθ əbaʊt ðə wʊlf. laɪk ... ə naɪtmɛɹ.

Sometimes, those terrible dreams come here. That sending was an enormous wolf, the size of a building, knocking aside much smaller wolves who tried to snap at him. There was a scent of terror and death about the wolf. Like ... a nightmare.

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd sloʊli.

Perrin nodded slowly.

mɛni wʊlvz əv bɪn kɑɾ ɪn ðə peɪnz ə ðiz fɪɹ-dʒɹimz. ðeɪ əpɪɹ mɔɹ kɑmənli wɛɹ mɛn maɪt wɔk, ðoʊ ðə dʒɹim lɪvz wɪθaʊt ðoʊz u kɹieɪɾəd ɪt.

Many wolves have been caught in the pains of these fear-dreams. They appear more commonly where men might walk, though the dream lives without those who created it.

hɑpɝ lʊkt ət pɛɹɪn. hʌntɪŋ ɪn ðə fɪɹ-dʒɹimz wɪl titʃ jə stʃɹɛŋkθ. bʌt jə maɪt daɪ. ɪts vɛɹi deɪnʒɝəs.

Hopper looked at Perrin. Hunting in the fear-dreams will teach you strength. But you might die. It is very dangerous.

"aɪ doʊn əv taɪm tə bi seɪf ɛnimɔɹ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "lɛts də ɪt."

"I don't have time to be safe anymore," Perrin said. "Let's do it."

hɑpɝ dɪdn æsk ɪf i wɑz sɝɾən. hi dʒʌmp daʊn tə ðə stʃɹit, ən pɛɹɪn fɑloʊd, lændɪŋ sɔfli. hɑpɝ bɪɡæn tə loʊp fɔɹwɝd, soʊ pɝ-ɹɪn bɹoʊk ɪndə ə dʒɑɡ.

Hopper didn't ask if he was certain. He jumped down to the street, and Perrin followed, landing softly. Hopper began to lope forward, so Per-rin broke into a jog.

"haʊ də wi faɪn ðɛm?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"How do we find them?" Perrin asked.

smɛl fɪɹ, hɑpɝ sɛnt. tɛɹɝ.

Smell fear, Hopper sent. Terror.

pɛɹɪn kloʊzd ɪz aɪz, bɹiðɪŋ ɪn dipli. dʒʌst əz dɔɹz flæʃt oʊpən ən kloʊzd, ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim i kəd səmtaɪmz smɛl θɪŋz ðəɹ fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən ɡɔn. mʌsti wɪntɝ pəteɪɾoʊz. ðə dʌŋ ʌv ə pæsɪŋ hɔɹs.

Perrin closed his eyes, breathing in deeply. Just as doors flashed open and closed, in the wolf dream he could sometimes smell things there for a moment, then gone. Musty winter potatoes. The dung of a passing horse.

ə paɪ, beɪkɪŋ.

A pie, baking.

wən i oʊpən ɪz aɪz, hi sɔ nʌn ə ðiz θɪŋz. ðeɪ wɝn ɹɪli ðɛɹ, bʌt ðeɪ ɔlmoʊst wɝ. ðeɪ kəɾ əv bɪn.

When he opened his eyes, he saw none of these things. They weren't really there, but they almost were. They could have been.

ðɛɹ, hɑpɝ sɛd, vænɪʃɪŋ. pɛɹɪn fɑloʊd, əpɪɹɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə wʊlf aʊtsaɪɾ ʌv ə nɛɹoʊ æliweɪ. ɪnsaɪd, ɪt lʊk tu dɑɹk tə bi nætʃɹəl.

There, Hopper said, vanishing. Perrin followed, appearing beside the wolf outside of a narrow alleyway. Inside, it looked too dark to be natural.

ɡoʊ ɪn, hɑpɝ sɛd. jəl nɑt læs lɔŋ jəɹ fɝs taɪm. əl kʌm fəɹ ju. ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪts nɑt. ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪts fɔls.

Go in, Hopper said. You will not last long your first time. I will come for you. Remember it is not. Remember it is false.

filɪŋ wɝid, bʌt dɪtɝmənd, pɛɹɪn stɛpt ɪndə ði æliweɪ. ðə wɔlz tə iðɝ saɪd wɝ blæk, əz ɪf ðeɪd bɪn peɪntəd. oʊnli . . . ðiz wɔlz wɝ tu dɑɹk tə bi peɪntəd. wɑz ðəɾ ə tʌft ʌv ɡɹæs bɪniθ ɪz fʊt? ðə skaɪ əbʌv hæd stɑp bɔɪlɪŋ, ən i θɔɾ i kəd si stɑɹz pikɪŋ daʊn. ə peɪl mun, fɑɹ tu lɑɹdʒ, əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə skaɪ, ʃɹaʊɾɪd ɪn klaʊdz. ɪt ɡeɪv ə koʊld ɡloʊ, laɪk aɪs.

Feeling worried, but determined, Perrin stepped into the alleyway. The walls to either side were black, as if they'd been painted. Only . . . these walls were too dark to be painted. Was that a tuft of grass beneath his foot? The sky above had stopped boiling, and he thought he could see stars peeking down. A pale moon, far too large, appeared in the sky, shrouded in clouds. It gave a cold glow, like ice.

hi wɑzn ɪn ðə sɪɾi ɛnimɔɹ. hi tɝn əbaʊt, əlɑɹmd, tə faɪn hɪmsɛlf ɪn ə fɔɹəst. ðə tʃɹiz hæd θɪk tʃɹʌŋks ən wɝ ə noʊ spiʃiz i kəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz. ðɛɹ bɹæntʃəz wɝ neɪkəd. ðə bɑɹk wɑz ə feɪnt ɡɹeɪ, lɪt baɪ ðə fæntəm laɪɾ əbʌv, ən lʊk laɪk boʊn.

He wasn't in the city anymore. He turned about, alarmed, to find himself in a forest. The trees had thick trunks and were of no species he could recognize. Their branches were naked. The bark was a faint gray, lit by the phantom light above, and looked like bone.

hi niɾəd tə ɡɛt bæk tə ðə sɪɾi! aʊɾ ə ðɪs tɛɹəbəl pleɪs. hi tɝn ɝaʊnd.

He needed to get back to the city! Out of this terrible place. He turned around.

sʌmθɪŋ flæʃt ɪn ðə naɪt, ən i spʌn. "huz ðɛɹ!" hi ʃaʊɾəd.

Something flashed in the night, and he spun. "Who's there!" he shouted.

ə wʊmən bɝs fɹəm ðə dɑɹknəs, ɹʌnɪŋ ɪn ə mæd skɹæmbəl. ʃi wɔɹ ə lus waɪt ɹoʊb, lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ə ʃɪft, ən ʃi hæd lɔŋ dɑɹk hɛɹ stʃɹimɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ. ʃi sɔ hɪm ən fɹoʊz, ðən tɝn ən meɪɾ əz ɪf tə ɹʌn ɪn ə dɪfɹən dɝɛkʃən.

A woman burst from the darkness, running in a mad scramble. She wore a loose white robe, little more than a shift, and she had long dark hair streaming behind her. She saw him and froze, then turned and made as if to run in a different direction.

pɛɹɪn kʌɾ əɹ ɔf, snætʃɪŋ əɹ hænd, pʊlɪŋ əɹ bæk. ʃi stʃɹʌɡəld, fit mɑɹɪŋ ðə loʊmi dɑɹk ɡɹaʊn bɪniθ əz ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə pʊl əweɪ. ʃi wɑz ɡæspɪŋ. ɪn ən aʊt. ɪn ən aʊt. ʃi smɛl fɹæntɪk.

Perrin cut her off, snatching her hand, pulling her back. She struggled, feet marring the loamy dark ground beneath as she tried to pull away. She was gasping. In and out. In and out. She smelled frantic.

aɪ nid tə noʊ ðə weɪ aʊt!" pɛɹɪn sɛd. "wi hæv tə ɹɪtɝn tə ðə sɪɾi."

I need to know the way out!" Perrin said. "We have to return to the city."

ʃi mɛɾ ɪz aɪz. "hiz kʌmɪŋ," ʃi hɪst. hɝ hæn slɪp fɹəm ɪz ən ʃi ɹæn, vænɪʃɪŋ ɪndə ðə naɪt, ðə dɑɹknəs ɛnfoʊldɪŋ əɹ laɪk ə ʃɹaʊd. pɛɹɪn tʊk ə stɛp fɔɹwɝd, hæn aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt.

She met his eyes. "He's coming," she hissed. Her hand slipped from his and she ran, vanishing into the night, the darkness enfolding her like a shroud. Perrin took a step forward, hand outstretched.

hi hɝd sʌmθɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm. hi tɝn sloʊli tə faɪn sʌmθɪŋ ɪnɔɹməs. ə lumɪŋ ʃædoʊ ðət sʌkt ɪn ðə munlaɪt. ðə θɪŋ sim tə dʒɹɔ bɹɛθ əweɪ, əbzɔɹbɪŋ ɪz vɛɹi laɪf ən wɪl.

He heard something behind him. He turned slowly to find something enormous. A looming shadow that sucked in the moonlight. The thing seemed to draw breath away, absorbing his very life and will.

ðə θɪŋ ɹɪɹɾ ʌp tɔlɝ. ɪt wɑz tɔlɝ ðən ðə tʃɹiz, ə hʌlkɪŋ mɑnstɝ wɪð ɑɹmz əz θɪk əz bæɹəlz, ɪts feɪs ən bɑɾi lɔst ɪn ʃædoʊ. ɪɾ oʊpən dip ɹɛɾ aɪz, laɪk tu hjudʒ koʊlz flɛɹɪŋ tə laɪf.

The thing reared up taller. It was taller than the trees, a hulking monster with arms as thick as barrels, its face and body lost in shadow. It opened deep red eyes, like two huge coals flaring to life.

/ nid tə faɪɾ ɪt! pɛɹɪn θɔt, hæmɝ əpɪɹɪŋ ɪn ɪz hænd. hi tʊk ə stɛp fɔɹwɝd, ðən θɔt bɛɾɝ ʌv ɪt. laɪt! ðət θɪŋ wɑz ɪnɔɹməs. hi kʊdn faɪɾ ɪt, nɑɾ aʊɾ ɪn ði oʊpən laɪk ðɪs.

/ need to fight it! Perrin thought, hammer appearing in his hand. He took a step forward, then thought better of it. Light! That thing was enormous. He couldn't fight it, not out in the open like this.

hi niɾəd kʌvɝ i tɝn ən ɹæn θɹu ðə hɑstəl wʊdz. ðə θɪŋ fɑloʊd. hi kəd hɪɹ ɪt snæpɪŋ bɹæntʃəz, ɪts fʊtstɛps meɪkɪŋ ði ɝθ ʃeɪk əhɛɾ ə hɪm, hi sɔ ðə wʊmən, hɝ θɪn waɪt ɡaʊn sloʊɪŋ əɹ əz ɪt kɑɾ ɑn ə bɹæntʃ. ʃi pʊl fɹi ən kəntɪnjud tə ɹʌn.

He needed cover He turned and ran through the hostile woods. The thing followed. He could hear it snapping branches, its footsteps making the earth shake Ahead of him, he saw the woman, her thin white gown slowing her as it caught on a branch. She pulled free and continued to run.

ðə kɹitʃɝ lumd. ɪt wəd kætʃ hɪm, kənsum hɪm, dɪstʃɹɔɪ hɪm! hi jɛl fəɹ ðə wʊmən, ɹitʃɪŋ aʊt təwɔɹd hɝ. ʃi ɡlænst oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ət hɪm, ən tʃɹɪpt.

The creature loomed. It would catch him, consume him, destroy him! He yelled for the woman, reaching out toward her. She glanced over her shoulder at him, and tripped.

pɛɹɪn kɝst. hi skɹæmbəl tə hɝ saɪd, tə hɛlp əɹ ʌp. bʌt ðə θɪŋ wɑz soʊ kloʊz!

Perrin cursed. He scrambled to her side, to help her up. But the thing was so close!

ɪt wɑz ə faɪt, ðɛn. hɪz hɑɹt wɑz θʌmpɪŋ əz kwɪkli əz ə wʊdlɑɹk pɛkɪŋ ə tʃɹi. hænz swɛɾi, hi tɝnd, ɡɹɪpɪŋ ɪz hæmɝ tə feɪs ðə tɛɹəbəl θɪŋ bɪhaɪnd. hi pleɪs hɪmsɛlf bɪtwin ɪɾ ən ðə wʊmən.

It was a fight, then. His heart was thumping as quickly as a woodlark pecking a tree. Hands sweaty, he turned, gripping his hammer to face the terrible thing behind. He placed himself between it and the woman.

ɪt ɹɪɹɾ ʌp, ɡɹoʊɪŋ lɑɹdʒɝ, ðoʊz ɹɛɾ aɪz bleɪzɪŋ wɪð faɪɝ. laɪt! hi kʊdn faɪt ðæt, kəd hi? hi niɾəd ən ɛdʒ ə səm kaɪnd. "wʌɾ ɪz ðət θɪŋ?" hi dɛspɝətli æskt ə ðə wʊmən. "waɪ dʌz ɪt tʃeɪs ʌs?"

It reared up, growing larger, those red eyes blazing with fire. Light! He couldn't fight that, could he? He needed an edge of some kind. "What is that thing?" he desperately asked of the woman. "Why does it chase us?"

"ɪts hɪm" ʃi hɪst. "ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn."

"It's him" she hissed. "The Dragon Reborn."

pɛɹɪn fɹoʊz. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. bʌt. . . bʌt ðət wɑz ɹænd. ɪts ə naɪtmɛɹ, hi ɹimaɪndəd hɪmsɛlf.

Perrin froze. The Dragon Reborn. But. . . but that was Rand. It's a nightmare, he reminded himself.

nʌn ə ðɪs ɪz ɹil. aɪ kæn lɛt maɪsɛlf bi kɑɾ ʌp ɪn ɪt!

None of this is real. I can't let myself be caught up in it!

ðə ɡɹaʊn tʃɹɛmbəld, əz ɪf moʊnɪŋ. hi kəd fil ðə hiɾ ə ðə mɑnstɝz aɪz. ə skɹæmbəlɪŋ saʊn keɪm fɹəm bɪhaɪn əz ðə wʊmən ɹæn, livɪŋ hɪm.

The ground trembled, as if moaning. He could feel the heat of the monster's eyes. A scrambling sound came from behind as the woman ran, leaving him.

pɛɹɪn stʊɾ ʌp, lɛɡz ʃeɪkɪŋ, ɛvɹi ɪnstɪŋkt kɹaɪɪŋ fəɹ ɪm tə ɹʌn. bʌt noʊ. hi kʊdn faɪɾ ɪt, iðɝ. hi kəd nɑɾ æksɛp ðɪs əz ɹil.

Perrin stood up, legs shaking, every instinct crying for him to run. But no. He couldn't fight it, either. He could not accept this as real.

ə wʊlf haʊld, ðən lɛpt ɪndə ðə klɪɹɪŋ. hɑpɝ sim tə pʊʃ bæk ðə dɑɹknəs. ðə kɹitʃɝ bɛn daʊn təwɔɹd pɛɹɪn, ɹitʃɪŋ ə mæsɪv hæn əz ɪf tə kɹʌʃ hɪm.

A wolf howled, then leaped into the clearing. Hopper seemed to push back the darkness. The creature bent down toward Perrin, reaching a massive hand as if to crush him.

ðɪs wɑz ən æli.

This was an alley.

ɪnsaɪɾ ə keɪɛmlɪn.

Inside of Caemlyn.

ɪt wɑzn ɹil.

It wasn't real.

ɪt wɑz nɑt.

It was not.

ðə dɑɹknəs ɝaʊn əm feɪɾəd. ði ɪnɔɹməs dɑɹk ʃædoʊ kɹitʃɝ wɔɹpt ɪn ði ɛɹ, laɪk ə pis ə klɔθ biɪŋ stʃɹɛtʃt. ðə mun vænɪʃt.

The darkness around them faded. The enormous dark shadow creature warped in the air, like a piece of cloth being stretched. The moon vanished.

ə smɔl pɑkəɾ ʌv ɡɹaʊnd - ðə dɝɾi, tʃɹæmpəld ɝθ ʌv ən æli - əpɪɹɾ ət ðɛɹ fit.

A small pocket of ground - the dirty, trampled earth of an alley - appeared at their feet.

ðɛn, wɪð ə snæp, ðə dʒɹim wɑz ɡɔn. pɛɹɪn stʊɾ ɪn ði æli əɡɛn, hɑpɝ əɾ ɪz saɪd, noʊ saɪn ə ðə fɔɹəst əɹ ðə tɛɹəbəl kɹitʃɝ ðət sʌmwʌn hæd vjuɾ əz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

Then, with a snap, the dream was gone. Perrin stood in the alley again, Hopper at his side, no sign of the forest or the terrible creature that someone had viewed as the Dragon Reborn.

pɛɹɪn ɛksheɪl sloʊli. swɛt dʒɹɪp fɹəm ɪz bɹaʊ. hi ɹitʃt ʌp tə waɪp ɪɾ əweɪ, ðən wɪl ðə swɛɾ əweɪ ɪnstɛd.

Perrin exhaled slowly. Sweat dripped from his brow. He reached up to wipe it away, then willed the sweat away instead.

hɑpɝ vænɪʃt, ən pɛɹɪn fɑloʊd, faɪndɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɑn ðə seɪm ɹuftɑp əz bɪfɔɹ. hi sæt daʊn. mɪɹli θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðət ʃædoʊ meɪɾ ɪm ʃɪvɝ. "ɪt fɛl soʊ ɹil," hi sɛd. "ə pis ə mi nu ɪt wɑz ə naɪtmɛɹ. aɪ kʊdn hɛlp bʌt tʃɹaɪ tə faɪt, əɹ tʃɹaɪ tə ɹʌn. wən aɪ dɪɾ iðɝ, ɪt ɡɹu stʃɹɔŋɝ, dɪdn ɪt? kəz aɪ æksɛptɪɾ ɪt wɑz ɹil?"

Hopper vanished, and Perrin followed, finding himself on the same rooftop as before. He sat down. Merely thinking of that shadow made him shiver. "It felt so real," he said. "A piece of me knew it was a nightmare. I couldn't help but try to fight, or try to run. When I did either, it grew stronger, didn't it? Because I accepted it was real?"

jɛs. jə mʌs nɑt bɪliv wʌt jə si.

Yes. You must not believe what you see.

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. "ðɛɹ wɑz ə wʊmən ɪn ðɛɹ. pɑɹɾ ə ðə dʒɹim? ʃi wɑzn ɹil iðɝ?"

Perrin nodded. "There was a woman in there. Part of the dream? She wasn't real either?"

jɛs.

Yes.

"meɪbi ʃi wɑz ðə wʌn u dʒɹimd ɪt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðə wʌn hævɪŋ ði ɝɪdʒənəl naɪtmɛɹ, kɑɾ ʌp ɪn ɪɾ ən tʃɹæp hɪɹ ɪn ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz."

"Maybe she was the one who dreamed it," Perrin said. "The one having the original nightmare, caught up in it and trapped here in the World of Dreams."

mɛn u dʒɹim də nɑt steɪ hɪɹ lɔŋ, hɑpɝ sɛnt. tə hɪm, ðət wɑz ði ɛn ə ðə dɪskʌʃən.

Men who dream do not stay here long, Hopper sent. To him, that was the end of the discussion.

jə wɝ stʃɹɔŋ, jʌŋ bʊl. jə dɪd wɛl. hi smɛl pɹaʊd.

You were strong, Young Bull. You did well. He smelled proud.

"ɪt hɛlpt wən ʃi kɔl ðə θɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ðət ʃoʊɾ ɪt wɑzn ɹil. hɛlp mi bɪliv ɪt wɑznt."

"It helped when she called the thing the Dragon Reborn. That showed it wasn't real. Helped me believe it wasn't."

jə dɪd wɛl, fulɪʃ kʌb, hɑpɝ ɹɪpiɾɪd. pɝhæps jə kən lɝn.

You did well, foolish cub, Hopper repeated. Perhaps you can learn.

"oʊnli ɪf aɪ kip pɹæktəsɪŋ. wi nid tə də ðəɾ əɡɛn. kən jə faɪn ənʌðɝ?"

"Only if I keep practicing. We need to do that again. Can you find another?"

jɛs, hɑpɝ sɛnt. ðəɹ ɑɹ ɔlweɪz naɪtmɛɹz wən jəɹ kaɪn ɪz nɪɹ. ɔlweɪz. ðə wʊlf tɝnd nɔɹθwɝɾ əɡɛn, haʊɛvɝ. pɛɹɪn hæd θɔt ðət ðə θɪŋ ðət hæd bɪn dɪstʃɹæktɪŋ ɪm ɝliɝ wɑz ðə dʒɹimz, bʌɾ ɪt dɪdn sim tə hæv bɪn ðə keɪs.

Yes, Hopper sent. There are always nightmares when your kind is near. Always. The wolf turned northward again, however. Perrin had thought that the thing that had been distracting him earlier was the dreams, but it didn't seem to have been the case.

wʌɾ ɪz ʌp ðɛɹ?" pɛɹɪn æskt. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt jə kip lʊkɪŋ təwɔɹd?"

What is up there?" Perrin asked. "What is it you keep looking toward?"

ɪt kʌmz, hɑpɝ sɛnt.

It comes, Hopper sent.

"wʌt?"

"What?"

ðə læs hʌnt. ɪt bɪɡɪnz. əɹ ɪt dʌz nɑt.

The Last Hunt. It begins. Or it does not.

pɛɹɪn fɹaʊnd, stændɪŋ. "ju min . . . ɹaɪt naʊ?"

Perrin frowned, standing. "You mean . . . right now?"

ðə dɪsɪʒən wɪl bi meɪd. sun. wʌt dɪsɪʒən?" hɑpɝz sɛndɪŋz wɝ kənfjuzɪŋ, ən i kʊdn dɪsaɪfɝ ðɛm. laɪɾ ən dɑɹknəs, ə vɔɪɾ ən faɪɝ, ə koʊlnəs ən ə tɛɹi-bəl, tɛɹəbəl hit. mɪkst wɪð wʊlvz haʊlɪŋ, kɔlɪŋ, lɛndɪŋ stʃɹɛŋkθ.

The decision will be made. Soon. What decision?" Hopper's sendings were confusing, and he couldn't decipher them. Light and darkness, a void and fire, a coldness and a terri-ble, terrible heat. Mixed with wolves howling, calling, lending strength.

kʌm. hɑpɝ stʊd, lʊkɪŋ tə ðə nɔɹθist.

Come. Hopper stood, looking to the northeast.

hɑpɝ vænɪʃt. pɛɹɪn ʃɪftəɾ æftɝ hɪm, əpɪɹɪŋ loʊ daʊn ɑn ðə sloʊps ə ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt, bɪsaɪɾ ən aʊtkɹɑpɪŋ ə stoʊn.

Hopper vanished. Perrin shifted after him, appearing low down on the slopes of the Dragonmount, beside an outcropping of stone.

"laɪt," pɛɹɪn sɛd sɔfli, lʊkɪŋ ʌp ɪn ɑ. ðə stɔɹm ðət hæd bɪn bɹuɪŋ fəɹ mʌnθs hæd kʌm tə ə hɛd. ə mæsɪv blæk θʌndɝhɛd dɑməneɪɾəd ðə skaɪ, kʌvɝɪŋ ðə tɑp ə ðə maʊntən. ɪt spʌn sloʊli ɪn ði ɛɹ, ən ɪnɔɹməs vɔɹɾɛks ə blæknəs, ɪmɪɾɪŋ boʊls ə laɪtnɪŋ ðət kɑn-nɛktɪd tə ðə klaʊdz əbʌv. ɪn ʌðɝ pɑɹts ə ðə wʊlf dʒɹim ðə klaʊdz wɝ tɛmpɛstʃuəs, jɛt dɪstənt. ðɪs fɛlt ɪmiɾiət.

"Light," Perrin said softly, looking up in awe. The storm that had been brewing for months had come to a head. A massive black thunderhead dominated the sky, covering the top of the mountain. It spun slowly in the air, an enormous vortex of blackness, emitting bolts of lightning that con-nected to the clouds above. In other parts of the wolf dream the clouds were tempestuous, yet distant. This felt immediate.

ðɪs wɑz ... ðə foʊkəs ə sʌmθɪŋ. pɛɹɪn kəd fil ɪt. ɔfən, ðə wʊlf dʒɹim ɹəflɛktəd θɪŋz ɪn ðə ɹil wɝld ɪn stʃɹeɪnʒ əɹ ʌnɪkspɛktɪd weɪz.

This was ... the focus of something. Perrin could feel it. Often, the wolf dream reflected things in the real world in strange or unexpected ways.

hɑpɝ stʊɾ ɑn ði aʊtkɹɑpɪŋ. pɛɹɪn kəd fil wʊlvz ɔl əkɹɔs ðə sloʊps ə dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt.

Hopper stood on the outcropping. Perrin could feel wolves all across the slopes of Dragonmount.

ɪn ivən ɡɹeɪɾɝ nʌmbɝz ðən hid fɛl hɪɹ ɹisənli.

In even greater numbers than he'd felt here recently.

ðeɪ weɪt, hɑpɝ sɛd. ðə læs hʌn kʌmz.

They wait, Hopper said. The Last Hunt comes.

əz pɛɹɪn ɹitʃt aʊt, hi faʊn ðəɾ ʌðɝ pæks wɝ kʌmɪŋ, stɪl dɪstən bʌt muvɪŋ təwɔɹd dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt. pɛɹɪn lʊkt ʌpwɝɾ ət ðə mɑnstʃɹəs pik. ðə tum ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, luz θɝɪn. ɪt wɑz ə mɑnjəmən tə hɪz mædnəs, tə boʊθ ɪz feɪljɝ ən ɪz səksɛs. hɪz pɹaɪɾ ən ɪz sɛlf-sækɹəfaɪs.

As Perrin reached out, he found that other packs were coming, still distant but moving toward Dragonmount. Perrin looked upward at the monstrous peak. The tomb of the Dragon, Lews Therin. It was a monument to his madness, to both his failure and his success. His pride and his self-sacrifice.

"ðə wʊlvz," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðeɪ ɡæðɝ fəɹ ðə læs hʌnt?"

"The wolves," Perrin said. "They gather for the Last Hunt?"

jɛs. ɪf ɪɾ əkɝz.

Yes. If it occurs.

pɛɹɪn tɝn bæk tə hɑpɝ. "ju sɛd ðəɾ ɪt wʊd. 'ðə læs hʌn kʌmz,' jə sɛd."

Perrin turned back to Hopper. "You said that it would. 'The Last Hunt comes,' you said."

ə tʃɔɪs mʌs bi meɪd, jʌŋ bʊl. wʌn pæθ lidz tə ðə læs hʌnt.

A choice must be made, Young Bull. One path leads to the Last Hunt.

"æn ði ʌðɝ?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"And the other?" Perrin asked.

hɑpɝ dɪdn ɹɪspɑn ɪmiɾiətli. hi tɝn təwɔɹd dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt. ði ʌðɝ pæθ dʌz nɑt lɛd tə ðə læs hʌnt.

Hopper didn't respond immediately. He turned toward Dragonmount. The other path does not lead to the Last Hunt.

"jɛs, bʌt wʌt dʌz ɪt lɛd tə?"

"Yes, but what does it lead to?"

tə nʌθɪŋ.

To nothing.

pɛɹɪn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə pɹɛs fɝðɝ, bʌt ðən ðə weɪɾ ə hɑpɝz sɛndɪŋ hɪt hɪm.

Perrin opened his mouth to press further, but then the weight of Hopper's sending hit him.

"nʌθɪŋ" tə ðə wʊlf mɛn ə veɪkən dɛn, ɔl ə ðə pʌps teɪkən baɪ tʃɹæpɝz. ə naɪt skaɪ ɛmpti ʌv stɑɹz.

"Nothing" to the wolf meant a vacant den, all of the pups taken by trappers. A night sky empty of stars.

ðə mun feɪɾɪŋ. ðə smɛl ʌv oʊl blʌd, dʒɹaɪ, steɪl ən fleɪkt əweɪ.

The moon fading. The smell of old blood, dry, stale and flaked away.

pɛɹɪn kloʊzd ɪz maʊð. ðə skaɪ kəntɪnjud tə tʃɝn wɪð ðət blæk stɔɹm. hi smɛld ɪɾ ɑn ðə wɪnd, ðə smɛl ə bɹoʊkən tʃɹiz ən dɝt, əɹ flʌɾəd filz ən laɪtnɪŋ faɪɝz. əz soʊ ɔfən, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɹisənli, ðoʊz sɛns sim tə kəntʃɹæst wɪð ðə wɝld ɝaʊn hɪm. wʌn ə hɪz sɛnsɪz toʊld ɪm i wɑz ɪn ðə vɛɹi sɛntɝ ʌv ə kətæstʃɹəfi waɪl ði ʌðɝz sɔ nʌθɪŋ əmɪs.

Perrin closed his mouth. The sky continued to churn with that black storm. He smelled it on the wind, the smell of broken trees and dirt, or flooded fields and lightning fires. As so often, particularly recently, those scents seemed to contrast with the world around him. One of his senses told him he was in the very center of a catastrophe while the others saw nothing amiss.

"ðɪs tʃɔɪs. waɪ doʊnt wi dʒʌs meɪk ɪt?"

"This choice. Why don't we just make it?"

ɪts nɑɾ əɹ tʃoʊk, jʌŋ bʊl.

It is not our choke, Young Bull.

pɛɹɪn fɛl dʒɹɔn tə ðə klaʊdz əbʌv. dɪspaɪt hɪmsɛlf, hi bɪɡæn tə wɔk ʌp ðə sloʊp. hɑpɝ loʊpt ʌp bɪsaɪd hɪm. ɪts deɪnʒɝəs əbʌv, jʌŋ bʊl.

Perrin felt drawn to the clouds above. Despite himself, he began to walk up the slope. Hopper loped up beside him. It is dangerous above, Young Bull.

"aɪ noʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. bʌɾ i kʊdn stɑp. ɪnstɛd, hi ɪnkɹist ɪz spid, itʃ stɛp lɔntʃɪŋ ɪm dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl fɑɹðɝ. hɑpɝ ɹæn bɪsaɪɾ ɪm pæsɪŋ tʃɹiz, ɹɑks, ɡɹups ʌv wɑtʃɪŋ wʊlvz.

"I know," Perrin said. But he couldn't stop. Instead, he increased his speed, each step launching him just a little farther. Hopper ran beside him passing trees, rocks, groups of watching wolves.

ʌpwɝd pɛɹɪn ən hɑpɝ wɛnt, klaɪmɪŋ əntɪl ðə tʃɹiz dwɪndəld ən ðə ɡɹaʊnd ɡɹu koʊld wɪð fɹɔst ən aɪs.

Upward Perrin and Hopper went, climbing until the trees dwindled and the ground grew cold with frost and ice.

ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ðeɪ əpɹoʊtʃt ðə klaʊɾ ɪtsɛlf. ɪt simd ə dɑɹk fɑɡ, ʃeɪkɪŋ wɪð kɝəns əz ɪt spʌn. pɛɹɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ət ðə pɝɪməɾɝ, ðən stɛpt ɪnsaɪd. ɪt wɑz laɪk stɛpɪŋ ɪndə ðə naɪtmɛɹ.

Eventually, they approached the cloud itself. It seemed a dark fog, shaking with currents as it spun. Perrin hesitated at the perimeter, then stepped inside. It was like stepping into the nightmare.

ðə wɪnd wɑz sʌɾənli vaɪələnt, ði ɛɹ bʌzɪŋ wɪð ɛnɝdʒi. livz ən dɝɾ ən ɡɹɪt blu ɪn ðə tɛmpəst, ən i hæd tə ɹeɪz ə hæn əɡɛnst ɪt.

The wind was suddenly violent, the air buzzing with energy. Leaves and dirt and grit blew in the tempest, and he had to raise a hand against it.

noʊ, hi θɔt.

No, he thought.

ə smɔl bʌbəl ə kɑm ɛɹ oʊpən ɝaʊn hɪm. ðə tɛmpəs kəntɪnjud tə bloʊ dʒʌst ɪntʃəz fɹəm ɪz feɪs, ən i hæd tə stʃɹeɪn tə kip fɹəm biɪŋ kleɪm baɪ ɪɾ əɡɛn. ðɪs stɔɹm wɑzn ə naɪtmɛɹ əɹ ə dʒɹim; ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ væst, sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ ɹil. ðɪs taɪm, pɛɹɪn wɑz ðə wʌn kɹieɪɾɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ æbnɔɹməl wɪð ðə bʌbəl ə seɪfti.

A small bubble of calm air opened around him. The tempest continued to blow just inches from his face, and he had to strain to keep from being claimed by it again. This storm wasn't a nightmare or a dream; it was something more vast, something more real. This time, Perrin was the one creating something abnormal with the bubble of safety.

hi pɹɛs fɔɹwɝd, sun livɪŋ tʃɹæks ɪn snoʊ. hɑpɝ stʃɹoʊɾ əɡɛns ðə wɪnd, lɛsənɪŋ ɪts ɪfɛkt ɑn ɪm əz wɛl. hi wɑz stʃɹɔŋɝ əɾ ɪt ðən pɛɹɪn wɑz - pɛɹɪn bɛɹli mænədʒ tə kip ɪz oʊn bʌbəl ʌp. hi fɪɹd ðət wɪθaʊɾ ɪt, hi wəd bi sʌkt ɪndə ðə stɔɹm ən tɔst ɪndə ði ɛɹ. hi sɔ lɑɹdʒ bɹæntʃəz ɹɪp pæst ɪn ði ɛɹ, ən ivən səm smɔlɝ tʃɹiz.

He pressed forward, soon leaving tracks in snow. Hopper strode against the wind, lessening its effect on him as well. He was stronger at it than Perrin was - Perrin barely managed to keep his own bubble up. He feared that without it, he would be sucked into the storm and tossed into the air. He saw large branches rip past in the air, and even some smaller trees.

hɑpɝ sloʊd, ðən sæt daʊn ɪn ðə snoʊ. hi lʊkt ʌpwɝd, təwɔɹd ðə pik. aɪ kænɑt steɪ, ðə wʊlf sɛnt. ðɪs ɪz nɑt maɪ pleɪs.

Hopper slowed, then sat down in the snow. He looked upward, toward the peak. I cannot stay, the wolf sent. This is not my place.

"aɪ ʌndɝstænd," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"I understand," Perrin said.

ðə wʊlf vænɪʃt, bʌt pɛɹɪn kəntɪnjud. hi kʊdn ɪkspleɪn wʌt dʒɹu hɪm, bʌɾ i nu ðəɾ i niɾəd tə wɪtnəs. sʌmwʌn dɪd. hi wɔk fəɹ wʌt sim laɪk aʊɝz, foʊkəs kəmplitli ɑn oʊnli tu θɪŋz: kipɪŋ ðə wɪnz ɔf ɪm ən pʊɾɪŋ wʌn fʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ʌðɝ.

The wolf vanished, but Perrin continued. He couldn't explain what drew him, but he knew that he needed to witness. Someone did. He walked for what seemed like hours, focused completely on only two things: keeping the winds off him and putting one foot in front of the other.

ðə stɔɹm ɡɹu ɪnkɹisɪŋli vaɪələnt. ɪt wɑz soʊ bæd hɪɹ ðəɾ i kʊdn kip ɔl ə ðə stɔɹm ɔf, dʒʌs ðə wɝst ʌv ɪt. hi pæs ðə ɹɪdʒ lɪp wɛɹ ðə maʊntəntɑp wɑz bɹoʊkən, pɪkɪŋ ɪz weɪ əlɔŋsaɪɾ ɪt, hʌn- kɛɹɾ əɡɛns ðə ɡʌsts, ə stip fɔl ɑn iðɝ saɪd. wɪn bɪɡæn tə wɪp əɾ ɪz kloʊðɪŋ, ən i hæd tə skwɪn ɪz aɪz əɡɛns ðə dʌst ən snoʊ ɪn ði ɛɹ.

The storm grew increasingly violent. It was so bad here that he couldn't keep all of the storm off, just the worst of it. He passed the ridged lip where the mountaintop was broken, picking his way alongside it, hun- kered against the gusts, a steep fall on either side. Wind began to whip at his clothing, and he had to squint his eyes against the dust and snow in the air.

bʌɾ i kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn. stʃɹaɪvɪŋ fəɹ ðə pik, wɪtʃ ɹoʊz əhɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ əbʌv ðə blæstəɾ aʊt saɪɾ ə ðə maʊntən. hi nu ðəɾ ətɑp ðət pɔɪn i wəd faɪnd wʌɾ i sɝtʃt fɔɹ. ðɪs hɔɹəbəl meɪlstʃɹəm wɑz ðə wʊlf dʒɹimz ɹiækʃən tə sʌmθɪŋ ɡɹeɪt, sʌmθɪŋ tɛɹəbəl. ɪn ðɪs pleɪs, səmtaɪmz θɪŋz wɝ mɔɹ ɹil ðən ɪn ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld. ðə dʒɹim ɹəflɛktəɾ ə tɛmpəs kəz sʌmθɪŋ vɛɹi ɪmpɔɹɾənt wɑz hæpənɪŋ i wɝid ðəɾ ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ tɛɹəbəl.

But he continued on. Striving for the peak, which rose ahead, rising above the blasted out side of the mountain. He knew that atop that point he would find what he searched for. This horrible maelstrom was the wolf dream's reaction to something great, something terrible. In this place, sometimes things were more real than in the waking world. The dream reflected a tempest because something very important was happening He worried that it was something terrible.

pɛɹɪn pɹɛs fɔɹwɝd, ʃʌvɪŋ ɪz weɪ θɹu ðə snoʊz, kɹɔlɪŋ ʌp ɹɑk feɪsəz, hɪz fɪŋɡɝz livɪŋ skɪn stɪkɪŋ tə ðə fɹɪdʒəd stoʊnz. bʌɾ i hæd tʃɹeɪnd wɛl ðiz læs fju wiks. hi lɛp tʃæzəmz i ʃʊdn əv bɪn eɪbəl tə lip ən klaɪmd ɹɑks ðət ʃʊɾə bɪn tu haɪ fəɹ hɪm.

Perrin pressed forward, shoving his way through the snows, crawling up rock faces, his fingers leaving skin sticking to the frigid stones. But he had trained well these last few weeks. He leapt chasms he shouldn't have been able to leap and climbed rocks that should have been too high for him.

ə fɪɡjɝ stʊɾ ət ðə vɛɹi tɑp ə ðə dʒæɡd, bɹoʊkən tɪp ə ðə maʊntən. pɛɹɪn kɛpt pɹɛsɪŋ ɔnwɝd. sʌmwʌn niɾəd tə wɑtʃ. sʌmwʌn niɾəd tə bi ðəɹ wən ɪt hæpənd.

A figure stood at the very top of the jagged, broken tip of the mountain. Perrin kept pressing onward. Someone needed to watch. Someone needed to be there when it happened.

faɪnəli, pɛɹɪn hivd ətɑp wʌn læst stoʊn ən faʊn hɪmsɛlf wɪðɪn ə dʌzən fiɾ ə ðə tɑp. hi kəd meɪk aʊt ðə fɪɡjɝ naʊ. ðə mæn stʊɾ ət ðə vɛɹi hɑɹɾ ə ðə vɔɹɾɛks ʌv wɪnz, stɛɹɪŋ istwɝd, moʊʃənləs. hi wɑz feɪn ən tʃɹænslusənt, ə ɹəflɛkʃən ə ðə ɹil wɝld. laɪk ə ʃædoʊ.

Finally, Perrin heaved atop one last stone and found himself within a dozen feet of the top. He could make out the figure now. The man stood at the very heart of the vortex of winds, staring eastward, motionless. He was faint and translucent, a reflection of the real world. Like a shadow.

pɛɹɪn hæd nɛvɝ sin ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ɪt.

Perrin had never seen anything like it.

ɪt wɑz ɹænd, ʌv kɔɹs. pɛɹɪn hæd noʊn ðəɾ ɪt wəd bi. pɛɹɪn hɛl tə ðə stoʊn wɪð wʌn ɹæɡəd hæn ən pʊld ɪz kloʊk kloʊs wɪð ði ʌðɝ - hid kɹieɪɾəd ðə kloʊk sɛvɹəl klɪf feɪsəz əɡoʊ.

It was Rand, of course. Perrin had known that it would be. Perrin held to the stone with one ragged hand and pulled his cloak close with the other - he'd created the cloak several cliff faces ago.

hi blɪŋk θɹu ɹɛɾənd aɪz, ɡeɪzɪŋ ʌpwɝd. hi hæd tə foʊkəs moʊst ə hɪz kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən ɑn pʊʃɪŋ bæk səm ə ðə wɪnz tə kip hɪmsɛlf fɹəm biɪŋ flʌŋ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə tɛmpəst.

He blinked through reddened eyes, gazing upward. He had to focus most of his concentration on pushing back some of the winds to keep himself from being flung out into the tempest.

laɪtnɪŋ flæʃt sʌɾənli, θʌndɝ saʊndɪŋ fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm sɪns hid bɪɡʌn klaɪmɪŋ. ðət laɪtnɪŋ bɪɡæn tə ɑɹk ɪn ə doʊm ɝaʊn ðə tɑp ə ðə maʊntən. ɪt θɹu laɪɾ əkɹɔs ɹændz feɪs. ðət hɑɹd, ɪmpæsɪv feɪs, laɪk stoʊn ɪtsɛlf. wɛɹ hæɾ ɪts kɝvz ɡɔn? wən hæd ɹænd ɡeɪn soʊ mɛni laɪnz ən æŋɡəlz? ən ðoʊz aɪz, ðeɪ simd meɪɾ ə mɑɹbəl!

Lightning flashed suddenly, thunder sounding for the first time since he'd begun climbing. That lightning began to arc in a dome around the top of the mountain. It threw light across Rand's face. That hard, impassive face, like stone itself. Where had its curves gone? When had Rand gained so many lines and angles? And those eyes, they seemed made of marble!

ɹænd wɔɹ ə koʊɾ ə blæk ən ɹɛd. faɪn ən ɔɹnəmɛntɪd, wɪð ə sɔɹɾ əɾ ɪz weɪst. ðə wɪnz dɪdn əfɛkt ɹændz kloʊðz. ðoʊz fɛl ənnətʃɝəli stɪl, əz ɪf i ɹɪli wɝ dʒʌst ə stætʃu. kɑɹv fɹəm stoʊn. ði oʊnli θɪŋ ðət muvd wɑz ɪz dɑɹk ɹɛd hɛɹ, bloʊɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪnd, θɹoʊn ən spʌn.

Rand wore a coat of black and red. Fine and ornamented, with a sword at his waist. The winds didn't affect Rand's clothes. Those fell unnaturally still, as if he really were just a statue. Carved from stone. The only thing that moved was his dark red hair, blowing in the wind, thrown and spun.

pɛɹɪn klʌŋ tə ðə ɹɑks fəɹ ɪz laɪf, koʊld wɪn baɪɾɪŋ ɪndə hɪz tʃiks, hɪz fɪŋɡɝz ən fit soʊ nʌm i kəd bɛɹli fil ðɛm. hɪz bɪɹd bɹɪsəld wɪð dʌsti aɪs ən snoʊ. sʌmθɪŋ blæk bɪɡæn tə spɪn ɝaʊn ɹænd. ɪt wɑzn pɑɹɾ ə ðə stɔɹm; ɪt sim laɪk naɪɾ ɪtsɛlf likɪŋ fɹəm hɪm. tɛnʒɹəlz ʌv ɪt ɡɹu fɹəm ɹændz oʊn skɪn, laɪk taɪni hænz kɝlɪŋ bæk ən ɹæpɪŋ ɝaʊn hɪm. ɪt simd ivəl ɪtsɛlf ɡɪvən laɪf.

Perrin clung to the rocks for his life, cold wind biting into his cheeks, his fingers and feet so numb he could barely feel them. His beard bristled with dusty ice and snow. Something black began to spin around Rand. It wasn't part of the storm; it seemed like night itself leaking from him. Tendrils of it grew from Rand's own skin, like tiny hands curling back and wrapping around him. It seemed evil itself given life.

"ɹænd!" pɛɹɪn bɛloʊd. "faɪɾ ɪt! ɹænd!"

"Rand!" Perrin bellowed. "Fight it! Rand!"

hɪz vɔɪs wɑz lɔst ɪn ðə wɪnd, ən i daʊɾɪd ðət ɹænd cʊɾə hɝɾ ɪm ɛniweɪ. ðə dɑɹknəs kəntɪnjud tə sip aʊt, laɪk ə lɪkwəd tɑɹ kʌmɪŋ θɹu ɹændz pɔɹz, kɹieɪɾɪŋ ə miæzmə ʌv pɪtʃ ɝaʊn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. wɪðɪn moʊməns, pɛɹɪn kəd bɛɹli si ɹænd θɹu ðə blæknəs. ɪɾ ɛnkloʊz hɪm, kʌɾɪŋ ɪm ɔf, bænɪʃɪŋ hɪm. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɑz ɡɔn. oʊnli ivəl ɹɪmeɪnd.

His voice was lost in the wind, and he doubted that Rand could have heard him anyway. The darkness continued to seep out, like a liquid tar coming through Rand's pores, creating a miasma of pitch around the Dragon Reborn. Within moments, Perrin could barely see Rand through the blackness. It enclosed him, cutting him off, banishing him. The Dragon Reborn was gone. Only evil remained.

"ɹænd, pliz . . ." pɛɹɪn wɪspɝd.

"Rand, please . . ." Perrin whispered.

ən ðən - fɹəm ðə mɪdst ə ðə blæknəs, fɹəm ðə sɛntɝ ə ði ʌpɹɔɹ ən ðə tɛmpəst - ə taɪni slɪvɝ ə laɪt splɪt θɹu ði ivəl. laɪk ə kændəlz ɡloʊ ɑn ə vɛɹi dɑɹk naɪt. ðə laɪt ʃoʊn ʌpwɝd, təwɔɹd ðə dɪstən skaɪ, laɪk ə bikən. soʊ fɹeɪl.

And then - from the midst of the blackness, from the center of the uproar and the tempest - a tiny sliver of light split through the evil. Like a candle's glow on a very dark night. The light shone upward, toward the distant sky, like a beacon. So frail.

ðə tɛmpəs bəfeɪɾ ɪt. ðə wɪnz stɔɹmd, haʊld, ən skɹimd. ðə laɪtnɪŋ biɾ əɡɛns ðə tɑp ə ðə ɹɑki pik, blæstɪŋ fɹi tʃʌŋks ə ɹɑk, skɔɹɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ðə blæknəs ənʒəleɪtɪd ən pʌlsd.

The tempest buffeted it. The winds stormed, howled, and screamed. The lightning beat against the top of the rocky peak, blasting free chunks of rock, scoring the ground. The blackness undulated and pulsed.

bʌt stɪl ðə laɪt ʃoʊn.

But still the light shone.

ə wɛb ə kɹæks əpɪɹd daʊn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ʃɛl ʌv ivəl blæknəs, laɪt ʃaɪnɪŋ fɹəm wɪðɪn.

A web of cracks appeared down the side of the shell of evil blackness, light shining from within.

ənʌðɝ fɹæktʃɝ dʒɔɪn ɪt, ən ənʌðɝ. sʌmθɪŋ stʃɹɔŋ wɑz ɪnsaɪd, sʌmθɪŋ ɡloʊɪŋ, sʌmθɪŋ bɹɪljənt.

Another fracture joined it, and another. Something strong was inside, something glowing, something brilliant.

ðə ʃɛl ɪksploʊɾəd aʊtwɝd, veɪpɝaɪzɪŋ ən ɹilisɪŋ ə kɑləm ə laɪt soʊ bɹaɪt, soʊ ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl ðəɾ ɪt sim tə sɪɹ ði aɪz fɹəm pɛɹɪnz hɛd. bʌɾ i lʊkt ɑn ɛniweɪ, nɑt ɹeɪzɪŋ ɑɹm tə ʃeɪɾ əɹ blɑk ðə ɹisplɛndən ɪmədʒ bɪfɔɹ hɪm. ɹænd stʊd wɪðɪn ðət laɪt, maʊθ oʊpən əz ɪf bɛloʊɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə skaɪz əbʌv. ðə sʌn-jɛloʊd kɑləm ʃɑɾ ɪndə ði ɛɹ, ən ðə stɔɹm sim tə ʃʌɾɝ, ði ɪntaɪɝ skaɪ ɪtsɛlf ʌnʒəleɪtɪŋ.

The shell exploded outward, vaporizing and releasing a column of light so bright, so incredible that it seemed to sear the eyes from Perrin's head. But he looked on anyway, not raising arm to shade or block the resplendent image before him. Rand stood within that light, mouth open as if bellowing toward the skies above. The sun-yellowed column shot into the air, and the storm seemed to shudder, the entire sky itself undulating.

ðə tɛmpəs vænɪʃt.

The tempest vanished.

ðət kɑləm ə faɪɝi laɪt bɪkeɪm ə kɑləm ə sʌnlaɪt stʃɹimɪŋ daʊn, ɪluməneɪɾɪŋ ðə pik ə dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt. pɛɹɪn pʊld ɪz fɪŋɡɝz fɹi fɹəm ðə ɹɑk, ɡeɪzɪŋ ɑn wɪð wʌndɝ ət ɹænd stændɪŋ wɪðɪn ðə laɪt. ɪt sim soʊ lɔŋ, soʊ vɛɹi lɔŋ, sɪns pɛɹɪn hæd sin ə ɹeɪ ʌv pjʊɹ sʌnlaɪt.

That column of fiery light became a column of sunlight streaming down, illuminating the peak of Dragonmount. Perrin pulled his fingers free from the rock, gazing on with wonder at Rand standing within the light. It seemed so long, so very long, since Perrin had seen a ray of pure sunlight.

ðə wʊlvz bɪɡæn tə haʊl. ɪt wɑz ə haʊl ə tʃɹaɪəmf, ʌv ɡlɔɹi ən ə vɪktɝi. pɛɹɪn ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛɾ ən haʊld əz wɛl, bɪkʌmɪŋ jʌŋ bʊl fəɹ ə moʊmənt. hi kəd fil ðə pul ə sʌnlaɪt ɡɹoʊɪŋ, ən ɪt wɑʃt oʊvɝ hɪm, ɪts wɔɹmθ bænɪʃɪŋ ðə fɹoʊzən tʃɪl. hi bɛɹli noʊɾəst wən ɹændz ɪmədʒ vænɪʃt, fəɹ i lɛf ðət sʌnlaɪt bɪhaɪnd.

The wolves began to howl. It was a howl of triumph, of glory and of victory. Perrin raised his head and howled as well, becoming Young Bull for a moment. He could feel the pool of sunlight growing, and it washed over him, its warmth banishing the frozen chill. He barely noticed when Rand's image vanished, for he left that sunlight behind.

wʊlvz əpɪɹɾ ɝaʊn pɛɹɪn, flæʃɪŋ ɪndə ɛɡzɪstəns mɪdlip. ðeɪ kəntɪnjud tə beɪ, dʒʌmpɪŋ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ, ɪɡzʌltɪŋ ən dænsɪŋ ɪn ðə waɪɾ əz ɪt wɑʃt oʊvɝ ðɛm. ðeɪ jɪpt ən bɑɹkt, tɔsɪŋ ʌp pætʃəz ə snoʊ əz ðeɪ baʊndəd. hɑpɝ wɑz əmʌŋ ðɛm, ən i lɛpt ɪndə ði ɛɹ, sɔɹɪŋ oʊvɝ tə pɛɹɪn. ðə læs hʌn bɪɡɪnz, jʌŋ bʊl! hɑpɝ skɹimd. wi laɪv. wi lɪv!

Wolves appeared around Perrin, flashing into existence midleap. They continued to bay, jumping at one another, exulting and dancing in the Wight as it washed over them. They yipped and barked, tossing up patches of snow as they bounded. Hopper was among them, and he leaped into the air, soaring over to Perrin. The Last Hunt begins, Young Bull! Hopper screamed. We live. We live!

pɛɹɪn tɝn bæk tə ðə pleɪs wɛɹ ɹænd hæd stʊd. ɪf ðət dɑɹkn hæd teɪkən ɹænd ... bʌɾ ɪt hædnt. hi smaɪl bɹɔdli. "ðə læs hʌn əz kʌm'" hi skɹim tə ðə wʊlvz. "lɛɾ ɪt bɪɡɪn!"

Perrin turned back to the place where Rand had stood. If that darkn had taken Rand ... But it hadn't. He smiled broadly. "The Last Hunt has come'" he screamed to the wolves. "Let it begin!"

ðeɪ haʊl ðɛɹ əɡɹimənt, əz laʊɾ əz ðə stɔɹm hæd bɪn dʒʌs moʊ-mɛns bɪfɔɹ.

They howled their agreement, as loud as the storm had been just mo-ments before.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾiwʌn


CHAPTER 31

ɪndə ðə vɔɪd


Into the Void

mæt dʌmp ðə ɹɛst ə ðə waɪn ɪndə hɪz maʊθ, seɪvɝɪŋ ðə swit, kul teɪst. hi bɹɔt ðə kʌp daʊn ən tɔst ə hændfʊl ə faɪv daɪs. ðeɪ tʌmbəl tə ðə wʊɾən flɔɹ ə ðə tævɝn, klækɪŋ əɡɛnst wʌn ənʌðɝ.

Mat dumped the rest of the wine into his mouth, savoring the sweet, cool taste. He brought the cup down and tossed a handful of five dice. They tumbled to the wooden floor of the tavern, clacking against one another.

ði ɛɹ wɑz θɪk. θɪk wɪð saʊnz, θɪk wɪð kɝsɪz, θɪk wɪð sɛns. smoʊk, pʌnʒənt lɪkɝz, ə steɪk ðət hæd bɪn pɛpɝd soʊ mʌtʃ ðət jə kəd hɑɹdli teɪs ðə mit. ðət wɑz pɹɑbli fəɹ ðə bɛst. ivən ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, mit spɔɪld ʌnpɹɪdɪktəbli.

The air was thick. Thick with sounds, thick with curses, thick with scents. Smoke, pungent liquors, a steak that had been peppered so much that you could hardly taste the meat. That was probably for the best. Even in Caemlyn, meat spoiled unpredictably.

ðə pʌnʒənt mɛn ɝaʊn mæt wɑtʃt ɪz daɪs fɔl: wʌn ə ðə mɛn stæŋk ʌv ɡɑɹlɪk, ənʌðɝ ə swɛt, ə θɝɾ ʌv ə tænɝi. ðɛɹ hɛɹ wɑz stʃɹɪŋi, ðɛɹ fɪŋɡɝz wɝ ɡɹaɪmi, bʌt ðɛɹ kɔɪn wɑz ɡʊd.

The pungent men around Mat watched his dice fall: one of the men stank of garlic, another of sweat, a third of a tannery. Their hair was stringy, their fingers were grimy, but their coin was good.

ðə ɡeɪm wɑz kɔl kɔɝɑŋkoʊz spɪt, ən heɪl fɹəm ʃaɪnɝ.

The game was called Koronko's Spit, and hailed from Shienar.

mæt dɪd nɑt noʊ ðə ɹulz.

Mat did not know the rules.

'faɪv wʌnz," sɛd ðə mæn u stæŋk ʌv ɡɑɹlɪk. hɪz neɪm wɑz ɹɪɾəl. hi simd ənsɛɾəld. "ðæts ə lɔs."

'Five ones," said the man who stank of garlic. His name was Rittle. He seemed unsettled. "That's a loss."

"noʊ ɪts nɑt," mæt sɛd sɔfli. nɛvɝ maɪn ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt noʊ ðə ɹulz. hi nu hi hæd wʌn; hi kəd fil ɪt. hɪz lʌk wɑz wɪð hɪm.

"No it's not," Mat said softly. Never mind that he did not know the rules. He knew he had won; he could feel it. His luck was with him.

ɡʊd θɪŋ, tu. hi niɾəd ɪt tənaɪt.

Good thing, too. He needed it tonight.

ðə mæn ðət smɛld ʌv ə tænɝi ɹitʃt fəɹ ɪz bɛlt, wɛɹ i kæɹiɾ ə wɪkəd naɪf. hɪz neɪm wɑz sæɾəlɝ, ən i hæɾ ə tʃɪn ðət cʊɾə bɪn juz tə ʃɑɹpən sɔɹdz. "aɪ θɔt jə sɛd jə dɪdnt noʊ ðɪs ɡeɪm, fɹɛnd."

The man that smelled of a tannery reached for his belt, where he carried a wicked knife. His name was Saddler, and he had a chin that could have been used to sharpen swords. "I thought you said you didn't know this game, friend."

"aɪ doʊnt," mæt sɛd. "fɹɛnd. bʌt ðæts ə wɪn. də wi nid tə æsk ɝaʊn ðə ɹum tə si ɪf ɛniwʌn ɛls kən kənfɝm ɪt?"

"I don't," Mat said. "Friend. But that's a win. Do we need to ask around the room to see if anyone else can confirm it?"

ðə θɹi mɛn lʊkt əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ, ɪkspɹɛʃənz dɑɹk. mæt stʊɾ ʌp. ði ɪn hæd wɔlz dɑɹk fɹəm jɪɹz ə mɛn smoʊkɪŋ paɪps ɪnsaɪɾ ɪt, ən ðə wɪndoʊz - ðoʊ ʌv faɪn ɡlæs - hæd ɡɹoʊn oʊpeɪk wɪð dɝɾ ən smoʊk. ɪt wɑz ə tʃɹədɪʃən ðət ðeɪ nɛvɝ bi klind. ðə wɛðɝd saɪn aʊt fɹʌn hæɾ ə wæɡən wil peɪntəɾ ɑn ɪt, ən ði əfɪʃəl neɪm wɑz ðə dʌsti wil. ɛvɹiwʌn kɔld ɪt ðə ɹumɝ wil ɪnstɛd; ɪt wɑz ðə bɛs pleɪs ɪn keɪɛmlɪn tə lɪsən tə ɹumɝz. moʊst ə ðɛm wɝ əntʃɹu, bʌt ðət wɑz hæf ðə fʌn.

The three men looked at each other, expressions dark. Mat stood up. The inn had walls dark from years of men smoking pipes inside it, and the windows - though of fine glass - had grown opaque with dirt and smoke. It was a tradition that they never be cleaned. The weathered sign out front had a wagon wheel painted on it, and the official name was The Dusty Wheel. Everyone called it The Rumor Wheel instead; it was the best place in Caemlyn to listen to rumors. Most of them were untrue, but that was half the fun.

moʊst ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə pleɪs wɑz dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ eɪl, bʌt mæt hæd teɪkən ə fænsi tə ɡʊd ɹɛd waɪn leɪtli.

Most everyone in the place was drinking ale, but Mat had taken a fancy to good red wine lately.

"wɑn səm mɔɹ, mæstɝ kɹɪmzən?" kɑɾi, ðə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən, æskt. ʃi wɑz ə ɹeɪvən-hɛɹd bjuɾi wɪð ə smaɪl soʊ waɪɾ ɪt ɹitʃt hæfweɪ tə kɛɹhin. ʃi hæd bɪn flɝɾɪŋ wɪð ɪm ɔl naɪt. nɛvɝ maɪn ðəɾ i hæd toʊld əɹ i wɑz mɛɹid. hi hæd nɑɾ ivən smaɪld ət hɝ. wɛl, nɑt mʌtʃ. ən hɑɹdli hɪz bɛst smaɪl. səm wɪmən kəd nɑt si ðə tʃɹuθ ə θɪŋz, ivən ɪf ɪt wɑz ɹɪɾən ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn fɔɹhɛdz, ðət wɑz ə fækt.

"Want some more, Master Crimson?" Kati, the serving woman, asked. She was a raven-haired beauty with a smile so wide it reached halfway to Cairhien. She had been flirting with him all night. Never mind that he had told her he was married. He had not even smiled at her. Well, not much. And hardly his best smile. Some women could not see the truth of things, even if it was written on their own foreheads, that was a fact.

hi weɪvd əɹ əweɪ. oʊnli wʌn kʌp tənaɪt, fəɹ kɝədʒ. bɝn hɪm, bʌɾ i niɾəd ə lɪɾəl ə ðæt.

He waved her away. Only one cup tonight, for courage. Burn him, but he needed a little of that.

wɪð ɹɛzəɡneɪʃən, hi tʊk ðə skɑɹf ɔf ɪz nɛk ən dʒɹɑpt ɪt tə ðə saɪd. hi əntʌk ðə fɑkshɛd mədæljən - laɪt, bʌɾ ɪt fɛlt ɡʊd tə bi wɛɹɪŋ ðəɾ əɡɛn! - ən hʌŋ ɪɾ aʊt fɹʌn ə hɪz kloʊðɪŋ. hi wɔɹ ðə nu ɹɛɾ ən sɪlvɝ koʊt ðət θɔɹn hæd bɑt hɪm.

With resignation, he took the scarf off his neck and dropped it to the side. He untucked the foxhead medallion - Light, but it felt good to be wearing that again! - and hung it out front of his clothing. He wore the new red and silver coat that Thorn had bought him.

mæt tʊk ɪz æsbændʒɹeɪ fɹəm bɪsaɪd ðə wɔl ən pʊld ɔf ðə klɔθ kʌvɝ, ɹɪvilɪŋ ðə bleɪd.

Mat took his asbandarei from beside the wall and pulled off the cloth cover, revealing the blade.

hi sɛɾ ɪɾ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "heɪ," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə laʊd vɔɪs. "ɛniwʌn ɪn ðə blʌɾi pleɪs noʊ ðə ɹulz fəɹ kɔɝɑŋkoʊz spɪt?"

He set it over his shoulder. "Hey," he said in a loud voice. "Anyone in the bloody place know the rules for Koronko's Spit?"

ðə θɹi mɛn i hæd bɪn dɪsɪŋ ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ðə wɛpən; ðə θɝɾ ə ðɛm, snɛl, stʊɾ ʌp, hʊkɪŋ ɪz θʌmz ɪndə ðə tɑp ə hɪz tʃɹaʊzɝz, pʊʃɪŋ bæk ɪz koʊɾ ən ʃoʊɪŋ ðə ʃɔɹtsɔɝd bʌkəld əɾ ɪz weɪst.

The three men he had been dicing regarded the weapon; the third of them, Snelle, stood up, hooking his thumbs into the top of his trousers, pushing back his coat and showing the shortsword buckled at his waist.

moʊs pipəl ɪɡnɔɹd mæt ət fɝst. kɑnvɝseɪʃənz ɹæŋ, stɔɹiz əbaʊt ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝ ɑɹmi ðət hæd pæst, əbaʊt ðə kwinz pɹɛɡnənsi, əbaʊt ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, əbaʊt mɪstɪɹiəs dɛθs əɹ nɑt soʊ mɪstɪɹiəs wʌnz. ɛvɹiwʌn hæɾ ə ɹumɝ tə ʃɛɹ. səm ə ði ɪnz ɑkjəpəns wɔɹ lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ ðən ɹæɡz, bʌt səm wɔɹ ðə faɪnəst ə kloʊðɪŋ. noʊbəlz, kɑmənɝz ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn bɪtwin keɪm tə ðə ɹumɝ wil.

Most people ignored Mat at first. Conversations rang, stories about the Borderlander army that had passed, about the Queen's pregnancy, about the Dragon Reborn, about mysterious deaths or not so mysterious ones. Everyone had a rumor to share. Some of the inn's occupants wore little better than rags, but some wore the finest of clothing. Nobles, commoners and everything in between came to The Rumor Wheel.

ə fju mɛn baɪ ðə bɑɹ ɡlænst ət mæt kəz ə ði aʊtbɝst. wʌn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, blɪŋkɪŋ. mæt ɹitʃt daʊn ən tʊk ɪz waɪd-bɹɪm blæk hæɾ ɔf ðə teɪbəl bɪsaɪd hɪm, hoʊldɪŋ ɪt baɪ ðə kɹaʊn, ðən sɛɾ ɪɾ ɑn ɪz hɛd. ðə mæn nʌdʒd ɪz kəmpænjənz. ðə swɛɾi, bɔldɪŋ mæn mæt hæd bɪn dɪsɪŋ wɪð ɹeɪz fɪŋɡɝz tə hɪz tʃɪn, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn θɔt, əz ɪf tʃɹaɪ-ɪŋ tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ sʌmθɪŋ.

A few men by the bar glanced at Mat because of the outburst. One hesitated, blinking. Mat reached down and took his wide-brimmed black hat off the table beside him, holding it by the crown, then set it on his head. The man nudged his companions. The sweaty, balding man Mat had been dicing with raised fingers to his chin, rubbing it in thought, as if try-ing to remember something.

snɛl smaɪld ət mæt. "lʊks laɪk noʊbɑdi ænsɝd ju, fɹɛnd. ɡɛs jəl əv tə tʃɹʌst ʌs. jə ʃʊdn əv θɹoʊn ɪf jə dɪdn æsk ðə ɹulz. naʊ, ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ tə peɪ, əɹ - "

Snelle smiled at Mat. "Looks like nobody answered you, friend. Guess you'll have to trust us. You shouldn't have thrown if you didn't ask the rules. Now, are you going to pay, or - "

ɹɪɾəlz aɪz oʊpənd waɪd, ən i stʊd heɪstəli ən tʊk ɪz fɹɛnz ɑɹm. hi lin ɪn, wɪspɝɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ. snɛl lʊk daʊn ət mæts mədæljən. hi lʊkt ʌp ən mɛt mæts aɪz.

Rittle's eyes opened wide, and he stood hastily and took his friend's arm. He leaned in, whispering something. Snelle looked down at Mat's medallion. He looked up and met Mat's eyes.

mæt nɑɾəd.

Mat nodded.

"ɪkskjus ʌs," ɹɪɾəl sɛd, stʌmbəlɪŋ əweɪ. ði ʌðɝ tu dʒɔɪn hɪm. ðeɪ lɛf ðɛɹ daɪs ən kɔɪnz ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

"Excuse us," Rittle said, stumbling away. The other two joined him. They left their dice and coins on the ground.

mæt kæʒəwəli nɛl daʊn, skupɪŋ ʌp ðə kɔɪnz ən dʌmpɪŋ əm ɪn ɪz paʊtʃ. hi lɛf ðə daɪs.

Mat casually knelt down, scooping up the coins and dumping them in his pouch. He left the dice.

ðeɪ wɝ loʊɾəd, mɛn tə ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz θɹoʊ θɹiz. hi hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə dʒʌdʒ ðət fɹəm ə fju kwɪk θɹoʊz bɪfɔɹ leɪɪŋ daʊn kɔɪnz.

They were loaded, meant to almost always throw threes. He had been able to judge that from a few quick throws before laying down coins.

wɪspɝz muv θɹu ði ɪnz kɑmən ɹum laɪk ə swɔɹm ʌv æns kʌvɝɪŋ ə kɔɹps. tʃɛɹz skuɾɪd bæk. kɑnvɝseɪʃənz tʃeɪnʒd tɛmpoʊ, səm saɪlənsɪŋ, ʌðɝz bɪkʌmɪŋ ɝdʒənt. mæt stʊɾ ʌp tə ɡoʊ. pipəl heɪsən aʊɾ ə hɪz weɪ.

Whispers moved through the inn's common room like a swarm of ants covering a corpse. Chairs scooted back. Conversations changed tempo, some silencing, others becoming urgent. Mat stood up to go. People hastened out of his way.

mæt lɛft ə ɡoʊldən kɹaʊn ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə bɑɹ, ðən tɪpt ɪz hæt tə hætʃ, ði ɪnkipɝ. ðə mæn stʊd bɪhaɪn ðə bɑɹ waɪpɪŋ ə ɡlæs, hɪz waɪf nɛks tə hɪm. ʃi wɑz ə pɹɪɾi wʌn, bʌt hætʃ kɛpt ə spɛʃəl kʌdʒəl fəɹ θʌmpɪŋ mɛn u lʊk tu lɔŋ. mæt ɡeɪv əɹ oʊnli ə ʃɔɹt lʊk, ðɛn.

Mat left a golden crown on the edge of the bar, then tipped his hat to Hatch, the innkeeper. The man stood behind the bar wiping a glass, his wife next to him. She was a pretty one, but Hatch kept a special cudgel for thumping men who looked too long. Mat gave her only a short look, then.

mæt pʊld ɔf ɪz blæk skɑɹf, livɪŋ ɪɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ. ɪt hæɾ ə hoʊl ɪn ɪt naʊ ɛniweɪ. hi stɛpt aʊɾ ɪndə ðə naɪt, ən ðə moʊmən i dɪd, ðə daɪs stɑp θʌndɝɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd.

Mat pulled off his black scarf, leaving it on the floor. It had a hole in it now anyway. He stepped out into the night, and the moment he did, the dice stopped thundering in his head.

ɪt wɑz taɪm tə ɡɛt tə wɝk.

It was time to get to work.

hi wɔkt aʊɾ ɑntu ðə stʃɹit. hi hæd spɛn ɔl ivnɪŋ wɪð ɪz feɪs ənkʌvɝd. hi wɑz sɝɾən i hæd bɪn ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ə fju taɪmz, moʊsli baɪ mɛn u hæd slɪpt aʊɾ ɪndə ðə naɪt wɪθaʊt seɪɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ. əz i wɔk daʊn ɔf ði ɪnz fɹʌn pɔɹtʃ, pipəl ɡæðɝɾ ət ðə wɪndoʊz ən dɔɹweɪ.

He walked out onto the street. He had spent all evening with his face uncovered. He was certain he had been recognized a few times, mostly by men who had slipped out into the night without saying anything. As he walked down off the inn's front porch, people gathered at the windows and doorway.

mæt tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə fil laɪk ɔl ə ðoʊz aɪz wɝ naɪvz stɪkɪŋ ɪndə hɪz bæk. laɪt, hi fɛlt laɪk i wɑz dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm ənʌðɝ nus. hi ɹitʃt ʌp ən fɛlt ət ðə skɑɹ ɑn ɪz nɛk. ɪt hæd bɪn ə lɔŋ waɪl sɪns i hæd ɡɔn əbaʊt wɪð ɪz nɛk ənkʌvɝd. ivən wɪð taɪlɪn, hi hæd nɔɹməli lɛf ðə skɑɹf ɑn.

Mat tried not to feel like all of those eyes were knives sticking into his back. Light, he felt like he was dangling from another noose. He reached up and felt at the scar on his neck. It had been a long while since he had gone about with his neck uncovered. Even with Tylin, he had normally left the scarf on.

tənaɪt, ðoʊ, hi dænst wɪð dʒæk oʊ' ðə ʃædoʊz. hi taɪɾ ɪz mədæljən tə ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ. hi əfɪkst ɪt soʊ ðət ðə mədæljən ɹɛstəɾ əɡɛns ðə flæɾ ə ðə bleɪd, ən wʌn ɛdʒ hʌŋ aʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə tɪp. ɪt wəd bi hɑɹd tə juz - hi wəɾ əv tə hɪt wɪð ðə flæɾ ə ðə bleɪɾ ɪn moʊs keɪsəz tə tʌtʃ ðə mədæljən tə flɛʃ; - bʌɾ ɪt ɡeɪv ɪm mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ɹitʃ ðən swɪŋɪŋ ðə mədæljən baɪ hænd.

Tonight, though, he danced with Jak o' the Shadows. He tied his medallion to the ashandarei. He affixed it so that the medallion rested against the flat of the blade, and one edge hung out over the tip. It would be hard to use - he would have to hit with the flat of the blade in most cases to touch the medallion to flesh; - but it gave him much better reach than swinging the medallion by hand.

mədæljən ɪn pleɪs, hi pɪkt ə dɝɛkʃən ən bɪɡæn wɔkɪŋ. hi wɑz ɪn ðə nu sɪɾi, ə pleɪs hipt wɪð mæn-meɪd bɪldɪŋz, ə kɑntʃɹæs tə ðə faɪn oʊɡiɝ wɝk ɛlswɛɹ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. ðiz bɪldɪŋz wɝ wɛl bɪlt, bʌt wɝ nɛɹoʊ ən θɪn, ʌp kloʊs nɛks tə wʌn ənʌðɝ.

Medallion in place, he picked a direction and began walking. He was in the New City, a place heaped with man-made buildings, a contrast to the fine Ogier work elsewhere in Caemlyn. These buildings were well built, but were narrow and thin, up close next to one another.

ðə fɝst ɡɹup tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl ɪm bɪfɔɹ i wɑz wʌn stʃɹiɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɹumɝ wil. ðəɹ wɝ fɔɹ ə ðɛm. əz ðeɪ tʃɑɹdʒ hɪm, ə ɡɹup ə ʃædoʊz lɛp fɹəm ə nɪɹbaɪ æliweɪ, tælmɑnz ət ðɛɹ hɛd. mæt spʌn ɑn ðə kɪlɝz, hu pʊld ʌp ʃɔɹɾ əz ɪz soʊlʒɝz dʒɔɪn hɪm. ðə stʃɹit tʌfs flɛɾ ɪn ə skɹæmbəl ən mæt nɑɾəd tə tælmɑnz.

The first group tried to kill him before he was one street away from The Rumor Wheel. There were four of them. As they charged him, a group of shadows leaped from a nearby alleyway, Talmanes at their head. Mat spun on the killers, who pulled up short as his soldiers joined him. The street toughs fled in a scramble and Mat nodded to Talmanes.

ðə mɛn ə ðə bæn feɪɾəd bæk ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs, ən mæt kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn ɪz weɪ. hi wɔk sloʊli, kæɹiɪŋ ɪz æsbændʒɹeɪ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. hɪz mɛn hæd bɪn toʊl tə kip ðɛɹ dɪstəns ənlɛs i wɑz ətækt.

The men of the Band faded back into the darkness, and Mat continued on his way. He walked slowly, carrying his asbandarei on his shoulder. His men had been told to keep their distance unless he was attacked.

hi ɛndəɾ ʌp niɾɪŋ əm θɹi mɔɹ taɪmz θɹu ði aʊɝ, itʃ taɪm skɛɹɪŋ əweɪ ə lɑɹdʒɝ ɡɹup ə θʌɡz. ðə læs taɪm, ðə bæn ən i æktʃəli  klæʃt wɪð ði əsæsənz. ðə θʌɡz wɝ noʊ mætʃ fəɹ tʃɹeɪn soʊlʒɝz, ivən ɑn ðə dɑɹkən stʃɹits ðət wɝ ðɛɹ hoʊm. ði ɪkstʃeɪnʒ lɛft faɪv ə ðə θʌɡz dɛd, bʌɾ oʊnli wʌn ə hɪz mɛn wundəd. mæt sɛn hɑɹvəl əweɪ wɪð ə ɡɑɹɾ ə tu.

He ended up needing them three more times through the hour, each time scaring away a larger group of thugs. The last time, the Band and he actually clashed with the assassins. The thugs were no match for trained soldiers, even on the darkened streets that were their home. The exchange left five of the thugs dead, but only one of his men wounded. Mat sent Harvell away with a guard of two.

ɪt ɡɹu leɪɾɝ ən leɪɾɝ. mæt bɪɡæn tə wɝi ðəɾ i wəɾ əv tə ɹɪpit ðɪs æk ðə nɛks naɪt, bʌt ðən i noʊɾəst sʌmwʌn stændɪŋ ɪn ðə stʃɹiɾ əhɛd. ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz wɝ wɛt fɹəm ə mɪstɪŋ ɝliɝ ɪn ðə naɪt, ən ðeɪ ɹəflɛktəd ðə slɪvɝd mun.

It grew later and later. Mat began to worry that he would have to repeat this act the next night, but then he noticed someone standing in the street ahead. The paving stones were wet from a misting earlier in the night, and they reflected the slivered moon.

mæt stɑpt, loʊɝɪŋ ɪz wɛpən tə hɪz saɪd. hi kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt dɪteɪlz əbaʊt ðə fɪɡjɝ, bʌt ðə weɪ ɪt stʊd . . .

Mat stopped, lowering his weapon to his side. He could not make out details about the figure, but the way it stood . . .

"ju θɪŋk tə æmbʊʃ mi?" ðə ɡoʊləm æskt, saʊndɪŋ əmjuzd. "wɪð jəɹ mɛn u skwɪʃ ən ɹɪp, hu daɪ soʊ izəli, ɔlmoʊst əɾ ə tʌtʃ?"

"You think to ambush me?" the gholam asked, sounding amused. "With your men who squish and rip, who die so easily, almost at a touch?"

"aɪm taɪɝɾ ə biɪŋ tʃeɪst," mæt sɛd laʊdli.

"I'm tired of being chased," Mat said loudly.

"soʊ jə dɪlɪvɝ jɝsɛlf tə mi? wʌɾ ə kaɪnd ɡɪft."

"So you deliver yourself to me? What a kind gift."

"ʃʊɹ," mæt sɛd, loʊɝɪŋ ɪz æsbændʒɹeɪ, fɑkshɛɾ ɑn ðə bæk kætʃɪŋ ðə munlaɪt. "dʒʌs maɪn ðə ʃɑɹp ɛdʒəz."

"Sure," Mat said, lowering his asbandarei, foxhead on the back catching the moonlight. "Just mind the sharp edges."

ðə θɪŋ slɪd fɔɹwɝd, ən mæts mɛn lɪt læntɝnz. ðə mɛn ə ðə bæn sɛt ðə læntɝnz ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ðən bækt əweɪ, ə fju ʌv əm dæʃɪŋ ɔf tə dɪlɪvɝ mɛsədʒəz. ðeɪ hæd stʃɹɪkt ɔɹɾɝz nɑt tə ɪntɝfɪɹ. tənaɪt wəd pɹɑbli stʃɹeɪn ðɛɹ oʊðz tə hɪm ɑn ðæt.

The thing slid forward, and Mat's men lit lanterns. The men of the Band set the lanterns on the ground, then backed away, a few of them dashing off to deliver messages. They had strict orders not to interfere. Tonight would probably strain their oaths to him on that.

mæt plæntəd hɪmsɛlf ən weɪɾəd fəɹ ðə ɡoʊləm. oʊnli ə hɪɹoʊ tʃɑɹdʒd ə bis laɪk ðæt, ən i wɑz noʊ blʌɾi hɪɹoʊ. ðoʊ hɪz mɛn wəd bi tʃɹaɪ- ɪŋ tə klɪɹ əweɪ ɛniwʌn ɑn ðə stʃɹits, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ði ɛɹiə ɛmpti soʊ noʊbɑdi wəd skɛɹ ðə ɡoʊləm əweɪ. ðət wɑz nɑt hɛɹoʊɪzəm. ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn stupɪɾɪti, ðoʊ.

Mat planted himself and waited for the gholam. Only a hero charged a beast like that, and he was no bloody hero. Though his men would be try- ing to clear away anyone on the streets, trying to keep the area empty so nobody would scare the gholam away. That was not heroism. It might have been stupidity, though.

ðə ɡoʊləmz, fluəd muvməns θɹu læntɝnlaɪt ʃædoʊz əkɹɔs ðə ɹoʊd. mæt mɛɾ ɪt wɪð ə swip ə hɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ, bʌt ðə bis dæns tə ðə saɪd, izəli ɪveɪɾɪŋ hɪm. blʌɾi æʃəz, bʌt ðə θɪŋ wɑz fæst! ɪt ɹitʃt aʊt, swaɪpɪŋ ət ðə fɹʌn ə ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ wɪð ðə naɪf ɪt hɛld.

The gholam's, fluid movements threw lanternlight shadows across the road. Mat met it with a sweep of his ashandarei, but the beast danced to the side, easily evading him. Bloody ashes, but the thing was fast! It reached out, swiping at the front of the ashandarei with the knife it held.

mæt jæŋk ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ bæk, nɑt lɛɾɪŋ ðə mɑnstɝ kʌt ðə mədæljən fɹi. ɪt dænst ɝaʊn mæt, ən i spʌn, steɪɪŋ ɪnsaɪd ðə ɹɪŋ ə læntɝnz. hi hæd tʃoʊzən ə ɹɛləɾɪvli waɪd stʃɹit, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ wɪð ə ʃɪvɝ ðət deɪ ɪn ði æliweɪ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ wɛɹ ðə ɡoʊləm hæd nɪɹli teɪkən ɪm ɪn kloʊs kɔɹɾɝz.

Mat yanked the ashandarei back, not letting the monster cut the medallion free. It danced around Mat, and he spun, staying inside the ring of lanterns. He had chosen a relatively wide street, remembering with a shiver that day in the alleyway of Ebou Dar where the gholam had nearly taken him in close quarters.

ðə bist slɪd fɔɹwɝɾ əɡɛn, ən mæt faɪntɪd, dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn. hi ɔlmoʊs mɪskælkjəleɪɾɪd, bʌt twɪstəd ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ ɪn taɪm tə slæp ðə ɡoʊləm wɪð ðə flæɾ ə ðə wɛpən. ðə mədæljən lɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɪs əz ɪt tʌtʃt ðə ɡoʊləmz ɑɹm.

The beast slid forward again, and Mat feinted, drawing it in. He almost miscalculated, but twisted the ashandarei in time to slap the gholam with the flat of the weapon. The medallion let out a hiss as it touched the gholam's arm.

ðə ɡoʊləm kɝst ən bækt əweɪ. weɪvɝɪŋ læntɝnlaɪɾ ɪluməneɪɾəd ɪts fitʃɝz, livɪŋ pɑkəts ə dɑɹknəs ən pɑkəts ə laɪt. ɪt wɑz smaɪlɪŋ əɡɛn, dɪspaɪt ðə wɪsp ə smoʊk ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ɪts ɑɹm. bɪfɔɹ, mæt hæd θɔt ðɪs kɹitʃɝz feɪs ənɹɪmɑɹkəbəl, bʌɾ ɪn ði ənivən laɪt -  ən wɪð ðət smaɪl - ɪt tʊk ɑn ə tɛɹəfaɪɪŋ kæst. mɔɹ æŋɡjəlɝ, ɹəflɛktəd læntɝnlaɪt meɪkɪŋ ɪts aɪz ɡloʊ laɪk taɪni jɛloʊ fleɪmz kənsum baɪ ðə dɑɹknəs ʌv ɪts sɑkəts.

The gholam cursed and backed away. Wavering lanternlight illuminated its features, leaving pockets of darkness and pockets of light. It was smiling again, despite the wisp of smoke rising from its arm. Before, Mat had thought this creature's face unremarkable, but in the uneven light -  and with that smile - it took on a terrifying cast. More angular, reflected lanternlight making its eyes glow like tiny yellow flames consumed by the darkness of its sockets.

nɑndɪskɹɪp baɪ deɪ, ə hɔɹɝ baɪ naɪt. ðɪs θɪŋ hæd slɔɾɝd taɪlɪn waɪl ʃi leɪ hɛlpləs.

Nondescript by day, a horror by night. This thing had slaughtered Tylin while she lay helpless.

mæt ɡɹɪɾɪd ɪz tiθ. ðən i ətækt.

Mat gritted his teeth. Then he attacked.

ɪt wɑz ə blʌɾi stupəd θɪŋ tə du. ðə ɡoʊləm wɑz fæstɝ ðən i wɑz, ən mæt hæd noʊ aɪdiə ɪf ðə fɑkshɛd kəd kɪl ɪɾ əɹ nɑt. hi ətækt ɛniweɪ. hi ətæk fəɹ taɪlɪn, fəɹ ðə mɛn hid lɔs tə ðɪs hɔɹɝ. hi ətækt kəz i hæd noʊ ʌðɝ ɑpʃən. wən jə ɹɪli wɑntəd tə si wʌɾ ə mæn wɑz wɝθ, jə bækt ɪm ɪndə ə kɔɹnɝ ən meɪɾ ɪm faɪt fəɹ ɪz laɪf.

It was a bloody stupid thing to do. The gholam was faster than he was, and Mat had no idea if the foxhead could kill it or not. He attacked anyway. He attacked for Tylin, for the men he'd lost to this horror. He attacked because he had no other option. When you really wanted to see what a man was worth, you backed him into a corner and made him fight for his life.

mæt wɑz ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ naʊ. blʌɾid ən hɛɹid. hi nu ðɪs θɪŋ wəɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli faɪn hɪm  - ɔɹ, wɝs, faɪn tuɑn əɹ oʊlvɝ. ɪt wɑz ðə kaɪn əɹ sɪtʃueɪʃən wɛɹ ə sɛnsəbəl mæn wəɾ əv ɹʌn.

Mat was in the corner now. Bloodied and harried. He knew this thing would eventually find him  - or, worse, find Tuon or Olver. It was the kind or situation where a sensible man would have run.

bʌɾ i wɑz ə blʌɾi ful ɪnstɛd. steɪɪŋ ɪn ðə sɪɾi kəz ʌv ən oʊθ tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ? wɛl, ɪf i daɪd, hi wəd ɡoʊ aʊt wɪð wɛpən ɪn hænd.

But he was a bloody fool instead. Staying in the city because of an oath to an Aes Sedai? Well, if he died, he would go out with weapon in hand.

mæt bɪkeɪm ə swɝlɪŋ sɪkloʊn ə stil ən wʊd, jɛlɪŋ əz i ətækt. ðə ɡoʊləm, simɪŋ ʃɑkt, æktʃəli  bækt əweɪ. mæt slæmd ɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ ɪndə ɪts hænd, bɝnɪŋ ðə flɛʃ, ðən spʌn ən nɑk ðə dæɡɝ fɹəm ɪts fɪŋɡɝz. ðə kɹitʃɝ lɛpt əweɪ, bʌt mæt lʌnʒd fɔɹwɝd, ɹæmɪŋ ðə bʌɾ ə hɪz spɪɹ bɪtwin ðə θɪŋz lɛɡz.

Mat became a swirling cyclone of steel and wood, yelling as he attacked. The gholam, seeming shocked, actually backed away. Mat slammed his ashandarei into its hand, burning the flesh, then spun and knocked the dagger from its fingers. The creature leaped away, but Mat lunged forward, ramming the butt of his spear between the thing's legs.

ɪt wɛn daʊn. ɪts moʊʃənz wɝ fluəd, ən ɪt kɑɾ ɪtsɛlf, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd ɡoʊ daʊn. əz ɪt θɹu ɪtsɛlf tə ɪts fit, mæt slæʃt ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ % bleɪɾ əɾ ɪts hil. hi nitli sɛvɝd ðə ɡoʊləm ɛs tɛndən, ən ɪf ðə θɪŋ hæd bɪn hjumən, ɪt wəɾ əv kəlæpst. ɪnstɛd, ɪt lændəd wɪθaʊɾ ivən ə wɪns ə peɪn, ən noʊ blʌd sip fɹi ʌv ðə kʌt.

It went down. Its motions were fluid, and it caught itself, but it did go down. As it threw itself to its feet, Mat slashed the ashandarei % blade at its heel. He neatly severed the gholam s tendon, and if the thing had been human, it would have collapsed. Instead, it landed without even a wince of pain, and no blood seeped free of the cut.

ɪt spʌn ən lʌnʒd ət mæt wɪð klɔd fɪŋɡɝz. hi wɑz fɔɹs tə stʌmbəl bæk, swɪŋɪŋ ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ tə wɔɹɾ ɪɾ əweɪ. ðə kɹitʃɝ ɡɹɪn ət hɪm.

It spun and lunged at Mat with clawed fingers. He was forced to stumble back, swinging the ashandarei to ward it away. The creature grinned at him.

ðɛn, ɑdli, ɪt tɝn ən ɹæn.

Then, oddly, it turned and ran.

mæt kɝst. hæd sʌmθɪŋ skɛɹɾ ɪɾ əweɪ? bʌt noʊ, ɪt wɑz nɑt fliɪŋ ɪt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ fəɹ ɪz mɛn!

Mat cursed. Had something scared it away? But no, it was not fleeing It was going for his men!

"ɹitʃɹit!" mæt kɔld ət ðɛm. "bæk! bɝn ju, jə blʌɾi mɑnstɝ. aɪm hɪɹ! faɪt mi!"

"Retreat!" Mat called at them. "Back! Burn you, you bloody monster. I'm here! Fight me!"

ðə mɛmbɝz ə ðə bæn skæɾɝd əɾ ɪz ɔɹɾɝz, ðoʊ tælmɑnz hʌŋ bæk, wɛɹɪŋ ə ɡɹɪm ɪkspɹɛʃən. ðə ɡoʊləm læft, bʌt dɪd nɑt tʃeɪs daʊn ðə soʊlʒɝz. ɪnstɛd, ðə θɪŋ kɪkt oʊvɝ ðə fɝs læntɝn, kɑzɪŋ ɪt tə wɪŋk aʊt. ɪt ɹæn ɝaʊn ðə sɝkəl, kɪkɪŋ əɾ itʃ wʌn, plʌnʒɪŋ ðə stʃɹiɾ ɪndə dɑɹknəs.

The members of the Band scattered at his orders, though Talmanes hung back, wearing a grim expression. The gholam laughed, but did not chase down the soldiers. Instead, the thing kicked over the first lantern, causing it to wink out. It ran around the circle, kicking at each one, plunging the street into darkness.

blʌɾi æʃəz! mæt tʃeɪst æftɝ ðə kɹitʃɝ. ɪf ɪt mænədʒ tə ɡɛɾ ɔl ə ðoʊz laɪts aʊt, wɪð ðət klaʊd kʌvɝ, mæt wəd bi lɛft faɪɾɪŋ ɪɾ əneɪbəl tə si!

Bloody ashes! Mat chased after the creature. If it managed to get all of those lights out, with that cloud cover, Mat would be left fighting it unable to see!

tælmɑnz - bleɪɾəntli ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ɪz oʊn seɪfti - lɛp fɔɹwɝɾ ən snætʃt ɪz læntɝn ʌp tə pɹətɛkt ɪt. hi flɛd daʊn ðə stʃɹit, ən mæt kɝst əz ðə ɡoʊləm tʃeɪst æftɝ.

Talmanes - blatantly ignoring his own safety - leaped forward and snatched his lantern up to protect it. He fled down the street, and Mat cursed as the gholam chased after.

mæt dæʃt bɪhaɪn ðɛm. tælmɑnz hæɾ ə ɡʊd lɛd, bʌt ðə ɡoʊləm wɑz soʊ kwɪk. ɪt nɪɹli ɡɑt tə hɪm, ən tælmɑnz dʒɝk tə ðə saɪd, bækɪŋ ʌp ðə stɛps ʌv ə nɪɹbaɪ bɪldɪŋ. ðə mɑnstɝ lʌnʒd fəɹ hɪm, ən tælmɑnz stʌmbəl bækwɝɾ əz mæt ɹæn təwɔɹɾ əm fəɹ ɔl i wɑz wɝθ.

Mat dashed behind them. Talmanes had a good lead, but the gholam was so quick. It nearly got to him, and Talmanes jerked to the side, backing up the steps of a nearby building. The monster lunged for him, and Talmanes stumbled backward as Mat ran toward them for all he was worth.

ðə læntɝn fɛl fɹəm tælmɑnz' fɪŋɡɝz ən splæʃt ɔɪl əkɹɔs ðə fɹʌn ə ðə bɪldɪŋ. ðə dʒɹaɪ wʊd keɪm əlaɪt, tʌŋz ə fleɪm ɹɪpəlɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə læmp ɔɪl, ɪluməneɪɾɪŋ ðə ɡoʊləm. ɪt lɛp fəɹ tælmɑnz.

The lantern fell from Talmanes' fingers and splashed oil across the front of the building. The dry wood came alight, tongues of flame rippling across the lamp oil, illuminating the gholam. It leaped for Talmanes.

mæt θɹu hɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ.

Mat threw his ashandarei.

ðə bɹɔd-bleɪɾɪd spɪɹ wɑz nɑt mɛn fəɹ θɹoʊɪŋ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑɾ əv ə naɪf hændi. hi eɪm fəɹ ðə ɡoʊlɛɹɪs hɛd. wʌn wəɾ əv nɛvɝ noʊn ðæt, fəɹ i mɪs pɪɾɪfəli. fɔɹtʃənətli, ðə wɛpən dɪp daʊn ən pæs bɪtwin ðə ɡoʊləmz lɛɡz.

The broad-bladed spear was not meant for throwing, but he did not have a knife handy. He aimed for the gholairis head. One would have never known that, for he missed pitifully. Fortunately, the weapon dipped down and passed between the gholam's legs.

ðə mɑnstɝ tʃɹɪpt, θəɾɪŋ hɛvəli tə ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz. tælmɑnz skɹæmbəl bæk ʌp ðə stɛps ə ðə naʊ-bleɪzɪŋ bɪldɪŋ.

The monster tripped, thudding heavily to the paving stones. Talmanes scrambled back up the steps of the now-blazing building.

blɛs ðɪs lʌk ə maɪn, mæt θɔt.

Bless this luck of mine, Mat thought.

ðə ɡoʊləm stʊɾ ʌp ən meɪɾ ə moʊʃən tə fɑloʊ tælmɑnz, bʌt ðən wʌnʊk daʊn ət wʌt hæd tʃɹɪpt ɪt. ðə kɹitʃɝ lʊkt ət mæt wɪð ə wɪkəd ɡɹɪn, hæf ɪts feɪs kæst ɪn ðə laɪɾ ə ðə bɝnɪŋ bɪldɪŋ. ðə kɹitʃɝ pɪkt ʌp mæts æʃhændʒɹeɪ - fɑkshɛd mədæljən stɪl taɪd tə ðə fɹʌnt - ðən wɪpt ɪts hæn tə ðə saɪd, tɔsɪŋ ðə wɛpən əweɪ. ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ kɹæʃt θɹu ə wɪndoʊ ən pæst ɪndə ðə bɝnɪŋ bɪldɪŋ. læmps spɑɹkt ɑn ɪnsaɪd, əz ɪf ðoʊz lɪvɪŋ ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli naʊ noʊɾɪk-ɪŋ ðə faɪt hæpənɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ pɹɑksɪməɾi. tælmɑnz ɡeɪv mæt ə lʊk, ən ðeɪ mɛɾ aɪz. ðə kɛɹhinɪn mæn θɹu hɪmsɛlf əɡɛns ðə dɔɹ ɪndə ðə bɝnɪŋ bɪldɪŋ ən bɹoʊk ɪn. ðə ɡoʊləm spʌn ɑn mæt, bæklɪt baɪ ðə ɡɹoʊɪŋ fleɪmz. ðeɪ bleɪz kwɪkli, ən mæts hɑɹt θʌmpt wɪð əlɑɹm əz ðə kɹitʃɝ keɪm fəɹ hɪm, ənnətʃɝəli fæst. mæt ɹitʃt ɪndə hɪz koʊt pɑkəts wɪð swɛɾi fɪŋɡɝz. ɹaɪt bɪfɔɹ ðə ɡoʊləm ɹitʃt ɪm - hænz ɡoʊɪŋ fəɹ mæts nɛk - mæt pʊl sʌmθɪŋ aʊt wɪð itʃ hænd, slæmɪŋ əm fɔɹwɝɾ ɪndə ðə ɡoʊləmz pɑmz. hɪsɪŋ ɹæŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, laɪk mit biɪŋ pleɪst ɑn ə ɡɹɪl, ən ðə ɡoʊləm skɹitʃt ɪn peɪn. ɪt stʌmbəld, waɪd-aɪd, əz ɪt lʊkt ət mæt.

The gholam stood up and made a motion to follow Talmanes, but then 1ooked down at what had tripped it. The creature looked at Mat with a wicked grin, half its face cast in the light of the burning building. The creature picked up Mat's ashandarei - foxhead medallion still tied to the front - then whipped its hand to the side, tossing the weapon away. The ashandarei crashed through a window and passed into the burning building. Lamps sparked on inside, as if those living there were only now notic-ing the fight happening in their proximity. Talmanes gave Mat a look, and they met eyes. The Cairhienin man threw himself against the door into the burning building and broke in. The gholam spun on Mat, backlit by the growing flames. They blazed quickly, and Mat's heart thumped with alarm as the creature came for him, unnaturally fast. Mat reached into his coat pockets with sweaty fingers. Right before the gholam reached him - hands going for Mat's neck - Mat pulled something out with each hand, slamming them forward into the gholam's palms. Hissing rang in the air, like meat being placed on a grill, and the gholam screeched in pain. It stumbled, wide-eyed, as it looked at Mat.

hu hɛld ə fɑkshɛd mədæljən ɪn itʃ hænd.

Who held a foxhead medallion in each hand.

hi wɪpt əm aʊt, itʃ hɛld ɑn ə lɔŋ, θɪk tʃeɪn, spɪnɪŋ ðɛm. ðə mədæljənz kɑt faɪɹlaɪt, simɪŋ tə ɡloʊ əz mæt wɪpt əm ət ðə ɡoʊləm, stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ɪɾ ɑn ði ɑɹm.

He whipped them out, each held on a long, thick chain, spinning them. The medallions caught firelight, seeming to glow as Mat whipped them at the gholam, striking it on the arm.

ðə kɹitʃɝ haʊld, bækɪŋ ʌp ənʌðɝ stɛp. "haʊ?" ɪt dɪmændəd. "haʊ!"

The creature howled, backing up another step. "How?" it demanded. "How!"

"doʊn ɹaɪtli noʊ maɪsɛlf." ɪleɪn hæd sɛɾ əɹ kɑpiz wɝn pɝfəkt, bʌɾ ɪt sim ðeɪ dɪd ðə dʒɑb wɛl ɪnʌf. soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ hɝt ðə ɡoʊləm, hi dɪdn kɛɹ əbaʊt ðɛɹ ʌðɝ əbɪləɾiz. mæt ɡɹɪnd, spɪnɪŋ ðə sɛkən mədæljən fɔɹwɝd. "ɡɛs aɪ dʒʌst ɡɑt lʌki."

"Don't rightly know myself." Elayne had said her copies weren't perfect, but it seemed they did the job well enough. So long as they hurt the gholam, he didn't care about their other abilities. Mat grinned, spinning the second medallion forward. "Guess I just got lucky."

ðə ɡoʊləm ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɪm, ðən stʌmbəld ʌp ðə stɛps təwɔɹd ðə bɝnɪŋ bɪldɪŋ. ɪt dæʃt ɪnsaɪd, pɝhæps dəsaɪɾɪŋ tə fli. mæt wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə lɛɾ ɪɾ ɪskeɪp, nɑt ðɪs taɪm. hi tʃɑɹdʒd ɪɾ ʌp ðə stɛps ən dʌk θɹu ðə fleɪmɪŋ dɔɹweɪ, ɹitʃɪŋ aʊɾ ə hæn əz tælmɑnz tɔst ɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ tə hɪm fɹəm ə saɪd hɔlweɪ.

The gholam glared at him, then stumbled up the steps toward the burning building. It dashed inside, perhaps deciding to flee. Mat was not about to let it escape, not this time. He charged it up the steps and ducked through the flaming doorway, reaching out a hand as Talmanes tossed his ashandarei to him from a side hallway.

mæt kɑt ðə wɛpən, livɪŋ ðə mədæljənz ɹæpt ɝaʊn ɪz fɹɑɹmz. ðə ɡoʊləm spʌn ɑn hɪm; ðə hɔlweɪ wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi bɝnɪŋ, ðə hit fɹəm ðə saɪdz ən əbʌv əpɹɛsɪv. smoʊk laɪn ðə silɪŋ. tælmɑnz kɔft, ə kɝtʃəf hɛl tə hɪz feɪs.

Mat caught the weapon, leaving the medallions wrapped around his forearms. The gholam spun on him; the hallway was already burning, the heat from the sides and above oppressive. Smoke lined the ceiling. Talmanes coughed, a kerchief held to his face.

ðə ɡoʊləm tɝn ɑn mæt, snɑɹlɪŋ ən ətækɪŋ. mæt mɛt ðə bist ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə waɪd hɔlweɪ, bɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp ɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ tə blɑk ðə ɡoʊləm'?, klɔlaɪk hænz. ðə bʌɾ ə mæts æʃhændʒɹeɪ hæd bɪn sɪŋʒd fɹəm sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə faɪɝ, ən ðə wʊd smoʊldɝɾ ət ði ɛnd. ɪt lɛft ə tʃɹeɪl ə smoʊk ɪn ði ɛɹ.

The gholam turned on Mat, snarling and attacking. Mat met the beast in the middle of the wide hallway, bringing up his ashandarei to block the gholam'?, clawlike hands. The butt of Mat's ashandarei had been singed from sitting in the fire, and the wood smoldered at the end. It left a trail of smoke in the air.

hi ətæk fəɹ ɔl i wɑz wɝθ, spɪnɪŋ ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ, ðə bæk ɛn livɪŋ ə wɝl ə smoʊk ɝaʊn hɪm. ðə ɡoʊləm tʃɹaɪd tə stʃɹaɪk ət hɪm, bʌt mæt dʒɹɑp ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ wɪð wʌn hæn ən flʌŋ wʌn ə ðə mədæljənz laɪk ə naɪf, hɪɾɪŋ ðə kɹitʃɝ ɪn ðə feɪs. ɪt haʊld ən stʌmbəl bæk, feɪs bɝn ən smoʊkɪŋ. mæt stɛp fɔɹwɝd, slæmɪŋ ði ɛn ə ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ əɡɛns ðə mədæljən əz ɪt hɪt ðə flɔɹ, flɪpɪŋ ɪt bæk ʌp ən hɪɾɪŋ ðə kɹitʃɝ əɡɛn.

He attacked for all he was worth, spinning the ashandarei, the back end leaving a whirl of smoke around him. The gholam tried to strike at him, but Mat dropped the ashandarei with one hand and flung one of the medallions like a knife, hitting the creature in the face. It howled and stumbled back, face burned and smoking. Mat stepped forward, slamming the end of the ashandarei against the medallion as it hit the floor, flipping it back up and hitting the creature again.

hi pʊʃt fɔɹwɝd, slæʃɪŋ wɪð ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ, ən sɛvɹəl ə ðə kɹitʃɝz fɪŋɡɝz flu fɹi.

He pushed forward, slashing with the ashandarei, and several of the creature's fingers flew free.

ʃʊɹ, ɪt dɪd nɑt bliɾ ən dɪd nɑt sim tə fil peɪn fɹəm ɔɹɾənɛɹi wunz, bʌt ðət wəd sloʊ ɪɾ ə bɪt. ðə ɡoʊləm ɹəkʌvɝd, hɪsɪŋ, aɪz waɪd wɪð æŋɡɝ. ɪts smaɪl wɑz ɡɔn naʊ. ɪt lɛp fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ə blɝ, bʌt mæt spʌn ən slaɪs daʊn ðə kɹitʃɝz tæn ʃɝt, ɪkspoʊzɪŋ ɪts tʃɛst. ðən i wɪp ðə sɛkən mədæljən tə ðə saɪd, hɪɾɪŋ ðə ɡoʊləm əz ɪt klɔɾ əɾ ɪz ɑɹm, slaɪsɪŋ ðə skɪn ən spɹeɪɪŋ blʌɾ əkɹɔs ðə wɔl.

Sure, it did not bleed and did not seem to feel pain from ordinary wounds, but that would slow it a bit. The gholam recovered, hissing, eyes wide with anger. Its smile was gone now. It leaped forward in a blur, but Mat spun and sliced down the creature's tan shirt, exposing its chest. Then he whipped the second medallion to the side, hitting the gholam as it clawed at his arm, slicing the skin and spraying blood across the wall.

mæt ɡɹʌntɪd. ðə ɡoʊləm haʊld ən stʌmbəl bæk, fɑɹðɝ daʊn ðə bɝnɪŋ hɔlweɪ. mæt wɑz swɛɾɪŋ fɹəm ðə hit, fɹəm ði ɪɡzɝʃən. mæt kəd nɑt faɪt ðɪs kɹitʃɝ. nɑt fəɹ lɔŋ. ðət dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ. hi pʊʃt fɔɹwɝd, lɛɾɪŋ ɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ bɪkʌm ə blɝ. hi slæp ðə flæɾ ʌv ɪt -  wɪð ðə mədæljən - əɡɛns ðə ɡoʊləm. wən ðə bist ɹəkʌvɝd, hi flʌŋ ðə sɛkən mədæljən əɾ ɪts feɪs, meɪkɪŋ ɪt dʌk. bʌt ðən i kɪk ðə θɝd wʌn ʌp tə hɪɾ ɪɾ ɑn ðə nɛk. hi lɛf laɪnz ə smoʊk ɪn ði ɛɹ əz i spʌn ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ, ɡɹæbɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn tu hænz əɡɛn. ði ɛn ə hɪz wɛpən ɡloʊɾ ən smoʊldɝd. hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf jɛlɪŋ ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ.

Mat grunted. The gholam howled and stumbled back, farther down the burning hallway. Mat was sweating from the heat, from the exertion. Mat could not fight this creature. Not for long. That did not matter. He pushed forward, letting his ashandarei become a blur. He slapped the flat of it -  with the medallion - against the gholam. When the beast recovered, he flung the second medallion at its face, making it duck. But then he kicked the third one up to hit it on the neck. He left lines of smoke in the air as he spun the ashandarei, grabbing it in two hands again. The end of his weapon glowed and smoldered. He found himself yelling in the Old Tongue.

"æl dɪvəl, æl kaɪsɝi, æl mæʃi!" fəɹ laɪt, ɡlɔɹi, ən lʌv!

"Al dival, al kiserai, al mashi!" For light, glory, and love!

ðə ɡoʊləm stɛp bæk, snɑɹlɪŋ ət ðə bɝɑʒ. ɪt lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪts ʃoʊldɝ, simɪŋ tə noʊɾəs sʌmθɪŋ bɪhaɪnd, bʌt mæts ətæk dʒɹu ɪts ətɛnʃən bæk.

The gholam stepped back, snarling at the barrage. It looked over its shoulder, seeming to notice something behind, but Mat's attack drew its attention back.

"teɪdeɪʃɝ!" tʃɹu blʌɾ ə bæɾəl!

"Tai'daishar!" True Blood of Battle!

mæt fɔɹs ðə kɹitʃɝ təwɔɹɾ ən oʊpən dɔɹweɪ ət ðə bæk ə ðə hɔlweɪ. ðə ɹum bɪɑnd wɑz ɪntaɪɝli dɑɹk. noʊ laɪɾ ə ðə faɪɝz ɹəflɛktəɾ ɔf wɔlz ðɛɹ.

Mat forced the creature toward an open doorway at the back of the hallway. The room beyond was entirely dark. No light of the fires reflected off walls there.

"kæɹɑi mænʃɪmaɪə taɪlɪn. kæɹɑi ən mænʃɪmaɪə neɪlzin. kæɹɑi ən mæn-ʃimaɪə aɪɛndæn!"

"Carai manshimaya Tylin. Carai an manshimaya Nalesean. Carai an man-shimaya ayend'an!"

ɑnɝ ə maɪ bleɪd fəɹ taɪlɪn. ɑnɝ ə maɪ bleɪd fəɹ neɪlzin. ɑnɝ ə maɪ bleɪd fəɹ ðə fɔlən.

Honor of my blade for Tylin. Honor of my blade for Nalesean. Honor of my blade for the fallen.

ðə kɔl ə vɛnʒəns.

The call of vengeance.

ðə ɡoʊləm bækt ɪndə ðə dɑɹkən ɹum, stɛpɪŋ ɑntu ə boʊn waɪt flɔɹ, aɪz flɪkɝɪŋ daʊn.

The gholam backed into the darkened room, stepping onto a bone white floor, eyes flickering down.

teɪkɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, mæt lɛp θɹu ðə dɔɹweɪ wɪð ə faɪnəl bɝst ə stʃɹɛŋkθ ən slæm ðə smoʊldɝɪŋ bʌɾ ə hɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ ɪndə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə kɹitʃɝz hɛd. ə spɹeɪ ʌv spɑɹks ən æʃ ɪksploʊɾəd ɝaʊn ɪts feɪs. ðə kɹitʃɝ kɝst ən stʌmbəl tə ðə ɹaɪt.

Taking a deep breath, Mat leaped through the doorway with a final burst of strength and slammed the smoldering butt of his ashandarei into the side of the creature's head. A spray of sparks and ash exploded around its face. The creature cursed and stumbled to the right.

ən ðɛɹ, ɪt nɪɹli stɛpt ɔf ði ɛdʒ ʌv ə plætfɔɹm hæŋɪŋ əbʌv ən ɪkspænsɪv vɔɪd. ðə ɡoʊləm hɪst ɪn æŋɡɝ, hæŋɪŋ wɪð wʌn lɛɡ oʊvɝ ðə vɔɪd, fleɪlɪŋ tə kip ɪts bæləns.

And there, it nearly stepped off the edge of a platform hanging above an expansive void. The gholam hissed in anger, hanging with one leg over the void, flailing to keep its balance.

fɹəm ðɪs saɪd, ðə dɔɹweɪ ɪndə ðə ɹum wɑz ɹɪŋ baɪ ə ɡloʊɪŋ waɪt laɪt - ði ɛdʒəz ʌv ə ɡeɪtweɪ meɪd fəɹ skɪmɪŋ. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf vu kən daɪ," mæt sɛd sɔfli. "aɪ hoʊp tə ðə laɪt ðət jə kænt." hi ɹeɪzd ə buɾ ən slæmd ɪɾ ɪndə ðə θɪŋz bæk, θɹoʊɪŋ ɪɾ ɔf ðə plætfɔɹm ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs. ɪt fɛl, twɪstɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, lʊkɪŋ ʌp əɾ ɪm wɪð ə hɔɹɝ.

From this side, the doorway into the room was ringed by a glowing white light - the edges of a gateway made for Skimming. "I don't know if vou can die," Mat said softly. "I hope to the Light that you can't." He raised a boot and slammed it into the thing's back, throwing it off the platform into the darkness. It fell, twisting in the air, looking up at him with a horror.

"aɪ hoʊp jə kæn daɪ," mæt sɛd, "bɪkɔz aɪm gɑnə ɛndʒɔɪ ðə θɔɾ ə jə fɔlɪŋ θɹu ðət blæknəs fɝɛvɝ, jə mɪsbəɡɑɾən sʌn ʌv ə ɡoʊts dʒɹɑpɪŋz." mæt spɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə saɪd, sɛndɪŋ ə bɪɾ ə blʌɾi spɪɾəl daʊn, plʌməɾɪŋ æftɝ ðə ɡoʊləm. boʊθ dɪsəpɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə blæknəs bɪloʊ.

"I hope you can't die," Mat said, "because I'm going to enjoy the thought of you falling through that blackness forever, you misbegotten son of a goat's droppings." Mat spit over the side, sending a bit of bloody spittle down, plummeting after the gholam. Both disappeared into the blackness below.

sumeɪkoʊ wɔkt ʌp bɪsaɪd hɪm. ðə staʊt kɪnswʊmən hæd lɔŋ dɑɹk hɛɹ ən ði ɛɹ ʌv ə wʊmən u dɪd nɑt laɪk biɪŋ ɔɹɾɝd əbaʊt. nɪɹli ɛvɹi wʊmən hæd ðət seɪm ɛɹ. ʃid bɪn stændɪŋ dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, tə ðə saɪd wɛɹ ʃi wəd bi ənsin fɹəm ðə hɔlweɪ. ʃi hæd tə bi ðəɹ tə meɪnteɪn ðə waɪt plætfɔɹm, wɪtʃ wɑz ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə lɑɹdʒ bʊk. ʃi ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ ət hɪm.

Sumeko walked up beside him. The stout Kinswoman had long dark hair and the air of a woman who did not like being ordered about. Nearly every woman had that same air. She'd been standing just inside the gateway, to the side where she would be unseen from the hallway. She had to be there to maintain the white platform, which was in the shape of a large book. She raised an eyebrow at him.

"θæŋks fəɹ ðə ɡeɪtweɪ," mæt sɛd, ʃoʊldɝɪŋ ɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ, ðə bʌt stɪl tʃɹeɪlɪŋ ə θɪn laɪn ə smoʊk. ʃid meɪd ðə ɡeɪtweɪ fɹəm ɪnsaɪd ðə pæləs, juzɪŋ ɪt tə tʃɹævəl tə ðɪs pɔɪn ən oʊpən ðə ɡeɪtweɪ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ. ðeɪd hoʊp ðət wəd kip ðə ɡoʊləm fɹəm filɪŋ əɹ tʃænəl, əz ʃid meɪd ðə wivz ɪn ðə pæləs.

"Thanks for the gateway," Mat said, shouldering his ashandarei, the butt still trailing a thin line of smoke. She'd made the gateway from inside the palace, using it to travel to this point and open the gateway in the hallway. They'd hoped that would keep the gholam from feeling her channel, as she'd made the weaves in the palace.

sumeɪkoʊ snɪft. təɡɛðɝ, ðə tu wɔkt aʊt θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ ən ɪndə ðə bɪldɪŋ. sɛvɹəl ə ðə bænd wɝ hɝidli pʊɾɪŋ aʊt ðə faɪɝ. tælmɑnz ɹʌʃt ʌp tə mæt əz ðə ɡeɪtweɪ vænɪʃt, əkʌmpənid baɪ ənʌðɝ ə ðə kɪnswɪmən, dʒulənjə.

Sumeko sniffed. Together, the two walked out through the gateway and into the building. Several of the Band were hurriedly putting out the fire. Talmanes rushed up to Mat as the gateway vanished, accompanied by another of the Kinswomen, Julanya.

"ju ʃʊɹ ðət dɑɹknəs ɡoʊz ɑn fɝɛvɝ?" mæt æskt. dʒulənjə wɑz ə plʌmp, pɹɪɾi wʊmən u wʊɾə fɪt naɪsli ɑn mæts ni. ðə waɪɾ ɪn əɹ hɛɹ dɪd nɑt dɪtʃɹæk fɹəm əɹ pɹɪɾinəs əɾ ɔl.

"You sure that darkness goes on forever?" Mat asked. Julanya was a plump, pretty woman who would have fit nicely on Mat's knee. The white in her hair did not detract from her prettiness at all.

"nɪɹ əz wi kən tɛl, ɪt dʌz," sumeɪkoʊ sɛd. "ðɪs wɑz kwaɪt nɪɹli bʌŋɡəld, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən.

"Near as we can tell, it does," Sumeko said. "This was quite nearly bungled, Matrim Cauthon.

ðə θɪŋ dɪdn sim sɝpɹaɪz baɪ ðə ɡeɪtweɪ. aɪ θɪŋk ɪt sɛnst ɪɾ ɛniweɪ."

The thing didn't seem surprised by the gateway. I think it sensed it anyway."

'stɪl mænədʒ tə faɪɾ ɪɾ ɔf ðə plætfɔɹm," mæt sɛd.

'Still managed to fight it off the platform," Mat said.

"bɛɹli. jə ʃʊɾə lɛɾ əs dil wɪð ðə bist." wʊdn əv wɝkt," mæt sɛd, teɪkɪŋ ə wɛɾɪd kɝtʃəf fɹəm tælmɑnz. sumeɪkoʊ ɡlænst əɾ ɪz ɑɹm, bʌt mæt dɪdn æsk fəɹ hilɪŋ. ðət kʌt wəd hil ɹaɪt naɪsli. maɪɾ ivən əv ə ɡʊd skɑɹ. skɑɹz ɪmpɹɛs moʊst wɪmən, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ ɑn ðə feɪs. wʌd tuɑn θɪŋk ə ðɛm?

"Barely. You should have let us deal with the beast." Wouldn't have worked," Mat said, taking a wetted kerchief from Talmanes. Sumeko glanced at his arm, but Mat didn't ask for Healing. That cut would heal right nicely. Might even have a good scar. Scars impressed most women, so long as they were not on the face. What did Tuon think of them?

sumeɪkoʊ snɪft. "ðə pɹaɪɾ ə mɛn. də nɑt fɝɡɛt ðət wi lɔst səm ʌv əɹ oʊn tə ðət θɪŋ."

Sumeko sniffed. "The pride of men. Do not forget that we lost some of our own to that thing."

"æn aɪm ɡlæɾ aɪ kəd hɛlp jə ɡɛt ɹivɛnʒ," mæt sɛd. hi smaɪld ət hɝ, ðoʊ ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt, ɪt hæd nɪɹli bɪn bʌŋɡəld. hi wɑz sɝɾən ðə ɡoʊləm hæd fɛl ðə kɪnswʊmən bɪɑn ðət dɔɹweɪ əz ðeɪ əpɹoʊtʃt fɔɹtʃənətli, ðoʊ, ðə θɪŋ hædn sim tə kənsɪɾɝ wʊmən u kəd tʃænəl tə bi ə θɹɛt.

"And I'm glad I could help you get revenge," Mat Said. He smiled at her, though she was right, it had nearly been bungled. He was certain the gholam had felt the Kinswoman beyond that doorway as they approached Fortunately, though, the thing hadn't seemed to consider woman who could channel to be a threat.

tælmɑnz hændəd mæt bæk ðə tu fɔlən mədæljənz. hi tʌkt əm əweɪ ən əntaɪd ðə wʌn ɑn ɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ, slɪpɪŋ ɪt bæk ɑntu hɪz nɛk. ðə kɪn wɑtʃt ðoʊz mədæljənz wɪð ə pɹɛɾətɔɹi hʌŋɡɝ. wɛl ðeɪ kəd də ðəɾ ɔl ðeɪ wɑntəd. hi ɪntɛndəd wʌn fəɹ oʊlvɝ ən ði ʌðɝ fəɹ tuɑn, wʌns i kəd faɪn hɝ.

Talmanes handed Mat back the two fallen medallions. He tucked them away and untied the one on his ashandarei, slipping it back onto his neck. The Kin watched those medallions with a predatory hunger. Well they could do that all they wanted. He intended one for Olver and the other for Tuon, once he could find her.

kæptən ɡaɪbɑn, bɝdʒɪts sɛkənd-ɪn-kəmænd, wɔkt ɪndə ðə bɪldɪŋ. "ðə bist ɪz dɛd?"

Captain Guybon, Birgitte's second-in-command, walked into the building. "The beast is dead?"

"noʊ," mæt sɛd, "bʌt kloʊs ɪnʌf fəɹ ə kɹaʊn kɑntʃɹækt."

"No," Mat said, "but close enough for a Crown contract."

"kɹaʊn kɑntʃɹækt?" ɡaɪbɑn æskt, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "ju æsk ðə kwinz eɪɾ ɑn ðɪs ɪndɛvɝ. ðɪs wɑzn dʌn ɑn əɹ kɑntʃɹækt."

"Crown contract?" Guybon asked, frowning. "You asked the Queen's aid on this endeavor. This wasn't done on her contract."

"æktʃəli ," tælmɑnz sɛd, klɪɹɪŋ ɪz θɹoʊt, "wi dʒʌst ɹɪd ðə sɪɾi ʌv ə mɝɾɝɝ u hæz teɪkən, ət læs kaʊnt, nɪɹli ə dʌzən ə hɝ sɪɾəzənz. wɝ ɛntaɪɾəld tə kɑmbæt peɪ, aɪ sɝmaɪz." hi sɛɾ ɪt wɪð ə kəmplitli stʃɹeɪt feɪs. blɛs ðə mæn.

"Actually," Talmanes said, clearing his throat, "we just rid the city of a murderer who has taken, at last count, nearly a dozen of her citizens. We're entitled to combat pay, I surmise." He said it with a completely straight face. Bless the man.

"blʌɾi ɹaɪt," mæt sɛd. stɑpɪŋ ðə ɡoʊləm ən ɡɛɾɪŋ peɪd fəɹ ɪt. ðət saʊndəd laɪk ə sʌni deɪ fəɹ ə tʃeɪnʒ. hi tɔst ɪz kɝtʃəf tə ɡaɪbɑn ən wɔkt əweɪ, livɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðə kɪnswɪmən u foʊldəd ðɛɹ ɑɹmz ən wɑtʃt wɪð dɪsplɛʒɝ. waɪ wɑz ɪɾ ə wʊmən kəd lʊk æŋɡɹi wɪð ə mæn ivən wən i hæd dʌn ɪɡzækli wʌɾ i hæd sɛɾ i wʊd, ɹɪskɪŋ ɪz nɛk ivən?

"Bloody right," Mat said. Stopping the gholam and getting paid for it. That sounded like a sunny day for a change. He tossed his kerchief to Guybon and walked away, leaving behind the Kinswomen who folded their arms and watched with displeasure. Why was it a woman could look angry with a man even when he had done exactly what he had said he would, risking his neck even?

"sɑɹi əbaʊt ðə faɪɝ, mæt," tælmɑnz sɛd. "dɪdn min tə dʒɹɑp ðə læntɝn laɪk ðæt. aɪ noʊ aɪ wɑz dʒʌst səpoʊz tə liɾ ɪm ɪndə ðə bɪldɪŋ."

"Sorry about the fire, Mat," Talmanes said. "Didn't mean to drop the lantern like that. I know I was just supposed to lead him into the building."

"wɝkt aʊt faɪn," mæt sɛd, ɪnspɛktɪŋ ðə bʌɾ ə hɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ. ðə dæmədʒ wɑz maɪnɝ.

"Worked out fine," Mat said, inspecting the butt of his ashandarei. The damage was minor.

ðeɪ hæd nɑt noʊn wɛɹ - əɹ ɪf - ðə ɡoʊləm wəɾ ətæk hɪm, bʌt ɡaɪbɑn hæd dʌn ɪz dʒɑb wɛl, ɡɛɾɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn aʊɾ ə ðə nɪɹbaɪ bɪldɪŋz, ðən pɪkɪŋ ə hɔlweɪ ðət ðə kɪnswʊmən wəd meɪk ðə ɡeɪtweɪ ɪntu. hid sɛn ə mɛmbɝ ə ðə bæn tə tɛl tælmɑnz wɛɹ tə ɡoʊ.

They had not known where - or if - the gholam would attack him, but Guybon had done his job well, getting everyone out of the nearby buildings, then picking a hallway that the Kinswoman would make the gateway into. He'd sent a member of the Band to tell Talmanes where to go.

wɛl, ɪleɪn ən bɝdʒɪts aɪdiə wɪð ðə ɡeɪtweɪ hæd wɝkt aʊt, ivən ɪf ɪt hædn bɪn ðə weɪ ðeɪd plænd. ɪt wɑz stɪl bɛɾɝ ðən wʌt mæt hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə kʌm wɪð; hɪz oʊnli aɪdiə bæd bɪn tə tʃɹaɪ tə stʌf wʌn ə ðoʊz mədæljənz daʊn ðə ɡoʊləmz θɹoʊt.

Well, Elayne and Birgitte's idea with the gateway had worked out, even if it hadn't been the way they'd planned. It was still better than what Mat had been able to come with; his only idea bad been to try to stuff one of those medallions down the gholam's throat.

"lɛts kəlɛk sɛɾəl ən oʊlvɝ fɹəm ðɛɹ ɪn," mæt sɛd, "ænd ɡɛt bæk tə kæmp. ɪksaɪtməns oʊvɝ fəɹ naʊ. əbaʊt blʌɾi taɪm."

"Let's collect Setalle and Olver from their inn," Mat said, "and get back to camp. Excitement's over for now. About bloody time."


tʃæptɝ θɝɾitu


CHAPTER 32

eɪ stɔɹm ə laɪt


A Storm of Light

ðə sɪɾi ʌv mɛɹədɑn bɝnd. vaɪələnt, twɪstɪŋ kɑləmz ə smoʊk ɹoʊz fɹəm dʌzənz ə bɪldɪŋz.

The city of Maradon burned. Violent, twisting columns of smoke rose from dozens of buildings.

ðə kɛɹfəl sɪɾi plænɪŋ kɛp ðə faɪɝz fɹəm spɹɛɾɪŋ tu kwɪkli, bʌt dɪd nɑt stɑp əm ɪntaɪɝli.

The careful city planning kept the fires from spreading too quickly, but did not stop them entirely.

hjumən biɪŋz ən tɪndɝ. ðeɪ wɛn təɡɛðɝ.

Human beings and tinder. They went together.

ɪɾɝɑldi kɹaʊtʃt ɪnsaɪɾ ə bɹoʊkən bɪldɪŋ, ɹʌbəl tə hɪz lɛft, ə smɔl bæn ə sɑldəiənz tə hɪz ɹaɪt. hiɾ əbændən ðə pæləs ɝli ɑn; ɪt hæd bɪn swɔɹmd wɪð ʃæɾoʊzpɔn. hid lɛft ɪt pækt wɪð ɔl ði ɔɪl ðeɪd bɪn eɪbəl tə faɪnd, ðən hæd ði æʃəmən sɛɾ ɪɾ əfleɪm, kɪlɪŋ hʌnʒɹədz ə tʃɹɑləks ən feɪdz tʃɹæpt ɪnsaɪd.

Ituralde crouched inside a broken building, rubble to his left, a small band of Saldaeans to his right. He'd abandoned the palace early on; it had been swarmed with Shadowspawn. He'd left it packed with all the oil they'd been able to find, then had the Asha'man set it aflame, killing hundreds of Trollocs and Fades trapped inside.

hi ɡlænst aʊt ðə wɪndoʊ ʌv ɪz kɝən haɪɾɪŋ pleɪs. hi cʊɾə swɔɹn hid sin ə pætʃ ə bɛɹ skaɪ aʊt ðə wɪndoʊ, bʌt ði æʃ ən smoʊki heɪz ɪn ði ɛɹ meɪɾ ɪt dɪfəkəl tə tɛl. ə bɪldɪŋ nɪɹbaɪ bɝn soʊ ɪntɛnsli ðəɾ i kəd fil ðə hit θɹu ðə stoʊn.

He glanced out the window of his current hiding place. He could have sworn he'd seen a patch of bare sky out the window, but the ash and smoky haze in the air made it difficult to tell. A building nearby burned so intensely that he could feel the heat through the stone.

hi juz ðə smoʊk ən ðə faɪɝ. ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɑn ə bæɾəlfild kəd bi ən ædvæntɪdʒ. ɪn ðɪs keɪs, wʌns joʊli hæɾ æksɛptɪd ðət ðə sɪɾi wɑz lɔst, ðeɪd stɑp dɪfɛndɪŋ ɪt. naʊ ðeɪ juz ðə sɪɾi əz ə kɪlɪŋ ɡɹaʊnd.

He used the smoke and the fire. Almost everything on a battlefield could be an advantage. In this case, once Yoeli had accepted that the city was lost, they'd stopped defending it. Now they used the city as a killing ground.

ðə stʃɹits kɹieɪɾəd ə meɪz ðəɾ ɪɾɝɑldi - wɪð ðə hɛlp ə ðə sɑldəiənz - nu ən ɪz ɛnəmiz dɪd nɑt. ɛvɹi ɹuftɑp wɑz ə ɹɪdʒ tə ɡɪv haɪ ɡɹaʊnd, ɛvɹi æli ə sikɹəɾ ɪskeɪp ɹut, ɛvɹi oʊpən skwɛɹ ə pətɛnʃəl tʃɹæp.

The streets created a maze that Ituralde - with the help of the Saldaeans - knew and his enemies did not. Every rooftop was a ridge to give high ground, every alley a secret escape route, every open square a potential trap.

ðə tʃɹɑləks ən ðɛɹ kəmændɝz hæd meɪɾ ə mɪsteɪk. ðeɪ əsum ðəɾ ɪɾɝɑldi kɛɹɾ əbaʊt pɹətɛktɪŋ ðə sɪɾi. ðeɪ mɪstʊk hɪm. ɔl i kɛɹɾ əbaʊt naʊ wɑz duɪŋ əz mʌtʃ dæmədʒ tə ðɛm əz pɑsəbəl. soʊ, hi juz ðɛɹ əsʌmpʃənz əɡɛns hɪm. jɛs, ðɛɹ ɑɹmi wɑz lɑɹdʒ. bʌɾ ɛni mæn u hæɾ ɛvɝ tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl ɹæts nu ðət ðə saɪz ə hɪz hæmɝ dɪdn mæɾɝ soʊ lɔŋ əz ðə ɹæts nu haʊ tə haɪd.

The Trollocs and their commanders had made a mistake. They assumed that Ituralde cared about protecting the city. They mistook him. All he cared about now was doing as much damage to them as possible. So, he used their assumptions against him. Yes, their army was large. But any man who had ever tried to kill rats knew that the size of his hammer didn't matter so long as the rats knew how to hide.

ə hɛzɪɾənt ɡɹup ə ðə kɹitʃɝz ʃʌfəl daʊn ðə blækən stʃɹiɾ aʊtsaɪɾ ɪɾɝɑldiz bɪldɪŋ.

A hesitant group of the creatures shuffled down the blackened street outside Ituralde's building.

ðə tʃɹɑləks snæpt ən huɾɪd wɛɹəli ət wʌn ənʌðɝ. səm snɪft ət ði ɛɹ, bʌt ðə smoʊk ɹuən ðɛɹ sɛns ə smɛl. ðeɪ kəmplitli mɪst ɪɾɝɑldi ən ɪz smɔl bænd, dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə bɪldɪŋ.

The Trollocs snapped and hooted warily at one another. Some sniffed at the air, but the smoke ruined their sense of smell. They completely missed Ituralde and his small band, just inside the building.

hʊfbits ɹæŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ ɛn ə ðə stʃɹit. ðə tʃɹɑləks bɪɡæn tə ʃaʊt, æɹəɾ ə ɡɹup hɝid tə ðə fɹʌnt, sɛɾɪŋ wɪkɪdli bɑɹb spɪɹz daʊn wɪð ðə bʌts əɡɛns ðə kɑbəlz. tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ ðət wəd bi dɛθ fəɹ kævəlɹi. ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ lɝnɪŋ tə bi mɔɹ kɛɹfəl.

Hoofbeats rang on the other end of the street. The Trollocs began to shout, arid a group hurried to the front, setting wickedly barbed spears down with the butts against the cobbles. Charging that would be death for cavalry. The Trollocs were learning to be more careful.

bʌt ðeɪ wɝn lɝnɪŋ wɛl ɪnʌf. ðə kævəlɹi keɪm ɪndə vju, ɹɪvilɪŋ wʌn mæn liɾɪŋ ə ɡɹup ʌv wundəɾ ən ɪɡzɔstəd hɔɹsəz. ə dɪstʃɹækʃən.

But they weren't learning well enough. The cavalry came into view, revealing one man leading a group of wounded and exhausted horses. A distraction.

"naʊ," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd. ði ɑɹtʃɝz ɝaʊn ɪm spɹæŋ ʌp ən bɪɡæn ʃuɾɪŋ aʊt ðə wɪndoʊz ət ðə tʃɹɑləks. mɛni daɪd; ʌðɝz spʌn ən tʃɑɹdʒd.

"Now," Ituralde said. The archers around him sprang up and began shooting out the windows at the Trollocs. Many died; others spun and charged.

ən fɹəm ə saɪd stʃɹiɾ ə kævəlɹi tʃɑɹdʒ - ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz kʌvɝd wɪð ɹæɡz tə dæmpən saʊnd  - ɡæləpt aʊt, ðɛɹ əpɹoʊtʃ kʌvɝd baɪ ðə laʊɾɝ hʊvz ə ðə daɪvɝʒənɛɹi hɔɹsəz. ðə sɑldəiənz ɹɪp θɹu ðə tʃɹɑləks, tʃɹæmplɪŋ ən kɪlɪŋ.

And from a side street a cavalry charge - the horses' hooves covered with rags to dampen sound  - galloped out, their approach covered by the louder hooves of the diversionary horses. The Saldaeans ripped through the Trollocs, trampling and killing.

ði ɑɹtʃɝz wupt ən tʊk aʊt sɔɹdz ən æksiz tə fɪnɪʃ ɔf ðə wundəd tʃɹɑləks. noʊ feɪd wɪð ðɪs ɡɹup, blɛs ðə laɪt. ɪɾɝɑldi stʊɾ ʌp, ə wɛt hæŋkɝtʃɪf tə hɪz feɪs əɡɛns ðə smoʊk.

The archers whooped and took out swords and axes to finish off the wounded Trollocs. No Fade with this group, bless the Light. Ituralde stood up, a wet handkerchief to his face against the smoke.

hɪz wɪɹinəs - wʌns bɛɹid dip - wɑz sloʊli ɹisɝfəsɪŋ. hi wɑz wɝid ðət wən ɪt hɪt hɪm, hid dʒɹɑp ʌnkɑnʃəs. bæd fəɹ mɝæl, ðæt.

His weariness - once buried deep - was slowly resurfacing. He was worried that when it hit him, he'd drop unconscious. Bad for morale, that.

noʊ, hi θɔt, haɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə smoʊk waɪl jəɹ hoʊm bɝnz, noʊɪŋ ðət ðə tʃɹɑləks ɑɹ sloʊli pɛnɪŋ jə ɪn . . . ðæts bæd fəɹ mɝæl.

No, he thought, hiding in the smoke while your home burns, knowing that the Trollocs are slowly penning you in . . . that's bad for morale.

hɪz mɛn fɪnɪʃt ɔf ðə fɪst ə tʃɹɑləks, ðən heɪsən tə ənʌðɝ pɹi-dɪsaɪɾɪd bɪldɪŋ ðət ðeɪ kəd haɪɾ ɪn. ɪɾɝɑldi hæɾ əbaʊt θɝɾi ɑɹtʃɝz ən ə kʌmpəni ʌv kævəlɹi, wɪtʃ i muvd əmʌŋ faɪv ɪndɪpɛndən bænz ʌv ɪɹɛɡjəlɝ faɪɾɝz sɪməlɝ tə ðɪs wʌn. hi weɪvd ɪz mɛn bæk ɪndə haɪɾɪŋ waɪl ɪz skaʊts bɹɔɾ ɪm ɪnfɝmeɪʃən. ivən wɪð ðə skaʊts, ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl tə ɡɛɾ ə ɡʊd ɹɛɾ ɑn ðə lɑɹdʒ sɪɾi. hi hæd veɪɡ aɪdiəz ʌv wɛɹ ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst ɹɪzɪstəns wɑz, ən sɛnt wʌɾ ɔɹɾɝz i kʊd, bʌt ðə bæɾəl wɑz spɹɛɾ oʊvɝ tu lɑɹdʒ ən ɛɹiə fəɹ ɪm tə bi eɪbəl tə koʊɔɹɾəneɪt ðə faɪɾɪŋ ɪfɛktɪvli. hi hoʊp joʊli wɑz wɛl.

His men finished off the fist of Trollocs, then hastened to another pre-decided building that they could hide in. Ituralde had about thirty archers and a company of cavalry, which he moved among five independent bands of irregular fighters similar to this one. He waved his men back into hiding while his scouts brought him information. Even with the scouts, it was difficult to get a good read on the large city. He had vague ideas of where the strongest resistance was, and sent what orders he could, but the battle was spread over too large an area for him to be able to coordinate the fighting effectively. He hoped Yoeli was well.

ði æʃəmən wɝ ɡɔn, ɪskeɪpɪŋ əɾ ɪz ɔɹɾɝ θɹu ðə taɪni ɡeɪtweɪ-oʊnli lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə kɹɔl θɹu - ðəɾ ænteɪl hæd meɪd. sɪns ðeɪd ɡɔn - ɪt wɑz aʊɝz əɡoʊ naʊ - ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ saɪn ʌv wʌtɛvɝ "ɹɛskjuɝz" wɝ səpoʊzədli kʌmɪŋ. bɪfɔɹ ði æʃəmən lɛft, hid sɛn ə skaʊt θɹu ə ɡeɪtweɪ tə ðət ɹɪdʒ wɛɹ ðə læstʃɹaɪɾɝz hæd bɪn sɛd tə wɑtʃ. ɔl ðət ðə skaʊt faʊnd wɑz ən ɛmpti kæmp, ðə faɪɝ bɝnɪŋ ənətɛndɪd.

The Ashaman were gone, escaping at his order through the tiny gateway-only large enough to crawl through - that Antail had made. Since they'd gone - it was hours ago now - there had been no sign of whatever "rescuers" were supposedly coming. Before the Ashaman left, he'd sent a scout through a gateway to that ridge where the Lastriders had been said to watch. All that the scout found was an empty camp, the fire burning unattended.

ɪɾɝɑldi dʒɔɪn ɪz mɛn ɪnsaɪd ðə nu haɪɾɪŋ pleɪs, livɪŋ ɪz hæŋkɝtʃɪf - naʊ steɪnd wɪð sʊt - ɑn ðə duɹknɑb tə ɡɪv ðə skaʊts ə klu tə hɪz loʊkeɪʃən. wʌns ɪnsaɪd, hi fɹoʊz, hɪɹɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ aʊtsaɪd.

Ituralde joined his men inside the new hiding place, leaving his handkerchief - now stained with soot - on the doorknob to give the scouts a clue to his location. Once inside, he froze, hearing something outside.

"hʌʃ," hi sɛd tə ðə mɛn. ðeɪ stɪl ðɛɹ klɪŋkɪŋ ɑɹmɝ.

"Hush," he said to the men. They stilled their clinking armor.

fʊtfɔlz. mɛni ʌv ðɛm. ðət wɑz ə tʃɹɑlɑk bæn fəɹ sɝɾən; hɪz mɛn hæɾ ɔɹɾɝz tə muv saɪlənli. hi nɑɾəd tə hɪz soʊlʒɝz, hoʊldɪŋ ʌp sɪks fɪŋɡɝz. plæn nʌmbɝ sɪks. ðeɪd haɪd, weɪɾɪŋ, hoʊpɪŋ ðə kɹitʃɝz wəd pæs əm baɪ. ɪf ðeɪ dɪdnt - ɪf ðeɪ dɪleɪd, əɹ stɑɹɾəd sɝtʃɪŋ ðə nɪɹbaɪ bɪldɪŋz - hɪz tim wəd bɝst aʊɾ ən bɹɔdsaɪd ðɛm.

Footfalls. Many of them. That was a Trolloc band for certain; his men had orders to move silently. He nodded to his soldiers, holding up six fingers. Plan number six. They'd hide, waiting, hoping the creatures would pass them by. If they didn't - if they delayed, or started searching the nearby buildings - his team would burst out and broadside them.

ɪt wɑz ðə ɹɪskiəst ə ðə plænz. hɪz mɛn wɝ ɪɡzɔstəɾ ən ðə kævəlɹi hæd bɪn sɛn tə ənʌðɝ ə hɪz ɡɹup ə dɪfɛndɝz. bʌt bɛɾɝ tə ətæk ðən bi dɪskʌvɝɾ əɹ sɝaʊndəd.

It was the riskiest of the plans. His men were exhausted and the cavalry had been sent to another of his group of defenders. But better to attack than be discovered or surrounded.

ɪɾɝɑldi saɪɾəld ʌp tə ðə wɪndoʊ, weɪɾɪŋ, lɪsnɪŋ, bɹiðɪŋ ʃæl-loʊli. laɪt, bʌɾ i wɑz taɪɝd.

Ituralde sidled up to the window, waiting, listening, breathing shal-lowly. Light, but he was tired.

ðə ɡɹup mɑɹtʃt ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ aʊtsaɪd, fʊtfɔlz ɪn junəsən. ðət wɑz ɑd. tʃɹɑləks dɪdn mɑɹtʃ soʊ ɹɛɡjəlɝli.

The group marched around the corner outside, footfalls in unison. That was odd. Trollocs didn't march so regularly.

"maɪ lɔɹd," wʌn ə hɪz mɛn wɪspɝd. "ðɛɹ ɑɹən ɛni hʊvz."

"My Lord," one of his men whispered. "There aren't any hooves."

ɪɾɝɑldi fɹoʊz. ðə mæn wɑz ɹaɪt. hɪz taɪɹədnəs wɑz meɪkɪŋ ɪm stupəd. ðæts ən ɑɹmi ʌv hʌnʒɹədz, hi θɔt. hi ɡɑt tə hɪz fit, kɑfɪŋ dɪspaɪt hɪmsɛlf, ən pʊʃt oʊpən ðə dɔɹ. hi stɛpt aʊtsaɪd.

Ituralde froze. The man was right. His tiredness was making him stupid. That's an army of hundreds, he thought. He got to his feet, coughing despite himself, and pushed open the door. He stepped outside.

ə ɡʌst ʌv wɪn blu daʊn ðə stʃɹiɾ əz ɪɾɝɑldi ɛs mɛn paɪld aʊt bɪhaɪn hɪm. ðə wɪn klɪɹd ðə smoʊk fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ɹɪvilɪŋ ə lɑɹdʒ tʃɹup ʌv ɪnfəntʃɹi kɪɾɪd aʊɾ ɪn sɪlvɝi ɑɹmɝ ən kæɹiɪŋ paɪks.

A gust of wind blew down the street as Ituralde s men piled out behind him. The wind cleared the smoke for a moment, revealing a large troop of infantry kitted out in silvery armor and carrying pikes.

ðeɪ simd ɡoʊsts fəɹ ə moʊmənt - ɡloʊɪŋ ɪn ə fæntəm ɡoʊldən laɪt fɹəm əbʌv, ə sʌn i hæd nɑt sin ɪn mʌnθs.

They seemed ghosts for a moment - glowing in a phantom golden light from above, a sun he had not seen in months.

ðə nukʌmɝz bɪɡæn tə kɔl əz ðeɪ sɔ hɪm ən ɪz mɛn, ən tu ʌv ðɛɹ ɔfəsɝz tʃɑɹdʒd ʌp tə hɪm. ðeɪ wɝ sɑldəiən. "wɛɹ ɪz jəɹ kəmændɝ?" wʌn æskt. "ðə mæn ɹoʊɾəl ɪɾɝɑldi?"

The newcomers began to call as they saw him and his men, and two of their officers charged up to him. They were Saldaean. "Where is your commander?" one asked. "The man Rodel Ituralde?"

"aɪ. . ." ɪɾɝɑldi faʊn hɪmsɛlf kɑfɪŋ. "aɪ æm hi. hu ɑɹ ju?"

"I. . ." Ituralde found himself coughing. "I am he. Who are you?"

"blɛs ðə laɪt," wʌn ə ðə mɛn sɛd, tɝnɪŋ bæk tə ði ʌðɝz. "pæs ðə wɝd tə lɔɹd bæʃɪɹ!

"Bless the Light," one of the men said, turning back to the others. "Pass the word to Lord Bashere!

wiv faʊn hɪm!"

We've found him!"

ɪɾɝɑldi blɪŋkt. hi lʊk bæk əɾ ɪz fɪlθi mɛn, feɪsəz blækənd wɪð sʊt. mɔɹ ðən ə fju hæɾ ən ɑɹm ɪn ə slɪŋ. hid stɑɹɾəd wɪð tu hʌnʒɹəd. naʊ ðəɹ wɝ fɪfti. ðeɪ ʃəd bi sɛləbɹeɪɾɪŋ, bʌt moʊst ə fɛm sæt daʊn ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, kloʊzɪŋ ðɛɹ aɪz.

Ituralde blinked. He looked back at his filthy men, faces blackened with soot. More than a few had an arm in a sling. He'd started with two hundred. Now there were fifty. They should be celebrating, but most of fhem sat down on the ground, closing their eyes.

ɪɾɝɑldi faʊn hɪmsɛlf læfɪŋ. "naʊ? ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛnz hɛlp naʊ?" hi stʌmbəld, ðən sæt daʊn, stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ət ðə bɝnɪŋ skaɪ. hi wɑz læf-ɪŋ, ən i kəd nɑt stɑp. sun tɪɹz bɪɡæn stʃɹikɪŋ daʊn ɪz tʃiks.

Ituralde found himself laughing. "Now? The Dragon sends help now?" He stumbled, then sat down, staring up at the burning sky. He was laugh-ing, and he could not stop. Soon tears began streaking down his cheeks.

jɛs, ðəɹ wɑz sʌnlaɪɾ ʌp ðɛɹ.

Yes, there was sunlight up there.

ɪɾɝɑldi hæd ɹiɡeɪn səm kəmpoʊʒɝ baɪ ðə taɪm ðə tʃɹups lɛɾ ɪm ɪndə ə wɛl-dɪfɛndəd sɛktɝ ə ðə sɪɾi. ðə smoʊk hɪɹ wɑz mʌtʃ lɛs θɪk. səpoʊzədli, ælθɹz tʃɹups - lɛd baɪ dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ - hæd ɹikleɪmd moʊst ə mɛɹədɑn. wʌt wɑz lɛft ʌv ɪt. ðeɪd bɪn pʊɾɪŋ aʊt ðə faɪɝz.

Ituralde had regained some composure by the time the troops led him into a well-defended sector of the city. The smoke here was much less thick. Supposedly, alThor's troops - led by Davram Bashere - had reclaimed most of Maradon. What was left of it. They'd been putting out the fires.

ɪt wɑz soʊ ɑd tə si tʃɹups wɪð ʃaɪni ɑɹmɝ, nit junəfɔɹmz, klin feɪsəz. ðeɪd swɛpt ɪn wɪð lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝz ʌv æʃəmən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ən ɑɹmi ðət - fəɹ naʊ - hæd bɪn ɪnʌf tə dʒɹaɪv ðə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn bæk tə ðə hɪlsaɪd fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃənz əbʌv ðə ɹɪvɝ. ælθɹz mɛn lɛɾ ɪm tə ə tɔl bɪldɪŋ ɪnsaɪd ðə sɪɾi. wɪð ðə pæləs bɝn aʊt, moʊsli dɪstʃɹɔɪd, ɪt lʊk laɪk ðeɪd pɪk ðɪs bɪldɪŋ əz ə kəmæn sɛntɝ.

It was so odd to see troops with shiny armor, neat uniforms, clean faces. They'd swept in with large numbers of Asha'man and Aes Sedai, and an army that - for now - had been enough to drive the Shadowspawn back to the hillside fortifications above the river. Al'Thor's men led him to a tall building inside the city. With the palace burned out, mostly destroyed, it looked like they'd picked this building as a command center.

ɪɾɝɑldi hæd bɪn faɪɾɪŋ ə dʒɹeɪnɪŋ wɔɹ fəɹ wiks naʊ. ælθɹz tʃɹups simd ɔlmoʊs tu klin. hɪz mɛn hæd bɪn daɪɪŋ waɪl ðiz mɛn wɑʃt ən slɛpt ən daɪn ɑn hɑt fud?

Ituralde had been fighting a draining war for weeks now. Al'Thor's troops seemed almost too clean. His men had been dying while these men washed and slept and dined on hot food?

stɑp ɪt, hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf, ɛntɝɪŋ ðə bɪldɪŋ. ɪt wɑz fɑɹ tu izi tə bleɪm ʌðɝz wən ə bæɾəl wɛn ɹɔŋ. ɪt wɑzn ðə fɔlt ə ðiz mɛn ðət ðɛɹ laɪvz hæd bɪn iziɝ ðən ɪz ɹisənli.

Stop it, he told himself, entering the building. It was far too easy to blame others when a battle went wrong. It wasn't the fault of these men that their lives had been easier than his recently.

hi leɪbɝɾ ʌp ðə stɛɹz, wɪʃɪŋ ðeɪd lɛɾ ɪm bi. ə ɡʊd naɪts slip, ə wɑʃ, ən ðən i kəd mit wɪð bæʃɪɹ. bʌt noʊ, ðət wʊdn du. ðə bæɾəl wɑzn oʊvɝ, ən ælθɹz mɛn wəd niɾ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən. ɪt wɑz dʒʌs ðəɾ ɪz maɪnd wɑz feɪlɪŋ hɪm, wɝkɪŋ vɛɹi sloʊli.

He labored up the stairs, wishing they'd let him be. A good night's sleep, a wash, and then he could meet with Bashere. But no, that wouldn't do. The battle wasn't over, and al'Thor's men would need information. It was just that his mind was failing him, working very slowly.

hi ɹitʃt ðə tɑp flɔɹ ən fɑloʊd bæʃɪɹz soʊlʒɝz ɪndə ə ɹum tə ðə ɹaɪt. bæʃɪɹ stʊd ðɛɹ, wɛɹɪŋ ə bɝnɪʃt bɹɛstpleɪt wɪθaʊt ðə mætʃɪŋ hɛlmət, hænz klæsp bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk əz i lʊkt aʊt ðə wɪndoʊ. hi wɔɹ wʌn ə ðoʊz oʊvɝli lɑɹdʒ sɑldəiən mʌstæʃɪz ən ə pɛɹ ʌv ɑləv tʃɹaʊzɝz stʌft ɪndə ni-haɪ buts.

He reached the top floor and followed Bashere's soldiers into a room to the right. Bashere stood there, wearing a burnished breastplate without the matching helmet, hands clasped behind his back as he looked out the window. He wore one of those overly large Saldaean mustaches and a pair of olive trousers stuffed into knee-high boots.

bæʃɪɹ tɝn ən stɑɹɾəd. "laɪt! jə lʊk laɪk dɛθ ɪtsɛlf, mæn!" hi tɝn tə ðə soʊlʒɝz.

Bashere turned and started. "Light! You look like death itself, man!" He turned to the soldiers.

"hi ʃəd bi ɪn ðə hilɝz tɛnt! sʌmwʌn fɛtʃ ən æʃəmən!"

"He should be in the Healer's tent! Someone fetch an Asha'man!"

'ɪm ɔl ɹaɪt," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd, fɔɹsɪŋ stɝnnəs ɪndə hɪz vɔɪs. "aɪ lʊk wɝs ðən aɪ fil, aɪd wɔɹənt."

'I'm all right," Ituralde said, forcing sternness into his voice. "I look worse than I feel, I'd warrant."

ðə soʊlʒɝz hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, lʊkɪŋ tə bæʃɪɹ. "wɛl," ðə mæn sɛd, "æt list ɡɛɾ ɪm ə tʃɛɹ ən sʌmθɪŋ tə waɪp ɪz feɪs wɪð. jə pʊɹ fɛloʊ; wi ʃʊɾə bɪn hɪɹ deɪz əɡoʊ."

The soldiers hesitated, looking to Bashere. "Well," the man said, "at least get him a chair and something to wipe his face with. You poor fellow; we should have been here days ago."

aʊtsaɪd, ɪɾɝɑldi kəd hɪɹ ðə saʊnz ə dɪstən bæɾəl. bæʃɪɹ hæd tʃoʊzən ə tɔl bɪldɪŋ, wʌn fɹəm wɪtʃ i kəd sɝveɪ ðə faɪɾɪŋ. ðə soʊlʒɝz bɹɔɾ ə tʃɛɹ, ən - fəɹ ɔl ɪz wɪʃ tə ʃoʊ ə stʃɹɔŋ feɪs tə ə fɛloʊ dʒɛnɝəl - ɪɾɝɑldi sæt wɪð ə saɪ.

Outside, Ituralde could hear the sounds of distant battle. Bashere had chosen a tall building, one from which he could survey the fighting. The soldiers brought a chair, and - for all his wish to show a strong face to a fellow general - Ituralde sat with a sigh.

hi lʊk daʊn, ən wɑz əmeɪz tə si haʊ dɝɾi hɪz hænz wɝ əz ðoʊ hid bɪn klinɪŋ ə hɑɹθ. noʊ daʊɾ ɪz feɪs wɑz sʊt-kʌvɝd, stʃɹikt wɪð swɛt, ən ðəɹ wɑz laɪkli stɪl dʒɹaɪd blʌɾ ɑn ɪt. hɪz kloʊðɪŋ wɑz ɹæɡəd fɹəm ðə blæs ðət hæd dɪstʃɹɔɪd ðə wɔl, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ə heɪstəli bændədʒ kʌɾ ɑn ɪz ɑɹm.

He looked down, and was amazed to see how dirty his hands were as though he'd been cleaning a hearth. No doubt his face was soot-covered, streaked with sweat, and there was likely still dried blood on it. His clothing was ragged from the blast that had destroyed the wall, not to mention a hastily bandaged cut on his arm.

"jɔɹ dɪfɛns ə ðɪs sɪɾi wɑz nʌθɪŋ ʃɔɹɾ ə stʌnɪŋ, lɔɹɾ ɪɾɝɑldi," bæʃɪɹ sɛd. ðəɹ wɑz ə fɔɹmæləɾi tə hɪz toʊn - sɑldɑiə ən ɑɹæd dumən wɝ nɑɾ ɛnəmiz, bʌt tu stʃɹɔŋ neɪʃənz kəd nɑt ʃɛɹ ə bɔɹɾɝ wɪθaʊt pɪɹiədz ʌv ænəmɑsəɾi. "ðə nʌmbɝ ə tʃɹɑləks dɛd kəmpɛɹd tə ðə nʌmbɝ ə mɛn jə hæd . . . ən wɪð ə ɡæp ðət lɑɹdʒ ɪn ðə wɔl . . . lemi seɪ ðəɾ aɪm ɪmpɹɛst." bæʃɪɹz toʊn ɪmplaɪd ðət sətʃ pɹeɪz wɑz nɑɾ izəli ɡɪvən.

"Your defense of this city was nothing short of stunning, Lord Ituralde," Bashere said. There was a formality to his tone - Saldaea and Arad Doman were not enemies, but two strong nations could not share a border without periods of animosity. "The number of Trollocs dead compared to the number of men you had . . . and with a gap that large in the wall . . . Let me say that I'm impressed." Bashere's tone implied that such praise was not easily given.

"wʌɾ ə joʊli?" ɪɾɝɑldi æskt.

"What of Yoeli?" Ituralde asked.

bæʃɪɹz ɪkspɹɛʃən ɡɹu ɡɹɪm. "maɪ mɛn faʊn ə smɔl bæn dɪfɛndɪŋ ɪz kɔɹps. hi daɪd bɹeɪvli, ðoʊ aɪ wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ɪm ɪn kəmæn ən tɔɹkjəmɛn - ə dɪstən kʌzən ə maɪn, ðə pɹəzum liɾɝ ə ðə sɪɾi - lɑkt ɪn ɪz ɹumz, ən əbændənd, wɛɹ ðə tʃɹɑləks cʊɾə ɡɑɾən hɪm."

Bashere's expression grew grim. "My men found a small band defending his corpse. He died bravely, though I was surprised to find him in command and Torkumen - a distant cousin of mine, the presumed leader of the city - locked in his rooms, and abandoned, where the Trollocs could have gotten him."

"joʊli wɑz ə ɡʊd mæn," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd stɪfli. "əmʌŋ ðə bɹeɪvəst aɪv hæd ði ɑnɝ ə noʊɪŋ.

"Yoeli was a good man," Ituralde said stiffly. "Among the bravest I've had the honor of knowing.

hi seɪv maɪ laɪf, bɹɔt maɪ mɛn ɪndə ðə sɪɾi əɡɛns tɔɹkjəmɛnz ɔɹɾɝz. ɪts ə bɝnɪŋ ʃeɪm tə luz hɪm. ə bɝnɪŋ ʃeɪm. wɪθaʊt joʊli, mɛɹədɑn wʊdn stæn ɹaɪt naʊ."

He saved my life, brought my men into the city against Torkumen's orders. It's a burning shame to lose him. A burning shame. Without Yoeli, Maradon wouldn't stand right now."

"ɪt hɑɹdli stænz ɛniweɪ," bæʃɪɹ sɛd sɑmbɝli.

"It hardly stands anyway," Bashere said somberly.

ɪɾɝɑldi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. hiz ʌŋkəl tə ðə kwin - ðɪs sɪɾi ɪz pɹɑbli hɪz hoʊm.

Ituralde hesitated. He's uncle to the Queen - this city is probably his home.

ðə tu lʊkt ət wʌn ənʌðɝ, laɪk oʊld wʊlvz, liɾɝz ə ɹaɪvəl pæks. stɛpɪŋ sɔfli. "aɪm sɑɹi fəɹ jəɹ lɔs," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd.

The two looked at one another, like old wolves, leaders of rival packs. Stepping softly. "I'm sorry for your loss," Ituralde said.

"ðə sɪɾi stænz əz wɛl əz ɪt dʌz," bæʃɪɹ sɛd, "bɪkɔz ə ju. aɪm nɑɾ æŋɡɹi, mæn. aɪm sæɾənd, bʌt nɑɾ æŋɡɹi. ən əl teɪk jəɹ wɝɾ ɑn joʊli. tə bi fɹæŋk, aɪv nɛvɝ laɪk tɔɹkjəmɛn.

"The city stands as well as it does," Bashere said, "because of you. I'm not angry, man. I'm saddened, but not angry. And I'll take your word on Yoeli. To be frank, I've never liked Torkumen.

fəɹ naʊ, aɪv lɛft ɪm ɪn ðə ɹum wɛɹ wi faʊn ɪm - stɪl əlaɪv, θæŋkfəli - ðoʊ əl hɪɹ θʌndɝ fɹəm ðə kwin fəɹ wʌts bɪn dʌn tə hɪm. ʃiz ɔlweɪz bɪn fɑn ə hɪm. bɑ! ʃi nɔɹməli hæz bɛɾɝ dʒʌdʒmənt."

For now, I've left him in the room where we found him - still alive, thankfully - though I'll hear thunder from the Queen for what's been done to him. She's always been fond of him. Bah! She normally has better judgment."

bæʃɪɹ nɑɾəd tə ðə saɪd wən i spoʊk ə tɔɹkjəmɛn, ən - wɪð ə stɑɹt - ɪɾɝɑldi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðɪs bɪldɪŋ. ðɪs wɑz tɔɹku- mɛnz hoʊm, wɛɹ joʊli hæd bɹɔɾ ɪɾɝɑldi ɑn ɪz fɝs deɪ ɪn ðə sɪɾi. ɪt meɪd sɛns tə tʃuz ðɪs bɪldɪŋ əz ə kəmæn poʊst - ɪt wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf tə ðə nɔɹðɝn wɔl tə hæv ə ɡʊd vju ʌv ði aʊtsaɪd, bʌt fɑɹ ɪnʌf əweɪ fɹəm ðə blæs tə hæv sɝvaɪvd, ənlaɪk ðə kaʊnsəl hɔl.

Bashere nodded to the side when he spoke of Torkumen, and - with a start - Ituralde realized that he recognized this building. This was Torku- men's home, where Yoeli had brought Ituralde on his first day in the city. It made sense to choose this building as a command post - it was close enough to the northern wall to have a good view of the outside, but far enough away from the blast to have survived, unlike the Council Hall.

wɛl, ɪt wʊɾə sɝv tɔɹkjəmɛn ɹaɪɾ ɪf ðə tʃɹɑləks hæd ɡɑɾən hɪm. ɪɾɝɑldi sæt bæk, kloʊzɪŋ ɪz aɪz, əz bæʃɪɹ kənsʌltəd wɪð ɪz ɔfəsɝz. bæʃɪɹ wɑz keɪpəbəl, ðət mʌtʃ wɑz ɑbviəs. vɛɹi kwɪkli hid swɛp ðə sɪɾi klin; wʌns ðə tʃɹɑləks hæd ɹilaɪz ðət ðəɹ wɑz ə lɑɹdʒɝ fɔɹs tə faɪt, ðeɪɾ əbændən ðə sɪɾi. ɪɾɝɑldi kəd fil pɹaɪd ðæt, ɪn pɑɹt, hɪz tənæsɪɾi wɑz wʌt hæd meɪɾ əm soʊ kwɪk tə ɹʌn.

Well, it would have served Torkumen right if the Trollocs had gotten him. Ituralde sat back, closing his eyes, as Bashere consulted with his officers. Bashere was capable, that much was obvious. Very quickly he'd swept the city clean; once the Trollocs had realized that there was a larger force to fight, they'd abandoned the city. Ituralde could feel pride that, in part, his tenacity was what had made them so quick to run.

ɪɾɝɑldi kəntɪnjud tə lɪsən. moʊst ə bæʃɪɹz tʃɹups hæd kʌm ɪndə ðə sɪɾi θɹu ɡeɪtweɪz, æftɝ sɛndɪŋ ɪn wʌn skaʊt tə faɪn seɪf pleɪsəz tə meɪk ðɛm. faɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə stʃɹits wʊdnt wɝk fəɹ ɪm əz ɪt hæɾ ɪɾɝɑldi; ðə hɪt-ænd-haɪd tæktɪk hæd bɪn dɪvoʊɾəd tə duɪŋ əz mʌtʃ dæmədʒ əz pɑsəbəl bɪfɔɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ kɪld. ɪt wɑz ə luzɪŋ tæktɪk.

Ituralde continued to listen. Most of Bashere's troops had come into the city through gateways, after sending in one scout to find safe places to make them. Fighting in the streets wouldn't work for him as it had Ituralde; the hit-and-hide tactic had been devoted to doing as much damage as possible before getting killed. It was a losing tactic.

ðə tʃɹɑləks hæd pʊl bæk ɪndə ðə fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃənz, bʌt ðeɪ wʊdn steɪ ðəɹ fəɹ lɔŋ. əz i sæt wɪð kloʊzd aɪz, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə steɪ əweɪk, ɪɾɝɑldi hɝd bæʃɪɹ ən ɪz kæptənz kʌm tə ðə seɪm daɪɹ kənkluʒən ɪɾɝɑldi hæd. mɛɹədɑn wɑz lɔst. ðə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn wəd weɪt fəɹ naɪt, ðən swɔɹm ɪn əɡɛn.

The Trollocs had pulled back into the fortifications, but they wouldn't stay there for long. As he sat with closed eyes, struggling to stay awake, Ituralde heard Bashere and his captains come to the same dire conclusion Ituralde had. Maradon was lost. The Shadowspawn would wait for night, then swarm in again.

æftɝ ɔl ðɪs, ðeɪd dʒʌs fli? æftɝ joʊli hæd daɪd hoʊldɪŋ ðə sɪɾi? æftɝ ɹədʒɑbi hæd bɪn kɪl baɪ ə dʒɹæɡkɝ? æftɝ æŋkɑɹ ən ɹɑsɪn hæd fɔlən dʊɹɪŋ ðə skɝmɪʃɪz ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz? æftɝ ɔl ðə blʌdʃɛd, ðeɪ faɪnəli sɔ hɛlp ɝaɪv, oʊnli tə hæv ɪt pɹuv ɪnsəfɪʃənt?

After all this, they'd just flee? After Yoeli had died holding the city? After Rajabi had been killed by a Draghkar? After Ankaer and Rossin had fallen during the skirmishes inside the walls? After all the bloodshed, they finally saw help arrive, only to have it prove insufficient?

"pɝhæps wi kəd pʊʃ əm ɔf ðət hɪltɑp," wʌn ə bæʃɪɹz mɛn sɛd. "klin aʊt ðə fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃənz."

"Perhaps we could push them off that hilltop," one of Bashere's men said. "Clean out the fortifications."

hi dɪdn saʊn vɛɹi ɑptəmɪstɪk.

He didn't sound very optimistic.

"sʌn," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd, fɔɹsɪŋ ɪz aɪz oʊpən, "aɪ hɛl ðət hɪl fəɹ wiks əɡɛnst ə supɪɹiɝ fɔɹs.

"Son," Ituralde said, forcing his eyes open, "I held that hill for weeks against a superior force.

jəɹ pipəl bɪlt ɪɾ ʌp wɛl, ən ðə pɹɑbləm wɪð wɛl-bɪl fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃənz ɪz ðət jəɹ ɛnəmi kən tɝn əm əɡɛns ju. jəl luz mɛn ətækɪŋ ðɛɹ. ə lɑɾ ə ðɛm."

Your people built it up well, and the problem with well-built fortifications is that your enemy can turn them against you. You'll lose men attacking there. A lot of them."

ðə ɹum fɛl saɪlənt. wi liv, ðɛn," bæʃɪɹ sɛd. "nf, wɪl nid ɡeɪtweɪz."

The room fell silent. We leave, then," Bashere said. "Naeff, we'll need gateways."

'jɛs, lɔɹd bæʃɪɹ." skwɛɹ-feɪst ən lin ə bɪld, ðə mæn wɔɹ ðə blæk koʊɾ ən ðə dʒɹæɡən pɪn ʌv ən æʃəmən.

'Yes, Lord Bashere." Square-faced and lean of build, the man wore the black coat and the Dragon pin of an Asha'man.

məleɪn, ɡæðɝ ðə kævəlɹi ən ɔɹɡənaɪz əm aʊtsaɪd; meɪk ɪt lʊk əz ɪf wɝ gɑnə tʃɹaɪ ən əsɔlt əɡɛns ðɛɹ fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃənz. ðæɾəl kip əm iɡɝ ən weɪɾɪŋ. wɪl ɪvækjəeɪt ðə wundəd, ðən wɪl əv ðə kævəlɹi tʃɑɹdʒ ɪn ði ʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən ɪndə - "

Malain, gather the cavalry and organize them outside; make it look as if we're going to try an assault against their fortifications. That'll keep them eager and waiting. We'll evacuate the wounded, then we'll have the cavalry charge in the other direction into - "

"baɪ ðə laɪɾ ən maɪ hoʊp fəɹ ɹibɝθ!" ə vɔɪs sʌɾənli ɪkskleɪmd.

"By the Light and my hope for rebirth!" a voice suddenly exclaimed.

ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə ɹum tɝn ɪn ʃɑk; ðət wɑzn ðə sɔɹɾ ʌv oʊθ jə hɝɾ ɛvɹi deɪ.

Everyone in the room turned in shock; that wasn't the sort of oath you heard every day.

ə jʌŋ soʊlʒɝ stʊd baɪ ðə wɪndoʊ, lʊkɪŋ aʊt wɪð ə lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs. bæʃɪɹ kɝst, ən hɝid tə ðə wɪndoʊ, ði ʌðɝz kɹaʊɾɪŋ ɝaʊnd, sɛvɹəl teɪkɪŋ aʊt lʊkɪŋ ɡlæsəz.

A young soldier stood by the window, looking out with a looking glass. Bashere cursed, and hurried to the window, the others crowding around, several taking out looking glasses.

wʌt naʊ? ɪɾɝɑldi θɔt, stændɪŋ dɪspaɪɾ ɪz fətiɡ ən hɝiɪŋ oʊvɝ. wʌt kəd ðeɪ pɑsəbli hæv kʌm ʌp wɪð? mɔɹ dʒɹæɡkɝ? dɑɹkhaʊnz?

What now? Ituralde thought, standing despite his fatigue and hurrying over. What could they possibly have come up with? More Draghkar? Darkhounds?

hi pɪɹɾ aʊt ðə wɪndoʊ, ən sʌmwʌn hændəɾ ɪm ə lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs. hi ɹeɪzd ɪt, ən əz hid ɡɛst, ðə bɪldɪŋ wɑz ɑn ɪnʌf ʌv ə ɹaɪz tə ' lʊk aʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə sɪɾi wɔl ən ɑntu ðə kɪlɪŋ fild aʊtsaɪɾ ən ðə bɪɑnd. ðə taʊɝ pəzɪʃənz ɑn ðə kɹɛst ə ðə hɪl wɝ klʌstɝd wɪð ɹɑ-' vɛnz.

He peered out the window, and someone handed him a looking glass. He raised it, and as he'd guessed, the building was on enough of a rise to ' look out over the city wall and onto the killing field outside and the beyond. The tower positions on the crest of the hill were clustered with ra-' vens.

θɹu ðə ɡlæs, hi kəd si tʃɹɑləks klɑɡɪŋ ðə haɪts, hoʊldɪŋ ði ʌpɝ kæmp, ðə taʊɝz, ən ðə bəlwɹks ðɛɹ.

Through the glass, he could see Trollocs clogging the heights, holding the upper camp, the towers, and the bulwarks there.

bɪɑn ðə hɪl, sɝdʒɪŋ daʊn θɹu ðə pæs, wɑz ən ɑsəm fɔɹs ə tʃɹɑləks, mɛni taɪmz ðə nʌmbɝ ðət hæɾ əsɔltɪd mɛɹədɑn. ðə weɪv ə mɑnstɝz sim tə kəntɪnju ɑn fɝɛvɝ, "wi nid tə ɡoʊ," bæʃɪɹ sɛd, loʊɝɪŋ ɪz lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs. "ɪmiɾiətli."

Beyond the hill, surging down through the pass, was an awesome force of Trollocs, many times the number that had assaulted Maradon. The wave of monsters seemed to continue on forever, "We need to go," Bashere said, lowering his looking glass. "Immediately."

"laɪt!" ɪɾɝɑldi wɪspɝd. "ɪf ðət fɔɹs ɡɛts pæst ʌs, ðəɹ woʊn bi ɛniθɪŋ ɪn sɑldɑiə, ændɝ, əɹ ɑɹæd dumən ðət kən stɑp ɪt. pliz tɛl mi ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən meɪd pis wɪð ðə sintʃæn, əz i pɹɑməst?"

"Light!" Ituralde whispered. "If that force gets past us, there won't be anything in Saldaea, Andor, or Arad Doman that can stop it. Please tell me the Lord Dragon made peace with the Seanchan, as he promised?"

"ɪn ðæt," ə kwaɪət vɔɪs sɛd fɹəm bɪhaɪnd, "æz ɪn soʊ mɛni ʌðɝ θɪŋz, aɪ hæv feɪld."

"In that," a quiet voice said from behind, "as in so many other things, I have failed."

ɪɾɝɑldi spʌn, loʊɝɪŋ ɪz lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs. ə tɔl mæn wɪð ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ stɛpt ɪndə ðə ɹum - ə mæn hum ɪɾɝɑldi fɛlt i hæd nɛvɝ mɛt bɪfɔɹ, dɪspaɪt ðə fəmɪljɝ fitʃɝz.

Ituralde spun, lowering his looking glass. A tall man with reddish hair stepped into the room - a man whom Ituralde felt he had never met before, despite the familiar features.

ɹænd ælθɹ hæd tʃeɪnʒd.

Rand al'Thor had changed.

ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn hæd ðət seɪm sɛlf-kɑnfəɾəns, ðət seɪm stʃɹeɪt bæk, ðət seɪm æɾətud ɪkspɛktɪŋ oʊbiɾiəns. ən jɛt, ət ðə seɪm taɪm, ɛvɹiθɪŋ sim dɪfɹənt. ðə weɪ hi stʊd, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ feɪnli səspɪʃəs. ðə weɪ hi stʌɾid ɪɾɝɑldi wɪð kənsɝn.

The Dragon Reborn had that same self-confidence, that same straight back, that same attitude expecting obedience. And yet, at the same time, everything seemed different. The way he stood, no longer faintly suspicious. The way he studied Ituralde with concern.

ðoʊz aɪz, koʊld ən ɪmoʊʃənləs, hæd wʌns kənvɪnst ɪɾɝɑldi tə fɑloʊ ðɪs mæn. ðoʊz aɪz hæd tʃeɪnʒd, tu. ɪɾɝɑldi hæd nɑt noʊɾəd wɪzdəm ɪn əm bɪfɔɹ.

Those eyes, cold and emotionless, had once convinced Ituralde to follow this man. Those eyes had changed, too. Ituralde had not noted wisdom in them before.

doʊn bi ə θɪkhɛɾɪd ful, ɪɾɝɑldi θɔt, jə kæn tɛl ɪf ə mæn ɪz waɪz baɪ lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪz aɪz.

Don't be a thickheaded fool, Ituralde thought, you can't tell if a man is wise by looking at his eyes.

ən jɛɾ i kʊd.

And yet he could.

"ɹoʊɾəl ɪɾɝɑldi," ælθɹ sɛd, stɛpɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ ən leɪɪŋ ə hæn ɑn ɪɾɝɑldi ɛs ɑɹm. "aɪ lɛf jə ən jəɹ mɛn stʃɹændəɾ ən oʊvɝwɛlmd. pliz fɝɡɪv mi."

"Rodel Ituralde," al'Thor said, stepping forward and laying a hand on Ituralde s arm. "I left you and your men stranded and overwhelmed. Please forgive me."

"aɪ meɪd ðɪs tʃɔɪs maɪsɛlf," ɪɾɝɑldi sɛd. ɑdli, hi fɛlt lɛs taɪɝd ðən i hæd dʒʌs moʊməns əɡoʊ.

"I made this choice myself," Ituralde said. Oddly, he felt less tired than he had just moments ago.

"aɪ hæv ɪnspɛktɪd jəɹ mɛn," ælθɹ sɛd. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ soʊ fju lɛft, ən ðeɪ ɑɹ bɹoʊkən ən bæɾɝd. haʊ dɪd jə hoʊl ðɪs sɪɾi? wʌt juv dʌn ɪz ə mɪɹəkəl."

"I have inspected your men," al'Thor said. "There are so few left, and they are broken and battered. How did you hold this city? What you have done is a miracle."

"aɪ də wʌt nidz tə bi dʌn."

"I do what needs to be done."

"ju mʌst əv lɔs mɛni fɹɛnz."

"You must have lost many friends."

"aɪ. . . jɛs." wʌɾ ʌðɝ ænsɝ wɑz ðɛɹ? tə dɪsmɪs ɪɾ əz nʌθɪŋ wəd bi tə dɪsɑnɝ ðɛm.

"I. . . Yes." What other answer was there? To dismiss it as nothing would be to dishonor them.

"weɪkeɪɾə fɛl tədeɪ. ɹədʒɑbi . . . wɛl, ə dʒɹæ-kɑɹ ɡɑt hɪm. æŋkɑɹ. hi læstəɾ əntɪl ðɪs æftɝnun.

"Wakeda fell today. Rajabi . . . well, a Dragh-kar got him. Ankaer. He lasted until this afternoon.

nɛvɝ dɪd faɪn aʊt waɪ ðət tʃɹʌmpəɾɝ saʊndəɾ ɝli. ɹɑsɪn wɑz lʊkɪŋ ɪndə ɪt. hiz dɛd, tu."

Never did find out why that trumpeter sounded early. Rossin was looking into it. He's dead, too."

"wi nid tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi," bæʃɪɹ sɛd, hɪz vɔɪs ɝdʒənt. "aɪm sɑɹi, mæn. mɛɹədɑn ɪz lɔst."

"We need to get out of the city," Bashere said, his voice urgent. "I'm sorry, man. Maradon is lost."

"noʊ," ælθɹ sɛd sɔfli. "ðə ʃædoʊ wɪl nɑɾ əv ðɪs sɪɾi. nɑɾ æftɝ wʌt ðiz mɛn dɪd tə hoʊld ɪt. əl nɑɾ əlaʊ ɪt."

"No," al'Thor said softly. "The Shadow will not have this city. Not after what these men did to hold it. I will not allow it."

"æn ɑnɝəbəl sɛntəmənt," bæʃɪɹ sɛd, "bʌt wi doʊnt . . ." hi tʃɹeɪld ɔf əz ælθɹ lʊkt ət hɪm.

"An honorable sentiment," Bashere said, "but we don't . . ." He trailed off as al'Thor looked at him.

ðoʊz aɪz. soʊ ɪntɛns. ðeɪ simd ɔlmoʊst əlaɪt. "ðeɪ wɪl nɑt teɪk ðɪs sɪɾi, bæʃɪɹ,"

Those eyes. So intense. They seemed almost alight. "They will not take this city, Bashere,"

ælθɹ sɛd, ən ɛdʒ ʌv æŋɡɝ ɛntɝɪŋ ɪz kwaɪət vɔɪs. hi weɪv tə ðə saɪd, ən ə ɡeɪtweɪ splɪt ði ɛɹ. ðə saʊnz ə dʒɹʌmz ən tʃɹɑləks jɛlɪŋ ɡɹu kloʊsɝ, sʌɾənli. "aɪm taɪɝɾ ə lɛɾɪŋ ɪm hɝt maɪ pipəl. pʊl jəɹ soʊlʒɝz bæk."

al'Thor said, an edge of anger entering his quiet voice. He waved to the side, and a gateway split the air. The sounds of drums and Trollocs yelling grew closer, suddenly. "I'm tired of letting him hurt my people. Pull your soldiers back."

wɪð ðæt, ælθɹ stɛp θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ. ə pɛɹ ʌv il meɪɾənz hɝiɾ ɪndə ðə ɹum, ən i lɛf ðə ɡeɪtweɪ oʊpən lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ əm tə lip θɹu bɪhaɪn hɪm. ðən i lɛɾ ɪt vænɪʃ.

With that, al'Thor stepped through the gateway. A pair of Aiel Maidens hurried into the room, and he left the gateway open long enough for them to leap through behind him. Then he let it vanish.

bæʃɪɹ lʊk stʌnd, maʊθ hæf-oʊpən. "kɝs ðət mæn!" hi faɪnəli sɛd, tɝnɪŋ tə ðə wɪndoʊ əɡɛn. "aɪ θɔɾ i wɑzn gɑnə də ðɪs sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ!"

Bashere looked stunned, mouth half-open. "Curse that man!" he finally said, turning to the window again. "I thought he wasn't going to do this sort of thing any longer!"

ɪɾɝɑldi dʒɔɪn bæʃɪɹ, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs, lʊkɪŋ aʊt θɹu ði ɪnɔɹməs ɡæp ɪn ðə wɔl. aʊtsaɪd, ælθɹ wɑz kɹɔsɪŋ ðə tʃɹæmpəld ɡɹaʊnd, wɛɹɪŋ ɪz bɹaʊn kloʊk ən fɑloʊd baɪ ðə tu meɪɾənz.

Ituralde joined Bashere, raising his looking glass, looking out through the enormous gap in the wall. Outside, al'Thor was crossing the trampled ground, wearing his brown cloak and followed by the two Maidens.

ɪɾɝɑldi θɔɾ i kəd hɪɹ ðə saʊnz ə ðə haʊlɪŋ tʃɹɑləks. ðɛɹ dʒɹʌmz bit. ðeɪ sɔ θɹi pipəl əloʊn.

Ituralde thought he could hear the sounds of the howling Trollocs. Their drums beat. They saw three people alone.

ðə tʃɹɑləks sɝdʒ fɔɹwɝd, tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hʌnʒɹədz, θaʊzənz. ɪɾɝɑldi ɡæspt.

The Trollocs surged forward, charging across the ground. Hundreds, Thousands. Ituralde gasped.

bæʃɪɹ ʌɾɝd ə kwaɪət pɹɛɹ.

Bashere uttered a quiet prayer.

ælθɹ ɹeɪzd wʌn hænd, ðən θɹʌst ɪt - pɑm fɔɹwɝd - təwɔɹd ðə taɪɾ ə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn.

Al'Thor raised one hand, then thrust it - palm forward - toward the tide of Shadowspawn.

ən ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd tə daɪ.

And they started to die.

ɪt bɪɡæn wɪð weɪvz ə faɪɝ, mʌtʃ laɪk ðə wʌnz æʃəmən juzd. oʊnli ðiz wɝ fɑɹ lɑɹdʒɝ. ðə fleɪmz bɝn tɛɹəbəl swɑθs ə dɛθ θɹu ðə tʃɹɑləks. ðeɪ fɑloʊd ðə kɔɹs ə ðə lænd, sipɪŋ ʌp ðə hɪl ən daʊn ɪndə ðə tʃɹɛntʃɪz, fɪlɪŋ əm wɪð waɪt-hɑt faɪɝ, sɪɹɪŋ ən dɪstʃɹɔɪɪŋ.

It began with waves of fire, much like the ones Asha'man used. Only these were far larger. The flames burned terrible swaths of death through the Trollocs. They followed the course of the land, seeping up the hill and down into the trenches, filling them with white-hot fire, searing and destroying.

klaʊdz ə dʒɹæɡkɝ spʌn ɪn ðə skaɪ, daɪvɪŋ fəɹ ælθɹ. ði ɛɹ əbʌv ɪm tɝn blu, ən ʃɑɹdz ʌv aɪs ɪksploʊɾəd aʊtwɝd, spɹeɪɪŋ ði ɛɹ laɪk æɹoʊz fɹəm ðə baʊz ʌv ən ɪntaɪɝ bænɝ ʌv ɑɹtʃɝz.

Clouds of Draghkar spun in the sky, diving for al'Thor. The air above him turned blue, and shards of ice exploded outward, spraying the air like arrows from the bows of an entire banner of archers.

ðə bists ʃɹik ðɛɹ ɪnhjumən æɡəni, kɑɹkəsɪz tʌmbəlɪŋ tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

The beasts shrieked their inhuman agony, carcasses tumbling to the ground.

laɪɾ ən paʊɝ ɪksploʊɾəd fɹəm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. hi wɑz laɪk ən ɪntaɪɝ ɑɹmi ʌv tʃænlɝz.

Light and Power exploded from the Dragon Reborn. He was like an entire army of channelers.

θaʊzənz ə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn daɪd. dɛθɡeɪts spɹæŋ ʌp, stʃɹaɪkɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹaʊnd, kɪlɪŋ hʌnʒɹədz.

Thousands of Shadowspawn died. Deathgates sprang up, striking across the ground, killing hundreds.

ði æʃəmən nf - stændɪŋ bɪsaɪd bæʃɪɹ - ɡæspt. "aɪv nɛvɝ sin soʊ mɛni wivz ət wʌns," hi wɪspɝd. "aɪ kæn tʃɹæk əm ɔl. hiz ə stɔɹm. ə stɔɹm ə laɪɾ ən stʃɹimz ə paʊɝ!"

The Asha'man Naeff - standing beside Bashere - gasped. "I've never seen so many weaves at once," he whispered. "I can't track them all. He's a storm. A storm of Light and streams of Power!"

klaʊdz bɪɡæn tə fɔɹm ən swɝl əbʌv ðə sɪɾi. ðə wɪn pɪkt ʌp, haʊlɪŋ, ən laɪtnɪŋ stʃɹʌk fɹəm əbʌv. blæsts ə θʌndɝ oʊvɝpaʊɝd ðə saʊnz ə dʒɹʌmz əz tʃɹɑləks tʃɹaɪɾ ɪn veɪn tə ɡɛt tə ælθɹ, klaɪmɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə bɝnɪŋ kɑɹkəsɪz ə ðɛɹ bɹɛðɹən. ðə swɝlɪŋ waɪt klaʊdz kɹæʃt ɪndə ðə blæk, bɔɪlɪŋ tɛmpəst, ɪntɝmɪŋɡəlɪŋ. wɪn spʌn ɝaʊn ælθɹ, wɪpɪŋ əɾ ɪz kloʊk.

Clouds began to form and swirl above the city. The wind picked up, howling, and lightning struck from above. Blasts of thunder overpowered the sounds of drums as Trollocs tried in vain to get to al'Thor, climbing over the burning carcasses of their brethren. The swirling white clouds crashed into the black, boiling tempest, intermingling. Wind spun around al'Thor, whipping at his cloak.

ðə mæn hɪmsɛlf sim tə bi ɡloʊɪŋ. wɑz ɪt ðə ɹəflɛkʃən ə ðə swɑθs ə faɪɝ, əɹ pɝhæps ðə laɪtnɪŋ blæsts? ælθɹ sim bɹaɪɾɝ ðən əm ɔl, hɪz hæn əpɹeɪzd əɡɛns ðə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn.

The man himself seemed to be glowing. Was it the reflection of the swaths of fire, or perhaps the lightning blasts? Al'Thor seemed brighter than them all, his hand upraised against the Shadowspawn.

hɪz meɪɾənz hʌntʃt nɪɹ ðə ɡɹaʊn ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɪm, aɪz fɔɹwɝd, ʃoʊldɝz sɛɾ əɡɛns ðə ɡɹeɪt wɪnd.

His Maidens hunched near the ground on either side of him, eyes forward, shoulders set against the great wind.

klaʊdz spɪnɪŋ əbaʊt wʌn ənʌðɝ meɪd fʌnəlz ɪndə ðə mæsəz ə tʃɹɑləks, swipɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə tɑp ə ðə hɪl, teɪkɪŋ ʌp ðə kɹitʃɝz ɪndə ði ɛɹ. ɡɹeɪt wɔɾɝspaʊts ɹoʊz bɪhaɪnd, meɪɾ ə flɛʃ ən faɪɝ. ðə bists ɹeɪn daʊn, fɔlɪŋ əpɑn ði ʌðɝz. ɪɾɝɑldi wɑtʃt wɪð ɑ, ðə hɛɹ ɑn ɪz ɑɹmz ən hɛd ɹaɪzɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz ən ɛnɝdʒi tə ðə vɛɹi ɛɹ ɪtsɛlf.

Clouds spinning about one another made funnels into the masses of Trollocs, sweeping across the top of the hill, taking up the creatures into the air. Great waterspouts rose behind, made of flesh and fire. The beasts rained down, falling upon the others. Ituralde watched with awe, the hair on his arms and head rising. There was an energy to the very air itself.

ə skɹim keɪm fɹəm nɪɹbaɪ. wɪðɪn ðə bɪldɪŋ, ɪn wʌn ə ðə nɪɹbaɪ ɹumz. ɪɾɝɑldi dɪd nɑt tɝn əweɪ fɹəm ðə wɪndoʊ. hi hæd tə wɑtʃ ðɪs bjuɾəfəl, tɛɹəbəl moʊmən ə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ən paʊɝ.

A scream came from nearby. Within the building, in one of the nearby rooms. Ituralde did not turn away from the window. He had to watch this beautiful, terrible moment of destruction and Power.

weɪvz ə tʃɹɑləks bɹoʊk, ðə dʒɹʌmz fɔltɝɪŋ. ɪntaɪɝ lidʒənz ə ðɛm tɝn ən flɛd, stʌmbəlɪŋ ʌp ðə hɪlsaɪɾ ən oʊvɝ wʌn ənʌðɝ, fliɪŋ bæk təwɔɹd ðə blaɪt. səm ɹɪmeɪn fɝm - tu æŋɡɹi, tu ɪntɪmɪdeɪɾɪd baɪ ðoʊz dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ðɛm, əɹ tu stupəd tə fli. ðə tɛmpəst ə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən sim tə kʌm tə ə pik, flæʃɪz ə laɪt blæstɪŋ daʊn ɪn taɪm wɪð haʊlɪŋ wɪnd, θɹʌmɪŋ weɪvz ə bɝnɪŋ fleɪm, tɪŋkəlɪŋ ʃɑɹdz ʌv aɪs.

Waves of Trollocs broke, the drums faltering. Entire legions of them turned and fled, stumbling up the hillside and over one another, fleeing back toward the Blight. Some remained firm - too angry, too intimidated by those driving them, or too stupid to flee. The tempest of destruction seemed to come to a peak, flashes of light blasting down in time with howling wind, thrumming waves of burning flame, tinkling shards of ice.

ɪt wɑz ə mæstɝwɝk. ə tɛɹəbəl, dɪstʃɹʌktɪv, wʌndɝfəl mæstɝwɝk. ælθɹ lɪftəɾ ɪz hæn təwɔɹd ðə skaɪ. ðə wɪnz ɡɹu fæstɝ, ðə laɪtnɪŋ stʃɹaɪks lɑɹdʒɝ, ðə faɪɝz hɑɾɝ. tʃɹɑləks skɹimd, moʊnd, haʊld. ɪɾɝɑldi faʊn hɪmsɛlf tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ.

It was a masterwork. A terrible, destructive, wonderful masterwork. Al'Thor lifted his hand toward the sky. The winds grew faster, the lightning strikes larger, the fires hotter. Trollocs screamed, moaned, howled. Ituralde found himself trembling.

ælθɹ kloʊzd ɪz hæn ɪndə ə fɪst, ən ɪɾ ɔl ɛndəd.

Al'Thor closed his hand into a fist, and it all ended.

ðə læst ə ðə wɪnd-siz tʃɹɑləks dʒɹɑp fɹəm ðə skaɪ laɪk livz əbændən baɪ ə pæsɪŋ bɹiz. ɛvɹiθɪŋ fɛl saɪlənt. ðə fleɪmz daɪd, ðə blæk ən waɪt klaʊdz klɪɹɾ ən oʊpən tə ə blu skaɪ.

The last of the wind-seized Trollocs dropped from the sky like leaves abandoned by a passing breeze. Everything fell silent. The flames died, the black and white clouds cleared and opened to a blue sky.

ælθɹ loʊɝɾ ɪz hænd. ðə fil bɪfɔɹ ɪm wɑz paɪld wɪð kɑɹkəsɪz ətɑp kɑɹkəsɪz. tɛnz ə θaʊzənz ə dɛd tʃɹɑləks smoʊldɝɪŋ. dɝɛkli bɪfɔɹ ælθɹ, ə paɪl ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz waɪd fɔɹmd ə ɹɪdʒ faɪv fit tɔl ə maʊn ə dɛd ðət hæd nɪɹli ɹitʃt hɪm.

Al'Thor lowered his hand. The field before him was piled with carcasses atop carcasses. Tens of thousands of dead Trollocs smoldering. Directly before al'Thor, a pile a hundred paces wide formed a ridge five feet tall a mound of dead that had nearly reached him.

haʊ lɔŋ hæɾ ɪt teɪkən? ɪɾɝɑldi faʊn ðəɾ i kəd nɑt ɡeɪdʒ ðə taɪm, ðoʊ lʊkɪŋ ət ðə sʌn, ət list ən aʊɝ hæd pæst. pɝhæps mɔɹ. ɪt hæd sim laɪk sɛkənz.

How long had it taken? Ituralde found that he could not gauge the time, though looking at the sun, at least an hour had passed. Perhaps more. It had seemed like seconds.

ælθɹ tɝn tə wɔk əweɪ. ðə meɪɾənz ɹoʊz ɑn ʃeɪki fit, stʌmbəlɪŋ æftɝ hɪm.

Al'Thor turned to walk away. The Maidens rose on shaky feet, stumbling after him.

"wʌt wɑz ðət skɹim?" nf æskt. "ðə wʌn nɪɹbaɪ, ɪn ðə bɪldɪŋ. dɪd jə hɪɹ ɪt?"

"What was that scream?" Naeff asked. "The one nearby, in the building. Did you hear it?"

ɪɾɝɑldi fɹaʊnd. wʌt hæd ðət bɪn? hi kɹɔs ðə ɹum, ði ʌðɝz - ɪnkluɾɪŋ sɛvɹəl ə bæʃɪɹz ɔfəsɝz - fɑloʊɪŋ. mɛni ʌðɝz steɪɾ ɪn ðə ɹum, haʊɛvɝ, stɛɹɪŋ aʊɾ ət ðə fil ðət hæd bɪn klɛnz baɪ aɪs ən baɪ faɪɝ. ɪt wɑz ɑd, bʌɾ ɪɾɝɑldi hædn bɪn eɪbəl tə spɑɾ ə sɪŋɡəl fɔlən taʊɝ ətɑp ðə hɪl. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ælθɹz ətæks hæd sʌmhaʊ əfɛktəɾ oʊnli ðə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn. kəɾ ə mæn ɹɪli bi ðət pɹɪsaɪs?

Ituralde frowned. What had that been? He crossed the room, the others - including several of Bashere's officers - following. Many others stayed in the room, however, staring out at the field that had been cleansed by ice and by fire. It was odd, but Ituralde hadn't been able to spot a single fallen tower atop the hill. It was as if al'Thor's attacks had somehow affected only the Shadowspawn. Could a man really be that precise?

ðə hɔlweɪ aʊtsaɪd wɑz ɛmpti, bʌɾ ɪɾɝɑldi hæɾ ə səspɪʃən naʊ ʌv wɛɹ ðə skɹim hæd kʌm fɹʌm. hi wɔk tə lɔɹd tɔɹkjəmɛnz dɔɹ; bæʃɪɹ ənlɑkt ɪt, ən ðeɪ wɛn ɪnsaɪd.

The hallway outside was empty, but Ituralde had a suspicion now of where the scream had come from. He walked to Lord Torkumen's door; Bashere unlocked it, and they went inside.

ɪt simd ɛmpti. ɪɾɝɑldi fɛlt ə spaɪk ə fɪɹ. hæd ðə mæn ɪskeɪpt? hi pʊld aʊɾ ɪz sɔɹd.

It seemed empty. Ituralde felt a spike of fear. Had the man escaped? He pulled out his sword.

noʊ. ə fɪɡjɝ wɑz hʌɾəld ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ bɪsaɪd ðə bɛd, faɪn kloʊðɪŋ ɹɪŋkəld, dʌbəlɛt steɪnd wɪð blʌd. ɪɾɝɑldi loʊɝɾ ɪz sɔɹd. lɔɹd tɔɹkjəmɛnz aɪz wɝ ɡɔn. hi əpɪɹd tə hæv pʊɾ əm aʊt wɪð ə ɹaɪɾɪŋ kwɪl; ðə blʌɾid ɪmpləmən leɪ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪsaɪd hɪm.

No. A figure was huddled in the corner beside the bed, fine clothing wrinkled, doublet stained with blood. Ituralde lowered his sword. Lord Torkumen's eyes were gone. He appeared to have put them out with a writing quill; the bloodied implement lay on the ground beside him.

ðə wɪndoʊ wɑz bɹoʊkən. bæʃɪɹ ɡlænst aʊɾ ɪt. "leɪɾi tɔɹkjəmɛn ɪz daʊn ðɛɹ."

The window was broken. Bashere glanced out it. "Lady Torkumen is down there."

"ʃi dʒʌmpt," tɔɹkjəmɛn wɪspɝd, klɔɪŋ əɾ ɪz aɪ sɑkəts, fɪŋɡɝz kʌvɝd wɪð blʌd. hi saʊndəd deɪzd. "ðæt laɪt . . . ðət tɛɹəbəl laɪt: ɪɾɝɑldi ɡlænst ət bæʃɪɹ. "aɪ kænɑt wɑtʃ ɪt,"

"She jumped," Torkumen whispered, clawing at his eye sockets, fingers covered with blood. He sounded dazed. "That light . . . That terrible light: Ituralde glanced at Bashere. "I cannot watch it,"

tɔɹkjəmɛn mʌɾɝd. "aɪ kænɑt! ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, wɛɹ ɪz jəɹ pɹətɛkʃən? wɛɹ ɑɹ jəɹ ɑɹmiz tə ɹɛnd, jəɹ sɔɹdz tə stʃɹaɪk? ðət laɪɾ its ət maɪ maɪnd, laɪk ɹæts fistɪŋ ɑn ə kɔɹps. ɪt bɝnz ət maɪ θɔts. ɪt kɪl mi. ðət laɪt kɪl mi."

Torkumen muttered. "I cannot! Great Lord, where is your protection? Where are your armies to rend, your swords to strike? That Light eats at my mind, like rats feasting on a corpse. It burns at my thoughts. It killed me. That light killed me."

"hiz ɡɔn mæd," bæʃɪɹ sɛd ɡɹɪmli, nilɪŋ daʊn bɪsaɪd ðə mæn. "bɛɾɝ ðən i dɪzɝvd, dʒʌdʒɪŋ baɪ ðoʊz ɹæmbəlɪŋz. laɪt! maɪ oʊn kʌzən ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd. ən ɪn kəntʃɹoʊl ə ðə sɪɾi!"

"He's gone mad," Bashere said grimly, kneeling down beside the man. "Better than he deserved, judging by those ramblings. Light! My own cousin a Darkfriend. And in control of the city!"

"wʌɾ ɪz i tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt?" wʌn ə bæʃɪɹz mɛn sɛd. "ə laɪt? ʃʊɹli hi kʊdn əv sin ðə bæɾəl. nʌn ə ðiz wɪndoʊz feɪs ðə ɹaɪt weɪ."

"What is he talking about?" one of Bashere's men said. "A light? Surely he couldn't have seen the battle. None of these windows face the right way."

"aɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ i wɑz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə bæɾəl, voʊɡəlɝ," bæʃɪɹ sɛd. "kʌm ɑn. aɪ səspɛk ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɪz gɑnə bi taɪɝd. aɪ wɑnə si ðət hiz kɛɹd fɔɹ."

"I'm not sure he was talking about the battle, Vogeler," Bashere said. "Come on. I suspect the Lord Dragon is going to be tired. I want to see that he's cared for."

ðɪs ɪz ɪt, mɪn θɔt, tæpɪŋ ðə peɪdʒ. ʃi sæɾ ɑn əɹ wɪndaʊsəl ɪn ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ, ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ ðə bɹiz. tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə θɪŋk ə ɹænd. hi wɑzn hɝt, bʌɾ ɪz ɪmoʊʃənz wɝ soʊ stʃɹɔŋ. æŋɡɝ. ʃid hoʊpt i wʊdn bi soʊ æŋɡɹi ɛvɝ əɡɛn.

This is it, Min thought, tapping the page. She sat on her windowsill in the Stone of Tear, enjoying the breeze. Trying not to think of Rand. He wasn't hurt, but his emotions were so strong. Anger. She'd hoped he wouldn't be so angry ever again.

ʃi ʃʊk ɔf ðə wɝiɪŋ; ʃi hæd wɝk tə du. wɑz ʃi fɑloʊɪŋ ðə ɹɔŋ θɹɛd? wɑz ʃi ɪntɝpɹɛɾɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ weɪ? ʃi ɹɛd ðə laɪn əɡɛn. laɪɾ ɪz hɛl bɪfɔɹ ðə mɔ ʌv ði ɪnfənət vɔɪd, ən ɔl ðət hiz kən bi sizd.

She shook off the worrying; she had work to do. Was she following the wrong thread? Was she interpreting in the wrong way? She read the line again. Light is held before the maw of the infinite void, and all that he is can be seized.

hɝ spɛkjəleɪʃən kʌɾ ɔf əz ʃi sɔ ə laɪɾ əpɪɹ fɹəm ðə ɹum əkɹɔs ðə hɔl. ʃi dʒɹɑpt əɹ bʊk ən lɛp daʊn tə ðə flɔɹ. ɹænd wɑz sʌɾənli kloʊs. ʃi kəd fil ɪt θɹu ðə bɑnd.

Her speculation cut off as she saw a light appear from the room across the hall. She dropped her book and leaped down to the floor. Rand was suddenly close. She could feel it through the bond.

tu meɪɾənz ɡɑɹɾəd ðə ɹum əkɹɔs ðə hɔl, moʊsli tə pɹɪvɛn pipəl fɹəm wɑndɝɪŋ ɪn ən ɡɛɾɪŋ hɝt baɪ ɡeɪtweɪz. ðə wʌn ðət hæɾ oʊpənd naʊ lɛd tə ə pleɪs ðət smɛld ə smoʊk. ɹænd stʌmbəl θɹu. mɪn ɹæn tə hɪm. hi lʊkt ɪɡzɔstəd, aɪz ɹɛd, feɪs wɑn. hi lin əɡɛnst əɹ wɪð ə saɪ, lɛɾɪŋ əɹ hɛlp ɪm tə ə tʃɛɹ.

Two Maidens guarded the room across the hall, mostly to prevent people from wandering in and getting hurt by gateways. The one that had opened now led to a place that smelled of smoke. Rand stumbled through. Min ran to him. He looked exhausted, eyes red, face wan. He leaned against her with a sigh, letting her help him to a chair.

"wʌt hæpənd?" mɪn dɪmændəɾ ʌv ɪvæsni, ðə meɪɾən u keɪm θɹu nɛkst. ʃi wɑz ə læŋki wʊmən wɪð dɑɹk ɹɛd hɛɹ, kʌt ʃɔɹt wɪð ə teɪl ɪn ðə bæk laɪk ðəɾ ə moʊs meɪɾənz.

"What happened?" Min demanded of Evasni, the Maiden who came through next. She was a lanky woman with dark red hair, cut short with a tail in the back like that of most Maidens.

"ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn ɪz wɛl," ðə wʊmən sɛd. "ðoʊ hiz laɪk ə juθ u ɹæn wʌn mɔɹ læp ɝaʊn ðə kæmp ðən ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls, oʊnli tə pɹuv ðəɾ i kʊd."

"The Car'a'carn is well," the woman said. "Though he is like a youth who ran one more lap around the camp than everyone else, only to prove that he could."

"hi ɡeɪn mʌtʃ dʒi tədeɪ," aɪfeɪinə - ði ʌðɝ meɪɾən - sɛd, ɔlmoʊst ɪn ɑɹɡjəmənt. hɝ vɔɪs wɑz sɑləm.

"He gained much ji today," Ifeyina - the other Maiden - said, almost in argument. Her voice was solemn.

ɹænd saɪd, sɛɾəlɪŋ bæk ɪn ðə tʃɛɹ. bæʃɪɹ fɑloʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, buts hɪɾɪŋ stoʊn.

Rand sighed, settling back in the chair. Bashere followed out of the gateway, boots hitting stone.

mɪn hɝd kɔlz fɹəm daʊn bɪloʊ - ə ɡɹup ʌv wundəd soʊlʒɝz biɪŋ bɹɔt θɹu ə lɑɹdʒɝ ɡeɪtweɪ. ðə stoʊnz kɔɹtʃjɑɹdz wɝ əlaɪv wɪð æktɪvəɾi, ɛɛs sədaɪ hilɝz ɹʌnɪŋ tə kɛɹ fəɹ ðə blʌɾid, suɾi mɛn.

Min heard calls from down below - a group of wounded soldiers being brought through a larger gateway. The Stone's courtyards were alive with activity, Aes Sedai Healers running to care for the bloodied, sooty men.

æftɝ bæʃɪɹ keɪm ə lin dəmɑni mæn ɪn ɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz. ɹoʊɾəl ɪtʃɹɑldi. hi lʊk mʌtʃ ðə wɝs fəɹ wɛɹ, wɪð dʒɹaɪd blʌɾ ɑn ɪz fɪlθi feɪs ɪz kloʊðɪŋ ɹɪpt, ən bɛɹɪŋ ə klʌmzi bændɪdʒ ɑn ɪz ɑɹm. ɹænd hæd noʊ vɪzəbəl wunz. hɪz kloʊðɪŋ wɑz klin, ðoʊ hi ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn stɪl wɛɹɪŋ ðəɾ eɪdʒ bɹaʊn kloʊk. bʌt laɪt, hi lʊk taɪɝd.

After Bashere came a lean Domani man in his middle years. Rodel Iturralde. He looked much the worse for wear, with dried blood on his filthy face his clothing ripped, and bearing a clumsy bandage on his arm. Rand had no visible wounds. His clothing was clean, though he insisted on still wearing that aged brown cloak. But Light, he looked tired.

"ɹænd," mɪn sɛd, nilɪŋ daʊn. "ɹænd, ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt?"

"Rand," Min said, kneeling down. "Rand, are you all right?"

"aɪ ɡɹu æŋɡɹi," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli. "aɪ hæd θɔt maɪsɛlf bɪɑn ðæt."

"I grew angry," Rand said softly. "I had thought myself beyond that."

ʃi fɛlt ə tʃɪl.

She felt a chill.

"ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə tɛɹəbəl æŋɡɝ, laɪk bɪfɔɹ," ɹænd sɛd. "ɪt wɑz nɑt ði æŋɡɝ ə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən, ðoʊ aɪ dɪd dɪstʃɹɔɪ. ɪn mɛɹədɑn, aɪ sɔ wʌt hæd bɪn dʌn tə mɛn u fɑloʊd mi. aɪ sɔ laɪɾ ɪn ðɛm, mɪn. dɪfaɪɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn noʊ mæɾɝ ðə lɛŋθ ə hɪz ʃædoʊ. wɪl lɪv, ðət dɪfaɪəns sɛd. wɪl lʌv ən wɪl hoʊp.

"It was not a terrible anger, like before," Rand said. "It was not the anger of destruction, though I did destroy. In Maradon, I saw what had been done to men who followed me. I saw Light in them, Min. Defying the Dark One no matter the length of his shadow. We will live, that defiance said. We will love and we will hope.

"æn aɪ sɔ hɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ soʊ hɑɹd tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðæt. hi noʊz ðəɾ ɪf i kəd bɹeɪk ðɛm, ɪt wəd min sʌmθɪŋ. sʌmθɪŋ mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən mɛɹədɑn. bɹeɪkɪŋ ðə spɪɹəɾ ə mɛn ... hi θɝsts fəɹ ðæt.

"And I saw him trying so hard to destroy that. He knows that if he could break them, it would mean something. Something much more than Maradon. Breaking the spirit of men ... he thirsts for that.

hi stʃɹʌk fɑɹ hɑɹɾɝ ðən i ʌðɝwaɪz wəɾ əv kəz i wɑntəd tə bɹeɪk maɪ spɪɹət." hɪz vɔɪs ɡɹu sɑftɝ ən i oʊpən ɪz aɪz, lʊkɪŋ daʊn ət hɝ. "æn soʊ aɪ stʊɾ əɡɛns hɪm."

He struck far harder than he otherwise would have because he wanted to break my spirit." His voice grew softer and he opened his eyes, looking down at her. "And so I stood against him."

"wʌt jə dɪd wɑz əmeɪzɪŋ," bæʃɪɹ sɛd, stændɪŋ bɪsaɪd mɪn wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz foʊldəd. "bʌt dɪd jə lɛɾ ɪm dʒɹaɪv jə tə ɪt?"

"What you did was amazing," Bashere said, standing beside Min with his arms folded. "But did you let him drive you to it?"

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ hæv ə ɹaɪt tə maɪ æŋɡɝ, bæʃɪɹ. doʊn jə si? bɪfɔɹ, aɪ tʃɹaɪd tə hoʊld ɪɾ ɔl hɪɾən wɪðɪn. ðət wɑz ɹɔŋ. aɪ mʌs fil. aɪ mʌs hɝt fəɹ ðə peɪnz, ðə dɛθs, ðə lɔsəz ə ðiz pipəl. aɪ hæv tə klɪŋ tə ðiz θɪŋz soʊ aɪ noʊ waɪ aɪm faɪɾɪŋ. ðəɹ ɑɹ taɪmz wən aɪ nid ðə vɔɪd, bʌt ðət dʌz nɑt meɪk maɪ æŋɡɝ ɛni lɛs ə pɑɹɾ ə mi."

Rand shook his head. "I have a right to my anger, Bashere. Don't you see? Before, I tried to hold it all hidden within. That was wrong. I must feel. I must hurt for the pains, the deaths, the losses of these people. I have to cling to these things so I know why I am fighting. There are times when I need the void, but that does not make my anger any less a part of me."

hi sim tə bi ɡɹoʊɪŋ mɔɹ kɑnfəɾənt wɪð itʃ wɝd, ən mɪn nɑɾəd.

He seemed to be growing more confident with each word, and Min nodded.

"wɛl, jə seɪv ðə sɪɾi," bæʃɪɹ sɛd.

"Well, you saved the city," Bashere said.

"nɑt sun ɪnʌf," ɹænd sɛd. mɪn kəd fil ɪz sɑɹoʊ. "æn maɪ ækʃənz tədeɪ meɪ stɪl əv bɪn ə mɪsteɪk."

"Not soon enough," Rand said. Min could feel his sorrow. "And my actions today may still have been a mistake."

mɪn fɹaʊnd. "waɪ?"

Min frowned. "Why?"

ɪt keɪm tu kloʊs tə ə kɑnfɹənteɪʃən bɪtwin ʌs," ɹænd sɛd. "ðæt mʌs hæpən ət ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, ən ət ðə ɹaɪt taɪm. aɪ kænɑɾ əfɔɹd tə lɛɾ ɪm pɹəvoʊk mi. bæʃɪɹ ɪz ɹaɪt. nɔɹ kən aɪ əfɔɹd tə lɛt ðə mɛn əsum ðəɾ əl ɔlweɪz bi eɪbəl tə stɛp ɪn ən seɪv ðɛm."

It came too close to a confrontation between us," Rand said. "That must happen at Shayol Ghul, and at the right time. I cannot afford to let him provoke me. Bashere is right. Nor can I afford to let the men assume that I will always be able to step in and save them."

pɝhæps," bæʃɪɹ sɛd. "bʌt wʌt jə dɪd tədeɪ . . ."

Perhaps," Bashere said. "But what you did today . . ."

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ æm nɑt tə faɪt ðɪs wɔɹ, bæʃɪɹ. tədeɪz bæɾəl ɪɡzɔstəd mi bɪɑnd wʌɾ aɪ ʃəɾ əv əlaʊd. ɪf maɪ ɛnəmiz wɝ tə kʌm əpɑn mi naʊ, aɪd bi fɪnɪʃt. bɪsaɪdz, aɪ kən oʊnli faɪɾ ɪn wʌn pleɪs əɾ ə taɪm. wʌɾ ɪz kʌmɪŋ wɪl bi ɡɹændɝ ðən ðæt, ɡɹændɝ ən mɔɹ tɛɹəbəl ðən ɛni wʌn mæn kəd hoʊp tə hoʊl bæk. əl ɔɹɡənaɪz ju, bʌɾ aɪ mʌs liv ju. ðə wɔɹ wɪl bi jʊɹz."

Rand shook his head. "I am not to fight this war, Bashere. Today's battle exhausted me beyond what I should have allowed. If my enemies were to come upon me now, I'd be finished. Besides, I can only fight in one place at a time. What is coming will be grander than that, grander and more terrible than any one man could hope to hold back. I will organize you, but I must leave you. The war will be yours."

hi fɛl saɪlənt, ən flɪn stɛp θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, lɛɾɪŋ ɪt slɪd kloʊzd.

He fell silent, and Flinn stepped through the gateway, letting it slid closed.

"aɪ mʌst ɹɛs naʊ," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli. "təmɑɹoʊ aɪ mit wɪð jəɹ nis ən ði ʌðɝ bɔɹɾɝləndɝz, bæʃɪɹ. aɪ noʊ nɑt wʌt ðəl ɹikwaɪɝ ə mi, bʌt ðeɪ mʌst ɹɪtɝn tə ðɛɹ poʊsts. ɪf sɑldɑiə wɑz ɪn sətʃ ə steɪt wɪð wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪt kæptənz liɾɪŋ ðə dɪfɛns, aɪ kən oʊnli ɡɛs wʌt ði ʌðɝ bɔɹɾɝlənd neɪʃənz ɑɹ sʌfɝɪŋ."

"I must rest now," Rand said softly. "Tomorrow I meet with your niece and the other Borderlanders, Bashere. I know not what they will require of me, but they must return to their posts. If Saldaea was in such a state with one of the great captains leading the defense, I can only guess what the other Borderland nations are suffering."

mɪn hɛlpt ɪm tə hɪz fit. "ɹænd," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "kædzueɪn ɹɪtɝnd, ən ʃi hæd sʌmwʌn wɪð hɝ."

Min helped him to his feet. "Rand," she said softly. "Cadsuane returned, and she had someone with her."

hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "teɪk mi tə hɝ."

He hesitated. "Take me to her."

mɪn wɪnst. "aɪ ʃʊdn əv mɛnʃən ɪt. jə ʃəd ɹɛst."

Min winced. "I shouldn't have mentioned it. You should rest."

"aɪ wɪl," hi sɛd. "doʊnt wɝi."

"I will," he said. "Don't worry."

ʃi kəd stɪl sɛns ɪz ɪɡzɔstʃən. bʌt ʃi dɪdn ɑɹɡju. ðeɪ wɔk fɹəm ðə ɹum. "ɹoʊɾəl ɪɾɝɑldi," ɹænd sɛd, pɔzɪŋ baɪ ðə dɔɹweɪ. "ju wɪl wɪʃ tə əkʌmpəni mi. aɪ kænɑt ɹipeɪ jə fəɹ ði ɑnɝ juv ʃoʊn, bʌɾ aɪ də hæv sʌmθɪŋ aɪ kən ɡɪv."

She could still sense his exhaustion. But she didn't argue. They walked from the room. "Rodel Ituralde," Rand said, pausing by the doorway. "You will wish to accompany me. I cannot repay you for the honor you have shown, but I do have something I can give."

ðə ɡɹɪzəl dəmɑni nɑɾəd, fɑloʊɪŋ. mɪn hɛlpt ɹænd daʊn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt hɪm. dɪɾ i hæv tə pʊʃ hɪmsɛlf ðɪs hɑɹd?

The grizzled Domani nodded, following. Min helped Rand down the corridor, worrying about him. Did he have to push himself this hard?

ənfɔɹtʃənətli, hi dʌz. ɹænd ælθɹ wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. hid bi blɛd dʒɹaɪ, ɡɹaʊn daʊn, juzd ʌp bɪfɔɹ ðɪs wɑz θɹu. ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊst ɪnʌf tə meɪk ə wʊmən stɑp tʃɹaɪɪŋ.

Unfortunately, he does. Rand al'Thor was the Dragon Reborn. He'd be bled dry, ground down, used up before this was through. It was almost enough to make a woman stop trying.

"ɹænd . . ." ʃi sɛd, ɪɾɝɑldi ən sɛvɹəl meɪɾənz tʃɹeɪlɪŋ ðɛm. fɔɹtʃənətli, kædzueɪn ɛs ɹum wɑzn fɑɹ.

"Rand . . ." she said, Ituralde and several Maidens trailing them. Fortunately, Cadsuane s room wasn't far.

"aɪ wɪl bi ɔl ɹaɪt," hi sɛd. "aɪ pɹɑməs. hæv jə nuz ə jəɹ stʌɾiz?" hi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪstʃɹæk hɝ.

"I will be all right," he said. "I promise. Have you news of your studies?" He was trying to distract her.

ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ðət kwɛstʃən dʒʌst sɛn əɹ tə ənʌðɝ wɝi. "hæv jə ɛvɝ wʌndɝd waɪ keɪlændɝ ɪz soʊ ɔfən kɔld ə 'fɪɹfəl bleɪd' əɹ 'ðə bleɪɾ ə ɹuən' ɪn ðə pɹɑfəsiz?"

Unfortunately, that question just sent her to another worry. "Have you ever wondered why Cailandor is so often called a 'fearful blade' or 'the blade of ruin' in the prophecies?"

"ɪts sətʃ ə paʊɝfəl sɑŋɡɹil," hi sɛd. "meɪbi ɪts kəz ə ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ɪt kən kɑz?"

"It's such a powerful sa'angreal," he said. "Maybe it's because of the destruction it can cause?"

"meɪbi," ʃi sɛd.

"Maybe," she said.

"ju θɪŋk ɪts sʌmθɪŋ ɛls."

"You think it's something else."

"ðɛɹz ə fɹeɪz," mɪn sɛd, "ɪn ðə dʒɛndaɪ pɹɑfəsi. aɪ wɪʃ wi nu mɔɹ ə ðɛm. ɛniweɪ, ɪt sɛz 'æn ðə bleɪd wɪl baɪn ɪm baɪ tweɪn.''

"There's a phrase," Min said, "in the Jendai Prophecy. I wish we knew more of them. Anyway, it says 'and the Blade will bind him by twain.''

"tu wɪmən," ɹænd sɛd. "aɪ nid tə bi ɪn ə sɝkəl wɪð tu wɪmən tə kəntʃɹoʊl ɪt."

"Two women," Rand said. "I need to be in a circle with two women to control it."

ʃi ɡɹɪməst.

She grimaced.

"wʌt?" ɹænd sɛd. "ju maɪɾ əz wɛl bi aʊt wɪð ɪt, mɪn. aɪ nid tə noʊ.

"What?" Rand said. "You might as well be out with it, Min. I need to know.

"ðɛɹz ənʌðɝ fɹeɪz, fɹəm ðə kæɹæəθən saɪkəl. ɛniweɪ, aɪ θɪŋk hæt kælændɝ maɪt bi flɔd bɪɑn ðæt. aɪ θɪŋk ɪt maɪt . . . ɹænd, aɪ θɪŋk ɪt maɪt meɪk jə wik, oʊpən jə tə ətæk, ɪf jə juz ɪt."

"There's another phrase, from The Karaethon Cycle. Anyway, I think hat Callandor might be flawed beyond that. I think it might . . . Rand, I think it might make you weak, open you to attack, if you use it."

"pɝhæps ðæts haʊ əl bi kɪld, ðɛn."

"Perhaps that's how I'll be killed, then."

"ju ɑɹən gɑnə bi kɪld," mɪn sɛd.

"You aren't going to be killed," Min said.

"aɪ - "

"I - "

"jul lɪv θɹu ðɪs, ʃifɝɾɝ," ʃi ɪnsɪstəd. "aɪm gɑnə si ðət jə du."

"You'll live through this, sheepherder," she insisted. "I'm going to see that you do."

hi smaɪld ət hɝ. hi lʊk soʊ taɪɝd. "aɪ ɔlmoʊs bɪliv ðət jəl də ɪt, mɪn. pɝhæps aɪm nɑt ðə wʌn ðə pæɾɝn bɛnz ɝaʊnd, bʌt ju." hi tɝnd, ðən nɑkt ɑn ə dɔɹ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ.

He smiled at her. He looked so tired. "I almost believe that you'll do it, Min. Perhaps I'm not the one the Pattern bends around, but you." He turned, then knocked on a door in the hallway.

ɪt kɹækt, mɛɹaɪs pikɪŋ aʊt. ʃi lʊkt ɹænd ʌp ən daʊn. "ju sim əz ɪf jə kən bɛɹli stæn ɑn jəɹ oʊn fit, ælθɹ."

It cracked, Merise peeking out. She looked Rand up and down. "You seem as if you can barely stand on your own feet, al'Thor."

"tʃɹu ɪndid," hi ɹɪplaɪd. "ɪz kædzueɪn sədaɪ hɪɹ?"

"True indeed," he replied. "Is Cadsuane Sedai here?"

"ʃi hæz dʌn əz jə æskt," mɛɹaɪs ɹɪplaɪd. "ænd, aɪ maɪt seɪ, ʃiz bɪn vɛɹi əkɑmədeɪɾɪŋ, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ haʊ jə - "

"She has done as you asked," Merise replied. "And, I might say, she's been very accommodating, considering how you - "

"lɛɾ ɪm ɪn, mɛɹaɪs," kædzueɪnz vɔɪs sɛd fɹəm ɪnsaɪd.

"Let him in, Merise," Cadsuane's voice said from inside.

mɛɹaɪs hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən ɡeɪv ɹænd ə ɡlɛɹ əz ʃi pʊl ðə dɔɹ oʊpən ɔl ðə weɪ. kædzueɪn sæɾ ɪn ə tʃɛɹ, spikɪŋ wɪð ən oʊldɝ mæn huz lɔŋ, ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ fɛl lus tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝz. hi hæɾ ə lɑɹdʒ bik ʌv ə noʊz ən ɹiɡəl kloʊðɪŋ.

Merise hesitated, then gave Rand a glare as she pulled the door open all the way. Cadsuane sat in a chair, speaking with an older man whose long, gray hair fell loose to his shoulders. He had a large beak of a nose and regal clothing.

ɹænd stɛp tə ðə saɪd. bɪhaɪn ðɛm, sʌmwʌn ɡæspt. ɹoʊɾəl ɪɾɝɑldi stɛpt ʌp tə ðə dɔɹweɪ, simɪŋ stʌnd, ən ðə mæn ɪn ðə ɹum tɝnd. hi hæd kaɪnli aɪz ən kɑpɝi skɪn.

Rand stepped to the side. Behind them, someone gasped. Rodel Ituralde stepped up to the doorway, seeming stunned, and the man in the room turned. He had kindly eyes and coppery skin.

maɪ lidʒ," ɪɾɝɑldi kɹaɪd, heɪsənɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, ðən ɡoʊɪŋ daʊn ɑn wʌn ni. "ju lɪv!"

My liege," Ituralde cried, hastening forward, then going down on one knee. "You live!"

mɪn fɛlt ən oʊvɝwɛlmɪŋ sɛns ə hæpinəs fɹəm ɹænd. ɪɾɝɑldi, ɪɾ əpɪɹd, wɑz wipɪŋ.

Min felt an overwhelming sense of happiness from Rand. Ituralde, it appeared, was weeping.

ɹænd stɛp bæk. "kʌm, lɛts ɡoʊ tə maɪ ɹumz ən ɹɛst."

Rand stepped back. "Come, let's go to my rooms and rest."

"ðə kɪŋ ʌv ɑɹæd dumən. wɛɹ dɪd ʃi faɪn hɪm?" mɪn sɛd. "haʊ dɪd jə noʊ?"

"The King of Arad Doman. Where did she find him?" Min said. "How did you know?"

ə fɹɛn lɛf mi ə sikɹət," ɹænd sɛd. "ðə waɪt taʊɝ kəlɛktəd mæɾɪn stɛpeɪnəoʊz tə 'pɹətɛkt'

A friend left me a secret," Rand said. "The White Tower collected Mattin Stepaneos to 'protect'

hɪm. wɛl, ɪt wɑzn tu mʌtʃ ʌv ə lip tə wʌndɝ ɪf ðeɪ maɪɾ əv dʌn ðət wɪð ʌðɝ mɑnɑɹks.

him. Well, it wasn't too much of a leap to wonder if they might have done that with other monarchs.

ən ɪf ðeɪ sɛn sɪstɝz tə ɑɹæd dumən tə siz ɪm mʌnθs əɡoʊ, bɪfɔɹ ɛni ʌv əm nu ʌv ɡeɪtweɪz, ðeɪ cʊɾə ɡɑɾən tʃɹæpt ɪn ðə snoʊz ɑn ðɛɹ ɹɪtɝn tʃɹɪp. hi sim soʊ ɹɪlivd.

And if they sent sisters to Arad Doman to seize him months ago, before any of them knew of gateways, they could have gotten trapped in the snows on their return trip. He seemed so relieved.

"ɡɹeɪndəl nɛvɝ hæd hɪm. aɪ dɪdn kɪl ɪm m. wʌn ɪnəsən aɪ əsum ðəɾ aɪd kɪl stɪl laɪvz.

"Graendal never had him. I didn't kill him Mm. One innocent I assumed that I'd killed still lives.

ðæts sʌmθɪŋ. ə smɔl sʌmθɪŋ. bʌɾ ɪt hɛlps."

That's something. A small something. But it helps."

ʃi hɛlpt ɪm wɔk ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ tə ðɛɹ ɹumz, kɑntɛns-fɔɹ moʊmənt - tə ʃɛɹ ɪn ɪz wɔɹm sɛns ə dʒɔɪ ən ɹɪlif.

She helped him walk the rest of the way to their rooms, contents-for moment - to share in his warm sense of joy and relief.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾiθɹi


CHAPTER 33

sɪuənz sup wɑz sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli ɡʊd. ʃi tʊk ənʌðɝ sɪp, ɹeɪzɪŋ ən aɪbɹaʊ. ɪt wɑz sɪmpəl - 


Siuan's soup was surprisingly good. She took another sip, raising an eyebrow. It was simple - 

bɹɔθ ən vɛdʒtəbəlz, bɪts ə tʃɪkən - bʌt wən moʊs fud teɪstəd steɪl ət bɛst, ðɪs simd ə wʌndɝ.

broth and vegetables, bits of chicken - but when most food tasted stale at best, this seemed a wonder.

ʃi tʃɹaɪd ðə bɪskət. noʊ wivəlz? dɪlaɪtfəl! nɪneɪiv hæd dʒʌs fɔlən saɪlənt, hɝ oʊn boʊl stimɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. nuli ɹeɪzd, ʃid teɪkən ði oʊðz ɝliɝ ɪn ðə deɪ. ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi, ʃʌɾɝz oʊpən ən spɪlɪŋ ɪn ɡoʊldən laɪt, nu ɹʌɡz ʌv ɡɹin ən ɡoʊld ɑn ðə flɔɹ.

She tried the biscuit. No weevils? Delightful! Nynaeve had just fallen silent, her own bowl steaming in front of her. Newly raised, she'd taken the oaths earlier in the day. They were in the Amyrlin's study, shutters open and spilling in golden light, new rugs of green and gold on the floor.

saɪlənli, sɪuən tʃaɪɾɪd hɝsɛlf fəɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ dɪstʃɹæktəd baɪ ðə sup. nɪneɪivz ɹipɔɹt dɪmændəd kənsɪɾɝeɪʃən. ʃid spoʊkən ə hɝ taɪm wɪð ɹænd ælθɹ, ən spəsɪfɪkli ʌv ɪvɛns sətʃ əz ðə klɛnzɪŋ. ʌv kɔɹs, sɪuən hæd hɝd ðə ɹɪpɔɹts ðət seɪɾɪn hæd bɪn klɛnzd; ən æʃəmən hæd vɪzəɾəd ðə kæmp dʊɹɪŋ ðə dɪvɪʒən. ʃi hæd ɹɪmeɪn skɛptəkəl, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl dɪnaɪɪŋ ɪt naʊ.

Silently, Siuan chided herself for getting distracted by the soup. Nynaeve's report demanded consideration. She'd spoken of her time with Rand al'Thor, and specifically of events such as the cleansing. Of course, Siuan had heard the reports that saidin had been cleansed; an Asha'man had visited the camp during the division. She had remained skeptical, but there was little denying it now.

wɛl," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd, "aɪ æm vɛɹi ɡlæd fəɹ ðɪs lɔŋɡɝ ɛkspləneɪʃən, nɪneɪiv. ðoʊ seɪɾɪn biɪŋ klɛnz dʌz meɪk ɪt lɛs ənsɛɾəlɪŋ tə kənsɪɾɝ æʃəmən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ bɑndɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ.

Well," the Amyrlin said, "I am very glad for this longer explanation, Nynaeve. Though saidin being cleansed does make it less unsettling to consider Asha'man and Aes Sedai bonding one another.

aɪ wɪʃ ɹænd hæd bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə spik tə mi ʌv ðət dʊɹɪŋ əɹ miɾɪŋ." ʃi sɛɾ ɪɾ ivənli, ðoʊ sɪuən nu ʃi lʊkt ɑn mɛn bɑndɪŋ wɪmən wɪð əz mʌtʃ plɛʒɝ əz ə kæptən lʊkt ɑn ə faɪɝ ɪn ɪz hoʊld.

I wish Rand had been willing to speak to me of that during our meeting." She said it evenly, though Siuan knew she looked on men bonding women with as much pleasure as a captain looked on a fire in his hold.

"aɪ səpoʊz," nɪneɪiv sɛd, lɪps tɝnɪŋ daʊn. "ɪf ɪt mæɾɝz, ɹænd dɪdn əpɹuv ðə mɛn bɑndɪŋ wɪmən."

"I suppose," Nynaeve said, lips turning down. "If it matters, Rand didn't approve the men bonding women."

"ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ ɪf i dɪɾ əɹ nɑt," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ði æʃɑɹnən ɑɹ ɪz ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi."

"It doesn't matter if he did or not," Egwene said. "The Asha'rnan are his responsibility."

"æz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hu tʃeɪn ɪm ən biɾ ɪm ɑɹ jʊɹz, mʌðɝ?" nɪneɪiv æskt.

"As the Aes Sedai who chained him and beat him are yours, Mother?" Nynaeve asked.

"ɪnhɛɹəɾɪd fɹəm ɪleɪɾə, pɝhæps," ɛɡwin sɛd, aɪz nɛɹoʊɪŋ dʒʌst slaɪtli.

"Inherited from Elaida, perhaps," Egwene said, eyes narrowing just slightly.

ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt tə bɹɪŋ nɪneɪiv bæk, sɪuən θɔt, teɪkɪŋ ə sɪp ə sup. ʃi teɪks ɪz saɪd fɑɹ tu ɔfən fəɹ kʌmfɝt.

She was right to bring Nynaeve back, Siuan thought, taking a sip of soup. She takes his side far too often for comfort.

nɪneɪiv saɪd, teɪkɪŋ əɹ spun tə bɪɡɪn əɹ sup. "aɪ dɪdn min ðəɾ əz ə tʃælənʒ, mʌðɝ. aɪ dʒʌst wɑnə ʃoʊ haʊ hi θɪŋks. laɪt' aɪ dɪdn əpɹuv ə mʌtʃ ʌv wʌɾ i dɪd, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli leɪtli.

Nynaeve sighed, taking her spoon to begin her soup. "I didn't mean that as a challenge, Mother. I just want to show how he thinks. Light' I didn't approve of much of what he did, particularly lately.

bʌɾ aɪ kən si haʊ hi ɡɑt ðɛɹ."

But I can see how he got there."

"hi hæz tʃeɪnʒd, ðoʊ," sɪuən sɛd θɔtfəli. "ju sɛd soʊ jɝsɛlf."

"He has changed, though," Siuan said thoughtfully. "You said so yourself."

"jɛs," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ði il seɪ hiz ɛmbɹeɪs dɛθ."

"Yes," Nynaeve said. "The Aiel say he's embraced death."

"aɪv hɝd ðət fɹəm ðɛm, tu," ɛɡwin sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ lʊkt ɪndə hɪz aɪz, ən sʌmθɪŋ ɛls əz tʃeɪnʒd, sʌmθɪŋ ɪnəksplɪsəbəl. ðə mæn aɪ sɔ . . ."

"I've heard that from them, too," Egwene said. "But I looked into his eyes, and something else has changed, something inexplicable. The man I saw . . ."

"hi dɪdn sim laɪk wʌn tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ nætʃɹɪnz bæɹoʊ?" sɪuən ʃɪvɝɾ əz ʃi θɔɾ ə ðæt.

"He didn't seem like one to destroy Natrin's Barrow?" Siuan shivered as she thought of that.

"ðə mæn aɪ sɔ wʊdnt nid tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ sətʃ ə pleɪs," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ðoʊz ɪnsaɪd wəd dʒʌs fɑloʊ hɪm. bɛn tə hɪz wɪʃɪz. kəz i wɑz"

"The man I saw wouldn't need to destroy such a place," Egwene said. "Those inside would just follow him. Bend to his wishes. Because he was"

ðə θɹi fɛl saɪlənt.

The three fell silent.

ɛɡwin ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ən tʊk ə sɪp ə hɝ sup. ʃi pɔzd, ðən smaɪld. "wɛl, aɪ si ðə sup ɪz ɡʊd. pɝhæps θɪŋz ɑɹən əz bæɾ əz aɪ θɔt."

Egwene shook her head and took a sip of her soup. She paused, then smiled. "Well, I see the soup is good. Perhaps things aren't as bad as I thought."

"ði ɪnɡɹiɾiənts keɪm fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn," nɪneɪiv noʊɾəd. "aɪ oʊvɝhɝd ðə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz tɔkɪŋ."

"The ingredients came from Caemlyn," Nynaeve noted. "I overheard the serving girls talking."

"oʊ."

"Oh."

mɔɹ saɪləns.

More silence.

"mʌðɝ," sɪuən sɛd, spikɪŋ kɛɹfəli. "ðə wɪmən ɑɹ stɪl wɝiɾ əbaʊt ðə dɛθs ɪn ðə taʊɝ."

"Mother," Siuan said, speaking carefully. "The women are still worried about the deaths in the Tower."

"aɪ əɡɹi. mʌðɝ," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "sɪstɝz stɛɹ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ wɪð dɪstʃɹʌst. ɪt wɝiz mi."

"I agree. Mother," Nynaeve said. "Sisters stare at one another with distrust. It worries me."

"ju boʊθ ʃʊɾə sin ɪt bɪfɔɹ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "dʊɹɪŋ ɪleɪɾəs ɹeɪn."

"You both should have seen it before," Egwene said. "During Elaidas reign."

"ɪf ɪt wɑz wɝs ðən ðɪs," nɪneɪiv sɛd, "aɪm ɡlæd ðəɾ aɪ dɪdnt." ʃi ɡlæns daʊn əɾ əɹ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ. ʃi dɪd ðəɾ ə lɑt, ɹisənli. əz ə fɪʃɝ wɪð ə nu boʊɾ ɔfən ɡlæns təwɔɹd ðə dɑks ən smaɪld. fəɹ ɔl əɹ kəmpleɪns ðət ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən fəɹ ɔl ðə fæk ðət ʃid bɪn wɛɹɪŋ ðət ɹɪŋ fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm naʊ' ʃi wɑz ɑbviəsli sæɾəsfaɪd tə hæv pæs ðə tɛstɪŋ ən teɪkən ði oʊðz. "ɪt wɑz tɛɹəbəl," ɛɡwin sɛd. "æn aɪ doʊn ɪntɛn tə lɛɾ ɪt ɡoʊ bæk tə ðæt. sɪuən, ðə plæn mʌs bi pʊɾ ɪndə moʊʃən."

"If it was worse than this," Nynaeve said, "I'm glad that I didn't." She glanced down at her Great Serpent ring. She did that a lot, recently. As a fisher with a new boat often glanced toward the docks and smiled. For all her complaints that she was Aes Sedai, and for all the fact that she'd been wearing that ring for a long time now' she was obviously satisfied to have passsed the testing and taken the oaths. "It was terrible," Egwene said. "And I don't intend to let it go back to that. Siuan, the plan must be put into motion."

sɪuən ɡɹɪməst. "aɪv bɪn titʃɪŋ ði ʌðɝz. bʌɾ aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðɪs ɪz ə ɡʊɾ aɪdiə, mʌðɝ.

Siuan grimaced. "I've been teaching the others. But I don't think this is a good idea, Mother.

ðəɹ bɛɹli tʃɹeɪnd."

They're barely trained."

"wʌts ðɪs?" nɪneɪiv æskt.

"What's this?" Nynaeve asked.

"ɛɛs sədaɪ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "kɛɹfəli tʃoʊzən ən ɡɪvən dʒɹim tɛɹæŋɡɹil. sɪuən ɪz ʃoʊɪŋ əm haʊ tɛlɝɛɝɝhiəd wɝks."

"Aes Sedai," Egwene said. "Carefully chosen and given dream ter'angreal. Siuan is showing them how Tel'ararirhiod works."

"mʌðɝ, ðət pleɪs ɪz deɪnʒɝəs."

"Mother, that place is dangerous."

ɛɡwin tʊk ənʌðɝ sɪp ə sup. "aɪ bɪliv aɪ noʊ ðət bɛɾɝ ðən moʊst. bʌɾ ɪts nɛsəsɛɹi; wi mʌs lʊɹ ðə kɪlɝz ɪndə ə kɑnfɹənteɪʃən. əl ɝeɪnʒ fəɹ ə 'sikɹət' miɾɪŋ əmʌŋ maɪ moʊs lɔɪəl ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪn ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz, ən pɝhæps leɪ kluz ðəɾ ʌðɝ pipəl ʌv ɪmpɔɹɾəns wɪl bi ətɛndɪŋ. sɪuən, juv kɑntæktɪd ðə wɪndfɪndɝz?"

Egwene took another sip of soup. "I believe I know that better than most. But it is necessary; we must lure the killers into a confrontation. I'll arrange for a 'secret' meeting among my most loyal Aes Sedai, in the World of Dreams, and perhaps lay clues that other people of importance will be attending. Siuan, you've contacted the Windfinders?"

"jɛs," sɪuən sɛd. "ðoʊ ðeɪ wɑnə noʊ wʌt jəl ɡɪv əm tə əɡɹi tə mit wɪð ju."

"Yes," Siuan said. "Though they want to know what you'll give them to agree to meet with you."

"ðə loʊn ə ðə dʒɹim tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɪl bi ɪnʌf," ɛɡwin sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "nɑɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ əz tə bi ə bɑɹɡən."

"The loan of the dream ter'angreal will be enough," Egwene said dryly. "Not everything has to be a bargain."

"tə ðɛm, ɪɾ ɔfən dʌz," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "bʌt ðæts bɪsaɪd ðə pɔɪnt. jəɹ bɹɪŋɪŋ wɪndfɪndən tə ðɪs miɾɪŋ tə lʊɹ mɛsænə?"

"To them, it often does," Nynaeve said. "But that's beside the point. You're bringing Windfinden to this meeting to lure Mesaana?"

"nɑɾ ɪɡzækli," ɛɡwin sɛd. "aɪl si ðə wɪndfɪndɝz ət ðə seɪm taɪm, ɪn ə dɪfɹən pleɪs. ən səm waɪz wʌnz əz wɛl. ɪnʌf tə hɪn tə mɛsænə - əsumɪŋ ʃiz ɡɑt spaɪz wɑtʃɪŋ ði ʌðɝ ɡɹups ʌv wɪmən u kən tʃænəl - ðət ʃi ɹɪli wɑns tə spaɪ ɑn əs ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd ðət deɪ.

"Not exactly," Egwene said. "I'll see the Windfinders at the same time, in a different place. And some Wise Ones as well. Enough to hint to Mesaana - assuming she's got spies watching the other groups of women who can channel - that she really wants to spy on us in Tel'aran'rhiod that day.

"ju ən sɪuən wɪl hoʊld ə miɾɪŋ ɪn ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, bʌɾ ɪɾəl bi ə dəkɔɪ tə dʒɹɔ mɛsænə əɹ əɹ mɪnjənz aʊɾ ə haɪɾɪŋ. wɪð wɔɹdz - ən səm sɪstɝz wɑtʃɪŋ fɹəm hɪɾən pleɪsəz -  wɪl bi eɪbəl tə tʃɹæp ðɛm. sɪuən wɪl sɛn fəɹ mi əz sun əz ðə tʃɹæp ɪz spɹʌŋ."

"You and Siuan will hold a meeting in the Hall of the Tower, but it will be a decoy to draw Mesaana or her minions out of hiding. With wards - and some sisters watching from hidden places -  we'll be able to trap them. Siuan will send for me as soon as the trap is sprung."

nɪneɪiv fɹaʊnd. "ɪts ə ɡʊd plæn, seɪv fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ. aɪ doʊn laɪk jə biɪŋ ɪn deɪnʒɝ, mʌðɝ.

Nynaeve frowned. "It's a good plan, save for one thing. I don't like you being in danger, Mother.

lemi lɛd ðɪs faɪt. aɪ kən mænədʒ ɪt."

Let me lead this fight. I can manage it."

ɛɡwin stʌɾid nɪneɪiv, ən sɪuən sɔ səm ə ðə ɹil ɛɡwin. θɔtfəl. boʊld, bʌt kælkjəleɪɾɪŋ. ʃi ɔlsoʊ sɔ ɛɡwinz fətiɡ, ðə weɪɾ ə ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi. sɪuən nu ðət filɪŋ wɛl.

Egwene studied Nynaeve, and Siuan saw some of the real Egwene. Thoughtful. Bold, but calculating. She also saw Egwene's fatigue, the weight of responsibility. Siuan knew that feeling well.

aɪ ə ədmɪt juv ə væləd kənsɝn," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ɛvɝ sɪns aɪ lɛt maɪsɛlf ɡɛt kæptʃɝd baɪ ɪleɪɾ eɪz kɹoʊniz aʊtsaɪɾ ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, aɪv wʌndɝɾ ɪf aɪ bɪkʌm tu dɝɛkli ɪnvɑlvd, tu dɝɛkli ɪn deɪnʒɝ."

I a admit you have a valid concern," Egwene said. "Ever since I let myself get captured by Elaid a's cronies outside of Tar Valon, I've wondered if I become too directly involved, too directly in danger."

"ɪɡzækli," nɪneɪiv sɛd.

"Exactly," Nynaeve said.

"haʊɛvɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd, "ðə sɪmpəl fækt ɹɪmeɪnz ðəɾ aɪm ðə wʌn əmʌŋ əs u ɪz moʊst ɛkspɝɾ ət tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. jə tu ɑɹ skɪld, tʃɹu, bʌɾ aɪ hæv mɔɹ ɪkspɪɹiəns. ɪn ðɪs keɪs, aɪm nɑt dʒʌs ðə liɾɝ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, aɪm ə tul ðət ðə waɪt taʊɝ mʌs juz." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd "aɪ dʒɹim ðɪs, nɪneɪiv. ɪf wi də nɑt dɪfit mɛsænə hɪɹ, ɔl kəd bi lɔst. ɔl wɪl bi lɔst. ɪts nɑɾ ə taɪm tə hoʊl bæk ɛni ʌv əɹ tulz, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ væljəbəl."

"However," Egwene said, "the simple fact remains that I am the one among us who is most expert at Tel'aran'rhiod. You two are skilled, true, but I have more experience. In this case, I am not just the leader of the Aes Sedai, I am a tool that the White Tower must use." She hesitated "I dreamed this, Nynaeve. If we do not defeat Mesaana here, all could be lost. All will be lost. It is not a time to hold back any of our tools, no matter how valuable."

nɪneɪiv ɹitʃt fəɹ əɹ bɹeɪd, bʌɾ ɪt naʊ keɪm oʊnli tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝz ʃi ɡɹɪɾɪd əɹ tiθ ət ðæt.

Nynaeve reached for her braid, but it now came only to her shoulders She gritted her teeth at that.

"ju maɪɾ əv ə pɔɪnt. bʌɾ aɪ doʊn laɪk ɪt."

"You might have a point. But I don't like it."

"ði il dʒɹimwɔkɝz," sɪuən sɛd. "mʌðɝ, jə sɛd jəl bi mit-ɪŋ wɪð ðɛm. maɪt ðeɪ bi wɪlɪŋ tə hɛlp? aɪd fil mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ əbaʊt hævɪŋ jə faɪɾ ɪf aɪ nu ðeɪ wɝ ɝaʊn tə kip ən aɪ ɑn ju."

"The Aiel dreamwalkers," Siuan said. "Mother, you said you'll be meet-ing with them. Might they be willing to help? I'd feel much better about having you fight if I knew they were around to keep an eye on you."

"jɛs," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ə ɡʊd sədʒɛstʃən. əl kɑntækt əm bɪfɔɹ wi miɾ ən meɪk ðə ɹɪkwɛst, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs."

"Yes," Egwene said. "A good suggestion. I will contact them before we meet and make the request, just in case."

"mʌðɝ," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "pɝhæps ɹænd - "

"Mother," Nynaeve said. "Perhaps Rand - "

"ðɪs ɪz ə mæɾɝ ə ðə taʊɝ, nɪneɪiv," ɛɡwin sɛd. "wi wɪl mænədʒ ɪt."

"This is a matter of the Tower, Nynaeve," Egwene said. "We will manage it."

"vɛɹi wɛl."

"Very well."

"naʊ," ɛɡwin kəntɪnjud, "wi nid tə fɪɡjɝ aʊt haʊ tə spɹɛd ðə ɹaɪt ɹumɝz soʊ ðət mɛsænə woʊn bi eɪbəl tə ɹɪzɪs kʌmɪŋ tə lɪsən . . ."

"Now," Egwene continued, "we need to figure out how to spread the right rumors so that Mesaana won't be able to resist coming to listen . . ."

pɛɹɪn hɪt ðə naɪtmɛɹ ɹʌnɪŋ. ði ɛɹ bɛn ɝaʊn hɪm, ən ðə sɪɾi haʊzɪz - ðɪs taɪm ə ðə kɛɹhinɪn flæt-tɑp vɝaɪəɾi - dɪsəpɪɹd. ðə ɹoʊd bɪkeɪm sɑf bɪniθ ɪz fit, laɪk mʌd, ðən tɝn tə lɪkwəd.

Perrin hit the nightmare running. The air bent around him, and the city houses - this time of the Cairhienin flat-topped variety - disappeared. The road became soft beneath his feet, like mud, then turned to liquid.

hi splæʃt ɪn ði oʊʃən. wɔɾɝ əɡɛn? hi θɔt wɪð ənɔɪəns.

He splashed in the ocean. Water again? he thought with annoyance.

dip ɹɛd laɪtnɪŋ kɹæʃt ɪn ðə skaɪ, θɹoʊɪŋ weɪvz ə blʌɾi laɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə si. itʃ bɝst ɹɪvild ʃæɾoʊd kɹitʃɝz lɝkɪŋ bɪniθ ðə weɪvz. mæsɪv θɪŋz, ivəl ən sɪnwəs ɪn ðə spæzəmɪŋ ɹɛd laɪtnɪŋ.

Deep red lightning crashed in the sky, throwing waves of bloody light across the sea. Each burst revealed shadowed creatures lurking beneath the waves. Massive things, evil and sinuous in the spasming red lightning.

pipəl klʌŋ tə ðə ɹɛkədʒ ʌv wʌt hæd wʌns bɪn ə ʃɪp, skɹimɪŋ ɪn tɛɹɝ ən kɹaɪɪŋ aʊt fəɹ lʌvd wʌnz. mɛn ɑn bɹoʊkən bɔɹdz, wɪmən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hoʊl ðɛɹ beɪbiz əbʌv ðə wɔɾɝ əz taʊɝɪŋ weɪvz bɹoʊk oʊvɝ ðɛm, dɛd bɑɾiz bɑbɪŋ laɪk sæks ʌv ɡɹeɪn.

People clung to the wreckage of what had once been a ship, screaming in terror and crying out for loved ones. Men on broken boards, women trying to hold their babies above the water as towering waves broke over them, dead bodies bobbing like sacks of grain.

ðə θɪŋz bɪniθ ðə weɪvz stʃɹʌk, snætʃɪŋ pipəl fɹəm ðə sɝfəs ən dʒɹæɡɪŋ əm ɪndə ðə dɛpθs wɪð splæʃəz ə fɪnz ən spɑɹkɪŋ, ɹeɪzɝ-ʃɑɹp tiθ. ðə wɔɾɝ wɑz sun bʌbəlɪŋ ɹɛd ðət dɪdn kʌm fɹəm ðə laɪtnɪŋ.

The things beneath the waves struck, snatching people from the surface and dragging them into the depths with splashes of fins and sparking, razor-sharp teeth. The water was soon bubbling red that didn't come from the lightning.

huɛvɝ hæd dʒɹim ðɪs pɝtɪkjəlɝ naɪtmɛɹ hæɾ ə sɪŋɡjəlɝli twɪstəɾ ɪmædʒəneɪʃən.

Whoever had dreamed this particular nightmare had a singularly twisted imagination.

pɛɹɪn ɹəfjuz tə lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi dʒɹɔn ɪn. hi skwɛltʃt ɪz fɪɹ, ən dɪd nɑt swɪm fəɹ wʌn ə ðoʊz plæŋks. ɪɾ ɪzən ɹil. ɪɾ ɪzən ɹil. ɪɾ ɪzən ɹil.

Perrin refused to let himself be drawn in. He squelched his fear, and did not swim for one of those planks. It isn't real. It isn't real. It isn't real.

dɪspaɪɾ ɪz ʌndɝstændɪŋ, pɑɹɾ ə hɪm nu ðəɾ i wɑz gɑnə daɪ ɪn ðiz wɔɾɝz. ðiz tɛɹəbəl, blʌɾi wɔɾɝz. ðə moʊnz ə ði ʌðɝz əsɔltɪd hɪm, ən i jɝn tə tʃɹaɪ tə hɛlp ðɛm. ðeɪ wɝn ɹil, hi nu. dʒʌs fɪɡməns. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz hɑɹd.

Despite his understanding, part of him knew that he was going to die in these waters. These terrible, bloody waters. The moans of the others assaulted him, and he yearned to try to help them. They weren't real, he knew. Just figments. But it was hard.

pɛɹɪn bɪɡæn tə ɹaɪz fɹəm ðə wɔɾɝ, ðə weɪvz tɝnɪŋ bæk ɪndə ɡɹaʊnd. bʌt ðən i kɹaɪɾ aʊɾ əz sʌmθɪŋ bɹʌʃt ɪz lɛɡ. laɪtnɪŋ kɹæʃt bɹeɪkɪŋ ði ɛɹ. ə wʊmən bɪsaɪɾ ɪm slɪp bɪniθ ðə weɪvz, tʌɡd baɪ ənsin dʒɔz. pænɪkt, pɛɹɪn wɑz sʌɾənli bæk ɪn ðə wɔɾɝ, ðəɹ ɪn ə hɑɹtbit, floʊɾɪŋ ɪn ə kəmplitli dɪfɹən pleɪs, wʌn ɑɹm slʌŋ oʊvɝ ə pis ə ɹɛkədʒ.

Perrin began to rise from the water, the waves turning back into ground. But then he cried out as something brushed his leg. Lightning crashed breaking the air. A woman beside him slipped beneath the waves, tugged by unseen jaws. Panicked, Perrin was suddenly back in the water, there in a heartbeat, floating in a completely different place, one arm slung over a piece of wreckage.

ðɪs hæpən səmtaɪmz. ɪf i weɪvɝd fəɹ ə moʊmənt - ɪf i lɛt hɪmsɛlf si ðə naɪtmɛɹ əz ɹil  - ɪt wəd pʊl ɪm ɪn ən æktʃəli  muv hɪm, fɪɾɪŋ ɪm ɪndə ɪts tɛɹəbəl moʊzeɪɪk. sʌmθɪŋ muvd ɪn ðə wɔɾɝ nɪɹbaɪ, ən i splæʃt əweɪ wɪð ə stɑɹt. wʌn ə ðə sɝdʒɪŋ weɪvz ɹeɪzd ɪm ɪndə ði ɛɹ.

This happened sometimes. If he wavered for a moment - if he let himself see the nightmare as real  - it would pull him in and actually move him, fitting him into its terrible mosaic. Something moved in the water nearby, and he splashed away with a start. One of the surging waves raised him into the air.

ɪɾ ɪzən ɹil. ɪɾ ɪzən ɹil. ɪɾ ɪzən ɹil.

It isn't real. It isn't real. It isn't real.

ðə wɔɾɝz wɝ soʊ koʊld. sʌmθɪŋ tʌtʃt ɪz lɛɡ əɡɛn, ən i skɹimd, ðən tʃoʊkt ɔf əz i ɡʌlpt ɪn ə maʊθfʊl ə sɔlti wɔɾɝ.

The waters were so cold. Something touched his leg again, and he screamed, then choked off as he gulped in a mouthful of salty water.

ɪɾ ɪzən ɹil/ hi wɑz ɪn kɛɹhin, liɡz fɹəm ði oʊʃən. ðɪs wɑz ə stʃɹit. hɑɹd stoʊnz bɪniθ. ðə smɛl ə beɪk bɹɛd kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ə nɪɹbaɪ beɪkɝi. ðə stʃɹit laɪnd wɪð smɔl, θɪn-tʃɹʌŋkt æʃ tʃɹiz.

IT ISN'T REAL/ He was in Cairhien, leagues from the ocean. This was a street. Hard stones beneath. The smell of baked bread coming from a nearby bakery. The street lined with small, thin-trunked ash trees.

wɪð ə bɛloʊɪŋ skɹim, hi klʌŋ tə ðɪs nɑlədʒ əz ðə pipəl ɝaʊn ɪm hɛl tə ðɛɹ flɑtsəm. pɛɹɪn nɑɾɪd ɪz hænz ɪndə fɪsts, foʊkəsɪŋ ɑn ɹiæləɾi.

With a bellowing scream, he clung to this knowledge as the people around him held to their flotsam. Perrin knotted his hands into fists, focusing on reality.

ðəɹ wɝ kɑbəlstoʊnz ʌndɝ ɪz fit. nɑt weɪvz. nɑt wɔɾɝ. nɑt tiθ ən fɪnz. sloʊli, hi ɹoʊz fɹəm ði oʊʃən əɡɛn. hi stɛpt aʊɾ ʌv ɪɾ ən sɛɾ ɪz fʊɾ ɑn ðə sɝfəs, filɪŋ sɑləd stoʊn bɪniθ ɪz but. ði ʌðɝ fʊt fɑloʊd. hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɑn ə smɔl, floʊɾɪŋ sɝkəl ə stoʊnz.

There were cobblestones under his feet. Not waves. Not water. Not teeth and fins. Slowly, he rose from the ocean again. He stepped out of it and set his foot on the surface, feeling solid stone beneath his boot. The other foot followed. He found himself on a small, floating circle of stones.

sʌmθɪŋ ɪnɔɹməs sɝdʒ fɹəm ðə wɔɾɝz tə hɪz lɛft, ə mæsɪv bis pɑɹt fɪʃ ən pɑɹt mɑnstɝ, wɪð ə mɔ soʊ waɪd ðəɾ ə mæn kəd wɔk ɪndə ɪt stændɪŋ əpɹaɪt. θɛtiθ wɝ əz lɑɹdʒ əz pɛɹɪnz hænd, ən ðeɪ ɡlɪɾɝd, dʒɹɪpɪŋ blʌd.

Something enormous surged from the waters to his left, a massive beast part fish and part monster, with a maw so wide that a man could walk into it standing upright. The'teeth were as large as Perrin's hand, and they glittered, dripping blood.

ɪt wɑz nɑt ɹil.

It was not real.

ðə kɹitʃɝ ɪksploʊɾəd ɪndə mɪst. ðə spɹeɪ hɪt pɛɹɪn, ðən dʒɹaɪɾ ɪmiɾiətli. ɝaʊn hɪm, ðə naɪtmɛɹ bɛnt, ə bʌbəl ə ɹiæləɾi pɹɛsɪŋ aʊt fɹəm hɪm. dɑɹk ɛɹ, koʊld weɪvz, skɹimɪŋ pipəl ɹæn təɡɛðɝ laɪk wɛt peɪnt.

The creature exploded into mist. The spray hit Perrin, then dried immediately. Around him, the nightmare bent, a bubble of reality pressing out from him. Dark air, cold waves, screaming people ran together like wet paint.

nɪɹ wɑz noʊ laɪtnɪŋ - hi dɪd nɑt si ɪt laɪɾ ɪz aɪlɪdz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ θʌndɝ. hi kəd nɑt hɪɹ ɪt kɹæʃɪŋ. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ weɪvz, nɑɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə lændlɑkt kɛɹhin.

Tnere was no lightning - he did not see it light his eyelids. There was no thunder. He could not hear it crashing. There were no waves, not in the middle of landlocked Cairhien.

pɛɹɪn snæpt ɪz aɪz oʊpən, ən ði ɪntaɪɝ naɪtmɛɹ bɹoʊk əpɑɹt, vænɪʃɪŋ laɪk ə fɪlm ə fɹɔst ɪkspoʊz tə ðə spɹɪŋ sʌnlaɪt. ðə bɪldɪŋz ɹiəpɪɹd, ðə stʃɹit ɹɪtɝnd, ðə weɪvz ɹitʃɹiɾəd. ðə skaɪ ɹɪtɝn tə ðə bɔɪlɪŋ blæk tɛmpəst. laɪtnɪŋ ðət wɑz bɹaɪɾ ən waɪt flæʃt ɪn ɪts dɛpθs, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ θʌndɝ.

Perrin snapped his eyes open, and the entire nightmare broke apart, vanishing like a film of frost exposed to the spring sunlight. The buildings reappeared, the street returned, the waves retreated. The sky returned to the boiling black tempest. Lightning that was bright and white flashed in its depths, but there was no thunder.

hɑpɝ sæɾ ɑn ðə stʃɹiɾ ə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns əweɪ. pɛɹɪn wɔkt oʊvɝ tə ðə wʊlf. hi cʊɾə dʒʌmp ðəɹ ɪmiɾiətli, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ i dɪdn laɪk ði aɪdiə ʌv duɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ izəli. ðət wəd baɪɾ əɾ ɪm wən i ɹɪtɝn tə ðə ɹil wɝld.

Hopper sat on the street a short distance away. Perrin walked over to the wolf. He could have jumped there immediately, of course, but he didn't like the idea of doing everything easily. That would bite at him when he returned to the real world.

jə ɡɹoʊ stʃɹɔŋ, jʌŋ bʊl, hɑpɝ sɛn əpɹuvɪŋli.

You grow strong, Young Bull, Hopper sent approvingly.

"aɪ stɪl teɪk tu lɔŋ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ɡlænsɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "ɛvɹi taɪm aɪ ɛntɝ, ɪt teɪks mi ə fju mɪnəts tə ɹɪɡeɪn kəntʃɹoʊl. aɪ nid tə bi fæstɝ. ɪn ə bæɾəl wɪð sleɪɝ, ə fju mɪnəts maɪɾ əz wɛl bi ən ɪtɝnəɾi."

"I still take too long," Perrin said, glancing over his shoulder. "Every time I enter, it takes me a few minutes to regain control. I need to be faster. In a battle with Slayer, a few minutes might as well be an eternity."

hɪl nɑt bi soʊ stʃɹɔŋ əz ðiz.

He will not be so strong as these.

"hil stɪl bi stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "hiz hæd jɪɹz tə lɝn tə kəntʃɹoʊl ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. aɪ oʊnli dʒʌst stɑɹɾəd."

"He'll still be strong enough," Perrin said. "He's had years to learn to control the wolf dream. I only just started."

hɑpɝ læft. jʌŋ bʊl, jə stɑɹɾəd ðə fɝs taɪm jə keɪm hɪɹ.

Hopper laughed. Young Bull, you started the first time you came here.

"jɛs, bʌɾ aɪ dʒʌst stɑɹɾəd tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ə fju wiks bæk."

"Yes, but I just started training a few weeks back."

hɑpɝ kəntɪnjud læfɪŋ. hi wɑz ɹaɪt, ɪn ə weɪ. pɛɹɪn hæd spɛn tu jɪɹz pɹipɛɹɪŋ, vɪzəɾɪŋ ðə wʊlf dʒɹim ət naɪt. bʌɾ i stɪl niɾəd tə lɝn əz mʌtʃ əz i kʊd. ɪn ə weɪ, hi wɑz ɡlæd fəɹ ðə dɪleɪ bɪfɔɹ ðə tʃɹaɪəl.

Hopper continued laughing. He was right, in a way. Perrin had spent two years preparing, visiting the wolf dream at night. But he still needed to learn as much as he could. In a way, he was glad for the delay before the trial.

bʌɾ i kəd nɑt dɪleɪ tu lɔŋ. ðə læs hʌnt wɑz əpɑn ðɛm. mɛni ʌv ðə wʊlvz wɝ ɹʌnɪŋ tə ðə nɔɹθ; pɛɹɪn kəd fil əm pæsɪŋ. ɹʌnɪŋ fəɹ ðə blaɪt, fəɹ ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. ðeɪ wɝ muvɪŋ boʊθ ɪn ðə ɹil wɝld ən ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim, bʌt ðoʊz hɪɹ dɪd nɑt ʃɪf ðəɹ dɝɛkli. ðeɪ ɹæn, əz pæks.

But he could not delay too long. The Last Hunt was upon them. Many of the wolves were running to the north; Perrin could feel them passing. Running for the Blight, for the Borderlands. They were moving both in the real world and in the wolf dream, but those here did not shift there directly. They ran, as packs.

hi kəd tɛl ðət hɑpɝ lɔŋ tə dʒɔɪn ðɛm. haʊɛvɝ, hi ɹɪmeɪn bɪhaɪnd, əz dɪd səm ʌðɝz.

He could tell that Hopper longed to join them. However, he remained behind, as did some others.

"kʌm ɑn," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "lɛts faɪn ənʌðɝ naɪtmɛɹ."

"Come on," Perrin said. "Let's find another nightmare."

ðə ɹoʊz mɑɹtʃ wɑz ɪn blum.

The Rose March was in bloom.

ðət wɑz ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl. fju ʌðɝ plæns hæd blumd ɪn ðɪs tɛɹəbəl sʌmɝ, ən ðoʊz ðət dɪd hæd wɪltɪd. bʌt ðə ɹoʊz mɑɹtʃ wɑz blumɪŋ, ən fɪɹsli, hʌnʒɹədz ə ɹɛɾ ɪksploʊʒənz twɪstɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə ɡɑɹɾən fɹeɪmwɝk. vɔɹeɪʃəs ɪnsɛks bʌz fɹəm flaʊɝ tə flaʊɝ, əz ɪf ɛvɹi bi ɪn ðə sɪɾi hæd kʌm hɪɹ tə fid.

That was incredible. Few other plants had bloomed in this terrible summer, and those that did had wilted. But the Rose March was blooming, and fiercely, hundreds of red explosions twisting around the garden framework. Voracious insects buzzed from flower to flower, as if every bee in the city had come here to feed.

ɡɔɪn kɛpt ɪz dɪstəns fɹəm ði ɪnsɛks, bʌt ðə sɛn ə ɹoʊzɪz wɑz soʊ pɝveɪsɪv ðəɾ i fɛl beɪðd ɪn ɪt. wʌns i fɪnɪʃt ɪz wɔk, hɪz kloʊðɪŋ wəd pɹɑbli smɛl ə ðə pɝfjum fəɹ aʊɝz.

Gawyn kept his distance from the insects, but the scent of roses was so pervasive that he felt bathed in it. Once he finished his walk, his clothing would probably smell of the perfume for hours.

ɪleɪn wɑz spikɪŋ wɪð sɛvɹəl ædvaɪzɝz nɪɹ wʌn ə ðə bɛntʃɪz bɪsaɪɾ ə smɔl, lɪli-kʌvɝd pɑnd. ʃi wɑz ʃoʊɪŋ əɹ pɹɛɡnənsi, ən simd ɹɑɾi- ænt. hɝ ɡoʊldən hɛɹ ɹəflɛktəd ðə sʌnlaɪt laɪk ðə sɝfəs ʌv ə mɪɹɝ; ətɑp ðət hɛɹ, ðə ɹoʊz kɹaʊn ʌv ændɝ lʊkt ɔlmoʊs pleɪn baɪ kəmpɛɹəsən.

Elayne was speaking with several advisors near one of the benches beside a small, lily-covered pond. She was showing her pregnancy, and seemed radi- ant. Her golden hair reflected the sunlight like the surface of a mirror; atop that hair, the Rose Crown of Andor looked almost plain by comparison.

ʃi ɔfən hæd mʌtʃ tə də ðiz deɪz. hid hɝd hʌʃt ɹɪpɔɹts ə ðə wɛpənz ʃi wɑz bɪldɪŋ, ðə wʌnz ʃi θɔt maɪt bi əz paʊɝfəl əz kæptɪv deɪmeɪn. ðə bɛlfndɝz ɪn keɪɛmlɪn hæd bɪn wɝkɪŋ fəɹ stʃɹeɪt θɹu ðə naɪts, fɹəm wʌt hid hɝd. keɪɛmlɪn wɑz pɹipɛɹɪŋ fəɹ wɔɹ, ðə sɪɾi əbʌz wɪð æktɪvəɾi. ʃi dɪdn ɔfən əv taɪm fəɹ hɪm, ðoʊ hi wɑz ɡlæd fəɹ wʌt ʃi kəd spɛɹ.

She often had much to do these days. He'd heard hushed reports of the weapons she was building, the ones she thought might be as powerful as captive damane. The bellfounders in Caemlyn had been working for straight through the nights, from what he'd heard. Caemlyn was preparing for war, the city abuzz with activity. She didn't often have time for him, though he was glad for what she could spare.

ʃi smaɪld əɾ ɪm əz i əpɹoʊtʃt, ðən weɪvd ɔf əɹ ətɛndəns fəɹ ðə moʊmənt. ʃi wɔk tə hɪm ən ɡeɪv ɪm ə fɑn kɪs ɑn ðə tʃik. "ju lʊk θɔtfəl."

She smiled at him as he approached, then waved off her attendants for the moment. She walked to him and gave him a fond kiss on the cheek. "You look thoughtful."

"ə kɑmən mæləɾi ʌv maɪn leɪtli," hi sɛd. "ju lʊk dɪstʃɹæktəd."

"A common malady of mine lately," he said. "You look distracted."

"ə kɑmən mæləɾi ʌv maɪn leɪtli," ʃi sɛd. "ðɛɹ ɪz ɔlweɪz tu mʌtʃ tə də ən nɛvɝ ɪnʌf ə mi tə də ɪt.

"A common malady of mine lately," she said. "There is always too much to do and never enough of me to do it.

"ɪf jə nid tə - "

"If you need to - "

"noʊ," ʃi sɛd, teɪkɪŋ ɪz ɑɹm. "aɪ nid tə spik tə ju. ən aɪv bɪn toʊl ðəɾ ə wɔk ɝaʊn ðə ɡɑɹɾənz wʌns ə deɪ wɪl bi ɡʊd fəɹ maɪ kɑnstətuʃən."

"No," she said, taking his arm. "I need to speak to you. And I've been told that a walk around the gardens once a day will be good for my constitution."

ɡɔɪn smaɪld, bɹiðɪŋ ɪn ðə sɛns ə ɹoʊzɪz ən mʌɾ ɝaʊn ðə pɑnd. ðə sɛns ə laɪf. hi ɡlænst ʌp ət ðə skaɪ əz ðeɪ wɔkt. "aɪ kæn bɪliv haʊ mʌtʃ sʌnlaɪt wiv bɪn siɪŋ hɪɹ. aɪd nɪɹli kənvɪns maɪsɛlf ðət ðə pɝpɛtʃuəl ɡlum wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ənnætʃɹəl."

Gawyn smiled, breathing in the scents of roses and mud around the pond. The scents of life. He glanced up at the sky as they walked. "I can't believe how much sunlight we've been seeing here. I'd nearly convinced myself that the perpetual gloom was something unnatural."

"oʊ, ɪt pɹɑbli ɪz," ʃi sɛd nɑnʃəlɑnli. "ə wik bæk ðə klaʊd kʌvɝ ɪn ændɝ bɹoʊk ɝaʊn keɪɛmlɪn, bʌt noʊwɛɹ ɛls."

"Oh, it probably is," she said nonchalantly. "A week back the cloud cover in Andor broke around Caemlyn, but nowhere else."

"bʌt. . . haʊ?"

"But. . . how?"

ʃi smaɪld. "ɹænd. sʌmθɪŋ i dɪd. hi wɑz ətɑp dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt, aɪ θɪŋk. ən ðən . . ."

She smiled. "Rand. Something he did. He was atop Dragonmount, I think. And then . . ."

sʌɾənli, ðə deɪ sim dɑɹkɝ. "ælθɹ əɡɛn," ɡɔɪn spæt. "hi fɑloʊz mi ivən hɪɹ."

Suddenly, the day seemed darker. "Al'Thor again," Gawyn spat. "He follows me even here."

"ivən hɪɹ?" ʃi sɛd wɪð əmjuzmənt. "aɪ bɪliv ðiz ɡɑɹɾənz ɑɹ wɛɹ wi fɝs mɛt hɪm."

"Even here?" she said with amusement. "I believe these gardens are where we first met him."

ɡɔɪn dɪdn ɹɪplaɪ tə ðæt. hi ɡlæns nɔɹθwɝd, tʃɛkɪŋ ðə skaɪ ɪn ðət dɝɛkʃən. ɑmənəs dɑɹk klaʊdz hʌŋ aʊt ðɛɹ. "hiz ðə fɑðɝ, ɪzən hi?"

Gawyn didn't reply to that. He glanced northward, checking the sky in that direction. Ominous dark clouds hung out there. "He's the father, isn't he?"

"ɪf i wɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd wɪθaʊt mɪsɪŋ ə bit, "ðɛn ɪt wəd bi pɹuɾənt tə haɪd ðət fækt, wʊdn ɪt? ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɪl bi tɑɹɡəts."

"If he were," Elayne said without missing a beat, "then it would be prudent to hide that fact, wouldn't it? The children of the Dragon Reborn will be targets."

ɡɔɪn fɛl sɪk. hid səspɛktəɾ ɪt ðə moʊmən hid dɪskʌvɝd ðə pɹɛɡnənsi. "bɝn mi," hi sɛd.

Gawyn felt sick. He'd suspected it the moment he'd discovered the pregnancy. "Burn me," he said.

"ɪleɪn, haʊ kəd ju? æftɝ wʌɾ i dɪd tə əɹ mʌðɝ!"

"Elayne, how could you? After what he did to our mother!"

"hi dɪd nʌθɪŋ tə hɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪ kən pɹədus wɪtnəs æftɝ wɪt-nɛs ðət wɪl kənfɝm ɪt, ɡɔɪn. mʌðɝ vænɪʃt bɪfɔɹ ɹænd lɪbɝeɪɾɪd keɪɛmlɪn." ðəɹ wɑz ə fɑn lʊk ɪn əɹ aɪz əz ʃi spoʊk ə hɪm. "sʌmθɪŋ ɪz hæpənɪŋ tə hɪm. aɪ kən fil ɪt, fil ɪm tʃeɪnʒɪŋ. klɛnzɪŋ. hi dʒɹaɪvz bæk ðə klaʊdz ən meɪks ðə ɹoʊzɪz blum."

"He did nothing to her," Elayne said. "I can produce witness after wit-ness that will confirm it, Gawyn. Mother vanished before Rand liberated Caemlyn." There was a fond look in her eyes as she spoke of him. "Something is happening to him. I can feel it, feel him changing. Cleansing. He drives back the clouds and makes the roses bloom."

ɡɔɪn ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ. ʃi θɔt ðə ɹoʊzɪz blum kəz ʌv eɪslæʃθɔɹ? wɛl, lʌv kəd meɪk ə pɝsən θɪŋk stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz, ən wən ðə mæn ʃi spoʊk ʌv wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, pɝhæps səm ɪɹæʃənæləɾi wɑz tə bi ɪkspɛktəd.

Gawyn raised an eyebrow. She thought the roses bloomed because of a/'Thor? Well, love could make a person think strange things, and when the man she spoke of was the Dragon Reborn, perhaps some irrationality was to be expected.

ðeɪ əpɹoʊtʃt ðə pɑnz smɔl dɑk. hi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ swɪmɪŋ ðəɹ əz ə tʃaɪld, ðən ɡɛɾɪŋ ən ɪɹfəl fəɹ ɪt. nɑt fɹəm ɪz mʌðɝ, fɹəm ɡɑləd, ðoʊ ɡɔɪnz mʌðɝ hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ə stɝn, dɪsəpɔɪntɪd lʊk. hid nɛvɝ toʊld ɛniwʌn ðət hid bɪn swɪmɪŋ oʊnli kəz ɪleɪn hæd pʊʃt ɪm ɪn.

They approached the pond's small dock. He could remember swimming there as a child, then getting an earful for it. Not from his mother, from Galad, though Gawyn's mother had given him a stern, disappointed look. He'd never told anyone that he'd been swimming only because Elayne had pushed him in.

"jɔɹ nɛvɝ gɑnə fɝɡɛt ðæt, ɑɹ ju?" ɪleɪn æskt.

"You're never going to forget that, are you?" Elayne asked.

"wʌt?" hi æskt.

"What?" he asked.

"ju wɝ θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðə taɪm jə slɪpt ɪndə ðə pɑn dʊɹɪŋ mʌðɝz miɾɪŋ wɪð haʊs fɛɹə."

"You were thinking of the time you slipped into the pond during Mother's meeting with House Farah."

"slɪpt? jə pʊʃt mi!"

"Slipped? You pushed me!"

"aɪ dɪd nʌθɪŋ ə ðə sɔɹt," ɪleɪn sɛd pɹɪmli. "ju wɝ ʃoʊɪŋ ɔf, bælənsɪŋ ɑn ðə poʊsts."

"I did nothing of the sort," Elayne said primly. "You were showing off, balancing on the posts."

"æn jə ʃʊk ðə dɑk."

"And you shook the dock."

"aɪ stɛpt ɑntu ɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd. "fɔɹsfəli. ɪm ə vɪɡɝəs pɝsən. aɪ hæv ə fɔɹsfəl stʃɹaɪd."

"I stepped onto it," Elayne said. "Forcefully. I'm a vigorous person. I have a forceful stride."

"ə fɔɹsfəl -  ðæts ə daʊnɹaɪt laɪ!"

"A forceful -  That's a downright lie!"

"noʊ, aɪm mɪɹli steɪɾɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ kɹieɪɾɪvli. aɪm ɛɛs sədaɪ naʊ. ɪts ə tælən ʌv aʊɝz. naʊ, ɑɹ jə gɑnə ɹoʊ mi ɑn ðə pɑnd, əɹ nɔɹ?"

"No, I'm merely stating the truth creatively. I'm Aes Sedai now. Its a talent of ours. Now, are you going to row me on the pond, or nor?"

"aɪ . . . ɹoʊ ju? wən dɪd ðət kʌm ʌp?"

"I . . . Row you? When did that come up?"

"dʒʌs naʊ. wɝn jə lɪsnɪŋ?"

"Just now. Weren't you listening?"

ɡɔɪn ʃʊk ə bɪmjuz hɛd. "faɪn." bɪhaɪn ðɛm, sɛvɹəl ɡɑɹdz-wɪmən tʊk ʌp poʊsts. ðeɪ wɝ ɔlweɪz nɪɹ, ɔfən lɛd baɪ ðə tɔl wʊmən u fænsid hɝsɛlf ən ɪmədʒ ə bɝdʒɪt fɹəm ðə stɔɹiz. ən meɪbi ʃi dɪd lʊk laɪk bɝdʒɪɾ ət ðət - ʃi wɛn baɪ ðə neɪm, ɛniweɪ, ən wɑz sɝvɪŋ əz kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl.

Gawyn shook a bemused head. "Fine." Behind them, several Guards-women took up posts. They were always near, often led by the tall woman who fancied herself an image of Birgitte from the stories. And maybe she did look like Birgitte at that - she went by the name, anyway, and was serving as Captain-General.

ðə ɡɑɹdz wɝ dʒɔɪn baɪ ə ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɡɹup ʌv ətɛndəns ən mɛs- sɛŋɝz. ðə læs bæɾəl əpɹoʊtʃt, ən ændɝ pɹipɛɹd - ænd, ənfɔɹɾu- nætli, mɛni ʌv ðoʊz pɹɛpɝeɪʃənz ɹikwaɪɝɾ ɪleɪnz dɝɛkt ətɛnʃən.

The Guards were joined by a growing group of attendants and mes- sengers. The Last Battle approached, and Andor prepared - and, unfortu- nately, many of those preparations required Elayne's direct attention.

ðoʊ ɡɔɪn hæd hɝɾ ə kjʊɹiəs stɔɹi ʌv ɪleɪn hævɪŋ bɪn kæɹiɾ ʌp ɑn ðə sɪɾi wɔl ɪn əɹ bɛɾ ə wik əɹ soʊ bæk. soʊ fɑɹ, hi hædn bɪn eɪbəl tə pɪn əɹ daʊn ɑn wɛðɝ ðət wɑz tʃɹu əɹ nɑt.

Though Gawyn had heard a curious story of Elayne having been carried up on the city wall in her bed a week or so back. So far, he hadn't been able to pin her down on whether that was true or not.

hi weɪv tə bɝdʒɪt, hu ɡeɪv ɪm ə skaʊl əz i lɛɾ ɪleɪn tə ðə pɑnz smɔl ɹoʊboʊt. "aɪ pɹɑməs nɑt tə dʌmp əɹ ɪn," ɡɔɪn kɔld. ðɛn, ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, "ðoʊ aɪ maɪt ɹoʊ 'fɔɹsfəli' ən ʌpɛn ʌs."

He waved to Birgitte, who gave him a scowl as he led Elayne to the pond's small rowboat. "I promise not to dump her in," Gawyn called. Then, under his breath, "Though I might row 'forcefully' and upend us."

"oʊ, hʌʃ," ɪleɪn sɛd, sɛɾəlɪŋ daʊn. "pɑndwɔɾɝ wʊdn bi ɡʊd fəɹ ðə beɪbiz."

"Oh, hush," Elayne said, settling down. "Pondwater wouldn't be good for the babies."

"spikɪŋ ʌv wɪtʃ," ɡɔɪn sɛd, pʊʃɪŋ ðə boʊɾ ɔf wɪð ɪz toʊ, ðən stɛpɪŋ ɪndə ɪt. ðə vɛsəl ʃʊk pɹɪkɛɹiəsli əntɪl i sæt daʊn. "ɑɹən jə səpoʊz tə bi wɔkɪŋ fəɹ jəɹ 'kɑnstətuʃən'?"

"Speaking of which," Gawyn said, pushing the boat off with his toe, then stepping into it. The vessel shook precariously until he sat down. "Aren't you supposed to be walking for your 'constitution'?"

"aɪl tɛl mɛlfən aɪ niɾəd tə teɪk ði ɑpɝtunəɾi tə ɹəfɔɹm maɪ mɪskɹiən bɹʌðɝ. jə kən ɡɛɾ əweɪ wɪð ɔl kaɪnz ə θɪŋz ɪf jəɹ ɡɪvɪŋ sʌmwʌn ə pɹɑpɝ skoʊldɪŋ."

"I'll tell Melfane I needed to take the opportunity to reform my miscreant brother. You can get away with all kinds of things if you're giving someone a proper scolding."

"æn ɪz ðət wʌɾ aɪm ɡɛɾɪŋ? ə skoʊldɪŋ?"

"And is that what I'm getting? A scolding?"

"nɑt nɛsəsɛɹəli." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz sɑmbɝ. ɡɔɪn ʃɪp ði ɔɹz ən slɪpt əm ɪndə ðə wɔɾɝ. ðə pɑnd wɑzn lɑɹdʒ, bɛɹli bɪɡ ɪnʌf tə dʒʌstəfaɪ ə boʊt, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə sɝɛnəɾi əbaʊt biɪŋ əpɑn ðə wɔɾɝ, əmɪd ðə pɑnd-ɹʌnɝz ən ðə bʌɾɝflaɪz.

"Not necessarily." Her voice was somber. Gawyn shipped the oars and slipped them into the water. The pond wasn't large, barely big enough to justify a boat, but there was a serenity about being upon the water, amid the pond-runners and the butterflies.

"ɡɔɪn," ɪleɪn sɛd, "waɪ hæv jə kʌm tə keɪɛmlɪn?"

"Gawyn," Elayne said, "why have you come to Caemlyn?"

"ɪts maɪ hoʊm," hi sɛd. "waɪ ʃʊdn aɪ kʌm hɪɹ?"

"It's my home," he said. "Why shouldn't I come here?"

"aɪ wɝiɾ əbaʊt jə dʊɹɪŋ ðə sidʒ. aɪ cʊɾə juz jə ɪn ðə faɪɾɪŋ. bʌt jə steɪɾ əweɪ."

"I worried about you during the siege. I could have used you in the fighting. But you stayed away."

"aɪ ɪkspleɪn ðæt, ɪleɪn! aɪ wɑz ɛmbɹɔɪld ɪn waɪt taʊɝ pɑlətɪks, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə wɪntɝ snoʊz. ɪt bɝnz mi ðəɾ aɪ kʊdn hɛlp, bʌt ðoʊz wɪmən hæd ðɛɹ fɪŋɡɝz ɑn mi."

"I explained that, Elayne! I was embroiled in White Tower politics, not to mention the winter snows. It burns me that I couldn't help, but those women had their fingers on me."

"aɪm wʌn ʌv 'ðoʊz wɪmən' maɪsɛlf, jə noʊ." ʃi hɛld ʌp əɹ hænd, ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɛnsɝkəlɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝ.

"I'm one of 'those women' myself, you know." She held up her hand, Great Serpent ring encircling her finger.

"jɔɹ dɪfɹənt," ɡɔɪn sɛd. 'ɛniweɪ, jəɹ ɹaɪt. aɪ ʃʊɾə bɪn hɪɹ. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ ʌðɝ əpɑlədʒiz jə ɪkspɛk mi tə meɪk, ðoʊ."

"You're different," Gawyn said. 'Anyway, you're right. I should have been here. I don't know what other apologies you expect me to make, though."

aɪ doʊn ɪkspɛkt ɛni əpɑlədʒiz," ɪleɪn sɛd. "oʊ, ɡɔɪn, aɪ wɑzn tʃæstaɪzɪŋ ju. waɪl aɪ sɝɾənli cʊɾə juz ju, wi mænədʒd. aɪ ɔlsoʊ wɝiɾ əbaʊt jə ɡɛɾɪŋ kɑt bɪtwin dɪfɛndɪŋ ðə taʊɝ ən pɹətɛktɪŋ ɛɡwin. ɪt simz ðət wɝkt aʊɾ əz wɛl. soʊ, aɪ æsk. waɪ hæv jə kʌm hɪɹ naʊ? dʌzn ɛɡwin nid ju?"

I don't expect any apologies," Elayne said. "Oh, Gawyn, I wasn't chastising you. While I certainly could have used you, we managed. I also worried about you getting caught between defending the Tower and protecting Egwene. It seems that worked out as well. So, I ask. Why have you come here now? Doesn't Egwene need you?"

"əpɛɹənli nɑt," ɡɔɪn sɛd, bækɪŋ ðə boʊt. ə mæsɪv dʒɹeɪpɪŋ wɪloʊ ɡɹu fɹəm ðə saɪɾ ə ðə pɑn hɪɹ, hæŋɪŋ daʊn bɹæntʃəz laɪk bɹeɪdz tə dæŋɡəl əbʌv ðə wɔɾɝ. hi ɹeɪzd ɪz ɔɹz aʊtsaɪd ðoʊz bɹæntʃəz ən ðə boʊt stɪld.

"Apparently not," Gawyn said, backing the boat. A massive draping willow grew from the side of the pond here, hanging down branches like braids to dangle above the water. He raised his oars outside those branches and the boat stilled.

"wɛl," ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪ woʊn pɹɪzum tə pɹaɪ ɪndə ðət - ət list, nɑɾ ət ðə moʊmənt. jə ɑɹ ɔlweɪz wɛlkəm hɪɹ, ɡɔɪn. aɪd meɪk jə kæptən.. dʒɛnɝəl ɪf jə æskt, bʌɾ aɪ doʊn θɪŋk jə wɑn ɪt."

"Well," Elayne said. "I won't presume to pry into that - at least, not at the moment. You are always welcome here, Gawyn. I'd make you Captain.. General if you asked, but I don't think you want it."

"wʌt meɪks jə seɪ ðæt?"

"What makes you say that?"

"wɛl, juv spɛn ðə mədʒɔɹəɾi ʌv jəɹ taɪm hɪɹ moʊpɪŋ ɝaʊn ðiz ɡɑɹɾənz."

"Well, you've spent the majority of your time here moping around these gardens."

"aɪ hæv nɑt bɪn moʊpɪŋ. aɪv bɪn pɑndɝɪŋ."

"I have not been moping. I've been pondering."

"ɑ, jɛs. aɪ si juv lɝn tə spik ðə tʃɹuθ kɹieɪɾɪvli, tu."

"Ah, yes. I see you've learned to speak the truth creatively, too."

hi snɔɹɾɪd sɔfli.

He snorted softly.

"ɡɔɪn, jə hævən bɪn spɛndɪŋ taɪm wɪð ɛni ʌv jəɹ fɹɛnz əɹ əkweɪntənsɪz fɹəm ðə pæləs. jə hævən bɪn stɛpɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɹoʊl ʌv ə pɹɪns əɹ kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl. ɪnstɛd jə mɪɹli . .

"Gawyn, you haven't been spending time with any of your friends or acquaintances from the palace. You haven't been stepping into the role of a prince or Captain-General. Instead you merely . .

. pɑndɝ."

. ponder."

ɡɔɪn lʊkt aʊɾ əkɹɔs ðə pɑnd. "aɪ doʊn spɛn taɪm wɪð ði ʌðɝz kəz ðeɪ ɔl wɑnə noʊ waɪ aɪ wɑzn hɪɹ fəɹ ðə sidʒ. ðeɪ kip æskɪŋ wən aɪm gɑnə teɪk maɪ steɪʃən hɪɹ ən lɛd jəɹ ɑɹmiz."

Gawyn looked out across the pond. "I don't spend time with the others because they all want to know why I wasn't here for the siege. They keep asking when I'm going to take my station here and lead your armies."

"ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt, ɡɔɪn. jə doʊn əv tə bi kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl, ən aɪ kən sɝvaɪv wɪð maɪ fɝs pɹɪns ə ðə sɔɹɾ æbsənt, ɪf aɪ mʌst. ðoʊ əl ədmɪt, bɝdʒɪɾ ɪz ɹæðɝ əpsɛt wɪð jə fəɹ nɑt bɪkʌmɪŋ kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl."

"It's all right, Gawyn. You don't have to be Captain-General, and I can survive with my First Prince of the Sword absent, if I must. Though I'll admit, Birgitte is rather upset with you for not becoming Captain-General."

"ɪz ðət ðə ɹizən fəɹ ðə ɡlɛɹz?"

"Is that the reason for the glares?"

"jɛs. bʌt ʃɪl mænədʒ; ʃiz æktʃəli  ɡʊɾ ət ðə dʒɑb. ən ɪf ðɛɹz ɛniwʌn aɪd wɑn jə pɹətɛktɪŋ, ɪt wəd bi ɛɡwin. ʃi dɪzɝvz ju."

"Yes. But she will manage; she's actually good at the job. And if there's anyone I'd want you protecting, it would be Egwene. She deserves you."

"ænd wʌɾ ɪf aɪv dɪsaɪɾɪd aɪ doʊnt wɑn hɝ?"

"And what if I've decided I don't want her?"

ɪleɪn ɹitʃt fɔɹwɝd, ɹɛstɪŋ əɹ hæn ɑn ɪz ɑɹm. hɝ feɪs -  fɹeɪmd ɪn ɡoʊldən hɛɹ, tɑp baɪ ðət mætʃɪŋ kɹaʊn - lʊkt kənsɝnd. "oʊ, ɡɔɪn. wʌɾ əz hæpən tə ju?"

Elayne reached forward, resting her hand on his arm. Her face -  framed in golden hair, topped by that matching crown - looked concerned. "Oh, Gawyn. What has happened to you?"

hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "bɹaɪn θɪŋks aɪ wɑz tu əkʌstəm tə səksiɾɪŋ, ən dɪdnt noʊ haʊ tə ɹiækt wən θɪŋz stɑɹɾəd tə ʌpɛn ɑn mi."

He shook his head. "Bryne thinks I was too accustomed to succeeding, and didn't know how to react when things started to upend on me."

"ænd wʌt dʒju θɪŋk?"

"And what do you think?"

"aɪ θɪŋk ɪts bɪn ɡʊd fəɹ mi tə bi hɪɹ," ɡɔɪn sɛd, teɪkɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ. səm wɪmən wɝ wɔkɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə pæθ ɝaʊn ðə pɑnd, lɛd baɪ ə wʊmən wɪð bɹaɪt ɹɛd hɛɹ ðət wɑz stʃɹikt wɪð waɪt. dmænə wɑz səm kaɪndə feɪl stuɾənt ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ɡɔɪn wɑzn kwaɪt sɝɾən əbaʊt ðə neɪtʃɝ ə ðə kɪn ən ðɛɹ ɹileɪʃənʃɪp wɪð ɪleɪn.

"I think it's been good for me to be here," Gawyn said, taking a deep breath. Some women were walking along the path around the pond, led by a woman with bright red hair that was streaked with white. Dimana was some kind of failed student of the White Tower. Gawyn wasn't quite certain about the nature of the Kin and their relationship with Elayne.

"biɪŋ hɪɹ," hi sɛd, "ɹimaɪndəd mi ʌv maɪ laɪf bɪfɔɹ. ɪts bɪn pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli lɪbɝeɪɾɪŋ tə bi fɹi ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ. fəɹ ə taɪm, aɪ wɑz ʃʊɹ ðəɾ aɪ niɾəd tə bi wɪð ɛɡwin. wən aɪ lɛf ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz tə ɹaɪd tə hɝ, ɪt fɛlt laɪk ðə bɛs tʃɔɪs aɪɾ ɛvɝ meɪd. ən jɛt, ʃi simz tə hæv muv bɪɑnd niɾɪŋ mi. ʃiz soʊ kənsɝnd wɪð biɪŋ stʃɹɔŋ, wɪð biɪŋ ði æmɪɝlɪn, ðət ʃi dʌzn əv ɹum fəɹ ɛniwʌn u woʊn baʊ tə hɝ ɛvɹi wɪm."

"Being here," he said, "reminded me of my life before. It's been particularly liberating to be free of Aes Sedai. For a time, I was sure that I needed to be with Egwene. When I left the Younglings to ride to her, it felt like the best choice I'd ever made. And yet, she seems to have moved beyond needing me. She's so concerned with being strong, with being the Amyrlin, that she doesn't have room for anyone who won't bow to her every whim."

"aɪ daʊt ðəɾ ɪts əz bæɾ əz jə seɪ, ɡɔɪn. ɛɡwin . . . wɛl, ʃiz tə pʊt fɔɹwɝɾ ə stʃɹɔŋ fɹʌnt. kəz ə hɝ juθ, ən ðə weɪ ʃi wɑz ɹeɪz bʌt ʃiz nɑɾ ɛɹəɡənt. noʊ mɔɹ soʊ ðən ɪz nɛsəsɛɹi."

"I doubt that it's as bad as you say, Gawyn. Egwene . . . well, she has to put forward a strong front. Because of her youth, and the way she was raised But she's not arrogant. No more so than is necessary."

ɪleɪn dɪpt əɹ fɪŋɡɝz ɪn ðə wɔɾɝ, stɑɹtlɪŋ ə ɡoʊldɪnbæk fɪʃ. "aɪv fɛl ðə weɪ ʃi mʌs bi filɪŋ. jə seɪ ʃi wɑns sʌmwʌn tə baʊ ən skɹeɪp fəɹ hɝ, bʌt wʌɾ aɪd bɛt ʃi ɹɪli wɑns - wʌt ʃi ɹɪli nidz - ɪz sʌmwʌn ʃi kən tʃɹʌs kəmplitli. sʌmwʌn ʃi kən ɡɪv tæsks, ðən nɑt wɝi əbaʊt haʊ ðəl bi hændəld. ʃiz ɪnɔɹməs ɹisɔɹsɪz. wɛlθ, tʃɹups, fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃənz, sɝvəns. bʌt ðɛɹz oʊnli wʌn ə hɝ, ən soʊ ɪf ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɹikwaɪɝz əɹ ətɛnʃən dɝɛkli, ʃi maɪɾ əz wɛl əv noʊ ɹisɔɹsɪz əɾ ɔl."

Elayne dipped her fingers in the water, startling a goldenback fish. "I've felt the way she must be feeling. You say she wants someone to bow and scrape for her, but what I'd bet she really wants - what she really needs - is someone she can trust completely. Someone she can give tasks, then not worry about how they will be handled. She has enormous resources. Wealth, troops, fortifications, servants. But there's only one of her, and so if everything requires her attention directly, she might as well have no resources at all."

"aɪ . . ."

"I . . ."

"ju seɪ jə lʌv hɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd. "juv toʊl mi jəɹ dɪvoʊɾəd tə hɝ, ðət jud daɪ fəɹ hɝ.

"You say you love her," Elayne said. "You've told me you're devoted to her, that you'd die for her.

wɛl, ɛɡwin əz ɑɹmiz fʊl ə ðoʊz kaɪnz ə pipəl, əz də aɪ. wʌɾ ɪz tʃɹuli junik ɪz sʌmwʌn u dʌz wʌɾ aɪ tɛl ðɛm. bɛɾɝ, sʌmwʌn u dʌz wʌt ðeɪ noʊ aɪd tɛl ðɛm, ɪf aɪ hæd ðə tʃæns."

Well, Egwene has armies full of those kinds of people, as do I. What is truly unique is someone who does what I tell them. Better, someone who does what they know I'd tell them, if I had the chance."

"aɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ aɪ kən bi tieɪtʃti mæn," ɡɔɪn sɛd.

"I'm not sure I can be th?t man," Gawyn said.

"waɪ nɑt? ʌv ɔl ðə mɛn ɹɛɾi tə səpɔɹɾ ə wʊmən ə paʊɝ, aɪɾ əv θɔɾ ɪt wəd bi ju."

"Why not? Of all the men ready to support a woman of Power, I'd have thought it would be you."

"ɪts dɪfɹənt wɪð ɛɡwin. aɪ kæn ɪkspleɪn waɪ."

"It's different with Egwene. I can't explain why."

"wɛl, ɪf jə wɪʃ tə mɛɹi ən æmɪɝlɪn, ðən jə mʌs meɪk ðɪs tʃɔɪs."

"Well, if you wish to marry an Amyrlin, then you must make this choice."

ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt. ɪt fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd hɪm, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt. "ɪnʌf əbaʊt ðæt," hi sɛd. "aɪ noʊɾəs ðə tɑpɪk muvd əweɪ fɹəm ælθɹ."

She was right. It frustrated him, but she was right. "Enough about that," he said. "I notice the topic moved away from al'Thor."

"bɪkɔz ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɔɹ tə seɪ əbaʊt hɪm."

"Because there was no more to say about him."

"ju hæv tə steɪ əweɪ fɹəm hɪm, ɪleɪn. hiz deɪnʒɝəs."

"You have to stay away from him, Elayne. He's dangerous."

ɪleɪn weɪvd əɹ hænd. "seɪɾɪn ɪz klɛnzd."

Elayne waved her hand. "Saidin is cleansed."

"ʌv kɔɹs i wəd seɪ ðæt."

"Of course he would say that."

"ju heɪt hɪm," ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪ kən hɪɹ ɪɾ ɪn jəɹ vɔɪs. ðɪs ɪzən əbaʊt mʌðɝ, ɪz ɪt?"

"You hate him," Elayne said. "I can hear it in your voice. This isn't about Mother, is it?"

hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ʃid ɡɹoʊn soʊ ɡʊɾ ət twɪstɪŋ ə kɑnvɝseɪʃən. wɑz ðət ðə kwin ɪn hɝ, əɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ? hi nɪɹli tɝn ðə boʊt bæk təwɔɹd ðə dɑk. bʌt ðɪs wɑz ɪleɪn. laɪt, bʌɾ ɪt fɛlt ɡʊd tə tɔk tə sʌmwʌn u ɹɪli ʌndɝstʊd hɪm.

He hesitated. She'd grown so good at twisting a conversation. Was that the queen in her, or the Aes Sedai? He nearly turned the boat back toward the dock. But this was Elayne. Light, but it felt good to talk to someone who really understood him.

"waɪ də aɪ heɪɾ ælθɹ?" ɡɔɪn sɛd. "wɛl, ðɛɹz mʌðɝ. bʌɾ ɪts nɑt dʒʌs hɝ. aɪ heɪt wʌt hiz bɪkʌm."

"Why do I hate al'Thor?" Gawyn said. "Well, there's Mother. But it's not just her. I hate what he's become."

"ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn?"

"The Dragon Reborn?"

"ə taɪɹənt."

"A tyrant."

"ju doʊnt noʊ ðæt, ɡɔɪn."

"You don't know that, Gawyn."

"hiz ə ʃifɝɾɝ. wʌt ɹaɪt dʌz i hæv tə kæs daʊn θɹoʊnz, tə tʃeɪnʒ ðə wɝld əz i dʌz?"

"He's a sheepherder. What right does he have to cast down thrones, to change the world as he does?"

"pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli waɪl jə hʌɾəld ɪn ə vɪlədʒ?" hid toʊld əɹ moʊst ʌv wʌt hæd hæpən tə hɪm ɪn ðə læs fju mʌnθs. "waɪl i kɑŋkɝd neɪʃənz, jə wɝ biɪŋ fɔɹs tə kɪl jəɹ fɹɛnz, ðən wɝ sɛn tə jəɹ dɛθ baɪ jəɹ æmɪɝlɪn."

"Particularly while you huddled in a village?" He'd told her most of what had happened to him in the last few months. "While he conquered nations, you were being forced to kill your friends, then were sent to your death by your Amyrlin."

"ɪɡzækli."

"Exactly."

"soʊ ɪts dʒɛləsi," ɪleɪn sɛd sɔfli.

"So it's jealousy," Elayne said softly.

"noʊ. nɑnsɛns. aɪ. . ."

"No. Nonsense. I. . ."

"wʌt wəd jə du, ɡɔɪn?" ɪleɪn æskt. "wʊd jə duəl hɪm?"

"What would you do, Gawyn?" Elayne asked. "Would you duel him?"

"meɪbi."

"Maybe."

"ænd wʌt wəd hæpən ɪf jə wʌn ən ɹæn ɪm θɹu əz juv sɛd jə wɑntəd tə du? wəd jə dum əs ɔl tə sæɾəsfaɪ jəɹ moʊməntɛɹi pæʃən?"

"And what would happen if you won and ran him through as you've said you wanted to do? Would you doom us all to satisfy your momentary passion?"

hi hæd noʊ ɹɪplaɪ tə ðæt.

He had no reply to that.

"ðæts nɑt dʒʌs dʒɛləsi, ɡɔɪn," ɪleɪn sɛd, teɪkɪŋ ði ɔɹz fɹəm hɪm. "ɪts sɛlfɪʃnəs. wi kæn əfɔɹd tə bi ʃɔɹtsaɪɾɪd ɹaɪt naʊ." ʃi bɪɡæn tə ɹoʊ ðɛm bæk dɪspaɪɾ ɪz pɹoʊɾɛst.

"That's not just jealousy, Gawyn," Elayne said, taking the oars from him. "It's selfishness. We can't afford to be shortsighted right now." She began to row them back despite his protest.

"ðɪs," hi sɛd, "kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðə wʊmən u pɝsənəli ɹeɪɾɪd ðə blæk ədʒɑ?"

"This," he said, "coming from the woman who personally raided the Black Ajah?"

ɪleɪn blʌʃt. hi kəd tɛl ðət ʃi wɪʃt hid nɛvɝ faʊn aʊɾ əbaʊt ðəɾ ɪvɛnt. "ɪt wɑz niɾəd. ən bɪsaɪdz, aɪ dɪd seɪ 'wi.' jə ən aɪ, wɪv ðɪs tʃɹʌbəl. bɝdʒɪt kips tɛlɪŋ mi aɪ nid tə lɝn tə bi mɔɹ tɛmpɹət. wɛl, jəl nid tə lɝn ðə seɪm θɪŋ, fəɹ ɛɡwinz seɪk. ən ʃi dʌz nid ju, ɡɔɪn. ʃi meɪ nɑt ɹilaɪz ɪt; ʃi meɪ bi kənvɪnst ʃi nidz tə hoʊld ʌp ðə wɝl hɝsɛlf. ʃiz ɹɔŋ."

Elayne blushed. He could tell that she wished he'd never found out about that event. "It was needed. And besides, I did say 'we.' You and I, we have this trouble. Birgitte keeps telling me I need to learn to be more temperate. Well, you'll need to learn the same thing, for Egwene's sake. And she does need you, Gawyn. She may not realize it; she may be convinced she needs to hold up the world herself. She's wrong."

ðə boʊt θʌmpt əɡɛns ðə dɑk. ɪleɪn ənʃɪp ði ɔɹz ən hɛld aʊɾ ə hænd. ɡɔɪn klaɪmd aʊt, ðən hɛlpt əɹ ʌp ɑntu ðə dɑk. ʃi ɡɹɪpt ɪz hæn fɑnli. "jul sɔɹɾ ɪɾ aʊt," ʃi sɛd. "aɪm ɹilisɪŋ jə fɹəm ɛni ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi tə bi maɪ kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl. fəɹ naʊ, aɪ woʊn əpɔɪn ənʌðɝ fɝs pɹɪns ə ðə sɔɹd, bʌt jə kən hoʊl ðət taɪɾəl wɪð duɾiz ɪn əbeɪəns. soʊ lɔŋ əz jə ʃoʊ ʌp fəɹ ði əkeɪʒənəl steɪt fʌŋkʃən, jə nidnt wɝi əbaʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ðət maɪt bi ɹikwaɪɝɾ ə ju. əl pʌblɪʃ ɪɾ ɪmiɾiətli, saɪɾɪŋ ə nid fəɹ jə tə bi duɪŋ ʌðɝ wɝk ət ði ædvɛn ə ðə læs bæɾəl."

The boat thumped against the dock. Elayne unshipped the oars and held out a hand. Gawyn climbed out, then helped her up onto the dock. She gripped his hand fondly. "You'll sort it out," she said. "I'm releasing you from any responsibility to be my Captain-General. For now, I wont appoint another First Prince of the Sword, but you can hold that title with duties in abeyance. So long as you show up for the occasional state function, you needn't worry about anything else that might be required of you. I will publish it immediately, citing a need for you to be doing other work at the advent of the Last Battle."

"aɪ. . . θæŋk ju," hi sɛd, ðoʊ hi wɑzn sɝɾən i fɛlt ɪt. ɪt saʊndəd tu mʌtʃ laɪk ɛɡwinz ɪnsɪstəns ðəɾ i dɪdnt nid tə ɡɑɹɾ əɹ dɔɹ.

"I. . . Thank you," he said, though he wasn't certain he felt it. It sounded too much like Egwene's insistence that he didn't need to guard her door.

ɪleɪn skwizd ɪz hæn əɡɛn, ðən tɝn ən wɔkt ʌp tə ði æt- tɛndəns. ɡɔɪn wɑtʃt əɹ spik tə ðɛm ɪn ə kɑm toʊn. ʃi sim tə ɡɹoʊ mɔɹ ɹiɡəl baɪ ðə deɪ; ɪt wɑz laɪk wɑtʃɪŋ ə flaʊɝ blɑsəm. hi wɪʃt hid bɪn ɪn keɪɛmlɪn tə vju ðə pɹɑsɛs fɹəm ðə stɑɹt.

Elayne squeezed his hand again, then turned and walked up to the at- tendants. Gawyn watched her speak to them in a calm tone. She seemed to grow more regal by the day; it was like watching a flower blossom. He wished he'd been in Caemlyn to view the process from the start.

hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf smaɪlɪŋ əz i tɝn tə kəntɪnju hɪz weɪ əlɔŋ ðə ɹoʊz mɑɹtʃ. hɪz ɹɪɡɹɛts hæd tʃɹʌbəl teɪkɪŋ hoʊl bɪfɔɹ ə hɛlθi doʊs ʌv ɪleɪnz kɛɹəktɝɪstɪk ɑptəmɪzəm. oʊnli ʃi kəd kɔl ə mæn dʒɛləs ən meɪk ɪm fil ɡʊɾ əbaʊɾ ɪt.

He found himself smiling as he turned to continue his way along the Rose March. His regrets had trouble taking hold before a healthy dose of Elayne's characteristic optimism. Only she could call a man jealous and make him feel good about it.

hi pæs θɹu weɪvz ə pɝfjum, filɪŋ ðə sʌn ɑn ɪz nɛk. hi wɔkt wɛɹ i ən ɡɑləd hæd pleɪɾ əz tʃɪlʒɹən, ən i θɔɾ ə hɪz mʌðɝ wɔkɪŋ ðiz ɡɑɹɾənz wɪð bɹaɪn. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ əɹ kɛɹfəl ɪnstʃɹʌkʃən wən i mɪsstɛpt, ðən əɹ smaɪlz wən i æktəɾ əz ə pɹɪns ʃʊd. ðoʊz smaɪlz hæd sim laɪk ðə sʌn ɹaɪzɪŋ.

He passed through waves of perfume, feeling the sun on his neck. He walked where he and Galad had played as children, and he thought of his mother walking these gardens with Bryne. He remembered her careful instruction when he misstepped, then her smiles when he acted as a prince should. Those smiles had seemed like the sun rising.

ðɪs pleɪs wɑz hɝ. ʃi lɪvd ɑn, ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, ɪn ɪleɪn - hu lʊk mɔɹ ən mɔɹ laɪk əɹ baɪ ði aʊɝ - ɪn ðə seɪfti ən stʃɹɛŋkθ ʌv ændɝz pipəl. hi stɑp bɪsaɪd ðə pɑnd, ðə vɛɹi spɑt wɛɹ ɡɑləd hæd seɪvd ɪm fɹəm dʒɹaʊnɪŋ əz ə tʃaɪld.

This place was her. She lived on, in Caemlyn, in Elayne - who looked more and more like her by the hour - in the safety and strength of Andor's people. He stopped beside the pond, the very spot where Galad had saved him from drowning as a child.

pɝhæps ɪleɪn wɑz ɹaɪt. pɝhæps ælθɹ hædn hæɾ ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð mɔɹɡeɪsəz dɛθ. ɪf i hæd, ɡɔɪn wəd nɛvɝ pɹuv ɪt. bʌt ðət dɪdn mæɾɝ. ɹænd ælθɹ wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi kəndɛm tə daɪ ət ðə læs bæɾəl. soʊ waɪ kip heɪɾɪŋ ðə mæn?

Perhaps Elayne was right. Perhaps al'Thor hadn't had anything to do with Morgase's death. If he had, Gawyn would never prove it. But that didn't matter. Rand al'Thor was already condemned to die at the Last Battle. So why keep hating the man?

"ʃi ɪz ɹaɪt," ɡɔɪn wɪspɝd, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə hɔkfliz dæns oʊvɝ ðə sɝfəs ə ðə wɔɾɝ.

"She is right," Gawyn whispered, watching the hawkflies dance over the surface of the water.

"wɝ dʌn, ælθɹ. fɹəm naʊ ɑn, aɪ kɛɹ nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ju."

"We're done, al'Thor. From now on, I care nothing for you."

ɪt fɛlt laɪk ən ɪnɔɹməs weɪt lɪftɪŋ fɹəm ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. ɡɔɪn lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ, ɹɪlækst saɪ. oʊnli naʊ ðəɾ ɪleɪn hæd ɹilist ɪm dɪɾ i ɹilaɪz haʊ mʌtʃ ɡɪl hid fɛlt oʊvɝ ɪz æbsəns fɹəm ændɝ. ðət wɑz ɡɔn naʊ, tu.

It felt like an enormous weight lifting from his shoulders. Gawyn let out a long, relaxed sigh. Only now that Elayne had released him did he realize how much guilt he'd felt over his absence from Andor. That was gone now, too.

taɪm tə foʊkəs ɑn ɛɡwin. hi ɹitʃt ɪndə hɪz pɑkət, slɪpɪŋ aʊt ði əsæsənz naɪf, ən hɛld ɪɾ ʌp ɪn ðə sʌnlaɪt, ɪnspɛktɪŋ ðoʊz ɹɛd stoʊnz. hi dɪɾ əv ə duɾi tə pɹətɛkt ɛɡwin. səpoʊzɪŋ ʃi ɹeɪld əɡɛns hɪm, heɪɾəd hɪm, ən ɛɡzaɪl hɪm; wʊdn ɪt bi wɝθ ðə pʌnɪʃməns ɪf i mænədʒ tə pɹəzɝv əɹ laɪf?

Time to focus on Egwene. He reached into his pocket, slipping out the assassin's knife, and held it up in the sunlight, inspecting those red stones. He did have a duty to protect Egwene. Supposing she railed against him, hated him, and exiled him; wouldn't it be worth the punishments if he managed to preserve her life?

baɪ maɪ mʌðɝz ɡɹeɪv," ə vɔɪs sɛd ʃɑɹpli fɹəm bɪhaɪnd. "wɛɹ dɪd jə ɡɛt ðæt?"

By my mother's grave," a voice said sharply from behind. "Where did you get that?"

ɡɔɪn spʌn. ðə wɪmən hid noʊɾəst ɝliɝ wɝ stændɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪm ɑn ðə pæθ. dmænə lɛd ðɛm, hɝ hɛɹ stʃɹikt wɪð waɪt, hɝ feɪs ɹɪŋkəld ɝaʊn ði aɪz. wɑznt wɝkɪŋ wɪð ðə paʊɝ səpoʊz tə stɑp ðoʊz saɪnz ʌv eɪdʒɪŋ?

Gawyn spun. The women he'd noticed earlier were standing behind him on the path. Dimana led them, her hair streaked with white, her face wrinkled around the eyes. Wasn't working with the Power supposed to stop those signs of aging?

ðəɹ wɝ tu pipəl wɪð hɝ. wʌn wɑz ə plʌmp jʌŋ wʊmən wɪð blæk hɛɹ, ði ʌðɝ ə staʊt wʊmən ɪn əɹ mɪɾəl jɪɹz. ðə sɛkənd wɑz ðə wʌn u hæd spoʊkən; ʃi hæd waɪd, ɪnəsənt-lʊkɪŋ aɪz. ən ʃi sim hɔɹəfaɪd.

There were two people with her. One was a plump young woman with black hair, the other a stout woman in her middle years. The second was the one who had spoken; she had wide, innocent-looking eyes. And she seemed horrified.

"wʌɾ ɪz ðæt, mɑɹɪl?" dmænə æskt.

"What is that, Marille?" Dimana asked.

"ðæt naɪf," mɑɹɪl sɛd, pɔɪntɪŋ ət ɡɔɪnz hænd. "mɑɹɪl əz sin wʌn laɪk ɪt bɪfɔɹ!"

"That knife," Marille said, pointing at Gawyn's hand. "Marille has seen one like it before!"

"aɪ hæv sin ɪt bɪfɔɹ," dmænə kɝɛktəd. "ju ɑɹ ə pɝsən ən nɑɾ ə θɪŋ."

"I have seen it before," Dimana corrected. "You are a person and not a thing."

"jɛs, dmænə. mʌtʃ əpɑlədʒiz, dmænə. mɑɹɪl . . . / wɪl nɑt meɪk ðə mɪsteɪk əɡɛn, dmænə."

"Yes, Dimana. Much apologies, Dimana. Marille . . . / will not make the mistake again, Dimana."

ɡɔɪn ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ. wʌt wɑz ɹɔŋ wɪð ðɪs pɝsən?

Gawyn raised an eyebrow. What was wrong with this person?

"fɝɡɪv hɝ, maɪ lɔɹd," dmænə sɛd. "mɑɹɪl spɛn ə lɔŋ taɪm əz ə deɪmeɪn, ən ɪz hævɪŋ dɪfəkəlti ədʒʌstɪŋ."

"Forgive her, my Lord," Dimana said. "Marille spent a long time as a damane, and is having difficulty adjusting."

"jɔɹ sintʃæn?" ɡɔɪn sɛd. ʌv kɔɹs. aɪ ʃʊɾə noʊɾəst ði æksɛnt.

"You're Seanchan?" Gawyn said. Of course. I should have noticed the accent.

mɑɹɪl nɑɾəd vɪɡɝəsli. ə fɔɹmɝ deɪmeɪn. ɡɔɪn fɛlt ə tʃɪl. ðɪs wʊmən hæd bɪn tʃɹeɪn tə kɪl wɪð ðə paʊɝ. ðə θɝd wʊmən ɹɪmeɪn saɪlənt, wɑtʃɪŋ wɪð kjʊɹiəs aɪz. ʃi dɪdn lʊk nɪɹli əz səbsɝviənt.

Marille nodded vigorously. A former damane. Gawyn felt a chill. This woman had been trained to kill with the Power. The third woman remained silent, watching with curious eyes. She didn't look nearly as subservient.

"wi ʃəd bi muvɪŋ ɑn," dmænə sɛd. "ɪɾ ɪzənt ɡʊd fəɹ əɹ tə si θɪŋz ðət ɹimaɪn əɹ ə sintʃæn. kʌm, mɑɹɪl. ðəɾ ɪz mɪɹli ə toʊkən lɔɹd tʃɹəkənd wʌn ɪn bæɾəl, aɪ səspɛkt."

"We should be moving on," Dimana said. "It isn't good for her to see things that remind her of Seanchan. Come, Marille. That is merely a token Lord Trakand won in battle, I suspect."

"noʊ, weɪt," ɡɔɪn sɛd, hoʊldɪŋ ʌp ə hænd. "ju ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðɪs bleɪd?"

"No, wait," Gawyn said, holding up a hand. "You recognize this blade?"

mɑɹɪl lʊk tə dmænə, əz ɪf ɹɪkwɛstɪŋ pɝmɪʃən tə ænsɝ. ðə kɪnswʊmən nɑɾəd sʌfɝɪŋli.

Marille looked to Dimana, as if requesting permission to answer. The Kinswoman nodded sufferingly.

"ɪɾ ɪz ə blʌdnaɪf, maɪ lɔɹd," mɑɹɪl sɛd. "ju dɪd nɑt wɪn ɪɾ ɪn bæɾəl, kəz mɛn də nɑt dɪfit blʌdnaɪvz. ðeɪ ɑɹ ənstɑpəbəl. ðeɪ oʊnli fɔl wən ðɛɹ oʊn blʌd tɝnz əɡɛns ðɛm."

"It is a Bloodknife, my Lord," Marille said. "You did not win it in battle, because men do not defeat Bloodknives. They are unstoppable. They only fall when their own blood turns against them."

ɡɔɪn fɹaʊnd. wʌt nɑnsɛns wɑz ðɪs? "soʊ ðɪs ɪz ə sintʃæn wɛpən?"

Gawyn frowned. What nonsense was this? "So this is a Seanchan weapon?"

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd," mɑɹɪl sɛd. "kæɹid baɪ ðə blʌdnaɪvz."

"Yes, my Lord," Marille said. "Carried by the Bloodknives."

"aɪ θɔt jə sɛd ðɪs wɑz ə blʌdnaɪf."

"I thought you said this was a Bloodknife."

"ɪɾ ɪz, bʌt ðəɾ ɪz ɔlsoʊ hu kæɹiz ðɛm. ʃɹaʊɾɪd ɪn ðə naɪt, sɛn baɪ ði ɛmpɹɛsəz wɪl - meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ - tə stʃɹaɪk daʊn əɹ foʊz ən daɪ ɪn əɹ neɪm ən ɡlɔɹi." mɑɹɪl loʊɝɾ əɹ aɪz fɑɹðɝ. "mɑɹɪl spiks tu mʌtʃ. ʃiz sɑɹi."

"It is, but that is also who carries them. Shrouded in the night, sent by the Empress's will - may she live forever - to strike down her foes and die in her name and glory." Marille lowered her eyes farther. "Marille speaks too much. She is sorry."

"aɪ æm sɑɹi," dmænə sɛd, ə hɪn ʌv ɛksæspɝeɪʃən ɪn əɹ toʊn.

"I am sorry," Dimana said, a hint of exasperation in her tone.

"aɪ æm sɑɹi," mɑɹɪl ɹɪpiɾɪd.

"I am sorry," Marille repeated.

"soʊ ðiz . . . blʌdnaɪvz," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "ðeɪɹ sintʃæn əsæsənz? hi fɛlt ə dip tʃɪl.

"So these . . . Bloodknives," Gawyn said. "They're Seanchan assassins? He felt a deep chill.

kəd ðeɪv lɛf bɪhaɪn suəsaɪd tʃɹups tə kɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ? jɛs. ɪt meɪd sɛns. ðə mɝɾɝɝ wɑznt wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən.

Could they have left behind suicide troops to kill Aes Sedai? Yes. It made sense. The murderer wasn't one of the Forsaken.

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd," mɑɹɪl sɛd. "aɪ sɔ wʌn ə ðə naɪvz hæŋɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹum ə maɪ mɪstʃɹəsəz kɔɹɾɝz; ɪt hæd bɪlɔŋ tə hɝ bɹʌðɝ, hu hæd bɔɹn ɪt wɪð ɑnɝ əntɪl ɪz blʌd tɝn əɡɛns hɪm."

"Yes, my Lord," Marille said. "I saw one of the knives hanging in the room of my mistress's quarters; it had belonged to her brother, who had borne it with honor until his blood turned against him."

"hɪz fæmli?"

"His family?"

"noʊ, hɪz blʌd." mɑɹɪl ʃɹæŋk daʊn fɑɹðɝ.

"No, his blood." Marille shrank down farther.

"tɛl mi ʌv ðɛm," ɡɔɪn sɛɾ ɝdʒənli.

"Tell me of them," Gawyn said urgently.

"ʃɹaʊɾɪd ɪn ðə naɪt," mɑɹɪl sɛd, "sɛn baɪ ði ɛmpɹɛsəz wɪl -  meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ - tə stʃɹaɪk daʊn əɹ foʊz ən daɪ ɪn - "

"Shrouded in the night," Marille said, "sent by the Empress's will -  may she live forever - to strike down her foes and die in - "

"jɛs, jɛs," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "ju sɛd ðəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. wʌt mɛθədz də ðeɪ jus? haʊ də ðeɪ haɪd soʊ wɛl? wʌt dʒju noʊ ʌv haʊ ðɪs əsæsən wɪl stʃɹaɪk?"

"Yes, yes," Gawyn said. "You said that already. What methods do they use? How do they hide so well? What do you know of how this assassin will strike?"

mɑɹɪl ʃɹæŋk daʊn fɑɹðɝ əɾ itʃ kwɛstʃən, ən bɪɡæn tə wɪmpɝ.

Marille shrank down farther at each question, and began to whimper.

"lɔɹd tʃɹəkənd!" dmænə sɛd. "kənteɪn jɝsɛlf."

"Lord Trakand!" Dimana said. "Contain yourself."

"mɑɹɪl dʌznt noʊ vɛɹi mʌtʃ," ðə deɪmeɪn sɛd. "mɑɹɪl ɪz sɑɹi. pliz, pʌnɪʃ əɹ fəɹ nɑt lɪsnɪŋ bɛɾɝ."

"Marille doesn't know very much," the damane said. "Marille is sorry. Please, punish her for not listening better."

ɡɔɪn pʊl bæk. ðə sintʃæn tʃɹiɾəd ðɛɹ deɪmeɪn wɝs ðən ænəməlz. mɑɹɪl wʊdn əv bɪn toʊld ɛniθɪŋ spəsɪfɪk ʌv wʌt ðiz blʌdnaɪvz kəd du. "wɛɹ dɪd jə ɡɛt ðiz deɪmeɪn?" ɡɔɪn æskt. "wɝ ɛni sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz kæptʃɝd? aɪ nid tə spik wɪð wʌn; ən ɔfəsɝ, pɹɛfɝəbli."

Gawyn pulled back. The Seanchan treated their damane worse than animals. Marille wouldn't have been told anything specific of what these Bloodknives could do. "Where did you get these damane?" Gawyn asked. "Were any Seanchan soldiers captured? I need to speak with one; an officer, preferably."

dmænə pɝst əɹ lɪps. "ðiz wɝ teɪkən ɪn ɔltɑɹə, ən oʊnli ðə deɪmeɪn wɝ sɛn tə ʌs."

Dimana pursed her lips. "These were taken in Altara, and only the damane were sent to us."

"dmænə," ði ʌðɝ wʊmən sɛd. ʃi dɪdn əv ə sintʃæn æksɛnt. "wʌɾ ə ðə sʌldəm?

"Dimana," the other woman said. She didn't have a Seanchan accent. "What of the sul'dam?

kziə wɑz ə ðə loʊ blʌd."

Kaisea was of the low Blood."

dmænə fɹaʊnd. "kziə ɪz . . . ʌnɹɪlaɪəbəl."

Dimana frowned. "Kaisea is . . . unreliable."

"pliz," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "ðɪs kəd seɪv laɪvz."

"Please," Gawyn said. "This could save lives."

"vɛɹi wɛl," dmænə sɛd. "weɪt hɪɹ. əl ɹɪtɝn wɪð hɝ." ʃi tʊk əɹ tu tʃɑɹdʒəz təwɔɹd ðə pæləs, livɪŋ ɡɔɪn tə weɪɾ æŋkʃəsli. ə fju mɪnəts leɪɾɝ, dmænə ɹɪtɝnd, fɑloʊd baɪ ə tɔl wʊmən wɛɹɪŋ ə peɪl ɡɹeɪ dʒɹɛs wɪθaʊt bɛlt əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi. hɝ lɔŋ blæk hɛɹ wɑz woʊvən ɪndə ə bɹeɪd, ən ʃi sim dɪtɝmən tə ɹɪmeɪn pɹɪsaɪsli wʌn stɛp bɪhaɪn dmænə - ən ækʃən ðət bɑðɝd ðə kɪnswʊmən, hu sim tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ən aɪ ɑn ðə wʊmən.

"Very well," Dimana said. "Wait here. I will return with her." She took her two charges toward the palace, leaving Gawyn to wait anxiously. A few minutes later, Dimana returned, followed by a tall woman wearing a pale gray dress without belt or embroidery. Her long black hair was woven into a braid, and she seemed determined to remain precisely one step behind Dimana - an action that bothered the Kinswoman, who seemed to be trying to keep an eye on the woman.

ðeɪ ɹitʃt ɡɔɪn, ən ðə sʌldəm - ɪnkɹɛɾəbli - ɡɑt daʊn ɑn əɹ niz ən pɹɑstʃɹeɪɾɪd hɝsɛlf ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, hɛd tʌtʃɪŋ ðə dɝt. ðəɹ wɑz ə smuð ɛləɡəns tə ðə boʊɪŋ; fəɹ səm ɹizən, ɪt meɪd ɡɔɪn fil əz ɪf i wɝ biɪŋ mɑkt.

They reached Gawyn, and the sul'dam - incredibly - got down on her knees and prostrated herself on the ground, head touching the dirt. There was a smooth elegance to the bowing; for some reason, it made Gawyn feel as if he were being mocked.

lɔɹd tʃɹəkənd," dmænə sɛd, "ðɪs ɪz kziə. ɔɹəɡən, ət list, ðæts wʌt ʃi ɪnsɪsts ðət wi kɔl əɹ naʊ."

Lord Trakand," Dimana said, "this is Kaisea. Or, at least, that's what she insists that we call her now."

kziə ɪz ə ɡʊd sɝvənt," ðə wʊmən sɛɾ ivənli.

Kaisea is a good servant," the woman said evenly.

"stæn ʌp," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ?"

"Stand up," Gawyn said. "What are you doing?"

"kziə hæz bɪn toʊl jə ɑɹ ðə kwinz bɹʌðɝ; jə ɑɹ ə ðə blʌɾ ə ðɪs ɹɛlm, ən aɪm ə loʊli deɪmeɪn"

"Kaisea has been told you are the Queen's brother; you are of the Blood of this realm, and I am a lowly damane"

"deɪmeɪn? jəɹ ə sʌldəm."

"Damane? You're a sul'dam."

"noʊ lɔŋɡɝ," ðə wʊmən sɛd. "aɪ mʌs bi kɑlɝd, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd. wɪl jə si ɪt dʌn? kziə ɪz deɪnʒɝəs."

"No longer," the woman said. "I must be collared, great Lord. Will you see it done? Kaisea is dangerous."

dmænə nɑɾəd tə ðə saɪd, ɪndəkeɪɾɪŋ ðeɪ ʃəd spik pɹaɪvətli. ɡɔɪn wɪθdʒɹu wɪð əɹ fɑɹðɝ daʊn ðə ɹoʊz mɑɹtʃ, livɪŋ kziə pɹɑstʃɹeɪɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

Dimana nodded to the side, indicating they should speak privately. Gawyn withdrew with her farther down the Rose March, leaving Kaisea prostrate on the ground.

"ʃiz ə sʌldəm?" ɡɔɪn æskt. "ɔɹ ɪz ʃi ə deɪmeɪn?"

"She's a sul'dam?" Gawyn asked. "Or is she a damane?"

"ɔl sʌldəm kən bi tʃɹeɪn tə tʃænəl," dmænə ɪkspleɪnd. "ɪleɪn θɪŋks ðət fækt wɪl ʌndɝmaɪn ðɛɹ ɪntaɪɝ kʌltʃɝ wʌns ɹɪvild, soʊ ʃiz hæɾ əs foʊkəs ɑn titʃɪŋ ðə sʌldəm tə æksɛs ðɛɹ paʊɝz. mɛni ɹəfjuz tə ədmɪt ðət ðeɪ kən si ðə wivz, bʌɾ ə fju hæv bɪn ɑnəst wɪð ʌs.

"All sul'dam can be trained to channel," Dimana explained. "Elayne thinks that fact will undermine their entire culture once revealed, so she's had us focus on teaching the sul'dam to access their powers. Many refuse to admit that they can see the weaves, but a few have been honest with us.

tə ə wʊmən, ðeɪv ɪnsɪstəd ðət ðeɪ ʃəd bi meɪd deɪmeɪn"

To a woman, they've insisted that they should be made damane"

ʃi nɑɾəd bæk təwɔɹd kziə. "ðɪs wʌn ɪz moʊs tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ. wi θɪŋk ʃiz ɪntɛnʃənəli wɝkɪŋ tə lɝn ðə wivz soʊ ðət ʃi kən kɹieɪɾ ən 'æksəɾənt,' ən juz əɹ oʊn ɹizənɪŋ əɡɛnst ʌs  - ɪf ʃi dʌz sʌmθɪŋ vaɪələnt wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ʃi kən kleɪm ðət wi wɝ ɹɔŋ tə liv əɹ fɹi."

She nodded back toward Kaisea. "This one is most troubling. We think she's intentionally working to learn the weaves so that she can create an 'accident,' and use our own reasoning against us  - if she does something violent with the One Power, she can claim that we were wrong to leave her free."

ə wʊmən u kəd bi tʃɹeɪn tə kɪl wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, hu wɑz nɑt baʊn baɪ ðə θɹi oʊðz, ən u hæɾ ə dɪtɝməneɪʃən tə pɹuv ðət ʃi wɑz deɪnʒɝəs? ɡɔɪn ʃɪvɝd.

A woman who could be trained to kill with the One Power, who was not bound by the Three Oaths, and who had a determination to prove that she was dangerous? Gawyn shivered.

"wi kip səm fɔkɹuɾ ɪn əɹ moʊs deɪz," dmænə sɛd. "aɪ doʊn tɛl jə ðɪs tə wɝi ju, bʌt tə wɔɹn jə ðət wʌt ʃi sɛz ən dʌz meɪ nɑt bi ɹɪlaɪəbəl."

"We keep some forkroot in her most days," Dimana said. "I don't tell you this to worry you, but to warn you that what she says and does may not be reliable."

ɡɔɪn nɑɾəd. "θæŋk ju."

Gawyn nodded. "Thank you."

dmænə lɛɾ ɪm bæk, ən ðə sʌldəm ɹɪmeɪn ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. "haʊ meɪ kziə sɝv ju, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd?" hɝ ækʃənz simd ə pɛɹəɾi ʌv mɑɹɪlz səbsɝviəns. wʌt ɡɔɪn hæɾ ɝɪdʒənəli teɪkən fəɹ mɑkɝi wɑzn ðəɾ əɾ ɔl - ɪnstɛd, ɪt wɑz ði ɪmpɝfɪkt ɛfɝts ʌv wʌn u wɑz haɪbɹn tə ɪməteɪt ðə loʊli.

Dimana led him back, and the sul'dam remained on the ground. "How may Kaisea serve you, great Lord?" Her actions seemed a parody of Marille's subservience. What Gawyn had originally taken for mockery wasn't that at all - instead, it was the imperfect efforts of one who was highborn to imitate the lowly.

"hæv jə ɛvɝ sin wʌn ə ðiz bɪfɔɹ?" ɡɔɪn æskt kæʒəwəli, teɪkɪŋ aʊt ðə blʌdnaɪf.

"Have you ever seen one of these before?" Gawyn asked casually, taking out the Bloodknife.

kziə ɡæspt. "wɛɹ dɪd jə faɪn ðæt? hu ɡeɪv ɪt tə ju?" ʃi kɹɪnʒd ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli, əz ɪf ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðət ʃid stɛpt aʊɾ ə hɝ əsumd ɹoʊl.

Kaisea gasped. "Where did you find that? Who gave it to you?" She cringed almost immediately, as if realizing that she'd stepped out of her assumed role.

"æn əsæsən tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl mi wɪð ɪt," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "wi fɔt, ən i ɡɑɾ əweɪ."

"An assassin tried to kill me with it," Gawyn said. "We fought, and he got away."

"ðæɾ ɪz ɪmpɑsəbəl, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd," ðə sintʃæn wʊmən sɛd, hɝ vɔɪs mɔɹ kəntʃɹoʊld.

"That is impossible, great Lord," the Seanchan woman said, her voice more controlled.

"waɪ dʒju seɪ ðæt?"

"Why do you say that?"

"bɪkɔz ɪf jə hæd fɔt wʌn ə ðə blʌdnaɪvz, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, jə wəd bi dɛd. ðeɪ ɑɹ ðə moʊst ɛkspɝt kɪlɝz ɪn ɔl ə ði ɛmpaɪɝ. ðeɪ faɪt ðə moʊst ɹuθləsli, kəz ðeɪ ɑɹ ɔlɹɛɾi dɛd."

"Because if you had fought one of the Bloodknives, great Lord, you would be dead. They are the most expert killers in all of the Empire. They fight the most ruthlessly, because they are already dead."

"suəsaɪd tʃɹups." ɡɔɪn nɑɾəd. "du juv ɛni ɪnfɝmeɪʃən əbaʊt ðɛm?"

"Suicide troops." Gawyn nodded. "Do you have any information about them?"

kziəz feɪs ɡɹu kənflɪktɪd.

Kaisea's face grew conflicted.

"ɪf aɪ si jə liʃt?" ɡɔɪn æskt. "wɪl jə ænsɝ mi ðɛn?"

"If I see you leashed?" Gawyn asked. "Will you answer me then?"

"maɪ lɔɹd!" dmænə sɛd. "ðə kwin wəd nɛvɝ əlaʊ ɪt!"

"My Lord!" Dimana said. "The Queen would never allow it!"

"aɪl æsk hɝ," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "aɪ kæn pɹɑməs ðət jəl bi liʃt, kaɪ-si bʌɾ aɪ kən pɹɑməs əl ɪntɝsid wɪð ðə kwin fəɹ ju."

"I'll ask her," Gawyn said. "I can't promise that you'll be leashed, Kai-sea but I can promise I'll intercede with the Queen for you."

"ju ɑɹ paʊɝfəl ən stʃɹɔŋ, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd," kziə sɛd. "ænd waɪz ɪndid. ɪf jəl də ðɪs θɪŋ, kziə wɪl ænsɝ ju."

"You are powerful and strong, great Lord," Kaisea said. "And wise indeed. If you will do this thing, Kaisea will answer you."

dmænə ɡlɛɹɾ ət ɡɔɪn.

Dimana glared at Gawyn.

"spik," ɡɔɪn sɛd tə ðə sʌldəm.

"Speak," Gawyn said to the sul'dam.

"blʌdnaɪvz də nɑt laɪv lɔŋ," kziə sɛd. "wʌns ðeɪ ɑɹ ɡɪvən ə duɾi, ðeɪ də nɑt ɹɛs fɹəm ɪt.

"Bloodknives do not live long," Kaisea said. "Once they are given a duty, they do not rest from it.

ðeɪ ɑɹ ɡɹæntəɾ əbɪləɾiz fɹəm ði ɛmpɹɛs, meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ, tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɹɪŋz ðət meɪk əm ɪndə ɡɹeɪt wɔɹiɝz."

They are granted abilities from the Empress, may she live forever, ter'angreal rings that make them into great warriors."

"ðoʊz blɝ ðɛɹ fɔɹmz," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "wɛn ðeɪ ɑɹ nɪɹ ʃædoʊ."

"Those blur their forms," Gawyn said. "When they are near shadow."

"jɛs," kziə sɛd, saʊndɪŋ sɝpɹaɪz ðəɾ i nu ðɪs. "ðeɪ kænɑt bi dɪfiɾəd. bʌɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ðɛɹ oʊn blʌd wɪl kɪl ðɛm."

"Yes," Kaisea said, sounding surprised that he knew this. "They cannot be defeated. But eventually, their own blood will kill them."

"ðɛɹ oʊn blʌd?"

"Their own blood?"

"ðeɪ ɑɹ pɔɪzən baɪ ðɛɹ sɝvəs. wʌns ðeɪ ɑɹ ɡɪvən ə tʃɑɹdʒ, ðeɪ ɔfən wɪl nɑt læs mɔɹ ðən ə fju wiks. ət moʊst, ðeɪ sɝvaɪv ə mʌnθ."

"They are poisoned by their service. Once they are given a charge, they often will not last more than a few weeks. At most, they survive a month."

ɡɔɪn hɛld ʌp ðə naɪf, dɪstɝbd. "soʊ wi oʊnli nid tə weɪɾ əm aʊt."

Gawyn held up the knife, disturbed. "So we only need to wait them out."

kziə læft. "ðæt wɪl nɑt hæpən. bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ daɪ, ðəl si ðɛɹ duɾi fʊlfɪld."

Kaisea laughed. "That will not happen. Before they die, they will see their duty fulfilled."

"ðɪs wʌn ɪz kɪlɪŋ pipəl sloʊli," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "wʌn ɛvɹi fju deɪz. ə hændfʊl soʊ fɑɹ."

"This one is killing people slowly," Gawyn said. "One every few days. A handful so far."

"tɛsts," kziə sɛd. "pɹɑɾɪŋ fəɹ wiknəsəz ən stʃɹɛŋkθs, lɝnɪŋ wɛɹ ðeɪ kən stʃɹaɪk wɪθaʊt biɪŋ sin. ɪf oʊnli ə fju ɑɹ dɛd, ðən juv nɑt jɛt sin ðə fʊl paʊɝ ə ðə blʌdnaɪf. ðeɪ də nɑt liv ə 'hændfʊl' ʌv dɛd, bʌt dʌzənz."

"Tests," Kaisea said. "Prodding for weaknesses and strengths, learning where they can strike without being seen. If only a few are dead, then you have not yet seen the full power of the Bloodknife. They do not leave a 'handful' of dead, but dozens."

"ənlɛs aɪ stɑp hɪm," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "wʌɾ ɑɹ ɪz wiknəsəz?"

"Unless I stop him," Gawyn said. "What are his weaknesses?"

kziə læft əɡɛn. "wiknəsəz? ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, dɪɾ aɪ nɑt seɪ ðət ðeɪ ɑɹ ðə faɪnəst wɔɹiɝz ɪn sintʃæn, ɛnhænst ən eɪɾəd baɪ ði ɛmpɹɛsəz feɪvɝ, meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ?"

Kaisea laughed again. "Weaknesses? Great Lord, did I not say that they are the finest warriors in Seanchan, enhanced and aided by the Empress's favor, may she live forever?"

faɪn. wʌɾ əbaʊt ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ðɛn? ɪt hɛlps ði əsæsən wən hiz ɪn ʃædoʊ? haʊ kən aɪ stɑp ɪt fɹəm wɝkɪŋ? pɝhæps laɪɾ ə lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝ ə tɔɹtʃɪz?"

Fine. What about the ter'angreal, then? It helps the assassin when he is in shadow? How can I stop it from working? Perhaps light a large number of torches?"

"ju kænɑɾ əv laɪt wɪθaʊt ʃædoʊ, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, ðə wʊmən sɛd. "kɹieɪt mɔɹ laɪt, ən jəl kɹieɪt mɔɹ ʃædoʊz."

"You cannot have light without shadow, great Lord, the woman said. "Create more light, and you will create more shadows."

"ðɛɹ əz tə bi ə weɪ."

"There has to be a way."

"kziə ɪz sɝɾən ðəɾ ɪf ðəɹ ɪz wʌn, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, jəl faɪn ɪt." ðə wʊmənz ɹɪspɑns hæɾ ə smʌɡ ɹoʊn tə ɪt. "ɪf kziə meɪ sədʒɛst, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd? kaʊn jɝsɛlf fɔɹtʃənət tə hæv sɝvaɪv faɪɾɪŋ ə blʌdnaɪf. jə mʌs nɑɾ əv bɪn ɪz əɹ əɹ tʃɹu tɑɹɡət. ɪt wəd bi pɹuɾənt tə haɪd jɝsɛlf əntɪl ə mʌnθ əz pæst. əlaʊ ði ɛmpɹɛs - meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ-__tə əkɑmplɪʃ əɹ wɪl, ən blɛs ði oʊmənz ðət jə wɝ ɡɪvən wɔɹnɪŋ ɪnʌf tə ɪskeɪp ən lɪv."

"Kaisea is certain that if there is one, great Lord, you will find it." The woman's response had a smug rone to it. "If Kaisea may suggest, great Lord? Count yourself fortunate to have survived fighting a Bloodknife. You must not have been his or her true target. It would be prudent to hide yourself until a month has passed. Allow the Empress - may she live forever-__to accomplish her will, and bless the omens that you were given warning enough to escape and live."

"ðæts ɪnʌf ə ðæt," dmænə sɛd. "aɪ tʃɹʌs juv wʌt jə wɪʃ, lɔɹd tʃɹəkənd?"

"That's enough of that," Dimana said. "I trust you have what you wish, Lord Trakand?"

"jɛs, θæŋk ju," ɡɔɪn sɛd, dɪstɝbd. hi bɛɹli noʊɾəst əz kziə ɹoʊz ən ðə kɪnswʊmən lɛɾ əɹ tʃɑɹdʒ əweɪ.

"Yes, thank you," Gawyn said, disturbed. He barely noticed as Kaisea rose and the Kinswoman led her charge away.

kaʊn jɝsɛlf fɔɹtʃənət tə hæv sɝvaɪvd. . . jə mʌs nɑt tʃɹuli hæv bɪn ɪz tɑɹɡət. . .

Count yourself fortunate to have survived. . . you must not truly have been his target. . .

ɡɔɪn tɛstəd ðə θɹoʊɪŋ naɪf ɪn ɪz hænz. ðə tɑɹɡət wɑz ɛɡwin, ɑbviəsli. "waɪ ɛls wəd ðə sintʃæn ɪkspɛn sətʃ ə paʊɝfəl wɛpən? pɝhæps ðeɪ θɔɾ əɹ dɛθ wəd bɹɪŋ daʊn ðə waɪt taʊɝ.

Gawyn tested the throwing knife in his hands. The target was Egwene, obviously. "Why else would the Seanchan expend such a powerful weapon? Perhaps they thought her death would bring down the White Tower.

ɛɡwin hæd tə bi wɔɹnd. ɪf ɪt meɪɾ əɹ æŋɡɹi ət hɪm, ɪf ɪt flu ɪn ðə feɪs ʌv wʌt ʃi wɑntəd, hi hæd tə bɹɪŋ əɹ ðɪs ɪnfɝmeɪʃən. ɪt kəd seɪv əɹ laɪf.

Egwene had to be warned. If it made her angry at him, if it flew in the face of what she wanted, he had to bring her this information. It could save her life.

hi wɑz stɪl stændɪŋ ðəɹ - kənsɪɾɝɪŋ haʊ tə əpɹoʊtʃ ɛɡwin -  wən ə sɝvən ɪn ɹɛɾ ən waɪt faʊn hɪm. ʃi kæɹiɾ ə pleɪt wɪð ə sild ɛnvəloʊp ɑn ɪt. "maɪ lɔɹd ɡɔɪn?"

He was still standing there - considering how to approach Egwene -  when a servant in red and white found him. She carried a plate with a sealed envelope on it. "My Lord Gawyn?"

"wʌts ðɪs?" ɡɔɪn æskt, teɪkɪŋ ðə lɛɾɝ ən juzɪŋ ðə blʌd-naɪf tə kʌɾ ɪɾ oʊpən əlɔŋ ðə tɑp.

"What's this?" Gawyn asked, taking the letter and using the Blood-knife to cut it open along the top.

"fɹʌm tɑɹ vəlɑn," ðə sɝvən sɛd, boʊɪŋ. "ɪt keɪm θɹu ə ɡeɪtweɪ."

"From Tar Valon," the servant said, bowing. "It came through a gateway."

ɡɔɪn ənfoʊldəd ðə θɪk ʃiɾ ə peɪpɝ ɪnsaɪd. hi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz sɪlvi-ɑnəz skɹɪpt.

Gawyn unfolded the thick sheet of paper inside. He recognized Silvi-ana's script.

ɡɔɪn tʃɹəkənd. ɪt ɹɛd. ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz θɝoʊli dɪspliz tə dɪskʌvɝ jəɹ dɪpɑɹtʃɝ. jə wɝ nɛvɝ ɪnstʃɹʌktəd tə liv ðə sɪɾi. ʃiz æsk mi tə sɛn ðɪs mɪsɪv, ɪkspleɪnɪŋ ðət juv bɪn ɡɪvən æmpəl taɪm tə aɪɾəl ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. jəɹ pɹɛzəns ɪz ɹikwaɪɝɾ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən jə ɑɹ tə ɹɪtɝn wɪð ɔl heɪst.

Gawyn Trakand. it read. The Amyrlin was thoroughly displeased to discover your departure. You were never instructed to leave the city. She has asked me to send this missive, explaining that you have been given ample time to idle in Caemlyn. Your presence is required in Tar Valon, and you are to return with all haste.

ɡɔɪn ɹɛd ðə lɛɾɝ, ðən ɹɛɾ ɪɾ əɡɛn. ɛɡwin skɹimd əɾ ɪm fəɹ dɪstɝbɪŋ əɹ plænz, ɔl bʌt θɹu hɪm aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ, ən ʃi wɑz dɪspliz tə dɪskʌvɝ hid lɛf ðə sɪɾi? wʌd ʃi ɪkspɛkt ɪm tə du? hi ɔlmoʊs læft.

Gawyn read the letter, then read it again. Egwene screamed at him for disturbing her plans, all but threw him out of the Tower, and she was displeased to discover he'd left the city? What did she expect him to do? He almost laughed.

"maɪ lɔɹd?" ðə sɝvən æskt. "wʊd jə laɪk tə sɛn ə ɹɪplaɪ?" ðəɹ wɑz peɪpɝ ən pɛn ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪ. "ðeɪ ɪmplaɪd ðət wʌn wəd bi ɪkspɛktəd.'

"My Lord?" the servant asked. "Would you like to send a reply?" There was paper and pen on the tray. "They implied that one would be expected.'

"sɛn əɹ ðɪs,' ɡɔɪn sɛd, tɔsɪŋ ðə blʌdnaɪf ɑntu ðə tʃɹeɪ. hi fɛl soʊ æŋɡɹi, sʌɾənli, ən ɔl θɔts ə ɹɪtɝnɪŋ flɛɾ ɪz maɪnd. fleɪmɪŋ wʊmən!

"Send her this,' Gawyn said, tossing the Bloodknife onto the tray. He felt so angry, suddenly, and all thoughts of returning fled his mind. Flaming woman!

"æn tɛl hɝ," hi æɾəd æftɝ ə moʊməns θɔt, "ðæt ði əsæsən ɪz sintʃæn, ən kæɹiz ə spɛʃəl tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðət meɪks ɪm dɪfəkəl tə si ɪn ʃædoʊz. bɛs tə kip ɛkstʃɹə laɪts bɝnɪŋ. ði ʌðɝ mɝɾɝz wɝ tɛsts ɡeɪdʒ əɹ dɪfɛnsəz. ʃiz ðə tʃɹu tɑɹɡət. ɛmfəsaɪz ðət ði əsæsən ɪz vɛɹi, vɛɹi deɪnʒɝəs - bʌt nɑt ðə pɝsən ʃi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz. ɪf ʃi nidz pɹuf, ʃi kən kʌm tɔk tə səm ə ðə sintʃæn hɪɹ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn."

"And tell her," he added after a moment's thought, "that the assassin is Seanchan, and carries a special ter'angreal that makes him difficult to see in shadows. Best to keep extra lights burning. The other murders were tests gauge our defenses. She is the true target. Emphasize that the assassin is very, very dangerous - but not the person she thought it was. If she needs proof, she can come talk to some of the Seanchan here in Caemlyn."

ðə sɝvən lʊk pɝplɛkst, bʌt wən i sɛd nʌθɪŋ fɝðɝ, ðə wʊmən ɹitʃɹiɾəd.

The servant looked perplexed, but when he said nothing further, the woman retreated.

hi tʃɹaɪd tə kul ɪz ɹeɪdʒ. hi wʊdnt ɡoʊ bæk, nɑt naʊ. nɑt wən ɪt wəd lʊk əz ɪf hid kʌm kɹɔlɪŋ bæk əɾ əɹ kəmænd. ʃi hæɾ əɹ "kɛɹfəl plænz ən tʃɹæps." ʃi hæd sɛd ʃi dɪdnt nid hɪm. ʃi wəɾ əv tə də wɪθaʊɾ ɪm fəɹ ə waɪl, ðɛn.

He tried to cool his rage. He wouldn't go back, not now. Not when it would look as if he'd come crawling back at her command. She had her "careful plans and traps." She had said she didn't need him. She would have to do without him for a while, then.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾifɔɹ


CHAPTER 34

dʒʌdʒmənt


Judgment

aɪ wɑn ðə skaʊts aʊt wɑtʃɪŋ," pɛɹɪn sɛd fɔɹsfəli. "ivən dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹaɪəl." "ðə meɪɾənz woʊn laɪk ðɪs, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," səlɪn sɛd. "nɑɾ ɪf ɪt meɪks əm mɪs ðə tʃæns tə dæns ðə spɪɹz."

I want the scouts out watching," Perrin said forcefully. "Even during the trial." "The Maidens won't like this, Perrin Aybara," Sulin said. "Not if it makes them miss the chance to dance the spears."

"ðeɪl də ɪɾ ɛniweɪ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, wɔkɪŋ θɹu kæmp, dænɪl ən ɡɔl əɾ ɪz saɪd. bɪhaɪn fɑloʊɾ ɑzi ən wɪl ælsin, hɪz tu ɡɑɹdz fəɹ ðə deɪ.

"They'll do it anyway," Perrin said, walking through camp, Dannil and Gaul at his side. Behind followed Azi and Wil al'Seen, his two guards for the day.

səlɪn ɪnspɛktɪd pɛɹɪn, ðən nɑɾəd. "ɪt wɪl bi dʌn." ʃi muvd ɔf.

Sulin inspected Perrin, then nodded. "It will be done." She moved off.

"lɔɹd pɛɹɪn," dænɪl æskt, smɛlɪŋ nɝvəs. "wʌts ðɪs əbaʊt?"

"Lord Perrin," Dannil asked, smelling nervous. "What's this about?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ jɛt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "sʌmθɪŋz ɹɔŋ ɑn ðə wɪnd."

"I don't know yet," Perrin said. "Something's wrong on the wind."

dænɪl fɹaʊnd, lʊkɪŋ kənfjuzd. wɛl, pɛɹɪn wɑz kənfjuzd, tu. kənfjuzd ən ɪnkɹisɪŋli sɝɾən. ɪt simd ə kɑntʃɹədɪkʃən, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz tʃɹu.

Dannil frowned, looking confused. Well, Perrin was confused, too. Confused and increasingly certain. It seemed a contradiction, but it was true.

ðə kæmp wɑz bɪzi, hɪz ɑɹmiz ɡæðɝɪŋ tə mit ðə waɪtkloʊks. nɑɾ ɪz ɑɹmi, hɪz ɑɹmiz.

The camp was busy, his armies gathering to meet the Whitecloaks. Not his army, his armies.

ðəɹ wɑz soʊ mʌtʃ dɪvɪʒən əmʌŋ ðɛm. ɑɹ-ɡændə ən ɡælɛn dʒɑsəlɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ fəɹ pəzɪʃən, ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn ɹɪzɛntɪŋ ðə nuɝ bænz ə mɝsənɛɹiz, ðə fɔɹmɝ ɹɛfjudʒiz mæʃt bɪtwin əm ɔl. ænd, ʌv kɔɹs, ði il, əluf ən duɪŋ əz ðeɪ wɪʃt.

There was so much division among them. Ar-ganda and Gallenne jostling one another for position, the Two Rivers men resenting the newer bands of mercenaries, the former refugees mashed between them all. And, of course, the Aiel, aloof and doing as they wished.

aɪm gɑnə dɪsbæn ðɛm, pɛɹɪn toʊl hɪmsɛlf. wʌt dʌz ɪt ?næɾɝ? ɪt bɑðɝɾ ɪm nʌnðəlɛs.

I'm going to disband them, Perrin told himself. What does it ?natter? It bothered him nonetheless.

ɪt wɑz ə dɪsɔɹɾɝli weɪ tə ɹʌn ə kæmp.

It was a disorderly way to run a camp.

ɛniweɪ, pɛɹɪnz pipəl hæd moʊsli ɹəkʌvɝd fɹəm ðɪs leɪɾəst bʌbəl ʌv ivəl. nʌn ə ðə wəd pɹɑbli lʊk ət ðɛɹ wɛpənz əɡɛn ðə seɪm weɪ, bʌt ðə wundəd hæd bɪn hild ən ðə tʃænlɝz wɝ ɹɛstəd.

Anyway, Perrin's people had mostly recovered from this latest bubble of evil. None of the would probably look at their weapons again the same way, but the wounded had been Healed and the channelers were rested.

ðə waɪtkloʊks hæd nɑt bɪn plizd ət ðə dɪleɪ, wɪtʃ hæɾ ɪkstɛndəd lɔŋɡɝ ðən ðeɪ hæd pɹɑbli ɪkspɛktəd. bʌt pɛɹɪn hæd niɾəd ðə taɪm, fəɹ ə nʌmbɝ ə ɹizənz.

The Whitecloaks had not been pleased at the delay, which had extended longer than they had probably expected. But Perrin had needed the time, for a number of reasons.

"dænɪl," hi sɛd. "maɪ waɪf əz jə mɪkst ʌp ɪn əɹ plɑts tə pɹətɛk mi, aɪ əsum."

"Dannil," he said. "My wife has you mixed up in her plots to protect me, I assume."

dænɪl stɑɹɾəd. "haʊ - "

Dannil started. "How - "

"ʃi nidz əɹ sikɹəts," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪ mɪs hæf ə ðɛm, bʌt ðɪs wʌn wɑz əz pleɪn əz deɪ. ʃiz nɑt hæpi əbaʊt ðɪs tʃɹaɪəl. wʌts ʃi ɡɑt jə duɪŋ? səm plæn wɪð ði æʃəmən tə ɡɛt mi aʊɾ ə deɪnʒɝ?"

"She needs her secrets," Perrin said. "I miss half of them, but this one was as plain as day. She's not happy about this trial. What's she got you doing? Some plan with the Asha'man to get me out of danger?"

"sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðæt, maɪ lɔɹd," dænɪl ədmɪɾəd.

"Something like that, my Lord," Dannil admitted.

"aɪl ɡoʊ, ɪf ɪt tɝnz bæd," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "bʌt doʊn dʒʌmp tə ɪt tu ɝli. aɪ woʊn əv ðɪs tɝn ɪndə ə blʌdbæθ kəz wʌn ə ðə waɪtkloʊks lɛts aʊɾ ə kɝs ət ðə ɹɔŋ taɪm. weɪt fəɹ maɪ sɪɡnəl.

"I'll go, if it turns bad," Perrin said. "But don't jump to it too early. I won't have this turn into a bloodbath because one of the Whitecloaks lets out a curse at the wrong time. Wait for my signal.

ʌndɝstʊd?"

Understood?"

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd," dænɪl sɛd, smɛlɪŋ ʃipɪʃ.

"Yes, my Lord," Dannil said, smelling sheepish.

pɛɹɪn niɾəd tə bi dʌn wɪð ðɪs ɔl. fɹi ʌv ɪt. naʊ. bɪkɔz, oʊvɝ ðiz læs fju deɪz, ɪt hæd bɪɡʌn tə fil nætʃɹəl tə hɪm. aɪm dʒʌst ə ... hi tʃɹeɪld ɔf. dʒʌst ə wʌt? ə blæksmɪθ? kəɾ i seɪ ðəɾ ɛnimɔɹ? wʌt wɑz hi?

Perrin needed to be done with this all. Free of it. Now. Because, over these last few days, it had begun to feel natural to him. I'm just a ... He trailed off. Just a what? A blacksmith? Could he say that anymore? What was he?

ʌp əhɛd, nil sæɾ ɑn ə stʌmp nɪɹ ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ ɡɹaʊnd. dʊɹɪŋ ðə læs fju deɪz, ðə juθfəl æʃəmən soʊlʒɝ ən ɡɔl hæd skaʊɾəd aʊɾ ɪn sɛvɹəl dɝɛkʃənz ət pɛɹɪnz ɔɹɾɝz, tə si ɪf ɡeɪtweɪz wɝkt ɪf wʌn ɡɑt fɑɹ ɪnʌf əweɪ fɹəm kæmp. ʃʊɹ ɪnʌf, ɪt tɝn aʊt ðeɪ dɪd, ðoʊ wʌn hæd ɡoʊ fəɹ aʊɝz tə ɪskeɪp ði ɪfɛkt.

Up ahead, Neald sat on a stump near the Traveling ground. During the last few days, the youthful Asha'man soldier and Gaul had scouted out in several directions at Perrin's orders, to see if gateways worked if one got far enough away from camp. Sure enough, it turned out they did, though one had go for hours to escape the effect.

niðɝ nil nɔɹ ɡɔl hæd noʊɾəd ɛni sɔɹɾ ə tʃeɪnʒ ʌðɝ ðən ðə wiv fəɹ ɡeɪtweɪz wɝkɪŋ əɡɛn. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ bæɹiɝ əɹ vɪzəbəl ɪndəkeɪʃən ɑn ðɪs saɪd, bʌɾ ɪf pɛɹɪn ɡɛst ɹaɪt, ði ɛɹiə wɛɹ ɡeɪtweɪz dɪdnt wɝk mætʃt ɪɡzækli ði ɛɹiə kʌvɝd baɪ ðə doʊm ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim.

Neither Neald nor Gaul had noted any sort of change other than the weave for gateways working again. There was no barrier or visible indication on this side, but if Perrin guessed right, the area where gateways didn't work matched exactly the area covered by the dome in the wolf dream.

ðət wɑz ðə doʊmz pɝpəs, ən ðət wɑz waɪ sleɪɝ ɡɑɹɾəd ɪt. ɪt wɑzn əbaʊt hʌntɪŋ ðə wʊlvz, ðoʊ hi ʃʊɹli dɪd ðət wɪð plɛʒɝ. sʌmθɪŋ wɑz kɑzɪŋ boʊθ ðə doʊm ən ðə pɹɑbləmz wɪð ði æʃəmən.

That was the dome's purpose, and that was why Slayer guarded it. It wasn't about hunting the wolves, though he surely did that with pleasure. Something was causing both the dome and the problems with the Asha'man.

"nild," pɛɹɪn sɛd, wɔkɪŋ ʌp tə ði æʃəmən. "leɪɾəst skaʊɾɪŋ mɪʃən wɛnt wɛl?"

"Neald," Perrin said, walking up to the Asha'man. "Latest scouting mission went well?"

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd."

"Yes, my Lord."

"wɛn ɡɹeɪɾi ən jə wɝ fɝs tɛlɪŋ mi əbaʊt ðə feɪlɪŋ wivz, jə sɛɾ ɪt hæd hæpən tə jə bɪfɔɹ. wən wɑz ðæt?"

"When Grady and you were first telling me about the failing weaves, you said it had happened to you before. When was that?"

"wɛn wi tʃɹaɪd tə oʊpən ðə ɡeɪtweɪ tə ɹɪtʃɹiv ðə skaʊɾɪŋ ɡɹup fɹəm kɛɹhin," nil sɛd.

"When we tried to open the gateway to retrieve the scouting group from Cairhien," Neald said.

"wi tʃɹaɪɾ ət fɝst ən ðə wivz fɛl əpɑɹt. bʌt wi weɪɾəd ə lɪɾəl waɪl ən tʃɹaɪɾ əɡɛn. ðət taɪm ɪt wɝkt."

"We tried at first and the weaves fell apart. But we waited a little while and tried again. That time it worked."

ðət wɑz dʒʌst æftɝ ðə fɝs naɪɾ aɪ sɔ ðə doʊm, pɛɹɪn θɔt. ɪt keɪm ʌp fəɹ ə ʃɔɹt taɪm, ðən vænɪʃt. sleɪɝ mʌst əv bɪn tɛstɪŋ ɪt.

That was just after the first night I saw the dome, Perrin thought. It came up for a short time, then vanished. Slayer must have been testing it.

"maɪ lɔɹd," nil sɛd, stɛpɪŋ kloʊs. hi wɑz ə fɑp ʌv ə mæn, bʌt hid bɪn ɹɪlaɪəbəl wən pɛɹɪn niɾəd hɪm. "wʌts ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn?"

"My Lord," Neald said, stepping close. He was a fop of a man, but he'd been reliable when Perrin needed him. "What's going on?"

"aɪ θɪŋk sʌmwʌnz sɛɾɪŋ ə tʃɹæp fəɹ ʌs," pɛɹɪn sɛd sɔfli. "bɑksɪŋ əs ɪn. aɪv sɛn səm ʌðɝz aʊt tə lʊk fəɹ ðə θɪŋ kɑzɪŋ ðɪs; ɪts pɹɑbli səm kaɪndə əbdʒɛkt ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ." hi wɝid ðəɾ ɪt maɪt bi hɪɾən ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. kəd sʌmθɪŋ ðəɹ pɹədus ən ɪfɛkt ɪn ðə ɹil wɝld?

"I think someone's setting a trap for us," Perrin said softly. "Boxing us in. I've sent some others out to look for the thing causing this; it's probably some kind of object of the One Power." He worried that it might be hidden in the wolf dream. Could something there produce an effect in the real world?

"naʊ, jəɹ ʃʊɹ jə kæn kɹieɪt ɡeɪtweɪz əɾ ɔl? nɑɾ ivən tə ʌðɝ pɔɪns nɪɹbaɪ, ɪnsaɪd ði ɪfɛktəɾ ɛɹiə?"

"Now, you're sure you can't create gateways at all? Not even to other points nearby, inside the effected area?"

nild ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

Neald shook his head.

ðə ɹulz ɑɹ dɪfɹən ɑn ðɪs saɪd, ðɛn, pɛɹɪn θɔt. ɔɹ, ət list ɪt wɝks dɪfɹənli ɑn tʃɹævlɪŋ ðən ɪt dʌz ɑn ʃɪftɪŋ ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. "nild, jə sɛd wɪð ðə lɑɹdʒɝ ɡeɪtweɪz -  juzɪŋ ə sɝkəl - jə kəd muv ði ɪntaɪɝ ɑɹmi θɹu ɪn ə fju aʊɝz?"

The rules are different on this side, then, Perrin thought. Or, at least it works differently on Traveling than it does on shifting in the wolf dream. "Neald, you said with the larger gateways -  using a circle - you could move the entire army through in a few hours?"

nil nɑɾəd. "wiv bɪn pɹæktəsɪŋ."

Neald nodded. "We've been practicing."

"wi nid tə bi ɹɛɾi fəɹ ðæt," pɛɹɪn sɛd, lʊkɪŋ ət ðə skaɪ. hi kəd stɪl smɛl ðəɾ ɑɾəti ɪn ði ɛɹ. ə feɪn steɪlnəs.

"We need to be ready for that," Perrin said, looking at the sky. He could still smell that oddity in the air. A faint staleness.

"maɪ lɔɹd," nil sɛd. "wil bi ɹɛɾi, bʌɾ ɪf wi kæn kɹieɪt ɡeɪtweɪz, ðən ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ.

"My Lord," Neald said. "We'll be ready, but if we can't create gateways, then it doesn't matter.

wi kəd mɑɹtʃ ði ɑɹmi aʊt tə ðət pɔɪn bɪɑn ði ɪfɛkt, ðoʊ, ən ɪskeɪp fɹəm ðɛɹ."

We could march the army out to that point beyond the effect, though, and escape from there."

ənfɔɹtʃənətli, pɛɹɪn səspɛktəd ðət wʊdn du. hɑpɝ hæd kɔl ðɪs ə θɪŋ ə ðə dip pæst.

Unfortunately, Perrin suspected that wouldn't do. Hopper had called this a thing of the deep past.

ðət mɛn ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡʊd tʃæns sleɪɝ wɑz wɝkɪŋ wɪð ðə fɔɹseɪkən. əɹ i wɑz wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən hɪmsɛlf. pɛɹɪn hæd nɛvɝ kənsɪɾɝd ðæt. iðɝ weɪ, ðə wʌnz plænɪŋ ðɪs tʃɹæp wəd bi wɑtʃɪŋ. ɪf ɪz ɑɹmi tʃɹaɪd tə ɪskeɪp, ði ɛnəmi wəd spɹɪŋ ɪts tʃɹæp əɹ ðeɪd muv ðə doʊm.

That meant there was a good chance Slayer was working with the Forsaken. Or he was one of the Forsaken himself. Perrin had never considered that. Either way, the ones planning this trap would be watching. If his army tried to escape, the enemy would spring its trap or they'd move the dome.

ðə fɔɹseɪkən hæd bɪn fulɪŋ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɪð ðoʊz bɑksəz ən hæd pleɪst əm hɪɹ. ən ðəɹ wɑz ɪz pɪktʃɝ, biɪŋ dɪstʃɹɪbjəɾəd. wɑz ɪɾ ɔl pɑɹɾ ə ðɪs tʃɹæp, wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz? deɪnʒɝz. soʊ mɛni deɪnʒɝz hʌntɪŋ hɪm.

The Forsaken had been fooling the Shaido with those boxes and had placed them here. And there was his picture, being distributed. Was it all part of this trap, whatever it was? Dangers. So many dangers hunting him.

wɛl, wʌd jə ɪkspɛkt, hi θɔt. ɪts tɑɹmən ɡdən.

Well, what did you expect, he thought. It's Tarmon Gai'don.

"aɪ wɪʃ ɛlaɪəs wəd ɹɪtɝn," hi sɛd. hid sɛn ðə mæn ɑn ə spɛʃəl skaʊɾɪŋ mɪʃən ə hɪz oʊn.

"I wish Elyas would return," he said. He'd sent the man on a special scouting mission of his own.

"dʒʌs bi ɹɛɾi, nild. dænɪl, ɪɾəd bi bɛst ɪf jud ɡoʊ pæs maɪ kɔʃənz ɑn tə jəɹ mɛn. aɪ doʊnt wɑn ɛni æksəɾənts."

"Just be ready, Neald. Dannil, it'd be best if you'd go pass my cautions on to your men. I don't want any accidents."

dænɪl ən nild wɛn ðɛɹ sɛpɹət weɪz, ən pɛɹɪn wɔk tə ðə hɔɹs pɪkəts tə faɪn stɛpɝ. ɡɔl, kwaɪəɾ əz ðə wɪnd, fɛl ɪn bɪsaɪd hɪm.

Dannil and Neald went their separate ways, and Perrin walked to the horse pickets to find Stepper. Gaul, quiet as the wind, fell in beside him.

sʌmwʌnz pʊlɪŋ ə snɛɹ taɪt, pɛɹɪn θɔt, sloʊli, ɪntʃ baɪ ɪntʃ, ɝaʊnd ?naɪ lɛɡ. pɹɑbli weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪm tə faɪt ðə waɪtkloʊks. æftɝwɝd, hɪz ɑɹmi wəd bi wikən ən wundəd. izi pɪkɪŋz. ɪt ɡeɪv ɪm ə tʃɪl tə ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɪf hid ɡɔn tə bæɾəl wɪð dəmədʒɹɾ ɝliɝ, ðə tʃɹæp maɪɾ əv bɪn spɹʌŋ ɹaɪt ðɛn. ðə tʃɹaɪəl sʌɾənli tʊk ɑn ɪnɔɹməs ɪmpɔɹt.

Someone's pulling a snare tight, Perrin thought, slowly, inch by inch, around ?ny leg. Probably waiting for him to fight the Whitecloaks. Afterward, his army would be weakened and wounded. Easy pickings. It gave him a chill to realize that if he'd gone to battle with Damodred earlier, the trap might have been sprung right then. The trial suddenly took on enormous import.

pɛɹɪn hæd tə faɪn ə weɪ tə fɔɹstɔl ə bæɾəl əntɪl i kəd ɡɛt tə ðə wʊlf dʒɹim wʌn mɔɹ taɪm. ɪn ɪt, pɝhæps i kəd faɪn ə weɪ tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðə doʊm ən fɹi hɪz pipəl.

Perrin had to find a way to forestall a battle until he could get to the wolf dream one more time. In it, perhaps he could find a way to destroy the dome and free his people.

"ju tʃeɪnʒ, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," ɡɔl sɛd.

"You change, Perrin Aybara," Gaul said.

"wʌts ðæt?" pɛɹɪn sɛd, teɪkɪŋ stɛpɝ fɹəm ə ɡɹum.

"What's that?" Perrin said, taking Stepper from a groom.

"ðɪs ɪz ə ɡʊd θɪŋ," ɡɔl ɹɪplaɪd. "ɪɾ ɪz ɡʊd tə si jə stɑp pɹoʊ-tɛstɪŋ əbaʊt biɪŋ tʃif. ɪts bɛɾɝ tə si jə ɛndʒɔɪ kəmænd."

"This is a good thing," Gaul replied. "It is good to see you stop pro-testing about being chief. It is better to see you enjoy command."

"aɪv stɑpt pɹətɛstɪŋ kəz aɪ hæv bɛɾɝ θɪŋz tə du," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "æn aɪ doʊn ɛndʒɔɪ biɪŋ ɪn kəmænd. aɪ də ɪt kəz aɪ hæv tə."

"I've stopped protesting because I have better things to do," Perrin said. "And I don't enjoy being in command. I do it because I have to."

ɡɔl nɑɾəd, əz ɪf i θɔt pɛɹɪn wɝ əɡɹiɪŋ wɪð hɪm.

Gaul nodded, as if he thought Perrin were agreeing with him.

il. pɛɹɪn swʌŋ ɪndə ðə sæɾəl. "lɛts ɡoʊ ɑn, ðɛn. ðə kɑləm ɪz stɑɹɾɪŋ tə mɑɹtʃ."

Aiel. Perrin swung into the saddle. "Let's go on, then. The column is starting to march."

"ɔf wɪð ju," feɪl sɛd tə ɝɑvin. "ði ɑɹmi ɪz muvɪŋ aʊt."

"Off with you," Faile said to Aravine. "The army is moving out."

ɝɑvin kɝtsiɾ ən muv tə pæs ði ɔɹɾɝz tə ðə ɹɛfjudʒiz. feɪl wɑzn sɝɾən wʌt ðɪs deɪ wəd bɹɪŋ, bʌt ʃi wɑntəd ðoʊz u steɪd bɪhaɪn tə bɹeɪk kæmp ən bi ɹɛɾi tə mɑɹtʃ, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs.

Aravine curtsied and moved to pass the orders to the refugees. Faile wasn't certain what this day would bring, but she wanted those who stayed behind to break camp and be ready to march, just in case.

əz ɝɑvin lɛft, feɪl noʊɾəst ɑldin ðə bʊkkipɝ dʒɔɪnɪŋ hɝ. hi dɪd sim tə bi vɪzəɾɪŋ ɝɑvin kwaɪɾ ɔfən leɪtli. pɝhæps hid faɪnəli ɡɪvən ʌp ɑn ɹɛlə.

As Aravine left, Faile noticed Aldin the bookkeeper joining her. He did seem to be visiting Aravine quite often lately. Perhaps he'd finally given up on Arrela.

ʃi heɪsən təwɔɹd ðə tɛnt. ɑn əɹ weɪ, ʃi pæs flæn bɑɹstɪɹ, dʒɑn ɡeɪɛlɪn ən mɑɹɛk kɔɹmɝ tʃɛkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ bɑstʃɹɪŋz ən æɹoʊ flɛtʃɪŋz. ɔl θɹi lʊkt ʌp əɾ əɹ ən weɪvd.

She hastened toward the tent. On her way, she passed Flann Barstere, Jon Gaelin and Marek Cormer checking over their bowstrings and arrow fletchings. All three looked up at her and waved.

ðəɹ sim tə bi ə sɛns ə ɹɪlif ɪn ðɛɹ aɪz, wɪtʃ wɑz ə ɡʊd saɪn. wʌns, ðiz mɛn hæd lʊkt əʃeɪmd wən ðeɪd sin hɝ, əz ɪf ðeɪ fɛl bæd fəɹ ðə weɪ pɛɹɪn hæd simɪŋli dælid wɪð bɹəleɪn dʊɹɪŋ feɪlz æbsəns.

There seemed to be a sense of relief in their eyes, which was a good sign. Once, these men had looked ashamed when they'd seen her, as if they felt bad for the way Perrin had seemingly dallied with Berelain during Faile's absence.

feɪl spɛndɪŋ taɪm wɪð bɹəleɪn, mɪkst wɪð ðə fɔɹməl dɪnʌnsieɪʃən ə ðə ɹumɝz, wɑz wɝkɪŋ tə kənvɪns ðə kæmp ðət nʌθɪŋ ɪnəpɹoʊpɹiɪt hæd hæpənd. ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ, ɪt sim ðət feɪl seɪvɪŋ bɹəleɪnz laɪf dʊɹɪŋ ðə bʌbəl ʌv ivəl hæd hæd ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst ɪfɛkt ɪn tʃeɪnʒɪŋ pipəlz maɪnz. ðeɪ əsum kəz ə ðəɾ ɪvɛn ðət ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɡɹʌdʒ bɪtwin ðə tu wɪmən.

Faile spending time with Berelain, mixed with the formal denunciation of the rumors, was working to convince the camp that nothing inappropriate had happened. Interesting, it seemed that Faile saving Berelain's life during the bubble of evil had had the strongest effect in changing people's minds. They assumed because of that event that there was no grudge between the two women.

ʌv kɔɹs, feɪl hædn seɪv ðə wʊmənz laɪf, dʒʌs hɛlp hɝ. bʌt ðət wɑznt wʌt ðə ɹumɝz sɛd, ən feɪl wɑz pliz tə si ðɛm wɝkɪŋ ɪn əɹ ən pɛɹɪnz feɪvɝ fəɹ wʌns.

Of course, Faile hadn't saved the woman's life, just helped her. But that wasn't what the rumors said, and Faile was pleased to see them working in her and Perrin's favor for once.

ʃi ɹitʃt ðə tɛn ən hɝidli wɑʃt ʌp wɪð ə dæmp klɔθ ən ðɛɹ beɪsən. ʃi pʊɾ ɑn səm pɝfjum, ðən dʒɹɛst ɪn əɹ naɪsɪst ɡaʊn -  ə dɛp ɡɹeɪ-ɡɹin wɪð ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd vaɪn pæɾɝnz əkɹɔs ðə bɑɾəs ən ɝaʊn ðə hɛm. faɪnəli, ʃi tʃɛk hɝsɛlf ɪn ðə mɪɹɝ. ɡʊd. ʃi wɑz haɪɾɪŋ əɹ æŋzaɪəɾi. pɛɹɪn wəd bi ɔl ɹaɪt. hi wəd bi.

She reached the tent and hurriedly washed up with a damp cloth and their basin. She put on some perfume, then dressed in her nicest gown -  a depp gray-green with embroidered vine patterns across the bodice and around the hem. Finally, she checked herself in the mirror. Good. She was hiding her anxiety. Perrin would be all right. He would be.

ʃi slɪpt ə fju naɪvz ɪndə hɝ bɛlt ən ʌp əɹ slivz ɛniweɪ. aʊt saɪd, ə ɡɹum hæd bɹɔt deɪlaɪt fəɹ hɝ. ʃi klaɪmd ʌp - mɪsɪŋ swɑloʊ, hu hæd bɪn kɪl baɪ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ. ivən əɹ faɪnəs dʒɹɛs hæd skɝts dɪvaɪɾəd fəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ; ʃi wʊdn kæɹi ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ɑn ðə ɹoʊd. hɝ mʌðɝ hæd tɔɾ əɹ ðət nʌθɪŋ dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ə wʊmənz kɹɛɾəbɪlɪti wɪð soʊlʒɝz mɔɹ kwɪkli ðən ɹaɪɾɪŋ saɪdsɑɾəl. ænd, ʃəd ði ənθɪŋkəbəl hæpən ən pɛɹɪn fɔl, feɪl maɪt nid tə teɪk kəmæn ə ðɛɹ fɔɹsɪz.

She slipped a few knives into her belt and up her sleeves anyway. Out side, a groom had brought Daylight for her. She climbed up - missing Swallow, who had been killed by the Shaido. Even her finest dress had skirts divided for riding; she wouldn't carry anything else on the road. Her mother had taught her that nothing destroyed a woman's credibility with soldiers more quickly than riding sidesaddle. And, should the unthinkable happen and Perrin fall, Faile might need to take command of their forces.

ʃi tʃɹɑɾəd ʌp tə ðə fɹʌn ə ðə ɡæðɝɪŋ ɑɹmi. pɛɹɪn sæɾ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl ðɛɹ. haʊ dɛɹ i lʊk soʊ peɪʃənt!

She trotted up to the front of the gathering army. Perrin sat in his saddle there. How dare he look so patient!

feɪl dɪdn lɛɾ əɹ ənɔɪəns ʃoʊ. ðəɹ wɑz ə taɪm tə bi ə tɛmpəst ən ə taɪm tə bi ə tɛndɝ bɹiz. ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi lɛt pɛɹɪn noʊ, ɪn noʊ ənsɝɾən tɝmz, wʌt ʃi θɔɾ ə ðɪs tʃɹaɪəl. fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, ʃi niɾəd tə bi sin səpɔɹɾɪŋ hɪm.

Faile didn't let her annoyance show. There was a time to be a tempest and a time to be a tender breeze. She had already let Perrin know, in no uncertain terms, what she thought of this trial. For the moment, she needed to be seen supporting him.

ʃi ɹoʊɾ ʌp bɪsaɪd pɛɹɪn əz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡæðɝd bɪhaɪnd, wɔkɪŋ laɪk ðə waɪz wʌnz. noʊ meɪɾənz. wɛɹ wɝ ðeɪ? ɪt mʌs bi ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə kip əm fɹəm ðə tʃɹaɪəl. tə səlɪn ən ði ʌðɝz, pɹətɛktɪŋ pɛɹɪn wɑz ə duɾi ɡɪvən əm baɪ ðɛɹ kɑɹəkɑɹn, ən ɪt wəd bi ə ɡɹeɪv mæɾɝ ə toʊ tə ðɛm ɪf i fɛl.

She rode up beside Perrin as the Aes Sedai gathered behind, walking like the Wise Ones. No Maidens. Where were they? It must be important to keep them from the trial. To Sulin and the others, protecting Perrin was a duty given them by their Car'a'carn, and it would be a grave matter of toh to them if he fell.

skænɪŋ ðə kæmp, ʃi noʊɾəd tu ɡeɪʃeɪn ɪn hʊɾɪd waɪt ɹoʊbz hɝiɪŋ tə ðə fɹʌn ə ðə laɪn.

Scanning the camp, she noted two gai'shain in hooded white robes hurrying to the front of the line.

ɡɔl, hu stʊd bɪsaɪd pɛɹɪnz hɔɹs, skaʊld. wʌn ə ðə fɪɡjɝz baʊd tə hɪm, hoʊldɪŋ fɔɹθ ə kəlɛkʃən ə spɪɹz. "fɹɛʃli ʃɑɹpənd," kiæd sɛd.

Gaul, who stood beside Perrin's horse, scowled. One of the figures bowed to him, holding forth a collection of spears. "Freshly sharpened," Chiad said.

"ænd nuli flɛtʃt æɹoʊz," beɪn æɾəd.

"And newly fletched arrows," Bain added.

"aɪ hæv æɹoʊz ən spɪɹz ɔlɹɛɾi," ɡɔl sɛd.

"I have arrows and spears already," Gaul said.

"jɛs," ðə wɪmən sɛd, nilɪŋ bɪfɔɹ hɪm, stɪl hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ ɔfɝɪŋz.

"Yes," the women said, kneeling before him, still holding their offerings.

"wʌt?" hi æskt.

"What?" he asked.

"wi wɝ sɪmpli wɝid fəɹ jəɹ seɪfti," beɪn sɛd. "ju pɹipɛɹd ðoʊz wɛpənz jɝsɛlf, æftɝ ɔl." ʃi sɛɾ ɪɾ ɝnəsli, noʊ hɪn ə mɑkɝi əɹ ɪnsənsɛɹəɾi. jɛt ðə wɝdz ðɛmsɛlvz wɝ kloʊs tə peɪtʃɹənaɪzɪŋ.

"We were simply worried for your safety," Bain said. "You prepared those weapons yourself, after all." She said it earnestly, no hint of mockery or insincerity. Yet the words themselves were close to patronizing.

ɡɔl stɑɹɾəd læfɪŋ. hi tʊk ðə wɛpənz ɔfɝɾ ən ɡeɪv ðə wɪmən ɪz oʊn. dɪspaɪt ðə tʃɹʌbəlz ə ðə deɪ, feɪl faʊn hɝsɛlf smaɪlɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz ə diviəs kəmplɛksəɾi tə il ɪntɝækʃənz.

Gaul started laughing. He took the weapons offered and gave the women his own. Despite the troubles of the day, Faile found herself smiling. There was a devious complexity to Aiel interactions.

wʌt ʃʊɾə plizd ɡɔl ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ ɪz ɡeɪʃeɪn ɔfən sim tə fɹʌstʃɹeɪt hɪm, ən jɛt ðət wɪtʃ ʃʊɾə bɪn ɪnsʌltɪŋ wɑz mɛt wɪð əmjuzmənt.

What should have pleased Gaul regarding his gai'shain often seemed to frustrate him, and yet that which should have been insulting was met with amusement.

əz beɪn ən kiæd ɹitʃɹiɾəd, feɪl lʊkt oʊvɝ ðə ɡæðɝɪŋ ɑɹmi. ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz kʌmɪŋ, nɑt dʒʌs kæptənz əɹ toʊkən fɔɹsɪz. moʊst wʊdn bi eɪbəl tə wɑtʃ ðə tʃɹaɪəl, bʌt ðeɪ niɾəd tə bi ðɛɹ. ɪn keɪs.

As Bain and Chiad retreated, Faile looked over the gathering army. Everyone was coming, not just captains or token forces. Most wouldn't be able to watch the trial, but they needed to be there. In case.

feɪl pʊld ʌp bɪsaɪɾ əɹ hʌzbənd. "sʌmθɪŋ wɝiz ju," ʃi sɛd tə hɪm.

Faile pulled up beside her husband. "Something worries you," she said to him.

"ðə wɝl hoʊlz ɪts bɹɛθ, feɪl," hi sɛd. "wʌt dʒju min?"

"The world holds its breath, Faile," he said. "What do you mean?"

hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ðə læs hʌn ɪz hɪɹ. ɹænd ɪz ɪn deɪnʒɝ. mɔɹ ðən ɛni ʌv ʌs, hiz ɪn deɪnʒɝ.

He shook his head. "The Last Hunt is here. Rand is in danger. More than any of us, he is in danger.

ən aɪ kænt ɡoʊ tə hɪm, nɑt jɛt."

And I can't go to him, not yet."

"pɛɹɪn, jəɹ nɑt meɪkɪŋ ɛni sɛns. haʊ kən jə noʊ ɹænd ɪz ɪn deɪnʒɝ?"

"Perrin, you're not making any sense. How can you know Rand is in danger?"

"aɪ kən si hɪm. ɛni taɪm aɪ mɛnʃən ɪz neɪm əɹ θɪŋk ɑn hɪm, ə vɪʒən ə hɪm oʊpənz tə maɪ aɪz."

"I can see him. Any time I mention his name or think on him, a vision of him opens to my eyes."

ʃi blɪŋkt.

She blinked.

hi tɝn təwɔɹd hɝ, hɪz jɛloʊ aɪz θɔtfəl. "aɪm kənɛktəd tə hɪm. hi . .  pʊlz ət mi, jə si. ɛniweɪ, aɪ toʊl maɪsɛlf aɪ wɑz gɑnə bi oʊpən wɪð jə əbaʊt θɪŋz laɪk ðɪs." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "maɪ ɑɹmiz hɪɹ, ðəɹ biɪŋ hɝɾɪd, feɪl. laɪk ʃip biɪŋ dʒɹɪvən tə ðə bʊtʃɝ."

He turned toward her, his yellow eyes thoughtful. "I'm connected to him. He . .  pulls at me, you see. Anyway, I told myself I was going to be open with you about things like this." He hesitated. "My armies here, they're being herded, Faile. Like sheep being driven to the butcher."

hi sʌɾənli ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪz vɪʒən fɹəm ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. ʃip ɹʌnɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv wʊlvz. hid θɔt hɪmsɛlf wʌn ə ðə wʊlvz. bʌt kəɾ i hæv bɪn ɹɔŋ?

He suddenly remembered his vision from the wolf dream. Sheep running in front of wolves. He'd thought himself one of the wolves. But could he have been wrong?

laɪt! hi hæd bɪn ɹɔŋ əbaʊt ðæt. hi nu wʌɾ ɪt mɛnt, naʊ. "aɪ kən fil ɪɾ ɑn ðə wɪnd," hi sɛd. "ðə pɹɑbləm wɪð ɡeɪtweɪz, ɪts ɹɪleɪɾɪd tə sʌmθɪŋ hæpənɪŋ ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. sʌmbɑɾi wɑns əs tə bi əneɪbəl tə ɪskeɪp ðɪs pleɪs."

Light! He had been wrong about that. He knew what it meant, now. "I can feel it on the wind," he said. "The problem with gateways, it's related to something happening in the wolf dream. Somebody wants us to be unable to escape this place."

ə koʊl bɹiz, ɑɾ ɪn ðə nundeɪ hit, wɑʃt oʊvɝ ðɛm. "ɑɹ jə sɝɾən?" feɪl æskt.

A cold breeze, odd in the noonday heat, washed over them. "Are you certain?" Faile asked.

"jɛs," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɑdli, aɪ æm."

"Yes," Perrin said. "Oddly, I am."

"ðæts wɛɹ ðə meɪɾənz ɑɹ? skaʊɾɪŋ?"

"That's where the Maidens are? Scouting?"

"sʌmwʌn wɑns tə tʃɹæp əs ən ətæk. meɪks moʊst sɛns tə lɛɾ əs klæʃ wɪð ðə waɪtkloʊks, ðən kɪl huɛvɝ sɝvaɪvz. bʌt ðət wəd ɹikwaɪɝ ən ɑɹmi, ʌv wɪtʃ ðəɹ ɪz noʊ saɪn. dʒʌst əs ən ðə waɪtkloʊks. aɪ hæv ɛlaɪəs hʌntɪŋ aʊt saɪnz ʌv ə weɪɡeɪɾ ɪn ði ɛɹiə, bʌɾ i hæzən faʊn ɛniθɪŋ jɛt.

"Someone wants to trap us and attack. Makes most sense to let us clash with the Whitecloaks, then kill whoever survives. But that would require an army, of which there is no sign. Just us and the Whitecloaks. I have Elyas hunting out signs of a Waygate in the area, but he hasn't found anything yet.

soʊ meɪbi ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ, ən aɪm dʒʌs dʒʌmpɪŋ ət ʃædoʊz."

So maybe there's nothing, and I'm just jumping at shadows."

"leɪtli, hʌzbənd, ɪts bɪkʌm laɪkli ðət ðoʊz ʃædoʊz kən baɪt. aɪ tʃɹʌs jəɹ ɪnstɪŋks."

"Lately, husband, it's become likely that those shadows can bite. I trust your instincts."

hi lʊk tə hɝ, ðən smaɪl dipli. "θæŋk ju."

He looked to her, then smiled deeply. "Thank you."

"soʊ wʌt də wi du?"

"So what do we do?"

"wi ɹaɪd tə ðɪs tʃɹaɪəl," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "æn də wʌtɛvɝ wi kən tə kip fɹəm ɡoʊɪŋ tə bæɾəl wɪð ðə waɪtkloʊks. ðən tənaɪt, aɪ si ɪf aɪ kən stɑp ðə θɪŋ ðəɾ ɪz pɹɪvɛntɪŋ ðə ɡeɪtweɪz. wi kæn dʒʌst ɹaɪd fɑɹ ɪnʌf əweɪ tə ɪskeɪp ɪt; ðə θɪŋ kən bi muvd. aɪ sɔ ɪɾ ɪn tu pleɪsəz. əl əv tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ɪt, sʌmhaʊ. æftɝ ðæt, wi ɪskeɪp."

"We ride to this trial," Perrin said. "And do whatever we can to keep from going to battle with the Whitecloaks. Then tonight, I see if I can stop the thing that is preventing the gateways. We can't just ride far enough away to escape it; the thing can be moved. I saw it in two places. I'll have to destroy it, somehow. After that, we escape."

ʃi nɑɾəd, ən pɛɹɪn ɡeɪv ðə kɔl tə mɑɹtʃ. ðoʊ ðə fɔɹs bɪhaɪn stɪl sim keɪɑɾɪk - laɪk ə ɹoʊp tʃæt hæd bɪn tæŋɡəld - ði ɑɹmi bɪɡæn tə muv. ðə vɛɹiəs ɡɹups sɔɹɾɪd ðɛmsɛlvz aʊt, ənɹævəlɪŋ.

She nodded, and Perrin gave the call to march. Though the force behind still seemed chaotic - like a rope chat had been tangled - the army began to move. The various groups sorted themselves out, unraveling.

ðeɪ meɪd ðə ʃɔɹt tʃɹɪp daʊn ðə dʒəhænə ɹoʊd, əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ðə fild wɪð ðə pəvɪljən. ðə waɪtkloʊks hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɝaɪvd; ðeɪ wɝ ɪn fɔɹmeɪʃən. ɪt lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪd bɹɔt ðɛɹ ɪntaɪɝ ɑɹmi əz wɛl.

They made the short trip down the Jehannah Road, approaching the field with the pavilion. The Whitecloaks had already arrived; they were in formation. It looked as if they'd brought their entire army as well.

ðɪs wɑz gɑnə bi ə tɛns æftɝnun.

This was going to be a tense afternoon.

ɡɔl ɹæn bɪsaɪd pɛɹɪnz hɔɹs, ən i dɪdn sim wɝid, nɔɹ dɪɾ i hæv ɪz feɪs veɪld. feɪl nu hi θɔɾ ɪɾ ɑnɝəbəl fəɹ pɛɹɪn tə ɡoʊ tə tʃɹaɪəl. pɛɹɪn iðɝ hæd tə dɪfɛn hɪmsɛlf əɹ ədmɪt toʊ ən æksɛp dʒʌdʒmənt. il hæd wɔk fɹili tə ðɛɹ oʊn ɛksəkjuʃənz tə mit toʊ.

Gaul ran beside Perrin's horse, and he didn't seem worried, nor did he have his face veiled. Faile knew he thought it honorable for Perrin to go to trial. Perrin either had to defend himself or admit toh and accept judgment. Aiel had walked freely to their own executions to meet toh.

ðeɪ ɹoʊd daʊn tə ðə pəvɪljən. ə tʃɛɹ hæd bɪn sɛɾ ɑn ə loʊ plætfɔɹm ət ðə nɔɹðɝn ɛnd, ɪts bæk tə ðə dɪstən fɔɹəst ə lɛðɝlif. mɔɹ-ɡeɪz sæɾ ɪn ði ɛləveɪɾɪd tʃɛɹ, lʊkɪŋ ɛvɹi ɪntʃ ə mɑnɑɹk, wɛɹɪŋ ə ɡaʊn ə ɹɛɾ ən ɡoʊl ðət ɡɑləd mʌst əv faʊn fəɹ hɝ. haʊ hæd feɪl ɛvɝ mɪsteɪkən ðɪs wʊmən fəɹ ə sɪmpəl leɪɾiz meɪd?

They rode down to the pavilion. A chair had been set on a low platform at the northern end, its back to the distant forest of leatherleaf. Mor-gase sat in the elevated chair, looking every inch a monarch, wearing a gown of red and gold that Galad must have found for her. How had Faile ever mistaken this woman for a simple lady's maid?

tʃɛɹz hæd bɪn pleɪst ɪn fɹʌn ə mɔɹɡeɪs, ən waɪtkloʊks fɪl hæf ə ðɛm. ɡɑləd stʊd bɪsaɪɾ əɹ meɪkʃɪf θɹoʊn ə dʒʌdʒmənt. hɪz ɛvɹi lɑk ə hɛɹ wɑz ɪn pleɪs, hɪz junəfɔɹm wɪθaʊt blɛmɪʃ, hɪz kloʊk fɔlɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm. feɪl ɡlæns tə ðə saɪɾ ən kɑt bɹəleɪn stɛɹɪŋ ət ɡɑləɾ ən blʌʃɪŋ, lʊkɪŋ ɔlmoʊs hʌŋɡɹi. ʃi hæd nɑt ɡɪvən ʌp ɑn əɹ ətɛmps tə pɝsweɪd pɛɹɪn tə lɛɾ əɹ ɡoʊ meɪk pis wɪð ðə waɪtkloʊks.

Chairs had been placed in front of Morgase, and Whitecloaks filled half of them. Galad stood beside her makeshift throne of judgment. His every lock of hair was in place, his uniform without blemish, his cloak falling behind him. Faile glanced to the side and caught Berelain staring at Galad and blushing, looking almost hungry. She had not given up on her attempts to persuade Perrin to let her go make peace with the Whitecloaks.

"ɡɑləd dəmədʒɹd," pɛɹɪn kɔld, dɪsmaʊntɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə pəvɪljən. feɪl dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ən wɔk bɪsaɪd hɪm. "aɪ wɑn jə tə pɹɑməs mi sʌmθɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðɪs bɪɡɪnz."

"Galad Damodred," Perrin called, dismounting before the pavilion. Faile dismounted and walked beside him. "I want you to promise me something before this begins."

"ænd wʌt wəd ðət bi?" ðə jʌŋ kəmændɝ kɔl fɹəm ði oʊpən-saɪɾəd tɛnt.

"And what would that be?" the young commander called from the open-sided tent.

"vaʊ nɑt tə lɛt ðɪs tɝn tə bæɾəl," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Vow not to let this turn to battle," Perrin said.

"aɪ kəd pɹɑməs ðæt," ɡɑləd sɛd. "bʌt, ʌv kɔɹs, juɾ əv tə pɹɑməs mi ðət jəɹ nɑt gɑnə ɹʌn ɪf ðə dʒʌdʒmən fɔlz əɡɛns ju.

"I could promise that," Galad said. "But, of course, you'd have to promise me that you're not going to run if the judgment falls against you.

pɛɹɪn fɛl saɪlənt. ðən i ɹɛstəɾ ɪz hæn əpɑn ɪz hæmɝ.

Perrin fell silent. Then he rested his hand upon his hammer.

"nɑt wɪlɪŋ tə pɹɑməs ɪt, aɪ si," ɡɑləd sɛd. "aɪ ɡɪv jə ðɪs tʃæns kəz maɪ mʌðɝ əz pɝsweɪɾəd mi ðət jə ʃəd bi əlaʊd tə spik ɪn jəɹ dɪfɛns. bʌɾ aɪ wəd sunɝ daɪ ðən əlaʊ ə mæn u hæz mɝɾɝd tʃɪlʒɹən tə wɔk əweɪ əntʃælɪnʒd. ɪf jə də nɑt wɪʃ ðɪs tə tɝn tə bæɾəl, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə, ðən pɹɛzən jəɹ dɪfɛns wɛl. iðɝ ðæt, əɹ æksɛpt pʌnɪʃmənt."

"Not willing to promise it, I see," Galad said. "I give you this chance because my mother has persuaded me that you should be allowed to speak in your defense. But I would sooner die than allow a man who has murdered Children to walk away unchallenged. If you do not wish this to turn to battle, Perrin Aybara, then present your defense well. Either that, or accept punishment."

feɪl ɡlænst əɾ əɹ hʌzbənd; hi wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ. hi lʊkt əz ɪf i wɑntəd tə spik ðə ɹɪkwɛstɪd pɹɑməs. ʃi leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn ɪz ɑɹm.

Faile glanced at her husband; he was frowning. He looked as if he wanted to speak the requested promise. She laid a hand on his arm.

"aɪ ʃəd də ɪt," hi sɛd kwaɪətli. "haʊ kən ɛni mæn bi əbʌv ðə lɔ, feɪl? aɪ kɪl ðoʊz mɛn ɪn ændɝ wən mɔɹɡeɪs wɑz kwin. aɪ ʃəɾ əbaɪd baɪ hɝ dʒʌdʒmənt."

"I should do it," he said quietly. "How can any man be above the law, Faile? I killed those men in Andor when Morgase was Queen. I should abide by her judgment."

"æn jəɹ duɾi tə ðə pipəl ə jəɹ ɑɹmi?" ʃi æskt. "jɔɹ duɾi tə ɹænd ən tə ðə læs bæɾəl?" ən tə mi?

"And your duty to the people of your army?" she asked. "Your duty to Rand and to the Last Battle?" And to me?

pɛɹɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən nɑɾəd. "jɔɹ ɹaɪt." ðɛn, laʊɾɝ, hi kəntɪnjud, "lɛts bi ɑn wɪð ðɪs."

Perrin hesitated, then nodded. "You're right." Then, louder, he continued, "Let's be on with this."

pɛɹɪn stʃɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə pəvɪljən, dʒɔɪn ɪmiɾiətli baɪ nild, dænɪl ən ɡɹeɪɾi. ðɛɹ pɹɛzəns meɪd pɛɹɪn fil laɪk ə kaʊɝd; ðə weɪ ðə fɔɹ stʊd meɪɾ ɪɾ ɑbviəs ðət ðeɪ hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə lɛɾɪŋ pɛɹɪn bi teɪkən.

Perrin strode into the pavilion, joined immediately by Neald, Dannil and Grady. Their presence made Perrin feel like a coward; the way the four stood made it obvious that they had no intention of letting Perrin be taken.

wʌt wɑz ə tʃɹaɪəl, ɪf pɛɹɪn wəd nɑɾ əbaɪd baɪ ɪts dɪtɝməneɪʃən? nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ə ʃæm.

What was a trial, if Perrin would not abide by its determination? Nothing more than a sham.

ðə waɪtkloʊks wɑtʃt tɛnsli, ðɛɹ ɔfəsɝz stændɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃeɪɾ ə ðə pəvɪljən, ðɛɹ ɑɹmi ət pɝeɪd ɹɛst. ðeɪ lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə stændɪŋ daʊn dʊɹɪŋ ðə pɹoʊsiɾɪŋz. pɛɹɪnz oʊn fɔɹsɪz -  lɑɹdʒɝ, bʌt lɛs ɔɹɾɝli - ɹɪspɑndɪd baɪ stændɪŋ ət ðə ɹɛɾi ɑpəzət ðə waɪtkloʊks.

The Whitecloaks watched tensely, their officers standing in the shade of the pavilion, their army at parade rest. They looked as if they had no intention of standing down during the proceedings. Perrin's own forces -  larger, but less orderly - responded by standing at the ready opposite the Whitecloaks.

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd, ən ɹoʊən hʌm muvd ɔf tə meɪk sɝɾən ɡɑləd hæd ɹilis ðə kæptɪvz.

Perrin nodded, and Rowan Hum moved off to make certain Galad had released the captives.

pɛɹɪn wɔk tə ðə fɹʌn ə ðə pəvɪljən, stɑpɪŋ dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ mɔɹɡeɪsəz ɛləveɪɾɪd sit. feɪl steɪd baɪ hɪz saɪd. ðəɹ wɝ tʃɛɹz fəɹ ɪm hɪɹ, ən i sæt. sɛvɹəl stɛps tə hɪz lɛft wɑz mɔɹɡeɪsəz stænd.

Perrin walked to the front of the pavilion, stopping just before Morgase's elevated seat. Faile stayed by his side. There were chairs for him here, and he sat. Several steps to his left was Morgase's stand.

tə hɪz ɹaɪt, ðə pipəl sæt tə wɑtʃ ðə tʃɹaɪəl. hɪz bæk wɑz təwɔɹɾ ɪz ɑɹmi.

To his right, the people sat to watch the trial. His back was toward his army.

feɪl - smɛlɪŋ wɛɹi - sæt nɛks tə hɪm. ʌðɝz faɪld ɪn. bɹəleɪn ən æliændɝ sæt wɪð ðɛɹ ɡɑɹdz nɪɹ hɪm; ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən waɪz wʌnz stʊɾ ət ðə bæk, ɹəfjuzɪŋ sits. ðə læs fju sits wɝ teɪkən baɪ ə fju ʌv ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn ən səm ə ðə sinjɝ fɔɹmɝ ɹɛfjudʒiz.

Faile - smelling wary - sat next to him. Others filed in. Berelain and Alliandre sat with their guards near him; the Aes Sedai and Wise Ones stood at the back, refusing seats. The last few seats were taken by a few of the Two Rivers men and some of the senior former refugees.

ðə waɪtkloʊk ɔfəsɝz sæt daʊn ɑpəzət ðɛm, feɪsɪŋ feɪl ən pɛɹɪn. bɔɹnhəld ən baɪɑɝ ət ðə fɹʌnt. ðəɹ wɝ əbaʊt θɝɾi tʃɛɹz, laɪkli teɪkən fɹəm pɛɹɪnz səplaɪz ðət ðə waɪtkloʊks hæɾ əpɹoʊpɹieɪɾɪd.

The Whitecloak officers sat down opposite them, facing Faile and Perrin. Bornhald and Byar at the front. There were about thirty chairs, likely taken from Perrin's supplies that the Whitecloaks had appropriated.

pɛɹɪn," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd fɹəm əɹ sit. "ɑɹ jə sɝɾən jə wɑnə ɡoʊ θɹu wɪð ðɪs?"

Perrin," Morgase said from her seat. "Are you certain you want to go through with this?"

"aɪ æm," hi sɛd.

"I am," he said.

vɛɹi wɛl," ʃi sɛd, hɝ feɪs ɪmpæsɪv, ðoʊ ʃi smɛl hɛzɪɾənt. ə fɔɹməli bɪɡɪn ðɪs tʃɹaɪəl.

Very well," she said, her face impassive, though she smelled hesitant. A formally begin this trial.

ði əkjuzd ɪz pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə, noʊn əz pɛɹɪn ɡoʊldeɪniz." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "lɔɹɾ ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz," ʃi æɾəd. "ɡɑləd, jəl pɹizɛn ðə tʃɑɹdʒəz."

The accused is Perrin Aybara, known as Perrin Goldeneyes." She hesitated. "Lord of the Two Rivers," she added. "Galad, you will present the charges."

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ θɹi," ɡɑləd sɛd, stændɪŋ. "ðə fɝs tu ɑɹ ði ənlɔfəl mɝɾɝ ə tʃaɪld læðən ən ði ənlɔfəl mɝɾɝ ə tʃaɪl jæmwɪk. eɪ-bɑɹə ɪz ɔlsoʊ əkjuzd ə biɪŋ ə dɑɹkfɹɛn ən ə bɹɪŋɪŋ tʃɹɑləks ɪndə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz."

"There are three," Galad said, standing. "The first two are the unlawful murder of Child Lathin and the unlawful murder of Child Yamwick. Ay-bara is also accused of being a Darkfriend and of bringing Trollocs into the Two Rivers."

ðəɹ wɝ æŋɡɹi mɝmɝz fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn ət ðət wʌnæs tʃɑɹdʒ. ðoʊz tʃɹɑləks hæd kɪl pɛɹɪnz oʊn fæmli.

There were angry murmurs from the Two Rivers men at that 1ast charge. Those Trollocs had killed Perrin's own family.

ɡɑləd kəntɪnjud, "ðə læs tʃɑɹdʒ kænɑt bi səbstænʃieɪɾɪd jɛt, əz maɪ mɛn wɝ fɔɹst aʊɾ ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd ɡæðɝ pɹuf, əz tə ðə fɝs tu tʃɑɹdʒəz, eɪbɑɹə hæz ɔlɹɛɾi ədmɪɾəd ɪz ɡɪlt."

Galad continued, "The last charge cannot be substantiated yet, as my men were forced out of the Two Rivers before they could gather proof, As to the first two charges, Aybara has already admitted his guilt."

"ɪz ðɪs soʊ, lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹə?" mɔɹɡeɪs æskt.

"Is this so, Lord Aybara?" Morgase asked.

"aɪ kɪl ðoʊz mɛn, ʃʊɹ ɪnʌf," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "bʌɾ ɪt wɑzn mɝɾɝ"

"I killed those men, sure enough," Perrin said. "But it wasn't murder"

"ðɛn ðɪs ɪz wʌt ðə kɔɹt wɪl dətɝmən," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd fɔɹməli. "æn ðɪs ɪz ðə dɪspjut."

"Then this is what the court will determine," Morgase said formally. "And this is the dispute."

mɔɹɡeɪs simd ə kəmplitli dɪfɹən pɝsən fɹəm meɪaɪɡdɪn. wɑz ðɪs haʊ pipəl ɪkspɛktəd pɛɹɪn tə ækt wən ðeɪ keɪm tə hɪm fəɹ dʒʌdʒmənt? hi hæd tə ədmɪt, ʃi dɪd lɛn ðə pɹoʊsiɾɪŋz ə mɛʒɝ ə niɾəd fɔɹmæləɾi. æftɝ ɔl, ðə tʃɹaɪəl wɑz hæpənɪŋ ɪn ə tɛn ɑn ə fild wɪð ðə dʒʌdʒəz tʃɛɹ ɛləveɪɾɪd baɪ wʌɾ əpɪɹd tə bi ə smɔl stæk ə bɑksəz wɪð ə ɹʌɡ θɹoʊn oʊvɝ ðɛm.

Morgase seemed a completely different person from Maighdin. Was this how people expected Perrin to act when they came to him for judgment? He had to admit, she did lend the proceedings a measure of needed formality. After all, the trial was happening in a tent on a field with the judge's chair elevated by what appeared to be a small stack of boxes with a rug thrown over them.

"ɡɑləd," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "jɔɹ mɛn meɪ tɛl ðɛɹ saɪɾ ə ðə stɔɹi."

"Galad," Morgase said. "Your men may tell their side of the story."

ɡɑləd nɑɾəd tə baɪɑɝ. hi stʊd, ən ənʌðɝ waɪtkloʊk - ə jʌŋ mæn wɪð ə kəmplitli bɔl hɛd - stɛp fɔɹwɝd tə dʒɔɪn hɪm. bɔɹnhəld ɹɪmeɪn siɾəd.

Galad nodded to Byar. He stood, and another Whitecloak - a young man with a completely bald head - stepped forward to join him. Bornhald remained seated.

"jɔɹ ɡɹeɪs," baɪɑɝ sɛd, "ɪt hæpən əbaʊt tu jɪɹz əɡoʊ. dʊɹɪŋ ðə spɹɪŋ. ən ənnətʃɝəli koʊl spɹɪŋ, aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ. wi wɝ ɑn əɹ weɪ bæk fɹəm ɪmpɔɹɾənt bɪznəs ət ðə kəmæn ə ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ, ən wi wɝ pæsɪŋ θɹu ðə wɪldɝnəs ə sɛntʃɹəl ændɝ. wi wɝ gɑnə kæmp fəɹ ðə naɪɾ əɾ ən əbændən oʊɡiɝ stɛɾɪŋ, ət ðə beɪs ʌv wʌt wɑz wʌns ən ɪnɔɹməs stætʃu. ðə kaɪndə pleɪs jə əsum wɪl bi seɪf."

"Your Grace," Byar said, "it happened about two years ago. During the spring. An unnaturally cold spring, I remember. We were on our way back from important business at the command of the Lord Captain Commander, and we were passing through the wilderness of central Andor. We were going to camp for the night at an abandoned Ogier stedding, at the base of what was once an enormous statue. The kind of place you assume will be safe."

pɛɹɪn ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət naɪt. ə tʃɪl ist wɪn bloʊɪŋ əkɹɔs hɪm, ɹʌfəlɪŋ ɪz kloʊk əz i stʊd baɪ ə pul ə fɹɛʃ wɔɾɝ. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə sʌn daɪɪŋ saɪlənli ɪn ðə wɛst. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə pul ɪn ðə weɪnɪŋ laɪt, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə wɪn ɹʌfəl ɪts sɝfəs, hoʊldɪŋ ði æks ɪn ɪz hænz.

Perrin remembered that night. A chill east wind blowing across him, ruffling his cloak as he stood by a pool of fresh water. He remembered the sun dying silently in the west. He remembered staring at the pool in the waning light, watching the wind ruffle its surface, holding the axe in his hands.

ðət blæstəɾ æks. hi ʃʊɾə θɹoʊn ɪɾ əweɪ ɹaɪt ðɛn. ɛlaɪəs hæd pɝsweɪɾəd ɪm tə kip ɪt.

That blasted axe. He should have thrown it away right then. Elyas had persuaded him to keep it.

"wɛn wi ɝaɪvd," baɪɑɝ kəntɪnjud, "wi faʊn ðət ðə kæmpsaɪt hæd bɪn juzd ɹisənli. ðət kənsɝn ʌs; fju pipəl nu ʌv ðə stɛɾɪŋ- wi dɪtɝmənd, fɹəm ðə sɪŋɡəl faɪɹɛpɪt, ðət ðəɹ wɝ nɑt mɛni ʌv ðiz mɪstɪɹiəs weɪfɛɹɝz."

"When we arrived," Byar continued, "we found that the campsite had been used recently. That concerned us; few people knew of the stedding- We determined, from the single firepit, that there were not many of these mysterious wayfarers."

hɪz vɔɪs wɑz pɹɪsaɪs, hɪz dɪskɹɪpʃən məθɑɾəkəl. ðət wɑzn haʊ pɛɹɪn ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə naɪt.

His voice was precise, his description methodical. That wasn't how Perrin remembered the night.

noʊ, hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə hɪs ə ðə fleɪmz, spɑɹks flʌɾɝɪŋ æŋɡɹəli ɪndə ði ɛɹ əz ɛlaɪəs dʌmp ðə tipəts kɑntɛns ɪn tə faɪɹɛpɪt. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ə heɪsti sɛndɪŋ fɹəm ðə wʊlvz flʌɾɪŋ ɪz maɪnd, kənfjuzɪŋ hɪm. ðə wʊlvz' wɛɹinɪs hæd meɪɾ ɪt hɑɹd tə sɛpɝeɪt hɪmsɛlf fɹəm ðɛm. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə smɛl ə fɪɹ ɑn ɛɡwin, ðə weɪ hi fʌmbəld wɪð bɛləz sæɾəl əz i sɪntʃt ɪt. ən i ɹɪmɛmbɝd hʌnʒɹədz ə mɛn u smɛld ɹɔŋ. laɪk ðə waɪtkloʊks ɪn ðə pəvɪljən. ðeɪ smɛld laɪk sɪk wʊlvz u snæpt əɾ ɛniθɪŋ ðət ɡɑt tu kloʊz. "ðə lɔɹd kæptən wɑz wɝid," baɪɑɝ kəntɪnjud. hi wɑz ɑbviəsli nɑt mɛnʃənɪŋ ðə kæptənz neɪm, pɝhæps tə spɛɹ bɔɹnhəld. ðə jʌŋ waɪtkloʊk kæptən sæt pɝfəkli stɪl, stɛɹɪŋ ət baɪɑɝ əz ɪf i dɪdn tʃɹʌs hɪmsɛlf tə lʊk ət pɛɹɪn. "hi θɔt ðət meɪbi ðə kæmp hæd bɪn juz baɪ bɹɪɡænz. hu ɛls wəd daʊs ðɛɹ faɪɝ ən vænɪʃ ðə moʊmən sʌmwʌn ɛls əpɹoʊtʃt? ðæts wən wi sɔ ðə fɝst wʊlf."

No, he remembered the hiss of the flames, sparks fluttering angrily into the air as Elyas dumped the teapots contents int to firepit. He remembered a hasty sending from the wolves flooding his mind, confusing him. The wolves' wariness had made it hard to separate himself from them. He remembered the smell of fear on Egwene, the way he fumbled with Bela's saddle as he cinched it. And he remembered hundreds of men who smelled wrong. Like the Whitecloaks in the pavilion. They smelled like sick wolves who snapped at anything that got too close. "The Lord Captain was worried," Byar continued. He was obviously not mentioning the captain's name, perhaps to spare Bornhald. The young Whitecloak captain sat perfectly still, staring at Byar as if he didn't trust himself to look at Perrin. "He thought that maybe the camp had been used by brigands. Who else would douse their fire and vanish the moment someone else approached? That's when we saw the first wolf."

haɪɾɪŋ, bɹɛθ kʌmɪŋ ɪn kwɪk ʃɔɹt ɡæsps, ɛɡwin hʌɾəld bɪsaɪɾ ɪm ɪn ðə dɑɹk. ðə sɛn ə kæmpfaɪɝ smoʊk ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm əɹ kloʊðɪŋ ən fɹəm hɪz. bɛlə bɹiðɪŋ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. ðə ʃɛltɝɪŋ kɑnfaɪnz ʌv ən ɪnɔɹməs stoʊn hænd, ðə hæn ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz stætʃu, wɪtʃ hæd bɹoʊkən fɹi lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ.

Hiding, breath coming in quick short gasps, Egwene huddled beside him in the dark. The scent of campfire smoke rising from her clothing and from his. Bela breathing in the darkness. The sheltering confines of an enormous stone hand, the hand of Artur Hawkwing's statue, which had broken free long before.

dæpəl, æŋɡɹi ən wɝid. ɪmədʒəz ə mɛn ɪn waɪt wɪð fleɪmɪŋ tɔɹtʃɪz. wɪnd, dɑɹɾɪŋ bɪtwin ðə tʃɹiz.

Dapple, angry and worried. Images of men in white with flaming torches. Wind, darting between the trees.

"ðə lɔɹd kæptən θɔt ðə wʊlvz wɝ ə bæd saɪn. ɛvɹiwʌn noʊz ðeɪ sɝv ðə dɑɹk wʌn.

"The Lord Captain thought the wolves were a bad sign. Everyone knows they serve the Dark One.

hi sɛn əs tə skaʊt. maɪ tim sɝtʃt tə ði ist, lʊkɪŋ θɹu ðə ɹɑk fɔɹmeɪʃənz ən ʃɑɹdz ə ði ɪnɔɹməs bɹoʊkən stætʃu."

He sent us to scout. My team searched to the east, looking through the rock formations and shards of the enormous broken statue."

peɪn. mɛn ʃaʊɾɪŋ. pɛɹɪn? wɪl jə dæns wɪð mi ət sʌndeɪ? ɪf wɝ hoʊm baɪ ðɛn. . . .

Pain. Men shouting. Perrin? Will you dance with me at Sunday? If we're home by then. . . .

"ðə wʊlvz stɑɹɾəd tə ətæk ʌs," baɪɑɝ sɛd, vɔɪs ɡɹoʊɪŋ hɑɹd. "ɪt wɑz ɑbviəs ðət ðeɪ wɝ noʊ ɔɹɾənɛɹi kɹitʃɝz. ðəɹ wɑz tu mʌtʃ koʊɔɹɾəneɪʃən tə ðɛɹ əsɔls. ðəɹ sim tə bi dʌzənz ə ðɛm, muvɪŋ θɹu ðə ʃædoʊz. ðəɹ wɝ mɛn əmʌŋ ðɛm, stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ən kɪlɪŋ əɹ maʊns."

"The wolves started to attack us," Byar said, voice growing hard. "It was obvious that they were no ordinary creatures. There was too much coordination to their assaults. There seemed to be dozens of them, moving through the shadows. There were men among them, striking and killing our mounts."

pɛɹɪn hæd wɑtʃt ɪt wɪð tu sɛts ʌv aɪz. hɪz oʊn, fɹəm ðə væntədʒ ə ðə hænd. ən ði aɪz ə ðə wʊlvz, hu oʊnli wɑntəd tə bi lɛft əloʊn. ðeɪ hæd bɪn wundəɾ ɝliɝ baɪ ən ɪnɔɹməs flɑk ə ɹeɪvənz. ðeɪd tʃɹaɪd tə dʒɹaɪv ðə mɛn əweɪ. skɛɹ ðɛm.

Perrin had watched it with two sets of eyes. His own, from the vantage of the hand. And the eyes of the wolves, who only wanted to be left alone. They had been wounded earlier by an enormous flock of ravens. They'd tried to drive the men away. Scare them.

soʊ mʌtʃ fɪɹ. boʊθ ðə fɪɹ ə ðə mɛn ən ðə fɪɹ ə ðə wʊlvz. ɪt hæd ɹul ðət naɪt, kəntʃɹoʊlɪŋ boʊθ saɪdz. hi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ faɪɾɪŋ tə ɹɪmeɪn hɪmsɛlf, bɪwɪldɝd baɪ ðə sɛndɪŋz.

So much fear. Both the fear of the men and the fear of the wolves. It had ruled that night, controlling both sides. He could remember fighting to remain himself, bewildered by the sendings.

"ðæt naɪt stʃɹɛtʃt lɔŋ," baɪɑɝ sɛd, vɔɪs ɡɹoʊɪŋ sɑftɝ, jɛt fʊl ʌv æŋɡɝ. "wi pæst ə hɪlsaɪd wɪð ə mæsɪv flæt ɹɑk ət ðə tɑp, ən tʃɪd læðən sɛɾ i θɔɾ i sɔ sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz ðɛɹ. wi stɑpt, hoʊldɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ əɹ laɪts, ən sɔ ðə lɛɡz ʌv ə hɔɹs bɪniθ ði oʊvɝhæŋ. aɪ ɡeɪv læðən ə nɑd, ən i stɛp fɔɹwɝd tə ɔɹɾɝ huɛvɝ wɑz ɪn ðəɹ daʊn tə aɪdɛntəfaɪ ðɛmsɛlvz.

"That night stretched long," Byar said, voice growing softer, yet full of anger. "We passed a hillside with a massive flat rock at the top, and Chid Lathin said he thought he saw something in the shadows there. We stopped, holding forward our lights, and saw the legs of a horse beneath the overhang. I gave Lathin a nod, and he stepped forward to order whoever was in there down to identify themselves.

"wɛl, ðət mæn - eɪbɑɹə - keɪm aʊɾ ə ðə dɑɹknəs wɪð ə jʌŋ wʊmən. hi wɑz kæɹiɪŋ ə wɪkəɾ æks, ən i wɔkt kɑmli ɹaɪɾ ʌp tə læðən, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə læns pɔɪntəɾ əɾ ɪz tʃɛst. ən ðɛn.

"Well, that man - Aybara - came out of the darkness with a young woman. He was carrying a wicked axe, and he walked calmly right up to Lathin, ignoring the lance pointed at his chest. And then.

. . ."

. . ."

ən ðən ðə wʊlvz tʊk oʊvɝ. ɪt wɑz ðə fɝs taɪm ɪt hæd hæpən tə pɛɹɪn. ðɛɹ sɛndɪŋz hæd bɪn soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ðət pɛɹɪn hæd lɔs hɪmsɛlf. hi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ kɹʌʃɪŋ læðənz nɛk wɪð ɪz tiθ, ðə wɔɹm blʌd bɝstɪŋ ɪndə hɪz maʊθ əz ɪf hid bɪɾən ɪndə ə fɹut. ðət mɛmɹi hæd bɪn hɑpɝz, bʌt pɛɹɪn kʊdn sɛpɹət hɪmsɛlf fɹəm ðə wʊlf fəɹ ðə moʊməns ə ðət faɪt.

And then the wolves took over. It was the first time it had happened to Perrin. Their sendings had been so strong that Perrin had lost himself. He could remember crushing Lathin's neck with his teeth, the warm blood bursting into his mouth as if he'd bitten into a fruit. That memory had been Hoppers, but Perrin couldn't separate himself from the wolf for the moments of that fight.

"æn ðɛn?" mɔɹɡeɪs pɹɑmptəd.

"And then?" Morgase prompted.

"æn ðən ðəɹ wɑz ə faɪt," baɪɑɝ sɛd. "wʊlvz lɛp fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊ ən eɪbɑɹə ətækt ʌs.

"And then there was a fight," Byar said. "Wolves leaped from the shadow and Aybara attacked us.

hi dɪdn muv laɪk ə mæn, bʌt laɪk ə bist, ɡɹoʊlɪŋ. wi səbduɾ ɪm ən kɪld wʌn ə ðə wʊlvz, bʌt nɑt bɪfɔɹ eɪbɑɹə hæd mænədʒ tə kɪl tu ʌv ðə tʃɪlʒɹən."

He didn't move like a man, but like a beast, growling. We subdued him and killed one of the wolves, but not before Aybara had managed to kill two of the Children."

baɪɑɝ sæt daʊn. mɔɹɡeɪs æsk noʊ kwɛstʃənz. ʃi tɝn tə ði ʌðɝ waɪtkloʊk u hæd stʊd wɪð baɪɑɝ.

Byar sat down. Morgase asked no questions. She turned to the other Whitecloak who had stood with Byar.

"aɪ hæv lɪɾəl tə lɛnd," ðə mæn sɛd. "aɪ wɑz ðɛɹ, ən aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪɾ ɪɡzækli ðə seɪm weɪ. aɪ wɑnə pɔɪn aʊt ðət wən wi tʊk eɪbɑɹə ɪndə kʌstəɾi, hi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi dʒʌdʒd ɡɪlti. wi wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə  - "

"I have little to lend," the man said. "I was there, and I remember it exactly the same way. I want to point out that when we took Aybara into custody, he was already judged guilty. We were going to  - "

"ðæt dʒʌdʒmən ɪz ə noʊ kənsɝn tə ðɪs tʃɹaɪəl," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd koʊldli."

"That judgment is of no concern to this trial," Morgase said coldly."

"wɛl, ðɛn, əlaʊ maɪ vɔɪs tə bi ðə tɛstəmoʊni ʌv ə sɛkənd wɪtnəs. aɪ sɔ ɪɾ ɔl, tu." ðə bɔld waɪtkloʊk sæt daʊn.

"Well, then, allow my voice to be the testimony of a second witness. I saw it all, too." The bald Whitecloak sat down.

mɔɹɡeɪs tɝn tə pɛɹɪn. "ju meɪ spik."

Morgase turned to Perrin. "You may speak."

pɛɹɪn stʊɾ ʌp sloʊli. "ðoʊz tu spoʊk tʃɹuli, mɔɹɡeɪs. ðæts əbaʊt haʊ ɪt hæpənd."

Perrin stood up slowly. "Those two spoke truly, Morgase. That's about how it happened."

"əbaʊt?" mɔɹɡeɪs æskt.

"About?" Morgase asked.

"hiz nɪɹli ɹaɪt."

"He's nearly right."

"jɔɹ ɡɪlt əɹ ɪnəsəns hæŋz ɑn ɪz 'nɪɹli,' lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹə. ɪts ðə mɛʒɝ baɪ wɪtʃ jəl bi dʒʌdʒd."

"Your guilt or innocence hangs on his 'nearly,' Lord Aybara. It is the measure by which you will be judged."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. "ðæɾ ɪt dʌz. tɛl mi sʌmθɪŋ, jəɹ ɡɹeɪs. wən jə dʒʌdʒ sʌmwʌn laɪk ðɪs, dʒju tʃɹaɪ tə ʌndɝstæn ðɛɹ dɪfɹən pisəz?"

Perrin nodded. "That it does. Tell me something, Your Grace. When you judge someone like this, do you try to understand their different pieces?"

ʃi fɹaʊnd. "wʌt?"

She frowned. "What?"

"maɪ mæstɝ, ðə mæn u tʃɹeɪn mi əz ə blæksmɪθ, tɔt mi ən ɪmpɔɹɾənt lɛsən. tə kɹieɪt sʌmθɪŋ, juv tə ʌndɝstæn ɪt. ən tə ʌndɝstæn sʌmθɪŋ, juv tə noʊ wʌɾ ɪts meɪɾ ʌv." ə kul bɹiz blu θɹu ðə pəvɪljən, ɹʌfəlɪŋ kloʊks. ðət mætʃt ðə kwaɪət saʊnz fɹəm ðə pleɪnz aʊtsaɪd  - mɛn ʃɪftɪŋ ɪn ɑɹmɝ ən hɔɹsəz stæmpɪŋ, kɔfs ən oʊkɑʒənəl wɪspɝz əz ɪz wɝdz wɝ pæs θɹu ðə ɹæŋks.

"My master, the man who trained me as a blacksmith, taught me an important lesson. To create something, you have to understand it. And to understand something, you have to know what it is made of." A cool breeze blew through the pavilion, ruffling cloaks. That matched the quiet sounds from the plains outside  - men shifting in armor and horses stamping, coughs and ocasional whispers as his words were passed through the ranks.

"aɪv kʌm tə si sʌmθɪŋ leɪtli," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "mɛn ɑɹ meɪɾ ʌp ʌv ə lɑɾ ə dɪfɹən pisəz.

"I've come to see something lately," Perrin said. "Men are made up of a lot of different pieces.

hu ðeɪ ɑɹ dɪpɛnz ɑn wʌt sɪtʃueɪʃən jə pʊɾ əm ɪn. aɪ hæɾ ə hæn ɪn kɪlɪŋ ðoʊz tu mɛn. bʌt tə ʌndɝstænd, juv tə si ðə pisəz ə mi."

Who they are depends on what situation you put them in. I had a hand in killing those two men. But to understand, you have to see the pieces of me."

hi mɛt ɡɑlədz aɪz. ðə jʌŋ waɪtkloʊk kæptən stʊd wɪð ə stʃɹeɪt bæk, hænz klæsp bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk. pɛɹɪn wɪʃt i kəd kætʃ ðə mænz sɛnt.

He met Galad's eyes. The young Whitecloak captain stood with a straight back, hands clasped behind his back. Perrin wished he could catch the man's scent.

pɛɹɪn tɝn bæk tə mɔɹɡeɪs. "aɪ kən spik wɪð wʊlvz. aɪ hɪɹ ðɛɹ vɔɪsəz ɪn maɪ maɪnd. aɪ noʊ ðət saʊnz laɪk ði ædmɪʃən ʌv ə mædmæn, bʌɾ aɪ səspɛk ðət mɛni ɪn maɪ kæmp u hɪɹ ɪt woʊn bi sɝpɹaɪzd. ɡɪvən taɪm, aɪ kəd pɹuv ɪt tə ju, wɪð ðə koʊɑpɝeɪʃən ə səm loʊkəl wʊlvz."

Perrin turned back to Morgase. "I can speak with wolves. I hear their voices in my mind. I know that sounds like the admission of a madman, but I suspect that many in my camp who hear it won't be surprised. Given time, I could prove it to you, with the cooperation of some local wolves."

"ðæt woʊn bi nɛsəsɛɹi," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. ʃi smɛld ə fɪɹ. ðə wɪspɝz fɹəm ði ɑɹmiz ɡɹu laʊɾɝ. hi kɑt feɪlz sɛnt. wɝi.

"That won't be necessary," Morgase said. She smelled of fear. The whispers from the armies grew louder. He caught Faile's scent. Worry.

"ðɪs θɪŋ aɪ kən du," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɪts ə pis ə mi, dʒʌst əz fɔɹdʒɪŋ aɪɝn ɪz. dʒʌst əz liɾɪŋ mɛn ɪz. ɪf jəɹ gɑnə pæs dʒʌdʒmən ɑn mi kəz ʌv ɪt, jə ʃəɾ ʌndɝstæn ɪt."

"This thing I can do," Perrin said. "It's a piece of me, just as forging iron is. Just as leading men is. If you're going to pass judgment on me because of it, you should understand it."

"ju dɪɡ jəɹ oʊn ɡɹeɪv, eɪbɑɹə," bɔɹnhəl sɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ ən pɔɪntɪŋ. "aʊɝ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ sɛɾ i kəd nɑt pɹuv jə wɝ ə dɑɹk-fɹɛnd, ən jɛt hɪɹ jə meɪk ðə keɪs fəɹ ʌs!"

"You dig your own grave, Aybara," Bornhald said, rising and pointing. "Our Lord Captain Commander said he could not prove you were a Dark-friend, and yet here you make the case for us!"

"ðɪs dʌzn meɪk mi ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"This doesn't make me a Darkfriend," Perrin said.

"ðə pɝpəs ə ðɪs kɔɹt," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd fɝmli, "ɪz nɑt tə dʒʌdʒ ðəɾ æləɡeɪʃən. wɪl dətɝmən eɪbɑɹəz kʌlpəbɪlɪɾi fəɹ ðə dɛθs ə ðoʊz tu mɛn, ən nʌθɪŋ ɛls. jə meɪ sɪt, tʃaɪl bɔɹnhəld."

"The purpose of this court," Morgase said firmly, "is not to judge that allegation. We will determine Aybara's culpability for the deaths of those two men, and nothing else. You may sit, Child Bornhald."

bɔɹnhəl sæɾ æŋɡɹəli.

Bornhald sat angrily.

"aɪ hæv jɛt tə hɪɹ jəɹ dɪfɛns, lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹə," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd.

"I have yet to hear your defense, Lord Aybara," Morgase said.

"ðə ɹizən aɪ toʊl jə wʌɾ aɪm - wʌɾ aɪ də - ɪz tə ʃoʊ jə ðət ðə wʊlvz wɝ maɪ fɹɛnz."

"The reason I told you what I am - what I do - is to show you that the wolves were my friends."

hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "ðæt naɪɾ ɪn ændɝ . . . ɪt wɑz tɛɹəbəl, əz baɪɑɝ sɛd. wi wɝ skɛɹd, ɔl ʌv ʌs. ðə waɪtkloʊks wɝ skɛɹɾ ə ðə wʊlvz, ðə wʊlvz wɝ skɛɹɾ ə ðə faɪɝ ən ðə θɹɛɾənɪŋ moʊʃənz ðə mɛn meɪd, ən aɪ wɑz pleɪn skɛɹɾ ə ðə wɝld ɝaʊn mi. aɪd nɛvɝ bɪn aʊɾ ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz bɪfɔɹ, ən dɪdn ʌndɝstænd waɪ aɪ hɝd wʊlvz ɪn maɪ hɛd.

He took a deep breath. "That night in Andor . . . it was terrible, as Byar said. We were scared, all of us. The Whitecloaks were scared of the wolves, the wolves were scared of the fire and the threatening motions the men made, and I was plain scared of the world around me. I'd never been out of the Two Rivers before, and didn't understand why I heard wolves in my head.

wɛl, nʌn ə ðəɾ ɪz ən ɪkskjus, ən aɪ doʊn min ɪt tə bi wʌn. aɪ kɪl ðoʊz mɛn, bʌt ðeɪ ətæk maɪ fɹɛnz. wən ðə mɛn wɛn hʌntɪŋ fəɹ wʊlf pɛls, ðə wʊlvz fɔt bæk." hi stɑpt. ðeɪ niɾəd ðə hoʊl tʃɹuθ. "tə bi ɑnəst, jəɹ ɡɹeɪs, aɪ wɑzn ɪn kəntʃɹoʊl ə maɪsɛlf. aɪ wɑz ɹɛɾi tə sɝɛndɝ. bʌt wɪð ðə wʊlvz ɪn maɪ hɛd. ... aɪ fɛl ðɛɹ peɪn. ðən ðə waɪtkloʊks kɪld ə dɪɹ fɹɛn ə maɪn, ən aɪ hæd tə faɪt. aɪd də ðə seɪm θɪŋ tə pɹətɛkt ə fɑɹmɝ biɪŋ hɝæs baɪ soʊlʒɝz."

Well, none of that is an excuse, and I don't mean it to be one. I killed those men, but they attacked my friends. When the men went hunting for wolf pelts, the wolves fought back." He stopped. They needed the whole truth. "To be honest, Your Grace, I wasn't in control of myself. I was ready to surrender. But with the wolves in my head. ... I felt their pain. Then the Whitecloaks killed a dear friend of mine, and I had to fight. I'd do the same thing to protect a farmer being harassed by soldiers."

"jɔɹ ə kɹitʃɝ ə ðə ʃædoʊ!" bɔɹnhəl sɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ əɡɛn. "jɔɹ laɪz ɪnsʌl ðə dɛd!"

"You're a creature of the Shadow!" Bornhald said, rising again. "Your lies insult the dead!"

pɛɹɪn tɝn təwɔɹd ðə mæn, hoʊldɪŋ ɪz aɪz. ðə tɛn fɛl saɪlənt, ən pɛɹɪn kəd smɛl ðə tɛnʃən hæŋɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ. "hæv jə nɛvɝ ɹeɪ-ælɪz ðət səm mɛn ɑɹ dɪfɹən fɹəm ju, bɔɹnhəld?" pɛɹɪn æskt. "hæv jə ɛvɝ tʃɹaɪd tə θɪŋk wʌɾ ɪt mʌs bi laɪk tə bi sʌmwʌn ɛls? ɪf jə kəd si θɹu ðiz ɡoʊldən aɪz ə maɪn, jud faɪn ðə wɝld ə dɪfɹən pleɪs."

Perrin turned toward the man, holding his eyes. The tent fell silent, and Perrin could smell the tension hanging in the air. "Have you never re-alized that some men are different from you, Bornhald?" Perrin asked. "Have you ever tried to think what it must be like to be someone else? If you could see through these golden eyes of mine, you'd find the world a different place."

bɔɹnhəld oʊpən ɪz maʊθ əz ɪf tə spɪɾ aʊɾ ənʌðɝ ɪnsəlt, bʌt lɪkt ɪz lɪps, əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd ɡɹoʊn dʒɹaɪ. "ju mɝɾɝd maɪ fɑðɝ," hi faɪnəli sɛd.

Bornhald opened his mouth as if to spit out another insult, but licked his lips, as if they had grown dry. "You murdered my father," he finally said.

"ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ hæd bɪn bloʊn," pɛɹɪn sɛd, "ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn fɔɾ ɪʃəml ɪn ðə skaɪ. ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɑɹmiz hæd ɹɪtɝn tə ðiz ʃɔɹz tə dɑməneɪt. jɛs, aɪ wɑz ɪn fɑlm. aɪ ɹoʊd tə bæɾəl əlɔŋsaɪd ðə hɪɹoʊz ə ðə hɔɹn, əlɔŋsaɪd hɔkwɪŋ hɪmsɛlf, faɪɾɪŋ əɡɛns ðə sintʃæn. aɪ fɔɾ ɑn ðə seɪm saɪɾ əz jəɹ fɑðɝ, bɔɹnhəld. aɪv sɛd ðəɾ i wɑz ə ɡʊd mæn, ən i wɑz. hi tʃɑɹdʒ bɹeɪvli. hi daɪd bɹeɪvli."

"The Horn of Valere had been blown," Perrin said, "the Dragon Reborn fought Ishamael in the sky. Artur Hawkwing's armies had returned to these shores to dominate. Yes, I was in Falme. I rode to battle alongside the heroes of the Horn, alongside Hawkwing himself, fighting against the Seanchan. I fought on the same side as your father, Bornhald. I've said that he was a good man, and he was. He charged bravely. He died bravely."

ði ɑɾiəns wɑz soʊ stɪl ðeɪ sim stætʃuz. nɑɾ ə wʌn muvd. bɔɹnhəld oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə əbdʒɛkt əɡɛn, bʌt ðən kloʊzd ɪt.

The audience was so still they seemed statues. Not a one moved. Bornhald opened his mouth to object again, but then closed it.

"aɪ swɛɹ tə ju," pɛɹɪn sɛd, "ʌndɝ ðə laɪɾ ən baɪ maɪ hoʊp ə sælveɪʃən ən ɹibɝθ, ðəɾ aɪ dɪd nɑt kɪl jəɹ fɑðɝ. nɔɹ hæɾ aɪ ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɪz dɛθ."

"I swear to you," Perrin said, "under the Light and by my hope of salvation and rebirth, that I did not kill your father. Nor had I anything to do with his death."

bɔɹnhəl sɝtʃt pɛɹɪnz aɪz, ən lʊk tʃɹʌbəld.

Bornhald searched Perrin's eyes, and looked troubled.

"doʊn lɪsən tə hɪm, deɪn," baɪɑɝ sɛd. ðə sɛn ə hɪm wɑz stʃɹɔŋ, stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ ɪn ðə pəvɪljən. fɹɛnzid, laɪk ɹɑɾən mit. "hi dɪd kɪl jəɹ fɑðɝ."

"Don't listen to him, Dain," Byar said. The scent of him was strong, stronger than any other in the pavilion. Frenzied, like rotten meat. "He did kill your father."

ɡɑləd stɪl stʊd, wɑtʃɪŋ ði ɪkstʃeɪnʒ. "aɪv nɛvɝ ʌndɝstʊd haʊ jə noʊ ðɪs, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ.

Galad still stood, watching the exchange. "I've never understood how you know this, Child Byar.

wʌd jə si? pɝhæps ðɪs ʃəd bi ðə tʃɹaɪəl wi hoʊld."

What did you see? Perhaps this should be the trial we hold."

"ɪɾ ɪz nɑt wʌɾ aɪ sɔ, lɔɹd kæptən," baɪɑɝ sɛd. "bʌt wʌɾ aɪ noʊ. haʊ ɛls kən jə ɪkspleɪn haʊ hi sɝvaɪvd, jɛt ðə lidʒən dɪd nɑt! jəɹ fɑðɝ wɑz ə væljənt wɔɹiɝ, bɔɹnhəld. hi wəd nɛvɝ əv fɔlən tə ðə sintʃæn!"

"It is not what I saw, Lord Captain," Byar said. "But what I know. How else can you explain how he survived, yet the legion did not! Your father was a valiant warrior, Bornhald. He would never have fallen to the Seanchan!"

"ðæts fulɪʃnəs," ɡɑləd sɛd. "ðə sintʃæn əv biɾən əs oʊvɝ ən oʊvɝ əɡɛn. ivən ə ɡʊd mæn kən fɔl ɪn bæɾəl."

"That's foolishness," Galad said. "The Seanchan have beaten us over and over again. Even a good man can fall in battle."

"aɪ sɔ ɡoʊldeɪniz ðɛɹ," baɪɑɝ sɛd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ təwɔɹd pɛɹɪn. "faɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋsaɪd ɡoʊsli æpɹɪʃənz! kɹitʃɝz ʌv ivəl!"

"I saw Goldeneyes there," Byar said, gesturing toward Perrin. "Fighting alongside ghostly apparitions! Creatures of evil!"

"ðə hɪɹoʊz ə ðə hɔɹn, baɪɑɝ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "kʊdn jə si ðət wi wɛɹ faɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋsaɪd ðə waɪtkloʊks?"

"The Heroes of the Horn, Byar," Perrin said. "Couldn't you see that we where fighting alongside the Whitecloaks?"

"ju sim tə bi," baɪɑɝ sɛd waɪldli. "dʒʌst əz jə sim tə bi dɪfɛndɪŋ ðə pipəl ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. bʌɾ aɪ sɔ θɹu ju, ʃæɾoʊzpɔn! aɪ sɔ θɹu jə ðə moʊmən aɪ mɛt ju!"

"You seemed to be," Byar said wildly. "Just as you seemed to be defending the people in the Two Rivers. But I saw through you, Shadowspawn! I saw through you the moment I met you!"

"ɪz ðət waɪ jə toʊl mi tə ɪskeɪp?" pɛɹɪn sɛd sɔfli. "wɛn aɪ wɑz kənfaɪn ɪn ði ɛldɝ lɔɹd bɔɹnhəlz tɛnt, fɑloʊɪŋ maɪ kæptʃɝ. jə ɡeɪv mi ə ʃɑɹp ɹɑk tə kʌt maɪ bɑnz ən toʊl mi ðəɾ ɪf aɪ ɹæn, noʊbɑdi wəd tʃeɪs mi."

"Is that why you told me to escape?" Perrin said softly. "When I was confined in the elder Lord Bornhald's tent, following my capture. You gave me a sharp rock to cut my bonds and told me that if I ran, nobody would chase me."

baɪɑɝ fɹoʊz. hi sim tə hæv fɝɡɑɾən ðəɾ əntɪl ðɪs moʊmənt.

Byar froze. He seemed to have forgotten that until this moment.

"ju wɑntəd mi tə tʃɹaɪ tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, "soʊ ðət jə kəd kɪl mi. jə wɑntəɾ ɛɡwin ən mi dɛd vɛɹi bædli."

"You wanted me to try to get away," Perrin said, "so that you could kill me. You wanted Egwene and me dead very badly."

"ɪz ðɪs tʃɹu, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ?" ɡɑləɾ æskt.

"Is this true, Child Byar?" Galad asked.

baɪɑɝ stʌmbəld. "ʌv kɔɹs ... ʌv kɔɹs nɑt. aɪ. . . ." sʌɾənli, hi spʌn ən tɝn tə mɔɹɡeɪs ətɑp əɹ sɪmpəl θɹoʊn ə dʒʌdʒmənt. "ðɪs tʃɹaɪəl ɪz nɑɾ əbaʊt mi, bʌt hɪm! juv hɝd boʊθ saɪdz. wʌɾ ɪz jəɹ ænsɝ? dʒʌdʒ, wʊmən!"

Byar stumbled. "Of course ... of course not. I. . . ." Suddenly, he spun and turned to Morgase atop her simple throne of judgment. "This trial is not about me, but him! You have heard both sides. What is your answer? Judge, woman!"

"ju ʃəd nɑt spik tə maɪ mʌðɝ soʊ," ɡɑləd sɛd kwaɪətli. hɪz feɪs wɑz ɪmpæsɪv, bʌt pɛɹɪn smɛl deɪnʒɝ ɑn hɪm. bɔɹnhəld, lʊkɪŋ vɛɹi tʃɹʌbəld, hæd sæt bæk daʊn ən wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ɪz hɛd wɪð ɪz hænd.

"You should not speak to my mother so," Galad said quietly. His face was impassive, but Perrin smelled danger on him. Bornhald, looking very troubled, had sat back down and was holding his head with his hand.

"noʊ, ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "hi ɪz ɹaɪt. ðɪs tʃɹaɪəl ɪz əbaʊt pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə." ʃi tɝn fɹəm baɪɑɝ tə ɹəɡɑɹd pɛɹɪn. hi lʊk bæk kɑmli. ʃi smɛld ... əz ɪf ʃi wɝ kjʊɹiəs əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ. "lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹə. dʒju fil juv spoʊkən æɾəkwətli fəɹ jɝsɛlf?"

"No, it is all right," Morgase said. "He is right. This trial is about Perrin Aybara." She turned from Byar to regard Perrin. He looked back calmly. She smelled ... as if she were curious about something. "Lord Aybara. Do you feel you have spoken adequately for yourself?"

"aɪ wɑz pɹətɛktɪŋ maɪsɛlf ən maɪ fɹɛnz," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðə waɪt-kloʊks hæd noʊ əθɔɹəɾi tə də əz ðeɪ dɪd, ɔɹɾɝɪŋ əs aʊt, θɹɛɾənɪŋ ʌs. jə noʊ ðɛɹ ɹɛpjəteɪʃən əz wɛl əz ɛni, aɪ səspɛkt. wi hæd ɡʊd ɹizən tə bi wɛɹi ʌv əm ən dɪsəbeɪ ðɛɹ ɔɹɾɝz. ɪt wɑzn mɝɾɝ. aɪ wɑz dʒʌs dɪfɛndɪŋ maɪsɛlf."

"I was protecting myself and my friends," Perrin said. "The White-cloaks had no authority to do as they did, ordering us out, threatening us. You know their reputation as well as any, I suspect. We had good reason to be wary of them and disobey their orders. It wasn't murder. I was just defending myself."

mɔɹɡeɪs nɑɾəd. "aɪ wɪl meɪk maɪ dɪsɪʒən, ðɛn."

Morgase nodded. "I will make my decision, then."

"wʌɾ ə hævɪŋ ʌðɝz spik fəɹ pɛɹɪn?" feɪl dɪmændəd, stændɪŋ.

"What of having others speak for Perrin?" Faile demanded, standing.

"ðæt woʊn bi niɾəd, leɪɾi feɪl," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "soʊ fɑɹ əz aɪ kən tɛl, ði oʊnli ʌðɝ pɝsən wi kəɾ ɪntɝvju wəd bi ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ, wɪtʃ dʌzn sim wɪðɪn ðə ɹizənəbəl baʊnz ə ðɪs tʃɹaɪəl."

"That won't be needed, Lady Faile," Morgase said. "So far as I can tell, the only other person we could interview would be Egwene al'Vere, which doesn't seem within the reasonable bounds of this trial."

"bʌt - "

"But - "

ɪts ɪnʌf," mɔɹɡeɪs ɪntɝʌptɪd, vɔɪs ɡɹoʊɪŋ koʊld. "wi kəɾ əv ə dʌzən tʃɪlʒɹən neɪm ɪm dɑɹkfɹɛn ən tu dʌzən ə hɪz fɑloʊ-ɝz lɔɾ ɪz vɝtʃuz. niðɝ wəd sɝv ðɪs tʃɹaɪəl. wəɹ spikɪŋ ə spəsɪfɪk ɪvɛns, ɑn ə spəsɪfɪk deɪ."

It is enough," Morgase interrupted, voice growing cold. "We could have a dozen Children name him Darkfriend and two dozen of his follow-ers laud his virtues. Neither would serve this trial. We are speaking of specific events, on a specific day."

feɪl fɛl saɪlənt, ðoʊ ʃi smɛl fjʊɹiəs. ʃi tʊk pɛɹɪnz ɑɹm, nɑt sɪɾɪŋ bæk daʊn. pɛɹɪn fɛlt . . . ɹɪɡɹɛtfəl. hi hæd pɹizɛntəd ðə tʃɹuθ. bʌɾ i wɑzn sæɾəsfaɪd.

Faile fell silent, though she smelled furious. She took Perrin's arm, not sitting back down. Perrin felt . . . regretful. He had presented the truth. But he wasn't satisfied.

hi hædnt wɑntəd tə kɪl ðoʊz waɪɾitʃoʊks, bʌɾ i hæd. ən hid dʌn ɪɾ ɪn ə fɹɛnzi, wɪθaʊt kəntʃɹoʊl. hi kəd bleɪm ðə wʊlvz, hi kəd bleɪm ðə waɪɾitʃoʊks, bʌt ði ɑnəs tʃɹuθ wɑz ðəɾ i hæd lɔs kəntʃɹoʊl wən hiɾ ɔfoʊkən, hid bɛɹli ɹɪmɛmbɝd wʌɾ i hæd dʌn.

He hadn't wanted to kill those Whitecioaks, but he had. And he'd done it in a frenzy, without control. He could blame the wolves, he could blame the Whitecioaks, but the honest truth was that he had lost control When he'd awoken, he'd barely remembered what he had done.

"ju noʊ maɪ ænsɝ, pɛɹɪn," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "aɪ kən si ɪɾ ɪn jəɹ aɪz "

"You know my answer, Perrin," Morgase said. "I can see it in your eyes "

"du wʌt jə mʌst," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Do what you must," Perrin said.

"pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə, aɪ pɹənaʊns jə ɡɪlti."

"Perrin Aybara, I pronounce you guilty."

"noʊ!" feɪl skɹimd. "haʊ dɛɹ ju! hi tʊk jə ɪn!"

"No!" Faile screamed. "How dare you! He took you in!"

pɛɹɪn pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. ʃid bɪn ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ əɹ sliv baɪ ɹiflɛks, eɪmɪŋ fəɹ ðə naɪvz ðɛɹ.

Perrin put a hand on her shoulder. She'd been reaching for her sleeve by reflex, aiming for the knives there.

"ðɪs əz nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð haʊ aɪ pɝsənəli fil əbaʊt pɛɹɪn," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "ðɪs ɪz ə tʃɹaɪəl baɪ ændɔɝən lɔ. wɛl, ðə lɔ ɪz vɛɹi klɪɹ. pɛɹɪn meɪ fil ðət ðə wʊlvz wɝ ɪz fɹɛnz, bʌt ðə lɔ steɪts ðəɾ ə mænz haʊn əɹ laɪvstɑk ɪz wɝθ ə sɝɾən pɹaɪs. sleɪɪŋ əm ɪz ənlɔfəl, bʌt kɪlɪŋ ə mæn ɪn ɹɛtʃɹəbjuʃən ɪz ivən mɔɹ soʊ. aɪ kən kwoʊt ðə vɛɹi stætʃuts tə jə ɪf jə wɪʃ."

"This has nothing to do with how I personally feel about Perrin," Morgase said. "This is a trial by Andoran law. Well, the law is very clear. Perrin may feel that the wolves were his friends, but the law states that a man's hound or livestock is worth a certain price. Slaying them is unlawful, but killing a man in retribution is even more so. I can quote the very statutes to you if you wish."

ðə pəvɪljən wɑz saɪlənt. nil hæd ɹɪzən hæfweɪ fɹəm ɪz tʃɛɹ, bʌt pɛɹɪn mɛɾ ɪz aɪz ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən waɪz wʌnz wɔɹ feɪsəz ðət bɪtʃɹeɪd nʌθɪŋ. bɹəleɪn lʊkt ɹɪzaɪnd, ən sʌn-hɛɹɾ æliændɝ hæd wʌn hæn tə hɝ maʊθ.

The pavilion was silent. Neald had risen halfway from his chair, but Perrin met his eyes and shook his head. The Aes Sedai and Wise Ones wore faces that betrayed nothing. Berelain looked resigned, and sun-haired Alliandre had one hand to her mouth.

dænɪl ən ɑzi ælθoʊn muvd ʌp tə pɛɹɪn ən feɪl, ən pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt fɔɹs əm tə bæk daʊn.

Dannil and Azi al'Thone moved up to Perrin and Faile, and Perrin did not force them to back down.

"wʌt dʌz ðɪs mæɾɝ?" baɪɑɝ dɪmændəd. "hiz nɑt gɑnə əbaɪd baɪ ðə dʒʌdʒmənt!"

"What does this matter?" Byar demanded. "He's not going to abide by the judgment!"

ʌðɝ waɪɾitʃoʊks stʊd, ən ðɪs taɪm pɛɹɪn kʊdn stɛɹ daʊn ɔl ðoʊz ɑn ɪz saɪɾ u dɪd laɪkwaɪz.

Other Whitecioaks stood, and this time Perrin couldn't stare down all those on his side who did likewise.

"aɪ hæv nɑt pæst sɛntəns jɛt," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd, vɔɪs kɹɪsp.

"I have not passed sentence yet," Morgase said, voice crisp.

"wʌɾ ʌðɝ sɛntəns kəd ðəɹ bi?" baɪɑɝ æskt. "ju sɛd hiz ɡɪlti.

"What other sentence could there be?" Byar asked. "You said he's guilty.

"jɛs," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "ðoʊ aɪ bɪliv ðəɹ ɑɹ fɝðɝ sɝkəmstænsəz ɹɛləvən tə ðə sɛntənsɪŋ." hɝ feɪs wɑz stɪl hɑɹd, ən ʃi smɛl dɪtɝmənd. wʌt wɑz ʃi duɪŋ?

"Yes," Morgase said. "Though I believe there are further circumstances relevant to the sentencing." Her face was still hard, and she smelled determined. What was she doing?

"ðə waɪɾitʃoʊks wɝ ən ənɔθɝaɪz mɪlətɛɹi ɡɹup wɪðɪn ðə kɑnfaɪnz ə maɪ ɹɛlm," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "baɪ ðɪs laɪt, waɪl aɪ də ɹul pɝ-ɹɪn ɡɪlti ʌv kɪlɪŋ jəɹ mɛn, aɪ ɹul ði ɪnsəɾənt sʌbʒɪkt tə ðə keɪnək pɹoʊɾəkɑl."

"The Whitecioaks were an unauthorized military group within the confines of my realm," Morgase said. "By this light, while I do rule Per-rin guilty of killing your men, I rule the incident subject to the Kainec protocol."

"ɪz ðət ðə lɔ ðət ɡʌvɝnz mɝsənɛɹiz?" ɡɑləɾ æskt.

"Is that the law that governs mercenaries?" Galad asked.

"ɪndid."

"Indeed."

"wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"What is this?" Perrin asked.

ɡɑləd tɝn tə hɪm. "ʃi hæz ɹul ðəɾ əɹ æltɝkeɪʃən wɑz ə bɹɔl bɪtwin ʌnɛmplɔɪd mɝsənɛɹi ɡɹups. ɪsɛnʃəli, ðə ɹulɪŋ steɪts ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ɪnəsəns ɪn ðə klæʃ - jə ɑɹ nɑt, ðɛɹfɔɹ, tʃɑɹdʒd wɪð mɝɾɝ. ɪnstɛd, juv kɪld ɪliɡəli."

Galad turned to him. "She has ruled that our altercation was a brawl between unemployed mercenary groups. Essentially, the ruling states there were no innocents in the clash - you are not, therefore, charged with murder. Instead, you have killed illegally."

"ðɛɹz ə dɪfɝəns?" dænɪl æskt, fɹaʊnɪŋ.

"There's a difference?" Dannil asked, frowning.

"wʌn ə sɪmæntɪks," ɡɑləd sɛd, hænz stɪl klæsp bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk, pɛɹɪn kɑɾ ɪz sɛnt; ɪt wɑz kjʊɹiəs. "jɛs, ðɪs ɪz ə ɡʊd ɹulɪŋ, mʌðɝ. bʌt ðə pʌnɪʃmən ɪz stɪl dɛθ, aɪ bɪliv."

"One of semantics," Galad said, hands still clasped behind his back, Perrin caught his scent; it was curious. "Yes, this is a good ruling, Mother. But the punishment is still death, I believe."

"ɪt kən bi," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "ðə koʊɾ ɪz mʌtʃ mɔɹ liniənt, dɪpɛndɪŋ ɑn ðə sɝkəmstænsəz."

"It can be," Morgase said. "The code is much more lenient, depending on the circumstances."

"ðɛn wʌt dʒju ɹul?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"Then what do you rule?" Perrin asked.

"aɪ də nɑt," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "ɡɑləd, jə ɑɹ ðə wʌn ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ ðə mɛn kɪld, əɹ ðə kloʊsəst wi hæv. əl pæs sɛntənsɪŋ ɑn tə ju. aɪ hæv ɡɪvən ðə ɹulɪŋ ən ðə liɡəl dɛfənɪʃənz. jə dɪsaɪd ðə pʌnɪʃmənt."

"I do not," Morgase said. "Galad, you are the one responsible for the men killed, or the closest we have. I will pass sentencing on to you. I have given the ruling and the legal definitions. You decide the punishment."

ɡɑləɾ ən pɛɹɪn lɑkt aɪz əkɹɔs ðə pəvɪljən. "aɪ si," ɡɑləd sɛd. "ə stʃɹeɪnʒ tʃɔɪs, jəɹ ɡɹeɪs. eɪbɑɹə, ɪt mʌs bi æskt əɡɛn. wɪl jə əbaɪd baɪ ðə dɪsɪʒənz ə ðɪs tʃɹaɪəl ðət jə jɝsɛlf sədʒɛstəd? əɹ mʌs ðɪs bi sɛɾəld wɪð kɑnflɪkt?"

Galad and Perrin locked eyes across the pavilion. "I see," Galad said. "A strange choice, Your Grace. Aybara, it must be asked again. Will you abide by the decisions of this trial that you yourself suggested? Or must this be settled with conflict?"

feɪl tɛnst əɾ ɪz saɪd. pɛɹɪn kəd hɪɹ ɪz ɑɹmi muvɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm, mɛn lusənɪŋ sɔɹdz ɪn ðɛɹ ʃiθs, mʌɾɝɪŋ. ðə wɝd pæs θɹu ðɛm əz ə loʊ hʌm. lɔɹd pɛɹɪn, neɪmd ɡɪlti.

Faile tensed at his side. Perrin could hear his army moving behind him, men loosening swords in their sheaths, muttering. The word passed through them as a low hum. Lord Perrin, named guilty.

ðəɹ gɑnə tʃɹaɪ tə teɪk hɪm. wi woʊn lɛɾ ɪt hæpən, wɪl wi?

They're going to try to take him. We won't let it happen, will we?

ðə bɪɾɝ sɛns ə fɪɹ ən æŋɡɝ mɪkst ɪn ðə pəvɪljən, boʊθ saɪdz ɡlaʊɝɪŋ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ.

The bitter scents of fear and anger mixed in the pavilion, both sides glowering at one another.

əbʌv ɪɾ ɔl, pɛɹɪn kəd smɛl ðət ɹɔŋɡnəs tə ði ɛɹ.

Above it all, Perrin could smell that wrongness to the air.

kən wʌn kəntɪnju tə ɹʌn? hi θɔt. haʊndɪd baɪ ðət deɪ? ðəɹ wɝ noʊ koʊɪnsəɾənsɪz wɪð tɑvɝən. waɪ hæd ðə pæɾɝn bɹɔɾ ɪm hɪɹ tə kənfɹʌn ðiz naɪtmɛɹz fɹəm ɪz pæst?

Can 1 continue to run? he thought. Hounded by that day? There were no coincidences with ta'veren. Why had the Pattern brought him here to confront these nightmares from his past?

"aɪ wɪl əbaɪd baɪ ɪt, dəmədʒɹd," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"I will abide by it, Damodred," Perrin said.

"wʌt?" feɪl ɡæspt.

"What?" Faile gasped.

bʌt," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝ, "oʊnli soʊ lɔŋ əz jə pɹɑməs tə dɪleɪ ɛksəkjuʃən ə ðɪs pʌnɪʃmən əntɪl æftɝ aɪ hæv dʌn maɪ duɾi ət ðə læs bæɾəl."

But," Perrin said, raising a finger, "only so long as you promise to delay execution of this punishment until after I have done my duty at the Last Battle."

jəl æksɛp dʒʌdʒmən æftɝ ðə læs bæɾəl?" bɔɹnhəld æskt, saʊnd-ɪŋ bɪfʌɾəld. "æftɝ wʌt meɪ bi ði ɛn ə ðə wɝld ɪtsɛlf? æftɝ juv hæd taɪm tə ɪskeɪp, pɝhæps bɪtʃɹeɪ ʌs? wʌt kaɪndə pɹɑməs ɪz ðæt?" "ði oʊnli kaɪn aɪ kən meɪk," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt ðə fjutʃɝ wɪl bɹɪŋ, əɹ ɪf wɪl ɹitʃ ɪt. bʌt wɝ faɪɾɪŋ fəɹ sɝvaɪvəl. meɪbi ðə wɝld ɪtsɛlf. bɪfɔɹ ðæt, ɔl ʌðɝ kənsɝnz ɑɹ sɛkəndɛɹi. ðɪs ɪz ði oʊnli weɪ aɪ kəd səbmɑt.

You'll accept judgment after the Last Battle?" Bornhald asked, sound-ing befuddled. "After what may be the end of the world itself? After you've had time to escape, perhaps betray us? What kind of promise is that?" "The only kind I can make," Perrin said. "I don't know what the future will bring, or if we'll reach it. But we're fighting for survival. Maybe the world itself. Before that, all other concerns are secondary. This is the only way I could submot.

weɪ wʌn kən səbmɪt.

way 1 can submit.

"haʊ də wi noʊ jəl kip jəɹ wɝd?" ɡɑləɾ æskt. "maɪ mɛn neɪm jə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn."

"How do we know you'll keep your word?" Galad asked. "My men name you Shadowspawn."

"aɪ keɪm hɪɹ, dɪdn aɪ?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"I came here, didn't I?" Perrin asked.

"bɪkɔz wi hæd jəɹ pipəl kæptɪv."

"Because we had your people captive."

"ænd wəd ʃæɾoʊzpɔn ɡɪv wʌn hɛɹz wɝi əbaʊt ðæt?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"And would Shadowspawn give one hair's worry about that?" Perrin asked.

ɡɑləd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd.

Galad hesitated.

"aɪ swɛɹ ɪt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "baɪ ðə laɪɾ ən baɪ maɪ hoʊp ə sælveɪʃən ən ɹibɝθ. baɪ maɪ lʌv ə feɪl ən ɑn ðə neɪm ə maɪ fɑðɝ. jəl əv jəɹ tʃæns, ɡɑləd dəmədʒɹd. ɪf jə ən aɪ boʊθ sɝvaɪv əntɪl ði ɛn ə ðɪs, əl səbmɪt tə jəɹ əθɔɹəɾi."

"I swear it," Perrin said. "By the Light and by my hope of salvation and rebirth. By my love of Faile and on the name of my father. You'll have your chance, Galad Damodred. If you and I both survive until the end of this, I'll submit to your authority."

ɡɑləd stʌɾid hɪm, ðən nɑɾəd. "vɛɹi wɛl."

Galad studied him, then nodded. "Very well."

"noʊ!" baɪɑɝ kɹaɪd. "ðɪs ɪz fulɪʃnəs!"

"No!" Byar cried. "This is foolishness!"

"wi liv, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ," ɡɑləd sɛd, wɔkɪŋ tə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə pəvɪljən. "maɪ dɪsɪʒən əz bɪn meɪd. mʌðɝ, wɪl jə ətɛn mi?"

"We leave, Child Byar," Galad said, walking to the side of the pavilion. "My decision has been made. Mother, will you attend me?"

"aɪm sɑɹi, ɡɑləd," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "bʌt noʊ. eɪbɑɹə ɪz meɪkɪŋ ɪz weɪ-bæk tə ændɝ, ən aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ wɪð hɪm."

"I'm sorry, Galad," Morgase said. "But no. Aybara is making his way-back to Andor, and I must go with him."

"vɛɹi wɛl." ɡɑləd kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn.

"Very well." Galad continued on.

"weɪt," pɛɹɪn kɔld. "ju dɪdn tɛl mi wʌt maɪ pʌnɪʃmənt wɪl bi, wʌns aɪ səbmɪt."

"Wait," Perrin called. "You didn't tell me what my punishment will be, once I submit."

"noʊ," ɡɑləd sɛd, stɪl wɔkɪŋ. "aɪ dɪdnt."

"No," Galad said, still walking. "I didn't."


tʃæptɝ θɝɾifaɪv


CHAPTER 35

ðə ɹaɪt θɪŋ


The Right Thing

jə ʌndɝstænd wʌt jə ɑɹ tə du?" ɛɡwin æskt, wɔkɪŋ təwɔɹɾ əɹ ɹumz ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. sɪuən nɑɾəd.

You understand what you are to do?" Egwene asked, walking toward her rooms in the White Tower. Siuan nodded.

"ɪf ðeɪ də əpɪɹ," ɛɡwin sɛd, "ju wɪl nɑt lɛt jɝsɛlf bi dʒɹɔn ɪndə ə faɪt."

"If they do appear," Egwene said, "you will not let yourself be drawn into a fight."

"wɝ nɑt tʃɪlʒɹən, mʌðɝ," sɪuən sɛd dʒɹaɪli.

"We're not children, Mother," Siuan said dryly.

"noʊ, jəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ - nɪɹli əz bæɾ ət fɑloʊɪŋ dɝɛkʃənz."

"No, you're Aes Sedai - nearly as bad at following directions."

sɪuən ɡeɪv əɹ ə flæt lʊk, ən ɛɡwin ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd əɹ wɝdz. ðeɪ hæd bɪn ənkɔld-fɔɹ; ʃi wɑz ɑn ɛdʒ. ʃi kɑm hɝsɛlf.

Siuan gave her a flat look, and Egwene regretted her words. They had been uncalled-for; she was on edge. She calmed herself.

ʃi hæd tʃɹaɪd sɛvɹəl fɔɹmz ə beɪt tə lʊɹ mɛsænə aʊt, bʌt soʊ fɑɹ, ðəɹ hædn bɪn ɛni nɪbəlz.

She had tried several forms of bait to lure Mesaana out, but so far, there hadn't been any nibbles.

ɛɡwin swɔɹ ʃi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fil ðə wʊmən wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. jukɪɝi ən əɹ ɡɹup wɝ əɾ ə stændstɪl.

Egwene swore she could almost feel the woman watching her in Tel'aran'rhiod. Yukiri and her group were at a standstill.

hɝ bɛs hoʊp wɑz ðə miɾɪŋ tənaɪt. ɪt hæd tə dʒɹɔ hɝ. ɛɡwin dɪdn əv ɛni taɪm lɛft - ðə mɑnɑɹks ʃid pɝsweɪɾəd wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə muv, ən ɹændz fɔɹsɪz wɝ ɡæðɝɪŋ.

Her best hope was the meeting tonight. It had to draw her. Egwene didn't have any time left - the monarchs she'd persuaded were already beginning to move, and Rand's forces were gathering.

tənaɪt. ɪt mʌs hæpən tənaɪt.

Tonight. It must happen tonight.

"ɡoʊ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "spik wɪð ði ʌðɝz. aɪ doʊnt wɑn ðəɹ tə bi ɛni fulɪʃ mɪsteɪks."

"Go," Egwene said. "Speak with the others. I don't want there to be any foolish mistakes."

"jɛs, mʌðɝ," sɪuən ɡɹʌmbəld, tɝnɪŋ əweɪ.

"Yes, Mother," Siuan grumbled, turning away.

ən sɪuən," ɛɡwin kɔld æftɝ hɝ.

And Siuan," Egwene called after her.

ðə fɔɹmɝ æmɪɝlɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "si tə jəɹ seɪfti tənaɪt," ɛɡwin sɛd. "aɪ wəd nɑt luz ju."

The former Amyrlin hesitated. "See to your safety tonight," Egwene said. "I would not lose you."

sɪuən ɔfən ɡeɪv sətʃ kənsɝn ə kɹʌsti ɹɪplaɪ, bʌt tənaɪt ʃi smaɪld ɛɡwin ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ən hɝiɾ ɑn tə hɝ ɹumz, wɛɹ ʃi faʊn sɪl-viænə weɪɾɪŋ.

Siuan often gave such concern a crusty reply, but tonight she smiled Egwene shook her head and hurried on to her rooms, where she found Sil-viana waiting.

"ɡɔɪn?" ɛɡwin æskt.

"Gawyn?" Egwene asked.

"ðɛɹ əz bɪn noʊ nuz ə hɪm," sɪlviænə ɹɪplaɪd. "aɪ sɛn ə mɛsənʒɝ fəɹ ɪm ðɪs æftɝnun, bʌt ðə mɛsənʒɝ hæzən ɹɪtɝnd. aɪ səspɛk ðət ɡɔɪn ɪz dɪleɪɪŋ ɪz ɹɪplaɪ tə bi dɪfəkəlt."

"There has been no news of him," Silviana replied. "I sent a messenger for him this afternoon, but the messenger hasn't returned. I suspect that Gawyn is delaying his reply to be difficult."

"hiz nʌθɪŋ ɪf nɑt stʌbɝn," ɛɡwin sɛd. ʃi fɛlt ɪkspoʊzd wɪθaʊt hɪm. ðət wɑz sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ, sɪns ʃid pɔɪntɪdli ɔɹɾɝd ɪm tə steɪ əweɪ fɹəm əɹ dɔɹ. naʊ ʃi wɝiɾ əbaʊɾ ɪm nɑt biɪŋ ðɛɹ?

"He's nothing if not stubborn," Egwene said. She felt exposed without him. That was surprising, since she'd pointedly ordered him to stay away from her door. Now she worried about him not being there?

"dʌbəl maɪ ɡɑɹd, ən meɪk sɝɾən tə hæv soʊlʒɝz poʊstɪd nɪɹbaɪ ɪf maɪ wɔɹdz ɡoʊ ɔf, ðəl ɹeɪz ə klæɾɝ."

"Double my guard, and make certain to have soldiers posted nearby If my wards go off, they will raise a clatter."

"jɛs, mʌðɝ," sɪlviænə sɛd.

"Yes, Mother," Silviana said.

"æn sɛnd ɡɔɪn ənʌðɝ mɛsənʒɝ," ʃi sɛd. "wʌn wɪð ə mɔɹ pəlaɪtli wɝɾɪd lɛɾɝ. æsk ɪm tə ɹɪtɝn; doʊn ɔɹɾɝ hɪm." noʊɪŋ sɪlviænəz əpɪnjən ʌv ɡɔɪn, ɛɡwin wɑz ʃʊɹ ði ɝɪdʒənəl lɛɾɝ hæd bɪn bɹʌsk.

"And send Gawyn another messenger," she said. "One with a more politely worded letter. Ask him to return; don't order him." Knowing Silviana's opinion of Gawyn, Egwene was sure the original letter had been brusque.

wɪð ðæt, ɛɡwin tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ðən wɛn ɪndə hɝ ɹumz, tʃɛkt ɑn əɹ wɔɹdz, ən pɹipɛɹd tə ɡoʊ tə slip.

With that, Egwene took a deep breath, then went into her rooms, checked on her wards, and prepared to go to sleep.

sɛvən ʃʊdn fil soʊ ɪɡzɔstəd, pɛɹɪn θɔɾ əz i klaɪm daʊn fɹəm stɛpɝ. aɪ dɪdn də ɛniθɪŋ bʌt tɔk.

7 shouldn't feel so exhausted, Perrin thought as he climbed down from Stepper. I didn't do anything but talk.

ðə tʃɹaɪəl weɪɾ ɑn hɪm. ɪt sim tə weɪ əpɑn ði ɪntaɪɝ ɑɹmi. pɛɹɪn lʊkt əɾ əm əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd bæk ɪndə kæmp. mɔɹɡeɪs wɑz ðɛɹ, ɔf ɑn əɹ oʊn. feɪl hæd wɑtʃt əɹ ðə hoʊl weɪ bæk, smɛlɪŋ ʌv æŋɡɝ, bʌt nɑt spikɪŋ ə wɝd. æliændɝ ən bɹəleɪn hæd kɛp ðɛɹ dɪstəns.

The trial weighed on him. It seemed to weigh upon the entire army. Perrin looked at them as they rode back into camp. Morgase was there, off on her own. Faile had watched her the whole way back, smelling of anger, but not speaking a word. Alliandre and Berelain had kept their distance.

mɔɹɡeɪs hæd kəndɛm hɪm, bʌɾ ɪn tʃɹuθ, hi dɪdn mʌtʃ kɛɹ. hi hæd dɪflɛktɪd ðə waɪtkloʊks;

Morgase had condemned him, but in truth, he didn't much care. He had deflected the Whitecloaks;

naʊ hi niɾəd tə liɾ ɪz pipəl tə seɪfti. mɔɹɡeɪs ɹoʊd θɹu kæmp, sikɪŋ aʊt lini ən mæstɝ ɡɪl. ðeɪɾ ɝaɪv seɪfli, təɡɛðɝ wɪð ɔl ði ʌðɝ kæptɪvz, əz ɡɑləd dəmədʒɹd hæd pɹɑməst.

now he needed to lead his people to safety. Morgase rode through camp, seeking out Lini and Master Gill. They'd arrived safely, together with all the other captives, as Galad Damodred had promised.

sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, hid sɛn ðə səplaɪz ən kɑɹts wɪð ðɛm.

Surprisingly, he'd sent the supplies and carts with them.

ðə tʃɹaɪəl wɑz ə vɪktɝi, ðɛn. pɛɹɪnz mɛn dɪdn sim tə si ɪt ðət weɪ. ðə soʊlʒɝz splɪɾ ɪndə ɡɹups əz ðeɪ slʌŋk bæk ɪndə kæmp. ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl tɔkɪŋ.

The trial was a victory, then. Perrin's men didn't seem to see it that way. The soldiers split into groups as they slunk back into camp. There was little talking.

bɪsaɪd pɛɹɪn, ɡɔl ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "tu sɪlvɝ pɔɪns."

Beside Perrin, Gaul shook his head. "Two silver points."

"wʌts ðæt?" pɛɹɪn æskt, hændɪŋ stɛpɝ tə ə ɡɹum.

"What's that?" Perrin asked, handing Stepper to a groom.

"ə seɪɪŋ," ɡɔl sɛd, ɡlænsɪŋ ʌp ət ðə skaɪ. "tu sɪlvɝ pɔɪns. twaɪs wɪv ɹɪɾən tə bæɾəl ən faʊnd noʊ foʊ. wʌns mɔɹ, ən wi luz ɑnɝ.

"A saying," Gaul said, glancing up at the sky. "Two silver points. Twice we have ridden to battle and found no foe. Once more, and we lose honor.

"bɛɾɝ tə faɪnd noʊ foʊ, ɡɔl," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "bɛɾɝ noʊ blʌd bi ʃɛd.'

"Better to find no foe, Gaul," Perrin said. "Better no blood be shed.'

ɡɔl læft. "aɪ də nɑt seɪ aɪ wɪʃ tə ɛn ðə dʒɹim, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. bʌt lʊk ət jəɹ mɛn. ðeɪ kən fil wʌɾ aɪ seɪ. jə ʃəd nɑt dæns ðə spɪɹz wɪθaʊt pɝpəs, bʌt niðɝ ʃəd jə tu ɔfən dɪmæn ðət mɛn pɹipɛɹ ðɛmsɛlvz tə kɪl, ðən ɡɪv əm noʊbɑdi tə faɪt." "aɪl də ɪɾ əz ɔfən əz aɪ laɪk," pɛɹɪn sɛd ɡɹʌflaɪ, "ɪf ɪt minz əvɔɪɾɪŋ ə bæɾəl. aɪ - "

Gaul laughed. "I do not say I wish to end the dream, Perrin Aybara. But look at your men. They can feel what I say. You should not dance the spears without purpose, but neither should you too often demand that men prepare themselves to kill, then give them nobody to fight." "I'll do it as often as I like," Perrin said gruffly, "if it means avoiding a battle. I - "

ə hɔɹsəz hʊvz θʌmp ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ən ðə wɪn bɹɔɾ ɪm feɪlz sɛn əz i tɝn tə feɪs hɝ.

A horse's hooves thumped the ground, and the wind brought him Faile's scent as he turned to face her.

"ə bæɾəl əvɔɪɾəd ɪndid, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," ɡɔl sɛd, "æn ənʌðɝ ɪnvaɪɾəd. meɪ jə faɪnd wɔɾɝ ən ʃeɪd." hi tʃɹɑɾəd əweɪ əz feɪl dɪsmaʊntɪd.

"A battle avoided indeed, Perrin Aybara," Gaul said, "and another invited. May you find water and shade." He trotted away as Faile dismounted.

pɛɹɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ.

Perrin took a deep breath.

"ɔl ɹaɪt, hʌzbənd," ʃi sɛd, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ ʌp tə hɪm. "ju wɪl ɪkspleɪn tə mi dʒʌst wʌt jə θɔt jə wɝ duɪŋ. jə lɛɾ ɪm pæs dʒʌdʒmən ɑn ju? jə pɹɑməs tə dɪlɪvɝ jɝsɛlf tə hɪm? aɪ wɑzn ʌndɝ ði ɪmpɹɛʃən ðəɾ aɪd mɛɹiɾ ə ful!"

"All right, husband," she said, striding up to him. "You will explain to me just what you thought you were doing. You let him pass judgment on you? You promised to deliver yourself to him? I wasn't under the impression that I'd married a fool!"

"ɪm noʊ ful, wʊmən," hi ɹɔɹd bæk. "ju kip tɛlɪŋ mi aɪ nid tə lid. wɛl, tədeɪ aɪ tʊk jəɹ ædvaɪs!"

"I'm no fool, woman," he roared back. "You keep telling me I need to lead. Well, today I took your advice!"

"ju tʊk ɪɾ ən meɪd ðə ɹɔŋ dɪsɪʒən."

"You took it and made the wrong decision."

"ðɛɹ wɑz noʊ ɹaɪt dɪsɪʒən!"

"There was no right decision!"

"ju cʊɾə lɛɾ əs faɪt ðɛm."

"You could have let us fight them."

"ðeɪ ɪntɛn tə faɪɾ ət ðə læs bæɾəl," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɛvɹi waɪt-kloʊk wi kɪld wəd bi wʌn lɛs mæn tə feɪs ðə dɑɹk wʌn. meɪn, maɪ mɛn, ðə waɪtkloʊks - nʌn ʌv əs mæɾɝ kəmpɛɹd tə wʌɾ ɪz kʌmɪŋ! ðeɪ hæd tə lɪv, ən soʊ dɪd wi. ən ðɪs wɑz ði oʊnli weɪ!"

"They intend to fight at the Last Battle," Perrin said. "Every White-cloak we killed would be one less man to face the Dark One. Me, my men, the Whitecloaks - none of us matter compared to what is coming! They had to live, and so did we. And this was the only way!"

laɪt, bʌɾ ɪt fɛlt ɹɔŋ tə jɛl ət hɝ. jɛɾ ɪɾ æktʃəli  sɔfən əɹ tɛmpɝ. ɹɪmɑɹkəbli, ðə soʊlʒɝz nɪɹbaɪ hɪm stɑɹɾəd tə nɑd, əz ɪf ðeɪ hædn bɪn eɪbəl tə si ðə tʃɹuθ əntɪl hid bɛloʊɾ ɪɾ aʊt.

Light, but it felt wrong to yell at her. Yet it actually softened her temper. Remarkably, the soldiers nearby him started to nod, as if they hadn't been able to see the truth until he'd bellowed it out.

"aɪ wɑn jə tə teɪk kəmæn ə ðə ɹitʃɹit," pɛɹɪn sɛd tə feɪl. "ðə tʃɹæp hæzən spɹʌŋ jɛt, bʌɾ aɪ faɪn maɪsɛlf ɪtʃɪŋ mɔɹ itʃ mɪnət. sʌmθɪŋz wɑtʃɪŋ ʌs; ðeɪv teɪkən əweɪ əɹ ɡeɪtweɪz, ən ðeɪ ɪntɛn tə si əs dɛd. ðeɪ naʊ noʊ wi woʊn faɪt ðə waɪtkloʊks, wɪtʃ minz ðəl ətæk sun. meɪbi ðɪs ivnɪŋ; ɪf wɝ lʌki, ðəl dɪleɪ əntɪl təmɑɹoʊ mɔɹnɪŋ."

"I want you to take command of the retreat," Perrin said to Faile. "The trap hasn't sprung yet, but I find myself itching more each minute. Something's watching us; they have taken away our gateways, and they intend to see us dead. They now know we won't fight the Whitecloaks, which means they'll attack soon. Maybe this evening; if we're lucky, they'll delay until tomorrow morning."

wi ɑɹən dʌn wɪð ðɪs ɑɹɡjəmənt," ʃi wɔɹnd.

We aren't done with this argument," she warned.

wʌts dʌn ɪz dʌn, feɪl. lʊk fɔɹwɝd."

What's done is done, Faile. Look forward."

vɛɹi wɛl." ʃi stɪl smɛld æŋɡɹi, ðoʊz bjuɾəfəl dɑɹk aɪz ə hɝz fɪɹs, bʌt ʃi kənteɪn ɪt.

Very well." She still smelled angry, those beautiful dark eyes of hers fierce, but she contained it.

"aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə wʊlf dʒɹim," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ɡlænsɪŋ təwɔɹd ði ɛdʒ ə kæmp, wɛɹ ðɛɹ tɛn leɪ.

"I'm going to the wolf dream," Perrin said, glancing toward the edge of camp, where their tent lay.

"ɪl iðɝ dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðət doʊm, əɹ əl faɪn ə weɪ tə fɔɹs sleɪɝ tə tɛl mi haʊ tə meɪk tʃɹævlɪŋ wɝk əɡɛn. ɡɛt ðə pipəl ɹɛɾi tə mɑɹtʃ, ən əv ði æʃəmən tʃɹaɪ tə meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ ɑn ɛvɹi kaʊn ʌv ə hʌnʒɹəd. ðə moʊmən ɪt wɝks, ɡɛɾ əɹ pipəl aʊɾ ə hɪɹ."

"Ill either destroy that dome, or I'll find a way to force Slayer to tell me how to make Traveling work again. Get the people ready to march, and have the Asha'man try to make a gateway on every count of a hundred. The moment it works, get our people out of here."

"wɛɹ?" feɪl æskt. "dʒəhænə?"

"Where?" Faile asked. "Jehannah?"

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "tu kloʊz. ði ɛnəmi maɪt bi wɑtʃɪŋ θɝ ændɝ. teɪk əm tə keɪɛmlɪn. æktʃəli , noʊ. waɪtbɹɪdʒ. lɛts steɪ əweɪ fɹəm ɛniwɛɹ ðeɪ maɪɾ ɪkspɛkt. bɪsaɪdz, aɪ wɑnə tə ʃoʊ ʌp wɪð ən ɑɹmi ɑn ɪleɪnz dɔɹstɛp əntɪl aɪv wɔɹn hɝ."

Perrin shook his head. "Too close. The enemy might be watching ther Andor. Take them to Caemlyn. Actually, no. Whitebridge. Let's stay away from anywhere they might expect. Besides, I don't want to show up with an army on Elayne's doorstep until I've warned her."

"ə ɡʊd plæn," feɪl sɛd. "ɪf jə fɪɹ ətæk, wi ʃəd muv ðə kɑɹnp fɑloʊɝz fɝst, ɹæðɝ ðən muvɪŋ ði ɑɹmiz θɹu ən livɪŋ əs ʌndɪfɛndəd."

"A good plan," Faile said. "If you fear attack, we should move the carnp followers first, rather than moving the armies through and leaving us undefended."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. "bʌt ɡɛɾ əm muvɪŋ əz sun əz ðə ɡeɪtweɪz wɝk əɡɛn."

Perrin nodded. "But get them moving as soon as the gateways work again."

"æn ɪf jə doʊn səksid?" feɪl hæd bɪɡʌn tə saʊn dɪtɝmənd. fɹaɪɾənd, bʌt dɪtɝmənd.

"And if you don't succeed?" Faile had begun to sound determined. Frightened, but determined.

"ɪf aɪ hævən ɹɪstɔɹd ɡeɪtweɪz ɪn wʌn aʊɝ, stɑɹɾ əm mɑɹtʃɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə pɝɪməɾɝ wɛɹ nil dɪskʌvɝd ðəɾ i kən meɪk ɡeɪtweɪz. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðət wɪl wɝk; aɪ θɪŋk sleɪɝ wɪl dʒʌs muv ðə doʊm, ɔlweɪz kipɪŋ əs ʌndɝniθ ɪt. bʌɾ ɪts sʌmθɪŋ."

"If I haven't restored gateways in one hour, start them marching toward the perimeter where Neald discovered that he can make gateways. I don't think that will work; I think Slayer will just move the dome, always keeping us underneath it. But it's something."

feɪl nɑɾəd, bʌɾ əɹ sɛn bɪkeɪm hɛzɪɾənt. "ðæt wɪl ɔlsoʊ pʊɾ əs mɑɹtʃɪŋ, ɹæðɝ ðən ɪn kæmp.

Faile nodded, but her scent became hesitant. "That will also put us marching, rather than in camp.

mʌtʃ iziɝ tə æmbʊʃ ðət weɪ."

Much easier to ambush that way."

"aɪ noʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðæɾ ɪz waɪ aɪ mʌs nɑt feɪl."

"I know," Perrin said. "That is why I must not fail."

ʃi tʊk ɪm ɪndə hɝ ɑɹmz, hɛɾ əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst. ʃi smɛl soʊ wʌndɝfəl. laɪk feɪl. ðət wɑz ðə dɛfənɪʃən ʌv wʌndɝfəl tə hɪm. "juv sɛd hiz stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən jə ɑɹ," ʃi wɪspɝd.

She took him into her arms, head against his chest. She smelled so wonderful. Like Faile. That was the definition of wonderful to him. "You've said he's stronger than you are," she whispered.

"hi ɪz."

"He is."

"kæn aɪ də ɛniθɪŋ tə hɛlp jə feɪs hɪm?" ʃi æsk sɔfli.

"Can I do anything to help you face him?" she asked softly.

"ɪf jə wɑtʃ oʊvɝ əm waɪl aɪm ɡɔn, ðət wɪl hɛlp."

"If you watch over them while I'm gone, that will help."

"wʌt hæpənz ɪf i kɪlz jə waɪl jəɹ ðɛɹ?"

"What happens if he kills you while you're there?"

pɛɹɪn dɪdn ɹɪplaɪ.

Perrin didn't reply.

"ðɛɹz noʊ ʌðɝ weɪ?" ʃi æskt.

"There's no other way?" she asked.

hi pʊl bæk fɹəm hɝ. "feɪl, aɪm fɛɹli sɝɾən ðət hiz lɔɹd luk. ðeɪ smɛl dɪfɹənt, bʌt ðɛɹz sʌmθɪŋ sɪməlɝ əbaʊt ðɛm, tu. ən wən aɪ wundəd sleɪɝ ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim bɪfɔɹ, luk bɔɹ ðə waʊnd."

He pulled back from her. "Faile, I'm fairly certain that he's Lord Luc. They smell different, but there's something similar about them, too. And when I wounded Slayer in the wolf dream before, Luc bore the wound."

"ɪz ðət səpoʊz tə hɛlp mi fil bɛɾɝ?" ʃi æskt, ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ.

"Is that supposed to help me feel better?" she asked, grimacing.

"ɪts ɔl kʌmɪŋ bæk ɝaʊnd. wi fɪnɪʃ wɪð meɪɾən ən faɪn aʊɝsɛlvz wɪðɪn ə stoʊnz tɔs ə ðə ɹɛmnəns ə ðə waɪtkloʊks, baɪɑɝ ən bɔɹnhəld wɪð ðɛm. sleɪɝ əpɪɹz ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim əɡɛn.

"It's all coming back around. We finish with Maiden and find ourselves within a stone's toss of the remnants of the Whitecloaks, Byar and Bornhald with them. Slayer appears in the wolf dream again.

ðət mæn aɪ toʊl jə ʌv, noʊm, ðə wʌn u wɑz ɪn ðə keɪdʒ. dʒju ɹɪmɛmbɝ wɛɹ aɪ faʊn hɪm?

That man I told you of, Noam, the one who was in the cage. Do you remember where I found him?

"ju sɛd jə wɝ tʃeɪsɪŋ ɹænd. θɹu . . ."

"You said you were chasing Rand. Through . . ."

"ɡildən," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɪt hæpənd nɑt wʌn wiks ɹaɪd fɹəm hɪɹ."

"Ghealdan," Perrin said. "It happened not one week's ride from here."

"æn ɑd koʊɪnsɪɾəns, bʌt - "

"An odd coincidence, but - "

"noʊ koʊɪnsəɾənsɪz, feɪl. nɑt wɪð mi. aɪm hɪɹ fəɹ ə ɹizən. hiz hɪɹ fəɹ ə ɹizən. aɪ mʌs feɪs ðɪs."

"No coincidences, Faile. Not with me. I'm here for a reason. He's here for a reason. I must face this."

ʃi nɑɾəd. hi tɝn tə wɔk təwɔɹd ðɛɹ tɛnt, hɝ hæn slɪpɪŋ fɹi ʌv hɪz. ðə waɪz wʌnz hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ə ti ðət wəd lɛɾ ɪm slip soʊ hi kəɾ ɛntɝ ðə wʊlf dʒɹim.

She nodded. He turned to walk toward their tent, her hand slipping free of his. The Wise Ones had given him a tea that would let him sleep so he could enter the wolf dream.

ɪt wɑz taɪm.

It was time.

"haʊ kəd jə lɛɾ ɪm ɡoʊ?" baɪɑɝ sɛd, nʌkəlz klɛntʃt ɑn ðə pɑməl ə hɪz sɔɹd, waɪt kloʊk flæpɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm. hi, bɔɹnhəld ən ɡɑləd wɔk θɹu ðə mɪɾəl ə ðɛɹ kæmp.

"How could you let him go?" Byar said, knuckles clenched on the pommel of his sword, white cloak flapping behind him. He, Bornhald and Galad walked through the middle of their camp.

"aɪ dɪd wʌt wɑz ɹaɪt," ɡɑləd sɛd.

"I did what was right," Galad said.

"lɛɾɪŋ ɪm ɡoʊ fɹi wɑz nɑt ɹaɪt!" baɪɑɝ sɛd. "ju kæn bɪliv - "

"Letting him go free was not right!" Byar said. "You can't believe - "

"tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ," ɡɑləd sɛd sɔfli, "aɪ faɪn jəɹ æɾətud ɪnkɹisɪŋli ɪnsəbɔɹɾəneɪt. ðət tʃɹʌbəlz mi.

"Child Byar," Galad said softly, "I find your attitude increasingly insubordinate. That troubles me.

ɪt ʃəd tʃɹʌbəl jə əz wɛl."

It should trouble you as well."

baɪɑɝ kloʊzd ɪz maʊθ ən sɛd noʊ mɔɹ, ðoʊ ɡɑləd kəd si ðəɾ ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl fəɹ ɪm tə hoʊld ɪz tʌŋ. bɪhaɪn baɪɑɝ, bɔɹnhəld wɔk saɪlənli, lʊkɪŋ vɛɹi əpsɛt.

Byar closed his mouth and said no more, though Galad could see that it was difficult for him to hold his tongue. Behind Byar, Bornhald walked silently, looking very upset.

"aɪ bɪliv ðəɾ eɪbɑɹə wɪl kip ɪz oʊθ," ɡɑləd sɛd. "æn ɪf i dʌz nɑt, aɪ naʊ hæv ðə liɡəl ɡɹaʊnz tə hʌn ɪm ən ɪɡzæk pʌnɪʃmənt. ɪts nɑɾ aɪdil, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz wɪzdəm tə hɪz wɝdz. aɪ də bɪliv ðə læs bæɾəl ɪz kʌmɪŋ, ən ɪf soʊ, ɪts taɪm tə junaɪɾ əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ."

"I believe that Aybara will keep his oath," Galad said. "And if he does not, I now have the legal grounds to hunt him and exact punishment. It is not ideal, but there was wisdom to his words. I do believe the Last Battle is coming, and if so, it is time to unite against the Shadow."

"maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," baɪɑɝ sɛd, mænɪdʒɪŋ ɪz toʊn, "wɪð ɔl ɹɪspɛkt, ðət mæn ɪz ə ðə ʃædoʊ. hɪl nɑt bi faɪɾɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ʌs, bʌɾ əɡɛnst ʌs."

"My Lord Captain Commander," Byar said, managing his tone, "with all respect, that man is of the Shadow. He will not be fighting beside us, but against us."

"ɪf ðəɾ ɪz tʃɹu," ɡɑləd sɛd, "wi wɪl stɪl əv ə tʃæns tə feɪs ɪm ɑn ðə fild ə bæɾəl. aɪ hæv meɪd maɪ dɪsɪʒən, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ." hɑɹnɪʃ stʃɹoʊɾ ʌp tə dʒɔɪn əm ən səluɾəd. ɡɑləd nɑɾəd. "tʃaɪl hɑɹnɪʃ, stʃɹaɪk kæmp."

"If that is true," Galad said, "we will still have a chance to face him on the field of battle. I have made my decision, Child Byar." Harnesh strode up to join them and saluted. Galad nodded. "Child Harnesh, strike camp."

"maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ? ðɪs leɪɾ ɪn ðə deɪ?"

"My Lord Captain Commander? This late in the day?"

'jɛs," ɡɑləd sɛd. "wi wɪl mɑɹtʃ ɪndə ðə naɪɾ ən pʊt səm dɪstəns bɪtwin əs ən eɪbɑɹə, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs. liv skaʊts, meɪk sɝɾən i dʌzn tʃɹaɪ tə fɑloʊ ʌs. wɪl meɪk fəɹ luɡɹd. wi kən ɹəkɹuɾ ən ɹisəp-plaɪ, ðən kəntɪnju ɑn təwɔɹɾ ændɝ."

'Yes," Galad said. "We will march into the night and put some distance between us and Aybara, just in case. Leave scouts, make certain he doesn't try to follow us. We'll make for Lugard. We can recruit and resup-ply, then continue on toward Andor."

jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," hɑɹnɪʃ sɛd.

Yes, my Lord Captain Commander," Harnesh said.

ɡɑləd tɝn tə baɪɑɝ əz hɑɹnɪʃ lɛft. ðə skɛləɾəl mæn ɡeɪv ə səlut, sʌŋkən aɪz deɪnʒɝəsli ɹɪzɛnfəl, ðən stɔkt ɔf. ɡɑləd stɑpt ɑn ðə fild, bɪtwin waɪt tɛns, hænz bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk əz i wɑtʃt mɛsənʒɝz ɹileɪ hɪz ɔɹɾɝz θɹu kæmp.

Galad turned to Byar as Harnesh left. The skeletal man gave a salute, sunken eyes dangerously resentful, then stalked off. Galad stopped on the field, between white tents, hands behind his back as he watched messengers relay his orders through camp.

"ju ɑɹ kwaɪət, tʃaɪl bɔɹnhəld," ɡɑləd sɛɾ æftɝ ə fju moʊməns. eɪt jə əz dɪsplizd wɪð maɪ ækʃənz əz tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ ɪz?"

"You are quiet, Child Bornhald," Galad said after a few moments. Ate you as displeased with my actions as Child Byar is?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ," bɔɹnhəl sɛd. "aɪv bɪliv fəɹ soʊ lɔŋ ðəɾ eɪbɑɹə kɪl maɪ fɑðɝ. ən jɛt, siɪŋ haʊ jɹəɾ æks, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ɪz dɪskɹɪpʃən... ðəɹ ɪz noʊ ɛvəɾəns. ɪt fɹʌstʃɹeɪts mi tə ədmɪɾ ɪt, ɡɑləd, bʌɾ aɪ hæv noʊ pɹuf i dɪd kɪl læðən ən jæmwɪk, haʊɛvɝ. hi kɪl tʃɪlʒɹən, soʊ hiz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd."

"I don't know," Bornhald said. "I've believed for so long that Aybara killed my father. And yet, seeing how Jaret acts, remembering his description... There is no evidence. It frustrates me to admit it, Galad, but I have no proof He did kill Lathin and Yamwick, however. He killed Children, so he is a Darkfriend."

"aɪ kɪld wʌn ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən, tu," ɡɑləd sɛd. "ænd wɑz neɪm dɑɹk-fɹɛn fəɹ ɪt."

"I killed one of the Children, too," Galad said. "And was named Dark-friend for it."

"ðæt wɑz dɪfɹənt." sʌmθɪŋ sim tə bi tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ bɔɹnhəld, sʌmθɪŋ i wɑzn seɪɪŋ.

"That was different." Something seemed to be troubling Bornhald, something he wasn't saying.

"wɛl, ðəɾ ɪz tʃɹu," ɡɑləd sɛd. "aɪ də nɑt dɪsəɡɹi ðəɾ eɪbɑɹə ʃəd bi pʌnɪʃt, bʌt ðə deɪz ɪvɛns liv mi stʃɹeɪnʒli tʃɹʌbəld."

"Well, that is true," Galad said. "I do not disagree that Aybara should be punished, but the day's events leave me strangely troubled."

hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. faɪndɪŋ ænsɝz ʃəd bi izi. ðə ɹaɪt θɪŋ ɔlweɪz keɪm tə hɪm.

He shook his head. Finding answers should be easy. The right thing always came to him.

haʊɛvɝ, wɛnɛvɝ i θɔt hid sizd əpɑn ðə ɹaɪt kɔɹs ʌv ækʃən ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ eɪbɑɹə, hi faʊn dɪsteɪsfəl wɝiz kɹɑpɪŋ ʌp ɪnsaɪɾ ə hɪm.

However, whenever he thought he'd seized upon the right course of action regarding Aybara, he found distasteful worries cropping up inside of him.

laɪf ɪz nɑt soʊ izi əz ðə tɔs ʌv ə kɔɪn, hɪz mʌðɝ hæd sɛd. wʌn saɪɾ əɹ ði ʌðɝ. . . jəɹ sɪmpəl ɪluʒənz . . .

Life is not so easy as the toss of a coin, his mother had said. One side or the other. . . your simple illusions . . .

hi dɪd nɑt laɪk ðə filɪŋ. nɑɾ əɾ ɔl.

He did not like the feeling. Not at all.

pɛɹɪn ɪnheɪl dipli. flaʊɝz blumd ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim, ivən əz ðə skaɪ ɹeɪdʒ sɪlvɝ, blæk ən ɡoʊld. ðə sɛns wɝ soʊ ɪŋkɔŋɹuəs. beɪkɪŋ tʃɛɹi paɪ. hɔɹs dʌŋ. ɔɪl ən ɡɹis. soʊp. ə wʊd faɪɝ. ɹəθ. θaɪm. kætfɝn. ə hʌnʒɹəd ʌðɝ ɝbz i kʊdnt neɪm.

Perrin inhaled deeply. Flowers bloomed in the wolf dream, even as the sky raged silver, black and gold. The scents were so incongruous. Baking cherry pie. Horse dung. Oil and grease. Soap. A wood fire. Arrath. Thyme. Catfern. A hundred other herbs he couldn't name.

vɛɹi fju ʌv əm fɪt ðə mɛdoʊ wɛɹ i hæɾ əpɪɹd. hid meɪd sɝɾən nɑt tə əpɪɹ wɛɹ ɪz kæmp wɑz ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim; ðət wʊɾə pʊɾ ɪm tu nɪɹ sleɪɝ.

Very few of them fit the meadow where he had appeared. He'd made certain not to appear where his camp was in the wolf dream; that would have put him too near Slayer.

ðə sɛns wɝ fliɾɪŋ. vænɪʃɪŋ tu kwɪkli, əz ɪf ðeɪd nɛvɝ ɹɪli bɪn ðɛɹ.

The scents were fleeting. Vanishing too quickly, as if they'd never really been there.

hɑpɝ, hi sɛnt.

Hopper, he sent.

/ æm hɪɹ, jʌŋ bʊl. ðə wʊlf əpɪɹd bɪsaɪd hɪm.

/ am here, Young Bull. The wolf appeared beside him.

"ɪt smɛlz stʃɹeɪnʒ."

"It smells strange."

sɛns blɛnd, hɑpɝ sɛnt. laɪk ðə wɔɾɝz ʌv ə θaʊzən stʃɹimz. ɪts nɑt nætʃɹəl. ɪts nɑt ɡʊd.

Scents blend, Hopper sent. Like the waters of a thousand streams. It is not natural. It is not good.

ðɪs pleɪs bɪɡɪnz tə bɹeɪk.

This place begins to break.

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. hi ʃɪftəd, əpɪɹɪŋ ni dip ɪn bɹaʊn kɑkəlbɝz dʒʌst aʊtsaɪɾ ə ðə vaɪəlɪt doʊm. hɑpɝ əpɪɹd tə hɪz ɹaɪt, widz kɹæklɪŋ əz i muvd əmʌŋ ðɛm.

Perrin nodded. He shifted, appearing knee deep in brown cockleburrs just outside of the violet dome. Hopper appeared to his right, weeds crackling as he moved among them.

ðə doʊm ɹoʊz, ɑmənəs ən ənnætʃɹəl. ə wɪn blu, ʃʌflɪŋ ðə widz ən ʃeɪkɪŋ tʃɹi lɪmz.

The dome rose, ominous and unnatural. A wind blew, shuffling the weeds and shaking tree limbs.

laɪtnɪŋ flæʃt saɪlənli ɪn ðə skaɪ.

Lightning flashed silently in the sky.

hiz ðɛɹ, hɑpɝ sɛnt. ɔlweɪz.

He is there, Hopper sent. Always.

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. dɪd sleɪɝ kʌm tə ðə wʊlf dʒɹim ðə weɪ pɛɹɪn dɪd? ən dɪd spɛndɪŋ taɪm ɪn ɪt liv ɪm stɪl taɪɝd, əz ɪt dɪd pɛɹɪn? ðə mæn nɛvɝ sim tə liv ðɪs ɛɹiə.

Perrin nodded. Did Slayer come to the wolf dream the way Perrin did? And did spending time in it leave him still tired, as it did Perrin? The man never seemed to leave this area.

hi wɑz ɡɑɹɾɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ. ðəɹ hæd tə bi ə weɪ ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim tə dɪseɪbəl ðə doʊm.

He was guarding something. There had to be a way in the wolf dream to disable the dome.

jʌŋ bʊl, wi kʌm. ðə sɛndɪŋ wɑz fɹəm oʊk dænsɝ. hɝ pæk wɑz əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ, naʊ oʊnli θɹi stʃɹɔŋ. spɑɹks, baʊnləs, oʊk dænsɝ hɝsɛlf. ðeɪ hæd tʃoʊzən tə kʌm hɪɹ, ɹæðɝ ðən dʒɔɪn ðə wʊlvz ɹʌnɪŋ nɔɹθwɝd.

Young Bull, we come. The sending was from Oak Dancer. Her pack was approaching, now only three strong. Sparks, Boundless, Oak Dancer herself. They had chosen to come here, rather than join the wolves running northward.

ðə θɹi əpɪɹd bɪhaɪn hɑpɝ. pɛɹɪn lʊk tə ðɛm, ən sɛn kənsɝn. ðɪs wɪl bi deɪnʒɝəs. wʊlvz meɪ daɪ.

The three appeared behind Hopper. Perrin looked to them, and sent concern. This will be dangerous. Wolves may die.

ðɛɹ sɛndɪŋ bæk wɑz ɪnsɪstənt. sleɪɝ mʌs fɔl fəɹ wʌt hiz dʌn. təɡɛðɝ wəɹ stʃɹɔŋ.

Their sending back was insistent. Slayer must fall for what he has done. Together we are strong.

jʌŋ bʊl ʃəd nɑt hʌn sətʃ deɪnʒɝəs pɹeɪ əloʊn.

Young Bull should not hunt such dangerous prey alone.

hi nɑɾəd ɪn əɡɹimənt, lɛɾɪŋ ɪz hæmɝ əpɪɹ ɪn ɪz hænd. təɡɛðɝ, ðeɪ əpɹoʊtʃt ðə doʊm. pɛɹɪn wɔkt ɪndə ɪt wɪð ə sloʊ, dɪtɝmən stʃɹaɪd. hi ɹəfjuz tə fil wiknəs. hi wɑz stʃɹɔŋ. ðə doʊm wɑz nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ ɛɹ. hi bɪliv ðə wɝl tə bi əz i wɪʃt ɪt.

He nodded in agreement, letting his hammer appear in his hand. Together, they approached the dome. Perrin walked into it with a slow, determined stride. He refused to feel weakness. He was strong. The dome was nothing but air. He believed the world to be as he wished it.

hi stʌmbəld, bʌt pʊl θɹu ɪndə ði ɪnsaɪɾ ə ðə doʊm. ðə lændskeɪp fɛl feɪnli dɑɹkɝ hɪɹ. ɛldɝ tʃɹiz mɔɹ dɪm ə bɑɹk, ðə daɪɪŋ dɔɡfən-nɛl ə dipɝ ɡɹin əɹ bɹaʊn. hɑpɝ ən ðə pæk muv θɹu ðə doʊm ɝaʊn hɪm.

He stumbled, but pulled through into the inside of the dome. The landscape felt faintly darker here. Elder trees more dim of bark, the dying dogfen-nel a deeper green or brown. Hopper and the pack moved through the dome around him.

wi meɪk fəɹ ðə sɛntɝ, pɛɹɪn sɛnt. ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ə sikɹət tə dɪskʌvɝ, ɪɾəl pɹɑbli bi ðɛɹ.

We make for the center, Perrin sent. If there is a secret to discover, it will probably be there.

ðeɪ muv sloʊli θɹu ðə bɹʌʃ ən stænz ə tʃɹiz. pɛɹɪn ɪmpoʊzd ɪz wɪl əpɑn ði ɛɹiə ɝaʊn hɪm, ən ðə livz stɑp kɹæklɪŋ, widz ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ saɪlənt wən i bɹʌʃt əɡɛns ðɛm.

They moved slowly through the brush and stands of trees. Perrin imposed his will upon the area around him, and the leaves stopped crackling, weeds remaining silent when he brushed against them.

ðət wɑz nætʃɹəl. ɪt wɑz ðə weɪ θɪŋz ʃəd bi. soʊ ɪt wɑz.

That was natural. It was the way things should be. So it was.

ɪt wəd bi ə lɔŋ dɪstəns tə ðə sɛntɝ, soʊ pɛɹɪn bɪɡæn hɑpɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. nɑt dʒʌmps əɹ stɛps; hi sɪmpli stɑp biɪŋ ɪn wʌn pleɪs, əpɪɹɪŋ ɪn ə dɪfɹən loʊkeɪʃən. hi mæskt ɪz sɛnt, ðoʊ sleɪɝ wɑz nɑɾ ə wʊlf.

It would be a long distance to the center, so Perrin began hopping forward. Not jumps or steps; he simply stopped being in one place, appearing in a different location. He masked his scent, though Slayer was not a wolf.

ðəɾ əz tə bɪkʌm maɪ ædvæntɪdʒ, pɛɹɪn θɔɾ əz ðeɪ ɡɹu kloʊsɝ ən kloʊsɝ tə ðə sɛntɝ. hiz mɔɹ ɪkspɪɹiəns ðən aɪ. bʌɾ aɪ hæv ðə wʊlf wɪðɪn mi. ðɪs pleɪs ɪz əɹ dʒɹim. hiz ði ɪnveɪɾɝ.

That has to become my advantage, Perrin thought as they grew closer and closer to the center. He is more experienced than I. But I have the wolf within me. This place is our dream. He is the invader.

haʊɛvɝ skɪld i meɪ bi, hiz nɑt wʌn ʌv ʌs.

However skilled he may be, he is not one of us.

ən ðəɾ ɪz waɪ əl wɪn.

And that is why I will win.

pɛɹɪn smɛl sʌmθɪŋ; ən ɪnkɹisɪŋ ɹɔŋɡnəs ɪn ði ɛɹ. hi ən ðə wʊlvz kɹɛpt ʌp tə ə lɑɹdʒ hɪlsaɪd, ðən pɪɹɾ ɝaʊn ə klft ɪn ðə læn ðɛɹ. ə smɔl stæn ʌv ɛldɝ tʃɹiz stʊd dʒʌst əhɛd, pɝhæps fɪfti peɪsɪz əweɪ. lʊkɪŋ ʌp, hi dʒʌdʒ ðɪs tə bi vɛɹi nɪɹ ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə doʊm.

Perrin smelled something; an increasing wrongness in the air. He and the wolves crept up to a large hillside, then peered around a cleft in the land there. A small stand of elder trees stood just ahead, perhaps fifty paces away. Looking up, he judged this to be very near the center of the dome.

juzɪŋ ðə ʃɪftɪŋ weɪ ʌv wʊlvz, ðeɪd tʃɹævəl sɛvɹəl aʊɝz' wɝθ ʌv wɔkɪŋ ɪn ə fju mɪnəts.

Using the shifting way of wolves, they'd traveled several hours' worth of walking in a few minutes.

ðəɾ ɪz ɪt, pɛɹɪn sɛnt. hi lʊkt ət hɑpɝ. ðə wʊlfs sɛnt wɑz mæskt, bʌɾ i wɑz kʌmɪŋ tə noʊ wʊlvz wɛl ɪnʌf tə ɹid kənsɝn ɪn hɑpɝz stɛɹ ən ðə weɪ hi stʊd wɪð fɔɹɛlɛɡz bɛn dʒʌst ə fɹækʃən.

That is it, Perrin sent. He looked at Hopper. The wolf's scent was masked, but he was coming to know wolves well enough to read concern in Hoppers stare and the way he stood with forelegs bent just a fraction.

sʌmθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒd.

Something changed.

pɛɹɪn hɝd nʌθɪŋ. hi smɛl nʌθɪŋ. bʌɾ i fɛl sʌmθɪŋ, ə smɔl tʃɹɛmbəl ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

Perrin heard nothing. He smelled nothing. But he felt something, a small tremble in the ground.

ɡoʊ! hi sɛnt, vænɪʃɪŋ. hi əpɪɹd tɛn peɪsɪz əweɪ tə si ən æɹoʊ hɪt ðə hɪlsaɪd wɛɹ hid bɪn stændɪŋ. ðə ʃæf splɪɾ ə lɑɹdʒ stoʊn, ɪmbɛɾɪŋ ɪtsɛlf ɪn ðə ɹɑk ən ɝθ ʌp tə ɪts blæk flɛtʃɪŋ.

Go! he sent, vanishing. He appeared ten paces away to see an arrow hit the hillside where he'd been standing. The shaft split a large stone, embedding itself in the rock and earth up to its black fletching.

sleɪɝ stʊd fɹəm ə kɹaʊtʃ, tɝnɪŋ tə lʊk ət pɛɹɪn əkɹɔs ðə ʃɔɹɾ ɪkspæns ʌv ɡɹaʊnd. hɪz aɪz sim blæk, hɪz skwɛɹ feɪs ʃæɾoʊd, hɪz tɔl bɑɾi mʌskjəlɝ ən deɪnʒɝəs. əz i ɔfən dɪd, hi wɔɹ ə smaɪl. ɹɪli ə snɪɹ. hi wɔɹ lɛðɝ bɹitʃɪz ən ə ʃɝɾ ə dip ɡɹin, fɹɑɹmz ɪkspoʊzd, hæn hoʊldɪŋ ɪz wɪkəd baʊ ʌv dɑɹk wʊd. hi wɔɹ noʊ kwɪvɝ; hi kɹieɪɾəd æɹoʊz əz i niɾəd ðɛm.

Slayer stood from a crouch, turning to look at Perrin across the short expanse of ground. His eyes seemed black, his square face shadowed, his tall body muscular and dangerous. As he often did, he wore a smile. Really a sneer. He wore leather breeches and a shirt of deep green, forearms exposed, hand holding his wicked bow of dark wood. He wore no quiver; he created arrows as he needed them.

pɛɹɪn hɛld ɪz aɪz, stɛpɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ əz ɪf ɪn tʃælənʒ. ðət wɑz ɪnʌf ʌv ə dɪstʃɹækʃən fəɹ ðə wʊlvz tə ətæk fɹəm bɪhaɪnd.

Perrin held his eyes, stepping forward as if in challenge. That was enough of a distraction for the wolves to attack from behind.

sleɪɝ jɛld, spɪnɪŋ əz baʊnləs slæmd ɪndə hɪm. pɛɹɪn wɑz ðəɹ ɪn ən aɪɛblɪŋk, bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪz hæmɝ daʊn. sleɪɝ vænɪʃt, ən pɛɹɪn stʃɹʌk oʊnli ɝθ, bʌɾ i kɑɾ ə wɪf ʌv wɛɹ sleɪɝ hæd ɡɔn.

Slayer yelled, spinning as Boundless slammed into him. Perrin was there in an eyeblink, bringing his hammer down. Slayer vanished, and Perrin struck only earth, but he caught a whiff of where Slayer had gone.

hɪɹ? ðət sɛnt wɑz ə ðə seɪm pleɪs ðət pɛɹɪn wɑz. əlɑɹmd, hi lʊkt ʌp tə si sleɪɝ hʌvɝɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ dʒʌst əbʌv, dʒɹɔɪŋ ən æɹoʊ.

Here? That scent was of the same place that Perrin was. Alarmed, he looked up to see Slayer hovering in the air just above, drawing an arrow.

ðə wɪnd, pɛɹɪn θɔt. ɪts soʊ stʃɹɔŋ!

The wind, Perrin thought. It is so strong!

ði æɹoʊ lust, bʌɾ ə sʌɾən ɡʌs blu ɪt saɪdweɪz. ɪt sæŋk ɪndə ði ɝθ dʒʌs bɪsaɪd pɛɹɪn. hi dɪd nɑt flɪntʃ, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz hænz, hɪz oʊn baʊ əpɪɹɪŋ ɪn ðɛm. ɔlɹɛɾi dʒɹɔn, æɹoʊ ɪn pleɪs.

The arrow loosed, but a sudden gust blew it sideways. It sank into the earth just beside Perrin. He did not flinch, raising his hands, his own bow appearing in them. Already drawn, arrow in place.

sleɪɝz aɪz oʊpənd waɪɾɝ əz pɛɹɪn lust. sleɪɝ vænɪʃt, əpɪɹɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns əweɪ - ən hɑpɝ lɛpt ɑn ɪm fɹəm əbʌv, pʊlɪŋ ɪm tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. sleɪɝ kɝst wɪð ə ɡʌɾɝəl saʊnd, ðən vænɪʃt.

Slayer's eyes opened wider as Perrin loosed. Slayer vanished, appearing on the ground a short distance away - and Hopper leaped on him from above, pulling him to the ground. Slayer cursed with a guttural sound, then vanished.

hɪɹ, hɑpɝ sɛnt, ʃoʊɪŋ ə hɪlsaɪd.

Here, Hopper sent, showing a hillside.

pɛɹɪn wɑz ðəɹ ɪn ən ɪnstənt, hæmɝ ɪn ɪz hænz, ðə pæk wɪð hɪm. sleɪɝ ɹeɪzd ə sɔɹɾ ɪn wʌn hæn ən ə naɪf ɪn ði ʌðɝ əz pɛɹɪn ən ðə fɔɹ wʊlvz ətækt.

Perrin was there in an instant, hammer in his hands, the pack with him. Slayer raised a sword in one hand and a knife in the other as Perrin and the four wolves attacked.

pɛɹɪn hɪt fɝst, swɪŋɪŋ ɪz hæmɝ wɪð ə ɹɔɹ. sleɪɝ æktʃəli  sæŋk ɪndə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, əz ɪf ɪt wɝ lɪkwəd, dʒɹɑpɪŋ bɪniθ ði æks bloʊ. hi ɹæmd ɪz naɪf fɔɹwɝd  - pɪɹsɪŋ oʊk dænsɝz bɹɛst wɪð ə splæʃ ə skɑɹlət blʌɾ əz i swʌŋ tə ðə saɪd, slæʃɪŋ əkɹɔs spɑɹks' feɪs. oʊk dænsɝ dɪdnt ɡɛt taɪm tə haʊl; ʃi kəlæps tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ən sleɪɝ vænɪʃt əz pɛɹɪn bɹɔɾ ɪz hæmɝ bæk ɝaʊnd.

Perrin hit first, swinging his hammer with a roar. Slayer actually sank into the ground, as if it were liquid, dropping beneath the axe blow. He rammed his knife forward  - piercing Oak Dancer's breast with a splash of scarlet blood as he swung to the side, slashing across Sparks' face. Oak Dancer didn't get time to howl; she collapsed to the ground, and Slayer vanished as Perrin brought his hammer back around.

wɪmpɝɪŋ, spɑɹks sɛn æɡəni ən pænɪk ən vænɪʃt. hi wəd lɪv. bʌɾ oʊk dænsɝ wɑz dɛd.

Whimpering, Sparks sent agony and panic and vanished. He would live. But Oak Dancer was dead.

sleɪɝz sɛn hæd bɪn ðɪs pleɪs əɡɛn. pɛɹɪn tɝn tə smæʃ ɪz hæmɝ ɪndə sleɪɝz sɔɹɾ əz ɪt sɔt tə pɪɹs ɪm fɹəm bɪhaɪnd. əɡɛn ə lʊk ə sɝpɹaɪz fɹəm sleɪɝ. ðə mæn bɛɹɾ ɪz tiθ, pʊlɪŋ bæk, kipɪŋ ə wɛɹi aɪ ɑn ðə tu ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ wʊlvz, hɑpɝ ən baʊnləs. sleɪɝz fɔɹɑɹm wɑz bliɾɪŋ wɛɹ hɑpɝ hæd bɪɾən hɪm.

Slayer's scent had been this place again. Perrin turned to smash his hammer into Slayer's sword as it sought to pierce him from behind. Again a look of surprise from Slayer. The man bared his teeth, pulling back, keeping a wary eye on the two remaining wolves, Hopper and Boundless. Slayer's forearm was bleeding where Hopper had bitten him.

"haʊ ɪz ðə doʊm kɹieɪɾəd, luk?" pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ʃoʊ mi ən liv. əl lɛt jə dɪpɑɹt."

"How is the dome created, Luc?" Perrin said. "Show me and leave. I will let you depart."

"boʊld wɝdz, kʌb," sleɪɝ snɑɹəl bæk. "fɔɹ wʌn u dʒʌst wɑtʃt mi kɪl wʌn ə jəɹ pæk."

"Bold words, cub," Slayer snarled back. "For one who just watched me kill one of your pack."

baʊnləs haʊld ɪn æŋɡɝ, lipɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. pɛɹɪn ətækt ət ðə seɪm taɪm, bʌt ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪniθ əm tʃɹɛmbəld, ʃeɪkɪŋ.

Boundless howled in anger, leaping forward. Perrin attacked at the same time, but the ground beneath them trembled, shaking.

noʊ, pɛɹɪn θɔt. hɪz oʊn fʊɾɪŋ bɪkeɪm fɝm əz baʊnləs wɑz nɑk tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

No, Perrin thought. His own footing became firm as Boundless was knocked to the ground.

sleɪɝ lʌnʒd, ən pənɪn ɹeɪzd ɪz hæmɝ tə blɑk - bʌt sleɪɝz wɛpən tɝn ɪndə smoʊk ən pæst ɹaɪt θɹu ɪt, səlɪɾəfaɪɪŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. wɪð ə jɛlp, pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd tə pʊl bæk, bʌt ðə bleɪd skɔɹɾ ɪm əkɹɔs ðə tʃɛst, kʌɾɪŋ θɹu hɪz ʃɝɾ ən livɪŋ ə ɡæʃ fɹəm wʌn ɑɹm tə ði ʌðɝ. ɪt flɛɹd wɪð peɪn.

Slayer lunged, and Penin raised his hammer to block - but Slayer's weapon turned into smoke and passed right through it, solidifying on the other side. With a yelp, Perrin tried to pull back, but the blade scored him across the chest, cutting through his shirt and leaving a gash from one arm to the other. It flared with pain.

pɛɹɪn ɡæspt, stʌmbəlɪŋ bækwɝd. sleɪɝ dʒɹoʊv fɔɹwɝd, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ kɹæʃt ɪndə hɪm fɹəm əbʌv. hɑpɝ. wʌns əɡɛn ðə ɡɹɪzəld wʊlf bɔɹ sleɪɝ tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɡɹoʊlɪŋ, fæŋz flæʃɪŋ.

Perrin gasped, stumbling backward. Slayer drove forward, but something crashed into him from above. Hopper. Once again the grizzled wolf bore Slayer to the ground, growling, fangs flashing.

sleɪɝ kɝst ən kɪk ðə wʊlf fɹi. hɑpɝ wɛn flaɪɪŋ wɪð ə wɪmpɝ ə peɪn, tɔst səm twɛnti fit. tə ðə saɪd, baʊnləs hæd kɑz ði ɝθ tə stɑp ɹʌmbəlɪŋ, bʌt hæd hɝɾ ɪz pɔ.

Slayer cursed and kicked the wolf free. Hopper went flying with a whimper of pain, tossed some twenty feet. To the side, Boundless had caused the earth to stop rumbling, but had hurt his paw.

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk hɪmsɛlf fɹi ʌv ɪz peɪn. sleɪɝ wɑz stʃɹɔŋ ɪn kəntʃɹoʊl oʊvɝ ðɪs wɝld. pɛɹɪnz hæmɝ fɛl slʌɡɪʃ wɛnɛvɝ i swʌŋ, əz ɪf ði ɛɹ ɪtsɛlf wɝ θɪkɝ.

Perrin shook himself free of his pain. Slayer was strong in control over this world. Perrin's hammer felt sluggish whenever he swung, as if the air itself were thicker.

sleɪɝ hæd smaɪld wən hid kɪld oʊk dænsɝ. pɛɹɪn muv fɔɹwɝd, ɛnɹeɪdʒd. sleɪɝ wɑz ɑn ɪz hɛɾ ən ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ bæk daʊn ðə hɪlsaɪd, təwɔɹd ðə tʃɹiz. pɛɹɪn tʃeɪst æftɝ hɪm, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ɪz waʊnd. ɪt wɑzn bæɾ ɪnʌf tə stɑp hɪm, ðoʊ hi dɪɾ ɪmædʒən ə bændɪdʒ ɪn pleɪs ɑn ɪt, hɪz kloʊðɪŋ mɛndɪɾ ən taɪɾ əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛs tə stæntʃ ðə blʌd.

Slayer had smiled when he'd killed Oak Dancer. Perrin moved forward, enraged. Slayer was on his het and retreating back down the hillside, toward the trees. Perrin chased after him, ignoring his wound. It wasn't bad enough to stop him, though he did imagine a bandage in place on it, his clothing mended and tight against his chest to stanch the blood.

hi ɛntɝd ðə tʃɹiz dʒʌs bɪhaɪn sleɪɝ. ðə bɹæntʃəz kloʊzd oʊvɝhɛd, ən vaɪnz wɪp fɹəm ðə dɑɹkənd ʃædoʊz. pɛɹɪn dɪdn bɑðɝ faɪɾɪŋ əm ɔf. vaɪnz dɪdn muv laɪk ðæt. ðeɪ kʊdn tʌtʃ hɪm. ʃʊɹ ɪnʌf, əz sun əz ðeɪ ɡɹu kloʊs, ðeɪ wɪðɝɾ ən fɛl stɪl.

He entered the trees just behind Slayer. The branches closed overhead, and vines whipped from the darkened shadows. Perrin didn't bother fighting them off. Vines didn't move like that. They couldn't touch him. Sure enough, as soon as they grew close, they withered and fell still.

sleɪɝ kɝst, ðən bɪɡæn tə muv ɪn bɝstɪŋ stɛps, livɪŋ ə blɝ bɪhaɪn hɪm. pɛɹɪn fɑloʊd, ɛnhænsɪŋ ɪz oʊn spid.

Slayer cursed, then began to move in bursting steps, leaving a blur behind him. Perrin followed, enhancing his own speed.

pɛɹɪn dɪdn kɑnʃəsli meɪk ðə dɪsɪʒən tə dʒɹɑp tə fɔɹ lɛɡz, bʌɾ ɪn ə hɑɹtbiɾ i hæd dʌn soʊ, tʃeɪsɪŋ æftɝ sleɪɝ əz hid hʌntəd ðə waɪt stæɡ.

Perrin didn't consciously make the decision to drop to four legs, but in a heartbeat he had done so, chasing after Slayer as he'd hunted the white stag.

sleɪɝ wɑz fæst, bʌɾ i wɑz mɪɹli ə mæn. jʌŋ bʊl wɑz pɑɹɾ ə ðə læn ɪtsɛlf, ðə tʃɹiz, ðə bɹʌʃ, ðə stoʊnz, ðə ɹɪvɝz. hi muv θɹu ðə fɔɹəs laɪk ə bɹiz bloʊɪŋ θɹu ə hɑloʊ, kipɪŋ peɪs wɪð sleɪɝ ɡeɪnɪŋ ɑn hɪm. itʃ lɔɡ ɪn sleɪɝz weɪ wɑz ən əbstʃɹʌkʃən, bʌt tə jʌŋ bʊl itʃ wɑz dʒʌst ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə pæθweɪ.

Slayer was fast, but he was merely a man. Young Bull was part of the land itself, the trees, the brush, the stones, the rivers. He moved through the forest like a breeze blowing through a hollow, keeping pace with Slayer gaining on him. Each log in Slayer's way was an obstruction, but to Young Bull each was just a part of the pathway.

jʌŋ bʊl lɛp tə ðə saɪd, pɔz əɡɛns ðə tʃɹi tʃɹʌŋks pʊʃɪŋ ɪm wən i tɝnd. hi sɔɹd, oʊvɝ stoʊnz ən ɹɑks, lipɪŋ fɹəm wʌn tə ðə nɛkst, livɪŋ ə blɝ ɪn ði ɛɹ bɪhaɪn hɪm.

Young Bull leaped to the side, paws against the tree trunks pushing him when he turned. He soared, over stones and rocks, leaping from one to the next, leaving a blur in the air behind him.

sleɪɝ smɛld əfɹeɪd fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. hi vænɪʃt, bʌt jʌŋ bʊl fɑloʊd, əpɪɹɪŋ ɪn ðə fild wɛɹ ði ɑɹmi kæmpt, bɪniθ ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv ðə lɑɹdʒ stoʊn sɔɹd. sleɪɝ lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ən kɝst, vænɪʃɪŋ əɡɛn.

Slayer smelled afraid for the first time. He vanished, but Young Bull followed, appearing in the field where the army camped, beneath the shadow of the large stone sword. Slayer looked over his shoulder and cursed, vanishing again.

jʌŋ bʊl fɑloʊd. ðə pleɪs wɛɹ ðə waɪtkloʊks hæd meɪd kæmp.

Young Bull followed. The place where the Whitecloaks had made camp.

ðə tɑp ʌv ə smɔl plætoʊ.

The top of a small plateau.

ə kævɝn bɝoʊɾ ɪndə ə hɪlsaɪd.

A cavern burrowed into a hillside.

ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə smɔl leɪk. jʌŋ bʊl ɹæn əpɑn ðə sɝfəs wɪð iz.

The middle of a small lake. Young Bull ran upon the surface with ease.

itʃ pleɪs sleɪɝ wɛnt, hi fɑloʊd, itʃ moʊmənt ɡɹoʊɪŋ kloʊsɝ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm fəɹ sɔɹdz, hæmɝz, əɹ baʊz. ðɪs wɑz ə tʃeɪs, ən jʌŋ bʊl wɑz ðə hʌntɝ ðɪs taɪm. hi -  hi lɛpt ɪndə ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə fild, ən sleɪɝ wɑzn ðɛɹ. hi smɛld wɛɹ ðə mæn hæd ɡɔn, haʊɛvɝ. hi fɑloʊd hɪm, ən əpɪɹɾ ɪn ənʌðɝ pleɪs ɑn ðə seɪm fild. ðəɹ wɝ sɛns ə pleɪsəz ɔl ɝaʊnd. wʌt?

Each place Slayer went, he followed, each moment growing closer. There was no time for swords, hammers, or bows. This was a chase, and Young Bull was the hunter this time. He -  He leaped into the middle of a field, and Slayer wasn't there. He smelled where the man had gone, however. He followed him, and appeared in another place on the same field. There were scents of places all around. What?

pɛɹɪn keɪm tə ə stɑp, buɾɪd fit ɡɹaɪndɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hi spʌn, bɪwɪldɝd. sleɪɝ mʌst əv hɑp kwɪkli θɹu sɛvɹəl dɪfɹən pleɪsəz ɪn ðə seɪm fild, kənfjuzɪŋ ɪz tʃɹeɪl. pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd tə dətɝmən wɪtʃ wʌn tə fɑloʊ, bʌt ðeɪ ɔl feɪɾəd ən ɪntɝmɪkst.

Perrin came to a stop, booted feet grinding into the ground. He spun, bewildered. Slayer must have hopped quickly through several different places in the same field, confusing his trail. Perrin tried to determine which one to follow, but they all faded and intermixed.

"bɝn hɪm!" hi sɛd.

"Burn him!" he said.

jʌŋ bʊl, ə sɛndɪŋ keɪm. spɑɹks. ðə wʊlf hæd bɪn wundəd, bʌɾ i hædn flɛɾ əz pɛɹɪn hæɾ əsumd. hi sɛn ən ɪmədʒ ʌv ə θɪn sɪlvɝ ɹɑd, tu hændspænz haɪ, spɹaʊɾɪŋ fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə stæn ə dɔɡfɛnəl.

Young Bull, a sending came. Sparks. The wolf had been wounded, but he hadn't fled as Perrin had assumed. He sent an image of a thin silver rod, two handspans high, sprouting from the ground in the middle of a stand of dogfennel.

pɛɹɪn smaɪld ən sɛn hɪmsɛlf ðɛɹ. ðə wundəd wʊlf, stɪl tʃɹeɪlɪŋ blʌd, leɪ bɪsaɪd ði ɑbʒɛkt. ɪt wɑz ɑbviəsli səm sɔɹɾ ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil. ɪt pɪɹd tə bi meɪɾ ə dʌzənz əpɑn dʌzənz ə faɪn, waɪɹlaɪk bɪts ə mɛɾəl woʊvən təɡɛðɝ laɪk ə bɹeɪd. ɪt wɑz əbaʊt tu hændspænz lɔŋ, ən wɑz dʒɹɪvən pɔɪn fɝst ɪndə ðə sɑft ɝθ.

Perrin smiled and sent himself there. The wounded wolf, still trailing blood, lay beside the object. It was obviously some sort of ter'angreal. it ppeared to be made of dozens upon dozens of fine, wirelike bits of metal woven together like a braid. It was about two handspans long, and was driven point first into the soft earth.

pɛɹɪn pʊld ɪt fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ðə doʊm dɪdn vænɪʃ. hi tɝn ðə spaɪk oʊvɝ ɪn ɪz hænd, bʌt hæd noʊ aɪdiə haʊ tə meɪk ðə doʊm stɑp. hi wɪl ðə spaɪk tə tʃeɪnʒ ɪndə sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, ə stɪk, ən wɑz ʃɑkt wən i wɑz ɹɪbʌft. ði ɑbʒɛkt æktʃəli  sim tə pʊʃ ɪz maɪn əweɪ.

Perrin pulled it from the ground. The dome didn't vanish. He turned the spike over in his hand, but had no idea how to make the dome stop. He willed the spike to change into something else, a stick, and was shocked when he was rebuffed. The object actually seemed to push his mind away.

ɪts hɪɹ ɪn ɪts ɹiæləɾi, spɑɹks sɛnt. ðə sɛndɪŋ tʃɹaɪd tə kənveɪ sʌmθɪŋ, ðət ði aɪɾəm wɑz sʌmhaʊ mɔɹ ɹil ðən moʊs θɪŋz ɪn ðə dʒɹim wɝld.

It is here in its reality, Sparks sent. The sending tried to convey something, that the item was somehow more real than most things in the dream world.

pɛɹɪn dɪdn əv taɪm tə wʌndɝ əbaʊɾ ɪt. fɝs pɹaɪɔɹəɾi wɑz tə muv ðə doʊm, ɪf i kʊd, əweɪ fɹəm wɛɹ ɪz pipəl kæmpt. hi sɛn hɪmsɛlf tə ði ɛdʒ wɛɹ hiɾ ɛntɝd ðə doʊm.

Perrin didn't have time to wonder about it. First priority was to move the dome, if he could, away from where his people camped. He sent himself to the edge where he'd entered the dome.

əz hid hoʊpt, ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə doʊm muvd wɪð hɪm. hi wɑz ət ðə pleɪs wɛɹ hiɾ ɛntɝd, bʌt ði ɛdʒ ə ðə doʊm hæd tʃeɪnʒd pəzɪʃənz, ðə sɛntɝ fɔlɪŋ wɛɹɛvɝ pɛɹɪn wɑz stændɪŋ. ðə doʊm stɪl dɑməneɪɾəd ðə skaɪ, ɪkstɛndɪŋ fɑɹ ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən.

As he'd hoped, the center of the dome moved with him. He was at the place where he'd entered, but the edge of the dome had changed positions, the center falling wherever Perrin was standing. The dome still dominated the sky, extending far in every direction.

jʌŋ bʊl, spɑɹks sɛnt. aɪm fɹi. ðə ɹɔŋɡnəs ɪz ɡɔn.

Young Bull, Sparks sent. I am free. The wrongness is gone.

ɡoʊ, pɛɹɪn sɛnt. əl teɪk ðɪs ən ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ʌv ɪt. itʃ ə ju, ɡoʊ ə dɪfɹən dɝɛkʃən ən haʊl.

Go, Perrin sent. I'll take this and get rid of it. Each of you, go a different direction and howl.

kənfjuz sleɪɝ.

Confuse Slayer.

ðə wʊlvz ɹɪspɑndɪd. ə pɑɹɾ ə pɛɹɪn, ðə hʌntɝ ɪnsaɪɾ ə hɪm, wɑz fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd ət nɑt hævɪŋ bɪn eɪbəl tə dɪfit sleɪɝ dɝɛkli. bʌt ðɪs wɑz mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt.

The wolves responded. A part of Perrin, the hunter inside of him, was frustrated at not having been able to defeat Slayer directly. But this was more important.

hi tʃɹaɪd tə ʃɪf tə sʌmpleɪs dɪstənt, bʌɾ ɪt dɪdnt wɝk. ɪɾ əpɪɹd ðəɾ ivən ðoʊ hi wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, hi wɑz stɪl baʊn baɪ ðə doʊmz ɹulz.

He tried to shift to someplace distant, but it didn't work. It appeared that even though he was holding the ter'angreal, he was still bound by the dome's rules.

soʊ, ɪnstɛd, hi ʃɪftəɾ əz fɑɹ əz i kʊd. nil hæd sɛɾ ɪt wɑz əbaʊt fɔɹ liɡz fɹəm ðɛɹ kæmp tə ðə pɝɪməɾɝ, soʊ pɛɹɪn ʃɪftəd ðət fɑɹ tə ðə nɔɹθ, ðən dɪd soʊ əɡɛn, ən əɡɛn. ði ɪnɔɹməs doʊm muvd wɪð hɪm, ɪts sɛntɝ ɔlweɪz əpɪɹɪŋ dɝɛkli oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd.

So, instead, he shifted as far as he could. Neald had said it was about four leagues from their camp to the perimeter, so Perrin shifted that far to the north, then did so again, and again. The enormous dome moved with him, its center always appearing directly over his head.

hi wəd teɪk ðə spaɪk sʌmpleɪs seɪf, sʌmpleɪs wɛɹ sleɪɝ kʊdn faɪn ɪt.

He would take the spike someplace safe, someplace where Slayer couldn't find it.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾisɪks


CHAPTER 36

ən ɪnvɪteɪʃən


An Invitation

ɛɡwin əpɪɹɾ ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd wɛɹɪŋ ə pjʊɹ waɪt ɡaʊn soʊn wɪð ɡoʊldən θɹɛɾ ət ðə simz ən ɪn ði ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi, taɪni bɪts ʌv əbsɪɾiən - pɑlɪʃt bʌɾ ənʃeɪpt - soʊn ɪn ɡoʊld əlɔŋ ðə tʃɹɪm ə ðə bɑɾəs. ə tɛɹəbli ɪmpɹæktəkəl dʒɹɛs tə oʊn, bʌt ðət dɪdn mæɾɝ hɪɹ.

Egwene appeared in Tel'aran'rhiod wearing a pure white gown sewn with golden thread at the seams and in the embroidery, tiny bits of obsidian - polished but unshaped - sewn in gold along the trim of the bodice. A terribly impractical dress to own, but that didn't matter here.

ʃi wɑz ɪn əɹ tʃeɪmbɝz, wɛɹ ʃid wɑntəd tə əpɪɹ. ʃi sɛn hɝsɛlf tə ðə hɔlweɪ aʊtsaɪd ðə jɛloʊ ədʒɑz kɔɹɾɝz. nɪneɪiv wɑz ðɛɹ, ɑɹmz foʊldəd, hɝ dʒɹɛs ə fɑɹ mɔɹ sɛnsəbəl tæn ən bɹaʊn.

She was in her chambers, where she'd wanted to appear. She sent herself to the hallway outside the Yellow Ajah's quarters. Nynaeve was there, arms folded, her dress a far more sensible tan and brown.

"aɪ wɑn jə tə bi vɛɹi kɛɹfəl," ɛɡwin sɛd. "jɔɹ ði oʊnli wʌn hɪɹ u hæz feɪst wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən dɝɛkli, ən jə ɔlsoʊ hæv mɔɹ ɪkspɪɹiəns wɪð tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd ðən ði ʌðɝz. ɪf mɛsænə ɝaɪvz, jə ɑɹ tə lid ði ətæk."

"I want you to be very careful," Egwene said. "You're the only one here who has faced one of the Forsaken directly, and you also have more experience with Tel'aran'rhiod than the others. If Mesaana arrives, you are to lead the attack."

"aɪ θɪŋk aɪ kən mænədʒ ðæt," nɪneɪiv sɛd, ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɝ maʊθ ɹaɪzɪŋ. jɛs, ʃi kəd mænədʒ ɪt. hoʊldɪŋ nɪneɪiv bæk fɹəm ətækɪŋ, ðət wʊɾə bɪn ðə dɪfəkəl tæsk.

"I think I can manage that," Nynaeve said, the corners of her mouth rising. Yes, she could manage it. Holding Nynaeve back from attacking, that would have been the difficult task.

ɛɡwin nɑɾəd, ən nɪneɪiv vænɪʃt. ʃid ɹɪmeɪn hɪɾən nɪɹ ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ mɛsænə əɹ blæk sɪstɝz kʌmɪŋ tə spaɪ ɑn ðə dəkɔɪ miɾɪŋ hæpənɪŋ ðɛɹ. ɛɡwin sɛn hɝsɛlf tə ənʌðɝ pleɪs ɪn ðə sɪɾi, ə hɔl wɛɹ ðə tʃɹu miɾɪŋ wəd teɪk pleɪs bɪtwin hɝsɛlf, ðə waɪz wʌnz ən ðə wɪndfɪndɝz.

Egwene nodded, and Nynaeve vanished. She'd remain hidden near the Hall of the Tower, watching for Mesaana or Black sisters coming to spy on the decoy meeting happening there. Egwene sent herself to another place in the city, a hall where the true meeting would take place between herself, the Wise Ones and the Windfinders.

tɑɹ vəlɑn hæd sɛvɹəl miɾɪŋ hɔlz juz fəɹ mjuzɪkəl pɝfɔɹmənsəz əɹ fəɹ ɡæðɝɪŋz. ðɪs wʌn, noʊn əz ðə mjuzɪʃənz weɪ, wɑz pɝfək fəɹ əɹ nidz. ɪt wɑz pɹɪsaɪsli dɛkɝeɪɾəd wɪð lɛðɝlif wʊd pænəlɪŋ kɑɹv tə lʊk laɪk ə fɔɹəst ə tʃɹiz laɪnɪŋ ðə wɔlz. ðə tʃɛɹz wɝ ʌv ə mætʃɪŋ wʊd, sʌŋ baɪ oʊɡiɝ, itʃ wʌn ə θɪŋ ə bjuɾi.

Tar Valon had several meeting halls used for musical performances or for gatherings. This one, known as the Musician's Way, was perfect for her needs. It was precisely decorated with leatherleaf wood paneling carved to look like a forest of trees lining the walls. The chairs were of a matching wood, sung by Ogier, each one a thing of beauty.

ðeɪ wɝ ɝeɪnʒd ɪn ðə ɹaʊnd, feɪsɪŋ ə sɛntʃɹəl poʊɾiəm. ðə doʊm silɪŋ wɑz ɪnsɛt wɪð mɑɹbəl kɑɹv tə lʊk laɪk stɑɹz ɪn ðə skaɪ. ði ɔɹnəmɛnteɪʃən wɑz ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl; bjuɾəfəl wɪθaʊt biɪŋ ɡɔɾi.

They were arranged in the round, facing a central podium. The domed ceiling was inset with marble carved to look like stars in the sky. The ornamentation was remarkable; beautiful without being gaudy.

ðə waɪz wʌnz hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɝaɪvd - æmɪz, bɛɹ ən məleɪn, huz bɛli wɑz ɡɹeɪt wɪð ðə leɪɾɝ steɪdʒəz ə pɹɛɡnənsi. ðɪs æmfəθiəɾɝ hæɾ ə ɹeɪz plætfɔɹm əlɔŋ wʌn saɪd wɛɹ ðə waɪz wʌnz kəd sɪt kʌmfɝɾəbli ɑn ðə flɔɹ, jɛt ðoʊz siɾəd ɪn ðə tʃɛɹz wəd nɑt lʊk daʊn ət ðɛm.

The Wise Ones had already arrived - Amys, Bair and Melaine, whose belly was great with the later stages of pregnancy. This amphitheater had a raised platform along one side where the Wise Ones could sit comfortably on the floor, yet those seated in the chairs would not look down at them.

lin, jukɪɝi ən sin sæɾ ɪn tʃɛɹz feɪsɪŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz, itʃ wɛɹɪŋ wʌn ʌv ɪleɪnz kɑpid dʒɹim tɛɹæŋɡɹil, lʊkɪŋ ʃæɾoʊi ən ɪnsəbstæntʃəl. ɪleɪn wɑz səpoʊz tə bi ðɛɹ, tu, bʌt ʃi hæd wɔɹnd ʃi maɪɾ əv tʃɹʌbəl tʃænəlɪŋ ɪnʌf tə ɛntɝ tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd.

Leane, Yukiri and Seaine sat in chairs facing the Wise Ones, each wearing one of Elayne's copied dream ter'angreal, looking shadowy and insubstantial. Elayne was supposed to be there, too, but she had warned she might have trouble channeling enough to enter Tel'aran'rhiod.

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən waɪz wʌnz ɪnspɛktɪd wʌn ənʌðɝ wɪð ə nɪɹli pælpəbəl ɛɹ ə hɑstɪləɾi. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kənsɪɾɝd ðə waɪz wʌnz tə bi pʊɹli tʃɹeɪnd waɪldɝz; ðə waɪz wʌnz, ɪn tɝn, θɔt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ fʊl ə ðɛmsɛlvz.

The Aes Sedai and Wise Ones inspected one another with a nearly palpable air of hostility. The Aes Sedai considered the Wise Ones to be poorly trained wilders; the Wise Ones, in turn, thought the Aes Sedai full of themselves.

əz ɛɡwin ɝaɪvd, ə ɡɹup ʌv wɪmən wɪð dɑɹk skɪn ən blæk hɛɹ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə vɛɹi sɛntɝ ə ðə ɹum. ðə wɪndndɝz ɡlænst əbaʊt səspɪʃəsli. sɪuən hæd sɛd, fɹəm əɹ taɪm titʃɪŋ ðɛm, ðət ðə si foʊk hæd lɛdʒənz əbaʊt tɛlɝɑnɹhiəɾ ən ɪts deɪnʒɝz. ðət hædn stɑp ðə wɪndndɝz fɹəm lɝnɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðeɪ kəɾ əbaʊt ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz ðə moʊmən ðeɪ dɪskʌvɝd ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ɹil.

As Egwene arrived, a group of women with dark skin and black hair appeared in the very center of the room. The Windhnders glanced about suspiciously. Siuan had said, from her time teaching them, that the Sea Folk had legends about Tel'aran'rhiod and its dangers. That hadn't stopped the Windhnders from learning everything they could about the World of Dreams the moment they discovered that it was real.

ət ðə hɛɾ ə ðə wɪndndɝz wɑz ə tɔl, slɛndɝ wʊmən wɪð nɛɹoʊ aɪz ən ə lɔŋ nɛk, numɝəs mədæljənz ɑn ðə faɪn tʃeɪn kənɛktɪŋ əɹ noʊz tə hɝ lɛft ɪɹ. ðət wəd bi ʃilɪn, wʌn ə ðoʊz nɪneɪiv hæd toʊld ɛɡwin əbaʊt. ðə θɹi ʌðɝ wɪndfɪndɝz ɪnkluɾəd ə dɪɡnəfaɪd wʊmən wɪð waɪt lɑks ə hɛɹ woʊvən əmʌŋ əɹ blæk. ðət wəd bi ɹɪneɪl, əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə lɛɾɝz ðeɪd sɛn ən nɪneɪivz ɪnstʃɹʌkʃən. ɛɡwin hæd bɪn lɛd tə bɪliv ʃid bi fɔɹmoʊst əmʌŋ ðɛm, bʌt ʃi sim səbsɝviən tə ði ʌðɝz. hæd ʃi lɔst əɹ pleɪs əz wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps?

At the head of the Windhnders was a tall, slender woman with narrow eyes and a long neck, numerous medallions on the fine chain connecting her nose to her left ear. That would be Shielyn, one of those Nynaeve had told Egwene about. The three other Windfinders included a dignified woman with white locks of hair woven among her black. That would be Renaile, according to the letters they'd sent and Nynaeve's instruction. Egwene had been led to believe she'd be foremost among them, but she seemed subservient to the others. Had she lost her place as Windfinder to the Mistress of the Ships?

"wɛlkəm," ɛɡwin sɛd tə ðɛm. "pliz, sɪt." wɪl stænd," ʃilɪn sɛd. hɝ vɔɪs wɑz tɛns.

"Welcome," Egwene said to them. "Please, sit." We will stand," Shielyn said. Her voice was tense.

'hu ɑɹ ðiz wʌnz, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ?" æmɪz æskt. "tʃɪlʒɹən ʃəd nɑt bi vɪzəɾɪŋ tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. ɪts nɑɾ ən əbændən sænd-bædʒɝz dɛn tə bi ɪksplɔɹd."

'Who are these ones, Egwene al'Vere?" Amys asked. "Children should not be visiting Tel'aran'rhiod. It is not an abandoned sand-badger's den to be explored."

"tʃɪlʒɹən?" ʃilɪn æskt.

"Children?" Shielyn asked.

"ju ɑɹ tʃɪlʒɹən hɪɹ, wɛtləndɝ."

"You are children here, wetlander."

"æmɪz, pliz," ɛɡwin kʌɾ ɪn. "aɪ lɛn əm tɛɹæŋɡɹil tə kʌm hɪɹ. ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi."

"Amys, please," Egwene cut in. "I lent them ter'angreal to come here. It was necessary."

"wi cʊɾə mɛɾ aʊtsaɪd ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz," bɛɹ sɛd. "tʃuzɪŋ ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə bæɾəlfild maɪɾ əv bɪn seɪfɝ."

"We could have met outside the World of Dreams," Bair said. "Choosing the middle of a battlefield might have been safer."

ɪndid, ðə wɪndfɪndɝz wɝ vɛɹi ʌnfəmɪljɝ wɪð ðə wɝkɪŋz ə tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. ðɛɹ bɹaɪt kloʊðɪŋ piɹiɑɾɪkəli tʃeɪnʒd kʌlɝz - ɪn fækt, əz ɛɡwin wɑtʃt, ɹɪneɪlz blaʊs vænɪʃt ɪntaɪɝli. ɛɡwin faʊn hɝsɛlf blʌʃɪŋ, ðoʊ ɪleɪn hæd mɛnʃən ðət wən ɑn ðə weɪvz, si foʊk mɛn ən wɪmən boʊθ wɝkt wɛɹɪŋ nɑɾ ə stɪtʃ əbʌv ðə weɪs ðə blaʊs wɑz bæk ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ. ðɛɹ dʒuəlɹi ɔlsoʊ simd ɪn ɔlmoʊs kɑnstən flʌks.

Indeed, the Windfinders were very unfamiliar with the workings of Tel'aran'rhiod. Their bright clothing periodically changed colors - in fact, as Egwene watched, Renaile's blouse vanished entirely. Egwene found herself blushing, though Elayne had mentioned that when on the waves, Sea Folk men and women both worked wearing not a stitch above the waist The blouse was back a moment later. Their jewelry also seemed in almost constant flux.

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ ɹizənz aɪ hæv dʌn wʌɾ aɪ hæv dʌn, æmɪz," ɛɡwin sɛd stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ ən siɾɪŋ hɝsɛlf. "ʃilɪn dɪn sæbʊɹə naɪt wɔɾɝz ən əɹ sɪstɝz əv bɪn toʊld ə ðə deɪnʒɝz ə ðɪs pleɪs, ən əv æksɛptɪd ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi fəɹ ðɛɹ oʊn seɪfti."

"There are reasons I have done what I have done, Amys," Egwene said striding forward and seating herself. "Shielyn din Sabura Night Waters and her sisters have been told of the dangers of this place, and have accepted responsibility for their own safety."

"ə lɪɾəl laɪk ɡɪvɪŋ ə faɪɝbɹæn ən ə kæsk ʌv ɔɪl tə ə tʃaɪld," məleɪn mʌɾɝd, "æn kleɪmɪŋ juv ɡɪvən ɪm ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi fəɹ ɪz oʊn seɪfti."

"A little like giving a firebrand and a cask of oil to a child," Melaine muttered, "and claiming you've given him responsibility for his own safety."

"mʌst wi ɛndʒjʊɹ ðɪs skwɑbəlɪŋ, mʌðɝ?" jukɪɝi æskt.

"Must we endure this squabbling, Mother?" Yukiri asked.

ɛɡwin tʊk ə kɑmɪŋ bɹɛθ. "pliz, jə ɑɹ liɾɝz ə jəɹ sɛpɹət pipəlz, wɪmən wɪð ɹɛpjəteɪʃənz fəɹ ɡɹeɪt wɪzdəm ən əkjuəɾi. kən wi nɑɾ ət lis bi sɪvəl wɪð wʌn ənʌðɝ?" ɛɡwin tɝn tə ðə si foʊk. "wɪnd-faɪndɝ ʃilɪn, juv æksɛptɪd maɪ ɪnvɪteɪʃən. ʃʊɹli jəl naʊ nɑt ɹɪdʒɛk maɪ hɑspətæləɾi baɪ stændɪŋ θɹu ði ɪntaɪɝ miɾɪŋ?"

Egwene took a calming breath. "Please, you are leaders of your separate peoples, women with reputations for great wisdom and acuity. Can we not at least be civil with one another?" Egwene turned to the Sea Folk. "Wind-finder Shielyn, you have accepted my invitation. Surely you will now not reject my hospitality by standing through the entire meeting?"

ðə wʊmən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ʃi hæɾ ə pɹaʊɾ ɛɹ tə hɝ; ɹisən ɪntɝækʃən bɪtwin ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə si foʊk hæd meɪɾ əɹ boʊld. ɛɡwin ʃʌv daʊn ə stæb ʌv æŋɡɝ; ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk ðə dɪteɪlz ə ðə bɑɹɡən ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə boʊl ʌv wɪnz. nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn ʃʊɾə noʊn bɛɾɝ. ðeɪ -  noʊ. ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv hæd dʌn ðɛɹ bɛst, ən hæd bɪn ʌndɝ ənjuʒəwəl stʃɹeɪn. bɪsaɪdz, bɑɹɡɪnɪŋ wɪð ðə si foʊk wɑz sɛd tə bi oʊnli wʌn stɛp seɪfɝ ðən bɑɹɡɪnɪŋ wɪð ðə dɑɹk wʌn hɪmsɛlf.

The woman hesitated. She had a proud air to her; recent interaction between the Aes Sedai and the Sea Folk had made her bold. Egwene shoved down a stab of anger; she did not like the details of the bargain regarding the Bowl of Winds. Nynaeve and Elayne should have known better. They -  No. Elayne and Nynaeve had done their best, and had been under unusual strain. Besides, bargaining with the Sea Folk was said to be only one step safer than bargaining with the Dark One himself.

ʃilɪn faɪnəli ɡeɪv ə kɝt nɑd, ðoʊ hɝ blaʊs tʃeɪnʒd kʌlɝz sɛvɹəl taɪmz waɪl ʃi kənsɪɾɝd, sɛɾəlɪŋ ɑn kɹɪmzən, ən əɹ dʒuəlɹi kɛp vænɪʃɪŋ ən ɹiəpɪɹɪŋ. "vɛɹi wɛl. wəɹ ɪndɛɾəd tə jə fəɹ ðə ɡɪft ə ðɪs pleɪs, ən wɪl əɡɹi tə jəɹ hɑspətæləɾi." ʃi sæt daʊn ɪn ə tʃɛɹ əpɑɹt fɹəm ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ðoʊz wɪð əɹ dɪɾ əz wɛl.

Shielyn finally gave a curt nod, though her blouse changed colors several times while she considered, settling on crimson, and her jewelry kept vanishing and reappearing. "Very well. We are indebted to you for the gift of this place, and will agree to your hospitality." She sat down in a chair apart from Egwene and the other Aes Sedai, and those with her did as well.

ɛɡwin ɹilist ə sɑf bɹɛθ ə ɹɪlif ən sʌmən sɛvɹəl smɔl teɪbəlz wɪð kʌps ʌv wɔɹm, fɹeɪɡɹən ti. ðə wɪndfɪndɝz dʒʌmpt, ðoʊ ðə waɪz wʌnz dɪdn bæɾ ən aɪ. æmɪz dɪd, haʊɛvɝ, ɹitʃ fəɹ əɹ kʌp ən tʃeɪnʒ ðə ɹoʊz-blɑsəm ti tə sʌmθɪŋ wɪð ə mʌtʃ dɑɹkɝ kæst.

Egwene released a soft breath of relief and summoned several small tables with cups of warm, fragrant tea. The Windfinders jumped, though the Wise Ones didn't bat an eye. Amys did, however, reach for her cup and change the rose-blossom tea to something with a much darker cast.

"pɝhæps jəl tɛl əs ðə pɝpəs ə ðɪs miɾɪŋ," bɛɹ sɛd, sɪpɪŋ əɹ ti. ðə si foʊk dɪd nɑt pɪk ʌp ðɛɹz, ðoʊ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd bɪɡæn tə dʒɹɪŋk.

"Perhaps you will tell us the purpose of this meeting," Bair said, sipping her tea. The Sea Folk did not pick up theirs, though the Aes Sedai did began to drink.

"wi hæv ɡɛst ɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi," ʃilɪn sɛd. "ðɪs kɑnfɹənteɪʃən ɪz ɪn-ɛvɪɾəbəl, ðoʊ aɪ wɪʃ tə ðə wɪnz ðəɾ ɪt wɝ nɑt soʊ."

"We have guessed it already," Shielyn said. "This confrontation is in-evitable, though I wish to the winds that it were not so."

"wɛl, spik ʌp, ðɛn," jukɪɝi sɛd. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪɾ əbaʊt?"

"Well, speak up, then," Yukiri said. "What is it about?"

ʃilɪn foʊkəst ɑn ɛɡwin. "fɔɹ mɛni sizənz ən taɪdz wi hɪd ðə neɪtʃɝ ʌv əɹ wɪnfmdɪŋ fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪnhəlz, bʌt dʌz nɑɾ ɪksheɪl - ðət wɪtʃ ɪz bɹɔɾ ɪn ɪz nɛvɝ əlaʊd tə liv. naʊ ðət jə noʊ ʌv ʌs, jə wɑn ʌs, fəɹ jə kænɑt stæn ðə θɔɾ ʌv wɪmən tʃænəlɪŋ aʊtsaɪɾ ə jəɹ ɡɹæsp."

Shielyn focused on Egwene. "For many seasons and tides we hid the nature of our Windfmding from the Aes Sedai. The White Tower inhales, but does not exhale - that which is brought in is never allowed to leave. Now that you know of us, you want us, for you cannot stand the thought of women channeling outside of your grasp."

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ fɹaʊnd. ɛɡwin kɑt məleɪn nɑɾɪŋ ɪn əɡɹimənt. ðə wɝdz wɝ tʃɹu ɪnʌf, ðoʊ oʊnli wʌn saɪɾ ə ði ɪʃu. ɪf ðeɪd noʊn haʊ jusfəl waɪt taʊɝ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ wəd bi, ən haʊ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪt wɑz fəɹ ðə pipəl tə noʊ ðət tʃænlɝz wɝ biɪŋ kɛɹd fəɹ ən tʃɹeɪnd . . .

The Aes Sedai frowned. Egwene caught Melaine nodding in agreement. The words were true enough, though only one side of the issue. If they'd known how useful White Tower training would be, and how important it was for the people to know that channelers were being cared for and trained . . .

haʊɛvɝ, ðət θɪŋkɪŋ fɛl hɑloʊ tə hɝ. ðə si foʊk hæd ðɛɹ oʊn tʃɹədɪʃənz, ən meɪd faɪn jus ə ðɛɹ tʃænlɝz wɪθaʊt ɹɛɡjəleɪʃən fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ɛɡwin hædn spɛn əz mʌtʃ taɪm wɪð ðə si foʊk əz nɪneɪiv əɹ ɪleɪn, bʌt ʃid hæd dɪteɪld ɹɪpɔɹts. ðə wɪndfɪndɝz wɝ ənskɪld wɪð mɛni wivz, bʌt ðɛɹ əbɪləɾiz wɪð spəsɪfɪk wivz -  pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ðoʊz foʊkəsɪŋ ɑn ɛɹ - wɝ fɑɹ mɔɹ ədvæns ðən ðoʊz pɹæktəs baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

However, that thinking felt hollow to her. The Sea Folk had their own traditions, and made fine use of their channelers without regulation from the White Tower. Egwene hadn't spent as much time with the Sea Folk as Nynaeve or Elayne, but she'd had detailed reports. The Windfinders were unskilled with many weaves, but their abilities with specific weaves -  particularly those focusing on Air - were far more advanced than those practiced by Aes Sedai.

ðiz wɪmən dɪzɝv ðə tʃɹuθ. wɑz ðət nɑt wʌt ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən ðə θɹi oʊðz, stʊd fɔɹ? "ju ɑɹ kɝɛkt, ʃilɪn dɪn sæbʊɹə naɪt wɔɾɝz " ɛɡwin sɛd. "æn jəɹ pipəl meɪ hæv bɪn waɪz tə kip ðɛɹ əbɪləɾiz hɪɾən fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪ."

These women deserved the truth. Was that not what the White Tower, and the Three Oaths, stood for? "You are correct, Shielyn din Sabura Night Waters " Egwene said. "And your people may have been wise to keep their abilities hidden from the Aes Sedai."

jukɪɝi ɡæspt, ə kwaɪɾ ʌn-ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹiækʃən. ʃilɪn fɹoʊz, tʃeɪn fɹəm əɹ ɪɹ tə noʊz tɪŋkəlɪŋ sɔfli əz ðə mədæljənz ɑn ɪt hɪt təɡɛðɝ. hɝ blaʊs tʃeɪnʒd tə blu. "wʌt?"

Yukiri gasped, a quite un-Aes Sedai reaction. Shielyn froze, chain from her ear to nose tinkling softly as the medallions on it hit together. Her blouse changed to blue. "What?"

"ju meɪ hæv bɪn waɪz," ɛɡwin sɛd. "aɪ wəd nɑt pɹɪzum tə sɛkənd-ɡɛs ði æmɪɝlənz u keɪm bɪfɔɹ mi, bʌt ðəɹ ɪz ən ɑɹɡjəmən tə bi meɪd. pɝhæps wɪv bɪn oʊvɝli zɛləs tə kəntʃɹoʊl wɪmən u kən wil ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ɪts ɑbviəs ðət ðə wɪndfɪndɝz əv dʌn wɛl ɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz. aɪ ʃəd θɪŋk ðət ðə waɪt taʊɝ kəd lɝn mʌtʃ fɹəm ju."

"You may have been wise," Egwene said. "I would not presume to second-guess the Amyrlins who came before me, but there is an argument to be made. Perhaps we have been overly zealous to control women who can wield the One Power. It is obvious that the Windfinders have done well in training themselves. I should think that the White Tower could learn much from you."

ʃilɪn sɛɾəld bæk, skænɪŋ ɛɡwinz feɪs. ɛɡwin mɛt ðə wʊmənz aɪz ən kɛpt əɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən kɑm. si ðəɾ aɪm ɹɛzəlut, ʃi θɔt. si ðəɾ aɪ min wʌɾ aɪ seɪ. ðəɾ ɪz nɑt flæɾɝi. aɪm ɛɛs sədaɪ. wʌn spik ðə tʃɹuθ.

Shielyn settled back, scanning Egwene's face. Egwene met the woman's eyes and kept her expression calm. See that I am resolute, she thought. See that I mean what I say. That is not flattery. I am Aes Sedai. 1 speak the truth.

"wɛl," ʃilɪn sɛd. "pɝhæps wi kəd meɪk ə bɑɹɡən ðət wəɾ əlaʊ əs tə tʃɹeɪn jəɹ wɪmən."

"Well," Shielyn said. "Perhaps we could make a bargain that would allow us to train your women."

ɛɡwin smaɪld. "aɪ wɑz hoʊpɪŋ ðət jə wəd si ði ædvæntɪdʒ ' ðæt." tə ðə saɪd, ðə θɹi ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ɛɡwin wɪð mi-ʃʊɹd hɑstɪləɾi. wɛl, ðeɪ wəd si. ðə bɛst weɪ tə ɡeɪn ði ʌpɝ hænd wɑz tə ʃeɪk ɛkspɛkteɪʃənz laɪk ɹɪndwɔɾɝ biɾəlz ɪn ə dʒɑɹ.

Egwene smiled. "I was hoping that you would see the advantage ' that." To the side, the three other Aes Sedai regarded Egwene with mea-sured hostility. Well, they would see. The best way to gain the upper hand was to shake expectations like rindwater beetles in a jar.

"æn jɛt," ɛɡwin sɛd, "ju æknɑlɪdʒ ðət ðəɹ ɑɹ θɪŋz ðə waɪt taʊɝ noʊz ðət jə də nɑt. ʌðɝwaɪz jə wəd nɑɾ əv stʃɹɪvən tə bɑɹɡən fəɹ əɹ wɪmən tə tʃɹeɪn jəɹ wɪnflndɝz."

"And yet," Egwene said, "you acknowledge that there are things the White Tower knows that you do not. Otherwise you would not have striven to bargain for our women to train your Windflnders."

"wi wɪl nɑt ɹɪsɪn ðəɾ əɡɹimənt," ʃilɪn sɛd kwɪkli. hɝ blaʊs tɝn peɪl jɛloʊ.

"We will not rescind that agreement," Shielyn said quickly. Her blouse turned pale yellow.

"oʊ, aɪ ɪkspɛk nʌθɪŋ ə ðə sɔɹt," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ɪɾ ɪz wɛl ðət jə naʊ hæv ɛɛs sədaɪ titʃɝz.

"Oh, I expect nothing of the sort," Egwene said. "It is well that you now have Aes Sedai teachers.

ðoʊz u bɑɹɡənd wɪð jə ətʃiv sʌmθɪŋ ʌnɪkspɛktɪd."

Those who bargained with you achieved something unexpected."

tʃɹu wɝdz, ɛvɹi wʌn. haʊɛvɝ, ðə weɪ ʃi sɛɾ əm ɪmplaɪd sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ - ðəɾ ɛɡwin hæd wɑntəd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə bi sɛn tə ðə si foʊk ʃɪps. ʃilɪnz fɹaʊn dipənd, ən ʃi sæt bæk ɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ. ɛɡwin hoʊpt ʃi wɑz kənsɪɾɝɪŋ wɛðɝ əɹ pipəlz ɡɹæn vɪktɝi oʊvɝ ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz hæd bɪn ə sɛtʌp fɹəm ðə stɑɹt.

True words, every one. However, the way she said them implied something more - that Egwene had wanted the Aes Sedai to be sent to the Sea Folk ships. Shielyn's frown deepened, and she sat back in her chair. Egwene hoped she was considering whether her people's grand victory over the Bowl of the Winds had been a setup from the start.

"ɪf ɛniθɪŋ," ɛɡwin kəntɪnjud, "aɪ fil ðət ðə pɹiviəs əɡɹimənt wɑz nɑɾ æmbɪʃəs ɪnʌf."

"If anything," Egwene continued, "I feel that the previous agreement was not ambitious enough."

ʃi tɝn tə ðə waɪz wʌnz. "æmɪz, wəd jə əɡɹi ðət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæv nɑlədʒ ʌv wivz ðət ðə waɪz wʌnz də nɑt?"

She turned to the Wise Ones. "Amys, would you agree that the Aes Sedai have knowledge of weaves that the Wise Ones do not?"

"ɪt wəd bi fulɪʃ nɑt tə ədmɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɛkspɝtiz ɪn ðiz ɛɹiəz," æmɪz sɛd kɛɹfəli. "ðeɪ spɛn mʌtʃ taɪm pɹæktəsɪŋ ðɛɹ wivz. bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ θɪŋz wi noʊ ðət ðeɪ də nɑt."

"It would be foolish not to admit Aes Sedai expertise in these areas," Amys said carefully. "They spend much time practicing their weaves. But there are things we know that they do not."

"jɛs," ɛɡwin sɛd. "dʊɹɪŋ maɪ taɪm tʃɹeɪnɪŋ bɪniθ ðə waɪz wʌnz, aɪ lɝn mɔɹ əbaʊt liɾɝʃɪp ðən aɪ dɪd dʊɹɪŋ maɪ taɪm ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. jə ɔlsoʊ ɡeɪv mi vɛɹi hɛlpfəl tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəɾ ən dʒɹimɪŋ."

"Yes," Egwene said. "During my time training beneath the Wise Ones, I learned more about leadership than I did during my time in the White Tower. You also gave me very helpful training in Tel'aran'rhiod and Dreaming."

"ɔl ɹaɪt," bɛɹ sɛd, "aʊt wɪð ɪt. wiv bɪn tʃeɪsɪŋ ə θɹi-lɛɡəd lɪzɝd ðɪs ɪntaɪɝ kɑnvɝseɪʃən, poʊkɪŋ ɪt wɪð ə stɪk tə si ɪf ɪɾəl muv ɛni fɝðɝ."

"All right," Bair said, "out with it. We've been chasing a three-legged lizard this entire conversation, poking it with a stick to see if it will move any further."

"wi nid tə ʃɛɹ wʌt wi noʊ wɪð wʌn ənʌðɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "wi θɹi ɡɹups - wɪmən u kən tʃænəl - nid tə fɔɹm ən əlaɪəns."

"We need to share what we know with one another," Egwene said. "We three groups - women who can channel - need to form an alliance."

"wɪð ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪn kəntʃɹoʊl, aɪ əsum," ʃilɪn sɛd.

"With the White Tower in control, I assume," Shielyn said.

"ɔl aɪm seɪɪŋ," ɛɡwin ɹɪplaɪd, "ɪz ðət ðəɹ ɪz wɪzdəm ɪn ʃɛɹɪŋ ən lɝnɪŋ fɹəm ʌðɝz.

"All I am saying," Egwene replied, "is that there is wisdom in sharing and learning from others.

waɪz wʌnz, aɪ wʊɾə æksɛptɪd fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ bi sɛn tə tʃɹeɪn wɪð ju. ɪt wəd bi pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli jusfəl tə hæv jə tʃɹeɪn əm tə mæstɝ tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd"

Wise Ones, I would have Accepted from the White Tower be sent to train with you. It would be particularly useful to have you train them to master Tel'aran'rhiod"

ɪt wɑz ənlaɪkli ðəɾ ənʌðɝ dʒɹimɝ, sətʃ əz ɛɡwin, wəd bi dɪskʌvɝɾ əmʌŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðoʊ ʃi kəd hoʊp. ðə tælənt wɑz vɛɹi ɹɛɹ. stɪl, ɪt wəd bi ædvənteɪdʒəs tə hæv səm sɪstɝz tʃɹeɪn ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, ivən ɪf ðeɪ dɪɾ əv tə ɛntɝ wɪð tɛɹæŋɡɹil.

It was unlikely that another Dreamer, such as Egwene, would be discovered among the Aes Sedai, though she could hope. The Talent was very rare. Still, it would be advantageous to have some sisters trained in Tel'aran'rhiod, even if they did have to enter with ter'angreal.

"wɪndfɪndɝz," ɛɡwin kəntɪnjud. "aɪ wəd sɛnd wɪmən tə jə əz wɛl, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ðoʊz skɪld ɪn ɛɹ, tə lɝn tə kɔl ðə wɪnz əz jə du."

"Windfinders," Egwene continued. "I would send women to you as well, particularly those skilled in Air, to learn to call the winds as you do."

"laɪf fəɹ ən əpɹɛntəs wɪndfɪndɝ ɪz nɑɾ izi," ʃilɪn sɛd. "aɪ θɪŋk jəɹ wɪmən wəd faɪn ɪt vɛɹi dɪfɹən fɹəm ðə sɑf laɪf ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ."

"Life for an apprentice Windfinder is not easy," Shielyn said. "I think your women would find it very different from the soft life in the White Tower."

ɛɡwinz bæksaɪd stɪl ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə peɪn ə hɝ "sɑft" laɪf ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. "aɪ də nɑt daʊt ðəɾ ɪɾəl bi tʃælənʒɪŋ," ʃi sɛd, "bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt daʊt ðəɾ ɪt wəd bi vɛɹi hɛlpfəl fəɹ ðət vɛɹi ɹizən."

Egwene's backside still remembered the pain of her "soft" life in the White Tower. "I do not doubt that it will be challenging," she said, "but I do not doubt that it would be very helpful for that very reason."

"wɛl, aɪ səspɛk ðɪs kəd bi ɝeɪnʒd," ʃilɪn sɛd, linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, saʊndɪŋ iɡɝ. "ðɛɹ wəɾ əv tə bi peɪmənt, ʌv kɔɹs."

"Well, I suspect this could be arranged," Shielyn said, leaning forward, sounding eager. "There would have to be payment, of course."

"æn ikwəl wʌn," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ɪn əlaʊɪŋ jə tə sɛn səm ə jəɹ əpɹɛntəsɪz tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ tə tʃɹeɪn wɪð ʌs."

"An equal one," Egwene said. "In allowing you to send some of your apprentices to the White Tower to train with us."

"wi ɔlɹɛɾi sɛnd wɪmən tə ju."

"We already send women to you."

ɛɡwin snɪft. "toʊkən sækɹəfaɪsɪz sɛn soʊ wɪl nɑt bɪkʌm səspɪʃəs ə jəɹ wɪndfɪndɝz.

Egwene sniffed. "Token sacrifices sent so we will not become suspicious of your Windfinders.

jəɹ wɪmən ɔfən sɛklud ðɛmsɛlvz, əɹ kʌm ɹɪlʌktənli. aɪ wəɾ əv ðət pɹæktəs stɑp - ðəɹ ɪz noʊ ɹizən tə dɪnaɪ pətɛnʃəl wɪndfɪndɝz tə jəɹ pipəl."

Your women often seclude themselves, or come reluctantly. I would have that practice stop - there is no reason to deny potential Windfinders to your people."

"wɛl, wʌt wəd bi ðə dɪfɝəns?" ʃilɪn æskt.

"Well, what would be the difference?" Shielyn asked.

"ðə wɪmən jə sɛnd wəd bi əlaʊd tə ɹɪtɝn tə jə æftɝ ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "waɪz wʌnz, aɪ wəɾ əv il əpɹɛntəsɪz sɛn tə əs əz wɛl. nɑt ɹɪlʌktənli, ən nɑt tə bɪkʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt tə tʃɹeɪn ən lɝn əɹ weɪz. ðeɪ, tu, wəd bi əlaʊd tə ɹɪtɝn, ʃəd ðeɪ dɪzaɪɝ ɪt, wʌns ðeɪ ɑɹ fɪnɪʃt."

"The women you send would be allowed to return to you after their training," Egwene said. "Wise Ones, I would have Aiel apprentices sent to us as well. Not reluctantly, and not to become Aes Sedai, but to train and learn our ways. They, too, would be allowed to return, should they desire it, once they are finished."

"ɪt wəɾ əv tə bi mɔɹ ðən ðæt," æmɪz sɛd. "aɪ wɝi wʌt wəd hæpən tə wɪmən u bɪkʌm tu əkʌstəm tə sɑft wɛtləndɝ weɪz."

"It would have to be more than that," Amys said. "I worry what would happen to women who become too accustomed to soft wetlander ways."

"ʃʊɹli jə wʊdnt wɑnə kəmpɛl əm - " ɛɡwin bɪɡæn.

"Surely you wouldn't want to compel them - " Egwene began.

bɛɹ kʌɾ ɪn. "ðeɪd stɪl bi əpɹɛntəs waɪz wʌnz, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ. tʃɪlʒɹən u nid tə kəmplit ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ. ən ðəɾ ɪz əsumɪŋ wi əɡɹi tə ðɪs plæn; sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪɾ ənsɛɾəlz maɪ stʌmək, laɪk tu mʌtʃ fuɾ æftɝ ə deɪ ʌv fæstɪŋ."

Bair cut in. "They'd still be apprentice Wise Ones, Egwene al'Vere. Children who need to complete their training. And that is assuming we agree to this plan; something about it unsettles my stomach, like too much food after a day of fasting."

"ɪf wi lɛt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛt hʊks ɪndə əɹ əpɹɛntəsɪz," məleɪn sɛd, ðəl nɑt sun bi pʊl fɹi."

"If we let the Aes Sedai set hooks into our apprentices," Melaine said, they will not soon be pulled free."

"du jə wɑn əm tə bi?" ɛɡwin sɛd. "du jə si wʌt juv ɪn mi, məleɪn? ən æmɪɝlɪn siɾ u wɑz tʃɹeɪn baɪ ði il? wʌt sækɹəfaɪs wəɾ ɪt bi wɝθ tə jəɹ pipəl tə hæv mɔɹ laɪk mi? ɛɛs sədaɪ hu ʌndɝstæn dʒiɾoʊ ən ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd, hu ɹɪspɛkt waɪz wʌnz ɹæðɝ ðən siɪŋ əm əz ɹaɪvəlz əɹ waɪldɝz?"

"Do you want them to be?" Egwene said. "Do you see what you have in me, Melaine? An Amyrlin Seat who was trained by the Aiel? What sacrifice would it be worth to your people to have more like me? Aes Sedai who understand ji'e'toh and the Three-fold Land, who respect Wise Ones rather than seeing them as rivals or wilders?"

ðə θɹi il sɛɾəld bæk ət ðæt, lʊkɪŋ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ, tʃɹʌbəld.

The three Aiel settled back at that, looking at one another, troubled.

"ænd wʌɾ ə ju, ʃilɪn?" ɛɡwin sɛd. "wʌt wəɾ ɪt bi wɝθ tə jəɹ pipəl tə hæv ən æmɪɝlɪn sit hu, hævɪŋ tʃɹeɪnd wɪð ju, ɹɪɡɑɹdz jə əz fɹɛnz ən u ɹɪspɛks jəɹ weɪz?"

"And what of you, Shielyn?" Egwene said. "What would it be worth to your people to have an Amyrlin Seat who, having trained with you, regards you as friends and who respects your ways?"

"ðæt kəd bi væljəbəl," ʃilɪn ədmɪɾəd. "əsumɪŋ ðə wɪmən jə sɛn tə əs əv ə bɛɾɝ tɛmpɹəmən ðən ðoʊz hum wɪv sin soʊ fɑɹ. aɪ hæv jɛt tə miɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hu kəd nɑt bɛnəfɪt fɹəm ə fju deɪz hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ðə haɪ mæst."

"That could be valuable," Shielyn admitted. "Assuming the women you send to us have a better temperament than those whom we have seen so far. I have yet to meet an Aes Sedai who could not benefit from a few days hanging from the high mast."

"ðæɾ ɪz kəz jə ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn ɡɛɾɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ," ɛɡwin sɛd "hu ɑɹ sɛɾ ɪn ðɛɹ weɪz. ɪf wi wɝ tə sɛn jə æksɛptɪɾ ɪnstɛd, ðeɪ wəd bi mʌtʃ mɔɹ plaɪəbəl."

"That is because you insisted on getting Aes Sedai," Egwene said "who are set in their ways. If we were to send you Accepted instead, they would be much more pliable."

"ɪnstɛd?" ʃilɪn sɛɾ ɪmiɾiətli. "ðɪs ɪz nɑt ðə bɑɹɡən wi wɝ dɪskʌsɪŋ."

"Instead?" Shielyn said immediately. "This is not the bargain we were discussing."

"ɪt kəd bi," ɛɡwin ɹɪplaɪd. "ɪf wi əlaʊ si foʊk tʃænlɝz tə ɹɪtɝn tə jə ɪnstɛɾ ə ɹikwaɪɝɪŋ ðət ðeɪ steɪ ɪn ðə taʊɝ, jəl noʊ lɔŋɡɝ əv sətʃ ə stʃɹɔŋ niɾ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ titʃɝz."

"It could be," Egwene replied. "If we allow Sea Folk channelers to return to you instead of requiring that they stay in the Tower, you will no longer have such a strong need of the Aes Sedai teachers."

"ðɪs mʌs bi ə dɪfɹən əɡɹimənt." ʃilɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "æn ɪɾəl nɑt bi ə bɑɹɡən tə meɪk laɪtli. ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ sɝpəns, laɪk ðoʊz ɹɪŋz jə wɛɹ."

"This must be a different agreement." Shielyn shook her head. "And it will not be a bargain to make lightly. Aes Sedai are serpents, like those rings you wear."

"wʌɾ ɪf aɪ ɔfɝ tə ɪnklud ðə dʒɹim tɛɹæŋɡɹil jə wɝ loʊnd?" ɛɡwin æskt.

"What if I offer to include the dream ter'angreal you were loaned?" Egwene asked.

ʃilɪn ɡlænst əɾ əɹ hænd wɛɹ, ɪn ðə ɹil wɝld, ʃi wəd bi hoʊldɪŋ ðə smɔl pleɪt ðət -  wɪð ə tʃænəl bɪɾ ə spɪɹət - lɛɾ ə wʊmən ɛntɝ tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. ɛɡwin hædnt ɡɪvən əm ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðət lɛt wʌn ɛntɝ wɪθaʊt niɾɪŋ tə tʃænəl, ʌv kɔɹs. ðoʊz wɝ mɔɹ vɝsəɾəl, ən ðɛɹfɔɹ mɔɹ paʊɝfəl. bɛs tə kip ðoʊz ə sikɹət.

Shielyn glanced at her hand where, in the real world, she would be holding the small plate that -  with a channeled bit of Spirit - let a woman enter Tel'aran'rhiod. Egwene hadn't given them the ter'angreal that let one enter without needing to channel, of course. Those were more versatile, and therefore more powerful. Best to keep those a secret.

"ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd" ɛɡwin sɛd, linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, "ju kən ɡoʊ ɛniwɛɹ. jə kən mit ðoʊz u ɑɹ dɪstənt wɪθaʊt niɾɪŋ tə tʃɹævəl ðɛɹ, kən lɝn wʌɾ ɪz hɪɾən, ən kən kənfɝ ɪn sikɹət."

"In Tel'aran'rhiod" Egwene said, leaning forward, "you can go anywhere. You can meet those who are distant without needing to Travel there, can learn what is hidden, and can confer in secret."

"ðɪs ɪz ə deɪnʒɝəs θɪŋ jə sədʒɛst, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ," æmɪz sɛd stɝnli. "tə lɛɾ əm lus wəd bi laɪk lɛɾɪŋ ə ɡɹup ʌv wɛtləndɝ tʃɪlʒɹən ɹʌn waɪld ɪn ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd."

"This is a dangerous thing you suggest, Egwene al'Vere," Amys said sternly. "To let them loose would be like letting a group of wetlander children run wild in the Three-fold Land."

"ju kænɑt kip ðɪs pleɪs fəɹ jɝsɛlf, æmɪz," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"You cannot keep this place for yourself, Amys," Egwene said.

"wi ɑɹ nɑt soʊ sɛlfɪʃ," ðə waɪz wʌn sɛd. "ɪɾ ɪz ðɛɹ seɪfti aɪ spik ʌv."

"We are not so selfish," the Wise One said. "It is their safety I speak of."

"ðɛn pɝhæps," ɛɡwin sɛd, "ɪt wəd bi bɛst ɪf ðə si foʊk sɛn səm ə ðɛɹ əpɹɛntəsɪz tə tʃɹeɪn wɪð jə waɪz wʌnz - ən pɝhæps jə kəd sɛn səm bæk."

"Then perhaps," Egwene said, "it would be best if the Sea Folk sent some of their apprentices to train with you Wise Ones - and perhaps you could send some back."

"tə lɪv ɑn ʃɪps?" məleɪn sɛd, əɡæst.

"To live on ships?" Melaine said, aghast.

"wʌt bɛɾɝ weɪ tə kɑŋkɝ jəɹ fɪɹz ə ðə wɔɾɝ?"

"What better way to conquer your fears of the water?"

"wi ɑɹən əfɹeɪɾ ʌv ɪt" æmɪz snæpt. "wi ɹɪspɛkt ɪt. jə wɛtlələnd-ɝz . . ." ʃi ɔlweɪz spoʊk ə ʃɪps əz wʌn spoʊk ʌv ə keɪdʒ laɪən.

"We aren't afraid of it" Amys snapped. "We respect it. You wetlaland-ers . . ." She always spoke of ships as one spoke of a caged lion.

"ɹəɡɑɹdləs." ɛɡwin tɝn bæk tə ðə si foʊk. "ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil kəd bi jʊɹz, ʃəd wɪv ə bɑɹɡən."

"Regardless." Egwene turned back to the Sea Folk. "The ter'angreal could be yours, should we have a bargain."

"ju ɔlɹɛɾi ɡeɪv ðiz tə ʌs," ʃilɪn sɛd.

"You already gave these to us," Shielyn said.

"ðeɪ wɝ lɛn tə ju, ʃilɪn, əz wɑz meɪd vɛɹi klɪɹ baɪ ðə wɪmən u dɪlɪvɝd ðɛm."

"They were lent to you, Shielyn, as was made very clear by the women who delivered them."

"æn jə wəd ɡɪv əm tə əs pɝmənənli?" ʃilɪn æskt. "wɪð nʌn ə ðɪs nɑnsɛns əbaʊɾ ɔl tɛɹæŋɡɹil bɪlɔŋɪŋ tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ?"

"And you would give them to us permanently?" Shielyn asked. "With none of this nonsense about all ter'angreal belonging to the White Tower?"

"ɪɾ ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðət ðəɹ bi ə ɹul tə pɹɪvɛn tɛɹæŋɡɹil fɹəm biɪŋ kɛp baɪ ðoʊz u dɪskʌvɝ ðɛm," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ðæt weɪ, wi kən ɹimuv ə pətɛnʃəli deɪnʒɝəs aɪɾəm fɹəm ə fulɪʃ mɝtʃən əɹ fɑɹmɝ. bʌɾ aɪ wəd bi wɪlɪŋ tə meɪk ə fɔɹməl ɪksɛpʃən fəɹ ðə wɪndndɝz ən waɪz wʌnz."

"It is important that there be a rule to prevent ter'angreal from being kept by those who discover them," Egwene said. "That way, we can remove a potentially dangerous item from a foolish merchant or farmer. But I would be willing to make a formal exception for the Windnnders and Wise Ones."

"soʊ ðə ɡlæs pɪlɝz . . ." æmɪz sɛd. "aɪ hæv wʌndɝɾ ɪf ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wəɾ ɛvɝ tʃɹaɪ tə leɪ kleɪm tə ðɛm."

"So the glass pillars . . ." Amys said. "I have wondered if the Aes Sedai would ever try to lay claim to them."

"aɪ daʊt ðət wəd hæpən," ɛɡwin sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ ɔlsoʊ səspɛk ðəɾ ɪt wəɾ iz il maɪnz ɪf wi wɝ tə pɹoʊkleɪm ɪɾ əfɪʃəli, ðət ðoʊz tɛɹæŋɡɹil - ən ʌðɝz jə pəzɛs - bɪlɔŋ tə ju, ən ðət sɪstɝz kænɑt kleɪm ðɛm."

"I doubt that would happen," Egwene said. "But I also suspect that it would ease Aiel minds if we were to proclaim it officially, that those ter'angreal - and others you possess - belong to you, and that sisters cannot claim them."

ðət ɡeɪv ðə waɪz wʌnz sɪɹiəs θɔt.

That gave the Wise Ones serious thought.

"wʌn stɪl faɪn ðɪs əɡɹimən ɑd," bɛɹ sɛd. "il, tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, bʌt nɑt bɪkʌmɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ? ɪts nɑt ðə weɪ θɪŋz əv bɪn."

"1 still find this agreement odd," Bair said. "Aiel, training in the White Tower, but not becoming Aes Sedai? It is not the way things have been."

"ðə wɝld ɪz tʃeɪnʒɪŋ, bɛɹ," ɛɡwin sɛd sɔfli. "bæk ɪn ɛmənz fild, ðəɹ wɑz ə pætʃ ə faɪn, kʌltəveɪɾəd ɛmənz ɡlɔɹi flaʊɝz nɪɹ ə bɹʊk. maɪ fɑðɝ laɪk tə wɔk ðɛɹ, ən lʌv ðɛɹ bjuɾi. bʌt ðən wən ðə nu bɹɪdʒ wɑz bɪlt, pipəl bɪɡæn tʃɹeɪpsɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə pætʃ tə ɡɛt tə ɪt.

"The world is changing, Bair," Egwene said softly. "Back in Emond's Field, there was a patch of fine, cultivated Emond's Glory flowers near a brook. My father liked to walk there, and loved their beauty. But then when the new bridge was built, people began traipsing across the patch to get to it.

"maɪ fɑðɝ tʃɹaɪd fəɹ jɪɹz tə kip əm ɔf ðə pætʃ. smɔl fɛnsəz, saɪnz. nʌθɪŋ wɝkt. ən ðən i θɔt tə bɪld ə nit pæθ ə ɹɪvɝ stoʊnz θɹu ðə pætʃ, kʌltɪveɪɾɪŋ ðə flaʊɝz tə ðə saɪdz. æftɝ ðæt, pipəl stɑpt wɔkɪŋ ɑn ðɛm.

"My father tried for years to keep them off the patch. Small fences, signs. Nothing worked. And then he thought to build a neat path of river stones through the patch, cultivating the flowers to the sides. After that, people stopped walking on them.

"wɛn tʃeɪnʒ kʌmz, jə kən skɹim ən tʃɹaɪ tə fɔɹs θɪŋz tə steɪ ðə seɪm. bʌt jəl juʒəwəli ɛn ʌp ɡɛɾɪŋ tʃɹæmpəld. haʊɛvɝ, ɪf jə kən dɝɛk ðə tʃeɪnʒəz, ðeɪ kən sɝv ju. dʒʌst əz ðə paʊɝ sɝvz ʌs, bʌɾ oʊnli æftɝ wi sɝɛndɝ tə ɪt."

"When change comes, you can scream and try to force things to stay the same. But you'll usually end up getting trampled. However, if you can direct the changes, they can serve you. Just as the Power serves us, but only after we surrender to it."

ɛɡwin lʊkt əɾ itʃ wʊmən ɪn tɝn. "aʊɝ θɹi ɡɹups ʃʊɾə bɪɡʌn wɝkɪŋ təɡɛðɝ lɔŋ əɡoʊ. ðə læs bæɾəl ɪz əpɑn ʌs, ən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn θɹɛɾənz tə fɹi ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ɪf ðət wɝn ɪnʌf, wɪv ənʌðɝ kɑmən foʊ - wʌn u wəd si ɛɛs sədaɪ, wɪndndɝz ən waɪz wʌnz əlaɪk dɪstʃɹɔɪd."

Egwene looked at each woman in turn. "Our three groups should have begun working together long ago. The Last Battle is upon us, and the Dragon Reborn threatens to free the Dark One. If that weren't enough, we have another common foe - one who would see Aes Sedai, Windnnders and Wise Ones alike destroyed."

"ðə sintʃæn," məleɪn sɛd.

"The Seanchan," Melaine said.

ɹɪneɪl, sɪɾɪŋ ət ðə bæk ə ðə wɪndndɝz, lɛɾ aʊɾ ə sɑf hɪs ət ðə wɝd. hɝ kloʊðɪŋ tʃeɪnʒd, ən ʃi wɑz wɛɹɪŋ ɑɹmɝ, hoʊldɪŋ ə sɔɹd. ɪt wɑz ɡɔn ɪn ə moʊmənt.

Renaile, sitting at the back of the Windnnders, let out a soft hiss at the word. Her clothing changed, and she was wearing armor, holding a sword. It was gone in a moment.

"jɛs," ɛɡwin sɛd. "təɡɛðɝ, wi kən bi stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə faɪɾ əm əpɑɹt. . ."

"Yes," Egwene said. "Together, we can be strong enough to fight them Apart. . ."

"wi mʌs kənsɪɾɝ ðɪs bɑɹɡən," ʃilɪn sɛd. ɛɡwin noʊɾəst ə wɪn bloʊɪŋ θɹu ðə ɹum, laɪkli kɹieɪɾəd baɪ wʌn ə ðə si foʊk baɪ æksəɾənt. "wi wɪl miɾ əɡɛn ən pɝhæps meɪk ə pɹɑməs.

"We must consider this bargain," Shielyn said. Egwene noticed a wind blowing through the room, likely created by one of the Sea Folk by accident. "We will meet again and perhaps make a promise.

ɪf wi meɪk ɪt, ðə tɝmz wɪl bi ðɪs: wɪl sɛn jə tu əpɹɛntəsɪz ə jɪɹ, ən jəl sɛn tu tə ʌs."

If we make it, the terms will be this: We will send you two apprentices a year, and you will send two to us."

"nɑt jəɹ wikəst," ɛɡwin sɛd. "aɪ wɑn jəɹ moʊs pɹɑməsɪŋ."

"Not your weakest," Egwene said. "I want your most promising."

"æn jəl sɛn ðə seɪm?" ʃilɪn sɛd.

"And you will send the same?" Shielyn said.

"jɛs," ɛɡwin sɛd. tu wɑz ə stɑɹt. ðeɪ wəd pɹɑbli wɪʃ tə muv tə lɑɹdʒɝ nʌmbɝz wʌns ðə plæn wɑz pɹuvən ɪfɛktɪv. bʌt ʃi wəd nɑt pʊʃ fəɹ ðəɾ ət ðə stɑɹt.

"Yes," Egwene said. Two was a start. They would probably wish to move to larger numbers once the plan was proven effective. But she would not push for that at the start.

"æn ʌs?" æmɪz sɛd. "wi ɑɹ pɑɹɾ ə ðɪs 'bɑɹɡən' əz jə pʊɾ ɪt?"

"And us?" Amys said. "We are part of this 'bargain' as you put it?"

"tu æksɛptɪd," ɛɡwin sɛd, "ɪn ɹɪtɝn fəɹ tu əpɹɛntəsɪz. ðeɪ tʃɹeɪn fəɹ ə pɪɹiəɾ ə noʊ lɛs ðən sɪks mʌnθs, bʌt noʊ mɔɹ ðən tu jɪɹz. wʌns əɹ wɪmən ɑɹ əmʌŋ ju, ðeɪ ɑɹ tə bi kənsɪɾɝd jəɹ əpɹɛntəsɪz, ən mʌs fɑloʊ jəɹ ɹulz." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "æt ði ɛn ə ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ, ɔl əpɹɛntəsɪz ən æksɛptɪd mʌst ɹɪtɝn tə ðɛɹ pipəl fəɹ ət list wʌn jɪɹ. æftɝ ðæt, ɪf jʊɹz dɪsaɪd ðeɪ wɑnə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðeɪ kən ɹɪtɝn tə bi kənsɪɾɝd. ðə seɪm ɡoʊz fəɹ wɪmən əmʌŋ ʌs, ʃəd ðeɪ dɪsaɪd tə dʒɔɪn wɪð jə ɪnstɛd."

"Two Accepted," Egwene said, "in return for two apprentices. They train for a period of no less than six months, but no more than two years. Once our women are among you, they are to be considered your apprentices, and must follow your rules." She hesitated. "At the end of their training, all apprentices and Accepted must return to their people for at least one year. After that, if yours decide they want to be Aes Sedai, they can return to be considered. The same goes for women among us, should they decide to join with you instead."

bɛɹ nɑɾəd θɔtfəli. "pɝhæps ðəɹ wɪl bi wɪmən laɪk jɝsɛlf hu, siɪŋ əɹ weɪz, wɪl noʊ ðɛm supɪɹiɝ. ɪts stɪl ə ʃeɪm wi lɔs ju."

Bair nodded thoughtfully. "Perhaps there will be women like yourself who, seeing our ways, will know them superior. It is still a shame we lost you."

"maɪ pleɪs wɑz ɛlswɛɹ," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"My place was elsewhere," Egwene said.

"wɪl jə æksɛp ðɪs bɪtwin əs əz wɛl?" ʃilɪn sɛd tə ðə waɪz wʌnz. "ʃʊd wi əɡɹi tə ðɪs bɑɹɡən, tu fəɹ tu, ɪn ə sɪməlɝ mænɝ?

"Will you accept this between us as well?" Shielyn said to the Wise Ones. "Should we agree to this bargain, two for two, in a similar manner?

"ɪf ðə bɑɹɡən ɪz əɡɹid tə," bɛɹ sɛd, lʊkɪŋ tə ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz, "wi wɪl meɪk ɪt wɪð jə əz wɛl. bʌt wi mʌst spik wɪð ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz əbaʊɾ ɪt."

"If the bargain is agreed to," Bair said, looking to the other Wise Ones, "we will make it with you as well. But we must speak with the other Wise Ones about it."

"ænd wʌɾ ə ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹɛəlt ʃilɪn sɛd, tɝnɪŋ bæk tə ɛɡwin.

"And what of the ter'angrealT Shielyn said, turning back to Egwene.

"jʊɹz," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ɪn ɪkstʃeɪnʒ, jəl ɹilis əs fɹəm aʊt pɹɑməs tə sɛn sɪstɝz tə tʃɹeɪn ju, ən wɪl lɛɾ ɛni si foʊk kɝənli əmʌŋ əs ɹɪtɝn tə ðɛɹ pipəl. ɔl ə ðɪs ɪz sʌbʒɪkt tə ði əpɹuvəl ə jəɹ pipəl, ən əl əv tə bɹɪŋ ðɪs bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ."

"Yours," Egwene said. "In exchange, you will release us from out promise to send sisters to train you, and we will let any Sea Folk currently among us return to their people. All of this is subject to the approval of your people, and I will have to bring this before the Hall of the Tower."

ʌv kɔɹs, əz æmɪɝlɪn, hɝ dɪkɹiz wɝ lɔ. ɪf ðə hɔl bɔkt, haʊɛvɝ, ðoʊz lɔz kəɾ ɛn ʌp biɪŋ ɪɡnɔɹd. ɪn ðɪs, ʃi wəd nid tə ɡɛt ðɛɹ səpɔɹt - ən ʃi wɑntəd tə, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli kənsɪɾɝɪŋ əɹ stæns ðət ðə hɔl ʃəd wɝk təɡɛðɝ wɪð əɹ mɔɹ ən miɾ ɪn sikɹət lɛs.

Of course, as Amyrlin, her decrees were law. If the Hall balked, however, those laws could end up being ignored. In this, she would need to get their support - and she wanted to, particularly considering her stance that the Hall should work together with her more and meet in secret less.

ʃi wɑz ɹizənəbli sɝɾən ʃi kəd ɡɛɾ əpɹuvəl fəɹ ðɪs pɹəpoʊzəl, haʊɛvɝ. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wʊdn laɪk ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp tɛɹæŋɡɹil, bʌt ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ dɪd nɑt laɪk ðə bɑɹɡən ðət hæd bɪn meɪd wɪð ðə si foʊk oʊvɝ ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz. tə bi ɹɪɾ ə ðæt, ðeɪ wəd ɡɪv ɔlmoʊst ɛniθɪŋ.

She was reasonably certain she could get approval for this proposal, however. The Aes Sedai wouldn't like giving up ter'angreal, but they also did not like the bargain that had been made with the Sea Folk over the Bowl of the Winds. To be rid of that, they would give almost anything.

"aɪ nu jə wəd tʃɹaɪ tə ɛn ðə sɪstɝz tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ʌs," ʃilɪn sɛd, saʊndɪŋ sɛlf-sæɾəsfaɪd.

"I knew you would try to end the sisters training us," Shielyn said, sounding self-satisfied.

"wɪtʃ wəd jə ɹæðɝ hæv?" ɛɡwin æskt. "wɪmən u ɑɹ əmʌŋ əɹ wikəs mɛmbɝz, ən u si ðɛɹ sɝvəs əz ə pʌnɪʃmənt? əɹ ɪnstɛd, jəɹ oʊn si foʊk, hu hæv lɝn ðə bɛst wi kən ɔfɝ ən ɹɪtɝn hæpəli tə ʃɛɹ?" ɛɡwin hæd bɪn hæf-tɛmptəd tə sɪmpli sɛn si foʊk ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ðɛm tə fʊlfɪl ðə bɑɹɡən ɛniweɪ; ɪt simd ə pɹɑpɝ twɪstɪŋ ə ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən.

"Which would you rather have?" Egwene asked. "Women who are among our weakest members, and who see their service as a punishment? Or instead, your own Sea Folk, who have learned the best we can offer and return happily to share?" Egwene had been half-tempted to simply send Sea Folk Aes Sedai to them to fulfill the bargain anyway; it seemed a proper twisting of the situation.

hoʊpfəli, haʊɛvɝ, ðɪs nu bɑɹɡən wəd səplæn ði oʊld wʌn. ʃi hæɾ ə filɪŋ ʃid luz ðə si foʊk sɪstɝz ɛniweɪ, ət lis ðə wʌnz u lɔŋ tə bi bæk wɪð ðɛɹ pipəl. ðə wɝld wɑz tʃeɪnʒɪŋ, ən naʊ ðət ðə wɪndfɪndɝz wɝ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ə sikɹət, ði oʊld weɪz nid nɑt bi meɪnteɪnd.

Hopefully, however, this new bargain would supplant the old one. She had a feeling she'd lose the Sea Folk sisters anyway, at least the ones who longed to be back with their people. The world was changing, and now that the Windfinders were no longer a secret, the old ways need not be maintained.

"wi wɪl dɪskʌs," ʃilɪn sɛd. ʃi nɑɾəd tə ði ʌðɝz, ən ðeɪ vænɪʃt fɹəm ðə ɹum. ðeɪ sɝɾənli dɪd lɝn kwɪkli.

"We will discuss," Shielyn said. She nodded to the others, and they vanished from the room. They certainly did learn quickly.

"ðɪs dæns ɪz ə deɪnʒɝəs wʌn, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ," æmɪz sɛd, stændɪŋ ən ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl.

"This dance is a dangerous one, Egwene al'Vere," Amys said, standing and adjusting her shawl.

"ðɛɹ wɑz ə taɪm wən ði il wʊɾə teɪkən pɹaɪd tə hæv sɝv ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðət taɪm əz pæst."

"There was a time when the Aiel would have taken pride to have served the Aes Sedai. That time has passed."

"ðə wɪmən jə θɔt jə wəd faɪn ɑɹ nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ə dʒɹim, æmɪz," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"The women you thought you would find are nothing more than a dream, Amys," Egwene said.

"ɹil laɪf ɪz ɔfən mɔɹ dɪsəpɔɪntɪŋ ðən dʒɹimz, bʌɾ ət list wən jə faɪn ɑnɝ ɪn ðə ɹil wɝld, jə noʊ ɪt tə bi mɔɹ ðən ə fænsi."

"Real life is often more disappointing than dreams, but at least when you find honor in the real world, you know it to be more than a fancy."

ðə waɪz wʌn nɑɾəd. "wi wɪl laɪkli əɡɹi tə ðɪs bɑɹɡən. wɪv nid tə lɝn wʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kən titʃ."

The Wise One nodded. "We will likely agree to this bargain. We have need to learn what the Aes Sedai can teach."

wɪl pɪk əɹ stʃɹɔŋɡəst wɪmən," bɛɹ æɾəd. "ðoʊz u wɪl nɑt bi kɝʌptɪd baɪ wɛtləndɝ sɔfnəs." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ kɑndəmneɪʃən ɪn ðoʊz wɝdz. kɔlɪŋ wɛtləndɝz sɑft wɑz nɑɾ ən ɪnsəlt, ɪn bɛɹz maɪnd.

We will pick our strongest women," Bair added. "Those who will not be corrupted by wetlander softness." There was no condemnation in those words. Calling wetlanders soft was not an insult, in Bair's mind.

æmɪz nɑɾəd. "ðɪs wɝk jə də ɪz ə ɡʊd wʌn soʊ lɔŋ əz jə də nɑt pɹɪzum tə taɪ əs ɪn stil bænz."

Amys nodded. "This work you do is a good one so long as you do not presume to tie us in steel bands."

noʊ, æmɪz, ɛɡwin θɔt. əl nɑt taɪ jə ɪn bænz ə stil. əl juz leɪs ɪnstɛd.

No, Amys, Egwene thought. I will not tie you in bands of steel. I'll use lace instead.

naʊ," bɛɹ sɛd. "ju stɪl əv niɾ ʌv əs ðɪs deɪ? jə ɪndəkeɪɾəd ə bæɾəl ...? "

Now," Bair said. "You still have need of us this day? You indicated a battle ...? "

"jɛs," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ɔɹ soʊ aɪ hoʊp." noʊ wɝd hæd kʌm. ðət mɛnt nɪneɪiv ən sɪuən hædn dɪskʌvɝɾ ɛniwʌn lɪsnɪŋ. hæɾ əɹ plɔɪ feɪld?

"Yes," Egwene said. "Or so I hope." No word had come. That meant Nynaeve and Siuan hadn't discovered anyone listening. Had her ploy failed?

ðə waɪz wʌnz nɑɾəd tə hɝ, ðən wɔk tə ðə saɪd, kənfɝɪŋ kwaɪətli. ɛɡwin tʃɹeɪld oʊvɝ tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

The Wise Ones nodded to her, then walked to the side, conferring quietly. Egwene trailed over to the Aes Sedai.

jukɪɝi stʊd. "aɪ doʊn laɪk ðɪs, mʌðɝ," jukɪɝi sɛd, spikɪŋ sɔfli ən aɪɪŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz. "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðə hɔl wɪl əɡɹi tə ðɪs. mɛni ɑɹ æɾəmənt ðəɾ ɔl ɑbʒɛkts ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ʃəd bɪlɔŋ tə ʌs."

Yukiri stood. "I don't like this, Mother," Yukiri said, speaking softly and eyeing the Wise Ones. "I don't think the Hall will agree to this. Many are adamant that all objects of the One Power should belong to us."

"ðə hɔl wɪl si ɹizən," ɛɡwin sɛd. "wiv ɔlɹɛɾi ɹɪtɝn ðə boʊl ʌv wɪnz tə ðə si foʊk, ən naʊ ðəɾ ɪleɪn əz ɹiɾɪskʌvɝd ðə mɛθəɾ ə kɹæftɪŋ tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ɪts oʊnli ə mæɾɝ ə taɪm bɪfɔɹ ðəɹ ɑɹ soʊ mɛni wi kænɑt kip tʃɹæk ə ðɛm ɔl."

"The Hall will see reason," Egwene said. "We've already returned the Bowl of Winds to the Sea Folk, and now that Elayne has rediscovered the method of crafting ter'angreal, it is only a matter of time before there are so many we cannot keep track of them all."

"bʌɾ ɪleɪn ɪz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, mʌðɝ," sin sɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ, feɪs tʃɹʌbəld. "ʃʊɹli jə kən kip əɹ ɪn laɪn."

"But Elayne is an Aes Sedai, Mother," Seaine said, rising, face troubled. "Surely you can keep her in line."

"pɝhæps," ɛɡwin sɛd, spikɪŋ sɔfli. "bʌt dʌzn ɪt stʃɹaɪk jə ɑd ðət - æftɝ ɔl ə ðiz jɪɹz - soʊ mɛni tæləns ɑɹ ɹɪtɝnɪŋ, soʊ mɛni dɪskʌvɝiz biɪŋ meɪd? maɪ dʒɹimɪŋ, ɪleɪnz tɛɹæŋɡɹil, fɔɹtɛlɪŋ. ɹɛɹ tæləns sim ɪn əbʌndəns. ən eɪdʒ ɪz ɛndɪŋ, ən ðə wɝld ɪz tʃeɪnʒɪŋ. aɪ daʊt ðəɾ ɪleɪnz tælənt wɪl ɹɪmeɪn junik. wʌɾ ɪf wʌn ə ðə waɪz wʌnz əɹ si foʊk mænəfɛst ɪt?"

"Perhaps," Egwene said, speaking softly. "But doesn't it strike you odd that - after all of these years - so many Talents are returning, so many discoveries being made? My Dreaming, Elayne's ter'angreal, Foretelling. Rare Talents seem in abundance. An Age is ending, and the world is changing. I doubt that Elayne's Talent will remain unique. What if one of the Wise Ones or Sea Folk manifest it?"

ði ʌðɝ θɹi sæt kwaɪətli, tʃɹʌbəld.

The other three sat quietly, troubled.

"ɪt stɪl ɪzən ɹaɪt tə ɡɪv ʌp, mʌðɝ," jukɪɝi faɪnəli sɛd. "wɪð ɛfɝt, wi kəd bɹɪŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz ən wɪndfɪndɝz ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl."

"It still isn't right to give up, Mother," Yukiri finally said. "With effort, we could bring the Wise Ones and Windfinders under control."

"æn ði æʃəmən?" ɛɡwin sɛd sɔfli, əneɪbəl tə kip ə hɪn ə dɪskʌmfɝɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ vɔɪs.

"And the Asha'man?" Egwene said softly, unable to keep a hint of discomfort out of her voice.

"wɪl wi ɪnsɪs ðəɾ ɔl æŋɡɹil ən sɑŋɡɹil kɹieɪɾəd fəɹ mɛn bɪlɔŋ tə ʌs, ðoʊ wi kænɑt juz ðɛm? wʌɾ ɪf ðəɹ ɑɹ æʃəmən u lɝn tə kɹieɪɾ ɑbʒɛkts ə paʊɝ? wɪl wi fɔɹs əm tə ɡɪv ʌp ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðeɪ kɹieɪt tə ʌs? kəd wi ɛnfɔɹs ðæt?"

"Will we insist that all angreal and sa'angreal created for men belong to us, though we cannot use them? What if there are Asha'man who learn to create objects of Power? Will we force them to give up everything they create to us? Could we enforce that?"

"aɪ . . ." jukɪɝi sɛd.

"I . . ." Yukiri said.

lin ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ʃiz ɹaɪt, jukɪɝi. laɪt, bʌt ʃi ɪz."

Leane shook her head. "She's right, Yukiri. Light, but she is."

"ðə wɝld əz ɪt wɑz kænɑt bi aʊɝz ɛni lɔŋɡɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd sɔfli, nɑt wɑntɪŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz tə oʊvɝhɪɹ. "wɑz ɪɾ ɛvɝ? ðə blæk taʊɝ bɑnz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ði il noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɹɪvɪɹ ʌs, ðə wɪndfɪndɝz əv hɪɾən ðɛɹ bɛs tʃænlɝz fɹəm əs fəɹ sɛntʃɝiz ən ɑɹ bɪkʌmɪŋ ɪnkɹisɪŋli bəlɪdʒɝənt. ɪf wi tʃɹaɪ tə hoʊl tu taɪtli tə ɔl ə ðɪs, wɪl iðɝ bɪkʌm taɪɹəns əɹ fulz, dɪpɛndɪŋ əpɑn haʊ səksɛsfəl wi ɑɹ. aɪ æksɛp niðɝ taɪɾəl.

"The world as it was cannot be ours any longer," Egwene said softly, not wanting the Wise Ones to overhear. "Was it ever? The Black Tower bonds Aes Sedai, the Aiel no longer revere us, the Windfinders have hidden their best channelers from us for centuries and are becoming increasingly belligerent. If we try to hold too tightly to all of this, we will either become tyrants or fools, depending upon how successful we are. I accept neither title.

"wi wɪl lid ðɛm, jukɪɝi. wi mʌs bɪkʌm ə sɔɹs ðət wɪmən lʊk tə, ɔl wɪmən. wi ətʃiv ðət baɪ nɑt hoʊldɪŋ tu taɪtli, baɪ bɹɪŋɪŋ ðɛɹ tʃænlɝz tə tʃɹeɪn wɪð əs ən baɪ sɛndɪŋ əɹ moʊs tæləntəɾ æksɛptɪd tə bɪkʌm ɛkspɝts ɪn ðə θɪŋz ðeɪ ɑɹ bɛst æt."

"We will lead them, Yukiri. We must become a source that women look to, all women. We achieve that by not holding too tightly, by bringing their channelers to train with us and by sending our most talented Accepted to become experts in the things they are best at."

"æn ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ seɪɪŋ ðə seɪm θɪŋ ɹaɪt naʊ?" lin æsk sɔfli, lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ət ðə waɪz wʌnz, hu wɝ spikɪŋ ɪn hʌʃt toʊnz ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum. "ɪf ðeɪ tʃɹaɪ tə pleɪ əs əz wi pleɪ ðɛm?"

"And if they are saying the same thing right now?" Leane asked softly, looking over at the Wise Ones, who were speaking in hushed tones on the far side of the room. "If they try to play us as we play them?"

"ðɛn wɪv tə pleɪ ðə bɛst," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ɔl ə ðɪs ɪz sɛkəndɛɹi, fəɹ naʊ. wi nid junəɾi əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ ən ðə sintʃæn. wɪv tə- -  ə fɹæzəld-lʊkɪŋ sɪuən əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə ɹum, hɝ dʒɹɛs sɪŋʒd ɑn wʌn saɪd. "mʌðɝ! wi nid ju!"

"Then we have to play the best," Egwene said. "All of this is secondary, for now. We need unity against the Shadow and the Seanchan. We have to- -  A frazzled-looking Siuan appeared in the room, her dress singed on one side. "Mother! We need you!"

"ðə bæɾəl əz bɪɡʌn?" ɛɡwin sɛd, ɝdʒənt. tə ðə saɪd, ðə waɪz wʌnz pɝkt ʌp.

"The battle has begun?" Egwene said, urgent. To the side, the Wise Ones perked up.

"ɪt hæz," sɪuən sɛd, pæntɪŋ. "ɪt hæpən ɹaɪɾ ɔf. mʌðɝ, ðeɪ dɪdn kʌm tə ivzdʒɹɑp! ðeɪ ətækt"

"It has," Siuan said, panting. "It happened right off. Mother, they didn't come to eavesdrop! They attacked"

pɛɹɪn stʃɹikt əkɹɔs ðə lænd, kʌvɝɪŋ liɡz wɪð itʃ stɛp. hi niɾəd tə teɪk ðə spaɪk sʌmpleɪs əweɪ fɹəm sleɪɝ. pɝhæps ði oʊʃən? hi kəd -  ən æɹoʊ hɪs θɹu ði ɛɹ, slaɪsɪŋ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. pɛɹɪn kɝst ən spʌn. ðeɪ wɝ ɑn ə haɪ ɹɑki hɪlsaɪd. sleɪɝ stʊd daʊnhɪl fɹəm hɪm, baʊ ɹeɪz tə hɪz æŋɡjəlɝ feɪs, dɑɹk aɪz əlaɪt wɪð æŋɡɝ. hi ɹilist ənʌðɝ æɹoʊ.

Perrin streaked across the land, covering leagues with each step. He needed to take the spike someplace away from Slayer. Perhaps the ocean? He could -  An arrow hissed through the air, slicing his shoulder. Perrin cursed and spun. They were on a high rocky hillside. Slayer stood downhill from him, bow raised to his angular face, dark eyes alight with anger. He released another arrow.

ə wɔl, pɛɹɪn θɔt, sʌmənɪŋ ə wɔl ə bɹɪks ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. ði æɹoʊ pʌntʃt sɛvɹəl ɪntʃəz ɪndə ðə bɹɪks, bʌt stɑpt. pɛɹɪn ɪmiɾiətli sɛn hɪmsɛlf əweɪ. hi kʊdnt ɡoʊ fɑɹ, ðoʊ, nɑt waɪl kæɹiɪŋ ðə doʊm.

A wall, Perrin thought, summoning a wall of bricks in front of him. The arrow punched several inches into the bricks, but stopped. Perrin immediately sent himself away. He couldn't go far, though, not while carrying the dome.

pɛɹɪn tʃeɪnʒd soʊ ðəɾ i wɑznt ɡoʊɪŋ stʃɹeɪt nɔɹθ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, bʌt muvɪŋ təwɔɹd ði ist. hi daʊɾɪd ðət wəd θɹoʊ ɔf sleɪɝ - hi kəd pɹɑbli si ðə doʊm muvɪŋ ən dʒʌdʒ ɪts dɝɛkʃən.

Perrin changed so that he wasn't going straight north any longer, but moving toward the east. He doubted that would throw off Slayer - he could probably see the dome moving and judge its direction.

wʌt tə du? hid plæn tə tɔs ðə spaɪk ɪndə ði oʊʃən, bʌɾ ɪf sleɪɝ wɑz fɑloʊɪŋ, hid dʒʌst ɹɪkʌvɝ ɪt. pɛɹɪn kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn muvɪŋ əz kwɪkli əz i kʊd, kʌvɝɪŋ liɡz wɪð itʃ hɑɹtbit. kəɾ i aʊtʃɹʌn ɪz foʊ? ðə lændskeɪp pæst ɪm ɪn ə blɝ. maʊntənz, fɔɹəsts, leɪks, mɛdoʊz.

What to do? He'd planned to toss the spike into the ocean, but if Slayer was following, he'd just recover it. Perrin concentrated on moving as quickly as he could, covering leagues with each heartbeat. Could he outrun his foe? The landscape passed him in a blur. Mountains, forests, lakes, meadows.

dʒʌst əz i θɔɾ i maɪɾ əv ɡɑɾən əhɛd, ə fɪɡjɝ əpɪɹd dʒʌs bɪsaɪd hɪm, swɪŋɪŋ ə sɔɹɾ əɾ ɪz nɛk. pɛɹɪn dʌkt, bɛɹli dɑdʒɪŋ ði ətæk. hi ɡɹaʊld, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz hæmɝ, bʌt sleɪɝ vænɪʃt.

Just as he thought he might have gotten ahead, a figure appeared just beside him, swinging a sword at his neck. Perrin ducked, barely dodging the attack. He growled, raising his hammer, but Slayer vanished.

pɛɹɪn stɑpt ɪn pleɪs, fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd. sleɪɝ kəd muv fæstɝ ðən pɝ-ɹɪn, ən kəd ɡɛɾ ʌndɝ ðə doʊm baɪ dʒʌmpɪŋ əhɛɾ ʌv ɪt, ðən weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ pɛɹɪn tə muv ɪɾ ɑn tɑp ə hɪm. fɹəm ðɛɹ, hi kəd dʒʌmp dɝɛkli tə pɝ-ɹɪn ən ətæk.

Perrin stopped in place, frustrated. Slayer could move faster than Per-rin, and could get under the dome by jumping ahead of it, then waiting for Perrin to move it on top of him. From there, he could jump directly to Per-rin and attack.

aɪ kæn aʊtʃɹʌn hɪm, pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪzd. ði oʊnli weɪ tə bi sɝɾən, ði oʊnli weɪ tə pɹətɛk feɪl ən ði ʌðɝz, wɑz tə kɪl sleɪɝ. ʌðɝwaɪz ðə mæn wəd ɹɪkʌvɝ ðə spaɪk fɹəm wɛɹɛvɝ pɛɹɪn pʊɾ ɪt, ðən ɹɪtɝn ɪt tə tʃɹæp ɪz pipəl.

I can't outrun him, Perrin realized. The only way to be certain, the only way to protect Faile and the others, was to kill Slayer. Otherwise the man would recover the spike from wherever Perrin put it, then return it to trap his people.

pɛɹɪn ɡlænst ɝaʊnd, ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪz bɛɹɪŋz. hi wɑz ɑn ə laɪtli fɔɹ-ɛstəd sloʊp, ən kəd si dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊn tə ðə nɔɹθ ə hɪm. hi ɡlænst istwɝd, ən sɔ ðə tɪp ʌv ə lɑɹdʒ stʃɹʌktʃɝ pikɪŋ aʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə tʃɹi-tɑps. ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ðə sɪɾi maɪt ɡɪv pɛɹɪn ən ædvæntɪdʒ, meɪk ɪɾ iziɝ tə haɪɾ ɪn wʌn ə ðə mɛni bɪldɪŋz əɹ æliz.

Perrin glanced around, getting his bearings. He was on a lightly for-ested slope, and could see Dragonmount to the north of him. He glanced eastward, and saw the tip of a large structure peeking out over the tree-tops. The White Tower. The city might give Perrin an advantage, make it easier to hide in one of the many buildings or alleys.

pɛɹɪn lɛpt ɔf ɪn ðət dɝɛkʃən, kæɹiɪŋ ðə spaɪk wɪð hɪm, ðə doʊm ɪt kɹieɪɾəd tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð ɪm əz i muvd. ɪt wəd kʌm daʊn tə ə faɪɾ æftɝ ɔl.

Perrin leaped off in that direction, carrying the spike with him, the dome it created traveling with him as he moved. It would come down to a fight after all.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾisɛvən


CHAPTER 37

dɑɹknəs ɪn ðə taʊɝ


Darkness in the Tower

ɡɔɪn sæɾ ɑn ə bɛntʃ ɪn ðə keɪɛmlɪn pæləs ɡɑɹɾənz. ɪt hæd bɪn sɛvɹəl aʊɝz sɪns hid sɛn ɛɡwinz mɛsənʒɝ əweɪ. ə ɡɪbəs mun hʌŋ fæɾ ɪn ðə skaɪ. sɝvəns əkeɪʒənəli pæs baɪ tə si ɪf i niɾəd ɛniθɪŋ. ðeɪ simd wɝiɾ əbaʊt hɪm.

Gawyn sat on a bench in the Caemlyn Palace gardens. It had been several hours since he'd sent Egwene's messenger away. A gibbous moon hung fat in the sky. Servants occasionally passed by to see if he needed anything. They seemed worried about him.

hi dʒʌst wɑntəd tə wɑtʃ ðə skaɪ. ɪt hæd bɪn wiks sɪns hid bɪn eɪbəl tə də ðæt. ði ɛɹ wɑz kulɪŋ, bʌɾ i lɛft ɪz koʊɾ ɔf, hʌŋ oʊvɝ ðə bæk ə ðə bɛntʃ. ði oʊpən ɛɹ fɛlt ɡʊd - dɪfɹənt, sʌmhaʊ, fɹəm ðə seɪm ɛɹ bɪniθ ə klaʊɾi skaɪ.

He just wanted to watch the sky. It had been weeks since he'd been able to do that. The air was cooling, but he left his coat off, hung over the back of the bench. The open air felt good - different, somehow, from the same air beneath a cloudy sky.

wɪð ðə læs laɪɾ ə dʌsk feɪɾɪŋ, ðə stɑɹz ʃoʊn laɪk hɛzɪɾənt tʃɪlʒɹən, pikɪŋ aʊt naʊ ðət ði ʌpɹɔɹ ə deɪ hæd daɪd daʊn. ɪt fɛl soʊ ɡʊd tə faɪnəli si ðɛm əɡɛn. ɡɔɪn bɹiðd ɪn dipli.

With the last light of dusk fading, the stars shone like hesitant children, peeking out now that the uproar of day had died down. It felt so good to finally see them again. Gawyn breathed in deeply.

ɪleɪn wɑz ɹaɪt. mʌtʃ ʌv ɡɔɪnz heɪtʃɹəɾ ʌv ælθɹ keɪm fɹəm fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. meɪbi dʒɛləsi.

Elayne was right. Much of Gawyn's hatred of al'Thor came from frustration. Maybe jealousy.

ælθɹ wɑz pleɪɪŋ ə ɹoʊl kloʊsɝ tə wʌt ɡɔɪn wʊɾə tʃoʊzən fəɹ hɪmsɛlf. ɹulɪŋ neɪʃənz, liɾɪŋ ɑɹmiz. lʊkɪŋ ət ðɛɹ laɪvz, hu hæd teɪkən ɑn ðə ɹoʊl ʌv ə pɹɪns, ən u ðə ɹoʊl ʌv ə lɔst ʃifɝɾɝ?

Al'Thor was playing a role closer to what Gawyn would have chosen for himself. Ruling nations, leading armies. Looking at their lives, who had taken on the role of a prince, and who the role of a lost sheepherder?

pɝhæps ɡɔɪn ɹɪzɪstɪɾ ɛɡwinz dɪmænz kəz i wɑntəd tə lid, tə bi ðə wʌn u əkɑmplɪʃt ðə hɪɹoʊɪk æks. ɪf i bɪkeɪm əɹ wɔɹɾɝ, hi wəɾ əv tə stɛp əsaɪɾ ən hɛlp əɹ tʃeɪnʒ ðə wɝld. ðəɹ wɑz ɑnɝ ɪn kipɪŋ sʌmwʌn ɡɹeɪɾ əlaɪv. ə dip ɑnɝ. wʌt wɑz ðə pɔɪn ʌv ɡɹeɪɾ æks? ðə ɹɛkəɡnɪʃən ðeɪ bɹɔt, əɹ ðə bɛɾɝ laɪvz ðeɪ kɹieɪɾəd?

Perhaps Gawyn resisted Egwene's demands because he wanted to lead, to be the one who accomplished the heroic acts. If he became her Warder, he would have to step aside and help her change the world. There was honor in keeping someone great alive. A deep honor. What was the point of great acts? The recognition they brought, or the better lives they created?

tə stɛp əsaɪd. hiɾ ədmaɪɝd mɛn laɪk slit fəɹ ðɛɹ wɪlɪŋnəs tə də ðɪs, bʌt hæd nɛvɝ ʌndɝstʊd ðɛm. nɑt tʃɹuli. / kæn liv əɹ tə də ɪɾ əloʊn, hi θɔt. sɛvən əv tə hɛlp hɝ. fɹəm wɪðɪn əɹ ʃædoʊ.

To step aside. He'd admired men like Sleete for their willingness to do this, but had never understood them. Not truly. / can't leave her to do it alone, he thought. 7 have to help her. From within her shadow.

kəz i lʌv hɝ. bʌɾ ɔlsoʊ kəz ɪt wɑz fəɹ ðə bɛst. ɪf tu bɑɹdz tʃɹaɪd tə pleɪ dɪfɹən sɔŋz ət ðə seɪm taɪm, ðeɪ boʊθ meɪd nɔɪz. bʌɾ ɪf wʌn stɛp bæk tə ɡɪv hɑɹməni tə ði ʌðɝz mɛləɾi, ðən ðə bjuɾi kəd bi ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən iðɝ meɪɾ əloʊn.

Because he loved her. But also because it was for the best. If two bards tried to play different songs at the same time, they both made noise. But if one stepped back to give harmony to the other's melody, then the beauty could be greater than either made alone.

ən ɪn ðət moʊmənt, faɪnəli, hi ʌndɝstʊd. hi stʊɾ ʌp. hi kʊdnt ɡoʊ tə ɛɡwin əz ə pɹɪns.

And in that moment, finally, he understood. He stood up. He couldn't go to Egwene as a prince.

hi hæd tə ɡoʊ tə hɝ əz ə wɔɹɾɝ. hi hæd tə wɑtʃ oʊvɝ hɝ, tə sɝv hɝ. si hɝ wɪʃɪz dʌn.

He had to go to her as a Warder. He had to watch over her, to serve her. See her wishes done.

ɪt wɑz taɪm tə ɹɪtɝn.

It was time to return.

slɪŋɪŋ ɪz koʊɾ ɑn, hi stʃɹoʊd daʊn ðə pæθ təwɔɹd ðə pæləs. ði oʊpənɪŋ sɛɹəneɪdz ə vɛɹiəs pɑn fɹɑɡz kʌt ʃɔɹt - fɑloʊd baɪ splæʃəz - əz i pæst əm ən ɛntɝd ðə bɪldɪŋ. ɪt wɑzn ə lɔŋ wɔk tə hɪz sɪstɝz ɹumz. ʃi wəd bi ʌp; ʃi hæd tʃɹʌbəl slipɪŋ leɪtli. dʊɹɪŋ ðə pæs fju deɪz, ðeɪ hæɾ ɔfən ɛndʒɔɪd kɑnvɝseɪʃən ən ə kʌp ʌv wɔɹm ti bɪfɔɹ bɛd. əɾ əɹ dɔɹz, haʊɛvɝ, hi wɑz stɑp baɪ bɝdʒɪt.

Slinging his coat on, he strode down the path toward the Palace. The opening serenades of various pond frogs cut short - followed by splashes - as he passed them and entered the building. It wasn't a long walk to his sister's rooms. She would be up; she had trouble sleeping lately. During the past few days, they had often enjoyed conversation and a cup of warm tea before bed. At her doors, however, he was stopped by Birgitte.

ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ənʌðɝ ɡlɛɹ. jɛs, ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk biɪŋ fɔɹs tə ækt əz kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl ɪn ɪz stɛd. hi kəd si ðət naʊ. hi fɛlt ə lɪɾəl ɑkwɝd stɛpɪŋ ʌp tə hɝ. ðə wʊmən hɛld ʌp ə hænd.

She gave him another glare. Yes, she did not like being forced to act as Captain-General in his stead. He could see that now. He felt a little awkward stepping up to her. The woman held up a hand.

"nɑt tənaɪt, pɹɪnsəlɪŋ."

"Not tonight, princeling."

"aɪm livɪŋ fəɹ ðə waɪt taʊɝ," hi sɛd. "aɪd laɪk tə seɪ fɛɹwɛl."

"I'm leaving for the White Tower," he said. "I'd like to say farewell."

hi muv tə stɛp fɔɹwɝd, bʌt bɝdʒɪt hɛld ə hæn əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst, dʒɛnli pʊʃɪŋ ɪm bæk.

He moved to step forward, but Birgitte held a hand against his chest, gently pushing him back.

"ju kən liv ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ."

"You can leave in the morning."

hi ɔlmoʊst ɹitʃt fəɹ ɪz sɔɹd, bʌt stɑp hɪmsɛlf. laɪt! ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə taɪm wən i hædn ɹiæktəd ðət weɪ tə ɛvɹiθɪŋ. hi hæd bɪkʌm ə ful. "æsk ɪf ʃɪl si mi," hi sɛd pəlaɪtli.

He almost reached for his sword, but stopped himself. Light! There had been a time when he hadn't reacted that way to everything. He had become a fool. "Ask if she'll see me," he said politely.

"pliz."

"Please."

"aɪ hæv maɪ ɔɹɾɝz," bɝdʒɪt sɛd. "bɪsaɪdz, ʃi kʊdn tɔk tə ju. ʃiz əslip."

"I have my orders," Birgitte said. "Besides, she couldn't talk to you. She's asleep."

"aɪm ʃʊɹ ʃid laɪk tə bi əweɪkənd."

"I'm sure she'd like to be awakened."

"ɪts nɑt ðət kaɪndə slip," bɝdʒɪt sɛd. ʃi saɪd. "ɪɾ əz tə də wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ mæɾɝz. ɡoʊ tə bɛd. ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, jəɹ sɪstɝ wɪl pɹɑbli hæv wɝd fɹəm ɛɡwin fəɹ ju."

"It's not that kind of sleep," Birgitte said. She sighed. "It has to do with Aes Sedai matters. Go to bed. In the morning, your sister will probably have word from Egwene for you."

ɡɔɪn fɹaʊnd. haʊ wəd . . .

Gawyn frowned. How would . . .

ðə dʒɹimz, hi ɹilaɪzd. ðɪs ɪz wʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ mɛnt, əbaʊɾ ɛɡwin tʃɹeɪnɪŋ əm tə wɔk ɪn ðɛɹ dʒɹimz. "soʊ ɛɡwinz slipɪŋ əz wɛl?"

The dreams, he realized. This is what the Aes Sedai meant, about Egwene training them to walk in their dreams. "So Egwene's sleeping as well?"

bɝdʒɪɾ aɪd hɪm. "blʌɾi æʃəz, aɪv pɹɑbli sɛd tu mʌtʃ ɔlɹɛɾi. ɔf tə jəɹ ɹumz."

Birgitte eyed him. "Bloody ashes, I've probably said too much already. Off to your rooms."

ɡɔɪn stɛpt əweɪ, bʌt nɑt tə ɡoʊ tə hɪz ɹumz. hɪl weɪt fəɹ ə taɪm ʌv wiknəs, hi θɔt, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðə sʌldəmz wɝdz. ən wən i stʃɹaɪks, hɪl liv sətʃ dɛsəleɪʃən əz jə wʊdn bɪliv ə sɪŋɡəl mæn kəd kɹieɪt . . .

Gawyn stepped away, but not to go to his rooms. He'll wait for a time of weakness, he thought, remembering the sul'dam's words. And when he strikes, he'll leave such desolation as you wouldn't believe a single man could create . . .

ə taɪm ʌv wiknəs.

A time of weakness.

hi dæʃt əweɪ fɹəm ɪleɪnz ɹumz, spɹɪntɪŋ θɹu ðə pæləs hɔlweɪz tə ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ ɹum ðəɾ ɪleɪn hæd sɛɾ ʌp. blɛsədli, ə kɪnswʊmən wɑz ɑn duɾi hɪɹ - blɪɹi-aɪd, bʌt weɪɾɪŋ ɪn keɪs ɪmɝdʒənsi mɛsədʒəz niɾəd tə bi sɛnt. ɡɔɪn dɪdn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə dɑɹk-hɛɹd wʊmən, bʌt ʃi sim tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz hɪm.

He dashed away from Elayne's rooms, sprinting through the palace hallways to the Traveling room that Elayne had set up. Blessedly, a Kinswoman was on duty here - bleary-eyed, but waiting in case emergency messages needed to be sent. Gawyn didn't recognize the dark-haired woman, but she seemed to recognize him.

ʃi jɔn ən oʊpən ə ɡeɪtweɪ əɾ ɪz ɹɪkwɛst. hi ɹæn θɹu ən ɑntu ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ ɡɹaʊn ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ðə ɡeɪtweɪ vænɪʃt ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn hɪm. ɡɔɪn stɑɹɾəd, spɪnɪŋ wɪð ə kɝs. ðət hæd nɪɹli kloʊzd ɹaɪɾ ɑn hɪm! waɪ hæd ðə kɪnswʊmən lɛɾ ɪt vænɪʃ soʊ əbɹʌpli, ən soʊ deɪnʒɝəsli? ə splɪt sɛkən sunɝ, ən ɪt wʊɾə teɪkən ɪz fʊɾ ɔf əɹ wɝs.

She yawned and opened a gateway at his request. He ran through and onto the Traveling ground of the White Tower. The gateway vanished right behind him. Gawyn started, spinning with a curse. That had nearly closed right on him! Why had the Kinswoman let it vanish so abruptly, and so dangerously? A split second sooner, and it would have taken his foot off or worse.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm. hi tɝn ən kəntɪnjud ɹʌnɪŋ.

There was no time. He turned and continued running.

ɛɡwin, lin ən ðə waɪz wʌnz əpɪɹɾ ɪn ə ɹum ət ðə beɪs ə ðə taʊɝ, wɛɹ ə ɡɹup ʌv æŋkʃəs wɪmən weɪɾəd. ðɪs wɑz ə ɡɑɹd poʊs ðəɾ ɛɡwin hæd stɪpjəleɪɾɪd əz ə fɔlbæk pəzɪʃən.

Egwene, Leane and the Wise Ones appeared in a room at the base of the Tower, where a group of anxious women waited. This was a guard post that Egwene had stipulated as a fallback position.

"ɹipɔɹt!" ɛɡwin dɪmændəd.

"Report!" Egwene demanded.

"ʃɛvən ən kɑɹlɪnjə ɑɹ dɛd, mʌðɝ," sɹɪn sɛd ɡɹɪmli. ðə bɹʌsk bɹaʊn wɑz pæntɪŋ.

"Shevan and Carlinya are dead, Mother," Saerin said grimly. The brusque Brown was panting.

ɛɡwin kɝst. "wʌt hæpənd?"

Egwene cursed. "What happened?"

"wi wɝ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv əɹ plɔɪ, hævɪŋ ə dɪskʌʃən əbaʊɾ ə feɪk plɑt tə bɹɪŋ pis tə ɑɹæd dumən, əz juɾ ɔɹɾɝd. ən ðən . . ."

"We were in the middle of our ploy, having a discussion about a fake plot to bring peace to Arad Doman, as you'd ordered. And then . . ."

"faɪɝ," mɔɹvɹɪn sɛd, ʃɪvɝɪŋ. "blæstɪŋ θɹu ðə wɔlz. wɪmən tʃænəlɪŋ, sɛvɹəl wɪð ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl paʊɝ. aɪ sɔ ɑlviɛɝɪn ðɛɹ. ʌðɝz, tu."

"Fire," Morvrin said, shivering. "Blasting through the walls. Women channeling, several with incredible Power. I saw Alviarin there. Others, too."

"nɪneɪiv ɪz stɪl ʌp ðɛɹ," bɹɛndəz æɾəd.

"Nynaeve is still up there," Brendas added.

"stʌbɝn wʊmən," ɛɡwin sɛd, lʊkɪŋ ət ðə θɹi waɪz wʌnz. ðeɪ nɑɾəd. "sɛn bɹɛndəz aʊt," ʃi sɛd, pɔɪntɪŋ ət ðə kul-aɪd waɪt. "wɛn jə weɪk, ɡoʊ ən weɪk ði ʌðɝz hɪɹ soʊ ðəl bi aʊɾ ə deɪnʒɝ. liv nɪneɪiv, sɪuən, lin ən maɪsɛlf."

"Stubborn woman," Egwene said, looking at the three Wise Ones. They nodded. "Send Brendas out," she said, pointing at the cool-eyed White. "When you wake, go and wake the others here so they will be out of danger. Leave Nynaeve, Siuan, Leane and myself."

"jɛs, mʌðɝ," bɹɛndəz sɛd.

"Yes, Mother," Brendas said.

æmɪz dɪd sʌmθɪŋ ðət meɪɾ əɹ fɔɹm feɪɾ əweɪ. ðə ɹɛst ə ju," ɛɡwin sɛd, "ɡoʊ sʌmpleɪs seɪf. əweɪ fɹəm ðə sɪɾi." vɛɹi wɛl, mʌðɝ," sɹɪn sɛd. ʃi steɪɾ ɪn pleɪs, haʊɛvɝ. wʌt?"

Amys did something that made her form fade away. The rest of you," Egwene said, "go someplace safe. Away from the city." Very well, Mother," Saerin said. She stayed in place, however. What?"

ɛɡwin sɛd.

Egwene said.

"aɪ .. ." sɹɪn fɹaʊnd. "aɪ kænt ɡoʊ. sʌmθɪŋ ɪz ɑd."

"I .. ." Saerin frowned. "I can't go. Something is odd."

"nɑnsɛns," bɛɹ snæpt. "ɪt - "

"Nonsense," Bair snapped. "It - "

"bɛɹ," æmɪz sɛd. "aɪ kæn liv. sʌmθɪŋ ɪz vɛɹi ɹɔŋ."

"Bair," Amys said. "I can't leave. Something is very wrong."

"ðə skaɪ ɪz vaɪəlɪt," jukɪɝi sɛd, lʊkɪŋ aʊɾ ə smɔl wɪndoʊ. "laɪɾ ɪt lʊks laɪk ə doʊm, kʌvɝɪŋ ðə taʊɝ ən ðə sɪɾi. wən dɪd ðət hæpən?"

"The sky is violet," Yukiri said, looking out a small window. "Light It looks like a dome, covering the Tower and the city. When did that happen?"

"sʌmθɪŋ ɪz vɛɹi ɹɔŋ hɪɹ," bɛɹ sɛd. "wi ʃəɾ əweɪkən."

"Something is very wrong here," Bair said. "We should awaken."

æmɪz sʌɾənli vænɪʃt, kɑzɪŋ ɛɡwin tə stɑɹt; ʃi wɑz bæk ɪn ə moʊmənt. "aɪ wɑz eɪbəl tə ɡoʊ tə ðə pleɪs wɛɹ wi wɝ bɪfɔɹ, bʌɾ aɪ kænɑt liv ðə sɪɾi. aɪ də nɑt laɪk ðɪs, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ."

Amys suddenly vanished, causing Egwene to start; She was back in a moment. "I was able to go to the place where we were before, but I cannot leave the city. I do not like this, Egwene al'Vere."

ɛɡwin tʃɹaɪd sɛndɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə kɛɹhin. ɪt dɪdnt wɝk. ʃi lʊkt aʊt ðə wɪndoʊ, filɪŋ wɝid, bʌt ɹɛzəlut. jɛs, ðəɹ wɑz vaɪəlɪɾ əbʌv.

Egwene tried sending herself to Cairhien. It didn't work. She looked out the window, feeling worried, but resolute. Yes, there was violet above.

"weɪk ɪf jə mʌst," ʃi sɛd tə ðə waɪz wʌnz. "aɪ wɪl faɪt. wʌn ə ðə ʃæɾoʊsuld ɪz hɪɹ."

"Wake if you must," she said to the Wise Ones. "I will fight. One of the Shadowsouled is here."

ðə waɪz wʌnz fɛl saɪlənt. "wi wɪl ɡoʊ wɪð ju," məleɪn faɪnəli sɛd.

The Wise Ones fell silent. "We will go with you," Melaine finally said.

"ɡʊd. jə ʌðɝz, bi əweɪ fɹəm ðɪs pleɪs. ɡoʊ tə ðə mjuzɪʃənz weɪ ən steɪ ðəɹ əntɪl əweɪkənd. məleɪn, æmɪz, bɛɹ, lin, wəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə ə pleɪs haɪɝ ɪn ðə taʊɝ, ə ɹum wɪð wʊd pænəlɪŋ ən ə fɔɹ-poʊstɝ bɛd, ɡɔz dʒɹpɪŋz ɝaʊn ɪt. ɪts maɪ bɛdʒɹum."

"Good. You others, be away from this place. Go to the Musician's Way and stay there until awakened. Melaine, Amys, Bair, Leane, we are going to a place higher in the Tower, a room with wood paneling and a four-poster bed, gauze drapings around it. It is my bedroom."

ðə waɪz wʌnz nɑɾəd, ən ɛɡwin sɛn hɝsɛlf ðɛɹ. ə læmp sæɾ ɑn əɹ naɪtstænd; ɪt dɪdn bɝn hɪɹ ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, ðoʊ ʃid lɛft ɪt bɝnɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹil wɝld. ðə waɪz wʌnz ən lin əpɪɹɾ ɝaʊn hɝ. ðə ɡɔz dʒɹeɪpɪŋ ɛɡwin ɛs bɛd ɹʌfəld ɪn ðə bɹiz ə ðɛɹ əpɪɹəns.

The Wise Ones nodded, and Egwene sent herself there. A lamp sat on her nightstand; it didn't burn here in Tel'aran'rhiod, though she'd left it burning in the real world. The Wise Ones and Leane appeared around her. The gauze draping Egwene s bed ruffled in the breeze of their appearance.

ðə taʊɝ ʃʊk. ðə faɪɾɪŋ kəntɪnjud.

The Tower shook. The fighting continued.

"bi kɛɹfəl," ɛɡwin sɛd. "wi hʌn deɪnʒɝəs foʊz, ən ðeɪ noʊ ðɪs tɝeɪn bɛɾɝ ðən ju."

"Be careful," Egwene said. "We hunt dangerous foes, and they know this terrain better than you."

"wi wɪl bi kɛɹfəl," bɛɹ ɹɪplaɪd. "aɪ hæv hɝd ðət ðə ʃæɾoʊsuld θɪŋk ðɛmsɛlvz mæstɝz ə ðɪs pleɪs. wɛl, wi ʃæl si."

"We will be careful," Bair replied. "I have heard that the Shadowsouled think themselves masters of this place. Well, we shall see."

"lin," ɛɡwin sɛd, "kæn jə hændəl jɝsɛlf?" ɛɡwin hæd bɪn tɛmptəd tə sɛn əɹ əweɪ, bʌt ʃi ən sɪuən hæd spɛn səm mɛʒɝ ə taɪm ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. sɝɾənli, ʃi wɑz mɔɹ ɪkspɪɹiəns ðən moʊst.

"Leane," Egwene said, "can you handle yourself?" Egwene had been tempted to send her away, but she and Siuan had spent some measure of time in Tel'aran'rhiod. Certainly, she was more experienced than most.

"aɪl kip maɪ hɛd loʊ, mʌðɝ," ʃi pɹɑməst. "bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ baʊn tə bi mɔɹ ə ðɛm ðən ʌs.

"I'll keep my head low, Mother," she promised. "But there are bound to be more of them than us.

jə nid mi."

You need me."

"əɡɹid," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"Agreed," Egwene said.

ðə fɔɹ wɪmən wɪŋkt əweɪ. waɪ kʊdn ðeɪ liv ðə taʊɝ? ɪt wɑz tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ, bʌɾ ɔlsoʊ jusfəl. ɪt wəd min ʃi wɑz tʃɹæp hɪɹ.

The four women winked away. Why couldn't they leave the Tower? It was troubling, but also useful. It would mean she was trapped here.

bʌt hoʊpfəli soʊ wɑz mɛsænə.

But hopefully so was Mesaana.

faɪv dʌvz ɹoʊz ɪndə ði ɛɹ, skæɾɝɪŋ fɹəm ðə lɛdʒ ə ðə ɹuftɑp. pɛɹɪn spʌn. sleɪɝ stʊd bɪhaɪn hɪm, smɛlɪŋ laɪk stoʊn.

Five doves rose into the air, scattering from the ledge of the rooftop. Perrin spun. Slayer stood behind him, smelling like stone.

ðə hɑɹd-aɪd mæn ɡlænst ʌp ət ðə fliɪŋ bɝdz. "jʊɹz?"

The hard-eyed man glanced up at the fleeing birds. "Yours?"

"fɔɹ wɔɹnɪŋ," pɛɹɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "aɪ fɪɡjɝd jud si θɹu wɔlnʌt ʃɛlz ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd."

"For warning," Perrin replied. "I figured you'd see through walnut shellls on the ground."

"klɛvɝ," sleɪɝ sɛd.

"Clever," Slayer said.

bɪhaɪn ɪm spɹɛɾ ə mæɡnɪfəsən sɪɾi. pɛɹɪn hædn bɪliv ðəɾ ɛni sɪɾi kəd bi əz mæɡnɪfəsən əz keɪɛmlɪn. bʌɾ ɪf ðəɹ wɑz sətʃ ə θɪŋ, tɑɹ vəlɑn wɑz ɪt. ði ɪntaɪɝ sɪɾi wɑz ə wɝk ʌv ɑɹt, ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹi bɪldɪŋ dɛkt wɪð ɑɹtʃweɪz, spaɪɹz, ɪnɡɹeɪvɪŋz ən ɔɹnəmɛnteɪʃən. ivən ðə kɑbəlstoʊnz sim tə bi ɝeɪnʒd ɑɹtɪstɪkli.

Behind him spread a magnificent city. Perrin hadn't believed that any city could be as magnificent as Caemlyn. But if there was such a thing, Tar Valon was it. The entire city was a work of art, almost every building decked with archways, spires, engravings and ornamentation. Even the cobblestones seemed to be arranged artistically.

sleɪɝz aɪz flɪkɝd daʊn tə pɛɹɪnz bɛlt. ðɛɹ, əfɪkst ɪn ə paʊtʃ pɛɹɪn hæd kɹieɪɾəd tə hoʊld ɪt, wɑz ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil. ðə tɪp stʌk aʊt ðə tɑp, sɪlvɝi bɪts ɹæpɪŋ ɝaʊnd wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn ə kɑmplɛks nɑɾɪd bɹeɪd. pɛɹɪn hæd tʃɹaɪɾ əɡɛn tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðə θɪŋ baɪ θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɪt, bʌt hæd bɪn ɹɪbʌft. ətækɪŋ ɪt wɪð ɪz hæmɝ hædn soʊ mʌtʃ əz bɛn ɪt. wʌtɛvɝ ðɪs θɪŋ wɑz, ɪt hæd bɪn bɪl tə ɹɪzɪst sətʃ ətæks.

Slayer's eyes flickered down to Perrin's belt. There, affixed in a pouch Perrin had created to hold it, was the ter'angreal. The tip stuck out the top, silvery bits wrapping around one another in a complex knotted braid. Perrin had tried again to destroy the thing by thinking of it, but had been rebuffed. Attacking it with his hammer hadn't so much as bent it. Whatever this thing was, it had been built to resist such attacks.

"juv ɡɹoʊn skɪldwʌn' sleɪɝ sɛd. "aɪ ʃʊɾə kɪl jə mʌnθs əɡoʊ."

"You've grown skilled,1' Slayer said. "I should have killed you months ago."

"aɪ bɪliv jə tʃɹaɪd," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz hæmɝ, ɹɛstɪŋ ɪɾ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "hu ɑɹ jə ɹɪli?"

"I believe you tried," Perrin said, raising his hammer, resting it on his shoulder. "Who are you really?"

"ə mæn ə tu wɝlz, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. ən wʌn oʊn baɪ boʊθ. əl nid ðə dʒɹimspaɪk bæk."

"A man of two worlds, Perrin Aybara. And one owned by both. I'll need the dreamspike back."

"stɛp kloʊsɝ, ən əl dɪstʃɹɔɪ ɪt," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Step closer, and I'll destroy it," Perrin said.

sleɪɝ snɔɹɾɪd, wɔkɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. "ju doʊn əv ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ fəɹ ðæt, bɔɪ. aɪ doʊn ivən əv ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ tə mænədʒ ðæt." hɪz aɪz flɪkɝɾ ʌnkɑnʃəsli oʊvɝ pɛɹɪnz ʃoʊldɝ. təwɔɹd wʌt?

Slayer snorted, walking forward. "You don't have the strength for that, boy. I don't even have the strength to manage that." His eyes flickered unconsciously over Perrin's shoulder. Toward what?

dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt, pɛɹɪn θɔt. hi mʌst əv wɝiɾ aɪ wɑz kʌmɪŋ ðɪs weɪ tə tɔs ɪɾ ɪn. wɑz ðæt, ðɛn, ən ɪndəkeɪʃən ʌv ə weɪ pɛɹɪn kəd dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil? əɹ wɑz sleɪɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə mɪslid hɪm?

Dragonmount, Perrin thought. He must have worried I was coming this way to toss it in. Was that, then, an indication of a way Perrin could destroy the ter'angreal? Or was Slayer trying to mislead him?

"doʊn pɹɛs mi, bɔɪ," sleɪɝ sɛd, sɔɹɾ ən naɪf əpɪɹɪŋ ɪn ɪz hænz əz i wɔk fɔɹwɝd.

"Don't press me, boy," Slayer said, sword and knife appearing in his hands as he walked forward.

"aɪv ɔlɹɛɾi kɪl fɔɹ wʊlvz tədeɪ. ɡɪmi ðə spaɪk."

"I've already killed four wolves today. Give me the spike."

fɔɹ? bʌt hid kɪld oʊnli wʌn ðət pɛɹɪn hæd sin. hiz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡoʊd mi.

Four? But he'd killed only one that Perrin had seen. He's trying to goad me.

jə θɪŋk əl bɪliv ðət jə woʊn kɪl mi ɪf aɪ ɡɪv ɪt tə ju?" pɝ- ɹɪn sɛd. "ɪf aɪ ɡeɪv ðɪs tə ju, juɾ əv tə ɡoʊ pʊɾ ɪt bæk ɪn ɡildən.

You think I'll believe that you won't kill me if I give it to you?" Per- rin said. "If I gave this to you, you'd have to go put it back in Ghealdan.

jə noʊ aɪd dʒʌs fɑloʊ jə ðɛɹ." pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "wʌn ʌv əs əz tə daɪ, ən ðæts ðæt."

You know I'd just follow you there." Perrin shook his head. "One of us has to die, and that's that."

sleɪɝ hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən smaɪld. "luk heɪts ju, jə noʊ. heɪts jə dipli."

Slayer hesitated, then smiled. "Luc hates you, you know. Hates you deeply."

ən jə doʊnt?" pɛɹɪn æskt, fɹaʊnɪŋ. noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðə wʊlf heɪts ðə stæɡ."

And you don't?" Perrin asked, frowning. No more than the wolf hates the stag."

"ju ɑɹ nɑɾ ə wʊlf," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ɡɹoʊlɪŋ sɔfli.

"You are not a wolf," Perrin said, growling softly.

sleɪɝ ʃɹʌɡd. "lɛɾ əs bi dʌn wɪð ðɪs, ðɛn." hi dæʃt fɔɹwɝd ɡɔɪn tʃɑɹdʒd ɪndə ðə waɪt taʊɝ; ðə mɛn ɑn ɡɑɹd bɛɹli hæd taɪm tə səlut. hi dæʃt pæs mɪɹɝd stænd-læmps. oʊnli wʌn ɪn ɛvɹi tu wɑz lɪt, tə kənsɝv ɔɪl. əz i ɹitʃt ə ɹæmp ʌpwɝd, hi hɝd fit bi-haɪn hɪm.

Slayer shrugged. "Let us be done with this, then." He dashed forward Gawyn charged into the White Tower; the men on guard barely had time to salute. He dashed past mirrored stand-lamps. Only one in every two was lit, to conserve oil. As he reached a ramp upward, he heard feet be-hind him.

hɪz sɔɹd hɪst əz i pʊld ɪt fɹi, spɪnɪŋ. mɑzoʊni ən sɛlɑɹk pʊl tə ə hɔlt. ðə fɔɹmɝ jʌŋɡəlɪŋz wɔɹ taʊɝ ɡɑɹd junəfɔɹmz naʊ wəd ðeɪ tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp hɪm? hu nu wʌt kaɪndə ɔɹɾɝz ɛɡwin hæd lɛft?

His sword hissed as he pulled it free, spinning. Mazone and Celark pulled to a halt. The former Younglings wore Tower Guard uniforms now Would they try to stop him? Who knew what kind of orders Egwene had left?

ðeɪ səluɾəd.

They saluted.

"mɛn?" ɡɔɪn sɛd. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ?"

"Men?" Gawyn said. "What are you doing?"

"sɝ," sɛlɑɹk sɛd, lin feɪs ʃæɾoʊd ɪn ðə pætʃi læmplaɪt. "wɛn ən ɔfəsɝ ɹʌnz baɪ wɪð ə lʊk laɪk ðəɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs, jə doʊn æsk ɪf i nidz hɛlp. jə dʒʌs fɑloʊ!"

"Sir," Celark said, lean face shadowed in the patchy lamplight. "When an officer runs by with a look like that on his face, you don't ask if he needs help. You just follow!"

ɡɔɪn smaɪld. "kʌm ɑn." hi dæʃt ʌp ðə ɹæmps, ðə tu mɛn fɑloʊɪŋ, sɔɹdz ət ðə ɹɛɾi.

Gawyn smiled. "Come on." He dashed up the ramps, the two men following, swords at the ready.

ɛɡwin ɛs kɔɹɾɝz wɝ səm weɪ ʌp, ən ɡɔɪnz pʌls wɑz ɹeɪsɪŋ -  hɪz bɹiðɪŋ fɔɹst - baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ ɹitʃt əɹ lɛvəl. ðeɪ hɝid daʊn θɹi hɔlweɪz; ðən ɡɔɪn hɛld ʌp ɪz hænd. hi ɡlænst ət ðə nɪɹbaɪ ʃæɾoʊd ɹisɛsəz. wɝ ɛni ʌv əm dip ɪnʌf tə haɪɾ ə blʌd-naɪf?

Egwene s quarters were some way up, and Gawyn's pulse was racing -  his breathing forced - by the time they reached her level. They hurried down three hallways; then Gawyn held up his hand. He glanced at the nearby shadowed recesses. Were any of them deep enough to hide a Blood-knife?

jə kænɑɾ əv laɪt wɪθaʊt ʃædoʊ . . .

You cannot have light without shadow . . .

hi pikt ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ təwɔɹɾ ɛɡwinz dɔɹ; hi stʊɾ ɪn vɝtʃuəli ðə seɪm pəzɪʃən i bɪn wən i hæd ɹuən əɹ plænz bɪfɔɹ. wɑz i duɪŋ ðə seɪm θɪŋ naʊ? hɪz tu ɡɑɹdzmɪn stʊɾ ʌp kloʊs bɪhaɪn hɪm, weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ɪz kəmænd.

He peeked around the corner toward Egwene's door; he stood in virtually the same position he been when he had ruined her plans before. Was he doing the same thing now? His two guardsmen stood up close behind him, waiting on his command.

jɛs. hi wɑz duɪŋ ðə seɪm θɪŋ əz bɪfɔɹ. ən jɛt, sʌmθɪŋ hæd tʃeɪnʒd. hi wəd si hɝ pɹətɛktəd soʊ ðət ʃi kəd də ɡɹeɪt θɪŋz. hi wəd stæn ɪn əɹ ʃædoʊ ən bi pɹaʊd. hi wəd də əz ʃi æskt - -bʌt wəd si hɝ seɪf noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt.

Yes. He was doing the same thing as before. And yet, something had changed. He would see her protected so that she could do great things. He would stand in her shadow and be proud. He would do as she asked - -but would see her safe no matter what.

kəz ðət wɑz wʌɾ ə wɔɹɾɝ dɪd.

Because that was what a Warder did.

hi slɪp fɔɹwɝd, weɪvɪŋ ɪz mɛn tə fɑloʊ. ðə dɑɹknəs ɪn ðət ʃæɾoʊi ælkoʊv fɹəm bɪfɔɹ dɪdn sim tə ɹɪpɛl ɪz ətɛnʃən əz ɪt hæd læs taɪm. ə ɡʊd saɪn. hi stɑpt ət ðə dɔɹ ən tʃɹaɪɾ ɪt kɛɹfəli. ɪt wɑz ənlɑkt. hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ðən slɪpt ɪnsaɪd.

He slipped forward, waving his men to follow. The darkness in that shadowy alcove from before didn't seem to repel his attention as it had last time. A good sign. He stopped at the door and tried it carefully. It was unlocked. He took a deep breath, then slipped inside.

noʊ əlɑɹmz wɛn ɔf; noʊ tʃɹæps kɑɾ ɪm ən flʌŋ ɪm əbaʊt. ə fju læmps ʃoʊn ɑn ðə wɔlz. əɾ ə feɪnt nɔɪz, hi lʊkt ʌpwɝd. eɪ taʊɝ meɪd hʌŋ ðɛɹ, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ, wɪð waɪɾ aɪz, maʊθ ɡæɡd baɪ ən ɪnvɪzəbəl floʊ ʌv ɛɹ.

No alarms went off; no traps caught him and flung him about. A few lamps shone on the walls. At a faint noise, he looked upward. A Tower maid hung there, struggling, with wide eyes, mouth gagged by an invisible flow of Air.

ɡɔɪn kɝst, dæʃɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə ɹum, ən θɹu oʊpən ðə dɔɹ tə ɛɡwinz slipɪŋ tʃeɪmbɝ. hɝ bɛd, wʌn saɪɾ əɡɛns ðə fɑɹ wɔl, wɑz dʒɹeɪpt wɪð waɪt ɡɔz kɝɾənz, ən ə læmp bɝn ɑn ðə stæn bɪsaɪɾ ɪt. ɡɔɪn kɹɔs ðə ɹum tə hɝ, pʊʃɪŋ ðə ɡɔz əsaɪd. wɑz ʃi slipɪŋ? əɹ wɑz ʃi...

Gawyn cursed, dashing across the room, and threw open the door to Egwene's sleeping chamber. Her bed, one side against the far wall, was draped with white gauze curtains, and a lamp burned on the stand beside it. Gawyn crossed the room to her, pushing the gauze aside. Was she sleeping? Or was she...

hi ɹitʃt ə hæn təwɔɹɾ əɹ nɛk, bʌɾ əɾ ə feɪn θʌmp bɪhaɪnd, ɡɔɪn wɪpt ɪz sɔɹɾ ɝaʊn ən blɑk ðə stʃɹaɪk kʌmɪŋ əɾ ɪz bæk. nɑt wʌn, bʌt tu blɝz ə dɑɹknəs lɛp fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz. hi spɛɹɾ ə ɡlæns fəɹ ɛɡwin; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ blʌd, bʌɾ i kʊdn tɛl ɪf ʃi wɑz bɹiðɪŋ əɹ nɑt. hæɾ ɪz ɛntʃɹəns ɪntɝʌptɪd ði əsæsənz ɪn taɪm?

He reached a hand toward her neck, but at a faint thump behind, Gawyn whipped his sword around and blocked the strike coming at his back. Not one, but two blurs of darkness leaped from the shadows. He spared a glance for Egwene; there was no blood, but he couldn't tell if she was breathing or not. Had his entrance interrupted the assassins in time?

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm tə tʃɛk. hi fɛl ɪndə æpəl blɑsəmz ɪn ðə wɪn ən bɪɡæn tə ʃaʊt. hɪz mɛn stɛpt ʌp tə ðə dɔɹweɪ, ðən fɹoʊz ðɛɹ, stʌnd.

There was no time to check. He fell into Apple Blossoms in the Wind and began to shout. His men stepped up to the doorway, then froze there, stunned.

"ɡɛt mɔɹ hɛlp!" ɡɔɪn sɛd. "ɡoʊ!"

"Get more help!" Gawyn said. "Go!"

dɑɹk-skɪn mɑzoʊni tɝn tə oʊbeɪ waɪl sɛlɑɹk, lʊkɪŋ dɪtɝmənd, lɛpt ɪndə ðə faɪt.

Dark-skinned Mazone turned to obey while Celark, looking determined, leaped into the fight.

ðə blʌdnaɪvz ʃɪftəɾ ən ənʒəleɪtɪd. ɡɔɪn mænədʒ tə slɪp ɪndə kæɾ ɑn hɑt sæn tə tɛs ðɛm, bʌɾ itʃ stʃɹaɪk hɪɾ oʊnli ɛɹ. hɪz aɪz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi hɝɾɪŋ fɹəm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɑloʊ ðə fɪɡjɝz.

The Bloodknives shifted and undulated. Gawyn managed to slip into Cat on Hot Sand to test them, but each strike hit only air. His eyes were already hurting from trying to follow the figures.

sɛlɑɹk ətæk fɹəm bɪhaɪnd, bʌt wɑz əz ɪnɪfɛktɪv əz ɡɔɪn. ɡɔɪn ɡɹɪɾɪd ɪz tiθ, faɪɾɪŋ wɪð ɪz bæk əɡɛns ðə bɛd. hi hæd tə kip əm əweɪ fɹəm ɛɡwin, lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ hɛlp tə kʌm.

Celark attacked from behind, but was as ineffective as Gawyn. Gawyn gritted his teeth, fighting with his back against the bed. He had to keep them away from Egwene, long enough for help to come.

ɪf i kəd -  boʊθ fɪɡjɝz twɪstəd sʌɾənli, stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ɪn tændəm ət sɛlɑɹk. ðə mæn bɛɹli hæd taɪm tə kɝs bɪfɔɹ ə sɔɹd tʊk ɪm ɪn ðə nɛk, ən bɹaɪt blʌd spɝɾɪd aʊt. ɡɔɪn jɛld əɡɛn, fɔlɪŋ ɪndə lɪzɝɾ ɪn ðə θɔɹnbʊʃ, stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ət ðə bæks ə ði əsæsənz.

If he could -  Both figures twisted suddenly, striking in tandem at Celark. The man barely had time to curse before a sword took him in the neck, and bright blood spurted out. Gawyn yelled again, falling into Lizard in the Thornbush, striking at the backs of the assassins.

əɡɛn, hɪz ətæks mɪst. ɪt simd i wɑz ɔf baɪ oʊnli ə fju hɛɹz. sɛlɑɹk stʌmbəl tə ðə flɔɹ wɪð ə ɡɝɡəl, hɪz blʌd ɹəflɛktɪŋ læntɝnlaɪt, ən ɡɔɪn kʊdn stɛp fɔɹwɝd tə dɪfɛn hɪm. nɑt wɪθaʊɾ ɪkspoʊzɪŋ ɛɡwin.

Again, his attacks missed. It seemed he was off by only a few hairs. Celark stumbled to the floor with a gurgle, his blood reflecting lanternlight, and Gawyn couldn't step forward to defend him. Not without exposing Egwene.

wʌn ə ði əsæsənz tɝn bæk tə ɡɔɪn waɪl ði ʌðɝ bɪhɛɾɪd sɛlɑɹk, wɪð ə slæʃ ðət -  dɪspaɪt ðə ʃædoʊz - lʊkt ə lɑt laɪk ðə ɹɪvɝ ʌndɝkʌts ðə bæŋk, ɡɔɪn stɛp bæk, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ɪz aɪz ɔf ðə fɔlən mæn. dɪfɛnd. hi oʊnli hæd tə dɪfɛn əntɪl hɛlp keɪm! hi ɛdʒ tə ðə saɪd.

One of the assassins turned back to Gawyn while the other beheaded Celark, with a slash that -  despite the shadows - looked a lot like The River Undercuts the Bank, Gawyn stepped back, trying to keep his eyes off the fallen man. Defend. He only had to defend until help came! He edged to the side.

ðə sintʃæn wɝ wɛɹi; ðeɪ nu hid fɔt wʌn ə ðɛm ɔf bɪfɔɹ.

The Seanchan were wary; they knew he'd fought one of them off before.

bʌt ðeɪ hæd sətʃ ə stʃɹɔŋ ædvæntɪdʒ. ɡɔɪn wɑzn sɝɾən i kəd stæn əɡɛns tu ʌv ðɛm.

But they had such a strong advantage. Gawyn wasn't certain he could stand against two of them.

jɛs jə wɪl, hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf stɝnli. ɪf jə fɔl, ɛɡɪvin daɪz.

Yes you will, he told himself sternly. If you fall, Egivene dies.

wɑz ðəɾ ə flɪkɝ ə muvmən fɹəm ði ʌðɝ ɹum? kəd hɛlp əv kʌm? ɡɔɪn fɛlt ə sɝdʒ ə hoʊp, ən ɛdʒ tə ðə saɪd. fɹəm ðɛɹ, hi kəd si mɑzoʊniz bɑɾi ɑn ɹə flɔɹ, bliɾɪŋ.

Was that a flicker of movement from the other room? Could help have come? Gawyn felt a surge of hope, and edged to the side. From there, he could see Mazone's body on rhe floor, bleeding.

ə θɝd ʃæɾoʊd fɪɡjɝ ɡlaɪɾɪd ɪndə ðə ɹum ən ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn lɑkɪŋ ɪt. ðət wɑz waɪ ði ʌðɝ tu hæd bɪn hɛzəteɪɾɪŋ. ðeɪd wɑntəd tə weɪɾ əntɪl ðɛɹ ælaɪ ɝaɪvd.

A third shadowed figure glided into the room and shut the door behind locking it. That was why the other two had been hesitating. They'd wanted to wait until their ally arrived.

ðə θɹi ʌv əm ətæk təɡɛðɝ.

The three of them attacked together.

pɛɹɪn lɛt ðə wʊlf fɹi.

Perrin let the wolf free.

fəɹ wʌns, hi dɪdnt wɝi əbaʊt wʌɾ ɪt wəd də tə hɪm. hi lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi, ən əz i fɔt, ðə wɝl sim tə bɪkʌm ɹaɪɾ ɝaʊn hɪm.

For once, he didn't worry about what it would do to him. He let himself be, and as he fought, the world seemed to become right around him.

pɝhæps ðət wɑz kəz ɪt bɛn tə hɪz wɪl.

Perhaps that was because it bent to his will.

jʌŋ bʊl lɛp fɹəm ə ɹuftɑp ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, paʊɝfəl haɪn lɛɡz spɹɪŋɪŋ ɪm ɪndə ði ɛɹ, tɛɹæŋɡɹil paʊtʃ fæsən tə hɪz bæk. hi sɔɹɾ oʊvɝ ə stʃɹiɾ ən lændəɾ ɑn ə waɪt mɑɹbəl ɹuf wɪð ɡɹups ə stætʃuz ɑn ɪts ɛdʒəz. hi ɹoʊld, kʌmɪŋ ʌp əz ə mæn - tɛɹæŋɡɹil taɪɾ əɾ ɪz weɪst -  wɪð hæmɝ swɪŋɪŋ.

Young Bull leaped from a rooftop in Tar Valon, powerful hind legs springing him into the air, ter'angreal pouch fastened to his back. He soared over a street and landed on a white marble roof with groups of statues on its edges. He rolled, coming up as a man - ter'angreal tied at his waist -  with hammer swinging.

sleɪɝ vænɪʃt ɹaɪt bɪfɔɹ ðə hæmɝ hɪt, ðən əpɪɹd bɪsaɪd pɛɹɪn. pɛɹɪn vænɪʃt əz sleɪɝ swʌŋ, ðən əpɪɹd dʒʌs tə ðə lɛft. bæk ən fɔɹθ ðeɪ wɛnt, spɪnɪŋ ɝaʊnd wʌn ənʌðɝ, itʃ dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ ðən əpɪɹɪŋ əɡɛn, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə læn ə bloʊ.

Slayer vanished right before the hammer hit, then appeared beside Perrin. Perrin vanished as Slayer swung, then appeared just to the left. Back and forth they went, spinning around one another, each disappearing then appearing again, struggling to land a blow.

pɛɹɪn θɹu hɪmsɛlf aʊɾ ə ðə saɪkəl, sɛndɪŋ hɪmsɛlf tə ə pleɪs bɪsaɪd wʌn ə ðə ɹufs lɑɹdʒ stætʃuz, ə pɑmpəs-lʊkɪŋ dʒɛnɝəl. hi swʌŋ, smæʃɪŋ ɪz hæmɝ ɪndə ɪt, mæɡnəfaɪɪŋ ðə paʊɝ ə ðə bloʊ. tʃʌŋks ə stætʃu ɪksploʊɾəd təwɔɹd sleɪɝ. ðə wʊlf-kɪlɝ əpɪɹd, ɪkspɛktɪŋ tə faɪn pɛɹɪn bɪsaɪd hɪm. ɪnstɛd, ə stɔɹm ə stoʊn ən dʌs kɹæʃt ɪndə hɪm.

Perrin threw himself out of the cycle, sending himself to a place beside one of the roof's large statues, a pompous-looking general. He swung, smashing his hammer into it, magnifying the power of the blow. Chunks of statue exploded toward Slayer. The wolf-killer appeared, expecting to find Perrin beside him. Instead, a storm of stone and dust crashed into him.

sleɪɝ bɛloʊd, stoʊn tʃɪps slaɪsɪŋ ɪz skɪn. hɪz kloʊk ɪmiɾiətli bɪkeɪm əz stʃɹɔŋ əz stil, ɹəflɛktɪŋ tʃʌŋks ə stoʊn. hi wɪpt ɪt bæk ən ði ɪntaɪɝ bɪldɪŋ stɑɹɾəd tə ʃeɪk. pɛɹɪn kɝst ən lɛp fɹi əz ðə ɹuf fɛl ɪn.

Slayer bellowed, stone chips slicing his skin. His cloak immediately became as strong as steel, reflecting chunks of stone. He whipped it back and the entire building started to shake. Perrin cursed and leaped free as the roof fell in.

pɛɹɪn sɔɹd, bɪkʌmɪŋ ə wʊlf bɪfɔɹ lændɪŋ ɑn ə nɪɹbaɪ ɹuftɑp-sleɪɝ əpɪɹɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, baʊ dʒɹɔn. jʌŋ bʊl ɡɹaʊld, ɪmædʒɪn-ɪŋ ðə wɪn bloʊɪŋ, bʌt sleɪɝ dɪdn faɪɝ. hi dʒʌst stʊd ðɛɹ, əz ɪf -  əz ɪf i wɝ dʒʌst ə stætʃu.

Perrin soared, becoming a wolf before landing on a nearby rooftop-Slayer appeared in front of him, bow drawn. Young Bull growled, imagin-ing the wind blowing, but Slayer didn't fire. He just stood there, as if -  As if he were just a statue.

pɛɹɪn kɝst, spɪnɪŋ əz ən æɹoʊ ʃɑt pæs hɪm, nɛɹoʊli mɪsɪŋ ɪm ət ðə weɪst. ðə ɹil sleɪɝ stʊɾ ə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns ɔf; hi vænɪʃt, livɪŋ ðə ɹɪmɑɹkəbli dɪteɪl stætʃu hid kɹieɪɾəd tə dɪstʃɹæk pɛɹɪn.

Perrin cursed, spinning as an arrow shot past him, narrowly missing him at the waist. The real Slayer stood a short distance off; he vanished, leaving the remarkably detailed statue he'd created to distract Perrin.

pɛɹɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən meɪd ðə swɛt liv ɪz bɹaʊ. sleɪɝ kəd kʌm əɾ ɪm fɹəm ɛni dɝɛkʃən. hi pʊɾ ə wɔl əɾ ɪz bæk ən stʊd ɹifəli, skænɪŋ ðə ɹuftɑp. ðə doʊm ʃʊk oʊvɝhɛd. hid ɡɹoʊn juz tə ðət - ɪt muvd wɪð hɪm.

Perrin took a deep breath and made the sweat leave his brow. Slayer could come at him from any direction. He put a wall at his back and stood refully, scanning the rooftop. The dome shook overhead. He'd grown used to that - it moved with him.

bʌɾ i wɑzn muvɪŋ.

But he wasn't moving.

hi lʊk daʊn wɪð ə pænɪk. ðə paʊtʃ wɑz ɡɔn - ði æɹoʊ sleɪɝ hæd faɪɝɾ əɾ ɪz weɪs hæd slaɪst ɪt fɹi. pɛɹɪn dæʃt fɔɹwɝd tə ði ɛdʒ ə ðə ɹuf. bɪloʊ, sleɪɝ ɹæn θɹu ðə stʃɹit, ðə paʊtʃ ɪn ɪz hænd.

He looked down with a panic. The pouch was gone - the arrow Slayer had fired at his waist had sliced it free. Perrin dashed forward to the edge of the roof. Below, Slayer ran through the street, the pouch in his hand.

ə wʊlf lɛp fɹəm ən æli, kɹæʃɪŋ ɪndə sleɪɝ, tɔsɪŋ ɪm tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hɑpɝ.

A wolf leaped from an alley, crashing into Slayer, tossing him to the ground. Hopper.

pɛɹɪn wɑz ðəɹ ɪn ə moʊmənt, ətækɪŋ. sleɪɝ kɝst, vænɪʃɪŋ fɹəm ʌndɝniθ hɑpɝ ən əpɪɹɪŋ ət ði ɛn ə ðə stʃɹit. hi bɪɡæn tə fli, livɪŋ ə blɝ bɪhaɪn hɪm.

Perrin was there in a moment, attacking. Slayer cursed, vanishing from underneath Hopper and appearing at the end of the street. He began to flee, leaving a blur behind him.

pɛɹɪn fɑloʊd, hɑpɝ dʒɔɪnɪŋ hɪm. haʊ dɪd jə faɪn mi? pɛɹɪn sɛnt.

Perrin followed, Hopper joining him. How did you find me? Perrin sent.

jə ɑɹ tu fulɪʃ kʌbz, hɑpɝ sɛnt. vɛɹi laʊd. laɪk snɑɹlɪŋ kæts. izi tə faɪnd.

You are two foolish cubs, Hopper sent. Very loud. Like snarling cats. Easy to find.

hid dɪlɪbɝətli nɑt ʃoʊn hɑpɝ wɛɹ i wɑz. æftɝ siɪŋ oʊk dænsɝ daɪ . . . wɛl, ðɪs wɑz pɛɹɪnz faɪt. naʊ ðət ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɑz əweɪ fɹəm ɡildən ən ɪz pipəl wɝ ɪskeɪpɪŋ, hi dɪdnt wɑnə ɹɪsk ðə laɪvz ʌv ʌðɝ wʊlvz.

He'd deliberately not shown Hopper where he was. After seeing Oak Dancer die . . . well, this was Perrin's fight. Now that the ter'angreal was away from Ghealdan and his people were escaping, he didn't want to risk the lives of other wolves.

nɑt ðət hɑpɝ wəd ɡoʊ ɪf i toʊld ɪm tə. ɡɹoʊlɪŋ əɡɛn, pɛɹɪn bæɹəld æftɝ sleɪɝ, wʊlf əɾ ɪz saɪd.

Not that Hopper would go if he told him to. Growling again, Perrin barreled after Slayer, wolf at his side.

ɛɡwin kɹaʊtʃt bɪsaɪd ðə wɔl ə ðə hɔlweɪ, pæntɪŋ, swɛt dʒɹɪpɪŋ fɹəm əɹ bɹaʊ. əkɹɔs fɹəm hɝ, moʊltən dʒɹɑps ə ɹɑk kul fɹəm ə blæst ə faɪɝ.

Egwene crouched beside the wall of the hallway, panting, sweat dripping from her brow. Across from her, molten drops of rock cooled from a blast of fire.

ðə taʊɝ hɔlweɪ fɛl stɪl. ə fju læmps flɪkɝɾ ɑn ðə wɔl. θɹu ə wɪndoʊ, ʃi kəd si ðə pɝpəl skaɪ əbʌv, bɪtwin ðə taʊɝ ən ðə dɑɹk klaʊdz. ʃid bɪn faɪɾɪŋ fəɹ wʌt sim laɪk aʊɝz, ðoʊ ɪt hæd pɹɑbli bɪn oʊnli fɪftin mɪnəts. ʃid lɔs tʃɹæk ə ðə waɪz wʌnz.

The Tower hallway fell still. A few lamps flickered on the wall. Through a window, she could see the purple sky above, between the Tower and the dark clouds. She'd been fighting for what seemed like hours, though it had probably been only fifteen minutes. She'd lost track of the Wise Ones.

ʃi bɪɡæn tə kɹip fɔɹwɝd, juzɪŋ ði ænti-ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ wiv tə meɪk əɹ fʊtfɔlz saɪlən əntɪl ʃi ɹitʃt ə kɔɹnɝ ən pɪɹɾ ɝaʊn ɪt.

She began to creep forward, using the anti-eavesdropping weave to make her footfalls silent until she reached a corner and peered around it.

dɑɹknəs ɪn boʊθ dɝɛkʃənz. ɛɡwin kɹɛp fɔɹwɝd, muvɪŋ kɛɹfəli, ɹɛsəlutli. ðə taʊɝ wɑz əɹ doʊmeɪn. ʃi fɛlt ɪnveɪɾəd, əz ʃʊɹli əz wən ðə sintʃæn hæd kʌm. haʊɛvɝ, ðɪs faɪt wɑz pɹuvɪŋ vɛɹi dɪfɹən fɹəm faɪɾɪŋ ɔf ðə sintʃæn. ðɛɹ, ði ɛnəmi hæd bɪn boʊld, izi tə spɑt.

Darkness in both directions. Egwene crept forward, moving carefully, resolutely. The Tower was her domain. She felt invaded, as surely as when the Seanchan had come. However, this fight was proving very different from fighting off the Seanchan. There, the enemy had been bold, easy to spot.

feɪn laɪɾ əpɪɹɾ ʌndɝ ə dɔɹweɪ əhɛd. ʃi ʃɪftəd hɝsɛlf ɪndə ðə ɹum, pɹipɛɹɪŋ wivz.

Faint light appeared under a doorway ahead. She shifted herself into the room, preparing weaves.

tu wɪmən wɝ ðɛɹ, spikɪŋ ɪn wɪspɝz, wʌn hoʊldɪŋ ə ɡloʊb ə laɪt. ɛvænɛlaɪn ən mɛstʃɹə, tu ʌv ðə blæk sɪstɝ u hæd flɛd ðə waɪt taʊɝ.

Two women were there, speaking in whispers, one holding a globe of light. Evanellein and Mestra, two of the Black sister who had fled the White Tower.

ɛɡwin lɛt lus wɪð ə bɔl ə faɪɝ ðət dɪstʃɹɔɪd mɛstʃɹə ɪn ən ɪnfɝnoʊ ɛvænɛlaɪn jɛlpt, ən ɛɡwin juzd ə tʃɹɪk nɪneɪiv hæd tɔt hɝ__ʃi ɪmædʒən ɛvænɛlaɪn biɪŋ stupəd, əneɪbəl tə θɪŋk, əneɪbəl tə ɹiækt.

Egwene let loose with a ball of fire that destroyed Mestra in an inferno Evanellein yelped, and Egwene used a trick Nynaeve had taught her__she imagined Evanellein being stupid, unable to think, unable to react.

ðə wʊmənz aɪz ɡleɪzd oʊvɝ, ən əɹ maʊθ oʊpənd. θɔt wɑz fæstɝ ðən wivz. ɛɡwin hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. naʊ wʌt? kɪl hɝ, waɪi dɪfɛnsləs? hɝ stʌmək tɝn ət ðət θɔt. / kəd teɪk əɹ kæptɪv. ɡoʊ ən - sʌmwʌn əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə ɹum wɪð hɝ. ðə nukʌmɝ wɔɹ blæk ə mæɡnɪfəsənt ɡaʊn wɪð sɪlvɝ tʃɹɪm. dɑɹknəs swɝld əbaʊt hɝ, meɪɾ ə spɪnɪŋ ɹɪbənz ə klɔθ, hɝ skɝt ɹɪpəlɪŋ. ði ɪfɛkt wɑz ənnætʃɹəl ən ɪmpɹɛsɪv; pɑsəbəl oʊnli hɪɹ ɪn tɛlɝɛɝɝhiəd.

The woman's eyes glazed over, and her mouth opened. Thought was faster than weaves. Egwene hesitated. Now what? Kill her, whiie defenseless? Her stomach turned at that thought. / could take her captive. Go and - Someone appeared in the room with her. The newcomer wore black a magnificent gown with silver trim. Darkness swirled about her, made of spinning ribbons of cloth, her skirt rippling. The effect was unnatural and impressive; possible only here in Tel'ararirhiod.

ɛɡwin lʊkt ɪndə ðə wʊmənz aɪz. lɑɹdʒ ən blu, sɛɾ ɪn ən æŋɡʌ-lɑɹ feɪs wɪð tʃɪn-lɛŋθ blæk hɛɹ. ðəɹ wɑz ə paʊɝ tə ðoʊz aɪz, ən ɛɡwin ɪmiɾiətli nu wʌt ʃi wɑz feɪsɪŋ.

Egwene looked into the woman's eyes. Large and blue, set in an angu-lar face with chin-length black hair. There was a power to those eyes, and Egwene immediately knew what she was facing.

waɪ faɪt? ʃi kʊdnt -  ɛɡwin fɛlt əɹ maɪn tʃeɪnʒ, bɪkʌm æksɛptɪŋ. ʃi fɔɾ ɪt wɪð ə bɝst ə pænɪk, ən ɪn ə moʊmən ə klɛɹəɾi, ʃi sɛn hɝsɛlf əweɪ.

Why fight? She couldn't -  Egwene felt her mind change, become accepting. She fought it with a burst of panic, and in a moment of clarity, she sent herself away.

ɛɡwin əpɪɹɾ ɪn əɹ ɹumz, ðən ɹeɪzd əɹ hæn tə hɝ hɛd, sɪɾɪŋ daʊn ɑn ðə bɛd. laɪt, bʌt ðət wʊmən hæd bɪn stʃɹɔŋ.

Egwene appeared in her rooms, then raised her hand to her head, sitting down on the bed. Light, but that woman had been strong.

sʌmθɪŋ saʊndəd bɪhaɪn hɝ; sʌmwʌn əpɪɹɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹum. ɛɡwin lɛp tə hɝ fit, pɹipɛɹɪŋ wivz. nɪneɪiv stʊd ðɛɹ, aɪz waɪd wɪð fjʊɹi. ðə wʊmən θɹʌst əɹ hænz fɔɹwɝd, wivz fɔɹmɪŋ, bʌt ʃi fɹoʊz.

Something sounded behind her; someone appearing in the room. Egwene leaped to her feet, preparing weaves. Nynaeve stood there, eyes wide with fury. The woman thrust her hands forward, weaves forming, but she froze.

"tə ðə ɡɑɹɾənz," ɛɡwin sɛd, nɑt tʃɹʌstɪŋ əɹ kɔɹɾɝz. ʃi ʃʊdn əv kʌm hɪɹ; mɛsænə wəd noʊ ðɪs pleɪs.

"To the gardens," Egwene said, not trusting her quarters. She shouldn't have come here; Mesaana would know this place.

nɪneɪiv nɑɾəd, ən ɛɡwin vænɪʃt, əpɪɹɪŋ ɪn ðə loʊɝ taʊɝ ɡɑɹɾən. ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ vaɪəlɪt doʊm ɪkstɛndəɾ əbʌv. wʌt wɑz ðæt, ən haʊ hæd mɛsænə bɹɔɾ ɪt hɪɹ? nɪneɪiv əpɪɹɾ ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ.

Nynaeve nodded, and Egwene vanished, appearing in the lower Tower garden. The strange violet dome extended above. What was that, and how had Mesaana brought it here? Nynaeve appeared a moment later.

"ðeɪɹ stɪl ʌp ðɛɹ," nɪneɪiv wɪspɝd. "aɪ dʒʌst sɔ ɑlviɛɝɪn."

"They're still up there," Nynaeve whispered. "I just saw Alviarin."

"aɪ sɔ mɛsænə," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ʃi nɪɹli tʊk mi."

"I saw Mesaana," Egwene said. "She nearly took me."

"laɪt! ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt?"

"Light! Are you all right?"

ɛɡwin nɑɾəd. "mɛstʃɹə ɪz dɛd. aɪ sɔ ɛvænɛlaɪn, tu."

Egwene nodded. "Mestra is dead. I saw Evanellein, too."

"ɪts blæk əz ə tum ʌp ðɛɹ," nɪneɪiv wɪspɝd. "aɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ meɪɾ ɪt ðət weɪ. sɪuən ən lin ɑɹ ɔl ɹaɪt; aɪ sɔ ðɛm ə lɪɾəl bɪɾ əɡoʊ, stɪkɪŋ təɡɛðɝ. dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ðæt, aɪ mænədʒ tə hɪt noʊtoʊfi wɪð ə blæs faɪɝ. ʃiz dɛd."

"It's black as a tomb up there," Nynaeve whispered. "I think they made it that way. Siuan and Leane are all right; I saw them a little bit ago, sticking together. Just before that, I managed to hit Notofi with a blast fire. She's dead."

"ɡʊd. ðə blæk ədʒɑ stoʊl naɪntin tɛɹæŋɡɹil. ðət maɪt ɡɪv əs ən ɛstəməɾ ə haʊ mɛni blæk ədʒɑ wɪv tə kəntɛnd wɪð." ʃi, sɪuən, nɪneɪiv, lin ən ðə θɹi waɪz wʌnz wɝ aʊtnʌmbɝd - bʌt ðə læk ədʒɑ dɪdn sim tə hæv mʌtʃ ɪkspɪɹiəns wɪð tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd.

"Good. The Black Ajah stole nineteen ter'angreal. That might give us an estimate of how many Black Ajah we have to contend with." She, Siuan, Nynaeve, Leane and the three Wise Ones were outnumbered - but the Rlack Ajah didn't seem to have much experience with Tel'aran'rhiod.

"hæv jə sin ðə waɪz wʌnz?"

"Have you seen the Wise Ones?"

"ðeɪɹ ʌp ðɛɹ." nɪneɪiv ɡɹɪməst. "ðeɪ sim tə bi ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ ðɪs."

"They're up there." Nynaeve grimaced. "They seem to be enjoying this."

"ðeɪ wʊd," ɛɡwin sɛd. "aɪ wɑn jə ən mi tə ɡoʊ təɡɛðɝ. wɪl əpɪɹ ɪn ɪntɝsɛkʃənz, bæk tə bæk, ən kwɪkli skæn fəɹ laɪɾ əɹ pipəl. ɪf jə si ə blæk, stʃɹaɪk. ɪf sʌmwʌn siz ju, seɪ 'ɡoʊ' ən wɪl dʒʌmp bæk hɪɹ."

"They would," Egwene said. "I want you and me to go together. We will appear in intersections, back to back, and quickly scan for light or people. If you see a Black, strike. If someone sees you, say 'Go' and we'll jump back here."

nɪneɪiv nɑɾəd.

Nynaeve nodded.

"fɝst ɪntɝsɛkʃən ɪz ðə wʌn aʊtsaɪd maɪ ɹum," ɛɡwin sɛd. "hɔlweɪ ɑn ðə saʊθ saɪd. əl flʌɾ ɪt wɪð laɪt; jə bi ɹɛɾi. fɹəm ðɛɹ, wɪl dʒʌmp daʊn wʌn hɔlweɪ, baɪ ðə dɔɹ ɪndə ðə sɝvəns' ɹæmp. ðən ɑn daʊn ðə laɪn."

"First intersection is the one outside my room," Egwene said. "Hallway on the south side. I'll flood it with light; you be ready. From there, we'll jump down one hallway, by the door into the servants' ramp. Then on down the line."

nɪneɪiv nɑɾəd ʃɑɹpli.

Nynaeve nodded sharply.

ðə wɝld wɪŋkt ɝaʊn ɛɡwin. ʃi əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ, ən ɪmiɾiətli θɔɾ ə ðə pleɪs lɪt, ɪmpoʊzɪŋ əɹ wɪl əpɑn ɪt. laɪt flʌɾəd ði ɪntaɪɝ speɪs. ə ɹaʊnd-feɪst wʊmən kɹaʊtʃt nɪɹ ðə saɪɾ ə ðə wɔl, wɛɹɪŋ waɪt. sɛdɔɹi, wʌn ə ðə blæk sɪstɝz.

The world winked around Egwene. She appeared in the hallway, and immediately thought of the place lit, imposing her will upon it. Light flooded the entire space. A round-faced woman crouched near the side of the wall, wearing white. Sedore, one of the Black sisters.

sɛdɔɹi spʌn, lʊkɪŋ æŋɡɹi, wivz spɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp ɝaʊn hɝ. ɛɡwin wɝk fæstɝ, kɹieɪɾɪŋ ə kɑləm ə faɪɝ ɹaɪt bɪfɔɹ sɛdɔɹi wʊɾə ɹilist əɹ oʊn. noʊ wivz ɑn ɛɡwinz pɑɹt. dʒʌs ðə faɪɝ.

Sedore spun, looking angry, weaves springing up around her. Egwene worked faster, creating a column of fire right before Sedore would have released her own. No weaves on Egwene's part. Just the fire.

ɛɡwin sɔ ðə blæks aɪz oʊpən waɪɾɝ əz ðə faɪɝ ɹɔɹɾ ɝaʊn hɝ. sɛdɔɹi skɹitʃt, bʌt ðət kʌɾ ɔf əz ðə hit kənsum hɝ. hɝ bɝn kɔɹps kəlæps tə ðə flɔɹ, smoʊldɝɪŋ.

Egwene saw the Black's eyes open wider as the fire roared around her. Sedore screeched, but that cut off as the heat consumed her. Her burned corpse collapsed to the floor, smoldering.

ɛɡwin lɛɾ aʊɾ ə ɹɪliv bɹɛθ. "ɛniwʌn ɑn jəɹ saɪd?"

Egwene let out a relieved breath. "Anyone on your side?"

"noʊ," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "hu wɑz ðət jə hɪt?"

"No," Nynaeve said. "Who was that you hit?"

"sɛdɔɹi."

"Sedore."

"ɹɪli?" nɪneɪiv sɛd, tɝnɪŋ. ʃi hæd bɪn ə sɪɾɝ fəɹ ðə jɛloʊ.

"Really?" Nynaeve said, turning. She had been a Sitter for the Yellow.

ɛɡwin smaɪld. "nɛks hɔlweɪ."

Egwene smiled. "Next hallway."

ðeɪ dʒʌmpt, ən ɹɪpiɾɪd ðɛɹ stʃɹæɾədʒi, flʌɾɪŋ ðə hɔlweɪ wɪð laɪt. ðəɹ wɑz noʊbɑdi ðɛɹ, soʊ ðeɪ muvd ɑn. ðə nɛks tu hɔlweɪz wɝ ɛmpti. ɛɡwin wɑz əbaʊt tə liv wən ə vɔɪs hɪst, "fulɪʃ tʃaɪld! jəɹ pæɾɝn ɪz ɑbviəs."

They jumped, and repeated their strategy, flooding the hallway with light. There was nobody there, so they moved on. The next two hallways were empty. Egwene was about to leave when a voice hissed, "Foolish child! Your pattern is obvious."

ɛɡwin spʌn. "wɛɹ . . ."

Egwene spun. "Where . . ."

ʃi kʌɾ ɔf əz ʃi sɔ bɛɹ. ði eɪdʒɪd waɪz wʌn hæd tʃeɪnʒd əɹ klɔθ-ɪŋ ən ivən əɹ skɪn ɪtsɛlf tə mætʃ ðə waɪt wɔlz ən flɔɹ taɪlz. ʃi wɑz pɹæktəkli ɪnvɪzəbəl, kɹaʊtʃɪŋ ɪn ən ælkoʊv.

She cut off as she saw Bair. The aged Wise One had changed her cloth-ing and even her skin itself to match the white walls and floor tiles. She was practically invisible, crouching in an alcove.

"ju ʃʊdnt - " bɛɹ bɪɡæn.

"You shouldn't - " Bair began.

ə wɔl bɪsaɪɾ əm ɪksploʊɾəd aʊtwɝd, θɹoʊɪŋ ʌp tʃʌŋks ə ɹɑk sɪks wɪmən stʊd bɪɑnd, ən ðeɪ ɹilist wivz ə faɪɝ. ɪɾ əpɪɹd ðət ðə taɪm fəɹ snikɪŋ hæɾ ɛndəd.

A wall beside them exploded outward, throwing up chunks of rock Six women stood beyond, and they released weaves of Fire. It appeared that the time for sneaking had ended.

pɛɹɪn kɹɛstəd ðə wɔl sɝaʊndɪŋ ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz, kʌmɪŋ daʊn wɪð ə θʌmp. ðə stʃɹeɪnʒnəs ə ðə wʊlf dʒɹim kəntɪnjud; hi naʊ nɑɾ oʊnli smɛld ɑd sɛns, bʌt hɝɾ ɑd saʊnz əz wɛl. ɹʌmbəlɪŋz fɹəm ɪnsaɪd ðə taʊɝ.

Perrin crested the wall surrounding the White Tower grounds, coming down with a thump. The strangeness of the wolf dream continued; he now not only smelled odd scents, but heard odd sounds as well. Rumblings from inside the Tower.

hi lɛpt æftɝ sleɪɝ, hu kɹɔs ðə ɡɹaʊnz, ðən ɹæn ʌp ði aʊtsaɪɾ ə ðə taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf.

He leaped after Slayer, who crossed the grounds, then ran up the outside of the Tower itself.

pɛɹɪn fɑloʊd, ɹʌnɪŋ ʌp ɪndə ði ɛɹ. sleɪɝ steɪd dʒʌst əhɛd, tɛɹæŋɡɹil paʊtʃ taɪɾ əɾ ɪz weɪst.

Perrin followed, running up into the air. Slayer stayed just ahead, ter'angreal pouch tied at his waist.

pɛɹɪn kɹieɪɾəd ə lɔŋboʊ. hi pʊld ɪt bæk, fɹizɪŋ ɪn pleɪs, stændɪŋ ɑn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə taʊɝ.

Perrin created a longbow. He pulled it back, freezing in place, standing on the side of the Tower.

hi lust, bʌt ðə wʊlf-kɪlɝ lɛpt ʌp, ðən fɛl ɪndə ðə taʊɝ θɹu ə wɪndoʊ. ði æɹoʊ pæst oʊvɝhɛd.

He loosed, but the wolf-killer leaped up, then fell into the Tower through a window. The arrow passed overhead.

pɛɹɪn lɛp tə ðə wɪndoʊ, ðən dʌkt ɪnsaɪd, hɑpɝ lipɪŋ ɪn æftɝ hɪm, livɪŋ ə blɝ bɪhaɪnd. ðeɪ ɛntɝɾ ə bɛdʒɹum hʌŋ wɪð bɹoʊkeɪdz ə blu. ðə dɔɹ slæmd, ən pɛɹɪn tʃɑɹdʒd æftɝ sleɪɝ. hi dɪdn bɑðɝ tə oʊpən ðə dɔɹ; hi smæʃt ɪt wɪð ɪz hæmɝ.

Perrin leaped to the window, then ducked inside, Hopper leaping in after him, leaving a blur behind. They entered a bedroom hung with brocades of blue. The door slammed, and Perrin charged after Slayer. He didn't bother to open the door; he smashed it with his hammer.

sleɪɝ tʃɑɹdʒ daʊn ə hɔlweɪ.

Slayer charged down a hallway.

fɑloʊ, pɛɹɪn sɛn tə hɑpɝ. əl kʌɾ ɪm ɔf.

Follow, Perrin sent to Hopper. I'll cut him off.

ðə wʊlf ɹeɪs fɔɹwɝd, æftɝ sleɪɝ. pɛɹɪn ɹæn tə ðə ɹaɪt, ðən kʌt daʊn ə hɔlweɪ. hi muv kwɪkli, ðə wɔlz spiɾɪŋ pæst.

The wolf raced forward, after Slayer. Perrin ran to the right, then cut down a hallway. He moved quickly, the walls speeding past.

hi pæst ə hɔlweɪ ðəɾ əpɪɹd tə bi fʊl ə pipəl. hi wɑz soʊ sɝpɹaɪz ðəɾ i fɹoʊz, ðə hɔl lɝtʃɪŋ ɝaʊn hɪm.

He passed a hallway that appeared to be full of people. He was so surprised that he froze, the hall lurching around him.

ðeɪ wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ðeɪ wɝ faɪɾɪŋ. ðə hɔlweɪ wɑz əlaɪt, tʃɹeɪlz ə faɪɝ flaɪɪŋ fɹəm wʌn ɛn tə ði ʌðɝ. ðə saʊnz hid hɝd bɪfɔɹ hædn bɪn fæntəmz. ænd, hi θɔt, jɛs . . .

They were Aes Sedai, and they were fighting. The hallway was alight, trails of fire flying from one end to the other. The sounds he'd heard before hadn't been phantoms. And, he thought, yes . . .

"ɛɡwin?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"Egwene?" Perrin asked.

ʃi stʊd pɹɛst əɡɛns ðə wɔl nɪɹbaɪ, ɪntɛnli lʊkɪŋ daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ. wən i spoʊk, ʃi spʌn ɑn hɪm, hænz ɡoʊɪŋ ʌp. hi fɛl sʌmθɪŋ ɡɹæb hɪm. hɪz maɪn ɪnstənli ɹiæktəd, haʊɛvɝ, pʊʃɪŋ ði ɛɹ əweɪ ɛɡwin stɑɹɾəd əz ʃi feɪl tə snætʃ hɪm.

She stood pressed against the wall nearby, intently looking down the hallway. When he spoke, she spun on him, hands going up. He felt something grab him. His mind instantly reacted, however, pushing the air away Egwene started as she failed to snatch him.

hi stɛp fɔɹwɝd. "ɛɡwin, jə ʃʊdn bi hɪɹ. ðɪs pleɪs ɪz deɪnʒɝəs."

He stepped forward. "Egwene, you shouldn't be here. This place is dangerous."

"pɛɹɪn?"

"Perrin?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ jə ɡɑt hɪɹ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "bʌt jə nid tə ɡoʊ. pliz. "haʊ dɪd jə stɑp mi?" ʃi dɪmændəd. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ hɪɹ. hæv jə bɪn wɪð ɹænd? tɛl mi wɛɹ i ɪz."

"I don't know how you got here," Perrin said. "But you need to go. Please. "How did you stop me?" she demanded. "What are you doing here. Have you been with Rand? Tell me where he is."

ʃi spoʊk wɪð sətʃ əθɔɹəɾi naʊ. ʃi ɔlmoʊst simd ə dɪfɹən pɝ-sʌn, dɛkeɪdz oʊldɝ ðən ðə ɡɝl hid noʊn. pɛɹɪn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə ɹɪplaɪ, bʌɾ ɛɡwin kʌɾ ɪm ɔf.

She spoke with such authority now. She almost seemed a different per-son, decades older than the girl he'd known. Perrin opened his mouth to reply, but Egwene cut him off.

"aɪ doʊn əv taɪm fəɹ ðɪs," ʃi sɛd. "aɪm sɑɹi, pɛɹɪn. əl bi bæk fəɹ ju." ʃi ɹeɪzd ə hænd, ən i fɛl θɪŋz tʃeɪnʒ ɝaʊn hɪm. ɹoʊps əpɪɹd, baɪndɪŋ hɪm.

"I don't have time for this," she said. "I'm sorry, Perrin. I'll be back for you." She raised a hand, and he felt things change around him. Ropes appeared, binding him.

hi lʊk daʊn, əmjuzd. ðə ɹoʊps slɪp fɹi ðə moʊmən i θɔɾ ə ðɛm biɪŋ tu lus.

He looked down, amused. The ropes slipped free the moment he thought of them being too loose.

ɛɡwin blɪŋkt, wɑtʃɪŋ əm dʒɹɑp tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. "haʊ - "

Egwene blinked, watching them drop to the ground. "How - "

sʌmwʌn bɝst aʊɾ ʌv ə ɹum nɪɹbaɪ, ə tɔl, slɛndɝ-nɛkt wʊmən wɪð ɹeɪvən hɛɹ, wɛɹɪŋ ə slik waɪt dʒɹɛs. ʃi smaɪld, ɹeɪzɪŋ əɹ hænz, ən ə laɪɾ əpɪɹd bɪfɔɹ hɝ.

Someone burst out of a room nearby, a tall, slender-necked woman with raven hair, wearing a sleek white dress. She smiled, raising her hands, and a light appeared before her.

pɛɹɪn dɪdnt nid tə noʊ wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ. hi wɑz ə wʊlf; hi wɑz ðə ɹulɝ ə ðɪs pleɪs.

Perrin didn't need to know what she was doing. He was a wolf; he was the ruler of this place.

wivz wɝ minɪŋləs. hi ɪmædʒən ðə wʊmənz ətæk mɪsɪŋ hɪm; hi nu ɪt wəd bi soʊ.

Weaves were meaningless. He imagined the woman's attack missing him; he knew it would be so.

ə bɑɹ ʌv waɪt-hɑt laɪt ʃɑt fɹəm ðə wʊmən. pɛɹɪn ɹeɪzd ə hæn bɪfɔɹ hɪmsɛlf ən ɛɡwin.

A bar of white-hot light shot from the woman. Perrin raised a hand before himself and Egwene.

ðə laɪt vænɪʃt, əz ɪf stɑp baɪ hɪz pɑm.

The light vanished, as if stopped by his palm.

ɛɡwin tɝnd, ən ðə wɔl əbʌv ðə wʊmən bɝst, ɹɑk ʃaʊɝɪŋ daʊn. ə tʃʌŋk smæʃt ðə wʊmən ɑn ðə hɛd bɹuɾəli, nɑkɪŋ əɹ tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. laɪt, ʃi wɑz pɹɑbli dɛd, æftɝ ə bloʊ laɪk ðæt.

Egwene turned, and the wall above the woman burst, rock showering down. A chunk smashed the woman on the head brutally, knocking her to the ground. Light, she was probably dead, after a blow like that.

ɛɡwin smɛld əmeɪzd. ʃi spʌn ɑn hɪm. "bɑlfaɪɝ? jə stɑp bɑlfaɪɝ? nʌθɪŋ ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə də ðæt."

Egwene smelled amazed. She spun on him. "Balefire? You stopped balefire? Nothing should be able to do that."

"ɪts dʒʌst ə wiv," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ɹitʃɪŋ aʊt fəɹ hɑpɝ. wɛɹ wɑz sleɪɝ?

"It's just a weave," Perrin said, reaching out for Hopper. Where was Slayer?

"ɪts nɑt dʒʌst ə wiv, pɛɹɪn, ɪts - "

"It's not just a weave, Perrin, it's - "

"aɪm sɑɹi, ɛɡwin," hi sɛd. "aɪ wɪl spik tə jə leɪɾɝ. bi kɛɹfəl ɪn ðɪs pleɪs. jə pɹɑbli ɔlɹɛɾi noʊ ðət jə nid tə bi, bʌt stɪl. ɪts mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ðən jə noʊ."

"I'm sorry, Egwene," he said. "I will speak to you later. Be careful in this place. You probably already know that you need to be, but still. It's more dangerous than you know."

hi tɝn ən ɹæn, livɪŋ ɛɡwin spʌɾɝɪŋ. ɪt simd ʃid mænədʒ tə bɪkʌm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ.

He turned and ran, leaving Egwene sputtering. It seemed she'd managed to become an Aes Sedai.

ðət wɑz ɡʊd; ʃi dɪzɝvd ɪt.

That was good; she deserved it.

hɑpɝ? hi sɛnt. wɛɹ ɑɹ ju?

Hopper? he sent. Where are you?

hɪz oʊnli ɹɪplaɪ wɑz ə sʌɾən, tɛɹəfaɪɪŋ, sɛndɪŋ ə peɪn.

His only reply was a sudden, terrifying, sending of pain.

ɡɔɪn fɔt fəɹ ɪz laɪf əɡɛns θɹi lɪvɪŋ ʃædoʊz ə dɑɹknəs ən stil ðeɪ pɹɛst ɪm tə ði ʌtmoʊst ə hɪz əbɪləɾi, livɪŋ ɪm blʌɾid hæf ə dʌzən taɪmz oʊvɝ ɑn ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz. hi juz ðə sɪkloʊn ɹeɪdʒɪz, ən ɪt dɪfɛndəɾ ɪz vaɪɾəlz. bɛɹli.

Gawyn fought for his life against three living shadows of darkness and steel They pressed him to the utmost of his ability, leaving him bloodied half a dozen times over on arms and legs. He used The Cyclone Rages, and it defended his vitals. Barely.

dʒɹɑps ə hɪz blʌd steɪn ðə ɡɔz dʒɹeɪpɪŋ ɛɡwinz bɛd. ɪf ɪz əpoʊnəns hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi kɪld ɛɡwin, ðən ðeɪ meɪɾ ə ɡʊd ʃoʊ ʌv kɑn-tɪnjuɪŋ tə θɹɛɾən hɝ.

Drops of his blood stained the gauze draping Egwene's bed. If his opponents had already killed Egwene, then they made a good show of con-tinuing to threaten her.

hi wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ wik ən taɪɝd. hɪz buts lɛf blʌɾi pɹɪns wən i stɛpt. hi kʊdn fil ðə peɪn. hɪz pɛɹiz wɝ bɪkʌmɪŋ slʌɡɪʃ. ðeɪɾ əv ɪm ɪn ənʌðɝ moʊmən əɹ tu.

He was growing weak and tired. His boots left bloody prints when he stepped. He couldn't feel the pain. His parries were becoming sluggish. They'd have him in another moment or two.

noʊ hɛlp keɪm, ɔlðoʊ hɪz vɔɪs wɑz hɔɹs fɹəm jɛlɪŋ. ful! hi θɔt. jə nid tə spɛn mɔɹ taɪm θɪŋkɪŋ ən lɛs taɪm ɹʌnɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ ɪndə deɪnʒɝ! hi ʃʊɾə əlɝɾɪd ði ɪntaɪɝ taʊɝ.

No help came, although his voice was hoarse from yelling. Fool! he thought. You need to spend more time thinking and less time running straight into danger! He should have alerted the entire Tower.

ði oʊnli ɹizən i wɑz əlaɪv wɑz kəz ðə θɹi wɝ biɪŋ kɛɹfəl wɛɹɪŋ ɪm daʊn. wʌns i fɛl, ðət sʌldəm hæɾ ɪndəkeɪɾəd ðeɪ wəd ɡoʊ ɑn ə ɹæmpeɪdʒ θɹu ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ɪt wəd teɪk ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kəmplitli baɪ sɝpɹaɪz. ðɪs naɪt kəd bi ə dɪzæstɝ ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən ði ɝɪdʒənəl sintʃæn stʃɹaɪk hæd bɪn.

The only reason he was alive was because the three were being careful wearing him down. Once he fell, that sul'dam had indicated they would go on a rampage through the White Tower. It would take the Aes Sedai completely by surprise. This night could be a disaster greater than the original Seanchan strike had been.

ðə θɹi muv fɔɹwɝd.

The three moved forward.

noʊ! ɡɔɪn θɔɾ əz wʌn ə ðɛm tʃɹaɪd ðə ɹɪvɝ ʌndɝkʌts ðə bæŋk. hi lɛp fɔɹwɝd, dɑdʒɪŋ bɪtwin tu bleɪdz, swɪŋɪŋ ɪz wɛpən. əmeɪzɪŋli, hi æktʃəli  stʃɹʌk, ən ə vɔɪs kɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ɪn ðə ɹum. blʌd spɹeɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹaʊnd, wʌn ʃæɾoʊi fɔɹm fɔlɪŋ.

No! Gawyn thought as one of them tried The River Undercuts the Bank. He leaped forward, dodging between two blades, swinging his weapon. Amazingly, he actually struck, and a voice cried out in the room. Blood sprayed across the ground, one shadowy form falling.

ðə tu ʌðɝz mʌɾɝd kɝsɪz, ən ɔl pɹitɛns ʌv wɛɹɪŋ ɪm daʊn vænɪʃt. ðeɪ stʃɹʌk ət hɪm, wɛpənz flæʃɪŋ əmɪd dɑɹk mɪst. ɪɡzɔstəd, ɡɔɪn tʊk ənʌðɝ hɪɾ ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ, blʌd tʃɹɪklɪŋ daʊn ɪz ɑɹm bɪniθ ɪz koʊt.

The two others muttered curses, and all pretense of wearing him down vanished. They struck at him, weapons flashing amid dark mist. Exhausted, Gawyn took another hit on the shoulder, blood trickling down his arm beneath his coat.

ʃædoʊz. haʊ kəɾ ə mæn bi ɪkspɛktəd tə faɪɾ əɡɛnst ʃædoʊz? ɪt wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl!

Shadows. How could a man be expected to fight against shadows? It was impossible!

wɛɹ ðəɹ ɪz laɪt, ðəɹ mʌs bi ʃædoʊ . . .

Where there is light, there must be shadow . . .

ə læst, dɛspɹɪt θɔɾ əkɝd tə hɪm. wɪð ə kɹaɪ, hi lɛp tə ðə saɪɾ ən jæŋkt ə pɪloʊ fɹəm ɛɡwinz bɛd. bleɪdz kʌt ði ɛɹ ɝaʊn ɪm əz i spʌn ən slæm ðə pɪloʊ ɑn ðə læntɝn, smʌðɝɪŋ ɪt.

A last, desperate thought occurred to him. With a cry, he leaped to the side and yanked a pillow from Egwene's bed. Blades cut the air around him as he spun and slammed the pillow on the lantern, smothering it.

plʌnʒɪŋ ðə ɹum ɪndə dɑɹknəs. noʊ laɪt. noʊ ʃædoʊz.

Plunging the room into darkness. No light. No shadows.

ɪkwɑləɾi.

Equality.

ðə dɑɹknəs ivən aʊɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ən ɪn ðə naɪt, jə kʊdn si kʌlɝ. hi kʊdn si ðə blʌɾ ɑn ɪz ɑɹmz, kʊdn si ðə blæk ʃædoʊz ə hɪz ɛnəmiz əɹ ðə waɪtnəs ʌv ɛɡwinz bɛd.

The darkness evened out everything, and in the night, you couldn't see color. He couldn't see the blood on his arms, couldn't see the black shadows of his enemies or the whiteness of Egwene's bed.

bʌɾ i kəd hɪɹ ðə mɛn muv.

But he could hear the men move.

hi ɹeɪzd ɪz bleɪd fəɹ ə dɛspɹɪt stʃɹaɪk, juzɪŋ hʌmɪŋbɝd kɪsəz ðə hʌniɹoʊz, pɹɪdɪktɪŋ wɛɹ ðə blʌdnaɪvz wəd muv. hi wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ dɪstʃɹæktəd baɪ ðɛɹ mɪstɪd fɪɡjɝz, ən ɪz stʃɹaɪk hɪt tʃɹu, sɪŋkɪŋ ɪndə flɛʃ.

He raised his blade for a desperate strike, using Hummingbird Kisses the Honeyrose, predicting where the Bloodknives would move. He was no longer distracted by their misted figures, and his strike hit true, sinking into flesh.

hi twɪstəd, jæŋkɪŋ ɪz bleɪd fɹi. ðə ɹum fɛl saɪlən seɪv fəɹ ðə fɔl ə ðə mæn hid hɪt. ɡɔɪn hɛld ɪz bɹɛθ, hɑɹtbit θʌmpɪŋ ɪn ɪz ɪɹz. wɛɹ wɑz ðə læst əsæsən?

He twisted, yanking his blade free. The room fell silent save for the fall of the man he'd hit. Gawyn held his breath, heartbeat thumping in his ears. Where was the last assassin?

noʊ laɪt keɪm ɪn fɹəm ðə ɹum nɛks dɔɹ; sɛlɑɹk hæd fɔlən bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹweɪ, blɑkɪŋ ðə laɪɾ ʌndɝniθ.

No light came in from the room next door; Celark had fallen beside the doorway, blocking the light underneath.

ɡɔɪn wɑz filɪŋ ʃeɪki naʊ. hid lɔs tu mʌtʃ blʌd. ɪf i hæd sʌmθɪŋ tə θɹoʊ tə kɹieɪɾ ə dɪstʃɹækʃən . . . bʌt noʊ. muvɪŋ wəd ɹʌsəl kloʊðɪŋ, wəd ɡɪv ɪm əweɪ.

Gawyn was feeling shaky now. He'd lost too much blood. If he had something to throw to create a distraction . . . but no. Moving would rustle clothing, would give him away.

soʊ, ɡɹɪɾɪŋ ɪz tiθ, hi tæpt ɪz fʊɾ ən ɹeɪzd ɪz bleɪd tə pɹətɛkt ɪz nɛk, pɹeɪɪŋ tə ðə laɪt ðət ði ətæk keɪm loʊ.

So, gritting his teeth, he tapped his foot and raised his blade to protect his neck, praying to the Light that the attack came low.

ɪt dɪd, kʌɾɪŋ dipli ɪndə hɪz saɪd. hi tʊk ɪt wɪð ə ɡɹʌnt, bʌɾ ɪmiɾiətli læʃt aʊt wɪð ɔl i hæd. hɪz sɔɹd hɪst, ən wɪð ə bɹif tʌɡ ɪt slaɪs tʃɹu. ə θʌmp fɑloʊd; ə dikæpəteɪɾɪd hɛd baʊnsɪŋ ɔf ðə wɔl, fɑloʊd baɪ ðə nɔɪz ʌv ə kɔɹps hɪɾɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

It did, cutting deeply into his side. He took it with a grunt, but immediately lashed out with all he had. His sword hissed, and with a brief tug it sliced true. A thump followed; a decapitated head bouncing off the wall, followed by the noise of a corpse hitting the ground.

ɡɔɪn slʌmpt əɡɛns ðə bɛd, blʌd ɡʌʃɪŋ fɹəm ɪz saɪd. hi wɑz blækɪŋ aʊt, ɔlðoʊ ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə tɛl ɪn ði ənlɪt ɹum.

Gawyn slumped against the bed, blood gushing from his side. He was blacking out, although it was hard to tell in the unlit room.

hi ɹitʃt fəɹ wɛɹ i ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɛɡwinz hæn biɪŋ, bʌt wɑz tu wik tə faɪn ɪt.

He reached for where he remembered Egwene's hand being, but was too weak to find it.

hi hɪt ðə flɔɹ ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ. hɪz læs θɔt wɑz ðəɾ i stɪl dɪdnt noʊ wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ʃi wɑz dɛd.

He hit the floor a moment later. His last thought was that he still didn't know whether or not she was dead.

"ɡɹeɪt mɪstʃɹəs," keɪɾɝin sɛd, nilɪŋ bɪfɔɹ mɛsænə, "wi kænɑt faɪn ðə θɪŋ jə dɪskɹaɪb.

"Great Mistress," Katerine said, kneeling before Mesaana, "we cannot find the thing you describe.

hæf ʌv əɹ wɪmən sɝtʃ fəɹ ɪt waɪl ði ʌðɝ hæf faɪt ðə wɝmz u ɹɪzɪst. bʌɾ ɪts noʊwɛɹ!"

Half of our women search for it while the other half fight the worms who resist. But it is nowhere!"

mɛsænə foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts əz ʃi kənsɪɾɝd ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən. wɪð ən ɑfhændɪd θɔt, ʃi stʃɹæp keɪɾɝinz bæk wɪð laɪnz ʌv ɛɹ. feɪljɝ niɾəd ɔlweɪz bi pʌnɪʃt.

Mesaana folded her arms beneath her breasts as she considered the situation. With an offhanded thought, she strapped Katerine's back with lines of Air. Failure needed always be punished.

kənsɪstənsi wɑz ðə ki ɪn ɔl fɔɹmz ə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ. ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɹʌmbəld əbʌv hɝ, ðoʊ ʃi wɑz seɪf hɪɹ. ʃiɾ ɪmpoʊzd əɹ wɪl ɑn ðɪs ɛɹiə, kɹieɪɾɪŋ ə nu ɹum bɪniθ ðə beɪsməns, kɑɹvd əz ə pɑkəɾ ɪn ðə stoʊn. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən u fɔɾ əbʌv ɑbviəsli nɔt ðɛmsɛlvz pɹæktəst ɪn ðɪs pleɪs, bʌt tʃɪlʒɹən ðeɪ wɝ. ʃi hæd bɪn kʌmɪŋ tə tɛlɝɑnɹbiəd fəɹ ə sɛntʃɝi bɪfɔɹ əɹ ɪmpɹɪzənmənt. ðə taʊɝ ɹʌmbəld əɡɛn. kɛɹfəli, ʃi kənsɪɾɝd əɹ sɪtʃueɪʃən.

Consistency was the key in all forms of training. The White Tower rumbled above her, though she was safe here. She'd imposed her will on this area, creating a new room beneath the basements, carved as a pocket in the stone. The children who fought above obviously nought themselves practiced in this place, but children they were. She had been coming to Tel'aran'rbiod for a century before her imprisonment. The Tower rumbled again. Carefully, she considered her situation.

sʌmhaʊ, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd faʊn ə dʒɹimspaɪk. haʊ hæd ðeɪ loʊkeɪɾəd sətʃ ə tʃɹɛʒɝ? mɛsænə wɑz nɪɹli əz ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ɡeɪnɪŋ kəntʃɹoʊl ʌv ɪɾ əz ʃi wɑz ɪn dɑməneɪɾɪŋ ðə tʃaɪld æmɪɝlɪn, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ. ði əbɪləɾi tə fɝbɪd ɡeɪtweɪz ɪndə jəɹ pleɪsəz ə ɹɛfjudʒ . . . wɛl, ɪt wɑz ə vaɪɾəl tul, pɑɹtɪkjəlɛɹi wən ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə muv əɡɛns ði ʌðɝ tʃoʊzən. ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ɪfɛktɪv ðən wɔɹdz, pɹətɛktɪŋ wʌnz dʒɹimz fɹəm ɛni ɪntʃɹuʒən, ən ɪt stɑpt ɔl fɔɹmz ə tʃɹævlɪŋ ɪn əɹ aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹiə ɪksɛp fəɹ ðoʊz æl-loʊd.

somehow, the Aes Sedai had found a dreamspike. How had they located such a treasure? Mesaana was nearly as interested in gaining control of it as she was in dominating the child Amyrlin, Egwene al'Vere. The ability to forbid gateways into your places of refuge . . . Well, it was a vital tool, particulary when she decided to move against the other Chosen. It was more effective than wards, protecting one's dreams from any intrusion, and it stopped all forms of Traveling in or out of the area except for those al-lowed.

haʊɛvɝ, wɪð ðə dʒɹimspaɪk ɪn pleɪs, ʃi ɔlsoʊ kəd nɑt muv ðɪs bæɾəl wɪð ðə tʃɪlʒɹən əbʌv tə ə mɔɹ suɾəbəl, kɛɹfəli səlɛktəd loʊkə-ʃən. æɡɹəveɪɾɪŋ. bʌt noʊ, ʃi wəd nɑɾ əlaʊ hɝsɛlf tə bɪkʌm ɛɹnoʊ-ʃənəl əbaʊt ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən.

However, with the dreamspike in place, she also could not move this battle with the children above to a more suitable, carefully selected loca-tion. Aggravating. But no, she would not allow herself to become erno-tional about the situation.

"ɹɪtɝn əbʌv ən kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɑn kæptʃɝɪŋ ðə wʊmən ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ," mɛsænə sɛd. "ʃi wɪl noʊ wɛɹ ðə dɪvaɪs ɪz." jɛs ðət wɑz klɪɹ tə hɝ naʊ. ʃi wəɾ ətʃiv tu vɪktɝiz wɪð ə sɪŋɡəl ækt "jɛs . . . mɪstʃɹəs . . ." keɪɾɝin wɑz stɪl kaʊɝɪŋ, stʃɹæps ʌv ɛɹ biɾɪŋ əɡɛnst əɹ bæk. ɑ, jɛs. mɛsænə weɪv kɝtli, dɪspɛlɪŋ ðə wiv. əz ʃi dɪd soʊ, ə θɔɾ əkɝd tə hɝ.

"Return above and concentrate everything on capturing the woman Egwene al'Vere," Mesaana said. "She will know where the device is." Yes that was clear to her now. She would achieve two victories with a single act "Yes . . . Mistress . . ." Katerine was still cowering, straps of Air beating against her back. Ah, yes. Mesaana waved curtly, dispelling the weave. As she did so, a thought occurred to her.

"weɪt hɪɹ, ə moʊmənt," ʃi sɛd tə keɪɾɝin. "aɪm gɑnə pleɪs ə wiv əpɑn ju. . . ."

"Wait here, a moment," she said to Katerine. "I'm going to place a weave upon you. . . ."

pɛɹɪn əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðə vɛɹi tɑp ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ.

Perrin appeared on the very top of the White Tower.

sleɪɝ hɛl hɑpɝ baɪ ðə skɹʌf ə hɪz nɛk. ðə wʊlf hæɾ ən æɹoʊ θɹu hɪz saɪd; blʌd ɹæn daʊn ɪz pɔ. wɪn blu əkɹɔs ðə ɹɑk, kætʃɪŋ ðə blʌɾ ən spɹeɪɪŋ ɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə stoʊnz.

Slayer held Hopper by the scruff of his neck. The wolf had an arrow through his side; blood ran down his paw. Wind blew across the rock, catching the blood and spraying it across the stones.

"hɑpɝ!" pɛɹɪn tʊk ə stɛp fɔɹwɝd. hi kəd stɪl sɛns hɑpɝz maɪnd, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz wik.

"Hopper!" Perrin took a step forward. He could still sense Hopper's mind, though it was weak.

sleɪɝ hɛl ðə wʊlf ʌp, lɪftɪŋ ɪm izəli. hi ɹeɪzd ə naɪf.

Slayer held the wolf up, lifting him easily. He raised a knife.

"noʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ju hæv wʌt jə wɑnt. dʒʌst ɡoʊ."

"No," Perrin said. "You have what you want. Just go."

"ænd wʌt wɑz ɪt jə sɛɾ ɝliɝ?" sleɪɝ æskt. "ðæt jə noʊ wɛɹ aɪ wəd ɡoʊ, ən jud fɑloʊ? ðə dʒɹimspaɪk ɪz tu izi tə loʊkeɪɾ ɑn ðɪs saɪd."

"And what was it you said earlier?" Slayer asked. "That you know where I would go, and you'd follow? The dreamspike is too easy to locate on this side."

hi kæʒəwəli tɔs ðə wʊlf ɔf ðə saɪɾ ə ðə taʊɝ.

He casually tossed the wolf off the side of the Tower.

"noʊ!" pɛɹɪn skɹimd. hi lɛp fəɹ ðə saɪd, bʌt sleɪɝ əpɪɹd bɪsaɪd hɪm, ɡɹæbɪŋ hɪm, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz dæɡɝ. ðə lip nɑkt əm boʊθ ɔf ðə saɪɾ ə ðə taʊɝ, pɛɹɪnz stʌmək lɝtʃɪŋ əz ðeɪ fɛl.

"NO!" Perrin screamed. He leaped for the side, but Slayer appeared beside him, grabbing him, raising his dagger. The leap knocked them both off the side of the Tower, Perrin's stomach lurching as they fell.

hi tʃɹaɪd tə sɛn hɪmsɛlf əweɪ, bʌt sleɪɝ hæd hoʊld ə hɪm, ən i tʃɹaɪd vɛɹi hɑɹd tə kip əm ɪn pleɪs. ðeɪ ʃʊk fəɹ ə moʊmənt, bʌt kɛp fɔlɪŋ.

He tried to send himself away, but Slayer had hold of him, and he tried very hard to keep them in place. They shook for a moment, but kept falling.

sleɪɝ wɑz soʊ stʃɹɔŋ. hi smɛld ɹɔŋ, laɪk steɪlnəs ən wʊlfs blʌd. hɪz naɪf sɔt pɛɹɪnz θɹoʊt, ən ðə bɛs pɛɹɪn kəd də wɑz ɹeɪz ɪz ɑɹm tə blɑk, θɪŋkɪŋ ə hɪz ʃɝt biɪŋ əz hɑɹɾ əz stil.

Slayer was so strong. He smelled wrong, like staleness and wolf's blood. His knife sought Perrin's throat, and the best Perrin could do was raise his arm to block, thinking of his shirt being as hard as steel.

sleɪɝ pɹɛs hɑɹɾɝ. pɛɹɪn fɛlt ə moʊmən ʌv wiknəs, ðə waʊn əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛs θɹɑbɪŋ əz i ən sleɪɝ tʌmbəld. ðə naɪf splɪt pɝ-ɹɪnz sliv ən ɹæmd ɪndə hɪz fɔɹɑɹm.

Slayer pressed harder. Perrin felt a moment of weakness, the wound across his chest throbbing as he and Slayer tumbled. The knife split Per-rin's sleeve and rammed into his forearm.

pɛɹɪn skɹimd. ðə wɪnd wɑz soʊ laʊd. ɪt hæd bɪn mɪɹ sɛkənz. sleɪɝ pʊl ðə naɪf fɹi.

Perrin screamed. The wind was so loud. It had been mere seconds. Slayer pulled the knife free.

hɑpɝ!

Hopper!

pɛɹɪn ɹɔɹɾ ən kɪkt ət sleɪɝ, pʊʃɪŋ ɪm əweɪ, bɹeɪkɪŋ ɪz ɡɹɪp. ɑɹm əfleɪm, pɛɹɪn twɪstəɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ. ðə ɡɹaʊn ɹʌʃt ət ðɛm. hi wɪl hɪmsɛlf tə ənʌðɝ pleɪs, ən i əpɪɹd dʒʌs bɪloʊ hɑpɝ, kætʃɪŋ ðə wʊlf ən kɹæʃɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hɪz niz bʌkəld; ðə ɡɹaʊn ɝaʊn ɪm ʃæɾɝd. bʌɾ i loʊɝd hɑpɝ seɪfli.

Perrin roared and kicked at Slayer, pushing him away, breaking his grip. Arm aflame, Perrin twisted in the air. The ground rushed at them. He willed himself to another place, and he appeared just below Hopper, catching the wolf and crashing into the ground. His knees buckled; the ground around him shattered. But he lowered Hopper safely.

ə blæk-flɛtʃt æɹoʊ zɪp fɹəm ðə skaɪ ən pɪɹs hɑpɝz bæk, pæsɪŋ ɔl ðə weɪ θɹu ðə wʊlf ən hɪɾɪŋ pɛɹɪn ɪn ɪz θaɪ, wɪtʃ wɑz bɛn ət ðə ni dʒʌs bɪniθ ðə wʊlf.

A black-fletched arrow zipped from the sky and pierced Hopper's back, passing all the way through the wolf and hitting Perrin in his thigh, which was bent at the knee just beneath the wolf.

pɛɹɪn jɛld, filɪŋ ɪz oʊn peɪn mɪks wɪð ə sʌɾən wɑʃ ʌv æɡəni fɹəm hɑpɝ. ðə wʊlfs maɪnd wɑz feɪɾɪŋ.

Perrin yelled, feeling his own pain mix with a sudden wash of agony from Hopper. The wolf's mind was fading.

"noʊ!" pɛɹɪn sɛnt, aɪz wɛt wɪð tɪɹz.

"No!" Perrin sent, eyes wet with tears.

jʌŋ bʊl. . . hɑpɝ sɛnt.

Young Bull. . . Hopper sent.

pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd tə sɛn hɪmsɛlf əweɪ, bʌɾ ɪz maɪnd wɑz fʌzi. ənʌðɝ æɹoʊ wəd sun fɔl. hi nu ɪt. hi mænədʒ tə ɹoʊl aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ əz ɪt stʃɹʌk ðə ɡɹaʊnd, bʌɾ ɪz lɛɡ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wɝkt, ən hɑpɝ wɑz soʊ hɛvi. pɛɹɪn pɪtʃt tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, dʒɹɑpɪŋ ðə wʊlf, ɹoʊlɪŋ.

Perrin tried to send himself away, but his mind was fuzzy. Another arrow would soon fall. He knew it. He managed to roll out of the way as it struck the ground, but his leg no longer worked, and Hopper was so heavy. Perrin pitched to the ground, dropping the wolf, rolling.

sleɪɝ lændəɾ ə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns əweɪ, lɔŋ, wɪkəd blæk baʊ ɪn hænd. "ɡʊdbaɪ, eɪbɑɹə." sleɪɝ ɹeɪzd ɪz baʊ. "lʊks laɪk aɪ kɪl faɪv wʊlvz tədeɪ."

Slayer landed a short distance away, long, wicked black bow in hand. "Goodbye, Aybara." Slayer raised his bow. "Looks like I kill five wolves today."

pɛɹɪn stɛɹɾ ʌp ət ði æɹoʊ. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz blɝi.

Perrin stared up at the arrow. Everything was blurry.

aɪ kæn liv feɪl. aɪ kæn liv hɑpɝ.

I can't leave Faile. I can't leave Hopper.

aɪ woʊnt!

I won't!

əz sleɪɝ ɹilist, pɛɹɪn dɛspɝətli ɪmædʒən hɪmsɛlf stʃɹɔŋ, nɑt feɪnt. hi fɛlt ɪz hɑɹt bɪkʌm heɪl əɡɛn, hɪz veɪnz fɪlɪŋ wɪð ɛnɝdʒi. hi jɛld, hɛd klɪɹɪŋ ɪnʌf tə meɪk hɪmsɛlf vænɪʃ ən əpɪɹ stændɪŋ bɪhaɪn sleɪɝ.

As Slayer released, Perrin desperately imagined himself strong, not faint. He felt his heart become hale again, his veins filling with energy. He yelled, head clearing enough to make himself vanish and appear standing behind Slayer.

hi swʌŋ wɪð ɪz hæmɝ.

He swung with his hammer.

meɪɝ tɝn kæʒəwəli ən blɑkt ɪt wɪð ɪz ɑɹm, wɪtʃ wɑz ɪnɔɹməsli stʃɹɔŋ. pɛɹɪn fɛl tə wʌn ni, ðə peɪn ɪn ɪz lɛɡ stɪl ðɛɹ. hi ɡæspt.

Mayer turned casually and blocked it with his arm, which was enormously strong. Perrin fell to one knee, the pain in his leg still there. He gasped.

"ju kæn hil jɝsɛlf," sleɪɝ sɛd. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ weɪz, bʌt sɪmpli ɪmɪdʒɪŋ jɝsɛlf wɛl dʌz nɑt wɝk. jə də sim tə hæv fɪɡjɝɾ aʊt haʊ tə ɹiplɛnɪʃ jəɹ blʌd, haʊɛvɝ, wɪtʃ ɪz jusfəl."

"You can't heal yourself," Slayer said. "There are ways, but simply imaging yourself well does not work. You do seem to have figured out how to replenish your blood, however, which is useful."

pɛɹɪn smɛl sʌmθɪŋ. tɛɹɝ. wɑz ɪɾ ɪz oʊn?

Perrin smelled something. Terror. Was it his own?

noʊ. noʊ, ðɛɹ. bɪhaɪn sleɪɝ wɑz ə dɔɹweɪ oʊpən ɪndə ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪnsaɪd wɑz blæknəs.

No. No, there. Behind Slayer was a doorway open into the White Tower Inside was blackness.

nɑt dʒʌst ʃædoʊ, blæknəs. pɛɹɪn hæd dʌn ɪnʌf pɹæktəs wɪð hɑpɝ tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz wʌɾ ɪt wɑz.

Not just shadow, blackness. Perrin had done enough practice with Hopper to recognize what it was.

ə naɪtmɛɹ.

A nightmare.

əz sleɪɝ oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ, pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld ən θɹu ɔl ə hɪz weɪt fɔɹwɝd, ɹæmɪŋ ɪndə sleɪɝ, hɪz lɛɡ skɹim ɪn peɪn.

As Slayer opened his mouth to say something, Perrin growled and threw all of his weight forward, ramming into Slayer, His leg scream in pain.

ðeɪ tʌmbəl dɝɛkli ɪndə ðə blæknəs ə ðə naɪtmɛɹ.

They tumbled directly into the blackness of the nightmare.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾieɪt


CHAPTER 38

wunz


Wounds

spɝts ə faɪɝ flæʃt θɹu ðə dɑɹk hɔlweɪz ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, livɪŋ tʃɹeɪlz ə smoʊk ðət kɝld ɪn ði ɛɹ, θɪk ən pʌnʒənt. pipəl skɹimd ən jɛld ən kɝst. ðə wɔlz ʃʊk əz blæsts tʊk ðɛm; tʃɪps ən tʃʌŋks ə ɹɑk spɹeɪɾ ɔf wivz ʌv ɛɹ kɹæftɪd fəɹ pɹətɛkʃən.

Spurts of fire flashed through the dark hallways of the White Tower, leaving trails of smoke that curled in the air, thick and pungent. People screamed and yelled and cursed. The walls shook as blasts took them; chips and chunks of rock sprayed off weaves of Air crafted for protection.

ðɛɹ. ɛɡwin noʊɾəd ə pleɪs wɛɹ sɛvɹəl blæk sɪstɝz wɝ lɑbɪŋ faɪɝ daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ.

There. Egwene noted a place where several Black sisters were lobbing fire down the hallway.

ɛvænɛlaɪn wɑz ðɛɹ.

Evanellein was there.

ɛɡwin sɛn hɝsɛlf ɪndə ðə ɹum nɛks tə ðə wʌn wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ stændɪŋ; ʃi kəd hɪɹ əm ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə wɔl. ʃi oʊpən əɹ hænz ən ɹilist ə paʊɝfəl blæst ə ɝθ ən faɪɝ dɝɛkli ət ðə wɔl, bloʊɪŋ ɪɾ aʊtwɝd.

Egwene sent herself into the room next to the one where they were standing; she could hear them on the other side of the wall. She opened her hands and released a powerful blast of Earth and Fire directly at the wall, blowing it outward.

ðə wɪmən bɪɑn stʌmbəld ən fɛl, ɛvænɛlaɪn kəlæpsɪŋ, blʌɾid. ði ʌðɝ wʊmən wɑz kwɪk ɪnʌf tə sɛn hɝsɛlf əweɪ.

The women beyond stumbled and fell, Evanellein collapsing, bloodied. The other woman was quick enough to send herself away.

ɛɡwin tʃɛk tə si ðəɾ ɛvænɛlaɪn wɑz dɛd. ʃi wɑz. ɛɡwin nɑɾəd wɪð sæɾəsfækʃən;

Egwene checked to see that Evanellein was dead. She was. Egwene nodded with satisfaction;

ɛvænɛlaɪn wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz ðət ʃid bɪn moʊst iɡɝ tə faɪnd. naʊ ɪf ʃi kəɾ oʊnli tʃɹæk daʊn keɪɾɝin əɹ ɑlviɛɝɪn.

Evanellein was one of those that she'd been most eager to find. Now if she could only track down Katerine or Alviarin.

tʃænəlɪŋ. bɪhaɪn hɝ. ɛɡwin θɹu hɝsɛlf tə ðə ɡɹaʊn əz ə blæst ə faɪɝ spɹeɪɾ oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd. mɛsænə, blæk klɔθ swɝlɪŋ əbaʊt hɝ. ɛɡwin ɡɹɪɾɪd əɹ tiθ ən sɛn hɝsɛlf əweɪ. ʃi dɪdn dɛɹ feɪs ðə wʊmən dɝɛkli.

Channeling. Behind her. Egwene threw herself to the ground as a blast of Fire sprayed over her head. Mesaana, black cloth swirling about her. Egwene gritted her teeth and sent herself away. She didn't dare face the woman directly.

ɛɡwin əpɪɹɾ ɪn ə stɔɹədʒ ɹum nɑt fɑɹ əweɪ, ðən stʌmbəld əz ə blæst ʃʊk ði ɛɹiə. ʃi weɪvd ə hænd, meɪkɪŋ ə wɪndoʊ ɪn ðə dɔɹ, ən sɔ æmɪz tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ pæst. ðə waɪz wʌn wɔɹ keɪɾɪnsɝ ən kæɹid spɪɹz. hɝ ʃoʊldɝ wɑz bliɾɪŋ ən blækənd. ənʌðɝ blæs hɪt nɪɹ əɹ bʌt ʃi vænɪʃt. ðət blæs meɪd ði ɛɹ aʊtsaɪd swɛltɝ, mɛltɪŋ ɛɡwinz wɪndoʊ ən fɔɹsɪŋ əɹ tə stɛp bæk.

Egwene appeared in a storage room not far away, then stumbled as a blast shook the area. She waved a hand, making a window in the door, and saw Amys charging past. The Wise One wore cadin'sor and carried spears. Her shoulder was bleeding and blackened. Another blast hit near her but she vanished. That blast made the air outside swelter, melting Egwene's window and forcing her to step back.

sɹɪnz ɹisɝtʃ hæd bɪn kɝɛkt. dɪspaɪt ði oʊpən bæɾəl, mɛsɑ hæd nɑt flɛɾ əɹ hɪd, əz mɑɡiɾin maɪt hæv. pɝhæps ʃi wɑz kɑnfəɾənt pɝhæps ʃi wɑz fɹaɪɾənd; laɪkli, ʃi niɾəd ɛɡwinz dɛθ tə pɹuv ə vɪktɝi bɪfɔɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn.

Saerin's research had been correct. Despite the open battle, Mesaa had not fled or hid, as Moghedien might have. Perhaps she was confident Perhaps she was frightened; likely, she needed Egwene's death to prove a victory before the Dark One.

ɛɡwin tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən pɹipɛɹd tə ɹɪtɝn tə ðə faɪɾɪŋ. ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, haʊɛvɝ, θɪŋkɪŋ ə pɛɹɪnz əpɪɹəns. hiɾ æktəɾ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ə nɑvəs. haʊ hæɾ i ɡɹoʊn soʊ kɑnfəɾənt, soʊ stʃɹɔŋ? ʃi hædn bɪn sɝpɹaɪz baɪ ðə θɪŋz hid dʌn soʊ mʌtʃ əz baɪ ðə fæk ðəɾ i hæd bɪn ðə wʌn duɪŋ ðɛm.

Egwene took a deep breath and prepared to return to the fighting. She hesitated, however, thinking of Perrin's appearance. He'd acted as if she were a novice. How had he grown so confident, so strong? She hadn't been surprised by the things he'd done so much as by the fact that he had been the one doing them.

hɪz əpɪɹəns wɑz ə lɛsən. ɛɡwin hæd tə bi vɛɹi kɛɹfəl nɑt tə ɹɪlaɪ ɑn əɹ wivz. bɛɹ kʊdn tʃænəl, bʌt ʃi wɑz əz ɪfɛktɪv əz ði ʌðɝz. haʊɛvɝ, ɪt dɪd sim ðət fəɹ səm θɪŋz, wivz wɝ bɛɾɝ. bloʊɪŋ ðə wɔl aʊtwɝd, fəɹ ɪnstəns, hæd simd iziɝ wɪð ə wiv ðən baɪ ɪmædʒənɪŋ ɪt, wɛɹ ɪmpoʊzɪŋ əɹ wɪl əɡɛnst soʊ lɑɹdʒ ən θɪk sɝfəs maɪɾ əv bɪn dɪfəkəlt.

His appearance was a lesson. Egwene had to be very careful not to rely on her weaves. Bair couldn't channel, but she was as effective as the others. However, it did seem that for some things, weaves were better. Blowing the wall outward, for instance, had seemed easier with a weave than by imagining it, where imposing her will against so large and thick surface might have been difficult.

ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ʃi wɑz ə dʒɹimɝ. ʃi hæd tə juz boʊθ. ɛɡwin kɔʃəsli sɛn hɝsɛlf bæk tə ðə ɹum wɛɹ ʃid sin mɛsænə. ɪt wɑz ɛmpti, ðoʊ ðə wɔl wɑz stɪl ɹʌbəl. blæsts saʊndəd fɹəm ðə ɹaɪt, ən ɛɡwin pikt ɝaʊnd. bɔlz ə faɪɝ ʃɑt bæk ən fɔɹθ ɪn ðət dɝɛkʃən, wivz flaɪɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ.

She was Aes Sedai and she was a Dreamer. She had to use both. Egwene cautiously sent herself back to the room where she'd seen Mesaana. It was empty, though the wall was still rubble. Blasts sounded from the right, and Egwene peeked around. Balls of fire shot back and forth in that direction, weaves flying in the air.

ɛɡwin sɛn hɝsɛlf bɪhaɪnd wʌn ə ðə faɪɾɪŋ ɡɹups ən kɹieɪɾəd ə θɪk sɪləndɝ ʌv ɡlæs ɝaʊn əɹ fəɹ pɹətɛkʃən. ðə taʊɝ wɑz bɹoʊkən ən skɑɹd hɪɹ, ðə wɔlz smoʊldɝɪŋ. ɛɡwin kɑt saɪɾ ʌv wʌn fɪɡjɝ stupɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ə sɛkʃən ə ɹʌbəl, wɛɹɪŋ ə blu dʒɹɛs.

Egwene sent herself behind one of the fighting groups and created a thick cylinder of glass around her for protection. The Tower was broken and scarred here, the walls smoldering. Egwene caught sight of one figure stooping beside a section of rubble, wearing a blue dress.

nɪkoʊlə? ɛɡwin θɔt wɪð æŋɡɝ. haʊ dɪd ʃi ɡɛt hɪɹ? aɪ θɔɾ aɪ kəd tʃɹʌst əɹ naʊ! ðə ful ɡɝl mʌst əv ɡɑɾən ə dʒɹim tɛɹæŋɡɹil fɹəm wʌn ə ði ʌðɝz u hæɾ əweɪkənd.

Nicola? Egwene thought with anger. How did she get here? I thought I could trust her now! The fool girl must have gotten a dream ter'angreal from one of the others who had awakened.

ɛɡwin pɹipɛɹd tə dʒʌmp oʊvɝ ən sɛn ðə ɡɝl əweɪ, bʌt ðə ɡɹaʊn sʌɾənli ɹɪpt ʌp bɪniθ nɪkoʊlə, faɪɝ bleɪzɪŋ. nɪkoʊlə skɹimd əz ʃi wɑz tɔst ɪndə ði ɛɹ, bɪts ə moʊltən ɹɑk spɹeɪɪŋ ɝaʊn hɝ.

Egwene prepared to jump over and send the girl away, but the ground suddenly ripped up beneath Nicola, fire blazing. Nicola screamed as she was tossed into the air, bits of molten rock spraying around her.

ɛɡwin jɛld, sɛndɪŋ hɝsɛlf ðɛɹ, ɪmædʒənɪŋ ə stʃɹɔŋ wɔl ə stoʊn bɪniθ nɪkoʊlə. ðə ɡɝl fɛl ən lændəɾ ɑn ɪt, blʌɾid, aɪz ənsiɪŋ-ɛɡwin kɝst, nilɪŋ. ðə ɡɝl wɑzn bɹiðɪŋ.

Egwene yelled, sending herself there, imagining a strong wall of stone beneath Nicola. The girl fell and landed on it, bloodied, eyes unseeing-Egwene cursed, kneeling. The girl wasn't breathing.

"noʊ!" ɛɡwin sɛd.

"No!" Egwene said.

"ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ! bɪwɛɹ!" məleɪnz vɔɪs.

"Egwene al'Vere! Beware!" Melaine's voice.

ɛɡwin tɝnd wɪð əlɑɹm əz ə wɔl əpɪɹd bɪsaɪd hɝ, meɪɾ əɹ hɪk ɡɹænət, blɑkɪŋ sɛvɹəl blæsts ə faɪɝ ðət hæd kʌm fɹəm bɪhaɪnd, məleɪn əpɪɹd nɛks tə ɛɡwin, dʒɹɛst ɪn ɔl blæk, hɝ vɛɹi skɪn kɑl-ɔɹɛd dɑɹk. ʃid bɪn haɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz bɪsaɪd ðə hɔlweɪ.

Egwene turned with alarm as a wall appeared beside her, made or hick granite, blocking several blasts of fire that had come from behind, Melaine appeared next to Egwene, dressed in all black, her very skin col-ored dark. She'd been hiding in the shadows beside the hallway.

"ðɪs pleɪs ɡɹoʊz tu deɪnʒɝəs fəɹ ju," məleɪn sɛd. "liv ɪt tə ʌs." ɛɡwin lʊk daʊn.

"This place grows too dangerous for you," Melaine said. "Leave it to us." Egwene looked down.

nɪkoʊləz kɔɹps feɪɾəd əweɪ. fulɪʃ tʃaɪld! ʃi sikt ɝaʊn ðə wɔl tə si tu blæk sɪstɝz -  ɑlviɛɝɪn ən ɹæmɑlə -  stændɪŋ bæk-tə-bæk ən sɛndɪŋ dɪstʃɹʌktɪv wivz ɪn dɪfɹən dɝɛkʃənz.

Nicola's corpse faded away. Foolish child! She seeked around the wall to see two Black sisters -  Alviarin and Ramola -  standing back-to-back and sending destructive weaves in different directions.

ðəɹ wɑz ə ɹum bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ɛɡwin kəd də əz ʃi hæd sɛvɹəl taɪmz bɪfɔɹ, dʒʌmpɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɹum, dɪstʃɹɔɪɪŋ ðə wɔl ən hɪɾɪŋ ðə tu ʌv əm . ..

There was a room behind them. Egwene could do as she had several times before, jumping into the room, destroying the wall and hitting the two of them . ..

fulɪʃ tʃaɪld, bɛɹ hæd sɛd, jəɹ pæɾɝn ɪz ɑbviəs.

Foolish child, Bair had said, your pattern is obvious.

ðət wɑz wʌt mɛsænə wɑntəɾ əɹ tə du. ðə tu blæk sɪstɝz wɝ beɪt.

That was what Mesaana wanted her to do. The two Black sisters were bait.

ɛɡwin dʒʌmpt ɪndə ðə ɹum, bʌt pʊɾ əɹ bæk tə ðə wɔl. ʃi ɛmptiɾ əɹ maɪnd, weɪɾɪŋ, tɛns.

Egwene jumped into the room, but put her back to the wall. She emptied her mind, waiting, tense.

mɛsænə əpɪɹɾ əz ʃi hæd bɪfɔɹ. ðət swɝlɪŋ blæk klɔθ wɑz ɪmpɹɛsɪv, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔlsoʊ fulɪʃ. ɪt tʊk θɔt tə meɪnteɪn. ɛɡwin stɛɹɾ ɪndə ðə wʊmənz sɝpɹaɪzd aɪz ən sɔ ðə wivz ðə wʊmən hæd pɹipɛɹd.

Mesaana appeared as she had before. That swirling black cloth was impressive, but it was also foolish. It took thought to maintain. Egwene stared into the woman's surprised eyes and saw the weaves the woman had prepared.

ðoʊz aɪvɪl nɑt hɪt mi, ɛɡwin θɔt, kɑnfəɾənt. ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɑz hɝz. mɛsænə ən əɹ mɪnjənz hæɾ ɪnveɪɾəd, kɪlɪŋ nɪkoʊlə, ʃɛvən ən kɑɹlɪnjə.

Those ivill not hit me, Egwene thought, confident. The White Tower was hers. Mesaana and her minions had invaded, killing Nicola, Shevan and Carlinya.

wivz ʃɑt fɔɹwɝd, bʌt ðeɪ bɛn ɝaʊn ɛɡwin. ɪn ə moʊmən ɛɡwin wɑz wɛɹɪŋ ðə kloʊðɪŋ ʌv ə waɪz wʌn. waɪt blaʊs, bɹaʊn skɝt, ʃɔl ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ʃi ɪmædʒən ə spɪɹ ɪn əɹ hænd, ən il spɪɹ, ən ʃi θɹu ɪt wɪð ə pɹɪsaɪs moʊʃən.

Weaves shot forward, but they bent around Egwene. In a moment Egwene was wearing the clothing of a Wise One. White blouse, brown skirt, shawl on her shoulders. She imagined a spear in her hand, an Aiel spear, and she threw it with a precise motion.

ðə spɪɹ pɪɹs ðə wivz ə faɪɝ ən ɛɹ, blæstɪŋ əm əweɪ, ðən hɪt sʌmθɪŋ θɪk. ə wɔl ʌv ɛɹ bɪfɔɹ mɛsænə. ɛɡwin ɹəfjuz tə əlaʊ ɪt. ðət wɔl dɪdn bɪlɔŋ hɪɹ. ɪt dɪd nɑɾ ɪɡzɪst.

The spear pierced the weaves of Fire and Air, blasting them away, then hit something thick. A wall of Air before Mesaana. Egwene refused to allow it. That wall didn't belong here. It did not exist.

ðə spɪɹ stɑp sloʊɪŋ ən ʃɑt fɔɹwɝd, teɪkɪŋ mɛsænə ɪn ðə nɛk. ðə wʊmənz aɪz oʊpənd waɪɾ ən ʃi slʌmp bækwɝd, blʌd spɝɾɪŋ fɹəm ðə waʊnd. ðə blæk stʃɹɪps swɝlɪŋ ɝaʊn əɹ vænɪʃt kəmplitli, əz dɪd ðə dʒɹɛs. soʊ ɪt hæd bɪn ə wiv. mɛsænəz dɑɹkən feɪs tɝn ɪndə ðəɾ ʌv . . .

The spear stopped slowing and shot forward, taking Mesaana in the neck. The woman's eyes opened wide and she slumped backward, blood spurting from the wound. The black strips swirling around her vanished completely, as did the dress. So it had been a weave. Mesaana's darkened face turned into that of . . .

keɪɾɝin? ɛɡwin fɹaʊnd. mɛsænə hæd bɪn keɪɾɝin ɔl əlɔŋ? bʌt ʃid bɪn blæk, ən flɛd ðə taʊɝ. ʃi hædn ɹɪmeɪnd, ən ðət mɛnt -  noʊ, ɛɡwin θɔt, aɪv bɪn hæd. ʃiz ə -  ət ðət moʊmənt, ɛɡwin fɛl sʌmθɪŋ snæp ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk. sʌm-θɪŋ koʊld ən mətælɪk, sʌmθɪŋ fəmɪljɝ ən tɛɹəfaɪɪŋ. ðə sɔɹs flɛɾ əɹ ɪn ə moʊmənt, fəɹ ʃi wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɔθɝaɪz tə hoʊld ɪt.

Katerine? Egwene frowned. Mesaana had been Katerine all along? But she'd been Black, and fled the Tower. She hadn't remained, and that meant -  No, Egwene thought, I've been had. She's a -  At that moment, Egwene felt something snap around her neck. Some-thing cold and metallic, something familiar and terrifying. The Source fled her in a moment, for she was no longer authorized to hold it.

ʃi spʌn ɪn tɛɹɝ. ə wʊmən wɪð tʃɪn-lɛŋθ dɑɹk hɛɹ ən dip blu aɪz stʊd bɪsaɪd hɝ. ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk vɛɹi ɪmpoʊzɪŋ, bʌt ʃi wɑz vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ðə paʊɝ. ən əɹ ɹɪs hɛld ə bɹeɪslət, kənɛktəd baɪ ə liʃ tə ðə bæn ɝaʊn ɛɡwinz nɛk.

She spun in terror. A woman with chin-length dark hair and deep blue eyes stood beside her. She did not look very imposing, but she was very strong in the Power. And her wrist held a bracelet, connected by a leash to the band around Egwene's neck.

ən æɾəm.

An a'dam.

"ɛksələnt," mɛsænə sɛd. "sʌtʃ ənɹuli tʃɪlʒɹən jə ɑɹ." ʃi klɪkt əɹ tʌŋ ɪn dɪsəpɹuvəl.

"Excellent," Mesaana said. "Such unruly children you are." She clicked her tongue in disapproval.

ɪn ə moʊmənt, ʃi ʃɪftəd sʌmwɛɹ ɛls, teɪkɪŋ ɛɡwin wɪð hɝ. ə tʃeɪmbɝ wɪð noʊ wɪndoʊz, lʊkɪŋ əz ɪf ɪt wɝ kʌt dɝɛkli fɹəm stoʊn. ðəɹ wɑzn ivən ə dɔɹweɪ.

In a moment, she shifted somewhere else, taking Egwene with her. A chamber with no windows, looking as if it were cut directly from stone. There wasn't even a doorway.

ɑlviɛɝɪn weɪɾəd hɪɹ, wɛɹɪŋ ə dʒɹɛs ʌv waɪɾ ən ɹɛd. ðə wʊmən ɪmiɾiətli nɛl bɪfɔɹ mɛsænə, ðoʊ ʃi spɛɹɾ ə sæɾəsfaɪd ɡlæns fəɹ ɛɡwin.

Alviarin waited here, wearing a dress of white and red. The woman immediately knelt before Mesaana, though she spared a satisfied glance for Egwene.

ɛɡwin bɛɹli noʊɾəst. ʃi stʊd, stɪf, ə taɪɾ ə pænɪk θɔts flʌɾɪŋ əɹ maɪnd. ʃi wɑz tʃɹæpt əɡɛn! ʃi kəd nɑt stæn ɪt. ʃi wəd daɪ bɪfɔɹ ʃi əlaʊd ðɪs tə hæpən. ɪmədʒəz flæʃt ɪn əɹ hɛd. tʃɹæpt ɪn ə ɹum, əneɪbəl tə muv mɔɹ ðən ə fju fit wɪθaʊt biɪŋ oʊvɝkʌm baɪ ði æɾəm. tʃɹiɾəd laɪk ən ænəməl, ə kɹipɪŋ sɛns ðət ʃi wəɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli bɹeɪk, wəɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli bɪkʌm ɪɡzækli wʌt ðeɪ wɑntəɾ əɹ tə bi.

Egwene barely noticed. She stood, stiff, a tide of panicked thoughts flooding her mind. She was trapped again! She could not stand it. She would die before she allowed this to happen. Images flashed in her head. Trapped in a room, unable to move more than a few feet without being overcome by the a'dam. Treated like an animal, a creeping sense that she would eventually break, would eventually become exactly what they wanted her to be.

oʊ, laɪt. ʃi kəd nɑt sʌfɝ ðɪs əɡɛn. nɑt ðɪs.

Oh, Light. She could not suffer this again. Not this.

"tɛl ðoʊz əbʌv tə wɪðdʒɹɔ," mɛsænə wɑz seɪɪŋ tə ɑlviɛɝɪn, hɝ vɔɪs kɑm. ɛɡwin bɛɹli ɹɛdʒəstɝd ðə wɝdz. "fulz ðeɪ ɑɹ, ən ðɛɹ ʃoʊɪŋ hɪɹ wɑz pəθɛɾɪk. pʌnɪʃməns wɪl bi ədmɪnəstɝd."

"Tell those above to withdraw," Mesaana was saying to Alviarin, her voice calm. Egwene barely registered the words. "Fools they are, and their showing here was pathetic. Punishments will be administered."

ðɪs wɑz haʊ mɑɡiɾin hæd bɪn kæptʃɝd baɪ nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn. ʃi wɑz kɛp kæptɪv, fɔɹs tə də əz ðeɪ dɪmændəd. ɛɡwin wəd sʌfɝ ðə seɪm! ɪndid, mɛsænə wəd pɹɑbli juz kəmpʌlʃən ɑn hɝ. ðə waɪt taʊɝ wəd bi fʊli ɪn ðə hænz ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən.

This was how Moghedien had been captured by Nynaeve and Elayne. She was kept captive, forced to do as they demanded. Egwene would suffer the same! Indeed, Mesaana would probably use Compulsion on her. The White Tower would be fully in the hands of the Forsaken.

ði ɪmoʊʃənz wɛld ʌp. ɛɡwin faʊn hɝsɛlf klɔɪŋ ət ðə kɑlɝ, wɪtʃ ɡɑɾ ə lʊk ʌv əmjuzmən fɹəm mɛsænə əz ɑlviɛɝɪn vænɪʃt tə ɹileɪ hɝ ɔɹɾɝ.

The emotions welled up. Egwene found herself clawing at the collar, which got a look of amusement from Mesaana as Alviarin vanished to relay her order.

ðɪs kəd nɑt bi hæpənɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ə naɪtmɛɹ. ə -  jə ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ə kwaɪət pis ə hɝ wɪspɝd ðə wɝdz, jɛt fəɹ ɔl ðɛɹ sɔfnəs, ðeɪ wɝ stʃɹɔŋ. ən ðeɪ wɝ dip wɪðɪn hɝ. ðə vɔɪs wɑz dipɝ ðən ðə tɛɹɝ ən fɪɹ.

This could not be happening. It was a nightmare. A -  You are Aes Sedai. A quiet piece of her whispered the words, yet for all their softness, they were strong. And they were deep within her. The voice was deeper than the terror and fear.

"naʊ," mɛsænə sɛd. "wi wɪl spik ə ðə dʒɹimspaɪk. wɛɹ maɪɾ aɪ faɪn ɪt?"

"Now," Mesaana said. "We will speak of the dreamspike. Where might I find it?"

ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪz kɑmnəs, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪz kəntʃɹoʊl, ɹəɡɑɹdləs ə ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən. ɛɡwin loʊɝɾ əɹ hænz fɹəm ðə kɑlɝ. ʃi hæd nɑt ɡɔn θɹu ðə tɛstɪŋ, ən ʃi hæd nɑt plæn tə. bʌɾ ɪf ʃi hæd, wʌɾ ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn fɔɹs tə feɪs ə sɪtʃueɪʃən laɪk ðɪs? wəd ʃi hæv bɹoʊkən? pɹuvən hɝsɛlf ənwɝði ʌv ðə mæntəl ʃi kleɪm tə kæɹi?

An Aes Sedai is calmness, an Aes Sedai is control, regardless of the situation. Egwene lowered her hands from the collar. She had not gone through the testing, and she had not planned to. But if she had, what if she had been forced to face a situation like this? Would she have broken? Proven herself unworthy of the mantle she claimed to carry?

"nɑt spikɪŋ, aɪ si," mɛsænə sɛd. "wɛl, ðət kən bi tʃeɪnʒd. ðiz æɾəm. sətʃ lʌvli dɪvaɪsəz. sɛmɝhɪdʒ wɑz soʊ dɪlaɪtfəli wʌndɝfəl ɪn bɹɪŋɪŋ əm tə maɪ ətɛnʃən, ivən ɪf ʃi dɪd soʊ æksədɛntəli. pɪɾi ʃi daɪd bɪfɔɹ aɪ kəd pleɪs wʌn ɑn əɹ nɛk."

"Not speaking, I see," Mesaana said. "Well, that can be changed. These a'dam. Such lovely devices. Semirhage was so delightfully wonderful in bringing them to my attention, even if she did so accidentally. Pity she died before I could place one on her neck."

peɪn ʃɑt θɹu ɛɡwinz bɑɾi, laɪk faɪɝ bɪniθ əɹ skɪn. hɝ aɪz wɔɾɝd fɹəm ɪt.

Pain shot through Egwene's body, like fire beneath her skin. Her eyes watered from it.

bʌt ʃi hæd sʌfɝd peɪn bɪfɔɹ, ən læft waɪl biɪŋ biɾən. ʃi hæd bɪn kæptɪv bɪfɔɹ, ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf, ən kæptɪvəɾi hæd nɑt stɑp hɝ.

But she had suffered pain before, and laughed while being beaten. She had been captive before, in the White Tower itself, and captivity had not stopped her.

bʌt ðɪs ɪz dɪfɹənt! ðə lɑɹdʒɝ pɑɹɾ ə hɝ wɑz tɛɹəfaɪd. ðɪs ɪz ði æɾəm! aɪ kænɑt wɪθstæn ɪt!

But this is different! The larger part of her was terrified. This is the a'dam! I cannot withstand it!

ən ɛɛs sədaɪ mʌst, ðə kwaɪət pis ə hɝ ɹɪplaɪd. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ kən sʌfɝ ɔl θɪŋz, fəɹ oʊnli ðən kən ʃi bi tʃɹuli ə sɝvən ʌv ɔl.

An Aes Sedai must, the quiet piece of her replied. An Aes Sedai can suffer all things, for only then can she be truly a servant of all.

"naʊ," mɛsænə sɛd. "tɛl mi wɛɹ juv hɪɾən ðə dɪvaɪs."

"Now," Mesaana said. "Tell me where you have hidden the device."

ɛɡwin kəntʃɹoʊld əɹ fɪɹ. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ izi. laɪt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz hɑɹd! bʌt ʃi dɪɾ ɪt. hɝ feɪs bɪkeɪm kɑm. ʃi dɪfaɪd ði æɾəm baɪ nɑt ɡɪvɪŋ ɪt paʊɝ oʊvɝ hɝ.

Egwene controlled her fear. It was not easy. Light, but it was hard! But she did it. Her face became calm. She defied the a'dam by not giving it power over her.

mɛsænə hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. ʃi ʃʊk ðə liʃ, ən mɔɹ peɪn flʌɾəd ɛɡwin.

Mesaana hesitated, frowning. She shook the leash, and more pain flooded Egwene.

ʃi meɪɾ ɪt vænɪʃ. "ɪɾ əkɝz tə mi, mɛsænə," ɛɡwin sɛd kɑmli, "ðæt mɑɡiɾin meɪɾ ə mɪsteɪk. ʃi æksɛptɪd ði æɾəm!'

She made it vanish. "It occurs to me, Mesaana," Egwene said calmly, "that Moghedien made a mistake. She accepted the a'dam!'

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə - "

"What are you - "

"ɪn ðɪs pleɪs, ən æɾəm ɪz əz minɪŋləs əz ðə wivz ɪt pɹɪvɛns," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ɪɾ ɪz oʊnli ə pis ə mɛɾəl. ən ɪɾ oʊnli wɪl stɑp jə ɪf jə æksɛp ðəɾ ɪt wɪl." ði æɾəm ənlɑkt ən fɛl fɹi ʌv əɹ nɛk.

"In this place, an a'dam is as meaningless as the weaves it prevents," Egwene said. "It is only a piece of metal. And it only will stop you if you accept that it will." The a'dam unlocked and fell free of her neck.

mɛsænə ɡlænst əɾ ɪɾ əz ɪt dʒɹɑp tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɪð ə mətælɪk ɹɪŋ. hɝ feɪs ɡɹu stɪl, ðən koʊld əz ʃi lʊkt ʌp əɾ ɛɡwin. ɪmpɹɛsɪvli, ʃi dɪd nɑt pænɪk. ʃi foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz, aɪz ɪmpæsɪv. "soʊ, juv pɹæktəs hɪɹ."

Mesaana glanced at it as it dropped to the ground with a metallic ring. Her face grew still, then cold as she looked up at Egwene. Impressively, she did not panic. She folded her arms, eyes impassive. "So, you have practiced here."

ɛɡwin mɛɾ əɹ ɡeɪz.

Egwene met her gaze.

jə ɑɹ stɪl ə tʃaɪld," mɛsænə sɛd. "ju θɪŋk ðət jə kən bɛs mi? hæv wɔkt ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd lɔŋɡɝ ðən jə kən ɪmædʒən. jə ɑɹ wʌt, twɛnti jɪɹz oʊld?"

You are still a child," Mesaana said. "You think that you can best me? have walked in Tel'aran'rhiod longer than you can imagine. You are what, twenty years old?"

aɪm ði æmɪɝlɪn," ɛɡwin sɛd. "æn æmɪɝlɪn tə tʃɪlʒɹən."

I am the Amyrlin," Egwene said. "An Amyrlin to children."

ən æmɪɝlɪn tə ə taʊɝ ðəɾ əz stʊd fəɹ θaʊzənz ə jɪɹz," ɛɡwin sɛd. θaʊzənz ə jɪɹz ə tʃɹʌbəl ən keɪɑs. jɛt moʊst ə jəɹ laɪf, jə lɪvd ɪn ə taɪm ə pis, nɑt stʃɹaɪf. kjʊɹiəs, ðət jə ʃəd θɪŋk jɝsɛlf soʊ stʃɹɔŋ wən mʌtʃ ə jəɹ laɪf wɑz soʊ izi."

An Amyrlin to a Tower that has stood for thousands of years," Egwene said. Thousands of years of trouble and chaos. Yet most of your life, you lived in a time of peace, not strife. Curious, that you should think yourself so strong when much of your life was so easy."

"izi?" mɛsænə sɛd. "ju noʊ nʌθɪŋ."

"Easy?" Mesaana said. "You know nothing."

niðɝ bɹoʊk əɹ ɡeɪz. ɛɡwin fɛl sʌmθɪŋ pɹɛs əɡɛnst əɹ əz ɪt hæd bɪfɔɹ. mɛsænəz wɪl, dɪmændɪŋ əɹ səbsɝviəns, hɝ sʌpləkeɪʃən. ən ətɛmp tə juz tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd tə tʃeɪnʒ ðə vɛɹi weɪ ðəɾ ɛɡwin θɔt.

Neither broke her gaze. Egwene felt something press against her as it had before. Mesaana's will, demanding her subservience, her supplication. An attempt to use Tel'aran'rhiod to change the very way that Egwene thought.

mɛsænə wɑz stʃɹɔŋ. bʌt stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ðɪs pleɪs wɑz ə mæɾɝ ə pɝ-. spɛktɪv. mɛsænəz wɪl pɹɛst əɡɛns hɝ. bʌɾ ɛɡwin hæd dɪfiɾəd ði æɾəm. ʃi kəd ɹɪzɪs ðɪs.

Mesaana was strong. But strength in this place was a matter of per-. spective. Mesaana's will pressed against her. But Egwene had defeated the a'dam. She could resist this.

"ju wɪl bɛnd," mɛsænə sɛd kwaɪətli.

"You will bend," Mesaana said quietly.

"ju ɑɹ mɪsteɪkən," ɛɡwin ɹɪplaɪd, vɔɪs tɛns. "ðɪs ɪz nɑɾ əbaʊt mi ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ ɪz ə tʃaɪld. bʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn ɪz nɑt. aɪ meɪ bi jʌŋ, bʌt ðə siɾ ɪz eɪntʃənt."

"You are mistaken," Egwene replied, voice tense. "This is not about me Egwene al'Vere is a child. But the Amyrlin is not. I may be young, but the Seat is ancient."

niðɝ wʊmən lʊkt əweɪ. ɛɡwin bɪɡæn tə pʊʃ bæk, tə dɪmæn ðət mɛsænə baʊ bɪfɔɹ hɝ, bɪfɔɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn. ði ɛɹ bɪɡæn tə fil hɛvi ɝaʊn ðɛm, ən wən ɛɡwin bɹiðd ɪɾ ɪn, ɪt sim θɪk sʌmhaʊ.

Neither woman looked away. Egwene began to push back, to demand that Mesaana bow before her, before the Amyrlin. The air began to feel heavy around them, and when Egwene breathed it in, it seemed thick somehow.

"eɪdʒ ɪz ɪɹɛləvənt," ɛɡwin sɛd. "tə ən ɪkstɛnt, ivən ɪkspɪɹiəns ɪz ɪɹɛləvənt. ðɪs pleɪs ɪz əbaʊt wʌɾ ə pɝsən ɪz. ði æmɪɝlɪn ɪz ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɪl nɑt bɛnd. ɪt dɪfaɪz ju, mɛsænə, ən jəɹ laɪz."

"Age is irrelevant," Egwene said. "To an extent, even experience is irrelevant. This place is about what a person is. The Amyrlin is the White Tower, and the White Tower will not bend. It defies you, Mesaana, and your lies."

tu wɪmən. ɡeɪzəz mætʃt. ɛɡwin stɑp bɹiðɪŋ. ʃi dɪd nɑt nid tə bɹið. ɔl wɑz foʊkəst ɑn mɛsænə. swɛt tʃɹɪkəl daʊn ɛɡwnz tɛmpəlz, ɛvɹi mʌsəl ɪn əɹ bɑɾi tɛns əz ʃi pʊʃt bæk əɡɛns mɛsænəz wɪl.

Two women. Gazes matched. Egwene stopped breathing. She did not need to breathe. All was focused on Mesaana. Sweat trickled down Egwenes temples, every muscle in her body tense as she pushed back against Mesaana's will.

ən ɛɡwin nu ðət ðɪs wʊmən, ðɪs kɹitʃɝ, wɑz ən ɪnsɪɡnjɪfɪkən ɪnsɛkt ʃʌvɪŋ əɡɛnst ən ɪnɔɹməs maʊntən. ðət maʊntən wəd nɑt muv. ɪndid, ʃʌv əɡɛnst ɪt tu hɑɹd, ən . . .

And Egwene knew that this woman, this creature, was an insignificant insect shoving against an enormous mountain. That mountain would not move. Indeed, shove against it too hard, and . . .

sʌmθɪŋ snæpt, sɔfli, ɪn ðə ɹum.

Something snapped, softly, in the room.

ɛɡwin bɹiðd ɪn wɪð ə ɡæsp əz ði ɛɹ ɹɪtɝn tə nɔɹməl. mɛsænə dʒɹɑp laɪk ə dɑl meɪɾ ə stʃɹɪps ə klɔθ. ʃi hɪt ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɪð əɹ aɪz stɪl oʊpən, ən ə lɪɾəl bɪɾ ə spɪɾəl dʒɹɪbəl fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ maʊθ.

Egwene breathed in with a gasp as the air returned to normal. Mesaana dropped like a doll made of strips of cloth. She hit the ground with her eyes still open, and a little bit of spittle dribbled from the corner of her mouth.

ɛɡwin sæt daʊn, deɪzd, bɹiðɪŋ ɪn ən aʊɾ ɪn ɡæsps. ʃi lʊk tə ðə saɪd, wɛɹ ði æɾəm leɪ dɪskɑɹɾɪd. ɪt vænɪʃt. ðən ʃi lʊk bæk ət mɛsænə, hu leɪ ɪn ə hip. hɝ tʃɛst wɑz stɪl ɹaɪzɪŋ ən loʊɝɪŋ, bʌt ʃi stɛɹd wɪð saɪtləs aɪz.

Egwene sat down, dazed, breathing in and out in gasps. She looked to the side, where the a'dam lay discarded. It vanished. Then she looked back at Mesaana, who lay in a heap. Her chest was still rising and lowering, but she stared with sightless eyes.

ɛɡwin leɪ fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmən ɹəkʌvɝɪŋ bɪfɔɹ stændɪŋ ən ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ ðə sɔɹs. ʃi woʊv laɪnz ʌv ɛɹ tə lɪf ði ʌnɹispɑnsɪv fɔɹseɪkən, ðən ʃɪftəd boʊθ hɝsɛlf ən ðə wʊmən bæk tə ði ʌpɝ flɔɹz ə ðə taʊɝ.

Egwene lay for a long moment recovering before standing and embracing the Source. She wove lines of Air to lift the unresponsive Forsaken, then shifted both herself and the woman back to the upper floors of the Tower.

wɪmən tɝn təwɔɹɾ əɹ wɪð ə stɑɹt. ðə hɔlweɪ hɪɹ wɑz stʃɹun wɪð ɹʌbəl, bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛɡwin sɔ wɑz wʌn ə hɝz. ðə waɪz wʌnz, spɪnɪŋ ɑn hɝ.

Women turned toward her with a start. The hallway here was strewn with rubble, but everyone Egwene saw was one of hers. The Wise Ones, spinning on her.

nɪneɪiv pɪkɪŋ θɹu səm ɹʌbəl. sɪuən ən lin, ðə læɾɝ bɛɹɪŋ sɛvɹəl blækən kʌts ɑn əɹ feɪs, bʌt lʊkɪŋ stʃɹɔŋ. "mʌðɝ," sɪuən sɛd wɪð ɹɪlif. "wi hæd fɪɹd . . ." "hu ɪz ðæt?"

Nynaeve picking through some rubble. Siuan and Leane, the latter bearing several blackened cuts on her face, but looking strong. "Mother," Siuan said with relief. "We had feared . . ." "Who is that?"

məleɪn æskt, wɔkɪŋ ʌp tə mɛsænə, hæŋɪŋ lɪmpli ɪn ðə wivz ʌv ɛɹ ən stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

Melaine asked, walking up to Mesaana, hanging limply in the weaves of Air and staring at the ground.

ðə wʊmən koʊud sʌɾənli, laɪk ə tʃaɪld, aɪz wɑtʃɪŋ ə bɪɾ ə bɝnɪŋ faɪɝ ɑn ðə ɹɛmnəns ʌv ə tæpəstʃɹi.

The woman cooed suddenly, like a child, eyes watching a bit of burning fire on the remnants of a tapestry.

"ɪɾ ɪz hɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd, taɪɝd. "mɛsænə."

"It is her," Egwene said, tired. "Mesaana."

məleɪn tɝn tə ɛɡwin, aɪz waɪd wɪð sɝpɹaɪz.

Melaine turned to Egwene, eyes wide with surprise.

"laɪt!" lin ɪkskleɪmd. "wʌɾ əv jə dʌn?"

"Light!" Leane exclaimed. "What have you done?"

"aɪ hæv sin ðɪs bɪfɔɹ," bɛɹ sɛd, ɪnspɛktɪŋ ðə wʊmən. "sɑmænə, ə waɪz wʌn dʒɹimɝ fɹəm maɪ juθ. ʃi ɪnkaʊntɝd sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðə dʒɹim ðət bɹoʊk əɹ maɪnd." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "ʃi spɛn ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ deɪz ɪn ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝl dʒɹulɪŋ, ən niɾɪŋ əɹ lɪnən tʃeɪnʒd. ʃi nɛvɝ spoʊk əɡɛn, ət lis nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ðə wɝdz ʌv ə beɪb u kən bɛɹli wɔk."

"I have seen this before," Bair said, inspecting the woman. "Sammana, a Wise One Dreamer from my youth. She encountered something in the dream that broke her mind." She hesitated. "She spent the rest of her days in the waking world drooling, and needing her linen changed. She never spoke again, at least nothing more than the words of a babe who can barely walk."

"pɝhæps ɪts taɪm tə stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ ə jə əz ən əpɹɛntəs, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ," æmɪz sɛd.

"Perhaps it is time to stop thinking of you as an apprentice, Egwene al'Vere," Amys said.

nɪneɪiv stʊd wɪð hænz ɑn hɪps, lʊkɪŋ ɪmpɹɛs bʌt stɪl klɪŋɪŋ tə ðə sɔɹs. hɝ bɹeɪd wɑz fʊl lɛŋθ əɡɛn ɪn ðə dʒɹim. "ði ʌðɝz əv ɡɔn," ʃi sɛd.

Nynaeve stood with hands on hips, looking impressed but still clinging to the Source. Her braid was full length again in the dream. "The others have gone," she said.

"mɛsænə ɔɹɾɝd əm tə fli," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"Mesaana ordered them to flee," Egwene said.

"ðeɪ kʊdn əv ɡɔn fɑɹ," sɪuən sɛd. "ðæt doʊm ɪz stɪl ðɛɹ."

"They couldn't have gone far," Siuan said. "That dome is still there."

"jɛs," bɛɹ sɛd. "bʌɾ ɪts taɪm fəɹ ðɪs bæɾəl tə ɛnd. ði ɛnəmi hæz bɪn dɪfiɾəd. wɪl spik əɡɛn, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ."

"Yes," Bair said. "But it is time for this battle to end. The enemy has been defeated. We will speak again, Egwene al'Vere."

ɛɡwin nɑɾəd. "aɪ əɡɹi ɑn boʊθ pɔɪns. bɛɹ, æmɪz, məleɪn, θæŋk jə fəɹ jəɹ mʌtʃ-niɾəd eɪd. juv ɡeɪn mʌtʃ dʒi ɪn ðɪs, ən aɪm ɪn jəɹ dɛt."

Egwene nodded. "I agree on both points. Bair, Amys, Melaine, thank you for your much-needed aid. You have gained much ji in this, and I am in your debt."

məleɪn aɪd ðə fɔɹseɪkən əz ɛɡwin sɛn hɝsɛlf aʊɾ ə ðə dʒɹim. "aɪ bɪliv ɪts ʌs, ən ðə wɝld ɪtsɛlf, hu ɑɹ ɪn jəɹ dɛt, ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ."

Melaine eyed the Forsaken as Egwene sent herself out of the dream. "I believe it is us, and the world itself, who are in your debt, Egwene al'Vere."

ði ʌðɝz nɑɾəd, ən əz ɛɡwin feɪɾəd fɹəm tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, ʃi hɝd bɛɹ mʌɾɝɪŋ, "sʌtʃ ə ʃeɪm ʃi dɪdn ɹɪtɝn tə ʌs."

The others nodded, and as Egwene faded from Tel'aran'rhiod, she heard Bair muttering, "Such a shame she didn't return to us."

'pɛɹɪn ɹæn θɹu kɹaʊdz ə tɛɹəfaɪd pipəl, ɪn ə bɝnɪŋ sɪɾi. tɑɹ vəlɑn. əfleɪm! ðə vɛɹi stoʊnz bɝnd, ðə skaɪ ə dip ɹɛd. ðə ɡɹaʊn tʃɹɛmbəld, laɪk ə wundəd bʌk kɪkɪŋ əz ə lɛpɝd blɛɾ ɪts nɛk. pɛɹɪn stʌmbəld əz ə kæzəm oʊpən bɪfɔɹ hɪm, fleɪmz bleɪzɪŋ ʌpwɝd, sɪŋɡɪŋ ðə hɛɹz ɑn ɪz ɑɹmz.

'Perrin ran through crowds of terrified people, in a burning city. Tar Valon. Aflame! The very stones burned, the sky a deep red. The ground trembled, like a wounded buck kicking as a leopard bled its neck. Perrin stumbled as a chasm opened before him, flames blazing upward, singeing the hairs on his arms.

pipəl skɹimd əz səm fɛl ɪndə ðə tɛɹəbəl ɹɪft, bɝnɪŋ əweɪ ɪndə nʌθɪŋ. bɑɾiz sʌɾənli lɪɾɝd ðə ɡɹaʊnd. tə hɪz ɹaɪt, ə bjuɾəfəl bɪldɪŋ wɪð ɑɹtʃt wɪndoʊz bɪɡæn tə mɛlt, ðə ɹɑk tɝnɪŋ lɪkwəd, lɑvə bliɾɪŋ fɹəm bɪtwin stoʊnz ən aʊɾ ʌv oʊpənɪŋz.

People screamed as some fell into the terrible rift, burning away into nothing. Bodies suddenly littered the ground. To his right, a beautiful building with arched windows began to melt, the rock turning liquid, lava bleeding from between stones and out of openings.

pɛɹɪn klaɪm tə hɪz fit. ɪts nɑt ɹil.

Perrin climbed to his feet. It's not real.

"tɑɹmən ɡdən!" pipəl jɛld. "ðə læs bæɾəl əz kʌm! ɪɾ ɛnz! laɪt, ɪɾ ɛnz!"

"Tarmon Gai'don!" people yelled. "The Last Battle has come! It ends! Light, it ends!"

pɛɹɪn stʌmbəld, pʊlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ʌp əɡɛnst ə tʃʌŋk ə ɹɑk, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stænd. hɪz ɑɹm hɝt, ən ɪz fɪŋɡɝz wʊdnt ɡɹɪp, bʌt ðə wɝst waʊnd wɑz ɪn ɪz lɛɡ, wɛɹ ði æɹoʊ hæd hɪt. hɪz tʃɹaʊzɝz ən koʊt wɝ wɛt wɪð blʌd, ən ðə sɛn ə hɪz oʊn tɛɹɝ wɑz paʊɝfəl ɪn ɪz noʊz.

Perrin stumbled, pulling himself up against a chunk of rock, trying to stand. His arm hurt, and his fingers wouldn't grip, but the worst wound was in his leg, where the arrow had hit. His trousers and coat were wet with blood, and the scent of his own terror was powerful in his nose.

hi nu ðɪs naɪtmɛɹ wɑz nɑt ɹil. ən jɛt, haʊ kəd wʌn nɑt fil ðə hɔɹɝ ʌv ɪt? tə ðə wɛst, dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt wɑz ɪɹʌptɪŋ, plumz ʌv æŋɡɹi smoʊk bɪloʊɪŋ ɪndə ðə skaɪ. ði ɪntaɪɝ maʊntən simd əfleɪm, ɹɪvɝz ə ɹɛd sɝdʒɪŋ daʊn ɪts saɪdz. pɛɹɪn kəd fil ɪt ʃeɪkɪŋ, daɪɪŋ. bɪldɪŋz kɹækt, tʃɹɛmbəld, mɛltəd, ʃæɾɝd. pipəl daɪd, kɹʌʃt baɪ stoʊnz əɹ bɝn tə dɛθ.

He knew this nightmare was not real. And yet, how could one not feel the horror of it? To the west, Dragonmount was erupting, plumes of angry smoke billowing into the sky. The entire mountain seemed aflame, rivers of red surging down its sides. Perrin could feel it shaking, dying. Buildings cracked, trembled, melted, shattered. People died, crushed by stones or burned to death.

noʊ. hi wəd nɑt bi dʒɹɔn ɪn. ðə ɡɹaʊn ɝaʊn ɪm tʃeɪnʒd fɹəm bɹoʊkən kɑbəlz tə nit taɪlz;

No. He would not be drawn in. The ground around him changed from broken cobbles to neat tiles;

ðə sɝvəns' ɛntʃɹəns tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. pɛɹɪn fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə hɪz fit, kɹieɪɾɪŋ ə stæf tə juz ɪn lɪmpɪŋ.

the servants' entrance to the White Tower. Perrin forced himself to his feet, creating a staff to use in limping.

hi dɪdn dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðə naɪtmɛɹ; hi hæd tə faɪn sleɪɝ. ɪn ðɪs tɛɹəbəl pleɪs, pɛɹɪn maɪt bi eɪbəl tə ɡeɪn ən ædvæntɪdʒ. sleɪɝ wɑz vɛɹi pɹæktəst ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, bʌt pɝhæps - ɪf pɛɹɪn hæd lʌk ɑn ɪz saɪd - ðə mæn wɑz skɪld ɪnʌf tə hæv əvɔɪɾəd naɪtmɛɹz ɪn ðə pæst. pɝhæps i wəd bi stɑɹɾəld baɪ ðɪs wʌn, teɪkən ɪn.

He didn't destroy the nightmare; he had to find Slayer. In this terrible place, Perrin might be able to gain an advantage. Slayer was very practiced in Tel'aran'rhiod, but perhaps - if Perrin had luck on his side - the man was skilled enough to have avoided nightmares in the past. Perhaps he would be startled by this one, taken in.

ɹɪlʌktənli, pɛɹɪn wikən ɪz ɹizɑlv, lɛɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf bi dʒɹɔn ɪndə ðə naɪtmɛɹ. sleɪɝ wəd bi kloʊs. pɛɹɪn stʌmbəld əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹit, steɪɪŋ fɑɹ fɹəm ðə bɪldɪŋ wɪð ðə lɑvə bɔɪlɪŋ fɹəm ɪts wɪndoʊz. ɪf wɑz hɑɹd tə kip hɪmsɛlf fɹəm ɡɪvɪŋ ɪn tə ðə skɹimz ə hɔɹɝ ən peɪn. ðə kɔlz fəɹ hɛlp.

Reluctantly, Perrin weakened his resolve, letting himself be drawn into the nightmare. Slayer would be close. Perrin stumbled across the street, staying far from the building with the lava boiling from its windows. If was hard to keep himself from giving in to the screams of horror and pain. The calls for help.

ðɛɹ, pɛɹɪn θɔt, ɹitʃɪŋ ən æli. sleɪɝ stʊɾ ɪnsaɪd, hɛd baʊd, ə hæn ʌp əɡɛnst wʌn wɔl. ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪsaɪd ðə mæn ɛndəɾ ɪn ə ɹɪft, bɔɪlɪŋ mæɡmə ət ðə bɑɾəm. pipəl klʌŋ tə ði ɛdʒ ə ðə ɡæp,, skɹimɪŋ. sleɪɝ ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛm. wɛɹ ɪz hæn tʌtʃt ðə wɔl, ɪt stɑɹɾəd tə tʃeɪnʒ fɹəm waɪtwɑʃt bɹɪk tə ðə ɡɹeɪ stoʊn ə ðə waɪt taʊɝz ɪntɪɹiɝ.

There, Perrin thought, reaching an alley. Slayer stood inside, head bowed, a hand up against one wall. The ground beside the man ended in a rift, boiling magma at the bottom. People clung to the edge of the gap,, screaming. Slayer ignored them. Where his hand touched the wall, it started to change from whitewashed brick to the gray stone of the White Tower's interior.

ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil stɪl hʌŋ ət sleɪɝz weɪst. pɛɹɪn hæd tə muv kwɪkli- ðə wɔl ɪz mɛltɪŋ fɹəm ðə hit, pɛɹɪn θɔt, foʊkəsɪŋ ɑn ðə wɔl bɪsaɪd sleɪɝ. ɪt wɑz iziɝ, hɪɹ, tə tʃeɪnʒ θɪŋz laɪk ðət - ɪt wɑz pleɪɪŋ ɪndə ðə wɝl ðə naɪtmɛɹ kɹieɪɾəd.

The ter'angreal still hung at Slayer's waist. Perrin had to move quickly- The wall is melting from the heat, Perrin thought, focusing on the wall beside Slayer. It was easier, here, to change things like that - it was playing into the world the nightmare created.

sleɪɝ kɝst, pʊlɪŋ ɪz hæn bæk əz ðə wɔl ɡɹu ɹɛd-hɑt. ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪniθ ɪm ɹʌmbəld, ən ɪz aɪz oʊpənd waɪɾ ɪn əlɑɹm. hi spʌn əz ə ɹɪft oʊpən bɪsaɪd hɪm, pɹədʒɛktəd ðəɹ baɪ pɛɹɪn. ɪn ðət moʊmənt, pɛɹɪn sɔ ðət sleɪɝ bɪlivd - fəɹ dʒʌst ə fɹækʃən ʌv ə sɛkʃən - ðət ðə naɪtmɛɹ wɑz ɹil. sleɪɝ stɛpt əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɹɪft, ɹeɪzɪŋ ə hæn əɡɛnst ɪts hit, bɪlivɪŋ ɪt ɹil.

Slayer cursed, pulling his hand back as the wall grew red-hot. The ground beneath him rumbled, and his eyes opened wide in alarm. He spun as a rift opened beside him, projected there by Perrin. In that moment, Perrin saw that Slayer believed - for just a fraction of a section - that the nightmare was real. Slayer stepped away from the rift, raising a hand against its heat, believing it real.

sleɪɝ vænɪʃt ɪn ðə blɪŋk ʌv ən aɪ, əpɪɹɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðoʊz hæŋɪŋ əbʌv ðə ɹɪft. ðə naɪtmɛɹ ɪnkɔɹpɝeɪɾəd hɪm, sʌkɪŋ ɪm ɪndə ɪts wɪmz, meɪkɪŋ ɪm pleɪ ə ɹoʊl ɪn ɪts tɛɹɝz. ɪt nɪɹli tʊk pɛɹɪn, tu. hi fɛl hɪmsɛlf weɪvɝ, nɪɹli ɹɪspɑndɪŋ tə ðə hit. bʌt noʊ. hɑpɝ wɑz daɪɪŋ. hi wəd nɑt feɪl!

Slayer vanished in the blink of an eye, appearing beside those hanging above the rift. The nightmare incorporated him, sucking him into its whims, making him play a role in its terrors. It nearly took Perrin, too. He felt himself waver, nearly responding to the heat. But no. Hopper was dying. He would not fail!

pɛɹɪn ɪmædʒən hɪmsɛlf əz sʌmwʌn ɛls. ɑzi ælθoʊn, wʌn ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn. pɛɹɪn pʊt hɪmsɛlf ɪn kloʊðɪŋ laɪk ðət hid sin ɑn ðə stʃɹit, ə vɛst ən ə waɪt ʃɝt, faɪnɝ tʃɹaʊzɝz ðən ɛni mæn wəd wɛɹ waɪl wɝkɪŋ ɪn ɛmənz fild. ðɪs stɛp wɑz ɔlmoʊs tu mʌtʃ fəɹ hɪm. hɪz hɑɹt bit fæstɝ, ən i stʌmbəld əz ðə ɡɹaʊn ɹʌmbəld. ɪf i lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi kɑɾ ʌp kəmplitli ɪn ðə naɪtmɛɹ, hiɾ ɛn ʌp laɪk sleɪɝ.

Perrin imagined himself as someone else. Azi al'Thone, one of the Two Rivers men. Perrin put himself in clothing like that he'd seen on the street, a vest and a white shirt, finer trousers than any man would wear while working in Emond's Field. This step was almost too much for him. His heart beat faster, and he stumbled as the ground rumbled. If he let himself be caught up completely in the nightmare, he'd end up like Slayer.

noʊ, pɛɹɪn θɔt, fɔɹsɪŋ hɪmsɛlf tə hoʊl tə hɪz mɛmɹi ʌv feɪl ɪn ɪz hɑɹt. hɪz hoʊm. hɪz feɪs maɪt tʃeɪnʒ, ðə wɝl maɪt ʃeɪk, bʌt ðət wɑz stɪl hoʊm.

No, Perrin thought, forcing himself to hold to his memory of Faile in his heart. His home. His face might change, the world might shake, but that was still home.

hi ɹæn tə ði ɛdʒ ə ðə ɹɪft, əbʌv ðə hit, æktɪŋ əz ɪf i wɝ dʒʌst ənʌðɝ pɑɹɾ ə ðə naɪtmɛɹ. hi skɹimd ɪn tɛɹɝ, ɹitʃɪŋ daʊn tə hɛlp ðoʊz u wɝ fɔlɪŋ. ðoʊ hi ɹitʃt fəɹ sʌmwʌn ɛls, sleɪɝ kɝst ən ɡɹæbd ɪz ɑɹm, juzɪŋ ɪt tə hiv hɪmsɛlf ʌpwɝd.

He ran to the edge of the rift, above the heat, acting as if he were just another part of the nightmare. He screamed in terror, reaching down to help those who were falling. Though he reached for someone else, Slayer cursed and grabbed his arm, using it to heave himself upward.

ən əz i pæst, pɛɹɪn ɡɹæb ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil. sleɪɝ kɹɔld oʊvɝ hɪm, ɹitʃɪŋ ðə ɹɛləɾɪv seɪfti ʌv ði æli. kʌvɝtli, pɛɹɪn meɪɾ ə naɪf ɪn ɪz ʌðɝ hænd.

And as he passed, Perrin grabbed the ter'angreal. Slayer crawled over him, reaching the relative safety of the alley. Covertly, Perrin made a knife in his other hand.

'bɝn mi," sleɪɝ ɡɹaʊld. "aɪ heɪt ðiz θɪŋz." ði ɛɹiə ɝaʊn əm sʌɾənli tʃeɪnʒd tə taɪlz.

'Burn me," Slayer growled. "I hate these things." The area around them suddenly changed to tiles.

pɛɹɪn stʊɾ ʌp, hoʊldɪŋ ə stæf tə stɛɾi hɪmsɛlf ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əpɪɹ tɛɹəfaɪd - ɪt wɑzn hɑɹd. hi bɪɡæn tə stʌmbəl pæst sleɪɝ. ɪn ðət moʊ-mɛnt, ðə hɑɹd-feɪs mæn lʊk daʊn ən sɔ ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɪn pɛɹɪnz æŋɡɝz.

Perrin stood up, holding a staff to steady himself and trying to appear terrified - it wasn't hard. He began to stumble past Slayer. In that mo-ment, the hard-faced man looked down and saw the ter'angreal in Perrin's Angers.

hɪz aɪz oʊpənd waɪd. pɛɹɪn ɹæmd ɪz hæn fɔɹwɝd, plʌnʒɪŋ ðə naɪf ɪndə sleɪɝz stʌmək.

His eyes opened wide. Perrin rammed his hand forward, plunging the knife into Slayer's stomach.

ðə mæn skɹimd, lɝtʃɪŋ bækwɝd, hæn tə hɪz bɛli. blʌd soʊkt ɪz fɪŋɡɝz.

The man screamed, lurching backward, hand to his belly. Blood soaked his fingers.

sleɪɝ klɛntʃt ɪz tiθ. ðə naɪtmɛɹ bɛn ɝaʊn hɪm. ɪt wəd bɝst sun. sleɪɝ ɹaɪɾɪd hɪmsɛlf, loʊɝɪŋ ɪz blʌɾid hænd, aɪz əlaɪt wɪð æŋɡɝ.

Slayer clenched his teeth. The nightmare bent around him. It would burst soon. Slayer righted himself, lowering his bloodied hand, eyes alight with anger.

pɛɹɪn fɛlt ənstɛɾi ɑn ɪz fit, ivən wɪð ðə stæf. hid bɪn wundəd soʊ bædli. ðə ɡɹaʊn tʃɹɛmbəld. ə ɹɪft oʊpən ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd nɛks tə hɪm, stimɪŋ wɪð hiɾ ən lɑvə, laɪk . . .

Perrin felt unsteady on his feet, even with the staff. He'd been wounded so badly. The ground trembled. A rift opened in the ground next to him, steaming with heat and lava, like . . .

pɛɹɪn stɑɹɾəd. laɪk dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt. hi lʊk daʊn ət ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɪn ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. ðə fɪɹ- dʒɹimz ə pipəl ɑɹ stʃɹɔŋ. hɑpɝz vɔɪs wɪspɝɾ ɪn pɛɹɪnz maɪnd. soʊ vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋ. . . .

Perrin started. Like Dragonmount. He looked down at the ter'angreal in his fingers. The fear- dreams of people are strong. Hopper's voice whispered in Perrin's mind. So very strong. . . .

əz sleɪɝ ədvænst ɑn hɪm, pɛɹɪn ɡɹɪɾɪd ɪz tiθ ən hɝl ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɪndə ðə ɹɪvɝ ə lɑvə.

As Slayer advanced on him, Perrin gritted his teeth and hurled the ter'angreal into the river of lava.

"noʊ!" sleɪɝ skɹimd, ɹiæləɾi ɹɪtɝnɪŋ ɝaʊn hɪm. ðə naɪtmɛɹ bɝst, ɪts læs vɛstɪdʒɪz vænɪʃɪŋ. pɛɹɪn wɑz lɛf nilɪŋ ɑn ðə koʊl taɪl flɔɹ ʌv ə smɔl hɔlweɪ.

"No!" Slayer screamed, reality returning around him. The nightmare burst, its last vestiges vanishing. Perrin was left kneeling on the cold tiled floor of a small hallway.

ə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns tə hɪz ɹaɪt, ə mɛltəd lʌmp ə mɛɾəl leɪ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. pɛɹɪn smaɪld.

A short distance to his right, a melted lump of metal lay on the ground. Perrin smiled.

laɪk sleɪɝ, ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɑz hɪɹ fɹəm ðə ɹil wɝld. ən laɪk ə pɝsən, ɪt kəd bi bɹoʊkən ən dɪstʃɹɔɪd hɪɹ. əbʌv ðɛm, ðə vaɪəlɪt doʊm hæd vænɪʃt.

Like Slayer, the ter'angreal was here from the real world. And like a person, it could be broken and destroyed here. Above them, the violet dome had vanished.

sleɪɝ ɡɹaʊld, ðən stɛp fɔɹwɝɾ ən kɪk pɛɹɪn ɪn ðə stʌmək. hɪz tʃɛst waʊn flɛɹd.

Slayer growled, then stepped forward and kicked Perrin in the stomach. His chest wound flared.

ənʌðɝ kɪk fɑloʊd. pɛɹɪn wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ dɪzi.

Another kick followed. Perrin was growing dizzy.

ɡoʊ, jʌŋ bʊl, hɑpɝ sɛnt, hɪz vɔɪs soʊ wik. fli.

Go, Young Bull, Hopper sent, his voice so weak. Flee.

aɪ kæn liv ju!

I can't leave you!

ən jɛt. . . aɪ mʌs liv ju.

And yet. . . I must leave you.

noʊ!

No!

juv faʊn jəɹ ænsɝ. sik baʊnləs. hi wɪl. . . ɪkspleɪn . . . ðəɾ ænsɝ.

You have found your answer. Seek Boundless. He will. . . explain . . . that answer.

pɛɹɪn blɪŋk θɹu tɪɹz əz ənʌðɝ kɪk lændəd. hi skɹimd, ɹæədli, əz hɑpɝz sɛndɪŋ  - soʊ kʌmfɝɾɪŋ, soʊ fəmɪljɝ - feɪɾəd fɹəm ɪz maɪnd.

Perrin blinked through tears as another kick landed. He screamed, raggedly, as Hopper's sending  - so comforting, so familiar - faded from his mind.

ɡɔn.

Gone.

pɛɹɪn skɹimd ɪn æŋɡwɪʃ. vɔɪs ɹæɡəd, aɪz steɪnd wɪð tɪɹz, pɛɹɪn wɪl hɪmsɛlf aʊɾ ə ðə wʊlf dʒɹim ən əweɪ. fliɪŋ laɪk ən ʌɾɝ kaʊɝd.

Perrin screamed in anguish. Voice ragged, eyes stained with tears, Perrin willed himself out of the wolf dream and away. Fleeing like an utter coward.

ɛɡwin əwoʊk wɪð ə saɪ. aɪz stɪl kloʊzd, ʃi bɹiðd ɪn. ðə bæɾəl wɪð mɛsænə hæd lɛft əɹ maɪn filɪŋ stʃɹeɪnd - ɪndid, ʃi hæɾ ə splɪɾɪŋ hɛdeɪk. ʃi hæd kwaɪt nɪɹli bɪn dɪfiɾəd ðɛɹ. hɝ plænz hæd wɝkt, bʌt ðə weɪɾ ʌv wʌt hæd hæpən lɛft əɹ filɪŋ kəntɛmpləɾɪv, ivən ə lɪɾəl oʊvɝwɛlmd.

Egwene awoke with a sigh. Eyes still closed, she breathed in. The battle with Mesaana had left her mind feeling strained - indeed, she had a splitting headache. She had quite nearly been defeated there. Her plans had worked, but the weight of what had happened left her feeling contemplative, even a little overwhelmed.

stɪl, ɪt hæd bɪn ə ɡɹeɪt vɪktɝi. ʃi wəɾ əv tə də ə sɝtʃ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ ən faɪn ðə wʊmən hu, wən əweɪkənd, naʊ hæd ðə maɪn ʌv ə tʃaɪld. ʃi nu, sʌmhaʊ, ðət ðɪs wɑz nɑt sʌmθɪŋ mɛsænə wəd ɹɪkʌvɝ fɹʌm. ʃid noʊn ɪɾ ivən bɪfɔɹ bɛɹ hæd spoʊkən əɹ wɝdz.

Still, it had been a great victory. She would have to do a search of the White Tower and find the woman who, when awakened, now had the mind of a child. She knew, somehow, that this was not something Mesaana would recover from. She'd known it even before Bair had spoken her words.

ɛɡwin oʊpən əɹ aɪz tə ə kʌmfɝɾəbli dɑɹk ɹum, meɪkɪŋ plænz tə ɡæðɝ ðə hɔl ən ɪkspleɪn waɪ ʃɛvən ən kɑɹlɪnjə wəd nɛvɝ əweɪkən.

Egwene opened her eyes to a comfortably dark room, making plans to gather the Hall and explain why Shevan and Carlinya would never awaken.

ʃi spɛɹɾ ə moʊmən tə mɔɹn fəɹ əm əz ʃi sæɾ ʌp. ʃiɾ ɪkspleɪn tə ðɛm ðə deɪnʒɝz, bʌt stɪl ʃi fɛlt əz ɪf ʃid feɪl ðɛm. ən nɪkoʊlə, ɔlweɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡoʊ fæstɝ ðən ʃi ʃʊd. ʃi ʃʊdn əv bɪn ðɛɹ. ɪt -  ɛɡwin hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. wʌt wɑz ðət smɛl? hædnt ʃi lɛft ə læmp bɝnɪŋ? ɪt mʌst əv ɡɔn aʊt.

She spared a moment to mourn for them as she sat up. She'd explained to them the dangers, but still she felt as if she'd failed them. And Nicola, always trying to go faster than she should. She shouldn't have been there. It -  Egwene hesitated. What was that smell? Hadn't she left a lamp burning? It must have gone out.

ɛɡwin ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs ən woʊv ə bɔl ə laɪt tə hæŋ əbʌv əɹ hænd. ʃi wɑz stʌn baɪ ðə sin ɪt ɹɪvild.

Egwene embraced the Source and wove a ball of light to hang above her hand. She was stunned by the scene it revealed.

ðə tʃɹænslusən kɝɾənz ə hɝ bɛd hæd bɪn spɹeɪd ɹɛd wɪð blʌd, ən faɪv bɑɾiz lɪɾɝd ðə flɔɹ. θɹi wɝ ɪn blæk. wʌn wɑz ən ʌnfəmɪljɝ jʌŋ mæn ɪn ðə tɑbɝɾ ə ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹd. ðə læst wɔɹ ə faɪn waɪɾ ən ɹɛd koʊɾ ən tʃɹaʊzɝz.

The translucent curtains of her bed had been sprayed red with blood, and five bodies littered the floor. Three were in black. One was an unfamiliar young man in the tabard of the Tower Guard. The last wore a fine white and red coat and trousers.

ɡɔɪn!

Gawyn!

ɛɡwin θɹu hɝsɛlf fɹəm ðə bɛɾ ən nɛl bɪsaɪd hɪm, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə peɪn ə hɝ hɛdeɪk. hi wɑz bɹiðɪŋ ʃæloʊli, ən hæɾ ə ɡeɪpɪŋ waʊn ɪn ɪz saɪd. ʃi woʊv ɝθ, spɪɹəɾ ən ɛɹ ɪndə ə hilɪŋ, bʌt ʃi wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm tæləntəɾ ɪn ðɪs ɛɹiə. ʃi wɝkt ɑn, ɪn ə pænɪk. səm ə hɪz kʌlɝ ɹɪtɝn ən ðə wunz bɪɡæn tə kloʊz, bʌt ʃi kʊdn də nɪɹli ɪnʌf.

Egwene threw herself from the bed and knelt beside him, ignoring the pain of her headache. He was breathing shallowly, and had a gaping wound in his side. She wove Earth, Spirit and Air into a Healing, but she was far from talented in this area. She worked on, in a panic. Some of his color returned and the wounds began to close, but she couldn't do nearly enough.

"hɛlp!" ʃi jɛld. "ði æmɪɝlɪn nidz hɛlp!"

"Help!" she yelled. "The Amyrlin needs help!"

ɡɔɪn stɝd. "ɛɡwin," hi wɪspɝd, hɪz aɪz flʌɾɝɪŋ oʊpən.

Gawyn stirred. "Egwene," he whispered, his eyes fluttering open.

"hʌʃ, ɡɔɪn. jəɹ gɑnə bi faɪn. eɪd! tə ði æmɪɝlɪn!"

"Hush, Gawyn. You're going to be fine. Aid! To the Amyrlin!"

"ju . . . dɪdn liv ɪnʌf laɪts ɑn," hi wɪspɝd.

"You . . . didn't leave enough lights on," he whispered.

"wʌt?"

"What?"

"ðə mɛsədʒ aɪ sɛnt ..."

"The message I sent ..."

"wi nɛvɝ ɡɑɾ ə mɛsədʒ," ʃi sɛd. "bi stɪl. hɛlp!"

"We never got a message," she said. "Be still. Help!"

"noʊbɑdi ɪz nɪɹ. aɪ jɛld. ðə læmps ... ɪts ɡʊd . . . jə dɪdnt. . ." hi smaɪl deɪzədli. "aɪ lʌv ju."

"Nobody is near. I yelled. The lamps ... it is good . . . you didn't. . ." He smiled dazedly. "I love you."

"laɪ stɪl," ʃi sɛd. laɪt! ʃi wɑz kɹaɪɪŋ.

"Lie still," she said. Light! She was crying.

ði əsæsənz wɝn jəɹ fɔɹseɪkən, ðoʊ," hi sɛd, wɝdz slɝɪŋ. "aɪ wɑz ɹaɪt."

The assassins weren't your Forsaken, though," he said, words slurring. "I was right."

ən i hæd bɪn; wʌt wɝ ðoʊz ʌnfəmɪljɝ blæk junəfɔɹmz? ʃɔn-tʃæn?

And he had been; what were those unfamiliar black uniforms? Sean-chan?

aɪ ʃəd bi dɛd, ʃi ɹilaɪzd. ɪf ɡɔɪn hædn stɑp ðiz əsæsənz, ʃiɾ əv bɪn mɝɾɝd ɪn əɹ slip ən wʊɾə vænɪʃt fɹəm tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. ʃid nɛvɝ əv kɪl mɛsænə.

I should be dead, she realized. If Gawyn hadn't stopped these assassins, she'd have been murdered in her sleep and would have vanished from Tel'aran'rhiod. She'd never have killed Mesaana.

sʌɾənli, ʃi fɛlt ə ful, ɛni sɛns ə vɪktɝi kəmplitli ɪvæpɝeɪɾɪŋ.

Suddenly, she felt a fool, any sense of victory completely evaporating.

"aɪm sɑɹi," ɡɔɪn sɛd kloʊzɪŋ ɪz aɪz, "fɔɹ dɪsəbɪŋ ju." hi wɑz slɪpɪŋ.

"I'm sorry," Gawyn said closing his eyes, "for disobeying you." He was slipping.

"ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt, ɡɔɪn," ʃi sɛd, blɪŋkɪŋ əweɪ tɪɹz. "aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ tə bɑn jə naʊ. ɪts ði oʊnli weɪ."

"It's all right, Gawyn," she said, blinking away tears. "I'm going to bond you now. It's the only way."

hɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn əɹ ɑɹm bɪkeɪm slaɪtli mɔɹ fɝm. "noʊ. nɑɾ ənlɛs... jə wɑnt. . ."

His grip on her arm became slightly more firm. "No. Not unless... you want. . ."

"ful," ʃi sɛd, pɹipɛɹɪŋ ðə wivz. "ʌv kɔɹs aɪ wɑn jə əz maɪ wɔɹɾɝ. aɪ ɔlweɪz hæv."

"Fool," she said, preparing the weaves. "Of course I want you as my Warder. I always have."

"swɛɹ ɪt."

"Swear it."

"aɪ swɛɹ ɪt. aɪ swɛɹ ðəɾ aɪ wɑn jə əz maɪ wɔɹɾɝ, ən əz maɪ hʌzbənd" ʃi ɹɛstəɾ əɹ hæn ɑn ɪz fɔɹhɛɾ ən leɪd ðə wiv ɑn hɪm. "aɪ lʌv ju."

"I swear it. I swear that I want you as my Warder, and as my husband" She rested her hand on his forehead and laid the weave on him. "I love you."

hi ɡæspt. sʌɾənli, ʃi kəd fil ɪz ɪmoʊʃənz, ən ɪz peɪn, əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ əɹ oʊn. ænd, ɪn ɹɪtɝn, ʃi nu ðəɾ i kəd fil ðə tʃɹuθ ə hɝ wɝdz.

He gasped. Suddenly, she could feel his emotions, and his pain, as if they were her own. And, in return, she knew that he could feel the truth of her words.

pɛɹɪn oʊpən ɪz aɪz ən tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. hi wɑz kɹaɪɪŋ. dɪd pipəl kɹaɪ ɪn ðɛɹ slip wən ðeɪ dʒɹim nɔɹməl dʒɹimz?

Perrin opened his eyes and took a deep breath. He was crying. Did people cry in their sleep when they dreamed normal dreams?

"laɪt bi pɹeɪzd," feɪl sɛd. hi oʊpən ɪz aɪz ən faʊn ðət ʃi nɛl nɛks tə hɪm, əz dɪd sʌmwʌn ɛls. mɑsʊɝi?

"Light be praised," Faile said. He opened his eyes and found that she knelt next to him, as did someone else. Masuri?

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡɹæb pɛɹɪnz hɛɾ ɪn əɹ hænz, ən pɛɹɪn fɛl ði aɪsi koʊld ʌv ə hilɪŋ wɑʃ əkɹɔs hɪm. ðə wunz ɪn ɪz lɛɡ ən əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛs kloʊzd.

The Aes Sedai grabbed Perrin's head in her hands, and Perrin felt the icy cold of a Healing wash across him. The wounds in his leg and across his chest closed.

"wi tʃɹaɪd tə hil jə waɪl jə slɛpt," feɪl sɛd, kɹeɪɾəlɪŋ pɛɹɪnz hɛɾ ɪn əɹ læp. "bʌɾ ɛdʒɹə stɑpt ʌs."

"We tried to Heal you while you slept," Faile said, cradling Perrin's head in her lap. "But Edarra stopped us."

"ɪɾ ɪz nɑt tə bi dʌn. wʊdnt wɝk ɛniweɪ." ðət wɑz ðə waɪz wʌnz vɔɪs. pɛɹɪn kəd hɪɹ əɹ ɪn ðə tɛn sʌmwɛɹ. hi blɪŋkt ɪz aɪz. hi leɪ ɑn ɪz pælət. ɪt wɑz dɪm aʊtsaɪd.

"It is not to be done. Wouldn't work anyway." That was the Wise One's voice. Perrin could hear her in the tent somewhere. He blinked his eyes. He lay on his pallet. It was dim outside.

"ɪts bɪn lɔŋɡɝ ðən ən aʊɝ," hi sɛd. "ju ʃʊɾə lɛf baɪ naʊ.'

"It's been longer than an hour," he said. "You should have left by now.'

"hʌʃ," feɪl sɛd. "ɡeɪtweɪz ɑɹ wɝkɪŋ əɡɛn, ən ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiwʌn ɪz θɹu. oʊnli ə fju θaʊzən soʊlʒɝz ɹɪmeɪn - il ən tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn, moʊsli. jə θɪŋk ðeɪd liv, jə θɪŋk aɪd liv, wɪθaʊt ju?

"Hush," Faile said. "Gateways are working again, and almost everyone is through. Only a few thousand soldiers remain - Aiel and Two Rivers men, mostly. You think they'd leave, you think I'd leave, without you?

hi sæɾ ʌp, waɪpɪŋ ɪz bɹaʊ. ɪt wɑz dæmp wɪð swɛt. hi tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk ɪt vænɪʃ, əz i hæɾ ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. hi feɪld, ʌv kɔɹs. ɛdʒɹə stʊd baɪ ðə fɑɹ wɔl, bɪhaɪn hɪm. ʃi wɑtʃt ɪm wɪð ə mɛʒɝɪŋ ɡeɪz.

He sat up, wiping his brow. It was damp with sweat. He tried to make it vanish, as he had in the wolf dream. He failed, of course. Edarra stood by the far wall, behind him. She watched him with a measuring gaze.

hi tɝn tə feɪl. "wi hæv tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ," hi sɛd, vɔɪs ɹæɡəd. "sleɪɝ wɪl nɑt bi wɝkɪŋ əloʊn. ðəɹ wɪl bi ə tʃɹæp, pɹɑbli ən ɑɹmi. sʌmwʌn wɪð ən ɑɹmi. ðeɪ maɪt tʃɹaɪ tə stʃɹaɪk əɾ ɛni moʊmənt."

He turned to Faile. "We have to get away," he said, voice ragged. "Slayer will not be working alone. There will be a trap, probably an army. Someone with an army. They might try to strike at any moment."

"kæn jə stænd?" feɪl æskt.

"Can you stand?" Faile asked.

"jɛs." hi fɛlt wik, bʌɾ i mænədʒd, wɪð feɪlz hɛlp. ðə flæp ɹʌsəld ən kiæɾ ɛntɝd wɪð ə wɔɾɝskɪn. pɛɹɪn tʊk ɪt ɡɹeɪtfəli, dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ. ɪt sleɪkt ɪz θɝst, bʌt peɪn stɪl bɝn ɪnsaɪɾ ə hɪm.

"Yes." He felt weak, but he managed, with Faile's help. The flap rustled and Chiad entered with a waterskin. Perrin took it gratefully, drinking. It slaked his thirst, but pain still burned inside of him.

hupɝ. . . hi loʊɝd ðə wɔɾɝskɪn. ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim, dɛθ wɑz faɪnəl. wɛɹ wəd hɑpɝz soʊl ɡoʊ?

Hoopper. . . He lowered the waterskin. In the wolf dream, death was final. Where would Hopper's soul go?

aɪ mʌs kip ɡoʊɪŋ, pɛɹɪn θɔt. si maɪ pipəl tə seɪfti. hi wɔk tə ðə tɛn flæps. hɪz lɛɡz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi mɔɹ stɛɾi.

I must keep going, Perrin thought. See my people to safety. He walked to the tent flaps. His legs were already more steady.

"aɪ si jəɹ sɑɹoʊ, maɪ hʌzbənd," feɪl sɛd, wɔkɪŋ bɪsaɪd hɪm, hæn ɑn ɪz ɑɹm. "wʌt hæpənd?"

"I see your sorrow, my husband," Faile said, walking beside him, hand on his arm. "What happened?"

"aɪ lɔst ə fɹɛnd," pɛɹɪn sɛd sɔfli. "fɔɹ ðə sɛkən taɪm."

"I lost a friend," Perrin said softly. "For the second time."

"hɑpɝ?" ʃi smɛl fɪɹfəl.

"Hopper?" She smelled fearful.

"jɛs."

"Yes."

"oʊ, pɛɹɪn, aɪm sɑɹi." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz tɛndɝ əz ðeɪ stɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə tɛnt. ɪt stʊd, əloʊn, ɑn ðə mɛdoʊ ðət hæd wʌns hɛld ɪz fɔɹsɪz. ðə bɹaʊn ən jɛloʊ ɡɹæs stɪl bɔɹ ði ɪmpɹɛʃənz ə tɛns, pæðz wɔɹn daʊn tə ðə mʌɾ ɪn ə lɑɹdʒ kɹɪskɹɔs pæɾɝn. ɪt lʊk laɪk ə leɪaʊt fəɹ ə taʊn, sɛkʃənz stæmp daʊn fəɹ bɪldɪŋz, laɪnz kʌt tə bɪkʌm ɹoʊdweɪz. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɪɹli ɛmpti ʌv pipəl naʊ.

"Oh, Perrin, I'm sorry." Her voice was tender as they stepped out of the tent. It stood, alone, on the meadow that had once held his forces. The brown and yellow grass still bore the impressions of tents, paths worn down to the mud in a large crisscross pattern. It looked like a layout for a town, sections stamped down for buildings, lines cut to become roadways. But it was nearly empty of people now.

ðə ɹʌmbəlɪŋ skaɪ wɑz dɑɹk. kiæd hɛld ə læntɝn ʌp tə ɪlumɪnɪt ðə ɡɹæs ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm.

The rumbling sky was dark. Chiad held a lantern up to illuminate the grass in front of them.

sɛvɹəl ɡɹups ə soʊlʒɝz weɪɾəd. meɪɾənz ɹeɪz ðɛɹ spɪɹz haɪ wən ðeɪ sɔ hɪm, ðən bæŋd əm ɑn ðɛɹ ʃilz. ə saɪn ʌv əpɹuvəl.

Several groups of soldiers waited. Maidens raised their spears high when they saw him, then banged them on their shields. A sign of approval.

ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn wɝ ðəɹ əz wɛl, ɡæðɝɪŋ ɝaʊn əz wɝd spɹɛd. haʊ mʌtʃ kəd ðeɪ ɡɛs ʌv wʌt hid dʌn tənaɪt? tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn tʃɪɹd, ən pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd tə ðɛm, ðoʊ hi fɛlt ɑn ɛdʒ. ðə ɹɔŋɡnəs wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ, ɪn ði ɛɹ. hiɾ əsum ðət ðə dʒɹimspaɪk wɑz kɑzɪŋ ɪt, bʌɾ i hæɾ əpɛɹənli bɪn ɹɔŋ. ði ɛɹ smɛld laɪk ðə blaɪt.

The Two Rivers men were there as well, gathering around as word spread. How much could they guess of what he'd done tonight? Two Rivers men cheered, and Perrin nodded to them, though he felt on edge. The wrongness was still there, in the air. He'd assumed that the dreamspike was causing it, but he had apparently been wrong. The air smelled like the Blight.

ði æʃəmən stʊd wɛɹ ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə kæmp hæd wʌns stʊd. ðeɪ tɝnd wən pɛɹɪn əpɹoʊtʃt, səluɾɪŋ, hænz tə tʃɛsts. ðeɪ lʊk tə bi ɪn ɡʊd ʃeɪp, dɪspaɪt dʒʌs hævɪŋ muvd ɔlmoʊs ði ɪntaɪɝ kæmp.

The Asha'man stood where the center of the camp had once stood. They turned when Perrin approached, saluting, hands to chests. They looked to be in good shape, despite just having moved almost the entire camp.

ɡɛɾ əs aʊɾ ə hɪɹ, mɛn," pɛɹɪn sɛd tə ðɛm. "aɪ doʊnt wɑnə spɛn ənʌðɝ mɪnəɾ ɪn ðɪs pleɪs."

Get us out of here, men," Perrin said to them. "I don't want to spend another minute in this place."

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd," ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd, saʊndɪŋ iɡɝ. hi ɡɑɾ ə lʊk ə kənsən-tʃɹeɪʃən ɑn ɪz feɪs, ən ə smɔl ɡeɪtweɪ oʊpən bɪsaɪd hɪm.

"Yes, my Lord," Grady said, sounding eager. He got a look of concen-tration on his face, and a small gateway opened beside him.

ɪɹaʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, weɪvɪŋ tə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn. ðeɪ kɹɔst wɪð ə kwɪk stɛp. ðə meɪɾənz ən ɡɔl weɪɾəd wɪð pɛɹɪn, əz dɪɾ ɛlaɪəs.

Ihrough," Perrin said, waving to the Two Rivers men. They crossed with a quick step. The Maidens and Gaul waited with Perrin, as did Elyas.

laɪt, pɛɹɪn θɔt, skænɪŋ ðə fild wɛɹ ðeɪd kæmpt. aɪ fil laɪk ə maʊs biɪŋ aɪd baɪ ə hɔk.

Light, Perrin thought, scanning the field where they'd camped. I feel like a mouse being eyed by a hawk.

"aɪ doʊn səpoʊz jə kəd ɡɪv əs səm laɪt," pɛɹɪn sɛd tə nild, stændɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə ɡeɪtweɪ.

"I don't suppose you could give us some light," Perrin said to Neald, standing beside the gateway.

ði æʃəmən kɑkt ɪz hɛd, ən ə ɡɹup ʌv ɡloʊɪŋ ɡlɑbz æp-pɪɹɾ ɝaʊn hɪm. ðeɪ zɪpt ʌp ɪndə ði ɛɹ ɝaʊn ðə mɛdoʊ.

The Asha'man cocked his head, and a group of glowing globes ap-peared around him. They zipped up into the air around the meadow.

ðeɪ ɪluməneɪɾəd nʌθɪŋ. dʒʌs ði əbændən kæmpsaɪt. ðə læst ə ðə tʃɹups faɪnəli faɪl θɹu.

They illuminated nothing. Just the abandoned campsite. The last of the troops finally filed through.

pɛɹɪn ən feɪl kɹɔst, ɡɔl, ɛlaɪəs ən ðə meɪɾənz ɡoʊɪŋ æftɝ hɪm. faɪnəli, ðə tʃænlɝz pæs θɹu, wɔkɪŋ ɪn ə klʌstɝ.

Perrin and Faile crossed, Gaul, Elyas and the Maidens going after him. Finally, the channelers passed through, walking in a cluster.

ði ɛɹ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɡeɪtweɪ wɑz kul, ən smɛld ɹifɹɛʃɪŋli klin. pɛɹɪn hædn ɹilaɪz haʊ mʌtʃ ði ivəl smɛl hæd bɪn bɑðɝɪŋ hɪm. hi ɪnheɪl dipli. ðeɪ wɝ ɑn ə ɹaɪz, səm dɪstəns fɹəm ə splæʃ ə laɪts bɪsaɪd ðə ɹɪvɝ ðət wɑz pɹɑbli waɪtbɹɪdʒ.

The air on the other side of the gateway was cool, and smelled refreshingly clean. Perrin hadn't realized how much the evil smell had been bothering him. He inhaled deeply. They were on a rise, some distance from a splash of lights beside the river that was probably Whitebridge.

hɪz tʃɹups tʃɪɹɾ əz i stɛp θɹu. ðə ɡɹeɪt kæmp wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi moʊsli sɛɾ ʌp, ɡɑɹd poʊsts ɪn pleɪs. ðə ɡeɪtweɪ hæd bɪn oʊpən ɪndə ə lɑɹdʒ ɛɹiə, mɑɹkt ɔf wɪð poʊsts, nɪɹ ðə bæk.

His troops cheered as he stepped through. The great camp was already mostly set up, guard posts in place. The gateway had been opened into a large area, marked off with posts, near the back.

ðeɪɾ ɪskeɪpt. ðə kɑs hæd bɪn ɡɹeɪt, bʌt ðeɪɾ ɪskeɪpt.

They'd escaped. The cost had been great, but they'd escaped.

ɡɹeɪndəl sæt bæk ɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ. ðə lɛðɝ kʊʃənz wɝ stʌft wɪð ðə daʊn ə ðə flɛdʒlɪŋ kælɪɝ, wɪtʃ dʊɹɪŋ ðɪs eɪdʒ lɪvd oʊnli ɪn ʃɑɹə. ʃi bɛɹli noʊɾəst ðə lʌɡʒɝi.

Graendal sat back in her chair. The leather cushions were stuffed with the down of the fledgling kallir, which during this Age lived only in Shara. She barely noticed the luxury.

ðə sɝvənt - wʌn mɔɹaɪɾɪn hæd loʊn əɹ - wɑz ɑn wʌn ni bɪfɔɹ hɝ. hɪz aɪz wɝ tɛmpɛstʃuəs, ən oʊnli hæf-loʊɝd. ðɪs wʌn wɑz ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl, bʌt bɛɹli. hi nu hi wɑz junik.

The servant - one Moridin had loaned her - was on one knee before her. His eyes were tempestuous, and only half-lowered. This one was under control, but barely. He knew he was unique.

hi ɔlsoʊ sim tə noʊ ðəɾ ɪz feɪljɝ wəd fɔl əpɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ɡɹeɪndəl dɪd nɑt swɛt.

He also seemed to know that his failure would fall upon her shoulders. Graendal did not sweat.

ʃi wɑz tu kəntʃɹoʊl fəɹ ðæt. ðə ʃʌɾɝz ɑn ðə wɪndoʊ ɪn ðə waɪd, ɹɛd-taɪld ɹum bɝst oʊpən sʌɾənli, ə koʊl si wɪn bloʊɪŋ θɹu ðə tʃeɪmbɝ ən pʊɾɪŋ aʊt sɛvɹəl ə ðə læmps. tɛnʒɹəlz ə smoʊk woʊv ʌp fɹəm ðɛɹ wɪks.

She was too controlled for that. The shutters on the window in the wide, red-tiled room burst open suddenly, a cold sea wind blowing through the chamber and putting out several of the lamps. Tendrils of smoke wove up from their wicks.

ʃi wəd nɑt feɪl.

She would not fail.

"pɹipɛɹ tə spɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹæp ɛniweɪ," ʃi kəmændəd.

"Prepare to spring the trap anyway," she commanded.

"bʌt - " ðə sɝvən sɛd.

"But - " the servant said.

"du ɪt, ən də nɑt spik bæk tə wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən, dɔɡ."

"Do it, and do not speak back to one of the Chosen, dog."

ðə sɝvən loʊɝɾ ɪz aɪz, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz stɪl ə ɹɪbɛljəs spɑɹk tə ðɛm.

The servant lowered his eyes, though there was still a rebellious spark to them.

nɛvɝ maɪnd. ʃi stɪl hæd wʌn tul lɛf tə hɝ, wʌn ʃi hæd pəzɪʃən soʊ vɛɹi kɛɹfəli. wʌn ʃi hæd pɹipɛɹd fəɹ ə moʊmən sətʃ əz ðɪs.

Never mind. She still had one tool left to her, one she had positioned so very carefully. One she had prepared for a moment such as this.

ɪt hæd tə bi dʌn kɛɹfəli. eɪbɑɹə wɑz tɑvɝən, ən soʊ stʃɹɔŋli wʌn əz tə bi fɹaɪɾənɪŋ. æɹoʊz faɪɝd fɹəm əfɑɹ wəd mɪs, ən ɪn ə taɪm ə pikfəl kɑntəmpleɪʃən, hi wəd bi əlɝɾɪd ən ɪskeɪp.

It had to be done carefully. Aybara was ta'veren, and so strongly one as to be frightening. Arrows fired from afar would miss, and in a time of peacful contemplation, he would be alerted and escape.

ʃi niɾəd ə tɛmpəst wɪð ɪm ət ðə sɛntɝ ʌv ɪt. ən ðɛn, ðə bleɪd wəd fɔl. ðɪs ɪz nɑt dʌn jɛt, fɔlən blæksmɪθ. nɑt baɪ ən ɪntʃ əɹ baɪ ə liɡ.

She needed a tempest with him at the center of it. And then, the blade would fall. This is not done yet, Fallen Blacksmith. Not by an inch or by a league.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾinaɪn


CHAPTER 39

ɪn ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd


In the Three-fold Land

eɪvinhə fɛlt ɹaɪɾ əɡɛn. ðəɹ wɑz ə kɑmɪŋ pɝfɛkʃən tə ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd. wɛt-lændɝz θɔt ðə lændskeɪps junəfɔɹm kʌlɝz dʒɹæb, bʌɾ eɪvinhə faʊn əm bjuɾəfəl. sɪmpəl bɹaʊnz ən tænz. ðeɪ wɝ fəmɪljɝ ən dɪpɛndəbəl, nɑt laɪk ðə wɛtlænz, wɛɹ boʊθ ðə lændskeɪp ən ðə wɛðɝ wɝ dɪfɹən ɛvɹi taɪm jə tɝn ɝaʊnd.

Aviendha felt right again. There was a calming perfection to the Three-fold Land. Wet-landers thought the landscape's uniform colors drab, but Aviendha found them beautiful. Simple browns and tans. They were familiar and dependable, not like the wetlands, where both the landscape and the weather were different every time you turned around.

eɪvinhə ɹæn fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹkənɪŋ naɪt, itʃ fʊt fɔlɪŋ ɑn dʌsti ɡɹaʊnd. fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ɪn mɛni mʌnθs, ʃi fɛlt əloʊn. ɪn ðə wɛtlænz, ʃi ɔlweɪz fɛlt əz ɪf ʃi wɑz biɪŋ wɑtʃt baɪ səm ɛnəmi ʃi kəd nɑt si əɹ ətæk.

Aviendha ran forward in the darkening night, each foot falling on dusty ground. For the first time in many months, she felt alone. In the wetlands, she always felt as if she was being watched by some enemy she could not see or attack.

nɑt ðət ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd wɑz seɪfɝ. fɑɹ fɹəm ɪt. ðət ʃæɾoʊd pætʃ bɪniθ ðə nædʒɹə-skɹu wɑz ðə dɛn ʌv ə liθəl sneɪk. ɪf wʌn bɹʌʃt ðə spɪnli bɹæntʃəz, ðə sneɪk wəd stʃɹaɪk; ʃi hæd sin faɪv mɛn daɪ fɹəm ðoʊz baɪts. ðə dɛn wɑz mɪɹli wʌn ə ðə mɛni hæzɝdz ʃi pæs dʊɹɪŋ əɹ ɹʌn tə ɹɪɾiən. bʌt ðoʊz deɪnʒɝz wɝ ʌndɝstændəbəl. ʃi kəd si ðɛm, mɛʒɝ əm ən əvɔɪd ðɛm. ɪf ʃi daɪd fɹəm ðə sneɪks baɪɾ əɹ fɛl tə ðə lænz hit, ðə fɔlt wəd bi hɝ oʊn.

Not that the Three-fold Land was safer. Far from it. That shadowed patch beneath the nadra-scruh was the den of a lethal snake. If one brushed the spindly branches, the snake would strike; she had seen five men die from those bites. The den was merely one of the many hazards she passed during her run to Rhuidean. But those dangers were understandable. She could see them, measure them and avoid them. If she died from the snakes bite or fell to the land's heat, the fault would be her own.

ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz pɹɛfɝəbəl tə feɪs ði ɛnəmi əɹ ðə deɪnʒɝ jə kəd si ðən tə fɪɹ ðə wʌn ðət hɪd bɪhaɪn ðə feɪsəz ə laɪɪŋ wɛtləndɝz.

It was always preferable to face the enemy or the danger you could see than to fear the one that hid behind the faces of lying wetlanders.

ʃi kəntɪnjud ɹʌnɪŋ, dɪspaɪt ðə dɪmɪŋ laɪt. ɪt wɑz ɡʊd tə swɛɾ əɡɛn. pipəl dɪdn swɛɾ ɪnʌf ɪn ðə wɛtlænz; pɝhæps ðət wɑz wʌt meɪɾ əm soʊ ənjuʒəwəl. ɪnstɛɾ ə lɛɾɪŋ ðə sʌn wɔɹm ðɛm, ðeɪ sɔt ɹəfɹɛʃmənt. ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ tə ə pɹɑpɝ swɛt tɛn tə ɡɛt klin, ðeɪ səbmɝs ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn wɔɾɝ. ðət kʊdn bi hɛlθi.

She continued running, despite the dimming light. It was good to sweat again. People didn't sweat enough in the wetlands; perhaps that was what made them so unusual. Instead of letting the sun warm them, they sought refreshment. Instead of going to a proper sweat tent to get clean, they submersed themselves in water. That couldn't be healthy.

ʃi wəd nɑt laɪ tə hɝsɛlf. eɪvinhə hɝsɛlf hæd pɑɹteɪkən ə ðoʊz lʌɡʒɝiz, ən ʃi hæd kʌm tə ɛndʒɔɪ ðoʊz bæθs ən ðə faɪn dʒɹɛsəz ɪleɪn fɔɹst əpɑn hɝ. wʌn hæd tə æknɑlɪdʒ wʌnz wiknəsəz bɪfɔɹ wʌn kəd dɪfit ðɛm. naʊ, əz ʃi ɹæn əkɹɔs ðə dʒɛnli sloʊpɪŋ ɝθ ə ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd, eɪvinhəz pɝspɛktɪv wɑz ɹɪstɔɹd.

She would not lie to herself. Aviendha herself had partaken of those luxuries, and she had come to enjoy those baths and the fine dresses Elayne forced upon her. One had to acknowledge one's weaknesses before one could defeat them. Now, as she ran across the gently sloping earth of the Three-fold Land, Aviendha's perspective was restored.

faɪnəli, ʃi sloʊd. əz tɛmptɪŋ əz ɪt wɑz tə tʃɹævəl ɪn ðə dɑɹk ən slip θɹu ðə deɪz hit, ɪt wɑz nɑt waɪz. ə mɪsstɛp ɪn ðə dɑɹk kəɾ ɛn jəɹ laɪf. ʃi kwɪkli kəlɛktəd səm dɛd tɑ-bɹʌʃ ən səm ɪnɑɾə bɑɹk, ðən meɪd hɝsɛlf ə kæmp ət ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə tʃɹəmɛndəs stoʊn.

Finally, she slowed. As tempting as it was to travel in the dark and sleep through the day's heat, it was not wise. A misstep in the dark could end your life. She quickly collected some dead ta-brush and some ina'ta bark, then made herself a camp at the side of a tremendous stone.

sun ʃi hæɾ ə faɪɝ bɝnɪŋ, ði ɔɹənʒ laɪt ɹəflɛktɪŋ ɔf ðə ɹɑk ðət taʊɝɾ oʊvɝ hɝ. ʃid sleɪn ə smɔl ʃɛlbæk ɝliɝ, ən ʃi ənɹæpt ɪt, skɪn ɪt, ðən sɛɾ ɪɾ ʌp ɑn ə spɪt. nɑt ðə moʊs dɛləkəɾ ə milz, bʌt sæɾəsfæktʃɹi.

Soon she had a fire burning, the orange light reflecting off the rock that towered over her. She'd slain a small shellback earlier, and she unwrapped it, skinned it, then set it up on a spit. Not the most delicate of meals, but satisfactory.

eɪvinhə sɛɾəld daʊn, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə faɪɝ kɹækəl, smɛlɪŋ ðə mit. jɛs, ʃi wɑz ɡlæd ʃi hædn tʃɹævəl dɝɛkli tə ɹɪɾiən, ɪnstɛd teɪkɪŋ ðə taɪm - pɹɛʃəs ðoʊ ðət taɪm wɑz - tə ɹʌn ɪn ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd. ɪt hɛlpt əɹ si wʌt ʃi hæd bɪn, ən wʌt ʃi hæd bɪkʌm. eɪvinhə ðə meɪɾən wɑz ɡɔn. ʃi hæɾ ɛmbɹeɪst əɹ pæθ əz ə waɪz wʌn, ən ðət bɹɔɾ əɹ ɑnɝ bæk. ʃi hæd pɝpəs əɡɛn. əz ə waɪz wʌn, ʃi kəd hɛlp lɛɾ əɹ pipəl θɹu ðɛɹ moʊs tʃɹaɪɪŋ taɪm.

Aviendha settled down, watching the fire crackle, smelling the meat. Yes, she was glad she hadn't Traveled directly to Rhuidean, instead taking the time - precious though that time was - to run in the Three-fold Land. It helped her see what she had been, and what she had become. Aviendha the Maiden was gone. She had embraced her path as a Wise One, and that brought her honor back. She had purpose again. As a Wise One, she could help lead her people through their most trying time.

wʌns ðɪs wɑz θɹu, hɝ pipəl wəd nid tə ɹɪtɝn tə ðə θɹifoʊld lænd. itʃ deɪ ɪn ðə wɛtlænz meɪɾ əm wikɝ; ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz ən ɛksələn ɪɡzæmpəl. ʃi hæd ɡɹoʊn sɑf ðɛɹ. haʊ kəd wʌn nɑt ɡɹoʊ sɑft ɪn ðət pleɪs? ɪt wəɾ əv tə bi əbændənd. sun.

Once this was through, her people would need to return to the Threefold Land. Each day in the wetlands made them weaker; she herself was an excellent example. She had grown soft there. How could one not grow soft in that place? It would have to be abandoned. Soon.

ʃi smaɪld, sɛɾəlɪŋ bæk ən kloʊzɪŋ əɹ aɪz fəɹ ə moʊmənt, lɛɾɪŋ ðə deɪz fətiɡ mɛlt əweɪ.

She smiled, settling back and closing her eyes for a moment, letting the day's fatigue melt away.

hɝ fjutʃɝ sim soʊ mʌtʃ mɔɹ klɪɹ. ʃi wɑz tə vɪzət ɹɪɾiən, pæs θɹu ðə kɹɪstəl kɑləmz, ðən ɹɪtɝn ən kleɪm əɹ ʃɛɹ ə ɹændz hɑɹt. ʃi wəd faɪɾ ət ðə læs bæɾəl. ʃi wəd hɛlp pɹəzɝv ðə ɹɛmnən ə ði il u sɝvaɪvd, ðən bɹɪŋ əm hoʊm wɛɹ ðeɪ bɪlɔŋd.

Her future seemed so much more clear. She was to visit Rhuidean, pass through the crystal columns, then return and claim her share of Rand's heart. She would fight at the Last Battle. She would help preserve the remnant of the Aiel who survived, then bring them home where they belonged.

ə saʊn keɪm fɹəm aʊtsaɪɾ əɹ kæmp.

A sound came from outside her camp.

eɪvinhə oʊpən əɹ aɪz ən dʒʌmpt ʌp, ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ ðə sɔɹs. ə pis ə hɝ wɑz pliz ðət ʃi naʊ ɪnstɪŋktɪvli lʊk tə ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ɹæðɝ ðən spɪɹz ðət wɝ nɑt ðɛɹ. ʃi woʊv ə ɡloʊb ə laɪt.

Aviendha opened her eyes and jumped up, embracing the Source. A piece of her was pleased that she now instinctively looked to the One Power, rather than spears that were not there. She wove a globe of light.

ə wʊmən stʊɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs nɪɹbaɪ, wɛɹɪŋ il ɡɑɹb. nɑt keɪɾɪnsɝ əɹ ðə ɡɑɹb ʌv ə waɪz wʌn, bʌt nɔɹməl kloʊðɪŋ: ə dɑɹk skɝɾ ən ə tæn blaʊs ən ʃɔl, ə kɝtʃəf ɑn əɹ ɡɹeɪɪŋ hɛɹ. ʃi wɑz mɪɾəl-eɪdʒɪd, ən kæɹid noʊ wɛpənz. ʃi wɑz stɪl.

A woman stood in the darkness nearby, wearing Aiel garb. Not cadin'sor or the garb of a Wise One, but normal clothing: a dark skirt and a tan blouse and shawl, a kerchief on her graying hair. She was middle-aged, and carried no weapons. She was still.

eɪvinhə ɡlæns tə ðə saɪdz. wɑz ðɪs ən æmbʊʃ? əɹ wɑz ðɪs wʊmən ə spɛktɝ? wʌn ə ðə dɛd wɔkɪŋ? waɪ hædn eɪvinhə hɝɾ əɹ əpɹoʊtʃ?

Aviendha glanced to the sides. Was this an ambush? Or was this woman a specter? One of the dead walking? Why hadn't Aviendha heard her approach?

"ɡɹiɾɪŋz, waɪz wʌn," ðə wʊmən sɛd, boʊɪŋ əɹ hɛd. "maɪɾ aɪ ʃɛɹ wɔɾɝ wɪð ju? aɪm tʃɹævlɪŋ fɑɹ, ən sɔ jəɹ faɪɝ." ðə wʊmən hæd fɝoʊd skɪn, ən ʃi kəd nɑt tʃænəl -  eɪvinhə kəd sɛns ðəɾ izəli.

"Greetings, Wise One," the woman said, bowing her head. "Might I share water with you? I am traveling far, and saw your fire." The woman had furrowed skin, and she could not channel -  Aviendha could sense that easily.

"aɪ æm nɑt jɛɾ ə waɪz wʌn," eɪvinhə sɛd, wɛɹi. "aɪ kɝənli teɪk maɪ sɛkən pæθ ɪndə ɹɪɾiən."

"I am not yet a Wise One," Aviendha said, wary. "I currently take my second path into Rhuidean."

"ðɛn jəl sun faɪn mʌtʃ ɑnɝ," ðə wʊmən sɛd. "aɪ æm nɑ-koʊmi. aɪ pɹɑməs ðəɾ aɪ min jə noʊ hɑɹm, tʃaɪld."

"Then you will soon find much honor," the woman said. "I am Na-komi. I promise that I mean you no harm, child."

sʌɾənli, eɪvinhə fɛl fulɪʃ. ðə wʊmən hæɾ əpɹoʊtʃt wɪθaʊt wɛpənz dʒɹɔn. eɪvinhə hæd bɪn dɪstʃɹæktəd baɪ hɝ θɔts; ðət wɑz waɪ ʃi hædn hɝd nɑkoʊmi əpɹoʊtʃ. "ʌv kɔɹs, pliz."

Suddenly, Aviendha felt foolish. The woman had approached without weapons drawn. Aviendha had been distracted by her thoughts; that was why she hadn't heard Nakomi approach. "Of course, please."

"θæŋk ju," nɑkoʊmi sɛd, stɛpɪŋ ɪndə ðə laɪɾ ən sɛɾɪŋ daʊn əɹ pæk bɪsaɪd ðə smɔl faɪɝ.

"Thank you," Nakomi said, stepping into the light and setting down her pack beside the small fire.

ʃi klɪkt əɹ tʌŋ, ðən dʒɹu səm smɔl bɹæntʃəz aʊɾ ə hɝ pæk tə bɪld ʌp ðə fleɪmz. ʃi ɹimuvd ə pɑt fəɹ ti. "maɪɾ aɪ hæv səm ə ðət wɔɾɝ?"

She clicked her tongue, then drew some small branches out of her pack to build up the flames. She removed a pot for tea. "Might I have some of that water?"

eɪvinhə ɡɑɾ aʊɾ ə wɔɾɝskɪn. ʃi kəd hɑɹdli spɛɹ ə dʒɹɑp - ʃi wɑz stɪl sɛvɹəl deɪz fɹəm ɹɪɾiən - bʌɾ ɪt wəd ɡɪv əfɛns nɑt tə ɹɪspɑn tə ðə ɹɪkwɛst æftɝ ɔfɝɪŋ tə ʃɛɹ ʃeɪd.

Aviendha got out a waterskin. She could hardly spare a drop - she was still several days from Rhuidean - but it would give offense not to respond to the request after offering to share shade.

nɑkoʊmi tʊk ðə wɔɾɝskɪn ən fɪld əɹ tipɑt, wɪtʃ ʃi ðən sɛt bɪsaɪd ðə faɪɝ tə wɔɹm. "ɪɾ ɪz ən ʌnɪkspɛktɪd plɛʒɝ," nɑkoʊmi sɛd, ɹaɪflɪŋ θɹu hɝ pæk, "tə kɹɔs ðə pæθ ʌv wʌn ɑn əɹ weɪ tə ɹɪɾiən. tɛl mi, wɑz jəɹ əpɹɛntəsʃɪp lɔŋ?"

Nakomi took the waterskin and filled her teapot, which she then set beside the fire to warm. "It is an unexpected pleasure," Nakomi said, rifling through her pack, "to cross the path of one on her way to Rhuidean. Tell me, was your apprenticeship long?"

"tu lɔŋ," eɪvinhə sɛd. "ðoʊ pɹaɪmɛɹəli kəz ə maɪ oʊn stʌbɝnnəs."

"Too long," Aviendha said. "Though primarily because of my own stubbornness."

"ɑ," nɑkoʊmi sɛd. "ju hæv ði ɛɹ ʌv ə wɔɹiɝ əbaʊt ju, tʃaɪld. tɛl mi, ɑɹ jə fɹəm əmʌŋ ðoʊz u wɛnt wɛst? ðə wʌnz u dʒɔɪn ðə wʌn neɪm ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn?"

"Ah," Nakomi said. "You have the air of a warrior about you, child. Tell me, are you from among those who went west? The ones who joined the one named the Car'a'carn?"

"hi ɪz ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn" eɪvinhə sɛd.

"He is the Car'a'carn" Aviendha said.

"aɪ dɪd nɑt seɪ ðəɾ i wɑz nɑt," nɑkoʊmi sɛd, saʊndɪŋ əmjuzd. ʃi ɡɑɾ aʊt səm ti livz ən ɝbz.

"I did not say that he was not," Nakomi said, sounding amused. She got out some tea leaves and herbs.

noʊ. ʃi hædn sɛd soʊ. eɪvinhə tɝn əɹ ʃɛlbæk, ən əɹ stʌmək ɹʌmbəld. ʃid nid tə ʃɛɹ əɹ mil wɪð nɑkoʊmi əz wɛl.

No. She hadn't said so. Aviendha turned her shellback, and her stomach rumbled. She'd need to share her meal with Nakomi as well.

"meɪ aɪ æsk," nɑkoʊmi sɛd. "wʌt dʒju θɪŋk ə ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn?"

"May I ask," Nakomi said. "What do you think of the Car'a'carn?"

aɪ lʌv hɪm, eɪvinhə θɔɾ ɪmiɾiətli. bʌt ʃi kʊdn seɪ ðæt, "aɪ θɪŋk hiz mʌtʃ ɑnɝ.

I love him, Aviendha thought immediately. But she couldn't say that, "I think he has much honor.

ən ðoʊ hiz ɪɡnɝən ə ðə pɹɑpɝ weɪz, hiz lɝnɪŋ."

And though he is ignorant of the proper ways, he is learning."

"ju hæv spɛn taɪm wɪð hɪm, ðɛn?"

"You have spent time with him, then?"

'sʌm," eɪvinhə sɛd. ðɛn, tə bi mɔɹ ɑnəst, ʃi æɾəd, "mɔɹ ðən moʊst-'

'Some," Aviendha said. Then, to be more honest, she added, "More than most-'

"hi ɪz ə wɛtləndɝ," nɑkoʊmi sɛd, θɔtfəl. "æn kɑɹəkɑɹn. tɛl mi, ɑɹ ðə wɛtlænz əz ɡlɔɹiəs əz soʊ mɛni seɪ? ɹɪvɝz soʊ waɪd jə kænɑt si ði ʌðɝ saɪd, plæns soʊ fʊl ʌv wɔɾɝ ðeɪ bɝst wən skwizd?"

"He is a wetlander," Nakomi said, thoughtful. "And Car'a'carn. Tell me, are the wetlands as glorious as so many say? Rivers so wide you cannot see the other side, plants so full of water they burst when squeezed?"

"ðə wɛtlænz ɑɹ nɑt ɡlɔɹiəs," eɪvinhə sɛd. "ðeɪ ɑɹ deɪnʒɝəs. ðeɪ meɪk əs wik."

"The wetlands are not glorious," Aviendha said. "They are dangerous. They make us weak."

nɑkoʊmi fɹaʊnd.

Nakomi frowned.

hu ɪz ðɪs wʊmən? ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ənjuʒəwəl tə faɪn il tʃɹævlɪŋ ðə weɪst; ivən tʃɪlʒɹən lɝn tə pɹətɛk ðɛmsɛlvz. bʌt ʃəd nɑkoʊmi nɑt bi tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð fɹɛnz, fæmli? ʃi dɪd nɑt wɛɹ ðə kloʊðɪŋ ʌv ə waɪz wʌn, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊɾ əɹ . . .

Who is this woman? It was not unusual to find Aiel traveling the Waste; even children learned to protect themselves. But should Nakomi not be traveling with friends, family? She did not wear the clothing of a Wise One, but there was something about her . . .

nɑkoʊmi stɝd ðə ti, ðən ɹipəzɪʃən eɪvinhəz ʃɛlbæk, pleɪsɪŋ ɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə koʊlz tə kʊk ɪt mɔɹ ivənli. fɹəm ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ pæk, ʃi dʒɹu fɔɹθ sɛvɹəl dipɹθ ɹuts. eɪvinhəz mʌðɝ hæɾ ɔlweɪz kʊk ðoʊz. nɑkoʊmi pleɪst əm ɪn ə smɔl sɝæmɪk beɪkɪŋ bɑks, ðən slɪd ðɪs ɪndə ðə koʊlz.

Nakomi stirred the tea, then repositioned Aviendha's shellback, placing it over the coals to cook it more evenly. From inside her pack, she drew forth several deepearth roots. Aviendha's mother had always cooked those. Nakomi placed them in a small ceramic baking box, then slid this into the coals.

eɪvinhə hædn ɹilaɪz ðə faɪɝ hæd ɡɹoʊn soʊ wɔɹm. wɛɹ hæɾ ɔl ðoʊz koʊlz kʌm fɹʌm?

Aviendha hadn't realized the fire had grown so warm. Where had all those coals come from?

"ju sim tʃɹʌbəld," nɑkoʊmi sɛd. "fɑɹ bi ɪt fəɹ mi tə kwɛstʃən ən əpɹɛntəs waɪz wʌn. bʌɾ aɪ də si wɝi ɪn jəɹ aɪz."

"You seem troubled," Nakomi said. "Far be it for me to question an apprentice Wise One. But I do see worry in your eyes."

eɪvinhə staɪfəld ə ɡɹɪmɑs. ʃi wʊɾə pɹəfɝd tə bi lɛft əloʊn. ən jɛt, ʃi hæɾ ɪnvaɪɾəd ðɪs wʊmən tə ʃɛɹ əɹ wɔɾɝ ən ʃeɪd. "aɪ æm wɝiɾ əbaʊɾ əɹ pipəl. deɪnʒɝəs taɪmz kʌm."

Aviendha stifled a grimace. She would have preferred to be left alone. And yet, she had invited this woman to share her water and shade. "I am worried about our people. Dangerous times come."

"ðə læs bæɾəl," nɑkoʊmi sɛd sɔfli. "ðə θɪŋ ðə wɛtləndɝz spik ʌv."

"The Last Battle," Nakomi said softly. "The thing the wetlanders speak of."

"jɛs. aɪ wɝi əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ bɪɑn ðæt. ðə wɛtlænz, kɝʌptɪŋ əɹ pipəl. meɪkɪŋ əm sɑft."

"Yes. I worry about something beyond that. The wetlands, corrupting our people. Making them soft."

"bʌt ðə wɛtlænz ɑɹ pɑɹɾ ʌv əɹ dɛstəni, ɑɹ ðeɪ nɑt? ðə θɪŋz ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn ɪz sɛd tə hæv ɹɪvild . . . ðeɪ lɪŋk əs tə ðə wɛtlænz ɪn kjʊɹiəs weɪz. əsumɪŋ wʌɾ i sɛd wɑz tʃɹu."

"But the wetlands are part of our destiny, are they not? The things the Car'a'carn is said to have revealed . . . they link us to the wetlands in curious ways. Assuming what he said was true."

"hi wəd nɑt laɪ əbaʊt ðɪs," eɪvinhə sɛd.

"He would not lie about this," Aviendha said.

ə smɔl weɪk ə bʌzɝdz kɔɾ ən flæpt pæst ɪn ðə dɑɹk naɪɾ ɛɹ. eɪvinhəz pipəlz hɪstɝi - ðə θɪŋz ɹænd ælθɹ hæd ɹɪvild - stɪl kɑz mɛni ʌv ði il ɡɹif. ɪn ɹɪɾiən, eɪvinhə wəd sun si ðɪs hɪstɝi fəɹ hɝsɛlf: ðət ði il hæd bɹoʊkən ðɛɹ vaʊz. eɪvinhəz pipəl hæd wʌns fɑloʊd, ðən əbændənd, ðə weɪ ʌv ðə lif.

A small wake of buzzards cawed and flapped past in the dark night air. Aviendha's people's history - the things Rand al'Thor had revealed - still caused many of the Aiel grief. In Rhuidean, Aviendha would soon see this history for herself: that the Aiel had broken their vows. Aviendha's people had once followed, then abandoned, the Way of the Leaf.

ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ θɔts jə ɹeɪz, əpɹɛntəs," nɑkoʊmi sɛd, pɔɹɪŋ ðə ti. "aʊɝ læn hɪɹ ɪz kɔl ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd. θɹi-foʊld, fəɹ ðə θɹi θɪŋz ɪt dɪd tə ʌs. ɪt pʌnɪʃt əs fəɹ sɪn. ɪt tɛstəɾ əɹ kɝədʒ. ɪt fɔɹmd ən ænvəl tə ʃeɪp ʌs."

Interesting thoughts you raise, apprentice," Nakomi said, pouring the tea. "Our land here is called the Three-fold Land. Three-fold, for the three things it did to us. It punished us for sin. It tested our courage. It formed an anvil to shape us."

"ðə θɹi-foʊld læn meɪks əs stʃɹɔŋ. soʊ, baɪ livɪŋ ɪt, wi bɪkʌm wik."

"The Three-fold Land makes us strong. So, by leaving it, we become weak."

"bʌɾ ɪf wi hæd tə kʌm hɪɹ tə bi fɔɹdʒd ɪndə sʌmθɪŋ ə stʃɹɛŋkθ"

"But if we had to come here to be forged into something of strength"

nɑkoʊmi sɛd, "dʌz ðət nɑt sədʒɛs ðət ðə tɛsts wi wɝ tə feɪs-ɪn ðə wɛtlænz - wɝ əz deɪnʒɝəs əz ðə θɹi-foʊld-læn ɪtsɛlf? soʊ deɪndʒɛɹoʊ ən dɪfəkəl ðət wi hæd tə kʌm hɪɹ tə pɹipɛɹ fəɹ ðɛm?" ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ɑ, bʌɾ aɪ ʃəd nɑɾ ɑɹɡju wɪð ə waɪz wʌn, nɑɾ ivən ən əpɹɛntəs. aɪ hæv toʊ"

Nakomi said, "does that not suggest that the tests we were to face-in the wetlands - were as dangerous as the Three-fold-land itself? So dangero and difficult that we had to come here to prepare for them?" She shook her head. "Ah, but I should not argue with a Wise One, not even an apprentice. I have toh"

"ðɛɹ ɪz nɛvɝ toʊ fəɹ spikɪŋ waɪz wɝdz," eɪvinhə sɛd. "tɛl mi nɑkoʊmi, wɛɹ ɪz ɪt jə tʃɹævəl? wɪtʃ sɛpt ɪz jəɹ oʊn?"

"There is never toh for speaking wise words," Aviendha said. "Tell me Nakomi, where is it you travel? Which sept is your own?"

"aɪ æm fɑɹ fɹəm maɪ ɹuf," ðə wʊmən sɛd, wɪsfəl, "jɛt nɑt fɑɹ əɾ ɔl pɝhæps // ɪz fɑɹ fɹəm mi. aɪ kænɑɾ ænsɝ jəɹ kwɛstʃən, əpɹɛntəs, fəɹ ɪts nɑt maɪ pleɪs tə ɡɪv ðɪs tʃɹuθ."

"I am far from my roof," the woman said, wistful, "yet not far at all Perhaps // is far from me. I cannot answer your question, apprentice, for it is not my place to give this truth."

eɪvinhə fɹaʊnd. wʌt kaɪndə ænsɝ wɑz ðæt?

Aviendha frowned. What kind of answer was that?

"ɪt simz tə mi," nɑkoʊmi sɛd, "ðæt baɪ bɹeɪkɪŋ əɹ eɪntʃən oʊðz tə də noʊ vaɪələns, əɹ pipəl əv ɡeɪnd ɡɹeɪt toʊ"

"It seems to me," Nakomi said, "that by breaking our ancient oaths to do no violence, our people have gained great toh"

"jɛs," eɪvinhə sɛd. wʌd jə də wən jəɹ ɪntaɪɝ pipəl hæd dʌn sʌmθɪŋ soʊ ɑfəl?

"Yes," Aviendha said. What did you do when your entire people had done something so awful?

ðɪs ɹiləzeɪʃən wɑz wʌt hæd kɑz soʊ mɛni ʌv ði il tə bi teɪkən baɪ ðə bliknəs. ðeɪ hæd θɹoʊn daʊn ðɛɹ spɪɹz, əɹ ɹəfjuz tə ɹimuv ðə waɪɾ ʌv ɡeɪʃeɪn, ɪmplaɪɪŋ ðət ðɛɹ pipəl hæd sətʃ ɡɹeɪt toʊ, ɪt kəd nɛvɝ bi mɛt.

This realization was what had caused so many of the Aiel to be taken by the bleakness. They had thrown down their spears, or refused to remove the white of gai'shain, implying that their people had such great toh, it could never be met.

bʌt ðeɪ wɝ ɹɔŋ. ði il toʊ kəd bi mɛt - ɪt hæd tə bi mɛt. ðət wɑz ðə pɝpəs ə sɝvɪŋ ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn, ðə ɹɛpɹəzɛntəɾɪv ə ðə wʌnz tə hum ði il hæɾ ɝɪdʒənəli swɔɹn ðɛɹ oʊðz.

But they were wrong. The Aiel toh could be met - it had to be met. That was the purpose of serving the Car'a'carn, the representative of the ones to whom the Aiel had originally sworn their oaths.

"wi wɪl miɾ əɹ toʊ" eɪvinhə sɛd. "baɪ faɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə læs bæɾəl."

"We will meet our toh" Aviendha said. "By fighting in the Last Battle."

ði il wəd ðɛɹfɔɹ ɹɪɡeɪn ðɛɹ ɑnɝ. wʌns jə peɪd toʊ, jə fɝɡɑɾ ɪt. tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ə fɔl ðət hæd bɪn ɹipeɪd-wɑz ɛɹəɡənt. ðeɪ wəd bi fɪnɪʃt. ðeɪ kəd ɹɪtɝn ən noʊ lɔŋɡɝ fil ʃeɪm fəɹ wʌt hæd hæpən ɪn ðə pæst. eɪvinhə nɑɾəd tə hɝsɛlf.

The Aiel would therefore regain their honor. Once you paid toh, you forgot it. To remember a fault that had been repaid-was arrogant. They would be finished. They could return and no longer feel shame for what had happened in the past. Aviendha nodded to herself.

"æn soʊ," nɑkoʊmi sɛd, hændɪŋ oʊvɝ ə kʌp ə ti, "ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd wɑz əɹ pʌnɪʃmənt. wi keɪm hɪɹ tə ɡɹoʊ soʊ ðət wi kəd miɾ əɹ toʊ"

"And so," Nakomi said, handing over a cup of tea, "the Three-fold Land was our punishment. We came here to grow so that we could meet our toh"

"jɛs," eɪvinhə sɛd. ɪt fɛl klɪɹ tə hɝ.

"Yes," Aviendha said. It felt clear to her.

"soʊ, wʌns wɪv fɔt fəɹ ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn, wɪl əv mɛt ðət toʊ. ən ðɛɹfɔɹ wɪl əv noʊ ɹizən tə bi pʌnɪʃt fɝðɝ. ɪf ðəɾ ɪz ðə keɪs, waɪ wəd wi ɹɪtɝn tə ðɪs lænd? wəd ðət nɑt bi laɪk sikɪŋ mɔɹ pʌnɪʃmənt, wʌns toʊ ɪz mɛt?"

"So, once we have fought for the Car'a'carn, we will have met that toh. And therefore will have no reason to be punished further. If that is the case, why would we return to this land? Would that not be like seeking more punishment, once toh is met?"

eɪvinhə fɹoʊz. bʌt noʊ, ðət wɑz sɪli. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɑɹɡju wɪð nɑkoʊmi ɑn ðə pɔɪnt, bʌt ði il bɪlɔŋd ɪn ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd.

Aviendha froze. But no, that was silly. She did not want to argue with Nakomi on the point, but the Aiel belonged in the Three-fold Land.

"pipəl ə ðə dʒɹæɡən," nɑkoʊmi sɛd, sɪpɪŋ əɹ ti. "ðæɾ ɪz wʌt wi ɑɹ, sɝvɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən wɑz ðə pɔɪn bɪhaɪn ɛvɹiθɪŋ wi dɪd. əɹ kʌs-tɑmz, əɹ ɹeɪdz ɑn itʃ ʌðɝ, əɹ hɑɹʃ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ . . . əɹ vɛɹi weɪ ʌv laɪf"

"People of the Dragon," Nakomi said, sipping her tea. "That is what we are, Serving the Dragon was the point behind everything we did. Our cus-toms, our raids on each other, our harsh training . . . our very way of life"

"jɛs," eɪvinhə sɛd.

"Yes," Aviendha said.

'æn soʊ," nɑkoʊmi sɛd sɔfli, "wʌns saɪtblɪndɝ ɪz dɪfiɾəd, wʌɾ ɪz lɛft fəɹ ʌs? pɝhæps ðɪs ɪz waɪ soʊ mɛni ɹəfjuz tə fɑloʊ ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn. kəz ðeɪ wɝiɾ ət wʌɾ ɪt mɛnt. waɪ kəntɪnju ði oʊld weɪz? haʊ də wi faɪn ɑnɝ ɪn ɹeɪɾɪŋ, ɪn kɪlɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ, ɪf wəɹ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ pɹi-nɑɹɪŋ fəɹ sətʃ ən ɪmpɔɹɾənt tæsk? waɪ ɡɹoʊ hɑɹɾɝ? fəɹ ðə seɪk ə biɪŋ hɑɹɾ ɪtsɛlf?"

'And so," Nakomi said softly, "once Sightblinder is defeated, what is left for us? Perhaps this is why so many refused to follow the Car'a'carn. Because they worried at what it meant. Why continue the old ways? How do we find honor in raiding, in killing one another, if we are no longer pre-naring for such an important task? Why grow harder? For the sake of being hard itself?"

"aɪ . . ."

"I . . ."

"aɪm sɑɹi," nɑkoʊmi sɛd. "aɪv lɛt maɪsɛlf ɹæmbəl əɡɛn. aɪm pɹoʊn tə ɪt, aɪ fɪɹ. hɪɹ, lɛɾ əs it."

"I'm sorry," Nakomi said. "I've let myself ramble again. I am prone to it, I fear. Here, let us eat."

eɪvinhə stɑɹɾəd. ʃʊɹli ðə ɹuts wɝn dʌn jɛt. haʊɛvɝ, nɑkoʊmi pʊld əm aʊt, ən ðeɪ smɛld wʌndɝfəl. ʃi kʌt ðə ʃɛlbæk, fɪʃɪŋ ə pɛɹ ə tɪn pleɪts fɹəm əɹ pæk. ʃi sizən ðə miɾ ən ɹuts, ðən pæst ə pleɪt tə eɪvinhə.

Aviendha started. Surely the roots weren't done yet. However, Nakomi pulled them out, and they smelled wonderful. She cut the shellback, fishing a pair of tin plates from her pack. She seasoned the meat and roots, then passed a plate to Aviendha.

ʃi teɪstəd hɛzɪɾəntli. ðə fud wɑz dɪlɪʃəs. wʌndɝfəl, ivən. bɛɾɝ ðən mɛni ə fist ʃid hæɾ ɪn faɪn pæləsəz bæk ɪn ðə wɛtlænz. ʃi stɛɹɾ ət ðə pleɪt, əmeɪzd.

She tasted hesitantly. The food was delicious. Wonderful, even. Better than many a feast she'd had in fine palaces back in the wetlands. She stared at the plate, amazed.

"ɪf jəl ɪkskjus mi," nɑkoʊmi sɛd. "aɪ nid tə si tə neɪtʃɝ." ʃi smaɪld, ɹaɪzɪŋ, ðən ʃʌfəld ɔf ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs.

"If you'll excuse me," Nakomi said. "I need to see to nature." She smiled, rising, then shuffled off into the darkness.

eɪvinhə eɪt kwaɪətli, dɪstɝbd baɪ wʌt hæd bɪn sɛd. wɑz nɑɾ ə wʌndɝfəl mil laɪk ðɪs, kʊkt oʊvɝ ə faɪɝ ən meɪd fɹəm hʌmbəl ɪnɡɹiɾiənts, pɹuf ðət ðə lʌɡʒɝi ʌv ðə wɛtlænz wɑznt niɾəd?

Aviendha ate quietly, disturbed by what had been said. Was not a wonderful meal like this, cooked over a fire and made from humble ingredients, proof that the luxury of the wetlands wasn't needed?

bʌt wʌt wɑz ðə pɝpəs ə ði il naʊ? ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt weɪt fəɹ ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn, wʌd ðeɪ du? faɪt, jɛs. ən ðɛn? kəntɪnju tə kɪl wʌn ənʌðɝ ɑn ɹeɪdz? tə wʌɾ ɛnd?

But what was the purpose of the Aiel now? If they did not wait for the Car'a'carn, what did they do? Fight, yes. And then? Continue to kill one another on raids? To what end?

ʃi fɪnɪʃt əɹ mil, ðən θɔt fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm. tu lɔŋ. nɑkoʊmi dɪd nɑt ɹɪtɝn. wɝid, eɪvinhə wɛn tə sɝtʃ fəɹ hɝ, bʌt faʊnd noʊ tʃɹeɪs ə ðə wʊmən.

She finished her meal, then thought for a long time. Too long. Nakomi did not return. Worried, Aviendha went to search for her, but found no trace of the woman.

əpɑn ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ðə faɪɝ, eɪvinhə sɔ ðət nɑkoʊmiz pæk ən pleɪt wɝ ɡɔn. ʃi weɪɾəd ʌp fəɹ ə taɪm, bʌt ðə wʊmən dɪd nɑt ɹɪtɝn.

Upon returning to the fire, Aviendha saw that Nakomi's pack and plate were gone. She waited up for a time, but the woman did not return.

ɪvɛntʃəwəli, eɪvinhə wɛn tə slip, filɪŋ tʃɹʌbəld.

Eventually, Aviendha went to sleep, feeling troubled.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾi


CHAPTER 40

eɪ meɪkɪŋ


A Making

pɛɹɪn sæɾ əloʊn ɑn ə tʃɹi stʌmp, aɪz kloʊzd ən feɪs tə ðə dɑɹk skaɪ. ðə kæmp wɑz sɪtʃueɪɾɪd, ðə ɡeɪtweɪ kloʊzd, ən ɹɪpɔɹts teɪkən. pɛɹɪn faɪnəli hæd taɪm tə ɹɛst.

Perrin sat alone on a tree stump, eyes closed and face to the dark sky. The camp was situated, the gateway closed, and reports taken. Perrin finally had time to rest.

ðət wɑz deɪnʒɝəs. ɹɛstɪŋ lɛɾ ɪm θɪŋk. θɪŋkɪŋ bɹɔɾ ɪm mɛmɹiz. mɛmɹiz bɹɔt peɪn.

That was dangerous. Resting let him think. Thinking brought him memories. Memories brought pain.

hi kəd smɛl ðə wɝld ɑn ðə wɪnd. leɪɝz ə sɛns, swɝlɪŋ təɡɛðɝ. ðə kæmp ɝaʊn hɪm:

He could smell the world on the wind. Layers of scents, swirling together. The camp around him:

swɛɾi pipəl, spaɪsəz fəɹ kʊkɪŋ, soʊps fəɹ klinɪŋ, hɔɹs dʌŋ, ɪmoʊʃənz. ðə hɪlz ɝaʊn ðɛm:

sweaty people, spices for cooking, soaps for cleaning, horse dung, emotions. The hills around them:

dʒɹaɪd paɪn niɾəlz, mʌd fɹəm ə stʃɹim, ðə kɑɹkəs ʌv ə dɛɾ ænəməl. ðə wɝl bɪɑnd: hɪns ə dʌs fɹəm ðə dɪstən ɹoʊd, ə stæn ə lævəndɝ ðət sʌmhaʊ sɝvaɪvd ɪn ðə daɪɪŋ wɝld.

dried pine needles, mud from a stream, the carcass of a dead animal. The world beyond: hints of dust from the distant road, a stand of lavender that somehow survived in the dying world.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɑlən. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ wʊlvz. boʊθ sim tɛɹəbəl saɪnz tə hɪm.

There was no pollen. There were no wolves. Both seemed terrible signs to him.

hi fɛl sɪk. fɪzɪkəli ɪl, əz ɪf ɪz stʌmək wɝ fɪld wɪð mʌɾi swɑmp wɔɾɝ, ɹɑɾɪŋ mɔs ən bɪts ə dɛd biɾəlz. hi wɑntəd tə skɹim. hi wɑntəd tə faɪn sleɪɝ ən kɪl hɪm, paʊn fɪsts ɑn ðə mænz feɪs əntɪl ðə blʌɾ ɪnɡʌlft ɪt.

He felt sick. Physically ill, as if his stomach were filled with muddy swamp water, rotting moss and bits of dead beetles. He wanted to scream. He wanted to find Slayer and kill him, pound fists on the man's face until the blood engulfed it.

fʊtstɛps əpɹoʊtʃt. feɪl. "pɛɹɪn? dʒju wɑnə tɔk?"

Footsteps approached. Faile. "Perrin? Do you want to talk?"

hi oʊpən ɪz aɪz. hi ʃəd bi kɹaɪɪŋ, skɹimɪŋ. bʌɾ i fɛl soʊ koʊld. koʊld ən fjʊɹiəs. ðoʊz tu dɪdnt ɡoʊ təɡɛðɝ fəɹ hɪm.

He opened his eyes. He should be crying, screaming. But he felt so cold. Cold and furious. Those two didn't go together for him.

hɪz tɛn hæd bɪn sɛɾ ʌp nɪɹbaɪ; ɪts flæps flʌɾɝd ɪn ðə wɪnd. nɪɹbaɪ, ɡɔl ɹɛklən əɡɛnst ə lɛðɝlif sæpəlɪŋ. ɪn ðə dɪstəns, wʌn ə ðə fɛɹɹi-ɝz wɝk leɪt. sɑf pilz ɪn ðə naɪt. "aɪ feɪld, feɪl," pɛɹɪn wɪspɝd. "ju ɡɑt ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil" ʃi sɛd, nilɪŋ bɪsaɪd hɪm. "ju seɪv ðə pipəl."

His tent had been set up nearby; its flaps fluttered in the wind. Nearby, Gaul reclined against a leatherleaf sapling. In the distance, one of the farri-ers worked late. Soft peals in the night. "I failed, Faile," Perrin whispered. "You got the ter'angreal" she said, kneeling beside him. "You saved the people."

"æn stɪl sleɪɝ biɾ ʌs," hi sɛd bɪɾɝli. "ə pæk ə faɪv ʌv əs təɡɛðɝ wɝn ɪnʌf tə faɪt hɪm."

"And still Slayer beat us," he said bitterly. "A pack of five of us together weren't enough to fight him."

pɛɹɪn hæd fɛl ðɪs weɪ wən hid faʊn ɪz fæmli dɛd, kɪl baɪ tʃɹɑləks. haʊ mɛni wɑz ðə ʃædoʊ gɑnə teɪk fɹəm ɪm baɪ ðə taɪm ðɪs wɑz dʌn? hɑpɝ ʃʊɾə bɪn seɪf ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim.

Perrin had felt this way when he'd found his family dead, killed by Trollocs. How many was the Shadow going to take from him by the time this was done? Hopper should have been safe in the wolf dream.

fulɪʃ kʌb, fulɪʃ kʌb.

Foolish cub, foolish cub.

hæd ðəɹ ivən ɹɪli bɪn ə tʃɹæp fəɹ pɛɹɪnz ɑɹmi? sleɪɝz dʒɹimspaɪk cʊɾə bɪn mɛn fəɹ ənʌðɝ pɝpəs ɪntaɪɝli. dʒʌst ə koʊɪnsɪɾəns.

Had there even really been a trap for Perrin's army? Slayer's dreamspike could have been meant for another purpose entirely. Just a coincidence.

ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ koʊɪnsəɾənsɪz fəɹ tɑvɝən . . .

There are no coincidences for ta'veren . . .

hi niɾəd tə faɪn sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɪz æŋɡɝ ən ɪz peɪn. hi stʊd, tɝnɪŋ, ən wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə si haʊ mɛni laɪts stɪl ʃoʊn ɪn kæmp. ə ɡɹup ə pipəl weɪɾəd nɪɹbaɪ, fɑɹ ɪnʌf əweɪ fɹəm ɪm ðəɾ i hædn meɪɾ aʊt ðɛɹ sɛns spəsɪfɪkli. æliændɝ ɪn ə ɡoʊldən ɡaʊn. bɪɹ- leɪn ɪn blu. boʊθ sæɾ ɑn tʃɛɹz bɪsaɪɾ ə smɔl wʊɾən tʃɹævəl teɪbəl, sɛt wɪð ə læntɝn. ɛlaɪəs sæɾ ɑn ə ɹɑk bɪsaɪd ðɛm, ʃɑɹpənɪŋ ɪz naɪf. ə dʌzən ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn - wɪl ælsin, dʒɑn aɪɛlɪn ən ɡɹeɪɔɹ fɹɛn əmʌŋ əm - hʌɾəld ɝaʊn ə faɪɹɛpɪt, ɡlænsɪŋ ət hɪm. ivən ɑɹɡændə ən ɡæl- lɛn wɝ ðɛɹ, spikɪŋ sɔfli.

He needed to find something to do with his anger and his pain. He stood, turning, and was surprised to see how many lights still shone in camp. A group of people waited nearby, far enough away from him that he hadn't made out their scents specifically. Alliandre in a golden gown. Bere- lain in blue. Both sat on chairs beside a small wooden travel table, set with a lantern. Elyas sat on a rock beside them, sharpening his knife. A dozen of the Two Rivers men - Wil al'Seen, Jon Ayellin and Grayor Frenn among them - huddled around a firepit, glancing at him. Even Arganda and Gal- lenne were there, speaking softly.

"ðeɪ ʃəd bi slipɪŋ," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"They should be sleeping," Perrin said.

"ðeɪɹ wɝiɾ əbaʊt ju," feɪl sɛd. ʃi smɛld wɝiɾ əz wɛl. "æn ðəɹ wɝid jəl sɛn əm əweɪ, naʊ ðət ɡeɪtweɪz wɝk əɡɛn."

"They're worried about you," Faile said. She smelled worried as well. "And they're worried you will send them away, now that gateways work again."

"fulz," pɛɹɪn wɪspɝd. "fulz tə fɑloʊ mi. fulz nɑt tə haɪd."

"Fools," Perrin whispered. "Fools to follow me. Fools not to hide."

"jud ɹɪli hæv əm də ðæt?" feɪl sɛd, æŋɡɹi. "kaʊɝ sʌmpleɪs waɪl ðə læs bæɾəl hæpənz? dɪdn jə seɪ ɛvɹi mæn wəd bi niɾəd?"

"You'd really have them do that?" Faile said, angry. "Cower someplace while the Last Battle happens? Didn't you say every man would be needed?"

ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt. ɛvɹi mæn wəd bi niɾəd. hi ɹilaɪz ðət pɑɹɾ ə hɪz fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən wɑz ðəɾ i dɪdnt noʊ wʌt hiɾ ɪskeɪpt. hid ɡɑɾən əweɪ, bʌt fɹəm wʌt? fəɹ wʌt hæd hɑpɝ daɪd? nɑt noʊɪŋ ði ɛnəmiz plæn meɪd pɛɹɪn fil blaɪnd.

She was right. Every man would be needed. He realized that part of his frustration was that he didn't know what he'd escaped. He'd gotten away, but from what? For what had Hopper died? Not knowing the enemy's plan made Perrin feel blind.

hi wɔkt əweɪ fɹəm ðə stʌmp, oʊvɝ tə wɛɹ ɑɹɡændə ən ɡælɛn wɝ tɔkɪŋ. "bɹɪŋ mi əɹ mæp," hi sɛd. "ʌv ðə dʒəhænə ɹoʊd."

He walked away from the stump, over to where Arganda and Gallenne were talking. "Bring me our map," he said. "Of the Jehannah Road."

ɑɹɡændə kɔld oʊvɝ hɝʃənɪn ən toʊld ɪm wɛɹ tə faɪnd wʌn. hɝ-ʃænɪn ɹæn ɔf, ən pɛɹɪn bɪɡæn tə wɔk θɹu kæmp. təwɔɹd ðə saʊn ə mɛɾəl hɪɾɪŋ mɛɾəl, ðə fɛɹiɝ wɝkɪŋ. pɛɹɪn sim dʒɹɔn tə ɪt. ðə sɛns ə kæmp swɝld ɝaʊn hɪm, ðə skaɪ ɹʌmbəlɪŋ əbʌv hɪm.

Arganda called over Hirshanin and told him where to find one. Hir-shanin ran off, and Perrin began to walk through camp. Toward the sound of metal hitting metal, the farrier working. Perrin seemed drawn to it. The scents of camp swirled around him, the sky rumbling above him.

ði ʌðɝz tʃɹeɪld æftɝ hɪm. feɪl, bɹəleɪn ən æliændɝ, ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn, ɛlaɪəs, ɡɔl. ðə ɡɹup ɡɹu, ʌðɝ tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn dʒɔɪnɪŋ ɪt noʊbɑdi spoʊk, ən pɛɹɪn ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛm, əntɪl i keɪm tə æɛmɪn wɝkɪŋ əɾ ən ænvəl, wʌn ə ðə kæmps hɔɹs-pʊl fɔɹdʒɪz sɛɾ ʌp bɪsaɪɾ ɪm ən bɝnɪŋ wɪð ə ɹɛd laɪt.

The others trailed after him. Faile, Berelain and Alliandre, the Two Rivers men, Elyas, Gaul. The group grew, other Two Rivers men joining it Nobody spoke, and Perrin ignored them, until he came to Aemin working at an anvil, one of the camp's horse-pulled forges set up beside him and burning with a red light.

hɝʃənɪn kɑɾ ʌp tə pɛɹɪn əz i ɝaɪvd, kæɹiɪŋ ðə mæp. pɛɹɪn ənɹoʊld ɪt, hoʊldɪŋ ɪt bɪfɔɹ ɪm əz æɛmɪn stɑpt ɪz wɝk, smɛlɪn kjʊɹiəs. "ɑɹɡændə, ɡælɛn," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "tɛl mi. ɪf jə wɝ gɑnə sɛɾ ʌp ðə bɛst æmbʊʃ fəɹ ə lɑɹdʒ ɡɹup muvɪŋ əlɔŋ ðɪs ɹoʊd təwɔɹd luɡɹd, wɛɹ wəd jə pleɪs ɪt?"

Hirshanin caught up to Perrin as he arrived, carrying the map. Perrin unrolled it, holding it before him as Aemin stopped his work, smellin curious. "Arganda, Gallenne," Perrin said. "Tell me. If you were going to set up the best ambush for a large group moving along this road toward Lugard, where would you place it?"

"hɪɹ," ɑɹɡændə sɛd wɪθaʊt hɛzəteɪʃən, pɔɪntɪŋ tə ə loʊkeɪʃən sɛvɹəl aʊɝz fɹəm wɛɹ ðeɪd bɪn kæmpɪŋ. "si hɪɹ? ðə ɹoʊd tɝnz tə fɑloʊ ən oʊld, dʒɹaɪd-aʊt stʃɹimd. ən ɑɹmi pæsɪŋ θɹu ðəɹ wəd bi toʊɾəli ɪkspoʊz tə ən æmbʊʃ; jud bi eɪbəl tə ətæk əm fɹəm ðə haɪts hɪɹ ən hɪɹ."

"Here," Arganda said without hesitation, pointing to a location several hours from where they'd been camping. "See here? The road turns to follow an old, dried-out streambed. An army passing through there would be totally exposed to an ambush; you'd be able to attack them from the heights here and here."

ɡælɛn nɑɾəd. "jɛs. ðɪs ɪz mɑɹkt əz ən ɛksələn pleɪs fəɹ ə lɑɹdʒ ɡɹup tə kæmp. ət ðə beɪs ə ðət hɪl wɛɹ ðə ɹoʊd bɛnz. bʌɾ ɪf sʌmwʌnz ɑn ðə haɪts əbʌv wɪð ə maɪn tə dʒju hɑɹm, jə maɪt nɑt weɪk ʌp ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ."

Gallenne nodded. "Yes. This is marked as an excellent place for a large group to camp. At the base of that hill where the road bends. But if someone's on the heights above with a mind to do you harm, you might not wake up in the morning."

ɑɹɡændə nɑɾəd.

Arganda nodded.

ðə haɪts ɹoʊz flæt-tɑp tə ðə nɔɹθ ə ðə ɹoʊd; ði oʊld ɹɪvɝbɛd hæd kʌɾ ə waɪd, lɛvəl pæθweɪ ðət wɑz wɑʃt aʊt tə ðə saʊθ ən wɛst. jə kəd fɪɾ ən ɑɹmi ɑn ðoʊz haɪts.

The heights rose flat-topped to the north of the road; the old riverbed had cut a wide, level pathway that was washed out to the south and west. You could fit an army on those heights.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ ðiz?" pɛɹɪn æskt, pɔɪntɪŋ tə səm mɑɹks saʊθ ə ðə ɹoʊd.

"What are these?" Perrin asked, pointing to some marks south of the road.

"oʊld ɹuənz," ɑɹɡændə sɛd. "nʌθɪŋ ə ɹɛləvəns; ðeɪv dɪɡɹeɪɾəd tu fɑɹ tə pɹəvaɪd kʌvɝ.

"Old ruins," Arganda said. "Nothing of relevance; they've degraded too far to provide cover.

ðəɹ ɹɪli dʒʌst ə fju mɔs-kʌvɝd boʊldɝz."

They're really just a few moss-covered boulders."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. sʌmθɪŋ wɑz kʌmɪŋ təɡɛðɝ fəɹ hɪm. "ɑɹ ɡɹeɪɾi ən nild əslip?" hi æskt.

Perrin nodded. Something was coming together for him. "Are Grady and Neald asleep?" he asked.

"noʊ," bɹəleɪn sɛd. "ðeɪ sɛd ðeɪ wɑntəd tə steɪ əweɪk, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs. aɪ θɪŋk jəɹ mud ɡeɪv əm ə fɹaɪt."

"No," Berelain said. "They said they wanted to stay awake, just in case. I think your mood gave them a fright."

"sɛn fəɹ ðɛm," pɛɹɪn sɛd tə noʊbɑdi ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ. "wʌn ə ðɛm nidz tə tʃɛk ɑn ðə waɪtkloʊk ɑɹmi. aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ sʌmwʌn tɛlɪŋ mi ðeɪ hæd bɹoʊkən kæmp." hi dɪdnt weɪt tə si ɪf ði ɔɹɾɝ wɑz fɑloʊd. hi stɛpt ʌp tə ðə fɔɹdʒ, leɪɪŋ ə hæn ɑn æɛmɪnz ʃoʊldɝ. "ɡɛt səm slip, æɛmɪn. aɪ nid sʌmθɪŋ tə wɝk ɑn. hɔɹsʃuz, ɪz ɪt?"

"Send for them," Perrin said to nobody in particular. "One of them needs to check on the Whitecloak army. I remember someone telling me they had broken camp." He didn't wait to see if the order was followed. He stepped up to the forge, laying a hand on Aemin's shoulder. "Get some sleep, Aemin. I need something to work on. Horseshoes, is it?"

ðə mæn nɑɾəd, lʊkɪŋ pɝplɛkst. pɛɹɪn tʊk ðə mænz eɪpɹən ən ɡlʌvz, ən æɛmɪn dɪpɑɹɾəd.

The man nodded, looking perplexed. Perrin took the man's apron and gloves, and Aemin departed.

pɛɹɪn ɡɑɾ aʊɾ ɪz oʊn hæmɝ. ðə hæmɝ hid bɪn ɡɪvən ɪn tɛɹ, ə hæmɝ ðət hæd bɪn juz tə kɪl, bʌt hædn bɪn juz tə kɹieɪɾ ɪn sətʃ ə lɔŋ taɪm.

Perrin got out his own hammer. The hammer he'd been given in Tear, a hammer that had been used to kill, but hadn't been used to create in such a long time.

ðə hæmɝ kəd bi iðɝ ə wɛpən əɹ ə tul. pɛɹɪn hæɾ ə tʃɔɪs, dʒʌst əz ɛvɹiwʌn u fɑloʊɾ ɪm hæɾ ə tʃɔɪs. hɑpɝ hæɾ ə tʃɔɪs. ðə wʊlf hæd meɪd ðət tʃɔɪs, ɹɪskɪŋ mɔɹ ɪn dɪfɛns ə ðə laɪt ðən ɛni hjumən - -seɪv pɛɹɪn - wəɾ ɛvɝ ʌndɝstænd.

The hammer could be either a weapon or a tool. Perrin had a choice, just as everyone who followed him had a choice. Hopper had a choice. The wolf had made that choice, risking more in defense of the Light than any human - -save Perrin - would ever understand.

pɛɹɪn juz ðə tɑŋz tə pʊl ə smɔl lɛŋθ ə mɛɾəl fɹəm ðə koʊlz, ðən pleɪst ɪɾ ɑn ði ænvəl. hi ɹeɪzd ɪz ɑɹm ən bɪɡæn tə paʊnd.

Perrin used the tongs to pull a small length of metal from the coals, then placed it on the anvil. He raised his arm and began to pound.

ɪt hæd bɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm sɪns hid faʊn ɪz weɪ tə ə fɔɹdʒ. ɪn fækt, ðə læst i kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ duɪŋ ɛni səbstæntʃəl wɝk ət wʌn wɑz bæk ɪn tiɹ, ɑn ðət pisfəl deɪ wən hid lɛft ɪz ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾiz fəɹ ə ʃɔɹt taɪm ən wɝkt ət ðət smɪθi.

It had been a long time since he'd found his way to a forge. In fact, the last he could remember doing any substantial work at one was back in Tear, on that peaceful day when he'd left his responsibilities for a short time and worked at that smithy.

jə ɑɹ laɪk ə wʊlf, hʌzbənd. feɪl hæd toʊld ɪm ðæt, ɹɪfɝɪŋ tə haʊ foʊkəst i bɪkeɪm. ðət wɑz ə θɪŋ ʌv wʊlvz; ðeɪ kəd noʊ ðə pæst ən ðə fjutʃɝ, jɛt kip ðɛɹ ətɛnʃən ɑn ðə hʌnt.

You are like a wolf, husband. Faile had told him that, referring to how focused he became. That was a thing of wolves; they could know the past and the future, yet keep their attention on the hunt.

kəɾ i də ðə seɪm? əlaʊ hɪmsɛlf tə bi kənsumd wən niɾəd, jɛt kip bæləns ɪn ʌðɝ pɑɹts ə hɪz laɪf?

Could he do the same? Allow himself to be consumed when needed, yet keep balance in other parts of his life?

ðə wɝk bɪɡæn tə əbzɔɹb hɪm. ðə ɹɪðmɪk biɾɪŋ ə hæmɝ ɑn mɛɾəl. hi flæɾənd ðə lɛŋθ ʌv aɪɝn, əkeɪʒənəli ɹɪtɝnɪŋ ɪt tə ðə koʊlz ən ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ənʌðɝ wʌn, wɝkɪŋ ɑn sɛvɹəl ʃuz ət wʌns. hi hæd ðə mɛʒɝməns nɪɹbaɪ fəɹ ðə saɪzəz ʌv wʌt wɑz niɾəd. hi sloʊli bɛn ðə mɛɾəl əɡɛns ðə saɪɾ ə ði ænvəl, ʃeɪpɪŋ ɪt. hɪz ɑɹmz bɪɡæn tə swɛt, hɪz feɪs wɔɹm baɪ ðə faɪɝ ən ðə wɝk.

The work began to absorb him. The rhythmic beating of hammer on metal. He flattened the length of iron, occasionally returning it to the coals and getting out another one, working on several shoes at once. He had the measurements nearby for the sizes of what was needed. He slowly bent the metal against the side of the anvil, shaping it. His arms began to sweat, his face warmed by the fire and the work.

nild ən ɡɹeɪɾi ɝaɪvd, əlɔŋ wɪð ðə waɪz wʌnz ən mɑsʊɝi. əz pɛɹɪn wɝkt, hi noʊɾəst əm sɛndɪŋ səlɪn θɹu ə ɡeɪtweɪ tə tʃɛk ɑn ðə waɪtkloʊks. ʃi ɹɪtɝn ə ʃɔɹt taɪm leɪɾɝ, bʌt dɪleɪɾ əɹ ɹipɔɹt, sɪns pɛɹɪn wɑz bɪzi wɪð ɪz wɝk.

Neald and Grady arrived, along with the Wise Ones and Masuri. As Perrin worked, he noticed them sending Sulin through a gateway to check on the Whitecloaks. She returned a short time later, but delayed her report, since Perrin was busy with his work.

pɛɹɪn hɛld ʌp ə hɔɹsʃu, ðən fɹaʊnd. ðɪs wɑzn dɪfəkəlt ɪnʌf wɝk. ɪt wɑz suðɪŋ, jɛs, bʌt tədeɪ hi wɑntəd sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ tʃælənʒɪŋ. hi fɛlt ə nid tə kɹieɪt, əz ɪf tə bæləns ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən hid sin ɪn ðə wɝld, ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən hid hɛlp kɹieɪt. ðəɹ wɝ sɛvɹəl lɛŋθs ʌv ənwɝk stil stæk bɪsaɪd ðə fɔɹdʒ, faɪnɝ mətɪɹiəl ðən wʌt wɑz juz fəɹ ʃuz. ðeɪ wɝ pɹɑbli weɪɾɪŋ tə bi tɝn ɪndə sɔɹdz fəɹ ðə fɔɹmɝ ɹɛfjudʒiz.

Perrin held up a horseshoe, then frowned. This wasn't difficult enough work. It was soothing, yes, but today he wanted something more challenging. He felt a need to create, as if to balance the destruction he'd seen in the world, the destruction he'd helped create. There were several lengths of unworked steel stacked beside the forge, finer material than what was used for shoes. They were probably waiting to be turned into swords for the former refugees.

pɛɹɪn tʊk sɛvɹəl ə ðoʊz lɛŋθs ə stil ən sɛɾ əm ɪndə koʊlz. ðɪs fɔɹdʒ wɑzn əz naɪs əz wʌɾ i wɑz əkʌstəm tə; ðoʊ hi hæɾ ə bɛloʊz ən θɹi bæɹəlz fəɹ kwɛntʃɪŋ, ðə wɪn kul ðə mɛɾəl, ən ðə koʊlz dɪdnt ɡɛɾ əz hɑɾ əz hid laɪk. hi wɑtʃt wɪð dɪsæɾɪsfækʃən.

Perrin took several of those lengths of steel and set them into coals. This Forge wasnt as nice as what he was accustomed to; though he had a bellows and three barrels for quenching, the wind cooled the metal, and the coals didn't get as hot as he'd like. He watched with dissatisfaction.

"aɪ kən hɛlp jə wɪð ðæt, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn," nil sɛd fɹəm ðə saɪd.

"I can help you with that, Lord Perrin," Neald said from the side.

"hit ðə mɛɾəl ʌp, ɪf jə wɑnt."

"Heat the metal up, if you want."

pɛɹɪn aɪd hɪm, ðən nɑɾəd. hi plʌkt aʊɾ ə lɛŋθ ə stil, hoʊldɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp wɪð ɪz tɑŋz. "aɪ wɑn ɪɾ ə naɪs jɛloʊ-ɹɛd. nɑt soʊ hɑɾ ɪt ɡoʊz waɪt, maɪn ju."

Perrin eyed him, then nodded. He plucked out a length of steel, holding it up with his tongs. "I want it a nice yellow-red. Not so hot it goes white, mind you."

nil nɑɾəd. pɛɹɪn sɛt ðə bɑɹ ɑn ði ænvəl, tʊk aʊɾ ɪz hæmɝ ən bɪɡæn tə paʊn əɡɛn.

Neald nodded. Perrin set the bar on the anvil, took out his hammer and began to pound again.

nil stʊɾ ət ðə saɪd, kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ.

Neald stood at the side, concentrating.

pɛɹɪn lɔs hɪmsɛlf ɪn ðə wɝk. fɔɪdʒ ðə stil. ɔl ɛls feɪɾəd. ðə ɹɪðmɪk paʊndɪŋ ə hæmɝ ɑn mɛɾəl, laɪk ðə biɾɪŋ ə hɪz hɑɹt, ðət ʃɪmɝɪŋ mɛɾəl, wɔɹm ən deɪnʒɝəs. ɪn ðət foʊkəs, hi faʊn klɛɹəɾi. ðə wɝld wɑz kɹækɪŋ, bɹeɪkɪŋ fɝðɝ itʃ deɪ. ɪt niɾəd hɛlp, ɹaɪt naʊ. wʌns ə θɪŋ ʃæɾɝd, jə kʊdn pʊɾ ɪt bæk təɡɛðɝ.

Perrin lost himself in the work. Foige the steel. All else faded. The rhythmic pounding of hammer on metal, like the beating of his heart, That shimmering metal, warm and dangerous. In that focus, he found clarity. The world was cracking, breaking further each day. It needed help, right now. Once a thing shattered, you couldn't put it back together.

"nild," ɡɹeɪɾiz vɔɪs sɛd. ɪt wɑz ɝdʒənt, bʌt dɪstən tə pɛɹɪn. "nild, wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ?"

"Neald," Grady's voice said. It was urgent, but distant to Perrin. "Neald, what are you doing?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ," nild ɹɪplaɪd. "ɪt filz ɹaɪt."

"I don't know," Neald replied. "It feels right."

pɛɹɪn kəntɪnjud tə paʊnd, hɑɹɾɝ ən hɑɹɾɝ. hi foʊldəd ðə mɛɾəl, flæɾənɪŋ pisəz əɡɛnst wʌn ənʌðɝ. ɪt wɑz wʌndɝfəl ðə weɪ ði æʃəmən kɛpt ɪɾ əɾ ɪɡzækli ðə ɹaɪt tɛmpɹətʃɝ. ðət fɹid pɛɹɪn fɹəm niɾɪŋ tə ɹɪlaɪ ɑn oʊnli ə fju moʊməns ə pɝfək tɛmpɹətʃɝ bɪtwin hiɾɪŋz.

Perrin continued to pound, harder and harder. He folded the metal, flattening pieces against one another. It was wonderful the way the Asha'man kept it at exactly the right temperature. That freed Perrin from needing to rely on only a few moments of perfect temperature between heatings.

ðə mɛɾəl sim tə floʊ, ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf ʃeɪp baɪ hɪz wɪl əloʊn. wʌt wɑz i meɪkɪŋ? hi tʊk ði ʌðɝ tu lɛŋθs aʊɾ ə ðə fleɪmz, ðən bɪɡæn tə swɪtʃ bɪtwin ðə θɹi. ðə fɝst - ən lɑɹdʒəst  - hi foʊldəɾ əpɑn ɪtsɛlf, moʊldɪŋ ɪt, juzɪŋ ə pɹɑsɛs noʊn əz ʃɹɪŋkɪŋ wɛɹ i ɪnkɹist ɪts ɡɝθ.

The metal seemed to flow, almost as if shaped by his will alone. What was he making? He took the other two lengths out of the flames, then began to switch between the three. The first - and largest  - he folded upon itself, molding it, using a process known as shrinking where he increased its girth.

hi meɪɾ ɪɾ ɪndə ə lɑɹdʒ bɔl, ðən æɾəd mɔɹ stil tə ɪɾ əntɪl ɪt wɑz nɪɹli əz lɑɹdʒ əz ə mænz hɛd.

He made it into a large ball, then added more steel to it until it was nearly as large as a man's head.

ðə sɛkən i dʒɹu, meɪkɪŋ ɪt lɔŋ ən θɪn, ðən foʊldəɾ ɪɾ ɪndə ə nɛɹoʊ ɹɑd. ðə faɪnəl, smɔləs pis i flæɾənd.

The second he drew, making it long and thin, then folded it into a narrow rod. The final, smallest piece he flattened.

hi bɹiðd ɪn ən aʊt, hɪz lʌŋz wɝkɪŋ laɪk bɛloʊz. hɪz swɛt wɑz laɪk ðə kwɛntʃɪŋ wɔɾɝz.

He breathed in and out, his lungs working like bellows. His sweat was like the quenching waters.

hɪz ɑɹmz wɝ laɪk ði ænvəl. hi wɑz ðə fɔɹdʒ.

His arms were like the anvil. He was the forge.

"waɪz wʌnz, aɪ niɾ ə sɝkəl," nil sɛɾ ɝdʒənli. "naʊ. doʊn ɑɹɡju! aɪ niɾ ɪt!"

"Wise Ones, I need a circle," Neald said urgently. "Now. Don't argue! I need it!"

spɑɹks bɪɡæn tə flaɪ əz pɛɹɪn paʊndɪd. lɑɹdʒɝ ʃaʊɝz wɪð itʃ bloʊ. hi fɛl sʌmθɪŋ likɪŋ fɹəm hɪm, əz ɪf itʃ bloʊ ɪnfjuz ðə mɛɾəl wɪð ɪz oʊn stʃɹɛŋkθ, ən ɔlsoʊ hɪz oʊn filɪŋz. boʊθ wɝiz ən hoʊps. ðiz floʊd fɹəm ɪm ɪndə ðə θɹi ənɹaʊt pisəz.

Sparks began to fly as Perrin pounded. Larger showers with each blow. He felt something leaking from him, as if each blow infused the metal with his own strength, and also his own feelings. Both worries and hopes. These flowed from him into the three unwrought pieces.

ðə wɝld wɑz daɪɪŋ. hi kʊdn seɪv ɪt. ðət wɑz ɹændz dʒɑb. pɛɹɪn dʒʌst wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ bæk tə hɪz sɪmpəl laɪf, dɪdn hi?

The world was dying. He couldn't save it. That was Rand's job. Perrin just wanted to go back to his simple life, didn't he?

noʊ. noʊ, hi wɑntəd feɪl, hi wɑntəd kəmplɛksəɾi. hi wɑntəd laɪf. hi kʊdn haɪd, ɛni mɔɹ ðən ðə pipəl u fɑloʊɾ ɪm kəd haɪd.

No. No, he wanted Faile, he wanted complexity. He wanted life. He couldn't hide, any more than the people who followed him could hide.

hi dɪdnt wɑn ðɛɹ əlidʒəns. bʌɾ i hæɾ ɪt. haʊ wəɾ i fil ɪi sʌmwʌn ɛls tʊk kəmænd, ən ðən ɡɑɾ əm kɪld?

He didn't want their allegiance. But he had it. How would he feel ii someone else took command, and then got them killed?

bloʊ æftɝ bloʊ. spɹeɪz ə spɑɹks. tu mɛni, əz ɪf i wɝ paʊndɪŋ əɡɛnst ə bʌkəɾ ə moʊltən lɪkwəd. spɑɹks splæʃt ɪn ði ɛɹ, ɪksploʊɾɪŋ fɹəm ɪz hæmɝ, flaɪɪŋ əz haɪ əz tʃɹitɑps ən spɹɛɾɪŋ tɛnz ə peɪsɪz. ðə pipəl wɑtʃɪŋ wɪθdʒɹu, ɔl seɪv ði æʃəmən ən waɪz wʌnz, hu stʊd ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊnd nild.

Blow after blow. Sprays of sparks. Too many, as if he were pounding against a bucket of molten liquid. Sparks splashed in the air, exploding from his hammer, flying as high as treetops and spreading tens of paces. The people watching withdrew, all save the Asha'man and Wise Ones, who stood gathered around Neald.

aɪ doʊnt wɑnə lid ðɛm, pɛɹɪn θɔt. bʌɾ ɪf aɪ doʊnt, hu wɪl? ɪf aɪ əbændən ðɛm, ən ðeɪ fɔl, ðən ɪɾəl bi maɪ fɔlt.

I don't want to lead them, Perrin thought. But if I don't, who will? If I abandon them, and they fall, then it will be my fault.

pɛɹɪn sɔ naʊ wʌɾ i wɑz meɪkɪŋ, wʌt hid bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk ɔl əlɔŋ. hi wɝk ðə lɑɹdʒəs lʌmp ɪndə ə bɹɪk ʃeɪp. ðə lɔŋ pis bim ə ɹɑd, θɪk əz θɹi fɪŋɡɝz. ðə flæt pis bɪkeɪm ə kæpɪŋ bɹækɪt, ə pis ə mɛɾəl tə ɹæp ɝaʊn ðə hɛɾ ən dʒɔɪn ɪt tə ðə ʃæft.

Perrin saw now what he was making, what he'd been trying to make all along. He worked the largest lump into a brick shape. The long piece beame a rod, thick as three fingers. The flat piece became a capping bracket, a piece of metal to wrap around the head and join it to the shaft.

ə hæmɝ. hi wɑz meɪkɪŋ ə hæmɝ. ðiz wɝ ðə pɑɹts.

A hammer. He was making a hammer. These were the parts.

hi ʌndɝstʊd naʊ.

He understood now.

hi ɡɹu tə hɪz tæsk. bloʊ æftɝ bloʊ. ðoʊz bits wɝ soʊ laʊd. itʃ bloʊ sim tə ʃeɪk ðə ɡɹaʊn ɝaʊn hɪm, ɹætlɪŋ tɛns. pɛɹɪn ɪɡzʌltɪd. hi nu wʌɾ i wɑz meɪkɪŋ. hi faɪnəli nu wʌɾ i wɑz meɪkɪŋ.

He grew to his task. Blow after blow. Those beats were so loud. Each blow seemed to shake the ground around him, rattling tents. Perrin exulted. He knew what he was making. He finally knew what he was making.

hi hædn æsk tə bɪkʌm ə liɾɝ, bʌt dɪd ðəɾ əbzɑlv ɪm ə ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi? pipəl niɾəd hɪm. ðə wɝl niɾəd hɪm. ænd, wɪð ən ʌndɝstændɪŋ ðət kuld ɪn ɪm laɪk moʊltən ɹɑk fɔɹmɪŋ ɪndə ə ʃeɪp, hi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i wɑntəd tə lid.

He hadn't asked to become a leader, but did that absolve him of responsibility? People needed him. The world needed him. And, with an understanding that cooled in him like molten rock forming into a shape, he realized that he wanted to lead.

ɪf sʌmwʌn hæd tə bi lɔɹɾ ə ðiz pipəl, hi wɑntəd tə də ɪt hɪmsɛlf. kəz duɪŋ ɪt jɝsɛlf wɑz ði oʊnli weɪ tə si ðəɾ ɪt wɑz dʌn ɹaɪt.

If someone had to be lord of these people, he wanted to do it himself. Because doing it yourself was the only way to see that it was done right.

hi juzd ɪz tʃɪzəl ən ɹɑd, ʃeɪpɪŋ ə hoʊl θɹu ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə hæmɝz hɛd, ðən ɡɹæb ðə hæft ən - ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪt fɑɹ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd -  slæmd ɪt daʊn ɪndə pleɪs. hi tʊk ðə bɹækɪɾ ən leɪd ðə hæmɝ ɑn ɪt, ðən ʃeɪpt ɪt. mɪɹ moʊməns əɡoʊ, ðɪs pɹɑsɛs hæd fɛɾ ɔf ɪz æŋɡɝ. bʌt naʊ ɪt sim tə dʒɹɔ fɔɹθ ɪz ɹɛzəluʃən, hɪz dɪtɝməneɪʃən.

He used his chisel and rod, shaping a hole through the center of the hammer's head, then grabbed the haft and - raising it far over his head -  slammed it down into place. He took the bracket and laid the hammer on it, then shaped it. Mere moments ago, this process had fed off his anger. But now it seemed to draw forth his resolution, his determination.

mɛɾəl wɑz sʌmθɪŋ əlaɪv. ɛvɹi blæksmɪθ nu ðɪs. wʌns jə hiɾəd ɪt, waɪl jə wɝkt ɪt, ɪt lɪvd. hi tʊk ɪz hæmɝ ən tʃɪzəl ən bɪɡæn tə ʃeɪp pæɾɝnz, ɹɪdʒəz, mɑɾəfəkeɪʃənz. weɪvz ə spɑɹks flu fɹəm hɪm, ðə ɹɪŋɪŋ ə hɪz hæmɝ ɛvɝ stʃɹɔŋɝ, ɛvɝ laʊɾɝ, pilɪŋ laɪk bɛlz. hi juzd ɪz tʃɪzəl ɑn ə smɔl tʃʌŋk ə stil tə fɔɹm ə ʃeɪp, ðən pleɪst ɪt daʊn ɑn tɑp ə ðə hæmɝ.

Metal was something alive. Every blacksmith knew this. Once you heated it, while you worked it, it lived. He took his hammer and chisel and began to shape patterns, ridges, modifications. Waves of sparks flew from him, the ringing of his hammer ever stronger, ever louder, pealing like bells. He used his chisel on a small chunk of steel to form a shape, then placed it down on top of the hammer.

wɪð ə ɹɔɹ, hi ɹeɪzd ɪz oʊl hæmɝ wʌn læs taɪm oʊvɝ ɪz hɛɾ ən biɾ ɪt daʊn ɑn ðə nu wʌn, ɪmpɹɪntɪŋ ði ɔɹnəmɛnteɪʃən əpɑn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə hæmɝ. ə lipɪŋ wʊlf.

With a roar, he raised his old hammer one last time over his head and beat it down on the new one, imprinting the ornamentation upon the side of the hammer. A leaping wolf.

pɛɹɪn loʊɝɾ ɪz tulz. ɑn ði ænvəl - stɪl ɡloʊɪŋ wɪð ən ɪnɝ hit - -wɑz ə bjuɾəfəl hæmɝ. ə wɝk bɪɑn ɛniθɪŋ hiɾ ɛvɝ kɹieɪɾəd, əɹ θɔt ðəɾ i maɪt kɹieɪt. ɪt hæɾ ə θɪk, paʊɝfəl hɛd, laɪk ə mɔl əɹ slɛdʒ, bʌt ðə bæk wɑz fɔɹm kɹɔs-feɪs ən flæɾənd. laɪk ə blæksmɪθs tul. ɪt wɑz fɔɹ fit fɹəm bɑɾəm tə tɑp, meɪbi lɔŋɡɝ, ən ɪnɔɹməs saɪz fəɹ ə hæmɝ ə ðɪs taɪp.

Perrin lowered his tools. On the anvil - still glowing with an inner heat - -was a beautiful hammer. A work beyond anything he'd ever created, or thought that he might create. It had a thick, powerful head, like a maul or sledge, but the back was formed cross-face and flattened. Like a blacksmith's tool. It was four feet from bottom to top, maybe longer, an enormous size for a hammer of this type.

ðə hæft wɑz ɔl ə stil, sʌmθɪŋ hid nɛvɝ sin ɑn ə hæmɝ bi-fɔɹ. pɛɹɪn pɪkt ɪɾ ʌp; hi wɑz eɪbəl tə lɪft ɪt wɪð wʌn hænd, bʌt bɛɹli. ɪt wɑz hɛvi. sɑləd.

The haft was all of steel, something he'd never seen on a hammer be-fore. Perrin picked it up; he was able to lift it with one hand, but barely. It was heavy. Solid.

ði ɔɹnəmɛnteɪʃən wɑz ʌv ə kɹɔʃætʃ pæɾɝn wɪð ðə lipɪŋ wʊlf stæmpt ɑn wʌn saɪd. ɪt lʊk laɪk hɑpɝ. pɛɹɪn tʌtʃt ɪt wɪð ə kæl luz θʌm, ən ðə mɛɾəl kwaɪəɾəd. ɪt stɪl fɛlt wɔɹm tə ðə tʌtʃ, bʌt dɪd nɑt bɝn hɪm.

The ornamentation was of a Crosshatch pattern with the leaping wolf stamped on one side. It looked like Hopper. Perrin touched it with a cal lused thumb, and the metal quieted. It still felt warm to the touch, but did not burn him.

hi tɝn tə lʊk, ən wɑz əmeɪzd ət ðə saɪz ə ðə kɹaʊd wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn stʊɾ ət ðə fɹʌnt, dʒɔɹi kɔŋɡɝ, ɑzi ælθoʊn, wɪl ælsin ən hʌnʒɹədz mɔɹ. ɡildænɪn, kɛɹhinɪn, ændɔɹənz, meɪ-ɛnɝz. wɑtʃɪŋ, kwaɪət. ðə ɡɹaʊn ɝaʊn pɛɹɪn wɑz blækən fɹəm ðə fɔlɪŋ spɑɹks; dʒɹɑps ə sɪlvɝi mɛɾəl spɹɛɾ aʊt fɹəm ɪm laɪk ə sʌnbɝst.

He turned to look, and was amazed at the size of the crowd watching him. The Two Rivers men stood at the front, Jori Congar, Azi al'Thone, Wil al'Seen and hundreds more. Ghealdanin, Cairhienin, Andorans, May-eners. Watching, quiet. The ground around Perrin was blackened from the falling sparks; drops of silvery metal spread out from him like a sunburst.

nil fɛl tə hɪz niz, pæntɪŋ, hɪz feɪs koʊɾəd wɪð swɛt. ɡɹeɪɾi ən ðə wɪmən ə ðə sɝkəl sæt daʊn, lʊkɪŋ ɪɡzɔstəd. ɔl sɪks waɪz wʌnz hæd dʒɔɪn ɪn. wʌt hæd ðeɪ dʌn?

Neald fell to his knees, panting, his face coated with sweat. Grady and the women of the circle sat down, looking exhausted. All six Wise Ones had joined in. What had they done?

pɛɹɪn fɛlt ɪɡzɔstəd, əz ɪf ɔl ə hɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ ən ɪmoʊʃən hæd bɪn fɔɹdʒd ɪndə ðə mɛɾəl. bʌɾ i kəd nɑt ɹɛst. "wɪl. wiks əɡoʊ, aɪ ɡeɪv jə ən ɔɹɾɝ. bɝn ðə bænɝz ðət bɔɹ ðə wʊlfhɛd. dɪd jə oʊbeɪ? dɪd jə bɝn ɛvɹi wʌn?"

Perrin felt exhausted, as if all of his strength and emotion had been forged into the metal. But he could not rest. "Wil. Weeks ago, I gave you an order. Burn the banners that bore the wolfhead. Did you obey? Did you burn every one?"

wɪl ælsin mɛɾ ɪz aɪz, ðən lʊk daʊn, əʃeɪmd. "lɔɹd pɛɹɪn, aɪ tʃɹaɪd. bʌt. . . laɪt, aɪ kʊdn də ɪt. aɪ kɛpt wʌn. ðə wʌn aɪd hɛlp soʊ."

Wil al'Seen met his eyes, then looked down, ashamed. "Lord Perrin, I tried. But. . . Light, I couldn't do it. I kept one. The one I'd helped sew."

"fɛtʃ ɪt, wɪl," pɛɹɪn sɛd. hɪz oʊn vɔɪs saʊndəd laɪk stil.

"Fetch it, Wil," Perrin said. His own voice sounded like steel.

wɪl ɹæn, smɛlɪŋ fɹaɪɾənd. hi ɹɪtɝnd ʃɔɹtli, bɛɹɪŋ ə foʊldəd klɔθ, waɪt wɪð ə ɹɛd bɔɹɾɝ.

Wil ran, smelling frightened. He returned shortly, bearing a folded cloth, white with a red border.

pɛɹɪn tʊk ɪt, ðən hɛld ɪɾ ɪn ə ɹɛvɝən hænd, hæmɝ ɪn ði ʌðɝ. hi lʊkt ət ðə kɹaʊd. feɪl wɑz ðɛɹ, hænz klæsp bɪfɔɹ hɝ. ʃi smɛl hoʊpfəl. ʃi kəd si ɪndə hɪm. ʃi nu.

Perrin took it, then held it in a reverent hand, hammer in the other. He looked at the crowd. Faile was there, hands clasped before her. She smelled hopeful. She could see into him. She knew.

"aɪ hæv tʃɹaɪd tə sɛn jə əweɪ," pɛɹɪn ənaʊns tə ðə kɹaʊd. "ju wəd nɑt ɡoʊ. aɪ hæv feɪlɪŋz. jə mʌs noʊ ðɪs. ɪf wi mɑɹtʃ tə wɔɹ, əl nɑt bi eɪbəl tə pɹətɛk jə ɔl. əl meɪk mɪsteɪks."

"I have tried to send you away," Perrin announced to the crowd. "You would not go. I have failings. You must know this. If we march to war, I will not be able to protect you all. I will make mistakes."

hi lʊkt əkɹɔs ðə kɹaʊd, miɾɪŋ ði aɪz ə ðoʊz u stʊd ðɛɹ. itʃ mæn əɹ wʊmən i lʊkt ət nɑɾəd saɪlənli. noʊ ɹɪɡɹɛts, noʊ hɛzəteɪʃənz. ðeɪ nɑɾəd.

He looked across the crowd, meeting the eyes of those who stood there. Each man or woman he looked at nodded silently. No regrets, no hesitations. They nodded.

pɛɹɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "ɪf jə wɪʃ ðɪs, əl æksɛp jəɹ oʊðz. əl lid ju."

Perrin took a deep breath. "If you wish this, I will accept your oaths. I will lead you."

ðeɪ tʃɪɹd hɪm. ən ɪnɔɹməs ɹɔɹ ʌv ɪksaɪtmənt. "ɡoʊldeɪniz. ɡoʊldeɪniz ðə wʊlf! tə ðə læs bæɾəl! teɪʃɝ meɪnɛðɝən!"

They cheered him. An enormous roar of excitement. "Goldeneyes. Goldeneyes the wolf! To the Last Battle! Tai'shar Manetheren!"

"wɪl!" pɛɹɪn bɛloʊd, hoʊldɪŋ ʌp ðə bænɝ. "ɹeɪz ðɪs bænɝ haɪ. doʊn teɪk ɪt daʊn əɡɛn əntɪl ðə læs bæɾəl əz bɪn wʌn. aɪ mɑɹtʃ bɪniθ ðə saɪn ə ðə wʊlf. ðə ɹɛst ə ju, ɹaʊs ðə kæmp. ɡɛɾ ɛvɹi soʊlʒɝ ɹɛɾi tə faɪt. wɪv ənʌðɝ tæsk tənaɪt!"

"Wil!" Perrin bellowed, holding up the banner. "Raise this banner high. Don't take it down again until the Last Battle has been won. i march beneath the sign of the wolf. The rest of you, rouse the camp. Get every soldier ready to fight. We have another task tonight!"

ðə jʌŋ mæn tʊk ðə bænɝ ən ənfɝld ɪt, dʒɔɹi ən ɑzi dʒɔɪnɪŋ ɪm ən hoʊldɪŋ ɪt soʊ ɪt dɪdn tʌtʃ ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ðeɪ ɹeɪzd ɪt haɪ, ɹʌn- nɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ ə poʊl. ðə ɡɹup bɹoʊk ʌp, mɛn ɹʌnɪŋ ðɪs weɪ ən ðæt, ʃaʊɾɪŋ ðə sʌmənz.

The young man took the banner and unfurled it, Jori and Azi joining him and holding it so it didn't touch the ground. They raised it high, run- ning to get a pole. The group broke up, men running this way and that, shouting the summons.

pɛɹɪn tʊk feɪl baɪ ðə hæn əz ʃi wɔkt ʌp tə hɪm. ʃi smɛl sæɾəsfaɪd. "ðæts ɪt, ðɛn?"

Perrin took Faile by the hand as she walked up to him. She smelled satisfied. "That's it, then?"

"noʊ mɔɹ kəmpleɪnɪŋ," hi pɹɑməst. "aɪ doʊn laɪk ɪt. bʌɾ aɪ doʊn laɪk kɪlɪŋ, iðɝ. əl də wʌt mʌs bi dʌn." hi lʊk daʊn ət ði ænvəl, blækən fɹəm ɪz wɝk. hɪz oʊl hæmɝ, naʊ wɔɹn ən dɛntɪd, leɪ əkɹɔs ɪt. hi fɛl sæd tə liv ɪt, bʌɾ i hæd meɪɾ ɪz dɪsɪʒən.

"No more complaining," he promised. "I don't like it. But I don't like killing, either. I'll do what must be done." He looked down at the anvil, blackened from his work. His old hammer, now worn and dented, lay across it. He felt sad to leave it, but he had made his decision.

"wʌt dɪd jə du, nild?" hi æskt əz ði æʃəmən - stɪl lʊkɪŋ peɪl__- stʌmbəld ʌp tə hɪz fit. pɛɹɪn ɹeɪz ðə nu hæmɝ, ʃoʊɪŋ ðə mæɡnɪfəsənt wɝk.

"What did you do, Neald?" he asked as the Asha'man - still looking pale__- stumbled up to his feet. Perrin raised the new hammer, showing the magnificent work.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ, maɪ lɔɹd," nil sɛd. "ɪt dʒʌst . . . wɛl, ɪt wɑz laɪk aɪ sɛd. ɪt fɛlt ɹaɪt. aɪ sɔ wʌt tə du, haʊ tə pʊt ðə wivz ɪndə ðə mɛɾəl ɪtsɛlf. ɪt sim tə dʒɹɔ ðɛm ɪn, laɪk ən oʊʃən dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ɪn ðə wɔɾɝ ʌv ə stʃɹim." hi blʌʃt, əz ɪf i θɔɾ ɪɾ ə fulɪʃ fɪɡjɝ ə spitʃ.

"I don't know, my Lord," Neald said. "It just . . . well, it was like I said. It felt right. I saw what to do, how to put the weaves into the metal itself. It seemed to draw them in, like an ocean drinking in the water of a stream." He blushed, as if he thought it a foolish figure of speech.

"ðæt saʊnz ɹaɪt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɪt nidz ə neɪm, ðɪs hæmɝ. dʒju noʊ mʌtʃ ə ði oʊl tʌŋ?"

"That sounds right," Perrin said. "It needs a name, this hammer. Do you know much of the Old Tongue?"

"noʊ, maɪ lɔɹd."

"No, my Lord."

pɛɹɪn lʊkt ət ðə wʊlf ɪmpɹɪntɪɾ ɑn ðə saɪd. "dʌz ɛniwʌn noʊ haʊ jə seɪ 'hi hu sɔɹz'?"

Perrin looked at the wolf imprinted on the side. "Does anyone know how you say 'He who soars'?"

"aɪ ... aɪ doʊnt . . ."

"I ... I don't . . ."

"mæhælaɪnɝ" bɹəleɪn sɛd, stɛpɪŋ ʌp fɹəm wɛɹ ʃid bɪn wɑtʃɪŋ.

"Mah'alleinir" Berelain said, stepping up from where she'd been watching.

"mæhælaɪnɝ" pɛɹɪn ɹɪpiɾɪd. "ɪt filz ɹaɪt. səlɪn? wʌɾ ə ðə waɪt-kloʊks?"

"Mah'alleinir" Perrin repeated. "It feels right. Sulin? What of the White-cloaks?"

"ðeɪ hæv meɪd kæmp, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," ðə meɪɾən ɹɪplaɪd.

"They have made camp, Perrin Aybara," the Maiden replied.

"ʃoʊ mi," hi sɛd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ tə ɑɹɡændəz mæp.

"Show me," he said, gesturing to Arganda's map.

ʃi pɔɪntəɾ aʊt ðə loʊkeɪʃən: ə pis ə læn ɑn ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə hɪl, haɪts ɹʌnɪŋ tə ðə nɔɹθ ʌv ɪt, ɹoʊdweɪ kʌmɪŋ ɪn fɹəm ðə nɔɹθist, ɹæpɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə saʊθ ə ðə haɪts - fɑloʊɪŋ ði eɪntʃən ɹɪvɝbɛd - ən ðən bɛndɪŋ saʊθwɝd wən ɪt hɪt ðə kæmpsaɪt baɪ ðə hɪl. fɹəm ðɛɹ, ðə ɹoʊd hɛɾəd təwɔɹd luɡɹd, bʌt ðə kæmpsaɪt wɑz pɹətɛktəd fɹəm wɪn ɑn tu saɪdz. ɪt wɑz ə pɝfəkt kæmpsaɪt, bʌɾ ɔlsoʊ ə pɝfək pleɪs fəɹ ən æmbʊʃ. ðə wʌn ɑɹɡændə ən ɡælɛn hæd pɔɪntəɾ aʊt.

She pointed out the location: a piece of land on the side of a hill, heights running to the north of it, roadway coming in from the northeast, wrapping around the south of the heights - following the ancient riverbed - and then bending southward when it hit the campsite by the hill. From there, the road headed toward Lugard, but the campsite was protected from wind on two sides. It was a perfect campsite, but also a perfect place for an ambush. The one Arganda and Gallenne had pointed out.

hi lʊkt ət ðət pæsədʒweɪ ən kæmpsaɪt, θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv wʌt hæd hæpən ðə læs fju wiks.

He looked at that passageway and campsite, thinking of what had happened the last few weeks.

wi mɛt tʃɹævəlɝz. . . . sɛd ðət ðə mʌdz tə ðə nɔɹθ wɝ ɔlmoʊs kəmplitli ɪmpæsəbəl wɪð wæɡənz əɹ kɑɹts . . .

We met travelers. . . . said that the muds to the north were almost completely impassable with wagons or carts . . .

ə flɑk ə ʃip, ɹʌnɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə pæk ɪndə ðə dʒɔz ʌv ə bist. feɪl ən ði ʌðɝz, wɔkɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ə klɪf. laɪt!

A flock of sheep, running before the pack into the jaws of a beast. Faile and the others, walking toward a cliff. Light!

"ɡɹeɪɾi, nild," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪm gɑnə niɾ ənʌðɝ ɡeɪtweɪ, kən jə mænədʒ?"

"Grady, Neald," Perrin said. "I'm going to need another gateway, Can you manage?"

"aɪ θɪŋk soʊ," nil sɛd. "dʒʌst ɡɪv əs ə fju mɪnəts tə kætʃ əɹ bɹɛθ."

"I think so," Neald said. "Just give us a few minutes to catch our breath."

"vɛɹi wɛl. pəzɪʃən ɪt hɪɹ." pɛɹɪn pɔɪntəd tə ðə haɪts əbʌv ðə waɪtkloʊks' kæmp. "ɡɔl!"

"Very well. Position it here." Perrin pointed to the heights above the Whitecloaks' camp. "Gaul!"

əz juʒəwəl, ði il mæn weɪɾəd nɪɹbaɪ hi loʊpt ʌp. "aɪ wɑn jə tə ɡoʊ spik wɪð dænɪl, ɑɹɡændə, ɡælɛn. aɪ wɑn ði ɪntaɪɝ ɑɹmi tə kɹɔs θɹu əz kwɪkli əz pɑsəbəl, bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ tə kip kwaɪət.

As usual, the Aiel man waited nearby He loped up. "I want you to go speak with Dannil, Arganda, Gallenne. I want the entire army to cross through as quickly as possible, but they are to keep quiet.

wi muv wɪð əz mʌtʃ stɛlθ əz ən ɑɹmi ðɪs saɪz kən mænədʒ."

We move with as much stealth as an army this size can manage."

ɡɔl nɑɾəd, ɹʌnɪŋ ɔf. ɡælɛn wɑz stɪl nɪɹbaɪ; ɡɔl stɑɹɾəd baɪ spikɪŋ wɪð hɪm.

Gaul nodded, running off. Gallenne was still nearby; Gaul started by speaking with him.

feɪl wɑtʃt pɛɹɪn, smɛlɪŋ kjʊɹiəs ən ə lɪɾəl æŋkʃəs. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə plænɪŋ, hʌzbənd?"

Faile watched Perrin, smelling curious and a little anxious. "What are you planning, husband?"

"ɪts taɪm fəɹ mi tə lid," pɛɹɪn sɛd. hi lʊkt wʌn læs taɪm əɾ ɪz oʊl hæmɝ, ən leɪd fɪŋɡɝz ɑn ɪts hæft. ðən i hɛftəd mæhælaɪnɝ tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝ ən stʃɹoʊɾ əweɪ, fit kɹæklɪŋ ɑn dʒɹɑps ə hɑɹɾənd stil.

"It's time for me to lead," Perrin said. He looked one last time at his old hammer, and laid fingers on its haft. Then he hefted Mah'alleinir to his shoulder and strode away, feet crackling on drops of hardened steel.

ðə tul i lɛf bɪhaɪnd wɑz ðə hæmɝ ʌv ə sɪmpəl blæksmɪθ. ðət pɝsən wəɾ ɔlweɪz bi pɑɹɾ ə pɛɹɪn, bʌɾ i kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ əfɔɹd tə lɛɾ ɪm lɛd.

The tool he left behind was the hammer of a simple blacksmith. That person would always be part of Perrin, but he could no longer afford to let him lead.

fɹəm naʊ ɑn, hi wəd kæɹi ðə hæmɝ ʌv ə kɪŋ.

From now on, he would carry the hammer of a king.

feɪl ɹæn əɹ fɪŋɡɝz əkɹɔs ði ænvəl əz pɛɹɪn stʃɹoʊɾ əweɪ, kɔlɪŋ fɝðɝ ɔɹɾɝz tə pɹipɛɹ ði ɑɹmi.

Faile ran her fingers across the anvil as Perrin strode away, calling further orders to prepare the army.

dɪɾ i ɹilaɪz haʊ hid lʊkt, stændɪŋ əmɪd ðoʊz ʃaʊɝz ə spɑɹks, itʃ bloʊ ʌv ɪz hæmɝ kɑzɪŋ ðə stil bɪfɔɹ ɪm tə pʌls ən flɛɹ tə laɪf? hɪz ɡoʊldən aɪz hæd bleɪzd əz bɹaɪtli əz ðə stil; itʃ pil ə ðə hæmɝ hæd bɪn nɪɹli dɛfənɪŋ.

Did he realize how he'd looked, standing amid those showers of sparks, each blow of his hammer causing the steel before him to pulse and flare to life? His golden eyes had blazed as brightly as the steel; each peal of the hammer had been nearly deafening.

"ɪɾ əz bɪn mɛni sɛntʃɝiz sɪns ðɪs læn əz sin ðə kɹieɪʃən ʌv ə paʊɝ-ɹɔt wɛpən,"

"It has been many centuries since this land has seen the creation of a Power-wrought weapon,"

bɹəleɪn sɛd. moʊst ʌðɝz hæd lɛf tə fɑloʊ pɝ-ɹɪnz ɔɹɾɝz, ən ðə tu wɝ əloʊn, seɪv fəɹ ɡælɛn stændɪŋ nɪɹbaɪ ən stʌɾiɪŋ ðə mæp waɪl ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz tʃɪn. "ɪɾ ɪz ə stʃɹɔŋ tælən ðə jʌŋ mæn dʒʌs dɪspleɪd. ðɪs wɪl bi ʌv jus. pɛɹɪnz ɑɹmi wɪl əv paʊɝ-ɹɔt bleɪdz tə stʃɹɛŋθən ðɛm."

Berelain said. Most others had left to follow Per-rin's orders, and the two were alone, save for Gallenne standing nearby and studying the map while rubbing his chin. "It is a strong Talent the young man just displayed. This will be of use. Perrin's army will have Power-wrought blades to strengthen them."

"ðə pɹɑsɛs sim vɛɹi dʒɹeɪnɪŋ," feɪl sɛd. "ivən ɪf nil kən ɹɪpit wʌɾ i dɪd, aɪ daʊt wɪl əv taɪm tə meɪk mɛni wɛpənz."

"The process seemed very draining," Faile said. "Even if Neald can repeat what he did, I doubt we will have time to make many weapons."

"ɛvɹi smɔl ædvæntɪdʒ hɛlps," bɹəleɪn sɛd. "ðɪs ɑɹmi jəɹ hʌzbən əz fɔɹdʒd, ɪɾəl bi sʌmθɪŋ ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl. tɑvɝən ɪz ət wɝk hɪɹ. hi ɡæðɝz mɛn, ən ðeɪ lɝn wɪð əmeɪzɪŋ spiɾ ən skɪl."

"Every small advantage helps," Berelain said. "This army your husband has forged, it will be something incredible. Ta'veren is at work here. He gathers men, and they learn with amazing speed and skill."

"pɝhæps," feɪl sɛd, wɔkɪŋ ɝaʊn ði ænvəl sloʊli, kipɪŋ əɹ aɪz ɑn bɹəleɪn, hu stʃɹoʊld ɝaʊn ɪɾ ɑpəzət hɝ. wʌt wɑz bɹəleɪnz ɡeɪm, hɪɹ?

"Perhaps," Faile said, walking around the anvil slowly, keeping her eyes on Berelain, who strolled around it opposite her. What was Berelain's game, here?

"ðɛn wi mʌst spik wɪð hɪm," bɹəleɪn sɛd. "tɝn ɪm fɹəm ðɪs kɔɹs ʌv ækʃən."

"Then we must speak with him," Berelain said. "Turn him from this course of action."

"ðɪs kɔɹs ʌv ækʃən?" feɪl æskt, dʒɛnjəwənli kənfjuzd.

"This course of action?" Faile asked, genuinely confused.

bɹəleɪn stɑpt, hɝ aɪz əlaɪt wɪð sʌmθɪŋ. ʃi sim tɛns. ʃiz wɝid, feɪl θɔt.

Berelain stopped, her eyes alight with something. She seemed tense. She's worried, Faile thought.

wɝid dipli əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ.

Worried deeply about something.

"lɔɹd pɛɹɪn mʌs nɑɾ ətæk ðə waɪtkloʊks," bɹəleɪn sɛd. "pliz, jə mʌs hɛlp mi pɝsweɪd hɪm."

"Lord Perrin must not attack the Whitecloaks," Berelain said. "Please, you must help me persuade him."

"hiz nɑt gɑnə ətæk ðɛm," feɪl sɛd. ʃi wɑz ɹizənəbli sɝɾən ə ðæt.

"He's not going to attack them," Faile said. She was reasonably certain of that.

"hiz sɛɾɪŋ ʌp ə pɝfəkt æmbʊʃ," bɹəleɪn sɛd. "æʃəmən tə juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ, tu ɹɪvɝz boʊmən tə ʃut fɹəm ðə haɪts daʊn ɑn ðə kæmp ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. kævəlɹi tə ɹaɪd daʊn ən swip ʌp æftɝ." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, simɪŋ peɪnd. "hiz sɛɾ əm ʌp pɝfəkli. hi toʊld əm ðəɾ ɪf i ən dəmədʒɹd boʊθ sɝvaɪv ðə læs bæɾəl, hid səbmɪt tə pʌnɪʃmənt. bʌt pɛɹɪn ɪz gɑnə meɪk sɝɾən ðə waɪtkloʊks doʊn ɹitʃ ðə læs bæɾəl. hi kən kip ɪz oʊθ ðət weɪ, bʌɾ ɔlsoʊ əvɔɪd tɝnɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɪn."

"He's setting up a perfect ambush," Berelain said. "Asha'man to use the One Power, Two Rivers bowmen to shoot from the heights down on the camp of the Children. Cavalry to ride down and sweep up after." She hesitated, seeming pained. "He's set them up perfectly. He told them that if he and Damodred both survived the Last Battle, he'd submit to punishment. But Perrin is going to make certain the Whitecloaks don't reach the Last Battle. He can keep his oath that way, but also avoid turning himself in."

feɪl ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "hid nɛvɝ də ðæt, bɹəleɪn."

Faile shook her head. "He'd never do that, Berelain."

"kæn jə bi sɝɾən?" bɹəleɪn æskt. "æbsəlutli sɝɾən?"

"Can you be certain?" Berelain asked. "Absolutely certain?"

feɪl hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. pɛɹɪn hæd bɪn tʃeɪnʒɪŋ leɪtli. moʊst ə ðə tʃeɪnʒəz wɝ ɡʊd wʌnz, sətʃ əz ɪz dɪsɪʒən tə faɪnəli æksɛp liɾɝʃɪp. ən ði æmbʊʃ bɹəleɪn spoʊk ʌv wəd meɪk ə kaɪndə pɝfəkt, ɹuθləs sɛns.

Faile hesitated. Perrin had been changing lately. Most of the changes were good ones, such as his decision to finally accept leadership. And the ambush Berelain spoke of would make a kind of perfect, ruthless sense.

bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔlsoʊ ɹɔŋ. tɛɹəbli ɹɔŋ. pɛɹɪn wʊdn də ðæt, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ mʌtʃ hid tʃeɪnʒd.

But it was also wrong. Terribly wrong. Perrin wouldn't do that, no matter how much he'd changed.

ʌv ðæt, feɪl kəd bi sɝɾən.

Of that, Faile could be certain.

"jɛs," ʃi sɛd. "ɡɪvɪŋ ə pɹɑməs tə ɡɑləd, ðən slɔɾɝɪŋ ðə waɪtkloʊks ɪn ðɪs weɪ, ɪt wəd ɹɪp pɛɹɪn əpɑɹt. hi dʌzn θɪŋk ðət weɪ. ɪt woʊn hæpən."

"Yes," she said. "Giving a promise to Galad, then slaughtering the Whitecloaks in this way, it would rip Perrin apart. He doesn't think that way. It won't happen."

aɪ hoʊp ðət jə ɑɹ ɹaɪt," bɹəleɪn sɛd. "aɪ hæd hoʊp səm sɔɹɾ ʌv əkɑmədeɪʃən kəd bi ɹitʃt wɪð ðɛɹ kəmændɝ bɪfɔɹ wi lɛft . . ."

I hope that you are right," Berelain said. "I had hoped some sort of accommodation could be reached with their commander before we left . . ."

eɪ waɪtkloʊk. laɪt! kʊdnt ʃi hæv pɪkt wʌn ə ðə noʊbəlmən ɪn kæmp tə ɡɪv əɹ ətɛnʃənz tə? wʌn u wɑzn mɛɹid? "ju ɑɹən vɛɹi ɡʊɾ ət pɪkɪŋ mɛn, ɑɹ ju, bɹəleɪn?" ðə wɝdz dʒʌst slɪpt aʊt.

A Whitecloak. Light! Couldn't she have picked one of the noblemen in camp to give her attentions to? One who wasn't married? "You aren't very good at picking men, are you, Berelain?" The words just slipped out.

bɹəleɪn tɝn bæk tə feɪl, aɪz waɪɾənɪŋ ɪn iðɝ ʃɑk əɹ æŋɡɝ. "ænd wʌɾ ə pɛɹɪn?"

Berelain turned back to Faile, eyes widening in either shock or anger. "And what of Perrin?"

ə tɛɹəbəl mætʃ fəɹ ju," feɪl sɛd wɪð ə snɪf. "juv ʃoʊn ðət tənaɪt, baɪ wʌt jə θɪŋk hiz keɪpəbəl ʌv."

A terrible match for you," Faile said with a sniff. "You've shown that tonight, by what you think he is capable of."

haʊ ɡʊɾ ə mætʃ i wɑz ɪz ɪɹɛləvənt. aɪ wɑz pɹɑməs hɪm."

How good a match he was is irrelevant. I was promised him."

"baɪ hum?"

"By whom?"

ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," bɹəleɪn sɛd.

The Lord Dragon," Berelain said.

"wʌt?"

"What?"

"aɪ keɪm tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪn ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ," ʃi sɛd. "bʌɾ i wəd nɑɾ əv mi - hi ivən ɡɹu æŋɡɹi wɪð maɪ ədvænsəz. aɪ ɹilaɪz ðət hi, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ɪntɛndəd tə mɛɹi ə mʌtʃ haɪɝ leɪɾi, pɹɑbli ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd. ɪt meɪks sɛns - hi kænɑt teɪk ɛvɹi ɹɛlm baɪ ðə sɔɹd;

"I came to the Dragon Reborn in the Stone of Tear," she said. "But he would not have me - he even grew angry with my advances. I realized that he, the Dragon Reborn, intended to marry a much higher lady, probably Elayne Trakand. It makes sense - he cannot take every realm by the sword;

səm wɪl əv tə kʌm tə hɪm θɹu əlaɪənsəz. ændɝ ɪz vɛɹi paʊɝfəl ɪz ɹul baɪ ə wʊmən, ən wəd bi ædvənteɪdʒəs tə hoʊl θɹu mɛɹɪdʒ."

some will have to come to him through alliances. Andor is very powerful is ruled by a woman, and would be advantageous to hold through marriage."

"pɛɹɪn sɛz ɹænd dʌzn θɪŋk laɪk ðæt, bɹəleɪn," feɪl sɛd. "nɑt soʊ kælkjəleɪɾɪŋ. ɪts maɪ ɪnkləneɪʃən, tu, fɹəm wʌɾ aɪ noʊ ʌv hɪm."

"Perrin says Rand doesn't think like that, Berelain," Faile said. "Not so calculating. It's my inclination, too, from what I know of him."

"æn jə seɪ ðə seɪm θɪŋ əbaʊt pɛɹɪn. juɾ əv mi bɪliv ðəɹ ɔl soʊ sɪmpəl. wɪθaʊɾ ə wɪɾ ɪn ðɛɹ hɛdz."

"And you say the same thing about Perrin. You'd have me believe they're all so simple. Without a wit in their heads."

"aɪ dɪdn seɪ ðæt."

"I didn't say that."

"æn jɛt jə juz ðə seɪm oʊl pɹoʊɾɛsts. taɪɹɪŋ. wɛl, aɪ ɹilaɪzd wʌt ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən wɑz ɪmplaɪɪŋ, soʊ aɪ tɝn maɪ ətɛnʃənz təwɔɹd wʌn ə hɪz kloʊs ətɛndəns. pɝhæps i dɪd nɑt 'pɹɑməs'

"And yet you use the same old protests. Tiring. Well, I realized what the Lord Dragon was implying, so I turned my attentions toward one of his close attendants. Perhaps he did not 'promise'

ðɛm tə mi. ðət wɑz ə pʊɹ tʃɔɪs ʌv wɝdz. bʌɾ aɪ nu hi wəd bi plizd ɪf aɪ meɪɾ ə junjən wɪð wʌn ə hɪz kloʊs ælaɪz ən fɹɛnz. ɪndid, aɪ səspɛk ðəɾ i wɪʃt mi tə də ɪt - æftɝ ɔl, ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən dɪd pleɪs mi ən pɛɹɪn təɡɛðɝ fəɹ ðɪs mɪʃən. hi kəd nɑt bi fɹæŋk əbaʊt wʌɾ i dɪzaɪɝd, haʊɛvɝ, soʊ əz tə nɑɾ əfɛn pɛɹɪn."

them to me. That was a poor choice of words. But I knew he would be pleased if I made a union with one of his close allies and friends. Indeed, I suspect that he wished me to do it - after all, the Lord Dragon did place me and Perrin together for this mission. He could not be frank about what he desired, however, so as to not offend Perrin."

feɪl hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ɑn wʌn hænd, wʌt bɹəleɪn sɛd wɑz pjʊɹli fulɪʃ . . . bʌɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ, ʃi kəd si wʌt ðə wʊmən maɪɾ əv sin. ɔɹ, pɝhæps, wʌt ʃi wɪʃt tə si. tə hɝ, bɹeɪkɪŋ əpɑɹɾ ə hʌzbən ən waɪf wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɪmɔɹəl. ðɪs wɑz pɑlətɪks. ænd, lɑdʒɪkli, ɹænd pɹɑbli ʃʊɾə wɑntəd tə taɪ neɪʃənz tə hɪm θɹu bɑnz ə mɛɹɪdʒ tə ðoʊz kloʊsəs tə hɪm.

Faile hesitated. On one hand, what Berelain said was purely foolish . . . but on the other, she could see what the woman might have seen. Or, perhaps, what she wished to see. To her, breaking apart a husband and wife was nothing immoral. This was politics. And, logically, Rand probably should have wanted to tie nations to him through bonds of marriage to those closest to him.

ðət dɪdn tʃeɪnʒ ðə fæk ðət niðɝ hi, nɔɹ pɛɹɪn, ɹəɡɑɹɾəd mæɾɝz ə ðə hɑɹɾ ɪn sətʃ ə weɪ.

That didn't change the fact that neither he, nor Perrin, regarded matters of the heart in such a way.

"aɪ hæv ɡɪvən ʌp ɑn pɛɹɪn," bɹəleɪn sɛd. "aɪ hoʊl tə maɪ pɹɑməs ðɛɹ. bʌɾ ɪt livz mi ɪn ə dɪfəkəl sɪtʃueɪʃən. aɪ hæv lɔŋ θɔt ðəɾ ə kənɛkʃən tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪz minz oʊnli hoʊp ɪn meɪnteɪnɪŋ ɪndɪpɛndəns ɪn ðə kʌmɪŋ jɪɹz."

"I have given up on Perrin," Berelain said. "I hold to my promise there. But it leaves me in a difficult situation. I have long thought that a connection to the Dragon Reborn is Mayene's only hope in maintaining independence in the coming years."

"mɛɹɪdʒ ɪzən oʊnli əbaʊt kleɪmɪŋ pəlɪɾəkəl ædvæntɪdʒɪz," feɪl sɛd.

"Marriage isn't only about claiming political advantages," Faile said.

"æn jɛt ði ædvæntɪdʒɪz ɑɹ soʊ ɑbviəs ðət ðeɪ kænɑt bi ɪɡnɔɹd."

"And yet the advantages are so obvious that they cannot be ignored."

"æn ðɪs waɪtkloʊk?" feɪl æskt.

"And this Whitecloak?" Faile asked.

"hæf-bɹʌðɝ ə ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ," bɹəleɪn sɛd, blʌʃɪŋ slaɪtli. "ɪf ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən dʌz ɪntɛn tə mɛɹi ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd, ðɪs wɪl ɡɪmi ə lɪŋk tə hɪm."

"Half-brother of the Queen of Andor," Berelain said, blushing slightly. "If the Lord Dragon does intend to marry Elayne Trakand, this will give me a link to him."

ɪt wɑz mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən ðæt; feɪl kəd si ɪɾ ɪn ðə weɪ bɹəleɪn æktəd, ɪn ðə weɪ ʃi lʊkt wən ʃi spoʊk ʌv ɡɑləd dəmədʒɹd. bʌɾ ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə ɹæʃənəlaɪz ə pəlɪɾəkəl moʊɾəveɪʃən fəɹ ɪt, feɪl hæd noʊ ɹizən tə dɪsweɪd hɝ, soʊ lɔŋ əz ɪt hɛlp dɪstʃɹækt əɹ fɹəm pɛɹɪn. "aɪ hæv dʌn əz jə æskt," bɹəleɪn sɛd. "æn soʊ naʊ, aɪ æsk jəɹ eɪd. ɪf ɪɾ əpɪɹz ðət hiz gɑnə ətæk ðɛm, pliz dʒɔɪn mi ɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪsweɪd hɪm. təɡɛðɝ, pɝhæps wi kən mænədʒ ɪt." "vɛɹi wɛl," feɪl sɛd.

It was much more than that; Faile could see it in the way Berelain acted, in the way she looked when she spoke of Galad Damodred. But if she wanted to rationalize a political motivation for it, Faile had no reason to dissuade her, so long as it helped distract her from Perrin. "I have done as you asked," Berelain said. "And so now, I ask your aid. If it appears that he is going to attack them, please join me in trying to dissuade him. Together, perhaps we can manage it." "Very well," Faile said.

pɛɹɪn ɹoʊɾ ət ðə hɛɾ ʌv ən ɑɹmi ðət fɛl junəfaɪd fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. ðə flæɡ ʌv min, ðə flæɡ ʌv ɡildən, ðə bænɝz ə noʊbəl haʊsəz fɹəm əmʌŋ ðə ɹɛfjudʒiz. ivən ə fju bænɝz ðə lædz hæd meɪɾ ʌp ɹɛpɹɪzɛntɪŋ ðə pɑɹts ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. əbʌv əm ɔl flæp ðə wʊlfhɛd.

Perrin rode at the head of an army that felt unified for the first time. The flag of Mayene, the flag of Ghealdan, the banners of noble Houses from among the refugees. Even a few banners the lads had made up representing the parts of the Two Rivers. Above them all flapped the wolfhead.

lɔɹd pɛɹɪn. hi wəd nɛvɝ ɡɛt juz tə ðæt, bʌt meɪbi ðət wɑz ə ɡʊd θɪŋ.

Lord Perrin. He would never get used to that, but maybe that was a good thing.

hi tʃɹɑɾəd stɛpɝ oʊvɝ tə ðə saɪɾ ə ði oʊpən ɡeɪtweɪ əz ðə tʃɹups mɑɹtʃt pæst, səluɾɪŋ. ðeɪ wɝ lɪt baɪ tɔɹtʃɪz fəɹ naʊ. hoʊpfəli ðə tʃænlɝz wəd bi eɪbəl tə laɪt ðə bæɾəlfild leɪɾɝ.

He trotted Stepper over to the side of the open gateway as the troops marched past, saluting. They were lit by torches for now. Hopefully the channelers would be able to light the battlefield later.

ə mæn keɪm ʌp bɪsaɪd stɛpɝ, ən pɛɹɪn smɛld ænəməl pɛls, loʊm ən ɹæbəts blʌd. ɛlaɪəs hæd ɡɔn hʌntɪŋ waɪl i weɪɾəd fəɹ ði ɑɹmi tə ɡæðɝ. ɪt tʊk kwaɪɾ ə kin hʌntɝ tə kætʃ ɹæbəts ət naɪt. ɛlaɪəs sɛɾ ɪt wɑz ə bɛɾɝ tʃælənʒ.

A man came up beside Stepper, and Perrin smelled animal pelts, loam and rabbits blood. Elyas had gone hunting while he waited for the army to gather. It took quite a keen hunter to catch rabbits at night. Elyas said it was a better challenge.

"ju sɛd sʌmθɪŋ tə mi wʌns, ɛlaɪəs," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ju toʊl mi ðəɾ ɪf aɪ ɛvɝ ɡɹu tə laɪk ði æks, aɪ ʃəd θɹoʊ ɪɾ əweɪ."

"You said something to me once, Elyas," Perrin said. "You told me that if I ever grew to like the axe, I should throw it away."

"ðæɾ aɪ dɪd."

"That I did."

"aɪ θɪŋk ɪɾ əplaɪz tə liɾɝʃɪp, tu. ðə mɛn u doʊnt wɑn taɪɾəlz ʃəd bi ðə wʌnz u ɡɛt ðɛm, ɪt simz. soʊ lɔŋ əz aɪ kip ðəɾ ɪn maɪnd, aɪ θɪŋk aɪ maɪt də ɔl ɹaɪt."

"I think it applies to leadership, too. The men who don't want titles should be the ones who get them, it seems. So long as I keep that in mind, I think I might do all right."

ɛlaɪəs tʃʌkəld. "ðə bænɝ lʊks ɡʊd, hæŋɪŋ ʌp ðɛɹ."

Elyas chuckled. "The banner looks good, hanging up there."

"ɪt fɪts mi. ɔlweɪz hæz. aɪ dʒʌs hævən ɔlweɪz fɪɾ ɪt."

"It fits me. Always has. I just haven't always fit it."

"dip θɔts, fəɹ ə blæksmɪθ."

"Deep thoughts, for a blacksmith."

"pɝhæps." pɛɹɪn pʊl ðə blæksmɪθs pʌzəl fɹəm ɪz pɑkət, ðə wʌn hid faʊn ɪn meɪɾən. hi stɪl hædn mænədʒ tə ɡɛt ðə θɪŋ əpɑɹt.

"Perhaps." Perrin pulled the blacksmith's puzzle from his pocket, the one he'd found in Maiden. He still hadn't managed to get the thing apart.

"hæz ɪɾ ɛvɝ stʃɹʌk jə əz ɑd ðət blæksmɪθs sim laɪk sətʃ sɪmpəl foʊk, jɛt ðəɹ ðə wʌnz u meɪk ɔl ə ðiz blæstəd pʌzəlz ðəɾ ɑɹ soʊ hɑɹd tə fɪɡjɝ aʊt?"

"Has it ever struck you as odd that blacksmiths seem like such simple folk, yet they're the ones who make all of these blasted puzzles that are so hard to figure out?"

"nɛvɝ θɔɾ ʌv ɪt laɪk ðæt. soʊ jəɹ wʌn ʌv ʌs, faɪnəli?" "noʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, pʊɾɪŋ ðə pʌzəl əweɪ. "aɪ æm u aɪ æm. faɪnəli." hi wɑzn sɝɾən wʌt hæd tʃeɪnʒd wɪðɪn hɪm. bʌt pɝhæps tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə θɪŋk ɪt θɹu tu mʌtʃ hæd bɪn ðə pɹɑbləm ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs.

"Never thought of it like that. So you're one of us, finally?" "No," Perrin said, putting the puzzle away. "I am who I am. Finally." He wasn't certain what had changed within him. But perhaps trying to think it through too much had been the problem in the first place.

hi nu ðət hid faʊn ɪz bæləns. hi wəd nɛvɝ bɪkʌm laɪk noʊm, ðə mæn u hæd lɔs hɪmsɛlf tə ðə wʊlf. ən ðət wɑz ɪnʌf pɛɹɪn ən ɛlaɪəs weɪɾəd fəɹ ə taɪm, wɑtʃɪŋ ði ɑɹmi pæs. ðiz lɑɹdʒɝ ɡeɪtweɪz meɪɾ ɪt mʌtʃ iziɝ tə tʃɹævəl; ðeɪɾ əv ɔl ə ðə faɪt-ɪŋ mɛn ən wɪmən θɹu ɪn ʌndɝ ən aʊɝ. mɛn ɹeɪz hænz tə pɝ-ɹɪn, smɛlɪŋ pɹaʊd. hɪz kənɛkʃən tə ðə wʊlvz dɪd nɑt fɹaɪɾən ðɛm; ɪn fækt, ðeɪ æktʃəli  sim lɛs wɝid naʊ ðət ðeɪ nu ðə spɪsɪfɪks ʌv ɪt. bɪfɔɹ, ðəɹ hæd bɪn spɛkjəleɪʃən. kwɛstʃənz. naʊ, ðeɪ kəd bɪɡɪn tə ɡɹoʊ kʌmftəɹbəl wɪð ðə tʃɹuθ. ən pɹaʊɾ ʌv ɪt.

He knew that he'd found his balance. He would never become like Noam, the man who had lost himself to the wolf. And that was enough Perrin and Elyas waited for a time, watching the army pass. These larger gateways made it much easier to Travel; they'd have all of the fight-ing men and women through in under an hour. Men raised hands to Per-rin, smelling proud. His connection to the wolves did not frighten them; in fact, they actually seemed less worried now that they knew the specifics of it. Before, there had been speculation. Questions. Now, they could begin to grow comfortable with the truth. And proud of it.

ðɛɹ lɔɹd wɑz noʊ ɔɹɾənɛɹi mæn. hi wɑz sʌmθɪŋ spɛʃəl.

Their lord was no ordinary man. He was something special.

"aɪ nid tə liv, pɛɹɪn," ɛlaɪəs sɛd. "tənaɪt, ɪf aɪ kæn."

"I need to leave, Perrin," Elyas said. "Tonight, if I can."

"aɪ noʊ. ðə læs hʌn əz bɪɡʌn. ɡoʊ wɪð ðɛm, ɛlaɪəs. wɪl miɾ ɪn ðə nɔɹθ."

"I know. The Last Hunt has begun. Go with them, Elyas. We will meet in the north."

ði eɪdʒɪŋ wɔɹɾɝ leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn pɛɹɪnz ʃoʊldɝ. "ɪf wi doʊn si wʌn ənʌðɝ ðɛɹ, pɝhæps wɪl miɾ ɪn ðə dʒɹim, maɪ fɹɛnd."

The aging Warder laid a hand on Perrin's shoulder. "If we don't see one another there, perhaps we'll meet in the dream, my friend."

"ðɪs ɪz ðə dʒɹim," pɛɹɪn sɛd, smaɪlɪŋ. "ænd wɪl miɾ əɡɛn. əl faɪn ju, ɪf jə ɑɹ wɪð ðə wʊlvz. hʌnt wɛl, lɔŋ tuθ."

"This is the dream," Perrin said, smiling. "And we will meet again. I will find you, if you are with the wolves. Hunt well, Long Tooth."

"hʌnt wɛl, jʌŋ bʊl."

"Hunt well, Young Bull."

ɛlaɪəs vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs wɪð bɛɹli ə ɹʌsəl.

Elyas vanished into the darkness with barely a rustle.

pɛɹɪn ɹitʃt daʊn tə ðə wɔɹm hæmɝ əɾ ɪz saɪd. hi hæd θɔt ðət ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi wəd bi ənʌðɝ weɪɾ əpɑn hɪm. ən jɛt, naʊ ðəɾ i hæɾ æksɛptɪɾ ɪt, hi æktʃəli  fɛlt laɪɾɝ.

Perrin reached down to the warm hammer at his side. He had thought that responsibility would be another weight upon him. And yet, now that he had accepted it, he actually felt lighter.

pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə wɑz dʒʌst ə mæn, bʌt pɛɹɪn ɡoʊldeɪniz wɑz ə sɪmbəl kɹieɪɾəd baɪ ðə pipəl u fɑloʊd hɪm. pɛɹɪn dɪdn əv ə tʃɔɪs əbaʊt ðæt; ɔl i kəd də wɑz lɛd ðə bɛst i kʊd. ɪf i dɪdnt, ðə sɪmbəl wʊdn vænɪʃ. ðə pipəl wəd dʒʌs luz feɪθ ɪn ɪt. əz pʊɹ ɛɹæm hæd.

Perrin Aybara was just a man, but Perrin Goldeneyes was a symbol created by the people who followed him. Perrin didn't have a choice about that; all he could do was lead the best he could. If he didn't, the symbol wouldn't vanish. The people would just lose faith in it. As poor Aram had.

aɪm sɑɹi, maɪ fɹɛnd, hi θɔt. jə aɪ feɪl moʊst ʌv ɔl. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn lʊkɪŋ bækwɝɾ ət ðæt. hi wəd sɪmpli hæv tə kəntɪnju fɔɹwɝɾ ən də bɛɾɝ. "aɪm pɛɹɪn ɡoʊldeɪniz," hi sɛd, "ðə mæn u kən spik tə wʊlvz. ən aɪ ɡɛs ðæts ə ɡʊd pɝsən tə bi."

I'm sorry, my friend, he thought. You I failed most of all. There was no point in looking backward at that. He would simply have to continue forward and do better. "I'm Perrin Goldeneyes," he said, "the man who can speak to wolves. And I guess that's a good person to be."

hi kɪk stɛpɝ θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, pɛɹɪn ɡoʊldeɪniz hæd səm kɪlɪŋ tə də tənaɪt.

He kicked Stepper through the gateway. Unfortunately, Perrin Goldeneyes had some killing to do tonight.

ɡɑləɾ əwoʊk əz sun əz ɪz tɛn flæp ɹʌsəld. hi dʒɹoʊv əweɪ ðə vɛstɪdʒɪz ə hɪz dʒɹim - ə sɪli θɪŋ, ʌv ɪm daɪnɪŋ wɪð ə dɑɹk-hɛɹd bjuɾi wɪð pɝfək lɪps ən kʌnɪŋ aɪz - ən ɹitʃt fəɹ ɪz sɔɹd.

Galad awoke as soon as his tent flap rustled. He drove away the vestiges of his dream - a silly thing, of him dining with a dark-haired beauty with perfect lips and cunning eyes - and reached for his sword.

"ɡɑləd!" ə vɔɪs hɪst. ɪt wɑz tʃɹɑm.

"Galad!" a voice hissed. It was Trom.

"wʌts ɹɔŋ?" ɡɑləɾ æskt, hæn stɪl ɑn ɪz sɔɹd.

"What's wrong?" Galad asked, hand still on his sword.

"ju wɝ ɹaɪt," tʃɹɑm sɛd.

"You were right," Trom said.

"əbaʊt wʌt?"

"About what?"

"eɪbɑɹəz ɑɹmi ɪz bæk. ɡɑləd, ðəɹ ɑn ðə haɪts dʒʌst əbʌv ʌs! wi oʊnli kɑt saɪɾ ə ðɛm baɪ æksəɾənt; əɹ mɛn wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə ɹoʊd, əz jə toʊld ʌs."

"Aybara's army is back. Galad, they're on the heights just above us! We only caught sight of them by accident; our men were watching along the road, as you told us."

ɡɑləd kɝst, sæɾ ʌp ən ɹitʃt fəɹ ɪz smɔlkloʊðz. "haʊ dɪd ðeɪ ɡɛɾ ʌp ðəɹ wɪθaʊɾ əs siɪŋ?"

Galad cursed, sat up and reached for his smallclothes. "How did they get up there without us seeing?"

"dɑɹk paʊɝz, ɡɑləd. baɪɑɝ wɑz ɹaɪt. jə sɔ haʊ fæs ðɛɹ kæmp ɛmptid."

"Dark powers, Galad. Byar was right. You saw how fast their camp emptied."

ðɛɹ skaʊts hæd ɹɪtɝn ən aʊɝ bɪfɔɹ. ðeɪd faʊn eɪbɑɹəz kæmpsaɪɾ ɪɹəli ɛmpti, əz ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn pɑpjəleɪɾəd baɪ ɡoʊsts. noʊbɑdi hæd sin əm liv əlɔŋ ðə ɹoʊd.

Their scouts had returned an hour before. They'd found Aybara's campsite eerily empty, as if it had been populated by ghosts. Nobody had seen them leave along the road.

naʊ ðɪs. ɡɑləd dʒɹɛs kwɪkli. "ɹaʊs ðə mɛn. si ɪf jə kən də ɪt kwaɪətli. jə wɝ waɪz tə bɹɪŋ noʊ laɪt; ðət maɪɾ əv əlɝɾɪd ði ɛnəmi. hæv ðə mɛn pʊɾ ɑn ðɛɹ ɑɹmɝ ɪnsaɪd ðɛɹ tɛns."

Now this. Galad dressed quickly. "Rouse the men. See if you can do it quietly. You were wise to bring no light; that might have alerted the enemy. Have the men put on their armor inside their tents."

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ," tʃɹɑm sɛd. ə ɹʌslɪŋ əkʌmpəniɾ ɪz dɪpɑɹtʃɝ.

"Yes, my Lord Captain Commander," Trom said. A rustling accompanied his departure.

ɡɑləd hɝid tə dʒɹɛs. wʌɾ əv aɪ dʌn? ɛvɹi stɛp ə ðə weɪ, hid bɪn kɑnfəɾənt ɪn ɪz tʃɔɪsəz, jɛt ðɪs wɑz wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd lɛd hɪm. eɪbɑɹə, pəzɪʃən tə ətæk, ɡɑlədz mɛn əslip. ɛvɝ sɪns mɔɹɡeɪs hæd ɹɪtɝnd, ɡɑləd hæd fɛlt ɪz wɝl kɹʌmbəlɪŋ. wʌt wɑz ɹaɪt wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ klɪɹ tə hɪm, nɑɾ əz ɪt hæd wʌns bɪn. ðə weɪ əhɛd sim klaʊɾəd.

Galad hurried to dress. What have I done? Every step of the way, he'd been confident in his choices, yet this was where they had led him. Aybara, positioned to attack, Galad's men asleep. Ever since Morgase had returned, Galad had felt his world crumbling. What was right was no longer clear to him, not as it had once been. The way ahead seemed clouded.

wi ʃəd sɝɛndɝ, hi θɔt, əfɪksɪŋ ɪz kloʊk ɪn pleɪs oʊvɝ ɪz meɪl. bʌt noʊ. tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt nɛvɝ ɡɪv ɪn tə dɑɹkfɹɛnz. haʊ kəɾ aɪ θɪŋk ðæt?

We should surrender, he thought, affixing his cloak in place over his mail. But no. Children of the Light never give in to Darkfriends. How could I think that?

ðeɪ hæd tə daɪ faɪɾɪŋ. bʌt wʌt wəd ðəɾ əkɑmplɪʃ? ði ɛn ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən, dɛd bɪfɔɹ ðə læs bæɾəl bɪɡæn?

They had to die fighting. But what would that accomplish? The end of the Children, dead before the Last Battle began?

hɪz tɛn flæps ɹʌsəld əɡɛn, ən i hæɾ ɪz sɔɹɾ aʊt, ɹɛɾi tə stʃɹaɪk.

His tent flaps rustled again, and he had his sword out, ready to strike.

"ɡɑləd," baɪɑɝ sɛd. "juv kɪld ʌs." ɔl ɹɪspɛkt wɑz ɡɔn fɹəm ɪz vɔɪs.

"Galad," Byar said. "You've killed us." All respect was gone from his voice.

ði ækjəzeɪʃən sɛt ɡɑləɾ ɑn ɛdʒ. "ðoʊz u wɔk ɪn ðə laɪt mʌs teɪk noʊ ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi fəɹ ði ækʃənz ə ðoʊz u fɑloʊ ðə ʃædoʊ." ə kwoʊt fɹəm lɑthɛɹ mæntəlɝ. "aɪ hæv æktəd wɪð ɑnɝ."

The accusation set Galad on edge. "Those who walk in the Light must take no responsibility for the actions of those who follow the Shadow." A quote from Lothair Mantelar. "I have acted with honor."

'ju ʃʊɾə ətækt ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ θɹu ðət ɹɪdɪkjələs 'tʃɹaɪəl'"

'You should have attacked instead of going through that ridiculous 'trial'"

wi wʊɾə bɪn slɔɾɝd. hi hæɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, il, mɛn u kən tʃænəl, mɔɹ soʊlʒɝz ðən ʌs, ən paʊɝz wi doʊn ʌndɝstænd." "ðə laɪt wʊɾə pɹətɛktəɾ ʌs!"

We would have been slaughtered. He had Aes Sedai, Aiel, men who can channel, more soldiers than us, and powers we don't understand." "The Light would have protected us!"

ən ɪf ðəɾ ɪz tʃɹu, ɪɾəl pɹətɛkt əs naʊ," ɡɑləd sɛd, kɑnfəɾəns stʃɹɛŋθənɪŋ.

And if that is true, it will protect us now," Galad said, confidence strengthening.

noʊ," baɪɑɝ sɛd, vɔɪs ən æŋɡɹi wɪspɝ. "wi hæv lɛɾ aʊɝsɛlvz tə ðɪs. ɪf wi fɔl, ɪɾəl bi dɪzɝvd." hi lɛft wɪð ə ɹʌsəl ə ðə flæps.

No," Byar said, voice an angry whisper. "We have led ourselves to this. If we fall, it will be deserved." He left with a rustle of the flaps.

ɡɑləd stʊd fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən bʌkəld ɑn ɪz sɔɹd. ɹɪkɹɪmɪneɪʃən ən ɹɪpɛntəns wəd weɪt.

Galad stood for a moment, then buckled on his sword. Recrimination and repentance would wait.

hi hæd tə faɪn ə weɪ tə sɝvaɪv ðɪs deɪ. ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ə weɪ.

He had to find a way to survive this day. if there was a way.

kaʊntɝ ðɛɹ æmbʊʃ, wɪð wʌn ə ðɛɹ oʊn, hi θɔt. hæv ðə mɛn steɪ ' ðɛɹ tɛns əntɪl ði ətæk stɑɹts, ðən sɝpɹaɪz eɪbɑɹə baɪ ɹʌʃɪŋ aʊɾ ɪn fɔɹs, ænd. . .

Counter their ambush, with one of their own, he thought. Have the men stay ' their tents until the attack starts, then surprise Aybara by rushing out in force, and. . .

noʊ. eɪbɑɹə wəd stɑɹt wɪð æɹoʊz, ɹeɪnɪŋ dɛθ ɑn ðə tɛns ɪt wəd bi ðə bɛst weɪ tə teɪk ædvæntɪdʒ ə hɪz haɪ ɡɹaʊn ən ɪz lɔŋ. boʊmən.

No. Aybara would start with arrows, raining death on the tents It would be the best way to take advantage of his high ground and his long. bowmen.

ðə bɛs θɪŋ tə də wɑz ɡɛt ðə mɛn ɑɹmɝd, ðən əv əm bɹeɪk fɹəm ðɛɹ tɛns təɡɛðɝ ɑn ə sɪɡnəl ən ɹʌn fəɹ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz. ði ɑɹnɑɾi-tʃnz kəd fɔɹm ə pɪkwɔl ət ðə beɪs ə ðə haɪts.

The best thing to do was get the men armored, then have them break from their tents together on a signal and run for their horses. The Arnadi-cians could form a pikewall at the base of the heights.

eɪbɑɹə maɪt ɹɪsk ɹʌnɪŋ kævəlɹi daʊn ðə stip sloʊp liɾɪŋ ʌp tə ðə ɹaɪz, bʌt pɪkmɛn kəɾ əpsɛt ðət mənuvɝ.

Aybara might risk running cavalry down the steep slope leading up to the rise, but pikemen could upset that maneuver.

ɑɹtʃɝz wəd stɪl bi ə pɹɑbləm. ʃilz wəd hɛlp. ə lɪɾəl. hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ðən stʃɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə naɪt tə ɡɪv ði ɔɹɾɝz.

Archers would still be a problem. Shields would help. A little. He took a deep breath, then strode into the night to give the orders.

"wʌns ðə bæɾəl bɪɡɪnz," pɛɹɪn sɛd, "aɪ wɑn jə θɹi tə ɹitʃɹit tə seɪfti. aɪ woʊn tʃɹaɪ tə sɛn jə bæk tə ændɝ; aɪ noʊ jə wʊdnt ɡoʊ. bʌt jəɹ nɑt tə pɑɹtɪsəpeɪɾ ɪn ðə bæɾəl. steɪ bɪhaɪn ðə bæɾəl laɪnz ən wɪð ðə ɹɪɹ ɡɑɹd."

"Once the battle begins," Perrin said, "I want you three to retreat to safety. I won't try to send you back to Andor; I know you wouldn't go. But you're not to participate in the battle. Stay behind the battle lines and with the rear guard."

feɪl ɡlænst ət hɪm. hi sæɾ ɪz maʊnt, aɪz fɔɹwɝd. ðeɪ stʊɾ ətɑp ðə haɪts, ðə læst ə hɪz ɑɹmi ɪmɝdʒɪŋ fɹəm ðə ɡeɪtweɪz pəzɪʃən bɪhaɪnd. dʒɔɹi kɔŋɡɝ hɛld ə ʃildɪd læntɝn fəɹ pɛɹɪn. ɪt ɡeɪv ði ɛɹiə ə vɛɹi feɪn laɪt.

Faile glanced at him. He sat his mount, eyes forward. They stood atop the heights, the last of his army emerging from the gateways positioned behind. Jori Congar held a shielded lantern for Perrin. It gave the area a very faint light.

"ʌv kɔɹs, maɪ lɔɹd," bɹəleɪn sɛd smuðli.

"Of course, my Lord," Berelain said smoothly.

"aɪl əv jəɹ oʊðz ɑn ɪt, ðɛn," pɛɹɪn sɛd, aɪz stɪl fɔɹwɝd. "ju ən æliændɝ, bɹəleɪn.

"I'll have your oaths on it, then," Perrin said, eyes still forward. "You and Alliandre, Berelain.

feɪl, əl sɪmpli æsk ən hoʊp."

Faile, I'll simply ask and hope."

"ju hæv maɪ oʊθ, maɪ lɔɹd," æliændɝ sɛd.

"You have my oath, my Lord," Alliandre said.

pɛɹɪnz vɔɪs wɑz soʊ fɝm, ən ðət wɝid feɪl. kəd bɹəleɪn bi ɹaɪt? wɑz i gɑnə ətæk ðə waɪtkloʊks? ðeɪ wɝ ən ʌnpɹɪdɪktəbəl ɛləmənt, fəɹ ɔl ðɛɹ pɹəfɛʃənz ʌv wɑntɪŋ tə faɪɾ ɪn ðə læs bæɾəl. ðeɪ kəd kɑz mɔɹ hɑɹm ðən hɛlp. bɪɑn ðæt, æliændɝ wɑz pɛɹɪnz lidʒ wʊmən, ən ðə waɪtkloʊks wɝ ɪn əɹ ɹɛlm. hu nu wʌt dæmədʒ ðeɪ wəd kɑz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ lɛft? bɪɑn ðæt, ðəɹ wɑz ðə fjutʃɝ sɔɹɾ ʌv ɡɑlədz dʒʌdʒmənt.

Perrin's voice was so firm, and that worried Faile. Could Berelain be right? Was he going to attack the Whitecloaks? They were an unpredictable element, for all their professions of wanting to fight in the Last Battle. They could cause more harm than help. Beyond that, Alliandre was Perrin's liege woman, and the Whitecloaks were in her realm. Who knew what damage they would cause before they left? Beyond that, there was the future sword of Galad's judgment.

"maɪ lɔɹd," bɹəleɪn sɛd, saʊndɪŋ wɝid. "pliz doʊn də ðɪs."

"My Lord," Berelain said, sounding worried. "Please don't do this."

"aɪm oʊnli duɪŋ wʌɾ aɪ mʌst," pɛɹɪn sɛd, lʊkɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə ɹoʊdweɪ ðət ɹæn təwɔɹd dʒəhænə. ðət wɑzn ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðə waɪtkloʊks. ðeɪ wɝ dʒʌst saʊθ ə pɛɹɪnz pəzɪʃən.

"I'm only doing what I must," Perrin said, looking along the roadway that ran toward Jehannah. That wasn't the direction of the Whitecloaks. They were just south of Perrin's position.

"pɛɹɪn," feɪl sɛd, ɡlænsɪŋ ət bɹəleɪn. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə - " ə mæn sʌɾənli ɪmɝdʒ fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz, meɪkɪŋ noʊ saʊnd, dɪspaɪt ðə dʒɹaɪɾ ʌndɝbɹʌʃ. "pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," ɡɔl sɛd. "ðə waɪtkloʊks noʊ wɝ hɪɹ."

"Perrin," Faile said, glancing at Berelain. "What are you - " A man suddenly emerged from the shadows, making no sound, despite the dried underbrush. "Perrin Aybara," Gaul said. "The Whitecloaks know we're here."

"ɑɹ jə sɝɾən?" pɛɹɪn æskt. hi dɪdn sim əlɑɹmd.

"Are you certain?" Perrin asked. He didn't seem alarmed.

"ðeɪ ɑɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə lɛɾ əs noʊ," ɡɔl sɛd, "bʌɾ aɪ kən si ɪt. ðə meɪɾənz əɡɹi. ðeɪ ɑɹ pɹipɛɹɪŋ fəɹ bæɾəl, ðə ɡɹumz ənhɑbəlɪŋ ðə hɔɹsəz, ɡɑɹdz muvɪŋ fɹəm tɛn tə tɛnt."

"They are trying not to let us know," Gaul said, "but I can see it. The Maidens agree. They are preparing for battle, the grooms unhobbling the horses, guards moving from tent to tent."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. hi nʌdʒ stɛpɝ fɔɹwɝd θɹu ðə bɹʌʃ, ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɹaɪɾ ʌp tə ði ɛdʒ ə ðə haɪts. feɪl muv deɪlaɪɾ ʌp bɪhaɪn hɪm, bɹəleɪn steɪɪŋ kloʊs tə hɝ.

Perrin nodded. He nudged Stepper forward through the brush, riding right up to the edge of the heights. Faile moved Daylight up behind him, Berelain staying close to her.

ðə læn sləp stipli daʊn tə ði eɪntʃən ɹɪvɝbɛd ðət flæŋk ðə ɹoʊdweɪ bɪloʊ. ðə ɹoʊd ɹæn fɹəm ðə dɝɛkʃən ə dʒəhænə, əntɪl ɪt pæs ðə beɪs ə ðiz haɪts ən tʊk ə tɝn ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ə luɡɹd. ɹaɪɾ ət ðə bɛnd wɑz ðə hɑloʊ, ʃɛltɝɾ əɡɛns ðə hɪl, wɛɹ ðə waɪtkloʊks hæɾ ɝeɪnʒd ðɛɹ sɝkəlz ə tɛns.

The land sloped steeply down to the ancient riverbed that flanked the roadway below. The road ran from the direction of Jehannah, until it passed the base of these heights and took a turn in the direction of Lugard. Right at the bend was the hollow, sheltered against the hill, where the Whitecloaks had arranged their circles of tents.

ðə klaʊdz wɝ θɪn, əlaʊɪŋ peɪl munlaɪt tə koʊt ðə læn ɪn sɪlvɝi waɪt. ə loʊ fɑɡ wɑz ɹoʊlɪŋ ɪn, steɪɪŋ meɪnli ɪn ðə ɹɪvɝbɛd, dip ən θɪk. pɛɹɪn skæn ðə sin; hi hæɾ ə klɪɹ vju ʌv ðə ɹoʊɾ ɪn boʊθ dɝɛkʃənz. sʌɾənli, ʃaʊts ɹæŋ aʊt bɪloʊ, mɛn bɝstɪŋ fɹəm ðə waɪt- kloʊk tɛns ən spɹɪntɪŋ təwɔɹd hɔɹslaɪnz. tɔɹtʃɪz flɛɹd tə laɪf.

The clouds were thin, allowing pale moonlight to coat the land in silvery white. A low fog was rolling in, staying mainly in the riverbed, deep and thick. Perrin scanned the scene; he had a clear view of the road in both directions. Suddenly, shouts rang out below, men bursting from the White- cloak tents and sprinting toward horselines. Torches flared to life.

"ɑɹtʃɝz fɔɹwɝd!" pɛɹɪn bɛloʊd.

"Archers forward!" Perrin bellowed.

ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn skɹæmbəl tə ði ɛdʒ ə ðɛɹ ɛləveɪɾɪd pəzɪʃən.

The Two Rivers men scrambled to the edge of their elevated position.

"ɪnfəntʃɹi, ɹɛɾi bɪhaɪn ði ɑɹtʃɝz!" pɛɹɪn jɛld. 'ɑɹɡændə, ɑn ðə lɛft flæŋk. ɡælɛn, ɑn ðə ɹaɪt! əl kɔl ɪf aɪ nid jə tə swip fəɹ ʌs." hi tɝn tə ðə fʊt soʊlʒɝz - meɪnli fɔɹmɝ ɹɛfjudʒiz.

"Infantry, ready behind the archers!" Perrin yelled. 'Arganda, on the left flank. Gallenne, on the right! I'll call if I need you to sweep for us." He turned to the foot soldiers - mainly former refugees.

"kip ɪn ə taɪt fɔɹmeɪʃən, bɔɪz. kip jəɹ ʃilz ʌp ən jəɹ spɪɹ ɑɹmz flɛkst. ɑɹtʃɝz, æɹoʊz tə baʊ!"

"Keep in a tight formation, boys. Keep your shields up and your spear arms flexed. Archers, arrows to bow!"

feɪl fɛl hɝsɛlf stɑɹt tə swɛt. ðɪs wɑz ɹɔŋ. ʃʊɹli pɛɹɪn wɑznt ɡoʊɪŋ tə . . .

Faile felt herself start to sweat. This was wrong. Surely Perrin wasn't going to . . .

hi stɪl wɑzn lʊkɪŋ ət ðə waɪtkloʊks bɪloʊ ðɛm. hi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ɹɪvɝbɛɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd, pɝhæps ə hʌnʒɹəd jɑɹdz əɹ soʊ bɪɑn ðə haɪts, wɪtʃ ɛndəɾ ɪn ə stip dʒɹɑp-ɔf kəz ə ði eɪntʃən ɹɪvɝz wɑʃɪŋ. pɛɹɪn lʊkt əz ɪf siɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm wɝnt. ən wɪð ðoʊz ɡoʊldən aɪz ə hɪz, pɝhæps i wɑz duɪŋ dʒʌs ðæt.

He still wasn't looking at the Whitecloaks below them. He was staring at the riverbed on the other side, perhaps a hundred yards or so beyond the heights, which ended in a steep drop-off because of the ancient river's washing. Perrin looked as if seeing something the rest of them weren't. And with those golden eyes of his, perhaps he was doing just that.

"maɪ lɔɹd," bɹəleɪn sɛd, muvɪŋ əɹ hɔɹs ʌp bɪsaɪd hɪm, saʊndɪŋ dɛspɹɪt. "ɪf jə mʌst ətæk, kəd jə spɛɹ ðə kəmændɝ ə ðə waɪtkloʊks? hi maɪt bi jusfəl fəɹ pəlɪɾəkəl ɹizənz."

"My Lord," Berelain said, moving her horse up beside him, sounding desperate. "If you must attack, could you spare the commander of the Whitecloaks? He might be useful for political reasons."

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt?" pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðə hoʊl ɹizən aɪm hɪɹ ɪz tə kip dəmədʒɹɾ əlaɪv."

"What are you talking about?" Perrin said. "The whole reason I'm here is to keep Damodred alive."

"ju . . . wʌt?" bɹəleɪn æskt.

"You . . . what?" Berelain asked.

"maɪ lɔɹd!" ɡɹeɪɾi sʌɾənli ɪkskleɪmd, ɹaɪɾɪŋ nɪɹbaɪ. "aɪ sɛns tʃænəlɪŋ!"

"My Lord!" Grady suddenly exclaimed, riding nearby. "I sense channeling!"

"wʌts ðæt, ðɛɹ!" dʒɔɹi kɔŋɡɝ jɛld, pɔɪntɪŋ. "sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðə fɑɡ. ɪts . . ."

"What's that, there!" Jori Congar yelled, pointing. "Something in the fog. It's . . ."

feɪl skwɪntɪd. ðɛɹ, dʒʌs bɪloʊ ði ɑɹmi ɪn ðə fɔɹmɝ ɹɪvɝbɛd, fɪɡjɝz bɪɡæn tə ɹaɪz əz ɪf fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊnd. mɪsʃeɪpən kɹitʃɝz wɪð ænəməl hɛdz ən bɑɾiz, hæf əɡɛn əz tɔl əz pɛɹɪn, bɛɹɪŋ bɹuɾɪʃ wɛpənz muvɪŋ əmʌŋ əm wɝ slik, aɪləs fɪɡjɝz ɪn blæk.

Faile squinted. There, just below the army in the former riverbed, figures began to rise as if from the ground. Misshapen creatures with animal heads and bodies, half again as tall as Perrin, bearing brutish weapons Moving among them were sleek, eyeless figures in black.

fɑɡ stʃɹimd ɝaʊn əm əz ðeɪ stʃɹoʊd fɔɹwɝd, tʃɹeɪlɪŋ wɪsps. ðə kɹitʃɝz kəntɪnjud tə əpɪɹ. dʌzənz ə ðɛm. hʌnʒɹədz. θaʊzənz.

Fog streamed around them as they strode forward, trailing wisps. The creatures continued to appear. Dozens of them. Hundreds. Thousands.

ən ɪntaɪɝ ɑɹmi ʌv tʃɹɑləks ən mɹdʒɹɑl.

An entire army of Trollocs and Myrddraal.

"ɡɹeɪɾi, nild!" pɛɹɪn bɛloʊd. "laɪt!"

"Grady, Neald!" Perrin bellowed. "Light!"

bɹɪljənt waɪt ɡlɑbz əpɪɹɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ ən hʌŋ ðɛɹ. mɔɹ ən mɔɹ tʃɹɑləks wɝ ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ðə fɑɡ, əz ɪf ɪt wɝ spɑnɪŋ ðɛm, bʌt ðeɪ sim bɪwɪldɝd baɪ ðə laɪts. ðeɪ lʊkt ʌp, skwɪntɪŋ ən ʃildɪŋ ðɛɹ aɪz.

Brilliant white globes appeared in the air and hung there. More and more Trollocs were rising from the fog, as if it were spawning them, but they seemed bewildered by the lights. They looked up, squinting and shielding their eyes.

pɛɹɪn ɡɹʌntɪd. "haʊ əbaʊt ðæt? ðeɪ wɝn ɹɛɾi fəɹ ʌs; ðeɪ θɔt ðeɪɾ əv ən izi ʃɑɾ ət ðə waɪtkloʊks." hi tɝnd, lʊkɪŋ daʊn ðə laɪnz ə sɝpɹaɪz soʊlʒɝz. "wɛl, mɛn, jə wɑntəd tə fɑloʊ mi tə ðə læs bæɾəl? wɝ gɑnə ɡɛɾ ə teɪst ʌv ɪt ɹaɪt hɪɹ! ɑɹtʃɝz, lus! lɛts sɛn ðoʊz ʃæɾoʊzpɔn bæk tə ðə pɪt ðət bɝθɛd ðɛm!"

Perrin grunted. "How about that? They weren't ready for us; they thought they'd have an easy shot at the Whitecloaks." He turned, looking down the lines of surprised soldiers. "Well, men, you wanted to follow me to the Last Battle? We're going to get a taste of it right here! Archers, loose! Let's send those Shadowspawn back to the pit that birthed them!"

hi ɹeɪzd ɪz nuli fɔɹdʒ hæmɝ, ən ðə bæɾəl bɪɡæn.

He raised his newly forged hammer, and the battle began.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾiwʌn


CHAPTER 41

ən ʌnɪkspɛktɪɾ ælaɪ


An Unexpected Ally

ɡɑləd ɹæn wɪð ɪz ʃild ɹeɪz haɪ. bɔɹnhəl dʒɔɪn hɪm, ɔlsoʊ hoʊldɪŋ ə ʃild ən tɔsɪŋ əsaɪɾ ɪz læntɝn əz ðoʊz ənnætʃɹəl laɪts flɛɹɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ. niðɝ spoʊk. ðə heɪl ʌv æɹoʊz wəd bɪɡɪn moʊməntɛɹəli.

Galad ran with his shield raised high. Bornhald joined him, also holding a shield and tossing aside his lantern as those unnatural lights flared in the air. Neither spoke. The hail of arrows would begin momentarily.

ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə hɔɹs pɪkəts, wɛɹ ə pɛɹ ə nɝvəs ɡɹumz hændəɾ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz. ɡɑləd loʊɝɾ ɪz ʃild, filɪŋ tɛɹəbli ɪkspoʊzd əz i swʌŋ ɑntu staʊts bæk. hi tɝn ðə hɔɹs ən ɡɑt ðə ʃil bæk ʌp. hi kəd hɪɹ ðə fəmɪljɝ twɑŋ ə baʊz, dɪstənt, æɹoʊz snæpɪŋ əz ðeɪ ɹeɪn daʊn.

They reached the horse pickets, where a pair of nervous grooms handed over their horses. Galad lowered his shield, feeling terribly exposed as he swung onto Stout's back. He turned the horse and got the shield back up. He could hear the familiar twang of bows, distant, arrows snapping as they rained down.

nʌn fɛl nɪɹ hɪm.

None fell near him.

hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ðə laɪts hæŋɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ meɪɾ ɪt bɹaɪɾ əz ə naɪt wɪð ə fʊl mun, meɪbi bɹaɪɾɝ.

He hesitated. The lights hanging in the air made it bright as a night with a full moon, maybe brighter.

"wʌts ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn?" bɔɹnhəl sɛd, hɔɹs dænsɪŋ nɝvəsli bɪniθ hɪm. "ðeɪ mɪst? ðoʊz æɹoʊz ɑɹ fɔlɪŋ wɛl aʊtsaɪɾ ə kæmp."

"What's going on?" Bornhald said, horse dancing nervously beneath him. "They missed? Those arrows are falling well outside of camp."

"tʃɹɑləks!" ə ʃaʊt fɹəm kæmp. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ θaʊzənz ə ðɛm kʌmɪŋ daʊn ðə ɹoʊdweɪ!"

"Trollocs!" A shout from camp. "There are thousands of them coming down the roadway!"

"mɑnstɝz!" ə tɛɹəfaɪɾ ɑmɑdɪʃən jɛld. "mɑnstɝz ə ðə ʃædoʊ! laɪt, ðəɹ ɹil?"

"Monsters!" a terrified Amadician yelled. "Monsters of the Shadow! Light, they're real?"

ɡɑləd ɡlænst ət bɔɹnhəld. ðeɪ ɡæləp ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz tə ði ʌv kæmp, waɪt kloʊks stʃɹimɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ən lʊkt ʌp ðə ɹoʊd.

Galad glanced at Bornhald. They galloped their horses to the of camp, white cloaks streaming behind them, and looked up the road.

əɾ ə slɔɾɝ.

At a slaughter.

weɪvz ʌv æɹoʊz fɛl fɹəm ðə haɪts, kɹæʃɪŋ ɪndə ðə mɑb ə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn. ðə kɹitʃɝz haʊld ən skɹitʃt, səm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹʌn fəɹ ɡɑlədz kæmp, ʌðɝz tə klaɪm təwɔɹd ði ɑɹtʃɝz.

Waves of arrows fell from the heights, crashing into the mob of Shadowspawn. The creatures howled and screeched, some trying to run for Galad's camp, others to climb toward the archers.

tʃɹɔɪɑlɑks ɪksploʊɾəd sʌd-dɛnli ɪndə ði ɛɹ, ðə ɡɹaʊn hivɪŋ bɪniθ ðɛm, ən faɪɝ fɛl fɹəm əbʌv.

Troilocs exploded sud-denly into the air, the ground heaving beneath them, and fire fell from above.

eɪbɑɹəz tʃænlɝz hæd dʒɔɪn ðə faɪt.

Aybara's channelers had joined the fight.

ɡɑləd tʊk ɪɾ ɪn. "fʊt, fɔɹm ə ʃildwɔl ɑn ðɪs saɪɾ ə ðə kæmp," hi bɛloʊd. "kɹɔsboʊmən, tə ðoʊz ɹuənz ðɛɹ. splɪt ðə lidʒənz ɪndə eɪt kævəlɹi kʌmpəniz, ən pɹipɛɹ tə sæli! boʊmən, ɡɛt ɹɛɾi!" ðə tʃɪlʒɹən wɝ pɹaɪmɛɹəli ə kævəlɹi fɔɹs. hɪz mɛn wəd ɹaɪɾ aʊt, hɪt ðə tʃɹɔɪɑlɑks ɪn weɪvz, wʌn kʌmpəni əɾ ə taɪm, ðən ɹitʃɹit bæk bɪhaɪn ðə fʊts dɪfɛnsɪv ʃildwɔl. kɹɔsboʊmən tə wikən ðə tʃɹɑlɑk laɪnz bɪfɔɹ ðə hɛvi kævəlɹi hɪɾ əm wɪð lænsɪz, ɑɹtʃɝz tə kʌvɝ əm əz ðeɪ ɹɪtɝn bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ dɪfɛnsəz.

Galad took it in. "Foot, form a shieldwall on this side of the camp," he bellowed. "Crossbowmen, to those ruins there. Split the legions into eight cavalry companies, and prepare to sally! Bowmen, get ready!" The Children were primarily a cavalry force. His men would ride out, hit the Troilocs in waves, one company at a time, then retreat back behind the foot's defensive shieldwall. Crossbowmen to weaken the Trolloc lines before the heavy cavalry hit them with lances, archers to cover them as they returned behind their defenses.

ði ɔɹɾɝz wɝ pæs kwɪkli, ðə tʃɪlʒɹən muvɪŋ mɔɹ ɪfɪʃənli ðən ði ɑmɑdɪʃənz.

The orders were passed quickly, the Children moving more efficiently than the Amadicians.

bɔɹnhəl nɑɾəd. ðɪs wɑz ə moʊsli dɪfɛnsɪv pɑstʃɝ, bʌt ðət meɪd ðə moʊst sɛns, ət list əntɪl ɡɑləd kəd sɔɹt θɹu wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ.

Bornhald nodded. This was a mostly defensive posture, but that made the most sense, at least until Galad could sort through what was happening.

hʊfbits ənaʊns baɪɑɝ ɡæləpɪŋ ʌp. hi ɹɪɹɾ ɪz hɔɹs, ðən tɝnd, aɪz waɪd. "tʃɹɔɪɑlɑks?

Hoofbeats announced Byar galloping up. He reared his horse, then turned, eyes wide. "Troilocs?

haʊ . . . ɪts eɪbɑɹə. hiz bɹɔɾ ən ɑɹmi ʌv ʃæɾoʊzpɔn!"

How . . . It's Aybara. He's brought an army of Shadowspawn!"

"ɪf i dɪd," ɡɑləd sɛd, "hiz tʃɹiɾɪŋ əm tə ə slɔɾɝ."

"If he did," Galad said, "he's treating them to a slaughter."

baɪɑɝ ɛdʒ kloʊsɝ. "ɪts ɪɡzækli laɪk ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. deɪn, jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌɾ i dɪd? tʃɹɔɪɑlɑks ətæk. eɪbɑɹə ɹæliz ə dɪfɛns, ən ðɛɹfɔɹ ɝnz səpɔɹt."

Byar edged closer. "It's exactly like the Two Rivers. Dain, you remember what he did? Troilocs attack. Aybara rallies a defense, and therefore earns support."

"wʌt wəd bi ðə pɔɪnt?" bɔɹnhəl sɛd.

"What would be the point?" Bornhald said.

"tə tʃɹɪk ʌs."

"To trick us."

"baɪ kɪlɪŋ əz mɛni tʃɹɔɪɑlɑks əz ɪt ɡeɪnz ɪm ɪn fɑloʊɝz?" bɔɹnhəl fɹaʊnd. "ɪt ... ɪt meɪks noʊ sɛns. ɪf eɪbɑɹə kən kəmæn θaʊzənz ə tʃɹɔɪɑlɑks, waɪ wəɾ i niɾ ʌs?"

"By killing as many Troilocs as it gains him in followers?" Bornhald frowned. "It ... it makes no sense. If Aybara can command thousands of Troilocs, why would he need us?"

"hɪz maɪn ɪz sɪk, twɪstəd," baɪɑɝ sɛd. "ɪf i dɪdn əv sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð ði əpɪɹəns ə ðə tʃɹɔɪɑlɑks, ðən haʊ dɪd boʊθ ʃoʊ ʌp ɹaɪt naʊ, ət ðə seɪm taɪm?"

"His mind is sick, twisted," Byar said. "If he didn't have something to do with the appearance of the Troilocs, then how did both show up right now, at the same time?"

wɛl, ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡɹeɪn ə tʃɹuθ ɪn ðæt, ɡɑləd hæd tə ədmɪt. "fɔɹ naʊ, hi sɛd, "ɪt ɡeɪnz əs ðə taɪm wi nid tə fɔɹm ʌp. bɔɹnhəld, baɪɑɝ, hɛlp pæs maɪ ɔɹɾɝz. aɪ wɑn ðə ɹaɪɾɝz ɹɛɾi tə sæli əz sun əz ðə kɹɔsboʊmən fɪnɪʃ. hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "bʌt lɛt ðə mɛn noʊ ðət wəɹ nɑt tə ɪkspoʊz əɹ flæŋks tə eɪbɑɹə. kip səm fʊt wɪð paɪks ət ðə beɪs ə ðoʊz haɪts. dʒʌst ɪn keɪs.

Well, there was a grain a truth in that, Galad had to admit. "For now, he said, "it gains us the time we need to form up. Bornhald, Byar, help pass my orders. I want the riders ready to sally as soon as the crossbowmen finish. He hesitated. "But let the men know that we are not to expose our flanks to Aybara. Keep some foot with pikes at the base of those heights. Just in case.

tʃɹɔɪɑlɑks fɛl skɹimɪŋ ʌndɝ ði æɹoʊz. stɪl mɔɹ kəntɪnjud tə əpɪɹ, ən mɛni ʌv ðə bists dɪdn fɔl əntɪl ðeɪ hæd mʌltəpəl æɹoʊz ɪn ðɛm.

Troilocs fell screaming under the arrows. Still more continued to appear, and many of the beasts didn't fall until they had multiple arrows in them.

ðə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn wɝ pɹipɛɹɪŋ fəɹ ə ɹʌʃ ʌp ði ɪnklaɪn təwɔɹd pɛɹɪnz fɔɹsɪz. ɪf ðeɪ dɪd, hiɾ əv ɪz fʊt hoʊl fəɹ ə taɪm - ðən pʊl əm bæk ən ɹʌn ðə kævəlɹi swip əlɔŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm.

The Shadowspawn were preparing for a rush up the incline toward Perrin's forces. If they did, he'd have his foot hold for a time - then pull them back and run the cavalry sweep along in front of them.

"haʊ dɪd jə noʊ?" feɪl æsk sɔfli.

"How did you know?" Faile asked softly.

hi ɡlænst ət hɝ. "ɪts taɪm fəɹ jə θɹi tə ɹitʃɹit bɪhaɪn tə ðə ɹɪɹ ɡɑɹd." hi ɡlænst ət bɹəleɪn, waɪt-feɪst ɑn əɹ hɔɹs, əz ɪf siɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑləks hæɾ ənhɪnʒd hɝ. hi nu hɝ tə bi ʌv stʃɹɔŋɝ stil ðən ðæt, haʊɛvɝ. waɪ dɪd ʃi smɛl soʊ wɝid?

He glanced at her. "It's time for you three to retreat behind to the rear guard." He glanced at Berelain, white-faced on her horse, as if seeing the Trollocs had unhinged her. He knew her to be of stronger steel than that, however. Why did she smell so worried?

"aɪ wɪl ɡoʊ," feɪl sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ hæv tə noʊ."

"I will go," Faile said. "But I have to know."

"ɪt meɪd sɛns," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðæt doʊm wɑz mɛn tə kip əs fɹəm fliɪŋ baɪ ɡeɪtweɪ. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔlsoʊ tə ɛnkɝɪdʒ əs əlɔŋ ðə ɹoʊd, tə kip əs fɹəm tʃɹævlɪŋ dɝɛkli tə ændɝ. ɪt simd ɑd tə əs ðət mæstɝ ɡɪl wəd tɝn əlɔŋ ðə ɹoʊd, dɪsəbɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz - bʌɾ ɪt hæpən kəz i wɑz kənvɪns baɪ pipəl kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðə nɔɹθ ðət ðə weɪ wɑz ɪmpæsəbəl. plæns baɪ əɹ ɛnəmiz, aɪ səspɛkt, tə lʊɹ əs ðɪs dɝɛkʃən.

"It made sense," Perrin said. "That dome was meant to keep us from fleeing by gateway. But it was also to encourage us along the road, to keep us from Traveling directly to Andor. It seemed odd to us that Master Gill would turn along the road, disobeying orders - but it happened because he was convinced by people coming from the north that the way was impassible. Plants by our enemies, I suspect, to lure us this direction.

"wi wɝ biɪŋ hɝɾɪd ɔl əlɔŋ. ðeɪ wɝnt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ əs tə ɛnɡeɪdʒ ðə waɪtkloʊks, ðeɪ wɝ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ əs tə meɪk fəɹ luɡɹɾ əz fæst əz wi kʊd. ɪf wid tʃɹaɪd tə ɡoʊ kɹɔs-kʌntʃɹi, əl bɛt sʌmθɪŋ wʊɾə hæpən tə tɝn əs bæk. ðeɪ dɛspɝətli wɑntəɾ əs wɔk ɪndə ðɛɹ æmbʊʃ.

"We were being herded all along. They weren't waiting for us to engage the Whitecloaks, they were waiting for us to make for Lugard as fast as we could. If we'd tried to go cross-country, I'll bet something would have happened to turn us back. They desperately wanted us walk into their ambush.

ɡɑlədz fɔɹs pɹɑbli wɑzn pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt - hi wɑz ə bɝ ðət ɡɑɾ ʌndɝ ðɛɹ sæɾəl."

Galad's force probably wasn't part of it - he was a burr that got under their saddle."

"bʌt ðə tʃɹɑləks. wɛɹ - "

"But the Trollocs. Where - "

"aɪ θɪŋk ɪt mʌs bi ə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪ nu səm kaɪndə ətæk wɑz gɑnə kʌm hɪɹ. dɪdnt noʊ haʊ. aɪ hæf θɔɾ ɪt wəd bi dʒɹæɡkɝ fɹəm ðə skaɪ əɹ ə weɪɡeɪt wid mɪst.

"I think it must be a Portal Stone," Perrin said. "I knew some kind of attack was going to come here. Didn't know how. I half thought it would be Draghkar from the sky or a Waygate we'd missed.

bʌt ðoʊz ɹuənz ɑɹ-ɡændə pɔɪntəɾ aʊt sim laɪk ðeɪ maɪt bi ə ɡʊd pleɪs fəɹ ə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn. ɪt mʌs bi bɛɹid, hævɪŋ fɔlən ʌndɝ ðə ɹɪvɝ wən ɪt tʃeɪnʒd ɪts kɔɹs. ðə tʃɹɑləks ɑɹən kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɹaʊnd; aɪ θɪŋk ðəɹ əpɪɹɪŋ fɹəm ðə stoʊn.

But those ruins Ar-ganda pointed out seem like they might be a good place for a Portal Stone. It must be buried, having fallen under the river when it changed its course. The Trollocs aren't coming out of the ground; I think they're appearing from the stone.

"ðɪs wɑz ðə tʃɹæp. ðeɪ pɹɑbli wʊɾə ətækt əs mʌtʃ ɝliɝ, bʌt ðə waɪtkloʊks wɝ ɪn ðə weɪ. ðeɪ hæd tə weɪt fəɹ əs tə dil wɪð ðɛm. ən ðən wi lɛft. soʊ . . ."

"This was the trap. They probably would have attacked us much earlier, but the Whitecloaks were in the way. They had to wait for us to deal with them. And then we left. So . . ."

soʊ ðeɪ ətæk dəmədʒɹɾ ən ɪz mɛn," feɪl sɛd. "æftɝ sɛɾɪŋ ʌp ðə tʃɹæp, ðeɪ ət list wɑntəd tə də səm dæmədʒ tə ðoʊz u maɪt faɪt leɪɾɝ ɑn."

So they attacked Damodred and his men," Faile said. "After setting uP the trap, they at least wanted to do some damage to those who might fight later on."

aɪ səspɛkt wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɪz bɪhaɪn ðɪs," pɛɹɪn sɛd, tɝnɪŋ təwɔɹd ɡɹeɪɾi.

I suspect one of the Forsaken is behind this," Perrin said, turning toward Grady.

"wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən?" æliændɝ sɛd, vɔɪs ɹaɪzɪŋ. "wi kæn faɪt wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən?

"One of the Forsaken?" Alliandre said, voice rising. "We can't fight one of the Forsaken?

pɛɹɪn ɡlænst ət hɝ. "wʌt dɪd jə θɪŋk jə wɝ saɪnɪŋ ʌp tə du, æliændɝ, wən jə dʒɔɪn mi? jə faɪt fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪn tɑɹ-moʊn ɡdən ɪtsɛlf. wɪl əv tə feɪs ðə fɔɹseɪkən sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ."

Perrin glanced at her. "What did you think you were signing up to do, Alliandre, when you joined me? You fight for the Dragon Reborn in Tar-mon Gai'don itself. We'll have to face the Forsaken sooner or later."

ʃi peɪld, bʌt tə hɝ kɹɛɾət, ʃi nɑɾəd.

She paled, but to her credit, she nodded.

"ɡɹeɪɾi.'" pɛɹɪn kɔl tə ði æʃəmən, hu wɑz faɪɹɪŋ blæsts daʊn ət ðə tʃɹɑləks. "ju stɪl sɛns tʃænəlɪŋ?"

"Grady.'" Perrin called to the Asha'man, who was firing blasts down at the Trollocs. "You still sense channeling?"

"oʊnli ɔf ən ɑn, maɪ lɔɹd," ɡɹeɪɾi kɔl bæk. "huɛvɝ ɪɾ ɪz, ðəɹ nɑt tɛɹəbli stʃɹɔŋ. ən ðəɹ nɑt dʒɔɪnɪŋ ðə bæɾəl. aɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ mʌs bi duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ tə bɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑləks, dʒʌmpɪŋ ɪn wɪð fɪsts ə ðɛm, ðən dʒʌmpɪŋ əweɪ ɪmiɾiətli tə fɛtʃ mɔɹ."

"Only off and on, my Lord," Grady called back. "Whoever it is, they're not terribly strong. And they're not joining the battle. I think they must be doing something to bring the Trollocs, jumping in with fists of them, then jumping away immediately to fetch more."

"wɑtʃ fəɹ hɪm," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "si ɪf jə kən teɪk ɪm daʊn."

"Watch for him," Perrin said. "See if you can take him down."

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd," ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd, səluɾɪŋ.

"Yes, my Lord," Grady said, saluting.

soʊ ɪt wɑznt wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən bɹɪŋɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑləks dɝɛkli. ðət dɪdn min ðɪs wɑzn ðə wɝk ʌv wʌn ə ðɛm, dʒʌs ðət ðeɪ hædn dɪsaɪɾɪd tə kəmɪt ðɛmsɛlvz dɝɛkli. "bæk wɪð jə θɹi," pɛɹɪn sɛd tə feɪl, bɹəleɪn ən æliændɝ, hɛftɪŋ ɪz hæmɝ. ðə tʃɹɑləks hæd bɪɡʌn tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ ʌp ðə ɹaɪz, mɛni dʒɹɑpɪŋ tə æɹoʊz, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ ɪnʌf ðət səm wəd ɹitʃ ðə tɑp sun. ɪt wɑz taɪm tə faɪt.

So it wasn't one of the Forsaken bringing the Trollocs directly. That didn't mean this wasn't the work of one of them, just that they hadn't decided to commit themselves directly. "Back with you three," Perrin said to Faile, Berelain and Alliandre, hefting his hammer. The Trollocs had begun charging up the rise, many dropping to arrows, but there were enough that some would reach the top soon. It was time to fight.

"ju doʊnt noʊ haʊ mɛni ʌv əm ðəɹ ɑɹ, maɪ hʌzbənd," feɪl sɛd sɔfli. "ðeɪ kip kʌmɪŋ.

"You don't know how many of them there are, my husband," Faile said softly. "They keep coming.

wʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ oʊvɝwɛlm ʌs?"

What if they overwhelm us?"

"wil ɹitʃɹit θɹu ə ɡeɪtweɪ ɪf θɪŋz tɝn pʊɹ fəɹ ʌs. bʌɾ aɪm nɑt lɛɾɪŋ əm əv ðə waɪtkloʊks wɪθaʊɾ ə faɪt - aɪ woʊn liv ɛni mæn tə ðə tʃɹɑləks, nɑɾ ivən ðɛɹ lɑt. ðeɪ ɪɡnɔɹd ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wən wi wɝ ətækt. wɛl, aɪ woʊn də ðə seɪm. ən ðæts ðæt."

"We'll retreat through a gateway if things turn poor for us. But I'm not letting them have the Whitecloaks without a fight - I won't leave any man to the Trollocs, not even their lot. They ignored the Two Rivers when we were attacked. Well, I won't do the same. And that's that."

feɪl, sʌɾənli, lin oʊvɝ tə kɪs hɪm. "θæŋk ju."

Faile, suddenly, leaned over to kiss him. "Thank you."

"fɔɹ wʌt?"

"For what?"

"fɔɹ biɪŋ ðə mæn ðət jə ɑɹ," ʃi sɛd, tɝnɪŋ əɹ maʊn ən liɾɪŋ ði ʌðɝ tu əweɪ.

"For being the man that you are," she said, turning her mount and leading the other two away.

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hi hæd bɪn wɝiɪŋ ðət hid nid tə hæv ɡɹeɪɾi ɹæp əɹ ʌp ɪn ɛɹ ən toʊ hɝ əweɪ. hi tɝn bæk tə ði əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ tʃɹɑləks. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn wɝn meɪkɪŋ ɪɾ izi fəɹ əm tə ɡɛɾ ʌp ði ɪnklaɪn. ðə mɛn wɝ ɹʌnɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv æɹoʊz, ðoʊ.

Perrin shook his head. He had been worrying that he'd need to have Grady wrap her up in Air and tow her away. He turned back to the approaching Trollocs. The Two Rivers men weren't making it easy for them to get up the incline. The men were running out of arrows, though.

pɛɹɪn hɛftəd mæhælaɪnɝ. ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm fɛl sɑɹi tə beɪð ðə wɛpən ɪn blʌd soʊ sun æftɝ ɪts bɝθ, bʌt ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ pɑɹɾ ə hɪm wɑz plizd. ðiz tʃɹɑləks, ən ðoʊz u lɛd ðɛm, hæd kɑz hɑpɝz dɛθ.

Perrin hefted Mah'alleinir. A part of him felt sorry to bathe the weapon in blood so soon after its birth, but the greater part of him was pleased. These Trollocs, and those who led them, had caused Hopper's death.

ə fɪst ə tʃɹɑləks kɹɛstəd ðə hɪltɑp, ə feɪd muvɪŋ ɪn bɪhaɪn ðɛm, lɛd baɪ ənʌðɝ feɪd wɪð ə blæk sɔɹd. pɛɹɪn lɛɾ aʊɾ ə ɹɔɹ ən tʃɑɹdʒ fɔɹwɝd, hæmɝ hɛl haɪ.

A fist of Trollocs crested the hilltop, a Fade moving in behind them, led by another Fade with a black sword. Perrin let out a roar and charged forward, hammer held high.

* * * ɡɑləd kɝst, tɝnɪŋ staʊɾ ən tʃɑpɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd daʊn ɪndə ðə nɛk ə tʃɹɑlɑk wɪð ðə hɛɾ ʌv ə bɛɹ, dɑɹk, θɪk blʌd spɝɾɪd aʊɾ ɪn ə nɔɪsəm ɡʌʃ, bʌt ðə bists wɝ tɛɹəbli dɪfəkəl tə kɪl. ɡɑləd hæd hɝd ðə stɔɹiz, hæd tʃɹeɪnd wɪð mɛn u hæd fɔt ʃæɾoʊzpɔn. stɪl, ðɛɹ ɹɪzɪliəns sɝpɹaɪz hɪm. hi hæd tə hæk ət ðə kɹitʃɝ θɹi mɔɹ taɪmz bɪfɔɹ ɪt dʒɹɑpt. ɔlɹɛɾi, ɡɑləɾ ɛs ɑɹm wɑz eɪkɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ fɪnɛs tə faɪɾɪŋ mɑnstɝz laɪk ðɪs. hi juz hɔɹsbæk sɔɹd fɔɹmz, bʌɾ ɔfən ðə moʊs dɝɛkt ən bɹuɾəl ə ðɛm. wʊdzmən stʃɹɪps ðə bɹæntʃ. ɑɹk ə ðə mun. stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ðə spɑɹk.

* * * Galad cursed, turning Stout and chopping his sword down into the neck of Trolloc with the head of a bear, Dark, thick blood spurted out in a noisome gush, but the beasts were terribly difficult to kill. Galad had heard the stories, had trained with men who had fought Shadowspawn. Still, their resilience surprised him. He had to hack at the creature three more times before it dropped. Already, Galad s arm was aching. There was no finesse to fighting monsters like this. He used horseback sword forms, but often the most direct and brutal of them. Woodsman Strips the Branch. Arc of the Moon. Striking the Spark.

hɪz mɛn wɝn fɛɹiŋ wɛl. ðeɪ wɝ bɑkst ɪn, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɹum fəɹ lænsɪz. ðə sæliɪŋ ətæks hæd wɝk fəɹ ə taɪm, bʌt ðə hɛvi kævəlɹi hæd bɪn fɔɹs tə ɹitʃɹit bæk tə ðə fʊt laɪnz, ən ɪz hoʊl fɔɹs wɑz biɪŋ pʊʃt ist. ði ɑmɑdɪʃənz wɝ biɪŋ oʊvɝwɛlmd, ən ðə fɔɹs ə ði ətæk wɑz tu ɡɹeɪt tə əlaʊ fɝðɝ kævəlɹi tʃɑɹdʒəz. ɔl ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ɑn hɔɹsbæk kəd də wɑz swɪŋ ðɛɹ wɛpənz waɪldli ɪn ən ətɛmp tə steɪ əlaɪv.

His men weren't faring well. They were boxed in, and there was no longer room for lances. The sallying attacks had worked for a time, but the heavy cavalry had been forced to retreat back to the foot lines, and his whole force was being pushed east. The Amadicians were being overwhelmed, and the force of the attack was too great to allow further cavalry charges. All the Children on horseback could do was swing their weapons wildly in an attempt to stay alive.

ɡɑləd tɝn staʊt, bʌt tu snɑɹlɪŋ tʃɹɑləks lɛp fəɹ hɪm. hi kwɪkli tʊk wʌn əkɹɔs ðə nɛk wɪð hɛɹən snætʃɪz ði ɪlvɝnʃ, bʌt ðə kɹitʃɝ fɛl fɔɹwɝɾ ɑntu staʊt, kɑzɪŋ ðə hɔɹs tə lɝtʃ əweɪ. ənʌðɝ bɹut slæʃt ə kætʃpoʊl ət ðə hɔɹsəz nɛk. ðə hɔɹs fɛl.

Galad turned Stout, but two snarling Trollocs leaped for him. He quickly took one across the neck with Heron Snatches the Silvernsh, but the creature fell forward onto Stout, causing the horse to lurch away. Another brute slashed a catchpole at the horse's neck. The horse fell.

ɡɑləd bɛɹli mænədʒ tə θɹoʊ hɪmsɛlf fɹi, hɪɾɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪn ə hip əz staʊt kəlæpst, lɛɡz dʒɝkɪŋ, nɛk spɝɾɪŋ blʌɾ əkɹɔs ɪz waɪt ʃoʊldɝ. ɡɑləd ɹoʊld, sɔɹd twɪstəd tə ðə saɪd, bʌɾ i hæd lændəd ɹɔŋ. hɪz æŋkəl ɹɛntʃt ɪn peɪn.

Galad barely managed to throw himself free, hitting the ground in a heap as Stout collapsed, legs jerking, neck spurting blood across his white shoulder. Galad rolled, sword twisted to the side, but he had landed wrong. His ankle wrenched in pain.

ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə peɪn, hi bɹɔɾ ɪz sɔɹɾ ʌp ɪn taɪm tə dɪflɛk ðə hʊk ʌv ə bɹaʊn-fɝd mɑnstɝ, naɪn fit tɔl, ðət stæŋk ə dɛθ. ɡɑlədz pɛɹi sɛn ɪm ɔf bæləns əɡɛn.

Ignoring the pain, he brought his sword up in time to deflect the hook of a brown-furred monster, nine feet tall, that stank of death. Galad's parry sent him off balance again.

"ɡɑləd!"

"Galad!"

fɪɡjɝz ɪn waɪt kɹæʃt ɪndə ðə tʃɹɑləks. ɹikɪŋ blʌd spɹeɪɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ. waɪt fɪɡjɝz tʌmbəl tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, bʌt ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ dʒɹɪvən bæk. bɔɹnhəl stʊd pæntɪŋ, sɔɹɾ aʊt, ʃil dɛntɪɾ ən spɹeɪd wɪð dɑɹk blʌd. hi hæd fɔɹ mɛn wɪð hɪm. tu ʌðɝz hæd fɔlən.

Figures in white crashed into the Trollocs. Reeking blood sprayed in the air. White figures tumbled to the ground, but the Trollocs were driven back. Bornhald stood panting, sword out, shield dented and sprayed with dark blood. He had four men with him. Two others had fallen.

θæŋk ju," ɡɑləd sɛd. "jɔɹ maʊns?"

Thank you," Galad said. "Your mounts?"

kʌt daʊn," bɔɹnhəl sɛd. "ðeɪ mʌst əv ɔɹɾɝz tə ɡoʊ æftɝ ðə hɔɹsəz."

Cut down," Bornhald said. "They must have orders to go after the horses."

"doʊnt wɑn əs ɪskeɪpɪŋ," ɡɑləd sɛd. "ɔɹ ɹæliɪŋ ə tʃɑɹdʒ." hi ɡlæns daʊn ðə laɪn ə bɪliɡɝd soʊlʒɝz. twɛnti θaʊzən hæd simd ə ɡɹæn ɑɹmi, bʌt ðə bæɾəl laɪnz wɝ ə mɛs. ən ðə tʃɹɑləks kəntɪnjud tə kʌm, weɪv æftɝ weɪv. ðə nɔɹðɝn sɛkʃən ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹənz laɪn wɑz bɹeɪkɪŋ, ən ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ pʊʃɪŋ fɔɹwɝd ðəɹ wɪð ə pɪnsɝ muvmən sɝaʊnd ɡɑlədz fɔɹs.

"Don't want us escaping," Galad said. "Or rallying a charge." He glanced down the line of beleaguered soldiers. Twenty thousand had seemed a grand army, but the battle lines were a mess. And the Trollocs continued to come, wave after wave. The northern section of the Children's line was breaking, and the Trollocs were pushing forward there with a pincer movement surround Galad's force.

ðeɪd kʌɾ əm ɔf ɑn ðə nɔɹθ ən saʊθ tə ɹæm əm əɡɛns ðə hɪl. laɪt!

They'd cut them off on the north and south to ram them against the hill. Light!

"ɹæli tə ðə nɔɹðɝn fʊt laɪn!" ɡɑləd jɛld. hi ɹæn ɪn ðət dɝək-ʃən əz kwɪkli əz i kʊd, hɪz æŋkəl pɹətɛstɪŋ, bʌt stɪl fʌŋkʃənɪŋ. mɛn dʒɔɪnd wɪð hɪm. ðɛɹ kloʊðɪŋ wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ waɪt.

"Rally to the northern foot line!" Galad yelled. He ran in that direc-tion as quickly as he could, his ankle protesting, but still functioning. Men joined with him. Their clothing was no longer white.

ɡɑləd nu ðət moʊs dʒɛnɝəlz, laɪk ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn, dɪdn faɪɾ ɑn ðə fɹʌn laɪnz. ðeɪ wɝ tu ɪmpɔɹɾənt fəɹ ðæt, ən ðɛɹ maɪnz wɝ niɾəd fəɹ ɔɹɡənaɪzɪŋ ðə faɪt. pɝhæps ðət wɑz wʌt ɡɑləd ʃʊɾə dʌn ɪt wɑz fɔlɪŋ əpɑɹt.

Galad knew that most generals, like Gareth Bryne, didn't fight on the front lines. They were too important for that, and their minds were needed for organizing the fight. Perhaps that was what Galad should have done It was falling apart.

hɪz mɛn wɝ ɡʊd. sɑləd. bʌt ðeɪ wɝ ɪnɪkspɪɹiənst wɪð tʃɹɑləks oʊnli naʊ - tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ əkɹɔs mʌɾi ɡɹaʊn ɑn ə dɑɹk naɪt, lɪt baɪ ɡlɑbz hæŋɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ - dɪɾ i si haʊ ɪnɪkspɪɹiəns mɛni ʌv əm wɝ. hi hæd səm vɛɾɝənz, bʌt ðə lɑɹdʒɝ ɡɹup hæd fɔt moʊsli əɡɛnst ənɹuli bændəts əɹ sɪɾi məlɪʃəz.

His men were good. Solid. But they were inexperienced with Trollocs Only now - charging across muddy ground on a dark night, lit by globes hanging in the air - did he see how inexperienced many of them were. He had some veterans, but the larger group had fought mostly against unruly bandits or city militias.

ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ dɪfɹənt. ðə haʊlɪŋ, ɡɹʌntɪŋ, snɑɹlɪŋ mɑnstɝz wɝ ɪn ə fɹɛnzi. wʌt ðeɪ lækt ɪn mɪlətɛɹi dɪsəplən ðeɪ meɪɾ ʌp fəɹ ɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ ən fɝɑsəɾi. ən hʌŋɡɝ. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl əmɪɾ əm wɝ tɛɹəbəl ɪnʌf tə bɹeɪk ə fɔɹmeɪʃən ɔl ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn. ɡɑlədz soʊlʒɝz wɝ bʌklɪŋ.

The Trollocs were different. The howling, grunting, snarling monsters were in a frenzy. What they lacked in military discipline they made up for in strength and ferocity. And hunger. The Myrddraal amid them were terrible enough to break a formation all on their own. Galad's soldiers were buckling.

"hoʊld!" ɡɑləd bɛloʊd, ɹitʃɪŋ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ sɛkʃən ə ðə laɪn. hi hæɾ ɔɹnhæfd ən əbaʊt fɪfti mɛn. nɑt nɪɹli ɪnʌf. "wi ɑɹ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt! wi də nɑt ɡɪv bɪfɔɹ ðə ʃædoʊ!"

"Hold!" Galad bellowed, reaching the breaking section of the line. He had Bornhafd and about fifty men. Not nearly enough. "We are the Children of the Light! We do not give before the Shadow!"

ɪt dɪdnt wɝk. wɑtʃɪŋ ðə dɪzæstɝ pleɪ aʊt, hɪz ɪntaɪɝ fɹeɪmwɝk ʌv ʌndɝstændɪŋ stɑɹɾəd tə kɹæk. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt wɝ nɑt pɹətɛktəd baɪ ðɛɹ ɡʊdnəs; ðeɪ wɝ fɔlɪŋ ɪn swɑθs, laɪk ɡɹeɪn bɪfɔɹ ðə saɪð. wɝs ðən ðæt, səm dɪd nɑt faɪt væljənli əɹ hoʊld wɪð ɹizɑlv. tu mɛni jɛld ɪn tɛɹɝ, ɹʌnɪŋ. ði ɑmɑdɪʃənz i kəɾ ʌndɝstænd, bʌɾ ə lɑɾ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ðɛmsɛlvz wɝ lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ.

It didn't work. Watching the disaster play out, his entire framework of understanding started to crack. The Children of the Light were not protected by their goodness; they were falling in swaths, like grain before the scythe. Worse than that, some did not fight valiantly or hold with resolve. Too many yelled in terror, running. The Amadicians he could understand, but a lot of the Children themselves were little better.

ðeɪ wɝn kaʊɝdz. ðeɪ wɝn pʊɹ faɪɾɝz. ðeɪ wɝ dʒʌs mɛn. ævɝɪdʒ. ðət wɑzn haʊ ɪt wɑz səpoʊz tə bi.

They weren't cowards. They weren't poor fighters. They were just men. Average. That wasn't how it was supposed to be.

θʌndɝ saʊndəɾ əz ɡælɛn bɹɔɾ ɪz hɔɹsmən ɝaʊn ɪn ənʌðɝ tʃɑɹdʒ. ðeɪ hæmɝɾ ɪndə ðə tʃɹɑlɑk laɪn ən fɔɹs mɛni ʌv əm ɔf ði ɛdʒ, tʌmbəlɪŋ əm bæk daʊn ði ɪnklaɪn.

Thunder sounded as Gallenne brought his horsemen around in another charge. They hammered into the Trolloc line and forced many of them off the edge, tumbling them back down the incline.

pɛɹɪn slæmd mæbɔlaɪnɝ ɪndə ə tʃɹɑləks hɛd. ðə fɔɹs ə ðə bloʊ tɔs ðə kɹitʃɝ tə ðə saɪd, ən - ɑdli - ɪts skɪn sɪzəld ən smoʊkt wɛɹ ðə hæmɝ hæd hɪt. ðɪs hæpənd wɪð itʃ bloʊ, əz ɪf ðə tʌtʃ ə mæhælaɪnɝ bɝn ðɛm, ðoʊ pɛɹɪn fɛlt oʊnli ə kʌmfɝt-eɪbəl wɔɹmθ fɹəm ðə hæmɝ.

Perrin slammed Mab'alleinir into a Trollocs head. The force of the blow tossed the creature to the side, and - oddly - its skin sizzled and smoked where the hammer had hit. This happened with each blow, as if the touch of Mah'alleinir burned them, though Perrin felt only a comfort-able warmth from the hammer.

ɡælɛnz tʃɑɹdʒ pʌntʃt θɹu ðə tʃɹɑlɑk ɹæŋks, sɛpɝeɪɾɪŋ əm ɪndə tu koʊhɔɹts, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ soʊ mɛni kɑɹkəsɪz ɪt wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ dɪfəkəl fəɹ ɪz lænsɝz tə tʃɑɹdʒ. ɡælɛn wɪθdʒɹu ən ə kəntɪnʒənt ə tu ɹɪv- ɝz mɛn muvd ɪn ən ʃɑɾ æɹoʊz ət ðə tʃɹɑləks, kʌɾɪŋ əm daʊn ɪn ə weɪv ə skɹimɪŋ, haʊlɪŋ, ɹikɪŋ dɛθ.

Gallenne's charge punched through the Trolloc ranks, separating them into two cohorts, but there were so many carcasses it was getting difficult for his lancers to charge. Gallenne withdrew and a contingent of Two Riv- ers men moved in and shot arrows at the Trollocs, cutting them down in a wave of screaming, howling, reeking death.

pɛɹɪn pʊl stɛpɝ bæk, fʊt soʊlʒɝz fɔɹmɪŋ ɝaʊn hɪm. vɛɹi fju ʌv ɪz mɛn hæd fɔlən əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹɑləks. ʌv kɔɹs, ivən wʌn wɑz tu mɛni.

Perrin pulled Stepper back, foot soldiers forming around him. Very few of his men had fallen among the Trollocs. Of course, even one was too many.

ɑɹɡændə tʃɹɑɾəd ʌp ɑn ɪz hɔɹs. hid lɔst ɪz hɛlməts plumz sʌmwɛɹ, bʌt wɑz smaɪlɪŋ bɹɔdli. "aɪv ɹɛɹli hæd sətʃ ə plizɪŋ bæɾəl, eɪ-bɑɹə," hi sɛd. "ɛnəmiz tə fɛl ðət jə nid nɑt fil ə stɪŋ ə pɪɾi fɔɹ, ə pɝfək steɪdʒɪŋ ɛɹiə ən dɪfɛnsəbəl pəzɪʃən. ɑɹtʃɝz tə dʒɹim ʌv ən æʃəmən tə stɑp ðə ɡæps! aɪv leɪd daʊn oʊvɝ tu dʌzən ə ðə bists maɪsɛlf. fəɹ ðɪs deɪ əloʊn, aɪm ɡlæd wi fɑloʊd ju!"

Arganda trotted up on his horse. He'd lost his helmet's plumes somewhere, but was smiling broadly. "I've rarely had such a pleasing battle, Ay-bara," he said. "Enemies to fell that you need not feel a sting of pity for, a perfect staging area and defensible position. Archers to dream of and Asha'man to stop the gaps! I've laid down over two dozen of the beasts myself. For this day alone, I'm glad we followed you!"

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. hi dɪdn pɔɪn aʊt ðət wʌn ə ðə ɹizənz ðeɪ wɝ hævɪŋ ən izi taɪm ʌv ɪt wɑz ðət moʊst ə ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ foʊkəst ɑn ðə waɪtkloʊks. tʃɹɑləks wɝ næsti, mɑnstʃɹəs θɪŋz, ən ðeɪ hæɾ ə fɪɹsli sɛlfɪʃ stʃɹik. tʃɑɹdʒ ʌp ðə hɪlsaɪɾ ət bɔlz ə faɪɝ ən lɔŋbaʊmən, oʊnli tə tʃɹaɪ ən siz ɡɹaʊn fɹəm tu fʊl kəntɪnʒənts ə kævəlɹi? bɛɾɝ tə sik ði iziɝ foʊ, ən ɪt meɪd tæktɪkəl sɛns, tu. foʊkəs ɑn ði iziɝ bæɾəl fɝst, wən jə hæd tu fɹʌns tə faɪɾ ɑn.

Perrin nodded. He didn't point out that one of the reasons they were having an easy time of it was that most of the Trollocs were focused on the Whitecloaks. Trollocs were nasty, monstrous things, and they had a fiercely selfish streak. Charge up the hillside at balls of fire and longbowmen, only to try and seize ground from two full contingents of cavalry? Better to seek the easier foe, and it made tactical sense, too. Focus on the easier battle first, when you had two fronts to fight on.

ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɹʌʃ ðə waɪtkloʊks bæk əɡɛns ðə hɪlsaɪɾ əz kwɪkli əz pɑsəbəl, ən hæd swɔɹm ðɛm, nɑt livɪŋ əm ɹum tə ɹaɪd ðɛɹ kævəlɹi ɪn tʃɑɹdʒəz, sɛpɝeɪɾɪŋ ɡɹups ə ðɛm.

They were trying to crush the Whitecloaks back against the hillside as quickly as possible, and had swarmed them, not leaving them room to ride their cavalry in charges, separating groups of them.

ðə pɝsən liɾɪŋ ðɪs ʌndɝstʊd tæktɪks; ðɪs wɑzn ðə wɝk ə tʃɹɑlɑk maɪnz.

The person leading this understood tactics; this wasn't the work of Trolloc minds.

"lɔɹd pɛɹɪn!" dʒɔɹi kɔŋɡɝz vɔɪs ɹoʊz əbʌv ðə dɪn ə haʊlɪŋ tʃɹɑləks. hi skɹæmbəld ʌp tə stɛpɝz saɪd. "ju æsk mi tə wɑtʃ ən tɛl jə haʊ ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ. wɛl, jəl wɑnə lʊk, meɪbi."

"Lord Perrin!" Jori Congar's voice rose above the din of howling Trollocs. He scrambled up to Stepper's side. "You asked me to watch and tell you how they were doing. Well, you'll want to look, maybe."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz fɪst, ðən meɪkɪŋ ə tʃɑpɪŋ moʊʃən. ɡɹeɪɾi ən nil stʊd bɪhaɪn hɪm, ɑn ə ɹɑk fɔɹmeɪʃən ðət kəd lʊk daʊn təwɔɹd ðə ɹoʊdweɪ. ðɛɹ meɪn ɔɹɾɝz wɝ tə teɪk daʊn ɛni mɹdʒɹɑl ðeɪ spɑɾəd. pɛɹɪn wɑntəd tə kip əz mɛni ʌv ðoʊz θɪŋz əz pɑsəbəl ɔf ðə haɪts; ɪt kəd kɑs dʌzənz ə laɪvz tə kɪl ə sɪŋɡəl mɹdʒɹɑl wɪð ðə sɔɹɾ əɹ æks. bɛs tə kɪl wɪð faɪɝ, fɹəm ə dɪstəns. bɪsaɪdz, səmtaɪmz kɪlɪŋ wʌn ə ðə feɪdz wəd min kɪlɪŋ ə kɑmpləmən ə tʃɹɑləks lɪŋk tə ɪt.

Perrin nodded, raising his fist, then making a chopping motion. Grady and Neald stood behind him, on a rock formation that could look down toward the roadway. Their main orders were to take down any Myrddraal they spotted. Perrin wanted to keep as many of those things as possible off the heights; it could cost dozens of lives to kill a single Myrddraal with the sword or axe. Best to kill with Fire, from a distance. Besides, sometimes killing one of the Fades would mean killing a complement of Trollocs linked to it.

ði æʃəmən, ɛɛs sədaɪ ən waɪz wʌnz sɔ pɛɹɪnz sɪɡnəl. ðeɪ bɪɡæn ə fʊl əsɔlt ɑn ðə tʃɹɑləks, faɪɝ flaɪɪŋ fɹəm hænz, laɪtnɪŋ blæstɪŋ fɹəm ðə skaɪ, pʊʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑləks bæk daʊn ði ɪnklaɪn. pɛɹɪnz fəɹ soʊlʒɝz pʊl bæk fəɹ ə fju moʊməns' ɹɛst.

The Asha'man, Aes Sedai and Wise Ones saw Perrin's signal. They began a full assault on the Trollocs, fire flying from hands, lightning blasting from the sky, pushing the Trollocs back down the incline. Perrin's for soldiers pulled back for a few moments' rest.

pɛɹɪn nʌdʒ stɛpɝ tə ði ɛdʒ, lʊkɪŋ daʊn ðə sloʊp tə ðə saʊθ, hoʊldɪŋ mæhælaɪnɝ daʊn baɪ hɪz lɛɡ. bɪloʊ, dəmədʒɹdz fɔɹs wɑz duɪŋ ivən wɝs ðən pɛɹɪn hæd wɝid. ðə tʃɹɑləks hæd dʒɹɪl fɔɹ-wɔɹd, nɪɹli dɪvaɪɾɪŋ ðə waɪtkloʊks ɪndə tu sɛkʃənz. ðə mɑnstɝz wɝ sɝdʒɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə saɪdz, ɛntʃɹæpɪŋ ɡɑləd, meɪkɪŋ ðə waɪtkloʊks faɪɾ ɑn θɹi fɹʌns. ðɛɹ bæks wɝ tə ðə hɪlsaɪd, ən mɛni ɡɹups ə kævəlɹi hæd bɪn kʌɾ ɔf fɹəm ðə meɪn bɑɾi ʌv faɪɾɪŋ.

Perrin nudged Stepper to the edge, looking down the slope to the south, holding Mah'alleinir down by his leg. Below, Damodred's force was doing even worse than Perrin had worried. The Trollocs had drilled for-ward, nearly dividing the Whitecloaks into two sections. The monsters were surging around the sides, entrapping Galad, making the Whitecloaks fight on three fronts. Their backs were to the hillside, and many groups of cavalry had been cut off from the main body of fighting.

ɡælɛn tʃɹɑɾəd ʌp bɪsaɪd pɛɹɪn. "ðə tʃɹɑləks ɑɹ stɪl əpɪɹɪŋ. aɪd ɡɛs fɪfti θaʊzən ə ðə bists soʊ fɑɹ. ði æʃəmən seɪ ðeɪv oʊnli sɛns ðə wʌn tʃænlɝ, ən i ɪzən ɛnɡeɪdʒɪŋ."

Gallenne trotted up beside Perrin. "The Trollocs are still appearing. I'd guess fifty thousand of the beasts so far. The Asha'man say they've only sensed the one channeler, and he isn't engaging."

"ðə wʌn liɾɪŋ ðə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn woʊnt wɑnə kəmɪt ðɛɹ tʃæn-nɛlɝz," pɛɹɪn ɡɛst.

"The one leading the Shadowspawn won't want to commit their chan-nelers," Perrin guessed.

"nɑt wɪð əs hævɪŋ ðə haɪ ɡɹaʊnd. ðəl liv ðə tʃɹɑləks tə də wʌt dæmədʒ ðeɪ kæn, ən si ɪf ðeɪ ɡeɪn ði ʌpɝ hænd. ɪf ðeɪ du, wɪl si tʃænlɝz kʌm aʊt."

"Not with us having the high ground. They'll leave the Trollocs to do what damage they can, and see if they gain the upper hand. If they do, we will see channelers come out."

ɡælɛn nɑɾəd.

Gallenne nodded.

"dəmədʒɹdz fɔɹs ɪz ɪn tʃɹʌbəl."

"Damodred's force is in trouble."

"jɛs," ɡælɛn sɛd. "ju pəzɪʃən əs wɛl tə hɛlp ðɛm, bʌɾ ɪɾ əpɪɹz wi wɝn ɪnʌf."

"Yes," Gallenne said. "You positioned us well to help them, but it appears we weren't enough."

"aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ daʊn fəɹ ðɛm," pɛɹɪn dɪsaɪɾɪd. hi pɔɪntəd. "ðə tʃɹɑləks ɑɹ sɝaʊndɪŋ hɪm, bɑksɪŋ ɪm ɪn əɡɛns ðə hɪlsaɪd. wi kəd swip daʊn ən sɝpɹaɪz ðə bists wɪð ə bɹɔdsaɪd, bɹeɪkɪŋ θɹu ən fɹiɪŋ dəmədʒɹdz mɛn tə ɡɛt ðɛmsɛlvz ʌp ɑn ðə plætoʊ hɪɹ."

"I'm going down for them," Perrin decided. He pointed. "The Trollocs are surrounding him, boxing him in against the hillside. We could sweep down and surprise the beasts with a broadside, breaking through and freeing Damodred's men to get themselves up on the plateau here."

ɡælɛn fɹaʊnd. "pɑɹɾən, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn, bʌɾ aɪ mʌst æsk. wʌɾ ɪz ɪt ðət jə fil jə oʊ ðɛm? aɪ wʊɾə sɑɹoʊɾ ɪf, ɪndid, wid kʌm hɪɹ tə ətæk əm - ðoʊ aɪ wʊɾə sin ɪts lɑdʒɪk.

Gallenne frowned. "Pardon, Lord Perrin, but I must ask. What is it that you feel you owe them? I would have sorrowed if, indeed, we'd come here to attack them - though I would have seen its logic.

bʌɾ aɪ si noʊ ɹizən tə hɛlp ðɛm."

But I see no reason to help them."

pɛɹɪn ɡɹʌntɪd. "ɪts dʒʌs ðə ɹaɪt θɪŋ tə du."

Perrin grunted. "It's just the right thing to do."

"ðæɾ ɪz ə sʌbʒɪkt ə dəbeɪt," ɡælɛn sɛd, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛlməɾɪd hɛd. "faɪɾɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑləks ən feɪdz ɪz ɛksələnt, fəɹ ɛvɹi wʌn ðət fɔlz ɪz wʌn fjuɝ tə feɪs ət ðə læs bæɾəl. əɹ mɛn ɡɛt pɹæktəs faɪɾɪŋ ðɛm, ən kən lɝn tə kəntʃɹoʊl ðɛɹ fɪɹz. bʌt ðət sloʊp ɪz stip ən tʃɹɛtʃɝəs; ɪf jə tʃɹaɪ tə ɹaɪd daʊn tə dəmədʒɹd, jə kəd dɪstʃɹɔɪ əɹ ædvæntɪdʒ.

"That is a subject of debate," Gallenne said, shaking his helmeted head. "Fighting the Trollocs and Fades is excellent, for every one that falls is one fewer to face at the Last Battle. Our men get practice fighting them, and can learn to control their fears. But that slope is steep and treacherous; if you try to ride down to Damodred, you could destroy our advantage.

"aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ ɛniweɪ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "dʒɔɹi, ɡoʊ ɡɛt ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn ən ði æʃəmən. əl niɾ əm tə sɑfən ðə tʃɹɑləks fəɹ maɪ tʃɑɹdʒ." hi lʊk daʊn əɡɛn. mɛmɹiz ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz flʌɾəd ɪz maɪnd. blʌd. dɛθ. mæhælaɪnɝ ɡɹu wɔɹmɝ ɪn ɪz fɪst. "aɪ woʊn liv əm tə ɪt, ɡæl- lɛn. nɑɾ ivən ðɛm. wɪl jə dʒɔɪn mi?"

"I'm going anyway," Perrin said. "Jori, go get the Two Rivers men and the Asha'man. I'll need them to soften the Trollocs for my charge." He looked down again. Memories of the Two Rivers flooded his mind. Blood. Death. Mah'alleinir grew warmer in his fist. "I won't leave them to it, Gal- lenne. Not even them. Will you join me?"

"ju ɑɹ ə stʃɹeɪnʒ mæn, eɪbɑɹə." ɡælɛn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "ænd wʌn ə tʃɹu ɑnɝ. jɛs, aɪ wɪl."

"You are a strange man, Aybara." Gallenne hesitated. "And one of true honor. Yes, I will."

"ɡʊd. dʒɔɹi, ɡɛt muvɪŋ. wi mʌst ɹitʃ dəmədʒɹd bɪfɔɹ ɪz laɪnz bɹeɪk."

"Good. Jori, get moving. We must reach Damodred before his lines break."

ə ʃɑk ɹɪpəl θɹu ðə mæs ə tʃɹɑləks. ɡɑləd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, sɔɹd ɹɪpt ɪn swɛɾi fɪŋɡɝz.

a shock rippled through the mass of Trollocs. Galad hesitated, sword ripped in sweaty fingers.

hɪz ɪntaɪɝ bɑɾi ætʃt. moʊnz keɪm fɹəm ɔl ɹaʊn hɪm, səm ɡʌɾɝəl ən snɑɹlɪŋ - tʃɹɑləks daɪɪŋ  - səm pɪɾiəs fɹəm fɔlən mɛn. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən nɪɹ ɪm wɝ hoʊldɪŋ. bɛɹli.

His entire body ached. Moans came from all round him, some guttural and snarling - Trollocs dying  - some piteous from fallen men. The Children near him were holding. Barely.

ðə naɪt wɑz dɪm, ivən wɪð ðoʊz laɪts. ɪt fɛlt laɪk faɪɾɪŋ naɪtmɛɹz. bʌɾ ɪf ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt kəd nɑt stæn əɡɛns dɑɹknəs, hu kʊd?

The night was dim, even with those lights. It felt like fighting nightmares. But if the Children of the Light could not stand against darkness, who could?

ðə tʃɹɑləks bɪɡæn haʊlɪŋ mɔɹ laʊdli. ðoʊz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm tɝnd, spikɪŋ tə wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn ə kɹud, snɑɹlɪŋ tʌŋ ðət kɑzd ɪm tə pʊl bæk ɪn ɹɪvʌlʃən. tʃɹɑləks kəd spik? hi hædnt noʊn ðæt. wʌt hæd dʒɹɔn ðɛɹ ətɛnʃən?

The Trollocs began howling more loudly. Those in front of him turned, speaking to one another in a crude, snarling tongue that caused him to pull back in revulsion. Trollocs could speak? He hadn't known that. What had drawn their attention?

ən ðən i sɔ ɪt. ə heɪl ʌv æɹoʊz, fɔlɪŋ fɹəm əbʌv, ɹɪpt ɪndə ɹæŋks ə ðə nɪɹbaɪ tʃɹɑləks.

And then he saw it. A hail of arrows, falling from above, ripped into ranks of the nearby Trollocs.

ðə tu ɹɪvɝz boʊmən lɪvd ʌp tə ðɛɹ ɹɛpjəteɪʃən. ɡɑləd wʊdn əv tʃɹʌstɪd moʊst ɑɹtʃɝz tə ʃut laɪk ðæt, nɑt wɪθaʊt stʃɹeɪ æɹoʊz fɔlɪŋ ɑn ðə waɪtkloʊks. ðiz ɑɹtʃɝz wɝ pɹɪsaɪs, haʊɛvɝ.

The Two Rivers bowmen lived up to their reputation. Galad wouldn't have trusted most archers to shoot like that, not without stray arrows falling on the Whitecloaks. These archers were precise, however.

ðə tʃɹɑləks skɹimd ən haʊld. ðɛn, fɹəm ðə tɑp ə ðə ɹaɪz, ə θaʊzən hɔɹsmən tʃɑɹdʒd.

The Trollocs screamed and howled. Then, from the top of the rise, a thousand horsemen charged.

laɪts flæʃt ɝaʊn ðɛm; faɪɝz fɛl fɹəm əbʌv, ɑɹsɪŋ daʊn laɪk ɹɛd-ɡoʊldən lænsɪz. ðeɪ ɪluməneɪɾəd ðə hɔɹsmən ɪn sɪlvɝ.

Lights flashed around them; fires fell from above, arcing down like red-golden lances. They illuminated the horsemen in silver.

ɪt wɑz ən ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl mənuvɝ. ði ɪnklaɪn wɑz stip ɪnʌf ðət hɔɹsəz kəɾ əv tʃɹɪpt, fɔlən, tʌmbəl ði ɪntaɪɝ fɔɹs ɪndə ə jusləs mæs ə bɑɾiz. bʌt ðeɪ dɪdn fɔl. ðeɪ ɡæləpt ʃʊɹ- fʊɾɪd, lænsɪz ɡlimɪŋ. ən ət ðɛɹ fɹʌn ɹoʊɾ ə bɪɹɾəd mɑnstɝ ʌv ə mæn wɪð ə lɑɹdʒ hæmɝ hɛl haɪ. pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə hɪmsɛlf, əbʌv ɪz hɛɾ ə bænɝ flæpɪŋ, kæɹid baɪ ə mæn ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒʌs bɪhaɪnd.

It was an incredible maneuver. The incline was steep enough that horses could have tripped, fallen, tumbled the entire force into a useless mass of bodies. But they didn't fall. They galloped sure- footed, lances gleaming. And at their front rode a bearded monster of a man with a large hammer held high. Perrin Aybara himself, above his head a banner flapping, carried by a man riding just behind.

ðə kɹɪmzən wʊlfhɛd.

The crimson wolfhead.

dɪspaɪt hɪmsɛlf, ɡɑləd loʊɝɾ ɪz ʃild ət ðə saɪt. eɪbɑɹə ɔlmoʊst simd əfleɪm fɹəm ðə tʌŋz ə faɪɝ ðət sɝaʊndəd hɪm. ɡɑləd kəd si ðoʊz waɪd, ɡoʊldən aɪz. laɪk faɪɝz ðɛmsɛlvz.

Despite himself, Galad lowered his shield at the sight. Aybara almost seemed aflame from the tongues of fire that surrounded him. Galad could see those wide, golden eyes. Like fires themselves.

ðə hɔɹsmən kɹæʃt ɪndə ðə tʃɹɑləks ðət hæd sɝaʊndəd ɡɑlədz fɔɹs. eɪbɑɹə lɛɾ aʊɾ ə ɹɔɹ oʊvɝ ðə dɪn, ðən bɪɡæn tə leɪ əbaʊɾ ɪm wɪð ðə hæmɝ. ði ətæk fɔɹs ðə tʃɹɑləks bæk.

The horsemen crashed into the Trollocs that had surrounded Galad's force. Aybara let out a roar over the din, then began to lay about him with the hammer. The attack forced the Trollocs back.

əsɔlt!" ɡɑləd jɛld. "pɹɛs ði ətæk! fɔɹs əm ɪndə ðə kævəlɹi!" hi tʃɑɹdʒ nɔɹθwɝd, təwɔɹd ðə feɪs ə ðə haɪts, bɔɹnhəld əɾ ɪz saɪd.

Assault!" Galad yelled. "Press the attack! Force them into the cavalry!" He charged northward, toward the face of the heights, Bornhald at his side.

nɪɹbaɪ, tʃɹɑm ɹælid wʌt wɑz lɛft ə hɪz lidʒən ən bɹɔɾ ɪɾ ɝaʊn tə ətæk ðə tʃɹɑləks ɑpəzəɾ eɪbɑɹə.

Nearby, Trom rallied what was left of his legion and brought it around to attack the Trollocs opposite Aybara.

ðə fɹeɪ ɡɹu ɪnkɹisɪŋli keɪɑɾɪk. ɡɑləd fɔt fjʊɹiəsli. əbʌv, ɪn-kɹɛɾəbli, eɪbɑɹəz ɪntaɪɝ ɑɹmi pɔɹd daʊn ði ɪnklaɪn, ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp ðə haɪ ɡɹaʊnd. ðeɪ fɛl əpɑn ðə tʃɹɑləks, tɛnz ə θaʊzənz ə mɛn jɛlɪŋ. "ɡoʊldeɪniz! ɡoʊldeɪniz!"

The fray grew increasingly chaotic. Galad fought furiously. Above, in-credibly, Aybara's entire army poured down the incline, giving up the high ground. They fell upon the Trollocs, tens of thousands of men yelling. "Goldeneyes! Goldeneyes!"

ði ətæk pʊt ɡɑləɾ ən bɔɹnhəld ɪndə ðə tʃɹɑləks' ɹæŋks. ðə kɹi-tʊɹz tʃɹaɪd tə pʊl bæk fɹəm eɪbɑɹə, sɝdʒɪŋ ɪn ɔl dɝɛkʃənz. ðə mɛn nɪɹ ɡɑləɾ ən bɔɹnhəld wɝ sun faɪɾɪŋ dɛspɝətli tə steɪ əlaɪv. ɡɑləd fɪnɪʃt ɔf ə tʃɹɑlɑk wɪð ɹɪbən ɪn ði ɛɹ, bʌt spʌn ən ɪm-daɪeɪtli faʊn hɪmsɛlf feɪsɪŋ ə ɹæm-feɪs bəhiməθ tɛn fit tɔl. hɔɹnz kɝld ɝaʊn ðə saɪdz ʌv ɪts ɪnɔɹməs skwɛɹ feɪs, bʌt ði aɪz wɝ hjumən, ən ðə loʊɝ dʒɔ əz wɛl.

The attack put Galad and Bornhald into the Trollocs' ranks. The crea-tures tried to pull back from Aybara, surging in all directions. The men near Galad and Bornhald were soon fighting desperately to stay alive. Galad finished off a Trolloc with Ribbon in the Air, but spun and imme-diately found himself facing a ram-faced behemoth ten feet tall. Horns curled around the sides of its enormous square face, but the eyes were human, and the lower jaw as well.

ɡɑləd dʌkt wən ɪt swʌŋ ɪts kætʃpoʊl, ðən ɹæmd ɪz sɔɹɾ ʌp ɪndə ɪts ɡʌt. ðə kɹitʃɝ skɹimd, ən bɔɹnhəl hæmstʃɹəŋ ɪt fɹəm ðə saɪd.

Galad ducked when it swung its catchpole, then rammed his sword up into its gut. The creature screamed, and Bornhald hamstrung it from the side.

ɡɑləd jɛld ən lɛp bækwɝd, bʌɾ ɪz twɪstəɾ æŋkəl faɪnəli feɪl hɪm. ɪt ɡɑt kɑɾ ɪn ə klft ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ən ɡɑləd hɝɾ ə tɛɹəbəl snæp əz i fɛl.

Galad yelled and leaped backward, but his twisted ankle finally failed him. It got caught in a cleft in the ground, and Galad heard a terrible snap as he fell.

ðə daɪɪŋ mɑnstɝ kɹæʃt daʊn ɑn hɪm, pɪnɪŋ ɪm tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. peɪn ʃɑɾ ʌp ɪz lɛɡ, bʌɾ i ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪt. hi dʒɹɑpt ɪz sɔɹd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ʃʌv ðə kɑɹkəs fɹi. bɔɹnhəld, swɛɹɪŋ, fɛndɪɾ ɔf ə tʃɹɑlɑk ðət hæd ðə snaʊɾ ʌv ə bɔɹ. ɪt meɪɾ ə hɔɹəd ɡɹʌntɪŋ saʊnd.

The dying monster crashed down on him, pinning him to the ground. Pain shot up his leg, but he ignored it. He dropped his sword, trying to shove the carcass free. Bornhald, swearing, fended off a Trolloc that had the snout of a boar. It made a horrid grunting sound.

ɡɑləd hivd ɔf ðə stɪŋkɪŋ kɑɹkəs. tə ðə saɪd, hi kəd si mɛn ɪn waɪt - tʃɹɑm, wɪð baɪɑɝ əɾ ɪz saɪd, faɪɾɪŋ dɛspɝətli tə ɹitʃ ɡɑləd. ðəɹ wɝ soʊ mɛni tʃɹɑləks, ən ðoʊz tʃɪlʒɹən ɪmiɾiətli nɪɹbaɪ hæd moʊsli fɔlən.

Galad heaved off the stinking carcass. To the side, he could see men in white - Trom, with Byar at his side, fighting desperately to reach Galad. There were so many Trollocs, and those Children immediately nearby had mostly fallen.

ɡɑləd ɹitʃt fəɹ ɪz sɔɹd dʒʌst əz ə maʊntəd fɪɡjɝ bɝs θɹu ðə ʃædoʊz ən tʃɹɑləks dʒʌs tə ðə nɔɹθ. eɪbɑɹə. hi ɹoʊɾ ʌp ən paʊndɪd ðət mæsɪv hæmɝ ə hɪz ɪndə ə bɔɹ tʃɹɑlɑk, sɛndɪŋ ɪt kɹæʃɪŋ tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. eɪbɑɹə lɛpt ɔf ɪz hɔɹs əz bɔɹnhəl skɹæmbəld oʊvɝ tə hɛlp ɡɑləd tə hɪz fit.

Galad reached for his sword just as a mounted figure burst through the shadows and Trollocs just to the north. Aybara. He rode up and pounded that massive hammer of his into a boar Trolloc, sending it crashing to the ground. Aybara leaped off his horse as Bornhald scrambled over to help Galad to his feet.

"ju ɑɹ wundəd?" eɪbɑɹə æskt.

"You are wounded?" Aybara asked.

"maɪ æŋkəl," ɡɑləd sɛd.

"My ankle," Galad said.

"ɑn maɪ hɔɹs," eɪbɑɹə sɛd.

"On my horse," Aybara said.

ɡɑləd dɪdn pɹoʊtɛst; ɪt meɪd sɛns. hi dɪd, haʊɛvɝ, fil ɪmbɛɹəst əz bɔɹnhəl hɛlpt ɪm ʌp. eɪbɑɹəz mɛn fɪld ɪn ɝaʊn ðɛm, pʊʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑləks bæk. naʊ ðəɾ eɪbɑɹəz ɑɹmi hæd dʒɔɪn ðə fɹeɪ, ɡɑlədz mɛn wɝ ɹæliɪŋ.

Galad didn't protest; it made sense. He did, however, feel embarrassed as Bornhald helped him up. Aybara's men filled in around them, pushing the Trollocs back. Now that Aybara's army had joined the fray, Galad's men were rallying.

ɹʌʃɪŋ daʊn ðə sloʊp hæd bɪn ə deɪnʒɝəs ɡæmbəl, bʌɾ əz sun əz ɡɑləd wɑz əstʃɹaɪɾ eɪbɑɹəz hɔɹs, hi kəd si ðət ðə ɡæmbəl hæd wɝkt, ðə mæsɪv tʃɑɹdʒ hæd bɹoʊkən ðə tʃɹɑləks əpɑɹt, ən səm ɡɹups stɑɹɾəd fliɾɪŋ. tʌŋz ə fleɪm fɛl fɹəm əbʌv, bɝnɪŋ mɹdʒɹɑl ən dʒɹɑpɪŋ ɪntaɪɝ fɪsts ə tʃɹɑləks lɪŋk tə ðɛm.

Rushing down the slope had been a dangerous gamble, but as soon as Galad was astride Aybara's horse, he could see that the gamble had worked, The massive charge had broken the Trollocs apart, and some groups started fleeting. Tongues of flame fell from above, burning Myrddraal and dropping entire fists of Trollocs linked to them.

ðəɹ wɑz stɪl ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə faɪɾɪŋ tə du, bʌt ðə taɪd wɑz tɝnɪŋ. eɪbɑɹəz fɔɹsɪz kɑɹvd aʊɾ ə sɛkʃən ɝaʊn ðɛɹ liɾɝ, ɡɪvɪŋ ɪm - ən baɪ ɪkstɛnʃən ɡɑləd - səm bɹiðɪŋ ɹum tə kənsɪɾɝ ðə nɛkst steɪdʒ ə ði ətæk.

There was still a great deal of fighting to do, but the tide was turning. Aybara's forces carved out a section around their leader, giving him - and by extension Galad - some breathing room to consider the next stage of the attack.

ɡɑləd tɝn tə eɪbɑɹə, hu wɑz stʌɾiɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑləks wɪð kin ivz. "aɪ əsum jə θɪŋk ðət seɪvɪŋ mi wɪl ɪnfluəns maɪ dɪsɪʒən əbaʊt jəɹ dʒʌdʒmənt," ɡɑləd sɛd.

Galad turned to Aybara, who was studying the Trollocs with keen eves. "I assume you think that saving me will influence my decision about your judgment," Galad said.

"ɪt hæd bɛɾɝ," eɪbɑɹə mʌɾɝd.

"It had better," Aybara muttered.

ɡɑləd ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ. ɪt wɑzn ðə ɹɪspɑns hid bɪn ɪkspɛktɪŋ. "maɪ mɛn faɪn ɪt səspɪʃəs ðət jə əpɪɹd soʊ sun bɪfɔɹ ðə tʃɹɑləks."

Galad raised an eyebrow. It wasn't the response he'd been expecting. "My men find it suspicious that you appeared so soon before the Trollocs."

"wɛl, ðeɪ kən θɪŋk ðəɾ ɪf ðeɪ wɑnt," eɪbɑɹə sɛd. "aɪ daʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ aɪ seɪ wɪl tʃeɪnʒ ðɛɹ maɪnz. ɪn ə weɪ, ðɪs ɪz maɪ fɔlt. ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ hɪɹ tə kɪl mi; aɪ dʒʌst ɡɑɾ əweɪ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd spɹɪŋ ðɛɹ tʃɹæp. bi ɡlæɾ aɪ dɪdn liv jə tə ðɛm. jə waɪtkloʊks əv kɑz mi nɪɹli əz mʌtʃ ɡɹif əz ðeɪ hæv."

"Well, they can think that if they want," Aybara said. "I doubt anything I say will change their minds. In a way, this is my fault. The Trollocs were here to kill me; I just got away before they could spring their trap. Be glad I didn't leave you to them. You Whitecloaks have caused me nearly as much grief as they have."

ɑdli, ɡɑləd faʊn hɪmsɛlf smaɪlɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz ə stʃɹeɪtfɔɹwɝɾ ɛɹ əbaʊt ðɪs pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. ə mæn kəɾ æsk fəɹ lɪɾəl mɔɹ ɪn ən ælaɪ.

Oddly, Galad found himself smiling. There was a straightforward air about this Perrin Aybara. A man could ask for little more in an ally.

ɑɹ wi ælaɪz, ðɛn? ɡɑləd θɔt, nɑɾɪŋ tə tʃɹɑm ən baɪɑɝ əz ðeɪ əpɹoʊtʃt. pɝhæps fəɹ naʊ. hi dɪd tʃɹʌst eɪbɑɹə. jɛs, pɝhæps ðəɹ wɝ mɛn ɪn ðə wɝld u wəd pʊt təɡɛðɝ ən ɪntʃɹəkət plɑt laɪk ðɪs wʌn, ɔl tə tʃɹɪk ɪz weɪ ɪndə ɡɑlədz feɪvɝ. vɑldə hæd bɪn laɪk ðæt.

Are we allies, then? Galad thought, nodding to Trom and Byar as they approached. Perhaps for now. He did trust Aybara. Yes, perhaps there were men in the world who would put together an intricate plot like this one, all to trick his way into Galad's favor. Valda had been like that.

eɪbɑɹə wɑznt. hi ɹɪli wɑz stʃɹeɪtfɔɹwɝd. ɪf hid wɑntəd ðə tʃɪlʒɹən aʊɾ ə hɪz weɪ, hiɾ əv kɪld əm ən muvd ɑn.

Aybara wasn't. He really was straightforward. If he'd wanted the Children out of his way, he'd have killed them and moved on.

"ðɛn soʊ bi ɪt, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," ɡɑləd sɛd. "aɪ neɪm jəɹ pʌnɪʃmən hɪɹ, ðɪs naɪt, ət ðɪs moʊmənt."

"Then so be it, Perrin Aybara," Galad said. "I name your punishment here, this night, at this moment."

pɛɹɪn fɹaʊnd, tɝnɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ɪz kɑntəmpleɪʃən ə ðə bæɾəl laɪnz. "wʌt? naʊ?"

Perrin frowned, turning away from his contemplation of the battle lines. "What? Now?"

aɪ dim, əz pʌnɪʃmənt, ðət jə peɪ blʌd pɹaɪs tə ðə fæmliz ə ðə dɛd tʃɪlʒɹən ɪn ði əmaʊn ə faɪv hʌnʒɹəd kɹaʊnz. aɪ ɔlsoʊ ɔɹɾɝ jə tə fɹɾ ɪn ðə læs bæɾəl wɪð ɔl ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ jə kən mʌstɝ. də ðiz θɪŋz, ən aɪ pɹənaʊns jə klɛnzd ʌv ɡɪlt."

I deem, as punishment, that you pay blood price to the families of the dead Children in the amount of five hundred crowns. I also order you to frght in the Last Battle with all the strength you can muster. Do these things, and I pronounce you cleansed of guilt."

ɪt wɑz ən ɑd taɪm fəɹ ɪm tə ɡɪv ðɪs pɹɑkləmeɪʃən, bʌɾ i hæd meɪɾ ɪz dɪsɪʒən. ðeɪ wəd stɪl faɪt, ən pɝhæps wʌn wəd fɔl. ɡɑləd wɑntəɾ eɪbɑɹə tə noʊ ðə dʒʌdʒmənt, ɪn keɪs.

It was an odd time for him to give this proclamation, but he had made his decision. They would still fight, and perhaps one would fall. Galad wanted Aybara to know the judgment, in case.

eɪbɑɹə stʌɾid hɪm, ðən nɑɾəd. "aɪ neɪm ðət fɛɹ, ɡɑləd dɑmoʊ-dʒɹɛd." hi hɛld ʌp ɪz hænd.

Aybara studied him, then nodded. "I name that fair, Galad Damo-dred." He held up his hand.

"kɹitʃɝ ə dɑɹknəs!" sʌmwʌn muv bɪhaɪn eɪbɑɹə. ə fɪɡjɝ, pʊl-ɪŋ fɹi hɪz sɔɹd. ə hɪs, ə flæʃ ə mɛɾəl. baɪɑɝz aɪz, əlaɪt wɪð æŋɡɝ. hid pəzɪʃən hɪmsɛlf ɹaɪt wɛɹ i kəd stʃɹaɪk eɪbɑɹə ɪn ðə bæk.

"Creature of darkness!" Someone moved behind Aybara. A figure, pull-ing free his sword. A hiss, a flash of metal. Byar's eyes, alight with anger. He'd positioned himself right where he could strike Aybara in the back.

eɪbɑɹə spʌn; ɡɑləd ɹeɪzd ɪz sɔɹd. boʊθ wɝ tu sloʊ.

Aybara spun; Galad raised his sword. Both were too slow.

bʌt jɹət baɪɑɝz bloʊ dɪd nɑt fɔl. hi stʊd wɪð ɪz wɛpən əpɹeɪzd, fɹoʊzən, blʌd dʒɹɪbəlɪŋ fɹəm ɪz lɪps. hi fɛl tə hɪz niz, ðən flɑpt ɑntu ðə ɡɹaʊn ɹaɪɾ əɾ eɪbɑɹəz fit.

But Jaret Byar's blow did not fall. He stood with his weapon upraised, frozen, blood dribbling from his lips. He fell to his knees, then flopped onto the ground right at Aybara's feet.

bɔɹnhəl stʊd bɪhaɪn hɪm, aɪz waɪd wɪð hɔɹɝ. hi lʊk daʊn əɾ ɪz sɔɹd. "aɪ . . . ɪt wɑzn ɹaɪt, tə stʃɹaɪk ə mæn ɪn ðə bæk æftɝ i seɪvd ʌs. ɪt. . ." hi dʒɹɑpt ɪz sɔɹd, stʌmbəlɪŋ bæk fɹəm baɪɑɝz kɔɹps..

Bornhald stood behind him, eyes wide with horror. He looked down at his sword. "I . . . It wasn't right, to strike a man in the back after he saved us. It. . ." He dropped his sword, stumbling back from Byar's corpse..

"ju dɪd ðə ɹaɪt θɪŋ, tʃaɪl bɔɹnhəld," ɡɑləd sɛd wɪð ɹəɡɹɛɾ i ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "hi wɑz ə faɪn ɔfəsɝ. ənplɛzən ət taɪmz, pɝhæps, bʌɾ ɔlsoʊ bɹeɪv. aɪm sɑɹi tə luz hɪm."

"You did the right thing, Child Bornhald," Galad said with regret He shook his head. "He was a fine officer. Unpleasant at times, perhaps, but also brave. I am sorry to lose him."

eɪbɑɹə ɡlæns tə ðə saɪdz, əz ɪf lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ʌðɝ tʃɪlʒɹən u maɪt stʃɹaɪk hɪm. "fɹʌm ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, ðət wʌn wɑz lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ən ɪkskjus tə si mi dɛd."

Aybara glanced to the sides, as if looking for other Children who might strike him. "From the beginning, that one was looking for an excuse to see me dead."

bɔɹnhəld lʊkt əɾ eɪbɑɹə, aɪz stɪl heɪtfəl, ðən klin ɪz sɔɹɾ ən ɹæmd ɪɾ ɪndə ɪts ʃiθ. hi wɔkt əweɪ, təwɔɹd ði ɛɹiə wɛɹ ðə wundəd hæd bɪn teɪkən. ði ɛɹiə ɝaʊnd ɡɑləɾ ən eɪbɑɹə wɑz ɪnkɹisɪŋli seɪf, ðə tʃɹɑləks pʊʃt bæk, mɔɹ sɑləd bæɾəl laɪnz fɔɹmɪŋ, meɪɾ ʌv eɪbɑɹəz mɛn ən ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ tʃɪlʒɹən.

Bornhald looked at Aybara, eyes still hateful, then cleaned his sword and rammed it into its sheath. He walked away, toward the area where the wounded had been taken. The area around Galad and Aybara was increasingly safe, the Trollocs pushed back, more solid battle lines forming, made of Aybara's men and the remaining Children.

"ðæt wʌn stɪl θɪŋks aɪ kɪld ɪz fɑðɝ," eɪbɑɹə sɛd.

"That one still thinks I killed his father," Aybara said.

"noʊ," ɡɑləd ɹɪplaɪd. "aɪ θɪŋk i bɪlivz ðət jə dɪd nɑt. bʌt hiz heɪɾəd jə fəɹ vɛɹi lɔŋ, lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹə, ən əz lʌv baɪɑɝ lɔŋɡɝ." hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "kɪlɪŋ ə fɹɛnd. ɪts səmtaɪmz peɪnfəl tə də wʌɾ ɪz ɹaɪt."

"No," Galad replied. "I think he believes that you did not. But he has hated you for very long, Lord Aybara, and has loved Byar longer." He shook his head. "Killing a friend. It is sometimes painful to do what is right."

eɪbɑɹə ɡɹʌntɪd. "ju ʃəd ɡɛt tə ðə wundəd," hi sɛd, hɛftɪŋ ɪz hæmɝ ən lʊkɪŋ təwɔɹd wɛɹ ðə faɪɾɪŋ wɑz stɪl θɪk.

Aybara grunted. "You should get to the wounded," he said, hefting his hammer and looking toward where the fighting was still thick.

"aɪ æm wɛl ɪnʌf tə faɪɾ ɪf aɪ hæv jəɹ maʊnt."

"I am well enough to fight if I have your mount."

"wɛl ðɛn, lɛts bi ɑn wɪð ɪt." eɪbɑɹə aɪd hɪm. "aɪl steɪ baɪ ju, ðoʊ, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs ɪt lʊks laɪk jə maɪt fɔl."

"Well then, let's be on with it." Aybara eyed him. "I'll stay by you, though, just in case it looks like you might fall."

"θæŋk ju."

"Thank you."

"aɪm fɑn ə ðə hɔɹs."

"I'm fond of the horse."

smaɪlɪŋ, ɡɑləd dʒɔɪn hɪm, ən ðeɪ weɪɾɪd bæk ɪndə ðə meɪleɪ.

Smiling, Galad joined him, and they waded back into the melee.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾitu


CHAPTER 42

stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən blʌd


Stronger than Blood

wʌns əɡɛn, ɡɔɪn sæɾ ɪn ðə smɔl, ʌnədɔɹn ɹum ʌv ɛɡwinz kɔɹɾɝz. hi wɑz ɪɡzɔstəd, wɪtʃ wɑzn sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ wʌt hid bɪn θɹu, hilɪŋz ɪnkluɾəd.

Once again, Gawyn sat in the small, unadorned room of Egwene's quarters. He was exhausted, which wasn't surprising, considering what he'd been through, Healings included.

hɪz ətɛnʃən wɑz kənsum baɪ ðə nu əwɛɹnəs ɪnsaɪɾ ə hɪm. ðət wʌndɝfəl blɑsəmɪŋ ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz maɪnd, ðət lɪŋk tə ɛɡwin ən əɹ ɪmoʊʃənz. ðə kənɛkʃən wɑz ə wʌndɝ, ən ə kʌmfɝt. sɛnsɪŋ əɹ lɛɾ ɪm noʊ ʃi wɑz əlaɪv.

His attention was consumed by the new awareness inside of him. That wonderful blossoming in the back of his mind, that link to Egwene and her emotions. The connection was a wonder, and a comfort. Sensing her let him know she was alive.

eɪbəl tə æntɪsəpeɪɾ əɹ əpɹoʊtʃ, hi stʊɾ ʌp əz ðə dɔɹ oʊpənd. "ɡɔɪn," ʃi sɛɾ əz ʃi stɛpt ɪn, "ju ʃʊdn bi stændɪŋ ʌp ɪn jəɹ kəndɪʃən. pliz, sɪt."

Able to anticipate her approach, he stood up as the door opened. "Gawyn," she said as she stepped in, "you shouldn't be standing up in your condition. Please, sit."

"aɪm faɪn," hi sɛd, bʌt dɪɾ əz kəmændəd.

"I'm fine," he said, but did as commanded.

ʃi pʊld oʊvɝ ði ʌðɝ stul, sɪɾɪŋ daʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. ʃi wɑz kɑm ən sɝin, bʌɾ i kəd sɛns ðət ʃi wɑz oʊvɝwɛlm baɪ ɪvɛns dʊɹɪŋ ðə naɪt. sɝvəns wɝ stɪl dilɪŋ wɪð ðə blʌdsteɪnz ən ðə bɑɾiz waɪl tʃʌbn wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ði ɪntaɪɝ taʊɝ əɾ əlɝt, tʃɛkɪŋ ɑn itʃ ən ɛvɹi sɪstɝ. wʌn ʌðɝ əsæsən hæd tɝn ʌp. ðeɪd lɔs tu soʊlʒɝz ən ə wɔɹɾɝ kɪlɪŋ hɝ.

She pulled over the other stool, sitting down in front of him. She was calm and serene, but he could sense that she was overwhelmed by events during the night. Servants were still dealing with the bloodstains and the bodies while Chubain was holding the entire Tower at alert, checking on each and every sister. One other assassin had turned up. They'd lost two soldiers and a Warder killing her.

jɛs, hi kəd fil əɹ ɪmoʊʃənəl tɛmpəs bɪhaɪn ðət kɑm feɪs. dɝ-ɪŋ ðə pæs fju mʌnθs, ɡɔɪn hæd bɪɡʌn tə θɪŋk ðət meɪbi ɛɛs sədaɪ lɝnd nɑt tə fil ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl. ðə bɑnd ɡeɪv ɪm pɹuf ʌðɝwaɪz, ɛɡwin dɪd fil; ʃi mɪɹli dɪdn lɛɾ əɹ ɪmoʊʃənz tʌtʃ əɹ fitʃɝz.

Yes, he could feel her emotional tempest behind that calm face. Dur-ing the past few months, Gawyn had begun to think that maybe Aes Sedai lerned not to feel anything at all. The bond gave him proof otherwise, Egwene did feel; she merely didn't let her emotions touch her features.

lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ feɪs ən filɪŋ ðə stɔɹm ɪnsaɪd, ɡɔɪn wɑz ɡɪvən-fɔɹ ðə fɝs taɪm - ənʌðɝ pɝspɛktɪv ɑn ðə wɔɹɾɝ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹileɪʃən-ʃɪp. wɔɹɾɝz wɝn dʒʌs bɑɾiɡɑɹdz; ðeɪ wɝ ðə wʌnz - ði oʊnli wʌnz-hu sɔ ðə tʃɹuθ ʌv wʌt hæpənd wɪðɪn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ pɹɑfɪʃən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪkeɪm ət haɪɾɪŋ ɪmoʊʃənz, hɝ wɔɹɾɝ nu ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ ðən ðə mæsk.

Looking at her face and feeling the storm inside, Gawyn was given-for the first time - another perspective on the Warder and Aes Sedai relation-ship. Warders weren't just bodyguards; they were the ones - the only ones-who saw the truth of what happened within the Aes Sedai. No matter how proficient the Aes Sedai became at hiding emotions, her Warder knew there was more than the mask.

"ju faʊn mɛsænə?" hi æskt.

"You found Mesaana?" he asked.

"jɛs, ðoʊ ɪt tʊk səm taɪm. ʃi wɑz ɪmpɝsəneɪɾɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ neɪm dənɛl, ʌv ðə bɹaʊn ədʒɑ. wi faʊn əɹ ɪn əɹ ɹum, bæbəlɪŋ laɪk ə tʃaɪld. ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi sɔɪl hɝsɛlf. aɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌt wɪl də wɪð hɝ."

"Yes, though it took some time. She was impersonating an Aes Sedai named Danelle, of the Brown Ajah. We found her in her room, babbling like a child. She had already soiled herself. I'm not sure what we will do with her."

"dənɛl. aɪ dɪdnt noʊ hɝ."

"Danelle. I didn't know her."

"ʃi kɛp tə hɝsɛlf," ɛɡwin sɛd. "wɪtʃ ɪz pɹɑbli waɪ mɛsænə pɪk hɝ."

"She kept to herself," Egwene said. "Which is probably why Mesaana picked her."

ðeɪ sæɾ ɪn saɪləns fəɹ ə fju moʊməns lɔŋɡɝ. "soʊ," ɛɡwin faɪnəli sɛd, "haʊ dʒju fil?"

They sat in silence for a few moments longer. "So," Egwene finally said, "how do you feel?"

"ju noʊ haʊ aɪ fil," ɡɔɪn sɛɾ ɑnəsli.

"You know how I feel," Gawyn said honestly.

"ɪt wɑz sɪmpli ə minz ə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ðə kɑnvɝseɪʃən."

"It was simply a means of beginning the conversation."

hi smaɪld. "aɪ fil wʌndɝfəl. əmeɪzɪŋ. ət pis. ən kənsɝnd, ən wɝid, æŋkʃəs. laɪk ju."

He smiled. "I feel wonderful. Amazing. At peace. And concerned, and worried, anxious. Like you."

"sʌmθɪŋ mʌs bi dʌn əbaʊt ðə sintʃæn."

"Something must be done about the Seanchan."

"aɪ əɡɹi. bʌt ðæts nɑt wʌɾ ɪz wɝiɪŋ ju. jəɹ bɑðɝd baɪ haʊ aɪ dɪsoʊbeɪd ju, ən jɛt jə noʊ ɪt wɑz ðə ɹaɪt θɪŋ tə du."

"I agree. But that's not what is worrying you. You're bothered by how I disobeyed you, and yet you know it was the right thing to do."

"ju dɪdn dɪsəbeɪ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "aɪ dɪd tɛl jə tə ɹɪtɝn."

"You didn't disobey," Egwene said. "I did tell you to return."

"ðə mɔɹətɔɹiəm ɑn ɡɑɹɾɪŋ jəɹ ɹum hæd nɑt bɪn lɪftəd. aɪ cʊɾə ənhɪnʒd plænz, kɑzd ə dɪstɝbəns, ən skɛɹɾ ɔf ði əsæsənz."

"The moratorium on guarding your room had not been lifted. I could have unhinged plans, caused a disturbance, and scared off the assassins."

"jɛs," ʃi sɛd. hɝ ɪmoʊʃənz ɡɹu mɔɹ tʃɹʌbəld. "bʌɾ ɪnstɛd, jə seɪv maɪ laɪf."

"Yes," she said. Her emotions grew more troubled. "But instead, you saved my life."

"haʊ dɪd ðeɪ ɡɛɾ ɪn?" ɡɔɪn æskt. "ʃʊdn juv əweɪkənd wən ðə meɪd tʃɹɪp jəɹ əlɑɹmz?"

"How did they get in?" Gawyn asked. "Shouldn't you have awakened when the maid tripped your alarms?"

ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "aɪ wɑz dip wɪðɪn ðə dʒɹim, faɪɾɪŋ mɛsænə. taʊɝ ɡɑɹdz wɝ wɪðɪn ɹeɪnʒ tə hɪɹ ði əlɑɹmz," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ðeɪ hæv ɔl bɪn faʊn dɛd. ɪt saʊnz laɪk ði əsæsənz wɝ ɪkspɛktɪŋ mi tə kʌm ɹʌnɪŋ. ðeɪ hæd wʌn ə ðɛɹ mɛmbɝz haɪɾɪŋ ɪn ði ɛntʃɹi ɹum tə kɪl mi æftɝ aɪ kæptʃɝd ði ʌðɝ tu." ʃi ɡɹɪməst. "ɪt maɪɾ əv wɝkt. aɪ wɑz æntɪsəpeɪɾɪŋ ðə blæk ədʒɑ, əɹ meɪbi ə ɡɹeɪ mæn."

She shook her head. "I was deep within the dream, fighting Mesaana. Tower Guards were within range to hear the alarms," Egwene said. "They have all been found dead. It sounds like the assassins were expecting me to come running. They had one of their members hiding in the entry room to kill me after I captured the other two." She grimaced. "It might have worked. I was anticipating the Black Ajah, or maybe a Gray Man."

"aɪ sɛnt wɔɹnɪŋ."

"I sent warning."

"ðə mɛsənʒɝ əz bɪn faʊn dɛɾ əz wɛl." ʃi aɪd hɪm. "ju dɪd ðə ɹaɪt θɪŋ tənaɪt, bʌɾ ɪt stɪl əz mi wɝid."

"The messenger has been found dead as well." She eyed him. "You did the right thing tonight, but it still has me worried."

"wil wɝk ɪɾ aʊt," ɡɑləd sɛd. "ju lemi pɹətɛk ju, ɛɡwin, ən əl oʊbeɪ jə ɪn ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. aɪ pɹɑməs ɪt." ɛɡwin hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən nɑɾəd. "wɛl, əl nid tə ɡoʊ spik wɪð ðə hɔl. ðəl bi ɹɛɾi tə bɹeɪk daʊn maɪ dɔɹ ən dɪmæn ænsɝz, baɪ naʊ." haʊ kəd tɛl ðəɾ ɑn ði ɪnsaɪd, ʃi wɑz ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ. "ɪt meɪ hɛlp," hi sɛd, "ɪf jə ɪmplaɪ ðət maɪ ɹɪtɝn wɑz ɔlweɪz pɑɹɾ ə ðə plæn."

"We'll work it out," Galad said. "You let me protect you, Egwene, and I'll obey you in anything else. I promise it." Egwene hesitated, then nodded. "Well, I'll need to go speak with the Hall. They'll be ready to break down my door and demand answers, by now." How could tell that on the inside, she was grimacing. "It may help," he said, "if you imply that my return was always part of the plan."

"ɪt wɑz," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ðoʊ ðə taɪmɪŋ wɑzn æntɪsəpeɪɾəd." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "wɛn aɪ ɹilaɪz haʊ sɪlviænə hæd fɹeɪz maɪ ɹɪkwɛs ðət jə ɹɪtɝn, aɪ wɑz wɝid ðət jə wʊdn kʌm bæk əɾ ɔl."

"It was," Egwene said. "Though the timing wasn't anticipated." She hesitated. "When I realized how Silviana had phrased my request that you return, I was worried that you wouldn't come back at all."

"aɪ nɪɹli dɪdnt."

"I nearly didn't."

"wʌt meɪd ðə dɪfɝəns?"

"What made the difference?"

"aɪ hæd tə lɝn haʊ tə sɝɛndɝ. ɪts sʌmθɪŋ aɪv nɛvɝ bɪn ɡʊɾ æt."

"I had to learn how to surrender. It's something I've never been good at."

ɛɡwin nɑɾəd, əz ɪf ʌndɝstændɪŋ. "aɪl liv ɔɹɾɝz fəɹ ə bɛd tə bi bɹɔɾ ɪndə ðɪs ɹum. aɪ wɑz ɔlweɪz plænɪŋ ðɪs tə bi maɪ wɔɹɾɝz steɪʃən."

Egwene nodded, as if understanding. "I'll leave orders for a bed to be brought into this room. I was always planning this to be my Warder's station."

ɡɔɪn smaɪld. slip ɪn ənʌðɝ ɹum? ʌndɝniθ ɪɾ ɔl, ðəɹ wɑz stɪl səm ə ðə kənsɝvəɾɪv ɪnkipɝz dɔɾɝ ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ. ɛɡwin blʌʃt əz ʃi sɛnst ɪz θɔts.

Gawyn smiled. Sleep in another room? Underneath it all, there was still some of the conservative innkeeper's daughter remaining. Egwene blushed as she sensed his thoughts.

"waɪ doʊnt wi ɡɛt mɛɹid?" ɡɔɪn sɛd. "ɹaɪt hɪɹ, tədeɪ. laɪt, ɛɡwin, jəɹ æmɪɝlɪn -  jəɹ wɝɾ ɪz əz ɡʊɾ əz lɔ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn. spik ðə wɝdz, ən wid bi wɛɾəd."

"Why don't we get married?" Gawyn said. "Right here, today. Light, Egwene, you're Amyrlin -  your word is as good as law in Tar Valon. Speak the words, and we'd be wedded."

ʃi peɪld; ɑd, haʊ ðət wəɾ ənsɛɾəl əɹ ðɪs naɪt. ɡɔɪn fɛlt ə stæb ʌv æŋzaɪəɾi. ʃid sɛd ʃi lʌv hɪm. dɪdnt ʃi wɑnə -  bʌt noʊ, hi kəd fil əɹ ɪmoʊʃənz. ʃi dɪd lʌv hɪm. ðən waɪ?

She paled; odd, how that would unsettle her this night. Gawyn felt a stab of anxiety. She'd said she loved him. Didn't she want to -  But no, he could feel her emotions. She did love him. Then why?

ɛɡwin saʊndəɾ əɡæst wən ʃi spoʊk. "ju θɪŋk aɪ kəd feɪs maɪ pɛɹəns ɪf aɪ ɡɑt mɛɹid wɪθaʊɾ əm noʊɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt? laɪt, ɡɔɪn, wɪl ət list əv tə sɛn fəɹ ðɛm! ən wʌɾ əbaʊɾ ɪleɪn? jud mɛɹi wɪθaʊt tɛlɪŋ hɝ?"

Egwene sounded aghast when she spoke. "You think I could face my parents if I got married without them knowing about it? Light, Gawyn, we'll at least have to send for them! And what about Elayne? You'd marry without telling her?"

hi smaɪld. "jɔɹ ɹaɪt, ʌv kɔɹs. əl kɑntæk ðɛm."

He smiled. "You're right, of course. I'll contact them."

"aɪ kən - "

"I can - "

"ɛɡwin, jəɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ðə weɪɾ ə ðə wɝld ɪtsɛlf ɪz ɑn jəɹ ʃoʊldɝz. lemi meɪk ɝeɪnʒmənts."

"Egwene, you're the Amyrlin Seat. The weight of the world itself is on your shoulders. Let me make arrangements."

vɛɹi wɛl," ʃi sɛd. ʃi stɛpt aʊtsaɪd, wɛɹ sɪlviænə weɪɾəd - ʃi hæd wʌn ə hɝ ɡlaʊɝz fəɹ ɡɔɪn. ɛɡwin sɛn səm sɝvəns fəɹ ə bɛd fəɹ hɪm, ðən ʃi ən əɹ kipɝ muvd ɔf, ə pɛɹ ə tʃʌbnz soʊlʒɝz fɑloʊɪŋ.

Very well," she said. She stepped outside, where Silviana waited - she had one of her glowers for Gawyn. Egwene sent some servants for a bed for him, then she and her Keeper moved off, a pair of Chubain's soldiers following.

ɡɔɪn wʊɾə laɪk tə ɡoʊ wɪð hɝ. ðəɹ maɪt stɪl bi əsæsənz əbaʊt. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt tə sɛn ɪm tə slip. hi wɑz hævɪŋ tʃɹʌbəl ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ əpɹaɪt. hi stʊɾ ɑn ənstɛɾi lɛɡz, ðən noʊɾəst ə laɪn ə ʃit-kʌvɝd bɑɾiz aʊtsaɪd. ðeɪ wʊdn bi ɹimuvd əntɪl sɪstɝz hæɾ ə tʃæns tə lʊk əm oʊvɝ. ɹaɪt naʊ, ɹɪndɪŋ mɛsænə - ən lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ʌðɝ əsæsənz - hæd bɪn mɔɹ pɹɛsɪŋ.

Gawyn would have liked to go with her. There might still be assassins about. Unfortunately, she was right to send him to sleep. He was having trouble remaining upright. He stood on unsteady legs, then noticed a line of sheet-covered bodies outside. They wouldn't be removed until sisters had a chance to look them over. Right now, rinding Mesaana - and looking for other assassins - had been more pressing.

ɡɹɪɾɪŋ ɪz tiθ, hi fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə wɔk oʊvɝ ən pʊl bæk ðə ʃit, ɹɪvilɪŋ sɛlɑɹks ən mɑzoʊniz laɪfləs feɪsəz - sɛlɑɹks, ənfɔɹɾu-nætli, sɪɾɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ɪz bɑɾi, sɛpɝeɪɾəd fɹəm ɪɾ ət ðə hɛk.

Gritting his teeth, he forced himself to walk over and pull back the sheet, revealing Celark's and Mazone's lifeless faces - Celark's, unfortu-nately, sitting beside his body, separated from it at the heck.

"ju dɪd wɛl, mɛn," hi sɛd. "aɪl si ðət jəɹ fæmliz noʊ ðət jə seɪv ðə laɪf ə ði æmɪɝlɪn." ɪt meɪɾ ɪm æŋɡɹi tə luz sətʃ ɡʊd mɛn.

"You did well, men," he said. "I'll see that your families know that you saved the life of the Amyrlin." It made him angry to lose such good men.

bɝn ðoʊz sintʃæn, hi θɔt. ɛɡwin ɪz ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt ðɛm. sʌmθɪŋ nidz tə bi dʌn.

Burn those Seanchan, he thought. Egwene is right about them. Something needs to be done.

hi ɡlæns tə ðə saɪd, tə wɛɹ ðə θɹi əsæsənz leɪ bɪniθ ʃits ə ðɛɹ oʊn, blæk- slɪpɝd fit stɪkɪŋ aʊt ðə bɑɾəm. tu wɪmən ən ə mæn.

He glanced to the side, to where the three assassins lay beneath sheets of their own, black- slippered feet sticking out the bottom. Two women and a man.

/ wʌndɝ... hi θɔt, ðən kɹɔs tə wɛɹ ðeɪ leɪ. ɡɑɹdz ɡlænst əɾ ɪm əz i pʊl bæk ðə ʃit, bʌt noʊbɑdi fɝbeɪd hɪm.

/ wonder... he thought, then crossed to where they lay. Guards glanced at him as he pulled back the sheet, but nobody forbade him.

ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɝ izi tə pɪk aʊt, ðoʊ oʊnli kəz hid bɪn toʊld wʌt tə lʊk fɔɹ.

The ter'angreal were easy to pick out, though only because he'd been told what to look for.

aɪdɛntɪkəl blæk stoʊn ɹɪŋz, wɔɹn ɑn ðə mɪɾəl fɪŋɡɝz ə ðɛɹ ɹaɪt hænz. ðə ɹɪŋz wɝ kɑɹvd ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə vaɪn wɪð θɔɹnz. əpɛɹənli nʌn ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd əm fəɹ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ, ət lis nɑt jɛt.

Identical black stone rings, worn on the middle fingers of their right hands. The rings were carved in the shape of a vine with thorns. Apparently none of the Aes Sedai had recognized them for what they were, at least not yet.

ɡɔɪn slɪpt ɔl θɹi ɹɪŋz ɔf, ðən tʌkt əm ɪndə hɪz pɑkət.

Gawyn slipped all three rings off, then tucked them into his pocket.

læn kəd fil sʌmθɪŋ, ə dɪstɪŋk dɪfɝəns tə ði ɪmoʊʃənz ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz maɪnd. hid ɡɹoʊn əkʌstəm tə ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðoʊz, ən ðə wʊmən ðeɪ ɹɛpɹəzɛntəd.

Lan could feel something, a distinct difference to the emotions in the back of his mind. He'd grown accustomed to ignoring those, and the woman they represented.

leɪtli, ðoʊz ɪmoʊʃənz hæd tʃeɪnʒd. mɔɹ ən mɔɹ, hi wɑz sɝɾən ðət nɪneɪiv hæd teɪkən ɪz bɑnd. hi kəɾ aɪdɛntəfaɪ hɝ baɪ ðə weɪ ʃi fɛlt. haʊ kəd wʌn nɑt noʊ hɝ, ðət sɛns ə pæʃən ən kaɪndnəs? ɪt fɛlt . . . ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl.

Lately, those emotions had changed. More and more, he was certain that Nynaeve had taken his bond. He could identify her by the way she felt. How could one not know her, that sense of passion and kindness? It felt . . . remarkable.

hi stɛɹd daʊn ðə ɹoʊdweɪ. ɪt twɪstəɾ ɝaʊn ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə hɪl bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ stʃɹeɪt təwɔɹɾ ə dɪstɪŋktɪv fɔɹtʃɹəs əhɛd. ðə bɔɹɾɝ bɪtwin kændɝ ən ɝæfəl wɑz mɑɹk baɪ ðə sɪlvɝwəl kips, ə lɑɹdʒ fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃən bɪlt ɑn tu saɪdz ə fɝtʃhən pæs. ɪt wɑz ən ɪkstʃɹimli ɪmpɹɛsɪv fɔɹtʃɹəs-ɹɪli tu ʌv ðɛm, itʃ wʌn bɪlt ʌp ðə stʃɹeɪt wɔl ə ðə nɛɹoʊ kænjənlaɪk pæs. laɪk tu saɪdz ʌv ən ɪnɔɹməs dɔɹweɪ.

He stared down the roadway. It twisted around the side of a hill before turning straight toward a distinctive fortress ahead. The border between Kandor and Arafel was marked by the Silverwall Keeps, a large fortification built on two sides of Firchon Pass. It was an extremely impressive fortress-really two of them, each one built up the straight wall of the narrow canyonlike pass. Like two sides of an enormous doorway.

ɡɛɾɪŋ θɹu ðə pæs ɹikwaɪɝd tʃɹævlɪŋ ə kənsɪɾɝəbəl dɪstəns bi-twin lɑɹdʒ stoʊn wɔlz pɑkt wɪð æɹoʊslɪts, ən ɪt wəd bi ɪfɛktɪv ət stɑpɪŋ ɑɹmiz muvɪŋ ɪn iðɝ dɝɛkʃən.

Getting through the pass required traveling a considerable distance be-tween large stone walls pocked with arrowslits, and it would be effective at stopping armies moving in either direction.

ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ælaɪz, ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz wɝ. bʌt ðət dɪdn stɑp ði ɝæfɛlɪn fɹəm wɑntɪŋ ə naɪs fɔɹtʃɹəs blɑkɪŋ ðə weɪ ʌp tə ʃoʊl ɑɹbɛlə. kæmpt ɪn fɹʌn ə ðət fɔɹtʃɹəs wɑz ə ɡæðɝɪŋ ə θaʊzənz ə pipəl, klʌstɝɾ ɪn smɔlɝ ɡɹups. ðə flæɡ ʌv mɔlkiɝ - ðə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn - flu oʊvɝ səm ə ðə ɡɹups. ʌðɝz flu flæɡz ə kændɝ əɹ ɝæfəl.

They were all allies, the Borderlanders were. But that didn't stop the Arafellin from wanting a nice fortress blocking the way up to Shol Arbela. Camped in front of that fortress was a gathering of thousands of people, clustered in smaller groups. The flag of Malkier - the Golden Crane - flew over some of the groups. Others flew flags of Kandor or Arafel.

""wɪtʃ ə jə bɹoʊk jəɹ oʊθ?" læn æskt, lʊkɪŋ bæk ət ðə kæɹəvæn.

""Which of you broke your oath?" Lan asked, looking back at the caravan.

ðə mɛn ðəɹ ʃʊk ðɛɹ hɛdz.

The men there shook their heads.

"noʊbɑdi niɾəd tə bɹeɪk ɪz oʊθ," ændɪɹ sɛd. "wʌɾ ɛls wəd jə du? kʌt θɹu ðə bɹoʊkən lænz? ði ənkæp hɪlz? ɪts hɪɹ əɹ noʊwɛɹ. ðeɪ noʊ ðɪs. ən soʊ ðeɪ weɪt fəɹ ju."

"Nobody needed to break his oath," Andere said. "What else would you do? Cut through the Broken Lands? The Uncapped Hills? It is here or nowhere. They know this. And so they wait for you."

læn ɡɹaʊld. ɪt wɑz pɹɑbli tʃɹu. "wi ɑɹ ə kæɹəvæn," hi sɛd laʊdli. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ɪf ɛni æsk, jə meɪ ədmɪt ðət wəɹ mɔlkɪɹi. jə meɪ seɪ jə weɪt fəɹ jəɹ kɪŋ. ðəɾ ɪz tʃɹuθ. jə meɪ nɑt mɛnʃən ðət juv faʊn hɪm."

Lan growled. It was probably true. "We are a caravan," he said loudly. "Remember, if any ask, you may admit that we are Malkieri. You may say you wait for your king. That is truth. You may not mention that you have found him."

ði ʌðɝz sim tʃɹʌbəld, bʌt ðeɪ meɪd noʊ əbdʒɛkʃən. læn lɛd ðə weɪ daʊn ðə sloʊp, ðɛɹ kæɹəvæn ə twɛnti wæɡənz, wɔɹhɔɹsɪz ən ətɛndəns fɑloʊɪŋ.

The others seemed troubled, but they made no objection. Lan led the way down the slope, their caravan of twenty wagons, warhorses and attendants following.

ðɪs wɑz wʌt hiɾ ɔlweɪz wɝid wəd hæpən. ɹikleɪmɪŋ mɔlkiɝ wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl. ðeɪ wəd daɪ, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ lɑɹdʒ ðɛɹ fɔɹs. ən əsɔlt? ɑn ðə blaɪt? ɹɪdɪkjələs.

This was what he'd always worried would happen. Reclaiming Malkier was impossible. They would die, no matter how large their force. An assault? On the Blight? Ridiculous.

hi kəd nɑɾ æsk ðəɾ ə ðɛm. hi kəd nɑɾ əlaʊ ðəɾ ə ðɛm. əz i kəntɪnjud daʊn ðə ɹoʊd, hi bɪkeɪm mɔɹ ɹɛzəlut. ðoʊz bɹeɪv mɛn, flaɪɪŋ ðoʊz flæɡz . . . ðeɪ ʃəd dʒɔɪn wɪð ðə ʃaɪnɝən fɔɹsɪz ən faɪɾ ɪn ə bæɾəl ðət mɛn sʌmθɪŋ. hi wəd nɑt teɪk ðɛɹ laɪvz.

He could not ask that of them. He could not allow that of them. As he continued down the road, he became more resolute. Those brave men, flying those flags . . . they should join with the Shienaran forces and fight in a battle that meant something. He would not take their lives.

dɛθ ɪz laɪɾɝ ðən ə fɛðɝ . . . ɹɑkim hæd θɹoʊn ðəɾ əɾ ɪm sɛvɹəl taɪmz dʊɹɪŋ ðɛɹ ɹaɪd. hi hæd fɑloʊd læn dɛkeɪdz əɡoʊ, dʊɹɪŋ ði il wɔɹ. duɾi ɪz hɛviɝ ðən ə maʊntən.

Death is lighter than a feather . . . Rakim had thrown that at him several times during their ride. He had followed Lan decades ago, during the Aiel War. Duty is heavier than a mountain.

læn wɑz nɑt ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm duɾi. hi wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ɪt. stɪl, saɪɾ ə ðə kæmps stɝɾ ɪz hɑɹɾ əz i ɹitʃt ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə sloʊp, ðən ɹoʊd fɔɹwɝd. ðə weɪɾɪŋ mɛn wɔɹ sɪmpəl wɔɹiɝz ɡɑɹb, hædɔɹi ɪn pleɪs, wɪmən mɑɹkt wɪð ə kɪsən ɑn ðɛɹ fɔɹhɛdz. səm ə ðə mɛn wɔɹ koʊts wɪð ðə ɡoʊldən kɹaʊn ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝz - ðə mɑɹk ə ðə ɹɔɪəl ɡɑɹɾ ə mɔlkiɝ. ðeɪ wʊɾə dɑn ðoʊz oʊnli ɪf ðɛɹ fɑðɝz əɹ ɡɹændfɑðɝz hæd sɝvd ɪn ðət ɡɑɹd.

Lan was not running from duty. He was running toward it. Still, sight of the camps stirred his heart as he reached the bottom of the slope, then rode forward. The waiting men wore simple warrior's garb, hadori in place, women marked with a ki'sain on their foreheads. Some of the men wore coats with the Golden Crown on the shoulders - the mark of the royal guard of Malkier. They would have donned those only if their fathers or grandfathers had served in that guard.

ɪt wɑz ə saɪt ðət wʊɾə meɪd bʌkɑmə kɹaɪ. hi hæd θɔt ðə mɔlkɪɹi ɡɔn əz ə pipəl, bɹoʊkən, ʃæɾɝd, əbzɔɹbd baɪ ʌðɝ neɪʃənz. jɛt hɪɹ ðeɪ wɝ, ɡæðɝɪŋ ət ðə feɪntəst wɪspɝ ʌv ə kɔl tə ɑɹmz. mɛni wɝ oʊldɝ - læn hæd bɪn bʌɾ ə beɪb wən ɪz kɪŋdəm fɛl, ən ðoʊz u ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət deɪ əz mɛn wəd naʊ bi ɪn ðɛɹ sɛvənθ əɹ eɪtθ dɛkeɪd. ðeɪ hæd ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ stɪl wɔɹiɝz, ən ðeɪd bɹɔt ðɛɹ sʌnz ən ɡɹændsʌnz.

It was a sight that would have made Bukama cry. He had thought the Malkieri gone as a people, broken, shattered, absorbed by other nations. Yet here they were, gathering at the faintest whisper of a call to arms. Many were older - Lan had been but a babe when his kingdom fell, and those who remembered that day as men would now be in their seventh or eighth decade. They had gray hair, but they were still warriors, and they'd brought their sons and grandsons.

"teɪʃɝ mɔlkiɝ!" ə mæn kɹaɪɾ əz lænz ɡɹup pæst. ðə kɔl wɛn ʌp ə dʌzən, tu dʌzən taɪmz əz ðeɪ sɔ hɪz hædɔɹi. nʌn sim tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ɪm fəɹ u hi wɑz. ðeɪ əsum ðəɾ i hæd kʌm fəɹ ðə ɹizən ðeɪ hæd kʌm.

"Tai'shar Malkier!" a man cried as Lan's group passed. The call went up a dozen, two dozen times as they saw his hadori. None seemed to recognize him for who he was. They assumed that he had come for the reason they had come.

ðə læs bæɾəl kʌmz, læn θɔt. mʌst aɪ dɪnaɪ ðɛm ðə ɹaɪt tə faɪɾ əlɔŋsaɪd mi?

The Last Battle comes, Lan thought. Must I deny them the right to fight alongside me?

jɛs, hi mʌst. bɛst i pæst ənnoʊɾɪst ən ənɹɛkəɡnaɪzd. hi kɛpt ɪz aɪz fɔɹwɝd, hɪz hæn ɑn ɪz sɔɹd, hɪz maʊθ kloʊzd. bʌɾ itʃ kɔl ə teɪʃɝ mɔlkiɝ meɪɾ ɪm wɑnə sɪɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪɾɝ.

Yes, he must. Best he passed unnoticed and unrecognized. He kept his eyes forward, his hand on his sword, his mouth closed. But each call of Tai'shar Malkier made him want to sit up straighter.

itʃ sim tə stʃɹɛŋθən hɪm, pʊʃ ɪm fɔɹwɝd.

Each seemed to strengthen him, push him forward.

ðə ɡeɪts bɪtwin ðə tu fɔɹtʃɹəs kips wɝ oʊpən, ðoʊ soʊlʒɝz tʃɛkt ɛvɹi mæn u wɛn θɹu. læn hɔltəd mændɑɹb, ən ɪz pipəl stɑp bɪhaɪn hɪm. kəd ði ɝæfɛlɪn əv ɔɹɾɝz tə wɑtʃ fəɹ hɪm? wʌɾ ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs dɪɾ i hæv bʌt tə ɡoʊ fɔɹwɝd? ɡoʊɪŋ ɝaʊnd wəd teɪk wiks. hɪz kæɹəvæn weɪɾəd ɪts tɝn, ðən stɛpt ʌp tə ðə ɡɑɹd poʊst.

The gates between the two fortress keeps were open, though soldiers checked every man who went through. Lan halted Mandarb, and his people stopped behind him. Could the Arafellin have orders to watch for him? What other choice did he have but to go forward? Going around would take weeks. His caravan waited its turn, then stepped up to the guard post.

"pɝpəs?" æsk ðə junəfɔɹmd ɝæfɛlɪn, hɛɹ ɪn bɹeɪdz.

"Purpose?" asked the uniformed Arafellin, hair in braids.

"tʃɹævlɪŋ tə fæl mɝæn," læn sɛd. "bɪkɔz ə ðə læs bæɾəl."

"Traveling to Fal Moran," Lan said. "Because of the Last Battle."

"jɔɹ nɑt gɑnə weɪt hɪɹ laɪk ðə ɹɛst?" ðə ɡɑɹd sɛd, weɪvɪŋ ə ɡɔntələɾəd hæn ət ðə ɡæðɝd mɔlkɪɹi. "fɔɹ jəɹ kɪŋ?"

"You're not going to wait here like the rest?" the guard said, waving a gauntleted hand at the gathered Malkieri. "For your king?"

"aɪ hæv noʊ kɪŋ," læn sɛd sɔfli.

"I have no king," Lan said softly.

ðə soʊlʒɝ nɑɾəd sloʊli, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz tʃɪn. ðən i weɪv fəɹ səm soʊlʒɝz tə ɪnspɛk ðə ɡʊdz ɪn ðə wæɡənz. "ðɛɹ wɪl bi ə tɛɹəf ɑn ðæt."

The soldier nodded slowly, rubbing his chin. Then he waved for some soldiers to inspect the goods in the wagons. "There will be a tariff on that."

"aɪ plæn tə ɡɪv ɪt tə ʃaɪnɝənz tə faɪɾ ɪn ðə læs bæɾəl," læn sɛd. "noʊ pɹaɪs æskt."

"I plan to give it to Shienarans to fight in the Last Battle," Lan said. "No price asked."

ðə ɡɑɹd ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ.

The guard raised an eyebrow.

"ju hæv maɪ oʊθ ɑn ɪt," læn sɛd sɔfli, miɾɪŋ ðə mænz aɪz.

"You have my oath on it," Lan said softly, meeting the man's eyes.

"noʊ tɛɹəf, ðɛn. teɪʃɝ mɔlkiɝ, fɹɛnd."

"No tariff, then. Tai'shar Malkier, friend."

"teɪʃɝ ɝæfəl." læn kɪkt ɪz hɔɹs fɔɹwɝd. hi heɪɾəd ɹaɪɾɪŋ θɹu ðə sɪlvɝwɔlz; ðeɪ meɪɾ ɪm fil əz ðoʊ ə θaʊzən ɑɹtʃɝz wɝ dʒɹɔɪŋ ɑn hɪm. ðə tʃɹɑləks wəd nɑɾ izəli ɡɛt θɹu hɪɹ, ɪf ði ɝæfɛlɪn wɝ fɔɹs tə ɹitʃɹit bæk ðɪs fɑɹ. ðəɹ wɝ taɪmz ðət hæd hæpənd, ən ðeɪ hæd hɛl hɪɹ itʃ taɪm, əz ɪn ðə deɪz ə jækəbɪn ði əndɔntɪd.

"Tai'shar Arafel." Lan kicked his horse forward. He hated riding through the Silverwalls; they made him feel as though a thousand archers were drawing on him. The Trollocs would not easily get through here, if the Arafellin were forced to retreat back this far. There were times that had happened, and they had held here each time, as in the days of Yakobin the Undaunted.

læn pɹæktəkli hɛld ɪz bɹɛθ ði ɪntaɪɝ weɪ. hi ɹitʃt ði ʌðɝ saɪd ɡɹeɪtfəli, ən ɝdʒ mændɑɹb aʊɾ ɑntu ðə ɹoʊdweɪ tə ðə nɔɹθist.

Lan practically held his breath the entire way. He reached the other side gratefully, and urged Mandarb out onto the roadway to the northeast.

"ælən mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən?" ə vɔɪs jɛld, saʊndɪŋ dɪstənt.

"Al'Lan Mandragoran?" a voice yelled, sounding distant.

læn fɹoʊz. ðət kɔl hæd kʌm fɹəm əbʌv. hi tɝnd, lʊkɪŋ bæk ət ðə lɛftmoʊs kip. ə hɛd wɑz stɪkɪŋ fɹəm ə wɪndoʊ ðɛɹ.

Lan froze. That call had come from above. He turned, looking back at the leftmost keep. A head was sticking from a window there.

"laɪt bi pɹeɪzd, ɪts ju!" ðə vɔɪs kɔld. ðə hɛd dʌk bæk ɪnsaɪd.

"Light be praised, it is you!" the voice called. The head ducked back inside.

læn fɛlt laɪk boʊltɪŋ. bʌɾ ɪf i dɪd, ðɪs pɝsən wəd ʃʊɹli kɔl bæk tə ði ʌðɝz. hi weɪɾəd.

Lan felt like bolting. But if he did, this person would surely call back to the others. He waited.

ðə fɪɡjɝ keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ aʊt wʌn ə ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs dɔɹweɪz. læn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz hɪm: ə bɔɪ nɑt jɛt ɡɹoʊn ɪndə ə mæn wɛɹɪŋ ɹɛd, wɪð ə ɹɪtʃ blu kloʊk. kseɪ nɔɹəmɑɡə, ɡɹændsʌn ə ðə kwin ə kændɝ.

The figure came running out one of the fortress doorways. Lan recognized him: a boy not yet grown into a man wearing red, with a rich blue cloak. Kaisei Noramaga, grandson of the Queen of Kandor.

"lɔɹd mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən," ðə juθ sɛd, tʃɹɑɾɪŋ ʌp. "ju keɪm! wən aɪ hɝd ðət ðə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn wɑz ɹeɪzd - "

"Lord Mandragoran," the youth said, trotting up. "You came! When I heard that the Golden Crane was raised - "

"aɪ hæv nɑt ɹeɪzd ɪt, pɹɪns kseɪ. maɪ plæn wɑz tə ɹaɪɾ əloʊn."

"I have not raised it, Prince Kaisei. My plan was to ride alone."

"ʌv kɔɹs. aɪ wəd laɪk tə ɹaɪɾ əloʊn wɪð ju. meɪ aɪ?"

"Of course. I would like to ride alone with you. May I?"

"ðɪs ɪz nɑɾ ə waɪz tʃɔɪs, jəɹ haɪnəs," læn sɛd. "jɔɹ ɡɹændmʌðɝ ɪz ɪn ðə saʊθ; aɪ əsum jəɹ fɑðɝ ɹulz ɪn kændɝ. jə ʃəd bi wɪð hɪm. wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ hɪɹ?"

"This is not a wise choice, Your Highness," Lan said. "Your grandmother is in the South; I assume your father rules in Kandor. You should be with him. What are you doing here?"

"pɹɪns kɛnʒɹəl ɪnvaɪɾəd mi," kseɪ sɛd. "æn maɪ fɑðɝ beɪd mi kʌm. wi boʊθ plæn tə ɹaɪd wɪð ju!"

"Prince Kendral invited me," Kaisei said. "And my father bade me come. We both plan to ride with you!"

"kɛnʒɹəl, tu?" læn æskt, əɡæst. ðə ɡɹændsʌn ə ði ɝæfɛlɪn kɪŋ? "jɔɹ pleɪsəz ɑɹ wɪð jəɹ pipəl!"

"Kendral, too?" Lan asked, aghast. The grandson of the Arafellin king? "Your places are with your people!"

"aʊɝ ænsɛstɝz swɔɹ ən oʊθ," ðə jʌŋ mæn sɛd. "æn oʊθ tə pɹətɛkt, tə dɪfɛnd. ðəɾ oʊθ ɪz stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən blʌd, lɔɹd mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən. ɪts stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən wɪl əɹ tʃɔɪs. jəɹ waɪf toʊld əs tə weɪt hɪɹ fəɹ ju; ʃi sɛd ðət jə maɪt tʃɹaɪ tə pæs wɪθaʊt ɡɹiɾɪŋ ʌs."

"Our ancestors swore an oath," the young man said. "An oath to protect, to defend. That oath is stronger than blood, Lord Mandragoran. It is stronger than will or choice. Your wife told us to wait here for you; she said that you might try to pass without greeting us."

"haʊ dɪd jə noʊɾəs mi?" læn æskt, kənteɪnɪŋ ɪz æŋɡɝ.

"How did you notice me?" Lan asked, containing his anger.

"ðə hɔɹs," kseɪ sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ tə mændɑɹb. "ʃi sɛd jə maɪt dɪsɡaɪz jɝsɛlf. bʌt jə wəd nɛvɝ liv ðə hɔɹs."

"The horse," Kaisei said, nodding to Mandarb. "She said you might disguise yourself. But you would never leave the horse."

bɝn ðət wʊmən, læn θɔɾ əz i hɝɾ ə kɔl biɪŋ ɹeɪz θɹu ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs. hid bɪn aʊtmənuvɝd. kɝs nɪneɪiv. ən blɛs hɝ, tu. hi tʃɹaɪd tə sɛn ə sɛns ə lʌv ən fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən θɹu ðə bɑn tə hɝ.

Burn that woman, Lan thought as he heard a call being raised through the fortress. He'd been outmaneuvered. Curse Nynaeve. And bless her, too. He tried to send a sense of love and frustration through the bond to her.

ən ðɛn, wɪð ə dip saɪ, hi ɡeɪv ɪn. "ðə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn flaɪz fəɹ tɑɹmən ɡdən," læn sɛd sɔfli. "lɛɾ ɛni mæn əɹ wʊmən u wɪʃɪz tə fɑloʊ dʒɔɪn ɪɾ ən faɪt."

And then, with a deep sigh, he gave in. "The Golden Crane flies for Tarmon Gai'don," Lan said softly. "Let any man or woman who wishes to follow join it and fight."

hi kloʊzd ɪz aɪz əz ðə kɔl wɛn ʌp. ɪt sun bɪkeɪm ə tʃɪɹ. ðən ə ɹɔɹ.

He closed his eyes as the call went up. It soon became a cheer. Then a roar.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾiθɹi


CHAPTER 43

səm ti


Some Tea

ən ðiz æʃəmən kleɪm ðeɪ ɑɹ fɹi ʌv ðə teɪnt?" ɡɑləɾ æskt, əz i ən pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə pɪk ðɛɹ weɪ θɹu ði æftɝmæθ ə ðə bæɾəl.

And these Ashaman claim they are free of the taint?" Galad asked, as he and Perrin Aybara picked their way through the aftermath of the battle.

"ðeɪ du," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "æn aɪv ə maɪn tə tʃɹʌs ðɛm. waɪ wəd ðeɪ laɪ?"

"They do," Perrin said. "And I've a mind to trust them. Why would they lie?"

ɡɑləd ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ. "ɪnsænəɾi?"

Galad raised an eyebrow. "Insanity?"

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd ət ðæt. ðɪs pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə wɑz ən ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ mæn. ʌðɝz ɔfən ɹɪspɑndɪd wɪð æŋɡɝ wən ɡɑləd sɛd wʌɾ i θɔt, bʌɾ i wɑz kʌmɪŋ tə ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i dɪdnt nid tə hoʊl hɪmsɛlf bæk wɪð pɛɹɪn. ðɪs mæn ɹɪspɑndɪd wɛl tə ɑnəsti. ɪf i wɑz ə dɑɹkfɹɛn əɹ ʃæd- oʊzpɔn, hi wɑz ə vɛɹi ɑd sɔɹt.

Perrin nodded at that. This Perrin Aybara was an interesting man. Others often responded with anger when Galad said what he thought, but he was coming to realize that he didn't need to hold himself back with Perrin. This man responded well to honesty. If he was a Darkfriend or Shad- owspawn, he was a very odd sort.

ðə hɝaɪzən wɑz stɑɹɾɪŋ tə ɡɹoʊ bɹaɪɾɝ. laɪt, hæd naɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi pæst? bɑɾiz lɪɾɝd ðə ɡɹaʊnd, moʊst ə ðɛm tʃɹɑləks. ðə stɛntʃ wɑz ə bɝn flɛʃ ən fɝ, nɔʒieɪɾɪŋ əz ɪt mɪkst wɪð ðəɾ ə blʌɾ ən mʌd. ɡɑləd fɛlt ɪɡzɔstəd.

The horizon was starting to grow brighter. Light, had night already passed? Bodies littered the ground, most of them Trollocs. The stench was of burned flesh and fur, nauseating as it mixed with that of blood and mud. Galad felt exhausted.

hiɾ əlaʊɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tə hil hɪm. "wʌns juv kəmɪɾəd jəɹ ɹɪzɝvz, ðɛɹz noʊ jus hoʊldɪŋ bæk jəɹ skaʊts," ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn wɑz fɑn ə seɪɪŋ. ɪf i wɑz gɑnə lɛɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ seɪv ɪz mɛn, ðən i maɪɾ əz wɛl æksɛp ðɛɹ hilɪŋ. wʌns, æksɛptɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ hilɪŋ hædn bɑðɝɾ ɪm nɪɹli soʊ mʌtʃ.

He'd allowed an Aes Sedai to Heal him. "Once you've committed your reserves, there's no use holding back your scouts," Gareth Bryne was fond of saying. If he was going to let Aes Sedai save his men, then he might as well accept their Healing. Once, accepting Aes Sedai Healing hadn't bothered him nearly so much.

"pɝhæps," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "pɝhæps ði æʃəmən ɑɹ mæd, ən ðə teɪn ɪzən klɛnzd. bʌt ðeɪv sɝv mi wɛl, ən aɪ fɪɡjɝ ðeɪv ɝn ðə ɹaɪt tə bi tʃɹʌstɪɾ əntɪl ðeɪ ʃoʊ mi ʌðɝwaɪz. jə ən jəɹ mɛn maɪt wɛl oʊ jəɹ laɪvz tə ɡɹeɪɾi ən nild."

"Perhaps," Perrin said. "Perhaps the Ashaman are mad, and the taint isn't cleansed. But they've served me well, and I figure they've earned the right to be trusted until they show me otherwise. You and your men might well owe your lives to Grady and Neald."

"æn ðeɪv maɪ θæŋks," ɡɑləd sɛd, stɛpɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə hʌlkɪŋ bɑɾi ʌv ə tʃɹɑlɑk wɪð ə bɛɹz snaʊt. "ðoʊ fju ʌv maɪ mɛn wɪl ɪkspɹɛs ðəɾ ɪmoʊʃən. ðeɪ ɑɹən sɝɾən wʌt tə θɪŋk ə jəɹ ɪntɝvɛntʃən hɪɹ, eɪbɑɹə."

"And they have my thanks," Galad said, stepping over the hulking body of a Trolloc with a bear's snout. "Though few of my men will express that emotion. They aren't certain what to think of your intervention here, Aybara."

"stɪl θɪŋk aɪ sɛɾ əm ʌp sʌmhaʊ?"

"Still think I set them up somehow?"

"pɝhæps," ɡɑləd sɛd. "iðɝ jə ɑɹ ə dɑɹkfɹɛn ʌv ʌnsɝpæs kʌnɪŋ, əɹ ju ɹɪli dɪɾ əz jə sɛd - kʌmɪŋ tə seɪv maɪ mɛn dɪspaɪt jəɹ tʃɹitmən əɾ əɹ hænz. ɪn ðət keɪs, jə ɑɹ ə mæn ʌv ɑnɝ. lɛɾɪŋ daɪ wʊɾə meɪd jəɹ laɪf mʌtʃ iziɝ, aɪ bɪliv."

"Perhaps," Galad said. "Either you are a Darkfriend of unsurpassed cunning, or yu really did as you said - coming to save my men despite your treatment at our hands. In that case, you are a man of honor. Letting die would have made your life much easier, I believe."

"noʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɛvɹi sɔɹɾ ɪz niɾəd ət ðə læs bæɾəl, ɡɑləd.

"No," Perrin said. "Every sword is needed at the Last Battle, Galad.

ɛvɹi wʌn."

Every one."

ɡɑləd ɡɹʌntɪd, nilɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ə soʊlʒɝ wɪð ə ɹɛd kloʊk ən tɝnɪŋ ɪm oʊvɝ. ɪt wɑzn ə ɹɛd kloʊk; ɪt wɑz ə waɪt wʌn soʊkt ɪn blʌd. ɹænən saɪnə wəd nɑt si ðə læs bæɾəl. ɡɑləd kloʊz ðə jʌŋ mænz aɪz, bɹiðɪŋ ə pɹɛɹ tə ðə laɪɾ ɪn ɪz neɪm.

Galad grunted, kneeling beside a soldier with a red cloak and turning him over. It wasn't a red cloak; it was a white one soaked in blood. Ranun Sinah would not see the Last Battle. Galad closed the young man's eyes, breathing a prayer to the Light in his name.

"soʊ wʌt naʊ fəɹ jə ən jʊɹz?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"So what now for you and yours?" Perrin asked.

"wi kəntɪnju ɑn," ɡɑləd sɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ. "nɔɹθ, tə maɪ ɪsteɪts ɪn ændɝ tə pɹipɛɹ."

"We continue on," Galad said, rising. "North, to my estates in Andor to prepare."

"ju kəd - " pɛɹɪn fɹoʊz. ðən i tɝnd, tʃɹɑɾɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə bæɾəlfild.

"You could - " Perrin froze. Then he turned, trotting across the battlefield.

ɡɑləd hɝiɾ æftɝ hɪm. pɛɹɪn ɹitʃt ə hip ə tʃɹɑləks, ðən bɪɡæn pʊʃɪŋ bɑɾiz əsaɪd.

Galad hurried after him. Perrin reached a heap of Trollocs, then began pushing bodies aside.

ɡɑləd hɝɾ ə vɛɹi feɪn saʊnd. moʊnɪŋ. hi hɛlp muv ə dɛd hɔk-hɛɾəd bist, ɪts tu-hjumən aɪz stɛɹɪŋ laɪfləsli.

Galad heard a very faint sound. Moaning. He helped move a dead hawk-headed beast, its too-human eyes staring lifelessly.

bɪniθ ɪt, ə jʌŋ mæn lʊkt ʌp, blɪŋkɪŋ. ɪt wɑz dʒɪɹəm nʌs, wʌn ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən.

Beneath it, a young man looked up, blinking. It was Jerum Nus, one of the Children.

"oʊ, laɪt," ðə jʌŋ mæn kɹoʊkt. "ɪt hɝts. aɪ θɔɾ aɪ wɑz dɛd. dɛd . . ."

"Oh, Light," the young man croaked. "It hurts. I thought I was dead. Dead . . ."

hɪz saɪd wɑz kʌɾ oʊpən. pɛɹɪn nɛl heɪstəli, lɪftɪŋ ðə bɔɪz hɛd, ɡɪvɪŋ ɪm ə dʒɹɪŋk ʌv wɔɾɝ əz ɡɑləd tʊk ə bændɪdʒ fɹəm ðə bæɡ hi kæɹiɾ ən juzd ɪt tə ɹæp ðə waʊnd. ðət kʌt wɑz bæd. ði ənfɔɹtʃənət juθ wəd daɪ fəɹ sɝɾən. hi -  noʊ, ɡɑləd ɹilaɪzd. wɪv ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə ɡɛt juz tə θɪŋkɪŋ ðət weɪ.

His side was cut open. Perrin knelt hastily, lifting the boy's head, giving him a drink of water as Galad took a bandage from the bag he carried and used it to wrap the wound. That cut was bad. The unfortunate youth would die for certain. He -  No, Galad realized. We have Aes Sedai. It was hard to get used to thinking that way.

dʒɪɹəm wɑz kɹaɪɪŋ wɪð dʒɔɪ, hoʊldɪŋ tə pɛɹɪnz ɑɹm. ðə bɔɪ lʊk dɛluʒənəl. hi dɪdn sim tə kɛɹ wʌn bɪɾ əbaʊt ðoʊz ɡoʊldən aɪz.

Jerum was crying with joy, holding to Perrin's arm. The boy looked delusional. He didn't seem to care one bit about those golden eyes.

"dʒɹɪŋk, sʌn," pɛɹɪn sɛd, vɔɪs suðɪŋ. kaɪnli. "ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt. wi faʊn ju. jəɹ gɑnə bi faɪn."

"Drink, son," Perrin said, voice soothing. Kindly. "It's all right. We found you. You're going to be fine."

ɪt sim laɪk aɪ jɛl fəɹ aʊɝz," ðə juθ sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ wɑz soʊ wik, ən ðeɪ wɝ ɑn tɑp ə mi.

It seemed like I yelled for hours," the youth said. "But I was so weak, and they were on top of me.

haʊ . . . haʊ dɪd jə faɪn mi?"

How . . . how did you find me?"

"aɪ hæv ɡʊɾ ɪɹz," pɛɹɪn sɛd. hi nɑɾəd tə ɡɑləd, ən təɡɛðɝ ðeɪ lɪftəd ðə juθ, pɛɹɪn bɪniθ ði ɑɹmz, ɡɑləd teɪkɪŋ ðə lɛɡz. ðeɪ kɛɹfəli kæɹiɾ ɪm əkɹɔs ðə bæɾəlfild. ðə juθ kəntɪnjud mʌm-bəlɪŋ, kɑnʃəsnəs slɪpɪŋ.

"I have good ears," Perrin said. He nodded to Galad, and together they lifted the youth, Perrin beneath the arms, Galad taking the legs. They carefully carried him across the battlefield. The youth continued mum-bling, consciousness slipping.

ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə bæɾəlfild, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən il waɪz wʌnz wɝ hilɪŋ ðə wundəd. əz ɡɑləɾ ən pɛɹɪn ɝaɪvd, əlaɪt-hɛɹd waɪz wʌn - ə wʊmən u lʊk nɑɾ ə deɪ oʊldɝ ðən ɡɑləd, bʌt spoʊk wɪð ði əθɔɹəɾi ʌv ən eɪdʒɪd meɪtʃɹən - hʌsəld oʊvɝ. ʃi bɪɡæn tʃæstaɪzɪŋ əm fəɹ muvɪŋ ðə læɾ əz ʃi ɹitʃt aʊt tə tʌtʃ ɪz hɛd.

At the side of the battlefield, the Aes Sedai and Aiel Wise Ones were Healing the wounded. As Galad and Perrin arrived, alight-haired Wise One - a woman who looked not a day older than Galad, but spoke with the authority of an aged matron - hustled over. She began chastising them for moving the lad as she reached out to touch his head.

"du jə ɡɪv pɝmɪʃən, ɡɑləd dəmədʒɹd? ʃi æskt. "ðɪs wʌn ɪz tu fɑɹ ɡɔn tə spik fəɹ hɪmsɛlf."

"Do you give permission, Galad Damodred? she asked. "This one is too far gone to speak for himself."

ɡɑləd hæɾ ɪnsɪstəd ðəɾ itʃ tʃaɪl bi ɡɪvən ðə tʃɔɪs tə ɹəfjuz hilɪŋ, ɹəɡɑɹdləs ə ðə neɪtʃɝ ə ðɛɹ waʊnd. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən waɪz wʌnz hædn laɪkt ɪt, bʌt pɛɹɪn hæd ɹɪpiɾɪd ði ɔɹɾɝ. ðeɪ sim tə lɪsən tə hɪm. ɑd. ɡɑləd hæd ɹɛɹli mɛɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ hu wəd lɪsən tə ði ɔɹɾɝz, əɹ ivən əpɪnjənz, ʌv ə mæn.

Galad had insisted that each Child be given the choice to refuse Healing, regardless of the nature of their wound. The Aes Sedai and Wise Ones hadn't liked it, but Perrin had repeated the order. They seemed to listen to him. Odd. Galad had rarely met Aes Sedai who would listen to the orders, or even opinions, of a man.

"jɛs," ɡɑləd sɛd. "hil hɪm."

"Yes," Galad said. "Heal him."

ðə waɪz wʌn tɝn tə hɝ wɝk. moʊs tʃɪlʒɹən hæd ɹəfjuz hilɪŋ, ðoʊ səm hæd tʃeɪnʒd ðɛɹ maɪnz wʌns ɡɑləd hɪmsɛlf æksɛptɪɾ ɪt. ðə juθs bɹiðɪŋ stɛɾid, hɪz waʊn kloʊzɪŋ. ðə waɪz wʌn dɪdn hil ɪm kəmplitli - oʊnli fɑɹ ɪnʌf ðət hid sɝvaɪv ðə deɪ. wən ʃi oʊpən əɹ aɪz, ʃi lʊk hæɡɝd, ivən mɔɹ taɪɝd ðən ɡɑləd fɛlt.

The Wise One turned to her work. Most Children had refused Healing, though some had changed their minds once Galad himself accepted it. The youth's breathing steadied, his wound closing. The Wise One didn't Heal him completely - only far enough that he'd survive the day. When she opened her eyes, she looked haggard, even more tired than Galad felt.

ðə tʃænlɝz hæd fɔɾ ɔl naɪt, fɑloʊd baɪ pɝfɔɹmɪŋ hilɪŋz. ɡɑləɾ ən pɛɹɪn muv bæk ɑntu ðə fild. ðeɪ wɝn ði oʊnli wʌnz sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ wundəd, ʌv kɔɹs. pɛɹɪn hɪmsɛlf cʊɾə ɡɔn bæk tə kæmp tə ɹɛst. bʌɾ i hædnt.

The channelers had fought all night, followed by performing Healings. Galad and Perrin moved back onto the field. They weren't the only ones searching for wounded, of course. Perrin himself could have gone back to camp to rest. But he hadn't.

"aɪ kən ɔfɝ jə ənʌðɝ ɑpʃən," pɛɹɪn sɛɾ əz ðeɪ wɔkt. "æz əpoʊz tə steɪɪŋ hɪɹ, ɪn ɡildən, wiks fɹəm jəɹ dɛstəneɪʃən. aɪ kəɾ əv jə ɪn ændɝ tənaɪt."

"I can offer you another option," Perrin said as they walked. "As opposed to staying here, in Ghealdan, weeks from your destination. I could have you in Andor tonight."

"maɪ mɛn wəd nɑt tʃɹʌs ðɪs tʃɹævlɪŋ."

"My men would not trust this Traveling."

"ðeɪd ɡoʊ ɪf jə ɔɹɾɝd ðɛm," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "juv sɛd ðət jəl faɪɾ əlɔŋsaɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

"They'd go if you ordered them," Perrin said. "You've said that you'll fight alongside Aes Sedai.

wɛl, aɪ doʊn si ɛniθɪŋ dɪfɹən bɪtwin ðəɾ ən ðɪs. kʌm wɪð mi."

Well, I don't see anything different between that and this. Come with me."

"jud lɛɾ əs dʒɔɪn ju, ðɛn?"

"You'd let us join you, then?"

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. "aɪd niɾ ən oʊθ fɹəm ju, ðoʊ."

Perrin nodded. "I'd need an oath from you, though."

"wʌt mænɝ ʌv oʊθ?"

"What manner of oath?"

"aɪl bi fɹæŋk wɪð ju, ɡɑləd. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk wɪv mʌtʃ taɪm lɛft. ə fju wiks, meɪbi. wɛl, aɪ fænsi wɪl nid ju, bʌt ɹænd woʊn laɪk ði aɪdiə ʌv waɪtkloʊks ɪn ðə bæɾəl laɪnz ənsupɝvaɪzd. soʊ, aɪ wɑn jə tə swɛɹ jəl æksɛp mi əz jəɹ kəmændɝ əntɪl ðə bæɾəl ɪz θɹu."

"I'll be frank with you, Galad. I don't think we have much time left. A few weeks, maybe. Well, I fancy we'll need you, but Rand won't like the idea of Whitecloaks in the battle lines unsupervised. So, I want you to swear you'll accept me as your commander until the battle is through."

ɡɑləd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. dɔn wɑz kloʊs naʊ; ɪn fækt, ɪt maɪɾ əv ɝaɪvd, bɪhaɪn ðoʊz klaʊdz. "du jə ɹilaɪz wʌɾ ən ɑdeɪʃəs sədʒɛstʃən jə meɪk? ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪɾ oʊbeɪɪŋ ði ɔɹɾɝz ʌv ɛni mæn wəd bi ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl. bʌt tə ju, ə mæn aɪ dʒʌst ɹisənli sɔ dʒʌdʒd ə kɪlɝ? ə mæn moʊst ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ɑɹ kənvɪnst ɪz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd?"

Galad hesitated. Dawn was close now; in fact, it might have arrived, behind those clouds. "Do you realize what an audacious suggestion you make? The Lord Captain Commander of the Children of the Light obeying the orders of any man would be remarkable. But to you, a man I just recently saw judged a killer? A man most of the Children are convinced is a Darkfriend?"

pɛɹɪn tɝn tə hɪm. "ju kʌm wɪð mi naʊ, ən əl ɡɛt jə tə ðə læs bæɾəl. wɪθaʊt mi, hu noʊz wʌt wɪl hæpən?"

Perrin turned to him. "You come with me now, and I'll get you to the Last Battle. Without me, who knows what will happen?"

"ju sɛɾ ɛvɹi sɔɹd wɑz niɾəd," ɡɑləd ɹɪplaɪd. "jud liv ʌs?"

"You said every sword was needed," Galad replied. "You'd leave us?"

"jɛs. ɪf aɪ doʊn əv ðəɾ oʊθ, aɪ wɪl. ɹænd meɪ kʌm bæk fəɹ jə hɪmsɛlf, ðoʊ. ɪn mi, jə noʊ wʌt jəɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ. əl bi fɛɹ tə ju. ɔl əl æsk ɪz ðət jəɹ mɛn steɪ ɪn laɪn, ðən faɪt wɛɹ ðəɹ toʊld wən ðə bæɾəl kʌmz. ɹænd . . . wɛl, jə kən seɪ noʊ tə mi. jəl faɪn ɪt mʌtʃ hɑɹɾɝ tə seɪ ɪt tə hɪm. ən aɪ daʊt jəl laɪk ðə ɹɪzʌl hæf əz mʌtʃ, iðɝ, wʌns jə ɛn ʌp seɪɪŋ jɛs."

"Yes. If I don't have that oath, I will. Rand may come back for you himself, though. In me, you know what you're getting. I'll be fair to you. All I'll ask is that your men stay in line, then fight where they're told when the battle comes. Rand . . . well, you can say no to me. You'll find it much harder to say it to him. And I doubt you'll like the result half as much, either, once you end up saying yes."

ɡɑləd fɹaʊnd. "jɔɹ ən ɑdli kəmpɛlɪŋ mæn, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə."

Galad frowned. "You're an oddly compelling man, Perrin Aybara."

"wi hæv ə bɑɹɡən?" pɛɹɪn hɛld aʊɾ ə hænd.

"We have a bargain?" Perrin held out a hand.

ɡɑləd tʊk ɪt. ɪt wɑzn ðə θɹɛt ðət dɪɾ ɪt; ɪt wɑz ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ pɛɹɪnz vɔɪs wən hid faʊn dʒɪɹəm wundəd. ðət kəmpæʃən. noʊ dɑɹkfɹɛn kəd feɪn ðæt.

Galad took it. It wasn't the threat that did it; it was remembering Perrin's voice when he'd found Jerum wounded. That compassion. No Darkfriend could feign that.

"ju hæv maɪ oʊθ," ɡɑləd sɛd. "tə æksɛp jə əz maɪ mɪlətɛɹi kəmændɝ əntɪl ði ɛn ə ðə læs bæɾəl," hi sʌɾənli fɛlt wikɝ ðən i hæd bɪfɔɹ, ən i ɹilist ə bɹɛθ, ðən sæɾ ɑn ə nɪɹbaɪ ɹɑk.

"You have my oath," Galad said. "To accept you as my military commander until the end of the Last Battle," He suddenly felt weaker than he had before, and he released a breath, then sat on a nearby rock.

"æn juv maɪ oʊθ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪl si jəɹ mɛn kɛɹd fəɹ laɪk ði ʌðɝz. sɪt hɪɹ ən ɹɛst ə spɛl; əl sɝtʃ ðət pætʃ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ. ðə wiknəs wɪl pæs sun."

"And you have my oath," Perrin said. "I'll see your men cared for like the others. Sit here and rest a spell; I'll search that patch over there. The weakness will pass soon."

"wiknəs?"

"Weakness?"

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. "aɪ noʊ wʌɾ ɪts laɪk tə bi kɑɾ ʌp ɪn ðə nidz ʌv ə tɑvɝən. laɪt, bʌɾ aɪ du."

Perrin nodded. "I know what it's like to be caught up in the needs of a ta'veren. Light, but I do."

hi aɪd ɡɑləd. "ju ɛvɝ wʌndɝ waɪ wi ɛndəɾ ʌp hɪɹ, ɪn ðɪs seɪm pleɪs?"

He eyed Galad. "You ever wonder why we ended up here, in this same place?"

"maɪ mɛn ən aɪ əsumd ɪt wɑz kəz ðə laɪt hæd pleɪs jə bɪfɔɹ ʌs," ɡɑləd sɛd. "soʊ wi kəd pʌnɪʃ ju."

"My men and I assumed it was because the Light had placed you before us," Galad said. "So we could punish you."

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ðæts nɑɾ ɪɾ əɾ ɔl. tʃɹuθ ɪz, ɡɑləd, aɪ əpɛɹənli niɾəd ju. ən ðæts waɪ jə ɛndəɾ ʌp hɪɹ." wɪð ðæt, hi hɛɾəd ɔf.

Perrin shook his head. "That's not it at all. Truth is, Galad, I apparently needed you. And that's why you ended up here." With that, he headed off.

æliændɝ kɛɹfəli foʊldəd ðə bændɪdʒ, ðən pæst ɪt tə ə weɪɾɪŋ ɡeɪʃeɪn. hɪz fɪŋɡɝz wɝ θɪk ən kælʌzd, hɪz feɪs hɪɾən bɪniθ ðə hʊɾ ə hɪz ɹoʊb. ʃi θɔɾ ɪt maɪt bi naɪəɡən, ðə bɹʌðɝləs ðət lətʃəl hæd bɪn teɪkɪŋ æftɝ. ðət stɪl ɝk feɪl, bʌɾ eɪliændɝ kʊdn fæðəm waɪ. ən il mæn wəd pɹɑbli mætʃ lətʃəl wɛl.

Alliandre carefully folded the bandage, then passed it to a waiting gai'shain. His fingers were thick and callused, his face hidden beneath the hood of his robe. She thought it might be Niagen, the Brotherless that Lacile had been taking after. That still irked Faile, but Ailiandre couldn't fathom why. An Aiel man would probably match Lacile well.

eɪliændɝ bɪɡæn ɹoʊlɪŋ ənʌðɝ bændɪdʒ. ʃi sæt wɪð ʌðɝ wɪmən ɪn ə smɔl klɪɹɪŋ nɪɹ ðə bæɾəlfild, sɝaʊndəd baɪ skɹæɡli skæɾɝhɛd ən stænz ə lɛðɝlif. ðə kul ɛɹ wɑz kwaɪət seɪv fəɹ ðə nɪɹbaɪ ɡɹoʊn ə ðə wundəd.

Ailiandre began rolling another bandage. She sat with other women in a small clearing near the battlefield, surrounded by scraggly scatterhead and stands of leatherleaf. The cool air was quiet save for the nearby groan of the wounded.

ʃi kʌɾ ənʌðɝ lɛŋθ ə klɔθ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ laɪt. ðə klɔθ hæd bɪn ə ʃɝt. naʊ ɪt wɑz bændədʒəz. nɑɾ ə ɡɹeɪt lɔs; ɪt hædn bɪn ə vɛɹi ɡʊd ʃɝt, baɪ ðə lʊks ʌv ɪt.

She cut another length of cloth in the morning light. The cloth had been a shirt. Now it was bandages. Not a great loss; it hadn't been a very good shirt, by the looks of it.

"ðə bæɾəl ɪz θɹu?" bɹəleɪn sɛd sɔfli. ʃi ən feɪl wɝk nɪɹbaɪ, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn stulz əkɹɔs fɹəm wʌn ənʌðɝ əz ðeɪ kʌt.

"The battle is through?" Berelain said softly. She and Faile worked nearby, sitting on stools across from one another as they cut.

"jɛs, ɪɾ əpɪɹz ðəɾ ɪɾ ɪz," feɪl ɹɪplaɪd.

"Yes, it appears that it is," Faile replied.

boʊθ fɛl saɪlənt. eɪliændɝ ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ, bʌt dɪd nɑt seɪ ɛniθɪŋ. sʌmθɪŋ wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn bɪtwin ðoʊz tu. waɪ sʌɾənli stɑɹt pɹitɛndɪŋ ðeɪ wɝ ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst ə fɹɛnz? ði æk sim tə ful mɛni ʌv ðə mɛn ɪn kæmp, bʌɾ eɪliændɝ kəd si ðə tʃɹuθ ɪn ðə weɪ ðɛɹ lɪps taɪɾənd wən ðeɪ sɔ wʌn ənʌðɝ. ɪt hæd lɛsən æftɝ feɪl hæd seɪv bɪɹ-leɪnz laɪf, bʌt nɑt vænɪʃt ɪntaɪɝli.

Both fell silent. Ailiandre raised an eyebrow, but did not say anything. Something was going on between those two. Why suddenly start pretending they were the greatest of friends? The act seemed to fool many of the men in camp, but Ailiandre could see the truth in the way their lips tightened when they saw one another. It had lessened after Faile had saved Bere-lain's life, but not vanished entirely.

"ju wɝ ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt hɪm," bɹəleɪn sɛd.

"You were right about him," Berelain said.

"ju saʊn sɝpɹaɪzd."

"You sound surprised."

"aɪ æm nɑɾ ɔfən ɹɔŋ wən ɪt kʌmz tə mɛn."

"I am not often wrong when it comes to men."

"maɪ hʌzbən ɪz nɑt laɪk ʌðɝ mɛn. ɪt - " feɪl kʌɾ ɔf. ʃi lʊk təwɔɹɾ eɪliændɝ, aɪz nɛɹoʊɪŋ.

"My husband is not like other men. It - " Faile cut off. She looked toward Ailiandre, eyes narrowing.

blʌɾi æʃəz, eɪliændɝ θɔt. ʃid sæt tu fɑɹ əweɪ, wɪtʃ meɪɾ əɹ stʃɹeɪn, tɝnɪŋ tə ivzdʒɹɑp. ðət wɑz səspɪʃəs.

Bloody ashes, Ailiandre thought. She'd sat too far away, which made her strain, turning to eavesdrop. That was suspicious.

ðə tu ʌv əm fɛl saɪlən əɡɛn, ən eɪliændɝ hɛld ʌp ə hænd, əz ɪf ɪnspɛktɪŋ əɹ neɪlz. jɛs, ʃi θɔt. ɪɡnɔɹ mi. aɪ doʊn mæɾɝ, aɪm dʒʌst ə wʊmən ɪn oʊvɝ əɹ hɛɾ ən stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə kip ʌp. feɪl ən bɹəleɪn dɪdn θɪŋk ðæt, ʌv kɔɹs, ɛni mɔɹ ðən ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn hæɾ ɛvɝ θɔt pɛɹɪn hæd bɪn ənfeɪθfəl. ɪf jə sæɾ əm daʊn ən æskt əm - ɹɪli meɪɾ əm θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪt - ðeɪd kʌm tə ðə kənkluʒən ðət sʌmθɪŋ ɛls mʌst əv hæpənd.

The two of them fell silent again, and Ailiandre held up a hand, as if inspecting her nails. Yes, she thought. Ignore me. I don't matter, I'm just a woman in over her head and struggling to keep up. Faile and Berelain didn't think that, of course, any more than the Two Rivers men had ever thought Perrin had been unfaithful. If you sat them down and asked them - really made them think about it - they'd come to the conclusion that something else must have happened.

bʌt θɪŋz laɪk supɝstɪʃən ən baɪəs ɹæn dipɝ ðən mɪɹ θɔts. wʌt ði ʌðɝ tu θɔɾ əbaʊɾ eɪliændɝ ən wʌt ðeɪ ɪnstɪŋktɪvli fɛlt wɝ dɪfɹənt. bɪsaɪdz, eɪliændɝ ɹɪli wɑz ə wʊmən u wɑz ɪn oʊvɝ əɹ hɛɾ ən stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə kip ʌp.

But things like superstition and bias ran deeper than mere thoughts. What the other two thought about Ailiandre and what they instinctively felt were different. Besides, Ailiandre really was a woman who was in over her head and struggling to keep up.

bɛs tə noʊ wʌt jəɹ stʃɹɛŋkθs wɝ.

Best to know what your strengths were.

eɪliændɝ tɝn bæk tə kʌɾɪŋ bændədʒəz. feɪl ən bɹəleɪn hæɾ ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn steɪɪŋ tə hɛlp;

Ailiandre turned back to cutting bandages. Faile and Berelain had insisted on staying to help;

eɪliændɝ kʊdnt ɡoʊ. nɑt wɪð ðə tu ʌv əm æktɪŋ soʊ blʌɾi fæsəneɪɾɪŋ leɪtli. bɪsaɪdz, ʃi dɪdn maɪn ðə wɝk. kɑm- pɛɹd tə ðɛɹ kæptɪvəɾi baɪ ði il, ðɪs wɑz ɹɪli kwaɪt plɛzənt. ənfɝ-tʌnsli, ðə tu dɪdnt ɡoʊ bæk tə ðɛɹ kɑnvɝseɪʃən. ɪn fækt, bɹəleɪn ɹoʊz, lʊkɪŋ fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd, ən wɔk təwɔɹd ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə klɪɹɪŋ.

Ailiandre couldn't go. Not with the two of them acting so bloody fascinating lately. Besides, she didn't mind the work. Com- pared to their captivity by the Aiel, this was really quite pleasant. Unfor-tunstely, the two didn't go back to their conversation. In fact, Berelain rose, looking frustrated, and walked toward the other side of the clearing.

æliændɝ kəd pɹæktəkli fil ðə fɹɔs kʌmɪŋ ɔf ðə wʊmən. bɹəleɪn stɑpt oʊvɝ wɛɹ ʌðɝz wɝ ɹoʊlɪŋ ðə stʃɹɪps ə klɔθ. æliændɝ stʊɾ ʌp, kæɹiɪŋ əɹ stul, sɪzɝz ən klɔθs oʊvɝ tə feɪl. "aɪ doʊn bɪliv aɪv ɛvɝ sin əɹ ðɪs ənsɛɾəld," æliændɝ sɛd.

Alliandre could practically feel the frost coming off the woman. Berelain stopped over where others were rolling the strips of cloth. Alliandre stood up, carrying her stool, scissors and cloths over to Faile. "I don't believe I've ever seen her this unsettled," Alliandre said.

"ʃiz nɑt fɑn ə biɪŋ ɹɔŋ," feɪl noʊɾəd. ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ðən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ʃi siz ðə wɝld əz ə nɛtwɝk ə hæf-tʃɹuθs ən ɪnfɝɛnsɪz, əskɹaɪbɪŋ kɑmplɛks moʊɾəveɪʃənz tə ðə sɪmpləst ə mɛn. aɪ səspɛkt ɪt meɪks əɹ vɛɹi ɡʊɾ ət kɔɹt pɑlətɪks. bʌɾ aɪ wʊdnt wɑnə lɪv ðət weɪ."

"She's not fond of being wrong," Faile noted. She took a deep breath, then shook her head. "She sees the world as a network of half-truths and inferences, ascribing complex motivations to the simplest of men. I suspect it makes her very good at court politics. But I wouldn't want to live that way."

"ʃiz vɛɹi waɪz," æliændɝ sɛd. "ʃi dʌz si θɪŋz, feɪl. ʃi ʌndɝstænz ðə wɝld, ʃi mɪɹli hæz ə fju blaɪn spɑts, laɪk moʊst ʌv ʌs."

"She's very wise," Alliandre said. "She does see things, Faile. She understands the world, she merely has a few blind spots, like most of us."

feɪl nɑɾəd æbsənli. "ðə θɪŋ aɪ pɪɾi moʊst ɪz ðə fæk ðæt, dɪspaɪɾ ɔl ə ðɪs, aɪ doʊn bɪliv ʃi wɑz ɛvɝ ɪn lʌv wɪð pɛɹɪn. ʃi tʃeɪst ɪm fəɹ spɔɹt, fəɹ pəlɪɾəkəl ædvæntɪdʒ, ən fəɹ min. ɪn ði ɛnd, ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ðə tʃælənʒ ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. ʃi meɪ bi fɑn ə hɪm, bʌt nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ. aɪ kʊd, pɝhæps, ʌndɝstæn əɹ ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn fəɹ lʌv."

Faile nodded absently. "The thing I pity most is the fact that, despite all of this, I don't believe she was ever in love with Perrin. She chased him for sport, for political advantage, and for Mayene. In the end, it was more the challenge than anything else. She may be fond of him, but nothing more. I could, perhaps, understand her if it had been for love."

æliændɝ kɛpt əɹ tʌŋ æftɝ ðæt, kʌɾɪŋ bændədʒəz. ʃi ɹæn əkɹɔs ə faɪn blu sɪlk ʃɝɾ ɪn ðə paɪl. ʃʊɹli ðəɹ kəd bi sʌmθɪŋ bɛɾɝ dʌn wɪð ðæt! ʃi stʌft ɪt bɪtwin tu ʌðɝz ən sɛt ðoʊz bɪsaɪd hɝ, əz ɪf ɪn ə paɪl ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə kʌt.

Alliandre kept her tongue after that, cutting bandages. She ran across a fine blue silk shirt in the pile. Surely there could be something better done with that! She stuffed it between two others and set those beside her, as if in a pile she intended to cut.

pɛɹɪn ɪvɛntʃəwəli tʃɹæmpt ɪndə ðə klɪɹɪŋ, fɑloʊd baɪ səm wɝkɝz ɪn blʌɾid kloʊðɪŋ. hi meɪɾ ɪnstənli fəɹ feɪl, sɪɾɪŋ daʊn ɑn bɪɹ-leɪnz stul, sɛɾɪŋ ɪz mɑɹvələs hæmɝ daʊn ɪn ðə widz bɪsaɪd hɪm. hi lʊkt ɪɡzɔstəd. feɪl ɡɑɾ ɪm sʌmθɪŋ tə dʒɹɪŋk ən ðən ɹʌbd ɪz ʃoʊldɝ.

Perrin eventually tramped into the clearing, followed by some workers in bloodied clothing. He made instantly for Faile, sitting down on Bere-lain's stool, setting his marvelous hammer down in the weeds beside him. He looked exhausted. Faile got him something to drink and then rubbed his shoulder.

æliændɝ ɪkskjuz hɝsɛlf, livɪŋ pɛɹɪn ən ɪz waɪf. ʃi meɪɾ əɹ weɪ oʊvɝ tə wɛɹ bɹəleɪn stʊɾ ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə klɪɹɪŋ, sɪpɪŋ ə kʌp ə ti teɪkən fɹəm ðə pɑɾ ɑn ðə faɪɝ. bɹəleɪn aɪd hɝ.

Alliandre excused herself, leaving Perrin and his wife. She made her way over to where Berelain stood at the edge of the clearing, sipping a cup of tea taken from the pot on the fire. Berelain eyed her.

æliændɝ pɔɹd hɝsɛlf ə kʌp ə ti, ðən blu ɑn ɪt fəɹ ə moʊmənt. ðeɪ ɑɹ ɡʊd fəɹ wʌn ənʌðɝ, bɹəleɪn," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ kænɑt seɪ aɪm sɑɹi tə si ðɪs ɹɪzʌlt."

Alliandre poured herself a cup of tea, then blew on it for a moment. They are good for one another, Berelain," she said. "I cannot say I'm sorry to see this result."

"ɛvɹi ɹileɪʃənʃɪp dɪzɝvz tə bi tʃælənʒd," bɹəleɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "æn ɪf ʃi hæd fɔlən ɪn meɪɾən - ən aʊtkʌm ɔl tu pɑsəbəl - hi wʊɾə niɾəd sʌmwʌn. ɪts nɑɾ ə ɡɹeɪt lɔs tə mi, haʊɛvɝ, tə teɪk maɪ aɪz ɔf pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. aɪ wʊɾə laɪk tə meɪk ə kənɛkʃən tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn θɹu hɪm, bʌt ðəɹ wɪl bi ʌðɝ ɑpɝtunəɾiz." ʃi sim fɑɹ lɛs fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd naʊ ðən ʃi hæd moʊməns əɡoʊ. ɪn fækt, ʃi sim tə hæv ɹɪtɝn tə hɝ kælkjəleɪɾɪŋ sɛlf.

"Every relationship deserves to be challenged," Berelain replied. "And if she had fallen in Maiden - an outcome all too possible - he would have needed someone. It is not a great loss to me, however, to take my eyes off Perrin Aybara. I would have liked to make a connection to the Dragon Reborn through him, but there will be other opportunities." She seemed far less frustrated now than she had moments ago. In fact, she seemed to have returned to her calculating self.

æliændɝ smaɪld. klɛvɝ wʊmən. feɪl niɾəd tə si hɝ ɹaɪvəl kɑm-plɛtli biɾən daʊn, soʊ ðət ʃi wəd kənsɪɾɝ ɹə θɹɛt pæst. ðɪs wɑz waɪ bɹəleɪn lɛt səm ə hɝ fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən ʃoʊ, mɔɹ ðən ʃi nɔɹməli wəd hæv.

Alliandre smiled. Clever woman. Faile needed to see her rival com-pletely beaten down, so that she would consider rhe threat passed. This was why Berelain let some of her frustration show, more than she normally would have.

æliændɝ sɪpt əɹ ti. "mɛɹɪdʒ simz nʌθɪŋ tə jə ʌðɝ ðən ə kælkjəleɪʃən, ðɛn? ði ædvæntɪdʒɪz ɡeɪnd?"

Alliandre sipped her tea. "Marriage seems nothing to you other than a calculation, then? The advantages gained?"

"ðɛɹz ɔlsoʊ ðə dʒɔɪ ʌv ðə hʌnt, ðə θɹɪl ə ðə ɡeɪm."

"There's also the joy of the hunt, the thrill of the game."

"ænd wʌɾ ə lʌv?"

"And what of love?"

"lʌv ɪz fəɹ ðoʊz u də nɑt ɹul," bɹəleɪn sɛd. "ə wʊmən ɪz wɝθ fɑɹ mɔɹ ðən əɹ əbɪləɾi tə meɪk ə mætʃ, bʌɾ aɪ mʌs kɛɹ fəɹ min. ɪf wi ɛntɝ ðə læs bæɾəl wɪθaʊt maɪ hævɪŋ sɪkjʊɹɾ ə hʌzbənd, ðət pʊts ðə səksɛʃən ɪn deɪnʒɝ. ən wən min əz ə səksɛʃən kɹaɪsəs, tiɹ ɪz ɔl tu kwɪk tə əsɝɾ ɪtsɛlf. ɹoʊmæns ɪz ən ənəfɔɹɾəbəl dɪstʃɹækʃən aɪ. . ."

"Love is for those who do not rule," Berelain said. "A woman is worth far more than her ability to make a match, but I must care for Mayene. If we enter the Last Battle without my having secured a husband, that puts the succession in danger. And when Mayene has a succession crisis, Tear is all too quick to assert itself. Romance is an unaffordable distraction I. . ."

ʃi tʃɹeɪld ɔf sʌɾənli, hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən tʃeɪnʒɪŋ. wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn? æliændɝ tɝn tə ðə saɪd, fɹaʊnɪŋ əntɪl ʃi sɔ ðə kɑz.

She trailed off suddenly, her expression changing. What was going on? Alliandre turned to the side, frowning until she saw the cause.

ɡɑləd dəmədʒɹd hæɾ ɛntɝd ðə klɪɹɪŋ.

Galad Damodred had entered the clearing.

hi hæd blʌɾ ɑn ɪz waɪt junəfɔɹm, ən i lʊkt ɪɡzɔstəd. jɛɾ i stʊɾ əpɹaɪt, stʃɹeɪt- bækt, ən ɪz feɪs wɑz klin. hi ɔlmoʊst sim tu bjuɾəfəl tə bi hjumən, wɪð ðət pɝfəkli mæskjələn feɪs ən ɡɹeɪsfəl, lin fɪɡjɝ. ən ðoʊz aɪz! laɪk dip, dɑɹk pulz. hi pɹæktəkli sim tə ɡloʊ.

He had blood on his white uniform, and he looked exhausted. Yet he stood upright, straight- backed, and his face was clean. He almost seemed too beautiful to be human, with that perfectly masculine face and graceful, lean figure. And those eyes! Like deep, dark pools. He practically seemed to glow.

"aɪ. . . wʌt wɑz aɪ seɪɪŋ?" bɹəleɪn æskt, aɪz ɑn dəmədʒɹd.

"I. . . What was I saying?" Berelain asked, eyes on Damodred.

"ðæt ðəɹ ɪz noʊ pleɪs fəɹ ɹoʊmæns ɪn ə liɾɝz laɪf?"

"That there is no place for romance in a leaders life?"

"jɛs," bɹəleɪn sɛd, saʊndɪŋ dɪstʃɹæktəd. "ɪts dʒʌs nɑt ɹizənəbəl əɾ ɔl."

"Yes," Berelain said, sounding distracted. "It's just not reasonable at all."

"nɑɾ əɾ ɔl."

"Not at all."

"aɪ - " bɹəleɪn bɪɡæn, bʌt dəmədʒɹd tɝn təwɔɹd ðɛm. ʃi kʌɾ ɔf əz ðɛɹ aɪz mɛt.

"I - " Berelain began, but Damodred turned toward them. She cut off as their eyes met.

æliændɝ səpɹɛst ə smaɪl əz dəmədʒɹd kɹɔs ðə klɪɹɪŋ. hi ɛksəkjuɾəd ənʌðɝ sɛɾ ə pɝfək baʊz, wʌn fəɹ itʃ ə ðɛm, ðoʊ hi bɛɹli sim tə noʊɾəs æliændɝ.

Alliandre suppressed a smile as Damodred crossed the clearing. He executed another set of perfect bows, one for each of them, though he barely seemed to notice Alliandre.

"maɪ . . . leɪɾi fɝst," hi sɛd. "lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹə sɛz ðæt, wən i fɝst əpɹoʊtʃt ðɪs bæɾəl, jə plɛd tə hɪm ɑn maɪ bɪhæf."

"My . . . Lady First," he said. "Lord Aybara says that, when he first approached this battle, you pled to him on my behalf."

"fulɪʃli," bɹəleɪn sɛd. "aɪ fɪɹɾ i wəɾ ətæk ju."

"Foolishly," Berelain said. "I feared he would attack you."

"ɪf fɪɹɪŋ ðət meɪks wʌn ə ful," dəmədʒɹd sɛd, "ðɛn wi tu ɑɹ fulz təɡɛðɝ ɪn ɪt. aɪ wɑz sɝɾən ðət maɪ mɛn wəd sun fɔl tə eɪbɑɹə.

"If fearing that makes one a fool," Damodred said, "then we two are fools together in it. I was certain that my men would soon fall to Aybara.

ʃi smaɪld ət hɪm. ðət kwɪkli, ʃi sim tə hæv fɝɡɑɾən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃid bɪn seɪɪŋ pɹiviəsli.

She smiled at him. That quickly, she seemed to have forgotten everything she'd been saying previously.

"wʊd jə laɪk səm ti?" dəmədʒɹd sɛd, spikɪŋ ə lɪɾəl əbɹʌpli əz i ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə tikəps, wɪtʃ sæɾ ɑn ə klɔθ əweɪ fɹəm ðə faɪɝ.

"Would you like some tea?" Damodred said, speaking a little abruptly as he reached for the teacups, which sat on a cloth away from the fire.

"aɪm dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ sʌm," ʃi noʊɾəd.

"I'm drinking some," she noted.

"sʌm mɔɹ ðɛn?" hi æskt, heɪstəli nilɪŋ ən pɔɹɪŋ ə kʌp.

"Some more then?" he asked, hastily kneeling and pouring a cup.

"ɝ."

"Er."

hi stʊɾ ʌp, hoʊldɪŋ ðə kʌp, ðən siɪŋ ðət ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi hæd wʌn ɪn əɹ hænz.

He stood up, holding the cup, then seeing that she already had one in her hands.

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ stɪl bændədʒəz tə kʌt," bɹəleɪn sɛd. "pɝhæps jə kəd hɛlp."

"There are still bandages to cut," Berelain said. "Perhaps you could help."

"pɝhæps," hi sɛd. hi hændəd ðə kʌp hid pɔɹɾ oʊvɝ tə æliændɝ. bɹəleɪn - hɝ aɪz stɪl hoʊldɪŋ ɪz - hændəd hɝz oʊvɝ əz wɛl, simɪŋ əblɪviəs tə wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ.

"Perhaps," he said. He handed the cup he'd poured over to Alliandre. Berelain - her eyes still holding his - handed hers over as well, seeming oblivious to what she was doing.

æliændɝ smaɪl dipli - naʊ hoʊldɪŋ θɹi tikəps - əz ðə tu ʌv əm wɔkt oʊvɝ tə ðə stæk ə klɔθs tə bi kʌt. ðɪs maɪt tɝn aʊt wɛl ɪndid. ət ðə vɛɹi list, ɪt wəd ɡɛt ðoʊz blæstəd waɪtkloʊks aʊɾ ə hɝ kɪŋdəm.

Alliandre smiled deeply - now holding three teacups - as the two of them walked over to the stack of cloths to be cut. This might turn out well indeed. At the very least, it would get those blasted Whitecloaks out of her kingdom.

ʃi wɔk bæk təwɔɹd feɪl ən pɛɹɪn. əz ʃi dɪd soʊ, ʃi slɪp ðə blu sɪlk ʃɝt fɹəm ðə paɪl ə klɔθ ʃid sɛɾ əsaɪd tə kʌt.

She walked back toward Faile and Perrin. As she did so, she slipped the blue silk shirt from the pile of cloth she'd set aside to cut.

ɪt ɹɪli wəd meɪk ə naɪs sæʃ.

It really would make a nice sash.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾifɔɹ


CHAPTER 44

eɪ bækhændəd ɹɪkwɛst


A Backhanded Request

mɔɹɡeɪs stɛpt aʊɾ ə hɝ hɪlsaɪd tɛn ən lʊkt aʊɾ əɾ ændɝ. waɪtbɹɪdʒ leɪ bɪloʊ, blɛsədli fəmɪljɝ, ɔlðoʊ ʃi kəd si ðəɾ ɪt hæd ɡɹoʊn. ðə fɑɹmz wɝ feɪlɪŋ, ðə læst ə ðə wɪntɝ stɔɹz spɔɪlɪŋ, soʊ pipəl meɪd fəɹ ðə sɪɾiz.

Morgase stepped out of her hillside tent and looked out at Andor. Whitebridge lay below, blessedly familiar, although she could see that it had grown. The farms were failing, the last of the winter stores spoiling, so people made for the cities.

ðə lændskeɪp ʃʊɾə bɪn ɡɹin. ɪnstɛd, ivən ðə jɛloʊd ɡɹæs wɑz daɪɪŋ ɔf, livɪŋ skɑɹz ə bɹaʊn. ɪt wʊdn bi lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ði ɪntaɪɝ lænd wɑz laɪk ðə weɪst. ʃi lɔŋ tə teɪk ækʃən. ðɪs wɑz əɹ neɪʃən. əɹ ɪt hæd wʌns bɪn.

The landscape should have been green. Instead, even the yellowed grass was dying off, leaving scars of brown. It wouldn't be long before the entire land was like the Waste. She longed to take action. This was her nation. Or it had once been.

ʃi lɛft əɹ tɛnt, lʊkɪŋ fəɹ mæstɝ ɡɪl. ɑn ðə weɪ, ʃi pæs feɪl, hu wɑz spikɪŋ wɪð ðə kɔɹɾɝmæstɝ əɡɛn. mɔɹɡeɪs nɑɾəd, ʃoʊɪŋ dɛfɝəns. feɪl nɑɾəd bæk. ðəɹ wɑz ə ɹɪf bɪtwin ðə tu ʌv əm naʊ. mɔɹɡeɪs wɪʃt ɪt kəd bi ʌðɝwaɪz. ʃi ən ði ʌðɝz hæd ʃɛɹɾ ə slɪvɝ ə ðɛɹ laɪvz wən hoʊp hæd bɪn wikɝ ðən ə kændəlz fleɪm. ɪt hæd bɪn feɪl u hæɾ ɛnkɝɪdʒ mɔɹɡeɪs tə juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ -  skwizɪŋ ɛvɹi læs dʒɹɑp fɹəm əɹ pəθɛɾɪk əbɪləɾi - tə sɪɡnəl fəɹ hɛlp waɪl ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹæpt.

She left her tent, looking for Master Gill. On the way, she passed Faile, who was speaking with the quartermaster again. Morgase nodded, showing deference. Faile nodded back. There was a rift between the two of them now. Morgase wished it could be otherwise. She and the others had shared a sliver of their lives when hope had been weaker than a candle's flame. It had been Faile who had encouraged Morgase to use the One Power -  squeezing every last drop from her pathetic ability - to signal for help while they were trapped.

ðə kæmp wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi wɛl sɛɾ ʌp, ən əmeɪzɪŋli ðə waɪtkloʊks hæd dʒɔɪn ðɛm, bʌt pɛɹɪn hædn jɛt dɪsaɪɾɪd wʌt tə du. əɹ ət list ɪf i hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd, hi wɑznt ʃɛɹɪŋ ðət dɪsɪʒən wɪð mɔɹɡeɪs.

The camp was already well set up, and amazingly the Whitecloaks had joined them, but Perrin hadn't yet decided what to do. Or at least if he had decided, he wasn't sharing that decision with Morgase.

ʃi wɔk tə ðə wæɡən laɪnz, pæs fɛɹiɝz ən ɡɹumz lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ðə bɛs pæstʃɝ, pipəl ɑɹɡjuɪŋ ɪn ðə səplaɪ dʌmp, soʊlʒɝz ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli dɪɡɪŋ tʃɹɛntʃɪz fəɹ weɪst. ɛvɹiwʌn hæd ðɛɹ pleɪs ɪksɛp mɔɹɡeɪs. sɝvəns bækt əweɪ, hæf-boʊɪŋ, ənsɝɾən haʊ tə tʃɹit hɝ. ʃi wɑzn ə kwin, bʌt niðɝ wɑz ʃi sɪmpli ənʌðɝ noʊbəlwʊmən. ʃi sɝɾənli wɑzn ə sɝvən ɛnimɔɹ.

She walked to the wagon lines, past farriers and grooms looking for the best pasture, people arguing in the supply dump, soldiers grudgingly digging trenches for waste. Everyone had their place except Morgase. Servants backed away, half-bowing, uncertain how to treat her. She wasn't a queen, but neither was she simply another noblewoman. She certainly wasn't a servant anymore.

ðoʊ hɝ taɪm wɪð ɡɑləd hæd ɹimaɪndəɾ əɹ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz tə bi ə kwin, ʃi wɑz θæŋkfəl fəɹ wʌt ʃi hæd lɝn əz meɪaɪɡdɪn. ðət hædn bɪn əz bæɾ əz ʃi hæd fɪɹd; ðəɹ hæd bɪn ædvæntɪdʒɪz tə biɪŋ ə leɪɾiz meɪd. ðə kɑmɝɑɾɝi ʌv ði ʌðɝ sɝvəns, ðə fɹiɾəm fɹəm ðə bɝɾənz ə liɾɝʃɪp, ðə taɪm spɛnt wɪð tɑlænvɝ. . . . ðət laɪf wɑz nɑt hɝz. ɪt wɑz taɪm tə bi dʌn wɪð pɹitɛndɪŋ. ʃi ɪvɛntʃəwəli faʊn bɑzəl ɡɪl pækɪŋ ðə kɑɹt, lini supɝvaɪzɪŋ, læmɡwɪn ən bɹin hɛlpɪŋ. feɪl hæd ɹilis bɹin ən læmɡwɪn fɹəm əɹ sɝvəs soʊ ðeɪ kəd sɝv mɔɹɡeɪs. mɔɹɡeɪs hæd kɛp saɪlən əbaʊt feɪl soʊ ɡɹeɪʃəsli ɡɹæntɪŋ əɹ bæk əɹ sɝvəns.

Though her time with Galad had reminded her what it was to be a queen, she was thankful for what she had learned as Maighdin. That hadn't been as bad as she had feared; there had been advantages to being a lady's maid. The camaraderie of the other servants, the freedom from the burdens of leadership, the time spent with Tallanvor. . . . That life was not hers. It was time to be done with pretending. She eventually found Basel Gill packing the cart, Lini supervising, Lamgwin and Breane helping. Faile had released Breane and Lamgwin from her service so they could serve Morgase. Morgase had kept silent about Faile so graciously granting her back her servants.

tɑlænvɝ wɑzn ðɛɹ. wɛl, ʃi kʊdn mun oʊvɝ ɪm laɪk ə ɡɝl ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. ʃi hæd tə ɡɛt bæk tə keɪɛmlɪn ən hɛlp ɪleɪn.

Tallanvor wasn't there. Well, she couldn't moon over him like a girl any longer. She had to get back to Caemlyn and help Elayne.

"jɔɹ mədʒz - " mæstɝ ɡɪl sɛd, boʊɪŋ. hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "aɪ min, maɪ leɪɾi. pɑɹɾən mi."

"Your Majes - " Master Gill said, bowing. He hesitated. "I mean, my Lady. Pardon me."

"doʊn maɪn ɪt, mæstɝ ɡɪl. aɪ hæv tʃɹʌbəl ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ maɪsɛlf."

"Don't mind it, Master Gill. I have trouble remembering myself."

"ju ʃʊɹ jə wɑnə ɡoʊ fɔɹwɝd wɪð ðɪs?" lini foʊldəɾ əɹ θɪn ɑɹmz.

"You sure you want to go forward with this?" Lini folded her thin arms.

"jɛs," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "ɪɾ ɪz əɹ duɾi tə ɹɪtɝn tə keɪɛmlɪn ən ɔfɝ ɪleɪn wʌɾ əsɪstəns wi kæn."

"Yes," Morgase said. "It is our duty to return to Caemlyn and offer Elayne what assistance we can."

"ɪf jə seɪ soʊ," lini sɛd. "mi, aɪ θɪŋk ðəɾ ɛniwʌn u əlaʊz tu ɹustɝz ɪn ðə seɪm bɑɹnjɑɹd dɪzɝvz ðə ɹʌkəs ðeɪ ɡɛt."

"If you say so," Lini said. "Me, I think that anyone who allows two roosters in the same barnyard deserves the ruckus they get."

mɔɹɡeɪs ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ. "noʊɾəd. bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk jəl faɪn ðəɾ aɪm kwaɪt keɪpəbəl ə hɛlpɪŋ wɪθaʊt jusɝpɪŋ əθɔɹəɾi fɹəm ɪleɪn."

Morgase raised an eyebrow. "Noted. But I think you'll find that I am quite capable of helping without usurping authority from Elayne."

lini ʃɹʌɡd.

Lini shrugged.

ʃi hæɾ ə pɔɪnt; mɔɹɡeɪs hæd tə bi kɛɹfəl. steɪɪŋ ɪn ðə kæpəɾəl fəɹ tu lɔŋ kəd θɹoʊ ə ʃædoʊ əkɹɔs ɪleɪn. bʌɾ ɪf ðəɹ wɑz wʌn θɪŋ mɔɹɡeɪs hæd lɝn fɹəm əɹ mʌnθs əz meɪaɪɡdɪn ɪt wɑz ðət pipəl niɾəd tə bi duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ pɹədʌktɪv, ivən ɪf ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ əz sɪmpəl əz lɝnɪŋ tə sɝv ti. mɔɹɡeɪs hæd skɪlz ðəɾ ɪleɪn kəd juz fəɹ ðə deɪnʒɝəs taɪmz əhɛd. ɪf ʃi bɪɡæn tə oʊvɝʃæɾoʊ hɝ dɔɾɝ, haʊɛvɝ, ʃi wəd muv aʊɾ ə keɪɛmlɪn tə hɝ hoʊldɪŋz ɪn ðə wɛst.

She had a point; Morgase had to be careful. Staying in the capital for too long could throw a shadow across Elayne. But if there was one thing Morgase had learned from her months as Maighdin it was that people needed to be doing something productive, even if it was something as simple as learning to serve tea. Morgase had skills that Elayne could use for the dangerous times ahead. If she began to overshadow her daughter, however, she would move out of Caemlyn to her holdings in the west.

ði ʌðɝz wɝkt kwɪkli loʊɾɪŋ ʌp, ən mɔɹɡeɪs hæd tə foʊld əɹ ɑɹmz tə kip fɹəm hɛlpɪŋ.

The others worked quickly loading up, and Morgase had to fold her arms to keep from helping.

ðəɹ wɑz ə sɝɾən fʊlfɪlmən tə kɛɹɪŋ fəɹ wʌnsɛlf. əz ʃi weɪɾəd, ʃi noʊɾəst sʌmwʌn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ʌp ðə pæθ fɹəm waɪtbɹɪdʒ. tɑlænvɝ. wʌt hæɾ i bɪn duɪŋ ɪn ðə sɪɾi? hi sɔ hɝ ən əpɹoʊtʃt, ðən baʊd, hɪz lin, skwɛɹ feɪs ə mɑɾəl ə dɛfɝəns. "maɪ leɪɾi."

There was a certain fulfillment to caring for oneself. As she waited, she noticed someone riding up the path from Whitebridge. Tallanvor. What had he been doing in the city? He saw her and approached, then bowed, his lean, square face a model of deference. "My Lady."

"ju vɪzəɾəd ðə sɪɾi? dɪd jə ɡɛt lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹəz pɝmɪʃən?" pɛɹɪn hædnt wɑntəɾ ə sʌɾən flʌɾ ə soʊlʒɝz ən ɹɛfjudʒiz ɡoʊɪŋ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi, kɑzɪŋ tʃɹʌbəl.

"You visited the city? Did you get Lord Aybara's permission?" Perrin hadn't wanted a sudden flood of soldiers and refugees going into the city, causing trouble.

"maɪ leɪɾi, aɪ hæv fæmli ðɛɹ," tɑlænvɝ sɛd, klaɪmɪŋ fɹəm ðə sæɾəl. hɪz vɔɪs wɑz stɪf ən fɔɹməl. "aɪ fɛlt ɪt waɪz tə ɪnvɛstəɡeɪt ði ɪn-fɔɹmeɪʃən dɪskʌvɝd baɪ lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹəz skaʊts."

"My Lady, I have family there," Tallanvor said, climbing from the saddle. His voice was stiff and formal. "I felt it wise to investigate the in-formation discovered by Lord Aybara's scouts."

"ɪz ðət soʊ, ɡɑɹdzmæn-lutɛnən tɑlænvɝ?" mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. ɪf i kəɾ ækt ɪn sətʃ ə fɔɹməl weɪ, ðən soʊ kəd ʃi. lini, pæsɪŋ wɪð ən ɑɹmloʊɾ ə lɪnənz tə pæk, ɡeɪv ə kwaɪət snɔɹɾ ət mɔɹɡeɪs ɛs toʊn.

"Is that so, Guardsman-Lieutenant Tallanvor?" Morgase said. If he could act in such a formal way, then so could she. Lini, passing with an armload of linens to pack, gave a quiet snort at Morgase s tone.

"jɛs, maɪ leɪɾi," tɑlænvɝ ɹɪplaɪd. "maɪ leɪɾi ... ɪf aɪ meɪ meɪk ə sədʒɛstʃən?"

"Yes, my Lady," Tallanvor replied. "My Lady ... if I may make a suggestion?"

"spik."

"Speak."

"baɪ ɹɪpɔɹts, jəɹ dɔɾɝ stɪl əsumz jə dɛd. aɪm sɝɾən ɪf wi spik tə lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹə, hɪl kəmæn ɪz æʃəmən tə meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ fəɹ əs tə ɹɪtɝn tə keɪɛmlɪn."

"By reports, your daughter still assumes you dead. I'm certain if we speak to Lord Aybara, he will command his Asha'man to make a gateway for us to return to Caemlyn."

"æn ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ sədʒɛstʃən," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd kɛɹfəli, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə smɝk ɑn liniz feɪs əz ʃi wɔk bæk baɪ ɪn ði ʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən.

"An interesting suggestion," Morgase said carefully, ignoring the smirk on Lini's face as she walked back by in the other direction.

"maɪ leɪɾi," tɑlænvɝ sɛd, aɪɪŋ lini, "maɪt wi spik ɪn pɹaɪvət?"

"My Lady," Tallanvor said, eyeing Lini, "might we speak in private?"

mɔɹɡeɪs nɑɾəd, stɛpɪŋ ɔf tə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə kæmp. tɑlænvɝ fɑloʊd. ə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns əweɪ, ʃi tɝn tə lʊk ət hɪm. "wɛl?"

Morgase nodded, stepping off to the side of the camp. Tallanvor followed. A short distance away, she turned to look at him. "Well?"

"maɪ leɪɾi," hi kəntɪnjuɾ ɪn ə sɑftɝ vɔɪs. "ði ændɔɝən kɔɹɾ ɪz sɝɾən tə hɪɹ ðət jə stɪl lɪv, naʊ ðəɾ eɪbɑɹəz ɪntaɪɝ kæmp noʊz. ɪf jə doʊn pɹɛzən jɝsɛlf ən ɪkspleɪn ðət juv ɹɪnaʊns ðə θɹoʊn, ðə ɹumɝz ə jəɹ sɝvaɪvəl kəɾ ɪɹoʊɾ ɪleɪnz əθɔɹəɾi."

"My Lady," he continued in a softer voice. "The Andoran court is certain to hear that you still live, now that Aybara's entire camp knows. If you don't present yourself and explain that you've renounced the throne, the rumors of your survival could erode Elayne's authority."

mɔɹɡeɪs dɪdn ɹɪplaɪ.

Morgase didn't reply.

"ɪf ðə læs bæɾəl tʃɹuli ɪz kʌmɪŋ," tɑlænvɝ sɛd, "wi kæn əfɔɹd - "

"If the Last Battle truly is coming," Tallanvor said, "we can't afford - "

"oʊ, hʌʃ," ʃi sɛd kɝtli. "aɪv ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɪvən lini ən ði ʌðɝz ði ɔɹɾɝ tə pæk ʌp. dɪdn jə noʊɾəs wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ?"

"Oh, hush," she said curtly. "I've already given Lini and the others the order to pack up. Didn't you notice what they were doing?"

tɑlænvɝ flʌʃt əz i noʊɾəst ɡɪl hɔlɪŋ ə tʃɛst oʊvɝ ən sɛɾɪŋ ɪɾ ɑn ðə kɑɹt.

Tallanvor flushed as he noticed Gill hauling a chest over and setting it on the cart.

"aɪ əpɑlədʒaɪz fəɹ maɪ fɔɹwɝdnəs. wɪð jəɹ liv, maɪ leɪɾi." tɑlænvɝ nɑɾəd tə hɝ ən tɝn tə ɡoʊ.

"I apologize for my forwardness. With your leave, my Lady." Tallanvor nodded to her and turned to go.

"mʌst wi bi soʊ fɔɹməl wɪð wʌn ənʌðɝ, tɑlænvɝ?"

"Must we be so formal with one another, Tallanvor?"

"ði ɪluʒən əz ɛndəd, maɪ leɪɾi." hi wɔkt əweɪ.

"The illusion has ended, my Lady." He walked away.

mɔɹɡeɪs wɑtʃt ɪm ɡoʊ, ən fɛlt əɹ hɑɹt twɪst. kɝs əɹ stʌbɝnnəs! kɝs ɡɑləd! hɪz ɝaɪvəl hæd ɹimaɪndəɾ əɹ ə hɝ pɹaɪd, ʌv əɹ ɹɔɪəl duɾi.

Morgase watched him go, and felt her heart twist. Curse her stubbornness! Curse Galad! His arrival had reminded her of her pride, of her royal duty.

ɪt wɑz bæd fəɹ əɹ tə hæv ə hʌzbənd. ʃid lɝn ðət fɹəm tɑɹɪŋɡeɪl. fəɹ ɔl ə ðə stəbɪlɪɾi hɝ mɛɹɪdʒ tə hɪm hæd bɹɔt, itʃ ən ɛvɹi ædvæntɪdʒ hæd kʌm wɪð ə θɹɛt tə hɝ θɹoʊn. ðət wɑz waɪ ʃid nɛvɝ meɪd bɹaɪn əɹ θɔɹn əɹ əfɪʃəl kɑnsɔɹt, ən ɡeɪbɹəl oʊnli pɹuv ðət ʃi hæd bɪn ɹaɪt tə wɝi.

It was bad for her to have a husband. She'd learned that from Taringail. For all of the stability her marriage to him had brought, each and every advantage had come with a threat to her throne. That was why she'd never made Bryne or Thorn her official consort, and Gaebril only proved that she had been right to worry.

ɛni mæn u mɛɹiɾ əɹ kʊd, pətɛnʃəli, bi ə θɹɛt tə ɪleɪn əz wɛl əz ændɝ. hɝ tʃɪlʒɹən, ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɛni mɔɹ, wəd bi ɹaɪvəlz tə ɪleɪnz. mɔɹɡeɪs kʊdn əfɔɹd tə lʌv.

Any man who married her could, potentially, be a threat to Elayne as well as Andor. Her children, if she had any more, would be rivals to Elayne's. Morgase couldn't afford to love.

tɑlænvɝ stɑpt ə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns əweɪ, ən əɹ bɹɛθ kɑt. hi tɝnd, ðən wɔk bæk tə hɝ. hi dʒɹu hɪz sɔɹɾ ən bɛn daʊn, plæk-ɪŋ ɪt ɹɛvɝənli əɾ əɹ fiɾ əz ʃi stʊɾ ɪn widz ən skɹʌb.

Tallanvor stopped a short distance away, and her breath caught. He turned, then walked back to her. He drew his sword and bent down, plac-ing it reverently at her feet as she stood in weeds and scrub.

"aɪ wɑz ɹɔŋ tə θɹɛɾən tə liv, bɪfɔɹ," hi sɛd sɔfli. "aɪ wɑz hɝt, ən peɪn meɪks ə mæn stupəd. jə noʊ ðəɾ əl ɔlweɪz bi hɪɹ, mɔɹɡeɪs. aɪv pɹɑməst ɪt tə jə bɪfɔɹ, ən aɪ min ɪt.

"I was wrong to threaten to leave, before," he said softly. "I was hurt, and pain makes a man stupid. You know that I will always be here, Morgase. I've promised it to you before, and I mean it.

ðiz deɪz, aɪ fil laɪk ə baɪtim ɪn ə wɝld ʌv iɡəlz. bʌɾ aɪ hæv maɪ sɔɹɾ ən maɪ hɑɹt, ən boʊθ ɑɹ jʊɹz. fɝɛvɝ."

These days, I feel like a biteme in a world of eagles. But I have my sword and my heart, and both are yours. Forever."

hi stʊd tə ɡoʊ.

He stood to go.

"tɑlænvɝ," ʃi sɛd, ɔlmoʊst ɪn ə wɪspɝ. "juv nɛvɝ æsk mi, jə noʊ. ɪf aɪ wəɾ əv ju."

"Tallanvor," she said, almost in a whisper. "You've never asked me, you know. If I would have you."

"aɪ kæn pʊt jə ɪndə ðət pəzɪʃən. ɪt wʊdn bi ɹaɪt tə fɔɹs jə tə də wʌt wi boʊθ noʊ jə mʌst, naʊ ðət juv bɪn ɪkspoʊzd."

"I can't put you into that position. It wouldn't be right to force you to do what we both know you must, now that you have been exposed."

"ænd wʌt mʌst aɪ du?"

"And what must I do?"

"tɝn mi daʊn," hi spæt, ɑbviəsli ɡɹoʊɪŋ æŋɡɹi. "fɔɹ ðə ɡʊɾ ʌv ændɝ."

"Turn me down," he spat, obviously growing angry. "For the good of Andor."

"mʌst aɪ?" ʃi æskt. "aɪ kip tɛlɪŋ maɪsɛlf ðæt, tɑlænvɝ, bʌt stɪl aɪ kwɛstʃən ɪt."

"Must I?" she asked. "I keep telling myself that, Tallanvor, but still I question it."

"wʌt ɡʊɾ æm aɪ tə ju?" hi æskt. "æt ðə vɛɹi list, jə ʃəd mɛɹi tə hɛlp ɪleɪn sɪkjʊɹ ðə lɔɪəlti ʌv wʌn ə ðə fækʃənz jə əfɛndəd."

"What good am I to you?" he asked. "At the very least, you should marry to help Elayne secure the loyalty of one of the factions you offended."

"æn soʊ aɪ ɡoʊ tə mɛɹɪdʒ wɪθaʊt lʌv," ʃi sɛd. "əɡɛn. haʊ mɛni taɪmz mʌst aɪ sækɹəfaɪs maɪ hɑɹt fəɹ ændɝ?"

"And so I go to marriage without love," she said. "Again. How many times must I sacrifice my heart for Andor?"

"æz mɛni taɪmz əz ɹikwaɪɝd, aɪ səpoʊz." hi saʊndəd soʊ bɪɾɝ, klɛntʃɪŋ ɪz fɪsts. nɑɾ æŋɡɹi ət hɝ, bʌɾ ət ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən. hi ɔlweɪz hæd bɪn ə mæn ə sətʃ pæʃən.

"As many times as required, I suppose." He sounded so bitter, clenching his fists. Not angry at her, but at the situation. He always had been a man of such passion.

ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "noʊ," ʃi sɛd. "nɑɾ əɡɛn. tɑlænvɝ, lʊk ət ðət skaɪ əbʌv.

She hesitated, then shook her head. "No," she said. "Not again. Tallanvor, look at that sky above.

juv sin ðə θɪŋz ðət wɔk ðə wɝld, fɛl ðə dɑɹk wʌnz kɝsɪz stʃɹaɪk ʌs. ðɪs ɪz nɑɾ ə taɪm tə bi wɪθaʊt hoʊp. wɪθaʊt lʌv."

You've seen the things that walk the world, felt the Dark One's curses strike us. This is not a time to be without hope. Without love."

"bʌt wʌɾ ə duɾi?"

"But what of duty?"

"duɾi kən blʌɾi ɡt ɪn laɪn. ɪts hæɾ ɪts ʃɛɹ ə mi. ɛvɹiwʌnz hæd ðɛɹ ʃɛɹ ə mi, tɑlænvɝ.

"Duty can bloody gtt in line. It's had its share of me. Everyone's had their share of me, Tallanvor.

ɛvɹiwʌn bʌt ðə mæn aɪ wɑnt." ʃi stɛpt oʊvɝ ɪz sɔɹd, stɪl laɪɪŋ ɪn ðə kɑkəlbɝz, ðən kʊdn stɑp hɝsɛlf. ɪn ə blɪŋk, ʃi wɑz kɪsɪŋ hɪm.

Everyone but the man I want." She stepped over his sword, still lying in the cockleburrs, then couldn't stop herself. In a blink, she was kissing him.

"ɔl ɹaɪt, jə tu," ə stɝn vɔɪs sɛd fɹəm bɪhaɪnd. "wɝ gɑnə si lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹə ɹaɪt naʊ."

"All right, you two," a stern voice said from behind. "We're going to see Lord Aybara right now."

mɔɹɡeɪs pʊld əweɪ. ɪt wɑz lini.

Morgase pulled away. It was Lini.

"wʌt?" mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹaɪd tə ɹɪɡeɪn səm kəmpoʊʒɝ.

"What?" Morgase tried to regain some composure.

"jɔɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ mɛɹid," lini dɪklɛɹd. "ɪf aɪ hæv tə pʊl jə tə ɪt baɪ ði ɪɹz."

"You're getting married," Lini declared. "If I have to pull you to it by the ears."

"aɪ wɪl meɪk maɪ oʊn tʃɔɪs," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd tə ɡɛt mi tə- - "

"I will make my own choice," Morgase said. "Perrin tried to get me to- - "

"aɪm nɑt hɪm," lini sɛd. "ðɪs ɪz bɛs dʌn bɪfɔɹ wi ɹɪtɝn tə ɪleɪn. wʌns jəɹ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn ðəɹ wɪl bi kɑmpləkeɪʃənz." ʃi tɝn əɹ aɪz ɑn ɡɪl, hu hæd ðə tʃɹʌŋk stoʊd. "æn ju!

"I'm not him," Lini said. "This is best done before we return to Elayne. Once you're in Caemlyn there will be complications." She turned her eyes on Gill, who had the trunk stowed. "And you!

ənpæk maɪ leɪɾiz θɪŋz."

Unpack my Lady's things."

"bʌt lini," mɔɹɡeɪs pɹətɛstəd, "wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə keɪɛmlɪn."

"But Lini," Morgase protested, "we're going to Caemlyn."

"təmɑɹoʊ wɪl bi sun ɪnʌf, tʃaɪld. tənaɪt, jə sɛləbɹeɪt." ʃi aɪd ðɛm. "æn əntɪl ðə mɛɹɪdʒ ɪz dʌn, aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ɪts seɪf tə tʃɹʌs jə tu əloʊn."

"Tomorrow will be soon enough, child. Tonight, you celebrate." She eyed them. "And until the marriage is done, I don't think it's safe to trust you two alone."

mɔɹɡeɪs flʌʃt. "lini," ʃi hɪst. "aɪm nɑɾ eɪtin ɛnimɔɹ!"

Morgase flushed. "Lini," she hissed. "I'm not eighteen anymore!"

"noʊ, wən jə wɝ eɪtin, jə wɝ mɛɹid pɹɑpɝ. də aɪ nid tə siz jəɹ ɪɹz?"

"No, when you were eighteen, you were married proper. Do I need to seize your ears?"

"aɪ - " mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd.

"I - " Morgase said.

"wɝ kʌmɪŋ, lini," tɑlænvɝ sɛd.

"We're coming, Lini," Tallanvor said.

mɔɹɡeɪs ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɪm.

Morgase glared at him.

hi fɹaʊnd. "wʌt?"

He frowned. "What?"

"ju hævən æskt."

"You haven't asked."

hi smaɪld, ðən hɛld əɹ kloʊs. "mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkənd, wɪl jə bi maɪ waɪf?"

He smiled, then held her close. "Morgase Trakand, will you be my wife?"

"jɛs," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd. "naʊ lɛts faɪn pɛɹɪn."

"Yes," she replied. "Now let's find Perrin."

pɛɹɪn tʌɡd ɑn ði oʊk bɹæntʃ. ɪt bɹoʊk ɔf, paʊɾɝi wʊd dʌs pʌfɪŋ aʊt. əz i hɛl ðə bɹæntʃ ʌp, sɔdʌst stʃɹimd aʊɾ ə ði ɛn ɑntu ðə bɹaʊn ɡɹæs.

Perrin tugged on the oak branch. It broke off, powdery wood dust puffing out. As he held the branch up, sawdust streamed out of the end onto the brown grass.

"hæpən læs naɪt, maɪ lɔɹd," kɛvlɪn tɔɹ sɛd, hoʊldɪŋ ɪz ɡlʌvz. "ði ɪntaɪɝ stæn ə hɑɹdwʊɾ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ, dɛɾ ən dʒɹaɪɾ ɪn wʌn naɪt. nɪɹli ə hʌnʒɹəd tʃɹiz, aɪd ɡɛs."

"Happened last night, my Lord," Kevlyn Torr said, holding his gloves. "The entire stand of hardwood over there, dead and dried in one night. Nearly a hundred trees, I'd guess."

pɛɹɪn dʒɹɑp ðə bɹæntʃ, ðən dʌstɪɾ ɔf ɪz hænz. "ɪts noʊ wɝs ðən wʌt wiv sin bɪfɔɹ."

Perrin dropped the branch, then dusted off his hands. "It's no worse than what we've seen before."

"bʌt - "

"But - "

"doʊnt wɝi əbaʊt ðɪs," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "sɛn səm mɛn tə hɑɹvəs ðɪs wʊd fəɹ faɪɝz; lʊks əz ɪf ɪɾəl bɝn ɹɪli wɛl."

"Don't worry about this," Perrin said. "Send some men to harvest this wood for fires; looks as if it will burn really well."

kɛvlɪn nɑɾəd, ðən hɝiɾ ɔf. ʌðɝ wʊdzmɪn wɝ poʊkɪŋ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz, lʊkɪŋ dɪstɝbd. oʊk, æʃ, ɛlm ən hɪkɝi tʃɹiz daɪɪŋ oʊvɝnaɪt wɑz bæɾ ɪnʌf. bʌt daɪɪŋ, ðən dʒɹaɪɪŋ aʊɾ əz ðoʊ dɛd fəɹ jɪɹz? ðət wɑz daʊnɹaɪɾ ənsɛɾəlɪŋ. bɛs tə teɪk ɪɾ ɪn stʃɹaɪd, ðoʊ, nɑt lɛt ðə mɛn ɡɹoʊ əfɹeɪd.

Kevlyn nodded, then hurried off. Other woodsmen were poking through the trees, looking disturbed. Oak, ash, elm and hickory trees dying overnight was bad enough. But dying, then drying out as though dead for years? That was downright unsettling. Best to take it in stride, though, not let the men grow afraid.

pɛɹɪn wɔk bæk təwɔɹd kæmp. ɪn ðə dɪstəns, ænvəlz ɹæŋ. ðeɪd bɑɾ ʌp ɹɔ mətɪɹiəlz, ɛvɹi bɪɾ ʌv aɪɝn əɹ stil ðeɪ kəd ɡɛt fɹəm waɪtbɹɪdʒ. ðə pipəl hæd bɪn iɡɝ tə tʃɹeɪd fəɹ fud, ən pɛɹɪn hæɾ əbteɪn faɪv fɔɹdʒɪz, wɪð mɛn tə muv əm ən sɛɾ əm ʌp, əlɔŋ wɪð hæmɝz, tulz ən koʊl.

Perrin walked back toward camp. In the distance, anvils rang. They'd bought up raw materials, every bit of iron or steel they could get from Whitebridge. The people had been eager to trade for food, and Perrin had obtained five forges, with men to move them and set them up, along with hammers, tools and coal.

hi maɪt dʒʌst əv seɪv səm ɪn ðə sɪɾi fɹəm stɑɹvɪŋ. fəɹ ə lɪɾəl waɪl ət list.

He might just have saved some in the city from starving. For a little while at least.

smɪθs kəntɪnjud tə paʊnd. hoʊpfəli hi wɑznt wɝkɪŋ nild ən ði ʌðɝz tu hɑɹd. paʊɝ- ɹɔt wɛpənz wəd ɡɪv ɪz pipəl ə kɹɪɾɪkəl ædvæntɪdʒ. nil hædn bɪn eɪbəl tə fɪɡjɝ aʊɾ ɪɡzækli wʌt hid dʌn ɪn hɛlpɪŋ fɔɹdʒ mæhælaɪnɝ, bʌt pɛɹɪn hædn bɪn sɝpɹaɪzd. ðət naɪt hæd bɪn junik. hi ɹɛstəɾ ə hæn ɑn ðə wɛpən, filɪŋ ɪts feɪnt wɔɹmθ, θɪŋkɪŋ ə hɑpɝ.

Smiths continued to pound. Hopefully he wasn't working Neald and the others too hard. Power- wrought weapons would give his people a critical advantage. Neald hadn't been able to figure out exactly what he'd done in helping forge Mah'alleinir, but Perrin hadn't been surprised. That night had been unique. He rested a hand on the weapon, feeling its faint warmth, thinking of Hopper.

naʊ, nil hæd fɪɡjɝɾ aʊt haʊ tə meɪk bleɪdz ðət wʊdn dʌl əɹ bɹeɪk. ðə mɔɹ i pɹæktəst, ðə ʃɑɹpɝ ɛdʒəz i wɑz eɪbəl tə kɹieɪt. ði il hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡʌn tə dɪmæn ðoʊz ɛdʒəz fəɹ ðɛɹ spɪɹz, ən pɛɹɪn hæd ɡɪvən nil ði ɔɹɾɝ tə si tə ðɛm fɝst. ɪt wɑz ðə list i oʊd ðɛm.

Now, Neald had figured out how to make blades that wouldn't dull or break. The more he practiced, the sharper edges he was able to create. The Aiel had already begun to demand those edges for their spears, and Perrin had given Neald the order to see to them first. It was the least he owed them.

ɑn ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ ɡɹaʊn ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə lɑɹdʒ, ɪnkɹisɪŋli ɛntʃɹɛntʃt kæmp, ɡɹeɪɾi stʊɾ ɪn ə sɝkəl wɪð ənʊɹə ən mɑsʊɝi, hoʊldɪŋ oʊpən ə ɡeɪtweɪ. ðɪs wɑz ðə læst ɡɹup ə nɑnkəmbæɾənts u wɑntəd tə liv hɪm, ðə ɡɹup tʃɹævlɪŋ tə keɪɛmlɪn. əmʌŋ ðɛm, hid sɛn ə mɛsənʒɝ tə ɪleɪn. hid nid tə mit wɪð əɹ sun; hi wɑzn sɝɾən ɪf i ʃəd bi wɝiɾ əɹ nɑt. taɪm wəd tɛl.

On the Traveling ground at the edge of the large, increasingly entrenched camp, Grady stood in a circle with Annoura and Masuri, holding open a gateway. This was the last group of noncombatants who wanted to leave him, the group traveling to Caemlyn. Among them, he'd sent a messenger to Elayne. He'd need to meet with her soon; he wasn't certain if he should be worried or not. Time would tell.

səm ʌðɝz wɝ kʌmɪŋ bæk θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, bɹɪŋɪŋ ə fju kɑɹts ə fud pɝtʃəst ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, wɛɹ səplaɪz wɝ stɪl əveɪləbəl. ɪvɛntʃəwəli hi kɑt saɪɾ ə feɪl pɪkɪŋ əɹ weɪ θɹu ðə kæmp təwɔɹd hɪm. hi ɹeɪzd ə hænd, dʒɹɔɪŋ əɹ oʊvɝ.

Some others were coming back through the gateway, bringing a few carts of food purchased in Caemlyn, where supplies were still available. Eventually he caught sight of Faile picking her way through the camp toward him. He raised a hand, drawing her over.

"ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɔl ɹaɪt wɪð beɪvɪn?" pɛɹɪn æskt. ʃid bɪn ət ðə kɔɹɾɝmæstɝz tɛnt.

"Everything all right with Bavin?" Perrin asked. She'd been at the quartermaster's tent.

"ɔl ɪz wɛl."

"All is well."

pɛɹɪn ɹʌbd ɪz tʃɪn. "aɪv bɪn minɪŋ tə tɛl jə fəɹ səm taɪm - aɪ doʊn θɪŋk hiz pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɑnəst."

Perrin rubbed his chin. "I've been meaning to tell you for some time - I don't think he's particularly honest."

"aɪl kip spɛʃəl wɑtʃ ɑn hɪm," ʃi sɛd, smɛlɪŋ əmjuzd.

"I'll keep special watch on him," she said, smelling amused.

"bɹəleɪnz bɪn spɛndɪŋ mɔɹ taɪm wɪð ðə waɪtkloʊks," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "simz ʃiz aɪz fəɹ dəmədʒɹd. ʃiz bɪn livɪŋ mi əloʊn ɪntaɪɝli."

"Berelain's been spending more time with the Whitecloaks," Perrin said. "Seems she has eyes for Damodred. She's been leaving me alone entirely."

"ɪz ðət soʊ?"

"Is that so?"

"jɛs. ən ʃi pʌblɪʃt ðət pɹɑkləmeɪʃən, kəndɛmɪŋ ðə ɹumɝz əbaʊt mi ən hɝ. laɪt, bʌt pipəl æktʃəli  sim tə bɪliv ɪt. aɪ wɑz wɝ-ɹid ðeɪɾ ɪts ɪz ə saɪn ə dɛspɝeɪʃən!"

"Yes. And she published that proclamation, condemning the rumors about me and her. Light, but people actually seem to believe it. I was wor-ried they'd see it is a sign of desperation!"

feɪl smɛl sæɾəsfaɪd.

Faile smelled satisfied.

hi leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt jə dɪd, bʌt θæŋk ju."

He laid a hand on her shoulder. "I don't know what you did, but thank you."

"du jə noʊ ðə dɪfɝəns bɪtwin ə hɔk ən ə fælkən, pɛɹɪn?"

"Do you know the difference between a hawk and a falcon, Perrin?"

"saɪz, moʊsli," hi sɛd. "wɪŋ ʃeɪp, tu. ðə fælkən əz ə mɔɹ æɹoʊlaɪk lʊk tə ɪt."

"Size, mostly," he said. "Wing shape, too. The falcon has a more arrowlike look to it."

"ðə fælkən," feɪl sɛd, "ɪz ə bɛɾɝ flaɪɝ. ɪt kɪlz wɪð ðə bik, ən kən flaɪ fæst ən kwɪk. ðə hɔk ɪz sloʊɝ ən stʃɹɔŋɝ; ɪɾ ɪksɛlz ət ɡɛɾɪŋ pɹeɪ ðəɾ ɪz muvɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ɪt laɪks tə kɪl wɪð ðə klɔ, ətækɪŋ fɹəm əbʌv."

"The falcon," Faile said, "is a better flyer. It kills with the beak, and can fly fast and quick. The hawk is slower and stronger; it excels at getting prey that is moving along the ground. It likes to kill with the claw, attacking from above."

"ɔl ɹaɪt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "bʌt dʌzn ðət min ðəɾ ɪf boʊθ si ə ɹæbət bɪloʊ, ðə hɔk wɪl bi bɛɾɝ ət snætʃɪŋ ɪt?"

"All right," Perrin said. "But doesn't that mean that if both see a rabbit below, the hawk will be better at snatching it?"

"ðæts ɪɡzækli wʌɾ ɪt minz." ʃi smaɪld. "ðə hɔk ɪz bɛɾɝ ət hʌntɪŋ ðə ɹæbət. bʌt, jə si, ðə fælkən ɪz bɛɾɝ ət hʌntɪŋ ðə hɔk. jə sɛn ðə mɛsənʒɝ tə ɪleɪn?"

"That's exactly what it means." She smiled. "The hawk is better at hunting the rabbit. But, you see, the falcon is better at hunting the hawk. You sent the messenger to Elayne?"

wɪmən. hid nɛvɝ meɪk sɛns ə ðɛm. fəɹ wʌns, ðoʊ, ðət simd ə ɡʊd θɪŋ. "aɪ dɪd.

Women. He'd never make sense of them. For once, though, that seemed a good thing. "I did.

hoʊpfəli wɪl bi eɪbəl tə mit wɪð əɹ sun."

Hopefully we'll be able to meet with her soon."

"ðɛɹ ɪz ɔlɹɛɾi tɔk ɪn kæmp ə hum jə maɪt bɹɪŋ wɪð ju."

"There is already talk in camp of whom you might bring with you."

"waɪ wəd ðəɹ bi tɔk?" pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɪɾəl bi ju. jəl bi bɛst ət noʊɪŋ haʊ tə dil wɪð ɪleɪn, ðoʊ hævɪŋ æliændɝ əlɔŋ pɹɑbli woʊn hɝt."

"Why would there be talk?" Perrin said. "It'll be you. You'll be best at knowing how to deal with Elayne, though having Alliandre along probably won't hurt."

"æn bɹəleɪn?"

"And Berelain?"

"ʃi kən steɪ ɪn kæmp," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "wɑtʃ oʊvɝ θɪŋz hɪɹ. ʃi ɡɑt tə ɡoʊ læs taɪm."

"She can stay in camp," Perrin said. "Watch over things here. She got to go last time."

feɪl smɛld ivən mɔɹ sæɾəsfaɪd. "wi ʃəd - " ʃi kʌɾ ɔf, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "wɛl, ɪt lʊks laɪk ðə læs lif faɪnəli fɛl."

Faile smelled even more satisfied. "We should - " She cut off, frowning. "Well, it looks like the last leaf finally fell."

"wʌt?" pɛɹɪn sɛd, tɝnɪŋ. ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ə ɡɹup kʌmɪŋ ət ðɛm. eɪdʒ lini, ən tʃɹeɪlɪŋ bɪhaɪn əɹ mɔɹɡeɪs ən tɑlænvɝ, ɡeɪzɪŋ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ laɪk ə kʌpəl dʒʌs bæk fɹəm ðɛɹ fɝs bɛl taɪn təɡɛðɝ. "aɪ θɔt ʃi dɪdn laɪk hɪm," hi sɛd. "ɔɹ, ɪf ʃi dɪd, ʃi wɑzn gɑnə mɛɹi hɪm ɛniweɪ."

"What?" Perrin said, turning. She was looking toward a group coming at them. Aged Lini, and trailing behind her Morgase and Tallanvor, gazing at one another like a couple just back from their first Bel Tine together. "I thought she didn't like him," he said. "Or, if she did, she wasn't going to marry him anyway."

"maɪnz tʃeɪnʒ," feɪl sɛd, "mʌtʃ mɔɹ kwɪkli ðən hɑɹts." hɝ sɛnt wɑz feɪnli æŋɡɹi, ðoʊ ʃi smʌðɝɾ ɪt. ʃi hædn kəmplitli fɝɡɪvən mɔɹɡeɪs, bʌt ʃi wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ aʊtʃɹaɪt hɑstəl.

"Minds change," Faile said, "much more quickly than hearts." Her scent was faintly angry, though she smothered it. She hadn't completely forgiven Morgase, but she was no longer outright hostile.

"pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "ju ɑɹ ðə kloʊsəs θɪŋ tə ə lɔɹd ðɪs kæmp hæz, ʌðɝ ðən maɪ stɛpsʌn. bʌɾ ɪt wʊdn bi ɹaɪt fəɹ ə sʌn tə smɛld æŋɡɹi əz wɛl. pɛɹɪn saɪd. faɪɾ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ðoʊ ðeɪ maɪt ðeɪ wɝ ɔlweɪz iɡɝ tə paʊns ɑn ə mæn u sɛd ðə ɹɔŋ θɪŋ, ivən ɪf ɪt wɑz ðə tʃɹuθ.

"Perrin Aybara," Morgase said. "You are the closest thing to a lord this camp has, other than my stepson. But it wouldn't be right for a son to smelled angry as well. Perrin sighed. Fight among themselves though they might they were always eager to pounce on a man who said the wrong thing, even if it was the truth.

haʊɛvɝ, mɔɹɡeɪs kɑm daʊn. "aɪm sɑɹi. aɪ dɪd nɑt min tə ɪnsʌl jəɹ əθɔɹəɾi."

However, Morgase calmed down. "I'm sorry. I did not mean to insult your authority."

"ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt," hi sɛd. "aɪ səpoʊz juv ɹizən tə kwɛstʃən."

"It's all right," he said. "I suppose you have reason to question."

"noʊ," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd, stændɪŋ ʌp tɔlɝ. laɪt, bʌt ʃi kəd lʊk laɪk ə kwin wən ʃi wɑntəd.

"No," Morgase said, standing up taller. Light, but she could look like a queen when she wanted.

haʊ hæd ðeɪ mɪst ɪt bɪfɔɹ? "ju ɑɹ ə lɔɹd, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. jəɹ ækʃənz ʃoʊ ɪt. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɪz blɛsɪd kəz ə ju, ən pɝhæps ændɝ əz wɛl. soʊ lɔŋ əz jə ɹɪmeɪn pɑɹɾ ə hɝ."

How had they missed it before? "You are a lord, Perrin Aybara. Your actions show it. The Two Rivers is blessed because of you, and perhaps Andor as well. So long as you remain part of her."

"aɪ ɪntɛn tə," pɛɹɪn pɹɑməst.

"I intend to," Perrin promised.

"wɛl, ɪf jə wəd də ðɪs θɪŋ fəɹ mi," ʃi sɛd, lʊkɪŋ tə tɑlən-vɔɹ, "ðɛn aɪ wəd bi wɪlɪŋ tə spik ɑn jəɹ bɪhæf wɪð ɪleɪn. ɝeɪnʒmənts kən bi meɪd, ən taɪɾəlz - pɹɑpɝ taɪɾəlz -  kən bi bɪstoʊd."

"Well, if you would do this thing for me," she said, looking to Tallan-vor, "then I would be willing to speak on your behalf with Elayne. Arrangements can be made, and titles - proper titles -  can be bestowed."

"wi wɪl teɪk jəɹ ɔfɝ ə spikɪŋ fəɹ ʌs," feɪl sɛd, spikɪŋ kwɪkli bɪfɔɹ pɛɹɪn kʊd.

"We will take your offer of speaking for us," Faile said, speaking quickly before Perrin could.

"bʌt wɪl dɪsaɪd, wɪð əɹ mædʒəsti, wɛðɝ bɪstoʊɪŋ taɪɾəlz ɪz ðə . . . pɹɑpɝ kɔɹs ət ðɪs pɔɪnt."

"But we will decide, with Her Majesty, whether bestowing titles is the . . . proper course at this point."

pɛɹɪn aɪd hɝ. ʃi wɑzn stɪl kənsɪɾɝɪŋ splɪɾɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɔf ɪndə ɪts oʊn kɪŋdəm, wɑz ʃi? ðeɪd nɛvɝ dɪskʌst ɪɾ ɪn sətʃ fɹæŋk tɝmz, bʌt ʃiɾ ɛnkɝɪdʒd ɪm tə juz ðə flæɡ ʌv meɪnɛðɝən. wɛl, ðeɪɾ əv tə si əbaʊt ðæt.

Perrin eyed her. She wasn't still considering splitting the Two Rivers off into its own kingdom, was she? They'd never discussed it in such frank terms, but she'd encouraged him to use the flag of Manetheren. Well, they'd have to see about that.

nɪɹbaɪ, hi kəd si ɡɑləd dəmədʒɹd wɔkɪŋ təwɔɹd ðɛm, bɪɹ-leɪn - əz ɔlweɪz leɪtli - əɾ ɪz saɪd. ɪɾ əpɪɹd ðət mɔɹɡeɪs hæd sɛn ə mɛsənʒɝ fəɹ hɪm. ɡɑləd wɑz tʌkɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ɪndə hɪz pɑkət. ə smɔl lɛɾɝ, ɪɾ əpɪɹd, wɪð ə ɹɛd sil. wɛɹ hæɾ i ɡɑɾən ðæt? hi lʊk tʃɹʌbəld, ðoʊ hɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən laɪɾənd əz i ɝaɪvd. hi dɪdn sim sɝpɹaɪz baɪ ðə nuz ə ðə mɛɹɪdʒ;

Nearby, he could see Galad Damodred walking toward them, Bere-lain - as always lately - at his side. It appeared that Morgase had sent a messenger for him. Galad was tucking something into his pocket. A small letter, it appeared, with a red seal. Where had he gotten that? He looked troubled, though his expression lightened as he arrived. He didn't seem surprised by the news of the marriage;

hi hæɾ ə nɑd fəɹ pɛɹɪn ən ə hʌɡ fəɹ ɪz mʌðɝ, ðən ə stɝn-aɪd - bʌt kɔɹdʒəl - ɡɹiɾɪŋ fəɹ tɑlænvɝ.

he had a nod for Perrin and a hug for his mother, then a stern-eyed - but cordial - greeting for Tallanvor.

"wʌt kaɪndə sɛɹəmoʊni wəd jə laɪk?" pɛɹɪn æsk mɔɹɡeɪs. "aɪ oʊnli noʊ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz weɪ."

"What kind of ceremony would you like?" Perrin asked Morgase. "I only know the Two Rivers way."

"aɪ bɪliv sɪmpəl oʊðz bɪfɔɹ jəl səfaɪs," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "aɪm oʊld ɪnʌf tə bi taɪɝɾ ə sɛɹəmoʊni."

"I believe simple oaths before you will suffice," Morgase said. "I'm old enough to be tired of ceremony."

"saʊnz əpɹoʊpɹiət tə mi," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Sounds appropriate to me," Perrin said.

ɡɑləd stɛp tə ðə saɪɾ ən mɔɹɡeɪs ən tɑlænvɝ klæsp hænz. "mɑɹɾɪn tɑlænvɝ," ʃi sɛd. "aɪv hæd mɔɹ fɹəm jə ðən aɪ dɪzɝv, fəɹ lɔŋɡɝ ðən aɪv noʊn ðəɾ aɪv hæɾ ɪt. juv kleɪm ðət ðə lʌv ʌv ə sɪmpəl soʊlʒɝ ɪz nʌθɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə mæntəl ʌv ə kwin, bʌt ðəfɝst seɪ ðə mi-ʃʊɹ ʌv ə mæn ɪz nɑɾ ɪn ɪz taɪɾəl, bʌɾ ɪn ɪz soʊl.

Galad stepped to the side and Morgase and Tallanvor clasped hands. "Martyn Tallanvor," she said. "I've had more from you than I deserve, for longer than I've known that I've had it. You've claimed that the love of a simple soldier is nothing before the mantle of a queen, but I say the mea-sure of a man is not in his title, but in his soul.

"aɪv sin fɹəm jə bɹeɪvɝi, dɛɾəkeɪʃən, lɔɪəlti, ən lʌv. aɪv sin ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv ə pɹɪns ɪnsaɪɾ ə ju, ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv ə mæn u wəd ɹɪmeɪn tʃɹu wən hʌnʒɹədz ɝaʊn ɪm feɪld. aɪ swɛɹ ðəɾ aɪ lʌv ju. ən bɪfɔɹ ðə laɪt, aɪ swɛɹ nɑt tə liv ju. aɪ swɛɹ tə tʃɛɹɪʃ jə fɝɛvɝ ən əv jə əz maɪ hʌzbənd."

"I've seen from you bravery, dedication, loyalty, and love. I've seen the heart of a prince inside of you, the heart of a man who would remain true when hundreds around him failed. I swear that I love you. And before the Light, I swear not to leave you. I swear to cherish you forever and have you as my husband."

bɹəleɪn tʊk aʊɾ ə kɝtʃəf ən dæb ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɝ aɪz. wɛl, wɪmən ɔlweɪz wɛpt ət θɪŋz laɪk wɛɾɪŋz. ðoʊ pɛɹɪn . . . wɛl i fɛlt ə lɪɾəl wɔɾɝ ɪn ɪz aɪz, tu. maɪɾ əv bɪn ðə sʌnlaɪt.

Berelain took out a kerchief and dabbed the corners of her eyes. Well, women always wept at things like weddings. Though Perrin . . . well he felt a little water in his eyes, too. Might have been the sunlight.

"mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkənd," tɑlænvɝ sɛd, "aɪ fɛl ɪn lʌv wɪð jə fəɹ ðə weɪ jə tʃɹiɾəd ðoʊz ɝaʊn jə əz kwin. aɪ sɔ ə wʊmən u tʊk duɾi wɪð nɑt dʒʌst ə sɛns ə ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi, bʌt wɪð ə pæʃən. ivən wən jə dɪdnt noʊ mi fɹəm ɛni ʌðɝ ɡɑɹd, jə tʃɹiɾəd mi wɪð kaɪndnəs ən ɹɪspɛkt. jə tʃɹiɾəd ɔl ə jəɹ sʌbʒɪkts ðət weɪ.

"Morgase Trakand," Tallanvor said, "I fell in love with you for the way you treated those around you as Queen. I saw a woman who took duty with not just a sense of responsibility, but with a passion. Even when you didn't know me from any other guard, you treated me with kindness and respect. You treated all of your subjects that way.

"aɪ lʌv jə fəɹ jəɹ ɡʊdnəs, jəɹ klɛvɝnəs, jəɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ ə maɪn ən wɪl. wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən kʊdn bɹeɪk ju; jə ɪskeɪpt ɪm wən i θɔt jə kəmplitli ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl. ðə moʊs tɛɹəbəl ə taɪɹəns kʊdn bɹeɪk ju, ivən wən i hɛl jə ɪn ɪz pɑm. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ kʊdn bɹeɪk ju. ənʌðɝ wəd bi heɪtfəl ɪn jəɹ pleɪs, ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn θɹu wʌt jə hæd. bʌt jə . . .

"I love you for your goodness, your cleverness, your strength of mind and will. One of the Forsaken couldn't break you; you escaped him when he thought you completely under control. The most terrible of tyrants couldn't break you, even when he held you in his palm. The Shaido couldn't break you. Another would be hateful in your place, if they had been through what you had. But you . . .

juv ɡɹoʊn, ɪnkɹisɪŋli, ɪndə sʌmwʌn tə ædmaɪɹ, tʃɛɹɪʃ, ən ɹɪspɛkt.

you have grown, increasingly, into someone to admire, cherish, and respect.

"aɪ swɛɹ ðəɾ aɪ lʌv ju. ən bɪfɔɹ ðə laɪt, aɪ swɛɹ ðəɾ əl nɛvɝ, nɛvɝ liv ju. aɪ swɛɹ tə tʃɛɹɪʃ jə fɝɛvɝ ən əv jə əz maɪ waɪf. aɪ swɛɹ ɪt, mɔɹɡeɪs, ðoʊ pɑɹɾ ə mi feɪlz tə bɪliv ðət ðɪs kəd ɹɪli bi hæpənɪŋ."

"I swear that I love you. And before the Light, I swear that I will never, never leave you. I swear to cherish you forever and have you as my wife. I swear it, Morgase, though part of me fails to believe that this could really be happening."

ən ðən ðeɪ stʊd laɪk ðæt, stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə wʌn ənʌðɝz aɪz, əz ɪf pɛɹɪn wɝn ivən ðɛɹ.

And then they stood like that, staring into one another's eyes, as if Perrin weren't even there.

hi kɔft. "wɛl, soʊ bi ɪt, ðɛn. jəɹ mɛɹid." ʃəɾ i ɡɪv ædvaɪs? haʊ dɪd wʌn ɡɪv ædvaɪs tə mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkənd, ə kwin wɪð tʃɪlʒɹən ɪz oʊn eɪdʒ? hi dʒʌst ʃɹʌɡd. "ɔf wɪð ju, ðɛn."

He coughed. "Well, so be it, then. You're married." Should he give advice? How did one give advice to Morgase Trakand, a queen with children his own age? He just shrugged. "Off with you, then."

bɪsaɪd hɪm, feɪl smɛld əmjuzd ən feɪnli dɪsæɾəsfaɪd. lini snɔɹɾɪd ət pɛɹɪnz pɝfɔɹməns, bʌɾ ʌʃɝd mɔɹɡeɪs ən tɑlænvɝ əweɪ. ɡɑləd nɑɾəd tə hɪm, ən bɹəleɪn kɝtsid. ðeɪ wɔkt əweɪ, bɹəleɪn ɹɪmɑɹkɪŋ ɑn ðə sʌɾənnəs ʌv ɪt.

Beside him, Faile smelled amused and faintly dissatisfied. Lini snorted at Perrin's performance, but ushered Morgase and Tallanvor away. Galad nodded to him, and Berelain curtsied. They walked away, Berelain remarking on the suddenness of it.

feɪl smaɪld ət hɪm. "jul əv tə ɡɛt bɛɾɝ ət ðæt."

Faile smiled at him. "You'll have to get better at that."

"ðeɪ wɑntəɾ ɪt sɪmpəl."

"They wanted it simple."

"ɛvɹiwʌn sɛz ðæt," feɪl ɹɪplaɪd. "bʌt jə kən əv ən ɛɹ ʌv ɔθɝ- aɪɾi waɪl kipɪŋ θɪŋz bɹif. wɪl tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt. nɛks taɪm jəl də ə mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ dʒɑb."

"Everyone says that," Faile replied. "But you can have an air of author- ity while keeping things brief. We'll talk about it. Next time you'll do a much better job."

nɛks taɪm? hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ əz feɪl tɝn ən wɔk təwɔɹd ðə kæmp.

Next time? He shook his head as Faile turned and walked toward the camp.

"wɛɹ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"Where are you going?" Perrin asked.

"tə beɪvɪn. aɪ nid tə ɹɛkwəzɪʃən səm kæsks ʌv eɪl."

"To Bavin. I need to requisition some casks of ale."

"fɔɹ wʌt?"

"For what?"

"ðə fɛstɪvəɾiz," feɪl sɛd, lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. "sɛɹəmoʊni kən bi skɪmpt ɪf niɾəd. bʌt ðə sɛləbɹeɪʃən ʃəd nɑt bi skɪmpt." ʃi ɡlænst ʌpwɝd. "pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ət taɪmz laɪk ðɪs."

"The festivities," Faile said, looking over her shoulder. "Ceremony can be skimped if needed. But the celebration should not be skimped." She glanced upward. "Particularly at times like this."

pɛɹɪn wɑtʃt əɹ ɡoʊ, dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ ɪndə ði ɪnɔɹməs kæmp. soʊlʒɝz, fɑɹmɝz, kɹæfsmən, il, waɪtkloʊks, ɹɛfjudʒiz. ɔlmoʊst sɛvənti θaʊzən stʃɹɔŋ, dɪspaɪt ðoʊz u hæd lɛft əɹ fɔlən ɪn bæɾəl.

Perrin watched her go, disappearing into the enormous camp. Soldiers, farmers, craftsmen, Aiel, Whitecloaks, refugees. Almost seventy thousand strong, despite those who had left or fallen in battle.

haʊ hæɾ i ɛndəɾ ʌp wɪð sətʃ ə fɔɹs? bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, hid nɛvɝ sin mɔɹ ðən ə θaʊzən pipəl ɡæðɝɾ ɪn wʌn pleɪs.

How had he ended up with such a force? Before leaving the Two Rivers, he'd never seen more than a thousand people gathered in one place.

ðə lɑɹdʒəs pɔɹʃən wɑz ðə ɡɹup ə fɔɹmɝ mɝsənɛɹiz ən ɹɛfjudʒiz u hæd bɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ʌndɝ tɑɹn ən dænɪl. ðə wʊlf ɡɑɹd, ðeɪ wɝ kɔlɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, wʌtɛvɝ ðət wɑz səpoʊz tə min. pɛɹɪn bɪɡæn wɔkɪŋ tə tʃɛk ɑn ðə səplaɪ kɑɹts, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ smɔl stʃɹʌk ɪm sɔfli ɑn ðə bæk ə ðə hɛd.

The largest portion was the group of former mercenaries and refugees who had been training under Tarn and Dannil. The Wolf Guard, they were calling themselves, whatever that was supposed to mean. Perrin began walking to check on the supply carts, but something small struck him softly on the back of the head.

hi fɹoʊz, tɝnɪŋ, skænɪŋ ðə fɔɹəs bɪhaɪn hɪm. tə ðə ɹaɪt, ɪt stʊd bɹaʊn ən dɛd; tə hɪz lɛft, ðə tʃɹi kʌvɝ dwɪndəld. hi kʊdn sin ɛniwʌn.

He froze, turning, scanning the forest behind him. To the right, it stood brown and dead; to his left, the tree cover dwindled. He couldn't seen anyone.

hæv aɪ bɪn pʊʃɪŋ maɪsɛlf tu hɑɹd? hi wʌndɝd, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ əz i tɝn tə kəntɪnju wɔkɪŋ. ɪmædʒənɪŋ θɪŋz ðət -  ənʌðɝ lɪɾəl stʃɹaɪk ɑn ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd. hi spʌn ən kɑt saɪɾ ə sʌmθɪŋ dʒɹɑpɪŋ tə ðə ɡɹæs. fɹaʊnɪŋ, hi nɛl daʊn ən pɪkt ɪɾ ʌp. ən eɪkɔɹn. ənʌðɝ wʌn smækt ɪm ɪn ðə fɔɹhɛd.

Have I been pushing myself too hard? he wondered, rubbing his head as he turned to continue walking. Imagining things that -  Another little strike on the back of his head. He spun and caught sight of something dropping to the grass. Frowning, he knelt down and picked it up. An acorn. Another one smacked him in the forehead.

ɪt hæd kʌm fɹəm ðə fɔɹəst.

It had come from the forest.

pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld ən stʃɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz. wʌn ə ðə kæmps fju tʃɪlʒɹən, pɝhæps? əhɛd wɑz ə lɑɹdʒ oʊk tʃɹi; ðə tʃɹʌŋk θɪk ən waɪɾ ɪnʌf tə haɪd sʌmwʌn. wʌns i ɡɹu kloʊs, hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd.

Perrin growled and strode into the trees. One of the camp's few children, perhaps? Ahead was a large oak tree; the trunk thick and wide enough to hide someone. Once he grew close, he hesitated.

wɑz ðɪs səm kaɪndə tʃɹæp? hi leɪɾ ɪz hæn ɑn ɪz hæmɝ ən ɪntʃt fɔɹwɝd. ðə tʃɹi wɑz daʊnwɪnd, ən i kʊdn kætʃ ðə sɛn ʌv -  ə hæn sʌɾənli dʒʌɾɪd aʊt fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðə tʃɹʌŋk, hoʊldɪŋ ə bɹaʊn sæk. "aɪ kɑɾ ə bædʒɝ," ə fəmɪljɝ vɔɪs sɛd. "wɑn tə lɛɾ ɪt ɡoʊ ɑn ðə vɪlədʒ ɡɹin?"

Was this some kind of trap? He laid his hand on his hammer and inched forward. The tree was downwind, and he couldn't catch the scent of -  A hand suddenly jutted out from behind the trunk, holding a brown sack. "I caught a badger," a familiar voice said. "Want to let it go on the village green?"

pɛɹɪn fɹoʊz, ðən lɛɾ aʊɾ ə bɛloʊɪŋ læf. hi ɹaʊndəd ðə tʃɹiz tʃɹʌŋk ən faʊn ə fɪɡjɝ ɪn ə haɪ-kɑlɝd ɹɛd koʊt - tʃɹɪmd wɪð ɡoʊld - ən faɪn bɹaʊn tʃɹaʊzɝz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə tʃɹiz ɪkspoʊzd ɹuts, ðə sæk skwɝmɪŋ nɪɹ ɪz æŋkəlz. mæt wɑz tʃuɪŋ aɪdli ɑn ə lɔŋ lɛŋθ ə dʒɝk. ən wɔɹ ə bɹɔd-bɹɪm blæk hæt. ə blæk pɑlɹm wɪð ə bɹɔd bleɪɾ ət ðə tɑp lin əɡɛns ðə tʃɹi bɪsaɪd hɪm. wɛɹ hæɾ i ɡɑɾən sətʃ faɪn kloʊðɪŋ? hædn i wʌns kəmpleɪn əbaʊt ɹænd wɛɹɪŋ aʊtfɪts laɪk ðæt?

Perrin froze, then let out a bellowing laugh. He rounded the tree's trunk and found a figure in a high-collared red coat - trimmed with gold - and fine brown trousers sitting on the tree's exposed roots, the sack squirming near his ankles. Mat was chewing idly on a long length of jerk. and wore a broad-brimmed black hat. A black polearm with a broad blade at the top leaned against the tree beside him. Where had he gotten such fine clothing? Hadn't he once complained about Rand wearing outfits like that?

"mæt?" pɛɹɪn æskt, nɪɹli tu stʌn tə spik. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ hɪɹ?"

"Mat?" Perrin asked, nearly too stunned to speak. "What are you doing here?"

"kætʃɪŋ bædʒɝz," mæt sɛd, ʃeɪkɪŋ ðə sæk. "blʌɾi hɑɹd tə du, jə noʊ, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɑn ʃɔɹt noʊɾəs."

"Catching badgers," Mat said, shaking the sack. "Bloody hard to do, you know, particularly on short notice."

ðə sæk ɹʌsəld ən pɛɹɪn hɝɾ ə feɪnt ɡɹaʊl fɹəm ɪnsaɪd. hi kəd smɛl ðət ðəɹ wɑz, ɪndid, sʌmθɪŋ əlaɪv ɪn ðət sæk. "ju æktʃəli  kɑt wʌn?"

The sack rustled and Perrin heard a faint growl from inside. He could smell that there was, indeed, something alive in that sack. "You actually caught one?"

"kɔl mi nɔstælʒɪk."

"Call me nostalgic."

pɛɹɪn dɪdnt noʊ wɛðɝ tə tʃæstaɪz mæt əɹ læf əɾ ɪm - ðət pɝtɪkjəlɝ mɪks ʌv ɪmoʊʃənz wɑz kɑmən wən mæt wɑz ɝaʊnd. noʊ kʌlɝz, fɔɹtʃənətli, spʌn ɪn pɛɹɪnz aɪz naʊ ðət ðeɪ wɝ nɪɹ wʌn ənʌðɝ. laɪt, ðət wʊɾə bɪn kənfjuzɪŋ. pɛɹɪn dɪd fil ə . . . taɪtnəs, haʊɛvɝ.

Perrin didn't know whether to chastise Mat or laugh at him - that particular mix of emotions was common when Mat was around. No colors, fortunately, spun in Perrin's eyes now that they were near one another. Light, that would have been confusing. Perrin did feel a . . . Tightness, however.

ðə lɔŋ-lɪmd mæn smaɪld, sɛɾɪŋ ðə sæk daʊn ən stændɪŋ, ɔfɝɪŋ ə hænd. pɛɹɪn tʊk ɪt, bʌt pʊl mæt ɪndə ə hɑɹɾi hʌɡ.

The long-limbed man smiled, setting the sack down and standing, offering a hand. Perrin took it, but pulled Mat into a hearty hug.

"laɪt, mæt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɪt simz laɪk ɪts bɪn fɝɛvɝ!"

"Light, Mat," Perrin said. "It seems like its been forever!"

"ə laɪftaɪm," mæt sɛd. "meɪbi tu. aɪ luz kaʊnt. ɛniweɪ, keɪɛmlɪn ɪz ɔlɹɛɾi ɪz bʌzɪŋ wɪð nuz ə jəɹ ɝaɪvəl. fɪɡjɝd ði oʊnli weɪ tə ɡɛɾ ɪn ə wɝɾ ʌv wɛlkəm wɑz tə slɪp θɹu ðət ɡeɪtweɪ ən faɪn jə bɪfɔɹ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls." mæt pɪkt ʌp ɪz spɪɹ ən ɹɛstəɾ ɪɾ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, bleɪd tə ðə bæk.

"A lifetime," Mat said. "Maybe two. I lose count. Anyway, Caemlyn is already is buzzing with news of your arrival. Figured the only way to get in a word of welcome was to slip through that gateway and find you before everyone else." Mat picked up his spear and rested it on his shoulder, blade to the back.

"wʌɾ əv jə bɪn duɪŋ? wɛɹ əv jə bɪn? ɪz tɑm wɪð ju? wʌɾ əbaʊt nɪneɪiv?"

"What have you been doing? Where have you been? Is Thom with you? What about Nynaeve?"

"soʊ mɛni kwɛstʃənz," mæt sɛd. "haʊ seɪf ɪz ðɪs kæmp ə jʊɹz?"

"So many questions," Mat said. "How safe is this camp of yours?"

"seɪf əz ɛni pleɪs."

"Safe as any place."

"nɑt seɪf ɪnʌf," mæt ɡɹu sɑləm. "lʊk, pɛɹɪn, wiv ɡɑt səm maɪɾi deɪnʒɝəs foʊks æftɝ ʌs. aɪ keɪm kəz aɪ wɑntəd tə wɔɹn jə tə teɪk ɛkstʃɹə kɛɹ. əsæsənz wɪl faɪn jə sun ɪnʌf, ən jud bɛs bi ɹɛɾi fəɹ ðɛm. wi nid tə kætʃ ʌp. bʌɾ aɪ doʊnt wɑnə də ɪt hɪɹ."

"Not safe enough," Mat grew solemn. "Look, Perrin, we've got some mighty dangerous folks after us. I came because I wanted to warn you to take extra care. Assassins will find you soon enough, and you'd best be ready for them. We need to catch up. But I don't want to do it here."

"wɛɹ, ðɛn?"

"Where, then?"

"mit mi ɪn ən ɪn kɔl ðə hæpi θɹɔŋ, ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. oʊ, ən ɪf jə doʊn maɪnd, əl bi wɑntɪŋ tə bɑɹoʊ wʌn ə ðoʊz blæk-koʊɾəd fɛloʊz ə jʊɹz fəɹ ə fju ʃeɪks. niɾ ə ɡeɪtweɪ."

"Meet me in an inn called The Happy Throng, in Caemlyn. Oh, and if you don't mind, I'll be wanting to borrow one of those black-coated fellows of yours for a few shakes. Need a gateway."

"fɔɹ wʌt pɝpəs?"

"For what purpose?"

"aɪl ɪkspleɪn. bʌt leɪɾɝ." mæt tɪpt ɪz hæt, tɝnɪŋ tə dʒɑɡ bæk təwɔɹd ðə stɪl-oʊpən ɡeɪtweɪ tə keɪɛmlɪn. "ɹɪli," hi sɛd, tɝnɪŋ ən dʒɑmɡ bækwɝd fəɹ ə moʊmənt.

"I'll explain. But later." Mat tipped his hat, turning to jog back toward the still-open gateway to Caemlyn. "Really," he said, turning and joggmg backward for a moment.

"bi kɛɹfəl, pɛɹɪn." wɪð ti hæɾ i dʌk pæst ə fju ɹɛfjudʒiz ən θtʌ ðə ɡeɪtweɪ.

"Be careful, Perrin." With t hat he ducked past a few refugees and thtough the gateway.

haʊ hæɾ i ɡɑɾən pæst ɡɹeɪɾi? laɪt! pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd tə hɪmsɛlf, ðən bɛn tə əntaɪ ðə sæk ən iz ðə pʊɹ bædʒɝ mæt hæd kæptʃɝd.

How had he gotten past Grady? Light! Perrin shook his head to himself, then bent to untie the sack and ease the poor badger Mat had captured.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾifaɪv


CHAPTER 45

eɪ ɹiunjən


A Reunion

ɪleɪn woʊk ɪn əɹ bɛd, blɪɹi-aɪd. "ɛɡwin?" ʃi sɛd, dɪsɔɹiɛntɪd. "wʌt?" ðə læs mɛmɹiz ə ðə dʒɹim wɝ dɪzɔlvɪŋ laɪk hʌni kənsum baɪ wɔɹm ti, bʌɾ ɛɡwin ɛs wɝdz ɹɪmeɪn fɝm ɪn ɪleɪnz maɪnd. ðə sɝpən əz fɔlən, ɛɡwin hæd sɛnt. jəɹ bɹʌðɝz ɹɪtɝn wɑz taɪmli.

Elayne woke in her bed, bleary-eyed. "Egwene?" she said, disoriented. "What?" The last memories of the dream were dissolving like honey consumed by warm tea, but Egwene s words remained firm in Elayne's mind. The serpent has fallen, Egwene had sent. Your brother's return was timely.

ɪleɪn sæɾ ʌp, filɪŋ ə sɝdʒ ə ɹɪlif. ʃi hæd spɛn ði ɪntaɪɝ naɪt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tʃænəl ɪnʌf tə meɪk əɹ dʒɹim tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɝk, tə noʊ əveɪl. wən ʃid faʊn aʊt ðət bɝdʒɪt hæd tɝn əweɪ ɡɔɪn - waɪl ɪleɪn sæɾ ɪnsaɪd, fjʊɹiəs bʌɾ əneɪbəl tə ətɛn ðə miɾɪŋ wɪð ɛɡwin -  ʃid bɪn lɪvɪd.

Elayne sat up, feeling a surge of relief. She had spent the entire night trying to channel enough to make her dream ter'angreal work, to no avail. When she'd found out that Birgitte had turned away Gawyn - while Elayne sat inside, furious but unable to attend the meeting with Egwene -  she'd been livid.

wɛl, mɛsænə hæd bɪn dɪfiɾəd, ɪt simd. ən wʌt wɑz ðəɾ əbaʊɾ əɹ bɹʌðɝ? ʃi smaɪld.

Well, Mesaana had been defeated, it seemed. And what was that about her brother? She smiled.

pɝhæps i ən ɛɡwin hæd wɝkt aʊt ðɛɹ pɹɑbləmz.

Perhaps he and Egwene had worked out their problems.

mɔɹnɪŋ laɪt pik θɹu ðə dʒɹeɪps. ɪleɪn sæt bæk, filɪŋ ðə paʊɝfəl wɔɹmθ θɹu ðə bɑnd wɪð ɹænd ðət hæɾ əpɪɹd ðɛɹ. laɪt, bʌt ðət wɑz ə wʌndɝfəl sɛnseɪʃən. ðə moʊmənt ʃid bɪɡʌn filɪŋ ɪt, ðə klaʊd kʌvɝ ɝaʊn ændɝ hæd bɹoʊkən.

Morning light peeked through the drapes. Elayne sat back, feeling the powerful warmth through the bond with Rand that had appeared there. Light, but that was a wonderful sensation. The moment she'd begun feeling it, the cloud cover around Andor had broken.

ɪt hæd bɪn əbaʊɾ ə wik sɪns ðə tɛstɪŋ ə ðə dʒɹæɡənz, ən ʃid pʊɾ ɔl ə ðə bɛlfndɝz ɪn əɹ neɪʃən tə wɝk ɑn kɹieɪɾɪŋ ðɛm. ðiz deɪz, wʌn kəd hɪɹ ə stɛɾi saʊn ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, ɹɪpiɾɪŋ bumz əz mɛmbɝz əɹ ðə bæn tʃɹeɪnd wɪð ðə wɛpənz ɪn ðə hɪlz aʊtsaɪɾ ə ðə sɪɾi. soʊ fɑɹ, ʃi hæd lɛɾ oʊnli ə fju ʌv ðə wɛpənz bi juz fəɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ; ðə dɪfɹən timz ɹoʊteɪɾɪd pɹæktəsɪŋ ɑn ðɛm.

It had been about a week since the testing of the dragons, and she'd put all of the bellfounders in her nation to work on creating them. These days, one could hear a steady sound in Caemlyn, repeating booms as members or the Band trained with the weapons in the hills outside of the city. So far, she had let only a few of the weapons be used for training; the different teams rotated practicing on them.

ʃid ɡæðɝd ðə lɑɹdʒɝ nʌmbɝ ɪn ə sikɹət wɛɹhaʊs ɪnsaɪd keɪɛmlɪn fəɹ seɪfkipɪŋ.

She'd gathered the larger number in a secret warehouse inside Caemlyn for safekeeping.

ʃi θɔɾ əbaʊt ðə dʒɹim sɛndɪŋ əɡɛn. ʃi hʌŋɡɝd fəɹ spɪsɪfɪks. wɛl, ɛɡwin wəd pɹɑbli sɛn ə mɛsənʒɝ baɪ ɡeɪtweɪ ɪvɛntʃəwəli.

She thought about the dream sending again. She hungered for specifics. Well, Egwene would probably send a messenger by gateway eventually.

ðə dɔɹ kɹækt, ən mɛlfən lʊkt ɪn. "jɔɹ mædʒəsti?" ðə ʃɔɹt, ɹaʊnd-feɪst wʊmən æskt.

The door cracked, and Melfane looked in. "Your Majesty?" the short, round-faced woman asked.

"ɪz ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɔl ɹaɪt? aɪ θɔɾ aɪ hɝɾ ə kɹaɪ ʌv peɪn." ɛvɝ sɪns lɪftɪŋ əɹ bæn ɑn ɪleɪn ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ ɪn bɛd, ðə mɪdwaɪf hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə slip ɪn ði æntətʃæmbɝ aʊtsaɪɾ ɪleɪnz bɛdʒɹum tə kip ə kɛɹfəl wɑtʃ ɑn hɝ.

"Is everything all right? I thought I heard a cry of pain." Ever since lifting her ban on Elayne remaining in bed, the midwife had decided to sleep in the antechamber outside Elayne's bedroom to keep a careful watch on her.

"ðæt wɑz ən ɛkskləmeɪʃən ə dʒɔɪ, mɛlfən," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ə ɡɹiɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə wʌndɝfəl mɔɹnɪŋ ðəɾ əz kʌm tə ʌs."

"That was an exclamation of joy, Melfane," Elayne said. "A greeting for the wonderful morning that has come to us."

mɛlfən fɹaʊnd. ɪleɪn tʃɹaɪd tə æk tʃɪɹfəl ɝaʊn ðə wʊmən, tə pɝsweɪɾ əɹ ðət mɔɹ bɛd ɹɛst wɑznt niɾəd, bʌt pɝhæps ðət læs pɑɹt hæd bɪn ə lɪɾəl mʌtʃ. ɪleɪn kʊdn əfɔɹd tə əpɪɹ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ fɔɹsɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə bi hæpi. ivən ɪf ʃi wɑz. ɪnsʌfɝəbəl wʊmən.

Melfane frowned. Elayne tried to act cheerful around the woman, to persuade her that more bed rest wasn't needed, but perhaps that last part had been a little much. Elayne couldn't afford to appear as if she were forcing herself to be happy. Even if she was. Insufferable woman.

mɛlfən wɔkt ɪn ən pʊld oʊpən ðə dʒɹeɪps - sʌnlaɪt wɑz ɡʊd fəɹ ə wʊmən wɪð tʃaɪld, ʃiɾ ɪkspleɪnd. pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪleɪnz tʃɹitmən leɪtli hæd bɪn tə sɪɾ ɪn əɹ bɛd wɪð ðə kʌvɝz dʒɹɔn bæk, lɛɾɪŋ ðə spɹɪŋ sʌnlaɪt beɪk əɹ skɪn. əz mɛlfən muvd, ɪleɪn fɛlt ə lɪɾəl tʃɹɛmbəl fɹəm ɪnsaɪd.

Melfane walked in and pulled open the drapes - sunlight was good for a woman with child, she'd explained. Part of Elayne's treatment lately had been to sit in her bed with the covers drawn back, letting the spring sunlight bake her skin. As Melfane moved, Elayne felt a little tremble from inside.

"oʊ! ðəɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ. ðəɹ kɪkɪŋ, mɛlfən! kʌm fil!"

"Oh! There was another. They're kicking, Melfane! Come feel!"

"aɪ woʊn bi eɪbəl tə fil ɪt jɛt, jəɹ mædʒəsti. nɑɾ əntɪl ðəɹ stʃɹɔŋɝ." ʃi bɪɡæn ðə nɔɹməl deɪli ɹutin. lɪsən tə ɪleɪnz hɑɹtbit, ðən lɪsən fəɹ ðə beɪbz. mɛlfən stɪl wʊdn bɪliv ðəɹ wɝ twɪnz. æftɝ ðæt, ʃi ɪnspɛktɪɾ ən pɹɑɾɪd ɪleɪn, pɝfɔɹmɪŋ ɔl ə ðə tɛsts ɪn əɹ sikɹəɾɪv lɪst ʌv ənɔɪɪŋ ən ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ θɪŋz tə də tə wɪmən.

"I won't be able to feel it yet, Your Majesty. Not until they're stronger." She began the normal daily routine. Listen to Elayne's heartbeat, then listen for the babe's. Melfane still wouldn't believe there were twins. After that, she inspected and prodded Elayne, performing all of the tests in her secretive list of annoying and embarrassing things to do to women.

faɪnəli, mɛlfən pleɪs hænz ɑn hɪps, ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ ɪleɪn, hu wɑz duɪŋ ʌp əɹ naɪtɡaʊn. "aɪ θɪŋk juv bɪn stʃɹeɪnɪŋ jɝsɛlf tu mʌtʃ leɪtli. aɪ wɑn jə tə bi sɝɾən tə teɪk pɹɑpɝ ɹɛst. maɪ kʌzən tɛsəz dɔɾɝ hæɾ ə tʃaɪl nɑt tu jɪɹz əɡoʊ hu wɑz bɝθɛd bɛɹli bɹiðɪŋ. laɪt bi θæŋk ðət ðə tʃaɪl sɝvaɪvd, bʌt ʃi hæd bɪn wɝkɪŋ ðə filz leɪt θɹu ðə deɪ bɪfɔɹ ən nɑt teɪkɪŋ pɹɑpɝ milz. ɪmædʒən! teɪk kɛɹ ə jɝsɛlf, maɪ kwin. jəɹ beɪbiz wɪl bi θæŋkfəl fəɹ ɪt."

Finally, Melfane placed hands on hips, regarding Elayne, who was doing up her nightgown. "I think you've been straining yourself too much lately. I want you to be certain to take proper rest. My cousin Tess's daughter had a child not two years ago who was birthed barely breathing. Light be thanked that the child survived, but she had been working the fields late through the day before and not taking proper meals. Imagine! Take care of yourself, my Queen. Your babies will be thankful for it."

ɪleɪn nɑɾəd, ɹɪlæksɪŋ. "weɪt!" ʃi sɛd, sɪɾɪŋ ʌp. "beɪbiz?"

Elayne nodded, relaxing. "Wait!" she said, sitting up. "Babies?"

"jɛs," mɛlfən sɛd, wɔkɪŋ tə ðə dɔɹ. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ tu hɑɹtbits ɪn jəɹ wum, ʃʊɹ əz aɪ hæv tu ɑɹmz. doʊnt noʊ haʊ jə nu ɪt."

"Yes," Melfane said, walking to the door. "There are two heartbeats in your womb, sure as I have two arms. Don't know how you knew it."

"ju hɝd ðə hɑɹtbits!" ɪleɪn ɪkskleɪmd, ɪleɪɾəd. jɛs, ðəɹ ðɛɹ, ʃʊɹ əz ðə sʌn."

"You heard the heartbeats!" Elayne exclaimed, elated. Yes, they're there, sure as the sun."

mɛlfən ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ən lɛft, sɛndɪŋ ɪn nɛɹɪs ən sɛfæni tə dʒɹɛs əɹ ən bɹʌʃ əɹ hɛɹ.

Melfane shook her head and left, sending in Naris and Sephanie to dress her and brush her hair.

ɪleɪn ɛndʒjʊɹd ðə pɹɑsɛs ɪn ə steɪɾ ʌv əmeɪzmənt. mɛlfən bɪlivd! ʃi kʊdn stɑp hɝsɛlf fɹəm smaɪlɪŋ.

Elayne endured the process in a state of amazement. Melfane believed! She couldn't stop herself from smiling.

ən aʊɝ leɪɾɝ, ʃi sɛɾəld ɪndə hɝ smɔl sɪɾɪŋ ɹum, wɪndoʊz ɔl θɹoʊn oʊpən tə lɛɾ ɪn ðə sʌnlaɪt, sɪpɪŋ wɔɹm ɡoʊts mɪlk. mæstɝ nɔɹi ɛntɝɾ ɑn lɔŋ spɪnli lɛɡz, tʌfs ə hɛɹ stɪkɪŋ ʌp bɪhaɪn ðə bæks ə hɪz ɪɹz, feɪs lɔŋ ən pikt, lɛðɝ foʊldɝ ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹm i wɑz əkʌmpənid baɪ daɪɛlɪn, hu dɪdn juʒəwəli ətɛn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ mit-ɪŋ. ɪleɪn ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ ət ðə wʊmən.

An hour later, she settled into her small sitting room, windows all thrown open to let in the sunlight, sipping warm goat's milk. Master Norry entered on long spindly legs, tufts of hair sticking up behind the backs of his ears, face long and peaked, leather folder under his arm He was accompanied by Dyelin, who didn't usually attend the morning meet-ing. Elayne raised an eyebrow at the woman.

"aɪ hæv ði ɪnfɝmeɪʃən jə ɹɪkwɛstɪd, ɪleɪn," daɪɛlɪn sɛd, pɔɹɪŋ hɝsɛlf səm mɔɹnɪŋ ti.

"I have the information you requested, Elayne," Dyelin said, pouring herself some morning tea.

tədeɪ ɪt wɑz klaʊdbɛɹi. "aɪ hɪɹ mɛlfən hɝd hɑɹtbits?"

Today it was cloudberry. "I hear Melfane heard heartbeats?"

"ʃi dɪɾ ɪndid."

"She did indeed."

"maɪ kənɡɹætʃəleɪʃənz, jəɹ mædʒəsti," mæstɝ nɔɹi sɛd. hi oʊpən ɪz foʊldɝ ən bɪɡæn ɝeɪnʒɪŋ ɪz peɪpɝz ɑn ðə tɔl, nɛɹoʊ teɪbəl bɪsaɪɾ əɹ tʃɛɹ. hi ɹɛɹli sæt daʊn ɪn ɪleɪn ɛs kʌmpəni. daɪɛlɪn tʊk wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ kʌmftəɹbəl tʃɛɹz bɪsaɪd ðə hɑɹθ.

"My congratulations, Your Majesty," Master Norry said. He opened his folder and began arranging his papers on the tall, narrow table beside her chair. He rarely sat down in Elayne s company. Dyelin took one of the other comfortable chairs beside the hearth.

wʌɾ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən hæɾ ɪleɪn ɹɪkwɛstɪɾ ə ðə wʊmən? ʃi dɪdn ɹikɔl æskɪŋ fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ spəsɪfɪk. ðə kwɛstʃən dɪstʃɹæktəɾ əɹ əz nɔɹi wɛn oʊvɝ ðə deɪli ɹɪpɔɹts ɑn ðə vɛɹiəs ɑɹmiz ɪn ði ɛɹiə. ðəɹ wɑz ə lɪst ʌv ɔltɝkeɪʃənz bɪtwin sɛl-sɔɹd ɡɹups.

What information had Elayne requested of the woman? She didn't recall asking for anything specific. The question distracted her as Norry went over the daily reports on the various armies in the area. There was a list of altercations between sell-sword groups.

hi ɔlsoʊ tɔkt ə fud pɹɑbləmz. dɪspaɪt ðə kɪnswɪmən meɪkɪŋ ɡeɪtweɪz tə ɹændz lænz tə ðə saʊθ fəɹ səplaɪ - ən dɪspaɪt ðə kæʃɪz ʌv ʌnɪkspɛktɪd fud stɔɹz ðət hæd bɪn dɪskʌvɝɾ ɪn ðə sɪɾi - keɪɛmlɪn wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ loʊ.

He also talked of food problems. Despite the Kinswomen making gateways to Rand's lands to the south for supply - and despite the caches of unexpected food stores that had been discovered in the city - Caemlyn was running low.

"faɪnəli, əz fəɹ aʊɝ, ʌm, ɡɛsts," nɔɹi sɛd. "mɛsənʒɝz əv ɝaɪvd wɪð ði æntɪsəpeɪɾəd ɹɪspɑnsɪz."

"Finally, as for our, um, guests," Norry said. "Messengers have arrived with the anticipated responses."

nʌn ə ðə θɹi haʊsəz huz noʊbɪləɾi hæd bɪn kæptʃɝd kəɾ əfɔɹd tə peɪ ɹænsəm. wʌns ði ɑɝɔn, sɑɝən ən mɑɹn ɪsteɪts hæd bɪn əmʌŋ ðə moʊs pɹədʌktɪv ən ɪkstɛnsɪv ɪn ændɝ - ən naʊ ðeɪ wɝ dɛstətut, ðɛɹ kɑfɝz dʒɹaɪ, ðɛɹ filz bæɹən. ən ɪleɪn hæd lɛf tu ʌv əm wɪθaʊt liɾɝʃɪp. laɪt, wʌɾ ə mɛs!

None of the three Houses whose nobility had been captured could afford to pay ransom. Once the Arawn, Sarand and Marne estates had been among the most productive and extensive in Andor - and now they were destitute, their coffers dry, their fields barren. And Elayne had left two of them without leadership. Light, what a mess!

nɔɹi muvd ɑn. ʃi hæɾ ə lɛɾɝ fɹəm tælmɑnz, əɡɹiɪŋ tə muv sɛvɹəl kʌmpəniz ə soʊlʒɝz fɹəm ðə bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hæn tə kɛɹhin. ʃi ɔɹɾɝd nɔɹi tə sɛn ɪm ə ɹɪt wɪð əɹ sil, ɔθɝaɪzɪŋ ðə soʊlʒɝz tə "lɛn eɪd ɹɪstɔɹɪŋ ɔɹɾɝ." ðət wɑz, ʌv kɔɹs, nɑnsɛns. noʊ ɔɹɾɝ niɾəd tə bi ɹɪstɔɹd. bʌɾ ɪf ɪleɪn wɑz ɛvɝ gɑnə muv fəɹ ðə sʌn θɹoʊn, ʃid nid tə meɪk səm pɹɪlɪmənɛɹi muvz ɪn ðət dɝɛkʃən.

Norry moved on. She had a letter from Talmanes, agreeing to move several companies of soldiers from the Band of the Red Hand to Cairhien. She ordered Norry to send him a writ with her seal, authorizing the soldiers to "lend aid restoring order." That was, of course, nonsense. No order needed to be restored. But if Elayne was ever going to move for the Sun Throne, she'd need to make some preliminary moves in that direction.

"ðɪs ɪz wʌɾ aɪ wɑntəd tə dɪskʌs, ɪleɪn," daɪɛlɪn sɛɾ əz nɔɹi bɪɡæn tə pæk ʌp ɪz peɪpɝz, ɝeɪnʒɪŋ itʃ wʌn wɪð mətɪkjələs kɛɹ. laɪt hɛlp əm ɪf wʌn ə ðoʊz pɹɛʃəs peɪdʒəz tɔɹ əɹ ɡɑɾ ə steɪn ɑn ɪt.

"This is what I wanted to discuss, Elayne," Dyelin said as Norry began to pack up his papers, arranging each one with meticulous care. Light help them if one of those precious pages tore or got a stain on it.

"ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən ɪn kɛɹhin ɪz . . . kɑmplɛks," daɪɛlɪn sɛd.

"The situation in Cairhien is . . . complex," Dyelin said.

'"wɛn ɪz ɪt nɑt?" ɪleɪn æskt wɪð ə saɪ. "juv ɪnfɝmeɪʃən ɑn ðə pəlɪɾəkəl klaɪmət ðɛɹ?"

'"When is it not?" Elayne asked with a sigh. "You've information on the political climate there?"

"ɪts ə mɛs," daɪɛlɪn sɛd sɪmpli. "wi nid tə tɔk əbaʊt haʊ jəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ mænədʒ ðə meɪntənəns ə tu neɪʃənz, wʌn ɪn æbsəns."

"It's a mess," Dyelin said simply. "We need to talk about how you're going manage the maintenance of two nations, one in absence."

"wi hæv ɡeɪtweɪz," ɪleɪn sɛd.

"We have gateways," Elayne said.

"tʃɹu. bʌt jə mʌs tə faɪn ə weɪ tə teɪk ðə sʌn θɹoʊn wɪθaʊt lɛɾɪŋ ɪt lʊk əz ɪf ændɝ ɪz sʌbsumɪŋ kɛɹhin. ðə noʊbɪləɾi ðəɹ maɪɾ æksɛp jə əz ðɛɹ kwin, bʌɾ oʊnli ɪf ðeɪ si ðɛmsɛlvz əz ikwəlz tə ði ændɔɹənz. ʌðɝwaɪz, ðə moʊmən ðəɹ aʊɾ ə jəɹ saɪt, ðə skimz wɪl ɡɹoʊ laɪk jist ɪn ə wɔɹm boʊl ʌv wɔɾɝ."

"True. But you must to find a way to take the Sun Throne without letting it look as if Andor is subsuming Cairhien. The nobility there might accept you as their queen, but only if they see themselves as equals to the Andorans. Otherwise, the moment they're out of your sight, the schemes will grow like yeast in a warm bowl of water."

"ðeɪ wɪl bi ði ikwəlz ə ði ændɔɹənz," ɪleɪn sɛd.

"They will be the equals of the Andorans," Elayne said.

"ðeɪ woʊn si ɪt ðət weɪ ɪf jə ɡoʊ ɪn wɪð jəɹ ɑɹmiz," daɪɛlɪn sɛd. "ðə kɛɹhinɪn ɑɹ ə pɹaʊd pipəl. tə θɪŋk ə ðɛmsɛlvz lɪvɪŋ kɑŋkɝd bɪniθ ændɝz kɹaʊn. . . ."

"They won't see it that way if you go in with your armies," Dyelin said. "The Cairhienin are a proud people. To think of themselves living conquered beneath Andor's Crown. . . ."

"ðeɪ lɪv bɪniθ ɹændz paʊɝ."

"They lived beneath Rand's power."

"wɪð ɔl du ɹɪspɛkt, ɪleɪn," daɪɛlɪn sɛd. "hi ɪz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. jə ɑɹ nɑt."

"With all due respect, Elayne," Dyelin said. "He is the Dragon Reborn. You are not."

ɪleɪn fɹaʊnd, bʌt haʊ dɪd wʌn ɑɹɡju wɪð ðæt?

Elayne frowned, but how did one argue with that?

mæstɝ nɔɹi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. "jɔɹ mædʒəsti, leɪɾi daɪɛlɪnz ædvaɪs ɪz nɑt bɔɹn ʌv aɪɾəl spɛkjəleɪʃən. aɪ, ʌm, hæv hɝd θɪŋz. noʊɪŋ ə jəɹ ɪntʃɹəsts ɪn kɛɹhin. . . ."

Master Norry cleared his throat. "Your Majesty, Lady Dyelin's advice is not born of idle speculation. I, um, have heard things. Knowing of your interests in Cairhien. . . ."

hid bɪn ɡɹoʊɪŋ bɛɾɝ ət ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪnfɔɹməns. ʃid tɝn ɪm ɪndə ə ɹɛɡjəlɝ spaɪmæstɝ jɛt!

He'd been growing better at gathering informants. She'd turn him into a regular spymaster yet!

"jɔɹ mædʒəsti," nɔɹi kəntɪnjud, vɔɪs loʊɝ. "ɹumɝz ɑɹ kleɪmɪŋ ðət jəl sun kʌm tə siz ðə sʌn θɹoʊn. ðəɹ ɪz ɔlɹɛɾi tɔk ə ɹɪbɛljən əɡɛns ju. aɪɾəl spɛkjəleɪʃən, aɪm sɝɾən, bʌt .

"Your Majesty," Norry continued, voice lower. "Rumors are claiming that you'll soon come to seize the Sun Throne. There is already talk of rebellion against you. Idle speculation, I'm certain, but .

. ."

. ."

"ðə kɛɹhinɪn kəd si ɹænd ælθɹ əz ən ɛmpɝɝ," daɪɛlɪn sɛd. "nɑɾ ə fɔɹən kɪŋ. ðəɾ ɪz ə dɪfɹən θɪŋ."

"The Cairhienin could see Rand al'Thor as an emperor," Dyelin said. "Not a foreign king. That is a different thing."

"wɛl, wi doʊnt nid tə muv ɑɹmiz tə teɪk ðə sʌn θɹoʊn," ɪleɪn sɛd θɔtfəli.

"Well, we don't need to move armies to take the Sun Throne," Elayne said thoughtfully.

aɪ. . . æm nɑt sɝɾən ə ðæt, jəɹ mædʒəsti," nɔɹi sɛd. "ðə ɹumɝz ɑɹ kwaɪt pɝveɪsɪv. ɪt simz ðəɾ əz sun əz ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ənaʊns ðə θɹoʊn wɑz tə bi jʊɹz, səm ɛləməns ɪn ðə neɪʃən bɪɡæn wɝkɪŋ -  vɛɹi sʌɾəli - tə pɹɪvɛn ɪt fɹəm hæpənɪŋ. kəz ə ðiz ɹumɝz, mɛni pipəl wɝi ðət jəl siz ðə taɪɾəlz ə ðə kɛɹhinɪn noʊbɪləɾi ən ɡɪv əm tə ændɔɹənz ɪnstɛd.

I. . . am not certain of that, Your Majesty," Norry said. "The rumors are quite pervasive. It seems that as soon as the Lord Dragon announced the throne was to be yours, some elements in the nation began working -  very subtly - to prevent it from happening. Because of these rumors, many people worry that you will seize the titles of the Cairhienin nobility and give them to Andorans instead.

ʌðɝz kleɪm jəl ɹɛləɡeɪɾ ɛni kɛɹhinɪn tə ə sɛkəndɛɹi steɪɾ ə sɪɾɪzənʃɪp."

Others claim you will relegate any Cairhienin to a secondary state of citizenship."

"nɑnsɛns," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ðæts pleɪn ɹɪdɪkjələs!"

"Nonsense," Elayne said. "That's plain ridiculous!"

'ɑbviəsli," nɔɹi sɛd. "bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛni ɹumɝz. ðeɪ də tɛn tə, ʌm, ɡɹoʊ laɪk tʃoʊkɪvinz.

'Obviously," Norry said. "But there are many rumors. They do tend to, um, grow like chokevines.

ðə sɛntəmən ɪz stʃɹɔŋ."

The sentiment is strong."

ɪleɪn ɡɹɪɾɪd əɹ tiθ. ðə wɝld wɑz fæs kʌmɪŋ tə bi ə pleɪs fəɹ ðoʊz wɪð stʃɹɔŋ əlaɪənsəz, nɪt təɡɛðɝ wɪð bɑnz ə boʊθ blʌɾ ən peɪpɝ. ʃi hæd ðə bɛs tʃæns ə junaɪɾɪŋ kɛɹhin ən ændɝ ðəɾ ɛni kwin hæd hæɾ ɪn dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz. "du wi noʊ hu hæz bɪn stɑɹɾɪŋ ðə ɹumɝz?

Elayne gritted her teeth. The world was fast coming to be a place for those with strong alliances, knit together with bonds of both blood and paper. She had the best chance of uniting Cairhien and Andor that any queen had had in generations. "Do we know who has been starting the rumors?

"ðæɾ əz bɪn vɛɹi dɪfəkəl tə æsɝteɪn, maɪ leɪɾif nɔɹi sɛd.

"That has been very difficult to ascertain, my Ladyf Norry said.

"hu stænz tə bɛnəfɪt moʊst?" ɪleɪn æskt. "ðæts ðə fɝs pleɪs wi ʃəd lʊk fəɹ ðə sɔɹs."

"Who stands to benefit most?" Elayne asked. "That's the first place we should look for the source."

nɔɹi ɡlænst ət daɪɛlɪn.

Norry glanced at Dyelin.

"ɛni nʌmbɝ ə pipəl kəd bɛnəfɪt," daɪɛlɪn sɛd, stɝɪŋ əɹ ti "aɪ wəd ɡɛs ðət ðoʊz wɪð ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst tʃæns ə teɪkɪŋ ðə θɹoʊn ðɛmsɛlvz wəd bɛnəfɪt ðə moʊst."

"Any number of people could benefit," Dyelin said, stirring her tea "I would guess that those with the greatest chance of taking the throne themselves would benefit the most."

"ðoʊz u ɹɪzɪstɪd ɹænd," ɪleɪn ɡɛst.

"Those who resisted Rand," Elayne guessed.

"pɝhæps," daɪɛlɪn sɛd. "ɔɹ pɝhæps nɑt. ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst ə ðə ɹɪbɛljəs ɛləməns ɹəsivd ɡɹeɪɾ ətɛnʃən fɹəm ðə dʒɹæɡən, ən mɛni ʌv əm wɝ iðɝ kənvɝɾɪd əɹ bɹoʊkən. soʊ hɪz əlaɪz - ðoʊz i tʃɹʌstɪd moʊst, əɹ u pɹəfɛst ɡɹeɪɾəst əlidʒəns tə hɪm - ɑɹ ðə wʌnz wi ʃəd pɹɑbli səspɛkt.

"Perhaps," Dyelin said. "Or perhaps not. The strongest of the rebellious elements received great attention from the Dragon, and many of them were either converted or broken. So his allies - those he trusted most, or who professed greatest allegiance to him - are the ones we should probably suspect.

ðɪs ɪz kɛɹhin, æftɝ ɔl."

This is Cairhien, after all."

deɪz deɪ mɑɹ. jɛs, ɪt wəd meɪk sɛns fəɹ ɹændz ælaɪz tə ɹɪzɪst əɹ əsɛn tə ðə θɹoʊn. ðoʊz u hæd bɪn feɪvɝd baɪ ɹænd wəd bi feɪvɝd fəɹ ðə θɹoʊn, ʃəɾ ɪleɪn pɹuv ɪnkeɪpəbəl.

Daes Dae mar. Yes, it would make sense for Rand's allies to resist her ascent to the throne. Those who had been favored by Rand would be favored for the throne, should Elayne prove incapable.

haʊɛvɝ, ðoʊz pipəl wəɾ ɔlsoʊ hæv ʌndɝmaɪn ðɛɹ tʃænsəz baɪ pɹəfɛsɪŋ əlidʒəns tə ə fɔɹən liɾɝ.

However, those people would also have undermined their chances by professing allegiance to a foreign leader.

"aɪ ʃəd θɪŋk," ɪleɪn sɛd θɔtfəli, "ðæt ðoʊz ɪn ðə bɛs pəzɪʃən fəɹ ðə θɹoʊn wəd bi ðoʊz ɪn ðə mɪɾəl. ɛniwʌn u dɪdn əpoʊz ɹænd, ən soʊ dɪdn ɝn ɪz aɪɹ. bʌɾ ɔlsoʊ sʌmwʌn u dɪdn səpɔɹɾ ɪm tu hoʊlhɑɹɾɪdli - sʌmwʌn u kən bi vjuɾ əz ə peɪtʃɹiəɾ u kən ɹɪlʌktənli stɛp ɪn ən teɪk paʊɝ wʌns aɪv feɪld." ʃi aɪd ði ʌðɝ tu. "ɡɛt mi ðə neɪmz ʌv ɛniwʌn u hæz ɹɪzən ʃɑɹpli ɪn ɪnfluəns ɹisənli, ə noʊbəlmən əɹ wʊmən u fɪts ðoʊz kɹaɪtɪɹiə."

"I should think," Elayne said thoughtfully, "that those in the best position for the throne would be those in the middle. Anyone who didn't oppose Rand, and so didn't earn his ire. But also someone who didn't support him too wholeheartedly - someone who can be viewed as a patriot who can reluctantly step in and take power once I've failed." She eyed the other two. "Get me the names of anyone who has risen sharply in influence recently, a nobleman or woman who fits those criteria."

daɪɛlɪn ən mæstɝ nɔɹi nɑɾəd. ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ʃi wəd pɹɑbli hæv tə bɪld ə stʃɹɔŋɝ nɛtwɝk ʌv aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz, əz niðɝ ə ðiz tu wɑz pɝfəkli suɾəd tə liɾɪŋ ðɛm. nɔɹi wɑz tu ɑbviəs, ən i ɔlɹɛɾi hæɾ ɪnʌf tə də wɪð ɪz ʌðɝ duɾiz. daɪɛlɪn wɑz . . . wɛl, ɪleɪn wɑzn sɝɾən wʌt daɪɛlɪn wɑz.

Dyelin and Master Norry nodded. Eventually, she would probably have to build a stronger network of eyes-and-ears, as neither of these two was perfectly suited to leading them. Norry was too obvious, and he already had enough to do with his other duties. Dyelin was . . . well, Elayne wasnt certain what Dyelin was.

ʃi oʊd mʌtʃ tə daɪɛlɪn, hu sim tə hæv teɪkən ɪɾ əpɑn hɝsɛlf tə ækt əz ə sɝəɡət mʌðɝ tə ɪleɪn. ə vɔɪs ʌv ɪkspɪɹiəns ən wɪzdəm. bʌɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli, daɪɛlɪn wəɾ əv tə teɪk ə fju stɛps bæk. niðɝ ə ðɛm kəɾ əfɔɹd tə ɛnkɝɪdʒ ðə noʊʃən ðət daɪɛlɪn wɑz ðə ɹil paʊɝ bɪhaɪn ðə θɹoʊn.

She owed much to Dyelin, who seemed to have taken it upon herself to act as a surrogate mother to Elayne. A voice of experience and wisdom. But eventually, Dyelin would have to take a few steps back. Neither of them could afford to encourage the notion that Dyelin was the real power behind the throne.

bʌt laɪt! wʌt wəd ʃi hæv dʌn wɪθaʊt ðə wʊmən? ɪleɪn hæd tə stil hɝsɛlf əɡɛns ðə sʌɾən sɝdʒ ə filɪŋ. blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz, wən wɑz ʃi gɑnə ɡɛɾ oʊvɝ ðiz mud swɪŋz?

But Light! What would she have done without the woman? Elayne had to steel herself against the sudden surge of feeling. Blood and bloody ashes, when was she going to get over these mood swings?

ə kwin kʊdn əfɔɹd tə bi sin kɹaɪɪŋ ɑn ə wɪm!

A queen couldn't afford to be seen crying on a whim!

ɪleɪn dæbd əɹ aɪz. daɪɛlɪn waɪzli sɛd nʌθɪŋ.

Elayne dabbed her eyes. Dyelin wisely said nothing.

"ðɪs wɪl bi fəɹ ðə bɛst," ɪleɪn sɛd fɝmli, tə dɪstʃɹækt ətɛnʃən ɛf ɹɑm əɹ tʃɹɛtʃɝəs aɪz.

"This will be for the best," Elayne said firmly, to distract attention f rom her treacherous eyes.

"aɪm stɪl wɝiɾ əbaʊt ði ɪnveɪʒən."

"I'm still worried about the invasion."

daɪɛlɪn sɛd nʌθɪŋ tə ðæt. ʃi dɪdn bɪliv ðət tʃɛzməl hæd bɪn tɔkɪŋ ʌv ə spəsɪfɪk ɪnveɪʒən ʌv ændɝ; ʃi θɔt ðət ðə blæk sɪstɝ hæd bɪn spikɪŋ ə ðə tʃɹɑlɑk ɪnveɪʒən ə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. bɝdʒɪt tʊk ðə nuz mɔɹ sɪɹiəsli, bifɪŋ ʌp soʊlʒɝz ɑn ði ændɔɝən bɔɹɾɝz.

Dyelin said nothing to that. She didn't believe that Chesmal had been talking of a specific invasion of Andor; she thought that the Black sister had been speaking of the Trolloc invasion of the Borderlands. Birgitte took the news more seriously, beefing up soldiers on the Andoran borders.

stɪl, ɛɡwin wəd vɛɹi mʌtʃ laɪk tə hæv kəntʃɹoʊl ə kɛɹhin; ɪf tʃɹɑləks wɝ tə mɑɹtʃ ɑn ændɝ, θɹu hɝ sɪstɝ ɹɛlm wəd bi wʌn ə ði ævənuz ðeɪ maɪt juz.

Still, Egwene would very much like to have control of Cairhien; if Trollocs were to march on Andor, through her sister realm would be one of the avenues they might use.

bɪfɔɹ ðə kɑnvɝseɪʃən kəd ɡoʊ fɝðɝ, ðə dɔɹ tə ðə hɔlweɪ oʊpənd, ən ɪleɪn wʊɾə dʒʌmpt ɪn əlɑɹm hæd ʃi nɑt fɛl ðəɾ ɪt wɑz bɝdʒɪt. ðə wɔɹɾɝ nɛvɝ nɑkt. ʃi stʃɹoʊɾ ɪn, wɛɹɪŋ ə sɔɹd -  ɹɪlʌktənli - ən əɹ ni-haɪ blæk buts oʊvɝ tʃɹaʊzɝz. ɑdli, ʃi wɑz fɑloʊd baɪ tu kloʊk fɪɡjɝz, ðɛɹ feɪsəz hɪɾən baɪ hʊdz. nɔɹi stɛp bæk, ɹeɪzɪŋ ə hæn tə hɪz bɹɛst ət ði ɪɹɛɡjəlɛɹəɾi ʌv ɪt. ɛvɹiwʌn nu ðəɾ ɪleɪn dɪdn laɪk tə si vɪzəɾɝz ɪn ðə smɔl sɪɾɪŋ ɹum. ɪf bɝdʒɪt wɑz bɹɪŋɪŋ pipəl hɪɹ. . . .

Before the conversation could go further, the door to the hallway opened, and Elayne would have jumped in alarm had she not felt that it was Birgitte. The Warder never knocked. She strode in, wearing a sword -  reluctantly - and her knee-high black boots over trousers. Oddly, she was followed by two cloaked figures, their faces hidden by hoods. Norry stepped back, raising a hand to his breast at the irregularity of it. Everyone knew that Elayne didn't like to see visitors in the small sitting room. If Birgitte was bringing people here. . . .

"mæt?" ɪleɪn ɡɛst.

"Mat?" Elayne guessed.

"hɑɹdli," ə fəmɪljɝ vɔɪs sɛd, fɝm ən klɪɹ. ðə lɑɹdʒɝ ə ðə fɪɡjɝz loʊɝɾ ɪz hʊd, ɹɪvilɪŋ ə pɝfəkli bjuɾəfəl mæskjələn feɪs. hi hæɾ ə skwɛɹ dʒɔ ən ə sɛɾ ə foʊkəst aɪz ðəɾ ɪleɪn ɹɪmɛmbɝd wɛl fɹəm əɹ tʃaɪldhʊd - moʊsli wən i hæd noʊɾəst əɹ duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ.

"Hardly," a familiar voice said, firm and clear. The larger of the figures lowered his hood, revealing a perfectly beautiful masculine face. He had a square jaw and a set of focused eyes that Elayne remembered well from her childhood - mostly when he had noticed her doing something wrong.

"ɡɑləd," ɪleɪn sɛd, sɝpɹaɪzd ət ðə wɔɹmθ ʃi fɛl fəɹ əɹ hæf-bɹʌðɝ. ʃi ɹoʊz, hoʊldɪŋ aʊɾ əɹ hænz təwɔɹd hɪm. ʃid spɛn moʊst ə ðɛɹ tʃaɪldhʊd fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd wɪð ɪm fəɹ wʌn ɹizən əɹ ənʌðɝ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɡʊd tə si hɪm əlaɪv ən wɛl. "wɛɹ əv jə bɪn?"

"Galad," Elayne said, surprised at the warmth she felt for her half-brother. She rose, holding out her hands toward him. She'd spent most of their childhood frustrated with him for one reason or another, but it was good to see him alive and well. "Where have you been?"

"aɪ hæv bɪn sikɪŋ tʃɹuθ," ɡɑləd sɛd boʊɪŋ wɪð ən ɛkspɝt baʊ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑɾ əpɹoʊtʃ tə teɪk əɹ hænz. hi ɹoʊz ən ɡlæns tə ðə saɪd. "aɪ faʊn ðət wɪtʃ aɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛkt. stil jɝsɛlf, sɪstɝ."

"I have been seeking truth," Galad said bowing with an expert bow, but he did not approach to take her hands. He rose and glanced to the side. "I found that which I did not expect. Steel yourself, sister."

ɪleɪn fɹaʊn əz ðə sɛkənd, ʃɔɹɾɝ fɪɡjɝ loʊɝɾ əɹ hʊd. ɪleɪnz mʌðɝ.

Elayne frowned as the second, shorter figure lowered her hood. Elayne's mother.

ɪleɪn ɡæspt. ɪt wɑz hɝ! ðət feɪs, ðət ɡoʊldən hɛɹ. ðoʊz aɪz ðət hæd soʊ ɔfən lʊkt əɾ ɪleɪn əz ə tʃaɪld, dʒʌdʒɪŋ hɝ, mɛʒɝɪŋ əɹ - nɑt mɪɹli əz ə pɛɹən mɛʒɝɾ əɹ dɔɾɝ, bʌɾ əz ə kwin mɛʒɝɾ əɹ səksɛsɝ. ɪleɪn fɛlt əɹ hɑɹt biɾɪŋ ɪn əɹ tʃɛst. hɝ mʌðɝ. hɝ mʌðɝ wɑz əlaɪv.

Elayne gasped. It was her! That face, that golden hair. Those eyes that had so often looked at Elayne as a child, judging her, measuring her - not merely as a parent measured her daughter, but as a queen measured her successor. Elayne felt her heart beating in her chest. Her mother. Her mother was alive.

mɔɹɡeɪs wɑz əlaɪv. ðə kwin stɪl lɪvd.

Morgase was alive. The Queen still lived.

mɔɹɡeɪs lɑkt aɪz wɪð ɪleɪn, ðən - ɑdli - mɔɹɡeɪs lʊk daʊn. "jɔɹ mædʒəsti," ʃi sɛd wɪð ə kɝtsi, stɪl ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ.

Morgase locked eyes with Elayne, then - oddly - Morgase looked down. "Your Majesty," she said with a curtsy, still remaining beside the door.

ɪleɪn kəntʃɹoʊld əɹ θɔts, kəntʃɹoʊld əɹ pænɪk. ʃi wɑz kwin, əɹ ʃi wʊɾə bɪn kwin, əɹ . . . laɪt! ʃid teɪkən ðə θɹoʊn, ən ʃi wɑz ət lis ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ. bʌt naʊ hɝ oʊnsɛvən

Elayne controlled her thoughts, controlled her panic. She was Queen, or she would have been Queen, or . . . Light! She'd taken the throne, and she was at least the Daughter-Heir. But now her own7

mʌðɝ keɪm bæk fɹəm ðə blʌɾi dɛd?

mother came back from the bloody dead?

"pliz, sɪt," ɪleɪn faʊn hɝsɛlf seɪɪŋ, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ mɔɹɡeɪs təwɔɹd ðə sit bɪsaɪd daɪɛlɪn. ɪt dɪɾ ɪleɪn ɡʊd tə si ðət daɪɛlɪn wɑzn dilɪŋ wɪð ðə ʃɑk ɛni bɛɾɝ ðən ɪleɪn. ʃi sæt wɪð əɹ hænd ɡɹɪpɪŋ əɹ kʌp ə ti, nʌkəlz waɪt, aɪz bʌlʒɪŋ.

"Please, sit," Elayne found herself saying, gesturing Morgase toward the seat beside Dyelin. It did Elayne good to see that Dyelin wasn't dealing with the shock any better than Elayne. She sat with her hand gripping her cup of tea, knuckles white, eyes bulging.

"θæŋk ju, jəɹ mædʒəsti," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd, wɔkɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, ɡɑləd dʒɔɪnɪŋ əɹ ən ɹɛstɪŋ ə hæn ɑn ɪleɪnz ʃoʊldɝ ɪn ə kʌmfɝɾɪŋ weɪ. hi ðən fɛtʃt hɪmsɛlf ə sit fɹəm ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum.

"Thank you, Your Majesty," Morgase said, walking forward, Galad joining her and resting a hand on Elayne's shoulder in a comforting way. He then fetched himself a seat from the other side of the room.

mɔɹɡeɪsəz toʊn wɑz mɔɹ ɹɪzɝv ðən ɪleɪn ɹɪmɛmbɝd. ən waɪ dɪd ʃi kəntɪnju tə kɔl ɪleɪn ðət taɪɾəl? ðə kwin hæd kʌm ɪn sikɹət, wɪð hʊd dʒɹɔn. ɪleɪn ɹəɡɑɹɾəd əɹ mʌðɝ, pʊɾɪŋ ðə pisəz təɡɛðɝ əz ʃi sæt. "ju ɹɪnaʊns ðə θɹoʊn, dɪdn ju?"

Morgase's tone was more reserved than Elayne remembered. And why did she continue to call Elayne that title? The Queen had come in secret, with hood drawn. Elayne regarded her mother, putting the pieces together as she sat. "You renounced the throne, didn't you?"

mɔɹɡeɪs ɡeɪv ə steɪtli nɑd.

Morgase gave a stately nod.

"oʊ, θæŋk ðə laɪt," daɪɛlɪn sɛd, lɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə laʊd bɹɛθ, hæn ɹeɪz tə hɝ bɹɛst. "noʊ əfɛns, mɔɹɡeɪs. bʌt fəɹ ə moʊmən ðɛɹ, aɪ ɪmædʒən ə wɔɹ bɪtwin tʃɹəkən ən tʃɹəkənd!"

"Oh, thank the Light," Dyelin said, letting out a loud breath, hand raised to her breast. "No offense, Morgase. But for a moment there, I imagined a war between Trakand and Trakand!"

"ɪt wʊdn əv kʌm tə ðæt," ɪleɪn sɛd, vɝtʃuəli ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðəɾ əɹ mʌðɝ sɛd sʌmθɪŋ sɪməlɝ. ðɛɹ aɪz mɛt, ən ɪleɪn əlaʊd hɝsɛlf tə smaɪl. "wi wʊɾə faʊn ə . . .

"It wouldn't have come to that," Elayne said, virtually at the same time that her mother said something similar. Their eyes met, and Elayne allowed herself to smile. "We would have found a . . .

ɹizənəbəl əkɑmədeɪʃən. ðɪs wɪl du, ðoʊ aɪ sɝɾənli wʌndɝ ət ðə sɝkəmstænsəz ə ði ɪvɛnt."

reasonable accommodation. This will do, though I certainly wonder at the circumstances of the event."

"aɪ wɑz biɪŋ hɛl baɪ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, ɪleɪn," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "oʊl peɪdʒɹən naɪl wɑz ə dʒɛntəlmən ɪn moʊst ɹɪspɛks, bʌɾ ɪz səksɛsɝ wɑz nɑt. aɪ wəd nɑt lɛt maɪsɛlf bi juzd əɡɛnst ændɝ."

"I was being held by the Children of the Light, Elayne," Morgase said. "Old Pedron Niall was a gentleman in most respects, but his successor was not. I would not let myself be used against Andor."

"blʌɾi waɪtkloʊks," ɪleɪn mʌɾɝd ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. laɪt, ðeɪɾ æktʃəli  bɪn tɛlɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ wən ðeɪd ɹɪɾən, kleɪmɪŋ tə hæv mɔɹɡeɪs ɪn ðɛɹ pəzɛʃən?

"Bloody Whitecloaks," Elayne muttered under her breath. Light, they'd actually been telling the truth when they'd written, claiming to have Morgase in their possession?

ɡɑləɾ aɪd hɝ, ɹeɪzɪŋ ən aɪbɹaʊ. hi pleɪs ðə tʃɛɹ hid bɹɔɾ oʊvɝ, ðən əndɪɾ ɪz kloʊk, ɹɪvilɪŋ ðə bɹɪljənt waɪt junəfɔɹm ʌndɝniθ, wɪð ðə sʌnbɝst ɑn ðə bɹɛst.

Galad eyed her, raising an eyebrow. He placed the chair he'd brought over, then undid his cloak, revealing the brilliant white uniform underneath, with the sunburst on the breast.

"oʊ, ðæts ɹaɪt" ɪleɪn sɛd, ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd. "aɪ ɔlmoʊs fɝɡɑt ðæt. ɪntɛnʃənəli."

"Oh, that's right" Elayne said, exasperated. "I almost forgot that. Intentionally."

"ðə tʃɪlʒɹən hæɾ ænsɝz, ɪleɪn," hi sɛd, sɪɾɪŋ. laɪt, bʌɾ i wɑz fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ɡʊd tə si hɪm, bʌɾ i wɑz fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾɪŋ!

"The Children had answers, Elayne," he said, sitting. Light, but he was frustrating. It was good to see him, but he was frustrating!

"aɪ doʊnt wɪʃ tə dɪskʌs ɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd. "haʊ mɛni waɪtkloʊks əv kʌm wɪð ju?"

"I don't wish to discuss it," Elayne said. "How many Whitecloaks have come with you?"

"ði ɪntaɪɝ fɔɹs ə tʃɪlʒɹən əkʌmpənid mi tə ændɝ," ɡɑləd sɛd. aɪm ðɛɹ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ."

"The entire force of Children accompanied me to Andor," Galad said. I am their Lord Captain Commander."

ɪleɪn blɪŋkt, ðən ɡlænst ət mɔɹɡeɪs. ði ɛldɝ tʃɹəkənd nɑɾəd. ."wɛl," ɪleɪn sɛd, "aɪ si wɪv mʌtʃ tə kætʃ ʌp ɑn."

Elayne blinked, then glanced at Morgase. The elder Trakand nodded. ."Well," Elayne said, "I see we have much to catch up on."

ɡɑləd tʊk ðəɾ əz ə ɹɪkwɛst - hi kəd bi vɛɹi lɪɾɝəl - ən bɪɡæn ɪkspleɪnɪŋ haʊ hid kʌm baɪ hɪz steɪʃən. hi wɑz kwaɪt dɪteɪld əbaʊɾ ɪt, ən ɪleɪn əkeɪʒənəli ɡlænst əɾ əɹ mʌðɝ. mɔɹɡeɪsəz ɪkspɹɛʃən wɑz ənɹiɾəbəl.

Galad took that as a request - he could be very literal - and began explaining how he'd come by his station. He was quite detailed about it, and Elayne occasionally glanced at her mother. Morgase's expression was unreadable.

wʌns ɡɑləd wɑz dʌn, hi æskt æftɝ ðə səksɛʃən wɔɹ. kənvɝsɪŋ wɪð ɡɑləd wɑz ɔfən laɪk ðɪs: ən ɪkstʃeɪnʒ, mɔɹ fɔɹməl ðən fəmɪljɝ. wʌns, ɪt hæd fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd hɝ, bʌt ðɪs taɪm ʃi faʊn ðət -  əɡɛnst əɹ bɛɾɝ wɪʃɪz - ʃiɾ æktʃəli  bɪn mɪsɪŋ hɪm. soʊ ʃi lɪsənd wɪð fɑndnəs.

Once Galad was done, he asked after the Succession war. Conversing with Galad was often like this: an exchange, more formal than familiar. Once, it had frustrated her, but this time she found that -  against her better wishes - she'd actually been missing him. So she listened with fondness.

ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ðə kɑnvɝseɪʃən waʊn daʊn. ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ tə tɔk əbaʊt wɪð hɪm, bʌɾ ɪleɪn wɑz daɪɪŋ fəɹ ə tʃæns tə spik dʒʌst wɪð əɹ mʌðɝ. "ɡɑləd," ɪleɪn sɛd, "aɪd laɪk tə tɔk fɝðɝ.

Eventually, the conversation wound down. There was more to talk about with him, but Elayne was dying for a chance to speak just with her mother. "Galad," Elayne said, "I'd like to talk further.

wəd jə bi əmɛnəbəl tə ən ɝli dɪnɝ ðɪs ivnɪŋ? jə meɪ teɪk ɹəfɹɛʃmən ɪn jəɹ oʊl kɔɹɾɝz əntɪl ðɛn."

Would you be amenable to an early dinner this evening? You may take refreshment in your old quarters until then."

hi nɑɾəd, stændɪŋ. "ðæt wəd bi wɛl."

He nodded, standing. "That would be well."

"daɪɛlɪn, mæstɝ nɔɹi," ɪleɪn sɛd. "maɪ mʌðɝz sɝvaɪvəl wɪl lid tə səm . . . dɛləkəɾ ɪʃuz ə steɪt. wɪl nid tə pʌblɪʃ əɹ æbdɪkeɪʃən əfɪʃəli, ən kwɪkli. mæstɝ nɔɹi, əl liv ðə fɔɹməl dɑkjəmɛn tə ju. daɪɛlɪn, pliz ɪnfɔɹm maɪ kloʊsəst ælaɪz ə ðɪs nuz soʊ ðət ðəl nɑt bi teɪkən baɪ sɝpɹaɪz."

"Dyelin, Master Norry," Elayne said. "My mother's survival will lead to some . . . delicate issues of state. We will need to publish her abdication officially, and quickly. Master Norry, I'll leave the formal document to you. Dyelin, please inform my closest allies of this news so that they will not be taken by surprise."

daɪɛlɪn nɑɾəd. ʃi ɡlænst ət mɔɹɡeɪs - daɪɛlɪn wɑznt wʌn ə ðoʊz hum ðə fɔɹmɝ kwin hæɾ ɪmbɛɹəs dʊɹɪŋ ðə deɪz ə ɹɑvɪn ɛs ɪnfluəns, bʌt ʃi hæɾ əndaʊɾɪdli hɝd ðə stɔɹiz. ðən daɪɛlɪn wɪθdʒɹu wɪð ɡɑləɾ ən mæstɝ nɔɹi. mɔɹɡeɪs ɡlænst ət bɝdʒɪɾ əz sun əz ðə dɔɹ kloʊzd; ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz ði oʊnli ʌðɝ wʌn ɪn ðə ɹum.

Dyelin nodded. She glanced at Morgase - Dyelin wasn't one of those whom the former Queen had embarrassed during the days of Rahvin s influence, but she had undoubtedly heard the stories. Then Dyelin withdrew with Galad and Master Norry. Morgase glanced at Birgitte as soon as the door closed; the Warder was the only other one in the room.

"aɪ tʃɹʌst əɹ laɪk ə sɪstɝ, mʌðɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd. "æn ɪnsʌfɝəbəl oʊldɝ sɪstɝ, səmtaɪmz, bʌɾ ə sɪstɝ nʌnðəlɛs."

"I trust her like a sister, Mother," Elayne said. "An insufferable older sister, sometimes, but a sister nonetheless."

mɔɹɡeɪs smaɪld, ðən ɹoʊz ən tʊk ɪleɪn baɪ ðə hænz, pʊlɪŋ əɹ ʌp ɪndə ən ɛmbɹeɪs. "ɑ, maɪ dɔɾɝ," ʃi sɛd, tɪɹz ɪn əɹ aɪz. "lʊk ət wʌt juv dʌn! kwin ɪn jəɹ oʊn ɹaɪt!"

Morgase smiled, then rose and took Elayne by the hands, pulling her up into an embrace. "Ah, my daughter," she said, tears in her eyes. "Look at what you've done! Queen in your own right!"

jə tʃɹeɪn mi wɛl, mʌðɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd. ʃi pʊl bæk. "æn jə ɹeɪ ə ɡɹændmʌðɝ! əɹ sun wɪl bi!"

You trained me well, Mother," Elayne said. She pulled back. "And you re a grandmother! Or soon will be!"

mɔɹɡeɪs fɹaʊnd, lʊkɪŋ daʊn ət hɝ. "jɛs, aɪ θɔɾ əz mʌtʃ fɹəm lʊkɪŋ ət ju. hu . . . ?"

Morgase frowned, looking down at her. "Yes, I thought as much from looking at you. Who . . . ?"

"ɹænd," ɪleɪn sɛd, blʌʃɪŋ, "ðoʊ ɪts nɑt waɪdli noʊn, ən aɪd ɹæðɝ ɪt steɪ ðət weɪ."

"Rand," Elayne said, blushing, "though it's not widely known, and I'd rather it stay that way."

"ɹæn ælθɹ . . ." mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd, hɝ mud dɑɹkənɪŋ. "ðæt-__"

"Rand al'Thor . . ." Morgase said, her mood darkening. "That-__"

"mʌðɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ə hæn tə ɡɹæsp hɝz. "hiz ə ɡʊd mæn ən aɪ lʌv hɪm. wʌt juv hɝɾ ɪz ɪɡzædʒɝeɪʃən əɹ bɪɾɝ ɹumɝ"

"Mother," Elayne said, raising a hand to grasp hers. "He's a good man and I love him. What you have heard is exaggeration or bitter rumor"

"bʌt hiz . . . ɪleɪn, ə mæn u kən tʃænəl, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn'"

"But he's . . . Elayne, a man who can channel, the Dragon Reborn'"

"æn stɪl ə mæn," ɪleɪn sɛd, filɪŋ ɪz nɑɾ ʌv ɪmoʊʃənz ɪn ðə bæk ə hɝ maɪnd, soʊ wɔɹm.

"And still a man," Elayne said, feeling his knot of emotions in the back of her mind, so warm.

"dʒʌst ə mæn, fəɹ ɔl ðəɾ ɪz dɪmændəɾ ə hɪm."

"Just a man, for all that is demanded of him."

mɔɹɡeɪs dʒɹu hɝ lɪps ɪndə ə θɪn laɪn. "aɪ ʃæl wɪθhoʊl dʒʌdʒmənt. ðoʊ ɪn ə weɪ aɪ stɪl fil ðəɾ aɪ ʃʊɾə θɹoʊn ðət bɔɪ ɪn ðə pæl-eɪs dʌnʒənz ðə moʊmənt wi faʊn ɪm skʌlkɪŋ ɪn ðə ɡɑɹɾənz. aɪ dɪdn laɪk haʊ hi lʊkt ət jə ivən ðɛn, maɪn ju."

Morgase drew her lips into a thin line. "I shall withhold judgment. Though in a way I still feel that I should have thrown that boy in the Pal-ace dungeons the moment we found him skulking in the gardens. I didn't like how he looked at you even then, mind you."

ɪleɪn smaɪld, ðən dʒɛstʃɝd bæk tə ðə sits. mɔɹɡeɪs sæt, ən ðɪs taɪm ɪleɪn tʊk ðə sit dɝɛkli bɪsaɪd hɝ, stɪl klʌtʃɪŋ əɹ mʌðɝz hænz. ʃi sɛnst əmjuzmən fɹəm bɝdʒɪt, hu stʊd wɪð əɹ bæk əɡɛns ðə fɑɹ wɔl, wʌn ni bɛn soʊ ðət ðə soʊl ə hɝ but ɹɛstəɾ əɡɛns ðə wʊd pænəlɪŋ.

Elayne smiled, then gestured back to the seats. Morgase sat, and this time Elayne took the seat directly beside her, still clutching her mother's hands. She sensed amusement from Birgitte, who stood with her back against the far wall, one knee bent so that the sole of her boot rested against the wood paneling.

"wʌt?" ɪleɪn æskt.

"What?" Elayne asked.

"nʌθɪŋ," bɝdʒɪt sɛd. "ɪts ɡʊd tə si jə tu æktɪŋ laɪk mʌðɝ ən tʃaɪld, əɹ ət list wʊmən ən wʊmən, ɹæðɝ ðən stɛɹɪŋ əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ laɪk tu poʊsts."

"Nothing," Birgitte said. "It's good to see you two acting like mother and child, or at least woman and woman, rather than staring at each other like two posts."

"ɪleɪn ɪz kwin," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd stɪfli. "hɝ laɪf bɪlɔŋz tə hɝ pipəl, ən maɪ ɝaɪvəl θɹɛɾənd tə əpsɛɾ əɹ səksɛʃən."

"Elayne is Queen," Morgase said stiffly. "Her life belongs to her people, and my arrival threatened to upset her Succession."

"ɪt stɪl maɪt mʌɾi θɪŋz, mʌðɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd. "jɔɹ əpɪɹəns kəɾ oʊpən oʊld wunz."

"It still might muddy things, Mother," Elayne said. "Your appearance could open old wounds."

"aɪ wɪl əv tə əpɑlədʒaɪz," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "pɝhæps ɔfɝ ɹɛpɝeɪʃənz." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "aɪ hæɾ ɪntɛndəd tə steɪ əweɪ, dɔɾɝ. ɪt wəd bi bɛst ɪf ðoʊz u heɪɾəd mi stɪl θɔt mi dɛd. bʌt - "

"I will have to apologize," Morgase said. "Perhaps offer reparations." She hesitated. "I had intended to stay away, daughter. It would be best if those who hated me still thought me dead. But - "

"noʊ," ɪleɪn sɛd kwɪkli, skwizɪŋ əɹ hænz. "ðɪs ɪz fəɹ ðə bɛst. wi sɪmpli wɪl əv tə əpɹoʊtʃ ɪt wɪð skɪl ən kɛɹ."

"No," Elayne said quickly, squeezing her hands. "This is for the best. We simply will have to approach it with skill and care."

mɔɹɡeɪs smaɪld. "ju meɪk mi pɹaʊd. jəl bi ə wʌndɝfəl kwin.

Morgase smiled. "You make me proud. You will be a wonderful queen.

ɪleɪn hæd tə fɔɹs hɝsɛlf tə stɑp bimɪŋ. hɝ mʌðɝ hæd nɛvɝ bɪn fɹi wɪð kɑmpləməns.

Elayne had to force herself to stop beaming. Her mother had never been free with compliments.

"bʌt tɛl mi, bɪfɔɹ wi ɡoʊ fɝðɝ," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd, vɔɪs ɡɹoʊɪŋ mɔɹ hɛzɪɾənt. "aɪ hæv hɝd ɹɪpɔɹts ðət ɡeɪbɹəl wɑz . . ."

"But tell me, before we go further," Morgase said, voice growing more hesitant. "I have heard reports that Gaebril was . . ."

"ɹɑvɪn," ɪleɪn sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ. "ɪts tʃɹu, mʌðɝ."

"Rahvin," Elayne said, nodding. "It's true, Mother."

"aɪ heɪɾ ɪm fəɹ wʌɾ i dɪd. aɪ kən si hɪm, juzɪŋ mi, dʒɹaɪvɪŋ spaɪks θɹu ðə hɑɹts ən lɔɪəlti ʌv maɪ dɪɹəs fɹɛnz. ən jɛt ðəɹ ɪz ə pɑɹɾ ə mi ðət lɔŋz tə si hɪm, ɪɹæʃənəli."

"I hate him for what he did. I can see him, using me, driving spikes through the hearts and loyalty of my dearest friends. And yet there is a part of me that longs to see him, irrationally."

"hi juz kəmpʌlʃən ɑn ju," ɪleɪn sɛd sɔfli. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ ʌðɝ ɛkspləneɪʃən. wɪl əv tə si ɪf ɛni fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ kən hil ɪt."

"He used Compulsion on you," Elayne said softly. "There is no other explanation. We will have to see if any from the White Tower can Heal it."

mɔɹɡeɪs ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz, ɪts feɪnt naʊ, ən mæn-iəbəl aɪ hæv faʊn ənʌðɝ tə ɡɪv maɪ əfɛkʃən."

Morgase shook her head. "Whatever it was, it is faint now, and man-eable I have found another to give my affection."

ɪleɪn fɹaʊnd.

Elayne frowned.

"aɪ wɪl ɪkspleɪn ðəɾ əɾ ənʌðɝ pɔɪnt," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "aɪm nɑt sɝɾən aɪ ʌndɝstæn ɪt jɛt. fɝst wi mʌs dɪsaɪd wʌt tə də əbaʊt maɪ ɹɪtɝn."

"I will explain that at another point," Morgase said. "I'm not certain I understand it yet. First we must decide what to do about my return."

"ðæɾ ɪz izi," ɪleɪn sɛd. "wi sɛləbɹeɪt!"

"That is easy," Elayne said. "We celebrate!"

"jɛs, bʌt - "

"Yes, but - "

"bʌt nʌθɪŋ, mʌðɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ju hæv ɹɪtɝn tə ʌs! ðə sɪɾi, ði ɪntaɪɝ neɪʃən, wɪl sɛləbɹeɪt." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "æn æftɝ ðæt, wɪl faɪn ən ɪmpɔɹɾənt fʌŋkʃən fəɹ ju."

"But nothing, Mother," Elayne said. "You have returned to us! The city, the entire nation, will celebrate." She hesitated. "And after that, we will find an important function for you."

"sʌmθɪŋ ðət teɪks mi əweɪ fɹəm ðə kæpəɾəl, soʊ aɪ kæs noʊ ənfɔɹtʃənət ʃædoʊz."

"Something that takes me away from the capital, so I cast no unfortunate shadows."

"bʌɾ ə duɾi ðəɾ ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt, soʊ ðət jə ɑɹ nɑt θɔɾ ʌv əz hævɪŋ bɪn pʊɾ aʊt tə pæstʃɝ."

"But a duty that is important, so that you are not thought of as having been put out to pasture."

ɪleɪn ɡɹɪməst. "pɝhæps wi kən ɡɪv jə tʃɑɹdʒ ə ðə wɛstɝn kɔɹɾɝ ə ðə ɹɛlm. aɪ hæv lɪɾəl plɛʒɝ ɪn ðə ɹɪpɔɹts ʌv wʌɾ ɪz hæpənɪŋ ðɛɹ."

Elayne grimaced. "Perhaps we can give you charge of the western quarter of the realm. I have little pleasure in the reports of what is happening there."

"ðə tu ɹɪvɝz?" mɔɹɡeɪs æskt. "æn lɔɹd pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə?"

"The Two Rivers?" Morgase asked. "And Lord Perrin Aybara?"

ɪleɪn nɑɾəd.

Elayne nodded.

"hi ɪz ən ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ wʌn, pɛɹɪn ɪz," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd θɔtfəli. "jɛs, pɝhæps aɪ kəd bi ʌv səm jus ðɛɹ. wɪv sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ən ʌndɝstændɪŋ ɔlɹɛɾi."

"He is an interesting one, Perrin is," Morgase said thoughtfully. "Yes, perhaps I could be of some use there. We have something of an understanding already."

ɪleɪn ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ.

Elayne raised an eyebrow.

"hi wɑz bɪhaɪn maɪ seɪf ɹɪtɝn tə ju," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. "hi ɪz ən ɑnəs mæn, ən ɑnɝəbəl əz wɛl. bʌɾ ɔlsoʊ ə ɹɛbəl, dɪspaɪɾ ɪz ɡʊɾ ɪntɛntʃənz. jəl nɑɾ əv ən izi taɪm ʌv ɪɾ ɪf jə kʌm tə bloʊz wɪð ðət wʌn."

"He was behind my safe return to you," Morgase said. "He is an honest man, and honorable as well. But also a rebel, despite his good intentions. You will not have an easy time of it if you come to blows with that one."

"aɪd ɹæðɝ əvɔɪɾ ɪt." ʃi ɡɹɪməst. ði iziəst weɪ tə dil wɪð ɪt wəd bi tə faɪn ɪm ən ɛksəkjut hɪm, bʌɾ ə kɔɹs ʃi wɑzn gɑnə də ðæt. ivən ɪf ɹɪpɔɹts hæɾ əɹ fjumɪŋ ɪnʌf tə ɔlmoʊst wɪʃ ðət ʃi kʊd.

"I'd rather avoid it." She grimaced. The easiest way to deal with it would be to find him and execute him, but of course she wasn't going to do that. Even if reports had her fuming enough to almost wish that she could.

'wɛl, wi ʃæl bɪɡɪn wɝkɪŋ ɑn ə weɪ." mɔɹɡeɪs smaɪld. "ɪt wɪl hɛlp jə tə hɪɹ ʌv wʌt hæpən tə mi. oʊ, ən lini ɪz seɪf. aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf juv wɝiɾ oʊvɝ əɹ əɹ nɑt."

'Well, we shall begin working on a way." Morgase smiled. "It will help you to hear of what happened to me. Oh, and Lini is safe. I don't know if you've worried over her or not."

tə bi ɑnəst, aɪ dɪdnt," ɪleɪn sɛd, ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ, filɪŋ ə spaɪk ə ʃeɪm. "ɪt simz ðət ðə kəlæps ə dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊn ɪtsɛlf kʊdn hɑɹm lini."

To be honest, I didn't," Elayne said, grimacing, feeling a spike of shame. "It seems that the collapse of Dragonmount itself couldn't harm Lini."

mɔɹɡeɪs smaɪld, ðən bɪɡæn əɹ stɔɹi. ɪleɪn lɪsənd wɪð ɑ, ən nɑɾ ə lɪɾəl ɪksaɪtmənt. hɝ mʌðɝ lɪvd. laɪt bi blɛsɪd, soʊ mɛni θɪŋz hæd ɡɔn ɹɔŋ ɹisənli, bʌɾ ət list wʌn hæd ɡɔn ɹaɪt.

Morgase smiled, then began her story. Elayne listened with awe, and not a little excitement. Her mother lived. Light be blessed, so many things had gone wrong recently, but at least one had gone right.

* * * ðə θɹi-foʊld læn ət naɪt wɑz pisfəl ən kwaɪət. moʊst ænəməlz wɝ æktɪv nɪɹ dʌsk ən dɔn, wən ɪt wɑz niðɝ swɛltɝɪŋ nɔɹ fɹizɪŋ.

* * * The Three-fold Land at night was peaceful and quiet. Most animals were active near dusk and dawn, when it was neither sweltering nor freezing.

eɪvinhə sæɾ ɑn ə smɔl ɹɑk aʊtkɹɑpɪŋ, lɛɡz foʊldəd bɪniθ hɝ, lʊkɪŋ daʊn əpɑn ɹɪɾiən, ɪn ðə lænz ə ðə dʒɛn il, ðə klæn ðət wɑz nɑt. wʌns ɹɪɾiən hæd bɪn ʃɹaʊɾɪd ɪn pɹətɛktɪv mɪsts. ðət wɑz bɪfɔɹ ɹænd hæd kʌm. hid bɹoʊkən ðə sɪɾi ɪn θɹi vɛɹi ɪmpɔɹɾənt vɛɹi dɪskʌmfɝɾɪŋ weɪz.

Aviendha sat on a small rock outcropping, legs folded beneath her, looking down upon Rhuidean, in the lands of the Jenn Aiel, the clan that was not. Once Rhuidean had been shrouded in protective mists. That was before Rand had come. He'd broken the city in three very important very discomforting ways.

ðə fɝst wɑz ðə sɪmpləst. ɹænd hæd teɪkən əweɪ ðə mɪst. ðə sɪɾi hæd ʃɛɾ ɪts doʊm laɪk ən ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ ənveɪlɪŋ ɪz feɪs. ʃi dɪdnt noʊ haʊ ɹænd hæd kɑz ðə tʃɹænsfɝmeɪʃən; ʃi daʊɾɪd ðəɾ i nu hɪmsɛlf. bʌɾ ɪn ɪkspoʊzɪŋ ðə sɪɾi, hi hæd tʃeɪnʒd ɪt fɝɛvɝ.

The first was the simplest. Rand had taken away the mist. The city had shed its dome like an algai'd'siswai unveiling his face. She didn't know how Rand had caused the transformation; she doubted that he knew himself. But in exposing the city, he had changed it forever.

ðə sɛkənd weɪ ɹænd hæd bɹoʊkən ɹɪɾiən wɑz baɪ bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪt wɔɾɝ ə ɡɹæn leɪk leɪ bɪsaɪd ðə sɪɾi, ən fæntəm munlaɪt, fɪltɝd θɹu klaʊdz əbʌv, meɪd ðə wɔɾɝz ʃaɪn. ðə pipəl wɝ kɔlɪŋ ðə leɪk tsɑdʒɹɛlimən. tɪɹz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, ðoʊ ðə leɪk ʃəd bi kɔl tɪɹz ə ði il. ɹænd ælθɹ hæd nɑt noʊn haʊ mʌtʃ peɪn i wəd kɑz ɪn wʌɾ i ɹɪvild. sətʃ wɑz ðə weɪ wɪð hɪm. hɪz ækʃənz wɝ ɔfən soʊ ɪnəsənt.

The second way Rand had broken Rhuidean was by bringing it water A grand lake lay beside the city, and phantom moonlight, filtered through clouds above, made the waters shine. The people were calling the lake Tsodrelle'Aman. Tears of the Dragon, though the lake should be called Tears of the Aiel. Rand al'Thor had not known how much pain he would cause in what he revealed. Such was the way with him. His actions were often so innocent.

ðə θɝd weɪ ɹænd hæd bɹoʊkən ðə sɪɾi wɑz ðə moʊs pɹoʊfaʊnd. eɪvinhə wɑz sloʊli kʌmɪŋ tə ʌndɝstæn ðɪs wʌn. nɑkoʊmiz wɝdz wɝid hɝ, ənnɝv hɝ. ðeɪ hæɾ əweɪkən ɪn əɹ ʃædoʊz ə mɛmɹiz, θɪŋz fɹəm pətɛnʃəl fjutʃɝz tʃæɾ eɪvinhə hæd sin ɪn ðə ɹɪŋz dʊɹɪŋ əɹ fɝs vɪzət tə ɹɪɾiən, bʌt ðəɾ əɹ maɪn kəd nɑt kwaɪt ɹikɔl, ət lis nɑt dɝɛkli.

The third way Rand had broken the city was the most profound. Aviendha was slowly coming to understand this one. Nakomi's words worried her, unnerved her. They had awakened in her shadows of memories, things from potential futures chat Aviendha had seen in the rings during her first visit to Rhuidean, but that her mind could not quite recall, at least not directly.

ʃi wɝid ðət ɹɪɾiən wəd stɑp mæɾɝɪŋ vɛɹi sun. wʌns, ðə sɪɾiz ʌltəmət pɝpəs hæd bɪn tə ʃoʊ waɪz wʌnz ən klæn tʃifs ðɛɹ pipəlz sikɹət pæst. tə pɹipɛɹ əm fəɹ ðə deɪ wən ðeɪd sɝv ðə dʒɹæɡən. ðət deɪ hæd kʌm. soʊ hu ʃəd kʌm tə ɹɪɾiən naʊ? sɛndɪŋ ði il liɾɝz θɹu ðə ɡlæs kɑləmz wəd bi ɹimaɪndɪŋ əm ə toʊ ðeɪ hæd bɪɡʌn tə mit.

She worried that Rhuidean would stop mattering very soon. Once, the city's ultimate purpose had been to show Wise Ones and clan chiefs their people's secret past. To prepare them for the day when they'd serve the Dragon. That day had come. So who should come to Rhuidean now? Sending the Aiel leaders through the glass columns would be reminding them of toh they had begun to meet.

ðɪs bɑðɝɾ eɪvinhə ɪn weɪz ðəɾ ɪtʃt bɪniθ əɹ skɪn. ʃi dɪdnt wɑnə æknɑlɪdʒ ðiz kwɛstʃənz. ʃi wɑntəd tə kəntɪnju wɪð tʃɹədɪʃən. bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt ɡɛɾ əm aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛd.

This bothered Aviendha in ways that itched beneath her skin. She didn't want to acknowledge these questions. She wanted to continue with tradition. But she could not get them out of her head.

ɹænd kɑz soʊ mɛni pɹɑbləmz. stɪl, ʃi lʌv hɪm. ʃi lʌvd ɪm fəɹ ɪz ɪɡnɝəns, ɪn ə weɪ. ɪɾ əlaʊɾ ɪm tə lɝn. ən ʃi lʌvd ɪm fəɹ ðə fulɪʃ weɪ hi tʃɹaɪd tə pɹətɛk ðoʊz u dɪd nɑt wɑnə bi pɹətɛktəd.

Rand caused so many problems. Still, she loved him. She loved him for his ignorance, in a way. It allowed him to learn. And she loved him for the foolish way he tried to protect those who did not want to be protected.

moʊst ʌv ɔl, ʃi lʌvd ɪm fəɹ ɪz dɪzaɪɝ tə bi stʃɹɔŋ. eɪvinhə hæɾ ɔlweɪz wɑntəd tə bi stʃɹɔŋ. lɝn ðə spɪɹ. faɪɾ ən ɝn dʒi.. bi ðə bɛst.

Most of all, she loved him for his desire to be strong. Aviendha had always wanted to be strong. Learn the spear. Fight and earn ji.. Be the best.

ʃi kəd fil ɪm naʊ, dɪstən fɹəm hɝ. ðeɪ wɝ soʊ əlaɪk ɪn ðɪs weɪ.

She could feel him now, distant from her. They were so alike in this way.

hɝ fiɾ ætʃt fɹəm ɹʌnɪŋ. ʃid ɹʌbd əm wɪð ðə sæp ʌv ə sɛɡeɪd plænt, bʌt ʃi kəd stɪl fil əm θɹɑbɪŋ. hɝ buts sæɾ ɑn ðə stoʊn bɪsaɪd hɝ, əlɔŋ wɪð ðə faɪn wʊlən stɑkɪŋz ðəɾ ɪleɪn hæd ɡɪvən hɝ.

Her feet ached from running. She'd rubbed them with the sap of a segade plant, but she could still feel them throbbing. Her boots sat on the stone beside her, along with the fine woolen stockings that Elayne had given her.

ʃi wɑz taɪɝɾ ən θɝsti - ʃi wəd fæs ðɪs naɪt, kɑntəmpleɪɾɪŋ, ðən ɹifɪl əɹ wɔɾɝskɪn ət ðə leɪk bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ɪndə ɹɪɾiən təmɑɹoʊ. tənaɪt, ʃi sæɾ ən θɔt, pɹipɛɹɪŋ.

She was tired and thirsty - she would fast this night, contemplating, then refill her waterskin at the lake before going into Rhuidean tomorrow. Tonight, she sat and thought, preparing.

ðə laɪvz ə ði il wɝ tʃeɪnʒɪŋ. ɪt wɑz stʃɹɛŋkθ tə æksɛp tʃeɪnʒ wən ɪt kəd nɑt bi əvɔɪɾəd. ɪf ə hoʊld wɑz dæmədʒ dʊɹɪŋ ə ɹeɪɾ ən jə ɹibɪlt ɪt, jə nɛvɝ meɪɾ ɪɾ ɪɡzækli ðə seɪm weɪ. jə tʊk ðə tʃæns tə fɪks ðə pɹɑbləmz - ðə dɔɹ ðət kɹikt ɪn ðə wɪnd, ði ənivən sɛkʃən ə flɔɹ. tə meɪk ɪɾ ɪɡzækli əz ɪt hæd bɪn wəd bi fulɪʃnəs.

The lives of the Aiel were changing. It was strength to accept change when it could not be avoided. If a hold was damaged during a raid and you rebuilt it, you never made it exactly the same way. You took the chance to fix the problems - the door that creaked in the wind, the uneven section of floor. To make it exactly as it had been would be foolishness.

pɝhæps tʃɹədɪʃənz - sətʃ əz kʌmɪŋ tə ɹɪɾiən, ən ivən lɪvɪŋ ɪn ðə θɹi-foʊld læn ɪtsɛlf -  wəd nid tə bi ɹiɪɡzæmən ɪvɛntʃəwəli. bʌt fəɹ naʊ, ði il kʊdn liv ðə wɛtlænz. ðəɹ wɑz ðə læs bæɾəl. ən ðən ðə sintʃæn hæd kæptʃɝd mɛni il ən meɪd waɪz wʌnz ɪndə deɪmeɪn; ðət kəd nɑt bi əlaʊd. ən ðə waɪt taʊɝ stɪl əsum ðəɾ ɔl il waɪz wʌnz u kəd tʃænəl wɝ waɪldɝz. sʌmθɪŋ wəɾ əv tə bi dʌn əbaʊt ðæt.

Perhaps traditions - such as coming to Rhuidean, and even living in the Three-fold Land itself -  would need to be reexamined eventually. But for now, the Aiel couldn't leave the wetlands. There was the Last Battle. And then the Seanchan had captured many Aiel and made Wise Ones into damane; that could not be allowed. And the White Tower still assumed that all Aiel Wise Ones who could channel were wilders. Something would have to be done about that.

ən hɝsɛlf? ðə mɔɹ ʃi θɔɾ ʌv ɪt, ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi kʊdnt ɡoʊ bæk tə hɝ oʊld laɪf. ʃi hæd tə bi wɪð ɹænd. ɪf i sɝvaɪv ðə læs bæɾəl - ən ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə faɪt hɑɹd tə meɪk sɝɾən i dɪd - hi wəd stɪl bi ə wɛtləndɝ kɪŋ. ən ðən ðəɹ wɑz ɪleɪn. eɪvinhə ən ʃi wɝ gɑnə bi sɪstɝ-waɪvz, bʌɾ ɪleɪn wəd nɛvɝ liv ændɝ. wəd ʃi ɪkspɛkt ɹænd tə steɪ wɪð hɝ?

And herself? The more she thought of it, she realized that she couldn't go back to her old life. She had to be with Rand. If he survived the Last Battle - and she intended to fight hard to make certain he did - he would still be a wetlander king. And then there was Elayne. Aviendha and she were going to be sister-wives, but Elayne would never leave Andor. Would she expect Rand to stay with her?

wəd ðət min eɪvinhə wəd nid tə əz wɛl?

Would that mean Aviendha would need to as well?

soʊ tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ, boʊθ fəɹ hɝsɛlf ən əɹ pipəl. tʃɹədɪʃənz ʃəd nɑt bi meɪnteɪn dʒʌs kəz ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹədɪʃənz. stʃɹɛŋkθ wɑz nɑt stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪf ɪt hæd noʊ pɝpəs əɹ dɝɛkʃən.

So troubling, both for herself and her people. Traditions should not be maintained just because they were traditions. Strength was not strength if it had no purpose or direction.

ʃi stʌɾid ɹɪɾiən, sətʃ ə ɡɹæn pleɪs ə stoʊn ən mædʒəsti. moʊst sɪɾiz dɪsɡʌstəɾ əɹ wɪð ðɛɹ kɝʌp fɪlθ, bʌt ɹɪɾiən wɑz dɪfɹənt. doʊmd ɹufs, hæf-fɪnɪʃt mɑnəlɪθs ən taʊɝz, kɛɹfəli plæn sɛkʃənz wɪð dwɛlɪŋz. ðə faʊntənz floʊd naʊ, ən ðoʊ ə lɑɹdʒ sɛkʃən stɪl bɔɹ ðə skɑɹz ʌv wən ɹænd hæd fɔt ðɛɹ. mʌtʃ ə ðət hæd bɪn klin ʌp baɪ ðə fæmliz u lɪv hɪɹ, il u hæd nɑt ɡɔn tə wɔɹ.

She studied Rhuidean, such a grand place of stone and majesty. Most cities disgusted her with their corrupt filth, but Rhuidean was different. Domed roofs, half-finished monoliths and towers, carefully planned sections with dwellings. The fountains flowed now, and though a large section still bore the scars of when Rand had fought there. Much of that had been cleaned up by the families who lived here, Aiel who had not gone to war.

ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ ʃɑps. noʊ ɑɹɡjəməns ɪn stʃɹits, noʊ mɝɾɝɝz ɪn æliz. ɹɪɾiən maɪɾ əv bɪn dɪpɹaɪvd ə minɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt wəd ɹeɪ-meɪn ə pleɪs ə pis.

There would be no shops. No arguments in streets, no murderers in alleys. Rhuidean might have been deprived of meaning, but it would re-main a place of peace.

əl ɡoʊ ɑn, ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd. pæs θɹu ðə ɡlæs kɑləmz. pɝhənz əɹ wɝ-ɹaɪz wɝ tʃɹu, ən ðə pæsədʒ wɑz naʊ fɑɹ lɛs minɪŋfəl, bʌt ʃi wɑz dʒɛnjəwənli kjʊɹiəs tə si wʌt ði ʌðɝz hæd sin.

I will go on, she decided. Pass through the glass columns. Perhans her wor-ries were true, and the passage was now far less meaningful, but she was genuinely curious to see what the others had seen.

bɪsaɪdz noʊɪŋ wʌnz pæst wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə ʌndɝstæn ðə fjutʃɝ.

Besides knowing ones past was important in order to understand the future.

waɪz wʌnz ən klæn tʃifs hæd bɪn vɪzəɾɪŋ ðɪs loʊkeɪʃən fəɹ sɛntʃɝiz ðeɪ ɹɪtɝnd wɪð nɑlədʒ. meɪbi ðə sɪɾi wəd ʃoʊ hɝ wʌt tə də əbaʊɾ əɹ pipəl, ən əbaʊɾ əɹ oʊn hɑɹt.

Wise Ones and clan chiefs had been visiting this location for centuries They returned with knowledge. Maybe the city would show her what to do about her people, and about her own heart.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾisɪks


CHAPTER 46

wɝkɪŋ lɛðɝ


Working Leather

ænʒɹəl kɛɹfəli tʊk ði oʊvəl pis ə lɛðɝ fɹəm ðə stimɪŋ wɔɾɝ; ɪt hæd dɑɹkən ən kɝld. hi muv kwɪkli, pɪkɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp ɪn ɪz kælʌz fɪŋɡɝz. ðə lɛðɝ wɑz spɹɪŋi ən flɛksəbəl naʊ.

Androl carefully took the oval piece of leather from the steaming water; it had darkened and curled. He moved quickly, picking it up in his callused fingers. The leather was springy and flexible now.

hi kwɪkli sæt daʊn əɾ ɪz bɛntʃ, ə skwɛɹ ə sʌnlaɪt kʌmɪŋ ɪn θɹu ðə wɪndoʊ ɑn ɪz ɹaɪt saɪd. hi ɹæp ðə lɛðɝ ɝaʊn ə θɪk wʊɾən ɹɑɾ əbaʊt tu ɪntʃəz əkɹɔs, ðən poʊk hoʊlz ɝaʊn ði ɛdʒəz.

He quickly sat down at his bench, a square of sunlight coming in through the window on his right side. He wrapped the leather around a thick wooden rod about two inches across, then poked holes around the edges.

fɹəm ðɛɹ, hi bɪɡæn stɪtʃɪŋ ðə lɛðɝ tə ənʌðɝ pis hid pɹipɛɹɾ ɝliɝ. ə ɡʊd stɪtʃɪŋ ɝaʊn ði aʊtsaɪd wəd kip ɪt fɹəm fɹeɪɪŋ. ə lɑɾ ə lɛðɝwɝkɝz wɝ kæʒəwəl əbaʊt stɪtʃɪŋ.

From there, he began stitching the leather to another piece he'd prepared earlier. A good stitching around the outside would keep it from fraying. A lot of leatherworkers were casual about stitching.

nɑɾ ænʒɹəl. ðə stɪtʃɪŋ wɑz wʌt pipəl sɔ fɝst; ɪt stʊɾ aʊt, laɪk peɪn ɑn ə wɔl.

Not Androl. The stitching was what people saw first; it stood out, like paint on a wall.

əz i wɝkt, ðə lɛðɝ dʒɹaɪɾ ən lɔst səm ʌv ɪts spɹɪŋʒənəs, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl flɛksəbəl ɪnʌf.

As he worked, the leather dried and lost some of its springiness, but it was still flexible enough.

hi meɪd ðə stɪtʃɪz niɾ ən ivən. hi pʊl ðə læs fju taɪɾ ən juzd əm tə taɪ ðə lɛðɝ ɝaʊn ðə wʊɾən ɹɑd; hid kʌt ðoʊz læst wʌns ðə lɛðɝ dʒɹaɪd.

He made the stitches neat and even. He pulled the last few tight and used them to tie the leather around the wooden rod; he'd cut those last once the leather dried.

stɪtʃɪŋ dʌn, hi æɾəd səm ɔɹnəməns. ə neɪm əkɹɔs ðə tɑp, paʊndɪɾ ɪndə pleɪs juzɪŋ ɪz smɔl mælɪɾ ən lɛɾɝ-tɑpt pɪnz. ðə sɪmbəlz ə ðə sɔɹɾ ən dʒɹæɡən keɪm nɛkst; hid meɪd ðoʊz pleɪts hɪmsɛlf, beɪst ɑn ðə pɪnz ði æʃəmən wɔɹ.

Stitching done, he added some ornaments. A name across the top, pounded into place using his small mallet and letter-topped pins. The symbols of the Sword and Dragon came next; he'd made those plates himself, based on the pins the Asha'man wore.

ət ðə bɑɾəm, juzɪŋ ɪz smɔlɝ lɛɾɝ pɪnz, hi stæmp ðə wɝdz, dɪfɛnd. ɡɑɹd. pɹətɛkt." əz ðə lɛðɝ kəntɪnjud tə dʒɹaɪ, hi ɡɑɾ aʊɾ ɪz steɪn ən ɡɔz tə kɛɹfəli kʌlɝ ðə lɛɾɝz ən ðə dɪzaɪnz fəɹ kɑntʃɹæst.

At the bottom, using his smaller letter pins, he stamped the words, Defend. Guard. Protect." As the leather continued to dry, he got out his stain and gauze to carefully color the letters and the designs for contrast.

ðəɹ wɑz ə tʃɹæŋkwɪlɪɾi tə ðɪs kaɪndə wɝk; soʊ mʌtʃ ə hɪz laɪf wɑz əbaʊt dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ðiz deɪz.

There was a tranquility to this kind of work; so much of his life was about destruction these days.

hi nu ðət hæd tə bi. hid kʌm tə ðə blæk taʊɝ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs kəz i ʌndɝstʊd wʌt wɑz tə kʌm. stɪl, ɪt wɑz naɪs tə kɹieɪt sʌmθɪŋ.

He knew that had to be. He'd come to the Black Tower in the first place because he understood what was to come. Still, it was nice to create something.

hi lɛft ɪz kɝən pis, lɛɾɪŋ ɪt dʒɹaɪ waɪl wɝkɪŋ ɑn səm sæɾəl stʃɹæps. hi mɛʒɝd ðə stʃɹæps wɪð ðə mɑɹks ɑn ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz teɪbəl ðən ɹitʃt fəɹ ɪz ʃiɹz ɪn ðə tul paʊtʃ ðət hʌŋ fɹəm ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz teɪbəl - hid meɪd ðət hɪmsɛlf. hi wɑz ənɔɪd tə dɪskʌvɝ ðət ðeɪ wɝn ɪn ðɛɹ pleɪs.

He left his current piece, letting it dry while working on some saddle straps. He measured the straps with the marks on the side of his table then reached for his shears in the tool pouch that hung from the side of his table - he'd made that himself. He was annoyed to discover that they weren't in their place.

bɝn ðə deɪ wɝd ɡɑɾ aʊt ðəɾ aɪ hæd ɡʊd ʃiɹz ɪn hɪɹ, hi θɔt. dɪspaɪt teɪmz səpoʊzədli stʃɹɪkt ɹulz fəɹ ðə blæk taʊɝ, ðəɹ wɑz ə dɪstʃɹɛsɪŋ əmaʊn ə keɪɑs. lɑɹdʒ ɪnfɹækʃənz wɝ pʌnɪʃt wɪð hɑɹʃ mɛʒɝz, bʌt ðə lɪɾəl θɪŋz - laɪk wɑndɝɪŋ ɪndə ə mænz wɝkʃɑp ən "bɑɹoʊɪŋ" hɪz ʃiɹz - wɝ ɪɡnɔɹd. pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɪf ðə bɑɹoʊɝ wɑz wʌn ə ðə lz feɪvɹɪts.

Burn the day word got out that I had good shears in here, he thought. Despite Taim's supposedly strict rules for the Black Tower, there was a distressing amount of chaos. Large infractions were punished with harsh measures, but the little things - like wandering into a man's workshop and "borrowing" his shears - were ignored. Particularly if the borrower was one of the M'Hael's favorites.

ænʒɹəl saɪd. hɪz bɛl naɪf wɑz weɪɾɪŋ ət kjulɝz pleɪs fəɹ ʃɑɹpənɪŋ. wɛl, hi θɔt, teɪm dʌz kip tɛlɪŋ əs tə lʊk fəɹ ɪkskjusɪz tə tʃænəl . . . ænʒɹəl ɛmptid hɪmsɛlf ʌv ɪmoʊʃən, ðən siz ðə sɔɹs. ɪt hæd bɪn mʌnθs sɪns hid hæd tʃɹʌbəl duɪŋ ðət - ət fɝst, hid bɪn eɪbəl tə tʃænəl oʊnli wən i wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ə stʃɹæp ə lɛðɝ. ðə l hæd biɾən ðəɾ aʊɾ ə hɪm. ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn ə plɛzən pɹɑsɛs.

Androl sighed. His belt knife was waiting at Cuellar's place for sharpening. Well, he thought, Taim does keep telling us to look for excuses to channel . . . Androl emptied himself of emotion, then seized the Source. It had been months since he'd had trouble doing that - at first, he'd been able to channel only when he was holding a strap of leather. The M'Hael had beaten that out of him. It had not been a pleasant process.

seɪɾɪn flʌɾəd ɪndə hɪm, swit, paʊɝfəl, bjuɾəfəl. hi sæt fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmənt, ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ ɪt. ðə teɪnt wɑz ɡɔn. wʌɾ ə wʌndɝ ðət wɑz. hi kloʊzd ɪz aɪz ən bɹiðd ɪn dipli.

Saidin flooded into him, sweet, powerful, beautiful. He sat for a long moment, enjoying it. The taint was gone. What a wonder that was. He closed his eyes and breathed in deeply.

wʌt wəɾ ɪt bi laɪk tə dʒɹɔ ɪn əz mʌtʃ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ əz ði ʌðɝz kʊd? ət taɪmz, hi θɝstɪd fəɹ ðæt. hi nu hi wɑz wik - wikəst ə ðə dɛɾəkeɪtəd ɪn ðə blæk taʊɝ. pɝhæps soʊ wik i ʃəd nɛvɝ əv bɪn pɹəmoʊɾəd fɹəm soʊlʒɝ. lɑɡən hæd ɡɔn tə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən əbaʊɾ ɪt, ən meɪd ðə pɹəmoʊʃən hæpən, əɡɛns teɪmz ɪkspɹɛs wɪʃɪz.

What would it be like to draw in as much of the One Power as the others could? At times, he thirsted for that. He knew he was weak - weakest of the Dedicated in the Black Tower. Perhaps so weak he should never have been promoted from soldier. Logain had gone to the Lord Dragon about it, and made the promotion happen, against Taim's express wishes.

ænʒɹəl oʊpən ɪz aɪz, ðən hɛld ʌp ðə stʃɹæp ən woʊv ə taɪni ɡeɪtweɪ, oʊnli ən ɪntʃ əkɹɔs. ɪt bɝst əlaɪv ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, slaɪsɪŋ ðə stʃɹæp ɪn tu. hi smaɪld, ðən lɛɾ ɪt vænɪʃ ən ɹɪpiɾɪd ðə pɹɑsɛs.

Androl opened his eyes, then held up the strap and wove a tiny gateway, only an inch across. It burst alive in front of him, slicing the strap in two. He smiled, then let it vanish and repeated the process.

səm sɛd ðət lɑɡən hæd fɔɹst ænʒɹəlz pɹəmoʊʃən oʊnli əz ə dɪɡ əɡɛns teɪmz əθɔɹəɾi. bʌt lɑɡən hæd sɛd ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ænʒɹəl ɛs ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl tælənt wɪð ɡeɪtweɪz ðət hæɾ ɝn ɪm ðə taɪɾəl ə dɛɾəkeɪtəd. lɑɡən wɑz ə hɑɹd mæn, bɹoʊkən ɝaʊn ði ɛdʒəz, laɪk ən oʊl skæbɝd ðət hædn bɪn pɹɑpɝli lækɝd. bʌt ðət skæbɝd stɪl hɛld ə dɛdli sɔɹd. lɑɡən wɑz ɑnəst. ə ɡʊd mæn, bɪniθ ðə skʌf mɑɹks.

Some said that Logain had forced Androl's promotion only as a dig against Taim's authority. But Logain had said that it was Androl s incredible Talent with gateways that had earned him the title of Dedicated. Logain was a hard man, broken around the edges, like an old scabbard that hadnt been properly lacquered. But that scabbard still held a deadly sword. Logain was honest. A good man, beneath the scuff marks.

ænʒɹəl ɪvɛntʃəwəli fɪnɪʃt wɪð ðə stʃɹæps. hi wɔkt oʊvɝ ən snɪp ðə stʃɹɪŋ hoʊldɪŋ ði oʊvəl pis ə lɛðɝ ɪn pleɪs. ɪt ɹɪteɪn ɪts ʃeɪp, ən i hɛld ɪɾ ʌp tə ðə sʌnlaɪt, ɪnspɛktɪŋ ðə stɪtʃɪŋ. ðə lɛðɝ wɑz stɪf wɪθaʊt biɪŋ bɹɪɾəl. hi fɪɾ ɪɾ ɑntu hɪz fɔɹɑɹm. jɛs, ðə moʊldɪŋ wɑz ɡʊd.

Androl eventually finished with the straps. He walked over and snipped the string holding the oval piece of leather in place. It retained its shape, and he held it up to the sunlight, inspecting the stitching. The leather was stiff without being brittle. He fit it onto his forearm. Yes, the molding was good.

hi nɑɾəd tə hɪmsɛlf. wʌn ə ðə tʃɹɪks tə laɪf wɑz peɪɪŋ ətɛnʃən tə ðə smɔl dɪteɪlz. foʊkəs, meɪk ðə smɔl θɪŋz ɹaɪt. ɪf itʃ stɪtʃ wɑz sɪkjʊɹ ɑn ən ɑɹmɡɑɹd, ðən ɪt wʊdn fɹeɪ əɹ snæp.

He nodded to himself. One of the tricks to life was paying attention to the small details. Focus, make the small things right. If each stitch was secure on an armguard, then it wouldn't fray or snap.

ðət kəd min ðə dɪfɝəns bɪtwin ən ɑɹtʃɝ læstɪŋ θɹu ə bɝɑʒ əɹ hævɪŋ tə pʊɾ əweɪ hɪz baʊ.

That could mean the difference between an archer lasting through a barrage or having to put away his bow.

wʌn ɑɹtʃɝ wʊdn meɪk ə bæɾəl. bʌt ðə smɔl θɪŋz paɪld ʌp, wʌn ətɑp ənʌðɝ, əntɪl ðeɪ bɪkeɪm lɑɹdʒ θɪŋz. hi fɪnɪʃt ði ɑɹmɡɑɹd baɪ əfɪksɪŋ ə fju pɝmənən taɪz tə ɪts bæk, soʊ wʌn kəd baɪn ɪɾ ɪn pleɪs ɑn ði ɑɹm.

One archer wouldn't make a battle. But the small things piled up, one atop another, until they became large things. He finished the armguard by affixing a few permanent ties to its back, so one could bind it in place on the arm.

hi tʊk ɪz blæk koʊɾ ɔf ðə bæk ə hɪz tʃɛɹ. ðə sɪlvɝ sɔɹd pɪn ɑn ðə haɪ kɑlɝ ɡlɪmɝɾ ɪn ðə wɪndoʊz sʌnlaɪɾ əz i dɪɾ ʌp ðə bʌɾənz. hi ɡlænst ət hɪmsɛlf ɪn ðə ɡlæsəz ɹəflɛkʃən, meɪkɪŋ sɝɾən ðə koʊt wɑz stʃɹeɪt. smɔl θɪŋz wɝ ɪmpɔɹɾənt. sɛkənz wɝ smɔl θɪŋz, ən ɪf jə hipt ɪnʌf ə ðoʊz ɑn tɑp ʌv wʌn ənʌðɝ, ðeɪ bɪkeɪm ə mænz laɪf.

He took his black coat off the back of his chair. The silver sword pin on the high collar glimmered in the window's sunlight as he did up the buttons. He glanced at himself in the glass's reflection, making certain the coat was straight. Small things were important. Seconds were small things, and if you heaped enough of those on top of one another, they became a man's life.

hi pʊt ði ɑɹmɡɑɹɾ ɑn ɪz ɑɹm, ðən pʊʃt oʊpən ðə dɔɹ tə hɪz smɔl wɝkʃɑp ən ɛntɝd ði aʊtskɝts ə ðə blæk taʊɝz vɪlədʒ. hɪɹ, klʌstɝz ə tu-stɔɹid bɪldɪŋz wɝ ɝeɪnʒd mʌtʃ laɪk ɛni smɔl taʊn ɪn ændɝ. pikt ɹufs, θætʃt, wɪð stʃɹeɪt wʊɾən wɔlz, səm stoʊn ən bɹɪk əz wɛl. ə dʌbəl laɪn ə ðɛm ɹæn daʊn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə vɪlədʒ. lʊkɪŋ oʊnli ət ðoʊz, wʌn maɪɾ əv θɔɾ i wɑz stʃɹoʊlɪŋ θɹu nu bɹəm əɹ ɡɹeɪfəndeɪl.

He put the armguard on his arm, then pushed open the door to his small workshop and entered the outskirts of the Black Tower's village. Here, clusters of two-storied buildings were arranged much like any small town in Andor. Peaked roofs, thatched, with straight wooden walls, some stone and brick as well. A double line of them ran down the center of the village. Looking only at those, one might have thought he was strolling through New Braem or Grafendale.

ʌv kɔɹs, ðət ɹikwaɪɝɾ ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə mɛn ɪn blæk koʊts. ðeɪ wɝ ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ɹʌnɪŋ ɛɹənz fəɹ ðə l, ɡoʊɪŋ tə pɹæktəs, wɝkɪŋ ɑn ðə faʊndeɪʃənz ə ðə blæk taʊɝ stʃɹʌktʃɝ ɪtsɛlf. ðɪs pleɪs wɑz stɪl ə wɝk ɪn pɹəɡɹɛs. ə ɡɹup ə soʊlʒɝz - bɛɹɪŋ niðɝ ðə sɔɹd pɪn nɔɹ ðə ɹɛd- ænd-ɡoʊl dʒɹæɡən - juz ðə paʊɝ tə blæst ə lɔŋ tʃɹɔf ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪsaɪd ðə ɹoʊd. ɪt hæd bɪn dɪsaɪɾɪd ðət ðə vɪlədʒ niɾəd ə kənæl.

Of course, that required ignoring the men in black coats. They were everywhere, running errands for the M'Hael, going to practice, working on the foundations of the Black Tower structure itself. This place was still a work in progress. A group of soldiers - bearing neither the sword pin nor the red- and-gold Dragon - used the Power to blast a long trough in the ground beside the road. It had been decided that the village needed a canal.

ænʒɹəl kəd si ðə wivz - moʊsli ɝθ - spɪnɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə soʊlʒɝz. ɪn ðə blæk taʊɝ, jə dɪɾ əz mʌtʃ wɪð ðə paʊɝ əz jə kʊd. ɔlweɪz tʃɹeɪnɪŋ, laɪk mɛn lɪftɪŋ stoʊnz tə bɪl ðɛɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ. laɪt, haʊ lɑɡən ən teɪm pʊʃt ðoʊz lædz.

Androl could see the weaves - mostly Earth - spinning around the soldiers. In the Black Tower, you did as much with the Power as you could. Always training, like men lifting stones to build their strength. Light, how Logain and Taim pushed those lads.

ænʒɹəl muvd aʊɾ ɑntu ðə nuli ɡɹævəld ɹoʊdweɪ. mʌtʃ ə ðət ɡɹævəl bɔɹ mɛltəɾ ɛdʒəz fɹəm wɛɹ ɪt hæd bɪn blæstəd. ðeɪ hæd bɹɔɾ ɪn boʊldɝz - θɹu ɡeɪtweɪz, ɑn wivz ʌv ɛɹ - ðən ʃæɾɝd əm wɪð ɪksploʊsɪv wivz. ɪt hæd bɪn laɪk ə wɔɹ zoʊn, ɹɑks ʃæɾɝɪŋ, spɹeɪ-ɪŋ tʃɪps. wɪð paʊɝ - ən tʃɹeɪnɪŋ - laɪk ðæt, ði æʃəmən wəd bi eɪbəl tə ɹədus sɪɾi wɔlz tə ɹʌbəl.

Androl moved out onto the newly graveled roadway. Much of that gravel bore melted edges from where it had been blasted. They had brought in boulders - through gateways, on weaves of Air - then shattered them with explosive weaves. It had been like a war zone, rocks shattering, spray-ing chips. With Power - and training - like that, the Asha'man would be able to reduce city walls to rubble.

ænʒɹəl kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn ɪz weɪ. ðə blæk taʊɝ wɑz ə pleɪs ə stʃɹeɪnʒ saɪts, ən mɛltəd ɡɹævəl wɑznt nɪɹli ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɪst ə ðɛm. niðɝ wɝ ðə soʊlʒɝz tɛɹɪŋ ʌp ɡɹaʊnd, fɑloʊɪŋ ænʒɹəl ɛs oʊn kɛɹfəl sɝveɪɪŋ. leɪtli, ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɪst saɪt tə hɪm wɑz ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. ðeɪ ɹæn ən pleɪd, dʒʌmpɪŋ ɪndə ðə tʃɹɔf lɛf bɪhaɪn baɪ ðə wɝkɪŋ soʊlʒɝz, slaɪɾɪŋ daʊn ɪts ɝθən saɪdz, ðən skɹæmbəlɪŋ bæk ʌp.

Androl continued on his way. The Black Tower was a place of strange sights, and melted gravel wasn't nearly the strangest of them. Neither were the soldiers tearing up ground, following Androl s own careful surveying. Lately, the strangest sight to him was the children. They ran and played, jumping into the trough left behind by the working soldiers, sliding down its earthen sides, then scrambling back up.

tʃɪlʒɹən. pleɪɪŋ ɪn ðə hoʊlz kɹieɪɾəd baɪ seɪɾɪn blæsts. ðə wɝld wɑz tʃeɪnʒɪŋ. ænʒɹəlz oʊn ɡɹæmə - soʊ eɪntʃənt ʃid lɔst ɛvɹi tuθ ɪn əɹ maʊθ - hæd juz stɔɹiz ə mɛn tʃænəlɪŋ tə fɹaɪɾən ɪm ɪndə bɛɾ ɑn naɪts wən i tʃɹaɪd tə slɪp aʊtsaɪɾ ən kaʊn ðə stɑɹz. ðə dɑɹknəs aʊtsaɪd hædn fɹaɪɾənd hɪm, nɔɹ hæd stɔɹiz ə tʃɹɑləks ən feɪdz. bʌt mɛn u kəd tʃænəl . . . ðət hæd tɛɹəfaɪd hɪm.

Children. Playing in the holes created by saidin blasts. The world was changing. Androl's own gramma - so ancient she'd lost every tooth in her mouth - had used stories of men channeling to frighten him into bed on nights when he tried to slip outside and count the stars. The darkness outside hadn't frightened him, nor had stories of Trollocs and Fades. But men who could channel . . . that had terrified him.

naʊ hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf hɪɹ, ɡɹoʊn ɪndə hɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz, sʌɾənli əfɹeɪɾ ə ðə dɑɹk bʌt kəmplitli ət pis wɪð mɛn u kəd tʃænəl. hi wɔk daʊn ðə ɹoʊd, ɡɹævəl kɹʌntʃɪŋ bɪniθ ɪz buts. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən keɪm skɹæmbəlɪŋ ʌp aʊɾ ə ðə dɪtʃ ən flɑkt ɝaʊn hɪm. hi aɪdli bɹɔɾ aʊɾ ə hændfʊl ə kændiz, pɝtʃəst ɑn ðə læst skaʊɾɪŋ mɪʃən.

Now he found himself here, grown into his middle years, suddenly afraid of the dark but completely at peace with men who could channel. He walked down the road, gravel crunching beneath his boots. The children came scrambling up out of the ditch and flocked around him. He idly brought out a handful of candies, purchased on the last scouting mission.

"tu itʃ," hi sɛd stɝnli əz dɝɾi hænz ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə kændiz. "ænd noʊ ʃʌvɪŋ, maɪn ju."

"Two each," he said sternly as dirty hands reached for the candies. "And no shoving, mind you."

hænz wɛn tə maʊðz, ən ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ɡeɪv ɪm bɑb hɛdz ɪn θæŋks, kɔlɪŋ ɪm "mæstɝ ɡɛnhəld," bɪfɔɹ ɹeɪsɪŋ əweɪ. ðeɪ dɪdnt ɡoʊ bæk tə ðə tʃɹɛntʃ, bʌɾ ɪnvɛntəɾ ə nu ɡeɪm, ɹʌnɪŋ ɔf təwɔɹd ðə filz tə ði ist.

Hands went to mouths, and the children gave him bobbed heads in thanks, calling him "Master Genhald," before racing away. They didn't go back to the trench, but invented a new game, running off toward the fields to the east.

ænʒɹəl bɹʌʃt ɔf ɪz hænz, smaɪlɪŋ. tʃɪlʒɹən wɝ soʊ ədæptəbəl. bɪfɔɹ ðɛm, sɛntʃɝiz ə tʃɹədɪʃən, tɛɹɝ ən supɝstɪʃən kəd mɛlt əweɪ laɪk bʌɾɝ lɛf tu lɔŋ ɪn ðə sʌn. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɡʊd ðət ðeɪd tʃoʊzən tə liv ðə tʃɹɛntʃ. ðə wʌn paʊɝ kəd bi ʌnpɹɪdɪktəbəl.

Androl brushed off his hands, smiling. Children were so adaptable. Before them, centuries of tradition, terror and superstition could melt away like butter left too long in the sun. But it was good that they'd chosen to leave the trench. The One Power could be unpredictable.

noʊ. ðət wɑzn ɹaɪt. seɪɾɪn wɑz vɛɹi pɹɪdɪktəbəl. ðə mɛn u wildɪɾ ɪt, haʊɛvɝ . . . wɛl, ðeɪ wɝ ə dɪfɹən stɔɹi.

No. That wasn't right. Saidin was very predictable. The men who wielded it, however . . . well, they were a different story.

ðə soʊlʒɝz hɔltəd ðɛɹ wɝk ən tɝn tə mit hɪm. hi wɑzn ə fʊl æʃəmən, ən dɪdn mɛɹəɾ ə səlut, bʌt ðeɪ ʃoʊɾ ɪm ɹɪspɛkt. tu mʌtʃ. hi wɑznt ʃʊɹ waɪ ðeɪ dɪfɝd tə hɪm. hi wɑz noʊ ɡɹeɪt mæn, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli nɑt hɪɹ, ɪn ðə blæk taʊɝ.

The soldiers halted their work and turned to meet him. He wasn't a full Asha'man, and didn't merit a salute, but they showed him respect. Too much. He wasn't sure why they deferred to him. He was no great man, particularly not here, in the Black Tower.

stɪl, ðeɪ nɑɾəd tə hɪm əz i pæst. moʊst ə ðiz wɝ əmʌŋ ðə mɛn u hæd bɪn ɹɪkɹuɾɪd fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. stɝɾi lædz ən mɛn, iɡɝ, ðoʊ mɛni wɝ ɑn ðə jʌŋ saɪd. hæf ə ðɛm dɪdnt nid tə ʃeɪv bʌt wʌns ə wik. ænʒɹəl wɔkt ʌp tə ðɛm, ðən ɪnspɛktɪd ðɛɹ wɝk, aɪɪŋ ðə laɪn ə stʃɹɪŋ hid taɪd tə smɔl steɪks. hi nɑɾəd ɪn æp-pɹɑvəl. "æŋɡəl ɪz ɡʊd, lædz," hi sɛd. "bʌt kip ðə saɪdz stipɝ, ɪf jə kæn."

Still, they nodded to him as he passed. Most of these were among the men who had been recruited from the Two Rivers. Sturdy lads and men, eager, though many were on the young side. Half of them didn't need to shave but once a week. Androl walked up to them, then inspected their work, eyeing the line of string he'd tied to small stakes. He nodded in ap-proval. "Angle is good, lads," he said. "But keep the sides steeper, if you can."

"jɛs, mæstɝ ɡɛnhəld," sɛd ðə wʌn liɾɪŋ ðə tim. dʒeɪm tɔɹfɪn wɑz ɪz neɪm, ə spɪnli jʌŋ mæn wɪð dʌsti bɹaʊn hɛɹ. hi stɪl hɛld i paʊɝ. ðət ɹeɪdʒɪŋ ɹɪvɝ ə stʃɹɛŋkθ wɑz soʊ ɛntaɪsɪŋ. ɹɛɹ wɑz ðə mæn u kəd ɹilis ɪt wɪθaʊɾ ə sɛns ə lɔs.

"Yes, Master Genhald," said the one leading the team. Jaim Torfinn was his name, a spindly young man with dusty brown hair. He still held he Power. That raging river of strength was so enticing. Rare was the man who could release it without a sense of loss.

ðə l ɛnkɝɪdʒd əm tə kip hoʊld ʌv ɪt, sɛd ðət hoʊldɪŋ ɪt tɔɾ əm tə kəntʃɹoʊl ɪt. bʌɾ ænʒɹəl hæd noʊn sɪdʌktɪv sɛnseɪʃənz sʌmwʌt laɪk seɪɾɪn bɪfɔɹ - ði ɪɡzɪlɝeɪʃən ə bæɾəl, ði ɪntɑksəkeɪʃən ə ɹɛɹ dʒɹɪŋks fɹəm ði aɪlz ə ðə si foʊk, ðə hɛɾi filɪŋ ə vɪktɝi. ə mæn kəd bi swɛpt ʌp ɪn ðoʊz filɪŋz ən luz kəntʃɹoʊl ə hɪmsɛlf, fɝɡɛɾɪŋ u hi wɑz. ən seɪɾɪn wɑz mɔɹ sɪdʌktɪv ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls hiɾ ɪkspɪɹiənst.

The M'Hael encouraged them to keep hold of it, said that holding it taught them to control it. But Androl had known seductive sensations somewhat like saidin before - the exhilaration of battle, the intoxication of rare drinks from the Isles of the Sea Folk, the heady feeling of victory. A man could be swept up in those feelings and lose control of himself, forgetting who he was. And saidin was more seductive than anything else he'd experienced.

hi sɛd nʌθɪŋ tə teɪm əbaʊɾ ɪz ɹɛzɝveɪʃənz. hi hæd noʊ bɪznəs lɛktʃɝɪŋ ðə l.

He said nothing to Taim about his reservations. He had no business lecturing the M'Hael.

"hɪɹ," ænʒɹəl sɛd, "lɛt mi ʃoʊ jə wʌɾ aɪ min baɪ stʃɹeɪt." hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ðən ɛmptid hɪmsɛlf ə filɪŋ. hi juz ði oʊl soʊlʒɝz tʃɹɪk tə də ðət - hid bɪn tɔɾ ɪt baɪ hɪz fɝst ɪnstʃɹʌktɝ ɪn ðə sɔɹd, oʊld wʌn-ɑɹmd ɡɑɹfən, huz hɛvi ɹʊɹəl ɪliɑnɝ æksɛn hæd bɪn vɝtʃuəli ɪŋkɑmpɹəhɛnsɪbəl. ʌv kɔɹs, ænʒɹəl hɪmsɛlf hæɾ ə feɪn tæɹɑboʊ-nɝ æksɛnt, hi wɑz toʊld. ɪt hæd feɪɾəd oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz sɪns hid læs bɪn hoʊm.

"Here," Androl said, "let me show you what I mean by straight." He took a deep breath, then emptied himself of feeling. He used the old soldier's trick to do that - he'd been taught it by his first instructor in the sword, old one-armed Garfin, whose heavy rural Illianer accent had been virtually incomprehensible. Of course, Androl himself had a faint Tarabo-ner accent, he was told. It had faded over the years since he'd last been home.

wɪðɪn ðə nʌθɪŋ - ðə vɔɪd - ænʒɹəl kəd fil ðə ɹeɪdʒɪŋ fɔɹs ðət wɑz seɪɾɪn. hi ɡɹæbd ɪɾ əz ə mæn ɡɹæb ðə nɛk ʌv ə hɔɹs ɹʌnɪŋ waɪld, hoʊpɪŋ tə stɪɹ ɪn səm smɔl weɪ bʌt moʊsli dʒʌs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hoʊld ɑn.

Within the nothing - the void - Androl could feel the raging force that was saidin. He grabbed it as a man grabbed the neck of a horse running wild, hoping to steer in some small way but mostly just trying to hold on.

seɪɾɪn wɑz wʌndɝfəl. jɛs, ɪt wɑz mɔɹ paʊɝfəl ðən ɛni ɪntɑksɪkənt. ɪt meɪd ðə wɝl mɔɹ bjuɾəfəl, mɔɹ lʌʃ. hoʊldɪŋ ðət tɛɹəbəl paʊɝ, ænʒɹəl fɛlt əz ɪf hid kʌm tə laɪf, livɪŋ ðə dʒɹaɪ hʌsk ə hɪz fɔɹmɝ sɛlf bɪhaɪnd. ɪt θɹɛɾənd tə kæɹi hɪm əweɪ ɪn ɪts swɪf kɝəns.

Saidin was wonderful. Yes, it was more powerful than any intoxicant. It made the world more beautiful, more lush. Holding that terrible Power, Androl felt as if he'd come to life, leaving the dry husk of his former self behind. It threatened to carry him away in its swift currents.

hi wɝkt kwɪkli, wivɪŋ ə taɪni tʃɹɪkəl ə ɝθ - ðə bɛst i kəd mænədʒ, fəɹ ɝθ wɑz wɛɹ i wɑz wikəst - ən kɛɹfəli ʃeɪv ðə saɪdz ə ðə kənæl. "ɪf jə liv tu mʌtʃ dʒʌɾɪŋ aʊt," hi ɪkspleɪn əz i wɝkt, "ðɛn ðə kənæl floʊ wɪl steɪ mʌɾi əz ɪt wɑʃɪz əweɪ ði ɝθ ɑn ðə saɪdz. ðə stʃɹeɪɾɝ ən mɔɹ fɝm ðə saɪdz, ðə bɛɾɝ. jə si?"

He worked quickly, weaving a tiny trickle of Earth - the best he could manage, for Earth was where he was weakest - and carefully shaved the sides of the canal. "If you leave too much jutting out," he explained as he worked, "then the canal flow will stay muddy as it washes away the earth on the sides. The straighter and more firm the sides, the better. You see?"

ðə soʊlʒɝz nɑɾəd. swɛt hæd biɾɪd ɑn ðɛɹ bɹaʊz, fleɪks ə dɝt stɪkɪŋ tə ðɛɹ fɔɹhɛdz ən tʃiks. bʌt ðɛɹ blæk koʊts wɝ klin, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ðə slivz. jə kəd dʒʌdʒ ə mænz ɹɪspɛk fəɹ ɪz junəfɔɹm baɪ wɛðɝ əɹ nɑɾ i juz ðə sliv tə waɪp ɪz bɹaʊ ɑn ə deɪ laɪk ðɪs. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz lædz juz hæŋkɝtʃəfs.

The soldiers nodded. Sweat had beaded on their brows, flakes of dirt sticking to their foreheads and cheeks. But their black coats were clean, particularly the sleeves. You could judge a man's respect for his uniform by whether or not he used the sleeve to wipe his brow on a day like this. The Two Rivers lads used handkerchiefs.

ðə mɔɹ sinjɝ æʃəmən, ʌv kɔɹs, ɹɛɹli swɛɾɪd əɾ ɔl. ɪt wəd teɪk ðiz lædz mɔɹ pɹæktəs tə ɡɛt ðət daʊn waɪl kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ soʊ mʌtʃ "ɡʊd mɛn," ænʒɹəl sɛd, stændɪŋ ʌp ən ɡlænsɪŋ oʊvɝ əm æn-dʒɹoʊl leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn dʒeɪmz ʃoʊldɝ. "ju lædz ɑɹ duɪŋ ə faɪn dʒɑb hɪɹ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ɪt ɡɹoʊz mɛn ɹaɪt."

The more senior Asha'man, of course, rarely sweated at all. It would take these lads more practice to get that down while concentrating so much "Good men," Androl said, standing up and glancing over them An-drol laid a hand on Jaim's shoulder. "You lads are doing a fine job here The Two Rivers, it grows men right."

ðə lædz bimd. ɪt wɑz ɡʊd tə hæv ðɛm, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli kəmpɛɹd tə ðə kwɑləɾi ʌv mɛn teɪm hæd bɪn ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ leɪtli. ðə lz skaʊts kleɪm ðeɪ tʊk huɛvɝ ðeɪ kəd faɪnd, jɛt waɪ wɑz ɪt ðət moʊs ðeɪ bɹɔt bæk hæd sətʃ æŋɡɹi, ənsɛɾəlɪŋ dɪspəzɪʃənz?

The lads beamed. It was good to have them, particularly compared to the quality of men Taim had been recruiting lately. The M'Hael's scouts claimed they took whoever they could find, yet why was it that most they brought back had such angry, unsettling dispositions?

"mæstɝ ɡɛnhəld?" æskt wʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz.

"Master Genhald?" asked one of the soldiers.

"jɛs, tʃɹɑst?" ænʒɹəl æskt.

"Yes, Trost?" Androl asked.

"hæv jə . . . hæv jə hɝɾ ɛniθɪŋ ə mæstɝ lɑɡən?"

"Have you . . . Have you heard anything of Master Logain?"

ði ʌðɝz lʊk hoʊpfəl.

The others looked hopeful.

ænʒɹəl ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "hi hæzən ɹɪtɝn fɹəm ɪz skaʊɾɪŋ mɪʃən. aɪm ʃʊɹ hɪl bi bæk sun."

Androl shook his head. "He hasn't returned from his scouting mission. I'm sure he'll be back soon."

ðə lædz nɑɾəd, ðoʊ hi kəd si ðət ðeɪ wɝ bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə wɝi. ðeɪ hæɾ ə ɹaɪt tə.

The lads nodded, though he could see that they were beginning to worry. They had a right to.

ænʒɹəl hæd bɪn wɝiɪŋ fəɹ wiks naʊ. ɛvɝ sɪns lɑɡən hæd lɛft ɪn ðə naɪt. wɛɹ hæɾ i ɡɔn? waɪ hæɾ i teɪkən dɑnɑloʊ, mɛzɝ ən wɛlɪn - θɹi ʌv ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl dɛɾəkeɪtəd lɔɪəl tə hɪm - əlɔŋ?

Androl had been worrying for weeks now. Ever since Logain had left in the night. Where had he gone? Why had he taken Donalo, Mezar and Welyn - three of the most powerful Dedicated loyal to him - along?

ən naʊ ðəɹ wɝ ðoʊz ɛɛs sədaɪ kæmpt aʊtsaɪd, səpoʊzədli sɛnt wɪð əθɔɹəɾi fɹəm ðə dʒɹæɡən tə bɑn æʃəmən. teɪm hæd ɡɪvən wʌn ə hɪz hæf-smaɪlz ət ðæt, ðə kaɪn ðət nɛvɝ ɹitʃt ɪz aɪz, ən toʊld əm ðə ɡɹup fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ hæd fɝs pɪk, sɪns ðeɪd kʌm fɝst. ði ʌðɝz weɪɾəd, ɪmpeɪʃənli.

And now there were those Aes Sedai camped outside, supposedly sent with authority from the Dragon to bond Asha'man. Taim had given one of his half-smiles at that, the kind that never reached his eyes, and told them the group from the White Tower had first pick, since they'd come first. The others waited, impatiently.

"ðə l," wʌn ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn sɛd, ɪkspɹɛʃən ɡɹoʊɪŋ dɑɹk. "hi - "

"The M'Hael," one of the Two Rivers men said, expression growing dark. "He - "

"kip jəɹ hɛdz ɑn jəɹ ʃoʊldɝz," ænʒɹəl ɪntɝʌptɪd, "æn doʊn meɪk weɪvz. nɑt jɛt. wi weɪt fəɹ lɑɡən."

"Keep your heads on your shoulders," Androl interrupted, "and don't make waves. Not yet. We wait for Logain."

ðə mɛn saɪd, bʌt nɑɾəd. dɪstʃɹæktəd baɪ ðə kɑnvɝseɪʃən, ænʒɹəl ɔlmoʊs dɪdnt noʊɾəs wən ðə ʃædoʊz nɪɹbaɪ bɪɡæn kɹipɪŋ təwɔɹd hɪm. ʃædoʊz ə mɛn, lɛŋθənɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌnlaɪt. ʃædoʊz wɪðɪn ðə tʃɹɔf. ʃædoʊz ə ɹɑks ən klɛfs ɪn ði ɝθ. sloʊli, dɪviəsli, ðeɪ tɝn təwɔɹɾ ænʒɹəl. ænʒɹəl stil hɪmsɛlf, bʌt kʊdn dɪspɛl ðə pænɪk. ðɪs wʌn tɛɹɝ i kəd fil dɪspaɪt ðə vɔɪd.

The men sighed, but nodded. Distracted by the conversation, Androl almost didn't notice when the shadows nearby began creeping toward him. Shadows of men, lengthening in the sunlight. Shadows within the trough. Shadows of rocks and clefts in the earth. Slowly, deviously, they turned toward Androl. Androl steeled himself, but couldn't dispel the panic. This one terror he could feel despite the void.

ðeɪ keɪm wɛnɛvɝ i hɛl seɪɾɪn fəɹ tu lɔŋ. hi ɹilist ɪɾ ɪmiɾiətli, ən ðə ʃædoʊz ɹɪlʌktənli kɹɛp bæk tə ðɛɹ pleɪsəz.

They came whenever he held saidin for too long. He released it immediately, and the shadows reluctantly crept back to their places.

ðə tu ɹɪvɝz lædz wɑtʃt hɪm, dɪskʌmfɝɾ ɪn ðɛɹ feɪsəz. kəd ðeɪ si ðə waɪl kæs tə ænʒɹəlz aɪz? noʊbɑdi spoʊk ə ði . . . ɪɹɛɡjəlæɾɝiz ðəɾ əflɪktəd mɛn ə ðə blæk taʊɝ. ɪt dʒʌst wɑzn dʌn. laɪk wɪspɝɪŋ dɝɾi fæmli sikɹəts.

The Two Rivers lads watched him, discomfort in their faces. Could they see the wild cast to Androl's eyes? Nobody spoke of the . . . irregulateries that afflicted men of the Black Tower. It just wasn't done. Like whispering dirty family secrets.

ðə teɪnt wɑz klɛnzd. ðiz lædz wəd nɛvɝ əv tə fil ðə θɪŋz ðəɾ ænʒɹəl dɪd. ɪvɛntʃəwəli, hi ən ði ʌðɝz u hæd bɪn ɪn ðə taʊɝ bɪfɔɹ ðə klɛnzɪŋ wəd bɪkʌm ɹɛɹɪɾiz. laɪt, bʌɾ i kʊdn ʌndɝ- stænd waɪ ɛniwʌn wəd lɪsən tə hɪm. wik ɪn ðə paʊɝ ən ɪnseɪn tə but?

The taint was cleansed. These lads would never have to feel the things that Androl did. Eventually, he and the others who had been in the Tower before the cleansing would become rarities. Light, but he couldn't under- stand why anyone would listen to him. Weak in the Power and insane to boot?

ən ðə wɝs pɑɹt wɑz, hi nu - dipli, daʊn tə hɪz vɛɹi sɛntɝ - ðət ðoʊz ʃædoʊz wɝ ɹil. nɑt dʒʌst səm mædnəs kənkɑktəd baɪ hɪz maɪnd. ðeɪ wɝ ɹil, ən ðeɪ wəd dɪstʃɹɔɪ hɪm ɪf ðeɪ ɹitʃt hɪm.

And the worst part was, he knew - deeply, down to his very center - that those shadows were real. Not just some madness concocted by his mind. They were real, and they would destroy him if they reached him.

ðeɪ wɝ ɹil. ðeɪ hæd tə bi.

They were real. They had to be.

oʊ, laɪt, hi θɔt, ɡɹɪɾɪŋ ɪz tiθ. iðɝ ɑpʃən ɪz tɛɹəfaɪɪŋ. iðɝ aɪm ɪnseɪn əɹ ðə dɑɹknəs ɪtsɛlf wɑns tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ mi.

Oh, Light, he thought, gritting his teeth. Either option is terrifying. Either I'm insane or the darkness itself wants to destroy me.

ðət wɑz waɪ hi kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ slip ət naɪts wɪθaʊt hʌɾəlɪŋ ɪn fɪɹ. səmtaɪmz i kəd ɡoʊ aʊɝz hoʊldɪŋ ðə sɔɹs wɪθaʊt siɪŋ ðə ʃædoʊz. səmtaɪmz oʊnli mɪnəts. hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ.

That was why he could no longer sleep at nights without huddling in fear. Sometimes he could go hours holding the Source without seeing the shadows. Sometimes only minutes. He took a deep breath.

"ɔl ɹaɪt," hi sɛd, sæɾəsfaɪd ðəɾ ɪz vɔɪs - ət list - saʊndəɾ ɪn kəntʃɹoʊl. "ju bɛst ɡɛt bæk tə wɝk. kip ðət sloʊp muvɪŋ ðə ɹaɪt dɝɛkʃən, maɪn ju. wɪl əv ə mɛs ən ə hæf tə dil wɪð ɪf ðə wɔɾɝ oʊvɝfloʊz ən flʌdz ðɪs ɛɹiə."

"All right," he said, satisfied that his voice - at least - sounded in control. "You best get back to work. Keep that slope moving the right direction, mind you. We'll have a mess and a half to deal with if the water overflows and floods this area."

əz ðeɪ oʊbeɪd, ænʒɹəl lɛf ðɛm, kʌɾɪŋ bæk θɹu ðə vɪlədʒ. nɪɹ ðə sɛntɝ stʊd ðə bæɹəks, faɪv lɑɹdʒ, θɪk-stoʊn bɪldɪŋz fəɹ ðə soʊlʒɝz, ə dʌzən smɔlɝ bɪldɪŋz fəɹ ðə dɛɾəkeɪtəd. ɹaɪt naʊ, ðɪs lɪɾəl vɪlədʒ wɑz ðə blæk taʊɝ. ðət wəd tʃeɪnʒ. ə taʊɝ pɹɑpɝ wɑz biɪŋ bɪl nɪɹbaɪ, ðə faʊndeɪʃən ɔlɹɛɾi dʌɡ.

As they obeyed, Androl left them, cutting back through the village. Near the center stood the barracks, five large, thick-stoned buildings for the soldiers, a dozen smaller buildings for the Dedicated. Right now, this little village was the Black Tower. That would change. A tower proper was being built nearby, the foundation already dug.

hi kəd vɪʒwəlaɪz wʌt ðə pleɪs maɪt sʌmdeɪ lʊk laɪk. hid wʌns wɝkt wɪð ə mæstɝ ɑɹkətɛkt - wʌn ʌv ə dʌzən dɪfɹən əpɹɛntəsʃɪps hid hɛld ɪn ə laɪf ðət səmtaɪmz sim tə hæv læstəd tu lɔŋ. jɛs, hi kəd si ɪɾ ɪn ɪz maɪnz aɪ. ə dɑmənɪɹɪŋ blæk stoʊn taʊɝ, paʊɝ-bɪlt.

He could visualize what the place might someday look like. He'd once worked with a master architect - one of a dozen different apprenticeships he'd held in a life that sometimes seemed to have lasted too long. Yes, he could see it in his mind's eye. A domineering black stone tower, Power-built.

stʃɹɔŋ, stɝɾi. əɾ ɪts beɪs wəd bi blɑkɪʃ skwɛɹ stʃɹʌktʃɝz wɪð kɹɛnəleɪɾəd tɑps.

Strong, sturdy. At its base would be blockish square structures with crenelated tops.

ðɪs vɪlədʒ wəd ɡɹoʊ tə bɪkʌm ə taʊn, ðən ə lɑɹdʒ sɪɾi, əz væst əz tɑɹ vəlɑn. ðə stʃɹits hæd bɪn bɪl tə əlaʊ ðə pæsɪŋ ə sɛvɹəl wæɡənz əɾ ə taɪm. nu sɛkʃənz wɝ sɝveɪɾ ən leɪd. ɪt bɪspoʊk vɪʒən ən plænɪŋ. ðə stʃɹits ðɛmsɛlvz wɪspɝɾ ə ðə blæk taʊɝz dɛstəni.

This village would grow to become a town, then a large city, as vast as Tar Valon. The streets had been built to allow the passing of several wagons at a time. New sections were surveyed and laid. It bespoke vision and planning. The streets themselves whispered of the Black Tower's destiny.

ænʒɹəl fɑloʊɾ ə wɔɹn pæθweɪ θɹu ðə skɹʌb ɡɹæs. dɪstən bumz ən snæps ɛkoʊɾ əkɹɔs ðə pleɪnz laɪk ðə saʊnz ʌv ə wɪp biɪŋ kɹækt. itʃ mæn hæɾ ɪz oʊn ɹizənz fəɹ kʌmɪŋ.

Androl followed a worn pathway through the scrub grass. Distant booms and snaps echoed across the plains like the sounds of a whip being cracked. Each man had his own reasons for coming.

ɹivɛnʒ, kjʊɹiɑsəɾi, dɛspɝeɪʃən, lʌs fəɹ paʊɝ. wɪtʃ wɑz ænʒɹəlz ɹizən? ɔl fɔɹ, pɝhæps?

Revenge, curiosity, desperation, lust for power. Which was Androl's reason? All four, perhaps?

hi lɛf ðə vɪlədʒ, ən ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɹaʊndəɾ ə laɪn ə tʃɹiz ən keɪm tə ðə pɹæktəs ɹeɪnʒ - ə smɔl kænjən bɪtwin tu hɪlz. ə laɪn ə mɛn stʊd tʃænəlɪŋ faɪɝ ən ɝθ. ðə hɪlz niɾəd tə bi lɛvəl tə meɪk læn fəɹ fɑɹmɪŋ. ən ɑpɝtunəɾi tə pɹæktəs.

He left the village, and eventually rounded a line of trees and came to the practice range - a small canyon between two hills. A line of men stood channeling Fire and Earth. The hills needed to be leveled to make land for farming. An opportunity to practice.

ðiz mɛn wɝ moʊsli dɛɾəkeɪtəd. wivz spʌn ɪn ði ɛɹ, mʌtʃ mɔɹ skɪlfəl ən paʊɝfəl ðən ðoʊz ðə tu ɹɪvɝz lædz hæd juzd. ðiz wɝ stʃɹimlaɪnd, laɪk hɪsɪŋ vaɪpɝz əɹ stʃɹaɪkɪŋ æɹoʊz.

These men were mostly Dedicated. Weaves spun in the air, much more skillful and powerful than those the Two Rivers lads had used. These were streamlined, like hissing vipers or striking arrows.

ɹɑks ɪksploʊɾəd ən bɝsts ə dɝt spɹeɪɾ ɪndə ði ɛɹ. ðə blæstɪŋ wɑz dʌn ɪn ən ʌnpɹɪdɪkt-eɪbəl pæɾɝn tə kənfjuz ən dɪsɔɹiɛn foʊz. ænʒɹəl kəɾ ɪmædʒən ə ɡɹup ə kævəlɹi θʌndɝɪŋ daʊn ðət sloʊp, oʊnli tə bi sɝpɹaɪz baɪ ɪksploʊɾɪŋ ɝθ. ə sɪŋɡəl dɛɾəkeɪtəd kəd waɪp aʊt dʌzənz ə ɹaɪɾɝz ɪn moʊməns.

Rocks exploded and bursts of dirt sprayed into the air. The blasting was done in an unpredict-able pattern to confuse and disorient foes. Androl could imagine a group of cavalry thundering down that slope, only to be surprised by exploding Earth. A single Dedicated could wipe out dozens of riders in moments.

ænʒɹəl noʊɾəd wɪð dɪsæɾɪsfækʃən ðət ðə wɝkɪŋ mɛn stʊɾ ɪn tu ɡɹups. ðə taʊɝ wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə splɪɾ ən dɪvaɪd, ðoʊz lɔɪəl tə lɑɡən ʃʌn ən ɔstʃɹəsaɪzd. ɑn ðə ɹaɪt, kænlɝ, əmɝɪn ən næləm wɝkt wɪð foʊkəs ən dɛɾəkeɪʃən, dʒɔɪn baɪ dʒɑnɪθ daʊtʃɹi - ðə moʊst skɪl soʊlʒɝ əmʌŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz lædz. ɑn ðə lɛft, ə ɡɹup ə teɪmz kɹoʊniz wɝ læfɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz. ðɛɹ wivz wɝ mɔɹ waɪld, bʌɾ ɔlsoʊ mʌtʃ mɔɹ dɪstʃɹʌktɪv. koʊɾɝən laʊnʒd ət ðə bæk, linɪŋ əɡɛnst ə lifi hɑɹdɡəm tʃɹi ən oʊvɝsiɪŋ ðə wɝk.

Androl noted with dissatisfaction that the working men stood in two groups. The Tower was beginning to split and divide, those loyal to Logain shunned and ostracized. On the right, Canler, Emarin and Nalaam worked with focus and dedication, joined by Jonneth Dowtry - the most skilled soldier among the Two Rivers lads. On the left, a group of Taim's cronies were laughing among themselves. Their weaves were more wild, but also much more destructive. Coteren lounged at the back, leaning against a leafy hardgum tree and overseeing the work.

ðə wɝkɝz tʊk ə bɹeɪk ən kɔl fəɹ ə vɪlədʒ bɔɪ tə bɹɪŋ wɔɾɝ. ænʒɹəl wɔkt ʌp, ən ɑɹlən næləm sɔ hɪm fɝst, weɪvɪŋ wɪð ə bɹɔd smaɪl. ðə dəmɑni mæn wɔɹ ə θɪn mʌstæʃ. hi wɑz dʒʌst ʃaɪ ʌv ɪz θɝɾiəθ jɪɹ, ðoʊ hi səmtaɪmz æktəd mʌtʃ jʌŋɡɝ. ænʒɹəl wɑz stɪl smɑɹɾɪŋ fɹəm ðə taɪm næləm hæd pʊt tʃɹi sæp ɪn ɪz buts.

The workers took a break and called for a village boy to bring water. Androl walked up, and Arlen Nalaam saw him first, waving with a broad smile. The Domani man wore a thin mustache. He was just shy of his thirtieth year, though he sometimes acted much younger. Androl was still smarting from the time Nalaam had put tree sap in his boots.

"ænʒɹəl!" næləm kɔld. "kʌm tɛl ðiz ʌnkʌltʃɝd laʊts wʌɾ ə ɹitæʃən dɑzɝ ɪz!"

"Androl!" Nalaam called. "Come tell these uncultured louts what a Retashen Dazer is!"

"eɪ ɹitæʃən dɑzɝ?" ænʒɹəl sɛd. "ɪts ə dʒɹɪŋk. mɪks ə miɾ ən uz mɪlk. faʊl stʌf"

"A Retashen Dazer?" Androl said. "It's a drink. Mix of mead and ewe's milk. Foul stuff"

næləm lʊkt ət ði ʌðɝz pɹaʊdli. hi hæd noʊ pɪnz ɑn ɪz koʊt. hi wɑz oʊnli ə soʊlʒɝ, bʌɾ i ʃʊɾə bɪn ədvæns baɪ naʊ.

Nalaam looked at the others proudly. He had no pins on his coat. He was only a soldier, but he should have been advanced by now.

"ju bɹæɡɪŋ əbaʊt jəɹ tʃɹævəlz əɡɛn, næləm?" ænʒɹəl æskt, ənleɪsɪŋ ðə lɛðɝ ɑɹmɡɑɹd.

"You bragging about your travels again, Nalaam?" Androl asked, unlacing the leather armguard.

"wi dəmɑni ɡɛɾ ɝaʊnd," næləm sɛd. "ju noʊ, ðə kaɪndə wɝk maɪ fɑðɝ dʌz, spaɪɪŋ fəɹ ðə kɹaʊn. . . ."

"We Domani get around," Nalaam said. "You know, the kind of work my father does, spying for the Crown. . . ."

"læst wik jə sɛd jəɹ fɑðɝ wɑz ə mɝtʃənt," kænlɝ sɛd. ðə stɝɾi mæn wɑz ði oʊldəst ə ðə ɡɹup, hɪz hɛɹ ɡɹeɪɪŋ, hɪz skwɛɹ feɪs wɔɹn fɹəm mɛni jɪɹz ɪn ðə sʌn.

"Last week you said your father was a merchant," Canler said. The sturdy man was the oldest of the group, his hair graying, his square face worn from many years in the sun.

"hi ɪz," næləm sɛd. "ðæts ɪz fɹʌn fəɹ biɪŋ ə spaɪ!"

"He is," Nalaam said. "That's his front for being a spy!"

"ɑɹənt wɪmən ðə mɝtʃəns ɪn ɑɹæd dumən?" dʒɑnɪθ æskt, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz tʃɪn. hi wɑz ə lɑɹdʒ, kwaɪət mæn wɪð ə ɹaʊn feɪs. hɪz ɪntaɪɝ fæmli-hɪz sɪblɪŋz, hɪz pɛɹəns, ən ɪz ɡɹændfɑðɝ bjul - hæd ɹiloʊkeɪɾɪd tə ðə vɪlədʒ ɹæðɝ ðən lɛɾɪŋ ɪm kʌm əloʊn.

"Aren't women the merchants in Arad Doman?" Jonneth asked, rubbing his chin. He was a large, quiet man with a round face. His entire family-his siblings, his parents, and his grandfather Buel - had relocated to the village rather than letting him come alone.

"wɛl, ðəɹ ðə bɛst," næləm sɛd, "æn maɪ mʌðɝ ɪz noʊ ɪksɛpʃən. wi mɛn noʊ ə θɪŋ əɹ tu, ðoʊ. bɪsaɪdz, sɪns maɪ mʌðɝ wɑz bɪzi ɪnfɪltʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ðə tuætɑn, maɪ fɑðɝ hæd tə teɪk oʊvɝ ðə bɪznəs."

"Well, they're the best," Nalaam said, "and my mother is no exception. We men know a thing or two, though. Besides, since my mother was busy infiltrating the Tuatha'an, my father had to take over the business."

"oʊ, naʊ ðæts dʒʌst ɹɪdɪkjələs," kænlɝ sɛd wɪð ə skaʊl. "hu wəɾ ɛvɝ wɑnə ɪnfɪltʃɹeɪɾ ə bʌntʃ ə tɪŋkɝz?"

"Oh, now that's just ridiculous," Canler said with a scowl. "Who would ever want to infiltrate a bunch of Tinkers?"

"tə lɝn ðɛɹ sikɹət ɹɛsəpiz," næləm sɛd. "ɪts sɛd ðəɾ ə tɪŋkɝ kən kʊk ə pɑɾ ə stu soʊ faɪn ðəɾ ɪɾəl meɪk jə liv haʊs ən hoʊm tə tʃɹævəl wɪð ðɛm. ɪts tʃɹu, aɪv teɪstəɾ ɪt maɪsɛlf, ən aɪ hæd tə bi taɪɾ ɪn ə ʃɛd fəɹ θɹi deɪz bɪfɔɹ ði ɪfɛkt wɔɹ ɔf."

"To learn their secret recipes," Nalaam said. "It's said that a Tinker can cook a pot of stew so fine that it will make you leave house and home to travel with them. It's true, I've tasted it myself, and I had to be tied in a shed for three days before the effect wore off."

kænlɝ snɪft. haʊɛvɝ, æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ðə fɑɹmɝ æɾəd, "soʊ . . . dɪd ʃi faɪn ðə ɹɛsəpi əɹ nɑt?"

Canler sniffed. However, after a moment, the farmer added, "So . . . did she find the recipe or not?"

næləm lɔntʃt ɪndə ənʌðɝ stɔɹi, kænlɝ ən dʒɑnɪθ lɪsnɪŋ ɪntɛnli. əmɝɪn stʊd tə ðə saɪd, lʊkɪŋ ɑn wɪð əmjuzmənt - hi wɑz ði ʌðɝ soʊlʒɝ ɪn ðə ɡɹup, bɛɹɪŋ noʊ pɪnz. hi wɑz ən oʊldɝ mæn, wɪð θɪn hɛɹ ən ɹɪŋkəlz əɾ ɪz aɪz. hɪz ʃɔɹt waɪt bɪɹd wɑz tʃɹɪm tə ə pɔɪnt.

Nalaam launched into another story, Canler and Jonneth listening intently. Emarin stood to the side, looking on with amusement - he was the other soldier in the group, bearing no pins. He was an older man, with thin hair and wrinkles at his eyes. His short white beard was trimmed to a point.

ðə dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃt mæn wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ən ɪnɪɡmə; hiɾ ɝaɪvd wɪð lɑɡən wʌn deɪ, ən hæd sɛd nʌθɪŋ ə hɪz pæst. hi hæɾ ə pɔɪz bɛɹɪŋ ən ə dɛləkət weɪ ʌv spikɪŋ. hi wɑz ə noʊbəlmən, ðət wɑz sɝɾən. bʌɾ ənlaɪk moʊst ʌðɝ noʊbəlmən ɪn ðə blæk taʊɝ, əmɝɪn meɪd noʊ ətɛmpt əɾ əsɝɾɪŋ ɪz pɹəzumd əθɔɹəɾi. mɛni noʊbəlmən tʊk wiks tə lɝn ðət wʌns jə dʒɔɪn ðə blæk taʊɝ, jəɹ aʊtsaɪd ɹæŋk wɑz minɪŋləs. ðət meɪɾ əm sʌlən ən snæpɪʃ, bʌɾ əmɝɪn hæd teɪkən tə laɪf ɪn ðə taʊɝ ɪmiɾiətli.

The distinguished man was something of an enigma; he'd arrived with Logain one day, and had said nothing of his past. He had a poised bearing and a delicate way of speaking. He was a nobleman, that was certain. But unlike most other noblemen in the Black Tower, Emarin made no attempt at asserting his presumed authority. Many noblemen took weeks to learn that once you joined the Black Tower, your outside rank was meaningless. That made them sullen and snappish, but Emarin had taken to life in the Tower immediately.

ɪt tʊk ə noʊbəlmən wɪð tʃɹu dɪɡnəɾi tə fɑloʊ ði ɔɹɾɝz ʌv ə kɑmənɝ hæf ɪz eɪdʒ wɪθaʊt kəmpleɪnt. əmɝɪn tʊk ə sɪp ʌv wɔɾɝ fɹəm ðə sɝvɪŋ bɔɪ, θæŋkɪŋ ðə læd, ðən stɛpt ʌp tə ænʒɹəl. hi nɑɾəd təwɔɹd næləm, hu wɑz stɪl tɔkɪŋ tə ði ʌðɝz. "ðæt wʌn əz ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv ə ɡlimən."

It took a nobleman with true dignity to follow the orders of a commoner half his age without complaint. Emarin took a sip of water from the serving boy, thanking the lad, then stepped up to Androl. He nodded toward Nalaam, who was still talking to the others. "That one has the heart of a gleeman."

ænʒɹəl ɡɹʌntɪd. "meɪbi hi kən juz ɪt tə ɝn səm ɛkstʃɹə kɔɪn. hi stɪl oʊz mi ə nu pɛɹ ə sɑks."

Androl grunted. "Maybe he can use it to earn some extra coin. He still owes me a new pair of socks."

"æn ju, maɪ fɹɛnd, hæv ðə soʊl ʌv ə skɹaɪb!" əmɝɪn læft. "ju nɛvɝ fɝɡɛɾ ə θɪŋ, də ju?"

"And you, my friend, have the soul of a scribe!" Emarin laughed. "You never forget a thing, do you?"

ænʒɹəl ʃɹʌɡd.

Androl shrugged.

"haʊ dɪd jə noʊ wʌɾ ə ɹitæʃən dɑzɝ wɑz? aɪ kənsɪɾɝ maɪsɛlf kwaɪɾ ɛdʒəkeɪɾəd ɪn ðiz mæɾɝz, jɛɾ aɪd hɝd nɑɾ ə wɝɾ ʌv ɪt."

"How did you know what a Retashen Dazer was? I consider myself quite educated in these matters, yet I'd heard not a word of it."

"aɪ hæd wʌn wʌns," ænʒɹəl sɛd. "dʒɹæŋk ɪɾ ɑn ə bɛt."

"I had one once," Androl said. "Drank it on a bet."

"jɛs, bʌt wɛɹ?"

"Yes, but where?"

"ɹitæʃ, ʌv kɔɹs."

"Retash, of course."

"bʌt ðæts liɡz ɔf ʃɔɹ, ɪn ə klʌstɝ ʌv aɪlənz nɑɾ ivən ðə si foʊk ɔfən vɪzət!"

"But that's leagues off shore, in a cluster of islands not even the Sea Folk often visit!"

ænʒɹəl ʃɹʌɡd əɡɛn. hi ɡlænst oʊvɝ ət teɪmz lækiz. ə vɪlədʒ bɔɪ hæd bɹɔɾ əm ə bæskəɾ ə fud fɹəm teɪm, ðoʊ ði ə kleɪm nɑt tə pleɪ feɪvɹɪts. ɪf ænʒɹəl æskt, hid faɪn ðəɾ ə bɔɪ wɑz sʌp-poʊz tə hæv bɪn sɛnt wɪð fud fəɹ ði ʌðɝz, tu. bʌt ðət læd wʊɾə bɪkʌm lɔst, əɹ hæd fɝɡɑɾən, əɹ meɪd səm ʌðɝ ɪnəsən mɪsteɪk. teɪm wəɾ əv sʌmwʌn wɪpt, ən nʌθɪŋ wəd tʃeɪnʒ.

Androl shrugged again. He glanced over at Taim's lackeys. A village boy had brought them a basket of food from Taim, though the M'HaeI claimed not to play favorites. If Androl asked, he'd find that a boy was sup-posed to have been sent with food for the others, too. But that lad would have become lost, or had forgotten, or made some other innocent mistake. Taim would have someone whipped, and nothing would change.

"ðɪs dɪvɪʒən ɪz tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ, maɪ fɹɛnd," əmɝɪn sɛd sɔfli. "haʊ kən wi faɪt fəɹ ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɪf wi kænɑt meɪk pis əmʌŋ aʊɝsɛlvz?"

"This division is troubling, my friend," Emarin said softly. "How can we fight for the Lord Dragon if we cannot make peace among ourselves?"

ænʒɹəl ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

Androl shook his head.

əmɝɪn kəntɪnjud. "ðeɪ seɪ ðət noʊ mæn feɪvɝɾ ə lɑɡən əz hæd ðə dʒɹæɡən pɪn ɪn wiks.

Emarin continued. "They say that no man favored of Logain has had the Dragon pin in weeks.

ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛni, laɪk næləm ðɛɹ, hu ʃʊɾə hæd ðə sɔɹd pɪn lɔŋ əɡoʊ - bʌɾ ɑɹ dɪnaɪd ɹɪpiɾɪdli baɪ ðə l. eɪ haʊs huz mɛmbɝz skwɑbəl fəɹ əθɔɹəɾi wɪl nɛvɝ pɹizɛn ə θɹɛt tə ʌðɝ haʊsəz."

There are many, like Nalaam there, who should have had the sword pin long ago - but are denied repeatedly by the M'Hael. A House whose members squabble for authority will never present a threat to other Houses."

"waɪz wɝdz," ænʒɹəl sɛd. "bʌt wʌt ʃəd wi du? wʌt kən wi du? teɪm ɪz l, ən lɑɡən hæzən ɹɪtɝn jɛt."

"Wise words," Androl said. "But what should we do? What can we do? Taim is M'Hael, and Logain hasn't returned yet."

"pɝhæps wi kəd sɛn sʌmwʌn fəɹ hɪm," əmɝɪn sɛd. "ɔɹ meɪbi jə kəd kɑm ði ʌðɝz. aɪ fɪɹ ðət səm ə ðɛm ɑɹ nɪɹ tə snæpɪŋ, ən ɪf ə faɪt bɹeɪks aʊt, aɪ hæv lɪɾəl daʊɾ u wəd si ðə ɹʌf saɪɾ ə teɪmz pʌnɪʃməns."

"Perhaps we could send someone for him," Emarin said. "Or maybe you could calm the others. I fear that some of them are near to snapping, and if a fight breaks out, I have little doubt who would see the rough side of Taim's punishments."

ænʒɹəl fɹaʊnd. "tʃɹu. bʌt waɪ mi? jəɹ fɑɹ bɛɾɝ wɪð wɝdz ðən aɪ æm, əmɝɪn."

Androl frowned. "True. But why me? You're far better with words than I am, Emarin."

əmɝɪn tʃʌkəld. "jɛs, bʌt lɑɡən tʃɹʌsts ju, ænʒɹəl. ði ʌðɝ mɛn lʊk tə ju."

Emarin chuckled. "Yes, but Logain trusts you, Androl. The other men look to you."

ðeɪ ʃʊdnt, ænʒɹəl θɔt. "aɪl si wʌɾ aɪ kən θɪŋk ʌv." næləm wɑz waɪndɪŋ ʌp fəɹ ənʌðɝ stɔɹi, bʌt bɪfɔɹ i kəd bɪɡɪn, ænʒɹəl dʒɛstʃɝd tə dʒɑnɪθ, hoʊldɪŋ ʌp ði ɑɹmɡɑɹd. "aɪ sɔ jəɹ oʊld wʌn hæd kɹækt. tʃɹaɪ ðɪs."

They shouldn't, Androl thought. "I'll see what I can think of." Nalaam was winding up for another story, but before he could begin, Androl gestured to Jonneth, holding up the armguard. "I saw your old one had cracked. Try this."

dʒɑnɪθ ɛs feɪs bɹaɪɾənd əz i tʊk ði ɑɹmɡɑɹd. "jɔɹ əmeɪzɪŋ, ænʒɹəl! aɪ dɪdn θɪŋk ɛniwʌn hæd noʊɾəst. ɪts ə sɪli θɪŋ, aɪ noʊ, bʌt. . ." hɪz smaɪl bɹɔɾənd ən i hɝid tə ə nɪɹbaɪ tʃɹi, bɪsaɪd wɪtʃ sæt səm ə ðə mɛnz ɪkwɪpmənt, ɪnkluɾɪŋ dʒɑnɪθs baʊ. ðiz tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn laɪk tə hæv əm hændi.

Jonneth s face brightened as he took the armguard. "You're amazing, Androl! I didn't think anyone had noticed. It's a silly thing, I know, but. . ." His smile broadened and he hurried to a nearby tree, beside which sat some of the men's equipment, including Jonneth's bow. These Two Rivers men liked to have them handy.

dʒɑnɪθ ɹɪtɝnd, stʃɹɪŋɪŋ ðə baʊ. hi pʊɾ ɑn ði ɑɹmɡɑɹd. "fɪts laɪk ə dʒɹim!" hi sɛd, ən ænʒɹəl fɛl hɪmsɛlf smaɪlɪŋ. smɔl θɪŋz. ðeɪ kəd min soʊ mʌtʃ.

Jonneth returned, stringing the bow. He put on the armguard. "Fits like a dream!" he said, and Androl felt himself smiling. Small things. They could mean so much.

dʒɑnɪθ tʊk eɪm ən lɔntʃt ən æɹoʊ, ðə ʃæf stʃɹikɪŋ ɪndə ði ɛɹ, bɑstʃɹɪŋ snæpɪŋ əɡɛns ði ɑɹmɡɑɹd. ði æɹoʊ sɔɹd fɑɹ, stʃɹɪk- ɪŋ ə tʃɹi ɑn ə hɪl bɛɾɝ ðən tu hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əweɪ.

Jonneth took aim and launched an arrow, the shaft streaking into the air, bowstring snapping against the armguard. The arrow soared far, strik- ing a tree on a hill better than two hundred paces away.

kænlɝ wɪsəld. "eɪn ɛvɝ sin ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ðoʊz baʊz ə jʊɹz, dʒɑnɪθ. nɛvɝ ɪn maɪ laɪf."

Canler whistled. "Ain't ever seen anything like those bows of yours, Jonneth. Never in my life."

ðeɪ wɝ fɛloʊ ændɔɹənz, ðoʊ kænlɝ hæd kʌm fɹəm ə taʊn mʌtʃ kloʊsɝ tə keɪɛmlɪn.

They were fellow Andorans, though Canler had come from a town much closer to Caemlyn.

dʒɑnɪθ lʊkt əɾ ɪz ʃɑt kɹɪɾɪkəli, ðən dʒɹu əɡɛn - flɛtʃɪŋ tə tʃik - ən lust. ðə ʃæft fɛl tʃɹu ən hɪt ðə vɛɹi seɪm tʃɹi. ænʒɹəl wəd ɡɛs ðət ðə ʃæfs wɝ lɛs ðən tu hændspænz əpɑɹt.

Jonneth looked at his shot critically, then drew again - fletching to cheek - and loosed. The shaft fell true and hit the very same tree. Androl would guess that the shafts were less than two handspans apart.

kænlɝ wɪsəld əɡɛn.

Canler whistled again.

"maɪ fɑðɝ tʃɹeɪn ɑn wʌn ə ðoʊz," næləm noʊɾəd. "lɝn ði ɑɹt fɹəm ə tu ɹɪvɝz mæn hum i ɹɛskjud fɹəm dʒɹaʊnɪŋ ɪn ɪljən. hæz ðə bɑstʃɹɪŋ əz ə mɪmɛntoʊ."

"My father trained on one of those," Nalaam noted. "Learned the art from a Two Rivers man whom he rescued from drowning in Illian. Has the bowstring as a memento."

kænlɝ ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ, bʌɾ i sim teɪkən wɪð ðə teɪl ət ðə seɪm taɪm. ænʒɹəl dʒʌs tʃʌkəld, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd. "maɪn ɪf aɪ hæv ə ɡoʊ, dʒɑnɪθ? ɪm ə pɹɪɾi dɛd ʃɑt wɪð ə tɛɹən baʊ, ən ðəɹ ə lɪɾəl lɔŋɡɝ ðən moʊst."

Canler raised an eyebrow, but he seemed taken with the tale at the same time. Androl just chuckled, shaking his head. "Mind if I have a go, Jonneth? I'm a pretty dead shot with a Tairen bow, and they're a little longer than most."

"ʃʊɹli," ðə læŋki mæn sɛd, ənstʃɹæpɪŋ ði ɑɹmɡɑɹɾ ən hændɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə baʊ.

"Surely," the lanky man said, unstrapping the armguard and handing over the bow.

ænʒɹəl dɑn ði ɑɹmɡɑɹɾ ən lɪftəd ðə baʊ. ɪt wɑz ə blæk ju, ən ðəɹ wɑzn əz mʌtʃ spɹɪŋ tə ðə stʃɹɪŋ əz i wɑz juz tə. dʒɑnɪθ hændəɾ ɪm ən æɹoʊ ən ænʒɹəl mɪmɪk ðə mænz pʊl, dʒɹɔɪŋ tə hɪz tʃik.

Androl donned the armguard and lifted the bow. It was of black yew, and there wasn't as much spring to the string as he was used to. Jonneth handed him an arrow and Androl mimicked the man's pull, drawing to his cheek.

"laɪt!" hi sɛɾ ət ðə weɪɾ ə ðə pʊl. "ðoʊz ɑɹmz ə jʊɹz ɑɹ dɪsɛptɪvli smɔl, dʒɑnɪθ.

"Light!" he said at the weight of the pull. "Those arms of yours are deceptively small, Jonneth.

haʊ dʒju mænədʒ tə eɪm? aɪ kən bɛɹli kip ɪt stɛɾi!"

How do you manage to aim? I can barely keep it steady!"

dʒɑnɪθ læft əz ænʒɹəlz ɑɹmz tʃɹɛmbəld, ən i faɪnəli lust, əneɪbəl tə kip ðə baʊ dʒɹɔn fəɹ ə bɹɛθ lɔŋɡɝ. ði æɹoʊ hɪt ðə ɡɹaʊn fɑɹ ɔf tɑɹɡət. hi hændəd ðə baʊ tə dʒɑnɪθ.

Jonneth laughed as Androl's arms trembled, and he finally loosed, unable to keep the bow drawn for a breath longer. The arrow hit the ground far off target. He handed the bow to Jonneth.

"ðæt wɑz fɛɹli ɡʊd, ænʒɹəl," dʒɑnɪθ sɛd. "ə lɑɾ ə mɛn kæn ivən ɡɛt ðə stʃɹɪŋ bæk. ɡɪmi tɛn jɪɹz, ən aɪ kəɾ əv jə ʃuɾɪŋ laɪk wʌn bɔɹn ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz!"

"That was fairly good, Androl," Jonneth said. "A lot of men can't even get the string back. Give me ten years, and I could have you shooting like one born in the Two Rivers!"

"aɪl stɪk tə ʃɔɹtbaʊz fəɹ naʊ," ænʒɹəl sɛd. "jud nɛvɝ bi eɪbəl tə ʃuɾ ə mɑnstɝ laɪk ðət fɹəm hɔɹsbæk."

"I'll stick to shortbows for now," Androl said. "You'd never be able to shoot a monster like that from horseback."

"aɪ wʊdnt nid tə!" dʒɑnɪθ sɛd.

"I wouldn't need to!" Jonneth said.

"wʌɾ ɪf jə wɝ biɪŋ tʃeɪst?"

"What if you were being chased?"

"ɪf ðəɹ wɝ fjuɝ ðən faɪv ə ðɛm," dʒɑnɪθ sɛd, "aɪd teɪk əm ɔl daʊn wɪð ðɪs bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɡɑt tə mi. ɪf ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ ðən faɪv, ðən wʌɾ æm aɪ duɪŋ ʃuɾɪŋ ət ðɛm? aɪ ʃəd bi ɹʌnɪŋ laɪk ðə dɑɹk wʌn hɪmsɛlf wɑz æftɝ mi."

"If there were fewer than five of them," Jonneth said, "I'd take them all down with this before they got to me. If there were more than five, then what am I doing shooting at them? I should be running like the Dark One himself was after me."

ði ʌðɝ mɛn tʃʌkəld, ðoʊ ænʒɹəl kɑɾ əmɝɪn aɪɪŋ hɪm.

The other men chuckled, though Androl caught Emarin eyeing him.

pɹɑbli wʌndɝɪŋ haʊ ænʒɹəl nu tə ʃuɾ ə baʊ fɹəm hɔɹsbæk i wɑz ə kin wʌn, ðət noʊbəlmən. ænʒɹəl wəɾ əv tə wɑtʃ hɪmsɛlf.

Probably wondering how Androl knew to shoot a bow from horseback He was a keen one, that nobleman. Androl would have to watch himself.

"ænd wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs?" ə vɔɪs æskt. "ju də bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lɝn tə ʃuɾ ə baʊ, peɪdʒbɔɪ? ɪz ðɪs soʊ jə kən æktʃəli  dɪfɛn jɝsɛlf?"

"And what is this?" a voice asked. "You do be trying to learn to shoot a bow, pageboy? Is this so you can actually defend yourself?"

ænʒɹəl ɡɹɪɾɪd ɪz tiθ, tɝnɪŋ əz koʊɾɝən sɔntɝɾ ʌp. hi wɑz ə bʌlki mæn, hɪz blæk, ɔɪli hɛɹ kɛp lɔŋ ən lus. ɪt hʌŋ ɝaʊn ə blʌn feɪs wɪð pʌdʒi tʃiks. hɪz aɪz wɝ foʊkəst, deɪnʒɝəs. hi smaɪld. ðə smaɪl ʌv ə kæt ðət hæd faʊn ə ɹoʊɾənt tə pleɪ wɪð.

Androl gritted his teeth, turning as Coteren sauntered up. He was a bulky man, his black, oily hair kept long and loose. It hung around a blunt face with pudgy cheeks. His eyes were focused, dangerous. He smiled. The smile of a cat that had found a rodent to play with.

ænʒɹəl kwaɪətli əndɪd ði ɑɹmɡɑɹd, hændɪŋ ɪt tə dʒɑnɪθ. koʊɾɝən wɑz fʊl æʃəmən, ə pɝsənəl fɹɛn ə ðə l. hi aʊtʃɹæŋkt ɛvɹiwʌn hɪɹ baɪ ə lɔŋ stʃɹaɪd.

Androl quietly undid the armguard, handing it to Jonneth. Coteren was full Asha'man, a personal friend of the M'Hael. He outranked everyone here by a long stride.

"ðə l wɪl hɪɹ ə ðɪs," koʊɾɝən sɛd. "ju də bi ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ jəɹ lɛsənz. juv noʊ nid fəɹ æɹoʊz əɹ baʊz - nɑt wən jə kən kɪl wɪð ðə paʊɝ!"

"The M'Hael will hear of this," Coteren said. "You do be ignoring your lessons. You have no need for arrows or bows - not when you can kill with the Power!"

"wi ɑɹən ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ," næləm sɛd stʌbɝnli.

"We aren't ignoring anything," Nalaam said stubbornly.

"kwaɪət, læd," ænʒɹəl sɛd. "maɪn jəɹ tʌŋ."

"Quiet, lad," Androl said. "Mind your tongue."

koʊɾɝən læft. "lɪsən tə ðə peɪdʒbɔɪ, jə lɑt. ðə l wɪl hɪɹ ə jəɹ ɪmpuɾəns ɔlsoʊ."

Coteren laughed. "Listen to the pageboy, you lot. The M'Hael will hear of your impudence also."

hi foʊkəst ɑn ænʒɹəl. "siz ðə sɔɹs."

He focused on Androl. "Seize the Source."

ænʒɹəl əblaɪdʒd ɹɪlʌktənli. ðə switnəs ə seɪɾɪn floʊɾ ɪndə hɪm, ən i ɡlæns nɝvəsli tə ðə saɪd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn ə ðə ʃædoʊz.

Androl obliged reluctantly. The sweetness of saidin flowed into him, and he glanced nervously to the side. There was no sign of the shadows.

"soʊ pəθɛɾɪk," koʊɾɝən sɛd. "dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðət stoʊn oʊvɝ ðɛɹ."

"So pathetic," Coteren said. "Destroy that stone over there."

ɪt wɑz fɑɹ tu lɑɹdʒ fəɹ hɪm. bʌt hid dɛlt wɪð bʊliz bɪfɔɹ, ən koʊɾɝən wɑz ə bʊli ʌv ðə moʊs deɪnʒɝəs taɪp - wʌn wɪð paʊɝ ən əθɔɹəɾi. ðə bɛs θɪŋ tə də wɑz tə maɪnd.

It was far too large for him. But he'd dealt with bullies before, and Coteren was a bully of the most dangerous type - one with power and authority. The best thing to do was to mind.

ɪmbɛɹəsmənt wɑz ə smɔl pʌnɪʃmənt. ðət wɑz sʌmθɪŋ fju bʊliz sim tə ʌndɝstænd.

Embarrassment was a small punishment. That was something few bullies seemed to understand.

ænʒɹəl woʊv ðə ɹɛkwəzət wiv ə faɪɝ ən ɝθ, stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ət ðə lɑɹdʒ stoʊn. ðə θɪn wiv hɛld ɔlmoʊst ɔl ə ðə paʊɝ i kəd mænədʒ, bʌɾ ɪɾ oʊnli fleɪkt ə fju tʃɪps ɔf ðə lɑɹdʒ stoʊn.

Androl wove the requisite weave of Fire and Earth, striking at the large stone. The thin weave held almost all of the Power he could manage, but it only flaked a few chips off the large stone.

koʊɾɝən læf hɑɹɾəli, əz dɪd ðə ɡɹup ə dɛɾəkeɪtəd iɾɪŋ bɪniθ ðə nɪɹbaɪ tʃɹi. "blʌɾi æʃəz, bʌt jəɹ jusləs!" koʊɾɝən sɛd. "fɝɡɛt wʌɾ aɪ sɛɾ ɝliɝ, peɪdʒbɔɪ! jə nid ðət baʊ!"

Coteren laughed heartily, as did the group of Dedicated eating beneath the nearby tree. "Bloody ashes, but you're useless!" Coteren said. "Forget what I said earlier, pageboy! You need that bow!"

ænʒɹəl ɹilis ðə wʌn paʊɝ. koʊɾɝən hæd hæɾ ɪz læf; hi wəd bi sæɾəsfaɪd. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ænʒɹəl fɛl mɛn siz ðə sɔɹs bɪhaɪn hɪm. dʒɑnɪθ, kænlɝ ən næləm stɛpt ʌp bɪsaɪɾ ænʒɹəl, itʃ ə ðɛm fɪld wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ ən bɹɪsəlɪŋ wɪð æŋɡɝ.

Androl released the One Power. Coteren had had his laugh; he would be satisfied. Unfortunately, Androl felt men seize the Source behind him. Jonneth, Canler and Nalaam stepped up beside Androl, each of them filled with the One Power and bristling with anger.

ðə mɛn u hæd bɪn iɾɪŋ stʊɾ ʌp, itʃ hoʊldɪŋ ðə sɔɹs əz wɛl. ðəɹ wɝ twaɪs əz mɛni ʌv əm əz ðəɹ wɝ ʌv ænʒɹəl ɛs fɹɛnz. koʊɾɝən smɝkt.

The men who had been eating stood up, each holding the Source as well. There were twice as many of them as there were of Androl s friends. Coteren smirked.

ænʒɹəl aɪd kænlɝ ən ði ʌðɝz. "naʊ lædz," hi sɛd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ə hænd, "æʃəmən koʊɾɝən wɑz dʒʌs duɪŋ wʌt ðə l ɔɹɾɝd hɪm. hi ɛs tʃɹaɪ-ɪŋ tə meɪk mi mæd soʊ əl pʊʃ maɪsɛlf."

Androl eyed Canler and the others. "Now lads," he said, raising a hand, "Asha'man Coteren was just doing what the M'Hael ordered him. He s try-ing to make me mad so I'll push myself."

ðə tu ɡɹups hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ði ɪntɛnsəɾi ʌv ðɛɹ lɑkt ɡeɪzəz ɹaɪvəl ðəɾ ə ðə paʊɝ wɪðɪn ðɛm. ðən dʒɑnɪθ ɹilis ðə sɔɹs. ðɪs kɑz næləm tə də laɪkwaɪz, ən faɪnəli ɡɹʌf kænlɝ tɝn əweɪ. koʊɾɝən læft.

The two groups hesitated. The intensity of their locked gazes rivaled that of the Power within them. Then Jonneth released the Source. This caused Nalaam to do likewise, and finally gruff Canler turned away. Coteren laughed.

"aɪ doʊn laɪk ðɪs," kænlɝ mʌɾɝd əz ðə ɡɹup ə ðɛm wɔkt ɔf. hi ʃɑɾ ə ɡlæns oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "doʊn laɪk ɪɾ əɾ ɔl. waɪd jə stɑp ʌs, ænʒɹəl?"

"I don't like this," Canler muttered as the group of them walked off. He shot a glance over his shoulder. "Don't like it at all. Why'd you stop us, Androl?"

"bɪkɔz ðeɪɾ əv meɪd ɹʌbəl ʌv əs fæstɝ ðən jə kən kɝs, kænlɝ" ænʒɹəl snæpt.

"Because they'd have made rubble of us faster than you can curse, Canler" Androl snapped.

"laɪt, mæn! aɪ kən bɛɹli tʃænəl wɝθ ə bin, ən əmɝɪn hæzən bɪn hɪɹ ə mʌnθ jɛt. dʒɑnɪθs lɝnɪŋ fæst, bʌt wi ɔl noʊ hiz nɛvɝ æktʃəli  fɔt wɪð ðə paʊɝ bɪfɔɹ, ən hæf ə koʊ-tʃɹənz mɛn sɔ bæɾəl bɪniθ ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən! jə ɹɪli θɪŋk jə ən næləm kəd hændəl tɛn mɛn, vɝtʃuəli ɑn jəɹ oʊn?"

"Light, man! I can barely channel worth a bean, and Emarin hasn't been here a month yet. Jonneth's learning fast, but we all know he's never actually fought with the Power before, and half of Co-teren's men saw battle beneath the Lord Dragon! You really think you and Nalaam could handle ten men, virtually on your own?"

kænlɝ kəntɪnjud tə bɹɪsəl, mʌɾɝɪŋ, bʌt lɛt ði ɑɹɡjəmən dʒɹɑp.

Canler continued to bristle, muttering, but let the argument drop.

"mɑkɑʃək nɑ fəmɑlɑʃtən mɔɹkeɪs," næləm mʌmbəld, "dɛlf tɑkɑk-sɑki mɪɹ!" hi læf tə hɪmsɛlf, aɪz waɪld. ɪt wɑzn ə læŋɡwədʒ ænʒɹəl nu- - ɪt wɑzn ði oʊl tʌŋ, ðət wɑz fəɹ sɝɾən.

"Makashak Na famalashten morkase," Nalaam mumbled, "delf takak-saki mere!" He laughed to himself, eyes wild. It wasn't a language Androl knew- - it wasn't the Old Tongue, that was for certain.

ɪt pɹɑbli wɑzn ivən ə læŋɡwədʒ əɾ ɔl.

It probably wasn't even a language at all.

nʌn ə ði ʌðɝz sɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ. næləm əkeɪʒənəli kækəl tə hɪmsɛlf ɪn ɡɪbɝɪʃ. ɪf æskt əbaʊɾ ɪt, hid kleɪm hid spoʊkən ɪn pleɪn ɔɹɾənɛɹi wɝdz. ði aʊtbɝst sim tə dɪskɑmfɪɾ əmɝɪn ən dʒɑnɪθ ə ɡɹeɪt dil. ðeɪ hædn ɛvɝ sin fɹɛnz ɡoʊ mæɾ ən kɪl ðoʊz ɝaʊn ðɛm. laɪt sɛn ðət ðeɪd nɛvɝ əv tə si ɪt, naʊ. wʌtɛvɝ ɛls ænʒɹəl θɔɾ ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən fəɹ livɪŋ əm əloʊn, ðə klɛnzɪŋ ɝn ælθɹ ɹɪdɛmpʃən. tʃænəlɪŋ wɑz seɪf naʊ.

None of the others said anything. Nalaam occasionally cackled to himself in gibberish. If asked about it, he'd claim he'd spoken in plain ordinary words. The outburst seemed to discomfit Emarin and Jonneth a great deal. They hadn't ever seen friends go mad and kill those around them. Light send that they'd never have to see it, now. Whatever else Androl thought of the Lord Dragon for leaving them alone, the cleansing earned al'Thor redemption. Channeling was safe now.

ɔɹ, ət list, ɪt wɑz seɪfɝ. tʃænəlɪŋ wəd nɛvɝ bi seɪf, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli naʊ wɪð teɪm pʊʃɪŋ ðɛm.

Or, at least, it was safer. Channeling would never be safe, particularly now with Taim pushing them.

"mɔɹ ən mɔɹ pipəl ɑɹ teɪkɪŋ ðoʊz bɝnɪŋ pɝsənəl lɛsənz fɹəm teɪm," næləm mʌɾɝd əz ðeɪ wɔk tə ðə ʃeɪɾ ə ðə tʃɹiz. "nɛnsənz səksɛs əz ðə mɛn iɡɝ. wiv lɔst ə ɡʊd dʌzən tə teɪmz saɪɾ ɪn ðə læs tʃu wiks. sun ðəɹ woʊn bi ɛniwʌn lɛf bɪsaɪdz əs hɪɹ. aɪm əfɹeɪd tə tɔk tə hæf ðə mɛn aɪ juz tə tʃɹʌst."

"More and more people are taking those burning personal lessons from Taim," Nalaam muttered as they walked to the shade of the trees. "Nensen's success has the men eager. We've lost a good dozen to Taim's side in the last tew weeks. Soon there won't be anyone left besides us here. I'm afraid to talk to half the men I used to trust."

"nɔɹli ɪz tʃɹʌstwɝði," kænlɝ sɛd. "ɛvɪn hɑɹdlɪn, tu."

"Norley is trustworthy," Canler said. "Evin Hardlin, too."

"ðæts ə smɔl lɪst," næləm sɛd. "tu smɔl."

"That's a small list," Nalaam said. "Too small."

"ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn ɑɹ wɪð ʌs," dʒɑnɪθ sɛd. "tə ə mæn."

"The Two Rivers men are with us," Jonneth said. "To a man."

"stɪl ə smɔl lɪst," næləm sɛd. "ænd nɑɾ ə fʊl æʃəmən əmʌŋ ʌs."

"Still a small list," Nalaam said. "And not a full Asha'man among us."

ðeɪ ɔl lʊk tə ænʒɹəl. hi ɡlæns bæk ət teɪmz lækiz, læf-ɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz əɡɛn.

They all looked to Androl. He glanced back at Taim's lackeys, laugh-ing among themselves again.

"wʌt, ænʒɹəl?"

"What, Androl?"

næləm æskt. "nɑt gɑnə tʃæstaɪz əs fəɹ tɔkɪŋ laɪk ðæt?"

Nalaam asked. "Not going to chastise us for talking like that?"

"laɪk wʌt?" ænʒɹəl æskt, lʊkɪŋ bæk ət ðɛm.

"Like what?" Androl asked, looking back at them.

"laɪk ɪts əs əɡɛns ðɛm."

"Like it's us against them."

"aɪ dɪdnt wɑn jə lædz tə ɡɛt jʊɹsɛlvz kɪld əɹ ɪmpɹɪzənd, bʌt ðət dʌzn min aɪ doʊn si ə pɹɑbləm." hi ɡlæns bæk ət ðɛm. "aɪ, ðɛɹz tʃɹʌbəl hɪɹ, bɹuɪŋ laɪk ə stɔɹm."

"I didn't want you lads to get yourselves killed or imprisoned, but that doesn't mean I don't see a problem." He glanced back at them. "Aye, there's trouble here, brewing like a storm."

"ðə mɛn u teɪk teɪmz pɹaɪvət lɛsənz lɝn tu kwɪkli," næləm sɛd. "nɛnsən wɑz bɛɹli paʊɝfəl ɪnʌf tə bi kənsɪɾɝd fəɹ dɛɾəkeɪtəd dʒʌst ə ʃɔɹt taɪm əɡoʊ. naʊ hiz fʊl æʃəmən.

"The men who take Taim's private lessons learn too quickly," Nalaam said. "Nensen was barely powerful enough to be considered for Dedicated just a short time ago. Now he's full Asha'man.

sʌmθɪŋ vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. ən ðoʊz ɛɛs sədaɪ. waɪ dɪd teɪm əɡɹi tə lɛɾ əm bɑn ʌs?

Something very strange is going on. And those Aes Sedai. Why did Taim agree to let them bond us?

jə noʊ hiz pɹətɛktəɾ ɔl ə hɪz feɪvɹɪts baɪ stɑpɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ fɹəm tʃuzɪŋ ɛni mæn wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən pɪn. bɝn mi, bʌɾ aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ əl də ɪf wʌn tʃuzəz mi. aɪm nɑt gɑnə bi pʊɾ ɑn səm ɛɛs sədaɪ ɛs stʃɹɪŋ."

You know he's protected all of his favorites by stopping the Aes Sedai from choosing any man with the Dragon pin. Burn me, but I don't know what I'll do if one chooses me. I'm not going to be put on some Aes Sedai s string."

ðəɹ wɝ sɛvɹəl mʌɾɝz əbaʊt ðæt.

There were several mutters about that.

"teɪmz mɛn spɹɛd ɹumɝz əmʌŋ ðə nukʌmɝz," dʒɑnɪθ sɛd sɔfli. "ðeɪ tɔk əbaʊt ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, ən haʊ hi dʒɹoʊv ɡʊd mɛn tə tɝn tʃɹeɪɾɝ. ðeɪ seɪ hiz əbændən ʌs, ən ðət hiz ɡɔn mæd. ðə l dʌznt wɑn ðoʊz ɹumɝz pɔɪntɪŋ bæk tə hɪm, bʌt bɝn mi ɪf i ɪzən ðə sɔɹs ə ðɛm ɔl."

"Taim's men spread rumors among the newcomers," Jonneth said softly. "They talk about the Lord Dragon, and how he drove good men to turn traitor. They say he's abandoned us, and that he's gone mad. The M'Hael doesn't want those rumors pointing back to him, but burn me if he isn't the source of them all."

"meɪbi hiz ɹaɪt," kænlɝ sɛd. ði ʌðɝz lʊkt əɾ ɪm ʃɑɹpli, ən ðə lɛðɝi mæn skaʊld.

"Maybe he's right," Canler said. The others looked at him sharply, and the leathery man scowled.

"aɪm nɑt seɪɪŋ ðəɾ aɪm gɑnə ɡoʊ dʒʌmp ɪndə teɪmz kæmp. bʌt ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən? wʌɾ əz i dʌn fəɹ ʌs? simz laɪk hiz fɝɡɑɾən əbaʊt ðɪs pleɪs. meɪbi hiz mæd."

"I'm not saying that I'm going to go jump into Taim's camp. But the Lord Dragon? What has he done for us? Seems like he's forgotten about this place. Maybe he is mad."

"hiz nɑt," əmɝɪn sɛd, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd. "aɪ mɛɾ ɪm dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ aɪ keɪm hɪɹ."

"He's not," Emarin said, shaking his head. "I met him just before I came here."

ði ʌðɝz lʊkt ət hɪm, sɝpɹaɪzd.

The others looked at him, surprised.

"hi ɪmpɹɛs mi," əmɝɪn sɛd. "jʌŋ, bʌt wɪð ə paʊɝfəl wɪl. aɪ tʃɹʌs hɪm. laɪt! aɪ bɛɹli spoʊk wɪð ɪm ə hæf-dʌzən taɪmz, bʌɾ aɪ tʃɹʌs hɪm."

"He impressed me," Emarin said. "Young, but with a powerful will. I trust him. Light! I barely spoke with him a half-dozen times, but I trust him."

ði ʌðɝz sloʊli nɑɾəd.

The others slowly nodded.

"bɝn mi," kænlɝ sɛd, "aɪ səpoʊz ðæts ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ mi. bʌɾ aɪ wɪʃ hid lɪsən! aɪ hɝd lɑɡən kɝsɪŋ ðət ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən woʊn hɪɹ ɪm wən i ɡɪvz wɔɹnɪŋz əbaʊt teɪm."

"Burn me," Canler said, "I suppose that's good enough for me. But I wish he'd listen! I heard Logain cursing that the Lord Dragon won't hear him when he gives warnings about Taim."

"æn ɪf wi ɡeɪv ɪm ɛvəɾəns?" dʒɑnɪθ æskt. "wʌɾ ɪf wi kəd faɪn sʌmθɪŋ ðət pɹuvz ðət teɪm ɪz ʌp tə noʊ ɡʊd?"

"And if we gave him evidence?" Jonneth asked. "What if we could find something that proves that Taim is up to no good?"

"sʌmθɪŋ ɪz stʃɹeɪnʒ əbaʊt nɛnsən," næləm ɹɪpiɾɪd. "æn ðət kæʃ. wɛɹ dɪɾ i ivən kʌm fɹʌm, ən haʊ dɪɾ i ɡɹoʊ soʊ paʊɝfəl soʊ kwɪkli? wʌɾ ɪf, wən lɑɡən ɹɪtɝnd, wi hæɾ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən fəɹ hɪm. əɹ ɪf wi kəd teɪk ɪt tə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən dɝɛkli . . ."

"Something is strange about Nensen," Nalaam repeated. "And that Kash. Where did he even come from, and how did he grow so powerful so quickly? What if, when Logain returned, we had information for him. Or if we could take it to the Lord Dragon directly . . ."

ðə ɡɹup tɝn tə ænʒɹəl. waɪ dɪd ðeɪ lʊk tə hɪm, ðə wikəst ə ðɛm? ɔl i kəd də wɑz kɹieɪt ɡeɪtweɪz. ðət wɑz wɛɹ koʊɾɝənz nɪkneɪm fəɹ ænʒɹəl hæd kʌm fɹʌm. peɪdʒbɔɪ. ði oʊnli θɪŋ i wɑz ɡʊd fəɹ wɑz dɪlɪvɝɪŋ mɛsədʒəz, teɪkɪŋ pipəl pleɪsəz.

The group turned to Androl. Why did they look to him, the weakest of them? All he could do was create gateways. That was where Coteren's nickname for Androl had come from. Pageboy. The only thing he was good for was delivering messages, taking people places.

bʌt ði ʌðɝz lʊk tə hɪm. fəɹ wʌn ɹizən əɹ ənʌðɝ, ðeɪ lʊk tə hɪm.

But the others looked to him. For one reason or another, they looked to him.

"ɔl ɹaɪt," ænʒɹəl sɛd. "lɛts si wʌt wi kən faɪnd. bɹɪŋ ɛvɪn, hɑɹd-lɪn ən nɔɹli ɪndə ðɪs bʌt doʊn tɛl ɛniwʌn ɛls, nɑɾ ivən ði ʌðɝ tu ɹɪvɝz lædz. doʊn ɹaɪl teɪm əɹ ɪz mɛn . . . bʌɾ ɪf jə də faɪn sʌmθɪŋ, bɹɪŋ ɪt tə mi. ən əl si ɪf aɪ kən faɪn ə weɪ tə kɑntæk lɑɡən, əɹ ət lis faɪnd wɛɹ i wɛnt."

"All right," Androl said. "Let's see what we can find. Bring Evin, Hard-lin and Norley into this but don't tell anyone else, not even the other Two Rivers lads. Don't rile Taim or his men . . . but if you do find something, bring it to me. And I'll see if I can find a way to contact Logain, or at least find where he went."

itʃ mæn nɑɾəd, sɑmbɝ. laɪt hɛlp əs ɪf wɝ ɹɔŋ, ænʒɹəl θɔt, lʊkɪŋ bæk ət teɪmz feɪvɹɪts. ən laɪt hɛlp əs mɔɹ ɪf wɝ ɹaɪt.

Each man nodded, somber. Light help us if we're wrong, Androl thought, looking back at Taim's favorites. And Light help us more if we're right.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾisɛvən


CHAPTER 47

eɪ titʃɪŋ tʃeɪmbɝ


A Teaching Chamber

feɪl sæɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli ətɑp deɪlaɪt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip hɝsɛlf fɹəm twɪtʃɪŋ əz ðə ɡeɪtweɪ splɪt ði ɛɹ. ə bɹaʊnɪŋ mɛdoʊ leɪ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd; ɡɔl ən ðə meɪɾənz ɪmiɾiətli slɪp θɹu tə skaʊt.

Faile sat impatiently atop Daylight, trying to keep herself from twitching as the gateway split the air. A browning meadow lay on the other side; Gaul and the Maidens immediately slipped through to scout.

"ɑɹ jə sɝɾən jə doʊnt wɑnə kʌm?" pɛɹɪn æskt ɡɑləd, hu stʊd nɪɹbaɪ, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə pɹəsɛʃən wɪð ɑɹmz klæsp bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk.

"Are you certain you don't want to come?" Perrin asked Galad, who stood nearby, watching the procession with arms clasped behind his back.

"noʊ," ɡɑləd sɛd. "maɪ mil wɪð ɪleɪn wɑz səfɪʃən fəɹ əs tə kætʃ ʌp."

"No," Galad said. "My meal with Elayne was sufficient for us to catch up."

"sut jɝsɛlf," pɛɹɪn sɛd. hi tɝn tə feɪl ən dʒɛstʃɝd tə ðə ɡeɪtweɪ.

"Suit yourself," Perrin said. He turned to Faile and gestured to the gateway.

ʃi kɪk deɪlaɪɾ ɪndə moʊʃən. ɪt wɑz taɪm, ət lɔŋ læst, tə feɪs ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ, ən ʃi hæd tə wɝk tə kənteɪn əɹ nɝvəsnəs. pɛɹɪn pæs θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ wɪð hɝ; ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd, keɪɛmlɪn wɑz kloʊz, ðə ɡɹæn sɪɾi tɑp baɪ pik taʊɝz ən bænɝz ə ɹɛɾ ən waɪt, pæləs ɹaɪzɪŋ ɪn ðə sɛntɝ. loʊ keɪɛmlɪn, wɪtʃ spɹɔld aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi wɔlz, wɑz ə ɡɹoʊɪŋ sɪɾi ʌv ɪts oʊn.

She kicked Daylight into motion. It was time, at long last, to face the Queen of Andor, and she had to work to contain her nervousness. Perrin passed through the gateway with her; on the other side, Caemlyn was close, the grand city topped by peaked towers and banners of red and white, palace rising in the center. Low Caemlyn, which sprawled outside the city walls, was a growing city of its own.

pɛɹɪn ɛs pɹəsɛʃən fɑloʊɾ əm aʊɾ ə ðə ɡeɪtweɪ; ɪt hæd bɪn kɛɹfəli plæn tə lʊk ɪmpɹɛsɪv, bʌt nɑt hɑstəl. æliændɝ wɪð ə hʌnʒɹəd ɡɑɹdzmɪn. ə hʌnʒɹəd tu ɹɪvɝz ɑɹtʃɝz wɪð ənstʃɹʌŋ lɔŋboʊz kæɹid laɪk steɪvz. ə hʌnʒɹəd ɹɛpɹəzɛntəɾɪvz ə ðə wʊlf ɡɑɹd, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ə lɑɹdʒ kəntɪnʒənt ə maɪnɝ kɛɹhin noʊbɪləɾi, ðə kʌlɝd slæʃɪz ɑn ðɛɹ junəfɔɹmz kɹieɪɾəd fɹəm klɔθ pɝtʃəst ɪn waɪtbɹɪdʒ. ænd, ʌv kɔɹs, ɡɔl ən ðə meɪɾənz.

Perrin s procession followed them out of the gateway; it had been carefully planned to look impressive, but not hostile. Alliandre with a hundred guardsmen. A hundred Two Rivers archers with unstrung longbows carried like staves. A hundred representatives of the Wolf Guard, including a large contingent of minor Cairhien nobility, the colored slashes on their uniforms created from cloth purchased in Whitebridge. And, of course, Gaul and the Maidens.

ɡɹeɪɾi keɪm læst. ðə mæn wɔɹ ə nitli pɹɛs blæk koʊt, hɪz dɛɾi-keɪtɪd pɪn pɑlɪʃt ən ɡlimɪŋ ɑn ðə haɪ kɑlɝ. hi ɪmiɾiətli lʊkt wɛstwɝd, təwɔɹd ðə blæk taʊɝ. hid tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ ðəɹ ɝliɝ ɪn ðə deɪ, wən pɛɹɪn hæd ɡɪvən ɪm pɝmɪʃən. ɪt hædnt wɝkt.

Grady came last. The man wore a neatly pressed black coat, his Dedi-cated pin polished and gleaming on the high collar. He immediately looked westward, toward the Black Tower. He'd tried to make a gateway there earlier in the day, when Perrin had given him permission. It hadn't worked.

pɛɹɪn wɑz dɪstɝbd baɪ ðæt. hi ɪntɛndəd tə ɪnvɛstəɡeɪt sun, tənaɪɾ əɹ təmɑɹoʊ naɪɾ ət ðə leɪɾəst.

Perrin was disturbed by that. He intended to investigate soon, tonight or tomorrow night at the latest.

ɡɔl ən ðə meɪɾənz fɔɹmd ʌp ɝaʊn pɛɹɪn ən feɪl, ən ðə pɹəsɛʃən muv daʊn ɑntu ðə ɹoʊd, ɑɹɡændə ən ə skwɑɾ ə pɛɹɪnz wʊlf ɡɑɹdz ɹaɪɾɪŋ əhɛd tə ənaʊns ðɛm. ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm muvd əlɔŋ ðə ɹoʊɾ əɾ ə ɹiɡəl peɪs. keɪɛmlɪnz spɹɔlɪŋ ɡɹoʊθ wɑz ivən wɝs ðən ðəɾ ʌv waɪtbɹɪdʒ. sɛvɹəl ɑɹmiz kæmp nɪɹ loʊ keɪɛmlɪn. pɹɑbli səpɔɹɾəd baɪ ðə vɛɹiəs lɔɹdz u hæd səpɔɹɾəd ɪleɪnz əsɛn tə ðə θɹoʊn.

Gaul and the Maidens formed up around Perrin and Faile, and the procession moved down onto the road, Arganda and a squad of Perrin's Wolf Guards riding ahead to announce them. The rest of them moved along the road at a regal pace. Caemlyn's sprawling growth was even worse than that of Whitebridge. Several armies camped near Low Caemlyn. Probably supported by the various lords who had supported Elayne's ascent to the throne.

ðəɹ wɑz ə dɪstɪŋkt ɪɹɛɡjəlɛɹəɾi hɪɹ. ðə klaʊdz bɹoʊk ɝaʊn keɪɛmlɪn. ðə klaʊd kʌvɝ hæd bɪn soʊ junəvɝsəl ɛlswɛɹ ðət feɪl stɑɹɾəd əpɑn siɪŋ ðɪs. ðə klaʊdz fɔɹmd ən oʊpən sɝkəl əbʌv ðə sɪɾi, ɪɹəli ivən. ɑɹɡændə ən ðə wʊlf ɡɑɹdz ɹɪtɝnd. "ðeɪ wɪl ɹəsiv ʌs, maɪ lɔɹd, maɪ leɪɾi," hi ənaʊnst.

There was a distinct irregularity here. The clouds broke around Caemlyn. The cloud cover had been so universal elsewhere that Faile started upon seeing this. The clouds formed an open circle above the city, eerily even. Arganda and the Wolf Guards returned. "They will receive us, my Lord, my Lady," he announced.

feɪl ən pɛɹɪn ɹoʊɾ ɪn saɪləns əz ðə ɡɹup meɪɾ ɪts weɪ daʊn ðə ɹoʊd. ðeɪ hæd dɪskʌs ðə kʌmɪŋ miɾɪŋ dʌzənz ə taɪmz oʊvɝ; ðəɹ wɑzn ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ tə seɪ. pɛɹɪn hæd waɪzli ɡɪvən əɹ ðə lɛɾ ɪn ðə dɪpləmæɾɪk nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz. ðə wɝl kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd wɔɹ bɪtwin ændɝ ən ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. nɑt naʊ.

Faile and Perrin rode in silence as the group made its way down the road. They had discussed the coming meeting dozens of times over; there wasn't anything more to say. Perrin had wisely given her the lead in the diplomatic negotiations. The world could not afford war between Andor and the Two Rivers. Not now.

əz ðeɪ pæs θɹu ðə sɪɾi ɡeɪts, pɛɹɪn ən ði il ɡɹu mɔɹ əlɝt. ʃi sʌfɝd ðɛɹ oʊvɝpɹoʊtɛktɪvnəs ɪn saɪləns. haʊ lɔŋ wəɾ əɹ kæptʃɝ baɪ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ lum oʊvɝ əɹ laɪf? ət taɪmz, ɪt sim pɛɹɪn wɑz loʊθ tə lɛɾ əɹ juz ðə pɹɪvi wɪθaʊt fɔɹ dʌzən ɡɑɹdz.

As they passed through the city gates, Perrin and the Aiel grew more alert. She suffered their overprotectiveness in silence. How long would her capture by the Shaido loom over her life? At times, it seemed Perrin was loath to let her use the privy without four dozen guards.

ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz, ðə stʃɹits timd wɪð pipəl, ðə bɪldɪŋz ən mɑɹkəts pækt. ɹɛfjus wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə paɪl ʌp, ən ə fɹaɪɾənɪŋ nʌmbɝ ə ɝtʃənz muv θɹu ðə kɹaʊdz. kɹɪɝz jɛld əbaʊt ðə deɪnʒɝəs taɪmz, səm pɝhæps ɪn ði ɛmplɔɪ ʌv ðə mɝtʃəns, ɛnkɝɪdʒɪŋ pipəl tə hɔɹd. pɛɹɪnz pipəl hæd bɑt fud hɪɹ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɪkspɛnsɪv; sun, ɪleɪn wəd nid tə sʌbsɪdaɪz ɪt, ɪf ʃi hædn ɔlɹɛɾi. haʊ ɡʊd wɝ ðə ɹɔɪəl stɔɹz?

Inside the walls, the streets teemed with people, the buildings and markets packed. Refuse was beginning to pile up, and a frightening number of urchins moved through the crowds. Criers yelled about the dangerous times, some perhaps in the employ of the merchants, encouraging people to hoard. Perrin's people had bought food here, but it was expensive; soon, Elayne would need to subsidize it, if she hadn't already. How good were the royal stores?

ðeɪ pæs θɹu ðə nu sɪɾi, ðən ɛntɝd ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi, klaɪmɪŋ ðə hɪl tə ðə pæləs ɪtsɛlf. ðə kwinz ɡɑɹd stʊɾ əɾ ətɛnʃən ɪn ðɛɹ ɹɛd-ænd-waɪt tɑbɝdz ən bɝnɪʃt pleɪt-ænd- meɪl aʊtsaɪd ðə pæləs ɡeɪts ɪn ðə pɹɪstin waɪt pæləs wɔlz.

They passed through the New City, then entered the Inner City, climbing the hill to the Palace itself. The Queen's Guard stood at attention in their red-and-white tabards and burnished plate-and- mail outside the Palace gates in the pristine white Palace walls.

wʌns pæs ðə ɡeɪts, ðeɪ dɪsmaʊntɪd. ə fɔɹs ʌv wʌn hʌnʒɹəd kəntɪn-ʊɛɾ ɑn wɪð pɛɹɪn ən feɪl ɪndə ðə pæləs. ɔl ə ði il, ən ə smɔlɝ ɑnɝ ɡɑɹd fɹəm itʃ kəntɪnʒənt. ðə pæləs hɔlweɪz wɝ waɪd bʌt ðət mɛni pipəl stɪl meɪd feɪl fil kɹaʊɾəd. ðə pæθ ʃi ən pɛɹɪn wɝ lɛɾ əlɔŋ wɑz ə dɪfɹənt weɪ tə ðə θɹoʊn ɹum ðən ʃid teɪkən bɪfɔɹ. waɪ nɑt juz ðə dɝɛkt weɪ?

Once past the gates, they dismounted. A force of one hundred contin-ued on with Perrin and Faile into the Palace. All of the Aiel, and a smaller honor guard from each contingent. The Palace hallways were wide but that many people still made Faile feel crowded. The path she and Perrin were led along was a different way to the throne room than she'd taken before. Why not use the direct way?

ɪt sim ðət lɪɾəl hæd tʃeɪnʒd əbaʊt ðə pæləs sɪns ɹændz taɪm ɹʌl-ɪŋ ɪt. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ il naʊ - seɪv fəɹ ðə wʌnz pɛɹɪn hæd bɹɔt. ðə seɪm nɛɹoʊ ɹɛd ɹʌɡ ɹæn daʊn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə hɔlweɪ, ðə seɪm ɝnz ət ðə kɔɹnɝz, ðə seɪm mɪɹɝz ɑn ðə wɔlz tə ɡɪv ən ɪluʒən ʌv ɡɹeɪɾɝ saɪz.

It seemed that little had changed about the Palace since Rand's time rul-ing it. There were no Aiel now - save for the ones Perrin had brought. The same narrow red rug ran down the middle of the hallway, the same urns at the corners, the same mirrors on the walls to give an illusion of greater size.

ə stʃɹʌktʃɝ laɪk ðɪs kəd stæn ənɔltɝɾ oʊvɝ ðə sɛntʃɝiz, peɪɪŋ lɪɾəl ətɛnʃən tə huz fit tʃɹɑd ðə ɹʌɡz ən huz bæksaɪd wɔɹm ðə θɹoʊn. ɪn wʌn jɪɹz taɪm, ðɪs pæləs hæd noʊn mɔɹɡeɪs, wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ən faɪnəli ɪleɪn.

A structure like this could stand unaltered over the centuries, paying little attention to whose feet trod the rugs and whose backside warmed the throne. In one year's time, this palace had known Morgase, one of the Forsaken, the Dragon Reborn and finally Elayne.

ɪn fækt, feɪl hæf-ɪkspɛktəd - əz ðeɪ ɹaʊndəd ðə kɔɹnɝ tə ðə θɹoʊn ɹum - tə faɪn ɹænd laʊnʒɪŋ ɑn ɪz dʒɹæɡən θɹoʊn, ðət stʃɹeɪnʒ hæf-spɪɹ hɛld ɪn ðə kɹʊk ə hɪz ɑɹm, ə ɡlɪmɝ ə mædnəs ɪn ɪz aɪz. haʊɛvɝ, ðə dʒɹæɡən θɹoʊn hæd bɪn ɹimuvd, ən ðə laɪən θɹoʊn əɡɛn hɛld ɪts kwin. ɹænd hæd sɛt ðət θɹoʊn əsaɪɾ ən pɹətɛktəɾ ɪt, laɪk ə flaʊɝ i ɪntɛndəd tə pɹizɛn tə ə fjutʃɝ lʌv.

In fact, Faile half-expected - as they rounded the corner to the throne room - to find Rand lounging on his Dragon Throne, that strange half-spear held in the crook of his arm, a glimmer of madness in his eyes. However, the Dragon Throne had been removed, and the Lion Throne again held its queen. Rand had set that throne aside and protected it, like a flower he intended to present to a future love.

ðə kwin wɑz ə jʌŋɡɝ vɝʒən ə hɝ mʌðɝ. tʃɹu, ɪleɪnz feɪs hæɾ æŋɡəlz ðət wɝ mɔɹ dɛləkət ðən mɔɹɡeɪsəz. bʌt ʃi hæd ðət seɪm ɹɛd-ɡoʊl hɛɹ ən ðət seɪm stʌnɪŋ bjuɾi. ʃi wɑz tɔl, ən wɑz ʃoʊɪŋ əɹ pɹɛɡnənsi ət ðə bɛli ən θɹu ðə tʃɛst.

The Queen was a younger version of her mother. True, Elayne's face had angles that were more delicate than Morgase's. But she had that same red-gold hair and that same stunning beauty. She was tall, and was showing her pregnancy at the belly and through the chest.

ðə θɹoʊn ɹum wɑz suɾəbli ɔɹneɪt, wɪð ɡɪldɪd wʊd tʃɹɪm ən nɛɹoʊ pɪlɝz ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝz, pɹɑbli ɔɹnəmɛntəl. ɪleɪn kɛp ðə ɹum bɛɾɝ lɪt ðən ɹænd hæd, stænd-læmps bɝnɪŋ bɹaɪtli.

The throne room was suitably ornate, with gilded wood trim and narrow pillars in the corners, probably ornamental. Elayne kept the room better lit than Rand had, stand-lamps burning brightly.

mɔɹɡeɪs hɝsɛlf stʊɾ ət ðə beɪs ə ðə θɹoʊn ɑn ðə ɹaɪt saɪd, ən eɪt mɛmbɝz ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹd stʊɾ ɑn ðə lɛft. səm lɛsɝ noʊbəlz laɪn ðə saɪdz ə ðə ɹum, wɑtʃɪŋ wɪð kin ətɛnʃən.

Morgase herself stood at the base of the throne on the right side, and eight members of the Queen's Guard stood on the left. Some lesser nobles lined the sides of the room, watching with keen attention.

ɪleɪn lin fɔɹwɝɾ ɑn əɹ θɹoʊn əz pɛɹɪn, feɪl ən ði ʌðɝz ɛntɝd. feɪl kɝtsid, ʌv kɔɹs, ən pɛɹɪn baʊd. nɑɾ ə loʊ baʊ, bʌɾ ə baʊ nʌnðəlɛs. baɪ ɝeɪnʒmənt, æliændɝ kɝtsid dipɝ ðən feɪl hæd. ðət wəɾ ɪmiɾiətli sɛɾ ɪleɪn θɪŋkɪŋ.

Elayne leaned forward on her throne as Perrin, Faile and the others entered. Faile curtsied, of course, and Perrin bowed. Not a low bow, but a bow nonetheless. By arrangement, Alliandre curtsied deeper than Faile had. That would immediately set Elayne thinking.

ði əfɪʃəl pɝpəs ə ðɪs vɪzət wɑz ə kɑməndeɪʃən baɪ ðə kɹaʊn, ə θæŋks tə pɛɹɪn ən feɪl fəɹ bɹɪŋɪŋ bæk mɔɹɡeɪs. ðət wɑz dʒʌst ən æfɛkteɪʃən, ʌv kɔɹs. ðɛɹ ɹil ɹizən fəɹ miɾɪŋ wɑz tə dɪskʌs ðə fjutʃɝ ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. bʌt ðət wɑz ðə sɔɹɾ ə dɛləkət ɡoʊl ðət niðɝ kəd spik ʌv aʊtʃɹaɪt, ət lis nɑɾ ət fɝst. mɪɹli steɪɾɪŋ ði əbdʒɛktɪv wəd ɹɪvil tu mʌtʃ tə ði ʌðɝ saɪd.

The official purpose of this visit was a commendation by the Crown, a thanks to Perrin and Faile for bringing back Morgase. That was just an affectation, of course. Their real reason for meeting was to discuss the future of the Two Rivers. But that was the sort of delicate goal that neither could speak of outright, at least not at first. Merely stating the objective would reveal too much to the other side.

"lɛɾ ɪt bi noʊn," ɪleɪn sɛd wɪð ə mjuzɪkəl vɔɪs, "ðæt ðə θɹoʊn wɛlkəmz ju, leɪɾi zɑɹin ni bæʃɪɹ teɪbɑɹə. kwin æliændɝ mɛɹɪðə kɪɡɛɝɪn. pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə." noʊ jus ə taɪɾəl fəɹ hɪm. "lɛɾ ɪt bi pɹoʊkleɪmd ɪn pɝsən əɹ ɡɹæɾətud tə jə fəɹ ɹɪtɝnɪŋ əɹ mʌðɝ. jəɹ dɪlədʒəns ɪn ðɪs mæɾɝ ɝnz jə ðə kɹaʊnz dipəst əpɹiʃieɪʃən."

"Let it be known," Elayne said with a musical voice, "that the throne welcomes you, Lady Zarine ni Bashere t'Aybara. Queen Alliandre Maritha Kigaarin. Perrin Aybara." No use of title for him. "Let it be proclaimed in person our gratitude to you for returning our mother. Your diligence in this matter earns you the Crown's deepest appreciation."

"θæŋk ju, jəɹ mædʒəsti," pɛɹɪn sɛd wɪð ɪz juʒəwəl ɡɹʌfnəs. feɪl hæd spoʊkən tə hɪm ət lɛŋθ əbaʊt nɑt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪspɛns wɪð ðə fɔɹmæləɾi əɹ sɛɹəmoʊni.

"Thank you, Your Majesty," Perrin said with his usual gruffness. Faile had spoken to him at length about not trying to dispense with the formality or ceremony.

"wi wɪl dɪklɛɹ ə deɪ ʌv sɛləbɹeɪʃən fəɹ maɪ mʌðɝz seɪf ɹɪtɝn," ɪleɪn kəntɪnjud. "æn fəɹ əɹ . . . ɹɛstɝeɪʃən tə pɹɑpɝ stæɾəs."

"We will declare a day of celebration for my mother's safe return," Elayne continued. "And for her . . . restoration to proper status."

wɛl, ðət pɔz mɛn ɪleɪn wɑz dɪspliz tə noʊ ðəɾ əɹ mʌðɝ hæd bɪn tʃɹiɾəd əz ə sɝvənt. ʃi hæd tə ɹilaɪz ðət pɛɹɪn ən feɪl hædnt noʊn wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ, bʌɾ ə kwin kəd stɪl kleɪm ɪndɪɡneɪʃən fəɹ sətʃ ən ɪvɛnt. ɪt wɑz ən ɛdʒ ðæt, pɝhæps, ʃi plæn tə juz.

Well, that pause meant Elayne was displeased to know that her mother had been treated as a servant. She had to realize that Perrin and Faile hadn't known what they were doing, but a queen could still claim indignation for such an event. It was an edge that, perhaps, she planned to use.

pɝhæps feɪl wɑz ɹiɾɪŋ tu mʌtʃ ɪndə ðə kɑmɛns, bʌt ʃi kʊdn hɛlp ɪt. ɪn mɛni weɪz, biɪŋ ə leɪɾi wɑz mʌtʃ laɪk biɪŋ ə mɝtʃənt, ən ʃi hæd bɪn tʃɹeɪnd wɛl fəɹ boʊθ ɹoʊlz.

Perhaps Faile was reading too much into the comments, but she couldn't help it. In many ways, being a lady was much like being a merchant, and she had been trained well for both roles.

"faɪnəli," ɪleɪn sɛd, "wi kʌm tə ðə pɝpəs ʌv əɹ miɾɪŋ. leɪɾi bæʃɪɹ, mæstɝ eɪbɑɹə. ɪz ðəɹ ə bun jə wəɾ æsk ɪn ɹɪtɝn fəɹ ðə ɡɪf juv ɡɪvən tə ændɝ?"

"Finally," Elayne said, "we come to the purpose of our meeting. Lady Bashere, Master Aybara. Is there a boon you would ask in return for the gift you have given to Andor?"

pɛɹɪn ɹɛstəɾ ɪz hæn ɑn ɪz hæmɝ, ðən lʊk tə feɪl kwɛstʃən-ɪŋli. ɑbviəsli, ɪleɪn ɪkspɛktəɾ əm tə æsk fəɹ ɪm tə bi neɪm fɔɹməli ə lɔɹd. ɔɹ, pɝhæps, tə æsk fɔɹbɛɹəns fəɹ ɪmpɝsəneɪɾɪŋ wʌn, əlɔŋ wɪð ə fɔɹməl pɑɹɾən. iðɝ dɝɛkʃən kəd bi ə ɹɪzʌlt ə ðɪs kɑnvɝseɪʃən.

Perrin rested his hand on his hammer, then looked to Faile question-ingly. Obviously, Elayne expected them to ask for him to be named formally a lord. Or, perhaps, to ask forbearance for impersonating one, along with a formal pardon. Either direction could be a result of this conversation.

feɪl wɑz tɛmptəd tə dɪmæn ðə fɝst. ɪt wəd bi ə sɪmpəl ænsɝ. bʌt pɝhæps tu sɪmpəl; ðəɹ wɝ θɪŋz feɪl hæd tə noʊ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd pɹəsid. "jɔɹ mædʒəsti," feɪl sɛd, kɛɹfəli, "maɪt wi dɪskʌs ðɪs bun ɪn ə mɔɹ ɪntəmət sɛɾɪŋ?"

Faile was tempted to demand the first. It would be a simple answer. But perhaps too simple; there were things Faile had to know before they could proceed. "Your Majesty," Faile said, carefully, "might we discuss this boon in a more intimate setting?"

ɪleɪn ɡeɪv ðət səm θɔt - ət lis θɝɾi sɛkənz' wɝθ, wɪtʃ simd ən ɪnfɪnəɾi. "vɛɹi wɛl. maɪ sɪɾɪŋ ɹum ɪz pɹipɛɹd."

Elayne gave that some thought - at least thirty seconds' worth, which seemed an infinity. "Very well. My sitting room is prepared."

feɪl nɑɾəd, ən ə sɝvən oʊpən ə smɔl dɔɹ ɑn ðə lɛft-hænd wɔl ə ðə θɹoʊn ɹum. pɛɹɪn wɔk təwɔɹɾ ɪt, ðən hɛld ʌp ə hæn tə ɡɔl, su-lɪn ən ɑɹɡændə. "weɪt hɪɹ." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ɡlænsɪŋ ət ɡɹeɪɾi. "ju, tu."

Faile nodded, and a servant opened a small door on the left-hand wall of the throne room. Perrin walked toward it, then held up a hand to Gaul, Su-lin and Arganda. "Wait here." He hesitated, glancing at Grady. "You, too."

nʌn ə ðɛm sim tə laɪk ðæt, bʌt ðeɪ oʊbeɪd. ðeɪd bɪn wɔɹn ðɪs maɪt hæpən.

None of them seemed to like that, but they obeyed. They'd been warned this might happen.

feɪl kənteɪn əɹ nɝvəsnəs - ʃi dɪdn laɪk livɪŋ ði æʃəmən, ðɛɹ bɛs minz ʌv ɪskeɪp. pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli sɪns ɪleɪn əndaʊɾɪdli hæd spaɪz ən ɡɑɹdz hɪɾən ɪnsaɪd ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum, ɹɛɾi tə spɹɪŋ aʊt ʃəd mæɾɝz tɝn deɪnʒɝəs. feɪl wʊɾə laɪkt ə sɪməlɝ pɹətɛkʃən, bʌt bɹɪŋɪŋ ə meɪl tʃænlɝ ɪn tə spik wɪð ðə kwin . . . wɛl, ðɪs wɑz haʊ ɪt wəɾ əv tə bi.

Faile contained her nervousness - she didn't like leaving the Asha'man, their best means of escape. Particularly since Elayne undoubtedly had spies and Guards hidden inside the sitting room, ready to spring out should matters turn dangerous. Faile would have liked a similar protection, but bringing a male channeler in to speak with the Queen . . . well, this was how it would have to be.

ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ɪleɪnz doʊmeɪn.

They were in Elayne's domain.

feɪl tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, dʒɔɪnɪŋ pɛɹɪn, æliændɝ ən mɔɹɡeɪs ɪn ðə smɔl saɪd ɹum. tʃɛɹz hæd bɪn ɝeɪnʒd; ɪleɪn hæd fɔɹsin ðɪs pɔz-sɪbɪlɪɾi. ðeɪ weɪɾəd fəɹ ɪleɪn tə ɛntɝ bɪfɔɹ sɪɾɪŋ. feɪl kʊdn si ɛni pleɪs fəɹ ɡɑɹdz tə bi haɪɾɪŋ.

Faile took a deep breath, joining Perrin, Alliandre and Morgase in the small side room. Chairs had been arranged; Elayne had foreseen this pos-sibility. They waited for Elayne to enter before sitting. Faile couldn't see any place for Guards to be hiding.

ɪleɪn ɛntɝɾ ən weɪvd ə hænd. ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɑn əɹ fɪŋɡɝ ɡlɪɾɝd ɪn ðə læmplaɪt.

Elayne entered and waved a hand. The Great Serpent ring on her finger glittered in the lamplight.

feɪl hæd nɪɹli fɝɡɑɾən ðət ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ. pɝhæps ðəɹ wɝn ɛni ɡɑɹdzmɪn lɝkɪŋ ɝaʊn tə hɛlp ə wʊmən u kəd tʃænəl wɑz əz deɪnʒɝəs əz ə dʌzən soʊlʒɝz.

Faile had nearly forgotten that she was Aes Sedai. Perhaps there weren't any Guardsmen lurking around to help a woman who could channel was as dangerous as a dozen soldiers.

wɪtʃ ə ðə ɹumɝz ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə fɑðɝ ʌv ɪleɪnz tʃaɪld wɝ tə bi bɪlivd? ʃʊɹli nɑt ðə wʌnz əbaʊt ðət ful ʌv ə mæn ɪn əɹ ɡɑɹd - ðət wɑz moʊs laɪkli ɑbfəskeɪʃən. kəɾ ɪt pɑsəbli bi ɹænd hɪmsɛlf?

Which of the rumors regarding the father of Elayne's child were to be believed? Surely not the ones about that fool of a man in her Guard - that was most likely obfuscation. Could it possibly be Rand himself?

mɔɹɡeɪs ɛntɝɾ æftɝ ɪleɪn. ʃi wɔɹ ə səbdud ɡaʊn ə dip ɹɛd. ʃi sæt daʊn bɪsaɪɾ əɹ dɔɾɝ, wɑtʃɪŋ kɛɹfəli, ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ saɪlənt.

Morgase entered after Elayne. She wore a subdued gown of deep red. She sat down beside her daughter, watching carefully, remaining silent.

"soʊ," ɪleɪn sɛd, "ɪkspleɪn tə mi waɪ aɪ ʃʊdn dʒʌst ɛksəkjut jə boʊθ əz tʃɹeɪɾɝz."

"So," Elayne said, "explain to me why I shouldn't just execute you both as traitors."

feɪl blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. pɛɹɪn, haʊɛvɝ, snɔɹɾɪd. "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ɹænd wəd θɪŋk vɛɹi haɪli ʌv ðət muv."

Faile blinked in surprise. Perrin, however, snorted. "I don't think Rand would think very highly of that move."

"aɪm nɑt bɪhoʊldən tə hɪm," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ju ɪkspɛk mi tə bɪliv ðəɾ i wɑz bɪhaɪn jə sɪdusɪŋ maɪ sɪɾəzənz ən neɪmɪŋ jɝsɛlf ə kɪŋ?"

"I'm not beholden to him," Elayne said. "You expect me to believe that he was behind you seducing my citizens and naming yourself a king?"

"ju hæv ə fju ʌv jəɹ fæks bækwɝd, jəɹ mædʒəsti," feɪl sɛd tɛstəli. "pɛɹɪn nɛvɝ neɪm hɪmsɛlf kɪŋ."

"You have a few of your facts backward, Your Majesty," Faile said testily. "Perrin never named himself king."

"oʊ, ən dɪɾ i ɹeɪz ðə flæɡ ʌv meɪnɛðɝən, əz maɪ ɪnfɔɹməns tɛl mi hi dɪd?" ɪleɪn æskt.

"Oh, and did he raise the flag of Manetheren, as my informants tell me he did?" Elayne asked.

"aɪ dɪd ðæt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ pʊɾ ɪɾ əweɪ ʌv maɪ oʊn tʃɔɪs."

"I did that," Perrin said. "But I put it away of my own choice."

"wɛl, ðæts sʌmθɪŋ," ɪleɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "ju meɪ nɑɾ əv kɔl jɝsɛlf ə kɪŋ, bʌt hoʊldɪŋ ʌp ðət bænɝ wɑz ɪsɛnʃəli ðə seɪm θɪŋ. oʊ, sɪt daʊn, ɔl ə ju." ʃi weɪvd ə hænd. ə tʃɹeɪ lɪftəɾ ɔf ðə fɑɹ teɪbəl ən floʊɾəd oʊvɝ tə hɝ. ɪt bɔɹ ɡoʊbləts ən ə pɪtʃɝ ʌv waɪn, əz wɛl əz ə tipɑɾ ən kʌps.

"Well, that's something," Elayne replied. "You may not have called yourself a king, but holding up that banner was essentially the same thing. Oh, sit down, all of you." She waved a hand. A tray lifted off the far table and floated over to her. It bore goblets and a pitcher of wine, as well as a teapot and cups.

fɛtʃɪŋ ɪt wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, feɪl θɔt. ɪts ə ɹimaɪndɝ ə hɝ stʃɹɛŋkθ. ə ɹæðɝ ənsʌɾəl wʌn.

Fetching it with the One Power, Faile thought. It's a reminder of her strength. A rather unsubtle one.

"stɪl," ɪleɪn sɛd, "aɪ wɪl də ðə bɛs fəɹ maɪ ɹɛlm, ɹəɡɑɹdləs ə ðə kɑst."

"Still," Elayne said, "I will do the best for my realm, regardless of the cost."

"aɪ daʊt ðəɾ əpsɛɾɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz," æliændɝ sɛd hɛzɪɾəntli, "wʊd bi bɛs fəɹ jəɹ ɹɛlm.

"I doubt that upsetting the Two Rivers," Alliandre said hesitantly, "would be best for your realm.

ɛksəkjuɾɪŋ ðɛɹ liɾɝ wəɾ əndaʊɾɪdli θɹoʊ ðə ɹidʒən ɪndə ɹɪbɛljən."

Executing their leader would undoubtedly throw the region into rebellion."

"soʊ fɑɹ əz aɪm kənsɝnd," ɪleɪn sɛd, pɔɹɪŋ sɛvɹəl kʌps ə ti, "ðeɪɹ ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ɹɪbɛljən."

"So far as I'm concerned," Elayne said, pouring several cups of tea, "they're already in rebellion."

"wi keɪm tə jə pisfəli," feɪl sɛd. "hɑɹdli ði ækʃən ə ɹɛbəlz."

"We came to you peacefully," Faile said. "Hardly the action of rebels."

ɪleɪn tʊk ə sɪp ə ðə ti fɝst, əz wɑz ðə kʌstəm, tə pɹuv ɪt wɑzn pɔɪzənd. "maɪ ɛnvɔɪz tə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz əv bɪn ɹəfjuzd, ən jəɹ pipəl hɪɹ ɡeɪv mi ə mɛsədʒ - ən aɪ kwoʊt - 'ðə lænz ə lɔɹd pɛɹɪn ɡoʊldən-vɛs ɹɛfjus jəɹ ændɔɝən tæksəz. teɪʃɝ mæmbɝən!'"

Elayne took a sip of the tea first, as was the custom, to prove it wasn't poisoned. "My envoys to the Two Rivers have been refused, and your people here gave me a message - and I quote - 'The lands of Lord Perrin Golden-ves refuse your Andoran taxes. Tai'shar Mamtberen!'"

æliændɝ peɪld. pɛɹɪn ɡɹoʊn sɔfli, ə saʊn ðət keɪm aʊt feɪnli laɪk ə ɡɹaʊl. feɪl tʊk əɹ kʌp ən sɪpt əɹ ti - mɪnt, wɪð klaʊdbɛɹiz' ɪt wɑz ɡʊd. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk hæd plʌk, ðət wɑz sɝɾən.

Alliandre paled. Perrin groaned softly, a sound that came out faintly like a growl. Faile took her cup and sipped her tea - mint, with cloudberries' it was good. The Two Rivers folk had pluck, that was certain.

"ðiz ɑɹ pæʃənət taɪmz, jəɹ mædʒəsti," feɪl sɛd. "ʃʊɹli jə kən si ðət ðə pipəl maɪt bi kənsɝnd; ðə tu ɹɪvɝz əz nɑɾ ɔfən bɪn ə pɹaɪɔɹəɾi fəɹ jəɹ θɹoʊn."

"These are passionate times, Your Majesty," Faile said. "Surely you can see that the people might be concerned; the Two Rivers has not often been a priority for your throne."

"ðæts pʊɾɪŋ ɪt maɪldli," pɛɹɪn æɾəd wɪð ə snɔɹt. "moʊst ʌv əs ɡɹu ʌp nɑt noʊɪŋ wi wɝ pɑɹɾ ʌv ændɝ. jə ɪɡnɔɹɾ ʌs."

"That's putting it mildly," Perrin added with a snort. "Most of us grew up not knowing we were part of Andor. You ignored us."

"ðæt wɑz kəz ði ɛɹiə wɑzn ɹaɪzɪŋ ɪn ɹɪbɛljən." ɪleɪn sɪpt əɹ ti.

"That was because the area wasn't rising in rebellion." Elayne sipped her tea.

"ɹɪbɛljən ɪzən ði oʊnli ɹizən mɛn maɪt nid ði ətɛnʃən ə ðə kwin u kleɪmz ðɛm,"

"Rebellion isn't the only reason men might need the attention of the queen who claims them,"

pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf juv hɝd, bʌt læs jɪɹ wi feɪs tʃɹɑləks ɑn əɹ oʊn, ən wɪθaʊɾ ə wɪskɝ ə hɛlp fɹəm ðə kɹaʊn. juɾ əv hɛlpt ɪf jud noʊn, bʌt ðə fæk ðət ðəɹ wɝ noʊ tʃɹups nɪɹbaɪ - nʌn keɪpəbəl ə noʊɪŋ əɹ deɪnʒɝ - sɛz sʌmθɪŋ."

Perrin said. "I don't know if you've heard, but last year we faced Trollocs on our own, and without a whisker of help from the Crown. You'd have helped if you'd known, but the fact that there were no troops nearby - none capable of knowing our danger - says something."

ɪleɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd.

Elayne hesitated.

"ðə tu ɹɪvɝz əz ɹiɾɪskʌvɝd ɪts hɪstɝi," feɪl sɛd kɛɹfəli. "ɪt kʊdn ɹɛs fɝɛvɝ, nɑt wɪð tɑɹmən ɡdən lumɪŋ. nɑɾ æftɝ ʃɛltɝɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn dʊɹɪŋ ɪz tʃaɪldhʊd. pɑɹɾ ə mi wʌndɝz ɪf meɪnɛðɝən hæd tə fɔl, ɪf ðə tu ɹɪvɝz hæd tə ɹaɪz, tə pɹəvaɪɾ ə pleɪs fəɹ ɹænd ælθɹ tə bi ɹeɪzd. əmʌŋ fɑɹmɝz wɪð ðə blʌd - ən ɑbstənəsi - ʌv kɪŋz."

"The Two Rivers has rediscovered its history," Faile said carefully. "It couldn't rest forever, not with Tarmon Gai'don looming. Not after sheltering the Dragon Reborn during his childhood. Part of me wonders if Manetheren had to fall, if the Two Rivers had to rise, to provide a place for Rand al'Thor to be raised. Among farmers with the blood - and obstinacy - of kings."

"wɪtʃ meɪks ɪɾ ɔl ðə mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðəɾ aɪ kwaɪət θɪŋz naʊ" ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪ ɔfɝd jə ə bun soʊ ðət jə kəɾ æsk fəɹ fɝɡɪvnəs. aɪd pɑɹɾən ju, ən əl bi sɝɾən tə sɛn tʃɹups soʊ ðət jəɹ pipəl ɑɹ pɹətɛktəd. æksɛp ðɪs, ən wi kən ɔl ɡoʊ bæk tə laɪf ðə weɪ ɪt ʃəd bi."

"Which makes it all the more important that I quiet things now" Elayne said. "I offered you a boon so that you could ask for forgiveness. I'd pardon you, and I'll be certain to send troops so that your people are protected. Accept this, and we can all go back to life the way it should be."

"ðæɾ ɪzənt ɡoʊɪŋ tə hæpən," pɛɹɪn sɛd sɔfli. "ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɪl əv lɔɹdz, naʊ. aɪ fɔɾ ɪt fəɹ ə taɪm. jə meɪ, tu, bʌɾ ɪt woʊn tʃeɪnʒ ɛniθɪŋ."

"That isn't going to happen," Perrin said softly. "The Two Rivers will have lords, now. I fought it for a time. You may, too, but it won't change anything."

'pɝhæps," ɪleɪn sɛd. "bʌt ɹɛkəɡnaɪzɪŋ jə wəd bi tə əɡɹi ðəɾ ə mæn kən dʒʌs kleɪm ə taɪɾəl wɪðɪn maɪ neɪʃən, ðən kip ɪt baɪ stʌbɝnli ɡæðɝɪŋ ən ɑɹmi. ɪt meɪks fəɹ ə tɛɹəbəl pɹɛsɪɾənt, pɛɹɪn. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk jə ɹilaɪz ðə pɹɪdɪkəmən juv pʊt mi ɪn."

'Perhaps," Elayne said. "But recognizing you would be to agree that a man can just claim a title within my nation, then keep it by stubbornly gathering an army. It makes for a terrible precedent, Perrin. I don't think you realize the predicament you've put me in."

"wil mʌɾəl θɹu," pɛɹɪn sɛɾ ɪn ðət stʌbɝn toʊn i juzd wən i wɑznt ɡoʊɪŋ tə bʌdʒ.

"We'll muddle through," Perrin said in that stubborn tone he used when he wasn't going to budge.

"aɪm nɑt stɛpɪŋ daʊn."

"I'm not stepping down."

"jɔɹ duɪŋ ə pʊɹ dʒɑb ə pɝsweɪɾɪŋ mi jəl æksɛp maɪ ɔθɝ-aɪɾi," ɪleɪn snæpt.

"You're doing a poor job of persuading me you will accept my author-ity," Elayne snapped.

nɑt ɡʊd, feɪl θɔt, oʊpənɪŋ əɹ maʊθ tə dʒʌmp ɪn. ə klæʃ hɪɹ wəd nɑt sɝv əm wɛl.

Not good, Faile thought, opening her mouth to jump in. A clash here would not serve them well.

bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd spik, haʊɛvɝ, ənʌðɝ vɔɪs kʌɾ ɪn. "dɔt " mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd sɔfli, dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ əɹ ti. "ɪf jə plæn tə dæns wɪð tɑvɝən, bi ʃʊɹ ðət jə noʊ ðə pɹɑpɝ stɛps. aɪv tʃɹævəld wɪð ðɪs mæn. aɪv sin ðə wɝl bɛn ɝaʊn hɪm; aɪv sin bɪɾɝ ɛnəmiz bɪkʌm ɪz ælaɪz tə faɪt ðə pæɾɝn ɪtsɛlf ɪz tə tʃɹaɪ tə muv ə maʊntən wɪð ə spun."

Before she could speak, however, another voice cut in. "Daughte " Morgase said softly, drinking her tea. "If you plan to dance with ta'veren, be sure that you know the proper steps. I've traveled with this man. I've seen the world bend around him; I've seen bitter enemies become his allies To fight the Pattern itself is to try to move a mountain with a spoon."

ɪleɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ mʌðɝ.

Elayne hesitated, looking at her mother.

"pliz fɝɡɪv mi ɪf aɪ oʊvɝstɛp maɪsɛlf," mɔɹɡeɪs kəntɪnjud. "bʌɾ ɪleɪn, aɪ pɹɑməs ðiz tu ðəɾ aɪ wəd spik fəɹ ðɛm. aɪ toʊl jə aɪ wʊd. ændɝ ɪz stʃɹɔŋ, bʌɾ aɪ fɪɹ ɪt kəd bɹeɪk ɪtsɛlf əɡɛns ðɪs mæn. hi dʌz nɑt wɑn jəɹ θɹoʊn, aɪ pɹɑməs ɪt, ən ðə tu ɹɪvɝz dʌz nid supɝvɪʒən.

"Please forgive me if I overstep myself," Morgase continued. "But Elayne, I promised these two that I would speak for them. I told you I would. Andor is strong, but I fear it could break itself against this man. He does not want your throne, I promise it, and the Two Rivers does need supervision.

wəɾ ɪt bi sətʃ ə tɛɹəbəl θɪŋ tə lɛɾ əm əv ðə mæn ðeɪ ðɛmsɛlvz əv tʃoʊzən?"

Would it be such a terrible thing to let them have the man they themselves have chosen?"

ðə smɔl ɹum fɛl saɪlənt. ɪleɪn aɪd pɛɹɪn, saɪzɪŋ ɪm ʌp. feɪl hɛld əɹ bɹɛθ.

The small room fell silent. Elayne eyed Perrin, sizing him up. Faile held her breath.

"ɔl ɹaɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪ əsum juv kʌm wɪð dɪmænz. lɛts hɪɹ əm soʊ wi kən dɪskʌvɝ ɪf ðɛɹz ɛniθɪŋ ðət kən bi dʌn."

"All right," Elayne said. "I assume you've come with demands. Let's hear them so we can discover if there's anything that can be done."

"noʊ dɪmænz," feɪl sɛd. "æn ɔfɝ."

"No demands," Faile said. "An offer."

ɪleɪn ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ.

Elayne raised an eyebrow.

"jɔɹ mʌðɝ ɪz ɹaɪt," feɪl sɛd. "pɛɹɪn dʌz nɑt wɑn jəɹ θɹoʊn."

"Your mother is right," Faile said. "Perrin does not want your throne."

"wʌt jə tu wɑn meɪ bi ɪɹɛləvənt wʌns jəɹ pipəl ɡɛɾ ən aɪdiə ɪn ðɛɹ maɪnz."

"What you two want may be irrelevant once your people get an idea in their minds."

feɪl ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ðeɪ lʌv hɪm, jəɹ mædʒəsti. ðeɪ ɹɪspɛk hɪm. ðəl də wʌɾ i sɛz.

Faile shook her head. "They love him, Your Majesty. They respect him. They'll do what he says.

wi kən ən wɪl pʊt daʊn aɪdiəz ə meɪnɛðɝən ɹaɪzɪŋ əɡɛn."

We can and will put down ideas of Manetheren rising again."

"ænd waɪ wəd jə də ðæt?" ɪleɪn æskt. "aɪ noʊ haʊ fæs ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɪz ɡɹoʊɪŋ wɪð ðoʊz ɹɛfjudʒiz kʌmɪŋ ɪn oʊvɝ ðə maʊntənz. neɪʃənz kəd ɹaɪz ən fɔl wɪð ðə kʌmɪŋ ə ðə læs bæɾəl. juv noʊ ɹizən tə ɡɪv ʌp ðə tʃæns tə fɔɹm jəɹ oʊn kɪŋdəm."

"And why would you do that?" Elayne asked. "I know how fast the Two Rivers is growing with those refugees coming in over the mountains. Nations could rise and fall with the coming of the Last Battle. You have no reason to give up the chance to form your own kingdom."

"æktʃəli ," feɪl sɛd, "wi hæv ɡʊd ɹizən. ændɝ ɪz ə stʃɹɔŋ neɪʃən, ən pɹɑspɝəs. ðə taʊnz ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz meɪ bi ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɹæpədli, bʌt ðə pipəl əv bɛɹli bɪɡʌn tə wɑn ə lɔɹd.

"Actually," Faile said, "we have good reason. Andor is a strong nation, and prosperous. The towns in the Two Rivers may be growing rapidly, but the people have barely begun to want a lord.

ðəɹ stɪl fɑɹmɝz ət hɑɹt. ðeɪ doʊnt wɑnt ɡlɔɹi; ðeɪ wɑn ðɛɹ kɹɑps tə sɝvaɪv." feɪl pɔzd.

They're still farmers at heart. They don't want glory; they want their crops to survive." Faile paused.

"pɝhæps jəɹ ɹaɪt, pɝhæps ðəɹ wɪl bi ənʌðɝ bɹeɪkɪŋ, bʌt ðæts oʊnli mɔɹ ɹizən tə hæv ælaɪz. noʊbɑdi wɑns sɪvəl wɔɹ ɪn ændɝ, list ʌv ɔl ðə tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk."

"Perhaps you're right, perhaps there will be another Breaking, but that's only more reason to have allies. Nobody wants civil war in Andor, least of all the Two Rivers folk."

"wʌt dʒju pɹəpoʊz, ðɛn?" ɪleɪn sɛd.

"What do you propose, then?" Elayne said.

"nʌθɪŋ, ɹɪli, ðət dʌzn ɪɡzɪst ɔlɹɛɾi," feɪl sɛd. "ɡɪv pɛɹɪn ən ɑfiʃəl taɪɾəl ən meɪk ɪm haɪ lɔɹɾ oʊvɝ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz." "ænd wʌt dʒju min baɪ 'haɪ lɔɹd?" ɪleɪn æskt. "hid ɹæŋk haɪɝ ðən ʌðɝ noʊbəl haʊsəz ɪn ændɝ, bʌt bɪniθ ðə kwin."

"Nothing, really, that doesn't exist already," Faile said. "Give Perrin an oficial title and make him High Lord over the Two Rivers." "And what do you mean by 'High Lord?" Elayne asked. "He'd rank higher than other noble Houses in Andor, but beneath the Queen."

"aɪ daʊt ði ʌðɝz wəd laɪk ðæt," ɪleɪn sɛd. "wʌɾ ə tæksəz?"

"I doubt the others would like that," Elayne said. "What of taxes?"

"ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɪz ɪɡzɛmpt," feɪl sɛd. əz ɪleɪnz ɪkspɹɛʃən saʊɝd, ʃi kəntɪnjud kwɪkli.

"The Two Rivers is exempt," Faile said. As Elayne's expression soured, she continued quickly.

"jɔɹ mædʒəsti, ðə θɹoʊn ɪɡnɔɹd ðə tu ɹɪvɝz fəɹ dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz, nɑt pɹətɛktɪŋ əm fɹəm bændəts əɹ sɛndɪŋ wɝkɝz tə ɪmpɹuv ðɛɹ ɹoʊdz, nɑt ɡɪvɪŋ əm ɛniθɪŋ ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv mædʒɪstʃɹeɪts əɹ dʒʌstəsəz."

"Your Majesty, the throne ignored the Two Rivers for generations, not protecting them from bandits or sending workers to improve their roads, not giving them anything in the way of magistrates or justices."

"ðeɪ dɪdnt niɾ ɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ðeɪ ɡʌvɝn ðɛmsɛlvz faɪn." ʃi lɛft ənsɛd ðət ðə tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk wəd pɹɑbli hæv tɔst aʊt tæks kəlɛktɝz, mædʒɪstʃɹeɪts əɹ dʒʌstəsəz sɛn baɪ ðə kwin  - bʌt ʃi sim tə noʊ ɪt.

"They didn't need it," Elayne said. "They governed themselves fine." She left unsaid that the Two Rivers folk would probably have tossed out tax collectors, magistrates or justices sent by the Queen  - but she seemed to know it.

"wɛl," feɪl sɛd, "nʌθɪŋ nidz tʃeɪnʒ, ðɛn. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɡʌvɝnz ɪtsɛlf."

"Well," Faile said, "nothing needs change, then. The Two Rivers governs itself."

"ju kəɾ əv tɛɹəf-fɹi tʃɹeɪd wɪð ðɛm," æliændɝ sɛd.

"You could have tariff-free trade with them," Alliandre said.

"sʌmθɪŋ aɪ ɔlɹɛɾi hæv," ɪleɪn sɛd.

"Something I already have," Elayne said.

"soʊ nʌθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒəz," feɪl sɛɾ əɡɛn. "ɪksɛp ðət jə ɡeɪn ə paʊɝfəl pɹɑvəns tə ðə wɛst.

"So nothing changes," Faile said again. "Except that you gain a powerful province to the west.

pɛɹɪn, əz jəɹ ælaɪ ən sʌbʒɪkt lɔɹd, wɪl əɡɹi tə mɑɹʃəl tʃɹups ɪn jəɹ dɪfɛns. hɪl ɔlsoʊ kɔl ʌp ɪz swɔɹn mɑnɑɹks tə jəɹ əlidʒəns."

Perrin, as your ally and subject lord, will agree to marshal troops in your defense. He will also call up his sworn monarchs to your allegiance."

ɪleɪn ɡlænst əɾ æliændɝ. ʃid pɹɑbli hɝɾ ʌv æliændɝz swɛɹɪŋ fɹəm mɔɹɡeɪs, bʌɾ ɔlsoʊ wəd wɑnə hɪɹ ɪt fəɹ hɝsɛlf.

Elayne glanced at Alliandre. She'd probably heard of Alliandre's swearing from Morgase, but also would want to hear it for herself.

"aɪ swɔɹ fiəlti tə lɔɹd pɛɹɪn," æliændɝ sɛd. "ɡildən hæd lɔŋ læk stʃɹɔŋ ælaɪz. aɪ mɛn tə tʃeɪnʒ ðæt."

"I swore fealty to Lord Perrin," Alliandre said. "Ghealdan had long lacked strong allies. I meant to change that."

"jɔɹ mædʒəsti," feɪl sɛd, linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, ti kʌpt ɪn əɹ hænz bɪfɔɹ hɝ. "pɛɹɪn spɛn sɛvɹəl wiks wɪð səm sintʃæn ɔfəsɝz. ðeɪv kɹieɪɾəd ə ɡɹeɪt pækt ə neɪʃənz əlaɪd bɪniθ wʌn bænɝ. ɹænd ælθɹ, ðoʊ jə meɪ tʃɹʌst ɪm əz ə fɹɛnd, hæz dʌn ðə seɪm. tɛɹ, ɪljən, ən meɪbi naʊ ɑɹæd dumən ɑɹ bɪniθ ɪz ɹul. neɪʃənz dʒɔɪn ɹæðɝ ðən splɪt, ðiz deɪz. ændɝ lʊks smɔlɝ baɪ ði aʊɝ."

"Your Majesty," Faile said, leaning forward, tea cupped in her hands before her. "Perrin spent several weeks with some Seanchan officers. They have created a great pact of nations allied beneath one banner. Rand al'Thor, though you may trust him as a friend, has done the same. Tear, Illian, and maybe now Arad Doman are beneath his rule. Nations join rather than split, these days. Andor looks smaller by the hour."

"ðæts waɪ aɪ dɪd wʌɾ aɪ dɪd," æliændɝ sɛd.

"That's why I did what I did," Alliandre said.

wɛl, ɪn feɪlz vju, æliændɝ hæd bɪn kɑɾ ʌp baɪ pɛɹɪn əz ə tɑvɝən. ðəɹ hædn bɪn mʌtʃ plænɪŋ. bʌɾ æliændɝ maɪt si ɪɾ ʌðɝwaɪz.

Well, in Faile's view, Alliandre had been caught up by Perrin as a taveren. There hadn't been much planning. But Alliandre might see it otherwise.

'jɔɹ mædʒəsti," feɪl kəntɪnjud, "ðɛɹ ɪz mʌtʃ tə ɡeɪn hɪɹ. θɹu maɪ mɛɹɪdʒ tə pɛɹɪn, jə ɡeɪn ə taɪ tə sɑldɑiə. θɹu æliændɝz oʊðz, ju ɡeɪn ɡildən. bɹəleɪn ɔlsoʊ fɑloʊz pɛɹɪn ən əz ɔfən mɛnʃən əɹ dɪzaɪɝ tə faɪn stʃɹɔŋ ælaɪz fəɹ min. ɪf wi wɝ tə spik wɪð hɝ, aɪ səspɛkt ʃi maɪt bi wɪlɪŋ tə meɪk ən əlaɪəns wɪð ʌs. wi kəd kɹieɪɾ əɹ oʊn pækt. faɪv neɪʃənz, ɪf jə kaʊn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz əz wʌn - sɪks, ɪf jə də teɪk ðə sʌn θɹoʊn, əz ɹumɝ kleɪmz jə wɪl. wəɹ nɑt ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl neɪʃənz, bʌt ðə mɛni ɑɹ stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ðə wʌn. ən jə wəd bi əɾ əɹ hɛd."

'Your Majesty," Faile continued, "there is much to gain here. Through my marriage to Perrin, you gain a tie to Saldaea. Through Alliandre's oaths, yu gain Ghealdan. Berelain also follows Perrin and has often mentioned her desire to find strong allies for Mayene. If we were to speak with her, I suspect she might be willing to make an alliance with us. We could create our own pact. Five nations, if you count the Two Rivers as one - six, if you do take the Sun Throne, as rumor claims you will. We are not the most powerful nations, but the many are stronger than the one. And you would be at our head."

ɪleɪnz feɪs hæd lɔst ɔlmoʊst ɔl ʌv ɪts hɑstɪləɾi. "sɑldɑiə. wʌɾ ɑɹ jə ɪn ɪts laɪn ə səksɛʃən?"

Elayne's face had lost almost all of its hostility. "Saldaea. What are you in its line of succession?"

"aɪm sɛkənd," feɪl ədmɪɾəd, wɪtʃ ɪleɪn pɹɑbli ɔlɹɛɾi nu. pɛɹɪn ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ɪz tʃɛɹ.

"I'm second," Faile admitted, which Elayne probably already knew. Perrin shifted in his chair.

ʃi nu hi wɑz stɪl ənkʌmftəɹbəl wɪð ðət fækt; wɛl, hi wəd sɪmpli hæv tə ɡɛt juz tə ɪt.

She knew he was still uncomfortable with that fact; well, he would simply have to get used to it.

"sɛkən ɪz tu kloʊs," ɪleɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "wʌɾ ɪf jə ɛn ʌp wɪð ðə θɹoʊn ə sɑldɑiə? aɪ kəd luz ðə tu ɹɪvɝz tə ənʌðɝ kʌntʃɹi ðət weɪ."

"Second is too close," Elayne replied. "What if you end up with the throne of Saldaea? I could lose the Two Rivers to another country that way."

"ðɪs ɪz izi tə fɪks," æliændɝ sɛd. "ɪf feɪl wɝ tə əsɛnd, wʌn ə hɝ ən pɛɹɪnz tʃɪlʒɹən kəd kəntɪnju əz lɔɹɾ ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ənʌðɝ kəd teɪk ðə θɹoʊn ə sɑldɑiə. pʊɾ ɪɾ ɪn ɹaɪɾɪŋ, ən jəl bi pɹətɛktəd."

"This is easy to fix," Alliandre said. "If Faile were to ascend, one of her and Perrin's children could continue as Lord of the Two Rivers. Another could take the throne of Saldaea. Put it in writing, and you will be protected."

"aɪ kəɾ æksɛp sətʃ ən ɝeɪnʒmənt," ɪleɪn sɛd.

"I could accept such an arrangement," Elayne said.

"aɪ doʊn əv pɹɑbləmz wɪð ɪt," feɪl ɹɪplaɪd, lʊkɪŋ ət pɛɹɪn.

"I don't have problems with it," Faile replied, looking at Perrin.

"aɪ səpoʊz."

"I suppose."

"aɪ ʃəd laɪk wʌn ə ðɛm maɪsɛlf," ɪleɪn sɛd θɔtfəli. "wʌn ə jəɹ tʃɪlʒɹən, aɪ min, tə mɛɹi ɪndə ði ændɔɝən ɹɔɪəl laɪn. ɪf ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɪz tə bi ɹul baɪ ə lɔɹd wɪð əz mʌtʃ paʊɝ əz ðɪs tʃɹiɾi wəd ɡɪv hɪm, ðən aɪ wəd lʌv tə hæv blʌd kənɛkʃənz tə ðə θɹoʊn."

"I should like one of them myself," Elayne said thoughtfully. "One of your children, I mean, to marry into the Andoran royal line. If the Two Rivers is to be ruled by a lord with as much power as this treaty would give him, then I would love to have blood connections to the throne."

"aɪ woʊn pɹɑməs ðæt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "maɪ tʃɪlʒɹən wɪl meɪk ðɛɹ oʊn tʃɔɪsəz."

"I won't promise that," Perrin said. "My children will make their own choices."

"ɪɾ ɪz səmtaɪmz ðə weɪ ʌv noʊbɪləɾi," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ɪt wəd bi ənjuʒəwəl, bʌt nɑɾ ənhɝɾ ʌv, fəɹ tʃɪlʒɹən laɪk aʊɝz tə bi ɛnɡeɪdʒ fɹəm bɝθ.

"It is sometimes the way of nobility," Elayne said. "It would be unusual, but not unheard of, for children like ours to be engaged from birth.

"wi woʊn də ɪt ðət weɪ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz," pɛɹɪn sɛd stʌbɝnli. "ɛvɝ."

"We won't do it that way in the Two Rivers," Perrin said stubbornly. "Ever."

feɪl ʃɹʌɡd. "wi kəɾ ɔfɝ ɛnkɝɪdʒmənt, jəɹ mædʒəsti."

Faile shrugged. "We could offer encouragement, Your Majesty."

ɪleɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən nɑɾəd. "ðæt wɪl bi faɪn. bʌt ði ʌðɝ haʊsəz woʊn laɪk ðɪs 'haɪ lɔɹd'

Elayne hesitated, then nodded. "That will be fine. But the other Houses won't like this 'High Lord'

bɪznəs. ðɛɹəd nid tə bi ə weɪ ɝaʊn ɪt...

business. There'd need to be a way around it...

"ɡɪv ðə tu ɹɪvɝz tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd.

"Give the Two Rivers to the Dragon Reborn," Morgase said.

ɪleɪnz aɪz lɪɾ ʌp. "jɛs. ðət wəd wɝk. ɪf aɪ ɡeɪv ði ɛɹiə tə hɪm tə bi hɪz siɾ ɪn ændɝ . . ."

Elayne's eyes lit up. "Yes. That would work. If I gave the area to him to be his seat in Andor . . ."

feɪl oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, bʌɾ ɪleɪn kʌɾ əɹ ɔf wɪð ə weɪv ə ðə hænd. "ðɪs ɪzənt nəɡoʊʃəbəl. əl nid səm weɪ tə kənvɪns ði ʌðɝ lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz ðəɾ aɪm ɹaɪt tə ɡɪv ðə tu ɹɪvɝz soʊ mʌtʃ ɔtɑnəmi. ɪf ðə lænz ɑɹ ɡɹæntəd tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ɡɪvɪŋ ɪm ə taɪɾəl ɪn ændɝ ən meɪkɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɪz sit, ðən ɪɾəl meɪk sɛns fəɹ jəɹ hoʊm tə bi tʃɹiɾəd dɪfɹənli.

Faile opened her mouth, but Elayne cut her off with a wave of the hand. "This isn't negotiable. I'll need some way to convince the other lords and ladies that I'm right to give the Two Rivers so much autonomy. If the lands are granted to the Dragon Reborn, giving him a title in Andor and making the Two Rivers his seat, then it will make sense for your home to be treated differently.

"ðə noʊbəl haʊsəz ʌv ændɝ wɪl æksɛp ðɪs, sɪns ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɪz wɛɹ ɹænd keɪm fɹʌm, ən ændɝ dʌz oʊ hɪm ə dɛt. wɪl əv ɪm pɔɪn pɛɹɪnz laɪn əz ɪz stuɝdz. ɪnstɛɾ ə kæpɪtʃəleɪɾɪŋ tə ɹəbɛlz wɪðɪn maɪ bɔɹɾɝz, əl bi sin əlaʊɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ðə mæn aɪ lʌv, tə ɛləveɪɾ ɪz ɡʊd fɹɛnd. ɪt maɪɾ ɔlsoʊ ɡɪv əs səm ɡɹaʊn əɡɛns ði ɪljən-tɛɹ pæk jə mɛnʃənd, hu ɑɹ baʊn tə kleɪm ðət ðɛɹ taɪz tə ɹænd ɡɪv əm ðə ɹaɪɾ ə kɑŋkwɛst." ʃi ɡɹu θɔtfəl, tæpɪŋ ðə saɪɾ ə hɝ kʌp.

"The noble Houses of Andor will accept this, since the Two Rivers is where Rand came from, and Andor does owe him a debt. We'll have him ppoint Perrin's line as his stewards. Instead of capitulating to rebels within my borders, I'll be seen allowing the Dragon Reborn, the man I love, to elevate his good friend. It might also give us some ground against the Illian-Tear pact you mentioned, who are bound to claim that their ties to Rand give them the right of conquest." She grew thoughtful, tapping the side of her cup.

"ðæt simz ɹizənəbəl," pɛɹɪn sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ. "stuɝɾ ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. aɪ laɪk ðə saʊn ə ðæt."

"That seems reasonable," Perrin said, nodding. "Steward of the Two Rivers. I like the sound of that."

"jɛs, wɛl," feɪl sɛd. "aɪ ɡɛs ɪts sɛɾəld, ðɛn."

"Yes, well," Faile said. "I guess it's settled, then."

"ðə tæksəz," ɪleɪn sɛd, əz ɪf ʃi hædn hɝd. "ju pʊɾ əm ɪndə ə tʃɹʌs tə bi ədmɪnəstɝd baɪ pɛɹɪn ən ɪz laɪn, wɪð ði ʌndɝstændɪŋ ðəɾ ɪf ðə dʒɹæɡən ɛvɝ ɹɪtɝnz, hi kən kɔl əpɑn ðɛm. jɛs.

"The taxes," Elayne said, as if she hadn't heard. "You put them into a trust to be administered by Perrin and his line, with the understanding that if the Dragon ever returns, he can call upon them. Yes.

ðət ɡɪvz əs ə liɡəl ɪkskjus fəɹ jəɹ ɪɡzɛmpʃən. ʌv kɔɹs, pɛɹɪn wɪl əv əθɔɹəɾi tə dɪp ɪndə ðoʊz fʌnz tə ɪmpɹuv ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ɹoʊdz, fud stɔɹz, dɪfɛnsəz."

That gives us a legal excuse for your exemption. Of course, Perrin will have authority to dip into those funds to improve the Two Rivers. Roads, food stores, defenses."

ɪleɪn lʊkt ət feɪl, ðən smaɪld, teɪkɪŋ ə lɔŋ dʒɹɪŋk ə ti. "aɪm bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə θɪŋk ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊɾ aɪdiə nɑt tə ɛksəkjut ju."

Elayne looked at Faile, then smiled, taking a long drink of tea. "I'm beginning to think it was a good idea not to execute you."

"ðæts sɝɾənli ə ɹɪlif," æliændɝ sɛd, smaɪlɪŋ. əz ðə lis paʊɝfəl wʌn ɪn ðə junjən, ʃi stʊd tə ɡeɪn ə lɑt fɹəm ði əlaɪənsəz.

"That's certainly a relief," Alliandre said, smiling. As the least powerful one in the union, she stood to gain a lot from the alliances.

"jɔɹ mædʒəsti - " feɪl sɛd.

"Your Majesty - " Faile said.

"kɔl mi ɪleɪn," ʃi sɛd, pɔɹɪŋ ə ɡɑbləɾ ʌv waɪn fəɹ feɪl.

"Call me Elayne," she said, pouring a goblet of wine for Faile.

"vɛɹi wɛl, ɪleɪn," feɪl sɛd, smaɪlɪŋ ən pʊɾɪŋ əsaɪɾ əɹ ti, ðən æksɛptɪŋ ðə waɪn. "aɪ nid tə æsk. dʒju noʊ wʌɾ ɪz hæpənɪŋ wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn?"

"Very well, Elayne," Faile said, smiling and putting aside her tea, then accepting the wine. "I need to ask. Do you know what is happening with the Dragon Reborn?"

"ɑks-bɹeɪn lʌmɑks," ɪleɪn sɛd, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd. "ðə blʌɾi mænz ɡɑɾ ɛɡwin ɔl ɹaɪld ʌp."

"Ox-brained lummox," Elayne said, shaking her head. "The bloody man's got Egwene all riled up."

"ɛɡwin?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"Egwene?" Perrin asked.

ʃiz æmɪɝlɪn, faɪnəli," ɪleɪn sɛd, əz ɪf ðə fæk hæd bɪn ɪnɛvəɾəbəl. pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd, ðoʊ feɪl faʊn hɝsɛlf əmeɪzd. haʊ hæd ðət hæpənd, ən waɪ wɑzn pɛɹɪn sɝpɹaɪz baɪ ɪt?

She's Amyrlin, finally," Elayne said, as if the fact had been inevitable. Perrin nodded, though Faile found herself amazed. How had that happened, and why wasn't Perrin surprised by it?

'wʌts i ɡɔn ən dʌn?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

'What's he gone and done?" Perrin asked.

"hi sɛz hiz gɑnə bɹeɪk ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ silz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən," ɪleɪn sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ.

"He says he's going to break the remaining seals of the Dark One's prison," Elayne said, frowning.

"wil nid tə stɑp hɪm, ʌv kɔɹs. fulɪʃ plæn. jə kəd hɛlp wɪð ðæt. ɛɡwinz ɡæðɝɪŋ ə fɔɹs tə pɝsweɪd hɪm."

"We'll need to stop him, of course. Foolish plan. You could help with that. Egwene's gathering a force to persuade him."

"aɪ θɪŋk aɪ kəd bi ʌv hɛlp," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"I think I could be of help," Perrin said.

"du jə noʊ wɛɹ hiz kɝənli?" feɪl æskt. pɛɹɪn hæɾ ə ɡʊɾ aɪdiə, fɹəm ɪz vɪʒənz, bʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə noʊ wʌɾ ɪleɪn nu. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ," ɪleɪn sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ də noʊ wɛɹ hɪl bi . . ."

"Do you know where he is currently?" Faile asked. Perrin had a good idea, from his visions, but she wanted to know what Elayne knew. "I don't know," Elayne said. "But I do know where he will be . . ."

fɔɹtwoʊnə æθeɪɪm dɛvi pɛndʒɹæɡ, ɹulɝ ə ðə ɡlɔɹiəs sintʃæn ɛmpaɪɝ mɑɹtʃt ɪndə hɝ titʃɪŋ tʃeɪmbɝ. ʃi wɔɹ ə mæɡnɪfəsənt ɡaʊn ʌv ɡoʊldən klɔθ, kʌɾ æftɝ ðə haɪəst ɪmpɪɹiəl fæʃən. ðə skɝt splɪɾ ət ðə fɹʌn tə dʒʌst əbʌv ðə niz, ən wɑz soʊ lɔŋ ðəɾ ɪt tʊk faɪv dækoʊvæl tə kæɹi ðə saɪdz ən tʃɹeɪn.

Fortuona Athaem Devi Paendrag, ruler of the Glorious Seanchan Empire marched into her Teaching Chamber. She wore a magnificent gown of golden cloth, cut after the highest Imperial fashion. The skirt split at the front to just above the knees, and was so long that it took five da'covale to carry the sides and train.

ʃi wɔɹ ən ɔɹneɪt hɛdʒɹɛs, ʌv ɡoʊld ən kɹɪmzən sɪlk wɪð bjuɾəfəl sɪlkən wɪŋz ʃeɪp laɪk ðoʊz ʌv ən aʊl teɪkɪŋ flaɪt, ən əɹ ɑɹmz ɡlɪɾɝd wɪð θɝtin bɹeɪslɪts, itʃ ʌv ə dɪfɹən dʒɛmstoʊn kɑmbəneɪʃən. ʃi wɔɹ kɹɪstəl əɾ əɹ θɹoʊɾ ɪn ə lɔŋ stʃɹænd. ʃi hæd hɝɾ ən aʊl əbʌv əɹ wɪndoʊ ðə læs naɪt, ən ɪt hæd nɑt floʊn əweɪ wən ʃi lʊkt aʊt. ən oʊmən ɪndəkeɪɾɪŋ ɡɹeɪt kɛɹ ʃəd bi teɪkən, ðət ðə nɛks deɪz wəd bi wʌnz ʌv ɪmpɔɹɾənt dɪsɪʒənz. ðə pɹɑpɝ ɹɪspɑns wɑz tə wɛɹ dʒuəlɹi wɪð paʊɝfəl sɪmbəlɪzəm.

She wore an ornate headdress, of gold and crimson silk with beautiful silken wings shaped like those of an owl taking flight, and her arms glittered with thirteen bracelets, each of a different gemstone combination. She wore crystal at her throat in a long strand. She had heard an owl above her window the last night, and it had not flown away when she looked out. An omen indicating great care should be taken, that the next days would be ones of important decisions. The proper response was to wear jewelry with powerful symbolism.

wən ʃi ɛntɝd ðə tʃeɪmbɝ, ðoʊz ɪnsaɪd pɹɑstʃɹeɪɾɪd ðɛmsɛlvz. oʊnli ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹd -  mɛn ɪn ɑɹmɝ ə blʌd ɹɛɾ ən dip ɡɹin--wɑz ɪɡzɛmpt; ðeɪ baʊd, bʌt kɛp ðɛɹ aɪz ʌp, wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ deɪnʒɝ.

When she entered the chamber, those inside prostrated themselves. Only the Deathwatch Guard -  men in armor of blood red and deep green--was exempt; they bowed, but kept their eyes up, watching for danger.

ðə lɑɹdʒ tʃeɪmbɝ wɑz wɪndoʊləs. laɪnz ə stæk pɑɾɝi stʊɾ ət wʌn ɛnd, ə pleɪs fəɹ deɪmeɪn tə pɹæktəs wivz ə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən. ðə flɔɹ wɑz kʌvɝɾ ɪn woʊvən mæts wɛɹ stʌbɝn deɪmeɪn wɝ sɛn tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɹaɪðɪŋ ɪn peɪn. ɪt wəd nɑt də fəɹ əm tə bi hɑɹm fɪzɪkəli.

The large chamber was windowless. Lines of stacked pottery stood at one end, a place for damane to practice weaves of destruction. The floor was covered in woven mats where stubborn damane were sent to the ground, writhing in pain. It would not do for them to be harmed physically.

deɪmeɪn wɝ əmʌŋ ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt tulz ði ɛmpaɪɝ hæd, mɔɹ væljəbəl ðən hɔɹsəz əɹ ɹeɪkən.

Damane were among the most important tools the Empire had, more valuable than horses or raken.

jə dɪd nɑt dɪstʃɹɔɪ ə bis kəz ɪt wɑz sloʊ tə lɝn; jə pʌnɪʃt ɪɾ əntɪl ɪt lɝnd.

You did not destroy a beast because it was slow to learn; you punished it until it learned.

fɔɹtwoʊnə kɹɔs ðə tʃeɪmbɝ tə wɛɹ ə pɹɑpɝ ɪmpɪɹiəl θɹoʊn hæd bɪn sɛɾ ʌp. ʃi kɑmənli keɪm hɪɹ, tə wɑtʃ ðə deɪmeɪn biɪŋ wɝkt əɹ bɹoʊkən. ɪt suð hɝ. ðə θɹoʊn wɑz ətɑp ə smɔl deɪz; ʃi klaɪm ðə stɛps, tʃɹeɪn ɹʌslɪŋ əz əɹ dækoʊvæl kæɹiɾ ɪt. ʃi tɝn tə feɪs ðə ɹum, əlaʊɪŋ ðə sɝvəns tə ɝeɪnʒ əɹ dʒɹɛs. ðeɪ tʊk əɹ baɪ hɝ ɑɹmz ən lɪftəɾ əɹ bæk ɪndə ðə θɹoʊn, dʒɹeɪpɪŋ əɹ lɔŋ ɡoʊldən skɝts daʊn ðə fɹʌn ə ðə deɪz laɪk ə tæpəstʃɹi.

Fortuona crossed the chamber to where a proper Imperial Throne had been set up. She commonly came here, to watch the damane being worked or broken. It soothed her. The throne was atop a small dais; she climbed the steps, train rustling as her da'covale carried it. She turned to face the room, allowing the servants to arrange her dress. They took her by her arms and lifted her back into the throne, draping her long golden skirts down the front of the dais like a tapestry.

ðoʊz skɝts wɝ soʊn wɪð ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋz ʌv ɪmpɪɹiəl paʊɝ. ði ɛmpɹɛs ɪz sintʃæn. ði ɛmpɹɛs wɪl lɪv fɝɛvɝ. ði ɛmpɹɛs mʌs bi oʊbeɪd. ʃi sæɾ əz ə lɪvɪŋ bænɝ tə ðə maɪɾ ə ði ɛmpaɪɝ.

Those skirts were sewn with the writings of Imperial power. The Empress IS Seanchan. The Empress WILL live forever. The Empress MUST be obeyed. She sat as a living banner to the might of the Empire.

sɪlutʃə tʊk əɹ pəzɪʃən ɑn ðə loʊɝ stɛps ə ðə deɪz. ðɪs dʌn, ðə kɔɹɾiɝz ɹeɪz ðɛmsɛlvz. ðə deɪmeɪn, ʌv kɔɹs, ɹɪmeɪnd nilɪŋ. ðəɹ wɝ tɛn ə ðɛm, wɪð hɛdz baʊd, ðɛɹ sʌldəm hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ liʃɪz ən - ɪn ə fju keɪsəz - pæɾɪŋ əm əfɛkʃənətli ɑn ðə hɛdz.

Selucia took her position on the lower steps of the dais. This done, the courtiers raised themselves. The damane, of course, remained kneeling. There were ten of them, with heads bowed, their sul'dam holding their leashes and - in a few cases - patting them affectionately on the heads.

kɪŋ bɛslən ɛntɝd. hid ʃeɪv moʊst ə hɪz hɛd, livɪŋ oʊnli ə dɑɹk stʃɹɪp ɑn ðə tɑp, ən sɛvən ə hɪz fɪŋɡɝneɪlz hæd bɪn lækɝd. wʌn mɔɹ fɪŋɡɝneɪl ðən ɛniwʌn ɑn ðɪs saɪɾ ə ði oʊʃən, ɛksɛptɪŋ fɔɹtwoʊnə hɝsɛlf. hi stɪl wɔɹ ɔltɑɹən kloʊðɪŋ - ə junəfɔɹm ʌv ɡɹin ən waɪt -  ɹæðɝ ðən sintʃæn ɹoʊbz. ʃi hæd nɑt pɹɛst ɪm ɑn ðɪs.

King Beslan entered. He'd shaved most of his head, leaving only a dark strip on the top, and seven of his fingernails had been lacquered. One more fingernail than anyone on this side of the ocean, excepting Fortuona herself. He still wore Altaran clothing - a uniform of green and white -  rather than Seanchan robes. She had not pressed him on this.

soʊ fɑɹ əz ʃi nu, sɪns ɪz ɹeɪzɪŋ, bɛslən hædn meɪɾ ɛni plænz tə hæv əɹ əsæsəneɪɾəd.

So far as she knew, since his raising, Beslan hadn't made any plans to have her assassinated.

ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl. ɛni sintʃæn wəɾ əv ɪmiɾiətli bɪɡʌn skimɪŋ. səm wʊɾə tʃɹaɪɾ ən əsæsəneɪʃən; ʌðɝz wʊɾə dɪsaɪɾɪd tə meɪk oʊnli plænz, bʌt ɹɪmeɪn səpɔɹɾɪv. bʌɾ ɔl wʊɾə kənsɪɾɝd kɪlɪŋ hɝ.

Remarkable. Any Seanchan would have immediately begun scheming. Some would have tried an assassination; others would have decided to make only plans, but remain supportive. But all would have considered killing her.

mɛni ɑn ðɪs saɪɾ ə ði oʊʃən θɔt dɪfɹənli. ʃid nɛvɝ əv bɪlivd ɪt, ɪf nɑt fəɹ əɹ taɪm wɪð meɪtʃɹim. ðət wɑz ɑbviəsli wʌn ɹizən waɪ fɔɹtwoʊnə hæd bɪn ɹikwaɪɝd tə ɡoʊ wɪð hɪm. ʃi dʒʌst wɪʃt ʃiɾ ɪntɝpɹəɾəd ði oʊmənz ɝliɝ.

Many on this side of the ocean thought differently. She'd never have believed it, if not for her time with Matrim. That was obviously one reason why Fortuona had been required to go with him. She just wished she'd interpreted the omens earlier.

bɛslən wɑz dʒɔɪn baɪ kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl lunəl ɡælɡən ən ə fju mɛmbɝz ə ðə loʊ blʌd.

Beslan was joined by Captain-General Lunal Galgan and a few members of the low Blood.

ɡælɡən wɑz ə waɪd-ʃoʊldɝd fɛloʊ wɪð ə kɹɛst ʌv waɪt hɛɹ ətɑp ɪz hɛd. ði ʌðɝ mɛmbɝz ə ðə blʌd dɪfɝd tə hɪm; ðeɪ nu hi hæɾ əɹ feɪvɝ. ɪf θɪŋz wɛnt wɛl hɪɹ ən wɪð ðə ɹɛkləmeɪʃən ə sintʃæn, ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡʊd tʃæns ʃid ɹeɪz ɪm tə ði ɪmpɪɹiəl fæmli. ðə ɹæŋks ə ðə fæmli wəd nid tə bi ɹifɪld, æftɝ ɔl, wʌns fɔɹtwoʊnə ɹɪtɝn ən ɹɪstɔɹɾ ɔɹɾɝ.

Galgan was a wide-shouldered fellow with a crest of white hair atop his head. The other members of the Blood deferred to him; they knew he had her favor. If things went well here and with the reclamation of Seanchan, there was a good chance she'd raise him to the Imperial family. The ranks of the family would need to be refilled, after all, once Fortuona returned and restored order.

əndaʊɾɪdli, mɛni hæd bɪn əsæsəneɪɾəd əɹ ɛksəkjuɾəd. ɡælɡən wɑz ə væljəbəl ælaɪ. hid nɑɾ oʊnli wɝkt oʊpənli əɡɛnst sjuɹɔθ, bʌt hæd sədʒɛstəd ði əsɔlt ɑn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, wɪtʃ hæd ɡɔn wɛl. ɪkstʃɹimli wɛl.

Undoubtedly, many had been assassinated or executed. Galgan was a valuable ally. He'd not only worked openly against Suroth, but had suggested the assault on the White Tower, which had gone well. Extremely well.

mɛlɪtin, fɔɹtwoʊnəz dɝsʌldəm, stɛp fɔɹwɝɾ ən baʊɾ əɡɛn. ðə staʊt, ɡɹeɪɪŋ wʊmən lɛɾ ə deɪmeɪn wɪð dɑɹk bɹaʊn hɛɹ ən blʌdʃɑɾ aɪz. əpɛɹənli ðɪs wʌn wɛpt ɔfən.

Melitene, Fortuona's der'sul'dam, stepped forward and bowed again. The stout, graying woman led a damane with dark brown hair and bloodshot eyes. Apparently this one wept often.

mɛlɪtin hæd ðə pɹɛzəns tə lʊk ɪmbɛɹəst ət ðə wipɪŋ, ən baʊɾ ɛkstʃɹə loʊ. fɔɹtwoʊnə tʃoʊz nɑt tə noʊɾəs ðət ðə deɪmeɪn wɑz æktɪŋ soʊ dɪsplisɪŋli. ðɪs wʌn wɑz ə faɪn kætʃ, dɪspaɪɾ əɹ pɛtʃələns.

Melitene had the presence to look embarrassed at the weeping, and bowed extra low. Fortuona chose not to notice that the damane was acting so displeasingly. This one was a fine catch, despite her petulance.

fɔɹtwoʊnə meɪɾ ə sɪɹiz ə dʒɛstʃɝz tə sɪlutʃə, ɪnstʃɹʌktɪŋ əɹ ɪn wʌt tə seɪ. ðə wʊmən wɑtʃt wɪð kin aɪz, hæf ə hɝ hɛd kʌvɝɾ ɪn klɔθ waɪl ʃi weɪɾəd fəɹ ðə hɛɹ tə ɡɹoʊ ðɛɹ, ði ʌðɝ hæf ʃeɪvd, fɔɹtwoʊnə wəɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli hæv tə tʃuz ənʌðɝ vɔɪs, əz sɪlutʃə wɑz naʊ hɝ tʃɹuθspikɝ.

Fortuona made a series of gestures to Selucia, instructing her in what to say. The woman watched with keen eyes, half of her head covered in cloth while she waited for the hair to grow there, the other half shaved, Fortuona would eventually have to choose another Voice, as Selucia was now her Truthspeaker.

ʃoʊ əs wʌt ðɪs wʊmən kən du," sɪlutʃə sɛd, vɔɪsɪŋ ðə wɝdz fɔɹtwoʊnə hæd saɪn tə hɝ.

Show us what this woman can do," Selucia said, Voicing the words Fortuona had signed to her.

mɛlɪtin pæɾəd ðə deɪmeɪn ɑn ðə hɛd. "sʌfə wɪl ʃoʊ aɪ ɛmpɹɛs - meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ -  ðə paʊɝ ə slaɪsɪŋ ði ɛɹ."

Melitene patted the damane on the head. "Suffa will show I Empress - may she live forever -  the Power of slicing the air."

"pliz," sʌfə sɛd, lʊkɪŋ pliɾɪŋli təwɔɹd fɔɹtwoʊnə. "pliz, lɪsən tə mi. aɪm ði æmɪɝlɪn sit'.'

"Please," Suffa said, looking pleadingly toward Fortuona. "Please, listen to me. I am the Amyrlin Seat'.'

mɛlɪtin hɪst, ən sʌfəz aɪz oʊpənd waɪd, ɑbviəsli filɪŋ ə blæst ə peɪn θɹu ði æɾəm. ðə deɪmeɪn kəntɪnjuɾ ɛniweɪ. "aɪ kən ɔfɝ ɡɹeɪt baʊnti, paʊɝfəl ɛmpɹɛs! ɪf aɪm ɹɪtɝnd, əl ɡɪv jə tɛn wɪmən tə teɪk maɪ pleɪs. twɛnti! ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ðə waɪt taʊɝ hæz. aɪ__" ʃi bɹoʊk ɔf, moʊnɪŋ, ən kəlæps tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

Melitene hissed, and Suffa's eyes opened wide, obviously feeling a blast of pain through the a'dam. The damane continued anyway. "I can offer great bounty, powerful Empress! If I am returned, I will give you ten women to take my place. Twenty! The most powerful the White Tower has. I__" She broke off, moaning, and collapsed to the ground.

mɛlɪtin wɑz swɛɾɪŋ. ʃi lʊk tə sɪlutʃə, spikɪŋ kwɪkli, nɝvəsli. "pliz ɪkspleɪn tə ði ɛmpɹɛs ʌv əs ɔl - meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ -  ðət maɪ aɪz ɑɹ loʊɝd fəɹ nɑt hævɪŋ tʃɹeɪn ðɪs wʌn pɹɑpɝli. sʌfə ɪz əmeɪzɪŋli stʌbɝn, dɪspaɪt haʊ kwɪk ʃiz tə wip ən ɔfɝ ʌðɝz ɪn əɹ pleɪs."

Melitene was sweating. She looked to Selucia, speaking quickly, nervously. "Please explain to the Empress of us all - may she live forever -  that my eyes are lowered for not having trained this one properly. Suffa is amazingly stubborn, despite how quick she is to weep and offer others in her place."

fɔɹtwoʊnə sæt fəɹ ə moʊmənt, lɛɾɪŋ mɛlɪtin swɛt. ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ʃi saɪn fəɹ sɪlutʃə tə spik.

Fortuona sat for a moment, letting Melitene sweat. Eventually, she signed for Selucia to speak.

"ði ɛmpɹɛs ɪz nɑt dɪsplizd wɪð ju," sɪlutʃə vɔɪst. "ðiz mɛɹɑɾədəmeɪn u kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz ɛɛs sədaɪ hæv ɔl pɹuvən stʌbɝn."

"The Empress is not displeased with you," Selucia Voiced. "These marattidamane who call themselves Aes Sedai have all proven stubborn."

"pliz ɪkspɹɛs maɪ ɡɹæɾətud tə ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst wʌn," mɛlɪtin sɛd, ɹɪlæksɪŋ. "ɪf ɪt plizɪz ʃi huz aɪz lʊk ʌpwɝd, aɪ kən meɪk sʌfə pɝfɔɹm. bʌt ðəɹ meɪ bi fɝðɝ aʊtbɝsts."

"Please express my gratitude to the Greatest One," Melitene said, relaxing. "If it pleases She Whose Eyes Look Upward, I can make Suffa perform. But there may be further outbursts."

"ju meɪ kəntɪnju," sɪlutʃə vɔɪst.

"You may continue," Selucia Voiced.

mɛlɪtin nɛl bɪsaɪd sʌfə, spikɪŋ ʃɑɹpli ət fɝst, ðən kənsoʊlɪŋli. ʃi wɑz vɛɹi skɪld ət wɝkɪŋ wɪð fɔɹmɝ mɛɹəθdəmeɪn. ʌv kɔɹs, fɔɹtwoʊnə kənsɪɾɝd hɝsɛlf ɡʊd wɪð deɪmeɪn əz wɛl. ʃi ɛndʒɔɪd bɹeɪkɪŋ mɛɹəθdəmeɪn əz mʌtʃ əz əɹ bɹʌðɝ hæveɪt hæɾ ɛndʒɔɪd tʃɹeɪnɪŋ waɪld ɡɹoʊm. ʃiɾ ɔlweɪz faʊn ɪɾ ə pɪɾi ðəɾ i hæd bɪn əsæsəneɪɾəd. hi wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn ə hɝ bɹʌðɝz u ʃiɾ ɛvɝ bɪn fɑn ʌv.

Melitene knelt beside Suffa, speaking sharply at first, then consolingly. She was very skilled at working with former marathdamane. Of course, Fortuona considered herself good with damane as well. She enjoyed breaking marath'damane as much as her brother Halvate had enjoyed training wild grolm. She'd always found it a pity that he had been assassinated. He was the only one of her brothers who she'd ever been fond of.

sʌfə faɪnəli ɡɑt bæk ɑntu hɝ niz. fɔɹtwoʊnə lin fɔɹwɝd, kjʊɹiəs. sʌfə baʊɾ əɹ hɛd, ən ə laɪn ə laɪt - bɹɪljən ən pjʊɹ - kʌt ði ɛɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. ðət laɪn tɝn saɪdweɪz əlɔŋ ə sɛntʃɹəl æksəs, oʊpənɪŋ ə hoʊl dɝɛkli ɪn fɹʌn ə fɔɹtwoʊnəz θɹoʊn. tʃɹiz ɹʌsəl bɪɑnd, ən fɔɹtwoʊnəz bɹɛθ kɑɾ əz ʃi sɔ ə hɔk wɪð ə waɪt hɛd stʃɹik əweɪ fɹəm ðə pɔɹɾəl. ən oʊmən ʌv ɡɹeɪt paʊɝ. ðə nɔɹməli ənflæpəbəl sɪlutʃə ɡæspt, ðoʊ wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz ət ðə pɔɹɾəl əɹ ði oʊmən, fɔɹtwoʊnə dɪd nɑt noʊ.

Suffa finally got back onto her knees. Fortuona leaned forward, curious. Suffa bowed her head, and a line of light - brilliant and pure - cut the air in front of her. That line turned sideways along a central axis, opening a hole directly in front of Fortuona's throne. Trees rustled beyond, and Fortuonas breath caught as she saw a hawk with a white head streak away from the portal. An omen of great power. The normally unflappable Selucia gasped, though whether it was at the portal or the omen, Fortuona did not know.

fɔɹtwoʊnə kʌvɝɾ əɹ oʊn sɝpɹaɪz. soʊ ɪt wɑz tʃɹu. tʃɹævlɪŋ wɑzn ə mɪθ əɹ ə ɹumɝ. ɪt wɑz ɹil. ðɪs tʃeɪnʒd ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə wɔɹ.

Fortuona covered her own surprise. So it was true. Traveling wasn't a myth or a rumor. It was real. This changed everything about the war.

bɛslən wɔk fɔɹwɝd, boʊɪŋ tə hɝ, lʊkɪŋ hɛzɪɾənt. ʃi weɪv fɑɾ ɪm ən ɡælɡən tə kʌm tə wɛɹ ðeɪ kəd si ðə fɔɹəst ɡleɪd θɹu ði oʊpənɪŋ. bɛslən stɛɹd, maʊθ hæŋɪŋ oʊpən.

Beslan walked forward, bowing to her, looking hesitant. She waved fot him and Galgan to come to where they could see the forest glade through the opening. Beslan stared, mouth hanging open.

ɡælɡən klæspt ɪz hænz bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk. hi wɑz ə kjʊɹiəs wʌn. hid mɛt wɪð əsæsənz ɪn ðə sɪɾi, ən hæɾ ɪnkwaɪɝɾ əbaʊt ðə kɑs fəɹ hævɪŋ fɔɹtwoʊnə kɪld. ðɛn, hid hæɾ itʃ ə ðə mɛn u kwoʊɾəd ɪm ə pɹaɪs ɛksəkjuɾəd. ə vɛɹi sʌɾəl mənuvɝ - ɪt wɑz mɛn tə ʃoʊ ðət ʃi ʃəd kənsɪɾɝ ɪm ə θɹɛt, əz i wɑz nɑɾ əfɹeɪɾ ə miɾɪŋ wɪð əsæsənz. haʊɛvɝ ɪt wɑz ɔlsoʊ ə vɪzəbəl saɪn ə lɔɪəlti. / fɑloʊ jə fəɹ naʊ, ðə muv sɛd, bʌɾ aɪm wɑtʃɪŋ, ən aɪm æmbɪʃəs.

Galgan clasped his hands behind his back. He was a curious one. He'd met with assassins in the city, and had inquired about the cost for having Fortuona killed. Then, he'd had each of the men who quoted him a price executed. A very subtle maneuver - it was meant to show that she should consider him a threat, as he was not afraid of meeting with assassins. However it was also a visible sign of loyalty. / follow you for now, the move said, but I am watching, and I am ambitious.

ɪn mɛni weɪz, hɪz kɛɹfəl mənuvɝɪŋ wɑz mɔɹ kʌmfɝɾɪŋ tə hɝ ðən bɛslənz əpɛɹənli ənweɪvɝɪŋ lɔɪəlti. ðə fɝst, ʃi kəɾ æntɪsəpeɪt. ðə sɛkənd . . . wɛl, ʃi wɑzn sɝɾən wʌt tə meɪk ʌv ɪt jɛt. wəd meɪtʃɹim bi ikwəli lɔɪəl? wʌt wəɾ ɪt bi laɪk, tə hæv ə pɹɪns ə ðə ɹeɪvənz hum ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə plɑɾ əɡɛnst? ɪt simd ɔlmoʊst ə fæntəsi, ðə taɪp ə teɪl toʊl tə kɑmən tʃɪlʒɹən tə meɪk əm dʒɹim ʌv ən ɪmpɑsəbəl mɛɹɪdʒ.

In many ways, his careful maneuvering was more comforting to her than Beslan's apparently unwavering loyalty. The first, she could anticipate. The second . . . well, she wasn't certain what to make of it yet. Would Matrim be equally loyal? What would it be like, to have a Prince of the Ravens whom she did not have to plot against? It seemed almost a fantasy, the type of tale told to common children to make them dream of an impossible marriage.

"ðɪs ɪz ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl!" bɛslən sɛd. "ɡɹeɪɾəst wʌn, wɪð ðɪs əbɪləɾi . . ." hɪz steɪʃən meɪɾ ɪm wʌn ə ði oʊnli pipəl eɪbəl tə spik dɝɛkli tə hɝ.

"This is incredible!" Beslan said. "Greatest One, with this ability . . ." His station made him one of the only people able to speak directly to her.

"ði ɛmpɹɛs wɪʃɪz tə noʊ," sɪlutʃə vɔɪst, ɹiɾɪŋ fɔɹtwoʊnəz fɪŋɡɝz, "ɪf ɛni ʌv ðə kæptʃɝd mɛɹəθdəmeɪn spoʊk ə ðə wɛpən."

"The Empress wishes to know," Selucia Voiced, reading Fortuona's fingers, "if any of the captured marath'damane spoke of the weapon."

"tɛl ðə haɪəst ɛmpɹɛs - meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ - ðət ðeɪ dɪd nɑt," mɛlɪtin sɛd, saʊndɪŋ wɝid. "ænd, ɪf aɪ meɪ bi soʊ boʊld, aɪ bɪliv ðət ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt laɪɪŋ. ɪt simz ðət ði ɪksploʊʒən aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi wɑz ən aɪsəleɪɾəd æksəɾənt - ðə ɹɪzʌlt ə səm ənnoʊn tɛɹæŋɡɹil, juzd ɪmpɹuɾəntli.

"Tell the highest Empress - may she live forever - that they did not," Melitene said, sounding worried. "And, if I may be so bold, I believe that they are not lying. It seems that the explosion outside the city was an isolated accident - the result of some unknown ter'angreal, used imprudently.

pɝhæps ðəɹ ɪz noʊ wɛpən."

Perhaps there is no weapon."

ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl. fɔɹtwoʊnə hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡʌn tə daʊt ðə vəlɪɾəti ʌv ðoʊz ɹumɝz. ði ɪksploʊʒən hæd hæpən bɪfɔɹ fɔɹtwoʊnə hæɾ ɝaɪvd ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ən ðə dɪteɪlz wɝ kənfjuzɪŋ. pɝhæps ðɪs hæɾ ɔl bɪn ə plɔɪ baɪ sjuɹɔθ əɹ əɹ ɛnəmiz.

It was possible. Fortuona had already begun to doubt the validity of those rumors. The explosion had happened before Fortuona had arrived in Ebou Dar, and the details were confusing. Perhaps this had all been a ploy by Suroth or her enemies.

"kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl," sɪlutʃə vɔɪst. "ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst wʌn wɪʃɪz tə noʊ wʌt jə wəd də wɪð ə paʊɝ sətʃ əz ðɪs tʃɹævlɪŋ əbɪləɾi."

"Captain-General," Selucia Voiced. "The Greatest One wishes to know what you would do with a Power such as this Traveling ability."

"ðæt dɪpɛnz," ɡælɡən sɛd, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz tʃɪn. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪts ɹeɪnʒ? haʊ lɑɹdʒ kən ʃi meɪk ɪt?

"That depends," Galgan said, rubbing his chin. "What is its range? How large can she make it?

kən ɔl deɪmeɪn də ðɪs? ɑɹ ðəɹ lɪmɪteɪʃənz ɑn wɛɹ ə hoʊl kən bi oʊpənd? ɪf ɪt plizɪz ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst wʌn, əl spik wɪð ðə deɪmeɪn ən ɡɛt ðiz ænsɝz."

Can all damane do this? Are there limitations on where a hole can be opened? If it pleases the Greatest One, I will speak with the damane and get these answers."

'ɪt dʌz pliz ði ɛmpɹɛs," sɪlutʃə vɔɪst.

'It does please the Empress," Selucia Voiced.

"ðɪs ɪz tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ," bɛslən sɛd. "ðeɪ kəɾ ətæk bɪhaɪn əɹ bæɾəl laɪnz. ðeɪ kəɾ oʊpən ə pɔɹɾəl laɪk ðɪs ɪndə ði ɛmpɹɛsəz oʊn tʃeɪmbɝz, meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ. wɪð ðɪs . . . ɛvɹiθɪŋ wi noʊ əbaʊt wɔɹ wɪl tʃeɪnʒ."

"This is troubling," Beslan said. "They could attack behind our battle lines. They could open a portal like this into the Empress's own chambers, may she live forever. With this . . . everything we know about war will change."

ðə mɛmbɝz ə ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹd ʃʌfəld - ə saɪn ʌv ɡɹeɪt dɪskʌmfɝt. oʊnli fɹɪk kɛɹid dɪd nɑt muv. ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, hɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən ɡɹu hɑɹɾɝ. fɔɹtwoʊnə nu ðəɾ i wəd sun bi sədʒɛstɪŋ ə nu, ɹoʊ-teɪɾɪŋ loʊkeɪʃən ə hɝ slipɪŋ kɔɹɾɝz.

The members of the Deathwatch Guard shuffled - a sign of great discomfort. Only Furyk Karede did not move. If anything, his expression grew harder. Fortuona knew that he would soon be suggesting a new, ro-tating location of her sleeping quarters.

fɔɹtwoʊnə θɔt fəɹ ə moʊmənt, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðət ɹɛn ɪn ði ɛɹ. ðət ɹɛn ɪn ɹiæləɾi ɪtsɛlf. ðɛn, kɑntʃɹɛɹi tə tʃɹədɪʃən, ʃi stʊɾ ʌp ɑn əɹ deɪz. fɔɹtʃənətli, bɛslən wɑz ðɛɹ, wʌn ʃi kəɾ ædʒɹɛs dɝɛkli - ən lɛt ði ʌðɝz hɪɹ əɹ kəmænz.

Fortuona thought for a moment, staring at that rent in the air. That rent in reality itself. Then, contrary to tradition, she stood up on her dais. Fortunately, Beslan was there, one she could address directly - and let the others hear her commands.

"ɹɪpɔɹts seɪ," fɔɹtwoʊnə ənaʊnst, "ðæt ðəɹ ɑɹ stɪl hʌnʒɹədz ə mɛɹəθdəmeɪn ɪn ðə pleɪs kɔl ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ðeɪ ɑɹ ðə ki tə ɹikæptʃɝɪŋ sintʃæn, ðə ki tə hoʊldɪŋ ðɪs lænd, ən ðə ki tə pɹipɛɹɪŋ fəɹ ðə læs bæɾəl. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɪl sɝv ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn.

"Reports say," Fortuona announced, "that there are still hundreds of marath'damane in the place called the White Tower. They are the key to recapturing Seanchan, the key to holding this land, and the key to preparing for the Last Battle. The Dragon Reborn will serve the Crystal Throne.

"wi hæv bɪn pɹəvaɪɾəd wɪð ə weɪ tə stʃɹaɪk. lɛɾ ɪt bi sɛd tə ðə kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl ðəɾ i ʃəd ɡæðɝ ɪz faɪnəst soʊlʒɝz. aɪ wɑn itʃ ən ɛvɹi deɪmeɪn wi kəntʃɹoʊl tə bi bɹɔt bæk tə ðə sɪɾi. wɪl tʃɹeɪn əm ɪn ðɪs mɛθəɾ ə tʃɹævlɪŋ. ən ðən wɪl ɡoʊ, ɪn fɔɹs, tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ.

"We have been provided with a way to strike. Let it be said to the Captain-General that he should gather his finest soldiers. I want each and every damane we control to be brought back to the city. We will train them in this method of Traveling. And then we will go, in force, to the White Tower.

bɪfɔɹ, wi stʃɹʌk əm wɪð ə pɪnpɹɪk. naʊ, wɪl lɛɾ əm noʊ ðə fʊl weɪɾ ʌv əɹ sɔɹd.

Before, we struck them with a pinprick. Now, we will let them know the full weight of our sword.

ɔl ə ðə mɛɹəθdəmeɪn mʌs bi liʃt."

All of the marath'damane must be leashed."

ʃi sæt bæk daʊn, lɛɾɪŋ ðə ɹum fɔl stɪl. ɪt wɑz ɹɛɹ ðət ði ɛmpɹɛs meɪd sətʃ ənaʊnsməns pɝsənəli. bʌt ðɪs wɑz ə taɪm fəɹ boʊlnəs.

She sat back down, letting the room fall still. It was rare that the Empress made such announcements personally. But this was a time for boldness.

"ju ʃəd nɑɾ əlaʊ wɝɾ ə ðɪs tə spɹɛd," sɪlutʃə sɛd tə hɝ, vɔɪs fɝm. ʃi wɑz naʊ spikɪŋ ɪn əɹ ɹoʊl əz tʃɹuθspikɝ. jɛs, ənʌðɝ wəɾ əv tə bi tʃoʊzən tə bi fɔɹtwoʊnəz vɔɪs.

"You should not allow word of this to spread," Selucia said to her, voice firm. She was now speaking in her role as Truthspeaker. Yes, another would have to be chosen to be Fortuona's voice.

"ju wəd bi ə ful tə lɛt ði ɛnəmi noʊ fəɹ sɝɾən wɪv ðɪs tʃɹævlɪŋ."

"You would be a fool to let the enemy know for certain we have this Traveling."

fɔɹtwoʊnə tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. jɛs, ðət wɑz tʃɹu. ʃi wəd meɪk sɝɾən itʃ ɪn ðɪs ɹum wɑz hɛl tə sikɹəsi. bʌt wʌns ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɑz kæptʃɝd, ðeɪ wəd tɔk ə hɝ pɹɑkləmeɪʃən, ən wəd ɹɛd ði oʊmənz ə hɝ vɪktɝi əpɑn ðə skaɪz ən wɝld ɝaʊn ðɛm.

Fortuona took a deep breath. Yes, that was true. She would make certain each in this room was held to secrecy. But once the White Tower was captured, they would talk of her proclamation, and would read the omens of her victory upon the skies and world around them.

wɪl nid tə stʃɹaɪk sun, sɪlutʃə saɪnd.

We will need to strike soon, Selucia signed.

jɛs, fɔɹtwoʊnə saɪn bæk. əɹ pɹiviəs ətæk wɪl əv əm ɡæðɝɪŋ ɑɹmz.

Yes, Fortuona signed back. Our previous attack will have them gathering arms.

əɹ nɛks muv wɪl əv tə bi dɪsaɪsɪv, ðɛn, sɪlutʃə saɪnd. bʌt θɪŋk. dɪlɪvɝɪŋ θaʊzənz ə soʊlʒɝz ɪndə ðə waɪt taʊɝ θɹu ə hɪɾən beɪsmənt, ɹum. stʃɹaɪkɪŋ wɪð ðə fɔɹs ʌv ə θaʊzən hæmɝz əɡɛnst ə θaʊzən ænvəlz!

Our next move will have to be decisive, then, Selucia signed. But think. Delivering thousands of soldiers into the White Tower through a hidden basement, room. Striking with the force of a thousand hammers against a thousand anvils!

fɔɹtwoʊnə nɑɾəd.

Fortuona nodded.

ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɑz dumd.

The White Tower was doomed.

"doʊnt noʊ ðət ðɛɹz mʌtʃ mɔɹ tə seɪ, pɛɹɪn," θɔɹn sɛd, linɪŋ bæk ɪn ɪz tʃɛɹ, təbæk smoʊk kɝlɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪz lɔŋ-stɛm paɪp. ɪt wɑz ə wɔɹm naɪt, ən ðeɪ dɪdn əv ə faɪɝ ɪn ðə hɑɹθ. dʒʌst ə fju kændəlz ɑn ðə teɪbəl, wɪð səm bɹɛd, tʃizɪz ən ə pɪtʃɝ ʌv eɪl.

"Don't know that there's much more to say, Perrin," Thorn said, leaning back in his chair, tabac smoke curling out of his long-stemmed pipe. It was a warm night, and they didn't have a fire in the hearth. Just a few candles on the table, with some bread, cheeses and a pitcher of ale.

pɛɹɪn pʌft ɑn ɪz oʊn paɪp. oʊnli hi, θɔɹn ən mæt wɝ ɪn ðə ɹum. ɡɔl ən ɡɹeɪɾi weɪɾəd aʊɾ ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum. mæt hæd kɝs pɛɹɪn fəɹ bɹɪŋɪŋ ðoʊz tu - ən il ən ən æʃəmən wɝ ɹæðɝ kənspɪkjuəs. bʌt pɛɹɪn fɛl seɪfɝ wɪð ðoʊz tu ðən wɪð ən ɪntaɪɝ kʌmpəni ʌv soʊlʒɝz.

Perrin puffed on his own pipe. Only he, Thorn and Mat were in the room. Gaul and Grady waited out in the common room. Mat had cursed Perrin for bringing those two - an Aiel and an Asha'man were rather conspicuous. But Perrin felt safer with those two than with an entire company of soldiers.

hid ʃɛɹɾ ɪz stɔɹi wɪð mæt ən θɔɹn fɝst, spikɪŋ ə meɪɾən, ðə pɹɑfət, æliændɝ, ən ɡɑləd. ðən ðeɪ hæd fɪld ɪm ɪn ɑn ðɛɹ ɪkspɪɹiənsɪz. ɪt stʌn pɛɹɪn, haʊ mʌtʃ hæd hæpən tə ðə θɹi ʌv əm sɪns ðɛɹ pɑɹɾɪŋ.

He'd shared his story with Mat and Thorn first, speaking of Maiden, the Prophet, Alliandre, and Galad. Then they had filled him in on their experiences. It stunned Perrin, how much had happened to the three of them since their parting.

"ɛmpɹɛs ə ðə sintʃæn, ɛ?" pɛɹɪn sɛd, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə smoʊk twɪst əbʌv ɪm ɪn ðə dɪm ɹum.

"Empress of the Seanchan, eh?" Perrin said, watching the smoke twist above him in the dim room.

"dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪn munz," mæt sɛd. "ɪts dɪfɹənt."

"Daughter of the Nine Moons," Mat said. "It's different."

"æn jəɹ mɛɹid." pɛɹɪn ɡɹɪnd. "meɪtʃɹim kɔθən. mɛɹid."

"And you're married." Perrin grinned. "Matrim Cauthon. Married."

"ju dɪdn əv tə ʃɛɹ ðət pɑɹt, jə noʊ," mæt sɛd tə tɑm.

"You didn't have to share that part, you know," Mat said to Thom.

"oʊ, aɪ əʃʊɹ ju, aɪ dɪɾ ɪndid."

"Oh, I assure you, I did indeed."

"fɔɹ ə ɡlimən, jə sim tə liv aʊt moʊst ə ðə hɪɹoʊɪk pɑɹts ə ðə θɪŋz aɪ du," mæt sɛd. "æt lis jə mɛnʃən ðə hæt."

"For a gleeman, you seem to leave out most of the heroic parts of the things I do," Mat said. "At least you mentioned the hat."

pɛɹɪn smaɪld, kəntɛntəd. hi hædn ɹilaɪz haʊ mʌtʃ hid mɪst sɪɾɪŋ wɪð fɹɛnz tə spɛn ði ivnɪŋ tʃæɾɪŋ. ə kɑɹvd wʊɾən saɪn hʌŋ aʊtsaɪd ðə wɪndoʊ, dʒɹɪpɪŋ wɪð ɹeɪnwɔɾɝ. ɪt dɪpɪktəd feɪsəz wɛɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪnʒ hæts ən ɪɡzædʒɝeɪɾəd smaɪlz. ðə hæpi θɹɔŋ. ðəɹ wɑz pɹɑbli ə stɔɹi bɪhaɪn ðə neɪm.

Perrin smiled, contented. He hadn't realized how much he'd missed sitting with friends to spend the evening chatting. A carved wooden sign hung outside the window, dripping with rainwater. It depicted faces wearing strange hats and exaggerated smiles. The Happy Throng. There was probably a story behind the name.

ðə θɹi ʌv əm wɝ ɪn ə pɹaɪvət daɪnɪŋ tʃeɪmbɝ, peɪd fəɹ baɪ mæt. ðeɪd bɹɔɾ ɪn θɹi ʌv ði ɪnz lɑɹdʒ hɑɹθ tʃɛɹz. ðeɪ dɪdn fɪt ðə teɪbəl, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ kʌmftəɹbəl. mæt lin bæk, pʊɾɪŋ ɪz fiɾ ʌp ɑn ðə teɪbəl. hi tʊk ʌp ə hʌŋk ʌv uz mɪlk tʃiz ən bɪɾ ɔf ə pis, ðən bæləns ðə ɹɛst ɑn ɪz tʃɛɹ ɑɹm.

The three of them were in a private dining chamber, paid for by Mat. They'd brought in three of the inn's large hearth chairs. They didn't fit the table, but they were comfortable. Mat leaned back, putting his feet up on the table. He took up a hunk of ewe's milk cheese and bit off a piece, then balanced the rest on his chair arm.

"ju noʊ, mæt," pɛɹɪn sɛd, "jɔɹ waɪf ɪz pɹɑbli gɑnə ɪkspɛk jə tə bi tɔt teɪbəl mænɝz."

"You know, Mat," Perrin said, "your wife is probably going to expect you to be taught table manners."

"oʊ, aɪv bɪn tɔt," mæt sɛd. "aɪ dʒʌs nɛvɝ lɝnd."

"Oh, I've been taught," Mat said. "I just never learned."

"aɪd laɪk tə mit hɝ," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"I'd like to meet her," Perrin said.

"ʃiz sʌmθɪŋ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ," tɑm ɹɪplaɪd.

"She's something interesting," Thom replied.

"ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ," mæt sɛd. "jæ." hi lʊkt wɪsfəl. "ɛniweɪ, juv hɝd ðə lɑɾ ʌv ɪt naʊ, pɛɹɪn. ðət blʌɾi bɹaʊn bɹɔɾ əs hɪɹ. hævən sin əɹ ɪn oʊvɝ tu wiks, naʊ."

"Interesting," Mat said. "Yeah." He looked wistful. "Anyway, you've heard the lot of it now, Perrin. That bloody Brown brought us here. Haven't seen her in over two weeks, now."

"kæn aɪ si ðə noʊt?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"Can I see the note?" Perrin asked.

mæt pæɾəd ə fju pɑkəts, ðən fɪʃt aʊɾ ə smɔl waɪt pis ə peɪpɝ, foʊldəd kloʊzd ən sild wɪð ɹɛd wæks. hi tɔst ɪɾ ɑntu ðə teɪbəl. ðə kɔɹnɝz wɝ bɛnt, ðə peɪpɝ smʌdʒd, bʌɾ ɪt hædn bɪn oʊpənd. meɪtʃɹim kɔθən wɑz ə mæn ə hɪz wɝd, ət list wən jə kəd pɹaɪ ən oʊθ aʊɾ ə hɪm.

Mat patted a few pockets, then fished out a small white piece of paper, folded closed and sealed with red wax. He tossed it onto the table. The corners were bent, the paper smudged, but it hadn't been opened. Matrim Cauthon was a man of his word, at least when you could pry an oath out of him.

pɛɹɪn lɪftəd ðə noʊt. ɪt smɛl feɪnli ʌv pɝfjum. hi tɝn ɪɾ oʊvɝ, ðən hɛld ɪɾ ʌp tə ə kændəl.

Perrin lifted the note. It smelled faintly of perfume. He turned it over, then held it up to a candle.

"dʌznt wɝk," mæt sɛd.

"Doesn't work," Mat said.

pɛɹɪn ɡɹʌntɪd. "soʊ wʌt dʒju θɪŋk ɪt sɛz?"

Perrin grunted. "So what do you think it says?"

"doʊnt noʊ," mæt sɛd. "blʌɾi ɪnseɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ min, ðəɹ ɔl ɑd. bʌt vɛɹɪnz fɔlən kəmplitli ɔf əɹ stoʊn. doʊn səpoʊz juv hɝd fɹəm hɝ?"

"Don't know," Mat said. "Bloody insane Aes Sedai. I mean, they're all odd. But Verin's fallen completely off her stone. Don't suppose you've heard from her?"

"aɪ hævənt."

"I haven't."

"hoʊp ʃiz ɔl ɹaɪt," mæt sɛd. "ʃi saʊndəd wɝid sʌmθɪŋ maɪt hæpən tə hɝ." hi tʊk ðə noʊt bæk, ðən tæpt ɪɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl.

"Hope she's all right," Mat said. "She sounded worried something might happen to her." He took the note back, then tapped it on the table.

"ju gɑnə oʊpən ɪt?"

"You going to open it?"

mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪl oʊpən ɪt wən aɪ ɡɛt bæk. aɪ - "

Mat shook his head. "I'll open it when I get back. I - "

ə nɑk keɪm ət ðə dɔɹ, ðən ɪt kɹikt oʊpən, ɹɪvilɪŋ ði ɪnkipɝ, ə jʌŋɡɝ mæn neɪm dɛnizəl. hi wɑz tɔl, wɪð ə lin feɪs ən ə hɛɾ i kɛpt ʃeɪvd. ðə mæn wɑz ɔl bʌt dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn, fɹəm wʌt pɛɹɪn hæd sin, ivən ɡoʊɪŋ soʊ fɑɹ əz tə hæv ə pɔɹtʃɹəɾ ə ɹænd kəmɪʃən ən hʌŋ ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum. ɪt wɑzn ə bæd laɪknəs.

A knock came at the door, then it creaked open, revealing the innkeeper, a younger man named Denezel. He was tall, with a lean face and a head he kept shaved. The man was all but Dragonsworn, from what Perrin had seen, even going so far as to have a portrait of Rand commissioned and hung in the common room. It wasn't a bad likeness.

"aɪ əpɑlədʒaɪz, mæstɝ kɹɪmzən," dɛnizəl sɛd, "bʌt mæstɝ ɡoʊldənz mæn ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn spikɪŋ wɪð hɪm."

"I apologize, Master Crimson," Denezel said, "but Master Goldens man insisted on speaking with him."

"ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"It's all right," Perrin said.

ɡɹeɪɾi poʊkt ɪz wɛðɝd feɪs ɪndə ðə ɹum ən dɛnizəl ɹitʃɹiɾəd.

Grady poked his weathered face into the room and Denezel retreated.

"hoʊ, ɡɹeɪɾi," mæt sɛd, weɪvɪŋ. "bloʊn ʌp ɛniwʌn ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ leɪtli?"

"Ho, Grady," Mat said, waving. "Blown up anyone interesting lately?"

ðə tæn æʃəmən fɹaʊnd, lʊkɪŋ tə pɛɹɪn. "maɪ lɔɹd. leɪɾi feɪl æsk mi tə ɹimaɪn jə wən mɪdnaɪɾ ɝaɪvd."

The tanned Asha'man frowned, looking to Perrin. "My Lord. Lady Faile asked me to remind you when midnight arrived."

mæt wɪsəld. "si, ðɪs ɪz waɪ aɪ lɛf maɪ waɪf ɪn ənʌðɝ kɪŋdəm."

Mat whistled. "See, this is why I left my wife in another kingdom."

ɡɹeɪɾiz fɹaʊn dipənd.

Grady's frown deepened.

"θæŋk ju, ɡɹeɪɾi," pɛɹɪn sɛd wɪð ə saɪ. "aɪ hædn ɹilaɪz ðə taɪm. wɪl bi ɡoʊɪŋ sun."

"Thank you, Grady," Perrin said with a sigh. "I hadn't realized the time. We'll be going soon."

ði æʃəmən nɑɾəd, ðən wɪθdʒɹu.

The Asha'man nodded, then withdrew.

"bɝn hɪm," mæt sɛd. "kæn ðə mæn ət list smaɪl? fleɪmɪŋ skaɪ ɪz dɪpɹɛsɪŋ ɪnʌf wɪθaʊt pipəl laɪk ɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪməteɪɾ ɪt."

"Burn him," Mat said. "Can't the man at least smile? Flaming sky is depressing enough without people like him trying to imitate it."

"wɛl, sʌn," θɔɹn sɛd, pɔɹɪŋ səm eɪl, "sʌm dʒʌs doʊn faɪn ðə wɝl pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli hjumɝəs leɪtli."

"Well, son," Thorn said, pouring some ale, "some just don't find the world particularly humorous lately."

"nɑnsɛns," mæt sɛd. "ðə wɝlz plɛnti hjumɝəs. ðə hoʊl blʌɾi pleɪs əz bɪn læfɪŋ ət mi, leɪtli. aɪm tɛlɪŋ ju, pɛɹɪn. wɪð ðoʊz dʒɹɔɪŋz ʌv əs əbaʊt, jə nid tə kip jəɹ hɛd loʊ."

"Nonsense," Mat said. "The world's plenty humorous. The whole bloody place has been laughing at me, lately. I'm telling you, Perrin. With those drawings of us about, you need to keep your head low."

"aɪ doʊn si haʊ aɪ kæn," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪv ɡɑɾ ən ɑɹmi tə lid, pipəl tə kɛɹ fɔɹ."

"I don't see how I can," Perrin said. "I've got an army to lead, people to care for."

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk jəɹ teɪkɪŋ vɛɹɪnz wɔɹnɪŋ sɪɹiəsli ɪnʌf, læd," tɑm sɛd, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd.

"I don't think you're taking Verin's warning seriously enough, lad," Thom said, shaking his head.

"ju ɛvɝ hɝɾ ə ðə bænəθ pipəl?"

"You ever heard of the Banath people?"

"noʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, lʊkɪŋ ət mæt.

"No," Perrin said, looking at Mat.

"ðeɪ wɝ ə ɡɹup ə sævədʒəz u ɹoʊmd wʌɾ ɪz naʊ ɑlməθ pleɪn," θɔɹn sɛd. "aɪ noʊ ə kʌpəl faɪn sɔŋz əbaʊt ðɛm. si, ðɛɹ vɛɹiəs tʃɹaɪbz ɔlweɪz peɪntəd ðə skɪn ə ðɛɹ liɾɝ ɹɛd tə meɪk ɪm stæn aʊt."

"They were a group of savages who roamed what is now Almoth Plain," Thorn said. "I know a couple fine songs about them. See, their various tribes always painted the skin of their leader red to make him stand out."

mæt tʊk ənʌðɝ baɪɾ ə hɪz tʃiz. "blʌɾi fulz. peɪntəd ðɛɹ liɾɝ ɹɛd? ðət wəd meɪk ɪm ə tɑɹɡət fəɹ ɛvɹi soʊlʒɝ ɑn ðə fild!"

Mat took another bite of his cheese. "Bloody fools. Painted their leader red? That would make him a target for every soldier on the field!"

"ðæt wɑz ðə pɔɪnt," θɔɹn sɛd. "ɪt wɑz ə tʃælənʒ, jə si. haʊ ɛls wəd ðɛɹ ɛnəmiz bi eɪbəl faɪn ɪm ən tɛs ðɛɹ skɪl əɡɛns hɪm?"

"That was the point," Thorn said. "It was a challenge, you see. How else would their enemies be able find him and test their skill against him?"

mæt snɔɹɾɪd. "aɪɾ əv peɪntəɾ ə fju dəkɔɪ soʊlʒɝz ɹɛd tə dɪstʃɹækt əm fɹəm mi, ðən hæd maɪ ɑɹtʃɝz fɛðɝ ðɛɹ liɾɝ wɪð æɹoʊz waɪl ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hʌn daʊn ðə fɛloʊz ðeɪ θɔt wɝ liɾɪŋ maɪ ɑɹmi."

Mat snorted. "I'd have painted a few decoy soldiers red to distract them from me, then had my archers feather their leader with arrows while everyone was trying to hunt down the fellows they thought were leading my army."

"æktʃəli ," tɑm sɛd, teɪkɪŋ ə sɪp ə hɪz eɪl, "ðæts ɪɡzækli wʌt vɪl-liəm blʌdlɛɾɝ dɪd dʊɹɪŋ ɪz fɝst, ən læst, bæɾəl wɪð ðɛm. 'ðə sɔŋ ʌv ə hʌnʒɹəd deɪz' tɔks əbaʊɾ ɪt. bɹɪljən mənuvɝ.

"Actually," Thom said, taking a sip of his ale, "that's exactly what Vil-liam Bloodletter did during his first, and last, battle with them. 'The Song of a Hundred Days' talks about it. Brilliant maneuver.

aɪm sɝpɹaɪz juv hɝɾ ə ðət sɔŋ - ɪts vɛɹi əbskjʊɹ, ən ðə bæɾəl hæpən soʊ lɔŋ əɡoʊ, moʊs hɪstɝi bʊks doʊn ivən ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪt."

I'm surprised you've heard of that song - it's very obscure, and the battle happened so long ago, most history books don't even remember it."

fəɹ səm ɹizən, ðə kɑmɛn meɪd mæt smɛl nɝvəs.

For some reason, the comment made Mat smell nervous.

"jɔɹ seɪɪŋ ðət wɝ meɪkɪŋ aʊɝsɛlvz tɑɹɡəts," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"You're saying that we're making ourselves targets," Perrin said.

"aɪm seɪɪŋ," tɑm ɹɪplaɪd, "ðæt jə bɔɪz ɑɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ hɑɹɾɝ ən hɑɹɾɝ tə haɪd. ɛvɹiwɛɹ jə ɡoʊ, bænɝz pɹoʊkleɪm jəɹ ɝaɪvəl. pipəl tɔk əbaʊt ju. aɪm hæf-kənvɪns juv oʊnli sɝvaɪv ðɪs lɔŋ kəz ðə fɔɹseɪkən dɪdnt noʊ wɛɹ tə faɪn ju."

"I'm saying," Thom replied, "that you boys are getting harder and harder to hide. Everywhere you go, banners proclaim your arrival. People talk about you. I'm half-convinced you have only survived this long because the Forsaken didn't know where to find you."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd, θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðə tʃɹæp ɪz ɑɹmi hæd nɪɹli fɔlən ɪntu. əsæsənz ɪn ðə naɪt wəd kʌm. "soʊ wʌt ʃəɾ aɪ du?"

Perrin nodded, thinking of the trap his army had nearly fallen into. Assassins in the night would come. "So what should I do?"

"mæts bɪn slipɪŋ ɪn ə dɪfɹən tɛn itʃ naɪt," tɑm sɛd. "æn səmtaɪmz ɪn ðə sɪɾi. jə ʃəd tʃɹaɪ sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðæt. ɡɹeɪɾi kən meɪk ɡeɪtweɪz, ɹaɪt? waɪ nɑɾ əv ɪm meɪk wʌn fəɹ jə ɪndə ðə mɪɾəl ə jəɹ tɛn itʃ naɪt? snik aʊɾ ən slip sʌmpleɪs ɛls, ðən tʃɹævəl bæk ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. ɛvɹiwʌn wɪl əsum jəɹ ɪn jəɹ tɛnt. ɪf əsæsənz stʃɹaɪk, jə woʊn bi ðɛɹ."

"Mat's been sleeping in a different tent each night," Thom said. "And sometimes in the city. You should try something like that. Grady can make gateways, right? Why not have him make one for you into the middle of your tent each night? Sneak out and sleep someplace else, then Travel back in the morning. Everyone will assume you're in your tent. If assassins strike, you won't be there."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd θɔtfəli. "ivən bɛɾɝ, aɪ kəd liv faɪv əɹ sɪks il ɪnsaɪd, ɑn əlɝt, weɪɾɪŋ."

Perrin nodded thoughtfully. "Even better, I could leave five or six Aiel inside, on alert, waiting."

"pɛɹɪn," mæt sɛd, "ðæts daʊnɹaɪt diviəs." hi smaɪld. "juv tʃeɪnʒd fəɹ ðə bɛɾɝ, maɪ fɹɛnd."

"Perrin," Mat said, "that's downright devious." He smiled. "You've changed for the better, my friend."

'fɹʌm ju, əl tʃɹaɪ tə æksɛp ðəɾ əz ə kɑmpləmənt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. hi pɔzd, ðən æɾəd, "ɪt wɪl bi dɪfəkəlt."

'From you, I'll try to accept that as a compliment," Perrin said. He Paused, then added, "It will be difficult."

tɑm tʃʌkəld. "hiz ɹaɪt, ðoʊ. juv tʃeɪnʒd. wʌt hæpən tə ðə sɑft-spoʊkən, ənʃʊɹ bɔɪ aɪ hɛlpt ɪskeɪp ðə tu ɹɪvɝz?"

Thom chuckled. "He's right, though. You've changed. What happened to the soft-spoken, unsure boy I helped escape the Two Rivers?"

"hi pæs θɹu ðə blæksmɪθs faɪɝ," pɛɹɪn sɛd sɔfli.

"He passed through the blacksmith's fire," Perrin said softly.

θɔɹn nɑɾəd, simɪŋ tə ʌndɝstænd.

Thorn nodded, seeming to understand.

"æn ju, mæt?" pɛɹɪn sɛd. "kæn aɪ də sʌmθɪŋ tə hɛlp ju? meɪbi lɛt jə tʃɹævəl bɪtwin tɛns?"

"And you, Mat?" Perrin said. "Can I do something to help you? Maybe let you Travel between tents?"

"noʊ. əl bi faɪn."

"No. I'll be fine."

"haʊ ɑɹ jə gɑnə pɹətɛk jɝsɛlf?"

"How are you going to protect yourself?"

"wɪð maɪ wɪts."

"With my wits."

"plænɪŋ tə faɪn səm ə ðoʊz, ðɛn?" pɛɹɪn sɛd. "əbaʊt taɪm."

"Planning to find some of those, then?" Perrin said. "About time."

mæt snɔɹɾɪd. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt wɪð ɛvɹiwʌn ən maɪ wɪts leɪtli? əl bi faɪn tʃɹʌs mi. ɹimaɪn mi tə tɛl jə əbaʊt ðə naɪt wən aɪ fɝs fɪɡjɝɾ aʊɾ aɪ kəd wɪn wʌtɛvɝ daɪs ɡeɪm aɪ wɑntəd tə. ɪts ə ɡʊd stɔɹi. ɪnvɑlvz fɔlɪŋ ɔf bɹɪdʒəz. wʌn bɹɪdʒ, ət list."

Mat snorted. "What is it with everyone and my wits lately? I'll be fine trust me. Remind me to tell you about the night when I first figured out I could win whatever dice game I wanted to. It's a good story. Involves falling off bridges. One bridge, at least."

"wɛl . . . jə kəd tɛl əs naʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Well . . . you could tell us now," Perrin said.

"nɑt ðə ɹaɪt taɪm. ɛniweɪ, ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ. si, aɪm livɪŋ sun."

"Not the right time. Anyway, it doesn't matter. See, I'm leaving soon."

θɔɹn smɛld ɪksaɪɾəd.

Thorn smelled excited.

"pɛɹɪn, jəl lɛn əs ə ɡeɪtweɪ, woʊn ju?" mæt æskt. "heɪt tə liv ðə bænd. ðəl bi ɪnkənsələbəl wɪθaʊt mi. ət lis ðeɪv ðoʊz dʒɹæɡənz tə bloʊ θɪŋz ʌp."

"Perrin, you will lend us a gateway, won't you?" Mat asked. "Hate to leave the Band. They'll be inconsolable without me. At least they have those dragons to blow things up."

"bʌt wɛɹ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"But where are you going?" Perrin asked.

"səpoʊz aɪ ʃəɾ ɪkspleɪn ɪt," mæt sɛd. "ðæt wɑz ðə ɹizən fəɹ miɾɪŋ wɪð ju, əsaɪd fɹəm ði eɪmiəbəl dɪskɔɹs ən ɔl." hi lin ɪn. "pɛɹɪn, mɔɪɹeɪn ɪz əlaɪv."

"Suppose I should explain it," Mat said. "That was the reason for meeting with you, aside from the amiable discourse and all." He leaned in. "Perrin, Moiraine is alive."

"wʌt?"

"What?"

"ɪts tʃɹu," mæt sɛd. "ɔɹ, wɛl, wi θɪŋk ɪɾ ɪz. ʃi sɛn θɔɹn ə lɛɾɝ, kleɪmɪŋ ʃid fɔɹsin ðə bæɾəl wɪð lænfɝ, ən nu ðət ʃi wəd . . . wɛl, ɛniweɪ, ðɛɹz ðɪs taʊɝ wɛst ə hɪɹ ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝ ɑɹi-nɛl. ɪts meɪɾ ɔl ə mɛɾəl. ɪt - "

"Its true," Mat said. "Or, well, we think it is. She sent Thorn a letter, claiming she'd foreseen the battle with Lanfear, and knew that she would . . . Well, anyway, there's this tower west of here on the River Ari-nelle. It's made all of metal. It - "

"ðə taʊɝ ʌv ɡɛndʒeɪaɪ," pɛɹɪn sɛd sɔfli. "jɛs, aɪ noʊ ʌv ɪt."

"The Tower of Ghenjei," Perrin said softly. "Yes, I know of it."

mæt blɪŋkt. "ju du? bɝn mi. wən dɪd jə ɡɛt tə bi ə skɑlɝ?"

Mat blinked. "You do? Burn me. When did you get to be a scholar?"

"aɪv mɪɹli hɝd səm θɪŋz. mæt, ðət pleɪs ɪz ivəl."

"I've merely heard some things. Mat, that place is evil."

"wɛl, mɔɪɹeɪn ɪz ɪnsaɪd," mæt sɛd. "kæptʃɝd. aɪ min tə ɡɛɾ əɹ bæk. aɪ hæv tə bit ðə sneɪks ən ðə fɑksəz. blʌɾi tʃits."

"Well, Moiraine is inside," Mat said. "Captured. I mean to get her back. I have to beat the snakes and the foxes. Bloody cheats."

"sneɪks ən fɑksəz?" pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Snakes and foxes?" Perrin said.

θɔɹn nɑɾəd. "ðə tʃɪlʒɹənz ɡeɪm ɪz neɪmd æftɝ ðə θɪŋz ðət lɪv ɪn ðə taʊɝ. soʊ wi θɪŋk."

Thorn nodded. "The children's game is named after the things that live in the tower. So we think."

"aɪv sin ðɛm," mæt sɛd. "ænd . . . wɛl, ðɛɹz ɹɪli nɑt taɪm fəɹ ðət naʊ."

"I've seen them," Mat said. "And . . . well, there's really not time for that now."

"ɪf jəɹ gɑnə ɹɛskju hɝ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, "pɝhæps aɪ kəd kʌm. əɹ ət list sɛnd wʌn ə ði æʃəmən."

"If you're going to rescue her," Perrin said, "perhaps I could come. Or at least send one of the Asha'man."

"aɪl teɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ ɡlædli," mæt sɛd. "bʌt jə kæn kʌm, pɛɹɪn.

"I'll take a gateway gladly," Mat said. "But you can't come, Perrin.

mɝeɪn ɪkspleɪn ɪɾ ɪn əɹ lɛɾɝ. oʊnli θɹi kən kʌm, ən aɪ noʊ æl-ɹɛɾi hu ðeɪv tə bi." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "oʊlvɝ ɪz gɑnə blʌɾi kɪl mi fəɹ nɑt teɪkɪŋ hɪm, jə noʊ."

Moraine explained it in her letter. Only three can come, and I know al-ready who they have to be." He hesitated. "Olver is going to bloody kill me for not taking him, you know."

"mæt," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ʃækmɡ hɪz hɛd. "jɔɹ nɑt mækmɡ ɛni sɛns. mæt ɛsɡd. "lɛt mi tɛl jə ðə hoʊl stɔɹi, ðɛn. hi aɪd ðə pɪtʃɝ ʌv eɪl. "wɝ gɑnə nid mɔɹ ə ðæt, ən jud bɛɾɝ tɛl ɡɹeɪɾi jəl bi səm taɪm jɛt . . ."

"Mat," Perrin said, shakmg his head. "You're not makmg any sense. Mat s.ghed. "Let me tell you the whole story, then. He eyed the pitcher of ale. "Were going to need more of that, and you'd better tell Grady you'll be some time yet . . ."


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾieɪt


CHAPTER 48

nɪɹ ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə


Near Avendesora

eɪvinhə tʊk wʌn faɪnəl stɛp ən wɑz aʊɾ ə ðə fɔɹəst ʌv ɡlæs pɪlɝz. ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ðən ɡlæns bæk ət ðə pæθ ʃi hæd teɪkən.

Aviendha took one final step and was out of the forest of glass pillars. She took a deep breath, then glanced back at the path she had taken.

ðə sɛntʃɹəl plɑzə ʌv ɹɪɾiən wɑz ən ɑ-ɪnspaɪɹɪŋ saɪt. smuð waɪt flæɡstoʊnz kɑɹpəɾɪd ði ɪntaɪɝ skwɛɹ seɪv fəɹ ði æbsəlut sɛntɝ. ðəɹ stʊɾ ən ɪnɔɹməs tʃɹi, bɹæntʃəz spɹɛd waɪd laɪk ɑɹmz ɹitʃɪŋ tə ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sʌn. ðə mæsɪv tʃɹi hæɾ ə pɝfɛkʃən ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɪkspleɪn. ɪt hæɾ ə nætʃɹəl sɪmətʃɹi - noʊ mɪsɪŋ bɹæntʃəz, noʊ ɡeɪpɪŋ hoʊlz ɪn ɪts lifi ʌpɝ ɹitʃəz. ɪt wɑz pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɪmpɹɛsɪv sɪns, wən ʃid læst sin ɪt, ɪt hæd bɪn blækən ən bɝnd.

The central plaza of Rhuidean was an awe-inspiring sight. Smooth white flagstones carpeted the entire square save for the absolute center. There stood an enormous tree, branches spread wide like arms reaching to embrace the sun. The massive tree had a perfection she could not explain. It had a natural symmetry - no missing branches, no gaping holes in its leafy upper reaches. It was particularly impressive since, when she'd last seen it, it had been blackened and burned.

ɪn ə wɝld wɛɹ ʌðɝ plæns wɝ daɪɪŋ wɪθaʊɾ ɛkspləneɪʃən, ðɪs wʌn hild ən flɝɪʃt fæstɝ ðən ɛvɝ ʃʊɾə bɪn pɑsəbəl. ɪts livz ɹʌsəl suðɪŋli ɪn ðə wɪnd, ən ɪts nɑɹld ɹuts poʊk θɹu ðə ɡɹaʊn laɪk ði eɪdʒɪd fɪŋɡɝz ʌv ə waɪz ɛldɝ. ðə tʃɹi meɪɾ əɹ wɑnə sɪɾ ən bæsk ɪn ðə sɪmpəl pis ə ðə moʊmənt.

In a world where other plants were dying without explanation, this one healed and flourished faster than ever should have been possible. Its leaves rustled soothingly in the wind, and its gnarled roots poked through the ground like the aged fingers of a wise elder. The tree made her want to sit and bask in the simple peace of the moment.

ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ðɪs tʃɹi wɝ ði aɪdil, ðə wʌn æftɝ wɪtʃ ɔl ʌðɝ tʃɹiz wɝ pæɾɝnd. ɪn lɛdʒən ɪt wɑz kɔld ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə. ðə tʃɹi ʌv laɪf.

It was as if this tree were the ideal, the one after which all other trees were patterned. In legend it was called Avendesora. The Tree of Life.

tə ðə saɪd sæt ðə ɡlæs kɑləmz. ðəɹ wɝ dʌzənz ə ðɛm, pɝhæps hʌnʒɹədz, fɔɹmɪŋ kənsɛntʃɹɪk ɹɪŋz. spɪnli ən θɪn, ðeɪ ɹitʃt haɪ ɪndə ðə skaɪ. əz pjʊɹli - ivən supɝləɾɪvli -  nætʃɹəl əz ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə wɑz, ðiz kɑləmz wɝ ikwəli nætʃɹəl. ðeɪ wɝ soʊ θɪn ən tɔl, lɑdʒɪk sɛd ðət ðə fɝst ɡʌst ʌv wɪnd ʃʊɾə tɑpəl ðɛm. ɪt wɑzn ðət ðeɪ wɝ æbɛɹənt, mɪɹli ɑɹɾəfɪʃəl.

To the side sat the glass columns. There were dozens of them, perhaps hundreds, forming concentric rings. Spindly and thin, they reached high into the sky. As purely - even superlatively -  natural as Avendesora was, these columns were equally natural. They were so thin and tall, logic said that the first gust of wind should have toppled them. It wasn't that they were aberrant, merely artificial.

"wɛn ʃi hæd fɝst ɛntɝd deɪz bɪfɔɹ, ðəɹ hæd bɪn ɡeɪʃeɪn ɪn waɪt kɛɹfəli pɪkɪŋ ʌp fɔlən livz ən twɪɡz. ðeɪ hæd ɹitʃɹiɾəd əz sun əz ðeɪ hæd sin hɝ. wɑz ʃi ðə fɝs tə ɡoʊ θɹu ðə ɡlæs pɪlɝz sɪns ɹɪɾiənz tʃɹænsfɝmeɪʃən? hɝ oʊn klæn hæd sɛnt noʊ wʌn, ən ʃi wɑz sɝɾən ʃi wəɾ əv hɝɾ ʌv ɪɾ ɪf ði ʌðɝz hæd.

"When she had first entered days before, there had been gai'shain in white carefully picking up fallen leaves and twigs. They had retreated as soon as they had seen her. Was she the first to go through the glass pillars since Rhuidean's transformation? Her own clan had sent no one, and she was certain she would have heard of it if the others had.

ðət lɛft oʊnli ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, bʌt ðeɪ hæd ɹɪdʒɛktɪd ɹændz kleɪmz əbaʊt ði il oʊst. eɪvinhə səspɛktəd ðəɾ ɪf ɛni ʃeɪɾoʊ hæd kʌm, ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn eɪbəl tə bɛɹ wʌt wɑz ʃoʊn hɪɹ.

That left only the Shaido, but they had rejected Rand's claims about the Aiel oast. Aviendha suspected that if any Shaido had come, they would not have been able to bear what was shown here.

ðeɪ wʊɾə pæst ɪndə ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə ɡlæs kɑləmz ən nɛvɝ ɹɪtɝnd.

They would have passed into the center of the glass columns and never returned.

ðət hæd nɑt bɪn ðə keɪs fəɹ eɪvinhə. ʃi hæd sɝvaɪvd. ɪndid, ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃid sin hæd bɪn ɪkspɛktəd. ɔlmoʊs dɪsəpɔɪntɪŋli soʊ.

That had not been the case for Aviendha. She had survived. Indeed, everything she'd seen had been expected. Almost disappointingly so.

ʃi saɪd, wɔkɪŋ oʊvɝ tə ɑvɛndɪsɹdz tʃɹʌŋk, ðən lʊkɪŋ ʌp θɹu ɪts wɛb ə bɹæntʃəz.

She sighed, walking over to Avendesords trunk, then looking up through its web of branches.

wʌns, ðɪs plɑzə hæd bɪn klʌɾɝd wɪð ʌðɝ tɛɹæŋɡɹil; ðɪs wɑz wɛɹ ɹænd hæd fɝs dɪskʌvɝd ði æksɛs kiz i hæd juz tə klɛnz seɪɾɪn. ðət wɛlθ ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɑz ɡɔn naʊ;

Once, this plaza had been cluttered with other ter'angreal; this was where Rand had first discovered the access keys he had used to cleanse saidin. That wealth of ter'angreal was gone now;

mɔɪɹeɪn hæd kleɪmd mɛni pisəz fəɹ ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən ði il u lɪv hɪɹ mʌst əv teɪkən ði ʌðɝz əweɪ. ðət lɛft oʊnli ðə tʃɹi, ðə kɑləmz ən ðə θɹi ɹɪŋz ðət wɪmən wɛn θɹu ɑn ðɛɹ fɝs tʃɹɪp hɪɹ, ðə tʃɹɪp ðət meɪɾ əm əpɹɛntəs waɪz wʌnz.

Moiraine had claimed many pieces for the White Tower, and the Aiel who lived here must have taken the others away. That left only the tree, the columns and the three rings that women went through on their first trip here, the trip that made them apprentice Wise Ones.

ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd səm ə hɝ tʃɹɪp θɹu ðoʊz ɹɪŋz, wɪtʃ hæd ʃoʊɾ əɹ laɪf - hɝ mɛni pɑsəbəl laɪvz - tə hɝ. ɹɪli, oʊnli bɪts ən pisəz ɹɪmeɪn ɪn əɹ mɛmɹi. hɝ nɑlədʒ ðət ʃi wəd lʌv ɹænd, ðət ʃi wəɾ əv sɪstɝ-waɪvz. ɪnkluɾəd ɪn ðət nɑlədʒ wɑz ði ɪmpɹɛʃən ðət ʃid ɹɪtɝn hɪɹ, tə ɹɪɾiən. ʃi hæd noʊn, ðoʊ oʊnli stɛpɪŋ ɪndə ðɪs kɔɹtʃjɑɹɾ əɡɛn hæd spɑɹk səm ə ðoʊz mɛmɹiz tə laɪf ɪn əɹ maɪnd.

She remembered some of her trip through those rings, which had showed her life - her many possible lives - to her. Really, only bits and pieces remained in her memory. Her knowledge that she would love Rand, that she would have sister-wives. Included in that knowledge was the impression that she'd return here, to Rhuidean. She had known, though only stepping into this courtyard again had sparked some of those memories to life in her mind.

ʃi sæt daʊn kɹɔs-lɛɡəd bɪtwin tu ʌv ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹiz ɹuts. ðə sɑft wɪnd wɑz suðɪŋ, ði ɛɹ dʒɹaɪ ən fəmɪljɝ, ðə dʌsti sɛn ə ðə θɹi-foʊld læn ɹimaɪndɪŋ əɹ ə hɝ tʃaɪldhʊd.

She sat down cross-legged between two of the great tree's roots. The soft wind was soothing, the air dry and familiar, the dusty scent of the Three-fold Land reminding her of her childhood.

hɝ tʃɹɪp θɹu ðə kɑləmz hæd sɝɾənli bɪn ɪmɝsɪv. ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd tə si ði ɔɹədʒɪnz ə ði il, pɝhæps wɪtnəs ðə deɪ wən ðeɪ hæd - -æz ə pipəl - dɪsaɪɾɪd tə teɪk ʌp ðə spɪɹz ən faɪt. ʃiɾ æntɪsəpeɪɾəd ə noʊbəl dɪsɪʒən, wɛɹ ɑnɝ oʊvɝkeɪm ði ɪnfɪɹiɝ laɪfstaɪl dɪkteɪɾəd baɪ ðə weɪ ʌv ðə lif.

Her trip through the columns had certainly been immersive. She had expected to see the origins of the Aiel, perhaps witness the day when they had - -as a people - decided to take up the spears and fight. She'd anticipated a noble decision, where honor overcame the inferior lifestyle dictated by the Way of the Leaf.

ʃi hæd bɪn sɝpɹaɪz tə si haʊ məndeɪn - ɔlmoʊst æksədɛntəl - ðə tʃɹu ɪvɛn hæd bɪn. noʊ ɡɹæn dɪsɪʒən; oʊnli ə mæn u hæd bɪn ənwɪlɪŋ tə lɛɾ ɪz fæmli bi mɝɾɝd. ðəɹ wɑz ɑnɝ ɪn wɑntɪŋ tə dɪfɛn ʌðɝz, bʌɾ i hæd nɑɾ əpɹoʊtʃt ɪz dɪsɪʒən wɪð ɑnɝ.

She had been surprised to see how mundane - almost accidental - the true event had been. No grand decision; only a man who had been unwilling to let his family be murdered. There was honor in wanting to defend others, but he had not approached his decision with honor.

ʃi ɹɛstəɾ əɹ hɛd bæk əɡɛns ðə tʃɹʌŋk ə ðə tʃɹi. ði il dɪd. dɪzɝv ðɛɹ pʌnɪʃmən ɪn ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd, ən ðeɪ dɪɾ əv toʊ - əz ə pipəl - tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi hæd sin ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd. bʌt mɛni ʌv ðə θɪŋz ʃi hæd bɪn hoʊpɪŋ tə lɝn hæd bɪn æbsənt. il wəd kəntɪnju tə vɪzət ðɪs pleɪs fəɹ sɛntʃɝiz, əz ðeɪ hæd fəɹ sɛntʃɝiz. ən itʃ ə ðɛm wəd lɝn sʌmθɪŋ ðət wɑz naʊ kɑmən nɑlədʒ.

She rested her head back against the trunk of the tree. The Aiel did. deserve their punishment in the Three-fold Land, and they did have toh - as a people - to the Aes Sedai. She had seen everything she had expected. But many of the things she had been hoping to learn had been absent. Aiel would continue to visit this place for centuries, as they had for centuries. And each of them would learn something that was now common knowledge.

ðət bɑðɝɾ əɹ dipli.

That bothered her deeply.

ʃi lʊkt ʌpwɝd, wɑtʃɪŋ bɹæntʃəz kwɪvɝ ɪn ðə bɹiz, sɛvɹəl livz fɔlɪŋ ən dʒɹɪftɪŋ daʊn təwɔɹd hɝ. wʌn pæst əɹ feɪs, bɹʌʃɪŋ əɹ tʃik bɪfɔɹ əlaɪɾɪŋ ɑn əɹ ʃɔl.

She looked upward, watching branches quiver in the breeze, several leaves falling and drifting down toward her. One passed her face, brushing her cheek before alighting on her shawl.

pæsɪŋ θɹu ðə ɡlæs kɑləmz wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ə tʃælənʒ. ɝɪdʒənəli, ðɪs tɛɹæŋɡɹil hæd pɹəvaɪɾəd ə tɛst. kəd ðə pətɛnʃəl liɾɝ feɪs ən æksɛp ði ilz dɑɹkəst sikɹət? əz ə meɪɾən, eɪvinhə hæd bɪn tɛstəɾ ɪn bɑɾi ən stʃɹɛŋkθ. bɪkʌmɪŋ ə waɪz wʌn tɛstəɾ ə pɝsən ɪmoʊʃnəli ən mɛntəli. ɹɪɾiən wɑz tə bi ðə kæpstoʊn ə ðət pɹɑsɛs, ðə faɪnəl tɛst ə mɛntəl ɛndɝəns. bʌt ðət tɛst wɑz ɡɔn naʊ.

Passing through the glass columns was no longer a challenge. Originally, this ter'angreal had provided a test. Could the potential leader face and accept the Aiel's darkest secret? As a Maiden, Aviendha had been tested in body and strength. Becoming a Wise One tested a person emotionally and mentally. Rhuidean was to be the capstone of that process, the final test of mental endurance. But that test was gone now.

mɔɹ ən mɔɹ, ʃi wɑz kʌmɪŋ tə bɪliv ðət tʃɹədɪʃən fəɹ ðə seɪk ə tʃɹədɪʃən wɑz fulɪʃnəs.

More and more, she was coming to believe that tradition for the sake of tradition was foolishness.

ɡʊd tʃɹədɪʃənz - stʃɹɔŋ, il tʃɹədɪʃənz - tɔt ðə weɪz ə dʒiɾoʊ, mɛθədz ə sɝvaɪvəl.

Good traditions - strong, Aiel traditions - taught the ways of ji'e'toh, methods of survival.

eɪvinhə saɪd, stændɪŋ. ðə fɔɹəst ə kɑləmz lʊk laɪk ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ laɪnz ə fɹoʊzən wɔɾɝ ʃi hæd sin dʊɹɪŋ wɪntɝ ɪn ðə wɛtlænz. aɪsɪkəlz, ɪleɪn hæd kɔl ðɛm. ðiz ɡɹu ʌp fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊnd, pɔɪntɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə skaɪ, θɪŋz ə bjuɾi ən paʊɝ. ɪt wɑz sæd tə wɪtnəs ðɛɹ læps ɪndə ɪɹɛləvəns.

Aviendha sighed, standing. The forest of columns looked like the strange lines of frozen water she had seen during winter in the wetlands. Icicles, Elayne had called them. These grew up from the ground, pointing toward the sky, things of beauty and Power. It was sad to witness their lapse into irrelevance.

sʌmθɪŋ əkɝd tə hɝ. bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæd lɛf keɪɛmlɪn, ʃi ən ɪleɪn hæd meɪɾ ə ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl dɪskʌvɝi. eɪvinhə hæd mænəfɛstəɾ ə tælən ɪn ðə wʌn paʊɝ: ði əbɪləɾi tə aɪdɛntəfaɪ tɛɹæŋɡɹil.

Something occurred to her. Before she had left Caemlyn, she and Elayne had made a remarkable discovery. Aviendha had manifested a Talent in the One Power: the ability to identify ter'angreal.

kəd ʃi dətɝmən, ɪɡzækli, wʌt ðə ɡlæs pɪlɝz dɪd? ðeɪ kʊdn əv bɪn kɹieɪɾəd spəsɪfɪkli fəɹ ði il, kəd ðeɪ? moʊs θɪŋz ʌv ɡɹeɪt paʊɝ laɪk ðɪs heɪl fɹəm vɛɹi eɪntʃən deɪz. ðə pɪlɝz wʊɾə bɪn kɹieɪɾəd dʊɹɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, ðən ədæptəd tə ðə pɝpəs ə ʃoʊɪŋ ði il ðɛɹ tʃɹu pæst.

Could she determine, exactly, what the glass pillars did? They couldn't have been created specifically for the Aiel, could they? Most things of great Power like this hailed from very ancient days. The pillars would have been created during the Age of Legends, then adapted to the purpose of showing the Aiel their true past.

ðəɹ wɑz soʊ mʌtʃ ðeɪ dɪdnt noʊ əbaʊt tɛɹæŋɡɹil. hæd ði eɪntʃən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹɪli ʌndɝstʊd ðɛm, ðə seɪm weɪ eɪvinhə ʌndɝstʊɾ ɪɡzækli haʊ ə baʊ əɹ spɪɹ wɝkt? əɹ hæd ðeɪ ðɛmsɛlvz bɪn mɪstəfaɪd baɪ ðə θɪŋz ðeɪ kɹieɪɾəd? ðə wʌn paʊɝ wɑz soʊ wʌnʒɹəs, soʊ mɪstɪɹiəs, ðəɾ ivən wɝkɪŋ pɹæktəst wivz ɔfən meɪɾ eɪvinhə fil laɪk ə tʃaɪld.

There was so much they didn't know about ter'angreal. Had the ancient Aes Sedai really understood them, the same way Aviendha understood exactly how a bow or spear worked? Or had they themselves been mystified by the things they created? The One Power was so wondrous, so mysterious, that even working practiced weaves often made Aviendha feel like a child.

ʃi stɛpt ʌp tə ðə nɪɹəst ɡlæs pɪlɝ, kɛɹfəl nɑt tə pæs ɪnsaɪd ðə ɹɪŋ. ɪf ʃi tʌtʃt wʌn ə ðə ɹɑdz, pɝhæps əɹ tælənt wəd lɛɾ əɹ ɹɛd sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛm. ɪt wɑz deɪnʒɝəs tə ɪkspɛɹəmənt wɪð tɛɹæŋɡɹil, bʌt ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi pæs ðɛɹ tʃælənʒ ən wɑz ənskeɪðd.

She stepped up to the nearest glass pillar, careful not to pass inside the ring. If she touched one of the rods, perhaps her Talent would let her read something about them. It was dangerous to experiment with ter'angreal, but she had already passed their challenge and was unscathed.

hɛzɪɾəntli, ʃi ɹitʃt aʊɾ ən leɪd fɪŋɡɝz ɑn ðə slɪk, ɡlæsi sɝfəs. ɪt wɑz əbaʊɾ ə fʊt θɪk.

Hesitantly, she reached out and laid fingers on the slick, glassy surface. It was about a foot thick.

ʃi kloʊzd əɹ aɪz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹid ðə pɪlɝz fʌŋkʃən.

She closed her eyes, trying to read the pillar's function.

ʃi sɛns ðə paʊɝfəl ɔɹə ʌv ðə pɪlɝ. ɪt wɑz fɑɹ mɔɹ poʊɾənt ðən ɛni ʌv ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ʃi hæd hændəld wɪð ɪleɪn. ɪndid, ðə pɪlɝz simd . . əlaɪv, sʌmhaʊ. ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf ʃi kəd sɛns ən əwɛɹnəs fɹəm ðɛm.

She sensed the powerful aura of the pillar. It was far more potent than any of the ter'angreal she had handled with Elayne. Indeed, the pillars seemed . . alive, somehow. It was almost as if she could sense an awareness from them.

ðət ɡeɪv əɹ ə tʃɪl. wɑz ʃi tʌtʃɪŋ ðə pɪlɝ, əɹ wɑz ɪt tʌtʃɪŋ hɝ?

That gave her a chill. Was she touching the pillar, or was it touching her?

ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə ɹid tɛɹæŋɡɹil əz ʃi hæd dʌn bɪfɔɹ, bʌt ðɪs wʌn wɑz væst. ɪŋkɑmpɹəhɛnsɪbəl, laɪk ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪtsɛlf. ʃi ɪnheɪld ʃɑɹpli, dɪsɔɹiɛntɪd baɪ ðə weɪɾ ʌv wʌt ʃi fɛlt. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ʃi hæd sʌɾənli fɔlən ɪndə ə dip, dɑɹk pɪt.

She tried to read ter'angreal as she had done before, but this one was vast. Incomprehensible, like the One Power itself. She inhaled sharply, disoriented by the weight of what she felt. It was as if she had suddenly fallen into a deep, dark pit.

ʃi snæpt əɹ aɪz oʊpən, pʊlɪŋ əɹ hæn əweɪ, pɑm kwɪvɝɪŋ. ðɪs wɑz bɪɑn hɝ. ʃi wɑz ən ɪnsɛkt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɹæsp ðə saɪz ən mæs ʌv ə maʊntən. ʃi tʊk ə bɹɛθ tə stɛɾi hɝsɛlf, ðən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ tə bi dʌn hɪɹ.

She snapped her eyes open, pulling her hand away, palm quivering. This was beyond her. She was an insect, trying to grasp the size and mass of a mountain. She took a breath to steady herself, then shook her head. There was nothing more to be done here.

ʃi tɝn fɹəm ðə ɡlæs pɪlɝz ən tʊk ə stɛp.

She turned from the glass pillars and took a step.

ʃi wɑz mɑlədʒɹə, eɪtin bʌt skɹɔni ɪnʌf tə əpɪɹ mʌtʃ jʌŋɡɝ. ʃi kɹɔld ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. kɛɹfəl. kwaɪət. ɪt wɑz deɪnʒɝəs tə ɡɛt ðɪs kloʊs tə ðə laɪtmeɪkɝz. hʌŋɡɝ dʒɹoʊv əɹ fɔɹwɝd. ɪɾ ɔlweɪz dɪd.

She was Malidra, eighteen but scrawny enough to appear much younger. She crawled in the darkness. Careful. Quiet. It was dangerous to get this close to the Lightmakers. Hunger drove her forward. It always did.

ðə naɪt wɑz koʊld, ðə lændskeɪp bæɹən. mɑlədʒɹə hæd hɝd stɔɹiz ʌv ə pleɪs bɪɑn ðə dɪstən maʊntənz, wɛɹ ðə lænd wɑz ɡɹin ən fud ɡɹu ɛvɹiwɛɹ. ʃi dɪdn bɪliv ðoʊz laɪz. ðə maʊntənz wɝ dʒʌs laɪnz ɪn ðə skaɪ, dʒæɡd tiθ. hu kəd klaɪm sʌmθɪŋ soʊ tɔl?

The night was cold, the landscape barren. Malidra had heard stories of a place beyond the distant mountains, where the land was green and food grew everywhere. She didn't believe those lies. The mountains were just lines in the sky, jagged teeth. Who could climb something so tall?

meɪbi ðə laɪtmeɪkɝz kʊd. ðeɪ dɪd kʌm fɹəm ðət dɝɛkʃən, juʒəwəli. ðɛɹ kæmp wɑz əhɛɾ ə hɝ, ɡloʊɪŋ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. ðət ɡloʊ wɑz tu stɛɾi tə bi faɪɝ. ɪt keɪm fɹəm ðə bɔlz ðeɪ kæɹid wɪð ðɛm. ʃi ɪntʃt kloʊsɝ, kɹaʊtʃɪŋ, bɛɹ kəɾ ən hænz dʌsti. ðəɹ wɝ ə fju mɛn ən wɪmən ə ðə foʊk wɪð hɝ. ɡɹaɪmi feɪsəz, stʃɹɪŋi hɛɹ. ɹæɡəd bɪɹdz ɑn ðə mɛn.

Maybe the Lightmakers could. They did come from that direction, usually. Their camp was ahead of her, glowing in the darkness. That glow was too steady to be fire. It came from the balls they carried with them. She inched closer, crouching, bare ket and hands dusty. There were a few men and women of the Folk with her. Grimy faces, stringy hair. Ragged beards on the men.

ə mɪʃmæʃ ə kloʊðɪŋ. tæɾɝd tʃɹaʊzɝz, ɡɑɹməns ðət maɪt wʌns əv bɪn ʃɝts. ɛniθɪŋ tə kip ðə sʌn ɔf dʊɹɪŋ ðə deɪ, kəz ðə sʌn kəd kɪl. ən dɪd. mɑlədʒɹə wɑz ðə læst ə fɔɹ sɪstɝz, tu dɛd baɪ ðə sʌn ən hʌŋɡɝ, wʌn dɛd fɹəm ðə baɪɾ ʌv ə sneɪk.

A mishmash of clothing. Tattered trousers, garments that might once have been shirts. Anything to keep the sun off during the day, because the sun could kill. And did. Malidra was the last of four sisters, two dead by the sun and hunger, one dead from the bite of a snake.

bʌt mɑlədʒɹə sɝvaɪvd. æŋkʃəsli, ʃi sɝvaɪvd. ðə bɛst weɪ wɑz tə fɑloʊ ðə laɪtmeɪkɝz. ɪt wɑz deɪnʒɝəs, bʌɾ əɹ maɪn bɛɹli noʊɾəst deɪnʒɝ ɛnimɔɹ. ðət wɑz wʌt hæpənd wən vɝtʃuəli ɛniθɪŋ kəd kɪl ju.

But Malidra survived. Anxiously, she survived. The best way was to follow the Lightmakers. It was dangerous, but her mind barely noticed danger anymore. That was what happened when virtually anything could kill you.

mɑlədʒɹə pæst ə bʊʃ, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə laɪtmeɪkɝ ɡɑɹdz. tu sɛntʃɹiz, kæɹiɪŋ ðɛɹ lɔŋ, ɹɑdlaɪk wɛpənz. mɑlədʒɹə hæd faʊnd wʌn ɑn ə dɛd mæn wʌns, bʌt ʃi hædn bɪn eɪbəl tə meɪk ɪt də ɛniθɪŋ.

Malidra passed a bush, watching the Lightmaker guards. Two sentries, carrying their long, rodlike weapons. Malidra had found one on a dead man once, but she hadn't been able to make it do anything.

ðə laɪtmək-ɝz hæd mæɡɪks, ðə seɪm mæɡɪks ðət kɹieɪɾəd ðɛɹ fuɾ ən ðɛɹ laɪts mæɡɪks ðət kɛpt əm wɔɹm ɪn ðə bɪɾɝ koʊld ət naɪt.

The Lightmak-ers had magics, the same magics that created their food and their lights Magics that kept them warm in the bitter cold at night.

ðə tu mɛn wɔɹ stʃɹeɪnʒ kloʊðɪŋ. tʃɹaʊzɝz ðət fɪt tu wɛl, koʊts kʌvɝd wɪð pɑkəts ən ɡlɪsnɪŋ bɪts ə mɛɾəl. boʊθ hæd hæts, ðoʊ wʌn wɔɹ ɪz bæk, hɛld ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk baɪ ə θɪn lɛðɝ stʃɹæp ðə mɛn tʃæɾəd. ðeɪ dɪdn əv bɪɹdz laɪk ðə foʊk dɪd. ðɛɹ hɛɹ wɑz dɑɹkɝ.

The two men wore strange clothing. Trousers that fit too well, coats covered with pockets and glistening bits of metal. Both had hats, though one wore his back, held around his neck by a thin leather strap The men chatted. They didn't have beards like the Folk did. Their hair was darker.

wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ foʊk ɡɑt tu kloʊs, ən mɑlədʒɹə hɪst ət hɝ. ðə wʊmən ʃɑt bæk ə ɡlɛɹ, bʌt muvd əweɪ. mɑlədʒɹə steɪɾ ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə laɪt. ðə laɪtmeɪkɝz wʊdn si hɝ. ðɛɹ stʃɹeɪnʒ ɡloʊɪŋ ɔɹbz ɹuən ðɛɹ naɪt vɪʒən.

One of the other Folk got too close, and Malidra hissed at her. The woman shot back a glare, but moved away. Malidra stayed at the edge of the light. The Lightmakers wouldn't see her. Their strange glowing orbs ruined their night vision.

ʃi ɹaʊndəd ðɛɹ mæsɪv wæɡən. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ hɔɹsəz. oʊnli ðə wæɡən, lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə haʊs ə dʌzən pipəl. ɪt muv mædʒɪkəli dʊɹɪŋ ðə deɪlaɪt, ɹoʊlɪŋ ɑn wilz nɪɹli əz waɪɾ əz mɑlədʒɹə wɑz tɔl. ʃi hæd hɝd - ɪn ðə hʌʃt, bɹoʊkən kəmjunəkeɪʃən ə foʊk - ðəɾ ɪn ði ist, ðə laɪtmeɪkɝz wɝ kɹieɪɾɪŋ ə mæsɪv ɹoʊdweɪ. ɪt wəd pæs dɝɛkli θɹu ðə weɪst. ɪt wɑz meɪd baɪ leɪɪŋ daʊn stʃɹeɪnʒ pisəz ə mɛɾəl. ðeɪ wɝ tu bɪɡ tə pɹaɪ ʌp, ðoʊ dʒɔɹʃəm hæd ʃoʊn əɹ ə lɑɹdʒ neɪl i hæd faʊnd. hi juzd ɪt tə skɹeɪp miɾ ɔf boʊnz.

She rounded their massive wagon. There were no horses. Only the wagon, large enough to house a dozen people. It moved magically during the daylight, rolling on wheels nearly as wide as Malidra was tall. She had heard - in the hushed, broken communication of Folk - that in the east, the Lightmakers were creating a massive roadway. It would pass directly through the Waste. It was made by laying down strange pieces of metal. They were too big to pry up, though Jorshem had shown her a large nail he had found. He used it to scrape meat off bones.

ɪt hæd bɪn kwaɪɾ ə waɪl sɪns ʃi hæɾ iɾən wɛl - nɑt sɪns ðeɪd mænədʒ tə kɪl ðət mɝtʃən ɪn ɪz slip tu jɪɹz əɡoʊ. ʃi kəd stɪl ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət fist, dɪɡɪŋ ɪndə hɪz stɔɹz, iɾɪŋ əntɪl əɹ stʌmək ætʃt. sətʃ ən ɑd filɪŋ. wʌnʒɹəs ən peɪnfəl.

It had been quite a while since she had eaten well - not since they'd managed to kill that merchant in his sleep two years ago. She could still remember that feast, digging into his stores, eating until her stomach ached. Such an odd feeling. Wondrous and painful.

moʊs laɪtmeɪkɝz wɝ tu kɛɹfəl fəɹ əɹ tə kɪl əm ɪn ðɛɹ slip. ʃi dɪdn dɛɹ feɪs əm wən ðeɪ wɝ əweɪk. ðeɪ kəd meɪk wʌn sətʃ əz əɹ vænɪʃ wɪð ə stɛɹ.

Most Lightmakers were too careful for her to kill them in their sleep. She didn't dare face them when they were awake. They could make one such as her vanish with a stare.

nɝvəsli, tʃɹeɪl baɪ ə kʌpəl ʌv ʌðɝ foʊk, ʃi ɹaʊndəd ðə wæɡən ən əpɹoʊtʃt ɪt fɹəm ðə bæk. ʃʊɹ ɪnʌf, hɪɹ ðə laɪtmeɪkɝz hæd tɔst səm ə ðə livɪŋz fɹəm ðɛɹ ɝliɝ mil. ʃi skʌɾəld fɔɹwɝɾ ən bɪɡæn tə dɪɡ θɹu ðə tʃɹæʃ. ðəɹ wɝ səm kʌɾɪŋz ə mit, stʃɹɪps ə fæt.

Nervously, trailed by a couple of other Folk, she rounded the wagon and approached it from the back. Sure enough, here the Lightmakers had tossed some of the leavings from their earlier meal. She scuttled forward and began to dig through the trash. There were some cuttings of meat, strips of fat.

ʃi snætʃt ðiz ʌp iɡɝli - hoʊldɪŋ əm kloʊs bɪfɔɹ ði ʌðɝz kəd si - ən stʌft əm ɪndə hɝ maʊθ. ʃi fɛl dɝt ɡɹaɪn əɡɛnst əɹ tiθ, bʌt mit wɑz fud. ʃi hɝidli pɪk θɹu ðə weɪst səm mɔɹ.

She snatched these up eagerly - holding them close before the others could see - and stuffed them into her mouth. She felt dirt grind against her teeth, but meat was food. She hurriedly picked through the waste some more.

ə bɹaɪt laɪt ʃoʊn ɑn hɝ. ʃi fɹoʊz, hæn hæfweɪ tə hɝ maʊð. ði ʌðɝ tu foʊk skɹimd, skɹæmbəlɪŋ əweɪ. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə də laɪkwaɪz bʌt tʃɹɪpt. ðəɹ wɑz ə hɪs ə saʊnd - wʌn ə ðə laɪtmeɪkɝ wɛpənz - ən sʌmθɪŋ pɑpt əɡɛnst əɹ bæk. ɪt fɛlt laɪk ʃid bɪn hɪt wɪð ə smɔl ɹɑk.

A bright light shone on her. She froze, hand halfway to her mouth. The other two Folk screamed, scrambling away. She tried to do likewise but tripped. There was a hiss of sound - one of the Lightmaker weapons - and something popped against her back. It felt like she'd been hit with a small rock.

ʃi kəlæpst, ðə peɪn sʌɾən ən ʃɑɹp. ðə laɪt feɪɾəd slaɪtli. ʃi blɪŋkt, aɪz ədʒʌstɪŋ ivən əz ʃi fɛlt əɹ laɪf sipɪŋ aʊɾ ən ɝaʊn əɹ hænz.

She collapsed, the pain sudden and sharp. The light faded slightly. She blinked, eyes adjusting even as she felt her life seeping out and around her hands.

"aɪ toʊl ju," ə vɔɪs sɛd. tu ʃædoʊz muvd ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə laɪt. ʃi hæd tə ɹʌn! ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə ɹaɪz, bʌɾ oʊnli mænədʒ tə θɹæʃ wikli.

"I told you," a voice said. Two shadows moved in front of the light. She had to run! She tried to rise, but only managed to thrash weakly.

"blʌɾ ən tʃɑɹ, flɝn," ə sɛkən vɔɪs sɛd. ə sɪləwɛt nɛl bɪsaɪd hɝ. "pʊɹ θɪŋ. ɔlmoʊst ə tʃaɪld. ʃi wɑzn duɪŋ ɛni hɑɹm."

"Blood and char, Flern," a second voice said. A silhouette knelt beside her. "Poor thing. Almost a child. She wasn't doing any harm."

flɝn snɔɹɾɪd. "noʊ hɑɹm? aɪv sin ðiz kɹitʃɝz tʃɹaɪ tə slɪɾ ə slipɪŋ mænz θɹoʊt. ɔl fəɹ ɪz tʃɹæʃ. blʌɾi pɛsts."

Flern snorted. "No harm? I've seen these creatures try to slit a sleeping man's throat. All for his trash. Bloody pests."

ði ʌðɝ ʃædoʊ lʊkt ət hɝ, ən ʃi kɑt saɪɾ ʌv ə ɡɹɪm feɪs. twɪŋkəlɪŋ aɪz. laɪk stɑɹz.

The other shadow looked at her, and she caught sight of a grim face. Twinkling eyes. Like stars.

ðə mæn saɪd, ɹaɪzɪŋ. "nɛks taɪm wi bɛɹi ðə tʃɹæʃ." hi ɹitʃɹiɾəd bæk təwɔɹd ðə laɪt.

The man sighed, rising. "Next time we bury the trash." He retreated back toward the light.

ðə sɛkən mæn, flɝn, stʊd wɑtʃɪŋ hɝ. wɑz ðəɾ əɹ blʌd? ɔl oʊvɝ əɹ hænz, wɔɹm, laɪk wɔɾɝ ðət hæd bɪn sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌn fəɹ tu lɔŋ?

The second man, Flern, stood watching her. Was that her blood? All over her hands, warm, like water that had been sitting in the sun for too long?

dɛθ dɪd nɑt sɝpɹaɪz hɝ. ɪn ə weɪ, ʃid bɪn ɪkspɛktɪŋ ɪt fəɹ moʊst ə hɝ eɪtin jɪɹz.

Death did not surprise her. In a way, she'd been expecting it for most of her eighteen years.

"blʌɾi il," flɝn sɛɾ əz əɹ saɪt feɪɾəd.

"Bloody Aiel," Flern said as her sight faded.

eɪvinhəz fʊt hɪt ðə flæɡstoʊn ɪn ɹɪɾiənz skwɛɹ, ən ʃi blɪŋkt ɪn ʃɑk. ðə sʌn hæd tʃeɪnʒd ɪn ðə skaɪ əbʌv. aʊɝz hæd pæst.

Aviendha's foot hit the flagstone in Rhuidean's square, and she blinked in shock. The sun had changed in the sky above. Hours had passed.

wʌt hæd hæpənd? ðə vɪʒən hæd bɪn soʊ ɹil, laɪk əɹ vjuɪŋz ə ði ɝli deɪz ə hɝ pipəl. bʌt ʃi kəd meɪk noʊ sɛns ʌv ɪt. hæd ʃi ɡɔn ivən fɑɹðɝ bæk ɪndə hɪstɝi? ðət sim laɪk ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ məʃinz, kloʊðɪŋ, ən wɛpənz. bʌt ðət bæd bɪn ðə weɪst.

What had happened? The vision had been so real, like her viewings of the early days of her people. But she could make no sense of it. Had she gone even farther back into history? That seemed like the Age of Legends. The strange machines, clothing, and weapons. But that bad been the Waste.

ʃi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ dɪstɪŋkli biɪŋ mɑlədʒɹə. ʃi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ jɪɹz ə hʌŋɡɝ, ʌv skævənʒəŋ, ʌv heɪtʃɹəd - ən fɪɹ - ʌv ðə laɪtmeɪkɝz. ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ əɹ dɛθ. ðə tɛɹɝ, tʃɹæpt ən bliɾɪŋ. ðət wɔɹm blʌɾ ɑn əɹ hænz. . . .

She could remember distinctly being Malidra. She could remember years of hunger, of scavenging, of hatred - and fear - of the Lightmakers. She remembered her death. The terror, trapped and bleeding. That warm blood on her hands. . . .

ʃi ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə hɝ hɛd, sɪk ən ənsɛɾəld. nɑt baɪ ðə dɛθ. ɛvɹiwʌn woʊk fɹəm ðə dʒɹim, ən waɪl ʃi dɪd nɑt wɛlkəm ɪt, ʃi wəd nɑt fɪɹ ɪt. noʊ, ðə hɔɹəbəl θɪŋ əbaʊt ðə vɪʒən hæd bɪn ðə kəmplit læk ʌv ɑnɝ ʃid sin. kɪlɪŋ mɛn ɪn ðə naɪt fəɹ ðɛɹ fud?

She raised a hand to her head, sick and unsettled. Not by the death. Everyone woke from the dream, and while she did not welcome it, she would not fear it. No, the horrible thing about the vision had been the complete lack of honor she'd seen. Killing men in the night for their food?

skævənʒəŋ fəɹ hæf-tʃud miɾ ɪn ðə dɝt? wɛɹɪŋ skɹæps? ʃid bɪn mɔɹ ən ænəməl ðən ə pɝsən!

Scavenging for half-chewed meat in the dirt? Wearing scraps? She'd been more an animal than a person!

bɛɾɝ tə daɪ. ʃʊɹli ði il kʊdn əv kʌm fɹəm ɹuts laɪk ðoʊz, lɔŋ əɡoʊ. ði il ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz hæd bɪn pisfəl sɝvəns ɹeɪ-spɛktɪd. haʊ kəd ðeɪv stɑɹɾəd əz skævənʒɝz?

Better to die. Surely the Aiel couldn't have come from roots like those, long ago. The Aiel in the Age of Legends had been peaceful servants re-spected. How could they have started as scavengers?

pɝhæps ðɪs wɑz mɪɹli wʌn taɪni ɡɹup ʌv il. əɹ meɪbi ðə mæn hæd bɪn mɪsteɪkən. ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl weɪ tə tɛl fɹəm ðɪs sɪŋɡəl vɪʒən. waɪ hæd ʃi bɪn ʃoʊn ɪt?

Perhaps this was merely one tiny group of Aiel. Or maybe the man had been mistaken. There was little way to tell from this single vision. Why had she been shown it?

ʃi tʊk ə hɛzɪɾənt stɛp əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɡlæs kɑləmz, ən nʌθɪŋ hæpənd. noʊ fɝðɝ vɪʒənz.

She took a hesitant step away from the glass columns, and nothing happened. No further visions.

dɪstɝbd, ʃi bɪɡæn tə wɔk fɹəm ðə plɑzə.

Disturbed, she began to walk from the plaza.

ðən ʃi sloʊd.

Then she slowed.

hɛzɪɾəntli ʃi tɝn bæk. ðə kɑləmz stʊɾ ɪn ðə dɪmɪŋ laɪt, kwaɪəɾ ən əloʊn, simɪŋ tə bʌz wɪð ən ənsin ɛnɝdʒi.

Hesitantly she turned back. The columns stood in the dimming light, quiet and alone, seeming to buzz with an unseen energy.

wɑz ðəɹ mɔɹ?

Was there more?

ðət wʌn vɪʒən sim soʊ dɪskənɛktɪd fɹəm ði ʌðɝz ʃid sin. ɪf ʃi pæst ɪndə ðə kɑləmz' mɪdst əɡɛn, wəd ʃi ɹɪpit wʌt ʃid bɪn ɡɪvən bɪfɔɹ? əɹ . . . hæd ʃi, pɝhæps, tʃeɪnʒd sʌmθɪŋ wɪð əɹ tælənt?

That one vision seemed so disconnected from the others she'd seen. If she passed into the columns' midst again, would she repeat what she'd been given before? Or . . . had she, perhaps, changed something with her Talent?

ɪn ðə sɛntʃɝiz sɪns ɹɪɾiənz faʊndɪŋ, ðoʊz kɑləmz hæd ʃoʊn ði il wʌt ðeɪ niɾəd tə noʊ əbaʊt ðɛmsɛlvz. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd sɛt ðəɾ ʌp, hædn ðeɪ? əɹ hæd ðeɪ sɪmpli pleɪs ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ən əlaʊɾ ɪt tə də wʌɾ ɪt plizd, noʊɪŋ ɪt wəd ɡɹænt wɪzdəm?

In the centuries since Rhuidean's founding, those columns had shown the Aiel what they needed to know about themselves. The Aes Sedai had set that up, hadn't they? Or had they simply placed the ter'angreal and allowed it to do what it pleased, knowing it would grant wisdom?

eɪvinhə lɪsən tə ðə tʃɹiz livz ɹʌsəl. ðoʊz pɪlɝz wɝ ə tʃælənʒ, əz ʃʊɹ əz ən ɛnəmi wɔɹiɝ wɪð ɪz spɪɹ ɪn hænd. ɪf ʃi pæst ɪndə ðɛɹ mɪdst əɡɛn, ʃi maɪt nɛvɝ kʌm aʊt; noʊbɑdi vɪzəɾəd ðɪs tɛɹæŋɡɹil ə sɛkən taɪm. ɪt wɑz fɔɹbɪɾən. wʌn tʃɹɪp θɹu ðə ɹɪŋz, wʌn θɹu ðə kɑləmz.

Aviendha listened to the tree's leaves rustle. Those pillars were a challenge, as sure as an enemy warrior with his spear in hand. If she passed into their midst again, she might never come out; nobody visited this ter'angreal a second time. It was forbidden. One trip through the rings, one through the columns.

bʌt ʃi hæd kʌm sikɪŋ nɑlədʒ. ʃi wəd nɑt liv wɪθaʊɾ ɪt. ʃi tɝn ən - teɪkɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ - wɔkt ʌp tə ðə pɪlɝz.

But she had come seeking knowledge. She would not leave without it. She turned and - taking a deep breath - walked up to the pillars.

ðən tʊk ə stɛp.

Then took a step.

ʃi wɑz nɔɹlɪʃ. ʃi hɛld əɹ jʌŋɡəs tʃaɪl kloʊs tə hɝ bʊzəm. ə dʒɹaɪ wɪn tʌɡd əɾ əɹ ʃɔl. hɝ beɪbi, ɡɑɹlvən, stɑɹɾəd tə wɪmpɝ, bʌt ʃi kwaɪəɾəd ɪm əz əɹ hʌzbən spoʊk wɪð ði aʊtləndɝz.

She was Norlesh. She held her youngest child close to her bosom. A dry wind tugged at her shawl. Her baby, Garlvan, started to whimper, but she quieted him as her husband spoke with the outlanders.

ən aʊtləndɝ vɪlədʒ stʊɾ ɪn ðə nɪɹ dɪstəns, bɪlt ə ʃæks əɡɛns ðə fʊthɪlz ə ðə maʊntənz. ðeɪ wɔɹ daɪd kloʊðɪŋ ən stʃɹeɪnʒli kʌt tʃɹaʊzɝz wɪð bʌtoʊnɪŋ ʃɝts. ðeɪ hæd kʌm fəɹ ði ɔɹ. haʊ kəd ɹɑks bi soʊ væljəbəl ðət ðeɪ wəd lɪv ɑn ðɪs saɪɾ ə ðə maʊntənz, əweɪ fɹəm ðɛɹ feɪbəld læn ʌv wɔɾɝ ən fud? əweɪ fɹəm ðɛɹ bɪldɪŋz wɛɹ laɪt ʃoʊn wɪθaʊt kændəlz ən ðɛɹ kɑɹts ðət muvd wɪθaʊt hɔɹsəz?

An outlander village stood in the near distance, built of shacks against the foothills of the mountains. They wore dyed clothing and strangely cut trousers with buttoning shirts. They had come for the ore. How could rocks be so valuable that they would live on this side of the mountains, away from their fabled land of water and food? Away from their buildings where light shone without candles and their carts that moved without horses?

hɝ ʃɔl slɪpt ən ʃi pʊld ɪɾ ʌp. ʃi niɾəd ə nu wʌn; ðɪs wʌn wɑz ɹæɡəd, ən ʃi dɪdn əv ɛni mɔɹ θɹɛd lɛft fəɹ pætʃɪŋ. ɡɑɹlvən wɪmpɝɾ ɪn əɹ ɑɹmz, ən əɹ oʊnli ʌðɝ lɪvɪŋ tʃaɪld - mis - hɛl tə hɝ skɝts. mis hædn spoʊkən fəɹ mɑnɹs, naʊ. nɑt sɪns əɹ oʊldɝ bɹʌðɝ hæd daɪd fɹəm ɪkspoʊʒɝ.

Her shawl slipped and she pulled it up. She needed a new one; this one was ragged, and she didn't have any more thread left for patching. Garlvan whimpered in her arms, and her only other living child - Meise - held to her skirts. Meise hadn't spoken for monrhs, now. Not since her older brother had died from exposure.

"pliz," sɛɾ əɹ hʌzbənd - mɛtɑlən - tə ði aʊtləndɝz. ðəɹ wɝ θɹi ʌv ðɛm, tu mɛn ən ə wʊmən, ɔl wɛɹɪŋ tʃɹaʊzɝz. ɹʌɡəd foʊk, nɑt laɪk ði ʌðɝ fɔɹənɝz, wɪð ðɛɹ dɛləkət fitʃɝz ən tu-faɪn sɪlks. ɪluməneɪɾəd wʌnz, ðoʊz ʌðɝz səmtaɪmz kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz. ðiz θɹi wɝ mɔɹ ɔɹɾənɛɹi.

"Please," said her husband - Metalan - to the outlanders. There were three of them, two men and a woman, all wearing trousers. Rugged folk, not like the other foreigners, with their delicate features and too-fine silks. Illuminated Ones, those others sometimes called themselves. These three were more ordinary.

"pliz," mɛtɑlən ɹɪpiɾɪd. "maɪ fæmli . . ."

"Please," Metalan repeated. "My family . . ."

hi wɑz ə ɡʊd mæn. əɹ i hæd bɪn wʌns, bæk wən hid bɪn stʃɹɔŋ ən fɪt. naʊ hi simd ə ʃɛl ə ðət mæn, hɪz tʃiks sʌŋkən. hɪz wʌns-vaɪbɹən blu aɪz stɛɹɾ æbsənli mʌtʃ ə ðə taɪm.

He was a good man. Or he had been once, back when he'd been strong and fit. Now he seemed a shell of that man, his cheeks sunken. His once-vibrant blue eyes stared absently much of the time.

hɔntəd. ðət lʊk keɪm fɹəm wɑtʃɪŋ θɹi ʌv ɪz tʃɪlʒɹən daɪ ɪn eɪtin mʌnθs' taɪm. ðoʊ mɛtɑlən wɑz ə hɛd tɔlɝ ðən ɛni ʌv ði aʊtləndɝz, hi sim tə ɡɹɑvəl bɪfɔɹ ðɛm.

Haunted. That look came from watching three of his children die in eighteen months' time. Though Metalan was a head taller than any of the outlanders, he seemed to grovel before them.

ðə lɛɾ aʊtləndɝ - ə mæn wɪð ə bʊʃi bɪɹɾ ən waɪd, ɑnəst aɪz - ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hi ɹɪtɝn tə mɛtɑlən ðə sæk fʊl ə stoʊnz. "ðə ɹeɪvən ɛmpɹɛs, meɪ ʃi ɔlweɪz dʒɹɔ bɹɛθ, fɝbɪdz ɪt. noʊ tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ wɪð il. wi kəd bi stʃɹɪpt ʌv əɹ tʃɑɹɾɝ fəɹ tɔkɪŋ tə ju."

The lead outlander - a man with a bushy beard and wide, honest eyes - shook his head. He returned to Metalan the sack full of stones. "The Raven Empress, may she always draw breath, forbids it. No trading with Aiel. We could be stripped of our charter for talking to you."

"wi hæv noʊ fud," mɛtɑlən sɛd. "maɪ tʃɪlʒɹən ɑɹ stɑɹvɪŋ. ðiz stoʊnz kənteɪn ɔɹ. aɪ noʊ ðəɾ ɪts ðə taɪp fəɹ wɪtʃ jə sɝtʃ. aɪ spɛnt wiks ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪt. ɡɪv əs ə bɪɾ ə fud. sʌmθɪŋ.

"We have no food," Metalan said. "My children are starving. These stones contain ore. I know that it is the type for which you search. I spent weeks gathering it. Give us a bit of food. Something.

pliz."

Please."

"sɑɹi, fɹɛnd," ðə lɛɾ aʊtləndɝ sɛd. "ɪɾ ɪzənt wɝθ tʃɹʌbəl wɪð ðə ɹeɪvənz. ɡoʊ ɑn jəɹ weɪ.

"Sorry, friend," the lead outlander said. "It isn't worth trouble with the Ravens. Go on your way.

wi doʊnt wɑn ən ɪnsəɾənt." sɛvɹəl aʊtləndɝz əpɹoʊtʃt fɹəm bɪhaɪnd, wʌn kæɹiɪŋ ən æks, tu ʌðɝz wɪð hɪs-steɪvz.

We don't want an incident." Several outlanders approached from behind, one carrying an axe, two others with hiss-staves.

hɝ hʌzbən slʌmpt. deɪz ə tʃɹævəl, wiks ə sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ðə stoʊnz. fəɹ nʌθɪŋ. hi tɝn ən wɔk bæk tə hɝ. ɪn ðə dɪstəns, ðə sʌn wɑz sɛɾɪŋ. wʌns i ɹitʃt hɝ, ʃi ən mis dʒɔɪn hɪm, wɔkɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ði aʊtləndɝ kæmp.

Her husband slumped. Days of travel, weeks of searching for the stones. For nothing. He turned and walked back to her. In the distance, the sun was setting. Once he reached her, she and Meise joined him, walking away from the outlander camp.

mis bɪɡæn tə snɪfəl, bʌt niðɝ ə ðɛm hæd ðə wɪl əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ tə kæɹi hɝ. əbaʊɾ ən aʊɝ əweɪ fɹəm ði aʊtləndɝ kæmp, hɝ hʌzbən faʊn ə hɑloʊ ɪn ə ɹɑk ʃɛlf. ðeɪ sɛɾəld ɪn, nɑt meɪkɪŋ ə faɪɝ. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə bɝn.

Meise began to sniffle, but neither of them had the will or strength to carry her. About an hour away from the outlander camp, her husband found a hollow in a rock shelf. They settled in, not making a fire. There was nothing to burn.

nɔɹlɪʃ wɑntəd tə kɹaɪ. bʌt . . . filɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ sim dɪfəkəlt. "aɪm soʊ hʌŋɡɹi," ʃi wɪspɝd.

Norlesh wanted to cry. But . . . feeling anything seemed difficult. "I'm so hungry," she whispered.

"aɪ wɪl tʃɹæp sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ," hɝ hʌzbən sɛd, stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ət ðə stɑɹz.

"I will trap something in the morning," her husband said, staring up at the stars.

"wi hævən kɑɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɪn deɪz," ʃi sɛd.

"We haven't caught anything in days," she said.

hi dɪdn ɹɪplaɪ.

He didn't reply.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ wi ɡoʊɪŋ tə du?" ʃi wɪspɝd. "wi hævən bɪn eɪbəl ti kip ə hoʊm fəɹ əɹ pipəl sɪns maɪ ɡɹieɪtmɑðɝ tɑvəz deɪ. ɪf wi ɡæðɝ ðeɪ ətæk ʌs. ɪf wi wɑndɝ ðə weɪst, wi daɪ ɔf.

"What are we going to do?" she whispered. "We haven't been able t keep a home for our people since my greatmother Tava's day. If we gather they attack us. If we wander the Waste, we die off.

ðeɪ woʊn tʃɹeɪd wɪð ʌs. ðeɪ woʊn lɛɾ əs kɹɔs ðə maʊntənz. wʌɾ ɑɹ wi ɡoʊɪŋ tə du?"

They won't trade with us. They won't let us cross the mountains. What are we going to do?"

hɪz ɹɪspɑns wɑz tə laɪ daʊn, tɝnɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm hɝ.

His response was to lie down, turning away from her.

hɝ tɪɹz dɪd kʌm ðɛn, kwaɪət, wik. ðeɪ ɹoʊl daʊn əɹ tʃiks əz ʃi əndɪɾ əɹ ʃɝt tə nɝs ɡɑɹlvən, ðoʊ ʃi hæd noʊ sʌk fəɹ hɪm.

Her tears did come then, quiet, weak. They rolled down her cheeks as she undid her shirt to nurse Garlvan, though she had no suck for him.

hi dɪdn muv. hi dɪdn lætʃ ɑn. ʃi lɪftəɾ ɪz smɔl fɔɹm ən ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bɹiðɪŋ. sʌmwɛɹ əlɔŋ ðə wɔk tə ðə hɑloʊ, hi hæd daɪd wɪθaʊɾ əɹ ɹilaɪzɪŋ ɪt.

He didn't move. He didn't latch on. She lifted his small form and realized that he was no longer breathing. Somewhere along the walk to the hollow, he had died without her realizing it.

ðə moʊs fɹaɪɾənɪŋ pɑɹt wɑz haʊ dɪfəkəlt ʃi faʊn ɪt tə sʌmən ɛni sɑɹoʊ ət ðə dɛθ.

The most frightening part was how difficult she found it to summon any sorrow at the death.

eɪvinhəz fʊt hɪt ðə flæɡstoʊnz. ɝaʊn hɝ, ðə fɔɹəst ʌv ɡlæs kɑləmz ʃɪmɝd wɪð pɹɪzmæɾɪk kʌlɝ. ɪt wɑz laɪk stændɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ən ɪluməneɪɾɝz faɪɝwɝk. ðə sʌn wɑz haɪ ɪn ðə skaɪ, klaʊd kʌvɝ ɹɪmɑɹkəbli ɡɔn.

Aviendha's foot hit the flagstones. Around her, the forest of glass columns shimmered with prismatic color. It was like standing in the middle of an Illuminator's firework. The sun was high in the sky, cloud cover remarkably gone.

ʃi wɑntəd tə liv ðə skwɛɹ fɝɛvɝ. ʃi hæd bɪn pɹipɛɹd fəɹ ðə nɑlədʒ ðət ði il hæd wʌns fɑloʊd ðə weɪ ʌv ðə lif. ðət nɑlədʒ wɑzn vɛɹi dɪstɝbɪŋ. ðeɪ wəd sun fʊlfɪl ðɛɹ toʊ.

She wanted to leave the square forever. She had been prepared for the knowledge that the Aiel had once followed the Way of the Leaf. That knowledge wasn't very disturbing. They would soon fulfill their toh.

bʌt ðɪs? ðiz skæɾɝd ən bɹoʊkən ɹɛtʃəz? pipəl u dɪdn stæn ʌp fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz, hu bɛɡd, hu dɪdnt noʊ haʊ tə sɝvaɪv ɔf ðə lænd? tə noʊ ðət ðiz wɝ əɹ ænsɛstɝz wɑz ə ʃeɪm ʃi nɪɹli kəd nɑt bɛɹ. ɪt wɑz ɡʊd ðət ɹænd ælθɹ hæd nɑt ɹɪvil ðɪs pæs tə ði il.

But this? These scattered and broken wretches? People who didn't stand up for themselves, who begged, who didn't know how to survive off the land? To know that these were her ancestors was a shame she nearly could not bear. It was good that Rand al'Thor had not revealed this past to the Aiel.

kəd ʃi fli? ɹʌn fɹəm ðə plɑzə ən si noʊ mɔɹ? ɪf ɪt ɡɹu ɛni wɝs, ðə ʃeɪm wəɾ oʊvɝwɛlm hɝ. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ʃi nu ðət ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn weɪ aʊt, naʊ ðət ʃid bɪɡʌn.

Could she flee? Run from the plaza and see no more? If it grew any worse, the shame would overwhelm her. Unfortunately, she knew that there was only one way out, now that she'd begun.

ɡɹɪɾɪŋ əɹ tiθ, ʃi tʊk ə stɛp fɔɹwɝd.

Gritting her teeth, she took a step forward.

ʃi wɑz tɑvə, fɔɹtin jɪɹz oʊld ən skɹimɪŋ ɪn ðə naɪɾ əz ʃi ɹæn fɹəm əɹ bɝnɪŋ haʊs.

She was Tava, fourteen years old and screaming in the night as she ran from her burning house.

ði ɪntaɪɝ væli - ɹɪli ə kænjən, wɪð stip saɪdz - wɑz ɪn fleɪmz. ɛvɹi bɪldɪŋ ɪn ðə flɛdʒlɪŋ hoʊl hæd bɪn sɛɾ əfaɪɹ. naɪtmɛɹɪʃ kɹitʃɝz, wɪð sɪnwəs nɛks ən waɪd wɪŋz, flæpt ɪn ðə naɪɾ əbʌv, bɛɹɪŋ ɹaɪɾɝz wɪð baʊz, spɪɹz, ən stʃɹeɪnʒ nu wɛpənz ðət meɪɾ ə hɪsɪŋ saʊnd wən ðeɪ faɪɝd.

The entire valley - really a canyon, with steep sides - was in flames. Every building in the fledgling hold had been set afire. Nightmarish creatures, with sinuous necks and wide wings, flapped in the night above, bearing riders with bows, spears, and strange new weapons that made a hissing sound when they fired.

tɑvə kɹaɪd, sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ əɹ fæmli, bʌt ðə hoʊld wɑz ə mæs ə keɪɑs ən kənfjuʒən. səm fju il wɔɹiɝz ɹɪzɪstɪd, bʌɾ ɛniwʌn u ɹeɪzd ə spɪɹ fɛl moʊməns leɪɾɝ, kɪl baɪ æɹoʊ əɹ baɪ wʌn ə ði ɪnvɪzəbəl ʃɑts fɹəm ðə nu wɛpənz.

Tava cried, searching for her family, but the hold was a mass of chaos and confusion. Some few Aiel warriors resisted, but anyone who raised a spear fell moments later, killed by arrow or by one of the invisible shots from the new weapons.

ən il mæn fɛl bɪfɔɹ hɝ, kɔɹps ɹoʊlɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ædvɪʃm hæd bɪn ɪz neɪm, ə stoʊn dɔɡ. ɪt wɑz wʌn ə ðə fju səsaɪəɾiz wɪtʃ stɪl meɪnteɪn ən aɪdɛntəɾi. moʊst wɔɹiɝz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ hɛl tə ə səsaɪəɾi; ðeɪ meɪd bɹʌðɝz ən sɪstɝz ə ðoʊz wɪð hum ðeɪ kæmpt. ɔl tu ɔfən, ðoʊz kæmps wɝ skæɾɝd ɛniweɪ.

An Aiel man fell before her, corpse rolling on the ground. Tadvishm had been his name, a Stone Dog. It was one of the few societies which still maintained an identity. Most warriors no longer held to a society; they made brothers and sisters of those with whom they camped. All too often, those camps were scattered anyway.

ðɪs hoʊld wɑz tə hæv bɪn dɪfɹənt, sikɹət, dip wɪðɪn ðə weɪst. haʊ hæd ðɛɹ ɛnəmiz faʊn ðɛm?

This hold was to have been different, secret, deep within the Waste. How had their enemies found them?

ə tʃaɪld ʌv oʊnli tu jɪɹz wɑz kɹaɪɪŋ. ʃi dæʃt tə hɪm, snætʃɪŋ ɪm fɹəm wɛɹ i leɪ nɪɹ ðə fleɪmz. ðɛɹ hoʊmz bɝnd. ðə wʊd hæd bɪn skævənʒd wɪð dɪfəkəlti fɹəm ðə maʊntənz ɑn ði istɝn ɛdʒ ə ðə weɪst.

A child of only two years was crying. She dashed to him, snatching him from where he lay near the flames. Their homes burned. The wood had been scavenged with difficulty from the mountains on the eastern edge of the Waste.

ʃi hɛl ðə tʃaɪl kloʊs ən ɹæn təwɔɹd ðə dipɝ ɹisɛsəz ə ðə kænjən. wɛɹ wɑz əɹ fɑðɝ?

She held the child close and ran toward the deeper recesses of the canyon. Where was her father?

wɪð ə sʌɾən wuʃ ə saʊnd, wʌn ə ðə naɪtmɛɹɪʃ kɹitʃɝz lændəd bɪfɔɹ hɝ, ðə bɝst ʌv wɪn meɪkɪŋ əɹ skɝt flæp. ə fɪɹsəm wɔɹiɝ sæɾ əpɑn ðə kɹitʃɝz bæk, hɛlmət laɪk ðəɾ ʌv ən ɪnsɛkt, mændəbəlz ʃɑɹp ən dʒæɡd. hi loʊɝɾ ɪz hɪsɪŋ stæf təwɔɹd hɝ. ʃi kɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ɪn tɛɹɝ, hʌɾəlɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə kɹaɪɪŋ tʃaɪld ən kloʊzɪŋ əɹ aɪz.

With a sudden whoosh of sound, one of the nightmarish creatures landed before her, the burst of wind making her skirt flap. A fearsome warrior sat upon the creature's back, helmet like that of an insect, mandibles sharp and jagged. He lowered his hissing staff toward her. She cried out in terror, huddling around the crying child and closing her eyes.

ðə hɪsɪŋ saʊnd nɛvɝ keɪm. əɾ ə ɡɹʌn ən ə sʌɾən skɹitʃ fɹəm ðə sɝpəntaɪn bist, ʃi lʊkt ʌp ən sɔ ə fɪɡjɝ stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ wɪð ði aʊtləndɝ. ðə faɪɹlaɪt ʃoʊd ðə feɪs ə hɝ fɑðɝ, klin-ʃeɪvən əz ði oʊl tʃɹədɪʃənz dɪkteɪɾəd. ðə bis bɪniθ ðə tu mɛn lɝtʃt, θɹoʊɪŋ boʊθ tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

The hissing sound never came. At a grunt and a sudden screech from the serpentine beast, she looked up and saw a figure struggling with the outlander. The firelight showed the face of her father, clean-shaven as the old traditions dictated. The beast beneath the two men lurched, throwing both to the ground.

ə fju moʊməns leɪɾɝ, hɝ fɑðɝ ɹoʊz, hoʊldɪŋ ði ɪnveɪɾɝz sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪz hænz, ɪts lɛŋθ steɪn dɑɹk. ði ɪnveɪɾɝ dɪd nɑt muv, ən bɪhaɪn əm ðə bis lɛpt ɪndə ði ɛɹ, haʊlɪŋ. tɑvə lʊkt ʌp, ən sɔ ðəɾ ɪt wɑz fɑloʊɪŋ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə pæk. ði ɪnveɪɾɝz wɝ wɪθdʒɹɔɪŋ, livɪŋ ə bɹoʊkən pipəl wɪð bɝnɪŋ hoʊmz.

A few moments later, her father rose, holding the invader's sword in his hands, its length stained dark. The invader did not move, and behind them the beast leaped into the air, howling. Tava looked up, and saw that it was following the rest of the pack. The invaders were withdrawing, leaving a broken people with burning homes.

ʃi lʊk daʊn əɡɛn. ðə sin hɔɹəfaɪd hɝ; soʊ mɛni bɑɾiz, dɑz-ɛnz, leɪ bliɾɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ði ɪnveɪɾɝ ðəɾ əɹ fɑðɝ hæd kɪld əpɪɹd tə bi ði oʊnli ɛnəmi ðət hæd fɔlən.

She looked down again. The scene horrified her; so many bodies, doz-ens, lay bleeding on the ground. The invader that her father had killed appeared to be the only enemy that had fallen.

"ɡæðɝ sænd!" hɝ fɑðɝ - ɹoʊən - ɹɔɹd. "kwɛntʃ ðə fleɪmz!"

"Gather sand!" her father - Rowahn - roared. "Quench the flames!"

tɔl - ivən fəɹ ən il - wɪð stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ɹɛd hɛɹ, hi wɔɹ ði oʊl kloʊðɪŋ ə bɹaʊn ən tæn, buts taɪd haɪ tə hɪz niz. ðət kloʊðɪŋ mɑɹkt wʌn əz il, ðɛɹfɔɹ mɛni hæɾ əbændən ɪt. biɪŋ noʊn əz il mɛn dɛθ.

Tall - even for an Aiel - with striking red hair, he wore the old clothing of brown and tan, boots tied high to his knees. That clothing marked one as Aiel, therefore many had abandoned it. Being known as Aiel meant death.

hɝ fɑðɝ hæɾ ɪnhɛɹəɾɪd ɪz kloʊðɪŋ fɹəm ɪz ɡɹændfɑðɝ, əlɔŋ wɪð ə tʃɑɹdʒ. fɑloʊ ði oʊld weɪz. ɹɪmɛmbɝ dʒiɾoʊ. faɪɾ ən meɪnteɪn ɑnɝ. ðoʊ hi hæd bɪn ɪn ðə hoʊl fəɹ oʊnli ə fju deɪz, ði ʌðɝz lɪsənd wən i jɛl fəɹ əm tə pʊɾ aʊt ðə faɪɝz. tɑvə ɹɪtɝn ðə tʃaɪl tə ə ɡɹeɪtfəl mʌðɝ ən ðən hɛlpt ɡæðɝ sæn ən dɝt.

Her father had inherited his clothing from his grandfather, along with a charge. Follow the old ways. Remember ji'e'toh. Fight and maintain honor. Though he had been in the hold for only a few days, the others listened when he yelled for them to put out the fires. Tava returned the child to a grateful mother and then helped gather sand and dirt.

ə fju aʊɝz leɪɾɝ, ə taɪɝɾ ən blʌɾid pipəl ɡæðɝɾ ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə kænjən, ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ wɪð dʌl aɪz wʌt ðeɪ hæd wɝk fəɹ mʌnθs tə bɪld. ɪt hæd bɪn waɪpt aʊɾ ɪn ə sɪŋɡəl naɪt. hɝ fɑðɝ stɪl kæɹid ðə sɔɹd. hi juzd ɪt tə dɝɛk ðə pipəl. səm ə ði oʊld wʌnz sɛd ðəɾ ə sɔɹd wɑz bæd lʌk, bʌt waɪ wəd ðeɪ seɪ ðæt? ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə wɛpən.

A few hours later, a tired and bloodied people gathered in the center of the canyon, regarding with dull eyes what they had worked for months to build. It had been wiped out in a single night. Her father still carried the sword. He used it to direct the people. Some of the old ones said that a sword was bad luck, but why would they say that? It was only a weapon.

"wi mʌst ɹibɪld," hɝ fɑðɝ sɛd, sɝveɪɪŋ ðə ɹɛkədʒ.

"We must rebuild," her father said, surveying the wreckage.

"ɹibɪld?" sɛɾ ə sʊt-steɪn mæn. "ðə ɡɹænɛɹi wɑz ðə fɝs tə bɝn! ðəɹ ɪz noʊ fud!"

"Rebuild?" said a soot-stained man. "The granary was the first to burn! There is no food!"

"wi wɪl sɝvaɪv," hɝ fɑðɝ sɛd. "wi kən muv dipɝ ɪndə ðə weɪst."

"We will survive," her father said. "We can move deeper into the Waste."

"ðɛɹ ɪz noʊwɛɹ ɛls tə ɡoʊ!" ənʌðɝ mæn sɛd. "ðə ɹeɪvən ɛmpaɪɝ əz sɛnt wɝd tə ðə fɑɹ wʌnz, ən ðeɪ hʌn əs ət ði istɝn bɔɹɾɝ!"

"There is nowhere else to go!" another man said. "The Raven Empire has sent word to the Far Ones, and they hunt us at the eastern border!"

"ðeɪ faɪn əs wɛnɛvɝ wi ɡæðɝ!" ənʌðɝ kɹaɪd.

"They find us whenever we gather!" another cried.

"ɪɾ ɪz ə pʌnɪʃmənt!" hɝ fɑðɝ sɛd. "bʌt wi mʌst ɛndʒjʊɹ!"

"It is a punishment!" her father said. "But we must endure!"

ðə pipəl lʊkt ət hɪm. ðɛn, ɪn pɛɹz əɹ smɔl ɡɹups, ðeɪ bɪɡæn tə wɔk əweɪ.

The people looked at him. Then, in pairs or small groups, they began to walk away.

"weɪt," hɝ fɑðɝ sɛd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz hænd. "wi mʌst steɪ təɡɛðɝ, kip faɪɾɪŋ! ðə klæn - "

"Wait," her father said, raising his hand. "We must stay together, keep fighting! The clan - "

"wi ɑɹ nɑɾ ə klæn," ən æʃən mæn sɛd. "aɪ kən sɝvaɪv bɛɾɝ ɑn maɪ oʊn. noʊ mɔɹ faɪɾɪŋ. ðeɪ biɾ əs wən wi faɪt."

"We are not a clan," an ashen man said. "I can survive better on my own. No more fighting. They beat us when we fight."

hɝ fɑðɝ loʊɝd ðə sɔɹd, ɪts tɪp hɪɾɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊnd. tɑvə muvd ʌp bɪsaɪd hɪm, wɝiɾ əz ʃi wɑtʃt ði ʌðɝz wɔk ðɛɹ weɪz ɪndə ðə naɪt. ði ɛɹ wɑz stɪl θɪk wɪð smoʊk. ðə dɪpɑɹɾɪŋ il wɝ ʃædoʊz, mɛltɪŋ ɪndə dɑɹknəs, laɪk swɝlz ə dʌs bloʊn ɑn ðə wɪnd. ðeɪ dɪdn pɔz tə bɛɹi ðɛɹ dɛd.

Her father lowered the sword, its tip hitting the ground. Tava moved up beside him, worried as she watched the others walk their ways into the night. The air was still thick with smoke. The departing Aiel were shadows, melting into darkness, like swirls of dust blown on the wind. They didn't pause to bury their dead.

hɝ fɑðɝ baʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ ən dʒɹɑp ðə sɔɹd tə ði æʃ-kʌvɝd ɡɹaʊnd.

Her father bowed his head and dropped the sword to the ash-covered ground.

ðəɹ wɝ tɛɹz ɪn eɪvinhəz aɪz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ʃeɪm ət kɹaɪɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɪs tʃɹædʒəɾi. ʃi hæd fɪɹd ðə tʃɹuθ, ən ʃi kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ dɪnaɪ ɪt.

There were tears in Aviendha's eyes. There was no shame at crying over this tragedy. She had feared the truth, and she could no longer deny it.

ðoʊz hæd bɪn sintʃæn ɹeɪɾɝz, ɹaɪɾɪŋ ətɑp ɹeɪkən. ðə ɹeɪvən ɛmpaɪɝ, ðə laɪtmeɪkɝz fɹəm əɹ fɝs vɪʒən, wɝ ðə sintʃæn - ən ðeɪ hædn ɪɡzɪstəɾ əntɪl ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə kɝən eɪdʒ, wən ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɑɹmiz hæd kɹɔs ði oʊʃənz. .

Those had been Seanchan raiders, riding atop raken. The Raven Empire, the Lightmakers from her first vision, were the Seanchan - and they hadn't existed until the middle of the current Age, when Artur Hawkwings armies had crossed the oceans. .

ʃi wɑz nɑt siɪŋ ðə dip pæst ə hɝ pipəl. ʃi wɑz siɪŋ ðɛɹ fjutʃɝ.

She was not seeing the deep past of her people. She was seeing their future.

hɝ fɝs taɪm θɹu ðə pɪlɝz, itʃ stɛp hæd teɪkən əɹ bækwɝd, muvɪŋ əɹ θɹu taɪm təwɔɹd ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ɪɾ əpɪɹd ðət ðɪs taɪm, ðə vɪʒənz hæd stɑɹɾəd əɾ ə dɪstən pɔɪn ɪn ðə fjutʃɝ, ən wɝ wɝkɪŋ bæk təwɔɹɾ əɹ deɪ, itʃ vɪʒən dʒʌmpɪŋ bæk ə dʒɛnɝeɪʃən əɹ tu. tɪɹz stʃɹikɪŋ əɹ feɪs, ʃi tʊk ðə nɛkst stɛp.

Her first time through the pillars, each step had taken her backward, moving her through time toward the Age of Legends. It appeared that this time, the visions had started at a distant point in the future, and were working back toward her day, each vision jumping back a generation or two. Tears streaking her face, she took the next step.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾinaɪn


CHAPTER 49

kɔɹɾ ə ðə sʌn


Court of the Sun

ʃi wɑz læɾəlɪn, waɪz wʌn ə ðə tɑɹdæɾ il. haʊ ʃi wɪʃt ðət ʃi hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə lɝn tə tʃænəl. ðət wɑz ə ʃeɪmfəl θɔt, wɪʃɪŋ fəɹ ə tælənt wʌn dɪd nɑt hæv, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt dɪnaɪ ɪt.

She was Ladalin, Wise One of the Taardad Aiel. How she wished that she had been able to learn to channel. That was a shameful thought, wishing for a talent one did not have, but she could not deny it.

ʃi sæɾ ɪn ðə tɛnt, filɪŋ ɹɪɡɹɛtfəl. ɪf ʃid bɪn eɪbəl tə wɝk wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, pɝhæps ʃi cʊɾə dʌn mɔɹ tə hɛlp ðə wundəd. ʃi cʊɾə ɹɪmeɪn jʌŋ tə liɾ əɹ klæn, ən pɝhæps əɹ boʊnz wəd nɑɾ eɪk soʊ. oʊld eɪdʒ wɑz ə fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən wən ðəɹ wɑz soʊ mʌtʃ tə du.

She sat in the tent, feeling regretful. If she'd been able to work with the One Power, perhaps she could have done more to help the wounded. She could have remained young to lead her clan, and perhaps her bones would not ache so. Old age was a frustration when there was so much to do.

ðə tɛnt wɔlz ɹʌsəld əz ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ klæn tʃifs sɛɾəld daʊn. ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn ʌðɝ waɪz wʌn ɪn ðə ɹum, mɔɹə ʌv ðə ɡoʊʃin il. ʃi kəd nɑt tʃænəl iðɝ. ðə sintʃæn wɝ pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli dɪtɝmənd wən ɪt keɪm tə kɪlɪŋ əɹ kæptʃɝɪŋ ɔl il - meɪl əɹ fimeɪl - hu ʃoʊɾ ɛni tælənt wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ.

The tent walls rustled as the remaining clan chiefs settled down. There was only one other Wise One in the room, Mora of the Goshien Aiel. She could not channel either. The Seanchan were particularly determined when it came to killing or capturing all Aiel - male or female - who showed any talent with the One Power.

ɪt wɑz ə sɑɹi ɡɹup ɡæðɝɾ ɪn ðə tɛnt. ə wʌn-ɑɹm jʌŋ soʊlʒɝ ɛntɝd wɪð ə wɔɹm bɹeɪziɝ ən sɛɾ ɪɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðɛm, ðən ɹitʃɹiɾəd. læɾəlɪnz mʌðɝ hæd spoʊkən ə ðə deɪz wən ðəɹ hæd stɪl bɪn ɡeɪʃeɪn tə də sətʃ wɝk. hæd ðəɹ ɹɪli bɪn il, mæn əɹ meɪɾən, hu hæd nɑt bɪn niɾəd fəɹ ðə wɔɹ əɡɛns ðə sintʃæn?

It was a sorry group gathered in the tent. A one-armed young soldier entered with a warm brazier and set it in the middle of them, then retreated. Ladalin's mother had spoken of the days when there had still been gai'shain to do such work. Had there really been Aiel, man or Maiden, who had not been needed for the war against the Seanchan?

læɾəlɪn ɹitʃt fɔɹwɝd tə wɔɹm əɹ hænz ət ðə bɹeɪziɝ, fɪŋɡɝz nɑɾɪd wɪð eɪdʒ. ʃid hɛld ə spɪɹ əz ə jʌŋ wʊmən; moʊst wɪmən dɪd, bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ mɛɹid. haʊ kəɾ ə wʊmən ɹɪmeɪn bɪhaɪnd wən ðə sintʃæn juz fimeɪl soʊlʒɝz ən ðɛɹ deɪmeɪn wɪð sətʃ ɪfɛktɪvnəs?

Ladalin reached forward to warm her hands at the brazier, fingers knotted with age. She'd held a spear as a young woman; most women did, before they married. How could a woman remain behind when the Seanchan used female soldiers and their damane with such effectiveness?

ʃid hɝd stɔɹiz əbaʊɾ əɹ mʌðɝ ən ɡɹieɪtmɑðɝz deɪz, bʌt ðeɪ siɹn ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl. ðə wɔɹ wɑz ɔl læɾəlɪn hæɾ ɛvɝ noʊn. hɝ fɝs mɛmɹiz əz ə lɪɾəl ɡɝl wɝ ə ði ɑlməθ stʃɹaɪks. hɝ juθ hæd bɪn spɛn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ. ʃi hæd fɔɾ ɪn ðə bæɾəlz foʊkəst ɝaʊn ðə læn ðət hæd bɪn noʊn əz tiɹ.

She'd heard stories about her mother and greatmother's days, but they seerned incredible. The war was all Ladalin had ever known. Her first memories as a little girl were of the Almoth strikes. Her youth had been spent training. She had fought in the battles focused around the land that had been known as Tear.

læɾəlɪn hæd mɛɹiɾ ən ɹeɪz tʃɪlʒɹən, bʌt hæd foʊkəst ɛvɹi bɹɛθ ɑn ðə kɑnflɪkt. il əɹ sintʃæn. boʊθ nu ðæt, ɪvɛntʃəwəli, oʊnli wʌn ə ðə tu wəd ɹɪmeɪn.

Ladalin had married and raised children, but had focused every breath on the conflict. Aiel or Seanchan. Both knew that, eventually, only one of the two would remain.

ɪt wɑz lʊkɪŋ mɔɹ ən mɔɹ laɪk ði il wəd bi ðə wʌnz fɔɹst aʊt. ðət wɑz ənʌðɝ dɪfɝəns bɪtwin əɹ deɪ ən əɹ mʌðɝz deɪ. hɝ mʌðɝ hæd nɑt spoʊkən ə feɪljɝ; læɾəlɪnz laɪftaɪm wɑz fɪld wɪð maɪlstoʊnz ʌv wɪðdʒɹɔəl ən ɹitʃɹit.

It was looking more and more like the Aiel would be the ones forced out. That was another difference between her day and her mother's day. Her mother had not spoken of failure; Ladalin's lifetime was filled with milestones of withdrawal and retreat.

ði ʌðɝz simd əbzɔɹbd ɪn ðɛɹ θɔts. θɹi klæn tʃifs ən tu waɪz wʌnz. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ðət ɹɪmeɪn ə ðə kaʊnsəl ə twɛnti-tu. haɪlənd wɪnz sip θɹu ðə tɛn flæps, tʃɪlɪŋ əɹ bæk. tɑmɑv wɑz ðə læs tə ɝaɪv. hi lʊkt əz oʊld əz ʃi fɛlt, hɪz feɪs skɑɹɾ ən ɪz lɛft aɪ lɔst ɪn bæɾəl. hi sæt daʊn ɑn ðə ɹɑk. ði il noʊ lɔŋɡɝ kæɹid ɹʌɡz əɹ kʊʃənz. oʊnli ði ɛsɛntʃəlz kəd bi tʃɹænspɔɹɾəd.

The others seemed absorbed in their thoughts. Three clan chiefs and two Wise Ones. They were all that remained of the Council of Twenty-Two. Highland winds seeped through the tent flaps, chilling her back. Tamaav was the last to arrive. He looked as old as she felt, his face scarred and his left eye lost in battle. He sat down on the rock. The Aiel no longer carried rugs or cushions. Only the essentials could be transported.

"ðə waɪt taʊɝ əz fɔlən," hi sɛd. "maɪ skaʊts ɪnfɔɹmd mi nɑɾ ən aʊɝ əɡoʊ. aɪ tʃɹʌs ðɛɹ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən." hi hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ə blʌn mæn, ən ə ɡʊd fɹɛn tə hɝ hʌzbənd, hu hæd fɔlən læs jɪɹ.

"The White Tower has fallen," he said. "My scouts informed me not an hour ago. I trust their information." He had always been a blunt man, and a good friend to her husband, who had fallen last year.

"ðɛn wɪð ɪt ɡoʊz əɹ læs hoʊp," sɛd tɑkɑi, ðə jʌŋɡəst ə ðə klæn tʃifs. hi wɑz ðə θɝd tʃif ə ðə maɪæɡoʊmə ɪn əz mɛni jɪɹz.

"Then with it goes our last hope," said Takai, the youngest of the clan chiefs. He was the third chief of the Miagoma in as many years.

"spik nɑt soʊ," læɾəlɪn sɛd. "ðɛɹ ɪz ɔlweɪz hoʊp."

"Speak not so," Ladalin said. "There is always hope."

"ðeɪ hæv pʊʃt əs ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðiz kɝs maʊntənz," tɑkɑi sɛd. "ðə ʃiæn ən ðə dɛɹn ɑɹ noʊ mɔɹ. ðət livz oʊnli faɪv klænz, ən wʌn ə ðoʊz ɪz bɹoʊkən ən skæɾɝd. wəɹ biɾən, læɾəlɪn."

"They have pushed us all the way to these cursed mountains," Takai said. "The Shiande and the Daryne are no more. That leaves only five clans, and one of those is broken and scattered. We are beaten, Ladalin."

tɑmɑv saɪd. ʃiɾ əv leɪn ə bɹaɪɾəl ɹiθ əɾ ɪz fit, hæd ðə jɪɹz bɪn ɝliɝ ən ðə taɪmz dɪfɹənt. hɝ klæn niɾəd ə tʃif. hɝ sʌn stɪl θɔt tə bɪkʌm ðə wʌn, bʌt wɪð ðə ɹisən sintʃæn kæptʃɝ ə ɹɪɾiən, ðə klænz wɝ ənsɝɾən haʊ tə tʃuz nu liɾɝz.

Tamaav sighed. She'd have lain a bridal wreath at his feet, had the years been earlier and the times different. Her clan needed a chief. Her son still thought to become the one, but with the recent Seanchan capture of Rhuidean, the clans were uncertain how to choose new leaders.

"wi mʌst ɹitʃɹiɾ ɪndə ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd," mɔɹə sɛɾ ɪn əɹ sɑft, meɪtʃɹənli vɔɪs. "æn sik pɛnəns fəɹ əɹ sɪnz."

"We must retreat into the Three-fold Land," Mora said in her soft, matronly voice. "And seek penance for our sins."

"wʌt sɪnz?" tɑkɑi snæpt.

"What sins?" Takai snapped.

"ðə dʒɹæɡən wɑntəd pis," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd.

"The Dragon wanted peace," she replied.

"ðə dʒɹæɡən lɛft ʌs!" tɑkɑi sɛd. "aɪ ɹəfjuz tə fɑloʊ ðə mɛmɹi ʌv ə mæn maɪ ɡɹeɪtfɑðɝz bɛɹli nu. wi meɪd noʊ oʊðz tə fɑloʊ hɪz fulɪʃ pækt. wi - "

"The Dragon left us!" Takai said. "I refuse to follow the memory of a man my greatfathers barely knew. We made no oaths to follow his foolish pact. We - "

"pis, tɑkɑi," dʒɔɹʃəm sɛd. ðə læst ə ðə θɹi klæn tʃifs wɑz ə smɔl, hɔk-feɪs mæn wɪð səm ændɔɝən blʌɾ ɪn ɪm fɹəm ɪz ɡɹeɪtfə-θɝ. "oʊnli ðə θɹi- foʊld læn hoʊlz ɛni hoʊp fəɹ ʌs, naʊ. ðə wɔɹ əɡɛns ðə ɹeɪvənz əz bɪn lɔst."

"Peace, Takai," Jorshem said. The last of the three clan chiefs was a small, hawk-faced man with some Andoran blood in him from his greatfa-ther. "Only the Three- fold Land holds any hope for us, now. The war against the Ravens has been lost."

ðə tɛn fɛl stɪl.

The tent fell still.

"ðeɪ sɛd ðeɪd hʌn ʌs," tɑkɑi sɛd. "wɛn ðeɪ dɪmændəd sɝɛndɝ, ðeɪ wɔɹn əs əɡɛnst ɹitʃɹit. jə noʊ ðæt. ðeɪ sɛd ðeɪ wəd dɪstʃɹɔɪ ɛni pleɪs wɛɹ θɹi il ɡæðɝd."

"They said they'd hunt us," Takai said. "When they demanded surrender, they warned us against retreat. You know that. They Said they would destroy any place where three Aiel gathered."

"wi wɪl nɑt sɝɛndɝ," læɾəlɪn sɛd fɝmli. mɔɹ fɝmli ðən ʃi fɛl tə bi ɑnəst.

"We will not surrender," Ladalin said firmly. More firmly than she felt to be honest.

"sɝɛndɝ wəd meɪk əs ɡeɪʃeɪn" tɑmɑv sɛd. ðeɪ juz ðə wɝd tə min wʌn wɪθaʊɾ ɑnɝ, ðoʊ ðət wɑz nɑt ðə weɪ læɾəlɪnz mʌðɝ hæd juzd ɪt. "læɾəlɪn. wʌɾ ɪz jəɹ ædvaɪs?"

"Surrender would make us gai'shain" Tamaav said. They used the word to mean one without honor, though that was not the way Ladalins mother had used it. "Ladalin. What is your advice?"

ði ʌðɝ fɔɹ lʊkt ət hɝ. ʃi wɑz ə ðə lɪniədʒ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, wʌn ə ðə læs lɪvɪŋ. ði ʌðɝ θɹi laɪnz hæd bɪn kɪld ɔf.

The other four looked at her. She was of the lineage of the Dragon, one of the last living. The other three lines had been killed off.

"ɪf wi bɪkʌm sleɪvz tə ðə sintʃæn, ði il əz ə pipəl wɪl bi noʊ mɔɹ," ʃi sɛd. "wi kænɑt wɪn, soʊ wi mʌst ɹitʃɹit. wɪl ɹɪtɝn tə ðə θɹi-foʊld læn ən bɪld ʌp əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ.

"If we become slaves to the Seanchan, the Aiel as a people will be no more," she said. "We cannot win, so we must retreat. We will return to the Three-fold Land and build up our strength.

pɝhæps əɹ tʃɪlʒɹən kən faɪt wɛɹ wi kænɑt."

Perhaps our children can fight where we cannot."

saɪləns əɡɛn. ðeɪ ɔl nu hɝ wɝdz tə bi ɑptəmɪstɪk ət bɛst. æftɝ dɛkeɪdz ʌv wɔɹ, ði il wɝ ə bɛɹ fɹækʃən ə ðə nʌmbɝ ðeɪ hæd wʌns bɪn.

Silence again. They all knew her words to be optimistic at best. After decades of war, the Aiel were a bare fraction of the number they had once been.

sintʃæn tʃænlɝz wɝ bɹuɾəl ɪn ðɛɹ ɪfɛktɪvnəs. ðoʊ ðə waɪz wʌnz ən dʒɹæɡən blʌɾɪd juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪn bæɾəl, ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf. ðoʊz kɝst æɾəm itʃ tʃænlɝ ði il lɔs tə kæptʃɝ wɑz ɪvɛntʃəwəli tɝn əɡɛns ðɛm.

Seanchan channelers were brutal in their effectiveness. Though the Wise Ones and Dragon Blooded used the One Power in battle, it was not enough. Those cursed a'dam\ Each channeler the Aiel lost to capture was eventually turned against them.

ðə ɹil tɝnɪŋ pɔɪn ɪn ðə wɔɹ hæd bɪn ði ɛntʃɹi ʌv ði ʌðɝ neɪʃənz. æftɝ ðæt, ðə sintʃæn hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə siz wɛtləndɝ pipəlz ən kʌl mɔɹ tʃænlɝz fɹəm ðɛɹ ɹæŋks. ðə ɹeɪvənz wɝ ənstɑpəbəl; naʊ ðət tɑɹ vəlɑn hæd fɔlən, ɛvɹi ɹɛlm ɪn ðə wɛtlænz wɑz sʌbʒɪkt tə ðə sintʃæn. oʊnli ðə blæk taʊɝ stɪl fɔt, ðoʊ ði æʃəmən dɪd soʊ ɪn sikɹət, əz ðɛɹ fɔɹtʃɹəs hæd fɔlən jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ.

The real turning point in the war had been the entry of the other nations. After that, the Seanchan had been able to seize wetlander peoples and cull more channelers from their ranks. The Ravens were unstoppable; now that Tar Valon had fallen, every realm in the wetlands was subject to the Seanchan. Only the Black Tower still fought, though the Asha'man did so in secret, as their fortress had fallen years before.

il kəd nɑt faɪɾ ɪn sikɹət. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɑnɝ tə ðæt. ʌv kɔɹs, wʌɾ ɑnɝ mæɾɝ naʊ?

Aiel could not fight in secret. There was no honor to that. Of course, what did honor matter now?

æftɝ dɛθs nʌmbɝɪŋ ɪn ðə hʌnʒɹədz ə θaʊzənz? æftɝ ðə bɝnɪŋ ə kɛɹhin ən ðə skaʊɝɪŋ oʊfɪljən? ɪt hæd bɪn twɛnti jɪɹz sɪns ðə sintʃæn hæd ɡeɪn ði ændɔɝən wɔɹ məʃinz. ði il hæd bɪn tʌmbəlɪŋ təwɔɹd dɪfit fəɹ dɛkeɪdz; ɪt wɑz ə tɛstəmən tə ðɛɹ təneɪʃəs neɪtʃɝ ðət ðeɪ hæd læstəd soʊ lɔŋ.

After deaths numbering in the hundreds of thousands? After the burning of Cairhien and the scouring ofIllian? It had been twenty years since the Seanchan had gained the Andoran war machines. The Aiel had been tumbling toward defeat for decades; it was a testament to their tenacious nature that they had lasted so long.

"ðɪs ɪz ɪz fɔlt," tɑkɑi sɛd, stɪl lʊkɪŋ sʌlən. "ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn cʊɾə lɛɾ əs tə ɡlɔɹi, bʌɾ i əbændən ʌs."

"This is his fault," Takai said, still looking sullen. "The Car'a'carn could have led us to glory, but he abandoned us."

"hɪz fɔlt?" læɾəlɪn sɛd, ʌndɝstændɪŋ - pɝhæps fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm- waɪ ðət steɪtmənt wɑz ɹɔŋ. "noʊ. il teɪk ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi fəɹ ðɛm-sɛlvz. ðɪs ɪz əɹ fɔlt, ən nɑt ðəɾ ə maɪ dɪstənt ɡɹeɪtfɑðɝ. wɪv fɝɡɑɾən u wi ɑɹ. wəɹ wɪθaʊɾ ɑnɝ."

"His fault?" Ladalin said, understanding - perhaps for the first time- why that statement was wrong. "No. Aiel take responsibility for them-selves. This is our fault, and not that of my distant greatfather. We have forgotten who we are. We are without honor."

"aʊɝ ɑnɝ wɑz teɪkən fɹəm ʌs," tɑkɑi sɛd, saɪɪŋ əz i stʊd. "pipəl ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪndid.

"Our honor was taken from us," Takai said, sighing as he stood. "People of the Dragon indeed.

wʌɾ ɪz ðə ɡʊɾ ə biɪŋ ɪz pipəl? wi wɝ dʒɹæftɪd tə bi ə spɪɹ, ðə lɛdʒənz seɪ, fɔɹdʒd ɪn ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd. hi juzd ʌs, ðən kæst əs əweɪ. wʌɾ ɪz ə dɪskɑɹɾɪd spɪɹ tə du, bʌt ɡoʊ tə wɔɹ?"

What is the good of being his people? We were drafted to be a spear, the legends say, forged in the Three-fold Land. He used us, then cast us away. What is a discarded spear to do, but go to war?"

wʌɾ ɪndid, læɾəlɪn θɔt. ðə dʒɹæɡən hæd dɪmændəd pis, θɪŋkɪŋ ðəɾ ɪt wəd bɹɪŋ hæpinəs tə ði il. bʌt haʊ kəd ðeɪ bi hæpi, wən ðə laɪt-kɝst sintʃæn wɝ ɪn ðə lænd? hɝ heɪtʃɹəɾ ə ði ɪnveɪɾɝz ɹæn dip.

What indeed, Ladalin thought. The Dragon had demanded peace, thinking that it would bring happiness to the Aiel. But how could they be happy, when the Light-cursed Seanchan were in the land? Her hatred of the invaders ran deep.

pɝhæps ðət heɪtʃɹəd hæd dɪstʃɹɔɪd ði il. ʃi lɪsən tə ðə wɪn haʊl əz tɑkɑi stɔk fɹəm ðə tɛnt. ɑn ðə mɑɹoʊ ði il wəd ɹɪtɝn tə ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd. ɪf ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ æksɛpt pis ðɛmsɛlvz, ɪt sim ðeɪ wəɾ əv tə hæv ɪt fɔɹst əpɑn ðɛm.

Perhaps that hatred had destroyed the Aiel. She listened to the wind howl as Takai stalked from the tent. On the morrow the Aiel would return to the Three-fold Land. If they would not accept peace themselves, it seemed they would have to have it forced upon them.

eɪvinhə tʊk ənʌðɝ stɛp fɔɹwɝd. ʃid nɪɹli ɹitʃt ðə vɛɹi sɛntɝ ə ðə kɑləmz, ən ʃɑɹdz ə laɪt spɑɹkəld ɝaʊn hɝ.

Aviendha took another step forward. She'd nearly reached the very center of the columns, and shards of light sparkled around her.

hɝ tɪɹz floʊd fɹili naʊ. ʃi fɛlt laɪk ə tʃaɪld. biɪŋ læɾəlɪn hæd bɪn wɝs ðən ði ʌðɝz, fəɹ ɪn hɝ, eɪvinhə hæd sin hɪns ə tʃɹu il weɪz, bʌt kɝʌptɪd, əz ɪf tə meɪk mɑkɝi. ðə wʊmən hæd θɔɾ ʌv wɔɹ ən əsoʊsieɪɾəd ɪt wɪð ɑnɝ, bʌt hædn ʌndɝstʊd wʌɾ ɑnɝ wɑz. noʊ ɡeɪʃeɪn? ɹitʃɹit? ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ mɛnʃən ə toʊ. ðɪs wɑz bæɾəl stʃɹɪp kəmplitli ʌv pɔɪn əɹ ɹizən.

Her tears flowed freely now. She felt like a child. Being Ladalin had been worse than the others, for in her, Aviendha had seen hints of true Aiel ways, but corrupted, as if to make mockery. The woman had thought of war and associated it with honor, but hadn't understood what honor was. No gai'shain? Retreat? There had been no mention of toh. This was battle stripped completely of point or reason.

waɪ faɪt? fəɹ læɾəlɪn, ɪt hæd bɪn əbaʊt heɪtʃɹəɾ ə ðə sintʃæn. ðəɹ wɑz wɔɹ kəz ðəɹ hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn wɔɹ.

Why fight? For Ladalin, it had been about hatred of the Seanchan. There was war because there had always been war.

haʊ? haʊ hæd ðɪs hæpən tə ði il?

How? How had this happened to the Aiel?

eɪvinhə tʊk ə stɛp fɔɹwɝd.

Aviendha took a step forward.

ʃi wɑz ɑnkɑlə, meɪɾən ə ðə spɪɹ. ʃi wəɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɡɪv ðə spɪɹ ʌp ən mɛɹi, dʒʌst əz əɹ mʌðɝ hæɾ ən əɹ mʌðɝz mʌðɝ bɪfɔɹ hɝ. bʌt naʊ wɑz ðə taɪm tə faɪt.

She was Oncala, Maiden of the Spear. She would eventually give the spear up and marry, just as her mother had and her mother's mother before her. But now was the time to fight.

ʃi stʃɹoʊd θɹu ðə stʃɹits ə keɪɛmlɪn, hɝ nɪɹ-sɪstɝ kæɹiɪŋ ðə bænɝ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən tə ənaʊns əɹ lɪniədʒ. nɛks tə ɑnkɑlə wɑz ðə mæn fəɹ hum ʃi wəd laɪkli ɡɪv ʌp əɹ spɪɹz.

She strode through the streets of Caemlyn, her near-sister carrying the banner of the Dragon to announce her lineage. Next to Oncala was the man for whom she would likely give up her spears.

hɛjəl, dɔn ɹʌnɝ, hæd kɪl mɔɹ sintʃæn ðən ɛni ʌv ɪz səsaɪəɾi, ɡeɪnɪŋ mʌtʃ dʒi. hi hæd bɪn ɡɹæntəd pɝmɪʃən tə tʃɹævəl tə ɹɪɾiən læs jɪɹ tə bɪkʌm klæn tʃif.

Hehyal, Dawn Runner, had killed more Seanchan than any of his society, gaining much ji. He had been granted permission to travel to Rhuidean last year to become clan chief.

ɹɪɾiən. ðə sɪɾi wɑz bɪsidʒ baɪ sintʃæn. ɑnkɑlə snɪɹd. ʃɔn-tʃæn hæd noʊ ɑnɝ. ðeɪ hæd bɪn toʊl ðət ɹɪɾiən wɑz ə pleɪs fəɹ pis. ði il dɪd nɑɾ əsɔl ðə pæləs ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ.

Rhuidean. The city was besieged by Seanchan. Oncala sneered. Sean-chan had no honor. They had been told that Rhuidean was a place for peace. The Aiel did not assault the palace in Ebou Dar.

ðə sintʃə ʃəd nɑɾ ətæk ɹɪɾiən.

The Seancha should not attack Rhuidean.

ðeɪ wɝ lɪzɝdz. ɪt wɑz ə sɔɹs ə kɑnstən fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən ðæt, æftɝ di-keɪdz ʌv wɔɹ, ðə bæɾəl laɪnz ɹɪmeɪnd nɪɹli ðə seɪm əz ðeɪ hæd bɪn æftɝ əɹ ɡɹeɪtfɑðɝ wɛn tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl.

They were lizards. It was a source of constant frustration that, after de-cades of war, the battle lines remained nearly the same as they had been after her greatfather went to Shayol Ghul.

ʃi ən hɛjəl wɝ əkʌmpənid baɪ tu θaʊzən spɪɹz əz ə ɡɑɹɾ ʌv ɑnɝ. kwin tɑlænə nu tə ɪkspɛk ðɛm, ən soʊ ðə waɪɾ ændɔɝən pæləs ɡeɪts wɝ oʊpən. hɛjəl weɪv fəɹ fɪfti spɪɹz, pɹisəlɛktɪd, tə wɔk wɪð əm θɹu ðə faɪn hɔlz. lʌʃnəs əbaʊndəd hɪɹ ɪn ðə pæləs.

She and Hehyal were accompanied by two thousand spears as a guard of honor. Queen Talana knew to expect them, and so the white Andoran palace gates were open. Hehyal waved for fifty spears, preselected, to walk with them through the fine halls. Lushness abounded here in the palace.

itʃ tæpəstʃɹi, itʃ veɪs, itʃ ɡoʊldən fɹeɪm simd ən ɪnsəl tə ɑnkɑlə. fɔɹɾi jɪɹz ʌv wɔɹ, ən ændɝ hæd nɑt bɪn tʌtʃt. ɪt leɪ seɪf, bæskɪŋ ɪn ðə pɹətɛkʃən ði il dɪfɛns ɡeɪv ðɛm.

Each tapestry, each vase, each golden frame seemed an insult to Oncala. Forty years of war, and Andor had not been touched. It lay safe, basking in the protection the Aiel defense gave them.

wɛl, ændɝ wəd si. ði il hæd ɡɹoʊn stʃɹɔŋɝ θɹu ðɛɹ faɪɾɪŋ. wʌns, ðɛɹ pɹaʊəs hæd bɪn lɛdʒəndɛɹi. naʊ ɪt wɑz ɡɹeɪɾɝ! wən ði il hæd dɪstʃɹɔɪd ðə sintʃæn, ðə wɝld wəd si wʌt ði il hæd lɝnd. ðə wɛtlæn ɹulɝz wəd wɪʃ ðeɪ hæd bɪn mɔɹ dʒɛnɝəs.

Well, Andor would see. The Aiel had grown stronger through their fighting. Once, their prowess had been legendary. Now it was greater! When the Aiel had destroyed the Seanchan, the world would see what the Aiel had learned. The wetland rulers would wish they had been more generous.

ðə θɹoʊn ɹum dɔɹz wɝ oʊpən; ɑnkɑlə ən hɛjəl ɛntɝd, livɪŋ ðɛɹ ɛskɔɹt. ðə bænɝ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən flu hɪɹ, tu, ə ɹimaɪndɝ ðət ði ændɔɝən ɹɔɪəl laɪn ɔlsoʊ kæɹid ðə lɪniədʒ ə ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn. wʌn mɔɹ ɹizən fəɹ ɑnkɑlə tə heɪt ðɛm. ði ændɔɝən noʊbɪləɾi θɔt ðɛmsɛlvz əɹ ikwəlz.

The throne room doors were open; Oncala and Hehyal entered, leaving their escort. The banner of the Dragon flew here, too, a reminder that the Andoran royal line also carried the lineage of the Car'a'carn. One more reason for Oncala to hate them. The Andoran nobility thought themselves her equals.

kwin tɑlænə wɑz ə mɪɾəl-eɪdʒd wʊmən wɪð dip, lʌstʃɹəs ɹɛd hɛɹ. nɑt vɛɹi pɹɪɾi, bʌt vɛɹi ɹiɡəl. ʃi wɑz spikɪŋ kwaɪətli wɪð wʌn ə hɝ ædvaɪzɝz, ən ʃi weɪv fəɹ ði il tə weɪt. ən ɪnsəlt, dɪlɪbɝɪt. ɑnkɑlə fjumd.

Queen Talana was a middle-aged woman with deep, lustrous red hair. Not very pretty, but very regal. She was speaking quietly with one of her advisors, and she waved for the Aiel to wait. An insult, deliberate. Oncala fumed.

faɪnəli, ðeɪ wɝ sʌmən tə əpɹoʊtʃ ðə laɪən θɹoʊn. tɑlænəz bɹʌðɝ, hɝ pɹətɛktɝ, stʊd bɪhaɪn əɹ ɪn kɔɹt kloʊðɪŋ - ə vɛst ən koʊt - hæn ɑn ɪz sɔɹd. ɑnkɑlə cʊɾə kɪld ɪm waɪl bɛɹli bɹeɪkɪŋ ə swɛt.

Finally, they were summoned to approach the Lion Throne. Talana's brother, her protector, stood behind her in court clothing - a vest and coat - hand on his sword. Oncala could have killed him while barely breaking a sweat.

"ɑ," kwin tɑlænə sɛd. "ðə tɑɹdæɾ il əɡɛn. jə stɪl kæɹi ðə spɪɹ, ɑnkɑlə?"

"Ah," Queen Talana said. "The Taardad Aiel again. You still carry the spear, Oncala?"

ɑnkɑlə foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz, bʌt sɛd nʌθɪŋ. ʃi nu ʃi wɑz nɑt ɡʊd wɪð pipəl. wən ʃi spoʊk, ɪnsʌls wɝ tu kɑmən. bɛɾɝ tə lɛt ðə klæn tʃif teɪk ðə lɛd.

Oncala folded her arms, but said nothing. She knew she was not good with people. When she spoke, insults were too common. Better to let the clan chief take the lead.

"aɪ əsum jəɹ hɪɹ tə bɛɡ fəɹ eɪɾ əɡɛn," tɑlænə sɛd.

"I assume you're here to beg for aid again," Talana said.

hɛjəl flʌʃt, ən ɑnkɑlə wɪʃt - fəɹ ə moʊmənt - ʃi hædn lɛft əɹ spɪɹ aʊtsaɪd.

Hehyal flushed, and Oncala wished - for a moment - she hadn't left her spear outside.

"wi hæv sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ ju," hɛjəl sɛd, teɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ə lɛðɝ paʊtʃ ən hændɪŋ ɪt tə wʌn ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz. ðə mæn oʊpən ɪt, ɪnspɛktɪŋ ðə peɪpɝz ɪnsaɪd. ənʌðɝ ɪnsəlt. mʌs ðeɪ bi tʃɹiɾəd laɪk əsæsənz? ɑnkɑlə dɪd nɑt laɪk ðə kwin, tʃɹu, bʌɾ əɹ fæmli ən tɑlænəz wɝ swɔɹn tə əlidʒəns kəz ə ðɛɹ ɡɹieɪtmɑðɝz, hu hæd bɪn fɝst-sɪstɝz.

"We have something for you," Hehyal said, taking out a leather pouch and handing it to one of the Queen's Guards. The man opened it, inspecting the papers inside. Another insult. Must they be treated like assassins? Oncala did not like the Queen, true, but her family and Talana's were sworn to allegiance because of their greatmothers, who had been first-sisters.

ðə soʊlʒɝ hændəd ðə kwin ðə peɪpɝz. tɑlænə pɝuz ðɛm, feɪs ɡɹoʊɪŋ kənsɝn ən θɔtfəl.

The soldier handed the Queen the papers. Talana perused them, face growing concerned and thoughtful.

tɑlænə, laɪk moʊst ə ðə ɹulɝz bɪniθ ðə dʒɹæɡənz pis, wɝiɾ əbaʊt ðə sintʃæn. ðə ɹeɪvən ɛmpaɪɝz tɛkniks ən skɪl wɪð ʃeɪpɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ wɝ ɡɹoʊɪŋ. ði il hæɾ əm hɛld əɾ ə steɪlmeɪt, fəɹ naʊ. wʌt wəd hæpən ɪf ðə sintʃæn wʌn? wəd ðeɪ hoʊl tə ðɛɹ oʊðz?

Talana, like most of the rulers beneath the Dragon's Peace, worried about the Seanchan. The Raven Empire's techniques and skill with shaping the One Power were growing. The Aiel had them held at a stalemate, for now. What would happen if the Seanchan won? Would they hold to their oaths?

haʊ mʌtʃ kəd ðə sintʃæn bi tʃɹʌstɪd? hɛjəlz eɪdʒəns hæd spɛn ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə taɪm oʊvɝ ðə læs dɛkeɪd siɾɪŋ ðət vɛɹi kwɛstʃən əmʌŋ ðə ɡɹeɪt kɔɹts ə ðə wɝld. hi wɑz ə waɪz mæn. ivən bɪfɔɹ i hæd bɪkʌm tʃif, hi hæd ɹilaɪz ðət ðɪs wɔɹ kəd nɑt bi wʌn baɪ ði il əloʊn. ðeɪ niɾəd ðiz sɑft wɛtləndɝz.

How much could the Seanchan be trusted? Hehyal's agents had spent a great deal of time over the last decade seeding that very question among the great courts of the world. He was a wise man. Even before he had become chief, he had realized that this war could not be won by the Aiel alone. They needed these soft wetlanders.

ən ðət wɑz ðə faɪnəl ɹizən ɑnkɑlə heɪɾəd ðɛm.

And that was the final reason Oncala hated them.

"wɛɹ dɪd jə ɡɛt ðiz?" tɑlænə æskt.

"Where did you get these?" Talana asked.

"fɹʌm ðə sintʃæn pæləs," hɛjəl sɛd. "ðeɪ ʃəd nɑɾ əv stʃɹʌk ət ɹɪɾiən. baɪ ɑnɝ, ðəɾ əlaʊɾ əs tə ɹɪsɪpɹəkeɪt - ðoʊ əɹ ətæk wɑz dʌn kwaɪətli tə ɹɪkʌvɝ ðiz. aɪ hæd lɔŋ səspɛktəd wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ loʊkeɪɾəd, ən oʊnli maɪ ɑnɝ ɪn nɑt bɹitʃɪŋ ðə sintʃæn seɪkɹəd pæləs hɛl mi bæk."

"From the Seanchan palace," Hehyal said. "They should not have struck at Rhuidean. By honor, that allowed us to reciprocate - though our attack was done quietly to recover these. I had long suspected where they were located, and only my honor in not breaching the Seanchan sacred palace held me back."

tɑlænəz feɪs ɡɹu hɑɹd. "jɔɹ sɝɾən ðiz ɑɹ əθɛntɪk?"

Talana's face grew hard. "You're certain these are authentic?"

"ju kwɛstʃən mi?" hɛjəl æskt.

"You question me?" Hehyal asked.

kwin tɑlænə ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, lʊkɪŋ tʃɹʌbəld. ʃi nu ðət ði il dɪd nɑt laɪ.

Queen Talana shook her head, looking troubled. She knew that the Aiel did not lie.

"wi hæv bɪn peɪʃənt wɪð ju," hɛjəl sɛd. "wi hæv kʌm tə jə ən ɪkspleɪnd wʌt wɪl hæpən ɪf wi kænɑt hoʊld ɔf ðə sintʃæn."

"We have been patient with you," Hehyal said. "We have come to you and explained what will happen if we cannot hold off the Seanchan."

"ðə dʒɹæɡənz pis - "

"The Dragon's Peace - "

"wʌt kɛɹ də ðeɪv fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən?" hɛjəl æskt. "ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪnveɪɾɝz u fɔɹst ɪm tə baʊ tə ðɛɹ ɛmpɹɛs. ʃiz kənsɪɾɝd əbʌv hɪm. ðəl nɑt kip pɹɑməsəz ðeɪ meɪd tə ən ɪnfɪɹiɝ."

"What care do they have for the Dragon?" Hehyal asked. "They are invaders who forced him to bow to their Empress. She is considered above him. They will not keep promises they made to an inferior."

kwin tɑlænə lʊk daʊn əɡɛn. ðə dɑkjəməns wɝ sintʃæn plænz fəɹ ətækɪŋ ændɝ, əlɔŋ wɪð ə dɪteɪl plɑt fəɹ ði əsæsəneɪʃən ə ðə kwin. ʌndɝniθ ðət wɝ sɪməlɝ plænz fəɹ dilɪŋ wɪð ðə ɹulɝz ə tɛɹ, ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ən ɪljən.

Queen Talana looked down again. The documents were Seanchan plans for attacking Andor, along with a detailed plot for the assassination of the Queen. Underneath that were similar plans for dealing with the rulers of Tear, the Two Rivers, and Illian.

"aɪ mʌst əv taɪm tə kənsʌlt wɪð maɪ ædvaɪzɝz," tɑlænə sɛd.

"I must have time to consult with my advisors," Talana said.

wɪv hɝ, ɑnkɑlə θɔt, smaɪlɪŋ. ɑnkɑlə ɔlɹɛɾi nu wʌt ðə kwinz ænsɝ wəd bi.

We have her, Oncala thought, smiling. Oncala already knew what the Queen's answer would be.

ðə tʃɹɪk hæd bɪn tə ɡɛɾ əɹ tə kənsɪɾɝ ækʃən.

The trick had been to get her to consider action.

hɛjəl nɑɾəd, ən ðə tu ʌv əm wɪθdʒɹu. ɑnkɑlə hæd tə kip hɝsɛlf fɹəm jɛlɪŋ ɪn vɪktɝi.

Hehyal nodded, and the two of them withdrew. Oncala had to keep herself from yelling in victory.

ɪf ændɝ ɛntɝd ðə wɔɹ, ði ʌðɝ neɪʃənz wəɾ əz wɛl, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ðoʊz ɪn ðə pækt ə ðə ɡɹɪfɪn ən ðoʊz ɪn ðə kɔɹɾ ə ðə sʌn. ðeɪ lʊk tə ði ændɔɝən kwin mʌtʃ əz ði ʌðɝ il klænz lʊk tə ɑnkɑlə. ðə blʌɾ ə ɹænd ælθɹ hɛl mʌtʃ weɪt.

If Andor entered the war, the other nations would as well, particularly those in the Pact of the Griffin and those in the Court of the Sun. They looked to the Andoran Queen much as the other Aiel clans looked to Oncala. The blood of Rand al'Thor held much weight.

"ɪz ðɪs ɹaɪt?" hɛjəl æskt əz ðeɪ wɔkt, ðɛɹ spɪɹz sɝaʊndɪŋ əm tə kip əweɪ pɹaɪɪŋ ɪɹz.

"Is this right?" Hehyal asked as they walked, their spears surrounding them to keep away prying ears.

ɑnkɑlə stɑɹɾəd. "ɪt wɑz jəɹ plæn."

Oncala started. "It was your plan."

hi nɑɾəd, fɹaʊnɪŋ.

He nodded, frowning.

nʌθɪŋ i hæd sɛd tə ðə kwin hæd bɪn əntʃɹu. ðɛɹ ɑnɝ wɑz ənsɔɪld. haʊɛvɝ, hɛjəl hæd lɛft aʊt wʌn ə ðə ʃits ðeɪd dɪskʌvɝd. ðət wʌn hæɾ ɪkspleɪn ðət ði ʌðɝ ʃits wɝ kəntɪnʒənsi plænz.

Nothing he had said to the Queen had been untrue. Their honor was unsoiled. However, Hehyal had left out one of the sheets they'd discovered. That one had explained that the other sheets were contingency plans.

ðə dɪskɹɪpʃənz ʌv ændɝz mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹsɪz, sədʒɛstʃənz ɑn haʊ tə juz ɡeɪtweɪz ən dʒɹæɡənz tə ətæk keɪɛmlɪn, ðə vɛɹi plɑt tə əsæsəneɪt kwin tɑlænə - ðiz hæd bɪn dʒɹɔn ʌp oʊnli ɪn keɪs ændɝ ɛntɝd ðə wɔɹ. ðeɪ wɝ mɛn əz ə pɹiɛmptɪv stʌɾi ɑn ə pətɛnʃəl ɛnəmi, nɑɾ ən æktʃəwəl plæn tə ətæk.

The descriptions of Andor's military forces, suggestions on how to use gateways and dragons to attack Caemlyn, the very plot to assassinate Queen Talana - these had been drawn up only in case Andor entered the war. They were meant as a preemptive study on a potential enemy, not an actual plan to attack.

ɪt wɑz vɝtʃuəli ðə seɪm θɪŋ. ðə sintʃæn wɝ sneɪks. ðeɪ wəd siz ændɝ ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ən baɪ ðən ði il maɪt bi əneɪbəl tə hɛlp. ɪf ðɪs wɔɹ wɛn bædli, hɝ pipəl wəd ɡoʊ tə ðə θɹi-foʊld læn ən liv ðə fulɪʃ wɛtləndɝz tə bi kɑŋkɝd. ðə sintʃæn wəd faɪn ɪɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl tə faɪt ði il ɪn ðɛɹ hoʊmlænd.

It was virtually the same thing. The Seanchan were snakes. They would seize Andor eventually, and by then the Aiel might be unable to help. If this war went badly, her people would go to the Three-fold Land and leave the foolish wetlanders to be conquered. The Seanchan would find it impossible to fight the Aiel in their homeland.

mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ fəɹ kwin tɑlænə tə ɛntɝ ðə wɔɹ naʊ. fəɹ əɹ oʊn ɡʊd, ɪt wɑz bɛst ʃi nɛvɝ sɔ ðəɾ ʌðɝ ʃit.

Much better for Queen Talana to enter the war now. For her own good, it was best she never saw that other sheet.

"ɪɾ ɪz dʌn," hɛjəl sɛd. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ ɹum fəɹ kwɛstʃən naʊ."

"It is done," Hehyal said. "There is no room for question now."

ɑnkɑlə nɑɾəd. ðə sintʃæn wəd fɔl, ən ði il wəd teɪk ðɛɹ ɹaɪtfəl pleɪs. ðə blʌɾ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɑz ɪn əɹ veɪnz. ʃi dɪzɝv tə ɹul.

Oncala nodded. The Seanchan would fall, and the Aiel would take their rightful place. The blood of the Dragon Reborn was in her veins. She deserved to rule.

ɪt wəd nɑt bi ðə ɹeɪvən ɛmpaɪɝ ðət ɹoʊz ət ði ɛn ə ðɪs ɔl, bʌt ðə dʒɹæɡən ɛmpaɪɝ.

It would not be the Raven Empire that rose at the end of this all, but the Dragon Empire.

"aɪ doʊnt wɑnə ɡoʊ ɑn," eɪvinhə sɛd tə ði ɛmpti fɔɹəst ʌv ɡlæs.

"I don't want to go on," Aviendha said to the empty forest of glass.

ðə bɹiz hæd fɔlən stɪl. hɝ kɑmɛnt wɑz mɛt wɪð saɪləns. hɝ tɪɹz hæd mɑɹk ðə dʌs baɪ hɝ fit, laɪk fɔlən dʒɹɑps ə ɹeɪn.

The breeze had fallen still. Her comment was met with silence. Her tears had marked the dust by her feet, like fallen drops of rain.

"ðæt . . . kɹitʃɝ hæd noʊ ɑnɝ," ʃi sɛd. "ʃi hæz ɹuən ʌs."

"That . . . creature had no honor," she said. "She has ruined us."

ðə wɝs pɑɹt wɑz, ðə wʊmən - ɑnkɑlə - hæd θɔɾ ə hɝ mɔθ-ɝz mʌðɝ. hɝ ɡɹieɪtmɑðɝ.

The worst part was, the woman - Oncala - had thought of her moth-er's mother. Her greatmother.

ɪnsaɪɾ oʊkæləz hɛd, ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə feɪs ətætʃt tə ðət taɪɾəl. eɪvinhə hæd ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ɪt.

Inside Ocala's head, there had been a face attached to that title. Aviendha had recognized it.

əz əɹ oʊn.

As her own.

kɹɪŋɪŋ, kloʊzɪŋ əɹ aɪz, ʃi stɛp fɔɹwɝɾ ɪndə ðə vɛɹi sɛntɝ ə ðə ɹeɪɾiənt kɑləmz.

Cringing, closing her eyes, she stepped forward into the very center of the radiant columns.

ʃi wɑz pædʒɹə, dɔɾɝ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, pɹaʊd meɪɾən ə ðə spɪɹ. ʃi jæŋkt əɹ wɛpən fɹəm ðə nɛk ʌv ə daɪɪŋ sintʃæn, ðən wɑtʃt ðə ɹɛs fli θɹu ðɛɹ ɡeɪtweɪ.

She was Padra, daughter of the Dragon Reborn, proud Maiden of the Spear. She yanked her weapon from the neck of a dying Seanchan, then watched the rest flee through their gateway.

laɪt kɝs ðə wʌn u tɔt ðə sintʃæn tʃɹævlɪŋ, pædʒɹə θɔt. ivən ɪf ðɛɹ wivz ɑɹən vɛɹi ɛləɡənt.

Light curse the one who taught the Seanchan Traveling, Padra thought. Even if their weaves aren't very elegant.

ʃi wɑz kənvɪɝ? sɛt ðət noʊ lɪvɪŋ pɝsən ʌndɝstʊd ðə wʌn paʊɝ əz ʃi ən əɹ sɪblɪŋz dɪd.

She was convir? ced that no living person understood the One Power as she and her siblings did.

ʃid bɪn eɪbəl tə wiv sɪns ʃid bɪn ə tʃaɪld, ən əɹ bɹʌðɝz ən sɪstɝ wɝ ðə seɪm. tə ðɛm, ɪt wɑz nætʃɹəl, ən ɔl ʌðɝz u tʃænəl simd ɑkwɝd baɪ kəmpɛɹəsən.

She'd been able to weave since she'd been a child, and her brothers and sister were the same. To them, it was natural, and all others who channeled seemed awkward by comparison.

ʃi wɑz kɛɹfəl nɑt tə spik ðət weɪ. ɛɛs sədaɪ ən waɪz wʌnz dɪdn laɪk biɪŋ ɹimaɪndəɾ ə ðɛɹ ʃɔɹtkʌmɪŋz. ɪt wɑz tʃɹu nʌnðəlɛs.

She was careful not to speak that way. Aes Sedai and Wise Ones didn't like being reminded of their shortcomings. It was true nonetheless.

pædʒɹə dʒɔɪn əɹ spɪɹ-sɪstɝz. ðeɪ lɛft wʌn ə ðɛɹ nʌmbɝ dɛɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹæs, ən pædʒɹə mɔɹn fəɹ hɝ. tɑɹə, ʌv ðə tɑɹdæɾ il. ʃi wəd bi ɹɪmɛmbɝd. bʌɾ ɑnɝ wɑz ðɛɹz, fəɹ ðeɪ hæd sleɪn eɪt sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz.

Padra joined her spear-sisters. They left one of their number dead on the grass, and Padra mourned for her. Tarra, of the Taardad Aiel. She would be remembered. But honor was theirs, for they had slain eight Seanchan soldiers.

ʃi woʊv ə ɡeɪtweɪ - fəɹ hɝ, ɪt hæpən əz fæst əz ʃi kəd θɪŋk. ʃi hɛl ðə wʌn paʊɝ pɝpɛtʃuəli, ivən waɪl ʃi slɛpt. ʃid nɛvɝ noʊn wʌɾ ɪt wɑz laɪk nɑt tə hæv ðət kʌmfɝɾɪŋ, sɝdʒɪŋ paʊɝ ɪn ðə bæk ə hɝ maɪnd. ʌðɝz sɛd ðeɪ fɪɹd biɪŋ kənsum baɪ ɪt, bʌt haʊ wɑz ðət pɑsəbəl? seɪaɪdɑɹ wɑz ə pis ə hɝ, laɪk əɹ ɑɹm əɹ əɹ lɛɡ. haʊ kəd wʌn bi kənsum baɪ wʌnz oʊn flɛʃ, boʊn ən blʌd?

She wove a gateway - for her, it happened as fast as she could think. She held the One Power perpetually, even while she slept. She'd never known what it was like not to have that comforting, surging Power in the back of her mind. Others said they feared being consumed by it, but how was that possible? Saidar was a piece of her, like her arm or her leg. How could one be consumed by one's own flesh, bone and blood?

ðə ɡeɪtweɪ lɛd tə ði il kæmp ɪn ðə læn kɔld ɑɹæd dumən. ðə kæmp wɑzn ə sɪɾi; il dɪdn əv sɪɾiz. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə vɛɹi lɑɹdʒ kæmp, ən ɪt hæd nɑt muvd ɪn ɔlmoʊst ə dɛkeɪd. pædʒɹə stʃɹoʊɾ əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹæs, ən il ɪn keɪɾɪnsɝ ʃoʊɾ əɹ dɛfɝəns. pædʒɹə ən əɹ sɪblɪŋz, əz tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, hæd bɪkʌm . . . sʌmθɪŋ tə ði il.

The gateway led to the Aiel camp in the land called Arad Doman. The camp wasn't a city; Aiel didn't have cities. But it was a very large camp, and it had not moved in almost a decade. Padra strode across the grass, and Aiel in cadin'sor showed her deference. Padra and her siblings, as children of the Dragon, had become . . . something to the Aiel.

nɑt lɔɹdz - ðət kɑnsɛp meɪɾ əɹ sɪk. bʌt ʃi wɑz mɔɹ ðən ən ɔɹɾənɛɹi ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ. ðə klæn tʃifs lʊk tə hɝ ən əɹ sɪblɪŋz fəɹ æd-vaɪs, ən ðə waɪz wʌnz tʊk spɛʃəl ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ðɛm. ðeɪ əlaʊɾ əɹ tə tʃænəl, ðoʊ ʃi wɑz nɑt wʌn ə ðɛm. ʃi kəd noʊ sunɝ stɑp tʃænəlɪŋ ðən ʃi kəd stɑp bɹiðɪŋ.

Not lords - that concept made her sick. But she was more than an ordinary algai'd'siswai. The clan chiefs looked to her and her siblings for ad-vice, and the Wise Ones took special interest in them. They allowed her to channel, though she was not one of them. She could no sooner stop channeling than she could stop breathing.

ʃi dɪsmɪst əɹ spɪɹ-sɪstɝz, ðən meɪɾ əɹ weɪ dɝɛkli tə ɹɑnəmz tɛnt. ðə klæn tʃif - sʌn ə ɹəɑɹk - wəd nid tə hɪɹ əɹ ɹipɔɹt. ʃi ɛntɝɾ ən wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə si ðət ɹɑnəm wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn. ə ɡɹup ə mɛn sæɾ ɑn ðə ɹʌɡ, klæn tʃifs ɛvɹi wʌn. hɝ sɪblɪŋz wɝ sɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ əz wɛl.

She dismissed her spear-sisters, then made her way directly to Ronam's tent. The clan chief - son of Rhuarc - would need to hear her report. She entered and was surprised to see that Ronam was not alone. A group of men sat on the rug, clan chiefs every one. Her siblings were sitting there as well.

"ɑ, pædʒɹə," ɹɑnəm sɛd. "ju hæv ɹɪtɝnd."

"Ah, Padra," Ronam said. "You have returned."

"aɪ kən kʌm bæk ənʌðɝ taɪm, ɹɑnəm," ʃi sɛd.

"I can come back another time, Ronam," she said.

"noʊ, jə wɝ wɑntəd fəɹ ðɪs miɾɪŋ. sɪɾ ən ʃɛɹ maɪ ʃeɪd."

"No, you were wanted for this meeting. Sit and share my shade."

pædʒɹə baʊɾ əɹ hɛɾ ət ði ɑnɝ i ʃoʊd hɝ. ʃi sæt bɪtwin əlɑɹtʃ ən dʒɑnduən, hɝ bɹʌðɝz. ðoʊ ðə fɔɹ sɪblɪŋz wɝ kwɑdʒɹu-plɛts, ðeɪ lʊk vɛɹi dɪssɪməlɝ. əlɑɹtʃ tʊk mɔɹ æftɝ ðɛɹ wɛtləndɝ saɪd, ən hæd dɑɹk hɛɹ. dʒɑnduən wɑz blɑn ən tɔl. bɪsaɪɾ ɪm mɹɪnə, ðɛɹ sɪstɝ, smɔl ə bɪld wɪð ə ɹaʊn feɪs.

Padra bowed her head at the honor he showed her. She sat between Alarch and Janduin, her brothers. Though the four siblings were quadru-plets, they looked very dissimilar. Alarch took more after their wetlander side, and had dark hair. Janduin was blond and tall. Beside him Marinna, their sister, small of build with a round face.

"aɪ ʃəd ɹipɔɹt," pædʒɹə sɛd tə ɹɑnəm, "ðæt ðə sintʃæn pətʃɹoʊl wɑz wɛɹ wi θɔt. wi ɛnɡeɪdʒ ðɛm."

"I should report," Padra said to Ronam, "that the Seanchan patrol was where we thought. We engaged them."

ðəɹ wɝ ənkʌmftəɹbəl mʌmbəlz əbaʊt ðæt.

There were uncomfortable mumbles about that.

"ɪɾ ɪz nɑɾ əɡɛns ðə dʒɹæɡənz pis fəɹ əm tə ɛntɝ ɑɹæd dumən" sɛd tɑvələd, klæn tʃif ə ðə ɡoʊʃin il.

"It is not against the Dragon's Peace for them to enter Arad Doman" said Tavalad, clan chief of the Goshien Aiel.

"nɔɹ ɪz ɪt ɹɔŋ fəɹ əs tə kɪl əm fəɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ tu kloʊs, klæn tʃif" pædʒɹə ɹɪplaɪd. "ði il ɑɹ nɑt baʊn baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡənz pis. ɪf ðə sintʃæn wɪʃ tə ɹɪsk ɪnspɛktɪŋ əɹ kæmp, ðən ðeɪ nid tə noʊ ðəɾ ɪts ə ɹɪsk."

"Nor is it wrong for us to kill them for getting too close, clan chief" Padra replied. "The Aiel are not bound by the Dragon's Peace. If the Seanchan wish to risk inspecting our camp, then they need to know that it is a risk."

sɛvɹəl ə ði ʌðɝz - mɔɹ ðən ʃi wʊɾə ɪkspɛktəd - nɑɾəd ət ðət kɑmɛnt. ʃi ɡlænst ət dʒɑnduən, ən i ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ. ʃi kʌvɝtli ɹeɪz tu fɪŋɡɝz. tu sintʃæn, dɛd baɪ hɝ spɪɹ. ʃi wʊɾə laɪk tə teɪk əm kæptɪv, bʌt ðə sintʃæn dɪd nɑt dɪzɝv tə bɪkʌm ɡeɪʃeɪn. ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ meɪd tɛɹəbəl pɹɪznɝz. bɛɾɝ tə spɛɹ əm ðə ʃeɪm ən lɛɾ əm daɪ.

Several of the others - more than she would have expected - nodded at that comment. She glanced at Janduin, and he raised an eyebrow. She covertly raised two fingers. Two Seanchan, dead by her spear. She would have liked to take them captive, but the Seanchan did not deserve to become gai'shain. They also made terrible prisoners. Better to spare them the shame and let them die.

"wi ʃəd spik wʌt wi keɪm tə seɪ," sɛɾ əlɔlvd, tʃif ə ðə tə-mənɛl il. pædʒɹə dɪɾ ə kwɪk kaʊnt. ɔl ɪlɛvən tʃifs wɝ əkaʊntəd fɔɹ, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðoʊz u hæd blʌɾ oʊðz əɡɛnst wʌn ənʌðɝ. ə miɾɪŋ laɪk ðɪs hædn bɪn sin ɪn jɪɹz, nɑt sɪns əɹ fɑðɝ hæd bɪn pɹipɛɹɪŋ fəɹ ðə læs bæɾəl.

"We should speak what we came to say," said Alalved, chief of the To-manelle Aiel. Padra did a quick count. All eleven chiefs were accounted for, including those who had blood oaths against one another. A meeting like this hadn't been seen in years, not since her father had been preparing for the Last Battle.

"ænd wʌd wi kʌm tə seɪ?" æskt wʌn ə ði ʌðɝz.

"And what did we come to say?" asked one of the others.

əlɔlvd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ðə spɪɹz ɡɹoʊ ɹɛsləs. ði il ɑɹ nɑt mɛn tə ɡɹoʊ fæɾ ɪn lʌʃ lænz, tɛndɪŋ kɹɑps. wəɹ wɔɹiɝz."

Alalved shook his head. "The spears grow restless. The Aiel are not meant to grow fat in lush lands, tending crops. We are warriors."

"ðə dʒɹæɡən æsk fəɹ pis," tɑvələd sɛd.

"The Dragon asked for peace," Tavalad said.

"ðə dʒɹæɡən æskt ʌðɝz fəɹ pis," əlɔlvd ɹɪplaɪd. "hi ɪkskluɾəd ði il."

"The Dragon asked others for peace," Alalved replied. "He excluded the Aiel."

"ðæɾ ɪz tʃɹu," sɛd dɑɹvɪn, tʃif ə ðə ɹn.

"That is true," said Darvin, chief of the Reyn.

"du wi ɹɪtɝn tə ɹeɪɾɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ æftɝ ɔl ə ðiz jɪɹz ə hoʊldɪŋ əɹ blʌd fjudz ɪn əbeɪəns?" ɹɑnəm æsk sɔfli. hi wɑz ən ɛksələn klæn tʃif, mʌtʃ əz ɹəɑɹk hæd bɪn. waɪz, jɛt nɑɾ əfɹeɪɾ ə bæɾəl.

"Do we return to raiding one another after all of these years of holding our blood feuds in abeyance?" Ronam asked softly. He was an excellent clan chief, much as Rhuarc had been. Wise, yet not afraid of battle.

"wʌt wəd bi ðə pɔɪnt?" æskt ʃɛdʒɹən, tʃif ə ðə dɛɹn il. ʌðɝz nɑɾəd. bʌt ðət ɹeɪzd ə lɑɹdʒɝ pɹɑbləm, wʌn əɹ mʌðɝ hæɾ ɔfən spoʊkən ʌv. wʌt wɑz ɪt tə bi il, naʊ ðət ðɛɹ duɾi tə ðə pæs hæd bɪn fʊlfɪld, ðɛɹ toʊ əz ə pipəl klɛnzd?

"What would be the point?" asked Shedren, chief of the Daryne Aiel. Others nodded. But that raised a larger problem, one her mother had often spoken of. What was it to be Aiel, now that their duty to the past had been fulfilled, their toh as a people cleansed?

"haʊ lɔŋ kən wi weɪt," əlɔlv sɛd, "noʊɪŋ ðət ðeɪv il wɪmən kæptɪv wɪð ðoʊz bɹeɪslɪts ə ðɛɹz? ɪts bɪn jɪɹz, ən ðeɪ stɪl kəntɪnju tə ɹəfjuz ɔl ɔfɝz ə peɪmən ən bɑɹɾɝ!

"How long can we wait," Alalved said, "knowing that they have Aiel women captive with those bracelets of theirs? It has been years, and they still continue to refuse all offers of payment and barter!

ðeɪ ɹɪtɝn əɹ səvɪləɾi wɪð ɹudnəs ən ɪnsʌls."

They return our civility with rudeness and insults."

"wi ɑɹ nɑt mɛn tə bɛɡ," sɛɾ eɪdʒ bɹəən. "ði il wɪl sun bɪkʌm mɪlk-fɛd wɛtləndɝz."

"We are not meant to beg," said aged Bruan. "The Aiel will soon become milk-fed wetlanders."

ɔl nɑɾəd əɾ ɪz wɝdz. waɪz bɹəən hæd lɪv θɹu ðə læs bæɾəl.

All nodded at his words. Wise Bruan had lived through the Last Battle.

"ɪf oʊnli ðə sintʃæn ɛmpɹɛs . . ." ɹɑnəm ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ən ʃi nu wʌɾ i wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ.

"If only the Seanchan Empress . . ." Ronam shook his head, and she knew what he was thinking.

ði oʊld ɛmpɹɛs, ðə wʌn u hæd ɹul dʊɹɪŋ ðə deɪz ə ðə læs bæɾəl, hæd bɪn kənsɪɾɝd ə wʊmən ʌv ɑnɝ baɪ ɹɑnəmz fɑðɝ. ən ʌndɝstændɪŋ hæd nɪɹli bɪn ɹitʃt wɪð hɝ, soʊ ɪt wɑz sɛd. bʌt mɛni jɪɹz hæd pæst sɪns əɹ ɹul.

The old empress, the one who had ruled during the days of the Last Battle, had been considered a woman of honor by Ronam's father. An understanding had nearly been reached with her, so it was said. But many years had passed since her rule.

"ɹəɡɑɹdləs," ɹɑnəm kəntɪnjud, "ðə spɪɹz klæʃ; əɹ pipəl faɪt wən ðeɪ mit. ɪts əɹ neɪtʃɝ. ɪf ðə sintʃæn woʊn lɪsən tə ɹizən, ðən wʌt kɑz də wɪv tə liv əm bi?"

"Regardless," Ronam continued, "the spears clash; our people fight when they meet. It is our nature. If the Seanchan won't listen to reason, then what cause do we have to leave them be?"

"ðɪs pis ə ðə dʒɹæɡənz wɪl nɑt læs lɔŋ, ɛniweɪ," əlɔlv sɛd. "skɝmɪʃɪz bɪtwin ðə neɪʃənz ɑɹ kɑmən, ðoʊ nʌn spik ə ðɛm. ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn ɹikwaɪɝd pɹɑməsəz ə ðə mɑnɑɹks, bʌt ðəɹ ɪz noʊ ɛnfɔɹsmənt. mɛni wɛtləndɝz kænɑt bi hɛld ət ðɛɹ wɝd, ən aɪ wɝi ðət ðə sintʃæn wɪl dɪvaʊɝ əm waɪl ðeɪ skwɑbəl."

"This peace of the Dragon's will not last long, anyway," Alalved said. "Skirmishes between the nations are common, though none speak of them. The Car'a'carn required promises of the monarchs, but there is no enforcement. Many wetlanders cannot be held at their word, and I worry that the Seanchan will devour them while they squabble."

ðəɹ wɝ mɛni nɑdz. oʊnli dɑɹvɪn ən tɑvələd dɪd nɑt sim kənvɪnst.

There were many nods. Only Darvin and Tavalad did not seem convinced.

pædʒɹə hɛld əɹ bɹɛθ. ðeɪ hæd noʊn ðɪs wɑz kʌmɪŋ. ðə skɝmɪʃɪz wɪð ðə sintʃæn, ðə ɹɛsləsnəs ə ðə klænz. ʃi hæd dʒɹimd ə ðɪs deɪ, bʌt fɪɹɾ ɪɾ əz wɛl. hɝ mʌðɝ hæd ɡeɪnd ɡɹeɪt dʒi ɪn bæɾəl. pædʒɹə hæd hæd fju tʃænsəz tə pɹuv hɝsɛlf.

Padra held her breath. They had known this was coming. The skirmishes with the Seanchan, the restlessness of the clans. She had dreamed of this day, but feared it as well. Her mother had gained great ji in battle. Padra had had few chances to prove herself.

ə wɔɹ wɪð ðə sintʃæn . . . ðə pɹɑspɛkt ɪnvɪɡɝeɪɾɪd hɝ. bʌɾ ɪt wəɾ ɔlsoʊ min mʌtʃ dɛθ.

A war with the Seanchan . . . the prospect invigorated her. But it would also mean much death.

"wʌt seɪ ðə dʒɹæɡənz tʃɪlʒɹən?" ɹɑnəm æskt, lʊkɪŋ ət ðə fɔɹ ə ðɛm.

"What say the Dragon's children?" Ronam asked, looking at the four of them.

ɪt stɪl sim stʃɹeɪnʒ ðət ðiz ɛldɝz lʊk tə hɝ. ʃi tʃɛkt ɑn seɪaɪdɑɹ, kʌmftəɹbəl ɪn ðə bæk ə hɝ maɪnd, ən dʒɹu stʃɹɛŋkθ fɹəm ɪt. wʌt wəd ʃi də wɪθaʊɾ ɪt?

It still seemed strange that these elders looked to her. She checked on saidar, comfortable in the back of her mind, and drew strength from it. What would she do without it?

aɪ seɪ ðət wi mʌst ɹikleɪm əɹ oʊn u ɑɹ hɛl baɪ ðə sintʃæn," sɛd mɹɪnə. ʃi wɑz tʃɹeɪnɪŋ tə bɪkʌm ə waɪz wʌn.

I say that we must reclaim our own who are held by the Seanchan," said Marinna. She was training to become a Wise One.

əlɑɹtʃ simd ənsɝɾən, ən i ɡlænst ət dʒɑnduən. əlɑɹtʃ ɔfən dɪfɝd tə hɪz bɹʌðɝ.

Alarch seemed uncertain, and he glanced at Janduin. Alarch often deferred to his brother.

"ði il mʌst əv ə pɝpəs," dʒɑnduən sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ. "wi ɑɹ juz-lɛs əz wi ɑɹ, ən wi meɪd noʊ pɹɑməs nɑt tə ətæk. ɪts ə tɛstəmən tə əɹ peɪʃəns ən ɹɪspɛk fəɹ maɪ fɑðɝ ðət wɪv weɪɾəd ðɪs lɔŋ."

"The Aiel must have a purpose," Janduin said, nodding. "We are use-less as we are, and we made no promise not to attack. It is a testament to our patience and respect for my father that we have waited this long."

aɪz tɝn tə pædʒɹə. "ðeɪ ɑɹ əɹ ɛnəmiz," ʃi sɛd.

Eyes turned to Padra. "They are our enemies," she said.

wʌn baɪ wʌn, ðə mɛn ɪn ðə ɹum nɑɾəd. ɪt sim sətʃ ə sɝnpəl ɪvɛn tə ɛn jɪɹz ʌv weɪɾɪŋ.

One by one, the men in the room nodded. It seemed such a sirnple event to end years of waiting.

"ɡoʊ tə jəɹ klænz." ɹɑnəm stʊɾ ʌp. "pɹipɛɹ ðɛm."

"Go to your clans." Ronam stood up. "Prepare them."

pædʒɹə ɹɪmeɪn siɾəd əz ði ʌðɝz sɛd ðɛɹ fɛɹwɛlz, səm sɑmbɝ, ʌðɝz ɪksaɪɾəd. sɛvəntin jɪɹz wɑz tu lɔŋ fəɹ ði il tə bi wɪθaʊt bæɾəl.

Padra remained seated as the others said their farewells, some somber, others excited. Seventeen years was too long for the Aiel to be without battle.

sun, ðə tɛnt wɑz ɛmpti seɪv fəɹ pædʒɹə. ʃi weɪɾəd, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ɹʌɡ bɪfɔɹ hɝ. wɔɹ. ʃi wɑz ɪksaɪɾəd, bʌɾ ənʌðɝ pɑɹɾ ə hɝ wɑz sɑmbɝ.. ʃi fɛlt əz ɪf ʃi hæd sɛt ðə klænz ɑn ə pæθ ðət wəd tʃeɪnʒ əm fɝɛvɝ.

Soon, the tent was empty save for Padra. She waited, staring at the rug before her. War. She was excited, but another part of her was somber.. She felt as if she had set the clans on a path that would change them forever.

"pædʒɹə?" ə vɔɪs æskt.

"Padra?" a voice asked.

ʃi tɝn tə si ɹɑnəm stændɪŋ ɪn ði ɛntʃɹɪweɪ tə ðə tɛnt. ʃi blʌʃt ən stʊd. ðoʊ hi wɑz tɛn jɪɹz əɹ sinjɝ, hi wɑz kwaɪt hænsəm. ʃid nɛvɝ ɡɪv ʌp ðə spɪɹ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ ɪf ʃi dɪd. . . .

She turned to see Ronam standing in the entryway to the tent. She blushed and stood. Though he was ten years her senior, he was quite handsome. She'd never give up the spear, of course, but if she did. . . .

"ju sim wɝid," hi sɛd.

"You seem worried," he said.

"aɪ wɑz sɪmpli θɪŋkɪŋ."

"I was simply thinking."

"əbaʊt ðə sintʃæn?"

"About the Seanchan?"

"əbaʊt maɪ fɑðɝ," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd.

"About my father," she replied.

"ɑ." ɹɑnəm nɑɾəd. "aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ wən i fɝs keɪm tə koʊld ɹɑks hoʊld. aɪ wɑz vɛɹi jʌŋ."

"Ah." Ronam nodded. "I remember when he first came to Cold Rocks Hold. I was very young."

"wʌt wɑz jəɹ ɪmpɹɛʃən ə hɪm?"

"What was your impression of him?"

"hi wɑz ən ɪmpɹɛsɪv mæn," ɹɑnəm sɛd.

"He was an impressive man," Ronam said.

"nʌθɪŋ ɛls?"

"Nothing else?"

hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪm sɑɹi, pædʒɹə, bʌɾ aɪ dɪd nɑt spɛn mʌtʃ taɪm wɪð hɪm. maɪ pæθ lɛd mi ɛlswɛɹ. aɪ. . . hɝd θɪŋz, fɹəm maɪ fɑðɝ, ðoʊ."

He shook his head. "I'm sorry, Padra, but I did not spend much time with him. My path led me elsewhere. I. . . heard things, from my father, though."

ʃi kɑkt əɹ hɛd.

She cocked her head.

ɹɑnəm tɝn ən lʊkt aʊt ði oʊpən tɛn flæps, təwɔɹd ðə ɡɹin ɡɹæs bɪɑnd. "maɪ fɑðɝ kɔld ɹænd ælθɹ ə klɛvɝ mæn ən ɡɹeɪt liɾɝ, bʌt wʌn u dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt tə də wɪð ði il. aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪm seɪɪŋ ðət wən ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn wɑz əmʌŋ ʌs, hi dɪd nɑt fil laɪk wʌn ʌv ʌs. əz ɪf wi meɪɾ ɪm ənkʌmftəɹbəl." ɹɑnəm ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls wɑz plæn fɔɹ, bʌt ði il wɝ lɛft ədʒɹɪft."

Ronam turned and looked out the open tent flaps, toward the green grass beyond. "My father called Rand al'Thor a clever man and great leader, but one who did not know what to do with the Aiel. I remember him saying that when the Car'a'carn was among us, he did not feel like one of us. As if we made him uncomfortable." Ronam shook his head. "Everyone else was planned for, but the Aiel were left adrift."

"sʌm seɪ wi ʃʊɾə ɹɪtɝn tə ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd," ʃi sɛd- "noʊ," ɹɑnəm sɛd. "noʊ, ðət wʊɾə dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ʌs. əɹ fɑðɝz nu nʌθɪŋ ə stieɪmhɔɹsɪz əɹ dʒɹæɡən tubz. wɝ ði il tə ɹɪtɝn tə ðə weɪst, wi wʊɾə bɪkʌm ɪɹɛləvənt. ðə wɝld wəd pæs əs baɪ, ən wi wəd vænɪʃ əz ə pipəl." "bʌt wɔɹ?" pædʒɹə sɛd. "ɪz ɪt ɹaɪt?" "aɪ də nɑt noʊ," ɹɑnəm sɛd sɔfli. "wi ɑɹ il.

"Some say we should have returned to the Three-fold Land," she said- "No," Ronam said. "No, that would have destroyed us. Our fathers knew nothing of steamhorses or dragon tubes. Were the Aiel to return to the Waste, we would have become irrelevant. The world would pass us by, and we would vanish as a people." "But war?" Padra said. "Is it right?" "I do not know," Ronam said softly. "We are Aiel.

ɪts wʌt wi noʊ haʊ tə du."

It is what we know how to do."

pædʒɹə nɑɾəd, filɪŋ mɔɹ sɝɾən.

Padra nodded, feeling more certain.

ði il wəd ɹaɪd tə wɔɹ əɡɛn. ən ðəɹ wəd bi mʌtʃ ɑnɝ ɪn ɪt.

The Aiel would ride to war again. And there would be much honor in it.

eɪvinhə blɪŋkt. ðə skaɪ wɑz dɑɹk.

Aviendha blinked. The sky was dark.

ʃi wɑz ɪɡzɔstəd. hɝ maɪnd wɑz dʒɹeɪnd, hɝ hɑɹɾ oʊpənd - əz ɪf bliɾɪŋ aʊt stʃɹɛŋkθ wɪð ɛvɹi bit. ʃi sæt daʊn ɪn ðə mɪdst ə ðə dɪmɪŋ kɑləmz. hɝ . . . tʃɪlʒɹən. ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðɛɹ feɪsəz fɹəm əɹ fɝs vɪzət tə ɹɪɾiən. ʃi hæd nɑt sin ðɪs. nɑt ðət ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd, ət list.

She was exhausted. Her mind was drained, her heart opened - as if bleeding out strength with every beat. She sat down in the midst of the dimming columns. Her . . . children. She remembered their faces from her first visit to Rhuidean. She had not seen this. Not that she remembered, at least.

"ɪz ɪt dɛstɪnd?" ʃi æskt. "kæn wi tʃeɪnʒ ɪt?"

"Is it destined?" she asked. "Can we change it?"

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ænsɝ, ʌv kɔɹs.

There was no answer, of course.

hɝ tɪɹz wɝ dʒɹaɪ. haʊ dɪd wʌn ɹiæk tə siɪŋ ði ʌɾɝ dɪstʃɹʌkʃən - noʊ, ði ʌɾɝ dəkeɪ - ʌv wʌnz pipəl? itʃ stɛp hæd sim lɑdʒɪkəl tə ðə pipəl u tʊk ɪt. bʌɾ itʃ hæd teɪkən ði il təwɔɹd ðɛɹ ɛnd.

Her tears were dry. How did one react to seeing the utter destruction - no, the utter decay - of one's people? Each step had seemed logical to the people who took it. But each had taken the Aiel toward their end.

ʃəɾ ɛniwʌn əv tə si sətʃ tɛɹəbəl vɪʒənz? ʃi wɪʃt ʃid nɛvɝ stɛp bæk ɪndə ðə fɔɹəst ə pɪlɝz. wɑz ʃi tə bleɪm fəɹ wʌt wɑz tə hæpən? ɪt wɑz əɹ laɪn ðət wəd dum əɹ pipəl.

Should anyone have to see such terrible visions? She wished she'd never stepped back into the forest of pillars. Was she to blame for what was to happen? It was her line that would doom her people.

ðɪs wɑz nɑt laɪk ði ɪvɛns ʃi hæd sin wən pæsɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɹɪŋz dʊɹɪŋ əɹ fɝs vɪzət tə ɹɪɾiən. ðoʊz hæd bɪn pɑsəbɪləɾiz. ðɪs deɪz vɪʒənz simd mɔɹ ɹil. ʃi fɛlt ɔlmoʊst sɝɾən ðət wʌt ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɪɹiənst wɑz nɑt sɪmpli wʌn ə mɛni pɑsəbɪləɾiz. wʌt ʃi hæd sin wəɾ əkɝ. stɛp baɪ stɛp, ɑnɝ dʒɹeɪn fɹəm əɹ pipəl. stɛp baɪ stɛp, ði il tɝn fɹəm pɹaʊd tə ɹɛtʃɪd.

This was not like the events she had seen when passing into the rings during her first visit to Rhuidean. Those had been possibilities. This day's visions seemed more real. She felt almost certain that what she had experienced was not simply one of many possibilities. What she had seen would occur. Step by step, honor drained from her people. Step by step, the Aiel turned from proud to wretched.

ðəɹ hæd tə bi mɔɹ. æŋɡɹi, ʃi stʊɾ ʌp ən tʊk ənʌðɝ stɛp. nʌθɪŋ hæpənd. ʃi wɔkt ɔl ðə weɪ tə ði ɛdʒ ə ðə pɪlɝz, ðən tɝnd, fjʊɹiəs.

There had to be more. Angry, she stood up and took another step. Nothing happened. She walked all the way to the edge of the pillars, then turned, furious.

"ʃoʊ mi mɔɹ," ʃi dɪmændəd. "ʃoʊ mi wʌɾ aɪ dɪd tə kɑz ðɪs! ɪt lɪs maɪ lɪniədʒ ðət bɹɔɾ əs ɹuən! wʌɾ ɪz maɪ pɑɹɾ ɪn ɪt?"

"Show me more," she demanded. "Show me what I did to cause this! It lis my lineage that brought us ruin! What is my part in it?"

ʃi wɔkt ɪndə ðə pɪlɝz əɡɛn.

She walked into the pillars again.

nʌθɪŋ. ðeɪ sim dɛd. ʃi ɹitʃt aʊɾ ən tʌtʃt wʌn, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ laɪf. noʊ hʌm, noʊ sɛns ə paʊɝ. ʃi kloʊzd əɹ aɪz, skwiz-ɪŋ wʌn mɔɹ tiɹ fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ʌv itʃ aɪ. ðə tɪɹz tʃɹeɪl daʊn əɹ feɪs, livɪŋ ə laɪn ə koʊld wɛtnəs ɑn əɹ tʃiks.

Nothing. They seemed dead. She reached out and touched one, but there was no life. No hum, no sense of Power. She closed her eyes, squeez-ing one more tear from the corner of each eye. The tears trailed down her face, leaving a line of cold wetness on her cheeks.

'kæn aɪ tʃeɪnʒ ɪt?" ʃi æskt.

'Can I change it?" she asked.

ɪf aɪ kænt, ʃi θɔt, wɪl ðət stɑp mi fɹəm tʃɹaɪɪŋ?

If I can't, she thought, will that stop me from trying?

ði ænsɝ wɑz sɪmpəl. noʊ. ʃi kəd nɑt lɪv wɪθaʊt duɪŋ sʌm-θɪŋ tə əvɝt ðət feɪt. ʃi hæd kʌm tə ɹɪɾiən sikɪŋ nɑlədʒ. wɛl, ʃi hæd ɹəsivd ɪt. ɪn mɔɹ əbʌndəns ðən ʃi hæd wɑntəd.

The answer was simple. No. She could not live without doing some-thing to avert that fate. She had come to Rhuidean seeking knowledge. Well, she had received it. In more abundance than she had wanted.

ʃi oʊpən əɹ aɪz ən ɡɹɪɾɪd əɹ tiθ. il tʊk ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi. il fɔt. il stʊd fəɹ ɑnɝ. ɪf ʃi wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn wsɪks nu ðə tɛɹɝz ə ðɛɹ fjutʃɝ, ðən ɪt wɑz əɹ duɾi - əz ə waɪz wʌn - tə ækt. ʃi wəd seɪv əɹ pipəl.

She opened her eyes and gritted her teeth. Aiel took responsibility. Aiel fought. Aiel stood for honor. If she was the only one wh6 knew the terrors of their future, then it was her duty - as a Wise One - to act. She would save her people.

ʃi wɔk fɹəm ðə pɪlɝz, ðən bɹoʊk ɪndə ə ɹʌn. ʃi niɾəd tə ɹɪtɝn, tə kənsʌlt wɪð ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz. bʌt fɝst ʃi niɾəd kwaɪət, aʊɾ ɪn ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd. taɪm tə θɪŋk.

She walked from the pillars, then broke into a run. She needed to return, to consult with the other Wise Ones. But first she needed quiet, out in the Three-fold Land. Time to think.


tʃæptɝ fɪfti


CHAPTER 50

tʃuzɪŋ ɛnəmiz


Choosing Enemies

ɪleɪn sæɾ æŋkʃəsli, hænz ɪn əɹ læp, lɪsnɪŋ tə ðə dɪstən bumz. ʃiɾ ɪntɛnʃənəli tʃoʊzən ðə θɹoʊn ɹum, ɹæðɝ ðən ə lɛs fɔɹməl ɑɾiəns tʃeɪmbɝ. tədeɪ, ʃi niɾəd tə bi sin əz ə kwin.

Elayne sat anxiously, hands in her lap, listening to the distant booms. She'd intentionally chosen the throne room, rather than a less formal audience chamber. Today, she needed to be seen as a queen.

ðə θɹoʊn ɹum wɑz ɪmpoʊzɪŋ, wɪð ɪts mədʒɛstɪk pɪlɝz ən lævɪʃ ɔɹnəmɛnteɪʃən. ɡoʊldən stænd- læmps bɝn ɪn ə lɔŋ dʌbəl ɹoʊ ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum, bɹeɪkɪŋ oʊnli fəɹ ðə pɪlɝz.

The throne room was imposing, with its majestic pillars and lavish ornamentation. Golden stand- lamps burned in a long double row on either side of the room, breaking only for the pillars.

ɡɑɹdzmɪn ɪn waɪɾ ən ɹɛd stʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm, bɝnɪʃt bɹɛstpleɪts ɡlimɪŋ. ðə mɑɹbəl kɑləmz wɝ mætʃt baɪ ðə θɪk kɹɪmzən ɹʌɡ, woʊvən wɪð ðə laɪən ʌv ændɝ ɪn ɡoʊld əɾ ɪts sɛntɝ. ɪt lɛd təwɔɹɾ ɪleɪn, wɛɹɪŋ ðə ɹoʊz kɹaʊn. hɝ ɡaʊn wɑz æftɝ ə tʃɹədɪʃənəl fæʃən ɹæðɝ ðən ðoʊz feɪvɝɾ ɪn kɔɹt ɹaɪt naʊ; ðə slivz wɝ waɪd, wɪð ðə kʌfs dɪzaɪn tə dʒɹup daʊn tə ə ɡoʊld-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd pɔɪn bɪniθ əɹ hænd.

Guardsmen in white and red stood in front of them, burnished breastplates gleaming. The marble columns were matched by the thick crimson rug, woven with the Lion of Andor in gold at its center. It led toward Elayne, wearing the Rose Crown. Her gown was after a traditional fashion rather than those favored in court right now; the sleeves were wide, with the cuffs designed to droop down to a gold-embroidered point beneath her hand.

ðət pæɾɝn wɑz ɛkoʊd baɪ ðə bɑɾəs, wɪtʃ wɑz haɪ ɪnʌf tə bi mɑɾəst, bʌt loʊ ɪnʌf tə ɹimaɪn ɔl ðəɾ ɪleɪn wɑz ə wʊmən. wʌn stɪl ənmɛɹid. hɝ mʌðɝ hæd mɛɹiɾ ə mæn fɹəm kɛɹhin ɝli ɪn əɹ ɹeɪn. ʌðɝz maɪt wʌndɝ ɪf ɪleɪn wəd də ðə seɪm tə səmɛn əɹ hoʊl ðɛɹ.

That pattern was echoed by the bodice, which was high enough to be modest, but low enough to remind all that Elayne was a woman. One still unmarried. Her mother had married a man from Cairhien early in her reign. Others might wonder if Elayne would do the same to cement her hold there.

ənʌðɝ dɪstən bum saʊndəd. ðə nɔɪz ə ðə dʒɹæɡənz faɪɹɪŋ wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ fəmɪljɝ. nɑt kwaɪɾ ə klæp ə θʌndɝ - loʊɝ, mɔɹ ɹɛɡjəlɝ.

Another distant boom sounded. The noise of the dragons firing was growing familiar. Not quite a clap of thunder - lower, more regular.

ɪleɪn hæd bɪn tɔt tə kənsil əɹ nɝvəsnəs. fɝs baɪ hɝ tuɾɝz, ən ðən baɪ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Elayne had been taught to conceal her nervousness. First by her tutors, and then by the Aes Sedai.

wʌtɛvɝ səm pipəl θɔt, ɪleɪn tʃɹəkən kəd kəntʃɹoʊl əɹ tɛmpɝ wən ʃi niɾəd tə. ʃi kɛpt əɹ hænz ɪn əɹ læp ən fɔɹst əɹ tʌŋ tə bi stɪl. ʃoʊɪŋ nɝvəsnəs wəd bi fɑɹ wɝs ðən æŋɡɝ.

Whatever some people thought, Elayne Trakand could control her temper when she needed to. She kept her hands in her lap and forced her tongue to be still. Showing nervousness would be far worse than anger.

daɪɛlɪn sæɾ ɪn ə tʃɛɹ nɪɹ ðə θɹoʊn. ðə steɪtli wʊmən wɔɹ i ɡoʊldən hɛɹ ənbaʊn ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ən ʃi wɑz wɝkɪŋ kwaɪətli əɾ ə hup ʌv ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi. daɪɛlɪn sɛɾ ɪt ɹɪlæks hɝ, pɹəvaɪɾɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ ðə hænz tə də waɪl ðə maɪnd wɑz bɪzi. ɪleɪnz mʌðɝ wɑz nɑɾ ɪn ətɛndəns.

Dyelin sat in a chair near the throne. The stately woman wore he golden hair unbound around her shoulders, and she was working quietly at a hoop of embroidery. Dyelin said it relaxed her, providing something for the hands to do while the mind was busy. Elayne's mother was not in attendance.

tədeɪ, ʃi maɪt bi tu mʌtʃ ʌv ə dɪstʃɹækʃən.

Today, she might be too much of a distraction.

ɪleɪn kʊdn əfɔɹd hɝsɛlf daɪɛlɪnz seɪm lʌɡʒɝi. ʃi niɾəd tə bi sin liɾɪŋ. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, "liɾɪŋ" ɔfən tʊk ðə fɔɹm ə sɪɾɪŋ ɑn əɹ θɹoʊn, aɪz fɔɹwɝd, pɹədʒɛktɪŋ dɪtɝməneɪʃən ən kəntʃɹoʊl waɪl ʃi weɪɾəd. ʃʊɹli ðə dɛmənstʃɹeɪʃən wɑz dʌn baɪ naʊ?

Elayne couldn't afford herself Dyelin's same luxury. She needed to be seen leading. Unfortunately, "leading" often took the form of sitting on her throne, eyes forward, projecting determination and control while she waited. Surely the demonstration was done by now?

ənʌðɝ bum. pɝhæps nɑt.

Another boom. Perhaps not.

ʃi kəd hɪɹ sɑf tʃæɾ ɪn ðə sɪɾɪŋ tʃeɪmbɝ tə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə θɹoʊn ɹum. ðoʊz haɪ sits stɪl ɪn keɪɛmlɪn hæd ɹəsivd ə ɹɔɪəl ɪnvɪteɪʃən tə mit wɪð ðə kwin ɪn ə dɪskʌʃən ə sænəteɪʃən ɹɪkwaɪɹməns fəɹ ðoʊz steɪɪŋ aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi. ðət miɾɪŋ wəd hæpən ət ðə stʃɹaɪk ə faɪv, bʌt ði ɪnvɪteɪʃənz hæd hɪntəd ðə haɪ sits wɝ tə ɝaɪv tu aʊɝz ɝli.

She could hear soft chat in the sitting chamber to the side of the throne room. Those High Seats still in Caemlyn had received a royal invitation to meet with the Queen in a discussion of sanitation requirements for those staying outside the city. That meeting would happen at the strike of five, but the invitations had hinted the High Seats were to arrive two hours early.

ðə wɝɾɪŋ ə ðə mɛsədʒ ʃʊɾə bɪn ɑbviəs. ɪleɪn wɑz gɑnə də sʌmθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt tədeɪ, ən ʃi wɑz ɪnvaɪɾɪŋ ðə haɪ sits ɝli soʊ ðət ðeɪ kəɾ ɛndʒɔɪ səm sæŋkʃən ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ. ðeɪ wɝ kɛpt wɛl səplaɪd wɪð dʒɹɪŋks ən smɔl dɪʃəz ə mits ən fɹuts ɪn ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum. laɪkli, ðə tʃæt ʃi oʊvɝhɝd wɑz spɛkjəleɪʃən əbaʊt wʌt ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə ɹɪvil.

The wording of the message should have been obvious. Elayne was going to do something important today, and she was inviting the High Seats early so that they could enjoy some sanctioned eavesdropping. They were kept well supplied with drinks and small dishes of meats and fruits in the sitting room. Likely, the chat she overheard was speculation about what she was going to reveal.

ɪf ðeɪ oʊnli nu. ɪleɪn kɛpt əɹ hænz ɪn əɹ læp. daɪɛlɪn kəntɪnjuɾ əɹ niɾəlwɝk, klɪkɪŋ əɹ tʌŋ tə hɝsɛlf əz pʊld aʊɾ ə ɹɔŋ stɪtʃ.

If they only knew. Elayne kept her hands in her lap. Dyelin continued her needlework, clicking her tongue to herself as pulled out a wrong stitch.

æftɝ ə nɪɹli ɪnsʌfɝəbəl weɪt, ðə dʒɹæɡənz stɑp saʊndɪŋ ən ɪleɪn fɛl bɝdʒɪt ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ðə pæləs. sɛndɪŋ əɹ wɪð ðə ɡɹup wɑz ðə bɛst weɪ tə noʊ wən ɪt wɑz ɹɪtɝnɪŋ. ðə taɪmɪŋ tədeɪ niɾəd tə bi hændəld wɪð æbsəlut kɛɹ. ɪleɪn bɹiðd ɪn ən aʊt tə stɪl əɹ nɝvz. ðɛɹ.

After a nearly insufferable wait, the dragons stopped sounding and Elayne felt Birgitte returning to the palace. Sending her with the group was the best way to know when it was returning. The timing today needed to be handled with absolute care. Elayne breathed in and out to still her nerves. There.

bɝdʒɪt wɑz ʃʊɹli ɪn ðə pæləs naʊ.

Birgitte was surely in the palace now.

ɪleɪn nɑɾəd tə kæptən ɡaɪbɑn. ɪt wɑz taɪm tə bɹɪŋ ɪn ðə pɹɪznɝz.

Elayne nodded to Captain Guybon. It was time to bring in the prisoners.

ə ɡɹup ʌv ɡɑɹdz ɛntɝɾ ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ, liɾɪŋ θɹi ɪndəvɪdʒəwəlz. snɪfəlɪŋ ɛɹəmɪlə wɑz stɪl plʌmp, dɪspaɪɾ əɹ kæptɪvəɾi. ði oʊldɝ wʊmən wɑz pɹɪɾi, əɹ maɪɾ əv bɪn, hæd ʃi bɪn wɛɹɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ɹæɡz. hɝ lɑɹdʒ bɹaʊn aɪz wɝ waɪd wɪð fɹaɪt. əz ɪf ʃi θɔɾ ɪleɪn maɪt stɪl ɛksəkjut hɝ.

A group of Guards entered a moment later, leading three individuals. Sniffling Arymilla was still plump, despite her captivity. The older woman was pretty, or might have been, had she been wearing more than rags. Her large brown eyes were wide with fright. As if she thought Elayne might still execute her.

ɛləniə wɑz fɑɹ mɔɹ ɪn kəntʃɹoʊl. ʃi, laɪk ði ʌðɝz, hæd bɪn stʃɹɪpt əɹ əɹ faɪn dʒɹɛs ən wɔɹ ə tæɾɝd ɡaʊn ɪnstɛd, bʌt ʃi hæd klin əɹ feɪs ən dʒɹɛst əɹ ɡoʊl hɛɹ ɪn ə nit bʌn. ɪleɪn dɪdn stɑɹv əɹ əbjuz əɹ pɹɪznɝz. hɝ ɛnəmiz ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ, ðeɪ wɝn tʃɹeɪɾɝz tə ændɝ.

Elenia was far more in control. She, like the others, had been stripped or her fine dress and wore a tattered gown instead, but she had cleaned her face and dressed her gold hair in a neat bun. Elayne didn't starve or abuse her prisoners. Her enemies though they were, they weren't traitors to Andor.

ɛləniə ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ɪleɪn. ðət vʌlpaɪn feɪs ə hɝz wɑz θɔtfəl, kælkjəleɪɾɪŋ. dɪd ʃi noʊ wɛɹ əɹ hʌzbənz ɑɹmi hæd vænɪʃt tə? ðət feɪs fɛlt laɪk ə hɪɾən naɪf, pɹɛs tə ɪleɪnz bæk. nʌn ə hɝ skaʊts hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə dɪskʌvɝ ɪts loʊkeɪʃən. laɪt! pɹɑbləmz ətɑp pɹɑbləmz.

Elenia regarded Elayne. That vulpine face of hers was thoughtful, calculating. Did she know where her husband's army had vanished to? That face felt like a hidden knife, pressed to Elayne's back. None of her scouts had been able to discover its location. Light! Problems atop problems.

ðə θɝd wʊmən wɑz nɑiən ɑɝɔn, ə slɪm, peɪl wʊmən huz blæk hɛɹ hæd lɔs mʌtʃ ʌv ɪts lʌstɝ dʊɹɪŋ əɹ kæptɪvəɾi. ðɪs wʌn hæd sim bɹoʊkən bɪfɔɹ ɪleɪn hæd teɪkən əɹ kæptɪv, ən ʃi kɛp bæk fɹəm ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən.

The third woman was Naean Arawn, a slim, pale woman whose black hair had lost much of its luster during her captivity. This one had seemed broken before Elayne had taken her captive, and she kept back from the other two women.

ðə θɹi wɝ pɹɑɾɪd tə ðə fʊɾ ə ðə θɹoʊnz deɪz, ðən fɔɹs daʊn ɑn ðɛɹ niz. ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ, ðə kɛɹhinɪn noʊbəlz wɝ ɹɪtɝnɪŋ nɔɪzəli fɹəm ðə dɛmənstʃɹeɪʃən ə ðə dʒɹæɡənz. ðeɪ wəɾ əsum ðət ðeɪd hæpən əpɑn ɪleɪnz dɪspleɪ baɪ æksəɾənt.

The three were prodded to the foot of the throne's dais, then forced down on their knees. In the hallway, the Cairhienin nobles were returning noisily from the demonstration of the dragons. They would assume that they'd happened upon Elayne's display by accident.

"ðə kɹaʊn æknɑlɪdʒɪz nɑiən ɑɝɔn, ɛləniə sɑɝən ən ɛɹəmɪlə mɑɹn," ɪleɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə laʊd vɔɪs. ðət stɪl ði aʊtsaɪd kɑnvɝseɪʃənz -  boʊθ ðoʊz ə ði ændɔɝən noʊbəlz ɪn ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum ən ðə kɛɹhinɪn aʊtsaɪɾ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ.

"The Crown acknowledges Naean Arawn, Elenia Sarand and Arymilla Marne," Elayne said in a loud voice. That stilled the outside conversations -  both those of the Andoran nobles in the sitting room and the Cairhienin outside in the hallway.

ʌv ðə θɹi, oʊnli ɛləniə dɛɹd ɡlæns ʌp. ɪleɪn mɛt ðə ɡeɪz wɪð wʌn əz hɑɹɾ əz stoʊn, ən ðə wʊmən blʌʃt bɪfɔɹ lʊkɪŋ daʊn əɡɛn. daɪɛlɪn hæd pʊɾ əweɪ hɝ niɾəlwɝk ən wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ kloʊsli.

Of the three, only Elenia dared glance up. Elayne met the gaze with one as hard as stone, and the woman blushed before looking down again. Dyelin had put away her needlework and was watching closely.

"ðə kɹaʊn əz ɡɪvən mʌtʃ θɔt tə jə θɹi," ɪleɪn pɹənaʊnst. "jɔɹ mɪsɡaɪɾɪd wɔɹ əɡɛns tʃɹəkən əz lɛf jə dɛstətut, ən ɹɪkwɛsts fəɹ ɹænsəm əv bɪn tɝn əweɪ baɪ jəɹ ɛɹz ən siənz. jəɹ oʊn haʊsəz əv əbændən ju."

"The Crown has given much thought to you three," Elayne pronounced. "Your misguided war against Trakand has left you destitute, and requests for ransom have been turned away by your heirs and scions. Your own Houses have abandoned you."

hɝ wɝdz ɹæŋ ɪn ðə ɡɹæn θɹoʊn ɹum. ðə wɪmən bɪfɔɹ əɹ baʊd daʊn fɝðɝ.

Her words rang in the grand throne room. The women before her bowed down further.

"ðɪs livz ðə kɹaʊn wɪð ə kənʌnʒɹəm," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ju vɛks əs wɪð jəɹ tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ ɪɡzɪstənsɪz. pɝhæps səm kwinz wʊɾə lɛf jə tə pɹɪzən, bʌɾ aɪ faɪn ðət ɹiks ʌv ɪndɪsɪʒən.

"This leaves the Crown with a conundrum," Elayne said. "You vex us with your troubling existences. Perhaps some queens would have left you to prison, but I find that reeks of indecision.

jə wəd dʒɹeɪn maɪ ɹisɔɹsɪz ən meɪk mɛn wɪspɝ ʌv weɪz tə fɹi ju."

You would drain my resources and make men whisper of ways to free you."

ðə hɔl fɛl saɪlən seɪv fəɹ ðə hʌski bɹiðɪŋ ə ðə pɹɪznɝz.

The hall fell silent save for the husky breathing of the prisoners.

"ðɪs kɹaʊn ɪz nɑt pɹoʊn tə ɪndɛsɪsɪvnəs," ɪleɪn pɹənaʊnst. "ɑn ðɪs deɪ, haʊsəz sɑɝənd, mɑɹn ən ɑɝɔn ɑɹ stʃɹɪpt ə taɪɾəl ən ɪsteɪt, ðɛɹ lænz fɔɹfɪt tə ðə kɹaʊn ɪn ɹɛtʃɹəbjuʃən fəɹ ðɛɹ kɹaɪmz."

"This Crown is not prone to indecisiveness," Elayne pronounced. "On this day, Houses Sarand, Marne and Arawn are stripped of title and estate, their lands forfeit to the Crown in retribution for their crimes."

ɛləniə ɡæspt, lʊkɪŋ ʌp. ɛɹəmɪlə ɡɹoʊnd, slaʊtʃɪŋ daʊn ɑn ðə laɪən-sɛntɝd ɹʌɡ. nɑiən dɪd nɑt ɹɪspɑnd. ʃi sim nʌm.

Elenia gasped, looking up. Arymilla groaned, slouching down on the lion-centered rug. Naean did not respond. She seemed numb.

mɝmɝɪŋ ɹoʊz ɪmiɾiətli fɹəm ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum. ðɪs wɑz wɝs ðən ən ɛksəkjuʃən. wən noʊbəlz wɝ ɛksəkjuɾəd, ðeɪ wɝ ət list ɛksəkjuɾəd wɪð ðɛɹ taɪɾəlz - ɪn ə weɪ, ən ɛksəkjuʃən wɑz ən æknɑlɪdʒmən ʌv ə wɝði foʊ. ðə taɪɾəl ən lænz pæst ɑn tə ði ɛɹ, ən ðə haʊs sɝvaɪvd.

Murmuring rose immediately from the sitting room. This was worse than an execution. When nobles were executed, they were at least executed with their titles - in a way, an execution was an acknowledgment of a worthy foe. The title and lands passed on to the heir, and the House survived.

bʌt ðɪs . . . ðɪs wɑz sʌmθɪŋ fju kwinz wəɾ ɛvɝ ətɛmpt. ɪf ɪleɪn wɝ sin əz sizɪŋ læn ən mʌni fəɹ ðə θɹoʊn, ði ʌðɝ noʊbəl wəd junaɪɾ əɡɛns hɝ. ʃi kəd ɡɛs ðə kɑnvɝseɪʃənz ɪn ði ʌð ɹum. hɝ paʊɝ beɪs wɑz ʃeɪki. hɝ ælaɪz, hu hæd stʊd wɪð əɹ bɪfɝ ðə sidʒ ən feɪs ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ʌv ɛksəkjuʃən ðɛmsɛlvz, maɪt vɛɹi wɛl naʊ bɪɡɪn tə kwɛstʃən.

But this . . . this was something few queens would ever attempt. If Elayne were seen as seizing land and money for the throne, the other noble would unite against her. She could guess the conversations in the othe room. Her power base was shaky. Her allies, who had stood with her befor the siege and faced the possibility of execution themselves, might very well now begin to question.

bɛs tə muv ɑn kwɪkli. ɪleɪn dʒɛstʃɝd, ən ðə ɡɑɹdz pʊl ðə θɹi pɹɪznɝz tə ðɛɹ fiɾ ən ðən lɛɾ əm tə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum ivən dɪfaɪən ɛləniə sim stʌnd. ɪn ɛsəns, ðɪs pɹɑkləmeɪʃən wɑz ə pɹɑkləmeɪʃən ə dɛθ. əz sun əz pɑsəbəl, ðeɪ wəd kəmɪt suəsaɪd ɹæðɝ ðən feɪs ðɛɹ haʊsəz.

Best to move on quickly. Elayne gestured, and the Guards pulled the three prisoners to their feet and then led them to the side of the room Even defiant Elenia seemed stunned. In essence, this proclamation was a proclamation of death. As soon as possible, they would commit suicide rather than face their Houses.

bɝdʒɪt nu hɝ kju. ʃi ɛntɝd, liɾɪŋ ðə ɡɹup ə kɛɹhinɪn noʊbəlz. ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɪnvaɪɾəd tə ə dɪspleɪ ʌv ændɝz nu wɛpən fəɹ "dɪfɛndɪŋ əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ," ən wɝ ə mɪks bænd. ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪn ðə ɡɹup wɑz pɹɑbli iðɝ bɝtoʊm seɪɡən əɹ lɔɹstʃɹəm ɛɛsnən.

Birgitte knew her cue. She entered, leading the group of Cairhienin nobles. They had been invited to a display of Andor's new weapon for "defending against the Shadow," and were a mixed band. The most important in the group was probably either Bertome Saighan or Lorstrum Aesnan.

bɝtoʊm wɑz ə ʃɔɹt mæn wɪð ə kaɪndə hænsəmnəs, ðoʊ ɪleɪn wɑz nɑt fɑn ə ðə weɪ ðə kɛɹhinɪn ʃeɪvd ən paʊɾɝd ðɛɹ fɔɹhɛdz. hi wɔɹ ə lɑɹdʒ naɪf əɾ ɪz bɛlt - sɔɹdz hæd bɪn fɔɹbɪɾən ɪn ðə kwinz pɹɛzəns - ən sim dɪstɝbd baɪ ɪleɪnz tʃɹitmən ə ðə pɹɪznɝz. əz wɛl i ʃəɾ əv bɪn. hɪz kʌzən, koʊləveɪɪɹ, hæd ɹəsivd ə sɪməlɝ pʌnɪʃmən fɹəm ɹænd, ðoʊ ðət hæd nɑɾ əfɛktəɾ əɹ ɪntaɪɝ haʊs. ʃid hæŋ hɝsɛlf ɹæðɝ ðən feɪs ðə ʃeɪm.

Bertome was a short man with a kind of handsomeness, though Elayne was not fond of the way the Cairhienin shaved and powdered their foreheads. He wore a large knife at his belt - swords had been forbidden in the Queen's presence - and seemed disturbed by Elayne's treatment of the prisoners. As well he should have been. His cousin, Colavaere, had received a similar punishment from Rand, though that had not affected her entire House. She'd hanged herself rather than face the shame.

hɝ dɛθ hæɾ ɛləveɪɾɪd bɝtoʊm, ən waɪl hid bɪn vɛɹi kɛɹfəl nɑt tə meɪk pʌblɪk weɪvz əɡɛnst ɹændz ɹul, ɪleɪnz sɔɹsəz pɪkt ɪm aʊɾ əz wʌn ə ðə meɪdʒɝ pɹaɪvət kɹɪɾɪks ə ɹænd ɪn kɛɹhin.

Her death had elevated Bertome, and while he'd been very careful not to make public waves against Rand's rule, Elayne's sources picked him out as one of the major private critics of Rand in Cairhien.

lɔɹstʃɹəm ɛɛsnən wɑz ə kwaɪət, θɪn mæn u wɔkt wɪð ɪz hænz bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk, ən tɛndəd tə lʊk daʊn ɪz noʊz. laɪk ði ʌðɝz ɪn ðə ɡɹup, hi wɔɹ dɑɹk kloʊðɪŋ æftɝ ðə kɛɹhinɪn fæʃən, hɪz koʊt stʃɹaɪpt wɪð ðə kʌlɝz ə hɪz haʊs. hi hæd ɹɪzən tə pɹɑmənəns fɑloʊɪŋ ɹændz dɪsəpɪɹəns fɹəm kɛɹhin. dɛspɹɪt taɪmz meɪd fəɹ kwɪk ədvænsəz, ən ðɪs mæn hæd nɑt muvd əɡɛnst ɹænd tu kwɪkli, jɛɾ ɔlsoʊ hædn əlaɪd wɪð hɪm. ðət mɪɾəl ɡɹaʊnd ɡeɪv ɪm paʊɝ, ən səm wɪspɝd ðəɾ i wɑz kənsɪɾɝɪŋ sizɪŋ ðə θɹoʊn.

Lorstrum Aesnan was a quiet, thin man who walked with his hands behind his back, and tended to look down his nose. Like the others in the group, he wore dark clothing after the Cairhienin fashion, his coat striped with the colors of his House. He had risen to prominence following Rand's disappearance from Cairhien. Desperate times made for quick advances, and this man had not moved against Rand too quickly, yet also hadn't allied with him. That middle ground gave him power, and some whispered that he was considering seizing the throne.

ʌðɝ ðən ðoʊz tu, ðə kɛɹhinɪn hɪɹ wɝ ə smæɾɝɪŋ ʌv ʌðɝ noʊbɪləɾi. eɪlɪl ɹieɪɾən wɑz nɑt ðə hɛɾ ə hɝ haʊs, bʌt sɪns ðə dɪsəpɪɹəns ə hɝ bɹʌðɝ - ə dɪsəpɪɹəns ðət wɑz lʊkɪŋ mɔɹ ən mɔɹ laɪk dɛθ - ʃi hæɾ əsum paʊɝ. ɹieɪɾən wɑz ə paʊɝfəl haʊs. ðə slɪm, mɪɾəl- eɪdʒd wʊmən wɑz tɔl fəɹ ə kɛɹhinɪn, ən wɔɹ ə dɑɹk blu dʒɹɛs slæʃt wɪð kʌlɝz, hɝ dʒɹɛs ʃeɪp baɪ hups θɹu ðə skɝts. hɝ fæmli hæd hɛl ðə sʌn θɹoʊn ɹisənli, ɪf oʊnli fəɹ ə ɹɛləɾɪvli ʃɔɹt taɪm, ən ʃi wɑz noʊn tə bi ə voʊkəl səpɔɹɾɝ ʌv ɪleɪn.

Other than those two, the Cairhienin here were a smattering of other nobility. Ailil Riatin was not the head of her House, but since the disappearance of her brother - a disappearance that was looking more and more like death - she had assumed power. Riatin was a powerful House. The slim, middle- aged woman was tall for a Cairhienin, and wore a dark blue dress slashed with colors, her dress shaped by hoops through the skirts. Her family had held the Sun Throne recently, if only for a relatively short time, and she was known to be a vocal supporter of Elayne.

lɔɹɾ ən leɪɾi əsiɛlɪn, lɔɹɾ ən leɪɾi tʃuliəndɝd, lɔɹɾ ən leɪɾi hæmɝɑʃəl, ən lɔɹd mævəbwən hæd ɡæðɝd bɪhaɪn ðoʊz ə mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾəns. ɔl wɝ ə mɪɾəlɪŋ paʊɝ, ən ɔl - fəɹ wʌn ɹizən əɹ ənʌðɝ -  wɝ laɪkli ɹoʊdblɑks tə ɪleɪn. ðeɪ wɝ ə klʌstɝ ə kɛɹfəli dʌn hɛɹ ən paʊɾɝd fɔɹhɛdz, waɪd dʒɹɛsəz ɑn ðə wɪmən, koʊts ən tʃɹaʊzɝz ɑn ðə mɛn, leɪs ət ðə kʌfs.

Lord and Lady Osiellin, Lord and Lady Chuliandred, Lord and Lady Hamarashle, and Lord Mavabwin had gathered behind those of more importance. All were of middling power, and all - for one reason or another -  were likely roadblocks to Elayne. They were a cluster of carefully done hair and powdered foreheads, wide dresses on the women, coats and trousers on the men, lace at the cuffs.

"maɪ lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz," ɪleɪn sɛd, neɪmɪŋ itʃ haʊs ɪn tɝn. "ju hæv ɛndʒɔɪɾ ændɝz dɛmənstʃɹeɪʃən?"

"My Lords and Ladies," Elayne said, naming each House in turn. "You have enjoyed Andor's demonstration?"

"ɪndid wi hæv, jəɹ mædʒəsti," læŋki lɔɹstʃɹəm sɛd, boʊɪŋ ɪz hɛd ɡɹeɪʃəsli. "ðoʊz wɛpənz ɑɹ kwaɪt . . . ɪntʃɹiɡɪŋ."

"Indeed we have, Your Majesty," lanky Lorstrum said, bowing his head graciously. "Those weapons are quite . . . intriguing."

hi wɑz ɑbviəsli dɪɡɪŋ fəɹ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən. ɪleɪn blɛst əɹ tuɾɝz fəɹ ðɛɹ ɪnsɪstəns ðət ʃi ʌndɝstæn ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz. "wi ɔl noʊ ðət ðə læs bæɾəl kwɪkli əpɹoʊtʃɪz," ɪleɪn sɛd.

He was obviously digging for information. Elayne blessed her tutors for their insistence that she understand the Game of Houses. "We all know that the Last Battle quickly approaches," Elayne said.

"aɪ θɔt ðət kɛɹhin ʃəd bɛs bi əpɹaɪzd ə ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ʌv ɪts ɡɹeɪɾəst ən kloʊsəst ælaɪ. ðəɹ wɪl bi taɪmz ɪn ðə nɪɹ fjutʃɝ wən wɪl nid tə ɹɪlaɪ əpɑn wʌn ənʌðɝ."

"I thought that Cairhien should best be apprised of the strength of its greatest and closest ally. There will be times in the near future when we will need to rely upon one another."

"ɪndid, jəɹ mædʒəsti," lɔɹstʃɹəm sɛd.

"Indeed, Your Majesty," Lorstrum said.

"jɔɹ mædʒəsti," bɝtoʊm sɛd, stɛpɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. ðə ʃɔɹt mæn foʊldəɾ ɪz ɑɹmz. "aɪ əʃʊɹ ju, kɛɹhin ɪɡzʌls ɪn ændɝz stʃɹɛŋkθ ən stəbɪlɪɾi."

"Your Majesty," Bertome said, stepping forward. The short man folded his arms. "I assure you, Cairhien exults in Andor's strength and stability."

ɪleɪn aɪd hɪm. wɑz i ɔfɝɪŋ əɹ səpɔɹt? noʊ, ɪt simd i wɑz ɔlsoʊ dɪɡɪŋ, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ɪleɪn wəd dɪklɛɹ hɝsɛlf ə kændəɾeɪt fəɹ ðə sʌn θɹoʊn. hɝ ɪntɛntʃənz ʃʊɾə bɪn ɑbviəs baɪ naʊ - sɛndɪŋ səm ə ðə bæn tə ðə sɪɾi hæd bɪn ən ɑbviəs muv, nɪɹli tu ɑbviəs fəɹ ðə sʌɾəl kɛɹhinɪn.

Elayne eyed him. Was he offering her support? No, it seemed he was also digging, wondering if Elayne would declare herself a candidate for the Sun Throne. Her intentions should have been obvious by now - sending some of the Band to the city had been an obvious move, nearly too obvious for the subtle Cairhienin.

"wʊd ðət kɛɹhin hæd sɪməlɝ stəbɪlɪɾi," ɪleɪn sɛd kɛɹfəli.

"Would that Cairhien had similar stability," Elayne said carefully.

sɛvɹəl ə ðɛm nɑɾəd, noʊ daʊt hoʊpɪŋ ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə ɔfɝ wʌn ə ðɛm ðə θɹoʊn. ɪf ʃi θɹu ændɝz səpɔɹt bɪhaɪnd wʌn ə ðiz, ɪt wəd ɡɛɹənti hɪm əɹ əɹ vɪktɝi. ən ɪt wəd ɡɪv əɹ ə sɪmpəθaɪzɝ əz kɪŋ əɹ kwin.

Several of them nodded, no doubt hoping she intended to offer one of them the throne. If she threw Andor's support behind one of these, it would guarantee him or her victory. And it would give her a sympathizer as King or Queen.

ənʌðɝ maɪɾ əv meɪd ðət plɔɪ. nɑt hɝ. ðət θɹoʊn wəd bi hɝz.

Another might have made that ploy. Not her. That throne would be hers.

"ðə teɪkɪŋ ʌv ə θɹoʊn ɪz ə vɛɹi dɛləkət bɪznəs," lɔɹstʃɹəm sɛd. "ɪɾ əz pɹuvən . . . deɪnʒɝəs ɪn ðə pæst. ən soʊ mɛni ɑɹ hɛzɪɾənt."

"The taking of a throne is a very delicate business," Lorstrum said. "It has proven . . . dangerous in the past. And so many are hesitant."

"ɪndid," ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪ də nɑɾ ɛnvi kɛɹhin ði ənsɝɾənti ðəɾ ɪts noʊn ðiz læs mʌnθs."

"Indeed," Elayne said. "I do not envy Cairhien the uncertainty that it has known these last months."

ən naʊ ðə moʊmənt. ɪleɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "feɪst wɪð ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ændɝ, wʌn maɪt θɪŋk ðɪs wəd bi ən ɑbviəs taɪm tə hæv stʃɹɔŋ əlaɪənsəz. ɪn fækt, ðə θɹoʊn ɹisənli əkwaɪɝd sɛvɹəl ɪsteɪts ə noʊ smɔl minz. ɪɾ əkɝz tə mi ðət ðiz ɪsteɪts əv noʊ stuɝdz."

And now the moment. Elayne took a deep breath. "Faced with the strength in Andor, one might think this would be an obvious time to have strong alliances. In fact, the throne recently acquired several estates of no small means. It occurs to me that these estates have no stewards."

ɔl ɡɹu kwaɪət. ðə wɪspɝz ɪn ði ʌðɝ ɹum stɑpt. hæd ðeɪ hɝd kɝɛkli? hæɾ ɪleɪn ɔfɝɾ ɪsteɪts ɪn ændɝ tə fɔɹən noʊbɪləɾi?

All grew quiet. The whispers in the other room stopped. Had they heard correctly? Had Elayne offered estates in Andor to foreign nobility?

ʃi hɪɾ əɹ smaɪl. sloʊli, səm ə ðɛm ɡɑɾ ɪt. lɔɹstʃɹəm ɡeɪv ə slaɪ smaɪl, ən i nɑɾəd tə hɝ ɛvɝ soʊ slaɪtli.

She hid her smile. Slowly, some of them got it. Lorstrum gave a sly smile, and he nodded to her ever so slightly.

"kɛɹhin ən ændɝ əv lɔŋ ʃɛɹd fɛloʊʃɪp," ɪleɪn kəntɪnjud, əz ɪf ði aɪdiə wɝ oʊnli naʊ əkɝɪŋ tə hɝ. "aʊɝ lɔɹdz əv mɛɹid jəɹ leɪɾiz, əɹ leɪɾiz jəɹ lɔɹdz, ən wi ʃɛɹ mɛni kɑmən bɑnz ə blʌɾ ən əfɛkʃən. aɪ ʃəd θɪŋk ðə wɪzdəm ʌv ə fju kɛɹhihɪn lɔɹdz wəd bi ə ɡɹeɪɾ ədɪʃən tə maɪ kɔɹt, ən pɝhæps ɛdʒəkeɪt mi əpɑn maɪ hɛɹəɾədʒ ɑn maɪ fɑðɝz saɪd."

"Cairhien and Andor have long shared fellowship," Elayne continued, as if the idea were only now occurring to her. "Our lords have married your ladies, our ladies your lords, and we share many common bonds of blood and affection. I should think the wisdom of a few Cairhiehin lords would be a great addition to my court, and perhaps educate me upon my heritage on my father's side."

ʃi lɑkt aɪz wɪð lɔɹstʃɹəm. wəɾ i baɪt? hɪz lænz ɪn kɛɹhin wɝ smɔl, ən ɪz ɪnfluəns ɡɹeɪt fəɹ ə taɪm - bʌt ðət kəd tɪp. ði ɪsteɪts ʃid siz fɹəm ðə θɹi pɹɪznɝz wɝ əmʌŋ ðə moʊst ɛnviəbəl ɪn əɹ kʌntʃɹi.

She locked eyes with Lorstrum. Would he bite? His lands in Cairhien were small, and his influence great for a time - but that could tip. The estates she'd seized from the three prisoners were among the most enviable in her country.

hi hæd tə si ɪt. ɪf ʃi tʊk ðə θɹoʊn ə kɛɹhin baɪ fɔɹs, ðə pipəl ən ðə noʊbɪləɾi wəd ɹəbɛl əɡɛns hɝ. ðət wɑz pɑɹʃəli lɔɹstʃɹəmz fɔlt, ɪf əɹ səspɪʃənz wɝ tʃɹu.

He had to see it. If she took the throne of Cairhien by force, the people and the nobility would rebel against her. That was partially Lorstrum's fault, if her suspicions were true.

bʌt wʌɾ ɪf ʃi ɡeɪv lænz wɪðɪn ændɝ tə səm ə ðə kɛɹhinɪn noʊbɪləɾi? wʌɾ ɪf ʃi kɹieɪɾəd mʌltəpəl bɑnz bɪtwin ðɛɹ kʌntʃɹiz? wʌɾ ɪf ʃi pɹuv ðət ʃi wəd nɑt stil ðɛɹ taɪɾəlz - bʌt wəɾ ɪnstɛd bi wɪlɪŋ tə ɡɪv səm ə ðɛm ɡɹeɪɾɝ hoʊldɪŋz? wəd ðət bi ɪnʌf tə pɹuv ðət ʃi dɪdn ɪntɛn tə stil ðə lænz ə ðə kɛɹhin noʊbɪləɾi ən ɡɪv əm tə hɝ oʊn pipəl? wəd ðəɾ iz ðɛɹ wɝiz?

But what if she gave lands within Andor to some of the Cairhienin nobility? What if she created multiple bonds between their countries? What if she proved that she would not steal their titles - but would instead be willing to give some of them greater holdings? Would that be enough to prove that she didn't intend to steal the lands of the Cairhien nobility and give them to her own people? Would that ease their worries?

lɔɹstʃɹəm mɛɾ əɹ aɪz. "aɪ si ɡɹeɪt pətɛnʃəl fəɹ əlaɪənsəz."

Lorstrum met her eyes. "I see great potential for alliances."

bɝtoʊm wɑz nɑɾɪŋ ɪn əpɹiʃieɪʃən. "aɪ tu, θɪŋk ðɪs kəd bi ɝeɪnʒd." niðɝ wəd ɡɪv ʌp ðɛɹ lænz, ʌv kɔɹs. ðeɪ sɪmpli plæn tə ɡeɪn ɪsteɪts ɪn ændɝ. wɛlθi wʌnz.

Bertome was nodding in appreciation. "I too, think this could be arranged." Neither would give up their lands, of course. They simply planne to gain estates in Andor. Wealthy ones.

ði ʌðɝz ʃɛɹd ɡlænsɪz. leɪɾi əsiɛlɪn ən lɔɹd mævəbwən wɝ ðə fɝs tu tə fɪɡjɝ ɪɾ aʊt.

The others shared glances. Lady Osiellin and Lord Mavabwin were the first two to figure it out.

ðeɪ spoʊk ət ðə seɪm taɪm, ɔfɝɪŋ əlaɪənsəz.

They spoke at the same time, offering alliances.

ɪleɪn stɪld əɹ æŋkʃəs hɑɹt, sɪɾɪŋ bæk ɪn ðə θɹoʊn. "aɪ hæv bʌt wʌn mɔɹ ɪsteɪt tə ɡɪv,"

Elayne stilled her anxious heart, sitting back in the throne. "I have but one more estate to give,"

ʃi sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ bɪliv ɪt kəd bi dɪvaɪɾəd.' ʃi wəd ɡɪv səm tə eɪlɪl ɔlsoʊ, tə kʌɹi feɪvɝ ən ɹɪwɔɹɾ əɹ səpɔɹt. naʊ fəɹ ðə sɛkən pɑɹɾ ə ðə plɔɪ. "leɪɾi sɑɝənd," ɪleɪn kɔl təwɔɹd ðə bæk ə ðə ɹum.

she said. "But I believe it could be divided.' She would give some to Ailil also, to curry favor and reward her support. Now for the second part of the ploy. "Lady Sarand," Elayne called toward the back of the room.

ɛləniə stɛp fɔɹwɝd, wɛɹɪŋ əɹ ɹæɡz.

Elenia stepped forward, wearing her rags.

"ðə kɹaʊn ɪz nɑt wɪθaʊt mɝsi," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ændɝ kænɑt fɝɡɪv jə fəɹ ðə peɪn ən sʌfɝɪŋ jə kɑzd. bʌɾ ʌðɝ kʌntʃɹiz əv noʊ sətʃ mɛmɹiz. tɛl mi, ɪf ðə kɹaʊn wɝ tə pɹəvaɪd jə wɪð ən ɑpɝtunəɾi fəɹ nu lænz, wəd ðəɾ ɑpɝtunəɾi bi teɪkən?"

"The Crown is not without mercy," Elayne said. "Andor cannot forgive you for the pain and suffering you caused. But other countries have no such memories. Tell me, if the Crown were to provide you with an opportunity for new lands, would that opportunity be taken?"

"nu lænz, jəɹ mædʒəsti?" ɛləniə æskt. "ʌv wɪtʃ lænz dʒju spik?"

"New lands, Your Majesty?" Elenia asked. "Of which lands do you speak?"

"ə junəfəkeɪʃən bɪtwin ændɝ ən kɛɹhin wəɾ ɔfɝ mɛni ɑpəɾunətiz," ɪleɪn sɛd.

"A unification between Andor and Cairhien would offer many oppotunities," Elayne said.

"pɝhæps juv hɝɾ ə ðə kɹaʊnz əlaɪəns wɪð ɡildən. pɝhæps juv hɝɾ ə ðə nuli ɹivaɪɾəlaɪzd lænz ɪn ðə wɛst ə ɹɛlm. ðɪs ɪz ə taɪm ʌv ɡɹeɪɾ ɑpɝtunəɾi. ɪf aɪ wɝ tə faɪn jə ən jəɹ hʌzbən ə pleɪs tə fɔɹm ə nu siɾ ɪn kɛɹhin, wəd jə teɪk wʌɾ ɪz ɡɪvən?"

"Perhaps you have heard of the Crown's alliance with Ghealdan. Perhaps you have heard of the newly revitalized lands in the west of realm. This is a time of great opportunity. If I were to find you and your husband a place to form a new seat in Cairhien, would you take what is given?"

"aɪ . . . wəd sɝɾənli kənsɪɾɝ ɪt, jəɹ mædʒəsti," ɛləniə sɛd, ʃoʊɪŋ ə ɡlɪmɝ ə hoʊp.

"I . . . would certainly consider it, Your Majesty," Elenia said, showing a glimmer of hope.

ɪleɪn tɝn tə ðə kɛɹhinɪn lɔɹdz. "fɔɹ ɛni ʌv ðɪs tə teɪk ɪfɛkt," ʃi sɛd, "aɪ wəd niɾ əθɔɹəɾi tə spik fəɹ boʊθ ændɝ ən kɛɹhin. haʊ lɔŋ, dʒju səspɛkt, maɪɾ ɪt teɪk fəɹ sətʃ ə sɪtʃueɪʃən tə bi ɝeɪnʒd?"

Elayne turned to the Cairhienin lords. "For any of this to take effect," she said, "I would need authority to speak for both Andor and Cairhien. How long, do you suspect, might it take for such a situation to be arranged?"

"ɹɪtɝn mi tə maɪ hoʊmlæn θɹu wʌn ə ðoʊz stʃɹeɪnʒ pɔɹɾəlz," lɔɹstʃɹəm sɛd, "ænd ɡɪmi wʌn aʊɝ."

"Return me to my homeland through one of those strange portals," Lorstrum said, "and give me one hour."

"aɪ niɾ oʊnli ə hæf ən aʊɝ, jəɹ mædʒəsti," bɝtoʊm pʊɾ ɪn, ɡlænsɪŋ ət lɔɹstʃɹəm.

"I need only a half an hour, Your Majesty," Bertome put in, glancing at Lorstrum.

"wʌn aʊɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd, hoʊldɪŋ ʌp əɹ hænz. "pɹipɛɹ wɛl."

"One hour," Elayne said, holding up her hands. "Prepare well."

"ɔl ɹaɪt," bɝdʒɪt sɛɾ əz ðə dɔɹ tə ðə smɔlɝ tʃeɪmbɝ kloʊzd. "wʌɾ ɪn ðə neɪm ə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz blʌɾi lɛf hæn dʒʌs hæpənd?"

"All right," Birgitte said as the door to the smaller chamber closed. "What in the name of the Dark One's bloody left hand just happened?"

ɪleɪn sæt daʊn. ɪt hæd wɝkt! əɹ ɪt simd əz ɪf ɪt wʊd. ðə plʌʃ tʃɛɹ wɑz ə kʌmfɝɾ æftɝ ðə stɪfnəs ə ðə laɪən θɹoʊn. daɪɛlɪn tʊk ə sit tə hɝ ɹaɪt; mɔɹɡeɪs sæt tə hɝ lɛft.

Elayne sat down. It had worked! Or it seemed as if it would. The plush chair was a comfort after the stiffness of the Lion Throne. Dyelin took a seat to her right; Morgase sat to her left.

"wʌt hæpənd," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd, "ɪz ðət maɪ dɔɾɝ ɪz bɹɪljənt."

"What happened," Morgase said, "is that my daughter is brilliant."

ɪleɪn smaɪld ɪn ɡɹæɾətud. bɝdʒɪt, haʊɛvɝ, fɹaʊnd. ɪleɪn kəd fil ðə wʊmənz kənfjuʒən.

Elayne smiled in gratitude. Birgitte, however, frowned. Elayne could feel the woman's confusion.

ʃi wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn ɪn ðə ɹum wɪð ðɛm; ðeɪ hæd tə weɪt wʌn aʊɝ tə si ðə tʃɹu ɹɪzʌls ʌv ɪleɪnz plɑɾɪŋ.

She was the only one in the room with them; they had to wait one hour to see the true results of Elayne's plotting.

"ɔl ɹaɪt," bɝdʒɪt sɛd. "soʊ jə ɡeɪv ʌp ə bʌntʃ ʌv ændɝz læn tə kɛɹhinɪn noʊbɪləɾi."

"All right," Birgitte said. "So you gave up a bunch of Andor's land to Cairhienin nobility."

"æz ə bɹaɪb," daɪɛlɪn sɛd. ʃi dɪdn sim əz kənvɪnst əz mɔɹɡeɪs. "ə klɛvɝ mənuvɝ, jəɹ mædʒəsti, bʌt deɪnʒɝəs."

"As a bribe," Dyelin said. She didn't seem as convinced as Morgase. "A clever maneuver, Your Majesty, but dangerous."

"deɪnʒɝəs?" bɝdʒɪt sɛd. "blʌɾ ən æʃəz, wɪl sʌmwʌn pliz ɪkspleɪn tə ði ɪɾiət oʊvɝ hɪɹ waɪ bɹaɪbɝi ɪz bɹɪljən əɹ klɛvɝ? ɪts hɑɹdli ɪleɪn u dɪskʌvɝɾ ɪt."

"Dangerous?" Birgitte said. "Blood and ashes, will someone please explain to the idiot over here why bribery is brilliant or clever? It's hardly Elayne who discovered it."

"ðɪs wɑz mɔɹ ðən ə ɡɪft," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd. ɪŋkɔŋɹuəsli, ʃi tʊk tə pɔɹɪŋ ti fəɹ ðoʊz ɪn ðə ɹum. ɪleɪn kʊdn ɛvɝ ɹikɔl siɪŋ əɹ mʌðɝ pɔɹ ti bɪfɔɹ. "ðə meɪdʒɝ ɑbstəkəl blɑkɪŋ ɪleɪn fɹəm kɛɹhin wɑz ðət ʃi wəd bi vjuɾ əz ə kɑŋkɝɝ."

"This was more than a gift," Morgase said. Incongruously, she took to pouring tea for those in the room. Elayne couldn't ever recall seeing her Mother pour tea before. "The major obstacle blocking Elayne from Cairhien was that she would be viewed as a conqueror."

"jɛs, soʊ?" bɝdʒɪɾ æskt.

"Yes, so?" Birgitte asked.

"soʊ ʃi meɪd bɑnz bɪtwin ðə tu neɪʃənz," daɪɛlɪn sɛd, æksɛptɪŋ ə kʌp ə tʃɹɛmælkɪŋ blæk fɹəm mɔɹɡeɪs. "baɪ ɡɪvɪŋ ðət ɡɹup səm læn ɪn ændɝ, ʃi ʃoʊz ðət ʃiz nɑt gɑnə ɪɡnɔɹ əɹ ɪmpɑvɹɪʃ ðə kɛɹhinɪn noʊbɪləɾi."

"So she made bonds between the two nations," Dyelin said, accepting a cup of Tremalking black from Morgase. "By giving that group some land in Andor, she shows that she's not going to ignore or impoverish the Cairhienin nobility."

"bɪɑn ðæt," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd, "ʃi meɪks hɝsɛlf lɛs ʌv ən ɑɾəti. ɪf ʃid teɪkən ðə θɹoʊn, ʃiɾ əv ɡeɪn ɪts lænz - ən bɪkʌm ði oʊnli pɝsən tə hæv hoʊldɪŋz ɪn boʊθ kʌntʃɹiz. naʊ ʃɪl bi wʌn ə mɛni."

"Beyond that," Morgase said, "she makes herself less of an oddity. If she'd taken the throne, she'd have gained its lands - and become the only person to have holdings in both countries. Now she'll be one of many."

"bʌɾ ɪts deɪnʒɝəs," daɪɛlɪn ɹɪpiɾɪd. "lɔɹstʃɹəm dɪdnt ɡɪv ɪn kəz ə ðə bɹaɪb."

"But it's dangerous," Dyelin repeated. "Lorstrum didn't give in because of the bribe."

"hi dɪdnt?" bɝdʒɪt sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "bʌt - "

"He didn't?" Birgitte said, frowning. "But - "

"ʃiz ɹaɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd, sɪpɪŋ əɹ ti. "hi ɡeɪv ɪn kəz i sɔ ðəɾ aɪ wɑz hændɪŋ ɪm ðə tʃæns fəɹ boʊθ θɹoʊnz."

"She's right," Elayne said, sipping her tea. "He gave in because he saw that I was handing him the chance for both thrones."

ðə ɹum fɛl saɪlənt.

The room fell silent.

"blʌɾi æʃəz," bɝdʒɪt faɪnəli swɔɹ.

"Bloody ashes," Birgitte finally swore.

daɪɛlɪn nɑɾəd. "ju hæv kɹieɪɾəd ɛnəmiz u kəɾ oʊvɝθɹoʊ ju, ɪleɪn. ɪf sʌmθɪŋ wɝ tə hæpən tə ju, ðəɹ ɪz ə ɡʊd tʃæns ðəɾ iðɝ lɔɹstʃɹəm əɹ bɝtoʊm kəd meɪk ə pleɪ fəɹ boʊθ kʌntʃɹiz."

Dyelin nodded. "You have created enemies who could overthrow you, Elayne. If something were to happen to you, there is a good chance that either Lorstrum or Bertome could make a play for both countries."

"aɪm kaʊntɪŋ ɑn ɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ðeɪɹ ðə tu moʊs paʊɝfəl noʊbəlmən ɪn kɛɹhin ɹaɪt naʊ, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli sɪns dɑbɹeɪn hæzən ɹɪtɝn fɹəm wɛɹɛvɝ ɹænd tʊk hɪm. wɪð əm æktɪvli səpɔɹɾɪŋ ði aɪdiə ʌv ə kɑmən mɑnɑɹk, wi æktʃəli  hæv ə tʃæns ət ðɪs."

"I'm counting on it," Elayne said. "They're the two most powerful noblemen in Cairhien right now, particularly since Dobraine hasn't returned from wherever Rand took him. With them actively supporting the idea of a common monarch, we actually have a chance at this."

"ðeɪl oʊnli bi səpɔɹɾɪŋ jə kəz ðeɪ si ə tʃæns ə teɪkɪŋ boʊθ θɹoʊnz fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz!"

"They'll only be supporting you because they see a chance of taking both thrones for themselves!"

daɪɛlɪn sɛd.

Dyelin said.

"bɛɾɝ tə tʃuz jəɹ ɛnəmiz ðən ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ɪɡnɝəns," ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪv ɪsɛnʃəli lɪməɾəd maɪ kɑmpətɪʃən. ðeɪ sɔ ðə dʒɹæɡənz, ən ðoʊz meɪɾ əm ɛnviəs. ðən aɪ ɔfɝɾ əm ðə tʃæns nɑɾ oʊnli tə ɡeɪn æksɛs tə ðoʊz wɛpənz, bʌt tə dʌbəl ðɛɹ wɛlθ. ən ɑn tɑp ə ðæt, aɪ ɡeɪv əm ðə siɾ ə pɑsəbɪləɾi ðət wʌn deɪ, ðeɪ maɪt bi neɪm kɪŋ."

"Better to choose your enemies than remain in ignorance," Elayne said. "I've essentially limited my competition. They saw the dragons, and those made them envious. Then I offered them the chance not only to gain access to those weapons, but to double their wealth. And on top of that, I gave them the seed of possibility that one day, they might be named king."

"soʊ ðəl tʃɹaɪ tə kɪl ju," bɝdʒɪt sɛd flætli.

"So they'll try to kill you," Birgitte said flatly.

"pɝhæps," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ɔɹ, pɝhæps ðəl tʃɹaɪ tə ʌndɝmaɪn mi. bʌt nɑt fəɹ mɛni jɪɹz - ə dɛkeɪd, aɪd ɡɛs. tə stʃɹaɪk naʊ wəd bi tə ɹɪsk ðə neɪʃənz dɪvaɪɾɪŋ əɡɛn. noʊ, fɝs ðəl ɪstæblɪʃ ðɛmsɛlvz ən ɛndʒɔɪ ðɛɹ wɛlθ. oʊnli wʌns ðəɹ sɝɾən ðət θɪŋz ɑɹ sɪkjʊɹ - ən ðəɾ aɪv ɡɹoʊn læks - wɪl ðeɪ muv. fɔɹtʃənətli, ðəɹ ɑɹ tu ʌv ðɛm, ən ðət wɪl lemi pleɪ ðɛm əɡɛnst wʌn ənʌðɝ. ən fəɹ naʊ, wɪv ɡeɪn tu stɔntʃ ælaɪz - mɛn u kinli wɑn maɪ bɪd fəɹ ðə sʌn θɹoʊn tə səksid. ðəl hæn ðə kɹaʊn ɹaɪt tə mi."

"Perhaps," Elayne said. "Or, perhaps they'll try to undermine me. But not for many years - a decade, I'd guess. To strike now would be to risk the nations dividing again. No, first they'll establish themselves and enjoy their wealth. Only once they're certain that things are secure - and that I've grown lax - will they move. Fortunately, there are two of them, and that will let me play them against one another. And for now, we have gained two staunch allies - men who keenly want my bid for the Sun Throne to succeed. They will hand the crown right to me."

"æn ðə pɹɪznɝz?" daɪɛlɪn sɛd. "ɛləniə ən ði ʌðɝ tu? dʒju ɹɪli ɪntɛn tə faɪn əm lænz?"

"And the prisoners?" Dyelin said. "Elenia and the other two? Do you really intend to find them lands?"

"jɛs," ɪleɪn sɛd. "wʌɾ aɪv dʌn fəɹ əm ɪz æktʃəli  vɛɹi kaɪnd. ðə kɹaʊn wɪl əsum ðɛɹ dɛts, ðən ɡɪv əm ə fɹɛʃ stɑɹɾ ɪn kɛɹhin, ɪlɛvən

"Yes," Elayne said. "What I've done for them is actually very kind. The Crown will assume their debts, then give them a fresh start in Cairhien, 11

ðɪs wɝks. ɪɾəl bi ɡʊd tə hæv ændɔɝən noʊbɪləɾi teɪkɪŋ lænz ðəɹ ðoʊ əl tɑbəbli hæv tə ɡɪv əm læn aʊɾ ə maɪ oʊn kɛɹənɪn "jul liv jsɛlf sɝaʊndəd baɪ ɛnəmiz," bɝdʒɪt sɛd, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd.

this works. It will be good to have Andoran nobility taking lands there though I will ptobably have to give them land out of my own Cairhenin "You'll leave youtself surrounded by enemies," Birgitte said, shaking her head.

"æz juʒəwəl," ɪleɪn sɛd. "fɔɹtʃənətli, aɪ hæv jə tə wɑtʃ oʊvɝ mi, ʃi smaɪld ət ðə wɔɹɾɝ, bɝ nu ðət bɝdʒɪt kəd sɛns əɹ nɝvəsnəs. ðɪs wɑz gɑnə bi ə lɔŋ aʊɝz weɪt.

"As usual," Elayne said. "Fortunately, I have you to watch over me, She smiled at the Warder, bur knew that Birgitte could sense her nervousness. This was going to be a long hour's wait.


tʃæptɝ fɪftiwʌn


CHAPTER 51

eɪ tɛstɪŋ


A Testing

ðə hɛɹ ɑn mɪnz nɛk ɹoʊz əz ʃi hɛl ðə kɹɪstəl sɔɹd. kælændɝ. ʃid hɝd stɔɹiz ə ðɪs wɛpən sɪns ʃi wɑz ə tʃaɪld, waɪl teɪlz ə dɪstən tiɹ ən ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ sɔɹd ðəɾ ɪz nɑɾ ə sɔɹd.

The hair on Min's neck rose as she held the crystal sword. Callandor. She'd heard stories of this weapon since she was a child, wild tales of distant Tear and the strange Sword That Is Not a Sword.

naʊ ʃi hɛld ɪɾ ɪn əɹ oʊn fɪŋɡɝz.

Now she held it in her own fingers.

ɪt wɑz laɪɾɝ ðən ʃiɾ ɪkspɛktəd. ɪts kɹɪstəlaɪn lɛŋθ kɑɾ ən pleɪd wɪð ðə læmplaɪt. ɪt sim tə ʃɪmɝ tu mʌtʃ, ðə laɪɾ ɪnsaɪd tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ivən wən ʃi dɪdn muv. ðə kɹɪstəl wɑz smuð, bʌt wɔɹm. ɪɾ ɔlmoʊs fɛlt əlaɪv.

It was lighter than she'd expected. Its crystalline length caught and played with the lamplight. It seemed to shimmer too much, the light inside changing even when she didn't move. The crystal was smooth, but warm. It almost felt alive.

ɹænd stʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, lʊkɪŋ daʊn ət ðə wɛpən. ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ðɛɹ ɹumz ɪnsaɪd ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ, əkʌmpənid baɪ kædzueɪn, nɛɹɪʃmə, mɛɹaɪs, nf ən tu meɪɾənz.

Rand stood in front of her, looking down at the weapon. They were in their rooms inside the Stone of Tear, accompanied by Cadsuane, Narishma, Merise, Naeff and two Maidens.

ɹænd ɹitʃt aʊt, tʌtʃɪŋ ðə wɛpən. ʃi ɡlænst ət hɪm, ən ə vjuɪŋ spɹæŋ tə laɪf əbʌv hɪm. ə ɡloʊɪŋ sɔɹd, kælændɝ; biɪŋ ɡɹɪpt ɪn ə blæk hænd. ʃi ɡæspt.

Rand reached out, touching the weapon. She glanced at him, and a viewing sprang to life above him. A glowing sword, Callandor; being gripped in a black hand. She gasped.

"wʌt dɪd jə si?" ɹænd æsk sɔfli.

"What did you see?" Rand asked softly.

"kælændɝ, hɛld ɪn ə fɪst. ðə hæn lʊks tə bi meɪɾ ʌv ɑnɪks."

"Callandor, held in a fist. The hand looks to be made of onyx."

"ɛni aɪdiə wʌɾ ɪt minz?"

"Any idea what it means?"

ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd.

She shook her head.

"wi ʃəd haɪɾ ɪɾ əweɪ əɡɛn," kædzueɪn sɛd. ʃi wɔɹ bɹaʊn ən ɡɹin tədeɪ, ɝθi kʌlɝz laɪɾənd baɪ hɝ ɡoʊldən hɛɹ ɔɹnəməns. ʃi stʊd wɪð ɑɹmz foʊldəd, bæk stʃɹeɪt. "fɔ! ɡɛɾɪŋ ði ɑbʒɛkt aʊt naʊ ɪz fulhɑɹɾi, bɔɪ."

"We should hide it away again," Cadsuane said. She wore brown and green today, earthy colors lightened by her golden hair ornaments. She stood with arms folded, back straight. "Phaw! Getting the object out now is foolhardy, boy."

"jɔɹ əbdʒɛkʃən ɪz noʊɾəd," ɹænd sɛd. hi tʊk ðə sɑŋɡɹil fɹəm mɪn, ðən slɪɾ ɪɾ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ɪndə ə ʃiθ ɑn ɪz bæk. əɾ ɪz saɪd, hi wʌns əɡɛn wɔɹ ði eɪntʃən sɔɹd wɪð ðə ɹɛd- ænd-ɡoʊl dʒɹæɡənz peɪntəɾ ɑn ðə ʃiθ. hid sɛd bɪfɔɹ ðəɾ i kənsɪɾɝd ðət tə bi ə kaɪndə sɪmbəl. ɪt ɹɛpɹəzɛntəd ðə pæs tə hɪm, ən kælændɝ - sʌmhaʊ - ɹɛpɹəzɛntəd ðə fjutʃɝ.

"Your objection is noted," Rand said. He took the sa'angreal from Min, then slid it over his shoulder into a sheath on his back. At his side, he once again wore the ancient sword with the red- and-gold dragons painted on the sheath. He'd said before that he considered that to be a kind of symbol. It represented the past to him, and Callandor - somehow - represented the future.

"ɹænd," mɪn sɛd, teɪkɪŋ ɪz ɑɹm. "maɪ ɹisɝtʃ . . . ɹɪmɛmbɝ, kælændɝ simz tə hæv ə dipɝ flɔ ðən wiv dɪskʌvɝd. ðɪs vjuɪŋ oʊnli ɹiɪnfɔɹsɪz wʌɾ aɪ sɛd bɪfɔɹ. aɪ wɝi ɪt meɪ bi juzd əɡɛns ju."

"Rand," Min said, taking his arm. "My research . . . remember, Callandor seems to have a deeper flaw than we've discovered. This viewing only reinforces what I said before. I worry it may be used against you."

"aɪ səspɛk ðəɾ ɪt wɪl," ɹænd sɛd. "ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls ɪn ðɪs wɝld əz bɪn juzd əɡɛns mi.

"I suspect that it will," Rand said. "Everything else in this world has been used against me.

nɛɹɪʃmə, ə ɡeɪtweɪ, pliz. wiv kɛp ðə bɔɹɾɝ-lændɝz weɪɾɪŋ lɔŋ ɪnʌf."

Narishma, a gateway, please. We've kept the Border-landers waiting long enough."

ði æʃəmən nɑɾəd, bɛlz ɪn ɪz hɛɹ tɪŋkəlɪŋ.

The Asha'man nodded, bells in his hair tinkling.

ɹænd tɝn tə nf "nf, ðəɹ əz stɪl bɪn noʊ wɝd fɹəm ðə blæk taʊɝ?"

Rand turned to Naeff "Naeff, there has still been no word from the Black Tower?"

"noʊ, maɪ lɔɹd," ðə tɔl æʃəmən sɛd.

"No, my Lord," the tall Asha'man said.

"aɪ hæv bɪn əneɪbəl tə tʃɹævəl ðɛɹ," ɹænd sɛd. "ðæɾ ɪmplaɪz ɡɹeɪt tʃɹʌbəl, wɝs ðən aɪ hæd fɪɹd. juz ðɪs wiv. ɪt kən dɪsɡaɪz ju. tʃɹævəl tə ə pleɪs ə deɪz ɹaɪɾ aʊtsaɪd, ən ɹaɪɾ ɪn, haɪɾɪŋ jɝsɛlf. si wʌt jə kən dɪskʌvɝ. hɛlp ɪf jə kæn, ən wən jə faɪn lɑɡən ən ðoʊz lɔɪəl tə hɪm, dɪlɪvɝ ɪm ə mɛsədʒ fəɹ mi."

"I have been unable to Travel there," Rand said. "That implies great trouble, worse than I had feared. Use this weave. It can disguise you. Travel to a place a day's ride outside, and ride in, hiding yourself. See what you can discover. Help if you can, and when you find Logain and those loyal to him, deliver him a message for me."

"wʌt mɛsədʒ, maɪ lɔɹd?"

"What message, my Lord?"

ɹænd lʊk dɪstənt. "tɛl əm ðəɾ aɪ wɑz ɹɔŋ. tɛl əm ðət wɝ nɑt wɛpənz. wɝ mɛn.

Rand looked distant. "Tell them that I was wrong. Tell them that we're not weapons. We're men.

pɝhæps ɪɾəl hɛlp. teɪk kɛɹ. ðɪs kəd bi deɪnʒɝəs. bɹɪŋ mi wɝd. əl nid tə fɪks θɪŋz ðɛɹ, bʌɾ aɪ kəɾ izəli stʌmbəl ɪndə ə tʃɹæp mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ðən ɛni aɪv əvɔɪɾəd soʊ fɑɹ. pɹɑbləmz ...

Perhaps it will help. Take care. This could be dangerous. Bring me word. I will need to fix things there, but I could easily stumble into a trap more dangerous than any I've avoided so far. Problems ...

soʊ mɛni pɹɑbləmz ðət nid fɪksɪŋ. ən oʊnli wʌn ə mi. ɡoʊ ɪn maɪ pleɪs, nf, fəɹ naʊ. aɪ niɾ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən."

so many problems that need fixing. And only one of me. Go in my place, Naeff, for now. I need information."

"aɪ. . . jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd." hi sim kənfjuzd, bʌɾ i dʌkt aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum tə oʊbeɪ.

"I. . . Yes, my Lord." He seemed confused, but he ducked out of the room to obey.

ɹænd tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ðən ɹʌb ðə stʌmp ə hɪz lɛft ɑɹm. "lɛts ɡoʊ."

Rand took a deep breath, then rubbed the stump of his left arm. "Let's go."

"ɑɹ jə sɝɾən jə doʊnt wɑnə bɹɪŋ mɔɹ pipəl?" mɪn æskt.

"Are you certain you don't want to bring more people?" Min asked.

"jɛs," ɹænd sɛd. "kædzueɪn, bi ɹɛɾi tə oʊpən ə ɡeɪtweɪ ən ɡɛɾ əs aʊɾ ɪf niɾəd."

"Yes," Rand said. "Cadsuane, be ready to open a gateway and get us out if needed."

"wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ ɪndə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ, bɔɪ," kædzueɪn sɛd. "ʃʊɹli jə hævən fɝɡɑɾən ðət wəɹ pɹɪvɛntɪd fɹəm tʌtʃɪŋ ðə sɔɹs waɪl ðɛɹ."

"We're going into Far Madding, boy," Cadsuane said. "Surely you haven't forgotten that we are prevented from touching the Source while there."

ɹænd smaɪld. "æn jəɹ wɛɹɪŋ ə fʊl pɛɹəlis-nɛɾ ɪn jəɹ hɛɹ, wɪtʃ ɪnkludz ə wɛl. aɪm sɝɾən jə kip ɪt fʊl, ən ðət ʃəd bi ɪnʌf tə kɹieɪɾ ə sɪŋɡəl ɡeɪtweɪ."

Rand smiled. "And you're wearing a full paralis-net in your hair, which includes a Well. I'm certain you keep it full, and that should be enough to create a single gateway."

kædzueɪnz feɪs ɡɹu ɪkspɹɛʃənləs. "aɪv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ə pɛɹəlis-nɛt"

Cadsuane's face grew expressionless. "I've never heard of a paralis-net"

"kædzueɪn sədaɪ," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli. "jɔɹ nɛɾ əz ə fju ɔɹnəməns aɪ doʊn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz - aɪ səspɛkt ɪts ə bɹeɪkɪŋ-ɛɹə kɹieɪʃən. bʌɾ aɪ wɑz ðəɹ wən ðə fɝst wʌnz wɝ dɪzaɪnd, ən aɪ wɔɹ ði ɝɪdʒənəl meɪl vɝʒən."

"Cadsuane Sedai," Rand said softly. "Your net has a few ornaments I don't recognize - I suspect it is a Breaking-era creation. But I was there when the first ones were designed, and I wore the original male version."

ðə ɹum fɛl stɪl.

The room fell still.

"wɛl, bɔɪ," kædzueɪn faɪnəli sɛd. "ju - "

"Well, boy," Cadsuane finally said. "You - "

"ɑɹ jə ɛvɝ gɑnə ɡɪv ʌp ðəɾ æfɛkteɪʃən, kædzueɪn sədaɪ?" ɹænd æskt. "kɔlɪŋ mi bɔɪ? aɪ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ maɪnd, ðoʊ ɪt dʌz fil ɑd. aɪ wɑz fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz oʊld ɑn ðə deɪ aɪ daɪd dʊɹɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. aɪ səspɛk ðət wəd meɪk jə maɪ dʒunjɝ baɪ sɛvɹəl dɛkeɪdz ət ðə list. aɪ ʃoʊ jə ɹɪspɛkt. pɝhæps ɪt wəd bi əpɹoʊpɹiət fəɹ jə tə ɹɪtɝn ɪt. ɪf jə wɪʃ, jə meɪ kɔl mi ɹænd sədaɪ. aɪ æm, soʊ fɑɹ əz aɪ noʊ, ði oʊnli meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ stɪl əlaɪv u wɑz pɹɑpɝli ɹeɪz bʌɾ u nɛvɝ tɝn tə ðə ʃædoʊ."

"Are you ever going to give up that affectation, Cadsuane Sedai?" Rand asked. "Calling me boy? I no longer mind, though it does feel odd. I was four hundred years old on the day I died during the Age of Legends. I suspect that would make you my junior by several decades at the least. I show you respect. Perhaps it would be appropriate for you to return it. If you wish, you may call me Rand Sedai. I am, so far as I know, the only male Aes Sedai still alive who was properly raised but who never turned to the Shadow."

kædzueɪn peɪl vɪzəbli.

Cadsuane paled visibly.

ɹændz smaɪl tɝn kaɪnli. "ju wɪʃt tə kʌm ɪn ən dæns wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, kædzueɪn. aɪm wʌɾ aɪ nid tə bi. bi kʌmfɝɾɪd -  jə feɪs ðə fɔɹseɪkən, bʌɾ əv wʌn əz eɪntʃən əz ðeɪ ət jəɹ saɪd." hi tɝn əweɪ fɹəm hɝ, aɪz ɡɹoʊɪŋ dɪstənt. "naʊ, ɪf oʊnli ɡɹeɪɾ eɪdʒ ɹɪli wɝ ən ɪndəkeɪʃən ʌv ɡɹeɪt wɪzdəm. əz izi tə wɪʃ ðət ðə dɑɹk wʌn wəd sɪmpli lɛɾ əs bi."

Rand's smile turned kindly. "You wished to come in and dance with the Dragon Reborn, Cadsuane. I am what I need to be. Be comforted -  you face the Forsaken, but have one as ancient as they at your side." He turned away from her, eyes growing distant. "Now, if only great age really were an indication of great wisdom. As easy to wish that the Dark One would simply let us be."

hi tʊk mɪn baɪ ði ɑɹm, ən təɡɛðɝ ðeɪ wɔk θɹu nɛɹɪʃ-mɑz ɡeɪtweɪ. bɪɑnd, ə smɔl klʌstɝ ə meɪɾənz weɪɾəd ɪnsaɪɾ ə wʊɾɪd klɪɹɪŋ, ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ə ɡɹup ə hɔɹsəz. mɪn klaɪmd ɪndə hɝ sæɾəl, noʊɾɪŋ haʊ ɹɪzɝv kædzueɪn lʊkt. əz wɛl ʃi ʃʊd. wən ɹænd spoʊk laɪk ðæt, ɪt tʃɹʌbəl mɪn mɔɹ ðən ʃi wɑntəd tə ədmɪt.

He took Min by the arm, and together they walked through Narish-ma's gateway. Beyond, a small cluster of Maidens waited inside a wooded clearing, guarding a group of horses. Min climbed into her saddle, noting how reserved Cadsuane looked. As well she should. When Rand spoke like that, it troubled Min more than she wanted to admit.

ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə smɔl θɪkɪt, daʊn təwɔɹd fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ, ən ɪmpɹɛsɪv sɪɾi sɛɾ ɑn ən aɪlən ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə leɪk. ə lɑɹdʒ ɑɹmi - flaɪɪŋ hʌnʒɹədz ə bænɝz - spɹɛɾ aʊɾ ɝaʊn ðə leɪk.

They rode out of the small thicket, down toward Far Madding, an impressive city set on an island in the middle of a lake. A large army - flying hundreds of banners - spread out around the lake.

"ɪts ɔlweɪz bɪn ə sɪɾi ʌv ɪmpɔɹɾəns, jə noʊ," ɹænd sɛd fɹəm bɪsaɪd mɪn, hɪz aɪz dɪstənt.

"It's always been a city of importance, you know," Rand said from beside Min, his eyes distant.

"ðə ɡɑɹɾiənz ɑɹ nuɝ, bʌt ðə sɪɾi wɑz hɪɹ lɔŋ əɡoʊ. ɹɛn dɛʃɑɝ, ɹɛn mədɔɹ, fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ.

"The Guardians are newer, but the city was here long ago. Aren Deshar, Aren Mador, Far Madding.

ɔlweɪz ə θɔɹn ɪn əɹ saɪd, ɹɛn dɛʃɑɝ wɑz. ði ɑnkleɪv ə ði ɪnkæstɑɹ - ðoʊz əfɹeɪɾ ə pɹɑɡɹɛs, əfɹeɪɾ ʌv wʌndɝ. tɝnz aʊt ðeɪ hæɾ ə ɹaɪt tə bi əfɹeɪd. haʊ aɪ wɪʃ aɪ hæd lɪsən tə ɡɪlɡeɪm . . ."

Always a thorn in our side, Aren Deshar was. The enclave of the Incastar - those afraid of progress, afraid of wonder. Turns out they had a right to be afraid. How I wish I had listened to Gilgame . . ."

"ɹænd?" mɪn sɛd sɔfli.

"Rand?" Min said softly.

ɪt dʒɹu hɪm aʊɾ ə hɪz ɹɛvɝi. "jɛs?"

It drew him out of his reverie. "Yes?"

"ɪz ɪt ɹɪli əz jə sɛd. ɑɹ jə fɔɹ sɛntʃɝiz oʊld?"

"Is it really as you said. Are you four centuries old?"

"aɪm nɪɹli fɔɹ ən ə hæf, aɪ səpoʊz. də maɪ jɪɹz ɪn ðɪs eɪdʒ æd tə ðoʊz aɪ hæd bɪfɔɹ?" hi lʊkt ət hɝ. "jɔɹ wɝid, ɑɹən ju? ðəɾ ɪm noʊ lɔŋɡɝ mi, ðə mæn jə nu, ðə fulɪʃ ʃifɝɾɝ?"

"I'm nearly four and a half, I suppose. Do my years in this Age add to those I had before?" He looked at her. "You're worried, aren't you? That I'm no longer me, the man you knew, the foolish sheepherder?"

"juv ɡɑɾ ɔl ə ðɪs ɪn jəɹ maɪnd, soʊ mʌtʃ pæst!'

"You've got all of this in your mind, so much past!'

"mɛmɹiz, oʊnli," ɹænd sɛd.

"Memories, only," Rand said.

"bʌt jəɹ hɪm, tu. jə tɔk laɪk jə wɝ ðə wʌn u tʃɹaɪd tə sil ðə bɔɹ. laɪk jə nu ðə fɔɹseɪkən pɝsənəli."

"But you're him, too. You talk like you were the one who tried to seal the Bore. Like you knew the Forsaken personally."

ɹænd ɹoʊɾ ɪn saɪləns fəɹ ə taɪm. "aɪ səpoʊz aɪm hɪm. bʌt mɪn, wʌt jəɹ mɪsɪŋ ɪz ðɪs: aɪ meɪ bi hɪm naʊ, bʌɾ i wɑz ɔlweɪz mi əz wɛl. aɪ wɑz ɔlweɪz hɪm. aɪm nɑt gɑnə tʃeɪnʒ dʒʌs kəz aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ - aɪ wɑz ðə seɪm. aɪm mi. ən aɪ ɔlweɪz əv bɪn mi."

Rand rode in silence for a time. "I suppose I am him. But Min, what you're missing is this: I may be him now, but he was always me as well. I was always him. I'm not going to change just because I remember - I was the same. I'm me. And I always have been me."

"luz θɝɪn wɑz mæd."

"Lews Therin was mad."

"æt ði ɛnd," ɹænd sɛd. "æn jɛs, hi meɪd mɪsteɪks. / meɪd mɪsteɪks. aɪ ɡɹu ɛɹəɡənt, dɛspɹɪt.

"At the end," Rand said. "And yes, he made mistakes. / made mistakes. I grew arrogant, desperate.

bʌt ðɛɹz ə dɪfɝəns ðɪs taɪm. ə ɡɹeɪt wʌn."

But there's a difference this time. A great one."

"wʌt dɪfɝəns?"

"What difference?"

hi smaɪld. "ðɪs taɪm, aɪ wɑz ɹeɪz bɛɾɝ."

He smiled. "This time, I was raised better."

mɪn faʊn hɝsɛlf smaɪlɪŋ əz wɛl.

Min found herself smiling as well.

"ju noʊ mi, mɪn. wɛl, aɪ pɹɑməs ju, aɪ fil mɔɹ laɪk maɪsɛlf naʊ ðən aɪ hæv ɪn mʌnθs. aɪ fil mɔɹ laɪk maɪsɛlf ðən aɪ ɛvɝ dɪɾ əz luz θɝɪn, ɪf ðət meɪks ɛni kaɪndə sɛns. ɪts kəz ə tæm, kəz ə ðə pipəl ɝaʊn mi. ju, pɛɹɪn, nɪneɪiv, mæt, eɪvinhə, ɪleɪn, mwɑ-ɹeɪn. hi tʃɹaɪd vɛɹi hɑɹd tə bɹeɪk mi. aɪ θɪŋk ɪf aɪd bɪn ðə seɪm əz aɪ wɑz soʊ lɔŋ əɡoʊ, hi wəɾ əv səksiɾəd."

"You know me, Min. Well, I promise you, I feel more like myself now than I have in months. I feel more like myself than I ever did as Lews Therin, if that makes any kind of sense. It's because of Tam, because of the people around me. You, Perrin, Nynaeve, Mat, Aviendha, Elayne, Moi-raine. He tried very hard to break me. I think if I'd been the same as I was so long ago, he would have succeeded."

ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ əkɹɔs ðə mɛdoʊ sɝaʊndɪŋ fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ. əz ɛvɹiwɛɹ ɛls, ðə ɡɹin hɪɹ hæd dɪpɑɹɾəd, livɪŋ jɛloʊ ən bɹaʊn. ɪt wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ wɝs ən wɝs.

They rode across the meadow surrounding Far Madding. As everywhere else, the green here had departed, leaving yellow and brown. It was getting worse and worse.

pɹitɛn ðəɾ ɪt slʌmɝz, mɪn toʊl hɝsɛlf. ðə læn ɪzən dɛd. ɪts weɪɾɪŋ θɹu ðə wɪntɝ. ə wɪntɝ ə stɔɹmz ən wɔɹ.

Pretend that it slumbers, Min told herself. The land isn't dead. It's waiting through the winter. A winter of storms and war.

nɛɹɪʃmə hɪst sɔfli, ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪnd. mɪn ɡlænst ət hɪm. ði æʃəmənz feɪs hæd ɡɔn hɑɹd.

Narishma hissed softly, riding behind. Min glanced at him. The Asha'man's face had gone hard.

əpɛɹənli, ðeɪd pæst ɪnsaɪd ðə bʌbəl ə ðə ɡɑɹɾiənz ɪnfluəns. ɹænd ɡeɪv noʊ ɪndəkeɪʃən hid noʊɾəst. hi dɪdn sim tə bi hævɪŋ ðə tʃɹʌbəl wɪð sɪknəs wən i tʃænəld ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, wɪtʃ ɹɪliv hɝ. əɹ wɑz i dʒʌs kʌvɝɪŋ ɪt?

Apparently, they'd passed inside the bubble of the Guardian's influence. Rand gave no indication he'd noticed. He didn't seem to be having the trouble with sickness when he channeled any longer, which relieved her. Or was he just covering it?

ʃi tɝn əɹ maɪn tə ðə tæsk ət hænd. ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝ ɑɹmiz hæd nɛvɝ ɪkspleɪnd waɪ ðeɪd dɪfaɪd kʌstəm ən lɑdʒɪk baɪ mɑɹtʃɪŋ saʊθ tə faɪn ɹænd. ðeɪ wɝ niɾəd dɛspɝətli. ɹændz ɪntɝvɛntʃən ət mɛɹədɑn hæd seɪvd wʌt wɑz lɛft ə ðə sɪɾi, bʌɾ ɪf ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ wɑz hæpənɪŋ ɔl əkɹɔs ðə bɔɹɾɝ wɪð ðə blaɪt. . . .

She turned her mind to the task at hand. The Borderlander armies had never explained why they'd defied custom and logic by marching south to find Rand. They were needed desperately. Rand's intervention at Maradon had saved what was left of the city, but if that sort of thing was happening all across the border with the Blight. . . .

twɛnti soʊlʒɝz - lænsɪz əphɛld wɪð nɛɹoʊ, blʌd-ɹɛd bænɝz flæpɪŋ fɹəm əm laɪk stʃɹimɝz - ɪntɝsɛptəd ɹændz ɡɹup lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ɪt ɹitʃt ði ɑɹmi. ɹænd stɑpt ən lɛɾ əm əpɹoʊtʃ.

Twenty soldiers - lances upheld with narrow, blood-red banners flapping from them like streamers - intercepted Rand's group long before it reached the army. Rand stopped and let them approach.

"ɹæn ælθɹ," wʌn ə ðə mɛn ənaʊnst. "wi ɑɹ ɹɛpɹəzɛntəɾɪvz ə ðə junəɾi ʌv ðə bɔɹɾɝ.

"Rand al'Thor," one of the men announced. "We are representatives of the Unity of the Border.

wɪl pɹəvaɪɾ ɛskɔɹt."

We will provide escort."

ɹænd nɑɾəd, ən ðə pɹəsɛʃən stɑɹɾəd fɔɹwɝɾ əɡɛn, ðɪs taɪm wɪð ɡɑɹdz.

Rand nodded, and the procession started forward again, this time with guards.

"ðeɪ dɪdn kɔl jə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," mɪn wɪspɝd tə ɹænd. hi nɑd dɪd θɔtfəli. pɝhæps ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz dɪd nɑt bɪliv i wɑz tieɪtʃ dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

"They didn't call you Lord Dragon," Min whispered to Rand. He nod ded thoughtfully. Perhaps the Borderlanders did not believe he was th Dragon Reborn.

"du nɑt bi ɛɹəɡən hɪɹ, ɹænd ælθɹ," kædzueɪn sɛd, tʃɹɑɾɪŋ ʌp tə ɹaɪd bɪsaɪd hɪm. "bʌt də nɑt bæk daʊn. moʊs bɔɹɾɝləndɝz wɪl ɹɪspɑn tə stʃɹɛŋkθ wən ðeɪ si ɪt."

"Do not be arrogant here, Rand al'Thor," Cadsuane said, trotting up to ride beside him. "But do not back down. Most Borderlanders will respond to strength when they see it."

soʊ. kædzueɪn kɔld ɹænd baɪ neɪm, ɪnstɛɾ ə neɪmɪŋ ɪm "bɔɪ." ɪt simd ə vɪktɝi, ən ɪt meɪd mɪn smaɪl.

So. Cadsuane called Rand by name, instead of naming him "boy." It seemed a victory, and it made Min smile.

"aɪ wɪl əv ðət ɡeɪtweɪ ɹɛɾi," kædzueɪn kəntɪnjud mɔɹ sɔfli. "bʌɾ ɪɾəl bi vɛɹi smɔl. ðə wɛl wɪl oʊnli ɡɪmi ɪnʌf tə meɪk wʌn wiɾ əv tə kɹɔl θɹu. wi ʃʊdnt niɾ ɪt. ðiz pipəl wɪl faɪt fəɹ ju. ðəl wɑnə faɪt fəɹ ju. oʊnli bʌmbəlɪŋ fulɪʃnəs kəd kip əm fɹəm ɪt."

"I will have that gateway ready," Cadsuane continued more softly. "But it will be very small. The Well will only give me enough to make one we'd have to crawl through. We shouldn't need it. These people will fight for you. They will want to fight for you. Only bumbling foolishness could keep them from it."

"ðɛɹ ɪz mɔɹ tə ɪt ðən ðæt, kædzueɪn sədaɪ," ɹænd ɹɪplaɪd, hɪz vɔɪs hʌʃt. "sʌmθɪŋ dʒɹoʊv əm saʊθwɝd. ðɪs ɪz ə tʃælənʒ, wʌn aɪm ənsɝɾən haʊ tə mit. bʌt jəɹ ædvaɪs ɪz əpɹiʃieɪɾɪd."

"There is more to it than that, Cadsuane Sedai," Rand replied, his voice hushed. "Something drove them southward. This is a challenge, one I am uncertain how to meet. But your advice is appreciated."

kædzueɪn nɑɾəd. ɪvɛntʃəwəli, mɪn pɪkt aʊɾ ə laɪn ə pipəl weɪɾɪŋ ət ðə fɔɹfɹʌn ə ði ɑɹmi. ðəɹ wɝ θaʊzənz ə soʊlʒɝz bɪhaɪnd, stændɪŋ ɪn ɹoʊz. sɑldəiənz, wɪð ðɛɹ baʊd lɛɡz.

Cadsuane nodded. Eventually, Min picked out a line of people waiting at the forefront of the army. There were thousands of soldiers behind, standing in rows. Saldaeans, with their bowed legs.

ʃaɪnɝənz ɪn tɑpnɑts. ɝæfɛlɪn, itʃ soʊlʒɝ wɪð tu sɔɹdz stʃɹæp tə hɪz bæk. kændɔɹi, wɪð fɔɹk bɪɹdz.

Shienarans in topknots. Arafellin, each soldier with two swords strapped to his back. Kandori, with forked beards.

ðə ɡɹup ət ðə hɛd stʊɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, wɪθaʊt maʊns. ðeɪ wɔɹ faɪn kloʊðɪŋ. tu wɪmən ən tu mɛn, ɔl wɪð wʌt wɝ ɑbviəsli ɛɛs sədaɪ ət ðɛɹ saɪdz, səm wɪð ən ətɛndən əɹ tu bɪhaɪnd.

The group at the head stood on the ground, without mounts. They wore fine clothing. Two women and two men, all with what were obviously Aes Sedai at their sides, some with an attendant or two behind.

"ðə wʌn ət ðə fɹʌn ɪz kwin ɛθɛniɛl," kædzueɪn wɪspɝd. "ʃi ɪz ə stɝn wʊmən, bʌt fɛɹ.

"The one at the front is Queen Ethenielle," Cadsuane whispered. "She is a stern woman, but fair.

ʃiz noʊn fəɹ mɛɾəlɪŋ ɪn ði əfɛɹz ə ðə sʌðɝn neɪʃənz, ən aɪ səspɛk ði ʌðɝz wɪl lɛɾ əɹ teɪk ðə lɛd tədeɪ. ðə hænsəm mæn bɪsaɪɾ əɹ ɪz peɪɾɝ nækɪmən, kɪŋ ə ɝæfəl."

She is known for meddling in the affairs of the southern nations, and I suspect the others will let her take the lead today. The handsome man beside her is Paitar Nachiman, King of Arafel."

"hænsəm?" mɪn æskt, ɪnspɛktɪŋ ðə bɔldɪŋ oʊldɝ ɝæfɛlɪn. ".hɪm?"

"Handsome?" Min asked, inspecting the balding older Arafellin. ".Him?"

"ɪt dɪpɛnz ɑn wʌnz pɝspɛktɪv, tʃaɪld," kædzueɪn sɛd wɪθaʊt mɪsɪŋ ə bit. "hi wɑz wʌns noʊn waɪdli fəɹ ɪz feɪs, ən hiz stɪl noʊn fəɹ ɪz sɔɹd. bɪsaɪɾ ɪm ɪz kɪŋ isɑɹ toʊdʒiɾə ʌv ʃaɪnɝ."

"It depends on one's perspective, child," Cadsuane said without missing a beat. "He was once known widely for his face, and he is still known for his sword. Beside him is King Easar Togita of Shienar."

"soʊ sæd," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli. "hu dɪɾ i luz?"

"So sad," Rand said softly. "Who did he lose?"

mɪn fɹaʊnd. isɑɹ dɪdn lʊk pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli sæd tə hɝ. sɑləm, pɝhæps.

Min frowned. Easar didn't look particularly sad to her. Solemn, perhaps.

"hiz ə bɔɹɾɝləndɝ," kædzueɪn sɛd. "hiz fɔt ðə tʃɹɑləks ɔl ɪz laɪf; aɪd səspɛk hiz lɔs mɛni ə pɝsən dɪɹ tə hɪm. hɪz waɪf dɪd daɪ səm jɪɹz bæk. hiz sɛd tə hæv ðə soʊl ʌv ə poʊət, bʌt hiz ən ɔstɪɹ mæn. ɪf jə kəɾ ɝn ɪz ɹɪspɛkt, ɪt wəd min mʌtʃ."

"He's a Borderlander," Cadsuane said. "He's fought the Trollocs all his life; I'd suspect he's lost many a person dear to him. His wife did die some years back. He's said to have the soul of a poet, but he is an austere man. If you could earn his respect, it would mean much."

"ðə læst wʌn ɪz tɛnoʊbiə, ðɛn," ɹænd sɛd, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz tʃɪn. "stɪl wɪʃ aɪ hæd bæʃɪɹ wɪð ʌs."

"The last one is Tenobia, then," Rand said, rubbing his chin. "Still wish I had Bashere with us."

bæʃɪɹ hæd sɛd ðəɾ ɪz feɪs maɪt fjuəl tɛnoʊbiəz æŋɡɝ, ən ɹænd hæd lɪsən tə ɹizən ɑn ðət kaʊnt.

Bashere had said that his face might fuel Tenobia's anger, and Rand had listened to reason on that count.

"tɛnoʊbiə," kædzueɪn sɛd, "ɪz ə waɪldfaɪɝ. jʌŋ, ɪmpɝɾənənt ən ɹɛkləs. doʊn lɛɾ əɹ dʒɹɔ jə ɪndə ən ɑɹɡjəmənt."

"Tenobia," Cadsuane said, "is a wildfire. Young, impertinent and reckless. Don't let her draw you into an argument."

ɹænd nɑɾəd. "mɪn?"

Rand nodded. "Min?"

"tɛnoʊbiə hæz ə spɪɹ hʌvɝɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd," mɪn sɛd. "blʌɾi, bʌt ʃaɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə laɪt.

"Tenobia has a spear hovering over her head," Min said. "Bloody, but shining in the light.

ɛθɛniɛl wɪl sun bi wɛd - aɪ si ðət baɪ waɪt dʌvz. ʃi plænz tə də sʌmθɪŋ deɪnʒɝəs tədeɪ, soʊ bi kɛɹfəl. ði ʌðɝ tu hæv vɛɹiəs sɔɹdz, ʃilz ən æɹoʊz hʌvɝɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛm. boʊθ wɪl faɪt sun."

Ethenielle will soon be wed - I see that by white doves. She plans to do something dangerous today, so be careful. The other two have various swords, shields and arrows hovering about them. Both will fight soon."

"ɪn ðə læs bæɾəl?" ɹænd æskt.

"In the Last Battle?" Rand asked.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ," ʃi ədmɪɾəd. "ɪt kəd bi hɪɹ, tədeɪ."

"I don't know," she admitted. "It could be here, today."

ðɛɹ ɛskɔɹt lɛɾ əm ʌp tə ðə fɔɹ mɑnɑɹks. ɹænd slɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə sæɾəl, pæɾɪŋ teɪdeɪʃɝ ɑn ðə nɛk əz ðə hɔɹs snɔɹɾɪd. mɪn muv tə dɪsmaʊnt, əz dɪd nɛɹɪʃmə, bʌt ɹænd hɛld ʌp ə hæn tə stɑp ðɛm.

Their escort led them up to the four monarchs. Rand slid out of the saddle, patting Tai'daishar on the neck as the horse snorted. Min moved to dismount, as did Narishma, but Rand held up a hand to stop them.

"blæstəd ful," kædzueɪn mʌɾɝd fɹəm bɪsaɪd mɪn, loʊ ɪnʌf ðət noʊbɑdi ɛls kəd hɪɹ. "hi æsks mi tə bi ɹɛɾi tə ɡɛɾ ɪm aʊt, ðən livz ʌs?"

"Blasted fool," Cadsuane muttered from beside Min, low enough that nobody else could hear. "He asks me to be ready to get him out, then leaves us?"

"hi laɪkli mɛn ðət jə ʃəd ɡɛt mi əweɪ," mɪn sɛd sɔfli. "noʊɪŋ hɪm, hiz mɔɹ wɝiɾ əbaʊt mi ðən hɪmsɛlf." ʃi pɔzd. "blæstəd ful."

"He likely meant that you should get me away," Min said softly. "Knowing him, he's more worried about me than himself." She paused. "Blasted fool."

kædzueɪn ʃɑɾ əɹ ə ɡlæns, ðən smaɪl slaɪtli bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ bæk tə wɑtʃ ɹænd.

Cadsuane shot her a glance, then smiled slightly before turning back to watch Rand.

hi stɛpt ʌp tə ðə fɔɹ mɑnɑɹks ən stɑpt, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmz tə ðə saɪdz, əz ɪf tə æsk, "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt jə wɪʃ ə mi?"

He stepped up to the four monarchs and stopped, raising his arms to the sides, as if to ask, "What is it you wish of me?"

ɛθɛniɛl tʊk ðə lɛd, əz kædzueɪn hæd ɡɛst. ʃi wɑz ə plʌmp wʊmən, hɝ dɑɹk hɛɹ pʊld əweɪ fɹəm əɹ feɪs ən taɪɾ ət ðə bæk. ʃi stʃɹoʊɾ ʌp tə ɹænd, ə mæn wɔkɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ əɹ ən kæɹiɪŋ ə ʃið sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪz ɑɹm, hɪl pɔɪntəd təwɔɹd hɝ.

Ethenielle took the lead, as Cadsuane had guessed. She was a plump woman, her dark hair pulled away from her face and tied at the back. She strode up to Rand, a man walking beside her and carrying a sheathed sword in his arm, hilt pointed toward her.

nɪɹbaɪ, ðə meɪɾənz ɹʌsəld. ðeɪ stɛpt ʌp bɪsaɪd ɹænd. əz juʒəwəl, ðeɪ əsum ðət kəmænz tə steɪ bæk dɪdn ɪnklud ðɛm.

Nearby, the Maidens rustled. They stepped up beside Rand. As usual, they assumed that commands to stay back didn't include them.

ɛθɛniɛl ɹeɪzd ə hæn ən slæpt ɹænd əkɹɔs ðə feɪs.

Ethenielle raised a hand and slapped Rand across the face.

nɛɹɪʃmə kɝst. ðə meɪɾənz ɹeɪz ðɛɹ veɪlz ən dʒɹu spɪɹz. mɪn nʌdʒd əɹ hɔɹs fɔɹwɝd, bɹeɪkɪŋ θɹu ðə laɪn ʌv ɡɑɹdz.

Narishma cursed. The Maidens raised their veils and drew spears. Min nudged her horse forward, breaking through the line of guards.

"stɑp!" ɹænd sɛd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz hænd. hi tɝnd, lʊkɪŋ ət ðə meɪɾənz.

"Stop!" Rand said, raising his hand. He turned, looking at the Maidens.

mɪn stɪld əɹ mɛɹ, pæɾɪŋ əɹ ɑn ðə nɛk. ʃi wɑz skɪɾɪʃ, əz maɪt bi ɪkspɛktəd. ðə meɪɾənz ɹɪlʌktənli bæk daʊn, ðoʊ kædsu-eɪn dɪd teɪk ði ɑpɝtunəɾi tə muv əɹ hɔɹs ʌp bɪsaɪd mɪnz.

Min stilled her mare, patting her on the neck. She was skittish, as might be expected. The Maidens reluctantly backed down, though Cadsu-ane did take the opportunity to move her horse up beside Min's.

ɹænd tɝn bæk tə ɛθɛniɛl ən ɹʌbd ɪz feɪs. "aɪ hoʊp ðæts səm tʃɹədɪʃənəl kændɔɹi ɡɹiɾɪŋ, jəɹ mædʒəsti."

Rand turned back to Ethenielle and rubbed his face. "I hope that's some traditional Kandori greeting, Your Majesty."

ʃi ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ, ðən dʒɛstʃɝd tə ðə saɪd, ən kɪŋ isɑɹ ə ʃaɪnɝ stɛpt ʌp tə ɹænd.

She raised an eyebrow, then gestured to the side, and King Easar of Shienar stepped up to Rand.

ðə mæn bækhændəd ɹænd əkɹɔs ðə maʊθ ðə fɔɹs ʌv ɪt kɑzɪŋ ɹænd tə stʌmbəl.

The man backhanded Rand across the mouth the force of it causing Rand to stumble.

ɹænd ɹaɪɾɪd hɪmsɛlf, əɡɛn weɪvɪŋ ðə meɪɾənz daʊn. hi mɛɾ isɑɹz aɪz. ə tʃɹɪkəl ə blʌd ɹæn daʊn ɹændz tʃɪn. ðə ʃaɪnɝən stʌɾid ɪm fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən nɑɾəd ən stɛp bæk.

Rand righted himself, again waving the Maidens down. He met Easar's eyes. A trickle of blood ran down Rand's chin. The Shienaran studied him for a moment, then nodded and stepped back.

tɛnoʊbiə keɪm nɛkst. ʃi slæpt ɹænd wɪð əɹ lɛf hænd, ə stʃɹɔŋ bloʊ ðət kɹækt ɪn ði ɛɹ.

Tenobia came next. She slapped Rand with her left hand, a strong blow that cracked in the air.

mɪn fɛlt ə flæʃ ə peɪn fɹəm ɹænd. tɛnoʊbiə ʃʊk əɹ hæn æftɝwɝd.

Min felt a flash of pain from Rand. Tenobia shook her hand afterward.

kɪŋ peɪɾɝ keɪm læst. ði eɪdʒɪŋ ɝæfɛlɪn wɪð oʊnli ə fɹɪnʒ ə hɛɹ wɔkt wɪð ɪz hænz bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk, kəntɛmpləɾɪv. hi stɛpt ʌp tə ɹænd ən ɹitʃt oʊvɝ ən dæbd ət ðə blʌɾ ɑn ɹændz tʃik. ðən i bækhændəd ɹænd wɪð ə bloʊ ðət sɛn ɪm tə hɪz niz, ə spɹeɪ ʌv blʌd flaɪɪŋ fɹəm ɪz maʊθ.

King Paitar came last. The aging Arafellin with only a fringe of hair walked with his hands behind his back, contemplative. He stepped up to Rand and reached over and dabbed at the blood on Rand's cheek. Then he backhanded Rand with a blow that sent him to his knees, a spray of blood flying from his mouth.

mɪn kʊdn sɪt baɪ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. "ɹænd!" ʃi sɛd, dʒʌmpɪŋ daʊn fɹəm əɹ sæɾəl ən ɹʌnɪŋ tə hɪm. ʃi ɹitʃt ɪz saɪd, stɛɾiɪŋ ɪm waɪl ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət ðə mɑnɑɹks. "haʊ dɛɹ ju! hi keɪm tə jə pisfəli."

Min couldn't sit by any longer. "Rand!" she said, jumping down from her saddle and running to him. She reached his side, steadying him while glaring at the monarchs. "How dare you! He came to you peacefully."

"pisfəli?" peɪɾɝ sɛd. "noʊ, jʌŋ wʊmən, hi dɪd nɑt kʌm tə ðɪs wɝld ɪn pis. hiz kənsum ðə lænd wɪð tɛɹɝ, keɪɑs ən dɪstʃɹʌkʃən."

"Peacefully?" Paitar said. "No, young woman, he did not come to this world in peace. He has consumed the land with terror, chaos and destruction."

"æz ðə pɹɑfəsiz sɛd ðəɾ i wʊd," kædzueɪn sɛd, wɔkɪŋ ʌp əz mɪn hɛlpt ɹænd bæk tə hɪz fit. "ju leɪ bɪfɔɹ ɪm ðə bɝɾənz ʌv ən ɪntaɪɝ eɪdʒ. jə kænɑt haɪɝ ə mæn tə ɹibɪl jəɹ haʊs, ðən ɹipɹoʊtʃ ɪm wən i mʌs nɑk daʊn ə wɔl tə də ðə dʒɑb."

"As the prophecies said that he would," Cadsuane said, walking up as Min helped Rand back to his feet. "You lay before him the burdens of an entire Age. You cannot hire a man to rebuild your house, then reproach him when he must knock down a wall to do the job."

"ðæt pɹəzumz ðət hiz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," tɛnoʊbiə sɛd, foʊldɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz. "wi - "

"That presumes that he is the Dragon Reborn," Tenobia said, folding her arms. "We - "

ʃi kʌɾ ɔf əz ɹænd stʊd, ðən kɛɹfəli slɪd kælændɝ fɹəm ɪts ʃiθ, ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ bleɪd ɹæspɪŋ.

She cut off as Rand stood, then carefully slid Callandor from its sheath, glittering blade rasping.

hi hɛld ɪt fɔɹθ. "du jə dɪnaɪ ðɪs, kwin tɛnoʊbiə, ʃild ə ðə nɔɹθ ən sɔɹɾ ə ðə blaɪtbɔɹɾɝ, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs kæzɑɾi? wɪl jə lʊk əpɑn ðɪs wɛpən ən kɔl mi ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən?"

He held it forth. "Do you deny this, Queen Tenobia, Shield of the North and Sword of the Blightborder, High Seat of House Kazadi? Will you look upon this weapon and call me a false Dragon?"

ðət kwaɪəɾəd hɝ. tə ðə saɪd, isɑɹ nɑɾəd. bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ɹæŋks ə saɪlən tʃɹups wɑtʃt wɪð lænsɪz, paɪks ən ʃilz hɛl haɪ. əz ɪf ɪn səlut. əɹ əz ɪf ɪn pɹɛpɝeɪʃən tə ətæk. mɪn lʊkt ʌp, ən kəd feɪnli meɪk aʊt pipəl laɪnɪŋ ðə wɔlz ə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ tə wɑtʃ.

That quieted her. To the side, Easar nodded. Behind them, ranks of silent troops watched with lances, pikes and shields held high. As if in salute. Or as if in preparation to attack. Min looked up, and could faintly make out people lining the walls of Far Madding to watch.

"lɛɾ əs pɹoʊsid," isɑɹ sɛd. "ɛθɛniɛl?"

"Let us proceed," Easar said. "Ethenielle?"

"vɛɹi wɛl," ðə wʊmən sɛd. "aɪ wɪl seɪ ðɪs, ɹænd ælθɹ. ivən ɪf jə də pɹuv tə bi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, juv mʌtʃ tə ænsɝ fɔɹ."

"Very well," the woman said. "I will say this, Rand al'Thor. Even if you do prove to be the Dragon Reborn, you have much to answer for."

"ju meɪ teɪk jəɹ pɹaɪs fɹəm maɪ skɪn, ɛθɛniɛl," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli, slaɪɾɪŋ kælændɝ bæk ɪndə ɪts ʃiθ. "bʌɾ oʊnli wʌns ðə dɑɹk wʌn əz hæɾ ɪz deɪ wɪð mi."

"You may take your price from my skin, Ethenielle," Rand said softly, sliding Callandor back into its sheath. "But only once the Dark One has had his day with me."

"ɹæn ælθɹ," peɪɾɝ sɛd. "aɪ hæv ə kwɛstʃən fəɹ ju. haʊ jə ænsɝ wɪl dətɝmən ði aʊtkʌm ə ðɪs deɪ."

"Rand al'Thor," Paitar said. "I have a question for you. How you answer will determine the outcome of this day."

"wʌt kaɪndə kwɛstʃən?" kædzueɪn dɪmændəd.

"What kind of question?" Cadsuane demanded.

"kædzueɪn, pliz," ɹænd sɛd, hoʊldɪŋ ʌp ɪz hænd. "lɔɹd peɪɾɝ, aɪ si ɪɾ ɪn jəɹ aɪz. jə noʊ ðəɾ aɪm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ɪz ðɪs kwɛstʃən nɛsəsɛɹi?"

"Cadsuane, please," Rand said, holding up his hand. "Lord Paitar, I see it in your eyes. You know that I am the Dragon Reborn. Is this question necessary?"

"ɪɾ ɪz vaɪɾəl, lɔɹɾ ælθɹ," peɪɾɝ ɹɪplaɪd. "ɪt dʒɹoʊv əs hɪɹ, ðoʊ maɪ ælaɪz dɪd nɑt noʊ ɪt fɹəm ðə stɑɹt. aɪ hæv ɔlweɪz bɪliv jə tə bi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ðət meɪd maɪ kwɛs hɪɹ ivən mɔɹ vaɪɾəl."

"It is vital, Lord al'Thor," Paitar replied. "It drove us here, though my allies did not know it from the start. I have always believed you to be the Dragon Reborn. That made my quest here even more vital."

mɪn fɹaʊnd. ði eɪdʒɪŋ soʊlʒɝ ɹitʃt daʊn tə hɪz sɔɹd hɪlt, əz ɪf ɹɛɾi tə dʒɹɔ. ðə meɪɾənz ɡɹu mɔɹ əlɝt. wɪð ə stɑɹt, mɪn ɹilaɪz peɪɾɝ wɑz stɪl stændɪŋ kloʊs tə ɹænd. tu kloʊs.

Min frowned. The aging soldier reached down to his sword hilt, as if ready to draw. The Maidens grew more alert. With a start, Min realized Paitar was still standing close to Rand. Too close.

hi kəɾ əv ðət sɔɹɾ aʊɾ ən swɪŋɪŋ fəɹ ɹændz nɛk ɪn ən aɪɛblɪŋk, ʃi ɹilaɪzd. peɪɾɝ pleɪs hɪmsɛlf ðəɹ tə bi ɹɛɾi tə stʃɹaɪk.

He could have that sword out and swinging for Rand's neck in an eyeblink, she realized. Paitar placed himself there to be ready to strike.

ɹænd dɪdn bɹeɪk ɪz ɡeɪz fɹəm ðə mɑnɑɹk. "æsk jəɹ kwɛstʃən."

Rand didn't break his gaze from the monarch. "Ask your question."

"haʊ dɪd tɛlɪndəl tɝɑsoʊ daɪ?"

"How did Tellindal Tirraso die?"

"hu?" mɪn æskt, lʊkɪŋ ət kædzueɪn. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, kənfjuzd.

"Who?" Min asked, looking at Cadsuane. The Aes Sedai shook her head, confused.

"haʊ dʒju noʊ ðət neɪm?" ɹænd dɪmændəd.

"How do you know that name?" Rand demanded.

"ænsɝ ðə kwɛstʃən," isɑɹ sɛd, hæn ɑn ɪz hɪlt, bɑɾi tɛns. ɝaʊn ðɛm, ɹæŋks ə mɛn pɹipɛɹd ðɛmsɛlvz.

"Answer the question," Easar said, hand on his hilt, body tense. Around them, ranks of men prepared themselves.

"ʃi wɑz ə klɝk," ɹænd sɛd. "dʊɹɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. dɪmɑndɝd, wən i keɪm fəɹ mi æftɝ faʊndɪŋ ði eɪɾi ən wʌn . . . ʃi fɛl ɪn ðə faɪɾɪŋ, laɪtnɪŋ fɹəm ðə skaɪ . . . hɝ blʌɾ ɑn maɪ hænz . . . haʊ dʒju noʊ ðət neɪm!"

"She was a clerk," Rand said. "During the Age of Legends. Demandred, when he came for me after founding the Eighty and One . . . She fell in the fighting, lightning from the sky . . . Her blood on my hands . . . How do you know that name!"

ɛθɛniɛl lʊk tə isɑɹ, ðən tə tɛnoʊbiə, ðən faɪnəli tə peɪɾɝ. hi nɑɾəd, ðən kloʊzd ɪz aɪz, lɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə saɪ ðət saʊndəd ɹɪlivd. hi tʊk ɪz hæn fɹəm ɪz sɔɹd.

Ethenielle looked to Easar, then to Tenobia, then finally to Paitar. He nodded, then closed his eyes, letting out a sigh that sounded relieved. He took his hand from his sword.

"ɹæn ælθɹ," ɛθɛniɛl sɛd, "dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. wəd jə kaɪnli sɪt daʊn ən spik wɪð ʌs?

"Rand al'Thor," Ethenielle said, "Dragon Reborn. Would you kindly sit down and speak with us?

wɪl ænsɝ jəɹ kwɛstʃənz."

We will answer your questions."

waɪ hæv aɪ nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə ðɪs soʊ-kɔl pɹɑfəsi?" kædzueɪn æskt. "ɪts neɪtʃɝ ɹikwaɪɝd sikɹəsi," kɪŋ peɪɾɝ sɛd. ðeɪ ɔl sæɾ ɑn kʊʃənz ɪn ə lɑɹdʒ tɛn ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝ ɑɹmi. ɪt meɪd kædzueɪn' ʃoʊldɝz ɪtʃ, biɪŋ sɝaʊndəd laɪk ðɪs, bʌt ðə ful bɔɪ - hi wəɾ æl-weɪz bi ə ful bɔɪ, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ oʊld i wɑz -  lʊk pɝfəkli ət pis θɝtin ɛɛs sədaɪ weɪɾəd aʊtsaɪd ðə tɛnt, wɪtʃ wɑzn lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf fəɹ əm ɔl. θɝtin. ðət hædn meɪɾ ælθɹ blɪŋk. wʌt mæn u kəd tʃænəl wəd sɪɾ əmɪd θɝtin ɛɛs sədaɪ ən nɑt swɛt?

Why have I never heard of this so-called prophecy?" Cadsuane asked. "Its nature required secrecy," King Paitar said. They all sat on cushions in a large tent in the middle of the Borderlander army. It made Cadsuane' shoulders itch, being surrounded like this, but the fool boy - he would al-ways be a fool boy, no matter how old he was -  looked perfectly at peace Thirteen Aes Sedai waited outside the tent, which wasn't large enough for them all. Thirteen. That hadn't made al'Thor blink. What man who could channel would sit amid thirteen Aes Sedai and not sweat?

hiz tʃeɪnʒd, kædzueɪn toʊl hɝsɛlf. jəɹ dʒʌs gɑnə hæv tə æksɛp ðət nɑt ðəɾ i dɪdnt niɾ əɹ ɛnimɔɹ. mɛn laɪk ɪm ɡɹu oʊvɝli kɑnfəɾənt ə fju lɪɾəl səksɛsəz, ən hid tʃɹɪp oʊvɝ ɪz oʊn fiɾ ən læn ɪn səm pɹɪdɪkəmənt.

He's changed, Cadsuane told herself. You're just going to have to accept that Not that he didn't need her anymore. Men like him grew overly confident A few little successes, and he'd trip over his own feet and land in some predicament.

bʌt. . . wɛl, ʃi wɑz pɹaʊɾ ə hɪm. ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli pɹaʊd. ə lɪɾəl.

But. . . well, she was proud of him. Grudgingly proud. A little.

"ɪt wɑz ɡɪvən baɪ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv maɪ oʊn fæmli laɪn," peɪɾɝ kəntɪnjud. ðə skwɛɹ-feɪs mæn sɪpt ə smɔl kʌp ə ti. "maɪ ænsɛstɝ, ɹioʊ maɪɝ-ʃi, wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn u hɝɾ ɪt. hi ɔɹɾɝd ðə wɝdz pɹəzɝvd, pæs fɹəm mɑnɑɹk tə mɑnɑɹk, fəɹ ðɪs deɪ."

"It was given by an Aes Sedai of my own family line," Paitar continued. The square-faced man sipped a small cup of tea. "My ancestor, Reo Myer-shi, was the only one who heard it. He ordered the words preserved, passed from monarch to monarch, for this day."

"spik əm tə mi," ɹænd sɛd. "pliz."

"Speak them to me," Rand said. "Please."

"aɪ si hɪm bɪfɔɹ ju!" peɪɾɝ kwoʊɾəd. "hɪm, ðə wʌn u lɪvz mɛni laɪvz, ðə wʌn u ɡɪvz dɛθs, ðə wʌn u ɹeɪzəz maʊntənz. hɪl bɹeɪk wʌɾ i mʌs bɹeɪk, bʌt fɝst i stænz hɪɹ, bɪfɔɹ əɹ kɪŋ. jəl blʌɾi hɪm! mɛʒɝ ɪz ɹɪstʃɹeɪnt. hi spiks! haʊ wɑz ðə fɔlən sleɪn?

"I see him before you!" Paitar quoted. "Him, the one who lives many lives, the one who gives deaths, the one who raises mountains. He will break what he must break, but first he stands here, before our king. You will bloody him! Measure his restraint. He speaks! How was the fallen slain?

tɛlɪndəl tɝɑsoʊ, mɝɾɝd baɪ hɪz hænd, ðə dɑɹknəs ðət keɪm ðə deɪ æftɝ ðə laɪt. jə mʌst æsk, ən jə mʌs noʊ jəɹ feɪt. ɪf i kænɑɾ ænsɝ . . ."

Tellindal Tirraso, murdered by his hand, the darkness that came the day after the light. You must ask, and you must know your fate. If he cannot answer . . ."

hi tʃɹeɪld ɔf, fɔlɪŋ saɪlənt.

He trailed off, falling silent.

"wʌt?" mɪn æskt.

"What?" Min asked.

"ɪf i kænɑɾ ænsɝ," peɪɾɝ sɛd, "ðɛn jəl bi lɔst. jəl bɹɪŋ ɪz ɛn swɪfli, soʊ ðət ðə faɪnəl deɪz meɪ hæv ðɛɹ stɔɹm. soʊ ðət laɪt meɪ nɑt bi kənsum baɪ hi hu wɑz tə hæv pɹəzɝvd ɪt. aɪ si hɪm. ən aɪ wip."

"If he cannot answer," Paitar said, "then you will be lost. You will bring his end swiftly, so that the final days may have their storm. So that Light may not be consumed by he who was to have preserved it. I see him. And I weep."

"ju keɪm tə mɝɾɝ hɪm, ðɛn," kædzueɪn sɛd.

"You came to murder him, then," Cadsuane said.

"tə tɛs hɪm," tɛnoʊbiə sɛd. "ɔɹ soʊ wi dɪsaɪɾɪd, wʌns peɪɾɝ toʊld əs ə ðə pɹɑfəsi."

"To test him," Tenobia said. "Or so we decided, once Paitar told us of the prophecy."

"ju doʊnt noʊ haʊ kloʊs jə keɪm tə dum," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli. "ɪf aɪ hæd kʌm tə jə bʌɾ ə ʃɔɹt taɪm ɝliɝ, aɪɾ əv ɹɪtɝn ðoʊz slæps wɪð bɑlfaɪɝ."

"You don't know how close you came to doom," Rand said softly. "If I had come to you but a short time earlier, I'd have returned those slaps with balefire."

"ɪnsaɪd ðə ɡɑɹɾiən?" tɛnoʊbiə snɪf dɪsdeɪnfəli.

"Inside the Guardian?" Tenobia sniffed disdainfully.

"ðə ɡɑɹɾiən blɑks ðə wʌn paʊɝ," ɹænd wɪspɝd. "ðə wʌn paʊɝ oʊnli."

"The Guardian blocks the One Power," Rand whispered. "The One Power only."

wʌt dʌz i min baɪ ðæt? kædzueɪn θɔt, fɹaʊnɪŋ.

What does he mean by that? Cadsuane thought, frowning.

"wi nu wɛl ðə ɹɪsk," ɛθɛniɛl sɛd pɹaʊdli. "aɪ dɪmændəd ðə ɹaɪt tə slæp jə fɝst. əɹ ɑɹmiz hæɾ ɔɹɾɝz tə ətæk ɪf wi fɛl."

"We knew well the risk," Ethenielle said proudly. "I demanded the right to slap you first. Our armies had orders to attack if we fell."

"maɪ fæmli hæz ænəlaɪz ðə wɝdz ə ðə pɹɑfəsi ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz oʊvɝ," peɪɾɝ sɛd. "ðə minɪŋ sim klɪɹ. ɪt wɑz əɹ tæsk tə tɛs ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. tə si ɪf i kəd bi tʃɹʌstɪd tə ɡoʊ tə ðə læs bæɾəl."

"My family has analyzed the words of the prophecy a hundred times over," Paitar said. "The meaning seemed clear. It was our task to test the Dragon Reborn. To see if he could be trusted to go to the Last Battle."

"oʊnli ə mʌnθ ɝliɝ," ɹænd sɛd. "aɪ wʊdn əv hæd ðə mɛmɹiz tə ænsɝ ju. ðɪs wɑz ə fulɪʃ ɡæmbɪt. ɪf jə hæd kɪl mi, ðən ɔl wʊɾə bɪn lɔst."

"Only a month earlier," Rand said. "I wouldn't have had the memories to answer you. This was a foolish gambit. If you had killed me, then all would have been lost."

"ə ɡæmbəl," peɪɾɝ sɛɾ ivənli. "pɝhæps ənʌðɝ wʊɾə ɹɪzən ɪn jəɹ stɛd."

"A gamble," Paitar said evenly. "Perhaps another would have risen in your stead."

"noʊ," ɹænd sɛd. "ðɪs pɹɑfəsi wɑz laɪk ði ʌðɝz. ə dɛklɝeɪʃən ʌv wʌt maɪt hæpən, nɑɾ ædvaɪs."

"No," Rand said. "This prophecy was like the others. A declaration of what might happen, not advice."

"aɪ si ɪt dɪfɹənli, ɹænd ælθɹ," peɪɾɝ sɛd. "æn ði ʌðɝz əɡɹid wɪð mi."

"I see it differently, Rand al'Thor," Paitar said. "And the others agreed with me."

"ɪt ʃəd bi noʊɾəd," ɛθɛniɛl sɛd, "ðæɾ aɪ dɪdn kʌm saʊθ kəz ə ðɪs pɹɑfəsi. maɪ ɡoʊl wɑz tə si ɪf aɪ kəd bɹɪŋ səm sɛns tə ðə wɝld. ən ðən . . ." ʃi ɡɹɪməst.

"It should be noted," Ethenielle said, "that I didn't come south because of this prophecy. My goal was to see if I could bring some sense to the world. And then . . ." She grimaced.

"wʌt?" kædzueɪn æskt, faɪnəli sɪpɪŋ əɹ ti. ɪt teɪstəd ɡʊd, əz ɪt juʒəwəli dɪd nɪɹ ælθɹ ðiz deɪz.

"What?" Cadsuane asked, finally sipping her tea. It tasted good, as it usually did near al'Thor these days.

"ðə stɔɹmz," tɛnoʊbiə sɛd. "ðə snoʊ stɑpt ʌs. ən ðɛn, faɪndɪŋ jə pɹuv mɔɹ dɪfəkəl ðən wiɾ əsumd. ðiz ɡeɪtweɪz. kən jə titʃ əm tə əɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

"The storms," Tenobia said. "The snow stopped us. And then, finding you proved more difficult than we'd assumed. These gateways. Can you teach them to our Aes Sedai?"

"aɪ wɪl əv jəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ tɔɾ ɪn ɹɪtɝn fəɹ ə pɹɑməs," ɹænd sɛd. "ju wɪl swɛɹ tə mi. aɪ hæv niɾ ə ju."

"I will have your Aes Sedai taught in return for a promise," Rand said. "You will swear to me. I have need of you."

"wi ɑɹ sɑvɹənz," tɛnoʊbiə snæpt. "aɪm nɑt gɑnə baʊ tə jə əz kwɪkli əz maɪ ʌŋkəl dɪd.

"We are sovereigns," Tenobia snapped. "I'm not going to bow to you as quickly as my uncle did.

wɪv tə spik əbaʊt ðæt, baɪ ðə weɪ."

We have to speak about that, by the way."

"aʊɝ oʊðz ɑɹ tə ðə lænz wi pɹətɛkt," isɑɹ sɛd.

"Our oaths are to the lands we protect," Easar said.

"æz jə wɪʃ," ɹænd sɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ. "aɪ wʌns ɡeɪv jə ən ʌltəmeɪɾəm. aɪ fɹeɪzd ɪt pʊɹli, ən aɪ ɹəɡɹɛt ðæt, bʌɾ aɪ ɹɪmeɪn jəɹ oʊnli pæθ tə ðə læs bæɾəl. wɪθaʊt mi, jəl ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ, hʌnʒɹədz ə liɡz fɹəm ðoʊz lænz jə swɔɹ tə pɹətɛkt." hi nɑɾəd tə itʃ ə ðɛm, ðən hɛlp mɪn tə hɝ fit. "təmɑɹoʊ, aɪ mit wɪð ðə mɑnɑɹks ə ðə wɝld. æftɝ ðæt, aɪm gɑnə ɡoʊ tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl ən bɹeɪk ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ silz ɑn ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən. ɡʊd deɪ."

"As you wish," Rand said, rising. "I once gave you an ultimatum. I phrased it poorly, and I regret that, but I remain your only path to the Last Battle. Without me, you will remain here, hundreds of leagues from those lands you swore to protect." He nodded to each of them, then helped Min to her feet. "Tomorrow, I meet with the monarchs of the world. After that, I am going to go to Shayol Ghul and break the remaining seals on the Dark One's prison. Good day."

kædzueɪn dɪdn ɹaɪz. ʃi sæt, sɪpɪŋ əɹ ti. ðə fɔɹ simd əstaʊndɪd. wɛl, ðə bɔɪ sɝɾənli hæd pɪkt ʌp ən ʌndɝstændɪŋ ə ðə dʒɹəmæɾɪk.

Cadsuane didn't rise. She sat, sipping her tea. The four seemed astounded. Well, the boy certainly had picked up an understanding of the dramatic.

"weɪt!" peɪɾɝ faɪnəli spʌɾɝd, ɹaɪzɪŋ. "jɔɹ gɑnə də wʌt?"

"Wait!" Paitar finally sputtered, rising. "You're going to do what?"

ɹænd tɝnd. "aɪm gɑnə ʃæɾɝ ðə silz, lɔɹd peɪɾɝ. aɪm gɑnə 'bɹeɪk wʌɾ i mʌs bɹeɪk' əz jəɹ oʊn pɹɑfəsi sɛz aɪ mʌst. jə kænɑt stɑp mi, nɑt wən ðoʊz wɝdz pɹuv wʌɾ əl du.

Rand turned. "I'm going to shatter the seals, Lord Paitar. I'm going to 'break what he must break' as your own prophecy says I must. You cannot stop me, not when those words prove what I will do.

ɝliɝ, aɪ stɛpt ɪn tə pɹɪvɛn mɛɹədɑn fɹəm fɔlɪŋ. ɪt wɑz nɪɹ tə ɪt, tɛnoʊbiə. ðə wɔlz ɑɹ ʃæɾɝd, jəɹ tʃɹups blʌɾid. wɪð hɛlp, aɪ wɑz eɪbəl tə seɪv ɪt. bɛɹli jəɹ kʌntʃɹiz nid ju.

Earlier, I stepped in to prevent Maradon from falling. It was near to it, Tenobia. The walls are shattered, your troops bloodied. With help, I was able to save it. Barely Your countries need you.

ən soʊ, juv tu tʃɔɪsəz. swɛɹ tə mi, əɹ sɪt hɪɹ ən lɛɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls faɪɾ ɪn jəɹ pleɪs."

And so, you have two choices. Swear to me, or sit here and let everyone else fight in your place."

kædzueɪn sɪpt əɹ ti. ðət wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ə lɪɾəl tu fɑɹ.

Cadsuane sipped her tea. That was going a little too far.

"aɪl liv jə tə dɪskʌs maɪ ɔfɝ," ɹænd sɛd. "aɪ kən spɛɹ wʌn aʊɝ-ðoʊ, bɪfɔɹ jə stɑɹt jəɹ dɪlɪbɝeɪʃən, kəd jə sɛn fəɹ sʌmwʌn ɑn maɪ bɪhæf? ðəɹ ɪz ə mæn ɪn jəɹ ɑɹmi neɪm hʊɹɪn. aɪ wəd laɪk tə əpɑlədʒaɪz tə hɪm."

"I'll leave you to discuss my offer," Rand said. "I can spare one hour-though, before you start your deliberation, could you send for someone on my behalf? There is a man in your army named Hurin. I would like to apologize to him."

ðeɪ stɪl lʊk stʌnd. kædzueɪn ɹoʊz tə ɡoʊ spik wɪð ðə sɪstɝz weɪɾɪŋ aʊtsaɪd; ʃi nu ə fju ʌv ðɛm, ən niɾəd tə fil aʊt ði ʌðɝz ʃi dɪdnt wɝi əbaʊt wʌt ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz wəd dɪsaɪd. ælθɹ hæd ðɛm. ənʌðɝ ɑɹmi bɪniθ ɪz bænɝ. aɪ dɪdn θɪŋk hid mænədʒ ðɪs wʌn.

They still looked stunned. Cadsuane rose to go speak with the sisters waiting outside; she knew a few of them, and needed to feel out the others She didn't worry about what the Borderlanders would decide. Al'Thor had them. Another army beneath his banner. I didn't think he'd manage this one.

wʌn mɔɹ deɪ ən ɪɾ ɔl bɪɡæn. laɪt, bʌt ʃi hoʊp ðət ðeɪ wɝ ɹɛɾi.

One more day and it all began. Light, but she hoped that they were ready.


tʃæptɝ fɪftiɾu


CHAPTER 52

buts


Boots

ɪleɪn sɛɾəld hɝsɛlf ɪn ɡlɪmɝz sæɾəl. ðə mɛɹ wɑz wʌn ə ðə pɹaɪzəz ə ðə ɹɔɪəl steɪbəl; ʃi wɑz ə faɪn sɑldəiən stɑk wɪð ə bɹɪljənt waɪt meɪn ən koʊt. ðə sæɾəl ɪtsɛlf wɑz ɹɪtʃ, ðə lɛðɝ tʃɹɪmd wɪð waɪn-ɹɛɾ ən ɡoʊld. ɪt wɑz ðə sɔɹɾ ə sæɾəl jə juzd wən pɝeɪɾɪŋ.

Elayne settled herself in Glimmer's saddle. The mare was one of the prizes of the royal stable; she was of fine Saldaean stock with a brilliant white mane and coat. The saddle itself was rich, the leather trimmed with wine-red and gold. It was the sort of saddle you used when parading.

bɝdʒɪt ɹoʊd ɹaɪzɪŋ, ə tɔl dʌn ɡɛldɪŋ, ɔlsoʊ wʌn ə ðə fæstəst ɪn ðə ɹɔɪəl steɪbəlz. ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæd tʃoʊzən boʊθ hɔɹsəz. ʃi ɪkspɛktəd tə hæv tə ɹʌn.

Birgitte rode Rising, a tall dun gelding, also one of the fastest in the royal stables. The Warder had chosen both horses. She expected to have to run.

bɝdʒɪt wɔɹ wʌn ʌv ɪleɪnz fɑkshɛd kɑpiz, ðoʊ ɪt hæɾ ə dɪfɹənt ʃeɪp, ə θɪn sɪlvɝ dɪsk wɪð ə ɹoʊz ɑn ðə fɹʌnt. ɪleɪn kæɹiɾ ənʌðɝ ɹæpt ɪn klɔθ ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ pɑkət.

Birgitte wore one of Elayne's foxhead copies, though it had a different shape, a thin silver disc with a rose on the front. Elayne carried another wrapped in cloth inside her pocket.

ʃid tʃɹaɪd meɪkɪŋ ənʌðɝ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt hæd mɛltəd, nɪɹli sɛɾɪŋ əɹ dʒɹɛsɝ ɑn faɪɝ. ʃi wɑz hævɪŋ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə dɪfəkəlti wɪθaʊt ði ɝɪdʒənəl tə stʌɾi. hɝ dʒɹimz ʌv ɑɹmɪŋ ɔl ə hɝ pɝsənəl ɡɑɹdz wɪð mədæljənz wɑz lʊkɪŋ lɛs ən lɛs pɑsəbəl, ənlɛs ʃi sʌmhaʊ mænədʒ tə pɝsweɪd mæt tə ɡɪv əɹ ði ɝɪdʒənəl əɡɛn.

She'd tried making another this morning, but it had melted, nearly setting her dresser on fire. She was having a great deal of difficulty without the original to study. Her dreams of arming all of her personal Guards with medallions was looking less and less possible, unless she somehow managed to persuade Mat to give her the original again.

hɝ ɑnɝ ɡɑɹd fɛl ɪndə maʊntəd ɹæŋks ɝaʊn əɹ ən bɝdʒɪɾ ɪn ðə kwinz plɑzə. ʃi wɑz bɹɪŋɪŋ oʊnli ə hʌnʒɹəd soʊlʒɝz - sɛvənti-faɪv ɡɑɹdzmɪn ən ən ɪnɝ ɹɪŋ ə twɛnti-faɪv ɡɑɹdzwɪmən. ɪt wɑz ə taɪni fɔɹs, bʌt ʃiɾ əv ɡɔn wɪθaʊt ðoʊz hʌnʒɹəd ɪf ʃid bɪn eɪbəl tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ wɪð ɪt. ʃi kʊdn əfɔɹd tə bi sin əz ə kɑŋkɝɝ.

Her honor guard fell into mounted ranks around her and Birgitte in the Queen's Plaza. She was bringing only a hundred soldiers - seventy-five Guardsmen and an inner ring of twenty-five Guardswomen. It was a tiny force, but she'd have gone without those hundred if she'd been able to get away with it. She couldn't afford to be seen as a conqueror.

"aɪ doʊn laɪk ðɪs," bɝdʒɪt sɛd.

"I don't like this," Birgitte said.

"ju doʊn laɪk ɛniθɪŋ, leɪtli," ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪ swɛɹ, jəɹ bɪkʌmɪŋ mɔɹ ɪɹəɾəbəl baɪ ðə deɪ."

"You don't like anything, lately," Elayne said. "I swear, you're becoming more irritable by the day."

"ɪts kəz jəɹ bɪkʌmɪŋ mɔɹ fulhɑɹɾi baɪ ðə deɪ."

"It's because you're becoming more foolhardy by the day."

"oʊ, kʌm naʊ. ðɪs ɪz hɑɹdli ðə moʊs fulhɑɹɾi θɪŋ aɪv dʌn."

"Oh, come now. This is hardly the most foolhardy thing I've done."

"oʊnli kəz juv sɛɾ ə vɛɹi haɪ bɛntʃmɑɹk fəɹ jɝsɛlf, ɪleɪn "

"Only because you've set a very high benchmark for yourself, Elayne "

"ɪt wɪl bi faɪn," ɪleɪn sɛd, ɡlænsɪŋ saʊθwɝd.

"It will be fine," Elayne said, glancing southward.

"waɪ dʒju kip lʊkɪŋ ɪn ðət dɝɛkʃən?"

"Why do you keep looking in that direction?"

"ɹænd," ɪleɪn sɛd, filɪŋ ðət wɔɹmθ əɡɛn, pʌlsɪŋ fɹəm ðə nɑɾ ʌv ɪmoʊʃənz ɪn əɹ maɪnd.

"Rand," Elayne said, feeling that warmth again, pulsing from the knot of emotions in her mind.

"hiz ɡɛɾɪŋ ɹɛɾi fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ. hi filz tʃɹʌbəld. ən pisfəl ət ðə seɪm taɪm." laɪt, bʌt ðət mæn kəd bi kənfjuzɪŋ.

"He's getting ready for something. He feels troubled. And peaceful at the same time." Light, but that man could be confusing.

ðə miɾɪŋ wəd hæpən ɪn wʌn deɪ, ɪf ɪz ɝɪdʒənəl dɛdlaɪn stɪl hɛld. ɛɡwin wɑz ɹaɪt;

The meeting would happen in one day, if his original deadline still held. Egwene was right;

bɹeɪkɪŋ ðə silz wəd bi fulɪʃ. bʌt ɹænd wəd si ɹizən.

breaking the seals would be foolish. But Rand would see reason.

æləz ɹoʊɾ ʌp tə hɝ, əkʌmpənid baɪ θɹi kɪnswɪmən. sɑɹeɪʒə wɑz ə plʌmp wʊmən wɪð ə ɡɹændmʌðɝli ɛɹ; dɑɹk-skɪn kimə kɛpt əɹ blæk hɛɹ ɪn θɹi lɔŋ bɹeɪdz, ən pɹɪm næʃiə wɪð ə juθfəl feɪs wɔɹ ə bæɡi dʒɹɛs.

Alise rode up to her, accompanied by three Kinswomen. Sarasia was a plump woman with a grandmotherly air; dark-skinned Kema kept her black hair in three long braids, and prim Nashia with a youthful face wore a baggy dress.

ðə fɔɹ tʊk ʌp pəzɪʃənz bɪsaɪɾ ɪleɪn. oʊnli tu ʌv əm wɝ stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə ɡeɪtweɪ -  mɛni ʌv ðə kɪn wɝ wikɝ ðən moʊst ɛɛs sədaɪ. bʌt ðət wəd bi ɪnʌf, əsumɪŋ ɪleɪn hæd tʃɹʌbəl ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ ðə sɔɹs.

The four took up positions beside Elayne. Only two of them were strong enough for a gateway -  many of the Kin were weaker than most Aes Sedai. But that would be enough, assuming Elayne had trouble embracing the Source.

"kæn jə də sʌmθɪŋ tə pɹɪvɛn ɑɹtʃɝz fɹəm hɪɾɪŋ hɝ?" bɝdʒɪɾ æskt æləz. "sʌm kaɪndə wiv?"

"Can you do something to prevent archers from hitting her?" Birgitte asked Alise. "Some kind of weave?"

æləz kɑkt əɹ hɛd θɔtfəli. "aɪ noʊ ʌv wʌn ðət maɪt hɛlp," ʃi sɛd, "bʌɾ aɪv nɛvɝ tʃɹaɪɾ ɪt."

Alise cocked her head thoughtfully. "I know of one that might help," she said, "but I've never tried it."

ənʌðɝ kɪnswʊmən woʊv ə ɡeɪtweɪ ʌp əhɛd. ɪɾ oʊpən tə ə spæn ə ɹʌf, bɹaʊn-ɡɹæs læn aʊtsaɪɾ ə kɛɹhin. ə mʌtʃ lɑɹdʒɝ ɑɹmi weɪɾəd ðɛɹ, wɛɹɪŋ ðə kwɪɹæsəz ən bɛl-ʃeɪp hɛlməts ə kɛɹhinɪn tʃɹups. ði ɔfəsɝz wɝ izi tə spɑt wɪð ðɛɹ dɑɹk kloʊðɪŋ, ɪn ðə kʌlɝz ə ðə haʊsəz ðeɪ sɝvd. ðeɪ wɔɹ kɑn ɹaɪzɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ bæks.

Another Kinswoman wove a gateway up ahead. It opened to a span of rough, brown-grassed land outside of Cairhien. A much larger army waited there, wearing the cuirasses and bell-shaped helmets of Cairhienin troops. The officers were easy to spot with their dark clothing, in the colors of the Houses they served. They wore con rising over their backs.

tɔl, nɛɹoʊ-feɪs lɔɹstʃɹəm sæɾ ɪz maʊn ət ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz ɑɹmi, wɪtʃ wɔɹ dɑɹk ɡɹin wɪð kɹɪmzən slæʃɪz; bɝtoʊm wɑz ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. ðɛɹ fɔɹsɪz lʊk tə bi əbaʊt ðə seɪm saɪz. faɪv θaʊzən itʃ. ði ʌðɝ fɔɹ haʊsəz hæd fildɪd smɔlɝ ɑɹmiz.

Tall, narrow-faced Lorstrum sat his mount at the front of his army, which wore dark green with crimson slashes; Bertome was on the other side. Their forces looked to be about the same size. Five thousand each. The other four Houses had fielded smaller armies.

"ɪf ðeɪ wɑntəd tə teɪk jə kæptɪv," bɝdʒɪt sɛd ɡɹɪmli, "jɔɹ hændɪŋ əm ðə tʃæns."

"If they wanted to take you captive," Birgitte said grimly, "you're handing them the chance."

"ðɛɹz noʊ weɪ tə də ðɪs ən ɹɪmeɪn seɪf, nɑɾ ənlɛs aɪ wɑnə haɪɾ ɪn maɪ pæləs ən sɛn maɪ tʃɹups ɪn. ðət wəɾ oʊnli lɛd tə ɹɪbɛljən ɪn kɛɹhin ən pətɛnʃəl kəlæps ɪn ændɝ." ʃi ɡlænst ət ðə wɔɹɾɝ. "aɪm kwin naʊ, bɝdʒɪt. jəɹ nɑt gɑnə bi eɪbəl tə kip mi fɹəm deɪnʒɝ, noʊ mɔɹ ðən jə kəd kip ə loʊn soʊlʒɝ seɪf ɑn ðə bæɾəlfild."

"There's no way to do this and remain safe, not unless I want to hide in my palace and send my troops in. That would only lead to rebellion in Cairhien and potential collapse in Andor." She glanced at the Warder. "I'm Queen now, Birgitte. You're not going to be able to keep me from danger, no more than you could keep a lone soldier safe on the battlefield."

bɝdʒɪt nɑɾəd. "steɪ kloʊs tə mi ən ɡaɪbɑn."

Birgitte nodded. "Stay close to me and Guybon."

ɡaɪbɑn əpɹoʊtʃt, ɑn ə lɑɹdʒ dæpəld ɡɛldɪŋ. wɪð bɝdʒɪɾ ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ə hɝ ən ɡaɪbɑn ɑn ði ʌðɝ - ən wɪð boʊθ ə ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz tɔlɝ ðən ɪleɪnz - ə wʊd-bi əsæsən wəɾ əv ɡɹeɪt dɪfəkəlti pɪkɪŋ əɹ ɔf wɪθaʊt fɝs hɪɾɪŋ əɹ fɹɛnz.

Guybon approached, on a large dappled gelding. With Birgitte on one side of her and Guybon on the other - and with both of their horses taller than Elayne's - a would-be assassin would have great difficulty picking her off without first hitting her friends.

soʊ ɪt wəd bi fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ laɪf. ʃi nʌdʒd ɡlɪmɝ ɪndə moʊʃən, ən əɹ tʃɹup meɪɾ ɪts weɪ θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ ən ɑntu kɛɹhinɪn sɔɪl. ðə noʊbəlmən ən noʊbəlwɪmən əhɛd baʊɾ əɹ kɝtsid fɹəm hɔɹsbæk, ən ðoʊz ɑbleɪʃənz wɝ dipɝ ðɪs taɪm ðən ðeɪ hæd bɪn wən miɾɪŋ ɪleɪn ɪn əɹ θɹoʊn ɹum. ðə ʃoʊ hæd bɪɡʌn.

So it would be for the rest of her life. She nudged Glimmer into motion, and her troop made its way through the gateway and onto Cairhienin soil. The noblemen and noblewomen ahead bowed or curtsied from horseback, and those oblations were deeper this time than they had been when meeting Elayne in her throne room. The show had begun.

ðə sɪɾi wɑz dʒʌst əhɛd, wɔlz stɪl blækən fɹəm faɪɝz dʊɹɪŋ ðə faɪt wɪð ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ. ɪleɪn kəd sɛns bɝdʒɪts tɛnʃən əz ðə ɡeɪtweɪ vænɪʃt bɪhaɪnd. ðə kɪn ɝaʊn ɪleɪn ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs, ən æləz woʊv ən ʌnfəmɪljɝ wiv, pleɪsɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ ɝaʊn ði ɪnɝ ɹɪŋ ə tʃɹups. ɪt meɪɾ ə smɔl - bʌt swɪft - wɪn spɪnɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ.

The city was just ahead, walls still blackened from fires during the fight with the Shaido. Elayne could sense Birgitte's tension as the gateway vanished behind. The Kin around Elayne embraced the source, and Alise wove an unfamiliar weave, placing it in the air around the inner ring of troops. It made a small - but swift - wind spinning in the air.

bɝdʒɪts æŋzaɪəɾi wɑz kənteɪdʒəs, ən ɪleɪn faʊn hɝsɛlf hoʊldɪŋ əɹ ɹeɪnz ɪn ə taɪt ɡɹɪp əz ɡlɪmɝ muv fɔɹwɝd. ði ɛɹ wɑz dʒɹaɪɝ hɪɹ ɪn kɛɹhin, wɪð ə feɪn dʌsti sɛn tə ɪt. ðə skaɪ wɑz oʊvɝkæst.

Birgitte's anxiety was contagious, and Elayne found herself holding her reins in a tight grip as Glimmer moved forward. The air was drier here in Cairhien, with a faint dusty scent to it. The sky was overcast.

ðə kɛɹhinɪn tʃɹups fɔɹmd ɝaʊn əɹ smɔl ɡɹup ʌv ændɔɹənz ɪn waɪɾ ən ɹɛd. moʊst ə ðə kɛɹhinɪn fɔɹsɪz wɝ fʊt, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz səm hɛvi kævəlɹi, hɔɹsəz ɪn ʃaɪni bɑɹɾɪŋ ən mɛn kæɹiɪŋ lænsɪz pɔɪntəd haɪ ɪndə ði ɛɹ. ɔl mɑɹtʃt ɪn pɝfək laɪnz, pɹətɛktɪŋ ɪleɪn. əɹ kipɪŋ əɹ kæptɪv.

The Cairhienin troops formed around her small group of Andorans in white and red. Most of the Cairhienin forces were foot, though there was some heavy cavalry, horses in shiny barding and men carrying lances pointed high into the air. All marched in perfect lines, protecting Elayne. Or keeping her captive.

lɔɹstʃɹəm muvd ɪz beɪ stæljən kloʊsɝ tə ɪleɪnz aʊɾɝ ɹæŋks. ɡaɪbɑn ɡlænst ət hɝ, ən ʃi nɑɾəd, soʊ ðə kæptən əlaʊɾ ɪm tə əpɹoʊtʃ.

Lorstrum moved his bay stallion closer to Elayne's outer ranks. Guybon glanced at her, and she nodded, so the captain allowed him to approach.

"ðə sɪɾi ɪz nɝvəs, jəɹ mædʒəsti," lɔɹstʃɹəm sɛd. bɝdʒɪt wɑz stɪl kɛɹfəl tə kip əɹ maʊn bɪtwin ɪz ən ɪleɪnz. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ . . . ənfɔɹtʃənət ɹumɝz sɝaʊndɪŋ jəɹ əsɛnʃən."

"The city is nervous, Your Majesty," Lorstrum said. Birgitte was still careful to keep her mount between his and Elayne's. "There are . . . unfortunate rumors surrounding your ascension."

ɹumɝz jə pɹɑbli ɪnɪʃieɪɾəd, ɪleɪn θɔt, bɪfɔɹ jə dɪsaɪɾɪd tə səpɔɹt mi ɪnstɛd. "ʃʊɹli ðeɪ woʊn ɹaɪz əɡɛns jəɹ tʃɹups?"

Rumors you probably initiated, Elayne thought, before you decided to support me instead. "Surely they won't rise against your troops?"

"aɪ hoʊp ðəl nɑt." hi aɪɾ əɹ fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪz flæt kæp ə fɔɹəst ɡɹin. hi wɔɹ ə blæk koʊt ðət wɛn daʊn tə hɪz niz ən slæʃɪz ə kʌlɝ əkɹɔs ɪɾ ɔl ðə weɪ daʊn, tə dɪnoʊɾ ɪz haʊs. ɪt wɑz ðə taɪp ə kloʊðɪŋ hid wɛɹ ɪf ɡoʊɪŋ tə ə bɔl. ðət pɹədʒɛktəɾ ə sɛns ə kɑnfəɾəns. hɪz fɔɹs wɑzn sizɪŋ ðə sɪɾi, ɪt wɑz ɛskɔɹɾɪŋ ðə nu kwin wɪð ən ɑnɝɛɹi pɝeɪd. "ɪɾ ɪz ənlaɪkli ðət ðəɹ wɪl bi ɑɹmd ɹɪzɪstəns. bʌɾ aɪ wɑntəd tə wɔɹn ju."

"I hope they will not." He eyed her from under his flat cap of forest green. He wore a black coat that went down to his knees and slashes of color across it all the way down, to denote his House. It was the type of clothing he'd wear if going to a ball. That projected a sense of confidence. His force wasn't seizing the city, it was escorting the new queen with an honorary parade. "It is unlikely that there will be armed resistance. But I wanted to warn you."

lɔɹstʃɹəm nɑɾəd tə hɝ wɪð ɹɪspɛkt. hi nu ʃi wɑz mənɪpjəleɪɾɪŋ hɪm, bʌɾ i ɔlsoʊ æksɛptɪd ðət mənɪpjəleɪʃən. ʃi wəɾ əv tə kip ə kɛɹfəl wɑtʃ ɑn ɪm ɪn ðə jɪɹz tə kʌm.

Lorstrum nodded to her with respect. He knew she was manipulating him, but he also accepted that manipulation. She would have to keep a careful watch on him in the years to come.

kɛɹhin wɑz sətʃ ə bɑksɪʃ sɪɾi, ɔl stʃɹeɪt laɪnz ən fɔɹɾəfaɪd taʊɝz. ðoʊ səm ʌv ɪts ɑɹkətɛktʃɝ wɑz bjuɾəfəl, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ kəmpɛɹɪŋ ðə pleɪs tə keɪɛmlɪn əɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn. ðeɪ ɹoʊd dɝɛkli ɪn θɹu ðə nɔɹðɝn ɡeɪts, ðə ɹɪvɝ ɑlɡnjə tə ðɛɹ ɹaɪt.

Cairhien was such a boxish city, all straight lines and fortified towers. Though some of its architecture was beautiful, there was no comparing the place to Caemlyn or Tar Valon. They rode directly in through the northern gates, the River Alguenya to their right.

kɹaʊdz weɪɾəd ɪnsaɪd. lɔɹstʃɹəm ən ði ʌðɝz hæd dʌn ðɛɹ wɝk wɛl. ðəɹ wɝ tʃɪɹz, pɹɑbli stɑɹɾəd baɪ kɛɹfəli pleɪs kɔɹɾiɝz. əz ɪleɪn ɛntɝd ðə sɪɾi, ðə tʃɪɹz ɡɹu laʊɾɝ.

Crowds waited inside. Lorstrum and the others had done their work well. There were cheers, probably started by carefully placed courtiers. As Elayne entered the city, the cheers grew louder.

ðət sɝpɹaɪz hɝ. ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd hɑstɪləɾi. ən jɛs, ðəɹ wɑz səm ə ðət - ði əkeɪʒənəl θɹoʊn pis ə ɹɛfjus, hɝl fɹəm ðə bæk ə ðə kɹaʊd. ʃi kɑɾ ə dʒɪɹ hɪɹ ən ðɛɹ. bʌt moʊst sim plizd.

That surprised her. She had expected hostility. And yes, there was some of that - the occasional thrown piece of refuse, hurled from the back of the crowd. She caught a jeer here and there. But most seemed pleased.

əz ʃi ɹoʊd daʊn ðət bɹɔd pæsədʒweɪ, laɪnd wɪð ðə ɹɛktæŋɡjəlɝ bɪldɪŋz kɛɹhinɪn feɪvɝd, ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət pɝhæps ðiz pipəl hæd bɪn weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ən ɪvɛn laɪk ðɪs. tɔkɪŋ ʌv ɪt, spɹɛɾɪŋ teɪlz. səm ə ðoʊz teɪlz hæd bɪn hɑstəl, ən ðoʊz wɝ wʌt nɔɹi hæd ɹipɔɹɾəd. bʌt ðeɪ naʊ sim tə hɝ mɔɹ ə saɪn ʌv wɝi ðən hɑstɪləɾi. kɛɹhin hæd bɪn tu lɔŋ wɪθaʊɾ ə mɑnɑɹk, ðɛɹ kɪŋ dɛd baɪ ənnoʊn hænz, ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən simɪŋli əbændənɪŋ ðɛm.

As she rode down that broad passageway, lined with the rectangular buildings Cairhienin favored, she realized that perhaps these people had been waiting for an event like this. Talking of it, spreading tales. Some of those tales had been hostile, and those were what Norry had reported. But they now seemed to her more a sign of worry than hostility. Cairhien had been too long without a monarch, their king dead by unknown hands, the Lord Dragon seemingly abandoning them.

hɝ kɑnfəɾəns ɡɹu. kɛɹhin wɑz ə wundəd sɪɾi. ðə bɝn ən bɹoʊkən ɹɛmnəns ə ðə fɔɹɡeɪɾ aʊtsaɪd. kɑbəlz hæd bɪn tɔɹn ʌp tə bi θɹoʊn fɹəm ðə wɔlz. ðə sɪɾi hæd nɛvɝ fʊli ɹəkʌvɝd fɹəm ði il wɔɹ, ən ði ənfɪnɪʃt tɑpləs taʊɝz - səmɛtʃɹɪkəl ɪn dɪzaɪn, bʌt woʊfəli fɝlɔɹn ɪn əpɪɹəns - wɝ ə lɔfti dɛklɝeɪʃən ə ðət fækt.

Her confidence grew. Cairhien was a wounded city. The burned and broken remnants of the Foregate outside. Cobbles had been torn up to be thrown from the walls. The city had never fully recovered from the Aiel War, and the unfinished Topless Towers - symmetrical in design, but woefully forlorn in appearance - were a lofty declaration of that fact.

ðət blʌɾi ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz wɑz nɪɹli əz bæɾ ə skɝdʒ. kəd ʃi tʃeɪnʒ ðæt? ðə pipəl ɝaʊn əɹ saʊndəd hoʊpfəl, əz ɪf ðeɪ nu wʌɾ ə twɪstəd mɛs ðɛɹ neɪʃən hæd bɪkʌm. wʌn kəd sunɝ teɪk əweɪ ən ilz spɪɹz ðən kʌt ðə kɹæftinəs aʊɾ ə ðə kɛɹhinɪn, bʌt pɝhæps ʃi kəd titʃ əm ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ lɔɪəlti tə kʌntʃɹi ən θɹoʊn. soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ hæɾ ə θɹoʊn wɝθ ðət lɔɪəlti.

That bloody Game of Houses was nearly as bad a scourge. Could she change that? The people around her sounded hopeful, as if they knew what a twisted mess their nation had become. One could sooner take away an Aiel's spears than cut the craftiness out of the Cairhienin, but perhaps she could teach them a greater loyalty to country and throne. So long as they had a throne worth that loyalty.

ðə sʌn pæləs stʊɾ ət ði ɪɡzæk sɛntɝ ə ðə sɪɾi. laɪk ðə ɹɛst ə ðə sɪɾi, ɪt wɑz skwɛɹ ən æŋɡjəlɝ, bʌt hɪɹ ði ɑɹkətɛktʃɝ ɡeɪv ə sɛns əɹ ɪmpoʊzɪŋ stʃɹɛŋkθ. ɪt wɑz ə ɡɹæn bɪldɪŋ, dɪspaɪt ðə bɹoʊkən wɪŋ wɛɹ ði ətɛmpt ɑn ɹændz laɪf hæd teɪkən pleɪs.

The Sun Palace stood at the exact center of the city. Like the rest of the city, it was square and angular, but here the architecture gave a sense or imposing strength. It was a grand building, despite the broken wing where the attempt on Rand's life had taken place.

mɔɹ noʊbəlz weɪɾəd hɪɹ, stændɪŋ ɑn kʌvɝd stɛps əɹ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɔɹneɪt kæɹɪdʒɪz. wɪmən ɪn fɔɹməl ɡaʊnz wɪð waɪd hups, ðə mɛn ɪn nit koʊts ə dɑɹk kʌlɝz, kæps ɑn ðə hɛdz. mɛni lʊk skɛptəkəl, ən səm əmeɪzd.

More nobles waited here, standing on covered steps or in front of ornate carriages. Women in formal gowns with wide hoops, the men in neat coats of dark colors, caps on the heads. Many looked skeptical, and some amazed.

ɪleɪn ʃɑt bɝdʒɪɾ ə sæɾəsfaɪd smaɪl. "ɪts wɝkɪŋ. noʊbɑdi ɪkspɛktəd mi tə ɹaɪd tə ðə pæləs ɛskɔɹɾɪd baɪ ə kɛɹhinɪn ɑɹmi."

Elayne shot Birgitte a satisfied smile. "It's working. Nobody expected me to ride to the palace escorted by a Cairhienin army."

bɝdʒɪt sɛd nʌθɪŋ. ʃi wɑz stɪl tɛns - ən pɹɑbli wəd bi əntɪl ɪleɪn ɹɪtɝn tə keɪɛmlɪn.

Birgitte said nothing. She was still tense - and probably would be until Elayne returned to Caemlyn.

tu wɪmən stʊɾ ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə stɛps, wʌn ə pɹɪɾi wʊmən wɪð bɛlz ɪn əɹ hɛɹ, ði ʌðɝ wɪð kɝli hɛɹ ən ə feɪs ðət dɪd nɑt sim ɛɛs sədaɪ, fəɹ ɔl ðə fæk ðət ʃi hæd bɪn wʌn fəɹ jɪɹz.

Two women stood at the foot of the steps, one a pretty woman with bells in her hair, the other with curly hair and a face that did not seem Aes Sedai, for all the fact that she had been one for years.

ðət wɑz sæʃəl ændɝli, ən ði ʌðɝ wʊmən - hu dɪɾ əv ən eɪdʒləs feɪs - wɑz sæmɪtsu tɑmɑɡoʊə. fɹəm wʌɾ ɪleɪnz sɔɹsəz hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə dətɝmən, ðiz tu wɝ əz kloʊz tə "ɹulɝz" əz ðə sɪɾi hæɾ ɪn ɹændz æbsəns. ʃid kɔɹəspɑndɪd wɪð boʊθ, ən faʊn sæʃəl ɹɪmɑɹkəbli kin əɾ ʌndɝstændɪŋ ðə kɛɹhinɪn weɪ ʌv θɪŋkɪŋ. ʃiɾ ɔfɝɾ ɪleɪn ðə sɪɾi, bʌt hæɾ ɪmplaɪd ðət ʃi ʌndɝstʊd ðət biɪŋ ɔfɝɾ ɪɾ ən teɪkɪŋ ɪt wɝ tu dɪfɹən θɪŋz.

That was Sashalle Anderly, and the other woman - who did have an ageless face - was Samitsu Tamagowa. From what Elayne's sources had been able to determine, these two were as close to "rulers" as the city had in Rand's absence. She'd corresponded with both, and found Sashalle remarkably keen at understanding the Cairhienin way of thinking. She'd offered Elayne the city, but had implied that she understood that being offered it and taking it were two different things.

sæʃəl stɛp fɔɹwɝd. "jɔɹ mædʒəsti," ʃi sɛd fɔɹməli, "lɛɾ ɪt bi noʊn ðət ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɡɪvz jə ɔl ɹaɪts ən kleɪm tə ðɪs lænd. ɔl fɔɹməl kəntʃɹoʊl i hæɾ oʊvɝ ðə læn ɪz siɾəd tə ju, ən ðə pəzɪʃən ə stuɝɾ oʊvɝ ðə neɪʃən ɪz dɪzɑlvd. meɪ jə ɹul ɪn wɪzdəm ən pis."

Sashalle stepped forward. "Your Majesty," she said formally, "let it be known that the Lord Dragon gives you all rights and claim to this land. All formal control he had over the land is ceded to you, and the position of steward over the nation is dissolved. May you rule in wisdom and peace."

ɪleɪn nɑɾəd tə hɝ ɹiɡəli fɹəm hɔɹsbæk, bʌɾ ɪnsaɪd ʃi siðd. ʃid sɛd ʃi dɪdn maɪn ɹændz hɛlp teɪkɪŋ ðɪs θɹoʊn, bʌɾ ɪt wɑzn laɪk ʃi wɑntəɾ əɹ noʊz ɹʌbd ɪn ɪt. stɪl, sæʃəl sim tə teɪk əɹ pəzɪʃən sɪɹiəsli, ðoʊ fɹəm wʌɾ ɪleɪn hæd dɪskʌvɝd, ðət pəzɪʃən wɑz ɪn lɑɹdʒ mɛʒɝ sɛlf-kɹieɪɾəd.

Elayne nodded to her regally from horseback, but inside she seethed. She'd said she didn't mind Rand's help taking this throne, but it wasn't like she wanted her nose rubbed in it. Still, Sashalle seemed to take her position seriously, though from what Elayne had discovered, that position was in large measure self-created.

ɪleɪn ən əɹ pɹəsɛʃən dɪsmaʊntɪd. hæd ɹænd θɔt ðəɾ ɪt wəd bi əz izi əz ðət tə ɡɪv əɹ ðə θɹoʊn? hid steɪɾ ɪn kɛɹhin lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə noʊ haʊ ðeɪ skimd. wʌn ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪkɪŋ ə pɹɑkləmeɪʃən wəd nɛvɝ əv bɪn ɪnʌf. bʌt hævɪŋ paʊɝfəl noʊbəlz səpɔɹɾ əɹ dɝɛkli ʃəd bi ɪnʌf tə də ɪt.

Elayne and her procession dismounted. Had Rand thought that it would be as easy as that to give her the throne? He'd stayed in Cairhien long enough to know how they schemed. One Aes Sedai making a proclamation would never have been enough. But having powerful nobles support her directly should be enough to do it.

ðɛɹ pɹəsɛʃən meɪɾ ɪts weɪ ʌp ðə stɛps. ðeɪ ɛntɝd, ən itʃ ə ðoʊz səpɔɹɾɪŋ əɹ bɹɔɾ ə smɔlɝ ɑnɝ ɡɑɹɾ ə fɪfti. ɪleɪn bɹɔɾ əɹ ɪntaɪɝ fɔɹs; ɪt wɑz kɹaʊɾəd, bʌt ʃi dɪdn ɪntɛn tə liv ɛni bɪhaɪnd.

Their procession made its way up the steps. They entered, and each of those supporting her brought a smaller honor guard of fifty. Elayne brought her entire force; it was crowded, but she didn't intend to leave any behind.

ði ɪnɝ hɔlweɪz wɝ stʃɹeɪt, wɪð pik silɪŋz ən ɡoʊldən tʃɹɪm. ðə sɪmbəl ə ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn ɛmbleɪzən itʃ dɔɹ. ðəɹ wɝ ælkoʊvz fəɹ ɹɪtʃəz tə bi dɪspleɪd, bʌt mɛni wɝ ɛmpti. ði il hæd teɪkən ðɛɹ fɪfθ fɹəm ðɪs pæləs.

The inner hallways were straight, with peaked ceilings and golden trim. The symbol of the Rising Sun emblazoned each door. There were alcoves for riches to be displayed, but many were empty. The Aiel had taken their fifth from this palace.

əpɑn ɹitʃɪŋ ði ɛntʃɹəns tə ðə ɡɹæn hɔl ə ðə sʌn, ɪleɪnz ændɔɝən ɡɑɹdzmɪn ən ɡɑɹdzwɪmən ɝeɪnʒd ðɛmsɛlvz laɪnɪŋ ði aʊɾɝ hɔlweɪ. ɪleɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ðən stʃɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə θɹoʊn ɹum wɪð ə ɡɹup ə tɛn. blu-stʃɹik mɑɹbəl kɑləmz ɹoʊz tə ðə silɪŋ ət ðə saɪdz ə ðə ɹum, ən ðə sʌn θɹoʊn sæɾ ɑn ɪts blu mɑɹbəl deɪz ət ðə bæk ə ðə lɑɹdʒ hɔl.

Upon reaching the entrance to the Grand Hall of the Sun, Elayne's Andoran Guardsmen and Guardswomen arranged themselves lining the outer hallway. Elayne took a deep breath, then strode into the throne room with a group of ten. Blue-streaked marble columns rose to the ceiling at the sides of the room, and the Sun Throne sat on its blue marble dais at the back of the large hall.

ðə sit wɑz ʌv ɡɪldɪd wʊd, bʌt wɑz sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli ʌnəsumɪŋ. pɝhæps ðət wɑz waɪ leɪmən hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə bɪl hɪmsɛlf ə nu θɹoʊn, juzɪŋ ɑvɛndɔɹɑldɛɹə ɪtsɛlf əz ə mətɪɹiəl. ɪleɪn wɔkt ʌp tə ðə deɪz, ðən tɝn əz ðə kɛɹhinɪn noʊbɪləɾi ɛntɝd, hɝ səpɔɹɾɝz fɝst, ðən ði ʌðɝz, ɹæŋkt əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə kɑmpləkeɪɾəd dɪkteɪts ə dʌz deɪmɑɹ. ðoʊz ɹæŋkɪŋz kəd tʃeɪnʒ baɪ ðə deɪ, ɪf nɑt ði aʊɝ.

The seat was of gilded wood, but was surprisingly unassuming. Perhaps that was why Laman had decided to build himself a new throne, using Avendoraldera itself as a material. Elayne walked up to the dais, then turned as the Cairhienin nobility entered, her supporters first, then the others, ranked according to the complicated dictates of Does Dae'mar. Those rankings could change by the day, if not the hour.

bɝdʒɪɾ aɪɾ itʃ wʌn u ɛntɝd, bʌt ðə kɛɹhinɪn wɝ mɑɾəlz ə pɹəpɹaɪəɾi. nʌn wəd ʃoʊ ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ɛlɹinz ɑdæsəɾi ɪn ændɝ. ʃi wɑz ə peɪtʃɹiət, ɪf wʌn u fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾɪŋli kəntɪnjud tə dɪsəɡɹi wɪð ɪleɪn. ɪn kɛɹhin, wʌn dɪd nɑt də sətʃ θɪŋz.

Birgitte eyed each one who entered, but the Cairhienin were models of propriety. None would show anything like Ellorien's audacity in Andor. She was a patriot, if one who frustratingly continued to disagree with Elayne. In Cairhien, one did not do such things.

wʌns ðə kɹaʊd hæd stɪld, ɪleɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. ʃid kənsɪɾɝd ə spitʃ, bʌɾ əɹ mʌðɝ hæd tɔɾ əɹ ðət səmtaɪmz, dɪsaɪsɪv ækʃən meɪd fəɹ ðə bɛst spitʃ. ɪleɪn muv tə sɪt daʊn ɪn ðə θɹoʊn.

Once the crowd had stilled, Elayne took a deep breath. She'd considered a speech, but her mother had taught her that sometimes, decisive action made for the best speech. Elayne moved to sit down in the throne.

bɝdʒɪt kɑɾ əɹ ɑɹm.

Birgitte caught her arm.

ɪleɪn ɡlænst əɾ əɹ kwɛstʃənɪŋli, bʌt ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz aɪɪŋ ðə θɹoʊn. "weɪɾ ə moʊmənt," ʃi sɛd, bɛndɪŋ daʊn.

Elayne glanced at her questioningly, but the Warder was eyeing the throne. "Wait a moment," she said, bending down.

ðə noʊbəlz bɪɡæn mɝmɝɪŋ wʌn tə ənʌðɝ, ən lɔɹstʃɹəm stɛpt ʌp tə ɪleɪn. "jɔɹ mædʒəsti?"

The nobles began murmuring one to another, and Lorstrum stepped up to Elayne. "Your Majesty?"

"bɝdʒɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd, blʌʃɪŋ, "ɪz ðɪs ɹɪli nɛsəsɛɹi?"

"Birgitte," Elayne said, blushing, "is this really necessary?"

bɝdʒɪɾ ɪɡnɔɹd hɝ, pɹɑɾɪŋ ət ðə sits kʊʃən. laɪt! wɑz ðə wɔɹɾɝ dɪtɝmən tə ɪmbɛɹəs əɹ ɪn ɛvɹi pɑsəbəl sɪtʃueɪʃən? ʃʊɹli ði -  "ɑhɑ!" bɝdʒɪt sɛd, jæŋkɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ fɹəm ðə pɪloʊd kʊʃən.

Birgitte ignored her, prodding at the seat's cushion. Light! Was the Warder determined to embarrass her in every possible situation? Surely the -  "Aha!" Birgitte said, yanking something from the pillowed cushion.

ɪleɪn stɑɹɾəd, ðə stɛp kloʊsɝ, lɔɹstʃɹəm ən bɝtoʊm əɾ əɹ saɪd. bɝdʒɪt wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ʌp ə smɔl niɾəl, tɪp blæk. "hɪɾən ɪn ðə kʊʃən."

Elayne started, the stepped closer, Lorstrum and Bertome at her side. Birgitte was holding up a small needle, tipped black. "Hidden in the cushion."

ɪleɪn peɪld.

Elayne paled.

"ɪt wɑz ði oʊnli pleɪs ðeɪ nu jud bi, ɪleɪn," bɝdʒɪt sɛd sɔfli. ʃi nɛl daʊn ən bɪɡæn pɹɑɾɪŋ fəɹ mɔɹ tʃɹæps.

"It was the only place they knew you'd be, Elayne," Birgitte said softly. She knelt down and began prodding for more traps.

lɔɹstʃɹəm hæd ɡɹoʊn flʌʃt. "aɪ wɪl faɪn u dɪd ðɪs, jəɹ mædʒəsti," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə loʊ vɔɪs. ə deɪnʒɝəs vɔɪs. "ðeɪ wɪl noʊ maɪ ɹæθ."

Lorstrum had grown flushed. "I will find who did this, Your Majesty," he said in a low voice. A dangerous voice. "They will know my wrath."

"nɑɾ ɪf ðeɪ noʊ maɪn fɝst," stɑki bɝtoʊm sɛd, lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə niɾəl.

"Not if they know mine first," stocky Bertome said, looking over the needle.

"ɑbviəsli ən əsæsəneɪʃən ətɛmpt ɪntɛndəd fəɹ ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, jəɹ mædʒəsti," lɔɹstʃɹəm sɛɾ ɪn ə laʊɾɝ vɔɪs, fəɹ ðə bɛnəfɪɾ ə ði ɑɾiəns. "nʌn wəd dɛɹ tʃɹaɪ tə kɪl ju, əɹ bɪlʌv sɪstɝ fɹəm ændɝ."

"Obviously an assassination attempt intended for the Lord Dragon, Your Majesty," Lorstrum said in a louder voice, for the benefit of the audience. "None would dare try to kill you, our beloved sister from Andor."

"ðæɾ ɪz ɡʊd tə hɪɹ," ɪleɪn sɛd, aɪɪŋ hɪm. ðəɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən ə hɝz sɛd tə ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə ɹum ðət ʃi wəd pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ðɪs ɹuz, ɪntɛndəd tə seɪv ɪz feɪs. əz əɹ stʃɹɔŋɡəst səpɔɹɾɝ, ðə ʃeɪm ʌv ən əsæsəneɪʃən ətɛmp fɛl ɑn hɪm.

"That is good to hear," Elayne said, eyeing him. That expression of hers said to everyone in the room that she would put up with this ruse, intended to save his face. As her strongest supporter, the shame of an assassination attempt fell on him.

əɡɹiɪŋ tə lɛɾ ɪm seɪv feɪs wəd kɑs hɪm. hi loʊɝɾ ɪz aɪz bɹifli ɪn ʌndɝstændɪŋ.

Agreeing to let him save face would cost him. He lowered his eyes briefly in understanding.

laɪt, ʃi heɪɾəd ðɪs ɡeɪm. bʌt ʃi wəd pleɪ ɪt. ən ʃi wəd pleɪ ɪt wɛl.

Light, she hated this game. But she would play it. And she would play it well.

"ɪz ɪt seɪf?" ʃi æsk bɝdʒɪt.

"Is it safe?" she asked Birgitte.

ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɹʌbd əɹ tʃɪn. "wʌn weɪ tə faɪn aʊt," ʃi sɛd, ðən plɑp hɝsɛlf daʊn ɪn ðə θɹoʊn wɪð ən ʌnsɛɹəmoʊniəs əmaʊn ə fɔɹs.

The Warder rubbed her chin. "One way to find out," she said, then plopped herself down in the throne with an unceremonious amount of force.

nɑɾ ə fju ʌv ðə noʊbəlz ɪn ðə hɔl ɡæspt, ən lɔɹstʃɹəm ɡɹu mɔɹ peɪl.

Not a few of the nobles in the hall gasped, and Lorstrum grew more pale.

"nɑt vɛɹi kʌmftəɹbəl," bɝdʒɪt sɛd, linɪŋ tə ðə saɪd, ðən pʊʃɪŋ əɹ bæk ʌp əɡɛns ðə wʊd. "aɪ wʊɾə ɪkspɛktəɾ ə mɑnɑɹks θɹoʊn tə bi mɔɹ kʊʃənd, wʌt wɪð jəɹ dɛləkət bæksaɪɾ ən ɔl."

"Not very comfortable," Birgitte said, leaning to the side, then pushing her back up against the wood. "I would have expected a monarch's throne to be more cushioned, what with your delicate backside and all."

"bɝdʒɪt!" ɪleɪn hɪst, filɪŋ əɹ feɪs ɡɹoʊ ɹɛɾ əɡɛn. "ju kæn sɪɾ ɪn ðə sʌn θɹoʊn!"

"Birgitte!" Elayne hissed, feeling her face grow red again. "You can't sit in the Sun Throne!"

"aɪm jəɹ bɑɾiɡɑɹd," bɝdʒɪt sɛd. "aɪ kən teɪs jəɹ fuɾ ɪf aɪ wɑnt, aɪ kən wɔk θɹu dɔɹweɪz bɪfɔɹ ju, ən aɪ kən blʌɾi sɪɾ ɪn jəɹ tʃɛɹ ɪf aɪ θɪŋk ɪɾəl pɹətɛk ju." ʃi ɡɹɪnd. "bɪsaɪdz,"

"I'm your bodyguard," Birgitte said. "I can taste your food if I want, I can walk through doorways before you, and I can bloody sit in your chair if I think it will protect you." She grinned. "Besides,"

ʃi æɾəd ɪn ə loʊɝ vɔɪs, "aɪ ɔlweɪz wʌndɝd wʌt wʌn ə ðiz fɛlt laɪk." ðə wɔɹɾɝ stʊɾ ʌp, stɪl wɛɹi, bʌɾ ɔlsoʊ sæɾəsfaɪd.

she added in a lower voice, "I always wondered what one of these felt like." The Warder stood up, still wary, but also satisfied.

ɪleɪn tɝn ən feɪs ðə noʊbɪləɾi ʌv kɛɹhin. "ju hæv weɪɾəd lɔŋ fəɹ ðɪs," ʃi sɛd. "sʌm ə jə ɑɹ dɪsæɾəsfaɪd, bʌt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət hæf ə maɪ blʌɾ ɪz kɛɹhinɪn. ðɪs əlaɪəns wɪl meɪk boʊθ ʌv əɹ neɪʃənz ɡɹeɪt. aɪ də nɑt dɪmæn jəɹ tʃɹʌst, bʌɾ aɪ də dɪmæn jəɹ oʊbiɾiəns." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən æɾəd, "ɹɪmɛmbɝ əɡɛn, ðɪs ɪz əz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɪʃɪz ɪt tə bi."

Elayne turned and faced the nobility of Cairhien. "You have waited long for this," she said. "Some of you are dissatisfied, but remember that half of my blood is Cairhienin. This alliance will make both of our nations great. I do not demand your trust, but I do demand your obedience." She hesitated, then added, "Remember again, this is as the Dragon Reborn wishes it to be."

ʃi sɔ ðət ðeɪ ʌndɝstʊd. ɹænd hæd kɑŋkɝd ðɪs sɪɾi wʌns, ðoʊ ɪt hæd bɪn tə lɪbɝeɪɾ ɪt fɹəm ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ. ðeɪ wəd bi waɪz nɑt tə tɛmpt ɪm tə kʌm bæk ən kɑŋkɝ ɪɾ əɡɛn. ə kwin juz ðə tulz ðət ʃi hæɾ ət hænd. ʃi hæd teɪkən ændɝ ɑn əɹ oʊn; ʃi wəd lɛt ɹænd hɛlp əɹ wɪð kɛɹhin.

She saw that they understood. Rand had conquered this city once, though it had been to liberate it from the Shaido. They would be wise not to tempt him to come back and conquer it again. A queen used the tools that she had at hand. She had taken Andor on her own; she would let Rand help her with Cairhien.

ʃi sæt daʊn. sətʃ ə sɪmpəl θɪŋ, bʌt ði ɪmpləkeɪʃənz wəd bi fɑɹ-ɹitʃɪŋ ɪndid. "ɡæðɝ jəɹ ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl fɔɹsɪz ən haʊs ɡɑɹdz," ʃi kəmændəd tə ðə kəlɛktəd noʊbəlz. "ju wɪl bi mɑɹtʃɪŋ, wɪð ðə fɔɹsɪz ʌv ændɝ, θɹu ɡeɪtweɪz tə ə pleɪs noʊn əz ðə fild ə mɛɹɪlɝ. wɪl bi miɾɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn."

She sat down. Such a simple thing, but the implications would be far-reaching indeed. "Gather your individual forces and House guards," she commanded to the collected nobles. "You will be marching, with the forces of Andor, through gateways to a place known as the Field of Merrilor. We will be meeting the Dragon Reborn."

ðə noʊbəlz sim sɝpɹaɪzd. ʃi wəd kʌm ɪn, teɪk ðə θɹoʊn, ðən kəmæn ðɛɹ ɑɹmiz fɹəm ðə sɪɾi ðə seɪm deɪ? ʃi smaɪld. bɛs tə ækt kwɪkli ən dɪsaɪsɪvli; ɪt wəd bɪl pɹɛsɪɾənt fəɹ oʊbeɪɪŋ hɝ. ən wəd bɪɡɪn tə ɹɛɾi ðɛm fəɹ ðə læs bæɾəl.

The nobles seemed surprised. She would come in, take the throne, then command their armies from the city the same day? She smiled. Best to act quickly and decisively; it would build precedent for obeying her. And would begin to ready them for the Last Battle.

"ɔlsoʊ," ʃi ənaʊnst əz ðeɪ bɪɡæn tə wɪspɝ, "aɪ wɑn jə tə ɡæðɝ ɛvɹi mæn ɪn ðɪs ɹɛlm u kən hoʊld ə sɔɹɾ ən kɑnskɹɪpt əm ɪndə ðə kwinz ɑɹmi. ðəɹ woʊn bi mʌtʃ taɪm fəɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ, bʌɾ ɛvɹi mæn wɪl bi niɾəd ɪn ðə læs bæɾəl - ən ðoʊz wɪmən u wɪʃ tə faɪt meɪ ɹipɔɹɾ əz wɛl. ɔlsoʊ, sɛnd wɝd tə ðə bɛlfndɝz ɪn jəɹ sɪɾi. əl nid tə mit wɪð əm wɪðɪn ði aʊɝ."

"Also," she announced as they began to whisper, "I want you to gather every man in this realm who can hold a sword and conscript them into the Queen's army. There won't be much time for training, but every man will be needed in the Last Battle - and those women who wish to fight may report as well. Also, send word to the bellfounders in your city. I will need to meet with them within the hour."

"bʌt," bɝtoʊm sɛd, "ðə kɔɹəneɪʃən fist, jəɹ mædʒəsti. . . ." "wi wɪl fist wən ðə læs bæɾəl əz bɪn wɝi ən kɛɹhinz tʃɪlʒɹən ɑɹ seɪf," ɪleɪn sɛd. ʃi niɾəd tə dɪstʃɹækt əm fɹəm ðɛɹ plɑts, ɡɪv əm wɝk tə kip əm bɪzi, ɪf pɑsəbəl. "muv! pɹitɛn ðə læs bæɾəl ɪz ɑn jəɹ dɔɹstɛp, ən wɪl ɝaɪv ɑn ðə mɑɹoʊ!" fɔɹ, ɪndiɾ ɪt maɪt.

"But," Bertome said, "the coronation feast, Your Majesty. . . ." "We will feast when the Last Battle has been wori and Cairhien's children are safe," Elayne said. She needed to distract them from their plots, give them work to keep them busy, if possible. "Move! Pretend the Last Battle is on your doorstep, and will arrive on the morrow!" For, indeed it might.

mæt lin əɡɛnst ə dɛd tʃɹi, lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz kæmp. hi bɹiðd ɪn ən aʊt, smaɪlɪŋ, filɪŋ ðə bjuɾəfəl kʌmfɝɾ ə noʊɪŋ ðəɾ i wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ biɪŋ tʃeɪst. hi hæd fɝɡɑɾən haʊ ɡʊd ðət fɛlt.

Mat leaned against a dead tree, looking over his camp. He breathed in and out, smiling, feeling the beautiful comfort of knowing that he was no longer being chased. He had forgotten how good that felt.

bɛɾɝ ðən ə pɹɪɾi sɝvɪŋ ɡɝl ɑn itʃ ni, ðət filɪŋ wɑz. wɛl, bɛɾɝ ðən wʌn sɝvɪŋ ɡɝl, ɛniweɪ.

Better than a pretty serving girl on each knee, that feeling was. Well, better than one serving girl, anyway.

ə mɪlətɛɹi kæmp əɾ ivnɪŋ wɑz wʌn ə ðə moʊs kʌmftəɹbəl pleɪsəz ɪn ɔl ðə wɝld, ivən ɪf hæf ðə kæmp wɑz ɛmpti, ðə mɛn ðəɹ hævɪŋ ɡɔn tə kɛɹhin. ðə sʌn hæd sɛt, ən səm ə ðoʊz u ɹɪmeɪn hæd tɝn ɪn. bʌt fəɹ ðoʊz u hæd pʊld æftɝnun duɾi ðə nɛks deɪ, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹizən tə slip dʒʌs jɛt.

A military camp at evening was one of the most comfortable places in all the world, even if half the camp was empty, the men there having gone to Cairhien. The sun had set, and some of those who remained had turned in. But for those who had pulled afternoon duty the next day, there was no reason to sleep just yet.

ə dʌzən faɪɹɛpɪts smoʊldɝd θɹu ðə kæmp, mɛn sɪɾɪŋ tə ʃɛɹ teɪlz ʌv ɛksplɔɪts, ʌv wɪmən lɛf bɪhaɪnd, əɹ ə ɹumɝz fɹəm fɑɹ ɔf. tʌŋz ə fleɪmz flɪkɝɾ əz mɛn læft, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn lɔɡz əɹ ɹɑks, sʌmwʌn əkeɪʒənəli dɪɡɪŋ ɪndə ðə koʊlz wɪð ə twɪstəd bɹæntʃ ən stɝɪŋ taɪni spɑɹks ɪndə ði ɛɹ əz ɪz fɹɛnz sæŋ "kʌm ji meɪdz" əɹ "fɔlən wɪloʊz ət nun."

A dozen firepits smoldered through the camp, men sitting to share tales of exploits, of women left behind, or of rumors from far off. Tongues of flames flickered as men laughed, sitting on logs or rocks, someone occasionally digging into the coals with a twisted branch and stirring tiny sparks into the air as his friends sang "Come Ye Maids" or "Fallen Willows at Noon."

ðə mɛn ə ðə bænd wɝ fɹəm ə dʌzən dɪfɹənt neɪʃənz, bʌt ðɪs kæmp wɑz ðɛɹ tʃɹu hoʊm. mæt stʃɹoʊd θɹu ðɛm, hæɾ ɑn ɪz hɛd, æʃhændʒɹeɪ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. hi hæd ɡɑɾən ə nu skɑɹf fəɹ ɪz nɛk. pipəl nu əbaʊɾ ɪz skɑɹ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹizən tə ʃoʊ ɪɾ ɔf laɪk wʌn əɹ lukəz blʌɾi wæɡənz.

The men of the Band were from a dozen different nations, but this camp was their true home. Mat strode through them, hat on his head, ashandarei over his shoulder. He had gotten a new scarf for his neck. People knew about his scar, but there was no reason to show it off like one or Luca's bloody wagons.

ðə skɑɹf i hæd tʃoʊzən ðɪs taɪm wɑz ɹɛd. ɪn mɛmɹi ʌv taɪlɪn ən ði ʌðɝz u hæd fɔlən tə ðə ɡoʊləm. fəɹ ə ʃɔɹt taɪm, hi hæd bɪn tɛmptəd tə tʃuz pɪŋk. ə vɛɹi ʃɔɹt taɪm.

The scarf he had chosen this time was red. In memory of Tylin and the others who had fallen to the gholam. For a short time, he had been tempted to choose pink. A very short time.

mæt smaɪld. ðoʊ sɔŋz ɹæŋ fɹəm sɛvɹəl ə ðə kæmpfaɪɝz, nʌn wɝ laʊd, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə hɛlθi stɪlnəs əbaʊt ðə kæmp. nɑɾ ə saɪləns. saɪləns wɑz nɛvɝ ɡʊd. hi heɪɾəd saɪləns. meɪɾ ɪm wʌndɝ u wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ soʊ hɑɹd tə snik ʌp ɑn hɪm. noʊ, ðɪs wɑz ə stɪlnəs. mɛn snɔɹɪŋ sɔfli, faɪɝz kɹæklɪŋ, ʌðɝ mɛn sɪŋɪŋ, widz kɹʌntʃɪŋ əz ðoʊz ɑn wɑtʃ pæs baɪ. ðə pisfəl nɔɪzɪz ə mɛn ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ ðɛɹ laɪvz.

Mat smiled. Though songs rang from several of the campfires, none were loud, and there was a healthy stillness about the camp. Not a silence. Silence was never good. He hated silence. Made him wonder who was trying so hard to sneak up on him. No, this was a stillness. Men snoring softly, fires crackling, other men singing, weeds crunching as those on watch passed by. The peaceful noises of men enjoying their lives.

mæt faʊn ɪz weɪ bæk tə hɪz teɪbəl aʊtsaɪɾ ɪz dɑɹkən tɛnt. hi sæt daʊn, lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə peɪpɝz i hæd stæk hɪɹ. ði ɪnsaɪɾ ə ðə tɛn hæd bɪn tu stʌfi. bɪsaɪdz, hi hæd nɑt wɑntəd tə weɪk oʊlvɝ.

Mat found his way back to his table outside his darkened tent. He sat down, looking over the papers he had stacked here. The inside of the tent had been too stuffy. Besides, he had not wanted to wake Olver.

mæts tɛn ɹɪpəld ɪn ðə waɪnd. hɪz sit dɪd lʊk ɑd, ðə faɪn oʊk teɪbəl sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ə pætʃ ə hɛnzfʊt, mæts tʃɛɹ bɪsaɪɾ ɪt, ə pɪtʃɝ ə mʌl saɪɾɝ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪsaɪd hɪm. ðə peɪpɝz ɑn ɪz teɪbəl wɝ weɪd daʊn wɪð vɛɹiəs ɹɑks i hæd pɪkt ʌp, lɪt baɪ ə sɪŋɡəl flɪkɝɪŋ læmp.

Mat's tent rippled in the wind. His seat did look odd, the fine oak table sitting in a patch of hensfoot, Mat's chair beside it, a pitcher of mulled cider on the ground beside him. The papers on his table were weighed down with various rocks he had picked up, lit by a single flickering lamp.

hi ʃəd nɑɾ əv tə hæv stæks ə peɪpɝ. hi ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə sɪɾ ət wʌn ə ðoʊz faɪɝz ən sɪŋ "dæns wɪð dʒæk oʊ' ðə ʃædoʊz." hi kəd feɪnli meɪk aʊt ðə wɝdz ə ðə sɔŋ fɹəm ə nɪɹbaɪ kæmpfaɪɝ.

He should not have to have stacks of paper. He should be able to sit at one of those fires and sing "Dance with Jak o' the Shadows." He could faintly make out the words of the song from a nearby campfire.

peɪpɝz. wɛl, hi hæɾ əɡɹid tə ɪleɪnz ɛmplɔɪmənt, ən ðəɹ wɝ peɪpɝz fəɹ ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ.

Papers. Well, he had agreed to Elayne's employment, and there were papers for that sort of thing.

ən peɪpɝz əbaʊt sɛɾɪŋ ʌp ðə dʒɹæɡən kɹuz. peɪpɝz əbaʊt səplaɪz, dɪsəplən ɹɪpɔɹts, ən ɔl kaɪnz ə nɑnsɛns. ən ə fju peɪpɝz i hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə wɪɡəl aʊɾ ə hɝ ɹɔɪəl mædʒəsti, spaɪ ɹɪpɔɹts i hæd wɑntəd tə lʊk oʊvɝ. ɹɪpɔɹts ɑn ðə sintʃæn.

And papers about setting up the dragon crews. Papers about supplies, discipline reports, and all kinds of nonsense. And a few papers he had been able to wiggle out of her royal majesty, spy reports he had wanted to look over. Reports on the Seanchan.

mʌtʃ ə ðə nuz wɑz nɑt nu tə hɪm; baɪ kɝɾəsi ʌv vɛɹɪnz ɡeɪtweɪ, mæt hæd tʃɹævəl tə keɪɛmlɪn mɔɹ kwɪkli ðən moʊst ɹumɝz. bʌɾ ɪleɪn hæd ɡeɪtweɪz ə hɝ oʊn, ən səm ə ðə nuz fɹəm tiɹ ən ɪljən wɑz fɹɛʃ. ðəɹ wɑz tɔk ə ðə nu sintʃæn ɛmpɹɛs. soʊ tuɑn ɹɪli hæd kɹaʊn hɝsɛlf, əɹ wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz ðə sintʃæn dɪd tə neɪm ə nu liɾɝ.

Much of the news was not new to him; by courtesy of Verin's gateway, Mat had traveled to Caemlyn more quickly than most rumors. But Elayne had gateways of her own, and some of the news from Tear and Illian was fresh. There was talk of the new Seanchan Empress. So Tuon really had crowned herself, or whatever it was the Seanchan did to name a new leader.

ðət meɪɾ ɪm smaɪl. laɪt, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ ɪn fɔɹ! ðeɪ pɹɑbli θɔt ðeɪ dɪd. bʌt ʃi wəd sɝpɹaɪz ðɛm, ʃʊɹ əz ðə skaɪ wɑz blu. ɔɹ, wɛl, ɪt hæd bɪn ɡɹeɪ leɪtli.

That made him smile. Light, but they did not know what they were in for! They probably thought they did. But she would surprise them, sure as the sky was blue. Or, well, it had been gray lately.

ðəɹ wɑz ɔlsoʊ tɔk ə si foʊk ɪn əlaɪəns wɪð ðə sintʃæn. mæt dɪsmɪs ðæt. ðə sintʃæn hæd kæptʃɝɾ ɪnʌf si foʊk vɛsəlz tə ɡɪv ðəɾ ɪmpɹɛʃən, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə tʃɹuθ. hi faʊn səm peɪdʒəz wɪð nuz əbaʊt ɹænd, tu, moʊst ʌv ɪɾ ənspəsɪfɪk əɹ əntʃɹʌstwɝði.

There was also talk of Sea Folk in alliance with the Seanchan. Mat dismissed that. The Seanchan had captured enough Sea Folk vessels to give that impression, but it was not the truth. He found some pages with news about Rand, too, most of it unspecific or untrustworthy.

blæstəd kʌlɝz. ɹænd wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɝaʊn ən tɔkɪŋ wɪð səm pipəl ɪn ə tɛnt. pɝhæps i wɑz ɪn ɑɹæd dumən, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt bi boʊθ ðəɹ ən faɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, naʊ kəd hi? wʌn ɹumɝ sɛd ðət ɹænd hæd kɪl kwin taɪlɪn. wɪtʃ blʌɾi ɪɾiəts θɔt ðæt?

Blasted colors. Rand was sitting around and talking with some people in a tent. Perhaps he was in Arad Doman, but he could not be both there and fighting in the Borderlands, now could he? One rumor said that Rand had killed Queen Tylin. Which bloody idiots thought that?

hi tɝn oʊvɝ ðə ɹɪpɔɹts ɑn ɹænd kwɪkli. hi heɪɾəd hævɪŋ tə bænɪʃ ðoʊz fleɪmɪŋ kʌlɝz oʊvɝ ən oʊvɝ əɡɛn. ət list ɹænd wɑz wɛɹɪŋ kloʊðz ðɪs taɪm.

He turned over the reports on Rand quickly. He hated having to banish those flaming colors over and over again. At least Rand was wearing clothes this time.

ðə læs peɪdʒ wɑz kjʊɹiəs. wʊlvz ɹʌnɪŋ ɪn ɪnɔɹməs pæks, kɑŋɡɹəɡeɪɾɪŋ ɪn klɪɹɪŋz ən haʊlɪŋ ɪn kɔɹəs? ðə skaɪz ʃaɪnɪŋ ɹɛɾ ət naɪt? laɪvstɑk laɪnɪŋ ʌp ɪn ðə filz, ɔl feɪsɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə nɔɹθ, wɑtʃɪŋ saɪlənli? ðə fʊtpɹɪns ə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn ɑɹmiz ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə filz?

The last page was curious. Wolves running in enormous packs, congregating in clearings and howling in chorus? The skies shining red at night? Livestock lining up in the fields, all facing toward the north, watching silently? The footprints of Shadowspawn armies in the middle of fields?

ðiz θɪŋz smɛld ə sɪmpəl hɪɹseɪ, pæst ɑn fɹəm fɑɹmwaɪf tə fɑɹm-waɪf əntɪl ðeɪ ɹitʃt ði ɪɹz ʌv ɪleɪnz spaɪz.

These things smelled of simple hearsay, passed on from farmwife to farm-wife until they reached the ears of Elayne's spies.

mæt lʊkt oʊvɝ ðə ʃit, ðən - wɪθaʊɾ ivən θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɪt-ɹilaɪzd i hæd pʊl vɛɹɪnz ɛnvəloʊp aʊɾ ə hɪz pɑkət. ðə stɪl-sild lɛɾɝ wɑz lʊkɪŋ wɔɹn ən dɝɾi, bʌɾ i hæd nɑɾ oʊpən ɪt. ɪt sim lk ðə moʊs dɪfəkəl θɪŋ i hæɾ ɛvɝ dʌn, ɹɪzɪstɪŋ ðætslæʃɝdʒ.

Mat looked over the sheet, then - without even thinking of it-realized he had pulled Verin's envelope out of his pocket. The still-sealed letter was looking worn and dirty, but he had not opened it. It seemed lke the most difficult thing he had ever done, resisting that;/urge.

"naʊ ðəɾ ɪz ə saɪɾ ə səm ɪɹɛɡjəlɛɹəɾi," ə wʊmənz vɔɪs sɛd. mæt lʊkt ʌp tə si sɛɾəl stʃɹoʊlɪŋ təwɔɹd hɪm. ʃi wɔɹ ə bɹaʊn dʒɹɛs ðət leɪst oʊvɝ əɹ æmpəl bʊzəm. nɑt ðət mæt spɛn ɛni taɪm lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪt.

"Now that is a sight of some irregularity," a woman's voice said. Mat looked up to see Setalle strolling toward him. She wore a brown dress that laced over her ample bosom. Not that Mat spent any time looking at it.

"ju laɪk maɪ dɛn?" mæt æskt. hi sɛt ði ɛnvəloʊp əsaɪd, ðən pʊt ðə læst ə ðə spaɪ ɹɪpɔɹts ɑn ə stæk, dʒʌs bɪsaɪɾ ə sɪɹiz ə skɛtʃəz hid bɪn duɪŋ ɑn səm nu kɹɔsboʊz, beɪst ɑn ðə wʌnz tælmɑnz hæd bɑt ðə peɪpɝz θɹɛɾənd tə bloʊ əweɪ. əz i hæd noʊ ɹɑk fəɹ ðɪs stæk, hi pʊld ɔf wʌn ə hɪz buts ən sɛɾ ɪɾ ɑn ðə tɑp.

"You like my den?" Mat asked. He set the envelope aside, then put the last of the spy reports on a stack, just beside a series of sketches he'd been doing on some new crossbows, based on the ones Talmanes had bought The papers threatened to blow away. As he had no rock for this stack, he pulled off one of his boots and set it on the top.

"jɔɹ dɛn?" sɛɾəl æskt, saʊndɪŋ əmjuzd.

"Your den?" Setalle asked, sounding amused.

"ʃʊɹ," mæt sɛd, skɹætʃɪŋ ðə bɑɾəm ə hɪz stɑkɪnɡd fʊt. "jul əv tə meɪk ən əpɔɪnmənt wɪð maɪ stuɝɾ ɪf jə wɑnə kʌm ɪn."

"Sure," Mat said, scratching the bottom of his stockinged foot. "You'll have to make an appointment with my steward if you want to come in."

"jɔɹ stuɝd?"

"Your steward?"

"ðə stʌmp ɹaɪɾ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ," mæt sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ. "nɑt ðə lɪɾəl wʌn, ðə bɪɡ wʌn wɪð mɔs ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɑn ðə tɑp."

"The stump right over there," Mat said, nodding. "Not the little one, the big one with moss growing on the top."

ʃi ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ.

She raised an eyebrow.

"hiz kwaɪt ɡʊd," mæt sɛd. "hɑɹdli ɛvɝ lɛts ɛniwʌn ɪn aɪ doʊnt wɑnə si."

"He's quite good," Mat said. "Hardly ever lets anyone in I don't want to see."

"ju ɑɹ ən ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ kɹitʃɝ, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən," sɛɾəl sɛd, siɾɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɑn ðə lɑɹdʒɝ stʌmp. hɝ dʒɹɛs wɑz æftɝ ði ɛbu dɑɹ staɪl, wɪð ðə saɪd pɪn ʌp tə ɹɪvil pɛɾikoʊts kʌlɝfəl ɪnʌf tə skɛɹ əweɪ ə tɪŋkɝ.

"You are an interesting creature, Matrim Cauthon," Setalle said, seating herself on the larger stump. Her dress was after the Ebou Dar style, with the side pinned up to reveal petticoats colorful enough to scare away a Tinker.

"dɪd jə wɑn ɛniθɪŋ spəsɪfɪk?" mæt æskt. "ɔɹ dɪd jə dʒʌs dʒɹɑp baɪ soʊ ðət jə kəd sɪɾ ɑn maɪ stuɝdz hɛd?"

"Did you want anything specific?" Mat asked. "Or did you just drop by so that you could sit on my steward's head?"

"aɪ hɝd ðət jə vɪzəɾəd ðə pæləs əɡɛn tədeɪ. ɪz ɪt tʃɹu ðət jə noʊ ðə kwin?"

"I heard that you visited the palace again today. Is it true that you know the Queen?"

mæt ʃɹʌɡd. "ɪleɪnz ə naɪs ɪnʌf ɡɝl. pɹɪɾi θɪŋ, ðæts fəɹ sɝɾən."

Mat shrugged. "Elayne's a nice enough girl. Pretty thing, that's for certain."

"ju doʊnt ʃɑk mi ɛnimɔɹ, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən," sɛɾəl noʊɾəd. "aɪv ɹilaɪz ðət ðə θɪŋz jə seɪ ɑɹ ɔfən ɪntɛndəd tə də ðæt."

"You don't shock me anymore, Matrim Cauthon," Setalle noted. "I've realized that the things you say are often intended to do that."

ðeɪ wɝ? "aɪ seɪ wʌɾ aɪm θɪŋkɪŋ, mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən. waɪ dʌz ɪt mæɾɝ tə jə ɪf aɪ noʊ ðə kwin?"

They were? "I say what I'm thinking, Mistress Anan. Why does it matter to you if I know the Queen?"

"mɪɹli ənʌðɝ pis ə ðə pʌzəl ðət jə ɹɛpɹəzɛnt," sɛɾəl sɛd. "aɪ ɹəsivd ə lɛɾɝ fɹəm dʒoʊlin tədeɪ."

"Merely another piece of the puzzle that you represent," Setalle said. "I received a letter from Joline today."

"wʌt dɪd ʃi wɑn fɹəm ju?"

"What did she want from you?"

"ʃi dɪdn æsk fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ. ʃi mɪɹli wɑntəd tə sɛnd wɝd ðət ðeɪ hæɾ ɝaɪv seɪfli ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn."

"She didn't ask for anything. She merely wanted to send word that they had arrived safely in Tar Valon."

"ju mʌst əv ɹɛɾ ɪt ɹɔŋ."

"You must have read it wrong."

sɛɾəl ɡeɪv ɪm ə tʃaɪɾɪŋ stɛɹ. "dʒoʊlin sədaɪ ɹɪspɛks ju, mæstɝ kɔθən. ʃi ɔfən spoʊk haɪli ʌv ju, ən ðə weɪ ðət jə ɹɛskjud nɑɾ oʊnli hɝ, bʌt ði ʌðɝ tu. ʃi æskt æftɝ jə ɪn ðə lɛɾɝ."

Setalle gave him a chiding stare. "Joline Sedai respects you, Master Cauthon. She often spoke highly of you, and the way that you rescued not only her, but the other two. She asked after you in the letter."

mæt blɪŋkt. "ɹɪli? ʃi sɛd θɪŋz laɪk ðæt?"

Mat blinked. "Really? She said things like that?"

sɛɾəl nɑɾəd.

Setalle nodded.

"bɝn mi," hi sɛd. "ɔlmoʊs meɪks mi fil bæd fəɹ peɪntɪŋ əɹ maʊθ blu. bʌt jə wʊdn əv noʊn ʃi θɔt ðət weɪ, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ haʊ ʃi tʃɹiɾəd mi."

"Burn me," he said. "Almost makes me feel bad for painting her mouth blue. But you wouldn't have known she thought that way, considering how she treated me."

"spikɪŋ sətʃ θɪŋz tə ə mæn ɪnfleɪts ɪz əpɪnjən ə hɪmsɛlf. wʌn wəd θɪŋk ðət ðə weɪ ʃi tʃɹiɾəd jə wʊɾə bɪn ɪnʌf."

"Speaking such things to a man inflates his opinion of himself. One would think that the way she treated you would have been enough."

"ʃiz ɛɛs sədaɪ," mæt mʌɾɝd. "ʃi tʃɹits ɛvɹiwʌn laɪk ðəɹ mʌd tə bi skɹeɪpt ɔf əɹ buts."

"She's Aes Sedai," Mat muttered. "She treats everyone like they're mud to be scraped off her boots."

sɛɾəl ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɪm. ʃi hæɾ ə steɪtli weɪ əbaʊt hɝ, pɑɹt ɡɹændmʌðɝ, pɑɹt kɔɹt leɪɾi, pɑɹt noʊ- nɑnsɛns ɪnkipɝ.

Setalle glared at him. She had a stately way about her, part grandmother, part court lady, part no- nonsense innkeeper.

"sɑɹi," hi sɛd. "sʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹən əz bæɾ əz ʌðɝz. aɪ dɪdn min tə ɪnsʌl ju."

"Sorry," he said. "Some Aes Sedai aren't as bad as others. I didn't mean to insult you."

"aɪl teɪk ðət fəɹ ə kɑmpləmənt," sɛɾəl sɛd. "ðoʊ aɪm nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"I'll take that for a compliment," Setalle said. "Though I'm not Aes Sedai."

mæt ʃɹʌɡd, faɪndɪŋ ə naɪs smɔl ɹɑk əɾ ɪz fit. hi juzd ɪt tə ɹipleɪs ɪz buɾ ətɑp ðə stæk ə peɪpɝ. ðə ɹeɪnz ə ðə læs fju deɪz hæd pæst, livɪŋ ə kɹɪsp fɹɛʃnəs tə ði ɛɹ. "aɪ noʊ jə sɛɾ ɪt dɪdn hɝt," mæt sɛd. "bʌt . . . wʌt dʌz ɪt fil laɪk? ðə θɪŋ jə lɔst?"

Mat shrugged, finding a nice small rock at his feet. He used it to replace his boot atop the stack of paper. The rains of the last few days had passed, leaving a crisp freshness to the air. "I know you said it didn't hurt," Mat said. "But . . . what does it feel like? The thing you lost?"

ʃi pɝst əɹ lɪps. "wʌɾ ɪz ðə moʊs dɪlaɪtfəl fud jə ɛndʒɔɪ, mæstɝ kɔθən? ðə wʌn θɪŋ ðət jə wəɾ iɾ əbʌv ɔl ʌðɝz?"

She pursed her lips. "What is the most delightful food you enjoy, Master Cauthon? The one thing that you would eat above all others?"

"mɑz swit paɪz," mæt sɛɾ ɪmiɾiətli.

"Ma's sweet pies," Mat said immediately.

"wɛl, ɪts laɪk ðæt," sɛɾəl sɛd. "noʊɪŋ ðət jə juz tə bi eɪbəl tə ɛndʒɔɪ ðoʊz paɪz ɛvɹi deɪ, bʌt naʊ ðeɪv bɪn dɪnaɪd ju. jəɹ fɹɛnz, ðeɪ kən əv əz mɛni ʌv ðoʊz paɪz əz ðeɪ wɑnt. jə ɛnvi ðɛm, ən jə hɝt, bʌɾ ət ðə seɪm taɪm jəɹ hæpi. ət list sʌmwʌn kən ɛndʒɔɪ wʌt jə kænɑt."

"Well, it is like that," Setalle said. "Knowing that you used to be able to enjoy those pies every day, but now they have been denied you. Your friends, they can have as many of those pies as they want. You envy them, and you hurt, but at the same time you're happy. At least someone can enjoy what you cannot."

mæt nɑɾəd sloʊli.

Mat nodded slowly.

"waɪ ɪz ɪt ðət jə heɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ soʊ, mæstɝ kɔθən?" sɛɾəl æskt.

"Why is it that you hate Aes Sedai so, Master Cauthon?" Setalle asked.

"aɪ doʊn heɪt ðɛm," mæt sɛd. "bɝn mi, bʌɾ aɪ doʊnt. bʌt səmtaɪmz, ə mæn kæn sim tə də tu θɪŋz wɪθaʊt wɪmən wɑntɪŋ ɪm tə də wʌn ə ðoʊz θɪŋz ə dɪfɹənt weɪ ən ɪɡnɔɹ ði ʌðɝ wʌn kəmplitli."

"I don't hate them," Mat said. "Burn me, but I don't. But sometimes, a man can't seem to do two things without women wanting him to do one of those things a different way and ignore the other one completely."

"ju ɑɹən fɔɹs tə teɪk ðɛɹ ædvaɪs, ən aɪ wɔɹən ðət mʌtʃ ə ðə taɪm, jə ɪvɛntʃəwəli ədmɪɾ ɪts ɡʊɾ ædvaɪs."

"You aren't forced to take their advice, and I warrant that much of the time, you eventually admit it is good advice."

mæt ʃɹʌɡd. "səmtaɪmz, ə mæn dʒʌs laɪks tə də wʌɾ i wɑns wɪθaʊt sʌmwʌn tɛlɪŋ ɪm wʌts ɹɔŋ wɪð ɪɾ ən wʌts ɹɔŋ wɪð hɪm. ðæts ɔl."

Mat shrugged. "Sometimes, a man just likes to do what he wants without someone telling him what's wrong with it and what's wrong with him. That's all."

"æn ɪts nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð jəɹ . . . pəkjuljɝ vjuz ə noʊbəlz? moʊst ɛɛs sədaɪ ækt əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ noʊbəlwɪmən, æftɝ ɔl."

"And it has nothing to do with your . . . peculiar views of nobles? Most Aes Sedai act as if they were noblewomen, after all."

"aɪ hæv nʌθɪŋ əɡɛns noʊbəlz," mæt sɛd, stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ ɪz koʊt. "aɪ dʒʌs doʊn fænsi biɪŋ wʌn maɪsɛlf."

"I have nothing against nobles," Mat said, straightening his coat. "I just don't fancy being one myself."

"waɪ ɪz ðæt, ðɛn?"

"Why is that, then?"

mæt sæt fəɹ ə moʊmənt. waɪ wɑz ɪt? faɪnəli, hi lʊk daʊn əɾ ɪz fʊt ðən ɹipleɪst ɪz but.

Mat sat for a moment. Why was it? Finally, he looked down at his foot then replaced his boot.

"ɪts buts."

"It's boots."

"buts?" sɛɾəl lʊkt kənfjuzd.

"Boots?" Setalle looked confused.

"buts," mæt sɛd wɪð ə nɑd, taɪɪŋ ɪz leɪsəz. "ɪts ɔl əbaʊt ðə buts."

"Boots," Mat said with a nod, tying his laces. "It's all about the boots."

"bʌt - "

"But - "

"ju si," mæt sɛd, pʊlɪŋ ðə leɪsəz taɪt, "ə lɑɾ ə mɛn doʊn əv tə wɝi mʌtʃ əbaʊt wʌt buts tə wɛɹ. ðəɹ ðə pʊɹɪst ə foʊks. ɪf jə æsk wʌn ə ðɛm 'wʌt buts ɑɹ jə gɑnə wɛɹ tədeɪ, mɑp?' ðɛɹ ænsɝ ɪz izi. 'wɛl, mæt. aɪ oʊnli hæv wʌn pɛɹ, soʊ aɪ ɡɛs aɪm ɡɑnə wɛɹ ðət pɛɹ.'"

"You see," Mat said, pulling the laces tight, "a lot of men don't have to worry much about what boots to wear. They're the poorest of folks. If you ask one of them 'What boots are you going to wear today, Mop?' their answer is easy. 'Well, Mat. I only have one pair, so I guess I'm gonna wear that pair.'"

mæt hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "ɔɹ, aɪ ɡɛs ðeɪ wʊdn seɪ ðət tə ju, sɛɾəl, sɪns jəɹ nɑt mi ən ɔl. ðeɪ wʊdn kɔl jə mæt, jə ʌndɝstænd."

Mat hesitated. "Or, I guess they wouldn't say that to you, Setalle, since you're not me and all. They wouldn't call you Mat, you understand."

"aɪ ʌndɝstænd," ʃi sɛd, saʊndɪŋ əmjuzd.

"I understand," she said, sounding amused.

"ɛniweɪ, fəɹ pipəl ðəɾ əv ə lɪɾəl kɔɪn, ðə kwɛstʃən ʌv wɪtʃ buts tə wɛɹ ɪz hɑɹɾɝ. jə si, ævɝɪdʒ mɛn, mɛn laɪk mi. . . ." hi aɪd hɝ. "æn ɪm ən ævɝɪdʒ mæn, maɪn ju."

"Anyway, for people that have a little coin, the question of which boots to wear is harder. You see, average men, men like me. . . ." He eyed her. "And I'm an average man, mind you."

"ʌv kɔɹs jə ɑɹ."

"Of course you are."

"blʌɾi ɹaɪɾ aɪ æm," mæt sɛd, fɪnɪʃɪŋ wɪð ɪz leɪsəz ən sɪɾɪŋ ʌp. "æn ævɝɪdʒ mæn maɪɾ əv θɹi pɛɹz ə buts. jəɹ θɝd bɛs pɛɹ ə buts, ðoʊz ɑɹ ðə buts jə wɛɹ wən jəɹ wɝkɪŋ ət sʌmθɪŋ ənplɛzənt. ðeɪ maɪt ɹʌb æftɝ ə fju peɪsɪz, ən ðeɪ maɪɾ əv ə fju hoʊlz, bʌt ðəɹ ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf tə kip jəɹ fʊɾɪŋ. jə doʊn maɪn mʌkɪŋ əm ʌp ɪn ðə filz əɹ ðə bɑɹn."

"Bloody right I am," Mat said, finishing with his laces and sitting up. "An average man might have three pairs of boots. Your third best pair of boots, those are the boots you wear when you're working at something unpleasant. They might rub after a few paces, and they might have a few holes, but they're good enough to keep your footing. You don't mind mucking them up in the fields or the barn."

"ɔl ɹaɪt," sɛɾəl sɛd.

"All right," Setalle said.

"ðɛn juv jəɹ sɛkən bɛs pɛɹ ə buts," mæt sɛd. "ðoʊz ɑɹ jəɹ deɪ-tə-deɪ buts. jə wɛɹ ðoʊz ɪf jə ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ oʊvɝ tə dɪnɝ ət ðə neɪbɝz. ɔɹ, ɪn maɪ keɪs, jə wɛɹ ðoʊz ɪf jəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə bæɾəl. ðəɹ naɪs buts, ɡɪv jə ɡʊd fʊɾɪŋ, ən jə doʊn maɪn biɪŋ sin ɪn əm əɹ ɛniθɪŋ."

"Then you have your second best pair of boots," Mat said. "Those are your day-to-day boots. You wear those if you are going over to dinner at the neighbors. Or, in my case, you wear those if you're going to battle. They're nice boots, give you good footing, and you don't mind being seen in them or anything."

"æn jəɹ bɛs pɛɹ ə buts?" sɛɾəl æskt. "ju wɛɹ ðoʊz tə soʊʃəl ɪvɛns, laɪk ə bɔl əɹ daɪnɪŋ wɪð ə loʊkəl dɪɡnətɛɹi?"

"And your best pair of boots?" Setalle asked. "You wear those to social events, like a ball or dining with a local dignitary?"

"bɔlz? dɪɡnətɛɹiz? blʌɾi æʃəz, wʊmən. aɪ θɔt jə wɝ ən ɪn-kipɝ."

"Balls? Dignitaries? Bloody ashes, woman. I thought you were an inn-keeper."

sɛɾəl blʌʃt feɪnli.

Setalle blushed faintly.

"wɝ nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ tə ɛni bɔlz," mæt sɛd. "bʌɾ ɪf wi hæd tə, aɪ səspɛkt wid wɛɹ əɹ sɛkən bɛs pɛɹ ə buts. ɪf ðəɹ ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ vɪzəɾɪŋ oʊld leɪɾi hɛmbɹu nɛks dɔɹ, ðən ðəɹ blʌɾi wɛl ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ stɛpɪŋ ɑn ðə toʊz ʌv ɛni wʊmən ful ɪnʌf tə dæns wɪð ʌs."

"We're not going to any balls," Mat said. "But if we had to, I suspect we'd wear our second best pair of boots. If they're good enough for visiting old lady Hembrew next door, then they're bloody well good enough for stepping on the toes of any woman fool enough to dance with us."

"ðɛn wʌɾ ɑɹ ðə bɛs buts fɔɹ?"

"Then what are the best boots for?"

"wɔkɪŋ," mæt sɛd. "ɛni fɑɹmɝ noʊz ðə vælju ʌv ɡʊd buts wən jə ɡoʊ wɔkɪŋ ə dɪstəns."

"Walking," Mat said. "Any farmer knows the value of good boots when you go walking a distance."

sɛɾəl lʊk θɔtfəl. "ɔl ɹaɪt. bʌt wʌt dʌz ðɪs əv tə də wɪð biɪŋ ə noʊbəlmən?"

Setalle looked thoughtful. "All right. But what does this have to do with being a nobleman?"

"ɛvɹiθɪŋ," mæt sɛd. "doʊn jə si? ɪf jəɹ ən ævɝɪdʒ fɛloʊ, jə noʊ ɪɡzækli wən tə juz jəɹ buts. ə mæn kən kip tʃɹæk ə θɹi pɛɹz ə buts. laɪf ɪz sɪmpəl wən juv θɹi pɛɹz ə buts. bʌt noʊbəlmən . . . tælmɑnz kleɪmz hiz fɔɹɾi dɪfɹən pɛɹz ə buts ət hoʊm. fɔɹɾi pɛɹz, kən jə ɪmædʒən ðæt?"

"Everything," Mat said. "Don't you see? If you're an average fellow, you know exactly when to use your boots. A man can keep track of three pairs of boots. Life is simple when you have three pairs of boots. But noblemen . . . Talmanes claims he has forty different pairs of boots at home. Forty pairs, can you imagine that?"

ʃi smaɪld ɪn əmjuzmənt.

She smiled in amusement.

"fɔɹɾi pɛɹz," mæt ɹɪpiɾɪd, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd. "fɔɹɾi blʌɾi pɛɹz. ænd, ðeɪ ɑɹən ɔl ðə seɪm kaɪndə buts iðɝ. ðəɹ ɪz ə pɛɹ fəɹ itʃ aʊtfɪt, ən ə dʌzən pɛɹz ɪn dɪfɹən staɪlz ðət wɪl mætʃ ɛni nʌmbɝ ə hæf jəɹ aʊtfɪts. juv buts fəɹ kɪŋz, buts fəɹ haɪ lɔɹdz, ən buts fəɹ nɔɹməl pipəl. juv buts fəɹ wɪntɝ ən buts fəɹ sʌmɝ, buts fəɹ ɹeɪni deɪz ən buts fəɹ dʒɹaɪ deɪz. juv blʌɾi ʃuz ðət jə wɛɹ oʊnli wən jəɹ wɔkɪŋ tə ðə beɪðɪŋ tʃeɪmbɝ.

"Forty pairs," Mat repeated, shaking his head. "Forty bloody pairs. And, they aren't all the same kind of boots either. There is a pair for each outfit, and a dozen pairs in different styles that will match any number of half your outfits. You have boots for kings, boots for high lords, and boots for normal people. You have boots for winter and boots for summer, boots for rainy days and boots for dry days. You have bloody shoes that you wear only when you're walking to the bathing chamber.

ləpɪn juz tə kəmpleɪn ðəɾ aɪ dɪdn əv ə pɛɹ tə wɛɹ tə ðə pɹɪvi ət naɪt!"

Lopin used to complain that I didn't have a pair to wear to the privy at night!"

"aɪ si. ... soʊ jəɹ juzɪŋ buts əz ə mɛɾəfɔɹ fəɹ ði oʊnəs ə ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi ən dɪsɪʒən pleɪst əpɑn ði ɛɹəstɑkɹəsi əz ðeɪ əsum liɾɝʃɪp ə kɑmplɛks pəlɪɾəkəl ən soʊʃəl pəzɪʃənz."

"I see. ... So you're using boots as a metaphor for the onus of responsibility and decision placed upon the aristocracy as they assume leadership of complex political and social positions."

"mɛɾəfɔɹ fɔɹ. . . ." mæt skaʊld. "blʌɾi æʃəz, wʊmən. ðɪs ɪzən ə mɛɾəfɔɹ fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ! ɪts dʒʌs buts"

"Metaphor for. . . ." Mat scowled. "Bloody ashes, woman. This isn't a metaphor for anything! It's just boots"

sɛɾəl ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "jɔɹ ən ʌnkənvɛnʃənəli waɪz mæn, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən."

Setalle shook her head. "You're an unconventionally wise man, Matrim Cauthon."

"aɪ tʃɹaɪ maɪ bɛst," hi noʊɾəd, ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ ðə pɪtʃɝ ə mʌl saɪɾɝ. "tə bi ʌnkənvɛnʃənəl, aɪ min."

"I try my best," he noted, reaching for the pitcher of mulled cider. "To be unconventional, I mean."

hi pɔɹɾ ə kʌp ən lɪftəɾ ɪɾ ɪn əɹ dɝɛkʃən. ʃi æksɛptɪd ɡɹeɪʃəsli ən dʒɹæŋk, ðən stʊd. "aɪ wɪl liv jə tə jəɹ oʊn əmjuzməns, ðɛn, mæstɝ kɔθən. bʌɾ ɪf juv meɪɾ ɛni pɹɑɡɹɛs ɑn ðət ɡeɪtweɪ fəɹ mi. . . ."

He poured a cup and lifted it in her direction. She accepted graciously and drank, then stood. "I will leave you to your own amusements, then, Master Cauthon. But if you have made any progress on that gateway for me. . . ."

"ɪleɪn sɛd ʃi wəɾ əv wʌn fəɹ jə sun. ɪn ə deɪ əɹ tu. wʌns aɪm bæk fɹəm ði ɛɹən aɪ hæv tə ɹʌn wɪð θɔɹn ən noʊl, əl si ɪt dʌn."

"Elayne said she would have one for you soon. In a day or two. Once I'm back from the errand I have to run with Thorn and Noal, I'll see it done."

ʃi nɑɾəd ɪn ʌndɝstændɪŋ. ɪf i dɪd nɑt ɹɪtɝn fɹəm ðət "ɛɹənd," ʃi wəd si tə oʊlvɝ. ʃi tɝn tə liv. mæt weɪɾəd əntɪl ʃi wɑz ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ teɪkɪŋ ə slɝp ə ðə saɪɾɝ stʃɹeɪt fɹəm ðə pɪtʃɝ. hi hæd bɪn duɪŋ ðəɾ ɔl ivnɪŋ, bʌɾ i fɪɡjɝd ʃi wəd pɹɑbli ɹæðɝ nɑt noʊ. ɪt wɑz ðə sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ wɪmən wɝ bɛɾɝ ɔf nɑt θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt.

She nodded in understanding. If he did not return from that "errand," she would see to Olver. She turned to leave. Mat waited until she was gone before taking a slurp of the cider straight from the pitcher. He had been doing that all evening, but he figured she would probably rather not know. It was the sort of thing women were better off not thinking about.

hi tɝn bæk tə hɪz ɹɪpɔɹts, bʌt sun faʊn ɪz maɪnd wɑndɝɪŋ tə ðə taʊɝ ʌv ɡɛndʒeɪaɪ, ən ðoʊz blʌɾi sneɪks ən fɑksəz. bɝdʒɪts kɑm-mɛns hæd bɪn ɛnlaɪɾənɪŋ, bʌt nɑt pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɛnkɝɪdʒɪŋ. tu mʌnθs? tu blʌɾi mʌnθs spɛnt wɑndɝɪŋ ðoʊz hɔlweɪz? ðət wɑz ə maɪɾi, stimɪŋ boʊl ʌv wɝi, sɝvd ʌp laɪk æftɝnun slɑp. bɪɑn ðæt, ʃi hæd teɪkən faɪɝ, mjuzɪk, ən aɪɝn. bɹeɪkɪŋ ðə ɹulz wɑz nɑt soʊ ɝɪdʒənəl ən aɪdiə.

He turned back to his reports, but soon found his mind wandering to the Tower of Ghenjei, and those bloody snakes and foxes. Birgitte's com-ments had been enlightening, but not particularly encouraging. Two months? Two bloody months spent wandering those hallways? That was a mighty, steaming bowl of worry, served up like afternoon slop. Beyond that, she had taken fire, music, and iron. Breaking the rules was not so original an idea.

hi wɑz nɑt sɝpɹaɪzd. laɪkli, ðə deɪ ðə laɪt meɪd ðə vɛɹi fɝs mæn, ən ðət mæn hæd meɪd ðə fɝst ɹul, sʌmwʌn ɛls hæd θɔt tə bɹeɪk ɪt. pipəl laɪk ɪleɪn meɪɾ ʌp ɹulz tə sut ðɛm. pipəl laɪk mæt faʊnd weɪz tə ɡɛɾ ɝaʊn ðə stupəd ɹulz.

He was not surprised. Likely, the day the Light made the very first man, and that man had made the first rule, someone else had thought to break it. People like Elayne made up rules to suit them. People like Mat found ways to get around the stupid rules.

ənfɔɹtʃənətli, bɝdʒɪt - wʌn ə ðə lɛdʒəndɛɹi hɪɹoʊz ə ðə hɔɹn -  hæd nɑt bɪn eɪbəl tə dɪfit ði æɛlfɪn ən ɛlfɪn. ðət wɑz dɪskənsɝɾɪŋ.

Unfortunately, Birgitte - one of the legendary Heroes of the Horn -  had not been able to defeat the Aelfinn and Eelfinn. That was disconcerting.

wɛl, mæt hæd sʌmθɪŋ ʃi hæd nɑt hæd. hɪz lʌk. hi sæt θɔtfəli, linɪŋ bæk ɪn ɪz tʃɛɹ.

Well, Mat had something she had not had. His luck. He sat thoughtfully, leaning back in his chair.

wʌn ə hɪz soʊlʒɝz pæs baɪ. klɪntɑk səluɾəd; ðə ɹɛdɑɹm tʃɛkt ɑn mæt ɛvɹi hæf-aʊɝ. ðeɪ stɪl hæd nɑt ɡɑɾən oʊvɝ ðə ʃeɪm ə lɛɾɪŋ ðə ɡboʊləm snik ɪndə kæmp.

One of his soldiers passed by. Clintock saluted; the Redarm checked on Mat every half-hour. They still had not gotten over the shame of letting the gbolam sneak into camp.

hi pɪkt ʌp vɛɹɪnz lɛɾɝ əɡɛn, filɪŋ ɪɾ oʊvɝ ɪn ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. ðə wɔɹn kɔɹnɝz, ðə smʌdʒɪz ə dɝɾ ɑn ðə wʌns-waɪt peɪpɝ. hi tæpt ɪɾ əɡɛns ðə wʊd.

He picked up Verin's letter again, feeling it over in his fingers. The worn corners, the smudges of dirt on the once-white paper. He tapped it against the wood.

ðən i tɔst ɪɾ ɑntu ðə dɛsk. noʊ. noʊ, hi wɑz nɑt gɑnə oʊpən ɪt, ivən wən i ɡɑt bæk. ðət wɑz ðæt. hi wəd nɛvɝ noʊ wʌt wɑz ɪn ɪt, ən i blʌɾi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ.

Then he tossed it onto the desk. No. No, he was not going to open it, even when he got back. That was that. He would never know what was in it, and he bloody did not care.

hi stʊɾ ʌp ən wɛn lʊkɪŋ fəɹ θɔɹn ən noʊl. təmɑɹoʊ, ðeɪ wəd liv fəɹ ðə taʊɝ ʌv ɡɛndʒeɪaɪ.

He stood up and went looking for Thorn and Noal. Tomorrow, they would leave for the Tower of Ghenjei.


tʃæptɝ fɪftiθɹi


CHAPTER 53

pɛvɑɹə kɛpt əɹ tʌŋ əz ʃi wɔk θɹu ðə vɪlədʒ ə ðə blæk taʊɝ wɪð dʒəvɪnʒɹə ænd


Pevara kept her tongue as she walked through the village of the Black Tower with Javindhra and

mæzɹim teɪm. ðəɹ wɑz æktɪvəɾi ɔl θɹu ðə pleɪs. ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz æktɪvəɾi ɪn ðə blæk taʊɝ. soʊlʒɝz fɛlɪŋ tʃɹiz nɪɹbaɪ; dɛɾəkeɪtəd stʃɹɪpɪŋ ðə bɑɹk əweɪ, ðən slaɪsɪŋ ðə lɔɡz ɪndə lʌmbɝ wɪð foʊkəs dʒɛts ʌv ɛɹ. sɔdʌs koʊɾəd ðə pæθ; wɪð ə tʃɪl, pɛvɑɹə ɹilaɪz ðət ðə stæk ə bɔɹdz nɪɹbaɪ hæd pɹɑbli bɪn kʌt baɪ æʃəmən.

Mazrim Taim. There was activity all through the place. There was always activity in the Black Tower. Soldiers felling trees nearby; Dedicated stripping the bark away, then slicing the logs into lumber with focused jets of Air. Sawdust coated the path; with a chill, Pevara realized that the stack of boards nearby had probably been cut by Asha'man.

laɪt! ʃid noʊn wʌt ʃid faɪn hɪɹ. ɪt wɑz mʌtʃ hɑɹɾɝ tə feɪs ðən ʃiɾ əsumd ɪt wəd bi.

Light! She'd known what she'd find here. It was much harder to face than she'd assumed it would be.

"æn jə si," teɪm sɛd, wɔkɪŋ wɪð wʌn hæn foʊldəd - fɪŋɡɝz meɪkɪŋ ə fɪst - bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk.

"And you see," Taim said, walking with one hand folded - fingers making a fist - behind his back.

wɪð ɪz ʌðɝ hænd, hi pɔɪntəd təwɔɹɾ ə dɪstənt, pɑɹt-fɪnɪʃt wɔl ə blæk stoʊn. "ɡɑɹd poʊsts speɪst ət fɪfti-fʊɾ ɪntɝvəlz. itʃ wɪð tu æʃəmən ətɑp ðɛm." hi smaɪld ɪn sæɾəsfækʃən. "ðɪs pleɪs wɪl bi ɪmpɹɛɡnəbəl."

With his other hand, he pointed toward a distant, part-finished wall of black stone. "Guard posts spaced at fifty-foot intervals. Each with two Asha'man atop them." He smiled in satisfaction. "This place will be impregnable."

"jɛs ɪndid," dʒəvɪnʒɹə sɛd. "ɪmpɹɛsɪv." hɝ toʊn wɑz flæɾ ən ənɪntʃɹəstəd. "bʌt ði aɪɾəm aɪ wɪʃt tə spik wɪð jə əbaʊt. ɪf wi kəd tʃuz mɛn wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən pɪn tə - "

"Yes indeed," Javindhra said. "Impressive." Her tone was flat and uninterested. "But the item I wished to speak with you about. If we could choose men with the Dragon pin to - "

"ðɪs əɡɛn?" teɪm sɛd. hi hæd faɪɝ ɪn ɪz aɪz, ðɪs mæzɹim teɪm. ə tɔl, blæk-hɛɹd mæn wɪð haɪ, sɑldəiən tʃikboʊnz. hi smaɪld. əɹ ðə kloʊsəst i keɪm tə sətʃ ən ɪkspɹɛʃən - ə hæf-smaɪl ðət dɪd nɑt ɹitʃ ɪz aɪz. ɪt lʊkt . . . pɹɛɾətɔɹi. "aɪ hæv meɪd maɪ wɪl noʊn. ən jɛt jə kəntɪnju tə pʊʃ. noʊ. soʊlʒɝz ən dɛɾəkeɪtəd oʊnli."

"This again?" Taim said. He had fire in his eyes, this Mazrim Taim. A tall, black-haired man with high, Saldaean cheekbones. He smiled. Or the closest he came to such an expression - a half-smile that did not reach his eyes. It looked . . . predatory. "I have made my will known. And yet you continue to push. No. Soldiers and Dedicated only."

"æz jə dɪmænd," dʒəvɪnʒɹə sɛd. "wi wɪl kəntɪnju əɹ kənsɪɾɝeɪʃən."

"As you demand," Javindhra said. "We will continue our consideration."

"wiks pæs," teɪm ɹɪplaɪd, "æn stɪl jə kənsɪɾɝ? wɛl, fɑɹ bi ɪt fɹəm mi tə kwɛstʃən ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ kɛɹ nɑt wʌt jə du. bʌt ðə wɪmən aʊtsaɪd maɪ ɡeɪts kleɪm tə bi fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ əz wɛl. dʒju nɑt wɪʃ mi tə ɪnvaɪɾ əm ɪn tə mit wɪð ju?"

"Weeks pass," Taim replied, "and still you consider? Well, far be it from me to question Aes Sedai. I care not what you do. But the women outside my gates claim to be from the White Tower as well. Do you not wish me to invite them in to meet with you?"

pɛvɑɹə fɛlt ə tʃɪl. hi ɔlweɪz sim tə noʊ tu mʌtʃ, ən hɪn ðəɾ i nu tu mʌtʃ, əbaʊɾ ɪntɝnəl waɪt taʊɝ pɑlətɪks.

Pevara felt a chill. He always seemed to know too much, and hint that he knew too much, about internal White Tower politics.

"ðæt woʊn bi niɾəd," dʒəvɪnʒɹə sɛd koʊldli.

"That won't be needed," Javindhra said coldly.

"æz jə wɪʃ," hi sɛd. "ju ʃəd meɪk jəɹ tʃɔɪsəz sun. ðeɪ ɡɹoʊ ɪmpeɪʃənt, ən ælθɹ əz ɡɪvən əm pɝmɪʃən tə bɑn maɪ mɛn. ðəl nɑt sʌfɝ maɪ stɔlɪŋ fɝɛvɝ."

"As you wish," he said. "You should make your choices soon. They grow impatient, and al'Thor has given them permission to bond my men. They will not suffer my stalling forever."

"ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹɛbəlz. jə nid peɪ ðɛm noʊ hiɾ əɾ ɔl."

"They are rebels. You need pay them no heed at all."

"ɹɛbəlz," teɪm sɛd, "wɪð ə mʌtʃ lɑɹdʒɝ fɔɹs ðən ju. wʌt dʒju hæv? sɪks wɪmən? fɹəm ðə weɪ jə tɔk, jə sim tə ɪntɛn tə bɑn ði ɪntaɪɝɾi ʌv ðə blæk taʊɝ!"

"Rebels," Taim said, "with a much larger force than you. What do you have? Six women? From the way you talk, you seem to intend to bond the entirety of the Black Tower!"

"pɝhæps wi maɪt." pɛvɑɹə spoʊk kɑmli. "noʊ lɪmət wɑz pleɪst əpɑn ʌs."

"Perhaps we might." Pevara spoke calmly. "No limit was placed upon us."

teɪm ɡlænst ət hɝ, ən ʃi hæd ðə dɪstɪŋk filɪŋ ʃi wɑz biɪŋ ɪnspɛktɪd baɪ ə wʊlf kənsɪɾɝɪŋ wɛðɝ ʃid meɪk ə ɡʊd mil. ʃi ʃʌv ðət filɪŋ əsaɪd. ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, noʊ izi mit. stɪl, ʃi kʊdn hɛlp ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðət ðeɪ wɝ oʊnli sɪks. ɪnsaɪɾ ə kæmp fɪld wɪð hʌnʒɹədz ə mɛn u kəd tʃænəl.

Taim glanced at her, and she had the distinct feeling she was being inspected by a wolf considering whether she'd make a good meal. She shoved that feeling aside. She was Aes Sedai, no easy meat. Still, she couldn't help remembering that they were only six. Inside a camp filled with hundreds of men who could channel.

"aɪ wʌns sɔ ə skaɪfɪʃɝ daɪɪŋ ɑn ðə sɪɾi dɑks ʌv ɪljən," teɪm sɛd. "ðə bɝd wɑz tʃoʊkɪŋ, hævɪŋ tʃɹaɪd tə swɑloʊ tu fɪʃ ət wʌns."

"I once saw a skyfisher dying on the city docks of Illian," Taim said. "The bird was choking, having tried to swallow two fish at once."

"dɪd jə hɛlp ðə sɑɹi θɪŋ?" dʒəvɪnʒɹə æskt.

"Did you help the sorry thing?" Javindhra asked.

"fulz wɪl ɔlweɪz tʃoʊk ðɛmsɛlvz wən ðeɪ ɡɹæsp fəɹ tu mʌtʃ, ɛɛs sədaɪ," teɪm sɛd.

"Fools will always choke themselves when they grasp for too much, Aes Sedai," Taim said.

"wʌt mæɾɝz ðət tə mi? aɪ hæɾ ə faɪn mil ʌv ɪt ðət naɪt. ðə flɛʃ ə ðə bɝd, ən ə ðə fɪʃ. aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ. bʌt bi wɔɹnd, naʊ ðəɾ aɪ hæv ə dɪfɛnsəbəl pɝɪməɾɝ, jə mʌst ɡɪmi wɔɹnɪŋ ɪf jə wɪʃ tə pæs aʊtsaɪd."

"What matters that to me? I had a fine meal of it that night. The flesh of the bird, and of the fish. I must go. But be warned, now that I have a defensible perimeter, you must give me warning if you wish to pass outside."

"ju min tə kip kʌmɪŋz ən ɡoʊɪŋz ðət taɪt?" pɛvɑɹə æskt.

"You mean to keep comings and goings that tight?" Pevara asked.

"ðə wɝl bɪkʌmz ə deɪnʒɝəs pleɪs," teɪm sɛd smuðli. "aɪ mʌs θɪŋk ə ðə nidz ə maɪ mɛn."

"The world becomes a dangerous place," Taim said smoothly. "I must think of the needs of my men."

pɛvɑɹə hæd noʊɾəst haʊ hi sɔ tə ðə "nidz" ʌv ɪz mɛn. ə ɡɹup ə jʌŋ soʊlʒɝz pæs baɪ, səluɾɪŋ teɪm. tu bɔɹ bɹuz fitʃɝz, wʌn wɪð ən aɪ swoʊlən ʃʌt. æʃəmən wɝ biɾən bɹuɾəli fəɹ meɪkɪŋ mɪsteɪks ɪn ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ, ðən fɔɹbɪɾən hilɪŋ.

Pevara had noticed how he saw to the "needs" of his men. A group of young soldiers passed by, saluting Taim. Two bore bruised features, one with an eye swollen shut. Asha'man were beaten brutally for making mistakes in their training, then forbidden Healing.

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ nɛvɝ tʌtʃt. ɪn fækt, ðə dɛfɝəns ðeɪ wɝ ʃoʊn bɔɹɾɝd ɑn mɑkɝi.

The Aes Sedai were never touched. In fact, the deference they were shown bordered on mockery.

teɪm nɑɾəd, ðən stɔkt ɔf, miɾɪŋ ʌp wɪð tu ʌv ɪz æʃəmən u weɪɾəd nɪɹbaɪ, bɪsaɪd ðə smɪθi. ðeɪ ɪmiɾiətli bɪɡæn spikɪŋ ɪn hʌʃt toʊnz.

Taim nodded, then stalked off, meeting up with two of his Asha'man who waited nearby, beside the smithy. They immediately began speaking in hushed tones.

"aɪ doʊn laɪk ðɪs," pɛvɑɹə sɛɾ əz sun əz ðə mɛn wɝ əweɪ. pɝhæps ʃi sɛɾ ɪt tu kwɪkli, bɪtʃɹeɪɪŋ əɹ wɝiz, bʌt ðɪs pleɪs hæɾ əɹ ɑn ɛdʒ. "ðɪs kəɾ izəli tɝn tə dɪzæstɝ. aɪm bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə θɪŋk ðət wi ʃəd də əz aɪ ɝɪdʒənəli steɪɾəd - bɑn ə fju dɛɾəkeɪtəd itʃ ən ɹɪtɝn tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. əɹ tæsk wɑz nɛvɝ tə lɑk daʊn ði ɪntaɪɝ blæk taʊɝ, bʌt tə ɡeɪn æksɛs tə æʃəmən ən lɝn əbaʊt ðɛm."

"I don't like this," Pevara said as soon as the men were away. Perhaps she said it too quickly, betraying her worries, but this place had her on edge. "This could easily turn to disaster. I'm beginning to think that we should do as I originally stated - bond a few Dedicated each and return to the White Tower. Our task was never to lock down the entire Black Tower, but to gain access to Asha'man and learn about them."

"ðæts wʌt wɝ duɪŋ," dʒəvɪnʒɹə sɛd. "aɪv bɪn lɝnɪŋ mʌtʃ ðiz læs fju wiks. wʌɾ əv jə bɪn duɪŋ?"

"That's what we're doing," Javindhra said. "I've been learning much these last few weeks. What have you been doing?"

pɛvɑɹə dɪd nɑt ɹaɪz tə ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz toʊn. mʌst ʃi bi soʊ kɑntʃɹɛɹi? pɛvɑɹə hæd liɾɝʃɪp ə ðɪs tim, ən ði ʌðɝz wəd dɪfɝ tə hɝ. bʌɾ ɪt dɪdn min ðət ðeɪ wəɾ ɔlweɪz bi plɛzən əbaʊɾ ɪt.

Pevara did not rise to the other woman's tone. Must she be so contrary? Pevara had leadership of this team, and the others would defer to her. But it didn't mean that they would always be pleasant about it.

"ðɪs əz bɪn ən ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ ɑpɝtunəɾi," dʒəvɪnʒɹə kəntɪnjud, skænɪŋ ðə taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz.

"This has been an interesting opportunity," Javindhra continued, scanning the Tower grounds.

"æn aɪ də θɪŋk hɪl jild ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɑn ðə sʌbʒɪkt ə fʊl æʃəmən."

"And I do think he will yield eventually on the subject of full Asha'man."

pɛvɑɹə fɹaʊnd. dʒəvɪnʒɹə kʊdn ɑnəsli θɪŋk ðæt, kəd ʃi? æftɝ haʊ stʌbɝn teɪm hæd bɪn? jɛs, pɛvɑɹə hæd jildəd tə sədʒɛstʃənz ðət ðeɪ ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə blæk taʊɝ ə lɪɾəl lɔŋɡɝ, tə lɝn ʌv ɪts wɝkɪŋz ən æsk teɪm tə əlaʊ ðɛm æksɛs tə ðə mɔɹ paʊɝfəl æʃəmən. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɑbviəs naʊ hi wəd nɑt ɡɪv ɪn. ʃʊɹli dʒəvɪnʒɹə sɔ ðæt.

Pevara frowned. Javindhra couldn't honestly think that, could she? After how stubborn Taim had been? Yes, Pevara had yielded to suggestions that they remain in the Black Tower a little longer, to learn of its workings and ask Taim to allow them access to the more powerful Asha'man. But it was obvious now he would not give in. Surely Javindhra saw that.

ənfɔɹtʃənətli, pɛvɑɹə wɑz hævɪŋ ɡɹeɪt dɪfəkəlti ɹiɾɪŋ dʒəvɪnʒɹə leɪtli. ɝɪdʒənəli, ðə wʊmən hæd simd əɡɛns kʌmɪŋ tə ðə blæk taʊɝ, oʊnli əɡɹiɪŋ tə ðə mɪʃən kəz ðə haɪəs hæɾ ɔɹɾɝd ɪt. jɛt naʊ ʃi ɔfɝd ɹizənz tə ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ.

Unfortunately, Pevara was having great difficulty reading Javindhra lately. Originally, the woman had seemed against coming to the Black Tower, only agreeing to the mission because the Highest had ordered it. Yet now she offered reasons to remain here.

"dʒəvɪnʒɹə," pɛvɑɹə sɛd, stɛpɪŋ kloʊsɝ. "ju hɝd wʌɾ i sɛd. wi naʊ nid pɝmɪʃən tə liv. ðɪs pleɪs ɪz tɝnɪŋ ɪndə ə keɪdʒ."

"Javindhra," Pevara said, stepping closer. "You heard what he said. We now need permission to leave. This place is turning into a cage."

"aɪ θɪŋk, wɝ seɪf," dʒəvɪnʒɹə sɛd, weɪvɪŋ ə hænd. "hi dʌznt noʊ wɪv ɡeɪtweɪz."

"I think, we're safe," Javindhra said, waving a hand. "He doesn't know we have gateways."

"soʊ fɑɹ əz wi noʊ," pɛvɑɹə sɛd.

"So far as we know," Pevara said.

"ɪf jə ɔɹɾɝ ɪt, aɪm ʃʊɹ ði ʌðɝz wɪl ɡoʊ," dʒəvɪnʒɹə sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ ɪntɛndəd tə kəntɪnju tə juz ði ɑpɝtunəɾi tə lɝn."

"If you order it, I'm sure the others will go," Javindhra said. "But I intended to continue to use the opportunity to learn."

pɛvɑɹə tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. ɪnsʌfɝəbəl wʊmən! ʃʊɹli ʃi wɑznt ɡoʊɪŋ soʊ fɑɹ əz tə ɪɡnɔɹ pɛvɑɹəz liɾɝʃɪp ə ðə ɡɹup? æftɝ ðə haɪəs hɝsɛlf hæd pleɪs pɛvɑɹə ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ? laɪt, bʌt dʒəvɪnʒɹə wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɪɹæɾɪk.

Pevara took a deep breath. Insufferable woman! Surely she wasn't going so far as to ignore Pevara's leadership of the group? After the Highest herself had placed Pevara in charge? Light, but Javindhra was growing erratic.

ðeɪ pɑɹɾəd wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ wɝd, pɛvɑɹə spɪnɪŋ ən wɔkɪŋ bæk daʊn ðə pæθ. ʃi kɛpt əɹ tɛmpɝ wɪð dɪfəkəlti. ðət læst steɪtmən hæd bɪn kloʊz tə aʊtʃɹaɪt dɪfaɪəns! wɛl, ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə dɪsəbeɪ ən ɹɪmeɪn, soʊ bi ɪt. ɪt wɑz taɪm tə bi ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ.

They parted without another word, Pevara spinning and walking back down the path. She kept her temper with difficulty. That last statement had been close to outright defiance! Well, if she wanted to disobey and remain, so be it. It was time to be returning to the White Tower.

mɛn ɪn blæk koʊts wɔkt ɔl ɝaʊn hɝ. mɛni nɑɾəd wɪð ðoʊz tu-əbsikwiəs ɡɹɪnz ə feɪn ɹɪspɛkt. hɝ wiks hɪɹ hæd nɑt dʌn ɛniθɪŋ tə meɪk əɹ mɔɹ kʌmftəɹbəl ɝaʊn ðiz mɛn. ʃi wəd meɪk ə fju ʌv əm wɔɹɾɝz. θɹi. ʃi kəd hændəl θɹi, kʊdnt ʃi?

Men in black coats walked all around her. Many nodded with those too-obsequious grins of feigned respect. Her weeks here had not done anything to make her more comfortable around these men. She would make a few of them Warders. Three. She could handle three, couldn't she?

ðoʊz dɑɹk ɪkspɹɛʃənz, laɪk ði aɪz ʌv ɛksəkjuʃənɝz waɪl weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə nɛks nɛk tə laɪn ʌp bɪfɔɹ ðɛm. ðə weɪ səm ə ðɛm mʌɾɝd tə ðɛmsɛlvz, əɹ dʒʌmpt ət ʃædoʊz, əɹ hɛl ðɛɹ hɛdz ən lʊk deɪzd. ʃi stʊɾ ɪn ðə vɛɹi pɪɾ ə mædnəs ɪtsɛlf, ən ɪt meɪɾ əɹ skɪn kɹip əz ɪf kʌvɝɾ ɪn kæɾəpɪlɝz. ʃi kʊdn hɛlp kwɪkənɪŋ əɹ peɪs. noʊ, ʃi θɔt. / kæn liv dʒəvɪnʒɹə hɪɹ, nɑt wɪθaʊt tʃɹaɪɪŋ wʌn mɔɹ taɪm. pɛvɑɹə wəɾ ɪkspleɪn tə ði ʌðɝz, ɡɪv əm ði ɔɹɾɝ tə liv. ðən ʃiɾ æsk ðɛm, tɑɹnə fɝst, tə əpɹoʊtʃ dʒəvɪnʒɹə. ʃʊɹli ðɛɹ junaɪɾəd ɑɹɡjəməns wəd kənvɪns hɝ.

Those dark expressions, like the eyes of executioners while waiting for the next neck to line up before them. The way some of them muttered to themselves, or jumped at shadows, or held their heads and looked dazed. She stood in the very pit of madness itself, and it made her skin creep as if covered in caterpillars. She couldn't help quickening her pace. No, she thought. / can't leave Javindhra here, not without trying one more time. Pevara would explain to the others, give them the order to leave. Then she'd ask them, Tarna first, to approach Javindhra. Surely their united arguments would convince her.

pɛvɑɹə ɹitʃt ðə hʌts ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɡɪvən. ʃi pɝpəsli dɪd nɑt lʊk tə ðə saɪd, təwɔɹd ðə laɪn ə smɔl bɪldɪŋz wɛɹ ðə bɑndəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪd ðɛɹ hoʊmz. ʃid hɝd wʌt səm ə ðɛm wɝ duɪŋ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kəntʃɹoʊl ðɛɹ æʃəmən juzɪŋ . . . vɛɹiəs mɛθədz. ðət meɪɾ əɹ skɪn kɹɔl, tu. waɪl ʃi θɔt moʊst ɹɛdz hæd tu hɑɹʃ ən əpɪnjən ə mɛn, wʌt ðoʊz wɪmən dɪd kɹɔs ðə laɪn wɪð ə hidləs lip.

Pevara reached the huts they had been given. She purposely did not look to the side, toward the line of small buildings where the bonded Aes Sedai made their homes. She'd heard what some of them were doing, trying to control their Asha'man using . . . various methods. That made her skin crawl, too. While she thought most Reds had too harsh an opinion of men, what those women did crossed the line with a heedless leap.

ʃi stɛpt ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ hʌt, ən ðəɹ faʊn tɑɹnə ət ðə dɛsk ɹaɪɾɪŋ ə lɛɾɝ. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd tə ʃɛɹ ðɛɹ hʌts, ən pɛvɑɹə hæd pɪk tɑɹnə spəsɪfɪkli. pɛvɑɹə maɪɾ əv bɪn meɪd liɾɝ ə ðɪs ɡɹup, bʌt tɑɹnə wɑz kipɝ ə ðə kɹɑnəkəlz. ðə pɑlətɪks ə ðɪs pɝtɪkjəlɝ ɛkspədɪʃən wɝ vɛɹi dɛləkət, wɪð soʊ mɛni ɪnfluɛntʃəl mɛmbɝz ən soʊ mɛni əpɪnjənz.

She stepped inside her hut, and there found Tarna at the desk writing a letter. The Aes Sedai had to share their huts, and Pevara had picked Tarna specifically. Pevara might have been made leader of this group, but Tarna was Keeper of the Chronicles. The politics of this particular expedition were very delicate, with so many influential members and so many opinions.

læs naɪt, tɑɹnə hæɾ əɡɹid ðəɾ ɪt wɑz taɪm tə liv. ʃid wɝk wɪð pɛvɑɹə ɑn ɡoʊɪŋ tə dʒəvɪnʒɹə.

Last night, Tarna had agreed that it was time to leave. She'd work with Pevara on going to Javindhra.

"teɪm əz lɑk daʊn ðə blæk taʊɝ," pɛvɑɹə sɛd kɑmli, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn əɹ bɛɾ ɪn ðə smɔl, sɝkjəlɝ tʃeɪmbɝ. "wi naʊ niɾ ɪz pɝmɪʃən tə liv. hi sɛɾ ɪɾ ɑfhændɪdli, əz ɪf ɪt wɝn ɹɪli mɛn tə stɑp ʌs. dʒʌst ə ɹul hid fɝɡɑɾən tə ɡɪv əs ə blæŋkəɾ ɪksɛpʃən tə."

"Taim has locked down the Black Tower," Pevara said calmly, sitting on her bed in the small, circular chamber. "We now need his permission to leave. He said it offhandedly, as if it weren't really meant to stop us. Just a rule he'd forgotten to give us a blanket exception to."

"laɪkli, ðæts dʒʌst wʌɾ ɪt wɑz," tɑɹnə sɛd. "aɪm ʃʊɹ ɪts nʌθɪŋ."

"Likely, that's just what it was," Tarna said. "I'm sure it's nothing."

pɛvɑɹə fɛl stɪl. wʌt? ʃi tʃɹaɪɾ əɡɛn. "dʒəvɪnʒɹə stɪl ɪɹæʃənəli θɪŋks hɪl tʃeɪnʒ ɪz maɪn ɑn lɛɾɪŋ əs bɑn fʊl æʃəmən. ɪts taɪm tə bɑn dɛɾəkeɪtəd ən liv, bʌt ʃiz hɪntəd ðət ʃɪl ɹɪmeɪn ɹəɡɑɹdləs ə maɪ ɪntɛntʃənz. aɪ wɑn jə tə spik tə hɝ."

Pevara fell still. What? She tried again. "Javindhra still irrationally thinks he will change his mind on letting us bond full Asha'man. It's time to bond Dedicated and leave, but she's hinted that she'll remain regardless of my intentions. I want you to speak to her."

"æktʃəli ," tɑɹnə sɛd, kəntɪnjuɪŋ tə ɹaɪt, "aɪv bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ ɑn wʌt wi dɪskʌs læs naɪt.

"Actually," Tarna said, continuing to write, "I've been thinking on what we discussed last night.

pɝhæps aɪ wɑz heɪsti. ðəɹ ɪz mʌtʃ tə lɝn hɪɹ, ən ðəɹ ɪz ðə mæɾɝ ə ðə ɹɛbəlz aʊtsaɪd. ɪf wi liv, ðəl bɑn æʃəmən, wɪtʃ ʃəd nɑt bi əlaʊd."

Perhaps I was hasty. There is much to learn here, and there is the matter of the rebels outside. If we leave, they will bond Asha'man, which should not be allowed."

ðə wʊmən lʊkt ʌp, ən pɛvɑɹə fɹoʊz. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ dɪfɝ- ɛn ɪn tɑɹnəz aɪz, sʌmθɪŋ koʊld. ʃiɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ə dɪstənt wʌn, bʌt ðɪs wɑz wɝs.

The woman looked up, and Pevara froze. There was something differ- ent in Tarna's eyes, something cold. She'd always been a distant one, but this was worse.

tɑɹnə smaɪld, ə ɡɹɪmɑs ðət lʊkt kəmplitli ənnætʃɹəl ɑn əɹ feɪs. laɪk ðə smaɪl ɑn ðə lɪps ʌv ə kɔɹps. ʃi tɝn bæk tə hɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ.

Tarna smiled, a grimace that looked completely unnatural on her face. Like the smile on the lips of a corpse. She turned back to her writing.

sʌmθɪŋ ɪz vɛɹi, vɛɹi ɹɔŋ hɪɹ, pɛvɑɹə θɔt. "wɛl, jə meɪ bi ɹaɪt," ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf seɪɪŋ. hɝ maʊθ wɝkt, ðoʊ hɝ maɪn ɹild. "ðɪs ɛkspədɪʃən wɑz jəɹ sədʒɛstʃən, æftɝ ɔl. əl θɪŋk ɑn ɪt fɝðɝ. ɪf jəl ɪkskjus mi."

Something is very, very wrong here, Pevara thought. "Well, you may be right," she found herself saying. Her mouth worked, though her mind reeled. "This expedition was your suggestion, after all. I will think on it further. If you'll excuse me."

tɑɹnə weɪvd æmbɪveɪlənli. pɛvɑɹə stʊd, jɪɹz əz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ kipɪŋ əɹ pɹoʊfaʊnd wɝi fɹəm ʃoʊɪŋ ɪn əɹ pɑstʃɝ. ʃi stɛpt aʊtsaɪd, ðən wɔkt istwɝd, əlɔŋ ði ənfɪnɪʃt wɔl.

Tarna waved ambivalently. Pevara stood, years as an Aes Sedai keeping her profound worry from showing in her posture. She stepped outside, then walked eastward, along the unfinished wall.

jɛs, ɡɑɹd steɪʃənz hæd bɪn sɛɾ ʌp ɹɛɡjəlɝli. ɝliɝ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, ðoʊz hædn bɪn mænd. naʊ ðeɪ wɝ, wɪð mɛn u kəd tʃænəl. wʌn ə ðoʊz mɛn kəd stʃɹaɪk əɹ dɛd bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd ɹɪspɑnd. ʃi kʊdn si ðɛɹ wivz, ən ʃi kʊdn stʃɹaɪk fɝst, kəz ə hɝ oʊðz.

Yes, guard stations had been set up regularly. Earlier this morning, those hadn't been manned. Now they were, with men who could channel. One of those men could strike her dead before she could respond. She couldn't see their weaves, and she couldn't strike first, because of her oaths.

ʃi tɝn ən wɔk tə ə smɔl stæn ə tʃɹiz, ə pleɪs ðət wɑz tə bɪkʌm ə ɡɑɹɾən. ɪnsaɪd, ʃi sæt daʊn ɑn ə stʌmp, bɹiðɪŋ dipli. ðə koʊlnəs - ɔlmoʊs laɪfləsnəs - ʃid sin ɪn tɑɹnəz aɪz stɪl tʃɪl hɝ.

She turned and walked to a small stand of trees, a place that was to become a garden. Inside, she sat down on a stump, breathing deeply. The coldness - almost lifelessness - she'd seen in Tarna's eyes still chilled her.

pɛvɑɹə hæd bɪn ɔɹɾɝd baɪ ðə haɪəs nɑt tə ɹɪsk ɡeɪtweɪz ənlɛs ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən wɝ daɪɹ. ðɪs sim laɪk ə daɪɹ sɪtʃueɪʃən tə hɝ. ʃi ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs ən woʊv ðə pɹɑpɝ wiv.

Pevara had been ordered by the Highest not to risk gateways unless the situation were dire. This seemed like a dire situation to her. She embraced the Source and wove the proper weave.

ðə wiv fɛl əpɑɹt ðə moʊmənt ʃi kəmpliɾəd ɪt. noʊ ɡeɪtweɪ fɔɹmd. aɪz waɪd, ʃi tʃɹaɪɾ əɡɛn, bʌt ɡɑt ðə seɪm ɹɪzʌlt. ʃi tʃɹaɪɾ ʌðɝ wivz, ən ðeɪ wɝkt, bʌt ɡeɪtweɪz feɪld ɛvɹi taɪm.

The weave fell apart the moment she completed it. No gateway formed. Eyes wide, she tried again, but got the same result. She tried other weaves, and they worked, but gateways failed every time.

hɝ tʃɪl bɪkeɪm fɹɔst wɪðɪn hɝ. ʃi wɑz tʃɹæpt.

Her chill became frost within her. She was trapped.

ðeɪ ɔl wɝ.

They all were.

pɛɹɪn klæsp hænz wɪð mæt. "ɡʊd lʌk, maɪ fɹɛnd."

Perrin clasped hands with Mat. "Good luck, my friend."

mæt ɡɹɪnd, tʌɡɪŋ daʊn ðə bɹɔd bɹɪm ə hɪz dɑɹk hæt. "lʌk? aɪ hoʊp ðɪs ɔl kʌmz daʊn tə lʌk. aɪm ɡʊd wɪð lʌk."

Mat grinned, tugging down the broad brim of his dark hat. "Luck? I hope this all comes down to luck. I'm good with luck."

mæt kæɹiɾ ə bʌlʒɪŋ pæk oʊvɝ wʌn ʃoʊldɝ, əz dɪd ðə boʊni, nɑɹl mæn ðət mæt hæɾ ɪntʃɹədust əz noʊl. θɔɹn hæɾ ɪz hɑɹp ɑn ɪz bæk ən ə sɪməlɝ pæk. pɛɹɪn stɪl wɑzn klɪɹ ɑn wʌt ðeɪ wɝ bɹɪŋɪŋ. mæt oʊnli plæn tə bi ət ðə taʊɝ fəɹ ə fju deɪz, soʊ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid fəɹ ə lɑɾ ə səplaɪz.

Mat carried a bulging pack over one shoulder, as did the bony, gnarled man that Mat had introduced as Noal. Thorn had his harp on his back and a similar pack. Perrin still wasn't clear on what they were bringing. Mat only planned to be at the tower for a few days, so there was no need for a lot of supplies.

ðə smɔl ɡɹup stʊɾ ɑn ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ ɡɹaʊn aʊtsaɪd pɛɹɪnz kæmp. bɪhaɪn ðɛm, pɛɹɪnz pipəl ʃaʊɾəd bæk ən fɔɹθ, bɹeɪkɪŋ daʊn ðə kæmp. nʌn hæɾ ɛni ɪŋklɪŋ ə haʊ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðɪs deɪ kəd pɹuv. mwɑ-ɹeɪn. mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz əlaɪv. laɪt, lɛɾ ɪt bi soʊ.

The small group stood on the Traveling ground outside Perrin's camp. Behind them, Perrin's people shouted back and forth, breaking down the camp. None had any inkling of how important this day could prove. Moi-raine. Moiraine was alive. Light, let it be so.

"ɑɹ jə sɝɾən aɪ kæn kənvɪns jə tə teɪk mɔɹ hɛlp?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"Are you certain I can't convince you to take more help?" Perrin asked.

mæt nɑɾəd. "sɑɹi. ðiz θɪŋz . . . wɛl, ðeɪ tɛn tə bi pɝtɪkjəlɝ. ðə noʊt wɑz klɪɹ. oʊnli θɹi ʌv əs kən ɛntɝ, ʌðɝwaɪz wɪl feɪl. ɪf wi feɪl ɛniweɪ . . . wɛl, aɪ ɡɛs ɪɾəl bi hɝ oʊn blʌɾi fɔl ðɛn, woʊn ɪt?"

Mat nodded. "Sorry. These things . . . well, they tend to be particular. The note was clear. Only three of us can enter, otherwise we'll fail. If we fail anyway . . . well, I guess it will be her own bloody fault then, won't it?"

pɛɹɪn fɹaʊnd. "dʒʌs bi kɛɹfəl. aɪm ɪkspɛktɪŋ ənʌðɝ hɛlpɪŋ fɹəm jəɹ paʊtʃ ə təbæk ət mæstɝ dɛnizəlz pleɪs wən jə ɹɪtɝn."

Perrin frowned. "Just be careful. I'm expecting another helping from your pouch of tabac at Master Denezel's place when you return."

"jul əv ɪt," θɔɹn sɛd, teɪkɪŋ pɛɹɪnz ɔfɝd hænd. hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, smaɪlɪŋ, ə feɪn twɪŋkəl ɪn ɪz aɪz.

"You'll have it," Thorn said, taking Perrin's offered hand. He hesitated, smiling, a faint twinkle in his eyes.

"wʌt?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"What?" Perrin asked.

θɔɹn ɹipəzɪʃən ɪz pæk. "ɪz ɛvɹi læs fɑɹmbɔɪ aɪ noʊ gɑnə tʃɹænsfɔɹm ɪndə ə noʊbəlmən baɪ ðə taɪm ðɪs ɪz θɹu?"

Thorn repositioned his pack. "Is every last farmboy I know going to transform into a nobleman by the time this is through?"

"ɪm noʊ noʊbəlmən," mæt sɛd.

"I'm no nobleman," Mat said.

"oʊ?" tɑm æskt. "pɹɪns ə ðə ɹeɪvənz?"

"Oh?" Thom asked. "Prince of the Ravens?"

mæt pʊld ɪz hæt daʊn. "pipəl kən kɔl mi wʌt ðeɪ wɑnt. ðət dʌzn min aɪm wʌn ə ðɛm."

Mat pulled his hat down. "People can call me what they want. That doesn't mean I'm one of them."

"æktʃəli ," tɑm sɛd, "ɪt - "

"Actually," Thom said, "it - "

"oʊpən ðə ɡeɪtweɪ soʊ wi kən ɡɛt ɡoʊɪŋ," mæt sɛd. "noʊ mɔɹ nɑnsɛns."

"Open the gateway so we can get going," Mat said. "No more nonsense."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd tə ɡɹeɪɾi. ði ɛɹ ɹɛnt, ə twɪstɪŋ bim ə laɪɾ oʊpənɪŋ ə pɔɹɾəl ðəɾ oʊvɝlʊkt ə bɹɔd, sloʊ-muvɪŋ ɹɪvɝ. "ðɪs ɪz əz kloʊz əz i kən ɡɛt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "æt list, nɑt wɪθaʊɾ ə bɛɾɝ dɪskɹɪpʃən ə ðə pleɪs."

Perrin nodded to Grady. The air rent, a twisting beam of light opening a portal that overlooked a broad, slow-moving river. "This is as close as he can get," Perrin said. "At least, not without a better description of the place."

"ɪɾəl du," mæt sɛd, poʊkɪŋ ɪz hɛd θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ. "jul oʊpən wʌn fəɹ əs tə ɡɛt bæk?"

"It'll do," Mat said, poking his head through the gateway. "You'll open one for us to get back?"

"itʃ deɪ ət nun," ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd, ɹɪpiɾɪŋ pɛɹɪnz ɔɹɾɝz tə hɪm. "ɪntu ðəɾ ɪɡzæk spɑt." hi smaɪld. "teɪk kɛɹ jə doʊnt ɡɛt jəɹ toʊz kʌɾ ɔf wən ɪɾ əpɪɹz, mæstɝ kɔθən."

"Each day at noon," Grady said, repeating Perrin's orders to him. "Into that exact spot." He smiled. "Take care you don't get your toes cut off when it appears, Master Cauthon."

"aɪl də maɪ bɛst," mæt sɛd. "aɪm ətætʃt tə ðoʊz toʊz." hi tʊk ə bɹɛθ ən stɛp θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ. kwaɪət noʊl fɑloʊd, smɛlɪŋ ə dɪtɝməneɪʃən. ðət wʌn wɑz ə lɑt tʌfɝ ðən i lʊkt.

"I'll do my best," Mat said. "I'm attached to those toes." He took a breath and stepped through the gateway. Quiet Noal followed, smelling of determination. That one was a lot tougher than he looked.

tɑm nɑɾəd tə pɛɹɪn, mʌstæʃɪz wæɡɪŋ, ðən hɑp θɹu. hi wɑz spɹaɪ, ðoʊ hi stɪl bɔɹ ðə stɪf lɛɡ fɹəm faɪɾɪŋ ðət feɪd tu jɪɹz əɡoʊ.

Thom nodded to Perrin, mustaches wagging, then hopped through. He was spry, though he still bore the stiff leg from fighting that Fade two years ago.

laɪt ɡaɪd ju, pɛɹɪn pɹeɪd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ə hæn tə ðə θɹi əz ðeɪ tʃɹʌdʒd əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪvɝz bæŋk.

Light guide you, Perrin prayed, raising a hand to the three as they trudged along the river's bank.

mɔɪɹeɪn. pɛɹɪn ʃəd sɛnd wɝd tə ɹænd. ðə kʌlɝz əpɪɹd, ʃoʊɪŋ ɹænd spikɪŋ wɪð ə ɡɹup ə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz. bʌt ... noʊ. pɛɹɪn kʊdn tɛl ɹænd əntɪl i wɑz sɝɾən ʃi lɪvd. tə də ʌðɝwaɪz wəd bi tu kɹuəl, ən wəd bi ən ɪnvɪteɪʃən fəɹ ɹænd tə mɛɾəl ɪn mæts mɪʃən.

Moiraine. Perrin should send word to Rand. The colors appeared, showing Rand speaking with a group of Borderlanders. But ... no. Perrin couldn't tell Rand until he was certain she lived. To do otherwise would be too cruel, and would be an invitation for Rand to meddle in Mat's mission.

pɛɹɪn tɝn əz ðə pɔɹɾəl kloʊzd. əz i stɛpt, hi fɛlt ə feɪn θɹɑbɪŋ fɹəm ɪz lɛɡ, wɛɹ sleɪɝz æɹoʊ hæd hɪt hɪm. hi hæd bɪn hild əɹ ðət waʊnd, ən fɹəm wʌt hid bɪn eɪbəl tə tɛl, ðə hilɪŋ hæd bɪn kəmplit. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɪnʒɝi. bʌɾ ɪz lɛɡ . . . ɪt fɛlt laɪk ɪt kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə waʊn ɛniweɪ. ɪt wɑz laɪk ə ʃædoʊ, vɛɹi feɪnt, ɔlmoʊst ənnɑɾəsəbəl.

Perrin turned as the portal closed. As he stepped, he felt a faint throbbing from his leg, where Slayer's arrow had hit him. He had been Healed or that wound, and from what he'd been able to tell, the Healing had been complete. There was no injury. But his leg . . . it felt like it could remember the wound anyway. It was like a shadow, very faint, almost unnoticeable.

feɪl wɔkt ʌp tə hɪm, hɝ feɪs kjʊɹiəs. ɡɔl wɑz wɪð hɝ, ən pɝ-ɹɪn smaɪld ət ðə weɪ hi kɛpt ɡlænsɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ət beɪn ən kiæd. wʌn kæɹiɾ ɪz spɪɹz, ði ʌðɝ ɪz baʊ. soʊ ðəɾ i dɪdn əv tə, əpɛɹənli.

Faile walked up to him, her face curious. Gaul was with her, and Per-rin smiled at the way he kept glancing over his shoulder at Bain and Chiad. One carried his spears, the other his bow. So that he didn't have to, apparently.

"aɪ mɪs ðə sɛndɔf?" feɪl æskt.

"I missed the sendoff?" Faile asked.

"æz jə ɪntɛndəd," pɛɹɪn ɹɪplaɪd.

"As you intended," Perrin replied.

ʃi snɪft. "meɪtʃɹim kɔθən ɪz ə bæɾ ɪnfluəns. aɪm sɝpɹaɪzd i dɪdn dʒɹæɡ jə ɔf tə ənʌðɝ tævɝn bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ."

She sniffed. "Matrim Cauthon is a bad influence. I'm surprised he didn't drag you off to another tavern before leaving."

əmjuzɪŋli, ðə kʌlɝz əpɪɹd, ʃoʊɪŋ ɪm mæt - hu hæd dʒʌs lɛft - wɔkɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪvɝ.

Amusingly, the colors appeared, showing him Mat - who had just left - walking along the river.

"hiz nɑɾ əz bæɾ əz ɔl ðæt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɑɹ wi ɹɛɾi?"

"He's not as bad as all that," Perrin said. "Are we ready?"

"ɝɑvin əz ɛvɹiwʌn ɔɹɡənaɪzd ən muvɪŋ," feɪl sɛd. "wi ʃəd bi ɹɛɾi tə mɑɹtʃ wɪðɪn ði aʊɝ."

"Aravine has everyone organized and moving," Faile said. "We should be ready to march within the hour."

ðət pɹuvd ə ɡʊɾ ɛstəmət. ɪn əbaʊɾ ə hæf-aʊɝ, pɛɹɪn stʊd tə ðə saɪɾ əz ən ɪnɔɹməs ɡeɪtweɪ splɪt ði ɛɹ, kɹieɪɾəd baɪ ɡɹeɪɾi ən nild lɪŋk təɡɛðɝ wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ɛdʒɹə.

That proved a good estimate. In about a half-hour, Perrin stood to the side as an enormous gateway split the air, created by Grady and Neald linked together with the Aes Sedai and Edarra.

noʊbɑdi hæd kwɛstʃən pɛɹɪnz dɪsɪʒən tə muv. ɪf ɹænd wɑz tʃɹævlɪŋ tə ðɪs pleɪs noʊn əz ðə fild ə mɛɹɪlɝ, ðən ðət wɑz wɛɹ pɛɹɪn wɑntəd tə bi. ɪt wɑz wɛɹ i niɾəd tə bi.

Nobody had questioned Perrin's decision to move. If Rand was traveling to this place known as the Field of Merrilor, then that was where Perrin wanted to be. It was where he needed to be.

ðə læn bɪɑn ðɪs ɡeɪtweɪ mɔɹ ɹʌɡəd ðən sʌðɝn ændɝ. fjuɝ tʃɹiz, mɔɹ pɹɛɹi ɡɹæs.

The land beyond this gateway more rugged than southern Andor. Fewer trees, more prairie grass.

səm ɹuənz leɪ ɪn ðə dɪstəns. ði oʊpən ɛɹiə bɪfɔɹ əm wɑz fɪld wɪð tɛns, bænɝz, ən kæmps.

Some ruins lay in the distance. The open area before them was filled with tents, banners, and camps.

ɪt lʊkt əz ɪf ɛɡwinz koʊəlɪʃən wɑz ɡæðɝd.

It looked as if Egwene's coalition was gathered.

ɡɹeɪɾi pɪɹd θɹu, ðən wɪsəl sɔfli. "haʊ mɛni pipəl ɪz ðæt?"

Grady peered through, then whistled softly. "How many people is that?"

"ðoʊz ɑɹ ðə kɹɛsən munz ə tɛɹ," pɛɹɪn noʊɾəd, pɔɪntɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ə bænɝ. "æn ðæts ɪljən. kæmpt ɑn ɑpəzət saɪdz ə ðə fild." ə ɡɹin bænɝ sɛt wɪð naɪn ɡoʊldən biz mɑɹk ðəɾ ɑɹmi.

"Those are the Crescent Moons of Tear," Perrin noted, pointing toward a banner. "And that's Illian. Camped on opposite sides of the field." A green banner set with nine golden bees marked that army.

"ə lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝ ə kɛɹhinɪn haʊsəz," feɪl sɛd, lʊkɪŋ aʊɾ ɔf ðə ɹaɪz. "nɑɾ ə fju il. . .

"A large number of Cairhienin Houses," Faile said, looking out off the rise. "Not a few Aiel. . .

noʊ bɔɹɾɝləndɝ flæɡz."

No Borderlander flags."

"aɪv nɛvɝ sin soʊ mɛni tʃɹups ɪn wʌn pleɪs," ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd.

"I've never seen so many troops in one place," Grady said.

ɪts ɹɪli hæpənɪŋ, pɛɹɪn θɔt, hɑɹt θʌmpɪŋ. ðə læs bæɾəl.

It's really happening, Perrin thought, heart thumping. The Last Battle.

"du jə θɪŋk ðəl bi ɪnʌf tə stɑp ɹænd?" feɪl æskt. "tə hɛlp əs kip ɪm fɹəm bɹeɪkɪŋ ðə silz?"

"Do you think they'll be enough to stop Rand?" Faile asked. "To help us keep him from breaking the seals?"

"hɛlp ʌs?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"Help us?" Perrin asked.

"ju toʊld ɪleɪn ðət jud ɡoʊ tə ðə fild ə mɛɹɪlɝ," feɪl sɛd. "bɪkɔz ʌv wʌɾ ɛɡwin hæɾ æskt."

"You told Elayne that you'd go to the Field of Merrilor," Faile said. "Because of what Egwene had asked."

"oʊ, aɪ toʊld əɹ aɪ niɾəd tə bi ðɛɹ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ sɛɾ aɪ wɑz gɑnə teɪk ɛɡwinz saɪd. aɪ tʃɹʌst ɹænd, feɪl, ən ɪt simz ɹaɪt tə mi ðət hid nid tə bɹeɪk ðə silz. ɪts laɪk meɪkɪŋ ə sɔɹd. jə juʒəwəli doʊnt wɑnə fɔɹdʒ wʌn aʊɾ ə ðə pisəz ʌv ə bɹoʊkən ən ɹuənd wɛpən jə ɡɛt nu ɡʊd stil tə meɪk ɪt. ɹæðɝ ðən pætʃ ði oʊl silz, hɪl nid tə meɪk nu wʌnz."

"Oh, I told her I needed to be there," Perrin said. "But I never said I was going to take Egwene's side. I trust Rand, Faile, and it seems right to me that he'd need to break the seals. It's like making a sword. You usually don't want to forge one out of the pieces of a broken and ruined weapon You get new good steel to make it. Rather than patch the old seals, he'll need to make new ones."

"pɝhæps," feɪl sɛd. "bʌt ðɪs ɪz gɑnə bi ə faɪn laɪn tə wɔk. soʊ mɛni ɑɹmiz ɪn wʌn pleɪs. ɪf səm saɪd wɪð ɹænd ən ʌðɝz wɪð ðə waɪt taʊɝ . . ."

"Perhaps," Faile said. "But this is going to be a fine line to walk. So many armies in one place. If some side with Rand and others with the White Tower . . ."

noʊbɑdi wəd wɪn ɪf ðeɪ tɝn əɡɛnst wʌn ənʌðɝ. wɛl, pɛɹɪn wəɾ əv tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðət dɪdn hæpən.

Nobody would win if they turned against one another. Well, Perrin would have to make sure that didn't happen.

ðə soʊlʒɝz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡæðɝɾ ɪn laɪnz, pɹipɛɹɪŋ tə mɑɹtʃ. pɛɹɪn tɝn tə ðɛm. "ɹæn sɛn əs əweɪ tə sɝtʃ fəɹ ən ɛnəmi," hi bɛloʊd. "wi ɹɪtɝn tə hɪm hævɪŋ faʊn ælaɪz. ɔnwɝd, tə ðə læs bæɾəl!"

The soldiers were already gathered in lines, preparing to march. Perrin turned to them. "Rand sent us away to search for an enemy," he bellowed. "We return to him having found allies. Onward, to the Last Battle!"

oʊnli ðə wʌnz ət ðə fɹʌn kəd hɪɹ hɪm, bʌt ðeɪ tʃɪɹɾ ən pæs ðə wɝd bæk. ɹænd əɹ ɪleɪn wʊɾə ɡɪvən ə fɑɹ mɔɹ ɪnspaɪɹɪŋ spitʃ. bʌt pɛɹɪn wɑzn ðɛm. hiɾ əv tə də θɪŋz ɪz weɪ.

Only the ones at the front could hear him, but they cheered and passed the word back. Rand or Elayne would have given a far more inspiring speech. But Perrin wasn't them. He'd have to do things his way.

"ɝɑvin," pɛɹɪn kɔl tə ðə plʌmp ɑmɑdɪʃən. "ɡoʊ θɹu ən meɪk ʃʊɹ ðət noʊbɑdi faɪts oʊvɝ wɛɹ tə sɛɾ ʌp ðɛɹ kæmps."

"Aravine," Perrin called to the plump Amadician. "Go through and make sure that nobody fights over where to set up their camps."

"jɛs, lɔɹd ɡoʊldeɪniz."

"Yes, Lord Goldeneyes."

"kip əs əweɪ fɹəm ði ʌðɝ ɑɹmiz fəɹ naʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, pɔɪntɪŋ. "hæv səlɪn ən ɡɔl pɪk ə ɡʊd saɪt. pæs ðə wɝd tə itʃ ə ði ɑɹmiz əz wi sɛɾ ʌp. wɝ nɑt tə ɪntɝækt wɪð, əɹ lʊk ðə ɹɔŋ weɪ æt, ɛni ʌv ðoʊz ʌðɝ fɔɹsɪz. ən doʊn lɛt pipəl ɡoʊ wɑndɝɪŋ ɔf saʊθwɝɾ iðɝ!

"Keep us away from the other armies for now," Perrin said, pointing. "Have Sulin and Gaul pick a good site. Pass the word to each of the armies as we set up. We're not to interact with, or look the wrong way at, any of those other forces. And don't let people go wandering off southward either!

wɝ nɑɾ ɪn ðə wɪldɝnəs ɛnimɔɹ, ən aɪ doʊnt wɑn ðə loʊkəl fɑɹmɝz kəmpleɪnɪŋ ə mɪstʃəf."

We're not in the wilderness anymore, and I don't want the local farmers complaining of mischief."

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd," ʃi sɛd.

"Yes, my Lord," she said.

hid nɛvɝ æskt ɝɑvin waɪ ʃi dɪdn dʒɔɪn wʌn ə ðə ɡɹups ðət hæd bɪn sɛn bæk tə ɑmɑdɪʃiə. ɪt wɑz pɹɑbli kəz ə ðə sintʃæn, ðoʊ. ʃi wɑz ɑbviəsli noʊbəl, bʌt dɪdn seɪ mʌtʃ ə hɝ pæst. hi wɑz ɡlæd tə hæv hɝ. əz ɪz kæmp stuɝd, ʃi wɑz ɪz lieɪzɑn bɪtwin ðə vɛɹiəs fækʃənz ðət meɪɾ ʌp ɪz ɑɹmi.

He'd never asked Aravine why she didn't join one of the groups that had been sent back to Amadicia. It was probably because of the Seanchan, though. She was obviously noble, but didn't say much of her past. He was glad to have her. As his camp steward, she was his liaison between the various factions that made up his army.

ðə wʊlf ɡɑɹd hæd dʒɹɔn fɝs lɑt, soʊ ðeɪ lɛd ðə weɪ θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ. ðə lɑɹdʒ kɑləm bɪɡæn tə muv. pɛɹɪn wɛn daʊn ðə laɪn, ɡɪvɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz, moʊsli ɹiɪnfɔɹsɪŋ ðəɾ i dɪdnt wɑn tʃɹʌbəl wɪð ðə loʊkəlz əɹ ði ʌðɝ ɑɹmiz. hi stɑpt əz i mɛt waɪtkloʊks weɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ tɝn.

The Wolf Guard had drawn first lot, so they led the way through the gateway. The large column began to move. Perrin went down the line, giving orders, mostly reinforcing that he didn't want trouble with the locals or the other armies. He stopped as he met Whitecloaks waiting their turn.

bɹəleɪn wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ nɛks tə ɡɑləɾ əɡɛn; ðeɪ sim vɛɹi əminəbli lɔst ɪn kɑnvɝseɪʃən. laɪt, bʌt ðə wʊmən hæd spɛn pɹɪɾi mʌtʃ ɛvɹi weɪkɪŋ aʊɝ wɪð ɡɑləd ðiz læs fju deɪz.

Berelain was riding next to Galad again; they seemed very amenably lost in conversation. Light, but the woman had spent pretty much every waking hour with Galad these last few days.

pɛɹɪn hædn pʊt ðə waɪtkloʊks ən minɝz təɡɛðɝ, jɛt ðeɪ sim tə hæv sʌmhaʊ ɛndəɾ ʌp ðət weɪ. əz ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd muvɪŋ, ɡɑlədz waɪtkloʊks ɹoʊɾ ɪn ə pɝfək laɪn, fɔɹ əkɹɔs, ðɛɹ waɪt tɑbɝdz sɛt wɪð sʌnbɝsts. pɛɹɪn stɪl hæɾ ə ɡʌt ɹiækʃən əkɪn tə pænɪk wɛnɛvɝ i sɔ ðɛm, bʌt ðeɪd meɪd sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli lɪɾəl tʃɹʌbəl sɪns ðə tʃɹaɪəl.

Perrin hadn't put the Whitecloaks and Mayeners together, yet they seemed to have somehow ended up that way. As they started moving, Galad's Whitecloaks rode in a perfect line, four across, their white tabards set with sunbursts. Perrin still had a gut reaction akin to panic whenever he saw them, but they'd made surprisingly little trouble since the trial.

minz wɪŋd ɡɑɹd ɹoʊɾ əlɔŋ ði ʌðɝ saɪd, ɡælɛn dʒʌs bɪhaɪn bɹəleɪn, ðɛɹ lænsɪz hɛl haɪ. ɹɛd stʃɹimɝz keɪm fɹəm ðə lænsɪz, ən bɹɛstpleɪts ən hɛlmz wɝ ʃaɪn tə pɝfɛkʃən.

Mayene's Winged Guard rode along the other side, Gallenne just behind Berelain, their lances held high. Red streamers came from the lances, and breastplates and helms were shined to perfection.

ɪt sim ðeɪ wɝ ɹɛɾi tə pɝeɪd. ən meɪbi ðeɪ wɝ. ɪf jə wɝ gɑnə ɹaɪd tə ðə læs bæɾəl, jə dɪɾ ɪt wɪð læns hɛl haɪ ən ɑɹmɝ pɑlɪʃt.

It seemed they were ready to parade. And maybe they were. If you were going to ride to the Last Battle, you did it with lance held high and armor polished.

pɛɹɪn kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn. æliændɝz ɑɹmi keɪm nɛkst, ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn ə taɪt fɔɹmeɪʃən ə hɛvi kævəlɹi, eɪt mɛn əkɹɔs, ɑɹɡændə ət ðɛɹ hɛd. hi kɔld ɔɹɾɝz wən i sɔ pɛɹɪn, ən ðə sɝpəntaɪn kɑləm ə soʊlʒɝz tɝn ən səluɾəd.

Perrin continued on. Alliandre's army came next, riding in a tight formation of heavy cavalry, eight men across, Arganda at their head. He called orders when he saw Perrin, and the serpentine column of soldiers turned and saluted.

pɛɹɪn ɹɪtɝn ðɛɹ səlut. hiɾ æskt æliændɝ, ən ʃiɾ ɪndəkeɪɾəd ðət wɑz ði əpɹoʊpɹiət ɹɪspɑns. ʃi ɹoʊd wɪð ɑɹɡændə, saɪdsɑɾəl, ɪn ə slɪm mɝun ɡaʊn wɪð ɡoʊl tʃɹɪm. ən ɪmpɹæktəkəl aʊtfɪt fəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ, bʌt ðeɪ wʊdn bi ɪn ðə sæɾəl vɛɹi lɔŋ. θɹi hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz ən əz mɛni liɡz.

Perrin returned their salute. He'd asked Alliandre, and she'd indicated that was the appropriate response. She rode with Arganda, sidesaddle, in a slim maroon gown with gold trim. An impractical outfit for riding, but they wouldn't be in the saddle very long. Three hundred paces and as many leagues.

hi kəd si hɝ sæɾəsfækʃən əz i səluɾəd əɹ soʊlʒɝz. ʃi wɑz pliz tə si hɪm stɛpɪŋ ɪndə hɪz ɹoʊl əz liɾɝ ə ðə koʊəlɪʃən. ɪn fækt, mɛni ɪn kæmp ɹiæktəd ðə seɪm weɪ. pɝhæps bɪfɔɹ, ðeɪd bɪn eɪbəl tə sɛns haʊ mʌtʃ i ɹizɛntəd liɾɝʃɪp. haʊ dɪd pipəl də ðæt, wɪθaʊt biɪŋ eɪbəl tə smɛl ɪmoʊʃənz?

He could see her satisfaction as he saluted her soldiers. She was pleased to see him stepping into his role as leader of the coalition. In fact, many in camp reacted the same way. Perhaps before, they'd been able to sense how much he resented leadership. How did people do that, without being able to smell emotions?

"lɔɹd pɛɹɪn," æliændɝ sɛd, ɹaɪɾɪŋ pæs hɪm. ʃi ɡeɪv ə boʊɪŋ sɔɹɾ ə sweɪ ðət wɑz ði ɪkwɪvələn ʌv ə hɔɹsbæk kɝtsi. "ʃʊd jə nɑt bi ɹaɪɾɪŋ?"

"Lord Perrin," Alliandre said, riding past him. She gave a bowing sort of sway that was the equivalent of a horseback curtsy. "Should you not be riding?"

"aɪ laɪk maɪ fit," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"I like my feet," Perrin said.

"ɪt lʊks mɔɹ əθɔɹəteɪɾɪv wən ə kəmændɝ ɹaɪdz."

"It looks more authoritative when a commander rides."

"aɪv dɪsaɪɾɪd tə lid ðɪs bʌntʃ, æliændɝ," pɛɹɪn sɛd ɡɹʌflaɪ, "bʌɾ əl də ɪt maɪ weɪ. ðət minz wɔkɪŋ wən aɪ wɑn tə." ðeɪ wɝ oʊnli ɡoʊɪŋ ə fju fit θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ. hɪz fit wəd sɝv ɪm wɛl ɪnʌf.

"I've decided to lead this bunch, Alliandre," Perrin said gruffly, "but I'll do it my way. That means walking when I want to." They were only going a few feet through the gateway. His feet would serve him well enough.

"ʌv kɔɹs, maɪ lɔɹd."

"Of course, my Lord."

"wʌns wɝ sɛɾəld, aɪ wɑn jə tə sɛn səm mɛn bæk tə dʒəhænə. si ɪf jə kən ɹəkɹuɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls, pɪk ʌp wʌtɛvɝ sɪɾi ɡɑɹd jə hæv. bɹɪŋ əm hɪɹ. wɝ gɑnə niɾ ɛvɹiwʌn wi kən ɡɛt, ən aɪ wɑnə tʃɹeɪn əm əz mʌtʃ əz pɑsəbəl bɪfɔɹ ðɪs wɔɹ hɪts."

"Once we're settled, I want you to send some men back to Jehannah. See if you can recruit anyone else, pick up whatever city guard you have. Bring them here. We're going to need everyone we can get, and I want to train them as much as possible before this war hits."

"vɛɹi wɛl, maɪ lɔɹd."

"Very well, my Lord."

"aɪv sɛn tə min ɔlɹɛɾi," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "æn tɑɹnz bɪn ɡæðɝɪŋ wʌɾ ɛkstʃɹəz i kən fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz." laɪt, bʌɾ i wɪʃt i kəd lɛɾ əm steɪ bɪhaɪnd, ɑn ðɛɹ fɑɹmz, tə lɪv ɪn pis waɪl ðə stɔɹm ɹeɪdʒd ɛlswɛɹ. bʌt ðɪs ɹɪli wɑz ði ɛnd. hi kəd fil ɪt. luz ðɪs faɪɾ ən ðeɪ lɔst ɛvɹiθɪŋ.

"I've sent to Mayene already," Perrin said. "And Tarn's been gathering what extras he can from the Two Rivers." Light, but he wished he could let them stay behind, on their farms, to live in peace while the storm raged elsewhere. But this really was the end. He could feel it. Lose this fight and they lost everything.

ðə wɝld. ðə pæɾɝn ɪtsɛlf. feɪsɪŋ ðæt, hid fil bɔɪz u kəd bɛɹli swɪŋ ə sɔɹɾ ən ɡɹændfɑðɝz u hæd tʃɹʌbəl wɔkɪŋ. ɪt twɪstəɾ ɪz stʌmək tə ədmɪɾ ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə tʃɹuθ.

The world. The Pattern itself. Facing that, he'd field boys who could barely swing a sword and grandfathers who had trouble walking. It twisted his stomach to admit it, but it was the truth.

hi kəntɪnjud daʊn ðə laɪn ən ɡeɪv səm ɔɹɾɝz tə sɛvɹəl ʌðɝ ɡɹups. əz i wɑz fɪnɪʃɪŋ ʌp wɪð ðə læst, hi noʊɾəst ə hændfʊl ə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn pæsɪŋ baɪ. wʌn, ɑzi, hɛl ðə wʊlfhɛd bænɝ. dʒɔɹi kɔŋɡɝ hʌŋ bæk. hi stɑpt, ðən weɪv ði ʌðɝ θɹi ɑn bɪfɔɹ tʃɹɑɾɪŋ ʌp tə pɛɹɪn.

He continued down the line and gave some orders to several other groups. As he was finishing up with the last, he noticed a handful of Two Rivers men passing by. One, Azi, held the wolfhead banner. Jori Congar hung back. He stopped, then waved the other three on before trotting up to Perrin.

wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ?

Was something wrong?

"lɔɹd pɛɹɪn." dʒɔɹi dʒɹu hɪmsɛlf ʌp, lɔŋ ən læŋki, laɪk ə bɝd stændɪŋ ɑn wʌn lɛɡ. "aɪ. . . ."

"Lord Perrin." Jori drew himself up, long and lanky, like a bird standing on one leg. "I. . . ."

"wɛl?" pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aʊt wɪð ɪt."

"Well?" Perrin said. "Out with it."

"aɪ wɑntəd tə əpɑlədʒaɪz," dʒɔɹi sɛd, wɝdz kʌmɪŋ ɪn ə ɹʌʃ.

"I wanted to apologize," Jori said, words coming in a rush.

"fɔɹ wʌt?"

"For what?"

"fɔɹ səm θɪŋz aɪ sɛd," dʒɔɹi sɛd, lʊkɪŋ əweɪ. "aɪ min, səm fulɪʃ wɝdz. ɪt wɑz æftɝ jə wɝ ɪl, jə si, ən jə wɝ teɪkən tə ðə fɝsts tɛn ən . . . wɛl, aɪ - "

"For some things I said," Jori said, looking away. "I mean, some foolish words. It was after you were ill, you see, and you were taken to the First's tent and . . . well, I - "

"ts ɔl ɹaɪt, dʒɔɹi," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪ ʌndɝstænd."

"Jt's all right, Jori," Perrin said. "I understand."

dʒɔɹi lʊkt ʌp, smaɪlɪŋ. "ɪts ə plɛʒɝ tə bi hɪɹ wɪð ju, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn. ə ɹil plɛʒɝ. wɪl fɑloʊ jə ɛniwɛɹ, ði ʌðɝz ən aɪ."

Jori looked up, smiling. "It's a pleasure to be here with you, Lord Perrin. A real pleasure. We'll follow you anywhere, the others and I."

wɪð ðæt, dʒɔɹi səluɾəd, ðən ɹæn ɔf. pɛɹɪn skɹætʃt əɾ ɪz bɪɹd, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə mæn ɡoʊ. dʒɔɹi wɑz wʌn ʌv ə ɡʊd dʌzən tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn u hæɾ əpɹoʊtʃt pɛɹɪn oʊvɝ ðə læs fju deɪz tə əpɑlədʒaɪz.

With that, Jori saluted, then ran off. Perrin scratched at his beard, watching the man go. Jori was one of a good dozen Two Rivers men who had approached Perrin over the last few days to apologize.

ɪt simd ɔl ə ðɛm fɛlt ɡɪlti fəɹ spɹɛɾɪŋ ɹumɝz əbaʊt pɛɹɪn ən bɹəleɪn, ðoʊ nʌn wəd seɪ ɪt stʃɹeɪɾ aʊt.

It seemed all of them felt guilty for spreading rumors about Perrin and Berelain, though none would say it straight out.

blɛs feɪl fəɹ wʌt ʃi hæd dʌn ðɛɹ.

Bless Faile for what she had done there.

ɛvɹiwʌn sin tə, pɛɹɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ðən wɔkt ʌp ðə kɑləm ən stɛp θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ.

Everyone seen to, Perrin took a deep breath, then walked up the column and stepped through the gateway.

kʌm kwɪkli, ɹænd, hi θɔt, kʌlɝz blɑsəmɪŋ ɪn ɪz vɪʒən. aɪ kən fil ɪt stɑɹɾɪŋ.

Come quickly, Rand, he thought, colors blossoming in his vision. I can feel it starting.

mæt stʊd wɪð θɔɹn əɾ ɪz lɛft ən noʊl əɾ ɪz ɹaɪt, lʊkɪŋ ʌp θɹu ðə tʃɹiz ət ðə spaɪɹ əhɛd. ə tʃɹɪklɪŋ, mjuzɪkəl stʃɹim ɡɝɡəl bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ə tʃɹɪbjətɛɹi ʌv ðə nɪɹbaɪ ɑɹɪnɛl. ə ɡɹæsi pleɪn spɹɛd bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ən bɪɑn ðæt, ðə ɡɹæn ɹɪvɝ ɪtsɛlf.

Mat stood with Thorn at his left and Noal at his right, looking up through the trees at the spire ahead. A trickling, musical stream gurgled behind them, a tributary of the nearby Arinelle. A grassy plain spread behind them, and beyond that, the grand river itself.

hæɾ i pæs ðɪs weɪ bɪfɔɹ? soʊ mʌtʃ ə hɪz mɛmɹi fɹəm ðət taɪm wɑz fɹæɡməntɪd. ən jɛt, ðɪs taʊɝ ɹɪmeɪn klɪɹ ɪn ɪz maɪnd, vjud fɹəm ə dɪstəns. ivən ðə dɑɹknəs ə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ hæd nɑt bɪn eɪbəl tə ɛksaɪs ɪt fɹəm ɪz maɪnd.

Had he passed this way before? So much of his memory from that time was fragmented. And yet, this tower remained clear in his mind, viewed from a distance. Even the darkness of Shadar Logoth had not been able to excise it from his mind.

ðə taʊɝ lʊk tə bi ʌv pjʊɹ mɛɾəl, ɪts sɑləd stil ɡlimɪŋ ɪn ði oʊvɝkæst sʌnlaɪt. mæt fɛlt ən aɪsaɪnəs bɪtwin ɪz ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz. mɛni tʃɹævəlɝz əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪvɝ θɔɾ ɪt səm ɹɛlɪk fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. wʌɾ ɛls dɪd jə meɪk ʌv ə kɑləm ə stil ɹaɪzɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə fɔɹəst, simɪŋli ʌnɪnhæbəɾɪd? ɪt wɑz əz ənnætʃɹəl ən aʊɾ ə pleɪs əz ðə twɪstəd ɹɛd dɔɹweɪz wɝ. ðoʊz wɔɹp ði aɪz tə lʊk ət ðɛm.

The tower looked to be of pure metal, its solid steel gleaming in the overcast sunlight. Mat felt an iciness between his shoulder blades. Many travelers along the river thought it some relic from the Age of Legends. What else did you make of a column of steel rising out of the forest, seemingly uninhabited? It was as unnatural and out of place as the twisted red doorways were. Those warped the eyes to look at them.

ðə fɔɹəs fɛl tu stɪl hɪɹ, kwaɪət seɪv fəɹ ðə fʊtstɛps ə ðə θɹi. noʊl wɔkt wɪð ə lɔŋ stæf, tɔlɝ ðən i wɑz. wɛɹ hæɾ i ɡɑɾən ɪt? ɪt hæd ðət smuð, ɔɪld lʊk ʌv wʊd ðət hæd spɛn mɔɹ jɪɹz əz ə wɔkɪŋ stæf ðən ɪɾ ɝɪdʒənəli hæɾ əz ə tʃɹi. noʊl hæɾ ɔlsoʊ pʊɾ ɑn ə dɑɹk blu -  nɪɹli blæk - pɛɹ ə tʃɹaʊzɝz ən ə ʃɝt ðət wɑz ʌv ən ɑd, ənnoʊn staɪl. ðə ʃoʊldɝz wɝ stɪfɝ ðən ðə kʌts mæt wɑz fəmɪljɝ wɪð, ən ðə koʊt lɔŋɡɝ, ɡoʊɪŋ ɔlmoʊst ɔl ðə weɪ daʊn tə noʊlz niz. ɪt bʌɾənd tə ðə weɪst, ðən splɪɾ ət ðə lɛɡz. stʃɹeɪnʒ ɪndid. ði oʊl mæn nɛvɝ wəɾ ænsɝ kwɛstʃənz əbaʊɾ ɪz pæst.

The forest felt too still here, quiet save for the footsteps of the three. Noal walked with a long staff, taller than he was. Where had he gotten it? It had that smooth, oiled look of wood that had spent more years as a walking staff than it originally had as a tree. Noal had also put on a dark blue -  nearly black - pair of trousers and a shirt that was of an odd, unknown style. The shoulders were stiffer than the cuts Mat was familiar with, and the coat longer, going almost all the way down to Noal's knees. It buttoned to the waist, then split at the legs. Strange indeed. The old man never would answer questions about his past.

tɑm hæɾ ɑptɪd fəɹ ɪz ɡlimənz kloʊðɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ɡʊd tə si hɪm ɪn ðəɾ əɡɛn, ɹæðɝ ðən ðə fɹɪli kɔɹt bɑɹɾ əpæɹəl. ðə pætʃwɝk kloʊk, ðə sɪmpəl ʃɝt ðət taɪɾ ʌp ðə fɹʌnt, ðə taɪt bɹitʃɪz tʌkt ɪndə buts. wən mæt hæɾ æskt əbaʊt ðə tʃɔɪs, tɑm hæd ʃɹʌɡd, seɪɪŋ, "ɪt filz laɪk wʌɾ aɪ ʃəd wɛɹ ɪf aɪm gɑnə si hɝ."

Thom had opted for his gleeman's clothing. It was good to see him in that again, rather than the frilly court bard apparel. The patchwork cloak, the simple shirt that tied up the front, the tight breeches tucked into boots. When Mat had asked about the choice, Thom had shrugged, saying, "It feels like what I should wear if I'm going to see her."

"hɝ" mɛn mɔɪɹeɪn. bʌt wʌt hæd ðə sneɪks ən fɑksəz dʌn tə hɝ? ɪt hæd bɪn soʊ lɔŋ, bʌt bɝn ɪm ɪf i wɑz gɑnə lɛɾ ənʌðɝ aʊɝ pæs. hi hæd tʃoʊzən kloʊðɪŋ ə fɔɹəst ɡɹinz ən ɝθi bɹaʊnz, əlɔŋ wɪð ə dip bɹaʊn kloʊk. hi kæɹiɾ ɪz pæk slʌŋ oʊvɝ wʌn ɑɹm ən ɪz æʃhændə-ɹeɪaɪ ɪn ɪz hænd. hi hæd pɹæktəst wɪð ðə nu aɪɝn kaʊntɝweɪɾ ɑn ðə bʌt, ən wɑz plizd.

"Her" meant Moiraine. But what had the snakes and foxes done to her? It had been so long, but burn him if he was going to let another hour pass. He had chosen clothing of forest greens and earthy browns, along with a deep brown cloak. He carried his pack slung over one arm and his ashanda-rei in his hand. He had practiced with the new iron counterweight on the butt, and was pleased.

ði ɛlfɪn hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ðə wɛpən. wɛl, ɪf ðeɪ dɛɹd stæn bɪtwin ɪm ən mɔɪɹeɪn, ðən ðeɪ wəd si wʌɾ i kəd də wɪð ðɛɹ ɡɪft. bɝn hɪm, bʌt ðeɪ wʊd.

The Eelfinn had given him the weapon. Well, if they dared stand between him and Moiraine, then they would see what he could do with their gift. Burn him, but they would.

ðə θɹi mɛn stɛpt ʌp tə ðə taʊɝ. ɪt dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə hæv ə sɪŋɡəl oʊpənɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ ɑn ɪts tu-hʌnʒɹəd-fʊt-tɔl haɪt. nɑɾ ə wɪndoʊ, nɑɾ ə sim, nɑɾ ə skɹætʃ. mæt lʊkt ʌp, filɪŋ dɪsɔɹiɛntɪɾ əz i stɛɹɾ əlɔŋ ɪts ɡlimɪŋ lɛŋθ təwɔɹd ðə dɪstənt ɡɹeɪ skaɪ. dɪd ðə taʊɝ ɹəflɛk tu mʌtʃ laɪt?

The three men stepped up to the tower. It did not appear to have a single opening anywhere on its two-hundred-foot-tall height. Not a window, not a seam, not a scratch. Mat looked up, feeling disoriented as he stared along its gleaming length toward the distant gray sky. Did the tower reflect too much light?

hi ʃʌɾɝəd ən tɝn tə tɑm. mæt ɡeɪv ə sɪŋɡəl nɑd.

He shuddered and turned to Thom. Mat gave a single nod.

hɛzəteɪɾɪŋ oʊnli bɹifli, tɑm slɪɾ ə bɹɑnz naɪf fɹəm ɪts ʃiθ ɑn ɪz bɛlt ən stɛpt oʊvɝ tə sɛt ðə tɪp əɡɛns ðə taʊɝ. hi ɡɹɪmli slɪd ðə naɪf ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə tʃɹaɪæŋɡəl, əbaʊɾ ə pɑm waɪd, pɔɪn daʊn. mɛɾəl skɹeɪpt əɡɛns mɛɾəl, bʌt lɛf noʊ tʃɹeɪl. tɑm fɪnɪʃt baɪ meɪkɪŋ ə weɪvi laɪn θɹu ðə sɛntɝ, əz wʌn dɪɾ ət ðə stɑɹɾ ʌv ɛni ɡeɪm ə sneɪks ən fɑksəz.

Hesitating only briefly, Thom slid a bronze knife from its sheath on his belt and stepped over to set the tip against the tower. He grimly slid the knife in the shape of a triangle, about a palm wide, point down. Metal scraped against metal, but left no trail. Thom finished by making a wavy line through the center, as one did at the start of any game of Snakes and Foxes.

ɔl stʊd saɪlənli. mæt ɡlænst ət θɔɹn. "dɪd jə də ɪt ɹaɪt?"

All stood silently. Mat glanced at Thorn. "Did you do it right?"

"aɪ θɪŋk soʊ," θɔɹn sɛd. "bʌt haʊ də wi noʊ wʌt 'ɹaɪt' ɪz? ðət ɡeɪm əz bɪn pæs daʊn fəɹ - "

"I think so," Thorn said. "But how do we know what 'right' is? That game has been passed down for - "

hi kʌɾ ɔf əz ə laɪn ə laɪɾ əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðə taʊɝ fɹʌnt. mæt dʒʌmp bæk, lɛvəlɪŋ ɪz spɪɹ. ðə ɡloʊɪŋ laɪnz fɔɹmd ə tʃɹaɪæŋɡəl mætʃɪŋ ðə wʌn ðət θɔɹn hæd dʒɹɔn, ən ðən - kwɪk əz ə sɪŋɡəl biɾ ʌv ə mɔθs wɪŋz - ðə stil ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə tʃɹaɪæŋɡəl vænɪʃt.

He cut off as a line of light appeared on the tower front. Mat jumped back, leveling his spear. The glowing lines formed a triangle matching the one that Thorn had drawn, and then - quick as a single beat of a moth's wings - the steel in the center of the triangle vanished.

noʊl aɪd ðə pɑm-saɪz hoʊl. "ðæts ə tæd smɔl tə ɡɛt θɹu." hi stɛpt ʌp tə ɪɾ ən lʊk θɹu. "nʌθɪŋ bʌt dɑɹknəs ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd."

Noal eyed the palm-sized hole. "That's a tad small to get through." He stepped up to it and looked through. "Nothing but darkness on the other side."

θɔɹn lʊk daʊn ət ðə naɪf. "ɡɛs ðət tʃɹaɪæŋɡəl ɪz æktʃəli  ə dɔɹweɪ. ðæts wʌt jəɹ dʒɹɔɪŋ wən jə stɑɹt ðə ɡeɪm. ʃəɾ aɪ tʃɹaɪ ə bɪɡɝ wʌn?"

Thorn looked down at the knife. "Guess that triangle is actually a doorway. That's what you're drawing when you start the game. Should I try a bigger one?"

"ɡɛs soʊ," mæt sɛd. "ənlɛs ðə ɡoʊləm tɔt jə haʊ tə skwiz θɹu hoʊlz ðə saɪz ʌv ə fɪst."

"Guess so," Mat said. "Unless the gholam taught you how to squeeze through holes the size of a fist."

"noʊ nid tə bi ənplɛzənt," θɔɹn sɛd, juzɪŋ ðə naɪf tə dʒɹɔ ənʌðɝ tʃɹaɪæŋɡəl ɝaʊn ðə fɝst, ðɪs wʌn lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə wɔk θɹu. hi fɪnɪʃt wɪð ðə weɪvi laɪn.

"No need to be unpleasant," Thorn said, using the knife to draw another triangle around the first, this one large enough to walk through. He finished with the wavy line.

mæt kaʊntəd. ɪt tʊk sɛvən hɑɹtbits fəɹ ðə laɪnz ʌv waɪt tə əpɪɹ. ðə stil bɪtwin əm feɪɾəd əweɪ, oʊpənɪŋ ə tʃɹaɪæŋɡjəlɝ kɔɹəɾɝ liɾɪŋ ɪndə ðə taʊɝ. ði ɪnsaɪd lʊk tə bi sɑləd stil.

Mat counted. It took seven heartbeats for the lines of white to appear. The steel between them faded away, opening a triangular corridor leading into the tower. The inside looked to be solid steel.

"laɪt bɝn mi," noʊl wɪspɝd. ðə kɔɹəɾɝ dɪsəpɪɹɾ ɪndə dɑɹknəs; ðə sʌnlaɪt sim hɛzɪɾənt tə ɛntɝ ði oʊpənɪŋ, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz pɹɑbli dʒʌst ə tʃɹɪk ə ðə laɪt.

"Light burn me," Noal whispered. The corridor disappeared into darkness; the sunlight seemed hesitant to enter the opening, though it was probably just a trick of the light.

"æn soʊ wi bɪɡɪn ðə ɡeɪm ðət kænɑt bi wʌn," θɔɹn sɛd, slaɪɾɪŋ ðə naɪf bæk ɪndə ɪts ʃiθ.

"And so we begin the game that cannot be won," Thorn said, sliding the knife back into its sheath.

"kɝədʒ tə stʃɹɛŋθən," noʊl wɪspɝd, stɛpɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, hoʊldɪŋ ʌp ə læntɝn wɪð ə flɪkɝɪŋ fleɪm. "faɪɝ tə blaɪnd. mjuzɪk tə dæzəl. aɪɝn tə baɪnd."

"Courage to strengthen," Noal whispered, stepping forward, holding up a lantern with a flickering flame. "Fire to blind. Music to dazzle. Iron to bind."

"æn meɪtʃɹim kɔθən," mæt æɾəd. "tə blʌɾi ivən ði ɑdz." hi stɛp θɹu ðə dɔɹweɪ.

"And Matrim Cauthon," Mat added. "To bloody even the odds." He stepped through the doorway.

laɪt flæʃt, bɹɪljənt waɪt, blaɪndɪŋ. hi kɝst, skwizɪŋ, hɪz aɪz ʃʌɾ ən loʊɝɪŋ ɪz æsbændʒɹeɪ ɪn wʌɾ i hoʊpt wɑz ə θɹɛɾənɪŋ pɑstʃɝ. hi blɪŋkt ən ðə waɪtnəs feɪɾəd. hi wɑz ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ʌv ə waɪd ɹum wɪð ə tʃɹaɪæŋɡjəlɝ oʊpənɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm, fɹistændɪŋ, wɪð ðə pɔɪn daʊn ət ðə flɔɹ. ɪt wɑz pjʊɹ blæk, meɪɾ ə twɪstɪŋ kɔɹdz ðəɾ ɪn səm pleɪsəz simd mɛɾəl ən ɪn ʌðɝ pleɪsəz simd wʊd.

Light flashed, brilliant white, blinding. He cursed, squeezing, his eyes shut and lowering his asbandarei in what he hoped was a threatening posture. He blinked and the whiteness faded. He was in the center of a wide room with a triangular opening behind him, freestanding, with the point down at the floor. It was pure black, made of twisting cords that in some places seemed metal and in other places seemed wood.

ðə ɹum wɑz blæk əz wɛl, ʃeɪp laɪk ən ɔf-kɪltɝ skwɛɹ. ɹɪpəlɪŋ waɪt stim pɔɹɾ ʌp fɹəm hoʊlz əɾ ɔl fɔɹ kɔɹnɝz; ðət mɪst ɡloʊd wɪð ə waɪt laɪt. ðəɹ wɝ fɔɹ hɔlweɪz ɪkstɛndɪŋ fɹəm ðə ɹum, wʌn ɪn itʃ dɝɛkʃən.

The room was black as well, shaped like an off-kilter square. Rippling white steam poured up from holes at all four corners; that mist glowed with a white light. There were four hallways extending from the room, one in each direction.

ðə tʃeɪmbɝ wɑz nɑɾ ɪɡzækli skwɛɹ. itʃ saɪd wɑz ə slaɪtli dɪfɹən lɛŋθ ðən ði ʌðɝz, meɪkɪŋ fəɹ ən ɑd miɾɪŋ ʌv æŋɡəlz ət ðə kɔɹnɝz. ən ðət stim! ɪt ɡeɪv ɔf ə sʌlfɝəs stɛntʃ ðət meɪɾ ɪm wɑnə bɹið θɹu hɪz maʊð. ði ɑnɪks-kʌlɝd wɔlz wɝ nɑt stoʊn, bʌt wɝ ə səm ɹɪflɛktɪv mətɪɹiəl, laɪk ðə skeɪlz ʌv ɪnɔɹməs fɪʃ. ðə stim kəlɛktəɾ ət ðə silɪŋ, ɡloʊɪŋ feɪnli wɪð ə sɑf laɪt.

The chamber was not exactly square. Each side was a slightly different length than the others, making for an odd meeting of angles at the corners. And that steam! It gave off a sulphurous stench that made him want to breathe through his mouth. The onyx-colored walls were not stone, but were of some reflective material, like the scales of enormous fish. The steam collected at the ceiling, glowing faintly with a soft light.

bɝn hɪm! ðɪs wɑz nɑt laɪk ðə fɝs pleɪs i hæd vɪzəɾəd, wɪð ɪts twɪstɪŋ kɔɪlz ən sɝkjəlɝ dɔɹweɪz, bʌt nɔɹ wɑz ɪt laɪk ðə sɛkənd wʌn, wɪð ðə stɑɹ-ʃeɪpt ɹumz ən laɪnz ə jɛloʊ laɪt!

Burn him! This was not like the first place he had visited, with its twisting coils and circular doorways, but nor was it like the second one, with the star-shaped rooms and lines of yellow light!

wɛɹ wɑz hi? wʌt hæɾ i ɡɑɾən hɪmsɛlf ɪntu? hi tɝn əbaʊt, nɝvəs.

Where was he? What had he gotten himself into? He turned about, nervous.

θɔɹn stʌmbəl θɹu ðə dɔɹweɪ, blɪŋkɪŋ, deɪzd. mæt dʒɹɑpt ɪz pæk ən kɑt ðə ɡlimən baɪ wʌn ɑɹm. noʊl keɪm nɛkst. ðə boʊni mæn kɛpt ɪz fʊɾɪŋ, bʌt wɑz ɑbviəsli blaɪndɪd, hɪz læntɝn hɛl fɔɹwɝd dɪfɛnsɪvli.

Thorn stumbled through the doorway, blinking, dazed. Mat dropped his pack and caught the gleeman by one arm. Noal came next. The bony man kept his footing, but was obviously blinded, his lantern held forward defensively.

ðə tu ʌðɝz blɪŋkt, tɪɹz stʃɹimɪŋ fɹəm noʊlz aɪz, bʌt ðeɪ ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɡɑt ðɛɹ bɛɹɪŋz ən ɡlænst əbaʊt. ðə ɹum, laɪk ðə hɔlweɪz ɪkstɛndɪŋ ɪn ɔl fɔɹ dɝɛkʃənz, wɑz ɛmpti.

The two others blinked, tears streaming from Noal's eyes, but they eventually got their bearings and glanced about. The room, like the hallways extending in all four directions, was empty.

"ðɪs dʌzn lʊk laɪk wʌt jə dɪskɹaɪbd, mæt," θɔɹn sɛd. hɪz vɔɪs ɛkoʊd feɪnli, ðoʊ ðə saʊnz simd ɪɹəli wɔɹpt. ɔlmoʊs laɪk wɪspɝz θɹoʊn bæk ət ðɛm. ɪt meɪd ðə hɛɹ ɑn mæts nɛk ɹaɪz.

"This doesn't look like what you described, Mat," Thorn said. His voice echoed faintly, though the sounds seemed eerily warped. Almost like whispers thrown back at them. It made the hair on Mat's neck rise.

"aɪ noʊ," mæt sɛd, pʊlɪŋ ə tɔɹtʃ fɹəm ɪz pæk. "ðɪs pleɪs dʌzn meɪks sɛns. ðə stɔɹiz əɡɹi əbaʊt ðæt, ət list. hɪɹ, laɪt ðɪs, noʊl."

"I know," Mat said, pulling a torch from his pack. "This place doesn't makes sense. The stories agree about that, at least. Here, light this, Noal."

θɔɹn ɡɑɾ aʊɾ ə tɔɹtʃ ə hɪz oʊn ən boʊθ lɪt fɹəm noʊlz læntɝn. ðeɪ hæd stʃɹaɪkɝz fɹəm ɑlʌdʒɹə, bʌt mæt wɑntəd tə seɪv ðoʊz. hi hæd bɪn hæf-əfɹeɪd ðəɾ ɪn ðə taʊɝ, fleɪmz wəd ɡoʊ aʊt wʌns lɪt.

Thorn got out a torch of his own and both lit from Noal's lantern. They had strikers from Aludra, but Mat wanted to save those. He had been half-afraid that in the tower, flames would go out once lit.

bʌt ðə laɪts bɝn stɛɾi ən tʃɹu. ðət hɑɹɾənd ɪm sʌmwʌt.

But the lights burned steady and true. That heartened him somewhat.

"soʊ wɛɹ ɑɹ ðeɪ?" θɔɹn æskt, wɔkɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə pɝɪməɾɝ ə ðə blæk ɹum.

"So where are they?" Thorn asked, walking around the perimeter of the black room.

"ðeɪɹ nɛvɝ hɪɹ wən jə kʌm θɹu," mæt sɛd, hoʊldɪŋ ʌp ɪz oʊn tɔɹtʃ ən ɪnspɛktɪŋ ə wɔl. wɑz ðət ɹaɪɾɪŋ, kɑɹvd ɪndə ðə nɑt-stoʊn? ði ʌnfəmɪljɝ skɹɪpt wɑz soʊ faɪn ən dɛləkəɾ i kəd bɛɹli si ɪt. "bʌt wɑtʃ jɝsɛlf. ðeɪ kən əpɪɹ bɪhaɪn ju, fæstɝ ðən ən ɪnkipɝ u hɝd kɔɪnz klɪŋk ɪn jəɹ paʊtʃ."

"They're never here when you come through," Mat said, holding up his own torch and inspecting a wall. Was that writing, carved into the not-stone? The unfamiliar script was so fine and delicate he could barely see it. "But watch yourself. They can appear behind you, faster than an innkeeper who heard coins clink in your pouch."

noʊl ɪnspɛktɪd ðə tʃɹaɪæŋɡjəlɝ oʊpənɪŋ ðeɪ hæd kʌm θɹu. "du jə səpoʊz wi kən juz ðɪs tə ɡɛt bæk?" ɪt ɹɪzɛmbəl ðə stoʊn tɛɹæŋɡɹil mæt hæd stɛp θɹu bɪfɔɹ. dʒʌst ə dɪfɹənt ʃeɪp.

Noal inspected the triangular opening they had come through. "Do you suppose we can use this to get back?" It resembled the stone ter'angreal Mat had stepped through before. Just a different shape.

"aɪ hoʊp soʊ," mæt sɛd."

"I hope so," Mat said."

"meɪbi wi ʃəd tʃɹaɪ," noʊl sɛd.

"Maybe we should try," Noal said.

mæt nɑɾəd tə hɪm. hi dɪd nɑt laɪk biɪŋ sɛpɝeɪɾəd, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd nid tə noʊ ɪf ðɪs wɑz ə weɪ bæk əɹ nɑt. noʊl lʊk dɪtɝmən ən stɛp θɹu. hi vænɪʃt.

Mat nodded to him. He did not like being separated, but they did need to know if this was a way back or not. Noal looked determined and stepped through. He vanished.

mæt hɛld ɪz bɹɛθ fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmənt, bʌt ði eɪdʒɪd mæn dɪd nɑt ɹɪtɝn. wɑz ɪɾ ə tʃɹɪk? hæd ðɪs dɔɹweɪ bɪn pleɪs hɪɹ tə -  noʊl stʌmbəl bæk ɪndə ðə ɹum θɹu ði oʊpənɪŋ. θɔɹn sɛɾ ɪz tɔɹtʃ ɑn ðə flɔɹ ən dæʃt oʊvɝ tə hɛlp. noʊl ɹəkʌvɝd mɔɹ kwɪkli ðɪs taɪm, blɪŋkɪŋ əweɪ ðə blaɪndnəs. "ɪt sil mi aʊt,"

Mat held his breath for a long moment, but the aged man did not return. Was it a trick? Had this doorway been placed here to -  Noal stumbled back into the room through the opening. Thorn set his torch on the floor and dashed over to help. Noal recovered more quickly this time, blinking away the blindness. "It sealed me out,"

hi ɪkspleɪnd. "aɪ hæd tə dʒɹɔ ənʌðɝ tʃɹaɪæŋɡəl tə ɡɛt bæk ɪn."

he explained. "I had to draw another triangle to get back in."

"æt list wi noʊ wiv ɡɑɾ ə minz ʌv ɪskeɪp," θɔɹn sɛd.

"At least we know we've got a means of escape," Thorn said.

əsumɪŋ ðoʊz blʌɾi æɛlfɪn əɹ ɛlfɪn doʊn muv ɪt, mæt θɔt, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ɪz pɹiviəs vɪzət, ðə wʌn ðət hæɾ ɛndəd wɪð ɪm biɪŋ hæŋd. ðət taɪm, ðə ɹumz ən kɔɹɪɾɝz hæd ʃɪftəd mɪstɪɹiəsli, ɪn toʊɾəl dɪfaɪəns ʌv wʌt wɑz ɹaɪt.

Assuming those bloody Aelfinn or Eelfinn don't move it, Mat thought, remembering his previous visit, the one that had ended with him being hanged. That time, the rooms and corridors had shifted mysteriously, in total defiance of what was right.

"wɪl jə lʊk ət ðæt?" θɔɹn sɛd.

"Will you look at that?" Thorn said.

mæt loʊɝɾ ɪz spɪɹ ən noʊl hæɾ ən aɪɝn ʃɔɹtsɔɝɾ ɪn ɪz hæn ɪn ə moʊmənt. θɔɹn wɑz pɔɪntɪŋ əɾ ɪz tɔɹtʃ, wɪtʃ bɝn fɪtfəli wɛɹ i hæd sɛɾ ɪɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ bɪsaɪd wʌn ə ðə ɡloʊɪŋ stim vɛns.

Mat lowered his spear and Noal had an iron shortsword in his hand in a moment. Thorn was pointing at his torch, which burned fitfully where he had set it on the floor beside one of the glowing steam vents.

ðə waɪt stim pʊʃt əweɪ fɹəm ðə fleɪmz, laɪk ɪt wɑz biɪŋ bloʊn baɪ ə bɹiz. oʊnli, noʊ bɹiz ɛvɝ meɪd stim muv soʊ ənnətʃɝəli. ɪt kɝvd ɝaʊn ðə faɪɝ ɪn ə lup. θɔɹn stɛpt oʊvɝ ən pɪkt ʌp ðə tɔɹtʃ. hi muvd ɪt təwɔɹd ðə kɑləm ə stim, ən ɪt baʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ. θɔɹn ɹæm ðə tɔɹtʃ dɝɛkli ɪndə ðə stimz pæθ, ən ðə stim splɪt, ɡoʊɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə fleɪm ən mɛldɪŋ təɡɛðɝ ɪndə ə sɪŋɡəl stʃɹim əɡɛn əbʌv.

The white steam pushed away from the flames, like it was being blown by a breeze. Only, no breeze ever made steam move so unnaturally. It curved around the fire in a loop. Thorn stepped over and picked up the torch. He moved it toward the column of steam, and it bowed out of the way. Thorn rammed the torch directly into the steam's path, and the steam split, going around the flame and melding together into a single stream again above.

θɔɹn ɡlænst ət ði ʌðɝz.

Thorn glanced at the others.

"doʊn æsk mi," mæt sɛd, skaʊlɪŋ. "aɪ sɛd ðɪs pleɪs dʌzn meɪk sɛns. ɪf ðæts ði ɑɾəst θɪŋ wi si hɪɹ, əl bi ə mʊɹændiənz mʌstæʃ. kʌm ɑn."

"Don't ask me," Mat said, scowling. "I said this place doesn't make sense. If that's the oddest thing we see here, I'll be a Murandian's mustache. Come on."

mæt pɪkt wʌn ə ðə hɔlweɪz ən bɪɡæn tə wɔk daʊn ɪt. ði ʌðɝ tu hɝid tə kætʃ ʌp. ðə stim ɡloʊɾ ɑn ðə silɪŋ, beɪðɪŋ ðə blæk hɔlweɪ wɪð ɪts mɪlki laɪt. ðə flɔɹ wɑz meɪɾ ʌv ɪntɝlɑkɪŋ tʃɹaɪæŋɡjəlɝ taɪlz ðæt, wʌns əɡɛn, lʊk dɪskʌmfɝɾɪŋli laɪk skeɪlz. ðə kɔɹəɾɝ wɑz waɪɾ ən lɔŋ, ði ʌðɝ ɛn dɪstən ən dɑɹk.

Mat picked one of the hallways and began to walk down it. The other two hurried to catch up. The steam glowed on the ceiling, bathing the black hallway with its milky light. The floor was made of interlocking triangular tiles that, once again, looked discomfortingly like scales. The corridor was wide and long, the other end distant and dark.

"tə θɪŋk," noʊl sɛd, hoʊldɪŋ ʌp ɪz læntɝn, "ɔl ə ðɪs hɪɾən ɪn ðət sɪŋɡəl taʊɝ."

"To think," Noal said, holding up his lantern, "all of this hidden in that single tower."

"aɪ daʊt wɝ ɪn ðə taʊɝ ɛnimɔɹ," mæt sɛd. ʌp əhɛd, hi kəd si ə slaɪs aʊɾ ə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə wɔl, ə kaɪndə wɪndoʊ. ɪt wɑz sɛɾ ʌp ə lɪɾəl tu haɪ ʌp tə fil nætʃɹəl.

"I doubt we're in the tower anymore," Mat said. Up ahead, he could see a slice out of the side of the wall, a kind of window. It was set up a little too high up to feel natural.

"ðɛn wɛɹ. . . ." noʊl tʃɹeɪld ɔf əz ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə wɪndoʊ, wɪtʃ wɑz ən ɔf-sɛntɝ skwɛɹ.

"Then where. . . ." Noal trailed off as they reached the window, which was an off-center square.

θɹu ɪt, ðeɪ kəd lʊk aʊɾ əɾ ən ənnætʃɹəl lændskeɪp. ðeɪ wɝ ʌp sɛvɹəl flɔɹz ɪn səm kaɪndə spaɪɹ, bʌt ðət sɝɾənli wɑz nɑɾ ændɝ aʊtsaɪd.

Through it, they could look out at an unnatural landscape. They were up several floors in some kind of spire, but that certainly was not Andor outside.

ðə wɪndoʊ lʊkt aʊɾ oʊvɝ ə kænəpi ʌv dɛns vɛdʒəteɪʃən ðət wɑz tu jɛloʊ. mæt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə wɪspi tʃɹiz wɪð ə dʒɹupɪŋ əmbɹɛlə ʌv bɹæntʃəz ət ðə tɑp, ðoʊ bɪfɔɹ i hæd sin əm fɹəm bɪloʊ. ðə fɝnlaɪk tʃɹiz wɪð ðɛɹ spɹɛɾɪŋ fænz ə livz wɝ fəmɪljɝ əz wɛl, ðoʊ ðoʊz hæd dip blæk fɹuts hæŋɪŋ fɹəm əm naʊ. ðə lɑɹdʒ fɹuts kɑz ðə livz tə dʒɹup.

The window looked out over a canopy of dense vegetation that was too yellow. Mat recognized the wispy trees with a drooping umbrella of branches at the top, though before he had seen them from below. The fernlike trees with their spreading fans of leaves were familiar as well, though those had deep black fruits hanging from them now. The large fruits caused the leaves to droop.

"mɝsi ʌv ðə wɪnoʊɝ," noʊl wɪspɝd, ə fɹeɪz mæt hæd nɛvɝ hɝd bɪfɔɹ.

"Mercy of the Winnower," Noal whispered, a phrase Mat had never heard before.

noʊl hæd ɹizən tə bi əstɑnɪʃt; mæt ɹɪmɛmbɝd lʊkɪŋ aʊɾ ət ðət fɔɹəs fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðət ðə twɪstəd dɔɹweɪ hæd nɑt bɹɔɾ ɪm tə ənʌðɝ pleɪs, bʌɾ ənʌðɝ wɝld ɪntaɪɝli.

Noal had reason to be astonished; Mat remembered looking out at that forest for the first time, realizing that the twisted doorway had not brought him to another place, but another world entirely.

mæt lʊk tə ðə saɪd. kəɾ i si ðə θɹi spaɪɹz i hæd noʊɾəd ɑn ɪz fɝs vɪzət? ðeɪ dɪd nɑt sim tə bi əbaʊt, ðoʊ ɪn ðɪs pleɪs, ðə vɛɹi nɛkst wɪndoʊ ðeɪ pæs kəd ʃoʊ ə dɪfɹən sin. ðeɪ kʊd. . . .

Mat looked to the side. Could he see the three spires he had noted on his first visit? They did not seem to be about, though in this place, the very next window they passed could show a different scene. They could. . . .

hi pɔzd, ðən ɡlænst ʃɑɹpli θɹu ðə wɪndoʊ. hi kəd meɪk aʊɾ ə spaɪɹ tə ðə lɛft. ən ðən i nu. hi wɑz ɪn wʌn ə ðə spaɪɹz i hæd sin ɪn ðə dɪstəns dʊɹɪŋ ɪz fɝs vɪzət.

He paused, then glanced sharply through the window. He could make out a spire to the left. And then he knew. He was in one of the spires he had seen in the distance during his first visit.

hi staɪfəld ə ʃɪvɝ ən tɝn əweɪ. ət list i nu fəɹ sɝɾən i wɑz ɪn ðə seɪm pleɪs. dɪd ðət min ðət ðə wɝlz ə ði æɛlfɪn ən ði ɛlfɪn wɝ ðə seɪm? hi hoʊp soʊ. mɔɪɹeɪn hæd fɔlən θɹu ðə sɛkən ə ðə twɪstəd ɹɛd dɔɹweɪz, wɪtʃ mɛnt ʃi hæd moʊs laɪkli bɪn teɪkən baɪ ði ɛlfɪn, ðə fɑksəz.

He stifled a shiver and turned away. At least he knew for certain he was in the same place. Did that mean that the worlds of the Aelfinn and the Eelfinn were the same? He hoped so. Moiraine had fallen through the second of the twisted red doorways, which meant she had most likely been taken by the Eelfinn, the foxes.

ðeɪ wɝ ðə wʌnz u hæd hæŋ mæt; ðə sneɪks, ət list, hæɾ oʊnli tɔst ɪm aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ ɹɛlm wɪθaʊɾ ɛni jusfəl ænsɝz. hi bɔɹ əm ə ɡɹʌdʒ, bʌt ðə fɑksəz . . . ðeɪ hæd ɹəfjuz tə ænsɝ ɪz kwɛstʃənz, ən hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ðiz blʌɾi mɛmɹiz ɪnstɛd!

They were the ones who had hanged Mat; the snakes, at least, had only tossed him out of their realm without any useful answers. He bore them a grudge, but the foxes . . . they had refused to answer his questions, and had given him these bloody memories instead!

mæt ən ði ʌðɝz kəntɪnjud daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ, ðɛɹ fʊtstɛps ɛkoʊɪŋ əɡɛns ðə flɔɹɪŋ. sun, mæt bɪɡæn tə ɡɛt ðə sɛns ðəɾ i wɑz biɪŋ wɑtʃt. hi hæd fɛlt ɪt bɪfɔɹ, ɑn ɪz ʌðɝ vɪzəts. hi tɝn tə ðə saɪd, ən kɑɾ ə ɡlɪmps ə feɪn moʊʃən fɑɹ bɪhaɪnd.

Mat and the others continued down the hallway, their footsteps echoing against the flooring. Soon, Mat began to get the sense that he was being watched. He had felt it before, on his other visits. He turned to the side, and caught a glimpse of faint motion far behind.

hi spʌn, pɹipɛɹɪŋ tə tɔs ɪz tɔɹtʃ əsaɪɾ ən faɪt wɪð ɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ, bʌt sɔ nʌθɪŋ. ði ʌðɝ tu fɹoʊz, lʊkɪŋ əbaʊt, æŋkʃəs. mæt kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn ʃipɪʃli, ðoʊ hi fɛlt lɛs soʊ æftɝ θɔɹn dɪd ðə seɪm θɪŋ ə ʃɔɹt taɪm leɪɾɝ. θɔɹn wɛn soʊ fɑɹ əz tə θɹoʊ ə naɪf əɾ ə dɑɹkən pætʃ ə ðə wɔl.

He spun, preparing to toss his torch aside and fight with his ashandarei, but saw nothing. The other two froze, looking about, anxious. Mat continued on sheepishly, though he felt less so after Thorn did the same thing a short time later. Thorn went so far as to throw a knife at a darkened patch of the wall.

ði aɪɝn wɛpən klæŋkt əɡɛns ðə sɝfəs. ðə dʌl ɹɪŋ ɛkoʊd fəɹ fɑɹ tu lɔŋ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ.

The iron weapon clanked against the surface. The dull ring echoed for far too long in the hallway.

"sɑɹi," θɔɹn sɛd.

"Sorry," Thorn said.

"ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt," mæt sɛd.

"It's all right," Mat said.

"ðeɪɹ wɑtʃɪŋ ʌs, ɑɹən ðeɪ?" noʊl æskt. hɪz vɔɪs wɑz sɑft feɪnli nɝvəs. laɪt! mæt fɛlt əz ɪf i wɑz gɑnə dʒʌmp aʊɾ ə hɪz skɪn ən ɹʌn əweɪ, livɪŋ ɪt bɪhaɪnd. kəmpɛɹd tə ðæt, noʊl sim stɛɾi.

"They're watching us, aren't they?" Noal asked. His voice was soft faintly nervous. Light! Mat felt as if he was going to jump out of his skin and run away, leaving it behind. Compared to that, Noal seemed steady.

"aɪ səspɛk ðeɪ ɑɹ, ət ðæt," mæt sɛd.

"I suspect they are, at that," Mat said.

wɪðɪn ə fju moʊməns, ðeɪ ɹitʃt ði ɛn ə ðə tu-lɔŋ hɔlweɪ hɪɹ, ðeɪ ɛntɝɾ ə tʃeɪmbɝ ðət wɑz aɪdɛntɪkəl tə ðə fɝst, seɪv ɪt hæd noʊ dɔɹweɪ ɪn ðə sɛntɝ. ɪt splɪɾ ɔf ɪn fɔɹ dɝɛkʃənz, itʃ kɔɹəɾɝ dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə dɪstən dɑɹknəs.

Within a few moments, they reached the end of the too-long hallway Here, they entered a chamber that was identical to the first, save it had no doorway in the center. It split off in four directions, each corridor disappearing into the distant darkness.

ðeɪ pɪkt ənʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən, mɛmɝaɪzɪŋ ðə pæθ ðeɪ wɝ teɪkɪŋ, ənsin aɪz skɹætʃɪŋ ət ðɛɹ bæks. hɪz fʊtstɛps ɡɹu mɔɹ hɝiɾ əz ðeɪ tʃɹævɝs ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə hɔlweɪ ən ɛntɝɾ ənʌðɝ tʃeɪmbɝ. ɪt wɑz ɪɡzækli laɪk ðə pɹiviəs wʌn.

They picked another direction, memorizing the path they were taking, unseen eyes scratching at their backs. His footsteps grew more hurried as they traversed the length of the hallway and entered another chamber. It was exactly like the previous one.

"izi tə bi dɪsɔɹiɛntɪɾ ɪn ə pleɪs laɪk ðɪs," noʊl sɛd. hi oʊpən ɪz pæk ən ɡɑɾ aʊɾ ə ʃiɾ ə peɪpɝ ən ə tʃɑɹkoʊl pɛnsəl. hi meɪd θɹi dɑts ɑn ɪz peɪpɝ, ðən kənɛktəɾ əm baɪ laɪnz, ɹɛpɹɪzɛntɪŋ ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz ən ɹumz ðeɪd ɡɔn θɹu. "ɪts ɔl ə mæɾɝ ə kipɪŋ ə ɡʊd mæp. ə ɡʊd mæp kən min laɪf əɹ dɛθ; jə kən tʃɹʌs mi ɑn ðæt."

"Easy to be disoriented in a place like this," Noal said. He opened his pack and got out a sheet of paper and a charcoal pencil. He made three dots on his paper, then connected them by lines, representing the corridors and rooms they'd gone through. "It's all a matter of keeping a good map. A good map can mean life or death; you can trust me on that."

mæt tɝn ɝaʊnd, lʊkɪŋ bæk ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæd kʌm. pɑɹɾ ə hɪm wɑntəd tə kip ɡoʊɪŋ, nɑt lʊk bækwɝd, bʌɾ i hæd tə noʊ. "kʌm ɑn," hi sɛd, ɡoʊɪŋ bæk ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæd kʌm.

Mat turned around, looking back the way they had come. Part of him wanted to keep going, not look backward, but he had to know. "Come on," he said, going back the way they had come.

θɔɹn ən noʊl ʃɛɹd lʊks, bʌt wʌns əɡɛn hɝid tə kætʃ ʌp. ɪt tʊk əm ə ɡʊd hæf-aʊɝ tə ɹitʃɹeɪs ðɛɹ stɛps bæk tə ðə fɝs tʃeɪmbɝ, ðə wʌn ðət ʃəd kənteɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ. ðeɪ faʊn ɪɾ ɛmpti. ðoʊz kɑləmz ə stim ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝz. ðeɪ hæɾ ɪn ði ʌðɝ tu ɹumz, tu.

Thorn and Noal shared looks, but once again hurried to catch up. It took them a good half-hour to retrace their steps back to the first chamber, the one that should contain the doorway. They found it empty. Those columns of steam rose from the corners. They had in the other two rooms, too.

"ɪmpɑsəbəl!" noʊl sɛd. "wi ɹitʃɹeɪst əɹ stɛps pɝfəkli! ðə weɪ aʊt ʃəd bi hɪɹ."

"Impossible!" Noal said. "We retraced our steps perfectly! The way out should be here."

ɪn ðə dɪstəns - feɪn ən ɔlmoʊst ɪnɔɾəbəl - mæt hɝd læftɝ. ə hɪsɪŋ, deɪnʒɝəs læftɝ.

In the distance - faint and almost inaudible - Mat heard laughter. A hissing, dangerous laughter.

məlɪʃəs.

Malicious.

mæts skɪn ɡɹu aɪsi. "θɔɹn," hi sɛd, "ju ɛvɝ hɪɹ ə stɔɹi əbaʊt bɝdʒɪt sɪlvɝboʊ ən əɹ vɪzət tə ðə taʊɝ ʌv ɡɛndʒeɪaɪ?"

Mat's skin grew icy. "Thorn," he said, "you ever hear a story about Birgitte Silverbow and her visit to the Tower of Ghenjei?"

"bɝdʒɪt?" tɑm æskt, lʊkɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ɪz ɪnspɛkʃən - wɪð noʊl - ʌv ðə flɔɹ. ðeɪ sim kənvɪns ðət ðə dɔɹweɪ mʌst əv bɪn pʊl daʊn ɪndə səm hɪɾən tʃɹæpdɔɹ. "noʊ, kæn seɪ ðəɾ aɪ hæv.

"Birgitte?" Thom asked, looking up from his inspection - with Noal - of the floor. They seemed convinced that the doorway must have been pulled down into some hidden trapdoor. "No, can't say that I have.

"wʌɾ əbaʊɾ ə stɔɹi ʌv ə wʊmən tʃɹæp fəɹ tu mʌnθs ɪn ə meɪz ə kɔɹɪɾɝz ɪnsaɪɾ ə fɔɹtʃɹəs?"

"What about a story of a woman trapped for two months in a maze of corridors inside a fortress?"

"tu mʌnθs?" tɑm sɛd. "wɛl, noʊ. bʌt ðɛɹz ðə teɪl ʌv ɛlməɑɹə ən ðə ʃæɾoʊaɪz. ʃi spɛn ə hʌnʒɹəd deɪz wɑndɝɪŋ ɪn ə meɪz, lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ði ɪnfəməs hilɪŋ spɹɪŋ ə sʌn tə seɪv əɹ lʌvɝz laɪf."

"Two months?" Thom said. "Well, no. But there's the tale of Elmiara and the Shadoweyes. She spent a hundred days wandering in a maze, looking for the infamous healing spring of Sund to save her lover's life."

ðət wɑz pɹɑbli ɪt. ðə stɔɹi hæd sɝvaɪvd; ɪt hæd tʃeɪnʒd fɔɹmz, ðə weɪ soʊ mɛni ʌv əm dɪd.

That was probably it. The story had survived; it had changed forms, the way so many of them did.

"ʃi dɪdnt ɡɛɾ aʊt, dɪd ʃi?"

"She didn't get out, did she?"

"noʊ. ʃi daɪɾ ət ði ɛnd, oʊnli tu stɛps əweɪ fɹəm ðə faʊntən, bʌt sɛpɝeɪɾəd fɹəm ɪt baɪ ə wɔl.

"No. She died at the end, only two steps away from the fountain, but separated from it by a wall.

ʃi kəd hɪɹ ɪt bʌbəlɪŋ; ɪt wɑz ðə læst saʊnd ʃi hɝd bɪfɔɹ daɪɪŋ fɹəm θɝst." hi ɡlænst əbaʊɾ ənkʌmftəbli, əz ɪf ənsɝɾən i wɑntəd tə bi ʃɛɹɪŋ sətʃ ə stɔɹi ɪn ðɪs pleɪs.

She could hear it bubbling; it was the last sound she heard before dying from thirst." He glanced about uncomfortably, as if uncertain he wanted to be sharing such a story in this place.

mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, wɝid. bɝn hɪm, bʌɾ i heɪɾəd ðiz fɑksəz. ðəɹ hæd tə bi ə weɪ tə -  "ju hæv bɹoʊkən ðə bɑɹɡən," ə sɑf vɔɪs sɛd.

Mat shook his head, worried. Burn him, but he hated these foxes. There had to be a way to -  "You have broken the bargain," a soft voice said.

mæt spʌn ən ði ʌðɝ tu kɝst, stændɪŋ ʌp, hænz ɑn wɛpənz. ə fɪɡjɝ stʊɾ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ɪt wɑz wʌn ə ðə kɹitʃɝz mæt ɹɪmɛmbɝd, pɝhæps ði ɪɡzæk seɪm wʌn u hæd mɛɾ ɪm læs taɪm. ʃɔɹt, bɹaɪt ɹɛd hɛɹ spɹaʊɾəd fɹəm ðə kɹitʃɝz peɪl skælp. ə pɛɹ ʌv ɪɹz klʌŋ tə ðə hɛd, slaɪtli pɔɪntəɾ ət ðə tɪps. ðə fɪɡjɝ wɑz wɪləwi ən tɔl, ðə ʃoʊldɝz dɪspɹəpɔɹʃənətli waɪd fəɹ ðə weɪst, ən ɪt wɔɹ peɪl lɛðɝ stʃɹæps kɹɔs ðə tʃɛst - mæt stɪl dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt wʌt ðoʊz maɪɾ əv bɪn meɪɾ ʌv - ən ə lɔŋ blæk kɪl bɪloʊ.

Mat spun and the other two cursed, standing up, hands on weapons. A figure stood in the hallway behind them. It was one of the creatures Mat remembered, perhaps the exact same one who had met him last time. Short, bright red hair sprouted from the creature's pale scalp. A pair of ears clung to the head, slightly pointed at the tips. The figure was willowy and tall, the shoulders disproportionately wide for the waist, and it wore pale leather straps crossed the chest - Mat still did not want to think about what those might have been made of - and a long black kilt below.

ɪt wɑz ðə feɪs ðət wɑz moʊs dɪstɪŋktɪv. lɑɹdʒ, ənnætʃɹəl aɪz, peɪl wɪð ə ʃeɪɾ ʌv aɪɹəs ɪn ðə sɛntɝ. ə nɛɹoʊ dʒɔ ən æŋɡjəlɝ fitʃɝz. laɪk ə fɑks. wʌn ə ði ɛlfɪn, mæstɝz ə ðɪs ɹɛlm.

It was the face that was most distinctive. Large, unnatural eyes, pale with a shade of iris in the center. A narrow jaw and angular features. Like a fox. One of the Eelfinn, masters of this realm.

ɪt hæd kʌm tə pleɪ wɪð ðə maɪs.

It had come to play with the mice.

"ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ bɑɹɡən ðɪs weɪ," mæt sɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ðə nɝvəsnəs fɹəm ɪz vɔɪs. "wi kən blʌɾi bɹɪŋ wʌt wi wɑnt."

"There is no bargain this way," Mat said, trying to keep the nervousness from his voice. "We can bloody bring what we want."

"hævɪŋ noʊ bɑɹɡən ɪz deɪnʒɝəs," ði ɛlfɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə smuð vɔɪs. "fɔɹ ju. fɔɹtʃənətli, aɪ kən teɪk jə wɛɹ jə dɪzaɪɝ."

"Having no bargain is dangerous," the Eelfinn said in a smooth voice. "For you. Fortunately, I can take you where you desire."

"wɛl, ðɛn," mæt sɛd. "du ɪt."

"Well, then," Mat said. "Do it."

"liv jəɹ aɪɝn," ði ɛlfɪn sɛd. "jɔɹ ɪmpləməns ə mjuzɪk. jəɹ faɪɝ."

"Leave your iron," the Eelfinn said. "Your implements of music. Your fire."

"nɛvɝ," mæt sɛd.

"Never," Mat said.

ði ɛlfɪn blɪŋk lɑɹdʒ aɪz. sloʊli, dɪlɪbɝətli. ɪt stɛp fɔɹwɝd, fʊtstɛps sɑft. mæt ɹeɪzd ɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ, bʌt ði ɛlfɪn meɪd noʊ dɝɛkli θɹɛɾənɪŋ muvz. ɪt ɡlaɪɾɪd ɝaʊn ðə θɹi ʌv ðɛm, spikɪŋ sɔfli.

The Eelfinn blinked large eyes. Slowly, deliberately. It stepped forward, footsteps soft. Mat raised his ashandarei, but the Eelfinn made no directly threatening moves. It glided around the three of them, speaking softly.

"kʌm naʊ," ɪt sɛd. "kæn wi nɑt spik wɪð səvɪləɾi? juv kʌm tə əɹ ɹɛlm sikɪŋ. wɪv paʊɝ tə ɡɹænt wʌt jə wɪʃ, wʌt jə nid. waɪ nɑt ʃoʊ ɡʊd feɪθ? liv bɪhaɪn jəɹ ɪmpləməns ə faɪɝ. ðoʊz oʊnli, ən aɪ pɹɑməs tə lid jə fəɹ ə taɪm."

"Come now," it said. "Can we not speak with civility? You have come to our realm seeking. We have power to grant what you wish, what you need. Why not show good faith? Leave behind your implements of fire. Those only, and I promise to lead you for a time."

ɪts vɔɪs wɑz hɪpnɑɾɪk, suðɪŋ. ɪt dɪd meɪk sɛns. wʌt nid hæd ðeɪ ʌv faɪɝ? ɪt wɑz laɪɾ ɪnʌf wɪð ðət mɪst. ɪt . . .

Its voice was hypnotic, soothing. It did make sense. What need had they of fire? It was light enough with that mist. It . . .

"θɔɹn," mæt sɛd. "mjuzɪk."

"Thorn," Mat said. "Music."

"wʌt?" θɔɹn sɛd, ʃeɪkɪŋ ə lɪɾəl bɪt.

"What?" Thorn said, shaking a little bit.

"pleɪ ɛniθɪŋ. ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ wʌt."

"Play anything. It doesn't matter what."

θɔɹn tʊk aʊɾ ɪz flut, ən ði ɛlfɪn nɛɹoʊɾ ɪts aɪz. θɔɹn bɪɡæn pleɪɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ə fəmɪljɝ sɔŋ, "ðə wɪn ðət ʃeɪks ðə wɪloʊz" mæt hæɾ ɪntɛndəd tə suð ði ɛlfɪn, meɪbi pʊɾ ɪɾ ɔf ɡɑɹd. bʌt ðə fəmɪljɝ tun sim tə hɛlp dɪspɛl ðə klaʊɾ ɑn mæts maɪnd.

Thorn took out his flute, and the Eelfinn narrowed its eyes. Thorn began playing. It was a familiar song, "The Wind That Shakes the Willows" Mat had intended to soothe the Eelfinn, maybe put it off guard. But the familiar tune seemed to help dispel the cloud on Mat's mind.

"ðɪs ɪzənt niɾəd," ði ɛlfɪn sɛd, ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət θɔɹn.

"This isn't needed," the Eelfinn said, glaring at Thorn.

"jɛs ɪɾ ɪz," mæt sɛd. "ænd wɝ nɑt blʌɾi livɪŋ əɹ faɪɝ. nɑɾ ənlɛs jə pɹɑməs tə teɪk əs ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə sɛntʃɹəl tʃeɪmbɝ ən ɡɪv əs bæk mɔɪɹeɪn."

"Yes it is," Mat said. "And we're not bloody leaving our fire. Not unless you promise to take us all the way to the central chamber and give us back Moiraine."

"aɪ kænɑt meɪk ðət bɑɹɡən," ðə kɹitʃɝ sɛd, kəntɪnjuɪŋ tə wɔk ɝaʊn ðɛm. mæt tɝn tə fɑloʊ ɪt, nɛvɝ lɛɾɪŋ ɪz bæk tə ðə θɪŋ. "aɪ hæv nɑt ði əθɔɹəɾi."

"I cannot make that bargain," the creature said, continuing to walk around them. Mat turned to follow it, never letting his back to the thing. "I have not the authority."

"bɹɪŋ sʌmwʌn u kæn."

"Bring someone who can."

"ɪmpɑsəbəl," ði ɛlfɪn sɛd. "lɪsən tə mi. faɪɝ ɪzənt niɾəd. əl lid jə hæf ə ðə weɪ tə ðə sɛntʃɹəl tʃeɪmbɝ, ðə tʃeɪmbɝ ə bɑnz, ʃəd jə liv bɪhaɪn ðət tɛɹəbəl faɪɝ. ɪɾ əfɛnz ʌs.

"Impossible," the Eelfinn said. "Listen to me. Fire isn't needed. I will lead you half of the way to the central chamber, the Chamber of Bonds, should you leave behind that terrible fire. It offends us.

wi wɪʃ oʊnli tə mit jəɹ dɪzaɪɝz."

We wish only to meet your desires."

ðə kɹitʃɝ wɑz ɑbviəsli tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lʌl əm əɡɛn, bʌɾ ɪts keɪɾəns wɑz ɔf, əɾ ɑdz wɪð θɔɹnz pleɪɪŋ. mæt wɑtʃt ɪt, ðən bɪɡæn tə sɪŋ əlɔŋ wɪð ðə flut pleɪɪŋ. hi dɪd nɑɾ əv ðə bɛs vɔɪs əmʌŋ ðoʊz i nu, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt tɛɹəbəl iðɝ. ði ɛlfɪn jɔnd, ðən sɛɾəld daʊn bɪsaɪd ðə wɔl ən kloʊzd ɪts aɪz. ɪn moʊməns, ɪt wɑz slipɪŋ.

The creature was obviously trying to lull them again, but its cadence was off, at odds with Thorn's playing. Mat watched it, then began to sing along with the flute playing. He did not have the best voice among those he knew, but he was not terrible either. The Eelfinn yawned, then settled down beside the wall and closed its eyes. In moments, it was sleeping.

θɔɹn loʊɝd ðə flut fɔɹm ɪz lɪps, lʊkɪŋ ɪmpɹɛst.

Thorn lowered the flute form his lips, looking impressed.

"naɪsli dʌn," noʊl wɪspɝd. "aɪ hæd noʊ aɪdiə jə wɝ soʊ fluən ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ."

"Nicely done," Noal whispered. "I had no idea you were so fluent in the Old Tongue."

mæt hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. hi hæd nɑɾ ivən ɹilaɪz ðeɪ hæd bɪn spikɪŋ ɪn ɪt.

Mat hesitated. He had not even realized they had been speaking in it.

"maɪ oʊl tʌŋ ɪz ɹʌsti," noʊl sɛd, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz tʃɪn, "bʌɾ aɪ kɑɾ ə lɑɾ ə ðæt. pɹɑbləm ɪz, wi stɪl doʊnt noʊ ðə weɪ θɹu ðɪs pleɪs. haʊ wɪl wi meɪk əɹ weɪ wɪθaʊt wʌn ə ðɛm tə ɡaɪɾ ʌs?"

"My Old Tongue is rusty," Noal said, rubbing his chin, "but I caught a lot of that. Problem is, we still don't know the way through this place. How will we make our way without one of them to guide us?"

hi wɑz ɹaɪt. bɝdʒɪt hæd wɑndɝd fəɹ mʌnθs, nɛvɝ noʊɪŋ ɪf əɹ ɡoʊl wɑz mɪɹli ə fju stɛps əweɪ. ðə tʃeɪmbɝ wɛɹ mæt hæd mɛt ði ɛlfɪn liɾɝz . . . ʃi hæd sɛd ðət wʌns jə wɝ ðɛɹ, ðeɪ hæd tə bɑɹɡən wɪð ju. ðət mʌs bi ðə tʃeɪmbɝ ə bɑnz ði ɛlfɪn hæd mɛnʃənd.

He was right. Birgitte had wandered for months, never knowing if her goal was merely a few steps away. The chamber where Mat had met the Eelfinn leaders . . . she had said that once you were there, they had to bargain with you. That must be the Chamber of Bonds the Eelfinn had mentioned.

pʊɹ mɔɪɹeɪn. ʃi hæd kʌm θɹu wʌn ə ðə ɹɛd dɔɹweɪz; ʃi ʃʊɾə bɪn pɹətɛktəd baɪ wʌtɛvɝ tʃɹiɾi ði ɛlfɪn hæd wɪð ði eɪntʃən ɛɛs sədaɪ. bʌt ðət dɔɹweɪ hæd bɪn dɪstʃɹɔɪd.

Poor Moiraine. She had come through one of the red doorways; she should have been protected by whatever treaty the Eelfinn had with the ancient Aes Sedai. But that doorway had been destroyed.

noʊ weɪ bæk.

No way back.

wən mæt hæd kʌm ɝɪdʒənəli, ðeɪ hæd pɹeɪzd ɪm əz waɪz fəɹ θɪŋkɪŋ tə æsk fəɹ ə liv- teɪkɪŋ. ðoʊ hi ɡɹʌmbəld, stɪl, əbaʊt ði ɛlfɪn nɑɾ ænsɝɪŋ ɪz kwɛstʃənz, hi kəd si ðət wɑz nɑt wʌt ðeɪ dɪd. ði æɛlfɪn wɝ fəɹ kwɛstʃənz; ði ɛlfɪn ɡɹæntəd ɹɪkwɛsts. bʌt ðeɪ twɪstəd ðoʊz ɹɪkwɛsts, ən tʊk wʌtɛvɝ pɹaɪs ðeɪ wɑntəd. mæt hæɾ ənwɪɾɪŋli æsk fəɹ ɪz mɛmɹi fɪld, fəɹ ə weɪ tə bi fɹi ʌv ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ə weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ.

When Mat had come originally, they had praised him as wise for thinking to ask for a leave- taking. Though he grumbled, still, about the Eelfinn not answering his questions, he could see that was not what they did. The Aelfinn were for questions; the Eelfinn granted requests. But they twisted those requests, and took whatever price they wanted. Mat had unwittingly asked for his memory filled, for a way to be free of the Aes Sedai, and a way out of the Tower.

ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn hæd nɑt noʊn ðɪs, ən hæd nɑɾ æsk fəɹ pæsədʒ aʊɾ əz i hæd dʌn ... əɹ ɪf ʃi hæɾ æsk fəɹ pæsədʒ bæk tə ðə dɔɹweɪ, nɑt noʊɪŋ ɪt hæd bɪn dɪstʃɹɔɪd. . . .

If Moiraine had not known this, and had not asked for passage out as he had done ... or if she had asked for passage back to the doorway, not knowing it had been destroyed. . . .

mæt hæɾ æsk fəɹ ə weɪ aʊt. ðeɪ hæd ɡɪvən ɪt tə hɪm, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz.

Mat had asked for a way out. They had given it to him, but he could not remember what it was.

ɛvɹiθɪŋ hæd ɡɔn blæk, ən i hæɾ əweɪkən hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ.

Everything had gone black, and he had awakened hanging from the ashandarei.

mæt pʊl sʌmθɪŋ fɹəm ɪz pɑkət, hoʊldɪŋ ɪt taɪtli ɪn ɪz fɪst. "ði æɛlfɪn ən ði ɛlfɪn ɡɛɾ ɝaʊn ɪn hɪɹ sʌmhaʊ," hɪz wɪspɝd. "ðɛɹ əz tə bi ə kɝɛk pæθweɪ."

Mat pulled something from his pocket, holding it tightly in his fist. "The Aelfinn and the Eelfinn get around in here somehow," his whispered. "There has to be a correct pathway."

"wʌn weɪ," noʊl sɛd. "fɔɹ tʃɔɪsəz, fɑloʊd baɪ fɔɹ tʃɔɪsəz, fɑloʊd baɪ fɔɹ tʃɔɪsəz . . .

"One way," Noal said. "Four choices, followed by four choices, followed by four choices . . .

ði ɑdz əɡɛnst əs ɑɹ ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl!"

The odds against us are incredible!"

"ɑdz," mæt sɛd, hoʊldɪŋ aʊɾ ɪz hænd. hi oʊpən ɪt, ɹɪvilɪŋ ə pɛɹ ə daɪs. "wʌt də / kɛɹ fəɹ ɑdz?"

"Odds," Mat said, holding out his hand. He opened it, revealing a pair of dice. "What do / care for odds?"

ðə tu lʊkt əɾ ɪz aɪvɝi daɪs, ðən lʊk bæk ʌp əɾ ɪz feɪs. mæt kəd fil ɪz lʌk sɝdʒ.

The two looked at his ivory dice, then looked back up at his face. Mat could feel his luck surge.

"twɛlv pɪps. θɹi fəɹ itʃ dɔɹweɪ. ɪf aɪ ɹoʊl ə wʌn, ə tu, əɹ ə θɹi, wi ɡoʊ stʃɹeɪt. fɔɹ, faɪv, əɹ sɪks, wi teɪk ðə ɹaɪt pæθ, ən soʊ ɑn."

"Twelve pips. Three for each doorway. If I roll a one, a two, or a three, we go straight. Four, five, or six, we take the right path, and so on."

"bʌt mæt," noʊl wɪspɝd, ɡlænsɪŋ ət ðə slipɪŋ ɛlfɪn. "ðə ɹoʊlz woʊn bi ikwəl. jə kæn ɹoʊl ə wʌn, fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl, ən ə sɛvən ɪz fɑɹ mɔɹ laɪkli tə - "

"But Mat," Noal whispered, glancing at the sleeping Eelfinn. "The rolls won't be equal. You can't roll a one, for example, and a seven is far more likely to - "

"ju doʊn ʌndɝstænd, noʊl," mæt sɛd, tɔsɪŋ ðə daɪs tə ðə flɔɹ. ðeɪ ɹæɾəld əɡɛns ðə skeɪl-laɪk taɪlz, klækɪŋ laɪk tiθ. "ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ wʌɾ ɪz laɪkli. nɑt wən aɪm ɝaʊnd."

"You don't understand, Noal," Mat said, tossing the dice to the floor. They rattled against the scale-like tiles, clacking like teeth. "It doesn't matter what is likely. Not when I'm around."

ðə daɪs keɪm tə ə ɹɛst. wʌn ə ðɛm kɑɾ ɪn ə ɹʌt bɪtwin tu taɪlz ən fɹoʊz pɹɪkɛɹiəsli, wʌn ə ðə kɔɹnɝz tə ði ɛɹ. ði ʌðɝ keɪm tə ɹɛst wɪð ə sɪŋɡəl pɪp ʃoʊɪŋ.

The dice came to a rest. One of them caught in a rut between two tiles and froze precariously, one of the corners to the air. The other came to rest with a single pip showing.

"haʊ əbaʊt ðæt, noʊl," θɔɹn sɛd. "lʊks laɪk i kən ɹoʊl ə wʌn æftɝ ɔl."

"How about that, Noal," Thorn said. "Looks like he can roll a one after all."

"naʊ ðæts sʌmθɪŋ," noʊl sɛd, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz tʃɪn.

"Now that's something," Noal said, rubbing his chin.

mæt fɛtʃt ɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ, ðən pɪkt ʌp ðə daɪs ən wɔk stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd. ði ʌðɝz fɑloʊd, livɪŋ ðə slipɪŋ ɛlfɪn bɪhaɪnd.

Mat fetched his ashandarei, then picked up the dice and walked straight ahead. The others followed, leaving the sleeping Eelfinn behind.

ət ðə nɛkst ɪntɝsɛkʃən, mæt ɹoʊld əɡɛn, ən ɡɑɾ ə naɪn. "bæk ðə weɪ wi keɪm?" θɔɹn æskt, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "ðæts - "

At the next intersection, Mat rolled again, and got a nine. "Back the way we came?" Thorn asked, frowning. "That's - "

"dʒʌst wʌt wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə du," mæt sɛd, tɝnɪŋ ən ɡoʊɪŋ bæk. ɪn ði ʌðɝ ɹum, ðə slipɪŋ ɛlfɪn wɑz ɡɔn.

"Just what we're going to do," Mat said, turning and going back. In the other room, the sleeping Eelfinn was gone.

"ðeɪ cʊɾə wækən hɪm," noʊl pɔɪntəɾ aʊt.

"They could have wakened him," Noal pointed out.

"ɔɹ ɪt kəd bi ə dɪfɹən ɹum," mæt sɛd, tɔsɪŋ ðə daɪs əɡɛn. ənʌðɝ naɪn. hi wɑz feɪsɪŋ ðə weɪ hi hæd kʌm, soʊ ə naɪn mɛnt ɡoʊɪŋ bæk əɡɛn. "ði æɛlfɪn ən ði ɛlfɪn əv ɹulz," mæt sɛd, tɝnɪŋ ən ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, ði ʌðɝ tu tʃeɪsɪŋ æftɝ hɪm. "æn ðɪs pleɪs əz ɹulz."

"Or it could be a different room," Mat said, tossing the dice again. Another nine. He was facing the way he had come, so a nine meant going back again. "The Aelfinn and the Eelfinn have rules," Mat said, turning and running down the corridor, the other two chasing after him. "And this place has rules."

"ɹulz əv tə meɪk sɛns, mæt," noʊl sɛd.

"Rules have to make sense, Mat," Noal said.

"ðeɪ hæv tə bi kənsɪstənt," mæt sɛd. "bʌt ðeɪ doʊn əv tə fɑloʊ əɹ lɑdʒɪk. waɪ ʃəd ðeɪ?"

"They have to be consistent," Mat said. "But they don't have to follow our logic. Why should they?"

ɪt meɪd sɛns tə hɪm. ðeɪ ɹæn fəɹ ə taɪm - ðɪs hɔlweɪ simd mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ ðən ði ʌðɝz. hi wɑz stɑɹɾɪŋ tə fil wɪndɪd wən i ɹitʃt ðə nɛkst ɹum. hi tɔs ðə daɪs əɡɛn, bʌt səspɛktəd wʌɾ i wəd si naɪn. bæk tə ðə fɝst ɹum əɡɛn.

It made sense to him. They ran for a time - this hallway seemed much longer than the others. He was starting to feel winded when he reached the next room. He tossed the dice again, but suspected what he would see Nine. Back to the first room again.

"lʊk, ðɪs ɪz fulɪʃ!" noʊl sɛɾ əz ðeɪ tɝn ən ɹæn bæk ði ʌðɝ weɪ. "wɝ nɛvɝ gɑnə ɡɛɾ ɛniwɛɹ ðɪs weɪ!"

"Look, this is foolish!" Noal said as they turned and ran back the other way. "We're never going to get anywhere this way!"

mæt ɪɡnɔɹd hɪm, kəntɪnjuɪŋ tə ɹʌn. sun ðeɪ əpɹoʊtʃt ðə fɝst ɹum əɡɛn.

Mat ignored him, continuing to run. Soon they approached the first room again.

"mæt," noʊl sɛd, pliɾɪŋli. "kæn wi ət list. . . ."

"Mat," Noal said, pleadingly. "Can we at least. . . ."

noʊl tʃɹeɪld ɔf əz ðeɪ bɝst ɪndə ðə fɝs tʃeɪmbɝ. oʊnli ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə fɝs tʃeɪmbɝ. ðɪs ɹum hæɾ ə waɪt flɔɹ, ən wɑz ɪnɔɹməs, wɪð θɪk, blæk kɑləmz ɹaɪzɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ən ənsin silɪŋ fɑɹ əbʌv.

Noal trailed off as they burst into the first chamber. Only it was not the first chamber. This room had a white floor, and was enormous, with thick, black columns rising toward an unseen ceiling far above.

ðə ɡloʊɪŋ waɪt stim ðət puld ətɑp ðɛɹ kɔɹəɾɝ pɔɹɾ ɪndə ðə ɹum ən fɛl ʌpwɝɾ ɪndə ðət blæknəs, laɪk ə wɔɾɝfɔl ɡoʊɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ dɝɛkʃən. ðoʊ ðə flɔɹ ən ðə kɑləmz lʊk laɪk ɡlæs, mæt nu ðeɪ wəd fil pɔɹəs, laɪk stoʊn. ðə ɹum wɑz lɪt baɪ ə sɪɹiz ʌv ɡloʊɪŋ jɛloʊ stʃɹaɪps ðət ɹæn ʌp itʃ kɑləm, mɑɹkɪŋ pleɪsəz wɛɹ ðə kɑɹvd ɡlæs-stoʊn wɑz fluɾəd tə ə pɔɪnt.

The glowing white steam that pooled atop their corridor poured into the room and fell upward into that blackness, like a waterfall going in the wrong direction. Though the floor and the columns looked like glass, Mat knew they would feel porous, like stone. The room was lit by a series of glowing yellow stripes that ran up each column, marking places where the carved glass-stone was fluted to a point.

θɔɹn klæpt ɪm ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ. "mæt, læd, ðət wɑz ɪnseɪn. ən ɪfɛktɪv. sʌmhaʊ."

Thorn clapped him on the shoulder. "Mat, lad, that was insane. And effective. Somehow."

"əbaʊt wʌt jə ʃəɾ ɪkspɛk fɹəm mi," mæt sɛd, pʊlɪŋ daʊn ðə bɹɪm ə hɪz hæt. "aɪv bɪn ɪn ðɪs ɹum bɪfɔɹ. wɝ ɑn tʃɹæk. ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn stɪl laɪvz, ðən ʃɪl bi sʌmwɛɹ pæs hɪɹ."

"About what you should expect from me," Mat said, pulling down the brim of his hat. "I've been in this room before. We're on track. If Moiraine still lives, then she'll be somewhere past here."


tʃæptɝ fɪftifɔɹ


CHAPTER 54

ðə laɪɾ ə ðə wɝld


The Light of the World

tɑm hɛld ʌp ɪz tɔɹtʃ, ɪnspɛktɪŋ ði ɪnɔɹməs stɑɹ-ʃeɪp blæk kɑləmz ən ðɛɹ ɡloʊɪŋ jɛloʊ laɪnz. ðoʊz laɪnz ɡeɪv ði ɪntaɪɝ ɹum ə sɪkli laɪt, meɪkɪŋ θɔɹn lʊk wɑn ən dʒɔndɪst.

Thom held up his torch, inspecting the enormous star-shaped black columns and their glowing yellow lines. Those lines gave the entire room a sickly light, making Thorn look wan and jaundiced.

mæt ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə stɪŋk ə ðɪs pleɪs, ðət mʌsti steɪlnəs. naʊ ðəɾ i nu wʌt tə lʊk fɔɹ, hi kəd smɛl sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, tu. ðə mʌski stɪŋk ʌv ən ænəməlz dɛn. ə pɹɛɾətɝz lɛɹ.

Mat remembered the stink of this place, that musty staleness. Now that he knew what to look for, he could smell something else, too. The musky stink of an animal's den. A predator's lair.

ðəɹ wɝ faɪv kɔɹɪɾɝz liɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum, wʌn əɾ itʃ ɪnɝ pɔɪn ə ðə stɑɹ ʃeɪp. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd pæsɪŋ θɹu wʌn ə ðoʊz pɑsɑdʒweɪz, bʌt hæd ðəɹ nɑt bɪn oʊnli wʌn weɪ aʊt bɪfɔɹ?

There were five corridors leading out of the room, one at each inner point of the star shape. He remembered passing through one of those passageways, but had there not been only one way out before?

"wʌndɝ haʊ haɪ ʌp ðə pɪlɝz ɡoʊ," θɔɹn sɛd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz tɔɹtʃ haɪɝ ən skwɪntɪŋ.

"Wonder how high up the pillars go," Thorn said, raising his torch higher and squinting.

mæt hɛld ɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ ɪn ə fɝmɝ ɡɹɪp, pɑmz swɛɾi. ðeɪ hæɾ ɛntɝd ðə fɑksəz' dɛn. hi fɛlt əɾ ɪz mədæljən. ði ɛln hæd nɑt juz ðə paʊɝ ɑn ɪm bɪfɔɹ, bʌt ðeɪ hæd tə hæv səm ʌndɝstændɪŋ ʌv ɪt, dɪd ðeɪ nɑt? ʌv kɔɹs, oʊɡiɝ kəd nɑt tʃænəl. pɝhæps ðət mɛn ɛlfɪn kəd nɑɾ iðɝ.

Mat held his ashandarei in a firmer grip, palms sweaty. They had entered the foxes' den. He felt at his medallion. The Eelnnn had not used the Power on him before, but they had to have some understanding of it, did they not? Of course, Ogier could not channel. Perhaps that meant Eelfinn could not either.

ɹʌslɪŋ saʊnz keɪm fɹəm ði ɛdʒəz ə ðə ɹum. ʃædoʊz ʃɪftəɾ ən muvd. ði ɛln wɝ ɪn ðɛɹ, ɪn ðət dɑɹknəs. "θɔɹn," mæt sɛd. "wi ʃəd pleɪ səm mɔɹ mjuzɪk."

Rustling sounds came from the edges of the room. Shadows shifted and moved. The Eelnnn were in there, in that darkness. "Thorn," Mat said. "We should play some more music."

θɔɹn wɑtʃt ðət dɑɹknəs. hi dɪd nɑɾ əbdʒɛkt; hi ɹeɪzd ɪz fluɾ ən bɪɡæn pleɪɪŋ. ðə saʊn sim loʊnli ɪn ðə væst ɹum.

Thorn watched that darkness. He did not object; he raised his flute and began playing. The sound seemed lonely in the vast room.

"mæt," noʊl sɛd, nilɪŋ nɪɹ ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə ɹum. "lʊk ət ðɪs."

"Mat," Noal said, kneeling near the center of the room. "Look at this."

"aɪ noʊ," mæt sɛd. "ɪt lʊks laɪk ɡlæs bʌt filz laɪk stoʊn."

"I know," Mat said. "It looks like glass but feels like stone."

"noʊ, nɑt ðæt," noʊl sɛd. "ðɛɹz sʌmθɪŋ hɪɹ."

"No, not that," Noal said. "There's something here."

mæt ɛdʒd oʊvɝ tə noʊl. θɔɹn dʒɔɪn ðɛm, wɑtʃɪŋ ən pleɪɪŋ əz noʊl juzd ɪz læntɝn tə ɪlumɪnɪɾ ə mɛltəd lʌmp ə slæɡ ɑn ðə flɔɹ, pɝhæps ðə saɪz ʌv ə smɔl tʃɛst. ɪt wɑz blæk, bʌɾ ə dipɝ, lɛs ɹɪflɛktɪv blæk ðən ðə flɔɹ ən ðə kɑləmz.

Mat edged over to Noal. Thorn joined them, watching and playing as Noal used his lantern to illuminate a melted lump of slag on the floor, perhaps the size of a small chest. It was black, but a deeper, less reflective black than the floor and the columns.

"wʌt dʒju meɪk ʌv ɪt?" noʊl æskt. "meɪbi wʌn ə ðə tʃɹæpdɔɹz?"

"What do you make of it?" Noal asked. "Maybe one of the trapdoors?"

"noʊ," mæt sɛd. "ɪts nɑt ðæt."

"No," Mat said. "It's not that."

ði ʌðɝ tu lʊkt ət hɪm.

The other two looked at him.

"ɪts ðə dɔɹfɹeɪm," mæt sɛd, filɪŋ sɪk. "ðə ɹɛd stoʊn dɔɹfɹeɪm. wən aɪ keɪm θɹu ɪt bɪfɔɹ, ɪt wɑz ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ʌv ə ɹum laɪk ðɪs. wən ɪt mɛltəɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd . . ."

"It's the doorframe," Mat said, feeling sick. "The red stone doorframe. When I came through it before, it was in the center of a room like this. When it melted on the other side . . ."

"ɪt mɛltəd hɪɹ tu," noʊl sɛd.

"It melted here too," Noal said.

ðə θɹi stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪt. θɔɹnz mjuzɪk saʊndəd hɔntɪŋ.

The three stared at it. Thorn's music sounded haunting.

"wɛl," mæt sɛd. "wi nu ɪt wɑzn ə weɪ aʊɾ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs. wɪl əv tə bɑɹɡən əɹ weɪ fɹi." ən əl meɪk blʌɾi ʃʊɹ nɑt tə ɡɛt hæŋ ðɪs taɪm.

"Well," Mat said. "We knew it wasn't a way out in the first place. We'll have to bargain our way free." And I'll make bloody sure not to get hanged this time.

"wɪl ðə daɪs lɛɾ ʌs?" noʊl æskt, ɹaɪzɪŋ.

"Will the dice lead us?" Noal asked, rising.

mæt fɛlt əm ɪn ɪz koʊt pɑkət. "aɪ doʊn si waɪ nɑt." bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt teɪk əm aʊt. hi tɝn tə ɹəɡɑɹd ðə dɛpθs ə ðə ɹum. θɔɹnz mjuzɪk sim tə hæv stɪl səm ə ðə ʃædoʊz. bʌɾ ʌðɝz stɪl muvd. ðəɹ wɑz ə ɹɛsləs ɛnɝdʒi tə ði ɛɹ.

Mat felt them in his coat pocket. "I don't see why not." But he did not take them out. He turned to regard the depths of the room. Thorn's music seemed to have stilled some of the shadows. But others still moved. There was a restless energy to the air.

"mæt?" θɔɹn æskt.

"Mat?" Thorn asked.

"ju nu aɪd kʌm bæk," mæt sɛd laʊdli. hɪz vɔɪs dɪd nɑɾ ɛkoʊ. laɪt! haʊ lɑɹdʒ wɑz ðə θɪŋ? "ju nu aɪd kʌm mɑɹtʃɪŋ bæk tə jəɹ blʌɾi ɹɛlm, dɪdn ju? jə nu juɾ əv mi ɪvɛntʃəwəli."

"You knew I'd come back," Mat said loudly. His voice did not echo. Light! How large was the thing? "You knew I'd come marching back to your bloody realm, didn't you? You knew you'd have me eventually."

hɛzɪɾənt, θɔɹn loʊɝɾ ɪz flut.

Hesitant, Thorn lowered his flute.

"ʃoʊ jʊɹsɛlvz!" mæt sɛd. "aɪ kən hɪɹ jə skɹæmbəlɪŋ, hɪɹ jə bɹiðɪŋ."

"Show yourselves!" Mat said. "I can hear you scrambling, hear you breathing."

"mæt," tɑm sɛd, leɪɪŋ ə hæn ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "ðeɪ kʊdn əv noʊn ðət jud kʌm bæk. mɔɪɹeɪn dɪdnt noʊ ðət jud kʌm fəɹ sɝɾən."

"Mat," Thom said, laying a hand on his shoulder. "They couldn't have known that you'd come back. Moiraine didn't know that you'd come for certain."

mæt wɑtʃt ðə dɑɹknəs. "ju ɛvɝ si mɛn lɛd kæɾəl tə slɔɾɝ, tɑm?"

Mat watched the darkness. "You ever see men lead cattle to slaughter, Thom?"

ðə ɡlimən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

The gleeman hesitated, then shook his head.

"wɛl, ɛvɹi mæn əz ɪz oʊn weɪz," mæt sɛd. "bʌt kæɾəl, si, ðəl noʊ sʌmθɪŋ ɪz ɹɔŋ.

"Well, every man has his own ways," Mat said. "But cattle, see, they'll know something is wrong.

ðəl smɛl ðə blʌd. ðəl ɡɛt fɹɛnzid, ɹəfjuz tə ɛntɝ ðə slɔɾɝhaʊs. ən jə noʊ haʊ jə fɪks ðæt?"

They'll smell the blood. They'll get frenzied, refuse to enter the slaughterhouse. And you know how you fix that?"

"du wɪv tə tɔk əbaʊt ðɪs naʊ, mæt?"

"Do we have to talk about this now, Mat?"

"ju fɪks ɪt," mæt sɛd, "baɪ teɪkɪŋ əm θɹu ðə slɔɾɝhaʊs ə fju taɪmz wən ɪts klin, wən ðə sɛns ɑɹən soʊ stʃɹɔŋ. jə lɛɾ əm ɡoʊ θɹu ən ɪskeɪp, si, ən ðəl θɪŋk ðə pleɪs ɪz seɪf." hi lʊkt ət tɑm. "ðeɪ nu aɪd bi bæk. ðeɪ nu aɪd sɝvaɪv ðət hæŋɪŋ. ðeɪ noʊ θɪŋz, tɑm. bɝn mi, bʌt ðeɪ du."

"You fix it," Mat said, "by taking them through the slaughterhouse a few times when it is clean, when the scents aren't so strong. You let them go through and escape, see, and they'll think the place is safe." He looked at Thom. "They knew I'd be back. They knew I'd survive that hanging. They know things, Thom. Burn me, but they do."

"wil ɡɛɾ aʊt, mæt," tɑm pɹɑməst. "wi kæn. mɔɪɹeɪn sɔ ɪt."

"We'll get out, Mat," Thom promised. "We can. Moiraine saw it."

mæt nɑɾəd fɝmli. "blʌɾi ɹaɪt wi wɪl. ðəɹ pleɪɪŋ ə ɡeɪm, tɑm. aɪ wɪn ɡeɪmz." hi pʊld ə hændfʊl ə daɪs fɹəm ɪz pɑkət. wʌn wɪn əm moʊst ə ðə taɪm, ɛniweɪ.

Mat nodded firmly. "Bloody right we will. They're playing a game, Thom. I win games." He pulled a handful of dice from his pocket. 1 win them most of the time, anyway.

ə vɔɪs wɪspɝd sʌɾənli fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðɛm. "wɛlkəm, sʌn ə bæɾəlz."

A voice whispered suddenly from behind them. "Welcome, son of battles."

mæt spʌn, kɝsɪŋ, ɡlænsɪŋ əbaʊt ðə tʃeɪmbɝ.

Mat spun, cursing, glancing about the chamber.

"ðɛɹ," noʊl sɛd, pɔɪntɪŋ wɪð ɪz stæf. ðəɹ wɑz ə fɪɡjɝ bɪsaɪd wʌn ə ðə pɪlɝz, hæf lɪt baɪ ðə jɛloʊ laɪt. ənʌðɝ ɛlfɪn. tɔlɝ, hɪz feɪs mɔɹ æŋɡjəlɝ. hɪz aɪz ɹəflɛktəd tɔɹtʃlaɪt. ɔɹənʒ.

"There," Noal said, pointing with his staff. There was a figure beside one of the pillars, half lit by the yellow light. Another Eelfinn. Taller, his face more angular. His eyes reflected torchlight. Orange.

"aɪ kən teɪk jə wɛɹ jə wɪʃ tə ɡoʊ," ði ɛlfɪn sɛd, vɔɪs ɹʌf ən ɡɹævəli. hi ɹeɪzd ən ɑɹm əɡɛns ðə ɡloʊ ʌv ðə tɔɹtʃɪz. "fɔɹ ə pɹaɪs."

"I can take you where you wish to go," the Eelfinn said, voice rough and gravelly. He raised an arm against the glow of the torches. "For a price."

"tɑm, mjuzɪk."

"Thom, music."

tɑm bɪɡæn pleɪɪŋ əɡɛn.

Thom began playing again.

"wʌn ə jə ɔlɹɛɾi tʃɹaɪd tə ɡɛɾ əs tə liv əɹ tulz bɪhaɪnd," mæt sɛd. hi pʊld ə tɔɹtʃ fɹəm ðə pæk oʊvɝ ɪz ɑɹm, ðən θɹʌst ɪt tə ðə saɪd, laɪɾɪŋ ɪɾ ɑn noʊlz læntɝn. "ɪt woʊnt wɝk."

"One of you already tried to get us to leave our tools behind," Mat said. He pulled a torch from the pack over his arm, then thrust it to the side, lighting it on Noal's lantern. "It won't work."

ði ɛlfɪn ʃaɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə nu laɪt, snɑɹlɪŋ sɔfli. "ju kʌm lʊkɪŋ tə bɑɹɡən, jɛt jə pɝpəsli æntæɡənaɪz? wɪv dʌn nʌθɪŋ tə ɝn ðɪs."

The Eelfinn shied away from the new light, snarling softly. "You come looking to bargain, yet you purposely antagonize? We have done nothing to earn this."

mæt pʊl ðə skɑɹf fɹi fɹəm ɪz nɛk. "nʌθɪŋ?"

Mat pulled the scarf free from his neck. "Nothing?"

ðə kɹitʃɝ meɪd noʊ ɹɪspɑns, ðoʊ ɪt dɪd bæk əweɪ, stɛpɪŋ ɪndə ðə dɑɹkɝ ɛɹiə bɪtwin pɪlɝz. ɪts tu-æŋɡjəlɝ feɪs wɑz naʊ oʊnli bɛɹli lɪt baɪ ðə jɛloʊ laɪts.

The creature made no response, though it did back away, stepping into the darker area between pillars. Its too-angular face was now only barely lit by the yellow lights.

"waɪ dʒju wɪʃ tə spik wɪð ʌs, sʌn ə bæɾəlz," ðə wɪspɝɝ sɛd fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz, "ɪf jə ɑɹ nɑt wɪlɪŋ tə bɑɹɡən?"

"Why do you wish to speak with us, son of battles," the whisperer said from the shadows, "if you are not willing to bargain?"

"noʊ," mæt sɛd. "noʊ bɑɹɡɪnɪŋ əntɪl wi ɹitʃ ðə ɡɹeɪt hɔl, ðə tʃeɪmbɝ ə bɑnz." ðət wɑz ði oʊnli pleɪs wɛɹ ðeɪ wəd bi baʊn tə ði əɡɹimənt. ɪz ðət nɑt wʌt bɝdʒɪt hæd sɛd? ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi hæd sim tə bi ɹilaɪɪŋ ɑn stɔɹiz ən hɪɹseɪ hɝsɛlf.

"No," Mat said. "No bargaining until we reach the great hall, the Chamber of Bonds." That was the only place where they would be bound to the agreement. Is that not what Birgitte had said? Of course, she had seemed to be relying on stories and hearsay herself.

tɑm kəntɪnjud pleɪɪŋ, aɪz dɑɹɾɪŋ fɹəm saɪd tə saɪd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə wɑtʃ ðə ʃædoʊz. noʊl bɪɡæn tə pleɪ ðə lɪɾəl sɪmbəlz i hæd taɪd tə ðə lɛɡz ə hɪz tʃɹaʊzɝz, tæpɪŋ əm ɪn taɪm wɪð tɑmz mjuzɪk. ðə ʃædoʊz kəntɪnjud tə muv aʊt ðɛɹ, haʊɛvɝ.

Thom continued playing, eyes darting from side to side, trying to watch the shadows. Noal began to play the little cymbals he had tied to the legs of his trousers, tapping them in time with Thom's music. The shadows continued to move out there, however.

"jɔɹ . . . kʌmfɝts wɪl nɑt sloʊ ʌs, sʌn ə bæɾəlz," ə vɔɪs sɛd fɹəm bɪhaɪnd. mæt spʌn, loʊɝɪŋ ɪz wɛpən. ənʌðɝ ɛlfɪn stʊd ðɛɹ, dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə ʃædoʊz. ə fimeɪl, wɪð ə kɹɛst ə ɹɛd ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn əɹ bæk, ðə lɛðɝ stʃɹæps kɹɔsɪŋ əɹ bɹɛsts ɪn ən 'ɛks' pæɾɝn. hɝ ɹɛd lɪps smaɪld. "wi ɑɹ ðə nɪɹ eɪntʃənt, ðə wɔɹiɝz ə faɪnəl ɹəɡɹɛt, ðə noʊɝz ə sikɹəts."

"Your . . . comforts will not slow us, son of battles," a voice said from behind. Mat spun, lowering his weapon. Another Eelfinn stood there, just inside the shadows. A female, with a crest of red running down her back, the leather straps crossing her breasts in an 'X' pattern. Her red lips smiled. "We are the near ancient, the warriors of final regret, the knowers of secrets."

"bi pɹaʊd, sʌn ə bæɾəlz," ənʌðɝ vɔɪs hɪst. mæt spʌn əɡɛn, swɛt dæmpənɪŋ ɪz bɹaʊ. ðə fimeɪl vænɪʃt bæk ɪndə ðə ʃædoʊz, bʌɾ ənʌðɝ ɛlfɪn stʃɹoʊl θɹu ðə laɪt. hi kæɹiɾ ə lɔŋ, wɪkəd bɹɑnz naɪf, wɪð ə kɹɔswɝk pæɾɝn ə ɹoʊzɪz əlɔŋ ɪts lɛŋθ ən θɔɹnz stɪkɪŋ aʊt nɪɹ ðə tɑp ə ðə kɹɔsɡɑɹd. "ju dʒɹɔ aʊɾ əɹ moʊst skɪl jə ɑɹ tə bi . . . seɪvɝd."

"Be proud, son of battles," another voice hissed. Mat spun again, sweat dampening his brow. The female vanished back into the shadows, but another Eelfinn strolled through the light. He carried a long, wicked bronze knife, with a crosswork pattern of roses along its length and thorns sticking out near the top of the crossguard. "You draw out our most skilled You are to be . . . savored."

"wʌt - " mæt bɪɡæn, bʌt ðə lin, deɪnʒɝəs-lʊkɪŋ ɛlfɪn stɛp bæk ɪndə ðə ʃædoʊz ən vænɪʃt. tu kwɪkli. əz ɪf ðə dɑɹknəs hæɾ əbzɔɹb hɪm.

"What - " Mat began, but the lean, dangerous-looking Eelfinn stepped back into the shadows and vanished. Too quickly. As if the darkness had absorbed him.

ʌðɝ wɪspɝz bɪɡæn ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz, spikɪŋ ɪn loʊ vɔɪsəz, oʊvɝlæpɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ. feɪsəz əpɪɹd fɹəm ðə dɑɹknəs, ɪnhjumən aɪz waɪd, lɪps kɝld ɪn smaɪlz. ðə kɹitʃɝz hæd pɔɪntəd tiθ.

Other whispers began in the shadows, speaking in low voices, overlapping each other. Faces appeared from the darkness, inhuman eyes wide, lips curled in smiles. The creatures had pointed teeth.

laɪt! ðəɹ wɝ dʌzənz ʌv ɛlfɪn ɪn ðə ɹum. ʃɪftɪŋ, muvɪŋ əbaʊt, dænsɪŋ ɪndə ðə laɪt, ðən dʒʌmpɪŋ bæk ɪndə ðə dɑɹk. səm wɝ kæʒəwəl, ʌðɝz ɛnɝdʒɛɾɪk. ɔl lʊk deɪnʒɝəs.

Light! There were dozens of Eelfinn in the room. Shifting, moving about, dancing into the light, then jumping back into the dark. Some were casual, others energetic. All looked dangerous.

"wɪl jə bɑɹɡən?" wʌn æskt.

"Will you bargain?" one asked.

"ju kʌm wɪθaʊt tʃɹiɾi. deɪnʒɝəs," sɛɾ ənʌðɝ.

"You come without treaty. Dangerous," said another.

"sʌn ə bæɾəlz."

"Son of battles."

"ðə seɪvɝ!"

"The savor!"

"fil ɪz fɪɹ."

"Feel his fear."

"kʌm wɪð ʌs. liv jəɹ tɛɹəbəl laɪt."

"Come with us. Leave your terrible light."

"ə bɑɹɡən mʌs bi meɪd. wɪl weɪt."

"A bargain must be made. We will wait."

"peɪʃənt wi ɑɹ. ɛvɝ peɪʃənt."

"Patient we are. Ever patient."

"ðə seɪvɝ!"

"The savor!"

"stɑp ɪt!" mæt bɛloʊd. "noʊ bɑɹɡənz! nɑɾ əntɪl wi ɹitʃ ðə sɛntɝ."

"Stop it!" Mat bellowed. "No bargains! Not until we reach the center."

əɾ ɪz saɪd, θɔɹn loʊɝd ðə flut. "mæt. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðə mjuzɪk ɪz wɝkɪŋ ɛnimɔɹ."

At his side, Thorn lowered the flute. "Mat. I don't think the music is working anymore."

mæt nɑɾəd kɝtli. hi niɾəd tɑm ɹɛɾi wɪð wɛpənz. ðə ɡli-mæn tʌkt əweɪ hɪz flut, ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊt naɪvz. mæt ɪɡnɔɹd ðə wɪspɝɪŋ vɔɪsəz ən tɔs ðə daɪs ɑntu ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

Mat nodded curtly. He needed Thom ready with weapons. The glee-man tucked away his flute, getting out knives. Mat ignored the whispering voices and tossed the dice onto the ground.

əz ðeɪ ɹoʊld, ə fɪɡjɝ skʌɾəld fɹəm ðə dɑɹknəs bɪsaɪd ðə nɪɹəs pɪlɝ. mæt kɝst, loʊɝɪŋ ɪz spɪɹ ən stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ət ði ɛlfɪn, wɪtʃ muvd əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹaʊn ɑn ɔl fɔɹz. bʌɾ ɪz bleɪd pæst ɹaɪt θɹu ɪt, əz ɪf ɪt wɝ smoʊk.

As they rolled, a figure scuttled from the darkness beside the nearest pillar. Mat cursed, lowering his spear and striking at the Eelfinn, which moved across the ground on all fours. But his blade passed right through it, as if it were smoke.

wɑz ɪɾ ən ɪluʒən? ə tʃɹɪk ə ði aɪz? mæt hɛzɪteɪɾɪd lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ ənʌðɝ kɹitʃɝ tə snætʃ ðə daɪs ən lip bæk təwɔɹd ðə ʃædoʊz.

Was it an illusion? A trick of the eyes? Mat hesitated long enough for another creature to snatch the dice and leap back toward the shadows.

sʌmθɪŋ spɑɹkəld ɪn ði ɛɹ. θɔɹnz dæɡɝ faʊn ɪts mɑɹk, stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ðə kɹitʃɝ ɪn ðə ʃoʊldɝ.

Something sparkled in the air. Thorn's dagger found its mark, striking the creature in the shoulder.

ðɪs taɪm ðə bleɪd pɪɹst ən steɪd, ɹilisɪŋ ə spɹeɪ ʌv dɑɹk blʌd.

This time the blade pierced and stayed, releasing a spray of dark blood.

aɪɝn, mæt θɔt, kɝsɪŋ ɪz stupɪɾɪti. hi spʌn ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ ɝaʊnd, juzɪŋ ðə saɪd bændɪd wɪð aɪɝn. hi ʃɪvɝɾ əz i sɔ ði ɛlfɪnz blʌɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪɡɪn tə stim. waɪt stim, əz ɪn ði ʌðɝ tʃeɪmbɝz, bʌt ðɪs hæd ʃeɪps ɪn ɪt. ðeɪ lʊk laɪk twɪstəd feɪsəz, əpɪɹɪŋ bɹifli ən jɛlɪŋ bɪfɔɹ vænɪʃɪŋ.

Iron, Mat thought, cursing his stupidity. He spun the ashandarei around, using the side banded with iron. He shivered as he saw the Eelfinn's blood on the ground begin to steam. White steam, as in the other chambers, but this had shapes in it. They looked like twisted faces, appearing briefly and yelling before vanishing.

bɝn ðɛm! hi kʊdnt ɡɛt dɪstʃɹæktəd. hi hæɾ ʌðɝ daɪs. hi ɹitʃt fəɹ ɪz pɑkət, bʌɾ ən ɛlfɪn dʌk fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz, əz ɪf tə ɡɹæb əɾ ɪz koʊt.

Burn them! He couldn't get distracted. He had other dice. He reached for his pocket, but an Eelfinn ducked from the shadows, as if to grab at his coat.

mæt spʌn ɪz wɛpən, stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ðə saɪɾ ə ðə fɑks meɪlz feɪs wɪð ðə bændɪɾ aɪɝn. hi kɹʌʃt boʊn, tɔsɪŋ ðə kɹitʃɝ tə ðə saɪd laɪk ə bʌndəl ə stɪks.

Mat spun his weapon, striking the side of the fox male's face with the banded iron. He crushed bone, tossing the creature to the side like a bundle of sticks.

hɪsɪz ən ɡɹaʊlz sɝaʊndəd ðɛm. aɪz ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs, ɹəflɛktɪŋ tɔɹtʃlaɪt. ði ɛlfɪn muvd, kloʊkt ɪn blæknəs, sɝaʊndɪŋ mæt ən ði ʌðɝz. mæt kɝst, teɪkɪŋ ə stɛp ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ði ɛlfɪn i hæd stʃɹʌk.

Hisses and growls surrounded them. Eyes shifted in the darkness, reflecting torchlight. The Eelfinn moved, cloaked in blackness, surrounding Mat and the others. Mat cursed, taking a step in the direction of the Eelfinn he had struck.

"mæt!" θɔɹn sɛd, ɡɹæbɪŋ ðə kʌf ə hɪz koʊt. "wi kænt weɪɾ ɪndə ðæt."

"Mat!" Thorn said, grabbing the cuff of his coat. "We can't wade into that."

mæt hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ɪt sim ðət ðə stɪŋk fɹəm bɪfɔɹ wɑz stʃɹɔŋɝ, ðə sɛn ə bists. ʃædoʊz muvd ɔl əbaʊt, mɔɹ fɹæntɪk naʊ, ðɛɹ wɪspɝz æŋɡɹi ən mɪkst wɪð jɪpɪŋ kɔlz.

Mat hesitated. It seemed that the stink from before was stronger, the scent of beasts. Shadows moved all about, more frantic now, their whispers angry and mixed with yipping calls.

"ðeɪ kəntʃɹoʊl ðə dɑɹknəs," noʊl sɛd. hi stʊd wɪð ɪz bæk tə mæt ən θɔɹn, wɛɹi. "ðoʊz jɛloʊ laɪts ɑɹ tə dɪstʃɹækt ʌs; ðəɹ ɑɹ bɹeɪks ɪn əm ən ʃɛltɝɾ ælkoʊvz. ɪts ɔl ə tʃɹɪk."

"They control the darkness," Noal said. He stood with his back to Mat and Thorn, wary. "Those yellow lights are to distract us; there are breaks in them and sheltered alcoves. It's all a trick."

mæt fɛlt ɪz hɑɹt biɾɪŋ ɹæpədli. ə tʃɹɪk? noʊ, nɑt dʒʌst ə tʃɹɪk. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ənnætʃɹəl əbaʊt ðə weɪ ðoʊz kɹitʃɝz muvd ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ. "bɝn ðɛm," mæt sɛd, ʃeɪkɪŋ θɔɹnz hæn fɹi bʌt nɑt tʃeɪsɪŋ ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs.

Mat felt his heart beating rapidly. A trick? No, not just a trick. There was something unnatural about the way those creatures moved in the shadow. "Burn them," Mat said, shaking Thorn's hand free but not chasing into the darkness.

"dʒɛntəlmɪn," noʊl sɛd. "ɡæðɝ ɑɹmz. . . ."

"Gentlemen," Noal said. "Gather arms. . . ."

mæt ɡlænst oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ðəɹ wɝ ɛlfɪn stɔkɪŋ fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ə dʌbəl weɪv, wʌn ɡɹup slaɪɾɪŋ ɑn ɔl fɔɹz bɪfɔɹ ə sɛkənd ɡɹup. ðə sɛkənd ɡɹup kæɹid ðoʊz wɪkəd-lʊkɪŋ bɹɑnz naɪvz.

Mat glanced over his shoulder. There were Eelfinn stalking from the shadows behind them, a double wave, one group sliding on all fours before a second group. The second group carried those wicked-looking bronze knives.

ðə ʃædoʊz fɹəm ðə dɛpθs ə ðə ɹum sim tə bi ɪkstɛndɪŋ wɪð ði ɛlfɪn, kloʊzɪŋ ɑn mæt ən ɪz ɡɹup. hɪz hɑɹt biɾ ivən fæstɝ.

The shadows from the depths of the room seemed to be extending with the Eelfinn, closing on Mat and his group. His heart beat even faster.

ði ɛlfɪn aɪz ʃoʊn, ən ðoʊz ɑn ɔl fɔɹz bɪɡæn tə loʊp fɔɹwɝd. mæt swʌŋ əz ði ɛlfɪn ɹitʃt ɪz ɡɹup, bʌt ðeɪ splɪt, dʌkɪŋ tə ðə saɪdz. dɪstʃɹæktɪŋ hɪm.

The Eelfinn eyes shone, and those on all fours began to lope forward. Mat swung as the Eelfinn reached his group, but they split, ducking to the sides. Distracting him.

bɪhaɪnd! mæt θɔt wɪð əlɑɹm. ənʌðɝ ɡɹup ʌv ɛlfɪn dʒʌmpt aʊɾ ə ðə dɑɹknəs ðɛɹ.

Behind! Mat thought with alarm. Another group of Eelfinn jumped out of the darkness there.

mæt tɝn ɑn ðɛm, swɪŋɪŋ. ðeɪ dʌk bæk bɪfɔɹ i hɪt. laɪt' ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ɝaʊnd, siθɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə dɑɹknəs, kʌmɪŋ kloʊs ɪnʌf tə bi deɪnʒɝəs, ðən bækɪŋ əweɪ.

Mat turned on them, swinging. They ducked back before he hit. Light' They were all around, seething out of the darkness, coming close enough to be dangerous, then backing away.

θɔɹn wɪpt aʊɾ ə pɛɹ ə dæɡɝz, θɹoʊɪŋ, ən noʊl kɛpt ɪz ʃɔɹtsɔɝɾ ət ðə ɹɛɾi, weɪvɪŋ ɪz tɔɹtʃ wɪð ɪz ʌðɝ hænd, hɪz bændɪd stæf ɑn ðə flɔɹ əɾ ɪz fit. wʌn ə θɔɹnz naɪvz flæʃt, sikɪŋ flɛʃ bʌt mɪst ən pæst ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs.

Thorn whipped out a pair of daggers, throwing, and Noal kept his shortsword at the ready, waving his torch with his other hand, his banded staff on the floor at his feet. One of Thorn's knives flashed, seeking flesh but missed and passed into the darkness.

"doʊnt weɪs naɪvz!" mæt sɛd. "blʌɾi sʌnz ʌv ɡoʊts, ðəɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk jə weɪs ðɛm, θɔɹn!"

"Don't waste knives!" Mat said. "Bloody sons of goats, they're trying to make you waste them, Thorn!"

"ðeɪɹ hæɹiɪŋ ʌs," noʊl ɡɹaʊld. "ðeɪl oʊvɝwɛlm əs ɪvɛntʃəwəli. wɪv tə muv!"

"They're harrying us," Noal growled. "They'll overwhelm us eventually. We have to move!"

"wɪtʃ weɪ?" θɔɹn æskt, ɝdʒənt. hi kɝst əz ə pɛɹ ʌv ɛlfɪn əpɪɹd fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz kæɹiɪŋ bɹɑnz-ɛndəd lænsɪz. ðeɪ θɹʌs fɔɹwɝd, fɔɹsɪŋ mæt, θɔɹn, ən noʊl tə bæk əweɪ.

"Which way?" Thorn asked, urgent. He cursed as a pair of Eelfinn appeared from the shadows carrying bronze-ended lances. They thrust forward, forcing Mat, Thorn, and Noal to back away.

noʊ taɪm fəɹ daɪs. ðeɪ wəd dʒʌst snætʃ ðoʊz ɛniweɪ. mæt jæŋkt oʊpən ɪz pæk ən pʊld aʊɾ ə naɪtfloʊɝ. "wʌns ðɪs ɡoʊz ɔf, aɪm gɑnə kloʊz maɪ aɪz ən spɪn əbaʊt."

No time for dice. They would just snatch those anyway. Mat yanked open his pack and pulled out a nightflower. "Once this goes off, I'm going to close my eyes and spin about."

"wʌt?" θɔɹn sɛd.

"What?" Thorn said.

"ɪts wɝk bɪfɔɹ!" mæt sɛd, laɪɾɪŋ ðə naɪtfloʊɝ ən θɹoʊɪŋ ɪɾ əz hɑɹɾ əz i kəɾ ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs. ðəɹ wɑz ə kaʊn ə faɪv, ən ðə bum ðət fɑloʊd ɹæɾəld ðə ɹum. ɔl θɹi ʌv əm əvɝɾəd ðɛɹ aɪz, bʌt ðə kʌlɝfəl flæʃ wɑz bɹaɪɾ ɪnʌf tə si θɹu aɪlɪdz.

"It's worked before!" Mat said, lighting the nightflower and throwing it as hard as he could into the darkness. There was a count of five, and the boom that followed rattled the room. All three of them averted their eyes, but the colorful flash was bright enough to see through eyelids.

ɛlfɪn skɹimd ɪn peɪn, ən mæt dɪstɪŋkli hɝd pɪŋz əz wɛpənz wɝ dʒɹɑpt. noʊ daʊt hænz wɝ ɹeɪz tə aɪz.

Eelfinn screamed in pain, and Mat distinctly heard pings as weapons were dropped. No doubt hands were raised to eyes.

"hɪɹ wi ɡoʊ!" mæt sɛd, spɪnɪŋ.

"Here we go!" Mat said, spinning.

"ðɪs ɪz fleɪmɪŋ ɪnseɪn," θɔɹn sɛd.

"This is flaming insane," Thorn said.

mæt kɛpt ɡoʊɪŋ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fil fəɹ ɪt. wɛɹ wɑz ðət lʌk? "ðæt weɪ!" hi sɛd, pɔɪntɪŋ ɪn ə ɹændəm dɝɛkʃən.

Mat kept going, trying to feel for it. Where was that luck? "That way!" he said, pointing in a random direction.

hi oʊpən ɪz aɪz ɪn taɪm tə lip oʊvɝ ðə dɑɹk fɔɹm ʌv ən ɛlfɪn hʌɾəlɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. mæt ən θɔɹn fɑloʊd, ən mæt lɛɾ əm stʃɹeɪɾ ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs. hi tʃɑɹdʒd əhɛɾ əntɪl ɪz fɹɛnz wɝ bɛɹli vɪzəbəl. ɔl i kəd si wɝ ðoʊz laɪnz ə jɛloʊ.

He opened his eyes in time to leap over the dark form of an Eelfinn huddling on the ground. Mat and Thorn followed, and Mat led them straight into the darkness. He charged ahead until his friends were barely visible. All he could see were those lines of yellow.

oʊ, blʌɾi æʃəz, hi θɔt. ɪf maɪ lʌk feɪlz mi naʊ. . . .

Oh, bloody ashes, he thought. If my luck fails me now. . . .

ðeɪ bɝst ɪndə ə faɪv-saɪɾəd kɔɹəɾɝ, ðə dɑɹknəs vænɪʃɪŋ ɝaʊn ðɛm. ðeɪ hæd nɑt bɪn eɪbəl tə si ðɪs kɔɹəɾɝ fɹəm ði ʌðɝ ɹum, bʌt hɪɹ ɪt wɑz.

They burst into a five-sided corridor, the darkness vanishing around them. They had not been able to see this corridor from the other room, but here it was.

θɔɹn lɛɾ aʊɾ ə wup. "mæt, jə wʊd-hɛɾəd ʃɛpɝd! fəɹ ðɪs, əl lɛt jə pleɪ maɪ hɑɹp!"

Thorn let out a whoop. "Mat, you wood-headed shepherd! For this, I'll let you play my harp!"

"aɪ doʊnt wɑnə pleɪ jəɹ blʌɾi hɑɹp," mæt sɛd, ɡlænsɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "bʌt jə kən baɪ mi ə mʌɡ əɹ tu wən wɝ aʊt."

"I don't want to play your bloody harp," Mat said, glancing over his shoulder. "But you can buy me a mug or two when we're out."

hi hɝd skɹimz ən skɹitʃɪz fɹəm ðə dɑɹk ɹum. ðət wɑz wʌn tʃɹɪk juzd ʌp; ðeɪ wəd bi ɪkspɛktɪŋ naɪtfloʊɝz naʊ. bɝdʒɪt, jə wɝ ɹaɪt, hi θɔt. jə pɹɑbli wɔk pæs ðə kɔɹəɾɝ jə niɾəd sɛvɹəl taɪmz, nɛvɝ noʊɪŋ ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə fju fiɾ əweɪ.

He heard screams and screeches from the dark room. That was one trick used up; they would be expecting nightflowers now. Birgitte, you were right, he thought. You probably walked past the corridor you needed several times, never knowing it was only a few feet away.

nɛvɝ tʃuz ðə kɑɹɾ ə mæn wɑns jə tə. mæt ʃʊɾə ɹilaɪz ðæt. ɪt wɑz wʌn ə ði oʊldəs kɑnz ɪn kɹieɪʃən. ðeɪ heɪsən fɔɹwɝd, pæsɪŋ faɪv-saɪɾəd dɔɹweɪz liɾɪŋ ɪndə lɑɹdʒ stɑɹ-ʃeɪp kævɝnz. θɔɹn ən noʊl ɡlænst ɪndə ðɛm, bʌt mæt kɛpt ɑn. stʃɹeɪt fɔɹwɝd. ðɪs wɑz ðə weɪ hɪz lʌk hæd sɛn ðɛm.

Never choose the card a man wants you to. Mat should have realized that. It was one of the oldest cons in creation. They hastened forward, passing five-sided doorways leading into large star-shaped caverns. Thorn and Noal glanced into them, but Mat kept on. Straight forward. This was the way his luck had sent them.

sʌmθɪŋ wɑz dɪfɹən fɹəm wən i hæd vɪzəɾəd bɪfɔɹ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ dʌst ɑn ðə flɔɹ tə meɪk fʊtpɹɪns. hæd ðeɪ noʊn i wɑz kʌmɪŋ, ən juz ðə dʌs tə kənfjuz hɪm? əɹ hæd ðeɪ klin ðə pleɪs ðɪs taɪm, noʊɪŋ ðət vɪzəɾɝz maɪɾ ɝaɪv? hu nu ɪn ə ɹɛlm sətʃ əz ðɪs?

Something was different from when he had visited before. There was no dust on the floor to make footprints. Had they known he was coming, and used the dust to confuse him? Or had they cleaned the place this time, knowing that visitors might arrive? Who knew in a realm such as this?

ɪt hæd bɪn ə lɔŋ wɔk bɪfɔɹ. əɹ hæɾ ɪt bɪn ə ʃɔɹt wʌn? taɪm blɛndəd hɪɹ. ɪt sim ðət ðeɪ ɹæn fəɹ mɛni aʊɝz, jɛɾ ɪɾ ɔlsoʊ fɛlt laɪk moʊməns.

It had been a long walk before. Or had it been a short one? Time blended here. It seemed that they ran for many hours, yet it also felt like moments.

ən ðən ðə dɔɹweɪ wɑz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm, əpɪɹɪŋ laɪk ə stʃɹaɪkɪŋ æɾɝ. ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn ðəɹ ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ. ðə ɹɪm ə ði oʊpənɪŋ wɑz ɪntʃɹəkətli kɑɹvd wʊd, wɪð ən ɪmpɑsəbəl pæɾɝn ʌv wivɪŋ vaɪnz ðət sim tə dʌbəl bæk ɑn wʌn ənʌðɝ ən meɪk noʊ sɛns.

And then the doorway was in front of them, appearing like a striking adder. It had not been there a moment before. The rim of the opening was intricately carved wood, with an impossible pattern of weaving vines that seemed to double back on one another and make no sense.

ɔl θɹi pʊl tə ə hɔlt. "mɪɹɝz," noʊl sɛd. "aɪv sin ɪt bɪfɔɹ. ðæts haʊ ðeɪ də ɪt, əbskjʊɹɪŋ θɪŋz wɪð mɪɹɝz." hi saʊndəɾ ənnɝvd. wɛɹ dɪd wʌn haɪd mɪɹɝz ɪn ə blʌɾi stʃɹeɪt tʌnəl?

All three pulled to a halt. "Mirrors," Noal said. "I've seen it before. That's how they do it, obscuring things with mirrors." He sounded unnerved. Where did one hide mirrors in a bloody straight tunnel?

ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ðə ɹaɪt pleɪs; mæt kəd smɛl ɪt. ðə stɪŋk ə ði ɛlfɪn wɑz stʃɹɔŋɡəs hɪɹ. hi sɛɾ ɪz dʒɔ ən stɛp θɹu ðə dɔɹweɪ.

They were in the right place; Mat could smell it. The stink of the Eelfinn was strongest here. He set his jaw and stepped through the doorway.

ðə ɹum bɪɑnd wɑz əz i ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪt. noʊ kɑləmz hɪɹ, ðoʊ ðə ɹum wɑz dɪstɪŋkli stɑɹ- ʃeɪpt. eɪt tɪps ən oʊnli ðə wʌn dɔɹweɪ. ðoʊz ɡloʊɪŋ jɛloʊ stʃɹɪps ɹæn ʌp ðə ʃɑɹp ɛnz ə ðə ɹum, ən eɪɾ ɛmpti pɛɾəstəlz stʊd, blæk ən ɑmənəs, wʌn əɾ itʃ pɔɪnt.

The room beyond was as he remembered it. No columns here, though the room was distinctly star- shaped. Eight tips and only the one doorway. Those glowing yellow strips ran up the sharp ends of the room, and eight empty pedestals stood, black and ominous, one at each point.

ɪt wɑz ɪɡzækli ðə seɪm. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə wʊmən floʊɾɪŋ əɾ ɪts sɛntɝ.

It was exactly the same. Except for the woman floating at its center.

ʃi wɑz kloʊðd oʊnli ɪn ə faɪn waɪt mɪs ðət ʃɪftəɾ ən ʃoʊn ɝaʊn hɝ, ðə dɪteɪlz ə hɝ fɪɡjɝ ɑbfəskeɪɾɪd bʌt nɑt hɪɾən. hɝ aɪz wɝ kloʊzd, ən əɹ dɑɹk hɛɹ - kɝli bʌt noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪn pɝfəkt ɹɪŋləts -  flʌɾɝd əz ɪf ɪn ə wɪn bloʊɪŋ ʌp fɹəm bɪniθ. hɝ hænz ɹɛstəɾ ətɑp əɹ stʌmək, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə stʃɹeɪnʒ bɹeɪsləɾ ə sʌmθɪŋ ðət lʊk laɪk eɪdʒd aɪvɝi ɑn əɹ lɛft ɹɪst.

She was clothed only in a fine white mist that shifted and shone around her, the details of her figure obfuscated but not hidden. Her eyes were closed, and her dark hair - curly but no longer in perfect ringlets -  fluttered as if in a wind blowing up from beneath. Her hands rested atop her stomach, and there was a strange bracelet of something that looked like aged ivory on her left wrist.

mɔɪɹeɪn.

Moiraine.

mæt fɛlt ə sɝdʒ ʌv ɪmoʊʃənz. wɝi, fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən, kənsɝn, ɑ. ʃi wɑz ðə wʌn u hæd stɑɹɾəd ðɪs ɔl. hi hæd heɪɾəd əɹ ət taɪmz. hi ɔlsoʊ oʊɾ əɹ ɪz laɪf. ʃi wɑz ðə fɝst wʌn u hæd mɛɾəld, jæŋkɪŋ ɪm ðɪs weɪ ən ðæt. jɛt - lʊkɪŋ bæk - hi fɪɡjɝd ðət ʃi hæd bɪn ðə moʊst ɑnəst əbaʊɾ ɪɾ ʌv ɛniwʌn u hæd juz hɪm. ʌnəpɑlədʒɛɾɪk, ənjildɪŋ. ən sɛlfləs.

Mat felt a surge of emotions. Worry, frustration, concern, awe. She was the one who had started this all. He had hated her at times. He also owed her his life. She was the first one who had meddled, yanking him this way and that. Yet - looking back - he figured that she had been the most honest about it of anyone who had used him. Unapologetic, unyielding. And selfless.

ʃi hæd dɛɾəkeɪtəd ɛvɹiθɪŋ tə pɹətɛktɪŋ θɹi fulɪʃ bɔɪz, ɔl ɪɡnɝən ʌv wʌt ðə wɝld wəd dɪmæn ə ðɛm. ʃi hæd dɪtɝmən tə teɪk əm tə seɪfti. meɪbi tʃɹeɪn əm ə lɪɾəl, wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɑntəɾ ɪɾ əɹ nɑt.

She had dedicated everything to protecting three foolish boys, all ignorant of what the world would demand of them. She had determined to take them to safety. Maybe train them a little, whether they wanted it or not.

kəz ðeɪ niɾəd ɪt.

Because they needed it.

laɪt, hɝ moʊɾɪvz sim klɪɹ tə hɪm naʊ. ðət dɪd nɑt meɪk ɪm ɛni lɛs æŋɡɹi wɪð hɝ, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd meɪk ɪm ɡɹeɪtfəl. bɝn hɝ, bʌt ðɪs wɑz ə kənfjuzɪŋ sɛɾ ʌv ɪmoʊʃənz! ðoʊz blʌɾi fɑksəz - haʊ dɛɹ ðeɪ kip əɹ laɪk ðɪs! wɑz ʃi əlaɪv?

Light, her motives seemed clear to him now. That did not make him any less angry with her, but it did make him grateful. Burn her, but this was a confusing set of emotions! Those bloody foxes - how dare they keep her like this! Was she alive?

θɔɹn ən noʊl wɝ stɛɹɪŋ - noʊl sɑləm, θɔɹn dɪsbɪlivɪŋ. soʊ mæt stɛp fɔɹwɝd tə pʊl mɔɪɹeɪn fɹi. əz sun əz ɪz hænz tʌtʃt ðə mɪst, haʊɛvɝ, hi fɛlt ə bleɪzɪŋ peɪn. hi skɹimd, pʊlɪŋ bæk, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hænd.

Thorn and Noal were staring - Noal solemn, Thorn disbelieving. So Mat stepped forward to pull Moiraine free. As soon as his hands touched the mist, however, he felt a blazing pain. He screamed, pulling back, shaking his hand.

"ɪts blʌɾi hɑt" mæt sɛd. "ɪt - "

"It's bloody hot" Mat said. "It - "

hi kʌɾ ɔf əz θɔɹn stɛp fɔɹwɝd.

He cut off as Thorn stepped forward.

"tɑm . . ." mæt sɛd wɔɹnɪŋli.

"Thom . . ." Mat said warningly.

"aɪ doʊn kɛɹ," ðə ɡlimən sɛd. hi stɛpt ʌp tə ðə mɪst, ɹitʃɪŋ ɪn, hɪz kloʊðɪŋ bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə stim, hɪz aɪz wɔɾɝɪŋ fɹəm ðə peɪn. hi dɪd nɑt flɪntʃ. hi dʌɡ ɪndə ðət mɪst ən tʊk hoʊld ə hɝ, ðən pʊld əɹ fɹi. hɝ weɪt sæŋk ɪndə hɪz ɑɹmz, bʌɾ ɪz eɪdʒɪŋ lɪmz wɝ stʃɹɔŋ, ən ʃi lʊk fɹeɪl ɪnʌf ðət ʃi mʌs nɑɾ əv weɪd mʌtʃ.

"I don't care," the gleeman said. He stepped up to the mist, reaching in, his clothing beginning to steam, his eyes watering from the pain. He did not flinch. He dug into that mist and took hold of her, then pulled her free. Her weight sank into his arms, but his aging limbs were strong, and she looked frail enough that she must not have weighed much.

laɪt! mæt hæd fɝɡɑɾən haʊ smɔl ʃi wɑz. ə ɡʊd hɛd ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən i wɑz. tɑm nɛlt, pʊlɪŋ ɔf ɪz ɡlimənz kloʊk ən ɹæpɪŋ əɹ ɪn ɪt. hɝ aɪz wɝ stɪl kloʊzd.

Light! Mat had forgotten how small she was. A good head shorter than he was. Thom knelt, pulling off his gleeman's cloak and wrapping her in it. Her eyes were still closed.

"ɪz ʃi . . ." noʊl æskt.

"Is she . . ." Noal asked.

"ʃi lɪvz," tɑm sɛd kwaɪətli. "aɪ fɛlt əɹ hɑɹtbit." hi tʊk ðə bɹeɪsləɾ ɔf əɹ ɑɹm. ɪt wɑz ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə mæn bɛn bækwɝd wɪð ɪz ɹɪsts baʊn tə hɪz æŋkəlz, kloʊðd ɪn ə stʃɹeɪnʒ suɾ ə kloʊðɪŋ. "ɪt lʊks laɪk ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ə səm sɔɹt," tɑm sɛd, tʌkɪŋ ɪɾ ɪndə hɪz kloʊk pɑkət. "aɪ - "

"She lives," Thom said quietly. "I felt her heartbeat." He took the bracelet off her arm. It was in the shape of a man bent backward with his wrists bound to his ankles, clothed in a strange suit of clothing. "It looks like a ter'angreal of some sort," Thom said, tucking it into his cloak pocket. "I - "

"ɪɾ ɪz ən æŋɡɹil" ə vɔɪs pɹoʊkleɪmd. "stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə bi nɪɹli sɑŋɡɹil. ɪt kən bi pɑɹɾ ə hɝ pɹaɪs, ʃəd jə wɪʃ tə peɪ ɪt."

"It is an angreal" a voice proclaimed. "Strong enough to be nearly sa'angreal. It can be part of her price, should you wish to pay it."

mæt spʌn. ðə pɛɾəstəlz wɝ naʊ ɑkjəpaɪd baɪ ɛlfɪn, fɔɹ meɪlz, fɔɹ fimeɪlz. ɔl eɪt wɔɹ waɪɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə blæk - waɪt skɝts wɪð stʃɹæps əkɹɔs ðə tʃɛsts fəɹ ðə meɪlz ən blaʊsəz fəɹ ðə fimeɪlz, meɪd fɹəm ðət dɪstɝbɪŋ peɪl sʌbstəns ðət lʊk laɪk skɪn.

Mat spun. The pedestals were now occupied by Eelfinn, four males, four females. All eight wore white instead of black - white skirts with straps across the chests for the males and blouses for the females, made from that disturbing pale substance that looked like skin.

"mɑɹk jəɹ tʌŋz," mæt sɛd tə θɔɹn ən noʊl, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənteɪn ɪz wɝi. "spik əmɪs, ən ðəl əv jə stʃɹʌŋ ʌp, kleɪmɪŋ ɪt wɑz jəɹ oʊn dɪzaɪɝ. æsk nʌθɪŋ ə ðɛm."

"Mark your tongues," Mat said to Thorn and Noal, trying to contain his worry. "Speak amiss, and they'll have you strung up, claiming it was your own desire. Ask nothing of them."

ði ʌðɝ tu fɛl saɪlənt, θɔɹn hoʊldɪŋ mɔɪɹeɪn kloʊs, noʊl kæɹiɪŋ ɪz tɔɹtʃ ən stæf wɛɹəli, pæk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ.

The other two fell silent, Thorn holding Moiraine close, Noal carrying his torch and staff warily, pack over his shoulder.

"ðɪs ɪz ðə ɡɹeɪt hɔl," mæt sɛd tə ði ɛlfɪn. "ðə pleɪs kɔl ðə tʃeɪmbɝ ə bɑnz. jə mʌst əbaɪd baɪ ðə pæks jə meɪk hɪɹ."

"This is the great hall," Mat said to the Eelfinn. "The place called the Chamber of Bonds. You must abide by the pacts you make here."

"ðə bɑɹɡən əz bɪn ɝeɪnʒd," wʌn ə ði ɛlfɪn meɪlz sɛd, smaɪlɪŋ, ʃoʊɪŋ pɔɪntəd tiθ.

"The bargain has been arranged," one of the Eelfinn males said, smiling, showing pointed teeth.

ði ʌðɝ ɛlfɪn lin ɪn, bɹiðɪŋ dipli, əz ɪf smɛlɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ. əɹ ... əz ɪf dʒɹɔɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ fɹəm mæt ən ði ʌðɝz. bɝdʒɪt hæd sɛd ðət ðeɪ fɛɾ ɔf ɪmoʊʃən.

The other Eelfinn leaned in, breathing deeply, as if smelling something. Or ... as if drawing something from Mat and the others. Birgitte had said that they fed off emotion.

"wʌt bɑɹɡən?" mæt snæpt, ɡlænsɪŋ ɝaʊn ət ðə pɛɾəstəlz. "bɝn ju, wʌt bɑɹɡən?"

"What bargain?" Mat snapped, glancing around at the pedestals. "Burn you, what bargain?"

"ə pɹaɪs mʌs bi peɪd," wʌn sɛd.

"A price must be paid," one said.

"ðə dɪmænz mʌs bi mɛt," sɛɾ ənʌðɝ.

"The demands must be met," said another.

"ə sækɹəfaɪs mʌs bi ɡɪvən." ðɪs fɹəm wʌn ə ðə fimeɪlz. ʃi smaɪl mɔɹ bɹɔdli ðən ði ʌðɝz. hɝ tiθ wɝ pɔɪntəd, tu.

"A sacrifice must be given." This from one of the females. She smiled more broadly than the others. Her teeth were pointed, too.

"aɪ wɑn ðə weɪ aʊt ɹɪstɔɹɾ əz pɑɹɾ ə ðə bɑɹɡən," mæt sɛd. "aɪ wɑn ɪt bæk wɛɹ ɪt wɑz ən oʊpən əɡɛn. ən aɪm nɑt blʌɾi dʌn nɪɡoʊʃieɪɾɪŋ, soʊ doʊn əsum ðət ðɪs ɪz maɪ oʊnli ɹɪkwɛst, bɝn ju."

"I want the way out restored as part of the bargain," Mat said. "I want it back where it was and open again. And I'm not bloody done negotiating, so don't assume that this is my only request, burn you."

"ɪt wɪl bi ɹɪstɔɹd," ən ɛlfɪn sɛd. ði ʌðɝz lin fɔɹwɝd. ðeɪ kəd sɛns ɪz dɛspɝeɪʃən. sɛvɹəl ə ðɛm sim dɪsæɾəsfaɪd. ðeɪ dɪdn ɪkspɛkt əs tə meɪk ɪt hɪɹ, mæt θɔt.

"It will be restored," an Eelfinn said. The others leaned forward. They could sense his desperation. Several of them seemed dissatisfied. They didn't expect us to make it here, Mat thought.

ðeɪ doʊn laɪk tə ɹɪsk luzɪŋ ʌs.

They don't like to risk losing us.

"aɪ wɑn jə tə liv ðət weɪ aʊɾ oʊpən əntɪl wi ɡɛt θɹu," mæt kəntɪnjud. "noʊ blɑkɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp əɹ meɪkɪŋ ɪt blʌɾi vænɪʃ wən wi ɝaɪv. ən aɪ wɑn ðə weɪ tə bi dɝɛkt, noʊ tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɹumz əbaʊt.

"I want you to leave that way out open until we get through," Mat continued. "No blocking it up or making it bloody vanish when we arrive. And I want the way to be direct, no changing rooms about.

ə stʃɹeɪt pæθweɪ. ən jə blʌɾi fɑksəz kænt nɑk əs ʌnkɑnʃəs əɹ tʃɹaɪ tə kɪl əs əɹ ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ðæt."

A straight pathway. And you bloody foxes can't knock us unconscious or try to kill us or anything like that."

ðeɪ dɪd nɑt laɪk ðæt. mæt kɑt sɛvɹəl ə ðɛm fɹaʊnɪŋ. ɡʊd. ðeɪ wəd si ðeɪ wɝ nɑt nɪɡoʊʃieɪɾɪŋ wɪð ə tʃaɪld.

They did not like that. Mat caught several of them frowning. Good. They would see they were not negotiating with a child.

"wi teɪk hɝ," mæt sɛd. "wi ɡɛɾ aʊt."

"We take her," Mat said. "We get out."

"ðiz dɪmænz ɑɹ ɪkspɛnsɪv," wʌn ə ði ɛlfɪn sɛd. "wʌt wɪl jə peɪ fəɹ ðiz bunz?"

"These demands are expensive," one of the Eelfinn said. "What will you pay for these boons?"

"ðə pɹaɪs əz bɪn sɛt," ənʌðɝ wɪspɝd fɹəm bɪhaɪnd.

"The price has been set," another whispered from behind.

ən ɪt hæd bɪn. sʌmhaʊ, mæt nu. ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm hæd noʊn fɹəm ðə fɝs taɪm i hæd ɹɛd ðət noʊt. ɪf i hæd nɛvɝ spoʊkən tə ði æɛlfɪn ðət fɝs taɪm, wəɾ ɛni ʌv ðɪs əv hæpənd?

And it had been. Somehow, Mat knew. A part of him had known from the first time he had read that note. If he had never spoken to the Aelfinn that first time, would any of this have happened?

laɪkli, hi wəɾ əv daɪd. ðeɪ hæd tə tɛl ðə tʃɹuθ.

Likely, he would have died. They had to tell the truth.

ðeɪ hæd wɔɹn ɪm ʌv ə peɪmən tə kʌm. fəɹ laɪf. fəɹ mɔɪɹeɪn.

They had warned him of a payment to come. For life. For Moiraine.

ən i wəɾ əv tə peɪ ɪt. ɪn ðət moʊmənt, hi nu ðəɾ i wʊd. fəɹ i nu ðəɾ ɪf i dɪd nɑt, ðə kɑst wəd bi tu ɡɹeɪt. nɑt dʒʌs tə tɑm, nɑt dʒʌs tə mɔɪɹeɪn, ən nɑt dʒʌs tə mæt hɪmsɛlf.

And he would have to pay it. In that moment, he knew that he would. For he knew that if he did not, the cost would be too great. Not just to Thom, not just to Moiraine, and not just to Mat himself.

baɪ wʌt hid bɪn toʊld, ðə feɪɾ ə ðə wɝld ɪtsɛlf dɪpɛndəɾ ɑn ðɪs moʊmənt.

By what he'd been told, the fate of the world itself depended on this moment.

wɛl bɝn mi fəɹ ə ful, mæt θɔt. meɪbi aɪm ə hɪɹoʊ æftɝ ɔl. dɪdn ðət biɾ ɔl?

Well burn me for a fool, Mat thought. Maybe I am a hero after all. Didn't that beat all?

"aɪl peɪ ɪt," mæt ənaʊnst. "hæf ðə laɪɾ ə ðə wɝld." tə seɪv ðə wɝld.

"I'll pay it," Mat announced. "Half the light of the world." To save the world.

"dʌn!" wʌn ə ðə meɪl ɛlfɪn ənaʊnst.

"Done!" one of the male Eelfinn announced.

ði eɪt kɹitʃɝz lɛpt - əz ɪf wʌn - fɹəm ðɛɹ pɛɾəstəlz. ðeɪ ɛnkloʊzd ɪm ɪn ə taɪɾənɪŋ sɝkəl, laɪk ə nus. kwɪk, sʌpəl ən pɹɛɾətɔɹi.

The eight creatures leaped - as if one - from their pedestals. They enclosed him in a tightening circle, like a noose. Quick, supple and predatory.

"mæt!" tɑm kɹaɪd, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə hoʊl ði ʌnkɑnʃəs mɔɪɹeɪn waɪl ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ wʌn ə hɪz naɪvz.

"Mat!" Thom cried, struggling to hold the unconscious Moiraine while reaching for one of his knives.

mæt hɛld ʌp ə hæn təwɔɹd tɑm ən noʊl. "ðɪs mʌs bi dʌn," hi sɛd, teɪkɪŋ ə fju stɛps əweɪ fɹəm ɪz fɹɛnz. ði ɛlfɪn pæst əm wɪθaʊt spɛɹɪŋ ə ɡlæns. ðə ɡoʊl stʌdz ɑn ðə stʃɹæps kɹɔsɪŋ ðə meɪl ɛlfɪnz tʃɛsts ɡlɪɾɝd ɪn ðə jɛloʊ laɪt. ɔl eɪt kɹitʃɝz wɝ smaɪlɪŋ waɪd.

Mat held up a hand toward Thom and Noal. "This must be done," he said, taking a few steps away from his friends. The Eelfinn passed them without sparing a glance. The gold studs on the straps crossing the male Eelfinn's chests glittered in the yellow light. All eight creatures were smiling wide.

noʊl ɹeɪzd ɪz sɔɹd.

Noal raised his sword.

"noʊ!" mæt jɛld. "doʊn bɹeɪk ðɪs əɡɹimənt. ɪf jə du, wi ɔl wɪl daɪ hɪɹ!"

"No!" Mat yelled. "Don't break this agreement. If you do, we all will die here!"

ði ɛlfɪn stɛpt ʌp ɪn ə taɪt sɝkəl ɝaʊn mæt. hi tʃɹaɪd tə lʊk əɾ əm ɔl ət wʌns, hɑɹt θəɾɪŋ laʊɾɝ ən laʊɾɝ ɪn ɪz tʃɛst. ðeɪ wɝ snɪfɪŋ əɾ ɪm əɡɛn, dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪn dip bɹɛθs, ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz ðeɪ dʒɹu fɹəm hɪm.

The Eelfinn stepped up in a tight circle around Mat. He tried to look at them all at once, heart thudding louder and louder in his chest. They were sniffing at him again, drawing in deep breaths, enjoying whatever it was they drew from him.

"du ɪt, bɝn ju," mæt ɡɹaʊld. "bʌt noʊ ðɪs ɪz ðə læs jəl ɡɛɾ ə mi. əl ɪskeɪp jəɹ taʊɝ, ən əl faɪn ə weɪ tə fɹi maɪ maɪn fɹəm jə fɝɛvɝ. jə woʊn əv mi. meɪtʃɹim kɔθən ɪz nɑt jəɹ blʌɾi pʌpət."

"Do it, burn you," Mat growled. "But know this is the last you'll get of me. I'll escape your tower, and I'll find a way to free my mind from you forever. You won't have me. Matrim Cauthon is not your bloody puppet."

"wi ʃæl si," ən ɛlfɪn meɪl ɡɹaʊld, aɪz lʌsfəl. ðə kɹitʃɝz hæn snæp fɔɹwɝd, tu- ʃɑɹp neɪlz ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ ɪn ðə dɪm laɪt. hi dʒɹoʊv əm dɝɛkli ɪndə ðə sɑkəɾ ɝaʊn mæts lɛft aɪ, ðən ɹɪp ði aɪ aʊt wɪð ə snæp.

"We shall see," an Eelfinn male growled, eyes lustful. The creature's hand snapped forward, too- sharp nails glittering in the dim light. He drove them directly into the socket around Mat's left eye, then ripped the eye out with a snap.

mæt skɹimd. laɪt, bʌɾ ɪt hɝt! mɔɹ ðən ɛni waʊn teɪkən ɪn bæɾəl, mɔɹ ðən ɛni ɪnsəlt əɹ bɑɹb. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ðə kɹitʃɝ hæd pɹɛst ɪts dəsitfəl klɔz ɪndə hɪz maɪn ən soʊl.

Mat screamed. Light, but it hurt! More than any wound taken in battle, more than any insult or barb. It was as if the creature had pressed its deceitful claws into his mind and soul.

mæt fɛl tə hɪz niz, spɪɹ klæɾɝɪŋ tə ðə ɡɹaʊn əz i ɹeɪz hænz tə hɪz feɪs. hi fɛl slɪknəs ɑn ɪz tʃik, ən i skɹimd əɡɛn əz ɪz fɪŋɡɝz fɛl ði ɛmpti hoʊl wɛɹ ɪz aɪ hæd bɪn.

Mat fell to his knees, spear clattering to the ground as he raised hands to his face. He felt slickness on his cheek, and he screamed again as his fingers felt the empty hole where his eye had been.

hi θɹu hɪz hɛd bæk ən jɛld ɪndə ðə ɹum, bɛloʊɪŋ ɪn æɡəni.

He threw his head back and yelled into the room, bellowing in agony.

ɛlfɪn wɑtʃt wɪð ðɛɹ hɔɹəd, ɔlmoʊst-hjumən feɪsəz, aɪz nɛɹoʊɾ ɪn ɛkstəsi əz ðeɪ fɛɾ ɑn sʌmθɪŋ ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm mæt, ən ɔlmoʊst ɪnvɪzəbəl veɪpɝ ə ɹɛɾ ən waɪt.

Eelfinn watched with their horrid, almost-human faces, eyes narrowed in ecstasy as they fed on something rising from Mat, An almost invisible vapor of red and white.

"ðə seɪvɝ!" wʌn ɛlfɪn ɪkskleɪmd.

"The savor!" one Eelfinn exclaimed.

"soʊ lɔŋ!" kɹaɪɾ ənʌðɝ.

"So long!" cried another.

"haʊ ɪt twɪsts ɝaʊn hɪm!" sɛd ðə wʌn u hæd teɪkən ɪz aɪ. "haʊ ɪt spɪnz! sɛns ə blʌɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ! ən ðə ɡæmblɝ bɪkʌmz ðə sɛntɝ ʌv ɔl! aɪ kən teɪs feɪɾ ɪtsɛlf!"

"How it twists around him!" said the one who had taken his eye. "How it spins! Scents of blood in the air! And the gambler becomes the center of all! I can taste fate itself!"

mæt haʊld, hɪz hæt fɔlɪŋ bæk əz i lʊk θɹu ə sɪŋɡəl, tɛɹ-mʌɾəld aɪ təwɔɹd ðə dɑɹknəs əbʌv. hɪz aɪ sɑkət sim tə bi ɑn faɪɝ! bleɪzɪŋ! hi fɛl ðə blʌɾ ən sɪɹə dʒɹaɪ ɑn ɪz feɪs, ðən fleɪk əweɪ əz i skɹimd. ði ɛlfɪn dʒɹu ɪn dipɝ bɹɛθs, lʊkɪŋ dʒɹʌŋk.

Mat howled, his hat falling back as he looked through a single, tear-muddled eye toward the darkness above. His eye socket seemed to be on fire! Blazing! He felt the blood and sera dry on his face, then flake away as he screamed. The Eelfinn drew in deeper breaths, looking drunk.

mæt lɛɾ aʊt wʌn faɪnəl skɹim. ðən i klɛntʃt ɪz fɪsts ən ʃʌɾ ɪz dʒɔ, ðoʊ hi kəd nɑt stɑp ə loʊ ɡɹoʊn - ə ɡɹaʊl ʌv æŋɡɝ ən peɪn -  fɹəm saʊndɪŋ dip wɪðɪn ɪz θɹoʊt. wʌn ə ði ɛlfɪn meɪlz kəlæpst, əz ɪf oʊvɝwɛlmd. hi wɑz ðə wʌn u hæd teɪkən mæts aɪ. hi klʌtʃt ɪɾ ɪn ɪz hænz, kɝlɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪt. ði ʌðɝz stʌmbəld əweɪ, faɪndɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ tə pɪlɝz əɹ ðə saɪdz ə ðə ɹum, ɹɛstɪŋ əɡɛnst əm fəɹ səpɔɹt.

Mat let out one final scream. Then he clenched his fists and shut his jaw, though he could not stop a low groan - a growl of anger and pain -  from sounding deep within his throat. One of the Eelfinn males collapsed, as if overwhelmed. He was the one who had taken Mat's eye. He clutched it in his hands, curling around it. The others stumbled away, finding their way to pillars or the sides of the room, resting against them for support.

noʊl dæʃt tə mæts saɪd, θɔɹn fɑloʊɪŋ mɔɹ kɛɹfəli, stɪl kɹeɪɾəlɪŋ mɔɪɹeɪn.

Noal dashed to Mat's side, Thorn following more carefully, still cradling Moiraine.

"mæt?" noʊl æskt.

"Mat?" Noal asked.

tiθ stɪl klɛntʃt əɡɛns ðə peɪn, mæt fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə ɹitʃ bæk ən snætʃ ɪz hæɾ ɔf ðə waɪt flɔɹ. hi wɑz nɑt livɪŋ ɪz hæt, bɝn hɪm. ɪt wɑz ə blʌɾi ɡʊd hæt.

Teeth still clenched against the pain, Mat forced himself to reach back and snatch his hat off the white floor. He was not leaving his hat, burn him. It was a bloody good hat.

hi stʌmbəl tə hɪz fit.

He stumbled to his feet.

"jɔɹ aɪ, mæt . . ." θɔɹn sɛd.

"Your eye, Mat . . ." Thorn said.

"dʌzn mæɾɝ," mæt sɛd. bɝn mi fəɹ ə ful. ə blʌɾi, ɡoʊt-hɛɾəd ful. hi kəd bɛɹli θɪŋk θɹu ði æɡəni.

"Doesn't matter," Mat said. Burn me for a fool. A bloody, goat-headed fool. He could barely think through the agony.

hɪz ʌðɝ aɪ blɪŋk tɪɹz ə peɪn. ɪt ɹɪli dɪd sim i hæd lɔs hæf ə ðə laɪɾ ə ðə wɝld. ɪt wɑz laɪk lʊkɪŋ θɹu ə wɪndoʊ wɪð wʌn hæf blækənd. dɪspaɪt ðə bleɪzɪŋ peɪn ɪn ɪz lɛf sɑkət, hi fɛlt əz i ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə oʊpən ɪz aɪ.

His other eye blinked tears of pain. It really did seem he had lost half of the light of the world. It was like looking through a window with one half blackened. Despite the blazing pain in his left socket, he felt as he should be able to open his eye.

bʌɾ i kəd nɑt. ɪt wɑz ɡɔn. ən noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ tʃænəlɪŋ kəd ɹipleɪs ðæt.

But he could not. It was gone. And no Aes Sedai channeling could replace that.

hi pʊld ɑn ɪz hæt, dɪfaɪənli ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə peɪn. hi pʊl ðə bɹɪm daʊn ɑn ðə lɛft, ʃeɪɾɪŋ ði ɛmpti sɑkət, ðən bɛn daʊn ən pɪkt ʌp ɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ, stʌmbəlɪŋ bʌt mænɪdʒɪŋ ɪt.

He pulled on his hat, defiantly ignoring the pain. He pulled the brim down on the left, shading the empty socket, then bent down and picked up his ashandarei, stumbling but managing it.

"aɪ ʃʊɾə bɪn ðə wʌn tə peɪ," θɔɹn sɛd, vɔɪs bɪɾɝ. "nɑt ju, mæt. jə dɪdn ivən wɑnə kʌm."

"I should have been the one to pay," Thorn said, voice bitter. "Not you, Mat. You didn't even want to come."

"ɪt wɑz maɪ tʃɔɪs," mæt sɛd. "æn aɪ hæd tə də ɪt, ɛniweɪ. ɪts wʌn ə ði ænsɝz aɪ wɑz toʊl baɪ ði æɛlfɪn wən aɪ fɝs keɪm. aɪɾ əv tə ɡɪv ʌp hæf ðə laɪɾ ə ðə wɝl tə seɪv ðə wɝld. blʌɾi sneɪks."

"It was my choice," Mat said. "And I had to do it, anyway. It's one of the answers I was told by the Aelfinn when I first came. I'd have to give up half the light of the world to save the world. Bloody snakes."

"tə seɪv ðə wɝld?" θɔɹn æskt, lʊkɪŋ daʊn ət mɔɪɹeɪnz pisfəl feɪs, hɝ bɑɾi ɹæpt ɪn ðə pætʃwɝk kloʊk. hi hæd lɛft ɪz pæk ɑn ðə flɔɹ.

"To save the world?" Thorn asked, looking down at Moiraine's peaceful face, her body wrapped in the patchwork cloak. He had left his pack on the floor.

"ʃi hæz sʌmθɪŋ jɛt tə du," mæt sɛd. ðə peɪn wɑz ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ sʌmwʌt. "wi nid hɝ, θɔɹn.

"She has something yet to do," Mat said. The pain was retreating somewhat. "We need her, Thorn.

bɝn mi, bʌɾ ɪts pɹɑbli sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɹænd. ɛniweɪ, ðɪs hæd tə hæpən."

Burn me, but it's probably something to do with Rand. Anyway, this had to happen."

"æn ɪf ɪt hædnt?" θɔɹn æskt. "ʃi sɛd ʃi sɔ . . ."

"And if it hadn't?" Thorn asked. "She said she saw . . ."

"ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ," mæt sɛd, tɝnɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹweɪ. ði ɛlfɪn wɝ stɪl oʊvɝwɛlmd.

"It doesn't matter," Mat said, turning toward the doorway. The Eelfinn were still overwhelmed.

wʌn wəd θɪŋk ðeɪ hæd bɪn ðə wʌnz tə luz ən aɪ, lʊkɪŋ ət ðoʊz ɪkspɹɛʃənz! mæt sɛɾ ɪz pæk ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, livɪŋ θɔɹnz wɛɹ ɪt sæt. hi kəd nɑt kæɹi tu, nɑɾ ən bi eɪbəl tə faɪt.

One would think they had been the ones to lose an eye, looking at those expressions! Mat set his pack on his shoulder, leaving Thorn's where it sat. He could not carry two, not and be able to fight.

"naʊ aɪv sin sʌmθɪŋ," noʊl sɛd, lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə ɹum ən ɪts ɑkjəpəns. "sʌmθɪŋ noʊ mæn əz ɛvɝ sin, aɪ wɔɹənt. ʃəd wi kɪl ðɛm?"

"Now I've seen something," Noal said, looking over the room and its occupants. "Something no man has ever seen, I warrant. Should we kill them?"

mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "maɪt bɹeɪk əɹ bɑɹɡən."

Mat shook his head. "Might break our bargain."

"wɪl ðeɪ kip ɪt?" tɑm æskt.

"Will they keep it?" Thom asked.

"nɑɾ ɪf ðeɪ kən wɪɡəl aʊɾ ʌv ɪt," mæt sɛd, ðən wɪnst əɡɛn. laɪt, bʌɾ ɪz hɛd hɝt! wɛl, hi kəd nɑt sɪɾ ɝaʊn ən kɹaɪ laɪk i hæd lɔst ɪz feɪvɹɪt foʊl. "lɛts ɡoʊ."

"Not if they can wiggle out of it," Mat said, then winced again. Light, but his head hurt! Well, he could not sit around and cry like he had lost his favorite foal. "Let's go."

ðeɪ meɪd ðɛɹ weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɹæn hɔl. noʊl kæɹiɾ ə tɔɹtʃ, ðoʊ hi hæd ɹɪlʌktənli lɛft ɪz stæf bɪhaɪnd, feɪvɝɪŋ ɪz ʃɔɹtsɔɝd.

They made their way out of the grand hall. Noal carried a torch, though he had reluctantly left his staff behind, favoring his shortsword.

ðəɹ wɝ noʊ oʊpənɪŋz ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ ðɪs taɪm, ən mæt hɝd noʊl mʌɾɝɪŋ ət ðæt. ɪt fɛlt ɹaɪt.

There were no openings in the hallway this time, and Mat heard Noal muttering at that. It felt right.

hi hæd dɪmændəɾ ə stʃɹeɪt pæθweɪ bæk. ði ɛlfɪn wɝ laɪɝz ən tʃits, bʌt ðeɪ sim tə bi laɪɝz ən tʃits laɪk ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. mæt hæd meɪɾ ɪz dɪmænz kɛɹfəli ðɪs taɪm, ɹæðɝ ðən spaʊɾɪŋ aʊt wʌtɛvɝ əkɝd tə hɪm.

He had demanded a straight pathway back. The Eelfinn were liars and cheats, but they seemed to be liars and cheats like the Aes Sedai. Mat had made his demands carefully this time, rather than spouting out whatever occurred to him.

ðə hɔlweɪ wɛn ɑn fəɹ ə lɔŋ waɪl. noʊl wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ mɔɹ ən mɔɹ nɝvəs; mæt kɛpt ɑn fɔɹwɝd, fʊtstɛps ɪn taɪm wɪð ɪz θɹɑbɪŋ skʌl. haʊ wəd mɪsɪŋ ən aɪ tʃeɪnʒ haʊ hi fɔt?

The hallway went on for a long while. Noal was growing more and more nervous; Mat kept on forward, footsteps in time with his throbbing skull. How would missing an eye change how he fought?

hi wəɾ əv tə bi mɔɹ kɛɹfəl ə ðət lɛf saɪd. ən i wəɾ əv tʃɹʌbəl dʒʌdʒɪŋ dɪstəns naʊ.

He would have to be more careful of that left side. And he would have trouble judging distance now.

ɪn fækt, hi hæd ðət tʃɹʌbəl naʊ - wɔlz ən flɔɹ wɝ dɪstɝbɪŋli hɑɹd tə dʒʌdʒ.

In fact, he had that trouble now - walls and floor were disturbingly hard to judge.

tɑm klʌtʃt mɔɪɹeɪn kloʊs tə hɪz tʃɛst, laɪk ə maɪzɝ hoʊldɪŋ ɪz ɡoʊld. wʌt wɑz ʃi tə hɪm, ɛniweɪ? mæt hæɾ əsum ðət tɑm wɑz əlɔŋ fəɹ ðə seɪm ɹizən ðət mæt wɑz - kəz ɪt fɛlt əz ɪf ɪt niɾəd tə bi dʌn. ðət tɛndɝnəs ɪn θɔɹnz feɪs wɑz nɑt wʌt mæt hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd tə si.

Thom clutched Moiraine close to his chest, like a miser holding his gold. What was she to him, anyway? Mat had assumed that Thom was along for the same reason that Mat was - because it felt as if it needed to be done. That tenderness in Thorn's face was not what Mat had expected to see.

ðə hɔlweɪ ɛndəɾ əbɹʌpli ɪn ə faɪv-saɪɾəd ɑɹtʃ. ðə ɹum bɪɑn əpɪɹd tə bi ðə wʌn wɪð ðə mɛltəd slæɡ ɑn ðə flɔɹ. noʊ saɪnz ə ðə faɪt bɪfɔɹ wɝ vɪzəbəl, noʊ blʌɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ.

The hallway ended abruptly in a five-sided arch. The room beyond appeared to be the one with the melted slag on the floor. No signs of the fight before were visible, no blood on the floor.

mæt tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən lɛd ðə weɪ θɹu. hi tɛnst əz i sɔ ɛlfɪn hɪɹ, kɹaʊtʃɪŋ əɹ stændɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz, hɪsɪŋ ən ɡɹoʊlɪŋ. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt muv, dɪd nɑt stʃɹaɪk, ðoʊ səm jɪp kwaɪətli. ʃædoʊz meɪɾ əm sim ivən mɔɹ laɪk fɑksəz. ɪf mæt lʊkt ɹaɪɾ ət wʌn, hi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs mɪsteɪk əm fəɹ ɔɹɾənɛɹi mɛn ən wɪmən, bʌt ðə weɪ ðeɪ muvd ɪn dɑɹknəs, səmtaɪmz ɑn ɔl fɔɹz . . . noʊ mæn wɔk laɪk ðæt, wɪð ði æŋkʃəs tɛnʃən ʌv ə tʃeɪn pɹɛɾətɝ. laɪk ən æŋɡɹi haʊnd, sɛpɝeɪɾəd fɹəm jə baɪ ə fɛns ən fɪɹsli iɡɝ tə ɡɛt tə jəɹ θɹoʊt.

Mat took a deep breath and led the way through. He tensed as he saw Eelfinn here, crouching or standing in the shadows, hissing and growling. They did not move, did not strike, though some yipped quietly. Shadows made them seem even more like foxes. If Mat looked right at one, he could almost mistake them for ordinary men and women, but the way they moved in darkness, sometimes on all fours . . . No man walked like that, with the anxious tension of a chained predator. Like an angry hound, separated from you by a fence and fiercely eager to get to your throat.

bʌt ðeɪ hɛl tə ðɛɹ bɑɹɡən. nʌn ətækt, ən mæt bɪɡæn tə fil ɹaɪt ɡʊɾ əbaʊt hɪmsɛlf wʌns ðeɪ ɹitʃt ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum. hi hæd biɾən ðɛm. læs taɪm, ðeɪ hæd ɡɑɾən ðə bɛɾɝ ɛnd, bʌt ðət wɑz oʊnli kəz ðeɪ hæd fɔt laɪk kaʊɝdz, pʌntʃɪŋ ə mæn u dɪd nɑt noʊ ðə faɪt hæd stɑɹɾəd.

But they held to their bargain. None attacked, and Mat began to feel right good about himself once they reached the other side of the room. He had beaten them. Last time, they had gotten the better end, but that was only because they had fought like cowards, punching a man who did not know the fight had started.

ðɪs taɪm i hæd bɪn ɹɛɾi. hi hæd ʃoʊn əm ðət meɪtʃɹim koʊ-θɑn wɑz noʊ ful.

This time he had been ready. He had shown them that Matrim Cau-thon was no fool.

ðeɪ ɛntɝɾ ə kɔɹəɾɝ wɪð ðə feɪnli ɡloʊɪŋ waɪt stim ət ðə tɑp. ðə flɔɹ wɑz ə ðoʊz blæk, ɪntɝlɑkɪŋ tʃɹaɪæŋɡəlz, kɝvd ɑn ðə saɪdz laɪk skeɪlz. mæt bɪɡæn tə bɹið iziɝ əz ðeɪ ɛntɝd wʌn ə ðə ɹumz wɪð ðə twɪstɪŋ stim ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝz, ðoʊ hɪz aɪ sɑkət stɪl hɝt laɪk ðə nɛðɝz ʌv ə fɹɛʃli ɡɛldɪd stæljən.

They entered a corridor with the faintly glowing white steam at the top. The floor was of those black, interlocking triangles, curved on the sides like scales. Mat began to breathe easier as they entered one of the rooms with the twisting steam rising from the corners, though his eye socket still hurt like the nethers of a freshly gelded stallion.

hi stɑpt ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə ɹum, bʌt ðən kəntɪnjud fɔɹwɝd. hi hæd dɪmændəɾ ə stʃɹeɪt pæθweɪ. ðət wɑz wʌɾ i wəd ɡɛt. noʊ dʌbəlɪŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ ðɪs taɪm. "blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz!" mæt sɛd, ɹilaɪzɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ əz i wɔkt.

He stopped in the center of the room, but then continued forward. He had demanded a straight pathway. That was what he would get. No doubling back and forth this time. "Blood and bloody ashes!" Mat said, realizing something as he walked.

"wʌt?" θɔɹn æskt, lʊkɪŋ ʌp fɹəm mɔɪɹeɪn wɪð əlɑɹm.

"What?" Thorn asked, looking up from Moiraine with alarm.

"maɪ daɪs," mæt sɛd. "aɪ ʃʊɾə ɪnkluɾəd ɡɛɾɪŋ maɪ daɪs bæk ɪn ðə bɑɹɡən."

"My dice," Mat said. "I should have included getting my dice back in the bargain."

"bʌt wi dɪskʌvɝd jə doʊnt niɾ əm tə ɡaɪɾ ʌs."

"But we discovered you don't need them to guide us."

"ɪts nɑɾ əbaʊt ðæt," mæt ɡɹʌmbəld. "aɪ laɪk ðoʊz daɪs." hi pʊld ɪz hæt daʊn əɡɛn, lʊkɪŋ daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ əhɛd. wɑz ðət moʊʃən i sɔ? ɔl ðə weɪ ɪn ðə dɪstəns, ə ɡʊd dʌzən ɹumz əweɪ? noʊ, ɪt mʌs bi ə tʃɹɪk ə ðə ʃædoʊz ən ðə ʃɪftɪŋ stim.

"It's not about that," Mat grumbled. "I like those dice." He pulled his hat down again, looking down the hallway ahead. Was that motion he saw? All the way in the distance, a good dozen rooms away? No, it must be a trick of the shadows and the shifting steam.

"mæt," noʊl sɛd. "aɪv mɛnʃən ðət maɪ oʊl tʌŋ ɪzənt wʌɾ ɪt wʌns wɑz. bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk aɪ ʌndɝstʊd wʌt jə sɛd. ðə bɑɹɡən jə meɪd."

"Mat," Noal said. "I've mentioned that my Old Tongue isn't what it once was. But I think I understood what you said. The bargain you made."

"jɛs?" mæt sɛd, oʊnli hæf-lɪsnɪŋ. hæɾ i bɪn spikɪŋ ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ əɡɛn? bɝn hɪm.

"Yes?" Mat said, only half-listening. Had he been speaking in the Old Tongue again? Burn him.

ən wʌt wɑz ðət daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ?

And what was that down the hallway?

"wɛl," noʊl sɛd, "ju sɛd - əz pɑɹɾ ə ðə bɑɹɡən - sʌmθɪŋ laɪk 'ju fɑksəz kænt nɑk əs daʊn əɹ tʃɹaɪ tə kɪl əs əɹ ɛniθɪŋ.' "

"Well," Noal said, "you said - as part of the bargain - something like 'you foxes can't knock us down or try to kill us or anything.' "

"ʃʊɹ dɪd," mæt sɛd.

"Sure did," Mat said.

"ju sɛd fɑksəz, mæt," noʊl sɛd. "ðə fɑksəz kæn hɝɾ ʌs."

"You said foxes, Mat," Noal said. "The foxes can't hurt us."

"æn ðeɪ lɛɾ əs pæs."

"And they let us pass."

"bʌt wʌɾ əbaʊt ði ʌðɝz?" noʊl æskt. "ði æɛlfɪn? ɪf ði ɛlfɪn kæn hɝɾ ʌs, ɑɹ ði æɛlfɪn ɹikwaɪɝd tə liv əs bi əz wɛl?"

"But what about the others?" Noal asked. "The Aelfinn? If the Eelfinn can't hurt us, are the Aelfinn required to leave us be as well?"

ðə ʃædoʊz ɪn ðə fɑɹ-dɪstən kɔɹəɾɝ ɹizɑlvd ɪndə fɪɡjɝz kæɹiɪŋ lɔŋ, sɪnwəs bɹɑnz sɔɹdz wɪð kɝvɪŋ bleɪdz. tɔl fɪɡjɝz, wɛɹɪŋ leɪɝz ə jɛloʊ klɔθ, ðə hɛɹ ɑn ðɛɹ hɛdz stʃɹeɪɾ ən blæk. dʌzənz ə ðɛm, hu muvd wɪð ən ənnætʃɹəl ɡɹeɪs, aɪz stɛɹɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. aɪz wɪð pjupəlz ðət wɝ vɝɾɪkəl slɪts.

The shadows in the far-distant corridor resolved into figures carrying long, sinuous bronze swords with curving blades. Tall figures, wearing layers of yellow cloth, the hair on their heads straight and black. Dozens of them, who moved with an unnatural grace, eyes staring forward. Eyes with pupils that were vertical slits.

blʌɾi ən blʌɾi æʃəz!

Bloody and bloody ashes!

"ɹʌn!" mæt jɛld.

"Run!" Mat yelled.

"wɪtʃ dɝɛkʃən?" noʊl æskt, əlɑɹmd.

"Which direction?" Noal asked, alarmed.

"ɛni dɝɛkʃən!" mæt jɛld. "soʊ lɔŋ əz ɪts əweɪ fɹəm ðɛm!"

"Any direction!" Mat yelled. "So long as it's away from them!"


tʃæptɝ fɪftifaɪv


CHAPTER 55

ðə wʌn lɛf bɪhaɪnd


The One Left Behind

əlaʊd bum ʃʊk ðə hɔlweɪz, meɪkɪŋ ði ɪntaɪɝ stʃɹʌktʃɝ ɹʌmbəl. mæt stʌmbəld, linɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔl fəɹ səpɔɹɾ əz smoʊk ən tʃɪps ə ɹɑk spɹeɪɾ aʊɾ ə ði oʊpənɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðɛm.

Aloud boom shook the hallways, making the entire structure rumble. Mat stumbled, leaning against the wall for support as smoke and chips of rock sprayed out of the opening behind them.

hi dʌkt ɪz hɛɾ ɝaʊn ən lʊk daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ əz θɔɹn ən noʊl ɹæn ɔnwɝd, θɔɹn klʌtʃɪŋ mɔɪɹeɪn. noʊl hæd tɔst ɪz tɔɹtʃ əsaɪɾ ən ɡɑɾən aʊɾ ə dʒɹʌm tə tʃɹaɪ tə suð ði æɛlfɪn.

He ducked his head around and looked down the hallway as Thorn and Noal ran onward, Thorn clutching Moiraine. Noal had tossed his torch aside and gotten out a drum to try to soothe the Aelfinn.

ðət hæd nɑt wɝkt, ən soʊ mæt hæd tɝn tə ði ɪksploʊɾɪŋ sɪləndɝz ən naɪtfloʊɝz.

That had not worked, and so Mat had turned to the exploding cylinders and nightflowers.

laɪt, bʌt ðə sɪləndɝz wɝ dɛdli! hi sɔ kɔɹpsəz ʌv æɛlfɪn laɪɪŋ skæɾɝd θɹu ðə hɔlweɪ, ðɛɹ ɡlɪsnɪŋ skɪn ɹɪpt ən tɔɹn, ivəl-lʊkɪŋ smoʊk stimɪŋ fɹəm ðɛɹ blʌd. ʌðɝz slɪɾ aʊɾ ə dɔɹweɪz ən ælkoʊvz, pʊʃɪŋ θɹu ðə smoʊk. ðeɪ wɔkt ɑn tu lɛɡz, bʌt ðeɪ sim tə slaɪðɝ əz ðeɪ wɔkt, weɪvɪŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ θɹu ðə hɔlweɪ, ðɛɹ hɪsɪŋ ɡɹoʊɪŋ æŋɡɹiɝ ən æŋɡɹiɝ.

Light, but the cylinders were deadly! He saw corpses of Aelfinn lying scattered through the hallway, their glistening skin ripped and torn, evil-looking smoke steaming from their blood. Others slid out of doorways and alcoves, pushing through the smoke. They walked on two legs, but they seemed to slither as they walked, waving back and forth through the hallway, their hissing growing angrier and angrier.

hɑɹt paʊndɪŋ, mæt tʃɑɹdʒd æftɝ mæt ən noʊl. "ðeɪ stɪl fɑloʊɪŋ?" noʊl kɔld.

Heart pounding, Mat charged after Mat and Noal. "They still following?" Noal called.

"wʌt dʒju θɪŋk?" mæt sɛd, kætʃɪŋ ʌp tə ði ʌðɝ tu. "laɪt, bʌt ðoʊz sneɪks ɑɹ fæsti"

"What do you think?" Mat said, catching up to the other two. "Light, but those snakes are fasti"

mæt ən ði ʌðɝ tu bɝst ɪndə ənʌðɝ ɹum, aɪdɛntɪkəl tə ɔl ə ði ʌðɝz. veɪɡli ɔf-skeɪl skwɛɹ wɔlz, stim ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝz, blæk tʃɹaɪæŋɡəl-pæɾɝn flɔɹ taɪlz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tʃɹaɪæŋɡjəlɝ oʊpənɪŋ ət ðə sɛntɝ tə ɡɛɾ əm aʊt. blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz.

Mat and the other two burst into another room, identical to all of the others. Vaguely off-scale square walls, steam rising from the corners, black triangle-pattern floor tiles. There was no triangular opening at the center to get them out. Blood and bloody ashes.

mæt ɡlænst ət ðə θɹi weɪz aʊt, hoʊldɪŋ ɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ ɪn swɛɾi hænz. ðeɪ kəd nɑt də ðə seɪm tʃɹɪk əz bɪfɔɹ, baʊnsɪŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ bɪtwin ðə seɪm tu ɹumz. nɑt wɪð ði æɛlfɪn bɪhaɪn ðɛm. hi niɾəd tə ɪnvoʊk ɪz lʌk. hi pɹipɛɹd tə spɪn, ən -  "wi hæv tə kip muvɪŋ!" noʊl jɛld. hi hæd stɑp baɪ ðə dɔɹweɪ, dænsɪŋ fɹəm wʌn toʊ tə ðə nɛkst ɪn æŋzaɪəɾi. "mæt! ɪf ðoʊz sneɪks kætʃ əs . . ."

Mat glanced at the three ways out, holding his ashandarei in sweaty hands. They could not do the same trick as before, bouncing back and forth between the same two rooms. Not with the Aelfinn behind them. He needed to invoke his luck. He prepared to spin, and -  "We have to keep moving!" Noal yelled. He had stopped by the doorway, dancing from one toe to the next in anxiety. "Mat! If those snakes catch us . . ."

mæt kəd hɪɹ əm bɪhaɪnd, hɪsɪŋ. laɪk ðə ɹʌʃ ʌv ə ɹɪvɝ. hi pɪkt ə dɝɛkʃən ən ɹæn.

Mat could hear them behind, hissing. Like the rush of a river. He picked a direction and ran.

"θɹoʊ ənʌðɝ sɪləndɝ!" θɔɹn sɛd.

"Throw another cylinder!" Thorn said.

"ðæt wɑz ðə læst wʌn!" mæt sɛd. "ænd wiv oʊnli ɡɑt θɹi naɪt-flaʊɝz." hɪz pæk wɑz filɪŋ laɪt.

"That was the last one!" Mat said. "And we've only got three night-flowers." His pack was feeling light.

"mjuzɪk dʌznt wɝk ɑn ðɛm," noʊl sɛd, θɹoʊɪŋ əsaɪɾ ɪz dʒɹʌm. "ðeɪɹ tu æŋɡɹi."

"Music doesn't work on them," Noal said, throwing aside his drum. "They're too angry."

mæt kɝst ən lɪɾ ə naɪtfloʊɝ wɪð ə stʃɹaɪkɝ, ðən tɔst ɪɾ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ðə θɹi ʌv əm bæɹəld ɪndə ənʌðɝ ɹum, ðən kəntɪnjuɾ ɑn dɝɛkli θɹu ðə dɔɹweɪ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd.

Mat cursed and lit a nightflower with a striker, then tossed it over his shoulder. The three of them barreled into another room, then continued on directly through the doorway on the other side.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt weɪ tə ɡoʊ, læd," θɔɹn sɛd. hi saʊndəd soʊ wɪndɪd! "wɝ lɔst."

"I don't know what way to go, lad," Thorn said. He sounded so winded! "We're lost."

"aɪv bɪn pɪkɪŋ dɝɛkʃənz ət ɹændəm!" mæt sɛd.

"I've been picking directions at random!" Mat said.

"oʊnli jə kænt ɡoʊ bækwɝd," θɔɹn sɛd. "ðæts pɹɑbli ðə dɝɛkʃən ðə lʌk wɑns əs tə ɡoʊ!"

"Only you can't go backward," Thorn said. "That's probably the direction the luck wants us to go!"

ðə naɪtfloʊɝ bumd, ði ɪksploʊʒən ɛkoʊɪŋ θɹu ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz. ɪt wɑz nɑt nɪɹli əz ɡɹeɪɾ əz ðəɾ ə ðə sɪləndɝz. mæt ɹɪskt ə ɡlæns oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, siɪŋ smoʊk ən spɑɹks flaɪ θɹu ðə tʌnəl. ðə faɪɝ sloʊd ði æɛlfɪn, bʌt sun ðə mɔɹ dɛɹɪŋ mɛmbɝz ə ðə bæn slaɪðɝd θɹu ðə smoʊk.

The nightflower boomed, the explosion echoing through the corridors. It was not nearly as great as that of the cylinders. Mat risked a glance over his shoulder, seeing smoke and sparks fly through the tunnel. The fire slowed the Aelfinn, but soon the more daring members of the band slithered through the smoke.

"meɪbi wi kən nəɡoʊʃieɪt!" θɔɹn pæntɪd.

"Maybe we can negotiate!" Thorn panted.

"ðeɪ lʊk tu æŋɡɹi!" noʊl sɛd.

"They look too angry!" Noal said.

"mæt," θɔɹn sɛd, "ju mɛnʃən ðət ðeɪ nu əbaʊt jəɹ aɪ. ðeɪ ænsɝɾ ə kwɛstʃən əbaʊɾ ɪt."

"Mat," Thorn said, "you mentioned that they knew about your eye. They answered a question about it."

"ðeɪ toʊl mi aɪd blʌɾi ɡɪv ʌp hæf ðə laɪɾ ə ðə wɝld," mæt sɛd, skʌl stɪl θɹɑbɪŋ. "aɪ dɪdnt wɑnə noʊ, bʌt ðeɪ toʊl mi ɛniweɪ."

"They told me I'd bloody give up half the light of the world," Mat said, skull still throbbing. "I didn't want to know, but they told me anyway."

"wʌɾ ɛls dɪd ðeɪ seɪ?" θɔɹn æskt. "ɛniθɪŋ ðət kən bi ə klu? haʊ dɪd jə ɡɛɾ aʊt læs taɪm?"

"What else did they say?" Thorn asked. "Anything that can be a clue? How did you get out last time?"

"ðeɪ θɹu mi aʊt," mæt sɛd.

"They threw me out," Mat said.

hi ən ði ʌðɝz bɝst ɪndə ənʌðɝ ɹum - noʊ dɔɹweɪ - ðən dæʃt aʊt ðə lɛft-hæn ɛɡzɪt. wʌt θɔɹn hæd sɛd bɪfɔɹ wɑz kɝɛkt. ðeɪ pɹɑbli niɾəd tə dʌbəl bæk. bʌt ðeɪ kəd nɑt, nɑt wɪð ðət nɛst ə vaɪpɝz fɑloʊɪŋ soʊ kloʊsli!

He and the others burst into another room - no doorway - then dashed out the left-hand exit. What Thorn had said before was correct. They probably needed to double back. But they could not, not with that nest of vipers following so closely!

"ðeɪ θɹu mi aʊɾ ə ðə dɔɹfɹeɪm ɪn ði æɛlfɪn ɹɛlm," mæt sɛd, filɪŋ wɪndɪd. "ɪt lidz tə ðə beɪsmən ə ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ."

"They threw me out of the doorframe in the Aelfinn realm," Mat said, feeling winded. "It leads to the basement of the Stone of Tear."

"ðɛn meɪbi wi kən faɪn ðæt!" tɑm sɛd. "jɔɹ lʌk, mæt. hæv ɪt teɪk əs tə ði æɛlfɪn ɹɛlm."

"Then maybe we can find that!" Thom said. "Your luck, Mat. Have it take us to the Aelfinn realm."

ɪt maɪt wɝk. "ɔl ɹaɪt," hi sɛd, kloʊzɪŋ ɪz aɪ ən spɪnɪŋ əbaʊt.

It might work. "All right," he said, closing his eye and spinning about.

mæt pɔɪntəɾ ɪn ə dɝɛkʃən ən oʊpən ɪz aɪ. hi wɑz pɔɪntɪŋ dɝɛkli təwɔɹd ðə ɡæŋ ʌv æɛlfɪn, wivɪŋ ʌp ðə kɔɹəɾɝ təwɔɹd ðɛm.

Mat pointed in a direction and opened his eye. He was pointing directly toward the gang of Aelfinn, weaving up the corridor toward them.

"blʌɾi æʃəz!" mæt kɝst, tɝnɪŋ ən ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðɛm, pɪkɪŋ ənʌðɝ kɔɹəɾɝ ət ɹændəm.

"Bloody ashes!" Mat cursed, turning and running away from them, picking another corridor at random.

tɑm dʒɔɪn hɪm, bʌt wɑz lʊkɪŋ vɛɹi wɪɹid. mæt kəd teɪk mwɑ-ɹeɪn fɹəm ɪm fəɹ ə waɪl, bʌt tɑm wəd bi soʊ taɪɝɾ i wəd nɑt bi eɪbəl tə faɪt. ði æɛlfɪn wɝ gɑnə ɹʌn əm ɹæɡəd, əz ðeɪ hæd bɝdʒɪt sɛntʃɝiz əɡoʊ.

Thom joined him, but was looking very wearied. Mat could take Moi-raine from him for a while, but Thom would be so tired he would not be able to fight. The Aelfinn were going to run them ragged, as they had Birgitte centuries ago.

ɪn ðə nɛkst ɹum, tɑm stʌmbəl tə ə hɔlt, dʒɹupɪŋ, ðoʊ hi stɪl hɛl mɔɪɹeɪn. laɪk ɔl ə ðə tʃeɪmbɝz, ðɪs wʌn hæd fɔɹ weɪz aʊt. bʌt ði oʊnli weɪ ðət mæɾɝd wɑz wʌn dɝɛkli təwɔɹd ði æɛlfɪn. ðə wʌn ðeɪ kʊdn teɪk.

In the next room, Thom stumbled to a halt, drooping, though he still held Moiraine. Like all of the chambers, this one had four ways out. But the only way that mattered was one directly toward the Aelfinn. The one they couldn't take.

"ðɛɹz noʊ wɪnɪŋ ðɪs ɡeɪm," tɑm sɛd, pæntɪŋ. "ivən ɪf wi tʃit, ðɛɹz noʊ wɪnɪŋ."

"There's no winning this game," Thom said, panting. "Even if we cheat, there's no winning."

"tɑm . . ." mæt sɛɾ ɝdʒənli. hi hændəd tɑm ɪz æsbændʒɹeɪ, ðən pɪkt ʌp mɔɪɹeɪn. ʃi wɑz soʊ laɪt. ə ɡʊd θɪŋ, tu, ʌðɝwaɪz tɑm wəd nɛvɝ əv læstəɾ əz lɔŋ əz i hæd.

"Thom . . ." Mat said urgently. He handed Thom his asbandarei, then picked up Moiraine. She was so light. A good thing, too, otherwise Thom would never have lasted as long as he had.

noʊl ɡlænst ət ðɛm, ðən daʊn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ. ði æɛlfɪn wəd bi ɑn əm ɪn moʊməns. noʊl mɛt mæts aɪ. "ɡɪv mi jəɹ pæk. aɪ nid ðoʊz naɪtfloʊɝz."

Noal glanced at them, then down the corridor. The Aelfinn would be on them in moments. Noal met Mat's eye. "Give me your pack. I need those nightflowers."

"bʌt - "

"But - "

"noʊ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ!" noʊl sɛd. hi dæʃt oʊvɝ ən snæɡd wʌn ə ðə naɪtfloʊɝz. ɪt hæɾ ə vɛɹi ʃɔɹt fjuz. hi lɪɾ ɪɾ ən tɔst ɪɾ ɪndə ðə kɔɹəɾɝ. ði æɛlfɪn wɝ kloʊs ɪnʌf ðət mæt kəd hɪɹ əm skɹim ən hɪs əz ðeɪ sɔ ðə faɪɝwɝk.

"No arguing!" Noal said. He dashed over and snagged one of the nightflowers. It had a very short fuse. He lit it and tossed it into the corridor. The Aelfinn were close enough that Mat could hear them scream and hiss as they saw the firework.

ðə bum keɪm, spɑɹks spɝɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹəɾɝ ən laɪɾɪŋ ðə dɑɹk ɹum. wɛɹ spɑɹks keɪm kloʊs tə wʌn ə ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ kɑləmz ə stim, ðət stim ʃaɪd bæk, dænsɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə fleɪmz. ði ɛɹ smɛl stʃɹɔŋli ʌv smoʊk ən sʌlfɝ. laɪt, hɪz sɑkət wɑz θɹɑbɪŋ əɡɛn.

The boom came, sparks spurting out of the corridor and lighting the dark room. Where sparks came close to one of the rising columns of steam, that steam shied back, dancing away from the flames. The air smelled strongly of smoke and sulphur. Light, his socket was throbbing again.

"naʊ, mæt," noʊl sɛd, mæts ɪɹz stɪl ɹɪŋɪŋ fɹəm ðə blæst, "ɡɪv mi ðə pæk."

"Now, Mat," Noal said, Mat's ears still ringing from the blast, "give me the pack."

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ?" mæt sɛd wɛɹəli əz noʊl tʊk ðə pæk, ðən fɪʃt aʊt ðə læs naɪtfloʊɝ.

"What are you doing?" Mat said warily as Noal took the pack, then fished out the last nightflower.

"ju kən si ɪt, mæt," noʊl sɛd. "wi nid mɔɹ taɪm. juv tə ɡɛt fɑɹ ɪnʌf əhɛɾ ə ðoʊz vaɪpɝz ðət jə kən dʌbəl bæk ə fju taɪmz, lɛt jəɹ lʌk wɝk jə aʊɾ ə ðɪs."

"You can see it, Mat," Noal said. "We need more time. You have to get far enough ahead of those vipers that you can double back a few times, let your luck work you out of this."

noʊl nɑɾəd tə wʌn ə ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz "ðiz kɔɹɪɾɝz ɑɹ nɛɹoʊ. ɡʊd tʃoʊk pɔɪns. ə mæn kəd stæn ðəɹ ən oʊnli hæv tə faɪt wʌn əɹ tu əɾ ə taɪm. hid læs meɪbi ə fju mɪnəts."

Noal nodded to one of the corridors "These corridors are narrow. Good choke points. A man could stand there and only have to fight one or two at a time. He'd last maybe a few minutes."

"noʊl!" tɑm sɛd, wizɪŋ, stændɪŋ wɪð ɪz hænz ɑn ɪz niz nɪɹ mæts æsbændʒɹeɪ linɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔl. "ju kæn də ðɪs."

"Noal!" Thom said, wheezing, standing with his hands on his knees near Mat's asbandarei leaning against the wall. "You can't do this."

"jɛs aɪ kæn," noʊl sɛd. hi stɛpt ʌp tə ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, bɪɑnd wɪtʃ ði æɛlfɪn ɡæðɝd. "tɑm, jəɹ ɪn noʊ ʃeɪp tə faɪt. mæt, jəɹ ðə wʌn huz lʌk kən faɪn ðə weɪ aʊt. niðɝ ə jə kən steɪ. bʌɾ aɪ kæn."

"Yes I can," Noal said. He stepped up to the corridor, beyond which the Aelfinn gathered. "Thom, you're in no shape to fight. Mat, you're the one whose luck can find the way out. Neither of you can stay. But I can."

"ðɛɹ wɪl bi noʊ kʌmɪŋ bæk fəɹ ju," mæt sɛd ɡɹɪmli. "æz sun əz wi dʌbəl bæk, ðɪs fleɪmɪŋ pleɪs wɪl teɪk əs sʌmwɛɹ ɛls."

"There will be no coming back for you," Mat said grimly. "As soon as we double back, this flaming place will take us somewhere else."

noʊl mɛɾ ɪz aɪ, ðət wɛðɝd feɪs dɪtɝmənd. "aɪ noʊ. ə pɹaɪs, mæt. wi nu ðɪs pleɪs wəd dɪmæn ə pɹaɪs. wɛl, aɪv sin ə lɑɾ ə θɪŋz, dʌn ə lɑɾ ə θɪŋz. aɪv bɪn juzd, mæt, wʌn tu mɛni taɪmz. ðɪs ɪz əz ɡʊɾ ə pleɪs əz ɛni tə mit ði ɛnd."

Noal met his eye, that weathered face determined. "I know. A price, Mat. We knew this place would demand a price. Well, I've seen a lot of things, done a lot of things. I've been used, Mat, one too many times. This is as good a place as any to meet the end."

mæt stʊɾ ʌp, lɪftɪŋ mɔɪɹeɪn, ðən nɑɾəd ɪn ɹɪspɛk tə noʊl. "kʌm ɑn, tɑm."

Mat stood up, lifting Moiraine, then nodded in respect to Noal. "Come on, Thom."

"bʌt - "

"But - "

"kʌm ɑn!" mæt bɑɹkt, dæʃɪŋ tə wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ dɔɹweɪz. tɑm hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən kɝst ən dʒɔɪn hɪm, kæɹiɪŋ mæts tɔɹtʃ ɪn wʌn hæn ən ɪz æsbændʒɹeɪ ɪn ði ʌðɝ. noʊl stɛpt ɪndə ðə kɔɹəɾɝ bɪhaɪnd, hɛftɪŋ ɪz ʃɔɹts wɝd. ʃeɪps muvd ɪn ðə smoʊk bɪɑn hɪm.

"Come on!" Mat barked, dashing to one of the other doorways. Thom hesitated, then cursed and joined him, carrying Mat's torch in one hand and his asbandarei in the other. Noal stepped into the corridor behind, hefting his shorts word. Shapes moved in the smoke beyond him.

"mæt," noʊl kɔld, ɡlænsɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ.

"Mat," Noal called, glancing over his shoulder.

mæt weɪv tɑm ɑn, bʌt hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, lʊkɪŋ bæk.

Mat waved Thom on, but hesitated, looking back.

"ɪf jə ɛvɝ miɾ ə mɔlkɪɹi," noʊl sɛd, "ju tɛl ɪm dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ daɪd klin."

"If you ever meet a Malkieri," Noal said, "you tell him Jain Farstrider died clean."

"aɪ wɪl, dʒaɪn," mæt sɛd. "meɪ ðə laɪt hoʊl ju."

"I will, Jain," Mat said. "May the light hold you."

noʊl tɝn bæk tə feɪs ði æɛlfɪn ən mæt lɛf hɪm. ðəɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ bum əz ə naɪtfloʊɝ wɛn ɔf. ðən mæt hɝd noʊlz vɔɪs ɛkoʊ daʊn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ əz i skɹimd ə bæɾəlkɹi. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪn ɛni tʌŋ mæt hæɾ ɛvɝ hɝd.

Noal turned back to face the Aelfinn and Mat left him. There was another boom as a nightflower went off. Then Mat heard Noal's voice echo down the corridor as he screamed a battlecry. It was not in any tongue Mat had ever heard.

hi ən tɑm ɛntɝɾ ənʌðɝ tʃeɪmbɝ. tɑm wɑz wipɪŋ, bʌt mæt hɛld ɪz tɪɹz. noʊl wəd daɪ wɪð ɑnɝ. wʌns, mæt wʊɾə θɔt ðət kaɪndə θɪŋkɪŋ fulɪʃ - wʌt ɡʊd wɑz ɑnɝ ɪf jə wɝ dɛd? bʌɾ i hæd tu mɛni mɛmɹiz ə soʊlʒɝz, hæd spɛn tu mʌtʃ taɪm wɪð mɛn u fɔɾ ən blɛd fəɹ ðəɾ ɑnɝ, tə dɪskɹɛɾət sətʃ noʊʃənz naʊ.

He and Thom entered another chamber. Thom was weeping, but Mat held his tears. Noal would die with honor. Once, Mat would have thought that kind of thinking foolish - what good was honor if you were dead? But he had too many memories of soldiers, had spent too much time with men who fought and bled for that honor, to discredit such notions now.

hi kloʊzd ɪz aɪ ən spʌn, mɔɪɹeɪnz weɪɾ ɔlmoʊst ənbælənsɪŋ hɪm. hi pɪkt ə dɝɛkʃən ən faʊn hɪmsɛlf pɔɪntɪŋ bæk ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæd kʌm. hi tʃɑɹdʒ daʊn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, tɑm fɑloʊɪŋ.

He closed his eye and spun, Moiraine's weight almost unbalancing him. He picked a direction and found himself pointing back the way they had come. He charged down the corridor, Thom following.

wən ðeɪ ɹitʃt ði ɛn ə ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, ɪt dɪd nɑɾ oʊpən ɪndə ðə ɹum wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd lɛf noʊl.

When they reached the end of the corridor, it did not open into the room where they had left Noal.

ðɪs ɹum wɑz ɹaʊn ən wɑz fɪld wɪð jɛloʊ kɑləmz, meɪɾ ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ɪnɔɹməs vaɪnz twɪstɪŋ ɝaʊnd wʌn ənʌðɝ wɪð ən oʊpən sɪləndɝ ə speɪs ət ðə sɛntɝ. kɔɪld læmp stænz hɛld ɡlɑbz ʌv waɪt ðət ɡeɪv ðə ɹum ə sɑf laɪt, ən ðə flɔɹ wɑz taɪld ɪn ðə pæɾɝn ʌv waɪɾ ən jɛloʊ stʃɹɪps, spaɪɹəlɪŋ aʊt fɹəm ðə sɛntɝ. ɪt smɛl pʌnʒəntli ʌv dʒɹaɪ sneɪkɛskɪn.

This room was round and was filled with yellow columns, made in the shape of enormous vines twisting around one another with an open cylinder of space at the center. Coiled lamp stands held globes of white that gave the room a soft light, and the floor was tiled in the pattern of white and yellow strips, spiraling out from the center. It smelled pungently of dry snakeskin.

meɪtʃɹim kɔθən, jəɹ noʊ hɪɹoʊ, hi θɔt, ɡlænsɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ðət mæn jə lɛf bɪhaɪnd, hiz ðə hɪɹoʊ. laɪɾ ɪlumin ju, noʊl.

Matrim Cauthon, you're no hero, he thought, glancing over his shoulder. That man you left behind, he's the hero. Light illumine you, Noal.

"naʊ wʌt?" θɔɹn æskt. hi sim tə hæv ɹəkʌvɝd səm ə hɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ, soʊ mæt hændəd bæk mɔɪɹeɪn ən tʊk ɪz spɪɹ. ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli tu dɔɹweɪz ɪn ðɪs ɹum, ðə wʌn bɪhaɪn ən wʌn dɝɛkli əkɹɔs ðə tʃeɪmbɝ. bʌt mæt spʌn wɪð ɪz aɪ kloʊzd ɛniweɪ. ðə lʌk pɔɪntəɾ əm tə ðə dɔɹweɪ ɑpəzət ðə wʌn ðeɪ hæɾ ɛntɝd.

"Now what?" Thorn asked. He seemed to have recovered some of his strength, so Mat handed back Moiraine and took his spear. There were only two doorways in this room, the one behind and one directly across the chamber. But Mat spun with his eye closed anyway. The luck pointed them to the doorway opposite the one they had entered.

ðeɪ tʊk ɪt. ðə wɪndoʊz ɪn ðɪs hɔlweɪ lʊkt aʊɾ ət ðə dʒʌŋɡəl, ən ðeɪ wɝ naʊ daʊn ɪn ðə θɪk ʌv ɪt. mæt əkeɪʒənəli spɑɾəd ðoʊz θɹi spaɪɹz. ðə pleɪs wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪn moʊməns əɡoʊ, ðə pleɪs wɛɹ noʊl blɛd.

They took it. The windows in this hallway looked out at the jungle, and they were now down in the thick of it. Mat occasionally spotted those three spires. The place where they had been moments ago, the place where Noal bled.

"ðɪs ɪz wɛɹ jə ɡɑt jəɹ ænsɝz, ɪzən ɪt?" θɔɹn æskt.

"This is where you got your answers, isn't it?" Thorn asked.

mæt nɑɾəd.

Mat nodded.

"ju θɪŋk aɪ kəd ɡɛt səm ə ðoʊz maɪsɛlf?" tɑm æskt. "θɹi kwɛstʃənz. ɛni ænsɝz jə laɪk. . . ."

"You think I could get some of those myself?" Thom asked. "Three questions. Any answers you like. . . ."

"ju doʊnt wɑn ðɛm," mæt sɛd, tʌɡɪŋ daʊn ðə bɹɪm ə hɪz hæt. "tʃɹʌs mi, jə doʊnt. ðeɪ ɑɹən ænsɝz. ðəɹ θɹɛts. pɹɑməsəz. wi - "

"You don't want them," Mat said, tugging down the brim of his hat. "Trust me, you don't. They aren't answers. They're threats. Promises. We - "

tɑm stɑp bɪsaɪd hɪm. ɪn θɔɹnz ɑɹmz, mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə stɝ. ʃi lɛɾ aʊɾ ə sɑft ɡɹoʊn, aɪz stɪl kloʊzd. bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt wʌt meɪd mæt fɹiz.

Thom stopped beside him. In Thorn's arms, Moiraine was beginning to stir. She let out a soft groan, eyes still closed. But that was not what made Mat freeze.

hi kəd si ənʌðɝ sɝkjəlɝ jɛloʊ ɹum ʌp əhɛd. sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðət ɹum wɑz ə ɹɛdstoʊn dɔɹweɪ. əɹ wʌt wɑz lɛft ʌv ɪt.

He could see another circular yellow room up ahead. Sitting in the middle of that room was a redstone doorway. Or what was left of it.

mæt kɝst, ɹʌnɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. ðə flɔɹ wɑz stʃɹun wɪð tʃʌŋks ə ɹɛd ɹɑk ɹʌbəl. mæt ɡɹoʊnd, dʒɹɑpɪŋ ɪz spɪɹ ən teɪkɪŋ ə fju ʌv ðə tʃʌŋks, hoʊldɪŋ əm ʌp. ðə dɔɹweɪ hæd bɪn ʃæɾɝd baɪ sʌmθɪŋ, ə bloʊ ʌv ɑsəm fɔɹs.

Mat cursed, running forward. The floor was strewn with chunks of red rock rubble. Mat groaned, dropping his spear and taking a few of the chunks, holding them up. The doorway had been shattered by something, a blow of awesome force.

nɪɹ ði ɛntʃɹəns tə ðə ɹum, tɑm sæŋk daʊn, hoʊldɪŋ ðə stɝɪŋ mɔɪɹeɪn. hi lʊkt ɪɡzɔstəd. niðɝ ə ðɛm hæɾ ə pæk ɛnimɔɹ; mæt hæd ɡɪvən ɪz tə noʊl, ən tɑm hæd lɛft ɪz bɪhaɪnd. ən ðɪs ɹum wɑz ə dɛɾ ɛnd, wɪð noʊ ʌðɝ dɔɹweɪz.

Near the entrance to the room, Thom sank down, holding the stirring Moiraine. He looked exhausted. Neither of them had a pack anymore; Mat had given his to Noal, and Thom had left his behind. And this room was a dead end, with no other doorways.

"bɝn ðɪs pleɪs!" mæt ʃaʊɾəd, ɹɪpɪŋ ɔf ɪz hæt, stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ɪndə ði ɪkspænsɪv, ɛnləs dɑɹknəs əbʌv. "bɝn jə ɔl, sneɪks ən fɑksəz! dɑɹk wʌn teɪk ðə lɑɾ ə ju. juv maɪ aɪ, juv noʊl. ðæts ɪnʌf ʌv ə pɹaɪs fəɹ ju! ðæts tu mʌtʃ ʌv ə pɹaɪs! ɪzən ðə laɪf ə dʒaɪn blʌɾi fɑɹ-stʃɹaɪɾɝ ɪnʌf tə əpiz ju, jə mɑnstɝz!"

"Burn this place!" Mat shouted, ripping off his hat, staring up into the expansive, endless darkness above. "Burn you all, snakes and foxes! Dark One take the lot of you. You have my eye, you have Noal. That's enough of a price for you! That's too much of a price! Isn't the life of Jain bloody Far-strider enough to appease you, you monsters!"

hɪz wɝdz ɹæŋ ən vænɪʃt, wɪð noʊ ɹɪplaɪ. ði oʊld ɡlimən skwizd ɪz aɪz ʃʌt, hoʊldɪŋ mɔɪɹeɪn. hi lʊk biɾən, ɡɹaʊn daʊn tə nʌθɪŋ. hɪz hænz wɝ ɹɛɾ ən blɪstɝd fɹəm pʊlɪŋ əɹ fɹi, hɪz koʊt slivz bɝnd.

His words rang and vanished, with no reply. The old gleeman squeezed his eyes shut, holding Moiraine. He looked beaten, ground down to nothing. His hands were red and blistered from pulling her free, his coat sleeves burned.

mæt lʊkt əbaʊt, dɛspɹɪt. hi tʃɹaɪd spɪnɪŋ əbaʊt wɪð aɪ kloʊz pɔɪntɪŋ. wən i oʊpən ɪz aɪ, hi wɑz pɔɪntɪŋ ət ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə ɹum. ðə bɹoʊkən dɔɹweɪ.

Mat looked about, desperate. He tried spinning about with eye closed pointing. When he opened his eye, he was pointing at the center of the room. The broken doorway.

ɪt wɑz ðən ðəɾ i fɛl hoʊp stɑɹt tə daɪ ɪnsaɪɾ ə hɪm.

It was then that he felt hope start to die inside of him.

"ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊd tʃɹaɪ, læd," θɔɹn sɛd. "wi dɪd wɛl. bɛɾɝ ðən wi ʃəɾ əv ɪkspɛktəd."

"It was a good try, lad," Thorn said. "We did well. Better than we should have expected."

"aɪ woʊnt ɡɪv ʌp," mæt sɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪfaɪ ðə kɹʌʃɪŋ sɛns ɪnsaɪɾ ə hɪm. "wil . . . wɪl ɹitʃɹeɪs əɹ stɛps, faɪn ə weɪ bæk tə ðə pleɪs bɪtwin ði æɛlfɪn ən ɛlfɪn. ðə bɑɹɡən sɛd ðeɪ hæd tə liv ðət pɔɹɾəl oʊpən. wɪl teɪk ɪɾ ən ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ, θɔɹn. əl bi bɝn ɪf aɪm gɑnə daɪ ɪn hɪɹ. jə stɪl oʊ mi ə kʌpəl ə mʌɡz."

"I won't give up," Mat said, trying to defy the crushing sense inside of him. "We'll . . . we'll retrace our steps, find a way back to the place between the Aelfinn and Eelfinn. The bargain said they had to leave that portal open. We'll take it and get out of here, Thorn. I'll be burned if I'm going to die in here. You still owe me a couple of mugs."

θɔɹn oʊpən ɪz aɪz ən smaɪld, bʌt dɪd nɑt stæn ʌp. hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ðoʊz dʒɹupɪŋ mʌstæʃɪz wæɡɪŋ, ən lʊk daʊn ət mɔɪɹeɪn.

Thorn opened his eyes and smiled, but did not stand up. He shook his head, those drooping mustaches wagging, and looked down at Moiraine.

hɝ aɪz flʌɾɝd oʊpən. "θɔɹn," ʃi wɪspɝd, smaɪlɪŋ. "aɪ θɔɾ aɪ hɝd jəɹ vɔɪs."

Her eyes fluttered open. "Thorn," she whispered, smiling. "I thought I heard your voice."

laɪt, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs tʊk mæt bæk. tə ʌðɝ taɪmz. eɪdʒəz əɡoʊ.

Light, but her voice took Mat back. To other times. Ages ago.

ʃi ɡlænst ət hɪm. "æn mæt. dɪɹ meɪtʃɹim. aɪ nu jə wəd kʌm fəɹ mi. boʊθ ə ju. aɪ wɪʃ jə hædnt, bʌɾ aɪ nu jə wʊd. . . ."

She glanced at him. "And Mat. Dear Matrim. I knew you would come for me. Both of you. I wish you hadn't, but I knew you would. . . ."

"ɹɛst, mɔɪɹeɪn," θɔɹn sɛd sɔfli. "wil bi aʊɾ ə hɪɹ ɪn tu stʃɹəmz ʌv ə hɑɹp."

"Rest, Moiraine," Thorn said softly. "We'll be out of here in two strums of a harp."

mæt lʊkt ət hɝ, laɪɪŋ ðɛɹ, hɛlpləs. "bɝn mi. aɪm nɑt gɑnə lɛɾ ɪɾ ɛn laɪk ðɪs!"

Mat looked at her, lying there, helpless. "Burn me. I'm not going to let it end like this!"

"ðeɪɹ kʌmɪŋ, læd," θɔɹn sɛd. "aɪ kən hɪɹ ðɛm."

"They're coming, lad," Thorn said. "I can hear them."

mæt tɝn tə lʊk θɹu ði oʊpənɪŋ. hi kəd si wʌt θɔɹn hæd hɝd. ði æɛlfɪn kɹɛp θɹu ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, sɪnwəs ən dɛdli. ðeɪ smaɪld, ən i kəd si fæŋɡlaɪk ɪnsaɪzɝz ət ðə fɔɹfɹʌn ə ðoʊz smaɪlz. ðeɪ cʊɾə bɪn hjumən, seɪv fəɹ ðoʊz fæŋz. ən ðoʊz aɪz. ðoʊz ənnætʃɹəl, slɪɾɪd aɪz. ðeɪ muv slikli. tɛɹəbəl, iɡɝ.

Mat turned to look through the opening. He could see what Thorn had heard. The Aelfinn crept through the corridor, sinuous and deadly. They smiled, and he could see fanglike incisors at the forefront of those smiles. They could have been human, save for those fangs. And those eyes. Those unnatural, slitted eyes. They moved sleekly. Terrible, eager.

"noʊ," mæt wɪspɝd. "ðɛɹ əz tə bi ə weɪ." θɪŋk, hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf. mæt, jə ful. ðəɹ əz tə bi ə weɪ aʊt. haʊ dɪd jə ɪskeɪp ðə læs taɪm? noʊl hæɾ æskt. ðət wɑz noʊ hɛlp.

"No," Mat whispered. "There has to be a way." Think, he told himself. Mat, you fool. There has to be a way out. How did you escape the last time? Noal had asked. That was no help.

θɔɹn, lʊkɪŋ dɛspɹɪt, ənhʊkt ɪz hɑɹp fɹəm ɪz bæk. hi bɪɡæn tə pleɪ ɪt. mæt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə tun, "swit wɪspɝz ə təmɑɹoʊ." ə mɔɹnfəl saʊnd, pleɪd fəɹ ðə fɔlən dɛd. ɪt wɑz bjuɾəfəl.

Thorn, looking desperate, unhooked his harp from his back. He began to play it. Mat recognized the tune, "Sweet Whispers of Tomorrow." A mournful sound, played for the fallen dead. It was beautiful.

ɹɪmɑɹkəbli, ðə mjuzɪk dɪd sim tə suð ði æɛlfɪn. ðeɪ sloʊd, ðə wʌnz ət ðə fɹʌn bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə sweɪ tə ðə biɾ ə ðə mɛləɾi əz ðeɪ wɔkt. ðeɪ nu. θɔɹn pleɪd fəɹ ɪz oʊn fjunɝəl.

Remarkably, the music did seem to soothe the Aelfinn. They slowed, the ones at the front beginning to sway to the beat of the melody as they walked. They knew. Thorn played for his own funeral.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ aɪ ɡɑɾ aʊt læs taɪm," mæt wɪspɝd. "aɪ wɑz ʌnkɑnʃəs. aɪ woʊk ʌp biɪŋ hæŋd. ɹænd kʌt mi daʊn."

"I don't know how I got out last time," Mat whispered. "I was unconscious. I woke up being hanged. Rand cut me down."

hi ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə hɪz skɑɹ. hɪz ɝɪdʒənəl æɛlfɪn ænsɝz ɹɪvil nʌθɪŋ. hi nu əbaʊt ðə dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪn munz, hi nu əbaʊt ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp hæf ðə laɪɾ ə ðə wɝld. hi nu əbaʊt ɹɪɾiən. ɪɾ ɔl meɪd sɛns. noʊ hoʊlz. noʊ kwɛstʃənz.

He raised a hand to his scar. His original Aelfinn answers revealed nothing. He knew about the Daughter of the Nine Moons, he knew about giving up half the light of the world. He knew about Rhuidean. It all made sense. No holes. No questions.

ɪksɛpt. . . .

Except. . . .

wʌd ði ɛlfɪn ɡɪv ju?

What did the Eelfinn give you?

"ɪf aɪ hæd maɪ weɪ," mæt wɪspɝd, stɛɹɪŋ ət ði ɔnkʌmɪŋ æɛlfɪn, "aɪ wəd wɑn ðoʊz hoʊlz fɪld."

"If I had my way," Mat whispered, staring at the oncoming Aelfinn, "I would want those holes filled."

ði æɛlfɪn slaɪðɝd fɔɹwɝd, wɛɹɪŋ ðoʊz klɔθs ə jɛloʊ ɹæpɪŋ ðɛɹ bɑɾiz. θɔɹnz mjuzɪk spʌn ɪn ði ɛɹ, ɛkoʊɪŋ. ðə kɹitʃɝz əpɹoʊtʃt wɪð stɛɾi, sloʊ stɛps. ðeɪ nu ðeɪ hæd ðɛɹ pɹeɪ naʊ.

The Aelfinn slithered forward, wearing those cloths of yellow wrapping their bodies. Thorn's music spun in the air, echoing. The creatures approached with steady, slow steps. They knew they had their prey now.

ðə tu æɛlfɪn ət ðə fɹʌn kæɹid sɔɹdz ʌv ɡlimɪŋ bɹɑnz, dʒɹɪpɪŋ ɹɛd. pʊɹ noʊl.

The two Aelfinn at the front carried swords of gleaming bronze, dripping red. Poor Noal.

tɑm bɪɡæn tə sɪŋ. "oʊ, haʊ lɔŋ wɝ ðə deɪz ʌv ə mæn. wən i stʃɹoʊɾ əpɑn ə bɹoʊkən lænd."

Thom began to sing. "Oh, how long were the days of a man. When he strode upon a broken land."

mæt lɪsənd, mɛmɹiz blɑsəmɪŋ ɪn ɪz maɪnd. θɔɹnz vɔɪs kæɹiɾ ɪm tə deɪz lɔŋ əɡoʊ. deɪz ɪn ɪz oʊn mɛmɹiz, deɪz ə ðə mɛmɹiz ʌv ʌðɝz. deɪz wən i hæd daɪd, deɪz wən i hæd lɪvd, deɪz wən i hæd fɔɾ ən wən i hæd wʌn.

Mat listened, memories blossoming in his mind. Thorn's voice carried him to days long ago. Days in his own memories, days of the memories of others. Days when he had died, days when he had lived, days when he had fought and when he had won.

"aɪ wɑn ðoʊz hoʊlz fɪld . . ." mæt wɪspɝd tə hɪmsɛlf. "ðæts wʌɾ aɪ sɛd. ði ɛlfɪn əblaɪdʒd, ɡɪvɪŋ mi mɛmɹiz ðət wɝ nɑt maɪ oʊn."

"I want those holes filled . . ." Mat whispered to himself. "That's what I said. The Eelfinn obliged, giving me memories that were not my own."

mɔɪɹeɪnz aɪz hæd kloʊzd əɡɛn, bʌt ʃi smaɪld əz ʃi lɪsən tə θɔɹnz mjuzɪk. mæt hæd θɔt tɑm wɑz pleɪɪŋ fəɹ ði æɛlfɪn, bʌt naʊ hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf i wɑz pleɪɪŋ fəɹ mɔɪɹeɪn. ə læst, mɛlənkɑli sɔŋ fəɹ ə feɪld ɹɛskju.

Moiraine's eyes had closed again, but she smiled as she listened to Thorn's music. Mat had thought Thom was playing for the Aelfinn, but now he wondered if he was playing for Moiraine. A last, melancholy song for a failed rescue.

"hi seɪld əz fɑɹ əz ə mæn kəd stɪɹ," tɑm sæŋ, vɔɪs sɑnɝəs, bjuɾəfəl. "æn i nɛvɝ wɪʃt tə luz ɪz fɪɹ."

"He sailed as far as a man could steer," Thom sang, voice sonorous, beautiful. "And he never wished to lose his fear."

"aɪ wɑn ðoʊz hoʊlz fɪld," mæt ɹɪpiɾɪd, "soʊ ðeɪ ɡeɪv mi mɛmɹiz. ðət wɑz maɪ fɝs bun."

"I want those holes filled," Mat repeated, "so they gave me memories. That was my first boon."

"fɔɹ ðə fɪɹ ə mæn ɪz ə θɪŋ əntoʊld. ɪt kips ɪm seɪf, ən ɪt pɹuvz ɪm boʊld!"

"For the fear of man is a thing untold. It keeps him safe, and it proves him bold!"

"aɪ æsk sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, nɑt noʊɪŋ ɪt," mæt sɛd. "aɪ sɛɾ aɪ wɑntəd tə bi fɹi ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə paʊɝ. ðeɪ ɡeɪv mi ðə mədæljən fəɹ ðæt. ənʌðɝ ɡɪft."

"I asked something else, not knowing it," Mat said. "I said I wanted to be free of Aes Sedai and the Power. They gave me the medallion for that. Another gift."

"doʊn lɛt fɪɹ meɪk jə sis tə stʃɹaɪv, fəɹ ðət fɪɹ ɪt pɹuvz jə ɹɪmeɪn əlaɪv!"

"Don't let fear make you cease to strive, for that fear it proves you remain alive!"

"ænd . . . ən aɪ æsk fəɹ wʌn mɔɹ θɪŋ. aɪ sɛɾ aɪ wɑntəd tə bi əweɪ fɹəm əm ən bæk tə ɹɪɾiən. ði ɛlfɪn ɡeɪv mi ɛvɹiθɪŋ aɪ æsk fɔɹ. ðə mɛmɹiz tə fɪl maɪ hoʊlz. ðə mədæljən tə kip mi fɹi fɹəm ðə paʊɝ. . . ."

"And . . . and I asked for one more thing. I said I wanted to be away from them and back to Rhuidean. The Eelfinn gave me everything I asked for. The memories to fill my holes. The medallion to keep me free from the Power. . . ."

ən wʌt? ðeɪ sɛn ɪm bæk tə ɹɪɾiən tə hæŋ. bʌt hæŋɪŋ wɑz ə pɹaɪs, nɑɾ ən ænsɝ tə hɪz dɪmænz.

And what? They sent him back to Rhuidean to hang. But hanging was a price, not an answer to his demands.

"aɪ wɪl wɔk ðɪs bɹoʊkən ɹoʊd," θɔɹn sæŋ, vɔɪs ɡɹoʊɪŋ laʊɾɝ, "æn əl kæɹi ə hɛvi loʊd!"

"I will walk this broken road," Thorn sang, voice growing louder, "and I will carry a heavy load!"

"ðeɪ dɪd ɡɪmi sʌmθɪŋ ɛls," mæt wɪspɝd, lʊkɪŋ daʊn ət ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ ɪn ɪz hænz əz ði æɛlfɪn bɪɡæn tə hɪs mɔɹ laʊdli.

"They did give me something else," Mat whispered, looking down at the ashandarei in his hands as the Aelfinn began to hiss more loudly.

ðʌs ɪz əɹ tʃɹiɾi ɹɪɾən; ðʌs ɪz əɡɹimən meɪd.

Thus is our treaty written; thus is agreement made.

ɪt wɑz kɑɹvd ɑn ðə wɛpən. ðə bleɪd hæd tu ɹeɪvənz, ðə ʃæft ɪnskɹaɪbd wɪð wɝdz ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ.

It was carved on the weapon. The blade had two ravens, the shaft inscribed with words in the Old Tongue.

θɔɾ ɪz ði æɹoʊ ʌv taɪm; mɛmɹi nɛvɝ feɪdz.

Thought is the arrow of time; memory never fades.

waɪ hæd ðeɪ ɡɪvən tə hɪm? hi hæd nɛvɝ kwɛstʃən ɪt. bʌɾ i hæd nɑɾ æsk fəɹ ə wɛpən.

Why had they given to him? He had never questioned it. But he had not asked for a weapon.

wʌt wɑz æskt ɪz ɡɪvən. ðə pɹaɪs ɪz peɪd.

What was asked is given. The price is paid.

noʊ, aɪ dɪdn æsk fəɹ ə wɛpən. aɪ æsk fəɹ ə weɪ aʊt.

No, I didn't ask for a weapon. I asked for a way out.

ən ðeɪ ɡeɪv mi ðɪs.

And they gave me this.

"soʊ kʌm ət mi wɪð jəɹ ɑfəl laɪz," θɔɹn bɛloʊd ðə faɪnəl laɪn ə ðə sɔŋ. "ɪm ə mæn ə tʃɹuθ, ən əl mit jəɹ aɪz!"

"So come at me with your awful lies," Thorn bellowed the final line of the song. "I'm a man of truth, and I'll meet your eyes!"

mæt spʌn ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ ən θɹʌst ɪɾ ɪndə ðə wɔl. ðə pɔɪn sæŋk ɪndə ðə nɑt-stoʊn. laɪt spɹeɪɾ aʊɾ ɝaʊn ɪt, spɪlɪŋ fɹi laɪk blʌd ɡʌʃɪŋ fɹəm ə splɪt veɪn. mæt skɹimd, ɹæmɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn fɑɹðɝ.

Mat spun the ashandarei and thrust it into the wall. The point sank into the not-stone. Light sprayed out around it, spilling free like blood gushing from a split vein. Mat screamed, ramming it in farther.

paʊɝfəl weɪvz ə laɪɾ ɪɹʌptəd fɹəm ðə wɔl.

Powerful waves of light erupted from the wall.

hi dʒɹu ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ daʊn əɾ ən æŋɡəl, meɪkɪŋ ə slɪt. hi pʊl ðə wɛpən ʌp ði ʌðɝ saɪd, kʌɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə lɑɹdʒ ɪnvɝs tʃɹaɪæŋɡəl ə laɪt. ðə laɪt sim tə θɹəm əz ɪt wɑʃt əkɹɔs hɪm. ði æɛlfɪn hæd ɹitʃt ðə dɔɹweɪ baɪ θɔɹn, bʌt ðeɪ hɪst, ʃaɪɪŋ bæk fɹəm ðə paʊɝfəl ɹeɪdʒjəns.

He drew the ashandarei down at an angle, making a slit. He pulled the weapon up the other side, cutting out a large inverse triangle of light. The light seemed to thrum as it washed across him. The Aelfinn had reached the doorway by Thorn, but they hissed, shying back from the powerful radiance.

mæt fɪnɪʃt baɪ dʒɹɔɪŋ ə weɪvi laɪn daʊn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə tʃɹaɪæŋɡəl. hi kəd bɛɹli si, ðə laɪt wɑz soʊ bɹaɪt. ðə sɛkʃən ə ðə wɔl ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm fɛl əweɪ, ɹɪvilɪŋ ə ɡloʊɪŋ waɪt pæsədʒ ðət sim tə bi kʌɾ aʊɾ ə stil.

Mat finished by drawing a wavy line down the middle of the triangle. He could barely see, the light was so bright. The section of the wall in front of him fell away, revealing a glowing white passage that seemed to be cut out of steel.

"wɛl əl . . ." θɔɹn wɪspɝd, stændɪŋ ʌp.

"Well I'll . . ." Thorn whispered, standing up.

ði æɛlfɪn skɹimd wɪð haɪ-pɪtʃt æŋɡɝ. ðeɪ ɛntɝd ðə ɹum, ɑɹmz ɹeɪz tə ʃil ðɛɹ aɪz, wɪkəd sɔɹdz ɡɹɪpt ɪn əpoʊzɪŋ hænz.

The Aelfinn screamed with high-pitched anger. They entered the room, arms raised to shield their eyes, wicked swords gripped in opposing hands.

"ɡɛɾ əɹ aʊt!" mæt bɛloʊd, spɪnɪŋ tə feɪs ðə kɹitʃɝz. hi lɪftəd ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ, juzɪŋ ðə bʌɾ ɛn tə smæʃ ðə feɪs ə ðə fɝst æɛlfɪn. "ɡoʊ!"

"Get her out!" Mat bellowed, spinning to face the creatures. He lifted the ashandarei, using the butt end to smash the face of the first Aelfinn. "Go!"

θɔɹn ɡɹæb mɔɪɹeɪn, ðən spɛɹɾ ə ɡlæns ət mæt.

Thorn grabbed Moiraine, then spared a glance at Mat.

"ɡoʊ!" mæt ɹɪpiɾɪd, smæʃɪŋ ði ɑɹm ʌv ənʌðɝ æɛlfɪn.

"Go!" Mat repeated, smashing the arm of another Aelfinn.

tɑm lɛpt ɪndə ðə dɔɹweɪ ən vænɪʃt. mæt smaɪld, spɪnɪŋ əmʌŋ ði æɛlfɪn wɪð ɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ, leɪɪŋ ɪndə lɛɡz, ɑɹmz, hɛdz. ðəɹ wɝ ə lɑɾ ə ðɛm, bʌt ðeɪ sim deɪz baɪ ðə laɪt, fɹɛnzid tə ɡɛt tə hɪm. əz i tʃɹɪp ðə fɝs fju, ði ʌðɝz stʌmbəld. ðə kɹitʃɝz bɪkeɪm ə skwɝmɪŋ mæs ə sɪnwəs ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz, hɪsɪŋ ən spɪɾɪŋ ɪn æŋɡɝ, sɛvɹəl ə ðoʊz ɪn bæk tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɹɔl oʊvɝ ðə paɪl tə ɹitʃ hɪm.

Thom leaped into the doorway and vanished. Mat smiled, spinning among the Aelfinn with his ashandarei, laying into legs, arms, heads. There were a lot of them, but they seemed dazed by the light, frenzied to get to him. As he tripped the first few, the others stumbled. The creatures became a squirming mass of sinuous arms and legs, hissing and spitting in anger, several of those in back trying to crawl over the pile to reach him.

mæt stɛp bæk ən tɪpt ɪz hæt tə ðə kɹitʃɝz. "lʊks laɪk ðə ɡeɪm kən bi wʌn æftɝ ɔl,"

Mat stepped back and tipped his hat to the creatures. "Looks like the game can be won after all,"

hi sɛd. "tɛl ðə fɑksəz aɪm maɪɾi plizd wɪð ðɪs ki ðeɪ ɡeɪv mi. ɔlsoʊ, jə kən ɔl ɡoʊ ɹɑɾ ɪn ə fleɪmɪŋ pɪɾ ə faɪɝ ən æʃəz, jə ənwɑʃt lʌmps ɑn ə pɪɡz bæksaɪd. hæv ə ɡɹæn blʌɾi deɪ."

he said. "Tell the foxes I'm mighty pleased with this key they gave me. Also, you can all go rot in a flaming pit of fire and ashes, you unwashed lumps on a pig's backside. Have a grand bloody day."

hi hɛld ɪz hæɾ ən lɛp θɹu ði oʊpənɪŋ.

He held his hat and leaped through the opening.

ɔl flæʃt waɪt.

All flashed white.


tʃæptɝ fɪftisɪks


CHAPTER 56

sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ


Something Wrong

ə sɑf nɑk keɪm ət ðə poʊst aʊtsaɪɾ ɛɡwinz tɛnt. "kʌm," ʃi sɛd, ʃʌflɪŋ θɹu ðə peɪpɝz ɑn əɹ dɛsk. ɡɔɪn slɪpt ɪn. hid ɡɪvən ʌp ɪz faɪn kloʊðɪŋ, tʃuzɪŋ tʃɹaʊzɝz ə bɹaʊn ən ə slaɪtli laɪɾɝ ʃɝt. eɪ wɔɹɾɝz kʌlɝ-ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊk hʌŋ ɝaʊn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, meɪkɪŋ ɪm blɛn ɪndə hɪz sɝaʊndɪŋz. ɛɡwin hɝsɛlf wɑz wɛɹɪŋ ə ɹiɡəl dʒɹɛs ʌv ɡɹin ən blu.

A soft knock came at the post outside Egwene's tent. "Come," she said, shuffling through the papers on her desk. Gawyn slipped in. He'd given up his fine clothing, choosing trousers of brown and a slightly lighter shirt. A Warders color-shifting cloak hung around his shoulders, making him blend into his surroundings. Egwene herself was wearing a regal dress of green and blue.

hɪz kloʊk ɹʌsəld əz i tʊk ə sit bɪsaɪɾ əɹ dɛsk. "ɪleɪnz ɑɹmi ɪz kɹɔsɪŋ. ʃi sɛnt wɝd ðət ʃiz ɑn əɹ weɪ tə kʌm vɪzəɾ əɹ kæmp."

His cloak rustled as he took a seat beside her desk. "Elayne's army is crossing. She sent word that she's on her way to come visit our camp."

"ɛksələnt," ɛɡwin sɛd. ɡɔɪn nɑɾəd, bʌɾ i wɑz tʃɹʌbəld. sətʃ ə jusfəl θɪŋ, ðət bɔl ʌv ɪmoʊʃənz kɑz baɪ ðə bɑnd. ɪf ʃid noʊn ɝliɝ ðə dɛpθ ə hɪz dɪvoʊʃən tə hɝ, ʃiɾ əv bɑndəɾ ɪm wiks əɡoʊ. "wʌt?" ɛɡwin æskt, sɛɾɪŋ əsaɪɾ əɹ peɪpɝz.

"Excellent," Egwene said. Gawyn nodded, but he was troubled. Such a useful thing, that ball of emotions caused by the bond. If she'd known earlier the depth of his devotion to her, she'd have bonded him weeks ago. "What?" Egwene asked, setting aside her papers.

"eɪbɑɹə," hi sɛd. "hi hæzən əɡɹid tə mit wɪð ju."

"Aybara," he said. "He hasn't agreed to meet with you."

"ɪleɪn sɛɾ i maɪt bi dɪfəkəlt."

"Elayne said he might be difficult."

"aɪ θɪŋk hiz gɑnə teɪk ælθɹz saɪd," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "ju kən si ɪɾ ɪn ðə weɪ hi sɛɾ ʌp kæmp, əpɑɹt fɹəm ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls. hi sɛn mɛsənʒɝz ɪmiɾiətli tə ði il ən tə ðə tɛɹənz. hiz ɡɑɾ ə ɡʊɾ ɑɹmi, ɛɡwin. ə hjudʒ wʌn. wɪð waɪtkloʊks ɪn ɪt."

"I think he's going to take al'Thor's side," Gawyn said. "You can see it in the way he set up camp, apart from everyone else. He sent messengers immediately to the Aiel and to the Tairens. He's got a good army, Egwene. A huge one. With Whitecloaks in it."

"ðæt dʌzn saʊn laɪkli tə meɪk ɪm saɪd wɪð ɹænd," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"That doesn't sound likely to make him side with Rand," Egwene said.

"dʌzn sim laɪk ɪt meɪks ɪm laɪkli tə saɪd wɪð əs iðɝ," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "ɛɡwin . . . ɡɑləd lidz ðə waɪtkloʊks."

"Doesn't seem like it makes him likely to side with us either," Gawyn said. "Egwene . . . Galad leads the Whitecloaks."

"jɔɹ bɹʌðɝ?"

"Your brother?"

"jɛs." ɡɔɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ðɪs mɛni ɑɹmiz, ðɪs mɛni lɔɪəltiz, ɔl ɹʌbɪŋ əɡɛnst wʌn ənʌðɝ. eɪbɑɹə ən ɪz fɔɹs kəd bi ə spɑɹk ðət sɛnz əs ɔl ʌp laɪk ə faɪɝwɝk."

"Yes." Gawyn shook his head. "This many armies, this many loyalties, all rubbing against one another. Aybara and his force could be a spark that sends us all up like a firework."

"ɪt wɪl bi bɛɾɝ wən ɪleɪn sɛɾəlz ɪn," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"It will be better when Elayne settles in," Egwene said.

"ɛɡwin, wʌɾ ɪf ælθɹ ɪzən kʌmɪŋ? wʌɾ ɪf i dɪd ðɪs tə dɪstʃɹækt ɛvɹiwʌn fɹəm wʌtɛvɝ ɛls hiz duɪŋ?"

"Egwene, what if al'Thor isn't coming? What if he did this to distract everyone from whatever else he's doing?"

"waɪ wəɾ i də ðæt?" ɛɡwin sɛd. "hiz ɔlɹɛɾi pɹuvən ðəɾ i kən əvɔɪd biɪŋ faʊnd, ɪf i wɑns tə." ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ɡɔɪn, hi noʊz i ʃʊdn bɹeɪk ðoʊz silz. ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm dʌz, ət list. pɝhæps ðæts waɪ hi toʊl mi - soʊ aɪ kəd ɡæðɝ ɹɪzɪstəns, soʊ aɪ kəd tɔk ɪm aʊɾ ʌv ɪt."

"Why would he do that?" Egwene said. "He's already proven that he can avoid being found, if he wants to." She shook her head. "Gawyn, he knows he shouldn't break those seals. A part of him does, at least. Perhaps that's why he told me - so I could gather resistance, so I could talk him out of it."

ɡɔɪn nɑɾəd. noʊ fɝðɝ kəmpleɪn əɹ ɑɹɡjəmənt. ɪt wɑz ə wʌndɝ haʊ hid tʃeɪnʒd. hi wɑz əz ɪntɛns əz ɛvɝ, jɛt lɛs əbɹeɪsɪv. ɛvɝ sɪns ðət naɪt wɪð ði əsæsənz, hi hæd stɑɹɾəd duɪŋ əz ʃi æskt. nɑɾ əz ə sɝvənt. əz ə pɑɹtnɝ dɛɾəkeɪtəd tə siɪŋ əɹ wɪl dʌn.

Gawyn nodded. No further complaint or argument. It was a wonder how he'd changed. He was as intense as ever, yet less abrasive. Ever since that night with the assassins, he had started doing as she asked. Not as a servant. As a partner dedicated to seeing her will done.

ɪt wɑz ə wʌndɝfəl θɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ɔlsoʊ ɪmpɔɹɾənt, sɪns ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ sim dɪtɝmən tə oʊvɝtɝn ðɛɹ əɡɹimən tə lɛɾ əɹ teɪk tʃɑɹdʒ ə dilɪŋz wɪð ɹænd. ʃi lʊk daʊn əɾ əɹ stæk ə peɪpɝz, nɑɾ ə fju ʌv wɪtʃ wɝ lɛɾɝz ʌv "ædvaɪs" fɹəm sɪɾɝz.

It was a wonderful thing. It was also important, since the Hall of the Tower seemed determined to overturn their agreement to let her take charge of dealings with Rand. She looked down at her stack of papers, not a few of which were letters of "advice" from Sitters.

bʌt ðeɪ keɪm tə hɝ, ɹæðɝ ðən sɝkəmvɛntɪŋ hɝ. ðət wɑz ɡʊd, ən ʃi kʊdn ɪɡnɔɹ ðɛm.

But they came to her, rather than circumventing her. That was good, and she couldn't ignore them.

ʃi hæd tə meɪk əm kəntɪnju tə bɪliv ðət wɝkɪŋ wɪð əɹ wɑz fəɹ ðə bɛst. ət ðə seɪm taɪm, ʃi kʊdn lɛɾ əm əsum ðət ʃid bi bloʊn oʊvɝ baɪ ə fju ɡʊd ʃaʊts.

She had to make them continue to believe that working with her was for the best. At the same time, she couldn't let them assume that she'd be blown over by a few good shouts.

sətʃ ə dɛləkət bæləns. "wɛl, lɛts ɡoʊ mit jəɹ sɪstɝ, ðɛn."

Such a delicate balance. "Well, let's go meet your sister, then."

ɡɔɪn ɹoʊz, muvɪŋ smuðli. ðə θɹi ɹɪŋz i wɔɹ ɑn ə tʃeɪn ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk ɹæɾəld əz i muvd; ʃiɾ əv tə æsk ɪm əɡɛn wɛɹ hid ɡɑɾən ðoʊz. hi hæd bɪn ɑdli kloʊsəməðd əbaʊt ðɛm. hi hɛld oʊpən ðə tɛn flæps fəɹ hɝ, ən ʃi stɛpt aʊt.

Gawyn rose, moving smoothly. The three rings he wore on a chain around his neck rattled as he moved; she'd have to ask him again where he'd gotten those. He had been oddly closemouthed about them. He held open the tent flaps for her, and she stepped out.

aʊtsaɪd, ðə leɪt-æftɝnun sʌn wɑz hɪɾən baɪ ɡɹeɪ klaʊdz. bɹaɪnz soʊlʒɝz wɝk bɪzəli ɑn ə pælɪsɑd. hɪz ɑɹmi hæd swɛl dʊɹɪŋ ðə læs fju wiks, ən ðeɪ dɑməneɪɾəd ði istɝn saɪɾ ə ðə waɪd, fɔɹəst-ɹɪmd ɡɹæslæn ðət hæd wʌns bɪn noʊn əz mɛɹɪlɝ. ðə ɹuənz ə ðə taʊɝ fɔɹtʃɹəs ðət hæd stʊd hɪɹ wɝ stʃɹun əkɹɔs ðə nɔɹðɝn saɪɾ ə ðə fild, mɔs-kʌvɝd, nɪɹli hɪɾən baɪ tʃoʊkɪvaɪn.

Outside, the late-afternoon sun was hidden by gray clouds. Bryne's soldiers worked busily on a palisade. His army had swelled during the last few weeks, and they dominated the eastern side of the wide, forest-rimmed grassland that had once been known as Merrilor. The ruins of the tower fortress that had stood here were strewn across the northern side of the field, moss-covered, nearly hidden by chokevine.

ɛɡwinz tɛnt wɑz ɑn ə ɹaɪz, ən ʃi kəɾ oʊvɝlʊk ðə mɛni ɑɹmiz ɪnkæmp hɪɹ. "ɪz ðət wʌn nu?" ʃi æskt, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ə smɔlɝ fɔɹs ðət hæd teɪkən ʌp ə pəzɪʃən dʒʌs bɪloʊ ðə ɹuənz.

Egwene's tent was on a rise, and she could overlook the many armies encamped here. "Is that one new?" she asked, gesturing toward a smaller force that had taken up a position just below the ruins.

"ðeɪ keɪm ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "fɑɹmɝz, moʊsli. nɑt ɹɪli ə tʃɹu ɑɹmi; moʊs doʊn əv sɔɹdz. pɪtʃfɔɹks, wʊɾ æksiz, kɔɹɾɝstɑfs. aɪ əsum ælθɹ sɛn ðɛm. ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd wɑndɝɪŋ ɪn jɛstɝdeɪ."

"They came on their own," Gawyn said. "Farmers, mostly. Not really a true army; most don't have swords. Pitchforks, wood axes, quarterstaffs. I assume al'Thor sent them. They started wandering in yesterday."

"kjʊɹiəs," ɛɡwin sɛd. ðeɪ simd ə vɛɹid bʌntʃ, wɪð mɪsmætʃt tɛns ən lɪɾəl ʌndɝstændɪŋ ə haʊ tə sɛɾ ʌp ən ɑɹmi kæmp. bʌt ðəɹ dɪd sim tə bi səm faɪv əɹ tɛn θaʊzən ə ðɛm. "hæv səm skaʊts kip ən aɪ ɑn ðɛm."

"Curious," Egwene said. They seemed a varied bunch, with mismatched tents and little understanding of how to set up an army camp. But there did seem to be some five or ten thousand of them. "Have some scouts keep an eye on them."

ɡɔɪn nɑɾəd.

Gawyn nodded.

ɛɡwin tɝn ən noʊɾəd ə pɹəsɛʃən muvɪŋ θɹu sɛvɹəl ɡeɪtweɪz nɪɹbaɪ, sɛɾɪŋ ʌp kæmp.

Egwene turned and noted a procession moving through several gateways nearby, setting up camp.

ðə laɪən ʌv ændɝ flu haɪ əbʌv əm ən ðə soʊlʒɝz mɑɹtʃt ɪn ɔɹɾɝli ɹoʊz. ə pɹəsɛʃən ɪn ɹɛɾ ən waɪt hæd lɛft əm ən wɑz mɑɹtʃɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ɛɡwinz kæmp, ðə bænɝ ə ðə kwin flaɪɪŋ əbʌv ðɛm.

The Lion of Andor flew high above them and the soldiers marched in orderly rows. A procession in red and white had left them and was marching toward Egwene's camp, the banner of the Queen flying above them.

ɡɔɪn əkʌmpəniɾ ɛɡwin əkɹɔs ðə jɛloʊd ɡɹæs tə miɾ ɪleɪn. ði ændɔɝən kwin hæd sɝɾənli teɪkən əɹ taɪm. oʊnli wʌn deɪ əntɪl ðə taɪm spɛsəfaɪd baɪ ɹænd. stɪl, ʃi hæd kʌm, əz hæɾ ʌðɝz. il hæɾ əkʌmpənid dɑɹlɪn fɹəm tiɹ, ən əɹ pɝsweɪʒən hæd bɪn ɪnʌf tə bɹɪŋ ə lɑɹdʒ kəntɪnʒənt ʌv ɪliɑnɝz, hu kæmpt ɑn ðə wɛstɝn saɪɾ ə ðə ɡɹæs.

Gawyn accompanied Egwene across the yellowed grass to meet Elayne. The Andoran Queen had certainly taken her time. Only one day until the time specified by Rand. Still, she had come, as had others. Aiel had accompanied Darlin from Tear, and her persuasion had been enough to bring a large contingent of Illianers, who camped on the western side of the grass.

ðə kɛɹhinɪn wɝ ɪleɪnz naʊ, baɪ ɹɪpɔɹts, ən wɝ kʌmɪŋ θɹu wɪð ði ændɔɹənz ən ə lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝ ə mɛn fɹəm ðə bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hænd. ɛɡwin hæd sɛn ən ɔfɝ, ən ə wʊmən tə ɔfɝ tʃɹævlɪŋ, tə kɪŋ ɹɔdʒɹən ə mʊɹændi, bʌt ʃi wɑz ənsɝɾən ɪf i wəd kʌm. ivən wɪθaʊt hɪm, haʊɛvɝ, ə kənsɪɾɝəbəl nʌmbɝ ə ðə wɝlz neɪʃənz wɝ ɹɛpɹəzɛntəd hɪɹ, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli sɪns ðə flæɡz ʌv ɡildən ən min kəd bi sin əmʌŋ pɛɹɪnz ɑɹmiz. ʃi wəɾ əv tə kɑntæk ðɛɹ tu ɹulɝz ən si ɪf ʃi kəd sweɪ ðɛm tə hɝ weɪ ʌv θɪŋkɪŋ. bʌɾ ivən ɪf nɑt, ʃʊɹli wʌt ʃi hæd ɡæðɝd wəd bi ɪnʌf tə kənvɪns ɹænd tə tʃeɪnʒ ɪz plænz. laɪt sɛn ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf. ʃi dɪdnt wɑnə θɪŋk ʌv wʌt wəd hæpən ɪf i fɔɹst əɹ hænd.

The Cairhienin were Elayne's now, by reports, and were coming through with the Andorans and a large number of men from the Band of the Red Hand. Egwene had sent an offer, and a woman to offer Traveling, to King Roedran of Murandy, but she was uncertain if he would come. Even without him, however, a considerable number of the world's nations were represented here, particularly since the flags of Ghealdan and Mayene could be seen among Perrin's armies. She would have to contact their two rulers and see if she could sway them to her way of thinking. But even if not, surely what she had gathered would be enough to convince Rand to change his plans. Light send it was enough. She didn't want to think of what would happen if he forced her hand.

ʃi wɔk daʊn ðə pæθweɪ, nɑɾɪŋ bæk tə sɪstɝz u nɑɾəd ən æksɛptɪɾ u kɝtsid, soʊlʒɝz u səluɾəd ən sɝvəns u baʊd. ɹænd wəd -  "ɪt kæn bi," ɡɔɪn sɛd sʌɾənli, fɹizɪŋ ɪn pleɪs.

She walked down the pathway, nodding back to sisters who nodded and Accepted who curtsied, soldiers who saluted and servants who bowed. Rand would -  "It can't be," Gawyn said suddenly, freezing in place.

"ɡɔɪn?" ʃi sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "ɑɹ jə - "

"Gawyn?" she said, frowning. "Are you - "

hi tʊk ɔf əɾ ə ɹʌn əkɹɔs ðə wid-stʃɹun hɪl. ɛɡwin lʊkt æftɝ ɪm wɪð dɪsæɾɪsfækʃən.

He took off at a run across the weed-strewn hill. Egwene looked after him with dissatisfaction.

hi stɪl hæɾ ən ɪmpʌlsɪv stʃɹik. waɪ wɑz i soʊ ʌpsɛt, sʌɾənli? ɪt wɑznt wɝi; ʃi kəd fil ðæt.

He still had an impulsive streak. Why was he so upset, suddenly? It wasn't worry; she could feel that.

ɪt wɑz kənfjuʒən. ʃi heɪsən æftɝ ɪm wɪð əz mʌtʃ spiɾ əz dɪkɔɹəm wəɾ əlaʊ. ɪleɪnz ɛnvɔɪ hæd stɑpt ɪn ðə dɛd ɡɹæs.

It was confusion. She hastened after him with as much speed as decorum would allow. Elayne's envoy had stopped in the dead grass.

ɡɔɪn wɑz ɑn ɪz niz ðɛɹ, bɪfɔɹ sʌmwʌn. ən oʊldɝ wʊmən wɪð ɹɛd-ɡoʊl hɛɹ, stændɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ə smaɪlɪŋ ɪleɪn, hu stɪl sæɾ əɹ hɔɹs.

Gawyn was on his knees there, before someone. An older woman with red-gold hair, standing beside a smiling Elayne, who still sat her horse.

ɑ, ɛɡwin θɔt. hɝ spaɪz hæd dɪlɪvɝd wɝɾ ə ðɪs ɹumɝ dʒʌs læs naɪt, bʌt ʃid wɑntəd tə kənfɝm ɪt bɪfɔɹ spikɪŋ tə ɡɔɪn.

Ah, Egwene thought. Her spies had delivered word of this rumor just last night, but she'd wanted to confirm it before speaking to Gawyn.

mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkən lɪvd.

Morgase Trakand lived.

ɛɡwin stʊd bæk, fəɹ naʊ. wʌns ʃi stɛp fɔɹwɝd, ɪleɪn wəɾ əv tə kɪs əɹ ɹɪŋ ən ði ɪntaɪɝ pɹəsɛʃən wəd baʊ; ðət wəd spɔɪl ɡɔɪnz moʊmənt. əz ʃi weɪɾəd, ðə klaʊdz əbʌv ɡɹu θɪnɝ.

Egwene stood back, for now. Once she stepped forward, Elayne would have to kiss her ring and the entire procession would bow; that would spoil Gawyn's moment. As she waited, the clouds above grew thinner.

sʌɾənli ðeɪ splɪt, ðə dɑɹk θʌndɝhɛdz pʊlɪŋ bæk. ðə skaɪ bɪkeɪm ən oʊpən fild ə blu, ə dip, pjʊɹ ɪkspæns. ɪleɪnz aɪz oʊpənd waɪd, ən ʃi tɝn ɑn əɹ hɔɹs, lʊkɪŋ ət pɛɹɪnz sɛkʃən ə kæmp.

Suddenly they split, the dark thunderheads pulling back. The sky became an open field of blue, a deep, pure expanse. Elayne's eyes opened wide, and she turned on her horse, looking at Perrin's section of camp.

hiz kʌm, ðɛn, ɛɡwin θɔt. ən ðə kɑm ɪz hɪɹ. ðə bɹif moʊmən ə pis bɪfɔɹ ðə stɔɹm ðət dɪstʃɹɔɪz.

He's come, then, Egwene thought. And the calm is here. The brief moment of peace before the storm that destroys.

"ju ɡɪv ɪɾ ə tʃɹaɪ, əmɝɪn," ænʒɹəl sɛd, stændɪŋ wɪð ə smɔl ɡɹup ɪnsaɪɾ ə stæn ə tʃɹiz nɪɹ ðə bɔɹɾɝ ə ðə blæk taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz.

"You give it a try, Emarin," Androl said, standing with a small group inside a stand of trees near the border of the Black Tower grounds.

ðə steɪtli noʊbəlmən kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd, hoʊldɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ. wivz spɹæŋ ʌp ɝaʊn hɪm. hi wɑz ɹɪmɑɹkəbli skɪlfəl, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ɪz ʃɔɹt taɪm pɹæktəsɪŋ, ən ɛkspɝtli kɹæftɪd ðə wiv fəɹ ə ɡeɪtweɪ.

The stately nobleman concentrated, holding the One Power. Weaves sprang up around him. He was remarkably skillful, considering his short time practicing, and expertly crafted the weave for a gateway.

ɪnstɛɾ ʌv oʊpənɪŋ ə hoʊl ɪn ði ɛɹ, ðə wiv ənɹævəld ən vænɪʃt. əmɝɪn tɝn tə ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm, swɛt stʃɹimɪŋ daʊn ɪz feɪs. "fɔɹmɪŋ ðoʊz wivz sim hɑɹɾɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ," hi sɛd.

Instead of opening a hole in the air, the weave unraveled and vanished. Emarin turned to the rest of them, sweat streaming down his face. "Forming those weaves seemed harder than before," he said.

"waɪ woʊn ðeɪ wɝk?" ɛvɪn sɛd. ðə jʌŋ mænz juθfəl feɪs flʌʃt wɪð æŋɡɝ - əz ɪf ðə pɹɑbləm wɪð ɡeɪtweɪz wɑz ən ɪnsəlt.

"Why won't they work?" Evin said. The young man's youthful face flushed with anger - as if the problem with gateways was an insult.

ænʒɹəl ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ɑɹmz foʊldəd. ðə tʃɹiz ɹʌsəld, livz ʃɪvɝɪŋ, mɛni fɔlɪŋ tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. bɹaʊn, əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ɔɾəm. ðəɾ ənnɝv hɪm. hid spɛn səm taɪm wɝkɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊn dʊɹɪŋ ɪz dʒɝniz ɪn laɪf, ən hæɾ əkwaɪɝɾ ə fɑɹmɝz sɛns fəɹ ɹaɪɾ ən ɹɔŋ ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə lænd.

Androl shook his head, arms folded. The trees rustled, leaves shivering, many falling to the ground. Brown, as if it were autumn. That unnerved him. He'd spent some time working the ground during his journeys in life, and had acquired a farmer's sense for right and wrong regarding the land.

"ju tʃɹaɪ ɪɾ əɡɛn, ænʒɹəl," ɛvɪn sɛd. "jɔɹ ɔlweɪz soʊ ɡʊd wɪð ɡeɪtweɪz."

"You try it again, Androl," Evin said. "You're always so good with gateways."

hi ɡlænst ət ði ʌðɝ θɹi. kænlɝ wɑz ði ʌðɝ wʌn ðɛɹ; ði eɪdʒɪŋ ændɔɝən fɑɹmɝ wɔɹ ə dip fɹaʊn. ʌv kɔɹs, kænlɝ ɔfən skaʊld ət wʌn θɪŋ əɹ ənʌðɝ.

He glanced at the other three. Canler was the other one there; the aging Andoran farmer wore a deep frown. Of course, Canler often scowled at one thing or another.

ænʒɹəl kloʊzd ɪz aɪz, ɛmptiɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ʌv ɔl pæʃənz, ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ ðə vɔɪd. seɪɾɪn ʃoʊn ɪn ðɛɹ, laɪf ən paʊɝ. hi sizd ɪt, dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn. hi oʊpən ɪz aɪz tə ə wɝl ðət wɑz mɔɹ vaɪbɹənt. kəd dɛd plæns lʊk boʊθ sɪkli ən vaɪbɹən ət ðə seɪm taɪm? ə stʃɹeɪnʒ dʒʌkstəpəzɪʃən meɪd pɑsəbəl baɪ seɪɾɪn.

Androl closed his eyes, emptying himself of all passions, embracing the void. Saidin shone in there, life and Power. He seized it, drinking it in. He opened his eyes to a world that was more vibrant. Could dead plants look both sickly and vibrant at the same time? A strange juxtaposition made possible by saidin.

hi foʊkəst. meɪkɪŋ ɡeɪtweɪz keɪm soʊ mʌtʃ iziɝ tə hɪm ðən ʌðɝ wivz dɪd; hid nɛvɝ ʌndɝstʊd waɪ. ðoʊ hi kʊdn bɹeɪk ivən ə smɔl ɹɑk əpɑɹt baɪ tʃænəlɪŋ, hi kəd meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə wæɡən tə dʒɹaɪv θɹu. lɑɡən hæd kɔld ɪɾ ɪmpɹɛsɪv; teɪm hæd kɔld ɪɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl.

He focused. Making gateways came so much easier to him than other weaves did; he'd never understood why. Though he couldn't break even a small rock apart by channeling, he could make a gateway large enough for a wagon to drive through. Logain had called it impressive; Taim had called it impossible.

ðɪs taɪm, ænʒɹəl pʊʃt ɔl ə ðə paʊɝ i hæɾ ɪndə hɪz wiv. hi ʌndɝstʊd ɡeɪtweɪz. ðeɪ meɪd sɛns. meɪbi ɪt wɑz ði ɪneɪt fɑndnəs i hæd fəɹ tʃɹævlɪŋ, fəɹ dɪskʌvɝɪŋ nu pleɪsəz ən nu ɑɹts.

This time, Androl pushed all of the Power he had into his weave. He understood gateways. They made sense. Maybe it was the innate fondness he had for traveling, for discovering new places and new arts.

ðə wivz keɪm təɡɛðɝ. hi dɪdnt noʊɾəs ɛni ʌv ðə dɪfəkəlti ðəɾ əmɝɪn hæd mɛnʃənd.

The weaves came together. He didn't notice any of the difficulty that Emarin had mentioned.

haʊɛvɝ, wən ðə fəmɪljɝ slæʃ ə laɪt ʃəɾ əv kʌm, ðə wiv bɪɡæn tə ənɹævəl ɪnstɛd.

However, when the familiar slash of light should have come, the weave began to unravel instead.

ænʒɹəl tʃɹaɪd tə hoʊl tə ɪt pʊlɪŋ ɪt təɡɛðɝ. fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ɪt lʊk laɪk ðət wəd wɝk. ðən ðə θɹɛdz slɪd fɹəm ɪz ɡɹɪp, ɪvæpɝeɪɾɪŋ. ðə ɡeɪtweɪ nɛvɝ fɔɹmd.

Androl tried to hold to it pulling it together. For a moment, it looked like that would work. Then the threads slid from his grip, evaporating. The gateway never formed.

"ði ʌðɝ wivz aɪv tʃɹaɪɾ ɔl wɝk," ɛvɪn sɛd, meɪkɪŋ ə ɡloʊb ə laɪt. "ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm."

"The other weaves I've tried all work," Evin said, making a globe of light. "Every one of them."

"oʊnli ɡeɪtweɪz," kænlɝ sɛd wɪð ə ɡɹʌnt.

"Only gateways," Canler said with a grunt.

"ɪts laɪk . . ." əmɝɪn sɛd. "ɪts əz ɪf sʌmθɪŋ wɑns tə kip əs hɪɹ. ɪn ðə blæk taʊɝ."

"It's like . . ." Emarin said. "It's as if something wants to keep us here. In the Black Tower."

"tʃɹaɪ ðɛm ɪn ʌðɝ pleɪsəz ɪnsaɪd ðə pɝɪməɾɝ," ænʒɹəl sɛd. "bʌt tʃɹaɪ nɑt tə lɛɾ ɛni ʌv teɪmz lɔɪəlɪsts si wʌt jəɹ duɪŋ. pɹitɛn tə bi sɝveɪɪŋ, əz teɪm ɔɹɾɝd."

"Try them in other places inside the perimeter," Androl said. "But try not to let any of Taim's loyalists see what you're doing. Pretend to be surveying, as Taim ordered."

ðə mɛn nɑɾəd, ðə θɹi ʌv əm haɪkɪŋ təwɔɹd ði ist. ænʒɹəl lɛf ðə ɡleɪd. nɔɹli wɑz stændɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə ɹoʊd, lʊkɪŋ əbaʊt fəɹ hɪm. ðə ʃɔɹt, θɪk-weɪstɪd kɛɹhinɪn mæn weɪvd ən əpɹoʊtʃt. ænʒɹəl mɛɾ ɪm hæfweɪ. nɔɹli hæɾ ən oʊpən, ɪnvaɪɾɪŋ smaɪl. noʊbɑdi ɛvɝ səspɛktəɾ ɪm ə spaɪɪŋ ɑn ðɛm, sʌmθɪŋ ænʒɹəl hæd pʊt tə ɡʊd jus.

The men nodded, the three of them hiking toward the east. Androl left the glade. Norley was standing beside the road, looking about for him. The short, thick-waisted Cairhienin man waved and approached. Androl met him halfway. Norley had an open, inviting smile. Nobody ever suspected him of spying on them, something Androl had put to good use.

"ju spoʊk wɪð mɛzɝ?" ænʒɹəl æskt.

"You spoke with Mezar?" Androl asked.

"ʃʊɹ dɪd," nɔɹli ɹɪplaɪd. "ʃɛɹɾ ə lʌntʃ wɪð hɪm." nɔɹli weɪvd ət mɪʃɹeɪl əz ðeɪ pæst ɪm supɝvaɪzɪŋ ə ɡɹup ə soʊlʒɝz pɹæktəsɪŋ ðɛɹ wivz. ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd mæn tɝn əweɪ dɪsmɪsɪvli.

"Sure did," Norley replied. "Shared a lunch with him." Norley waved at Mishraile as they passed him supervising a group of soldiers practicing their weaves. The golden-haired man turned away dismissively.

"ænd?" ænʒɹəl æskt, tɛns.

"And?" Androl asked, tense.

"ɪts nɑt ɹɪli mɛzɝ," nɔɹli sɛd. "oʊ, ɪts mɛzɝz feɪs, ɹaɪɾ ɪnʌf. bʌɾ ɪts nɑt hɪm. aɪ kən si ɪɾ ɪn ɪz aɪz. tʃɹʌbəl ɪz, wʌtɛvɝ ðə θɪŋ ɪz, ɪts mɛzɝz mɛmɹiz. tɔks ɹaɪt laɪk hɪm. bʌt ðə smaɪl ɪz ɹɔŋ. ɔl ɹɔŋ."

"It's not really Mezar," Norley said. "Oh, it has Mezar's face, right enough. But it's not him. I can see it in his eyes. Trouble is, whatever the thing is, it has Mezar's memories. Talks right like him. But the smile is wrong. All wrong."

ænʒɹəl ʃɪvɝd. "ɪɾ əz tə bi hɪm, nɔɹli."

Androl shivered. "It has to be him, Norley."

"ɪɾ eɪnt. aɪ pɹɑməs jə ðæt."

"It ain't. I promise you that."

"bʌt - "

"But - "

"ɪt dʒʌst eɪnt" ðə staʊt mæn sɛd.

"It just ain't" the stout man said.

ænʒɹəl tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. wən mɛzɝ hæd ɹɪtɝn ə fju deɪz bæk - ɪkspleɪnɪŋ ðət lɑɡən wɑz wɛl ən ðəɾ ɔl wəd sun bi ɹizɑlvd wɪð teɪm - ænʒɹəl hæd bɪɡʌn tə hoʊp ðət ðəɹ wɑz ə weɪ aʊɾ ə ðɪs mɛs. bʌt sʌmθɪŋ hæd simd ɔf əbaʊt ðə mæn. bɪɑn ðæt, ðə l hæd meɪɾ ə ɡɹeɪt ʃoʊ ʌv æksɛptɪŋ mɛzɝ əz ə fʊl æʃəmən; ðə dʒɹæɡən hæd ɹeɪz hɪm. ən naʊ mɛzɝ - wʌns fɪɹsli lɔɪəl tə lɑɡən -  wɑz spɛndɪŋ ɪz taɪm wɪð koʊɾɝən ən teɪmz ʌðɝ lækiz.

Androl took a deep breath. When Mezar had returned a few days back - explaining that Logain was well and that all would soon be resolved with Taim - Androl had begun to hope that there was a way out of this mess. But something had seemed off about the man. Beyond that, the M'Hael had made a great show of accepting Mezar as a full Ashaman; the Dragon had raised him. And now Mezar - once fiercely loyal to Logain -  was spending his time with Coteren and Taim's other lackeys.

"ðɪs ɪz ɡɛɾɪŋ bæd, ænʒɹəl," nɔɹli sɛd sɔfli, smaɪlɪŋ ən weɪvɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ənʌðɝ ɡɹup ə pɹæktəsɪŋ mɛn. "aɪd seɪ ɪts taɪm fəɹ əs tə liv hɪɹ, wɛðɝ əɹ nɑɾ ɪts əɡɛnst ɔɹɾɝz."

"This is getting bad, Androl," Norley said softly, smiling and waving toward another group of practicing men. "I'd say it's time for us to leave here, whether or not it's against orders."

"wid nɛvɝ ɡɛt pæs ðoʊz ɡɑɹd poʊsts," ænʒɹəl sɛd. "teɪm woʊn ivən lɛt ðoʊz ɛɛs sədaɪ liv; jə hɝd ðə fɪt ðət plʌmp wʌn θɹu ət ðə ɡeɪts ði ʌðɝ deɪ. teɪm dʌbəlz ðə ɡɑɹɾ ət naɪt, ən ɡeɪtweɪz doʊnt wɝk."

"We'd never get past those guard posts," Androl said. "Taim won't even let those Aes Sedai leave; you heard the fit that plump one threw at the gates the other day. Taim doubles the guard at night, and gateways don't work."

"wɛl, wɪv tə də sʌmθɪŋ, doʊnt wi? aɪ min . . . wʌɾ ɪf ðeɪv ɡɑt lɑɡən? wʌt ðɛn?"

"Well, we have to do something, don't we? I mean . . . what if they've got Logain? What then?"

"aɪ . . ." zi doʊnt noʊ. "ɡoʊ tɔk tə ði ʌðɝz u ɑɹ lɔɪəl tə lɑɡən. aɪm gɑnə muv əs tə ə ʃɛɹd bæɹək. ðɛm ən ðɛɹ fæmliz. wɪl tɛl ðə l ðət wi wɑnə ɡɪv mɔɹ speɪs fəɹ ɪz nu ɹəkɹuts. ðən wɪl poʊst ə ɡɑɹɾ ət naɪts."

"I . . ." Z don't know. "Go talk to the others who are loyal to Logain. I'm going to move us to a shared barrack. Them and their families. We'll tell the M'Hael that we want to give more space for his new recruits. Then we'll post a guard at nights."

"ðæts gɑnə bi ə lɪɾəl ɑbviəs."

"That's going to be a little obvious."

"ðə dɪvɪʒən ɪz ɔlɹɛɾi ɑbviəs," ænʒɹəl sɛd. "ɡoʊ də ɪt."

"The division is already obvious," Androl said. "Go do it."

"ʃʊɹ θɪŋ. bʌt wʌɾ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ tə du?"

"Sure thing. But what are you going to do?"

ænʒɹəl tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "aɪm gɑnə faɪn əs səm ælaɪz."

Androl took a deep breath. "I'm going to find us some allies."

nɔɹli muvd ɔf tə ðə lɛft, bʌɾ ænʒɹəl kəntɪnjud daʊn ðə pæθ, θɹu ðə vɪlədʒ. ɪt sim ðət fjuɝ ən fjuɝ pipəl wɝ ʃoʊɪŋ ɪm ɹɪspɛk ðiz deɪz. iðɝ ðeɪ wɝ əfɹeɪd tə də soʊ, əɹ ðeɪd θɹoʊn ðɛɹ lɑɾ ɪn wɪð teɪm.

Norley moved off to the left, but Androl continued down the path, through the village. It seemed that fewer and fewer people were showing him respect these days. Either they were afraid to do so, or they'd thrown their lot in with Taim.

pæks ə blæk-koʊɾəd mæn stʊd, wɪð ɑɹmz foʊldəd, wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm. ænʒɹəl tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə fil ə tʃɪl.

Packs of black-coated man stood, with arms folded, watching him. Androl tried not to feel a chill.

əz i wɔkt, hi noʊɾəd mɛzɝ - hɛɹ ɡɹeɪɪŋ ət ðə saɪdz, skɪn ə dəmɑni kɑpɝ - stændɪŋ wɪð ə ɡɹup ə lækiz. ðə mæn smaɪld ət hɪm. mɛzɝ hædn ɛvɝ bɪn wʌn u smaɪld izəli. ænʒɹəl nɑɾəd tə hɪm, miɾɪŋ ɪz aɪz.

As he walked, he noted Mezar - hair graying at the sides, skin a Domani copper - standing with a group of lackeys. The man smiled at him. Mezar hadn't ever been one who smiled easily. Androl nodded to him, meeting his eyes.

ən i sɔ wʌt nɔɹli hæd sin. sʌmθɪŋ wɑz dipli ɹɔŋ, sʌmθɪŋ nɑt-kwaɪt-əlaɪv ɪnsaɪd ðoʊz aɪz. ðɪs dɪdn sim tə bi ə mæn, bʌɾ ə pɛɹəɾi ʌv wʌn. ə ʃædoʊ stʌft ɪnsaɪd hjumən skɪn.

And he saw what Norley had seen. Something was deeply wrong, something not-quite-alive inside those eyes. This didn't seem to be a man, but a parody of one. A shadow stuffed inside human skin.

laɪt hɛlp əs ɔl, ænʒɹəl θɔt, hɝiɪŋ baɪ. hi meɪɾ ɪz weɪ tə ðə sʌðɝn saɪɾ ə ðə vɪlədʒ, tə ə ɡɹup ə smɔl hʌts wɪð blitʃt waɪt wʊd wɔlz ən θætʃt ɹufs ðət niɾəd tə bi ɹipleɪst.

Light help us all, Androl thought, hurrying by. He made his way to the southern side of the village, to a group of small huts with bleached white wood walls and thatched roofs that needed to be replaced.

ænʒɹəl hɛzɪteɪɾɪd aʊtsaɪd. wʌt wɑz i duɪŋ? ðɪs wɑz wɛɹ ðə wɪmən ə ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ wɝ steɪɪŋ. ðeɪ sɛd ðeɪd kʌm tə bɑn ði æʃəmən, bʌt ðeɪ hædn dʌn ɪt soʊ fɑɹ. ðət wɑz ɑbviəsli səm kaɪndə ɹuz. pɝhæps ðeɪd kʌm hɪɹ tə tʃɹaɪ tə faɪn ə weɪ tə dʒɛntəl ði ɪntaɪɝ lɑt.

Androl hesitated outside. What was he doing? This was where the women of the Red Ajah were staying. They said they'd come to bond the Ashaman, but they hadn't done it so far. That was obviously some kind of ruse. Perhaps they'd come here to try to find a way to gentle the entire lot.

bʌɾ ɪf ðət wɝ ðə keɪs, ðən ət list i kəd kaʊn ɑn əm nɑt saɪɾɪŋ wɪð teɪm. wən jə stɛɹd daʊn ðə ɡʌləɾ ʌv ə laɪənfɪʃ, ə paɪɹəts bɹɪɡ dɪdn sim soʊ bæd. ænʒɹəl hæd hɝd ðə seɪɪŋ wʌns waɪl wɝkɪŋ ə fɪʃɝz boʊɾ ɪn ðə saʊθ.

But if that were the case, then at least he could count on them not siding with Taim. When you stared down the gullet of a lionfish, a pirate's brig didn't seem so bad. Androl had heard the saying once while working a fisher's boat in the south.

teɪkɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, hi nɑkt. ðə plʌmp ɹɛɾ ænsɝd ðə dɔɹ. ʃi hæd ði eɪdʒləs feɪs ʌv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ - nɑt jʌŋ, ɹɪli, bʌɾ ɔlsoʊ nɑɾ oʊld. ʃi aɪd hɪm.

Taking a deep breath, he knocked. The plump Red answered the door. She had the ageless face of an Aes Sedai - not young, really, but also not old. She eyed him.

"aɪ hɪɹ jə wɑnə liv ðə blæk taʊɝ," ænʒɹəl sɛd, hoʊpɪŋ i wɑz duɪŋ ðə ɹaɪt θɪŋ.

"I hear you want to leave the Black Tower," Androl said, hoping he was doing the right thing.

"hæz jəɹ l tʃeɪnʒd ɪz maɪnd?" ʃi æskt, saʊndɪŋ hoʊpfəl. ʃi æktʃəli  smaɪld. ə ɹɛɹ ækʃən fəɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ.

"Has your M'Hael changed his mind?" she asked, sounding hopeful. She actually smiled. A rare action for an Aes Sedai.

"noʊ," ænʒɹəl sɛd, "soʊ fɑɹ əz aɪ noʊ, hi stɪl fɝbɪdz jə tə liv."

"No," Androl said, "so far as I know, he still forbids you to leave."

ʃi fɹaʊnd. "ðɛn - "

She frowned. "Then - "

ænʒɹəl loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs. "jɔɹ nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn u wəd laɪk tə liv ðɪs pleɪs, ɛɛs sədaɪ."

Androl lowered his voice. "You're not the only one who would like to leave this place, Aes Sedai."

ʃi lʊkt ət hɪm, hɝ feɪs bɪkʌmɪŋ pɝfəkli kɑm. ʃi dʌzn tʃɹʌs mi, hi θɔt. ɑd, haʊ ðə mɪɹ læk ʌv ɪmoʊʃən kəɾ ɪtsɛlf kənveɪ minɪŋ.

She looked at him, her face becoming perfectly calm. She doesn't trust me, he thought. Odd, how the mere lack of emotion could itself convey meaning.

dɛspɹɪt, hi tʊk ə stɛp fɔɹwɝd, leɪɪŋ ə hæn ɑn ðə fɹeɪm ə ðə dɔɹ. "sʌmθɪŋz ɹɔŋ ɪn ðɪs pleɪs. sʌmθɪŋ wɝs ðən jə ʌndɝstænd. wʌns, lɔŋ əɡoʊ, mɛn ən wɪmən u wɝk ðə paʊɝ stʃɹoʊv təɡɛðɝ. ðeɪ wɝ stʃɹɔŋɝ fəɹ ɪt. pliz. hɪɹ mi aʊt."

Desperate, he took a step forward, laying a hand on the frame of the door. "Something's wrong in this place. Something worse than you understand. Once, long ago, men and women who worked the Power strove together. They were stronger for it. Please. Hear me out."

ʃi stʊd fəɹ ə moʊmən lɔŋɡɝ, ðən pʊl ðə dɔɹ oʊpən. "kʌm ɪn, kwɪkli. tɑɹnə - ðə wʊmən aɪ ʃɛɹ ðɪs hʌt wɪð - ɪz əweɪ. wi mʌs bi dʌn bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹɪtɝnz."

She stood for a moment longer, then pulled the door open. "Come in, quickly. Tarna - the woman I share this hut with - is away. We must be done before she returns."

ænʒɹəl stɛpt ʌp ɪndə ðə bɪldɪŋ. hi dɪdnt noʊ wɛðɝ i wɑz stɛpɪŋ ɪndə ðə paɪɹəts bɹɪɡ əɹ ðə laɪənfɪʃəz maʊθ. bʌɾ ɪt wəɾ əv tə du.

Androl stepped up into the building. He didn't know whether he was stepping into the pirate's brig or the lionfish's mouth. But it would have to do.


tʃæptɝ fɪftisɛvən


CHAPTER 57

eɪ ɹæbət fəɹ sʌpɝ


A Rabbit for Supper

eɪ ɹæbət fəɹ sʌpɝ mæt hɪɾ ənivən ɡɹaʊnd, blaɪndɪd baɪ ðə flæʃ ə laɪt. kɝsɪŋ, hi juz ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ tə stɛɾi hɪmsɛlf ɑn ðə spɹɪŋi ɝθ. hi smɛl foʊlɪdʒ, dɝɾ ən ɹɑɾɪŋ wʊd. ɪnsɛks bʌzd ɪn ðə ʃeɪd.

A Rabbit for Supper Mat hit uneven ground, blinded by the flash of light. Cursing, he used the ashandarei to steady himself on the springy earth. He smelled foliage, dirt and rotting wood. Insects buzzed in the shade.

ðə waɪtnəs feɪɾəd, ən i faʊn hɪmsɛlf stændɪŋ aʊtsaɪd ðə taʊɝ ʌv ɡɛndʒeɪaɪ. hi hæd hæf- ɪkspɛktəd tə ɹiəpɪɹ ɪn ɹɪɾiən. ɪt sim ðət ðə spɪɹ ɹɪtɝn ɪm tə hɪz wɝld ɪn ðə pleɪs wɛɹ i hæɾ ɛntɝd. tɑm sæɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, pɹɑpɪŋ ʌp mɔɪɹeɪn, hu wɑz blɪŋkɪŋ ən lʊkɪŋ əbaʊt hɝ.

The whiteness faded, and he found himself standing outside the Tower of Ghenjei. He had half- expected to reappear in Rhuidean. It seemed that the spear returned him to his world in the place where he had entered. Thom sat on the ground, propping up Moiraine, who was blinking and looking about her.

mæt spʌn ɑn ðə taʊɝ ən pɔɪntəɾ ʌpwɝd. "aɪ noʊ jəɹ wɑtʃɪŋ!" hi sɛd, θɹɪld. hi hæd meɪɾ ɪt. hi hæd blʌɾi meɪɾ ɪɾ aʊɾ əlaɪv! "aɪ bit ju, jə kɹʌsti but-livɪŋz! aɪ, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən, sɝvaɪv jəɹ tʃɹæps! hɑ!" hi ɹeɪz ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd. "æn jə ɡeɪv mi ðə weɪ aʊt!

Mat spun on the tower and pointed upward. "I know you're watching!" he said, thrilled. He had made it. He had bloody made it out alive! "I beat you, you crusty boot-leavings! I, Matrim Cauthon, survived your traps! Ha!" He raised the ashandarei over his head. "And you gave me the way out!

tʃu ɑn ðət bɪɾɝnəs fəɹ lʌntʃ, jə fleɪmɪŋ, bɝnɪŋ, mɪsbəɡɑɾən laɪɝz!"

Chew on that bitterness for lunch, you flaming, burning, misbegotten liars!"

mæt bimd, slæmɪŋ ðə spɪɹ daʊn bʌt fɝst ɑntu ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪsaɪd hɪm. hi nɑɾəd. noʊbɑdi ɡɑt ðə bɛɾɝ ə meɪtʃɹim kɔθən. ðeɪ hæd laɪd tə hɪm, toʊld ɪm veɪɡ pɹɑfəsiz ən θɹɛɾənd hɪm, ən ðən ðeɪ hæd hæŋ hɪm. bʌt mæt keɪm aʊɾ əhɛɾ ɪn ði ɛnd.

Mat beamed, slamming the spear down butt first onto the ground beside him. He nodded. Nobody got the better of Matrim Cauthon. They had lied to him, told him vague prophecies and threatened him, and then they had hanged him. But Mat came out ahead in the end.

"hu wɑz ði ʌðɝ?" mɔɪɹeɪnz sɑf vɔɪs æsk fɹəm bɪhaɪnd. "ðə wʌn aɪ sɔ, bʌt dɪd nɑt noʊ?"

"Who was the other?" Moiraine's soft voice asked from behind. "The one I saw, but did not know?"

"hi dɪdn meɪk ɪɾ aʊt," tɑm sɛd sɑmbɝli.

"He didn't make it out," Thom said somberly.

ðət dæmpən mæts spɪɹəts. ðɛɹ vɪktɝi hæd kʌm əɾ ə pɹaɪs, ə tɛɹəbəl wʌn. mæt bɪn tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð ə lɛdʒən ɔl ðɪs taɪm?

That dampened Mat's spirits. Their victory had come at a price, a terrible one. Mat been traveling with a legend all this time?

"hi wɑz ə fɹɛnd," θɔɹn sɛd sɔfli.

"He was a friend," Thorn said softly.

"hi wɑz ə ɡɹeɪt mæn," mæt sɛd, tɝnɪŋ ən pʊlɪŋ ɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ fɹəm wɛɹ i hæd plæntəɾ ɪɾ ɪn ðə dɝt. "wɛn jə ɹaɪt ðə bæləɾ ʌv ɔl ðɪs, tɑm, meɪk ʃʊɹ jə pɔɪn aʊt ðəɾ i wɑz ðə hɪɹoʊ."

"He was a great man," Mat said, turning and pulling his ashandarei from where he had planted it in the dirt. "When you write the ballad of all this, Thom, make sure you point out that he was the hero."

θɔɹn ɡlænst ət mæt, ðən nɑɾəd noʊɪŋli. "ðə wɝld wɪl wɑnə noʊ wʌt hæpən tə ðət mæn." laɪt. əz mæt θɔɾ əbaʊɾ ɪt tɑm hæd nɑt bɪn əɾ ɔl sɝpɹaɪz tə hɪɹ noʊl wɑz dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ. hi hæd noʊn. wən hæɾ i fɪɡjɝɾ ɪɾ aʊt? waɪ hæɾ i sɛd nʌθɪŋ tə mæt? səm fɹɛn tɑm wɑz.

Thorn glanced at Mat, then nodded knowingly. "The world will want to know what happened to that man." Light. As Mat thought about it Thom had not been at all surprised to hear Noal was Jain Farstrider. He had known. When had he figured it out? Why had he said nothing to Mat? Some friend Thom was.

mæt dʒʌst ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "wɛl, wɝ aʊt, wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ. bʌt tɑm, nɛks taɪm aɪ wɑnə də ðə blʌɾi nɪɡoʊʃieɪɾɪŋ, snik ʌp bɪhaɪn ən hɪt mi ɑn ðə hɛd wɪð sʌmθɪŋ lɑɹdʒ, hɛvi ən blʌnt.

Mat just shook his head. "Well, we're out, one way or another. But Thom, next time I want to do the bloody negotiating, sneak up behind and hit me on the head with something large, heavy and blunt.

ðən teɪk oʊvɝ."

Then take over."

"jɔɹ ɹɪkwɛst ɪz noʊɾəd."

"Your request is noted."

"lɛts muv ɑn ə lɪɾəl weɪ. aɪ doʊn laɪk ðət blʌɾi taʊɝ lumɪŋ oʊvɝ mi."

"Let's move on a little way. I don't like that bloody tower looming over me."

"jɛs," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "ju kəd seɪ ðət ðeɪ fiɾ ɔf ɪmoʊʃən. ðoʊ aɪ wʊdn kɔl ɪt 'fiɾɪŋ ɔf soʊ mʌtʃ əz 'dɪlaɪɾɪŋ ɪn' ɪmoʊʃən. ðeɪ doʊnt niɾ ɪt tə sɝvaɪv, bʌɾ ɪt plizɪz əm ɡɹeɪtli."

"Yes," Moiraine said, "you could say that they feed off emotion. Though I wouldn't call it 'feeding off so much as 'delighting in' emotion. They don't need it to survive, but it pleases them greatly."

ðeɪ sæɾ ɪn ə wʊɾɪd hɑloʊ ə ʃɔɹt wɔk fɹəm ðə taʊɝ, nɛks tə ðə mɛdoʊ bɪsaɪd ði ɑɹɪnɛl. ðə θɪk tʃɹi kænəpi kul ði ɛɹ ən əbskjʊɹd ðɛɹ vju ʌv ðə taʊɝ.

They sat in a wooded hollow a short walk from the tower, next to the meadow beside the Arinelle. The thick tree canopy cooled the air and obscured their view of the tower.

mæt sæɾ ɑn ə smɔl, mɔsi boʊldɝ əz tɑm meɪɾ ə faɪɝ. hi hæɾ ə fju ʌv ɑlʌdʒɹəz stʃɹaɪkɝz ɪn ɪz pɑkəɾ əz wɛl əz səm pækɪts ə ti, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə wɔɹm ðə wɔɾɝ ɪn.

Mat sat on a small, mossy boulder as Thom made a fire. He had a few of Aludra's strikers in his pocket as well as some packets of tea, though there was nothing to warm the water in.

mɔɪɹeɪn sæɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, stɪl ɹæpt ɪn θɔɹnz kloʊk, linɪŋ bæk əɡɛnst ə fɔlən lɔɡ. ʃi hɛl ðə kloʊk kloʊz fɹəm ði ɪnsaɪd, lɛɾɪŋ ɪɾ ɪnvɛləp əɹ kəmplitli, seɪv fəɹ əɹ feɪs ən ðoʊz dɑɹk kɝlz. ʃi lʊk mɔɹ ə wʊmən ðən mæt ɹɪmɛmbɝd - ɪn ɪz mɛmɹiz, ʃi wɑz laɪk ə stætʃu.

Moiraine sat on the ground, still wrapped in Thorn's cloak, leaning back against a fallen log. She held the cloak closed from the inside, letting it envelop her completely, save for her face and those dark curls. She looked more a woman than Mat remembered - in his memories, she was like a statue.

ɔlweɪz ɪkspɹɛʃənləs, feɪs laɪk pɑlɪʃt stoʊn, aɪz laɪk dɑɹk bɹaʊn toʊpæz.

Always expressionless, face like polished stone, eyes like dark brown topaz.

naʊ ʃi sæt wɪð peɪl skɪn, flʌʃt tʃiks, hɛɹ kɝld ən fɔlɪŋ nætʃɹəli ɝaʊn əɹ feɪs. ʃi wɑz fɛtʃɪŋ, seɪv fəɹ ðəɾ eɪdʒləs ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪs. jɛt ðət feɪs ʃoʊd fɑɹ mɔɹ ɪmoʊʃən ðən mæt ɹɪmɛmbɝd, ə lʊk ə fɑndnəs wən ʃi ɡlænst ət tɑm, ə feɪnt ʃɪvɝ wən ʃi spoʊk ə hɝ taɪm ɪn ðə taʊɝ.

Now she sat with pale skin, flushed cheeks, hair curled and falling naturally around her face. She was fetching, save for that ageless Aes Sedai face. Yet that face showed far more emotion than Mat remembered, a look of fondness when she glanced at Thom, a faint shiver when she spoke of her time in the tower.

ʃi ɡlænst ət mæt, ən əɹ aɪz wɝ stɪl əpɹeɪzɪŋ. jɛs, ðɪs wɑz ðə seɪm mɔɪɹeɪn.

She glanced at Mat, and her eyes were still appraising. Yes, this was the same Moiraine.

hʌmbəld, kæs daʊn. ðət meɪɾ əɹ sim stʃɹɔŋɝ tə hɪm fəɹ səm ɹizən.

Humbled, cast down. That made her seem stronger to him for some reason.

θɔɹn blu əɾ ə hɛzɪɾənt fleɪm ðət kɝld ə lɑk ə smoʊk ɪndə ði ɛɹ bɪfɔɹ flɪkɝɪŋ aʊt. ðə wʊd wɑz pɹɑbli tu wɛt. θɔɹn kɝst.

Thorn blew at a hesitant flame that curled a lock of smoke into the air before flickering out. The wood was probably too wet. Thorn cursed.

"ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt, tɑm," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd sɔfli. "aɪ wɪl bi wɛl."

"It's all right, Thom," Moiraine said softly. "I will be well."

"aɪ woʊn əv jə kætʃɪŋ koʊl ðə moʊmənt wi fɹi jə fɹəm ðət pleɪs" tɑm sɛd. hi ɡɑɾ aʊɾ ə stʃɹaɪkɝ, bʌt sʌɾənli ðə wʊd spɑɹkt, ən ðən faɪɝ spʌɾɝd tə laɪf əz ɪt kənsum ðə tu-wɛt tɪndɝ.

"I won't have you catching cold the moment we free you from that place" Thom said. He got out a striker, but suddenly the wood sparked, and then fire sputtered to life as it consumed the too-wet tinder.

mæt ɡlænst ət mɔɪɹeɪn, hu hæɾ ə lʊk ə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs.

Mat glanced at Moiraine, who had a look of concentration on her face.

"oʊ," tɑm sɛd, ðən tʃʌkəld. "aɪd fɝɡɑɾən əbaʊt ðæt, nɪɹli. . . ."

"Oh," Thom said, then chuckled. "I'd forgotten about that, nearly. . . ."

"ɪts ɔl aɪ kən mænədʒ naʊ ɑn maɪ oʊn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ. laɪt, hæd mɔɪɹeɪn ɡɹɪməs bɪfɔɹ? ʃi bɪn tu haɪ-ænd-maɪɾi fəɹ ðæt, hæd ʃi nɑt? əɹ wɑz mæt ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ əɹ ɹɔŋ?

"It's all I can manage now on my own," Moiraine said, grimacing. Light, had Moiraine grimaced before? She been too high-and-mighty for that, had she not? Or was Mat remembering her wrong?

mɔɪɹeɪn. hi wɑz tɔkɪŋ tə fleɪmɪŋ ɑlwɹeɪnɛl ðoʊ hi hæd ɡɔn ɪndə ðə taʊɝ wɪð ðə dɪstɪŋk pɝpəs ə ɹɛskjuɪŋ hɝ, ɪt simd ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl ðəɾ i wɑz spikɪŋ wɪð hɝ. ɪt wɑz laɪk tɔkɪŋ tə . . .

Moiraine. He was talking to flaming Aloirainel Though he had gone into the tower with the distinct purpose of rescuing her, it seemed incredible that he was speaking with her. It was like talking to . . .

wɛl, laɪk tɔkɪŋ tə bɝdʒɪt sɪlvɝboʊ əɹ dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ. mæt smaɪld, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd. wʌɾ ə wɝl ðɪs wɑz, ən wʌɾ ə stʃɹeɪnʒ pleɪs i hæɾ ɪn ɪt.

Well, like talking to Birgitte Silverbow or Jain Farstrider. Mat smiled, shaking his head. What a world this was, and what a strange place he had in it.

"wʌt dɪd jə min baɪ ðæt, mɔɪɹeɪn?" tɑm æskt, nɝtʃɝɪŋ ðə faɪɝ wɪð səm stɪks. "ɪts ɔl jə kən mænədʒ?"

"What did you mean by that, Moiraine?" Thom asked, nurturing the fire with some sticks. "It's all you can manage?"

"ði æɛlfɪn ən ɛlfɪn," ʃi ɪkspleɪnd, vɔɪs kɑm. "ðeɪ seɪvɝ ən ɹɛlɪʃ paʊɝfəl ɪmoʊʃənz.

"The Aelfinn and Eelfinn," she explained, voice calm. "They savor and relish powerful emotions.

fəɹ səm ɹizən ði ɪfɛks ʌv ə tɑvɝən ɑɹ ivən mɔɹ ɪntɑksɪkeɪɾɪŋ tə ðɛm. ðəɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝ θɪŋz ðət ðeɪ ɛndʒɔɪ."

For some reason the effects of a ta'veren are even more intoxicating to them. There are other things that they enjoy."

tɑm ɡlænst ət hɝ, fɹaʊnɪŋ.

Thom glanced at her, frowning.

"maɪ paʊɝ, tɑm," ʃi ɪkspleɪnd. "aɪ kəd hɪɹ əm bɑɹkɪŋ ən hɪsɪŋ tə wʌn ənʌðɝ əz ðeɪ fɛɾ ɑn mi, boʊθ æɛlfɪn ən ɛlfɪn ɪn tɝn. ðeɪv nɑɾ ɔfən hæɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ðɛmsɛlvz, ɪt simz. waɪl dʒɹeɪnɪŋ maɪ əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl, ðeɪ wɝ fɛd tufoʊld - maɪ sɑɹoʊ ət wʌɾ aɪ wɑz luzɪŋ ən ðə paʊɝ ɪtsɛlf. maɪ kəpæsəɾi hæz bɪn ɡɹeɪtli ɹədust.

"My Power, Thom," she explained. "I could hear them barking and hissing to one another as they fed on me, both Aelfinn and Eelfinn in turn. They have not often had an Aes Sedai to themselves, it seems. While draining my ability to channel, they were fed twofold - my sorrow at what I was losing and the Power itself. My capacity has been greatly reduced.

"ðeɪ kleɪm tə hæv kɪld lænfɝ baɪ dʒɹeɪnɪŋ əɹ tu kwɪkli, ðoʊ aɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ meɪ hæv bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk mi əfɹeɪd. ə mæn wɑz ðəɹ wʌns, wən ðeɪ woʊk mi. hi sɛɾ aɪ wɑz nɑt ðə wʌn i wɑntəd." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən ʃɪvɝd. "səmtaɪmz aɪ wɪʃt ðət ðeɪ wəd dʒɹeɪn mi kwɪkli ən ɛn maɪ laɪf."

"They claimed to have killed Lanfear by draining her too quickly, though I think they may have been trying to make me afraid. A man was there once, when they woke me. He said I was not the one he wanted." She hesitated, then shivered. "Sometimes I wished that they would drain me quickly and end my life."

ðə smɔl kæmp ɡɹu saɪlən seɪv fəɹ ðə pɑpɪŋ ə ðə faɪɝ. tɑm lʊk təwɔɹd mɔɪɹeɪn, simɪŋ hɛlpləs.

The small camp grew silent save for the popping of the fire. Thom looked toward Moiraine, seeming helpless.

"du nɑt ʃoʊ mi sətʃ sɑɹoʊ, tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, smaɪlɪŋ. "aɪ hæv fɛl tɛɹəbəl θɪŋz, bʌɾ ɔl pipəl noʊ sətʃ moʊməns ə dɪspɛɹ. aɪ bɪliv ðət jə wəd kʌm." ʃi ɹimuvd əɹ hæn fɹəm ðə kloʊk - ɹɪvilɪŋ ə slɛndɝ, peɪl ʃoʊldɝ ən kɑlɝboʊn - ən ɹitʃt təwɔɹd hɪm. hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən tʊk ðə hæn ən skwizd ɪt.

"Do not show me such sorrow, Thom Merrilin," Moiraine said, smiling. "I have felt terrible things, but all people know such moments of despair. I believed that you would come." She removed her hand from the cloak - revealing a slender, pale shoulder and collarbone - and reached toward him. He hesitated, then took the hand and squeezed it.

mɔɪɹeɪn lʊk tə mæt. "æn ju, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən. nɑɾ ə sɪmpəl fɑɹm læɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. dʌz jəɹ aɪ peɪn jə mʌtʃ?"

Moiraine looked to Mat. "And you, Matrim Cauthon. Not a simple farm lad any longer. Does your eye pain you much?"

mæt ʃɹʌɡd.

Mat shrugged.

"aɪ wəd hil ðə waʊn ɪf aɪ kʊd," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "bʌɾ ivən wɝ aɪ stɪl əz stʃɹɔŋ əz aɪ wʌns wɑz, aɪ kʊdn ɹɪstɔɹ jəɹ aɪ." ʃi lʊk daʊn ɹilisɪŋ θɔɹnz hæn ən hoʊldɪŋ ʌp əɹ ɑɹm.

"I would Heal the wound if I could," Moiraine said. "But even were I still as strong as I once was, I couldn't restore your eye." She looked down releasing Thorn's hand and holding up her arm.

"du juv ði æŋɡɹil?"

"Do you have the angreal?"

"oʊ, jɛs," θɔɹn sɛd, fɪʃɪŋ ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ bɹeɪsləɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz pɑkət. hi pʊɾ ɪɾ ɑn əɹ ɑɹm.

"Oh, yes," Thorn said, fishing the strange bracelet out of his pocket. He put it on her arm.

"wɪð ðɪs," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "aɪ wɪl bi stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ət lis teɪk ðə peɪn əweɪ. ðeɪ pleɪst ɪɾ ɑn mi tə lemi dʒɹɔ mɔɹ ə ðə paʊɝ, tə meɪk ðɛɹ fiɾɪŋ mɔɹ sʌkjəlɪnt. aɪ æsk fəɹ ɪt, æktʃəli , əz wʌn ə maɪ θɹi dɪmænz. aɪ dɪd nɑt ɹilaɪz ðeɪ wəɾ ɛn ʌp juzɪŋ ɪɾ əɡɛns mi."

"With this," Moiraine said. "I will be strong enough to at least take the pain away. They placed it on me to let me draw more of the Power, to make their feeding more succulent. I asked for it, actually, as one of my three demands. I did not realize they would end up using it against me."

"ðeɪ ɡeɪv jə jəɹ θɹi dɪmænz?" mæt æskt, fɹaʊnɪŋ.

"They gave you your three demands?" Mat asked, frowning.

"aɪ pæs θɹu ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil" ʃi sɛd. "ði eɪntʃən tʃɹiɾi hɛl fəɹ boʊθ ʌv ʌs, ðoʊ wɪð ðə dɔɹweɪ dɪstʃɹɔɪd, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ sɪmpəl ɹɪtɝn. aɪ nu fɹəm . . . pɹiviəs ɪvɛns ðəɾ aɪ wəd nɑɾ ɪskeɪp ənlɛs jə keɪm fəɹ mi, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt maɪ dɪmænz wɝ əɹ haʊ kɛɹfəli aɪ wɝɾɪd ðɛm. soʊ aɪ juzd əm fəɹ ðə bɛst."

"I passed through the ter'angreal" she said. "The ancient treaty held for both of us, though with the doorway destroyed, there was no simple return. I knew from . . . previous events that I would not escape unless you came for me, no matter what my demands were or how carefully I worded them. So I used them for the best."

"wʌt dɪd jə æsk fɔɹ?" mæt æskt. "bɪɑn ði æŋɡɹil?"

"What did you ask for?" Mat asked. "Beyond the angreal?"

ʃi smaɪld. "aɪ ʃæl kip ðət tə maɪsɛlf, fəɹ naʊ. jə də hæv maɪ θæŋks, jʌŋ meɪtʃɹim. fəɹ maɪ laɪf."

She smiled. "I shall keep that to myself, for now. You do have my thanks, young Matrim. For my life."

"ðɛn aɪ ɡɛs wɝ ikwəl," hi sɛd. "ju seɪv mi fɹəm laɪf ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. bɝn mi ɪf aɪ hævən hæɾ ə naɪs ɡæləp ʌv ɪt sɪns ðɛn."

"Then I guess we're equal," he said. "You saved me from life in the Two Rivers. Burn me if I haven't had a nice gallop of it since then."

"æn jəɹ waʊnd?"

"And your wound?"

"dʌzn hɝt soʊ mʌtʃ." æktʃəli , ɪt θɹɑbd. ɹɪli, ɹɪli bædli. "noʊ nid fəɹ jə tə weɪst stʃɹɛŋkθ ɑn ɪt."

"Doesn't hurt so much." Actually, it throbbed. Really, really badly. "No need for you to waste strength on it."

"stɪl əfɹeɪɾ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ, aɪ si."

"Still afraid of the One Power, I see."

hi bɹɪsəld. "əfɹeɪd?"

He bristled. "Afraid?"

"aɪ ʃəd θɪŋk juv ɡʊd ɹizən fəɹ ðət wɛɹinɪs." ʃi lʊkt əweɪ fɹəm hɪm. "bʌt teɪk kɛɹ. ðə moʊs dɪsplisɪŋ ʌv ɪvɛns ɪn əɹ laɪvz ɑɹ səmtaɪmz fəɹ əɹ ɡʊd."

"I should think you have good reason for that wariness." She looked away from him. "But take care. The most displeasing of events in our lives are sometimes for our good."

jɛs, ʃi wɑz stɪl mɔɪɹeɪn. kwɪk wɪð ə mɔɹəl ən ædvaɪs. bʌt pɝhæps ʃi hæɾ ə ɹaɪt - æftɝ wʌt ʃi hæd bɪn θɹu - tə lɛktʃɝ ɑn sʌfɝɪŋ. laɪt! ʃi hæd noʊn wʌt ʃi wəɾ əv tə ɡoʊ θɹu, ən jɛt ʃi hæd stɪl pʊld lænfɝ ɪndə ðət tɛɹæŋɡɹil? meɪbi mæt wɑz nɑt ðə hɪɹoʊ hɪɹ, ən meɪbi noʊl wɑz nɑɾ iðɝ.

Yes, she was still Moiraine. Quick with a moral and advice. But perhaps she had a right - after what she had been through - to lecture on suffering. Light! She had known what she would have to go through, and yet she had still pulled Lanfear into that ter'angreal? Maybe Mat was not the hero here, and maybe Noal was not either.

"soʊ wʌt naʊ?" θɔɹn sɛd, sɛɾəlɪŋ bæk ɑn ə stʌmp. ðə wɔɹmθ ə ðə faɪɝ dɪd fil ɡʊd.

"So what now?" Thorn said, settling back on a stump. The warmth of the fire did feel good.

"aɪ mʌs faɪn ɹænd," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "hi wɪl nid maɪ hɛlp. aɪ tʃɹʌs hiz dʌn wɛl ɪn maɪ æbsəns?"

"I must find Rand," Moiraine said. "He will need my help. I trust he has done well in my absence?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ əbaʊt ðæt," mæt sɛd. "hiz hæf mæɾ ən ðə hoʊl blʌɾi wɝld ɪz ət wʌn ənʌðɝz θɹoʊts." kʌlɝz swɝld. ɹænd iɾɪŋ ə mil wɪð mɪn. mæt dɪspɛl ði ɪmədʒ.

"I don't know about that," Mat said. "He's half mad and the whole bloody world is at one another's throats." Colors swirled. Rand eating a meal with Min. Mat dispelled the image.

ʃi ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ.

She raised an eyebrow.

"bʌt," mæt æknɑlɪdʒd, "hiz ɡɑt moʊst ɛvɹibɑɾi pɔɪntəd təwɔɹd ðə læs bæɾəl. ən vɛɹɪn sɛz i mænədʒ tə klin ðə teɪn fɹəm seɪɾɪn."

"But," Mat acknowledged, "he's got most everybody pointed toward the Last Battle. And Verin says he managed to clean the taint from saidin."

"blɛsɪd laɪt," mɔɪɹeɪn wɪspɝd. "haʊ?"

"Blessed Light," Moiraine whispered. "How?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ."

"I don't know."

"ðɪs tʃeɪnʒəz ɛvɹiθɪŋ," ʃi sɛd, smaɪl dipənɪŋ. "hi hæz fɪkst wʌɾ i wʌns sɛt ɹɔŋ. 'baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡən keɪm əɹ peɪn, ən baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡən wɑz ðə waʊn ɹɪpɛɹd.'"

"This changes everything," she said, smile deepening. "He has fixed what he once set wrong. 'By the Dragon came our pain, and by the Dragon was the wound repaired.'"

"mæt kips seɪɪŋ wi ʃəd bi hævɪŋ ə fɛstəvəl əɹ sʌmθɪŋ tə sɛləbɹeɪt," θɔɹn noʊɾəd.

"Mat keeps saying we should be having a festival or something to celebrate," Thorn noted.

"ðoʊ meɪbi hi oʊnli wɑns ə ɡʊɾ ɪkskjus tə ɡɛt dʒɹʌŋk."

"Though maybe he only wants a good excuse to get drunk."

"aɪd seɪ ðæts ə sɝɾənti," mæt æɾəd. "ɛniweɪ, ɹændz bɪn bɪzi. ɪleɪn sɛz hiz ɡɑt səm kaɪndə miɾɪŋ ɝeɪnʒd wɪð ðə mɑnɑɹks ʌndɝ ɪm kʌmɪŋ ʌp sun."

"I'd say that's a certainty," Mat added. "Anyway, Rand's been busy. Elayne says he's got some kind of meeting arranged with the monarchs under him coming up soon."

"ɪleɪn ɪz kwin, ðɛn?"

"Elayne is Queen, then?"

"ʃʊɹ ɪz. hɝ mʌðɝ wɑz kɪl baɪ ɹɑvɪn," mæt sɛd.

"Sure is. Her mother was killed by Rahvin," Mat said.

"soʊ jə toʊl mi."

"So you told me."

"aɪ dɪd? wɛn?"

"I did? When?"

"ə laɪftaɪm əɡoʊ, meɪtʃɹim," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd, smaɪlɪŋ.

"A lifetime ago, Matrim," she replied, smiling.

"oʊ. wɛl, ɹænd fɪnɪʃt ɪm ɔf. soʊ ðæts ɡʊd."

"Oh. Well, Rand finished him off. So that's good."

"æn ði ʌðɝ fɔɹseɪkən?" mɔɪɹeɪn æskt.

"And the other Forsaken?" Moiraine asked.

"doʊnt noʊ," mæt sɛd.

"Don't know," Mat said.

"mæts bɪn tu bɪzi tə kip tʃɹæk," tɑm æɾəd. "hiz bɪn spɛndɪŋ ɪz taɪm mɛɹiɪŋ ði ɛmpɹɛs ə ðə sintʃæn."

"Mat's been too busy to keep track," Thom added. "He's been spending his time marrying the Empress of the Seanchan."

mɔɪɹeɪn blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. "ju dɪd wʌt?"

Moiraine blinked in surprise. "You did what?"

"ɪt wɑz ən æksəɾənt," mæt sɛd leɪmli, hʌntʃɪŋ daʊn.

"It was an accident," Mat said lamely, hunching down.

"ju æksədɛntəli mɛɹid ðə sintʃæn ɛmpɹɛs?"

"You accidentally married the Seanchan Empress?"

"ðeɪv ɡɑt səm ɑd kʌstəmz," mæt sɛd, pʊlɪŋ ɪz hæt daʊn. "stʃɹeɪnʒ foʊk." hi fɔɹst aʊɾ ə tʃʌkəl.

"They've got some odd customs," Mat said, pulling his hat down. "Strange folk." He forced out a chuckle.

"tɑvɝən" mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd.

"Ta'veren" Moiraine said.

sʌmhaʊ, hi hæd noʊn ʃi wəd seɪ ðæt. laɪt. wɛl, ɪt wɑz ɡʊd tə hæv əɹ bæk. mæt wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd ət haʊ stʃɹɔŋli hi fɛl ðæt. hu wʊɾə θɔɾ ɪt? əfɛkʃən fəɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, fɹəm hɪm?

Somehow, he had known she would say that. Light. Well, it was good to have her back. Mat was surprised at how strongly he felt that. Who would have thought it? Affection for an Aes Sedai, from him?

"wɛl," ʃi sɛd, "aɪ kən si ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛni teɪlz aɪ nid tə bi toʊld. bʌt fəɹ naʊ, wɪl nid tə sik aʊt ɹænd."

"Well," she said, "I can see there are many tales I need to be told. But for now, we will need to seek out Rand."

hi hæɾ ɔlsoʊ noʊn ðət ʃi wəd tʃɹaɪ tə teɪk tʃɑɹdʒ. "ju faɪn ɪm mɔɪɹeɪn, bʌɾ aɪv ɡɑt θɪŋz tə də ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. doʊn min tə ɑɹɡju ən ɔl, bʌt ðæts ðə fækt ʌv ɪt. jə ʃəd kʌm ðɛɹ, tu.

He had also known that she would try to take charge. "You find him Moiraine, but I've got things to do in Caemlyn. Don't mean to argue and all, but that's the fact of it. You should come there, too.

ɪleɪnz mɔɹ laɪkli ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls tə bi eɪbəl tə hɛlp jə wɪð ɹænd."

Elayne's more likely than anyone else to be able to help you with Rand."

blʌɾi kʌlɝz. əz ɪf hævɪŋ wʌn aɪ wɝ nɑt bæɾ ɪnʌf, hi hæd ðoʊz fleɪmɪŋ vɪʒənz bʌntʃɪŋ ʌp ɪz saɪɾ ɛvɹi taɪm i soʊ mʌtʃ əz θɔɾ ə ɹæn -  bɝn ðoʊz vɪʒənz!

Bloody colors. As if having one eye were not bad enough, he had those flaming visions bunching up his sight every time he so much as thought of Ran -  Burn those visions!

mɔɪɹeɪn ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ əz i ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ðən blʌʃt. hi pɹɑbli lʊk laɪk i wɑz hævɪŋ ə fɪt.

Moiraine raised an eyebrow as he shook his head, then blushed. He probably looked like he was having a fit.

"wi ʃæl si, meɪtʃɹim," ʃi sɛd, ðən ɡlænst ət θɔɹn, hu stʊd hoʊldɪŋ ðə pækɪts ə ti.

"We shall see, Matrim," she said, then glanced at Thorn, who stood holding the packets of tea.

mæt hæf θɔɾ i wəd tʃɹaɪ tə bɔɪl wɔɾɝ ɪn ɪz oʊn hænz, ɪf oʊnli tə ɡɛt səm wɔɹm ti fəɹ mɔɪɹeɪn. θɔɹn lʊkt ət hɝ, ən ʃi hɛld aʊɾ əɹ hæn əɡɛn.

Mat half thought he would try to boil water in his own hands, if only to get some warm tea for Moiraine. Thorn looked at her, and she held out her hand again.

"dɪɹəs θɔɹn," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ wəɾ əv jə fəɹ ə hʌzbənd, ɪf jəl əv mi fəɹ ə waɪf."

"Dearest Thorn," she said. "I would have you for a husband, if you'll have me for a wife."

"wʌt?" mæt sɛd, stændɪŋ ʌp. hi ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə hɪz fɔɹhɛd, nɪɹli nɑkɪŋ ɪz hæt fɹi.

"What?" Mat said, standing up. He raised a hand to his forehead, nearly knocking his hat free.

"wʌt dɪd jə seɪ?"

"What did you say?"

"hʌʃ, mæt," θɔɹn sɛd. hi dɪd nɑt teɪk mɔɪɹeɪnz ɔfɝd hænd. "ju noʊ aɪv nɛvɝ mʌtʃ laɪkt wɪmən u kən tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ, mɔɪɹeɪn. jə noʊ ɪt hɛl mi bæk ɪn ðə pæst."

"Hush, Mat," Thorn said. He did not take Moiraine's offered hand. "You know I've never much liked women who can channel the One Power, Moiraine. You know it held me back in the past."

"aɪ doʊn əv mʌtʃ ə ðə paʊɝ naʊ, dɪɹəs θɔɹn. wɪθaʊt ðɪs æn-ɡɹil, aɪ wʊdn bi stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə bi ɹeɪzd æksɛptɪɾ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. əl θɹoʊ ɪɾ əweɪ, ɪf jə wɪʃ ɪɾ ə mi." ʃi lɪftəɾ aʊɾ əɹ ʌðɝ hænd, bɛɹli steɪɪŋ mɑɾəst. ʃi pʊld ɔf ði æŋɡɹil.

"I don't have much of the Power now, dearest Thorn. Without this an-greal, I wouldn't be strong enough to be raised Accepted in the White Tower. I will throw it away, if you wish it of me." She lifted out her other hand, barely staying modest. She pulled off the angreal.

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk soʊ, mɔɪɹeɪn," θɔɹn sɛd, nilɪŋ daʊn, teɪkɪŋ əɹ hænz. "noʊ, aɪ woʊn ɹɑb jə ʌv ɛniθɪŋ."

"I don't think so, Moiraine," Thorn said, kneeling down, taking her hands. "No, I won't rob you of anything."

"bʌt wɪð ɪɾ əl bi vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋ, stʃɹɔŋɝ ɪn ðə paʊɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ aɪ wɑz teɪkən."

"But with it I'll be very strong, stronger in the Power than before I was taken."

"soʊ bi ɪt, ðɛn," hi sɛd. hi pʊt ðə bɹeɪslət bæk ɑn əɹ ɹɪst. "aɪl mɛɹi jə naʊ, ɪf jə wɪʃ ɪt."

"So be it, then," he said. He put the bracelet back on her wrist. "I'll marry you now, if you wish it."

ʃi smaɪl dipli.

She smiled deeply.

mæt stʊd, stʌnd. "æn huz gɑnə blʌɾi mɛɹi ju?" hi blɝɾɪd aʊt. "ɪt ʃʊɹ əz θʌndɝ ɪzən gɑnə bi mi, əl tɛl jə ðæt."

Mat stood, stunned. "And who's going to bloody marry you?" he blurted out. "It sure as thunder isn't going to be me, I'll tell you that."

ðə tu ɡlænst ət hɪm, θɔɹn wɪð ə flæt stɛɹ, mɔɪɹeɪn wɪð ə hɪn ʌv ə smaɪl. "aɪ kən si waɪ ðə sintʃæn wʊmən hæd tə hæv ju, mæt," ʃi noʊɾəd. "ju sɝɾənli hæv ə maɪn fəɹ ɹoʊmæns."

The two glanced at him, Thorn with a flat stare, Moiraine with a hint of a smile. "I can see why the Seanchan woman had to have you, Mat," she noted. "You certainly have a mind for romance."

"aɪ dʒʌst . . ." hi pʊld ɔf ɪz hæt, hoʊldɪŋ ɪɾ ɔkwɝdli, lʊkɪŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ bɪtwin ðɛm. "aɪ dʒʌst - bɝn mi! haʊ dɪɾ aɪ mɪs ðɪs? aɪ wɑz wɪð ðə tu ʌv jə moʊs ðə taɪm jə wɝ təɡɛðɝ! wən dɪd jə bɪkʌm əfɛkʃənət?"

"I just . . ." He pulled off his hat, holding it awkwardly, looking back and forth between them. "I just - burn me! How did I miss this? I was with the two of you most the time you were together! When did you become affectionate?"

"ju wɝnt wɑtʃɪŋ vɛɹi kloʊsli," θɔɹn sɛd. hi tɝn bæk tə mɔɪɹeɪn. "aɪ əsum jəl wɑn mi əz ə wɔɹɾɝ, tu."

"You weren't watching very closely," Thorn said. He turned back to Moiraine. "I assume you'll want me as a Warder, too."

ʃi smaɪld. "maɪ pɹiviəs ɡeɪɾɪn əz bɪn əpɹoʊpɹieɪɾɪd baɪ ənʌðɝ baɪ naʊ, aɪ hoʊp."

She smiled. "My previous Gaidin has been appropriated by another by now, I hope."

"aɪl teɪk ðə dʒɑb," θɔɹn sɛd, "ðoʊ jəl əv tə ɪkspleɪn tə ɪleɪn waɪ hɝ kɔɹt-bɑɹɾ ɪz sʌmwʌnz wɔɹɾɝ." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "ju θɪŋk ðeɪ kən meɪk wʌn ə ðoʊz kʌlɝ-tʃeɪnʒɪŋ kloʊks wɪð səm pætʃəz ɑn ɪt?"

"I'll take the job," Thorn said, "though you'll have to explain to Elayne why her court-bard is someone's Warder." He hesitated. "You think they can make one of those color-changing cloaks with some patches on it?"

"wɛl, jə tu hæv ɡɔn blʌɾi ɪnseɪn, aɪ si," mæt sɛd. "θɔɹn, dɪdn jə wʌns tɛl mi wʌns ðət ðə tu moʊs peɪnfəl pleɪsəz fəɹ jə tə bi wɝ tɑɹ vəlɑn ən keɪɛmlɪn? naʊ jəɹ ɹʌnɪŋ hɛdlɔŋ daʊn ðə hɪlsaɪd ðət wɪl ɛnd wɪð jə lɪvɪŋ ɪn wʌn əɹ ði ʌðɝ!"

"Well, you two have gone bloody insane, I see," Mat said. "Thorn, didn't you once tell me once that the two most painful places for you to be were Tar Valon and Caemlyn? Now you're running headlong down the hillside that will end with you living in one or the other!"

θɔɹn ʃɹʌɡd. "taɪmz tʃeɪnʒ."

Thorn shrugged. "Times change."

"aɪ nɛvɝ əv spɛn mʌtʃ ə maɪ taɪm ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "aɪ θɪŋk wi ʃæl ɛndʒɔɪ tʃɹævlɪŋ təɡɛðɝ, tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn. ʃəd wi sɝvaɪv ðə mʌnθs tə kʌm." ʃi lʊkt ət mæt. "ju ʃəd nɑt spɝn ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑn soʊ izəli, mæt. ðə blɛsɪŋz ɪt pɹəvaɪdz wɪl bi ʌv ɡɹeɪt jus tə mɛn ɪn ðiz deɪz."

"I never have spent much of my time in Tar Valon," Moiraine said. "I think we shall enjoy traveling together, Thom Merrilin. Should we survive the months to come." She looked at Mat. "You should not spurn the Warder bond so easily, Mat. The blessings it provides will be of great use to men in these days."

mæt pʊld ɪz hæt bæk ɑn. "ðæt meɪ bi tʃɹu, bʌt jəl nɛvɝ si mi blʌɾi tʃɹæp baɪ wʌn. noʊ əfɛns, mɔɪɹeɪn. aɪ laɪk jə wɛl ɪnʌf. bʌt tə bi bɑndəd tə ə wʊmən? ɪzən gɑnə hæpən tə meɪtʃɹim kɔθən."

Mat pulled his hat back on. "That may be true, but you'll never see me bloody trapped by one. No offense, Moiraine. I like you well enough. But to be bonded to a woman? Isn't going to happen to Matrim Cauthon."

"ɪz ðət soʊ?" tɑm æskt, əmjuzd. "dɪdnt wi dətɝmən ðət jəɹ tuɑn wəd bi keɪpəbəl ə tʃænəlɪŋ, ʃəd ʃi dɪsaɪd tə lɝn?"

"Is that so?" Thom asked, amused. "Didn't we determine that your Tuon would be capable of channeling, should she decide to learn?"

mæt fɹoʊz. blʌɾi æʃəz. tɑm wɑz ɹaɪt. bʌt tʃænəlɪŋ wəd meɪk əɹ mɛɹəθdəmeɪn. ʃi wəd nɑt də sətʃ ə θɪŋ. hi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə wɝi.

Mat froze. Bloody ashes. Thom was right. But channeling would make her marath'damane. She would not do such a thing. He did not have to worry.

dɪd hi?

Did he?

hi mʌst əv meɪɾ ə feɪs ət ðə θɔt, fəɹ tɑm tʃʌkəld ən mɔɪɹeɪn smaɪld əɡɛn. ðə tu ʌv əm sun lɔst ɪntʃɹəst ɪn spɔɹɾɪŋ wɪð mæt, haʊɛvɝ, ən tɝn tə ə sɑf dɪskʌʃən. ðəɾ əfɛkʃən ɪn ðɛɹ aɪz wɑz tʃɹu. ðeɪ dɪd lʌv itʃ ʌðɝ. laɪt! haʊ hæd mæt mɪst ɪt? hi fɛlt laɪk ə mæn u hæd bɹɔɾ ə hɑɡ tə ə hɔɹs ɹeɪs.

He must have made a face at the thought, for Thom chuckled and Moiraine smiled again. The two of them soon lost interest in sporting with Mat, however, and turned to a soft discussion. That affection in their eyes was true. They did love each other. Light! How had Mat missed it? He felt like a man who had brought a hog to a horse race.

hi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə meɪk hɪmsɛlf skɛɹs, livɪŋ ðə tu ʌv əm əloʊn. hi wɛn tə skaʊt ði ɛɹiə wɛɹ ðɛɹ ɡeɪtweɪ wɑz səpoʊz tə əpɪɹ. ɪt hæd bɛɾɝ. ðeɪ hæd noʊ səplaɪz, ən mæt dɪd nɑt fænsi flæɡɪŋ daʊn ə ʃɪp ən ɹaɪɾɪŋ ðə lɔŋ weɪ bæk tə keɪɛmlɪn.

He decided to make himself scarce, leaving the two of them alone. He went to scout the area where their gateway was supposed to appear. It had better. They had no supplies, and Mat did not fancy flagging down a ship and riding the long way back to Caemlyn.

ɪt wɑz ə ʃɔɹt haɪk əkɹɔs ðə mɛdoʊ tə ðə bæŋks ə ði ɑɹɪnɛl. wʌns ðɛɹ, hi meɪɾ ə smɔl kɛɹn fəɹ noʊl, ðən tɪpt ɪz hæt tə ɪɾ ən sæt daʊn tə weɪɾ ən θɪŋk.

It was a short hike across the meadow to the banks of the Arinelle. Once there, he made a small cairn for Noal, then tipped his hat to it and sat down to wait and think.

mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz seɪf. mæt hæd sɝvaɪvd, ðoʊ ðət blʌɾi sɑkət θɹɑb laɪk nʌθɪŋ ɛls. hi stɪl wɑz nɑt sɝɾən ɪf ði ɑfɪn ən ɛlfɪn hæd stʃɹɪŋz ɝaʊn ɪm əɹ nɑt, bʌɾ i hæd ɡɔn ɪndə ðɛɹ dɛn ən kʌm aʊɾ ənskeɪðd. moʊsli, ɛniweɪ.

Moiraine was safe. Mat had survived, though that bloody socket throbbed like nothing else. He still was not certain if the Aeifinn and Eelfinn had strings around him or not, but he had gone into their den and come out unscathed. Mostly, anyway.

wʌn aɪ lɔst. wʌt wəd ðət də tə hɪz əbɪləɾi tə faɪt? ðət wɝiɾ ɪm mɔɹ ðən ɛniθɪŋ. hi hæd pʊɾ ɑn ə bɹeɪv fɹʌnt, bʌɾ ɪnsaɪɾ i tʃɹɛmbəld. wʌt wəd tuɑn θɪŋk ʌv ə hʌzbən mɪsɪŋ ən aɪ?

One eye lost. What would that do to his ability to fight? That worried him more than anything. He had put on a brave front, but inside he trembled. What would Tuon think of a husband missing an eye?

ə hʌzbən u maɪt nɑt bi eɪbəl tə dɪfɛn hɪmsɛlf?

A husband who might not be able to defend himself?

hi pʊld aʊɾ ə naɪf, flɪpɪŋ ɪt. ðɛn, ɑn ə wɪm, hi tɔst ɪt bɪhaɪn ɪm wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ. hi hɝɾ ə sɑf skɹitʃ, ðən tɝn tə si ə ɹæbət slʌmp tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, spɪɹd baɪ ði aɪdli θɹoʊn naɪf.

He pulled out a knife, flipping it. Then, on a whim, he tossed it behind him without looking. He heard a soft screech, then turned to see a rabbit slump to the ground, speared by the idly thrown knife.

hi smaɪld, ðən tɝn bæk tə ðə ɹɪvɝ. ðɛɹ, hi noʊɾəst sʌmθɪŋ kɑt bɪtwin tu lɑɹdʒ ɹɪvɝ stoʊnz əlɔŋ ðə ʃɔɹ. ɪt wɑz ən oʊvɝtɝn kʊkɪŋ pɑt, wɪð ə kɑpɝ bɑɾəm, bɛɹli juzd, oʊnli dɪŋɡd ɑn ðə saɪdz ə kʌpəl ə taɪmz. ɪt mʌst əv bɪn dʒɹɑp baɪ ə tʃɹævəlɝ wɔkɪŋ ʌp ðə ɹɪvɝ.

He smiled, then turned back to the river. There, he noticed something caught between two large river stones along the shore. It was an overturned cooking pot, with a copper bottom, barely used, only dinged on the sides a couple of times. It must have been dropped by a traveler walking up the river.

jɛs, hi maɪt nɑt bi eɪbəl tə dʒʌdʒ dɪstəns, ən i maɪt nɑt bi eɪbəl tə si əz wɛl. bʌt lʌk wɝk bɛɾɝ wən jə wɝ nɑt lʊkɪŋ ɛniweɪ.

Yes, he might not be able to judge distance, and he might not be able to see as well. But luck worked better when you were not looking anyway.

hi smaɪld waɪɾɝ, ðən fɛtʃt ðə ɹæbət - hi wəd skɪn ðət fəɹ sʌpɝ - ən plʌk ðə pɑɾ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ.

He smiled wider, then fetched the rabbit - he would skin that for supper - and plucked the pot out of the river.

mɔɪɹeɪn wəd ɡɛɾ əɹ ti æftɝ ɔl.

Moiraine would get her tea after all.


ɛpəlɔɡ ən æftɝ



EPILOGUE And After

ɡɹeɪndəl hɝidli ɡæðɝd wʌt ʃi niɾəd fɹəm əɹ nu pæləs. fɹəm əɹ dɛsk, ʃi tʊk ə smɔl æŋɡɹil mɛsænə hæd tʃɹeɪɾɪd əɹ ɪn ɪkstʃeɪnʒ fəɹ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən. ɪt wɑz ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə smɔl, kɑɹvd aɪvɝi naɪf; ʃid lɔst əɹ ɡoʊld ɹɪŋ ɪn ælθɹz ətæk.

Graendal hurriedly gathered what she needed from her new palace. From her desk, she took a small angreal Mesaana had traded her in exchange for information. It was in the shape of a small, carved ivory knife; she'd lost her gold ring in al'Thor's attack.

ɡɹeɪndəl tɔst ɪɾ ɪn əɹ pæk, ðən snætʃt ə ʃif ə peɪpɝz fɹəm əɹ bɛd. neɪmz ə kɑntæks, aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz - ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃid mænədʒ tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ fɹəm wʌt hæd bɪn dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ət nætʃɹɪnz bæɹoʊ.

Graendal tossed it in her pack, then snatched a sheaf of papers from her bed. Names of contacts, eyes-and-ears - everything she'd managed to remember from what had been destroyed at Natrin's Barrow.

weɪvz sɝdʒd əɡɛns ðə ɹɑks aʊtsaɪd. ɪt wɑz stɪl dɑɹk. oʊnli moʊməns hæd pæst sɪns əɹ læs tul hæd feɪl hɝ, eɪbɑɹə sɝvaɪvɪŋ ðə bæɾəlfild. ðət wɑz səpoʊz tə hæv wɝkt!

Waves surged against the rocks outside. It was still dark. Only moments had passed since her last tool had failed her, Aybara surviving the battlefield. That was supposed to have worked!

ʃi wɑz ɪn əɹ ɛləɡən mænɝ haʊs ə fju liɡz fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ. naʊ ðət sɛmɝhɪdʒ wɑz ɡɔn, ɡɹeɪndəl hæd bɪɡʌn pleɪsɪŋ səm stʃɹɪŋz ɝaʊn ðɛɹ nu, tʃaɪldlaɪk ɛmpɹɛs. ʃiɾ əv tə əbændən ðoʊz skimz naʊ.

She was in her elegant manor house a few leagues from Ebou Dar. Now that Semirhage was gone, Graendal had begun placing some strings around their new, childlike Empress. She'd have to abandon those schemes now.

pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə hæɾ ɪskeɪpt. ʃi fɛl stʌnd. plæn æftɝ pɝfək plæn hæd fɔlən ɪn pleɪs. ən ðən . . . hiɾ ɪskeɪpt. haʊ? ðə pɹɑfəsi ... ɪt hæd sɛd . . .

Perrin Aybara had escaped. She felt stunned. Plan after perfect plan had fallen in place. And then . . . he'd escaped. How? The prophecy ... it had said . . .

ðət ful hæm, ɡɹeɪndəl θɔt, stʌfɪŋ ðə peɪpɝz ɪn əɹ pæk. ən ðəɾ ɪɾiət waɪtkloʊk! ʃi wɑz swɛɾɪŋ. ʃi ʃʊdn bi swɛɾɪŋ.

That fool ham, Graendal thought, stuffing the papers in her pack. And that idiot Whitecloak! She was sweating. She shouldn't be sweating.

ʃi tɔst ə fju tɛɹæŋɡɹil fɹəm əɹ dɛsk ɪndə ðə pæk, ðən ɹaɪfəld əɹ klɑzət fəɹ tʃeɪnʒəz ə kloʊðɪŋ. hi kəd faɪn əɹ ɛniwɛɹ ɪn ðə wɝld.

She tossed a few ter'angreal from her desk into the pack, then rifled her closet for changes of clothing. He could find her anywhere in the world.

bʌt pɝhæps wʌn ə ðə mɪɹɝ ɹɛlmz ə ðə pɔɹɾəl stoʊnz. jɛs. ðɛɹ, hɪz kənɛkʃənz wɝ nɑt -  ʃi tɝnd, ɑɹmz fʊl ə sɪlk, ən fɹoʊz. ə fɪɡjɝ stʊɾ ɪn ðə ɹum tɔl, laɪk ə pɪlɝ dʒɹɛst ɪn blæk ɹoʊbz. aɪləs. smaɪlɪŋ lɪps ðə kʌlɝ ə dɛθ.

But perhaps one of the mirror realms of the Portal Stones. Yes. There, his connections were not -  She turned, arms full of silk, and froze. A figure stood in the room Tall, like a pillar dressed in black robes. Eyeless. Smiling lips the color of death.

ɡɹeɪndəl dʒɹɑp tə hɝ niz, θɹoʊɪŋ əsaɪd ðə kloʊðɪŋ. swɛt ɹæn daʊn əɹ tɛmpəl ɑntu hɝ tʃik.

Graendal dropped to her knees, throwing aside the clothing. Sweat ran down her temple onto her cheek.

"ɡɹeɪndəl," sɛd ðə tɔl mɹdʒɹɑl. hɪz vɔɪs wɑz tɛɹəbəl, laɪk ðə læst wɪspɝz ʌv ə daɪɪŋ mæn.

"Graendal," said the tall Myrddraal. His voice was terrible, like the last whispers of a dying man.

"ju hæv feɪld, ɡɹeɪndəl."

"You have failed, Graendal."

ʃeɪaɪdɑɹ hæɹən. vɛɹi bæd. "aɪ . . ." ʃi sɛd, lɪkɪŋ əɹ dʒɹaɪ lɪps. haʊ tə twɪs ðɪs tə ə vɪktɝi? "ɪɾ ɪz əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə plæn. ɪts mɪɹli ə - "

Shaidar Haran. Very bad. "I . . ." she said, licking her dry lips. How to twist this to a victory? "It is according to plan. It is merely a - "

"aɪ noʊ jəɹ hɑɹt, ɡɹeɪndəl. aɪ kən teɪs jəɹ tɛɹɝ"

"I know your heart, Graendal. I can taste your terror"

ʃi skwizd əɹ aɪz ʃʌt.

She squeezed her eyes shut.

"mɛsænə hæz fɔlən," ʃeɪaɪdɑɹ hæɹən wɪspɝd. "θɹi tʃoʊzən, dɪstʃɹɔɪd baɪ jəɹ ækʃənz. ðə dɪzaɪn bɪlz, ə læɾəs ə feɪljɝ, ə fɹeɪmwɝk ʌv ɪnkɑmpəɾəns."

"Mesaana has fallen," Shaidar Haran whispered. "Three Chosen, destroyed by your actions. The design builds, a lattice of failure, a framework of incompetence."

"aɪ hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð mɛsænəz fɔl!"

"I had nothing to do with Mesaana's fall!"

"nʌθɪŋ? ɡɹeɪndəl, ðə dʒɹimspaɪk wɑz ðɛɹ. ðoʊz u fɔt wɪð mɛsænə sɛd ðət ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd tə muv, tə dʒɹɔ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ə loʊkeɪʃən wɛɹ ðɛɹ tʃɹæp kəd bi spɹʌŋ. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt mɛn tə faɪɾ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ðeɪ kəd nɑt liv. kəz ə ju."

"Nothing? Graendal, the dreamspike was there. Those who fought with Mesaana said that they tried to move, to draw the Aes Sedai to a location where their trap could be sprung. They were not meant to fight in the White Tower. They could not leave. Because of you."

"ɪsəm - "

"Isam - "

"ə tul ɡɪvən ju. ðə feɪljɝ ɪz jʊɹz, ɡɹeɪndəl."

"A tool given you. The failure is yours, Graendal."

ʃi lɪkt əɹ lɪps əɡɛn. hɝ ɪntaɪɝ maʊθ hæd ɡɔn dʒɹaɪ. ðəɹ hæd tə bi ə weɪ aʊt. "aɪ hæv ə bɛɾɝ plæn, mɔɹ boʊld. jəl bi ɪmpɹɛst. ælθɹ θɪŋks aɪm dɛd, ən soʊ aɪ kən - "

She licked her lips again. Her entire mouth had gone dry. There had to be a way out. "I have a better plan, more bold. You will be impressed. Al'Thor thinks I am dead, and so I can - "

"noʊ." sətʃ ə kwaɪət vɔɪs, bʌt soʊ hɔɹəbəl. ɡɹeɪndəl faʊnd ʃi kəd nɑt spik. sʌmθɪŋ hæd teɪkən əɹ vɔɪs. "noʊ," ʃeɪaɪdɑɹ hæɹən kəntɪnjud. "ðɪs ɑpɝtunəɾi hæz bɪn ɡɪvən tə ənʌðɝ. bʌt ɡɹeɪndəl, jə ʃæl nɑt bi fɝɡɑɾən."

"No." Such a quiet voice, but so horrible. Graendal found she could not speak. Something had taken her voice. "No," Shaidar Haran continued. "This opportunity has been given to another. But Graendal, you shall not be forgotten."

ʃi lʊkt ʌp, filɪŋ ə sɝdʒ ə hoʊp. ðoʊz dɛd lɪps wɝ smaɪlɪŋ waɪdli, ðəɾ aɪləs ɡeɪz fɪkst ɑn hɝ. ʃi fɛlt ə hɔɹəbəl sɪŋkɪŋ filɪŋ.

She looked up, feeling a surge of hope. Those dead lips were smiling widely, that eyeless gaze fixed on her. She felt a horrible sinking feeling.

"noʊ," ʃeɪaɪdɑɹ hæɹən sɛd, "aɪ ʃæl nɑt fɝɡɛt ju, ən jə ʃæl nɑt fɝɡɛt ðət wɪtʃ kʌmz nɛkst."

"No," Shaidar Haran said, "I shall not forget you, and you shall not forget that which comes next."

ʃi oʊpən əɹ aɪz waɪd, ðən haʊld əz i ɹitʃt fəɹ hɝ.

She opened her eyes wide, then howled as he reached for her.

ðə skaɪ ɹʌmbəld; ðə ɡɹæs ɝaʊn pɛɹɪn ʃɪvɝd. ðət ɡɹæs wɑz spɑɾəd blæk, dʒʌst əz ɪn ðə ɹil wɝld. ivən ðə wʊlf dʒɹim wɑz daɪɪŋ.

The sky rumbled; the grass around Perrin shivered. That grass was spotted black, just as in the real world. Even the wolf dream was dying.

ði ɛɹ wɑz fʊl ə sɛns ðət dɪd nɑt bɪlɔŋ. ə faɪɝ bɝnɪŋ. blʌd dʒɹaɪɪŋ. ðə dɛd flɛʃ ʌv ə bist i dɪdn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz. ɛɡz ɹɑɾɪŋ.

The air was full of scents that did not belong. A fire burning. Blood drying. The dead flesh of a beast he didn't recognize. Eggs rotting.

noʊ, hi θɔt. noʊ ɪɾəl nɑt bi.

No, he thought. No it will not be.

hi ɡæðɝɾ ɪz wɪl. ðoʊz sɛns wəd vænɪʃ. ðeɪ dɪd, ɹipleɪst wɪð ðə sɛns ə sʌmɝ.

He gathered his will. Those scents would vanish. They did, replaced with the scents of summer.

ɡɹæs, hɛdʒhɑɡz, biɾəlz, mɔs, maɪs, blu-wɪŋ dʌvz, pɝpəl fɪntʃɪz. ðeɪ əpɪɹd, bɝstɪŋ tə laɪf ɪn ə sɝkəl ɝaʊn hɪm.

Grass, hedgehogs, beetles, moss, mice, blue-winged doves, purple finches. They appeared, bursting to life in a circle around him.

hi ɡɹɪɾɪd ɪz tiθ. ðə ɹiæləɾi spɹɛd fɹəm ɪm laɪk ə weɪv, blæknəs feɪɾɪŋ fɹəm ðə plæns.

He gritted his teeth. The reality spread from him like a wave, blackness fading from the plants.

əbʌv hɪm, ðə klaʊdz ənʒəleɪtɪd, ðən pɑɹɾəd. sʌnlaɪt stʃɹim daʊn. ðə θʌndɝ kɑmd.

Above him, the clouds undulated, then parted. Sunlight streamed down. The thunder calmed.

ən hɑpɝ laɪvz, pɛɹɪn θɔt. hi dʌz! aɪ kən smɛl ɪz koʊt, hɪɹ ɪm ləpɪŋ ɪn ðə ɡɹæs.

And Hopper lives, Perrin thought. He does! I can smell his coat, hear him loping in the grass.

ə wʊlf əpɪɹd bɪfɔɹ hɪm, fɔɹmɪŋ əz ɪf fɹəm mɪst. sɪlvɝi ɡɹeɪ, ɡɹɪzəl fɹəm jɪɹz ə laɪf.

A wolf appeared before him, forming as if from mist. Silvery gray, grizzled from years of life.

pɛɹɪn θɹɪld ɪn ɪz paʊɝ. ɪt wɑz ɹil.

Perrin thrilled in his power. It was real.

ən ðən i sɔ ðə wʊlfs aɪz. laɪfləs.

And then he saw the wolf's eyes. Lifeless.

ðə sɛn tɝn steɪl ən ɹɔŋ.

The scent turned stale and wrong.

pɛɹɪn wɑz swɛɾɪŋ fɹəm ðə stʃɹeɪn ə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ soʊ hɑɹd. sʌmθɪŋ wɪðɪn ɪm bɪkeɪm dɪsdʒɔɪntɪd. hi wɑz kʌmɪŋ ɪndə ðə wʊlf dʒɹim tu stʃɹɔŋli; tə tʃɹaɪ tə kəntʃɹoʊl ðɪs pleɪs æbsəlutli wɑz laɪk tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənteɪn ə wʊlf ɪn ə bɑks.

Perrin was sweating from the strain of concentrating so hard. Something within him became disjointed. He was coming into the wolf dream too strongly; to try to control this place absolutely was like trying to contain a wolf in a box.

hi kɹaɪɾ aʊt, fɔlɪŋ tə hɪz niz. ðə mɪsti nɑt-hɑpɝ vænɪʃt ɪn ə pʌf ən ðə klaʊdz kɹæʃt bæk ɪndə pleɪs. laɪtnɪŋ ɪksploʊɾəd əbʌv ɪm ən ðə blæk spɑts flʌɾəd ðə ɡɹæs. ðə ɹɔŋ sɛns ɹɪtɝnd.

He cried out, falling to his knees. The misty not-Hopper vanished in a puff and the clouds crashed back into place. Lightning exploded above him and the black spots flooded the grass. The wrong scents returned.

pɛɹɪn nɛlt, swɛt dʒɹɪpɪŋ fɹəm ɪz bɹaʊ, wʌn hæn ɑn ðə pɹɪkli bɹaʊn ən blæk ɡɹæs. tu stɪf.

Perrin knelt, sweat dripping from his brow, one hand on the prickly brown and black grass. Too stiff.

pɛɹɪn θɔɾ ə feɪl ɪn ðɛɹ tɛn bæk ɪn ðə fild ə mɛɹɪlɝ. ʃi wɑz ɪz hoʊm. ðəɹ wɑz mʌtʃ tə du. ɹænd hæd kʌm, əz pɹɑməst. təmɑɹoʊ, hi wəd feɪs ɛɡwin. θɔɾ ə ðə ɹil wɝld ɡɹaʊndɪd pɛɹɪn, kipɪŋ ɪm fɹəm ɛntɝɪŋ ðə wʊlf dʒɹim tu stʃɹɔŋli.

Perrin thought of Faile in their tent back in the Field of Merrilor. She was his home. There was much to do. Rand had come, as promised. Tomorrow, he would face Egwene. Thought of the real world grounded Perrin, keeping him from entering the wolf dream too strongly.

pɛɹɪn stʊd. hi kəd də mɛni θɪŋz ɪn ðɪs pleɪs, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ lɪməts. ðəɹ wɝ ɔlweɪz lɪməts.

Perrin stood. He could do many things in this place, but there were limits. There were always limits.

sik baʊnləs. hɪl ɪkspleɪn.

Seek Boundless. He will explain.

hɑpɝz læst sɛndɪŋ tə hɪm. wʌɾ ɪt min? hɑpɝ hæd sɛd ðət pɛɹɪn hæd faʊn ði ænsɝ. ən jɛt, baʊnləs wəɾ ɪkspleɪn ðəɾ ænsɝ? ðə sɛndɪŋ hæd bɪn əwɑʃ wɪð peɪn, lɔs, sæɾəsfækʃən ət siɪŋ pɛɹɪn æksɛp ðə wʊlf wɪðɪn hɪm. wʌn faɪnəl ɪmədʒ ʌv ə wʊlf lipɪŋ pɹaʊdli ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs, koʊt ʃaɪnɪŋ, sɛn dɪtɝmənd.

Hopper's last sending to him. What did it mean? Hopper had said that Perrin had found the answer. And yet, Boundless would explain that answer? The sending had been awash with pain, loss, satisfaction at seeing Perrin accept the wolf within him. One final image of a wolf leaping proudly into the darkness, coat shining, scent determined.

pɛɹɪn sɛn hɪmsɛlf tə ðə dʒəhænə ɹoʊd. baʊnləs wɑz ɔfən ðɛɹ, wɪð ðə ɹɛmnəns ə ðə pæk. pɛɹɪn ɹitʃt aʊɾ ən faʊn hɪm: ə juθfəl meɪl wɪð bɹaʊn fɝ ən ə lin bɪld. baʊnləs tizd ɪm sɛndɪŋ ði ɪmədʒ ə pɛɹɪn əz ə bʊl tʃɹæmplɪŋ ə stæɡ. ði ʌðɝz hæd lɛf ðəɾ ɪmədʒ əloʊn, bʌt baʊnləs kəntɪnjud tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ.

Perrin sent himself to the Jehannah Road. Boundless was often there, with the remnants of the pack. Perrin reached out and found him: a youthful male with brown fur and a lean build. Boundless teased him sending the image of Perrin as a bull trampling a stag. The others had left that image alone, but Boundless continued to remember.

baʊnləs, pɛɹɪn sɛnt. hɑpɝ toʊl mi aɪ niɾəd ju.

Boundless, Perrin sent. Hopper told me I needed you.

ðə wʊlf vænɪʃt.

The wolf vanished.

pɛɹɪn stɑɹɾəd, ðən dʒʌmp tə ðə pleɪs ðə wʊlf hæd 'bɪn - ə klɪf tɑp sɛvɹəl liɡz fɹəm ðə ɹoʊd. hi kɑt ðə feɪntəst sɛn ə ðə wʊlfs dɛstəneɪʃən, ən ðən wɛn ðɛɹ. ən oʊpən fild wɪð ə dɪstən bɑɹn, lʊkɪŋ ɹɑɾɪd.

Perrin started, then jumped to the place the wolf had 'been - a cliff top several leagues from the road. He caught the faintest scent of the wolf's destination, and then went there. An open field with a distant barn, looking rotted.

baʊnləs? pɛɹɪn sɛnt. ðə wʊlf kɹaʊtʃt ɪn ə paɪl ə bɹʌʃ nɪɹbaɪ.

Boundless? Perrin sent. The wolf crouched in a pile of brush nearby.

noʊ. noʊ. baʊnləs sɛn fɹaɪɾ ən æŋɡɝ.

No. No. Boundless sent fright and anger.

wʌɾ aɪ du?

What did I do?

ðə wʊlf stʃɹikt əweɪ, livɪŋ ə blɝ. pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld, ən wɛn daʊn ɑn ɔl fɔɹz, bɪkʌmɪŋ ə wʊlf. jʌŋ bʊl fɑloʊd, wɪn ɹɔɹɪŋ ɪn ɪz ɪɹz. hi fɔɹst ɪt tə pɑɹt bɪfɔɹ hɪm, ɪnkɹisɪŋ ɪz spid fɝðɝ.

The wolf streaked away, leaving a blur. Perrin growled, and went down on all fours, becoming a wolf. Young Bull followed, wind roaring in his ears. He forced it to part before him, increasing his speed further.

baʊnləs tʃɹaɪd tə vænɪʃ, bʌt jʌŋ bʊl fɑloʊd, əpɪɹɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ði oʊʃən. hi hɪt ðə weɪvz, wɔɾɝ fɝm bɪniθ ɪz pɔz, ən kəntɪnjuɾ æftɝ baʊnləs wɪθaʊt bɹeɪkɪŋ stʃɹaɪd.

Boundless tried to vanish, but Young Bull followed, appearing in the middle of the ocean. He hit the waves, water firm beneath his paws, and continued after Boundless without breaking stride.

baʊnləsəz sɛndɪŋz flæʃt wɪð ɪmədʒəz. fɔɹəsts. sɪɾiz. filz. ən ɪmədʒ ə pɛɹɪn, lʊkɪŋ daʊn ət hɪm, stændɪŋ aʊtsaɪɾ ə keɪdʒ.

Boundless's sendings flashed with images. Forests. Cities. Fields. An image of Perrin, looking down at him, standing outside a cage.

pɛɹɪn fɹoʊz, bɪkʌmɪŋ hjumən əɡɛn. hi stʊɾ əpɑn ðə sɝdʒɪŋ weɪvz, ɹaɪzɪŋ sloʊli ɪndə ði ɛɹ.

Perrin froze, becoming human again. He stood upon the surging waves, rising slowly into the air.

wʌt? ðət sɛndɪŋ hæd bɪn ʌv ə jʌŋɡɝ pɛɹɪn. ən mɔɪɹeɪn hæd bɪn wɪð hɪm. haʊ kəd baʊnləs əv . . .

What? That sending had been of a younger Perrin. And Moiraine had been with him. How could Boundless have . . .

ən sʌɾənli, pɛɹɪn nu. baʊnləs wɑz ɔlweɪz faʊn ɪn ɡildən ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim.

And suddenly, Perrin knew. Boundless was always found in Ghealdan in the wolf dream.

noʊm, hi sɛn tə ðə wʊlf, naʊ dɪstənt.

Noam, he sent to the wolf, now distant.

ðəɹ wɑz ə stɑɹɾ ə sɝpɹaɪz, ən ðən ðə maɪn vænɪʃt. pɛɹɪn muv tə wɛɹ baʊnləs hæd bɪn, ən ðəɹ smɛld ə smɔl vɪlədʒ. ə bɑɹn. ə keɪdʒ.

There was a start of surprise, and then the mind vanished. Perrin moved to where Boundless had been, and there smelled a small village. A barn. A cage.

pɛɹɪn əpɪɹd ðɛɹ. baʊnləs leɪ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪtwin tu haʊsəz, lʊkɪŋ ʌp ət pɛɹɪn.

Perrin appeared there. Boundless lay on the ground between two houses, looking up at Perrin.

baʊnləs wɑz ɪndɪstɪŋɡwɪʃəbəl fɹəm ði ʌðɝ wʊlvz, fəɹ ɔl ðət pɛɹɪn naʊ səspɛktəd ðə tʃɹuθ.

Boundless was indistinguishable from the other wolves, for all that Perrin now suspected the truth.

ðɪs wɑz nɑɾ ə wʊlf. hi wɑz ə mæn.

This was not a wolf. He was a man.

"baʊnləs," pɛɹɪn sɛd, nilɪŋ daʊn ɑn wʌn ni tə lʊk ðə wʊlf ɪn ði aɪz. "noʊm. dʒju ɹɪmɛmbɝ mi?"

"Boundless," Perrin said, kneeling down on one knee to look the wolf in the eyes. "Noam. Do you remember me?"

ʌv kɔɹs. jə ɑɹ jʌŋ bʊl.

Of course. You are Young Bull.

"aɪ min, dʒju ɹɪmɛmbɝ mi fɹəm bɪfɔɹ, wən wi mɛɾ ɪn ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld? jə sɛn ən ɪmədʒ ʌv ɪt."

"I mean, do you remember me from before, when we met in the waking world? You sent an image of it."

noʊm oʊpən ɪz dʒɔz, ən ə boʊn əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðɛm. ə lɑɹdʒ fimɝ wɪð səm mit stɪl ɑn ɪt. hi leɪ ɑn ɪz saɪd, tʃuɪŋ ðə boʊn. jə ɑɹ jʌŋ hʌl, hi sɛnt, stʌbɝn.

Noam opened his jaws, and a bone appeared in them. A large femur with some meat still on it. He lay on his side, chewing the bone. You are Young hull, he sent, stubborn.

"du jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə keɪdʒ, noʊm?" pɛɹɪn æsk sɔfli, sɛndɪŋ ði ɪmədʒ. ði ɪmədʒ ʌv ə mæn, hɪz fɪlθi kloʊðɪŋ hæf ɹɪpt ɔf, lɑkt ɪn ə meɪkʃɪft wʊɾən sɛl baɪ hɪz fæmli.

"Do you remember the cage, Noam?" Perrin asked softly, sending the image. The image of a man, his filthy clothing half ripped off, locked in a makeshift wooden cell by his family.

noʊm fɹoʊz, ən ɪz ɪmədʒ weɪvɝd moʊməntɛɹəli, bɪkʌmɪŋ ðəɾ ʌv ə mæn. ðə wʊlf ɪmədʒ ɹiɾənd ɪmiɾiətli, ən i ɡɹaʊld ə loʊ, deɪnʒɝəs ɡɹaʊl.

Noam froze, and his image wavered momentarily, becoming that of a man. The wolf image retuned immediately, and he growled a low, dangerous growl.

"aɪ də nɑt bɹɪŋ ʌp bæd taɪmz tə meɪk jə æŋɡɹi, noʊm," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪ... wɛl, aɪm laɪk ju."

"I do not bring up bad times to make you angry, Noam," Perrin said. "I... Well, I'm like you."

aɪm ə wʊlf.

I am a wolf.

"jɛs," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "bʌt nɑɾ ɔlweɪz."

"Yes," Perrin said. "But not always."

ɔlweɪz.

Always.

"noʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd fɝmli. "wʌns jə wɝ laɪk mi. θɪŋkɪŋ ɪt dɪfɹənli dʌzn meɪk ɪt soʊ."

"No," Perrin said firmly. "Once you were like me. Thinking it differently doesn't make it so."

hɪɹ ɪt dʌz, jʌŋ bʊl, noʊm sɛnt. hɪɹ ɪt dʌz.

Here it does, Young Bull, Noam sent. Here it does.

ðət wɑz tʃɹu. waɪ wɑz pɛɹɪn pɹɛsɪŋ ðɪs ɪʃu? hɑpɝ hæd sɛn ɪm hɪɹ, ðoʊ. waɪ ʃəd baʊnləs əv ði ænsɝ? siɪŋ hɪm, noʊɪŋ u hi wɑz, bɹɔt bæk ɔl ə pɛɹɪnz fɪɹz.

That was true. Why was Perrin pressing this issue? Hopper had sent him here, though. Why should Boundless have the answer? Seeing him, knowing who he was, brought back all of Perrin's fears.

hid meɪd pis wɪð hɪmsɛlf, jɛt hɪɹ wɑz ə mæn u hæd lɔs hɪmsɛlf kəmplitli tə ðə wʊlf.

He'd made peace with himself, yet here was a man who had lost himself completely to the wolf.

ðɪs wɑz wʌt pɛɹɪn hæd bɪn tɛɹəfaɪɾ ʌv. ðɪs wɑz wʌt hæd dʒɹɪvən ðə wɛdʒ bɪtwin ɪm ən ðə wʊlvz. naʊ ðət hiɾ oʊvɝkʌm ðæt, waɪ wəd hɑpɝ sɛn ɪm hɪɹ? baʊnləs sɛntɪɾ ɪz kənfjuʒən. ðə boʊn vænɪʃt ən baʊnləs sɛɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɑn ɪz pɔz, lʊkɪŋ ʌp ət pɛɹɪn.

This was what Perrin had been terrified of. This was what had driven the wedge between him and the wolves. Now that he'd overcome that, why would Hopper send him here? Boundless scented his confusion. The bone vanished and Boundless set his head on his paws, looking up at Perrin.

noʊm - hɪz maɪn ɔlmoʊst ɡɔn - hæd θɔɾ oʊnli ʌv bɹeɪkɪŋ fɹi ən ə kɪlɪŋ; hid bɪn ə deɪnʒɝ tə ɛvɹiwʌn ɝaʊn hɪm. ðəɹ wɑz nʌn ə ðət naʊ. baʊnləs simd ət pis. wən ðeɪd fɹid noʊm, pɛɹɪn hæd wɝid ðət ðə mæn wəd daɪ kwɪkli, bʌɾ i simd əlaɪv ən wɛl. əlaɪv, ət list - pɛɹɪn kʊdn dʒʌdʒ mʌtʃ əbaʊɾ ɪz wɛlnəs fɹəm haʊ ðə mæn lʊkt ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim.

Noam - his mind almost gone - had thought only of breaking free and of killing; he'd been a danger to everyone around him. There was none of that now. Boundless seemed at peace. When they'd freed Noam, Perrin had worried that the man would die quickly, but he seemed alive and well. Alive, at least - Perrin couldn't judge much about his wellness from how the man looked in the wolf dream.

stɪl, baʊnləsəz maɪnd wɑz fɑɹ bɛɾɝ naʊ. pɛɹɪn fɹaʊn tə hɪmsɛlf. mɔɪɹeɪn hæd sɛd ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ lɛft ə ðə mæn noʊm ɪn ðə maɪn ə ðə kɹitʃɝ.

Still, Boundless's mind was far better now. Perrin frowned to himself. Moiraine had said there was nothing left of the man Noam in the mind of the creature.

"baʊnləs," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "wʌt dʒju θɪŋk ə ðə wɝld ə mɛn?"

"Boundless," Perrin said. "What do you think of the world of men?"

pɛɹɪn wɑz ɪmiɾiətli hɪt wɪð ə ɹæpəd səksɛʃən ʌv ɪmədʒəz. peɪn. sædnəs. daɪɪŋ kɹɑps. peɪn.

Perrin was immediately hit with a rapid succession of images. Pain. Sadness. Dying crops. Pain.

ə lɑɹdʒ, staʊt mæn, hæf-dʒɹʌŋk, biɾɪŋ ə pɹɪɾi wʊmən. peɪn. ə faɪɝ. fɪɹ, sɑɹoʊ. veɪn.

A large, stout man, half-drunk, beating a pretty woman. Pain. A fire. Fear, sorrow. Vain.

pɛɹɪn stʌmbəl bæk. baʊnləs kɛp sɛndɪŋ ði ɪmədʒəz. wʌn æftɝ ənʌðɝ. ə ɡɹeɪv. ə smɔlɝ ɡɹeɪv bɪsaɪɾ ɪt, əz ɪf fəɹ ə tʃaɪld. ðə faɪɝ ɡɛɾɪŋ lɑɹdʒɝ. ə mæn -  noʊmz bɹʌðɝ, pɛɹɪn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz hɪm, ðoʊ ðə mæn hæd nɑt sim deɪnʒɝəs ət ðə taɪm -  ɛnɹeɪdʒd.

Perrin stumbled back. Boundless kept sending the images. One after another. A grave. A smaller grave beside it, as if for a child. The fire getting larger. A man -  Noam's brother, Perrin recognized him, though the man had not seemed dangerous at the time -  enraged.

ɪt wɑz ə flʌd, tu mʌtʃ. pɛɹɪn haʊld. ə ləmɛn fəɹ ðə laɪf ðət noʊm hæd lɛd, ə dɝdʒ ə sɑɹoʊ ən peɪn. noʊ wʌndɝ ðɪs mæn pɹəfɝd ðə laɪf ʌv ə wʊlf.

It was a flood, too much. Perrin howled. A lament for the life that Noam had led, a dirge of sorrow and pain. No wonder this man preferred the life of a wolf.

ði ɪmədʒəz stɑpt, ən baʊnləs tɝn ɪz hɛɾ əweɪ. pɛɹɪn faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɡæspɪŋ fəɹ bɹɛθ.

The images stopped, and Boundless turned his head away. Perrin found himself gasping for breath.

ə ɡɪft, baʊnləs sɛnt.

A gift, Boundless sent.

"baɪ ðə laɪt," pɛɹɪn wɪspɝd. "ðɪs wɑz ə tʃɔɪs, wɑzn ɪt? jə pɪk ðə wʊlf ɪntɛnʃənəli."

"By the Light," Perrin whispered. "This was a choice, wasn't it? You picked the wolf intentionally."

baʊnləs kloʊzd ɪz aɪz.

Boundless closed his eyes.

"aɪ ɔlweɪz θɔɾ ɪt wəd teɪk mi, ɪf aɪ wɝn kɛɹfəl," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"I always thought it would take me, if I weren't careful," Perrin said.

ðə wʊlf ɪz pis, baʊnləs sɛnt.

The wolf is peace, Boundless sent.

"jɛs," pɛɹɪn sɛd, leɪɪŋ ə hæn ɑn ðə wʊlfs hɛd. "aɪ ʌndɝstænd."

"Yes," Perrin said, laying a hand on the wolf's head. "I understand."

ðɪs wɑz ðə bæləns fəɹ baʊnləs. dɪfɹən fɹəm ðə bæləns fəɹ ɛlaɪəs. ən dɪfɹən fɹəm wʌt pɛɹɪn hæd faʊnd. hi ʌndɝstʊd. ðɪs dɪd nɑt min ðət ðə weɪ hi lɛt hɪmsɛlf luz kəntʃɹoʊl wɑz nɑɾ ə deɪnʒɝ. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə faɪnəl pis i niɾəd tə ʌndɝstænd. ðə faɪnəl pis ə hɪmsɛlf.

This was the balance for Boundless. Different from the balance for Elyas. And different from what Perrin had found. He understood. This did not mean that the way he let himself lose control was not a danger. But it was the final piece he needed to understand. The final piece of himself.

θæŋk ju, pɛɹɪn sɛnt. ði ɪmədʒ ə jʌŋ bʊl ðə wʊlf ən pɛɹɪn ðə mæn stændɪŋ bɪsaɪd wʌn ənʌðɝ, ətɑp ə hɪl, ðɛɹ sɛns ðə seɪm. hi sɛn ðəɾ ɪmədʒ aʊtwɝd, əz paʊɝfli əz i kʊd. tə baʊnləs, tə ðə wʊlvz nɪɹbaɪ. tə ɛni hu wəd lɪsən.

Thank you, Perrin sent. The image of Young Bull the wolf and Perrin the man standing beside one another, atop a hill, their scents the same. He sent that image outward, as powerfully as he could. To Boundless, to the wolves nearby. To any who would listen.

θæŋk ju.

Thank you.

"doʊvjndi saʊθis tɑvjə sɑɡən," oʊlvɝ sɛd, θɹoʊɪŋ ðə daɪs. ðeɪ ɹoʊld əkɹɔs ðə kænvəs flɔɹ ə ðə tɛnt. oʊlvɝ smaɪld əz ðeɪ keɪm ʌp. ɔl blæk dɑts, noʊ weɪvi laɪnz əɹ tʃɹaɪæŋɡəlz. ə lʌki ɹoʊl ɪndid.

"Dovie'andi se tovya sagain," Olver said, throwing the dice. They rolled across the canvas floor of the tent. Olver smiled as they came up. All black dots, no wavy lines or triangles. A lucky roll indeed.

oʊlvɝ muvd ɪz pis əlɔŋ ðə klɔθ bɔɹɾ ə ðə sneɪks ændi fɑksəz ɡeɪm ɪz fɑðɝ hæd meɪd fəɹ hɪm. siɪŋ ðət bɔɹd meɪɾ oʊlvɝ hɝɾ ɛvɹi taɪm. ɪt ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm ə hɪz fɑðɝ. bʌɾ i kɛpt ɪz lɪp stɪf ən dɪd nɑt lɛɾ ɛniwʌn noʊ. wɔɹiɝz dɪd nɑt kɹaɪ. ən bɪsaɪdz, sʌmdeɪ hi wəd faɪn ðət ʃeɪɾoʊ hu hæd kɪld ɪz fɑðɝ. ðən oʊlvɝ wəd ɡɛɾ ɪz vɛnʒəns.

Olver moved his piece along the cloth board of the Snakes an.d Foxes game his father had made for him. Seeing that board made Olver hurt every time. It reminded him of his father. But he kept his lip stiff and did not let anyone know. Warriors did not cry. And besides, someday he would find that Shaido who had killed his father. Then Olver would get his vengeance.

ðət wɑz ðə sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ ə mæn dɪd, wən i wɑz ə wɔɹiɝ. hi fɪɡjɝd mæt wəd hɛlp, wʌns i wɑz dʌn wɪð ɔl ə ðɪs bɪznəs ət ðə læs bæɾəl. hi wəɾ oʊ oʊlvɝ baɪ ðɛn, ən nɑt dʒʌs fəɹ ɔl ðə taɪm oʊlvɝ hæd spɛn biɪŋ mæts pɝsənəl mɛsənʒɝ. fəɹ ði ɪnfɝmeɪʃən i hæd ɡɪvən ɪm əbaʊt ðə sneɪks ən ðə fɑksəz.

That was the sort of thing a man did, when he was a warrior. He figured Mat would help, once he was done with all of this business at the Last Battle. He would owe Olver by then, and not just for all the time Olver had spent being Mat's personal messenger. For the information he had given him about the snakes and the foxes.

tælmɑnz sæɾ ɪn ə tʃɛɹ bɪsaɪɾ oʊlvɝ. ðə stoʊɪk mæn wɑz ɹiɾɪŋ ə bʊk, oʊnli peɪɪŋ maɪld ətɛnʃən tə ðə ɡeɪm. hi wɑz nɑt nɪɹli əz ɡʊd tə pleɪ wɪð əz noʊl əɹ θɔɹn. bʌt ðɛn, tælmɑnz hæd nɑt bɪn sɛn tə pleɪ wɪð oʊlvɝ soʊ mʌtʃ əz wɑtʃ oʊvɝ hɪm.

Talmanes sat in a chair beside Olver. The stoic man was reading a book, only paying mild attention to the game. He was not nearly as good to play with as Noal or Thorn. But then, Talmanes had not been sent to play with Olver so much as watch over him.

mæt dɪd nɑt wɑn oʊlvɝ tə noʊ ðəɾ i hæd ɡɔn tə ðə taʊɝ ʌv ɡɛndʒeɪaɪ, livɪŋ oʊlvɝ bɪhaɪnd.

Mat did not want Olver to know that he had gone to the Tower of Ghenjei, leaving Olver behind.

wɛl, oʊlvɝ wɑz nɑɾ ə ful, ən i nu wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. hi wɑz nɑt mæd, nɑt ɹɪli. noʊl wɑz ə ɡʊd wʌn tə teɪk, ən ɪf mæt kəɾ oʊnli teɪk θɹi, wɛl . . . noʊl kəd faɪt bɛɾɝ ðən oʊlvɝ. soʊ ɪt meɪd sɛns fəɹ ɪm tə ɡoʊ.

Well, Olver was not a fool, and he knew what was going on. He was not mad, not really. Noal was a good one to take, and if Mat could only take three, well . . . Noal could fight better than Olver. So it made sense for him to go.

bʌt nɛks taɪm, oʊlvɝ wəd də ðə tʃuzɪŋ. ən ðən mæt hæd bɛɾɝ bi naɪs, əɹ i wəd bi lɛf bɪhaɪnd.

But next time, Olver would do the choosing. And then Mat had better be nice, or he would be left behind.

"jɔɹ ɹoʊl, tælmɑnz," oʊlvɝ sɛd.

"Your roll, Talmanes," Olver said.

tælmɑnz mʌmbəl sʌmθɪŋ, ɹitʃɪŋ oʊvɝ ən tɔsɪŋ ðə hændfʊl ə daɪs wɪθaʊt luzɪŋ ɪz pleɪs ɪn ðə bʊk. hi wɑz ən ɔl-ɹaɪt fɛloʊ, ðoʊ ə lɪɾəl stɪf. oʊlvɝ wəd nɑt tʃuz tə hæv ə mæn laɪk ɪm ɑn ə ɡʊd naɪɾ ə dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ən hʌntɪŋ sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz. əz sun əz oʊlvɝ wɑz oʊld ɪnʌf tə ɡoʊ dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ən hʌntɪŋ sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz. hi fɪɡjɝɾ i wəd bi ɹɛɾi ɪn ənʌðɝ jɪɹ əɹ soʊ.

Talmanes mumbled something, reaching over and tossing the handful of dice without losing his place in the book. He was an all-right fellow, though a little stiff. Olver would not choose to have a man like him on a good night of drinking and hunting serving girls. As soon as Olver was old enough to go drinking and hunting serving girls. He figured he would be ready in another year or so.

oʊlvɝ muv ðə sneɪks ən fɑksəz, ðən pɪkt ʌp ðə daɪs fəɹ ɪz nɛks θɹoʊ. hi hæd fɪɡjɝɾ ɪɾ ɔl aʊt. ðəɹ wɝ ə lɑɾ ə ʃeɪɾoʊ aʊt ðɛɹ, ən i hæd noʊ aɪdiə haʊ tə faɪn ðə wʌn u hæd kɪld ɪz pɛɹəns. bʌt ði æɛlfɪn, ðeɪ kəɾ ænsɝ kwɛstʃənz. hi hæd hɝd mæt tɔkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt. soʊ oʊlvɝ wəd ɡoʊ ɡɛɾ ɪz ænsɝz, ðən tʃɹæk ðə mæn daʊn. izi əz ɹaɪɾɪŋ ə hɔɹs. hi dʒʌs hæd tə tʃɹeɪn wɪð ðə bæn bɪfɔɹhænd, soʊ hi kəd faɪt wɛl ɪnʌf tə si dʌn wʌt niɾəd tə bi dʌn.

Olver moved the snakes and foxes, then picked up the dice for his next throw. He had figured it all out. There were a lot of Shaido out there, and he had no idea how to find the one who had killed his parents. But the Aelfinn, they could answer questions. He had heard Mat talking about it. So Olver would go get his answers, then track the man down. Easy as riding a horse. He just had to train with the Band beforehand, so he could fight well enough to see done what needed to be done.

hi θɹu hɪz daɪs. ənʌðɝ fʊl ɹʌn. oʊlvɝ smaɪld, muvɪŋ ɪz pis bæk təwɔɹd ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə bɔɹd, hæf lɔst ɪn θɔɾ ən dʒɹimɪŋ ə ðə deɪ wən i wəd faɪnəli ɡɛɾ ɪz ɹivɛnʒ, laɪk wɑz pɹɑpɝ.

He threw his dice. Another full run. Olver smiled, moving his piece back toward the center of the board, half lost in thought and dreaming of the day when he would finally get his revenge, like was proper.

hi muvd ɪz pis əkɹɔs wʌn mɔɹ laɪn, ðən fɹoʊz.

He moved his piece across one more line, then froze.

hɪz pis wɑz ɑn ðə sɛntɝ spɑt.

His piece was on the center spot.

"aɪ wʌn!" hi ɪkskleɪmd.

"I won!" he exclaimed.

tælmɑnz lʊkt ʌp, paɪp loʊɝɪŋ ɪn ɪz lɪps. hi kɑkt ɪz hɛd, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə bɔɹd. "bɝn mi," hi mʌɾɝd. "wi mʌst əv kaʊntəd ɹɔŋ, əɹ . . ."

Talmanes looked up, pipe lowering in his lips. He cocked his head, staring at the board. "Burn me," he muttered. "We must have counted wrong, or . . ."

"kaʊntəd ɹɔŋ?"

"Counted wrong?"

"aɪ min . . ." tælmɑnz lʊk stʌnd. "ju kænt wɪn. ðə ɡeɪm kæn bi wʌn. ɪt dʒʌs kænt."

"I mean . . ." Talmanes looked stunned. "You can't win. The game can't be won. It just can't."

ðət wɑz nɑnsɛns. waɪ wəɾ oʊlvɝ paɪeɪ ɪf ɪt kəd nɑt bi wʌn? hi smaɪld, lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə bɔɹd. ðə sneɪks ən ðə fɑksəz wɝ wɪðɪn wʌn tɔs ʌv ɡɛɾɪŋ tə hɪz pis ən meɪkɪŋ ɪm luz. bʌt ðɪs taɪm, hid ɡɑɾən ɔl ðə weɪ tə ði aʊtsaɪd ɹɪŋ ən bæk. hi hæd wʌn.

That was nonsense. Why would Olver piay if it could not be won? He smiled, looking over the board. The snakes and the foxes were within one toss of getting to his piece and making him lose. But this time, he'd gotten all the way to the outside ring and back. He had won.

ɡʊd θɪŋ, tu. hi hæd stɑɹɾəd tə θɪŋk i wəd nɛvɝ mænədʒ ɪt!

Good thing, too. He had started to think he would never manage it!

oʊlvɝ stʊɾ ʌp, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ ɪz lɛɡz. tælmɑnz klaɪmd ɔf ɪz tʃɛɹ, skwɑɾɪŋ daʊn bɪsaɪd ðə ɡeɪm bɔɹɾ ən skɹætʃɪŋ ɪz hɛd, smoʊk aɪdli kɝlɪŋ fɹəm ði ɛn ə hɪz paɪp.

Olver stood up, stretching his legs. Talmanes climbed off his chair, squatting down beside the game board and scratching his head, smoke idly curling from the end of his pipe.

"aɪ hoʊp mæt wɪl bi bæk sun," oʊlvɝ sɛd.

"I hope Mat will be back soon," Olver said.

"aɪm ʃʊɹ hɪl bi," tælmɑnz sɛd. "hɪz tæsk fəɹ əɹ mædʒəsti ʃʊdn teɪk mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ." ðət wɑz ðə laɪ ðeɪ hæd toʊld oʊlvɝ - ðət mæt, θɔɹn ən noʊl hæd ɡɔn ɔf ɑn səm sikɹəɾ ɛɹən fəɹ ðə kwin. wɛl, ðət wɑz dʒʌst ənʌðɝ ɹizən ðət mæt wəɾ oʊ hɪm. ɑnəsli, mæt kəd bi soʊ pɹɪm səmtaɪmz, æktɪŋ əz ɪf oʊlvɝ kəd nɑt teɪk kɛɹ ə hɪmsɛlf.

"I'm sure he will be," Talmanes said. "His task for Her Majesty shouldn't take much longer." That was the lie they had told Olver - that Mat, Thorn and Noal had gone off on some secret errand for the Queen. Well, that was just another reason that Mat would owe him. Honestly, Mat could be so prim sometimes, acting as if Olver could not take care of himself.

oʊlvɝ ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, stʃɹoʊlɪŋ oʊvɝ tə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə tɛnt, wɛɹ ə stæk ə mæts peɪpɝz sæt weɪɾɪŋ ɪz ɹɪtɝn. ðɛɹ, pikɪŋ fɹəm bɪtwin tu ʌv ðɛm, oʊlvɝ noʊɾəst sʌmθɪŋ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ. ə bɪɾ ə ɹɛd, laɪk blʌd. hi ɹitʃt ʌp, slaɪɾɪŋ ə wɔɹn lɛɾɝ fɹəm bɪtwin tu ʌv ðə ʃits. ɪt wɑz sil kloʊzd wɪð ə dɑləp ʌv wæks.

Olver shook his head, strolling over to the side of the tent, where a stack of Mat's papers sat waiting his return. There, peeking from between two of them, Olver noticed something interesting. A bit of red, like blood. He reached up, sliding a worn letter from between two of the sheets. It was sealed closed with a dollop of wax.

oʊlvɝ fɹaʊnd, tɝnɪŋ ðə smɔl lɛɾɝ oʊvɝ. hi hæd sin mæt kæɹiɪŋ ɪɾ əbaʊt. waɪ hæɾ i nɑɾ oʊpən ɪt? ðət wɑz daʊnɹaɪt ɹud. sɛɾəl hæd wɝk hɑɹd tə ɪkspleɪn pɹəpɹaɪəɾi tə oʊlvɝ, ən waɪl moʊst ʌv wʌt ʃi sɛd meɪd noʊ sɛns - hi dʒʌs nɑɾəd ɪz hɛd soʊ ʃi wəd lɛɾ ɪm snʌɡəl ʌp tə hɝ - hi wɑz ʃʊɹ jə wɝ səpoʊz tə oʊpən lɛɾɝz pipəl sɛn ju, ðən ɹɪspɑn kaɪnli.

Olver frowned, turning the small letter over. He had seen Mat carrying it about. Why had he not opened it? That was downright rude. Setalle had worked hard to explain propriety to Olver, and while most of what she said made no sense - he just nodded his head so she would let him snuggle up to her - he was sure you were supposed to open letters people sent you, then respond kindly.

hi tɝn ðə lɛɾɝ oʊvɝ əɡɛn, ðən ʃɹʌɡd ən bɹoʊk ðə sil. oʊlvɝ wɑz mæts pɝsənəl mɛsənʒɝ, ɔl əfɪʃəl ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ɪt wɑz noʊ wʌndɝ mæt səmtaɪmz fɝɡɑt θɪŋz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz oʊlvɝz dʒɑb tə teɪk kɛɹ ə hɪm. naʊ ðət ləpɪn wɑz ɡɔn, mæt wəd niɾ ɛkstʃɹə teɪkɪŋ kɛɹ ʌv. ɪt wɑz wʌn ə ðə ɹizənz oʊlvɝ steɪd wɪð ðə bænd. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌt mæt wəd də wɪθaʊt hɪm.

He turned the letter over again, then shrugged and broke the seal. Olver was Mat's personal messenger, all official and everything. It was no wonder Mat sometimes forgot things, but it was Olver's job to take care of him. Now that Lopin was gone, Mat would need extra taking care of. It was one of the reasons Olver stayed with the Band. He was not sure what Mat would do without him.

hi ənfoʊldəd ðə lɛɾɝ ən ɹimuvd ə smɔl, stɪf pis ə peɪpɝ ɪnsaɪd. hi fɹaʊnd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk aʊt ðə wɝdz. hi wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ pɹɪɾi ɡʊd wɪð ɹiɾɪŋ, moʊsli kəz ə sɛɾəl, bʌt səm wɝdz ɡeɪv ɪm tʃɹʌbəl. hi skɹætʃt ɪz hɛd. "tælmɑnz," hi sɛd. "ju ʃəd pɹɑbli ɹɛd ðɪs."

He unfolded the letter and removed a small, stiff piece of paper inside. He frowned, trying to make out the words. He was getting pretty good with reading, mostly because of Setalle, but some words gave him trouble. He scratched his head. "Talmanes," he said. "You should probably read this."

"wʌts ðæt?" ðə mæn lʊkt ʌp fɹəm ðə ɡeɪm. "hɪɹ, naʊ! oʊlvɝ, wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ? ðət wɑzn tə bi oʊpənd!" ðə mæn ɹoʊz, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ oʊvɝ tə snætʃ ðə peɪpɝ fɹəm oʊlvɝz fɪŋɡɝz.

"What's that?" the man looked up from the game. "Here, now! Olver, what are you doing? That wasn't to be opened!" The man rose, striding over to snatch the paper from Olver's fingers.

"bʌt - " oʊlvɝ bɪɡæn.

"But - " Olver began.

"lɔɹd mæt dɪdn oʊpən ɪt," tælmɑnz sɛd. "hi nu ðəɾ ɪt wəd ɡɛɾ əs taɪɾ ʌp ɪn waɪt taʊɝ pɑlətɪks. hi weɪɾəd ɔl ðoʊz wiks! naʊ lʊk wʌt juv dʌn. aɪ wʌndɝ ɪf wi kən stʌf ɪt bæk ɪnsaɪd . . ."

"Lord Mat didn't open it," Talmanes said. "He knew that it would get us tied up in White Tower politics. He waited all those weeks! Now look what you've done. I wonder if we can stuff it back inside . . ."

"tælmɑnz," oʊlvɝ sɛɾ ɪnsɪstənli. "aɪ θɪŋk ɪts ɪmpɔɹɾənt"

"Talmanes," Olver said insistently. "I think it's important"

tælmɑnz hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. hi sim tɔɹn fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən hɛl ðə lɛɾɝ soʊ ðət ðə laɪt ʃoʊn bɛɾɝ ɑn ɪt. hi ɹɛɾ ɪt kwɪkli, wɪð ði ɛɹ ʌv ə bɔɪ stilɪŋ fud fɹəm ə stʃɹit vɛndɝz kɑɹɾ ən stʌfɪŋ ɪndə hɪz maʊθ bɪfɔɹ i kəd bi dɪskʌvɝd.

Talmanes hesitated. He seemed torn for a moment, then held the letter so that the light shone better on it. He read it quickly, with the air of a boy stealing food from a street vendor's cart and stuffing into his mouth before he could be discovered.

tælmɑnz wɪspɝɾ ə kɝs ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. hi ɹɛd ðə lɛɾɝ əɡɛn, ðən kɝs mɔɹ laʊdli.

Talmanes whispered a curse under his breath. He read the letter again, then cursed more loudly.

hi ɡɹæbd ɪz sɔɹd fɹəm ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum ən dæʃt aʊɾ ə ðə tɛnt. hi lɛf ðə lɛɾɝ ɑn ðə flɔɹ.

He grabbed his sword from the side of the room and dashed out of the tent. He left the letter on the floor.

oʊlvɝ lʊkt ɪɾ oʊvɝ əɡɛn, saʊndɪŋ aʊt ðə wɝdz i hæd nɑɾ ʌndɝstʊd ðə fɝs taɪm.

Olver looked it over again, sounding out the words he had not understood the first time.

meɪtʃɹim, ɪf jə ɑɹ oʊpənɪŋ ðɪs, ðən aɪm dɛd. aɪ hæd plæn tə ɹɪtɝn ən ɹilis jə ʌv jəɹ oʊθ ɪn ə sɪŋɡəl deɪ. ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛni pətɛnʃəl kɑmpləkeɪʃənz tə maɪ nɛks tæsk, haʊɛvɝ, ən ə lɑɹdʒ tʃæns ðəɾ əl nɑt sɝvaɪv. aɪ niɾəd tə noʊ ðəɾ aɪd lɛf sʌmwʌn bɪhaɪn u kəd si ðɪs wɝk dʌn.

Matrim, If you are opening this, then I am dead. I had planned to return and release you of your oath in a single day. There are many potential complications to my next task, however, and a large chance that I will not survive. I needed to know that I'd left someone behind who could see this work done.

fɔɹtʃənətli, ɪf ðɛɹz wʌn θɪŋ aɪ bɪliv aɪ kən ɹɪlaɪ əpɑn, ɪts jəɹ kjʊɹiɑsəɾi. aɪ səspɛk jə læstəɾ ə fju deɪz bɪfɔɹ oʊpənɪŋ ðɪs lɛɾɝ, wɪtʃ ɪz lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ mi tə hæv ɹɪtɝn ɪf aɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə. ðɛɹfɔɹ, ðɪs tæsk fɔlz əpɑn ju.

Fortunately, if there's one thing I believe I can rely upon, it is your curiosity. I suspect you lasted a few days before opening this letter, which is long enough for me to have returned if I were going to. Therefore, this task falls upon you.

ðəɹ ɪz ə weɪɡeɪɾ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. ɪts ɡɑɹɾəd, bæɹəkeɪɾɪd, ən θɔt sɪkjʊɹ. ɪts nɑt.

There is a Waygate in Caemlyn. It is guarded, barricaded, and thought secure. It is not.

ən ɪnɔɹməs fɔɹs ə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn muvz θɹu ðə weɪz təwɔɹd keɪɛmlɪn. aɪ də nɑt noʊ wən ðeɪ lɛft ɪɡzækli, bʌt ðəɹ ʃəd bi taɪm tə stɑp ðɛm. jə mʌst ɹitʃ ðə kwin ən pɝsweɪɾ əɹ tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðə weɪɡeɪt. ɪt kən bi dʌn; wɔlɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp wɪl nɑt səfaɪs. ɪf jə kænɑt dɪstʃɹɔɪ ɪt, ðə kwin mʌs bɹɪŋ ɔl ə hɝ fɔɹsɪz tə bɛɹ əpɑn ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə loʊkeɪʃən.

An enormous force of Shadowspawn moves through the Ways toward Caemlyn. I do not know when they left exactly, but there should be time to stop them. You must reach the Queen and persuade her to destroy the Waygate. It can be done; walling it up will not suffice. If you cannot destroy it, the Queen must bring all of her forces to bear upon guarding the location.

ɪf jə feɪl ɪn ðɪs, aɪ fɪɹ keɪɛmlɪn wɪl bi lɔs bɪfɔɹ ðə mʌnθ ɪz aʊt.

If you fail in this, I fear Caemlyn will be lost before the month is out.

sɪnsɪɹli, vɛɹɪn mæθwɪn oʊlvɝ ɹʌbd ɪz tʃɪn. wʌt wɑz ə weɪɡeɪt? hi θɔɾ i hæd hɝd mæt ən θɔɹn tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛm. hi tʊk ðə lɛɾɝ ən wɔkt aʊɾ ə ðə tɛnt.

Sincerely, Verin Mathwin Olver rubbed his chin. What was a Waygate? He thought he had heard Mat and Thorn talking about them. He took the letter and walked out of the tent.

tælmɑnz stʊd dʒʌst aʊtsaɪd ðə tɛnt, lʊkɪŋ istwɝd. təwɔɹd keɪɛmlɪn.

Talmanes stood just outside the tent, looking eastward. Toward Caemlyn.

ə ɹɛɾɪʃ heɪz hʌŋ ɑn ðə hɝaɪzən, ə ɡloʊ oʊvɝ ðə sɪɾi. wʌn lɑɹdʒɝ ðən hæd bɪn ðəɹ ɑn ʌðɝ naɪts.

A reddish haze hung on the horizon, a glow over the city. One larger than had been there on other nights.

"laɪt pɹəzɝv ʌs," tælmɑnz wɪspɝd. "ɪts bɝnɪŋ. ðə sɪɾi ɪz bɝnɪŋ." hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, əz ɪf klɪɹɪŋ ɪt, ðən ɹeɪzd ə kɔl. "tə ɑɹmz! tʃɹɑləks ɪn keɪɛmlɪn! ðə sɪɾi ɪz ət wɔɹ! tə ɑɹmz, mɛn!

"Light preserve us," Talmanes whispered. "It's burning. The city is burning." He shook his head, as if clearing it, then raised a call. "To arms! Trollocs in Caemlyn! The city is at war! To arms, men!

bɝn mi, wɪv tə ɡɛɾ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi ən sælvədʒ ðoʊz dʒɹæɡənz! ɪf ðoʊz fɔl ɪɹiɾoʊ ðə ʃædoʊz hænz, wɝ ɔl dɛd mɛn!"

Burn me, we have to get into the city and salvage those dragons! If those fall irito the Shadow's hands, we're all dead men!"

oʊlvɝ loʊɝd ðə lɛɾɝ ɪn ɪz fɪŋɡɝz, aɪz waɪd. tʃɹɑləks ɪn keɪɛmlɪn? ɪt wəd bi laɪk ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ ɪn kɛɹhin, oʊnli wɝs.

Olver lowered the letter in his fingers, eyes wide. Trollocs in Caemlyn? It would be like the Shaido in Cairhien, only worse.

hi hɝiɾ ɪndə mæts tɛnt, stʌmbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə ɹʌɡ, ən θɹu hɪmsɛlf tə hɪz niz bɪsaɪɾ ɪz slipɪŋ pælət. hi hɝidli pʊld ət ðə stɪtʃ-ɪŋz ɑn ðə saɪd. ðə wʊl stʌft ɪnsaɪd bʌlʒd aʊt θɹu ði oʊpənɪŋ. hi ɹitʃt ɪn, fɪʃɪŋ əbaʊt, ən pʊl fɹi ðə lɑɹdʒ naɪf i hæd hɪɾən ðɛɹ.

He hurried into Mat's tent, stumbling over the rug, and threw himself to his knees beside his sleeping pallet. He hurriedly pulled at the stitch-ings on the side. The wool stuffed inside bulged out through the opening. He reached in, fishing about, and pulled free the large knife he had hidden there.

ɪt wɑz ɹæpt ɪn ə lɛðɝ ʃiθ. hi hæd teɪkən ɪt fɹəm wʌn ə ðə bænz kɔɹɾɝmæstɝz, bɝɡɛvɪn, wən i hæd nɑt bɪn lʊkɪŋ.

It was wrapped in a leather sheath. He had taken it from one of the Band's quartermasters, Bergevin, when he had not been looking.

æftɝ kɛɹhin, oʊlvɝ hæd swɔɹn tə hɪmsɛlf ðəɾ i wəd nɛvɝ pɹuv hɪmsɛlf ə kaʊɝɾ əɡɛn. hi ɡɹɪp ðə lɑɹdʒ naɪf ɪn tu hænz, nʌkəlz waɪt, ðən dæʃt aʊɾ ə ðə tɛnt.

After Cairhien, Olver had sworn to himself that he would never prove himself a coward again. He gripped the large knife in two hands, knuckles white, then dashed out of the tent.

ɪt wɑz taɪm tə faɪt.

It was time to fight.

bɑɹiɡə stʌmbəld əz i kɹɔl pæs ðə stʌmp ʌv ə fɔlən tʃɹi. blʌd fɹəm ɪz bɹaʊ dʒɹɪpt ɑntu ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ən ðə dɑɹk-spɛkəl nɛɾəlz sim tə soʊk ɪɾ ɪn, fiɾɪŋ əpɑn ɪz laɪf. hi ɹeɪzd ə tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ hæn tə hɪz bɹaʊ. ðə bændɪdʒ wɑz soʊk θɹu.

Barriga stumbled as he crawled past the stump of a fallen tree. Blood from his brow dripped onto the ground, and the dark-speckled nettles seemed to soak it in, feeding upon his life. He raised a trembling hand to his brow. The bandage was soaked through.

noʊ taɪm tə stɑp. noʊ taɪm! hi fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə hɪz fiɾ ən heɪstəli skɹæmbəl θɹu ðə bɹaʊn sɔlif. hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə lʊk ət ðə blæk spɑts ɑn ðə plæns. ðə blaɪt, hiɾ ɛntɝd ðə blaɪt. bʌt wʌɾ ɛls wɑz i tə du? ðə tʃɹɑləks ɹæmpeɪdʒ tə ðə saʊθ; ðə taʊɝz hæɾ ɔl fɔlən. kændɝ ɪtsɛlf hæd fɔlən.

No time to stop. No time! He forced himself to his feet and hastily scrambled through the brown sawleaf. He tried not to look at the black spots on the plants. The Blight, he'd entered the Blight. But what else was he to do? The Trollocs rampaged to the south; the towers had all fallen. Kandor itself had fallen.

bɑɹiɡə tʃɹɪpt ən fɛl tə ði ɝθ. hi ɡɹoʊnd, ɹoʊlɪŋ oʊvɝ, ɡæspɪŋ. hi wɑz ɪn ə tʃɹɔf bɪtwin tu hɪlz nɔɹθ ə hiθ taʊɝ. hɪz wʌns faɪn kloʊðɪŋ - koʊɾ ən vɛst ə ɹɪtʃ vɛlvət - wɑz ɹæɡəɾ ən steɪnd wɪð blʌd. hi stæŋk ə smoʊk, ən wən i kloʊzd ɪz aɪz, hi sɔ ðə tʃɹɑləks.

Barriga tripped and fell to the earth. He groaned, rolling over, gasping. He was in a trough between two hills north of Heeth Tower. His once fine clothing - coat and vest of rich velvet - was ragged and stained with blood. He stank of smoke, and when he closed his eyes, he saw the Trollocs.

wɑʃɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz kæɹəvæn, slɔɾɝɪŋ ɪz sɝvəns ən soʊlʒɝz.

Washing over his caravan, slaughtering his servants and soldiers.

ðeɪɾ ɔl fɔlən. θʌm, jæŋ . . . boʊθ dɛd. laɪt, ðeɪ wɝ ɔl dɛd.

They'd all fallen. Thum, Yang . . . both dead. Light, they were all dead.

bɑɹiɡə ʃʌɾɝəd. haʊ hæɾ i kʌm tə ðɪs? hi wɑz dʒʌst ə mɝtʃənt. aɪ ʃʊɾə lɪsən tə ɹɪbɪk, hi θɔt. smoʊk ɹoʊz fɹəm hiθ taʊɝ bɪhaɪnd. ðət wɑz wɛɹ ɪz kæɹəvæn hæd bɪn ɡoʊɪŋ. haʊ kəd ðɪs bi hæpənɪŋ?

Barriga shuddered. How had he come to this? He was just a merchant. I should have listened to Rebek, he thought. Smoke rose from Heeth Tower behind. That was where his caravan had been going. How could this be happening?

hi niɾəd tə kip muvɪŋ. ist. hid meɪk fəɹ ɝæfəl. ði ʌðɝ bɔɹɾɝlændz wəd kʊdn əv fɔlən, kəd ðeɪ?

He needed to keep moving. East. He'd make for Arafel. The other Borderlands would couldn't have fallen, could they?

hi klaɪmd ʌp ə hɪlsaɪd, hænz pʊlɪŋ əɡɛnst ʃɔɹt, kɔɪlɪŋ tʃoʊk-vaɪn. laɪk wɝmz bɪtwin ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. hi wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ wuzi. hi ɹitʃt ðə hɪltɑp; ðə wɝld wɑz spɪnɪŋ. hi fɛl ðɛɹ, blʌd sipɪŋ fɹəm ɪz bændɪdʒ.

He climbed up a hillside, hands pulling against short, coiling choke-vine. Like worms between his fingers. He was growing woozy. He reached the hilltop; the world was spinning. He fell there, blood seeping from his bandage.

sʌmθɪŋ muvd ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. hi blɪŋkt. ðoʊz klaʊdz əbʌv wɝ ə tɛmpəst. ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, θɹi fɪɡjɝz wɛɹɪŋ blæk ən bɹaʊn əpɹoʊtʃt wɪð ə slik ɡɹeɪs. mɹdʒɹɑl!

Something moved in front of him. He blinked. Those clouds above were a tempest. In front of him, three figures wearing black and brown approached with a sleek grace. Myrddraal!

noʊ. hi blɪŋk ðə tɪɹz ən blʌd fɹəm ɪz aɪz. noʊ, ðoʊz wɝn mɹdʒɹɑl. ðeɪ wɝ mɛn, wɛɹɪŋ ɹɛd veɪlz oʊvɝ ðɛɹ feɪsəz. ðeɪ wɔkt əɾ ə kɹaʊtʃ, skænɪŋ ðə tɝeɪn, ʃɔɹt spɪɹz wɔɹn ɑn ðɛɹ bæks.

No. He blinked the tears and blood from his eyes. No, those weren't Myrddraal. They were men, wearing red veils over their faces. They walked at a crouch, scanning the terrain, short spears worn on their backs.

"laɪt bi pɹeɪzd," hi wɪspɝd. "il." hid bɪn ɪn ændɝ wən ɹænd ælθɹ hæd kʌm.

"Light be praised," he whispered. "Aiel." He'd been in Andor when Rand al'Thor had come.

ɛvɹiwʌn nu ði il fɑloʊd ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. hi hæd teɪm ðɛm.

Everyone knew the Aiel followed the Dragon Reborn. He had tamed them.

aɪm seɪf!

I'm safe!

wʌn ə ði il stɛpt ʌp tə bɑɹiɡə. waɪ wɑz ðə mænz veɪl ɹɛd? ðət wɑz ənjuʒəwəl. ði ilz dɑɹk aɪz wɝ ɡlæsi ən hɑɹd. ði il mæn əndɪɾ ɪz veɪl, ən ɹɪvild ə smaɪlɪŋ feɪs.

One of the Aiel stepped up to Barriga. Why was the man's veil red? That was unusual. The Aiel's dark eyes were glassy and hard. The Aiel man undid his veil, and revealed a smiling face.

ðə mænz tiθ hæd bɪn faɪl tə pɔɪns. hɪz smaɪl bɹɔɾənd, ən i slɪpt ə naɪf fɹəm ɪz bɛlt.

The man's teeth had been filed to points. His smile broadened, and he slipped a knife from his belt.

bɑɹiɡə stʌɾɝd, lʊkɪŋ ət ðət hɔɹɪfɪk mɔ ən ðə ɡli ɪn ðɪs mænz aɪz əz i ɹitʃt ɪn fəɹ ðə kɪl. ðiz wɝn il. ðeɪ wɝ sʌmθɪŋ ɛls.

Barriga stuttered, looking at that horrific maw and the glee in this man's eyes as he reached in for the kill. These weren't Aiel. They were something else.

sʌmθɪŋ tɛɹəbəl.

Something terrible.

ɹænd ælθɹ, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, sæt kwaɪətli ɪn ɪz dʒɹim. hi bɹiðd ɪn ðə kul, tʃɪl ɛɹ.

Rand al'Thor, the Dragon Reborn, sat quietly in his dream. He breathed in the cool, chill air.

waɪt klaʊdz floʊɾəd dʒɛnli ɝaʊn hɪm, kɪsɪŋ ɪz skɪn wɪð ðɛɹ kɑndənseɪʃən.

White clouds floated gently around him, kissing his skin with their condensation.

hɪz θɹoʊn fəɹ ðə naɪt wɑz ə flæt boʊldɝ ɑn ə maʊntən sloʊp; hi lʊk daʊn θɹu ðə klaʊdz əɾ ə nɛɹoʊ væli. ðɪs wɑzn ðə ɹil loʊkeɪʃən. ɪt wɑzn ivən ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz, ðət pleɪs wɛɹ hid fɔt fɔɹseɪkən, ðə pleɪs hid bɪn toʊld wɑz soʊ deɪnʒɝəs.

His throne for the night was a flat boulder on a mountain slope; he looked down through the clouds at a narrow valley. This wasn't the real location. It wasn't even the World of Dreams, that place where he'd fought Forsaken, the place he'd been told was so dangerous.

noʊ, ðɪs wɑz wʌn ə hɪz oʊn ɔɹɾənɛɹi dʒɹimz. hi kəntʃɹoʊld əm naʊ. ðeɪ wɝ ə pleɪs i kəd faɪn pis tə θɪŋk, pɹətɛktəd baɪ wɔɹdz waɪl ɪz bɑɾi slɛp bɪsaɪd mɪn ɪn ðɛɹ nu kæmp, sɝaʊndəd baɪ bɔɹɾɝləndɝz, sɛɾ ʌp ɑn ðə fild ə mɛɹɪlɝ. ɛɡwin wɑz ðɛɹ, wɪð ɑɹmiz mɑɹʃəld. hi wɑz ɹɛɾi fəɹ ðæt. hid kaʊntəɾ ɑn ɪt.

No, this was one of his own ordinary dreams. He controlled them now. They were a place he could find peace to think, protected by wards while his body slept beside Min in their new camp, surrounded by Borderlanders, set up on the Field of Merrilor. Egwene was there, with armies marshaled. He was ready for that. He'd counted on it.

ɑn ðə mɑɹoʊ, ðeɪd hɪɹ ɪz dɪmænz. nɑt wʌɾ i wəd dɪmæn tə kip ɪm fɹəm bɹeɪkɪŋ ðə silz - hi wɑz gɑnə də ðæt, ɹəɡɑɹdləs ʌv wʌɾ ɛɡwin sɛd.

On the morrow, they'd hear his demands. Not what he would demand to keep him from breaking the seals - he was going to do that, regardless of what Egwene said.

noʊ, ðiz wəd bi ðə dɪmænz i meɪɾ ɑn ðə mɑnɑɹks ə ðə wɝld ɪn ɪkstʃeɪnʒ fəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl tə feɪs ðə dɑɹk wʌn.

No, these would be the demands he made on the monarchs of the world in exchange for going to Shayol Ghul to face the Dark One.

hi wɑzn sɝɾən wʌt hid də ɪf ðeɪ ɹəfjuz hɪm. ðeɪd faɪn ɪt vɛɹi dɪfəkəl tə də soʊ.

He wasn't certain what he'd do if they refused him. They'd find it very difficult to do so.

səmtaɪmz, ɪt kəd bi jusfəl tə hæv ə ɹɛpjəteɪʃən fəɹ biɪŋ ɪɹæʃənəl.

Sometimes, it could be useful to have a reputation for being irrational.

hi bɹiðd ɪn dipli, pisfəl. hɪɹ, ɪn ɪz dʒɹimz, ðə hɪlz ɡɹu ɡɹin. əz i ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðɛm. ɪn ðət neɪmləs væli bɪloʊ, ʃɛltɝɾ ɪn ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst, hid bɪɡʌn ə dʒɝni. nɑɾ ɪz fɝst, ən nɑɾ ɪz læst, bʌt pɝhæps ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt. wʌn ə ðə moʊs peɪnfəl, fəɹ sɝɾən.

He breathed in deeply, peaceful. Here, in his dreams, the hills grew green. As he remembered them. In that nameless valley below, sheltered in the Mountains of Mist, he'd begun a journey. Not his first, and not his last, but perhaps the most important. One of the most painful, for certain.

"ænd naʊ aɪ kʌm bæk," hi wɪspɝd. "aɪv tʃeɪnʒd əɡɛn. ə mæn ɪz ɔlweɪz tʃeɪnʒɪŋ."

"And now I come back," he whispered. "I've changed again. A man is always changing."

hi fɛlt ə junəɾi ɪn ɹɪtɝnɪŋ hɪɹ, tə ðə pleɪs wɛɹ hid fɝs kənfɹʌntəd ðə kɪlɝ ɪnsaɪd hɪm. ðə pleɪs wɛɹ hid fɝs tʃɹaɪd tə fli fɹəm ðoʊz hum i ʃʊɾə kɛp nɪɹ. hi kloʊzd ɪz aɪz, ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ tʃɹæŋkwɪlɪɾi. kɑmnəs. hɑɹməni.

He felt a unity in returning here, to the place where he'd first confronted the killer inside him. The place where he'd first tried to flee from those whom he should have kept near. He closed his eyes, enjoying tranquility. Calmness. Harmony.

ɪn ðə dɪstəns, hi hɝd skɹimz ə peɪn.

In the distance, he heard screams of pain.

ɹænd oʊpən ɪz aɪz. wʌt hæd ðət bɪn? hi stʊɾ ʌp, spɪnɪŋ. ðɪs pleɪs wɑz kɹieɪɾəd ə hɪz oʊn maɪnd, pɹətɛktəɾ ən seɪf. ɪt kʊdnt -  ðə skɹim keɪm əɡɛn. dɪstənt. hi fɹaʊn ən ɹeɪzd ə hænd. ðə sin ɝaʊn ɪm vænɪʃt, pʌfɪŋ əweɪ ɪndə mɪst. hi stʊɾ ɪn blæknəs.

Rand opened his eyes. What had that been? He stood up, spinning. This place was created of his own mind, protected and safe. It couldn't -  The scream came again. Distant. He frowned and raised a hand. The scene around him vanished, puffing away into mist. He stood in blackness.

ðɛɹ, hi θɔt. hi wɑz ɪn ə lɔŋ kɔɹəɾɝ ə dɑɹk wʊd pænəlɪŋ. hi wɔk daʊn ɪt, buts θʌmpɪŋ. ðət skɹimɪŋ. ɪt ʃʊk ɪz pis. sʌmwʌn wɑz ɪn peɪn. ðeɪ niɾəd hɪm.

There, he thought. He was in a long corridor of dark wood paneling. He walked down it, boots thumping. That screaming. It shook his peace. Someone was in pain. They needed him.

ɹænd bɪɡæn tə ɹʌn. hi ɹitʃt ə dɔɹweɪ ət ði ɛn ə ðə hɔl. ðə dɔɹz ɹʌsət wʊd wɑz nɑbd ən ɹɪdʒd, laɪk ðə θɪk ɹuts ʌv ən eɪntʃən tʃɹi. ɹænd siz ðə hændəl - dʒʌst ənʌðɝ ɹut  - ən ɹɛntʃt ðə dɔɹ oʊpən.

Rand began to run. He reached a doorway at the end of the hall. The door's russet wood was knobbed and ridged, like the thick roots of an ancient tree. Rand seized the handle - just another root  - and wrenched the door open.

ðə væst ɹum bɪɑnd wɑz pjʊɹ blæk, laɪtləs, laɪk ə kævɝn dip bɪniθ ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ðə ɹum sim tə sʌk ɪn ðə laɪɾ ən ɪkstɪŋɡwɪʃ ɪt. ðə skɹimɪŋ vɔɪs wɑz ɪnsaɪd. ɪt wɑz wik, əz ɪf ɪt wɝ biɪŋ smʌðɝd baɪ ðə dɑɹknəs.

The vast room beyond was pure black, lightless, like a cavern deep beneath the ground. The room seemed to suck in the light and extinguish it. The screaming voice was inside. It was weak, as if it were being smothered by the darkness.

ɹænd ɛntɝd. ðə dɑɹknəs swɑloʊd hɪm. ɪt sim tə pʊl ðə laɪf aʊɾ ə hɪm, laɪk ə hʌnʒɹəd litʃɪz sʌkɪŋ blʌd fɹəm ɪz veɪnz. hi pɹɛst ɔnwɝd. hi kʊdn dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃ ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðə kɹaɪz, soʊ hi muvd əlɔŋ ðə wɔlz; ðeɪ fɛlt laɪk boʊn, smuð bʌɾ əkeɪʒənəli kɹækt.

Rand entered. The darkness swallowed him. It seemed to pull the life out of him, like a hundred leeches sucking blood from his veins. He pressed onward. He couldn't distinguish the direction of the cries, so he moved along the walls; they felt like bone, smooth but occasionally cracked.

ðə ɹum wɑz ɹaʊnd. əz ɪf i stʊɾ ɪnsaɪd ðə boʊl ʌv ən ɪnɔɹməs skʌl.

The room was round. As if he stood inside the bowl of an enormous skull.

ðɛɹ! ə feɪn laɪɾ əhɛd, ə sɪŋɡəl kændəl ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɪluməneɪɾɪŋ ə flɔɹ ə blæk mɑɹbəl. ɹænd hɝid təwɔɹɾ ɪt. jɛs, ðəɹ wɑz ə fɪɡjɝ ðɛɹ. hʌɾəld əɡɛns ðə boʊn-waɪt wɔl. ɪt wɑz ə wʊmən wɪð sɪlvɝi hɛɹ, wɛɹɪŋ ə θɪn waɪt ʃɪft.

There! A faint light ahead, a single candle on the ground, illuminating a floor of black marble. Rand hurried toward it. Yes, there was a figure there. Huddled against the bone-white wall. It was a woman with silvery hair, wearing a thin white shift.

ʃi wɑz wipɪŋ naʊ, hɝ fɪɡjɝ ʃeɪkɪŋ ən tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ. ɹænd nɛl bɪsaɪd hɝ, ðə kændəl flɪkɝɪŋ fɹəm ɪz moʊʃən. haʊ hæd ðɪs wʊmən ɡɑɾən ɪndə hɪz dʒɹim? wɑz ʃi sʌmwʌn ɹil, əɹ wɑz ðɪs ə kɹieɪʃən ə hɪz maɪnd? hi leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ.

She was weeping now, her figure shaking and trembling. Rand knelt beside her, the candle flickering from his motion. How had this woman gotten into his dream? Was she someone real, or was this a creation of his mind? He laid a hand on her shoulder.

ʃi ɡlæns təwɔɹd hɪm, aɪz ɹɛd, feɪs ə mæsk ə peɪn, tɪɹz dʒɹɪpɪŋ fɹəm əɹ tʃɪn. "pliz," ʃi plɛd. "pliz. hiz mi."

She glanced toward him, eyes red, face a mask of pain, tears dripping from her chin. "Please," she pled. "Please. He has me."

"hu ɑɹ ju?"

"Who are you?"

"ju noʊ mi," ʃi wɪspɝd, teɪkɪŋ ɪz hænd, klɪŋɪŋ tə ɪt. "aɪm sɑɹi. aɪm soʊ sɑɹi. hiz mi.

"You know me," she whispered, taking his hand, clinging to it. "I'm sorry. I'm so sorry. He has me.

hi fleɪz maɪ soʊl ənu itʃ iv. oʊ, pliz! lɛɾ ɪt stɑp." ðə tɪɹz floʊd mɔɹ fɹili.

He flays my soul anew each eve. Oh, please! Let it stop." The tears flowed more freely.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ ju," ɹænd sɛd. "aɪ . . ."

"I don't know you," Rand said. "I . . ."

ðoʊz aɪz. ðoʊz bjuɾəfəl, tɛɹəbəl aɪz. ɹænd ɡæspt, ɹilisɪŋ əɹ hænd. ðə feɪs wɑz dɪfɹənt. bʌɾ i dɪd noʊ ðət soʊl. "maɪɹɪn? jəɹ dɛd. aɪ sɔ jə daɪ!"

Those eyes. Those beautiful, terrible eyes. Rand gasped, releasing her hand. The face was different. But he did know that soul. "Mierin? You're dead. I saw you die!"

ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "aɪ wɪʃ aɪ wɝ dɛd. aɪ wɪʃ ɪt. pliz! hi ɡɹaɪnz maɪ boʊnz ən snæps əm laɪk twɪɡz, ðən livz mi tə daɪ bɪfɔɹ hilɪŋ mi dʒʌst ɪnʌf tə kip mi əlaɪv. hi - " ʃi kʌɾ ɔf, dʒɝkɪŋ.

She shook her head. "I wish I were dead. I wish it. Please! He grinds my bones and snaps them like twigs, then leaves me to die before Healing me just enough to keep me alive. He - " She cut off, jerking.

"wʌt?"

"What?"

hɝ aɪz oʊpənd waɪɾ ən ʃi spʌn təwɔɹd ðə wɔl. "noʊ!" ʃi skɹimd. "hi kʌmz! ðə ʃædoʊ ɪn ɛvɹi mænz maɪnd, ðə mɝɾɝɝ ə tʃɹuθ. noʊ!" ʃi spʌn, ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ ɹænd, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ toʊɾ əɹ bækwɝd. ðə wɔl bɹoʊk əweɪ, ən ʃi tʌmbəld ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs.

Her eyes opened wide and she spun toward the wall. "No!" she screamed. "He comes! The Shadow in every man's mind, the murderer of truth. No!" She spun, reaching for Rand, but something towed her backward. The wall broke away, and she tumbled into the darkness.

ɹænd dʒʌmp fɔɹwɝd, ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ hɝ, bʌɾ i wɑz tu leɪt. hi kɑɾ ə ɡlɪmps ə hɝ bɪfɔɹ ʃi vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə blæknəs bɪloʊ.

Rand jumped forward, reaching for her, but he was too late. He caught a glimpse of her before she vanished into the blackness below.

ɹænd fɹoʊz, stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ðət pɪt. hi sɔt kɑmnəs, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt faɪn ɪt. ɪnstɛd, hi fɛl heɪtʃɹəd, kənsɝn, ən - laɪk ə siθɪŋ vaɪpɝ wɪðɪn ɪm - dɪzaɪɝ. ðət hæd bɪn maɪɹɪn ɝoʊneɪl, ə wʊmən i hæd wʌns kɔl ðə leɪɾi səlin.

Rand froze, staring into that pit. He sought calmness, but he could not find it. Instead, he felt hatred, concern, and - like a seething viper within him - desire. That had been Mierin Eronaile, a woman he had once called the Lady Selene.

ə wʊmən moʊs pipəl nu baɪ ðə neɪm ʃid teɪkən əpɑn hɝsɛlf. lænfɝ.

A woman most people knew by the name she'd taken upon herself. Lanfear.

ə kɹuəl, dʒɹaɪ wɪn blu əkɹɔs lænz feɪs əz i lʊk daʊn əɾ ə kɝʌp lændskeɪp. tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp wɑz ə waɪd pæs, ɹɑki, spɛkəld wɪð blaɪɾɪd naɪfɡɹæs. ðɪs hæd wʌns bɪn pɑɹɾ ə mɔlkiɝ.

A cruel, dry wind blew across Lan's face as he looked down at a corrupt landscape. Tarwin's Gap was a wide pass, rocky, speckled with Blighted knifegrass. This had once been part of Malkier.

hi wɑz hoʊm əɡɛn. fəɹ ðə læs taɪm.

He was home again. For the last time.

mæsəz ə tʃɹɑləks klʌstɝɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɡæp. θaʊzənz.

Masses of Trollocs clustered on the other side of the Gap. Thousands.

tɛnz ə θaʊzənz. pɹɑbli hʌnʒɹədz ə θaʊzənz. izəli tɛn taɪmz ðə nʌmbɝ ə mɛn læn hæd ɡæðɝd dʊɹɪŋ ɪz mɑɹtʃ əkɹɔs ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. nɔɹməli, mɛn hɛld ət ðɛɹ saɪɾ ə ðə ɡæp, bʌt læn kəd nɑt də ðæt.

Tens of thousands. Probably hundreds of thousands. Easily ten times the number of men Lan had gathered during his march across the Borderlands. Normally, men held at their side of the Gap, but Lan could not do that.

hi hæd kʌm tə ətæk, tə ɹaɪd fəɹ mɔlkiɝ. ændɪɹ ɹoʊɾ ʌp bɪsaɪɾ ɪm ɑn ɪz lɛft, jʌŋ ksəl ə kændɝ ɑn ɪz ɹaɪt. hi kəd fil sʌmθɪŋ, dɪstənt, ðət hæd ɡɪvən ɪm stʃɹɛŋkθ ɹisənli. ðə bɑn hæd tʃeɪnʒd. ði ɪmoʊʃənz hæd tʃeɪnʒd.

He had come to attack, to ride for Malkier. Andere rode up beside him on his left, young Kaisel of Kandor on his right. He could feel something, distant, that had given him strength recently. The bond had changed. The emotions had changed.

hi kəd stɪl fil nɪneɪiv, soʊ wʌndɝfəl, kɛɹɪŋ, ən pæʃənəɾ ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz maɪnd. hi ʃʊɾə bɪn peɪn tə noʊ ðət naʊ ʃi wəd sʌfɝ wən i daɪd, ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ənʌðɝ.

He could still feel Nynaeve, so wonderful, caring, and passionate in the back of his mind. He should have been pained to know that now she would suffer when he died, instead of another.

haʊɛvɝ, ðət kloʊsnɪs tə hɝ - ə faɪnəl kloʊsnɪs - bɹɔɾ ɪm stʃɹɛŋkθ.

However, that closeness to her - a final closeness - brought him strength.

ðə hɑt wɪn sim tu dʒɹaɪ; ɪt smɛld ə dʌst ən dɝt, ən dʒɹu ðə mɔɪstʃɝ fɹəm ɪz aɪz, fɔɹsɪŋ ɪm tə blɪŋk.

The hot wind seemed too dry; it smelled of dust and dirt, and drew the moisture from his eyes, forcing him to blink.

"ɪɾ ɪz fɪɾɪŋ," ksəl sɛd.

"It is fitting," Kaisel said.

"wʌt?" læn æskt.

"What?" Lan asked.

"ðæt wi ʃəd stʃɹaɪk hɪɹ."

"That we should strike here."

"jɛs," læn sɛd.

"Yes," Lan said.

"pɝhæps," ksəl sɛd. "bʌɾ ɪts boʊld. ɪt ʃoʊz ðə ʃædoʊ ðət wɪl nɑt bi biɾən daʊn, ðət wɪl nɑt kaʊɝ. ðɪs ɪz jəɹ lænd, lɔɹd mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən."

"Perhaps," Kaisel said. "But it is bold. It shows the Shadow that we will not be beaten down, that we will not cower. This is your land, Lord Mandragoran."

maɪ lænd, hi θɔt. jɛs, ɪt wɑz. hi nʌdʒ mændɑɹb fɔɹwɝd.

My land, he thought. Yes, it was. He nudged Mandarb forward.

"aɪ æm ælən mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən," læn bɛloʊd. "lɔɹɾ ə ðə sɛvən taʊɝz, dɪfɛndɝ ə ðə wɔl ə fɝs faɪɝz, bɛɹɝ ə ðə sɔɹɾ ə ðə θaʊzən leɪks! aɪ wɑz wʌns neɪmd ənælaɪn, bʌɾ aɪ ɹidʒɛk ðət taɪɾəl, fəɹ aɪm əloʊn noʊ mɔɹ. fɪɹ mi, ʃædoʊ! fɪɹ mi ən noʊ. aɪ hæv ɹɪtɝn fəɹ wʌɾ ɪz maɪn. aɪ meɪ bi ə kɪŋ wɪθaʊɾ ə lænd. bʌɾ aɪm stɪl ə kɪŋɡəl"

"I am al'Lan Mandragoran," Lan bellowed. "Lord of the Seven Towers, Defender of the Wall of First Fires, Bearer of the Sword of the Thousand Lakes! I was once named Aan'allein, but I reject that title, for I am alone no more. Fear me, Shadow! Fear me and know. I have returned for what is mine. I may be a king without a land. But I am still a kingl"

hi ɹɔɹd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd. ə tʃɪɹ ɹoʊz fɹəm bɪhaɪn hɪm. hi sɛn ə faɪnəl, paʊɝfəl sɛnseɪʃən ə lʌv tə nɪneɪiv əz i kɪk mændɑɹb ɪndə ə ɡæləp.

He roared, raising his sword. A cheer rose from behind him. He sent a final, powerful sensation of love to Nynaeve as he kicked Mandarb into a gallop.

hɪz ɑɹmi tʃɑɹdʒ bɪhaɪn hɪm, itʃ mæn maʊntəd - ə tʃɑɹdʒ ə kæn-dɔɹi, ɝæfɛlɪn, ʃaɪnɝənz, ən sɑldəiənz. bʌt moʊst ʌv ɔl mɔlkɪɹi. læn wʊdn bi sɝpɹaɪzd ɪf hid dʒɹɔn ɛvɹi lɪvɪŋ mæn fɹəm ɪz fɔɹmɝ kɪŋdəm u kəd stɪl hoʊld ə wɛpən.

His army charged behind him, each man mounted - a charge of Kan-dori, Arafellin, Shienarans, and Saldaeans. But most of all Malkieri. Lan wouldn't be surprised if he'd drawn every living man from his former kingdom who could still hold a weapon.

ðeɪ ɹoʊd, tʃɪɹɪŋ, bɹændɪʃɪŋ sɔɹdz ən lɛvəlɪŋ lænsɪz. ðɛɹ hʊvz wɝ θʌndɝ, ðɛɹ vɔɪsəz ə kɹæʃ ʌv weɪvz, ðɛɹ pɹaɪd stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ðə bleɪzɪŋ sʌn. ðeɪ wɝ twɛlv θaʊzən stʃɹɔŋ.

They rode, cheering, brandishing swords and leveling lances. Their hooves were thunder, their voices a crash of waves, their pride stronger than the blazing sun. They were twelve thousand strong.

ən ðeɪ tʃɑɹdʒd ə fɔɹs ʌv ət list wʌn hʌnʒɹəd ən fɪfti θaʊzənd.

And they charged a force of at least one hundred and fifty thousand.

ðɪs deɪ wɪl bi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪn ɑnɝ, læn θɔt, ɡæləpɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. ðə læs tʃɑɹdʒ ə ðə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn. ðə fɔl ə ðə mɔlkɪɹi.

This day will be remembered in honor, Lan thought, galloping forward. The Last Charge of the Golden Crane. The fall of the Malkieri.

ði ɛn hæd kʌm. ðeɪ wəd miɾ ɪt wɪð sɔɹdz ɹeɪzd.

The end had come. They would meet it with swords raised.

loʊ, ɪt ʃæl kʌm əpɑn ðə wɝl ðət ðə pɹɪzən ə ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst wʌn ʃæl ɡɹoʊ wik, laɪk ðə lɪmz ə ðoʊz u kɹæftɪɾ ɪt. wʌns əɡɛn, hɪz ɡlɔɹiəs kloʊk ʃæl smʌðɝ ðə pæɾɝn ʌv ɔl θɪŋz, ən ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd ʃæl stʃɹɛtʃ fɔɹθ ɪz hæn tə kleɪm wʌɾ ɪz hɪz. ðə ɹɪbɛljəs neɪʃənz ʃæl bi leɪd bæɹən, ðɛɹ tʃɪlʒɹən kɑz tə wip. ðəɹ ʃæl bi nʌn bʌt hɪm, ən ðoʊz u hæv tɝn ðɛɹ aɪz tə hɪz mædʒəsti.

Lo, it shall come upon the world that the prison of the Greatest One shall grow weak, like the limbs of those who crafted it. Once again, His glorious cloak shall smother the Pattern of all things, and the Great Lord shall stretch forth His hand to claim what is His. The rebellious nations shall be laid barren, their children caused to weep. There shall be none but Him, and those who have turned their eyes to His majesty.

ɪn ðət deɪ, wən ðə wʌn-aɪd ful tʃɹævəlz ðə hɔlz ə mɔɹnɪŋ, ən ðə fɝst əmʌŋ vɝmɪn lɪfs ɪz hæn tə bɹɪŋ fɹiɾəm tə hɪm u wɪl dɪstʃɹɔɪ, ðə læs deɪz ə ðə fɔlən blæksmɪθs pɹaɪd ʃæl kʌm. jeɪ, ən ðə bɹoʊkən wʊlf, ðə wʌn hum dɛθ əz noʊn, ʃæl fɔl ən bi kənsum baɪ ðə mɪdnaɪt taʊɝz. ən ɪz dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ʃæl bɹɪŋ fɪɹ ən sɑɹoʊ tə ðə hɑɹts ə mɛn, ən ʃæl ʃeɪk ðɛɹ vɛɹi wɪl ɪtsɛlf.

In that day, when the One-Eyed Fool travels the halls of mourning, and the First Among Vermin lifts his hand to bring freedom to Him who will Destroy, the last days of the Fallen Blacksmith's pride shall come. Yea, and the Broken Wolf, the one whom Death has known, shall fall and be consumed by the Midnight Towers. And his destruction shall bring fear and sorrow to the hearts of men, and shall shake their very will itself.

ən ðɛn, ʃæl ðə lɔɹɾ ə ði ivnɪŋ kʌm. ən i ʃæl teɪk əɹ aɪz, fəɹ əɹ soʊlz ʃæl baʊ bɪfɔɹ hɪm, ən i ʃæl teɪk əɹ skɪn, fəɹ əɹ flɛʃ ʃæl sɝv hɪm, ən i ʃæl teɪk əɹ lɪps, fəɹ oʊnli hɪm wɪl wi pɹeɪz. ən ðə lɔɹɾ ə ði ivnɪŋ ʃæl feɪs ðə bɹoʊkən tʃæmpiən, ən ʃæl spɪl ɪz blʌɾ ən bɹɪŋ əs ðə dɑɹknəs soʊ bjuɾəfəl. lɛt ðə skɹimz bɪɡɪn, oʊ fɑloʊɝz ə ðə ʃædoʊ. bɛɡ fəɹ jəɹ dɪstʃɹʌkʃən!

And then, shall the Lord of the Evening come. And He shall take our eyes, for our souls shall bow before Him, and He shall take our skin, for our flesh shall serve Him, and He shall take our lips, for only Him will we praise. And the Lord of the Evening shall face the Broken Champion, and shall spill his blood and bring us the Darkness so beautiful. Let the screams begin, O followers of the Shadow. Beg for your destruction!

 - fɹəm ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə ʃædoʊ ði ɛn ə ðə θɝtinθ bʊk ə ðə wil ə taɪm ɡlɔsɝi eɪ noʊɾ ɑn deɪts ɪn ðɪs ɡlɔsɝi. ðə toʊmən kæləndɝ (dɪvaɪz baɪ toʊmə dɝ ɑməd) wɑz ədɑptəɾ əpɹɑksəmətli tu sɛntʃɝiz æftɝ ðə dɛθ ə ðə læs meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɹəkɔɹɾɪŋ jɪɹz æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld (æb). soʊ mɛni ɹɛkɝdz wɝ dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz ðəɾ ət ðɛɹ ɛn ðəɹ wɑz ɑɹɡjəmən əbaʊt ði ɪɡzæk jɪɹ ʌndɝ ði oʊl sɪstəm. ə nu kæləndɝ, pɹəpoʊz baɪ tiəm ʌv ɡɑzɹ, sɛləbɹeɪɾəd fɹiɾəm fɹəm ðə tʃɹɑlɑk θɹɛɾ ən ɹəkɔɹɾəd itʃ jɪɹ əz ə fɹi jɪɹ (fi).

 - from The Prophecies of the Shadow The End of the Thirteenth Book of The Wheel of Time GLOSSARY A Note on Dates in This Glossary. The Toman Calendar (devised by Toma dur Ahmid) was adopted approximately two centuries after the death of the last male Aes Sedai, recording years After the Breaking of the World (AB). So many records were destroyed in the Trolloc Wars that at their end there was argument about the exact year under the old system. A new calendar, proposed by Tiam of Gazar, celebrated freedom from the Trolloc threat and recorded each year as a Free Year (FY).

ðə ɡɑzɝən kæləndɝ ɡeɪnd waɪɾ æksɛptəns wɪðɪn twɛnti jɪɹz æftɝ ðə wɔɹz' ɛnd. ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ətɛmptəd tə ɪstæblɪʃ ə nu kæləndɝ beɪst ɑn ðə faʊndɪŋ ə hɪz ɛmpaɪɝ (, fɹəm ðə faʊndɪŋ), bʌɾ oʊnli hɪstɔɹiənz naʊ ɹəfɝ tə ɪt. æftɝ ðə dɛθ ən dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ə ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, ə θɝd kæləndɝ wɑz dɪvaɪz baɪ ɝɛn dɪn dʒubaɪ sɔɹɪŋ ɡʌl, ə skɑlɝ ə ðə si foʊk, ən pɹɑməlɡeɪɾəd baɪ ðə pɑnɑɹtʃ fɛɹiɾ ə tæɹɑbən. ðə fɛɹid kæləndɝ, deɪɾɪŋ fɹəm ði ɑɹbɪtʃɹɛɹəli dɪsaɪɾɪd ɛn ə ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz ən ɹəkɔɹɾɪŋ jɪɹz ə ðə nu ɛɹə (nəbɹæskə), ɪz kɝənli ɪn jus.

The Gazaran Calendar gained wide acceptance within twenty years after the Wars' end. Artur Hawkwing attempted to establish a new calendar based on the founding of his empire (FF, From the Founding), but only historians now refer to it. After the death and destruction of the War of the Hundred Years, a third calendar was devised by Uren din Jubai Soaring Gull, a scholar of the Sea Folk, and promulgated by the Panarch Farede of Tarabon. The Farede Calendar, dating from the arbitrarily decided end of the War of the Hundred Years and recording years of the New Era (NE), is currently in use.

æɛlfɪn: ə ɹeɪs ə biɪŋz, lɑɹdʒli hjumən ɪn əpɪɹəns bʌt wɪð sneɪklaɪk kɛɹəktɝɪstɪks, hu wɪl ɡɪv tʃɹu ænsɝz tə θɹi kwɛstʃənz. wʌtɛvɝ ðə kwɛstʃən, ðɛɹ ænsɝz ɑɹ ɔlweɪz kɝɛkt, ɪf fɹikwənli ɡɪvən ɪn fɔɹmz ðəɾ ɑɹ nɑt klɪɹ, bʌt kwɛstʃənz kənsɝnɪŋ ðə ʃædoʊ kən bi ɪkstʃɹimli deɪnʒɝəs. ðɛɹ tʃɹu loʊkeɪʃən ɪz ənnoʊn, bʌt ðeɪ kən bi vɪzəɾəd baɪ pæsɪŋ θɹu ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, wʌns ə pəzɛʃən ə min bʌɾ ɪn ɹisən jɪɹz hɛld ɪn ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ. ðeɪ kən ɔlsoʊ bi ɹitʃt baɪ ɛntɝɪŋ ðə taʊɝ ʌv ɡɛndʒeɪaɪ. ðeɪ spik ði oʊl tʌŋ, mɛnʃən tʃɹiɾiz ən əɡɹiməns, ən æsk ɪf ðoʊz ɛntɝɪŋ kæɹi aɪɝn, ɪnstʃɹəməns ə mjuzɪk, əɹ dɪvaɪsəz ðət kən meɪk faɪɝ. si ɔlsoʊ ɛlfɪn, sneɪks ən fɑksəz.

Aelfinn: A race of beings, largely human in appearance but with snakelike characteristics, who will give true answers to three questions. Whatever the question, their answers are always correct, if frequently given in forms that are not clear, but questions concerning the Shadow can be extremely dangerous. Their true location is unknown, but they can be visited by passing through a ter'angreal, once a possession of Mayene but in recent years held in the Stone of Tear. They can also be reached by entering the Tower of Ghenjei. They speak the Old Tongue, mention treaties and agreements, and ask if those entering carry iron, instruments of music, or devices that can make fire. See also Eelfinn, Snakes and Foxes.

ɑɹæd dumən: ə neɪʃən ɑn ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən, kɝənli ɹæk baɪ sɪvəl wɔɹ ən baɪ wɔɹz əɡɛns ðoʊz u hæv dɪklɛɹd fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ɪts kæpəɾəl ɪz bændɑɹ ɛbən, wɛɹ mɛni ʌv ɪts pipəl əv kʌm fəɹ ɹɛfjudʒ. fuɾ ɪz skɛɹs. ɪn ɑɹæd dumən, ðoʊz u ɑɹ dɪsɛndəd fɹəm ðə noʊbɪləɾi ət ðə taɪm ə ðə faʊndɪŋ ə ðə neɪʃən, əz əpoʊz tə ðoʊz ɹeɪz leɪɾɝ, ɑɹ noʊn əz ðə blʌdbɔɹn.

Arad Doman: A nation on the Aryth Ocean, currently racked by civil war and by wars against those who have declared for the Dragon Reborn. Its capital is Bandar Eban, where many of its people have come for refuge. Food is scarce. In Arad Doman, those who are descended from the nobility at the time of the founding of the nation, as opposed to those raised later, are known as the bloodborn.

ðə ɹulɝ (kɪŋ əɹ kwin) ɪz ɪlɛktəd baɪ ə kaʊnsəl ə ðə hɛdz ə mɝtʃənt ɡɪlz (ðə kaʊnsəl ə mɝtʃəns), hu ɑɹ ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz wɪmən. hi əɹ ʃi mʌs bi fɹəm ðə noʊbəl klæs, nɑt ðə mɝtʃənt, ən ɪz ɪlɛktəd fəɹ laɪf. liɡəli ðə kɪŋ əɹ kwin əz æbsəluɾ əθɔɹəɾi, ɪksɛp ðəɾ i əɹ ʃi kən bi dɪpoʊz baɪ ə θɹi-kɔɹɾɝ voʊɾ ə ðə kaʊnsəl. ðə kɝən ɹulɝ ɪz kɪŋ ælsələm sɑiɾ ælməɾɝ, lɔɹɾ ʌv ælməɾɝ, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs ælməɾɝ.

The ruler (king or queen) is elected by a council of the heads of merchant guilds (the Council of Merchants), who are almost always women. He or she must be from the noble class, not the merchant, and is elected for life. Legally the king or queen has absolute authority, except that he or she can be deposed by a three-quarter vote of the Council. The current ruler is King Alsalam Saeed Almadar, Lord of Almadar, High Seat of House Almadar.

ɛɹiə, junəts ʌv: (wʌn) lænd: wʌn ɹɪbən ikwəlz twɛnti peɪsɪz ɛks tɛn peɪsɪz (tuhʌnʒɹəd skwɛɹ peɪsɪz); wʌn kɔɹɾ ikwəlz twɛnti peɪsɪz ɛks fɪfti peɪsɪz (wʌnθaʊzən skwɛɹ peɪsɪz); wʌn haɪɾ ikwəlz wʌnhʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz ɛks wʌnhʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz (tɛnθaʊzən skwɛɹ peɪsɪz); wʌn ɹoʊp ikwəlz wʌnhʌnʒɹəd

area, units of: (1) Land: 1 ribbon = 20 paces X 10 paces (200 square paces); 1 cord = 20 paces X 50 paces (1000 square paces); 1 hide = 100 paces X 100 paces (10,000 square paces); 1 rope = 100

peɪsɪz ɛks wʌnθaʊzən peɪsɪz (wʌnhʌnʒɹədθaʊzənd skwɛɹ peɪsɪz); fɝs mɑɹtʃ ikwəlz wʌnθaʊzən peɪsɪz ɛks wʌnθaʊzən peɪsɪz (wʌnfɔɹθ skwɛɹ maɪl).

paces X 1000 paces (100,000 square paces); 1 march = 1000 paces X 1000 paces (1/4 square mile).

(tu) klɔθ: wʌn peɪs ikwəlz wʌn peɪs plʌs wʌn hæn ɛks wʌn peɪs plʌs wʌn hænd.

(2) Cloth: 1 pace = 1 pace plus 1 hand X 1 pace plus 1 hand.

æʃəmən: (wʌn) ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ɡɑɹɾiən" əɹ "ɡɑɹɾiənz," bʌɾ ɔlweɪz ə ɡɑɹɾiən ə dʒʌstəs ən tʃɹuθ. (tu) ðə neɪm ɡɪvən, boʊθ kəlɛktɪvli ən əz ə ɹæŋk, tə ðə mɛn u hæv kʌm tə ðə blæk taʊɝ, nɪɹ keɪɛmlɪn ɪn ændɝ, ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə lɝn tə tʃænəl. ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ lɑɹdʒli kɑnsəntʃɹeɪts ɑn ðə weɪz ɪn wɪtʃ ðə wʌn paʊɝ kən bi juzd əz ə wɛpən, ən ɪn ənʌðɝ dɪpɑɹtʃɝ fɹəm ðə jusədʒəz ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, wʌns ðeɪ lɝn tə siz seɪɾɪn, ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə paʊɝ, ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹikwaɪɝd tə pɝfɔɹm ɔl tʃɔɹz ən leɪbɝz wɪð ðə paʊɝ. wən nuli ɛnɹoʊld, ə mæn ɪz tɝmd ə soʊlʒɝ; hi wɛɹz ə pleɪn blæk koʊt wɪð ə haɪ kɑlɝ, ɪn ði ændɔɝən fæʃən. biɪŋ ɹeɪz tə dɛɾəkeɪtəd bɹɪŋz ðə ɹaɪt tə wɛɹ ə sɪlvɝ pɪn, kɔl ðə sɔɹd, ɑn ðə kɑlɝ ə hɪz koʊt. pɹəmoʊʃən tə æʃəmən bɹɪŋz ðə ɹaɪt tə wɛɹ ə dʒɹæɡən pɪn, ɪn ɡoʊld ən ɹɛɾ ɪnæməl, ɑn ðə kɑlɝ ɑpəzət ðə sɔɹd.

Asha'man: (1) In the Old Tongue, "Guardian" or "Guardians," but always a guardian of justice and truth. (2) The name given, both collectively and as a rank, to the men who have come to the Black Tower, near Caemlyn in Andor, in order to learn to channel. Their training largely concentrates on the ways in which the One Power can be used as a weapon, and in another departure from the usages of the White Tower, once they learn to seize saidin, the male half of the Power, they are required to perform all chores and labors with the Power. When newly enrolled, a man is termed a soldier; he wears a plain black coat with a high collar, in the Andoran fashion. Being raised to Dedicated brings the right to wear a silver pin, called the Sword, on the collar of his coat. Promotion to Asha'man brings the right to wear a Dragon pin, in gold and red enamel, on the collar opposite the Sword.

ɔlðoʊ mɛni wɪmən, ɪnkluɾɪŋ waɪvz, fli wən ðeɪ lɝn ðət ðɛɹ mɛn æktʃəli  kən tʃænəl, ə fɛɹ nʌmbɝ ə mɛn ət ðə blæk taʊɝ ɑɹ mɛɹid, ən ðeɪ juz ə vɝʒən ə ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑn tə kɹieɪɾ ə lɪŋk wɪð ðɛɹ waɪvz. ðɪs seɪm bɑnd, ɔltɝd tə kəmpɛl oʊbiɾiəns, hæz bɪn juz tə bɑn kæptʃɝɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ əz wɛl. səm æʃəmən əv bɪn bɑndəd baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɔlðoʊ ðə tʃɹədɪʃənəl wɔɹɾɝ bɑn ɪz juzd.

Although many women, including wives, flee when they learn that their men actually can channel, a fair number of men at the Black Tower are married, and they use a version of the Warder bond to create a link with their wives. This same bond, altered to compel obedience, has been used to bond captured Aes Sedai as well. Some Asha'man have been bonded by Aes Sedai, although the traditional Warder bond is used.

ði æʃəmən ɑɹ lɛd baɪ mæzɹim teɪm, hu hæz staɪl hɪmsɛlf ðə l, oʊl tʌŋ fəɹ "liɾɝ."

The Asha'man are led by Mazrim Taim, who has styled himself the M'Hael, Old Tongue for "leader."

ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə tʃɹi ʌv laɪf." ɪts loʊkeɪɾəd ɪn ɹɪɾiən.

Avendesora: In the Old Tongue, "the Tree of Life." It is located in Rhuidean.

beɪlwɝ, sɛbæn: fɔɹmɝli peɪdʒɹən naɪlz sɛkɹətɛɹi, ɪn pʌblɪk, ən sikɹɪtli naɪlz spaɪ mæstɝ. hi eɪɾəd mɔɹɡeɪsəz ɪskeɪp fɹəm ðə sintʃæn ɪn æmədɔɹ fəɹ ɪz oʊn ɹizənz, ən naʊ ɪz ɛmplɔɪɾ əz sɛkɹətɛɹi tə pɛɹɪn tæʃɪɹ eɪbɑɹə ən feɪl ni bæʃɪɹ teɪbɑɹə. hɪz duɾiz ɪkspændəd, haʊɛvɝ, ən i naʊ dɝɛks tʃɑ feɪl ɪn ðɛɹ æktɪvəɾiz, æktɪŋ əz ə spaɪmæstɝ fəɹ pɛɹɪn, ðoʊ pɛɹɪn dʌzn θɪŋk ə hɪm soʊ. si ɔlsoʊ tʃɑ feɪl.

Balwer, Sebban: Formerly Pedron Niall's secretary, in public, and secretly Niall's spy master. He aided Morgase's escape from the Seanchan in Amador for his own reasons, and now is employed as secretary to Perrin t'Bashere Aybara and Faile ni Bashere t'Aybara. His duties expanded, however, and he now directs Cha Faile in their activities, acting as a spymaster for Perrin, though Perrin doesn't think of him so. See also Cha Faile.

bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hænd: si ʃɛn ən kɑlhɑɹ.

Band of the Red Hand: See Shen an Calhar.

blʌdnaɪvz: ən ɪlit dɪvɪʒən ə sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz. itʃ ɪz ɪkwɪpt wɪð ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðəɾ ɪnkɹisəz ðɛɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ ən spidz ən ʃɹaʊdz ɪm ɪn dɑɹknəs. ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɪz æktəveɪɾəd baɪ tʌtʃɪŋ ə dʒɹɑp ə ðə blʌdnaɪfs blʌd tə ðə ɹɪŋ, ən wʌns æktəveɪɾəd, ɪt sloʊli litʃɪz ðə laɪf fɹəm ɪts hoʊst. dɛθ əkɝz wɪðɪn ə mæɾɝ ə deɪz.

Bloodknives: An elite division of Seanchan soldiers. Each is equipped with a ter'angreal that increases their strength and speeds and shrouds him in darkness. The ter'angreal is activated by touching a drop of the Bloodknife's blood to the ring, and once activated, it slowly leaches the life from its host. Death occurs within a matter of days.

bɹaʊn ədʒɑ kaʊnsəl: ðə bɹaʊn ədʒɑ ɪz hɛɾəd baɪ ə kaʊnsəl ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ən ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Brown Ajah Council: The Brown Ajah is headed by a council instead of an individual Aes Sedai.

ðə kɝən hɛɾ ə ðə kaʊnsəl ɪz dʒɛsi biləl; ði ʌðɝ mɛmbɝz ɑɹ ənnoʊn.

The current head of the council is Jesse Bilal; the other members are unknown.

kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl: (wʌn) ðə mɪlətɛɹi ɹæŋk ə ðə liɾɝ ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹɾ ʌv ændɝ. ðɪs pəzɪʃən ɪz kɝənli hɛl baɪ leɪɾi bɝdʒɪt tʃɹɑ-hilaɪən. (tu) ðə taɪɾəl ɡɪvən tə ðə hɛɾ ə ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ. ðɪs pəzɪʃən ɪz kɝənli hɛl baɪ ædlɔɹnə bæstin.

Captain-General: (1) The military rank of the leader of the Queen's Guard of Andor. This position is currently held by Lady Birgitte Tra-helion. (2) The title given to the head of the Green Ajah. This position is currently held by Adelorna Bastine.

kæləndɝ: ðəɹ ɑɹ tɛn deɪz tə ðə wik, twɛntieɪt deɪz tə ðə mʌnθ ən θɝtin mʌnθs tə ðə jɪɹ. sɛvɹəl fis deɪz ɑɹ nɑt pɑɹɾ ʌv ɛni mʌnθ; ðiz ɪnklud sʌndeɪ (ðə lɔŋɡəs deɪ ʌv ðə jɪɹ), ðə fist ə θæŋksɡɪvɪŋ (wʌns ɛvɹi fɔɹ jɪɹz ət ðə spɹɪŋ ikwənɑks) ən ðə fist ʌv ɔl soʊlz sælveɪʃən, ɔlsoʊ kɔld ɔl soʊlz deɪ (wʌns ɛvɹi tɛn jɪɹz ət ði ɔɾəm ikwənɑks). waɪl ðə mʌnθs əv neɪmz (teɪʃəm, dʒumɑɹə, seɪbən, eɪn, ədɑɹ, sævən, ɑmɑdeɪn, tæməz, meɪaɪɡdəl, kɔɹən, ʃɔldin, nɛzæn ən dænu), ðiz ɑɹ sɛldəm juzd ɪksɛpt ɪn əfɪʃəl dɑkjəməns ən baɪ əfɪʃəlz. fəɹ moʊs pipəl, juzɪŋ ðə sizənz ɪz ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf.

calendar: There are 10 days to the week, 28 days to the month and 13 months to the year. Several feast days are not part of any month; these include Sunday (the longest day of the year), the Feast of Thanksgiving (once every four years at the spring equinox) and the Feast of All Souls Salvation, also called All Souls Day (once every ten years at the autumn equinox). While the months have names (Taisham, Jumara, Saban, Aine, Adar, Saven, Amadaine, Tammaz, Maigdhal, Choren, Shaldine, Nesan and Danu), these are seldom used except in official documents and by officials. For most people, using the seasons is good enough.

kælændɝ: ðə sɔɹd ðəɾ ɪz nɑɾ ə sɔɹd, ðə sɔɹd ðət kænɑt bi tʌtʃt. ə kɹɪstəl sɔɹd wʌns hɛld ɪn ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ, ɪts ə paʊɝfəl sɑŋɡɹil fəɹ jus baɪ meɪl tʃænlɝz. ɪts noʊn flɔz: ɪt læks ðə bʌfɝ ðət meɪks sɑŋɡɹil seɪf tə juz, ən mæɡnəfaɪd ðə teɪnt. ʌðɝ flɔz ɑɹ səspɛktəd.

Callandor: The Sword That Is Not a Sword, the Sword That Cannot Be Touched. A crystal sword once held in the Stone of Tear, it is a powerful sa'angreal for use by male channelers. It has known flaws: It lacks the buffer that makes sa'angreal safe to use, and magnified the taint. Other flaws are suspected.

tʃɑ feɪl: (wʌn) ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə fælkənz tælən." (tu) neɪm teɪkən baɪ ðə jʌŋ kɛɹhinɪn ən tɛɹənz, ətɛmptəd fɑloʊɝz ə dʒiɾoʊ, hu hæv swɔɹn fiəlti tə feɪl ni bæʃɪɹ teɪbɑɹə. ɪn sikɹət, ðeɪ ækt əz əɹ pɝsənəl skaʊts ən spaɪz. dʊɹɪŋ əɹ kæptɪvəɾi wɪð ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, ðeɪ kəntɪnjud ðɛɹ æktɪvəɾiz ʌndɝ ðə ɡaɪɾəns ə sɛbæn beɪlwɝ. si ɔlsoʊ beɪlwɝ, sɛbæn.

Cha Faile: (1) In the Old Tongue, "the Falcon's Talon." (2) Name taken by the young Cairhienin and Tairens, attempted followers of ji'e'toh, who have sworn fealty to Faile ni Bashere tAybara. In secret, they act as her personal scouts and spies. During her captivity with the Shaido, they continued their activities under the guidance of Sebban Balwer. See also Balwer, Sebban.

tʃɛɝɪn, dʒaɪn: si fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ, dʒaɪn.

Charin, Jain: See Farstrider, Jain.

tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt: səsaɪəɾi ʌv stʃɹɪkt əsɛɾɪk bɪlifs, oʊɪŋ əlidʒəns tə noʊ neɪʃən ən dɛɾəkeɪtəd tə ðə dɪfiɾ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn ən ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ʌv ɔl dɑɹkfɹɛnz. faʊndəd dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz baɪ lɑthɛɹ mæntəlɝ tə pɹɑsələtaɪz əɡɛnst ən ɪnkɹis ɪn dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ðeɪ ɪvɑlv dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ɪndə ə kəmplitli mɪlətɛɹi səsaɪəɾi. ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪkstʃɹimli ɹɪdʒəɾ ɪn ðɛɹ bɪlifs, ən sɝɾən ðəɾ oʊnli ðeɪ noʊ ðə tʃɹuθ ən ðə ɹaɪt. ðeɪ kənsɪɾɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ɛni hu səpɔɹɾ əm tə bi dɑɹkfɹɛnz. noʊn dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋli əz waɪtkloʊks, ə neɪm ðeɪ ðɛmsɛlvz dɪspaɪz, ðeɪ wɝ fɔɹmɝli hɛdkɔɹɾɝd ɪn æmədɔɹ, ɑmɑdɪʃiə, bʌt wɝ fɔɹst aʊt wən ðə sintʃæn kɑŋkɝd ðə sɪɾi. ɡɑləd dəmədʒɹd bɪkeɪm lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ æftɝ i kɪld imən vɑldə ɪn ə duəl fəɹ əsɔltɪŋ ɪz stɛpmʌðɝ, mɔɹɡeɪs. vɑldəz dɛθ pɹədust ə skɪzəm ɪn ði ɔɹɡənəzeɪʃən, wɪð ɡɑləd liɾɪŋ wʌn fækʃən, ən ɹɑɾəm əsunɑwə, haɪ ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ ə ðə hæn ə ðə laɪt, liɾɪŋ ði ʌðɝ. ðɛɹ saɪn ɪz ə ɡoʊldən sʌnbɝst ɑn ə fild ʌv waɪt. si ɔlsoʊ kwɛstʃənɝz.

Children of the Light: Society of strict ascetic beliefs, owing allegiance to no nation and dedicated to the defeat of the Dark One and the destruction of all Darkfriends. Founded during the War of the Hundred Years by Lothair Mantelar to proselytize against an increase in Darkfriends, they evolved during the war into a completely military society. They are extremely rigid in their beliefs, and certain that only they know the truth and the right. They consider Aes Sedai and any who support them to be Darkfriends. Known disparagingly as Whitecloaks, a name they themselves despise, they were formerly headquartered in Amador, Amadicia, but were forced out when the Seanchan conquered the city. Galad Damodred became Lord Captain Commander after he killed Eamon Valda in a duel for assaulting his stepmother, Morgase. Valda's death produced a schism in the organization, with Galad leading one faction, and Rhadam Asunawa, High Inquisitor of the Hand of the Light, leading the other. Their sign is a golden sunburst on a field of white. See also Questioners.

kənsɑlədeɪʃən, ðə: wən ði ɑɹmiz sɛn baɪ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz sʌn luthɛɹ lændəɾ ɪn sintʃæn, ðeɪ dɪskʌvɝɾ ə ʃɪftɪŋ kwɪlt ə neɪʃənz ɔfən ət wɔɹ wɪð wʌn ənʌðɝ, wɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔfən ɹeɪnd. wɪθaʊɾ ɛni ɪkwɪvələn ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝk fəɹ ðɛɹ oʊn ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl ɪntʃɹəst, juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ. fɔɹmɪŋ smɔl ɡɹups, ðeɪ skimd əɡɛnst wʌn ənʌðɝ kɑnstənli. ɪn lɑɹdʒ pɑɹɾ ɪt wɑz ðɪs kɑnstən skimɪŋ fəɹ pɝsənəl ædvæntɪdʒ ən ðə ɹɪzʌltɪŋ wɔɹz əmʌŋ ðə mɪɹiəd neɪʃənz ðəɾ əlaʊd ði ɑɹmiz fɹəm ist ə ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən tə bɪɡɪn ðə kɑŋkwɛst ʌv ən ɪntaɪɝ kɑntənənt, ən fəɹ ðɛɹ dɪsɛndəns tə kəmpliɾ ɪt. ðɪs kɑŋkwɛst, dʊɹɪŋ wɪtʃ ðə dɪsɛndəns ə ði ɝɪdʒənəl ɑɹmiz bɪkeɪm sintʃæn əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ kɑŋkɝd sintʃæn, tʊk sɛntʃɝiz ən ɪz kɔl ðə kənsɑlədeɪʃən. si ɔlsoʊ taʊɝz ə mɪdnaɪt.

Consolidation, the: When the armies sent by Artur Hawkwing under his son Luthair landed in Seanchan, they discovered a shifting quilt of nations often at war with one another, where Aes Sedai often reigned. Without any equivalent of the White Tower, Aes Sedai worked for their own individual interest, using the Power. Forming small groups, they schemed against one another constantly. In large part it was this constant scheming for personal advantage and the resulting wars among the myriad nations that allowed the armies from east of the Aryth Ocean to begin the conquest of an entire continent, and for their descendants to complete it. This conquest, during which the descendants of the original armies became Seanchan as much as they conquered Seanchan, took centuries and is called the Consolidation. See also Towers of Midnight.

kwəndɪlɝ: ə səpoʊzədli ɪndəstʃɹʌktɪbəl sʌbstəns kɹieɪɾəd dʊɹɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ɛni noʊn fɔɹs juzd ɪn ən ətɛmp tə bɹeɪk ɪt, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ɪz əbzɔɹbd, meɪkɪŋ kwəndɪlɝ stʃɹɔŋɝ. ɔlðoʊ ðə meɪkɪŋ ə kwəndɪlɝ wɑz θɔt lɔs fɝɛvɝ, nu ɑbʒɛkts meɪd fɹəm ɪɾ əv sɝfɪst. ɪts ɔlsoʊ noʊn əz hɑɹtstoʊn.

cuendillar: A supposedly indestructible substance created during the Age of Legends. Any known force used in an attempt to break it, including the One Power, is absorbed, making cuendillar stronger. Although the making of cuendillar was thought lost forever, new objects made from it have surfaced. It is also known as heartstone.

kɝənsi: æftɝ mɛni sɛntʃɝiz ə tʃɹeɪd, ðə stændɝd tɝmz fəɹ kɔɪnz ɑɹ ðə seɪm ɪn ɛvɹi lænd:

currency: After many centuries of trade, the standard terms for coins are the same in every land:

kɹaʊnz (ðə lɑɹdʒəs kɔɪn ɪn saɪz), mɑɹks ən pɛniz. kɹaʊnz ən mɑɹks kən bi mɪntɪɾ ʌv ɡoʊld əɹ sɪlvɝ, waɪl pɛniz kən bi sɪlvɝ əɹ kɑpɝ, ðə læst ɔfən kɔl sɪmpli ə kɑpɝ. ɪn dɪfɹən lænz, haʊɛvɝ, ðiz kɔɪnz ɑɹ ə dɪfɹən saɪzəz ən weɪts. ivən ɪn wʌn neɪʃən, kɔɪnz ə dɪfɹən saɪzəz ən weɪts əv bɪn mɪntɪd baɪ dɪfɹən ɹulɝz. kəz ə tʃɹeɪd, ðə kɔɪnz ə mɛni neɪʃənz kən bi faʊn ɔlmoʊst ɛniwɛɹ, ən fəɹ ðət ɹizən, bæŋkɝz, mʌnilɛndɝz ən mɝtʃəns ɔl jus skeɪlz tə dətɝmən ðə vælju ʌv ɛni ɡɪvən kɔɪn. ivən lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝz ə kɔɪnz ɑɹ weɪd.

crowns (the largest coin in size), marks and pennies. Crowns and marks can be minted of gold or silver, while pennies can be silver or copper, the last often called simply a copper. In different lands, however, these coins are of different sizes and weights. Even in one nation, coins of different sizes and weights have been minted by different rulers. Because of trade, the coins of many nations can be found almost anywhere, and for that reason, bankers, moneylenders and merchants all use scales to determine the value of any given coin. Even large numbers of coins are weighed.

ðə hɛviəs kɔɪnz kʌm fɹəm ændɝ ən tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən ɪn ðoʊz tu pleɪsəz ðə ɹɛləɾɪv væljuz ɑɹ: tɛn kɑpɝ pɛniz ikwəlz wʌn sɪlvɝ pɛni; wʌnhʌnʒɹəd sɪlvɝ pɛniz ikwəlz lsɪlvɝ mɑɹk; tɛn sɪlvɝ mɑɹks ikwəlz wʌn sɪlvɝ kɹaʊn; tɛn sɪlvɝ kɹaʊnz ikwəlz wʌn ɡoʊl mɑɹk; tɛn ɡoʊl mɑɹks ikwəlz wʌn ɡoʊl kɹaʊn. baɪ kɑntʃɹæst, ɪn ɔltɑɹə, wɛɹ ðə lɑɹdʒɝ kɔɪnz kənteɪn lɛs ɡoʊld əɹ sɪlvɝ, ðə ɹɛləɾɪv væljuz ɑɹ: tɛn kɑpɝ pɛniz ikwəlzwʌn sɪlvɝ pɛni; twɛntiwʌn sɪlvɝ pɛniz ikwəlz wʌn sɪlvɝ mɑɹk; twɛnti sɪlvɝ mɑɹks ikwəlz wʌn sɪlvɝ kɹaʊn; twɛnti sɪlvɝ kɹaʊnz ikwəlz wʌn ɡoʊl mɑɹk; twɛnti ɡoʊl mɑɹks ikwəlz wʌn ɡoʊl kɹaʊn.

The heaviest coins come from Andor and Tar Valon, and in those two places the relative values are: 10 copper pennies = 1 silver penny; 100 silver pennies = lsilver mark; 10 silver marks = 1 silver crown; 10 silver crowns = 1 gold mark; 10 gold marks = 1 gold crown. By contrast, in Altara, where the larger coins contain less gold or silver, the relative values are: 10 copper pennies =1 silver penny; 21 silver pennies = 1 silver mark; 20 silver marks = 1 silver crown; 20 silver crowns = 1 gold mark; 20 gold marks = 1 gold crown.

ði oʊnli peɪpɝ kɝənsi ɪz "lɛɾɝz-ʌv-ɹaɪts," wɪtʃ ɑɹ ɪʃud baɪ bæŋkɝz, ɡɛɹəntiɪŋ tə pɹizɛn ə sɝɾən əmaʊn ʌv ɡoʊld əɹ sɪlvɝ wən ðə lɛɾɝ-ʌv-ɹaɪts ɪz pɹizɛntəd. kəz ə ðə lɔŋ dɪstənsəz bɪtwin sɪɾiz, ðə lɛŋθ ə taɪm niɾəd tə tʃɹævəl fɹəm wʌn tə ənʌðɝ, ən ðə dɪfəkəltiz ə tʃɹænzækʃənz ət lɔŋ dɪstəns, ə lɛɾɝ-ʌv-ɹaɪts meɪ bi æksɛptɪɾ ət fʊl vælju ɪn ə sɪɾi nɪɹ tə ðə bæŋk wɪtʃ ɪʃuɾ ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt meɪ oʊnli bi æksɛptɪɾ əɾ ə loʊɝ vælju ɪn ə sɪɾi fɑɹðɝ əweɪ. dʒɛnɝəli, sʌmwʌn ɪntɛndɪŋ tə bi tʃɹævlɪŋ fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm wɪl kæɹi wʌn əɹ mɔɹ lɛɾɝz-ʌv-ɹaɪts tə ɪkstʃeɪnʒ fəɹ kɔɪn wən niɾəd. lɛɾɝz-ʌv-ɹaɪts ɑɹ juʒəwəli æksɛptɪɾ oʊnli baɪ bæŋkɝz əɹ mɝtʃəns, ən wəd nɛvɝ bi juzd ɪn ʃɑps.

The only paper currency is "letters-of-rights," which are issued by bankers, guaranteeing to present a certain amount of gold or silver when the letter-of-rights is presented. Because of the long distances between cities, the length of time needed to travel from one to another, and the difficulties of transactions at long distance, a letter-of-rights may be accepted at full value in a city near to the bank which issued it, but it may only be accepted at a lower value in a city farther away. Generally, someone intending to be traveling for a long time will carry one or more letters-of-rights to exchange for coin when needed. Letters-of-rights are usually accepted only by bankers or merchants, and would never be used in shops.

dækoʊvæl: (wʌn) ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "wʌn u ɪz oʊnd," əɹ "pɝsən u ɪz pɹɑpɝɾi." (tu) əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, ðə tɝm ɔfən juzd, əlɔŋ wɪð "pɹɑpɝɾi," fəɹ sleɪvz. sleɪvɝi hæz ə lɔŋ ən ənjuʒəwəl hɪstɝi əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, wɪð sleɪvz hævɪŋ ði əbɪləɾi tə ɹaɪz tə pəzɪʃənz ʌv ɡɹeɪt paʊɝ ən oʊpən əθɔɹəɾi, ɪnkluɾɪŋ əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ ðoʊz u ɑɹ fɹi. ɪts ɔlsoʊ pɑsəbəl fəɹ ðoʊz ɪn pəzɪʃənz ʌv ɡɹeɪt paʊɝ tə bi ɹədus tə dækoʊvæl. si ɔlsoʊ sɔɪhɪn.

da'covale: (1) In the Old Tongue, "one who is owned," or "person who is property." (2) Among the Seanchan, the term often used, along with "property," for slaves. Slavery has a long and unusual history among the Seanchan, with slaves having the ability to rise to positions of great power and open authority, including authority over those who are free. It is also possible for those in positions of great power to be reduced to da'covale. See also so'jhin.

dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz, ðə: ði ɪlit mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən ə ðə sintʃæn ɛmpaɪɝ, ɪnkluɾɪŋ boʊθ hjumənz ən oʊɡiɝ. ðə hjumən mɛmbɝz ə ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹɾ ɑɹ ɔl dækoʊvæl, bɔɹn əz pɹɑpɝɾi ən tʃoʊzən waɪl jʌŋ tə sɝv ði ɛmpɹɛs, huz pɝsənəl pɹɑpɝɾi ðeɪ ɑɹ. fənæɾɪkəli lɔɪəl ən fɪɹsli pɹaʊd, ðeɪ ɔfən dɪspleɪ ðə ɹeɪvənz tætuɾ ɑn ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ðə mɑɹk ʌv ə dækoʊvæl ə ði ɛmpɹɛs. ði oʊɡiɝ mɛmbɝz ɑɹ noʊn əz ɡɑɹɾənɝz, ən ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt dækoʊvæl. ðə ɡɑɹɾənɝz ɑɹ əz fɪɹsli lɔɪəl əz ðə hjumən dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz, ðoʊ, ən ɑɹ ivən mɔɹ fɪɹd.

Deathwatch Guards, the: The elite military formation of the Seanchan Empire, including both humans and Ogier. The human members of the Deathwatch Guard are all da'covale, born as property and chosen while young to serve the Empress, whose personal property they are. Fanatically loyal and fiercely proud, they often display the ravens tattooed on their shoulders, the mark of a da'covale of the Empress. The Ogier members are known as Gardeners, and they are not da'covale. The Gardeners are as fiercely loyal as the human Deathwatch Guards, though, and are even more feared.

hjumən əɹ oʊɡiɝ, ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz nɑɾ oʊnli ɑɹ ɹɛɾi tə daɪ fəɹ ði ɛmpɹɛs ən ði ɪmpɪɹiəl fæmli, bʌt bɪliv ðət ðɛɹ laɪvz ɑɹ ðə pɹɑpɝɾi ʌv ði ɛmpɹɛs, tə bi dɪspoʊzd ʌv əz ʃi wɪʃɪz.

Human or Ogier, the Deathwatch Guards not only are ready to die for the Empress and the Imperial family, but believe that their lives are the property of the Empress, to be disposed of as she wishes.

ðɛɹ hɛlməts ən ɑɹmɝ ɑɹ lækɝɾ ɪn dɑɹk ɡɹin (soʊ dɑɹk ðəɾ ɪts ɔfən mɪsteɪkənli kɔl blæk)

Their helmets and armor are lacquered in dark green (so dark that it is often mistakenly called black)

ən blʌd ɹɛd, ðɛɹ ʃilz ɑɹ lækɝd blæk, ən ðɛɹ sɔɹdz, spɪɹz, æksiz ən hælbɝdz kæɹi blæk tæsəlz. si ɔlsoʊ dækoʊvæl.

and blood red, their shields are lacquered black, and their swords, spears, axes and halberds carry black tassels. See also da'covale.

dɛlvɪŋ: (wʌn) juzɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ tə daɪəɡnoʊs fɪzɪkəl kəndɪʃən ən ɪlnəs. (tu) faɪndɪŋ dəpɑzɪts ə mɛɾəl ɔɹz wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ðət ðɪs əz lɔŋ bɪn ə lɔst əbɪləɾi əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪ əkaʊn fəɹ ðə neɪm bɪkʌmɪŋ ətætʃt tə ənʌðɝ əbɪləɾi.

Delving: (1) Using the One Power to diagnose physical condition and illness. (2) Finding deposits of metal ores with the One Power. That this has long been a lost ability among Aes Sedai may account for the name becoming attached to another ability.

dɝmɝæt-: (wʌn) ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "mæstɝ hænlɝ." (tu) əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, ðə pɹifɪks əplaɪd tə ɪndəkeɪɾ ə sinjɝ ən haɪli skɪl hænlɝ ʌv wʌn ə ði ɛɡzɑɾɪks, wʌn u tʃɹeɪnz ʌðɝz, əz ɪn dɝmɝətʃɹeɪkən.

der'morat-: (1) In the Old Tongue, "master handler." (2) Among the Seanchan, the prefix applied to indicate a senior and highly skilled handler of one of the exotics, one who trains others, as in der'morat'raken.

dɝmɝæt kən əv ə fɛɹli haɪ soʊʃəl stæɾəs, ðə haɪəst ʌv ɔl hɛl baɪ dɝsʌldəm, ðə tʃɹeɪnɝz ə sʌldəm, hu ɹæŋk wɪð fɛɹli haɪ mɪlətɛɹi ɔfəsɝz. si ɔlsoʊ mɔɝæt-.

Der'morat can have a fairly high social status, the highest of all held by der'sul'dam, the trainers of sul'dam, who rank with fairly high military officers. See also morat-.

dʒɹæɡən: ə paʊɝfəl nu wɛpən keɪpəbəl ə faɪɹɪŋ ɪksploʊsɪv tʃɑɹdʒəz oʊvɝ lɑɹdʒ dɪstənsəz, kɑzɪŋ ɪkstɛnsɪv dæmədʒ tə ði ɛnəmi.

dragon: A powerful new weapon capable of firing explosive charges over large distances, causing extensive damage to the enemy.

dʒɹæɡənz' ɛɡz: ðə neɪm ɡɪvən tə ði ɪksploʊsɪv tʃɑɹdʒəz faɪɝd baɪ dʒɹæɡənz.

dragons' eggs: The name given to the explosive charges fired by dragons.

ɛlfɪn: ə ɹeɪs ə biɪŋz, lɑɹdʒli hjumən ɪn əpɪɹəns bʌt wɪð fɑks-laɪk kɛɹəktɝɪstɪks, hu wɪl ɡɹæn θɹi wɪʃɪz, ɔlðoʊ ðeɪ æsk fəɹ ə pɹaɪs ɪn ɹɪtɝn. ɪf ðə pɝsən æskɪŋ dʌz nɑt nəɡoʊʃieɪɾ ə pɹaɪs, ði ɛlfɪn tʃuz ɪt. ðə moʊs kɑmən pɹaɪs ɪn sətʃ sɝkəmstænsəz ɪz dɛθ, bʌt ðeɪ stɪl fʊlfɪl ðɛɹ pɑɹɾ ə ðə bɑɹɡən, ɔlðoʊ ðə mænɝ ɪn wɪtʃ ðeɪ fʊlfɪl ɪts sɛldəm ðə mænɝ ðə wʌn æskɪŋ ɪkspɛks. ðɛɹ tʃɹu loʊkeɪʃən ɪz ənnoʊn, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl tə vɪzəɾ əm baɪ minz ʌv ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðət wɑz loʊkeɪɾəd ɪn ɹɪɾiən. ðət tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɑz teɪkən baɪ mɔɪɹeɪn dəmədʒɹd tə kɛɹhin, wɛɹ ɪt wɑz dɪstʃɹɔɪd. ðeɪ meɪ ɔlsoʊ bi ɹitʃt baɪ ɛntɝɪŋ ðə taʊɝ ʌv ɡɛndʒeɪaɪ. ðeɪ æsk ðə seɪm kwɛstʃənz əz ði æɛlfɪn ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ faɪɝ, aɪɝn, ən mjuzɪkəl ɪnstʃɹəməns. si ɔlsoʊ æɛlfɪn, sneɪks ən fɑksəz.

Eelfinn: A race of beings, largely human in appearance but with fox-like characteristics, who will grant three wishes, although they ask for a price in return. If the person asking does not negotiate a price, the Eelfinn choose it. The most common price in such circumstances is death, but they still fulfill their part of the bargain, although the manner in which they fulfill it is seldom the manner the one asking expects. Their true location is unknown, but it was possible to visit them by means of a ter'angreal that was located in Rhuidean. That ter'angreal was taken by Moiraine Damodred to Cairhien, where it was destroyed. They may also be reached by entering the Tower of Ghenjei. They ask the same questions as the Aelfinn regarding fire, iron, and musical instruments. See also Aelfinn, Snakes and Foxes.

fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ, dʒaɪn: ə hɪɹoʊ ʌv ðə nɔɹðɝn lænz u dʒɝnid tə mɛni lænz ən hæd mɛni ædvɛntʃɝz; hi kæptʃɝd kaʊɪn fɛɹhɑɹɾ ən bɹɔɾ ɪm tə ðə kɪŋz dʒʌstəs. hi wɑz ði ɔθɝ ə sɛvɹəl bʊks, əz wɛl əz ðə sʌbʒɪkt ə bʊks ən stɔɹiz. hi vænɪʃt ɪn naɪnhʌnʒɹədeɪtiwʌn ni, æftɝ ɹɪtɝnɪŋ fɹəm ə tʃɹɪp ɪndə ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt wɪtʃ səm sɛd hæd teɪkən ɪm ɔl ðə weɪ tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl.

Farstrider, Jain: A hero of the northern lands who journeyed to many lands and had many adventures; he captured Cowin Fairheart and brought him to the king's justice. He was the author of several books, as well as the subject of books and stories. He vanished in 981 NE, after returning from a trip into the Great Blight which some said had taken him all the way to Shayol Ghul.

fɛl, hɹɪd: ði ɔθɝ ə ɹizən ən ənɹisən ən ʌðɝ bʊks. fɛl wɑz ə stuɾənt (æn titʃɝ)

Fel, Herid: The author of Reason and Unreason and other books. Fel was a student (and teacher)

ʌv hɪstɝi ən fəlɑsəfi ət ði əkæɾəmi ʌv kɛɹhin. hi wɑz dɪskʌvɝɾ ɪn ɪz stʌɾi tɔɹn lɪm fɹəm lɪm.

of history and philosophy at the Academy of Cairhien. He was discovered in his study torn limb from limb.

fɝst ɹizənɝ: ðə taɪɾəl ɡɪvən tə ðə hɛɾ ə ðə waɪɾ ədʒɑ. ðɪs pəzɪʃən ɪz kɝənli hɛl baɪ fɛɹən nhɝən.

First Reasoner: The title given to the head of the White Ajah. This position is currently held by Ferane Neheran.

fɝst səlɛktɝ: ðə taɪɾəl ɡɪvən tə ðə hɛɾ ə ðə blu ədʒɑ. ðə fɝst səlɛktɝ ɪz kɝənli ənnoʊn, ɔlðoʊ ɪts səspɛktəd ðət ləleɪn əkɑʃi fɪlz ðɪs pəzɪʃən.

First Selector: The title given to the head of the Blue Ajah. The First Selector is currently unknown, although it is suspected that Lelaine Akashi fills this position.

fɝst wivɝ: ðə taɪɾəl ɡɪvən tə ðə hɛɾ ə ðə jɛloʊ ədʒɑ. ðɪs pəzɪʃən ɪz kɝənli hɛl baɪ swænə dʒɹeɪɡən ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ.

First Weaver: The title given to the head of the Yellow Ajah. This position is currently held by Suana Dragand in the White Tower.

fɔɹseɪkən, ðə: ðə neɪm ɡɪvən tə θɝtin paʊɝfəl ɛɛs sədaɪ, mɛn ən wɪmən boʊθ, hu wɛn oʊvɝ tə ðə ʃædoʊ dʊɹɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ən wɝ tʃɹæpt ɪn ðə silɪŋ ə ðə bɔɹ ɪndə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən. waɪl ɪts lɔŋ bɪn bɪliv ðət ðeɪ əloʊn əbændən ðə laɪt dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ, ɪn fækt ʌðɝz dɪɾ əz wɛl; ðiz θɝtin wɝ oʊnli ðə haɪəst-ɹæŋkɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛm. ðə fɔɹseɪkən (hu kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz ðə tʃoʊzən) ɑɹ sʌmwʌt ɹədust ɪn nʌmbɝ sɪns ðɛɹ əweɪkənɪŋ ɪn ðə pɹɛzən deɪ. səm ə ðoʊz kɪld wɝ ɹiɪnkɑɹneɪɾɪd ɪn nu bɑɾiz.

Forsaken, the: The name given to thirteen powerful Aes Sedai, men and women both, who went over to the Shadow during the Age of Legends and were trapped in the sealing of the Bore into the Dark One's prison. While it has long been believed that they alone abandoned the Light during the War of the Shadow, in fact others did as well; these thirteen were only the highest-ranking among them. The Forsaken (who call themselves the Chosen) are somewhat reduced in number since their awakening in the present day. Some of those killed were reincarnated in new bodies.

ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn, ðə: ðə bænɝ ə ðə lɔs bɔɹɾɝlənd neɪʃən ə mɔlkiɝ.

Golden Crane, the: The banner of the lost Borderland nation of Malkier.

ɡɹeɪndəl: wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən. wʌns noʊn əz kɑmɝəl mɛɹɑdim nɪn-dɑɹ, ə noʊɾəd əsɛɾɪk, ʃi wɑz ðə sɛkən ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən tə dɪsaɪd tə sɝv ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ə ɹuθləs kɪlɝ, ʃi wɑz ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ ðə dɛθs ə ɝæŋɡɝ ən æzmɑɾiən ən fəɹ ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ə mɛsænə. hɝ pɹɛzən sɝkəmstænsəz ɑɹ ənsɝɾən.

Graendal: One of the Forsaken. Once known as Kamarile Maradim Nin-dar, a noted ascetic, she was the second of the Forsaken to decide to serve the Dark One. A ruthless killer, she was responsible for the deaths of Aran'gar and Asmodean and for the destruction of Mesaana. Her present circumstances are uncertain.

bɑdɔɹi: ðə bɹeɪɾɪd lɛðɝ kɔɹd ðəɾ ə mɔlkɪɹi mæn taɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪz tɛmpəlz tə hoʊld ɪz hɛɹ bæk. əntɪl æftɝ mɔlkiɝ fɛl tə ðə blaɪt, ɛvɹi ədʌl mɔlkɪɹi meɪl wɔɹ ɪz hɛɹ tə ðə ʃoʊldɝz ən taɪd bæk wɪð ə hædɔɹi. laɪk ðə pɹɛzənteɪʃən ə hɪz sɔɹd, biɪŋ əlaʊd tə wɛɹ ðə bɑdɔɹi mɑɹk ðə muv fɹəm tʃaɪldhʊd tə ədʌlthʊd fəɹ mɔlkɪɹi meɪlz. ðə bɑdɔɹi sɪmbəlaɪz ðə duɾiz ən ɑbləɡeɪʃənz ðət baʊn ɪm əz ən ədʌlt, ən ɔlsoʊ hɪz kənɛkʃən tə mɔlkiɝ. si ɔlsoʊ kɪsən.

badori: The braided leather cord that a Malkieri man tied around his temples to hold his hair back. Until after Malkier fell to the Blight, every adult Malkieri male wore his hair to the shoulders and tied back with a hadori. Like the presentation of his sword, being allowed to wear the badori marked the move from childhood to adulthood for Malkieri males. The badori symbolized the duties and obligations that bound him as an adult, and also his connection to Malkier. See also ki'sain.

hænlən, dɑvd: eɪ dɑɹkfɹɛnd, ɔlsoʊ noʊn əz dɔɪlɪn mɛlɝ, hu wɑz kæptʃɝd wɪð leɪɾi ʃieɪn, tʃɛzməl ɛmɹi, ɛlʒɹɪθ ɑndɑɹ, təmeɪl kɪndɝəd, fæljən boʊɾə ən mɑɹilɪn ɡəmɑlfɪn.

Hanlon, Daved: A Darkfriend, also known as Doilin Mellar, who was captured with Lady Shiaine, Chesmal Emry, Eldrith Jhondar, Temaile Kinderode, Falion Bhoda and Marillin Gemalphin.

hɛd klɝk: ðə taɪɾəl ɡɪvən tə ðə hɛɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪ ədʒɑ. ðɪs pəzɪʃən ɪz kɝənli hɛl baɪ sɹæntʃə kɑlvaɪn.

Head Clerk: The title given to the head of the Gray Ajah. This position is currently held by Serancha Colvine.

hɛɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪt kaʊnsəl ə θɝtin: ðə taɪɾəl ɡɪvən tə ðə hɛɾ ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ. ðɪs pəzɪʃən ɪz kɝənli hɛl baɪ ɑlviɛɝɪn fɹaɪɾən.

Head of the Great Council of Thirteen: The title given to the head of the Black Ajah. This position is currently held by Alviarin Freidhen.

hɑɹt: ðə beɪsɪk junəɾ ʌv ɔɹɡənəzeɪʃən ɪn ðə blæk ədʒɑ. ɪn ɪfɛkt, ə sɛl. ə hɑɹt kənsɪsts ə θɹi sɪstɝz u noʊ itʃ ʌðɝ, wɪð itʃ mɛmbɝ ə ðə hɑɹt noʊɪŋ wʌn ədɪʃənəl sɪstɝ ə ðə blæk u ɪz ənnoʊn tə ði ʌðɝ tu ʌv əɹ hɑɹt.

heart: The basic unit of organization in the Black Ajah. In effect, a cell. A heart consists of three sisters who know each other, with each member of the heart knowing one additional sister of the Black who is unknown to the other two of her heart.

haɪəst: ðə taɪɾəl ɡɪvən tə ðə hɛɾ ə ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ. ðɪs pəzɪʃən ɪz kɝənli hɛl baɪ tsutɑmə ɹæθ.

Highest: The title given to the head of the Red Ajah. This position is currently held by Tsutama Rath.

ɪluməneɪɾɝz, ɡɪld ʌv: ə səsaɪəɾi ðət hɛl ðə sikɹəɾ ə meɪkɪŋ faɪɹwɝks. ɪt ɡɑɹɾəd ðɪs sikɹət vɛɹi kloʊsli, ivən tə ði ɪkstɛn ə duɪŋ mɝɾɝ tə pɹətɛkt ɪt. ðə ɡɪld ɡeɪn ɪts neɪm fɹəm ðə ɡɹæn dɪspleɪz, kɔld ɪluməneɪʃənz, ðəɾ ɪt pɹəvaɪɾəd fəɹ ɹulɝz ən səmtaɪmz fəɹ ɡɹeɪɾɝ lɔɹdz.

Illuminators, Guild of: A society that held the secret of making fireworks. It guarded this secret very closely, even to the extent of doing murder to protect it. The Guild gained its name from the grand displays, called Illuminations, that it provided for rulers and sometimes for greater lords.

lɛsɝ faɪɹwɝks wɝ soʊl fəɹ jus baɪ ʌðɝz, bʌt wɪð daɪɹ wɔɹnɪŋz ə ðə dɪzæstɝ ðət kəd ɹɪzʌl fɹəm ətɛmptɪŋ tə lɝn wʌt wɑz ɪnsaɪd ðɛm. ðə ɡɪld wʌns hæd tʃæptɝ haʊsəz ɪn kɛɹhin ən tæntʃəkoʊ, bʌt boʊθ ɑɹ naʊ dɪstʃɹɔɪd. ɪn ədɪʃən, ðə mɛmbɝz ə ðə ɡɪld ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ ɹɪzɪstɪd ði ɪnveɪʒən baɪ ðə sintʃæn ən wɝ meɪd dækoʊvæl, ən ðə ɡɪld əz sətʃ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪɡzɪsts. haʊɛvɝ, ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl ɪluməneɪɾɝz stɪl ɪɡzɪst aʊtsaɪɾ ə sintʃæn ɹul ən wɝk tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðət ðə ɡɪld wɪl bi ɹɪmɛmbɝd. si ɔlsoʊ dækoʊvæl.

Lesser fireworks were sold for use by others, but with dire warnings of the disaster that could result from attempting to learn what was inside them. The Guild once had chapter houses in Cairhien and Tanchico, but both are now destroyed. In addition, the members of the Guild in Tanchico resisted the invasion by the Seanchan and were made da'covale, and the Guild as such no longer exists. However, individual Illuminators still exist outside of Seanchan rule and work to make sure that the Guild will be remembered. See also da'covale.

ɪmfɹəl: ðə sɪksθ-lɑɹdʒəst sɪɾi ʌv sintʃæn. ɪts loʊkeɪɾəd nɔɹθwɛst ə sindɑɹ, ən ɪz hoʊm tə ðə taʊɝz ə mɪdnaɪt. si ɔlsoʊ taʊɝz ə mɪdnaɪt.

Imfaral: The sixth-largest city of Seanchan. It is located northwest of Seandar, and is home to the Towers of Midnight. See also Towers of Midnight.

kɪsən: ə smɔl mɑɹk, ə dɑt, wɪtʃ ən ədʌl mɔlkɪɹi wʊmən peɪntəɾ ɑn əɹ fɔɹhɛɾ itʃ mɔɹnɪŋ ɪn plɛdʒ ðət ʃi wəd swɛɹ (ɔɹ hæd swɔɹn) hɝ sʌnz tə faɪt ðə ʃædoʊ. ðɪs plɛdʒ wɑz nɑt nɛsəsɛɹəli ðət ðeɪ wəd bi wɔɹiɝz, bʌt ðət ðeɪ wəɾ əpoʊz ðə ʃædoʊ ɛvɹi deɪ ɪn ɛvɹi weɪ ðət ðeɪ kʊd. laɪk ðə hædɔɹi, ðə kɪsən wɑz ɔlsoʊ kənsɪɾɝd ə sɪmbəl ə kənɛkʃən tə mɔlkiɝ, ən ə ðə bɑnz ðət junaɪɾəd əɹ wɪð ʌðɝ mɔlkɪɹi. ɔlsoʊ laɪk ðə hɑ-dɔɹi, ðə kɪsən wɑz ə saɪn ʌv ədʌlthʊd. ðə kɪsən ɔlsoʊ ɡeɪv ɪnfɝmeɪʃən əbaʊt ðə wʊmən u wɔɹ ɪt. ə blu mɑɹk wɑz wɔɹn baɪ ə wʊmən u hæd nɑt mɛɹid, ə ɹɛd mɑɹk baɪ ə mɛɹid wʊmən ən ə waɪt mɑɹk baɪ ə wɪɾoʊ. ɪn dɛθ, ʃi wəd bi mɑɹkt wɪð ɔl θɹi, wʌn ʌv itʃ kʌlɝ, wɛðɝ ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ mɛɹiɾ əɹ nɑt. si ɔlsoʊ hædɔɹi.

ki'sain: A small mark, a dot, which an adult Malkieri woman painted on her forehead each morning in pledge that she would swear (or had sworn) her sons to fight the Shadow. This pledge was not necessarily that they would be warriors, but that they would oppose the Shadow every day in every way that they could. Like the hadori, the ki'sain was also considered a symbol of connection to Malkier, and of the bonds that united her with other Malkieri. Also like the ha-dori, the ki'sain was a sign of adulthood. The ki'sain also gave information about the woman who wore it. A blue mark was worn by a woman who had not married, a red mark by a married woman and a white mark by a widow. In death, she would be marked with all three, one of each color, whether she had ever married or not. See also hadori.

lidʒən ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, ðə: ə lɑɹdʒ mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən, ɔl ɪnfəntʃɹi, ɡɪvɪŋ əlidʒəns tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, tʃɹeɪn baɪ dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ əlɔŋ laɪnz wɝkt aʊt baɪ hɪmsɛlf ən mæt kɔθən, laɪnz wɪtʃ dɪpɑɹt ʃɑɹpli fɹəm ðə juʒəwəl ɛmplɔɪmən ə fʊt. waɪl mɛni mɛn sɪmpli wɔk ɪn tə vɑləntɪɹ, lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝz ə ðə lidʒən ɑɹ skupt ʌp baɪ ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ pɑɹɾiz fɹəm ðə blæk taʊɝ, hu fɝst ɡæðɝ ɔl ə ðə mɛn ɪn ən ɛɹiə hu wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə fɑloʊ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən oʊnli æftɝ teɪkɪŋ əm θɹu ɡeɪtweɪz nɪɹ keɪɛmlɪn wɪnoʊ aʊt ðoʊz u kən bi tɔt tə tʃænəl. ðə ɹɪmeɪndɝ, baɪ fɑɹ ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ nʌmbɝ, ɑɹ sɛn tə bæʃɪɹz tʃɹeɪnɪŋ kæmps. ðə lidʒən ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪz ət pɹɛzən tʃɹeɪnɪŋ fəɹ ðə læs bæɾəl.

Legion of the Dragon, the: A large military formation, all infantry, giving allegiance to the Dragon Reborn, trained by Davram Bashere along lines worked out by himself and Mat Cauthon, lines which depart sharply from the usual employment of foot. While many men simply walk in to volunteer, large numbers of the Legion are scooped up by recruiting parties from the Black Tower, who first gather all of the men in an area who were willing to follow the Dragon Reborn, and only after taking them through gateways near Caemlyn winnow out those who can be taught to channel. The remainder, by far the greater number, are sent to Bashere's training camps. The Legion of the Dragon is at present training for the Last Battle.

lɛŋθ, junəts ʌv: tɛn ɪntʃəz ikwəlz wʌn fʊt; θɹi fiɾ ikwəlz wʌn peɪs; tu peɪsɪz ikwəlz wʌn spæn; wʌnθaʊzən spænz ikwəlz wʌn maɪl; fɔɹ

length, units of: 10 inches = 1 foot; 3 feet = 1 pace; 2 paces = 1 span; 1000 spans = 1 mile; 4

maɪlz  wʌn liɡ.

miles = 1 league.

lɪsənɝz: eɪ sintʃæn spaɪ ɔɹɡənəzeɪʃən. ɔlmoʊst ɛniwʌn ɪn ðə haʊshoʊld ʌv ə sintʃæn noʊbəl, mɝtʃən əɹ bæŋkɝ meɪ bi ə lɪsənɝ, ɪnkluɾɪŋ dækoʊvæl əkeɪʒənəli, ðoʊ sɛldəm sɔɪtn. ðeɪ teɪk noʊ æktɪv ɹoʊl, mɪɹli wɑtʃɪŋ, lɪsnɪŋ ən ɹipɔɹɾɪŋ. ðɛɹ ɹɪpɔɹts ɑɹ sɛn tə lɛsɝ hænz u kəntʃɹoʊl boʊθ əm ən ðə sikɝz ən dɪsaɪd wʌt ʃəd bi pæst ɑn tə ðə sikɝz fəɹ fɝðɝ ækʃən. si ɔlsoʊ sikɝz.

Listeners: A Seanchan spy organization. Almost anyone in the household of a Seanchan noble, merchant or banker may be a Listener, including da'covale occasionally, though seldom so'jhtn. They take no active role, merely watching, listening and reporting. Their reports are sent to Lesser Hands who control both them and the Seekers and decide what should be passed on to the Seekers for further action. See also Seekers.

mɛɹəθdətnən: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðoʊz u mʌs bi liʃt," ən ɔlsoʊ "wʌn u mʌs bi liʃt." ðə tɝm əplaɪd baɪ ðə sintʃæn tə ɛni wʊmən keɪpəbəl ə tʃænəlɪŋ u hæz nɑt bɪn kɑlɝɾ əz ə deɪmeɪn.

marath'datnane: In the Old Tongue, "those who must be leashed," and also "one who must be leashed." The term applied by the Seanchan to any woman capable of channeling who has not been collared as a damane.

mɑɹtʃ: si ɛɹiə, junəts ʌv.

march: See area, units of.

mɛlɝ, dɔɪlɪn: si hænlən, dɑvd.

Mellar, Doilin: See Hanlon, Daved.

mɛɝeɪɾɪn: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə bɹʌðɝləs." ðə neɪm ədɑptəd, əz ə səsaɪəɾi, baɪ ðoʊz il u əbændən klæn ən sɛpt ən wɛn tə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ kəz ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ æksɛpt ɹænd ælθɹ, ə wɛtləndɝ, əz ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn, əɹ kəz ðeɪ ɹəfjuz tə æksɛpt ɪz ɹɛvəleɪʃənz kənsɝnɪŋ ðə hɪstɝi ən ɔɹədʒɪnz ə ði il. dɛzɝɾɪŋ klæn ən sɛp fəɹ ɛni ɹizən ɪz ənæθəmə əmʌŋ ði il, ðɛɹfɔɹ ðɛɹ oʊn wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz əmʌŋ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɝ ənwɪlɪŋ tə teɪk əm ɪn, ən ðeɪ fɔɹm ðɪs səsaɪəɾi, ðə bɹʌðɝləs.

Mera'din: In the Old Tongue, "the Brotherless." The name adopted, as a society, by those Aiel who abandoned clan and sept and went to the Shaido because they could not accept Rand al'Thor, a wetlander, as the Car'a'carn, or because they refused to accept his revelations concerning the history and origins of the Aiel. Deserting clan and sept for any reason is anathema among the Aiel, therefore their own warrior societies among the Shaido were unwilling to take them in, and they formed this society, the Brotherless.

mɔɪɹeɪn dəmədʒɹd: eɪ kɛɹhinɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə blu ədʒɑ. lɔŋ pɹəzum dɛd. θɔɹn mɛɹɪlɪn hæz, haʊɛvɝ, ɹɪvil ðə ɹɪsiɾ ʌv ə lɛɾɝ pɝpɔɹɾɪŋ tə bi fɹəm hɝ. ɪts ɹipɹədus hɪɹ:

Moiraine Damodred: A Cairhienin Aes Sedai of the Blue Ajah. Long presumed dead. Thorn Merrilin has, however, revealed the receipt of a letter purporting to be from her. It is reproduced here:

maɪ dɪɹəs θɔɹn, ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛni wɝdz aɪ wəd laɪk tə ɹaɪt tə ju, wɝdz fɹəm maɪ hɑɹt, bʌɾ aɪ hæv pʊt ðɪs ɔf kəz aɪ nu ðəɾ aɪ mʌst, ən naʊ ðəɹ ɪz lɪɾəl taɪm. ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛni θɪŋz aɪ kænɑt tɛl jə lɛst aɪ bɹɪŋ dɪzæstɝ, bʌt wʌɾ aɪ kæn, aɪ wɪl. hid kɛɹfəli wʌɾ aɪ seɪ. ɪn ə ʃɔɹt waɪl əl ɡoʊ daʊn tə ðə dɑks, ən ðəɹ əl kənfɹʌn lænfɝ. haʊ kən aɪ noʊ ðæt? ðət sikɹət bɪlɔŋz tə ʌðɝz. səfaɪs ɪt ðəɾ aɪ noʊ, ən lɛt ðət fɹknoʊlɪdʒ stæn əz pɹuf fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ʌv wʌɾ aɪ seɪ.

My dearest Thorn, There are many words I would like to write to you, words from my heart, but I have put this off because I knew that I must, and now there is little time. There are many things I cannot tell you lest I bring disaster, but what I can, I will. Heed carefully what I say. In a short while I will go down to the docks, and there I will confront Lanfear. How can I know that? That secret belongs to others. Suffice it that I know, and let that foreknowledge stand as proof for the rest of what I say.

wən jə ɹəsiv ðɪs, jəl bi toʊl ðəɾ aɪm dɛd. ɔl wɪl bɪliv ðæt. aɪm nɑt dɛd, ən ɪt meɪ bi ðəɾ aɪ ʃæl lɪv tə maɪ əpɔɪntəd jɪɹz. ɪɾ ɔlsoʊ meɪ bi ðət jə ən mæt kɔθən ən ənʌðɝ, ə mæn aɪ də nɑt noʊ, wɪl tʃɹaɪ tə ɹɛskju mi. meɪ, aɪ seɪ kəz ɪt meɪ bi ðət jəl nɑɾ əɹ kænɑt, əɹ kəz mæt meɪ ɹəfjuz. hi dʌz nɑt hoʊl mi ɪn ði əfɛkʃən jə sim tə, ən hiz ɪz ɹizənz wɪtʃ i noʊ daʊt θɪŋks ɑɹ ɡʊd. ɪf jə tʃɹaɪ, ɪt mʌs bi oʊnli jə ən mæt ən wʌn ʌðɝ. mɔɹ wɪl min dɛθ fəɹ ɔl. fjuɝ wɪl min dɛθ fəɹ ɔl.

When you receive this, you will be told that I am dead. All will believe that. I am not dead, and it may be that I shall live to my appointed years. It also may be that you and Mat Cauthon and another, a man I do not know, will try to rescue me. May, I say because it may be that you will not or cannot, or because Mat may refuse. He does not hold me in the affection you seem to, and he has his reasons which he no doubt thinks are good. If you try, it must be only you and Mat and one other. More will mean death for all. Fewer will mean death for all.

ivən ɪf jə kʌm oʊnli wɪð mæt ən wʌn ʌðɝ, dɛθ ɔlsoʊ meɪ kʌm. aɪ hæv sin jə tʃɹaɪ ən daɪ, wʌn əɹ tu əɹ ɔl θɹi. aɪ hæv sin maɪsɛlf daɪ ɪn ði ətɛmpt. aɪ hæv sin ɔl ʌv əs lɪv ən daɪ əz kæptɪvz. ʃəd jə dɪsaɪd tə meɪk ði ətɛmpt ɛniweɪ, jʌŋ mæt noʊz ðə weɪ tə faɪn mi, jɛt jə mʌs nɑt ʃoʊ hɪm ðɪs lɛɾɝ əntɪl i æsks əbaʊɾ ɪt. ðəɾ ɪz ə ði ʌtmoʊst ɪmpɔɹɾəns. hi mʌs noʊ nʌθɪŋ ðəɾ ɪz ɪn ðɪs lɛɾɝ əntɪl i æsks. ɪvɛns mʌs pleɪ aʊɾ ɪn sɝɾən weɪz, wʌtɛvɝ ðə kɑsts.

Even if you come only with Mat and one other, death also may come. I have seen you try and die, one or two or all three. I have seen myself die in the attempt. I have seen all of us live and die as captives. Should you decide to make the attempt anyway, young Mat knows the way to find me, yet you must not show him this letter until he asks about it. That is of the utmost importance. He must know nothing that is in this letter until he asks. Events must play out in certain ways, whatever the costs.

ɪf jə si læn əɡɛn, tɛl ɪm ðəɾ ɔl ə ðɪs ɪz fəɹ ðə bɛst. hɪz dɛstəni fɑloʊz ə dɪfɹən pæθ fɹəm maɪn. aɪ wɪʃ ɪm ɔl hæpinəs wɪð nɪneɪiv.

If you see Lan again, tell him that all of this is for the best. His destiny follows a different path from mine. I wish him all happiness with Nynaeve.

ə faɪnəl pɔɪnt. ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌt jə noʊ əbaʊt ðə ɡeɪm ə sneɪks ən fɑksəz. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ən hid.

A final point. Remember what you know about the game of Snakes and Foxes. Remember, and heed.

ɪts taɪm, ən aɪ mʌs də wʌt mʌs bi dʌn.

It is time, and I must do what must be done.

meɪ ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin jə ən ɡɪv jə dʒɔɪ, maɪ dɪɹəs θɔɹn, wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt wi ɛvɝ si wʌn ənʌðɝ əɡɛn.

May the Light illumine you and give you joy, my dearest Thorn, whether or not we ever see one another again.

mɔɪɹeɪn mɔɝæt-: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "hænlɝ." əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, ɪts juz fəɹ ðoʊz u hændəl ɛɡzɑɾɪks, sətʃ əz mɔɹətʃɹeɪkən, eɪ. ɹeɪkən hænlɝ əɹ ɹaɪɾɝ, ɔlsoʊ ɪnfɔɹməli kɔld ə flaɪɝ. si ɔlsoʊ dɝmɝæt-.

Moiraine morat-: In the Old Tongue, "handler." Among the Seanchan, it is used for those who handle exotics, such as morat'raken, a. raken handler or rider, also informally called a flier. See also der'morat-.

pɹɑfət, ðə: mɔɹ fɔɹməli, ðə pɹɑfəɾ ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. wʌns noʊn əz mæsimə dɑɡɝ, ə ʃaɪnɝən soʊlʒɝ, hi ʌndɝwɛn ə ɹɛvəleɪʃən ən dɪsaɪɾɪd ðəɾ i hæd bɪn kɔl tə spɹɛd ðə wɝɾ ə ðə dʒɹæɡənz ɹibɝθ. hi bɪliv ðət nʌθɪŋ - nʌθɪŋ! - wɑz mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən æknɑlɪdʒɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əz ðə laɪt meɪd flɛʃ ən biɪŋ ɹɛɾi wən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn kɔld, ən i ən ɪz fɑloʊɝz wəd juz ɛni minz tə fɔɹs ʌðɝz tə sɪŋ ðə ɡlɔɹiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ðoʊz u ɹəfjuzd wɝ mɑɹk fəɹ dɛθ, ən ðoʊz u wɝ sloʊ maɪt faɪn ðɛɹ hoʊmz ən ʃɑps bɝn ən ðɛmsɛlvz flɑɡd. fɔɹseɪkɪŋ ɛni neɪm bʌt "ðə pɹɑfət," hi bɹɔt keɪɑs tə mʌtʃ ʌv ɡildən ən ɑmɑdɪʃiə, lɑɹdʒ pɑɹts ʌv wɪtʃ i kəntʃɹoʊld, ɔlðoʊ wɪð ɪm ɡɔn, ðə sintʃæn ɑɹ ɹiɪstæblɪʃɪŋ ɔɹɾɝ ɪn ɑmɑdɪʃiə ən ðə kɹaʊn haɪ kaʊnsəl ɪn ɡildən. hi dʒɔɪnd wɪð pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə, hu wɑz sɛn tə bɹɪŋ ɪm tə ɹænd, ænd, fəɹ ɹizənz ənnoʊn, steɪd wɪð ɪm ivən ðoʊ ðɪs dɪleɪɾ ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. hi wɑz fɑloʊd baɪ mɛn ən wɪmən ə ðə loʊəst sɔɹt; ɪf ðeɪ wɝ nɑt soʊ wən ðeɪ wɝ pʊld ɪn baɪ hɪz kɝɪzmə, ðeɪ bɪkeɪm soʊ ʌndɝ ɪz ɪnfluəns. hi daɪɾ ʌndɝ mɪstɪɹiəs sɝkəmstænsəz.

Prophet, the: More formally, the Prophet of the Lord Dragon. Once known as Masema Dagar, a Shienaran soldier, he underwent a revelation and decided that he had been called to spread the word of the Dragon's Rebirth. He believed that nothing - nothing! - was more important than acknowledging the Dragon Reborn as the Light made flesh and being ready when the Dragon Reborn called, and he and his followers would use any means to force others to sing the glories of the Dragon Reborn. Those who refused were marked for death, and those who were slow might find their homes and shops burned and themselves flogged. Forsaking any name but "the Prophet," he brought chaos to much of Ghealdan and Amadicia, large parts of which he controlled, although with him gone, the Seanchan are reestablishing order in Amadicia and the Crown High Council in Ghealdan. He joined with Perrin Aybara, who was sent to bring him to Rand, and, for reasons unknown, stayed with him even though this delayed his going to the Dragon Reborn. He was followed by men and women of the lowest sort; if they were not so when they were pulled in by his charisma, they became so under his influence. He died under mysterious circumstances.

kwinz ɡɑɹdz, ðə: ði ɪlit mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən ɪn ændɝ. ɪn pistaɪm ðə ɡɑɹɾ ɪz ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ əphoʊldɪŋ ðə kwinz lɔ ən kipɪŋ ðə pis əkɹɔs ændɝ. ðə junəfɔɹm ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹɾ ɪnkluɾ ə ɹɛɾ ʌndɝkoʊt, ɡlimɪŋ meɪl ən pleɪɾ ɑɹmɝ, ə bɹɪljən ɹɛd kloʊk, ən ə kɑnɪkəl hɛlmət wɪð ə bɑɹd vaɪzɝ. haɪ-ɹæŋkɪŋ ɔfəsɝz wɛɹ nɑts ə ɹæŋk ɑn ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝ ən ɡoʊldən laɪən-hɛd spɝz. ə ɹisən ədɪʃən tə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz ɪz ðə kwinz pɝsənəl bɑɾiɡɑɹd, wɪtʃ ɪz kəmpoʊzd ɪntaɪɝli ʌv wɪmən sɪns ði ɝɛst ʌv ɪts fɔɹmɝ kæptən, dɔɪlɪn mɛlɝ. ðiz ɡɑɹdzwɪmən wɛɹ mʌtʃ mɔɹ ɪlæbɹət junəfɔɹmz ðən ðɛɹ meɪl kaʊntɝpɑɹts, ɪnkluɾɪŋ bɹɔd-bɹɪm hæts wɪð waɪt plumz, ɹɛd-lækɝd bɹɛstpleɪts ən hɛlməts tʃɹɪmd ɪn waɪt, ən leɪs-ɛdʒ sæʃɪz bɛɹɪŋ ðə waɪt laɪən ʌv ændɝ.

Queen's Guards, the: The elite military formation in Andor. In peacetime the Guard is responsible for upholding the Queen's law and keeping the peace across Andor. The uniform of the Queen's Guard include a red undercoat, gleaming mail and plate armor, a brilliant red cloak, and a conical helmet with a barred visor. High-ranking officers wear knots of rank on their shoulder and golden lion-head spurs. A recent addition to the Queen's Guards is the Queen's personal bodyguard, which is composed entirely of women since the arrest of its former captain, Doilin Mellar. These Guardswomen wear much more elaborate uniforms than their male counterparts, including broad-brimmed hats with white plumes, red-lacquered breastplates and helmets trimmed in white, and lace-edged sashes bearing the White Lion of Andor.

kwɛstʃənɝz, ðə: ən ɔɹɾɝ wɪðɪn ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. ðeɪ ɹəfɝ tə ðɛmsɛlvz əz ðə hæn ə ðə laɪt - ðeɪ ɪntɛnsli dɪslaɪk biɪŋ kɔl kwɛstʃənɝz - ən ðɛɹ əvaʊd pɝpəsəz ɑɹ tə dɪskʌvɝ ðə tʃɹuθ ɪn dɪspjəteɪʃənz ən ənkʌvɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ɪn ðə sɝtʃ fəɹ tʃɹuθ ən ðə laɪt, ðɛɹ nɔɹməl mɛθəɾ ʌv ɪnkwaɪɹi ɪz tɔɹtʃɝ; ðɛɹ nɔɹməl mænɝ ɪz ðət ðeɪ noʊ ðə tʃɹuθ ɔlɹɛɾi ən mʌst oʊnli meɪk ðɛɹ vɪktəm kənfɛs tə ɪt. ət taɪmz ðeɪ ækt əz ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪntaɪɝli sɛpɹət fɹəm ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ən ðə kaʊnsəl ə ði ənɔɪntəd, wɪtʃ kəmænz ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. ðɛɹ saɪn ɪz ə blʌd-ɹɛd ʃɛpɝdz kɹʊk.

Questioners, the: An order within the Children of the Light. They refer to themselves as the Hand of the Light - they intensely dislike being called Questioners - and their avowed purposes are to discover the truth in disputations and uncover Darkfriends. In the search for truth and the Light, their normal method of inquiry is torture; their normal manner is that they know the truth already and must only make their victim confess to it. At times they act as if they are entirely separate from the Children and the Council of the Anointed, which commands the Children. Their sign is a blood-red shepherd's crook.

ɹɛdʒɹmz: soʊlʒɝz ə ðə bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hænd, hu hæv bɪn tʃoʊzən aʊt fəɹ tɛmpɝɛɹi pəlis duɾi tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ʌðɝ soʊlʒɝz ə ðə bæn kɑz noʊ tʃɹʌbəl əɹ dæmədʒ ɪn ə taʊn əɹ vɪlədʒ wɛɹ ðə bæn əz stɑpt. soʊ neɪm bɪkɔz, waɪl ɑn duɾi, ðeɪ wɛɹ vɛɹi bɹɔd ɹɛɾ ɑɹmbænz ðət ɹitʃ fɹəm kʌf tə ɛlboʊ. juʒəwəli tʃoʊzən fɹəm əmʌŋ ðə moʊst ɪkspɪɹiənst ən ɹɪlaɪəbəl mɛn.

Redarms: Soldiers of the Band of the Red Hand, who have been chosen out for temporary police duty to make sure that other soldiers of the Band cause no trouble or damage in a town or village where the Band has stopped. So named because, while on duty, they wear very broad red armbands that reach from cuff to elbow. Usually chosen from among the most experienced and reliable men.

sɪns ɛni dæmədʒəz mʌs bi peɪd fəɹ baɪ ðə mɛn sɝvɪŋ əz ɹɛdʒɹmz, ðeɪ wɝk hɑɹd tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ɔl ɪz kwaɪəɾ ən pisfəl. si ɔlsoʊ ʃɛn ən kɑlhɑɹ.

Since any damages must be paid for by the men serving as Redarms, they work hard to make sure all is quiet and peaceful. See also Shen an Calhar.

sɑldɑiə: ə neɪʃən ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. ɪts kæpəɾəl ɪz mɛɹədɑn, ən ɪts ɹɔɪəl pæləs ɪz noʊn əz ðə kɝdɑmɔɹə (fɹʌm ði oʊl tʌŋ fəɹ "hɑɹɾ ə ðə pipəl"). ɪts ɹul baɪ ə kɪŋ əɹ kwin, ən ɪz ə hɝɛɾətɛɹi mɑnɑɹki. ðə kɹaʊn haɪ kaʊnsəl, ɔlsoʊ noʊn əz ðə kaʊnsəl ə lɔɹdz, ædvaɪzɪz ən əsɪsts ðə mɑnɑɹk ɪn ædmɪnɪstɝɪŋ ðə neɪʃən. ðə hʌzbən əɹ waɪf ʌv ə sɑldəiən ɹulɝ ɪz nɑt sɪmpli ə kɑnsɔɹt, bʌɾ ən ɔlmoʊs koʊ-ikwəl ɹulɝ. sɑldɑiə ɪz kɝənli ɹul baɪ hɝ moʊst ɪlumən mædʒəsti, tɛnoʊbiə si bæʃɪɹ kæzɑɾi, kwin ə sɑldɑiə, dɪfɛndɝ ə ðə laɪt, sɔɹɾ ə ðə blaɪtbɔɹɾɝ, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs kæzɑɾi ən leɪɾi ʌv ʃhɑnji, æsnɛl, kʌnwɔɹ ən ɡɑnɑi; hɝ mɑɹʃəl-dʒɛnɝəl ən ðə liɾɝ ə hɝ ɑɹmi ɪz əɹ ʌŋkəl ən ɛɹ, dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ, ɔlðoʊ hiz bɪn mɪsɪŋ fɹəm ɪz poʊs fəɹ səm taɪm.

Saldaea: A nation in the Borderlands. Its capital is Maradon, and its royal palace is known as the Cordamora (from the Old Tongue for "Heart of the People"). It is ruled by a king or queen, and is a hereditary monarchy. The Crown High Council, also known as the Council of Lords, advises and assists the monarch in administering the nation. The husband or wife of a Saldaean ruler is not simply a consort, but an almost co-equal ruler. Saldaea is currently ruled by Her Most Illumined Majesty, Tenobia si Bashere Kazadi, Queen of Saldaea, Defender of the Light, Sword of the Blightborder, High Seat of House Kazadi and Lady of Shahanyi, Asnelle, Kunwar and Ganai; her Marshal-General and the leader of her army is her uncle and heir, Davram Bashere, although he has been missing from his post for some time.

sindɑɹ: ði ɪmpɪɹiəl kæpəɾəl ə sintʃæn, loʊkeɪɾəd ɪn ðə nɔɹθist ə ðə sintʃæn kɑntənənt. ɪts ɔlsoʊ ðə lɑɹdʒəst sɪɾi ɪn ði ɛmpaɪɝ. æftɝ ðə dɛθ ʌv ɛmpɹɛs ɹɑɾənən, ɪt dɪsɛndəɾ ɪndə keɪɑs.

Seandar: The Imperial capital of Seanchan, located in the northeast of the Seanchan continent. It is also the largest city in the Empire. After the death of Empress Radhanan, it descended into chaos.

sikɝz: mɔɹ fɔɹməli, sikɝz fəɹ tʃɹuθ, ðeɪ ɑɹ ə pəlisslæʃspaɪ ɔɹɡənəzeɪʃən ə ðə sintʃæn ɪmpɪɹiəl θɹoʊn. ɔlðoʊ moʊst sikɝz ɑɹ dækoʊvæl ən ðə pɹɑpɝɾi ʌv ði ɪmpɪɹiəl fæmli, ðeɪv waɪd-ɹeɪnʒɪŋ paʊɝz. ivən wʌn ə ðə blʌd kən bi ɝɛstəd fəɹ feɪljɝ tə ænsɝ ɛni kwɛstʃən pʊt baɪ ə sikɝ, əɹ fəɹ feɪljɝ tə koʊɑpɝeɪt fʊli wɪð ə sikɝ, ðɪs læs dɛn baɪ ðə sikɝz ðɛmsɛlvz, sʌbʒɪkt oʊnli tə ɹivju baɪ ði ɛmpɹɛs. ðɛɹ ɹɪpɔɹts ɑɹ sɛn tə lɛs hænz, hu kəntʃɹoʊl boʊθ əm ən ðə lɪsənɝz. moʊst sikɝz fi ðət ðə hænz də nɑt pæs ɑn əz mʌtʃ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən əz ðeɪ ʃul ənlaɪk ðə lɪsənɝz', ðə sikɝz' ɹoʊl ɪz æktɪv. ðoʊz sikɝz w ɑɹ dækoʊvæl ɑɹ mɑɹkt ɑn iðɝ ʃoʊldɝ wɪð ə ɹeɪvən ən ə toʊ ənlaɪk ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz, sikɝz ɑɹ sɛldəm iɡɝ tə ʃoʊ ðɛɹ ɹeɪvənz, ɪn pɑɹt kəz ɪt nəsɛsəteɪts ɹɪvilɪŋ u ən wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ. si ɔlsoʊ lɪsənɝz.

Seekers: More formally, Seekers for Truth, they are a police/spy organization of the Seanchan Imperial Throne. Although most Seekers are da'covale and the property of the Imperial family, they have wide-ranging powers. Even one of the Blood can be arrested for failure to answer any question put by a Seeker, or for failure to cooperate fully with a Seeker, this last denned by the Seekers themselves, subject only to review by the Empress. Their reports are sent to Lesse Hands, who control both them and the Listeners. Most Seekers fee that the Hands do not pass on as much information as they shoul Unlike the Listeners', the Seekers' role is active. Those Seekers wh are da'covale are marked on either shoulder with a raven and a towe Unlike the Deathwatch Guards, Seekers are seldom eager to sho~ their ravens, in part because it necessitates revealing who and what they are. See also Listeners.

ʃɑɹə: ə mɪstɪɹiəs læn tə ði ist ə ði il weɪst wɪtʃ ɪz ðə sɔɹs ə sɪlk ən aɪvɝi, əmʌŋ ʌðɝ tʃɹeɪd ɡʊdz. ðə læn ɪz pɹətɛktəd boʊθ baɪ ɪnhɑspəɾəbəl nætʃɹəl fitʃɝz ən baɪ mæn- meɪd wɔlz. lɪɾəl ɪz noʊn əbaʊt ʃɑɹə, əz ðə pipəl ə ðət lænd wɝk tə kip ðɛɹ kʌltʃɝ sikɹət.

Shara: A mysterious land to the east of the Aiel Waste which is the source of silk and ivory, among other trade goods. The land is protected both by inhospitable natural features and by man- made walls. Little is known about Shara, as the people of that land work to keep their culture secret.

ðə ʃɝɑnz dɪnaɪ ðət ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz tʌtʃt ðɛm, dɪspaɪɾ il steɪtməns tə ðə kɑntʃɹɛɹi. ðeɪ dɪnaɪ nɑlədʒ ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ətɛmptəɾ ɪnveɪʒən, dɪspaɪt ði əkaʊns ʌv aɪwɪtnəsɪz fɹəm ðə si foʊk. ðə lɪɾəl ɪnfɝmeɪʃən ðəɾ əz likt aʊt ɹɪvilz ðət ðə ʃɝɑnz ɑɹ ɹul baɪ ə sɪŋɡəl æbsəlut mɑnɑɹk, ə boʊn ɪf ə wʊmən ən ə boʊɾ ɪf ə mæn. ðət mɑnɑɹk ɹulz fəɹ ɪɡzækli sɛvən jɪɹz, ðən daɪz. ðə ɹul ðən pæsəz tə ðə meɪɾ ə ðət ɹulɝ, hu ɹulz fəɹ sɛvən jɪɹz ən ðən daɪz. ðɪs pæɾɝn əz ɹɪpiɾɪd ɪtsɛlf sɪns ðə taɪm ə ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. ðə ʃɝɑnz bɪliv ðət ðə dɛθs ɑɹ ðə "wɪl ə ðə pæɾɝn."

The Sharans deny that the Trolloc Wars touched them, despite Aiel statements to the contrary. They deny knowledge of Artur Hawkwing's attempted invasion, despite the accounts of eyewitnesses from the Sea Folk. The little information that has leaked out reveals that the Sharans are ruled by a single absolute monarch, a Sh'boan if a woman and a Sh'botay if a man. That monarch rules for exactly seven years, then dies. The rule then passes to the mate of that ruler, who rules for seven years and then dies. This pattern has repeated itself since the time of the Breaking of the World. The Sharans believe that the deaths are the "Will of the Pattern."

ðəɹ ɑɹ tʃænlɝz ɪn ʃɑɹə, noʊn əz ði aɪɑd, hu ɑɹ tætuɾ ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz ət bɝθ. ðə wɪmən ə ði aɪɑɾ ɛnfɔɹs ði aɪɑd lɔz stʃɹɪnʒəntli. ə sɛkʃuəl ɹileɪʃənʃɪp bɪtwin aɪɑɾ ən nɑn-aɪɑɾ ɪz pʌnɪʃəbəl baɪ dɛθ fəɹ ðə nɑn-aɪɑd, ən ði aɪɑɾ ɪz ɔlsoʊ ɛksəkjuɾəd ɪf fɔɹs ɑn ɪz əɹ əɹ pɑɹt kən bi pɹuvən. ɪf ə tʃaɪld ɪz bɔɹn ə ðə junjən, ɪts lɛft ɪkspoʊz tə ði ɛləməns, ən daɪz.

There are channelers in Shara, known as the Ayyad, who are tattooed on their faces at birth. The women of the Ayyad enforce the Ayyad laws stringently. A sexual relationship between Ayyad and non-Ayyad is punishable by death for the non-Ayyad, and the Ayyad is also executed if force on his or her part can be proven. If a child is born of the union, it is left exposed to the elements, and dies.

meɪl aɪɑɾ ɑɹ juzd əz bɹiɾɪŋ stɑk oʊnli. ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑɾ ɛdʒəkeɪɾəd ɪn ɛni fæʃən, nɑɾ ivən haʊ tə ɹiɾ əɹ ɹaɪt, ən wən ðeɪ ɹitʃ ðɛɹ twɛnti-fɝs jɪɹ əɹ bɪɡɪn tə tʃænəl, wɪtʃɛvɝ kʌmz fɝst, ðeɪ ɑɹ kɪld ən ðə bɑɾi kɹimeɪɾɪd. səpoʊzədli, ði aɪɑd tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ oʊnli ət ðə kəmæn ə ðə boʊn əɹ boʊt, hu ɪz ɔlweɪz sɝaʊndəd baɪ aɪɑd wɪmən.

Male Ayyad are used as breeding stock only. They are not educated in any fashion, not even how to read or write, and when they reach their twenty-first year or begin to channel, whichever comes first, they are killed and the body cremated. Supposedly, the Ayyad channel the One Power only at the command of the Sh'boan or Sh'botay, who is always surrounded by Ayyad women.

ivən ðə neɪm ə ðə læn ɪz ɪn daʊt. ðə neɪɾɪvz əv bɪn noʊn tə kɔl ɪt mɛni dɪfɹənt neɪmz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ʃəmɑɹə, koʊɾənsɪn, toʊmɑkə, kiɡɑli ən ʃɪbujə.

Even the name of the land is in doubt. The natives have been known to call it many different names, including Shamara, Co'dansin, Tomaka, Kigali and Shibouya.

ʃɛn ən kɑlhɑɹ: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hænd." (wʌn) ə lɛdʒəndɛɹi ɡɹup ə hɪɹoʊz u hæd mɛni ɛksplɔɪts, faɪnəli daɪɪŋ ɪn ðə dɪfɛns ə meɪnɛðɝən wən ðət lænd wɑz dɪstʃɹɔɪd dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹoʊl-lɑk wɔɹz. (tu) ə mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən pʊt təɡɛðɝ ɔlmoʊs baɪ æksəɾənt baɪ mæt kɔθən ən ɔɹɡənaɪzd əlɔŋ ðə laɪnz ə mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹsɪz dʊɹɪŋ wʌɾ ɪz kənsɪɾɝd ðə haɪɾ ə ðə mɪlətɛɹi ɑɹts, ðə deɪz ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ən ðə sɛntʃɝiz ɪmiɾiətli pɹisiɾɪŋ.

Shen an Calhar: In the Old Tongue, "the Band of the Red Hand." (1) A legendary group of heroes who had many exploits, finally dying in the defense of Manetheren when that land was destroyed during the Trol-loc Wars. (2) A military formation put together almost by accident by Mat Cauthon and organized along the lines of military forces during what is considered the height of the military arts, the days of Artur Hawkwing and the centuries immediately preceding.

sɪsnɛɹə, dɑɹlɪn: eɪ haɪ lɔɹɾ ɪn tɛɹ, hi wɑz fɔɹmɝli ɪn ɹɪbɛljən əɡɛns ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

Sisnera, Darlin: A High Lord in Tear, he was formerly in rebellion against the Dragon Reborn.

æftɝ sɝvɪŋ fəɹ ə ʃɔɹt pɪɹiəɾ əz stuɝɾ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪn tɛɹ, hi wɑz tʃoʊzən tə bi ðə fɝs kɪŋ ə tiɹ.

After serving for a short period as Steward of the Dragon Reborn in Tear, he was chosen to be the first king of Tear.

sneɪks ən fɑksəz: ə ɡeɪm ðəɾ ɪz mʌtʃ lʌv baɪ tʃɪlʒɹən əntɪl ðeɪ mətʃʊɹ ɪnʌf tə ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɪt kən nɛvɝ bi wʌn wɪθaʊt bɹeɪkɪŋ ðə ɹulz. ɪts pleɪd wɪð ə bɔɹd ðəɾ əz ə wɛb ə laɪnz wɪð æɹoʊz ɪndəkeɪɾɪŋ dɝɛkʃən. ðəɹ ɑɹ tɛn dɪsks ɪŋkt wɪð tʃɹaɪæŋɡəlz tə ɹɛpɹəzɛn ðə fɑksəz, ən tɛn dɪsks ɪŋkt wɪð weɪvi laɪnz tə ɹɛpɹəzɛn ðə sneɪks. ðə ɡeɪm ɪz bɪɡʌn baɪ seɪɪŋ "kɝədʒ tə stʃɹɛŋθən, faɪɝ tə blaɪnd, mjuzɪk tə dæzəl, aɪɝn tə baɪnd," waɪl dɪskɹaɪbɪŋ ə tʃɹaɪæŋɡəl wɪð ə weɪvi laɪn θɹu ɪt wɪð wʌnz hænd. daɪs ɑɹ ɹoʊl tə dətɝmən muvz fəɹ ðə pleɪɝz ən ðə sneɪks ən fɑksəz. ɪf ə sneɪk əɹ fɑks lænz ɑn ə pleɪɝz pis, hiz aʊɾ ə ðə ɡeɪm, ən əz lɔŋ əz ðə ɹulz ɑɹ fɑloʊd, ðɪs ɔlweɪz hæpənz. si ɔlsoʊ æɛlfɪn, ɛlfɪn.

Snakes and Foxes: A game that is much loved by children until they mature enough to realize that it can never be won without breaking the rules. It is played with a board that has a web of lines with arrows indicating direction. There are ten discs inked with triangles to represent the foxes, and ten discs inked with wavy lines to represent the snakes. The game is begun by saying "Courage to strengthen, fire to blind, music to dazzle, iron to bind," while describing a triangle with a wavy line through it with one's hand. Dice are rolled to determine moves for the players and the snakes and foxes. If a snake or fox lands on a player's piece, he is out of the game, and as long as the rules are followed, this always happens. See also Aelfinn, Eelfinn.

sɔɪhɪn: ðə kloʊsəs tʃɹænzleɪʃən fɹəm ði oʊl tʌŋ wəd bi "ə haɪɾ əmʌŋ loʊnəs," ðoʊ səm tʃɹænzleɪɾ ɪɾ əz minɪŋ "boʊθ skaɪ ən væli" əmʌŋ sɛvɹəl ʌðɝ pɑsəbɪləɾiz. sɔɪhɪn ɪz ðə tɝm əplaɪd baɪ ðə sintʃæn tə hɝɛɾətɛɹi ʌpɝ sɝvəns. ðeɪ ɑɹ dækoʊvæl, pɹɑpɝɾi, jɛɾ ɑkjəpaɪ pəzɪʃənz ə kənsɪɾɝəbəl əθɔɹəɾi ən ɔfən paʊɝ. ivən ðə blʌd stɛp kɛɹfəli ɝaʊn sɔɪhɪn ə ði ɪmpɪɹiəl fæmli, ən spik tə sɔɪhɪn ə ði ɛmpɹɛs hɝsɛlf əz tə ikwəlz. si ɔlsoʊ dækoʊvæl.

so'jhin: The closest translation from the Old Tongue would be "a height among lowness," though some translate it as meaning "both sky and valley" among several other possibilities. So'jhin is the term applied by the Seanchan to hereditary upper servants. They are da'covale, property, yet occupy positions of considerable authority and often power. Even the Blood step carefully around so'jhin of the Imperial family, and speak to so'jhin of the Empress herself as to equals. See also da'covale.

stʌmp: ə pʌblɪk miɾɪŋ əmʌŋ ði oʊɡiɝ. ɪts pɹɪzaɪɾɪd oʊvɝ baɪ ðə kaʊnsəl ʌv ɛldɝz ʌv ə stɛɾɪŋ, bʌɾ ɛni ədʌlt oʊɡiɝ meɪ spik, əɹ meɪ tʃuz ən ædvəkət tə spik fəɹ hɪm. eɪ stʌmp ɪz ɔfən hɛld ət ðə lɑɹdʒəs tʃɹi stʌmp ɪn ə stɛɾɪŋ, ən meɪ læs fəɹ sɛvɹəl jɪɹz. wən ə kwɛstʃən ɝaɪzəz ðəɾ əfɛks ɔl oʊɡiɝ, ə ɡɹeɪt stʌmp ɪz hɛld, ən oʊɡiɝ fɹəm ɔl stɛɾɪŋ mit tə ædʒɹɛs ðə kwɛstʃən. ðə vɛɹiəs stɛɾɪŋ teɪk tɝnz hoʊstɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪt stʌmp.

Stump: A public meeting among the Ogier. It is presided over by the Council of Elders of a stedding, but any adult Ogier may speak, or may choose an advocate to speak for him. A Stump is often held at the largest tree stump in a stedding, and may last for several years. When a question arises that affects all Ogier, a Great Stump is held, and Ogier from all stedding meet to address the question. The various stedding take turns hosting the Great Stump.

səksɛʃən: ɪn dʒɛnɝəl, wən wʌn haʊs səksidz ənʌðɝ ɑn ðə θɹoʊn. ɪn ændɝ, ðə tɝm ɪz waɪdli juz fəɹ ðə stʃɹʌɡəl fəɹ ðə θɹoʊn ðəɾ ɝoʊz əpɑn mɔɹdʒɹɛlənz dɛθ. tɪɡɹeɪnz dɪsəpɪɹəns hæd lɛf mæn-tiɹ wɪθaʊɾ ə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ, ən tu jɪɹz pæs bɪfɔɹ mɔɹɡeɪs, ʌv haʊs tʃɹəkənd, tʊk ðə θɹoʊn. aʊtsaɪɾ ʌv ændɝ, ðɪs kɑnflɪkt wɑz noʊn əz ðə θɝd wɔɹ ʌv ændɔɝən səksɛʃən.

Succession: In general, when one House succeeds another on the throne. In Andor, the term is widely used for the struggle for the throne that arose upon Mordrellen's death. Tigraine's disappearance had left Man-tear without a Daughter-Heir, and two years passed before Morgase, of House Trakand, took the throne. Outside of Andor, this conflict was known as the Third War of Andoran Succession.

tæɹɑbən: ə neɪʃən ɑn ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən. wʌns ə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ neɪʃən, ə sɔɹs ə ɹʌɡz, daɪz ən ðə ɡɪld ʌv ɪluməneɪɾɝz' faɪɹwɝks əmʌŋ ʌðɝ θɪŋz, tæɹɑbən əz fɔlən ɑn hɑɹd taɪmz. ɹæk baɪ ænɝki ən sɪvəl wɔɹ kəmpaʊndəd baɪ saɪməlteɪniəs wɔɹz əɡɛnst ɑɹæd dumən ən ðə dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn, ɪt wɑz ɹaɪp fəɹ ðə pɪkɪŋ wən ðə sintʃæn ɝaɪvd. ɪts naʊ fɝmli ʌndɝ sintʃæn kəntʃɹoʊl, ðə tʃæptɝ haʊs ə ðə ɡɪld ʌv ɪluməneɪɾɝz əz bɪn dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ən ði ɪluməneɪɾɝz ðɛmsɛlvz əv bɪn meɪd dækoʊvæl. moʊs tæɹɑbənɝz əpɪɹ ɡɹeɪtfəl ðət ðə sintʃæn əv ɹɪstɔɹɾ ɔɹɾɝ, ən sɪns ðə sintʃæn əlaʊ ðɛm tə kəntɪnju lɪvɪŋ ðɛɹ laɪvz wɪð mɪnəməl ɪntɝfɪɹəns, ðeɪv noʊ dɪzaɪɝ tə bɹɪŋ ɑn mɔɹ wɔɹfɛɹ baɪ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tʃeɪs ðə sintʃæn aʊt. ðəɹ ɑɹ, haʊɛvɝ, səm lɔɹdz ən soʊlʒɝz u ɹɪmeɪn aʊtsaɪd ðə sintʃæn sfɪɹ ʌv ɪnfluəns ən ɑɹ faɪɾɪŋ tə ɹikleɪm ðɛɹ lænd.

Tarabon: A nation on the Aryth Ocean. Once a great trading nation, a source of rugs, dyes and the Guild of Illuminators' fireworks among other things, Tarabon has fallen on hard times. Racked by anarchy and civil war compounded by simultaneous wars against Arad Doman and the Dragonsworn, it was ripe for the picking when the Seanchan arrived. It is now firmly under Seanchan control, the chapter house of the Guild of Illuminators has been destroyed and the Illuminators themselves have been made da'covale. Most Taraboners appear grateful that the Seanchan have restored order, and since the Seanchan allow them to continue living their lives with minimal interference, they have no desire to bring on more warfare by trying to chase the Seanchan out. There are, however, some lords and soldiers who remain outside the Seanchan sphere of influence and are fighting to reclaim their land.

taʊɝ ə ɹeɪvənz, ðə: ðə sɛntʃɹəl ɪmpɪɹiəl pɹɪzən ə sintʃæn. ɪts loʊkeɪɾəd ɪn ðə kæpəɾəl ə sindɑɹ ən sɝvz əz ðə hɛdkɔɹɾɝz fəɹ ðə sikɝz fəɹ tʃɹuθ. mɛmbɝz ə ðə blʌɾ ɑɹ ɪmpɹɪzənd, kwɛstʃən ən ɛksəkjuɾəd wɪðɪn ɪt. ðə kwɛstʃənɪŋ ən ɛksəkjuʃən mʌs bi əkɑmplɪʃt wɪθaʊt spɪlɪŋ ə dʒɹɑp ə blʌd. si ɔlsoʊ sikɝz.

Tower of Ravens, the: The central Imperial prison of Seanchan. It is located in the capital of Seandar and serves as the headquarters for the Seekers for Truth. Members of the Blood are imprisoned, questioned and executed within it. The questioning and execution must be accomplished without spilling a drop of blood. See also Seekers.

taʊɝz ə mɪdnaɪt, ðə: θɝtin fɔɹtʃɹəsəz ʌv ʌnpəlɪʃt blæk mɑɹbəl loʊkeɪɾəd ɪn ɪmfɹəl, sintʃæn. ət ðə taɪm ə ðə kənsɑlədeɪʃən ə sintʃæn, ɪt wɑz ðə sɛntɝ ə mɪlətɛɹi maɪt. ðə faɪnəl bæɾəl ə ðə kənsɑlədeɪʃən tʊk pleɪs ðɛɹ, livɪŋ hɔkwɪŋz dɪsɛndəns ɪn paʊɝ. sɪns ðət taɪm, ɪts bɪn ənɑkjəpaɪd. lɛdʒən əz ɪt ðəɾ ɪn taɪm ə daɪɹ nid, ði ɪmpɪɹiəl fæmli wɪl ɹɪtɝn tə ðə taʊɝz ə mɪdnaɪɾ ən "ɹaɪt ðət wɪtʃ ɪz ɹɔŋ." si ɔlsoʊ kənsɑlədeɪʃən.

Towers of Midnight, the: Thirteen fortresses of unpolished black marble located in Imfaral, Seanchan. At the time of the Consolidation of Seanchan, it was the center of military might. The final battle of the Consolidation took place there, leaving Hawkwing's descendants in power. Since that time, it has been unoccupied. Legend has it that in time of dire need, the Imperial family will return to the Towers of Midnight and "right that which is wrong." See also Consolidation.

weɪt, junəts ʌv: tɛn aʊnsəz ikwəlz wʌn paʊnd; tɛn paʊnz ikwəlz wʌn stoʊn; tɛn stoʊn ikwəlz wʌn hʌnʒɹədweɪt; tɛn

weight, units of: 10 ounces = 1 pound; 10 pounds = 1 stone; 10 stone = 1 hundredweight; 10

hʌnʒɹədweɪt  wʌn tʌn.

hundredweight = 1 ton.

wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz, ðə: ðə pɝsənəl bɑɾiɡɑɹdz ə ðə fɝst ə min, ən ði ɪlit mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən ə min. mɛmbɝz ə ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz wɛɹ ɹɛd-peɪntəd bɹɛstpleɪts ən hɛlməts ʃeɪp laɪk ɹɪm pɑts ðət kʌm daʊn tə ðə neɪp ə ðə nɛks ɪn ðə bæk, ən kæɹi ɹɛd-stʃɹimɝd lænsɪz. ɔfəsɝz əv wɪŋz wɝkt ɑn ðə saɪdz ə ðɛɹ hɛlməts, ən ɹæŋk ɪz dɪnoʊɾəd baɪ slɛndɝ plumz.

Winged Guards, the: The personal bodyguards of the First of Mayene, and the elite military formation of Mayene. Members of the Winged Guards wear red-painted breastplates and helmets shaped like rimmed pots that come down to the nape of the necks in the back, and carry red-streamered lances. Officers have wings worked on the sides of their helmets, and rank is denoted by slender plumes.

əbaʊt ði ɔθɝz ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən wɑz bɔɹn ɪn naɪntinfɔɹɾieɪt ɪn tʃɑɹlstən, saʊθ kɛɹəlaɪnə. hi tɔt hɪmsɛlf tə ɹid wən i wɑz fɔɹ wɪð ði ɪnsɪdɛntəl eɪɾ ʌv ə twɛlv-jɪɹz-oʊldɝ bɹʌðɝ, ən wɑz tæklɪŋ mɑɹk tweɪn ən dʒulz vɝn baɪ faɪv. hi wɑz ə ɡɹædʒəwəɾ ə ðə sɪɾədɛl, ðə mɪlətɛɹi kɑlɪdʒ ə saʊθ kɛɹəlaɪnə, wɪð ə dɪɡɹi ɪn fɪzɪks. hi sɝv tu tʊɹz ɪn viɛtnɑm wɪð ðə juɛs. ɑɹmi; əmʌŋ ɪz dɛkɝeɪʃənz ɑɹ ðə dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃt flaɪɪŋ kɹɔs wɪð bɹɑnz oʊk lif klʌstɝ, ðə bɹɑnz stɑɹ wɪð "vi" ən bɹɑnz oʊk lif klʌstɝ, ən tu viɛtnɑmis ɡæləntʃɹi kɹɔsɪz wɪð pɑm. ə hɪstɝi bʌf, hi ɔlsoʊ ɹoʊt dæns ən θiəɾɝ kɹɪɾɪsɪzəm. hi ɛndʒɔɪd ði aʊtdɔɹ spɔɹts ə hʌntɪŋ, fɪʃɪŋ, ən seɪlɪŋ, ən ði ɪndɔɹ spɔɹts ə poʊkɝ, tʃɛs, pul, ən paɪp kəlɛktɪŋ. hi bɪɡæn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn naɪntinsɛvəntisɛvən ən kəntɪnjuɾ əntɪl ɪz dɛθ ɑn sɛptɛmbɝ sɪkstinθ, tuθaʊzənsɛvən.

About the Authors Robert Jordan was born in 1948 in Charleston, South Carolina. He taught himself to read when he was four with the incidental aid of a twelve-years-older brother, and was tackling Mark Twain and Jules Verne by five. He was a graduate of the Citadel, the Military college of South Carolina, with a degree in physics. He served two tours in Vietnam with the U.S. Army; among his decorations are the Distinguished Flying Cross with bronze oak leaf cluster, the Bronze Star with "V" and bronze oak leaf cluster, and two Vietnamese Gallantry Crosses with Palm. A history buff, he also wrote dance and theater criticism. He enjoyed the outdoor sports of hunting, fishing, and sailing, and the indoor sports of poker, chess, pool, and pipe collecting. He began writing in 1977 and continued until his death on September 16, 2007.

bɹændən sændɝsən wɑz bɔɹn ɪn naɪntinsɛvəntifaɪv ɪn lɪŋkən, nəbɹæskə. æftɝ ə səmɛstɝ əz ə baɪətʃəm meɪdʒɝ, bɹændən keɪm tə hɪz sɛnsɪz ən ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ɹaɪɾɪŋ əz ɪz tʃɹu voʊkeɪʃən. hi swɪtʃt tə ɪŋɡlɪʃ, ɡɹædʒəweɪɾɪŋ fɹəm bɹɪɡəm jʌŋ junəvɝsəɾi, ðən ɹɪtɝnɪŋ fəɹ ə mæstɝz ɪn kɹieɪɾɪv ɹaɪɾɪŋ. dʊɹɪŋ ðɪs taɪm bɹændən ɹoʊt θɝtin nɑvəlz, faɪnəli pʌblɪʃɪŋ ɪz sɪksθ, ilæntʃɹɪs, ɪn tuθaʊzənfaɪv. hiz sɪns ɹilis bʊks fəɹ boʊθ ədʌls ən jʌŋ ɹiɾɝz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðə mɪsbɹn tʃɹɪlədʒi, wɔɹbɹeɪkɝ, ən ði ɑlkætʃɹɑz sɪɹiz. hi lɪvz wɪð ɪz waɪf ən tʃɪlʒɹən ɪn jutɔ, wɛɹ i ɔfən pleɪz mædʒɪk: ðə ɡæðɝɪŋ, ɹɛɡjəlɝli its mæk-ænd-tʃiz, ən əkeɪʒənəli titʃəz ɹaɪɾɪŋ ət bju. faɪn mɔɹ ət wwwbɹændɑnsændɝsənkɑm.

Brandon Sanderson was born in 1975 in Lincoln, Nebraska. After a semester as a biochem major, Brandon came to his senses and recognized writing as his true vocation. He switched to English, graduating from Brigham Young University, then returning for a master's in creative writing. During this time Brandon wrote thirteen novels, finally publishing his sixth, Elantris, in 2005. He has since released books for both adults and young readers, including the Mistborn trilogy, Warbreaker, and the Alcatraz series. He lives with his wife and children in Utah, where he often plays Magic: The Gathering, regularly eats mac-and-cheese, and occasionally teaches writing at BYU. Find more at www.brandonsanderson.com.

teɪbəl ə kɑntɛns stɑɹt teɪbəl ə kɑntɛns stɑɹt teɪbəl ə kɑntɛns stɑɹt dɑkjəmɛn aʊtlaɪn stɑɹt teɪbəl ə kɑntɛns stɑɹt 
Table of Contents Start Table of Contents Start Table of Contents Start Document Outline Start Table of Contents Start 