ðə wil ə taɪm bʊk tu ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌnt "dʒɔɹɾən əz kʌm tə dɑməneɪt ðə wɝl ðət toʊkin bɪɡæn tə ɹɪvil. . . . ðə bæɾəl sinz əv ðə bɹɛθləs ɝdʒənsi ʌv fɝsthæn ɪkspɪɹiəns, ən ði . . . ivəl leɪst ɪndə ðə fɔɹsɪz ʌv ɡʊd, ðə deɪnʒɝz leɪɾənt ɪn ɛni pɹɑməst sælveɪʃən, ðə sɛns ə ði ʌnəvɔɪɾəbəl ɔnslɔɾ ʌv ʌnpɹɪdɪktəbəl ɪvɛns bɛɹ ðə mɑɹks ʌv əmɛɹəkən næʃənəl ɪkspɪɹiəns dʊɹɪŋ ðə læs θɹi dɛkeɪdz."

THE WHEEL OF TIME Book Two THE GREAT HUNT "Jordan has come to dominate the world that Tolkien began to reveal. . . . The battle scenes have the breathless urgency of firsthand experience, and the . . . evil laced into the forces of good, the dangers latent in any promised salvation, the sense of the unavoidable onslaught of unpredictable events bear the marks of American national experience during the last three decades."

 - ɛdwɝd ɹɔθstaɪn, ðə nu jɔɹk taɪmz "ðoʊz u laɪk fæntəsi kən ɹɪdʒɔɪs. ðɪs ɪz ðə dʒɛnjəwən ɑɹɾəkəl . . . kæɹɪktɝz jə kən kɛɹ əbaʊt, ə wɝl jə kən bɪliv ɪn, hɪɾiəs mɑnstɝz, bæɾəlz, mædʒɪk, ivən lʌv.

 - Edward Rothstein, The New York Times "Those who like fantasy can rejoice. This is the genuine article . . . characters you can care about, a world you can believe in, hideous monsters, battles, magic, even love.

"aɪ oʊnli hæv wʌn pɹɑbləm. haʊ æm aɪ gɑnə ɡɛt baɪ əntɪl ðə nɛks vɑljum kʌmz aʊt?"

"I only have one problem. How am I going to get by until the next volume comes out?"

 - dʒɑn li, ɔθɝ ə ðə junɪkɔɹn səluʃən "ɹaʊzɪŋ, slæm-bæŋ . . . fʊl ə væljən skɝmɪʃɪz, ɡɹeɪt hɪɹoʊz, ən kloʊs ɹɛskjuz. ðə ɹil wɔɹ ɪz oʊnli bɪɡɪnɪŋ, bʌt ðɪs wʌn bæɾəl ət list ɛnz wɪð ðə sɔɹɾ ʌv ɡɹæn fənæli wɝθ ɹiɹiɾɪŋ ə taɪm əɹ tu."

 - John Lee, author of The Unicorn Solution "Rousing, slam-bang . . . full of valiant skirmishes, great heroes, and close rescues. The real war is only beginning, but this one battle at least ends with the sort of grand finale worth rereading a time or two."

 - loʊkəs "ðɪs ɪz ɡʊd stʌf. tə ɹaɪt wʌn əbzɔɹbɪŋ lɔŋ nɑvəl [ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld] ɪz ən ətʃivmənt; tə ɹaɪt tu ɪz mɝækjələs, ən [wɪð ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn dʒɔɹɾən hæz] ətʃiv ðə mɪɹəkəl. . . . aɪ ʃæl sɝɾənli [laɪn ʌp] fəɹ ðə θɝd vɑljum."

 - Locus "This is good stuff. To write one absorbing long novel [The Eye of the World] is an achievement; to write two is miraculous, and [with The Great Hunt Jordan has] achieved the miracle. . . . I shall certainly [line up] for the third volume."

 - ɪntɝzoʊni pɹeɪz fəɹ ðə wil ə taɪm bʊk wʌn ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld "nu ɹiɾɝz ɑɹ ædvaɪz tə stɑɹt wɪð ðə fɝs bʊk, ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld. ɪt meɪ teɪk jə ə jɪɹ ə stɛɾi ɹɛɾɪŋ, bʌt baɪ nɛks jɪɹ jəl bi tʃɑmpɪŋ ət ðə bɪt tə dʒʌmp ɑn ðə [nuəst] bʊk."

 - Interzone Praise for THE WHEEL OF TIME Book One THE EYE OF THE WORLD "New readers are advised to start with the first book, The Eye of the World. It may take you a year of steady reading, but by next year you'll be chomping at the bit to jump on the [newest] book."

 - ɹɑbɝt nɑks,  nuzpeɪpɝz "ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən ɹaɪts wɪð ðə stɑɹk vɪʒən ə laɪɾ ən dɑɹknəs, ən səmtaɪmz tʃaɪldlaɪk sɛns ʌv wʌndɝ, ðət pɝmieɪts dʒeɪɑɹɑɹ. toʊkinz wɝks."

 - Robert Knox, MPG Newspapers "Robert Jordan writes with the stark vision of light and darkness, and sometimes childlike sense of wonder, that permeates J.R.R. Tolkien's works."

 - ðə pɪtsbɝɡ pɹɛs "ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld ɪz ðə bɛst ʌv ɪts ʒɑnɹə."

 - The Pittsburgh Press "The Eye of the World is the best of its genre."

 - ɑɾəwɑ sɪɾəzən "ə meɪdʒɝ pis ə fæntəsi. dʒɔɹɾən əz nɑt mɪɹli pʊɾ oʊld waɪn ɪndə nu bɑɾəlz: hiz kloʊðd oʊl boʊnz wɪð nu flɛʃ."

 - Ottawa Citizen "A major piece of fantasy. Jordan has not merely put old wine into new bottles: he has clothed old bones with new flesh."

 - ʃəkɑɡoʊ sʌn-taɪmz "dʒɔɹɾənz wɝld ɪz ɹɪtʃ ɪn dɪteɪl ən ɪz plɑɾ ɪz ɹɪtʃ ɪn ɪnsəɾənt. haɪli ɹɛkəmɛndəd."

 - Chicago Sun-Times "Jordan's world is rich in detail and his plot is rich in incident. Highly recommended."

 - eɪlə bʊklɪst "ə paʊɝfəl vɪʒən ʌv ɡʊɾ ən ivəl . . . [ænd] fæsəneɪɾɪŋ pipəl muvɪŋ θɹu ə ɹɪtʃ ən ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ wɝld."

 - ALA Booklist "A powerful vision of good and evil . . . [and] fascinating people moving through a rich and interesting world."

 - ɔɹsən skɑt kɑɹd "mædʒɪk ən peɪsɪŋ ən dɪteɪl ən hjumən ɪnvɑlvmənt, wɪð ə sɝɾən sʌɾəlti ʌv pɹɛzənteɪʃən ən ə ɡɹæn sɛntʃɹəl vɪʒən. ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən . . . ɪz ə lɑɾ ə ɹaɪɾɝ!"

 - Orson Scott Card "Magic and pacing and detail and human involvement, with a certain subtlety of presentation and a grand central vision. Robert Jordan . . . is a lot of writer!"

 - pɪɹz ænθəni "æn ɪksaɪɾɪŋ stɔɹi; ðə ɹiɾɝ ɪz dʒɹɔn ɪn ɝli ən kɛp ðəɹ əntɪl ðə læs peɪdʒ. ðəɹ ɪz ædvɛntʃɝ ən mɪstɝi ən dɑɹk θɪŋz ðət muv ɪn ðə naɪt - ə kɑmbəneɪʃən ə ɹɑbən hʊɾ ən stivən kɪŋ ðəɾ ɪz hɑɹd tə ɹɪzɪst. . . . dʒɔɹɾən meɪks ðə ɹiɾɝ kɛɹ əbaʊt ðiz kæɹɪktɝz əz ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ oʊl fɹɛnz."

 - Piers Anthony "An exciting story; the reader is drawn in early and kept there until the last page. There is adventure and mystery and dark things that move in the night - a combination of Robin Hood and Stephen King that is hard to resist. . . . Jordan makes the reader care about these characters as though they were old friends."

 - mɪlwɔki sɛntənəl "ɡʊdnəs, laɪf, ən laɪɾ ɑɹ ɔlweɪz ɪn ɹitʃɹit, ɔlweɪz əbaʊt tə bi dɪfiɾəd, bʌt nɛvɝ kwaɪt! doʊn mɪs ɪt!"

 - Milwaukee Sentinel "Goodness, life, and light are always in retreat, always about to be defeated, but never quite! Don't miss it!"

 - ænʒɹu ɛm ɡɹili "wʌn hɛl ʌv ə stɔɹi. [ɪt] kɛp mi ʌp pæs maɪ bɛdtaɪm fəɹ θɹi naɪts ɹʌnɪŋ - ən ɪts bɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm sɪns ə nɑvəlz dʌn ðæt. dʒɔɹɾən kips ðə səspɛns əkjuɾ ən ðə sɝpɹaɪzəz ən ɪnvɛnʃən bjuɾəfli peɪst. kəmpɛlɪŋ. ən ɪɡzɪlɝeɪɾɪŋ ɪkspɪɹiəns."

 - Andrew M. Greeley "One hell of a story. [It] kept me up past my bedtime for three nights running - and it's been a long time since a novel's done that. Jordan keeps the suspense acute and the surprises and invention beautifully paced. Compelling. An exhilarating experience."

 - aɪzək æsɪmɑvz saɪəns fɪkʃən mæɡəzin ðə wil ə taɪm baɪ ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝl ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ðə ʃædoʊ ɹaɪzɪŋ ðə faɪɝz ə hɛvən lɔɹɾ ə keɪɑs eɪ kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz ðə pæθ ə dæɡɝz wɪntɝz hɑɹt kɹɔsɹoʊdz ə twaɪlaɪt naɪf ə dʒɹimz baɪ ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən ən bɹændən sændɝsən ðə ɡæðɝɪŋ stɔɹm ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən eɪ tɑm doʊɝɾi əsoʊsiɪts bʊknu jɔɹk ðɪs ɪz ə wɝk ə fɪkʃən. ɔl ə ðə kæɹɪktɝz, ɔɹɡənəzeɪʃənz, ən ɪvɛns pɔɹtʃɹeɪɾ ɪn ðɪs nɑvəl ɑɹ iðɝ pɹɑɾəkts ə ði ɔθɝz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən əɹ ɑɹ juz fɪktɪʃəsli.

 - Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine THE WHEEL OF TIME by Robert Jordan The Eye of the World The Great Hunt The Dragon Reborn The Shadow Rising The Fires of Heaven Lord of Chaos A Crown of Swords The Path of Daggers Winter's Heart Crossroads of Twilight Knife of Dreams by Robert Jordan and Brandon Sanderson The Gathering Storm THE GREAT HUNT ROBERT JORDAN A TOM DOHERTY ASSOCIATES BOOKNEW YORK This is a work of fiction. All of the characters, organizations, and events portrayed in this novel are either products of the author's imagination or are used fictitiously.

ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn kɑpiɹaɪt  naɪntinnaɪnti baɪ ðə bændɝsnætʃ ɡɹup, ɪŋk.

THE GREAT HUNT Copyright  1990 by The Bandersnatch Group, Inc.

ðə fɹeɪzəz "ðə wil ə taɪm" ən "ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," ən ðə sneɪk-wil sɪmbəl, ɑɹ tʃɹeɪdmɑɹks ə ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən.

The phrases "The Wheel of Time" and "The Dragon Reborn," and the snake-wheel symbol, are trademarks of Robert Jordan.

ɔl ɹaɪts ɹɪzɝvd.

All rights reserved.

fɹʌntispis baɪ kəkaɪ koʊtɑki mæps baɪ ɛlisə mɪtʃəl ɪntɪɹiɝ ɪləstʃɹeɪʃənz baɪ mæθju si nilsən ən ɛlisə mɪtʃəl eɪ tɔɹ bʊk pʌblɪʃt baɪ tɑm doʊɝɾi əsoʊsiɪts,  wʌnhʌnʒɹədsɛvəntifaɪv fɪfθ ævənu nu jɔɹk, nujɔɹk wʌnzɪɹoʊzɪɹoʊwʌnzɪɹoʊ

Frontispiece by Kekai Kotaki Maps by Ellisa Mitchell Interior illustrations by Matthew C. Nielsen and Ellisa Mitchell A Tor Book Published by Tom Doherty Associates, LLC 175 Fifth Avenue New York, NY 10010

wwwtɔɹ-fɔɹdʒkɑm tɔɹ ɪz ə ɹɛdʒəstɝd tʃɹeɪdmɑɹk ə tɑm doʊɝɾi əsoʊsiɪts, .

www.tor-forge.com Tor is a registered trademark of Tom Doherty Associates, LLC.

 naɪnsɛvəneɪt-wʌn-fɔɹθaʊzəntuhʌndʒɹədnaɪntinaɪn-sɪkszɪɹoʊwʌnθɹi-sɛvən

ISBN 978-1-4299-6013-7

fɝst ədɪʃən: noʊvɛmbɝ naɪntinnaɪnti

First Edition: November 1990

fɝst i-bʊk ədɪʃən: noʊvɛmbɝ tuθaʊzəndnaɪn

First E-book Edition: November 2009

mænjəfæktʃɝɾ ɪn ðə junaɪɾəd steɪts ʌv əmɛɹəkə ðɪs bʊk ɪz dɛɾəkeɪtəd tə lusɪndə kʌlpɪn, æl dɛmpsi, tɑm doʊɝɾi, suzən ɪŋɡlənd, dɪk ɡɔlən, kæθi ɡɹumz, mɛɹisə ɡɹumz, wɪlsən ən dʒænət ɡɹumz, dʒɑn dʒɛɝəld, ðə dʒɑnsən sɪɾi bɔɪz (maɪk lɛsli, kɛnɪθ lʌvləs, dʒeɪmz di lʌnd, pɔl ɑɹ ɹɑbənsən), kɑɹl lʌndɡɹɛn, wɪljəm məkduɡəl, ðə mɑntænə ɡæŋ (ɪldɑn kɑɹɾɝ, ɹeɪ ɡɹɛnfəl, kɛn mɪlɝ, ɹɑd mʊɹ, dɪk ʃmɪt, ɹeɪ sɛʃənz, ɛd wɪldi, maɪk wɪldi, ən ʃɝmən wɪljəmz), tʃɑɹli mʊɹ, luizə tʃivz pɑfəm ɹɑul, tɛɾ ən sɪdni ɹɪɡni, ɹɑbɝɾ eɪ. ti skɑt, bɹaɪən ən ʃæɹən wɛb, ən hɛðɝ wʊd.

Manufactured in the United States of America This book is dedicated to Lucinda Culpin, Al Dempsey, Tom Doherty, Susan England, Dick Gallen, Cathy Grooms, Marisa Grooms, Wilson and Janet Grooms, John Jarrold, the Johnson City Boys (Mike Leslie, Kenneth Loveless, James D. Lund, Paul R. Robinson), Karl Lundgren, William McDougal, the Montana Gang (Eldon Carter, Ray Grenfell, Ken Miller, Rod Moore, Dick Schmidt, Ray Sessions, Ed Wildey, Mike Wildey, and Sherman Williams), Charlie Moore, Louisa Cheves Popham Raoul, Ted and Sydney Rigney, Robert A. T. Scott, Bryan and Sharon Webb, and Heather Wood.

ðeɪ keɪm tə maɪ eɪd wən ɡɑd wɔkt əkɹɔs ðə wɔɾɝ ən ðə tʃɹu aɪ ʌv ðə wɝl pæst oʊvɝ maɪ haʊs.

They came to my aid when God walked across the water and the true Eye of the World passed over my house.

 - ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən tʃɑɹlstən,  fɛbjəwɛɹi naɪntinnaɪnti

 - Robert Jordan Charleston, SC February 1990

kɑntɛns mæp pɹoʊlɑɡ: ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ wʌn ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn tu ðə wɛlkəm θɹi fɹɛnz ən ɛnəmiz fɔɹ sʌmən faɪv ðə ʃædoʊ ɪn ʃaɪnɝ sɪks dɑɹk pɹɑfəsi sɛvən blʌd kɔlz blʌɾ eɪt ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn naɪn livɛteɪkɪŋz tɛn ðə hʌn bɪɡɪnz ɪlɛvən ɡlɪmɝz ə ðə pæɾɝn twɛlv woʊvən ɪn ðə pæɾɝn θɝtin fɹəm stoʊn tə stoʊn fɔɹtin wʊlfbɹəðɝ fɪftin kɪnsleɪɝ sɪkstin ɪn ðə mɪɹɝ ə dɑɹknəs sɛvəntin tʃɔɪsəz eɪtin tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ naɪntin bɪniθ ðə dæɡɝ twɛnti seɪɾɪn twɛntiwʌn ðə naɪn ɹɪŋz twɛntiɾu wɑtʃɝz twɛntiθɹi ðə tɛstɪŋ twɛntifɔɹ nu fɹɛnz ən oʊld ɛnəmiz twɛntifaɪv kɛɹhin twɛntisɪks dɪskɔɹd twɛntisɛvən ðə ʃædoʊ ɪn ðə naɪt.

CONTENTS MAP PROLOGUE: In the Shadow 1 The Flame of Tar Valon 2 The Welcome 3 Friends and Enemies 4 Summoned 5 The Shadow in Shienar 6 Dark Prophecy 7 Blood Calls Blood 8 The Dragon Reborn 9 Leavetakings 10 The Hunt Begins 11 Glimmers of the Pattern 12 Woven in the Pattern 13 From Stone to Stone 14 Wolfbrother 15 Kinslayer 16 In the Mirror of Darkness 17 Choices 18 To the White Tower 19 Beneath the Dagger 20 Saidin 21 The Nine Rings 22 Watchers 23 The Testing 24 New Friends and Old Enemies 25 Cairhien 26 Discord 27 The Shadow in the Night.

twɛntieɪɾ eɪ nu θɹɛɾ ɪn ðə pæɾɝn.

28 A New Thread in the Pattern.

twɛntinaɪn sintʃæn θɝɾi deɪz deɪmɑɹ θɝɾiwʌn ɑn ðə sɛn θɝɾitu deɪnʒɝəs wɝdz θɝɾiθɹi eɪ mɛsədʒ fɹəm ðə dɑɹk θɝɾifɔɹ ðə wil wivz θɝɾifaɪv stɛɾɪŋ tsəfu θɝɾisɪks əmʌŋ ði ɛldɝz θɝɾisɛvən wʌt maɪt bi θɝɾieɪt pɹæktəs θɝɾinaɪn flaɪt fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ fɔɹɾi deɪmeɪn fɔɹɾiwʌn dɪsəɡɹiməns fɔɹɾitu fɑlm fɔɹɾiθɹi eɪ plæn fɔɹɾifɔɹ faɪv wɪl ɹaɪd fɔɹθ fɔɹɾifaɪv bleɪdmæstɝ fɔɹɾisɪks tə kʌm aʊɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊ fɔɹɾisɛvən ðə ɡɹeɪv ɪz noʊ bɑɹ tə maɪ kɔl fɔɹɾieɪt fɝs kleɪmɪŋ fɔɹɾinaɪn wʌt wɑz mɛn tə bi fɪfti æftɝ ɡlɔsɝi ən ɪt ʃæl kʌm tə pæs ðət wʌt mɛn meɪd ʃæl bi ʃæɾɝd, ən ðə ʃædoʊ ʃæl laɪ əkɹɔs ðə pæɾɝn ə ði eɪdʒ, ən ðə dɑɹk wʌn ʃæl wʌns mɔɹ leɪ hɪz hæn əpɑn ðə wɝld ə mæn. wɪmən ʃæl wip ən mɛn kweɪl əz ðə neɪʃənz ə ði ɝθ ɑɹ ɹɛn laɪk ɹɑɾɪŋ klɔθ. niðɝ ʃæl ɛniθɪŋ stænd nɔɹ əbaɪd . . .

29 Seanchan 30 Daes Dae'mar 31 On the Scent 32 Dangerous Words 33 A Message from the Dark 34 The Wheel Weaves 35 Stedding Tsofu 36 Among the Elders 37 What Might Be 38 Practice 39 Flight from the White Tower 40 Damane 41 Disagreements 42 Falme 43 A Plan 44 Five Will Ride Forth 45 Blademaster 46 To Come Out of the Shadow 47 The Grave Is No Bar to My Call 48 First Claiming 49 What Was Meant to Be 50 After GLOSSARY And it shall come to pass that what men made shall be shattered, and the Shadow shall lie across the Pattern of the Age, and the Dark One shall once more lay his hand upon the world of man. Women shall weep and men quail as the nations of the earth are rent like rotting cloth. Neither shall anything stand nor abide . . .

jɛt wʌn ʃæl bi bɔɹn tə feɪs ðə ʃædoʊ, bɔɹn wʌns mɔɹ əz i wɑz bɔɹn bɪfɔɹ ən ʃæl bi bɔɹn əɡɛn, taɪm wɪθaʊɾ ɛnd. ðə dʒɹæɡən ʃæl bi ɹibɔɹn, ən ðəɹ ʃæl bi weɪlɪŋ ən næʃɪŋ ə tiθ əɾ ɪz ɹibɝθ. ɪn sæklɔθ ən æʃəz ʃæl i kloʊð ðə pipəl, ən i ʃæl bɹeɪk ðə wɝld əɡɛn baɪ hɪz kʌmɪŋ, tɛɹɪŋ əpɑɹɾ ɔl taɪz ðət baɪnd. laɪk ði ənfɛɾɝd dɔn ʃæl i blaɪn ʌs, ən bɝn ʌs, jɛt ʃæl ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn kənfɹʌn ðə ʃædoʊ ət ðə læs bæɾəl, ən ɪz blʌd ʃæl ɡɪv əs ðə laɪt. lɛt tɪɹz floʊ, oʊ ji pipəl ə ðə wɝld. wip fəɹ jəɹ sælveɪʃən.

Yet one shall be born to face the Shadow, born once more as he was born before and shall be born again, time without end. The Dragon shall be Reborn, and there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth at his rebirth. In sackcloth and ashes shall he clothe the people, and he shall break the world again by his coming, tearing apart all ties that bind. Like the unfettered dawn shall he blind us, and burn us, yet shall the Dragon Reborn confront the Shadow at the Last Battle, and his blood shall give us the Light. Let tears flow, O ye people of the world. Weep for your salvation.

 - fɹəm ðə kæɹæəθən saɪkəl:

 - from The Karaethon Cycle:

ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, əz tʃɹænzleɪɾəd baɪ ɛleɪn mɛɹɪsaɪɾɪn ælʃɪn, tʃif laɪbɹɛɹiən ət ðə kɔɹɾ ə ɝæfəl, ɪn ðə jɪɹ ʌv ɡɹeɪs tuhʌnʒɹədθɝdiwʌn

The Prophecies of the Dragon, as translated by Ellaine Marise'idin Alshinn, Chief Librarian at the Court of Arafel, in the Year of Grace 231

ʌv ðə nu ɛɹə, ðə θɝɾ eɪdʒ 
of the New Era, the Third Age 
pɹoʊlɑɡ ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ



PROLOGUE In the Shadow

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz, ət list ɪn ðɪs pleɪs, snɪɹɾ ət ðə loʊ mɝmɝɪŋ ðət ɹoʊld ɝaʊn ðə vɔltəd tʃeɪmbɝ laɪk ðə sɑft ɡæbəl ʌv ɡis. hɪz ɡɹɪmɑs wɑz hɪɾən baɪ ðə blæk sɪlk mæsk ðət kʌvɝɾ ɪz feɪs, ðoʊ, dʒʌs laɪk ðə mæsks ðət kʌvɝd ðə hʌnʒɹəd ʌðɝ feɪsəz ɪn ðə tʃeɪmbɝ. ə hʌnʒɹəd blæk mæsks, ən ə hʌnʒɹəd pɛɹz ʌv aɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə si wʌt leɪ bɪhaɪn ðɛm.

The man who called himself Bors, at least in this place, sneered at the low murmuring that rolled around the vaulted chamber like the soft gabble of geese. His grimace was hidden by the black silk mask that covered his face, though, just like the masks that covered the hundred other faces in the chamber. A hundred black masks, and a hundred pairs of eyes trying to see what lay behind them.

ɪf wʌn dɪd nɑt lʊk tu kloʊsli, ðə hjudʒ ɹum cʊɾə bɪn ɪn ə pæləs, wɪð ɪts tɔl mɑɹbəl faɪɝpleɪsəz ən ɪts ɡoʊldən læmps hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ðə doʊm silɪŋ, ɪts kʌlɝfəl tæpəstʃɹiz ən ɪntʃɹəkətli pæɾɝnd moʊzeɪɪk flɔɹ. ɪf wʌn dɪd nɑt lʊk tu kloʊsli. ðə faɪɝpleɪsəz wɝ koʊld, fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ. fleɪmz dænst ɑn lɔɡz əz θɪk əz ə mænz lɛɡ, bʌt ɡeɪv noʊ hit. ðə wɔlz bɪhaɪn ðə tæpəstʃɹiz, ðə silɪŋ haɪ əbʌv ðə læmps, wɝ ənʒɹəst stoʊn, ɔlmoʊs blæk. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ wɪndoʊz, ən oʊnli tu dɔɹweɪz, wʌn əɾ iðɝ ɛn ə ðə ɹum. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf sʌmwʌn hæɾ ɪntɛndəd tə ɡɪv ðə sɛmbləns ʌv ə pæləs ɹɪsɛpʃən tʃeɪmbɝ bʌt hæd nɑt kɛɹɾ ɪnʌf tə bɑðɝ wɪð mɔɹ ðən ði aʊtlaɪn ən ə fju tʌtʃəz fəɹ dɪteɪl.

If one did not look too closely, the huge room could have been in a palace, with its tall marble fireplaces and its golden lamps hanging from the domed ceiling, its colorful tapestries and intricately patterned mosaic floor. If one did not look too closely. The fireplaces were cold, for one thing. Flames danced on logs as thick as a man's leg, but gave no heat. The walls behind the tapestries, the ceiling high above the lamps, were undressed stone, almost black. There were no windows, and only two doorways, one at either end of the room. It was as if someone had intended to give the semblance of a palace reception chamber but had not cared enough to bother with more than the outline and a few touches for detail.

wɛɹ ðə tʃeɪmbɝ wɑz, ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz dɪd nɑt noʊ, nɔɹ dɪɾ i θɪŋk ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz nu. hi dɪd nɑt laɪk tə θɪŋk əbaʊt wɛɹ ɪt maɪt bi. ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf ðəɾ i hæd bɪn sʌmənd. hi dɪd nɑt laɪk tə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðæt, iðɝ, bʌt fəɹ sətʃ ə sʌmənz, ivən i keɪm.

Where the chamber was, the man who called himself Bors did not know, nor did he think any of the others knew. He did not like to think about where it might be. It was enough that he had been summoned. He did not like to think about that, either, but for such a summons, even he came.

hi ʃɪftəɾ ɪz kloʊk, θæŋkfəl ðət ðə faɪɝz wɝ koʊld, ɛls ɪt wʊɾə bɪn tu hɑt fəɹ ðə blæk wʊl dʒɹeɪpɪŋ ɪm tə ðə flɔɹ. ɔl ɪz kloʊðz wɝ blæk. ðə bʌlki foʊlz ə ðə kloʊk hɪd ðə stup i juz tə dɪsɡaɪz ɪz haɪt, ən bɹɛd kənfjuʒən əz tə wɛðɝ i wɑz θɪn əɹ θɪk. hi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn ðəɹ ɛnvɛləpt ɪn ə teɪlɝz spæn ə klɔθ.

He shifted his cloak, thankful that the fires were cold, else it would have been too hot for the black wool draping him to the floor. All his clothes were black. The bulky folds of the cloak hid the stoop he used to disguise his height, and bred confusion as to whether he was thin or thick. He was not the only one there enveloped in a tailor's span of cloth.

saɪlənli hi wɑtʃt ɪz kəmpænjənz. peɪʃəns hæd mɑɹk mʌtʃ ə hɪz laɪf. ɔlweɪz, ɪf i weɪɾəd ən wɑtʃt lɔŋ ɪnʌf, sʌmwʌn meɪɾ ə mɪsteɪk. moʊst ə ðə mɛn ən wɪmən hɪɹ maɪɾ əv hæd ðə seɪm fəlɑsəfi; ðeɪ wɑtʃt, ən lɪsən saɪlənli tə ðoʊz u hæd tə spik. səm pipəl kəd nɑt bɛɹ weɪɾɪŋ, əɹ saɪləns, ən soʊ ɡeɪv əweɪ mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ nu.

Silently he watched his companions. Patience had marked much of his life. Always, if he waited and watched long enough, someone made a mistake. Most of the men and women here might have had the same philosophy; they watched, and listened silently to those who had to speak. Some people could not bear waiting, or silence, and so gave away more than they knew.

sɝvəns sɝkjəleɪɾəd θɹu ðə ɡɛsts, slɛndɝ, ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd juðz pɹɑfɝɪŋ waɪn wɪð ə baʊ ən ə wɝdləs smaɪl. jʌŋ mɛn ən jʌŋ wɪmən əlaɪk, ðeɪ wɔɹ taɪt waɪt bɹitʃɪz ən floʊɪŋ waɪt ʃɝts. ən meɪl ən fimeɪl əlaɪk, ðeɪ muvd wɪð dɪstɝbɪŋ ɡɹeɪs. itʃ lʊk mɔɹ ðən ə mɪɹɝ ɪmədʒ ə ði ʌðɝz, ðə bɔɪz əz hænsəm əz ðə ɡɝlz wɝ bjuɾəfəl. hi daʊɾɪd i kəd dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃ wʌn fɹəm ənʌðɝ, ən i hæɾ ən aɪ ən ə mɛmɹi fəɹ feɪsəz.

Servants circulated through the guests, slender, golden-haired youths proffering wine with a bow and a wordless smile. Young men and young women alike, they wore tight white breeches and flowing white shirts. And male and female alike, they moved with disturbing grace. Each looked more than a mirror image of the others, the boys as handsome as the girls were beautiful. He doubted he could distinguish one from another, and he had an eye and a memory for faces.

ə smaɪlɪŋ, waɪt-klæd ɡɝl ɔfɝɾ əɹ tʃɹeɪ ʌv kɹɪstəl ɡoʊbləts tə hɪm. hi tʊk wʌn wɪð noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ; ɪt maɪɾ əpɪɹ əntʃɹʌstɪŋ - əɹ wɝs, ən iðɝ kəd bi dɛdli hɪɹ - ɪf i ɹəfjuzd ɔltəɡɛðɝ, bʌɾ ɛniθɪŋ kəd bi slɪpt ɪndə ə dʒɹɪŋk. ʃʊɹli səm əmʌŋ ɪz kəmpænjənz wəɾ əv noʊ əbdʒɛkʃənz tə siɪŋ ðə nʌmbɝ ə ðɛɹ ɹaɪvəlz fəɹ paʊɝ dwɪndəl, humɛvɝ ði ənlʌki wʌnz hæpən tə bi.

A smiling, white-clad girl offered her tray of crystal goblets to him. He took one with no intention of drinking; it might appear untrusting - or worse, and either could be deadly here - if he refused altogether, but anything could be slipped into a drink. Surely some among his companions would have no objections to seeing the number of their rivals for power dwindle, whomever the unlucky ones happened to be.

aɪdli hi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðə sɝvəns wəɾ əv tə bi dɪspoʊzd ʌv æftɝ ðɪs miɾɪŋ. sɝvəns hɪɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. əz ðə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝl stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm əɹ baʊ, hɪz aɪ kɑt hɝz əbʌv ðət swit smaɪl. blæŋk aɪz. ɛmpti aɪz. ə dɑlz aɪz. aɪz mɔɹ dɛd ðən dɛθ.

Idly he wondered whether the servants would have to be disposed of after this meeting. Servants hear everything. As the serving girl straightened from her bow, his eye caught hers above that sweet smile. Blank eyes. Empty eyes. A doll's eyes. Eyes more dead than death.

hi ʃɪvɝɾ əz ʃi muvd ɡɹeɪsfəli əweɪ, ən ɹeɪz ðə ɡɑblət tə hɪz lɪps bɪfɔɹ i kɑt hɪmsɛlf. ɪt wɑz nɑt wʌt hæd bɪn dʌn tə ðə ɡɝl ðət tʃɪl hɪm. ɹæðɝ, ɛvɹi taɪm i θɔɾ i dɪtɛktəɾ ə wiknəs ɪn ðoʊz i naʊ sɝvd, hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf pɹɪsiɾɪd, ðə səpoʊzd wiknəs kʌɾ aʊt wɪð ə ɹuθləs pɹisɪʒən ðət lɛft ɪm əmeɪzd. ən wɝid. ðə fɝst ɹul ə hɪz laɪf hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn tə sɝtʃ fəɹ wiknəs, fəɹ ɛvɹi wiknəs wɑz ə tʃɪŋk wɛɹ i kəd pɹoʊb ən pɹaɪ ən ɪnfluəns. ɪf ɪz kɝən mæstɝz, hɪz mæstɝz fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, hæd noʊ wiknəs. . . .

He shivered as she moved gracefully away, and raised the goblet to his lips before he caught himself. It was not what had been done to the girl that chilled him. Rather, every time he thought he detected a weakness in those he now served, he found himself preceded, the supposed weakness cut out with a ruthless precision that left him amazed. And worried. The first rule of his life had always been to search for weakness, for every weakness was a chink where he could probe and pry and influence. If his current masters, his masters for the moment, had no weakness. . . .

fɹaʊnɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪz mæsk, hi stʌɾid ɪz kəmpænjənz. ət lis ðəɹ wɑz plɛnti ʌv wiknəs ðɛɹ. ðɛɹ nɝvəsnəs bɪtʃɹeɪd ðɛm, ivən ðoʊz u hæd sɛns ɪnʌf tə ɡɑɹd ðɛɹ tʌŋz. ə stɪfnəs ɪn ðə weɪ ðɪs wʌn hɛl hɪmsɛlf, ə dʒɝkənəs ɪn ðə weɪ ðət wʌn hændəld əɹ skɝts.

Frowning behind his mask, he studied his companions. At least there was plenty of weakness there. Their nervousness betrayed them, even those who had sense enough to guard their tongues. A stiffness in the way this one held himself, a jerkiness in the way that one handled her skirts.

ə ɡʊd kɔɹɾɝ ə ðɛm, hi ɛstəmeɪɾəd, hæd nɑt bɑðɝd wɪð dɪsɡaɪz bɪɑn ðə blæk mæsks. ðɛɹ kloʊðz toʊl mʌtʃ. ə wʊmən stændɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ə ɡoʊld-ænd-kɹɪmzən wɔl hæŋɪŋ, spikɪŋ sɔfli tə ə fɪɡjɝ - ɪmpɑsəbəl tə seɪ wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz mæn əɹ wʊmən - kloʊkt ən hʊɾɪd ɪn ɡɹeɪ. ʃi hæɾ ɑbviəsli tʃoʊzən ðə spɑt kəz ðə kʌlɝz ə ðə tæpəstʃɹi sɛɾ ɔf əɹ ɡɑɹb. dʌbli fulɪʃ tə dʒɹɔ ətɛnʃən tə hɝsɛlf, fəɹ əɹ skɑɹlət dʒɹɛs, kʌt loʊ ɪn ðə bɑɾəs tə ʃoʊ tu mʌtʃ flɛʃ ən haɪ ət ðə hɛm tə dɪspleɪ ɡoʊldən slɪpɝz, mɑɹkt əɹ fɹəm ɪljən, ən ə wʊmən ʌv wɛlθ, pɝhæps ivən ə noʊbəl blʌd.

A good quarter of them, he estimated, had not bothered with disguise beyond the black masks. Their clothes told much. A woman standing before a gold-and-crimson wall hanging, speaking softly to a figure - impossible to say whether it was man or woman - cloaked and hooded in gray. She had obviously chosen the spot because the colors of the tapestry set off her garb. Doubly foolish to draw attention to herself, for her scarlet dress, cut low in the bodice to show too much flesh and high at the hem to display golden slippers, marked her from Illian, and a woman of wealth, perhaps even of noble blood.

nɑt fɑɹ bɪɑn ði ɪliɑnɝ, ənʌðɝ wʊmən stʊd, əloʊn ən ædmɝəbli saɪlənt. wɪð ə swɑnz nɛk ən lʌstʃɹəs blæk hɛɹ fɔlɪŋ ɪn weɪvz bɪloʊ hɝ weɪst, ʃi kɛpt əɹ bæk tə ðə stoʊn wɔl, əbzɝvɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. noʊ nɝvəsnəs ðɛɹ, oʊnli sɝin sɛlf-pəzɛʃən. vɛɹi ædmɝəbəl, ðæt, bʌɾ əɹ kɑpɝi skɪn ən əɹ kɹimi, haɪ-nɛkt ɡaʊn - livɪŋ nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ əɹ hænz ənkʌvɝd, jɛt klɪŋɪŋ ən oʊnli dʒʌs bɛɹli oʊpeɪk, soʊ ðəɾ ɪt hɪntəɾ əɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ən ɹɪvil nʌθɪŋ - mɑɹkt əɹ dʒʌst əz klɪɹli ʌv ðə fɝs blʌɾ ʌv ɑɹæd dumən. ən ənlɛs ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz mɪst ɪz ɡɛs ɪntaɪɝli, ðə waɪd ɡoʊldən bɹeɪsləɾ ɑn əɹ lɛft ɹɪs bɔɹ əɹ haʊs sɪmbəlz. ðeɪ wəd bi fəɹ əɹ oʊn haʊs; noʊ dəmɑni blʌdbɔɹn wəd bɛn əɹ stɪf pɹaɪɾ ɪnʌf tə wɛɹ ðə sɪɡəlz ʌv ənʌðɝ haʊs. wɝs ðən fulɪʃnəs.

Not far beyond the Illianer, another woman stood, alone and admirably silent. With a swan's neck and lustrous black hair falling in waves below her waist, she kept her back to the stone wall, observing everything. No nervousness there, only serene self-possession. Very admirable, that, but her coppery skin and her creamy, high-necked gown - leaving nothing but her hands uncovered, yet clinging and only just barely opaque, so that it hinted at everything and revealed nothing - marked her just as clearly of the first blood of Arad Doman. And unless the man who called himself Bors missed his guess entirely, the wide golden bracelet on her left wrist bore her House symbols. They would be for her own House; no Domani bloodborn would bend her stiff pride enough to wear the sigils of another House. Worse than foolishness.

ə mæn ɪn ə haɪ-kɑlɝd, skaɪ-blu ʃaɪnɝən koʊt pæst ɪm wɪð ə wɛɹi, hɛd-tə-toʊ ɡlæns θɹu ði aɪhoʊlz ə hɪz mæsk. ðə mænz kæɹɪdʒ neɪmd ɪm soʊlʒɝ; ðə sɛɾ ə hɪz ʃoʊldɝz, ðə weɪ hɪz ɡeɪz nɛvɝ ɹɛstəɾ ɪn wʌn pleɪs fəɹ lɔŋ, ən ðə weɪ hɪz hæn simd ɹɛɾi tə dɑɹt fəɹ ə sɔɹd ðət wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ, ɔl pɹoʊkleɪmd ɪt. ðə ʃaɪnɝən weɪstəd lɪɾəl taɪm ɑn ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz; stupt ʃoʊldɝz ən ə bɛn bæk hɛl noʊ θɹɛt.

A man in a high-collared, sky-blue Shienaran coat passed him with a wary, head-to-toe glance through the eyeholes of his mask. The man's carriage named him soldier; the set of his shoulders, the way his gaze never rested in one place for long, and the way his hand seemed ready to dart for a sword that was not there, all proclaimed it. The Shienaran wasted little time on the man who called himself Bors; stooped shoulders and a bent back held no threat.

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz snɔɹɾɪd əz ðə ʃaɪnɝən muvd ɑn, ɹaɪt hæn klɛntʃɪŋ ən aɪz ɔlɹɛɾi stʌɾiɪŋ ɛlswɛɹ fəɹ deɪnʒɝ. hi kəd ɹiɾ əm ɔl, tə klæs ən kʌntʃɹi. mɝtʃən ən wɔɹiɝ, kɑmənɝ ən noʊbəl. fɹəm kændɝ ən kɛɹhin, sɑldɑiə ən ɡildən. fɹəm ɛvɹi neɪʃən ən nɪɹli ɛvɹi pipəl. hɪz noʊz ɹɪŋkəld ɪn sʌɾən dɪsɡʌst. ivən ə tɪŋkɝ, ɪn bɹaɪt ɡɹin bɹitʃɪz ən ə vɪɹələn jɛloʊ koʊt. wi kən də wɪθaʊt ðoʊz kʌm ðə deɪ.

The man who called himself Bors snorted as the Shienaran moved on, right hand clenching and eyes already studying elsewhere for danger. He could read them all, to class and country. Merchant and warrior, commoner and noble. From Kandor and Cairhien, Saldaea and Ghealdan. From every nation and nearly every people. His nose wrinkled in sudden disgust. Even a Tinker, in bright green breeches and a virulent yellow coat. We can do without those come the Day.

ðə dɪsɡaɪzd wʌnz wɝ noʊ bɛɾɝ, mɛni ʌv ðɛm, kloʊkt ən ʃɹaʊɾɪd əz ðeɪ wɝ. hi kɑt saɪt, ʌndɝ ði ɛdʒ ʌv wʌn dɑɹk ɹoʊb, ʌv ðə sɪlvɝ-wɝk buts ʌv ə haɪ lɔɹɾ ə tiɹ, ən ʌndɝ ənʌðɝ ə ɡlɪmps ʌv ɡoʊldən laɪən-hɛd spɝz, wɔɹn oʊnli baɪ haɪ ɔfəsɝz ɪn ði ændɔɝən kwinz ɡɑɹdz. ə slɛndɝ fɛloʊ - slɛndɝ ivən ɪn ə flɔɹ-dʒɹæɡɪŋ blæk ɹoʊb ən ən ənɑnəməs ɡɹeɪ kloʊk kɑt wɪð ə pleɪn sɪlvɝ pɪn - wɑtʃt fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz ə hɪz dip kaʊl. hi kəd bi ɛniwʌn, fɹəm ɛniwɛɹ . . . ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ tætuɾ ɑn ðə wɛb bɪtwin θʌm ən fɔɹfɪŋɡɝ ə hɪz ɹaɪt hænd. wʌn ə ðə si foʊk ðɛn, ən ə lʊk əɾ ɪz lɛf hænd wəd ʃoʊ ðə mɑɹks ə hɪz klæn ən laɪn. ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ tə tʃɹaɪ.

The disguised ones were no better, many of them, cloaked and shrouded as they were. He caught sight, under the edge of one dark robe, of the silver-worked boots of a High Lord of Tear, and under another a glimpse of golden lion-head spurs, worn only by high officers in the Andoran Queen's Guards. A slender fellow - slender even in a floor-dragging black robe and an anonymous gray cloak caught with a plain silver pin - watched from the shadows of his deep cowl. He could be anyone, from anywhere . . . except for the six-pointed star tattooed on the web between thumb and forefinger of his right hand. One of the Sea Folk then, and a look at his left hand would show the marks of his clan and line. The man who called himself Bors did not bother to try.

sʌɾənli hɪz aɪz nɛɹoʊd, fɪksɪŋ ɑn ə wʊmən ɛnvɛləpt ɪn blæk tɪl nʌθɪŋ ʃoʊd bʌɾ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. ɑn əɹ ɹaɪt hæn ɹɛstəɾ ə ɡoʊld ɹɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə sɝpən iɾɪŋ ɪts oʊn teɪl. ɛɛs sədaɪ, əɹ ət list ə wʊmən tʃɹeɪn ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ. nʌn ɛls wəd wɛɹ ðət ɹɪŋ. iðɝ weɪ meɪd noʊ dɪfɝəns tə hɪm. hi lʊkt əweɪ bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd noʊɾəs ɪz wɑtʃɪŋ, ən ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli hi spɑɾəd ənʌðɝ wʊmən swɑð fɹəm hɛd tə toʊ ɪn blæk ən wɛɹɪŋ ə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ. ðə tu wɪtʃəz ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ðət ðeɪ nu itʃ ʌðɝ. ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ ðeɪ sæt laɪk spaɪɾɝz ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə wɛb, pʊlɪŋ ðə stʃɹɪŋz ðət meɪd kɪŋz ən kwinz dæns, mɛɾəlɪŋ. kɝs əm ɔl tə dɛθ ɪtɝnəl! hi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i wɑz ɡɹaɪndɪŋ ɪz tiθ. ɪf nʌmbɝz mʌs dwɪndəl - ən ðeɪ mʌst, bɪfɔɹ ðə deɪ - ðəɹ wɝ səm u wəd bi mɪst ivən lɛs ðən tɪŋkɝz.

Suddenly his eyes narrowed, fixing on a woman enveloped in black till nothing showed but her fingers. On her right hand rested a gold ring in the shape of a serpent eating its own tail. Aes Sedai, or at least a woman trained in Tar Valon by Aes Sedai. None else would wear that ring. Either way made no difference to him. He looked away before she could notice his watching, and almost immediately he spotted another woman swathed from head to toe in black and wearing a Great Serpent ring. The two witches gave no sign that they knew each other. In the White Tower they sat like spiders in the middle of a web, pulling the strings that made kings and queens dance, meddling. Curse them all to death eternal! He realized that he was grinding his teeth. If numbers must dwindle - and they must, before the Day - there were some who would be missed even less than Tinkers.

ə tʃaɪm saʊndəd, ə sɪŋɡəl, ʃɪvɝɪŋ noʊt ðət keɪm fɹəm ɛvɹiwɛɹ ət wʌns ən kʌɾ ɔf ɔl ʌðɝ saʊnz laɪk ə naɪf.

A chime sounded, a single, shivering note that came from everywhere at once and cut off all other sounds like a knife.

ðə tɔl dɔɹz ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə tʃeɪmbɝ swʌŋ oʊpən, ən tu tʃɹɑləks stɛpt ɪndə ðə ɹum, spaɪks dɛkɝeɪɾɪŋ ðə blæk meɪl ðət hʌŋ tə ðɛɹ niz. ɛvɹiwʌn ʃaɪd bæk. ivən ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz.

The tall doors at the far end of the chamber swung open, and two Trollocs stepped into the room, spikes decorating the black mail that hung to their knees. Everyone shied back. Even the man who called himself Bors.

hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz tɔlɝ ðən ðə tɔlɪs mæn ðɛɹ, ðeɪ wɝ ə stʌmək-tɝnɪŋ blɛn ə mæn ən ænəməl, hjumən feɪsəz twɪstəɾ ən ɔltɝd. wʌn hæɾ ə hɛvi, pɔɪntəd bik wɛɹ ɪz maʊθ ən noʊz ʃəɾ əv bɪn, ən fɛðɝz kʌvɝɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə hɛɹ. ði ʌðɝ wɔkt ɑn hʊvz, hɪz feɪs pʊʃt aʊɾ ɪn ə hɛɹi mʌzəl, ən ɡoʊt hɔɹnz stʌk ʌp əbʌv ɪz ɪɹz.

Head and shoulders taller than the tallest man there, they were a stomach-turning blend of man and animal, human faces twisted and altered. One had a heavy, pointed beak where his mouth and nose should have been, and feathers covered his head instead of hair. The other walked on hooves, his face pushed out in a hairy muzzle, and goat horns stuck up above his ears.

ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə hjumənz, ðə tʃɹɑləks tɝn bæk təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ ən baʊd, sɝvəl ən kɹɪŋɪŋ. ðə fɛðɝz ɑn ðə wʌn lɪftəɾ ɪn ə taɪt kɹɛst.

Ignoring the humans, the Trollocs turned back toward the door and bowed, servile and cringing. The feathers on the one lifted in a tight crest.

eɪ mɹdʒɹɑl stɛp bɪtwin ðɛm, ən ðeɪ fɛl tə ðɛɹ niz. ɪt wɑz ɡɑɹbd ɪn blæk ðət meɪd ðə tʃɹɑləks' meɪl ən ðə hjumənz' mæsks sim bɹaɪt, ɡɑɹməns ðət hʌŋ stɪl, wɪθaʊɾ ə ɹɪpəl, əz ɪt muvd wɪð ə vaɪpɝz ɡɹeɪs.

A Myrddraal stepped between them, and they fell to their knees. It was garbed in black that made the Trollocs' mail and the humans' masks seem bright, garments that hung still, without a ripple, as it moved with a viper's grace.

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz fɛlt ɪz lɪps dʒɹɔɪŋ bæk oʊvɝ ɪz tiθ, hæf snɑɹl ən hæf, hi wɑz ʃeɪm tə ədmɪɾ ivən tə hɪmsɛlf, fɪɹ. ɪt hæɾ ɪts feɪs ənkʌvɝd. ɪts peɪsti peɪl feɪs, ə mænz feɪs, bʌɾ aɪləs əz ən ɛɡ, laɪk ə mæɡəɾ ɪn ə ɡɹeɪv.

The man who called himself Bors felt his lips drawing back over his teeth, half snarl and half, he was shamed to admit even to himself, fear. It had its face uncovered. Its pasty pale face, a man's face, but eyeless as an egg, like a maggot in a grave.

ðə smuð waɪt feɪs swɪvəld, ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ əm ɔl wʌn baɪ wʌn, ɪt simd. ə vɪzəbəl ʃɪvɝ ɹæn θɹu ðɛm ʌndɝ ðəɾ aɪləs lʊk. θɪn, blʌdləs lɪps kwɝkt ɪn wʌt maɪɾ ɔlmoʊst əv bɪn ə smaɪl æz, wʌn baɪ wʌn, ðə mæskt wʌnz tʃɹaɪd tə pɹɛs bæk ɪndə ðə kɹaʊd, mɪlɪŋ tə əvɔɪd ðət ɡeɪz. ðə mɹdʒɹɑlz lʊk ʃeɪpt əm ɪndə ə sɛmɪsɝkəl feɪsɪŋ ðə dɔɹ.

The smooth white face swiveled, regarding them all one by one, it seemed. A visible shiver ran through them under that eyeless look. Thin, bloodless lips quirked in what might almost have been a smile as, one by one, the masked ones tried to press back into the crowd, milling to avoid that gaze. The Myrddraal's look shaped them into a semicircle facing the door.

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz swɑloʊd. ðəɹ wɪl kʌm ə deɪ, hæfmən. wən ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk kʌmz əɡɛn, hɪl tʃuz ɪz nu dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz, ən jəl kaʊɝ bɪfɔɹ ðɛm. jəl kaʊɝ bɪfɔɹ mɛn. bɪfɔɹ mi! waɪ dʌzn ɪt spik? stɑp stɛɹɪŋ ət mi, ən spik!

The man who called himself Bors swallowed. There will come a day, Halfman. When the Great Lord of the Dark comes again, he will choose his new Dreadlords, and you will cower before them. You will cower before men. Before me! Why doesn't it speak? Stop staring at me, and speak!

"jɔɹ mæstɝ kʌmz." ðə mɹdʒɹɑlz vɔɪs ɹæsp laɪk ə dʒɹaɪ sneɪk skɪn kɹʌmbəlɪŋ. "tə jəɹ bɛliz, wɝmz! ɡɹɑvəl, lɛst ɪz bɹɪljəns blaɪn ən bɝn ju!"

"Your Master comes." The Myrddraal's voice rasped like a dry snake skin crumbling. "To your bellies, worms! Grovel, lest his brilliance blind and burn you!"

ɹeɪdʒ fɪl ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz, ət ðə toʊn əz mʌtʃ əz ðə wɝdz, bʌt ðən ði ɛɹ əbʌv ðə hæfmən ʃɪmɝd, ən ði ɪmpɔɹt dʒɹoʊv hoʊm. ɪt kæn bi! ɪt kænt . . . ! ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ɑn ðɛɹ bɛliz, ɹaɪðɪŋ əz ɪf ðeɪ wɑntəd tə bɝoʊ ɪndə ðə flɔɹ.

Rage filled the man who called himself Bors, at the tone as much as the words, but then the air above the Halfman shimmered, and the import drove home. It can't be! It can't . . . ! The Trollocs were already on their bellies, writhing as if they wanted to burrow into the floor.

wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ tə si ɪf ɛniwʌn ɛls muvd, ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz dʒɹɑp feɪsdaʊn, ɡɹʌntɪŋ əz i bɹuz hɪmsɛlf ɑn ðə stoʊn. wɝdz spɹæŋ tə hɪz lɪps laɪk ə tʃɑɹm əɡɛns deɪnʒɝ - ðeɪ wɝ ə tʃɑɹm, ðoʊ ə θɪn ɹiɾ əɡɛnst wʌɾ i fɪɹd - ən i hɝɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd ʌðɝ vɔɪsəz, bɹɛθi wɪð fɪɹ, spikɪŋ ðə seɪm əɡɛns ðə flɔɹ.

Without waiting to see if anyone else moved, the man who called himself Bors dropped facedown, grunting as he bruised himself on the stone. Words sprang to his lips like a charm against danger - they were a charm, though a thin reed against what he feared - and he heard a hundred other voices, breathy with fear, speaking the same against the floor.

"ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk ɪz maɪ mæstɝ, ən moʊs hɑɹɾəli də aɪ sɝv ɪm tə ðə læst ʃɹɛɾ ə maɪ vɛɹi soʊl." ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz maɪn ə vɔɪs tʃæɾɝd wɪð fɪɹ. ðə dɑɹk wʌn ən ɔl ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑɹ baʊnd. . . . ʃɪvɝɪŋ, hi fɔɹst ɪt tə saɪləns. hi hæɾ əbændən ðət vɔɪs lɔŋ sɪns. "loʊ, maɪ mæstɝ ɪz dɛθs mæstɝ. æskɪŋ nʌθɪŋ də aɪ sɝv əɡɛns ðə deɪ ʌv ɪz kʌmɪŋ, jɛt də aɪ sɝv ɪn ðə ʃʊɹ ən sɝɾən hoʊp ə laɪf ɛvɝlæstɪŋ." . . . baʊn ɪn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, baʊn baɪ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ ət ðə moʊmən ə kɹieɪʃən. noʊ, aɪ sɝv ə dɪfɹən mæstɝ naʊ. "ʃʊɹli ðə feɪθfəl ʃæl bi ɪɡzɔltɪɾ ɪn ðə lænd, ɪɡzɔltɪɾ əbʌv ði ʌnbəlivɝz, ɪɡzɔltɪɾ əbʌv θɹoʊnz, jɛt də aɪ sɝv hʌmbli əɡɛns ðə deɪ ʌv ɪz ɹɪtɝn." ðə hæn ə ðə kɹieɪɾɝ ʃɛltɝz əs ɔl, ən ðə laɪt pɹətɛks əs fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊ. noʊ, noʊ! ə dɪfɹən mæstɝ. "swɪf kʌm ðə deɪ ʌv ɹɪtɝn. swɪf kʌm ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk tə ɡaɪɾ əs ən ɹul ðə wɝl fɝɛvɝ ən ɛvɝ."

"The Great Lord of the Dark is my Master, and most heartily do I serve him to the last shred of my very soul." In the back of his mind a voice chattered with fear. The Dark One and all the Forsaken are bound. . . . Shivering, he forced it to silence. He had abandoned that voice long since. "Lo, my Master is death's Master. Asking nothing do I serve against the Day of his coming, yet do I serve in the sure and certain hope of life everlasting." . . . bound in Shayol Ghul, bound by the Creator at the moment of creation. No, I serve a different master now. "Surely the faithful shall be exalted in the land, exalted above the unbelievers, exalted above thrones, yet do I serve humbly against the Day of his Return." The hand of the Creator shelters us all, and the Light protects us from the Shadow. No, no! A different master. "Swift come the Day of Return. Swift come the Great Lord of the Dark to guide us and rule the world forever and ever."

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz fɪnɪʃt ðə kɹid pæntɪŋ, əz ɪf i hæd ɹʌn tɛn maɪlz. ðə ɹæsp ə bɹɛθ ɔl ɝaʊn toʊld ɪm i wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn.

The man who called himself Bors finished the creed panting, as if he had run ten miles. The rasp of breath all around told him he was not the only one.

"ɹaɪz. ɔl ə ju, ɹaɪz."

"Rise. All of you, rise."

ðə mɛləfls vɔɪs tʊk ɪm baɪ sɝpɹaɪz. ʃʊɹli nʌn ə hɪz kəmpænjənz, laɪɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ bɛliz wɪð ðɛɹ mæsk feɪsəz pɹɛs tə ðə moʊzeɪɪk taɪlz, wəɾ əv spoʊkən, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə vɔɪs i ɪkspɛktəd fɹʌm. . . . kɔʃəsli, hi ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛɾ ɪnʌf tə si wɪð wʌn aɪ.

The mellifluous voice took him by surprise. Surely none of his companions, lying on their bellies with their masked faces pressed to the mosaic tiles, would have spoken, but it was not the voice he expected from. . . . Cautiously, he raised his head enough to see with one eye.

ðə fɪɡjɝ ʌv ə mæn floʊɾəd ɪn ði ɛɹ əbʌv ðə mɹdʒɹɑl, ðə hɛm ə hɪz blʌd-ɹɛd ɹoʊb hæŋɪŋ ə spæn oʊvɝ ðə hæfmənz hɛd. mæskt ɪn blʌd-ɹɛd, tu. wəd ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk əpɪɹ tə ðɛm əz ə mæn? ən mæskt, bɪsaɪdz? jɛt ðə mɹdʒɹɑl, ɪts vɛɹi ɡeɪz fɪɹ, tʃɹɛmbəld ən ɔlmoʊs kaʊɝd wɛɹ ɪt stʊɾ ɪn ðə fɪɡjɝz ʃædoʊ. ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz ɡɹæsp fəɹ ən ænsɝ ɪz maɪn kəd kənteɪn wɪθaʊt splɪɾɪŋ. wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən, pɝhæps.

The figure of a man floated in the air above the Myrddraal, the hem of his blood-red robe hanging a span over the Halfman's head. Masked in blood-red, too. Would the Great Lord of the Dark appear to them as a man? And masked, besides? Yet the Myrddraal, its very gaze fear, trembled and almost cowered where it stood in the figure's shadow. The man who called himself Bors grasped for an answer his mind could contain without splitting. One of the Forsaken, perhaps.

ðət θɔt wɑz oʊnli ə lɪɾəl lɛs peɪnfəl. ivən soʊ, ɪt mɛn ðə deɪ ʌv ðə dɑɹk wʌnz ɹɪtɝn mʌs bi kloʊs ət hæn ɪf wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən wɑz fɹi. ðə fɔɹseɪkən, θɝtin ə ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl wildɝz ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪn ən eɪdʒ fɪld wɪð paʊɝfəl wildɝz, hæd bɪn sild ʌp ɪn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl əlɔŋ wɪð ðə dɑɹk wʌn, sild əweɪ fɹəm ðə wɝld ə mɛn baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡən ən ðə hʌnʒɹəd kəmpænjənz. ən ðə bækbləst ə ðət silɪŋ hæd teɪntɪd ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs; ən ɔl ðə meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðoʊz kɝst wildɝz ə ðə paʊɝ, wɛn mæɾ ən bɹoʊk ðə wɝld, tɔɹ ɪɾ əpɑɹt laɪk ə pɑɾɝi boʊl smæʃt ɑn ɹɑks, ɛndɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ daɪd, ɹɑɾɪŋ waɪl ðeɪ stɪl lɪvd. ə fɪɾɪŋ dɛθ fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, tə hɪz maɪnd. tu ɡʊd fəɹ ðɛm. hi ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd oʊnli ðət ðə wɪmən hæd bɪn spɛɹd.

That thought was only a little less painful. Even so, it meant the Day of the Dark One's return must be close at hand if one of the Forsaken was free. The Forsaken, thirteen of the most powerful wielders of the One Power in an Age filled with powerful wielders, had been sealed up in Shayol Ghul along with the Dark One, sealed away from the world of men by the Dragon and the Hundred Companions. And the backblast of that sealing had tainted the male half of the True Source; and all the male Aes Sedai, those cursed wielders of the Power, went mad and broke the world, tore it apart like a pottery bowl smashed on rocks, ending the Age of Legends before they died, rotting while they still lived. A fitting death for Aes Sedai, to his mind. Too good for them. He regretted only that the women had been spared.

sloʊli, peɪnfəli, hi fɔɹs ðə pænɪk tə ðə bæk ə hɪz maɪnd, kənfaɪn ɪɾ ən hɛld ɪt taɪt ðoʊ ɪt skɹim tə ɡɛɾ aʊt. ɪt wɑz ðə bɛst i kəd du. nʌn ə ðoʊz ɑn ðɛɹ bɛliz hæd ɹɪzən, ən oʊnli ə fju hæɾ ivən dɛɹd ɹeɪz ðɛɹ hɛdz.

Slowly, painfully, he forced the panic to the back of his mind, confined it and held it tight though it screamed to get out. It was the best he could do. None of those on their bellies had risen, and only a few had even dared raise their heads.

"ɹaɪz." ðəɹ wɑz ə snæp ɪn ðə ɹɛd-mæsk fɪɡjɝz vɔɪs ðɪs taɪm. hi dʒɛstʃɝd wɪð boʊθ hænz. "stænd!"

"Rise." There was a snap in the red-masked figure's voice this time. He gestured with both hands. "Stand!"

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz skɹæmbəld ʌp ɔkwɝdli, bʌt hæfweɪ tə hɪz fit, hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ðoʊz dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ hænz wɝ hɔɹəbli bɝnd, kɹɪskɹɔs baɪ blæk fɪʃɝz, ðə ɹɔ flɛʃ bɪtwin əz ɹɛɾ əz ðə fɪɡjɝz ɹoʊbz. wəd ðə dɑɹk wʌn əpɪɹ soʊ? əɹ ivən wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən? ði aɪhoʊlz ə ðət blʌd-ɹɛd mæsk swɛp sloʊli əkɹɔs hɪm, ən i stʃɹeɪɾənd heɪstəli. hi θɔɾ i kəd fil ðə hiɾ ʌv ən oʊpən fɝnəs ɪn ðət ɡeɪz.

The man who called himself Bors scrambled up awkwardly, but halfway to his feet, he hesitated. Those gesturing hands were horribly burned, crisscrossed by black fissures, the raw flesh between as red as the figure's robes. Would the Dark One appear so? Or even one of the Forsaken? The eyeholes of that blood-red mask swept slowly across him, and he straightened hastily. He thought he could feel the heat of an open furnace in that gaze.

ði ʌðɝz oʊbeɪd ðə kəmænd wɪð noʊ mɔɹ ɡɹeɪs ən noʊ lɛs fɪɹ ɪn ðɛɹ ɹaɪzɪŋ. wən ɔl wɝ ɑn ðɛɹ fit, ðə floʊɾɪŋ fɪɡjɝ spoʊk.

The others obeyed the command with no more grace and no less fear in their rising. When all were on their feet, the floating figure spoke.

"aɪ hæv bɪn noʊn baɪ mɛni neɪmz, bʌt ðə wʌn baɪ wɪtʃ jə ʃæl noʊ mi ɪz bælzəmən."

"I have been known by many names, but the one by which you shall know me is Ba'alzamon."

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz klæmpt ɪz tiθ tə kip əm fɹəm tʃæɾɝɪŋ. bælzəmən. ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk tʌŋ, ɪt mɛn hɑɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk, ən ivən ʌnbəlivɝz nu ɪt wɑz ðə tʃɹɑlɑk neɪm fəɹ ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk. hi huz neɪm mʌs nɑt bi ʌɾɝd. nɑt ðə tʃɹu neɪm, ʃeɪtɑn, bʌt stɪl fɔɹbɪɾən. əmʌŋ ðoʊz ɡæðɝd hɪɹ, ən ʌðɝz ə ðɛɹ kaɪnd, tə sʌli iðɝ wɪð ə hjumən tʌŋ wɑz blæsfəmi. hɪz bɹɛθ wɪsəl θɹu hɪz nɑstʃɹəlz, ən ɔl ɝaʊn ɪm i kəd hɪɹ ʌðɝz pæntɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ mæsks. ðə sɝvəns wɝ ɡɔn, ən ðə tʃɹɑləks əz wɛl, ðoʊ hi hæd nɑt sin əm ɡoʊ.

The man who called himself Bors clamped his teeth to keep them from chattering. Ba'alzamon. In the Trolloc tongue, it meant Heart of the Dark, and even unbelievers knew it was the Trolloc name for the Great Lord of the Dark. He Whose Name Must Not Be Uttered. Not the True Name, Shai'tan, but still forbidden. Among those gathered here, and others of their kind, to sully either with a human tongue was blasphemy. His breath whistled through his nostrils, and all around him he could hear others panting behind their masks. The servants were gone, and the Trollocs as well, though he had not seen them go.

"ðə pleɪs wɛɹ jə stæn laɪz ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl." mɔɹ ðən wʌn vɔɪs moʊn ət ðæt; ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪz oʊn wɑz nɑɾ əmʌŋ ðɛm. ə tʌtʃ ʌv wʌt maɪɾ ɔlmoʊs bi kɔl mɑkɝi ɛntɝd bælzəmənz vɔɪs əz i spɹɛɾ ɪz ɑɹmz waɪd. "fɪɹ nɑt, fəɹ ðə deɪ ʌv jəɹ mæstɝz ɹaɪzɪŋ əpɑn ðə wɝld ɪz nɪɹ ət hænd. ðə deɪ ʌv ɹɪtɝn dʒɹɔz naɪ. dʌz ɪt nɑt tɛl jə soʊ ðəɾ aɪm hɪɹ, tə bi sin baɪ jə feɪvɝd fju əmʌŋ jəɹ bɹʌðɝz ən sɪstɝz? sun ðə wil ə taɪm wɪl bi bɹoʊkən. sun ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpənt wɪl daɪ, ən wɪð ðə paʊɝ ə ðət dɛθ, ðə dɛθ ə taɪm ɪtsɛlf, jəɹ mæstɝ wɪl ɹimeɪk ðə wɝld ɪn ɪz oʊn ɪmədʒ fəɹ ðɪs eɪdʒ ən fəɹ ɔl eɪdʒəz tə kʌm. ən ðoʊz u sɝv mi, feɪθfəl ən stɛdfæst, wɪl sɪɾ ət maɪ fiɾ əbʌv ðə stɑɹz ɪn ðə skaɪ ən ɹul ðə wɝld ə mɛn fɝɛvɝ. soʊ hæv aɪ pɹɑməst, ən soʊ ʃæl ɪt bi, wɪθaʊɾ ɛnd. jə ʃæl lɪv ən ɹul fɝɛvɝ."

"The place where you stand lies in the shadow of Shayol Ghul." More than one voice moaned at that; the man who called himself Bors was not sure his own was not among them. A touch of what might almost be called mockery entered Ba'alzamon's voice as he spread his arms wide. "Fear not, for the Day of your Master's rising upon the world is near at hand. The Day of Return draws nigh. Does it not tell you so that I am here, to be seen by you favored few among your brothers and sisters? Soon the Wheel of Time will be broken. Soon the Great Serpent will die, and with the power of that death, the death of Time itself, your Master will remake the world in his own image for this Age and for all Ages to come. And those who serve me, faithful and steadfast, will sit at my feet above the stars in the sky and rule the world of men forever. So have I promised, and so shall it be, without end. You shall live and rule forever."

ə mɝmɝ ʌv æntɪsəpeɪʃən ɹæn θɹu ðə lɪsənɝz, ən səm ivən tʊk ə stɛp fɔɹwɝd, təwɔɹd ðə floʊɾɪŋ, kɹɪmzən ʃeɪp, ðɛɹ aɪz lɪftəd, ɹæptʃɝəs. ivən ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz fɛl ðə pʊl ə ðət pɹɑməs, ðə pɹɑməs fəɹ wɪtʃ i hæd dɛlt əweɪ hɪz soʊl ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz oʊvɝ.

A murmur of anticipation ran through the listeners, and some even took a step forward, toward the floating, crimson shape, their eyes lifted, rapturous. Even the man who called himself Bors felt the pull of that promise, the promise for which he had dealt away his soul a hundred times over.

"ðə deɪ ʌv ɹɪtɝn kʌmz kloʊsɝ," bælzəmən sɛd. "bʌt ðəɹ ɪz mʌtʃ jɛt tə du. mʌtʃ tə du."

"The Day of Return comes closer," Ba'alzamon said. "But there is much yet to do. Much to do."

ði ɛɹ tə bælzəmənz lɛft ʃɪmɝɾ ən θɪkənd, ən ðə fɪɡjɝ ʌv ə jʌŋ mæn hʌŋ ðɛɹ, ə lɪɾəl loʊɝ ðən bælzəmən. ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz kəd nɑt dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz ə lɪvɪŋ biɪŋ əɹ nɑt. ə kʌntʃɹi læd, baɪ hɪz kloʊðz, wɪð ə laɪɾ ə mɪstʃəf ɪn ɪz bɹaʊn aɪz ən ðə hɪn ʌv ə smaɪl ɑn ɪz lɪps, əz ɪf ɪn mɛmɹi əɹ æntɪsəpeɪʃən ʌv ə pɹæŋk. ðə flɛʃ lʊkt wɔɹm, bʌt ðə tʃɛs dɪd nɑt muv wɪð bɹɛθ, ði aɪz dɪd nɑt blɪŋk.

The air to Ba'alzamon's left shimmered and thickened, and the figure of a young man hung there, a little lower than Ba'alzamon. The man who called himself Bors could not decide whether it was a living being or not. A country lad, by his clothes, with a light of mischief in his brown eyes and the hint of a smile on his lips, as if in memory or anticipation of a prank. The flesh looked warm, but the chest did not move with breath, the eyes did not blink.

ði ɛɹ tə bælzəmənz ɹaɪt weɪvɝɾ əz ɪf wɪð hit, ən ə sɛkən kʌntʃɹi-klæd fɪɡjɝ hʌŋ səspɛndəɾ ə lɪɾəl bɪloʊ bælzəmən. ə kɝli-hɛɹd juθ, əz hɛvəli mʌsəld əz ə blæksmɪθ. ən ən ɑɾəti: ə bæɾəl æks hʌŋ əɾ ɪz saɪd, ə ɡɹeɪt, stil hæf-mun bæləns baɪ ə θɪk spaɪk. ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz sʌɾənli lin fɔɹwɝd, ɪntɛn ɑn ən ivən ɡɹeɪɾɝ stʃɹeɪnʒnəs. ə juθ wɪð jɛloʊ aɪz.

The air to Ba'alzamon's right wavered as if with heat, and a second country-clad figure hung suspended a little below Ba'alzamon. A curly-haired youth, as heavily muscled as a blacksmith. And an oddity: a battle axe hung at his side, a great, steel half-moon balanced by a thick spike. The man who called himself Bors suddenly leaned forward, intent on an even greater strangeness. A youth with yellow eyes.

fəɹ ðə θɝd taɪm ɛɹ səlɪɾəfaɪd ɪndə ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə jʌŋ mæn, ðɪs taɪm dɝɛkli ʌndɝ bælzəmənz aɪ, ɔlmoʊst əɾ ɪz fit. ə tɔl fɛloʊ, wɪð aɪz naʊ ɡɹeɪ, naʊ ɔlmoʊs blu əz ðə laɪt tʊk ðɛm, ən dɑɹk, ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ. ənʌðɝ vɪlɪdʒɝ, əɹ fɑɹmɝ. ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz ɡæspt. jɛɾ ənʌðɝ θɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi, ðoʊ hi wʌndɝd waɪ hi ʃəɾ ɪkspɛkt ɛniθɪŋ tə bi ɔɹɾənɛɹi hɪɹ. ə sɔɹd swʌŋ fɹəm ðə fɪɡjɝz bɛlt, ə sɔɹd wɪð ə bɹɑnz hɛɹən ɑn ðə skæbɝɾ ən ənʌðɝ ɪnsɛɾ ɪndə ðə lɔŋ, tu-hændəd hɪlt. ə vɪlədʒ bɔɪ wɪð ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd? ɪmpɑsəbəl! wʌt kən ɪt min? ən ə bɔɪ wɪð jɛloʊ aɪz. hi noʊɾəst ðə mɹdʒɹɑl lʊkɪŋ ət ðə fɪɡjɝz, tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ; ən ənlɛs i mɪsdʒʌdʒd ɪntaɪɝli, ɪts tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ fɪɹ, bʌt heɪtʃɹəd.

For the third time air solidified into the shape of a young man, this time directly under Ba'alzamon's eye, almost at his feet. A tall fellow, with eyes now gray, now almost blue as the light took them, and dark, reddish hair. Another villager, or farmer. The man who called himself Bors gasped. Yet another thing out of the ordinary, though he wondered why he should expect anything to be ordinary here. A sword swung from the figure's belt, a sword with a bronze heron on the scabbard and another inset into the long, two-handed hilt. A village boy with a heron-mark blade? Impossible! What can it mean? And a boy with yellow eyes. He noticed the Myrddraal looking at the figures, trembling; and unless he misjudged entirely, its trembling was no longer fear, but hatred.

dɛd saɪləns hæd fɔlən, saɪləns ðət bælzəmən lɛt dipən bɪfɔɹ i spoʊk. "ðɛɹ ɪz naʊ wʌn u wɔks ðə wɝld, wʌn u wɑz ən wɪl bi, bʌɾ ɪz nɑt jɛt, ðə dʒɹæɡən."

Dead silence had fallen, silence that Ba'alzamon let deepen before he spoke. "There is now one who walks the world, one who was and will be, but is not yet, the Dragon."

ə stɑɹɾəld mɝmɝ ɹæn θɹu hɪz lɪsənɝz.

A startled murmur ran through his listeners.

"ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn! wəɹ tə kɪl hɪm, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd?" ðət fɹəm ðə ʃaɪnɝən, hænd ɡɹæspɪŋ iɡɝli əɾ ɪz saɪd wɛɹ ɪz sɔɹd wəd hæŋ.

"The Dragon Reborn! We are to kill him, Great Lord?" That from the Shienaran, hand grasping eagerly at his side where his sword would hang.

"pɝhæps," bælzəmən sɛd sɪmpli. "æn pɝhæps nɑt. pɝhæps i kən bi tɝn tə maɪ juz. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ɪɾəl bi soʊ, ɪn ðɪs eɪdʒ əɹ ənʌðɝ."

"Perhaps," Ba'alzamon said simply. "And perhaps not. Perhaps he can be turned to my use. Sooner or later it will be so, in this Age or another."

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz blɪŋkt. ɪn ðɪs eɪdʒ əɹ ənʌðɝ? aɪ θɔt ðə deɪ ʌv ɹɪtɝn wɑz nɪɹ. wʌt mæɾɝ tə mi wʌt hæpənz ɪn ənʌðɝ eɪdʒ ɪf aɪ ɡɹoʊ oʊld ən daɪ weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðɪs wʌn? bʌt bælzəmən wɑz spikɪŋ əɡɛn.

The man who called himself Bors blinked. In this Age or another? I thought the Day of Return was near. What matter to me what happens in another Age if I grow old and die waiting in this one? But Ba'alzamon was speaking again.

"ɔlɹɛɾi ə bɛn ɪz fɔɹmɪŋ ɪn ðə pæɾɝn, wʌn ə mɛni pɔɪns wɛɹ i hu wɪl bɪkʌm ðə dʒɹæɡən meɪ bi tɝn tə maɪ sɝvəs. mʌs bi tɝnd! bɛɾɝ ðəɾ i sɝv mi əlaɪv ðən dɛd, bʌɾ əlaɪv əɹ dɛd, sɝv mi hi mʌst ən wɪl! ðiz θɹi jə mʌs noʊ, fəɹ itʃ ɪz ə θɹɛɾ ɪn ðə pæɾɝn aɪ min tə wiv, ən ɪɾəl bi ʌp tə jə tə si ðət ðeɪ ɑɹ pleɪst əz aɪ kəmænd. stʌɾi ðɛm wɛl, ðət jəl noʊ ðɛm."

"Already a bend is forming in the Pattern, one of many points where he who will become the Dragon may be turned to my service. Must be turned! Better that he serve me alive than dead, but alive or dead, serve me he must and will! These three you must know, for each is a thread in the pattern I mean to weave, and it will be up to you to see that they are placed as I command. Study them well, that you will know them."

əbɹʌpli ɔl saʊnd wɑz ɡɔn. ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli, ən sɔ ʌðɝz duɪŋ ðə seɪm. ɔl bʌt ði ɪliɑnɝ wʊmən, hi ɹilaɪzd. wɪð əɹ hænz spɹɛɾ oʊvɝ əɹ bʊzəm əz ɪf tə haɪd ðə ɹaʊndəd flɛʃ ʃi ɪkspoʊzd, aɪz waɪd, hæf fɹaɪɾənd ən hæf ɛkstæɾɪk, ʃi wɑz nɑɾɪŋ iɡɝli əz ðoʊ tə sʌmwʌn feɪs-tə-feɪs wɪð hɝ. səmtaɪmz ʃi əpɪɹd tə ɡɪv ə ɹɪplaɪ, bʌt ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz hɝd nɑɾ ə wɝd. sʌɾənli ʃi ɑɹtʃt bækwɝdz, tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ ən ɹaɪzɪŋ ɑn əɹ toʊz. hi kəd nɑt si waɪ ʃi dɪd nɑt fɔl, ənlɛs sʌmθɪŋ ənsin hɛl hɝ. ðɛn, dʒʌst əz əbɹʌpli, ʃi sɛɾəld bæk tə hɝ fiɾ ən nɑɾəd əɡɛn, boʊɪŋ, ʃɪvɝɪŋ. ivən əz ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd, wʌn ə ðə wɪmən wɛɹɪŋ ə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən bɪɡæn nɑɾɪŋ.

Abruptly all sound was gone. The man who called himself Bors shifted uneasily, and saw others doing the same. All but the Illianer woman, he realized. With her hands spread over her bosom as if to hide the rounded flesh she exposed, eyes wide, half frightened and half ecstatic, she was nodding eagerly as though to someone face-to-face with her. Sometimes she appeared to give a reply, but the man who called himself Bors heard not a word. Suddenly she arched backwards, trembling and rising on her toes. He could not see why she did not fall, unless something unseen held her. Then, just as abruptly, she settled back to her feet and nodded again, bowing, shivering. Even as she straightened, one of the women wearing a Great Serpent ring gave a start and began nodding.

soʊ itʃ ʌv əs hɪɹz ɪz oʊn ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz, ən nʌn hɪɹz ənʌðɝz. ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz mʌɾɝd ɪn fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. ɪf i nu wʌɾ ivən wʌn ʌðɝ wɑz kəmændəd, hi maɪt bi eɪbəl tə juz ðə nɑlədʒ tə ædvæntɪdʒ, bʌt ðɪs weɪ. . . . ɪmpeɪʃənli hi weɪɾəd fəɹ ɪz tɝn, fɝɡɛɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɪnʌf tə stæn stʃɹeɪt.

So each of us hears his own instructions, and none hears another's. The man who called himself Bors muttered in frustration. If he knew what even one other was commanded, he might be able to use the knowledge to advantage, but this way. . . . Impatiently he waited for his turn, forgetting himself enough to stand straight.

wʌn baɪ wʌn ðə ɡæðɝɪŋ ɹəsiv ðɛɹ ɔɹɾɝz, itʃ wɔld ɪn saɪləns jɛt stɪl ɡɪvɪŋ tæntəlaɪzɪŋ kluz, ɪf oʊnli hi kəd ɹid ðɛm. ðə mæn ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ, ðə si foʊk, stɪfənɪŋ wɪð ɹɪlʌktəns əz i nɑɾəd. ðə ʃaɪnɝən, hɪz stæns bɪspikɪŋ kənfjuʒən ivən waɪl i ækwiɛst. ðə sɛkənd wʊmən ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ɡɪvɪŋ ə stɑɹt, əz ə ʃɑk, ən ðə ɡɹeɪ-swɑð fɪɡjɝ huz sɛks i kəd nɑt dətɝmən ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪts hɛd bɪfɔɹ fɔlɪŋ tə ɪts niz ən nɑɾɪŋ vɪɡɝəsli. səm ʌndɝwɛn ðə seɪm kənvʌlʃən əz ði ɪliɑnɝ wʊmən, əz ɪf peɪn ɪtsɛlf lɪftəɾ əm tə toʊ tɪps.

One by one the gathering received their orders, each walled in silence yet still giving tantalizing clues, if only he could read them. The man of the Atha'an Miere, the Sea Folk, stiffening with reluctance as he nodded. The Shienaran, his stance bespeaking confusion even while he acquiesced. The second woman of Tar Valon giving a start, as of shock, and the gray-swathed figure whose sex he could not determine shaking its head before falling to its knees and nodding vigorously. Some underwent the same convulsion as the Illianer woman, as if pain itself lifted them to toe tips.

"bɔɹz."

"Bors."

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz dʒɝkt əz ə ɹɛd mæsk fɪld ɪz aɪz. hi kəd stɪl si ðə ɹum, stɪl si ðə floʊɾɪŋ ʃeɪp ə bælzəmən ən ðə θɹi fɪɡjɝz bɪfɔɹ hɪm, bʌɾ ət ðə seɪm taɪm ɔl i kəd si wɑz ðə ɹɛd-mæsk feɪs. dɪzi, hi fɛlt əz ɪf ɪz skʌl wɝ splɪɾɪŋ oʊpən ən ɪz aɪz wɝ biɪŋ pʊʃt aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛd. fəɹ ə moʊmən i θɔɾ i kəd si fleɪmz θɹu ði aɪhoʊlz ə ðə mæsk.

The man who called himself Bors jerked as a red mask filled his eyes. He could still see the room, still see the floating shape of Ba'alzamon and the three figures before him, but at the same time all he could see was the red-masked face. Dizzy, he felt as if his skull were splitting open and his eyes were being pushed out of his head. For a moment he thought he could see flames through the eyeholes of the mask.

"ɑɹ jə feɪθfəl . . . bɔɹz?"

"Are you faithful . . . Bors?"

ðə hɪn ə mɑkɪŋ ɪn ðə neɪm sɛn ə tʃɪl daʊn ɪz bækboʊn. "aɪ æm feɪθfəl, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd. aɪ kænɑt haɪd fɹəm ju." aɪm feɪθfəl! aɪ swɛɹ ɪt!

The hint of mocking in the name sent a chill down his backbone. "I am faithful, Great Lord. I cannot hide from you." I am faithful! I swear it!

"noʊ, jə kænɑt."

"No, you cannot."

ðə sɝɾənti ɪn bælzəmənz vɔɪs dʒɹaɪɾ ɪz maʊθ, bʌɾ i fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə spik. "kəmæn mi, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, ən aɪ oʊbeɪ."

The certainty in Ba'alzamon's voice dried his mouth, but he forced himself to speak. "Command me, Great Lord, and I obey."

"fɝsli, jə ɑɹ tə ɹɪtɝn tə tæɹɑbən ən kəntɪnju jəɹ ɡʊd wɝks. ɪn fækt, aɪ kəmæn jə tə ɹidʌbəl jəɹ ɛfɝts."

"Firstly, you are to return to Tarabon and continue your good works. In fact, I command you to redouble your efforts."

hi stɛɹɾ ət bælzəmən ɪn pʌzəlmənt, bʌt ðən faɪɝz flɛɹɾ əɡɛn bɪhaɪn ðə mæsk, ən i tʊk ði ɪkskjus ʌv ə baʊ tə pʊl ɪz aɪz əweɪ. "æz jə kəmænd, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, soʊ ʃæl ɪt bi."

He stared at Ba'alzamon in puzzlement, but then fires flared again behind the mask, and he took the excuse of a bow to pull his eyes away. "As you command, Great Lord, so shall it be."

"sɛkənli, jəl wɑtʃ fəɹ ðə θɹi jʌŋ mɛn, ən əv jəɹ fɑloʊɝz wɑtʃ. bi wɔɹnd; ðeɪ ɑɹ deɪnʒɝəs."

"Secondly, you will watch for the three young men, and have your followers watch. Be warned; they are dangerous."

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz ɡlænst ət ðə fɪɡjɝz floʊɾɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə bælzəmən. haʊ kən aɪ də ðæt? aɪ kən si ðɛm, bʌɾ aɪ kæn si ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛpt ɪz feɪs. hɪz hɛd fɛlt əbaʊt tə bɝst. swɛt slɪkt ɪz hænz ʌndɝ ɪz θɪn ɡlʌvz, ən ɪz ʃɝt klʌŋ tə hɪz bæk. "deɪnʒɝəs, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd? fɑɹmbɔɪz? ɪz wʌn ə ðɛm ðə - "

The man who called himself Bors glanced at the figures floating in front of Ba'alzamon. How can I do that? I can see them, but I can't see anything except his face. His head felt about to burst. Sweat slicked his hands under his thin gloves, and his shirt clung to his back. "Dangerous, Great Lord? Farmboys? Is one of them the - "

"ə sɔɹɾ ɪz deɪnʒɝəs tə ðə mæn ət ðə pɔɪnt, bʌt nɑt tə ðə mæn ət ðə hɪlt. ənlɛs ðə mæn hoʊldɪŋ ðə sɔɹɾ ɪz ə ful, əɹ kɛɹləs, əɹ ənskɪld, ɪn wɪtʃ keɪs ɪts twaɪs əz deɪnʒɝəs tə hɪm əz tə ɛniwʌn ɛls. ɪts ɪnʌf ðəɾ aɪ hæv toʊl jə tə noʊ ðɛm. ɪts ɪnʌf ðət jə oʊbeɪ mi."

"A sword is dangerous to the man at the point, but not to the man at the hilt. Unless the man holding the sword is a fool, or careless, or unskilled, in which case it is twice as dangerous to him as to anyone else. It is enough that I have told you to know them. It is enough that you obey me."

"æz jə kəmænd, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, soʊ ʃæl ɪt bi."

"As you command, Great Lord, so shall it be."

"θɝdli, ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðoʊz u hæv lændəɾ ət toʊmən hɛd, ən ðə dəmɑni. ʌv ðɪs jəl spik tə noʊ wʌn. wən jə ɹɪtɝn tə tæɹɑbən. . . ."

"Thirdly, regarding those who have landed at Toman Head, and the Domani. Of this you will speak to no one. When you return to Tarabon. . . ."

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz ɹilaɪzd əz i lɪsən ðəɾ ɪz maʊθ wɑz sæɡɪŋ oʊpən. ði ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz meɪd noʊ sɛns. ɪf aɪ nu wʌt səm ə ði ʌðɝz wɝ toʊld, pɝhæps aɪ kəd pis ɪt təɡɛðɝ.

The man who called himself Bors realized as he listened that his mouth was sagging open. The instructions made no sense. If I knew what some of the others were told, perhaps I could piece it together.

əbɹʌpli hi fɛlt ɪz hɛd ɡɹæspt əz ðoʊ baɪ ə dʒaɪən hæn kɹʌʃɪŋ ɪz tɛmpəlz, fɛl hɪmsɛlf biɪŋ lɪftəd, ən ðə wɝl blu əpɑɹɾ ɪn ə θaʊzən stɑɹbɝsts, itʃ flæʃ ə laɪt bɪkʌmɪŋ ən ɪmədʒ ðət flɛɾ əkɹɔs ɪz maɪn əɹ spʌn ən dwɪndəld ɪndə ðə dɪstəns bɪfɔɹ i kəd mɔɹ ðən bɛɹli ɡɹæsp ɪt. ən ɪmpɑsəbəl skaɪ ʌv stʃɹieɪɾɪd klaʊdz, ɹɛɾ ən jɛloʊ ən blæk, ɹeɪsɪŋ əz ɪf dʒɹɪvən baɪ ðə maɪɾiəst waɪn ðə wɝl hæɾ ɛvɝ sin. ə wʊmən - ə ɡɝl? - dʒɹɛst ɪn waɪt ɹəsiɾəd ɪndə blæknəs ən vænɪʃt əz sun əz ʃi əpɪɹd. ə ɹeɪvən stɛɹɾ ɪm ɪn ði aɪ, noʊɪŋ hɪm, ən wɑz ɡɔn. ən ɑɹmɝd mæn ɪn ə bɹuɾəl hɛlm, ʃeɪpt ən peɪntəɾ ən ɡɪldɪd laɪk səm mɑnstʃɹəs, pɔɪzənəs ɪnsɛkt, ɹeɪzd ə sɔɹɾ ən plʌnʒd tə wʌn saɪd, bɪɑn ɪz vju. ə hɔɹn, kɝld ən ɡoʊldən, keɪm hɝtlɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə fɑɹ dɪstəns. wʌn pɪɹsɪŋ noʊɾ ɪt saʊndəɾ əz ɪt flæʃt təwɔɹd hɪm, tʌɡɪŋ ɪz soʊl. ət ðə læst ɪnstən ɪt flæʃt ɪndə ə blaɪndɪŋ, ɡoʊldən ɹɪŋ ə laɪt ðət pæs θɹu hɪm, tʃɪlɪŋ ɪm bɪɑn dɛθ. ə wʊlf lɛp fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz ə lɔst saɪɾ ən ɹɪpt aʊɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. hi kəd nɑt skɹim. ðə tɔɹənt wɛn ɑn, dʒɹaʊnɪŋ hɪm, bɛɹiɪŋ hɪm. hi kəd bɛɹli ɹɪmɛmbɝ u hi wɑz, əɹ wʌɾ i wɑz. ðə skaɪz ɹeɪn faɪɝ, ən ðə mun ən stɑɹz fɛl; ɹɪvɝz ɹæn ɪn blʌd, ən ðə dɛd wɔkt; ði ɝθ splɪɾ oʊpən ən faʊnteɪn moʊltən ɹɑk. . . .

Abruptly he felt his head grasped as though by a giant hand crushing his temples, felt himself being lifted, and the world blew apart in a thousand starbursts, each flash of light becoming an image that fled across his mind or spun and dwindled into the distance before he could more than barely grasp it. An impossible sky of striated clouds, red and yellow and black, racing as if driven by the mightiest wind the world had ever seen. A woman - a girl? - dressed in white receded into blackness and vanished as soon as she appeared. A raven stared him in the eye, knowing him, and was gone. An armored man in a brutal helm, shaped and painted and gilded like some monstrous, poisonous insect, raised a sword and plunged to one side, beyond his view. A horn, curled and golden, came hurtling out of the far distance. One piercing note it sounded as it flashed toward him, tugging his soul. At the last instant it flashed into a blinding, golden ring of light that passed through him, chilling him beyond death. A wolf leaped from the shadows of lost sight and ripped out his throat. He could not scream. The torrent went on, drowning him, burying him. He could barely remember who he was, or what he was. The skies rained fire, and the moon and stars fell; rivers ran in blood, and the dead walked; the earth split open and fountained molten rock. . . .

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz faʊn hɪmsɛlf hæf kɹaʊtʃɪŋ ɪn ðə tʃeɪmbɝ wɪð ði ʌðɝz, moʊst wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, ɔl saɪlənt. wɛɹɛvɝ i lʊkt, ʌp əɹ daʊn əɹ ɪn ɛni dɝɛkʃən, ðə mæsk feɪs ə bælzəmən oʊvɝwɛlmd ɪz aɪz. ði ɪmədʒəz ðət hæd flʌɾəd ɪndə hɪz maɪnd wɝ feɪɾɪŋ; hi wɑz ʃʊɹ mɛni wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɔn fɹəm mɛmɹi. hɛzɪɾəntli, hi stʃɹeɪɾənd, bælzəmən ɔlweɪz bɪfɔɹ hɪm.

The man who called himself Bors found himself half crouching in the chamber with the others, most watching him, all silent. Wherever he looked, up or down or in any direction, the masked face of Ba'alzamon overwhelmed his eyes. The images that had flooded into his mind were fading; he was sure many were already gone from memory. Hesitantly, he straightened, Ba'alzamon always before him.

"ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, wʌt - ?"

"Great Lord, what - ?"

"sʌm kəmænz ɑɹ tu ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə bi noʊn ivən baɪ hi hu kæɹiz əm aʊt."

"Some commands are too important to be known even by he who carries them out."

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz bɛn ɔlmoʊs dʌbəl ɪn ɪz baʊ. "æz jə kəmænd, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd," hi wɪspɝd hɔɹsli, "soʊ ʃæl ɪt bi."

The man who called himself Bors bent almost double in his bow. "As you command, Great Lord," he whispered hoarsely, "so shall it be."

wən i stʃɹeɪɾənd, hi wɑz əloʊn ɪn saɪləns wʌns mɔɹ. ənʌðɝ, ðə tɛɹən haɪ lɔɹd, nɑɾəd ən baʊd tə sʌmwʌn nʌn ɛls sɔ. ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz pʊɾ ən ənstɛɾi hæn tə hɪz bɹaʊ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hoʊld ɑn tə sʌmθɪŋ ʌv wʌt hæd bɝs θɹu hɪz maɪnd, ðoʊ hi wɑz nɑt kəmplitli sɝɾən i wɑntəd tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ. ðə læst ɹɛmnən flɪkɝɾ aʊt, ən sʌɾənli hi wɑz wʌndɝɪŋ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðəɾ i wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹikɔl. aɪ noʊ ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ, bʌt wʌt? ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ! wɑzn ðɛɹ? hi ɹʌbd ɪz hænz təɡɛðɝ, ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ ət ðə fil ə swɛɾ ʌndɝ ɪz ɡlʌvz, ən tɝn ɪz ətɛnʃən tə ðə θɹi fɪɡjɝz hæŋɪŋ səspɛndəd bɪfɔɹ bælzəmənz floʊɾɪŋ fɔɹm.

When he straightened, he was alone in silence once more. Another, the Tairen High Lord, nodded and bowed to someone none else saw. The man who called himself Bors put an unsteady hand to his brow, trying to hold on to something of what had burst through his mind, though he was not completely certain he wanted to remember. The last remnant flickered out, and suddenly he was wondering what it was that he was trying to recall. I know there was something, but what? There was something! Wasn't there? He rubbed his hands together, grimacing at the feel of sweat under his gloves, and turned his attention to the three figures hanging suspended before Ba'alzamon's floating form.

ðə mʌskjəlɝ, kɝli-hɛɹd juθ; ðə fɑɹmɝ wɪð ðə sɔɹd; ən ðə læd wɪð ðə lʊk ə mɪstʃəf ɑn ɪz feɪs. ɔlɹɛɾi, ɪn ɪz maɪnd, ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz hæd neɪmd əm ðə blæksmɪθ, ðə sɔɝdzmən, ən ðə tʃɹɪkstɝ. wʌɾ ɪz ðɛɹ pleɪs ɪn ðə pʌzəl? ðeɪ mʌs bi ɪmpɔɹɾənt, əɹ bælzəmən wəd nɑɾ əv meɪɾ əm ðə sɛntɝ ə ðɪs ɡæðɝɪŋ. bʌt fɹəm ɪz ɔɹɾɝz əloʊn ðeɪ kəɾ ɔl daɪ əɾ ɛni taɪm, ən i hæd tə θɪŋk ðət səm ə ði ʌðɝz, ət list, hæɾ ɔɹɾɝz əz dɛdli fəɹ ðə θɹi. haʊ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɑɹ ðeɪ? blu aɪz kəd min ðə noʊbɪləɾi ʌv ændɝ - ənlaɪkli ɪn ðoʊz kloʊðz - ən ðəɹ wɝ bɔɹɾɝləndɝz wɪð laɪɾ aɪz, əz wɛl əz səm tɛɹənz, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ə fju fɹəm ɡildən, ænd, ʌv kɔɹs. . . . noʊ, noʊ hɛlp ðɛɹ. bʌt jɛloʊ aɪz? hu ɑɹ ðeɪ? wʌɾ ɑɹ ðeɪ?

The muscular, curly-haired youth; the farmer with the sword; and the lad with the look of mischief on his face. Already, in his mind, the man who called himself Bors had named them the Blacksmith, the Swordsman, and the Trickster. What is their place in the puzzle? They must be important, or Ba'alzamon would not have made them the center of this gathering. But from his orders alone they could all die at any time, and he had to think that some of the others, at least, had orders as deadly for the three. How important are they? Blue eyes could mean the nobility of Andor - unlikely in those clothes - and there were Borderlanders with light eyes, as well as some Tairens, not to mention a few from Ghealdan, and, of course. . . . No, no help there. But yellow eyes? Who are they? What are they?

hi stɑɹɾəd əɾ ə tʌtʃ ɑn ɪz ɑɹm, ən lʊkt ɝaʊn tə faɪnd wʌn ə ðə waɪt-klæd sɝvəns, ə jʌŋ mæn, stændɪŋ baɪ hɪz saɪd. ði ʌðɝz wɝ bæk, tu, mɔɹ ðən bɪfɔɹ, wʌn fəɹ itʃ ə ðə mæskt. hi blɪŋkt. bælzəmən wɑz ɡɔn. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl wɑz ɡɔn, tu, ən oʊnli ɹʌf stoʊn wɑz wɛɹ ðə dɔɹ ɪt hæd juz hæd bɪn. ðə θɹi fɪɡjɝz stɪl hʌŋ ðɛɹ, ðoʊ. hi fɛlt əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm.

He started at a touch on his arm, and looked around to find one of the white-clad servants, a young man, standing by his side. The others were back, too, more than before, one for each of the masked. He blinked. Ba'alzamon was gone. The Myrddraal was gone, too, and only rough stone was where the door it had used had been. The three figures still hung there, though. He felt as if they were staring at him.

"ɪf ɪt pliz ju, maɪ lɔɹd bɔɹz, əl ʃoʊ jə tə jəɹ ɹum."

"If it please you, my Lord Bors, I will show you to your room."

əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðoʊz dɛɾ aɪz, hi ɡlænst wʌns mɔɹ ət ðə θɹi fɪɡjɝz, ðən fɑloʊd. ənizəli hi wʌndɝd haʊ ðə juθ hæd noʊn wʌt neɪm tə juz. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əntɪl ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ kɑɹv dɔɹz kloʊz bɪhaɪn ɪm ən ðeɪ hæd wɔkt ə dʌzən peɪsɪz ðəɾ i ɹilaɪzd i wɑz əloʊn ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ wɪð ðə sɝvənt. hɪz bɹaʊz dʒɹu daʊn səspɪʃəsli bɪhaɪn ɪz mæsk, bʌt bɪfɔɹ i kəɾ oʊpən ɪz maʊð, ðə sɝvən spoʊk.

Avoiding those dead eyes, he glanced once more at the three figures, then followed. Uneasily he wondered how the youth had known what name to use. It was not until the strange carved doors closed behind him and they had walked a dozen paces that he realized he was alone in the corridor with the servant. His brows drew down suspiciously behind his mask, but before he could open his mouth, the servant spoke.

"ði ʌðɝz ɑɹ ɔlsoʊ biɪŋ ʃoʊn tə ðɛɹ ɹumz, maɪ lɔɹd. ɪf jə pliz, maɪ lɔɹd? taɪm ɪz ʃɔɹt, ən əɹ mæstɝ ɪz ɪmpeɪʃənt."

"The others are also being shown to their rooms, my Lord. If you please, my Lord? Time is short, and our Master is impatient."

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz ɡɹaʊn ɪz tiθ, boʊθ ət ðə læk ʌv ɪnfɝmeɪʃən ən ət ði ɪmpləkeɪʃən ə seɪmnəs bɪtwin hɪmsɛlf ən ðə sɝvənt, bʌɾ i fɑloʊɾ ɪn saɪləns. oʊnli ə ful ɹæntəɾ əɾ ə sɝvənt, ən wɝs, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðə fɛloʊz aɪz, hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪt wəd də ɛni ɡʊd. ən haʊ dɪɾ i noʊ wʌɾ aɪ wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə æsk? ðə sɝvən smaɪld.

The man who called himself Bors ground his teeth, both at the lack of information and at the implication of sameness between himself and the servant, but he followed in silence. Only a fool ranted at a servant, and worse, remembering the fellow's eyes, he was not sure it would do any good. And how did he know what I was going to ask? The servant smiled.

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz dɪd nɑt fil əɾ ɔl kʌmftəɹbəl əntɪl i wɑz bæk ɪn ðə ɹum wɛɹ i hæd weɪɾəd ɑn fɝst ɝaɪvɪŋ, ən ðən nɑt mʌtʃ. ivən faɪndɪŋ ðə silz ɑn ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz əntʌtʃt wɑz smɔl kʌmfɝt.

The man who called himself Bors did not feel at all comfortable until he was back in the room where he had waited on first arriving, and then not much. Even finding the seals on his saddlebags untouched was small comfort.

ðə sɝvən stʊɾ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ, nɑɾ ɛntɝɪŋ. "ju meɪ tʃeɪnʒ tə jəɹ oʊn ɡɑɹməns ɪf jə wɪʃ, maɪ lɔɹd. nʌn wɪl si jə dɪpɑɹt hɪɹ, nɔɹ ɝaɪv ət jəɹ dɛstəneɪʃən, bʌɾ ɪt meɪ bi bɛs tə ɝaɪv ɔlɹɛɾi pɹɑpɝli kloʊðd. sʌmwʌn wɪl kʌm sun tə ʃoʊ jə ðə weɪ."

The servant stood in the hallway, not entering. "You may change to your own garments if you wish, my Lord. None will see you depart here, nor arrive at your destination, but it may be best to arrive already properly clothed. Someone will come soon to show you the way."

əntʌtʃt baɪ ɛni vɪzəbəl hænd, ðə dɔɹ swʌŋ ʃʌt.

Untouched by any visible hand, the door swung shut.

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz ʃɪvɝɾ ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf. heɪstəli hi əndɪd ðə silz ən bʌkəlz ə hɪz sæɾəlbæɡz ən pʊld aʊɾ ɪz juʒəwəl kloʊk. ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz maɪn ə smɔl vɔɪs wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðə pɹɑməs paʊɝ, ivən ði ɪmɔɹtælɪɾi, wɑz wɝθ ənʌðɝ miɾɪŋ laɪk ðɪs, bʌɾ i læft ɪt daʊn ɪmiɾiətli. fəɹ ðət mʌtʃ paʊɝ, aɪ wəd pɹeɪz ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk ʌndɝ ðə doʊm ə tʃɹuθ. ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðə kəmænz ɡɪvən ɪm baɪ bælzəmən, hi fɪŋɡɝd ðə ɡoʊldən, flɛɹɪŋ sʌn wɝkt ɑn ðə bɹɛst ə ðə waɪt kloʊk, ən ðə ɹɛd ʃɛpɝdz kɹʊk bɪhaɪn ðə sʌn, sɪmbəl ə hɪz ɔfəs ɪn ðə wɝld ə mɛn, ən i ɔlmoʊs læft. ðəɹ wɑz wɝk, ɡɹeɪt wɝk, tə bi dʌn ɪn tæɹɑbən, ən ɑn ɑlməθ pleɪn.

The man who called himself Bors shivered in spite of himself. Hastily he undid the seals and buckles of his saddlebags and pulled out his usual cloak. In the back of his mind a small voice wondered if the promised power, even the immortality, was worth another meeting like this, but he laughed it down immediately. For that much power, I would praise the Great Lord of the Dark under the Dome of Truth. Remembering the commands given him by Ba'alzamon, he fingered the golden, flaring sun worked on the breast of the white cloak, and the red shepherd's crook behind the sun, symbol of his office in the world of men, and he almost laughed. There was work, great work, to be done in Tarabon, and on Almoth Plain.


tʃæptɝ wʌn


CHAPTER 1

ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn


The Flame of Tar Valon

ðə wil ə taɪm tɝnz, ən eɪdʒəz kʌm ən pæs livɪŋ mɛmɹiz ðət bɪkʌm lɛdʒənd, ðən feɪd tə mɪθ, ən ɑɹ lɔŋ fɝɡɑt wən ðəɾ eɪdʒ kʌmz əɡɛn. ɪn wʌn eɪdʒ, kɔl ðə θɝɾ eɪdʒ baɪ sʌm, ən eɪdʒ jɛt tə kʌm, ən eɪdʒ lɔŋ pæst, ə wɪn ɹoʊz ɪn ðə maʊntənz ə dum. ðə wɪnd wɑz nɑt ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. ðəɹ ɑɹ niðɝ bɪɡɪnɪŋz nɔɹ ɛndɪŋz tə ðə tɝnɪŋ ə ðə wil ə taɪm. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə bɪɡɪnɪŋ.

The Wheel of Time turns, and Ages come and pass leaving memories that become legend, then fade to myth, and are long forgot when that Age comes again. In one Age, called the Third Age by some, an Age yet to come, an Age long past, a wind rose in the Mountains of Dhoom. The wind was not the beginning. There are neither beginnings nor endings to the turning of the Wheel of Time. But it was a beginning.

bɔɹn əmʌŋ blæk, naɪf-ɛdʒ piks, wɛɹ dɛθ ɹoʊm ðə haɪ pæsəz jɛt hɪd fɹəm θɪŋz stɪl mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs, ðə wɪn blu saʊθ əkɹɔs ðə tæŋɡəl fɔɹəst ə ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt, ə fɔɹəs teɪntɪɾ ən twɪstəd baɪ ðə tʌtʃ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ðə sɪkli swit smɛl ə kɝʌpʃən feɪɾəd baɪ ðə taɪm ðə wɪn kɹɔs ðəɾ ɪnvɪzəbəl laɪn mɛn kɔl ðə bɔɹɾɝ ə ʃaɪnɝ, wɛɹ spɹɪŋ flaʊɝz hʌŋ θɪk ɪn ðə tʃɹiz. ɪt ʃʊɾə bɪn sʌmɝ baɪ naʊ, bʌt spɹɪŋ hæd bɪn leɪɾ ɪn kʌmɪŋ, ən ðə læn hæd ɹʌn waɪl tə kætʃ ʌp. nu-kʌm peɪl ɡɹin bɹɪsəld ɑn ɛvɹi bʊʃ, ən ɹɛd nu ɡɹoʊθ tɪpt ɛvɹi tʃɹi bɹæntʃ. ðə wɪn ɹɪpəl fɑɹmɝz' filz laɪk vɝɾənt pɑnz, sɑləd wɪð kɹɑps ðəɾ ɔlmoʊst sim tə kɹip ʌpwɝd vɪzəbli.

Born among black, knife-edged peaks, where death roamed the high passes yet hid from things still more dangerous, the wind blew south across the tangled forest of the Great Blight, a forest tainted and twisted by the touch of the Dark One. The sickly sweet smell of corruption faded by the time the wind crossed that invisible line men called the border of Shienar, where spring flowers hung thick in the trees. It should have been summer by now, but spring had been late in coming, and the land had run wild to catch up. New-come pale green bristled on every bush, and red new growth tipped every tree branch. The wind rippled farmers' fields like verdant ponds, solid with crops that almost seemed to creep upward visibly.

ðə smɛl ə dɛθ wɑz ɔl bʌt ɡɔn lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə wɪn ɹitʃt ðə stoʊn-wɔl taʊn ə fæl dæɹə ɑn ɪts hɪlz, ən wɪpt ɝaʊn ə taʊɝ ə ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs ɪn ðə vɛɹi sɛntɝ ə ðə taʊn, ə taʊɝ ətɑp wɪtʃ tu mɛn sim tə dæns. hɑɹd-wɔld ən haɪ, fæl dæɹə, boʊθ kip ən taʊn, nɛvɝ teɪkən, nɛvɝ bɪtʃɹeɪd. ðə wɪn moʊn əkɹɔs wʊd-ʃɪŋɡəld ɹuftɑps, ɝaʊn tɔl stoʊn tʃɪmniz ən tɔlɝ taʊɝz, moʊn laɪk ə dɝdʒ.

The smell of death was all but gone long before the wind reached the stone-walled town of Fal Dara on its hills, and whipped around a tower of the fortress in the very center of the town, a tower atop which two men seemed to dance. Hard-walled and high, Fal Dara, both keep and town, never taken, never betrayed. The wind moaned across wood-shingled rooftops, around tall stone chimneys and taller towers, moaned like a dirge.

stʃɹɪp tə ðə weɪst, ɹænd ælθɹ ʃɪvɝɾ ət ðə wɪnz koʊl kɝɛs, ən ɪz fɪŋɡɝz flɛkst ɑn ðə lɔŋ hɪlt ə ðə pɹæktəs sɔɹɾ i hɛld. ðə hɑt sʌn hæd slɪkt ɪz tʃɛst, ən ɪz dɑɹk, ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ klʌŋ tə hɪz hɛɾ ɪn ə swɛt-kɝl mæt. ə feɪn oʊɾɝ ɪn ðə swɝl ʌv ɛɹ meɪɾ ɪz noʊz twɪtʃ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt kənɛk ðə smɛl wɪð ði ɪmədʒ ʌv ən oʊld ɡɹeɪv fɹɛʃ-oʊpən ðət flæʃt θɹu hɪz hɛd. hi wɑz bɛɹli əwɛɹ ʌv oʊɾɝ əɹ ɪmədʒ əɾ ɔl; hi stʃɹoʊv tə kip ɪz maɪn ɛmpti, bʌt ði ʌðɝ mæn ʃɛɹɪŋ ðə taʊɝ tɑp wɪð ɪm kɛpt ɪntʃɹuɾɪŋ ɑn ði ɛmptinəs. tɛn peɪsɪz əkɹɔs, ðə taʊɝ tɑp wɑz, ɪnsɝkəl baɪ ə tʃɛst-haɪ, kɹɛnɛleɪɾɪd wɔl. bɪɡ ɪnʌf ən mɔɹ nɑt tə fil kɹaʊɾəd, ɪksɛpt wən ʃɛɹd wɪð ə wɔɹɾɝ.

Stripped to the waist, Rand al'Thor shivered at the wind's cold caress, and his fingers flexed on the long hilt of the practice sword he held. The hot sun had slicked his chest, and his dark, reddish hair clung to his head in a sweat-curled mat. A faint odor in the swirl of air made his nose twitch, but he did not connect the smell with the image of an old grave fresh-opened that flashed through his head. He was barely aware of odor or image at all; he strove to keep his mind empty, but the other man sharing the tower top with him kept intruding on the emptiness. Ten paces across, the tower top was, encircled by a chest-high, crenellated wall. Big enough and more not to feel crowded, except when shared with a Warder.

jʌŋ əz i wɑz, ɹænd wɑz tɔlɝ ðən moʊs mɛn, bʌt læn stʊd dʒʌst əz tɔl ən mɔɹ hɛvəli mʌsəld, ɪf nɑt kwaɪt soʊ bɹɔɾ ɪn ðə ʃoʊldɝz. ə nɛɹoʊ bæn ə bɹeɪɾɪd lɛðɝ hɛl ðə wɔɹɾɝz lɔŋ hɛɹ bæk fɹəm ɪz feɪs, ə feɪs ðət simd meɪd fɹəm stoʊni pleɪnz ən æŋɡəlz, ə feɪs ənlaɪn əz ɪf tə bɪlaɪ ðə tɪnʒ ʌv ɡɹeɪ əɾ ɪz tɛmpəlz. dɪspaɪt ðə hiɾ ən ɪɡzɝʃən, oʊnli ə laɪt koʊɾ ə swɛt ɡlɪsən ɑn ɪz tʃɛst ən ɑɹmz. ɹænd sɝtʃt lænz aɪsi blu aɪz, hʌntɪŋ fəɹ səm hɪn ʌv wʌt ði ʌðɝ mæn ɪntɛndəd. ðə wɔɹɾɝ nɛvɝ sim tə blɪŋk, ən ðə pɹæktəs sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪz hænz muvd ʃʊɹli ən smuðli əz i floʊd fɹəm wʌn stæns tə ənʌðɝ.

Young as he was, Rand was taller than most men, but Lan stood just as tall and more heavily muscled, if not quite so broad in the shoulders. A narrow band of braided leather held the Warder's long hair back from his face, a face that seemed made from stony planes and angles, a face unlined as if to belie the tinge of gray at his temples. Despite the heat and exertion, only a light coat of sweat glistened on his chest and arms. Rand searched Lan's icy blue eyes, hunting for some hint of what the other man intended. The Warder never seemed to blink, and the practice sword in his hands moved surely and smoothly as he flowed from one stance to another.

wɪð ə bʌndəl ə θɪn, lusli baʊn steɪvz ɪn pleɪs ʌv ə bleɪd, ðə pɹæktəs sɔɹd wəd meɪk ə laʊd klæk wən ɪt stʃɹʌk ɛniθɪŋ, ən liv ə wɛlt wɛɹ ɪt hɪt flɛʃ. ɹænd nu ɔl tu wɛl. θɹi θɪn ɹɛd laɪnz stʌŋ ɑn ɪz ɹɪbz, ən ənʌðɝ bɝn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ɪt hæd teɪkən ɔl ɪz ɛfɝts nɑt tə wɛɹ mɔɹ dɛkɝeɪʃənz. læn bɔɹ nɑɾ ə mɑɹk.

With a bundle of thin, loosely bound staves in place of a blade, the practice sword would make a loud clack when it struck anything, and leave a welt where it hit flesh. Rand knew all too well. Three thin red lines stung on his ribs, and another burned his shoulder. It had taken all his efforts not to wear more decorations. Lan bore not a mark.

əz i hæd bɪn tɔt, ɹænd fɔɹmd ə sɪŋɡəl fleɪm ɪn ɪz maɪn ən kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn ɪt, tʃɹaɪd tə fiɾ ɔl ɪmoʊʃən ən pæʃən ɪndə ɪt, tə fɔɹm ə vɔɪd wɪðɪn hɪmsɛlf, wɪð ivən θɔɾ aʊtsaɪd. ɛmptinəs keɪm. əz wɑz tu ɔfən ðə keɪs ə leɪɾ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə pɝfəkt ɛmptinəs; ðə fleɪm stɪl ɹɪmeɪnd, əɹ səm sɛns ə laɪt sɛndɪŋ ɹɪpəlz θɹu ðə stɪlnəs. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf, bɛɹli. ðə kul pis ə ðə vɔɪd kɹɛpt oʊvɝ hɪm, ən i wɑz wʌn wɪð ðə pɹæktəs sɔɹd, wɪð ðə smuð stoʊnz ʌndɝ ɪz buts, ivən wɪð læn. ɔl wɑz wʌn, ən i muvd wɪθaʊt θɔɾ ɪn ə ɹɪðəm ðət mætʃt ðə wɔɹɾɝz stɛp fəɹ stɛp ən muv fəɹ muv.

As he had been taught, Rand formed a single flame in his mind and concentrated on it, tried to feed all emotion and passion into it, to form a void within himself, with even thought outside. Emptiness came. As was too often the case of late it was not a perfect emptiness; the flame still remained, or some sense of light sending ripples through the stillness. But it was enough, barely. The cool peace of the void crept over him, and he was one with the practice sword, with the smooth stones under his boots, even with Lan. All was one, and he moved without thought in a rhythm that matched the Warder's step for step and move for move.

ðə wɪn ɹoʊz əɡɛn, bɹɪŋɪŋ ðə ɹɪŋɪŋ ə bɛlz fɹəm ðə taʊn. sʌmbɑɾiz stɪl sɛləbɹeɪɾɪŋ ðət spɹɪŋ əz faɪnəli kʌm. ði ɛkstʃɹeɪniəs θɔt flʌɾɝd θɹu ðə vɔɪɾ ɑn weɪvz ə laɪt, dɪstɝbɪŋ ði ɛmptinəs, ən əz ɪf ðə wɔɹɾɝ kəd ɹid ɹændz maɪnd, ðə pɹæktəs sɔɹd wɝld ɪn lænz hænz.

The wind rose again, bringing the ringing of bells from the town. Somebody's still celebrating that spring has finally come. The extraneous thought fluttered through the void on waves of light, disturbing the emptiness, and as if the Warder could read Rand's mind, the practice sword whirled in Lan's hands.

fəɹ ə lɔŋ mɪnut ðə swɪf klæk-klæk-klæk ə bʌndəld leɪðz miɾɪŋ fɪl ðə taʊɝ tɑp. ɹænd meɪd noʊ ɛfɝt tə ɹitʃ ði ʌðɝ mæn; ɪt wɑz ɔl i kəd də tə kip ðə wɔɹɾɝz stʃɹaɪks fɹəm ɹitʃɪŋ hɪm. tɝnɪŋ lænz bloʊz ət ðə læs pɑsəbəl moʊmənt, hi wɑz fɔɹs bæk. lænz ɪkspɹɛʃən nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒd; ðə pɹæktəs sɔɹd simd əlaɪv ɪn ɪz hænz. əbɹʌpli ðə wɔɹɾɝz swɪŋɪŋ slæʃ tʃeɪnʒd ɪn mɪd-moʊʃən tə ə θɹʌst. kɑt baɪ sɝpɹaɪz, ɹænd stɛp bæk, ɔlɹɛɾi wɪnsɪŋ wɪð ðə bloʊ hi nu hi kəd nɑt stɑp ðɪs taɪm.

For a long minute the swift clack-clack-clack of bundled lathes meeting filled the tower top. Rand made no effort to reach the other man; it was all he could do to keep the Warder's strikes from reaching him. Turning Lan's blows at the last possible moment, he was forced back. Lan's expression never changed; the practice sword seemed alive in his hands. Abruptly the Warder's swinging slash changed in mid-motion to a thrust. Caught by surprise, Rand stepped back, already wincing with the blow he knew he could not stop this time.

ðə wɪn haʊld əkɹɔs ðə taʊɝ . . . ən tʃɹæp hɪm. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ði ɛɹ hæd sʌɾənli dʒɛld, hoʊldɪŋ ɪm ɪn ə kəkun. pʊʃɪŋ ɪm fɔɹwɝd. taɪm ən moʊʃən sloʊd; hɔɹəfaɪd, hi wɑtʃt lænz pɹæktəs sɔɹd dʒɹɪf təwɔɹɾ ɪz tʃɛst. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ sloʊ əɹ sɑft əbaʊt ði ɪmpækt. hɪz ɹɪbz kɹikt əz ɪf i hæd bɪn stʃɹʌk wɪð ə hæmɝ. hi ɡɹʌntɪd, bʌt ðə wɪnd wəd nɑɾ əlaʊ hɪm tə ɡɪv weɪ; ɪt stɪl kæɹiɾ ɪm fɔɹwɝd, ɪnstɛd. ðə leɪðz ə lænz pɹæktəs sɔɹd flɛkst ən bɛnt - ɛvɝ soʊ sloʊli, ɪt sim tə ɹænd - ðən ʃæɾɝd, ʃɑɹp pɔɪns uzɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ɪz hɑɹt, dʒæɡd leɪðz pɪɹsɪŋ ɪz skɪn. peɪn læns θɹu hɪz bɑɾi; hɪz hoʊl skɪn fɛl slæʃt. hi bɝn əz ðoʊ ðə sʌn hæd flɛɹd tə kɹɪsp ɪm laɪk beɪkən ɪn ə pæn.

The wind howled across the tower . . . and trapped him. It was as if the air had suddenly jelled, holding him in a cocoon. Pushing him forward. Time and motion slowed; horrified, he watched Lan's practice sword drift toward his chest. There was nothing slow or soft about the impact. His ribs creaked as if he had been struck with a hammer. He grunted, but the wind would not allow him to give way; it still carried him forward, instead. The lathes of Lan's practice sword flexed and bent - ever so slowly, it seemed to Rand - then shattered, sharp points oozing toward his heart, jagged lathes piercing his skin. Pain lanced through his body; his whole skin felt slashed. He burned as though the sun had flared to crisp him like bacon in a pan.

wɪð ə ʃaʊt, hi θɹu hɪmsɛlf stʌmbəlɪŋ bæk, fɔlɪŋ əɡɛns ðə stoʊn wɔl. hæn tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ, hi tʌtʃt ðə ɡæʃəz ɑn ɪz tʃɛst ən ɹeɪz blʌɾi fɪŋɡɝz bɪfɔɹ ɪz ɡɹeɪ aɪz ɪn dɪsbɪlif.

With a shout, he threw himself stumbling back, falling against the stone wall. Hand trembling, he touched the gashes on his chest and raised bloody fingers before his gray eyes in disbelief.

"ænd wʌt wɑz ðət ful muv, ʃifɝɾɝ?" læn ɡɹeɪɾɪd. "ju noʊ bɛɾɝ baɪ naʊ, əɹ ʃəɾ ənlɛs juv fɝɡɑɾən ɛvɹiθɪŋ aɪv tʃɹaɪd tə titʃ ju. haʊ bædli ɑɹ jə - ?" hi kʌɾ ɔf əz ɹænd lʊkt ʌp ət hɪm.

"And what was that fool move, sheepherder?" Lan grated. "You know better by now, or should unless you have forgotten everything I've tried to teach you. How badly are you - ?" He cut off as Rand looked up at him.

"ðə wɪnd." ɹændz maʊθ wɑz dʒɹaɪ. "ɪt - ɪt pʊʃt mi! ɪt. . . . ɪt wɑz sɑləɾ əz ə wɔl!"

"The wind." Rand's mouth was dry. "It - it pushed me! It. . . . It was solid as a wall!"

ðə wɔɹɾɝ stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm ɪn saɪləns, ðən ɔfɝɾ ə hænd. ɹænd tʊk ɪɾ ən lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi pʊl tə hɪz fit.

The Warder stared at him in silence, then offered a hand. Rand took it and let himself be pulled to his feet.

"stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz kən hæpən ðɪs kloʊs tə ðə blaɪt," læn sɛd faɪnəli, bʌt fəɹ ɔl ðə flætnəs ə ðə wɝdz i saʊndəd tʃɹʌbəld. ðəɾ ɪn ɪtsɛlf wɑz stʃɹeɪnʒ. wɔɹɾɝz, ðoʊz hæf-lɛdʒəndɛɹi wɔɹiɝz u sɝv ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, sɛldəm ʃoʊɾ ɪmoʊʃən, ən læn ʃoʊd lɪɾəl ivən fəɹ ə wɔɹɾɝ. hi tɔs ðə ʃæɾɝd leɪð sɔɹɾ əsaɪɾ ən lin əɡɛns ðə wɔl wɛɹ ðɛɹ ɹil sɔɹdz leɪ, aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ ʌv ðɛɹ pɹæktəs.

"Strange things can happen this close to the Blight," Lan said finally, but for all the flatness of the words he sounded troubled. That in itself was strange. Warders, those half-legendary warriors who served the Aes Sedai, seldom showed emotion, and Lan showed little even for a Warder. He tossed the shattered lathe sword aside and leaned against the wall where their real swords lay, out of the way of their practice.

"nɑt laɪk ðæt," ɹænd pɹətɛstəd. hi dʒɔɪn ði ʌðɝ mæn, skwɑɾɪŋ wɪð ɪz bæk əɡɛns ðə stoʊn. ðət weɪ ðə tɑp ə ðə wɔl wɑz haɪɝ ðən ɪz hɛd, pɹətɛkʃən ʌv ə kaɪn fɹəm ðə wɪnd. ɪf ɪt wɑz ə wɪnd. noʊ wɪn hæɾ ɛvɝ fɛlt . . . sɑləd . . . laɪk ðæt. "pis! meɪbi nɑɾ ivən ɪn ðə blaɪt."

"Not like that," Rand protested. He joined the other man, squatting with his back against the stone. That way the top of the wall was higher than his head, protection of a kind from the wind. If it was a wind. No wind had ever felt . . . solid . . . like that. "Peace! Maybe not even in the Blight."

"fɔɹ sʌmwʌn laɪk ju. . . ." læn ʃɹʌɡd əz ɪf ðəɾ ɪkspleɪn ɛvɹiθɪŋ. "haʊ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ jə liv, ʃifɝɾɝ? ə mʌnθ sɪns jə sɛd jə wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ, ən aɪ θɔt jud bi tu wiks ɡɔn baɪ naʊ."

"For someone like you. . . ." Lan shrugged as if that explained everything. "How long before you leave, sheepherder? A month since you said you were going, and I thought you'd be two weeks gone by now."

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ʌp əɾ ɪm ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. hiz æktɪŋ laɪk nʌθɪŋ hæpənd! fɹaʊnɪŋ, hi sɛt daʊn ðə pɹæktəs sɔɹɾ ən lɪftəɾ ɪz ɹil sɔɹd tə hɪz niz, fɪŋɡɝz ɹʌnɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə lɔŋ, lɛðɝ-ɹæp hɪlt ɪnsɛt wɪð ə bɹɑnz hɛɹən. ənʌðɝ bɹɑnz hɛɹən stʊɾ ɑn ðə skæbɝd, ən jɛɾ ənʌðɝ wɑz skɹaɪbd ɑn ðə ʃið bleɪd. ɪt wɑz stɪl ə lɪɾəl stʃɹeɪnʒ tə hɪm ðəɾ i hæɾ ə sɔɹd. ɛni sɔɹd, mʌtʃ lɛs wʌn wɪð ə bleɪdmæstɝz mɑɹk. hi wɑz ə fɑɹmɝ fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, soʊ fɑɹ əweɪ, naʊ. meɪbi fɑɹ əweɪ fɝɛvɝ, naʊ. hi wɑz ə ʃɛpɝd laɪk ɪz fɑðɝ - aɪ wɑz ə ʃɛpɝd. wʌɾ æm aɪ naʊ? - ən ɪz fɑðɝ hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk sɔɹd. tæm ɪz maɪ fɑðɝ, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ ɛnibəɾi sɛz. hi wɪʃt ɪz oʊn θɔts dɪd nɑt saʊn əz ɪf i wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənvɪns hɪmsɛlf.

Rand stared up at him in surprise. He's acting like nothing happened! Frowning, he set down the practice sword and lifted his real sword to his knees, fingers running along the long, leather-wrapped hilt inset with a bronze heron. Another bronze heron stood on the scabbard, and yet another was scribed on the sheathed blade. It was still a little strange to him that he had a sword. Any sword, much less one with a blademaster's mark. He was a farmer from the Two Rivers, so far away, now. Maybe far away forever, now. He was a shepherd like his father - I was a shepherd. What am I now? - and his father had given him a heron-marked sword. Tam is my father, no matter what anybody says. He wished his own thoughts did not sound as if he was trying to convince himself.

əɡɛn læn sim tə ɹiɾ ɪz maɪnd. "ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, ʃifɝɾɝ, ɪf ə mæn əz ðə ɹeɪzɪŋ ʌv ə tʃaɪld, ðət tʃaɪld ɪz hɪz, ən nʌn kən seɪ dɪfɹənt."

Again Lan seemed to read his mind. "In the Borderlands, sheepherder, if a man has the raising of a child, that child is his, and none can say different."

skaʊlɪŋ, ɹænd ɪɡnɔɹd ðə wɔɹɾɝz wɝdz. ɪt wɑz noʊ wʌnz bɪznəs bʌɾ ɪz oʊn. "aɪ wɑnə lɝn haʊ tə juz ðɪs. aɪ nid tə." ɪt hæd kɑzd ɪm pɹɑbləmz, kæɹiɪŋ ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk sɔɹd. nɑɾ ɛvɹibɑɾi nu wʌɾ ɪt mɛnt, əɹ ivən noʊɾəst ɪt, bʌɾ ivən soʊ ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd, ɪspɛʃli ɪn ðə hænz ʌv ə juθ bɛɹli oʊld ɪnʌf tə bi kɔld ə mæn, stɪl ətʃɹæktəd ðə ɹɔŋ sɔɹɾ ʌv ətɛnʃən. "aɪv bɪn eɪbəl tə blʌf səmtaɪmz, wən aɪ kəd nɑt ɹʌn, ən aɪv bɪn lʌki, bɪsaɪdz. bʌt wʌt hæpənz wən aɪ kæn ɹʌn, ən aɪ kæn blʌf, ən maɪ lʌk ɹʌnz aʊt?"

Scowling, Rand ignored the Warder's words. It was no one's business but his own. "I want to learn how to use this. I need to." It had caused him problems, carrying a heron-marked sword. Not everybody knew what it meant, or even noticed it, but even so a heron-mark blade, especially in the hands of a youth barely old enough to be called a man, still attracted the wrong sort of attention. "I've been able to bluff sometimes, when I could not run, and I've been lucky, besides. But what happens when I can't run, and I can't bluff, and my luck runs out?"

"ju kəd sɛl ɪt," læn sɛd kɛɹfəli. "ðæt bleɪɾ ɪz ɹɛɹ ivən əmʌŋ hɛɹən-mɑɹk sɔɹdz. ɪt wəd fɛtʃ ə pɹɪɾi pɹaɪs."

"You could sell it," Lan said carefully. "That blade is rare even among heron-mark swords. It would fetch a pretty price."

"noʊ!" ɪt wɑz ən aɪdiə hi hæd θɔɾ ə mɔɹ ðən wʌns, bʌɾ i ɹɪdʒɛktɪɾ ɪt naʊ fəɹ ðə seɪm ɹizən i ɔlweɪz hæd, ən mɔɹ fɪɹsli fəɹ kʌmɪŋ fɹəm sʌmwʌn ɛls. əz lɔŋ əz aɪ kip ɪt, aɪ hæv ðə ɹaɪt tə kɔl tæm fɑðɝ. hi ɡeɪv ɪt tə mi, ən ɪt ɡɪvz mi ðə ɹaɪt. "aɪ θɔɾ ɛni hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd wɑz ɹɛɹ."

"No!" It was an idea he had thought of more than once, but he rejected it now for the same reason he always had, and more fiercely for coming from someone else. As long as I keep it, I have the right to call Tam father. He gave it to me, and it gives me the right. "I thought any heron-mark blade was rare."

læn ɡeɪv ɪm ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊk. "tæm dɪdn tɛl ju, ðɛn? hi mʌs noʊ. pɝhæps i dɪdn bɪliv. mɛni də nɑt." hi snætʃt ʌp ɪz oʊn sɔɹd, ɔlmoʊs ðə twɪn ə ɹændz ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə læk ə hɛɹənz, ən wɪpt ɔf ðə skæbɝd. ðə bleɪd, slaɪtli kɝvd ən sɪŋɡəl-ɛdʒd, ɡlɪɾɝd sɪlvɝi ɪn ðə sʌnlaɪt.

Lan gave him a sidelong look. "Tam didn't tell you, then? He must know. Perhaps he didn't believe. Many do not." He snatched up his own sword, almost the twin of Rand's except for the lack of herons, and whipped off the scabbard. The blade, slightly curved and single-edged, glittered silvery in the sunlight.

ɪt wɑz ðə sɔɹɾ ə ðə kɪŋz ə mɔlkiɝ. læn dɪd nɑt spik ʌv ɪt - hi dɪd nɑɾ ivən laɪk ʌðɝz tə spik ʌv ɪt - bʌɾ ælən mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən wɑz lɔɹɾ ə ðə sɛvən taʊɝz, lɔɹɾ ə ðə leɪks, ən ʌnkɹoʊn kɪŋ ə mɔlkiɝ. ðə sɛvən taʊɝz wɝ bɹoʊkən naʊ, ən ðə θaʊzən leɪks ðə lɛɹ ʌv ənklin θɪŋz. mɔlkiɝ leɪ swɑloʊd baɪ ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt, ən ʌv ɔl ðə mɔlkɪɹi lɔɹdz, oʊnli wʌn stɪl lɪvd.

It was the sword of the kings of Malkier. Lan did not speak of it - he did not even like others to speak of it - but al'Lan Mandragoran was Lord of the Seven Towers, Lord of the Lakes, and uncrowned King of Malkier. The Seven Towers were broken now, and the Thousand Lakes the lair of unclean things. Malkier lay swallowed by the Great Blight, and of all the Malkieri lords, only one still lived.

səm sɛd læn hæd bɪkʌm ə wɔɹɾɝ, bɑndɪŋ hɪmsɛlf tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, soʊ hi kəd sik dɛθ ɪn ðə blaɪɾ ən dʒɔɪn ðə ɹɛst ə hɪz blʌd. ɹænd hæɾ ɪndid sin læn pʊt hɪmsɛlf ɪn hɑɹmz weɪ simɪŋli wɪθaʊt ɹəɡɑɹd fəɹ ɪz oʊn seɪfti, bʌt fɑɹ bɪɑn ɪz oʊn laɪf ən seɪfti hi hɛl ðoʊz ə mɔɪɹeɪn, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hɛld ɪz bɑnd. ɹænd dɪd nɑt θɪŋk læn wəd tʃɹuli sik dɛθ waɪl mɔɪɹeɪn lɪvd.

Some said Lan had become a Warder, bonding himself to an Aes Sedai, so he could seek death in the Blight and join the rest of his blood. Rand had indeed seen Lan put himself in harm's way seemingly without regard for his own safety, but far beyond his own life and safety he held those of Moiraine, the Aes Sedai who held his bond. Rand did not think Lan would truly seek death while Moiraine lived.

tɝnɪŋ ɪz bleɪɾ ɪn ðə laɪt, læn spoʊk. "ɪn ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ, ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪtsɛlf wɑz juzd əz ə wɛpən, ən wɛpənz wɝ meɪd wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ. səm wɛpənz juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ, θɪŋz ðət kəd dɪstʃɹɔɪ ən ɪntaɪɝ sɪɾi ət wʌn bloʊ, leɪ weɪs tə ðə læn fəɹ liɡz. dʒʌst əz wɛl ðoʊz wɝ ɔl lɔst ɪn ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ; dʒʌst əz wɛl noʊ wʌn ɹɪmɛmbɝz ðə meɪkɪŋ ə ðɛm. bʌt ðəɹ wɝ sɪmpəlɝ wɛpənz, tu, fəɹ ðoʊz u wəd feɪs mɹdʒɹɑl, ən wɝs θɪŋz ðə dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz meɪd, bleɪd tə bleɪd.

Turning his blade in the light, Lan spoke. "In the War of the Shadow, the One Power itself was used as a weapon, and weapons were made with the One Power. Some weapons used the One Power, things that could destroy an entire city at one blow, lay waste to the land for leagues. Just as well those were all lost in the Breaking; just as well no one remembers the making of them. But there were simpler weapons, too, for those who would face Myrddraal, and worse things the Dreadlords made, blade to blade.

"wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ɛɛs sədaɪ dʒɹu aɪɝn ən ʌðɝ mɛɾəlz fɹəm ði ɝθ, smɛltəd ðɛm, fɔɹmd ən ɹɔt ðɛm. ɔl wɪð ðə paʊɝ. sɔɹdz, ən ʌðɝ wɛpənz, tu. mɛni ðət sɝvaɪv ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld wɝ dɪstʃɹɔɪd baɪ mɛn u fɪɹɾ ən heɪɾəd ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝk, ən ʌðɝz əv vænɪʃt wɪð ðə jɪɹz. fju ɹɪmeɪn, ən fju mɛn tʃɹuli noʊ wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ. ðəɹ əv bɪn lɛdʒənz ə ðɛm, swoʊlən teɪlz ə sɔɹdz ðət sim tə hæv ə paʊɝ ə ðɛɹ oʊn. juv hɝd ðə ɡlimənz teɪlz. ðə ɹiæləɾi ɪz ɪnʌf. bleɪdz ðət wɪl nɑt ʃæɾɝ əɹ bɹeɪk, ən nɛvɝ luz ðɛɹ ɛdʒ. aɪv sin mɛn ʃɑɹpənɪŋ əm - pleɪɪŋ ət ʃɑɹpənɪŋ, əz ɪt wɝ - bʌɾ oʊnli kəz ðeɪ kəd nɑt bɪliv ə sɔɹd dɪd nɑt niɾ ɪɾ æftɝ juz. ɔl ðeɪ ɛvɝ dɪd wɑz wɛɹ əweɪ ðɛɹ ɔɪlstoʊnz.

"With the One Power, Aes Sedai drew iron and other metals from the earth, smelted them, formed and wrought them. All with the Power. Swords, and other weapons, too. Many that survived the Breaking of the World were destroyed by men who feared and hated Aes Sedai work, and others have vanished with the years. Few remain, and few men truly know what they are. There have been legends of them, swollen tales of swords that seemed to have a power of their own. You've heard the gleemen's tales. The reality is enough. Blades that will not shatter or break, and never lose their edge. I've seen men sharpening them - playing at sharpening, as it were - but only because they could not believe a sword did not need it after use. All they ever did was wear away their oilstones.

"ðoʊz wɛpənz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪd, ən ðəɹ wɪl nɛvɝ bi ʌðɝz. wən ɪt wɑz dʌn, wɔɹ ən eɪdʒ ɛndəd təɡɛðɝ, wɪð ðə wɝld ʃæɾɝd, wɪð mɔɹ dɛɾ ənbɹaɪd ðən ðəɹ wɝ əlaɪv ən ðoʊz əlaɪv fliɪŋ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn səm pleɪs, ɛni pleɪs, ʌv seɪfti, wɪð ɛvɹi sɛkənd wʊmən wipɪŋ kəz ʃid nɛvɝ si hʌzbən əɹ sʌnz əɡɛn; wən ɪt wɑz dʌn, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hu stɪl lɪv swɔɹ ðeɪ wəd nɛvɝ əɡɛn meɪk ə wɛpən fəɹ wʌn mæn tə kɪl ənʌðɝ. ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ swɔɹ ɪt, ən ɛvɹi wʊmən ə ðɛm sɪns əz kɛp ðəɾ oʊθ. ivən ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ, ən ðeɪ kɛɹ lɪɾəl wʌt hæpənz tə ɛni meɪl.

"Those weapons the Aes Sedai made, and there will never be others. When it was done, war and Age ended together, with the world shattered, with more dead unburied than there were alive and those alive fleeing, trying to find some place, any place, of safety, with every second woman weeping because she'd never see husband or sons again; when it was done, the Aes Sedai who still lived swore they would never again make a weapon for one man to kill another. Every Aes Sedai swore it, and every woman of them since has kept that oath. Even the Red Ajah, and they care little what happens to any male.

"wʌn ə ðoʊz sɔɹdz, ə pleɪn soʊlʒɝz sɔɹd" - wɪð ə feɪnt ɡɹɪmɑs, ɔlmoʊst sæd, ɪf ðə wɔɹɾɝ kəd bi sɛd tə ʃoʊ ɪmoʊʃən, hi slɪd ðə bleɪd bæk ɪndə ɪts ʃiθ - "bɪkeɪm sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, ðoʊz meɪd fəɹ lɔɹd-dʒɛnɝəlz, wɪð bleɪdz soʊ hɑɹd noʊ bleɪdɛsmɪθ kəd mɑɹk ðɛm, jɛt mɑɹkt ɔlɹɛɾi wɪð ə hɛɹən, ðoʊz bleɪdz bɪkeɪm sɔɾ æftɝ."

"One of those swords, a plain soldier's sword" - with a faint grimace, almost sad, if the Warder could be said to show emotion, he slid the blade back into its sheath - "became something more. On the other hand, those made for lord-generals, with blades so hard no bladesmith could mark them, yet marked already with a heron, those blades became sought after."

ɹændz hænz dʒɝkt əweɪ fɹəm ðə sɔɹd pɹɑpt ɑn ɪz niz. ɪt tɑpəld, ən ɪnstɪŋktɪvli hi ɡɹæbd ɪt bɪfɔɹ ɪt hɪt ðə flɔɹstoʊnz. "ju min ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪd ðɪs? aɪ θɔt jə wɝ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt jəɹ sɔɹd."

Rand's hands jerked away from the sword propped on his knees. It toppled, and instinctively he grabbed it before it hit the floorstones. "You mean Aes Sedai made this? I thought you were talking about your sword."

"nɑɾ ɔl hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪdz ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝk. fju mɛn hændəl ə sɔɹd wɪð ðə skɪl tə bi neɪm bleɪdmæstɝ ən bi əwɔɹɾəd ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd, bʌɾ ivən soʊ, nɑɾ ɪnʌf ɛɛs sədaɪ bleɪdz ɹɪmeɪn fəɹ mɔɹ ðən ə hændfʊl tə hæv wʌn. moʊs kʌm fɹəm mæstɝ bleɪdɛsmɪθs; ðə faɪnəst stil mɛn kən meɪk, jɛt stɪl ɹɔt baɪ ə mænz hænz. bʌt ðət wʌn, ʃifɝɾɝ . . . ðət wʌn kəd tɛl ə teɪl ə θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz ən mɔɹ."

"Not all heron-mark blades are Aes Sedai work. Few men handle a sword with the skill to be named blademaster and be awarded a heron-mark blade, but even so, not enough Aes Sedai blades remain for more than a handful to have one. Most come from master bladesmiths; the finest steel men can make, yet still wrought by a man's hands. But that one, sheepherder . . . that one could tell a tale of three thousand years and more."

"aɪ kænt ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðɛm," ɹænd sɛd, "kæn aɪ?" hi bæləns ðə sɔɹɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm ɑn skæbɝd pɔɪnt; ɪt lʊk noʊ dɪfɹən ðən ɪt hæd bɪfɔɹ i nu. "ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝk." bʌt tæm ɡeɪv ɪt tə mi. maɪ fɑðɝ ɡeɪv ɪt tə mi. hi ɹəfjuz tə θɪŋk ə haʊ ə tu ɹɪvɝz ʃɛpɝd hæd kʌm baɪ ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd. ðəɹ wɝ deɪnʒɝəs kɝəns ɪn sətʃ θɔts, dips i dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɪksplɔɹ.

"I can't get away from them," Rand said, "can I?" He balanced the sword in front of him on scabbard point; it looked no different than it had before he knew. "Aes Sedai work." But Tam gave it to me. My father gave it to me. He refused to think of how a Two Rivers shepherd had come by a heron-mark blade. There were dangerous currents in such thoughts, deeps he did not want to explore.

"du jə ɹɪli wɑnə ɡɛɾ əweɪ, ʃifɝɾɝ? əl æsk əɡɛn. waɪ ɑɹ jə nɑt ɡɔn, ðɛn? ðə sɔɹd? ɪn faɪv jɪɹz aɪ kəd meɪk jə wɝði ʌv ɪt, meɪk jə ə bleɪdmæstɝ. juv kwɪk ɹɪsts, ɡʊd bæləns, ən jə doʊn meɪk ðə seɪm mɪsteɪk twaɪs. bʌɾ aɪ də nɑɾ əv faɪv jɪɹz tə ɡɪv oʊvɝ tə titʃɪŋ ju, ən jə də nɑɾ əv faɪv jɪɹz fəɹ lɝnɪŋ. juv nɑɾ ivən wʌn jɪɹ, ən jə noʊ ɪt. əz ɪɾ ɪz, jəl nɑt stæb jɝsɛlf ɪn ðə fʊt. jə hoʊl jɝsɛlf əz ɪf ðə sɔɹd bɪlɔŋz ət jəɹ weɪst, ʃifɝɾɝ, ən moʊs vɪlədʒ bʊliz wɪl sɛns ɪt. bʌt juv hæd ðət mʌtʃ ɔlmoʊst sɪns ðə deɪ jə pʊɾ ɪɾ ɑn. soʊ waɪ ɑɹ jə stɪl hɪɹ?"

"Do you really want to get away, sheepherder? I'll ask again. Why are you not gone, then? The sword? In five years I could make you worthy of it, make you a blademaster. You have quick wrists, good balance, and you don't make the same mistake twice. But I do not have five years to give over to teaching you, and you do not have five years for learning. You have not even one year, and you know it. As it is, you will not stab yourself in the foot. You hold yourself as if the sword belongs at your waist, sheepherder, and most village bullies will sense it. But you've had that much almost since the day you put it on. So why are you still here?"

"mæɾ ən pɛɹɪn ɑɹ stɪl hɪɹ," ɹænd mʌmbəld. "aɪ doʊnt wɑnə liv bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ du. aɪ woʊn ɛvɝ - aɪ maɪt nɑt si ðɛm əɡɛn fəɹ - fəɹ jɪɹz, meɪbi." hɪz hɛd dʒɹɑp bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl. "blʌɾ ən æʃəz! ət lis ðeɪ dʒʌs θɪŋk aɪm kɹeɪzi nɑt tə ɡoʊ hoʊm wɪð ðɛm. hæf ðə taɪm nɪneɪiv lʊks ət mi laɪk aɪm sɪks jɪɹz oʊld ən aɪv skɪn maɪ ni, ən ʃiz gɑnə meɪk ɪt bɛɾɝ; ði ʌðɝ hæf ʃi lʊks laɪk ʃiz siɪŋ ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ. wʌn ʃi maɪɾ əfɛn ɪf ʃi lʊks tu kloʊsli, ət ðæt. ʃiz ə wɪzdəm, ən bɪsaɪdz ðæt, aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ʃiz ɛvɝ bɪn əfɹeɪɾ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ, bʌt ʃi. . . ." hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "æn ɛɡwin. bɝn mi! ʃi noʊz waɪ aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ, bʌɾ ɛvɹi taɪm aɪ mɛnʃən ɪt ʃi lʊks ət mi, ən aɪ nɑɾ ʌp ɪnsaɪɾ ænd. . . ." hi kloʊzd ɪz aɪz, pɹɛsɪŋ ðə sɔɹd hɪlt əɡɛnst ɪz fɔɹhɛɾ əz ɪf i kəd pɹɛs wʌɾ i wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ɛɡzɪstəns. "aɪ wɪʃ. . . . aɪ wɪʃ. . . ."

"Mat and Perrin are still here," Rand mumbled. "I don't want to leave before they do. I won't ever - I might not see them again for - for years, maybe." His head dropped back against the wall. "Blood and ashes! At least they just think I'm crazy not to go home with them. Half the time Nynaeve looks at me like I'm six years old and I've skinned my knee, and she's going to make it better; the other half she looks like she's seeing a stranger. One she might offend if she looks too closely, at that. She's a Wisdom, and besides that, I don't think she's ever been afraid of anything, but she. . . ." He shook his head. "And Egwene. Burn me! She knows why I have to go, but every time I mention it she looks at me, and I knot up inside and. . . ." He closed his eyes, pressing the sword hilt against his forehead as if he could press what he was thinking out of existence. "I wish. . . . I wish. . . ."

"ju wɪʃ ɛvɹiθɪŋ kəd bi ðə weɪ ɪt wɑz, ʃifɝɾɝ? əɹ jə wɪʃ ðə ɡɝl wəd ɡoʊ wɪð jə ɪnstɛɾ ə tə tɑɹ vəlɑn? jə θɪŋk ʃɪl ɡɪv ʌp bɪkʌmɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ ə laɪf ʌv wɑndɝɪŋ? wɪð ju? ɪf jə pʊɾ ɪt tə hɝ ɪn ðə ɹaɪt weɪ, ʃi maɪt. lʌv ɪz ən ɑd θɪŋ." læn saʊndəd sʌɾənli wɪɹi. "æz ɑɾ ə θɪŋ əz ðəɹ ɪz."

"You wish everything could be the way it was, sheepherder? Or you wish the girl would go with you instead of to Tar Valon? You think she'll give up becoming an Aes Sedai for a life of wandering? With you? If you put it to her in the right way, she might. Love is an odd thing." Lan sounded suddenly weary. "As odd a thing as there is."

"noʊ." ɪt wɑz wʌɾ i hæd bɪn wɪʃɪŋ, ðət ʃi wəd wɑnə ɡoʊ wɪð hɪm. hi oʊpən ɪz aɪz ən skwɛɹɾ ɪz bæk ən meɪɾ ɪz vɔɪs fɝm. "noʊ, aɪ wʊdn lɛɾ əɹ kʌm wɪð mi ɪf ʃi dɪɾ æsk." hi kəd nɑt də ðət tə hɝ. bʌt laɪt, wʊdn ɪt bi swit, dʒʌs fəɹ ə mɪnət, ɪf ʃi sɛd ʃi wɑntəd tə? "ʃi ɡɛts mjuli stʌbɝn ɪf ʃi θɪŋks aɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tɛl əɹ wʌt tə du, bʌɾ aɪ kən stɪl pɹətɛkt əɹ fɹəm ðæt." hi wɪʃt ʃi wɝ bæk hoʊm ɪn ɛmənz fild, bʌɾ ɔl hoʊp ə ðət hæd ɡɔn ðə deɪ mɔɪɹeɪn keɪm tə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. "ivən ɪf ɪt minz ʃi dʌz bɪkʌm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ!" ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ kɑt lænz ɹeɪzd aɪbɹaʊ, ən i flʌʃt.

"No." It was what he had been wishing, that she would want to go with him. He opened his eyes and squared his back and made his voice firm. "No, I wouldn't let her come with me if she did ask." He could not do that to her. But Light, wouldn't it be sweet, just for a minute, if she said she wanted to? "She gets muley stubborn if she thinks I'm trying to tell her what to do, but I can still protect her from that." He wished she were back home in Emond's Field, but all hope of that had gone the day Moiraine came to the Two Rivers. "Even if it means she does become an Aes Sedai!" The corner of his eye caught Lan's raised eyebrow, and he flushed.

"æn ðəɾ ɪz ɔl ðə ɹizən? jə wɑnə spɛn əz mʌtʃ taɪm əz jə kən wɪð jəɹ fɹɛnz fɹəm hoʊm bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɡoʊ? ðæts waɪ jəɹ dʒɹæɡɪŋ jəɹ fit? jə noʊ wʌts snɪfɪŋ ət jəɹ hilz."

"And that is all the reason? You want to spend as much time as you can with your friends from home before they go? That's why you're dragging your feet? You know what's sniffing at your heels."

ɹænd sɝdʒd æŋɡɹəli tə hɪz fit. "ɔl ɹaɪt, ɪts mɔɪɹeɪn! aɪ wʊdn ivən bi hɪɹ ɪf nɑt fəɹ hɝ, ən ʃi woʊn əz mʌtʃ əz tɔk tə mi."

Rand surged angrily to his feet. "All right, it's Moiraine! I wouldn't even be here if not for her, and she won't as much as talk to me."

"jud bi dɛɾ ɪf nɑt fəɹ hɝ, ʃifɝɾɝ," læn sɛd flætli, bʌt ɹænd ɹʌʃt ɑn.

"You'd be dead if not for her, sheepherder," Lan said flatly, but Rand rushed on.

"ʃi tɛlz mi . . . tɛlz mi hɔɹəbəl θɪŋz əbaʊt maɪsɛlf" - hɪz nʌkəlz waɪɾənd ɑn ðə sɔɹd. ðəɾ aɪm gɑnə ɡoʊ mæɾ ən daɪ! - "æn ðən sʌɾənli ʃi woʊn ivən seɪ tu wɝdz tə mi. ʃi æks əz ɪf ɪm noʊ dɪfɹən ðən ðə deɪ ʃi faʊn mi, ən ðət smɛlz ɹɔŋ, tu."

"She tells me . . . tells me horrible things about myself" - his knuckles whitened on the sword. That I'm going to go mad and die! - "and then suddenly she won't even say two words to me. She acts as if I'm no different than the day she found me, and that smells wrong, too."

"ju wɑn əɹ tə tʃɹit jə laɪk wʌt jə ɑɹ?"

"You want her to treat you like what you are?"

"noʊ! aɪ doʊn min ðæt. bɝn mi, aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ aɪ min hæf ðə taɪm. aɪ doʊnt wɑn ðæt, ən aɪm skɛɹɾ ə ði ʌðɝ. naʊ ʃiz ɡɔn ɔf sʌmwɛɹ, vænɪʃt . . ."

"No! I don't mean that. Burn me, I don't know what I mean half the time. I don't want that, and I'm scared of the other. Now she's gone off somewhere, vanished . . ."

"aɪ toʊl jə ʃi nidz tə bi əloʊn səmtaɪmz. ɪɾ ɪzən fəɹ ju, əɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls, tə kwɛstʃən əɹ ækʃənz."

"I told you she needs to be alone sometimes. It isn't for you, or anyone else, to question her actions."

". . . wɪθaʊt tɛlɪŋ ɛnibəɾi wɛɹ ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ, əɹ wən ʃid bi bæk, əɹ ivən ɪf ʃi wəd bi bæk. ʃiz tə bi eɪbəl tə tɛl mi sʌmθɪŋ tə hɛlp mi, læn. sʌmθɪŋ. ʃiz tə. ɪf ʃi ɛvɝ kʌmz bæk."

". . . without telling anybody where she was going, or when she'd be back, or even if she would be back. She has to be able to tell me something to help me, Lan. Something. She has to. If she ever comes back."

"ʃiz bæk, ʃifɝɾɝ. læs naɪt. bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ʃiz toʊl jə ɔl ʃi kæn. bi sæɾəsfaɪd. juv lɝnd wʌt jə kən fɹəm hɝ." wɪð ə ʃeɪk ə hɪz hɛd, lænz vɔɪs bɪkeɪm bɹɪsk. "ju sɝɾənli ɑɹən lɝnɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ stændɪŋ ðɛɹ. taɪm fəɹ ə lɪɾəl bæləns wɝk. ɡoʊ θɹu pɑɹɾɪŋ ðə sɪlk, bɪɡɪnɪŋ fɹəm hɛɹən weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹʌʃəz. ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət ðət hɛɹən fɔɹm ɪz oʊnli fəɹ pɹæktəsɪŋ bæləns. ɛniwɛɹ bʌt duɪŋ fɔɹmz, ɪt livz jə waɪɾ oʊpən; jə kən stʃɹaɪk hoʊm fɹəm ɪt, ɪf jə weɪt fəɹ ði ʌðɝ mæn tə muv fɝst, bʌt jəl nɛvɝ əvɔɪɾ ɪz bleɪd."

"She's back, sheepherder. Last night. But I think she has told you all she can. Be satisfied. You've learned what you can from her." With a shake of his head, Lan's voice became brisk. "You certainly aren't learning anything standing there. Time for a little balance work. Go through Parting the Silk, beginning from Heron Wading in the Rushes. Remember that that Heron form is only for practicing balance. Anywhere but doing forms, it leaves you wide open; you can strike home from it, if you wait for the other man to move first, but you'll never avoid his blade."

"ʃi hæz tə bi eɪbəl tə tɛl mi sʌmθɪŋ, læn. ðət waɪnd. ɪt wɑznt nætʃɹəl, ən aɪ doʊn kɛɹ haʊ kloʊs tə ðə blaɪt wi ɑɹ."

"She has to be able to tell me something, Lan. That wind. It wasn't natural, and I don't care how close to the Blight we are."

"hɛɹən weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹʌʃəz, ʃifɝɾɝ. ən maɪn jəɹ ɹɪsts."

"Heron Wading in the Rushes, sheepherder. And mind your wrists."

fɹəm ðə saʊθ keɪm ə feɪn pil ə tʃɹʌmpəts, ə ɹoʊlɪŋ fænfɛɹ sloʊli ɡɹoʊɪŋ laʊɾɝ, əkʌmpənid baɪ ðə stɛɾi θɹəm-θɹəm-θɹəm-θɹəm ə dʒɹʌmz. fəɹ ə moʊmən ɹænd ən læn stɛɹɾ əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ, ðən ðə dʒɹʌmz dʒɹu ðɛm tə ðə taʊɝ wɔl tə stɛɹ saʊθwɝd.

From the south came a faint peal of trumpets, a rolling fanfare slowly growing louder, accompanied by the steady thrum-thrum-THRUM-thrum of drums. For a moment Rand and Lan stared at each other, then the drums drew them to the tower wall to stare southward.

ðə sɪɾi stʊɾ ɑn haɪ hɪlz, ðə læn ɝaʊn ðə sɪɾi wɔlz klɪɹd tə æŋkəl haɪt fəɹ ə fʊl maɪl ɪn ɔl dɝɛkʃənz, ən ðə kip kʌvɝd ðə haɪəs hɪl ʌv ɔl. fɹəm ðə taʊɝ tɑp, ɹænd hæɾ ə klɪɹ vju əkɹɔs ðə tʃɪmniz ən ɹufs tə ðə fɔɹəst. ðə dʒɹʌmɝz əpɪɹd fɝs fɹəm ðə tʃɹiz, ə dʌzən ə ðɛm, dʒɹʌmz lɪftɪŋ əz ðeɪ stɛp tə ðɛɹ oʊn bit, mæləts wɝlɪŋ. nɛks keɪm tʃɹʌmpəɾɝz, lɔŋ, ʃaɪnɪŋ hɔɹnz ɹeɪzd, stɪl kɔlɪŋ ðə flɝɪʃ. ət ðət dɪstəns ɹænd kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt ðə hjudʒ, skwɛɹ bænɝ wɪpɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪn bɪhaɪn ðɛm. læn ɡɹʌntɪd, ðoʊ; ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæɾ aɪz laɪk ə snoʊ iɡəl.

The city stood on high hills, the land around the city walls cleared to ankle height for a full mile in all directions, and the keep covered the highest hill of all. From the tower top, Rand had a clear view across the chimneys and roofs to the forest. The drummers appeared first from the trees, a dozen of them, drums lifting as they stepped to their own beat, mallets whirling. Next came trumpeters, long, shining horns raised, still calling the flourish. At that distance Rand could not make out the huge, square banner whipping in the wind behind them. Lan grunted, though; the Warder had eyes like a snow eagle.

ɹænd ɡlænst ət hɪm, bʌt ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd nʌθɪŋ, hɪz aɪz ɪntɛn ɑn ðə kɑləm ɪmɝdʒɪŋ fɹəm ðə fɔɹəst. maʊntəd mɛn ɪn ɑɹmɝ ɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɹiz, ən wɪmən əhɔɹsbæk, tu. ðən ə pɑlɑnkwɪn bɔɹn baɪ hɔɹsəz, wʌn bɪfɔɹ ən wʌn bɪhaɪnd, ɪts kɝɾənz daʊn, ən mɔɹ mɛn ɑn hɔɹsbæk. ɹæŋks ə mɛn əfʊt, paɪks ɹaɪzɪŋ əbʌv əm laɪk ə bɹɪsəl ə lɔŋ θɔɹnz, ən ɑɹtʃɝz wɪð ðɛɹ baʊz hɛl slæntəɾ əkɹɔs ðɛɹ tʃɛsts, ɔl stɛpɪŋ tə ðə dʒɹʌmz. ðə tʃɹʌmpəts kɹaɪɾ əɡɛn. laɪk ə sɪŋɪŋ sɝpən ðə kɑləm waʊn ɪts weɪ təwɔɹd fæl dæɹə.

Rand glanced at him, but the Warder said nothing, his eyes intent on the column emerging from the forest. Mounted men in armor rode out of the trees, and women ahorseback, too. Then a palanquin borne by horses, one before and one behind, its curtains down, and more men on horseback. Ranks of men afoot, pikes rising above them like a bristle of long thorns, and archers with their bows held slanted across their chests, all stepping to the drums. The trumpets cried again. Like a singing serpent the column wound its way toward Fal Dara.

ðə wɪn flæp ðə bænɝ, tɔlɝ ðən ə mæn, stʃɹeɪɾ aʊt tə wʌn saɪd. əz bɪɡ əz ɪt wɑz, ɪt wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf naʊ fəɹ ɹænd tə si klɪɹli. ə swɝl ə kʌlɝz ðət mɛnt nʌθɪŋ tə hɪm, bʌɾ ət ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt, ə ʃeɪp laɪk ə pjʊɹ waɪt tɪɹdʒɹɑp. hɪz bɹɛθ fɹoʊz ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt. ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn.

The wind flapped the banner, taller than a man, straight out to one side. As big as it was, it was close enough now for Rand to see clearly. A swirl of colors that meant nothing to him, but at the heart of it, a shape like a pure white teardrop. His breath froze in his throat. The Flame of Tar Valon.

"ɪŋtʃɹz wɪð ðɛm." læn saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ɪz θɔts wɝ ɛlswɛɹ. "bæk fɹəm ɪz hʌntɪŋ ət læst. bɪn ɡɔn lɔŋ ɪnʌf. aɪ wʌndɝ ɪf i hæɾ ɛni lʌk?"

"Ingtar's with them." Lan sounded as if his thoughts were elsewhere. "Back from his hunting at last. Been gone long enough. I wonder if he had any luck?"

"ɛɛs sədaɪ," ɹænd wɪspɝd wən i faɪnəli kʊd. ɔl ðoʊz wɪmən aʊt ðɛɹ. . . . mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, jɛs, bʌɾ i hæd tʃɹævəld wɪð hɝ, ən ɪf i dɪd nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli tʃɹʌs hɝ, ət list i nu hɝ. əɹ θɔɾ i dɪd. bʌt ʃi wɑz oʊnli wʌn. soʊ mɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ təɡɛðɝ, ən kʌmɪŋ laɪk ðɪs, wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls əɡɛn. hi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt; wən i spoʊk, hɪz vɔɪs ɡɹeɪɾɪd. "waɪ soʊ mɛni, læn? waɪ ɛni əɾ ɔl? ən wɪð dʒɹʌmz ən tʃɹʌmpəts ən ə bænɝ tə ənaʊns ðɛm."

"Aes Sedai," Rand whispered when he finally could. All those women out there. . . . Moiraine was Aes Sedai, yes, but he had traveled with her, and if he did not entirely trust her, at least he knew her. Or thought he did. But she was only one. So many Aes Sedai together, and coming like this, was something else again. He cleared his throat; when he spoke, his voice grated. "Why so many, Lan? Why any at all? And with drums and trumpets and a banner to announce them."

ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ɹɪspɛktɪɾ ɪn ʃaɪnɝ, ət lis baɪ moʊs pipəl, ən ðə ɹɛst ɹɪspɛkfəli fɪɹd ðɛm, bʌt ɹænd hæd bɪn ɪn pleɪsəz wɛɹ ɪt wɑz dɪfɹənt, wɛɹ ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ðə fɪɹ, ən ɔfən heɪt. wɛɹ i hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp, səm mɛn, ət list, spoʊk ʌv "tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪtʃəz" əz ðeɪ wəd spik ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. hi tʃɹaɪd tə kaʊn ðə wɪmən, bʌt ðeɪ kɛp noʊ ɹæŋks əɹ ɔɹɾɝ, muvɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ɝaʊn tə kənvɝs wɪð wʌn ənʌðɝ əɹ wɪð huɛvɝ wɑz ɪn ðə pɑlɑnkwɪn. ɡus bʌmps kʌvɝd hɪm. hi hæd tʃɹævəld wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn, ən mɛɾ ənʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən i hæd bɪɡʌn tə θɪŋk ə hɪmsɛlf əz wɝldli. noʊbɑdi ɛvɝ lɛf ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, əɹ ɔlmoʊs noʊbɑdi, bʌɾ i hæd. hi hæd sin θɪŋz noʊ wʌn bæk ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz hæɾ ɛvɝ leɪɾ aɪz ɑn, dʌn θɪŋz ðeɪ hæɾ oʊnli dʒɹimd ʌv, ɪf ðeɪ hæd dʒɹim soʊ fɑɹ. hi hæd sin ə kwin ən mɛt ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ, feɪst ə mɹdʒɹɑl ən tʃɹævəl ðə weɪz, ən nʌn ʌv ɪt hæd pɹipɛɹɾ ɪm fəɹ ðɪs moʊmənt.

Aes Sedai were respected in Shienar, at least by most people, and the rest respectfully feared them, but Rand had been in places where it was different, where there was only the fear, and often hate. Where he had grown up, some men, at least, spoke of "Tar Valon witches" as they would speak of the Dark One. He tried to count the women, but they kept no ranks or order, moving their horses around to converse with one another or with whoever was in the palanquin. Goose bumps covered him. He had traveled with Moiraine, and met another Aes Sedai, and he had begun to think of himself as worldly. Nobody ever left the Two Rivers, or almost nobody, but he had. He had seen things no one back in the Two Rivers had ever laid eyes on, done things they had only dreamed of, if they had dreamed so far. He had seen a queen and met the Daughter-Heir of Andor, faced a Myrddraal and traveled the Ways, and none of it had prepared him for this moment.

"waɪ soʊ mɛni?" hi wɪspɝɾ əɡɛn.

"Why so many?" he whispered again.

"ði æmɪɝlɪn sits kʌm ɪn pɝsən." læn lʊkt ət hɪm, hɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən əz hɑɹɾ ən ənɹiɾəbəl əz ə ɹɑk. "jɔɹ lɛsənz ɑɹ dʌn, ʃifɝɾɝ." hi pɔz ðɛn, ən ɹænd ɔlmoʊs θɔt ðəɹ wɑz sɪmpəθi ɑn ɪz feɪs. ðət kəd nɑt bi, ʌv kɔɹs. "bɛɾɝ fəɹ jə ɪf jə wɝ ə wik ɡɔn." wɪð ðət ðə wɔɹɾɝ snætʃt ʌp ɪz ʃɝɾ ən dɪsəpɪɹd daʊn ðə læɾɝ ɪndə ðə taʊɝ.

"The Amyrlin Seat's come in person." Lan looked at him, his expression as hard and unreadable as a rock. "Your lessons are done, sheepherder." He paused then, and Rand almost thought there was sympathy on his face. That could not be, of course. "Better for you if you were a week gone." With that the Warder snatched up his shirt and disappeared down the ladder into the tower.

ɹænd wɝkt ɪz maʊθ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ ə lɪɾəl mɔɪstʃɝ. hi stɛɹɾ ət ðə kɑləm əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ fæl dæɹə əz ɪf ɪt ɹɪli wɝ ə sneɪk, ə dɛdli vaɪpɝ. ðə dʒɹʌmz ən tʃɹʌmpəts sæŋ, laʊɾ ɪn ɪz ɪɹz. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, hu ɔɹɾɝd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃiz kʌm kəz ə mi. hi kəd θɪŋk ə noʊ ʌðɝ ɹizən.

Rand worked his mouth, trying to get a little moisture. He stared at the column approaching Fal Dara as if it really were a snake, a deadly viper. The drums and trumpets sang, loud in his ears. The Amyrlin Seat, who ordered the Aes Sedai. She's come because of me. He could think of no other reason.

ðeɪ nu θɪŋz, hæd nɑlədʒ ðət kəd hɛlp hɪm, hi wɑz ʃʊɹ. ən i dɪd nɑt dɛɹ æsk ɛni ʌv ðɛm. hi wɑz əfɹeɪd ðeɪ hæd kʌm tə dʒɛntəl hɪm. ən əfɹeɪd ðeɪ hævənt, tu, hi ədmɪɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli. laɪt, aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɪtʃ skɛɹz mi mɔɹ.

They knew things, had knowledge that could help him, he was sure. And he did not dare ask any of them. He was afraid they had come to gentle him. And afraid they haven't, too, he admitted reluctantly. Light, I don't know which scares me more.

"aɪ dɪdn min tə tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ," hi wɪspɝd. "ɪt wɑz ən æksəɾənt! laɪt, aɪ doʊnt wɑn ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɪt. aɪ swɛɹ əl nɛvɝ tʌtʃ ɪɾ əɡɛn! aɪ swɛɹ ɪt!"

"I didn't mean to channel the Power," he whispered. "It was an accident! Light, I don't want anything to do with it. I swear I'll never touch it again! I swear it!"

wɪð ə stɑɹt, hi ɹilaɪz ðət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pɑɹɾi wɑz ɛntɝɪŋ ðə sɪɾi ɡeɪts. ðə wɪn swɝld ʌp fɪɹsli, tʃɪlɪŋ ɪz swɛt laɪk dʒɹɑpləts ʌv aɪs, meɪkɪŋ ðə tʃɹʌmpəts saʊn laɪk slaɪ læftɝ; hi θɔɾ i kəd smɛl ən oʊpənd ɡɹeɪv, stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ. maɪ ɡɹeɪv, ɪf aɪ kip stændɪŋ hɪɹ.

With a start, he realized that the Aes Sedai party was entering the city gates. The wind swirled up fiercely, chilling his sweat like droplets of ice, making the trumpets sound like sly laughter; he thought he could smell an opened grave, strong in the air. My grave, if I keep standing here.

ɡɹæbɪŋ ɪz ʃɝt, hi skɹæmbəl daʊn ðə læɾɝ ən bɪɡæn tə ɹʌn.

Grabbing his shirt, he scrambled down the ladder and began to run.


tʃæptɝ tu


CHAPTER 2

ðə wɛlkəm


The Welcome

ðə hɔlz ə fæl dæɹə kip, ðɛɹ smuð stoʊn wɔlz spɑɹsli dɛkɝeɪɾəd wɪð ɛlɪɡənli sɪmpəl tæpəstʃɹiz ən peɪntəd skɹinz, bʌsəld wɪð nuz ə ði æmɪɝlɪn sits ɪmənən ɝaɪvəl. sɝvəns ɪn blæk-ænd-ɡoʊl dɑɹɾɪd əbaʊt ðɛɹ tæsks, ɹʌnɪŋ tə pɹipɛɹ ɹumz əɹ kæɹi ɔɹɾɝz tə ðə kɪtʃənz, moʊnɪŋ ðət ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ əv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɹɛɾi fəɹ soʊ ɡɹeɪɾ ə pɝsənɑdʒ wən ðeɪ hæd hæd noʊ wɔɹnɪŋ. dɑɹk-aɪd wɔɹiɝz, ðɛɹ hɛdz ʃeɪvən ɪksɛp fəɹ ə tɑpnɑt baʊnd wɪð ə lɛðɝ kɔɹd, dɪd nɑt ɹʌn, bʌt heɪs fɪl ðɛɹ stɛps ən ðɛɹ feɪsəz ʃoʊn wɪð ən ɪksaɪtmənt nɔɹməli ɹɪzɝv fəɹ bæɾəl. səm ə ðə mɛn spoʊk əz ɹænd hɝid pæst.

The halls of Fal Dara keep, their smooth stone walls sparsely decorated with elegantly simple tapestries and painted screens, bustled with news of the Amyrlin Seat's imminent arrival. Servants in black-and-gold darted about their tasks, running to prepare rooms or carry orders to the kitchens, moaning that they could not have everything ready for so great a personage when they had had no warning. Dark-eyed warriors, their heads shaven except for a topknot bound with a leather cord, did not run, but haste filled their steps and their faces shone with an excitement normally reserved for battle. Some of the men spoke as Rand hurried past.

"ɑ, ðəɹ jə ɑɹ, ɹænd ælθɹ. pis feɪvɝ jəɹ sɔɹd. ɑn jəɹ weɪ tə klin ʌp? jəl wɑnə lʊk jəɹ bɛst wən jə ɑɹ pɹizɛntəd tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ʃɪl wɑnə si jə ən jəɹ tu fɹɛnz əz wɛl əz ðə wɪmən, jə kən kaʊn ɑn ɪt."

"Ah, there you are, Rand al'Thor. Peace favor your sword. On your way to clean up? You'll want to look your best when you are presented to the Amyrlin Seat. She'll want to see you and your two friends as well as the women, you can count on it."

hi tʃɹɑɾəd təwɔɹd ðə bɹɔd stɛɹz, waɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ twɛnti mɛn əbɹɛst, ðət lɛɾ ʌp tə ðə mɛnz əpɑɹtməns.

He trotted toward the broad stairs, wide enough for twenty men abreast, that led up to the men's apartments.

"ði æmɪɝlɪn hɝsɛlf, kʌm wɪð noʊ mɔɹ wɔɹnɪŋ ðən ə pæk pɛdlɝ. mʌs bi kəz ə mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ ən jə sʌðɝnɝz, ɛ? wʌɾ ɛls?"

"The Amyrlin herself, come with no more warning than a pack peddler. Must be because of Moiraine Sedai and you southerners, eh? What else?"

ðə waɪd, aɪɝn-baʊn dɔɹz ə ðə mɛnz əpɑɹtməns stʊɾ oʊpən, ən hæf dʒæmd wɪð tɑp-nɑɾɪd mɛn bʌzɪŋ wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪnz ɝaɪvəl.

The wide, iron-bound doors of the men's apartments stood open, and half jammed with top-knotted men buzzing with the Amyrlin's arrival.

"hoʊ, saʊθlændɝ! ði æmɪɝlɪnz hɪɹ. kʌm fəɹ jə ən jəɹ fɹɛnz, aɪ səpoʊz. pis, wʌɾ ɑnɝ fəɹ ju! ʃi sɛldəm livz tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən ʃiz nɛvɝ kʌm tə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz ɪn maɪ mɛmɹi."

"Ho, southlander! The Amyrlin's here. Come for you and your friends, I suppose. Peace, what honor for you! She seldom leaves Tar Valon, and she's never come to the Borderlands in my memory."

hi fɛndɪɾ əm ɔl ɔf wɪð ə fju wɝdz. hi hæd tə wɑʃ. faɪn ə klin ʃɝt. noʊ taɪm tə tɔk. ðeɪ θɔt ðeɪ ʌndɝstʊd, ən lɛɾ ɪm ɡoʊ. nɑɾ ə wʌn ə ðɛm nu ə θɪŋ ɪksɛp ðəɾ i ən ɪz fɹɛnz tʃɹævəld ɪn kʌmpəni wɪð ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðət tu ʌv ɪz fɹɛnz wɝ wɪmən u wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn tə tʃɹeɪn əz ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ðɛɹ wɝdz stæbd əɾ ɪm əz ɪf ðeɪ nu ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ʃiz kʌm fəɹ mi.

He fended them all off with a few words. He had to wash. Find a clean shirt. No time to talk. They thought they understood, and let him go. Not a one of them knew a thing except that he and his friends traveled in company with an Aes Sedai, that two of his friends were women who were going to Tar Valon to train as Aes Sedai, but their words stabbed at him as if they knew everything. She's come for me.

hi dæʃt θɹu ðə mɛnz əpɑɹtməns, dɑɹɾɪd ɪndə ðə ɹum i ʃɛɹd wɪð mæt ən pɛɹɪn . . . ən fɹoʊz, hɪz dʒɔ dʒɹɑpɪŋ ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt. ðə ɹum wɑz fɪld wɪð wɪmən wɛɹɪŋ ðə blæk-ænd-ɡoʊld, ɔl wɝkɪŋ pɝpəsfəli. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə bɪɡ ɹum, ən ɪts wɪndoʊz, ə pɛɹ ə tɔl, nɛɹoʊ æɹoʊslɪts lʊkɪŋ daʊn ɑn wʌn ə ði ɪnɝ kɔɹtʃjɑɹdz, dɪd nʌθɪŋ tə meɪk ɪt sim lɑɹdʒɝ. θɹi bɛdz ɑn blæk-ænd-waɪt taɪl plætfɔɹmz, itʃ wɪð ə tʃɛst ət ðə fʊt, θɹi pleɪn tʃɛɹz, ə wɑʃstæn baɪ ðə dɔɹ, ən ə tɔl, waɪd wɔɹdʒɹoʊb kɹaʊɾəd ðə ɹum. ði eɪt wɪmən ɪn ðəɹ sim laɪk fɪʃ ɪn ə bæskət.

He dashed through the men's apartments, darted into the room he shared with Mat and Perrin . . . and froze, his jaw dropping in astonishment. The room was filled with women wearing the black-and-gold, all working purposefully. It was not a big room, and its windows, a pair of tall, narrow arrowslits looking down on one of the inner courtyards, did nothing to make it seem larger. Three beds on black-and-white tiled platforms, each with a chest at the foot, three plain chairs, a washstand by the door, and a tall, wide wardrobe crowded the room. The eight women in there seemed like fish in a basket.

ðə wɪmən bɛɹli ɡlænst ət hɪm, ən wɛn ɹaɪɾ ɑn klɪɹɪŋ ɪz kloʊðz - ən mæts ən pɛɹɪnz - aʊɾ ə ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb ən ɹɪpleɪsɪŋ əm wɪð nu. ɛniθɪŋ faʊn ɪn ðə pɑkəts wɑz pʊɾ ətɑp ðə tʃɛsts, ən ði oʊl kloʊðz wɝ bʌndəld ʌp kɛɹləsli, laɪk ɹæɡz.

The women barely glanced at him, and went right on clearing his clothes - and Mat's and Perrin's - out of the wardrobe and replacing them with new. Anything found in the pockets was put atop the chests, and the old clothes were bundled up carelessly, like rags.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ?" hi dɪmændəd wən i kɑɾ ɪz bɹɛθ. "ðoʊz ɑɹ maɪ kloʊðz!" wʌn ə ðə wɪmən snɪft ən poʊkt ə fɪŋɡɝ θɹu ə tiɹ ɪn ðə sliv ə hɪz oʊnli koʊt, ðən æɾəd ɪt tə ðə paɪl ɑn ðə flɔɹ.

"What are you doing?" he demanded when he caught his breath. "Those are my clothes!" One of the women sniffed and poked a finger through a tear in the sleeve of his only coat, then added it to the pile on the floor.

ənʌðɝ, ə blæk-hɛɹd wʊmən wɪð ə bɪɡ ɹɪŋ ə kiz əɾ əɹ weɪst, sɛɾ əɹ aɪz ɑn hɪm. ðət wɑz ilænsu, ʃætʃjən ə ðə kip. hi θɔɾ ə ðə ʃɑɹp-feɪst wʊmən əz ə haʊskipɝ, ðoʊ ðə haʊs ʃi kɛpt wɑz ə fɔɹtʃɹəs ən skɔɹz ə sɝvəns dɪɾ əɹ bɪɾɪŋ. "mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ sɛɾ ɔl ə jəɹ kloʊðz ɑɹ wɔɹn aʊt, ən ðə leɪɾi əmælisə hæd nu meɪd tə ɡɪv ju. dʒʌs kip aʊɾ ʌv əɹ weɪ," ʃi æɾəd fɝmli, "ænd wɪl bi dʌn ðə kwɪkɝ." ðəɹ wɝ fju mɛn ðə ʃætʃjən kəd nɑt bʊli ɪndə duɪŋ əz ʃi wɪʃt - səm sɛɾ ivən lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ - ən ʃi pleɪnli dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛkt ɛni tʃɹʌbəl wɪð wʌn mæn jʌŋ ɪnʌf tə bi hɝ sʌn.

Another, a black-haired woman with a big ring of keys at her waist, set her eyes on him. That was Elansu, shatayan of the keep. He thought of the sharp-faced woman as a housekeeper, though the house she kept was a fortress and scores of servants did her bidding. "Moiraine Sedai said all of your clothes are worn out, and the Lady Amalisa had new made to give you. Just keep out of our way," she added firmly, "and we will be done the quicker." There were few men the shatayan could not bully into doing as she wished - some said even Lord Agelmar - and she plainly did not expect any trouble with one man young enough to be her son.

hi swɑloʊd wʌɾ i hæd bɪn ɡoʊɪŋ tə seɪ; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit kəd bi sɛndɪŋ fəɹ ɪm əɾ ɛni mɪnət. "ɑnɝ tə ðə leɪɾi əmælisə fəɹ əɹ ɡɪft," hi mænədʒd, æftɝ ðə ʃaɪnɝən weɪ, "æn ɑnɝ tə ju, ilænsu ʃætʃjən. pliz, kənveɪ maɪ wɝdz tə ðə leɪɾi əmælisə, ən tɛl əɹ aɪ sɛd, hɑɹɾ ən soʊl tə sɝv." ðəɾ ɔt tə sæɾəsfaɪ ðə ʃaɪnɝən lʌv ə sɛɹəmoʊni fəɹ boʊθ wɪmən. "bʌt naʊ ɪf jəl pɑɹɾən mi, aɪ wɑnə tʃeɪnʒ."

He swallowed what he had been going to say; there was no time for arguing. The Amyrlin Seat could be sending for him at any minute. "Honor to the Lady Amalisa for her gift," he managed, after the Shienaran way, "and honor to you, Elansu Shatayan. Please, convey my words to the Lady Amalisa, and tell her I said, heart and soul to serve." That ought to satisfy the Shienaran love of ceremony for both women. "But now if you'll pardon me, I want to change."

"ðæɾ ɪz wɛl," ilænsu sɛd kʌmfɝɾəbli. "mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ sɛd tə ɹimuv ɔl ði oʊld. ɛvɹi stɪtʃ. smɔlkloʊðz, tu." sɛvɹəl ə ðə wɪmən aɪɾ ɪm saɪdweɪz. nʌn ə ðɛm meɪɾ ə muv təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ.

"That is well," Elansu said comfortably. "Moiraine Sedai said to remove all the old. Every stitch. Smallclothes, too." Several of the women eyed him sideways. None of them made a move toward the door.

hi bɪɾ ɪz tʃik tə kip fɹəm læfɪŋ hɪstɛɹɪkli. mɛni weɪz wɝ dɪfɹən ɪn ʃaɪnɝ fɹəm wʌɾ i wɑz juz tə, ən ðəɹ wɝ səm tə wɪtʃ i wəd nɛvɝ bɪkʌm əkʌstəmd ɪf i lɪv fɝɛvɝ. hi hæd teɪkən tə beɪðɪŋ ɪn ðə smɔl aʊɝz ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, wən ðə bɪɡ, taɪl pulz wɝ ɛmpti ʌv pipəl, æftɝ i dɪskʌvɝd ðəɾ əɾ ɛni ʌðɝ taɪm ə wʊmən maɪt wɛl klaɪm ɪndə ðə wɔɾɝ wɪð hɪm. ɪt kəd bi ə skʌljən əɹ ðə leɪɾi əmælisə, lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝz sɪstɝ hɝsɛlf - ðə bæθs wɝ wʌn pleɪs ɪn ʃaɪnɝ wɛɹ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹæŋk - ɪkspɛktɪŋ ɪm tə skɹʌb əɹ bæk ɪn ɹɪtɝn fəɹ ðə seɪm feɪvɝ, æskɪŋ ɪm waɪ hɪz feɪs wɑz soʊ ɹɛd, hæɾ i teɪkən tu mʌtʃ sʌn? ðeɪ hæd sun lɝn tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ɪz blʌʃəz fəɹ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ, ən nɑɾ ə wʊmən ɪn ðə kip bʌt sim fæsəneɪɾəd baɪ ðɛm.

He bit his cheek to keep from laughing hysterically. Many ways were different in Shienar from what he was used to, and there were some to which he would never become accustomed if he lived forever. He had taken to bathing in the small hours of the morning, when the big, tiled pools were empty of people, after he discovered that at any other time a woman might well climb into the water with him. It could be a scullion or the Lady Amalisa, Lord Agelmar's sister herself - the baths were one place in Shienar where there was no rank - expecting him to scrub her back in return for the same favor, asking him why his face was so red, had he taken too much sun? They had soon learned to recognize his blushes for what they were, and not a woman in the keep but seemed fascinated by them.

aɪ maɪt bi dɛɾ əɹ wɝs ɪn ənʌðɝ aʊɝ, ən ðəɹ weɪɾɪŋ tə si mi blʌʃ! hi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. "ɪf jəl weɪɾ aʊtsaɪd, əl pæs ðə ɹɛst aʊt tə ju. ɑn maɪ ɑnɝ."

I might be dead or worse in another hour, and they're waiting to see me blush! He cleared his throat. "If you'll wait outside, I will pass the rest out to you. On my honor."

wʌn ə ðə wɪmən ɡeɪv ə sɑf kɔɹɾəl, ən ivən ilænsuz lɪps twɪtʃt, bʌt ðə ʃætʃjən nɑɾəd ən dɝɛktəd ði ʌðɝ wɪmən tə ɡæðɝ ʌp ðə bʌndəlz ðeɪ hæd meɪd. ʃi wɑz ðə læs tə liv, ən ʃi pɔzd ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ tə æd, "ðə buts, tu. mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ sɛɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ."

One of the women gave a soft chortle, and even Elansu's lips twitched, but the shatayan nodded and directed the other women to gather up the bundles they had made. She was the last to leave, and she paused in the doorway to add, "The boots, too. Moiraine Sedai said everything."

hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, ðən kloʊzd ɪɾ əɡɛn. hɪz buts, ət list, wɝ sɝɾənli stɪl ɡʊd, meɪd baɪ ælwɪn ælvən, ðə kɑblɝ bæk ɪn ɛmənz fild, ən wɛl bɹoʊkən ɪn ən kʌmftəɹbəl. bʌɾ ɪf ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp ɪz buts wəd meɪk ðə ʃætʃjən liv ɪm əloʊn soʊ hi kəd ɡoʊ, hi wəd ɡɪv əɹ ðə buts, ən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ʃi wɑntəd. hi hæd noʊ taɪm. "jɛs. jɛs, ʌv kɔɹs. ɑn maɪ ɑnɝ." hi pʊʃt ɑn ðə dɔɹ, fɔɹsɪŋ əɹ aʊt.

He opened his mouth, then closed it again. His boots, at least, were certainly still good, made by Alwyn al'Van, the cobbler back in Emond's Field, and well broken in and comfortable. But if giving up his boots would make the shatayan leave him alone so he could go, he would give her the boots, and anything else she wanted. He had no time. "Yes. Yes, of course. On my honor." He pushed on the door, forcing her out.

əloʊn, hi dʒɹɑpt ɑntu hɪz bɛd tə tʌɡ ɔf ɪz buts - ðeɪ wɝ stɪl ɡʊd, ə lɪɾəl wɔɹn, ðə lɛðɝ kɹæk hɪɹ ən ðɛɹ, bʌt stɪl wɛɹəbəl ən wɛl bɹoʊkən-ɪn tə fɪɾ ɪz fit - ðən heɪstəli stʃɹɪpt ɔf, paɪlɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ətɑp ðə buts, ən wɑʃt ət ðə beɪsən dʒʌst əz kwɪkli. ðə wɔɾɝ wɑz koʊld; ðə wɔɾɝ wɑz ɔlweɪz koʊld ɪn ðə mɛnz əpɑɹtməns.

Alone, he dropped onto his bed to tug off his boots - they were still good, a little worn, the leather cracked here and there, but still wearable and well broken-in to fit his feet - then hastily stripped off, piling everything atop the boots, and washed at the basin just as quickly. The water was cold; the water was always cold in the men's apartments.

ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb hæd θɹi waɪd dɔɹz kɑɹvd ɪn ðə sɪmpəl ʃaɪnɝən mænɝ, sədʒɛstɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ʃoʊɪŋ ə sɪɹiz ʌv wɔɾɝfɔlz ən ɹɑki pulz. pʊlɪŋ oʊpən ðə sɛntɝ dɔɹ, hi stɛɹd fəɹ ə moʊmən ət wʌt hæd ɹipleɪs ðə fju ɡɑɹməns i hæd bɹɔt wɪð hɪm. ə dʌzən haɪ-kɑlɝd koʊts ə ðə faɪnəst wʊl ən əz wɛl kʌɾ əz ɛni hi hæɾ ɛvɝ sin ɑn ə mɝtʃəns bæk əɹ ə lɔɹdz, moʊst ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd laɪk fistdeɪ kloʊðz. ə dʌzən! θɹi ʃɝts fəɹ ɛvɹi koʊt, boʊθ lɪnən ən sɪlk, wɪð waɪd slivz ən taɪt kʌfs. tu kloʊks. tu, wən i hæd meɪd də wɪð wʌn əɾ ə taɪm ɔl ɪz laɪf. wʌn kloʊk wɑz pleɪn, staʊt wʊl ən dɑɹk ɡɹin, ði ʌðɝ dip blu wɪð ə stɪf-stændɪŋ kɑlɝ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɪn ɡoʊld wɪð hɛɹənz . . . ən haɪ ɑn ðə lɛf bɹɛst, wɛɹ ə lɔɹd wəd wɛɹ ɪz saɪn. . . .

The wardrobe had three wide doors carved in the simple Shienaran manner, suggesting more than showing a series of waterfalls and rocky pools. Pulling open the center door, he stared for a moment at what had replaced the few garments he had brought with him. A dozen high-collared coats of the finest wool and as well cut as any he had ever seen on a merchant's back or a lord's, most embroidered like feastday clothes. A dozen! Three shirts for every coat, both linen and silk, with wide sleeves and tight cuffs. Two cloaks. Two, when he had made do with one at a time all his life. One cloak was plain, stout wool and dark green, the other deep blue with a stiff-standing collar embroidered in gold with herons . . . and high on the left breast, where a lord would wear his sign. . . .

hɪz hæn dʒɹɪftəd tə ðə kloʊk ʌv ɪts oʊn əkɔɹd. əz ɪf ənsɝɾən wʌt ðeɪ wəd fil, hɪz fɪŋɡɝz bɹʌʃt ðə stɪtʃɪŋ ʌv ə sɝpən kɝld ɔlmoʊst ɪndə ə sɝkəl, bʌɾ ə sɝpənt wɪð fɔɹ lɛɡz ən ə laɪənz ɡoʊldən meɪn, skeɪld ɪn kɹɪmzən ən ɡoʊld, ɪts fiɾ itʃ tɪpt wɪð faɪv ɡoʊldən klɔz. hɪz hæn dʒɝk bæk əz ɪf bɝnd. laɪt hɛlp mi! wɑz ɪɾ əmælisə hæd ðɪs meɪd, əɹ mɔɪɹeɪn? haʊ mɛni sɔ ɪt? haʊ mɛni noʊ wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz, wʌɾ ɪt minz? ivən wʌn ɪz tu mɛni. bɝn mi, ʃiz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛt mi kɪld. blʌɾi mɔɪɹeɪn woʊn ivən tɔk tə mi, bʌt naʊ ʃiz ɡɪvən mi blʌɾi faɪn nu kloʊðz tə daɪ ɪn!

His hand drifted to the cloak of its own accord. As if uncertain what they would feel, his fingers brushed the stitching of a serpent curled almost into a circle, but a serpent with four legs and a lion's golden mane, scaled in crimson and gold, its feet each tipped with five golden claws. His hand jerked back as if burned. Light help me! Was it Amalisa had this made, or Moiraine? How many saw it? How many know what it is, what it means? Even one is too many. Burn me, she's trying to get me killed. Bloody Moiraine won't even talk to me, but now she's given me bloody fine new clothes to die in!

ə ɹæp ət ðə dɔɹ sɛn ɪm lipɪŋ hæf aʊɾ ə hɪz skɪn.

A rap at the door sent him leaping half out of his skin.

"ɑɹ jə dʌn?" keɪm ilænsuz vɔɪs. "ɛvɹi stɪtʃ, naʊ. pɝhæps aɪ hæd bɛɾɝ. . . ." ə kɹik əz ɪf ʃi wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ ðə nɑb.

"Are you done?" came Elansu's voice. "Every stitch, now. Perhaps I had better. . . ." A creak as if she were trying the knob.

wɪð ə stɑɹt ɹænd ɹilaɪzd i wɑz stɪl neɪkəd. "aɪm dʌn," hi ʃaʊɾəd. "pis! doʊn kʌm ɪn!" hɝidli hi ɡæðɝɾ ʌp wʌɾ i hæd bɪn wɛɹɪŋ, buts ən ɔl. "aɪl bɹɪŋ ðɛm!" haɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðə dɔɹ, hi oʊpən ɪt dʒʌst waɪɾ ɪnʌf tə ʃʌv ðə bʌndəl ɪndə ði ɑɹmz ə ðə ʃætʃjən. "ðæts ɛvɹiθɪŋ."

With a start Rand realized he was still naked. "I'm done," he shouted. "Peace! Don't come in!" Hurriedly he gathered up what he had been wearing, boots and all. "I'll bring them!" Hiding behind the door, he opened it just wide enough to shove the bundle into the arms of the shatayan. "That's everything."

ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə pɪɹ θɹu ðə ɡæp. "ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ? mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ sɛɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. pɝhæps aɪ hæd bɛɾɝ dʒʌs lʊk - "

She tried to peer through the gap. "Are you sure? Moiraine Sedai said everything. Perhaps I had better just look - "

"ɪts ɛvɹiθɪŋ," hi ɡɹaʊld. "ɑn maɪ ɑnɝ!" hi ʃoʊldɝd ðə dɔɹ ʃʌɾ ɪn əɹ feɪs, ən hɝd læftɝ fɹəm ði ʌðɝ saɪd.

"It's everything," he growled. "On my honor!" He shouldered the door shut in her face, and heard laughter from the other side.

mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, hi dʒɹɛs hɝidli. hi wəd nɑt pʊɾ ɪt pæst ɛni ʌv əm tə faɪn səm ɪkskjus tə kʌm bʊlɪŋ ɪn ɛniweɪ. ðə ɡɹeɪ bɹitʃɪz wɝ snʌɡɡɝ ðən i wɑz juz tə, bʌt stɪl kʌmftəɹbəl, ən ðə ʃɝt, wɪð ɪts bɪloʊi slivz, wɑz waɪɾ ɪnʌf tə sæɾəsfaɪ ɛni ɡʊdwaɪf ɪn ɛmənz fild ɑn lɔnʒɹi deɪ. ðə ni-haɪ buts fɪɾ əz ɪf i hæd wɔɹn əm ə jɪɹ. hi hoʊpt ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ə ɡʊd kɑblɝ, ən nɑt mɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝk.

Muttering under his breath, he dressed hurriedly. He would not put it past any of them to find some excuse to come bulling in anyway. The gray breeches were snugger than he was used to, but still comfortable, and the shirt, with its billowy sleeves, was white enough to satisfy any goodwife in Emond's Field on laundry day. The knee-high boots fit as if he had worn them a year. He hoped it was just a good cobbler, and not more Aes Sedai work.

ɔl ə ðiz kloʊðz wəd meɪk ə pæk əz bɪɡ əz i wɑz. jɛt, hi hæd ɡɹoʊn juz tə ðə kʌmfɝɾ ə klin ʃɝts əɡɛn, ʌv nɑt wɛɹɪŋ ðə seɪm bɹitʃɪz deɪ æftɝ deɪ əntɪl swɛɾ ən dɝt meɪɾ əm əz stɪf əz ɪz buts, ðən wɛɹɪŋ əm stɪl. hi tʊk ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz fɹəm ɪz tʃɛst ən stʌft wʌɾ i kəɾ ɪndə ðɛm, ðən ɹɪlʌktənli spɹɛd ðə fænsi kloʊk aʊɾ ɑn ðə bɛɾ ən paɪld ə fju mɔɹ ʃɝts ən bɹitʃɪz ɑn ðæt. foʊldəd wɪð ðə deɪnʒɝəs sɪdʒəl ɪnsaɪɾ ən taɪd wɪð ə kɔɹd lup soʊ ɪt kəd bi slʌŋ ɑn ə ʃoʊldɝ, ɪt lʊk nɑt mʌtʃ dɪfɹən fɹəm ðə pæks i hæd sin kæɹid baɪ ʌðɝ jʌŋ mɛn ɑn ðə ɹoʊd.

All of these clothes would make a pack as big as he was. Yet, he had grown used to the comfort of clean shirts again, of not wearing the same breeches day after day until sweat and dirt made them as stiff as his boots, then wearing them still. He took his saddlebags from his chest and stuffed what he could into them, then reluctantly spread the fancy cloak out on the bed and piled a few more shirts and breeches on that. Folded with the dangerous sigil inside and tied with a cord looped so it could be slung on a shoulder, it looked not much different from the packs he had seen carried by other young men on the road.

ə pil ə tʃɹʌmpəts ɹoʊl θɹu ði æɹoʊslɪts, tʃɹʌmpəts kɔlɪŋ ðə fænfɛɹ fɹəm aʊtsaɪd ðə wɔlz, tʃɹʌmpəts ænsɝɪŋ fɹəm ðə kip taʊɝz.

A peal of trumpets rolled through the arrowslits, trumpets calling the fanfare from outside the walls, trumpets answering from the keep towers.

"aɪl pɪk aʊt ðə stɪtʃɪŋ wən aɪ ɡɛɾ ə tʃæns," hi mʌɾɝd. hi hæd sin wɪmən pɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi wən ðeɪ hæd meɪɾ ə mɪsteɪk əɹ tʃeɪnʒd ðɛɹ maɪn ɑn ðə pæɾɝn, ən ɪt dɪd nɑt lʊk vɛɹi hɑɹd.

"I'll pick out the stitching when I get a chance," he muttered. He had seen women picking out embroidery when they had made a mistake or changed their mind on the pattern, and it did not look very hard.

ðə ɹɛst ə ðə kloʊðz - moʊst ə ðɛm, ɪn fækt - hi stʌf bæk ɪndə ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb. noʊ nid tə liv ɛvəɾəns ə flaɪt tə bi faʊn baɪ ðə fɝs pɝsən tə poʊk ə hɛɾ ɪn æftɝ i wɛnt.

The rest of the clothes - most of them, in fact - he stuffed back into the wardrobe. No need to leave evidence of flight to be found by the first person to poke a head in after he went.

stɪl fɹaʊnɪŋ, hi nɛl bɪsaɪɾ ɪz bɛd. ðə taɪl plætfɔɹmz ɑn wɪtʃ ðə bɛdz ɹɛstəd wɝ stoʊvz, wɛɹ ə smɔl faɪɝ dæmp daʊn tə bɝn ɔl naɪt kəd kip ðə bɛd wɔɹm θɹu ðə wɝs naɪɾ ɪn ə ʃaɪnɝən wɪntɝ. ðə naɪts wɝ stɪl kulɝ ðən i wɑz juz tə ðɪs taɪm ə jɪɹ, bʌt blæŋkəts wɝ ɪnʌf fəɹ wɔɹmθ naʊ. pʊlɪŋ oʊpən ðə faɪɝbɑks dɔɹ, hi tʊk aʊɾ ə bʌndəl i kəd nɑt liv bɪhaɪnd. hi wɑz ɡlæɾ ilænsu hæd nɑt θɔɾ ɛniwʌn wəd kip kloʊðz ɪn ðɛɹ.

Still frowning, he knelt beside his bed. The tiled platforms on which the beds rested were stoves, where a small fire damped down to burn all night could keep the bed warm through the worst night in a Shienaran winter. The nights were still cooler than he was used to this time of year, but blankets were enough for warmth now. Pulling open the firebox door, he took out a bundle he could not leave behind. He was glad Elansu had not thought anyone would keep clothes in there.

sɛɾɪŋ ðə bʌndəl ətɑp ðə blæŋkəts, hi əntaɪd wʌn ɛn ən pɑɹʃəli ənfoʊldəɾ ɪt. ə ɡlimənz kloʊk, tɝn ɪnsaɪɾ aʊt tə haɪd ðə hʌnʒɹədz ə pætʃəz ðət kʌvɝɾ ɪt, pætʃəz ɪn ɛvɹi saɪz ən kʌlɝ ɪmædʒənəbəl. ðə kloʊk ɪtsɛlf wɑz saʊn ɪnʌf; ðə pætʃəz wɝ ə ɡlimənz bædʒ. hæd bɪn ə ɡlimənz bædʒ.

Setting the bundle atop the blankets, he untied one end and partially unfolded it. A gleeman's cloak, turned inside out to hide the hundreds of patches that covered it, patches in every size and color imaginable. The cloak itself was sound enough; the patches were a gleeman's badge. Had been a gleeman's badge.

ɪnsaɪd nɛsəl tu hɑɹd lɛðɝ keɪsəz. ðə lɑɹdʒɝ hɛld ə hɑɹp, wɪtʃ i nɛvɝ tʌtʃt. ðə hɑɹp wɑz nɛvɝ mɛn fəɹ ə fɑɹmɝz klʌmzi fɪŋɡɝz, bɔɪ. ði ʌðɝ, lɔŋ ən slɪm, kənteɪn ðə ɡoʊld-ænd-sɪlvɝ tʃeɪs fluɾ i hæd juz tə ɝn ɪz sʌpɝ ən bɛd mɔɹ ðən wʌns sɪns livɪŋ hoʊm. tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn hæd tɔɾ ɪm tə pleɪ ðət flut, bɪfɔɹ ðə ɡlimən daɪd. ɹænd kəd nɛvɝ tʌtʃ ɪt wɪθaʊt ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ tɑm, wɪð ɪz ʃɑɹp blu aɪz ən ɪz lɔŋ waɪt mʌstæʃɪz, ʃʌvɪŋ ðə bʌndəl kloʊk ɪndə hɪz hænz ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪm tə ɹʌn. ən ðən tɑm hæd ɹʌn hɪmsɛlf, naɪvz əpɪɹɪŋ mædʒɪkəli ɪn ɪz hænz əz ɪf i wɝ pɝfɔɹmɪŋ, tə feɪs ðə mɹdʒɹɑl ðət wɑz kʌmɪŋ tə kɪl ðɛm.

Inside nestled two hard leather cases. The larger held a harp, which he never touched. The harp was never meant for a farmer's clumsy fingers, boy. The other, long and slim, contained the gold-and-silver chased flute he had used to earn his supper and bed more than once since leaving home. Thom Merrilin had taught him to play that flute, before the gleeman died. Rand could never touch it without remembering Thom, with his sharp blue eyes and his long white mustaches, shoving the bundled cloak into his hands and shouting for him to run. And then Thom had run himself, knives appearing magically in his hands as if he were performing, to face the Myrddraal that was coming to kill them.

wɪð ə ʃɪvɝ, hi ɹidɪd ðə bʌndəl. "ðæts ɔl oʊvɝ wɪð." θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðə wɪn ɑn ðə taʊɝ tɑp, hi æɾəd, "stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz hæpən ðɪs kloʊs tə ðə blaɪt." hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i bɪlivd ɪt, nɑt ðə weɪ læn hæɾ əpɛɹənli mɛn ɪt. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ivən wɪθaʊt ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ɪt wɑz pæs taɪm fəɹ ɪm tə bi ɡɔn fɹəm fæl dæɹə.

With a shiver, he redid the bundle. "That's all over with." Thinking of the wind on the tower top, he added, "Strange things happen this close to the Blight." He was not sure he believed it, not the way Lan had apparently meant it. In any case, even without the Amyrlin Seat, it was past time for him to be gone from Fal Dara.

ʃɹʌɡɪŋ ɪndə ðə koʊɾ i hæd kɛpt aʊt - ɪt wɑz ə dip, dɑɹk ɡɹin, ən meɪɾ ɪm θɪŋk ə ðə fɔɹəsts ət hoʊm, tæmz wɛstwʊd fɑɹm wɛɹ i hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp, ən ðə wɔɾɝwʊd wɛɹ i hæd lɝn tə swɪm - hi bʌkəl ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk sɔɹd tə hɪz weɪst ən hʌŋ ɪz kwɪvɝ, bɹɪsəlɪŋ wɪð æɹoʊz, ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. hɪz ənstʃɹʌŋ baʊ stʊd pɹɑpt ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ wɪð mæts ən pɛɹɪnz, ðə steɪv tu hænz tɔlɝ ðən i wɑz. hi hæd meɪɾ ɪt hɪmsɛlf sɪns kʌmɪŋ tə fæl dæɹə, ən bɪsaɪdz hɪm, oʊnli læn ən pɛɹɪn kəd dʒɹɔ ɪt. stʌfɪŋ ɪz blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl ən ɪz nu kloʊk θɹu ðə lups ɑn ɪz bʌndəlz, hi slʌŋ ðə pɛɹ fɹəm ɪz lɛft ʃoʊldɝ, tɔst ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz ətɑp ðə kɔɹdz, ən ɡɹæb ðə baʊ. liv ðə sɔɹd-ɑɹm fɹi, hi θɔt. meɪk əm θɪŋk aɪm deɪnʒɝəs. meɪbi sʌmbɑɾi wɪl.

Shrugging into the coat he had kept out - it was a deep, dark green, and made him think of the forests at home, Tam's Westwood farm where he had grown up, and the Waterwood where he had learned to swim - he buckled the heron-mark sword to his waist and hung his quiver, bristling with arrows, on the other side. His unstrung bow stood propped in the corner with Mat's and Perrin's, the stave two hands taller than he was. He had made it himself since coming to Fal Dara, and besides him, only Lan and Perrin could draw it. Stuffing his blanketroll and his new cloak through the loops on his bundles, he slung the pair from his left shoulder, tossed his saddlebags atop the cords, and grabbed the bow. Leave the sword-arm free, he thought. Make them think I'm dangerous. Maybe somebody will.

kɹækɪŋ ðə dɔɹ ɹɪvil ðə hɔl ɔl bʌɾ ɛmpti; wʌn lɪvɹid sɝvən dæʃt baɪ, bʌɾ i nɛvɝ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlænst ət ɹænd. əz sun əz ðə mænz ɹæpəd fʊtfɔlz feɪɾəd, ɹænd slɪpt aʊɾ ɪndə ðə kɔɹəɾɝ.

Cracking the door revealed the hall all but empty; one liveried servant dashed by, but he never so much as glanced at Rand. As soon as the man's rapid footfalls faded, Rand slipped out into the corridor.

hi tʃɹaɪd tə wɔk nætʃɹəli, kæʒəwəli, bʌt wɪð sæɾəlbæɡz ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ən bʌndəlz ɑn ɪz bæk, hi nu hi lʊk laɪk wʌɾ i wɑz, ə mæn sɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ɑn ə dʒɝni ən nɑt minɪŋ tə kʌm bæk. ðə tʃɹʌmpəts kɔld əɡɛn, saʊndɪŋ feɪntɝ hɪɹ ɪnsaɪd ðə kip.

He tried to walk naturally, casually, but with saddlebags on his shoulder and bundles on his back, he knew he looked like what he was, a man setting out on a journey and not meaning to come back. The trumpets called again, sounding fainter here inside the keep.

hi hæɾ ə hɔɹs, ə tɔl beɪ stæljən, ɪn ðə nɔɹθ steɪbəl, kɔl ðə lɔɹdz steɪbəl, kloʊs baɪ ðə sæli ɡeɪt ðət lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ juzd wən i wɛn ɹaɪɾɪŋ. niðɝ ðə lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə nɔɹ ɛni ʌv ɪz fæmli wəd bi ɹaɪɾɪŋ tədeɪ, ðoʊ, ən ðə steɪbəl maɪt bi ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə steɪbəlbɔɪz. ðəɹ wɝ tu weɪz tə ɹitʃ ðə lɔɹdz steɪbəl fɹəm ɹændz ɹum. wʌn wəd teɪk ɪm ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊn ðə kip, bɪhaɪn lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝz pɹaɪvət ɡɑɹɾən, ðən daʊn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ən θɹu ðə fɛɹiɝz smɪθi, laɪkwaɪz sɝɾənli ɛmpti naʊ, tə ðə steɪbliɑɹd. taɪm ɪnʌf ðət weɪ fəɹ ɔɹɾɝz tə bi ɡɪvən, fəɹ ə sɝtʃ tə stɑɹt, bɪfɔɹ i ɹitʃt ɪz hɔɹs. ði ʌðɝ wɑz fɑɹ ʃɔɹɾɝ; fɝst əkɹɔs ði aʊɾɝ kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, wɛɹ ivən naʊ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɑz ɝaɪvɪŋ wɪð ənʌðɝ dʌzən əɹ mɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

He had a horse, a tall bay stallion, in the north stable, called the Lord's Stable, close by the salley gate that Lord Agelmar used when he went riding. Neither the Lord of Fal Dara nor any of his family would be riding today, though, and the stable might be empty except for the stableboys. There were two ways to reach the Lord's Stable from Rand's room. One would take him all the way around the keep, behind Lord Agelmar's private garden, then down the far side and through the farrier's smithy, likewise certainly empty now, to the stableyard. Time enough that way for orders to be given, for a search to start, before he reached his horse. The other was far shorter; first across the outer courtyard, where even now the Amyrlin Seat was arriving with another dozen or more Aes Sedai.

hɪz skɪn pɹɪkəld ət ðə θɔt; hi hæd hæd mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ ɛni seɪn laɪftaɪm. wʌn wɑz tu mɛni. ɔl ðə stɔɹiz sɛɾ ɪt, ən i nu ɪt fəɹ fækt. bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt sɝpɹaɪzd wən ɪz fit tʊk ɪm təwɔɹd ði aʊɾɝ kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. hi wəd nɛvɝ si lɛdʒəndɛɹi tɑɹ vəlɑn - hi kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd ðət ɹɪsk, naʊ əɹ ɛvɝ - bʌɾ i maɪt kætʃ ə ɡlɪmps ə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit bɪfɔɹ i lɛft. ðət wəd bi əz mʌtʃ əz siɪŋ ə kwin. ðəɹ kæn bi ɛniθɪŋ deɪnʒɝəs ɪn dʒʌs lʊkɪŋ, fɹəm ə dɪstəns. əl kip muvɪŋ ən bi ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɛvɝ noʊz aɪ wɑz ðɛɹ.

His skin prickled at the thought; he had had more than enough of Aes Sedai for any sane lifetime. One was too many. All the stories said it, and he knew it for fact. But he was not surprised when his feet took him toward the outer courtyard. He would never see legendary Tar Valon - he could not afford that risk, now or ever - but he might catch a glimpse of the Amyrlin Seat before he left. That would be as much as seeing a queen. There can't be anything dangerous in just looking, from a distance. I'll keep moving and be gone before she ever knows I was there.

hi oʊpən ə hɛvi, aɪɝn-stʃɹæp dɔɹ ɑntu ði aʊɾɝ kɔɹtʃjɑɹɾ ən stɛpt aʊɾ ɪndə saɪləns. pipəl fɔɹəstəd ðə ɡɑɹdwɔk ətɑp ɛvɹi wɔl, tɑp-nɑɾɪd soʊlʒɝz, ən lɪvɹid sɝvəns, ən minaɪəlz stɪl ɪn ðɛɹ mʌk, ɔl pɹɛs təɡɛðɝ tʃik baɪ dʒaʊl, wɪð tʃɪlʒɹən sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ʃoʊldɝz tə lʊk oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ɛldɝz' hɛdz əɹ skwizɪŋ ɪn tə pɪɹ ɝaʊnd weɪsts ən niz. ɛvɹi ɑɹtʃɝz' bælkəni wɑz pæk laɪk ə bæɹəl ʌv æpəlz, ən feɪsəz ivən ʃoʊɾ ɪn ðə nɛɹoʊ æɹoʊslɪts ɪn ðə wɔlz. ə θɪk mæs ə pipəl bɔɹɾɝd ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd laɪk ənʌðɝ wɔl. ən ɔl ə ðɛm wɑtʃt ən weɪɾəd ɪn saɪləns.

He opened a heavy, iron-strapped door onto the outer courtyard and stepped out into silence. People forested the guardwalk atop every wall, top-knotted soldiers, and liveried servants, and menials still in their muck, all pressed together cheek by jowl, with children sitting on shoulders to look over their elders' heads or squeezing in to peer around waists and knees. Every archers' balcony was packed like a barrel of apples, and faces even showed in the narrow arrowslits in the walls. A thick mass of people bordered the courtyard like another wall. And all of them watched and waited in silence.

hi pʊʃt ɪz weɪ əlɔŋ ðə wɔl, ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə smɪθiz ən flɛtʃɝz' stɔlz ðət laɪn ðə kɔɹt - fæl dæɹə wɑz ə fɔɹtʃɹəs, nɑɾ ə pæləs, dɪspaɪɾ ɪts saɪz ən ɡɹɪm ɡɹænduɹ, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt sɝv ðəɾ ɛnd - əpɑlədʒaɪzɪŋ kwaɪətli tə ðə pipəl i dʒɑsəld. səm lʊkt ɝaʊnd wɪð ə fɹaʊn, ən ə fju ɡeɪv ə sɛkən stɛɹ tə hɪz sæɾəlbæɡz ən bʌndəlz, bʌt nʌn bɹoʊk ðə saɪləns. moʊs dɪd nɑɾ ivən bɑðɝ tə lʊk əɾ u hæd bʌmpt pæs ðɛm.

He pushed his way along the wall, in front of the smithies and fletchers' stalls that lined the court - Fal Dara was a fortress, not a palace, despite its size and grim grandeur, and everything about it served that end - apologizing quietly to the people he jostled. Some looked around with a frown, and a few gave a second stare to his saddlebags and bundles, but none broke the silence. Most did not even bother to look at who had bumped past them.

hi kəɾ izəli si oʊvɝ ðə hɛdz ə moʊst ə ðɛm, ɪnʌf tə meɪk aʊt klɪɹli wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn ɪn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə meɪn ɡeɪt, ə laɪn ə mɛn stʊd bɪsaɪd ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, fɔɹtin ə ðɛm. noʊ tu wɔɹ ðə seɪm kaɪndə ɑɹmɝ əɹ kæɹid ðə seɪm sɔɹɾ ə sɔɹd, ən nʌn lʊk laɪk læn, bʌt ɹænd dɪd nɑt daʊt ðeɪ wɝ wɔɹɾɝz. ɹaʊn feɪsəz, skwɛɹ feɪsəz, lɔŋ feɪsəz, nɛɹoʊ feɪsəz, ðeɪ ɔl hæd ðə lʊk, əz ɪf ðeɪ sɔ θɪŋz ʌðɝ mɛn dɪd nɑt si, hɝd θɪŋz ʌðɝ mɛn dɪd nɑt hɪɹ. stændɪŋ ət ðɛɹ iz, ðeɪ lʊkt əz dɛdli əz ə pæk ʌv wʊlvz. oʊnli wʌn ʌðɝ θɪŋ əbaʊɾ əm wɑz əlaɪk. wʌn ən ɔl ðeɪ wɔɹ ðə kʌlɝ-ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊk i hæd fɝst sin ɑn læn, ðə kloʊk ðəɾ ɔfən sim tə feɪɾ ɪndə wʌtɛvɝ wɑz bɪhaɪn ɪt. ɪt dɪd nɑt meɪk fəɹ izi wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ ə stɪl stʌmək, soʊ mɛni mɛn ɪn ðoʊz kloʊks.

He could easily see over the heads of most of them, enough to make out clearly what was going on in the courtyard. Just inside the main gate, a line of men stood beside their horses, fourteen of them. No two wore the same kind of armor or carried the same sort of sword, and none looked like Lan, but Rand did not doubt they were Warders. Round faces, square faces, long faces, narrow faces, they all had the look, as if they saw things other men did not see, heard things other men did not hear. Standing at their ease, they looked as deadly as a pack of wolves. Only one other thing about them was alike. One and all they wore the color-shifting cloak he had first seen on Lan, the cloak that often seemed to fade into whatever was behind it. It did not make for easy watching or a still stomach, so many men in those cloaks.

ə dʌzən peɪsɪz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə wɔɹɾɝz, ə ɹoʊ ʌv wɪmən stʊd baɪ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz' hɛdz, ðə kaʊlz ə ðɛɹ kloʊks θɹoʊn bæk. hi kəd kaʊn ðɛm, naʊ. fɔɹtin. fɔɹtin ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðeɪ mʌs bi. tɔl ən ʃɔɹt, slɛndɝ ən plʌmp, dɑɹk ən fɛɹ, hɛɹ kʌt ʃɔɹɾ əɹ lɔŋ, hæŋɪŋ lus daʊn ðɛɹ bæks əɹ bɹeɪɾɪd, ðɛɹ kloʊðz wɝ əz dɪfɹən əz ðə wɔɹɾɝz' wɝ, ɪn əz mɛni kʌts ən kʌlɝz əz ðəɹ wɝ wɪmən. jɛt ðeɪ, tu, hæɾ ə seɪmnəs, wʌn ðət wɑz oʊnli ɑbviəs wən ðeɪ stʊd təɡɛðɝ laɪk ðɪs. tə ə wʊmən, ðeɪ simd eɪdʒləs. fɹəm ðɪs dɪstəns i wʊɾə kɔld əm ɔl jʌŋ, bʌt kloʊsɝ i nu ðeɪ wəd bi laɪk mɔɪɹeɪn. jʌŋ-simɪŋ jɛt nɑt, smuð-skɪn bʌt wɪð feɪsəz tu mətʃʊɹ fəɹ juθ, aɪz tu noʊɪŋ.

A dozen paces in front of the Warders, a row of women stood by their horses' heads, the cowls of their cloaks thrown back. He could count them, now. Fourteen. Fourteen Aes Sedai. They must be. Tall and short, slender and plump, dark and fair, hair cut short or long, hanging loose down their backs or braided, their clothes were as different as the Warders' were, in as many cuts and colors as there were women. Yet they, too, had a sameness, one that was only obvious when they stood together like this. To a woman, they seemed ageless. From this distance he would have called them all young, but closer he knew they would be like Moiraine. Young-seeming yet not, smooth-skinned but with faces too mature for youth, eyes too knowing.

kloʊsɝ? ful! aɪm tu kloʊs ɔlɹɛɾi! bɝn mi, aɪ ʃʊɾə ɡɔn ðə lɔŋ weɪ. hi pɹɛst ɑn təwɔɹɾ ɪz ɡoʊl, ənʌðɝ aɪɝn-baʊn dɔɹ ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə kɔɹt, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt stɑp lʊkɪŋ.

Closer? Fool! I'm too close already! Burn me, I should have gone the long way. He pressed on toward his goal, another iron-bound door at the far end of the court, but he could not stop looking.

kɑmli ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪɡnɔɹd ði ɔnlʊkɝz ən kɛp ðɛɹ ətɛnʃən ɑn ðə kɝteɪn pɑlɑnkwɪn, naʊ ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. ðə hɔɹsəz bɛɹɪŋ ɪt hɛld əz stɪl əz ɪf ɑslɝz stʊɾ ət ðɛɹ hɑɹnəs, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn tɔl wʊmən bɪsaɪd ðə pɑlɑnkwɪn, hɝ feɪs ən ɛɛs sədaɪz feɪs, ən ʃi peɪd noʊ maɪn tə ðə hɔɹsəz. ðə stæf ʃi hɛld əpɹaɪt bɪfɔɹ əɹ wɪð boʊθ hænz wɑz əz tɔl əz ʃi, ðə ɡɪldɪd fleɪm kæpɪŋ ɪt stændɪŋ əbʌv əɹ aɪz.

Calmly the Aes Sedai ignored the onlookers and kept their attention on the curtained palanquin, now in the center of the courtyard. The horses bearing it held as still as if ostlers stood at their harness, but there was only one tall woman beside the palanquin, her face an Aes Sedai's face, and she paid no mind to the horses. The staff she held upright before her with both hands was as tall as she, the gilded flame capping it standing above her eyes.

lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ feɪs ðə pɑlɑnkwɪn fɹəm ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə kɔɹt, blʌf ən skwɛɹ ən feɪs ənɹiɾəbəl. hɪz haɪ-kɑlɝd koʊɾ ə dɑɹk blu bɔɹ ðə θɹi ɹʌnɪŋ ɹɛd fɑksəz ə ðə haʊs dʒəɡəɾ əz wɛl əz ðə stupɪŋ blæk hɔk ə ʃaɪnɝ. bɪsaɪɾ ɪm stʊd ɹoʊnən, eɪdʒ-wɪðɝd bʌt stɪl tɔl; θɹi fɑksəz kɑɹv fɹəm ɹɛɾ æveɪtin tɑp ðə tɔl stæf ðə ʃæmbaɪən bɔɹ. ɹoʊnən wɑz ilænsuz ikwəl ɪn ɔɹɾɝɪŋ ðə kip, ʃæmbaɪən ən ʃætʃjən, bʌɾ ilænsu lɛf lɪɾəl fəɹ ɪm ɪksɛp sɛɹəmoʊniz ən æktɪŋ əz lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝz sɛkɹətɛɹi. boʊθ mɛnz tɑpnɑts wɝ snoʊ-waɪt.

Lord Agelmar faced the palanquin from the far end of the court, bluff and square and face unreadable. His high-collared coat of dark blue bore the three running red foxes of the House Jagad as well as the stooping black hawk of Shienar. Beside him stood Ronan, age-withered but still tall; three foxes carved from red avatine topped the tall staff the shambayan bore. Ronan was Elansu's equal in ordering the keep, shambayan and shatayan, but Elansu left little for him except ceremonies and acting as Lord Agelmar's secretary. Both men's topknots were snow-white.

ɔl ə ðɛm - ðə wɔɹɾɝz, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðə lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə, ən ɪz ʃæmbaɪən - stʊɾ əz stɪl əz stoʊn. ðə wɑtʃɪŋ kɹaʊd sim tə hoʊld ɪts bɹɛθ. dɪspaɪt hɪmsɛlf, ɹænd sloʊd.

All of them - the Warders, the Aes Sedai, the Lord of Fal Dara, and his shambayan - stood as still as stone. The watching crowd seemed to hold its breath. Despite himself, Rand slowed.

sʌɾənli ɹoʊnən ɹæpt ɪz stæf laʊdli θɹi taɪmz ɑn ðə bɹɔd peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz, kɔlɪŋ ɪndə ðə saɪləns, "hu kʌmz hɪɹ? hu kʌmz hɪɹ? hu kʌmz hɪɹ?"

Suddenly Ronan rapped his staff loudly three times on the broad paving stones, calling into the silence, "Who comes here? Who comes here? Who comes here?"

ðə wʊmən bɪsaɪd ðə pɑlɑnkwɪn tæpt əɹ stæf θɹi taɪmz ɪn ɹɪplaɪ. "ðə wɑtʃɝ ə ðə silz. ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit."

The woman beside the palanquin tapped her staff three times in reply. "The Watcher of the Seals. The Flame of Tar Valon. The Amyrlin Seat."

"waɪ ʃəd wi wɑtʃ?" ɹoʊnən dɪmændəd.

"Why should we watch?" Ronan demanded.

"fɔɹ ðə hoʊp ə hjumənkaɪnd," ðə tɔl wʊmən ɹɪplaɪd.

"For the hope of humankind," the tall woman replied.

"əɡɛnst wʌt də wi ɡɑɹd?"

"Against what do we guard?"

"ðə ʃædoʊ ət nun."

"The shadow at noon."

"haʊ lɔŋ ʃæl wi ɡɑɹd?"

"How long shall we guard?"

"fɹʌm ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn tə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðə wil ə taɪm tɝnz."

"From rising sun to rising sun, so long as the Wheel of Time turns."

eɪɡəlmɝ baʊd, hɪz waɪt tɑpnɑt stɝɪŋ ɪn ðə bɹiz. "fæl dæɹə ɔfɝz bɹɛɾ ən sɔlt ən wɛlkəm. wɛl kʌm ɪz ði æmɪɝlɪn sit tə fæl dæɹə, fəɹ hɪɹ ɪz ðə wɑtʃ kɛpt, hɪɹ ɪz ðə pæk meɪnteɪnd. wɛlkəm."

Agelmar bowed, his white topknot stirring in the breeze. "Fal Dara offers bread and salt and welcome. Well come is the Amyrlin Seat to Fal Dara, for here is the watch kept, here is the Pact maintained. Welcome."

ðə tɔl wʊmən dʒɹu bæk ðə kɝɾən ə ðə pɑlɑnkwɪn, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn sit stɛpt aʊt. dɑɹk-hɛɹd, eɪdʒləs əz ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ eɪdʒləs, ʃi ɹæn əɹ aɪz oʊvɝ ði əsɛmbəld wɑtʃɝz əz ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd. ɹænd flɪntʃt wən əɹ ɡeɪz kɹɔs hɪm; hi fɛlt əz ɪf i hæd bɪn tʌtʃt. bʌɾ əɹ aɪz pæst ɑn ən keɪm tə ɹɛst ɑn lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ. ə lɪvɹid sɝvənt nɛlt əɾ əɹ saɪd wɪð foʊldəd taʊəlz, stim stɪl ɹaɪzɪŋ, ɑn ə sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ. fɔɹməli, ʃi waɪpt əɹ hænz ən pæɾəd əɹ feɪs wɪð ə dæmp klɔθ. "aɪ ɔfɝ θæŋks fəɹ jəɹ wɛlkəm, maɪ sʌn. meɪ ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin haʊs dʒəɡəd. meɪ ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin fæl dæɹə ən ɔl əɹ pipəl."

The tall woman drew back the curtain of the palanquin, and the Amyrlin Seat stepped out. Dark-haired, ageless as all Aes Sedai were ageless, she ran her eyes over the assembled watchers as she straightened. Rand flinched when her gaze crossed him; he felt as if he had been touched. But her eyes passed on and came to rest on Lord Agelmar. A liveried servant knelt at her side with folded towels, steam still rising, on a silver tray. Formally, she wiped her hands and patted her face with a damp cloth. "I offer thanks for your welcome, my son. May the Light illumine House Jagad. May the Light illumine Fal Dara and all her people."

eɪɡəlmɝ baʊɾ əɡɛn. "ju ɑnɝ ʌs, mʌðɝ." ɪt dɪd nɑt saʊn ɑd, hɝ kɔlɪŋ ɪm sʌn əɹ ɪm kɔlɪŋ əɹ mʌðɝ, ðoʊ kəmpɛɹɪŋ əɹ smuð tʃiks tə hɪz kɹæɡi feɪs meɪɾ ɪm sim mɔɹ laɪk əɹ fɑðɝ, əɹ ivən ɡɹændfɑðɝ. ʃi hæɾ ə pɹɛzəns ðət mɔɹ ðən mætʃt hɪz. "haʊs dʒəɡəɾ ɪz jʊɹz. fæl dæɹə ɪz jʊɹz."

Agelmar bowed again. "You honor us, Mother." It did not sound odd, her calling him son or him calling her Mother, though comparing her smooth cheeks to his craggy face made him seem more like her father, or even grandfather. She had a presence that more than matched his. "House Jagad is yours. Fal Dara is yours."

tʃɪɹz ɹoʊz ɑn ɛvɹi saɪd, kɹæʃɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔlz ə ðə kip laɪk bɹeɪkɪŋ weɪvz.

Cheers rose on every side, crashing against the walls of the keep like breaking waves.

ʃɪvɝɪŋ, ɹænd hɝid təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ tə seɪfti, kɛɹləs ə hum i bʌmpt ɪndə naʊ. dʒʌs jəɹ blʌɾi ɪmædʒəneɪʃən. ʃi dʌzn ivən noʊ hu jə ɑɹ. nɑt jɛt. blʌɾ ən æʃəz, ɪf ʃi dɪd. . . . hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk ʌv wʌt wʊɾə hæpən ɪf ʃi nu hu hi wɑz, wʌɾ i wɑz. wʌt wəd hæpən wən ʃi faɪnəli faʊn aʊt. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ʃi hæd hæɾ ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə wɪn ətɑp ðə taʊɝ; ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd də θɪŋz laɪk ðæt. wən i pʊʃt θɹu ðət dɔɹ ən slæmd ɪt ʃʌt bɪhaɪn hɪm, mjuɾɪŋ ðə ɹɔɹ ʌv wɛlkəm ðət stɪl ʃʊk ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, hi hivd ə ɹɪliv saɪ.

Shivering, Rand hurried toward the door to safety, careless of whom he bumped into now. Just your bloody imagination. She doesn't even know who you are. Not yet. Blood and ashes, if she did. . . . He did not want to think of what would have happened if she knew who he was, what he was. What would happen when she finally found out. He wondered if she had had anything to do with the wind atop the tower; Aes Sedai could do things like that. When he pushed through that door and slammed it shut behind him, muting the roar of welcome that still shook the courtyard, he heaved a relieved sigh.

ðə hɔlz hɪɹ wɝ əz ɛmpti əz ði ʌðɝz hæd bɪn, ən i ɔl bʌt ɹæn. aʊɾ əkɹɔs ə smɔlɝ kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, wɪð ə faʊntən splæʃɪŋ ɪn ðə sɛntɝ, daʊn jɛɾ ənʌðɝ kɔɹəɾɝ ən aʊɾ ɪndə ðə flæɡstoʊn steɪbliɑɹd. ðə lɔɹdz steɪbəl ɪtsɛlf, bɪlt ɪndə ðə wɔl ə ðə kip, stʊd tɔl ən lɔŋ, wɪð bɪɡ wɪndoʊz hɪɹ ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz, ən hɔɹsəz kɛpt ɑn tu flɔɹz. ðə smɪθi əkɹɔs ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd stʊd saɪlənt, ðə fɛɹiɝ ən ɪz hɛlpɝz ɡɔn tə si ðə wɛlkəm.

The halls here were as empty as the others had been, and he all but ran. Out across a smaller courtyard, with a fountain splashing in the center, down yet another corridor and out into the flagstoned stableyard. The Lord's Stable itself, built into the wall of the keep, stood tall and long, with big windows here inside the walls, and horses kept on two floors. The smithy across the courtyard stood silent, the farrier and his helpers gone to see the Welcome.

timə, ðə lɛðɝi-feɪs hɛd ɡɹum, mɛɾ ɪm ət ðə waɪd dɔɹz wɪð ə dip baʊ, tʌtʃɪŋ ɪz fɔɹhɛɾ ən ðən ɪz hɑɹt. "spɪɹəɾ ən hɑɹt tə sɝv, maɪ lɔɹd. haʊ meɪ timə sɝv, maɪ lɔɹd?" noʊ wɔɹiɝz tɑpnɑt hɪɹ; timəz hɛɹ sæɾ ɑn ɪz hɛd laɪk ən ɪnvɝɾɪd ɡɹeɪ boʊl.

Tema, the leathery-faced head groom, met him at the wide doors with a deep bow, touching his forehead and then his heart. "Spirit and heart to serve, my Lord. How may Tema serve, my Lord?" No warrior's topknot here; Tema's hair sat on his head like an inverted gray bowl.

ɹænd saɪd. "fɔɹ ðə hʌnʒɹədθ taɪm, timə, aɪm nɑɾ ə lɔɹd."

Rand sighed. "For the hundredth time, Tema, I am not a lord."

"æz maɪ lɔɹd wɪʃɪz." ðə ɡɹumz baʊ wɑz ivən loʊɝ ðɪs taɪm.

"As my Lord wishes." The groom's bow was even lower this time.

ɪt wɑz ɪz neɪm ðət kɑz ðə pɹɑbləm, ən ə sɪməlɛɹəɾi. ɹænd ælθɹ. ælən mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən. fəɹ læn, əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə kʌstəm ə mɔlkiɝ, ðə ɹɔɪəl "æl" neɪmd ɪm kɪŋ, ðoʊ hi nɛvɝ juzd ɪt hɪmsɛlf. fəɹ ɹænd, "æl" wɑz dʒʌst ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪz neɪm, ðoʊ hi hæd hɝd ðət wʌns, lɔŋ əɡoʊ, bɪfɔɹ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɑz kɔl ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ɪt hæd mɛnt "sʌn ʌv." səm ə ðə sɝvəns ɪn fæl dæɹə kip, ðoʊ, hæd teɪkən ɪt tə min i wɑz ə kɪŋ, tu, əɹ ət list ə pɹɪns. ɔl ə hɪz ɑɹɡjəmən tə ðə kɑntʃɹɛɹi hæɾ oʊnli mænədʒ tə dɪmoʊɾ ɪm tə lɔɹd. ət list, hi θɔɾ ɪt hæd; hi hæd nɛvɝ sin kwaɪt soʊ mʌtʃ boʊɪŋ ən skɹeɪpɪŋ, ivən wɪð lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ.

It was his name that caused the problem, and a similarity. Rand al'Thor. Al'Lan Mandragoran. For Lan, according to the custom of Malkier, the royal "al" named him King, though he never used it himself. For Rand, "al" was just a part of his name, though he had heard that once, long ago, before the Two Rivers was called the Two Rivers, it had meant "son of." Some of the servants in Fal Dara keep, though, had taken it to mean he was a king, too, or at least a prince. All of his argument to the contrary had only managed to demote him to lord. At least, he thought it had; he had never seen quite so much bowing and scraping, even with Lord Agelmar.

"aɪ nid ɹɛd sæɾəld, timə." hi nu bɛɾɝ ðən tə ɔfɝ tə də ɪt hɪmsɛlf; timə wəd nɑt lɛt ɹænd sɔɪl ɪz hænz. "aɪ θɔɾ aɪd spɛn ə fju deɪz siɪŋ ðə kʌntʃɹi ɝaʊn ðə taʊn." wʌns i wɑz ɑn ðə bɪɡ beɪ stæljənz bæk, ə fju deɪz wəd si hɪm ət ðə ɹɪvɝ ɛɹɪnɪn, əɹ əkɹɔs ðə bɔɹɾɝ ɪndə ɝæfəl. ðəl nɛvɝ faɪn mi ðɛn.

"I need Red saddled, Tema." He knew better than to offer to do it himself; Tema would not let Rand soil his hands. "I thought I'd spend a few days seeing the country around the town." Once he was on the big bay stallion's back, a few days would see him at the River Erinin, or across the border into Arafel. They'll never find me then.

ðə ɡɹum bɛn hɪmsɛlf ɔlmoʊs dʌbəl, ən steɪd bɛnt. "fɝɡɪv, maɪ lɔɹd," hi wɪspɝd hɔɹsli. "fɝɡɪv, bʌt timə kænɑɾ oʊbeɪ."

The groom bent himself almost double, and stayed bent. "Forgive, my Lord," he whispered hoarsely. "Forgive, but Tema cannot obey."

flʌʃɪŋ wɪð ɪmbɛɹəsmənt, ɹænd tʊk ən æŋkʃəs lʊk ɝaʊnd - ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn ɛls ɪn saɪt - ðən ɡɹæb ðə mænz ʃoʊldɝ ən pʊld ɪm əpɹaɪt. hi maɪt nɑt bi eɪbəl tə stɑp timə ən ə fju ʌðɝz fɹəm æktɪŋ laɪk ðɪs, bʌɾ i kəd tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp ɛniwʌn ɛls fɹəm siɪŋ ɪt. "waɪ nɑt, timə? timə, lʊk ət mi, pliz. waɪ nɑt?"

Flushing with embarrassment, Rand took an anxious look around - there was no one else in sight - then grabbed the man's shoulder and pulled him upright. He might not be able to stop Tema and a few others from acting like this, but he could try to stop anyone else from seeing it. "Why not, Tema? Tema, look at me, please. Why not?"

"ɪɾ ɪz kəmændəd, maɪ lɔɹd," timə sɛd, stɪl wɪspɝɪŋ. hi kɛp dʒɹɑpɪŋ ɪz aɪz, nɑɾ əfɹeɪd, bʌɾ əʃeɪm ðəɾ i kəd nɑt də wʌt ɹænd æskt. ʃaɪnɝənz tʊk ʃeɪm ðə weɪ ʌðɝ pipəl tʊk biɪŋ bɹændɪɾ ə θif. "noʊ hɔɹs meɪ liv ðɪs steɪbəl əntɪl ði ɔɹɾɝ ɪz tʃeɪnʒd. nɔɹ ɛni steɪbəl ɪn ðə kip, maɪ lɔɹd."

"It is commanded, my Lord," Tema said, still whispering. He kept dropping his eyes, not afraid, but ashamed that he could not do what Rand asked. Shienarans took shame the way other people took being branded a thief. "No horse may leave this stable until the order is changed. Nor any stable in the keep, my Lord."

ɹænd hæɾ ɪz maʊθ oʊpən tə tɛl ðə mæn ɪt wɑz ɔl ɹaɪt, bʌɾ ɪnstɛɾ i lɪkt ɪz lɪps. "noʊ hɔɹs fɹəm ɛni steɪbəl?"

Rand had his mouth open to tell the man it was all right, but instead he licked his lips. "No horse from any stable?"

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd. ði ɔɹɾɝ keɪm daʊn oʊnli ə ʃɔɹt taɪm əɡoʊ. oʊnli moʊməns." timəz vɔɪs pɪkt ʌp stʃɹɛŋkθ. "ɔl ðə ɡeɪts ɑɹ kloʊzd əz wɛl, maɪ lɔɹd. nʌn meɪ ɛntɝ əɹ liv wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən. nɑɾ ivən ðə sɪɾi pətʃɹoʊl, soʊ timə hæz bɪn toʊld."

"Yes, my Lord. The order came down only a short time ago. Only moments." Tema's voice picked up strength. "All the gates are closed as well, my Lord. None may enter or leave without permission. Not even the city patrol, so Tema has been told."

ɹænd swɑloʊd hɑɹd, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt lɛsən ðə filɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝz klʌtʃɪŋ ɪz wɪnpəp. "ði ɔɹɾɝ, timə. ɪt keɪm fɹəm lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ?"

Rand swallowed hard, but it did not lessen the feeling of fingers clutching his windpipe. "The order, Tema. It came from Lord Agelmar?"

"ʌv kɔɹs, maɪ lɔɹd. hu ɛls? lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ dɪd nɑt spik ðə kəmæn tə timə, ʌv kɔɹs, nɔɹ ivən tə ðə mæn u dɪd spik tə timə, bʌt, maɪ lɔɹd, hu ɛls kəd ɡɪv sətʃ ə kəmæn ɪn fæl dæɹə?"

"Of course, my Lord. Who else? Lord Agelmar did not speak the command to Tema, of course, nor even to the man who did speak to Tema, but, my Lord, who else could give such a command in Fal Dara?"

hu ɛls? ɹænd dʒʌmpt əz ðə bɪɡəs bɛl ɪn ðə kip bɛl taʊɝ lɛɾ aʊɾ ə sɑnɝəs pil. ði ʌðɝ bɛlz dʒɔɪn ɪn, ðən bɛlz fɹəm ðə taʊn.

Who else? Rand jumped as the biggest bell in the keep bell tower let out a sonorous peal. The other bells joined in, then bells from the town.

"ɪf timə meɪ bi boʊld," ðə ɡɹum kɔld əbʌv ðə ɹɪvɝbɝeɪʃənz, "maɪ lɔɹd mʌs bi vɛɹi hæpi."

"If Tema may be bold," the groom called above the reverberations, "my Lord must be very happy."

ɹænd hæd tə ʃaʊt bæk tə bi hɝd. "hæpi? waɪ?"

Rand had to shout back to be heard. "Happy? Why?"

"ðə wɛlkəm ɪz fɪnɪʃt, maɪ lɔɹd." timəz dʒɛstʃɝ tʊk ɪn ðə bɛl taʊɝ. "ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɪl bi sɛndɪŋ fəɹ maɪ lɔɹd, ən maɪ lɔɹdz fɹɛnz, tə kʌm tə hɝ, naʊ."

"The Welcome is finished, my Lord." Tema's gesture took in the bell tower. "The Amyrlin Seat will be sending for my Lord, and my Lord's friends, to come to her, now."

ɹænd bɹoʊk ɪndə ə ɹʌn. hi dʒʌs hæd taɪm tə si ðə sɝpɹaɪz ɑn timəz feɪs, ən ðən i wɑz ɡɔn. hi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ wʌt timə θɔt. ʃɪl bi sɛndɪŋ fəɹ mi naʊ.

Rand broke into a run. He just had time to see the surprise on Tema's face, and then he was gone. He did not care what Tema thought. She will be sending for me now.


tʃæptɝ θɹi


CHAPTER 3

fɹɛnz ən ɛnəmiz


Friends and Enemies

ɹænd dɪd nɑt ɹʌn fɑɹ, oʊnli əz fɑɹ əz ðə sæli ɡeɪɾ ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ fɹəm ðə steɪbəl. hi sloʊd tə ə wɔk bɪfɔɹ i ɡɑt ðɛɹ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əpɪɹ kæʒəwəl ən ənhɝid.

Rand did not run far, only as far as the sally gate around the corner from the stable. He slowed to a walk before he got there, trying to appear casual and unhurried.

ði ɑɹtʃt ɡeɪt wɑz kloʊz taɪt. ɪt wɑz bɛɹli bɪɡ ɪnʌf fəɹ tu mɛn tə ɹaɪd θɹu əbɹɛst, bʌt laɪk ɔl ðə ɡeɪts ɪn ði aʊɾɝ wɔl, ɪt wɑz kʌvɝd wɪð bɹɔd stʃɹɪps ə blæk aɪɝn, ən lɑkt ʃʌt wɪð ə θɪk bɑɹ. tu ɡɑɹdz stʊd bɪfɔɹ ðə ɡeɪɾ ɪn pleɪn kɑnɪkəl hɛlməts ən pleɪt-ænd-meɪl ɑɹmɝ, wɪð lɔŋ sɔɹdz ɑn ðɛɹ bæks. ðɛɹ ɡoʊldən sɝkoʊts bɔɹ ðə blæk hɔk ɑn ðə tʃɛst. hi nu wʌn ə ðɛm slaɪtli, ɹeɪɡən. ðə skɑɹ fɹəm ə tʃɹɑlɑk æɹoʊ meɪɾ ə waɪt tʃɹaɪæŋɡəl əɡɛnst ɹeɪɡənz dɑɹk tʃik bɪhaɪn ðə bɑɹz ə hɪz feɪs-ɡɑɹd. ðə pʌkɝd skɪn dɪmpəld wɪð ə ɡɹɪn wən i sɔ ɹænd.

The arched gate was closed tight. It was barely big enough for two men to ride through abreast, but like all the gates in the outer wall, it was covered with broad strips of black iron, and locked shut with a thick bar. Two guards stood before the gate in plain conical helmets and plate-and-mail armor, with long swords on their backs. Their golden surcoats bore the Black Hawk on the chest. He knew one of them slightly, Ragan. The scar from a Trolloc arrow made a white triangle against Ragan's dark cheek behind the bars of his face-guard. The puckered skin dimpled with a grin when he saw Rand.

"pis feɪvɝ ju, ɹænd ælθɹ." ɹeɪɡən ɔlmoʊst ʃaʊɾəd tə bi hɝɾ oʊvɝ ðə bɛlz. "du jə ɪntɛn tə ɡoʊ hɪt ɹæbəts oʊvɝ ðə hɛd, əɹ dʒju stɪl ɪnsɪs ðət klʌb ɪz ə baʊ?" ði ʌðɝ ɡɑɹd ʃɪftəd tə stæn mɔɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə ɡeɪt.

"Peace favor you, Rand al'Thor." Ragan almost shouted to be heard over the bells. "Do you intend to go hit rabbits over the head, or do you still insist that club is a bow?" The other guard shifted to stand more in front of the gate.

"pis feɪvɝ ju, ɹeɪɡən," ɹænd sɛd, stɑpɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm. ɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝt tə kip ɪz vɔɪs kɑm. "ju noʊ ɪts ə baʊ. juv sin mi ʃuɾ ɪt."

"Peace favor you, Ragan," Rand said, stopping in front of them. It was an effort to keep his voice calm. "You know it's a bow. You've seen me shoot it."

"noʊ ɡʊd fɹəm ə hɔɹs," ði ʌðɝ ɡɑɹd sɛd saʊɝli. ɹænd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz hɪm, naʊ, wɪð ɪz dip-sɛt, ɔlmoʊst-blæk aɪz ðət nɛvɝ sim tə blɪŋk. ðeɪ pɪɹd fɹəm ɪz hɛlmət laɪk twɪn keɪvz ɪnsaɪɾ ənʌðɝ keɪv. hi səpoʊz ðəɹ kəd bi wɝs lʌk fəɹ ɪm ðən mæsimə ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə ɡeɪt, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ, ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ə ɹɛɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ. "ɪts tu lɔŋ," mæsimə æɾəd. "aɪ kən ʃut θɹi æɹoʊz wɪð ə hɔɹsboʊ waɪl jə lus wʌn wɪð ðət mɑnstɝ."

"No good from a horse," the other guard said sourly. Rand recognized him, now, with his deep-set, almost-black eyes that never seemed to blink. They peered from his helmet like twin caves inside another cave. He supposed there could be worse luck for him than Masema guarding the gate, but he was not sure how, short of a Red Aes Sedai. "It's too long," Masema added. "I can shoot three arrows with a horsebow while you loose one with that monster."

ɹænd fɔɹst ə ɡɹɪn, əz ɪf i θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ə dʒoʊk. mæsimə hæd nɛvɝ meɪɾ ə dʒoʊk ɪn ɪz hɪɹɪŋ, nɔɹ læft ət wʌn. moʊst ə ðə mɛn ət fæl dæɹə æksɛptɪd ɹænd; hi tʃɹeɪnd wɪð læn, ən lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ hæɾ ɪm ət teɪbəl, ən moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt ʌv ɔl, hi hæɾ ɝaɪvd ət fæl dæɹə ɪn kʌmpəni wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. səm simd əneɪbəl tə fɝɡɛɾ ɪz biɪŋ ən aʊtləndɝ, ðoʊ, bɛɹli seɪɪŋ tu wɝdz tə hɪm, ən ðən oʊnli ɪf ðeɪ hæd tə. mæsimə wɑz ðə wɝst ə ðoʊz.

Rand forced a grin, as if he thought it was a joke. Masema had never made a joke in his hearing, nor laughed at one. Most of the men at Fal Dara accepted Rand; he trained with Lan, and Lord Agelmar had him at table, and most important of all, he had arrived at Fal Dara in company with Moiraine, an Aes Sedai. Some seemed unable to forget his being an outlander, though, barely saying two words to him, and then only if they had to. Masema was the worst of those.

"ɪts ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ mi," ɹænd sɛd. "spikɪŋ ə ɹæbəts, ɹeɪɡən, haʊ əbaʊt lɛɾɪŋ mi aʊt? ɔl ðɪs nɔɪz ən bʌsəl ɪz tu mʌtʃ fəɹ mi. bɛɾɝ tə bi aʊt hʌntɪŋ ɹæbəts, ivən ɪf aɪ nɛvɝ si wʌn."

"It's good enough for me," Rand said. "Speaking of rabbits, Ragan, how about letting me out? All this noise and bustle is too much for me. Better to be out hunting rabbits, even if I never see one."

ɹeɪɡən hæf tɝn tə lʊk əɾ ɪz kəmpænjən, ən ɹændz hoʊps bɪɡæn tə lɪft. ɹeɪɡən wɑz ən iziɡoʊɪŋ mæn, hɪz mænɝ bɪlaɪɪŋ ɪz ɡɹɪm skɑɹ, ən i sim tə laɪk ɹænd. bʌt mæsimə wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd. ɹeɪɡən saɪd. "ɪt kænɑt bi, ɹænd ælθɹ." hi ɡeɪv ə taɪni nɑd təwɔɹd mæsimə əz ɪf tə ɪkspleɪn. ɪf ɪt wɝ ʌp tə hɪm əloʊn. . . . "noʊ wʌn ɪz tə liv wɪθaʊɾ ə ɹɪɾən pæs. tu bæd jə dɪd nɑɾ æsk ə fju mɪnəts əɡoʊ. ðə kəmæn dʒʌs keɪm daʊn tə bɑɹ ðə ɡeɪts."

Ragan half turned to look at his companion, and Rand's hopes began to lift. Ragan was an easygoing man, his manner belying his grim scar, and he seemed to like Rand. But Masema was already shaking his head. Ragan sighed. "It cannot be, Rand al'Thor." He gave a tiny nod toward Masema as if to explain. If it were up to him alone. . . . "No one is to leave without a written pass. Too bad you did not ask a few minutes ago. The command just came down to bar the gates."

"bʌt waɪ wəd lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ wɑnə kip mi ɪn?" mæsimə wɑz aɪɪŋ ðə bʌndəlz ɑn ɹændz bæk, ən ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz. ɹænd tʃɹaɪd tə ɪɡnɔɹ hɪm. "ɪm ɪz ɡɛst," hi wɛn ɑn tə ɹeɪɡən. "baɪ maɪ ɑnɝ, aɪ cʊɾə lɛft ɛnitaɪm ðiz pæst wiks. waɪ wəɾ i min ðɪs ɔɹɾɝ fəɹ mi? ɪts lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝz ɔɹɾɝ, ɪzən ɪt?" mæsimə blɪŋkt ət ðæt, ən ɪz pɝpɛtʃuəl fɹaʊn dipənd; hi ɔlmoʊst əpɪɹd tə fɝɡɛt ɹændz pæks.

"But why would Lord Agelmar want to keep me in?" Masema was eyeing the bundles on Rand's back, and his saddlebags. Rand tried to ignore him. "I'm his guest," he went on to Ragan. "By my honor, I could have left anytime these past weeks. Why would he mean this order for me? It is Lord Agelmar's order, isn't it?" Masema blinked at that, and his perpetual frown deepened; he almost appeared to forget Rand's packs.

ɹeɪɡən læft. "hu ɛls kəd ɡɪv sətʃ ən ɔɹɾɝ, ɹænd ælθɹ? ʌv kɔɹs, ɪt wɑz ənoʊ hu pæst ɪt tə mi, bʌt huz ɔɹɾɝ kəɾ ɪɾ əv bɪn?"

Ragan laughed. "Who else could give such an order, Rand al'Thor? Of course, it was Uno who passed it to me, but whose order could it have been?"

mæsiməz aɪz, fɪkst ɑn ɹændz feɪs, dɪd nɑt blɪŋk. "aɪ dʒʌst wɑnə ɡoʊ aʊt baɪ maɪsɛlf, ðæts ɔl," ɹænd sɛd. "aɪl tʃɹaɪ wʌn ə ðə ɡɑɹɾənz, ðɛn. noʊ ɹæbəts, bʌɾ ət lis ðəɹ woʊn bi ə kɹaʊd. ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ju, ən pis feɪvɝ ju."

Masema's eyes, fixed on Rand's face, did not blink. "I just want to go out by myself, that's all," Rand said. "I'll try one of the gardens, then. No rabbits, but at least there won't be a crowd. The Light illumine you, and peace favor you."

hi wɔkt əweɪ wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ən ænsɝɪŋ blɛsɪŋ, ɹizɑlvɪŋ nɑt tə ɡoʊ nɪɹ ɛni ʌv ðə ɡɑɹɾənz ɑn ɛni əkaʊnt. bɝn mi, wʌns ðə sɛɹəmoʊniz ɑɹ dʌn ðəɹ kəd bi ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ɛni ʌv ðɛm. əwɛɹ ə mæsiməz aɪz ɑn ɪz bæk - hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz mæsimə - hi kɛpt ɪz peɪs nɔɹməl.

He walked away without waiting for an answering blessing, resolving not to go near any of the gardens on any account. Burn me, once the ceremonies are done there could be Aes Sedai in any of them. Aware of Masema's eyes on his back - he was sure it was Masema - he kept his pace normal.

sʌɾənli ðə bɛlz stɑpt ɹɪŋɪŋ, ən i skɪpt ə stɛp. mɪnəts wɝ pæsɪŋ. ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni ʌv ðɛm. taɪm fəɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit tə bi ʃoʊn tə hɝ tʃeɪmbɝz. taɪm fəɹ əɹ tə sɛn fəɹ hɪm, tə stɑɹɾ ə sɝtʃ wən i wɑz nɑt faʊnd. əz sun əz i wɑz aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ə ðə sæli ɡeɪt, hi bɪɡæn tə ɹʌn əɡɛn.

Suddenly the bells stopped ringing, and he skipped a step. Minutes were passing. A great many of them. Time for the Amyrlin Seat to be shown to her chambers. Time for her to send for him, to start a search when he was not found. As soon as he was out of sight of the sally gate, he began to run again.

nɪɹ ðə bæɹəks' kɪtʃənz, ðə kɑɹɾɝz' ɡeɪt, wɛɹ ɔl ðə fudstʌfs fəɹ ðə kip wɝ bɹɔɾ ɪn, stʊd kloʊzd ən bɑɹd, bɪhaɪn ə pɛɹ ə soʊlʒɝz. hi hɝid pæst, əkɹɔs ðə kɪtʃən jɑɹd, əz ɪf i hæd nɛvɝ mɛn tə stɑp.

Near the barracks' kitchens, the Carters' Gate, where all the foodstuffs for the keep were brought in, stood closed and barred, behind a pair of soldiers. He hurried past, across the kitchen yard, as if he had never meant to stop.

ðə dɔɡ ɡeɪt, ət ðə bæk ə ðə kip, dʒʌs haɪ ɪnʌf ən waɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ wʌn mæn ɑn fʊt, hæɾ ɪts ɡɑɹdz, tu. hi tɝn ɝaʊn bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ sɔ hɪm. ðəɹ wɝ nɑt mɛni ɡeɪts, ivən əz bɪɡ əz ðə kip wɑz, bʌɾ ɪf ðə dɔɡ ɡeɪt wɑz ɡɑɹɾəd, ðeɪ ɔl wəd bi.

The Dog Gate, at the back of the keep, just high enough and wide enough for one man on foot, had its guards, too. He turned around before they saw him. There were not many gates, even as big as the keep was, but if the Dog Gate was guarded, they all would be.

pɝhæps i kəd faɪn ə lɛŋθ ə ɹoʊp. . . . hi klaɪmd wʌn ə ðə stɛɹz tə ðə tɑp ə ði aʊɾɝ wɔl, tə ðə waɪd pɛɹəpət wɪð ɪts kɹɛnɛleɪɾɪd wɔlz. ɪt wɑz nɑt kʌmftəɹbəl fəɹ hɪm, biɪŋ soʊ haɪ ən ɪkspoʊzd ɪf ðət wɪn keɪm əɡɛn, bʌt fɹəm ðəɹ i kəd si əkɹɔs ðə tɔl tʃɪmniz ən ʃɑɹp ɹufs ə ðə taʊn ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə sɪɾi wɔl. ivən æftɝ nɪɹli ə mʌnθ, ðə haʊsəz stɪl lʊkt ɑd tə hɪz tu ɹɪvɝz aɪz, ivz ɹitʃɪŋ ɔlmoʊs tə ðə ɡɹaʊn əz ɪf ðə haʊsəz wɝ ɔl wʊd-ʃɪŋɡəld ɹuf, ən tʃɪmniz æŋɡəl tə lɛt hɛvi snoʊ slaɪd pæst. ə bɹɔd, peɪv skwɛɹ sɝaʊndəd ðə kip, bʌɾ oʊnli ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz fɹəm ðə wɔl leɪ stʃɹits fʊl ə pipəl ɡoʊɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛɹ deɪli bɪznəs, eɪpɹənd ʃɑpkipɝz aʊɾ ʌndɝ ði ɔnɪŋz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛɹ ʃɑps, ɹʌf-kloʊð fɑɹmɝz ɪn taʊn tə baɪ ən sɛl, hɔkɝz ən tʃɹeɪdzmən ən taʊnzpipəl ɡæðɝɾ ɪn nɑts, noʊ daʊt tə tɔk əbaʊt ðə sɝpɹaɪz vɪzət fɹəm ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. hi kəd si kɑɹts ən pipəl floʊɪŋ θɹu wʌn ə ðə ɡeɪts ɪn ðə taʊn wɔl. əpɛɹənli ðə ɡɑɹdz ðəɹ hæd noʊ ɔɹɾɝz əbaʊt stɑpɪŋ ɛniwʌn.

Perhaps he could find a length of rope. . . . He climbed one of the stairs to the top of the outer wall, to the wide parapet with its crenellated walls. It was not comfortable for him, being so high and exposed if that wind came again, but from there he could see across the tall chimneys and sharp roofs of the town all the way to the city wall. Even after nearly a month, the houses still looked odd to his Two Rivers eyes, eaves reaching almost to the ground as if the houses were all wood-shingled roof, and chimneys angled to let heavy snow slide past. A broad, paved square surrounded the keep, but only a hundred paces from the wall lay streets full of people going about their daily business, aproned shopkeepers out under the awnings in front of their shops, rough-clothed farmers in town to buy and sell, hawkers and tradesmen and townspeople gathered in knots, no doubt to talk about the surprise visit from the Amyrlin Seat. He could see carts and people flowing through one of the gates in the town wall. Apparently the guards there had no orders about stopping anyone.

hi lʊkt ʌp ət ðə nɪɹəst ɡɑɹtaʊɝ; wʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz ɹeɪzd ə ɡɔntələɾəd hæn tə hɪm. wɪð ə bɪɾɝ læf, hi weɪv bæk. nɑɾ ə fʊɾ ə ðə wɔl bʌt wɑz ʌndɝ ði aɪz ʌv ɡɑɹdz. linɪŋ θɹu ən ɛmbɹəʒɝ, hi pɪɹd daʊn pæs ðə slɑts ɪn ðə stoʊn fəɹ sɛɾɪŋ hɔɹɾɪŋz, daʊn ðə ʃɪɹ ɪkspæns ə stoʊn tə ðə dʒɹaɪmoʊt fɑɹ bɪloʊ. twɛnti peɪsɪz waɪɾ ən tɛn dip, feɪst wɪð stoʊn pɑlɪʃt slɪpɝi smuð. ə loʊ wɔl, slæntəd tə ɡɪv noʊ haɪɾɪŋ pleɪs, sɝaʊndəɾ ɪt tə kip ɛniwʌn fɹəm fɔlɪŋ ɪn baɪ æksəɾənt, ən ɪts bɑɾəm wɑz ə fɔɹəst ə ɹeɪzɝ-ʃɑɹp spaɪks. ivən wɪð ə ɹoʊp tə klaɪm daʊn ən noʊ ɡɑɹdz wɑtʃɪŋ, hi kəd nɑt kɹɔs ðæt. wʌt sɝv tə kip tʃɹɑləks aʊɾ ɪn ðə læst ɪkstʃɹim sɝv dʒʌst əz wɛl tə kip ɪm ɪn.

He looked up at the nearest guardtower; one of the soldiers raised a gauntleted hand to him. With a bitter laugh, he waved back. Not a foot of the wall but was under the eyes of guards. Leaning through an embrasure, he peered down past the slots in the stone for setting hoardings, down the sheer expanse of stone to the drymoat far below. Twenty paces wide and ten deep, faced with stone polished slippery smooth. A low wall, slanted to give no hiding place, surrounded it to keep anyone from falling in by accident, and its bottom was a forest of razor-sharp spikes. Even with a rope to climb down and no guards watching, he could not cross that. What served to keep Trollocs out in the last extreme served just as well to keep him in.

sʌɾənli hi fɛlt wɪɹi tə ðə boʊn, dʒɹeɪnd. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɑz ðɛɹ, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ aʊt. noʊ weɪ aʊt, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn sit ðɛɹ. ɪf ʃi nu hi wɑz ðɛɹ, ɪf ʃi hæd sɛn ðə wɪn ðət hæd siz hɪm, ðən ʃi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi hʌntɪŋ hɪm, hʌntɪŋ wɪð ən ɛɛs sədaɪz paʊɝz. ɹæbəts hæd mɔɹ tʃæns əɡɛnst ɪz baʊ. hi ɹəfjuz tə ɡɪv ʌp, ðoʊ. ðəɹ wɝ ðoʊz u sɛd tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk kəd titʃ stoʊnz ən ɡɪv lɛsənz tə mjulz. wən ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɛls lɛft, tu ɹɪvɝz pipəl hʌŋ ɑn tə ðɛɹ stʌbɝnnəs.

Suddenly he felt weary to the bone, drained. The Amyrlin Seat was there, and there was no way out. No way out, and the Amyrlin Seat there. If she knew he was there, if she had sent the wind that had seized him, then she was already hunting him, hunting with an Aes Sedai's powers. Rabbits had more chance against his bow. He refused to give up, though. There were those who said Two Rivers folk could teach stones and give lessons to mules. When there was nothing else left, Two Rivers people hung on to their stubbornness.

livɪŋ ðə wɔl, hi wɑndɝd θɹu ðə kip. hi peɪd noʊ maɪn tə wɛɹ i wɛnt, soʊ lɔŋ əz ɪt wɑz noʊwɛɹ i wəd bi ɪkspɛktəd. nɑɾ ɛniwɛɹ nɪɹ ɪz ɹum, nɔɹ ɛni ʌv ðə steɪbəlz, nɔɹ ɛni ɡeɪt - mæsimə maɪt ɹɪsk ənoʊz tʌŋ tə ɹipɔɹɾ ɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə liv - nɔɹ ɡɑɹɾən. ɔl i kəd θɪŋk ʌv wɑz kipɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ. ivən mɔɪɹeɪn. ʃi nu əbaʊt hɪm. dɪspaɪt ðæt, ʃi hæd dʌn nʌθɪŋ əɡɛns hɪm. soʊ fɑɹ. soʊ fɑɹ əz jə noʊ. wʌɾ ɪf ʃiz tʃeɪnʒd əɹ maɪnd? meɪbi ʃi sɛn fəɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit.

Leaving the wall, he wandered through the keep. He paid no mind to where he went, so long as it was nowhere he would be expected. Not anywhere near his room, nor any of the stables, nor any gate - Masema might risk Uno's tongue to report him trying to leave - nor garden. All he could think of was keeping away from any Aes Sedai. Even Moiraine. She knew about him. Despite that, she had done nothing against him. So far. So far as you know. What if she's changed her mind? Maybe she sent for the Amyrlin Seat.

fəɹ ə moʊmənt, filɪŋ lɔst, hi lin əɡɛns ðə kɔɹəɾɝ wɔl, ðə stoʊn hɑɹɾ ʌndɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. aɪz blæŋk, hi stɛɹɾ əɾ ə dɪstənt nʌθɪŋ ən sɔ θɪŋz i dɪd nɑt wɑnə si. dʒɛntəld. wəɾ ɪt bi soʊ bæd, tə hæv ɪɾ ɔl oʊvɝ? ɹɪli oʊvɝ? hi kloʊzd ɪz aɪz, bʌɾ i kəd stɪl si hɪmsɛlf, hʌɾəlɪŋ laɪk ə ɹæbət wɪð noʊwɛɹ lɛf tə ɹʌn, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ kloʊzɪŋ ɹaʊn ɪm laɪk ɹeɪvənz. ðeɪ ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz daɪ sun æftɝ, mɛn huv bɪn dʒɛntəld. ðeɪ stɑp wɑntɪŋ tə lɪv. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd tɑm mɛɹɪlɪnz wɝdz tu wɛl tə feɪs ðæt. wɪð ə bɹɪsk ʃeɪk, hi hɝiɾ ɑn daʊn ðə hɔl. noʊ nid tə steɪ ɪn wʌn pleɪs əntɪl i wɑz faʊnd. haʊ lɔŋ tɪl ðeɪ faɪn jə ɛniweɪ? jəɹ laɪk ə ʃip ɪn ə pɛn. haʊ lɔŋ? hi tʌtʃt ðə sɔɹd hɪlt əɾ ɪz saɪd. noʊ, nɑɾ ə ʃip. nɑt fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ ɛnibəɾi ɛls. hi fɛlt ə lɪɾəl fulɪʃ, bʌt dɪtɝmənd.

For a moment, feeling lost, he leaned against the corridor wall, the stone hard under his shoulder. Eyes blank, he stared at a distant nothing and saw things he did not want to see. Gentled. Would it be so bad, to have it all over? Really over? He closed his eyes, but he could still see himself, huddling like a rabbit with nowhere left to run, and Aes Sedai closing round him like ravens. They almost always die soon after, men who've been gentled. They stop wanting to live. He remembered Thom Merrilin's words too well to face that. With a brisk shake, he hurried on down the hall. No need to stay in one place until he was found. How long till they find you anyway? You're like a sheep in a pen. How long? He touched the sword hilt at his side. No, not a sheep. Not for Aes Sedai or anybody else. He felt a little foolish, but determined.

pipəl wɝ ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ðɛɹ tæsks. ə dɪn ə vɔɪsəz ən klæɾɝɪŋ pɑts fɪl ðə kɪtʃən ðət leɪ nɪɹəs ðə ɡɹeɪt hɔl, wɛɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ən əɹ pɑɹɾi wəd fis ðət naɪt. kʊks ən skʌljənz ən pɑtbɔɪz ɔl bʌt ɹæn ət ðɛɹ wɝk; ðə spɪt dɑɡz tʃɹɑɾəd ɪn ðɛɹ wɪkɝ wilz tə tɝn ðə spɪɾɪd mits. hi meɪɾ ɪz weɪ kwɪkli θɹu ðə hiɾ ən stim, θɹu ðə smɛlz ə spaɪsəz ən kʊkɪŋ. noʊ wʌn spɛɹɾ ɪm ə sɛkənd ɡlæns; ðeɪ wɝ ɔl tu bɪzi.

People were returning to their tasks. A din of voices and clattering pots filled the kitchen that lay nearest the Great Hall, where the Amyrlin Seat and her party would feast that night. Cooks and scullions and potboys all but ran at their work; the spit dogs trotted in their wicker wheels to turn the spitted meats. He made his way quickly through the heat and steam, through the smells of spices and cooking. No one spared him a second glance; they were all too busy.

ðə bæk hɔlz, wɛɹ ðə sɝvəns lɪvd ɪn smɔl əpɑɹtməns, wɝ stɝɪŋ laɪk ə kɪkt ænθip əz mɛn ən wɪmən skɝid tə dɑn ðɛɹ bɛs lɪvɝi. tʃɪlʒɹən dɪd ðɛɹ pleɪɪŋ ɪn kɔɹnɝz, aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ. bɔɪz weɪvd wʊɾən sɔɹdz, ən ɡɝlz pleɪd wɪð kɑɹv dɑlz, səm ənaʊnsɪŋ ðət hɝz wɑz ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. moʊst ə ðə dɔɹz stʊɾ oʊpən, dɔɹweɪz blɑkt oʊnli baɪ biɾɪd kɝɾənz. nɔɹməli, ðət mɛn huɛvɝ lɪv ðəɹ wɑz oʊpən tə vɪzəɾɝz, bʌt tədeɪ ɪt sɪmpli mɛn ðə ɹɛzəɾənts wɝ ɪn ə hɝi. ivən ðoʊz u baʊd tə hɪm dɪd soʊ wɪð hɑɹdli ə pɔz.

The back halls, where the servants lived in small apartments, were stirring like a kicked antheap as men and women scurried to don their best livery. Children did their playing in corners, out of the way. Boys waved wooden swords, and girls played with carved dolls, some announcing that hers was the Amyrlin Seat. Most of the doors stood open, doorways blocked only by beaded curtains. Normally, that meant whoever lived there was open to visitors, but today it simply meant the residents were in a hurry. Even those who bowed to him did so with hardly a pause.

wəɾ ɛni ʌv əm hɪɹ, wən ðeɪ wɛn tə sɝv, ðəɾ i wɑz biɪŋ sɔt, ən spik ə siɪŋ hɪm? spik tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ən tɛl əɹ wɛɹ tə faɪn hɪm? ði aɪz ðəɾ i pæst sʌɾənli əpɪɹd tə bi stʌɾiɪŋ ɪm slaɪli, ən tə bi weɪɪŋ ən kənsɪɾɝɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk. ivən ðə tʃɪlʒɹən tʊk ɑn ʃɑɹpɝ lʊks ɪn ɪz maɪnz aɪ. hi nu ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ɪz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən - hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz; ɪt hæd tə bi - bʌt wən ðə sɝvəns' əpɑɹtməns wɝ bɪhaɪn hɪm, hi fɛlt əz ɪf i hæɾ ɪskeɪp bɪfɔɹ ə tʃɹæp kəd spɹɪŋ ʃʌt.

Would any of them hear, when they went to serve, that he was being sought, and speak of seeing him? Speak to an Aes Sedai and tell her where to find him? The eyes that he passed suddenly appeared to be studying him slyly, and to be weighing and considering behind his back. Even the children took on sharper looks in his mind's eye. He knew it was just his imagination - he was sure it was; it had to be - but when the servants' apartments were behind him, he felt as if he had escaped before a trap could spring shut.

səm pleɪsəz ɪn ðə kip wɝ ɛmpti ʌv pipəl, ðə foʊk u nɔɹməli wɝk ðəɹ ɹilis fəɹ ðə sʌɾən hɑlədeɪ. ði ɑɹmɔɹɝz fɔɹdʒ, wɪð ɔl ðə faɪɝz bæŋkt, ði ænvəlz saɪlənt. saɪlənt. koʊld. laɪfləs. jɛt sʌmhaʊ nɑɾ ɛmpti. hɪz skɪn pɹɪkəld, ən i spʌn ɑn ɪz hil. noʊ wʌn ðɛɹ. dʒʌs ðə bɪɡ skwɛɹ tul tʃɛsts ən ðə kwɛntʃɪŋ bæɹəlz fʊl ʌv ɔɪl. ðə hɛɹ ɑn ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk stɝd, ən i wɪpt ɹaʊn əɡɛn. ðə hæmɝz ən tɑŋz hʌŋ ɪn ðɛɹ pleɪsəz ɑn ðə wɔl. æŋɡɹəli hi stɛɹɾ ɝaʊn ðə bɪɡ ɹum. ðɛɹz noʊbɑdi ðɛɹ. ɪts dʒʌs maɪ ɪmædʒəneɪʃən. ðət wɪnd, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn; ðæts ɪnʌf tə meɪk mi ɪmædʒən θɪŋz.

Some places in the keep were empty of people, the folk who normally worked there released for the sudden holiday. The armorer's forge, with all the fires banked, the anvils silent. Silent. Cold. Lifeless. Yet somehow not empty. His skin prickled, and he spun on his heel. No one there. Just the big square tool chests and the quenching barrels full of oil. The hair on the back of his neck stirred, and he whipped round again. The hammers and tongs hung in their places on the wall. Angrily he stared around the big room. There's nobody there. It's just my imagination. That wind, and the Amyrlin; that's enough to make me imagine things.

aʊtsaɪɾ ɪn ði ɑɹmɔɹɝz jɑɹd, ðə wɪn swɝld ʌp ɝaʊn ɪm moʊməntɛɹəli. dɪspaɪt hɪmsɛlf i dʒʌmpt, θɪŋkɪŋ ɪt mɛn tə kætʃ hɪm. fəɹ ə moʊmən i smɛl ðə feɪn oʊɾɝ ə dəkeɪ əɡɛn, ən hɝd sʌmwʌn bɪhaɪn ɪm læfɪŋ slaɪli. dʒʌs fəɹ ə moʊmənt. fɹaɪɾənd, hi ɛdʒd ɪn ə sɝkəl, piɹɪŋ wɛɹəli. ðə jɑɹd, peɪvd wɪð ɹʌf stoʊn, wɑz ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ hɪm. dʒʌs jəɹ blʌɾi ɪmædʒəneɪʃən! hi ɹæn ɛniweɪ, ən bɪhaɪn ɪm i θɔɾ i hɝd ðə læftɝ əɡɛn, ðɪs taɪm wɪθaʊt ðə wɪnd.

Outside in the armorer's yard, the wind swirled up around him momentarily. Despite himself he jumped, thinking it meant to catch him. For a moment he smelled the faint odor of decay again, and heard someone behind him laughing slyly. Just for a moment. Frightened, he edged in a circle, peering warily. The yard, paved with rough stone, was empty except for him. Just your bloody imagination! He ran anyway, and behind him he thought he heard the laughter again, this time without the wind.

ɪn ðə wʊdʒjɑɹd, ðə pɹɛzəns ɹɪtɝnd, ðə sɛns ə sʌmwʌn ðɛɹ. ðə fil ʌv aɪz piɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm ɝaʊn tɔl paɪlz ə splɪt faɪɝwʊɾ ʌndɝ ðə lɔŋ ʃɛdz, dɑɹɾɪŋ ɡlænsɪz oʊvɝ ðə stæks ə sizən plæŋks ən tɪmbɝz weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə jɑɹd fəɹ ðə kɑɹpəntɝz ʃɑp, naʊ kloʊzd ʌp taɪt. hi ɹəfjuz tə lʊk ɝaʊnd, ɹəfjuz tə θɪŋk ə haʊ wʌn sɛɾ ʌv aɪz kəd muv fɹəm pleɪs tə pleɪs soʊ fæst, kəd kɹɔs ði oʊpən jɑɹd fɹəm ðə faɪɝwʊd ʃɛd tə ðə lʌmɝʃɛt wɪθaʊɾ ivən ə flɪkɝ ə muvmən ðəɾ i kəd si. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz wʌn sɛɾ ʌv aɪz. ɪmædʒəneɪʃən. əɹ meɪbi aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ kɹeɪzi ɔlɹɛɾi. hi ʃɪvɝd. nɑt jɛt. laɪt, pliz nɑt jɛt. stɪf-bækt, hi stɔkt əkɹɔs ðə wʊdʒjɑɹd, ən ði ənsin wɑtʃɝ fɑloʊd.

In the woodyard, the presence returned, the sense of someone there. The feel of eyes peering at him around tall piles of split firewood under the long sheds, darting glances over the stacks of seasoned planks and timbers waiting on the other side of the yard for the carpenter's shop, now closed up tight. He refused to look around, refused to think of how one set of eyes could move from place to place so fast, could cross the open yard from the firewood shed to the lumbershed without even a flicker of movement that he could see. He was sure it was one set of eyes. Imagination. Or maybe I'm going crazy already. He shivered. Not yet. Light, please not yet. Stiff-backed, he stalked across the woodyard, and the unseen watcher followed.

daʊn dip kɔɹɪɾɝz lɪɾ oʊnli baɪ ə fju ɹʌʃ tɔɹtʃɪz, ɪn stɔɹɹumz fɪld wɪð sæks ə dʒɹaɪd piz əɹ binz, kɹaʊɾəd wɪð slæɾɪd ɹæks hipt wɪð ɹɪŋkəl tɝnəps ən bits, əɹ stækt wɪð bæɹəlz ʌv waɪn ən kæsks ə sɔltəd bif ən kɛɡz ʌv eɪl, ði aɪz wɝ ɔlweɪz ðɛɹ, səmtaɪmz fɑloʊɪŋ hɪm, səmtaɪmz weɪɾɪŋ wən i ɛntɝd. hi nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə fʊtstɛp bʌɾ ɪz oʊn, nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə dɔɹ kɹik ɪksɛpt wən i oʊpən ən kloʊzd ɪt, bʌt ði aɪz wɝ ðɛɹ. laɪt, aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ kɹeɪzi.

Down deep corridors lit only by a few rush torches, in storerooms filled with sacks of dried peas or beans, crowded with slatted racks heaped with wrinkled turnips and beets, or stacked with barrels of wine and casks of salted beef and kegs of ale, the eyes were always there, sometimes following him, sometimes waiting when he entered. He never heard a footstep but his own, never heard a door creak except when he opened and closed it, but the eyes were there. Light, I am going crazy.

ðən i oʊpən ənʌðɝ stɔɹɹum dɔɹ, ən hjumən vɔɪsəz, hjumən læftɝ, dʒɹɪftəɾ aʊt tə fɪl ɪm wɪð ɹɪlif. ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ ənsin aɪ hɪɹ. hi wɛn ɪn.

Then he opened another storeroom door, and human voices, human laughter, drifted out to fill him with relief. There would be no unseen eye here. He went in.

hæf ðə ɹum wɑz stæk tə ðə silɪŋ wɪð sæks ʌv ɡɹeɪn. ɪn ði ʌðɝ hæf ə θɪk sɛmɪsɝkəl ə mɛn nɛlt ɪn fɹʌn ʌv wʌn ə ðə bɛɹ wɔlz. ðeɪ ɔl sim tə wɛɹ ðə lɛðɝ dʒɝkɪnz ən boʊl-kʌt hɛɹ ə minaɪəlz. noʊ wɔɹiɝz' tɑpnɑts, noʊ lɪvɝi. noʊ wʌn u maɪt bɪtʃɹeɪ hɪm æksədɛntəli. wʌɾ əbaʊɾ ɑn pɝpəs? ðə ɹæɾəl ə daɪs keɪm θɹu ðɛɹ sɑf mɝmɝz, ən sʌmbɑɾi lɛɾ aʊɾ ə ɹɔkəs læf ət ðə θɹoʊ.

Half the room was stacked to the ceiling with sacks of grain. In the other half a thick semicircle of men knelt in front of one of the bare walls. They all seemed to wear the leather jerkins and bowl-cut hair of menials. No warriors' topknots, no livery. No one who might betray him accidentally. What about on purpose? The rattle of dice came through their soft murmurs, and somebody let out a raucous laugh at the throw.

lɔɪəl wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ əm daɪs, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz tʃɪn θɔtfəli wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ θɪkɝ ðən ə bɪɡ mænz θʌm, hɪz hɛɾ ɔlmoʊst ɹitʃɪŋ ðə ɹæftɝz nɪɹli tu spænz ʌp. nʌn ə ðə dɪsɝz ɡeɪv ɪm ə ɡlæns. oʊɡiɝ wɝ nɑɾ ɪɡzækli kɑmən ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, əɹ ɛniwɛɹ ɛls, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ noʊn ən æksɛptɪd hɪɹ, ən lɔɪəl hæd bɪn ɪn fæl dæɹə lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɪksaɪt lɪɾəl kɑmɛnt. ði oʊɡiɝz dɑɹk, stɪf-kɑlɝd tunɪk wɑz bʌɾənd ʌp tə hɪz nɛk ən flɛɹd bɪloʊ ðə weɪst oʊvɝ ɪz haɪ buts, ən wʌn ə ðə bɪɡ pɑkəts bʌlʒd ən sæɡd wɪð ðə weɪɾ ə sʌmθɪŋ. bʊks, ɪf ɹænd nu hɪm. ivən wɑtʃɪŋ mɛn ɡæmbəl, lɔɪəl wəd nɑt bi fɑɹ fɹəm ə bʊk.

Loial was watching them dice, rubbing his chin thoughtfully with a finger thicker than a big man's thumb, his head almost reaching the rafters nearly two spans up. None of the dicers gave him a glance. Ogier were not exactly common in the Borderlands, or anywhere else, but they were known and accepted here, and Loial had been in Fal Dara long enough to excite little comment. The Ogier's dark, stiff-collared tunic was buttoned up to his neck and flared below the waist over his high boots, and one of the big pockets bulged and sagged with the weight of something. Books, if Rand knew him. Even watching men gamble, Loial would not be far from a book.

ɪn spaɪɾ ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ɹænd faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɡɹɪnɪŋ. lɔɪəl ɔfən hæd ðəɾ ɪfɛkt ɑn hɪm. ði oʊɡiɝ nu soʊ mʌtʃ əbaʊt səm θɪŋz, soʊ lɪɾəl əbaʊɾ ʌðɝz, ən i sim tə wɑnə noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. jɛt ɹænd kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə fɝs taɪm i ɛvɝ sɔ lɔɪəl, wɪð ɪz tʌftəɾ ɪɹz ən ɪz aɪbɹaʊz ðət dæŋɡəld laɪk lɔŋ mʌstæʃɪz ən ɪz noʊz ɔlmoʊst əz waɪɾ əz ɪz feɪs - sɔ hɪm ən θɔɾ i wɑz feɪsɪŋ ə tʃɹɑlɑk. ɪt stɪl ʃeɪm hɪm. oʊɡiɝ ən tʃɹɑləks. mɹdʒɹɑl, ən θɪŋz fɹəm ðə dɑɹk kɔɹnɝz ə mɪdnaɪt teɪlz. θɪŋz aʊɾ ə stɔɹiz ən lɛdʒənz. ðət wɑz haʊ hi hæd θɔɾ ə ðɛm bɪfɔɹ i lɛft ɛmənz fild. bʌt sɪns livɪŋ hoʊm i hæd sin tu mɛni stɔɹiz wɔkɪŋ ɪn ðə flɛʃ ɛvɝ tə bi soʊ ʃʊɹ əɡɛn. ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ənsin wɑtʃɝz, ən ə wɪn ðət kɑɾ ən hɛld. hɪz smaɪl feɪɾəd.

In spite of everything, Rand found himself grinning. Loial often had that effect on him. The Ogier knew so much about some things, so little about others, and he seemed to want to know everything. Yet Rand could remember the first time he ever saw Loial, with his tufted ears and his eyebrows that dangled like long mustaches and his nose almost as wide as his face - saw him and thought he was facing a Trolloc. It still shamed him. Ogier and Trollocs. Myrddraal, and things from the dark corners of midnight tales. Things out of stories and legends. That was how he had thought of them before he left Emond's Field. But since leaving home he had seen too many stories walking in the flesh ever to be so sure again. Aes Sedai, and unseen watchers, and a wind that caught and held. His smile faded.

"ɔl ðə stɔɹiz ɑɹ ɹil," hi sɛd sɔfli.

"All the stories are real," he said softly.

lɔɪəlz ɪɹz twɪtʃt, ən ɪz hɛd tɝn təwɔɹd ɹænd. wən i sɔ hu ɪt wɑz, ði oʊɡiɝz feɪs splɪɾ ɪn ə ɡɹɪn, ən i keɪm oʊvɝ. "ɑ, ðəɹ jə ɑɹ." hɪz vɔɪs wɑz ə dip bʌmbəlɪbi ɹʌmbəl. "aɪ dɪd nɑt si jə ət ðə wɛlkəm. ðət wɑz sʌmθɪŋ aɪ hæd nɑt sin bɪfɔɹ. tu θɪŋz. ðə ʃaɪnɝən wɛlkəm, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ʃi lʊks taɪɝd, doʊn jə θɪŋk? ɪt kænɑt bi izi, biɪŋ æmɪɝlɪn. wɝs ðən biɪŋ ən ɛldɝ, aɪ səpoʊz." hi pɔzd, wɪð ə θɔtfəl lʊk, bʌɾ oʊnli fəɹ ə bɹɛθ. "tɛl mi, ɹænd, dʒju pleɪ ət daɪs, tu? ðeɪ pleɪ ə sɪmpəlɝ ɡeɪm hɪɹ, wɪð oʊnli θɹi daɪs. wi juz fɔɹ ɪn ðə stɛɾɪŋ. ðeɪ woʊn lemi pleɪ, jə noʊ. ðeɪ dʒʌst seɪ, 'ɡlɔɹi tə ðə bɪldɝz,' ən wɪl nɑt bɛɾ əɡɛns mi. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðæts fɛɹ, də ju? ðə daɪs ðeɪ jus ɑɹ ɹæðɝ smɔl" - hi fɹaʊn ət wʌn ə hɪz hænz, bɪɡ ɪnʌf tə kʌvɝ ə hjumən hɛd - "bʌɾ aɪ stɪl θɪŋk - "

Loial's ears twitched, and his head turned toward Rand. When he saw who it was, the Ogier's face split in a grin, and he came over. "Ah, there you are." His voice was a deep bumblebee rumble. "I did not see you at the Welcome. That was something I had not seen before. Two things. The Shienaran Welcome, and the Amyrlin Seat. She looks tired, don't you think? It cannot be easy, being Amyrlin. Worse than being an Elder, I suppose." He paused, with a thoughtful look, but only for a breath. "Tell me, Rand, do you play at dice, too? They play a simpler game here, with only three dice. We use four in the stedding. They won't let me play, you know. They just say, 'Glory to the Builders,' and will not bet against me. I don't think that's fair, do you? The dice they use are rather small" - he frowned at one of his hands, big enough to cover a human head - "but I still think - "

ɹænd ɡɹæbd ɪz ɑɹm ən kʌɾ ɪm ɔf. ðə bɪldɝz! "lɔɪəl, oʊɡiɝ bɪl fæl dæɹə, dɪdn ðeɪ? dʒju noʊ ɛni weɪ aʊɾ ɪksɛp baɪ ðə ɡeɪts? ə kɹɔl hoʊl. ə dʒɹeɪn paɪp. ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl, ɪf ɪts bɪɡ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə mæn tə wɪɡəl θɹu. aʊɾ ə ðə wɪnd wəd bi ɡʊd, tu."

Rand grabbed his arm and cut him off. The Builders! "Loial, Ogier built Fal Dara, didn't they? Do you know any way out except by the gates? A crawl hole. A drain pipe. Anything at all, if it's big enough for a man to wiggle through. Out of the wind would be good, too."

lɔɪəl ɡeɪv ə peɪnd ɡɹɪmɑs, ði ɛnz ə hɪz aɪbɹaʊz ɔlmoʊs bɹʌʃɪŋ ɪz tʃiks. "ɹænd, oʊɡiɝ bɪl mæfəl dɑɾɝɑnɛl, bʌt ðət sɪɾi wɑz dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz. ðɪs" - hi tʌtʃt ðə stoʊn wɔl laɪtli wɪð bɹɔd fɪŋɡɝtɪps - "wɑz bɪl baɪ mɛn. aɪ kən skɛtʃ ə plæn ə mæfəl dɑɾɝɑnɛl - aɪ sɔ ðə mæps, wʌns, ɪn ən oʊl bʊk ɪn stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ - bʌɾ ə fæl dæɹə, aɪ noʊ noʊ mɔɹ ðən ju. ɪts wɛl bɪlt, ðoʊ, ɪzən ɪt? stɑɹk, bʌt wɛl meɪd."

Loial gave a pained grimace, the ends of his eyebrows almost brushing his cheeks. "Rand, Ogier built Mafal Dadaranell, but that city was destroyed in the Trolloc Wars. This" - he touched the stone wall lightly with broad fingertips - "was built by men. I can sketch a plan of Mafal Dadaranell - I saw the maps, once, in an old book in Stedding Shangtai - but of Fal Dara, I know no more than you. It is well built, though, isn't it? Stark, but well made."

ɹænd slʌmpt əɡɛns ðə wɔl, skwizɪŋ ɪz aɪz ʃʌt. "aɪ niɾ ə weɪ aʊt," hi wɪspɝd. "ðə ɡeɪts ɑɹ bɑɹd, ən ðeɪ woʊn lɛɾ ɛniwʌn pæs, bʌɾ aɪ niɾ ə weɪ aʊt."

Rand slumped against the wall, squeezing his eyes shut. "I need a way out," he whispered. "The gates are barred, and they won't let anyone pass, but I need a way out."

"bʌt waɪ, ɹænd?" lɔɪəl sɛd sloʊli. "noʊ wʌn hɪɹ wɪl hɝt ju. ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt? ɹænd?" sʌɾənli hɪz vɔɪs ɹoʊz. "mæt! pɛɹɪn! aɪ θɪŋk ɹænd ɪz sɪk."

"But why, Rand?" Loial said slowly. "No one here will hurt you. Are you all right? Rand?" Suddenly his voice rose. "Mat! Perrin! I think Rand is sick."

ɹænd oʊpən ɪz aɪz tə si hɪz fɹɛnz stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ ʌp aʊɾ ə ðə nɑɾ ə dɪsɝz. mæt kɔθən, lɔŋ-lɪmd əz ə stɔɹk, wɛɹɪŋ ə hæf smaɪl əz ɪf i sɔ sʌmθɪŋ fʌni ðət noʊ wʌn ɛls sɔ. ʃæɡi-hɛɹd pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə, wɪð hɛvi ʃoʊldɝz ən θɪk ɑɹmz fɹəm ɪz wɝk əz ə blæksmɪθs əpɹɛntəs. ðeɪ boʊθ stɪl wɔɹ ðɛɹ tu ɹɪvɝz ɡɑɹb, pleɪn ən stɝɾi, bʌt tʃɹævəl-wɔɹn.

Rand opened his eyes to see his friends straightening up out of the knot of dicers. Mat Cauthon, long-limbed as a stork, wearing a half smile as if he saw something funny that no one else saw. Shaggy-haired Perrin Aybara, with heavy shoulders and thick arms from his work as a blacksmith's apprentice. They both still wore their Two Rivers garb, plain and sturdy, but travel-worn.

mæt tɔs ðə daɪs bæk ɪndə ðə sɛmɪsɝkəl əz i stɛpt aʊt, ən wʌn ə ðə mɛn kɔld, "hɪɹ, saʊθlændɝ, jə kæn kwɪt waɪl jəɹ wɪnɪŋ."

Mat tossed the dice back into the semicircle as he stepped out, and one of the men called, "Here, southlander, you can't quit while you're winning."

"bɛɾɝ ðən wən aɪm luzɪŋ," mæt sɛd wɪð ə læf. ʌnkɑnʃəsli hi tʌtʃt ɪz koʊɾ ət ðə weɪst, ən ɹænd wɪnst. mæt hæɾ ə dæɡɝ wɪð ə ɹubi ɪn ɪts hɪlt ʌndɝ ðɛɹ, ə dæɡɝ i wɑz nɛvɝ wɪθaʊt, ə dæɡɝ i kəd nɑt bi wɪθaʊt. ɪt wɑz ə teɪntɪd bleɪd, fɹəm ðə dɛd sɪɾi ʌv ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, teɪntɪɾ ən twɪstəd baɪ ən ivəl ɔlmoʊst əz bæɾ əz ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ði ivəl ðət hæd kɪld ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ tu θaʊzən jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ, jɛt stɪl lɪvd əmʌŋ ði əbændən ɹuənz. ðət teɪnt wəd kɪl mæt ɪf i kɛp ðə dæɡɝ; ɪt wəd kɪl ɪm ivən fæstɝ ɪf i pʊɾ ɪɾ əsaɪd. "jul əv ənʌðɝ tʃæns tə wɪn ɪt bæk." ɹaɪ snɔɹts fɹəm ðə nilɪŋ mɛn ɪndəkeɪɾəd ðeɪ dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðəɹ wɑz mʌtʃ tʃæns ə ðæt.

"Better than when I'm losing," Mat said with a laugh. Unconsciously he touched his coat at the waist, and Rand winced. Mat had a dagger with a ruby in its hilt under there, a dagger he was never without, a dagger he could not be without. It was a tainted blade, from the dead city of Shadar Logoth, tainted and twisted by an evil almost as bad as the Dark One, the evil that had killed Shadar Logoth two thousand years before, yet still lived among the abandoned ruins. That taint would kill Mat if he kept the dagger; it would kill him even faster if he put it aside. "You'll have another chance to win it back." Wry snorts from the kneeling men indicated they did not think there was much chance of that.

pɛɹɪn kɛpt ɪz aɪz daʊn əz i fɑloʊd mæt əkɹɔs tə ɹænd. pɛɹɪn ɔlweɪz kɛpt ɪz aɪz daʊn ðiz deɪz, ən ɪz ʃoʊldɝz sæɡd əz ɪf i kæɹiɾ ə weɪt tu hɛvi ivən fəɹ ðɛɹ wɪdθ.

Perrin kept his eyes down as he followed Mat across to Rand. Perrin always kept his eyes down these days, and his shoulders sagged as if he carried a weight too heavy even for their width.

"wʌts ðə mæɾɝ, ɹænd?" mæt æskt. "jɔɹ əz waɪɾ əz jəɹ ʃɝt. heɪ! wɛɹ dɪd jə ɡɛt ðoʊz kloʊðz? jə tɝnɪŋ ʃaɪnɝən? meɪbi əl baɪ maɪsɛlf ə koʊt laɪk ðæt, ən ə faɪn ʃɝt." hi ʃʊk ɪz koʊt pɑkət, pɹədusɪŋ ə klɪŋk ə kɔɪnz. "aɪ sim tə hæv lʌk wɪð ðə daɪs. aɪ kən hɑɹdli tʌtʃ əm wɪθaʊt wɪnɪŋ."

"What's the matter, Rand?" Mat asked. "You're as white as your shirt. Hey! Where did you get those clothes? You turning Shienaran? Maybe I'll buy myself a coat like that, and a fine shirt." He shook his coat pocket, producing a clink of coins. "I seem to have luck with the dice. I can hardly touch them without winning."

"ju doʊn əv tə baɪ ɛniθɪŋ," ɹænd sɛd taɪɹədli. "mɔɪɹeɪn hæɾ ɔl əɹ kloʊðz ɹipleɪst. ðəɹ bɝn ɔlɹɛɾi fəɹ ɔl aɪ noʊ, ɔl bʌt wʌt jə tu ɑɹ wɛɹɪŋ. ilænsu wɪl pɹɑbli bi ɝaʊn tə kəlɛk ðoʊz, tu, soʊ aɪd tʃeɪnʒ fæst ɪf aɪ wɝ ju, bɪfɔɹ ʃi teɪks əm ɔf jəɹ bæk." pɛɹɪn stɪl dɪd nɑt lʊk ʌp, bʌɾ ɪz tʃiks tɝn ɹɛd; mæts ɡɹɪn dipənd, ðoʊ ɪt lʊk fɔɹst. ðeɪ tu hæd hæɾ ɪnkaʊntɝz ɪn ðə bæθs, ən oʊnli mæt tʃɹaɪd tə pɹitɛn ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ. "æn aɪm nɑt sɪk. aɪ dʒʌs nid tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ. ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɪz hɪɹ. læn sɛd . . . hi sɛd wɪð əɹ hɪɹ, ɪt wʊɾə bɪn bɛɾɝ fəɹ mi ɪf aɪ wɝ ɡɔn ə wik. aɪ nid tə liv, ən ɔl ðə ɡeɪts ɑɹ bɑɹd."

"You don't have to buy anything," Rand said tiredly. "Moiraine had all our clothes replaced. They're burned already for all I know, all but what you two are wearing. Elansu will probably be around to collect those, too, so I'd change fast if I were you, before she takes them off your back." Perrin still did not look up, but his cheeks turned red; Mat's grin deepened, though it looked forced. They too had had encounters in the baths, and only Mat tried to pretend it did not matter. "And I'm not sick. I just need to get out of here. The Amyrlin Seat is here. Lan said . . . he said with her here, it would have been better for me if I were gone a week. I need to leave, and all the gates are barred."

"hi sɛd ðæt?" mæt fɹaʊnd. "aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd. hid nɛvɝ seɪ ɛniθɪŋ əɡɛnst ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. waɪ naʊ? lʊk, ɹænd, aɪ doʊn laɪk ɛɛs sədaɪ ɛni mɔɹ ðən jə du, bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹən gɑnə də ɛniθɪŋ tə ʌs." hi loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs tə seɪ ðæt, ən lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ tə si ɪf ɛni ʌv ðə ɡæmblɝz wɑz lɪsnɪŋ. fɪɹd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ maɪt bi, bʌɾ ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, ðeɪ wɝ fɑɹ fɹəm biɪŋ heɪɾəd, ən ə dɪsɹɪspɛkfəl kɑmɛn əbaʊɾ əm kəd læn jə ɪn ə faɪt, əɹ wɝs. "lʊk ət mɔɪɹeɪn. ʃi ɪzən soʊ bæd, ivən ɪf ʃiz ɛɛs sədaɪ. jəɹ θɪŋkɪŋ laɪk oʊl sɛn bui tɛlɪŋ ɪz tɔl teɪlz bæk hoʊm, ɪn ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn. aɪ min, ʃi hæzən hɝɾ ʌs, ən ðeɪ woʊnt. waɪ wəd ðeɪ?"

"He said that?" Mat frowned. "I don't understand. He'd never say anything against an Aes Sedai. Why now? Look, Rand, I don't like Aes Sedai any more than you do, but they aren't going to do anything to us." He lowered his voice to say that, and looked over his shoulder to see if any of the gamblers was listening. Feared the Aes Sedai might be, but in the Borderlands, they were far from being hated, and a disrespectful comment about them could land you in a fight, or worse. "Look at Moiraine. She isn't so bad, even if she is Aes Sedai. You're thinking like old Cenn Buie telling his tall tales back home, in the Winespring Inn. I mean, she hasn't hurt us, and they won't. Why would they?"

pɛɹɪnz aɪz lɪftəd. jɛloʊ aɪz, ɡlimɪŋ ɪn ðə dɪm laɪt laɪk bɝnɪʃt ɡoʊld. mɔɪɹeɪn hæzən hɝɾ ʌs? ɹænd θɔt. pɛɹɪnz aɪz hæd bɪn əz dip ə bɹaʊn əz mæts wən ðeɪ lɛf ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ɹænd hæd noʊ aɪdiə haʊ ðə tʃeɪnʒ hæd kʌm əbaʊt - pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt wɑnə tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt, əɹ əbaʊt vɛɹi mʌtʃ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ sɪns ɪt hæpənd - bʌɾ ɪt hæd kʌm ət ðə seɪm taɪm əz ðə slʌmp ɪn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, ən ə dɪstəns ɪn ɪz mænɝ əz ɪf i fɛlt əloʊn ivən wɪð fɹɛnz ɝaʊn hɪm. pɛɹɪnz aɪz ən mæts dæɡɝ. niðɝ wʊɾə hæpən ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɑt lɛft ɛmənz fild, ən ɪt wɑz mɔɪɹeɪn u hæd teɪkən əm əweɪ. hi nu ðət wɑz nɑt fɛɹ. ðeɪ wəd pɹɑbli ɔl bi dɛɾ ət tʃɹɑləks' hænz, ən ə ɡʊd pɑɹɾ ʌv ɛmənz fild əz wɛl, ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt kʌm tə ðɛɹ vɪlədʒ. bʌt ðət dɪd nɑt meɪk pɛɹɪn læf ðə weɪ hi juz tə, əɹ teɪk ðə dæɡɝ fɹəm mæts bɛlt. ən mi? ɪf aɪ wɑz hoʊm ən stɪl əlaɪv, wəɾ aɪ stɪl bi wʌɾ aɪm naʊ? ət list aɪ wʊdn bi wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt wʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ gɑnə də tə mi.

Perrin's eyes lifted. Yellow eyes, gleaming in the dim light like burnished gold. Moiraine hasn't hurt us? Rand thought. Perrin's eyes had been as deep a brown as Mat's when they left the Two Rivers. Rand had no idea how the change had come about - Perrin did not want to talk about it, or about very much of anything since it happened - but it had come at the same time as the slump in his shoulders, and a distance in his manner as if he felt alone even with friends around him. Perrin's eyes and Mat's dagger. Neither would have happened if they had not left Emond's Field, and it was Moiraine who had taken them away. He knew that was not fair. They would probably all be dead at Trollocs' hands, and a good part of Emond's Field as well, if she had not come to their village. But that did not make Perrin laugh the way he used to, or take the dagger from Mat's belt. And me? If I was home and still alive, would I still be what I am now? At least I wouldn't be worrying about what the Aes Sedai are going to do to me.

mæt wɑz stɪl lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪm kwɪtsɪkli, ən pɛɹɪn hæd ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛɾ ɪnʌf tə stɛɹ fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪz aɪbɹaʊz. lɔɪəl weɪɾəd peɪʃənli. ɹænd kəd nɑt tɛl əm waɪ hi hæd tə steɪ əweɪ fɹəm ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌɾ i wɑz. læn nu, ən mɔɪɹeɪn. ən ɛɡwin, ən nɪneɪiv. hi wɪʃt nʌn ə ðɛm nu, ən moʊst ʌv ɔl i wɪʃt ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt, bʌɾ ət lis mæt ən pɛɹɪn - ən lɔɪəl, tu - bɪlivd i wɑz stɪl ðə seɪm. hi θɔɾ i wəd ɹæðɝ daɪ ðən lɛɾ əm noʊ, ðən si ðə hɛzəteɪʃən ən wɝi hi səmtaɪmz kɑɾ ɪn ɛɡwinz aɪz, ən nɪneɪivz, ivən wən ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ ðɛɹ bɛst.

Mat was still looking at him quizzically, and Perrin had raised his head enough to stare from under his eyebrows. Loial waited patiently. Rand could not tell them why he had to stay away from the Amyrlin Seat. They did not know what he was. Lan knew, and Moiraine. And Egwene, and Nynaeve. He wished none of them knew, and most of all he wished Egwene did not, but at least Mat and Perrin - and Loial, too - believed he was still the same. He thought he would rather die than let them know, than see the hesitation and worry he sometimes caught in Egwene's eyes, and Nynaeve's, even when they were trying their best.

"sʌmbɑɾiz . . . wɑtʃɪŋ mi," hi sɛd faɪnəli. "fɑloʊɪŋ mi. oʊnli. . . . oʊnli, ðɛɹz noʊbɑdi ðɛɹ."

"Somebody's . . . watching me," he said finally. "Following me. Only. . . . Only, there's nobody there."

pɛɹɪnz hɛd dʒɝkt ʌp, ən mæt lɪkt ɪz lɪps ən wɪspɝd, "eɪ feɪd?"

Perrin's head jerked up, and Mat licked his lips and whispered, "A Fade?"

"ʌv kɔɹs nɑt," lɔɪəl snɔɹɾɪd. "haʊ kəd wʌn ə ði aɪləs ɛntɝ fæl dæɹə, taʊn əɹ kip? baɪ lɔ, noʊ wʌn meɪ haɪɾ ɪz feɪs ɪnsaɪd ðə taʊn wɔlz, ən ðə læmplaɪɾɝz ɑɹ tʃɑɹdʒd wɪð kipɪŋ ðə stʃɹits lɪɾ ət naɪt soʊ ðəɹ ɪzən ə ʃædoʊ fəɹ ə mɹdʒɹɑl tə haɪɾ ɪn. ɪt kəd nɑt hæpən."

"Of course not," Loial snorted. "How could one of the Eyeless enter Fal Dara, town or keep? By law, no one may hide his face inside the town walls, and the lamplighters are charged with keeping the streets lit at night so there isn't a shadow for a Myrddraal to hide in. It could not happen."

"wɔlz doʊn stɑp ə feɪd," mæt mʌɾɝd. "nɑt wən ɪt wɑns tə kʌm ɪn. aɪ doʊnt noʊ əz lɔz ən læmps wɪl də ɛni bɛɾɝ." hi dɪd nɑt saʊn laɪk sʌmwʌn u hæd hæf θɔt feɪdz wɝ oʊnli ɡlimənz teɪlz lɛs ðən hæf ə jɪɹ bɪfɔɹ. hi hæd sin tu mʌtʃ, tu.

"Walls don't stop a Fade," Mat muttered. "Not when it wants to come in. I don't know as laws and lamps will do any better." He did not sound like someone who had half thought Fades were only gleemen's tales less than half a year before. He had seen too much, too.

"æn ðəɹ wɑz ðə wɪnd," ɹænd æɾəd. hɪz vɔɪs hɑɹdli ʃʊk əz i toʊld wʌt hæd hæpən ɑn ðə taʊɝ tɑp. pɛɹɪnz fɪsts taɪɾənd əntɪl ɪz nʌkəlz kɹækt. "aɪ dʒʌst wɑnə liv hɪɹ," ɹænd fɪnɪʃt. "aɪ wɑnə ɡoʊ saʊθ. sʌmwɛɹ əweɪ. dʒʌst sʌmwɛɹ əweɪ."

"And there was the wind," Rand added. His voice hardly shook as he told what had happened on the tower top. Perrin's fists tightened until his knuckles cracked. "I just want to leave here," Rand finished. "I want to go south. Somewhere away. Just somewhere away."

"bʌɾ ɪf ðə ɡeɪts ɑɹ bɑɹd," mæt sɛd, "haʊ də wi ɡɛɾ aʊt?"

"But if the gates are barred," Mat said, "how do we get out?"

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət hɪm. "wi?" hi hæd tə ɡoʊ əloʊn. ɪt wəd bi deɪnʒɝəs fəɹ ɛniwʌn nɪɹ hɪm, ɪvɛntʃəwəli. hi wəd bi deɪnʒɝəs, ən ivən mɔɪɹeɪn kəd nɑt tɛl ɪm haʊ lɔŋ i hæd. "mæt, jə noʊ juv tə ɡoʊ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn. ʃi sɛd ðæts ði oʊnli pleɪs jə kən bi sɛpɝeɪɾəd fɹəm ðət blʌɾi dæɡɝ wɪθaʊt daɪɪŋ. ən jə noʊ wʌt wɪl hæpən ɪf jə kip ɪt."

Rand stared at him. "We?" He had to go alone. It would be dangerous for anyone near him, eventually. He would be dangerous, and even Moiraine could not tell him how long he had. "Mat, you know you have to go to Tar Valon with Moiraine. She said that's the only place you can be separated from that bloody dagger without dying. And you know what will happen if you keep it."

mæt tʌtʃt ɪz koʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə dæɡɝ, nɑt simɪŋ tə ɹilaɪz wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ. " 'æn ɛɛs sədaɪz ɡɪft ɪz beɪt fəɹ ə fɪʃ,' " hi kwoʊɾəd. "wɛl, meɪbi aɪ doʊnt wɑnə pʊt ðə hʊk ɪn maɪ maʊθ. meɪbi wʌtɛvɝ ʃi wɑns tə də ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn ɪz wɝs ðən ɪf aɪ doʊnt ɡoʊ əɾ ɔl. meɪbi ʃiz laɪɪŋ. 'ðə tʃɹuθ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tɛlz ɪz nɛvɝ ðə tʃɹuθ jə θɪŋk ɪɾ ɪz.' "

Mat touched his coat over the dagger, not seeming to realize what he was doing. " 'An Aes Sedai's gift is bait for a fish,' " he quoted. "Well, maybe I don't want to put the hook in my mouth. Maybe whatever she wants to do in Tar Valon is worse than if I don't go at all. Maybe she's lying. 'The truth an Aes Sedai tells is never the truth you think it is.' "

"ju hæv ɛni mɔɹ oʊl seɪɪŋz jə wɑnə ɹɪd jɝsɛlf ʌv?" ɹænd æskt. " 'ə saʊθ wɪn bɹɪŋz ə wɔɹm ɡɛst, ə nɔɹθ waɪn ən ɛmpti haʊs'? 'ə pɪɡ peɪntəd ɡoʊld ɪz stɪl ə pɪɡ'? wʌɾ əbaʊt, 'tɔk ʃiɹz noʊ ʃip'? 'ə fulz wɝdz ɑɹ dʌst'?"

"You have any more old sayings you want to rid yourself of?" Rand asked. " 'A south wind brings a warm guest, a north wind an empty house'? 'A pig painted gold is still a pig'? What about, 'talk shears no sheep'? 'A fool's words are dust'?"

"izi, ɹænd," pɛɹɪn sɛd sɔfli. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ nid tə bi soʊ ɹʌf."

"Easy, Rand," Perrin said softly. "There is no need to be so rough."

"ɪzən ðɛɹ? meɪbi aɪ doʊnt wɑn jə tu ɡoʊɪŋ wɪð mi, ɔlweɪz hæŋɪŋ ɝaʊnd, fɔlɪŋ ɪndə tʃɹʌbəl ən ɪkspɛktɪŋ mi tə pʊl jə aʊt. jə ɛvɝ θɪŋk ə ðæt? bɝn mi, dɪɾ ɪɾ ɛvɝ əkɝ tə jə aɪ maɪt bi taɪɝɾ ʌv ɔlweɪz hævɪŋ jə ðəɹ wɛnɛvɝ aɪ tɝn ɝaʊnd? ɔlweɪz ðɛɹ, ən aɪm taɪɝɾ ʌv ɪt." ðə hɝɾ ɑn pɛɹɪnz feɪs kʌɾ ɪm laɪk ə naɪf, bʌɾ i pʊʃt ɑn ɹɪlɛnləsli. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ səm hɪɹ θɪŋk ɪm ə lɔɹd. ə lɔɹd. meɪbi aɪ laɪk ðæt. bʌt lʊk ət ju, dɪsɪŋ wɪð steɪbəlɪhənz. wən aɪ ɡoʊ, aɪ ɡoʊ baɪ maɪsɛlf. jə tu kən ɡoʊ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn əɹ ɡoʊ hæŋ jʊɹsɛlvz, bʌɾ aɪ liv hɪɹ əloʊn."

"Isn't there? Maybe I don't want you two going with me, always hanging around, falling into trouble and expecting me to pull you out. You ever think of that? Burn me, did it ever occur to you I might be tired of always having you there whenever I turn around? Always there, and I'm tired of it." The hurt on Perrin's face cut him like a knife, but he pushed on relentlessly. "There are some here think I'm a lord. A lord. Maybe I like that. But look at you, dicing with stablehands. When I go, I go by myself. You two can go to Tar Valon or go hang yourselves, but I leave here alone."

mæts feɪs hæd ɡɔn stɪf, ən i klʌtʃt ðə dæɡɝ θɹu hɪz koʊt tɪl ɪz nʌkəlz wɝ waɪt. "ɪf ðəɾ ɪz haʊ jə wɑn ɪt," hi sɛd koʊldli. "aɪ θɔt wi wɝ. . . . haʊɛvɝ jə wɑn ɪt, ælθɹ. bʌɾ ɪf aɪ dɪsaɪd tə liv ət ðə seɪm taɪm jə du, əl ɡoʊ, ən jə kən stæn klɪɹ ə mi."

Mat's face had gone stiff, and he clutched the dagger through his coat till his knuckles were white. "If that is how you want it," he said coldly. "I thought we were. . . . However you want it, al'Thor. But if I decide to leave at the same time you do, I'll go, and you can stand clear of me."

"noʊbɑdi ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, "ɪf ðə ɡeɪts ɑɹ bɑɹd." hi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə flɔɹ əɡɛn. læftɝ ɹoʊl fɹəm ðə ɡæmblɝz əɡɛns ðə wɔl əz sʌmwʌn lɔst.

"Nobody is going anywhere," Perrin said, "if the gates are barred." He was staring at the floor again. Laughter rolled from the gamblers against the wall as someone lost.

"ɡoʊ əɹ steɪ," lɔɪəl sɛd, "təɡɛðɝ əɹ əpɑɹt, ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ. jə ɑɹ ɔl θɹi tɑvɝən. ivən aɪ kən si ɪt, ən aɪ doʊn əv ðət tælənt, dʒʌs baɪ wʌt hæpənz ɝaʊn ju. ən mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ sɛz ɪt, tu."

"Go or stay," Loial said, "together or apart, it doesn't matter. You are all three ta'veren. Even I can see it, and I don't have that Talent, just by what happens around you. And Moiraine Sedai says it, too."

mæt θɹu ʌp ɪz hænz. "noʊ mɔɹ, lɔɪəl. aɪ doʊnt wɑnə hɪɹ əbaʊt ðəɾ ɛnimɔɹ."

Mat threw up his hands. "No more, Loial. I don't want to hear about that anymore."

lɔɪəl ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "wɛðɝ jə hɪɹ ɪɾ əɹ nɑt, ɪts stɪl tʃɹu. ðə wil ə taɪm wivz ðə pæɾɝn ə ði eɪdʒ, juzɪŋ ðə laɪvz ə mɛn fəɹ θɹɛd. ən jə θɹi ɑɹ tɑvɝən, sɛntɝpɔɪns ə ðə wivɪŋ."

Loial shook his head. "Whether you hear it or not, it is still true. The Wheel of Time weaves the Pattern of the Age, using the lives of men for thread. And you three are ta'veren, centerpoints of the weaving."

"noʊ mɔɹ, lɔɪəl."

"No more, Loial."

"fɔɹ ə taɪm, ðə wil wɪl bɛn ðə pæɾɝn ɝaʊn jə θɹi, wʌtɛvɝ jə du. ən wʌtɛvɝ jə də ɪz mɔɹ laɪkli tə bi tʃoʊzən baɪ ðə wil ðən baɪ ju. tɑvɝən pʊl hɪstɝi əlɔŋ bɪhaɪn əm ən ʃeɪp ðə pæɾɝn dʒʌs baɪ biɪŋ, bʌt ðə wil wivz tɑvɝən ɑn ə taɪɾɝ laɪn ðən ʌðɝ mɛn. wɛɹɛvɝ jə ɡoʊ ən wʌtɛvɝ jə du, əntɪl ðə wil tʃuzəz ʌðɝwaɪz jəl - "

"For a time, the Wheel will bend the Pattern around you three, whatever you do. And whatever you do is more likely to be chosen by the Wheel than by you. Ta'veren pull history along behind them and shape the Pattern just by being, but the Wheel weaves ta'veren on a tighter line than other men. Wherever you go and whatever you do, until the Wheel chooses otherwise you will - "

"noʊ mɔɹ!" mæt ʃaʊɾəd. ðə mɛn dɪsɪŋ lʊkt ɝaʊnd, ən i ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ əm əntɪl ðeɪ bɛn bæk tə ðɛɹ ɡeɪm.

"No more!" Mat shouted. The men dicing looked around, and he glared at them until they bent back to their game.

"aɪ æm sɑɹi, mæt," lɔɪəl ɹʌmbəld. "aɪ noʊ aɪ tɔk tu mʌtʃ, bʌɾ aɪ dɪd nɑt min - "

"I am sorry, Mat," Loial rumbled. "I know I talk too much, but I did not mean - "

"aɪ æm nɑt steɪɪŋ hɪɹ," mæt toʊl ðə ɹæftɝz, "wɪð ə bɪɡməðd oʊɡiɝ ən ə ful huz hɛɾ ɪz tu bɪɡ fəɹ ə hæt. jə kʌmɪŋ, pɛɹɪn?" pɛɹɪn saɪd, ən ɡlænst ət ɹænd, ðən nɑɾəd.

"I am not staying here," Mat told the rafters, "with a bigmouthed Ogier and a fool whose head is too big for a hat. You coming, Perrin?" Perrin sighed, and glanced at Rand, then nodded.

ɹænd wɑtʃt əm ɡoʊ wɪð ə stɪk kɑɾ ɪn ɪz θɹɛt. aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ əloʊn. laɪt hɛlp mi, aɪ hæv tə.

Rand watched them go with a stick caught in his threat. I must go alone. Light help me, I have to.

lɔɪəl wɑz stɛɹɪŋ æftɝ ðɛm, tu, aɪbɹaʊz dʒɹupɪŋ wɝidli. "ɹænd, aɪ ɹɪli dɪdn min tə - "

Loial was staring after them, too, eyebrows drooping worriedly. "Rand, I really didn't mean to - "

ɹænd meɪɾ ɪz vɔɪs hɑɹʃ. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə weɪɾɪŋ fɔɹ? ɡoʊ ɑn wɪð ðɛm! aɪ doʊn si waɪ jəɹ stɪl hɪɹ. jə ɑɹ noʊ jus tə mi ɪf jə doʊnt noʊ ə weɪ aʊt. ɡoʊ ɑn! ɡoʊ faɪn jəɹ tʃɹiz, ən jəɹ pɹɛʃəs ɡɹoʊvz, ɪf ðeɪ hævən ɔl bɪn kʌt daʊn, ən ɡʊd ɹɪɾəns tə ðɛm ɪf ðeɪ hæv."

Rand made his voice harsh. "What are you waiting for? Go on with them! I don't see why you're still here. You are no use to me if you don't know a way out. Go on! Go find your trees, and your precious groves, if they haven't all been cut down, and good riddance to them if they have."

lɔɪəlz aɪz, əz bɪɡ əz kʌps, lʊk sɝpɹaɪzd ən hɝt, ət fɝst, bʌt sloʊli ðeɪ taɪɾənd ɪndə wʌɾ ɔlmoʊs maɪt bi æŋɡɝ. ɹænd dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt kəd bi. səm ə ði oʊl stɔɹiz kleɪmd oʊɡiɝ wɝ fɪɹs, ðoʊ ðeɪ nɛvɝ sɛd haʊ, ɪɡzækli, bʌt ɹænd hæd nɛvɝ mɛɾ ɛniwʌn əz dʒɛntəl əz lɔɪəl.

Loial's eyes, as big as cups, looked surprised and hurt, at first, but slowly they tightened into what almost might be anger. Rand did not think it could be. Some of the old stories claimed Ogier were fierce, though they never said how, exactly, but Rand had never met anyone as gentle as Loial.

"ɪf jə wɪʃ ɪt soʊ, ɹænd ælθɹ," lɔɪəl sɛd stɪfli. hi ɡeɪv ə ɹɪdʒəd baʊ ən stɔkt əweɪ æftɝ mæt ən pɛɹɪn.

"If you wish it so, Rand al'Thor," Loial said stiffly. He gave a rigid bow and stalked away after Mat and Perrin.

ɹænd slʌmpt əɡɛns ðə stæk sæks ʌv ɡɹeɪn. wɛl, ə vɔɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd tɔntɪd, jə dɪɾ ɪt, dɪdn ju. aɪ hæd tə, hi toʊld ɪt. əl bi deɪnʒɝəs dʒʌs tə bi ɝaʊnd. blʌɾ ən æʃəz, aɪm gɑnə ɡoʊ mæd, ænd. . . . noʊ! noʊ, aɪ woʊnt! əl nɑt juz ðə paʊɝ, ən ðən aɪ woʊnt ɡoʊ mæd, ænd. . . . bʌɾ aɪ kæn ɹɪsk ɪt. aɪ kænt, doʊn jə si? bʌt ðə vɔɪs oʊnli læft ət hɪm.

Rand slumped against the stacked sacks of grain. Well, a voice in his head taunted, you did it, didn't you. I had to, he told it. I will be dangerous just to be around. Blood and ashes, I'm going to go mad, and. . . . No! No, I won't! I will not use the Power, and then I won't go mad, and. . . . But I can't risk it. I can't, don't you see? But the voice only laughed at him.

ðə ɡæmblɝz wɝ lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, hi ɹilaɪzd. ɔl ə ðɛm, stɪl nilɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔl, hæd tɝn tə stɛɹ ət hɪm. ʃaɪnɝənz ʌv ɛni klæs wɝ ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz pəlaɪɾ ən kɝɛkt, ivən tə blʌɾ ɛnəmiz, ən oʊɡiɝ wɝ nɛvɝ ɛni ɛnəmiz ə ʃaɪnɝ. ʃɑk fɪl ðə ɡæmblɝz' aɪz. ðɛɹ feɪsəz wɝ blæŋk, bʌt ðɛɹ aɪz sɛd wʌɾ i hæd dʌn wɑz ɹɔŋ. pɑɹɾ ə hɪm θɔt ðeɪ wɝ ɹaɪt, ən ðət dʒɹoʊv ðɛɹ saɪlən ækjəzeɪʃən dip. ðeɪ oʊnli lʊkt ət hɪm, bʌɾ i stʌmbəld aʊɾ ə ðə stɔɹɹum əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ tʃeɪsɪŋ hɪm.

The gamblers were looking at him, he realized. All of them, still kneeling against the wall, had turned to stare at him. Shienarans of any class were almost always polite and correct, even to blood enemies, and Ogier were never any enemies of Shienar. Shock filled the gamblers' eyes. Their faces were blank, but their eyes said what he had done was wrong. Part of him thought they were right, and that drove their silent accusation deep. They only looked at him, but he stumbled out of the storeroom as if they were chasing him.

nʌmbli hi wɛn ɑn θɹu ðə stɔɹɹumz, hʌntɪŋ ə pleɪs tə sɪkɹit hɪmsɛlf əntɪl səm tʃɹæfɪk wɑz əlaʊd θɹu ðə ɡeɪts əɡɛn. ðən i kəd haɪɾ ɪn ðə bɑɾəm ʌv ə vɪktʃueɪlɝz kɑɹt, meɪbi. ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt sɝtʃ ðə kɑɹts ɑn ðə weɪ aʊt. ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt sɝtʃ ðə stɔɹɹumz, sɝtʃ ðə hoʊl kip fəɹ hɪm. stʌbɝnli hi ɹəfjuz tə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðæt, stʌbɝnli kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn faɪndɪŋ ə seɪf pleɪs. bʌɾ ɛvɹi pleɪs i faʊnd - ə hɑloʊ ɪn ə stæk ʌv ɡɹeɪn sæks, ə nɛɹoʊ æli əlɔŋ ðə wɔl bɪhaɪn səm waɪn bæɹəlz, ən əbændən stɔɹɹum hæf fɪld wɪð ɛmpti kɹeɪts ən ʃædoʊz - hi kəɾ ɪmædʒən sɝtʃɝz faɪndɪŋ ɪm ðɛɹ. hi kəɾ ɪmædʒən ðəɾ ənsin wɑtʃɝ, huɛvɝ ɪt wɑz - əɹ wʌtɛvɝ - faɪndɪŋ ɪm ðɛɹ, tu. soʊ hi hʌntəɾ ɑn, θɝsti ən dʌsti ən wɪð kɑbwɛbz ɪn ɪz hɛɹ.

Numbly he went on through the storerooms, hunting a place to secrete himself until some traffic was allowed through the gates again. Then he could hide in the bottom of a victualer's cart, maybe. If they did not search the carts on the way out. If they did not search the storerooms, search the whole keep for him. Stubbornly he refused to think about that, stubbornly concentrated on finding a safe place. But every place he found - a hollow in a stack of grain sacks, a narrow alley along the wall behind some wine barrels, an abandoned storeroom half filled with empty crates and shadows - he could imagine searchers finding him there. He could imagine that unseen watcher, whoever it was - or whatever - finding him there, too. So he hunted on, thirsty and dusty and with cobwebs in his hair.

ən ðən i keɪm aʊɾ ɪndə ə dɪmli tɔɹtʃ-lɪt kɔɹəɾɝ, ən ɛɡwin wɑz kɹipɪŋ əlɔŋ ɪt, pɔzɪŋ tə pɪɹ ɪndə ðə stɔɹɹumz ʃi pæst. hɝ dɑɹk hɛɹ, hæŋɪŋ tə hɝ weɪst, wɑz kɑt bæk wɪð ə ɹɛd ɹɪbən, ən ʃi wɔɹ ə ɡus-ɡɹeɪ dʒɹɛs ɪn ðə ʃaɪnɝən fæʃən, tʃɹɪmd ɪn ɹɛd. ət ðə saɪɾ ə hɝ, sædnəs ən lɔs ɹoʊld oʊvɝ hɪm, wɝs ðən wən i hæd tʃeɪs mæt ən pɛɹɪn ən lɔɪəl əweɪ. hi hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp θɪŋkɪŋ i wəd mɛɹi ɛɡwin wʌn deɪ; ðeɪ boʊθ hæd. bʌt naʊ. . . .

And then he came out into a dimly torch-lit corridor, and Egwene was creeping along it, pausing to peer into the storerooms she passed. Her dark hair, hanging to her waist, was caught back with a red ribbon, and she wore a goose-gray dress in the Shienaran fashion, trimmed in red. At the sight of her, sadness and loss rolled over him, worse than when he had chased Mat and Perrin and Loial away. He had grown up thinking he would marry Egwene one day; they both had. But now. . . .

ʃi dʒʌmpt wən i pɑpt aʊt ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, ən əɹ bɹɛθ kɑt laʊdli, bʌt wʌt ʃi sɛd wɑz, "soʊ ðəɹ jə ɑɹ. mæt ən pɛɹɪn toʊl mi wʌt jə dɪd. ən lɔɪəl. aɪ noʊ wʌt jəɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə du, ɹænd, ən ɪts pleɪn fulɪʃ." ʃi kɹɔst əɹ ɑɹmz ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛsts, ən əɹ bɪɡ, dɑɹk aɪz fɪkst ɪm stɝnli. hi ɔlweɪz wʌndɝd haʊ ʃi mænədʒ tə sim tə bi lʊkɪŋ daʊn əɾ ɪm - ʃi dɪɾ ɪɾ ət wɪl - ɔlðoʊ ʃi wɑz oʊnli əz tɔl əz ɪz tʃɛst, ən tu jɪɹz jʌŋɡɝ bɪsaɪdz.

She jumped when he popped out right in front of her, and her breath caught loudly, but what she said was, "So there you are. Mat and Perrin told me what you did. And Loial. I know what you're trying to do, Rand, and it is plain foolish." She crossed her arms under her breasts, and her big, dark eyes fixed him sternly. He always wondered how she managed to seem to be looking down at him - she did it at will - although she was only as tall as his chest, and two years younger besides.

"ɡʊd," hi sɛd. hɝ hɛɹ sʌɾənli meɪɾ ɪm æŋɡɹi. hi hæd nɛvɝ sin ə ɡɹoʊn wʊmən wɪð əɹ hɛɹ ənbɹeɪɾɪd əntɪl i lɛf ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ðɛɹ, ɛvɹi ɡɝl weɪɾəd iɡɝli fəɹ ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl ə hɝ vɪlədʒ tə seɪ ʃi wɑz oʊld ɪnʌf tə bɹeɪɾ əɹ hɛɹ. ɛɡwin sɝɾənli hæd. ən hɪɹ ʃi wɑz wɪð əɹ hɛɹ lus ɪksɛp fəɹ ə ɹɪbən. aɪ wɑnə ɡoʊ hoʊm ən kænt, ən ʃi kænt weɪt tə fɝɡɛɾ ɛmənz fild. "ju ɡoʊ əweɪ ən liv mi əloʊn, tu. jə doʊnt wɑnə kip kʌmpəni wɪð ə ʃɛpɝɾ ɛnimɔɹ. ðəɹ ɑɹ plɛnti ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ hɪɹ fəɹ jə tə mun ɝaʊnd, naʊ. ən doʊn tɛl ɛni ʌv əm jə sɔ mi. ðəɹ æftɝ mi, ən aɪ doʊnt nid jə hɛlpɪŋ ðɛm."

"Good," he said. Her hair suddenly made him angry. He had never seen a grown woman with her hair unbraided until he left the Two Rivers. There, every girl waited eagerly for the Women's Circle of her village to say she was old enough to braid her hair. Egwene certainly had. And here she was with her hair loose except for a ribbon. I want to go home and can't, and she can't wait to forget Emond's Field. "You go away and leave me alone, too. You don't want to keep company with a shepherd anymore. There are plenty of Aes Sedai here for you to moon around, now. And don't tell any of them you saw me. They're after me, and I don't need you helping them."

bɹaɪt spɑts ə kʌlɝ blumd ɪn əɹ tʃiks. "du jə θɪŋk aɪ wəd - "

Bright spots of color bloomed in her cheeks. "Do you think I would - "

hi tɝn tə wɔk əweɪ, ən wɪð ə kɹaɪ ʃi θɹu hɝsɛlf ət hɪm, flʌŋ əɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn ɪz lɛɡz. ðeɪ boʊθ tʌmbəl tə ðə stoʊn flɔɹ, hɪz sæɾəlbæɡz ən bʌndəlz flaɪɪŋ. hi ɡɹʌntɪd wən i hɪt, sɔɹd hɪl dɪɡɪŋ ɪndə hɪz saɪd, ən əɡɛn wən ʃi skɹæbəld ʌp ən plɑp hɝsɛlf daʊn ɑn ɪz bæk əz ɪf i wɝ ə tʃɛɹ. "maɪ mʌðɝ," ʃi sɛd fɝmli, "ɔlweɪz toʊl mi ðə bɛst weɪ tə lɝn tə dil wɪð ə mæn wɑz tə lɝn tə ɹaɪɾ ə mjul. ʃi sɛd ðeɪv əbaʊɾ ikwəl bɹeɪnz moʊst ə ðə taɪm. səmtaɪmz ðə mjul ɪz smɑɹɾɝ."

He turned to walk away, and with a cry she threw herself at him, flung her arms around his legs. They both tumbled to the stone floor, his saddlebags and bundles flying. He grunted when he hit, sword hilt digging into his side, and again when she scrabbled up and plopped herself down on his back as if he were a chair. "My mother," she said firmly, "always told me the best way to learn to deal with a man was to learn to ride a mule. She said they have about equal brains most of the time. Sometimes the mule is smarter."

hi ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛd tə lʊk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ət hɝ. "ɡɛɾ ɔf mi, ɛɡwin. ɡɛɾ ɔf! ɛɡwin, ɪf jə doʊnt ɡɛɾ ɔf" - hi loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs ɑmənəsli - "aɪl də sʌmθɪŋ tə ju. jə noʊ wʌɾ aɪ æm." hi æɾəd ə ɡlɛɹ fəɹ ɡʊd mɛʒɝ.

He raised his head to look over his shoulder at her. "Get off me, Egwene. Get off! Egwene, if you don't get off" - he lowered his voice ominously - "I'll do something to you. You know what I am." He added a glare for good measure.

ɛɡwin snɪft. "ju wʊdnt, ɪf jə kʊd. jə wəd nɑt hɝɾ ɛnibəɾi. bʌt jə kænt, ɛniweɪ. aɪ noʊ jə kænɑt tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ wɛnɛvɝ jə wɑnt; ɪt dʒʌs hæpənz, ən jə kænɑt kəntʃɹoʊl ɪt. soʊ jə ɑɹ nɑt gɑnə də ɛniθɪŋ tə mi əɹ ɛnibəɾi ɛls. aɪ, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, hæv bɪn teɪkɪŋ lɛsənz wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn, soʊ ɪf jə doʊn lɪsən tə səm sɛns, ɹænd ælθɹ, aɪ maɪt dʒʌst sɛt jəɹ bɹitʃɪz ɑn faɪɝ. aɪ kən mænədʒ ðət mʌtʃ. jə kip ɑn əz jə ɑɹ ən si ɪf aɪ kænɑt." sʌɾənli, fəɹ dʒʌst ə moʊmənt, ðə tɔɹtʃ nɪɹəst əm ɑn ðə wɔl flɛɹɾ ʌp wɪð ə ɹɔɹ. ʃi ɡeɪv ə skwik ən stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪt, stɑɹɾəld.

Egwene sniffed. "You wouldn't, if you could. You would not hurt anybody. But you can't, anyway. I know you cannot channel the One Power whenever you want; it just happens, and you cannot control it. So you are not going to do anything to me or anybody else. I, on the other hand, have been taking lessons with Moiraine, so if you don't listen to some sense, Rand al'Thor, I might just set your breeches on fire. I can manage that much. You keep on as you are and see if I cannot." Suddenly, for just a moment, the torch nearest them on the wall flared up with a roar. She gave a squeak and stared at it, startled.

twɪstɪŋ ɝaʊnd, hi ɡɹæbd əɹ ɑɹm, pʊld əɹ ɔf ɪz bæk, ən sæɾ əɹ əɡɛns ðə wɔl. wən i sæɾ ʌp hɪmsɛlf, ʃi wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ əkɹɔs fɹəm hɪm, ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ ɑɹm fjʊɹiəsli. "ju ɹɪli wəd hæv, wʊdn ju?" hi sɛɾ æŋɡɹəli. "jɔɹ fulɪŋ wɪð θɪŋz jə doʊn ʌndɝstænd. jə cʊɾə bɝn boʊθ ʌv əs tə tʃɑɹkoʊl!"

Twisting around, he grabbed her arm, pulled her off his back, and sat her against the wall. When he sat up himself, she was sitting there across from him, rubbing her arm furiously. "You really would have, wouldn't you?" he said angrily. "You're fooling with things you don't understand. You could have burned both of us to charcoal!"

"mɛn! wən jə kænɑt wɪn ən ɑɹɡjəmənt, jə iðɝ ɹʌn əweɪ əɹ ɹɪzɔɹt tə fɔɹs."

"Men! When you cannot win an argument, you either run away or resort to force."

"hoʊld ɑn ðɛɹ! hu tʃɹɪp hu? hu sæɾ ɑn hu? ən jə θɹɛɾənd - tʃɹaɪd! - tə - " hi ɹeɪz boʊθ hænz. "noʊ, jə doʊnt. jə də ðɪs tə mi ɔl ðə taɪm. wɛnɛvɝ jə ɹilaɪz ði ɑɹɡjəmən ɪzənt ɡoʊɪŋ ðə weɪ jə wɑnt, sʌɾənli wəɹ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ ɛls kəmplitli. nɑt ðɪs taɪm."

"Hold on there! Who tripped who? Who sat on who? And you threatened - tried! - to - " He raised both hands. "No, you don't. You do this to me all the time. Whenever you realize the argument isn't going the way you want, suddenly we are arguing about something else completely. Not this time."

"aɪ æm nɑɾ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ," ʃi sɛd kɑmli, "æn aɪm nɑt tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ðə sʌbʒɪkt, iðɝ. wʌɾ ɪz haɪɾɪŋ ɪksɛpt ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ? ən æftɝ jə haɪd, jəl ɹʌn əweɪ fəɹ tʃɹu. ən wʌɾ əbaʊt hɝɾɪŋ mæt, ən pɛɹɪn, ən lɔɪəl? ən mi? aɪ noʊ waɪ. jəɹ əfɹeɪd jəl hɝt sʌmbɑɾi ivən wɝs ɪf jə lɛɾ əm steɪ nɪɹ ju. ɪf jə doʊn də wʌt jə ʃʊdnt, ðən jə də nɑɾ əv tə wɝi əbaʊt hɝɾɪŋ ɛnibəɾi. ɔl ðɪs ɹʌnɪŋ ɝaʊn ən stʃɹaɪkɪŋ aʊt, ən jə doʊn ivən noʊ ɪf ðɛɹz ə ɹizən. waɪ ʃəd ði æmɪɝlɪn, əɹ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn, ivən noʊ jə ɪɡzɪst?"

"I am not arguing," she said calmly, "and I am not changing the subject, either. What is hiding except running away? And after you hide, you'll run away for true. And what about hurting Mat, and Perrin, and Loial? And me? I know why. You're afraid you will hurt somebody even worse if you let them stay near you. If you don't do what you shouldn't, then you do not have to worry about hurting anybody. All this running around and striking out, and you don't even know if there's a reason. Why should the Amyrlin, or any Aes Sedai but Moiraine, even know you exist?"

fəɹ ə moʊmən i stɛɹɾ ət hɝ. ðə lɔŋɡɝ ʃi spɛnt wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn ən nɪneɪiv, ðə mɔɹ ʃi tʊk ɑn ðɛɹ mænɝ, ət list wən ʃi wɑntəd tə. ðeɪ wɝ mʌtʃ əlaɪk ət taɪmz, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə wɪzdəm, dɪstən ən noʊɪŋ. ɪt wɑz dɪskənsɝɾɪŋ kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ɛɡwin. faɪnəli hi toʊld əɹ wʌt læn hæd sɛd. "wʌɾ ɛls kəɾ i min?"

For a moment he stared at her. The longer she spent with Moiraine and Nynaeve, the more she took on their manner, at least when she wanted to. They were much alike at times, the Aes Sedai and the Wisdom, distant and knowing. It was disconcerting coming from Egwene. Finally he told her what Lan had said. "What else could he mean?"

hɝ hæn fɹoʊz ɑn əɹ ɑɹm, ən ʃi fɹaʊnd wɪð kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən. "mɔɪɹeɪn noʊz əbaʊt ju, ən ʃi hæzən dʌn ɛniθɪŋ, soʊ waɪ ʃəd ʃi naʊ? bʌɾ ɪf læn. . . ." stɪl fɹaʊnɪŋ, ʃi mɛɾ ɪz aɪz. "ðə stɔɹɹumz ɑɹ ðə fɝs pleɪs ðəl lʊk. ɪf ðeɪ də lʊk. əntɪl wi faɪn aʊɾ ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ lʊkɪŋ, wi nid tə pʊt jə sʌmwɛɹ ðeɪ wəd nɛvɝ θɪŋk ə sɝtʃɪŋ. aɪ noʊ. ðə dʌnʒən."

Her hand froze on her arm, and she frowned with concentration. "Moiraine knows about you, and she hasn't done anything, so why should she now? But if Lan. . . ." Still frowning, she met his eyes. "The storerooms are the first place they will look. If they do look. Until we find out if they are looking, we need to put you somewhere they would never think of searching. I know. The dungeon."

hi skɹæmbəl tə hɪz fit. "ðə dʌnʒən!"

He scrambled to his feet. "The dungeon!"

"nɑɾ ɪn ə sɛl, sɪli. aɪ ɡoʊ ðəɹ səm ivnɪŋz tə vɪzət pdən feɪn. nɪneɪiv dʌz, tu. noʊ wʌn wɪl θɪŋk ɪɾ ɑɾ ɪf aɪ ɡoʊ ɝli tədeɪ. ɪn tʃɹuθ, wɪð ɛvɹibɑɾi lʊkɪŋ tə ði æmɪɝlɪn, noʊ wʌn wɪl ivən noʊɾəs ʌs."

"Not in a cell, silly. I go there some evenings to visit Padan Fain. Nynaeve does, too. No one will think it odd if I go early today. In truth, with everybody looking to the Amyrlin, no one will even notice us."

"bʌt, mɔɪɹeɪn. . . ."

"But, Moiraine. . . ."

"ʃi dʌznt ɡoʊ tə ðə dʌnʒənz tə kwɛstʃən mæstɝ feɪn. ʃiz ɪm bɹɔt tə hɝ. ən ʃiz nɑt dʌn ðət vɛɹi mʌtʃ fəɹ wiks. bɪliv mi, jəl bi seɪf ðɛɹ."

"She doesn't go to the dungeons to question Master Fain. She has him brought to her. And she has not done that very much for weeks. Believe me, you will be safe there."

stɪl, hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. pdən feɪn. "waɪ dʒju vɪzət ðə pɛdlɝ, ɛniweɪ? hiz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, ədmɪɾəd aʊɾ ə hɪz oʊn maʊθ, ən ə bæd wʌn. bɝn mi, ɛɡwin, hi bɹɔt ðə tʃɹɑləks tə ɛmənz fild! ðə dɑɹk wʌnz haʊnd, hi kɔl hɪmsɛlf, ən hiz bɪn snɪfɪŋ ɑn maɪ tʃɹeɪl sɪns wɪntɝnaɪt."

Still, he hesitated. Padan Fain. "Why do you visit the peddler, anyway? He's a Darkfriend, admitted out of his own mouth, and a bad one. Burn me, Egwene, he brought the Trollocs to Emond's Field! The Dark One's hound, he called himself, and he has been sniffing on my trail since Winternight."

"wɛl, hiz seɪf bɪhaɪn aɪɝn bɑɹz naʊ, ɹænd." ɪt wɑz əɹ tɝn tə hɛzəteɪt, ən ʃi lʊkt əɾ ɪm ɔlmoʊs pliɾɪŋ. "ɹænd, hiz bɹɔɾ ɪz wæɡən ɪndə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɛvɹi spɹɪŋ sɪns bɪfɔɹ aɪ wɑz bɔɹn. hi noʊz ɔl ðə pipəl aɪ noʊ, ɔl ðə pleɪsəz. ɪts stʃɹeɪnʒ, bʌt ðə lɔŋɡɝ hiz bɪn lɑkt ʌp, ði iziɝ ɪn hɪmsɛlf hiz bɪkʌm. ɪts ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf hiz bɹeɪkɪŋ fɹi ʌv ðə dɑɹk wʌn. hi læfs əɡɛn, ən tɛlz fʌni stɔɹiz, əbaʊɾ ɛmənz fil foʊk, ən səmtaɪmz əbaʊt pleɪsəz aɪ nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə bɪfɔɹ. səmtaɪmz hiz ɔlmoʊs laɪk ɪz oʊl sɛlf. aɪ dʒʌs laɪk tə tɔk tə sʌmbɑɾi əbaʊt hoʊm."

"Well, he is safe behind iron bars now, Rand." It was her turn to hesitate, and she looked at him almost pleading. "Rand, he has brought his wagon into the Two Rivers every spring since before I was born. He knows all the people I know, all the places. It's strange, but the longer he has been locked up, the easier in himself he has become. It's almost as if he is breaking free of the Dark One. He laughs again, and tells funny stories, about Emond's Field folk, and sometimes about places I never heard of before. Sometimes he is almost like his old self. I just like to talk to somebody about home."

sɪns aɪv bɪn əvɔɪɾɪŋ ju, hi θɔt, ən sɪns pɛɹɪnz bɪn əvɔɪɾɪŋ ɛvɹibɑɾi, ən mæts bɪn spɛndɪŋ ɔl ɪz taɪm ɡæmbəlɪŋ ən kəɹaʊzəŋ. "aɪ ʃʊdn əv kɛp tə maɪsɛlf soʊ mʌtʃ," hi mʌɾɝd, ðən saɪd. "wɛl, ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn θɪŋks ɪts seɪf ɪnʌf fəɹ ju, aɪ səpoʊz ɪts seɪf ɪnʌf fəɹ mi. bʌt ðɛɹz noʊ nid fəɹ jə tə bi mɪkst ɪn ɪt."

Since I've been avoiding you, he thought, and since Perrin's been avoiding everybody, and Mat's been spending all his time gambling and carousing. "I shouldn't have kept to myself so much," he muttered, then sighed. "Well, if Moiraine thinks it's safe enough for you, I suppose it is safe enough for me. But there's no need for you to be mixed in it."

ɛɡwin ɡɑt tə hɝ fiɾ ən kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn bɹʌʃɪŋ ɔf əɹ dʒɹɛs, əvɔɪɾɪŋ ɪz aɪ.

Egwene got to her feet and concentrated on brushing off her dress, avoiding his eye.

"mɔɪɹeɪn əz sɛɾ ɪts seɪf? ɛɡwin?"

"Moiraine has said it's safe? Egwene?"

"mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ hæz nɛvɝ toʊl mi aɪ kəd nɑt vɪzət mæstɝ feɪn," ʃi sɛd kɛɹfəli.

"Moiraine Sedai has never told me I could not visit Master Fain," she said carefully.

hi stɛɹɾ ət hɝ, ðən bɝst aʊt, "ju nɛvɝ æsk hɝ. ʃi dʌznt noʊ. ɛɡwin, ðæts stupəd. pdən feɪnz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, ən əz bæɾ əz ɛvɝ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd wɑz."

He stared at her, then burst out, "You never asked her. She doesn't know. Egwene, that's stupid. Padan Fain's a Darkfriend, and as bad as ever a Darkfriend was."

"hi ɪz lɑkt ɪn ə keɪdʒ," ʃi sɛd stɪfli, "æn aɪ də nɑɾ əv tə æsk mɔɪɹeɪnz pɝmɪʃən fəɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ aɪ du. ɪts ə lɪɾəl leɪt fəɹ jə tə stɑɹt wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt duɪŋ wʌɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ θɪŋks, ɪzən ɪt? naʊ, ɑɹ jə kʌmɪŋ?"

"He is locked in a cage," she said stiffly, "and I do not have to ask Moiraine's permission for everything I do. It is a little late for you to start worrying about doing what an Aes Sedai thinks, isn't it? Now, are you coming?"

"aɪ kən faɪn ðə dʌnʒən wɪθaʊt ju. ðeɪ ɑɹ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ mi, əɹ wɪl bi, ən ɪt woʊn dʒju ɛni ɡʊd tə bi faʊnd wɪð mi."

"I can find the dungeon without you. They are looking for me, or will be, and it won't do you any good to be found with me."

"wɪθaʊt mi," ʃi sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "jul laɪkli tʃɹɪp oʊvɝ jəɹ oʊn fiɾ ən fɔl ɪn ði æmɪɝlɪn sits læp, ðən kənfɛs ɛvɹiθɪŋ waɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tɔk jəɹ weɪ aʊɾ ʌv ɪt."

"Without me," she said dryly, "you'll likely trip over your own feet and fall in the Amyrlin Seat's lap, then confess everything while trying to talk your way out of it."

"blʌɾ ən æʃəz, jə ɔt tə bi ɪn ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl bæk hoʊm. ɪf mɛn wɝ ɔl əz fʌmbəl-fʊɾɪd ən hɛlpləs əz jə sim tə θɪŋk, wid nɛvɝ - "

"Blood and ashes, you ought to be in the Women's Circle back home. If men were all as fumble-footed and helpless as you seem to think, we'd never - "

"ɑɹ jə gɑnə stæn hɪɹ tɔkɪŋ əntɪl ðeɪ də faɪn ju? pɪk ʌp jəɹ θɪŋz, ɹænd, ən kʌm wɪð mi." nɑt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ən ænsɝ, ʃi spʌn ɝaʊn ən stɑɹɾəd ɔf daʊn ðə hɔl. mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, hi ɹɪlʌktənli oʊbeɪd.

"Are you going to stand here talking until they do find you? Pick up your things, Rand, and come with me." Not waiting for an answer, she spun around and started off down the hall. Muttering under his breath, he reluctantly obeyed.

ðəɹ wɝ fju pipəl - sɝvəns, meɪnli - ɪn ðə bæk weɪz ðeɪ tʊk, bʌt ɹænd hæd ðə filɪŋ ðət ðeɪ ɔl tʊk spɛʃəl noʊɾəs ə hɪm. nɑt noʊɾəs ʌv ə mæn bɝɾənd fəɹ ə dʒɝni, bʌɾ ə hɪm, ɹænd ælθɹ ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ. hi nu ɪt wɑz ɪz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən - hi hoʊpt ɪt wɑz - bʌɾ ivən soʊ, hi fɛl noʊ ɹɪlif wən ðeɪ stɑpt ɪn ə pæsədʒweɪ dip bɪniθ ðə kip, bɪfɔɹ ə tɔl dɔɹ wɪð ə smɔl aɪɝn ɡɹɪl sɛɾ ɪn ɪt, əz θɪkli stʃɹæpt wɪð aɪɝn əz ɛni ɪn ði aʊɾɝ wɔl. ə klæpɝ hʌŋ bɪloʊ ðə ɡɹɪl.

There were few people - servants, mainly - in the back ways they took, but Rand had the feeling that they all took special notice of him. Not notice of a man burdened for a journey, but of him, Rand al'Thor in particular. He knew it was his imagination - he hoped it was - but even so, he felt no relief when they stopped in a passageway deep beneath the keep, before a tall door with a small iron grill set in it, as thickly strapped with iron as any in the outer wall. A clapper hung below the grill.

θɹu ðə ɡɹɪl ɹænd kəd si bɛɹ wɔlz, ən tu tɑp-nɑɾɪd soʊlʒɝz sɪɾɪŋ bæɹhɛɾɪd əɾ ə teɪbəl wɪð ə læmp ɑn ɪt. wʌn ə ðə mɛn wɑz ʃɑɹpənɪŋ ə dæɡɝ wɪð lɔŋ, sloʊ stʃɹoʊks ʌv ə stoʊn. hɪz stʃɹoʊks nɛvɝ fɔltɝd wən ɛɡwin ɹæpt wɪð ðə klæpɝ, ə ʃɑɹp klæŋ ʌv aɪɝn ɑn aɪɝn. ði ʌðɝ mæn, hɪz feɪs flæɾ ən sʌlən, lʊkt ət ðə dɔɹ əz ɪf kənsɪɾɝɪŋ bɪfɔɹ i faɪnəli ɹoʊz ən keɪm oʊvɝ. hi wɑz skwɑɾ ən stɑki, bɛɹli tɔl ɪnʌf tə lʊk θɹu ðə kɹɔs-hætʃt bɑɹz.

Through the grill Rand could see bare walls, and two top-knotted soldiers sitting bareheaded at a table with a lamp on it. One of the men was sharpening a dagger with long, slow strokes of a stone. His strokes never faltered when Egwene rapped with the clapper, a sharp clang of iron on iron. The other man, his face flat and sullen, looked at the door as if considering before he finally rose and came over. He was squat and stocky, barely tall enough to look through the cross-hatched bars.

"wʌt dʒju wɑnt? oʊ, ɪts jə əɡɛn, ɡɝl. kʌm tə si jəɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnd? huz ðæt?" hi meɪd noʊ muv tə oʊpən ðə dɔɹ.

"What do you want? Oh, it's you again, girl. Come to see your Darkfriend? Who's that?" He made no move to open the door.

"hiz ə fɹɛn ə maɪn, tʃæŋɡʌ. hi wɑns tə si mæstɝ feɪn, tu."

"He's a friend of mine, Changu. He wants to see Master Fain, too."

ðə mæn stʌɾid ɹænd, hɪz ʌpɝ lɪp kwɪvɝɪŋ bæk tə bɛɹ tiθ. ɹænd dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt wɑz səpoʊz tə bi ə smaɪl. "wɛl," tʃæŋɡʌ sɛd faɪnəli. "wɛl. tɔl, ɑɹən ju? tɔl. ən fænsi dʒɹɛs fəɹ jəɹ kaɪnd. sʌmbɑɾi kætʃ jə jʌŋ ɪn ði istɝn mɑɹtʃɪz ən teɪm ju?" hi slæm bæk ðə boʊls ən jæŋkt oʊpən ðə dɔɹ. "wɛl, kʌm ɪn ɪf jəɹ kʌmɪŋ." hi tʊk ɑn ə mɑkɪŋ toʊn. "teɪk kɛɹ nɑt tə bʌmp jəɹ hɛd, maɪ lɔɹd."

The man studied Rand, his upper lip quivering back to bare teeth. Rand did not think it was supposed to be a smile. "Well," Changu said finally. "Well. Tall, aren't you? Tall. And fancy dressed for your kind. Somebody catch you young in the Eastern Marches and tame you?" He slammed back the bolts and yanked open the door. "Well, come in if you're coming." He took on a mocking tone. "Take care not to bump your head, my Lord."

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ deɪnʒɝ ə ðæt; ðə dɔɹ wɑz tɔl ɪnʌf fəɹ lɔɪəl. ɹænd fɑloʊɾ ɛɡwin ɪn, fɹaʊnɪŋ ən wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ðɪs tʃæŋɡʌ mɛn tə meɪk səm sɔɹɾ ə tʃɹʌbəl. hi wɑz ðə fɝst ɹud ʃaɪnɝən ɹænd hæd mɛt; ivən mæsimə wɑz oʊnli koʊld, nɑt ɹɪli ɹud. bʌt ðə fɛloʊ dʒʌs bæŋ ðə dɔɹ ʃʌɾ ən ɹæm ðə hɛvi boʊls hoʊm, ðən wɛn tə səm ʃɛlvz bɪɑn ði ɛn ə ðə teɪbəl ən tʊk wʌn ə ðə læmps ðɛɹ. ði ʌðɝ mæn nɛvɝ sist stʃɹɑpɪŋ ɪz naɪf, nɛvɝ ivən lʊkt ʌp fɹəm ɪt. ðə ɹum wɑz bɛɹ ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə teɪbəl ən bɛntʃɪz ən ʃɛlvz, wɪð stʃɹɔ ɑn ðə flɔɹ ən ənʌðɝ aɪɝn-baʊn dɔɹ liɾɪŋ dipɝ ɪn.

There was no danger of that; the door was tall enough for Loial. Rand followed Egwene in, frowning and wondering if this Changu meant to make some sort of trouble. He was the first rude Shienaran Rand had met; even Masema was only cold, not really rude. But the fellow just banged the door shut and rammed the heavy bolts home, then went to some shelves beyond the end of the table and took one of the lamps there. The other man never ceased stropping his knife, never even looked up from it. The room was bare except for the table and benches and shelves, with straw on the floor and another iron-bound door leading deeper in.

"jul wɑn səm laɪt, woʊn ju," tʃæŋɡʌ sɛd, "ɪn ðəɹ ɪn ðə dɑɹk wɪð jəɹ dɑɹkfɹɛn fɹɛnd." hi læft, kɔɹs ən hjumɝləs, ən lɪt ðə læmp. "hiz weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ju." hi θɹʌs ðə læmp əɾ ɛɡwin, ən əndɪd ði ɪnɝ dɔɹ ɔlmoʊst iɡɝli. "weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ju. ɪn ðɛɹ, ɪn ðə dɑɹk."

"You'll want some light, won't you," Changu said, "in there in the dark with your Darkfriend friend." He laughed, coarse and humorless, and lit the lamp. "He's waiting for you." He thrust the lamp at Egwene, and undid the inner door almost eagerly. "Waiting for you. In there, in the dark."

ɹænd pɔzd ənizəli ət ðə blæknəs bɪɑnd, ən tʃæŋɡʌ ɡɹɪnɪŋ bɪhaɪnd, bʌɾ ɛɡwin kɑɾ ɪz sliv ən pʊld ɪm ɪn. ðə dɔɹ slæmd, ɔlmoʊs kætʃɪŋ ɪz hil; ðə lætʃ bɑɹz klæŋd ʃʌt. ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ðə laɪɾ ə ðə læmp, ə smɔl pul ɝaʊn əm ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs.

Rand paused uneasily at the blackness beyond, and Changu grinning behind, but Egwene caught his sleeve and pulled him in. The door slammed, almost catching his heel; the latch bars clanged shut. There was only the light of the lamp, a small pool around them in the darkness.

"ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ hɪl lɛɾ əs aʊt?" hi æskt. ðə mæn hæd nɛvɝ ivən lʊkt əɾ ɪz sɔɹɾ əɹ baʊ, hi ɹilaɪzd, nɛvɝ æskt wʌt wɑz ɪn ɪz bʌndəlz. "ðeɪ ɑɹən vɛɹi ɡʊd ɡɑɹdz. wi kəd bi hɪɹ tə bɹeɪk feɪn fɹi fəɹ ɔl i noʊz."

"Are you sure he'll let us out?" he asked. The man had never even looked at his sword or bow, he realized, never asked what was in his bundles. "They aren't very good guards. We could be here to break Fain free for all he knows."

"ðeɪ noʊ mi bɛɾɝ ðən ðæt," ʃi sɛd, bʌt ʃi saʊndəd tʃɹʌbəld, ən ʃi æɾəd, "ðeɪ sim wɝs ɛvɹi taɪm aɪ kʌm. ɔl ðə ɡɑɹdz du. minɝ, ən mɔɹ sʌlən. tʃæŋɡʌ toʊl dʒoʊks ðə fɝs taɪm aɪ keɪm, ən naɪdaʊ nɛvɝ ivən spiks ɛnimɔɹ. bʌɾ aɪ səpoʊz wɝkɪŋ ɪn ə pleɪs laɪk ðɪs kænt ɡɪv ə mæn ə laɪt hɑɹt. meɪbi ɪts dʒʌs mi. ðɪs pleɪs dʌz nɑt də maɪ hɑɹɾ ɛni ɡʊd, iðɝ." dɪspaɪɾ əɹ wɝdz, ʃi dʒɹu hɪm kɑnfəɾəntli ɪndə ðə blæk. hi kɛpt ɪz fɹi hæn ɑn ɪz sɔɹd.

"They know me better than that," she said, but she sounded troubled, and she added, "They seem worse every time I come. All the guards do. Meaner, and more sullen. Changu told jokes the first time I came, and Nidao never even speaks anymore. But I suppose working in a place like this can't give a man a light heart. Maybe it is just me. This place does not do my heart any good, either." Despite her words, she drew him confidently into the black. He kept his free hand on his sword.

ðə peɪl læmplaɪt ʃoʊɾ ə waɪd hɔl wɪð flæɾ aɪɝn ɡɹɪlz tə iðɝ saɪd, fɹʌntɪŋ stoʊn-wɔl sɛlz. oʊnli tu ʌv ðə sɛlz ðeɪ pæs hɛl pɹɪznɝz. ði ɑkjəpəns sæɾ ʌp ɑn ðɛɹ nɛɹoʊ kɑts əz ðə laɪt stʃɹʌk ðɛm, ʃildɪŋ ðɛɹ aɪz wɪð ðɛɹ hænz, ɡlɛɹɪŋ bɪtwin ðɛɹ fɪŋɡɝz. ivən wɪð ðɛɹ feɪsəz hɪɾən, ɹænd wɑz ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɡlɛɹɪŋ. ðɛɹ aɪz ɡlɪɾɝd ɪn ðə læmplaɪt.

The pale lamplight showed a wide hall with flat iron grills to either side, fronting stone-walled cells. Only two of the cells they passed held prisoners. The occupants sat up on their narrow cots as the light struck them, shielding their eyes with their hands, glaring between their fingers. Even with their faces hidden, Rand was sure they were glaring. Their eyes glittered in the lamplight.

"ðæt wʌn laɪks tə dʒɹɪŋk ən faɪt," ɛɡwin mɝmɝd, ɪndəkeɪɾɪŋ ə bɝli fɛloʊ wɪð sʌŋkən nʌkəlz. "ðɪs taɪm i ɹɛk ðə kɑmən ɹum ʌv ən ɪn ɪn ðə taʊn sɪŋɡəl-hændəd, ən hɝt səm mɛn bædli." ði ʌðɝ pɹɪznɝ wɔɹ ə ɡoʊld-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd koʊt wɪð waɪd slivz, ən loʊ, ɡlimɪŋ buts. "hi tʃɹaɪd tə liv ðə sɪɾi wɪθaʊt sɛɾəlɪŋ ɪz ɪn bɪl" - ʃi snɪf laʊdli ət ðæt; hɝ fɑðɝ wɑz ən ɪnkipɝ əz wɛl əz meɪɝ ʌv ɛmənz fild - "nɔɹ peɪɪŋ hæf ə dʌzən ʃɑpkipɝz ən mɝtʃəns wʌɾ i oʊd."

"That one likes to drink and fight," Egwene murmured, indicating a burly fellow with sunken knuckles. "This time he wrecked the common room of an inn in the town single-handed, and hurt some men badly." The other prisoner wore a gold-embroidered coat with wide sleeves, and low, gleaming boots. "He tried to leave the city without settling his inn bill" - she sniffed loudly at that; her father was an innkeeper as well as Mayor of Emond's Field - "nor paying half a dozen shopkeepers and merchants what he owed."

ðə mɛn snɑɹəld ət ðɛm, ɡʌɾɝəl kɝsɪz əz bæɾ əz ɛni ɹænd hæd hɝd fɹəm mɝtʃəns' ɡɑɹdz.

The men snarled at them, guttural curses as bad as any Rand had heard from merchants' guards.

"ðeɪ ɡɹoʊ wɝs ɛvɹi deɪ, tu," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs, ən kwɪkən əɹ stɛp.

"They grow worse every day, too," she said in a tight voice, and quickened her step.

ʃi wɑz ɪnʌf əhɛɾ ə hɪm wən ðeɪ ɹitʃt pdən feɪnz sɛl, ət ðə vɛɹi ɛnd, ðət ɹænd wɑz aʊɾ ə ðə laɪɾ ɪntaɪɝli. hi stɑp ðɛɹ, ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz bɪhaɪn əɹ læmp.

She was enough ahead of him when they reached Padan Fain's cell, at the very end, that Rand was out of the light entirely. He stopped there, in the shadows behind her lamp.

feɪn wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ɪz kɑt, linɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ ɪkspɛktənli əz ɪf weɪɾɪŋ, dʒʌst əz tʃæŋɡʌ hæd sɛd. hi wɑz ə boʊni, ʃɑɹp-aɪd mæn, wɪð lɔŋ ɑɹmz ən ə bɪɡ noʊz, ivən mɔɹ ɡɔnt naʊ ðən ɹænd ɹɪmɛmbɝd. nɑt ɡɔn fɹəm ðə dʌnʒən - ðə fud hɪɹ wɑz ðə seɪm əz ðə sɝvəns eɪt, ən nɑɾ ivən ðə wɝs pɹɪznɝ wɑz ʃɔɹɾɪd - bʌt fɹəm wʌɾ i hæd dʌn bɪfɔɹ kʌmɪŋ tə fæl dæɹə.

Fain was sitting on his cot, leaning forward expectantly as if waiting, just as Changu had said. He was a bony, sharp-eyed man, with long arms and a big nose, even more gaunt now than Rand remembered. Not gaunt from the dungeon - the food here was the same as the servants ate, and not even the worst prisoner was shorted - but from what he had done before coming to Fal Dara.

ðə saɪɾ ə hɪm bɹɔt bæk mɛmɹiz ɹænd wəd dʒʌst əz sun əv dʌn wɪθaʊt. feɪn ɑn ðə siɾ ə hɪz bɪɡ pɛdlɝz wæɡən wilɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə wæɡən bɹɪdʒ, ɝaɪvɪŋ ɪn ɛmənz fil ðə deɪ ʌv wɪntɝnaɪt. ən ɑn wɪntɝnaɪt ðə tʃɹɑləks keɪm, kɪlɪŋ ən bɝnɪŋ, hʌntɪŋ. hʌntɪŋ θɹi jʌŋ mɛn, mɔɪɹeɪn hæd sɛd. hʌntɪŋ mi, ɪf ðeɪ oʊnli nu ɪt, ən juzɪŋ feɪn fəɹ ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪl haʊnd.

The sight of him brought back memories Rand would just as soon have done without. Fain on the seat of his big peddler's wagon wheeling across the Wagon Bridge, arriving in Emond's Field the day of Winternight. And on Winternight the Trollocs came, killing and burning, hunting. Hunting three young men, Moiraine had said. Hunting me, if they only knew it, and using Fain for their trail hound.

feɪn stʊɾ əɾ ɛɡwinz əpɹoʊtʃ, nɑt ʃildɪŋ ɪz aɪz əɹ ivən blɪŋkɪŋ ət ðə laɪt. hi smaɪld ət hɝ, ə smaɪl ðət tʌtʃt oʊnli hɪz lɪps, ðən ɹeɪzd ɪz aɪz əbʌv əɹ hɛd. lʊkɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ ət ɹænd, hɪɾən ɪn ðə blæknəs bɪhaɪn ðə laɪt, hi pɔɪntəɾ ə lɔŋ fɪŋɡɝ ət hɪm. "aɪ fil jə ðɛɹ, haɪɾɪŋ, ɹænd ælθɹ," hi sɛd, ɔlmoʊs kɹunɪŋ. "ju kæn haɪd, nɑt fɹəm mi, ən nɑt fɹəm ðɛm. jə θɔɾ ɪt wɑz oʊvɝ, dɪd jə nɑt? bʌt ðə bæɾəlz nɛvɝ dʌn, ælθɹ. ðeɪ ɑɹ kʌmɪŋ fəɹ mi, ən ðəɹ kʌmɪŋ fəɹ ju, ən ðə wɔɹ ɡoʊz ɑn. wɛðɝ jə lɪv əɹ daɪ, ɪts nɛvɝ oʊvɝ fəɹ ju. nɛvɝ." sʌɾənli hi bɪɡæn tə tʃænt.

Fain stood at Egwene's approach, not shielding his eyes or even blinking at the light. He smiled at her, a smile that touched only his lips, then raised his eyes above her head. Looking straight at Rand, hidden in the blackness behind the light, he pointed a long finger at him. "I feel you there, hiding, Rand al'Thor," he said, almost crooning. "You can't hide, not from me, and not from them. You thought it was over, did you not? But the battle's never done, al'Thor. They are coming for me, and they're coming for you, and the war goes on. Whether you live or die, it's never over for you. Never." Suddenly he began to chant.

"sun kʌmz ðə deɪ ɔl ʃæl bi fɹi.

"Soon comes the day all shall be free.

ivən ju, ən ivən mi.

Even you, and even me.

sun kʌmz ðə deɪ ɔl ʃæl daɪ.

Soon comes the day all shall die.

ʃʊɹli ju, bʌt nɛvɝ aɪ."

Surely you, but never I."

hi lɛɾ ɪz ɑɹm fɔl, ən ɪz aɪz ɹoʊz tə stɛɹ ɪntɛnli əɾ ən æŋɡəl ʌp ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs. ə kɹʊkəd ɡɹɪn twɪstɪŋ ɪz maʊθ, hi tʃʌkəl dip ɪn ɪz θɹoʊɾ əz ɪf wʌtɛvɝ i sɔ wɑz əmjuzɪŋ. "mɔɹɾɪθ noʊz mɔɹ ðən ɔl ə ju. mɔɹɾɪθ noʊz."

He let his arm fall, and his eyes rose to stare intently at an angle up into the darkness. A crooked grin twisting his mouth, he chuckled deep in his throat as if whatever he saw was amusing. "Mordeth knows more than all of you. Mordeth knows."

ɛɡwin bækt əweɪ fɹəm ðə sɛl əntɪl ʃi ɹitʃt ɹænd, ən oʊnli ði ɛdʒ ə ðə laɪt tʌtʃt ðə bɑɹz ə feɪnz sɛl. dɑɹknəs hɪd ðə pɛdlɝ, bʌt ðeɪ kəd stɪl hɪɹ ɪz tʃʌkəlz. ivən əneɪbəl tə si hɪm, ɹænd wɑz ʃʊɹ feɪn wɑz stɪl piɹɪŋ ɔf ət nʌθɪŋ.

Egwene backed away from the cell until she reached Rand, and only the edge of the light touched the bars of Fain's cell. Darkness hid the peddler, but they could still hear his chuckles. Even unable to see him, Rand was sure Fain was still peering off at nothing.

wɪð ə ʃɪvɝ, hi pɹaɪɾ ɪz fɪŋɡɝz ɔf ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt. "laɪt!" hi sɛd hɔɹsli. "ðɪs ɪz wʌt jə kɔl biɪŋ laɪk i juz tə bi?"

With a shiver, he pried his fingers off his sword hilt. "Light!" he said hoarsely. "This is what you call being like he used to be?"

"səmtaɪmz hiz bɛɾɝ, ən səmtaɪmz wɝs." ɛɡwinz vɔɪs wɑz ənstɛɾi. "ðɪs ɪz wɝs - mʌtʃ wɝs ðən juʒəwəl."

"Sometimes he's better, and sometimes worse." Egwene's voice was unsteady. "This is worse - much worse than usual."

"wʌɾ ɪz i siɪŋ, aɪ wʌndɝ. hiz mæd, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ə stoʊn silɪŋ ɪn ðə dɑɹk." ɪf ðə stoʊn wɝn ðɛɹ, hid bi lʊkɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ ət ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns. wɛɹ mɔɪɹeɪn ɪz, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. hi ʃɪvɝɾ əɡɛn. "hiz mæd."

"What is he seeing, I wonder. He's mad, staring at a stone ceiling in the dark." If the stone weren't there, he'd be looking straight at the women's apartments. Where Moiraine is, and the Amyrlin Seat. He shivered again. "He's mad."

"ðɪs wɑz nɑɾ ə ɡʊɾ aɪdiə, ɹænd." lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ət ðə sɛl, ʃi dʒɹu hɪm əweɪ fɹəm ɪɾ ən loʊɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs əz ɪf əfɹeɪd feɪn maɪɾ oʊvɝhɪɹ. feɪnz tʃʌkəlz fɑloʊd ðɛm. "ivən ɪf ðeɪ doʊn lʊk hɪɹ, aɪ kænɑt steɪ hɪɹ wɪð ɪm laɪk ðɪs, ən aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk jə ʃʊd, iðɝ. ðəɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪm tədeɪ ðæt. . . ." ʃi dʒɹu ə ʃeɪki bɹɛθ. "ðɛɹ ɪz wʌn pleɪs ivən seɪfɝ fɹəm sɝtʃ ðən hɪɹ. aɪ dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən ɪt bɪfɔɹ kəz ɪt wɑz iziɝ tə ɡɛt jə ɪn hɪɹ, bʌt ðəl nɛvɝ lʊk ɪn ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns. nɛvɝ."

"This was not a good idea, Rand." Looking over her shoulder at the cell, she drew him away from it and lowered her voice as if afraid Fain might overhear. Fain's chuckles followed them. "Even if they don't look here, I cannot stay here with him like this, and I do not think you should, either. There is something about him today that. . . ." She drew a shaky breath. "There is one place even safer from search than here. I did not mention it before because it was easier to get you in here, but they will never look in the women's apartments. Never."

"ðə wɪmənz . . . ! ɛɡwin, feɪn meɪ bi mæd, bʌt jəɹ mæɾɝ. jə kæn haɪd fɹəm hɔɹnəts ɪn ə hɔɹnəts' nɛst."

"The women's . . . ! Egwene, Fain may be mad, but you're madder. You can't hide from hornets in a hornets' nest."

"wʌt bɛɾɝ pleɪs? wʌɾ ɪz ðə wʌn pɑɹɾ ə ðə kip noʊ mæn wɪl ɛntɝ wɪθaʊɾ ə wʊmənz ɪnvɪteɪʃən, nɑɾ ivən lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ? wʌɾ ɪz ðə wʌn pleɪs noʊ wʌn wəɾ ɛvɝ θɪŋk tə lʊk fəɹ ə mæn?"

"What better place? What is the one part of the keep no man will enter without a woman's invitation, not even Lord Agelmar? What is the one place no one would ever think to look for a man?"

"wʌɾ ɪz ðə wʌn pleɪs ɪn ðə kip ʃʊɹ tə bi fʊl ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ? ɪts kɹeɪzi, ɛɡwin."

"What is the one place in the keep sure to be full of Aes Sedai? It is crazy, Egwene."

poʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪz bʌndəlz, ʃi spoʊk əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ɔl dɪsaɪɾɪd. "ju mʌst ɹæp jəɹ sɔɹɾ ən baʊ ɪn jəɹ kloʊk, ən ðən ɪɾəl lʊk əz ɪf jə ɑɹ kæɹiɪŋ θɪŋz fəɹ mi. ɪt ʃəd nɑt bi tu hɑɹd tə faɪn jə ə dʒɝkɪn ən ə ʃɝt ðəɾ ɪzən soʊ pɹɪɾi. jəl əv tə stup, ðoʊ."

Poking at his bundles, she spoke as if it were all decided. "You must wrap your sword and bow in your cloak, and then it will look as if you are carrying things for me. It should not be too hard to find you a jerkin and a shirt that isn't so pretty. You will have to stoop, though."

"aɪ toʊl ju, aɪ woʊn də ɪt."

"I told you, I won't do it."

"sɪns jəɹ æktɪŋ stʌbɝn əz ə mjul, jə ʃəd teɪk ɹaɪt tə pleɪɪŋ maɪ bist ə bɝɾən. ənlɛs jə wəd ɹɪli ɹæðɝ steɪ daʊn hɪɹ wɪð hɪm."

"Since you're acting stubborn as a mule, you should take right to playing my beast of burden. Unless you would really rather stay down here with him."

feɪnz læfɪŋ wɪspɝ keɪm θɹu ðə blæk ʃædoʊz. "ðə bæɾəlz nɛvɝ dʌn, ælθɹ. mɔɹɾɪθ noʊz."

Fain's laughing whisper came through the black shadows. "The battle's never done, al'Thor. Mordeth knows."

"aɪɾ əv ə bɛɾɝ tʃæns dʒʌmpɪŋ ɔf ðə wɔl," ɹænd mʌɾɝd. bʌɾ i ənsləŋ ɪz bʌndəlz ən sɛɾ əbaʊt ɹæpɪŋ sɔɹɾ ən baʊ ən kwɪvɝ əz ʃi hæd sədʒɛstəd.

"I'd have a better chance jumping off the wall," Rand muttered. But he unslung his bundles and set about wrapping sword and bow and quiver as she had suggested.

ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs, feɪn læft. "ɪts nɛvɝ oʊvɝ, ælθɹ. nɛvɝ."

In the darkness, Fain laughed. "It's never over, al'Thor. Never."


tʃæptɝ fɔɹ


CHAPTER 4

sʌmənd


Summoned

əloʊn ɪn əɹ ɹumz ɪn ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns, mɔɪɹeɪn ədʒʌstəd ðə ʃɔl, ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð kɝlɪŋ aɪvi ən ɡɹeɪpvaɪnz, ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz ən stʌɾid ði ɪfɛkt ɪn ðə tɔl fɹeɪm mɪɹɝ stændɪŋ ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ. hɝ lɑɹdʒ, dɑɹk aɪz kəɾ əpɪɹ əz ʃɑɹp əz ə hɔks wən ʃi wɑz æŋɡɹi. ðeɪ sim tə pɪɹs ðə sɪlvɝd ɡlæs, naʊ. ɪt wɑz oʊnli hæpənstæns ðət ʃi hæd hæd ðə ʃɔl ɪn əɹ sæɾəlbæɡz wən ʃi keɪm tə fæl dæɹə. wɪð ðə bleɪzɪŋ waɪt fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn sɛntɝɾ ɑn ðə wɛɹɝz bæk ən lɔŋ fɹɪnʒ kʌlɝd tə ʃoʊ hɝ ədʒɑ - mɔɪɹeɪnz wɑz əz blu əz ə mɔɹnɪŋ skaɪ - ðə ʃɔlz wɝ sɛldəm wɔɹn aʊtsaɪd tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən ivən ðəɹ juʒəwəli oʊnli ɪnsaɪd ðə waɪt taʊɝ. lɪɾəl ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn bɪsaɪdz ə miɾɪŋ ə ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ kɔl fəɹ ðə fɔɹmæləɾi ʌv ðə ʃɔlz, ən bɪɑn ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ wɔlz ə saɪɾ ə ðə fleɪm wəd sɛn tu mɛni pipəl ɹʌnɪŋ, tə haɪɾ əɹ pɝhæps tə fɛtʃ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. eɪ waɪtkloʊks æɹoʊ wɑz əz feɪɾəl tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ əz tə ɛniwʌn ɛls, ən ðə tʃɪlʒɹən wɝ tu waɪli tə lɛɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ si ðə boʊmən bɪfɔɹ ði æɹoʊ stʃɹʌk, waɪl ʃi stɪl maɪt də sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt. mɔɪɹeɪn hæd sɝɾənli nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd tə wɛɹ ðə ʃɔl ɪn fæl dæɹə. bʌt fəɹ ən ɑɾiəns wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn, ðəɹ wɝ pɹəpɹaɪəɾiz tə əbzɝv.

Alone in her rooms in the women's apartments, Moiraine adjusted the shawl, embroidered with curling ivy and grapevines, on her shoulders and studied the effect in the tall frame mirror standing in a corner. Her large, dark eyes could appear as sharp as a hawk's when she was angry. They seemed to pierce the silvered glass, now. It was only happenstance that she had had the shawl in her saddlebags when she came to Fal Dara. With the blazing white Flame of Tar Valon centered on the wearer's back and long fringe colored to show her Ajah - Moiraine's was as blue as a morning sky - the shawls were seldom worn outside Tar Valon, and even there usually only inside the White Tower. Little in Tar Valon besides a meeting of the Hall of the Tower called for the formality of the shawls, and beyond the Shining Walls a sight of the Flame would send too many people running, to hide or perhaps to fetch the Children of the Light. A Whitecloak's arrow was as fatal to an Aes Sedai as to anyone else, and the Children were too wily to let an Aes Sedai see the bowman before the arrow struck, while she still might do something about it. Moiraine had certainly never expected to wear the shawl in Fal Dara. But for an audience with the Amyrlin, there were proprieties to observe.

ʃi wɑz slɛndɝ ən nɑɾ əɾ ɔl tɔl, ən smuð-tʃikt ɛɛs sədaɪ eɪɡləsnəs ɔfən meɪɾ əɹ əpɪɹ jʌŋɡɝ ðən ʃi wɑz, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn hæɾ ə kəmændɪŋ ɡɹeɪs ən kɑm pɹɛzəns ðət kəd dɑməneɪɾ ɛni ɡæðɝɪŋ. ə mænɝ ɪnɡɹeɪnd ɡɹoʊɪŋ ʌp ɪn ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs ə kɛɹhin hæd bɪn haɪɾənd, nɑt səbmɝdʒd, baɪ stɪl mɔɹ jɪɹz əz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi nu ʃi maɪt niɾ ɛvɹi bɪɾ ʌv ɪt tədeɪ. jɛt mʌtʃ ə ðə kɑm wɑz ɑn ðə sɝfəs, tədeɪ. ðəɹ mʌs bi tʃɹʌbəl, əɹ ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv kʌm hɝsɛlf, ʃi θɔt fəɹ ət lis ðə tɛnθ taɪm. bʌt bɪɑn ðət leɪ ə θaʊzən kwɛstʃənz mɔɹ. wʌt tʃɹʌbəl, ən u dɪd ʃi tʃuz tə əkʌmpəni hɝ? waɪ hɪɹ? waɪ naʊ? ɪt kænɑt bi əlaʊd tə ɡoʊ ɹɔŋ naʊ.

She was slender and not at all tall, and smooth-cheeked Aes Sedai agelessness often made her appear younger than she was, but Moiraine had a commanding grace and calm presence that could dominate any gathering. A manner ingrained growing up in the Royal Palace of Cairhien had been heightened, not submerged, by still more years as an Aes Sedai. She knew she might need every bit of it today. Yet much of the calm was on the surface, today. There must be trouble, or she would not have come herself, she thought for at least the tenth time. But beyond that lay a thousand questions more. What trouble, and who did she choose to accompany her? Why here? Why now? It cannot be allowed to go wrong now.

ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɑn əɹ ɹaɪt hæn kɑt ðə laɪt dʌli əz ʃi tʌtʃt ðə dɛləkət ɡoʊldən tʃeɪn fæsən ɪn əɹ dɑɹk hɛɹ, wɪtʃ hʌŋ ɪn weɪvz tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝz. ə smɔl, klɪɹ blu stoʊn dæŋɡəl fɹəm ðə tʃeɪn, ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə hɝ fɔɹhɛd. mɛni ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ nu ʌv ðə tʃɹɪks ʃi kəd də juzɪŋ ðət stoʊn əz ə foʊkəs. ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə pɑlɪʃt bɪɾ ə blu kɹɪstəl, dʒʌst sʌmθɪŋ ə jʌŋ ɡɝl hæd juzd ɪn əɹ fɝs lɝnɪŋ, wɪð noʊ wʌn tə ɡaɪd hɝ. ðət ɡɝl hæd ɹɪmɛmbɝd teɪlz ʌv æŋɡɹil ən ivən mɔɹ paʊɝfəl sɑŋɡɹil - ðoʊz feɪbəld ɹɛmnəns ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ðəɾ əlaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ tə tʃænəl mɔɹ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ðən ɛni kəd seɪfli hændəl əneɪɾɪd - ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ən θɔt səm sətʃ foʊkəs wɑz ɹikwaɪɝd tə tʃænəl əɾ ɔl. hɝ sɪstɝz ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ nu ə fju ʌv əɹ tʃɹɪks, ən səspɛktəɾ ʌðɝz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ səm ðət dɪd nɑɾ ɪɡzɪst, səm ðət hæd ʃɑkt əɹ wən ʃi lɝn ə ðɛm. ðə θɪŋz ʃi dɪd wɪð ðə stoʊn wɝ sɪmpəl ən smɔl, ɪf əkeɪʒənəli jusfəl; ðə kaɪn ə tʃaɪld wəɾ ɪmædʒən. bʌɾ ɪf ðə ɹɔŋ wɪmən hæɾ əkʌmpənid ði æmɪɝlɪn, ðə kɹɪstəl maɪt pʊɾ əm ɔf bæləns, kəz ə ðə teɪlz.

The Great Serpent ring on her right hand caught the light dully as she touched the delicate golden chain fastened in her dark hair, which hung in waves to her shoulders. A small, clear blue stone dangled from the chain, in the middle of her forehead. Many in the White Tower knew of the tricks she could do using that stone as a focus. It was only a polished bit of blue crystal, just something a young girl had used in her first learning, with no one to guide her. That girl had remembered tales of angreal and even more powerful sa'angreal - those fabled remnants of the Age of Legends that allowed Aes Sedai to channel more of the One Power than any could safely handle unaided - remembered and thought some such focus was required to channel at all. Her sisters in the White Tower knew a few of her tricks, and suspected others, including some that did not exist, some that had shocked her when she learned of them. The things she did with the stone were simple and small, if occasionally useful; the kind a child would imagine. But if the wrong women had accompanied the Amyrlin, the crystal might put them off balance, because of the tales.

ə ɹæpəd, ɪnsɪstənt nɑkɪŋ keɪm ət ðə tʃeɪmbɝ dɔɹ. noʊ ʃaɪnɝən wəd nɑk ðət weɪ, nɑɾ əɾ ɛniwʌnz dɔɹ, bʌt list ʌv ɔl hɝz. ʃi ɹɪmeɪn lʊkɪŋ ɪndə ðə mɪɹɝ əntɪl əɹ aɪz stɛɹd bæk sɝinəli, ɔl θɔt hɪɾən ɪn ðɛɹ dɑɹk dɛpθs. ʃi tʃɛk ðə sɑf lɛðɝ paʊtʃ hæŋɪŋ əɾ əɹ bɛlt. wʌtɛvɝ tʃɹʌbəlz bɹɔɾ əɹ aʊɾ ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ʃɪl fɝɡɛɾ əm wən aɪ leɪ ðɪs tʃɹʌbəl bɪfɔɹ hɝ. ə sɛkən θʌmpɪŋ, ivən mɔɹ vɪɡɝəs ðən ðə fɝst, saʊndəd bɪfɔɹ ʃi kɹɔs ðə ɹum ən oʊpən ðə dɔɹ wɪð ə kɑm smaɪl fəɹ ðə tu wɪmən u hæd kʌm fəɹ hɝ.

A rapid, insistent knocking came at the chamber door. No Shienaran would knock that way, not at anyone's door, but least of all hers. She remained looking into the mirror until her eyes stared back serenely, all thought hidden in their dark depths. She checked the soft leather pouch hanging at her belt. Whatever troubles brought her out of Tar Valon, she will forget them when I lay this trouble before her. A second thumping, even more vigorous than the first, sounded before she crossed the room and opened the door with a calm smile for the two women who had come for her.

ʃi ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd əm boʊθ. dɑɹk-hɛɹɾ æneɪjə ɪn əɹ blu-fɹɪnd ʃɔl, ən fɛɹ-hɛɹd liɑnʒɹɪn ɪn əɹ ɹɛd. liɑnʒɹɪn, nɑɾ oʊnli jʌŋ-simɪŋ bʌt jʌŋ ən pɹɪɾi, wɪð ə dɑlz feɪs ən ə smɔl, pɛtʃələn maʊθ, hæɾ əɹ hæn ɹeɪz tə paʊn əɡɛn. hɝ dɑɹk bɹaʊz ən dɑɹkɝ aɪz wɝ ə ʃɑɹp kɑntʃɹæs tə ðə mʌltətuɾ ə peɪl hʌni bɹeɪdz bɹʌʃɪŋ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, bʌt ðə kɑmbəneɪʃən wɑz nɑɾ ənkɑmən ɪn tæɹɑbən. boʊθ wɪmən wɝ tɔlɝ ðən mɔɪɹeɪn, ðoʊ liɑnʒɹɪn baɪ lɛs ðən ə hænd.

She recognized them both. Dark-haired Anaiya in her blue-fringed shawl, and fair-haired Liandrin in her red. Liandrin, not only young-seeming but young and pretty, with a doll's face and a small, petulant mouth, had her hand raised to pound again. Her dark brows and darker eyes were a sharp contrast to the multitude of pale honey braids brushing her shoulders, but the combination was not uncommon in Tarabon. Both women were taller than Moiraine, though Liandrin by less than a hand.

æneɪjəz blʌn feɪs bɹoʊk ɪndə ə smaɪl əz sun əz mɔɪɹeɪn oʊpən ðə dɔɹ. ðət smaɪl ɡeɪv əɹ ði oʊnli bjuɾi ʃi wəɾ ɛvɝ hæv, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf; ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiwʌn fɛl kʌmfɝɾɪd, seɪf ən spɛʃəl, wən æneɪjə smaɪld ət ðɛm. "ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn ju, mɔɪɹeɪn. ɪts ɡʊd tə si jə əɡɛn. ɑɹ jə wɛl? ɪts bɪn soʊ lɔŋ."

Anaiya's blunt face broke into a smile as soon as Moiraine opened the door. That smile gave her the only beauty she would ever have, but it was enough; almost everyone felt comforted, safe and special, when Anaiya smiled at them. "The Light shine on you, Moiraine. It's good to see you again. Are you well? It has been so long."

"maɪ hɑɹɾ ɪz laɪɾɝ fəɹ jəɹ pɹɛzəns, æneɪjə." ðət wɑz sɝɾənli tʃɹu; ɪt wɑz ɡʊd tə noʊ ʃi hæɾ ət list wʌn fɹɛn əmʌŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæd kʌm tə fæl dæɹə. "ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ju."

"My heart is lighter for your presence, Anaiya." That was certainly true; it was good to know she had at least one friend among the Aes Sedai who had come to Fal Dara. "The Light illumine you."

liɑnʒɹɪnz maʊθ taɪɾənd, ən ʃi ɡeɪv əɹ ʃɔl ə twɪtʃ. "ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ʃi ɹikwaɪɝz jəɹ pɹɛzəns, sɪstɝ." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz pɛtʃələnt, tu, ən koʊld-ɛdʒd. nɑt fəɹ mɔɪɹeɪnz seɪk, əɹ nɑt soʊlli; liɑnʒɹɪn ɔlweɪz saʊndəd dɪsæɾəsfaɪd wɪð sʌmθɪŋ. fɹaʊnɪŋ, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə lʊk oʊvɝ mɔɪɹeɪnz ʃoʊldɝ ɪndə ðə ɹum. "ðɪs tʃeɪmbɝ, ɪts wɔɹɾɪd. wi kænɑɾ ɛntɝ. waɪ dʒju wɔɹɾ əɡɛns jəɹ sɪstɝz?"

Liandrin's mouth tightened, and she gave her shawl a twitch. "The Amyrlin Seat, she requires your presence, Sister." Her voice was petulant, too, and cold-edged. Not for Moiraine's sake, or not solely; Liandrin always sounded dissatisfied with something. Frowning, she tried to look over Moiraine's shoulder into the room. "This chamber, it is warded. We cannot enter. Why do you ward against your sisters?"

"əɡɛnst ɔl," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd smuðli. "mɛni ʌv ðə sɝvɪŋ wɪmən ɑɹ kjʊɹiəs əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən aɪ də nɑt wɑn əm pɔɪŋ θɹu maɪ ɹumz wən aɪm nɑt hɪɹ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə meɪk ə dɪstɪŋkʃən əntɪl naʊ." ʃi pʊl ðə dɔɹ ʃʌt bɪhaɪn hɝ, livɪŋ ɔl θɹi ʌv əm ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ. "ʃæl wi ɡoʊ? wi mʌs nɑt kip ði æmɪɝlɪn weɪɾɪŋ."

"Against all," Moiraine replied smoothly. "Many of the serving women are curious about Aes Sedai, and I do not want them pawing through my rooms when I am not here. There was no need to make a distinction until now." She pulled the door shut behind her, leaving all three of them in the corridor. "Shall we go? We must not keep the Amyrlin waiting."

ʃi stɑɹɾəd daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ wɪð æneɪjə tʃæɾɪŋ əɾ əɹ saɪd. liɑnʒɹɪn stʊd fəɹ ə moʊmən stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə dɔɹ əz ɪf wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz haɪɾɪŋ, ðən hɝid tə dʒɔɪn ði ʌðɝz. ʃi bɹækəɾɪd mɔɪɹeɪn, wɔkɪŋ əz stɪfli əz ə ɡɑɹd. æneɪjə mɪɹli wɔkt, kipɪŋ kʌmpəni. ðɛɹ slɪpɝd fʊtstɛps fɛl sɔfli ɑn θɪk-woʊvən kɑɹpəts wɪð sɪmpəl pæɾɝnz.

She started down the hallway with Anaiya chatting at her side. Liandrin stood for a moment staring at the door as if wondering what Moiraine was hiding, then hurried to join the others. She bracketed Moiraine, walking as stiffly as a guard. Anaiya merely walked, keeping company. Their slippered footsteps fell softly on thick-woven carpets with simple patterns.

lɪvɹid wɪmən kɝtsid dipli əz ðeɪ pæst, mɛni mɔɹ dipli ðən ðeɪ wəɾ əv fəɹ ðə lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə hɪmsɛlf. ɛɛs sədaɪ, θɹi təɡɛðɝ, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hɝsɛlf ɪn ðə kip; ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ɑnɝ ðən ɛni wʊmən ə ðə kip hæɾ ɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪn əɹ laɪftaɪm. ə fju wɪmən ə noʊbəl haʊsəz wɝ aʊɾ ɪn ðə hɔlz, ən ðeɪ kɝtsid, tu, wɪtʃ ðeɪ moʊst sɝɾənli wəd nɑɾ əv dʌn fəɹ lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ. mɔɪɹeɪn ən æneɪjə smaɪld ən baʊd ðɛɹ hɛdz tə æknɑlɪdʒ itʃ ɹɛvɝəns, fɹəm sɝvən əɹ noʊbəl ikwəli. liɑnʒɹɪn ɪɡnɔɹɾ əm ɔl.

Liveried women curtsied deeply as they passed, many more deeply than they would have for the Lord of Fal Dara himself. Aes Sedai, three together, and the Amyrlin Seat herself in the keep; it was more honor than any woman of the keep had ever expected in her lifetime. A few women of noble Houses were out in the halls, and they curtsied, too, which they most certainly would not have done for Lord Agelmar. Moiraine and Anaiya smiled and bowed their heads to acknowledge each reverence, from servant or noble equally. Liandrin ignored them all.

ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli wɪmən hɪɹ, ʌv kɔɹs, noʊ mɛn. noʊ ʃaɪnɝən meɪl əbʌv ði eɪdʒ ə tɛn wəɾ ɛntɝ ðə wɪmənz ɹumz wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən əɹ ɪnvɪteɪʃən, ɔlðoʊ ə fju smɔl bɔɪz ɹæn ən pleɪɾ ɪn ðə hɔlz hɪɹ. ðeɪ nɛlt ɑn wʌn ni, ɔkwɝdli, wən ðɛɹ sɪstɝz dʒɹɑp dip kɝtsiz. naʊ ən ðən æneɪjə smaɪld ən ɹʌfəld ə smɔl hɛɾ əz ʃi pæst.

There were only women here, of course, no men. No Shienaran male above the age of ten would enter the women's rooms without permission or invitation, although a few small boys ran and played in the halls here. They knelt on one knee, awkwardly, when their sisters dropped deep curtsies. Now and then Anaiya smiled and ruffled a small head as she passed.

"ðɪs taɪm, mɔɪɹeɪn," æneɪjə sɛd, "ju hæv bɪn ɡɔn fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn tu lɔŋ. mʌtʃ tu lɔŋ. tɑɹ vəlɑn mɪsəz ju. jəɹ sɪstɝz mɪs ju. ən jə ɑɹ niɾəd ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ."

"This time, Moiraine," Anaiya said, "you have been gone from Tar Valon too long. Much too long. Tar Valon misses you. Your sisters miss you. And you are needed in the White Tower."

"sʌm ʌv əs mʌst wɝk ɪn ðə wɝld," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd dʒɛnli. "aɪ wɪl liv ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ tə ju, æneɪjə. jɛɾ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, jə hɪɹ mɔɹ ʌv wʌɾ əkɝz ɪn ðə wɝl ðən aɪ. tu ɔfən aɪ aʊtʃɹʌn wʌt hæpənz wɛɹ aɪ wɑz jɛstɝdeɪ. wʌt nuz əv ju?"

"Some of us must work in the world," Moiraine said gently. "I will leave the Hall of the Tower to you, Anaiya. Yet in Tar Valon, you hear more of what occurs in the world than I. Too often I outrun what happens where I was yesterday. What news have you?"

"θɹi mɔɹ fɔls dʒɹæɡənz." liɑnʒɹɪn bɪt ðə wɝdz ɔf. "ɪn sɑldɑiə, mʊɹændi, ən tɛɹ fɔls dʒɹæɡənz ɹævədʒ ðə lænd. ðə waɪl, jə bluz smaɪl ən tɔk ə nʌθɪŋ, ən tʃɹaɪ tə hoʊld ɑn tə ðə pæst." æneɪjə ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ, ən liɑnʒɹɪn snæpt əɹ maʊθ ʃʌt wɪð ə ʃɑɹp snɪf.

"Three more false Dragons." Liandrin bit the words off. "In Saldaea, Murandy, and Tear false Dragons ravage the land. The while, you Blues smile and talk of nothing, and try to hold on to the past." Anaiya raised an eyebrow, and Liandrin snapped her mouth shut with a sharp sniff.

"θɹi," mɔɪɹeɪn mjuz sɔfli. fəɹ ən ɪnstən əɹ aɪz ɡlimd, bʌt ʃi mæskt ɪt kwɪkli. "θɹi ɪn ðə læs tu jɪɹz, ən naʊ θɹi mɔɹ ət wʌns."

"Three," Moiraine mused softly. For an instant her eyes gleamed, but she masked it quickly. "Three in the last two years, and now three more at once."

"æz ði ʌðɝz wɝ, ðiz wɪl bi dɛlt wɪð ɔlsoʊ. ðɪs meɪl vɝmɪn ən ɛni ɹæɡtæɡ ɹæbəl u fɑloʊ ðɛɹ bænɝz."

"As the others were, these will be dealt with also. This male vermin and any ragtag rabble who follow their banners."

mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz ɔlmoʊst əmjuz baɪ ðə sɝɾənti ɪn liɑnʒɹɪnz vɔɪs. ɔlmoʊst. ʃi wɑz tu əwɛɹ ə ðə ɹiæləɾiz, tu əwɛɹ ə ðə pɑsəbɪləɾiz. "hæv ə fju mʌnθs bɪn ɪnʌf fəɹ jə tə fɝɡɛt, sɪstɝ? ðə læs fɔls dʒɹæɡən ɔl bʌt tɔɹ ɡildən əpɑɹt bɪfɔɹ ɪz ɑɹmi, ɹæɡtæɡ ɹæbəl əɹ nɑt, wɑz dɪfiɾəd. jɛs, lɑɡən ɪz ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn baɪ naʊ, dʒɛntəld ən seɪf, aɪ səpoʊz, bʌt səm ʌv əɹ sɪstɝz daɪd tə oʊvɝpaʊɝ hɪm. ivən wʌn sɪstɝ dɛɾ ɪz mɔɹ lɔs ðən wi kən bɛɹ, bʌt ɡildənz lɔsəz wɝ mʌtʃ wɝs. ðə tu bɪfɔɹ lɑɡən kəd nɑt tʃænəl, jɛɾ ivən soʊ ðə pipəl ə kændɝ ən ɑɹæd dumən ɹɪmɛmbɝ əm wɛl. vɪlədʒəz bɝn ən mɛn dɛɾ ɪn bæɾəl. haʊ izəli kən ðə wɝl dil wɪð θɹi ət wʌn taɪm? haʊ mɛni wɪl flɑk tə ðɛɹ bænɝz? ðəɹ əz nɛvɝ bɪn ə ʃɔɹɾədʒ ə fɑloʊɝz fəɹ ɛni mæn kleɪmɪŋ tə bi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. haʊ ɡɹeɪt wɪl ðə wɔɹz bi ðɪs taɪm?"

Moiraine was almost amused by the certainty in Liandrin's voice. Almost. She was too aware of the realities, too aware of the possibilities. "Have a few months been enough for you to forget, Sister? The last false Dragon all but tore Ghealdan apart before his army, ragtag rabble or not, was defeated. Yes, Logain is in Tar Valon by now, gentled and safe, I suppose, but some of our sisters died to overpower him. Even one sister dead is more loss than we can bear, but Ghealdan's losses were much worse. The two before Logain could not channel, yet even so the people of Kandor and Arad Doman remember them well. Villages burned and men dead in battle. How easily can the world deal with three at one time? How many will flock to their banners? There has never been a shortage of followers for any man claiming to be the Dragon Reborn. How great will the wars be this time?"

"ɪɾ ɪzən soʊ ɡɹɪm əz ðæt," æneɪjə sɛd. "æz fɑɹ əz wi noʊ, oʊnli ðə wʌn ɪn sɑldɑiə kən tʃænəl. hiz nɑt hæd taɪm tə ətʃɹæk mɛni fɑloʊɝz, ən sɪstɝz ʃəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bi ðəɹ tə dil wɪð hɪm. ðə tɛɹənz ɑɹ hæɹiɪŋ ðɛɹ fɔls dʒɹæɡən ən ɪz fɑloʊɝz θɹu hæɾən mɝk, waɪl ðə fɛloʊ ɪn mʊɹændi ɪz ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn tʃeɪnz." ʃi ɡeɪv ə ʃɔɹt, wʌndɝɪŋ læf. "tə θɪŋk ðə mʊɹændiənz, ʌv ɔl pipəl, wəd dil wɪð ðɛɹz soʊ kwɪkli. æsk, ən ðeɪ də nɑɾ ivən kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz mʊɹændiənz, bʌt luɡɑɝɾɝz, əɹ ɪnɪʃlɪni, əɹ ðɪs əɹ ðət lɔɹdz əɹ leɪɾiz mæn. jɛt fəɹ fɪɹ wʌn ə ðɛɹ neɪbɝz wəd teɪk ði ɪkskjus tə ɪnveɪd, ðə mʊɹændiənz lɛpt ɑn ðɛɹ fɔls dʒɹæɡən ɔlmoʊst əz sun əz i oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə pɹoʊkleɪm hɪmsɛlf."

"It isn't so grim as that," Anaiya said. "As far as we know, only the one in Saldaea can channel. He has not had time to attract many followers, and sisters should already be there to deal with him. The Tairens are harrying their false Dragon and his followers through Haddon Mirk, while the fellow in Murandy is already in chains." She gave a short, wondering laugh. "To think the Murandians, of all people, would deal with theirs so quickly. Ask, and they do not even call themselves Murandians, but Lugarders, or Inishlinni, or this or that lord's or lady's man. Yet for fear one of their neighbors would take the excuse to invade, the Murandians leaped on their false Dragon almost as soon as he opened his mouth to proclaim himself."

"stɪl," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "θɹi ət ðə seɪm taɪm kænɑt bi ɪɡnɔɹd. hæz ɛni sɪstɝ bɪn eɪbəl tə də ə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ?" ɪt wɑz ə slaɪt tʃæns - fju ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd mænəfɛstəɾ ɛni pɑɹɾ ə ðət tælənt, ivən ðə smɔləs pɑɹt, ɪn sɛntʃɝiz - soʊ ʃi wɑz nɑt sɝpɹaɪzd wən æneɪjə ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. nɑt sɝpɹaɪzd, bʌɾ ə lɪɾəl ɹɪlivd.

"Still," Moiraine said, "three at the same time cannot be ignored. Has any sister been able to do a Foretelling?" It was a slight chance - few Aes Sedai had manifested any part of that Talent, even the smallest part, in centuries - so she was not surprised when Anaiya shook her head. Not surprised, but a little relieved.

ðeɪ ɹitʃt ə dʒʌŋktʃɝ ə hɔlweɪz ət ðə seɪm taɪm əz ðə leɪɾi əmælisə. ʃi dʒɹɑpt ə fʊl kɝtsi, boʊɪŋ dip ən spɹɛɾɪŋ əɹ peɪl ɡɹin skɝts waɪd. "ɑnɝ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn," ʃi mɝmɝd. "ɑnɝ tə ɛɛs sədaɪ."

They reached a juncture of hallways at the same time as the Lady Amalisa. She dropped a full curtsy, bowing deep and spreading her pale green skirts wide. "Honor to Tar Valon," she murmured. "Honor to Aes Sedai."

ðə sɪstɝ ə ðə lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə ɹikwaɪɝd mɔɹ ðən ə nɑɾ ə ðə hɛd. mɔɪɹeɪn tʊk əmælisəz hænz ən dʒɹu hɝ tə hɝ fit. "ju ɑnɝ ʌs, əmælisə. ɹaɪz, sɪstɝ."

The sister of the Lord of Fal Dara required more than a nod of the head. Moiraine took Amalisa's hands and drew her to her feet. "You honor us, Amalisa. Rise, Sister."

əmælisə stʃɹeɪɾɪd ɡɹeɪsfəli, wɪð ə flʌʃ ɑn əɹ feɪs. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ əz mʌtʃ əz bɪn tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən tə bi kɔl sɪstɝ baɪ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz hɛɾi ivən fəɹ sʌmwʌn ə hɝ ɹæŋk. ʃɔɹɾ ən ə mɪɾəl jɪɹz, ʃi hæɾ ə dɑɹk, mətʃʊɹ bjuɾi, ən ðə kʌlɝ ɪn əɹ tʃiks sɛɾ ɪɾ ɔf. "ju ɑnɝ mi tu ɡɹeɪtli, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ."

Amalisa straighted gracefully, with a flush on her face. She had never as much as been to Tar Valon, and to be called Sister by an Aes Sedai was heady even for someone of her rank. Short and of middle years, she had a dark, mature beauty, and the color in her cheeks set it off. "You honor me too greatly, Moiraine Sedai."

mɔɪɹeɪn smaɪld. "haʊ lɔŋ əv wi noʊn itʃ ʌðɝ, əmælisə? mʌst aɪ naʊ kɔl jə maɪ leɪɾi əmælisə, əz ɪf wi hæd nɛvɝ sæɾ oʊvɝ ti təɡɛðɝ?"

Moiraine smiled. "How long have we known each other, Amalisa? Must I now call you my Lady Amalisa, as if we had never sat over tea together?"

"ʌv kɔɹs nɑt." əmælisə smaɪl bæk. ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ɛvəɾənt ɪn əɹ bɹʌðɝz feɪs wɑz ɪn hɝz, tu, ən noʊ lɛs fəɹ ðə sɑftɝ laɪn ə tʃik ən dʒɔ. ðəɹ wɝ ðoʊz u sɛd ðəɾ əz hɑɹɾ ən ɹɪnaʊn ə faɪɾɝ əz eɪɡəlmɝ wɑz, hi wɑz noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən ən ivən mætʃ fəɹ ɪz sɪstɝ. "bʌt wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hɪɹ. . . . wən kɪŋ isɑɹ vɪzəts fæl dæɹə, ɪn pɹaɪvəɾ aɪ kɔl ɪm mæɡɑmi, lɪɾəl ʌŋkəl, əz aɪ dɪd wən aɪ wɑz ə tʃaɪld ən i ɡeɪv mi ɹaɪdz ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, bʌɾ ɪn pʌblɪk ɪt mʌs bi dɪfɹənt."

"Of course not." Amalisa smiled back. The strength evident in her brother's face was in hers, too, and no less for the softer line of cheek and jaw. There were those who said that as hard and renowned a fighter as Agelmar was, he was no better than an even match for his sister. "But with the Amyrlin Seat here. . . . When King Easar visits Fal Dara, in private I call him Magami, Little Uncle, as I did when I was a child and he gave me rides on his shoulder, but in public it must be different."

æneɪjə tskt. "səmtaɪmz fɔɹmæləɾi ɪz nɛsəsɛɹi, bʌt mɛn ɔfən meɪk mɔɹ ʌv ɪt ðən ðeɪ mʌst. pliz, kɔl mi æneɪjə, ən əl kɔl jə əmælisə, ɪf aɪ meɪ."

Anaiya tsked. "Sometimes formality is necessary, but men often make more of it than they must. Please, call me Anaiya, and I will call you Amalisa, if I may."

fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ, mɔɪɹeɪn sɔ ɛɡwin, fɑɹ daʊn ðə saɪd hɔl, dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ hɝidli ɝaʊn ə kɔɹnɝ. ə stupt ʃeɪp ɪn ə lɛðɝ dʒɝkɪn, hɛd daʊn ən ɑɹmz loʊɾəd wɪð bʌndəlz, ʃæmbəld əɾ əɹ hilz. mɔɪɹeɪn pɝmɪɾəd hɝsɛlf ə smɔl smaɪl, kwɪkli mæskt. ɪf ðə ɡɝl ʃoʊz əz mʌtʃ ɪnɪʃəɾɪv ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, ʃi θɔt ɹaɪli, ʃɪl sɪɾ ɪn ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wʌn deɪ. ɪf ʃi kən lɝn tə kəntʃɹoʊl ðəɾ ɪnɪʃəɾɪv. ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ən æmɪɝlɪn sit lɛft ɑn wɪtʃ tə sɪt.

From the corner of her eye, Moiraine saw Egwene, far down the side hall, disappearing hurriedly around a corner. A stooped shape in a leather jerkin, head down and arms loaded with bundles, shambled at her heels. Moiraine permitted herself a small smile, quickly masked. If the girl shows as much initiative in Tar Valon, she thought wryly, she will sit in the Amyrlin Seat one day. If she can learn to control that initiative. If there is an Amyrlin Seat left on which to sit.

wən ʃi tɝn əɹ ətɛnʃən bæk tə ði ʌðɝz, liɑnʒɹɪn wɑz spikɪŋ.

When she turned her attention back to the others, Liandrin was speaking.

". . . ən aɪ wəd wɛlkəm ðə tʃæns tə lɝn mɔɹ ə jəɹ lænd." ʃi wɔɹ ə smaɪl, oʊpən ən ɔlmoʊst ɡɝlɪʃ, ən əɹ vɔɪs wɑz fɹɛnli.

". . . and I would welcome the chance to learn more of your land." She wore a smile, open and almost girlish, and her voice was friendly.

mɔɪɹeɪn skuld əɹ feɪs tə stɪlnəs əz əmælisə ɪkstɛndəɾ ən ɪnvɪteɪʃən tə dʒɔɪn əɹ ən əɹ leɪɾiz ɪn əɹ pɹaɪvət ɡɑɹɾən, ən liɑnʒɹɪn æksɛptɪd wɔɹmli. liɑnʒɹɪn meɪd fju fɹɛnz, ən nʌn aʊtsaɪd ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ. sɝɾənli nɛvɝ aʊtsaɪd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi wəd sunɝ meɪk fɹɛnz wɪð ə mæn, əɹ ə tʃɹɑlɑk. mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ liɑnʒɹɪn sɔ mʌtʃ dɪfɝəns bɪtwin mɛn ən tʃɹɑləks. ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɛni ʌv ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ dɪd.

Moiraine schooled her face to stillness as Amalisa extended an invitation to join her and her ladies in her private garden, and Liandrin accepted warmly. Liandrin made few friends, and none outside the Red Ajah. Certainly never outside the Aes Sedai. She would sooner make friends with a man, or a Trolloc. Moiraine was not sure Liandrin saw much difference between men and Trollocs. She was not sure any of the Red Ajah did.

æneɪjə ɪkspleɪn ðət dʒʌs naʊ ðeɪ mʌst ətɛn ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. "ʌv kɔɹs," əmælisə sɛd. "ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin hɝ, ən ðə kɹieɪɾɝ ʃɛltɝ hɝ. bʌt leɪɾɝ, ðɛn." ʃi stʊd stʃɹeɪɾ ən baʊɾ əɹ hɛɾ əz ðeɪ lɛf hɝ.

Anaiya explained that just now they must attend the Amyrlin Seat. "Of course," Amalisa said. "The Light illumine her, and the Creator shelter her. But later, then." She stood straight and bowed her head as they left her.

mɔɪɹeɪn stʌɾid liɑnʒɹɪn əz ðeɪ wɔkt, nɛvɝ lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ dɝɛkli. ðə hʌni-hɛɹɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz stɛɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, ɹoʊzbʌd lɪps pɝs θɔtfəli. ʃi əpɪɹd tə hæv fɝɡɑɾən mɔɪɹeɪn ən æneɪjə boʊθ. wʌɾ ɪz ʃi ʌp tə?

Moiraine studied Liandrin as they walked, never looking at her directly. The honey-haired Aes Sedai was staring straight ahead, rosebud lips pursed thoughtfully. She appeared to have forgotten Moiraine and Anaiya both. What is she up to?

æneɪjə sim nɑt tə hæv noʊɾəst ɛniθɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi, bʌt ðən ʃi ɔlweɪz mænədʒ tə æksɛpt pipəl boʊθ əz ðeɪ wɝ ən əz ðeɪ wɑntəd tə bi. ɪt kɑnstənli əmeɪz mɔɪɹeɪn ðəɾ æneɪjə dɛlt əz wɛl əz ʃi dɪɾ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, bʌt ðoʊz u wɝ diviəs ɔlweɪz sim tə teɪk əɹ oʊpənnəs ən ɑnəsti, hɝ æksɛptəns ʌv ɛvɹiwʌn, əz kʌnɪŋ dɪvaɪsəz. ðeɪ wɝ ɔlweɪz kɑt kəmplitli ɔf bæləns wən ʃi tɝn aʊt tə min wʌt ʃi sɛɾ ən seɪ wʌt ʃi mɛnt. tu, ʃi hæɾ ə weɪ ʌv siɪŋ tə ðə hɑɹɾ ə θɪŋz. ən ʌv æksɛptɪŋ wʌt ʃi sɔ. naʊ ʃi blaɪθli ɹɪzum spikɪŋ ə ðə nuz.

Anaiya seemed not to have noticed anything out of the ordinary, but then she always managed to accept people both as they were and as they wanted to be. It constantly amazed Moiraine that Anaiya dealt as well as she did in the White Tower, but those who were devious always seemed to take her openness and honesty, her acceptance of everyone, as cunning devices. They were always caught completely off balance when she turned out to mean what she said and say what she meant. Too, she had a way of seeing to the heart of things. And of accepting what she saw. Now she blithely resumed speaking of the news.

"ðə wɝd fɹəm ændɝ ɪz boʊθ ɡʊɾ ən bæd. ðə stʃɹit ɹaɪəts ɪn keɪɛmlɪn daɪd daʊn wɪð ðə kʌmɪŋ ə spɹɪŋ, bʌt ðəɹ ɪz stɪl tɔk, tu mʌtʃ tɔk, bleɪmɪŋ ðə kwin, ən tɑɹ vəlɑn əz wɛl, fəɹ ðə lɔŋ wɪntɝ. mɔɹɡeɪs hoʊlz əɹ θɹoʊn lɛs sɪkjʊɹli ðən ʃi dɪd læs jɪɹ, bʌt ʃi hoʊlz ɪt stɪl, ən wɪl soʊ lɔŋ əz ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn ɪz kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz. ən ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪn, ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ, ən əɹ bɹʌðɝ, ðə lɔɹd ɡɔɪn, hæv kʌm seɪfli tə tɑɹ vəlɑn fəɹ ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz səm fɪɹ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ ðət ðə kʌstəm wəd bi bɹoʊkən."

"The word from Andor is both good and bad. The street riots in Caemlyn died down with the coming of spring, but there is still talk, too much talk, blaming the Queen, and Tar Valon as well, for the long winter. Morgase holds her throne less securely than she did last year, but she holds it still, and will so long as Gareth Bryne is Captain-General of the Queen's Guards. And the Lady Elayne, the Daughter-Heir, and her brother, the Lord Gawyn, have come safely to Tar Valon for their training. There was some fear in the White Tower that the custom would be broken."

"nɑt waɪl mɔɹɡeɪs əz bɹɛθ ɪn əɹ bɑɾi," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd.

"Not while Morgase has breath in her body," Moiraine said.

liɑnʒɹɪn ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl stɑɹt, əz ɪf ʃi hæd dʒʌst əweɪkənd. "pɹeɪ ðət ʃi kəntɪnjuz tə hæv bɹɛθ. ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹz pɑɹɾi wɑz fɑloʊd tə ðə ɹɪvɝ ɛɹɪnɪn baɪ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. tə ðə vɛɹi bɹɪdʒəz tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. mɔɹ stɪl kæmp aʊtsaɪd keɪɛmlɪn, fəɹ ðə tʃæns ə mɪstʃəf, ən ɪnsaɪd keɪɛmlɪn stɪl ɑɹ ðoʊz u lɪsən."

Liandrin gave a little start, as if she had just awakened. "Pray that she continues to have breath. The Daughter-Heir's party was followed to the River Erinin by the Children of the Light. To the very bridges to Tar Valon. More still camp outside Caemlyn, for the chance of mischief, and inside Caemlyn still are those who listen."

"pɝhæps ɪts taɪm mɔɹɡeɪs lɝn ə lɪɾəl kɑʃən," æneɪjə saɪd. "ðə wɝld ɪz bɪkʌmɪŋ mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ɛvɹi deɪ, ivən fəɹ ə kwin. pɝhæps ɪspɛʃli fəɹ ə kwin. ʃi wɑz ɛvɝ hɛdstʃɹɔŋ. aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ wən ʃi keɪm tə tɑɹ vəlɑn əz ə ɡɝl. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv ði əbɪləɾi tə bɪkʌm ə fʊl sɪstɝ, ən ɪt ɹæŋkəld ɪn hɝ. səmtaɪmz aɪ θɪŋk ʃi pʊʃəz əɹ dɔɾɝ kəz ə ðæt, wʌtɛvɝ ðə ɡɝl tʃuzəz."

"Perhaps it is time Morgase learned a little caution," Anaiya sighed. "The world is becoming more dangerous every day, even for a queen. Perhaps especially for a queen. She was ever headstrong. I remember when she came to Tar Valon as a girl. She did not have the ability to become a full sister, and it rankled in her. Sometimes I think she pushes her daughter because of that, whatever the girl chooses."

mɔɪɹeɪn snɪf dɪsdeɪnfəli. "ɪleɪn wɑz bɔɹn wɪð ðə spɑɹk ɪn hɝ; ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə mæɾɝ ə tʃuzɪŋ. mɔɹɡeɪs wəd nɑt ɹɪsk lɛɾɪŋ ðə ɡɝl daɪ fɹəm læk ə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɪf ɔl ðə waɪtkloʊks ɪn ɑmɑdɪʃiə wɝ kæmpt aʊtsaɪd keɪɛmlɪn. ʃi wəd kəmænd ɡɛɹɪθ bɝn ən ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz tə kʌɾ ə pæθ θɹu ðɛm tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən ɡɛɹɪθ bɝn wəd də ɪɾ ɪf i hæd tə də ɪɾ əloʊn." bʌt ʃi stɪl mʌs kip ðə fʊl ɪkstɛn ə ðə ɡɝlz pətɛnʃəl sikɹət. wəd ðə pipəl ʌv ændɝ noʊɪŋli æksɛpt ɪleɪn ɑn ðə laɪən θɹoʊn æftɝ mɔɹɡeɪs ɪf ðeɪ nu? nɑt dʒʌst ə kwin tʃɹeɪn ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə kʌstəm, bʌɾ ə fʊl ɛɛs sədaɪ? ɪn ɔl ə ɹəkɔɹɾəd hɪstɝi ðəɹ hæd bɪn oʊnli ə hændfʊl ə kwinz wɪð ðə ɹaɪt tə bi kɔld ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ðə fju hu lɛɾ ɪt bi noʊn hæɾ ɔl lɪv tə ɹəɡɹɛɾ ɪt. ʃi fɛlt ə tʌtʃ ə sædnəs. bʌt tu mʌtʃ wɑz əfʊt tə spɛɹ eɪd, əɹ ivən wɝi, fəɹ wʌn læn ən wʌn θɹoʊn. "wʌɾ ɛls, æneɪjə?"

Moiraine sniffed disdainfully. "Elayne was born with the spark in her; it was not a matter of choosing. Morgase would not risk letting the girl die from lack of training if all the Whitecloaks in Amadicia were camped outside Caemlyn. She would command Gareth Byrne and the Queen's Guards to cut a path through them to Tar Valon, and Gareth Byrne would do it if he had to do it alone." But she still must keep the full extent of the girl's potential secret. Would the people of Andor knowingly accept Elayne on the Lion Throne after Morgase if they knew? Not just a queen trained in Tar Valon according to custom, but a full Aes Sedai? In all of recorded history there had been only a handful of queens with the right to be called Aes Sedai, and the few who let it be known had all lived to regret it. She felt a touch of sadness. But too much was afoot to spare aid, or even worry, for one land and one throne. "What else, Anaiya?"

"ju mʌs noʊ ðət ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn əz bɪn kɔld ɪn ɪljən, ðə fɝs taɪm ɪn fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz. ði ɪliɑnɝz seɪ ðə læs bæɾəl ɪz kʌmɪŋ" - æneɪjə ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl ʃɪvɝ, əz wɛl ʃi maɪt, bʌt wɛn ɑn wɪθaʊɾ ə pɔz - "æn ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ mʌs bi faʊn bɪfɔɹ ðə faɪnəl bæɾəl əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ. mɛn fɹəm ɛvɹi læn ɑɹ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡæðɝɪŋ, ɔl iɡɝ tə bi pɑɹɾ ə ðə lɛdʒənd, iɡɝ tə faɪn ðə hɔɹn. mʊɹændi ən ɔltɑɹə ɑɹ ɑn ðɛɹ toʊz, ʌv kɔɹs, θɪŋkɪŋ ɪts ɔl ə mæsk fəɹ ə muv əɡɛnst wʌn ə ðɛm. ðəɾ ɪz pɹɑbli waɪ ðə mʊɹændiənz kɑt ðɛɹ fɔls dʒɹæɡən soʊ kwɪkli. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðəɹ wɪl bi ə nu lɑɾ ə stɔɹiz fəɹ ðə bɑɹdz ən ɡlimən tə æd tə ðə saɪkəl. ðə laɪt sɛn ɪts oʊnli nu stɔɹiz."

"You must know that the Great Hunt of the Horn has been called in Illian, the first time in four hundred years. The Illianers say the Last Battle is coming" - Anaiya gave a little shiver, as well she might, but went on without a pause - "and the Horn of Valere must be found before the final battle against the Shadow. Men from every land are already gathering, all eager to be part of the legend, eager to find the Horn. Murandy and Altara are on their toes, of course, thinking it's all a mask for a move against one of them. That is probably why the Murandians caught their false Dragon so quickly. In any case, there will be a new lot of stories for the bards and gleemen to add to the cycle. The Light send it is only new stories."

"pɝhæps nɑt ðə stɔɹiz ðeɪ ɪkspɛkt," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. liɑnʒɹɪn lʊkt əɾ əɹ ʃɑɹpli, ən ʃi kɛpt əɹ feɪs stɪl.

"Perhaps not the stories they expect," Moiraine said. Liandrin looked at her sharply, and she kept her face still.

"aɪ səpoʊz nɑt," æneɪjə sɛd plɑtʃədli. "ðə stɔɹiz ðeɪ list ɪkspɛkt wɪl bi ɪɡzækli ðə wʌnz ðəl æd tə ðə saɪkəl. bɪɑn ðæt, aɪ hæv oʊnli ɹumɝ tə ɔfɝ. ðə si foʊk ɑɹ ædʒəteɪɾəd, ðɛɹ ʃɪps flaɪɪŋ fɹəm pɔɹt tə pɔɹt wɪð bɛɹli ə pɔz. sɪstɝz fɹəm ði aɪlənz seɪ ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ, ðɛɹ tʃoʊzən wʌn, ɪz kʌmɪŋ, bʌt ðeɪ woʊn seɪ mɔɹ. jə noʊ haʊ kloʊs-maʊðd ði æθɑn maɪɹ ɑɹ wɪð aʊtsaɪɾɝz əbaʊt ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ, ən ɪn ðɪs əɹ sɪstɝz sim tə θɪŋk mɔɹ əz si foʊk ðən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ði il əpɪɹ tə bi stɝɪŋ, tu, bʌt noʊ wʌn noʊz waɪ. noʊ wʌn ɛvɝ noʊz wɪð ði il. ət lis ðəɹ ɪz noʊ ɛvəɾəns ðeɪ min tə kɹɔs ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld əɡɛn, θæŋk ðə laɪt." ʃi saɪɾ ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "wʌɾ aɪ wəd nɑt ɡɪv fəɹ ivən wʌn sɪstɝ fɹəm əmʌŋ ði il. dʒʌst wʌn. wi noʊ tu lɪɾəl ə ðɛm."

"I suppose not," Anaiya said placidly. "The stories they least expect will be exactly the ones they will add to the cycle. Beyond that, I have only rumor to offer. The Sea Folk are agitated, their ships flying from port to port with barely a pause. Sisters from the islands say the Coramoor, their Chosen One, is coming, but they won't say more. You know how close-mouthed the Atha'an Miere are with outsiders about the Coramoor, and in this our sisters seem to think more as Sea Folk than Aes Sedai. The Aiel appear to be stirring, too, but no one knows why. No one ever knows with the Aiel. At least there is no evidence they mean to cross the Spine of the World again, thank the Light." She sighed and shook her head. "What I would not give for even one sister from among the Aiel. Just one. We know too little of them."

mɔɪɹeɪn læft. "səmtaɪmz aɪ θɪŋk jə bɪlɔŋ ɪn ðə bɹaʊn ədʒɑ, æneɪjə."

Moiraine laughed. "Sometimes I think you belong in the Brown Ajah, Anaiya."

"ɑlməθ pleɪn," liɑnʒɹɪn sɛd, ən lʊk sɝpɹaɪz ðət ʃi hæd spoʊkən.

"Almoth Plain," Liandrin said, and looked surprised that she had spoken.

"naʊ ðət tʃɹuli ɪz ɹumɝ, sɪstɝ," æneɪjə sɛd. "ə fju wɪspɝz hɝɾ əz wi wɝ livɪŋ tɑɹ vəlɑn. ðəɹ meɪ bi faɪɾɪŋ ɑn ɑlməθ pleɪn, ən pɝhæps toʊmən hɛd, əz wɛl. aɪ seɪ, meɪ bi. ðə wɪspɝz wɝ feɪnt. ɹumɝz ə ɹumɝz. wi lɛf bɪfɔɹ wi kəd hɪɹ mɔɹ."

"Now that truly is rumor, Sister," Anaiya said. "A few whispers heard as we were leaving Tar Valon. There may be fighting on Almoth Plain, and perhaps Toman Head, as well. I say, may be. The whispers were faint. Rumors of rumors. We left before we could hear more."

"ɪt wəɾ əv tə bi tæɹɑbən ən ɑɹæd dumən," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ðeɪ hæv skwɑbəld oʊvɝ ɑlməθ pleɪn fəɹ nɪɹli θɹi hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, bʌɾ ɪts nɛvɝ kʌm tə oʊpən bloʊz." ʃi lʊkt ət liɑnʒɹɪn; ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ səpoʊz tə θɹoʊ ɔf ɔl ðɛɹ oʊld lɔɪəltiz tə lænz ən ɹulɝz, bʌt fju dɪd soʊ kəmplitli. ɪt wɑz hɑɹd nɑt tə kɛɹ fəɹ ðə læn ə jəɹ bɝθ. "waɪ wəd ðeɪ naʊ - ?"

"It would have to be Tarabon and Arad Doman," Moiraine said, and shook her head. "They have squabbled over Almoth Plain for nearly three hundred years, but it has never come to open blows." She looked at Liandrin; Aes Sedai were supposed to throw off all their old loyalties to lands and rulers, but few did so completely. It was hard not to care for the land of your birth. "Why would they now - ?"

"ɪnʌf ʌv aɪɾəl tɔk," ðə hʌni-hɛɹd wʊmən bɹoʊk ɪn æŋɡɹəli. "fɔɹ ju, mɔɪɹeɪn, ði æmɪɝlɪn weɪts." ʃi tʊk θɹi kwɪk stʃɹaɪdz əhɛɾ ə ði ʌðɝz ən θɹu oʊpən wʌn ʌv ə pɛɹ ə tɔl dɔɹz. "fɔɹ ju, ði æmɪɝlɪn wɪl əv noʊ aɪɾəl tɔk."

"Enough of idle talk," the honey-haired woman broke in angrily. "For you, Moiraine, the Amyrlin waits." She took three quick strides ahead of the others and threw open one of a pair of tall doors. "For you, the Amyrlin will have no idle talk."

ʌnkɑnʃəsli tʌtʃɪŋ ðə paʊtʃ əɾ əɹ weɪst, mɔɪɹeɪn wɛn pæs liɑnʒɹɪn θɹu ðə dɔɹweɪ, wɪð ə nɑɾ əz ɪf ði ʌðɝ wʊmən wɝ hoʊldɪŋ ðə dɔɹ fəɹ hɝ. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən smaɪl ət ðə waɪt flæʃ ʌv æŋɡɝ ɑn liɑnʒɹɪnz feɪs. wʌɾ ɪz ðə ɹɛtʃɪd ɡɝl ʌp tə?

Unconsciously touching the pouch at her waist, Moiraine went past Liandrin through the doorway, with a nod as if the other woman were holding the door for her. She did not even smile at the white flash of anger on Liandrin's face. What is the wretched girl up to?

bɹaɪtli kʌlɝd kɑɹpəts kʌvɝd ði æntəɹum flɔɹ ɪn leɪɝz, ən ðə ɹum wɑz plɛzənli fɝnɪʃt wɪð tʃɛɹz ən kʊʃən bɛntʃɪz ən smɔl teɪbəlz, ðə wʊd sɪmpli wɝkt əɹ dʒʌs pɑlɪʃt. bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd kɝɾənz saɪɾəd ðə tɔl æɹoʊslɪts tə meɪk əm sim mɔɹ laɪk wɪndoʊz. noʊ faɪɝz bɝn ɪn ðə faɪɝpleɪsəz; ðə deɪ wɑz wɔɹm, ən ðə ʃaɪnɝən tʃɪl wəd nɑt kʌm əntɪl naɪtfɔl.

Brightly colored carpets covered the anteroom floor in layers, and the room was pleasantly furnished with chairs and cushioned benches and small tables, the wood simply worked or just polished. Brocaded curtains sided the tall arrowslits to make them seem more like windows. No fires burned in the fireplaces; the day was warm, and the Shienaran chill would not come until nightfall.

fjuɝ ðən hæf ə dʌzən ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæɾ əkʌmpənid ði æmɪɝlɪn wɝ ðɛɹ. vɛɹɪn mæθwɪn ən sɹəfɛl, ʌv ðə bɹaʊn ədʒɑ, dɪd nɑt lʊk ʌp ət mɔɪɹeɪnz ɛntʃɹəns. sɹəfɛl wɑz ɪntɛnli ɹiɾɪŋ ən oʊl bʊk wɪð ə wɔɹn, feɪɾəd lɛðɝ kʌvɝ, hænlɪŋ ɪts tæɾɝd peɪdʒəz kɛɹfəli, waɪl plʌmp vɛɹɪn, sɪɾɪŋ kɹɔs-lɛɡəd bɪniθ ən æɹoʊslɪt, hɛld ə smɔl blɑsəm ʌp tə ðə laɪɾ ən meɪd noʊts ən skɛtʃəz ɪn ə pɹɪsaɪs hæn ɪn ə bʊk bælənst ɑn əɹ ni. ʃi hæɾ ən oʊpən ɪŋkpɑɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ bɪsaɪd hɝ, ən ə smɔl paɪl ə flaʊɝz ɑn əɹ læp. ðə bɹaʊn sɪstɝz kənsɝn ðɛmsɛlvz wɪð lɪɾəl bɪsaɪd sikɪŋ nɑlədʒ. mɔɪɹeɪn səmtaɪmz wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɹɪli əwɛɹ ʌv wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn ɪn ðə wɝld, əɹ ivən ɪmiɾiətli ɝaʊn ðɛm.

Fewer than half a dozen of the Aes Sedai who had accompanied the Amyrlin were there. Verin Mathwin and Serafelle, of the Brown Ajah, did not look up at Moiraine's entrance. Serafelle was intently reading an old book with a worn, faded leather cover, handling its tattered pages carefully, while plump Verin, sitting cross-legged beneath an arrowslit, held a small blossom up to the light and made notes and sketches in a precise hand in a book balanced on her knee. She had an open inkpot on the floor beside her, and a small pile of flowers on her lap. The Brown sisters concerned themselves with little beside seeking knowledge. Moiraine sometimes wondered if they were really aware of what was going on in the world, or even immediately around them.

ðə θɹi ʌðɝ wɪmən ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ðə ɹum tɝnd, bʌt ðeɪ meɪd noʊ ɛfɝt tə əpɹoʊtʃ mɔɪɹeɪn, oʊnli lʊkt ət hɝ. wʌn, ə slɛndɝ wʊmən ə ðə jɛloʊ ədʒɑ, ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ; ʃi spɛn tu lɪɾəl taɪm ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn tə noʊ ɔl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɔlðoʊ ðɛɹ nʌmbɝz wɝ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ vɛɹi ɡɹeɪt. ʃi wɑz əkweɪntəd wɪð ðə tu ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ, haʊɛvɝ. kɑɹlɪnjə wɑz əz peɪl ə skɪn ən koʊld ə mænɝ əz ðə waɪt fɹɪnʒ ɑn əɹ ʃɔl, ði ɪɡzækt ɑpəzəɾ ɪn ɛvɹi weɪ ʌv dɑɹk, faɪɝi ɑlɑnə mɑsvɑni, ʌv ðə ɡɹin, bʌt ðeɪ boʊθ stʊɾ ən stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ wɪθaʊt spikɪŋ, wɪθaʊɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən. ɑlɑnə ʃɑɹpli snʌɡd əɹ ʃɔl ɝaʊn hɝ, bʌt kɑɹlɪnjə meɪd noʊ muv əɾ ɔl. ðə slɛndɝ jɛloʊ sɪstɝ tɝn əweɪ wɪð ən ɛɹ ə ɹəɡɹɛt.

The three other women already in the room turned, but they made no effort to approach Moiraine, only looked at her. One, a slender woman of the Yellow Ajah, she did not know; she spent too little time in Tar Valon to know all the Aes Sedai, although their numbers were no longer very great. She was acquainted with the two remaining, however. Carlinya was as pale of skin and cold of manner as the white fringe on her shawl, the exact opposite in every way of dark, fiery Alanna Mosvani, of the Green, but they both stood and stared at her without speaking, without expression. Alanna sharply snugged her shawl around her, but Carlinya made no move at all. The slender Yellow sister turned away with an air of regret.

"ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin jə ɔl, sɪstɝz," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. noʊ wʌn ænsɝd. ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ sɹəfɛl əɹ vɛɹɪn hæɾ ivən hɝd. wɛɹ ɑɹ ði ʌðɝz? ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid fəɹ əm ɔl tə bi ðəɹ - moʊst wəd bi ɹɛstɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ ɹumz, fɹɛʃɪŋ fɹəm ðə dʒɝni - bʌt ʃi wɑz ɑn ɛdʒ naʊ, ɔl ðə kwɛstʃənz ʃi kəd nɑɾ æsk ɹʌnɪŋ θɹu hɝ hɛd. nʌn ʌv ɪt ʃoʊɾ ɑn əɹ feɪs.

"The Light illumine you all, Sisters," Moiraine said. No one answered. She was not sure Serafelle or Verin had even heard. Where are the others? There was no need for them all to be there - most would be resting in their rooms, freshing from the journey - but she was on edge now, all the questions she could not ask running through her head. None of it showed on her face.

ði ɪnɝ dɔɹ oʊpənd, ən lin əpɪɹd, wɪθaʊɾ əɹ ɡɪlt-fleɪm stæf. ðə kipɝ ə ðə kɹɑnəkəlz wɑz əz tɔl əz moʊs mɛn, wɪləwi ən ɡɹeɪsfəl, stɪl bjuɾəfəl, wɪð kɑpɝi skɪn ən ʃɔɹt, dɑɹk hɛɹ. ʃi wɔɹ ə blu stoʊl, ə hænd waɪd, ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə ʃɔl, fəɹ ʃi sæɾ ɪn ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, ðoʊ əz kipɝ, nɑt tə ɹɛpɹəzɛn əɹ ədʒɑ.

The inner door opened, and Leane appeared, without her gilt-flamed staff. The Keeper of the Chronicles was as tall as most men, willowy and graceful, still beautiful, with coppery skin and short, dark hair. She wore a blue stole, a hand wide, instead of a shawl, for she sat in the Hall of the Tower, though as Keeper, not to represent her Ajah.

"ðɛɹ jə ɑɹ," ʃi sɛd bɹɪskli tə mɔɪɹeɪn, ən dʒɛstʃɝd tə ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn hɝ. "kʌm, sɪstɝ. ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɪz weɪɾɪŋ." ʃi spoʊk nætʃɹəli ɪn ə klɪpt, kwɪk weɪ ðət nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒd, wɛðɝ ʃi wɑz æŋɡɹi əɹ dʒɔɪfəl əɹ ɪksaɪɾəd. əz mɔɪɹeɪn fɑloʊd lin ɪn, ʃi wʌndɝd wʌɾ ɪmoʊʃən ðə kipɝ wɑz filɪŋ naʊ. lin pʊl ðə dɔɹ tə bɪhaɪn ðɛm; ɪt bæŋd ʃʌt wɪð sʌmθɪŋ ə ðə saʊn ʌv ə sɛl dɔɹ kloʊzɪŋ.

"There you are," she said briskly to Moiraine, and gestured to the door behind her. "Come, Sister. The Amyrlin Seat is waiting." She spoke naturally in a clipped, quick way that never changed, whether she was angry or joyful or excited. As Moiraine followed Leane in, she wondered what emotion the Keeper was feeling now. Leane pulled the door to behind them; it banged shut with something of the sound of a cell door closing.

ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hɝsɛlf sæt bɪhaɪn ə bɹɔd teɪbəl ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə kɑɹpət, ən ɑn ðə teɪbəl ɹɛstəɾ ə flæɾənd kjub ʌv ɡoʊld, ðə saɪz ʌv ə tʃɹævəl tʃɛst ən ɔɹnətli wɝkt wɪð sɪlvɝ. ðə teɪbəl wɑz hɛvəli bɪlt, ɪts lɛɡz staʊt, bʌɾ ɪt sim tə skwɑɾ ʌndɝ ə weɪt tu stʃɹɔŋ mɛn wʊɾə hæd tʃɹʌbəl lɪftɪŋ.

The Amyrlin Seat herself sat behind a broad table in the middle of the carpet, and on the table rested a flattened cube of gold, the size of a travel chest and ornately worked with silver. The table was heavily built, its legs stout, but it seemed to squat under a weight two strong men would have had trouble lifting.

ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ɡoʊldən kjub mɔɪɹeɪn hæd dɪfəkəlti kipɪŋ əɹ feɪs ənɹʌfəld. ðə læst ʃi hæd sin ʌv ɪt, ɪt hæd bɪn seɪfli lɑkt ɪn eɪɡəlmɝz stʃɹɔŋɡɹum. ɑn lɝnɪŋ ə ði æmɪɝlɪn sits ɝaɪvəl ʃi hæd mɛn tə tɛl əɹ ʌv ɪt hɝsɛlf. ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ði æmɪɝlɪnz pəzɛʃən wɑz ə tʃɹaɪfəl, bʌɾ ə wɝisəm tʃɹaɪfəl. ɪvɛns kəd bi aʊtpeɪsɪŋ hɝ.

At the sight of the golden cube Moiraine had difficulty keeping her face unruffled. The last she had seen of it, it had been safely locked in Agelmar's strongroom. On learning of the Amyrlin Seat's arrival she had meant to tell her of it herself. That it was already in the Amyrlin's possession was a trifle, but a worrisome trifle. Events could be outpacing her.

ʃi swɛpt ə dip kɝtsi ən sɛd fɔɹməli, "æz jə kɔl mi, mʌðɝ, soʊ hæv aɪ kʌm." ði æmɪɝlɪn ɪkstɛndəɾ əɹ hænd, ən mɔɪɹeɪn kɪst əɹ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ, noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ðəɾ ʌv ɛni ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɹaɪzɪŋ, ʃi meɪɾ əɹ toʊn mɔɹ kɑnvɝseɪʃənəl, bʌt nɑt tu mʌtʃ soʊ. ʃi wɑz əwɛɹ ə ðə kipɝ stændɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ, bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ. "aɪ hoʊp jə hæɾ ə plɛzən dʒɝni, mʌðɝ."

She swept a deep curtsy and said formally, "As you called me, Mother, so have I come." The Amyrlin extended her hand, and Moiraine kissed her Great Serpent ring, no different from that of any other Aes Sedai. Rising, she made her tone more conversational, but not too much so. She was aware of the Keeper standing behind her, beside the door. "I hope you had a pleasant journey, Mother."

ði æmɪɝlɪn hæd bɪn bɔɹn ɪn tiɹ, ʌv ə sɪmpəl fɪʃɝmænz fæmli, nɑɾ ə noʊbəl haʊs, ən əɹ neɪm wɑz sɪuən sɑntʃ, ðoʊ vɛɹi fju hæd juz ðət neɪm, əɹ ivən θɔɾ ʌv ɪt, ɪn ðə tɛn jɪɹz sɪns ʃi hæd bɪn ɹeɪz fɹəm ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ. ʃi wɑz ði æmɪɝlɪn sit; ðət wɑz ðə hoʊl ʌv ɪt. ðə bɹɔd stoʊl ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz wɑz stʃɹaɪpt ɪn ðə kʌlɝz ə ðə sɛvən ədʒəz; ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz ʌv ɔl ədʒəz ən ə nʌn. ʃi wɑz oʊnli ʌv miɾiəm haɪt, ən hænsəm ɹæðɝ ðən bjuɾəfəl, bʌɾ əɹ feɪs hɛld ə stʃɹɛŋkθ ðət hæd bɪn ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ əɹ ɛləveɪʃən, ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ə ðə ɡɝl u hæd sɝvaɪv ðə stʃɹits ə ðə mɔl, tɛɹz pɔɹt dɪstʃɹɪkt, ən əɹ klɪɹ blu ɡeɪz hæd meɪd kɪŋz ən kwinz, ən ivən ðə kæptən kəmændɝ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, dʒɹɑp ðɛɹ aɪz. hɝ oʊn aɪz wɝ stʃɹeɪnd, naʊ, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə nu taɪtnəs tə hɝ maʊθ.

The Amyrlin had been born in Tear, of a simple fisherman's family, not a noble House, and her name was Siuan Sanche, though very few had used that name, or even thought of it, in the ten years since she had been raised from the Hall of the Tower. She was the Amyrlin Seat; that was the whole of it. The broad stole on her shoulders was striped in the colors of the seven Ajahs; the Amyrlin was of all Ajahs and of none. She was only of medium height, and handsome rather than beautiful, but her face held a strength that had been there before her elevation, the strength of the girl who had survived the streets of the Maule, Tear's port district, and her clear blue gaze had made kings and queens, and even the Captain Commander of the Children of the Light, drop their eyes. Her own eyes were strained, now, and there was a new tightness to her mouth.

"wi kɔl ðə wɪnz tə spiɾ əɹ vɛsəlz ʌp ði ɛɹɪnɪn, dɔɾɝ, ən ivən tɝn ðə kɝəns tə əɹ eɪd." ði æmɪɝlɪnz vɔɪs wɑz dip, ən sæd. "aɪ hæv sin ðə flʌɾɪŋ wi kɑzd ɪn vɪlədʒəz əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪvɝ, ən ðə laɪɾ oʊnli noʊz wʌt wɪv dʌn tə ðə wɛðɝ. wɪl nɑɾ əv ɛndiɹɾ aʊɝsɛlvz baɪ ðə dæmədʒ wiv dʌn ən ðə kɹɑps wi meɪ hæv ɹuənd. ɔl tə ɹitʃ hɪɹ əz kwɪkli əz pɑsəbəl." hɝ aɪz stʃɹeɪd tə ði ɔɹneɪt ɡoʊldən kjub, ən ʃi hæf lɪftəɾ ə hæn əz ɪf tə tʌtʃ ɪt, bʌt wən ʃi spoʊk ɪt wɑz tə seɪ, "ɪleɪɾə ɪz ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, dɔɾɝ. ʃi keɪm wɪð ɪleɪn ən ɡɔɪn."

"We called the winds to speed our vessels up the Erinin, Daughter, and even turned the currents to our aid." The Amyrlin's voice was deep, and sad. "I have seen the flooding we caused in villages along the river, and the Light only knows what we have done to the weather. We will not have endeared ourselves by the damage we've done and the crops we may have ruined. All to reach here as quickly as possible." Her eyes strayed to the ornate golden cube, and she half lifted a hand as if to touch it, but when she spoke it was to say, "Elaida is in Tar Valon, Daughter. She came with Elayne and Gawyn."

mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz kɑnʃəs ə lin stændɪŋ tə wʌn saɪd, kwaɪəɾ əz ɔlweɪz ɪn ðə pɹɛzəns ə ði æmɪɝlɪn. bʌt wɑtʃɪŋ, ən lɪsnɪŋ. "aɪ æm sɝpɹaɪzd, mʌðɝ," ʃi sɛd kɛɹfəli. "ðɪs ɪz noʊ taɪm fəɹ mɔɹɡeɪs tə bi wɪθaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ kaʊnsəl." mɔɹɡeɪs wɑz wʌn ə ðə fju ɹulɝz tə oʊpənli ədmɪt tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ kaʊnsəlɝ; ɔlmoʊst ɔl hæd wʌn, bʌt fju ədmɪɾəd ɪt.

Moiraine was conscious of Leane standing to one side, quiet as always in the presence of the Amyrlin. But watching, and listening. "I am surprised, Mother," she said carefully. "This is no time for Morgase to be without Aes Sedai counsel." Morgase was one of the few rulers to openly admit to an Aes Sedai councilor; almost all had one, but few admitted it.

"ɪleɪɾə ɪnsɪstəd, dɔɾɝ, ən kwin əɹ nɑt, aɪ daʊt mɔɹɡeɪs ɪz ə mætʃ fəɹ ɪleɪɾə ɪn ə kɑntɛst ʌv wɪlz. ɪn ɛni keɪs, pɝhæps ðɪs taɪm ʃi dɪd nɑt wɪʃ tə bi. ɪleɪn əz pətɛnʃəl. mɔɹ ðən aɪ hæv ɛvɝ sin bɪfɔɹ. ɔlɹɛɾi ʃi ʃoʊz pɹəɡɹɛs. ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝz ɑɹ swoʊlən ʌp laɪk pʌf-fɪʃ wɪð ɪt. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðə ɡɝl linz tə ðɛɹ weɪ ʌv θɪŋkɪŋ, bʌt ʃiz jʌŋ, ən ðəɹ ɪz noʊ tɛlɪŋ. ivən ɪf ðeɪ doʊn mænədʒ tə bɛn hɝ, ɪɾəl meɪk lɪɾəl dɪfɝəns. ɪleɪn kəd wɛl bi ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ə θaʊzən jɪɹz, ən ɪts ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ hu faʊn hɝ. ðeɪv ɡeɪn mʌtʃ stæɾəs ɪn ðə hɔl fɹəm ðə ɡɝl."

"Elaida insisted, Daughter, and queen or not, I doubt Morgase is a match for Elaida in a contest of wills. In any case, perhaps this time she did not wish to be. Elayne has potential. More than I have ever seen before. Already she shows progress. The Red sisters are swollen up like puff-fish with it. I don't think the girl leans to their way of thinking, but she is young, and there is no telling. Even if they don't manage to bend her, it will make little difference. Elayne could well be the most powerful Aes Sedai in a thousand years, and it is the Red Ajah who found her. They have gained much status in the Hall from the girl."

"aɪ hæv tu jʌŋ wɪmən wɪð mi ɪn fæl dæɹə, mʌðɝ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "boʊθ fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, wɛɹ ðə blʌɾ ə meɪnɛðɝən stɪl ɹʌnz stʃɹɔŋ, ðoʊ ðeɪ də nɑɾ ivən ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðəɹ wɑz wʌns ə læn kɔl meɪnɛðɝən. ði oʊl blʌd sɪŋz, mʌðɝ, ən ɪt sɪŋz laʊdli ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ɛɡwin, ə vɪlədʒ ɡɝl, ɪz ət list əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ɪleɪn. aɪ hæv sin ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ, ən aɪ noʊ. əz fəɹ ði ʌðɝ, nɪneɪiv wɑz ðə wɪzdəm ɪn ðɛɹ vɪlədʒ, jɛt ʃiz lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ə ɡɝl hɝsɛlf. ɪt sɛz sʌmθɪŋ ə hɝ ðət ðə wɪmən ə hɝ vɪlədʒ tʃoʊz əɹ wɪzdəm əɾ əɹ eɪdʒ. wʌns ʃi ɡeɪnz kɑnʃəs kəntʃɹoʊl ʌv wʌt ʃi naʊ dʌz wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ, ʃɪl bi əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ɛni ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn. wɪð tʃɹeɪnɪŋ, ʃɪl ʃaɪn laɪk ə bɑnfaɪɝ bɪsaɪd ðə kændəlz ʌv ɪleɪn ən ɛɡwin. ən ðəɹ ɪz noʊ tʃæns ðiz tu wɪl tʃuz ðə ɹɛd. ðeɪ ɑɹ əmjuz baɪ mɛn, ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd baɪ ðɛm, bʌt ðeɪ də laɪk ðɛm. ðəl izəli kaʊntɝ wʌtɛvɝ ɪnfluəns ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ ɡeɪnz ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ fɹəm faɪndɪŋ ɪleɪn."

"I have two young women with me in Fal Dara, Mother," Moiraine said. "Both from the Two Rivers, where the blood of Manetheren still runs strong, though they do not even remember there was once a land called Manetheren. The old blood sings, Mother, and it sings loudly in the Two Rivers. Egwene, a village girl, is at least as strong as Elayne. I have seen the Daughter-Heir, and I know. As for the other, Nynaeve was the Wisdom in their village, yet she is little more than a girl herself. It says something of her that the women of her village chose her Wisdom at her age. Once she gains conscious control of what she now does without knowing, she will be as strong as any in Tar Valon. With training, she will shine like a bonfire beside the candles of Elayne and Egwene. And there is no chance these two will choose the Red. They are amused by men, exasperated by them, but they do like them. They will easily counter whatever influence the Red Ajah gains in the White Tower from finding Elayne."

ði æmɪɝlɪn nɑɾəd əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ɔl ə noʊ kɑnsəkwəns. mɔɪɹeɪnz aɪbɹaʊz lɪftəɾ ɪn sɝpɹaɪz bɪfɔɹ ʃi kɑt hɝsɛlf ən smuðd əɹ fitʃɝz. ðoʊz wɝ ðə tu meɪn kənsɝnz ɪn ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, ðət fjuɝ ɡɝlz u kəd bi tʃɹeɪn tə tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ wɝ faʊn ɛvɹi jɪɹ, əɹ soʊ ɪt simd, ən ðət fjuɝ ə ɹil paʊɝ wɝ faʊnd. wɝs ðən ðə fɪɹ ɪn ðoʊz u bleɪmd ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, wɝs ðən ðə heɪtʃɹəd fɹəm ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, wɝs ivən ðən ðə wɝkɪŋz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnz, wɝ ðə ʃɪɹ dwɪndəlɪŋ ə nʌmbɝz ən ðə lɛsənɪŋ ʌv əbɪləɾiz. ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɝ spɑɹsli pɑpjəleɪɾəd wɛɹ wʌns ðeɪ hæd bɪn kɹaʊɾəd, ən wʌt kəd wʌns bi dʌn izəli wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ kəd naʊ bi dʌn oʊnli wɪð dɪfəkəlti, əɹ nɑɾ əɾ ɔl.

The Amyrlin nodded as if it were all of no consequence. Moiraine's eyebrows lifted in surprise before she caught herself and smoothed her features. Those were the two main concerns in the Hall of the Tower, that fewer girls who could be trained to channel the One Power were found every year, or so it seemed, and that fewer of real power were found. Worse than the fear in those who blamed Aes Sedai for the Breaking of the World, worse than the hatred from the Children of the Light, worse even than the workings of Darkfriends, were the sheer dwindling of numbers and the lessening of abilities. The corridors of the White Tower were sparsely populated where once they had been crowded, and what could once be done easily with the One Power could now be done only with difficulty, or not at all.

"ɪleɪɾə hæɾ ənʌðɝ ɹizən fəɹ kʌmɪŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, dɔɾɝ. ʃi sɛn ðə seɪm mɛsədʒ baɪ sɪks dɪfɹən pɪdʒənz tə meɪk ʃʊɹ aɪ ɹəsivd ɪt - ən tə hum ɛls ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn ʃi sɛn pɪdʒənz, aɪ kən oʊnli ɡɛs - ðən keɪm hɝsɛlf. ʃi toʊl ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ ðət jə ɑɹ mɛɾəlɪŋ wɪð ə jʌŋ mæn u ɪz tɑvɝən, ən deɪnʒɝəs. hi wɑz ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, ʃi sɛd, bʌt wən ʃi faʊn ði ɪn wɛɹ i hæd bɪn steɪɪŋ, ʃi dɪskʌvɝd jə hæd spɪɹəɾəd ɪm əweɪ."

"Elaida had another reason for coming to Tar Valon, Daughter. She sent the same message by six different pigeons to make sure I received it - and to whom else in Tar Valon she sent pigeons, I can only guess - then came herself. She told the Hall of the Tower that you are meddling with a young man who is ta'veren, and dangerous. He was in Caemlyn, she said, but when she found the inn where he had been staying, she discovered you had spirited him away."

"ðə pipəl ət ðəɾ ɪn sɝvd əs wɛl ən feɪθfəli, mʌðɝ. ɪf ʃi hɑɹmd ɛni ʌv ðɛm. . . ." mɔɪɹeɪn kəd nɑt kip ðə ʃɑɹpnəs aʊɾ ə hɝ vɔɪs, ən ʃi hɝd lin ʃɪft. wʌn dɪd nɑt spik tə ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɪn ðət toʊn; nɑɾ ivən ə kɪŋ ɑn ɪz θɹoʊn dɪd.

"The people at that inn served us well and faithfully, Mother. If she harmed any of them. . . ." Moiraine could not keep the sharpness out of her voice, and she heard Leane shift. One did not speak to the Amyrlin Seat in that tone; not even a king on his throne did.

"ju ʃəd noʊ, dɔɾɝ," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "ðæɾ ɪleɪɾə hɑɹmz noʊ wʌn ɪksɛp ðoʊz ʃi kənsɪɾɝz deɪnʒɝəs. dɑɹkfɹɛnz, əɹ ðoʊz pʊɹ ful mɛn u tʃɹaɪ tə tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ. əɹ wʌn u θɹɛɾənz tɑɹ vəlɑn. ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls u ɪzən ɛɛs sədaɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl bi pisəz ɑn ə stoʊnz bɔɹɾ əz fɑɹ əz ʃiz kənsɝnd. lʌkəli fəɹ hɪm, ði ɪnkipɝ, wʌn mæstɝ ɡɪl əz aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ, əpɛɹənli θɪŋks mʌtʃ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən soʊ ænsɝɾ əɹ kwɛstʃənz tə hɝ sæɾəsfækʃən. ɪleɪɾə æktʃəli  spoʊk wɛl ə hɪm. bʌt ʃi spoʊk mɔɹ ə ðə jʌŋ mæn jə tʊk əweɪ wɪð ju. mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ðən ɛni mæn sɪns ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ, ʃi ʃiz hæz ðə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ səmtaɪmz, jə noʊ, ən əɹ wɝdz kæɹid weɪt wɪð ðə hɔl."

"You should know, Daughter," the Amyrlin said dryly, "that Elaida harms no one except those she considers dangerous. Darkfriends, or those poor fool men who try to channel the One Power. Or one who threatens Tar Valon. Everyone else who isn't Aes Sedai might as well be pieces on a stones board as far as she is concerned. Luckily for him, the innkeeper, one Master Gill as I remember, apparently thinks much of Aes Sedai, and so answered her questions to her satisfaction. Elaida actually spoke well of him. But she spoke more of the young man you took away with you. More dangerous than any man since Artur Hawkwing, she said. She has the Foretelling sometimes, you know, and her words carried weight with the Hall."

fəɹ linz seɪk, mɔɪɹeɪn meɪɾ əɹ vɔɪs əz mik əz ʃi kʊd. ðət wɑz nɑt vɛɹi mik, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə bɛst ʃi kəd du. "aɪ hæv θɹi jʌŋ mɛn wɪð mi, mʌðɝ, bʌt nʌn ə ðɛm ɪz ə kɪŋ, ən ðəfɝs daʊt vɛɹi mʌtʃ ɪf ɛni ʌv əm ivən dʒɹimz ə junaɪɾɪŋ ðə wɝld ʌndɝ wʌn ɹulɝ. noʊ wʌn əz dʒɹimd ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz dʒɹim sɪns ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz."

For Leane's sake, Moiraine made her voice as meek as she could. That was not very meek, but it was the best she could do. "I have three young men with me, Mother, but none of them is a king, and I doubt very much if any of them even dreams of uniting the world under one ruler. No one has dreamed Artur Hawkwing's dream since the War of the Hundred Years."

"jɛs, dɔɾɝ. vɪlədʒ juðz, soʊ lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ tɛlz mi. bʌt wʌn ə ðɛm ɪz tɑvɝən." ði æmɪɝlɪnz aɪz stʃɹeɪd tə ðə flæɾənd kjub əɡɛn. "ɪt wɑz pʊt fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ðə hɔl ðət jə ʃəd bi sɛn ɪndə ɹitʃɹit fəɹ kɑntəmpleɪʃən. ðɪs wɑz pɹəpoʊz baɪ wʌn ə ðə sɪɾɝz fəɹ ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ, wɪð ði ʌðɝ tu nɑɾɪŋ əpɹuvəl əz ʃi spoʊk."

"Yes, Daughter. Village youths, so Lord Agelmar tells me. But one of them is ta'veren." The Amyrlin's eyes strayed to the flattened cube again. "It was put forward in the Hall that you should be sent into retreat for contemplation. This was proposed by one of the Sitters for the Green Ajah, with the other two nodding approval as she spoke."

lin meɪɾ ə saʊn ə dɪsɡʌst, əɹ pɝhæps fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. ʃi ɔlweɪz kɛpt ɪn ðə bækɡɹaʊnd wən ði æmɪɝlɪn sit spoʊk, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn kəɾ ʌndɝstæn ðə smɔl ɪntɝʌpʃən ðɪs taɪm. ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ hæd bɪn əlaɪd wɪð ðə blu fəɹ ə θaʊzən jɪɹz; sɪns ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz taɪm, ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl bʌt spoʊkən wɪð wʌn vɔɪs. "aɪ hæv noʊ dɪzaɪɝ tə hoʊ vɛdʒtəbəlz ɪn səm ɹɪmoʊt vɪlədʒ, mʌðɝ." nɔɹ wɪl aɪ, wʌtɛvɝ ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ sɛz.

Leane made a sound of disgust, or perhaps frustration. She always kept in the background when the Amyrlin Seat spoke, but Moiraine could understand the small interruption this time. The Green Ajah had been allied with the Blue for a thousand years; since Artur Hawkwing's time, they had all but spoken with one voice. "I have no desire to hoe vegetables in some remote village, Mother." Nor will I, whatever the Hall of the Tower says.

"ɪt wɑz fɝðɝ pɹəpoʊzd, ɔlsoʊ baɪ ðə ɡɹinz, ðət jəɹ kɛɹ dʊɹɪŋ jəɹ ɹitʃɹit ʃəd bi ɡɪvən tə ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ. ðə ɹɛd sɪɾɝz tʃɹaɪd tə əpɪɹ sɝpɹaɪzd, bʌt ðeɪ lʊk laɪk fɪʃɝ-bɝdz u nu ðə kætʃ wɑz ənɡɑɹɾɪd." ði æmɪɝlɪn snɪft. "ðə ɹɛdz pɹəfɛst ɹɪlʌktəns tə teɪk kʌstəɾi ʌv wʌn nɑɾ ə ðɛɹ ədʒɑ, bʌt sɛd ðeɪ wəɾ æksid tə ðə wɪʃɪz ə ðə hɔl."

"It was further proposed, also by the Greens, that your care during your retreat should be given to the Red Ajah. The Red Sitters tried to appear surprised, but they looked like fisher-birds who knew the catch was unguarded." The Amyrlin sniffed. "The Reds professed reluctance to take custody of one not of their Ajah, but said they would accede to the wishes of the Hall."

dɪspaɪt hɝsɛlf, mɔɪɹeɪn ʃɪvɝd. "ðæt wəd bi . . . moʊst ənplɛzənt, mʌðɝ." ɪt wəd bi wɝs ðən ənplɛzənt, mʌtʃ wɝs; ðə ɹɛdz wɝ nɛvɝ dʒɛntəl. ʃi pʊt ðə θɔɾ ʌv ɪt fɝmli tə wʌn saɪd, tə dil wɪð leɪɾɝ. "mʌðɝ, aɪ kænɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðɪs əpɛɹən əlaɪəns bɪtwin ðə ɡɹinz ən ðə ɹɛdz. ðɛɹ bɪlifs, ðɛɹ æɾətudz təwɔɹd mɛn, ðɛɹ vjuz ʌv əɹ vɛɹi pɝpəsəz əz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɑɹ kəmplitli ɑpəzət. eɪ ɹɛɾ ən ə ɡɹin kænɑɾ ivən tɔk tə itʃ ʌðɝ wɪθaʊt kʌmɪŋ tə ʃaʊts."

Despite herself, Moiraine shivered. "That would be . . . most unpleasant, Mother." It would be worse than unpleasant, much worse; the Reds were never gentle. She put the thought of it firmly to one side, to deal with later. "Mother, I cannot understand this apparent alliance between the Greens and the Reds. Their beliefs, their attitudes toward men, their views of our very purposes as Aes Sedai, are completely opposite. A Red and a Green cannot even talk to each other without coming to shouts."

"θɪŋz tʃeɪnʒ, dɔɾɝ. fɔɹ ə ðə læs faɪv wɪmən ɹeɪzd æmɪɝlɪn əv kʌm fɹəm ðə blu. pɝhæps ðeɪ fil ðəɾ ɪz tu mɛni, əɹ ðət ðə blu weɪ ʌv θɪŋkɪŋ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ səfaɪsɪz ɪn ə wɝl fʊl ə fɔls dʒɹæɡənz. æftɝ ə θaʊzən jɪɹz, mɛni θɪŋz tʃeɪnʒ." ði æmɪɝlɪn ɡɹɪməst ən spoʊk əz ɪf tə hɝsɛlf. "oʊld wɔlz wikən, ən oʊl bæɹiɝz fɔl." ʃi ʃʊk hɝsɛlf, ən əɹ vɔɪs fɝmd. "ðɛɹ wɑz jɛɾ ənʌðɝ pɹəpoʊzəl, wʌn ðət stɪl smɛlz laɪk wik-oʊl fɪʃ ɑn ðə dʒɛɾi. sɪns lin ɪz ə ðə blu ədʒɑ ən aɪ keɪm fɹəm ðə blu, ɪt wɑz pʊt fɔɹwɝd ðət sɛndɪŋ tu sɪstɝz ə ðə blu wɪð mi ɑn ðɪs dʒɝni wəd ɡɪv ðə blu fɔɹ ɹɛpɹəzɛntəɾɪvz. pɹəpoʊzd ɪn ðə hɔl, tə maɪ feɪs, əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ dɪskʌsɪŋ ɹɪpɛɹɪŋ ðə dʒɹeɪnz. tu ʌv ðə waɪt sɪstɝz stʊɾ əɡɛns mi, ən tu ɡɹin. ðə jɛloʊ mʌɾɝd əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, ðən wəd nɑt spik fəɹ əɹ əɡɛnst. wʌn mɔɹ seɪɪŋ neɪ, ən jəɹ sɪstɝz æneɪjə ən meɪɡɑn wəd nɑt bi hɪɹ. ðəɹ wɑz ivən səm tɔk, oʊpən tɔk, ðəɾ aɪ ʃəd nɑt liv ðə waɪt taʊɝ əɾ ɔl."

"Things change, Daughter. Four of the last five women raised Amyrlin have come from the Blue. Perhaps they feel that is too many, or that the Blue way of thinking no longer suffices in a world full of false Dragons. After a thousand years, many things change." The Amyrlin grimaced and spoke as if to herself. "Old walls weaken, and old barriers fall." She shook herself, and her voice firmed. "There was yet another proposal, one that still smells like week-old fish on the jetty. Since Leane is of the Blue Ajah and I came from the Blue, it was put forward that sending two sisters of the Blue with me on this journey would give the Blue four representatives. Proposed in the Hall, to my face, as if they were discussing repairing the drains. Two of the White Sisters stood against me, and two Green. The Yellow muttered among themselves, then would not speak for or against. One more saying nay, and your sisters Anaiya and Maigan would not be here. There was even some talk, open talk, that I should not leave the White Tower at all."

mɔɪɹeɪn fɛlt ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ ʃɑk ðən ɑn hɪɹɪŋ ðət ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ wɑntəɾ əɹ ɪn ðɛɹ hænz. wʌtɛvɝ ədʒɑ ʃi keɪm fɹʌm, ðə kipɝ ə ðə kɹɑnəkəlz spoʊk oʊnli fəɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn spoʊk fəɹ ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ɔl ədʒəz. ðət wɑz ðə weɪ ɪt hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn, ən noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ sədʒɛstəɾ ʌðɝwaɪz, nɑɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹkəs deɪz ə ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, nɑt wən ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɑɹmiz hæd pɛn ɛvɹi sɝvaɪvɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪnsaɪd tɑɹ vəlɑn. əbʌv ɔl, ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɑz ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz plɛdʒ tə oʊbeɪ hɝ. noʊ wʌn kəd kwɛstʃən wʌt ʃi dɪɾ əɹ wɛɹ ʃi tʃoʊz tə ɡoʊ. ðɪs pɹəpoʊzəl wɛn əɡɛns θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz ə kʌstəm ən lɔ.

Moiraine felt a greater shock than on hearing that the Red Ajah wanted her in their hands. Whatever Ajah she came from, the Keeper of the Chronicles spoke only for the Amyrlin, and the Amyrlin spoke for all Aes Sedai and all Ajahs. That was the way it had always been, and no one had ever suggested otherwise, not in the darkest days of the Trolloc Wars, not when Artur Hawkwing's armies had penned every surviving Aes Sedai inside Tar Valon. Above all, the Amyrlin Seat was the Amyrlin Seat. Every Aes Sedai was pledged to obey her. No one could question what she did or where she chose to go. This proposal went against three thousand years of custom and law.

"hu wəd dɛɹ, mʌðɝ?"

"Who would dare, Mother?"

ði æmɪɝlɪn sits læf wɑz bɪɾɝ. "ɔlmoʊst ɛniwʌn, dɔɾɝ. ɹaɪəts ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn kɔld wɪθaʊɾ ɛni ʌv əs hævɪŋ ə hɪn ʌv ɪɾ əntɪl ðə pɹɑkləmeɪʃən. fɔls dʒɹæɡənz pɑpɪŋ ʌp laɪk ɹɛdbɛlz æftɝ ə ɹeɪn. neɪʃənz feɪɾɪŋ, ən mɔɹ noʊbəlz pleɪɪŋ ət ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz ðən əɾ ɛni taɪm sɪns ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ kʌɾ ɔl ðɛɹ plɑɾɪŋz ʃɔɹt. ən wɝst ʌv ɔl, ɛvɹi wʌn ʌv əs noʊz ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪz stɝɪŋ əɡɛn. ʃoʊ mi ə sɪstɝ u dʌz nɑt θɪŋk ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪz luzɪŋ ɪts ɡɹɪp ɑn ɪvɛns, ən ɪf ʃiz nɑt bɹaʊn ədʒɑ, ʃiz dɛd. taɪm meɪ bi ɡɹoʊɪŋ ʃɔɹt fəɹ ɔl ʌv ʌs, dɔɾɝ. səmtaɪmz aɪ θɪŋk aɪ kən ɔlmoʊs fil ɪt ɡɹoʊɪŋ ʃɔɹɾɝ."

The Amyrlin Seat's laugh was bitter. "Almost anyone, Daughter. Riots in Caemlyn. The Great Hunt called without any of us having a hint of it until the proclamation. False Dragons popping up like redbells after a rain. Nations fading, and more nobles playing at the Game of Houses than at any time since Artur Hawkwing cut all their plottings short. And worst of all, every one of us knows the Dark One is stirring again. Show me a sister who does not think the White Tower is losing its grip on events, and if she is not Brown Ajah, she is dead. Time may be growing short for all of us, Daughter. Sometimes I think I can almost feel it growing shorter."

"æz jə seɪ, mʌðɝ, θɪŋz tʃeɪnʒ. bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ stɪl wɝs pɛɹəlz aʊtsaɪd ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ wɔlz ðən wɪðɪn."

"As you say, Mother, things change. But there are still worse perils outside the Shining Walls than within."

fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmən ði æmɪɝlɪn mɛt mɔɪɹeɪnz ɡeɪz, ðən nɑɾəd sloʊli. "liv ʌs, lin. aɪ wəd tɔk tə maɪ dɔɾɝ mɔɪɹeɪn əloʊn."

For a long moment the Amyrlin met Moiraine's gaze, then nodded slowly. "Leave us, Leane. I would talk to my Daughter Moiraine alone."

ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ə moʊməns hɛzəteɪʃən bɪfɔɹ lin sɛd, "æz jə wɪʃ, mʌðɝ." mɔɪɹeɪn kəd fil əɹ sɝpɹaɪz. ði æmɪɝlɪn ɡeɪv fju ɑɾiənsəz wɪθaʊt ðə kipɝ pɹɛzənt, ɪspɛʃli nɑt tə ə sɪstɝ ʃi hæd ɹizən tə tʃæstaɪz.

There was only a moment's hesitation before Leane said, "As you wish, Mother." Moiraine could feel her surprise. The Amyrlin gave few audiences without the Keeper present, especially not to a sister she had reason to chastise.

ðə dɔɹ oʊpən ən kloʊz bɪhaɪn lin. ʃi wəd nɑt seɪ ə wɝɾ ɪn ði æntəɹum ʌv wʌt hæɾ əkɝɾ ɪnsaɪd, bʌt ðə nuz ðət mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz əloʊn wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn wəd spɹɛd θɹu ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn fæl dæɹə laɪk waɪldfaɪɝ θɹu ə dʒɹaɪ fɔɹəst, ən ðə spɛkjəleɪʃən wəd bɪɡɪn.

The door opened and closed behind Leane. She would not say a word in the anteroom of what had occurred inside, but the news that Moiraine was alone with the Amyrlin would spread through the Aes Sedai in Fal Dara like wildfire through a dry forest, and the speculation would begin.

əz sun əz ðə dɔɹ kloʊz ði æmɪɝlɪn stʊd, ən mɔɪɹeɪn fɛlt ə moʊməntɛɹi tɪŋɡəl ɪn əɹ skɪn əz ði ʌðɝ wʊmən tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ. fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ði æmɪɝlɪn sit sim tə hɝ tə bi sɝaʊndəd baɪ ə nɪmbəs ə bɹaɪt laɪt.

As soon as the door closed the Amyrlin stood, and Moiraine felt a momentary tingle in her skin as the other woman channeled the One Power. For an instant, the Amyrlin Seat seemed to her to be surrounded by a nimbus of bright light.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ ðəɾ ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz əv jəɹ oʊl tʃɹɪk," ði æmɪɝlɪn sit sɛd, laɪtli tʌtʃɪŋ ðə blu stoʊn ɑn mɔɪɹeɪnz fɔɹhɛd wɪð wʌn fɪŋɡɝ, "bʌt moʊst ʌv əs əv səm smɔl tʃɹɪks ɹɪmɛmbɝd fɹəm tʃaɪldhʊd. ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt, noʊ wʌn kən hɪɹ wʌt wi seɪ naʊ."

"I don't know that any of the others have your old trick," the Amyrlin Seat said, lightly touching the blue stone on Moiraine's forehead with one finger, "but most of us have some small tricks remembered from childhood. In any event, no one can hear what we say now."

sʌɾənli ʃi θɹu hɝ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn mɔɪɹeɪn, ə wɔɹm hʌɡ bɪtwin oʊl fɹɛnz; mɔɪɹeɪn hʌɡd bæk əz wɔɹmli.

Suddenly she threw her arms around Moiraine, a warm hug between old friends; Moiraine hugged back as warmly.

"ju ɑɹ ði oʊnli wʌn, mɔɪɹeɪn, wɪð hum aɪ kən ɹɪmɛmbɝ u aɪ wɑz. ivən lin ɔlweɪz æks əz ɪf aɪ hæd bɪkʌm ðə stoʊl ən ðə stæf, ivən wən wəɹ əloʊn, əz ɪf wid nɛvɝ ɡɪɡəl təɡɛðɝ əz nɑvəsɪz. səmtaɪmz aɪ wɪʃ wi stɪl wɝ nɑvəsɪz, jə ən aɪ. stɪl ɪnəsən ɪnʌf tə si ɪɾ ɔl əz ə ɡlimənz teɪl kʌm tʃɹu, stɪl ɪnəsən ɪnʌf tə θɪŋk wi wəd faɪn mɛn - ðeɪ wəd bi pɹɪnsəz, ɹɪmɛmbɝ, hænsəm ən stʃɹɔŋ ən dʒɛntəl? - hu kəd bɛɹ tə lɪv wɪð wɪmən ʌv ən ɛɛs sədaɪz paʊɝ. stɪl ɪnəsən ɪnʌf tə dʒɹim ə ðə hæpi ɛndɪŋ tə ðə ɡlimənz teɪl, ʌv lɪvɪŋ əɹ laɪvz əz ʌðɝ wɪmən du, dʒʌst wɪð mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ."

"You are the only one, Moiraine, with whom I can remember who I was. Even Leane always acts as if I had become the stole and the staff, even when we are alone, as if we'd never giggled together as novices. Sometimes I wish we still were novices, you and I. Still innocent enough to see it all as a gleeman's tale come true, still innocent enough to think we would find men - they would be princes, remember, handsome and strong and gentle? - who could bear to live with women of an Aes Sedai's power. Still innocent enough to dream of the happy ending to the gleeman's tale, of living our lives as other women do, just with more than they."

"wi ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, sɪuən. wɪv əɹ duɾi. ivən ɪf jə ən aɪ hæd nɑt bɪn bɔɹn tə tʃænəl, wəd jə ɡɪv ɪɾ ʌp fəɹ ə hoʊm ən ə hʌzbənd, ivən ə pɹɪns? aɪ də nɑt bɪliv ɪt. ðəɾ ɪz ə vɪlədʒ ɡʊdwaɪfs dʒɹim. nɑɾ ivən ðə ɡɹinz ɡoʊ soʊ fɑɹ."

"We are Aes Sedai, Siuan. We have our duty. Even if you and I had not been born to channel, would you give it up for a home and a husband, even a prince? I do not believe it. That is a village goodwife's dream. Not even the Greens go so far."

ði æmɪɝlɪn stɛp bæk. "noʊ, aɪ wəd nɑt ɡɪv ɪɾ ʌp. moʊst ə ðə taɪm, noʊ. bʌt ðəɹ əv bɪn taɪmz aɪ ɛnvid ðət vɪlədʒ ɡʊdwaɪf. ət ðɪs moʊmənt, aɪ ɔlmoʊs du. mɔɪɹeɪn, ɪf ɛniwʌn, ivən lin, dɪskʌvɝz wʌt wi plæn, wɪl boʊθ bi stɪld. ən aɪ kæn seɪ ðeɪ wəd bi ɹɔŋ tə də ɪt."

The Amyrlin stepped back. "No, I would not give it up. Most of the time, no. But there have been times I envied that village goodwife. At this moment, I almost do. Moiraine, if anyone, even Leane, discovers what we plan, we will both be stilled. And I can't say they would be wrong to do it."


tʃæptɝ faɪv


CHAPTER 5

ðə ʃædoʊ ɪn ʃaɪnɝ


The Shadow in Shienar

stɪld. ðə wɝd sim tə kwɪvɝ ɪn ði ɛɹ, ɔlmoʊs vɪzəbəl. wən ɪt wɑz dʌn tə ə mæn u kəd tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ, hu mʌs bi stɑp bɪfɔɹ mædnəs dʒɹoʊv ɪm tə ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ʌv ɔl ɝaʊn hɪm, ɪt wɑz kɔl dʒɛntəlɪŋ, bʌt fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪt wɑz stɪlɪŋ. stɪld. noʊ lɔŋɡɝ eɪbəl tə tʃænəl ðə floʊ ʌv ðə wʌn paʊɝ. eɪbəl tə sɛns seɪaɪdɑɹ, ðə fimeɪl hæf ə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, bʌt noʊ lɔŋɡɝ hævɪŋ ði əbɪləɾi tə tʌtʃ ɪt. ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ wʌt wɑz ɡɔn fɝɛvɝ. soʊ sɛldəm hæɾ ɪt bɪn dʌn ðəɾ ɛvɹi nɑvəs wɑz ɹikwaɪɝd tə lɝn ðə neɪm ʌv itʃ ɛɛs sədaɪ sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld u hæd bɪn stɪld, ən əɹ kɹaɪm, bʌt nʌn kəd θɪŋk ʌv ɪt wɪθaʊɾ ə ʃʌɾɝ. wɪmən bɔɹ biɪŋ stɪl noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən mɛn dɪd biɪŋ dʒɛntəld.

Stilled. The word seemed to quiver in the air, almost visible. When it was done to a man who could channel the Power, who must be stopped before madness drove him to the destruction of all around him, it was called gentling, but for Aes Sedai it was stilling. Stilled. No longer able to channel the flow of the One Power. Able to sense saidar, the female half of the True Source, but no longer having the ability to touch it. Remembering what was gone forever. So seldom had it been done that every novice was required to learn the name of each Aes Sedai since the Breaking of the World who had been stilled, and her crime, but none could think of it without a shudder. Women bore being stilled no better than men did being gentled.

mɔɪɹeɪn hæd noʊn ðə ɹɪsk fɹəm ðə fɝst, ən ʃi nu ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi. ðət dɪd nɑt min ɪt wɑz plɛzən tə dwɛl ɑn. hɝ aɪz nɛɹoʊd, ən oʊnli ðə ɡlim ɪn əm ʃoʊɾ əɹ æŋɡɝ, ən əɹ wɝi. "lin wəd fɑloʊ jə tə ðə sloʊps ə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, sɪuən, ən ɪndə ðə pɪɾ ə dum. jə kænɑt θɪŋk ʃi wəd bɪtʃɹeɪ ju."

Moiraine had known the risk from the first, and she knew it was necessary. That did not mean it was pleasant to dwell on. Her eyes narrowed, and only the gleam in them showed her anger, and her worry. "Leane would follow you to the slopes of Shayol Ghul, Siuan, and into the Pit of Doom. You cannot think she would betray you."

"noʊ. bʌt ðɛn, wəd ʃi θɪŋk ɪt bɪtʃɹeɪəl? ɪz ɪt bɪtʃɹeɪəl tə bɪtʃɹeɪ ə tʃɹeɪɾɝ? dʒju nɛvɝ θɪŋk ə ðæt?"

"No. But then, would she think it betrayal? Is it betrayal to betray a traitor? Do you never think of that?"

"nɛvɝ. wʌt wi du, sɪuən, ɪz wʌt mʌs bi dʌn. wɪv boʊθ noʊn ɪt fəɹ nɪɹli twɛnti jɪɹz. ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz, ən jə ən aɪ wɝ tʃoʊzən fəɹ ðɪs baɪ ðə pæɾɝn. wəɹ ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə pɹɑfəsiz, ən ðə pɹɑfəsiz mʌs bi fʊlfɪld. mʌst!"

"Never. What we do, Siuan, is what must be done. We have both known it for nearly twenty years. The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills, and you and I were chosen for this by the Pattern. We are a part of the Prophecies, and the Prophecies must be fulfilled. Must!"

"ðə pɹɑfəsiz mʌs bi fʊlfɪld. wi wɝ tɔt ðət ðəl bi, ən mʌs bi, ən jɛt ðət fʊlfɪlmən ɪz tʃɹizən tə ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls wi wɝ tɔt. səm wəd seɪ tə ɛvɹiθɪŋ wi stæn fɔɹ." ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz, ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɔkt oʊvɝ tə pɪɹ θɹu ðə nɛɹoʊ æɹoʊslɪɾ ət ðə ɡɑɹɾən bɪloʊ. ʃi tʌtʃt ðə kɝɾənz. "hɪɹ ɪn ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns ðeɪ hæŋ dʒɹeɪpɝiz tə sɑfən ðə ɹumz, ən ðeɪ plæn bjuɾəfəl ɡɑɹɾənz, bʌt ðəɹ ɪz noʊ pɑɹɾ ə ðɪs pleɪs nɑt pɝpəs-meɪd fəɹ bæɾəl, dɛθ, ən kɪlɪŋ." ʃi kəntɪnjuɾ ɪn ðə seɪm pɛnsɪv toʊn. "oʊnli twaɪs sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld əz ði æmɪɝlɪn sit bɪn stʃɹɪpt ə stoʊl ən stæf."

"The Prophecies must be fulfilled. We were taught that they will be, and must be, and yet that fulfillment is treason to everything else we were taught. Some would say to everything we stand for." Rubbing her arms, the Amyrlin Seat walked over to peer through the narrow arrowslit at the garden below. She touched the curtains. "Here in the women's apartments they hang draperies to soften the rooms, and they plant beautiful gardens, but there is no part of this place not purpose-made for battle, death, and killing." She continued in the same pensive tone. "Only twice since the Breaking of the World has the Amyrlin Seat been stripped of stole and staff."

"tɛtsuən, hu bɪtʃɹeɪd meɪnɛðɝən fəɹ dʒɛləsi ʌv ɛlɪsɑnz paʊɝz, ən bɑnwɪn, hu tʃɹaɪd tə juz ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ fəɹ ə pʌpət tə kəntʃɹoʊl ðə wɝld ən soʊ nɪɹli dɪstʃɹɔɪd tɑɹ vəlɑn."

"Tetsuan, who betrayed Manetheren for jealousy of Ellisande's powers, and Bonwhin, who tried to use Artur Hawkwing for a puppet to control the world and so nearly destroyed Tar Valon."

ði æmɪɝlɪn kəntɪnjuɾ əɹ stʌɾi ʌv ðə ɡɑɹɾən. "boʊθ ə ðə ɹɛd, ən boʊθ ɹipleɪs baɪ æmɪɝlɪn fɹəm ðə blu. ðə ɹizən ðəɹ əz nɑt bɪn ən æmɪɝlɪn tʃoʊzən fɹəm ðə ɹɛd sɪns bɑnwɪn, ən ðə ɹizən ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ wɪl teɪk ɛni pɹitɛks tə pʊl daʊn ən æmɪɝlɪn fɹəm ðə blu, ɔl ɹæp nitli təɡɛðɝ. aɪ hæv noʊ wɪʃ tə bi ðə θɝd tə luz ðə stoʊl ən ðə stæf, mɔɪɹeɪn. fəɹ ju, ʌv kɔɹs, ɪt wəd min biɪŋ stɪld ən pʊɾ aʊtsaɪd ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ wɔlz."

The Amyrlin continued her study of the garden. "Both of the Red, and both replaced by Amyrlin from the Blue. The reason there has not been an Amyrlin chosen from the Red since Bonwhin, and the reason the Red Ajah will take any pretext to pull down an Amyrlin from the Blue, all wrapped neatly together. I have no wish to be the third to lose the stole and the staff, Moiraine. For you, of course, it would mean being stilled and put outside the Shining Walls."

"ɪleɪɾə, fəɹ wʌn, wəd nɛvɝ lemi ɔf soʊ izəli." mɔɪɹeɪn wɑtʃt əɹ fɹɛnz bæk ɪntɛnli. laɪt, wʌɾ əz kʌm oʊvɝ hɝ? ʃiz nɛvɝ bɪn laɪk ðɪs bɪfɔɹ. wɛɹ ɪz əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ, hɝ faɪɝ? "bʌɾ ɪɾəl nɑt kʌm tə ðæt, sɪuən."

"Elaida, for one, would never let me off so easily." Moiraine watched her friend's back intently. Light, what has come over her? She has never been like this before. Where is her strength, her fire? "But it will not come to that, Siuan."

ði ʌðɝ wʊmən wɛn ɑn əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt spoʊkən. "fɔɹ mi, ɪt wəd bi dɪfɹənt. ivən stɪld, ən æmɪɝlɪn u hæz bɪn pʊl daʊn kænɑt bi əlaʊd tə wɑndɝ əbaʊt lus; ʃi maɪt bi sin əz ə mɑɹɾɝ, bɪkʌm ə ɹæliɪŋ pɔɪn fəɹ ɑpəzɪʃən. tɛtsuən ən bɑnwɪn wɝ kɛpt ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ əz sɝvəns. skʌlɝi meɪdz, hu kəd bi pɔɪntəd tə əz kɔʃənz əz tə wʌt kən hæpən tə ðə maɪɾiəst. noʊ wʌn kən ɹæli ɝaʊn ə wʊmən u mʌst skɹʌb flɔɹz ən pɑts ɔl deɪ. pɪɾi hɝ, jɛs, bʌt nɑt ɹæli tə hɝ."

The other woman went on as if she had not spoken. "For me, it would be different. Even stilled, an Amyrlin who has been pulled down cannot be allowed to wander about loose; she might be seen as a martyr, become a rallying point for opposition. Tetsuan and Bonwhin were kept in the White Tower as servants. Scullery maids, who could be pointed to as cautions as to what can happen to the mightiest. No one can rally around a woman who must scrub floors and pots all day. Pity her, yes, but not rally to her."

aɪz bleɪzɪŋ, mɔɪɹeɪn lin əɹ fɪsts ɑn ðə teɪbəl. "lʊk ət mi, sɪuən. lʊk ət mi! ɑɹ jə seɪɪŋ ðət jə wɑnə ɡɪv ʌp, æftɝ ɔl ðiz jɪɹz, æftɝ ɔl wɪv dʌn? ɡɪv ʌp, ən lɛt ðə wɝld ɡoʊ? ən ɔl fəɹ fɪɹ ʌv ə swɪtʃɪŋ fəɹ nɑt ɡɛɾɪŋ ðə pɑts klin ɪnʌf!" ʃi pʊɾ ɪndə ɪɾ ɔl ðə skɔɹn ʃi kəd sʌmən, ən wɑz ɹɪlivd wən əɹ fɹɛn spʌn tə feɪs hɝ. ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ, stʃɹeɪn bʌt stɪl ðɛɹ. ðoʊz klɪɹ blu aɪz wɝ əz hɑt wɪð æŋɡɝ əz əɹ oʊn.

Eyes blazing, Moiraine leaned her fists on the table. "Look at me, Siuan. Look at me! Are you saying that you want to give up, after all these years, after all we have done? Give up, and let the world go? And all for fear of a switching for not getting the pots clean enough!" She put into it all the scorn she could summon, and was relieved when her friend spun to face her. The strength was still there, strained but still there. Those clear blue eyes were as hot with anger as her own.

"aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ wɪtʃ ə ðə tu ʌv əs skwil ðə laʊɾəst wən wi wɝ swɪtʃt əz nɑvəsɪz. jə hæd lɪvd ə sɑf laɪf ɪn kɛɹhin, mɔɪɹeɪn. nɑt laɪk wɝkɪŋ ə fɪʃɪŋ boʊt." əbɹʌpli sɪuən slæp ðə teɪbəl wɪð ə laʊd kɹæk. "noʊ, aɪm nɑt sədʒɛstɪŋ ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp, bʌt niðɝ də aɪ pɹəpoʊz tə wɑtʃ ɛvɹiθɪŋ slaɪɾ aʊɾ ʌv əɹ hænz waɪl aɪ kən də nʌθɪŋ! moʊst ə maɪ tʃɹʌbəlz wɪð ðə hɔl stɛm fɹəm ju. ivən ðə ɡɹinz wʌndɝ waɪ aɪ hævən kɔl jə tə ðə taʊɝ ən tɔt jə ə lɪɾəl dɪsəplən. hæf ðə sɪstɝz wɪð mi θɪŋk jə ʃəd bi hændəɾ oʊvɝ tə ðə ɹɛdz, ən ɪf ðət hæpənz, jəl wɪʃ jə wɝ ə nɑvəs əɡɛn, wɪð nʌθɪŋ wɝs tə lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə ðən ə swɪtʃɪŋ. laɪt! ɪf ɛni ʌv əm ɹɪmɛmbɝ wi wɝ fɹɛnz əz nɑvəsɪz, aɪd bi ðəɹ bɪsaɪd ju.

"I remember which of the two of us squealed the loudest when we were switched as novices. You had lived a soft life in Cairhien, Moiraine. Not like working a fishing boat." Abruptly Siuan slapped the table with a loud crack. "No, I am not suggesting giving up, but neither do I propose to watch everything slide out of our hands while I can do nothing! Most of my troubles with the Hall stem from you. Even the Greens wonder why I haven't called you to the Tower and taught you a little discipline. Half the sisters with me think you should be handed over to the Reds, and if that happens, you will wish you were a novice again, with nothing worse to look forward to than a switching. Light! If any of them remember we were friends as novices, I'd be there beside you.

"wi hæɾ ə plæn! ə plæn, mɔɪɹeɪn! loʊkeɪt ðə bɔɪ ən bɹɪŋ ɪm tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, wɛɹ wi kəd haɪd hɪm, kip ɪm seɪf ən ɡaɪd hɪm. sɪns jə lɛf ðə taʊɝ, aɪ hæv hæɾ oʊnli tu mɛsədʒəz fɹəm ju. tu! aɪ fil əz ɪf aɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə seɪl ðə fɪŋɡɝz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪn ðə dɑɹk. wʌn mɛsədʒ tə seɪ jə wɝ ɛntɝɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðɪs vɪlədʒ, ðɪs ɛmənz fild. sun, aɪ θɔt. hiz faʊnd, ən ʃɪl əv ɪm ɪn hæn sun. ðən wɝd fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn tə seɪ jə wɝ kʌmɪŋ tə ʃaɪnɝ, tə fæl dæɹə, nɑt tɑɹ vəlɑn. fæl dæɹə, wɪð ðə blaɪɾ ɔlmoʊs kloʊs ɪnʌf tə tʌtʃ. fæl dæɹə, wɛɹ tʃɹɑləks ɹeɪɾ ən mɹdʒɹɑl ɹaɪɾ əz nɪɹ ɛvɹi deɪ əz meɪks noʊ dɪfɝəns. nɪɹli twɛnti jɪɹz ə plænɪŋ ən sɝtʃɪŋ, ən jə tɔs ɔl əɹ plænz pɹæktəkli ɪn ðə dɑɹk wʌnz feɪs. ɑɹ jə mæd?"

"We had a plan! A plan, Moiraine! Locate the boy and bring him to Tar Valon, where we could hide him, keep him safe and guide him. Since you left the Tower, I have had only two messages from you. Two! I feel as if I'm trying to sail the Fingers of the Dragon in the dark. One message to say you were entering the Two Rivers, going to this village, this Emond's Field. Soon, I thought. He's found, and she'll have him in hand soon. Then word from Caemlyn to say you were coming to Shienar, to Fal Dara, not Tar Valon. Fal Dara, with the Blight almost close enough to touch. Fal Dara, where Trollocs raid and Myrddraal ride as near every day as makes no difference. Nearly twenty years of planning and searching, and you toss all our plans practically in the Dark One's face. Are you mad?"

naʊ ðət ʃi hæd stɝd laɪf ɪn ði ʌðɝ wʊmən, mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪtɝn tə aʊtwɝd kɑm, hɝsɛlf. kɑm, bʌt fɝm ɪnsɪstəns, tu. "ðə pæɾɝn peɪz noʊ hid tə hjumən plænz, sɪuən. wɪð ɔl əɹ skimɪŋ, wi fɝɡɑt wʌt wi wɝ dilɪŋ wɪð. tɑvɝən. ɪleɪɾə ɪz ɹɔŋ. ɑɹɾɝ pɛndʒɹæɡ tænɹəl wɑz nɛvɝ ðɪs stʃɹɔŋli tɑvɝən. ðə wil wɪl wiv ðə pæɾɝn ɝaʊn ðɪs jʌŋ mæn əz ɪt wɪlz, wʌtɛvɝ əɹ plænz."

Now that she had stirred life in the other woman, Moiraine returned to outward calm, herself. Calm, but firm insistence, too. "The Pattern pays no heed to human plans, Siuan. With all our scheming, we forgot what we were dealing with. Ta'veren. Elaida is wrong. Artur Paendrag Tanreall was never this strongly ta'veren. The Wheel will weave the Pattern around this young man as it wills, whatever our plans."

ði æŋɡɝ lɛft æmɪɝlɪnz feɪs, ɹipleɪs baɪ waɪt-feɪst ʃɑk. "ɪt saʊnz əz ɪf jə ɑɹ seɪɪŋ wi maɪɾ əz wɛl ɡɪv ʌp. dʒju naʊ sədʒɛst stændɪŋ əsaɪɾ ən wɑtʃɪŋ ðə wɝl bɝn?"

The anger left Amyrlin's face, replaced by white-faced shock. "It sounds as if you are saying we might as well give up. Do you now suggest standing aside and watching the world burn?"

"noʊ, sɪuən. nɛvɝ stændɪŋ əsaɪd." jɛt ðə wɝld wɪl bɝn, sɪuən, wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ, wʌtɛvɝ wi du. jə kəd nɛvɝ si ðæt. "bʌt wi mʌs naʊ ɹilaɪz ðəɾ əɹ plænz ɑɹ pɹikɛɹiəs θɪŋz. wɪv ivən lɛs kəntʃɹoʊl ðən wi θɔt. pɝhæps oʊnli ə fɪŋɡɝneɪlz ɡɹɪp. ðə wɪnz ə dɛstəni ɑɹ bloʊɪŋ, sɪuən, ən wi mʌst ɹaɪɾ əm wɛɹ ðeɪ teɪk ʌs."

"No, Siuan. Never standing aside." Yet the world will burn, Siuan, one way or another, whatever we do. You could never see that. "But we must now realize that our plans are precarious things. We have even less control than we thought. Perhaps only a fingernail's grip. The winds of destiny are blowing, Siuan, and we must ride them where they take us."

ði æmɪɝlɪn ʃɪvɝɾ əz ɪf ʃi fɛl ðoʊz wɪnz aɪsi ɑn ðə bæk ə hɝ nɛk. hɝ hænz wɛn tə ðə flæɾənd kjub ʌv ɡoʊld, blʌnt, keɪpəbəl fɪŋɡɝz faɪndɪŋ pɹɪsaɪs pɔɪns ɪn ðə kɑmplɛks dɪzaɪnz. kʌnɪŋli bælənst, ðə tɑp lɪftəd bæk tə ɹɪvil ə kɝld, ɡoʊldən hɔɹn nɛsəld wɪðɪn ə speɪs dɪzaɪn tə hoʊld ɪt. ʃi lɪftəd ði ɪnstʃɹəmən ən tʃɹeɪs ðə floʊɪŋ sɪlvɝ skɹɪpt, ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, ɪnleɪɾ ɝaʊn ðə flɛɹɪŋ maʊθ.

The Amyrlin shivered as if she felt those winds icy on the back of her neck. Her hands went to the flattened cube of gold, blunt, capable fingers finding precise points in the complex designs. Cunningly balanced, the top lifted back to reveal a curled, golden horn nestled within a space designed to hold it. She lifted the instrument and traced the flowing silver script, in the Old Tongue, inlaid around the flaring mouth.

" 'ðə ɡɹeɪv ɪz noʊ bɑɹ tə maɪ kɔl,' " ʃi tʃɹænzleɪɾəd, soʊ sɔfli ʃi sim tə bi spikɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf. "ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, meɪd tə kɔl dɛd hɪɹoʊz bæk fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪv. ən pɹɑfəsi sɛɾ ɪt wəɾ oʊnli bi faʊn dʒʌst ɪn taɪm fəɹ ðə læs bæɾəl." əbɹʌpli ʃi θɹʌs ðə hɔɹn bæk ɪndə ɪts nɪtʃ ən kloʊz ðə lɪɾ əz ɪf ʃi kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bɛɹ ðə saɪɾ ʌv ɪt. "eɪɡəlmɝ pʊʃt ɪɾ ɪndə maɪ hænz əz sun əz ðə wɛlkəm wɑz dʌn. hi sɛɾ i wɑz əfɹeɪd tə ɡoʊ ɪndə hɪz oʊn stʃɹɔŋɡɹum ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, wɪð ɪt ðɛɹ. ðə tɛmteɪʃən wɑz tu ɡɹeɪt, hi sɛd. tə saʊn ðə hɔɹn hɪmsɛlf ən lɛd ðə hoʊs ðəɾ ænsɝɾ ɪts kɔl nɔɹθ θɹu ðə blaɪt tə lɛvəl ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl ɪtsɛlf ən pʊɾ ən ɛn tə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. hi bɝnd wɪð ði ɛkstəsi ʌv ɡlɔɹi, ən ɪt wɑz ðæt, hi sɛd, ðət toʊld ɪm ɪt wɑz nɑt tə bi hɪm, mʌs nɑt bi hɪm. hi kəd nɑt weɪt tə bi ɹɪɾ ʌv ɪt, jɛɾ i wɑntəɾ ɪt stɪl."

" 'The grave is no bar to my call,' " she translated, so softly she seemed to be speaking to herself. "The Horn of Valere, made to call dead heroes back from the grave. And prophecy said it would only be found just in time for the Last Battle." Abruptly she thrust the Horn back into its niche and closed the lid as if she could no longer bear the sight of it. "Agelmar pushed it into my hands as soon as the Welcome was done. He said he was afraid to go into his own strongroom any longer, with it there. The temptation was too great, he said. To sound the Horn himself and lead the host that answered its call north through the Blight to level Shayol Ghul itself and put an end to the Dark One. He burned with the ecstasy of glory, and it was that, he said, that told him it was not to be him, must not be him. He could not wait to be rid of it, yet he wanted it still."

mɔɪɹeɪn nɑɾəd. eɪɡəlmɝ wɑz fəmɪljɝ wɪð ðə pɹɑfəsi ʌv ðə hɔɹn; moʊst u fɔt ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɝ. " 'lɛt husoʊɛvɝ saʊnz mi θɪŋk nɑɾ ʌv ɡlɔɹi, bʌɾ oʊnli ʌv sælveɪʃən.' "

Moiraine nodded. Agelmar was familiar with the Prophecy of the Horn; most who fought the Dark One were. " 'Let whosoever sounds me think not of glory, but only of salvation.' "

"sælveɪʃən." ði æmɪɝlɪn læf bɪɾɝli. "fɹʌm ðə lʊk ɪn eɪɡəlmɝz aɪz, hi dɪdnt noʊ wɛðɝ i wɑz ɡɪvɪŋ əweɪ sælveɪʃən əɹ ɹɪdʒɛktɪŋ ðə kɑndəmneɪʃən ə hɪz oʊn soʊl. hi oʊnli nu hi hæd tə bi ɹɪɾ ʌv ɪt bɪfɔɹ ɪt bɝn ɪm ʌp. hiz tʃɹaɪd tə kip ɪt sikɹət, bʌɾ i sɛz ðəɹ ɑɹ ɹumɝz ɪn ðə kip ɔlɹɛɾi. aɪ də nɑt fil ɪz tɛmteɪʃən, jɛt ðə hɔɹn stɪl meɪks maɪ skɪn kɹɔl. hɪl əv tə teɪk ɪt bæk ɪndə hɪz stʃɹɔŋɡɹum əntɪl aɪ liv. aɪ kəd nɑt slip wɪð ɪɾ ivən ɪn ðə nɛkst ɹum." ʃi ɹʌb fɹaʊn laɪnz fɹəm əɹ fɔɹhɛɾ ən saɪd. "æn ɪt wɑz nɑt tə bi faʊn əntɪl dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ðə læs bæɾəl. kən ɪt bi ðət kloʊs? aɪ θɔt, hoʊpt, wi wəɾ əv mɔɹ taɪm."

"Salvation." The Amyrlin laughed bitterly. "From the look in Agelmar's eyes, he didn't know whether he was giving away salvation or rejecting the condemnation of his own soul. He only knew he had to be rid of it before it burned him up. He has tried to keep it secret, but he says there are rumors in the keep already. I do not feel his temptation, yet the Horn still makes my skin crawl. He will have to take it back into his strongroom until I leave. I could not sleep with it even in the next room." She rubbed frown lines from her forehead and sighed. "And it was not to be found until just before the Last Battle. Can it be that close? I thought, hoped, we would have more time."

"ðə kæɹæəθən saɪkəl."

"The Karaethon Cycle."

"jɛs, mɔɪɹeɪn. jə də nɑɾ əv tə ɹimaɪn mi. aɪv lɪvd wɪð ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən əz lɔŋ əz ju." ði æmɪɝlɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "nɛvɝ mɔɹ ðən wʌn fɔls dʒɹæɡən ɪn ə dʒɛnɝeɪʃən sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ, ən naʊ θɹi lus ɪn ðə wɝld ət wʌn taɪm, ən θɹi mɔɹ ɪn ðə pæs tu jɪɹz. ðə pæɾɝn dɪmænz ə dʒɹæɡən kəz ðə pæɾɝn wivz təwɔɹd tɑɹmən ɡdən. səmtaɪmz daʊt fɪlz mi, mɔɪɹeɪn." ʃi sɛɾ ɪt mjuzɪŋli, əz ɪf wʌndɝɪŋ əɾ ɪt, ən wɛn ɑn ɪn ðə seɪm toʊn. "wʌɾ ɪf lɑɡən wɑz ðə wʌn? hi kəd tʃænəl, bɪfɔɹ ðə ɹɛdz bɹɔɾ ɪm tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən wi dʒɛntəl hɪm. soʊ kən mæzɹim teɪm, ðə mæn ɪn sɑldɑiə. wʌɾ ɪf ɪts hɪm? ðəɹ ɑɹ sɪstɝz ɪn sɑldɑiə ɔlɹɛɾi; hi meɪ bi teɪkən baɪ naʊ. wʌɾ ɪf wɪv bɪn ɹɔŋ sɪns ðə stɑɹt? wʌt hæpənz ɪf ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪz dʒɛntəl bɪfɔɹ ðə læs bæɾəl ivən bɪɡɪnz? ivən pɹɑfəsi kən feɪl ɪf ðə wʌn pɹɑfəsaɪɾ ɪz sleɪn əɹ dʒɛntəld. ən ðən wi feɪs ðə dɑɹk wʌn neɪkəd tə ðə stɔɹm."

"Yes, Moiraine. You do not have to remind me. I've lived with the Prophecies of the Dragon as long as you." The Amyrlin shook her head. "Never more than one false Dragon in a generation since the Breaking, and now three loose in the world at one time, and three more in the past two years. The Pattern demands a Dragon because the Pattern weaves toward Tarmon Gai'don. Sometimes doubt fills me, Moiraine." She said it musingly, as if wondering at it, and went on in the same tone. "What if Logain was the one? He could channel, before the Reds brought him to the White Tower, and we gentled him. So can Mazrim Taim, the man in Saldaea. What if it is him? There are sisters in Saldaea already; he may be taken by now. What if we have been wrong since the start? What happens if the Dragon Reborn is gentled before the Last Battle even begins? Even prophecy can fail if the one prophesied is slain or gentled. And then we face the Dark One naked to the storm."

"niðɝ ə ðɛm ɪz ðə wʌn, sɪuən. ðə pæɾɝn dʌz nɑt dɪmæn ə dʒɹæɡən, bʌt ðə wʌn tʃɹu dʒɹæɡən. əntɪl i pɹoʊkleɪmz hɪmsɛlf, ðə pæɾɝn wɪl kəntɪnju tə θɹoʊ ʌp fɔls dʒɹæɡənz, bʌɾ æftɝ ðət ðəɹ wɪl bi noʊ ʌðɝz. ɪf lɑɡən əɹ ði ʌðɝ wɝ ðə wʌn, ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ ʌðɝz."

"Neither of them is the one, Siuan. The Pattern does not demand a Dragon, but the one true Dragon. Until he proclaims himself, the Pattern will continue to throw up false Dragons, but after that there will be no others. If Logain or the other were the one, there would be no others."

" 'fɔɹ i ʃæl kʌm laɪk ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ dɔn, ən ʃæɾɝ ðə wɝld əɡɛn wɪð ɪz kʌmɪŋ, ən meɪk ɪɾ ənu.' iðɝ wi ɡoʊ neɪkəɾ ɪn ðə stɔɹm, əɹ klɪŋ tə ə pɹətɛkʃən ðət wɪl skɝdʒ ʌs. ðə laɪt hɛlp əs ɔl." ði æmɪɝlɪn ʃʊk hɝsɛlf əz ɪf tə θɹoʊ ɔf əɹ oʊn wɝdz. hɝ feɪs wɑz sɛt, əz ðoʊ bɹeɪsɪŋ fəɹ ə bloʊ. "ju kəd nɛvɝ haɪd wʌt jə wɝ θɪŋkɪŋ fɹəm mi əz jə də fɹəm ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls, mɔɪɹeɪn. juv mɔɹ tə tɛl mi, ən nʌθɪŋ ɡʊd."

" 'For he shall come like the breaking dawn, and shatter the world again with his coming, and make it anew.' Either we go naked in the storm, or cling to a protection that will scourge us. The Light help us all." The Amyrlin shook herself as if to throw off her own words. Her face was set, as though bracing for a blow. "You could never hide what you were thinking from me as you do from everyone else, Moiraine. You have more to tell me, and nothing good."

fəɹ ænsɝ mɔɪɹeɪn tʊk ðə lɛðɝ paʊtʃ fɹəm əɹ bɛlt ən ʌpɛndəɾ ɪt, spɪlɪŋ ðə kɑntɛns ɑn ðə teɪbəl. ɪɾ əpɪɹd tə bi oʊnli ə hip ə fɹæɡməntɪd pɑɾɝi, ʃaɪni blæk ən waɪt.

For answer Moiraine took the leather pouch from her belt and upended it, spilling the contents on the table. It appeared to be only a heap of fragmented pottery, shiny black and white.

ði æmɪɝlɪn sit tʌtʃt wʌn bɪt kjʊɹiəsli, ən əɹ bɹɛθ kɑt. "kwəndɪlɝ."

The Amyrlin Seat touched one bit curiously, and her breath caught. "Cuendillar."

"hɑɹtstoʊn," mɔɪɹeɪn əɡɹid. ðə meɪkɪŋ ə kwəndɪlɝ hæd bɪn lɔst ət ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, bʌt wʌt hæd bɪn meɪɾ ə hɑɹtstoʊn hæd sɝvaɪv ðə kæɾəklɪsəm. ivən ðoʊz ɑbʒɛkts swɑloʊd baɪ ði ɝθ əɹ sʌŋk ɪn ðə si hæd sɝvaɪvd; ðeɪ mʌs hæv. noʊ noʊn fɔɹs kəd bɹeɪk kwəndɪlɝ wʌns ɪt wɑz kəmplit; ivən ðə wʌn paʊɝ dɝɛktəɾ əɡɛns hɑɹtstoʊn oʊnli meɪɾ ɪt stʃɹɔŋɝ. ɪksɛp ðət səm paʊɝ hæd bɹoʊkən ðɪs.

"Heartstone," Moiraine agreed. The making of cuendillar had been lost at the Breaking of the World, but what had been made of heartstone had survived the cataclysm. Even those objects swallowed by the earth or sunk in the sea had survived; they must have. No known force could break cuendillar once it was complete; even the One Power directed against heartstone only made it stronger. Except that some power had broken this.

ði æmɪɝlɪn heɪstəli əsɛmbəl ðə pisəz. wʌt ðeɪ fɔɹmd wɑz ə dɪsk ðə saɪz ʌv ə mænz hænd, hæf blækɝ ðən pɪtʃ ən hæf waɪɾɝ ðən snoʊ, ðə kʌlɝz miɾɪŋ əlɔŋ ə sɪnwəs laɪn, ənfeɪɾɪd baɪ eɪdʒ. ði eɪntʃən sɪmbəl ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ, bɪfɔɹ ðə wɝld wɑz bɹoʊkən, wən mɛn ən wɪmən wildɪd ðə paʊɝ təɡɛðɝ. hæf ʌv ɪt wɑz naʊ kɔl ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn; ði ʌðɝ hæf wɑz skɹɔld ɑn dɔɹz, ðə dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ, tə əkjuz ðoʊz wɪðɪn ʌv ivəl. oʊnli sɛvən laɪk ɪt hæd bɪn meɪd; ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛvɝ meɪɾ ə hɑɹtstoʊn wɑz ɹəkɔɹɾəd ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən ðoʊz sɛvən wɝ ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ əbʌv ɔl. sɪuən sɑntʃ stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪɾ əz ʃi wəɾ əv əɾ ə vaɪpɝ ɑn əɹ pɪloʊ.

The Amyrlin hastily assembled the pieces. What they formed was a disk the size of a man's hand, half blacker than pitch and half whiter than snow, the colors meeting along a sinuous line, unfaded by age. The ancient symbol of Aes Sedai, before the world was broken, when men and women wielded the Power together. Half of it was now called the Flame of Tar Valon; the other half was scrawled on doors, the Dragon's Fang, to accuse those within of evil. Only seven like it had been made; everything ever made of heartstone was recorded in the White Tower, and those seven were remembered above all. Siuan Sanche stared at it as she would have at a viper on her pillow.

"wʌn ə ðə silz ɑn ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli, ɹɪlʌktənli. ɪt wɑz ðoʊz sɛvən silz oʊvɝ wɪtʃ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɑz səpoʊz tə bi wɑtʃɝ. ðə sikɹət hɪɾən fɹəm ðə wɝld, ɪf ðə wɝld ɛvɝ θɔɾ ʌv ɪt, wɑz ðət noʊ æmɪɝlɪn sit hæd noʊn wɛɹ ɛni ʌv ðə silz wɝ sɪns ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz.

"One of the seals on the Dark One's prison," she said finally, reluctantly. It was those seven seals over which the Amyrlin Seat was supposed to be Watcher. The secret hidden from the world, if the world ever thought of it, was that no Amyrlin Seat had known where any of the seals were since the Trolloc Wars.

"wi noʊ ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪz stɝɪŋ, sɪuən. wi noʊ hɪz pɹɪzən kænɑt steɪ sil fɝɛvɝ. hjumən wɝk kən nɛvɝ mætʃ ðə kɹieɪɾɝz. wi nu hiz tʌtʃt ðə wɝld əɡɛn, ivən ɪf, θæŋk ðə laɪt, oʊnli ɪndɝɛkli. dɑɹkfɹɛnz mʌltəplaɪ, ən wʌt wi kɔld ivəl bʌt tɛn jɪɹz əɡoʊ simz ɔlmoʊs kəpɹis kəmpɛɹd wɪð wʌt naʊ ɪz dʌn ɛvɹi deɪ."

"We know the Dark One is stirring, Siuan. We know his prison cannot stay sealed forever. Human work can never match the Creator's. We knew he has touched the world again, even if, thank the Light, only indirectly. Darkfriends multiply, and what we called evil but ten years ago seems almost caprice compared with what now is done every day."

"ɪf ðə silz ɑɹ ɔlɹɛɾi bɹeɪkɪŋ. . . . wi meɪ hæv noʊ taɪm əɾ ɔl."

"If the seals are already breaking. . . . We may have no time at all."

"lɪɾəl ɪnʌf. bʌt ðət lɪɾəl meɪ bi ɪnʌf. ɪɾəl əv tə bi."

"Little enough. But that little may be enough. It will have to be."

ði æmɪɝlɪn tʌtʃt ðə fɹæktʃɝd sil, ən əɹ vɔɪs ɡɹu taɪt, əz ɪf ʃi wɝ fɔɹsɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə spik. "aɪ sɔ ðə bɔɪ, jə noʊ, ɪn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɛlkəm. ɪts wʌn ə maɪ tæləns, siɪŋ tɑvɝən. ə ɹɛɹ tælən ðiz deɪz, ivən mɔɹ ɹɛɹ ðən tɑvɝən, ən sɝɾənli nɑɾ ə mʌtʃ juz. ə tɔl bɔɪ, ə fɛɹli hænsəm jʌŋ mæn. nɑt mʌtʃ dɪfɹən fɹəm ɛni jʌŋ mæn jə maɪt si ɪn ɛni taʊn." ʃi pɔz tə dʒɹɔ bɹɛθ. "mɔɪɹeɪn, hi bleɪz laɪk ðə sʌn. aɪv sɛldəm bɪn əfɹeɪɾ ɪn maɪ laɪf, bʌt ðə saɪɾ ə hɪm meɪd mi əfɹeɪd ɹaɪt daʊn tə maɪ toʊz. aɪ wɑntəd tə kaʊɝ, tə haʊl. aɪ kəd bɛɹli spik. eɪɡəlmɝ θɔɾ aɪ wɑz æŋɡɹi wɪð hɪm, aɪ sɛd soʊ lɪɾəl. ðət jʌŋ mæn . . . hiz ðə wʌn wɪv sɔt ðiz twɛnti jɪɹz."

The Amyrlin touched the fractured seal, and her voice grew tight, as if she were forcing herself to speak. "I saw the boy, you know, in the courtyard during the Welcome. It is one of my Talents, seeing ta'veren. A rare Talent these days, even more rare than ta'veren, and certainly not of much use. A tall boy, a fairly handsome young man. Not much different from any young man you might see in any town." She paused to draw breath. "Moiraine, he blazed like the sun. I've seldom been afraid in my life, but the sight of him made me afraid right down to my toes. I wanted to cower, to howl. I could barely speak. Agelmar thought I was angry with him, I said so little. That young man . . . he's the one we have sought these twenty years."

ðəɹ wɑz ə hɪn ə kwɛstʃən ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. mɔɪɹeɪn ænsɝɾ ɪt. "hi ɪz."

There was a hint of question in her voice. Moiraine answered it. "He is."

"ɑɹ jə sɝɾən? kən i . . . ? kən i . . . tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ?"

"Are you certain? Can he . . . ? Can he . . . channel the One Power?"

hɝ maʊθ stʃɹeɪn ɝaʊn ðə wɝdz, ən mɔɪɹeɪn fɛl ðə tɛnʃən, tu, ə twɪstɪŋ ɪnsaɪd, ə koʊl klʌtʃɪŋ əɾ əɹ hɑɹt. ʃi kɛpt əɹ feɪs smuð, ðoʊ. "hi kæn." ə mæn wildɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ðət wɑz ə θɪŋ noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd kɑntəmpleɪt wɪθaʊt fɪɹ. ɪt wɑz ə θɪŋ ðə hoʊl wɝl fɪɹd. ən əl lus ɪɾ ɑn ðə wɝld. "ɹæn ælθɹ wɪl stæn bɪfɔɹ ðə wɝld əz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn."

Her mouth strained around the words, and Moiraine felt the tension, too, a twisting inside, a cold clutching at her heart. She kept her face smooth, though. "He can." A man wielding the One Power. That was a thing no Aes Sedai could contemplate without fear. It was a thing the whole world feared. And I will loose it on the world. "Rand al'Thor will stand before the world as the Dragon Reborn."

ði æmɪɝlɪn ʃʌɾɝəd. "ɹæn ælθɹ. ɪt dʌz nɑt saʊn laɪk ə neɪm tə ɪnspaɪɹ fɪɹ ən sɛt ðə wɝld ɑn faɪɝ." ʃi ɡeɪv ənʌðɝ ʃɪvɝ ən ɹʌbd əɹ ɑɹmz bɹɪskli, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz sʌɾənli ʃoʊn wɪð ə pɝpəsfəl laɪt. "ɪf hiz ðə wʌn, ðən wi tʃɹuli meɪ hæv taɪm ɪnʌf. bʌɾ ɪz i seɪf hɪɹ? aɪ hæv tu ɹɛd sɪstɝz wɪð mi, ən aɪ kən noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ænsɝ fəɹ ɡɹin əɹ jɛloʊ, iðɝ. ðə laɪt kənsum mi, aɪ kæn ænsɝ fəɹ ɛni ʌv ðɛm, nɑt wɪð ðɪs. ivən vɛɹɪn ən sɹəfɛl wəd lip ɑn ɪm ðə weɪ ðeɪ wəɾ ə skɑɹləɾ æɾɝ ɪn ə nɝsɝi."

The Amyrlin shuddered. "Rand al'Thor. It does not sound like a name to inspire fear and set the world on fire." She gave another shiver and rubbed her arms briskly, but her eyes suddenly shone with a purposeful light. "If he is the one, then we truly may have time enough. But is he safe here? I have two Red sisters with me, and I can no longer answer for Green or Yellow, either. The Light consume me, I can't answer for any of them, not with this. Even Verin and Serafelle would leap on him the way they would a scarlet adder in a nursery."

"hi ɪz seɪf, fəɹ ðə moʊmənt."

"He is safe, for the moment."

ði æmɪɝlɪn weɪɾəd fəɹ əɹ tə seɪ mɔɹ. ðə saɪləns stʃɹɛtʃt, əntɪl ɪt wɑz pleɪn ʃi wəd nɑt. faɪnəli ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd, "ju seɪ əɹ oʊl plæn ɪz jusləs. wʌt dʒju sədʒɛs naʊ?"

The Amyrlin waited for her to say more. The silence stretched, until it was plain she would not. Finally the Amyrlin said, "You say our old plan is useless. What do you suggest now?"

"aɪ hæv pɝpəsli lɛɾ ɪm θɪŋk aɪ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ əv ɛni ɪntʃɹəst ɪn hɪm, ðəɾ i meɪ ɡoʊ wɛɹ i plizɪz fəɹ ɔl ə mi." ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ hænz əz ði æmɪɝlɪn oʊpən əɹ maʊð. "ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi, sɪuən. ɹænd ælθɹ wɑz ɹeɪzd ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, wɛɹ meɪnɛðɝənz stʌbɝn blʌd floʊz ɪn ɛvɹi veɪn, ən ɪz oʊn blʌɾ ɪz laɪk ɹɑk bɪsaɪd kleɪ kəmpɛɹd tə meɪnɛðɝənz. hi mʌs bi hændəl dʒɛnli, əɹ hɪl boʊlt ɪn ɛni dɝɛkʃən bʌt ðə wʌn wi wɑnt."

"I have purposely let him think I no longer have any interest in him, that he may go where he pleases for all of me." She raised her hands as the Amyrlin opened her mouth. "It was necessary, Siuan. Rand al'Thor was raised in the Two Rivers, where Manetheren's stubborn blood flows in every vein, and his own blood is like rock beside clay compared to Manetheren's. He must be handled gently, or he will bolt in any direction but the one we want."

"ðɛn wɪl hændəl ɪm laɪk ə nubɔɹn beɪb. wɪl ɹæp ɪm ɪn swɑɾəlɪŋ kloʊðz ən pleɪ wɪð ɪz toʊz, ɪf ðæts wʌt jə θɪŋk wi nid. bʌt tə wʌɾ ɪmiɾiət pɝpəs?"

"Then we'll handle him like a newborn babe. We'll wrap him in swaddling clothes and play with his toes, if that's what you think we need. But to what immediate purpose?"

"hɪz tu fɹɛnz, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən ən pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə, ɑɹ ɹaɪp tə si ðə wɝl bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ sɪŋk bæk ɪndə ði əbskjʊɹəɾi ʌv ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ɪf ðeɪ kən sɪŋk bæk; ðeɪ ɑɹ tɑvɝən, tu, ɪf lɛsɝ ðən hi. əl ɪndus əm tə kæɹi ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ tə ɪljən." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "ðɛɹ ɪz . . . ə pɹɑbləm wɪð mæt. hi kæɹiz ə dæɡɝ fɹəm ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ."

"His two friends, Matrim Cauthon and Perrin Aybara, are ripe to see the world before they sink back into the obscurity of the Two Rivers. If they can sink back; they are ta'veren, too, if lesser than he. I will induce them to carry the Horn of Valere to Illian." She hesitated, frowning. "There is . . . a problem with Mat. He carries a dagger from Shadar Logoth."

"ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ! laɪt, waɪ dɪd jə ɛvɝ lɛɾ əm ɡɛt nɪɹ ðət pleɪs. ɛvɹi stoʊn ʌv ɪts teɪntɪd. ðəɹ ɪzən ə pɛbəl seɪf tə kæɹi əweɪ. laɪt hɛlp ʌs, ɪf mɔɹɾɪθ tʌtʃt ðə bɔɪ. . . ." ði æmɪɝlɪn saʊndəɾ əz ðoʊ ʃi wɝ stʃɹæŋɡəlɪŋ. "ɪf ðət hæpənd, ðə wɝld wəd bi dumd."

"Shadar Logoth! Light, why did you ever let them get near that place. Every stone of it is tainted. There isn't a pebble safe to carry away. Light help us, if Mordeth touched the boy. . . ." The Amyrlin sounded as though she were strangling. "If that happened, the world would be doomed."

"bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt, sɪuən. wi də wʌt wi mʌs fɹəm nəsɛsəɾi, ən ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi. aɪ hæv dʌn ɪnʌf soʊ ðət mæt wɪl nɑɾ ɪnfɛkt ʌðɝz, bʌɾ i hæd ðə dæɡɝ tu lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ aɪ nu. ðə lɪŋk ɪz stɪl ðɛɹ. aɪ hæd θɔɾ aɪ mʌs teɪk ɪm tə tɑɹ vəlɑn tə kjʊɹ ɪt, bʌt wɪð soʊ mɛni sɪstɝz pɹɛzənt, ɪt maɪt bi dʌn hɪɹ. soʊ lɔŋ əz ðəɹ ɑɹ ə fju jə kən tʃɹʌs nɑt tə si dɑɹkfɹɛnz wɛɹ ðəɹ ɑɹ nʌn. jə ən aɪ ən tu ʌðɝz wɪl səfaɪs, juzɪŋ maɪ æŋɡɹil."

"But it did not, Siuan. We do what we must from necessity, and it was necessary. I have done enough so that Mat will not infect others, but he had the dagger too long before I knew. The link is still there. I had thought I must take him to Tar Valon to cure it, but with so many sisters present, it might be done here. So long as there are a few you can trust not to see Darkfriends where there are none. You and I and two others will suffice, using my angreal."

"lin wɪl də fəɹ wʌn, ən aɪ kən faɪn ənʌðɝ." sʌɾənli ði æmɪɝlɪn sit ɡeɪv ə ɹaɪ ɡɹɪn. "ðə hɔl wɑns ðəɾ æŋɡɹil bæk, mɔɪɹeɪn. ðəɹ ɑɹ nɑt vɛɹi mɛni ʌv əm lɛft, ən jə ɑɹ naʊ kənsɪɾɝd . . . ʌnɹɪlaɪəbəl."

"Leane will do for one, and I can find another." Suddenly the Amyrlin Seat gave a wry grin. "The Hall wants that angreal back, Moiraine. There are not very many of them left, and you are now considered . . . unreliable."

mɔɪɹeɪn smaɪld, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt tʌtʃ əɹ aɪz. "ðeɪ wɪl θɪŋk wɝs ə mi bɪfɔɹ aɪm dʌn. mæt wɪl lip ət ðə tʃæns tə bi soʊ bɪɡ ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə lɛdʒən ə ðə hɔɹn, ən pɛɹɪn ʃəd nɑt bi hɑɹd tə kənvɪns. hi nidz sʌmθɪŋ tə teɪk ɪz maɪn ɔf ɪz oʊn tʃɹʌbəlz. ɹænd noʊz wʌt hiz - səm ʌv ɪt, ət list; ə lɪɾəl - ən hiz əfɹeɪɾ ʌv ɪt, nætʃɹəli. hi wɑns tə ɡoʊ ɔf sʌmwɛɹ əloʊn, wɛɹ i kænɑt hɝɾ ɛniwʌn. hi sɛz hɪl nɛvɝ wil ðə paʊɝ əɡɛn, bʌɾ i fɪɹz nɑt biɪŋ eɪbəl tə stɑp ɪt."

Moiraine smiled, but it did not touch her eyes. "They will think worse of me before I am done. Mat will leap at the chance to be so big a part of the legend of the Horn, and Perrin should not be hard to convince. He needs something to take his mind off his own troubles. Rand knows what he is - some of it, at least; a little - and he is afraid of it, naturally. He wants to go off somewhere alone, where he cannot hurt anyone. He says he will never wield the Power again, but he fears not being able to stop it."

"æz wɛl i maɪt. iziɝ tə ɡɪv ʌp dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ wɔɾɝ."

"As well he might. Easier to give up drinking water."

"ɪɡzækli. ən i wɑns tə bi fɹi fɹəm ɛɛs sədaɪ." mɔɪɹeɪn ɡeɪv ə smɔl, mɝθləs smaɪl. "ɔfɝd ðə tʃæns tə liv ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪhaɪn ən stɪl steɪ wɪð ɪz fɹɛnz ə waɪl lɔŋɡɝ, hi ʃəd bi əz iɡɝ əz mæt."

"Exactly. And he wants to be free from Aes Sedai." Moiraine gave a small, mirthless smile. "Offered the chance to leave Aes Sedai behind and still stay with his friends a while longer, he should be as eager as Mat."

"bʌt haʊ ɪz i livɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪhaɪnd? ʃʊɹli jə mʌs tʃɹævəl wɪð hɪm. wi kæn luz ɪm naʊ, mɔɪɹeɪn."

"But how is he leaving Aes Sedai behind? Surely you must travel with him. We can't lose him now, Moiraine."

"aɪ kænɑt tʃɹævəl wɪð hɪm." ɪts ə lɔŋ weɪ fɹəm fæl dæɹə tə ɪljən, bʌt hiz tʃɹævəld ɔlmoʊst əz fɑɹ ɔlɹɛɾi. "hi mʌs bi lɛɾ ɔf ðə liʃ fəɹ ə taɪm. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ hɛlp fəɹ ɪt. aɪ hæv hæɾ ɔl ə ðɛɹ oʊl kloʊðz bɝnd. ðəɹ əz bɪn tu mʌtʃ ɑpɝtunəɾi fəɹ səm ʃɹɛɾ ʌv wʌt ðeɪ wɝ wɛɹɪŋ tə hæv fɔlən ɪndə ðə ɹɔŋ hænz. əl klɛnz əm bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ liv; ðəl nɑɾ ivən ɹilaɪz ɪts bɪn dʌn. ðəɹ wɪl bi noʊ tʃæns ðeɪ kən bi tʃɹæk ðət weɪ, ən ði oʊnli ʌðɝ θɹɛɾ ə ðət kaɪn ɪz lɑkt əweɪ hɪɹ ɪn ðə dʌnʒən." ði æmɪɝlɪn, mɪdweɪ ɪn nɑɾɪŋ əpɹuvəl, ɡeɪv əɹ ə kwɛstʃənɪŋ lʊk, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt pɔz. "ðeɪ wɪl tʃɹævəl əz seɪfli əz aɪ kən mænədʒ, sɪuən. ən wən ɹænd nidz mi ɪn ɪljən, əl bi ðɛɹ, ən əl si ðəɾ ɪts i hu pɹizɛns ðə hɔɹn tə ðə kaʊnsəl ə naɪn ən ði əsɛmblədʒ. əl si tə ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn ɪljən. sɪuən, ði ɪliɑnɝz wəd fɑloʊ ðə dʒɹæɡən, əɹ bælzəmən hɪmsɛlf, ɪf i keɪm bɛɹɪŋ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, ən soʊ wɪl ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ pɑɹɾ ə ðoʊz ɡæðɝd fəɹ ðə hʌnt. ðə tʃɹu dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɪl nɑt nid tə ɡæðɝ ə fɑloʊɪŋ bɪfɔɹ neɪʃənz muv əɡɛns hɪm. hɪl bɪɡɪn wɪð ə neɪʃən ɝaʊn ɪm ən ən ɑɹmi əɾ ɪz bæk."

"I cannot travel with him." It is a long way from Fal Dara to Illian, but he has traveled almost as far already. "He must be let off the leash for a time. There is no help for it. I have had all of their old clothes burned. There has been too much opportunity for some shred of what they were wearing to have fallen into the wrong hands. I will cleanse them before they leave; they will not even realize it has been done. There will be no chance they can be tracked that way, and the only other threat of that kind is locked away here in the dungeon." The Amyrlin, midway in nodding approval, gave her a questioning look, but she did not pause. "They will travel as safely as I can manage, Siuan. And when Rand needs me in Illian, I will be there, and I will see that it is he who presents the Horn to the Council of Nine and the Assemblage. I will see to everything in Illian. Siuan, the Illianers would follow the Dragon, or Ba'alzamon himself, if he came bearing the Horn of Valere, and so will the greater part of those gathered for the Hunt. The true Dragon Reborn will not need to gather a following before nations move against him. He will begin with a nation around him and an army at his back."

ði æmɪɝlɪn dʒɹɑp bæk ɪndə hɝ tʃɛɹ, bʌɾ ɪmiɾiətli lin fɔɹwɝd. ʃi sim kɑt bɪtwin wɪɹinəs ən hoʊp. "bʌt wɪl i pɹoʊkleɪm hɪmsɛlf? ɪf hiz əfɹeɪd. . . . ðə laɪt noʊz i ʃəd bi, mɔɪɹeɪn, bʌt mɛn u neɪm ðɛmsɛlvz əz ðə dʒɹæɡən wɑn ðə paʊɝ. ɪf i dʌz nɑt. . . ."

The Amyrlin dropped back into her chair, but immediately leaned forward. She seemed caught between weariness and hope. "But will he proclaim himself? If he's afraid. . . . The Light knows he should be, Moiraine, but men who name themselves as the Dragon want the power. If he does not. . . ."

"aɪ hæv ðə minz tə si hɪm neɪm dʒɹæɡən wɛðɝ i wɪlz ɪɾ əɹ nɑt. ən ivən ɪf aɪ sʌmhaʊ feɪl, ðə pæɾɝn ɪtsɛlf wɪl si hɪm neɪm dʒɹæɡən wɛðɝ i wɪlz ɪɾ əɹ nɑt. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, hiz tɑvɝən, sɪuən. hiz noʊ mɔɹ kəntʃɹoʊl oʊvɝ ɪz feɪt ðən ə kændəl wɪk əz oʊvɝ ðə fleɪm."

"I have the means to see him named Dragon whether he wills it or not. And even if I somehow fail, the Pattern itself will see him named Dragon whether he wills it or not. Remember, he is ta'veren, Siuan. He has no more control over his fate than a candle wick has over the flame."

ði æmɪɝlɪn saɪd. "ɪts ɹɪski, mɔɪɹeɪn. ɹɪski. bʌt maɪ fɑðɝ juz tə seɪ, 'ɡɝl, ɪf jə woʊn teɪk ə tʃæns, jəl nɛvɝ wɪn ə kɑpɝ.' wɪv plænz tə meɪk. sɪt daʊn; ðɪs woʊn bi dʌn kwɪkli. əl sɛn fəɹ waɪn ən tʃiz."

The Amyrlin sighed. "It's risky, Moiraine. Risky. But my father used to say, 'Girl, if you won't take a chance, you'll never win a copper.' We have plans to make. Sit down; this won't be done quickly. I will send for wine and cheese."

mɔɪɹeɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "wi hæv bɪn klɑzəɾɪd əloʊn tu lɔŋ ɔlɹɛɾi. ɪf ɛni dɪd tʃɹaɪ lɪsnɪŋ ən faʊn jəɹ wɔɹɾɪŋ, ðəl bi wʌndɝɪŋ ɔlɹɛɾi. ɪts nɑt wɝθ ðə ɹɪsk. wi kən kəntʃɹaɪv ənʌðɝ miɾɪŋ təmɑɹoʊ." bɪsaɪdz, maɪ dɪɹəs fɹɛnd, aɪ kænɑt tɛl jə ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ən aɪ kænɑt ɹɪsk lɛɾɪŋ jə noʊ aɪm hoʊldɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ bæk.

Moiraine shook her head. "We have been closeted alone too long already. If any did try listening and found your Warding, they will be wondering already. It is not worth the risk. We can contrive another meeting tomorrow." Besides, my dearest friend, I cannot tell you everything, and I cannot risk letting you know I am holding anything back.

"aɪ səpoʊz jə ɑɹ ɹaɪt. bʌt fɝs θɪŋ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. ðɛɹz soʊ mʌtʃ aɪ hæv tə noʊ."

"I suppose you are right. But first thing in the morning. There's so much I have to know."

"ðə mɔɹnɪŋ," mɔɪɹeɪn əɡɹid. ði æmɪɝlɪn ɹoʊz, ən ðeɪ hʌɡd əɡɛn. "ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ əl tɛl jə ɛvɹiθɪŋ jə nid tə noʊ."

"The morning," Moiraine agreed. The Amyrlin rose, and they hugged again. "In the morning I will tell you everything you need to know."

lin ɡeɪv mɔɪɹeɪn ə ʃɑɹp lʊk wən ʃi keɪm aʊɾ ɪndə ði æntəɹum, ðən dɑɹɾɪd ɪndə ði æmɪɝlɪnz tʃeɪmbɝ. mɔɪɹeɪn tʃɹaɪd tə pʊɾ ɑn ə tʃeɪsən feɪs, əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɛndʒjʊɹd wʌn ə ði æmɪɝlɪnz ɪnfəməs ʌpbɹeɪɾɪŋz - moʊst wɪmən, haʊɛvɝ stʃɹɔŋ-wɪld, ɹɪtɝn fɹəm ðoʊz bɪɡ-aɪɾ ən wik-nid - bʌt ði ɪkspɹɛʃən wɑz fɔɹən tə hɝ. ʃi lʊk mɔɹ æŋɡɹi ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, wɪtʃ sɝv mʌtʃ ðə seɪm pɝpəs. ʃi wɑz oʊnli veɪɡli əwɛɹ ə ði ʌðɝ wɪmən ɪn ði aʊɾɝ ɹum; ʃi θɔt səm hæd ɡɔn ən ʌðɝz kʌm sɪns ʃi wɛn ɪn, bʌt ʃi bɛɹli lʊkt ət ðɛm. ði aʊɝ wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ leɪt, ən ðəɹ wɑz mʌtʃ tə bi dʌn bɪfɔɹ ðə mɔɹnɪŋ keɪm. mʌtʃ, bɪfɔɹ ʃi spoʊk tə ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ əɡɛn.

Leane gave Moiraine a sharp look when she came out into the anteroom, then darted into the Amyrlin's chamber. Moiraine tried to put on a chastened face, as if she had endured one of the Amyrlin's infamous upbraidings - most women, however strong-willed, returned from those big-eyed and weak-kneed - but the expression was foreign to her. She looked more angry than anything else, which served much the same purpose. She was only vaguely aware of the other women in the outer room; she thought some had gone and others come since she went in, but she barely looked at them. The hour was growing late, and there was much to be done before the morning came. Much, before she spoke to the Amyrlin Seat again.

kwɪkənɪŋ əɹ stɛp, ʃi muv dipɝ ɪndə ðə kip.

Quickening her step, she moved deeper into the keep.

ðə kɑləm wʊɾə meɪɾ ən ɪmpɹɛsɪv saɪɾ ʌndɝ ðə wæksɪŋ mun, muvɪŋ θɹu ðə tæɹɑbən naɪt tə ðə dʒæŋɡəl ə hɑɹnəs, hæd ðəɹ bɪn ɛniwʌn tə si ɪt. ə fʊl tu θaʊzən tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, wɛl maʊntəd, ɪn waɪt tɑbɝdz ən kloʊks, ɑɹmɝ bɝnɪʃt, wɪð ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪn ə səplaɪ wæɡənz, ən fɛɹiɝz, ən ɡɹumz wɪð ðə stʃɹɪŋz ə ɹimaʊns. ðəɹ wɝ vɪlədʒəz ɪn ðɪs spɑɹsli fɔɹəstəd kʌntʃɹi, bʌt ðeɪ hæd lɛft ɹoʊdz bɪhaɪnd, ən steɪd klɪɹ ʌv ivən fɑɹmɝz' kɹɔfs. ðeɪ wɝ tə mit . . . sʌmwʌn . . . əɾ ə flaɪspɛk vɪlədʒ nɪɹ ðə nɔɹðɝn bɔɹɾɝ ə tæɹɑbən, ət ði ɛdʒ ʌv ɑlməθ pleɪn.

The column would have made an impressive sight under the waxing moon, moving through the Tarabon night to the jangle of harness, had there been anyone to see it. A full two thousand Children of the Light, well mounted, in white tabards and cloaks, armor burnished, with their train of supply wagons, and farriers, and grooms with the strings of remounts. There were villages in this sparsely forested country, but they had left roads behind, and stayed clear of even farmers' crofts. They were to meet . . . someone . . . at a flyspeck village near the northern border of Tarabon, at the edge of Almoth Plain.

dʒɛəfɹæm bɔɹnhəld, ɹaɪɾɪŋ ət ðə hɛɾ ə hɪz mɛn, wʌndɝd wʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔl əbaʊt. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd tu wɛl ɪz ɪntɝvju wɪð peɪdʒɹən naɪl, lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, ɪn æmədɔɹ, bʌɾ i hæd lɝn lɪɾəl ðɛɹ.

Geofram Bornhald, riding at the head of his men, wondered what it was all about. He remembered too well his interview with Pedron Niall, Lord Captain Commander of the Children of the Light, in Amador, but he had learned little there.

"wi ɑɹ əloʊn, dʒɛəfɹæm," ðə waɪt-hɛɹd mæn hæd sɛd. hɪz vɔɪs wɑz θɪn ən ɹiɾi wɪð eɪdʒ. "aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɡɪvɪŋ jə ði oʊθ . . . wʌt . . . θɝɾi-sɪks jɪɹz əɡoʊ, ɪt mʌs bi, naʊ."

"We are alone, Geofram," the white-haired man had said. His voice was thin and reedy with age. "I remember giving you the oath . . . what . . . thirty-six years ago, it must be, now."

bɔɹnhəl stʃɹeɪɾənd. "maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ, meɪ aɪ æsk waɪ aɪ wɑz kɔl bæk fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn, ən wɪð sətʃ ɝdʒənsi? ə pʊʃ, ən mɔɹɡeɪs kəd bi tɑpəld. ðəɹ ɑɹ haʊzɪz ɪn ændɝ ðət si dilɪŋ wɪð tɑɹ vəlɑn əz wi du, ən ðeɪ wɝ ɹɛɾi tə leɪ kleɪm tə ðə θɹoʊn. aɪ lɛft imən vɑldə ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ, bʌɾ i simd ɪntɛn ɑn fɑloʊɪŋ ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. aɪ wəd nɑt bi sɝpɹaɪz tə lɝn ðə mæn əz kɪdnæp ðə ɡɝl, əɹ ivən ətæk tɑɹ vəlɑn." ən deɪn, bɔɹnhəlz sʌn, hæɾ ɝaɪv dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ bɔɹnhəld wɑz ɹɪkɔld. deɪn wɑz fʊl ə zil. tu mʌtʃ zil, səmtaɪmz. ɪnʌf tə fɔl ɪn blaɪnli wɪð wʌtɛvɝ vɑldə pɹəpoʊzd.

Bornhald straightened. "My Lord Captain Commander, may I ask why I was called back from Caemlyn, and with such urgency? A push, and Morgase could be toppled. There are Houses in Andor that see dealing with Tar Valon as we do, and they were ready to lay claim to the throne. I left Eamon Valda in charge, but he seemed intent on following the Daughter-Heir to Tar Valon. I would not be surprised to learn the man has kidnapped the girl, or even attacked Tar Valon." And Dain, Bornhald's son, had arrived just before Bornhald was recalled. Dain was full of zeal. Too much zeal, sometimes. Enough to fall in blindly with whatever Valda proposed.

"vɑldə wɔks ɪn ðə laɪt, dʒɛəfɹæm. bʌt jə ɑɹ ðə bɛs bæɾəl kəmændɝ əmʌŋ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. jəl əsɛmbəl ə fʊl lidʒən, ðə bɛs mɛn jə kən faɪnd, ən teɪk əm ɪndə tæɹɑbən, əvɔɪɾɪŋ ɛni aɪz ətætʃt tə ə tʌŋ ðət meɪ spik. ɛni sətʃ tʌŋ mʌs bi saɪlənst, ɪf ði aɪz si."

"Valda walks in the Light, Geofram. But you are the best battle commander among the Children. You will assemble a full legion, the best men you can find, and take them into Tarabon, avoiding any eyes attached to a tongue that may speak. Any such tongue must be silenced, if the eyes see."

bɔɹnhəl hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. fɪfti tʃɪlʒɹən təɡɛðɝ, əɹ ivən ə hʌnʒɹəd, kəɾ ɛntɝ ɛni lænd wɪθaʊt kwɛstʃən, ət list wɪθaʊɾ oʊpən kwɛstʃən, bʌɾ ən ɪntaɪɝ lidʒən. . . . "ɪz ɪt wɔɹ, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ? ðəɹ ɪz tɔk ɪn ðə stʃɹits. waɪld ɹumɝz, meɪnli, əbaʊɾ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɑɹmiz kʌm bæk." ði oʊl mæn dɪd nɑt spik. "ðə kɪŋ. . . ."

Bornhald hesitated. Fifty Children together, or even a hundred, could enter any land without question, at least without open question, but an entire legion. . . . "Is it war, my Lord Captain Commander? There is talk in the streets. Wild rumors, mainly, about Artur Hawkwing's armies come back." The old man did not speak. "The King. . . ."

"dʌz nɑt kəmæn ðə tʃɪlʒɹən, lɔɹd kæptən bɔɹnhəld." fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ðəɹ wɑz ə snæp ɪn ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝz vɔɪs. "aɪ du. lɛt ðə kɪŋ sɪɾ ɪn ɪz pæləs ən də wʌɾ i dʌz bɛst. nʌθɪŋ. jəl bi mɛɾ əɾ ə vɪlədʒ kɔld ælkɹunə, ən ðəɹ jəl ɹəsiv jəɹ faɪnəl ɔɹɾɝz. aɪ ɪkspɛk jəɹ lidʒən tə ɹaɪɾ ɪn θɹi deɪz. naʊ ɡoʊ, dʒɛəfɹæm. juv wɝk tə du."

"Does not command the Children, Lord Captain Bornhald." For the first time there was a snap in the Lord Captain Commander's voice. "I do. Let the King sit in his palace and do what he does best. Nothing. You will be met at a village called Alcruna, and there you will receive your final orders. I expect your legion to ride in three days. Now go, Geofram. You have work to do."

bɔɹnhəl fɹaʊnd. "pɑɹɾən, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ, bʌɾ u wɪl mit mi? waɪ æm aɪ ɹɪskɪŋ wɔɹ wɪð tæɹɑbən?"

Bornhald frowned. "Pardon, my Lord Captain Commander, but who will meet me? Why am I risking war with Tarabon?"

"ju wɪl bi toʊld wʌt jə mʌs noʊ wən jə ɹitʃ ælkɹunə." ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ sʌɾənli lʊk mɔɹ ðən ɪz eɪdʒ. æbsənli hi plʌkt əɾ ɪz waɪt tunɪk, wɪð ðə ɡoʊldən sʌnbɝst ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən lɑɹdʒ ɑn ðə tʃɛst. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ fɔɹsɪz ət wɝk bɪɑnd wʌt jə noʊ, dʒɛəfɹæm. bɪɑnd wʌɾ ivən jə kən noʊ. tʃuz jəɹ mɛn kwɪkli. naʊ ɡoʊ. æsk mi noʊ mɔɹ. ən ðə laɪt ɹaɪd wɪð ju."

"You will be told what you must know when you reach Alcruna." The Lord Captain Commander suddenly looked more than his age. Absently he plucked at his white tunic, with the golden sunburst of the Children large on the chest. "There are forces at work beyond what you know, Geofram. Beyond what even you can know. Choose your men quickly. Now go. Ask me no more. And the Light ride with you."

naʊ bɔɹnhəl stʃɹeɪɾənd ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, wɝkɪŋ ə nɑɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz bæk. aɪm ɡɛɾɪŋ oʊld, hi θɔt. ə deɪ ən ə naɪɾ ɪn ðə sæɾəl, wɪð tu pɔzəz tə wɔɾɝ ðə hɔɹsəz, ən i fɛlt ɛvɹi ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ ɑn ɪz hɛd. hi wəd nɑɾ ivən əv noʊɾəst ə fju jɪɹz əɡoʊ. ət list aɪ hæv nɑt kɪld ɛni ɪnəsəns. hi kəd bi əz hɑɹɾ ɑn dɑɹkfɹɛnz əz ɛni mæn swɔɹn tə ðə laɪt - dɑɹkfɹɛnz mʌs bi dɪstʃɹɔɪd bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ pʊl ðə hoʊl wɝld ʌndɝ ðə ʃædoʊ - bʌɾ i wɑntəd tə bi ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz fɝst. ɪt hæd bɪn dɪfəkəlt əvɔɪɾɪŋ tæɹɑbənɝ aɪz wɪð soʊ mɛni mɛn, ivən ɪn ðə bækaʊntʃɹi, bʌɾ i hæd mænədʒd ɪt. noʊ tʌŋz hæd niɾəd tə bi saɪlənst.

Now Bornhald straightened in his saddle, working a knot out of his back. I am getting old, he thought. A day and a night in the saddle, with two pauses to water the horses, and he felt every gray hair on his head. He would not even have noticed a few years ago. At least I have not killed any innocents. He could be as hard on Darkfriends as any man sworn to the Light - Darkfriends must be destroyed before they pulled the whole world under the Shadow - but he wanted to be sure they were Darkfriends first. It had been difficult avoiding Taraboner eyes with so many men, even in the backcountry, but he had managed it. No tongues had needed to be silenced.

ðə skaʊts i hæd sɛn aʊt keɪm ɹaɪɾɪŋ bæk, ən bɪhaɪn əm keɪm mɔɹ mɛn ɪn waɪt kloʊks, səm kæɹiɪŋ tɔɹtʃɪz tə ɹuən ðə naɪt vɪʒən ʌv ɛvɹiwʌn ət ðə hɛɾ ə ðə kɑləm. wɪð ə mʌɾɝd kɝs, bɔɹnhəld ɔɹɾɝd ə hɔlt waɪl i stʌɾid ðoʊz u keɪm tə mit hɪm.

The scouts he had sent out came riding back, and behind them came more men in white cloaks, some carrying torches to ruin the night vision of everyone at the head of the column. With a muttered curse, Bornhald ordered a halt while he studied those who came to meet him.

ðɛɹ kloʊks bɔɹ ðə seɪm ɡoʊldən sʌnbɝst ɑn ðə bɹɛst əz hɪz, ðə seɪm əz ɛvɹi tʃaɪld ə ðə laɪt, ən ðɛɹ liɾɝ ivən hæd ɡoʊldən nɑts ə ɹæŋk bɪloʊ ɪɾ ɪkwɪvələn tə bɔɹnhəlz. bʌt bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ sʌnbɝsts wɝ ɹɛd ʃɛpɝdz kɹʊks. kwɛstʃənɝz. wɪð hɑɾ aɪɝnz ən pɪntʃɝz ən dʒɹɪpɪŋ wɔɾɝ ðə kwɛstʃənɝz pʊl kənfɛʃən ən ɹɪpɛntəns fɹəm dɑɹkfɹɛnz, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ ðoʊz u sɛd ðeɪ dɪsaɪɾɪd ɡɪl bɪfɔɹ ɛvɝ ðeɪ bɪɡæn. dʒɛəfɹæm bɔɹnhəld wɑz wʌn u sɛɾ ɪt.

Their cloaks bore the same golden sunburst on the breast as his, the same as every Child of the Light, and their leader even had golden knots of rank below it equivalent to Bornhald's. But behind their sunbursts were red shepherd's crooks. Questioners. With hot irons and pinchers and dripping water the Questioners pulled confession and repentance from Darkfriends, but there were those who said they decided guilt before ever they began. Geofram Bornhald was one who said it.

aɪ hæv bɪn sɛn hɪɹ tə mit kwɛstʃənɝz?

I have been sent here to meet Questioners?

"wi hæv bɪn weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ju, lɔɹd kæptən bɔɹnhəld," ðə liɾɝ sɛɾ ɪn ə hɑɹʃ vɔɪs. hi wɑz ə tɔl, hʊk-noʊz mæn wɪð ðə ɡlim ə sɝɾənti ɪn ɪz aɪz ðəɾ ɛvɹi kwɛstʃənɝ hæd. "ju cʊɾə meɪd bɛɾɝ taɪm. aɪm aɪnɝ sɹən, sɛkən tə dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn, hu kəmænz ðə hæn ə ðə laɪɾ ɪn tæɹɑbən." ðə hæn ə ðə laɪt - ðə hæn ðət dʌɡ aʊt tʃɹuθ, soʊ ðeɪ sɛd. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt laɪk ðə neɪm kwɛstʃənɝz. "ðɛɹ ɪz ə bɹɪdʒ ət ðə vɪlədʒ. hæv jəɹ mɛn muv əkɹɔs. wɪl tɔk ɪn ði ɪn. ɪts sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli kʌmftəɹbəl."

"We have been waiting for you, Lord Captain Bornhald," the leader said in a harsh voice. He was a tall, hook-nosed man with the gleam of certainty in his eyes that every Questioner had. "You could have made better time. I am Einor Saren, second to Jaichim Carridin, who commands the Hand of the Light in Tarabon." The Hand of the Light - the Hand that dug out truth, so they said. They did not like the name Questioners. "There is a bridge at the village. Have your men move across. We will talk in the inn. It is surprisingly comfortable."

"aɪ wɑz toʊl baɪ ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ hɪmsɛlf tə əvɔɪɾ ɔl aɪz."

"I was told by the Lord Captain Commander himself to avoid all eyes."

"ðə vɪlədʒ əz bɪn . . . pæsəfaɪd. naʊ muv jəɹ mɛn. aɪ kəmænd, naʊ. aɪ hæv ɔɹɾɝz wɪð ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝz sil, ɪf jə daʊt."

"The village has been . . . pacified. Now move your men. I command, now. I have orders with the Lord Captain Commander's seal, if you doubt."

bɔɹnhəl səpɹɛs ðə ɡɹaʊl ðət ɹoʊz ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt. pæsəfaɪd. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðə bɑɾiz hæd bɪn paɪld aʊtsaɪd ðə vɪlədʒ, əɹ ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn θɹoʊn ɪndə ðə ɹɪvɝ. ɪt wəd bi laɪk ðə kwɛstʃənɝz, koʊld ɪnʌf tə kɪl ən ɪntaɪɝ vɪlədʒ fəɹ sikɹəsi ən stupəɾ ɪnʌf tə θɹoʊ ðə bɑɾiz ɪndə ðə ɹɪvɝ tə floʊt daʊnstʃɹim ən tʃɹʌmpət ðɛɹ did fɹəm ælkɹunə tə tæntʃəkoʊ. "wʌɾ aɪ daʊɾ ɪz waɪ aɪm ɪn tæɹɑbən wɪð tu θaʊzən mɛn, kwɛstʃənɝ."

Bornhald suppressed the growl that rose in his throat. Pacified. He wondered if the bodies had been piled outside the village, or if they had been thrown into the river. It would be like the Questioners, cold enough to kill an entire village for secrecy and stupid enough to throw the bodies into the river to float downstream and trumpet their deed from Alcruna to Tanchico. "What I doubt is why I am in Tarabon with two thousand men, Questioner."

sɹənz feɪs taɪɾənd, bʌɾ ɪz vɔɪs ɹɪmeɪn hɑɹʃ ən dɪmændɪŋ. "ɪɾ ɪz sɪmpəl, lɔɹd kæptən. ðəɹ ɑɹ taʊnz ən vɪlədʒəz əkɹɔs ɑlməθ pleɪn wɪð nʌn ɪn əθɔɹəɾi əbʌv ə meɪɝ əɹ ə taʊn kaʊnsəl. ɪts pæs taɪm ðeɪ wɝ bɹɔt tə ðə laɪt. ðəɹ wɪl bi mɛni dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪn sətʃ pleɪsəz."

Saren's face tightened, but his voice remained harsh and demanding. "It is simple, Lord Captain. There are towns and villages across Almoth Plain with none in authority above a mayor or a Town Council. It is past time they were brought to the Light. There will be many Darkfriends in such places."

bɔɹnhəlz hɔɹs stæmpt. "ɑɹ jə seɪɪŋ, sɹən, ðəɾ aɪv bɹɔɾ ən ɪntaɪɝ lidʒən əkɹɔs moʊst ə tæɹɑbən ɪn sikɹəsi tə ɹuɾ ə fju dɑɹkfɹɛnz aʊɾ ə səm ɡɹʌbi vɪlədʒəz?"

Bornhald's horse stamped. "Are you saying, Saren, that I've brought an entire legion across most of Tarabon in secrecy to root a few Darkfriends out of some grubby villages?"

"ju ɑɹ hɪɹ tə də əz jə ɑɹ toʊld, bɔɹnhəld. tə də ðə wɝk ə ðə laɪt! əɹ ɑɹ jə slaɪɾɪŋ fɹəm ðə laɪt?" sɹənz smaɪl wɑz ə ɡɹɪmɑs. "ɪf bæɾəl ɪz wʌt jə sik, jə meɪ hæv jəɹ tʃæns. ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝz əv ə ɡɹeɪt fɔɹs ɑn toʊmən hɛd, mɔɹ ðən tæɹɑbən ən ɑɹæd dumən təɡɛðɝ meɪ bi eɪbəl tə hoʊld, ivən ɪf ðeɪ kən stɑp ðɛɹ oʊn bɪkɝɪŋ lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə wɝk təɡɛðɝ. ɪf ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝz bɹeɪk θɹu, jəl əv ɔl ðə faɪɾɪŋ jə kən hændəl. ðə tæɹɑbənɝz kleɪm ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝz ɑɹ mɑnstɝz, kɹitʃɝz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. səm seɪ ðeɪv ɛɛs sədaɪ tə faɪt fəɹ ðɛm. ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ðiz stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, ðəl əv tə bi dɛlt wɪð, tu. ɪn ðɛɹ tɝn."

"You are here to do as you are told, Bornhald. To do the work of the Light! Or are you sliding from the Light?" Saren's smile was a grimace. "If battle is what you seek, you may have your chance. The strangers have a great force on Toman Head, more than Tarabon and Arad Doman together may be able to hold, even if they can stop their own bickering long enough to work together. If the strangers break through, you will have all the fighting you can handle. The Taraboners claim the strangers are monsters, creatures of the Dark One. Some say they have Aes Sedai to fight for them. If they are Darkfriends, these strangers, they will have to be dealt with, too. In their turn."

fəɹ ə moʊmənt, bɔɹnhəl stɑp bɹiðɪŋ. "ðɛn ðə ɹumɝz ɑɹ tʃɹu. ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɑɹmiz əv ɹɪtɝnd."

For a moment, Bornhald stopped breathing. "Then the rumors are true. Artur Hawkwing's armies have returned."

"stʃɹeɪnʒɝz," sɹən sɛd flætli. hi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf i ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd hævɪŋ mɛnʃən ðɛm. "stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, ən pɹɑbli dɑɹkfɹɛnz, fɹəm wɛɹɛvɝ ðeɪ keɪm. ðəɾ ɪz ɔl wi noʊ, ən ɔl jə nid tə noʊ. ðeɪ də nɑt kənsɝn jə naʊ. wəɹ weɪstɪŋ taɪm. muv jəɹ mɛn əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ, bɔɹnhəld. əl ɡɪv jə jəɹ ɔɹɾɝz ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ." hi wɝld ɪz hɔɹs ən ɡæləp bæk ðə weɪ hi hæd kʌm, hɪz tɔɹtʃbɛɹɝz ɹaɪɾɪŋ əɾ ɪz hilz.

"Strangers," Saren said flatly. He sounded as if he regretted having mentioned them. "Strangers, and probably Darkfriends, from wherever they came. That is all we know, and all you need to know. They do not concern you now. We are wasting time. Move your men across the river, Bornhald. I will give you your orders in the village." He whirled his horse and galloped back the way he had come, his torchbearers riding at his heels.

bɔɹnhəl kloʊzd ɪz aɪz tə heɪsən ðə ɹɪtɝn ə hɪz naɪt saɪt. wəɹ biɪŋ juz laɪk stoʊnz ɑn ə bɔɹd. "baɪɑɝ!" hi oʊpən ɪz aɪz əz ɪz sɛkən əpɪɹɾ əɾ ɪz saɪd, stɪfənɪŋ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl bɪfɔɹ ðə lɔɹd kæptən. ðə ɡɔnt-feɪs mæn hæɾ ɔlmoʊs ðə kwɛstʃənɝz laɪɾ ɪn ɪz aɪz, bʌɾ i wɑz ə ɡʊd soʊlʒɝ dɪspaɪt. "ðɛɹ ɪz ə bɹɪdʒ əhɛd. muv ðə lidʒən əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ ən meɪk kæmp. əl dʒɔɪn jə əz sun əz aɪ kæn."

Bornhald closed his eyes to hasten the return of his night sight. We are being used like stones on a board. "Byar!" He opened his eyes as his second appeared at his side, stiffening in his saddle before the Lord Captain. The gaunt-faced man had almost the Questioner's light in his eyes, but he was a good soldier despite. "There is a bridge ahead. Move the legion across the river and make camp. I will join you as soon as I can."

hi ɡæðɝɾ ɪz ɹeɪnz ən ɹoʊɾ ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ðə kwɛstʃənɝ hæd teɪkən. stoʊnz ɑn ə bɔɹd. bʌɾ u ɪz muvɪŋ ʌs? ən waɪ?

He gathered his reins and rode in the direction the Questioner had taken. Stones on a board. But who is moving us? And why?

æftɝnun ʃædoʊz ɡeɪv weɪ tə ivnɪŋ əz liɑnʒɹɪn meɪɾ əɹ weɪ θɹu ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns. bɪɑn ði æɹoʊslɪts, dɑɹknəs ɡɹu ən pɹɛst ɑn ðə laɪt fɹəm ðə læmps ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ. twaɪlaɪt wɑz ə tʃɹʌbəl taɪm fəɹ liɑnʒɹɪn ə leɪt, ðəɾ ən dɔn. ət dɔn ðə deɪ wɑz bɔɹn, dʒʌst əz twaɪlaɪt ɡeɪv bɝθ tə naɪt, bʌɾ ət dɔn, naɪt daɪd, ən ət twaɪlaɪt, deɪ. ðə dɑɹk wʌnz paʊɝ wɑz ɹuɾəd ɪn dɛθ; hi ɡeɪn paʊɝ fɹəm dɛθ, ən ət ðoʊz taɪmz ʃi θɔt ʃi kəd fil ɪz paʊɝ stɝɪŋ. sʌmθɪŋ stɝɾ ɪn ðə hæf dɑɹk, ət list. sʌmθɪŋ ʃi ɔlmoʊs θɔt ʃi kəd kætʃ ɪf ʃi tɝn kwɪkli ɪnʌf, sʌmθɪŋ ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi kəd si ɪf ʃi lʊk hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf.

Afternoon shadows gave way to evening as Liandrin made her way through the women's apartments. Beyond the arrowslits, darkness grew and pressed on the light from the lamps in the corridor. Twilight was a troubled time for Liandrin of late, that and dawn. At dawn the day was born, just as twilight gave birth to night, but at dawn, night died, and at twilight, day. The Dark One's power was rooted in death; he gained power from death, and at those times she thought she could feel his power stirring. Something stirred in the half dark, at least. Something she almost thought she could catch if she turned quickly enough, something she was sure she could see if she looked hard enough.

sɝvɪŋ wɪmən ɪn blæk-ænd-ɡoʊl kɝtsiɾ əz ʃi pæst, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹɪspɑnd. ʃi kɛpt əɹ aɪz fɪkst stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, ən dɪd nɑt si ðɛm.

Serving women in black-and-gold curtsied as she passed, but she did not respond. She kept her eyes fixed straight ahead, and did not see them.

ət ðə dɔɹ ʃi sɔt, ʃi pɔz fəɹ ə kwɪk ɡlæns ʌp ən daʊn ðə hɔl. ði oʊnli wɪmən ɪn saɪt wɝ sɝvəns; ðəɹ wɝ noʊ mɛn, ʌv kɔɹs. ʃi pʊʃt oʊpən ðə dɔɹ ən wɛn ɪn wɪθaʊt nɑkɪŋ.

At the door she sought, she paused for a quick glance up and down the hall. The only women in sight were servants; there were no men, of course. She pushed open the door and went in without knocking.

ði aʊɾɝ ɹum ə ðə leɪɾi əmælisəz tʃeɪmbɝz wɑz bɹaɪtli lɪt, ən ə bleɪzɪŋ faɪɝ ɑn ðə hɑɹθ hɛl bæk ðə tʃɪl ə ðə ʃaɪnɝən naɪt. əmælisə ən əɹ leɪɾiz sæɾ əbaʊt ðə ɹum, ɪn tʃɛɹz ən ɑn ðə leɪɝd kɑɹpəts, lɪsnɪŋ waɪl wʌn ə ðɛɹ nʌmbɝ, stændɪŋ, ɹɛɾ əlaʊd tə ðɛm. ɪt wɑz ðə dæns ə ðə hɔk ən ðə hʌmɪŋbɝd, baɪ teɪvən ɛɝwɪn, wɪtʃ pɝpɔɹɾɪd tə sɛt fɔɹθ ðə pɹɑpɝ kʌndəkt ə mɛn təwɔɹd wɪmən ən wɪmən təwɔɹd mɛn. liɑnʒɹɪnz maʊθ taɪɾənd; ʃi sɝɾənli hæd nɑt ɹɛɾ ɪt, bʌt ʃi hæd hɝɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi niɾəd əbaʊɾ ɪt. əmælisə ən əɹ leɪɾiz ɡɹiɾəd itʃ pɹənaʊnsmənt wɪð ɡeɪlz ə læftɝ, fɔlɪŋ əɡɛnst itʃ ʌðɝ ən dʒɹʌmɪŋ ðɛɹ hilz ɑn ðə kɑɹpəts laɪk ɡɝlz.

The outer room of the Lady Amalisa's chambers was brightly lit, and a blazing fire on the hearth held back the chill of the Shienaran night. Amalisa and her ladies sat about the room, in chairs and on the layered carpets, listening while one of their number, standing, read aloud to them. It was The Dance of the Hawk and the Hummingbird, by Teven Aerwin, which purported to set forth the proper conduct of men toward women and women toward men. Liandrin's mouth tightened; she certainly had not read it, but she had heard as much as she needed about it. Amalisa and her ladies greeted each pronouncement with gales of laughter, falling against each other and drumming their heels on the carpets like girls.

ðə ɹiɾɝ wɑz ðə fɝs tə bɪkʌm əwɛɹ ə liɑnʒɹɪnz pɹɛzəns. ʃi kʌɾ ɔf wɪð ə sɝpɹaɪzd waɪɾənɪŋ ə hɝ aɪz. ði ʌðɝz tɝn tə si wʌt ʃi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ æt, ən saɪləns ɹipleɪs læftɝ. ɔl bʌɾ əmælisə skɹæmbəl tə ðɛɹ fit, heɪstəli smuðɪŋ hɛɹ ən skɝts.

The reader was the first to become aware of Liandrin's presence. She cut off with a surprised widening of her eyes. The others turned to see what she was staring at, and silence replaced laughter. All but Amalisa scrambled to their feet, hastily smoothing hair and skirts.

ðə leɪɾi əmælisə ɹoʊz ɡɹeɪsfəli, wɪð ə smaɪl. "ju ɑnɝ əs wɪð jəɹ pɹɛzəns, liɑnʒɹɪn. ðɪs ɪz ə moʊs plɛzən sɝpɹaɪz. aɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛk jə əntɪl təmɑɹoʊ. aɪ θɔt jə wəd wɑnə ɹɛst æftɝ jəɹ lɔŋ dʒaʊɹ - "

The Lady Amalisa rose gracefully, with a smile. "You honor us with your presence, Liandrin. This is a most pleasant surprise. I did not expect you until tomorrow. I thought you would want to rest after your long jour - "

liɑnʒɹɪn kʌɾ əɹ ɔf ʃɑɹpli, ədʒɹɛsɪŋ ði ɛɹ. "aɪ wɪl spik tə ðə leɪɾi əmælisə əloʊn. ɔl ə jəl liv. naʊ."

Liandrin cut her off sharply, addressing the air. "I will speak to the Lady Amalisa alone. All of you will leave. Now."

ðəɹ wɑz ə moʊmən ə ʃɑk saɪləns, ðən ði ʌðɝ wɪmən meɪd ðɛɹ ɡʊdbaɪz tə əmælisə. wʌn baɪ wʌn ðeɪ kɝtsid tə liɑnʒɹɪn, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ æknɑlɪdʒ ðɛm. ʃi kəntɪnjud tə stɛɹ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛɾ ət nʌθɪŋ, bʌt ʃi sɔ ðɛm, ən hɝd. ɑnɹəfɪks ɔfɝd wɪð bɹɛθi əniz ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪz mud. aɪz fɔlɪŋ wən ʃi ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛm. ðeɪ skwiz pæst əɹ tə ðə dɔɹ, pɹɛsɪŋ bæk ɔkwɝdli soʊ ðɛɹ skɝts dɪd nɑt dɪstɝb hɝz.

There was a moment of shocked silence, then the other women made their goodbyes to Amalisa. One by one they curtsied to Liandrin, but she did not acknowledge them. She continued to stare straight ahead at nothing, but she saw them, and heard. Honorifics offered with breathy unease at the Aes Sedai's mood. Eyes falling when she ignored them. They squeezed past her to the door, pressing back awkwardly so their skirts did not disturb hers.

əz ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn ðə læst ə ðɛm, əmælisə sɛd, "liɑnʒɹɪn, aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝst - "

As the door closed behind the last of them, Amalisa said, "Liandrin, I do not underst - "

"du jə wɔk ɪn ðə laɪt, maɪ dɔɾɝ?" ðəɹ wəd bi nʌn ə ðət fulɪʃnəs ə kɔlɪŋ əɹ sɪstɝ hɪɹ. ði ʌðɝ wʊmən wɑz oʊldɝ baɪ səm jɪɹz, bʌt ði eɪntʃən fɔɹmz wəd bi əbzɝvd. haʊɛvɝ lɔŋ ðeɪ hæd bɪn fɝɡɑɾən, ɪt wɑz taɪm ðeɪ wɝ ɹɪmɛmbɝd.

"Do you walk in the Light, my daughter?" There would be none of that foolishness of calling her sister here. The other woman was older by some years, but the ancient forms would be observed. However long they had been forgotten, it was time they were remembered.

əz sun əz ðə kwɛstʃən wɑz aʊɾ ə hɝ maʊθ, ðoʊ, liɑnʒɹɪn ɹilaɪzd ʃi hæd meɪɾ ə mɪsteɪk. ɪt wɑz ə kwɛstʃən ɡɛɹəntid tə kɑz daʊɾ ən æŋzaɪəɾi, kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌɾ əmælisəz bæk stɪfənd, ən əɹ feɪs hɑɹɾənd.

As soon as the question was out of her mouth, though, Liandrin realized she had made a mistake. It was a question guaranteed to cause doubt and anxiety, coming from an Aes Sedai, but Amalisa's back stiffened, and her face hardened.

"ðæɾ ɪz ən ɪnsəlt, liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ. aɪm ʃaɪnɝən, ʌv ə noʊbəl haʊs ən ðə blʌɾ ə soʊlʒɝz. maɪ laɪn əz fɔt ðə ʃædoʊ sɪns bɪfɔɹ ðəɹ wɑz ə ʃaɪnɝ, θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz wɪθaʊt feɪl əɹ ə deɪz wiknəs."

"That is an insult, Liandrin Sedai. I am Shienaran, of a noble House and the blood of soldiers. My line has fought the Shadow since before there was a Shienar, three thousand years without fail or a day's weakness."

liɑnʒɹɪn ʃɪftəɾ əɹ pɔɪn ʌv ətæk, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹitʃɹit. stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə ɹum, ʃi tʊk ðə lɛðɝ-baʊn kɑpi ʌv ðə dæns ə ðə hɔk ən ðə hʌmɪŋbɝd fɹəm ðə mæntəlpis ən hɛftəɾ ɪt wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪt. "ɪn ʃaɪnɝ əbʌv ʌðɝ lænz, maɪ dɔɾɝ, ðə laɪt mʌs bi pɹɛʃəs, ən ðə ʃædoʊ fɪɹd." kæʒəwəli ʃi θɹu ðə bʊk ɪndə ðə faɪɝ. fleɪmz lɛpt əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ə lɔɡ ʌv fætwʊd, θʌndɝɪŋ əz ðeɪ lɪkt ʌp ðə tʃɪmni. ɪn ðə seɪm ɪnstən ɛvɹi læmp ɪn ðə ɹum flɛɹd, hɪsɪŋ, soʊ fɪɹsli dɪd ðeɪ bɝn, flʌɾɪŋ ðə tʃeɪmbɝ wɪð laɪt. "hɪɹ əbʌv ɔl. hɪɹ, soʊ kloʊs tə ðə kɝs blaɪt, wɛɹ kɝʌpʃən weɪts. hɪɹ, ivən wʌn u θɪŋks i wɔks ɪn ðə laɪt meɪ stɪl bi kɝʌptɪd baɪ ðə ʃædoʊ."

Liandrin shifted her point of attack, but she did not retreat. Striding across the room, she took the leather-bound copy of The Dance of the Hawk and the Hummingbird from the mantelpiece and hefted it without looking at it. "In Shienar above other lands, my daughter, the Light must be precious, and the Shadow feared." Casually she threw the book into the fire. Flames leaped as if it were a log of fatwood, thundering as they licked up the chimney. In the same instant every lamp in the room flared, hissing, so fiercely did they burn, flooding the chamber with light. "Here above all. Here, so close to the cursed Blight, where corruption waits. Here, even one who thinks he walks in the Light may still be corrupted by the Shadow."

bidz ə swɛt ɡlɪsən ɑn əmælisəz fɔɹhɛd. ðə hænd ʃi hæd ɹeɪzd ɪn pɹoʊɾɛst fəɹ əɹ bʊk fɛl sloʊli tə hɝ saɪd. hɝ fitʃɝz stɪl hɛl fɝm, bʌt liɑnʒɹɪn sɔ hɝ swɑloʊ, ən əɹ fit ʃɪft. "aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd, liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ. ɪz ɪt ðə bʊk? ɪts oʊnli fulɪʃnəs."

Beads of sweat glistened on Amalisa's forehead. The hand she had raised in protest for her book fell slowly to her side. Her features still held firm, but Liandrin saw her swallow, and her feet shift. "I do not understand, Liandrin Sedai. Is it the book? It is only foolishness."

ðəɹ wɑz ə feɪn kweɪvɝ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. ɡʊd. ɡlæs læmp mæntəlz kɹækt əz ðə fleɪmz lɛp haɪɝ ən hɑɾɝ, laɪɾɪŋ ðə ɹum əz bɹaɪɾ əz ənʃɛltɝd nun. əmælisə stʊɾ əz stɪf əz ə poʊst, hɝ feɪs taɪɾ əz ʃi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə skwɪnt.

There was a faint quaver in her voice. Good. Glass lamp mantles cracked as the flames leaped higher and hotter, lighting the room as bright as unsheltered noon. Amalisa stood as stiff as a post, her face tight as she tried not to squint.

"ɪɾ ɪz jə hu ɑɹ fulɪʃ, maɪ dɔɾɝ. aɪ kɛɹ nʌθɪŋ fəɹ bʊks. hɪɹ, mɛn ɛntɝ ðə blaɪt, ən wɔk ɪn ɪts teɪnt. ɪn ðə vɛɹi ʃædoʊ. waɪ wʌndɝ jə ðət ðət teɪn meɪ sip ɪndə ðɛm? wɛðɝ əɹ nɑɾ əɡɛns ðɛɹ wɪl, stɪl ɪt meɪ sip. waɪ θɪŋk jə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hɝsɛlf əz kʌm?"

"It is you who are foolish, my daughter. I care nothing for books. Here, men enter the Blight, and walk in its taint. In the very Shadow. Why wonder you that that taint may seep into them? Whether or not against their will, still it may seep. Why think you the Amyrlin Seat herself has come?"

"noʊ." ɪt wɑz ə ɡæsp.

"No." It was a gasp.

"ʌv ðə ɹɛɾ æm aɪ, maɪ dɔɾɝ," liɑnʒɹɪn sɛd ɹɪlɛnləsli. "aɪ hʌn ɔl mɛn kɝʌptɪd."

"Of the Red am I, my daughter," Liandrin said relentlessly. "I hunt all men corrupted."

"aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd."

"I don't understand."

"nɑɾ oʊnli ðoʊz faʊl wʌnz u tʃɹaɪ ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ɔl mɛn kɝʌptɪd. haɪ ən loʊ də aɪ hʌnt."

"Not only those foul ones who try the One Power. All men corrupted. High and low do I hunt."

"aɪ doʊnt. . . ." əmælisə lɪkt əɹ lɪps ənstɛɾəli ən meɪɾ ə vɪzəbəl ɛfɝt tə ɡæðɝ hɝsɛlf. "aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd, liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ. pliz. . . ."

"I don't. . . ." Amalisa licked her lips unsteadily and made a visible effort to gather herself. "I do not understand, Liandrin Sedai. Please. . . ."

"haɪ ivən bɪfɔɹ loʊ."

"High even before low."

"noʊ!" əz ɪf səm ɪnvɪzəbəl səpɔɹt hæd vænɪʃt, əmælisə fɛl tə hɝ niz, ən əɹ hɛd dʒɹɑpt. "pliz, liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ, seɪ jə də nɑt min eɪɡəlmɝ. ɪt kænɑt bi hɪm."

"No!" As if some invisible support had vanished, Amalisa fell to her knees, and her head dropped. "Please, Liandrin Sedai, say you do not mean Agelmar. It cannot be him."

ɪn ðət moʊmən ə daʊɾ ən kənfjuʒən, liɑnʒɹɪn stʃɹʌk. ʃi dɪd nɑt muv, bʌt læʃt aʊt wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ. əmælisə ɡæspt ən ɡeɪv ə dʒɝk, əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn pɹɪkt wɪð ə niɾəl, ən liɑnʒɹɪnz pɛtʃələn maʊθ pɝkt ɪn ə smaɪl.

In that moment of doubt and confusion, Liandrin struck. She did not move, but lashed out with the One Power. Amalisa gasped and gave a jerk, as if she had been pricked with a needle, and Liandrin's petulant mouth perked in a smile.

ðɪs wɑz əɹ oʊn spɛʃəl tʃɹɪk fɹəm tʃaɪldhʊd, ðə fɝs lɝn ə hɝ əbɪləɾiz. ɪt hæd bɪn fɔɹbɪɾən tə hɝ əz sun əz ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz dɪskʌvɝɾ ɪt, bʌt tə liɑnʒɹɪn ðəɾ oʊnli mɛnt wʌn mɔɹ θɪŋ ʃi niɾəd tə kənsil fɹəm ðoʊz u wɝ dʒɛləs ə hɝ.

This was her own special trick from childhood, the first learned of her abilities. It had been forbidden to her as soon as the Mistress of Novices discovered it, but to Liandrin that only meant one more thing she needed to conceal from those who were jealous of her.

ʃi stʃɹoʊd fɔɹwɝɾ ən pʊld əmælisəz tʃɪn ʌp. ðə mɛɾəl ðət hæd stɪfən əɹ wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz bæzɝ mɛɾəl naʊ, mæliəbəl tə ðə ɹaɪt pɹɛʃɝz. tɪɹz tʃɹɪkəl fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝz ʌv əmælisəz aɪz, ɡlɪsnɪŋ ɑn əɹ tʃiks. liɑnʒɹɪn lɛt ðə faɪɝz daɪ bæk tə nɔɹməl; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɛni nid fəɹ sʌtʃ. ʃi sɔfən əɹ wɝdz, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs wɑz əz ənjildɪŋ əz stil.

She strode forward and pulled Amalisa's chin up. The metal that had stiffened her was still there, but it was baser metal now, malleable to the right pressures. Tears trickled from the corners of Amalisa's eyes, glistening on her cheeks. Liandrin let the fires die back to normal; there was no longer any need for such. She softened her words, but her voice was as unyielding as steel.

"dɔɾɝ, noʊ wʌn wɑns tə si jə ən eɪɡəlmɝ θɹoʊn tə ðə pipəl əz dɑɹkfɹɛnz. əl hɛlp ju, bʌt jə mʌs hɛlp."

"Daughter, no one wants to see you and Agelmar thrown to the people as Darkfriends. I will help you, but you must help."

"eɪtʃ-hɛlp ju?" əmælisə pʊɾ əɹ hænz tə hɝ tɛmpəlz; ʃi lʊkt kənfjuzd. "pliz, liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ, aɪ doʊnt . . . ʌndɝstænd. ɪts ɔl soʊ. . . . ɪts ɔl. . . ."

"H-help you?" Amalisa put her hands to her temples; she looked confused. "Please, Liandrin Sedai, I don't . . . understand. It is all so. . . . It's all. . . ."

ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə pɝfəkt əbɪləɾi; liɑnʒɹɪn kəd nɑt fɔɹs ɛniwʌn tə də wʌt ʃi wɑntəd - ðoʊ ʃi hæd tʃɹaɪd; oʊ, haʊ ʃi hæd tʃɹaɪd. bʌt ʃi kəɾ oʊpən əm waɪd tə hɝ ɑɹɡjəməns, meɪk əm wɑnə bɪliv hɝ, wɑn mɔɹ ðən ɛniθɪŋ tə bi kənvɪnst ə hɝ ɹaɪtnəs.

It was not a perfect ability; Liandrin could not force anyone to do what she wanted - though she had tried; oh, how she had tried. But she could open them wide to her arguments, make them want to believe her, want more than anything to be convinced of her rightness.

"oʊbeɪ, dɔɾɝ. oʊbeɪ, ən ænsɝ maɪ kwɛstʃənz tʃɹuθfəli, ən aɪ pɹɑməs ðət noʊ wʌn wɪl spik ə jə ən eɪɡəlmɝ əz dɑɹkfɹɛnz. jəl nɑt bi dʒɹæɡd neɪkəd θɹu ðə stʃɹits, tə bi flɑɡd fɹəm ðə sɪɾi ɪf ðə pipəl də nɑt tɛɹ jə tə pisəz fɝst. əl nɑt lɛt ðɪs hæpən. jə ʌndɝstænd?"

"Obey, daughter. Obey, and answer my questions truthfully, and I promise that no one will speak of you and Agelmar as Darkfriends. You will not be dragged naked through the streets, to be flogged from the city if the people do not tear you to pieces first. I will not let this happen. You understand?"

"jɛs, liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ, jɛs. əl də əz jə seɪ ən ænsɝ jə tʃɹuli."

"Yes, Liandrin Sedai, yes. I will do as you say and answer you truly."

liɑnʒɹɪn stʃɹeɪɾənd, lʊkɪŋ daʊn ət ði ʌðɝ wʊmən. ðə leɪɾi əmælisə steɪɾ əz ʃi wɑz, nilɪŋ, hɝ feɪs əz oʊpən əz ə tʃaɪlz, ə tʃaɪld weɪɾɪŋ tə bi kʌmfɝɾɪd ən hɛlp baɪ sʌmwʌn waɪzɝ ən stʃɹɔŋɝ. ðəɹ wɑz ə ɹaɪtnəs əbaʊɾ ɪt tə liɑnʒɹɪn. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ ʌndɝstʊd waɪ ə sɪmpəl baʊ əɹ kɝtsi wɑz səfɪʃən fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ wən mɛn ən wɪmən nɛl tə kɪŋz ən kwinz. wʌt kwin əz wɪðɪn əɹ maɪ paʊɝ? hɝ maʊθ twɪstəɾ æŋɡɹəli, ən əmælisə ʃɪvɝd.

Liandrin straightened, looking down at the other woman. The Lady Amalisa stayed as she was, kneeling, her face as open as a child's, a child waiting to be comforted and helped by someone wiser and stronger. There was a rightness about it to Liandrin. She had never understood why a simple bow or curtsy was sufficient for Aes Sedai when men and women knelt to kings and queens. What queen has within her my power? Her mouth twisted angrily, and Amalisa shivered.

"bi izi ɪn jɝsɛlf, maɪ dɔɾɝ. aɪ hæv kʌm tə hɛlp ju, nɑt tə pʌnɪʃ. oʊnli ðoʊz u dɪzɝv ɪɾəl bi pʌnɪʃt. tʃɹuθ oʊnli, spik tə mi."

"Be easy in yourself, my daughter. I have come to help you, not to punish. Only those who deserve it will be punished. Truth only, speak to me."

"aɪ wɪl, liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ. aɪ wɪl, aɪ swɛɹ ɪt baɪ maɪ haʊs ən ɑnɝ."

"I will, Liandrin Sedai. I will, I swear it by my House and honor."

"mɔɪɹeɪn keɪm tə fæl dæɹə wɪð ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd."

"Moiraine came to Fal Dara with a Darkfriend."

əmælisə wɑz tu fɹaɪɾənd tə ʃoʊ sɝpɹaɪz. "oʊ, noʊ, liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ. noʊ. ðət mæn keɪm leɪɾɝ. hiz ɪn ðə dʌnʒənz naʊ."

Amalisa was too frightened to show surprise. "Oh, no, Liandrin Sedai. No. That man came later. He is in the dungeons now."

"leɪɾɝ, jə seɪ. bʌɾ ɪts tʃɹu ðət ʃi spiks ɔfən wɪð hɪm? ʃiz ɔfən ɪn kʌmpəni wɪð ðɪs dɑɹkfɹɛnd? əloʊn?"

"Later, you say. But it is true that she speaks often with him? She is often in company with this Darkfriend? Alone?"

"ɛs-səmtaɪmz, liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ. oʊnli səmtaɪmz. ʃi wɪʃɪz tə faɪn aʊt waɪ hi keɪm hɪɹ. mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ ɪz - " liɑnʒɹɪn hɛld ʌp əɹ hænd ʃɑɹpli, ən əmælisə swɑloʊd wʌtɛvɝ ɛls ʃi hæd bɪn ɡoʊɪŋ tə seɪ.

"S-sometimes, Liandrin Sedai. Only sometimes. She wishes to find out why he came here. Moiraine Sedai is - " Liandrin held up her hand sharply, and Amalisa swallowed whatever else she had been going to say.

"baɪ θɹi jʌŋ mɛn mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz əkʌmpənid. ðɪs aɪ noʊ. wɛɹ ɑɹ ðeɪ? aɪ hæv bɪn tə ðɛɹ ɹumz, ən ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt tə bi faʊnd."

"By three young men Moiraine was accompanied. This I know. Where are they? I have been to their rooms, and they are not to be found."

"aɪ - aɪ də nɑt noʊ, liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ. ðeɪ sim naɪs bɔɪz. ʃʊɹli jə doʊn θɪŋk ðeɪ ɑɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz."

"I - I do not know, Liandrin Sedai. They seem nice boys. Surely you don't think they are Darkfriends."

"nɑt dɑɹkfɹɛnz, noʊ. wɝs. baɪ fɑɹ mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ðən dɑɹkfɹɛnz, maɪ dɔɾɝ. ði ɪntaɪɝ wɝld ɪz ɪn deɪnʒɝ fɹəm ðɛm. ðeɪ mʌs bi faʊnd. jəl kəmæn jəɹ sɝvəns tə sɝtʃ ðə kip, ən jəɹ leɪɾiz, ən jɝsɛlf. ɛvɹi kɹæk ən kɹæni. tə ðɪs, jəl si pɝsənəli. pɝsənəli! ən tə noʊ wʌn wɪl jə spik ʌv ɪt, seɪv ðoʊz aɪ neɪm. nʌn ɛls meɪ noʊ. nʌn. fɹəm fæl dæɹə ɪn sikɹəsi ðiz jʌŋ mɛn mʌs bi ɹimuvd, ən tə tɑɹ vəlɑn teɪkən. ɪn ʌɾɝ sikɹəsi."

"Not Darkfriends, no. Worse. By far more dangerous than Darkfriends, my daughter. The entire world is in danger from them. They must be found. You will command your servants to search the keep, and your ladies, and yourself. Every crack and cranny. To this, you will see personally. Personally! And to no one will you speak of it, save those I name. None else may know. None. From Fal Dara in secrecy these young men must be removed, and to Tar Valon taken. In utter secrecy."

"æz jə kəmænd, liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ. bʌɾ aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðə nid fəɹ sikɹəsi. noʊ wʌn hɪɹ wɪl hɪndɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"As you command, Liandrin Sedai. But I do not understand the need for secrecy. No one here will hinder Aes Sedai."

"ʌv ðə blæk ədʒɑ juv hɝd?"

"Of the Black Ajah you have heard?"

əmælisəz aɪz bʌlʒd, ən ʃi lin bæk əweɪ fɹəm liɑnʒɹɪn, ɹeɪzɪŋ əɹ hænz əz ðoʊ tə ʃil hɝsɛlf fɹəm ə bloʊ. "ə vi-vaɪl ɹumɝ, liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ. vi-vaɪl. ðəɹ ɑɹ ɛn-noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ hu ɛs-sɝv ðə dɑɹk wʌn. aɪ də nɑt bɪliv ɪt. jə mʌs bɪliv mi! ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, aɪ ɛs-swɛɹ aɪ də nɑt bɪliv ɪt. baɪ maɪ ɑnɝ ən maɪ haʊs, aɪ swɛɹ. . . ."

Amalisa's eyes bulged, and she leaned back away from Liandrin, raising her hands as though to shield herself from a blow. "A v-vile rumor, Liandrin Sedai. V-vile. There are n-no Aes Sedai who s-serve the Dark One. I do not believe it. You must believe me! Under the Light, I s-swear I do not believe it. By my honor and my House, I swear. . . ."

kuli liɑnʒɹɪn lɛɾ əɹ ɡoʊ ɑn, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə læst ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ stʃɹɛŋkθ litʃ aʊɾ ə ði ʌðɝ wʊmən wɪð əɹ oʊn saɪləns. ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd bɪn noʊn tə bɪkʌm æŋɡɹi, vɛɹi æŋɡɹi, wɪð ðoʊz u ivən mɛnʃən ðə blæk ədʒɑ mʌtʃ lɛs ðoʊz u sɛd ðeɪ bɪlivd ɪn ɪts hɪɾən ɛɡzɪstəns. æftɝ ðɪs, wɪð əɹ wɪl ɔlɹɛɾi wikən baɪ ðət lɪɾəl tʃaɪldhʊd tʃɹɪk, əmælisə wəd bi əz kleɪ ɪn əɹ hænz. æftɝ wʌn mɔɹ bloʊ.

Coolly Liandrin let her go on, watching the last remaining strength leach out of the other woman with her own silence. Aes Sedai had been known to become angry, very angry, with those who even mentioned the Black Ajah much less those who said they believed in its hidden existence. After this, with her will already weakened by that little childhood trick, Amalisa would be as clay in her hands. After one more blow.

"ðə blæk ədʒɑ ɪz ɹil, tʃaɪld. ɹil, ən hɪɹ wɪðɪn fæl dæɹəz wɔlz." əmælisə nɛl ðɛɹ, hɝ maʊθ hæŋɪŋ oʊpən. ðə blæk ədʒɑ. ɛɛs sədaɪ hu wɝ ɔlsoʊ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ɔlmoʊst əz hɔɹəbəl tə lɝn ðə dɑɹk wʌn hɪmsɛlf wɔk fæl dæɹə kip. bʌt liɑnʒɹɪn wəd nɑt lɛɾ ʌp naʊ. "ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə hɔlz jə pæs, ə blæk sɪstɝ kəd bi. ðɪs aɪ swɛɹ. aɪ kænɑt tɛl jə wɪtʃ ðeɪ ɑɹ, bʌt maɪ pɹətɛkʃən jə kən hæv. ɪf ɪn ðə laɪt jə wɔk ən mi oʊbeɪ."

"The Black Ajah is real, child. Real, and here within Fal Dara's walls." Amalisa knelt there, her mouth hanging open. The Black Ajah. Aes Sedai who were also Darkfriends. Almost as horrible to learn the Dark One himself walked Fal Dara keep. But Liandrin would not let up now. "Any Aes Sedai in the halls you pass, a Black sister could be. This I swear. I cannot tell you which they are, but my protection you can have. If in the Light you walk and me obey."

"aɪ wɪl," əmælisə wɪspɝd hɔɹsli. "aɪ wɪl. pliz, liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ, pliz seɪ jəl pɹətɛk maɪ bɹʌðɝ, ən maɪ leɪɾiz. . . ."

"I will," Amalisa whispered hoarsely. "I will. Please, Liandrin Sedai, please say you will protect my brother, and my ladies. . . ."

"hu dɪzɝvz pɹətɛkʃən əl pɹətɛkt. kənsɝn jɝsɛlf wɪð jɝsɛlf, maɪ dɔɾɝ. ən θɪŋk oʊnli ʌv wʌɾ aɪ hæv kəmændəɾ ə ju. oʊnli ðæt. ðə feɪɾ ə ðə wɝld ɹaɪdz ɑn ðɪs, maɪ dɔɾɝ. ɔl ɛls jə mʌs fɝɡɛt."

"Who deserves protection I will protect. Concern yourself with yourself, my daughter. And think only of what I have commanded of you. Only that. The fate of the world rides on this, my daughter. All else you must forget."

"jɛs, liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ. jɛs. jɛs."

"Yes, Liandrin Sedai. Yes. Yes."

liɑnʒɹɪn tɝn ən kɹɔs ðə ɹum, nɑt lʊkɪŋ bæk əntɪl ʃi ɹitʃt ðə dɔɹ. əmælisə wɑz stɪl ɑn əɹ niz, stɪl wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ æŋkʃəsli. "ɹaɪz, maɪ leɪɾi əmælisə." liɑnʒɹɪn meɪɾ əɹ vɔɪs plɛzənt, wɪð oʊnli ə hɪn ə ðə mɑkɪŋ ʃi fɛlt. sɪstɝ, ɪndid! nɑt wʌn deɪ əz ə nɑvəs wəd ʃi læst. ən paʊɝ tə kəmænd ʃi hæz. "ɹaɪz." əmælisə stʃɹeɪɾənd ɪn sloʊ, stɪf dʒɝks, əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn baʊn hæn ən fʊt fəɹ aʊɝz. əz ʃi faɪnəli keɪm əpɹaɪt, liɑnʒɹɪn sɛd, ðə stil bæk ɪn fʊl stʃɹɛŋkθ, "æn ɪf jə feɪl ðə wɝld, ɪf jə feɪl mi, ðət ɹɛtʃɪd dɑɹkfɹɛn ɪn ðə dʌnʒən wɪl bi jəɹ ɛnvi."

Liandrin turned and crossed the room, not looking back until she reached the door. Amalisa was still on her knees, still watching her anxiously. "Rise, my Lady Amalisa." Liandrin made her voice pleasant, with only a hint of the mocking she felt. Sister, indeed! Not one day as a novice would she last. And power to command she has. "Rise." Amalisa straightened in slow, stiff jerks, as if she had been bound hand and foot for hours. As she finally came upright, Liandrin said, the steel back in full strength, "And if you fail the world, if you fail me, that wretched Darkfriend in the dungeon will be your envy."

fɹəm ðə lʊk ɑn əmælisəz feɪs, liɑnʒɹɪn dɪd nɑt θɪŋk feɪljɝ wəd kʌm fɹəm ɛni læk ʌv ɛfɝɾ ɑn əɹ pɑɹt.

From the look on Amalisa's face, Liandrin did not think failure would come from any lack of effort on her part.

pʊlɪŋ ðə dɔɹ ʃʌt bɪhaɪn hɝ, liɑnʒɹɪn sʌɾənli fɛlt ə pɹɪklɪŋ əkɹɔs əɹ skɪn. bɹɛθ kætʃɪŋ, ʃi wɝld əbaʊt, lʊkɪŋ ʌp ən daʊn ðə dɪmli lɪt hɔl. ɛmpti. ɪt wɑz fʊl naɪt bɪɑn ði æɹoʊslɪts. ðə hɔl wɑz ɛmpti, jɛt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðəɹ hæd bɪn aɪz ɑn hɝ. ðə veɪkən kɔɹəɾɝ, ʃæɾoʊi bɪtwin ðə læmps ɑn ðə wɔlz, mɑk hɝ. ʃi ʃɹʌɡd ənizəli, ðən stɑɹɾəd daʊn ðə hɔl dətɝmənədli. fænsiz teɪk mi. nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ.

Pulling the door shut behind her, Liandrin suddenly felt a prickling across her skin. Breath catching, she whirled about, looking up and down the dimly lit hall. Empty. It was full night beyond the arrowslits. The hall was empty, yet she was sure there had been eyes on her. The vacant corridor, shadowy between the lamps on the walls, mocked her. She shrugged uneasily, then started down the hall determinedly. Fancies take me. Nothing more.

fʊl naɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi, ən ðəɹ wɑz mʌtʃ tə də bɪfɔɹ dɔn. hɝ ɔɹɾɝz hæd bɪn ɪksplɪsət.

Full night already, and there was much to do before dawn. Her orders had been explicit.

pɪtʃ-blæknəs kʌvɝd ðə dʌnʒənz wʌtɛvɝ ði aʊɝ, ənlɛs sʌmwʌn bɹɔɾ ɪn ə læntɝn, bʌt pdən feɪn sæɾ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə hɪz kɑt, stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə dɑɹk wɪð ə smaɪl ɑn ɪz feɪs. hi kəd hɪɹ ði ʌðɝ tu pɹɪznɝz ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ slip, mʌɾɝɪŋ ɪn naɪtmɛɹz. pdən feɪn wɑz weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ, sʌmθɪŋ i hæd bɪn əweɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm. fəɹ tu lɔŋ. bʌt nɑt mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ.

Pitch-blackness covered the dungeons whatever the hour, unless someone brought in a lantern, but Padan Fain sat on the edge of his cot, staring into the dark with a smile on his face. He could hear the other two prisoners grumbling in their sleep, muttering in nightmares. Padan Fain was waiting for something, something he had been awaiting for a long time. For too long. But not much longer.

ðə dɔɹ tə ði aʊɾɝ ɡɑɹdʒɹum oʊpənd, spɪlɪŋ ɪn ə flʌɾ ə laɪt, dɑɹkli aʊtlaɪnɪŋ ə fɪɡjɝ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ.

The door to the outer guardroom opened, spilling in a flood of light, darkly outlining a figure in the doorway.

feɪn stʊd. "ju! nɑɾ u aɪ ɪkspɛktəd." hi stʃɹɛtʃt wɪð ə kæʒəɑlnəs i dɪd nɑt fil. blʌd ɹeɪs θɹu hɪz veɪnz; hi θɔɾ i kəd lip oʊvɝ ðə kip ɪf i tʃɹaɪd. "sɝpɹaɪzəz fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn, ɛ? wɛl, kʌm ɑn. ðə naɪts ɡɛɾɪŋ oʊld, ən aɪ wɑn səm slip sʌmtaɪm."

Fain stood. "You! Not who I expected." He stretched with a casualness he did not feel. Blood raced through his veins; he thought he could leap over the keep if he tried. "Surprises for everyone, eh? Well, come on. The night's getting old, and I want some sleep sometime."

əz ə læmp keɪm ɪndə ðə sɛl tʃeɪmbɝ, feɪn ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛd, ɡɹɪnɪŋ ət sʌmθɪŋ, ənsin jɛt fɛlt, bɪɑn ðə dʌnʒənz stoʊn silɪŋ. "ɪɾ ɪzən oʊvɝ jɛt," hi wɪspɝd. "ðə bæɾəlz nɛvɝ oʊvɝ."

As a lamp came into the cell chamber, Fain raised his head, grinning at something, unseen yet felt, beyond the dungeon's stone ceiling. "It isn't over yet," he whispered. "The battle's never over."


tʃæptɝ sɪks


CHAPTER 6

dɑɹk pɹɑfəsi


Dark Prophecy

ðə fɑɹmhaʊs dɔɹ ʃʊk ʌndɝ fjʊɹiəs bloʊz fɹəm aʊtsaɪd; ðə hɛvi bɑɹ əkɹɔs ðə dɔɹ dʒʌmpt ɪn ɪts bɹækəts. bɪɑn ðə wɪndoʊ nɛks tə ðə dɔɹ muv ðə hɛvi-mʌzəl sɪləwɛɾ ʌv ə tʃɹɑlɑk. ðəɹ wɝ wɪndoʊz ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ən mɔɹ ʃæɾoʊi ʃeɪps aʊtsaɪd. nɑt ʃæɾoʊi ɪnʌf, ðoʊ. ɹænd kəd stɪl meɪk əm aʊt.

The farmhouse door shook under furious blows from outside; the heavy bar across the door jumped in its brackets. Beyond the window next to the door moved the heavy-muzzled silhouette of a Trolloc. There were windows everywhere, and more shadowy shapes outside. Not shadowy enough, though. Rand could still make them out.

ðə wɪndoʊz, hi θɔt dɛspɝətli. hi bækt əweɪ fɹəm ðə dɔɹ, klʌtʃɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd bɪfɔɹ ɪm ɪn boʊθ hænz. ivən ɪf ðə dɔɹ hoʊlz, ðeɪ kən bɹeɪk ɪn ðə wɪndoʊz. waɪ ɑɹən ðeɪ tʃɹaɪɪŋ ðə wɪndoʊz?

The windows, he thought desperately. He backed away from the door, clutching his sword before him in both hands. Even if the door holds, they can break in the windows. Why aren't they trying the windows?

wɪð ə dɛfənɪŋ mətælɪk skɹitʃ, wʌn ə ðə bɹækəts pʊl pɑɹtli əweɪ fɹəm ðə dɔɹfɹeɪm, hæŋɪŋ lus ɑn neɪlz ɹɪpt ə fɪŋɡɝz wɪdθ aʊɾ ə ðə wʊd. ðə bɑɹ kwɪvɝd fɹəm ənʌðɝ bloʊ, ən ðə neɪlz skwild əɡɛn.

With a deafening metallic screech, one of the brackets pulled partly away from the doorframe, hanging loose on nails ripped a finger's width out of the wood. The bar quivered from another blow, and the nails squealed again.

"wi hæv tə stɑp ðɛm!" ɹænd ʃaʊɾəd. oʊnli wi kænt. wi kæn stɑp ðɛm. hi lʊkt ɝaʊn fəɹ ə weɪ tə ɹʌn, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ðə wʌn dɔɹ. ðə ɹum wɑz ə bɑks. oʊnli wʌn dɔɹ, ən soʊ mɛni wɪndoʊz. "wi hæv tə də sʌmθɪŋ. sʌmθɪŋ!"

"We have to stop them!" Rand shouted. Only we can't. We can't stop them. He looked around for a way to run, but there was only the one door. The room was a box. Only one door, and so many windows. "We have to do something. Something!"

"ɪts tu leɪt," mæt sɛd. "doʊn jə ʌndɝstænd?" hɪz ɡɹɪn lʊkt ɑɾ ɑn ə blʌdləs peɪl feɪs, ən ðə hɪlt ʌv ə dæɡɝ stʊɾ aʊt fɹəm ɪz tʃɛst, ðə ɹubi ðət kæpt ɪt bleɪzɪŋ əz ɪf ɪt hɛl faɪɝ. ðə dʒɛm hæd mɔɹ laɪf ðən ɪz feɪs. "ɪts tu leɪt fəɹ əs tə tʃeɪnʒ ɛniθɪŋ."

"It's too late," Mat said. "Don't you understand?" His grin looked odd on a bloodless pale face, and the hilt of a dagger stood out from his chest, the ruby that capped it blazing as if it held fire. The gem had more life than his face. "It's too late for us to change anything."

"aɪv faɪnəli ɡɑɾən ɹɪɾ ə ðɛm," pɛɹɪn sɛd, læfɪŋ. blʌd stʃɹim daʊn ɪz feɪs laɪk ə flʌɾ ə tɪɹz fɹəm ɪz ɛmpti sɑkəts. hi hɛld aʊt ɹɛd hænz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk ɹænd lʊk ət wʌɾ i hɛld. "aɪm fɹi, naʊ. ɪts oʊvɝ."

"I've finally gotten rid of them," Perrin said, laughing. Blood streamed down his face like a flood of tears from his empty sockets. He held out red hands, trying to make Rand look at what he held. "I'm free, now. It's over."

"ɪts nɛvɝ oʊvɝ, ælθɹ," pdən feɪn kɹaɪd, keɪpɝɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə flɔɹ. "ðə bæɾəlz nɛvɝ dʌn."

"It's never over, al'Thor," Padan Fain cried, capering in the middle of the floor. "The battle's never done."

ðə dɔɹ ɪksploʊɾəd ɪn splɪntɝz, ən ɹænd dʌkt əweɪ fɹəm ðə flaɪɪŋ ʃɑɹdz ʌv wʊd. tu ɹɛd-klæɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ stɛp θɹu, boʊɪŋ ðɛɹ mæstɝ ɪn. ə mæsk ðə kʌlɝ ə dʒɹaɪd blʌd kʌvɝd bælzəmənz feɪs, bʌt ɹænd kəd si ðə fleɪmz ə hɪz aɪz θɹu ði aɪɛslɪts; hi kəd hɪɹ ðə ɹɔɹɪŋ faɪɝz ə bælzəmənz maʊθ.

The door exploded in splinters, and Rand ducked away from the flying shards of wood. Two red-clad Aes Sedai stepped through, bowing their master in. A mask the color of dried blood covered Ba'alzamon's face, but Rand could see the flames of his eyes through the eyeslits; he could hear the roaring fires of Ba'alzamon's mouth.

"ɪɾ ɪz nɑt jɛt dʌn bɪtwin ʌs, ælθɹ," bælzəmən sɛd, ən i ən feɪn spoʊk təɡɛðɝ əz wʌn, "fɔɹ ju, ðə bæɾəl ɪz nɛvɝ dʌn."

"It is not yet done between us, al'Thor," Ba'alzamon said, and he and Fain spoke together as one, "For you, the battle is never done."

wɪð ə stʃɹæŋɡəld ɡæsp ɹænd sæɾ ʌp ɑn ðə flɔɹ, klɔɪŋ ɪz weɪ əweɪk. ɪt simd i kəd stɪl hɪɹ feɪnz vɔɪs, əz ʃɑɹp əz ɪf ðə pɛdlɝ wɝ stændɪŋ bɪsaɪd hɪm. ɪts nɛvɝ oʊvɝ. ðə bæɾəlz nɛvɝ dʌn.

With a strangled gasp Rand sat up on the floor, clawing his way awake. It seemed he could still hear Fain's voice, as sharp as if the peddler were standing beside him. It's never over. The battle's never done.

blɪɹi-aɪd, hi lʊkt ɝaʊn tə kənvɪns hɪmsɛlf ðəɾ i wɑz stɪl hɪɾən əweɪ wɛɹ ɛɡwin hæd lɛf hɪm, bɛɾəd daʊn ɑn ə pæləɾ ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ ɹum. ðə dɪm laɪɾ ʌv ə sɪŋɡəl læmp səfjuz ðə ɹum, ən i wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə si nɪneɪiv, nɪɾɪŋ ɪn ə ɹɑkɪŋ tʃɛɹ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə loʊn bɛd, ɪts kʌvɝz stɪl ɪn pleɪs. ɪt wɑz naɪɾ aʊtsaɪd.

Bleary-eyed, he looked around to convince himself that he was still hidden away where Egwene had left him, bedded down on a pallet in a corner of her room. The dim light of a single lamp suffused the room, and he was surprised to see Nynaeve, knitting in a rocking chair on the other side of the lone bed, its covers still in place. It was night outside.

dɑɹk-aɪɾ ən slɛndɝ, nɪneɪiv wɔɹ əɹ hɛɹ ɪn ə fæt bɹeɪd, pʊld oʊvɝ wʌn ʃoʊldɝ ən hæŋɪŋ ɔlmoʊs tə hɝ weɪst. ʃi hæd nɑt ɡɪvən ʌp ɑn hoʊm. hɝ feɪs wɑz kɑm, ən ʃi simd əwɛɹ ə nʌθɪŋ ɪksɛpt əɹ nɪɾɪŋ əz ʃi ɹɑk dʒɛnli. ðə stɛɾi klɪk-klɪk ə hɝ nɪɾɪŋ niɾəlz wɑz ði oʊnli saʊnd. ðə ɹʌɡ saɪləns ðə ɹɑkɪŋ tʃɛɹ.

Dark-eyed and slender, Nynaeve wore her hair in a fat braid, pulled over one shoulder and hanging almost to her waist. She had not given up on home. Her face was calm, and she seemed aware of nothing except her knitting as she rocked gently. The steady click-click of her knitting needles was the only sound. The rug silenced the rocking chair.

ðəɹ hæd bɪn naɪts ə leɪt wən i hæd wɪʃt fəɹ ə kɑɹpəɾ ɑn ðə koʊl stoʊn flɔɹ ə hɪz ɹum, bʌɾ ɪn ʃaɪnɝ mɛnz ɹumz wɝ ɔlweɪz bɛɹ ən stɑɹk. ðə wɔlz hɪɹ hæd tu tæpəstʃɹiz, maʊntən sinz wɪð wɔɾɝfɔlz, ən flaʊɝ-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd kɝɾənz əlɔŋsaɪd ði æɹoʊslɪts. kʌt flaʊɝz, waɪt mɔɹnɪŋstɑɹz, stʊɾ ɪn ə flæt, ɹaʊn veɪs ɑn ðə teɪbəl baɪ ðə bɛd, ən mɔɹ nɑɾəd ɪn ɡleɪzd waɪt skɑnsɪz ɑn ðə wɔlz. ə tɔl mɪɹɝ stʊɾ ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ, ən ənʌðɝ hʌŋ oʊvɝ ðə wɑʃstænd, wɪð ɪts blu-stʃɹaɪpt pɪtʃɝ ən boʊl. hi wʌndɝd waɪ ɛɡwin niɾəd tu mɪɹɝz; ðəɹ wɑz nʌn ɪn ɪz ɹum, ən i dɪd nɑt mɪs ɪt. ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn læmp lɪt, bʌt fɔɹ mɔɹ stʊɾ ɝaʊn ðə ɹum, wɪtʃ wɑz nɪɹli əz lɑɹdʒ əz ðə wʌn i ʃɛɹd wɪð mæt ən pɛɹɪn. ɛɡwin hæɾ ɪɾ əloʊn.

There had been nights of late when he had wished for a carpet on the cold stone floor of his room, but in Shienar men's rooms were always bare and stark. The walls here had two tapestries, mountain scenes with waterfalls, and flower-embroidered curtains alongside the arrowslits. Cut flowers, white morningstars, stood in a flat, round vase on the table by the bed, and more nodded in glazed white sconces on the walls. A tall mirror stood in a corner, and another hung over the washstand, with its blue-striped pitcher and bowl. He wondered why Egwene needed two mirrors; there was none in his room, and he did not miss it. There was only one lamp lit, but four more stood around the room, which was nearly as large as the one he shared with Mat and Perrin. Egwene had it alone.

wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ ʌp, nɪneɪiv sɛd, "ɪf jə slip ɪn ði æftɝnun, jə kæn ɪkspɛk tə slip ət naɪt."

Without looking up, Nynaeve said, "If you sleep in the afternoon, you can't expect to sleep at night."

hi fɹaʊnd, ðoʊ ʃi kəd nɑt si ɪt. ət list, hi θɔt ʃi kəd nɑt. ʃi wɑz oʊnli ə fju jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən hi, bʌt biɪŋ wɪzdəm æɾəd fɪfti jɪɹz ʌv əθɔɹəɾi. "aɪ niɾəd ə pleɪs tə haɪd, ən aɪ wɑz taɪɝd," hi sɛd, ðən kwɪkli æɾəd, "aɪ dɪdn dʒʌs kʌm hɪɹ. ɛɡwin ɪnvaɪɾəd mi ɪndə ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns."

He frowned, though she could not see it. At least, he thought she could not. She was only a few years older than he, but being Wisdom added fifty years of authority. "I needed a place to hide, and I was tired," he said, then quickly added, "I didn't just come here. Egwene invited me into the women's apartments."

nɪneɪiv loʊɝɾ əɹ nɪɾɪŋ ən ɡeɪv ɪm ən əmjuz smaɪl. ʃi wɑz ə pɹɪɾi wʊmən. ðət wɑz sʌmθɪŋ i wəd nɛvɝ əv noʊɾəst bæk hoʊm; wʌn dʒʌs dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʌv ə wɪzdəm ðət weɪ. "ðə laɪt hɛlp mi, ɹænd, jə ɑɹ bɪkʌmɪŋ mɔɹ ʃaɪnɝən ɛvɹi deɪ. ɪnvaɪɾəd ɪndə ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns, ɪndid." ʃi snɪft. "ɛni deɪ naʊ, jəl stɑɹt tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt jəɹ ɑnɝ, ən æskɪŋ pis tə feɪvɝ jəɹ sɔɹd." hi kʌlɝd, ən hoʊpt ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊɾəs ɪn ðə dɪm laɪt. ʃi aɪɾ ɪz sɔɹd, ɪts hɪl stɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə lɔŋ bʌndəl bɪsaɪɾ ɪm ɑn ðə flɔɹ. hi nu ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əpɹuv ə ðə sɔɹd, ʌv ɛni sɔɹd, bʌt ʃi sɛd nʌθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt fəɹ wʌns. "ɛɡwin toʊl mi waɪ jə niɾ ə pleɪs tə haɪd. doʊnt wɝi. wɪl kip jə hɪɾən fɹəm ði æmɪɝlɪn, əɹ fɹəm ɛni ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪf ðəɾ ɪz wʌt jə wɑnt."

Nynaeve lowered her knitting and gave him an amused smile. She was a pretty woman. That was something he would never have noticed back home; one just did not think of a Wisdom that way. "The Light help me, Rand, you are becoming more Shienaran every day. Invited into the women's apartments, indeed." She sniffed. "Any day now, you'll start talking about your honor, and asking peace to favor your sword." He colored, and hoped she did not notice in the dim light. She eyed his sword, its hilt sticking out of the long bundle beside him on the floor. He knew she did not approve of the sword, of any sword, but she said nothing about it for once. "Egwene told me why you need a place to hide. Don't worry. We will keep you hidden from the Amyrlin, or from any other Aes Sedai, if that is what you want."

ʃi mɛɾ ɪz aɪz ən dʒɝk hɝz əweɪ, bʌt nɑt bɪfɔɹ i sɔ hɝ ʌnizinəs. hɝ daʊt. ðæts ɹaɪt, aɪ kən tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ. ə mæn wildɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ! jə ɔt tə bi hɛlpɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hʌn mi daʊn ən dʒɛntəl mi.

She met his eyes and jerked hers away, but not before he saw her uneasiness. Her doubt. That's right, I can channel the Power. A man wielding the One Power! You ought to be helping the Aes Sedai hunt me down and gentle me.

skaʊlɪŋ, hi stʃɹeɪɾənd ðə lɛðɝ dʒɝkɪn ɛɡwin hæd faʊn fəɹ ɪm ən twɪstəɾ ɝaʊn soʊ hi kəd lin bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl. "æz sun əz aɪ kæn, əl haɪɾ ɪn ə kɑɹt, əɹ snik aʊt. jə woʊn əv tə haɪd mi lɔŋ." nɪneɪiv dɪd nɑt seɪ ɛniθɪŋ; ʃi fɪkst ɑn əɹ nɪɾɪŋ, meɪkɪŋ ən æŋɡɹi saʊnd wən ʃi dʒɹɑpt ə stɪtʃ. "wɛɹ ɪz ɛɡwin?"

Scowling, he straightened the leather jerkin Egwene had found for him and twisted around so he could lean back against the wall. "As soon as I can, I will hide in a cart, or sneak out. You won't have to hide me long." Nynaeve did not say anything; she fixed on her knitting, making an angry sound when she dropped a stitch. "Where is Egwene?"

ʃi lɛt ðə nɪɾɪŋ fɔl ɑntu hɝ læp. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ aɪm ivən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tənaɪt. aɪ kæn kip tʃɹæk ə maɪ stɪtʃɪz fəɹ səm ɹizən. ʃiz ɡɔn daʊn tə si pdən feɪn. ʃi θɪŋks siɪŋ feɪsəz i noʊz maɪt hɛlp hɪm."

She let the knitting fall onto her lap. "I don't know why I am even trying tonight. I can't keep track of my stitches for some reason. She has gone down to see Padan Fain. She thinks seeing faces he knows might help him."

"maɪn sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt. ʃi ɔt tə steɪ əweɪ fɹəm hɪm. hiz deɪnʒɝəs."

"Mine certainly did not. She ought to stay away from him. He's dangerous."

"ʃi wɑns tə hɛlp hɪm," nɪneɪiv sɛd kɑmli. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ʃi wɑz tʃɹeɪnɪŋ tə bi maɪ əsɪstənt, ən biɪŋ ə wɪzdəm ɪz nɑɾ ɔl pɹɪdɪktɪŋ ðə wɛðɝ. hilɪŋ ɪz pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt, tu. ɛɡwin əz ðə dɪzaɪɝ tə hil, ðə nid tə. ən ɪf pdən feɪn ɪz soʊ deɪnʒɝəs, mɔɪɹeɪn wʊɾə sɛd sʌmθɪŋ."

"She wants to help him," Nynaeve said calmly. "Remember, she was training to be my assistant, and being a Wisdom is not all predicting the weather. Healing is part of it, too. Egwene has the desire to heal, the need to. And if Padan Fain is so dangerous, Moiraine would have said something."

hi bɑɹkt ə læf. "ju dɪdn æsk hɝ. ɛɡwin ədmɪɾəd ɪt, ən aɪ kən dʒʌst si jə æskɪŋ pɝmɪʃən fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ." hɝ ɹeɪzd aɪbɹaʊ waɪp ðə læf ɔf ɪz feɪs. hi ɹəfjuz tə əpɑlədʒaɪz, ðoʊ. ðeɪ wɝ ə lɔŋ weɪ fɹəm hoʊm, ən i dɪd nɑt si haʊ ʃi kəd ɡoʊ ɑn biɪŋ wɪzdəm ʌv ɛmənz fild ɪf ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. "hæv ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd tə sɝtʃ fəɹ mi, jɛt? ɛɡwin ɪz nɑt ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wɪl, bʌt læn sɛz ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɪz hɪɹ kəz ə mi, ən aɪ θɪŋk əl teɪk ɪz əpɪnjən oʊvɝ hɝz."

He barked a laugh. "You didn't ask her. Egwene admitted it, and I can just see you asking permission for anything." Her raised eyebrow wiped the laugh off his face. He refused to apologize, though. They were a long way from home, and he did not see how she could go on being Wisdom of Emond's Field if she was going to Tar Valon. "Have they started to search for me, yet? Egwene is not sure they will, but Lan says the Amyrlin Seat is here because of me, and I think I'll take his opinion over hers."

fəɹ ə moʊmənt nɪneɪiv dɪd nɑɾ ænsɝ. ɪnstɛd ʃi fʌst wɪð əɹ sknz ə jɑɹn. faɪnəli ʃi sɛd, "aɪ æm nɑt ʃʊɹ. wʌn ə ðə sɝvɪŋ wɪmən keɪm ə lɪɾəl waɪl əɡoʊ. tə tɝn daʊn ðə bɛd, ʃi sɛd. əz ɪf ɛɡwin wəd bi gɑnə slip ɔlɹɛɾi, wɪð ðə fis fəɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn tənaɪt. aɪ sɛn əɹ əweɪ; ʃi dɪdn si ju."

For a moment Nynaeve did not answer. Instead she fussed with her skeins of yarn. Finally she said, "I am not sure. One of the serving women came a little while ago. To turn down the bed, she said. As if Egwene would be going to sleep already, with the feast for the Amyrlin tonight. I sent her away; she didn't see you."

"noʊbɑdi tɝnz jəɹ bɛd daʊn fəɹ jə ɪn ðə mɛnz kɔɹɾɝz." ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə lɛvəl lʊk, wʌn ðət wʊɾə sɛɾ ɪm stæmɝɪŋ ə jɪɹ əɡoʊ. hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ðeɪ wʊdn juz ðə meɪdz tə lʊk fəɹ mi, nɪneɪiv."

"Nobody turns your bed down for you in the men's quarters." She gave him a level look, one that would have set him stammering a year ago. He shook his head. "They wouldn't use the maids to look for me, Nynaeve."

"wɛn aɪ wɛn tə ðə bʌɾɝi fəɹ ə kʌp ə mɪlk ɝliɝ, ðəɹ wɝ tu mɛni wɪmən ɪn ðə hɔlz. ðoʊz u ɑɹ ətɛndɪŋ ðə fist ʃʊɾə bɪn ɡɛɾɪŋ dʒɹɛst, ən ði ʌðɝz ʃəɾ iðɝ əv bɪn hɛlpɪŋ əm əɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ ɹɛɾi tə sɝv, əɹ tə. . . ." ʃi fɹaʊnd wɝidli. "ðɛɹz mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf wɝk fəɹ ɛvɹibɑɾi wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn hɪɹ. ən ðeɪ wɝ nɑt dʒʌs hɪɹ ɪn ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns. aɪ sɔ ðə leɪɾi əmælisə hɝsɛlf kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə stɔɹɹum nɪɹ ðə bʌɾɝi wɪð əɹ feɪs ɔl oʊvɝ dʌst."

"When I went to the buttery for a cup of milk earlier, there were too many women in the halls. Those who are attending the feast should have been getting dressed, and the others should either have been helping them or getting ready to serve, or to. . . ." She frowned worriedly. "There's more than enough work for everybody with the Amyrlin here. And they were not just here in the women's apartments. I saw the Lady Amalisa herself coming out of a storeroom near the buttery with her face all over dust."

"ðæts ɹɪdɪkjələs. waɪ wəd ʃi bi pɑɹɾ ʌv ə sɝtʃ? əɹ ɛni ʌv ðə wɪmən, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. ðeɪd bi juzɪŋ lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝz soʊlʒɝz, ən ðə wɔɹɾɝz. ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðeɪ mʌs dʒʌs bi duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ ðə fist. bɝn mi ɪf aɪ noʊ wʌɾ ə ʃaɪnɝən fis teɪks."

"That's ridiculous. Why would she be part of a search? Or any of the women, for that matter. They'd be using Lord Agelmar's soldiers, and the Warders. And the Aes Sedai. They must just be doing something for the feast. Burn me if I know what a Shienaran feast takes."

"ju ɑɹ ə wʊlhɛd, səmtaɪmz, ɹænd. ðə mɛn aɪ sɔ dɪdnt noʊ wʌt ðə wɪmən wɝ duɪŋ iðɝ. aɪ hɝd səm ə ðɛm kəmpleɪnɪŋ əbaʊt hævɪŋ tə də ɔl ðə wɝk baɪ ðɛmsɛlvz. aɪ noʊ ɪt meɪks noʊ sɛns ðət ðeɪ wɝ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ju. nʌn ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sim tə bi teɪkɪŋ ɛni ɪntʃɹəst. bʌɾ əmælisə wɑz nɑt ɹɛɾiɪŋ hɝsɛlf fəɹ ðə fis baɪ dɝɾiɪŋ əɹ dʒɹɛs ɪn ə stɔɹɹum. ðeɪ wɝ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ, sʌmθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt. ivən ɪf ʃi bɪɡæn ɹaɪɾ æftɝ aɪ sɔ hɝ, ʃi wəd bɛɹli hæv taɪm tə beɪð ən tʃeɪnʒ. spikɪŋ ʌv wɪtʃ, ɪf ɛɡwin dʌzn kʌm bæk sun, ʃɪl əv tə tʃuz bɪtwin tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ən biɪŋ leɪt."

"You are a woolhead, sometimes, Rand. The men I saw didn't know what the women were doing either. I heard some of them complaining about having to do all the work by themselves. I know it makes no sense that they were looking for you. None of the Aes Sedai seemed to be taking any interest. But Amalisa was not readying herself for the feast by dirtying her dress in a storeroom. They were looking for something, something important. Even if she began right after I saw her, she would barely have time to bathe and change. Speaking of which, if Egwene doesn't come back soon, she'll have to choose between changing and being late."

fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, hi ɹilaɪz ðət nɪneɪiv wɑz nɑt wɛɹɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wʊlənz i wɑz juz tə. hɝ dʒɹɛs wɑz peɪl blu sɪlk, ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɪn snoʊdʒɹɑp blɑsəmz ɝaʊn ðə nɛk ən daʊn ðə slivz. itʃ blɑsəm sɛntɝɾ ɑn ə smɔl pɝl, ən əɹ bɛlt wɑz tuld ɪn sɪlvɝ, wɪð ə sɪlvɝ bʌkəl sɛt wɪð pɝlz. hi hæd nɛvɝ sin əɹ ɪn ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ðæt. ivən fistdeɪ kloʊðz bæk hoʊm maɪt nɑt mætʃ ɪt.

For the first time, he realized that Nynaeve was not wearing the Two Rivers woolens he was used to. Her dress was pale blue silk, embroidered in snowdrop blossoms around the neck and down the sleeves. Each blossom centered on a small pearl, and her belt was tooled in silver, with a silver buckle set with pearls. He had never seen her in anything like that. Even feastday clothes back home might not match it.

"jɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə fist?"

"You're going to the feast?"

"ʌv kɔɹs. ivən ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn hæd nɑt sɛɾ aɪ ʃʊd, aɪ wəd nɛvɝ lɛɾ əɹ θɪŋk aɪ wɑz. . . ." hɝ aɪz lɪɾ ʌp fɪɹsli fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ən i nu wʌt ʃi mɛnt. nɪneɪiv wəd nɛvɝ lɛɾ ɛniwʌn θɪŋk ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪd, ivən ɪf ʃi wɑz. sɝɾənli nɑt mɔɪɹeɪn, ən ɪspɛʃli nɑt læn. hi hoʊpt ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ hi wɑz əwɛɹ ə hɝ filɪŋz fəɹ ðə wɔɹɾɝ.

"Of course. Even if Moiraine had not said I should, I would never let her think I was. . . ." Her eyes lit up fiercely for a moment, and he knew what she meant. Nynaeve would never let anyone think she was afraid, even if she was. Certainly not Moiraine, and especially not Lan. He hoped she did not know he was aware of her feelings for the Warder.

æftɝ ə moʊmən əɹ ɡeɪz sɔfən əz ɪt fɛl ɑn ðə sliv ə hɝ dʒɹɛs. "ðə leɪɾi əmælisə ɡeɪv mi ðɪs," ʃi sɛd soʊ sɔfli hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ʃi wɑz spikɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf. ʃi stʃɹoʊk ðə sɪlk wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝz, aʊtlaɪnɪŋ ði ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd flaʊɝz, smaɪlɪŋ, lɔst ɪn θɔt.

After a moment her gaze softened as it fell on the sleeve of her dress. "The Lady Amalisa gave me this," she said so softly he wondered if she was speaking to herself. She stroked the silk with her fingers, outlining the embroidered flowers, smiling, lost in thought.

"ɪts vɛɹi pɹɪɾi ɑn ju, nɪneɪiv. jəɹ pɹɪɾi tənaɪt." hi wɪnst əz sun əz i sɛɾ ɪt. ɛni wɪzdəm wɑz tʌtʃi əbaʊɾ əɹ əθɔɹəɾi, bʌt nɪneɪiv wɑz tʌtʃiɝ ðən moʊst. ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl bæk hoʊm hæɾ ɔlweɪz lʊkt oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ kəz ʃi wɑz jʌŋ, ən meɪbi kəz ʃi wɑz pɹɪɾi, ən əɹ faɪts wɪð ðə meɪɝ ən ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl hæd bɪn ðə stʌf ə stɔɹiz.

"It's very pretty on you, Nynaeve. You're pretty tonight." He winced as soon as he said it. Any Wisdom was touchy about her authority, but Nynaeve was touchier than most. The Women's Circle back home had always looked over her shoulder because she was young, and maybe because she was pretty, and her fights with the Mayor and the Village Council had been the stuff of stories.

ʃi dʒɝkt əɹ hæn əweɪ fɹəm ði ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ən ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɪm, bɹaʊz loʊɝɪŋ. hi spoʊk kwɪkli tə fɔɹstɔl hɝ.

She jerked her hand away from the embroidery and glared at him, brows lowering. He spoke quickly to forestall her.

"ðeɪ kæn kip ðə ɡeɪts bɑɹd fɝɛvɝ. wʌns ðeɪ ɑɹ oʊpənd, əl bi ɡɔn, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪl nɛvɝ faɪn mi. pɛɹɪn sɛz ðəɹ ɑɹ pleɪsəz ɪn ðə blæk hɪlz ən ðə kæɹələn ɡɹæs jə kən ɡoʊ fəɹ deɪz wɪθaʊt siɪŋ ə soʊl. meɪbi - meɪbi aɪ kən fɪɡjɝ aʊt wʌt tə də əbaʊt. . . ." hi ʃɹʌɡd ənkʌmftəbli. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə seɪ ɪt, nɑt tə hɝ. "æn ɪf aɪ kænt, ðɛɹəl bi noʊ wʌn tə hɝt."

"They can't keep the gates barred forever. Once they are opened, I will be gone, and the Aes Sedai will never find me. Perrin says there are places in the Black Hills and the Caralain Grass you can go for days without seeing a soul. Maybe - maybe I can figure out what to do about. . . ." He shrugged uncomfortably. There was no need to say it, not to her. "And if I can't, there'll be no one to hurt."

nɪneɪiv wɑz saɪlən fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən ʃi sɛd sloʊli, "aɪ æm nɑt soʊ ʃʊɹ, ɹænd. aɪ kæn seɪ jə lʊk laɪk mɔɹ ðən ənʌðɝ vɪlədʒ bɔɪ tə mi, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn ɪnsɪsts jə ɑɹ tɑvɝən, ən aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ʃi bɪlivz ðə wil ɪz fɪnɪʃt wɪð ju. ðə dɑɹk wʌn simz - "

Nynaeve was silent for a moment, then she said slowly, "I am not so sure, Rand. I can't say you look like more than another village boy to me, but Moiraine insists you are ta'veren, and I don't think she believes the Wheel is finished with you. The Dark One seems - "

"ʃeɪtɑn ɪz dɛd," hi sɛd hɑɹʃli, ən əbɹʌpli ðə ɹum sim tə lɝtʃ. hi ɡɹæbd ɪz hɛɾ əz weɪvz ə dɪzinəs slɑʃt θɹu hɪm.

"Shai'tan is dead," he said harshly, and abruptly the room seemed to lurch. He grabbed his head as waves of dizziness sloshed through him.

"ju ful! jə pjʊɹ, blaɪnd, ɪɾiɑtɪk ful! neɪmɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn, bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪz ətɛnʃən daʊn ɑn ju! doʊn juv ɪnʌf tʃɹʌbəl?"

"You fool! You pure, blind, idiotic fool! Naming the Dark One, bringing his attention down on you! Don't you have enough trouble?"

"hiz dɛd," ɹænd mʌɾɝd, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz hɛd. hi swɑloʊd. ðə dɪzinəs wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi feɪɾɪŋ. "ɔl ɹaɪt, ɔl ɹaɪt. bælzəmən, ɪf jə wɑnt. bʌt hiz dɛd; aɪ sɔ hɪm daɪ, sɔ hɪm bɝn."

"He's dead," Rand muttered, rubbing his head. He swallowed. The dizziness was already fading. "All right, all right. Ba'alzamon, if you want. But he's dead; I saw him die, saw him burn."

"æn aɪ wɑznt wɑtʃɪŋ jə wən ðə dɑɹk wʌnz aɪ fɛl ɑn jə dʒʌs naʊ? doʊn tɛl mi jə fɛl nʌθɪŋ, əɹ əl bɑks jəɹ ɪɹz; aɪ sɔ jəɹ feɪs."

"And I wasn't watching you when the Dark One's eye fell on you just now? Don't tell me you felt nothing, or I'll box your ears; I saw your face."

"hiz dɛd," ɹænd ɪnsɪstəd. ði ənsin wɑtʃɝ flæʃt θɹu hɪz hɛd, ən ðə wɪn ɑn ðə taʊɝ tɑp. hi ʃɪvɝd. "stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz hæpən ðɪs kloʊs tə ðə blaɪt."

"He's dead," Rand insisted. The unseen watcher flashed through his head, and the wind on the tower top. He shivered. "Strange things happen this close to the Blight."

"ju ɑɹ ə ful, ɹænd ælθɹ." ʃi ʃʊk ə fɪst ət hɪm. "aɪ wəd bɑks jəɹ ɪɹz fəɹ jə ɪf aɪ θɔɾ ɪt wəd nɑk ɛni sɛns - "

"You are a fool, Rand al'Thor." She shook a fist at him. "I would box your ears for you if I thought it would knock any sense - "

ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ wɝdz wɝ swɑloʊɾ əz bɛlz kɹæʃt aʊt ɹɪŋɪŋ ɔl oʊvɝ ðə kip.

The rest of her words were swallowed as bells crashed out ringing all over the keep.

hi baʊndəd tə hɪz fit. "ðæts ən əlɑɹm! ðəɹ sɝtʃɪŋ. . . ." neɪm ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ən ɪz ivəl kʌmz daʊn ɑn ju.

He bounded to his feet. "That's an alarm! They're searching. . . ." Name the Dark One, and his evil comes down on you.

nɪneɪiv stʊd mɔɹ sloʊli, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ ənizəli. "noʊ, aɪ doʊn θɪŋk soʊ. ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ju, ɔl ðə bɛlz də ɪz wɔɹn ju. noʊ, ɪf ɪts ən əlɑɹm, ɪts nɑt fəɹ ju."

Nynaeve stood more slowly, shaking her head uneasily. "No, I don't think so. If they are searching for you, all the bells do is warn you. No, if it's an alarm, it is not for you."

"ðɛn wʌt?" hi hɝid tə ðə nɪɹəst æɹoʊslɪɾ ən pɪɹɾ aʊt.

"Then what?" He hurried to the nearest arrowslit and peered out.

laɪts dɑɹɾɪd θɹu ðə naɪt-kloʊkt kip laɪk faɪɝəfliz, læmps ən tɔɹtʃɪz dæʃɪŋ hɪɹ ən ðɛɹ. səm wɛn tə ði aʊɾɝ wɔlz ən taʊɝz, bʌt moʊst ə ðoʊz ðəɾ i kəd si mɪl θɹu ðə ɡɑɹɾən bɪloʊ ən ðə wʌn kɔɹtʃjɑɹɾ i kəd dʒʌst ɡlɪmps pɑɹɾ ʌv. wʌtɛvɝ hæd kɑz ði əlɑɹm wɑz ɪnsaɪd ðə kip. ðə bɛlz fɛl saɪlənt, ənmæskɪŋ ðə ʃaʊts ə mɛn, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt wʌt ðeɪ wɝ kɔlɪŋ.

Lights darted through the night-cloaked keep like fireflies, lamps and torches dashing here and there. Some went to the outer walls and towers, but most of those that he could see milled through the garden below and the one courtyard he could just glimpse part of. Whatever had caused the alarm was inside the keep. The bells fell silent, unmasking the shouts of men, but he could not make out what they were calling.

ɪf ɪɾ ɪzən fəɹ mi. . . . "ɛɡwin," hi sɛd sʌɾənli. ɪf hiz stɪl əlaɪv, ɪf ðɛɹz ɛni ivəl, ɪts səpoʊz tə kʌm tə mi.

If it isn't for me. . . . "Egwene," he said suddenly. If he's still alive, if there's any evil, it's supposed to come to me.

nɪneɪiv tɝn fɹəm lʊkɪŋ θɹu ənʌðɝ æɹoʊslɪt. "wʌt?"

Nynaeve turned from looking through another arrowslit. "What?"

"ɛɡwin." hi kɹɔs ðə ɹum ɪn kwɪk stʃɹaɪdz ən snætʃt ɪz sɔɹɾ ən skæbɝd fɹi ʌv ðə bʌndəl. laɪt, ɪts səpoʊz tə hɝt mi, nɑt hɝ. "ʃiz ɪn ðə dʌnʒən wɪð feɪn. wʌɾ ɪf hiz lus sʌmhaʊ?"

"Egwene." He crossed the room in quick strides and snatched his sword and scabbard free of the bundle. Light, it's supposed to hurt me, not her. "She's in the dungeon with Fain. What if he's loose somehow?"

ʃi kɑɾ ɪm ət ðə dɔɹ, ɡɹæbɪŋ ɪz ɑɹm. ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əz tɔl əz ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, bʌt ʃi hɛld ɑn laɪk aɪɝn. "doʊn bi ə wɝs ɡoʊt-bɹeɪn ful ðən juv ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn, ɹænd ælθɹ. ivən ɪf ðɪs dʌzn əv ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð ju, ðə wɪmən ɑɹ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ! laɪt, mæn, ðɪs ɪz ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns. ðəɹ wɪl bi ɛɛs sədaɪ aʊt ðəɹ ɪn ðə hɔlz, laɪkli əz nɑt. ɛɡwin wɪl bi ɔl ɹaɪt. ʃi wɑz gɑnə teɪk mæt ən pɛɹɪn wɪð hɝ. ivən ɪf ʃi mɛt tʃɹʌbəl, ðeɪ wəd lʊk æftɝ hɝ."

She caught him at the door, grabbing his arm. She was not as tall as his shoulder, but she held on like iron. "Don't be a worse goat-brained fool than you've already been, Rand al'Thor. Even if this doesn't have anything to do with you, the women are looking for something! Light, man, this is the women's apartments. There will be Aes Sedai out there in the halls, likely as not. Egwene will be all right. She was going to take Mat and Perrin with her. Even if she met trouble, they would look after her."

"wʌɾ ɪf ʃi kʊdn faɪn ðɛm, nɪneɪiv? ɛɡwin wəd nɛvɝ lɛt ðət stɑp hɝ. ʃi wəd ɡoʊ əloʊn, ðə seɪm əz ju, ən jə noʊ ɪt. laɪt, aɪ toʊld əɹ feɪn ɪz deɪnʒɝəs! bɝn mi, aɪ toʊl hɝ!" pʊlɪŋ fɹi, hi dʒɝkt oʊpən ðə dɔɹ ən dæʃt aʊt. laɪt bɝn mi, ɪts səpoʊz tə hɝt mi!

"What if she couldn't find them, Nynaeve? Egwene would never let that stop her. She would go alone, the same as you, and you know it. Light, I told her Fain is dangerous! Burn me, I told her!" Pulling free, he jerked open the door and dashed out. Light burn me, it's supposed to hurt me!

ə wʊmən skɹimd ət ðə saɪɾ ə hɪm, ɪn ə leɪbɝɝz kɔɹs ʃɝɾ ən dʒɝkɪn wɪð ə sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪz hænd. ivən ɪnvaɪɾəd, mɛn dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ ɑɹmd ɪn ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns ənlɛs ðə kip wɑz ʌndɝ ətæk. wɪmən fɪl ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, sɝvɪŋ wɪmən ɪn ðə blæk-ænd-ɡoʊld, leɪɾiz ə ðə kip ɪn sɪlks ən leɪsəz, wɪmən ɪn ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ʃɔlz wɪð lɔŋ fɹɪnʒɪz, ɔl tɔkɪŋ laʊdli ət ðə seɪm taɪm, ɔl dɪmændɪŋ tə noʊ wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ. kɹaɪɪŋ tʃɪlʒɹən klʌŋ tə skɝts ɛvɹiwɛɹ. hi plʌnʒd θɹu ðɛm, dɑdʒɪŋ wɛɹ i kʊd, mʌɾɝɪŋ əpɑlədʒiz tə ðoʊz i ʃoʊldɝɾ əsaɪd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðɛɹ stɑɹɾəld stɛɹz.

A woman screamed at the sight of him, in a laborer's coarse shirt and jerkin with a sword in his hand. Even invited, men did not go armed in the women's apartments unless the keep was under attack. Women filled the corridor, serving women in the black-and-gold, ladies of the keep in silks and laces, women in embroidered shawls with long fringes, all talking loudly at the same time, all demanding to know what was happening. Crying children clung to skirts everywhere. He plunged through them, dodging where he could, muttering apologies to those he shouldered aside, trying to ignore their startled stares.

wʌn ə ðə wɪmən ɪn ə ʃɔl tɝn tə ɡoʊ bæk ɪndə hɝ ɹum, ən i sɔ ðə bæk ə hɝ ʃɔl, sɔ ðə ɡlimɪŋ waɪt tɪɹdʒɹɑp ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə hɝ bæk. sʌɾənli hi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz feɪsəz i hæd sin ɪn ði aʊɾɝ kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. ɛɛs sədaɪ, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm ɪn əlɑɹm, naʊ.

One of the women in a shawl turned to go back into her room, and he saw the back of her shawl, saw the gleaming white teardrop in the middle of her back. Suddenly he recognized faces he had seen in the outer courtyard. Aes Sedai, staring at him in alarm, now.

"hu ɑɹ ju? wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ hɪɹ?"

"Who are you? What are you doing here?"

"ɪz ðə kip ʌndɝ ətæk? ænsɝ mi, mæn!"

"Is the keep under attack? Answer me, man!"

"hiz noʊ soʊlʒɝ. hu ɪz hi? wʌts hæpənɪŋ?"

"He's no soldier. Who is he? What's happening?"

"ɪts ðə jʌŋ saʊθlæn lɔɹd!"

"It's the young southland lord!"

"sʌmwʌn stɑp hɪm!"

"Someone stop him!"

fɪɹ pʊʃt ɪz lɪps bæk, bɛɹɪŋ ɪz tiθ, bʌɾ i kɛp muvɪŋ, ən tʃɹaɪd tə muv fæstɝ.

Fear pushed his lips back, baring his teeth, but he kept moving, and tried to move faster.

ðən ə wʊmən keɪm aʊɾ ɪndə ðə hɔl, feɪs-tə-feɪs wɪð hɪm, ən i stɑpt ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf. hi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðət feɪs əbʌv ðə ɹɛst; hi θɔɾ i wəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪɾ ɪf i lɪv fɝɛvɝ. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. hɝ aɪz waɪɾənd ət ðə saɪɾ ə hɪm, ən ʃi stɑɹɾəd bæk. ənʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðə tɔl wʊmən i hæd sin wɪð ðə stæf, pʊt hɝsɛlf bɪtwin ɪm ən ði æmɪɝlɪn, ʃaʊɾɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ əɾ ɪm ðəɾ i kəd nɑt meɪk aʊɾ oʊvɝ ði ɪnkɹisɪŋ bæbəl.

Then a woman came out into the hall, face-to-face with him, and he stopped in spite of himself. He recognized that face above the rest; he thought he would remember it if he lived forever. The Amyrlin Seat. Her eyes widened at the sight of him, and she started back. Another Aes Sedai, the tall woman he had seen with the staff, put herself between him and the Amyrlin, shouting something at him that he could not make out over the increasing babble.

ʃi noʊz. laɪt hɛlp mi, ʃi noʊz. mɔɪɹeɪn toʊl hɝ. snɑɹlɪŋ, hi ɹæn ɑn. laɪt, dʒʌs lemi meɪk ʃʊɹ ɛɡwinz seɪf bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ. . . . hi hɝd ʃaʊɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt lɪsən.

She knows. Light help me, she knows. Moiraine told her. Snarling, he ran on. Light, just let me make sure Egwene's safe before they. . . . He heard shouting behind him, but he did not listen.

ðəɹ wɑz ɪnʌf tɝmɔɪl ɝaʊn ɪm aʊɾ ɪn ðə kip. mɛn ɹʌnɪŋ fəɹ ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹdz wɪð sɔɹdz ɪn hænd, nɛvɝ lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. oʊvɝ ðə klæmɝ ʌv əlɑɹm bɛlz, hi kəd meɪk aʊɾ ʌðɝ nɔɪzɪz, naʊ. ʃaʊts. skɹimz. mɛɾəl ɹɪŋɪŋ ɑn mɛɾəl. hi hæd dʒʌs taɪm tə ɹilaɪz ðeɪ wɝ ðə saʊnz ə bæɾəl - faɪɾɪŋ? ɪnsaɪd fæl dæɹə? - wən θɹi tʃɹɑləks keɪm dæʃɪŋ ɝaʊn ə kɔɹnɝ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm.

There was enough turmoil around him out in the keep. Men running for the courtyards with swords in hand, never looking at him. Over the clamor of alarm bells, he could make out other noises, now. Shouts. Screams. Metal ringing on metal. He had just time to realize they were the sounds of battle - Fighting? Inside Fal Dara? - when three Trollocs came dashing around a corner in front of him.

hɛɹi snaʊts dɪstɔɹɾəd ʌðɝwaɪz hjumən feɪsəz, ən wʌn ə ðɛm hæd ɹæmz hɔɹnz. ðeɪ bɛɹd tiθ, ɹeɪzɪŋ saɪð-laɪk sɔɹdz əz ðeɪ spɛd təwɔɹd hɪm.

Hairy snouts distorted otherwise human faces, and one of them had ram's horns. They bared teeth, raising scythe-like swords as they sped toward him.

ðə hɔlweɪ ðət hæd bɪn fʊl ə ɹʌnɪŋ mɛn ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ wɑz ɛmpti naʊ ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə θɹi tʃɹɑləks ən hɪmsɛlf. kɑt baɪ sɝpɹaɪz, hi ənʃiðd ɪz sɔɹɾ ɔkwɝdli, tʃɹaɪd hʌmɪŋbɝd kɪsəz ðə hʌniɹoʊz. ʃeɪkən ət faɪndɪŋ tʃɹɑləks ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə kip, hi dɪd ðə fɔɹm soʊ bædli læn wʊɾə stɔkt ɔf ɪn dɪsɡʌst. ə bɛɹ-snaʊɾəd tʃɹɑlɑk ɪveɪɾɪd ɪɾ izəli, bʌmpɪŋ ði ʌðɝ tu ɔf stʃɹaɪd fəɹ dʒʌst ən ɪnstənt.

The hallway that had been full of running men a moment before was empty now except for the three Trollocs and himself. Caught by surprise, he unsheathed his sword awkwardly, tried Hummingbird Kisses the Honeyrose. Shaken at finding Trollocs in the heart of Fal Dara keep, he did the form so badly Lan would have stalked off in disgust. A bear-snouted Trolloc evaded it easily, bumping the other two off stride for just an instant.

sʌɾənli ðəɹ wɝ ə dʌzən ʃaɪnɝənz ɹʌʃɪŋ pæst ɪm ət ðə tʃɹɑləks, mɛn hæf dʒɹɛst ɪn faɪnɝi fəɹ ðə fist, bʌt sɔɹdz ət ðə ɹɛɾi. ðə bɛɹ-snaʊɾəd tʃɹɑlɑk snɑɹəld əz ɪt daɪd, ən ɪts kəmpænjənz ɹæn, pɝsud baɪ ʃaʊɾɪŋ mɛn weɪvɪŋ stil. ʃaʊts ən skɹimz fɪl ði ɛɹ fɹəm ɛvɹiwɛɹ.

Suddenly there were a dozen Shienarans rushing past him at the Trollocs, men half dressed in finery for the feast, but swords at the ready. The bear-snouted Trolloc snarled as it died, and its companions ran, pursued by shouting men waving steel. Shouts and screams filled the air from everywhere.

ɛɡwin!

Egwene!

ɹænd tɝn dipɝ ɪndə ðə kip, ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn hɔlz ɛmpti ʌv laɪf, ðoʊ naʊ ən əɡɛn ə dɛd tʃɹɑlɑk leɪ ɑn ðə flɔɹ. əɹ ə dɛd mæn.

Rand turned deeper into the keep, running down halls empty of life, though now and again a dead Trolloc lay on the floor. Or a dead man.

ðən i keɪm tə ə kɹɔsɪŋ ə kɔɹɪɾɝz, ən tə hɪz lɛft wɑz ðə teɪl ɛn ʌv ə faɪt. sɪks tɑp-nɑɾɪd mɛn leɪ bliɾɪŋ ən stɪl, ən ə sɛvənθ wɑz daɪɪŋ. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl ɡeɪv ɪts sɔɹɾ ən ɛkstʃɹə twɪst əz ɪt pʊl ðə bleɪd fɹi ʌv ðə mænz bɛli, ən ðə soʊlʒɝ skɹimd əz i dʒɹɑpt ɪz sɔɹɾ ən fɛl. ðə feɪd muvd wɪð vaɪpɝəs ɡɹeɪs, ðə sɝpən ɪluʒən haɪɾənd baɪ ði ɑɹmɝ ə blæk, oʊvɝlæpɪŋ pleɪts ðət kʌvɝɾ ɪts tʃɛst. ɪt tɝnd, ən ðət peɪl, aɪləs feɪs stʌɾid ɹænd. ɪt stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd hɪm, smaɪlɪŋ ə blʌdləs smaɪl, nɑt hɝiɪŋ. ɪt hæd noʊ nid tə hɝi fəɹ wʌn mæn əloʊn.

Then he came to a crossing of corridors, and to his left was the tail end of a fight. Six top-knotted men lay bleeding and still, and a seventh was dying. The Myrddraal gave its sword an extra twist as it pulled the blade free of the man's belly, and the soldier screamed as he dropped his sword and fell. The Fade moved with viperous grace, the serpent illusion heightened by the armor of black, overlapping plates that covered its chest. It turned, and that pale, eyeless face studied Rand. It started toward him, smiling a bloodless smile, not hurrying. It had no need to hurry for one man alone.

hi fɛlt ɹuɾəd wɛɹ i stʊd; hɪz tʌŋ stʌk tə ðə ɹuf ə hɪz maʊð. ðə lʊk ə ði aɪləs ɪz fɪɹ. ðət wɑz wʌt ðeɪ sɛɾ əlɔŋ ðə bɔɹɾɝ. hɪz hænz ʃʊk əz i ɹeɪzd ɪz sɔɹd. hi nɛvɝ ivən θɔɾ ʌv əsumɪŋ ðə vɔɪd. laɪt, ɪt dʒʌs kɪl sɛvən ɑɹm soʊlʒɝz təɡɛðɝ. laɪt, wʌɾ æm aɪ ɡoʊɪŋ tə du. laɪt!

He felt rooted where he stood; his tongue stuck to the roof of his mouth. The look of the Eyeless is fear. That was what they said along the Border. His hands shook as he raised his sword. He never even thought of assuming the void. Light, it just killed seven armed soldiers together. Light, what am I going to do. Light!

əbɹʌpli ðə mɹdʒɹɑl stɑpt, ɪts smaɪl ɡɔn.

Abruptly the Myrddraal stopped, its smile gone.

"ðɪs wʌn ɪz maɪn, ɹænd." ɹænd ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ əz ɪŋtʃɹ stɛpt ʌp bɪsaɪd hɪm, dɑɹk ən stɑki ɪn ə jɛloʊ fistdeɪ koʊt, sɔɹd hɛld ɪn boʊθ hænz. ɪŋtʃɹz dɑɹk aɪz nɛvɝ lɛf ðə feɪdz feɪs; ɪf ðə ʃaɪnɝən fɛl ðə fɪɹ ə ðət ɡeɪz, hi ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn. "tʃɹaɪ jɝsɛlf ɑn ə tʃɹɑlɑk əɹ tu," hi sɛd sɔfli, "bɪfɔɹ jə feɪs wʌn ə ðiz."

"This one is mine, Rand." Rand gave a start as Ingtar stepped up beside him, dark and stocky in a yellow feastday coat, sword held in both hands. Ingtar's dark eyes never left the Fade's face; if the Shienaran felt the fear of that gaze, he gave no sign. "Try yourself on a Trolloc or two," he said softly, "before you face one of these."

"aɪ wɑz kʌmɪŋ daʊn tə si ɪf ɛɡwin ɪz seɪf. ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə dʌnʒən tə vɪzət feɪn, ən - "

"I was coming down to see if Egwene is safe. She was going to the dungeon to visit Fain, and - "

"ðɛn ɡoʊ si tə hɝ."

"Then go see to her."

ɹænd swɑloʊd. "wil teɪk ɪt təɡɛðɝ, ɪŋtʃɹ."

Rand swallowed. "We'll take it together, Ingtar."

"ju ɑɹən ɹɛɾi fəɹ ðɪs. ɡoʊ si tə jəɹ ɡɝl. ɡoʊ! jə wɑn tʃɹɑləks tə faɪn əɹ ʌnpɹətɛktɪd?"

"You aren't ready for this. Go see to your girl. Go! You want Trollocs to find her unprotected?"

fəɹ ə moʊmən ɹænd hʌŋ ðɛɹ, ʌndɪsaɪɾɪd. ðə feɪd hæd ɹeɪzd ɪts sɔɹd, fəɹ ɪŋtʃɹ. ə saɪlən snɑɹl twɪstəɾ ɪŋtʃɹz maʊθ, bʌt ɹænd nu ɪt wɑz nɑt fɪɹ. ən ɛɡwin kəd bi əloʊn ɪn ðə dʌnʒən wɪð feɪn, əɹ wɝs. stɪl i fɛlt əʃeɪmd əz i ɹæn fəɹ ðə stɛɹz ðət lɛɾ ʌndɝɡɹaʊnd. hi nu ə feɪdz lʊk kəd meɪk ɛni mæn əfɹeɪd, bʌɾ ɪŋtʃɹ hæd kɑŋkɝd ðə dʒɹɛd. hɪz stʌmək stɪl fɛl nɑɾɪd.

For a moment Rand hung there, undecided. The Fade had raised its sword, for Ingtar. A silent snarl twisted Ingtar's mouth, but Rand knew it was not fear. And Egwene could be alone in the dungeon with Fain, or worse. Still he felt ashamed as he ran for the stairs that led underground. He knew a Fade's look could make any man afraid, but Ingtar had conquered the dread. His stomach still felt knotted.

ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz bɪniθ ðə kip wɝ saɪlənt, ən fibli lɪt baɪ flɪkɝɪŋ, fɑɹ-speɪs læmps ɑn ðə wɔlz. hi sloʊɾ əz i keɪm kloʊsɝ tə ðə dʌnʒənz, kɹipɪŋ əz saɪlənli əz i kəɾ ɑn ɪz toʊz. ðə ɡɹeɪɾ ə hɪz buts ɑn ðə bɛɹ stoʊn sim tə fɪl ɪz ɪɹz. ðə dɔɹ tə ðə dʌnʒənz stʊd kɹækt oʊpən ə hændbɹidθ. ɪt ʃʊɾə bɪn kloʊzd ən boʊltəd.

The corridors beneath the keep were silent, and feebly lit by flickering, far-spaced lamps on the walls. He slowed as he came closer to the dungeons, creeping as silently as he could on his toes. The grate of his boots on the bare stone seemed to fill his ears. The door to the dungeons stood cracked open a handbreadth. It should have been closed and bolted.

stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə dɔɹ, hi tʃɹaɪd tə swɑloʊ ən kəd nɑt. hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə kɔl aʊt, ðən ʃʌɾ ɪɾ əɡɛn kwɪkli. ɪf ɛɡwin wɑz ɪn ðəɹ ən ɪn tʃɹʌbəl, ʃaʊɾɪŋ wəɾ oʊnli wɔɹn huɛvɝ wɑz ɛndeɪnʒɝɪŋ hɝ. əɹ wʌtɛvɝ. teɪkɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, hi sɛt hɪmsɛlf.

Staring at the door, he tried to swallow and could not. He opened his mouth to call out, then shut it again quickly. If Egwene was in there and in trouble, shouting would only warn whoever was endangering her. Or whatever. Taking a deep breath, he set himself.

ɪn wʌn moʊʃən i pʊʃt ðə dɔɹ waɪɾ oʊpən wɪð ðə skæbɝɾ ɪn ɪz lɛf hæn ən θɹu hɪmsɛlf ɪndə ðə dʌnʒən, tʌkɪŋ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ʌndɝ tə ɹoʊl θɹu ðə stʃɹɔ kʌvɝɪŋ ðə flɔɹ ən kʌm tə hɪz fit, spɪnɪŋ ðɪs weɪ ən ðət tu kwɪkli tə ɡɛɾ ə klɪɹ pɪktʃɝ ə ðə ɹum, lʊkɪŋ dɛspɝətli fəɹ ɛniwʌn u maɪɾ ətæk hɪm, lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ɛɡwin. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn ðɛɹ.

In one motion he pushed the door wide open with the scabbard in his left hand and threw himself into the dungeon, tucking his shoulder under to roll through the straw covering the floor and come to his feet, spinning this way and that too quickly to get a clear picture of the room, looking desperately for anyone who might attack him, looking for Egwene. There was no one there.

hɪz aɪz fɛl ɑn ðə teɪbəl, ən i stɑp dɛd, bɹɛθ ən ivən θɔt fɹizɪŋ. ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə stɪl-bɝnɪŋ læmp, əz ɪf tə meɪk ə sɛntɝpis, sæt ðə hɛdz ə ðə ɡɑɹdz ɪn tu pulz ə blʌd. ðɛɹ aɪz stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, waɪd wɪð fɪɹ, ən ðɛɹ maʊðz ɡeɪpt ɪn ə læst skɹim noʊ wʌn kəd hɪɹ. ɹænd ɡæɡd ən dʌbəld oʊvɝ; hɪz stʌmək hivd əɡɛn ən əɡɛn əz i vɑməɾəd ɪndə ðə stʃɹɔ. faɪnəli hi mænədʒ tə pʊl hɪmsɛlf ɪɹɛkt, skɹʌbɪŋ ɪz maʊθ wɪð ɪz sliv; hɪz θɹoʊt fɛl skɹeɪpt ɹɔ.

His eyes fell on the table, and he stopped dead, breath and even thought freezing. On either side of the still-burning lamp, as if to make a centerpiece, sat the heads of the guards in two pools of blood. Their eyes stared at him, wide with fear, and their mouths gaped in a last scream no one could hear. Rand gagged and doubled over; his stomach heaved again and again as he vomited into the straw. Finally he managed to pull himself erect, scrubbing his mouth with his sleeve; his throat felt scraped raw.

sloʊli hi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə ðə ɹɛst ə ðə ɹum, oʊnli hæf sin ən nɑt teɪkən ɪn dʊɹɪŋ ɪz heɪsti sɝtʃ fəɹ ən ətækɝ. blʌɾi lʌmps ə flɛʃ leɪ skæɾɝd θɹu ðə stʃɹɔ. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ i kəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz əz hjumən ɪksɛp ðə tu hɛdz. səm ə ðə pisəz lʊk tʃud. soʊ ðæts wʌt hæpən tə ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛɹ bɑɾiz. hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd ət ðə kɑmnəs ə hɪz θɔts, ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf i hæɾ ətʃiv ðə vɔɪd wɪθaʊt tʃɹaɪɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ðə ʃɑk, hi nu veɪɡli.

Slowly he became aware of the rest of the room, only half seen and not taken in during his hasty search for an attacker. Bloody lumps of flesh lay scattered through the straw. There was nothing he could recognize as human except the two heads. Some of the pieces looked chewed. So that's what happened to the rest of their bodies. He was surprised at the calmness of his thoughts, almost as if he had achieved the void without trying. It was the shock, he knew vaguely.

hi dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz iðɝ ə ðə hɛdz; ðə ɡɑɹdz hæd bɪn tʃeɪnʒd sɪns i wɑz ðəɹ ɝliɝ. hi wɑz ɡlæd fəɹ ðæt. noʊɪŋ u ðeɪ wɝ, ivən tʃæŋɡʌ, wʊɾə meɪɾ ɪt wɝs. blʌd kʌvɝd ðə wɔlz, tu, bʌɾ ɪn skɹɔld lɛɾɝz, sɪŋɡəl wɝdz ən hoʊl sɛntənsəz splæʃt ɑn ɛvɹi wɪtʃ weɪ. səm wɝ hɑɹʃ ən æŋɡjəlɝ, ɪn ə læŋɡwədʒ i dɪd nɑt noʊ, ðoʊ hi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz tʃɹɑlɑk skɹɪpt. ʌðɝz i kəd ɹid, ən wɪʃt i kəd nɑt. blæsfəmiz ən ɑbsɛnɪɾiz bæɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ə steɪbəlɪhæn əɹ ə mɝtʃəns ɡɑɹd ɡoʊ peɪl.

He did not recognize either of the heads; the guards had been changed since he was there earlier. He was glad for that. Knowing who they were, even Changu, would have made it worse. Blood covered the walls, too, but in scrawled letters, single words and whole sentences splashed on every which way. Some were harsh and angular, in a language he did not know, though he recognized Trolloc script. Others he could read, and wished he could not. Blasphemies and obscenities bad enough to make a stablehand or a merchant's guard go pale.

"ɛɡwin." kɑmnəs vænɪʃt. ʃʌvɪŋ ɪz skæbɝd θɹu hɪz bɛlt, hi snætʃt ðə læmp fɹəm ðə teɪbəl, hɑɹdli noʊɾɪsɪŋ wən ðə hɛdz tɑpəld oʊvɝ. "ɛɡwin! wɛɹ ɑɹ ju?"

"Egwene." Calmness vanished. Shoving his scabbard through his belt, he snatched the lamp from the table, hardly noticing when the heads toppled over. "Egwene! Where are you?"

hi stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd ði ɪnɝ dɔɹ, tʊk tu stɛps, ən stɑpt, stɛɹɪŋ. ðə wɝdz ɑn ðə dɔɹ, dɑɹk ən ɡlɪsnɪŋ wɛtli ɪn ðə laɪɾ ə hɪz læmp, wɝ pleɪn ɪnʌf.

He started toward the inner door, took two steps, and stopped, staring. The words on the door, dark and glistening wetly in the light of his lamp, were plain enough.

wɪl miɾ əɡɛn ɑn toʊmən hɛd.

WE WILL MEET AGAIN ON TOMAN HEAD.

ɪts nɛvɝ oʊvɝ, ælθɹ.

IT IS NEVER OVER, AL'THOR.

hɪz sɔɹd dʒɹɑp fɹəm ə hæn sʌɾənli nʌm. nɛvɝ teɪkɪŋ ɪz aɪz ɔf ðə dɔɹ, hi bɛn tə pɪk ɪɾ ʌp. ɪnstɛɾ i ɡɹæbd ə hændfʊl ə stʃɹɔ ən bɪɡæn skɹʌbɪŋ fjʊɹiəsli ət ðə wɝdz ɑn ðə dɔɹ. pæntɪŋ, hi skɹʌbd əntɪl ɪt wɑz ɔl wʌn blʌɾi smɪɹ, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt stɑp.

His sword dropped from a hand suddenly numb. Never taking his eyes off the door, he bent to pick it up. Instead he grabbed a handful of straw and began scrubbing furiously at the words on the door. Panting, he scrubbed until it was all one bloody smear, but he could not stop.

"wʌt dʒju du?"

"What do you do?"

ət ðə ʃɑɹp vɔɪs bɪhaɪn hɪm, hi wɝld, stupɪŋ tə siz ɪz sɔɹd.

At the sharp voice behind him, he whirled, stooping to seize his sword.

ə wʊmən stʊɾ ɪn ði aʊɾɝ dɔɹweɪ, bæk stɪf wɪð aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ. hɝ hɛɹ wɑz laɪk peɪl ɡoʊld, ɪn ə dʌzən əɹ mɔɹ bɹeɪdz, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz wɝ dɑɹk, ən ʃɑɹp ɑn ɪz feɪs. ʃi lʊk nɑt mʌtʃ oʊldɝ ðən hi, ən pɹɪɾi ɪn ə sʌlki weɪ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə taɪtnəs tə hɝ maʊθ i dɪd nɑt laɪk. ðən i sɔ ðə ʃɔl ʃi hæd ɹæp taɪtli ɝaʊn hɝ, wɪð ɪts lɔŋ, ɹɛd fɹɪnʒ.

A woman stood in the outer doorway, back stiff with outrage. Her hair was like pale gold, in a dozen or more braids, but her eyes were dark, and sharp on his face. She looked not much older than he, and pretty in a sulky way, but there was a tightness to her mouth he did not like. Then he saw the shawl she had wrapped tightly around her, with its long, red fringe.

ɛɛs sədaɪ. ən laɪt hɛlp mi, ʃiz ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ. "aɪ. . . . aɪ wɑz dʒʌst. . . . ɪts fɪlθi stʌf. vaɪl."

Aes Sedai. And Light help me, she's Red Ajah. "I. . . . I was just. . . . It's filthy stuff. Vile."

"ɛvɹiθɪŋ mʌs bi lɛft ɪɡzækli əz ɪts fəɹ əs tə ɪɡzæmɪn. tʌtʃ nʌθɪŋ." ʃi tʊk ə stɛp fɔɹwɝd, piɹɪŋ ət hɪm, ən i tʊk wʌn bæk. "jɛs. jɛs, əz aɪ θɔt. wʌn ə ðoʊz wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn. wʌt juv tə də wɪð ðɪs?" hɝ dʒɛstʃɝ tʊk ɪn ðə hɛdz ɑn ðə teɪbəl ən ðə blʌɾi skɹɔl ɑn ðə wɔlz.

"Everything must be left exactly as it is for us to examine. Touch nothing." She took a step forward, peering at him, and he took one back. "Yes. Yes, as I thought. One of those with Moiraine. What do you have to do with this?" Her gesture took in the heads on the table and the bloody scrawl on the walls.

fəɹ ə mɪnəɾ i ɡɑɡəld ət hɝ. "mi? nʌθɪŋ! aɪ keɪm daʊn hɪɹ tə faɪnd. . . . ɛɡwin!"

For a minute he goggled at her. "Me? Nothing! I came down here to find. . . . Egwene!"

hi tɝn tə oʊpən ði ɪnɝ dɔɹ, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃaʊɾəd, "noʊ! jəl ænsɝ mi!"

He turned to open the inner door, and the Aes Sedai shouted, "No! You will answer me!"

sʌɾənli ɪt wɑz ɔl i kəd də tə stæn ʌp, tə kip hoʊldɪŋ ðə læmp ən ɪz sɔɹd. aɪsi koʊl skwizd əɾ ɪm fɹəm ɔl saɪdz. hɪz hɛd fɛl kɑɾ ɪn ə fɹoʊzən vaɪs; hi kəd bɛɹli bɹið fəɹ ðə pɹɛʃɝ ɑn ɪz tʃɛst.

Suddenly it was all he could do to stand up, to keep holding the lamp and his sword. Icy cold squeezed at him from all sides. His head felt caught in a frozen vise; he could barely breathe for the pressure on his chest.

"ænsɝ mi, bɔɪ. tɛl mi jəɹ neɪm."

"Answer me, boy. Tell me your name."

ɪnvoʊlʌntɝɪli hi ɡɹʌntɪd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ænsɝ əɡɛns ðə tʃɪl ðət sim tə bi pɹɛsɪŋ ɪz feɪs bæk ɪndə hɪz skʌl, kənstʃɹɪktɪŋ ɪz tʃɛs laɪk fɹoʊzən aɪɝn bænz. hi klɛntʃt ɪz dʒɔz tə kip ðə saʊn ɪn. peɪnfəli hi ɹoʊld ɪz aɪz tə ɡlɛɹ əɾ əɹ θɹu ə blɝ ə tɛɹz. ðə laɪt bɝn ju, ɛɛs sədaɪ! aɪ woʊn seɪ ə wɝd, ðə ʃædoʊ teɪk ju!

Involuntarily he grunted, trying to answer against the chill that seemed to be pressing his face back into his skull, constricting his chest like frozen iron bands. He clenched his jaws to keep the sound in. Painfully he rolled his eyes to glare at her through a blur of tears. The Light burn you, Aes Sedai! I won't say a word, the Shadow take you!

"ænsɝ mi, bɔɪ! naʊ!"

"Answer me, boy! Now!"

fɹoʊzən niɾəlz pɪɹst ɪz bɹeɪn wɪð æɡəni, ɡɹeɪɾɪd ɪndə hɪz boʊnz. ðə vɔɪd fɔɹmd ɪnsaɪɾ ɪm bɪfɔɹ i ivən ɹilaɪzd i hæd θɔɾ ʌv ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt kəd nɑt hoʊld aʊt ðə peɪn. dɪmli hi sɛns laɪɾ ən wɔɹmθ sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə dɪstəns. ɪt flɪkɝd kwizəli, bʌt ðə laɪt wɑz wɔɹm, ən i wɑz koʊld. dɪstən bɪɑnd noʊɪŋ, bʌt sʌmhaʊ dʒʌst wɪðɪn ɹitʃ. laɪt, soʊ koʊld. aɪ hæv tə ɹitʃ . . . wʌt? ʃiz kɪlɪŋ mi. aɪ hæv tə ɹitʃ ɪt, əɹ ʃɪl kɪl mi. dɛspɝətli hi stʃɹɛtʃt təwɔɹd ðə laɪt.

Frozen needles pierced his brain with agony, grated into his bones. The void formed inside him before he even realized he had thought of it, but it could not hold out the pain. Dimly he sensed light and warmth somewhere in the distance. It flickered queasily, but the light was warm, and he was cold. Distant beyond knowing, but somehow just within reach. Light, so cold. I have to reach . . . what? She's killing me. I have to reach it, or she'll kill me. Desperately he stretched toward the light.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn hɪɹ?"

"What is going on here?"

əbɹʌpli ðə koʊld ən ðə pɹɛʃɝ ən ðə niɾəlz vænɪʃt. hɪz niz sæɡd, bʌɾ i fɔɹst əm stɪf. hi wəd nɑt fɔl tə hɪz niz; hi wəd nɑt ɡɪv əɹ ðə sæɾəsfækʃən. ðə vɔɪd wɑz ɡɔn, tu, əz sʌɾənli əz ɪt hæd kʌm. ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɪl mi. pæntɪŋ, hi ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛd. mɔɪɹeɪn stʊɾ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ.

Abruptly the cold and the pressure and the needles vanished. His knees sagged, but he forced them stiff. He would not fall to his knees; he would not give her the satisfaction. The void was gone, too, as suddenly as it had come. She was trying to kill me. Panting, he raised his head. Moiraine stood in the doorway.

"aɪ æskt wʌɾ ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn hɪɹ, liɑnʒɹɪn," ʃi sɛd.

"I asked what is going on here, Liandrin," she said.

"aɪ faʊn ðɪs bɔɪ hɪɹ," ðə ɹɛɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹɪplaɪd kɑmli. "ðə ɡɑɹdz ɑɹ mɝɾɝd, ən hɪɹ i ɪz. wʌn ə jʊɹz. ən wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ hɪɹ, mɔɪɹeɪn? ðə bæɾəl ɪz əbʌv, nɑt hɪɹ."

"I found this boy here," the Red Aes Sedai replied calmly. "The guards are murdered, and here he is. One of yours. And what are you doing here, Moiraine? The battle is above, not here."

"aɪ kəɾ æsk ðə seɪm ə ju, liɑnʒɹɪn." mɔɪɹeɪn lʊkt ɝaʊn ðə ɹum wɪð oʊnli ə slaɪt taɪɾənɪŋ ə hɝ maʊθ fəɹ ðə tʃɑɹnəl. "waɪ ɑɹ jə hɪɹ?"

"I could ask the same of you, Liandrin." Moiraine looked around the room with only a slight tightening of her mouth for the charnel. "Why are you here?"

ɹænd tɝn əweɪ fɹəm ðɛm, ɔkwɝdli ʃʌv bæk ðə boʊls ɑn ði ɪnɝ dɔɹ ən pʊld ɪɾ oʊpən. "ɛɡwin keɪm daʊn hɪɹ," hi ənaʊns fəɹ ɛniwʌn u kɛɹd, ən wɛn ɪn, hoʊldɪŋ ɪz læmp haɪ. hɪz niz kɛpt wɑntɪŋ tə ɡɪv weɪ; hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ hi steɪɾ ɑn ɪz fit, oʊnli ðəɾ i hæd tə faɪn ɛɡwin. "ɛɡwin!"

Rand turned away from them, awkwardly shoved back the bolts on the inner door and pulled it open. "Egwene came down here," he announced for anyone who cared, and went in, holding his lamp high. His knees kept wanting to give way; he was not sure how he stayed on his feet, only that he had to find Egwene. "Egwene!"

ə hɑloʊ ɡɝɡəl ən ə θɹæʃɪŋ saʊn keɪm fɹəm ɪz ɹaɪt, ən i θɹʌs ðə læmp ðət weɪ. ðə pɹɪznɝ ɪn ðə fænsi koʊt wɑz sæɡɪŋ əɡɛns ði aɪɝn ɡɹɪl ə hɪz sɛl, hɪz bɛlt lupt ɝaʊn ðə bɑɹz ən ðən ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk. əz ɹænd lʊkt, hi ɡeɪv wʌn læs kɪk, skɹeɪpɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹɔ-kʌvɝd flɔɹ, ən wɑz stɪl, tʌŋ ən aɪz bʌlʒɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə feɪs ɡɔn ɔlmoʊs blæk. hɪz niz ɔlmoʊs tʌtʃt ðə flɔɹ; hi cʊɾə stʊɾ ɛnitaɪm i wɑntəd tə.

A hollow gurgle and a thrashing sound came from his right, and he thrust the lamp that way. The prisoner in the fancy coat was sagging against the iron grille of his cell, his belt looped around the bars and then around his neck. As Rand looked, he gave one last kick, scraping across the straw-covered floor, and was still, tongue and eyes bulging out of a face gone almost black. His knees almost touched the floor; he could have stood anytime he wanted to.

ʃɪvɝɪŋ, ɹænd pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə nɛkst sɛl. ðə bɪɡ mæn wɪð ðə sʌŋkən nʌkəlz hʌɾəld ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz sɛl, aɪz əz waɪɾ əz ðeɪ kəɾ oʊpən. ət ðə saɪɾ ə ɹænd, hi skɹimd ən twɪstəɾ ɝaʊnd, klɔɪŋ fɹæntəkəli ət ðə stoʊn wɔl.

Shivering, Rand peered into the next cell. The big man with the sunken knuckles huddled in the back of his cell, eyes as wide as they could open. At the sight of Rand, he screamed and twisted around, clawing frantically at the stone wall.

"aɪ woʊn hɝt ju," ɹænd kɔld. ðə mæn kɛpt ɑn skɹimɪŋ ən dɪɡɪŋ. hɪz hænz wɝ blʌɾi, ən ɪz skɹæbəlɪŋz stʃɹikt əkɹɔs dɑɹk, kɑndʒil smɪɹz. ðɪs wɑz nɑɾ ɪz fɝst ətɛmp tə dɪɡ θɹu ðə stoʊn wɪð ɪz bɛɹ hænz.

"I won't hurt you," Rand called. The man kept on screaming and digging. His hands were bloody, and his scrabblings streaked across dark, conjealed smears. This was not his first attempt to dig through the stone with his bare hands.

ɹænd tɝn əweɪ, ɹɪliv ðəɾ ɪz stʌmək wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɛmpti. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ i kəd də fəɹ iðɝ ə ðɛm. "ɛɡwin!"

Rand turned away, relieved that his stomach was already empty. But there was nothing he could do for either of them. "Egwene!"

hɪz laɪt faɪnəli ɹitʃt ði ɛn ə ðə sɛlz. ðə dɔɹ tə feɪnz sɛl stʊɾ oʊpən, ən ðə sɛl wɑz ɛmpti, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə tu ʃeɪps ɑn ðə stoʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə sɛl ðət meɪd ɹænd lip fɔɹwɝɾ ən dʒɹɑp tə hɪz niz bɪtwin ðɛm.

His light finally reached the end of the cells. The door to Fain's cell stood open, and the cell was empty, but it was the two shapes on the stone in front of the cell that made Rand leap forward and drop to his knees between them.

ɛɡwin ən mæt leɪ spɹɔl boʊnləsli, ʌnkɑnʃəs . . . əɹ dɛd. wɪð ə flʌɾ ə ɹɪlif i sɔ ðɛɹ tʃɛsts ɹaɪz ən fɔl. ðəɹ dɪd nɑt sim tə bi ə mɑɹk ɑn iðɝ ə ðɛm.

Egwene and Mat lay sprawled bonelessly, unconscious . . . or dead. With a flood of relief he saw their chests rise and fall. There did not seem to be a mark on either of them.

"ɛɡwin? mæt?" sɛɾɪŋ ðə sɔɹd daʊn, hi ʃʊk ɛɡwin dʒɛnli. "ɛɡwin?" ʃi dɪd nɑɾ oʊpən əɹ aɪz. "mɔɪɹeɪn! ɛɡwinz hɝt! ən mæt!" mæts bɹiðɪŋ saʊndəd leɪbɝd, ən ɪz feɪs wɑz dɛθli peɪl. ɹænd fɛlt ɔlmoʊs laɪk kɹaɪɪŋ. ɪt wɑz səpoʊz tə hɝt mi. aɪ neɪm ðə dɑɹk wʌn. meɪn!

"Egwene? Mat?" Setting the sword down, he shook Egwene gently. "Egwene?" She did not open her eyes. "Moiraine! Egwene's hurt! And Mat!" Mat's breathing sounded labored, and his face was deathly pale. Rand felt almost like crying. It was supposed to hurt me. I named the Dark One. Me!

"du nɑt muv ðɛm." mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd nɑt saʊn əpsɛt, əɹ ivən sɝpɹaɪzd.

"Do not move them." Moiraine did not sound upset, or even surprised.

ðə tʃeɪmbɝ wɑz sʌɾənli flʌɾəd wɪð laɪɾ əz ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ ɛntɝd. itʃ bælənst ə ɡloʊɪŋ bɔl ə kul laɪt, floʊɾɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ əbʌv əɹ hænd.

The chamber was suddenly flooded with light as the two Aes Sedai entered. Each balanced a glowing ball of cool light, floating in the air above her hand.

liɑnʒɹɪn mɑɹtʃt stʃɹeɪt daʊn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə waɪd hɔl, hoʊldɪŋ əɹ skɝts ʌp aʊɾ ə ðə stʃɹɔ wɪð əɹ fɹi hænd, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn pɔz tə lʊk ət ðə tu pɹɪznɝz bɪfɔɹ fɑloʊɪŋ. "ðɛɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ tə də fəɹ ðə wʌn," ʃi sɛd, "æn ði ʌðɝ kən weɪt."

Liandrin marched straight down the middle of the wide hall, holding her skirts up out of the straw with her free hand, but Moiraine paused to look at the two prisoners before following. "There is nothing to do for the one," she said, "and the other can wait."

liɑnʒɹɪn ɹitʃt ɹænd fɝst ən bɪɡæn tə bɛn təwɔɹɾ ɛɡwin, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn dɑɹɾɪd ɪn əhɛɾ ə hɝ ən leɪɾ əɹ fɹi hæn ɑn ɛɡwinz hɛd. liɑnʒɹɪn stʃɹeɪɾənd wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs.

Liandrin reached Rand first and began to bend toward Egwene, but Moiraine darted in ahead of her and laid her free hand on Egwene's head. Liandrin straightened with a grimace.

"ʃi ɪz nɑt bædli hɝt," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt. "ʃi wɑz stʃɹʌk hɪɹ." ʃi tʃɹeɪst ən ɛɹiə ɑn ðə saɪɾ ʌv ɛɡwinz hɛd, kʌvɝd baɪ hɝ hɛɹ; ɹænd kəd si nʌθɪŋ dɪfɹən əbaʊɾ ɪt. "ðæɾ ɪz ði oʊnli ɪnʒɝi ʃiz teɪkən. ʃɪl bi ɔl ɹaɪt."

"She is not badly hurt," Moiraine said after a moment. "She was struck here." She traced an area on the side of Egwene's head, covered by her hair; Rand could see nothing different about it. "That is the only injury she has taken. She will be all right."

ɹænd lʊk fɹəm wʌn ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ði ʌðɝ. "wʌɾ əbaʊt mæt?" liɑnʒɹɪn ɑɹtʃt ən aɪbɹaʊ əɾ ɪm ən tɝn tə wɑtʃ mɔɪɹeɪn wɪð ə ɹaɪ ɪkspɹɛʃən.

Rand looked from one Aes Sedai to the other. "What about Mat?" Liandrin arched an eyebrow at him and turned to watch Moiraine with a wry expression.

"bi kwaɪət," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. fɪŋɡɝz stɪl laɪɪŋ ɑn ði ɛɹiə wɛɹ ʃi sɛɾ ɛɡwin hæd bɪn hɪt, ʃi kloʊzd əɹ aɪz. ɛɡwin mɝmɝɾ ən stɝd, ðən leɪ stɪl.

"Be quiet," Moiraine said. Fingers still lying on the area where she said Egwene had been hit, she closed her eyes. Egwene murmured and stirred, then lay still.

"ɪz ʃi . . . ?"

"Is she . . . ?"

"ʃi ɪz slipɪŋ, ɹænd. ʃɪl bi wɛl, bʌt ʃi mʌst slip." mɔɪɹeɪn ʃɪftəd tə mæt, bʌt hɪɹ ʃi oʊnli tʌtʃt ɪm fəɹ ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ dʒɹɔɪŋ bæk. "ðɪs ɪz mɔɹ sɪɹiəs," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. ʃi fʌmbəld ət mæts weɪst, pʊlɪŋ ɪz koʊɾ oʊpən, ən meɪɾ ən æŋɡɹi saʊnd. "ðə dæɡɝ ɪz ɡɔn."

"She is sleeping, Rand. She will be well, but she must sleep." Moiraine shifted to Mat, but here she only touched him for a moment before drawing back. "This is more serious," she said softly. She fumbled at Mat's waist, pulling his coat open, and made an angry sound. "The dagger is gone."

"wʌt dæɡɝ?" liɑnʒɹɪn æskt.

"What dagger?" Liandrin asked.

vɔɪsəz sʌɾənli keɪm fɹəm ði aʊɾɝ ɹum, mɛn ɪkskleɪmɪŋ ɪn dɪsɡʌst ən æŋɡɝ.

Voices suddenly came from the outer room, men exclaiming in disgust and anger.

"ɪn hɪɹ," mɔɪɹeɪn kɔld. "bɹɪŋ tu lɪɾɝz. kwɪkli." sʌmwʌn ɪn ði aʊɾɝ ɹum ɹeɪzd ə kɹaɪ fəɹ lɪɾɝz.

"In here," Moiraine called. "Bring two litters. Quickly." Someone in the outer room raised a cry for litters.

"feɪn ɪz ɡɔn," ɹænd sɛd.

"Fain is gone," Rand said.

ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ lʊkt ət hɪm. hi kəd ɹid nʌθɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz. ðɛɹ aɪz ɡlɪɾɝd ɪn ðə laɪt.

The two Aes Sedai looked at him. He could read nothing on their faces. Their eyes glittered in the light.

"soʊ aɪ si," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs.

"So I see," Moiraine said in a flat voice.

"aɪ toʊld əɹ nɑt tə kʌm. aɪ toʊld əɹ i wɑz deɪnʒɝəs."

"I told her not to come. I told her he was dangerous."

"wɛn aɪ keɪm," liɑnʒɹɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə koʊl vɔɪs, "hi wɑz dɪstʃɹɔɪɪŋ ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn ði aʊɾɝ tʃeɪmbɝ."

"When I came," Liandrin said in a cold voice, "he was destroying the writing in the outer chamber."

hi ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli ɑn ɪz niz. ði ɛɛs sədaɪz aɪz simd əlaɪk, naʊ. mɛʒɝɪŋ ən weɪɪŋ hɪm, kul ən tɛɹəbəl.

He shifted uneasily on his knees. The Aes Sedai's eyes seemed alike, now. Measuring and weighing him, cool and terrible.

"ɪt - ɪt wɑz fɪlθ," hi sɛd. "dʒʌs fɪlθ." ðeɪ stɪl lʊkt ət hɪm, nɑt spikɪŋ. "ju doʊn θɪŋk aɪ. . . . mɔɪɹeɪn, jə kæn θɪŋk aɪ hæɾ ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð - wɪð wʌt hæpən aʊt ðɛɹ." laɪt, dɪɾ aɪ? aɪ neɪm ðə dɑɹk wʌn.

"It - it was filth," he said. "Just filth." They still looked at him, not speaking. "You don't think I. . . . Moiraine, you can't think I had anything to do with - with what happened out there." Light, did I? I named the Dark One.

ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ænsɝ, ən i fɛlt ə tʃɪl ðət wɑz nɑt lɛsən baɪ mɛn ɹʌʃɪŋ ɪn wɪð tɔɹtʃɪz ən læmps. mɔɪɹeɪn ən liɑnʒɹɪn lɛt ðɛɹ ɡloʊɪŋ bɔlz wɪŋk aʊt. ðə læmps ən tɔɹtʃɪz dɪd nɑt ɡɪv əz mʌtʃ laɪt; ʃædoʊz spɹæŋ ʌp ɪn ðə dɛpθs ə ðə sɛlz. mɛn wɪð lɪɾɝz hɝid tə ðə fɪɡjɝz laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ. ɪŋtʃɹ lɛd ðɛm. hɪz tɑpnɑɾ ɔlmoʊs kwɪvɝd wɪð æŋɡɝ, ən i lʊkt iɡɝ tə faɪn sʌmθɪŋ ɑn wɪtʃ tə juz ɪz sɔɹd.

She did not answer, and he felt a chill that was not lessened by men rushing in with torches and lamps. Moiraine and Liandrin let their glowing balls wink out. The lamps and torches did not give as much light; shadows sprang up in the depths of the cells. Men with litters hurried to the figures lying on the floor. Ingtar led them. His topknot almost quivered with anger, and he looked eager to find something on which to use his sword.

"soʊ ðə dɑɹkfɹɛn ɪz ɡɔn, tu," hi ɡɹaʊld. "wɛl, ɪts ðə list ʌv wʌɾ əz hæpən ðɪs naɪt."

"So the Darkfriend is gone, too," he growled. "Well, it's the least of what has happened this night."

"ðə list ivən hɪɹ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd ʃɑɹpli. ʃi dɝɛktəd ðə mɛn pʊɾɪŋ ɛɡwin ən mæt ɑn ðə lɪɾɝz. "ðə ɡɝl ɪz tə bi teɪkən tə hɝ ɹum. ʃi nidz ə wʊmən tə wɑtʃ ɪn keɪs ʃi weɪks ɪn ðə naɪt. ʃi meɪ bi fɹaɪɾənd, bʌt mɔɹ ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ʃi nidz slip, naʊ. ðə bɔɪ. . . ." ʃi tʌtʃt mæt əz tu mɛn lɪftəɾ ɪz lɪɾɝ, ən pʊld əɹ hæn bæk kwɪkli. "teɪk ɪm tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sits tʃeɪmbɝz. faɪn ði æmɪɝlɪn wɛɹɛvɝ ʃi ɪz, ən tɛl əɹ hiz ðɛɹ. tɛl əɹ ɪz neɪm ɪz meɪtʃɹim kɔθən. əl dʒɔɪn əɹ əz sun əz aɪm eɪbəl."

"The least even here," Moiraine said sharply. She directed the men putting Egwene and Mat on the litters. "The girl is to be taken to her room. She needs a woman to watch in case she wakes in the night. She may be frightened, but more than anything else she needs sleep, now. The boy. . . ." She touched Mat as two men lifted his litter, and pulled her hand back quickly. "Take him to the Amyrlin Seat's chambers. Find the Amyrlin wherever she is, and tell her he is there. Tell her his name is Matrim Cauthon. I will join her as soon as I am able."

"ði æmɪɝlɪn!" liɑnʒɹɪn ɪkskleɪmd. "ju θɪŋk tə hæv ði æmɪɝlɪn əz hilɝ fəɹ jəɹ - jəɹ pɛt? jə ɑɹ mæd, mɔɪɹeɪn."

"The Amyrlin!" Liandrin exclaimed. "You think to have the Amyrlin as Healer for your - your pet? You are mad, Moiraine."

"ði æmɪɝlɪn sit," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd kɑmli, "dʌz nɑt ʃɛɹ jəɹ ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ pɹɛdʒəɾɪsɪz, liɑnʒɹɪn. ʃɪl hil ə mæn wɪθaʊt niɾ ʌv ə spɛʃəl jus fəɹ hɪm. ɡoʊ əhɛd," ʃi toʊl ðə lɪɾɝ bɛɹɝz.

"The Amyrlin Seat," Moiraine said calmly, "does not share your Red Ajah prejudices, Liandrin. She will Heal a man without need of a special use for him. Go ahead," she told the litter bearers.

liɑnʒɹɪn wɑtʃt əm liv, mɔɪɹeɪn ən ðə mɛn kæɹiɪŋ mæt ən ɛɡwin, ðən tɝn tə stɛɹ ət ɹænd. hi tʃɹaɪd tə ɪɡnɔɹ hɝ. hi kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn skæbɑɹɾɪŋ ɪz sɔɹɾ ən bɹʌʃɪŋ ɔf ðə stʃɹɔ ðət klʌŋ tə hɪz ʃɝɾ ən bɹitʃɪz. wən i ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛd, ðoʊ, ʃi wɑz stɪl stʌɾiɪŋ hɪm, hɝ feɪs əz blæŋk əz aɪs. seɪɪŋ nʌθɪŋ, ʃi tɝn tə kənsɪɾɝ ði ʌðɝ mɛn θɔtfəli. wʌn hɛl ðə bɑɾi ʌv ðə hæŋ mæn ʌp waɪl ənʌðɝ wɝk tə ənfæstən ðə bɛlt. ɪŋtʃɹ ən ði ʌðɝz weɪɾəd ɹɪspɛkfəli. wɪð ə læst ɡlæns ət ɹænd, ʃi lɛft, hɛd hɛld laɪk ə kwin.

Liandrin watched them leave, Moiraine and the men carrying Mat and Egwene, then turned to stare at Rand. He tried to ignore her. He concentrated on scabbarding his sword and brushing off the straw that clung to his shirt and breeches. When he raised his head, though, she was still studying him, her face as blank as ice. Saying nothing, she turned to consider the other men thoughtfully. One held the body of the hanged man up while another worked to unfasten the belt. Ingtar and the others waited respectfully. With a last glance at Rand, she left, head held like a queen.

"ə hɑɹd wʊmən," ɪŋtʃɹ mʌɾɝd, ðən sim sɝpɹaɪz ðəɾ i hæd spoʊkən. "wʌt hæpən hɪɹ, ɹænd ælθɹ?"

"A hard woman," Ingtar muttered, then seemed surprised that he had spoken. "What happened here, Rand al'Thor?"

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ, ɪksɛp ðət feɪn ɪskeɪp sʌmhaʊ. ən hɝɾ ɛɡwin ən mæt duɪŋ ɪt. aɪ sɔ ðə ɡɑɹdʒɹum" - hi ʃʌɾɝəd - "bʌɾ ɪn hɪɹ. . . . wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz, ɪŋtʃɹ, ɪt skɛɹd ðət fɛloʊ bæɾ ɪnʌf ðəɾ i hʌŋ hɪmsɛlf. aɪ θɪŋk ði ʌðɝ wʌnz ɡɔn mæd fɹəm siɪŋ ɪt."

Rand shook his head. "I don't know, except that Fain escaped somehow. And hurt Egwene and Mat doing it. I saw the guardroom" - he shuddered - "but in here. . . . Whatever it was, Ingtar, it scared that fellow bad enough that he hung himself. I think the other one's gone mad from seeing it."

"wi ɑɹ ɔl ɡoʊɪŋ mæd tənaɪt."

"We are all going mad tonight."

"ðə feɪd . . . jə kɪld ɪt?"

"The Fade . . . you killed it?"

"noʊ!" ɪŋtʃɹ slæmd ɪz sɔɹɾ ɪndə ɪts ʃiθ; ðə hɪl stʌk ʌp əbʌv ɪz ɹaɪt ʃoʊldɝ. hi simd æŋɡɹi ən əʃeɪmd ət ðə seɪm taɪm. "ɪts aʊɾ ə ðə kip baɪ naʊ, əlɔŋ wɪð ðə ɹɛst ʌv wʌt wi kəd nɑt kɪl."

"No!" Ingtar slammed his sword into its sheath; the hilt stuck up above his right shoulder. He seemed angry and ashamed at the same time. "It's out of the keep by now, along with the rest of what we could not kill."

"æt lis jəɹ əlaɪv, ɪŋtʃɹ. ðət feɪd kɪl sɛvən mɛn!"

"At least you're alive, Ingtar. That Fade killed seven men!"

"əlaɪv? ɪz ðət soʊ ɪmpɔɹɾənt?" sʌɾənli ɪŋtʃɹz feɪs wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ æŋɡɹi, bʌt taɪɝɾ ən fʊl ə peɪn. "wi hæɾ ɪɾ ɪn əɹ hænz. ɪn əɹ hænz! ən wi lɔst ɪt, ɹænd. lɔst ɪt!" hi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf i kəd nɑt bɪliv wʌɾ i wɑz seɪɪŋ.

"Alive? Is that so important?" Suddenly Ingtar's face was no longer angry, but tired and full of pain. "We had it in our hands. In our hands! And we lost it, Rand. Lost it!" He sounded as if he could not believe what he was saying.

"lɔst wʌt?" ɹænd æskt.

"Lost what?" Rand asked.

"ðə hɔɹn! ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. ɪts ɡɔn, tʃɛst ən ɔl."

"The Horn! The Horn of Valere. It's gone, chest and all."

"bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɪn ðə stʃɹɔŋɡɹum."

"But it was in the strongroom."

"ðə stʃɹɔŋɡɹum wɑz luɾəd," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd wɛɹəli. "ðeɪ dɪd nɑt teɪk mʌtʃ, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə hɔɹn. wʌt ðeɪ kəd stʌf ɪn ðɛɹ pɑkəts. aɪ wɪʃ ðeɪ hæd teɪkən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls ən lɛf ðæt. ɹoʊnən ɪz dɛd, ən ðə wɑtʃmən i hæd ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə stʃɹɔŋɡɹum." hɪz vɔɪs bɪkeɪm kwaɪət. "wɛn aɪ wɑz ə bɔɪ, ɹoʊnən hɛl dʒəhɑn taʊɝ wɪð twɛnti mɛn əɡɛnst ə θaʊzən tʃɹɑləks. hi dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ daʊn izəli, ðoʊ. ði oʊl mæn hæd blʌɾ ɑn ɪz dæɡɝ. noʊ mæn kən æsk mɔɹ ðən ðæt." hi wɑz saɪlən fəɹ ə moʊmənt. "ðeɪ keɪm ɪn θɹu ðə dɔɡ ɡeɪt, ən lɛf ðə seɪm weɪ. wi pʊɾ ən ɛn tə fɪfti əɹ mɔɹ, bʌt tu mɛni ɪskeɪpt. tʃɹɑləks! wiv nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ hæd tʃɹɑləks ɪnsaɪd ðə kip. nɛvɝ!"

"The strongroom was looted," Ingtar said wearily. "They did not take much, except for the Horn. What they could stuff in their pockets. I wish they had taken everything else and left that. Ronan is dead, and the watchmen he had guarding the strongroom." His voice became quiet. "When I was a boy, Ronan held Jehaan Tower with twenty men against a thousand Trollocs. He did not go down easily, though. The old man had blood on his dagger. No man can ask more than that." He was silent for a moment. "They came in through the Dog Gate, and left the same way. We put an end to fifty or more, but too many escaped. Trollocs! We've never before had Trollocs inside the keep. Never!"

"haʊ kəd ðeɪ ɡɛɾ ɪn θɹu ðə dɔɡ ɡeɪt, ɪŋtʃɹ? wʌn mæn kəd stɑp ə hʌnʒɹəd ðɛɹ. ən ɔl ðə ɡeɪts wɝ bɑɹd." hi ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ waɪ. "ðə ɡɑɹdz wəd nɑɾ əv oʊpən ɪt tə lɛɾ ɛnibəɾi ɪn."

"How could they get in through the Dog Gate, Ingtar? One man could stop a hundred there. And all the gates were barred." He shifted uneasily, remembering why. "The guards would not have opened it to let anybody in."

"ðɛɹ θɹoʊts wɝ kʌt," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd. "boʊθ ɡʊd mɛn, ən jɛt ðeɪ wɝ bʊtʃɝd laɪk pɪɡz. ɪt wɑz dʌn fɹəm ɪnsaɪd. sʌmwʌn kɪl ðɛm, ðən oʊpən ðə ɡeɪt. sʌmwʌn u kəd ɡɛt kloʊs tə ðɛm wɪθaʊt səspɪʃən. sʌmwʌn ðeɪ nu."

"Their throats were cut," Ingtar said. "Both good men, and yet they were butchered like pigs. It was done from inside. Someone killed them, then opened the gate. Someone who could get close to them without suspicion. Someone they knew."

ɹænd lʊkt ət ði ɛmpti sɛl wɛɹ pdən feɪn hæd bɪn. "bʌt ðət minz. . . ."

Rand looked at the empty cell where Padan Fain had been. "But that means. . . ."

"jɛs. ðəɹ ɑɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪnsaɪd fæl dæɹə. əɹ wɝ. wɪl sun noʊ ɪf ðæts ðə keɪs. keɪdʒɪn ɪz tʃɛkɪŋ naʊ tə si ɪf ɛniwʌn ɪz mɪsɪŋ. pis! tʃɹɛtʃɝi ɪn fæl dæɹə kip!" skaʊlɪŋ, hi lʊkt ɝaʊn ðə dʌnʒən, ət ðə mɛn weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ hɪm. ðeɪ ɔl hæd sɔɹdz, wɔɹn oʊvɝ fistdeɪ kloʊðz, ən səm hæd hɛlməts. "wi ɑɹən duɪŋ ɛni ɡʊd hɪɹ. aʊt! ɛvɹiwʌn!" ɹænd dʒɔɪn ðə wɪðdʒɹɔəl. ɪŋtʃɹ tæpt ɹændz dʒɝkɪn. "wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs? hæv jə dɪsaɪɾɪd tə bɪkʌm ə steɪbəlmən?"

"Yes. There are Darkfriends inside Fal Dara. Or were. We will soon know if that's the case. Kajin is checking now to see if anyone is missing. Peace! Treachery in Fal Dara keep!" Scowling, he looked around the dungeon, at the men waiting for him. They all had swords, worn over feastday clothes, and some had helmets. "We aren't doing any good here. Out! Everyone!" Rand joined the withdrawal. Ingtar tapped Rand's jerkin. "What is this? Have you decided to become a stableman?"

"ɪts ə lɔŋ stɔɹi," ɹænd sɛd. "tu lɔŋ tə tɛl hɪɹ. meɪbi səm ʌðɝ taɪm." meɪbi nɛvɝ, ɪf aɪm lʌki. meɪbi aɪ kən ɪskeɪp ɪn ɔl ðɪs kənfjuʒən. noʊ, aɪ kænt. nɑɾ əntɪl aɪ noʊ ɛɡwinz ɔl ɹaɪt. ən mæt. laɪt, wʌt wɪl hæpən tə hɪm wɪθaʊt ðə dæɡɝ? "aɪ səpoʊz lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝz dʌbəl ðə ɡɑɹɾ ɑn ɔl ðə ɡeɪts."

"It's a long story," Rand said. "Too long to tell here. Maybe some other time." Maybe never, if I'm lucky. Maybe I can escape in all this confusion. No, I can't. Not until I know Egwene's all right. And Mat. Light, what will happen to him without the dagger? "I suppose Lord Agelmar's doubled the guard on all the gates."

"tʃɹɪpəld," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛɾ ɪn toʊnz ə sæɾəsfækʃən. "noʊ wʌn wɪl pæs ðoʊz ɡeɪts, fɹəm ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ aʊt. əz sun əz lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ hɝd wʌt hæd hæpənd, hi ɔɹɾɝd ðət noʊ wʌn wɑz tə bi əlaʊd tə liv ðə kip wɪθaʊɾ ɪz pɝsənəl pɝmɪʃən."

"Tripled," Ingtar said in tones of satisfaction. "No one will pass those gates, from inside or out. As soon as Lord Agelmar heard what had happened, he ordered that no one was to be allowed to leave the keep without his personal permission."

əz sun əz i hɝd . . . ? "ɪŋtʃɹ, wʌɾ əbaʊt bɪfɔɹ? wʌɾ əbaʊt ði ɝliɝ ɔɹɾɝ kipɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn?"

As soon as he heard . . . ? "Ingtar, what about before? What about the earlier order keeping everyone in?"

"ɝliɝ ɔɹɾɝ? wʌɾ ɝliɝ ɔɹɾɝ? ɹænd, ðə kip wɑz nɑt kloʊzd əntɪl lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ hɝɾ ə ðɪs. sʌmwʌn toʊl jə ɹɔŋ."

"Earlier order? What earlier order? Rand, the keep was not closed until Lord Agelmar heard of this. Someone told you wrong."

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd sloʊli. niðɝ ɹeɪɡən nɔɹ timə wʊɾə meɪɾ ʌp sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðæt. ən ivən ɪf ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hæd ɡɪvən ði ɔɹɾɝ, ɪŋtʃɹ wəɾ əv tə noʊ ʌv ɪt. soʊ hu? ən haʊ? hi ɡlænst saɪdweɪz əɾ ɪŋtʃɹ, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ðə ʃaɪnɝən wɑz laɪɪŋ. jə ɹɪli ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ mæɾ ɪf jə səspɛkt ɪŋtʃɹ.

Rand shook his head slowly. Neither Ragan nor Tema would have made up something like that. And even if the Amyrlin Seat had given the order, Ingtar would have to know of it. So who? And how? He glanced sideways at Ingtar, wondering if the Shienaran was lying. You really are going mad if you suspect Ingtar.

ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ðə dʌnʒən ɡɑɹdʒɹum, naʊ. ðə sɛvɝd hɛdz ən ðə pisəz ə ðə ɡɑɹdz hæd bɪn ɹimuvd, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɝ stɪl ɹɛd smɪɹz ɑn ðə teɪbəl ən dæmp pætʃəz ɪn ðə stʃɹɔ tə ʃoʊ wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪn. tu ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ðɛɹ, plæsəd-lʊkɪŋ wɪmən wɪð bɹaʊn-fɹɪnd ʃɔlz, stʌɾiɪŋ ðə wɝdz skɹɔld ɑn ðə wɔlz, kɛɹləs ʌv wʌt ðɛɹ skɝts dʒɹæɡd θɹu ɪn ðə stʃɹɔ. itʃ hæɾ ən ɪŋkpɑɾ ɪn ə ɹaɪɾɪŋ-keɪs hʌŋ əɾ əɹ bɛlt ən wɑz meɪkɪŋ noʊts ɪn ə smɔl bʊk wɪð ə pɛn. ðeɪ nɛvɝ ivən ɡlænst ət ðə mɛn tʃɹupɪŋ θɹu.

They were in the dungeon guardroom, now. The severed heads and the pieces of the guards had been removed, though there were still red smears on the table and damp patches in the straw to show where they had been. Two Aes Sedai were there, placid-looking women with brown-fringed shawls, studying the words scrawled on the walls, careless of what their skirts dragged through in the straw. Each had an inkpot in a writing-case hung at her belt and was making notes in a small book with a pen. They never even glanced at the men trooping through.

"lʊk hɪɹ, vɛɹɪn," wʌn ə ðɛm sɛd, pɔɪntɪŋ tə ə sɛkʃən ə stoʊn kʌvɝd wɪð laɪnz ə tʃɹɑlɑk skɹɪpt. "ðɪs lʊks ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ."

"Look here, Verin," one of them said, pointing to a section of stone covered with lines of Trolloc script. "This looks interesting."

ði ʌðɝ hɝiɾ oʊvɝ, pɪkɪŋ ʌp ɹɛɾɪʃ steɪnz ɑn əɹ skɝt. "jɛs, aɪ si. ə mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ hæn ðən ðə ɹɛst. nɑɾ ə tʃɹɑlɑk. vɛɹi ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ." ʃi bɪɡæn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn əɹ bʊk, lʊkɪŋ ʌp ɛvɹi soʊ ɔfən tə ɹid ði æŋɡjəlɝ lɛɾɝz ɑn ðə wɔl.

The other hurried over, picking up reddish stains on her skirt. "Yes, I see. A much better hand than the rest. Not a Trolloc. Very interesting." She began writing in her book, looking up every so often to read the angular letters on the wall.

ɹænd hɝiɾ aʊt. ivən ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɑt bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ, hi wəd nɑɾ əv wɑntəd tə ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə seɪm ɹum wɪð ɛniwʌn u θɔt ɹɛɾɪŋ tʃɹɑlɑk skɹɪpt ɹɪɾən ɪn hjumən blʌd wɑz "ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ."

Rand hurried out. Even if they had not been Aes Sedai, he would not have wanted to remain in the same room with anyone who thought reading Trolloc script written in human blood was "interesting."

ɪŋtʃɹ ən ɪz mɛn stɔkt ɑn əhɛd, ɪntɛn ɑn ðɛɹ duɾiz. ɹænd dɔɾəld, wʌndɝɪŋ wɛɹ i kəd ɡoʊ naʊ. ɡɛɾɪŋ bæk ɪndə ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns wəd nɑt bi izi wɪθaʊɾ ɛɡwin tə hɛlp. laɪt, lɛɾ əɹ bi ɔl ɹaɪt. mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd ʃid bi ɔl ɹaɪt.

Ingtar and his men stalked on ahead, intent on their duties. Rand dawdled, wondering where he could go now. Getting back into the women's apartments would not be easy without Egwene to help. Light, let her be all right. Moiraine said she'd be all right.

læn faʊn ɪm bɪfɔɹ i ɹitʃt ðə fɝst stɛɹz liɾɪŋ ʌp. "ju kən ɡoʊ bæk tə jəɹ ɹum, ɪf jə wɑnt, ʃifɝɾɝ. mɔɪɹeɪn hæd jəɹ θɪŋz fɛtʃt fɹəm ɛɡwinz ɹum ən teɪkən tə jʊɹz."

Lan found him before he reached the first stairs leading up. "You can go back to your room, if you want, sheepherder. Moiraine had your things fetched from Egwene's room and taken to yours."

"haʊ dɪd ʃi noʊ . . . ?"

"How did she know . . . ?"

"mɔɪɹeɪn noʊz ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni θɪŋz, ʃifɝɾɝ. jə ʃəɾ ʌndɝstæn ðət baɪ naʊ. jə hæd bɛɾɝ wɑtʃ jɝsɛlf. ðə wɪmən ɑɹ ɔl tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt jə ɹʌnɪŋ θɹu ðə hɔlz, weɪvɪŋ ə sɔɹd. stɛɹɪŋ daʊn ði æmɪɝlɪn, soʊ ðeɪ seɪ."

"Moiraine knows a great many things, sheepherder. You should understand that by now. You had better watch yourself. The women are all talking about you running through the halls, waving a sword. Staring down the Amyrlin, so they say."

"laɪt! aɪm sɑɹi ðəɹ æŋɡɹi, læn, bʌɾ aɪ wɑz ɪnvaɪɾəd ɪn. ən wən aɪ hɝd ði əlɑɹm . . . bɝn mi, ɛɡwin wɑz daʊn hɪɹ!"

"Light! I am sorry they're angry, Lan, but I was invited in. And when I heard the alarm . . . burn me, Egwene was down here!"

læn pɝst ɪz lɪps θɔtfəli; ɪt wɑz ði oʊnli ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn ɪz feɪs. "oʊ, ðəɹ nɑɾ æŋɡɹi, ɪɡzækli. ðoʊ moʊst ə ðɛm θɪŋk jə niɾ ə stʃɹɔŋ hæn tə sɛɾəl jə daʊn sʌm. fæsəneɪɾəd ɪz mɔɹ laɪk ɪt. ivən ðə leɪɾi əmælisə kæn stɑp æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz əbaʊt ju. səm ə ðɛm ɑɹ stɑɹɾɪŋ tə bɪliv ðə sɝvəns' teɪlz. ðeɪ θɪŋk jəɹ ə pɹɪns ɪn dɪsɡaɪz, ʃifɝɾɝ. nɑɾ ə bæd θɪŋ. ðəɹ ɪz ən oʊl seɪɪŋ hɪɹ ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz: 'bɛɾɝ tə hæv wʌn wʊmən ɑn jəɹ saɪd ðən tɛn mɛn.' ðə weɪ ðeɪ ɑɹ tɔkɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, ðəɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪsaɪd huz dɔɾɝ ɪz stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə hændəl ju. ɪf jə doʊnt wɑtʃ jəɹ stɛp, ʃifɝɾɝ, jəl faɪn jɝsɛlf mɛɹiɾ ɪndə ə ʃaɪnɝən haʊs bɪfɔɹ jə ɹilaɪz wʌɾ əz hæpənd." sʌɾənli hi bɝst aʊt læfɪŋ; ɪt lʊkt ɑd, laɪk ə ɹɑk læfɪŋ. "ɹʌnɪŋ θɹu ðə hɔlz ə ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə naɪt, wɛɹɪŋ ə leɪbɝɝz dʒɝkɪn ən weɪvɪŋ ə sɔɹd. ɪf ðeɪ doʊn əv jə flɑɡd, ət ðə vɛɹi lis ðəl tɔk əbaʊt jə fəɹ jɪɹz. ðeɪv nɛvɝ sin ə meɪl əz pəkjuljɝ əz ju. wʌtɛvɝ waɪf ðeɪ tʃoʊz fəɹ ju, ʃid pɹɑbli hæv jə ðə hɛɾ ə jəɹ oʊn haʊs ɪn tɛn jɪɹz, ən əv jə θɪŋkɪŋ jə hæd dʌn ɪt jɝsɛlf, bɪsaɪdz. ɪts tu bæd juv tə liv."

Lan pursed his lips thoughtfully; it was the only expression on his face. "Oh, they're not angry, exactly. Though most of them think you need a strong hand to settle you down some. Fascinated is more like it. Even the Lady Amalisa can't stop asking questions about you. Some of them are starting to believe the servants' tales. They think you're a prince in disguise, sheepherder. Not a bad thing. There is an old saying here in the Borderlands: 'Better to have one woman on your side than ten men.' The way they are talking among themselves, they're trying to decide whose daughter is strong enough to handle you. If you don't watch your step, sheepherder, you will find yourself married into a Shienaran House before you realize what has happened." Suddenly he burst out laughing; it looked odd, like a rock laughing. "Running through the halls of the women's apartments in the middle of the night, wearing a laborer's jerkin and waving a sword. If they don't have you flogged, at the very least they'll talk about you for years. They have never seen a male as peculiar as you. Whatever wife they chose for you, she'd probably have you the head of your own House in ten years, and have you thinking you had done it yourself, besides. It is too bad you have to leave."

ɹænd hæd bɪn ɡeɪpɪŋ ət ðə wɔɹɾɝ, bʌt naʊ hi ɡɹaʊld, "aɪ hæv bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ. ðə ɡeɪts ɑɹ ɡɑɹɾəd, ən noʊ wʌn kən liv. aɪ tʃɹaɪd waɪl ɪt wɑz stɪl deɪlaɪt. aɪ kʊdn ivən teɪk ɹɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðə steɪbəl."

Rand had been gaping at the Warder, but now he growled, "I have been trying. The gates are guarded, and no one can leave. I tried while it was still daylight. I couldn't even take Red out of the stable."

"noʊ mæɾɝ, naʊ. mɔɪɹeɪn sɛn mi tə tɛl ju. jə kən liv ɛnitaɪm jə wɑn tə. ivən ɹaɪt naʊ. mɔɪɹeɪn hæɾ eɪɡəlmɝ ɪɡzɛmp jə fɹəm ði ɔɹɾɝ."

"No matter, now. Moiraine sent me to tell you. You can leave anytime you want to. Even right now. Moiraine had Agelmar exempt you from the order."

"waɪ naʊ, ən nɑɾ ɝliɝ? waɪ kʊdn aɪ liv bɪfɔɹ? wɑz ʃi ðə wʌn u hæd ðə ɡeɪts bɑɹd ðɛn? ɪŋtʃɹ sɛɾ i nu nʌθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɛni ɔɹɾɝ tə kip pipəl ɪn bɪfɔɹ tənaɪt."

"Why now, and not earlier? Why couldn't I leave before? Was she the one who had the gates barred then? Ingtar said he knew nothing about any order to keep people in before tonight."

ɹænd θɔt ðə wɔɹɾɝ lʊk tʃɹʌbəld, bʌɾ ɔl i sɛd wɑz, "wɛn sʌmwʌn ɡɪvz jə ə hɔɹs, ʃifɝɾɝ, doʊn kəmpleɪn ðəɾ ɪɾ ɪzən əz fæst əz jud laɪk."

Rand thought the Warder looked troubled, but all he said was, "When someone gives you a horse, sheepherder, don't complain that it isn't as fast as you'd like."

"wʌɾ əbaʊɾ ɛɡwin? ən mæt? ɑɹ ðeɪ ɹɪli ɔl ɹaɪt? aɪ kæn liv əntɪl aɪ noʊ ðəɹ ɔl ɹaɪt."

"What about Egwene? And Mat? Are they really all right? I can't leave until I know they're all right."

"ðə ɡɝl ɪz faɪn. ʃɪl weɪk ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, ən pɹɑbli nɑɾ ivən ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌt hæpənd. bloʊz tə ðə hɛɾ ɑɹ laɪk ðæt."

"The girl is fine. She'll wake in the morning, and probably not even remember what happened. Blows to the head are like that."

"wʌɾ əbaʊt mæt?"

"What about Mat?"

"ðə tʃɔɪs ɪz ʌp tə ju, ʃifɝɾɝ. jə kən liv naʊ, əɹ təmɑɹoʊ, əɹ nɛkst wik. ɪts ʌp tə ju." hi wɔkt əweɪ, livɪŋ ɹænd stændɪŋ ðəɹ ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ dip ʌndɝ fæl dæɹə kip.

"The choice is up to you, sheepherder. You can leave now, or tomorrow, or next week. It's up to you." He walked away, leaving Rand standing there in the corridor deep under Fal Dara keep.


tʃæptɝ sɛvən


CHAPTER 7

blʌd kɔlz blʌd


Blood Calls Blood

əz ðə lɪɾɝ kæɹiɪŋ mæt lɛf ði æmɪɝlɪn sits tʃeɪmbɝz, mɔɪɹeɪn kɛɹfəli ɹiɹæp ði æŋɡɹil - ə smɔl, eɪdʒ-dɑɹkən aɪvɝi kɑɹvɪŋ ʌv ə wʊmən ɪn floʊɪŋ ɹoʊbz - ɪn ə skwɛɹ ə sɪlk ən pʊɾ ɪt bæk ɪndə hɝ paʊtʃ. wɝkɪŋ təɡɛðɝ wɪð ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ, mɝdʒɪŋ ðɛɹ əbɪləɾiz, tʃænəlɪŋ ðə floʊ ʌv ðə wʌn paʊɝ tə ə sɪŋɡəl tæsk, wɑz taɪɹɪŋ wɝk ʌndɝ ðə bɛs kəndɪʃənz, ivən wɪð ði eɪɾ ʌv ən æŋɡɹil, ən wɝkɪŋ θɹu ðə naɪt wɪθaʊt slip wɑz nɑt ðə bɛs kəndɪʃənz. ən ðə wɝk ðeɪ hæd dʌn ɑn ðə bɔɪ hæd nɑt bɪn izi.

As the litter carrying Mat left the Amyrlin Seat's chambers, Moiraine carefully rewrapped the angreal - a small, age-darkened ivory carving of a woman in flowing robes - in a square of silk and put it back into her pouch. Working together with other Aes Sedai, merging their abilities, channeling the flow of the One Power to a single task, was tiring work under the best conditions, even with the aid of an angreal, and working through the night without sleep was not the best conditions. And the work they had done on the boy had not been easy.

lin dɝɛktəd ðə lɪɾɝ bɛɹɝz aʊt wɪð ʃɑɹp dʒɛstʃɝz ən ə fju kɹɪsp wɝdz. ðə tu mɛn kɛp dʌkɪŋ ðɛɹ hɛdz, nɝvəs ət biɪŋ ɝaʊn soʊ mɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ ət wʌns, ən wʌn ə ðɛm ði æmɪɝlɪn hɝsɛlf, nɛvɝ maɪn ðət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd bɪn juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ. ðeɪ hæd weɪɾəd ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, skwɑɾɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔl waɪl ðə wɝk wɑz dʌn, ən ðeɪ wɝ æŋkʃəs tə bi ɡɔn fɹəm ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns. mæt leɪ wɪð ɪz aɪz kloʊzd ən ɪz feɪs peɪl, bʌɾ ɪz tʃɛst ɹoʊz ən fɛl ɪn ði ivən ɹɪðəm ʌv ə dip slip.

Leane directed the litter bearers out with sharp gestures and a few crisp words. The two men kept ducking their heads, nervous at being around so many Aes Sedai at once, and one of them the Amyrlin herself, never mind that the Aes Sedai had been using the Power. They had waited in the corridor, squatting against the wall while the work was done, and they were anxious to be gone from the women's apartments. Mat lay with his eyes closed and his face pale, but his chest rose and fell in the even rhythm of a deep sleep.

haʊ wɪl ðɪs əfɛk mæɾɝz? mɔɪɹeɪn wʌndɝd. hiz nɑt nɛsəsɛɹi wɪð ðə hɔɹn ɡɔn, ən jɛt. . . .

How will this affect matters? Moiraine wondered. He is not necessary with the Horn gone, and yet. . . .

ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn lin ən ðə lɪɾɝ bɛɹɝz, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn dʒɹu ən ənstɛɾi bɹɛθ. "ə næsti bɪznəs ðæt. næsti." hɝ feɪs wɑz smuð, bʌt ʃi ɹʌbd əɹ hænz təɡɛðɝ əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə wɑʃ ðɛm.

The door closed behind Leane and the litter bearers, and the Amyrlin drew an unsteady breath. "A nasty business that. Nasty." Her face was smooth, but she rubbed her hands together as if she wanted to wash them.

"bʌt kwaɪɾ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ," vɛɹɪn sɛd. ʃi hæd bɪn ðə fɔɹθ ɛɛs sədaɪ ði æmɪɝlɪn hæd tʃoʊzən fəɹ ðə wɝk. "ɪɾ ɪz tu bæd wi də nɑɾ əv ðə dæɡɝ soʊ ðə hilɪŋ kəd bi kəmplit. fəɹ ɔl wi dɪd tənaɪt, hɪl nɑt laɪv lɔŋ. mʌnθs, pɝhæps, ət bɛst." ðə θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ əloʊn ɪn ði æmɪɝlɪnz tʃeɪmbɝz. bɪɑn ði æɹoʊslɪts dɔn pɝl ðə skaɪ.

"But quite interesting," Verin said. She had been the fourth Aes Sedai the Amyrlin had chosen for the work. "It is too bad we do not have the dagger so the Healing could be complete. For all we did tonight, he will not live long. Months, perhaps, at best." The three Aes Sedai were alone in the Amyrlin's chambers. Beyond the arrowslits dawn pearled the sky.

"bʌt hɪl əv ðoʊz mʌnθs, naʊ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "æn ɪf ɪt kən bi ɹitʃɹivd, ðə lɪŋk kən stɪl bi bɹoʊkən." ɪf ɪt kən bi ɹitʃɹivd. jɛs, ʌv kɔɹs.

"But he will have those months, now," Moiraine said sharply. "And if it can be retrieved, the link can still be broken." If it can be retrieved. Yes, of course.

"ɪt kən stɪl bi bɹoʊkən," vɛɹɪn əɡɹid. ʃi wɑz ə plʌmp, skwɛɹ-feɪst wʊmən, ən ivən wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡɪft ʌv eɪɡləsnəs, ðəɹ wɑz ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪ ɪn əɹ bɹaʊn hɛɹ. ðət wɑz əɹ oʊnli saɪn ʌv eɪdʒ, bʌt fəɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪt mɛnt ʃi wɑz vɛɹi oʊld ɪndid. hɝ vɔɪs hɛl stɛɾi, ðoʊ, mætʃɪŋ əɹ smuð tʃiks. "hi hæz bɪn lɪŋk tə ðə dæɡɝ ə lɔŋ taɪm, haʊɛvɝ, əz ə θɪŋ laɪk ðət mʌs bi ɹɛkənd. ən hɪl bi lɪŋk lɔŋɡɝ jɛt, wɛðɝ ɪts faʊn əɹ nɑt. hi meɪ ɔlɹɛɾi bi tʃeɪnʒd bɪɑn ðə ɹitʃ ə fʊl hilɪŋ, ivən ɪf noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪnʌf tə kəntæməneɪɾ ʌðɝz. sətʃ ə smɔl θɪŋ, ðət dæɡɝ," ʃi mjuzd, "bʌɾ ɪɾəl kɝʌp huɛvɝ kæɹiz ɪt lɔŋ ɪnʌf. hi hu kæɹiz ɪɾəl ɪn tɝn kɝʌp ðoʊz u kʌm ɪn kɑntækt wɪð hɪm, ən ðəl kɝʌp stɪl ʌðɝz, ən ðə heɪtʃɹəɾ ən səspɪʃən ðət dɪstʃɹɔɪd ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, ɛvɹi mæn ən wʊmənz hæn tɝn əɡɛnst ɛvɹi ʌðɝ, wɪl bi lus ɪn ðə wɝld əɡɛn. aɪ wʌndɝ haʊ mɛni pipəl ɪt kən teɪn ɪn, seɪ, ə jɪɹ. ɪt ʃəd bi pɑsəbəl tə kælkjəleɪɾ ə ɹizənəbəl əpɹɑksəmeɪʃən."

"It can still be broken," Verin agreed. She was a plump, square-faced woman, and even with the Aes Sedai gift of agelessness, there was a touch of gray in her brown hair. That was her only sign of age, but for an Aes Sedai it meant she was very old indeed. Her voice held steady, though, matching her smooth cheeks. "He has been linked to the dagger a long time, however, as a thing like that must be reckoned. And he will be linked longer yet, whether it is found or not. He may already be changed beyond the reach of full Healing, even if no longer enough to contaminate others. Such a small thing, that dagger," she mused, "but it will corrupt whoever carries it long enough. He who carries it will in turn corrupt those who come in contact with him, and they will corrupt still others, and the hatred and suspicion that destroyed Shadar Logoth, every man and woman's hand turned against every other, will be loose in the world again. I wonder how many people it can taint in, say, a year. It should be possible to calculate a reasonable approximation."

mɔɪɹeɪn ɡeɪv ðə bɹaʊn sɪstɝ ə ɹaɪ lʊk. ənʌðɝ deɪnʒɝ kənfɹʌns ʌs, ən ʃi saʊnz əz ɪf ɪts ə pʌzəl ɪn ə bʊk. laɪt, ðə bɹaʊnz tʃɹuli ɑɹ nɑɾ əwɛɹ ə ðə wɝld əɾ ɔl. "ðɛn wi mʌs faɪn ðə dæɡɝ, sɪstɝ. eɪɡəlmɝ ɪz sɛndɪŋ mɛn tə hʌn ðoʊz u tʊk ðə hɔɹn ən slu hɪz oʊθmɛn, ðə seɪm u tʊk ðə dæɡɝ. ɪf wʌn ɪz faʊnd, ði ʌðɝ wɪl bi."

Moiraine gave the Brown sister a wry look. Another danger confronts us, and she sounds as if it is a puzzle in a book. Light, the Browns truly are not aware of the world at all. "Then we must find the dagger, Sister. Agelmar is sending men to hunt those who took the Horn and slew his oathmen, the same who took the dagger. If one is found, the other will be."

vɛɹɪn nɑɾəd, bʌt fɹaʊn ət ðə seɪm taɪm. "jɛt, ivən ɪf ɪts faʊnd, hu kən ɹɪtɝn ɪt seɪfli? huɛvɝ tʌtʃəz ɪt ɹɪsks ðə teɪn ɪf ðeɪ hændəl ɪt lɔŋ. pɝhæps ɪn ə tʃɛst, wɛl ɹæpt ən pæɾəd, bʌɾ ɪt wəd stɪl bi deɪnʒɝəs tə ðoʊz nɪɹbaɪ fəɹ ɛni ɡɹeɪt taɪm. wɪθaʊt ðə dæɡɝ ɪtsɛlf tə stʌɾi, wi kænɑt bi ʃʊɹ haʊ mʌtʃ ɪt mʌs bi ʃildɪd. bʌt jə sɔ ɪɾ ən mɔɹ, mɔɪɹeɪn. jə dɛlt wɪð ɪt, ɪnʌf fəɹ ðət jʌŋ mæn tə sɝvaɪv kæɹiɪŋ ɪɾ ən tə stɑp ɪm ɪnfɛktɪŋ ʌðɝz. jə mʌst əv ə ɡʊɾ aɪdiə ʌv haʊ stʃɹɔŋ ɪts ɪnfluəns ɪz."

Verin nodded, but frowned at the same time. "Yet, even if it is found, who can return it safely? Whoever touches it risks the taint if they handle it long. Perhaps in a chest, well wrapped and padded, but it would still be dangerous to those nearby for any great time. Without the dagger itself to study, we cannot be sure how much it must be shielded. But you saw it and more, Moiraine. You dealt with it, enough for that young man to survive carrying it and to stop him infecting others. You must have a good idea of how strong its influence is."

"ðɛɹ ɪz wʌn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "hu kən ɹɪtʃɹiv ðə dæɡɝ wɪθaʊt biɪŋ hɑɹm baɪ ɪt. wʌn hum wɪv ʃildɪɾ ən bʌfɝɾ əɡɛns ðət teɪn əz mʌtʃ əz ɛniwʌn kən bi. mæt kɔθən."

"There is one," Moiraine said, "who can retrieve the dagger without being harmed by it. One whom we have shielded and buffered against that taint as much as anyone can be. Mat Cauthon."

ði æmɪɝlɪn nɑɾəd. "jɛs, ʌv kɔɹs. hi kən də ɪt. ɪf i laɪvz lɔŋ ɪnʌf. ðə laɪɾ oʊnli noʊz haʊ fɑɹ ɪɾəl bi kæɹid bɪfɔɹ eɪɡəlmɝz mɛn faɪn ɪt. ɪf ðeɪ də faɪn ɪt. ən ɪf ðə bɔɪ daɪz fɝst . . . wɛl, ɪf ðə dæɡɝ ɪz lus ðət lɔŋ, wɪv ənʌðɝ wɝi." ʃi ɹʌbd əɹ aɪz taɪɹədli. "aɪ θɪŋk wi mʌs faɪn ðɪs pdən feɪn, tu. waɪ ɪz ðɪs dɑɹkfɹɛn ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪnʌf fəɹ əm tə ɹɪsk wʌt ðeɪ dɪd tə ɹɛskju hɪm? mʌtʃ iziɝ fəɹ əm dʒʌs tə stil ðə hɔɹn. stɪl ɹɪski əz ə wɪntɝ ɡeɪl ɪn ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, kʌmɪŋ ɪndə ðə vɛɹi kip laɪk ðæt, bʌt ðeɪ kəmpaʊndəd ðɛɹ ɹɪsk tə fɹi ðɪs dɑɹkfɹɛnd. ɪf ðə lɝks θɪŋk hiz ðəɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt" - ʃi pɔzd, ən mɔɪɹeɪn nu ʃi wɑz wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ɪt tʃɹuli wɑz stɪl oʊnli ðə mɹdʒɹɑl ɡɪvɪŋ kəmænz - "ðɛn soʊ mʌst wi."

The Amyrlin nodded. "Yes, of course. He can do it. If he lives long enough. The Light only knows how far it will be carried before Agelmar's men find it. If they do find it. And if the boy dies first . . . well, if the dagger is loose that long, we have another worry." She rubbed her eyes tiredly. "I think we must find this Padan Fain, too. Why is this Darkfriend important enough for them to risk what they did to rescue him? Much easier for them just to steal the Horn. Still risky as a winter gale in the Sea of Storms, coming into the very keep like that, but they compounded their risk to free this Darkfriend. If the Lurks think he is that important" - she paused, and Moiraine knew she was wondering if it truly was still only the Myrddraal giving commands - "then so must we."

"hi mʌs bi faʊnd," mɔɪɹeɪn əɡɹid, hoʊpɪŋ ðət nʌn ə ði ɝdʒənsi ʃi fɛlt ʃoʊd, "bʌɾ ɪts laɪkli hɪl bi faʊnd wɪð ðə hɔɹn."

"He must be found," Moiraine agreed, hoping that none of the urgency she felt showed, "but it is likely he will be found with the Horn."

"æz jə seɪ, dɔɾɝ." ði æmɪɝlɪn pɹɛs fɪŋɡɝz tə hɝ lɪps tə staɪfəl ə jɔn. "ænd naʊ, vɛɹɪn, ɪf jəl ɪkskjuz mi, əl dʒʌst seɪ ə fju wɝdz tə mɔɪɹeɪn ən ðən slip ə lɪɾəl. aɪ səpoʊz eɪɡəlmɝ wɪl ɪnsɪst ɑn fistɪŋ tənaɪt sɪns læs naɪt wɑz spɔɪld. jəɹ hɛlp wɑz ɪnvæljəbəl, dɔɾɝ. pliz ɹɪmɛmbɝ, seɪ nʌθɪŋ ə ðə neɪtʃɝ ə ðə bɔɪz hɝt tə ɛniwʌn. ðəɹ ɑɹ səm ə jəɹ sɪstɝz u wəd si ðə ʃædoʊ ɪn ɪm ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə θɪŋ mɛn meɪɾ ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn."

"As you say, Daughter." The Amyrlin pressed fingers to her lips to stifle a yawn. "And now, Verin, if you will excuse me, I will just say a few words to Moiraine and then sleep a little. I suppose Agelmar will insist on feasting tonight since last night was spoiled. Your help was invaluable, Daughter. Please remember, say nothing of the nature of the boy's hurt to anyone. There are some of your sisters who would see the Shadow in him instead of a thing men made on their own."

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə neɪm ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ. ən pɝhæps, mɔɪɹeɪn θɔt, ðə ɹɛdz wɝ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ði oʊnli wʌnz ə hum ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi tə bi wɛɹi.

There was no need to name the Red Ajah. And perhaps, Moiraine thought, the Reds were no longer the only ones of whom it was necessary to be wary.

"aɪ wɪl seɪ nʌθɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs, mʌðɝ." vɛɹɪn baʊd, bʌt meɪd noʊ muv təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ. "aɪ θɔt jə maɪt wɪʃ tə si ðɪs, mʌðɝ." ʃi pʊld ə smɔl noʊtbʊk, baʊn ɪn sɑft, bɹaʊn lɛðɝ, fɹəm əɹ bɛlt. "wʌt wɑz ɹɪɾən ɑn ðə wɔlz ɪn ðə dʌnʒən. ðəɹ wɝ fju pɹɑbləmz wɪð tʃɹænzleɪʃən. moʊst wɑz ðə juʒəwəl - blæsfəmi ən boʊstɪŋ; tʃɹɑləks sim tə noʊ lɪɾəl ɛls - bʌt ðəɹ wɑz wʌn pɑɹt dʌn ɪn ə bɛɾɝ hænd. ən ɛdʒəkeɪɾəd dɑɹkfɹɛnd, əɹ pɝhæps ə mɹdʒɹɑl. ɪt kəd bi oʊnli tɔntɪŋ, jɛɾ ɪts ðə fɔɹm ə poʊətʃɹi, əɹ sɔŋ, ən ðə saʊn ə pɹɑfəsi. wi noʊ lɪɾəl ə pɹɑfəsiz fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊ, mʌðɝ."

"I will say nothing, of course, Mother." Verin bowed, but made no move toward the door. "I thought you might wish to see this, Mother." She pulled a small notebook, bound in soft, brown leather, from her belt. "What was written on the walls in the dungeon. There were few problems with translation. Most was the usual - blasphemy and boasting; Trollocs seem to know little else - but there was one part done in a better hand. An educated Darkfriend, or perhaps a Myrddraal. It could be only taunting, yet it has the form of poetry, or song, and the sound of prophecy. We know little of prophecies from the Shadow, Mother."

ði æmɪɝlɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊnli ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ nɑɾɪŋ. pɹɑfəsiz fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊ, dɑɹk pɹɑfəsiz, hæɾ ən ənfɔɹtʃənət weɪ ʌv biɪŋ fʊlfɪld əz wɛl əz pɹɑfəsiz fɹəm ðə laɪt. "ɹɛɾ ɪt tə mi."

The Amyrlin hesitated only a moment before nodding. Prophecies from the Shadow, dark prophecies, had an unfortunate way of being fulfilled as well as prophecies from the Light. "Read it to me."

vɛɹɪn ɹʌfəl θɹu ðə peɪdʒəz, ðən klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊɾ ən bɪɡæn ɪn ə kɑm, lɛvəl vɔɪs.

Verin ruffled through the pages, then cleared her throat and began in a calm, level voice.

"dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪt, ʃi wɔks əɡɛn.

"Daughter of the Night, she walks again.

ði eɪntʃənt wɔɹ, ʃi jɛt faɪts.

The ancient war, she yet fights.

hɝ nu lʌvɝ ʃi siks, hu ʃæl sɝv əɹ ən daɪ, jɛt sɝv stɪl.

Her new lover she seeks, who shall serve her and die, yet serve still.

hu ʃæl stæn əɡɛnst əɹ kʌmɪŋ?

Who shall stand against her coming?

ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ wɔlz ʃæl nil.

The Shining Walls shall kneel.

blʌd fidz blʌd.

Blood feeds blood.

blʌd kɔlz blʌd.

Blood calls blood.

blʌɾ ɪz, ən blʌd wɑz, ən blʌd ʃæl ɛvɝ bi.

Blood is, and blood was, and blood shall ever be.

ðə mæn u tʃænəlz stænz əloʊn.

The man who channels stands alone.

hi ɡɪvz ɪz fɹɛnz fəɹ sækɹəfaɪs.

He gives his friends for sacrifice.

tu ɹoʊdz bɪfɔɹ hɪm, wʌn tə dɛθ bɪɑn daɪɪŋ, wʌn tə laɪf ɪtɝnəl.

Two roads before him, one to death beyond dying, one to life eternal.

wɪtʃ wɪl i tʃuz? wɪtʃ wɪl i tʃuz?

Which will he choose? Which will he choose?

wʌt hænd ʃɛltɝz? wʌt hæn sleɪz?

What hand shelters? What hand slays?

blʌd fidz blʌd.

Blood feeds blood.

blʌd kɔlz blʌd.

Blood calls blood.

blʌɾ ɪz, ən blʌd wɑz, ən blʌd ʃæl ɛvɝ bi.

Blood is, and blood was, and blood shall ever be.

luk keɪm tə ðə maʊntənz ə dum.

Luc came to the Mountains of Dhoom.

ɪsəm weɪɾəd ɪn ðə haɪ pæsəz.

Isam waited in the high passes.

ðə hʌn ɪz naʊ bɪɡʌn. ðə ʃædoʊz haʊnz naʊ kɔɹs, ən kɪl.

The hunt is now begun. The Shadow's hounds now course, and kill.

wʌn dɪd lɪv, ən wʌn dɪd daɪ, bʌt boʊθ ɑɹ.

One did live, and one did die, but both are.

ðə taɪm ə tʃeɪnʒ əz kʌm.

The Time of Change has come.

blʌd fidz blʌd.

Blood feeds blood.

blʌd kɔlz blʌd.

Blood calls blood.

blʌɾ ɪz, ən blʌd wɑz, ən blʌd ʃæl ɛvɝ bi.

Blood is, and blood was, and blood shall ever be.

ðə wɑtʃɝz weɪɾ ɑn toʊmənz hɛd.

The Watchers wait on Toman's Head.

ðə siɾ ə ðə hæmɝ bɝnz ði eɪntʃən tʃɹi.

The seed of the Hammer burns the ancient tree.

dɛθ ʃæl saʊ, ən sʌmɝ bɝn, bɪfɔɹ ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd kʌmz.

Death shall sow, and summer burn, before the Great Lord comes.

dɛθ ʃæl ɹip, ən bɑɾiz feɪl, bɪfɔɹ ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd kʌmz.

Death shall reap, and bodies fail, before the Great Lord comes.

əɡɛn ðə sid sleɪz eɪntʃən ɹɔŋ, bɪfɔɹ ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd kʌmz.

Again the seed slays ancient wrong, before the Great Lord comes.

naʊ ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd kʌmz.

Now the Great Lord comes.

naʊ ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd kʌmz.

Now the Great Lord comes.

blʌd fidz blʌd.

Blood feeds blood.

blʌd kɔlz blʌd.

Blood calls blood.

blʌɾ ɪz, ən blʌd wɑz, ən blʌd ʃæl ɛvɝ bi.

Blood is, and blood was, and blood shall ever be.

naʊ ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd kʌmz."

Now the Great Lord comes."

ðəɹ wɑz ə lɔŋ saɪləns wən ʃi fɪnɪʃt.

There was a long silence when she finished.

faɪnəli ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd, "hu ɛls əz sin ðɪs, dɔɾɝ? hu noʊz ʌv ɪt?"

Finally the Amyrlin said, "Who else has seen this, Daughter? Who knows of it?"

"oʊnli sɹəfɛl, mʌðɝ. əz sun əz wi hæd kɑpiɾ ɪt daʊn, aɪ hæd mɛn skɹʌb ðə wɔlz. ðeɪ dɪdn kwɛstʃən; ðeɪ wɝ iɡɝ tə bi ɹɪɾ ʌv ɪt."

"Only Serafelle, Mother. As soon as we had copied it down, I had men scrub the walls. They didn't question; they were eager to be rid of it."

ði æmɪɝlɪn nɑɾəd. "ɡʊd. tu mɛni ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz kən pʌzəl aʊt tʃɹɑlɑk skɹɪpt. noʊ nid tə ɡɪv əm sʌmθɪŋ ɛls tə wɝi oʊvɝ. ðeɪv ɪnʌf."

The Amyrlin nodded. "Good. Too many in the Borderlands can puzzle out Trolloc script. No need to give them something else to worry over. They have enough."

"wʌt dʒju meɪk ʌv ɪt?" mɔɪɹeɪn æsk vɛɹɪn ɪn ə kɛɹfəl vɔɪs. "ɪz ɪt pɹɑfəsi, dʒju θɪŋk?"

"What do you make of it?" Moiraine asked Verin in a careful voice. "Is it prophecy, do you think?"

vɛɹɪn tɪltəɾ əɹ hɛd, piɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ noʊts ɪn θɔt. "pɑsəbli. ɪts ðə fɔɹm ə səm ə ðə fju dɑɹk pɹɑfəsiz wi noʊ. ən pɑɹts ʌv ɪɾ ɑɹ klɪɹ ɪnʌf. ɪt kəd stɪl bi oʊnli ə tɔnt, ðoʊ." ʃi ɹɛstəɾ ə fɪŋɡɝ ɑn wʌn laɪn. " 'dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪt, ʃi wɔks əɡɛn.' ðət kən oʊnli min lænfɝ ɪz lus əɡɛn. əɹ sʌmwʌn wɑns əs tə θɪŋk ʃi ɪz."

Verin tilted her head, peering at her notes in thought. "Possibly. It has the form of some of the few dark prophecies we know. And parts of it are clear enough. It could still be only a taunt, though." She rested a finger on one line. " 'Daughter of the Night, she walks again.' That can only mean Lanfear is loose again. Or someone wants us to think she is."

"ðæt wəd bi sʌmθɪŋ tə wɝi ʌs, dɔɾɝ," ði æmɪɝlɪn sit sɛd, "ɪf ɪt wɝ tʃɹu. bʌt ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑɹ stɪl baʊnd." ʃi ɡlænst ət mɔɪɹeɪn, lʊkɪŋ tʃɹʌbəl fəɹ ən ɪnstən bɪfɔɹ ʃi skuld əɹ fitʃɝz. "ivən ɪf ðə silz ɑɹ wikənɪŋ, ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑɹ stɪl baʊnd."

"That would be something to worry us, Daughter," the Amyrlin Seat said, "if it were true. But the Forsaken are still bound." She glanced at Moiraine, looking troubled for an instant before she schooled her features. "Even if the seals are weakening, the Forsaken are still bound."

lænfɝ. ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪt. noʊwɛɹ wɑz əɹ ɹil neɪm ɹəkɔɹɾəd, bʌt ðət wɑz ðə neɪm ʃi hæd teɪkən fəɹ hɝsɛlf, ənlaɪk moʊst ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən, hu hæd bɪn neɪm baɪ ðoʊz ðeɪ bɪtʃɹeɪd. səm sɛd ʃi hæd ɹɪli bɪn ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən, nɛks tə ɪʃəml, ðə bɪtʃɹeɪɝ ə hoʊp, bʌt hæd kɛpt əɹ paʊɝz hɪɾən. tu lɪɾəl wɑz lɛft fɹəm ðət taɪm fəɹ ɛni skɑlɝ tə seɪ fəɹ sɝɾən.

Lanfear. In the Old Tongue, Daughter of the Night. Nowhere was her real name recorded, but that was the name she had taken for herself, unlike most of the Forsaken, who had been named by those they betrayed. Some said she had really been the most powerful of the Forsaken, next to Ishamael, the Betrayer of Hope, but had kept her powers hidden. Too little was left from that time for any scholar to say for certain.

"wɪð ɔl ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡənz ðəɾ ɑɹ əpɪɹɪŋ, ɪts nɑt sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ sʌmwʌn wəd tʃɹaɪ tə bɹɪŋ lænfɝ ɪndə ɪt." mɔɪɹeɪnz vɔɪs wɑz əz ənɹʌfəld əz əɹ feɪs, bʌɾ ɪnsaɪd hɝsɛlf ʃi ɹɔɪld. oʊnli wʌn θɪŋ fəɹ sɝɾən wɑz noʊn ə lænfɝ bɪsaɪd ðə neɪm: bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɛn oʊvɝ tə ðə ʃædoʊ, bɪfɔɹ luz θɝɪn tɛləmən mɛɾ aɪlaɪɛnə, lænfɝ hæd bɪn ɪz lʌvɝ. ə kɑmpləkeɪʃən wi də nɑt nid.

"With all the false Dragons that are appearing, it is not surprising someone would try to bring Lanfear into it." Moiraine's voice was as unruffled as her face, but inside herself she roiled. Only one thing for certain was known of Lanfear beside the name: before she went over to the Shadow, before Lews Therin Telamon met Ilyena, Lanfear had been his lover. A complication we do not need.

ði æmɪɝlɪn sit fɹaʊn əz ɪf ʃi hæd hæd ðə seɪm θɔt, bʌt vɛɹɪn nɑɾəd əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ɔl dʒʌst wɝdz. "ʌðɝ neɪmz ɑɹ klɪɹ, tu, mʌðɝ. lɔɹd luk, ʌv kɔɹs, wɑz bɹʌðɝ tə tɪɡɹeɪn, ðən ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ, ən i vænɪʃt ɪn ðə blaɪt. hu ɪsəm ɪz, əɹ wʌt hiz tə də wɪð luk, aɪ də nɑt noʊ, haʊɛvɝ."

The Amyrlin Seat frowned as if she had had the same thought, but Verin nodded as if it were all just words. "Other names are clear, too, Mother. Lord Luc, of course, was brother to Tigraine, then the Daughter-Heir of Andor, and he vanished in the Blight. Who Isam is, or what he has to do with Luc, I do not know, however."

"wi wɪl faɪn aʊt wʌt wi nid tə noʊ ɪn taɪm," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd smuðli. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ pɹuf əz jɛt ðət ðɪs ɪz pɹɑfəsi." ʃi nu ðə neɪm. ɪsəm hæd bɪn ðə sʌn ə bɹeɪən, waɪf ə leɪn mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən, huz ətɛmp tə siz ðə θɹoʊn ə mɔlkiɝ fəɹ əɹ hʌzbən hæd bɹɔt ðə tʃɹɑlɑk hɔɹdz kɹæʃɪŋ daʊn. bɹeɪən ən əɹ ɪnfən sʌn hæd boʊθ vænɪʃt wən ðə tʃɹɑləks oʊvɝɹæn mɔlkiɝ. ən ɪsəm hæd bɪn blʌd kɪn tə læn. əɹ ɪz blʌd kɪn? aɪ mʌs kip ðɪs fɹəm hɪm, əntɪl aɪ noʊ haʊ hɪl ɹiækt. əntɪl wəɹ əweɪ fɹəm ðə blaɪt. ɪf i θɔɾ ɪsəm wɝ əlaɪv. . . .

"We will find out what we need to know in time," Moiraine said smoothly. "There is no proof as yet that this is prophecy." She knew the name. Isam had been the son of Breyan, wife of Lain Mandragoran, whose attempt to seize the throne of Malkier for her husband had brought the Trolloc hordes crashing down. Breyan and her infant son had both vanished when the Trollocs overran Malkier. And Isam had been blood kin to Lan. Or is blood kin? I must keep this from him, until I know how he will react. Until we are away from the Blight. If he thought Isam were alive. . . .

" 'ðə wɑtʃɝz weɪɾ ɑn toʊmən hɛd,' " vɛɹɪn wɛn ɑn. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ə fju hu stɪl klɪŋ tə ði oʊl bɪlif ðət ði ɑɹmiz ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ sɛn əkɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən wɪl ɹɪtɝn wʌn deɪ, ðoʊ æftɝ ɔl ðɪs taɪm. . . ." ʃi ɡeɪv ə dɪsdeɪnfəl snɪf. "ðə də maɪɹ ævɹən, ðə wɑtʃɝz oʊvɝ ðə weɪvz, stɪl əv ə . . . kəmjunəɾi ɪz ðə bɛst wɝd, aɪ səpoʊz . . . ɑn toʊmən hɛd, ət fɑlm. ən wʌn ə ði oʊl neɪmz fəɹ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ wɑz hæmɝ ə ðə laɪt."

" 'The Watchers wait on Toman Head,' " Verin went on. "There are a few who still cling to the old belief that the armies Artur Hawkwing sent across the Aryth Ocean will return one day, though after all this time. . . ." She gave a disdainful sniff. "The Do Miere A'vron, the Watchers Over the Waves, still have a . . . community is the best word, I suppose . . . on Toman Head, at Falme. And one of the old names for Artur Hawkwing was Hammer of the Light."

"ɑɹ jə sədʒɛstɪŋ, dɔɾɝ," ði æmɪɝlɪn sit sɛd, "ðæɾ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɑɹmiz, əɹ ɹæðɝ ðɛɹ dɪsɛndəns, maɪɾ æktʃəli  ɹɪtɝn æftɝ ə θaʊzən jɪɹz?"

"Are you suggesting, Daughter," the Amyrlin Seat said, "that Artur Hawkwing's armies, or rather their descendants, might actually return after a thousand years?"

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ ɹumɝz ʌv wɔɹ ɑn ɑlməθ pleɪn ən toʊmən hɛd," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd sloʊli. "æn hɔkwɪŋ sɛn tu ʌv ɪz sʌnz, əz wɛl əz ɑɹmiz. ɪf ðeɪ dɪd sɝvaɪv ɪn wʌtɛvɝ lænz ðeɪ faʊnd, ðəɹ kəd wɛl bi mɛni dɪsɛndəns ə hɔkwɪŋ. əɹ nʌn."

"There are rumors of war on Almoth Plain and Toman Head," Moiraine said slowly. "And Hawkwing sent two of his sons, as well as armies. If they did survive in whatever lands they found, there could well be many descendants of Hawkwing. Or none."

ði æmɪɝlɪn ɡeɪv mɔɪɹeɪn ə ɡɑɹɾəd lʊk, ɑbviəsli wɪʃɪŋ ðeɪ wɝ əloʊn soʊ ʃi kəd dɪmæn tə noʊ wʌt mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz ʌp tə. mɔɪɹeɪn meɪɾ ə suðɪŋ dʒɛstʃɝ, ən əɹ oʊl fɹɛnd ɡɹɪməst ət hɝ.

The Amyrlin gave Moiraine a guarded look, obviously wishing they were alone so she could demand to know what Moiraine was up to. Moiraine made a soothing gesture, and her old friend grimaced at her.

vɛɹɪn, wɪð əɹ noʊz stɪl bɛɹiɾ ɪn əɹ noʊts, noʊɾəst nʌn ʌv ɪt. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ, mʌðɝ. aɪ daʊɾ ɪt, ðoʊ. wi noʊ nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl ə ðoʊz lænz ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ sɛɾ aʊt tə kɑŋkɝ. ɪts tu bæd ðə si foʊk ɹəfjuz tə kɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən. ðeɪ seɪ ði aɪlənz ə ðə dɛd laɪ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. aɪ wɪʃ aɪ nu wʌt ðeɪ mɛn baɪ ðæt, bʌt ðəɾ əkɝst si foʊk kloʊsəməðədnəs. . . ." ʃi saɪd, stɪl nɑt ɹeɪzɪŋ əɹ hɛd. "ɔl wɪv ɪz wʌn ɹɛfɝəns tə 'lænz ʌndɝ ðə ʃædoʊ, bɪɑn ðə sɛɾɪŋ sʌn, bɪɑn ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən, wɛɹ ði ɑɹmiz ə naɪt ɹeɪn.' nʌθɪŋ ðəɹ tə tɛl əs ɪf ði ɑɹmiz hɔkwɪŋ sɛnt wɝ ɪnʌf baɪ ðɛmsɛlvz tə dɪfit ðiz 'ɑɹmiz ə ðə naɪt,' əɹ ivən tə sɝvaɪv hɔkwɪŋz dɛθ. wʌns ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz stɑɹɾəd, ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz tu ɪntɛn ɑn kɑɹvɪŋ aʊt ðɛɹ oʊn pɑɹɾ ə hɔkwɪŋz ɛmpaɪɝ tə spɛɹ ə θɔt fəɹ ɪz ɑɹmiz əkɹɔs ðə si. ɪt simz tə mi, mʌðɝ, ðəɾ ɪf ðɛɹ dɪsɛndəns stɪl lɪvd, ən ɪf ðeɪ ɛvɝ ɪntɛndəd tə ɹɪtɝn, ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ əv weɪɾəd soʊ lɔŋ."

Verin, with her nose still buried in her notes, noticed none of it. "I don't know, Mother. I doubt it, though. We know nothing at all of those lands Artur Hawkwing set out to conquer. It's too bad the Sea Folk refuse to cross the Aryth Ocean. They say the Islands of the Dead lie on the other side. I wish I knew what they meant by that, but that accursed Sea Folk closemouthedness. . . ." She sighed, still not raising her head. "All we have is one reference to 'lands under the Shadow, beyond the setting sun, beyond the Aryth Ocean, where the Armies of Night reign.' Nothing there to tell us if the armies Hawkwing sent were enough by themselves to defeat these 'Armies of the Night,' or even to survive Hawkwing's death. Once the War of the Hundred Years started, everyone was too intent on carving out their own part of Hawkwing's empire to spare a thought for his armies across the sea. It seems to me, Mother, that if their descendants still lived, and if they ever intended to return, they would not have waited so long."

"ðɛn jə bɪliv ɪts nɑt pɹɑfəsi, dɔɾɝ?"

"Then you believe it is not prophecy, Daughter?"

"naʊ, 'ði eɪntʃən tʃɹi,' " vɛɹɪn sɛd, ɪmɝst ɪn əɹ oʊn θɔts. "ðɛɹ əv ɔlweɪz bɪn ɹumɝz - noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðət - ðət waɪl ðə neɪʃən ʌv ɑlməθ stɪl lɪvd, ðeɪ hæɾ ə bɹæntʃ ʌv ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə, pɝhæps ivən ə lɪvɪŋ sæpəlɪŋ. ən ðə bænɝ ʌv ɑlməθ wɑz 'blu fəɹ ðə skaɪ əbʌv, blæk fəɹ ði ɝθ bɪloʊ, wɪð ðə spɹɛɾɪŋ tʃɹi ʌv laɪf tə dʒɔɪn ðɛm.' ʌv kɔɹs, tæɹɑbənɝz kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz ðə tʃɹi ʌv mæn, ən kleɪm tə bi dɪsɛndəd fɹəm ɹulɝz ən noʊbəlz ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ən dəmɑni kleɪm dɪsɛn fɹəm ðoʊz u meɪd ðə tʃɹi ʌv laɪf ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ðəɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝ pɑsəbɪləɾiz, bʌt jəl noʊt, mʌðɝ, ðəɾ ət lis θɹi sɛntɝ ɝaʊn ɑlməθ pleɪn ən toʊmən hɛd."

"Now, 'the ancient tree,' " Verin said, immersed in her own thoughts. "There have always been rumors - no more than that - that while the nation of Almoth still lived, they had a branch of Avendesora, perhaps even a living sapling. And the banner of Almoth was 'blue for the sky above, black for the earth below, with the spreading Tree of Life to join them.' Of course, Taraboners call themselves the Tree of Man, and claim to be descended from rulers and nobles in the Age of Legends. And Domani claim descent from those who made the Tree of Life in the Age of Legends. There are other possibilities, but you will note, Mother, that at least three center around Almoth Plain and Toman Head."

ði æmɪɝlɪnz vɔɪs bɪkeɪm dɪsɛptɪvli dʒɛntəl. "wɪl jə meɪk ʌp jəɹ maɪnd, dɔɾɝ? ɪf ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz siɾ ɪz nɑt ɹɪtɝnɪŋ, ðən ðɪs ɪz nɑt pɹɑfəsi ən ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ ə ɹɑɾɪd fɪʃ hɛd wʌɾ eɪntʃən tʃɹi ɪz mɛnt."

The Amyrlin's voice became deceptively gentle. "Will you make up your mind, Daughter? If Artur Hawkwing's seed is not returning, then this is not prophecy and it doesn't matter a rotted fish head what ancient tree is meant."

"aɪ kən oʊnli ɡɪv jə wʌɾ aɪ noʊ, mʌðɝ," vɛɹɪn sɛd, lʊkɪŋ ʌp fɹəm əɹ noʊts, "æn liv ðə dɪsɪʒən ɪn jəɹ hænz. aɪ bɪliv ðə læst ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz fɔɹən ɑɹmiz daɪd lɔŋ əɡoʊ, bʌt kəz aɪ bɪliv ɪt dʌz nɑt meɪk ɪt soʊ. ðə taɪm ə tʃeɪnʒ, ʌv kɔɹs, ɹəfɝz tə ði ɛn ʌv ən eɪdʒ, ən ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd - "

"I can only give you what I know, Mother," Verin said, looking up from her notes, "and leave the decision in your hands. I believe the last of Artur Hawkwing's foreign armies died long ago, but because I believe it does not make it so. The Time of Change, of course, refers to the end of an Age, and the Great Lord - "

ði æmɪɝlɪn slæp ðə teɪbəltɑp laɪk ə θʌndɝklæp. "aɪ noʊ vɛɹi wɛl u ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ɪz, dɔɾɝ. aɪ θɪŋk jə hæd bɛɾɝ ɡoʊ naʊ." ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ən tʊk hoʊld ə hɝsɛlf vɪzəbli. "ɡoʊ, vɛɹɪn. aɪ də nɑt wɑnə bɪkʌm æŋɡɹi wɪð ju. aɪ də nɑt wɑnə fɝɡɛɾ u ɪt wɑz hæd ðə kʊks liv switkeɪks aʊɾ ət naɪt wən aɪ wɑz ə nɑvəs."

The Amyrlin slapped the tabletop like a thunderclap. "I know very well who the Great Lord is, Daughter. I think you had better go now." She took a deep breath, and took hold of herself visibly. "Go, Verin. I do not want to become angry with you. I do not want to forget who it was had the cooks leave sweetcakes out at night when I was a novice."

"mʌðɝ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "ðɛɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ ɪn ðɪs tə sədʒɛs pɹɑfəsi. ɛniwʌn wɪð ə lɪɾəl wɪɾ ən ə lɪɾəl nɑlədʒ kəd pʊt təɡɛðɝ əz mʌtʃ, ən noʊ wʌn əz ɛvɝ sɛd mɹdʒɹɑl də nɑɾ əv ə slaɪ wɪt."

"Mother," Moiraine said, "there is nothing in this to suggest prophecy. Anyone with a little wit and a little knowledge could put together as much, and no one has ever said Myrddraal do not have a sly wit."

"æn ə kɔɹs," vɛɹɪn sɛd kɑmli, "ðə mæn u tʃænəlz mʌs bi wʌn ə ðə θɹi jʌŋ mɛn tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð ju, mɔɪɹeɪn."

"And of course," Verin said calmly, "the man who channels must be one of the three young men traveling with you, Moiraine."

mɔɪɹeɪn stɛɹɾ ɪn ʃɑk. nɑɾ əwɛɹ ə ðə wɝld? aɪm ə ful. bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹilaɪzd wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ, ʃi hæd ɹitʃt aʊt tə ðə pʌlsɪŋ ɡloʊ ʃi ɔlweɪz fɛl ðəɹ weɪɾɪŋ, tə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. ðə wʌn paʊɝ sɝdʒd əlɔŋ əɹ veɪnz, tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ əɹ wɪð ɛnɝdʒi, mjuɾɪŋ ðə ʃin ə paʊɝ fɹəm ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ əz ʃi dɪd ðə seɪm. mɔɪɹeɪn hæd nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ ivən θɔɾ ʌv wildɪŋ ðə paʊɝ əɡɛnst ənʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. wi lɪv ɪn pɛɹələs taɪmz, ən ðə wɝl hæŋz ɪn ðə bæləns, ən wʌt mʌs bi dʌn, mʌs bi dʌn. ɪt mʌst. oʊ, vɛɹɪn, waɪ dɪd juv tə pʊt jəɹ noʊz ɪn wɛɹ ɪt dʌz nɑt bɪlɔŋ?

Moiraine stared in shock. Not aware of the world? I am a fool. Before she realized what she was doing, she had reached out to the pulsing glow she always felt there waiting, to the True Source. The One Power surged along her veins, charging her with energy, muting the sheen of Power from the Amyrlin Seat as she did the same. Moiraine had never before even thought of wielding the Power against another Aes Sedai. We live in perilous times, and the world hangs in the balance, and what must be done, must be done. It must. Oh, Verin, why did you have to put your nose in where it does not belong?

vɛɹɪn kloʊzd əɹ bʊk ən slɪpt ɪt bæk bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛlt, ðən lʊk fɹəm wʌn wʊmən tə ði ʌðɝ. ʃi kəd nɑt bʌt bi əwɛɹ ə ðə nɪmbəs sɝaʊndɪŋ itʃ ə ðɛm, ðə laɪt ðət keɪm fɹəm tʌtʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. oʊnli sʌmwʌn tʃɹeɪn ɪn tʃænəlɪŋ hɝsɛlf kəd si ðə ɡloʊ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tʃæns ʌv ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ mɪsɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn ənʌðɝ wʊmən.

Verin closed her book and slipped it back behind her belt, then looked from one woman to the other. She could not but be aware of the nimbus surrounding each of them, the light that came from touching the True Source. Only someone trained in channeling herself could see the glow, but there was no chance of any Aes Sedai missing it in another woman.

ə hɪn ə sæɾəsfækʃən sɛɾəld ɑn vɛɹɪnz feɪs, bʌt noʊ saɪn ðət ʃi ɹilaɪzd ʃi hæd hɝld ə laɪtnɪŋ boʊlt. ʃi oʊnli lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi hæd faʊn ənʌðɝ pis ðət fɪɾ ɪn ə pʌzəl. "jɛs, aɪ θɔɾ ɪt mʌs bi soʊ. mɔɪɹeɪn kəd nɑt də ðɪs əloʊn, ən u bɛɾɝ tə hɛlp ðən əɹ ɡɝlhʊd fɹɛn u juz tə snik daʊn wɪð əɹ tə snɪtʃ switkeɪks." ʃi blɪŋkt. "fɝɡɪv mi, mʌðɝ. aɪ ʃəd nɑɾ əv sɛd ðæt."

A hint of satisfaction settled on Verin's face, but no sign that she realized she had hurled a lightning bolt. She only looked as if she had found another piece that fit in a puzzle. "Yes, I thought it must be so. Moiraine could not do this alone, and who better to help than her girlhood friend who used to sneak down with her to snitch sweetcakes." She blinked. "Forgive me, Mother. I should not have said that."

"vɛɹɪn, vɛɹɪn." ði æmɪɝlɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd wʌndɝɪŋli. "ju əkjuz jəɹ sɪstɝ - ən mi? - ʌv. . . . aɪ woʊn ivən seɪ ɪt. ən jə ɑɹ wɝid ðət juv spoʊkən tu fəmɪljɹli tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit? jə bɔɹ ə hoʊl ɪn ðə boʊɾ ən wɝi ðəɾ ɪts ɹeɪnɪŋ. θɪŋk wʌt jə ɑɹ sədʒɛstɪŋ, dɔɾɝ."

"Verin, Verin." The Amyrlin shook her head wonderingly. "You accuse your sister - and me? - of. . . . I won't even say it. And you are worried that you've spoken too familiarly to the Amyrlin Seat? You bore a hole in the boat and worry that it's raining. Think what you are suggesting, Daughter."

ɪts tu leɪt fəɹ ðæt, sɪuən, mɔɪɹeɪn θɔt. ɪf wi hæd nɑt pænɪkt ən ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə sɔɹs, pɝhæps ðɛn. . . . bʌt ʃiz ʃʊɹ, naʊ. "waɪ ɑɹ jə tɛlɪŋ əs ðɪs, vɛɹɪn?" ʃi sɛɾ əlaʊd. "ɪf jə bɪliv wʌt jə seɪ, jə ʃəd bi tɛlɪŋ ɪt tə ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz, tə ðə ɹɛdz ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ."

It is too late for that, Siuan, Moiraine thought. If we had not panicked and reached for the Source, perhaps then. . . . But she is sure, now. "Why are you telling us this, Verin?" she said aloud. "If you believe what you say, you should be telling it to the other sisters, to the Reds in particular."

vɛɹɪnz aɪz waɪɾənd ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. "jɛs. jɛs, aɪ səpoʊz aɪ ʃʊd. aɪ hædn θɔɾ ə ðæt. bʌt ðɛn, ɪf aɪ dɪd, jə wəd bi stɪld, mɔɪɹeɪn, ən ju, mʌðɝ, ən ðə mæn dʒɛntəld. noʊ wʌn əz ɛvɝ ɹəkɔɹɾəd ðə pɹəɡɹɛʃən ɪn ə mæn u wilz ðə paʊɝ. wən dʌz ðə mædnəs kʌm, ɪɡzækli, ən haʊ dʌz ɪt teɪk hɪm? haʊ kwɪkli dʌz ɪt ɡɹoʊ? kən i stɪl fʌŋkʃən wɪð ɪz bɑɾi ɹɑɾɪŋ ɝaʊn hɪm? fəɹ haʊ lɔŋ? ənlɛs hiz dʒɛntəld, wʌt wɪl hæpən tə ðə jʌŋ mæn, wɪtʃɛvɝ i ɪz, wɪl hæpən wɛðɝ əɹ nɑɾ aɪm ðəɹ tə pʊt daʊn ði ænsɝz. ɪf hiz wɑtʃt ən ɡaɪɾəd, wi ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə kip səm ɹɛkɝd wɪð ɹizənəbəl seɪfti, fəɹ ə taɪm, ət list. ænd, tu, ðəɹ ɪz ðə kæɹæəθən saɪkəl." ʃi kɑmli ɹɪtɝn ðɛɹ stɑɹɾəld lʊks. "aɪ əsum, mʌðɝ, ðət hiz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn? aɪ kænɑt bɪliv jə wəd də ðɪs - liv wɔkɪŋ fɹi ə mæn u kən tʃænəl - ənlɛs i wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən."

Verin's eyes widened in surprise. "Yes. Yes, I suppose I should. I hadn't thought of that. But then, if I did, you would be stilled, Moiraine, and you, Mother, and the man gentled. No one has ever recorded the progression in a man who wields the Power. When does the madness come, exactly, and how does it take him? How quickly does it grow? Can he still function with his body rotting around him? For how long? Unless he is gentled, what will happen to the young man, whichever he is, will happen whether or not I am there to put down the answers. If he is watched and guided, we should be able to keep some record with reasonable safety, for a time, at least. And, too, there is The Karaethon Cycle." She calmly returned their startled looks. "I assume, Mother, that he is the Dragon Reborn? I cannot believe you would do this - leave walking free a man who can channel - unless he was the Dragon."

ʃi θɪŋks oʊnli ʌv ðə nɑlədʒ, mɔɪɹeɪn θɔt wʌndɝɪŋli. ðə kʌlməneɪʃən ə ðə daɪɹəs pɹɑfəsi ðə wɝl noʊz, pɝhæps ði ɛn ə ðə wɝld, ən ʃi kɛɹz oʊnli əbaʊt ðə nɑlədʒ. bʌt ʃiz stɪl deɪnʒɝəs, fəɹ ðæt.

She thinks only of the knowledge, Moiraine thought wonderingly. The culmination of the direst prophecy the world knows, perhaps the end of the world, and she cares only about the knowledge. But she is still dangerous, for that.

"hu ɛls noʊz ə ðɪs?" ði æmɪɝlɪnz vɔɪs wɑz feɪnt, bʌt stɪl ʃɑɹp. "sɹəfɛl, aɪ səpoʊz. hu ɛls, vɛɹɪn?"

"Who else knows of this?" The Amyrlin's voice was faint, but still sharp. "Serafelle, I suppose. Who else, Verin?"

"noʊ wʌn, mʌðɝ. sɹəfɛl ɪz nɑt ɹɪli ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ɛniθɪŋ ðət sʌmwʌn hæzən ɔlɹɛɾi sɛt daʊn ɪn ə bʊk, pɹɛfɝəbli əz lɔŋ əɡoʊ əz pɑsəbəl. ʃi θɪŋks ðəɹ ɑɹ ɪnʌf oʊl bʊks ən mænjəskɹɪps ən fɹæɡməns skæɾɝd əbaʊt, lɔst əɹ fɝɡɑɾən, tə ikwəl tɛn taɪmz wʌt wɪv ɡæðɝɾ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn. ʃi filz sɝɾən ðəɹ ɪz ɪnʌf ə ði oʊl nɑlədʒ stɪl ðəɹ tə bi faʊn fəɹ - "

"No one, Mother. Serafelle is not really interested in anything that someone hasn't already set down in a book, preferably as long ago as possible. She thinks there are enough old books and manuscripts and fragments scattered about, lost or forgotten, to equal ten times what we have gathered in Tar Valon. She feels certain there is enough of the old knowledge still there to be found for - "

"ɪnʌf, sɪstɝ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. ʃi lust əɹ hoʊld ɑn ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, ən æftɝ ə moʊmən fɛl ði æmɪɝlɪn də ðə seɪm. ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz ə lɔs tə fil ðə paʊɝ dʒɹeɪnɪŋ əweɪ, laɪk blʌɾ ən laɪf pɔɹɪŋ fɹəm ən oʊpən waʊnd. ə pɑɹɾ ə hɝ wɑntəd tə hoʊld ɑn, bʌɾ ənlaɪk səm ə hɝ sɪstɝz, ʃi meɪɾ ɪɾ ə pɔɪn ə sɛlf-dɪsəplən nɑt tə ɡɹoʊ tu fɑn ə ðə filɪŋ. "sɪt daʊn, vɛɹɪn, ən tɛl əs wʌt jə noʊ ən haʊ jə faʊn ɪɾ aʊt. liv aʊt nʌθɪŋ."

"Enough, Sister," Moiraine said. She loosed her hold on the True Source, and after a moment felt the Amyrlin do the same. It was always a loss to feel the Power draining away, like blood and life pouring from an open wound. A part of her wanted to hold on, but unlike some of her sisters, she made it a point of self-discipline not to grow too fond of the feeling. "Sit down, Verin, and tell us what you know and how you found it out. Leave out nothing."

əz vɛɹɪn tʊk ə tʃɛɹ - wɪð ə lʊk tə ði æmɪɝlɪn fəɹ pɝmɪʃən tə sɪɾ ɪn əɹ pɹɛzəns - mɔɪɹeɪn wɑtʃt əɹ sædli.

As Verin took a chair - with a look to the Amyrlin for permission to sit in her presence - Moiraine watched her sadly.

"ɪɾ ɪz ənlaɪkli," vɛɹɪn bɪɡæn, "ðæɾ ɛniwʌn u hæzən stʌɾid ði oʊld ɹɛkɝdz θɝoʊli wəd noʊɾəs ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛp ðət jə wɝ bɪheɪvɪŋ ɑdli. fɝɡɪv mi, mʌðɝ. ɪt wɑz nɪɹli twɛnti jɪɹz əɡoʊ, wɪð tɑɹ vəlɑn bɪsidʒd, ðəɾ aɪ hæd maɪ fɝs klu, ən ðət wɑz oʊnli. . . .

"It is unlikely," Verin began, "that anyone who hasn't studied the old records thoroughly would notice anything except that you were behaving oddly. Forgive me, Mother. It was nearly twenty years ago, with Tar Valon besieged, that I had my first clue, and that was only. . . .

laɪt hɛlp mi, vɛɹɪn, haʊ aɪ lʌv jə fəɹ ðoʊz switkeɪks, ən fəɹ jəɹ bʊzəm tə wip ɑn. bʌɾ əl də wʌɾ aɪ mʌs du. aɪ wɪl. aɪ mʌst.

Light help me, Verin, how I loved you for those sweetcakes, and for your bosom to weep on. But I will do what I must do. I will. I must.

pɛɹɪn pɪɹɾ ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ ət ðə ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ bæk ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi smɛld ə lævəndɝ soʊp, ðoʊ moʊst wəd nɑɾ əv sɛntɪɾ ɪɾ ivən kloʊs ʌp. əz sun əz ʃi tɝn aʊɾ ə saɪt, hi hɝid fəɹ ði ɪnfɝmɝi dɔɹ. hi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi tʃɹaɪd tə si mæt wʌns, ən ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ - lin, hi hæd hɝd sʌmbɑɾi kɔl əɹ - hæd nɪɹli snæpt ɪz hɛɾ ɔf wɪθaʊɾ ivən lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊn tə si hu hi wɑz. hi fɛlt ənizi ɝaʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪspɛʃli ɪf ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪz aɪz.

Perrin peered around the corner at the retreating back of the Aes Sedai. She smelled of lavender soap, though most would not have scented it even close up. As soon as she turned out of sight, he hurried for the infirmary door. He had already tried to see Mat once, and that Aes Sedai - Leane, he had heard somebody call her - had nearly snapped his head off without even looking around to see who he was. He felt uneasy around Aes Sedai, especially if they started looking at his eyes.

pɔzɪŋ ət ðə dɔɹ tə lɪsən - hi kəd hɪɹ noʊ fʊtstɛps daʊn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ iðɝ weɪ, ən nʌθɪŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə dɔɹ - hi wɛn ɪn ən kloʊzd ɪt sɔfli bɪhaɪn hɪm.

Pausing at the door to listen - he could hear no footsteps down the corridor either way, and nothing on the other side of the door - he went in and closed it softly behind him.

ði ɪnfɝmɝi wɑz ə lɔŋ ɹum wɪð waɪt wɔlz, ən ði ɛntʃɹənsəz tə ɑɹtʃɝz' bælkəniz əɾ iðɝ ɛn lɛɾ ɪn lɑts ə laɪt. mæt wɑz ɪn wʌn ə ðə nɛɹoʊ bɛdz ðət laɪn ðə wɔlz. æftɝ læs naɪt, pɛɹɪn hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd moʊst ə ðə bɛdz tə hæv mɛn ɪn ðɛm, bʌɾ ɪn ə moʊmən i ɹilaɪz ðə kip wɑz fʊl ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ. ði oʊnli θɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd nɑt kjʊɹ baɪ hilɪŋ wɑz dɛθ. tə hɪm, ðə ɹum smɛld ə sɪknəs ɛniweɪ.

The infirmary was a long room with white walls, and the entrances to archers' balconies at either end let in lots of light. Mat was in one of the narrow beds that lined the walls. After last night, Perrin had expected most of the beds to have men in them, but in a moment he realized the keep was full of Aes Sedai. The only thing an Aes Sedai could not cure by Healing was death. To him, the room smelled of sickness anyway.

pɛɹɪn ɡɹɪməst wən i θɔɾ ə ðæt. mæt leɪ stɪl, aɪz kloʊzd, hænz ənmoʊvɪŋ ətɑp ɪz blæŋkəts. hi lʊkt ɪɡzɔstəd. nɑt sɪk ɹɪli, bʌɾ əz ɪf i hæd wɝk θɹi deɪz ɪn ðə filz ən oʊnli naʊ leɪd daʊn tə ɹɛst. hi smɛld . . . ɹɔŋ, ðoʊ. ɪt wɑz nʌθɪŋ pɛɹɪn kəd pʊɾ ə neɪm tə. dʒʌst ɹɔŋ.

Perrin grimaced when he thought of that. Mat lay still, eyes closed, hands unmoving atop his blankets. He looked exhausted. Not sick really, but as if he had worked three days in the fields and only now laid down to rest. He smelled . . . wrong, though. It was nothing Perrin could put a name to. Just wrong.

pɛɹɪn sæt daʊn kɛɹfəli ɑn ðə bɛd nɛks tə mæts. hi ɔlweɪz dɪd θɪŋz kɛɹfəli. hi wɑz bɪɡɝ ðən moʊs pipəl, ən hæd bɪn bɪɡɝ ðən ði ʌðɝ bɔɪz əz lɔŋ əz i kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ. hi hæd hæd tə bi kɛɹfəl soʊ hi wəd nɑt hɝt sʌmwʌn æksədɛntəli, əɹ bɹeɪk θɪŋz. naʊ ɪt wɑz sɛkənd neɪtʃɝ tə hɪm. hi laɪk tə θɪŋk θɪŋz θɹu, tu, ən səmtaɪmz tɔk əm oʊvɝ wɪð sʌmbɑɾi. wɪð ɹænd θɪŋkɪŋ hiz ə lɔɹd, aɪ kæn tɔk tə hɪm, ən mæt sɝɾənli ɪzən gɑnə hæv mʌtʃ tə seɪ.

Perrin sat down carefully on the bed next to Mat's. He always did things carefully. He was bigger than most people, and had been bigger than the other boys as long as he could remember. He had had to be careful so he would not hurt someone accidentally, or break things. Now it was second nature to him. He liked to think things through, too, and sometimes talk them over with somebody. With Rand thinking he's a lord, I can't talk to him, and Mat certainly isn't going to have much to say.

hi hæd ɡɔn ɪndə wʌn ə ðə ɡɑɹɾənz ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ, tə θɪŋk θɪŋz θɹu. ðə mɛmɹi stɪl meɪɾ ɪm ə lɪɾəl əʃeɪmd. ɪf i hæd nɑt ɡɔn, hi wʊɾə bɪn ɪn ɪz ɹum tə ɡoʊ wɪð ɛɡwin ən mæt, ən meɪbi hi cʊɾə kɛpt əm fɹəm biɪŋ hɝt. mɔɹ laɪkli, hi nu, hi wəd bi ɪn wʌn ə ðiz bɛdz, laɪk mæt, əɹ dɛd, bʌt ðət dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ ðə weɪ hi fɛlt. stɪl, hi hæd ɡɔn tə ðə ɡɑɹɾən, ən ɪt wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə tʃɹɑlɑk ətæk ðət wɑz wɝiɪŋ ɪm naʊ.

He had gone into one of the gardens the night before, to think things through. The memory still made him a little ashamed. If he had not gone, he would have been in his room to go with Egwene and Mat, and maybe he could have kept them from being hurt. More likely, he knew, he would be in one of these beds, like Mat, or dead, but that did not change the way he felt. Still, he had gone to the garden, and it was nothing to do with the Trolloc attack that was worrying him now.

sɝvɪŋ wɪmən hæd faʊn ɪm sɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ ɪn ðə dɑɹk, ən wʌn ə ðə leɪɾi əmælisəz ətɛndəns, ðə leɪɾi timɔɹə. əz sun əz ðeɪ keɪm əpɑn hɪm, timɔɹə sɛnt wʌn ə ði ʌðɝz ɹʌnɪŋ, ən i hæd hɝɾ əɹ seɪ, "faɪn liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ! kwɪkli!"

Serving women had found him sitting there in the dark, and one of the Lady Amalisa's attendants, the Lady Timora. As soon as they came upon him, Timora sent one of the others running, and he had heard her say, "Find Liandrin Sedai! Quickly!"

ðeɪ hæd stʊd ðəɹ wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd θɔɾ i maɪt vænɪʃ ɪn ə pʌf ə smoʊk laɪk ə ɡlimən. ðət hæd bɪn wən ðə fɝst əlɑɹm bɛl ɹæŋ, ən ɛvɹibɑɾi ɪn ðə kip stɑɹɾəd ɹʌnɪŋ.

They had stood there watching him as if they had thought he might vanish in a puff of smoke like a gleeman. That had been when the first alarm bell rang, and everybody in the keep started running.

"liɑnʒɹɪn," hi mʌɾɝd naʊ. "ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ. əbaʊɾ ɔl ðeɪ də ɪz hʌn fəɹ mɛn u tʃænəl. jə doʊn θɪŋk ʃi bɪlivz aɪm wʌn ə ðoʊz, də ju?" mæt dɪd nɑɾ ænsɝ, ʌv kɔɹs. pɛɹɪn ɹʌbd ɪz noʊz ɹufəli. "naʊ aɪm tɔkɪŋ tə maɪsɛlf. aɪ doʊnt nid ðəɾ ɑn tɑp ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls."

"Liandrin," he muttered now. "Red Ajah. About all they do is hunt for men who channel. You don't think she believes I'm one of those, do you?" Mat did not answer, of course. Perrin rubbed his nose ruefully. "Now I'm talking to myself. I don't need that on top of everything else."

mæts aɪlɪdz flʌɾɝd. "hu . . . ? pɛɹɪn? wʌt hæpənd?" hɪz aɪz dɪd nɑɾ oʊpən ɔl ðə weɪ, ən ɪz vɔɪs saʊndəɾ əz ɪf i wɝ stɪl moʊsli əslip.

Mat's eyelids fluttered. "Who . . . ? Perrin? What happened?" His eyes did not open all the way, and his voice sounded as if he were still mostly asleep.

"doʊn jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ, mæt?"

"Don't you remember, Mat?"

"ɹɪmɛmbɝ?" mæt slipəli ɹeɪzd ə hæn təwɔɹɾ ɪz feɪs, ðən lɛɾ ɪt fɔl əɡɛn wɪð ə saɪ. hɪz aɪz bɪɡæn tə dʒɹɪft ʃʌt. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛɡwin. æsk mi . . . ɡoʊ daʊn . . . si feɪn." hi læft, ən ɪt tɝn ɪndə ə jɔn. "ʃi dɪdn æsk. toʊl mi. . . . doʊnt noʊ wʌt hæpən æftɝ. . . ." hi smækt ɪz lɪps, ən ɹɪzum ðə dip, ivən bɹiðɪŋ ə slip.

"Remember?" Mat sleepily raised a hand toward his face, then let it fall again with a sigh. His eyes began to drift shut. "Remember Egwene. Asked me . . . go down . . . see Fain." He laughed, and it turned into a yawn. "She didn't ask. Told me. . . . Don't know what happened after. . . ." He smacked his lips, and resumed the deep, even breathing of sleep.

pɛɹɪn lɛp tə hɪz fiɾ əz ɪz ɪɹz kɑt ðə saʊn ʌv əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ fʊtstɛps, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊwɛɹ tə ɡoʊ. hi wɑz stɪl stændɪŋ ðəɹ bɪsaɪd mæts bɛd wən ðə dɔɹ oʊpən ən lin keɪm ɪn. ʃi stɑpt, pʊɾ əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps, ən lʊkt ɪm sloʊli ʌp ən daʊn. ʃi wɑz nɪɹli əz tɔl əz i wɑz.

Perrin leaped to his feet as his ears caught the sound of approaching footsteps, but there was nowhere to go. He was still standing there beside Mat's bed when the door opened and Leane came in. She stopped, put her fists on her hips, and looked him slowly up and down. She was nearly as tall as he was.

"naʊ ju," ʃi sɛd, ɪn toʊnz kwaɪət jɛt bɹɪsk, "ɑɹ ɔlmoʊst ə pɹɪɾi ɪnʌf bɔɪ tə meɪk mi wɪʃ aɪ wɑz ə ɡɹin. ɔlmoʊst. bʌɾ ɪf juv dɪstɝb maɪ peɪʃənt . . . wɛl, aɪ dɛlt wɪð bɹʌðɝz ɔlmoʊst əz bɪɡ əz jə bɪfɔɹ aɪ wɛn tə ðə taʊɝ, soʊ jə nidn θɪŋk ðoʊz ʃoʊldɝz wɪl hɛlp jə ɛni."

"Now you," she said, in tones quiet yet brisk, "are almost a pretty enough boy to make me wish I was a Green. Almost. But if you've disturbed my patient . . . well, I dealt with brothers almost as big as you before I went to the Tower, so you needn't think those shoulders will help you any."

pɛɹɪn klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. hæf ðə taɪm i dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd wʌt wɪmən mɛnt wən ðeɪ sɛd θɪŋz. nɑt laɪk ɹænd. hi ɔlweɪz noʊz wʌt tə seɪ tə ðə ɡɝlz. hi ɹilaɪzd i wɑz skaʊlɪŋ ən waɪpt ɪɾ əweɪ. hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt ɹænd, bʌɾ i sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt wɑnə əpsɛɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪspɛʃli wʌn u wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə tæp əɹ fʊɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli. "ɑ . . . aɪ dɪdn dɪstɝb hɪm. hiz stɪl slipɪŋ. si?"

Perrin cleared his throat. Half the time he did not understand what women meant when they said things. Not like Rand. He always knows what to say to the girls. He realized he was scowling and wiped it away. He did not want to think about Rand, but he certainly did not want to upset an Aes Sedai, especially one who was beginning to tap her foot impatiently. "Ah . . . I didn't disturb him. He's still sleeping. See?"

"soʊ hi ɪz. ə ɡʊd θɪŋ fəɹ ju. naʊ, wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ ɪn hɪɹ? aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ tʃeɪsɪŋ jə aʊt wʌns; jə nidn θɪŋk aɪ doʊnt."

"So he is. A good thing for you. Now, what are you doing in here? I remember chasing you out once; you needn't think I don't."

"aɪ oʊnli wɑntəd tə noʊ haʊ hi ɪz."

"I only wanted to know how he is."

ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "hi ɪz slipɪŋ ɪz haʊ hi ɪz. ən ɪn ə fju aʊɝz, hɪl ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðət bɛd, ən jəl θɪŋk ðəɹ wɑz nɛvɝ ɛniθɪŋ ɹɔŋ wɪð hɪm."

She hesitated. "He is sleeping is how he is. And in a few hours, he will get out of that bed, and you'll think there was never anything wrong with him."

ðə pɔz meɪɾ ɪz hækəlz ɹaɪz. ʃi wɑz laɪɪŋ, sʌmhaʊ. ɛɛs sədaɪ nɛvɝ laɪd, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz tɛl ðə tʃɹuθ, iðɝ. hi wɑz nɑt sɝɾən wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn - liɑnʒɹɪn lʊkɪŋ fəɹ hɪm, lin laɪɪŋ tə hɪm - bʌɾ i θɔɾ ɪt wɑz taɪm i ɡɑɾ əweɪ fɹəm ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ i kəd də fəɹ mæt.

The pause made his hackles rise. She was lying, somehow. Aes Sedai never lied, but they did not always tell the truth, either. He was not certain what was going on - Liandrin looking for him, Leane lying to him - but he thought it was time he got away from Aes Sedai. There was nothing he could do for Mat.

"θæŋk ju," hi sɛd. "aɪd bɛɾɝ lɛɾ ɪm slip, ðɛn. ɪkskjus mi."

"Thank you," he said. "I'd better let him sleep, then. Excuse me."

hi tʃɹaɪd tə slaɪɾ ɝaʊn əɹ tə ðə dɔɹ, bʌt sʌɾənli hɝ hænz ʃɑɾ aʊɾ ən ɡɹæbd ɪz feɪs, tɪltɪŋ ɪt daʊn soʊ ʃi kəd pɪɹ ɪndə hɪz aɪz. sʌmθɪŋ sim tə pæs θɹu hɪm, ə wɔɹm ɹɪpəl ðət stɑɹɾəd ət ðə tɑp ə hɪz hɛɾ ən wɛn tə hɪz fit, ðən keɪm bæk əɡɛn. hi pʊld ɪz hɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ hænz.

He tried to slide around her to the door, but suddenly her hands shot out and grabbed his face, tilting it down so she could peer into his eyes. Something seemed to pass through him, a warm ripple that started at the top of his head and went to his feet, then came back again. He pulled his head out of her hands.

"jɔɹ əz hɛlθi əz ə jʌŋ waɪld ænəməl," ʃi sɛd, pɝsɪŋ əɹ lɪps. "bʌɾ ɪf jə wɝ bɔɹn wɪð ðoʊz aɪz, aɪm ə waɪtkloʊk."

"You're as healthy as a young wild animal," she said, pursing her lips. "But if you were born with those eyes, I am a Whitecloak."

"ðeɪɹ ði oʊnli aɪz aɪ ɛvɝ hæd," hi ɡɹaʊld. hi fɛlt ə lɪɾəl əbæʃt, spikɪŋ tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðət toʊn, bʌɾ i wɑz əz sɝpɹaɪzd əz ʃi wən i tʊk əɹ dʒɛnli baɪ ði ɑɹmz ən lɪftəɾ əɹ tə wʌn saɪd, sɛɾɪŋ əɹ daʊn əɡɛn aʊɾ ə hɪz weɪ. əz ðeɪ stɛɹɾ əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ, hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ɪz aɪz wɝ əz waɪd wɪð ʃɑk əz hɝz. "ɪkskjus mi," hi sɛɾ əɡɛn, ən ɔl bʌt ɹæn.

"They're the only eyes I ever had," he growled. He felt a little abashed, speaking to an Aes Sedai in that tone, but he was as surprised as she when he took her gently by the arms and lifted her to one side, setting her down again out of his way. As they stared at each other, he wondered if his eyes were as wide with shock as hers. "Excuse me," he said again, and all but ran.

maɪ aɪz. maɪ laɪt-kɝst aɪz! ðə mɔɹnɪŋ sʌnlaɪt kɑɾ ɪz aɪz, ən ðeɪ ɡlɪntɪd laɪk bɝnɪʃt ɡoʊld.

My eyes. My Light-cursed eyes! The morning sunlight caught his eyes, and they glinted like burnished gold.

* * * ɹænd twɪstəɾ ɑn ɪz bɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn ə kʌmftəɹbəl pəzɪʃən ɑn ðə θɪn mætʃɹəs. sʌnlaɪt stʃɹim θɹu ði æɹoʊslɪts, peɪntɪŋ ðə bɛɹ stoʊn wɔlz. hi hæd nɑt slɛp dʊɹɪŋ ðə ɹɪmeɪndɝ ə ðə naɪt, ən taɪɝɾ əz i wɑz, hi wɑz ʃʊɹ i kəd nɑt slip naʊ. ðə lɛðɝ dʒɝkɪn leɪ ɑn ðə flɔɹ bɪtwin ɪz bɛɾ ən ðə wɔl, bʌɾ əsaɪd fɹəm ðəɾ i wɑz fʊli dʒɹɛst, ivən tə hɪz nu buts. hɪz sɔɹd stʊd pɹɑp bɪsaɪd ðə bɛd, ən ɪz baʊ ən kwɪvɝ ɹɛstəɾ ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ əkɹɔs ðə bʌndəl kloʊks.

* * * Rand twisted on his bed, trying to find a comfortable position on the thin mattress. Sunlight streamed through the arrowslits, painting the bare stone walls. He had not slept during the remainder of the night, and tired as he was, he was sure he could not sleep now. The leather jerkin lay on the floor between his bed and the wall, but aside from that he was fully dressed, even to his new boots. His sword stood propped beside the bed, and his bow and quiver rested in a corner across the bundled cloaks.

hi kəd nɑt ɹɪd hɪmsɛlf ə ðə filɪŋ ðəɾ i ʃəd teɪk ðə tʃæns mɔɪɹeɪn hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ən liv ɪmiɾiətli. ði ɝdʒ hæd bɪn wɪð ɪm ɔl naɪt. θɹi taɪmz i hæd ɹɪzən tə ɡoʊ. twaɪs i hæd ɡɔn əz fɑɹ əz oʊpənɪŋ ðə dɔɹ. ðə hɔlz hæd bɪn ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju sɝvəns duɪŋ leɪt tʃɔɹz; ðə weɪ hæd bɪn klɪɹ. bʌɾ i hæd tə noʊ.

He could not rid himself of the feeling that he should take the chance Moiraine had given him and leave immediately. The urge had been with him all night. Three times he had risen to go. Twice he had gone as far as opening the door. The halls had been empty except for a few servants doing late chores; the way had been clear. But he had to know.

pɛɹɪn keɪm ɪn, hɛd daʊn ən jɔnɪŋ, ən ɹænd sæɾ ʌp. "haʊ ɪz ɛɡwin? ən mæt?"

Perrin came in, head down and yawning, and Rand sat up. "How is Egwene? And Mat?"

"ʃiz əslip, soʊ ðeɪ tɛl mi. ðeɪ wʊdn lemi ɪndə ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns tə si hɝ. mæt ɪz - " sʌɾənli pɛɹɪn skaʊld ət ðə flɔɹ. "ɪf jəɹ soʊ ɪntʃɹəstəd, waɪ hævən jə ɡɔn tə si hɪm jɝsɛlf? aɪ θɔt jə wɝ nɑɾ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn əs ɛnimɔɹ. jə sɛd jə wɝnt." hi pʊld oʊpən ɪz dɔɹ ə ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb ən bɪɡæn ɹʌmɪdʒɪŋ fəɹ ə klin ʃɝt.

"She's asleep, so they tell me. They wouldn't let me into the women's apartments to see her. Mat is - " Suddenly Perrin scowled at the floor. "If you're so interested, why haven't you gone to see him yourself? I thought you were not interested in us anymore. You said you weren't." He pulled open his door of the wardrobe and began rummaging for a clean shirt.

"aɪ dɪd ɡoʊ tə ði ɪnfɝmɝi, pɛɹɪn. ðəɹ wɑz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ðɛɹ, ðət tɔl wʌn huz ɔlweɪz wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ʃi sɛd mæt wɑz əslip, ən aɪ wɑz ɪn ðə weɪ, ən aɪ kəd kʌm bæk səm ʌðɝ taɪm. ʃi saʊndəd laɪk mæstɝ θeɪn ɔɹɾɝɪŋ ðə mɛn ət ðə mɪl. jə noʊ haʊ mæstɝ θeɪn ɪz, ɔl fʊl ə snæp ən də ɪt ɹaɪt ðə fɝs taɪm, ən də ɪt ɹaɪt naʊ."

"I did go to the infirmary, Perrin. There was an Aes Sedai there, that tall one who's always with the Amyrlin Seat. She said Mat was asleep, and I was in the way, and I could come back some other time. She sounded like Master Thane ordering the men at the mill. You know how Master Thane is, all full of snap and do it right the first time, and do it right now."

pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑɾ ænsɝ. hi dʒʌst ʃʌkt ɔf ɪz koʊɾ ən pʊld ɪz ʃɝɾ ɔf oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd.

Perrin did not answer. He just shucked off his coat and pulled his shirt off over his head.

ɹænd stʌɾid ɪz fɹɛnz bæk fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən dʌɡ ʌp ə læf. "ju wɑnə hɪɹ sʌmθɪŋ? jə noʊ wʌt ʃi sɛd tə mi? ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ði ɪnfɝmɝi, aɪ min. jə sɔ haʊ tɔl ʃi ɪz. əz tɔl əz moʊs mɛn. ə hæn tɔlɝ, ən ʃi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs lʊk mi ɪn ði aɪz. wɛl, ʃi stɛɹd mi ʌp ən daʊn, ən ðən ʃi mʌɾɝd, 'tɔl, ɑɹən ju? wɛɹ wɝ jə wən aɪ wɑz sɪkstin? əɹ ivən θɝɾi?' ən ðən ʃi læft, əz ɪf ɪt wɑz ɔl ə dʒoʊk. wʌt dʒju θɪŋk ə ðæt?"

Rand studied his friend's back for a moment, then dug up a laugh. "You want to hear something? You know what she said to me? The Aes Sedai in the infirmary, I mean. You saw how tall she is. As tall as most men. A hand taller, and she could almost look me in the eyes. Well, she stared me up and down, and then she muttered, 'Tall, aren't you? Where were you when I was sixteen? Or even thirty?' And then she laughed, as if it was all a joke. What do you think of that?"

pɛɹɪn fɪnɪʃt tʌɡɪŋ ɑn ə klin ʃɝɾ ən ɡeɪv ɪm ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊk. wɪð ɪz bɝli ʃoʊldɝz ən θɪk kɝlz, hi meɪd ɹænd θɪŋk ʌv ə hɝt bɛɹ. ə bɛɹ ðət dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ hæɾ i bɪn hɝt.

Perrin finished tugging on a clean shirt and gave him a sidelong look. With his burly shoulders and thick curls, he made Rand think of a hurt bear. A bear that did not understand why had he been hurt.

"pɛɹɪn, aɪm - "

"Perrin, I'm - "

"ɪf jə wɑnə meɪk dʒoʊks wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ," pɛɹɪn bɹoʊk ɪn, "ðæts ʌp tə ju. maɪ lɔɹd." hi bɪɡæn stʌfɪŋ ɪz ʃɝteɪl ɪndə hɪz bɹitʃɪz. "aɪ doʊn spɛn mʌtʃ taɪm biɪŋ - wɪɾi; ɪz ðət ðə wɝd? - wɪɾi wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ. bʌt ðɛn, aɪm oʊnli ə klʌmzi blæksmɪθ, ən aɪ maɪt bi ɪn sʌmbɑɾiz weɪ. maɪ lɔɹd." snætʃɪŋ ɪz koʊt fɹəm ðə flɔɹ, hi stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ.

"If you want to make jokes with Aes Sedai," Perrin broke in, "that's up to you. My Lord." He began stuffing his shirttail into his breeches. "I don't spend much time being - witty; is that the word? - witty with Aes Sedai. But then, I'm only a clumsy blacksmith, and I might be in somebody's way. My Lord." Snatching his coat from the floor, he started for the door.

"bɝn mi, pɛɹɪn, aɪm sɑɹi. aɪ wɑz əfɹeɪd, ən aɪ θɔɾ aɪ wɑz ɪn tʃɹʌbəl - meɪbi aɪ wɑz; meɪbi aɪ stɪl æm, aɪ doʊnt noʊ - ən aɪ dɪdnt wɑn jə ən mæt tə bi ɪn ɪt wɪð mi. laɪt, ɔl ðə wɪmən wɝ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ mi læs naɪt. aɪ θɪŋk ðæts pɑɹɾ ə ðə tʃɹʌbəl aɪm ɪn. aɪ θɪŋk soʊ. ən liɑnʒɹɪn. . . . ʃi. . . ." hi θɹu ʌp ɪz hænz. "pɛɹɪn, bɪliv mi, jə doʊnt wɑn ɛni pɑɹɾ ə ðɪs."

"Burn me, Perrin, I'm sorry. I was afraid, and I thought I was in trouble - maybe I was; maybe I still am, I don't know - and I didn't want you and Mat to be in it with me. Light, all the women were looking for me last night. I think that's part of the trouble I'm in. I think so. And Liandrin. . . . She. . . ." He threw up his hands. "Perrin, believe me, you don't want any part of this."

pɛɹɪn hæd stɑpt, bʌɾ i stʊd feɪsɪŋ ðə dɔɹ ən oʊnli tɝn ɪz hɛɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɹænd tə si wʌn ɡoʊldən aɪ. "lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ju? meɪbi ðeɪ wɝ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ɔl ʌv ʌs."

Perrin had stopped, but he stood facing the door and only turned his head enough for Rand to see one golden eye. "Looking for you? Maybe they were looking for all of us."

"noʊ, ðeɪ wɝ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ mi. aɪ wɪʃ ðeɪ hædn bɪn, bʌɾ aɪ noʊ bɛɾɝ."

"No, they were looking for me. I wish they hadn't been, but I know better."

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "liɑnʒɹɪn wɑntəd mi, ɛniweɪ, aɪ noʊ. aɪ hɝd."

Perrin shook his head. "Liandrin wanted me, anyway, I know. I heard."

ɹænd fɹaʊnd. "waɪ wəd ʃi . . . ? ɪt dʌzn tʃeɪnʒ ɛniθɪŋ. lʊk, aɪ oʊpən maɪ maʊθ ən sɛd wʌɾ aɪ ʃʊdnt. aɪ dɪd nɑt min ɪt, pɛɹɪn. naʊ, pliz, wəd jə tɛl mi əbaʊt mæt?"

Rand frowned. "Why would she . . . ? It doesn't change anything. Look, I opened my mouth and said what I shouldn't. I did not mean it, Perrin. Now, please, would you tell me about Mat?"

"hiz əslip. lin - ðæts ði ɛɛs sədaɪ - sɛɾ i wəd bi ɑn ɪz fiɾ ɪn ə fju aʊɝz." hi ʃɹʌɡd ənkʌmftəbli. "aɪ θɪŋk ʃi wɑz laɪɪŋ. aɪ noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ nɛvɝ laɪ, nɑt soʊ jə kən kætʃ ðɛm, bʌt ʃi wɑz laɪɪŋ, əɹ kipɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ bæk." hi pɔzd, lʊkɪŋ ət ɹænd saɪdweɪz. "ju dɪdn min ɔl ðæt? wɪl liv hɪɹ təɡɛðɝ? ju, ən mi, ən mæt?"

"He's asleep. Leane - that's the Aes Sedai - said he would be on his feet in a few hours." He shrugged uncomfortably. "I think she was lying. I know Aes Sedai never lie, not so you can catch them, but she was lying, or keeping something back." He paused, looking at Rand sideways. "You didn't mean all that? We will leave here together? You, and me, and Mat?"

"aɪ kænt, pɛɹɪn. aɪ kæn tɛl jə waɪ, bʌɾ aɪ ɹɪli də hæv tə ɡoʊ baɪ maɪs - pɛɹɪn, weɪt!"

"I can't, Perrin. I can't tell you why, but I really do have to go by myse - Perrin, wait!"

ðə dɔɹ slæm bɪhaɪn ɪz fɹɛnd.

The door slammed behind his friend.

ɹænd fɛl bæk ɑn ðə bɛd. "aɪ kæn tɛl ju," hi mʌɾɝd. hi paʊndɪɾ ɪz fɪst ɑn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə bɛd. "aɪ kænt." bʌt jə kən ɡoʊ naʊ, ə vɔɪs sɛɾ ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd. ɛɡwinz gɑnə bi ɔl ɹaɪt, ən mæt wɪl bi ʌp ən ɝaʊn ɪn ən aʊɝ əɹ tu. jə kən ɡoʊ naʊ. bɪfɔɹ mɔɪɹeɪn tʃeɪnʒəz əɹ maɪnd.

Rand fell back on the bed. "I can't tell you," he muttered. He pounded his fist on the side of the bed. "I can't." But you can go now, a voice said in the back of his head. Egwene's going to be all right, and Mat will be up and around in an hour or two. You can go now. Before Moiraine changes her mind.

hi stɑɹɾəd tə sɪɾ ʌp wən ə paʊndɪŋ ɑn ðə dɔɹ meɪɾ ɪm lip tə hɪz fit. ɪf ɪt wɑz pɛɹɪn kʌm bæk, hi wəd nɑt nɑk. ðə paʊndɪŋ keɪm əɡɛn.

He started to sit up when a pounding on the door made him leap to his feet. If it was Perrin come back, he would not knock. The pounding came again.

"hu ɪz ɪt?"

"Who is it?"

læn stʃɹoʊɾ ɪn, pʊʃɪŋ ðə dɔɹ tə bɪhaɪn ɪm wɪð ɪz but hil. əz juʒəwəl, hi wɔɹ ɪz sɔɹɾ oʊvɝ ə pleɪn koʊɾ ʌv ɡɹin ðət wɑz nɪɹli ɪnvɪzəbəl ɪn ðə wʊdz. ðɪs taɪm, ðoʊ, hi hæɾ ə waɪd, ɡoʊldən kɔɹd taɪd haɪ ɝaʊn ɪz lɛft ɑɹm, ðə fɹɪn ɛnz hæŋɪŋ ɔlmoʊs tə hɪz ɛlboʊ. ɑn ðə nɑt wɑz pɪn ə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn ɪn flaɪt, ðə sɪmbəl ə mɔlkiɝ.

Lan strode in, pushing the door to behind him with his boot heel. As usual, he wore his sword over a plain coat of green that was nearly invisible in the woods. This time, though, he had a wide, golden cord tied high around his left arm, the fringed ends hanging almost to his elbow. On the knot was pinned a golden crane in flight, the symbol of Malkier.

"ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɑns ju, ʃifɝɾɝ. jə kænt ɡoʊ laɪk ðæt. aʊɾ ə ðət ʃɝɾ ən bɹʌʃ jəɹ hɛɹ. jə lʊk laɪk ə heɪstæk." hi dʒɝkt oʊpən ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb ən bɪɡæn pɔɪŋ θɹu ðə kloʊðz ɹænd mɛn tə liv bɪhaɪnd.

"The Amyrlin Seat wants you, sheepherder. You can't go like that. Out of that shirt and brush your hair. You look like a haystack." He jerked open the wardrobe and began pawing through the clothes Rand meant to leave behind.

ɹænd stʊd stɪf wɛɹ i wɑz; hi fɛlt əz ðoʊ hi hæd bɪn hɪɾ ɪn ðə hɛd wɪð ə hæmɝ. hi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪt, ʌv kɔɹs, ɪn ə weɪ, bʌɾ i hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ i wəd bi ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ ðə sʌmənz keɪm. ʃi noʊz. laɪt, aɪm ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt. "wʌt dʒju min, ʃi wɑns mi? aɪm livɪŋ, læn. jə wɝ ɹaɪt. aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə steɪbəl ɹaɪt naʊ, ɡɛt maɪ hɔɹs, ən liv."

Rand stood stiff where he was; he felt as though he had been hit in the head with a hammer. He had expected it, of course, in a way, but he had been sure he would be gone before the summons came. She knows. Light, I'm sure of it. "What do you mean, she wants me? I'm leaving, Lan. You were right. I am going to the stable right now, get my horse, and leave."

"ju ʃʊɾə dʌn ðət læs naɪt." ðə wɔɹɾɝ tɔst ə waɪt sɪlk ʃɝɾ ɑntu ðə bɛd. "noʊ wʌn ɹəfjuzəz ən ɑɾiəns wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ʃifɝɾɝ. nɑt ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ ə ðə waɪtkloʊks hɪmsɛlf. peɪdʒɹən naɪl maɪt spɛn ðə tʃɹɪp plænɪŋ haʊ tə kɪl hɝ, ɪf i kəd də ɪɾ ən ɡɛɾ əweɪ, bʌɾ i wəd kʌm." hi tɝn ɝaʊnd wɪð wʌn ə ðə haɪ-kɑlɝd koʊts ɪn ɪz hænz ən hɛld ɪɾ ʌp. "ðɪs wʌn wɪl du." tæŋɡəld, lɔŋ-θɔɹn bɹaɪɹz klaɪmd itʃ ɹɛd sliv ɪn ə θɪk, ɡoʊld-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd laɪn, ən ɹæn ɝaʊn itʃ kʌf. ɡoʊldən hɛɹənz stʊɾ ɑn ðə kɑlɝz, wɪtʃ wɝ ɛdʒd wɪð ɡoʊld. "ðə kʌlɝ ɪz ɹaɪt, tu." hi sim tə bi əmjuzd ət sʌmθɪŋ, əɹ sæɾəsfaɪd. "kʌm ɑn, ʃifɝɾɝ. tʃeɪnʒ jəɹ ʃɝt. muv."

"You should have done that last night." The Warder tossed a white silk shirt onto the bed. "No one refuses an audience with the Amyrlin Seat, sheepherder. Not the Lord Captain Commander of the Whitecloaks himself. Pedron Niall might spend the trip planning how to kill her, if he could do it and get away, but he would come." He turned around with one of the high-collared coats in his hands and held it up. "This one will do." Tangled, long-thorned briars climbed each red sleeve in a thick, gold-embroidered line, and ran around each cuff. Golden herons stood on the collars, which were edged with gold. "The color is right, too." He seemed to be amused at something, or satisfied. "Come on, sheepherder. Change your shirt. Move."

ɹɪlʌktənli ɹænd pʊl ðə kɔɹs wʊl wɝkmənz ʃɝɾ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd. "aɪl fil ə ful," hi mʌɾɝd. "ə sɪlk ʃɝt! aɪ nɛvɝ wɔɹ ə sɪlk ʃɝɾ ɪn maɪ laɪf. ən aɪ nɛvɝ wɔɹ soʊ fænsi ə koʊt, iðɝ, ivən ɑn ə fistdeɪ." laɪt, ɪf pɛɹɪn siz mi ɪn ðæt. . . . bɝn mi, æftɝ ɔl ðət ful tɔk əbaʊt biɪŋ ə lɔɹd, ɪf i siz mi ɪn ðæt, hɪl nɛvɝ lɪsən tə ɹizən.

Reluctantly Rand pulled the coarse wool workman's shirt over his head. "I'll feel a fool," he muttered. "A silk shirt! I never wore a silk shirt in my life. And I never wore so fancy a coat, either, even on a feastday." Light, if Perrin sees me in that. . . . Burn me, after all that fool talk about being a lord, if he sees me in that, he'll never listen to reason.

"ju kænt ɡoʊ bɪfɔɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit dʒɹɛs laɪk ə ɡɹum fɹɛʃ aʊɾ ə ðə steɪbəlz, ʃifɝɾɝ. lemi si jəɹ buts. ðəl du. wɛl, ɡɛɾ ɑn wɪð ɪt, ɡɛɾ ɑn wɪð ɪt. jə doʊn kip ði æmɪɝlɪn weɪɾɪŋ. wɛɹ jəɹ sɔɹd."

"You can't go before the Amyrlin Seat dressed like a groom fresh out of the stables, sheepherder. Let me see your boots. They'll do. Well, get on with it, get on with it. You don't keep the Amyrlin waiting. Wear your sword."

"maɪ sɔɹd!" ðə sɪlk ʃɝɾ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd mʌfəld ɹændz jɛlp. hi jæŋkt ɪt ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ ɑn. "ɪn ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns? læn, ɪf aɪ ɡoʊ fəɹ ən ɑɾiəns wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn sit - ði æmɪɝlɪn sit! - wɛɹɪŋ ə sɔɹd, ʃɪl - "

"My sword!" The silk shirt over his head muffled Rand's yelp. He yanked it the rest of the way on. "In the women's apartments? Lan, if I go for an audience with the Amyrlin Seat - the Amyrlin Seat! - wearing a sword, she'll - "

"du nʌθɪŋ," læn kʌɾ ɪm ɔf dʒɹaɪli. "ɪf ði æmɪɝlɪn ɪz əfɹeɪɾ ə jə - ən ɪts smɑɹɾɝ fəɹ jə tə θɪŋk ʃi ɪzənt, kəz aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɛniθɪŋ ðət kəd fɹaɪɾən ðət wʊmən - ɪt woʊn bi fəɹ ə sɔɹd. naʊ ɹɪmɛmbɝ, jə nil wən jə ɡoʊ bɪfɔɹ hɝ. wʌn ni oʊnli, maɪnd," hi æɾəd ʃɑɹpli. "jɔɹ nɑt səm mɝtʃən kɑt ɡɪvɪŋ ʃɔɹt weɪt. meɪbi jə hæd bɛɾɝ pɹæktəs ɪt."

"Do nothing," Lan cut him off dryly. "If the Amyrlin is afraid of you - and it's smarter for you to think she isn't, because I don't know anything that could frighten that woman - it won't be for a sword. Now remember, you kneel when you go before her. One knee only, mind," he added sharply. "You're not some merchant caught giving short weight. Maybe you had better practice it."

"aɪ noʊ haʊ, aɪ θɪŋk. aɪ sɔ haʊ ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz nɛl tə kwin mɔɹɡeɪs."

"I know how, I think. I saw how the Queen's Guards knelt to Queen Morgase."

ðə ɡoʊst ʌv ə smaɪl tʌtʃt ðə wɔɹɾɝz lɪps. "jɛs, jə də ɪt dʒʌst əz ðeɪ dɪd. ðət wɪl ɡɪv əm sʌmθɪŋ tə θɪŋk əbaʊt."

The ghost of a smile touched the Warder's lips. "Yes, you do it just as they did. That will give them something to think about."

ɹænd fɹaʊnd. "waɪ ɑɹ jə tɛlɪŋ mi ðɪs, læn? jəɹ ə wɔɹɾɝ. jəɹ æktɪŋ əz ɪf jə ɑɹ ɑn maɪ saɪd."

Rand frowned. "Why are you telling me this, Lan? You're a Warder. You're acting as if you are on my side."

"aɪ æm ɑn jəɹ saɪd, ʃifɝɾɝ. ə lɪɾəl. ɪnʌf tə hɛlp jə ə bɪt." ðə wɔɹɾɝz feɪs wɑz stoʊn, ən sɪmpəθɛɾɪk wɝdz saʊndəd stʃɹeɪnʒ ɪn ðət ɹʌf vɔɪs. "wʌt tʃɹeɪnɪŋ juv hæd, aɪ ɡeɪv ju, ən əl nɑɾ əv jə ɡɹɔvəlɪŋ ən snaɪvəlɪŋ. ðə wil wivz əs ɔl ɪndə ðə pæɾɝn əz ɪt wɪlz. juv lɛs fɹiɾəm əbaʊɾ ɪt ðən moʊst, bʌt baɪ ðə laɪt, jə kən stɪl feɪs ɪɾ ɑn jəɹ fit. jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ u ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɪz, ʃifɝɾɝ, ən jə ʃoʊ hɝ pɹɑpɝ ɹɪspɛkt, bʌt jə də wʌɾ aɪ tɛl ju, ən jə lʊk əɹ ɪn ði aɪ. wɛl, doʊn stæn ðəɹ ɡeɪpɪŋ. tʌk ɪn jəɹ ʃɝt."

"I am on your side, sheepherder. A little. Enough to help you a bit." The Warder's face was stone, and sympathetic words sounded strange in that rough voice. "What training you've had, I gave you, and I'll not have you groveling and sniveling. The Wheel weaves us all into the Pattern as it wills. You have less freedom about it than most, but by the Light, you can still face it on your feet. You remember who the Amyrlin Seat is, sheepherder, and you show her proper respect, but you do what I tell you, and you look her in the eye. Well, don't stand there gaping. Tuck in your shirt."

ɹænd ʃʌɾ ɪz maʊθ ən tʌkt ɪn ɪz ʃɝt. ɹɪmɛmbɝ u ʃi ɪz? bɝn mi, wʌɾ aɪ wʊdnt ɡɪv tə fɝɡɛɾ u ʃi ɪz!

Rand shut his mouth and tucked in his shirt. Remember who she is? Burn me, what I wouldn't give to forget who she is!

læn kɛpt ʌp ə ɹʌnɪŋ floʊ ʌv ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz waɪl ɹænd ʃɹʌɡd ɪndə ðə ɹɛd koʊɾ ən bʌkəld ɑn ɪz sɔɹd. wʌt tə seɪ ən tə hum, ən wʌt nɑt tə seɪ. wʌt tə du, ən wʌt nɑt. haʊ tə muv, ivən. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪɾ ɔl - moʊst ʌv ɪt saʊndəɾ ɑd, ən izi tə fɝɡɛt - ən i wɑz ʃʊɹ wʌtɛvɝ i fɝɡɑt wəd bi dʒʌs ðə θɪŋ tə meɪk ði ɛɛs sədaɪ æŋɡɹi wɪð hɪm. ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹən ɔlɹɛɾi. ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn toʊl ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, hu ɛls dɪd ʃi tɛl?

Lan kept up a running flow of instructions while Rand shrugged into the red coat and buckled on his sword. What to say and to whom, and what not to say. What to do, and what not. How to move, even. He was not sure he could remember it all - most of it sounded odd, and easy to forget - and he was sure whatever he forgot would be just the thing to make the Aes Sedai angry with him. If they aren't already. If Moiraine told the Amyrlin Seat, who else did she tell?

"læn, waɪ kæn aɪ dʒʌs liv ðə weɪ aɪ plænd? baɪ ðə taɪm ʃi nu aɪ wɑz nɑt kʌmɪŋ, aɪd bi ə liɡ aʊtsaɪd ðə wɔlz ən ɡæləpɪŋ."

"Lan, why can't I just leave the way I planned? By the time she knew I was not coming, I'd be a league outside the walls and galloping."

"ænd ʃiɾ əv tʃɹækɝz æftɝ jə bɪfɔɹ jə hæd ɡɔn tu. wʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑns, ʃifɝɾɝ, ʃi ɡɛts." hi ədʒʌstəd ɹændz sɔɹd bɛl soʊ ðə hɛvi bʌkəl wɑz sɛntɝd. "wʌɾ aɪ də ɪz ðə bɛst aɪ kən fəɹ ju. bɪliv ɪt."

"And she'd have trackers after you before you had gone two. What the Amyrlin wants, sheepherder, she gets." He adjusted Rand's sword belt so the heavy buckle was centered. "What I do is the best I can for you. Believe it."

"bʌt waɪ ɔl ðɪs? wʌt dʌz ɪt min? waɪ də aɪ pʊt maɪ hæn oʊvɝ maɪ hɑɹɾ ɪf ði æmɪɝlɪn sit stænz ʌp? waɪ ɹɛfjus ɛniθɪŋ bʌt wɔɾɝ - nɑt ðəɾ aɪ wɑnə iɾ ə mil wɪð əɹ - ðən dʒɹɪbəl səm ɑn ðə flɔɹ ən seɪ 'ðə læn θɝsts'? ən ɪf ʃi æsks haʊ oʊld aɪ æm, waɪ tɛl əɹ haʊ lɔŋ ɪts sɪns aɪ wɑz ɡɪvən ðə sɔɹd? aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstæn hæf ʌv wʌt juv toʊl mi."

"But why all this? What does it mean? Why do I put my hand over my heart if the Amyrlin Seat stands up? Why refuse anything but water - not that I want to eat a meal with her - then dribble some on the floor and say 'The land thirsts'? And if she asks how old I am, why tell her how long it is since I was given the sword? I don't understand half of what you've told me."

"θɹi dʒɹɑps, ʃifɝɾɝ, doʊn pɔɹ ɪt. jə spɹɪŋkəl θɹi dʒɹɑps oʊnli. jə kən ʌndɝstæn leɪɾɝ soʊ lɔŋ əz jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ naʊ. θɪŋk ʌv ɪɾ əz əphoʊldɪŋ kʌstəm. ði æmɪɝlɪn wɪl də wɪð jə əz ʃi mʌst. ɪf jə bɪliv jə kən əvɔɪɾ ɪt, ðən jə bɪliv jə kən flaɪ tə ðə mun laɪk lɛn. jə kæn ɪskeɪp, bʌt meɪbi jə kən hoʊl jəɹ oʊn fəɹ ə waɪl, ən pɝhæps jə kən kip jəɹ pɹaɪd, ət list. ðə laɪt bɝn mi, aɪm pɹɑbli weɪstɪŋ maɪ taɪm, bʌɾ aɪv nʌθɪŋ bɛɾɝ tə du. hoʊl stɪl." fɹəm ɪz pɑkət ðə wɔɹɾɝ pɹədust ə lɔŋ lɛŋθ ʌv waɪd, fɹɪnd ɡoʊldən kɔɹɾ ən taɪɾ ɪɾ ɝaʊn ɹændz lɛft ɑɹm ɪn ə kɑmpləkeɪɾəd nɑt. ɑn ðə nɑɾ i fæsən ə ɹɛd-ɪnæməl pɪn, ən iɡəl wɪð ɪts wɪŋz spɹɛd. "aɪ hæd ðət meɪd tə ɡɪv ju, ən naʊ ɪz əz ɡʊɾ ə taɪm əz ɛni. ðət wɪl meɪk əm θɪŋk." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ daʊɾ əbaʊɾ ɪt, naʊ. ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz smaɪlɪŋ.

"Three drops, sheepherder, don't pour it. You sprinkle three drops only. You can understand later so long as you remember now. Think of it as upholding custom. The Amyrlin will do with you as she must. If you believe you can avoid it, then you believe you can fly to the moon like Lenn. You can't escape, but maybe you can hold your own for a while, and perhaps you can keep your pride, at least. The Light burn me, I am probably wasting my time, but I've nothing better to do. Hold still." From his pocket the Warder produced a long length of wide, fringed golden cord and tied it around Rand's left arm in a complicated knot. On the knot he fastened a red-enameled pin, an eagle with its wings spread. "I had that made to give you, and now is as good a time as any. That will make them think." There was no doubt about it, now. The Warder was smiling.

ɹænd lʊk daʊn ət ðə pɪn wɝidli. kɑldəzɑɹ. ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl ə meɪnɛðɝən. "ə θɔɹn tə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz fʊt," hi mɝmɝd, "æn ə bɹæmbəl tə hɪz hænd." hi lʊkt ət ðə wɔɹɾɝ. "meɪnɛðɝənz lɔŋ dɛɾ ən fɝɡɑɾən, læn. ɪts dʒʌst ə neɪm ɪn ə bʊk, naʊ. ðəɹ ɪz oʊnli ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. wʌtɛvɝ ɛls aɪ æm, ɪm ə ʃɛpɝɾ ən ə fɑɹmɝ. ðæts ɔl."

Rand looked down at the pin worriedly. Caldazar. The Red Eagle of Manetheren. "A thorn to the Dark One's foot," he murmured, "and a bramble to his hand." He looked at the Warder. "Manetheren's long dead and forgotten, Lan. It's just a name in a book, now. There is only the Two Rivers. Whatever else I am, I'm a shepherd and a farmer. That's all."

"wɛl, ðə sɔɹd ðət kəd nɑt bi bɹoʊkən wɑz ʃæɾɝd ɪn ði ɛnd, ʃifɝɾɝ, bʌɾ ɪt fɔt ðə ʃædoʊ tə ðə læst. ðəɹ ɪz wʌn ɹul, əbʌv ɔl ʌðɝz, fəɹ biɪŋ ə mæn. wʌtɛvɝ kʌmz, feɪs ɪɾ ɑn jəɹ fit. naʊ, ɑɹ jə ɹɛɾi? ði æmɪɝlɪn sit weɪts."

"Well, the sword that could not be broken was shattered in the end, sheepherder, but it fought the Shadow to the last. There is one rule, above all others, for being a man. Whatever comes, face it on your feet. Now, are you ready? The Amyrlin Seat waits."

wɪð ə koʊl nɑɾ ɪn ðə pɪɾ ə hɪz bɛli, ɹænd fɑloʊd ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɪndə ðə hɔl.

With a cold knot in the pit of his belly, Rand followed the Warder into the hall.


tʃæptɝ eɪt


CHAPTER 8

ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn


The Dragon Reborn

ɹænd wɔk stɪf-lɛɡəɾ ən nɝvəs ət fɝst, bɪsaɪd ðə wɔɹɾɝ. feɪs ɪɾ ɑn jəɹ fit. ɪt wɑz izi fəɹ læn tə seɪ. hi hæd nɑt bɪn sʌmən baɪ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. hi wɑz nɑt wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf i wəd bi dʒɛntəl bɪfɔɹ ðə deɪ wɑz dʌn, əɹ wɝs. ɹænd fɛlt əz ɪf i hæd sʌmθɪŋ kɑɾ ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt; hi kəd nɑt swɑloʊ, ən i wɑntəd tə, bædli.

Rand walked stiff-legged and nervous at first, beside the Warder. Face it on your feet. It was easy for Lan to say. He had not been summoned by the Amyrlin Seat. He was not wondering if he would be gentled before the day was done, or worse. Rand felt as if he had something caught in his throat; he could not swallow, and he wanted to, badly.

ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz bʌsəld wɪð pipəl, sɝvəns ɡoʊɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛɹ mɔɹnɪŋ tʃɔɹz, wɔɹiɝz wɛɹɪŋ sɔɹdz oʊvɝ laʊnʒɪŋ ɹoʊbz. ə fju jʌŋ bɔɪz kæɹiɪŋ smɔl pɹæktəs sɔɹdz steɪd nɪɹ ðɛɹ ɛldɝz, ɪməteɪɾɪŋ ðə weɪ ðeɪ wɔkt. noʊ saɪn ɹɪmeɪn ə ðə faɪɾɪŋ, bʌɾ ən ɛɹ ʌv əlɝtnəs klʌŋ ivən tə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. ɡɹoʊn mɛn lʊk laɪk kæts weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ə pæk ə ɹæts.

The corridors bustled with people, servants going about their morning chores, warriors wearing swords over lounging robes. A few young boys carrying small practice swords stayed near their elders, imitating the way they walked. No sign remained of the fighting, but an air of alertness clung even to the children. Grown men looked like cats waiting for a pack of rats.

ɪŋtʃɹ ɡeɪv ɹænd ən læn ə pəkjuljɝ lʊk, ɔlmoʊs tʃɹʌbəld, oʊpənɪŋ ɪz maʊθ, ðən seɪɪŋ nʌθɪŋ əz ðeɪ pæs hɪm. keɪdʒɪn, tɔl ən lin ən sæloʊ, pʌmpt ɪz fɪsts oʊvɝ ɪz hɛɾ ən ʃaʊɾəd, "teɪʃɝ mɔlkiɝ! teɪʃɝ meɪnɛðɝən!" tʃɹu blʌɾ ə mɔlkiɝ. tʃɹu blʌɾ ə meɪnɛðɝən.

Ingtar gave Rand and Lan a peculiar look, almost troubled, opening his mouth, then saying nothing as they passed him. Kajin, tall and lean and sallow, pumped his fists over his head and shouted, "Tai'shar Malkier! Tai'shar Manetheren!" True blood of Malkier. True blood of Manetheren.

ɹænd dʒʌmpt. laɪt, waɪ dɪɾ i seɪ ðæt? doʊn bi ə ful, hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf. ðeɪ ɔl noʊ əbaʊt meɪnɛðɝən hɪɹ. ðeɪ noʊ ɛvɹi oʊl stɔɹi, ɪf ɪts faɪɾɪŋ ɪn ɪt. bɝn mi, aɪ hæv tə teɪk ə ɹeɪn ɑn maɪsɛlf.

Rand jumped. Light, why did he say that? Don't be a fool, he told himself. They all know about Manetheren here. They know every old story, if it has fighting in it. Burn me, I have to take a rein on myself.

læn ɹeɪzd ɪz fɪsts ɪn ɹɪplaɪ. "teɪʃɝ ʃaɪnɝ!"

Lan raised his fists in reply. "Tai'shar Shienar!"

ɪf i meɪɾ ə ɹʌn fəɹ ɪt, kəɾ i luz hɪmsɛlf ɪn ðə kɹaʊd lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɹitʃ ɪz hɔɹs? ɪf ʃi sɛnz tʃɹækɝz æftɝ mi. . . . wɪð ɛvɹi stɛp i ɡɹu mɔɹ tɛns.

If he made a run for it, could he lose himself in the crowd long enough to reach his horse? If she sends trackers after me. . . . With every step he grew more tense.

əz ðeɪ əpɹoʊtʃt ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns, læn sʌɾənli snæpt, "kæt kɹɔsɪz ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd!"

As they approached the women's apartments, Lan suddenly snapped, "Cat Crosses the Courtyard!"

stɑɹɾəld, ɹænd ɪnstɪŋktɪvli əsum ðə wɔkɪŋ stæns əz i hæd bɪn tɔt, bæk stʃɹeɪt bʌɾ ɛvɹi mʌsəl lus, əz ɪf i hʌŋ fɹəm ə waɪɝ ət ðə tɑp ə hɪz hɛd. ɪt wɑz ə ɹɪlækst, ɔlmoʊst ɛɹəɡənt, sɔntɝ. ɹɪlækst ɑn ði aʊtsaɪd; hi sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt fil ɪɾ ɪnsaɪd. hi hæd noʊ taɪm tə wʌndɝ wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ. ðeɪ ɹaʊndəd ðə læs kɔɹəɾɝ ɪn stɛp wɪð itʃ ʌðɝ.

Startled, Rand instinctively assumed the walking stance as he had been taught, back straight but every muscle loose, as if he hung from a wire at the top of his head. It was a relaxed, almost arrogant, saunter. Relaxed on the outside; he certainly did not feel it inside. He had no time to wonder what he was doing. They rounded the last corridor in step with each other.

ðə wɪmən ət ði ɛntʃɹəns tə ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns lʊkt ʌp kɑmli əz ðeɪ keɪm kloʊsɝ. səm sæt bɪhaɪn slæntəd teɪbəlz, tʃɛkɪŋ lɑɹdʒ lɛdʒɝz ən səmtaɪmz meɪkɪŋ ən ɛntʃɹi. ʌðɝz wɝ nɪɾɪŋ, əɹ wɝkɪŋ wɪð niɾəl ən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi hup. leɪɾiz ɪn sɪlks kɛp ðɪs wɑtʃ, əz wɛl əz wɪmən ɪn lɪvɝi. ði ɑɹtʃt dɔɹz stʊɾ oʊpən, ənɡɑɹɾɪd ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə wɪmən. noʊ mɔɹ wɑz niɾəd. noʊ ʃaɪnɝən mæn wəɾ ɛntɝ ʌnɪnvaɪɾɪd, bʌɾ ɛni ʃaɪnɝən mæn stʊd ɹɛɾi tə dɪfɛn ðət dɔɹ ɪf niɾəd, ən i wəd bi əɡæst ət ðə nid.

The women at the entrance to the women's apartments looked up calmly as they came closer. Some sat behind slanted tables, checking large ledgers and sometimes making an entry. Others were knitting, or working with needle and embroidery hoop. Ladies in silks kept this watch, as well as women in livery. The arched doors stood open, unguarded except for the women. No more was needed. No Shienaran man would enter uninvited, but any Shienaran man stood ready to defend that door if needed, and he would be aghast at the need.

ɹændz stʌmək tʃɝnd, hɑɹʃ ən æsəd. ðəl teɪk wʌn lʊk əɾ əɹ sɔɹdz ən tɝn əs əweɪ. wɛl, ðæts wʌɾ aɪ wɑnt, ɪzən ɪt? ɪf ðeɪ tɝn əs bæk, meɪbi aɪ kən stɪl ɡɛɾ əweɪ. ɪf ðeɪ doʊn kɔl ðə ɡɑɹdz daʊn ɑn ʌs. hi klʌŋ tə ðə stæns læn hæd ɡɪvən ɪm əz i wəɾ əv tə ə floʊɾɪŋ bɹæntʃ ɪn ə flʌd; hoʊldɪŋ ɪt wɑz ði oʊnli θɪŋ ðət kɛpt ɪm fɹəm tɝnɪŋ teɪl ən ɹʌnɪŋ.

Rand's stomach churned, harsh and acid. They'll take one look at our swords and turn us away. Well, that's what I want, isn't it? If they turn us back, maybe I can still get away. If they don't call the guards down on us. He clung to the stance Lan had given him as he would have to a floating branch in a flood; holding it was the only thing that kept him from turning tail and running.

wʌn ə ðə leɪɾi əmælisəz ətɛndəns, nɪʃʊɹə, ə ɹaʊnd-feɪst wʊmən, pʊɾ əsaɪɾ əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ən stʊɾ əz ðeɪ keɪm tə ə stɑp. hɝ aɪz flɪkɝɾ əkɹɔs ðɛɹ sɔɹdz, ən əɹ maʊθ taɪɾənd, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən ðɛm. ɔl ðə wɪmən stɑpt wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ tə wɑtʃ, saɪlən ən ɪntɛnt.

One of the Lady Amalisa's attendants, Nisura, a round-faced woman, put aside her embroidery and stood as they came to a stop. Her eyes flickered across their swords, and her mouth tightened, but she did not mention them. All the women stopped what they were doing to watch, silent and intent.

"ɑnɝ tə jə boʊθ," nɪʃʊɹə sɛd, boʊɪŋ əɹ hɛd slaɪtli. ʃi ɡlænst ət ɹænd, soʊ kwɪkli hi wɑz ɔlmoʊs nɑt ʃʊɹ i hæd sin ɪt; ɪt ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm ʌv wʌt pɛɹɪn hæd sɛd. "ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ əweɪts ju." ʃi moʊʃənd, ən tu ʌðɝ leɪɾiz - nɑt sɝvəns; ðeɪ wɝ biɪŋ ɑnɝd - stɛp fɔɹwɝd fəɹ ɛskɔɹts. ðə wɪmən baʊd, ə hɛɹ mɔɹ ðən nɪʃʊɹə hæd, ən moʊʃən əm θɹu ði ɑɹtʃweɪ. ðeɪ boʊθ ɡeɪv ɹænd ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlæns, ðən dɪd nɑt lʊk əɾ ɪm əɡɛn.

"Honor to you both," Nisura said, bowing her head slightly. She glanced at Rand, so quickly he was almost not sure he had seen it; it reminded him of what Perrin had said. "The Amyrlin Seat awaits you." She motioned, and two other ladies - not servants; they were being honored - stepped forward for escorts. The women bowed, a hair more than Nisura had, and motioned them through the archway. They both gave Rand a sidelong glance, then did not look at him again.

wɝ ðeɪ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ɔl ʌv ʌs, əɹ dʒʌs mi? waɪ ɔl ʌv ʌs?

Were they looking for all of us, or just me? Why all of us?

ɪnsaɪd, ðeɪ ɡɑt ðə lʊks ɹænd ɪkspɛktəd - tu mɛn ɪn ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns wɛɹ mɛn wɝ ɹɛɹ - ən ðɛɹ sɔɹdz kɑz mɔɹ ðən wʌn ɹeɪzd aɪbɹaʊ, bʌt nʌn ə ðə wɪmən spoʊk. ðə tu mɛn lɛf nɑts ə kɑnvɝseɪʃən ɪn ðɛɹ pæθ, sɑf mɝmɝz tu loʊ fəɹ ɹænd tə meɪk aʊt. læn stʃɹoʊɾ əlɔŋ əz ɪf i dɪd nɑɾ ivən noʊɾəs. ɹænd kɛpt peɪs bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ ɛskɔɹts ən wɪʃt i kəd hɪɹ.

Inside, they got the looks Rand expected - two men in the women's apartments where men were rare - and their swords caused more than one raised eyebrow, but none of the women spoke. The two men left knots of conversation in their path, soft murmurs too low for Rand to make out. Lan strode along as if he did not even notice. Rand kept pace behind their escorts and wished he could hear.

ən ðən ðeɪ ɹitʃt ði æmɪɝlɪn sits tʃeɪmbɝz, wɪð θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə hɔl aʊtsaɪd ðə dɔɹ. ðə tɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ, lin, hɛld əɹ ɡoʊldən-fleɪm stæf. ɹænd dɪd nɑt noʊ ði ʌðɝ tu, wʌn ə ðə waɪɾ ədʒɑ ən wʌn jɛloʊ baɪ ðɛɹ fɹɪnʒ. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðɛɹ feɪsəz, ðoʊ, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm əz i hæd ɹʌn θɹu ðiz seɪm hɔlz. smuð ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪsəz, wɪð noʊɪŋ aɪz. ðeɪ stʌɾid ɪm wɪð ɑɹtʃt aɪbɹaʊz ən pɝs lɪps. ðə wɪmən u hæd bɹɔt læn ən ɹænd kɝtsid, hændɪŋ əm oʊvɝ tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

And then they reached the Amyrlin Seat's chambers, with three Aes Sedai in the hall outside the door. The tall Aes Sedai, Leane, held her golden-flamed staff. Rand did not know the other two, one of the White Ajah and one Yellow by their fringe. He remembered their faces, though, staring at him as he had run through these same halls. Smooth Aes Sedai faces, with knowing eyes. They studied him with arched eyebrows and pursed lips. The women who had brought Lan and Rand curtsied, handing them over to the Aes Sedai.

lin lʊkt ɹænd oʊvɝ wɪð ə slaɪt smaɪl. dɪspaɪt ðə smaɪl, hɝ vɔɪs hæɾ ə snæp tə ɪt. "wʌɾ əv jə bɹɔt ði æmɪɝlɪn sit tədeɪ, læn ɡeɪɾɪn? ə jʌŋ laɪən? bɛɾɝ jə doʊn lɛɾ ɛni ɡɹinz si ðɪs wʌn, əɹ wʌn ə ðɛm wɪl bɑn ɪm bɪfɔɹ i kən teɪk ə bɹɛθ. ɡɹinz laɪk tə bɑn əm jʌŋ."

Leane looked Rand over with a slight smile. Despite the smile, her voice had a snap to it. "What have you brought the Amyrlin Seat today, Lan Gaidin? A young lion? Better you don't let any Greens see this one, or one of them will bond him before he can take a breath. Greens like to bond them young."

ɹænd wʌndɝɾ ɪf ɪt wɑz ɹɪli pɑsəbəl tə swɛɾ ɪnsaɪd jəɹ skɪn. hi fɛlt əz ɪf i wɑz. hi wɑntəd tə lʊk ət læn, bʌɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðɪs pɑɹɾ ə ðə wɔɹɾɝz ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz. "aɪ æm ɹænd ælθɹ, sʌn ə tæm ælθɹ, ʌv ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, wɪtʃ wʌns wɑz meɪnɛðɝən. əz aɪ hæv bɪn sʌmən baɪ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, lin sədaɪ, soʊ də aɪ kʌm. aɪ stæn ɹɛɾi." hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz ðəɾ ɪz vɔɪs dɪd nɑt ʃeɪk wʌns.

Rand wondered if it was really possible to sweat inside your skin. He felt as if he was. He wanted to look at Lan, but he remembered this part of the Warder's instructions. "I am Rand al'Thor, son of Tam al'Thor, of the Two Rivers, which once was Manetheren. As I have been summoned by the Amyrlin Seat, Leane Sedai, so do I come. I stand ready." He was surprised that his voice did not shake once.

lin blɪŋkt, ən əɹ smaɪl feɪɾəd tə ə θɔtfəl lʊk. "ðɪs ɪz səpoʊz tə bi ə ʃɛpɝd, læn ɡeɪɾɪn? hi wɑz nɑt soʊ ʃʊɹ ə hɪmsɛlf ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ."

Leane blinked, and her smile faded to a thoughtful look. "This is supposed to be a shepherd, Lan Gaidin? He was not so sure of himself this morning."

"hi ɪz ə mæn, lin sədaɪ," læn sɛd fɝmli, "noʊ mɔɹ, ən noʊ lɛs. wəɹ wʌt wi ɑɹ."

"He is a man, Leane Sedai," Lan said firmly, "no more, and no less. We are what we are."

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ðə wɝld ɡɹoʊz stʃɹeɪnʒɝ ɛvɹi deɪ. aɪ səpoʊz ðə blæksmɪθ wɪl wɛɹ ə kɹaʊn ən spik ɪn haɪ tʃænt. weɪt hɪɹ." ʃi vænɪʃt ɪnsaɪd tə ənaʊns ðɛm.

The Aes Sedai shook her head. "The world grows stranger every day. I suppose the blacksmith will wear a crown and speak in High Chant. Wait here." She vanished inside to announce them.

ʃi wɑz oʊnli ɡɔn ə fju moʊməns, bʌt ɹænd wɑz ənkʌmftəbli əwɛɹ ə ði aɪz ə ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. hi tʃɹaɪd tə ɹɪtɝn ðɛɹ ɡeɪz lɛvəli, ðə weɪ læn hæd toʊld ɪm tə, ən ðeɪ pʊt ðɛɹ hɛdz təɡɛðɝ, wɪspɝɪŋ. wʌɾ ɑɹ ðeɪ seɪɪŋ? wʌt də ðeɪ noʊ? laɪt, ɑɹ ðeɪ gɑnə dʒɛntəl mi? wɑz ðət wʌt læn mɛn əbaʊt feɪsɪŋ wʌtɛvɝ kʌmz?

She was only gone a few moments, but Rand was uncomfortably aware of the eyes of the remaining Aes Sedai. He tried to return their gaze levelly, the way Lan had told him to, and they put their heads together, whispering. What are they saying? What do they know? Light, are they going to gentle me? Was that what Lan meant about facing whatever comes?

lin ɹɪtɝnd, moʊʃənɪŋ ɹænd tə ɡoʊ ɪn. wən læn stɑɹɾəd tə fɑloʊ, ʃi θɹʌst əɹ stæf əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst, stɑpɪŋ hɪm. "nɑt ju, læn ɡeɪɾɪn. mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ hæz ə tæsk fəɹ ju. jəɹ laɪən kʌb wɪl bi seɪf ɪnʌf baɪ hɪmsɛlf."

Leane returned, motioning Rand to go in. When Lan started to follow, she thrust her staff across his chest, stopping him. "Not you, Lan Gaidin. Moiraine Sedai has a task for you. Your lion cub will be safe enough by himself."

ðə dɔɹ swʌŋ ʃʌt bɪhaɪn ɹænd, bʌt nɑt bɪfɔɹ i hɝd lænz vɔɪs, fɪɹs ən stʃɹɔŋ, bʌt loʊ fəɹ ɪz ɪɹ əloʊn. "teɪʃɝ meɪnɛðɝən!"

The door swung shut behind Rand, but not before he heard Lan's voice, fierce and strong, but low for his ear alone. "Tai'shar Manetheren!"

mɔɪɹeɪn sæt tə wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum, ən wʌn ə ðə bɹaʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ hi hæd sin ɪn ðə dʌnʒən sæt tə ði ʌðɝ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə wʊmən ɪn ðə tɔl tʃɛɹ bɪhaɪn ðə waɪd teɪbəl u hɛld ɪz aɪz. ðə kɝɾənz hæd bɪn pɑɹʃəli dʒɹɔn oʊvɝ ði æɹoʊslɪts, bʌt ðə ɡæps lɛɾ ɪn ɪnʌf laɪt bɪhaɪn əɹ tə meɪk əɹ feɪs hɑɹd tə si klɪɹli. hi stɪl ɹɛkəɡnaɪz hɝ, ðoʊ. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit.

Moiraine sat to one side of the room, and one of the Brown Aes Sedai he had seen in the dungeon sat to the other, but it was the woman in the tall chair behind the wide table who held his eyes. The curtains had been partially drawn over the arrowslits, but the gaps let in enough light behind her to make her face hard to see clearly. He still recognized her, though. The Amyrlin Seat.

kwɪkli hi dʒɹɑp tə wʌn ni, lɛf hæn ɑn sɔɹd hɪlt, ɹaɪt fɪs pɹɛs tə ðə pæɾɝnd ɹʌɡ, ən baʊɾ ɪz hɛd. "æz juv sʌmən mi, mʌðɝ, soʊ hæv aɪ kʌm. aɪ stæn ɹɛɾi." hi lɪftəɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪn taɪm tə si hɝ aɪbɹaʊz ɹaɪz.

Quickly he dropped to one knee, left hand on sword hilt, right fist pressed to the patterned rug, and bowed his head. "As you have summoned me, Mother, so have I come. I stand ready." He lifted his head in time to see her eyebrows rise.

"du jə naʊ, bɔɪ?" ʃi saʊndəɾ ɔlmoʊst əmjuzd. ən sʌmθɪŋ ɛls i kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt. ʃi sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt lʊk əmjuzd. "stæn ʌp, bɔɪ, ən lemi hæv ə lʊk ət ju."

"Do you now, boy?" She sounded almost amused. And something else he could not make out. She certainly did not look amused. "Stand up, boy, and let me have a look at you."

hi stʃɹeɪɾənd ən tʃɹaɪd tə kip ɪz feɪs ɹɪlækst. ɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝt nɑt tə klɛntʃ ɪz hænz. θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ. haʊ mɛni dʌz ɪt teɪk tə dʒɛntəl ə mæn? ðeɪ sɛn ə dʌzən əɹ mɔɹ æftɝ lɑɡən. wəd mɔɪɹeɪn də ðət tə mi? hi mɛt ði æmɪɝlɪn sits lʊk aɪ tə aɪ. ʃi dɪd nɑt blɪŋk.

He straightened and tried to keep his face relaxed. It was an effort not to clench his hands. Three Aes Sedai. How many does it take to gentle a man? They sent a dozen or more after Logain. Would Moiraine do that to me? He met the Amyrlin Seat's look eye to eye. She did not blink.

"sɪt, bɔɪ," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ tə ə læɾɝ-bæk tʃɛɹ ðət hæd bɪn pʊld ɝaʊn skwɛɹli ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə teɪbəl. "ðɪs wɪl nɑt bi ʃɔɹt, aɪ fɪɹ."

"Sit, boy," she said finally, gesturing to a ladder-back chair that had been pulled around squarely in front of the table. "This will not be short, I fear."

"θæŋk ju, mʌðɝ." hi baʊɾ ɪz hɛd, ðɛn, əz læn hæd toʊl hɪm, ɡlænst ət ðə tʃɛɹ ən tʌtʃt ɪz sɔɹd. "baɪ jəɹ liv, mʌðɝ, əl stænd. ðə wɑtʃ ɪz nɑt dʌn."

"Thank you, Mother." He bowed his head, then, as Lan had told him, glanced at the chair and touched his sword. "By your leave, Mother, I will stand. The watch is not done."

ði æmɪɝlɪn sit meɪɾ ən ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd saʊn ən lʊkt ət mɔɪɹeɪn. "hæv jə lɛt læn ət hɪm, dɔɾɝ? ðɪs wɪl bi dɪfəkəlt ɪnʌf wɪθaʊɾ ɪm pɪkɪŋ ʌp wɔɹɾɝ weɪz."

The Amyrlin Seat made an exasperated sound and looked at Moiraine. "Have you let Lan at him, Daughter? This will be difficult enough without him picking up Warder ways."

"læn əz bɪn titʃɪŋ ɔl ðə bɔɪz, mʌðɝ," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd kɑmli. "hi hæz spɛn ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ taɪm wɪð ðɪs wʌn ðən ði ʌðɝz kəz i kæɹiz ə sɔɹd."

"Lan has been teaching all the boys, Mother," Moiraine replied calmly. "He has spent a little more time with this one than the others because he carries a sword."

ðə bɹaʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃɪftəɾ ɑn əɹ tʃɛɹ. "ðə ɡeɪɾɪn ɑɹ stɪf-nɛkt ən pɹaʊd, mʌðɝ, bʌt jusfəl. aɪ wəd nɑt bi wɪθaʊt toʊmɑs, əz jə wəd nɑt luz ɔlɹɪk. aɪ hæv ivən hɝɾ ə fju ɹɛdz seɪ ðeɪ səmtaɪmz wɪʃ fəɹ ə wɔɹɾɝ. ən ðə ɡɹinz, ʌv kɔɹs. . . ."

The Brown Aes Sedai shifted on her chair. "The Gaidin are stiff-necked and proud, Mother, but useful. I would not be without Tomas, as you would not lose Alric. I have even heard a few Reds say they sometimes wish for a Warder. And the Greens, of course. . . ."

ðə θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ɔl ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ hɪm, naʊ. "ðɪs sɔɹd," ði æmɪɝlɪn sit sɛd. "ɪɾ əpɪɹz tə bi ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd. haʊ dɪɾ i kʌm baɪ ðæt, mɔɪɹeɪn?"

The three Aes Sedai were all ignoring him, now. "This sword," the Amyrlin Seat said. "It appears to be a heron-mark blade. How did he come by that, Moiraine?"

"tæm ælθɹ lɛf ðə tu ɹɪvɝz əz ə bɔɪ, mʌðɝ. hi dʒɔɪn ði ɑɹmi ʌv ɪljən, ən sɝvd ɪn ðə waɪtkloʊk wɔɹ ən ðə læs tu wɔɹz wɪð tiɹ. ɪn taɪm i ɹoʊz tə bi ə bleɪdmæstɝ ən ðə sɛkən kæptən ə ðə kəmpænjənz. æftɝ ði il wɔɹ, tæm ælθɹ ɹɪtɝn tə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɪð ə waɪf fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn ən ən ɪnfən bɔɪ. ɪt wʊɾə seɪv mʌtʃ, hæɾ aɪ noʊn ðɪs ɝliɝ, bʌɾ aɪ noʊ ɪt naʊ."

"Tam al'Thor left the Two Rivers as a boy, Mother. He joined the army of Illian, and served in the Whitecloak War and the last two wars with Tear. In time he rose to be a blademaster and the Second Captain of the Companions. After the Aiel War, Tam al'Thor returned to the Two Rivers with a wife from Caemlyn and an infant boy. It would have saved much, had I known this earlier, but I know it now."

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət mɔɪɹeɪn. hi nu tæm hæd lɛf ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ən kʌm bæk wɪð ən aʊtləndɝ waɪf ən ðə sɔɹd, bʌt ðə ɹɛst. . . . wɛɹ dɪd jə lɝn ɔl ðæt? nɑɾ ɪn ɛmənz fild. ənlɛs nɪneɪiv toʊl jə mɔɹ ðən ʃiz ɛvɝ toʊl mi. ən ɪnfən bɔɪ. ʃi dʌzn seɪ hɪz sʌn. bʌɾ aɪ æm. "əɡɛns tɛɹ." ði æmɪɝlɪn sit fɹaʊn slaɪtli. "wɛl, ðəɹ wɑz bleɪm ɪnʌf ɑn boʊθ saɪdz ɪn ðoʊz wɔɹz. ful mɛn u wəd ɹæðɝ faɪt ðən tɔk. kən jə tɛl ɪf ðə bleɪɾ ɪz əθɛntɪk, vɛɹɪn?"

Rand stared at Moiraine. He knew Tam had left the Two Rivers and come back with an outlander wife and the sword, but the rest. . . . Where did you learn all that? Not in Emond's Field. Unless Nynaeve told you more than she's ever told me. An infant boy. She doesn't say his son. But I am. "Against Tear." The Amyrlin Seat frowned slightly. "Well, there was blame enough on both sides in those wars. Fool men who would rather fight than talk. Can you tell if the blade is authentic, Verin?"

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ tɛsts, mʌðɝ."

"There are tests, Mother."

"ðɛn teɪk ɪɾ ən tɛst ɪt, dɔɾɝ."

"Then take it and test it, Daughter."

ðə θɹi wɪmən wɝ nɑɾ ivən lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. ɹænd stɛp bæk, ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə hɪl hɑɹd. "maɪ fɑðɝ ɡeɪv ðɪs sɔɹd tə mi," hi sɛɾ æŋɡɹəli. "noʊbɑdi ɪz teɪkɪŋ ɪt fɹəm mi." ɪt wɑz oʊnli ðən ðəɾ i ɹilaɪz vɛɹɪn hæd nɑt muv fɹəm əɹ tʃɛɹ. hi lʊkt əɾ əm ɪn kənfjuʒən, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹɪkʌvɝ ɪz ikwəlɪbɹiəm.

The three women were not even looking at him. Rand stepped back, gripping the hilt hard. "My father gave this sword to me," he said angrily. "Nobody is taking it from me." It was only then that he realized Verin had not moved from her chair. He looked at them in confusion, trying to recover his equilibrium.

"soʊ," ði æmɪɝlɪn sit sɛd, "ju hæv səm faɪɝ ɪn jə bɪsaɪdz wʌtɛvɝ læn pʊɾ ɪn. ɡʊd. jəl niɾ ɪt."

"So," the Amyrlin Seat said, "you have some fire in you besides whatever Lan put in. Good. You will need it."

"aɪ æm wʌɾ aɪ æm, mʌðɝ," hi mænədʒ smuðli ɪnʌf. "aɪ stæn ɹɛɾi fəɹ wʌt kʌmz."

"I am what I am, Mother," he managed smoothly enough. "I stand ready for what comes."

ði æmɪɝlɪn sit ɡɹɪməst. "læn əz bɪn ət ju. lɪsən tə mi, bɔɪ. ɪn ə fju aʊɝz, ɪŋtʃɹ wɪl liv tə faɪn ðə stoʊlən hɔɹn. jəɹ fɹɛnd, mæt, wɪl ɡoʊ wɪð hɪm. aɪ ɪkspɛk ðət jəɹ ʌðɝ fɹɛnd - pɛɹɪn? - wɪl ɡoʊ, ɔlsoʊ. dʒju wɪʃ tə əkʌmpəni ðɛm?"

The Amyrlin Seat grimaced. "Lan has been at you. Listen to me, boy. In a few hours, Ingtar will leave to find the stolen Horn. Your friend, Mat, will go with him. I expect that your other friend - Perrin? - will go, also. Do you wish to accompany them?"

"mæɾ ən pɛɹɪn ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ? waɪ?" bɪleɪɾədli hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd tə æɾ ə ɹɪspɛkfəl, "mʌðɝ."

"Mat and Perrin are going? Why?" Belatedly he remembered to add a respectful, "Mother."

"ju noʊ ʌv ðə dæɡɝ jəɹ fɹɛn kæɹid?" ə twɪst ə hɝ maʊθ ʃoʊd wʌt ʃi θɔɾ ə ðə dæɡɝ. "ðæt wɑz teɪkən, tu. ənlɛs ɪts faʊnd, ðə lɪŋk bɪtwin ɪm ən ðə bleɪd kænɑt bi bɹoʊkən kəmplitli, ən hɪl daɪ. jə kən ɹaɪd wɪð ðɛm, ɪf jə wɑnt. əɹ jə kən steɪ hɪɹ. noʊ daʊt lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ wɪl lɛt jə ɹɪmeɪn əz ə ɡɛst əz lɔŋ əz jə wɪʃ. əl bi livɪŋ tədeɪ, əz wɛl. mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ wɪl əkʌmpəni mi, ən soʊ wɪl ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv, soʊ jəl steɪ əloʊn, ɪf jə steɪ. ðə tʃɔɪs ɪz jʊɹz."

"You know of the dagger your friend carried?" A twist of her mouth showed what she thought of the dagger. "That was taken, too. Unless it is found, the link between him and the blade cannot be broken completely, and he will die. You can ride with them, if you want. Or you can stay here. No doubt Lord Agelmar will let you remain as a guest as long as you wish. I will be leaving today, as well. Moiraine Sedai will accompany me, and so will Egwene and Nynaeve, so you will stay alone, if you stay. The choice is yours."

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət hɝ. ʃiz seɪɪŋ aɪ kən ɡoʊ əz aɪ wɑnt. ɪz ðət wʌt ʃi bɹɔt mi hɪɹ fɔɹ? mæt ɪz daɪɪŋ! hi ɡlænst ət mɔɪɹeɪn, sɪɾɪŋ ɪmpæsɪvli wɪð əɹ hænz foʊldəɾ ɪn əɹ læp. ʃi lʊkt əz ɪf nʌθɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝl kəd kənsɝn əɹ lɛs ðən wɛɹ i wɛnt. wɪtʃ weɪ ɑɹ jə tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊʃ mi, ɛɛs sədaɪ? bɝn mi, bʌɾ əl ɡoʊ ənʌðɝ. bʌɾ ɪf mæts daɪɪŋ. . . . aɪ kæn əbændən hɪm. laɪt, haʊ ɑɹ wi gɑnə faɪn ðət dæɡɝ?

Rand stared at her. She is saying I can go as I want. Is that what she brought me here for? Mat is dying! He glanced at Moiraine, sitting impassively with her hands folded in her lap. She looked as if nothing in the world could concern her less than where he went. Which way are you trying to push me, Aes Sedai? Burn me, but I'll go another. But if Mat's dying. . . . I can't abandon him. Light, how are we going to find that dagger?

"ju də nɑɾ əv tə meɪk ðə tʃɔɪs naʊ," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd. ʃi dɪd nɑt sim tə kɛɹ, iðɝ. "bʌt jəl əv tə tʃuz bɪfɔɹ ɪŋtʃɹ livz."

"You do not have to make the choice now," the Amyrlin said. She did not seem to care, either. "But you will have to choose before Ingtar leaves."

"aɪ wɪl ɹaɪd wɪð ɪŋtʃɹ, mʌðɝ."

"I will ride with Ingtar, Mother."

ði æmɪɝlɪn sit nɑɾəd æbsənli. "naʊ ðət ðəɾ ɪz dɛlt wɪð, wi kən muv ɑn tə ɪmpɔɹɾənt mæɾɝz. aɪ noʊ jə kən tʃænəl, bɔɪ. wʌt dʒju noʊ?"

The Amyrlin Seat nodded absently. "Now that that is dealt with, we can move on to important matters. I know you can channel, boy. What do you know?"

ɹændz maʊθ fɛl oʊpən. kɑɾ ʌp ɪn wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt mæt, hɝ kæʒəwəl wɝdz hɪɾ ɪm laɪk ə swɪŋɪŋ bɑɹn dɔɹ. ɔl ə lænz ædvaɪs ən ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz wɛn spɪnɪŋ. hi stɛɹɾ ət hɝ, lɪkɪŋ ɪz lɪps. ɪt wɑz wʌn θɪŋ tə θɪŋk ʃi nu, ɪntaɪɝli ənʌðɝ tə faɪn aʊt ʃi ɹɪli dɪd. ðə swɛt faɪnəli sipt aʊɾ ɑn ɪz fɔɹhɛd.

Rand's mouth fell open. Caught up in worrying about Mat, her casual words hit him like a swinging barn door. All of Lan's advice and instructions went spinning. He stared at her, licking his lips. It was one thing to think she knew, entirely another to find out she really did. The sweat finally seeped out on his forehead.

ʃi lin fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn əɹ sit, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪz ænsɝ, bʌɾ i hæd ðə filɪŋ ʃi wɑntəd tə lin bæk. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd wʌt læn hæd sɛd. ɪf ʃiz əfɹeɪɾ ə ju. . . . hi wɑntəd tə læf. ɪf ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪɾ ə hɪm.

She leaned forward in her seat, waiting for his answer, but he had the feeling she wanted to lean back. He remembered what Lan had said. If she's afraid of you. . . . He wanted to laugh. If she was afraid of him.

"noʊ, aɪ kænt. aɪ min . . . aɪ dɪdn də ɪɾ ɑn pɝpəs. ɪt dʒʌs hæpənd. aɪ doʊnt wɑnə - tə tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ. aɪ woʊn ɛvɝ də ɪɾ əɡɛn. aɪ swɛɹ ɪt."

"No, I can't. I mean . . . I didn't do it on purpose. It just happened. I don't want to - to channel the Power. I won't ever do it again. I swear it."

"ju doʊnt wɑn tə," ði æmɪɝlɪn sit sɛd. "wɛl, ðæts waɪz ə ju. ən fulɪʃ, tu. səm kən bi tɔt tə tʃænəl; moʊs kænɑt. ə fju, ðoʊ, hæv ðə siɾ ɪn əm ət bɝθ. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ðeɪ wil ðə wʌn paʊɝ wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɑnə əɹ nɑt, əz ʃʊɹli əz ɹoʊ meɪks fɪʃ. jəl kəntɪnju tə tʃænəl, bɔɪ. jə kæn hɛlp ɪt. ən jə hæd bɛɾɝ lɝn tə tʃænəl, lɝn tə kəntʃɹoʊl ɪt, əɹ jəl nɑt laɪv lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɡoʊ mæd. ðə wʌn paʊɝ kɪlz ðoʊz u kænɑt kəntʃɹoʊl ɪts floʊ."

"You don't want to," the Amyrlin Seat said. "Well, that's wise of you. And foolish, too. Some can be taught to channel; most cannot. A few, though, have the seed in them at birth. Sooner or later, they wield the One Power whether they want to or not, as surely as roe makes fish. You will continue to channel, boy. You can't help it. And you had better learn to channel, learn to control it, or you will not live long enough to go mad. The One Power kills those who cannot control its flow."

"haʊ æm aɪ səpoʊz tə lɝn?" hi dɪmændəd. mɔɪɹeɪn ən vɛɹɪn dʒʌst sæt ðɛɹ, ənɹʌfəld, wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm. laɪk spaɪɾɝz. "haʊ? mɔɪɹeɪn kleɪmz ʃi kæn titʃ mi ɛniθɪŋ, ən aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ tə lɝn, əɹ wʌt. aɪ doʊnt wɑn tə, ɛniweɪ. aɪ wɑnə stɑp. kæn jə ʌndɝstæn ðæt? tə stɑp!"

"How am I supposed to learn?" he demanded. Moiraine and Verin just sat there, unruffled, watching him. Like spiders. "How? Moiraine claims she can't teach me anything, and I don't know how to learn, or what. I don't want to, anyway. I want to stop. Can't you understand that? To stop!"

"aɪ toʊl jə ðə tʃɹuθ, ɹænd," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ hævɪŋ ə plɛzən kɑnvɝseɪʃən. "ðoʊz u kəd titʃ ju, ðə meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɑɹ θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz dɛd. noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ lɪvɪŋ kən titʃ jə tə tʌtʃ seɪɾɪn ɛni mɔɹ ðən jə kəd lɝn tə tʌtʃ seɪaɪdɑɹ. ə bɝd kænɑt titʃ ə fɪʃ tə flaɪ, nɔɹ ə fɪʃ titʃ ə bɝd tə swɪm."

"I told you the truth, Rand," Moiraine said. She sounded as if they were having a pleasant conversation. "Those who could teach you, the male Aes Sedai, are three thousand years dead. No Aes Sedai living can teach you to touch saidin any more than you could learn to touch saidar. A bird cannot teach a fish to fly, nor a fish teach a bird to swim."

"aɪ hæv ɔlweɪz θɔt ðət wɑz ə bæd seɪɪŋ," vɛɹɪn sɛd sʌɾənli. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ bɝdz ðət daɪv ən swɪm. ən ɪn ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz ɑɹ fɪʃ ðət flaɪ, wɪð lɔŋ fɪnz ðət stʃɹɛtʃ aʊɾ əz waɪɾ əz jəɹ aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt ɑɹmz, ən biks laɪk sɔɹdz ðət kən pɪɹs. . . ." hɝ wɝdz tʃɹeɪld ɔf ən ʃi bɪkeɪm flʌstɝd. mɔɪɹeɪn ən ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɝ stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ wɪθaʊɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən.

"I have always thought that was a bad saying," Verin said suddenly. "There are birds that dive and swim. And in the Sea of Storms are fish that fly, with long fins that stretch out as wide as your outstretched arms, and beaks like swords that can pierce. . . ." Her words trailed off and she became flustered. Moiraine and the Amyrlin Seat were staring at her without expression.

ɹænd tʊk ði ɪntɝʌpʃən tə tʃɹaɪ tə ɹɪɡeɪn səm kəntʃɹoʊl ə hɪmsɛlf. əz tæm hæd tɔɾ ɪm lɔŋ əɡoʊ, hi fɔɹmd ə sɪŋɡəl fleɪm ɪn ɪz maɪn ən fɛɾ ɪz fɪɹz ɪndə ɪt, sikɪŋ ɛmptinəs, ðə stɪlnəs ə ðə vɔɪd. ðə fleɪm sim tə ɡɹoʊ əntɪl ɪɾ ɛnvɛləpt ɛvɹiθɪŋ, əntɪl ɪt wɑz tu lɑɹdʒ tə kənteɪn əɹ ɪmædʒən ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. wɪð ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ɡɔn, livɪŋ ɪn ɪts pleɪs ə sɛns ə pis. əɾ ɪts ɛdʒəz, ɪmoʊʃənz stɪl flɪkɝd, fɪɹ ən æŋɡɝ laɪk blæk blɑtʃəz, bʌt ðə vɔɪd hɛld. θɔt skɪmd əkɹɔs ɪts sɝfəs laɪk pɛbəlz əkɹɔs aɪs. ði ɛɛs sədaɪz ətɛnʃən wɑz oʊnli ɔf ɪm fəɹ ə moʊmənt, bʌt wən ðeɪ tɝn bæk ɪz feɪs wɑz kɑm.

Rand took the interruption to try to regain some control of himself. As Tam had taught him long ago, he formed a single flame in his mind and fed his fears into it, seeking emptiness, the stillness of the void. The flame seemed to grow until it enveloped everything, until it was too large to contain or imagine any longer. With that it was gone, leaving in its place a sense of peace. At its edges, emotions still flickered, fear and anger like black blotches, but the void held. Thought skimmed across its surface like pebbles across ice. The Aes Sedai's attention was only off him for a moment, but when they turned back his face was calm.

"waɪ ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ tə mi laɪk ðɪs, mʌðɝ?" hi æskt. "ju ʃəd bi dʒɛntəlɪŋ mi."

"Why are you talking to me like this, Mother?" he asked. "You should be gentling me."

ði æmɪɝlɪn sit fɹaʊn ən tɝn tə mɔɪɹeɪn. "dɪd læn titʃ ɪm ðɪs?"

The Amyrlin Seat frowned and turned to Moiraine. "Did Lan teach him this?"

"noʊ, mʌðɝ. hi hæɾ ɪt fɹəm tæm ælθɹ."

"No, Mother. He had it from Tam al'Thor."

"waɪ?" ɹænd dɪmændəɾ əɡɛn.

"Why?" Rand demanded again.

ði æmɪɝlɪn sit lʊkt ɪm stʃɹeɪɾ ɪn ði aɪ ən sɛd, "bɪkɔz jə ɑɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn."

The Amyrlin Seat looked him straight in the eye and said, "Because you are the Dragon Reborn."

ðə vɔɪd ɹɑkt. ðə wɝld ɹɑkt. ɛvɹiθɪŋ sim tə spɪn ɝaʊn hɪm. hi kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn nʌθɪŋ, ən ði ɛmptinəs ɹɪtɝnd, ðə wɝl stɛɾid. "noʊ, mʌðɝ. aɪ kən tʃænəl, ðə laɪt hɛlp mi, bʌɾ aɪm nɑt ɹɑoʊlɪn dɑɹksbeɪn, nɔɹ ɡɛɹ əmɑlɑsən, nɔɹ jʊɹiən stoʊnboʊ. jə kən dʒɛntəl mi, əɹ kɪl mi, əɹ lemi ɡoʊ, bʌɾ əl nɑt bi ə teɪm fɔls dʒɹæɡən ɑn ə tɑɹ vəlɑn liʃ."

The void rocked. The world rocked. Everything seemed to spin around him. He concentrated on nothing, and the emptiness returned, the world steadied. "No, Mother. I can channel, the Light help me, but I am not Raolin Darksbane, nor Guaire Amalasan, nor Yurian Stonebow. You can gentle me, or kill me, or let me go, but I will not be a tame false Dragon on a Tar Valon leash."

hi hɝd vɛɹɪn ɡæsp, ən ði æmɪɝlɪnz aɪz waɪɾənd, ə ɡeɪz əz hɑɹɾ əz blu ɹɑk. ɪt dɪd nɑɾ əfɛk hɪm; ɪt slɪɾ ɔf ðə vɔɪd wɪðɪn.

He heard Verin gasp, and the Amyrlin's eyes widened, a gaze as hard as blue rock. It did not affect him; it slid off the void within.

"wɛɹ dɪd jə hɪɹ ðoʊz neɪmz?" ði æmɪɝlɪn dɪmændəd. "hu toʊl jə tɑɹ vəlɑn pʊlz ðə laɪnz ɑn ɛni fɔls dʒɹæɡən?"

"Where did you hear those names?" the Amyrlin demanded. "Who told you Tar Valon pulls the lines on any false Dragon?"

"ə fɹɛnd, mʌðɝ," hi sɛd. "ə ɡlimən. hɪz neɪm wɑz tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn. hiz dɛd, naʊ." mɔɪɹeɪn meɪɾ ə saʊnd, ən i ɡlænst ət hɝ. ʃi kleɪm tɑm wɑz nɑt dɛd, bʌt ʃi hæd nɛvɝ ɔfɝɾ ɛni pɹuf, ən i kəd nɑt si haʊ ɛni mæn kəd sɝvaɪv ɡɹæplɪŋ hænd-tə-hænd wɪð ə feɪd. ðə θɔt wɑz ɛkstʃɹeɪniəs, ən ɪt feɪɾəd əweɪ. ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ðə vɔɪɾ ən ðə wʌnnəs naʊ.

"A friend, Mother," he said. "A gleeman. His name was Thom Merrilin. He's dead, now." Moiraine made a sound, and he glanced at her. She claimed Thom was not dead, but she had never offered any proof, and he could not see how any man could survive grappling hand-to-hand with a Fade. The thought was extraneous, and it faded away. There was only the void and the oneness now.

"ju ɑɹ nɑɾ ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd fɝmli. "ju ɑɹ ðə tʃɹu dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn."

"You are not a false Dragon," the Amyrlin said firmly. "You are the true Dragon Reborn."

"aɪ æm ə ʃɛpɝd fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, mʌðɝ."

"I am a shepherd from the Two Rivers, Mother."

"dɔɾɝ, tɛl ɪm ðə stɔɹi. ə tʃɹu stɔɹi, bɔɪ. lɪsən wɛl."

"Daughter, tell him the story. A true story, boy. Listen well."

mɔɪɹeɪn bɪɡæn spikɪŋ. ɹænd kɛpt ɪz aɪz ɑn ði æmɪɝlɪnz feɪs, bʌɾ i hɝd.

Moiraine began speaking. Rand kept his eyes on the Amyrlin's face, but he heard.

"nɪɹli twɛnti jɪɹz əɡoʊ ði il kɹɔs ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld, ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl, ði oʊnli taɪm ðeɪv ɛvɝ dʌn soʊ. ðeɪ ɹævɪdʒ θɹu kɛɹhin, dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ɛvɹi ɑɹmi sɛn əɡɛns ðɛm, bɝn ðə sɪɾi ʌv kɛɹhin ɪtsɛlf, ən fɔɾ ɔl ðə weɪ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ɪt wɑz wɪntɝ ən snoʊɪŋ, bʌt koʊld əɹ hit min lɪɾəl tə ən il. ðə faɪnəl bæɾəl, ðə læs ðət kaʊntəd, wɑz fɔɾ aʊtsaɪd ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ wɔlz, ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt. ɪn θɹi deɪz ən θɹi naɪts ə faɪɾɪŋ, ði il wɝ tɝn bæk. əɹ ɹæðɝ ðeɪ tɝn bæk, fəɹ ðeɪ hæd dʌn wʌt ðeɪ keɪm tə du, wɪtʃ wɑz tə kɪl kɪŋ leɪmən ə kɛɹhin, fəɹ ɪz sɪn əɡɛns ðə tʃɹi. ɪts ðən ðət maɪ stɔɹi bɪɡɪnz. ən jʊɹz."

"Nearly twenty years ago the Aiel crossed the Spine of the World, the Dragonwall, the only time they have ever done so. They ravaged through Cairhien, destroyed every army sent against them, burned the city of Cairhien itself, and fought all the way to Tar Valon. It was winter and snowing, but cold or heat mean little to an Aiel. The final battle, the last that counted, was fought outside the Shining Walls, in the shadow of Dragonmount. In three days and three nights of fighting, the Aiel were turned back. Or rather they turned back, for they had done what they came to do, which was to kill King Laman of Cairhien, for his sin against the Tree. It is then that my story begins. And yours."

ðeɪ keɪm oʊvɝ ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl laɪk ə flʌd. ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ wɔlz. ɹænd weɪɾəd fəɹ ðə mɛmɹiz tə feɪd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz tæmz vɔɪs i hɝd, tæm sɪk ən ɹeɪvɪŋ, pʊlɪŋ ʌp sikɹəts fɹəm ɪz pæst. ðə vɔɪs klʌŋ aʊtsaɪd ðə vɔɪd, klæmɝɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ ɪn.

They came over the Dragonwall like a flood. All the way to the Shining Walls. Rand waited for the memories to fade, but it was Tam's voice he heard, Tam sick and raving, pulling up secrets from his past. The voice clung outside the void, clamoring to get in.

"aɪ wɑz wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd, ðɛn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "æz wɑz əɹ mʌðɝ, ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. wi wɝ sun tə bi ɹeɪz tə sɪstɝhʊd, ən ðət naɪt wi stʊɾ ətɛndəns ɑn ðə ðən æmɪɝlɪn. hɝ kipɝ ə ðə kɹɑnəkəlz, ɡɪtɑɹə mɔɹoʊsoʊ, wɑz ðɛɹ. ɛvɹi ʌðɝ fʊl sɪstɝ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn wɑz aʊt hilɪŋ əz mɛni wundəɾ əz ʃi kəd faɪnd, ivən ðə ɹɛdz. ɪt wɑz dɔn. ðə faɪɝ ɑn ðə hɑɹθ kəd nɑt kip ðə koʊld aʊt. ðə snoʊ hæd faɪnəli stɑpt, ən ɪn ði æmɪɝlɪnz tʃeɪmbɝz ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ wi kəd smɛl ðə smoʊk ʌv aʊtlaɪɪŋ vɪlədʒəz bɝn ɪn ðə faɪɾɪŋ."

"I was one of the Accepted, then," Moiraine said, "as was our Mother, the Amyrlin Seat. We were soon to be raised to sisterhood, and that night we stood attendance on the then Amyrlin. Her Keeper of the Chronicles, Gitara Moroso, was there. Every other full sister in Tar Valon was out Healing as many wounded as she could find, even the Reds. It was dawn. The fire on the hearth could not keep the cold out. The snow had finally stopped, and in the Amyrlin's chambers in the White Tower we could smell the smoke of outlying villages burned in the fighting."

bæɾəlz ɑɹ ɔlweɪz hɑt, ivən ɪn ðə snoʊ. hæd tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə stɪŋk ə dɛθ. tæmz dɪlɪɹiəs vɔɪs klɔɾ ət ði ɛmpti kɑm ɪnsaɪd ɹænd. ðə vɔɪd tʃɹɛmbəld ən ʃɹæŋk, stɛɾid, ðən weɪvɝɾ əɡɛn. ði æmɪɝlɪnz aɪz bɔɹɾ ət hɪm. hi fɛl swɛɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs əɡɛn. "ɪt wɑz ɔl ə fivɝ-dʒɹim," hi sɛd. "hi wɑz sɪk." hi ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs. "maɪ neɪm ɪz ɹænd ælθɹ. aɪm ə ʃɛpɝd. maɪ fɑðɝ ɪz tæm ælθɹ, ən maɪ mʌðɝ wɑz - "

Battles are always hot, even in the snow. Had to get away from the stink of death. Tam's delirious voice clawed at the empty calm inside Rand. The void trembled and shrank, steadied, then wavered again. The Amyrlin's eyes bored at him. He felt sweat on his face again. "It was all a fever-dream," he said. "He was sick." He raised his voice. "My name is Rand al'Thor. I am a shepherd. My father is Tam al'Thor, and my mother was - "

mɔɪɹeɪn hæd pɔz fəɹ hɪm, bʌt naʊ hɝ əntʃeɪnʒɪŋ vɔɪs kʌɾ ɪm ɔf, sɑft ən ɹɪlɛnlɪs. "ðə kæɹæəθən saɪkəl, ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, sɛz ðət ðə dʒɹæɡən wɪl bi ɹibɔɹn ɑn ðə sloʊps ə dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt, wɛɹ i daɪd dʊɹɪŋ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. ɡɪtɑɹə sədaɪ hæd ðə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ səmtaɪmz. ʃi wɑz oʊld, hɝ hɛɹ əz waɪɾ əz ðə snoʊ aʊtsaɪd, bʌt wən ʃi hæd ðə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ, ɪt wɑz stʃɹɔŋ. ðə mɔɹnɪŋ laɪt θɹu ðə wɪndoʊz wɑz stʃɹɛŋθənɪŋ əz aɪ hændəɾ əɹ ə kʌp ə ti. ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ æsk mi wʌt nuz ðəɹ wɑz fɹəm ðə fild ə bæɾəl. ən ɡɪtɑɹə sədaɪ stɑɹɾəd ʌp aʊɾ ə hɝ tʃɛɹ, hɝ ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz ɹɪdʒəd, tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ, hɝ feɪs əz ɪf ʃi lʊkt ɪndə ðə pɪɾ ə dum ət ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, ən ʃi kɹaɪɾ aʊt, 'hi ɪz bɔɹn əɡɛn! aɪ fil hɪm! ðə dʒɹæɡən teɪks ɪz fɝs bɹɛθ ɑn ðə sloʊp ə dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt! hiz kʌmɪŋ! hiz kʌmɪŋ! laɪt hɛlp ʌs! laɪt hɛlp ðə wɝld! hi laɪz ɪn ðə snoʊ ən kɹaɪz laɪk ðə θʌndɝ! hi bɝnz laɪk ðə sʌn!' ən ʃi fɛl fɔɹwɝɾ ɪndə maɪ ɑɹmz, dɛd."

Moiraine had paused for him, but now her unchanging voice cut him off, soft and relentless. "The Karaethon Cycle, the Prophecies of the Dragon, says that the Dragon will be reborn on the slopes of Dragonmount, where he died during the Breaking of the World. Gitara Sedai had the Foretelling sometimes. She was old, her hair as white as the snow outside, but when she had the Foretelling, it was strong. The morning light through the windows was strengthening as I handed her a cup of tea. The Amyrlin Seat asked me what news there was from the field of battle. And Gitara Sedai started up out of her chair, her arms and legs rigid, trembling, her face as if she looked into the Pit of Doom at Shayol Ghul, and she cried out, 'He is born again! I feel him! The Dragon takes his first breath on the slope of Dragonmount! He is coming! He is coming! Light help us! Light help the world! He lies in the snow and cries like the thunder! He burns like the sun!' And she fell forward into my arms, dead."

sloʊp ə ðə maʊntən. hɝɾ ə beɪbi kɹaɪ. ɡeɪv bɝθ ðəɹ əloʊn, bɪfɔɹ ʃi daɪd. tʃaɪl blu wɪð ðə koʊld. ɹænd tʃɹaɪd tə fɔɹs tæmz vɔɪs əweɪ. ðə vɔɪd ɡɹu smɔlɝ. "ə fivɝ-dʒɹim," hi ɡæspt. aɪ kʊdn liv ə tʃaɪld. "aɪ wɑz bɔɹn ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz." ɔlweɪz nu jə wɑntəd tʃɪlʒɹən, kɛɹi. hi pʊld ɪz aɪz əweɪ fɹəm ði æmɪɝlɪnz ɡeɪz. hi tʃɹaɪd tə fɔɹs ðə vɔɪd tə hoʊld. hi nu ðət wɑz nɑt ðə weɪ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz kəlæpsɪŋ ɪn hɪm. jɛs, læs. ɹænd ɪz ə ɡʊd neɪm. "aɪ - æm - ɹænd - ælθɹ!" hɪz lɛɡz tʃɹɛmbəld.

Slope of the mountain. Heard a baby cry. Gave birth there alone, before she died. Child blue with the cold. Rand tried to force Tam's voice away. The void grew smaller. "A fever-dream," he gasped. I couldn't leave a child. "I was born in the Two Rivers." Always knew you wanted children, Kari. He pulled his eyes away from the Amyrlin's gaze. He tried to force the void to hold. He knew that was not the way, but it was collapsing in him. Yes, lass. Rand is a good name. "I - am - Rand - al'Thor!" His legs trembled.

"æn soʊ wi nu ðə dʒɹæɡən wɑz ɹibɔɹn," mɔɪɹeɪn wɛn ɑn. "ði æmɪɝlɪn swɔɹ əs tə sikɹəsi, wi tu, fəɹ ʃi nu nɑɾ ɔl ðə sɪstɝz wəd si ðə ɹibɝθ əz ɪt mʌs bi sin. ʃi sɛɾ əs tə sɝtʃɪŋ. ðəɹ wɝ mɛni fɑðɝləs tʃɪlʒɹən æftɝ ðət bæɾəl. tu mɛni. bʌt wi faʊn ə stɔɹi, ðət wʌn mæn hæd faʊn ən ɪnfən ɑn ðə maʊntən. ðət wɑz ɔl. ə mæn ən ən ɪnfən bɔɪ. soʊ wi sɝtʃt ɑn. fəɹ jɪɹz wi sɝtʃt, faɪndɪŋ ʌðɝ kluz, pɔɹɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə pɹɑfəsiz. 'hi wɪl bi ʌv ði eɪntʃən blʌd, ən ɹeɪz baɪ ði oʊl blʌd.' ðət wɑz wʌn; ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝz. bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛni pleɪsəz wɛɹ ði oʊl blʌd, dɪsɛndəd fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, ɹɪmeɪnz stʃɹɔŋ. ðɛn, ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, wɛɹ ði oʊl blʌɾ ə meɪnɛðɝən siθz stɪl laɪk ə ɹɪvɝ ɪn flʌd, ɪn ɛmənz fild, aɪ faʊn θɹi bɔɪz huz neɪm-deɪz wɝ wɪðɪn wiks ə ðə bæɾəl ət dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt. ən wʌn ə ðɛm kən tʃænəl. dɪd jə θɪŋk tʃɹɑləks keɪm æftɝ jə dʒʌs kəz jə ɑɹ tɑvɝən? jə ɑɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn."

"And so we knew the Dragon was Reborn," Moiraine went on. "The Amyrlin swore us to secrecy, we two, for she knew not all the sisters would see the Rebirth as it must be seen. She set us to searching. There were many fatherless children after that battle. Too many. But we found a story, that one man had found an infant on the mountain. That was all. A man and an infant boy. So we searched on. For years we searched, finding other clues, poring over the Prophecies. 'He will be of the ancient blood, and raised by the old blood.' That was one; there were others. But there are many places where the old blood, descended from the Age of Legends, remains strong. Then, in the Two Rivers, where the old blood of Manetheren seethes still like a river in flood, in Emond's Field, I found three boys whose name-days were within weeks of the battle at Dragonmount. And one of them can channel. Did you think Trollocs came after you just because you are ta'veren? You are the Dragon Reborn."

ɹændz niz ɡeɪv weɪ; hi dʒɹɑp tə ə skwɑt, hænz slæpɪŋ ðə ɹʌɡ tə kætʃ hɪmsɛlf fɹəm fɔlɪŋ ɑn ɪz feɪs. ðə vɔɪd wɑz ɡɔn, ðə stɪlnəs ʃæɾɝd. hi ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛd, ən ðeɪ wɝ lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, ðə θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðɛɹ feɪsəz wɝ sɝin, smuð əz ənɹʌfəl pɑnz, bʌt ðɛɹ aɪz dɪd nɑt blɪŋk. "maɪ fɑðɝ ɪz tæm ælθɹ, ən aɪ wɑz bɔɹn. . . ." ðeɪ stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, ənmoʊvɪŋ. ðəɹ laɪɪŋ. aɪm nɑt . . . wʌt ðeɪ seɪ! səm weɪ, sʌmhaʊ, ðəɹ laɪɪŋ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə juz mi. "aɪ wɪl nɑt bi juz baɪ ju."

Rand's knees gave way; he dropped to a squat, hands slapping the rug to catch himself from falling on his face. The void was gone, the stillness shattered. He raised his head, and they were looking at him, the three Aes Sedai. Their faces were serene, smooth as unruffled ponds, but their eyes did not blink. "My father is Tam al'Thor, and I was born. . . ." They stared at him, unmoving. They're lying. I am not . . . what they say! Some way, somehow, they're lying, trying to use me. "I will not be used by you."

"æn æŋkɝ ɪz nɑt dɪmin baɪ biɪŋ juz tə hoʊld ə boʊt," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd. "ju wɝ meɪd fəɹ ə pɝpəs, ɹænd ælθɹ. 'wɛn ðə wɪnz ə tɑɹmən ɡdən skaʊɝ ði ɝθ, hɪl feɪs ðə ʃædoʊ ən bɹɪŋ fɔɹθ laɪɾ əɡɛn ɪn ðə wɝld.' ðə pɹɑfəsiz mʌs bi fʊlfɪld, əɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɪl bɹeɪk fɹi ən ɹimeɪk ðə wɝld ɪn ɪz ɪmədʒ. ðə læs bæɾəl ɪz kʌmɪŋ, ən jə wɝ bɔɹn tə junaɪt mænkaɪn ən lɛɾ əm əɡɛns ðə dɑɹk wʌn."

"An anchor is not demeaned by being used to hold a boat," the Amyrlin said. "You were made for a purpose, Rand al'Thor. 'When the winds of Tarmon Gai'don scour the earth, he will face the Shadow and bring forth Light again in the world.' The Prophecies must be fulfilled, or the Dark One will break free and remake the world in his image. The Last Battle is coming, and you were born to unite mankind and lead them against the Dark One."

"bælzəmən ɪz dɛd," ɹænd sɛd hɔɹsli, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn snɔɹɾɪd laɪk ə steɪbəlɪhænd.

"Ba'alzamon is dead," Rand said hoarsely, and the Amyrlin snorted like a stablehand.

"ɪf jə bɪliv ðæt, jə ɑɹ əz mʌtʃ ə ful əz ðə dəmɑni. mɛni ðəɹ bɪliv hiz dɛd, əɹ seɪ ðeɪ du, bʌɾ aɪ noʊɾəs ðeɪ stɪl woʊn ɹɪsk neɪmɪŋ hɪm. ðə dɑɹk wʌn laɪvz, ən hiz bɹeɪkɪŋ fɹi. jəl feɪs ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ɪts jəɹ dɛstəni."

"If you believe that, you are as much a fool as the Domani. Many there believe he is dead, or say they do, but I notice they still won't risk naming him. The Dark One lives, and he is breaking free. You will face the Dark One. It is your destiny."

ɪts jəɹ dɛstəni. hi hæd hɝd ðət bɪfɔɹ, ɪn ə dʒɹim ðət hæd meɪbi nɑt bɪn ɪntaɪɝli ə dʒɹim. hi wʌndɝd wʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn wəd seɪ ɪf ʃi nu bælzəmən hæd spoʊkən tə hɪm ɪn dʒɹimz. ðæts dʌn wɪð. bælzəmən ɪz dɛd. aɪ sɔ hɪm daɪ.

It is your destiny. He had heard that before, in a dream that had maybe not been entirely a dream. He wondered what the Amyrlin would say if she knew Ba'alzamon had spoken to him in dreams. That's done with. Ba'alzamon is dead. I saw him die.

sʌɾənli ɪt keɪm tə hɪm ðəɾ i wɑz kɹaʊtʃɪŋ laɪk ə toʊd, hʌɾəlɪŋ ʌndɝ ðɛɹ aɪz. hi tʃɹaɪd tə fɔɹm ðə vɔɪɾ əɡɛn, bʌt vɔɪsəz wɝl θɹu hɪz hɛd, swipɪŋ əweɪ ɛvɹi ɛfɝt. ɪts jəɹ dɛstəni. beɪb laɪɪŋ ɪn ðə snoʊ. jə ɑɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. bælzəmən ɪz dɛd. ɹænd ɪz ə ɡʊd neɪm, kɛɹi. əl nɑt bi juzd! dʒɹɔɪŋ ɑn ɪz oʊn neɪɾɪv stʌbɝnnəs, hi fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf bæk əpɹaɪt. feɪs ɪɾ ɑn jəɹ fit. jə kən kip jəɹ pɹaɪd, ət list. ðə θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑtʃt wɪð noʊ ɪkspɹɛʃən.

Suddenly it came to him that he was crouching like a toad, huddling under their eyes. He tried to form the void again, but voices whirled through his head, sweeping away every effort. It is your destiny. Babe lying in the snow. You are the Dragon Reborn. Ba'alzamon is dead. Rand is a good name, Kari. I will not be used! Drawing on his own native stubbornness, he forced himself back upright. Face it on your feet. You can keep your pride, at least. The three Aes Sedai watched with no expression.

"wʌt. . . ." wɪð ən ɛfɝɾ i stɛɾid ɪz vɔɪs. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə gɑnə də tə mi?"

"What. . . ." With an effort he steadied his voice. "What are you going to do to me?"

"nʌθɪŋ," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd, ən i blɪŋkt. ɪt wɑz nɑt ði ænsɝ i hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd, ðə wʌn i hæd fɪɹd. "ju seɪ jə wɑnə əkʌmpəni jəɹ fɹɛnd wɪð ɪŋtʃɹ, ən jə meɪ. aɪ hæv nɑt mɑɹk jə aʊɾ ɪn ɛni weɪ. səm ə ðə sɪstɝz meɪ noʊ jə ɑɹ tɑvɝən, bʌt noʊ mɔɹ. oʊnli wi θɹi noʊ hu jə tʃɹuli ɑɹ. jəɹ fɹɛn pɛɹɪn wɪl bi bɹɔt tə mi, əz jə wɝ, ən əl vɪzət jəɹ ʌðɝ fɹɛn ɪn ði ɪnfɝmɝi. jə meɪ ɡoʊ əz jə wɪl, wɪθaʊt fɪɹ ðət wɪl sɛt ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝz ɑn ju."

"Nothing," the Amyrlin said, and he blinked. It was not the answer he had expected, the one he had feared. "You say you want to accompany your friend with Ingtar, and you may. I have not marked you out in any way. Some of the sisters may know you are ta'veren, but no more. Only we three know who you truly are. Your friend Perrin will be brought to me, as you were, and I will visit your other friend in the infirmary. You may go as you will, without fear that we will set the Red sisters on you."

hu jə tʃɹuli ɑɹ. æŋɡɝ flɛɹɾ ʌp ɪn hɪm, hɑɾ ən kɝoʊsɪv. hi fɔɹst ɪt tə steɪ ɪnsaɪd, hɪɾən. "waɪ?"

Who you truly are. Anger flared up in him, hot and corrosive. He forced it to stay inside, hidden. "Why?"

"ðə pɹɑfəsiz mʌs bi fʊlfɪld. wi lɛt jə wɔk fɹi, noʊɪŋ wʌt jə ɑɹ, kəz ʌðɝwaɪz ðə wɝld wi noʊ wɪl daɪ, ən ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɪl kʌvɝ ði ɝθ wɪð faɪɝ ən dɛθ. mɑɹk mi, nɑɾ ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ fil ðə seɪm. ðəɹ ɑɹ səm hɪɹ ɪn fæl dæɹə hu wəd stʃɹaɪk jə daʊn ɪf ðeɪ nu ə tɛnθ ʌv wʌt jə ɑɹ, ən fil noʊ mɔɹ ɹɪmɔɹs ðən fəɹ ɡʌɾɪŋ ə fɪʃ. bʌt ðɛn, ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛn huv noʊ daʊt læft wɪð jə hu wəd də ðə seɪm, ɪf ðeɪ nu. hæv ə kɛɹ, ɹænd ælθɹ, dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn."

"The Prophecies must be fulfilled. We let you walk free, knowing what you are, because otherwise the world we know will die, and the Dark One will cover the earth with fire and death. Mark me, not all Aes Sedai feel the same. There are some here in Fal Dara who would strike you down if they knew a tenth of what you are, and feel no more remorse than for gutting a fish. But then, there are men who've no doubt laughed with you who would do the same, if they knew. Have a care, Rand al'Thor, Dragon Reborn."

hi lʊkt əɾ itʃ ə ðɛm ɪn tɝn. jəɹ pɹɑfəsiz ɑɹ noʊ pɑɹɾ ə mi. ðeɪ ɹɪtɝn ɪz ɡeɪz soʊ kɑmli ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə bɪliv ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənvɪns ɪm i wɑz ðə moʊs heɪɾəd, ðə moʊs fɪɹd mæn ɪn ðə hɪstɝi ʌv ðə wɝld. hi hæd ɡɔn ɹaɪt θɹu fɪɹ ən kʌm aʊt ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ɪn səm pleɪs koʊld. æŋɡɝ wɑz ɔl ðət kɛpt ɪm wɔɹm. ðeɪ kəd dʒɛntəl hɪm, əɹ bɝn ɪm tə ə kɹɪsp wɛɹ i stʊd, ən i noʊ lɔŋɡɝ kɛɹd.

He looked at each of them in turn. Your Prophecies are no part of me. They returned his gaze so calmly it was hard to believe they were trying to convince him he was the most hated, the most feared man in the history of the world. He had gone right through fear and come out the other side in some place cold. Anger was all that kept him warm. They could gentle him, or burn him to a crisp where he stood, and he no longer cared.

ə pɑɹɾ ə lænz ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz keɪm bæk tə hɪm. lɛf hæn ɑn ðə hɪlt, hi twɪstəd ðə sɔɹd bɪhaɪn hɪm, kætʃɪŋ ðə skæbɝɾ ɪn ɪz ɹaɪt, ðən baʊd, ɑɹmz stʃɹeɪt. "baɪ jəɹ liv, mʌðɝ, meɪ aɪ dɪpɑɹt ðɪs pleɪs?"

A part of Lan's instructions came back to him. Left hand on the hilt, he twisted the sword behind him, catching the scabbard in his right, then bowed, arms straight. "By your leave, Mother, may I depart this place?"

"aɪ ɡɪv jə liv tə ɡoʊ, maɪ sʌn."

"I give you leave to go, my son."

stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ, hi stʊd ðəɹ ə moʊmən lɔŋɡɝ. "aɪ wɪl nɑt bi juzd," hi toʊl ðɛm. ðəɹ wɑz ə lɔŋ saɪləns əz i tɝn ən lɛft.

Straightening, he stood there a moment longer. "I will not be used," he told them. There was a long silence as he turned and left.

ðə saɪləns stʃɹɛtʃt ɑn ɪn ðə ɹum æftɝ ɹænd lɛft əntɪl ɪt wɑz bɹoʊkən baɪ ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ fɹəm ði æmɪɝlɪn. "aɪ kænɑt meɪk maɪsɛlf laɪk wʌt wi dʒʌs dɪd," ʃi sɛd. "ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi, bʌt. . . . dɪɾ ɪt wɝk, dɔɾɝz?"

The silence stretched on in the room after Rand left until it was broken by a long breath from the Amyrlin. "I cannot make myself like what we just did," she said. "It was necessary, but. . . . Did it work, Daughters?"

mɔɪɹeɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, dʒʌs ðə slaɪɾəst muvmənt. "aɪ də nɑt noʊ. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi, ən ɪz."

Moiraine shook her head, just the slightest movement. "I do not know. But it was necessary, and is."

"nɛsəsɛɹi," vɛɹɪn əɡɹid. ʃi tʌtʃt əɹ fɔɹhɛd, ðən pɪɹɾ ət ðə dæmpnəs ɑn əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. "hi ɪz stʃɹɔŋ. ən əz stʌbɝn əz jə sɛd, mɔɪɹeɪn. mʌtʃ stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən aɪ ɪkspɛktəd. wi meɪ hæv tə dʒɛntəl ɪm æftɝ ɔl bɪfɔɹ. . . ." hɝ aɪz waɪɾənd. "bʌt wi kænɑt, kən wi? ðə pɹɑfəsiz. ðə laɪt fɝɡɪv əs fəɹ wʌt wəɹ lusɪŋ ɑn ðə wɝld."

"Necessary," Verin agreed. She touched her forehead, then peered at the dampness on her fingers. "He is strong. And as stubborn as you said, Moiraine. Much stronger than I expected. We may have to gentle him after all before. . . ." Her eyes widened. "But we cannot, can we? The Prophecies. The Light forgive us for what we are loosing on the world."

"ðə pɹɑfəsiz," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ. "æftɝwɝdz, wɪl də əz wi mʌst. əz wi də naʊ."

"The Prophecies," Moiraine said, nodding. "Afterwards, we will do as we must. As we do now."

"æz wi mʌst," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd. "jɛs. bʌt wən i lɝnz tə tʃænəl, ðə laɪt hɛlp əs ɔl."

"As we must," the Amyrlin said. "Yes. But when he learns to channel, the Light help us all."

ðə saɪləns ɹɪtɝnd.

The silence returned.

ðəɹ wɑz ə stɔɹm kʌmɪŋ. nɪneɪiv fɛlt ɪt. ə bɪɡ stɔɹm, wɝs ðən ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ sin. ʃi kəd lɪsən tə ðə wɪnd, ən hɪɹ wʌt ðə wɛðɝ wəd bi. ɔl wɪsdəmz kleɪm tə bi eɪbəl tə də ðæt, ðoʊ mɛni kəd nɑt. nɪneɪiv hæd fɛl mɔɹ kʌmftəɹbəl wɪð ði əbɪləɾi bɪfɔɹ lɝnɪŋ ɪt wɑz ə mænəfɛsteɪʃən ə ðə paʊɝ. ɛni wʊmən u kəd lɪsən tə ðə wɪn kəd tʃænəl, ðoʊ moʊst wɝ pɹɑbli əz ʃi hæd bɪn, ʌnəwɛɹ ʌv wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ, ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪɾ oʊnli ɪn fɪts ən stɑɹts.

There was a storm coming. Nynaeve felt it. A big storm, worse than she had ever seen. She could listen to the wind, and hear what the weather would be. All Wisdoms claimed to be able to do that, though many could not. Nynaeve had felt more comfortable with the ability before learning it was a manifestation of the Power. Any woman who could listen to the wind could channel, though most were probably as she had been, unaware of what she was doing, getting it only in fits and starts.

ðɪs taɪm, ðoʊ, sʌmθɪŋ wɑz ɹɔŋ. aʊtsaɪd, ðə mɔɹnɪŋ sʌn wɑz ə ɡoʊldən bɔl ɪn ə klɪɹ blu skaɪ, ən bɝdz sæŋ ɪn ðə ɡɑɹɾənz, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑɾ ɪt. ðəɹ wʊɾə bɪn nʌθɪŋ tə lɪsnɪŋ tə ðə wɪn ɪf ʃi kəd nɑt fɔɹtɛl ðə wɛðɝ bɪfɔɹ ðə saɪnz wɝ vɪzəbəl. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ wɪð ðə filɪŋ ðɪs taɪm, sʌmθɪŋ nɑt kwaɪt ðə weɪ ɪt juʒəwəli wɑz. ðə stɔɹm fɛl dɪstənt, tu fɑɹ ɔf fəɹ əɹ tə fil əɾ ɔl. jɛɾ ɪt fɛlt əz ɪf ðə skaɪ əbʌv ʃʊɾə bɪn pɔɹɪŋ daʊn ɹeɪn, ən snoʊ, ən heɪl, ɔl ət ðə seɪm taɪm, wɪð wɪnz haʊlɪŋ tə ʃeɪk ðə stoʊnz ə ðə kip. ən ʃi kəd fil ðə ɡʊd wɛðɝ, tu, læstɪŋ fəɹ deɪz jɛt, bʌt ðət wɑz mjuɾɪd ʌndɝ ði ʌðɝ.

This time, though, something was wrong. Outside, the morning sun was a golden ball in a clear blue sky, and birds sang in the gardens, but that was not it. There would have been nothing to listening to the wind if she could not foretell the weather before the signs were visible. There was something wrong with the feeling this time, something not quite the way it usually was. The storm felt distant, too far off for her to feel at all. Yet it felt as if the sky above should have been pouring down rain, and snow, and hail, all at the same time, with winds howling to shake the stones of the keep. And she could feel the good weather, too, lasting for days yet, but that was muted under the other.

ə blufɪntʃ pɝtʃt ɪn ən æɹoʊslɪt laɪk ə mɑkɝi ʌv əɹ wɛðɝ sɛns, piɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə hɔlweɪ. wən ɪt sɔ hɝ, ɪt vænɪʃt ɪn ə flæʃ ə blu ən waɪt fɛðɝz.

A bluefinch perched in an arrowslit like a mockery of her weather sense, peering into the hallway. When it saw her, it vanished in a flash of blue and white feathers.

ʃi stɛɹɾ ət ðə spɑt wɛɹ ðə bɝd hæd bɪn. ðəɹ ɪz ə stɔɹm, ən ðəɹ ɪzənt. ɪt minz sʌmθɪŋ. bʌt wʌt?

She stared at the spot where the bird had been. There is a storm, and there isn't. It means something. But what?

fɑɹ daʊn ðə hɔl fʊl ʌv wɪmən ən smɔl tʃɪlʒɹən ʃi sɔ ɹænd stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əweɪ, hɪz ɛskɔɹɾ ʌv wɪmən hæf ɹʌnɪŋ tə kip ʌp. nɪneɪiv nɑɾəd fɝmli. ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ə stɔɹm ðət wɑz nɑɾ ə stɔɹm, hi wəd bi ðə sɛntɝ ʌv ɪt. ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ skɝts, ʃi hɝiɾ æftɝ hɪm.

Far down the hall full of women and small children she saw Rand striding away, his escort of women half running to keep up. Nynaeve nodded firmly. If there was a storm that was not a storm, he would be the center of it. Gathering her skirts, she hurried after him.

wɪmən wɪð hum ʃi hæd ɡɹoʊn fɹɛnli sɪns kʌmɪŋ tə fæl dæɹə tʃɹaɪd tə spik tə hɝ; ðeɪ nu ɹænd hæd kʌm wɪð əɹ ən ðət ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ən ðeɪ wɑntəd tə noʊ waɪ ði æmɪɝlɪn hæd sʌmən hɪm. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit! aɪs ɪn ðə pɪɾ ə hɝ bɛli, ʃi bɹoʊk ɪndə ə ɹʌn, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ʃi lɛf ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns, ʃi hæd lɔst ɪm ɝaʊn tu mɛni kɔɹnɝz ən bɪɑn tu mɛni pipəl.

Women with whom she had grown friendly since coming to Fal Dara tried to speak to her; they knew Rand had come with her and that they were both from the Two Rivers, and they wanted to know why the Amyrlin had summoned him. The Amyrlin Seat! Ice in the pit of her belly, she broke into a run, but before she left the women's apartments, she had lost him around too many corners and beyond too many people.

"wɪtʃ weɪ dɪɾ i ɡoʊ?" ʃi æsk nɪʃʊɹə. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə seɪ hu. ʃi hɝd ɹændz neɪm ɪn ðə kɑnvɝseɪʃən ə ði ʌðɝ wɪmən klʌstɝɾ ɝaʊn ði ɑɹtʃt dɔɹz.

"Which way did he go?" she asked Nisura. There was no need to say who. She heard Rand's name in the conversation of the other women clustered around the arched doors.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ, nɪneɪiv. hi keɪm aʊɾ əz fæst əz ɪf i hæd hɑɹtsbeɪn hɪmsɛlf əɾ ɪz hilz. əz wɛl i maɪt, kʌmɪŋ hɪɹ wɪð ə sɔɹɾ əɾ ɪz bɛlt. ðə dɑɹk wʌn ʃəd bi ðə list ə hɪz wɝiz æftɝ ðæt. wʌɾ ɪz ðə wɝl kʌmɪŋ tə? ən ɪm pɹizɛntəd tə ði æmɪɝlɪn ɪn əɹ tʃeɪmbɝz, noʊ lɛs. tɛl mi, nɪneɪiv, ɪz i ɹɪli ə pɹɪns ɪn jəɹ lænd?" ði ʌðɝ wɪmən stɑp tɔkɪŋ ən lin kloʊsɝ tə lɪsən.

"I don't know, Nynaeve. He came out as fast as if he had Heartsbane himself at his heels. As well he might, coming here with a sword at his belt. The Dark One should be the least of his worries after that. What is the world coming to? And him presented to the Amyrlin in her chambers, no less. Tell me, Nynaeve, is he really a prince in your land?" The other women stopped talking and leaned closer to listen.

nɪneɪiv wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌt ʃi ænsɝd. sʌmθɪŋ ðət meɪɾ əm lɛɾ əɹ ɡoʊ ɑn. ʃi hɝiɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns, hɛd swɪvəlɪŋ əɾ ɛvɹi kɹɔsɪŋ kɔɹəɾɝ tə lʊk fəɹ hɪm, fɪsts klɛntʃt. laɪt, wʌɾ əv ðeɪ dʌn tə hɪm? aɪ ʃʊɾə ɡɑɾən ɪm əweɪ fɹəm mɔɪɹeɪn sʌmhaʊ, ðə laɪt blaɪn hɝ. ɪm ɪz wɪzdəm.

Nynaeve was not sure what she answered. Something that made them let her go on. She hurried away from the women's apartments, head swiveling at every crossing corridor to look for him, fists clenched. Light, what have they done to him? I should have gotten him away from Moiraine somehow, the Light blind her. I'm his Wisdom.

ɑɹ ju, ə smɔl vɔɪs tɔntɪd. juv əbændən ɛmənz fil tə fɛn fəɹ ɪtsɛlf. kən jə stɪl kɔl jɝsɛlf ðɛɹ wɪzdəm?

Are you, a small voice taunted. You've abandoned Emond's Field to fend for itself. Can you still call yourself their Wisdom?

aɪ dɪd nɑɾ əbændən ðɛm, ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf fɪɹsli. aɪ bɹɔt mævɹə mɔlən ʌp fɹəm dɛvən ɹaɪd tə lʊk æftɝ mæɾɝz tɪl aɪ ɡɛt bæk. ʃi kən dil wɛl ɪnʌf wɪð ðə meɪɝ ən ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl, ən ʃi ɡɛts ɑn wɛl wɪð ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl.

I did not abandon them, she told herself fiercely. I brought Mavra Mallen up from Deven Ride to look after matters till I get back. She can deal well enough with the Mayor and the Village Council, and she gets on well with the Women's Circle.

mævɹə wɪl əv tə ɡɛt bæk tə hɝ oʊn vɪlədʒ. noʊ vɪlədʒ kən də wɪθaʊɾ ɪts wɪzdəm fəɹ lɔŋ. nɪneɪiv kɹɪnʒd ɪnsaɪd. ʃi hæd bɪn ɡɔn mʌnθs fɹəm ɛmənz fild.

Mavra will have to get back to her own village. No village can do without its Wisdom for long. Nynaeve cringed inside. She had been gone months from Emond's Field.

"aɪ æm ðə wɪzdəm ʌv ɛmənz fild!" ʃi sɛɾ əlaʊd.

"I am the Wisdom of Emond's Field!" she said aloud.

ə lɪvɹid sɝvən kæɹiɪŋ ə boʊlt ə klɔθ blɪŋkt ət hɝ, ðən baʊd loʊ bɪfɔɹ skɝiɪŋ ɔf. baɪ hɪz feɪs i wɑz iɡɝ tə bi ɛniwɛɹ ɛls.

A liveried servant carrying a bolt of cloth blinked at her, then bowed low before scurrying off. By his face he was eager to be anywhere else.

blʌʃɪŋ, nɪneɪiv lʊkt ɝaʊn tə si ɪf ɛniwʌn hæd noʊɾəst. ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli ə fju mɛn ɪn ðə hɔl, ɪnɡɹoʊst ɪn ðɛɹ oʊn kɑnvɝseɪʃənz, ən səm wɪmən ɪn blæk-ænd-ɡoʊld ɡoʊɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛɹ bɪznəs, ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ ə baʊ əɹ kɝtsi əz ʃi pæst. ʃi hæd hæd ðəɾ ɑɹɡjəmənt wɪð hɝsɛlf ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz bɪfɔɹ, bʌt ðɪs wɑz ðə fɝs taɪm ɪt hæd kʌm tə tɔkɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf aʊt laʊd. ʃi mʌɾɝd ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, ðən pɹɛst əɹ lɪps fɝmli təɡɛðɝ wən ʃi ɹilaɪzd wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ.

Blushing, Nynaeve looked around to see if anyone had noticed. There were only a few men in the hall, engrossed in their own conversations, and some women in black-and-gold going about their business, giving her a bow or curtsy as she passed. She had had that argument with herself a hundred times before, but this was the first time it had come to talking to herself out loud. She muttered under her breath, then pressed her lips firmly together when she realized what she was doing.

ʃi wɑz faɪnəli bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ɹilaɪz əɹ sɝtʃ wɑz fjuɾəl wən ʃi keɪm ɑn læn, hɪz bæk tə hɝ, lʊkɪŋ daʊn ɑn ði aʊɾɝ kɔɹtʃjɑɹd θɹu ən æɹoʊslɪt. ðə nɔɪz fɹəm ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd wɑz ɔl hɔɹsəz ən mɛn, neɪɪŋ ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ. soʊ ɪntɛnt wɑz læn ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt, fəɹ wʌns, sim tə hɪɹ hɝ. ʃi heɪɾəd ðə fæk ðət ʃi kəd nɛvɝ snik ʌp ɑn hɪm, haʊɛvɝ sɔfli ʃi stɛpt. ʃi hæd bɪn əkaʊntəd ɡʊɾ ət wʊdskɹæf bæk ɪn ɛmənz fild, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə skɪl ɪn wɪtʃ mɛni wɪmən tʊk ɛni ɪntʃɹəst.

She was finally beginning to realize her search was futile when she came on Lan, his back to her, looking down on the outer courtyard through an arrowslit. The noise from the courtyard was all horses and men, neighing and shouting. So intent was Lan that he did not, for once, seem to hear her. She hated the fact that she could never sneak up on him, however softly she stepped. She had been accounted good at woodscraft back in Emond's Field, though it was not a skill in which many women took any interest.

ʃi stɑpt ɪn əɹ tʃɹæks, pɹɛsɪŋ əɹ hænz tə hɝ stʌmək tə kwaɪəɾ ə flʌɾɝ. aɪ ɔt tə doʊs maɪsɛlf wɪð ɹænəl ən ʃipstɔŋ ɹut, ʃi θɔt saʊɝli. ɪt wɑz ðə mɪkstʃɝ ʃi ɡeɪv ɛniwʌn u moʊpt əbaʊɾ ən kleɪm ðeɪ wɝ sɪk, əɹ bɪheɪv laɪk ə ɡus. ɹænəl ən ʃipstɔŋ ɹut wəd pɝk jə ʌp ə lɪɾəl, ən dɪd noʊ hɑɹm, bʌt meɪnli ɪt teɪstəd hɔɹəbəl, ən ðə teɪs læstəɾ ɔl deɪ. ɪt wɑz ə pɝfəkt kjʊɹ fəɹ æktɪŋ ðə ful.

She stopped in her tracks, pressing her hands to her stomach to quiet a flutter. I ought to dose myself with rannel and sheepstongue root, she thought sourly. It was the mixture she gave anyone who moped about and claimed they were sick, or behaved like a goose. Rannel and sheepstongue root would perk you up a little, and did no harm, but mainly it tasted horrible, and the taste lasted all day. It was a perfect cure for acting the fool.

seɪf fɹəm ɪz aɪz, ʃi stʌɾid ðə lɛŋθ ə hɪm, linɪŋ əɡɛns ðə stoʊn ən fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ɪz tʃɪn əz i stʌɾid wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn bɪloʊ. hiz tu tɔl, fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, ən oʊld ɪnʌf tə bi maɪ fɑðɝ, fəɹ ənʌðɝ. ə mæn wɪð ə feɪs laɪk ðət wəɾ əv tə bi kɹuəl. noʊ, hiz nɑt ðæt. nɛvɝ ðæt. ən i wɑz ə kɪŋ. hɪz lænd wɑz dɪstʃɹɔɪd waɪl i wɑz ə tʃaɪld, ən i wəd nɑt kleɪm ə kɹaʊn, bʌɾ i wɑz ə kɪŋ, fəɹ ðæt. wʌt wəɾ ə kɪŋ wɑnt wɪð ə vɪlədʒ wʊmən? hiz ə wɔɹɾɝ, tu. bɑndəd tə mɔɪɹeɪn. ʃiz ɪz lɔɪəlti tə dɛθ, ən taɪz kloʊsɝ ðən ɛni lʌvɝ, ən ʃiz hɪm. ʃiz ɛvɹiθɪŋ aɪ wɑnt, ðə laɪt bɝn hɝ!

Safe from his eyes, she studied the length of him, leaning against the stone and fingering his chin as he studied what was going on below. He's too tall, for one thing, and old enough to be my father, for another. A man with a face like that would have to be cruel. No, he's not that. Never that. And he was a king. His land was destroyed while he was a child, and he would not claim a crown, but he was a king, for that. What would a king want with a village woman? He's a Warder, too. Bonded to Moiraine. She has his loyalty to death, and ties closer than any lover, and she has him. She has everything I want, the Light burn her!

hi tɝn fɹəm ði æɹoʊslɪt, ən ʃi wɝl tə ɡoʊ.

He turned from the arrowslit, and she whirled to go.

"nɪneɪiv." hɪz vɔɪs kɑɾ ən hɛld əɹ laɪk ə nus. "aɪ wɑntəd tə spik tə jə əloʊn. jə ɔlweɪz sim tə bi ɪn ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns, əɹ ɪn kʌmpəni."

"Nynaeve." His voice caught and held her like a noose. "I wanted to speak to you alone. You always seem to be in the women's apartments, or in company."

ɪt tʊk ən ɛfɝt tə feɪs hɪm, bʌt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ əɹ fitʃɝz wɝ kɑm wən ʃi lʊkt ʌp ət hɪm. "aɪm lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ɹænd." ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə ədmɪt tə əvɔɪɾɪŋ hɪm. "wi sɛɾ ɔl wi nid tə seɪ lɔŋ əɡoʊ, jə ən aɪ. aɪ ʃeɪmd maɪsɛlf - wɪtʃ əl nɑt də əɡɛn - ən jə toʊl mi tə ɡoʊ əweɪ."

It took an effort to face him, but she was sure her features were calm when she looked up at him. "I'm looking for Rand." She was not about to admit to avoiding him. "We said all we need to say long ago, you and I. I shamed myself - which I will not do again - and you told me to go away."

"aɪ nɛvɝ sɛd - " hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "aɪ toʊl jə aɪ hæd nʌθɪŋ tə ɔfɝ fəɹ bɹɪɾɪpɹaɪs bʌt wɪɾoʊz kloʊðz. nɑɾ ə ɡɪft ɛni mæn kəd ɡɪv ə wʊmən. nɑɾ ə mæn u kən kɔl hɪmsɛlf ə mæn."

"I never said - " He took a deep breath. "I told you I had nothing to offer for brideprice but widow's clothes. Not a gift any man could give a woman. Not a man who can call himself a man."

"aɪ ʌndɝstænd," ʃi sɛd kuli. "ɪn ɛni keɪs, ə kɪŋ dʌz nɑt ɡɪv ɡɪfs tə vɪlədʒ wɪmən. ən ðɪs vɪlədʒ wʊmən wəd nɑt teɪk ðɛm. hæv jə sin ɹænd? aɪ nid tə tɔk tə hɪm. hi wɑz tə si ði æmɪɝlɪn. dʒju noʊ wʌt ʃi wɑntəd wɪð hɪm?"

"I understand," she said coolly. "In any case, a king does not give gifts to village women. And this village woman would not take them. Have you seen Rand? I need to talk to him. He was to see the Amyrlin. Do you know what she wanted with him?"

hɪz aɪz bleɪz laɪk blu aɪs ɪn ðə sʌn. ʃi stɪfən əɹ lɛɡz tə kip fɹəm stɛpɪŋ bæk, ən mɛɾ ɪm ɡlɛɹ fəɹ ɡlɛɹ.

His eyes blazed like blue ice in the sun. She stiffened her legs to keep from stepping back, and met him glare for glare.

"ðə dɑɹk wʌn teɪk ɹænd ælθɹ ən ði æmɪɝlɪn sit boʊθ," hi ɡɹeɪɾɪd, pɹɛsɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ɪndə hɝ hænd. "aɪ wɪl meɪk jə ə ɡɪft ən jəl teɪk ɪɾ ɪf aɪ hæv tə tʃeɪn ɪɾ ɝaʊn jəɹ nɛk."

"The Dark One take Rand al'Thor and the Amyrlin Seat both," he grated, pressing something into her hand. "I will make you a gift and you will take it if I have to chain it around your neck."

ʃi pʊld əɹ aɪz əweɪ fɹəm hɪz. hi hæɾ ə stɛɹ laɪk ə blu-aɪd hɔk wən i wɑz æŋɡɹi. ɪn əɹ hænd wɑz ə sɪɡnɪt ɹɪŋ, hɛvi ɡoʊld ən wɔɹn wɪð eɪdʒ, ɔlmoʊs lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf fəɹ boʊθ əɹ θʌmz tə fɪt θɹu. ɑn ɪt, ə kɹeɪn flu əbʌv ə læns ən kɹaʊn, ɔl kɛɹfəli ɹɔɾ ɪn dɪteɪl. hɝ bɹɛθ kɑt. ðə ɹɪŋ ə mɔlkɪɹi kɪŋz. fɝɡɛɾɪŋ tə ɡlɛɹ, ʃi lɪftəɾ əɹ feɪs. "aɪ kænɑt teɪk ðɪs, læn."

She pulled her eyes away from his. He had a stare like a blue-eyed hawk when he was angry. In her hand was a signet ring, heavy gold and worn with age, almost large enough for both her thumbs to fit through. On it, a crane flew above a lance and crown, all carefully wrought in detail. Her breath caught. The ring of Malkieri kings. Forgetting to glare, she lifted her face. "I cannot take this, Lan."

hi ʃɹʌɡd ɪn ən ɔfhænd weɪ. "ɪɾ ɪz nʌθɪŋ. oʊld, ən jusləs, naʊ. bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ ðoʊz u wəd noʊ ɪt wən ðeɪ sɔ ɪt. ʃoʊ ðæt, ən jəl əv ɡɛstʃɹaɪt, ən hɛlp ɪf jə niɾ ɪt, fɹəm ɛni lɔɹɾ ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. ʃoʊ ɪt tə ə wɔɹɾɝ, ən hɪl ɡɪv eɪd, əɹ kæɹi ə mɛsədʒ tə mi. sɛn ɪt tə mi, əɹ ə mɛsədʒ mɑɹkt wɪð ɪt, ən əl kʌm tə ju, wɪθaʊt dɪleɪ ən wɪθaʊt feɪl. ðɪs aɪ swɛɹ."

He shrugged in an offhand way. "It is nothing. Old, and useless, now. But there are those who would know it when they saw it. Show that, and you will have guestright, and help if you need it, from any lord in the Borderlands. Show it to a Warder, and he will give aid, or carry a message to me. Send it to me, or a message marked with it, and I will come to you, without delay and without fail. This I swear."

hɝ vɪʒən blɝɾ ət ði ɛdʒəz. ɪf aɪ kɹaɪ naʊ, əl kɪl maɪsɛlf. "aɪ kænt. . . . aɪ də nɑt wɑn ə ɡɪft fɹəm ju, ælən mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən. hɪɹ, teɪk ɪt."

Her vision blurred at the edges. If I cry now, I will kill myself. "I can't. . . . I do not want a gift from you, al'Lan Mandragoran. Here, take it."

hi fɛndɪɾ ɔf əɹ ətɛmps tə ɡɪv ðə ɹɪŋ bæk tə hɪm. hɪz hæn ɛnvɛləp hɝz, dʒɛntəl bʌt fɝm əz ə ʃækəl. "ðɛn teɪk ɪt fəɹ maɪ seɪk, əz ə feɪvɝ tə mi. əɹ θɹoʊ ɪɾ əweɪ, ɪf ɪt dɪsplisɪz ju. aɪv noʊ bɛɾɝ jus fəɹ ɪt." hi bɹʌʃt əɹ tʃik wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ, ən ʃi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. "aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ naʊ, nɪneɪiv mæʃiɑɹə. ði æmɪɝlɪn wɪʃɪz tə liv bɪfɔɹ mɪddeɪ, ən ðəɹ ɪz mʌtʃ jɛt tə bi dʌn. pɝhæps wɪl əv taɪm tə tɔk ɑn ðə dʒɝni tə tɑɹ vəlɑn." hi tɝn ən wɑz ɡɔn, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ daʊn ðə hɔl.

He fended off her attempts to give the ring back to him. His hand enveloped hers, gentle but firm as a shackle. "Then take it for my sake, as a favor to me. Or throw it away, if it displeases you. I've no better use for it." He brushed her cheek with a finger, and she gave a start. "I must go now, Nynaeve mashiara. The Amyrlin wishes to leave before midday, and there is much yet to be done. Perhaps we will have time to talk on the journey to Tar Valon." He turned and was gone, striding down the hall.

nɪneɪiv tʌtʃt əɹ tʃik. ʃi kəd stɪl fil wɛɹ i hæd tʌtʃt hɝ. mæʃiɑɹə. bɪlʌvd ə hɑɹɾ ən soʊl, ɪt mɛnt, bʌɾ ə lʌv lɔst, tu. lɔs bɪɑn ɹɪɡeɪnɪŋ. ful wʊmən! stɑp æktɪŋ laɪk ə ɡɝl wɪð əɹ hɛɹ stɪl nɑt bɹeɪɾɪd. ɪts noʊ jus lɛɾɪŋ ɪm meɪk jə fil. . . .

Nynaeve touched her cheek. She could still feel where he had touched her. Mashiara. Beloved of heart and soul, it meant, but a love lost, too. Lost beyond regaining. Fool woman! Stop acting like a girl with her hair still not braided. It's no use letting him make you feel. . . .

klʌtʃɪŋ ðə ɹɪŋ taɪtli, ʃi tɝn ɝaʊnd, ən dʒʌmpt wən ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf feɪs-tə-feɪs wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn. "haʊ lɔŋ əv jə bɪn ðɛɹ?" ʃi dɪmændəd.

Clutching the ring tightly, she turned around, and jumped when she found herself face-to-face with Moiraine. "How long have you been there?" she demanded.

"nɑt lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ ɛniθɪŋ aɪ ʃəd nɑt hæv," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹɪplaɪd smuðli. "wi wɪl bi livɪŋ sun. aɪ hɝd ðæt. jə mʌst si tə jəɹ pækɪŋ."

"Not long enough to hear anything I should not have," the Aes Sedai replied smoothly. "We will be leaving soon. I heard that. You must see to your packing."

livɪŋ. ɪt hæd nɑt pɛnətʃɹeɪɾəd wən læn sɛɾ ɪt. "aɪ wɪl əv tə seɪ ɡʊdbaɪ tə ðə bɔɪz," ʃi mʌɾɝd, ðən ɡeɪv mɔɪɹeɪn ə ʃɑɹp lʊk. "wʌɾ əv jə dʌn tə ɹænd? hi wɑz teɪkən tə ði æmɪɝlɪn. waɪ? dɪd jə tɛl əɹ əbaʊt - əbaʊt . . . ?" ʃi kəd nɑt seɪ ɪt. hi wɑz fɹəm əɹ oʊn vɪlədʒ, ən ʃi wɑz dʒʌst ɪnʌf oʊldɝ ðən i tə hæv lʊkt æftɝ ɪm ə taɪm əɹ tu wən i wɑz lɪɾəl, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑɾ ivən θɪŋk əbaʊt wʌɾ i hæd bɪkʌm wɪθaʊɾ əɹ stʌmək twɪstɪŋ.

Leaving. It had not penetrated when Lan said it. "I will have to say goodbye to the boys," she muttered, then gave Moiraine a sharp look. "What have you done to Rand? He was taken to the Amyrlin. Why? Did you tell her about - about . . . ?" She could not say it. He was from her own village, and she was just enough older than he to have looked after him a time or two when he was little, but she could not even think about what he had become without her stomach twisting.

"ði æmɪɝlɪn wɪl bi siɪŋ ɔl θɹi, nɪneɪiv. tɑvɝən ɑɹ nɑt soʊ kɑmən ðət ʃi wəd mɪs ðə tʃæns tə si θɹi təɡɛðɝ ɪn wʌn pleɪs. pɝhæps ʃɪl ɡɪv əm ə fju wɝdz ʌv ɛnkɝɪdʒmənt, sɪns ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ wɪð ɪŋtʃɹ tə hʌn ðoʊz u stoʊl ðə hɔɹn. ðəl bi livɪŋ əbaʊt ðə taɪm wi du, soʊ jə hæd bɛɾɝ hɝi wɪð ɛni fɛɹwɛlz."

"The Amyrlin will be seeing all three, Nynaeve. Ta'veren are not so common that she would miss the chance to see three together in one place. Perhaps she will give them a few words of encouragement, since they are riding with Ingtar to hunt those who stole the Horn. They will be leaving about the time we do, so you had better hurry with any farewells."

nɪneɪiv dæʃt tə ðə nɪɹəst æɹoʊslɪɾ ən pɪɹd daʊn ət ði aʊɾɝ kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. hɔɹsəz wɝ ɛvɹiwɛɹ, pæk ænəməlz ən sæɾəl hɔɹsəz, ən mɛn hɝiɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛm, kɔlɪŋ tə itʃ ʌðɝ. ði oʊnli klɪɹ speɪs wɑz wɛɹ ði æmɪɝlɪnz pɑlɑnkwɪn stʊd, ɪts pɛɹd hɔɹsəz weɪɾɪŋ peɪʃənli wɪθaʊɾ ɛni ətɛndəns. səm ə ðə wɔɹɾɝz wɝ aʊt ðɛɹ, lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ maʊns, ən ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, ɪŋtʃɹ stʊd wɪð ə nɑɾ ə ʃaɪnɝənz ɝaʊn ɪm ɪn ɑɹmɝ. səmtaɪmz ə wɔɹɾɝ əɹ wʌn ʌv ɪŋtʃɹz mɛn kɹɔs ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz tə ɪkstʃeɪnʒ ə wɝd.

Nynaeve dashed to the nearest arrowslit and peered down at the outer courtyard. Horses were everywhere, pack animals and saddle horses, and men hurrying about them, calling to each other. The only clear space was where the Amyrlin's palanquin stood, its paired horses waiting patiently without any attendants. Some of the Warders were out there, looking over their mounts, and on the other side of the courtyard, Ingtar stood with a knot of Shienarans around him in armor. Sometimes a Warder or one of Ingtar's men crossed the paving stones to exchange a word.

"aɪ ʃʊɾə ɡɑɾən ðə bɔɪz əweɪ fɹəm ju," ʃi sɛd, stɪl lʊkɪŋ aʊt. ɛɡwin, tu, ɪf aɪ kəd də ɪt wɪθaʊt kɪlɪŋ hɝ. laɪt, waɪ dɪd ʃi hæv tə bi bɔɹn wɪð ðɪs kɝst əbɪləɾi? "aɪ ʃʊɾə teɪkən əm bæk hoʊm."

"I should have gotten the boys away from you," she said, still looking out. Egwene, too, if I could do it without killing her. Light, why did she have to be born with this cursed ability? "I should have taken them back home."

"ðeɪ ɑɹ mɔɹ ðən oʊld ɪnʌf tə bi ɔf eɪpɹən stʃɹɪŋz," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "æn jə noʊ vɛɹi wɛl waɪ jə kəd nɛvɝ də ðæt. fəɹ wʌn ə ðɛm, ət list. bɪsaɪdz, ɪt wəd min livɪŋ ɛɡwin tə ɡoʊ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn əloʊn. əɹ əv jə dɪsaɪɾɪd tə fɔɹɡoʊ tɑɹ vəlɑn jɝsɛlf? ɪf jəɹ oʊn jus ə ðə paʊɝ ɪz nɑt skuld, jəl nɛvɝ bi eɪbəl tə juz ɪɾ əɡɛns mi."

"They are more than old enough to be off apron strings," Moiraine said dryly. "And you know very well why you could never do that. For one of them, at least. Besides, it would mean leaving Egwene to go to Tar Valon alone. Or have you decided to forgo Tar Valon yourself? If your own use of the Power is not schooled, you will never be able to use it against me."

nɪneɪiv spʌn tə feɪs ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, hɝ dʒɔ dʒɹɑpɪŋ. ʃi kəd nɑt hɛlp ɪt. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt jə ɑɹ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt."

Nynaeve spun to face the Aes Sedai, her jaw dropping. She could not help it. "I don't know what you are talking about."

"dɪd jə θɪŋk aɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ, tʃaɪld? wɛl, əz jə wɪʃ ɪt. aɪ teɪk ɪt ðət jə ɑɹ kʌmɪŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn? jɛs, aɪ θɔt soʊ."

"Did you think I did not know, child? Well, as you wish it. I take it that you are coming to Tar Valon? Yes, I thought so."

nɪneɪiv wɑntəd tə hɪt hɝ, tə nɑk əweɪ ðə bɹif smaɪl ðət flæʃt əkɹɔs ði ɛɛs sədaɪz feɪs. ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd nɑt bɪn eɪbəl tə wil paʊɝ oʊpənli sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ, mʌtʃ lɛs ðə wʌn paʊɝ, bʌt ðeɪ plɑɾəd ən mənɪpjəleɪɾɪd, pʊl stʃɹɪŋz laɪk pʌptmæstɝz, juz θɹoʊnz ən neɪʃənz laɪk stoʊnz ɑn ə stoʊnz bɔɹd. ʃi wɑns tə juz mi, tu, sʌmhaʊ. ɪf ə kɪŋ əɹ ə kwin, waɪ nɑɾ ə wɪzdəm? dʒʌs ðə weɪ ʃiz juzɪŋ ɹænd. ɪm noʊ tʃaɪld, ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Nynaeve wanted to hit her, to knock away the brief smile that flashed across the Aes Sedai's face. Aes Sedai had not been able to wield power openly since the Breaking, much less the One Power, but they plotted and manipulated, pulled strings like puppetmasters, used thrones and nations like stones on a stones board. She wants to use me, too, somehow. If a king or a queen, why not a Wisdom? Just the way she's using Rand. I'm no child, Aes Sedai.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ wɪð ɹænd, naʊ? hæv jə nɑt juzd ɪm ɪnʌf? aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ juv nɑt hæɾ ɪm dʒɛntəld, naʊ ði æmɪɝlɪnz hɪɹ wɪð ɔl ðoʊz ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt jə mʌst əv ə ɹizən. ɪt mʌs bi səm plɑt jəɹ hætʃɪŋ. ɪf ði æmɪɝlɪn nu wʌt jə wɝ ʌp tə, aɪ weɪdʒɝ ʃid - "

"What are you doing with Rand, now? Have you not used him enough? I don't know why you have not had him gentled, now the Amyrlin's here with all those other Aes Sedai, but you must have a reason. It must be some plot you're hatching. If the Amyrlin knew what you were up to, I wager she'd - "

mɔɪɹeɪn kʌɾ əɹ ɔf. "wʌt pɑsəbəl ɪntʃɹəs kəd ði æmɪɝlɪn əv ɪn ə ʃɛpɝd? ʌv kɔɹs, ɪf i wɝ bɹɔt tə hɝ ətɛnʃən ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ weɪ, hi maɪt bi dʒɛntəld, əɹ ivən kɪld. hiz wʌɾ i ɪz, æftɝ ɔl. ən ðəɹ ɪz kənsɪɾɝəbəl æŋɡɝ əbaʊt læs naɪt. ɛvɹiwʌn ɪz lʊkɪŋ fəɹ hum tə bleɪm." ði ɛɛs sədaɪ fɛl saɪlənt, ən lɛt ðə saɪləns stʃɹɛtʃ. nɪneɪiv stɛɹɾ ət hɝ, ɡɹaɪndɪŋ əɹ tiθ.

Moiraine cut her off. "What possible interest could the Amyrlin have in a shepherd? Of course, if he were brought to her attention in the wrong way, he might be gentled, or even killed. He is what he is, after all. And there is considerable anger about last night. Everyone is looking for whom to blame." The Aes Sedai fell silent, and let the silence stretch. Nynaeve stared at her, grinding her teeth.

"jɛs," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd faɪnəli, "mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ tə lɛɾ ə slipɪŋ laɪən slip. bɛs jə si tə jəɹ pækɪŋ, naʊ." ʃi muvd ɔf ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən læn hæd ɡɔn, simɪŋ tə ɡlaɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ.

"Yes," Moiraine said finally, "much better to let a sleeping lion sleep. Best you see to your packing, now." She moved off in the direction Lan had gone, seeming to glide across the floor.

ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ, nɪneɪiv swʌŋ əɹ fɪs bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl; ðə ɹɪŋ dʌɡ əɾ əɹ pɑm. ʃi oʊpən əɹ hæn tə lʊk əɾ ɪt. ðə ɹɪŋ sim tə hiɾ əɹ æŋɡɝ, foʊkəs əɹ heɪt. əl lɝn. jə θɪŋk kəz jə noʊ, jə kən ɪskeɪp mi. bʌɾ əl lɝn bɛɾɝ ðən jə θɪŋk, ən əl pʊl jə daʊn fəɹ wʌt juv dʌn. fəɹ wʌt juv dʌn tə mæt, ən tə pɛɹɪn. fəɹ ɹænd, ðə laɪt hɛlp ɪm ən ðə kɹieɪɾɝ ʃɛltɝ hɪm. ɪspɛʃli fəɹ ɹænd. hɝ hæn kloʊzd ɝaʊn ðə hɛvi sɝkləɾ ʌv ɡoʊld. ən fəɹ mi.

Grimacing, Nynaeve swung her fist back against the wall; the ring dug at her palm. She opened her hand to look at it. The ring seemed to heat her anger, focus her hate. I will learn. You think because you know, you can escape me. But I will learn better than you think, and I will pull you down for what you've done. For what you've done to Mat, and to Perrin. For Rand, the Light help him and the Creator shelter him. Especially for Rand. Her hand closed around the heavy circlet of gold. And for me.

ɛɡwin wɑtʃt ðə lɪvɹid meɪd foʊldɪŋ əɹ dʒɹɛsəz ɪndə ə lɛðɝ-kʌvɝd tʃɹævəl tʃɛst, stɪl ə lɪɾəl ənkʌmftəɹbəl, ivən æftɝ nɪɹli ə mʌnθs pɹæktəs, wɪð sʌmwʌn ɛls duɪŋ wʌt ʃi kəd vɛɹi wɛl əv dʌn hɝsɛlf. ðeɪ wɝ sətʃ bjuɾəfəl dʒɹɛsəz, ɔl ɡɪfs fɹəm ðə leɪɾi əmælisə, dʒʌs laɪk ðə ɡɹeɪ sɪlk ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs ʃi wɔɹ, ðoʊ ðət wɑz pleɪn ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju waɪt mɔɹnɪŋstɑɹ blɑsəmz wɝkt ɑn ðə bɹɛst. mɛni ʌv ðə dʒɹɛsəz wɝ mʌtʃ mɔɹ ɪlæbɹeɪt. ɛni wʌn ə ðɛm wəd ʃaɪn ət sʌndeɪ, əɹ ət bɛl taɪn. ʃi saɪd, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðət ʃi wəd bi ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn fəɹ ðə nɛkst sʌndeɪ, nɑɾ ɛmənz fild. fɹəm ðə lɪɾəl mɔɪɹeɪn hæd toʊld əɹ ə nɑvəs tʃɹeɪnɪŋ - ɔlmoʊs nʌθɪŋ, ɹɪli - ʃi ɪkspɛktəd ʃi maɪt nɑt bi hoʊm fəɹ bɛl taɪn, ɪn ðə spɹɪŋ, əɹ ivən ðə sʌndeɪ æftɝ ðæt.

Egwene watched the liveried maid folding her dresses into a leather-covered travel chest, still a little uncomfortable, even after nearly a month's practice, with someone else doing what she could very well have done herself. They were such beautiful dresses, all gifts from the Lady Amalisa, just like the gray silk riding dress she wore, though that was plain except for a few white morningstar blossoms worked on the breast. Many of the dresses were much more elaborate. Any one of them would shine at Sunday, or at Bel Tine. She sighed, remembering that she would be in Tar Valon for the next Sunday, not Emond's Field. From the little Moiraine had told her of novice training - almost nothing, really - she expected she might not be home for Bel Tine, in the spring, or even the Sunday after that.

nɪneɪiv pʊɾ əɹ hɛɾ ɪndə ðə ɹum. "ɑɹ jə ɹɛɾi?" ʃi keɪm ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ ɪn. "wi mʌs bi daʊn ɪn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd sun." ʃi wɔɹ ə ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs, tu, ɪn blu sɪlk wɪð ɹɛd lʌvɝsknɑts ɑn ðə bʊzəm. ənʌðɝ ɡɪft fɹəm əmælisə.

Nynaeve put her head into the room. "Are you ready?" She came the rest of the way in. "We must be down in the courtyard soon." She wore a riding dress, too, in blue silk with red loversknots on the bosom. Another gift from Amalisa.

"nɪɹli, nɪneɪiv. aɪm ɔlmoʊst sɑɹi tə bi ɡoʊɪŋ. aɪ doʊn səpoʊz wɪl əv mɛni tʃænsəz ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn tə wɛɹ ðə naɪs dʒɹɛsəz əmælisə ɡeɪv ʌs." ʃi ɡeɪv ən əbɹʌp læf. "stɪl, wɪzdəm, aɪ woʊn mɪs biɪŋ eɪbəl tə beɪð wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ maɪ ʃoʊldɝ ðə hoʊl taɪm."

"Nearly, Nynaeve. I am almost sorry to be going. I don't suppose we'll have many chances in Tar Valon to wear the nice dresses Amalisa gave us." She gave an abrupt laugh. "Still, Wisdom, I won't miss being able to bathe without looking over my shoulder the whole time."

"mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ tə beɪð əloʊn," nɪneɪiv sɛd bɹɪskli. hɝ feɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, bʌɾ æftɝ ə moʊmən əɹ tʃiks kʌlɝd.

"Much better to bathe alone," Nynaeve said briskly. Her face did not change, but after a moment her cheeks colored.

ɛɡwin smaɪld. ʃiz θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt læn. ɪt wɑz stɪl ɑd tə θɪŋk ə nɪneɪiv, ðə wɪzdəm, munɪŋ æftɝ ə mæn. ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt wəd bi waɪz tə pʊɾ ɪt tə nɪneɪiv ɪn kwaɪt ðət weɪ, bʌɾ ə leɪt, səmtaɪmz ðə wɪzdəm æktəɾ əz stʃɹeɪnʒli əz ɛni ɡɝl u hæd sɛɾ əɹ hɑɹɾ ɑn ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ mæn. ən wʌn u dʌzn əv ɪnʌf sɛns tə bi wɝði ʌv hɝ, ət ðæt. ʃi lʌvz hɪm, ən aɪ kən si hi lʌvz hɝ, soʊ waɪ kæn i hæv sɛns ɪnʌf tə spik ʌp?

Egwene smiled. She's thinking about Lan. It was still odd to think of Nynaeve, the Wisdom, mooning after a man. She did not think it would be wise to put it to Nynaeve in quite that way, but of late, sometimes the Wisdom acted as strangely as any girl who had set her heart on a particular man. And one who doesn't have enough sense to be worthy of her, at that. She loves him, and I can see he loves her, so why can't he have sense enough to speak up?

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk jə ʃəd kɔl mi wɪzdəm ɛni lɔŋɡɝ," nɪneɪiv sɛd sʌɾənli.

"I don't think you should call me Wisdom any longer," Nynaeve said suddenly.

ɛɡwin blɪŋkt. ɪt wɑz nɑt ɹikwaɪɝd, ɪɡzækli, ən nɪneɪiv nɛvɝ ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn ɪɾ ənlɛs ʃi wɑz æŋɡɹi, əɹ biɪŋ fɔɹməl, bʌt ðɪs. . . . "waɪ ɛvɝ nɑt?"

Egwene blinked. It was not required, exactly, and Nynaeve never insisted on it unless she was angry, or being formal, but this. . . . "Why ever not?"

"ju ɑɹ ə wʊmən, naʊ." nɪneɪiv ɡlænst əɾ əɹ ənbɹeɪɾɪd hɛɹ, ən ɛɡwin ɹɪzɪstɪd ði ɝdʒ tə hɝidli twɪst ɪɾ ɪndə ə sɛmbləns ʌv ə bɹeɪd. ɛɛs sədaɪ wɔɹ ðɛɹ hɛɹ ɛni weɪ ðeɪ wɑntəd, bʌt wɛɹɪŋ hɝz lus hæd bɪkʌm ə sɪmbəl ə stɑɹɾɪŋ ɑn ə nu laɪf. "ju ɑɹ ə wʊmən," nɪneɪiv ɹɪpiɾɪd fɝmli. "wi ɑɹ tu wɪmən, ə lɔŋ weɪ fɹəm ɛmənz fild, ən ɪɾəl bi lɔŋɡɝ stɪl bɪfɔɹ wi si hoʊm əɡɛn. ɪɾəl bi bɛɾɝ ɪf jə sɪmpli kɔl mi nɪneɪiv."

"You are a woman, now." Nynaeve glanced at her unbraided hair, and Egwene resisted the urge to hurriedly twist it into a semblance of a braid. Aes Sedai wore their hair any way they wanted, but wearing hers loose had become a symbol of starting on a new life. "You are a woman," Nynaeve repeated firmly. "We are two women, a long way from Emond's Field, and it will be longer still before we see home again. It will be better if you simply call me Nynaeve."

"wi wɪl si hoʊm əɡɛn, nɪneɪiv. wi wɪl."

"We will see home again, Nynaeve. We will."

"doʊn tʃɹaɪ tə kʌmfɝt ðə wɪzdəm, ɡɝl," nɪneɪiv sɛd ɡɹʌflaɪ, bʌt ʃi smaɪld.

"Don't try to comfort the Wisdom, girl," Nynaeve said gruffly, but she smiled.

ðəɹ wɑz ə nɑk ət ðə dɔɹ, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ɛɡwin kəɾ oʊpən ɪt, nɪʃʊɹə keɪm ɪn, ædʒəteɪʃən ɔl oʊvɝ əɹ feɪs. "ɛɡwin, ðət jʌŋ mæn ə jʊɹz ɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kʌm ɪndə ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns." ʃi saʊndəd skændəlaɪzd. "ænd wɛɹɪŋ ə sɔɹd. dʒʌs kəz ði æmɪɝlɪn lɛɾ ɪm ɛntɝ ðət weɪ. . . . lɔɹd ɹænd ʃəd noʊ bɛɾɝ. hiz kɑzɪŋ ən ʌpɹɔɹ. ɛɡwin, jə mʌst spik tə hɪm."

There was a knock at the door, but before Egwene could open it, Nisura came in, agitation all over her face. "Egwene, that young man of yours is trying to come into the women's apartments." She sounded scandalized. "And wearing a sword. Just because the Amyrlin let him enter that way. . . . Lord Rand should know better. He is causing an uproar. Egwene, you must speak to him."

"lɔɹd ɹænd," nɪneɪiv snɔɹɾɪd. "ðæt jʌŋ mæn ɪz ɡɹoʊɪŋ tu bɪɡ fəɹ ɪz bɹitʃɪz. wən aɪ ɡɛt maɪ hænz ɑn hɪm, əl lɔɹd hɪm."

"Lord Rand," Nynaeve snorted. "That young man is growing too big for his breeches. When I get my hands on him, I'll lord him."

ɛɡwin pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn nɪneɪivz ɑɹm. "lɛt mi spik tə hɪm, nɪneɪiv. əloʊn."

Egwene put a hand on Nynaeve's arm. "Let me speak to him, Nynaeve. Alone."

"oʊ, vɛɹi wɛl. ðə bɛst ə mɛn ɑɹ nɑt mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ðən haʊsbɹoʊkən." nɪneɪiv pɔzd, ən æɾəd hæf tə hɝsɛlf, "bʌt ðɛn, ðə bɛst ə ðɛm ɑɹ wɝθ ðə tʃɹʌbəl ə haʊsbɹeɪkɪŋ."

"Oh, very well. The best of men are not much better than housebroken." Nynaeve paused, and added half to herself, "But then, the best of them are worth the trouble of housebreaking."

ɛɡwin ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ əz ʃi fɑloʊd nɪʃʊɹə ɪndə ðə hɔl. ivən hæf ə jɪɹ bɪfɔɹ, nɪneɪiv wəd nɛvɝ əv æɾəd ðə sɛkən pɑɹt. bʌt ʃɪl nɛvɝ haʊsbɹeɪk læn. hɝ θɔts tɝn tə ɹænd. kɑzɪŋ ən ʌpɹɔɹ, wɑz hi? "haʊs bɹeɪk hɪm?" ʃi mʌɾɝd. "ɪf i hæzən lɝn mænɝz baɪ ðɪs taɪm, əl skɪn ɪm əlaɪv."

Egwene shook her head as she followed Nisura into the hall. Even half a year before, Nynaeve would never have added the second part. But she'll never housebreak Lan. Her thoughts turned to Rand. Causing an uproar, was he? "House break him?" she muttered. "If he hasn't learned manners by this time, I'll skin him alive."

"səmtaɪmz ðəɾ ɪz wʌɾ ɪt teɪks," nɪʃʊɹə sɛd, wɔkɪŋ kwɪkli. "mɛn ɑɹ nɛvɝ mɔɹ ðən hæf-sɪvəlaɪzd əntɪl ðəɹ wɛɾəd." ʃi ɡeɪv ɛɡwin ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlæns. "du jə ɪntɛn tə mɛɹi lɔɹd ɹænd? aɪ də nɑt min tə pɹaɪ, bʌt jə ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛldəm wɛd - nʌn bʌt səm ə ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ, ðəɾ aɪv ɛvɝ hɝd, ən nɑt mɛni ʌv əm - ænd. . . ."

"Sometimes that is what it takes," Nisura said, walking quickly. "Men are never more than half-civilized until they're wedded." She gave Egwene a sidelong glance. "Do you intend to marry Lord Rand? I do not mean to pry, but you are going to the White Tower, and Aes Sedai seldom wed - none but some of the Green Ajah, that I've ever heard, and not many of them - and. . . ."

ɛɡwin kəd səplaɪ ðə ɹɛst. ʃi hæd hɝd ðə tɔk ɪn ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns əbaʊɾ ə suɾəbəl waɪf fəɹ ɹænd. ət fɝst ɪt hæd kɑz stæbz ə dʒɛləsi, ən æŋɡɝ. hi hæd bɪn ɔl bʌt pɹɑməs tə hɝ sɪns ðeɪ wɝ tʃɪlʒɹən. bʌt ʃi wɑz gɑnə bi ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən i wɑz wʌɾ i wɑz. ə mæn u kəd tʃænəl. ʃi kəd mɛɹi hɪm. ən wɑtʃ ɪm ɡoʊ mæd, wɑtʃ ɪm daɪ. ði oʊnli weɪ tə stɑp ɪt wəd bi tə hæv ɪm dʒɛntəld. aɪ kæn də ðət tə hɪm. aɪ kænt! "aɪ də nɑt noʊ," ʃi sɛd sædli.

Egwene could supply the rest. She had heard the talk in the women's apartments about a suitable wife for Rand. At first it had caused stabs of jealousy, and anger. He had been all but promised to her since they were children. But she was going to be an Aes Sedai, and he was what he was. A man who could channel. She could marry him. And watch him go mad, watch him die. The only way to stop it would be to have him gentled. I can't do that to him. I can't! "I do not know," she said sadly.

nɪʃʊɹə nɑɾəd. "noʊ wʌn wɪl poʊtʃ wɛɹ juv ə kleɪm, bʌt jə ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə taʊɝ, ən hɪl meɪk ə ɡʊd hʌzbənd. wʌns hiz bɪn tʃɹeɪnd. ðəɹ i ɪz."

Nisura nodded. "No one will poach where you have a claim, but you are going to the Tower, and he will make a good husband. Once he has been trained. There he is."

ðə wɪmən ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn ði ɛntʃɹəns tə ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns, boʊθ ɪnsaɪɾ ən aʊt, wɝ ɔl wɑtʃɪŋ θɹi mɛn ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ aʊtsaɪd. ɹænd, wɪð ɪz sɔɹd bʌkəld oʊvɝ ɪz ɹɛd koʊt, wɑz biɪŋ kənfɹʌntəd baɪ eɪɡəlmɝ ən keɪdʒɪn. niðɝ ə ðɛm wɔɹ ə sɔɹd; ivən æftɝ wʌt hæd hæpən ɪn ðə naɪt, ðiz wɝ stɪl ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns. ɛɡwin stɑpt ət ðə bæk ə ðə kɹaʊd.

The women gathered around the entrance to the women's apartments, both inside and out, were all watching three men in the hallway outside. Rand, with his sword buckled over his red coat, was being confronted by Agelmar and Kajin. Neither of them wore a sword; even after what had happened in the night, these were still the women's apartments. Egwene stopped at the back of the crowd.

"ju ʌndɝstænd waɪ jə kænɑt ɡoʊ ɪn," eɪɡəlmɝ wɑz seɪɪŋ. "aɪ noʊ ðət θɪŋz ɑɹ dɪfɹən ɪn ændɝ, bʌt jə də ʌndɝstænd?"

"You understand why you cannot go in," Agelmar was saying. "I know that things are different in Andor, but you do understand?"

"aɪ dɪdn tʃɹaɪ tə ɡoʊ ɪn." ɹænd saʊndəɾ əz ɪf i hæɾ ɪkspleɪn ɔl ðɪs mɔɹ ðən wʌns ɔlɹɛɾi. "aɪ toʊl ðə leɪɾi nɪʃʊɹə aɪ wɑntəd tə si ɛɡwin, ən ʃi sɛɾ ɛɡwin wɑz bɪzi, ən aɪɾ əv tə weɪt. ɔl aɪ dɪd wɑz ʃaʊt fəɹ əɹ fɹəm ðə dɔɹ. aɪ dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə ɛntɝ. juɾ əv θɔɾ aɪ wɑz neɪmɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ðə weɪ ðeɪ ɔl stɑɹɾəd ɪn ɑn mi."

"I didn't try to go in." Rand sounded as if he had explained all this more than once already. "I told the Lady Nisura I wanted to see Egwene, and she said Egwene was busy, and I'd have to wait. All I did was shout for her from the door. I did not try to enter. You'd have thought I was naming the Dark One, the way they all started in on me."

"wɪmən əv ðɛɹ oʊn weɪz," keɪdʒɪn sɛd. hi wɑz tɔl fəɹ ə ʃaɪnɝən, ɔlmoʊst əz tɔl əz ɹænd, læŋki ən sæloʊ. hɪz tɑpnɑt wɑz blæk əz pɪtʃ. "ðeɪ sɛt ðə ɹulz fəɹ ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns, ən wi əbaɪd baɪ ðɛm ivən wən ðeɪ ɑɹ fulɪʃ." ə nʌmbɝ ʌv aɪbɹaʊz wɝ ɹeɪzd əmʌŋ ðə wɪmən, ən i heɪstəli klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. "ju mʌst sɛn ə mɛsədʒ ɪn ɪf jə wɪʃ tə spik tə wʌn ə ðə wɪmən, bʌɾ ɪɾəl bi dɪlɪvɝd wən ðeɪ tʃuz, ən əntɪl ɪɾ ɪz, jə mʌst weɪt. ðəɾ ɪz əɹ kʌstəm."

"Women have their own ways," Kajin said. He was tall for a Shienaran, almost as tall as Rand, lanky and sallow. His topknot was black as pitch. "They set the rules for the women's apartments, and we abide by them even when they are foolish." A number of eyebrows were raised among the women, and he hastily cleared his throat. "You must send a message in if you wish to speak to one of the women, but it will be delivered when they choose, and until it is, you must wait. That is our custom."

"aɪ hæv tə si hɝ," ɹænd sɛd stʌbɝnli. "wɝ livɪŋ sun. nɑt sun ɪnʌf fəɹ mi, bʌɾ aɪ stɪl əv tə si ɛɡwin. wɪl ɡɛt ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ən ðə dæɡɝ bæk, ən ðət wɪl bi ði ɛn ʌv ɪt. ði ɛn ʌv ɪt. bʌɾ aɪ wɑnə si hɝ bɪfɔɹ aɪ ɡoʊ." ɛɡwin fɹaʊnd; hi saʊndəɾ ɑd.

"I have to see her," Rand said stubbornly. "We're leaving soon. Not soon enough for me, but I still have to see Egwene. We will get the Horn of Valere and the dagger back, and that will be the end of it. The end of it. But I want to see her before I go." Egwene frowned; he sounded odd.

"noʊ nid tə bi soʊ fɪɹs," keɪdʒɪn sɛd. "ju ən ɪŋtʃɹ wɪl faɪn ðə hɔɹn, əɹ nɑt. ən ɪf nɑt, ðən ənʌðɝ wɪl ɹɪtʃɹiv ɪt. ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz, ən wəɹ bʌt θɹɛdz ɪn ðə pæɾɝn."

"No need to be so fierce," Kajin said. "You and Ingtar will find the Horn, or not. And if not, then another will retrieve it. The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills, and we are but threads in the Pattern."

"du nɑt lɛt ðə hɔɹn siz ju, ɹænd," eɪɡəlmɝ sɛd. "ɪt kən teɪk hoʊld ʌv ə mæn - aɪ noʊ haʊ ɪt kən - ən ðəɾ ɪz nɑt ðə weɪ. ə mæn mʌst sik duɾi, nɑt ɡlɔɹi. wʌt wɪl hæpən, wɪl hæpən. ɪf ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ɪz mɛn tə bi saʊndəd fəɹ ðə laɪt, ðən ɪɾəl bi."

"Do not let the Horn seize you, Rand," Agelmar said. "It can take hold of a man - I know how it can - and that is not the way. A man must seek duty, not glory. What will happen, will happen. If the Horn of Valere is meant to be sounded for the Light, then it will be."

"hɪɹ ɪz jəɹ ɛɡwin," keɪdʒɪn sɛd, spɑɾɪŋ hɝ.

"Here is your Egwene," Kajin said, spotting her.

eɪɡəlmɝ lʊkt ɝaʊnd, ən nɑɾəd wən i sɔ hɝ wɪð nɪʃʊɹə. "aɪ wɪl liv jə ɪn əɹ hænz, ɹænd ælθɹ. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, hɪɹ, hɝ wɝdz ɑɹ lɔ, nɑt jʊɹz. leɪɾi nɪʃʊɹə, də nɑt bi tu hɑɹɾ ɑn hɪm. hi oʊnli wɪʃt tə si hɪz jʌŋ wʊmən, ən i dʌz nɑt noʊ əɹ weɪz."

Agelmar looked around, and nodded when he saw her with Nisura. "I will leave you in her hands, Rand al'Thor. Remember, here, her words are law, not yours. Lady Nisura, do not be too hard on him. He only wished to see his young woman, and he does not know our ways."

ɛɡwin fɑloʊd nɪʃʊɹə əz ðə ʃaɪnɝən wʊmən θɹɛɾəd əɹ weɪ θɹu ðə wɑtʃɪŋ wɪmən. nɪʃʊɹə ɪnklaɪn əɹ hɛd bɹifli tə eɪɡəlmɝ ən keɪdʒɪn; ʃi pɔɪntɪdli dɪd nɑɾ ɪnklud ɹænd. hɝ vɔɪs wɑz taɪt. "lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ. lɔɹd keɪdʒɪn. hi ʃəd noʊ ðɪs mʌtʃ ʌv əɹ weɪz baɪ naʊ, bʌt hiz tu bɪɡ tə spæŋk, soʊ əl lɛɾ ɛɡwin dil wɪð hɪm."

Egwene followed Nisura as the Shienaran woman threaded her way through the watching women. Nisura inclined her head briefly to Agelmar and Kajin; she pointedly did not include Rand. Her voice was tight. "Lord Agelmar. Lord Kajin. He should know this much of our ways by now, but he is too big to spank, so I will let Egwene deal with him."

eɪɡəlmɝ ɡeɪv ɹænd ə fɑðɝli pæɾ ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ. "ju si. jəl spik wɪð hɝ, ɪf nɑɾ ɪɡzækli ɪn ðə weɪ jə wɪʃt. kʌm, keɪdʒɪn. wɪv mʌtʃ tə si tə jɛt. ði æmɪɝlɪn stɪl ɪnsɪsts ɑn. . . ." hɪz vɔɪs tʃɹeɪld əweɪ əz i ən ði ʌðɝ mæn lɛft. ɹænd stʊd ðɛɹ, lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɛɡwin.

Agelmar gave Rand a fatherly pat on the shoulder. "You see. You will speak with her, if not exactly in the way you wished. Come, Kajin. We have much to see to yet. The Amyrlin still insists on. . . ." His voice trailed away as he and the other man left. Rand stood there, looking at Egwene.

ðə wɪmən wɝ stɪl wɑtʃɪŋ, ɛɡwin ɹilaɪzd. wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ əz wɛl əz ɹænd. weɪɾɪŋ tə si wʌt ʃi wəd du. soʊ aɪm səpoʊz tə dil wɪð hɪm, æm aɪ? jɛt ʃi fɛlt əɹ hɑɹt ɡoʊɪŋ aʊt tə hɪm. hɪz hɛɹ niɾəd bɹʌʃɪŋ. hɪz feɪs ʃoʊɾ æŋɡɝ, dɪfaɪəns, ən wɪɹinəs. "wɔk wɪð mi," ʃi toʊl hɪm. ə mɝmɝ stɑɹɾəd ʌp bɪhaɪn əm əz i wɔk daʊn ðə hɔl bɪsaɪd hɝ, əweɪ fɹəm ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns. ɹænd sim tə bi stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ wɪð hɪmsɛlf, hʌntɪŋ fəɹ wʌt tə seɪ.

The women were still watching, Egwene realized. Watching her as well as Rand. Waiting to see what she would do. So I'm supposed to deal with him, am I? Yet she felt her heart going out to him. His hair needed brushing. His face showed anger, defiance, and weariness. "Walk with me," she told him. A murmur started up behind them as he walked down the hall beside her, away from the women's apartments. Rand seemed to be struggling with himself, hunting for what to say.

"aɪv hɝɾ əbaʊt jəɹ . . . ɛksplɔɪts," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. "ɹʌnɪŋ θɹu ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns læs naɪt wɪð ə sɔɹd. wɛɹɪŋ ə sɔɹd tə ən ɑɾiəns wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn sit." hi stɪl sɛd nʌθɪŋ, oʊnli wɔkt əlɔŋ fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə flɔɹ. "ʃi dɪdnt . . . hɝt ju, dɪd ʃi?" ʃi kəd nɑt meɪk hɝsɛlf æsk ɪf i hæd bɪn dʒɛntəld; hi lʊkt ɛniθɪŋ bʌt dʒɛntəl, bʌt ʃi hæd noʊ aɪdiə wʌɾ ə mæn lʊk laɪk æftɝwɝdz.

"I've heard about your . . . exploits," she said finally. "Running through the women's apartments last night with a sword. Wearing a sword to an audience with the Amyrlin Seat." He still said nothing, only walked along frowning at the floor. "She didn't . . . hurt you, did she?" She could not make herself ask if he had been gentled; he looked anything but gentle, but she had no idea what a man looked like afterwards.

hi ɡeɪv ə dʒɝk. "noʊ. ʃi dɪdnt. . . . ɛɡwin, ði æmɪɝlɪn. . . ." hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ʃi dɪdn hɝt mi."

He gave a jerk. "No. She didn't. . . . Egwene, the Amyrlin. . . ." He shook his head. "She didn't hurt me."

ʃi hæd ðə filɪŋ i hæd bɪn gɑnə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ ɛls ɪntaɪɝli. juʒəwəli ʃi kəd fɛɹəɾ aʊt wʌtɛvɝ i wɑntəd tə haɪd fɹəm hɝ, bʌt wən i ɹɪli wɑntəd tə bi stʌbɝn, ʃi kəd mɔɹ izəli dɪɡ ə bɹɪk aʊɾ ʌv ə wɔl wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝneɪlz. baɪ ðə sɛɾ ə hɪz dʒɔ, hi wɑz əɾ ɪz moʊst stʌbɝn ɹaɪt naʊ.

She had the feeling he had been going to say something else entirely. Usually she could ferret out whatever he wanted to hide from her, but when he really wanted to be stubborn, she could more easily dig a brick out of a wall with her fingernails. By the set of his jaw, he was at his most stubborn right now.

"wʌt dɪd ʃi wɑnt wɪð ju, ɹænd?"

"What did she want with you, Rand?"

"nʌθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt. tɑvɝən. ʃi wɑntəd tə si tɑvɝən." hɪz feɪs sɔfən əz i lʊk daʊn ət hɝ. "wʌɾ əbaʊt ju, ɛɡwin? ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt? mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd jə wəd bi, bʌt jə wɝ soʊ stɪl. aɪ θɔt jə wɝ dɛd, ət fɝst."

"Nothing important. Ta'veren. She wanted to see ta'veren." His face softened as he looked down at her. "What about you, Egwene? Are you all right? Moiraine said you would be, but you were so still. I thought you were dead, at first."

"wɛl, ɪm nɑt." ʃi læft. ʃi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛniθɪŋ ðət hæd hæpən æftɝ ʃi hæɾ æsk mæt tə ɡoʊ tə ðə dʌnʒənz wɪð hɝ, nɑɾ əntɪl weɪkɪŋ ɪn əɹ oʊn bɛd ðət mɔɹnɪŋ. fɹəm wʌt ʃi hæd hɝɾ ə ðə naɪt, ʃi wɑz ɔlmoʊst ɡlæd ʃi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ. "mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd ʃi wʊɾə lɛf mi ə hɛdeɪk fəɹ biɪŋ fulɪʃ ɪf ʃi cʊɾə hil ðə ɹɛst ən nɑt ðæt, bʌt ʃi kʊdnt."

"Well, I'm not." She laughed. She could not remember anything that had happened after she had asked Mat to go to the dungeons with her, not until waking in her own bed that morning. From what she had heard of the night, she was almost glad she could not remember. "Moiraine said she would have left me a headache for being foolish if she could have Healed the rest and not that, but she couldn't."

"aɪ toʊl jə feɪn wɑz deɪnʒɝəs," hi mʌɾɝd. "aɪ toʊl ju, bʌt jə wʊdn lɪsən."

"I told you Fain was dangerous," he muttered. "I told you, but you wouldn't listen."

"ɪf ðæts ðə weɪ jə ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɔk," ʃi sɛd fɝmli, "aɪ wɪl ɡɪv jə bæk tə nɪʃʊɹə. ʃi woʊn tɔk tə jə ðə weɪ aɪ æm. ðə læs mæn u tʃɹaɪd tə pʊʃ ɪz weɪ ɪndə ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns spɛn ə mʌnθ ʌp tə hɪz ɛlboʊz ɪn soʊpi wɔɾɝ, hɛlpɪŋ wɪð ðə wɪmənz lɔnʒɹi, ən i wɑz oʊnli tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn ɪz bɪtʃɹɑθd ən meɪk ʌp ən ɑɹɡjəmənt. ət list i nu ɪnʌf nɑt tə wɛɹ ɪz sɔɹd. ðə laɪt noʊz wʌt ðeɪd də tə ju."

"If that's the way you are going to talk," she said firmly, "I will give you back to Nisura. She won't talk to you the way I am. The last man who tried to push his way into the women's apartments spent a month up to his elbows in soapy water, helping with the women's laundry, and he was only trying to find his betrothed and make up an argument. At least he knew enough not to wear his sword. The Light knows what they'd do to you."

"ɛvɹibɑɾi wɑns tə də sʌmθɪŋ tə mi," hi ɡɹaʊld. "ɛvɹibɑɾi wɑns tə juz mi fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ. wɛl, aɪ woʊn bi juzd. wʌns wi faɪn ðə hɔɹn, ən mæts dæɡɝ, əl nɛvɝ bi juzd əɡɛn."

"Everybody wants to do something to me," he growled. "Everybody wants to use me for something. Well, I won't be used. Once we find the Horn, and Mat's dagger, I'll never be used again."

wɪð ən ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd ɡɹʌnt, ʃi kɑɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ən meɪɾ ɪm feɪs hɝ. ʃi ɡlɛɹɾ ʌp ət hɪm. "ɪf jə doʊn stɑɹt tɔkɪŋ sɛns, ɹænd ælθɹ, aɪ swɛɹ əl bɑks jəɹ ɪɹz."

With an exasperated grunt, she caught his shoulders and made him face her. She glared up at him. "If you don't start talking sense, Rand al'Thor, I swear I will box your ears."

"naʊ jə saʊn laɪk nɪneɪiv." hi læft. əz i lʊk daʊn ət hɝ, ðoʊ, hɪz læftɝ feɪɾəd. "aɪ səpoʊz - aɪ səpoʊz əl nɛvɝ si jə əɡɛn. aɪ noʊ juv tə ɡoʊ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. aɪ noʊ ðæt. ən jəl bɪkʌm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪm dʌn wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɛɡwin. aɪ woʊn bi ə pʌpət fəɹ ðɛm, nɑt fəɹ mɔɪɹeɪn, əɹ ɛni ʌv ðɛm."

"Now you sound like Nynaeve." He laughed. As he looked down at her, though, his laughter faded. "I suppose - I suppose I'll never see you again. I know you have to go to Tar Valon. I know that. And you'll become an Aes Sedai. I am done with Aes Sedai, Egwene. I won't be a puppet for them, not for Moiraine, or any of them."

hi lʊk soʊ lɔst ʃi wɑntəd tə pʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ən soʊ stʌbɝn ʃi ɹɪli dɪd wɑnə bɑks ɪz ɪɹz. "lɪsən tə mi, jə ɡɹeɪɾ ɑks. aɪm gɑnə bi ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən əl faɪn ə weɪ tə hɛlp ju. aɪ wɪl."

He looked so lost she wanted to put his head on her shoulder, and so stubborn she really did want to box his ears. "Listen to me, you great ox. I am going to be an Aes Sedai, and I'll find a way to help you. I will."

"ðə nɛks taɪm jə si mi, jəl laɪkli wɑnə dʒɛntəl mi."

"The next time you see me, you will likely want to gentle me."

ʃi lʊkt ɝaʊn heɪstəli; ðeɪ wɝ əloʊn ɪn ðɛɹ stʃɹɛtʃ ə ðə hɔl. "ɪf jə doʊnt wɑtʃ jəɹ tʌŋ, əl nɑt bi eɪbəl tə hɛlp ju. dʒju wɑn ɛvɹiwʌn tə noʊ?"

She looked around hastily; they were alone in their stretch of the hall. "If you don't watch your tongue, I will not be able to help you. Do you want everyone to know?"

"tu mɛni noʊ ɔlɹɛɾi," hi sɛd. "ɛɡwin, aɪ wɪʃ θɪŋz wɝ dɪfɹənt, bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹənt. aɪ wɪʃ. . . . teɪk kɛɹ ə jɝsɛlf. ən pɹɑməs mi jə woʊn tʃuz ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ."

"Too many know already," he said. "Egwene, I wish things were different, but they aren't. I wish. . . . Take care of yourself. And promise me you won't choose the Red Ajah."

tɪɹz blɝɾ əɹ vɪʒən əz ʃi θɹu hɝ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɪm. "ju teɪk kɛɹ ə jɝsɛlf," ʃi sɛd fɪɹsli ɪndə hɪz tʃɛst. "ɪf jə doʊnt, əl - aɪl. . . ." ʃi θɔt ʃi hɝɾ ɪm mɝmɝ, "aɪ lʌv ju," ən ðən i wɑz fɝmli ənɹæpɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz, dʒɛnli muvɪŋ əɹ əweɪ fɹəm hɪm. hi tɝn ən stʃɹoʊɾ əweɪ fɹəm hɝ, ɔlmoʊst ɹʌnɪŋ.

Tears blurred her vision as she threw her arms around him. "You take care of yourself," she said fiercely into his chest. "If you don't, I'll - I'll. . . ." She thought she heard him murmur, "I love you," and then he was firmly unwrapping her arms, gently moving her away from him. He turned and strode away from her, almost running.

ʃi dʒʌmpt wən nɪʃʊɹə tʌtʃt əɹ ɑɹm. "hi lʊks əz ɪf jə sɛɾ ɪm ə tæsk i woʊn ɛndʒɔɪ. bʌt jə mʌsnt lɛɾ ɪm si jə kɹaɪ oʊvɝ ɪt. ðət nɪɡeɪts ðə pɝpəs. kʌm. nɪneɪiv wɑns ju."

She jumped when Nisura touched her arm. "He looks as if you set him a task he won't enjoy. But you mustn't let him see you cry over it. That negates the purpose. Come. Nynaeve wants you."

skɹʌbɪŋ əɹ tʃiks, ɛɡwin fɑloʊd ði ʌðɝ wʊmən. teɪk kɛɹ ə jɝsɛlf, jə wʊl-hɛɾəd lʌmɑks. laɪt, teɪk kɛɹ ə hɪm.

Scrubbing her cheeks, Egwene followed the other woman. Take care of yourself, you wool-headed lummox. Light, take care of him.


tʃæptɝ naɪn


CHAPTER 9

livɛteɪkɪŋz


Leavetakings

ði aʊɾɝ kɔɹtʃjɑɹd wɑz ɪn ɔɹɾɝd tɝmɔɪl wən ɹænd faɪnəli ɹitʃt ɪt wɪð ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz ən ðə bʌndəl kənteɪnɪŋ ðə hɑɹp ən flut. ðə sʌn klaɪm təwɔɹd mɪddeɪ. mɛn hɝiɾ ɝaʊn ðə hɔɹsəz, tʌɡɪŋ ət sæɾəl ɡɝθs ən pækhɑɹnəs, vɔɪsəz ɹeɪzd. ʌðɝz dɑɹɾɪd wɪð læst-mɪnəɾ ədɪʃənz tə ðə pæksæɾəlz, əɹ wɔɾɝ fəɹ ðə mɛn wɝkɪŋ, əɹ dæʃt ɔf tə fɛtʃ sʌmθɪŋ dʒʌst ɹɪmɛmbɝd. bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn sim tə noʊ ɪɡzækli wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ ən wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ. ðə ɡɑɹdwɔks ən ɑɹtʃɝz' bælkəniz wɝ kɹaʊɾəd əɡɛn, ən ɪksaɪtmən kɹækəld ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ɛɹ. hʊvz klæɾɝd ɑn ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz. wʌn ə ðə pækhɔɹsɪz bɪɡæn kɪkɪŋ, ən steɪbəlmən ɹæn tə kɑm ɪt. ðə smɛl ə hɔɹsəz hʌŋ θɪk. ɹændz kloʊk tʃɹaɪd tə flæp ɪn ðə bɹiz ðət ɹɪpəl ðə swupɪŋ-hɔk bænɝz ɑn ðə taʊɝz, bʌɾ ɪz baʊ, slʌŋ əkɹɔs ɪz bæk, hɛld ɪt daʊn.

The outer courtyard was in ordered turmoil when Rand finally reached it with his saddlebags and the bundle containing the harp and flute. The sun climbed toward midday. Men hurried around the horses, tugging at saddle girths and packharness, voices raised. Others darted with last-minute additions to the packsaddles, or water for the men working, or dashed off to fetch something just remembered. But everyone seemed to know exactly what they were doing and where they were going. The guardwalks and archers' balconies were crowded again, and excitement crackled in the morning air. Hooves clattered on the paving stones. One of the packhorses began kicking, and stablemen ran to calm it. The smell of horses hung thick. Rand's cloak tried to flap in the breeze that rippled the swooping-hawk banners on the towers, but his bow, slung across his back, held it down.

fɹəm aʊtsaɪd ði oʊpən ɡeɪts keɪm ðə saʊnz ə ði æmɪɝlɪnz pɪkmɛn ən ɑɹtʃɝz fɔɹmɪŋ ʌp ɪn ðə skwɛɹ. ðeɪ hæd mɑɹtʃt ɝaʊn fɹəm ə saɪd ɡeɪt. wʌn ə ðə tʃɹʌmpəɾɝz tɛstəɾ ɪz hɔɹn.

From outside the open gates came the sounds of the Amyrlin's pikemen and archers forming up in the square. They had marched around from a side gate. One of the trumpeters tested his horn.

səm ə ðə wɔɹɾɝz ɡlænst ət ɹænd əz i wɔkt əkɹɔs ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd; ə fju ɹeɪzd aɪbɹaʊz wən ðeɪ sɔ ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk sɔɹd, bʌt nʌn spoʊk. hæf wɔɹ ðə kloʊks ðət wɝ soʊ kwizi-meɪkɪŋ tə lʊk æt. mændɑɹb, lænz stæljən, wɑz ðɛɹ, tɔl, ən blæk, ən fɪɹs-aɪd, bʌt ðə mæn hɪmsɛlf wɑz nɑt, ən nʌn ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, nʌn ə ðə wɪmən, wɝ ɪn ɛvəɾəns jɛɾ iðɝ. mɔɪɹeɪnz waɪt mɛɹ, ɑldib, stɛp deɪntəli bɪsaɪd ðə stæljən.

Some of the Warders glanced at Rand as he walked across the courtyard; a few raised eyebrows when they saw the heron-mark sword, but none spoke. Half wore the cloaks that were so queasy-making to look at. Mandarb, Lan's stallion, was there, tall, and black, and fierce-eyed, but the man himself was not, and none of the Aes Sedai, none of the women, were in evidence yet either. Moiraine's white mare, Aldieb, stepped daintily beside the stallion.

ɹændz beɪ stæljən wɑz wɪð ði ʌðɝ ɡɹup ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, wɪð ɪŋtʃɹ, ən ə bænɝmən hoʊldɪŋ ɪŋtʃɹz ɡɹeɪ aʊl bænɝ, ən twɛnti ʌðɝ ɑɹmɝd mɛn wɪð lænsɪz tɪpt wɪð tu fiɾ ə stil, ɔl maʊntəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. ðə bɑɹz ə ðɛɹ hɛlməts kʌvɝd ðɛɹ feɪsəz, ən ɡoʊldən sɝkoʊts wɪð ðə blæk hɔk ɑn ðə tʃɛs hɪd ðɛɹ pleɪt-ænd-meɪl. oʊnli ɪŋtʃɹz hɛlmət hæɾ ə kɹɛst, ə kɹɛsən mun əbʌv ɪz bɹaʊ, pɔɪns ʌp. ɹænd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz səm ə ðə mɛn. ɹʌf-tʌŋd ənoʊ, wɪð ə lɔŋ skɑɹ daʊn ɪz feɪs ən oʊnli wʌn aɪ. ɹeɪɡən ən mæsimə. ʌðɝz u hæɾ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ə wɝd, əɹ pleɪɾ ə ɡeɪm ə stoʊnz. ɹeɪɡən weɪv tə hɪm, ən ənoʊ nɑɾəd, bʌt mæsimə wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn u ɡeɪv ɪm ə koʊl stɛɹ ən tɝn əweɪ. ðɛɹ pækhɔɹsɪz stʊd plɑtʃədli, teɪlz swɪʃɪŋ.

Rand's bay stallion was with the other group on the far side of the courtyard, with Ingtar, and a bannerman holding Ingtar's Gray Owl banner, and twenty other armored men with lances tipped with two feet of steel, all mounted already. The bars of their helmets covered their faces, and golden surcoats with the Black Hawk on the chest hid their plate-and-mail. Only Ingtar's helmet had a crest, a crescent moon above his brow, points up. Rand recognized some of the men. Rough-tongued Uno, with a long scar down his face and only one eye. Ragan and Masema. Others who had exchanged a word, or played a game of stones. Ragan waved to him, and Uno nodded, but Masema was not the only one who gave him a cold stare and turned away. Their packhorses stood placidly, tails swishing.

ðə bɪɡ beɪ dænst əz ɹænd taɪɾ ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz ən bʌndəl bɪhaɪn ðə haɪ-kæntəl sæɾəl. hi pʊɾ ɪz fʊɾ ɪn ðə stɝəp ən mɝmɝd, "izi, ɹɛd," əz i swʌŋ ɪndə ðə sæɾəl, bʌɾ i lɛt ðə stæljən fɹɪsk əweɪ səm ə hɪz steɪbəl-baʊn ɛnɝdʒi.

The big bay danced as Rand tied his saddlebags and bundle behind the high-cantled saddle. He put his foot in the stirrup and murmured, "Easy, Red," as he swung into the saddle, but he let the stallion frisk away some of his stable-bound energy.

tə ɹændz sɝpɹaɪz, lɔɪəl əpɪɹd fɹəm ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðə steɪbəlz, ɹaɪɾɪŋ tə dʒɔɪn ðɛm. ði oʊɡiɝz hɛɹi-fɛtlɑk maʊnt wɑz əz bɪɡ ən hɛvi əz ə pɹaɪm dɝən stæljən. bɪsaɪɾ ɪt, ɔl ði ʌðɝ ænəməlz lʊk ðə saɪz ə bɛlə, bʌt wɪð lɔɪəl ɪn ðə sæɾəl, ðə hɔɹs simd ɔlmoʊst ə poʊni.

To Rand's surprise, Loial appeared from the direction of the stables, riding to join them. The Ogier's hairy-fetlocked mount was as big and heavy as a prime Dhurran stallion. Beside it, all the other animals looked the size of Bela, but with Loial in the saddle, the horse seemed almost a pony.

lɔɪəl kæɹid noʊ wɛpən ðət ɹænd kəd si; hi hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ɛni oʊɡiɝ juzɪŋ ə wɛpən. ðɛɹ stɛɾɪŋ wɝ pɹətɛkʃən ɪnʌf. ən lɔɪəl hæɾ ɪz oʊn pɹaɪɔɹəɾiz, hɪz oʊn aɪdiəz ʌv wʌt wɑz niɾəd fəɹ ə dʒɝni. ðə pɑkəts ə hɪz lɔŋ koʊt hæɾ ə tɛlteɪl bʌlʒ, ən ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz ʃoʊd ðə skwɛɹ ɪmpɹɪns ə bʊks.

Loial carried no weapon that Rand could see; he had never heard of any Ogier using a weapon. Their stedding were protection enough. And Loial had his own priorities, his own ideas of what was needed for a journey. The pockets of his long coat had a telltale bulge, and his saddlebags showed the square imprints of books.

ði oʊɡiɝ stɑpt ɪz hɔɹs ə lɪɾəl weɪ ɔf ən lʊkt ət ɹænd, hɪz tʌftəɾ ɪɹz twɪtʃɪŋ ənsɝteɪnli.

The Ogier stopped his horse a little way off and looked at Rand, his tufted ears twitching uncertainly.

"aɪ dɪdnt noʊ jə wɝ kʌmɪŋ," ɹænd sɛd. "aɪd θɪŋk jə wʊɾə hæɾ ɪnʌf ə tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð ʌs. ðɪs taɪm ðɛɹz noʊ tɛlɪŋ haʊ lɔŋ ɪɾəl bi, əɹ wɛɹ wɪl ɛn ʌp."

"I didn't know you were coming," Rand said. "I'd think you would have had enough of traveling with us. This time there's no telling how long it will be, or where we will end up."

lɔɪəlz ɪɹz lɪftəɾ ə lɪɾəl. "ðɛɹ wɑz noʊ tɛlɪŋ wən aɪ fɝs mɛt ju, iðɝ. bɪsaɪdz, wʌt hɛl ðɛn, hoʊlz naʊ. aɪ kæn lɛt ðə tʃæns pæs tə si hɪstɝi æktʃəli  wiv ɪtsɛlf ɝaʊn tɑvɝən. ən tə hɛlp faɪn ðə hɔɹn. . . ."

Loial's ears lifted a little. "There was no telling when I first met you, either. Besides, what held then, holds now. I can't let the chance pass to see history actually weave itself around ta'veren. And to help find the Horn. . . ."

mæt ən pɛɹɪn ɹoʊɾ ʌp bɪhaɪn lɔɪəl ən pɔzd. mæt lʊkt ə lɪɾəl taɪɝɾ ɝaʊn ði aɪz, bʌɾ ɪz feɪs wɔɹ ə blum ə hɛlθ.

Mat and Perrin rode up behind Loial and paused. Mat looked a little tired around the eyes, but his face wore a bloom of health.

"mæt," ɹænd sɛd, "aɪm sɑɹi fəɹ wʌɾ aɪ sɛd. pɛɹɪn, aɪ dɪdn min ɪt. aɪ wɑz biɪŋ stupəd."

"Mat," Rand said, "I'm sorry for what I said. Perrin, I didn't mean it. I was being stupid."

mæt oʊnli ɡlænst ət hɪm, ðən ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ən maʊð sʌmθɪŋ tə pɛɹɪn ðət ɹænd kəd nɑt hɪɹ. mæt hæɾ oʊnli hɪz baʊ ən kwɪvɝ, bʌt pɛɹɪn ɔlsoʊ wɔɹ ɪz æks əɾ ɪz bɛlt, wɪð ɪts bɪɡ hæf-mun bleɪd bæləns baɪ ə θɪk spaɪk.

Mat only glanced at him, then shook his head and mouthed something to Perrin that Rand could not hear. Mat had only his bow and quiver, but Perrin also wore his axe at his belt, with its big half-moon blade balanced by a thick spike.

"mæt? pɛɹɪn? ɹɪli, aɪ dɪdnt - " ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ɑn təwɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ.

"Mat? Perrin? Really, I didn't - " They rode on toward Ingtar.

"ðæɾ ɪz nɑɾ ə koʊt fəɹ tʃɹævlɪŋ, ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd.

"That is not a coat for traveling, Rand," Loial said.

ɹænd ɡlæns daʊn ət ðə ɡoʊldən θɔɹnz klaɪmɪŋ ɪz kɹɪmzən sliv ən ɡɹɪməst. smɔl wʌndɝ mæt ən pɛɹɪn stɪl θɪŋk aɪm pʊɾɪŋ ɑn ɛɹz. ɑn ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə hɪz ɹum i hæd faʊn ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɔlɹɛɾi pækt ən sɛn ɑn. ɔl ə ðə pleɪn koʊts i hæd bɪn ɡɪvən wɝ ɑn ðə pækhɔɹsɪz, soʊ ðə sɝvəns sɛd; ɛvɹi koʊt lɛft ɪn ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb wɑz ət list əz ɔɹneɪɾ əz ðə wʌn i wɔɹ. hɪz sæɾəlbæɡz hɛl nʌθɪŋ ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv kloʊðz bʌɾ ə fju ʃɝts, səm wʊl stɑkɪŋz, ən ə spɛɹ pɛɹ ə bɹitʃɪz. ət list i hæd ɹimuv ðə ɡoʊldən kɔɹd fɹəm ɪz sliv, ðoʊ hi hæd ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl pɪn ɪn ɪz pɑkət. læn hæd mɛn ɪt fəɹ ə ɡɪft, æftɝ ɔl.

Rand glanced down at the golden thorns climbing his crimson sleeve and grimaced. Small wonder Mat and Perrin still think I'm putting on airs. On returning to his room he had found everything already packed and sent on. All of the plain coats he had been given were on the packhorses, so the servants said; every coat left in the wardrobe was at least as ornate as the one he wore. His saddlebags held nothing in the way of clothes but a few shirts, some wool stockings, and a spare pair of breeches. At least he had removed the golden cord from his sleeve, though he had the red eagle pin in his pocket. Lan had meant it for a gift, after all.

"aɪl tʃeɪnʒ wən wi stɑp tənaɪt," hi mʌɾɝd. hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "lɔɪəl, aɪ sɛd θɪŋz tə jə aɪ ʃəd nɑt hæv, ən aɪ hoʊp jəl fɝɡɪv mi. juv ɛvɹi ɹaɪt tə hoʊld əm əɡɛns mi, bʌɾ aɪ hoʊp jə woʊnt."

"I'll change when we stop tonight," he muttered. He took a deep breath. "Loial, I said things to you I should not have, and I hope you'll forgive me. You have every right to hold them against me, but I hope you won't."

lɔɪəl ɡɹɪnd, ən ɪz ɪɹz stʊɾ ʌp. hi muvd ɪz hɔɹs kloʊsɝ. "aɪ seɪ θɪŋz aɪ ʃəd nɑɾ ɔl ðə taɪm. ði ɛldɝz ɔlweɪz sɛɾ aɪ spoʊk ən aʊɝ bɪfɔɹ aɪ θɔt."

Loial grinned, and his ears stood up. He moved his horse closer. "I say things I should not all the time. The Elders always said I spoke an hour before I thought."

sʌɾənli læn wɑz ət ɹændz stɝəp, ɪn ɪz ɡɹeɪ-ɡɹin skeɪld ɑɹmɝ ðət wəd meɪk ɪm ɔl bʌt dɪsəpɪɹ ɪn fɔɹəst əɹ dɑɹknəs. "aɪ nid tə tɔk tə ju, ʃifɝɾɝ." hi lʊkt ət lɔɪəl. "əloʊn, ɪf jə pliz, bɪldɝ." lɔɪəl nɑɾəd ən muvd ɪz bɪɡ hɔɹs əweɪ.

Suddenly Lan was at Rand's stirrup, in his gray-green scaled armor that would make him all but disappear in forest or darkness. "I need to talk to you, sheepherder." He looked at Loial. "Alone, if you please, Builder." Loial nodded and moved his big horse away.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf aɪ ʃəd lɪsən tə ju," ɹænd toʊl ðə wɔɹɾɝ. "ðiz fænsi kloʊðz, ən ɔl ðoʊz θɪŋz jə toʊl mi, ðeɪ dɪdn hɛlp mʌtʃ."

"I don't know if I should listen to you," Rand told the Warder. "These fancy clothes, and all those things you told me, they didn't help much."

"wɛn jə kænt wɪn ə bɪɡ vɪktɝi, ʃifɝɾɝ, lɝn tə sɛɾəl fəɹ ðə smɔl wʌnz. ɪf jə meɪɾ əm θɪŋk ə jə əz sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ə fɑɹmbɔɪ hul bi izi tə hændəl, ðən jə wʌn ə smɔl vɪktɝi. naʊ bi kwaɪəɾ ən lɪsən. aɪv oʊnli taɪm fəɹ wʌn læs lɛsən, ðə hɑɹɾəst. ʃiðɪŋ ðə sɔɹd."

"When you can't win a big victory, sheepherder, learn to settle for the small ones. If you made them think of you as something more than a farmboy who'll be easy to handle, then you won a small victory. Now be quiet and listen. I've only time for one last lesson, the hardest. Sheathing the Sword."

"juv spɛn ən aʊɝ ɛvɹi mɔɹnɪŋ meɪkɪŋ mi də nʌθɪŋ bʌt dʒɹɔ ðɪs blʌɾi sɔɹɾ ən pʊɾ ɪt bæk ɪn ðə skæbɝd. stændɪŋ, sɪɾɪŋ, laɪɪŋ daʊn. aɪ θɪŋk aɪ kən mænədʒ tə ɡɛɾ ɪt bæk ɪn ðə ʃiθ wɪθaʊt kʌɾɪŋ maɪsɛlf."

"You've spent an hour every morning making me do nothing but draw this bloody sword and put it back in the scabbard. Standing, sitting, lying down. I think I can manage to get it back in the sheath without cutting myself."

"aɪ sɛd lɪsən, ʃifɝɾɝ," ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɡɹaʊld. "ðɛɹ wɪl kʌm ə taɪm wən jə mʌst ətʃiv ə ɡoʊl əɾ ɔl kɑsts. ɪt meɪ kʌm ɪn ətæk əɹ ɪn dɪfɛns. ən ði oʊnli weɪ wɪl bi tə əlaʊ ðə sɔɹd tə bi ʃiðd ɪn jəɹ oʊn bɑɾi."

"I said listen, sheepherder," the Warder growled. "There will come a time when you must achieve a goal at all costs. It may come in attack or in defense. And the only way will be to allow the sword to be sheathed in your own body."

"ðæts kɹeɪzi," ɹænd sɛd. "waɪ wəɾ aɪ ɛvɝ - ?"

"That's crazy," Rand said. "Why would I ever - ?"

ðə wɔɹɾɝ kʌɾ ɪm ɔf. "ju wɪl noʊ wən ɪt kʌmz, ʃifɝɾɝ, wən ðə pɹaɪs ɪz wɝθ ðə ɡeɪn, ən ðəɹ ɪz noʊ ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs lɛf tə ju. ðəɾ ɪz kɔld ʃiðɪŋ ðə sɔɹd. ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪt."

The Warder cut him off. "You will know when it comes, sheepherder, when the price is worth the gain, and there is no other choice left to you. That is called Sheathing the Sword. Remember it."

ði æmɪɝlɪn əpɪɹd, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə kɹaʊɾəd kɔɹtʃjɑɹd wɪð lin ən əɹ stæf, ən lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ əɾ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. ivən ɪn ə ɡɹin vɛlvət koʊt, ðə lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə dɪd nɑt lʊk aʊɾ ə pleɪs əmʌŋ soʊ mɛni ɑɹmɝd mɛn. ðəɹ wɑz stɪl noʊ saɪn ə ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. əz ðeɪ wɛn baɪ, ɹænd kɑt pɑɹɾ ə ðɛɹ kɑnvɝseɪʃən.

The Amyrlin appeared, striding across the crowded courtyard with Leane and her staff, and Lord Agelmar at her shoulder. Even in a green velvet coat, the Lord of Fal Dara did not look out of place among so many armored men. There was still no sign of the other Aes Sedai. As they went by, Rand caught part of their conversation.

"bʌt, mʌðɝ," eɪɡəlmɝ wɑz pɹətɛstɪŋ, "juv hæd noʊ taɪm tə ɹɛs fɹəm ðə dʒɝni hɪɹ. steɪ ət list ə fju deɪz mɔɹ. aɪ pɹɑməs jə ə fis tənaɪt sətʃ əz jə kəd hɑɹdli ɡɛɾ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn."

"But, Mother," Agelmar was protesting, "you've had no time to rest from the journey here. Stay at least a few days more. I promise you a feast tonight such as you could hardly get in Tar Valon."

ði æmɪɝlɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd wɪθaʊt bɹeɪkɪŋ stʃɹaɪd. "aɪ kænɑt, eɪɡəlmɝ. jə noʊ aɪ wəɾ ɪf aɪ kʊd. aɪ hæd nɛvɝ plæn tə ɹɪmeɪn lɔŋ, ən mæɾɝz ɝdʒənli ɹikwaɪɝ maɪ pɹɛzəns ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. aɪ ʃəd bi ðəɹ naʊ."

The Amyrlin shook her head without breaking stride. "I cannot, Agelmar. You know I would if I could. I had never planned to remain long, and matters urgently require my presence in the White Tower. I should be there now."

"mʌðɝ, ɪt ʃeɪmz mi ðət jə kʌm wʌn deɪ ən liv ðə nɛkst. aɪ swɛɹ tə ju, ðəɹ wɪl bi noʊ ɹɛpətɪʃən ə læs naɪt. aɪ hæv tʃɹɪpəl ðə ɡɑɹɾ ɑn ðə sɪɾi ɡeɪts əz wɛl əz ðə kip. aɪ hæv tʌmblɝz ɪn fɹəm ðə taʊn, ən ə bɑɹd kʌmɪŋ fɹəm mɔs ʃɪɹɛɹ. waɪ, kɪŋ isɑɹ wɪl bi ɑn ɪz weɪ fɹəm fæl mɝæn. aɪ sɛnt wɝɾ əz sun æz. . . ."

"Mother, it shames me that you come one day and leave the next. I swear to you, there will be no repetition of last night. I have tripled the guard on the city gates as well as the keep. I have tumblers in from the town, and a bard coming from Mos Shirare. Why, King Easar will be on his way from Fal Moran. I sent word as soon as. . . ."

ðɛɹ vɔɪsəz feɪɾəd əz ðeɪ kɹɔs ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, swɑloʊɾ ʌp baɪ ðə dɪn ə pɹɛpɝeɪʃən. ði æmɪɝlɪn nɛvɝ əz mʌtʃ əz ɡlænst ɪn ɹændz dɝɛkʃən.

Their voices faded as they crossed the courtyard, swallowed up by the din of preparation. The Amyrlin never as much as glanced in Rand's direction.

wən ɹænd lʊk daʊn, ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz ɡɔn, ən noʊwɛɹ tə bi sin. lɔɪəl bɹɔɾ ɪz hɔɹsbæk tə ɹændz saɪd. "ðæɾ ɪz ə hɑɹd mæn tə kætʃ ən hoʊld, ɪzən hi, ɹænd? hiz nɑt hɪɹ, ðən hiz hɪɹ, ðən hiz ɡɔn, ən jə doʊn si hɪm kʌmɪŋ əɹ ɡoʊɪŋ."

When Rand looked down, the Warder was gone, and nowhere to be seen. Loial brought his horseback to Rand's side. "That is a hard man to catch and hold, isn't he, Rand? He's not here, then he's here, then he's gone, and you don't see him coming or going."

ʃiðɪŋ ðə sɔɹd. ɹænd ʃɪvɝd. wɔɹɾɝz mʌst ɔl bi kɹeɪzi.

Sheathing the Sword. Rand shivered. Warders must all be crazy.

ðə wɔɹɾɝ ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz spikɪŋ tə sʌɾənli spɹæŋ ɪndə hɪz sæɾəl. hi wɑz əɾ ə dɛd ɡæləp bɪfɔɹ i ɹitʃt ðə waɪd-stændɪŋ ɡeɪts. ʃi stʊd wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm ɡoʊ, ən əɹ stæns sim tə ɝdʒ ɪm tə ɡoʊ fæstɝ.

The Warder the Amyrlin was speaking to suddenly sprang into his saddle. He was at a dead gallop before he reached the wide-standing gates. She stood watching him go, and her stance seemed to urge him to go faster.

"wɛɹ ɪz i hɛɾəd ɪn sətʃ ə hɝi?" ɹænd wʌndɝɾ əlaʊd.

"Where is he headed in such a hurry?" Rand wondered aloud.

"aɪ hɝd," lɔɪəl sɛd, "ðæt ʃi wɑz sɛndɪŋ sʌmwʌn aʊt tədeɪ, ɔl ðə weɪ tə ɑɹæd dumən. ðəɹ ɪz wɝɾ ə səm sɔɹɾ ə tʃɹʌbəl ɑn ɑlməθ pleɪn, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɑns tə noʊ ɪɡzækli wʌt. wʌɾ aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstæn ɪz, waɪ naʊ? fɹəm wʌɾ aɪ hɪɹ, ðə ɹumɝz ə ðɪs tʃɹʌbəl keɪm fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"I heard," Loial said, "that she was sending someone out today, all the way to Arad Doman. There is word of some sort of trouble on Almoth Plain, and the Amyrlin Seat wants to know exactly what. What I don't understand is, why now? From what I hear, the rumors of this trouble came from Tar Valon with the Aes Sedai."

ɹænd fɛl koʊld. ɛɡwinz fɑðɝ hæɾ ə bɪɡ mæp bæk ət hoʊm, ə mæp ɹænd hæd pɔɹɾ oʊvɝ mɔɹ ðən wʌns, dʒɹimɪŋ bɪfɔɹ i faʊn aʊt wʌt ðə dʒɹimz wɝ laɪk wən ðeɪ keɪm tʃɹu. ɪt wɑz oʊld, ðət mæp, ʃoʊɪŋ səm lænz ən neɪʃənz ðə mɝtʃəns fɹəm aʊtsaɪd sɛd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪɡzɪstəd, bʌɾ ɑlməθ pleɪn wɑz mɑɹkt, bʌɾɪŋ əɡɛns toʊmən hɛd. wɪl miɾ əɡɛn ɑn toʊmən hɛd. ɪt wɑz ɔl ðə weɪ əkɹɔs ðə wɝld i nu, ɑn ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən. "ɪɾ əz nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ʌs," hi wɪspɝd. "nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð mi."

Rand felt cold. Egwene's father had a big map back at home, a map Rand had pored over more than once, dreaming before he found out what the dreams were like when they came true. It was old, that map, showing some lands and nations the merchants from outside said no longer existed, but Almoth Plain was marked, butting against Toman Head. We will meet again on Toman Head. It was all the way across the world he knew, on the Aryth Ocean. "It has nothing to do with us," he whispered. "Nothing to do with me."

lɔɪəl əpɪɹd nɑt tə hæv hɝd. ɹʌbɪŋ ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz noʊz wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ laɪk ə sɔsədʒ, ði oʊɡiɝ wɑz stɪl piɹɪŋ ət ðə ɡeɪt wɛɹ ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæd vænɪʃt. "ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə noʊ, waɪ nɑt sɛn sʌmwʌn bɪfɔɹ ʃi lɛf tɑɹ vəlɑn? bʌt jə hjumənz ɑɹ ɔlweɪz sʌɾən ən ɪksaɪɾəbəl, ɔlweɪz dʒʌmpɪŋ ɝaʊn ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ." hɪz ɪɹz stɪfənd wɪð ɪmbɛɹəsmənt. "aɪ æm sɑɹi, ɹænd. jə si wʌɾ aɪ min əbaʊt spikɪŋ bɪfɔɹ aɪ θɪŋk. aɪm ɹæʃ ən ɪksaɪɾəbəl səmtaɪmz maɪsɛlf, əz jə noʊ."

Loial appeared not to have heard. Rubbing the side of his nose with a finger like a sausage, the Ogier was still peering at the gate where the Warder had vanished. "If she wanted to know, why not send someone before she left Tar Valon? But you humans are always sudden and excitable, always jumping around and shouting." His ears stiffened with embarrassment. "I am sorry, Rand. You see what I mean about speaking before I think. I'm rash and excitable sometimes myself, as you know."

ɹænd læft. ɪt wɑz ə wik læf, bʌɾ ɪt fɛlt ɡʊd tə hæv sʌmθɪŋ tə læf æt. "meɪbi ɪf wi lɪvd əz lɔŋ əz jə oʊɡiɝ, wid bi mɔɹ sɛɾəld." lɔɪəl wɑz naɪnti jɪɹz oʊld; baɪ oʊɡiɝ stændɝdz, nɑɾ oʊld ɪnʌf baɪ tɛn jɪɹz tə bi aʊtsaɪd ðə stɛɾɪŋ əloʊn. ðəɾ i hæd ɡɔn ɛniweɪ wɑz pɹuf, hi meɪnteɪnd, ʌv ɪz ɹæʃnəs. ɪf lɔɪəl wɑz ən ɪksaɪɾəbəl oʊɡiɝ, ɹænd θɔt moʊst ə ðɛm mʌs bi meɪɾ ə stoʊn.

Rand laughed. It was a weak laugh, but it felt good to have something to laugh at. "Maybe if we lived as long as you Ogier, we'd be more settled." Loial was ninety years old; by Ogier standards, not old enough by ten years to be outside the stedding alone. That he had gone anyway was proof, he maintained, of his rashness. If Loial was an excitable Ogier, Rand thought most of them must be made of stone.

"pɝhæps soʊ," lɔɪəl mjuzd, "bʌt jə hjumənz də soʊ mʌtʃ wɪð jəɹ laɪvz. wi də nʌθɪŋ bʌt hʌɾəl ɪn əɹ stɛɾɪŋ. plæntɪŋ ðə ɡɹoʊvz, ən ivən ðə bɪldɪŋ, wɝ ɔl dʌn bɪfɔɹ ðə lɔŋ ɛɡzaɪl ɛndəd." ɪt wɑz ðə ɡɹoʊvz lɔɪəl hɛl dɪɹ, nɑt ðə sɪɾiz mɛn ɹɪmɛmbɝd ði oʊɡiɝ fəɹ bɪldɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ðə ɡɹoʊvz, plæntəd tə ɹimaɪn oʊɡiɝ bɪldɝz ə ðə stɛɾɪŋ, ðət lɔɪəl hæd lɛft ɪz hoʊm tə si. "sɪns wi faʊn əɹ weɪ bæk tə ðə stɛɾɪŋ, wi. . . ." hɪz wɝdz tʃɹeɪld ɔf əz ði æmɪɝlɪn əpɹoʊtʃt.

"Perhaps so," Loial mused, "but you humans do so much with your lives. We do nothing but huddle in our stedding. Planting the groves, and even the building, were all done before the Long Exile ended." It was the groves Loial held dear, not the cities men remembered the Ogier for building. It was the groves, planted to remind Ogier Builders of the stedding, that Loial had left his home to see. "Since we found our way back to the stedding, we. . . ." His words trailed off as the Amyrlin approached.

ɪŋtʃɹ ən ði ʌðɝ mɛn ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz, pɹipɛɹɪŋ tə dɪsmaʊn ən nil, bʌt ʃi moʊʃən əm tə steɪ əz ðeɪ wɝ. lin stʊɾ əɾ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ən eɪɡəlmɝ ə peɪs bæk. fɹəm ɪz ɡlʌm feɪs, hi əpɪɹd tə hæv ɡɪvən ʌp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənvɪns əɹ tə ɹɪmeɪn lɔŋɡɝ.

Ingtar and the other men shifted in their saddles, preparing to dismount and kneel, but she motioned them to stay as they were. Leane stood at her shoulder, and Agelmar a pace back. From his glum face, he appeared to have given up trying to convince her to remain longer.

ði æmɪɝlɪn lʊkt əɾ əm wʌn baɪ wʌn bɪfɔɹ ʃi spoʊk. hɝ ɡeɪz steɪɾ ɑn ɹænd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ðən ɑn ɛni ʌðɝ.

The Amyrlin looked at them one by one before she spoke. Her gaze stayed on Rand no longer than on any other.

"pis feɪvɝ jəɹ sɔɹd, lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. "ɡlɔɹi tə ðə bɪldɝz, lɔɪəl kaɪsɝən."

"Peace favor your sword, Lord Ingtar," she said finally. "Glory to the Builders, Loial Kiseran."

"ju ɑnɝ ʌs, mʌðɝ. meɪ pis feɪvɝ tɑɹ vəlɑn." ɪŋtʃɹ baʊɾ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, ən ði ʌðɝ ʃaɪnɝənz dɪd, tu.

"You honor us, Mother. May peace favor Tar Valon." Ingtar bowed in his saddle, and the other Shienarans did, too.

"ɔl ɑnɝ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn," lɔɪəl sɛd, boʊɪŋ.

"All honor to Tar Valon," Loial said, bowing.

oʊnli ɹænd, ən ɪz tu fɹɛnz ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə pɑɹɾi, steɪɾ əpɹaɪt. hi wʌndɝd wʌt ʃi hæd sɛd tə ðɛm. linz fɹaʊn tʊk ɪn ɔl θɹi ʌv ðɛm, ən eɪɡəlmɝz aɪz waɪɾənd, bʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn tʊk noʊ noʊɾəs.

Only Rand, and his two friends on the other side of the party, stayed upright. He wondered what she had said to them. Leane's frown took in all three of them, and Agelmar's eyes widened, but the Amyrlin took no notice.

"ju ɹaɪd tə faɪn ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ," ʃi sɛd, "æn ðə hoʊp ə ðə wɝld ɹaɪdz wɪð ju. ðə hɔɹn kænɑt bi lɛft ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ hænz, ɪspɛʃli ɪn dɑɹkfɹɛn hænz. ðoʊz u kʌm tə ænsɝ ɪts kɔl, wɪl kʌm huɛvɝ bloʊz ɪt, ən ðeɪ ɑɹ baʊn tə ðə hɔɹn, nɑt tə ðə laɪt."

"You ride to find the Horn of Valere," she said, "and the hope of the world rides with you. The Horn cannot be left in the wrong hands, especially in Darkfriend hands. Those who come to answer its call, will come whoever blows it, and they are bound to the Horn, not to the Light."

ðəɹ wɑz ə stɝ əmʌŋ ðə lɪsnɪŋ mɛn. ɛvɹiwʌn bɪliv ðət ðoʊz hɪɹoʊz kɔl bæk fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪv wəd faɪt fəɹ ðə laɪt. ɪf ðeɪ kəd faɪt fəɹ ðə ʃædoʊ, ɪnstɛd. . . .

There was a stir among the listening men. Everyone believed that those heroes called back from the grave would fight for the Light. If they could fight for the Shadow, instead. . . .

ði æmɪɝlɪn wɛn ɑn, bʌt ɹænd wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ lɪsnɪŋ. ðə wɑtʃɝ wɑz bæk. ðə hɛɹ stɝɾ ɑn ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk. hi pɪɹɾ ʌp ət ðə pækt ɑɹtʃɝz' bælkəniz oʊvɝlʊkɪŋ ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, ət ðə ɹoʊz ə pipəl dʒæmd əlɔŋ ðə ɡɑɹdwɔks ətɑp ðə wɔlz. sʌmwɛɹ əmʌŋ əm wɑz ðə sɛɾ ʌv aɪz ðət hæd fɑloʊɾ ɪm ənsin. ðə ɡeɪz klʌŋ tə hɪm laɪk dɝɾi ɔɪl. ɪt kæn bi ə feɪd, nɑt hɪɹ. ðən hu? əɹ wʌt? hi twɪstəɾ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, pʊlɪŋ ɹɛɾ ɝaʊnd, sɝtʃɪŋ. ðə beɪ bɪɡæn tə dæns əɡɛn.

The Amyrlin went on, but Rand was no longer listening. The watcher was back. The hair stirred on the back of his neck. He peered up at the packed archers' balconies overlooking the courtyard, at the rows of people jammed along the guardwalks atop the walls. Somewhere among them was the set of eyes that had followed him unseen. The gaze clung to him like dirty oil. It can't be a Fade, not here. Then who? Or what? He twisted in his saddle, pulling Red around, searching. The bay began to dance again.

sʌɾənli sʌmθɪŋ flæʃt əkɹɔs ɪn fɹʌn ə ɹændz feɪs. ə mæn pæsɪŋ bɪhaɪn ði æmɪɝlɪn kɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ən fɛl, ə blæk-flɛtʃt æɹoʊ dʒʌɾɪŋ fɹəm ɪz saɪd. ði æmɪɝlɪn stʊd kɑmli lʊkɪŋ əɾ ə ɹɛn ɪn əɹ sliv; blʌd sloʊli steɪn ðə ɡɹeɪ sɪlk.

Suddenly something flashed across in front of Rand's face. A man passing behind the Amyrlin cried out and fell, a black-fletched arrow jutting from his side. The Amyrlin stood calmly looking at a rent in her sleeve; blood slowly stained the gray silk.

ə wʊmən skɹimd, ən əbɹʌpli ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd ɹæŋ wɪð kɹaɪz ən ʃaʊts. ðə pipəl ɑn ðə wɔlz mɪl fjʊɹiəsli, ən ɛvɹi mæn ɪn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd hæɾ ɪz sɔɹɾ aʊt. ivən ɹænd, hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə ɹilaɪz.

A woman screamed, and abruptly the courtyard rang with cries and shouts. The people on the walls milled furiously, and every man in the courtyard had his sword out. Even Rand, he was surprised to realize.

eɪɡəlmɝ ʃʊk ɪz bleɪɾ ət ðə skaɪ. "faɪn hɪm!" hi ɹɔɹd. "bɹɪŋ ɪm tə mi!" hɪz feɪs wɛn fɹəm ɹɛd tə waɪt wən i sɔ ðə blʌɾ ɑn ði æmɪɝlɪnz sliv. hi fɛl tə hɪz niz, hɛd baʊd. "fɝɡɪv, mʌðɝ. aɪ hæv feɪl jəɹ seɪfti. aɪm əʃeɪmd."

Agelmar shook his blade at the sky. "Find him!" he roared. "Bring him to me!" His face went from red to white when he saw the blood on the Amyrlin's sleeve. He fell to his knees, head bowed. "Forgive, Mother. I have failed your safety. I am ashamed."

"nɑnsɛns, eɪɡəlmɝ," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd. "lin, stɑp fʌsɪŋ oʊvɝ mi ən si tə ðət mæn. aɪv kʌt maɪsɛlf wɝs ðən ðɪs mɔɹ ðən wʌns klinɪŋ fɪʃ, ən i nidz hɛlp naʊ. eɪɡəlmɝ, stæn ʌp. stæn ʌp, lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə. juv nɑt feɪl mi, ən juv noʊ ɹizən fəɹ ʃeɪm. læs jɪɹ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, wɪð maɪ oʊn ɡɑɹdz əɾ ɛvɹi ɡeɪɾ ən wɔɹɾɝz ɔl ɝaʊn mi, ə mæn wɪð ə naɪf keɪm wɪðɪn faɪv stɛps ə mi. eɪ waɪtkloʊk, noʊ daʊt, ðoʊ aɪv noʊ pɹuf. pliz stæn ʌp, əɹ əl bi ʃeɪmd." əz eɪɡəlmɝ sloʊli ɹoʊz, ʃi fɪŋɡɝɾ əɹ slaɪst sliv. "ə pʊɹ ʃɑt fəɹ ə waɪtkloʊk boʊmən, əɹ ivən ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd." hɝ aɪz flɪkɝɾ ʌp tə tʌtʃ ɹænz. "ɪf ɪt wɑz ət mi hi eɪmd." hɝ ɡeɪz wɑz ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ i kəd ɹiɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɑn əɹ feɪs, bʌɾ i sʌɾənli wɑntəd tə dɪsmaʊn ən haɪd.

"Nonsense, Agelmar," the Amyrlin said. "Leane, stop fussing over me and see to that man. I've cut myself worse than this more than once cleaning fish, and he needs help now. Agelmar, stand up. Stand up, Lord of Fal Dara. You have not failed me, and you have no reason for shame. Last year in the White Tower, with my own guards at every gate and Warders all around me, a man with a knife came within five steps of me. A Whitecloak, no doubt, though I've no proof. Please stand up, or I will be shamed." As Agelmar slowly rose, she fingered her sliced sleeve. "A poor shot for a Whitecloak bowman, or even a Darkfriend." Her eyes flickered up to touch Rand's. "If it was at me he aimed." Her gaze was gone before he could read anything on her face, but he suddenly wanted to dismount and hide.

ɪt wɑzn eɪmd ət hɝ, ən ʃi noʊz ɪt.

It wasn't aimed at her, and she knows it.

lin stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm wɛɹ ʃi hæd bɪn nilɪŋ. sʌmwʌn hæd leɪɾ ə kloʊk oʊvɝ ðə feɪs ə ðə mæn u hæd teɪkən ði æɹoʊ. "hi ɪz dɛd, mʌðɝ." ʃi saʊndəd taɪɝd. "hi wɑz dɛd wən i stʃɹʌk ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ivən ɪf aɪ hæd bɪn əɾ ɪz saɪd. . . ."

Leane straightened from where she had been kneeling. Someone had laid a cloak over the face of the man who had taken the arrow. "He is dead, Mother." She sounded tired. "He was dead when he struck the ground. Even if I had been at his side. . . ."

"ju dɪd wʌt jə kʊd, dɔɾɝ. dɛθ kænɑt bi hild."

"You did what you could, Daughter. Death cannot be Healed."

eɪɡəlmɝ muv kloʊsɝ. "mʌðɝ, ɪf ðəɹ ɑɹ waɪtkloʊk kɪlɝz əbaʊt, əɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz, jə mʌst əlaʊ mi tə sɛn mɛn wɪð ju. əz fɑɹ əz ðə ɹɪvɝ, ət list. aɪ kəd nɑt lɪv ɪf hɑɹm keɪm tə jə ɪn ʃaɪnɝ. pliz, ɹɪtɝn tə ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns. əl si ðɛm ɡɑɹɾəd wɪð maɪ laɪf əntɪl jə ɑɹ ɹɛɾi tə tʃɹævəl."

Agelmar moved closer. "Mother, if there are Whitecloak killers about, or Darkfriends, you must allow me to send men with you. As far as the river, at least. I could not live if harm came to you in Shienar. Please, return to the women's apartments. I will see them guarded with my life until you are ready to travel."

"bi əɾ iz," ʃi toʊl hɪm. "ðɪs skɹætʃ wɪl nɑt dɪleɪ mi ə moʊmənt. jɛs, jɛs, əl ɡlædli æksɛp jəɹ mɛn əz fɑɹ əz ðə ɹɪvɝ, ɪf jə ɪnsɪst. bʌɾ əl nɑt lɛt ðɪs dɪleɪ lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ ə moʊmənt, iðɝ. ɛvɹi hɑɹtbit kaʊns əntɪl ðə hɔɹn ɪz faʊn əɡɛn. jəɹ liv, lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ, tə ɔɹɾɝ jəɹ oʊθmɛn?"

"Be at ease," she told him. "This scratch will not delay me a moment. Yes, yes, I will gladly accept your men as far as the river, if you insist. But I will not let this delay Lord Ingtar a moment, either. Every heartbeat counts until the Horn is found again. Your leave, Lord Agelmar, to order your oathmen?"

hi baʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪn əsɛnt. ət ðət moʊmən i wʊɾə ɡɪvən əɹ fæl dæɹə hæd ʃi æskt.

He bowed his head in assent. At that moment he would have given her Fal Dara had she asked.

ði æmɪɝlɪn tɝn bæk tə ɪŋtʃɹ ən ðə mɛn ɡæðɝd bɪhaɪn hɪm. ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk ət ɹænd əɡɛn. hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə si hɝ smaɪl sʌɾənli.

The Amyrlin turned back to Ingtar and the men gathered behind him. She did not look at Rand again. He was surprised to see her smile suddenly.

"aɪ weɪdʒɝ ɪljən dʌz nɑt ɡɪv ɪts ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn soʊ ɹaʊzɪŋ ə sɛnd-ɔf," ʃi sɛd. "bʌt jʊɹz ɪz ðə tʃɹu ɡɹeɪt hʌnt. jə ɑɹ fju, soʊ jə meɪ tʃɹævəl kwɪkli, jɛɾ ɪnʌf tə də wʌt jə mʌst. aɪ tʃɑɹdʒ ju, lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ ə haʊs ʃɪnoʊwə, aɪ tʃɑɹdʒ ɔl ə ju, faɪn ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, ən lɛt nʌθɪŋ bɑɹ jəɹ weɪ."

"I wager Illian does not give its Great Hunt of the Horn so rousing a send-off," she said. "But yours is the true Great Hunt. You are few, so you may travel quickly, yet enough to do what you must. I charge you, Lord Ingtar of House Shinowa, I charge all of you, find the Horn of Valere, and let nothing bar your way."

ɪŋtʃɹ wɪpt ɪz sɔɹd fɹəm ɪz bæk ən kɪs ðə bleɪd. "baɪ maɪ laɪf ən soʊl, baɪ maɪ haʊs ən ɑnɝ, aɪ swɛɹ ɪt, mʌðɝ."

Ingtar whipped his sword from his back and kissed the blade. "By my life and soul, by my House and honor, I swear it, Mother."

"ðɛn ɹaɪd."

"Then ride."

ɪŋtʃɹ swʌŋ ɪz hɔɹs təwɔɹd ðə ɡeɪt.

Ingtar swung his horse toward the gate.

ɹænd dʌɡ hɪz hilz ɪndə ɹɛdz flæŋks ən ɡæləpt æftɝ ðə kɑləm ɔlɹɛɾi dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ θɹu ðə ɡeɪts.

Rand dug his heels into Red's flanks and galloped after the column already disappearing through the gates.

ʌnəwɛɹ ʌv wʌt hæɾ əkɝd wɪðɪn, ði æmɪɝlɪnz pɪkmɛn ən ɑɹtʃɝz stʊd wɔlɪŋ ə pæθ fɹəm ðə ɡeɪts tə ðə sɪɾi pɹɑpɝ, ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ɑn ðɛɹ tʃɛsts. hɝ dʒɹʌmɝz ən tʃɹʌmpəɾɝz weɪɾəd nɪɹ ðə ɡeɪts, ɹɛɾi tə fɔl ɪn wən ʃi lɛft. bɪhaɪn ðə ɹoʊz ʌv ɑɹmɝd mɛn, pipəl pæk ðə skwɛɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə kip. səm tʃɪɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹz bænɝ, ən ʌðɝz noʊ daʊt θɔt ðɪs wɑz ðə stɑɹɾ ə ði æmɪɝlɪn sits dɪpɑɹtʃɝ. ə swɛlɪŋ ɹɔɹ fɑloʊd ɹænd əkɹɔs ðə skwɛɹ.

Unaware of what had occurred within, the Amyrlin's pikemen and archers stood walling a path from the gates to the city proper, the Flame of Tar Valon on their chests. Her drummers and trumpeters waited near the gates, ready to fall in when she left. Behind the rows of armored men, people packed the square in front of the keep. Some cheered Ingtar's banner, and others no doubt thought this was the start of the Amyrlin Seat's departure. A swelling roar followed Rand across the square.

hi kɑɾ ʌp wɪð ɪŋtʃɹ wɛɹ loʊ-iv haʊsəz ən ʃɑps stʊd tə iðɝ saɪd, ən mɔɹ pipəl θɪkli laɪn ðə stoʊn-peɪv stʃɹit. səm ə ðɛm tʃɪɹd, tu. mæt ən pɛɹɪn hæd bɪn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ət ðə hɛɾ ə ðə kɑləm wɪð ɪŋtʃɹ ən lɔɪəl, bʌt ðə tu ʌv əm fɛl bæk wən ɹænd dʒɔɪn ðɛm. haʊ æm aɪ ɛvɝ gɑnə əpɑlədʒaɪz ɪf ðeɪ woʊn steɪ nɪɹ mi lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ mi tə seɪ ɛniθɪŋ? bɝn mi, hi dʌzn lʊk laɪk hiz daɪɪŋ.

He caught up with Ingtar where low-eaved houses and shops stood to either side, and more people thickly lined the stone-paved street. Some of them cheered, too. Mat and Perrin had been riding at the head of the column with Ingtar and Loial, but the two of them fell back when Rand joined them. How am I ever going to apologize if they won't stay near me long enough for me to say anything? Burn me, he doesn't look like he's dying.

"tʃæŋɡʌ ən naɪdaʊ ɑɹ ɡɔn," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛɾ əbɹʌpli. hi saʊndəd koʊld ən æŋɡɹi, bʌt ʃeɪkən, tu. "wi kaʊntəɾ ɛvɹi hɛɾ ɪn ðə kip, əlaɪv əɹ dɛd, læs naɪɾ ən əɡɛn ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. ðeɪ ɑɹ ði oʊnli wʌnz nɑɾ əkaʊntəd fɔɹ."

"Changu and Nidao are gone," Ingtar said abruptly. He sounded cold and angry, but shaken, too. "We counted every head in the keep, alive or dead, last night and again this morning. They are the only ones not accounted for."

"tʃæŋɡʌ wɑz ɑn ɡɑɹɾ ɪn ðə dʌnʒən jɛstɝdeɪ," ɹænd sɛd sloʊli.

"Changu was on guard in the dungeon yesterday," Rand said slowly.

"ænd naɪdaʊ. ðeɪ hæd ðə sɛkənd wɑtʃ. ðeɪ ɔlweɪz steɪd təɡɛðɝ, ivən ɪf ðeɪ hæd tə tʃɹeɪɾ əɹ də ɛkstʃɹə duɾi fəɹ ɪt. ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ ɑn ɡɑɹd wən ɪt hæpənd, bʌt. . . . ðeɪ fɔɾ ət tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp, ə mʌnθ ɡɔn, ən seɪv lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ wən ɪz hɔɹs wɛn daʊn wɪð tʃɹɑləks ɔl ɝaʊn hɪm. naʊ ðɪs. dɑɹkfɹɛnz." hi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. "ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪz bɹeɪkɪŋ əpɑɹt."

"And Nidao. They had the second watch. They always stayed together, even if they had to trade or do extra duty for it. They were not on guard when it happened, but. . . . They fought at Tarwin's Gap, a month gone, and saved Lord Agelmar when his horse went down with Trollocs all around him. Now this. Darkfriends." He drew a deep breath. "Everything is breaking apart."

ə mæn ɑn hɔɹsbæk fɔɹst ɪz weɪ θɹu ðə θɹɔŋ laɪnɪŋ ðə stʃɹiɾ ən dʒɔɪn ɪn bɪhaɪn ɪŋtʃɹ. hi wɑz ə taʊnzmən, baɪ hɪz kloʊðz, lin, wɪð ə laɪn feɪs ən ɡɹeɪɪŋ hɛɹ kʌt lɔŋ. ə bʌndəl ən wɔɾɝbətəlz wɝ læʃt bɪhaɪn ɪz sæɾəl, ən ə ʃɔɹt-bleɪɾɪd sɔɹɾ ən ə nɑtʃt sɔɹd-bɹeɪkɝ hʌŋ əɾ ɪz bɛlt, əlɔŋ wɪð ə kʌdʒəl.

A man on horseback forced his way through the throng lining the street and joined in behind Ingtar. He was a townsman, by his clothes, lean, with a lined face and graying hair cut long. A bundle and waterbottles were lashed behind his saddle, and a short-bladed sword and a notched sword-breaker hung at his belt, along with a cudgel.

ɪŋtʃɹ noʊɾəst ɹændz ɡlænsɪz. "ðɪs ɪz hʊɹɪn, əɹ snɪfɝ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə lɛt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ noʊ əbaʊt hɪm. nɑt ðət wʌɾ i dʌz ɪz ɹɔŋ, jə ʌndɝstænd. ðə kɪŋ kips ə snɪfɝ ɪn fæl mɝæn, ən ðɛɹz ənʌðɝ ɪn ɑŋkɝ deɪl. ɪts dʒʌs ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛldəm laɪk wʌt ðeɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd, ən wɪð ɪm biɪŋ ə mæn. . . . ɪts nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə paʊɝ, ʌv kɔɹs. ɑə! jə tɛl hɪm, hʊɹɪn."

Ingtar noticed Rand's glances. "This is Hurin, our sniffer. There was no need to let the Aes Sedai know about him. Not that what he does is wrong, you understand. The King keeps a sniffer in Fal Moran, and there's another in Ankor Dail. It's just that Aes Sedai seldom like what they do not understand, and with him being a man. . . . It's nothing to do with the Power, of course. Aaaah! You tell him, Hurin."

"jɛs, lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ," ðə mæn sɛd. hi baʊd loʊ tə ɹænd fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl. "ɑnɝ tə sɝv, maɪ lɔɹd."

"Yes, Lord Ingtar," the man said. He bowed low to Rand from his saddle. "Honor to serve, my Lord."

"kɔl mi ɹænd." ɹænd stʌk aʊɾ ɪz hænd, ən æftɝ ə moʊmən hʊɹɪn ɡɹɪn ən tʊk ɪt.

"Call me Rand." Rand stuck out his hand, and after a moment Hurin grinned and took it.

"æz jə wɪʃ, maɪ lɔɹd ɹænd. lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ ən lɔɹd keɪdʒɪn doʊn maɪn ə mænz weɪz - ən lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ, ʌv kɔɹs - bʌt ðeɪ seɪ ɪn ðə taʊn jəɹ ən aʊtlæn pɹɪns fɹəm ðə saʊθ, ən səm aʊtlæn lɔɹdz ɑɹ stʃɹɪk fəɹ ɛvɹi mæn ɪn ɪz pleɪs."

"As you wish, my Lord Rand. Lord Ingtar and Lord Kajin don't mind a man's ways - and Lord Agelmar, of course - but they say in the town you're an outland prince from the south, and some outland lords are strict for every man in his place."

"aɪm nɑɾ ə lɔɹd." ət list əl ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðæt, naʊ. "dʒʌst ɹænd."

"I'm not a lord." At least I'll get away from that, now. "Just Rand."

hʊɹɪn blɪŋkt. "æz jə wɪʃ, maɪ lɔɹ - ɑ - ɹænd. ɪm ə snɪfɝ, jə si. bɪn wʌn fɔɹ jɪɹz ðɪs sʌndeɪ. aɪ nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə sətʃ ə θɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðɛn, bʌɾ aɪ hɪɹ ðɛɹz ə fju ʌðɝz laɪk mi. ɪt stɑɹɾəd sloʊ, kætʃɪŋ bæd smɛlz wɛɹ noʊbɑdi ɛls smɛld ɛniθɪŋ, ən ɪt ɡɹu. tʊk ə hoʊl jɪɹ bɪfɔɹ aɪ ɹilaɪzd wʌɾ ɪt wɑz. aɪ kəd smɛl vaɪələns, ðə kɪlɪŋ ən ðə hɝɾɪŋ. smɛl wɛɹ ɪt hæpənd. smɛl ðə tʃɹeɪl ə ðoʊz u dɪɾ ɪt. ɛvɹi tʃɹeɪlz dɪfɹənt, soʊ ðɛɹz noʊ tʃæns ə mɪksɪŋ əm ʌp. lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ hɝɾ ʌv ɪt, ən tʊk mi ɪn ɪz sɝvəs, tə sɝv ðə kɪŋz dʒʌstəs."

Hurin blinked. "As you wish, my Lor - ah - Rand. I'm a sniffer, you see. Been one four years this Sunday. I never heard of such a thing before then, but I hear there's a few others like me. It started slow, catching bad smells where nobody else smelled anything, and it grew. Took a whole year before I realized what it was. I could smell violence, the killing and the hurting. Smell where it happened. Smell the trail of those who did it. Every trail's different, so there's no chance of mixing them up. Lord Ingtar heard of it, and took me in his service, to serve the King's justice."

"ju kən smɛl vaɪələns?" ɹænd sɛd. hi kəd nɑt hɛlp lʊkɪŋ ət ðə mænz noʊz. ɪt wɑz ən ɔɹɾənɛɹi noʊz, nɑt lɑɹdʒ, nɑt smɔl. "ju min jə kən ɹɪli fɑloʊ sʌmbɑɾi hu, seɪ, kɪld ənʌðɝ mæn? baɪ smɛl?"

"You can smell violence?" Rand said. He could not help looking at the man's nose. It was an ordinary nose, not large, not small. "You mean you can really follow somebody who, say, killed another man? By smell?"

"aɪ kən ðæt, maɪ lɔɹ - ɑ - ɹænd. ɪt feɪdz wɪð taɪm, bʌt ðə wɝs ðə vaɪələns, ðə lɔŋɡɝ ɪt læsts. eɪi, aɪ kən smɛl ə bæɾəlfild tɛn jɪɹz oʊld, ðoʊ ðə tʃɹeɪlz ə ðə mɛn u wɝ ðəɹ ɑɹ ɡɔn. ʌp nɪɹ ðə blaɪt, ðə tʃɹeɪlz ə ðə tʃɹɑləks ɔlmoʊs nɛvɝ feɪd. nɑt mʌtʃ tə ə tʃɹɑlɑk bʌt kɪlɪŋ ən hɝɾɪŋ. ə faɪɾ ɪn ə tævɝn, ðoʊ, wɪð meɪbi ə bɹoʊkən ɑɹm . . . ðət smɛlz ɡɔn ɪn aʊɝz."

"I can that, my Lor - ah - Rand. It fades with time, but the worse the violence, the longer it lasts. Aiie, I can smell a battlefield ten years old, though the trails of the men who were there are gone. Up near the Blight, the trails of the Trollocs almost never fade. Not much to a Trolloc but killing and hurting. A fight in a tavern, though, with maybe a broken arm . . . that smell's gone in hours."

"aɪ kən si wɛɹ jə wʊdnt wɑn ɛɛs sədaɪ tə faɪn aʊt."

"I can see where you wouldn't want Aes Sedai to find out."

"ɑ, lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ wɑz ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin əm - ɑ - ɹænd. ðəɹ wɑz wʌn ɪn kɛɹhin wʌns - bɹaʊn ədʒɑ, bʌɾ aɪ swɛɹ aɪ θɔt ʃi wɑz ɹɛd bɪfɔɹ ʃi lemi ɡoʊ - ʃi kɛp mi ə mʌnθ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn aʊt haʊ aɪ də ɪt. ʃi dɪdn laɪk nɑt noʊɪŋ. ʃi kɛp mʌɾɝɪŋ, 'ɪz ɪɾ oʊl kʌm əɡɛn, əɹ nu?' ən stɛɹɪŋ ət mi əntɪl jə wʊɾə θɔɾ aɪ wɑz juzɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ɔlmoʊs hæd mi daʊɾɪŋ maɪsɛlf. bʌɾ aɪ hævənt ɡɔn mæd, ən aɪ doʊn də ɛniθɪŋ. aɪ dʒʌst smɛl ɪt."

"Ah, Lord Ingtar was right about the Aes Sedai, the Light illumine them - ah - Rand. There was one in Cairhien once - Brown Ajah, but I swear I thought she was Red before she let me go - she kept me a month trying to find out how I do it. She didn't like not knowing. She kept muttering, 'Is it old come again, or new?' and staring at me until you would have thought I was using the One Power. Almost had me doubting myself. But I haven't gone mad, and I don't do anything. I just smell it."

ɹænd kəd nɑt hɛlp ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ mɔɪɹeɪn. oʊl bæɹiɝz wikən. ðəɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ ə dɪsəluʃən ən tʃeɪnʒ əbaʊɾ əɹ taɪm. oʊl θɪŋz wɔk əɡɛn, ən nu θɪŋz ɑɹ bɔɹn. wi meɪ lɪv tə si ði ɛn ʌv ən eɪdʒ. hi ʃɪvɝd. "soʊ wɪl tʃɹæk ðoʊz u tʊk ðə hɔɹn wɪð jəɹ noʊz."

Rand could not help remembering Moiraine. Old barriers weaken. There is something of dissolution and change about our time. Old things walk again, and new things are born. We may live to see the end of an Age. He shivered. "So we'll track those who took the Horn with your nose."

ɪŋtʃɹ nɑɾəd. hʊɹɪn ɡɹɪn pɹaʊdli, ən sɛd, "wi wɪl ðət - ɑ - ɹænd. aɪ fɑloʊɾ ə mɝɾɝɝ tə kɛɹhin, wʌns, ən ənʌðɝ ɔl ðə weɪ tə mɛɹədɑn, tə bɹɪŋ əm bæk fəɹ ðə kɪŋz dʒʌstəs." hɪz ɡɹɪn feɪɾəd, ən i lʊk tʃɹʌbəld. "ðɪs ɪz ðə wɝst ɛvɝ, ðoʊ. mɝɾɝ smɛlz bæd, ən ðə tʃɹeɪl ʌv ə mɝɾɝɝ stɪŋks wɪð ɪt, bʌt ðɪs. . . ." hɪz noʊz ɹɪŋkəld. "ðɛɹ wɝ mɛn ɪn ɪt læs naɪt. dɑɹkfɹɛnz, mʌs bi, bʌt jə kæn tɛl ə dɑɹkfɹɛn baɪ smɛl. wʌɾ əl fɑloʊ ɪz ðə tʃɹɑləks, ən ðə hæfmən. ən sʌmθɪŋ ivən wɝs." hi tʃɹeɪld ɔf, fɹaʊnɪŋ ən mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf, bʌt ɹænd kəd hɪɹ ɪt. "sʌmθɪŋ ivən wɝs, ðə laɪt hɛlp mi."

Ingtar nodded. Hurin grinned proudly, and said, "We will that - ah - Rand. I followed a murderer to Cairhien, once, and another all the way to Maradon, to bring them back for the King's justice." His grin faded, and he looked troubled. "This is the worst ever, though. Murder smells bad, and the trail of a murderer stinks with it, but this. . . ." His nose wrinkled. "There were men in it last night. Darkfriends, must be, but you can't tell a Darkfriend by smell. What I'll follow is the Trollocs, and the Halfmen. And something even worse." He trailed off, frowning and muttering to himself, but Rand could hear it. "Something even worse, the Light help me."

ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə sɪɾi ɡeɪts, ən dʒʌs bɪɑn ðə wɔlz hʊɹɪn lɪftəɾ ɪz feɪs tə ðə bɹiz. hɪz nɑstʃɹəlz flɛɹd, ðən i ɡeɪv ə snɔɹɾ ə dɪsɡʌst. "ðæt weɪ, maɪ lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ." hi pɔɪntəd saʊθ.

They reached the city gates, and just beyond the walls Hurin lifted his face to the breeze. His nostrils flared, then he gave a snort of disgust. "That way, my Lord Ingtar." He pointed south.

ɪŋtʃɹ lʊk sɝpɹaɪzd. "nɑt təwɔɹd ðə blaɪt?"

Ingtar looked surprised. "Not toward the Blight?"

"noʊ, lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ. fɔ!" hʊɹɪn waɪpt ɪz maʊθ ɑn ɪz sliv. "aɪ kən ɔlmoʊs teɪs ðɛm. saʊθ, ðeɪ wɛnt."

"No, Lord Ingtar. Faugh!" Hurin wiped his mouth on his sleeve. "I can almost taste them. South, they went."

"ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt, ðɛn, ði æmɪɝlɪn sit," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd sloʊli. "ə ɡɹeɪɾ ən waɪz wʊmən, hu dɪzɝvz bɛɾɝ ðən mi tə sɝv hɝ. teɪk ðə tʃɹeɪl, hʊɹɪn."

"She was right, then, the Amyrlin Seat," Ingtar said slowly. "A great and wise woman, who deserves better than me to serve her. Take the trail, Hurin."

ɹænd tɝn ən pɪɹd bæk θɹu ðə ɡeɪts, ʌp ðə stʃɹit tə ðə kip. hi hoʊpt ɛɡwin wɑz ɔl ɹaɪt. nɪneɪiv wɪl lʊk æftɝ hɝ. meɪbi ɪts bɛɾɝ ðɪs weɪ, laɪk ə klin kʌt, tu kwɪk tə hɝt tɪl æftɝ ɪts dʌn.

Rand turned and peered back through the gates, up the street to the keep. He hoped Egwene was all right. Nynaeve will look after her. Maybe it's better this way, like a clean cut, too quick to hurt till after it's done.

hi ɹoʊɾ æftɝ ɪŋtʃɹ ən ðə ɡɹeɪ aʊl bænɝ, saʊθ. ðə wɪnd wɑz meɪkɪŋ ʌp, ən koʊld əɡɛnst ɪz bæk dɪspaɪt ðə sʌn. hi θɔɾ i hɝd læftɝ ɪn ɪt, feɪn ən mɑkɪŋ.

He rode after Ingtar and the Gray Owl banner, south. The wind was making up, and cold against his back despite the sun. He thought he heard laughter in it, faint and mocking.

ðə wæksɪŋ mun lɪt ðə hjuməd, naɪt-dɑɹk stʃɹits ʌv ɪljən, wɪtʃ stɪl ɹæŋ wɪð sɛləbɹeɪʃən lɛft oʊvɝ fɹəm deɪlaɪt. ɪn oʊnli ə fju mɔɹ deɪz, ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn wəd bi sɛn fɔɹθ wɪð pɑmp ən sɛɹəmoʊni ðət tʃɹədɪʃən kleɪm deɪɾɪd tə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ðə fɛstɪvəɾiz fəɹ ðə hʌntɝz hæd blɛndəɾ ɪndə ðə fist ə teɪvən, wɪð ɪts feɪm kɑntɛsts ən pɹaɪzəz fəɹ ɡlimən. ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst pɹaɪz ʌv ɔl, əz ɔlweɪz, wəd ɡoʊ fəɹ ðə bɛs tɛlɪŋ ə ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn.

The waxing moon lit the humid, night-dark streets of Illian, which still rang with celebration left over from daylight. In only a few more days, the Great Hunt of the Horn would be sent forth with pomp and ceremony that tradition claimed dated to the Age of Legends. The festivities for the Hunters had blended into the Feast of Teven, with its famed contests and prizes for gleemen. The greatest prize of all, as always, would go for the best telling of The Great Hunt of the Horn.

tənaɪt ðə ɡlimən ɛntɝteɪn ɪn ðə pæləsəz ən mæntʃənz ə ðə sɪɾi, wɛɹ ðə ɡɹeɪɾ ən maɪɾi dɪspɔɹɾɪd ðɛmsɛlvz, ən ðə hʌntɝz kʌm fɹəm ɛvɹi neɪʃən tə ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ən faɪnd, ɪf nɑt ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ɪtsɛlf, ət list ɪmɔɹtælɪɾi ɪn sɔŋ ən stɔɹi. ðeɪ wəɾ əv mjuzɪk ən dænsɪŋ, ən fænz ən aɪsəz tə dɪspɛl ðə jɪɹz fɝst ɹil hit, bʌt kɑɹnəvəl fɪl ðə stʃɹits, tu, ɪn ðə mun-bɹaɪt mʌɡi naɪt. ɛvɹi deɪ wɑz ə kɑɹnəvəl, əntɪl ðə hʌn dɪpɑɹɾəd, ən ɛvɹi naɪt.

Tonight the gleemen entertained in the palaces and mansions of the city, where the great and mighty disported themselves, and the Hunters come from every nation to ride out and find, if not the Horn of Valere itself, at least immortality in song and story. They would have music and dancing, and fans and ices to dispel the year's first real heat, but carnival filled the streets, too, in the moon-bright muggy night. Every day was a carnival, until the Hunt departed, and every night.

pipəl ɹæn pæs beɪl doʊmən ɪn mæsks ən kɑstumz bəzɑɹ ən fænsɪfəl, mɛni ʃoʊɪŋ tu mʌtʃ flɛʃ. ʃaʊɾɪŋ ən sɪŋɪŋ ðeɪ ɹæn, ə hæf dʌzən təɡɛðɝ, ðən skæɾɝd pɛɹz ɡɪɡəlɪŋ ən klʌtʃɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ, ðən twɛnti ɪn ə ɹɔkəs nɑt. faɪɹwɝks kɹækəld ɪn ðə skaɪ, ɡoʊld ən sɪlvɝ bɝsts əɡɛns ðə blæk. ðəɹ wɝ ɔlmoʊst əz mɛni ɪluməneɪɾɝz ɪn ðə sɪɾi əz ðəɹ wɝ ɡlimən.

People ran past Bayle Domon in masks and costumes bizarre and fanciful, many showing too much flesh. Shouting and singing they ran, a half dozen together, then scattered pairs giggling and clutching each other, then twenty in a raucous knot. Fireworks crackled in the sky, gold and silver bursts against the black. There were almost as many Illuminators in the city as there were gleemen.

doʊmən spɛɹd lɪɾəl θɔt fəɹ faɪɹwɝks, əɹ fəɹ ðə hʌnt. hi wɑz ɑn ɪz weɪ tə mit mɛn i θɔt maɪt bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɪl hɪm.

Domon spared little thought for fireworks, or for the Hunt. He was on his way to meet men he thought might be trying to kill him.

hi kɹɔs ðə bɹɪdʒ ə flaʊɝz, oʊvɝ wʌn ə ðə sɪɾiz mɛni kənælz, ɪndə ðə pɝfjum kɔɹɾɝ, ðə pɔɹt dɪstʃɹɪkt ʌv ɪljən. ðə kənæl smɛld ə tu mɛni tʃeɪmbɝ pɑts, wɪð nɛvɝ ə saɪn ðət ðəɹ hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn flaʊɝz nɪɹ ðə bɹɪdʒ. ðə kɔɹɾɝ smɛld ə hɛmp ən pɪtʃ fɹəm ðə ʃɪpjɑɹdz ən dɑks, ən saʊɝ hɑɹbɝ mʌd, ɔl ʌv ɪt meɪd fɪɹsɝ baɪ hiɾəd ɛɹ ðət sim nɪɹli dæmp ɪnʌf tə dʒɹɪŋk. doʊmən bɹið hɛvəli; ɛvɹi taɪm i ɹɪtɝn fɹəm ðə nɔɹθkaʊntʃɹi hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf sɝpɹaɪzd, fəɹ ɔl i hæd bɪn bɔɹn ðɛɹ, ət ði ɝli sʌmɝ hiɾ ɪn ɪljən.

He crossed the Bridge of Flowers, over one of the city's many canals, into the Perfumed Quarter, the port district of Illian. The canal smelled of too many chamber pots, with never a sign that there had ever been flowers near the bridge. The quarter smelled of hemp and pitch from the shipyards and docks, and sour harbor mud, all of it made fiercer by heated air that seemed nearly damp enough to drink. Domon breathed heavily; every time he returned from the northcountry he found himself surprised, for all he had been born there, at the early summer heat in Illian.

ɪn wʌn hæn i kæɹiɾ ə staʊt kʌdʒəl, ən ði ʌðɝ hæn ɹɛstəɾ ɑn ðə hɪlt ə ðə ʃɔɹt sɔɹɾ i hæɾ ɔfən juzd ɪn dɪfɛndɪŋ ðə dɛks ə hɪz ɹɪvɝ tʃɹeɪɾɝ fɹəm bɹɪɡænz. noʊ fju fʊtpædz stɔk ðiz naɪts ə ɹɛvəlɹi, wɛɹ ðə pɪkɪŋz wɝ ɹɪtʃ ən moʊst wɝ dip ɪn waɪn.

In one hand he carried a stout cudgel, and the other hand rested on the hilt of the short sword he had often used in defending the decks of his river trader from brigands. No few footpads stalked these nights of revelry, where the pickings were rich and most were deep in wine.

jɛɾ i wɑz ə bɹɔd, mʌskjəlɝ mæn, ən nʌn ə ðoʊz aʊt fəɹ ə kætʃ ʌv ɡoʊl θɔɾ ɪm ɹɪtʃ ɪnʌf, ɪn ɪz pleɪn-kʌt koʊt, tə ɹɪsk ɪz saɪz ən ɪz kʌdʒəl. ðə fju hu kɑɾ ə klɪɹ ɡlɪmps ə hɪm, wən i pæs θɹu laɪt spɪlɪŋ fɹəm ə wɪndoʊ, ɛdʒ bæk tɪl i wɑz wɛl pæst. dɑɹk hɛɹ ðət hʌŋ tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝz ən ə lɔŋ bɪɹd ðət lɛft ɪz ʌpɝ lɪp bɛɹ fɹeɪmd ə ɹaʊn feɪs, bʌt ðət feɪs hæd nɛvɝ bɪn sɑft, ən naʊ ɪt wɑz sɛɾ əz ɡɹɪmli əz ɪf i mɛn tə bæɾɝ ɪz weɪ θɹu ə wɔl. hi hæd mɛn tə mit, ən i wɑz nɑt hæpi əbaʊɾ ɪt.

Yet he was a broad, muscular man, and none of those out for a catch of gold thought him rich enough, in his plain-cut coat, to risk his size and his cudgel. The few who caught a clear glimpse of him, when he passed through light spilling from a window, edged back till he was well past. Dark hair that hung to his shoulders and a long beard that left his upper lip bare framed a round face, but that face had never been soft, and now it was set as grimly as if he meant to batter his way through a wall. He had men to meet, and he was not happy about it.

mɔɹ ɹɛvəlɝz ɹæn pæst sɪŋɪŋ ɔf-ki, waɪn mæŋɡəlɪŋ ðɛɹ wɝdz. "ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ," maɪ eɪdʒd ɡɹændmʌðɝ! doʊmən θɔt ɡlʌmli. ɪt bi maɪ ʃɪp aɪ də wɑnə hæŋ ɑn tə. ən maɪ laɪf, fɔɹtʃən pɹɪk mi.

More revelers ran past singing off-key, wine mangling their words. "The Horn of Valere," my aged grandmother! Domon thought glumly. It be my ship I do want to hang on to. And my life, Fortune prick me.

hi pʊʃt ɪndə ən ɪn, ʌndɝ ə saɪn ʌv ə bɪɡ, waɪt-stʃɹaɪp bædʒɝ dænsɪŋ ɑn ɪts haɪn lɛɡz wɪð ə mæn kæɹiɪŋ ə sɪlvɝ ʃʌvəl. izɪŋ ðə bædʒɝ, ɪt wɑz kɔld, ðoʊ nɑɾ ivən niɾə saɪdɔɹoʊ, ði ɪnkipɝ, nu wʌt ðə neɪm mɛnt; ðəɹ hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ən ɪn ə ðə neɪm ɪn ɪljən.

He pushed into an inn, under a sign of a big, white-striped badger dancing on its hind legs with a man carrying a silver shovel. Easing the Badger, it was called, though not even Nieda Sidoro, the innkeeper, knew what the name meant; there had always been an inn of the name in Illian.

ðə kɑmən ɹum, wɪð sɔdʌst ɑn ðə flɔɹ ən ə mjuzɪʃən sɔfli stʃɹʌmɪŋ ə twɛlv-stʃɹɪŋ bɪɾɝn ɪn wʌn ə ðə si foʊks sæd sɔŋz, wɑz wɛl laɪɾəd ən kwaɪət. niɾə əlaʊd noʊ kəmoʊʃən ɪn əɹ pleɪs, ən əɹ nɛfju, bili, wɑz bɪɡ ɪnʌf tə kæɹi ə mæn aʊt wɪð iðɝ hænd. seɪlɝz, dɑkwɝkɝz, ən wɛɹhaʊsmən keɪm tə ðə bædʒɝ fəɹ ə dʒɹɪŋk ən meɪbi ə lɪɾəl tɔk, fəɹ ə ɡeɪm ə stoʊnz əɹ dɑɹts. ðə ɹum wɑz hæf fʊl naʊ; ivən mɛn u laɪkt kwaɪət hæd bɪn lʊɹɾ aʊt baɪ kɑɹnəvəl. ðə tɔk wɑz sɑft, bʌt doʊmən kɑt mɛnʃənz ə ðə hʌnt, ən ə ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən ðə mʊɹændiənz hæd teɪkən, ən ə ðə wʌn ðə tɛɹənz wɝ tʃeɪsɪŋ θɹu hæɾən mɝk. ðəɹ sim tə bi səm kwɛstʃən wɛðɝ ɪt wəd bi pɹɛfɝəbəl tə si ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən daɪ, əɹ ðə tɛɹənz.

The common room, with sawdust on the floor and a musician softly strumming a twelve-stringed bittern in one of the Sea Folk's sad songs, was well lighted and quiet. Nieda allowed no commotion in her place, and her nephew, Bili, was big enough to carry a man out with either hand. Sailors, dockworkers, and warehousemen came to the Badger for a drink and maybe a little talk, for a game of stones or darts. The room was half full now; even men who liked quiet had been lured out by carnival. The talk was soft, but Domon caught mentions of the Hunt, and of the false Dragon the Murandians had taken, and of the one the Tairens were chasing through Haddon Mirk. There seemed to be some question whether it would be preferable to see the false Dragon die, or the Tairens.

doʊmən ɡɹɪməst. fɔls dʒɹæɡənz! fɔɹtʃən pɹɪk mi, ðəɹ bi noʊ pleɪs seɪf ðiz deɪz. bʌɾ i hæd noʊ ɹil kɛɹ fəɹ fɔls dʒɹæɡənz, ɛni mɔɹ ðən fəɹ ðə hʌnt.

Domon grimaced. False Dragons! Fortune prick me, there be no place safe these days. But he had no real care for false Dragons, any more than for the Hunt.

ðə staʊt pɹəpɹaɪətʃɹəs, wɪð əɹ hɛɹ ɹoʊld ət ðə bæk ə hɝ hɛd, wɑz waɪpɪŋ ə mʌɡ, kipɪŋ ə ʃɑɹp aɪ ɑn əɹ ɪstæblɪʃmənt. ʃi dɪd nɑt stɑp wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ, əɹ ivən lʊk ət hɪm, ɹɪli, bʌɾ əɹ lɛft aɪləd dʒɹupt, ən əɹ aɪz slæntəd təwɔɹd θɹi mɛn əɾ ə teɪbəl ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ. ðeɪ wɝ kwaɪəɾ ivən fəɹ ðə bædʒɝ, ɔlmoʊst sɑmbɝ, ən ðɛɹ bɛl-ʃeɪp vɛlvət kæps ən dɑɹk koʊts, ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd əkɹɔs ðə tʃɛst ɪn bɑɹz ə sɪlvɝ ən skɑɹləɾ ən ɡoʊld, stʊɾ aʊɾ əmʌŋ ðə pleɪn dʒɹɛs ə ði ʌðɝ peɪtʃɹənz.

The stout proprietress, with her hair rolled at the back of her head, was wiping a mug, keeping a sharp eye on her establishment. She did not stop what she was doing, or even look at him, really, but her left eyelid drooped, and her eyes slanted toward three men at a table in the corner. They were quiet even for the Badger, almost somber, and their bell-shaped velvet caps and dark coats, embroidered across the chest in bars of silver and scarlet and gold, stood out among the plain dress of the other patrons.

doʊmən saɪɾ ən tʊk ə teɪbəl ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ baɪ hɪmsɛlf. kɛɹhinɪn, ðɪs taɪm. hi tʊk ə mʌɡ ʌv bɹaʊn eɪl fɹəm ə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝl ən dʒɹu ə lɔŋ swɑloʊ. wən i loʊɝd ðə mʌɡ, ðə θɹi mɛn ɪn stʃɹaɪp koʊts wɝ stændɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ɪz teɪbəl. hi meɪɾ ən ʌnəbtʃɹusɪv dʒɛstʃɝ, tə lɛt niɾə noʊ ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt nid bili.

Domon sighed and took a table in a corner by himself. Cairhienin, this time. He took a mug of brown ale from a serving girl and drew a long swallow. When he lowered the mug, the three men in striped coats were standing beside his table. He made an unobtrusive gesture, to let Nieda know that he did not need Bili.

"kæptən doʊmən?" ðeɪ wɝ ɔl θɹi nɑndɪskɹɪpt, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ən ɛɹ əbaʊt ðə spikɝ ðət meɪd doʊmən teɪk ɪm fəɹ ðɛɹ liɾɝ. ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə bi ɑɹmd; dɪspaɪt ðɛɹ faɪn kloʊðz, ðeɪ lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt nid tə bi. ðəɹ wɝ hɑɹɾ aɪz ɪn ðoʊz soʊ vɛɹi ɔɹɾənɛɹi feɪsəz. "kæptən beɪl doʊmən, ʌv ðə spɹeɪ?"

"Captain Domon?" They were all three nondescript, but there was an air about the speaker that made Domon take him for their leader. They did not appear to be armed; despite their fine clothes, they looked as if they did not need to be. There were hard eyes in those so very ordinary faces. "Captain Bayle Domon, of the Spray?"

doʊmən ɡeɪv ə ʃɔɹt nɑd, ən ðə θɹi sæt daʊn wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ən ɪnvɪteɪʃən. ðə seɪm mæn dɪd ðə tɔkɪŋ; ði ʌðɝ tu dʒʌst wɑtʃt, hɑɹdli blɪŋkɪŋ. ɡɑɹdz, doʊmən θɔt, fəɹ ɔl ðɛɹ faɪn kloʊðz. hu də hi bi tə hæv ə pɛɹ ʌv ɡɑɹdz tə lʊk oʊvɝ hɪm?

Domon gave a short nod, and the three sat down without waiting for an invitation. The same man did the talking; the other two just watched, hardly blinking. Guards, Domon thought, for all their fine clothes. Who do he be to have a pair of guards to look over him?

"kæptən doʊmən, wɪv ə pɝsənɑdʒ u mʌs bi bɹɔt fɹəm min tə ɪljən."

"Captain Domon, we have a personage who must be brought from Mayene to Illian."

"spɹeɪ bi ə ɹɪvɝ kɹæft," doʊmən kʌɾ ɪm ɔf. "hɝ dʒɹæf bi ʃæloʊ, ən ʃiz noʊ ðə kil fəɹ dip wɔɾɝ." ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪɡzækli tʃɹu, bʌt kloʊs ɪnʌf fəɹ lænzmɪn. ət list ɪt bi ə tʃeɪnʒ fɹəm tɛɹ. ðeɪ bi ɡɛɾɪŋ smɑɹɾɝ.

"Spray be a river craft," Domon cut him off. "Her draft be shallow, and she has no the keel for deep water." It was not exactly true, but close enough for landsmen. At least it be a change from Tear. They be getting smarter.

ðə mæn simd ʌnpɝtɝbd ət ði ɪntɝʌpʃən. "wi hæd hɝd jə wɝ ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp ðə ɹɪvɝ tʃɹeɪd."

The man seemed unperturbed at the interruption. "We had heard you were giving up the river trade."

"meɪbi aɪ du, ən meɪbi noʊ. aɪ hæv noʊ dɪsaɪɾɪd." hi hæd, ðoʊ. hi wəd nɑt ɡoʊ bæk ʌpɹɪvɝ, bæk tə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, fəɹ ɔl ðə sɪlk ʃɪpt ɪn tɛɹən bɑɾəmz. sɑldəiən fɝz ən aɪs pɛpɝz wɝ nɑt wɝθ ɪt, ən ɪt hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən i hæd hɝɾ ə ðɛɹ. bʌɾ i wʌndɝɾ əɡɛn haʊ ɛniwʌn nu. hi hæd nɑt spoʊkən ʌv ɪt tə ɛniwʌn, jɛt ði ʌðɝz hæd noʊn, tu.

"Maybe I do, and maybe no. I have no decided." He had, though. He would not go back upriver, back to the Borderlands, for all the silk shipped in Tairen bottoms. Saldaean furs and ice peppers were not worth it, and it had nothing to do with the false Dragon he had heard of there. But he wondered again how anyone knew. He had not spoken of it to anyone, yet the others had known, too.

"ju kən koʊs tə min izəli ɪnʌf. ʃʊɹli, kæptən, jə wəd bi wɪlɪŋ tə seɪl əlɔŋ ðə ʃɔɹlaɪn fəɹ ə θaʊzənd ɡoʊl mɑɹks."

"You can coast to Mayene easily enough. Surely, Captain, you would be willing to sail along the shoreline for a thousand gold marks."

dɪspaɪt hɪmsɛlf, doʊmən ɡɑɡəld. ɪt wɑz fɔɹ taɪmz ðə læst ɔfɝ, ən ðət hæd bɪn ɪnʌf tə meɪk ə mænz dʒɔ dʒɹɑp. "hu dʒju wɑn mi tə fɛtʃ fəɹ ðæt? ðə fɝst ə min hɝsɛlf? hæz tɛɹ faɪnəli fɔɹst əɹ ɔl ðə weɪ aʊt, ðɛn?"

Despite himself, Domon goggled. It was four times the last offer, and that had been enough to make a man's jaw drop. "Who do you want me to fetch for that? The First of Mayene herself? Has Tear finally forced her all the way out, then?"

"ju nid noʊ neɪmz, kæptən." ðə mæn sɛɾ ə lɑɹdʒ lɛðɝ paʊtʃ ɑn ðə teɪbəl, ən ə sil pɑɹtʃmənt. ðə paʊtʃ klɪŋk hɛvəli əz i pʊʃt əm əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəl. ðə bɪɡ ɹɛd wæks sɝkəl hoʊldɪŋ ðə foʊldəd pɑɹtʃmənt ʃʌt bɔɹ ðə mɛni-ɹeɪd ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn ə kɛɹhin. "tu hʌnʒɹəd ɑn əkaʊnt. fəɹ ə θaʊzən mɑɹks, aɪ θɪŋk jə nid noʊ neɪmz. ɡɪv ðæt, sil ənbɹoʊkən, tə ðə pɔɹt kæptən ə min, ən hɪl ɡɪv jə θɹi hʌnʒɹəd mɔɹ, ən jəɹ pæsənʒɝ. əl hæn oʊvɝ ðə ɹɪmeɪndɝ wən jəɹ pæsənʒɝ ɪz dɪlɪvɝd hɪɹ. soʊ lɔŋ əz juv meɪd noʊ ɛfɝt tə dɪskʌvɝ ðət pɝsənɑdʒəz aɪdɛntəɾi."

"You need no names, Captain." The man set a large leather pouch on the table, and a sealed parchment. The pouch clinked heavily as he pushed them across the table. The big red wax circle holding the folded parchment shut bore the many-rayed Rising Sun of Cairhien. "Two hundred on account. For a thousand marks, I think you need no names. Give that, seal unbroken, to the Port Captain of Mayene, and he will give you three hundred more, and your passenger. I will hand over the remainder when your passenger is delivered here. So long as you have made no effort to discover that personage's identity."

doʊmən dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. fɔɹtʃən, ɪt bi wɝθ ðə vɔɪədʒ ɪf ðəɹ bi nɛvɝ ənʌðɝ pɛni bɪɑnd wʌt bi ɪn ðət sæk. ən ə θaʊzənd wɑz mɔɹ mʌni ðən i wəd klɪɹ ɪn θɹi jɪɹz. hi səspɛktəd ðəɾ ɪf i pɹoʊbd ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ, ðəɹ wəd bi ʌðɝ hɪns, dʒʌs hɪns, ðət ðə vɔɪədʒ ɪnvɑlv hɪɾən dilɪŋz bɪtwin ɪljənz kaʊnsəl ə naɪn ən ðə fɝst ə min. ðə fɝsts sɪɾi-steɪt wɑz ə pɹɑvəns ə tiɹ ɪn ɔl bʌt neɪm, ən ʃi wəd noʊ daʊt laɪk ɪljənz eɪd. ən ðəɹ wɝ mɛni ɪn ɪljən u sɛɾ ɪt wɑz taɪm fəɹ ənʌðɝ wɔɹ, ðət tiɹ wɑz teɪkɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ə fɛɹ ʃɛɹ ə ðə tʃɹeɪɾ ɑn ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz. ə laɪkli nɛt tə snɛɹ hɪm, ɪf i hæd nɑt sin θɹi laɪk ɪɾ ɪn ðə pæs mʌnθ.

Domon drew a deep breath. Fortune, it be worth the voyage if there be never another penny beyond what be in that sack. And a thousand was more money than he would clear in three years. He suspected that if he probed a little more, there would be other hints, just hints, that the voyage involved hidden dealings between Illian's Council of Nine and the First of Mayene. The First's city-state was a province of Tear in all but name, and she would no doubt like Illian's aid. And there were many in Illian who said it was time for another war, that Tear was taking more than a fair share of the trade on the Sea of Storms. A likely net to snare him, if he had not seen three like it in the past month.

hi ɹitʃt tə teɪk ðə paʊtʃ, ən ðə mæn u hæd dʌn ɔl ðə tɔkɪŋ kɑɾ ɪz ɹɪst. doʊmən ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɪm, bʌɾ i lʊk bæk ʌndɪstɝbd.

He reached to take the pouch, and the man who had done all the talking caught his wrist. Domon glared at him, but he looked back undisturbed.

"ju mʌst seɪl əz sun əz pɑsəbəl, kæptən."

"You must sail as soon as possible, Captain."

"æt fɝs laɪt," doʊmən ɡɹaʊld, ən ðə mæn nɑɾəd ən ɹilist ɪz hoʊld.

"At first light," Domon growled, and the man nodded and released his hold.

"æt fɝs laɪt, ðɛn, kæptən doʊmən. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, dɪskɹɛʃən kips ə mæn əlaɪv tə spɛn ɪz mʌni."

"At first light, then, Captain Domon. Remember, discretion keeps a man alive to spend his money."

doʊmən wɑtʃt ðə θɹi ʌv əm liv, ðən stɛɹd saʊɝli ət ðə paʊtʃ ən ðə pɑɹtʃmən ɑn ðə teɪbəl ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. sʌmwʌn wɑntəɾ ɪm tə ɡoʊ ist. tiɹ əɹ min, ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ soʊ lɔŋ əz i wɛn ist. hi θɔɾ i nu hu wɑntəɾ ɪt. ən ðən əɡɛn, aɪ hæv noʊ ə klu tə ðɛm. hu kəd noʊ hu wɑz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd? bʌɾ i nu ðət dɑɹkfɹɛnz hæd bɪn æftɝ ɪm sɪns bɪfɔɹ i lɛf mɛɹəbən tə kʌm bæk daʊnɹɪvɝ. dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən tʃɹɑləks. ʌv ðæt, hi wɑz ʃʊɹ. ðə ɹil kwɛstʃən, ðə wʌn i hæd nɑɾ ivən ə ɡlɪmɝ ʌv ən ænsɝ fɔɹ, wɑz waɪ?

Domon watched the three of them leave, then stared sourly at the pouch and the parchment on the table in front of him. Someone wanted him to go east. Tear or Mayene, it did not matter so long as he went east. He thought he knew who wanted it. And then again, I have no a clue to them. Who could know who was a Darkfriend? But he knew that Darkfriends had been after him since before he left Marabon to come back downriver. Darkfriends and Trollocs. Of that, he was sure. The real question, the one he had not even a glimmer of an answer for, was why?

"tʃɹʌbəl, beɪl?" niɾə æskt. "ju də lʊk əz ɪf jə hæd sin ə tʃɹɑlɑk." ʃi ɡɪɡəld, ən ɪmpɹɑbəbəl saʊn fɹəm ə wʊmən əɹ saɪz. laɪk moʊs pipəl u hæd nɛvɝ bɪn tə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, niɾə dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪn tʃɹɑləks. hi hæd tʃɹaɪd tɛlɪŋ əɹ ðə tʃɹuθ ʌv ɪt; ʃi ɛndʒɔɪɾ ɪz stɔɹiz, ən θɔt ðeɪ wɝ ɔl laɪz. ʃi dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪn snoʊ, iðɝ.

"Trouble, Bayle?" Nieda asked. "You do look as if you had seen a Trolloc." She giggled, an improbable sound from a woman her size. Like most people who had never been to the Borderlands, Nieda did not believe in Trollocs. He had tried telling her the truth of it; she enjoyed his stories, and thought they were all lies. She did not believe in snow, either.

"noʊ tʃɹʌbəl, niɾə." hi əntaɪd ðə paʊtʃ, dʌɡ ə kɔɪn aʊt wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ, ən tɔst ɪt tə hɝ. "dʒɹɪŋks fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn tɪl ðət də ɹʌn aʊt, ðən əl ɡɪv jə ənʌðɝ."

"No trouble, Nieda." He untied the pouch, dug a coin out without looking, and tossed it to her. "Drinks for everyone till that do run out, then I'll give you another."

niɾə lʊkt ət ðə kɔɪn ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. "eɪ tɑɹ vəlɑn mɑɹk! dʒju bi tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ wɪð ðə wɪtʃəz naʊ, beɪl?"

Nieda looked at the coin in surprise. "A Tar Valon mark! Do you be trading with the witches now, Bayle?"

"noʊ," hi sɛd hɔɹsli. "ðæɾ aɪ də nɑt!"

"No," he said hoarsely. "That I do not!"

ʃi bɪt ðə kɔɪn, ðən kwɪkli snʌɡd ɪɾ əweɪ bɪhaɪn əɹ bɹɔd bɛlt. "wɛl, ɪt bi ɡoʊl fəɹ ðæt. ən aɪ səspɛk ðə wɪtʃəz bi noʊ soʊ bæɾ əz səm meɪk əm aʊt, ɛniweɪ. aɪd noʊ seɪ soʊ mʌtʃ tə mɛni mɛn. aɪ noʊ ə mʌni tʃeɪnɝ u də hændəl sʌtʃ. jəl noʊ hæv tə ɡɪmi ənʌðɝ, wɪð əz fju əz bi hɪɹ tənaɪt. mɔɹ eɪl fəɹ ju, beɪl?"

She bit the coin, then quickly snugged it away behind her broad belt. "Well, it be gold for that. And I suspect the witches be no so bad as some make them out, anyway. I'd no say so much to many men. I know a money changer who do handle such. You'll no have to give me another, with as few as be here tonight. More ale for you, Bayle?"

hi nɑɾəd nʌmbli, ðoʊ hɪz mʌɡ wɑz stɪl ɔlmoʊs fʊl, ən ʃi tʃɹʌndəld ɔf. ʃi wɑz ə fɹɛnd, ən wəd nɑt spik ʌv wʌt ʃi hæd sin. hi sæt stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə lɛðɝ paʊtʃ. ənʌðɝ mʌɡ wɑz bɹɔt bɪfɔɹ i kəd meɪk hɪmsɛlf oʊpən ɪɾ ɪnʌf tə lʊk ət ðə kɔɪnz ɪnsaɪd. hi stɝɾ əm wɪð ə kælʌz fɪŋɡɝ. ɡoʊl mɑɹks ɡlɪɾɝd ʌp əɾ ɪm ɪn ðə læmplaɪt, ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm bɛɹɪŋ ðə dæmɪŋ fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn. hɝidli hi taɪd ðə bæɡ. deɪnʒɝəs kɔɪnz. wʌn əɹ tu maɪt pæs, bʌt soʊ mɛni wəd seɪ tə moʊs pipəl ɪɡzækli wʌt niɾə θɔt. ðəɹ wɝ tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪɾ ɪn ðə sɪɾi, ən ɔlðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ lɔ ɪn ɪljən əɡɛns dilɪŋ wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ, hi wəd nɛvɝ meɪk ɪt tə ə mædʒəstʃɹeɪɾ ɪf ðə waɪtkloʊks hɝɾ ə ðɪs. ðiz mɛn hæd meɪd ʃʊɹ i wəd nɑt sɪmpli teɪk ðə ɡoʊld ən steɪ ɪn ɪljən.

He nodded numbly, though his mug was still almost full, and she trundled off. She was a friend, and would not speak of what she had seen. He sat staring at the leather pouch. Another mug was brought before he could make himself open it enough to look at the coins inside. He stirred them with a callused finger. Gold marks glittered up at him in the lamplight, every one of them bearing the damning Flame of Tar Valon. Hurriedly he tied the bag. Dangerous coins. One or two might pass, but so many would say to most people exactly what Nieda thought. There were Children of the Light in the city, and although there was no law in Illian against dealing with Aes Sedai, he would never make it to a magistrate if the Whitecloaks heard of this. These men had made sure he would not simply take the gold and stay in Illian.

waɪl i wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ wɝiɪŋ, jɑɹən mldæn, hɪz bɹuɾɪŋ, stɔɹk-laɪk sɛkən ɑn spɹeɪ, keɪm ɪndə ðə bædʒɝ wɪð ɪz bɹaʊz pʊl daʊn tə hɪz lɔŋ noʊz ən stʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə kæptənz teɪbəl. "kɑɹnz dɛd, kæptən."

While he was sitting there worrying, Yarin Maeldan, his brooding, stork-like second on Spray, came into the Badger with his brows pulled down to his long nose and stood over the captain's table. "Carn's dead, Captain."

doʊmən stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, fɹaʊnɪŋ. θɹi ʌðɝz ə hɪz mɛn hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn kɪld, wʌn itʃ taɪm i ɹəfjuzd ə kəmɪʃən ðət wəd teɪk ɪm ist. ðə mædʒɪstʃɹeɪts hæd dʌn nʌθɪŋ; ðə stʃɹits wɝ deɪnʒɝəs ət naɪt, ðeɪ sɛd, ən seɪlɝz ə ɹʌf ən kwɔɹəlsəm lɑt. mædʒɪstʃɹeɪts sɛldəm tʃɹʌbəl ðɛmsɛlvz wɪð wʌt hæpən ɪn ðə pɝfjum kɔɹɾɝ, əz lɔŋ əz noʊ ɹɪspɛktəbəl sɪɾəzənz wɝ ɪnʒɝd.

Domon stared at him, frowning. Three others of his men had already been killed, one each time he refused a commission that would take him east. The magistrates had done nothing; the streets were dangerous at night, they said, and sailors a rough and quarrelsome lot. Magistrates seldom troubled themselves with what happened in the Perfumed Quarter, as long as no respectable citizens were injured.

"bʌt ðɪs taɪm aɪ dɪɾ æksɛp ðɛm," hi mʌɾɝd.

"But this time I did accept them," he muttered.

" 'tɪsn ɔl, kæptən," jɑɹən sɛd. "ðeɪ wɝkt kɑɹn wɪð naɪvz, laɪk ðeɪ wɑntəɾ ɪm tə tɛl əm sʌmθɪŋ. ən səm mɔɹ mɛn tʃɹaɪd tə snik əbɔɹd spɹeɪ nɑɾ ən aʊɝ ɡɔn. ðə dɑk wɑtʃ ɹæn əm ɔf. θɝd taɪm ɪn tɛn deɪz, ən aɪ nɛvɝ nu wɔɹf ɹæts tə bi soʊ pɝsɪstənt. ðeɪ laɪk tə lɛɾ ən əlɑɹm daɪ daʊn bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn. ən sʌmbɑɾi tɔs maɪ ɹum ət ðə sɪlvɝ dɑlfən læs naɪt. tʊk səm sɪlvɝ, soʊ aɪd θɪŋk ɪt wɑz θivz, bʌt ðeɪ lɛf ðət bɛl bʌkəl ə maɪn, ðə wʌn sɛt wɪð ɡɑɹnəts ən munstoʊnz, laɪɪŋ ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ɪn pleɪn saɪt. wʌts ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn, kæptən? ðə mɛn ɑɹ əfɹeɪd, ən ɪm ə lɪɾəl nɝvəs maɪsɛlf."

" 'Tisn't all, Captain," Yarin said. "They worked Carn with knives, like they wanted him to tell them something. And some more men tried to sneak aboard Spray not an hour gone. The dock watch ran them off. Third time in ten days, and I never knew wharf rats to be so persistent. They like to let an alarm die down before they try again. And somebody tossed my room at the Silver Dolphin last night. Took some silver, so I'd think it was thieves, but they left that belt buckle of mine, the one set with garnets and moonstones, lying right out in plain sight. What's going on, Captain? The men are afraid, and I'm a little nervous myself."

doʊmən ɹɪɹd tə hɪz fit. "ɹs ðə kɹu, jɑɹən. faɪn əm ən tɛl əm spɹeɪ seɪlz əz sun əz ðəɹ də bi mɛn ɪnʌf əbɔɹd tə hændəl hɝ." stʌfɪŋ ðə pɑɹtʃmən ɪndə hɪz koʊt pɑkət, hi snætʃt ʌp ðə bæɡ ʌv ɡoʊld ən pʊʃt ɪz sɛkən aʊt ðə dɔɹ əhɛɾ ə hɪm. "ɹs ðɛm, jɑɹən, fəɹ əl liv ɛni mæn u noʊ meɪks ɪt, stændɪŋ ɑn ðə ki əz i ɪz."

Domon reared to his feet. "Roust the crew, Yarin. Find them and tell them Spray sails as soon as there do be men enough aboard to handle her." Stuffing the parchment into his coat pocket, he snatched up the bag of gold and pushed his second out the door ahead of him. "Roust them, Yarin, for I'll leave any man who no makes it, standing on the quay as he is."

doʊmən ɡeɪv jɑɹən ə ʃʌv tə stɑɹɾ ɪm ɹʌnɪŋ, ðən stɔkt ɔf təwɔɹd ðə dɑks. ivən fʊtpædz u hɝd ðə klɪŋkɪŋ ə ðə paʊtʃ i kæɹid stɪɹd klɪɹ ə hɪm, fəɹ i wɔk naʊ laɪk ə mæn gɑnə də mɝɾɝ.

Domon gave Yarin a shove to start him running, then stalked off toward the docks. Even footpads who heard the clinking of the pouch he carried steered clear of him, for he walked now like a man going to do murder.

ðəɹ wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi kɹumɪn skɹæmbəlɪŋ əbɔɹd spɹeɪ wən i ɝaɪvd, ən mɔɹ ɹʌnɪŋ bɛɹfʊt daʊn ðə stoʊn ki. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌɾ i fɪɹd wɑz pɝsuɪŋ hɪm, əɹ ivən ðəɾ ɛniθɪŋ dɪd pɝsu hɪm, bʌt ðeɪ nu hi meɪd ɡʊd pɹɑfəts, ən æftɝ ði ɪliɑnɝ weɪ, hi ɡeɪv ʃɛɹz tə ðə kɹu.

There were already crewmen scrambling aboard Spray when he arrived, and more running barefoot down the stone quay. They did not know what he feared was pursuing him, or even that anything did pursue him, but they knew he made good profits, and after the Illianer way, he gave shares to the crew.

spɹeɪ wɑz eɪɾi fit lɔŋ, wɪð tu mæsts, ən bɹɔɾ ɪn ðə bim, wɪð ɹum fəɹ dɛk kɑɹɡoʊ əz wɛl əz ɪn ðə hoʊlz. dɪspaɪt wʌt doʊmən hæd toʊl ðə kɛɹhinɪn - ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn kɛɹhinɪn - hi θɔt ʃi kəd stæn ði oʊpən wɔɾɝ. ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz wɑz kwaɪəɾɝ ɪn ðə sʌmɝ.

Spray was eighty feet long, with two masts, and broad in the beam, with room for deck cargo as well as in the holds. Despite what Domon had told the Cairhienin - if they had been Cairhienin - he thought she could stand the open water. The Sea of Storms was quieter in the summer.

"ʃil əv tə," hi mʌɾɝd, ən stʃɹoʊd bɪloʊ tə hɪz kæbən.

"She'll have to," he muttered, and strode below to his cabin.

hi tɔs ðə sæk ʌv ɡoʊld ɑn ɪz bɛd, bɪl nitli əɡɛns ðə hʌl laɪk ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls ɪn ðə stɝn kæbən, ən dʌɡ aʊt ðə pɑɹtʃmənt. laɪɾɪŋ ə læntɝn, hæŋɪŋ ɪn ɪts swɪvəl fɹəm ði oʊvɝhɛd, hi stʌɾid ðə sil dɑkjəmɛnt, tɝnɪŋ ɪɾ əz ɪf i kəd ɹid wʌt wɑz ɪnsaɪd wɪθaʊɾ oʊpənɪŋ ɪt. ə ɹæp ɑn ðə dɔɹ meɪɾ ɪm fɹaʊn.

He tossed the sack of gold on his bed, built neatly against the hull like everything else in the stern cabin, and dug out the parchment. Lighting a lantern, hanging in its swivel from the overhead, he studied the sealed document, turning it as if he could read what was inside without opening it. A rap on the door made him frown.

"kʌm."

"Come."

jɑɹən stʌk ɪz hɛɾ ɪn. "ðeɪɹ ɔl əbɔɹd bʌt θɹi aɪ kʊdn faɪnd, kæptən. bʌɾ aɪv spɹɛd ðə wɝd θɹu ɛvɹi tævɝn, hɛl, ən kɹɪb ɪn ðə kɔɹɾɝ. ðəl bi əbɔɹd bɪfɔɹ ɪts laɪɾ ɪnʌf tə stɑɹɾ ʌpɹɪvɝ."

Yarin stuck his head in. "They're all aboard but three I couldn't find, Captain. But I've spread the word through every tavern, hell, and crib in the quarter. They'll be aboard before it's light enough to start upriver."

"spɹeɪ də seɪl naʊ. tə si." doʊmən kʌɾ ɔf jɑɹənz pɹoʊɾɛsts əbaʊt laɪɾ ən taɪdz, ən spɹeɪ nɑt biɪŋ bɪl fəɹ ði oʊpən si. "naʊ! spɹeɪ kən klɪɹ ðə bɑɹz ət dɛd loʊ taɪd. juv noʊ fɝɡɑɾən haʊ tə seɪl baɪ ðə stɑɹz, hæv ju? teɪk əɹ aʊt, jɑɹən. teɪk əɹ aʊt naʊ, ən kʌm bæk tə mi wən wi bi bɪɑn ðə bɹeɪkwɔɾɝ."

"Spray do sail now. To sea." Domon cut off Yarin's protests about light and tides, and Spray not being built for the open sea. "Now! Spray can clear the bars at dead low tide. You've no forgotten how to sail by the stars, have you? Take her out, Yarin. Take her out now, and come back to me when we be beyond the breakwater."

hɪz sɛkən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd - doʊmən nɛvɝ lɛɾ ə tʃɹɪki bɪɾ ə seɪlɪŋ pæs wɪθaʊɾ ɪm ɑn dɛk ɡɪvɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz, ən teɪkɪŋ spɹeɪ aʊɾ ɪn ðə naɪt wəd bi ɔl ə ðæt, ʃæloʊ dʒɹæft əɹ noʊ - ðən nɑɾəd ən vænɪʃt. ɪn moʊməns ðə saʊnz ə jɑɹən ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz ən bɛɹ fit θʌmpɪŋ ɑn ðə dɛks oʊvɝhɛd pɛnətʃɹeɪɾəd doʊmənz kæbən. hi ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛm, ivən wən ðə ʃɪp lɝtʃt, kætʃɪŋ ðə taɪd.

His second hesitated - Domon never let a tricky bit of sailing pass without him on deck giving orders, and taking Spray out in the night would be all of that, shallow draft or no - then nodded and vanished. In moments the sounds of Yarin shouting orders and bare feet thumping on the decks overhead penetrated Domon's cabin. He ignored them, even when the ship lurched, catching the tide.

faɪnəli hi lɪftəd ðə mæntəl ə ðə læntɝn ən stʌk ə naɪf ɪndə ðə fleɪm. smoʊk kɝld ʌp əz ɔɪl bɝn ɔf ðə bleɪd, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ðə mɛɾəl kəd tɝn ɹɛd, hi pʊʃt tʃɑɹts aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ ən pɹɛs ðə pɑɹtʃmən flæɾ ɑn ɪz dɛsk, wɝkɪŋ ðə hɑt stil sloʊli ʌndɝ ðə silɪŋ wæks. ðə tɑp foʊld lɪftəd.

Finally he lifted the mantle of the lantern and stuck a knife into the flame. Smoke curled up as oil burned off the blade, but before the metal could turn red, he pushed charts out of the way and pressed the parchment flat on his desk, working the hot steel slowly under the sealing wax. The top fold lifted.

ɪt wɑz ə sɪmpəl dɑkjəmɛnt, wɪθaʊt pɹiæmbəl əɹ səluteɪʃən, ən ɪt meɪd swɛt bɹeɪk aʊɾ ɑn ɪz fɔɹhɛd.

It was a simple document, without preamble or salutation, and it made sweat break out on his forehead.

ðə bɛɹɝ ə ðɪs ɪz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd wɑntəɾ ɪn kɛɹhin fəɹ mɝɾɝz ən ʌðɝ faʊl kɹaɪmz, list əmʌŋ ðɛm, θɛft fɹəm əɹ pɝsən. wi kɔl əpɑn jə tə siz ðɪs mæn ən ɔl θɪŋz faʊn ɪn ɪz kipɪŋ, tə ðə smɔləst. əɹ ɹɛpɹəzɛntəɾɪv wɪl kʌm tə kæɹi əweɪ wʌt hiz stoʊlən fɹəm ʌs. lɛɾ ɔl i pəzɛsəz, seɪv wʌt wi kleɪm, ɡoʊ tə jə əz ɹɪwɔɹd fəɹ teɪkɪŋ hɪm. lɛt ðə vaɪl mɪskɹiən hɪmsɛlf bi hæŋd ɪmiɾiətli, ðəɾ ɪz ʃædoʊ-spɔn vɪləni noʊ lɔŋɡɝ teɪn ðə laɪt.

The bearer of this is a Darkfriend wanted in Cairhien for murders and other foul crimes, least among them, theft from Our Person. We call upon you to seize this man and all things found in his keeping, to the smallest. Our representative will come to carry away what he has stolen from Us. Let all he possesses, save what We claim, go to you as reward for taking him. Let the vile miscreant himself be hanged immediately, that his Shadow-spawned villainy no longer taint the Light.

sil baɪ əɹ hænd ɡɔlʒɹiən su ɹieɪɾən ɹi kɪŋ ə kɛɹhin dɪfɛndɝ ə ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl ɪn θɪn ɹɛd wæks bɪloʊ ðə sɪɡnətʃɝ wɝ ɪmpɹɛs ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn sil ə kɛɹhin ən ðə faɪv stɑɹz ə haʊs ɹieɪɾən.

Sealed by Our Hand Galldrian su Riatin Rie King of Cairhien Defender of the Dragonwall In thin red wax below the signature were impressed the Rising Sun seal of Cairhien and the Five Stars of House Riatin.

"dɪfɛndɝ ə ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl, maɪ eɪdʒd ɡɹændmʌðɝ," doʊmən kɹoʊkt. "faɪn ɹaɪt ðə mæn də hæv tə kɔl hɪmsɛlf ðəɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ."

"Defender of the Dragonwall, my aged grandmother," Domon croaked. "Fine right the man do have to call himself that any longer."

hi ɪɡzæmən ðə silz ən sɪɡnətʃɝ mɪnətli, hoʊldɪŋ ðə dɑkjəmɛn kloʊs tə ðə læmp, wɪð ɪz noʊz ɔl bʌt bɹʌʃɪŋ ðə pɑɹtʃmənt, bʌɾ i kəd faɪnd noʊ flɔ ɪn ðə wʌn, ən fəɹ ði ʌðɝ, hi hæd noʊ aɪdiə wʌt ɡɔlʒɹiənz hæn lʊk laɪk. ɪf ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə kɪŋ hɪmsɛlf u hæd saɪn ɪt, hi səspɛktəd ðət huɛvɝ hæd hæd meɪɾ ə ɡʊɾ ɪməteɪʃən ʌv ɡɔlʒɹiənz skɹɔl. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ɪt meɪd noʊ ɹil dɪfɝəns. ɪn tɛɹ, ðə lɛɾɝ wəd bi ɪnstənli dæmɪŋ ɪn ðə hænz ʌv ən ɪliɑnɝ. əɹ ɪn min, wɪð tɛɹən ɪnfluəns soʊ stʃɹɔŋ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wɔɹ naʊ, ən mɛn fɹəm iðɝ pɔɹt keɪm ən wɛn fɹili, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz əz lɪɾəl lʌv fəɹ ɪliɑnɝz ɪn tiɹ əz ði ʌðɝ weɪ ɹaʊnd. ɪspɛʃli wɪð ən ɪkskjus laɪk ðɪs.

He examined the seals and signature minutely, holding the document close to the lamp, with his nose all but brushing the parchment, but he could find no flaw in the one, and for the other, he had no idea what Galldrian's hand looked like. If it was not the King himself who had signed it, he suspected that whoever had had made a good imitation of Galldrian's scrawl. In any case, it made no real difference. In Tear, the letter would be instantly damning in the hands of an Illianer. Or in Mayene, with Tairen influence so strong. There was no war now, and men from either port came and went freely, but there was as little love for Illianers in Tear as the other way round. Especially with an excuse like this.

fəɹ ə moʊmən i θɔɾ ə pʊɾɪŋ ðə pɑɹtʃmən ɪndə ðə læntɝnz fleɪm - ɪt wɑz ə deɪnʒɝəs θɪŋ tə hæv, ɪn tiɹ əɹ ɪljən əɹ ɛniwɛɹ i kəɾ ɪmædʒən - bʌt faɪnəli hi tʌkt ɪt kɛɹfəli ɪndə ə sikɹət kʌbihoʊl bɪhaɪn ɪz dɛsk, kənsil baɪ ə pænəl oʊnli hi nu haʊ tə oʊpən.

For a moment he thought of putting the parchment into the lantern's flame - it was a dangerous thing to have, in Tear or Illian or anywhere he could imagine - but finally he tucked it carefully into a secret cubbyhole behind his desk, concealed by a panel only he knew how to open.

"maɪ pəzɛʃənz, ɛ?"

"My possessions, eh?"

hi kəlɛktəɾ oʊl θɪŋz, əz mʌtʃ əz i kəd lɪvɪŋ ɑn ʃɪpbɔɹd. wʌɾ i kəd nɑt baɪ, kəz ɪt wɑz tu ɪkspɛnsɪv əɹ tu lɑɹdʒ, hi kəlɛktəd baɪ siɪŋ ən ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ. ɔl ðoʊz ɹɛmnəns ə taɪmz ɡɔn, ðoʊz wʌndɝz skæɾɝd ɝaʊn ðə wɝl ðət hæd fɝs pʊld ɪm əbɔɹɾ ə ʃɪp əz bɔɪ. hi hæɾ æɾəd fɔɹ tə hɪz kəlɛkʃən ɪn mɛɹədɑn ðɪs læs tʃɹɪp, ən ɪt hæd bɪn ðən ðət ðə dɑɹkfɹɛn pɝsut bɪɡæn. ən tʃɹɑləks, tu, fəɹ ə taɪm. hi hæd hɝd ðət waɪtbɹɪdʒ hæd bɪn bɝn tə ðə ɡɹaʊn ɹaɪɾ æftɝ i seɪl fɹəm ðɛɹ, ən ðəɹ hæd bɪn ɹumɝz ə mɹdʒɹɑl əz wɛl əz tʃɹɑləks. ɪt wɑz ðæt, ɔl ʌv ɪt təɡɛðɝ, ðət hæd fɝs kənvɪnst ɪm i wɑz nɑɾ ɪmædʒənɪŋ θɪŋz, ðət hæd hæɾ ɪm ɑn ɡɑɹd wən ðət fɝst ɑd kəmɪʃən wɑz ɔfɝd, tu mʌtʃ mʌni fəɹ ə sɪmpəl vɔɪədʒ tə tɛɹ, ən ə θɪn teɪl fəɹ ə ɹizən.

He collected old things, as much as he could living on shipboard. What he could not buy, because it was too expensive or too large, he collected by seeing and remembering. All those remnants of times gone, those wonders scattered around the world that had first pulled him aboard a ship as boy. He had added four to his collection in Maradon this last trip, and it had been then that the Darkfriend pursuit began. And Trollocs, too, for a time. He had heard that Whitebridge had been burned to the ground right after he sailed from there, and there had been rumors of Myrddraal as well as Trollocs. It was that, all of it together, that had first convinced him he was not imagining things, that had had him on guard when that first odd commission was offered, too much money for a simple voyage to Tear, and a thin tale for a reason.

dɪɡɪŋ ɪndə hɪz tʃɛst, hi sɛɾ aʊɾ ɑn ðə dɛsk wʌɾ i hæd bɑɾ ɪn mɛɹədɑn. ə laɪtstɪk, lɛft fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, əɹ soʊ ɪt wɑz sɛd. sɝɾənli noʊ wʌn nu ðə meɪkɪŋ ə ðɛm ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. ɪkspɛnsɪv, ðæt, ən ɹɛɹɝ ðən ən ɑnəs mædʒəstʃɹeɪt. ɪt lʊk laɪk ə pleɪn ɡlæs ɹɑd, θɪkɝ ðən ɪz θʌm ən nɑt kwaɪɾ əz lɔŋ əz ɪz fɔɹɑɹm, bʌt wən hɛld ɪn ðə hæn ɪt ɡloʊɾ əz bɹaɪtli əz ə læntɝn. laɪtstɪks ʃæɾɝd laɪk ɡlæs, tu; hi hæd nɪɹli lɔst spɹeɪ ɪn ðə faɪɝ kɑz baɪ ðə fɝst i hæɾ oʊnd. ə smɔl, eɪdʒ-dɑɹk aɪvɝi kɑɹvɪŋ ʌv ə mæn hoʊldɪŋ ə sɔɹd. ðə fɛloʊ hu soʊld ɪt kleɪmd ɪf jə hɛld ɪt lɔŋ ɪnʌf jə stɑɹɾəd tə fil wɔɹm. doʊmən nɛvɝ hæd, ən niðɝ hæɾ ɛni ʌv ðə kɹu hi lɛt hoʊld ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz oʊld, ən ðət wɑz ɪnʌf fəɹ doʊmən. ðə skʌl ʌv ə kæɾ əz bɪɡ əz ə laɪən, ən soʊ oʊld ɪt wɑz tɝn tə stoʊn. bʌt noʊ laɪən hæɾ ɛvɝ hæd fæŋz, ɔlmoʊs tʌsks, ə fʊt lɔŋ. ən ə θɪk dɪsk ðə saɪz ʌv ə mænz hænd, hæf waɪɾ ən hæf blæk, ə sɪnwəs laɪn sɛpɝeɪɾɪŋ ðə kʌlɝz. ðə ʃɑpkipɝ ɪn mɛɹədɑn hæd sɛɾ ɪt wɑz fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, θɪŋkɪŋ i laɪd, bʌt doʊmən hæd hæɡəld oʊnli ə lɪɾəl bɪfɔɹ peɪɪŋ, kəz i ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd wʌt ðə ʃɑpkipɝ dɪd nɑt: ði eɪntʃən sɪmbəl ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ fɹəm bɪfɔɹ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. nɑɾ ə seɪf θɪŋ tə hæv, pɹɪsaɪsli, bʌt niðɝ ə θɪŋ tə bi pæst ʌp baɪ ə mæn wɪð ə fæsəneɪʃən fəɹ ði oʊld.

Digging into his chest, he set out on the desk what he had bought in Maradon. A lightstick, left from the Age of Legends, or so it was said. Certainly no one knew the making of them any longer. Expensive, that, and rarer than an honest magistrate. It looked like a plain glass rod, thicker than his thumb and not quite as long as his forearm, but when held in the hand it glowed as brightly as a lantern. Lightsticks shattered like glass, too; he had nearly lost Spray in the fire caused by the first he had owned. A small, age-dark ivory carving of a man holding a sword. The fellow who sold it claimed if you held it long enough you started to feel warm. Domon never had, and neither had any of the crew he let hold it, but it was old, and that was enough for Domon. The skull of a cat as big as a lion, and so old it was turned to stone. But no lion had ever had fangs, almost tusks, a foot long. And a thick disk the size of a man's hand, half white and half black, a sinuous line separating the colors. The shopkeeper in Maradon had said it was from the Age of Legends, thinking he lied, but Domon had haggled only a little before paying, because he recognized what the shopkeeper did not: the ancient symbol of Aes Sedai from before the Breaking of the World. Not a safe thing to have, precisely, but neither a thing to be passed up by a man with a fascination for the old.

ən ɪt wɑz hɑɹtstoʊn. ðə ʃɑpkipɝ hæd nɛvɝ dɛɹɾ æd ðət tə wʌɾ i θɔt wɝ laɪz. noʊ ɹɪvɝfɹʌnt ʃɑpkipɝ ɪn mɛɹədɑn kəɾ əfɔɹɾ ivən wʌn pis ə kwəndɪlɝ.

And it was heartstone. The shopkeeper had never dared add that to what he thought were lies. No riverfront shopkeeper in Maradon could afford even one piece of cuendillar.

ðə dɪsk fɛl hɑɹɾ ən smuð ɪn ɪz hænd, ən nɑɾ əɾ ɔl væljəbəl ɪksɛp fəɹ ɪts eɪdʒ, bʌɾ i wɑz əfɹeɪɾ ɪt wɑz wʌɾ ɪz pɝsuɝz wɝ æftɝ. laɪtstɪks, ən aɪvɝi kɑɹvɪŋz, ən ivən boʊnz tɝn tə stoʊn, hi hæd sin ʌðɝ taɪmz, ʌðɝ pleɪsəz. jɛɾ ivən noʊɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ wɑntəd - ɪf i dɪd noʊ - hi stɪl hæd noʊ aɪdiə waɪ, ən i kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bi ʃʊɹ u hɪz pɝsuɝz wɝ. tɑɹ vəlɑn mɑɹks, ən ən eɪntʃən ɛɛs sədaɪ sɪmbəl. hi skɹʌbd ə hæn əkɹɔs ɪz lɪps; ðə teɪst ə fɪɹ leɪ bɪɾɝ ɑn ɪz tʌŋ.

The disk felt hard and smooth in his hand, and not at all valuable except for its age, but he was afraid it was what his pursuers were after. Lightsticks, and ivory carvings, and even bones turned to stone, he had seen other times, other places. Yet even knowing what they wanted - if he did know - he still had no idea why, and he could no longer be sure who his pursuers were. Tar Valon marks, and an ancient Aes Sedai symbol. He scrubbed a hand across his lips; the taste of fear lay bitter on his tongue.

ə nɑk ət ðə dɔɹ. hi sɛt ðə dɪsk daʊn ən pʊld ən ənɹoʊl tʃɑɹɾ oʊvɝ wʌt leɪ ɑn ɪz dɛsk. "kʌm."

A knock at the door. He set the disk down and pulled an unrolled chart over what lay on his desk. "Come."

jɑɹən ɛntɝd. "wɝ bɪɑn ðə bɹeɪkwɔɾɝ, kæptən."

Yarin entered. "We're beyond the breakwater, Captain."

doʊmən fɛlt ə flæʃ ə sɝpɹaɪz, ðən æŋɡɝ wɪð hɪmsɛlf. hi ʃəd nɛvɝ əv ɡɑɾən soʊ ɪnɡɹoʊs ðəɾ i feɪl tə fil spɹeɪ lɪftɪŋ ɑn ðə swɛlz. "meɪk wɛst, jɑɹən. si tə ɪt."

Domon felt a flash of surprise, then anger with himself. He should never have gotten so engrossed that he failed to feel Spray lifting on the swells. "Make west, Yarin. See to it."

"ɛbu dɑɹ, kæptən?"

"Ebou Dar, Captain?"

noʊ fɑɹ ɪnʌf. noʊ baɪ faɪv hʌnʒɹəd liɡz. "wil pʊɾ ɪn lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ mi tə ɡɛt tʃɑɹts ən tɑp ðə wɔɾɝ bæɹəlz, ðən wi də seɪl wɛst."

No far enough. No by five hundred leagues. "We'll put in long enough for me to get charts and top the water barrels, then we do sail west."

"wɛst, kæptən? tʃɹɛmælkɪŋ? ðə si foʊk ɑɹ taɪt wɪð ɛni tʃɹeɪɾɝz bʌt ðɛɹ oʊn."

"West, Captain? Tremalking? The Sea Folk are tight with any traders but their own."

"ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən, jɑɹən. plɛnti ʌv tʃɹeɪd bɪtwin tæɹɑbən ən ɑɹæd dumən, ən hɑɹdli ə tæɹɑbənɝ əɹ dəmɑni bɑɾəm tə wɝi əbaʊt. ðeɪ də noʊ laɪk ðə si, aɪ hæv hɝd. ən ɔl ðoʊz smɔl taʊnz ɑn toʊmən hɛd, ɛvɹi wʌn hoʊldɪŋ ɪtsɛlf fɹi ʌv ɛni neɪʃən əɾ ɔl. wi kən ivən pɪk ʌp sɑldəiən fɝz ən aɪs pɛpɝz bɹɔt daʊn tə bændɑɹ ɛbən."

"The Aryth Ocean, Yarin. Plenty of trade between Tarabon and Arad Doman, and hardly a Taraboner or Domani bottom to worry about. They do no like the sea, I have heard. And all those small towns on Toman Head, every one holding itself free of any nation at all. We can even pick up Saldaean furs and ice peppers brought down to Bandar Eban."

jɑɹən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd sloʊli. hi ɔlweɪz lʊkt ət ðə dɑɹk saɪd, bʌɾ i wɑz ə ɡʊd seɪlɝ. "fɝz ən pɛpɝzəl kɑs mɔɹ ðəɹ ðən ɹʌnɪŋ ʌpɹɪvɝ fəɹ ðɛm, kæptən. ən aɪ hɪɹ ðɛɹz səm kaɪndə wɔɹ. ɪf tæɹɑbən ən ɑɹæd dumən ɑɹ faɪɾɪŋ, ðəɹ meɪ bi noʊ tʃɹeɪd. aɪ daʊt wɪl meɪk mʌtʃ ɔf ðə taʊnz ɑn toʊmən hɛɾ əloʊn, ivən ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ seɪf. fɑlmz ðə lɑɹdʒəst, ən ɪts nɑt bɪɡ."

Yarin shook his head slowly. He always looked at the dark side, but he was a good sailor. "Furs and peppers'll cost more there than running upriver for them, Captain. And I hear there's some kind of war. If Tarabon and Arad Doman are fighting, there may be no trade. I doubt we'll make much off the towns on Toman Head alone, even if they are safe. Falme's the largest, and it is not big."

"ðə tæɹɑbənɝz ən ðə dəmɑni hæv ɔlweɪz skwɑbəld oʊvɝ ɑlməθ pleɪn ən toʊmən hɛd. ivən ɪf ɪts kʌm tə bloʊz ðɪs taɪm, ə kɛɹfəl mæn kən ɔlweɪz faɪn tʃɹeɪd. wɛst, jɑɹən."

"The Taraboners and the Domani have always squabbled over Almoth Plain and Toman Head. Even if it has come to blows this time, a careful man can always find trade. West, Yarin."

wən jɑɹən hæd ɡɔn tɑpsaɪd, doʊmən kwɪkli æɾəd ðə blæk-ænd-waɪt dɪsk tə ðə kʌbihoʊl, ən stoʊd ðə ɹɛs bæk ɪn ðə bɑɾəm ə hɪz tʃɛst. dɑɹkfɹɛnz əɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, əl noʊ ɹʌn ðə weɪ ðeɪ wɑn mi. fɔɹtʃən pɹɪk mi, əl noʊ.

When Yarin had gone topside, Domon quickly added the black-and-white disk to the cubbyhole, and stowed the rest back in the bottom of his chest. Darkfriends or Aes Sedai, I'll no run the way they want me. Fortune prick me, I'll no.

filɪŋ seɪf fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ɪn mʌnθs, doʊmən wɛn ɑn dɛk əz spɹeɪ hil tə kætʃ ðə wɪn ən pʊɾ əɹ baʊ wɛst ɪndə ðə naɪt-dɑɹk si.

Feeling safe for the first time in months, Domon went on deck as Spray heeled to catch the wind and put her bow west into the night-dark sea.


tʃæptɝ tɛn


CHAPTER 10

ðə hʌn bɪɡɪnz


The Hunt Begins

ɪŋtʃɹ sɛɾ ə fæs peɪs fəɹ ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ʌv ə lɔŋ dʒɝni, fæst ɪnʌf ðət ɹænd wɝiɾ ə lɪɾəl əbaʊt ðə hɔɹsəz. ði ænəməlz kəd kip ʌp ðə tʃɹɑt fəɹ aʊɝz, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz stɪl moʊst ə ðə deɪ əhɛd, ən laɪkli deɪz mɔɹ bɪɑn ðæt. ðə weɪ ɪŋtʃɹz feɪs wɑz sɛt, ðoʊ, ɹænd θɔɾ i maɪɾ ɪntɛn tə kætʃ ðoʊz u hæd stoʊlən ðə hɔɹn ɪn ðə fɝs deɪ, ɪn ðə fɝst aʊɝ. ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ɪz vɔɪs wən i swɔɹ ɪz oʊθ tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ɹænd wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn sɝpɹaɪzd. hi kɛpt ɪz maʊθ ʃʌt, ðoʊ. ɪt wɑz lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹz kəmænd; əz fɹɛnli əz i hæd bɪn tə ɹænd, hi stɪl wəd nɑɾ əpɹiʃieɪɾ ə ʃɛpɝd ɡɪvɪŋ ædvaɪs.

Ingtar set a fast pace for the beginning of a long journey, fast enough that Rand worried a little about the horses. The animals could keep up the trot for hours, but there was still most of the day ahead, and likely days more beyond that. The way Ingtar's face was set, though, Rand thought he might intend to catch those who had stolen the Horn in the first day, in the first hour. Remembering his voice when he swore his oath to the Amyrlin Seat, Rand would not have been surprised. He kept his mouth shut, though. It was Lord Ingtar's command; as friendly as he had been to Rand, he still would not appreciate a shepherd giving advice.

hʊɹɪn ɹoʊɾ ə peɪs bɪhaɪn ɪŋtʃɹ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə snɪfɝ u lɛɾ əm saʊθ, pɔɪntɪŋ ðə weɪ fəɹ ɪŋtʃɹ. ðə lænd wɑz ɹoʊlɪŋ, fɔɹəstəd hɪlz, θɪk wɪð fɝ ən lɛðɝlif ən oʊk, bʌt ðə pæθ hʊɹɪn sɛt lɛɾ ɔlmoʊst stʃɹeɪɾ əz ən æɹoʊ, nɛvɝ weɪvɝɪŋ ɪksɛp tə ɡoʊ ɝaʊn ə fju ʌv ðə tɔlɝ hɪlz, wɛɹ ðə weɪ wɑz klɪɹli kwɪkɝ ɝaʊn ðən oʊvɝ. ðə ɡɹeɪ aʊl bænɝ ɹɪpəld ɪn ðə wɪnd.

Hurin rode a pace behind Ingtar, but it was the sniffer who led them south, pointing the way for Ingtar. The land was rolling, forested hills, thick with fir and leatherleaf and oak, but the path Hurin set led almost straight as an arrow, never wavering except to go around a few of the taller hills, where the way was clearly quicker around than over. The Gray Owl banner rippled in the wind.

ɹænd tʃɹaɪd tə ɹaɪd wɪð mæt ən pɛɹɪn, bʌt wən ɹænd lɛɾ ɪz hɔɹs dʒɹɑp bæk tə ðɛm, mæt nʌdʒ pɛɹɪn, ən pɛɹɪn ɹɪlʌktənli ɡæləp tə ðə hɛɾ ə ðə kɑləm wɪð mæt. tɛlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ət ðə bæk baɪ hɪmsɛlf, ɹænd ɹoʊd bæk tə ðə fɹʌnt. ðeɪ fɛl tə ðə ɹɪɹ əɡɛn, mæt əɡɛn ɝdʒɪŋ pɛɹɪn.

Rand tried to ride with Mat and Perrin, but when Rand let his horse drop back to them, Mat nudged Perrin, and Perrin reluctantly galloped to the head of the column with Mat. Telling himself there was no point riding at the back by himself, Rand rode back to the front. They fell to the rear again, Mat again urging Perrin.

bɝn ðɛm. aɪ oʊnli wɑnə əpɑlədʒaɪz. hi fɛlt əloʊn. ɪt dɪd nɑt hɛlp ðəɾ i nu ɪt wɑz ɪz oʊn fɔlt.

Burn them. I only want to apologize. He felt alone. It did not help that he knew it was his own fault.

ətɑp wʌn hɪl, ənoʊ dɪsmaʊntɪd tə ɪɡzæmɪn ɡɹaʊn tʃɝn baɪ hʊvz. hi poʊkt ət səm hɔɹs dʒɹɑpɪŋz ən ɡɹʌntɪd. "blʌɾi wɛl muvɪŋ fæst, maɪ lɔɹd." hi hæɾ ə vɔɪs ðət saʊndəɾ əz ɪf i wɝ ʃaʊɾɪŋ wən i wɑz dʒʌst spikɪŋ. "wiv nɑt meɪɾ ʌp ən aʊɝ ɑn ðɛm. bɝn mi, wi meɪ hæv lɔst ə fleɪmɪŋ aʊɝ. ðəl kɪl ðɛɹ blʌɾi hɔɹsəz, ðə weɪ ðəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ." hi fɪŋɡɝɾ ə hʊf tʃɹæk. "noʊ hɔɹs, ðæt. blʌɾi tʃɹɑlɑk. səm fleɪmɪŋ ɡoʊt fiɾ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ."

Atop one hill, Uno dismounted to examine ground churned by hooves. He poked at some horse droppings and grunted. "Bloody well moving fast, my Lord." He had a voice that sounded as if he were shouting when he was just speaking. "We've not made up an hour on them. Burn me, we may have lost a flaming hour. They'll kill their bloody horses, the way they're going." He fingered a hoofed track. "No horse, that. Bloody Trolloc. Some flaming goat feet over there."

"wi wɪl kætʃ ðɛm," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd ɡɹɪmli.

"We will catch them," Ingtar said grimly.

"aʊɝ hɔɹsəz, maɪ lɔɹd. dʌz noʊ ɡʊd tə ɹaɪɾ əm ɪndə ðə blʌɾi ɡɹaʊn bɪfɔɹ wi də kætʃ ʌp, maɪ lɔɹd. ivən ɪf ðeɪ də kɪl ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, blʌɾi tʃɹɑləks kən kip ɡoʊɪŋ lɔŋɡɝ ðən hɔɹsəz."

"Our horses, my Lord. Does no good to ride them into the bloody ground before we do catch up, my Lord. Even if they do kill their horses, bloody Trollocs can keep going longer than horses."

"wi wɪl kætʃ ðɛm. maʊnt, ənoʊ."

"We will catch them. Mount, Uno."

ənoʊ lʊkt ət ɹænd wɪð ɪz wʌn aɪ, ðən ʃɹʌɡd ən klaɪmd ɪndə hɪz sæɾəl. ɪŋtʃɹ tʊk əm daʊn ðə fɑɹ sloʊp əɾ ə ɹʌn, hæf slaɪɾɪŋ ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə bɑɾəm, ən ɡæləpt ʌp ðə nɛkst.

Uno looked at Rand with his one eye, then shrugged and climbed into his saddle. Ingtar took them down the far slope at a run, half sliding all the way to the bottom, and galloped up the next.

waɪ dɪɾ i lʊk ət mi ðət weɪ, ɹænd wʌndɝd. ənoʊ wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz u hæd nɛvɝ ʃoʊn mʌtʃ fɹɛnlinɪs təwɔɹd hɪm. ɪt wɑz nɑt laɪk mæsiməz oʊpən dɪslaɪk; ənoʊ wɑz nɑt fɹɛnli wɪð ɛniwʌn ɪksɛpt ə fju vɛɾɝənz əz ɡɹɪzəld əz hɪmsɛlf. ʃʊɹli hi dʌzn bɪliv ðət teɪl əbaʊt mi biɪŋ ə lɔɹd.

Why did he look at me that way, Rand wondered. Uno was one of those who had never shown much friendliness toward him. It was not like Masema's open dislike; Uno was not friendly with anyone except a few veterans as grizzled as himself. Surely he doesn't believe that tale about me being a lord.

ənoʊ spɛn ɪz taɪm stʌɾiɪŋ ðə kʌntʃɹi əhɛd, bʌt wən i kɑt ɹænd lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, hi ɡeɪv bæk stɛɹ fəɹ stɛɹ, ən nɛvɝ sɛɾ ə wɝd. ɪt dɪd nɑt min mʌtʃ. hi wəd stɛɹ ɪŋtʃɹ ɪn ði aɪ, tu. ðət wɑz ənoʊz weɪ.

Uno spent his time studying the country ahead, but when he caught Rand looking at him, he gave back stare for stare, and never said a word. It did not mean much. He would stare Ingtar in the eye, too. That was Uno's way.

ðə pæθ tʃoʊzən baɪ ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz - ən wʌɾ ɛls, ɹænd wʌndɝd; hʊɹɪn kɛp mʌɾɝɪŋ əbaʊt "sʌmθɪŋ wɝs" - hu hæd stoʊlən ðə hɔɹn nɛvɝ keɪm kloʊs tə ɛni vɪlədʒ. ɹænd sɔ vɪlədʒəz, fɹəm wʌn hɪltɑp tə ənʌðɝ, wɪð ə maɪl əɹ mɔɹ ʌv ʌp-ænd-daʊn kʌntʃɹi bɪtwin, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nɛvɝ wʌn kloʊs ɪnʌf tə meɪk aʊt ðə pipəl ɪn ðə stʃɹits. əɹ kloʊs ɪnʌf fəɹ ðoʊz pipəl tə meɪk aʊɾ ə pɑɹɾi hɛɾɪŋ saʊθ. ðəɹ wɝ fɑɹmz, tu, wɪð loʊ-iv haʊsəz ən tɔl bɑɹnz ən smoʊkɪŋ tʃɪmniz, ɑn hɪltɑps ən ɑn hɪlsaɪdz ən ɪn ðə bɑɾəmz, bʌt nɛvɝ wʌn kloʊs ɪnʌf fəɹ ðə fɑɹmɝ tə hæv sin ðɛɹ kwɔɹi.

The path chosen by the Darkfriends - And what else, Rand wondered; Hurin kept muttering about "something worse" - who had stolen the Horn never came close to any village. Rand saw villages, from one hilltop to another, with a mile or more of up-and-down country between, but there was never one close enough to make out the people in the streets. Or close enough for those people to make out a party heading south. There were farms, too, with low-eaved houses and tall barns and smoking chimneys, on hilltops and on hillsides and in the bottoms, but never one close enough for the farmer to have seen their quarry.

ɪvɛntʃəwəli ivən ɪŋtʃɹ hæd tə ɹilaɪz ðət ðə hɔɹsəz kəd nɑt kip ɑn əz ðeɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ. ɹænd hɝd mʌɾɝd kɝsɪz, ən ɪŋtʃɹ paʊndɪɾ ɪz θaɪ wɪð ə ɡɔntələɾəd fɪst, bʌt faɪnəli hi ɔɹɾɝd ɛvɹiwʌn tə dɪsmaʊnt. ðeɪ tʃɹɑɾəd, liɾɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, ʌphɪl ən daʊn, fəɹ ə maɪl, ðən maʊntəɾ ən ɹoʊɾ əɡɛn. ðən ɪt wɑz daʊn əɡɛn ən tʃɹɑt. tʃɹɑɾ ə maɪl, ðən ɹaɪɾ ə maɪl. tʃɹɑt, ðən ɹaɪd.

Eventually even Ingtar had to realize that the horses could not keep on as they were going. Rand heard muttered curses, and Ingtar pounded his thigh with a gauntleted fist, but finally he ordered everyone to dismount. They trotted, leading their horses, uphill and down, for a mile, then mounted and rode again. Then it was down again and trot. Trot a mile, then ride a mile. Trot, then ride.

ɹænd wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə si lɔɪəl ɡɹɪnɪŋ wən ðeɪ wɝ daʊn ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, tɔɪlɪŋ ʌp ə hɪl. ði oʊɡiɝ hæd bɪn ənizi əbaʊt ɹaɪɾɪŋ ən hɔɹsəz wən ðeɪ fɝs mɛt, pɹɪfɝɪŋ tə tʃɹʌs tə hɪz oʊn fit, bʌt ɹænd θɔɾ i hæd lɔŋ ɡɑɾən oʊvɝ ðæt.

Rand was surprised to see Loial grinning when they were down on the ground, toiling up a hill. The Ogier had been uneasy about riding and horses when they first met, preferring to trust to his own feet, but Rand thought he had long gotten over that.

"du jə laɪk tə ɹʌn, ɹænd?" lɔɪəl læft. "aɪ du. aɪ wɑz ðə fæstəst ɪn stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ. aɪ aʊtʃɹæn ə hɔɹs, wʌns."

"Do you like to run, Rand?" Loial laughed. "I do. I was the fastest in Stedding Shangtai. I outran a horse, once."

ɹænd oʊnli ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə weɪs bɹɛθ ɑn tɔk. hi lʊk fəɹ mæt ən pɛɹɪn, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ stɪl ət ðə bæk, tu mɛni mɛn bɪtwin fəɹ ɹænd tə meɪk əm aʊt. hi wʌndɝd haʊ ðə ʃaɪnɝənz kəd mænədʒ ðɪs ɪn ðɛɹ ɑɹmɝ. nɑɾ ə wʌn ə ðɛm sloʊɾ əɹ vɔɪst ə kəmpleɪnt. ənoʊ dɪd nɑɾ ivən lʊk əz ɪf i wɝ bɹeɪkɪŋ ə swɛt, ən ðə bænɝmən nɛvɝ lɛt ðə ɡɹeɪ aʊl weɪvɝ.

Rand only shook his head. He did not want to waste breath on talk. He looked for Mat and Perrin, but they were still at the back, too many men between for Rand to make them out. He wondered how the Shienarans could manage this in their armor. Not a one of them slowed or voiced a complaint. Uno did not even look as if he were breaking a sweat, and the bannerman never let the Gray Owl waver.

ɪt wɑz ə kwɪk peɪs, bʌt twaɪlaɪt bɪɡæn tə kloʊz wɪθaʊɾ ɛni saɪɾ ə ðoʊz ðeɪ hʌntəɾ ɪksɛp ðɛɹ tʃɹæks. ət læst, ɹɪlʌktənli, ɪŋtʃɹ kɔld ə hɔl tə meɪk kæmp fəɹ ðə naɪɾ ɪn ðə fɔɹəst. ðə ʃaɪnɝənz wɛn əbaʊt ɡɛɾɪŋ faɪɝz stɑɹɾəd ən sɛɾɪŋ pɪkət-laɪnz fəɹ ðə hɔɹsəz wɪð ə smuð ɪkɑnəmi ʌv ɛfɝt bɔɹn ə lɔŋ ɪkspɪɹiəns. ɪŋtʃɹ poʊstɪd sɪks ɡɑɹdz, ɪn pɛɹz, fəɹ ðə fɝst wɑtʃ.

It was a quick pace, but twilight began to close without any sight of those they hunted except their tracks. At last, reluctantly, Ingtar called a halt to make camp for the night in the forest. The Shienarans went about getting fires started and setting picket-lines for the horses with a smooth economy of effort born of long experience. Ingtar posted six guards, in pairs, for the first watch.

ɹændz fɝst ɔɹɾɝ ə bɪznəs wɑz faɪndɪŋ ɪz bʌndəl ɪn ðə wɪkɝ pænɪɝz fɹəm ðə pækhɔɹsɪz. ɪt wɑz nɑt hɑɹd - ðəɹ wɝ fju pɝsənəl bʌndəlz əmʌŋ ðə səplaɪz - bʌt wən i hæɾ ɪɾ oʊpən, hi lɛɾ aʊɾ ə ʃaʊt ðət bɹɔɾ ɛvɹi mæn ɪn ðə kæmp ɪɹɛkt wɪð sɔɹɾ ɪn hænd.

Rand's first order of business was finding his bundle in the wicker panniers from the packhorses. It was not hard - there were few personal bundles among the supplies - but when he had it open, he let out a shout that brought every man in the camp erect with sword in hand.

ɪŋtʃɹ keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt? pis, dɪd sʌmwʌn ɡɛt θɹu? aɪ dɪd nɑt hɪɹ ðə ɡɑɹdz."

Ingtar came running. "What is it? Peace, did someone get through? I did not hear the guards."

"ɪts ðiz koʊts," ɹænd ɡɹaʊld, stɪl stɛɹɪŋ ət wʌɾ i hæɾ ənpækt. wʌn koʊt wɑz blæk, ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð sɪlvɝ θɹɛd, ði ʌðɝ waɪt wɝkt ɪn ɡoʊld. boʊθ hæd hɛɹənz ɑn ðə kɑlɝz, ən boʊθ wɝ ət list əz ɔɹneɪɾ əz ðə skɑɹlət koʊɾ i wɑz wɛɹɪŋ. "ðə sɝvəns toʊl mi aɪ hæd tu ɡʊd, sɝvəsəbəl koʊts ɪn hɪɹ. lʊk ət ðɛm!"

"It's these coats," Rand growled, still staring at what he had unpacked. One coat was black, embroidered with silver thread, the other white worked in gold. Both had herons on the collars, and both were at least as ornate as the scarlet coat he was wearing. "The servants told me I had two good, serviceable coats in here. Look at them!"

ɪŋtʃɹ ʃiðd ɪz sɔɹɾ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ði ʌðɝ mɛn bɪɡæn tə sɛɾəl bæk daʊn. "wɛl, ðeɪ ɑɹ sɝvəsəbəl."

Ingtar sheathed his sword over his shoulder. The other men began to settle back down. "Well, they are serviceable."

"aɪ kænt wɛɹ ðiz. aɪ kænt ɡoʊ ɝaʊn dʒɹɛs laɪk ðɪs ɔl ðə taɪm."

"I can't wear these. I can't go around dressed like this all the time."

"ju kən wɛɹ ðɛm. ə koʊts ə koʊt. aɪ ʌndɝstæn mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ hɝsɛlf sɔ tə jəɹ pækɪŋ. meɪbi ɛɛs sədaɪ də nɑɾ ɪɡzækli ʌndɝstænd wʌɾ ə mæn wɛɹz ɪn ðə fild." ɪŋtʃɹ ɡɹɪnd. "æftɝ wi kætʃ ðiz tʃɹɑləks, pɝhæps wɪl əv ə fist. jəl bi dʒɹɛs fəɹ ɪt, ət list, ivən ɪf ðə ɹɛst ʌv əs ɑɹ nɑt." hi stʃɹoʊl bæk tə wɛɹ ðə kʊk faɪɝz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi bɝnɪŋ.

"You can wear them. A coat's a coat. I understand Moiraine Sedai herself saw to your packing. Maybe Aes Sedai do not exactly understand what a man wears in the field." Ingtar grinned. "After we catch these Trollocs, perhaps we'll have a feast. You will be dressed for it, at least, even if the rest of us are not." He strolled back to where the cook fires were already burning.

ɹænd hæd nɑt muv sɪns ɪŋtʃɹ mɛnʃən mɔɪɹeɪn. hi stɛɹɾ ət ðə koʊts. wʌɾ ɪz ʃi duɪŋ? wʌtɛvɝ ɪɾ ɪz, əl nɑt bi juzd. hi bʌndəld ɛvɹiθɪŋ təɡɛðɝ əɡɛn ən stʌf ðə bʌndəl bæk ɪndə ðə pæniɝ. aɪ kən ɔlweɪz ɡoʊ neɪkəd, hi θɔt bɪɾɝli.

Rand had not moved since Ingtar mentioned Moiraine. He stared at the coats. What is she doing? Whatever it is, I will not be used. He bundled everything together again and stuffed the bundle back into the pannier. I can always go naked, he thought bitterly.

ʃaɪnɝənz tʊk tɝnz ət ðə kʊkɪŋ wən ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ðə fild, ən mæsimə wɑz stɝɪŋ ðə kɛɾəl wən ɹænd ɹɪtɝn tə ðə faɪɝz. ðə smɛl ʌv ə stu meɪd fɹəm tɝnəps, ʌnjənz, ən dʒɹaɪd mit sɛɾəld oʊvɝ ðə kæmp. ɪŋtʃɹ wɑz sɝv fɝst, ən ðən ənoʊ, bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls stʊɾ ɪn laɪn haʊɛvɝ ðeɪ hæpən tə kʌm. mæsimə slɑpt ə bɪɡ leɪɾəl ə stu ɑn ɹændz pleɪt; ɹænd stɛp bæk kwɪkli tə kip fɹəm ɡɛɾɪŋ ði oʊvɝfloʊ ɑn ɪz koʊt, ən meɪd ɹum fəɹ ðə nɛks mæn waɪl sʌkɪŋ ə bɝn θʌm. mæsimə stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, wɪð ə fɪkst ɡɹɪn ðət nɛvɝ ɹitʃt ɪz aɪz. əntɪl ənoʊ stɛpt ʌp ən kʌf hɪm.

Shienarans took turns at the cooking when they were in the field, and Masema was stirring the kettle when Rand returned to the fires. The smell of a stew made from turnips, onions, and dried meat settled over the camp. Ingtar was served first, and then Uno, but everyone else stood in line however they happened to come. Masema slopped a big ladle of stew on Rand's plate; Rand stepped back quickly to keep from getting the overflow on his coat, and made room for the next man while sucking a burned thumb. Masema stared at him, with a fixed grin that never reached his eyes. Until Uno stepped up and cuffed him.

"wi dɪdn blʌɾi bɹɪŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ jə tə bi spɪlɪŋ ɪɾ ɑn ðə fleɪmɪŋ ɡɹaʊnd." ðə wʌn-aɪd mæn lʊkt ət ɹænd ən lɛft. mæsimə ɹʌbd ɪz ɪɹ, bʌɾ ɪz ɡlɛɹ fɑloʊd ɹænd.

"We didn't bloody bring enough for you to be spilling it on the flaming ground." The one-eyed man looked at Rand and left. Masema rubbed his ear, but his glare followed Rand.

ɹænd wɛn tə dʒɔɪn ɪŋtʃɹ ən lɔɪəl, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ʌndɝ ə spɹɛɾɪŋ oʊk. ɪŋtʃɹ hæɾ ɪz hɛlməɾ ɔf, ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪsaɪd hɪm, bʌɾ ʌðɝwaɪz i wɑz fʊli ɑɹmɝd. mæt ən pɛɹɪn wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ðɛɹ, iɾɪŋ hʌŋɡɹəli. mæt ɡeɪv ə bɹɔd snɪɹ ət ɹændz koʊt, bʌt pɛɹɪn bɛɹli lʊkt ʌp, ɡoʊldən aɪz ʃaɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə hæf-laɪt fɹəm ðə faɪɝz, bɪfɔɹ bɛndɪŋ bæk tə hɪz pleɪt.

Rand went to join Ingtar and Loial, sitting on the ground under a spreading oak. Ingtar had his helmet off, on the ground beside him, but otherwise he was fully armored. Mat and Perrin were already there, eating hungrily. Mat gave a broad sneer at Rand's coat, but Perrin barely looked up, golden eyes shining in the half-light from the fires, before bending back to his plate.

ət lis ðeɪ dɪdn liv ðɪs taɪm.

At least they didn't leave this time.

hi sæt kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ʌv ɪŋtʃɹ fɹəm ðɛm. "aɪ wɪʃ aɪ nu waɪ ənoʊ kips lʊkɪŋ ət mi. ɪts pɹɑbli ðɪs blʌɾi koʊt."

He sat cross-legged on the other side of Ingtar from them. "I wish I knew why Uno keeps looking at me. It's probably this bloody coat."

ɪŋtʃɹ pɔz θɔtfəli ɝaʊn ə maʊθfʊl ə stu. faɪnəli hi sɛd, "ənoʊ noʊ daʊt wʌndɝz ɪf jə ɑɹ wɝði ʌv ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd." mæt snɔɹɾɪd laʊdli, bʌɾ ɪŋtʃɹ wɛn ɑn ʌnpɝtɝbd. "du nɑt lɛɾ ənoʊ ʌpsɛt ju. hi wəd tʃɹit lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ laɪk ə ɹɔ ɹəkɹuɾ ɪf i kʊd. wɛl, pɝhæps nɑɾ eɪɡəlmɝ, bʌɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls. hiz ə tʌŋ laɪk ə faɪl, bʌɾ i ɡɪvz ɡʊɾ ædvaɪs. hi ʃʊd; hiz bɪn kæmpeɪnɪŋ sɪns bɪfɔɹ aɪ wɑz bɔɹn. lɪsən tə hɪz ædvaɪs, doʊn maɪn ɪz tʌŋ, ən jəl də ɔl ɹaɪt wɪð ənoʊ."

Ingtar paused thoughtfully around a mouthful of stew. Finally he said, "Uno no doubt wonders if you are worthy of a heron-mark blade." Mat snorted loudly, but Ingtar went on unperturbed. "Do not let Uno upset you. He would treat Lord Agelmar like a raw recruit if he could. Well, perhaps not Agelmar, but anyone else. He has a tongue like a file, but he gives good advice. He should; he's been campaigning since before I was born. Listen to his advice, don't mind his tongue, and you will do all right with Uno."

"aɪ θɔɾ i wɑz laɪk mæsimə." ɹænd ʃʌvəl stu ɪndə hɪz maʊð. ɪt wɑz tu hɑt, bʌɾ i ɡʌlpt ɪt daʊn. ðeɪ hæd nɑɾ iɾən sɪns livɪŋ fæl dæɹə, ən i hæd bɪn tu wɝid tə it ðət mɔɹnɪŋ. hɪz stʌmək ɹʌmbəld, ɹimaɪndɪŋ ɪm ɪt wɑz pæs taɪm. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf tɛlɪŋ mæsimə hi laɪk ðə fud wəd hɛlp. "mæsimə æks laɪk i heɪts mi, ən aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstæn ɪt."

"I thought he was like Masema." Rand shoveled stew into his mouth. It was too hot, but he gulped it down. They had not eaten since leaving Fal Dara, and he had been too worried to eat that morning. His stomach rumbled, reminding him it was past time. He wondered if telling Masema he liked the food would help. "Masema acts like he hates me, and I don't understand it."

"mæsimə sɝv θɹi jɪɹz ɪn ði istɝn mɑɹtʃɪz," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd. "æɾ ɑŋkɝ deɪl, əɡɛns ði il." hi stɝɾ ɪz stu wɪð ɪz spun, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "aɪ æsk noʊ kwɛstʃənz, maɪnd. ɪf læn daɪ ʃæn ən mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ wɑnə seɪ jə ɑɹ fɹəm ændɝ, fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ðən jə ɑɹ. bʌt mæsimə kænt ɡɛt ðə lʊk ə ði il aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛd, ən wən i siz ju. . . ." hi ʃɹʌɡd. "aɪ æsk noʊ kwɛstʃənz."

"Masema served three years in the Eastern Marches," Ingtar said. "At Ankor Dail, against the Aiel." He stirred his stew with his spoon, frowning. "I ask no questions, mind. If Lan Dai Shan and Moiraine Sedai want to say you are from Andor, from the Two Rivers, then you are. But Masema can't get the look of the Aiel out of his head, and when he sees you. . . ." He shrugged. "I ask no questions."

ɹænd dʒɹɑpt ɪz spun ɪn ðə pleɪt wɪð ə saɪ. "ɛvɹibɑɾi θɪŋks aɪm sʌmbɑɾi aɪm nɑt. aɪm fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ɪŋtʃɹ. aɪ ɡɹu təbæk wɪð - wɪð maɪ fɑðɝ, ən tɛndəɾ ɪz ʃip. ðəɾ ɪz wʌɾ aɪ æm. ə fɑɹmɝ ən ʃɛpɝd fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz."

Rand dropped his spoon in the plate with a sigh. "Everybody thinks I'm somebody I am not. I am from the Two Rivers, Ingtar. I grew tabac with - with my father, and tended his sheep. That is what I am. A farmer and shepherd from the Two Rivers."

"hiz fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz," mæt sɛd skɔɹnfəli. "aɪ ɡɹu ʌp wɪð hɪm, ðoʊ jud nɛvɝ noʊ ɪt naʊ. jə pʊt ðɪs il nɑnsɛns ɪn ɪz hɛɾ ɑn tɑp ʌv wʌts ɔlɹɛɾi ðɛɹ, ən ðə laɪt noʊz wʌt wɪl hæv. ən il lɔɹd, meɪbi."

"He's from the Two Rivers," Mat said scornfully. "I grew up with him, though you'd never know it now. You put this Aiel nonsense in his head on top of what's already there, and the Light knows what we'll have. An Aiel lord, maybe."

"noʊ," lɔɪəl sɛd, "hi hæz ðə lʊk. jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ɹænd, aɪ ɹɪmɑɹkt ɑn ɪt wʌns, ðoʊ aɪ θɔɾ ɪt wɑz dʒʌs kəz aɪ dɪdnt noʊ jə hjumənz wɛl ɪnʌf ðɛn. ɹɪmɛmbɝ? 'tɪl ʃeɪɾ ɪz ɡɔn, tɪl wɔɾɝ ɪz ɡɔn, ɪndə ðə ʃædoʊ wɪð tiθ bɛɹd, skɹimɪŋ dɪfaɪəns wɪð ðə læs bɹɛθ, tə spɪɾ ɪn saɪtblɪndɝz aɪ ɑn ðə læs deɪ.' jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ɹænd."

"No," Loial said, "he has the look. You remember, Rand, I remarked on it once, though I thought it was just because I didn't know you humans well enough then. Remember? 'Till shade is gone, till water is gone, into the Shadow with teeth bared, screaming defiance with the last breath, to spit in Sightblinder's eye on the Last Day.' You remember, Rand."

ɹænd stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪz pleɪt. ɹæp ə ʃoʊufə ɝaʊn jəɹ hɛd, ən jə wəd bi ði ɪmədʒ ʌv ən ilmən. ðət hæd bɪn ɡɔɪn, bɹʌðɝ tə ɪleɪn, ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ. ɛvɹibɑɾi θɪŋks aɪm sʌmbɑɾi aɪm nɑt.

Rand stared at his plate. Wrap a shoufa around your head, and you would be the image of an Aielman. That had been Gawyn, brother to Elayne, the Daughter-Heir of Andor. Everybody thinks I'm somebody I'm not.

"wʌt wɑz ðæt?" mæt æskt. "əbaʊt spɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə dɑɹk wʌnz aɪ."

"What was that?" Mat asked. "About spitting in the Dark One's eye."

"ðæts haʊ lɔŋ ði il seɪ ðəl faɪt," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd, "æn aɪ doʊn daʊt ðeɪ wɪl. ɪksɛp fəɹ pɛdlɝz ən ɡlimən, il dɪvaɪd ðə wɝld ɪn tu. il, ən ɛnəmiz. ðeɪ tʃeɪnʒd ðət fəɹ kɛɹhin faɪv hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz əɡoʊ, fəɹ səm ɹizən noʊ wʌn bʌɾ ən il kəɾ ʌndɝstænd, bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ðəl ɛvɝ də soʊ əɡɛn."

"That's how long the Aiel say they'll fight," Ingtar said, "and I don't doubt they will. Except for peddlers and gleemen, Aiel divide the world in two. Aiel, and enemies. They changed that for Cairhien five hundred years ago, for some reason no one but an Aiel could understand, but I do not think they will ever do so again."

"aɪ səpoʊz nɑt," lɔɪəl saɪd. "bʌt ðeɪ də lɛt ðə tuætɑn, ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl, kɹɔs ðə weɪst. ən ðeɪ doʊn si oʊɡiɝ əz ɛnəmiz, iðɝ, ðoʊ aɪ daʊɾ ɛni ʌv əs wəd wɑnə ɡoʊ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə weɪst. il kʌm tə stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ səmtaɪmz tə tʃɹeɪd fəɹ sʌŋ wʊd. ə hɑɹd pipəl, ðoʊ."

"I suppose not," Loial sighed. "But they do let the Tuatha'an, the Traveling People, cross the Waste. And they don't see Ogier as enemies, either, though I doubt any of us would want to go out into the Waste. Aiel come to Stedding Shangtai sometimes to trade for sung wood. A hard people, though."

ɪŋtʃɹ nɑɾəd. "aɪ wɪʃ aɪ hæd səm əz hɑɹd. hæf əz hɑɹd."

Ingtar nodded. "I wish I had some as hard. Half as hard."

"ɪz ðəɾ ə dʒoʊk?" mæt læft. "ɪf aɪ ɹæn ə maɪl wɛɹɪŋ ɔl ði aɪɝn jəɹ wɛɹɪŋ, aɪ wəd fɔl daʊn ən slip ə wik. juv dʌn ɪt maɪl æftɝ maɪl ɔl deɪ."

"Is that a joke?" Mat laughed. "If I ran a mile wearing all the iron you're wearing, I would fall down and sleep a week. You've done it mile after mile all day."

"il ɑɹ hɑɹd," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd. "mæn ən wʊmən, hɑɹd. aɪv fɔt ðɛm, ən aɪ noʊ. ðəl ɹʌn fɪfti maɪlz, ən faɪɾ ə bæɾəl ət ði ɛn ʌv ɪt. ðəɹ dɛθ wɔkɪŋ, wɪð ɛni wɛpən əɹ nʌn. ɪksɛpt ə sɔɹd. ðəl nɑt tʌtʃ ə sɔɹd, fəɹ səm ɹizən. əɹ ɹaɪɾ ə hɔɹs, nɑt ðət ðeɪ nid tə. ɪf juv ə sɔɹd, ən ði ilmən əz ɪz bɛɹ hænz, ɪts ən ivən faɪt. ɪf jəɹ ɡʊd. ðeɪ hɝd kæɾəl ən ɡoʊts wɛɹ jə əɹ aɪ wəd daɪ ʌv θɝs bɪfɔɹ ðə deɪ wɑz dʌn. ðeɪ dɪɡ ðɛɹ vɪlədʒəz ɪndə hjudʒ ɹɑk spaɪɹz aʊɾ ɪn ðə weɪst. ðeɪv bɪn ðəɹ sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ, nɪɹ ɪnʌf. ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ tʃɹaɪd tə dɪɡ ðɛm aʊɾ ən wɑz blʌɾid, ði oʊnli meɪdʒɝ dɪfits i ɛvɝ sʌfɝd. baɪ deɪ ði ɛɹ ɪn ði il weɪst ʃɪmɝz wɪð hit, ən baɪ naɪɾ ɪt fɹizɪz. ən ən il wɪl ɡɪv jə ðət blu-aɪd stɛɹ ən tɛl jə ðəɹ ɪz noʊ pleɪs ɑn ɝθ i wəd ɹæðɝ bi. hi woʊn bi laɪɪŋ, iðɝ. ɪf ðeɪ ɛvɝ tʃɹaɪd tə kʌm aʊt, wi wəd bi hɑɹd-pɹɛs tə stɑp ðɛm. ði il wɔɹ læstəd θɹi jɪɹz, ən ðət wɑz oʊnli fɔɹ aʊɾ ə θɝtin klænz."

"Aiel are hard," Ingtar said. "Man and woman, hard. I've fought them, and I know. They will run fifty miles, and fight a battle at the end of it. They're death walking, with any weapon or none. Except a sword. They will not touch a sword, for some reason. Or ride a horse, not that they need to. If you have a sword, and the Aielman has his bare hands, it is an even fight. If you're good. They herd cattle and goats where you or I would die of thirst before the day was done. They dig their villages into huge rock spires out in the Waste. They've been there since the Breaking, near enough. Artur Hawkwing tried to dig them out and was bloodied, the only major defeats he ever suffered. By day the air in the Aiel Waste shimmers with heat, and by night it freezes. And an Aiel will give you that blue-eyed stare and tell you there is no place on earth he would rather be. He won't be lying, either. If they ever tried to come out, we would be hard-pressed to stop them. The Aiel War lasted three years, and that was only four out of thirteen clans."

"ɡɹeɪ aɪz fɹəm ɪz mʌðɝ dʌzn meɪk ɪm ən il," mæt sɛd.

"Gray eyes from his mother doesn't make him an Aiel," Mat said.

ɪŋtʃɹ ʃɹʌɡd. "æz aɪ sɛd, aɪ æsk noʊ kwɛstʃənz."

Ingtar shrugged. "As I said, I ask no questions."

wən ɹænd faɪnəli sɛɾəld daʊn fəɹ ðə naɪt, hɪz hɛd hʌmd wɪð ənwɔntɪd θɔts. ɪmədʒ ʌv ən ilmən. mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ wɑns tə seɪ jəɹ fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. il ɹævɪdʒd ɔl ðə weɪ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. bɔɹn ɑn ðə sloʊps ə dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

When Rand finally settled down for the night, his head hummed with unwanted thoughts. Image of an Aielman. Moiraine Sedai wants to say you're from the Two Rivers. Aiel ravaged all the way to Tar Valon. Born on the slopes of Dragonmount. The Dragon Reborn.

"aɪ wɪl nɑt bi juzd," hi mʌɾɝd, bʌt slip wɑz ə lɔŋ taɪm kʌmɪŋ.

"I will not be used," he muttered, but sleep was a long time coming.

ɪŋtʃɹ bɹoʊk kæmp bɪfɔɹ ðə sʌn wɑz ʌp ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. ðeɪ hæd bɹɛkfæstəɾ ən wɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ saʊθ waɪl ðə klaʊdz ɪn ði ist wɝ stɪl ɹɛd wɪð sʌnɹaɪz tə kʌm ən du stɪl hʌŋ ɑn ðə livz. ðɪs taɪm ɪŋtʃɹ pʊɾ aʊt skaʊts, ən ðoʊ ðə peɪs wɑz hɑɹd, ɪt wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ hɔɹs-kɪlɪŋ. ɹænd θɔt meɪbi ɪŋtʃɹ hæd ɹilaɪz ðeɪ wɝ nɑt gɑnə də ɪɾ ɔl ɪn ə deɪ. ðə tʃɹeɪl stɪl lɛd saʊθ, hʊɹɪn sɛd. əntɪl, tu aʊɝz æftɝ ðə sʌn ɹoʊz, wʌn ə ðə skaʊts keɪm ɡæləpɪŋ bæk.

Ingtar broke camp before the sun was up in the morning. They had breakfasted and were riding south while the clouds in the east were still red with sunrise to come and dew still hung on the leaves. This time Ingtar put out scouts, and though the pace was hard, it was no longer horse-killing. Rand thought maybe Ingtar had realized they were not going to do it all in a day. The trail still led south, Hurin said. Until, two hours after the sun rose, one of the scouts came galloping back.

"əbændən kæmp əhɛd, maɪ lɔɹd. dʒʌst ɑn ðət hɪltɑp ðɛɹ. mʌst əv bɪn ət lis θɝɾi əɹ fɔɹɾi ʌv əm ðəɹ læs naɪt, maɪ lɔɹd."

"Abandoned camp ahead, my Lord. Just on that hilltop there. Must have been at least thirty or forty of them there last night, my Lord."

ɪŋtʃɹ pʊt spɝz tə hɔɹs əz ɪf i hæd bɪn toʊl ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz wɝ stɪl ðɛɹ, ən ɹænd hæd tə kip peɪs əɹ bi tʃɹæmpəl baɪ ðə ʃaɪnɝənz u ɡæləpt ʌp ðə hɪl bɪhaɪn hɪm.

Ingtar put spurs to horse as if he had been told the Darkfriends were still there, and Rand had to keep pace or be trampled by the Shienarans who galloped up the hill behind him.

ðəɹ wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ tə si. ðə koʊld æʃəz ə kæmpfaɪɝz, wɛl hɪɾən ɪn ðə tʃɹiz, wɪð wʌt lʊk laɪk ðə ɹɛmnəns ʌv ə mil tɔst ɪn ðɛm. ə ɹɛfjus hip tu nɪɹ ðə faɪɝz ən ɔlɹɛɾi bʌzɪŋ wɪð flaɪz.

There was not much to see. The cold ashes of campfires, well hidden in the trees, with what looked like the remnants of a meal tossed in them. A refuse heap too near the fires and already buzzing with flies.

ɪŋtʃɹ kɛp ði ʌðɝz bæk, ən dɪsmaʊntɪd tə wɔk θɹu ðə kæmpsaɪt wɪð ənoʊ, ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hʊɹɪn ɹoʊd ðə sɝkʌmfɹəns ə ðə saɪt, snɪfɪŋ. ɹænd sæɾ ɪz stæljən wɪð ði ʌðɝ mɛn; hi hæd noʊ dɪzaɪɝ fəɹ ɛni kloʊsɝ lʊk əɾ ə pleɪs wɛɹ tʃɹɑləks ən dɑɹkfɹɛnz hæd kæmpt. ən ə feɪd. ən sʌmθɪŋ wɝs.

Ingtar kept the others back, and dismounted to walk through the campsite with Uno, examining the ground. Hurin rode the circumference of the site, sniffing. Rand sat his stallion with the other men; he had no desire for any closer look at a place where Trollocs and Darkfriends had camped. And a Fade. And something worse.

mæt skɹæmbəld ʌp ðə hɪl əfʊɾ ən stɔkt ɪndə ðə kæmpsaɪt. "ɪz ðɪs wʌɾ ə dɑɹkfɹɛn kæmp lʊks laɪk? smɛlz ə bɪt, bʌɾ aɪ kæn seɪ ɪt lʊks ɛni dɪfɹən fɹəm ɛnibəɾi ɛlsəz." hi kɪkt ət wʌn ə ði æʃ hips, nɑkɪŋ aʊɾ ə pis ə bɝn boʊn, ən stup tə pɪk ɪɾ ʌp. "wʌt də dɑɹkfɹɛnz it? dʌzn lʊk laɪk ə ʃip boʊn, əɹ ə kaʊ."

Mat scrambled up the hill afoot and stalked into the campsite. "Is this what a Darkfriend camp looks like? Smells a bit, but I can't say it looks any different from anybody else's." He kicked at one of the ash heaps, knocking out a piece of burned bone, and stooped to pick it up. "What do Darkfriends eat? Doesn't look like a sheep bone, or a cow."

"ðɛɹ wɑz mɝɾɝ dʌn hɪɹ," hʊɹɪn sɛd mɔɹnfəli. hi skɹʌbd əɾ ɪz noʊz wɪð ə kɝtʃəf. "wɝs ðən mɝɾɝ."

"There was murder done here," Hurin said mournfully. He scrubbed at his nose with a kerchief. "Worse than murder."

"ðɛɹ wɝ tʃɹɑləks hɪɹ," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd, lʊkɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ ət mæt. "aɪ səpoʊz ðeɪ ɡɑt hʌŋɡɹi, ən ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz wɝ hændi." mæt dʒɹɑp ðə blækən boʊn; hi lʊkt əz ɪf i wɝ gɑnə bi sɪk.

"There were Trollocs here," Ingtar said, looking straight at Mat. "I suppose they got hungry, and the Darkfriends were handy." Mat dropped the blackened bone; he looked as if he were going to be sick.

"ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ saʊθ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, maɪ lɔɹd," hʊɹɪn sɛd. ðət tʊk ɛvɹiwʌnz ətɛnʃən. hi pɔɪntəd bæk, tə ðə nɔɹθist. "meɪbi ðeɪv dɪsaɪɾɪd tə bɹeɪk fəɹ ðə blaɪɾ æftɝ ɔl. ɡoʊ ɝaʊn ʌs. meɪbi ðeɪ wɝ dʒʌs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊɾ əs ɔf baɪ kʌmɪŋ saʊθ." hi dɪd nɑt saʊn əz ɪf i bɪlivd ɪt. hi saʊndəd pʌzəld.

"They are not going south any longer, my Lord," Hurin said. That took everyone's attention. He pointed back, to the northeast. "Maybe they've decided to break for the Blight after all. Go around us. Maybe they were just trying to put us off by coming south." He did not sound as if he believed it. He sounded puzzled.

"wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ," ɪŋtʃɹ snɑɹəld, "aɪl əv əm naʊ. maʊnt!"

"Whatever they were trying," Ingtar snarled, "I'll have them now. Mount!"

lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ən aʊɝ leɪɾɝ, ðoʊ, hʊɹɪn dʒɹu ɹeɪn. "ðeɪ tʃeɪnʒd əɡɛn, maɪ lɔɹd. saʊθ əɡɛn. ən ðeɪ kɪl sʌmwʌn ɛls hɪɹ."

Little more than an hour later, though, Hurin drew rein. "They changed again, my Lord. South again. And they killed someone else here."

ðəɹ wɝ noʊ æʃəz ðɛɹ, ɪn ðə ɡæp bɪtwin tu hɪlz, bʌɾ ə fju mɪnəts' sɝtʃ faʊn ðə bɑɾi. ə mæn kɝld ʌp ən stʌft ʌndɝ səm bʊʃəz. ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd wɑz smæʃt ɪn, ən ɪz aɪz stɪl bʌlʒd wɪð ðə fɔɹs ə ðə bloʊ. noʊ wʌn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz hɪm, ðoʊ hi wɑz wɛɹɪŋ ʃaɪnɝən kloʊðz.

There were no ashes there, in the gap between two hills, but a few minutes' search found the body. A man curled up and stuffed under some bushes. The back of his head was smashed in, and his eyes still bulged with the force of the blow. No one recognized him, though he was wearing Shienaran clothes.

"wil weɪs noʊ taɪm bɛɹiɪŋ dɑɹkfɹɛnz," ɪŋtʃɹ ɡɹaʊld. "wi ɹaɪd saʊθ." hi suɾəd ɪz oʊn wɝdz ɔlmoʊs bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ aʊɾ ə hɪz maʊθ.

"We'll waste no time burying Darkfriends," Ingtar growled. "We ride south." He suited his own words almost before they were out of his mouth.

ðə deɪ wɑz ðə seɪm əz ðə deɪ bɪfɔɹ hæd bɪn, ðoʊ. ənoʊ stʌɾid tʃɹæks ən dʒɹɑpɪŋz, ən sɛd ðeɪ hæd ɡeɪn ə lɪɾəl ɡɹaʊn ɑn ðɛɹ kwɔɹi. twaɪlaɪt keɪm wɪð noʊ saɪɾ ə tʃɹɑləks əɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ən ðə nɛks mɔɹnɪŋ ðəɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ əbændən kæmp - ən ənʌðɝ mɝɾɝ dʌn, soʊ hʊɹɪn sɛd - ən ənʌðɝ tʃeɪnʒ ə dɝɛkʃən, ðɪs taɪm tə ðə nɔɹθwɛst. lɛs ðən tu aʊɝz ɑn ðət tʃɹæk faʊn ənʌðɝ bɑɾi, ə mæn wɪð ɪz skʌl splɪɾ oʊpən baɪ ən æks, ən ənʌðɝ tʃeɪnʒ ə dɝɛkʃən. saʊθ əɡɛn. əɡɛn ɡeɪnɪŋ ɡɹaʊnd, baɪ ənoʊz ɹɛɾɪŋ ə ðə tʃɹæks. əɡɛn siɪŋ nʌθɪŋ bʌt dɪstən fɑɹmz əntɪl naɪtfɔl. ən ðə nɛks deɪ wɑz ðə seɪm, tʃeɪnʒəz ɪn dɝɛkʃən, mɝɾɝz ən ɔl. ən ðə nɛkst.

The day was the same as the day before had been, though. Uno studied tracks and droppings, and said they had gained a little ground on their quarry. Twilight came with no sight of Trollocs or Darkfriends, and the next morning there was another abandoned camp - and another murder done, so Hurin said - and another change of direction, this time to the northwest. Less than two hours on that track found another body, a man with his skull split open by an axe, and another change of direction. South again. Again gaining ground, by Uno's reading of the tracks. Again seeing nothing but distant farms until nightfall. And the next day was the same, changes in direction, murders and all. And the next.

ɛvɹi deɪ bɹɔɾ əm ə lɪɾəl kloʊsɝ bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ pɹeɪ, bʌɾ ɪŋtʃɹ fjumd. hi sədʒɛstəd kʌɾɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əkɹɔs wən ðə tʃɹeɪl tʃeɪnʒd dɝɛkʃən ʌv ə mɔɹnɪŋ - ʃʊɹli ðeɪ wəd kʌm ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪl hɛɾɪŋ saʊθ əɡɛn, ən ɡeɪn mɔɹ taɪm - ən bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn kəd spik, hi sɛɾ ɪt wɑz ə bæɾ aɪdiə, ɪn keɪs ðɪs wʌns ðə mɛn ðeɪ hʌntəd dɪd nɑt tɝn saʊθ. hi ɝdʒd ɛvɹiwʌn tə ɡɹeɪɾɝ spid, tə stɑɹɾ ɝliɝ ən ɹaɪd tɪl fʊl dɑɹk. hi ɹimaɪndəɾ əm ə ðə tʃɑɹdʒ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hæd ɡɪvən ðɛm, tə ɹɪkʌvɝ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, ən lɛt nʌθɪŋ bɑɹ ðɛɹ weɪ. hi spoʊk ə ðə ɡlɔɹi ðeɪ wəd hæv, ðɛɹ neɪmz ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪn stɔɹi ən hɪstɝi, ɪn ɡlimənz teɪlz ən bɑɹdz' sɔŋz, ðə mɛn u faʊn ðə hɔɹn. hi tɔkt əz ɪf i kəd nɑt stɑp, ən i stɛɹd daʊn ðə tʃɹeɪl ðeɪ fɑloʊɾ əz ɪf ɪz hoʊp ə ðə laɪt leɪ ət ði ɛn ʌv ɪt. ivən ənoʊ bɪɡæn tə lʊk əɾ ɪm əskæns.

Every day brought them a little closer behind their prey, but Ingtar fumed. He suggested cutting straight across when the trail changed direction of a morning - surely they would come on the trail heading south again, and gain more time - and before anyone could speak, he said it was a bad idea, in case this once the men they hunted did not turn south. He urged everyone to greater speed, to start earlier and ride till full dark. He reminded them of the charge the Amyrlin Seat had given them, to recover the Horn of Valere, and let nothing bar their way. He spoke of the glory they would have, their names remembered in story and history, in gleemen's tales and bards' songs, the men who found the Horn. He talked as if he could not stop, and he stared down the trail they followed as if his hope of the Light lay at the end of it. Even Uno began to look at him askance.

ən soʊ ðeɪ keɪm tə ðə ɹɪvɝ ɛɹɪnɪn.

And so they came to the River Erinin.

ɪt kəd nɑt pɹɑpɝli bi kɔld ə vɪlədʒ əɾ ɔl, tə ɹændz maɪnd. hi sæɾ ɪz hɔɹs əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz, piɹɪŋ ʌp ət hæf ə dʌzən smɔl haʊsəz wɪð wʊd-ʃɪŋɡəld ɹufs ən ivz ɔlmoʊs tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɑn ə hɪltɑp oʊvɝlʊkɪŋ ðə ɹɪvɝ bɪniθ ðə mɔɹnɪŋ sʌn. fju pipəl pæs ðɪs weɪ. ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə fju aʊɝz sɪns ðeɪ hæd bɹoʊkən kæmp, bʌt pæs taɪm fəɹ əm tə hæv faʊn ðə ɹɪmeɪnz ə ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz' ɹɛstɪŋ pleɪs ɪf ðə pæɾɝn hɛld. ðeɪ hæd sin nʌθɪŋ ə ðə sɔɹt, haʊɛvɝ.

It could not properly be called a village at all, to Rand's mind. He sat his horse among the trees, peering up at half a dozen small houses with wood-shingled roofs and eaves almost to the ground, on a hilltop overlooking the river beneath the morning sun. Few people passed this way. It was only a few hours since they had broken camp, but past time for them to have found the remains of the Darkfriends' resting place if the pattern held. They had seen nothing of the sort, however.

ðə ɹɪvɝ ɪtsɛlf wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ laɪk ðə maɪɾi ɛɹɪnɪn ə stɔɹi, hɪɹ soʊ fɑɹ təwɔɹɾ ɪts sɔɹs ɪn ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld. pɝhæps sɪksti peɪsɪz ə swɪft wɔɾɝ tə ðə fɑɹ bæŋk, laɪnd wɪð tʃɹiz, ən ə bɑɹdʒ-laɪk fɛɹi ɑn ə θɪk ɹoʊp spænɪŋ ðə dɪstəns. ðə fɛɹi sæt snʌɡd əɡɛns ði ʌðɝ saɪd.

The river itself was not much like the mighty Erinin of story, here so far toward its source in the Spine of the World. Perhaps sixty paces of swift water to the far bank, lined with trees, and a barge-like ferry on a thick rope spanning the distance. The ferry sat snugged against the other side.

fəɹ wʌns ðə tʃɹeɪl hæd lɛd stʃɹeɪt tə hjumən hæbəteɪʃən. stʃɹeɪt tə ðə haʊsəz ɑn ðə hɪl. noʊ wʌn muvd ɑn ðə sɪŋɡəl dɝt stʃɹiɾ ɝaʊnd wɪtʃ ðə dwɛlɪŋz klʌstɝd.

For once the trail had led straight to human habitation. Straight to the houses on the hill. No one moved on the single dirt street around which the dwellings clustered.

"æmbʊʃ, maɪ lɔɹd?" ənoʊ sɛd sɔfli.

"Ambush, my Lord?" Uno said softly.

ɪŋtʃɹ ɡeɪv ðə nɛsəsɛɹi ɔɹɾɝz, ən ðə ʃaɪnɝənz ənlɪmbɝd ðɛɹ lænsɪz, swipɪŋ ɝaʊn tə ɛnsɝkəl ðə haʊsəz. əɾ ə hæn sɪɡnəl fɹəm ɪŋtʃɹ ðeɪ ɡæləp bɪtwin ðə haʊsəz fɹəm fɔɹ dɝɛkʃənz, θʌndɝɪŋ ɪn wɪð aɪz sɝtʃɪŋ, lænsɪz ɹɛɾi, dʌst ɹaɪzɪŋ ʌndɝ ðɛɹ hʊvz. nʌθɪŋ muv bʌt ðɛm. ðeɪ dʒɹu ɹeɪn, ən ðə dʌs bɪɡæn tə sɛɾəl.

Ingtar gave the necessary orders, and the Shienarans unlimbered their lances, sweeping around to encircle the houses. At a hand signal from Ingtar they galloped between the houses from four directions, thundering in with eyes searching, lances ready, dust rising under their hooves. Nothing moved but them. They drew rein, and the dust began to settle.

ɹænd ɹɪtɝn tə hɪz kwɪvɝ ði æɹoʊ hi hæd nɑkt, ən slʌŋ ɪz baʊ ɑn ɪz bæk əɡɛn. mæt ən pɛɹɪn dɪd ðə seɪm. lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn hæd dʒʌst weɪɾəd ðəɹ wɛɹ ɪŋtʃɹ hæd lɛf ðɛm, wɑtʃɪŋ ənizəli.

Rand returned to his quiver the arrow he had nocked, and slung his bow on his back again. Mat and Perrin did the same. Loial and Hurin had just waited there where Ingtar had left them, watching uneasily.

ɪŋtʃɹ weɪvd, ən ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz ɹoʊɾ ʌp tə dʒɔɪn ðə ʃaɪnɝənz.

Ingtar waved, and Rand and the others rode up to join the Shienarans.

"aɪ doʊn laɪk ðə smɛl ə ðɪs pleɪs," pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd əz ðeɪ keɪm əmʌŋ ðə haʊsəz. hʊɹɪn ɡeɪv ɪm ə lʊk, ən i stɛɹd bæk əntɪl hʊɹɪn dʒɹɑpt ɪz aɪz. "ɪt smɛlz ɹɔŋ."

"I don't like the smell of this place," Perrin muttered as they came among the houses. Hurin gave him a look, and he stared back until Hurin dropped his eyes. "It smells wrong."

"blʌɾi dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən tʃɹɑləks wɛn stʃɹeɪt θɹu, maɪ lɔɹd," ənoʊ sɛd, pɔɪntɪŋ tə ə fju tʃɹæks nɑt tʃɑp tə pisəz baɪ ðə ʃaɪnɝənz. "stʃɹeɪt θɹu tə ðə ɡoʊt-kɪsɪŋ fɛɹi, wɪtʃ ðeɪ blʌɾi lɛft ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz! wɝ fleɪmɪŋ lʌki ðeɪ dɪdn kʌɾ ɪɾ ədʒɹɪft."

"Bloody Darkfriends and Trollocs went straight through, my Lord," Uno said, pointing to a few tracks not chopped to pieces by the Shienarans. "Straight through to the goat-kissing ferry, which they bloody left on the other side. Blood and bloody ashes! We're flaming lucky they didn't cut it adrift."

"wɛɹ ɑɹ ðə pipəl?" lɔɪəl æskt.

"Where are the people?" Loial asked.

dɔɹz stʊɾ oʊpən, kɝɾənz flæpt əɾ oʊpən wɪndoʊz, bʌt noʊ wʌn hæd kʌm aʊt fəɹ ɔl ðə θʌndɝ ə hʊvz.

Doors stood open, curtains flapped at open windows, but no one had come out for all the thunder of hooves.

"sɝtʃ ðə haʊsəz," ɪŋtʃɹ kəmændəd. mɛn dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ən ɹæn tə kəmplaɪ, bʌt ðeɪ keɪm bæk ʃeɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ hɛdz.

"Search the houses," Ingtar commanded. Men dismounted and ran to comply, but they came back shaking their heads.

"ðeɪɹ dʒʌst ɡɔn, maɪ lɔɹd," ənoʊ sɛd. "dʒʌs blʌɾi ɡɔn, bɝn mi. laɪk ðeɪd pɪkt ʌp ən dɪsaɪɾɪd tə fleɪmɪŋ wɔk əweɪ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə blʌɾi deɪ." hi stɑp sʌɾənli, pɔɪntɪŋ ɝdʒənli tə ə haʊs bɪhaɪn ɪŋtʃɹ. "ðɛɹz ə wʊmən ət ðət wɪndoʊ. haʊ aɪ blʌɾi mɪs hɝ. . . ." hi wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ fəɹ ðə haʊs bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls kəd muv.

"They're just gone, my Lord," Uno said. "Just bloody gone, burn me. Like they'd picked up and decided to flaming walk away in the middle of the bloody day." He stopped suddenly, pointing urgently to a house behind Ingtar. "There's a woman at that window. How I bloody missed her. . . ." He was running for the house before anyone else could move.

"doʊn fɹaɪɾən hɝ!" ɪŋtʃɹ ʃaʊɾəd. "ənoʊ, wi niɾ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən. ðə laɪt blaɪn ju, ənoʊ, doʊn fɹaɪɾən hɝ!" ðə wʌn-aɪd mæn dɪsəpɪɹd θɹu ði oʊpən dɔɹ. ɪŋtʃɹ ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs əɡɛn. "wi wɪl nɑt hɑɹm ju, ɡʊd leɪɾi. wəɹ lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝz oʊθmɛn, fɹəm fæl dæɹə. də nɑt bi əfɹeɪd! wɪl nɑt hɑɹm ju."

"Don't frighten her!" Ingtar shouted. "Uno, we need information. The Light blind you, Uno, don't frighten her!" The one-eyed man disappeared through the open door. Ingtar raised his voice again. "We will not harm you, good lady. We are Lord Agelmar's oathmen, from Fal Dara. Do not be afraid! We will not harm you."

ə wɪndoʊ ət ðə tɑp ə ðə haʊs flu ʌp, ən ənoʊ stʌk ɪz hɛɾ aʊt, stɛɹɪŋ ɝaʊnd waɪldli. wɪð ən oʊθ i pʊl bæk. θʌmps ən klæɾɝz mɑɹkt ɪz pæsədʒ bæk, əz ɪf i wɝ kɪkɪŋ θɪŋz ɪn fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. faɪnəli hi əpɪɹd fɹəm ðə dɔɹweɪ.

A window at the top of the house flew up, and Uno stuck his head out, staring around wildly. With an oath he pulled back. Thumps and clatters marked his passage back, as if he were kicking things in frustration. Finally he appeared from the doorway.

"ɡɔn, maɪ lɔɹd. bʌt ʃi wɑz ðɛɹ. ə wʊmən ɪn ə waɪt dʒɹɛs, ət ðə wɪndoʊ. aɪ sɔ hɝ. aɪ ivən θɔɾ aɪ sɔ hɝ ɪnsaɪd, fəɹ ə moʊmənt, bʌt ðən ʃi wɑz ɡɔn, ænd. . . ." hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "ðə haʊs ɪz ɛmpti, maɪ lɔɹd." ɪt wɑz ə mɛʒɝ ə hɪz ædʒəteɪʃən ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt kɝs.

"Gone, my Lord. But she was there. A woman in a white dress, at the window. I saw her. I even thought I saw her inside, for a moment, but then she was gone, and. . . ." He took a deep breath. "The house is empty, my Lord." It was a measure of his agitation that he did not curse.

"kɝɾənz," mæt mʌɾɝd. "hiz dʒʌmpɪŋ ət blʌɾi kɝɾənz." ənoʊ ɡeɪv ɪm ə ʃɑɹp lʊk, ðən ɹɪtɝn tə hɪz hɔɹs.

"Curtains," Mat muttered. "He's jumping at bloody curtains." Uno gave him a sharp look, then returned to his horse.

"wɛɹ dɪd ðeɪ ɡoʊ?" ɹænd æsk lɔɪəl. "du jə θɪŋk ðeɪ ɹæn ɔf wən ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz keɪm?" ən tʃɹɑləks, ən ə mɹdʒɹɑl. ən hʊɹɪnz sʌmθɪŋ wɝs. smɑɹt pipəl, ɪf ðeɪ ɹæn əz hɑɹɾ əz ðeɪ kʊd.

"Where did they go?" Rand asked Loial. "Do you think they ran off when the Darkfriends came?" And Trollocs, and a Myrddraal. And Hurin's something worse. Smart people, if they ran as hard as they could.

"aɪ fɪɹ ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz tʊk ðɛm, ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd sloʊli. hi ɡɹɪməst, ɔlmoʊst ə snɑɹl wɪð ɪz bɹɔd noʊz laɪk ə snaʊt. "fɔɹ ðə tʃɹɑləks." ɹænd swɑloʊɾ ən wɪʃt i hæd nɑɾ æskt; ɪt wɑz nɛvɝ plɛzən tə θɪŋk ɑn haʊ tʃɹɑləks fɛd.

"I fear the Darkfriends took them, Rand," Loial said slowly. He grimaced, almost a snarl with his broad nose like a snout. "For the Trollocs." Rand swallowed and wished he had not asked; it was never pleasant to think on how Trollocs fed.

"wʌtɛvɝ wɑz dʌn hɪɹ," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd, "aʊɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz dɪɾ ɪt. hʊɹɪn, wɑz ðəɹ vaɪələns hɪɹ? kɪlɪŋ? hʊɹɪn!"

"Whatever was done here," Ingtar said, "our Darkfriends did it. Hurin, was there violence here? Killing? Hurin!"

ðə snɪfɝ ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl ən lʊkt ɝaʊnd waɪldli. hi hæd bɪn stɛɹɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ. "vaɪələns, maɪ lɔɹd? jɛs. kɪlɪŋ, noʊ. əɹ nɑɾ ɪɡzækli." hi ɡlænst saɪdweɪz ət pɛɹɪn. "aɪv nɛvɝ smɛld ɛniθɪŋ ɪɡzækli laɪk ɪt bɪfɔɹ, maɪ lɔɹd. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz hɝɾɪŋ dʌn."

The sniffer gave a start in his saddle and looked around wildly. He had been staring across the river. "Violence, my Lord? Yes. Killing, no. Or not exactly." He glanced sideways at Perrin. "I've never smelled anything exactly like it before, my Lord. But there was hurting done."

"ɪz ðəɹ ɛni daʊt ðeɪ kɹɔst oʊvɝ? hæv ðeɪ dʌbəl bæk əɡɛn?"

"Is there any doubt they crossed over? Have they doubled back again?"

"ðeɪ kɹɔst, maɪ lɔɹd." hʊɹɪn lʊkt ənizəli ət ðə fɑɹ bæŋk. "ðeɪ kɹɔst. wʌt ðeɪ dɪɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd, ðoʊ. . . ." hi ʃɹʌɡd.

"They crossed, my Lord." Hurin looked uneasily at the far bank. "They crossed. What they did on the other side, though. . . ." He shrugged.

ɪŋtʃɹ nɑɾəd. "ənoʊ, aɪ wɑn ðət fɛɹi bæk ɑn ðɪs saɪd. ən aɪ wɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd skaʊɾəd bɪfɔɹ wi kɹɔs. dʒʌs kəz ðəɹ wɑz noʊ æmbʊʃ hɪɹ dʌzn min ðəɹ wɪl nɑt bi wʌn wən wəɹ splɪt baɪ ðə ɹɪvɝ. ðət fɛɹi dʌz nɑt lʊk bɪɡ ɪnʌf tə kæɹi əs ɔl ɪn wʌn tʃɹɪp. si tə ɪt."

Ingtar nodded. "Uno, I want that ferry back on this side. And I want the other side scouted before we cross. Just because there was no ambush here doesn't mean there will not be one when we are split by the river. That ferry does not look big enough to carry us all in one trip. See to it."

ənoʊ baʊd, ən ɪn moʊməns ɹeɪɡən ən mæsimə wɝ hɛlpɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ ɑɹmɝ. stʃɹɪp daʊn tə bɹitʃklaʊts, wɪð ə dæɡɝ stʌk bɪhaɪn ɪn ðə smɔl ə ðə bæk, ðeɪ tʃɹɑɾəd tə ðə ɹɪvɝ ɑn hɔɹsmənz baʊd lɛɡz ən weɪɾɪd ɪn, bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə wɝk ðɛɹ weɪ hæn oʊvɝ hæn əlɔŋ ðə θɪk ɹoʊp əlɔŋ wɪtʃ ðə fɛɹi ɹæn. ðə keɪbəl sæɡd ɪnʌf ɪn ðə mɪɾəl tə pʊɾ əm ɪn ðə ɹɪvɝ tə ðɛɹ weɪsts, ən ðə kɝənt wɑz stʃɹɔŋ, pʊlɪŋ əm daʊnstʃɹim, jɛɾ ɪn lɛs taɪm ðən ɹænd ɪkspɛktəd ðeɪ wɝ hɔlɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz oʊvɝ ðə slæɾɪd saɪdz ə ðə fɛɹi. dʒɹɔɪŋ ðɛɹ dæɡɝz, ðeɪ dɪsəpɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz.

Uno bowed, and in moments Ragan and Masema were helping each other out of their armor. Stripped down to breechclouts, with a dagger stuck behind in the small of the back, they trotted to the river on horsemen's bowed legs and waded in, beginning to work their way hand over hand along the thick rope along which the ferry ran. The cable sagged enough in the middle to put them in the river to their waists, and the current was strong, pulling them downstream, yet in less time than Rand expected they were hauling themselves over the slatted sides of the ferry. Drawing their daggers, they disappeared into the trees.

æftɝ wʌt sim laɪk fɝɛvɝ, ðə tu mɛn ɹiəpɪɹɾ ən bɪɡæn pʊlɪŋ ðə fɛɹi sloʊli əkɹɔs. ðə bɑɹdʒ bʌɾɪd əɡɛns ðə bæŋk bɪloʊ ðə vɪlədʒ, ən mæsimə taɪɾ ɪɾ ɔf waɪl ɹeɪɡən tʃɹɑɾəd ʌp tə wɛɹ ɪŋtʃɹ weɪɾəd. hɪz feɪs wɑz peɪl, ði æɹoʊ skɑɹ ɑn ɪz tʃik ʃɑɹp, ən i saʊndəd ʃeɪkən.

After what seemed like forever, the two men reappeared and began pulling the ferry slowly across. The barge butted against the bank below the village, and Masema tied it off while Ragan trotted up to where Ingtar waited. His face was pale, the arrow scar on his cheek sharp, and he sounded shaken.

"ðə fɑɹ bæŋk. . . . ðəɹ ɪz noʊ æmbʊʃ ɑn ðə fɑɹ bæŋk, maɪ lɔɹd, bʌt. . . ." hi baʊd dipli, stɪl wɛɾ ən ʃɪvɝɪŋ fɹəm ɪz ɪkskɝʒən. "maɪ lɔɹd, jə mʌst si fəɹ jɝsɛlf. ðə bɪɡ stoʊnioʊk, fɪfti peɪsɪz saʊθ fɹəm ðə lændɪŋ. aɪ kænɑt seɪ ðə wɝdz. jə mʌst si ɪt jɝsɛlf."

"The far bank. . . . There is no ambush on the far bank, my Lord, but. . . ." He bowed deeply, still wet and shivering from his excursion. "My Lord, you must see for yourself. The big stoneoak, fifty paces south from the landing. I cannot say the words. You must see it yourself."

ɪŋtʃɹ fɹaʊnd, lʊkɪŋ fɹəm ɹeɪɡən tə ði ʌðɝ bæŋk. faɪnəli, hi sɛd, "ju hæv dʌn wɛl, ɹeɪɡən. boʊθ ə jə hæv." hɪz vɔɪs bɪkeɪm mɔɹ bɹɪsk. "faɪn ðiz mɛn sʌmθɪŋ tə dʒɹaɪ ðɛmsɛlvz ɑn fɹəm ðə haʊsəz, ənoʊ. ən si ɪf ɛnibəɾi lɛft wɔɾɝ ɑn fəɹ ti. pʊt sʌmθɪŋ hɑɾ ɪndə ðɛm, ɪf jə kæn. ðən bɹɪŋ ðə sɛkən faɪl ən ðə pæk ænəməlz oʊvɝ." hi tɝn tə ɹænd. "wɛl, ɑɹ jə ɹɛɾi tə si ðə saʊθ bæŋk ə ði ɛɹɪnɪn?" hi dɪd nɑt weɪt fəɹ ən ænsɝ, bʌt ɹoʊd daʊn tə ðə fɛɹi wɪð hʊɹɪn ən hæf ðə lænsɝz.

Ingtar frowned, looking from Ragan to the other bank. Finally, he said, "You have done well, Ragan. Both of you have." His voice became more brisk. "Find these men something to dry themselves on from the houses, Uno. And see if anybody left water on for tea. Put something hot into them, if you can. Then bring the second file and the pack animals over." He turned to Rand. "Well, are you ready to see the south bank of the Erinin?" He did not wait for an answer, but rode down to the ferry with Hurin and half the lancers.

ɹænd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊnli ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ fɑloʊɪŋ. lɔɪəl wɛnt wɪð hɪm. tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, pɛɹɪn ɹoʊd daʊn əhɛɾ ə ðɛm, lʊkɪŋ ɡɹɪm. səm ə ðə lænsɝz, meɪkɪŋ ɡɹʌf dʒoʊks, dɪsmaʊntɪd tə hɔl ɑn ðə ɹoʊp ən wɔk ðə fɛɹi oʊvɝ.

Rand hesitated only a moment before following. Loial went with him. To his surprise, Perrin rode down ahead of them, looking grim. Some of the lancers, making gruff jokes, dismounted to haul on the rope and walk the ferry over.

mæt weɪɾəd əntɪl ðə læs mɪnət, wən wʌn ə ðə ʃaɪnɝənz wɑz əntiɪŋ ðə fɛɹi, bɪfɔɹ i kɪkt ɪz hɔɹs ən kɹaʊɾəd əbɔɹd. "aɪ hæv tə kʌm sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, doʊn aɪ?" hi sɛd, bɹɛθləs, tə noʊ wʌn ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ. "aɪ hæv tə faɪn ɪt."

Mat waited until the last minute, when one of the Shienarans was untying the ferry, before he kicked his horse and crowded aboard. "I have to come sooner or later, don't I?" he said, breathless, to no one in particular. "I have to find it."

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. wɪð mæt lʊkɪŋ əz hɛlθi əz i ɛvɝ hæd, hi hæɾ ɔlmoʊs fɝɡɑɾən waɪ hi wɑz əlɔŋ. tə faɪn ðə dæɡɝ. lɛɾ ɪŋtʃɹ əv ðə hɔɹn. aɪ dʒʌst wɑn ðə dæɡɝ fəɹ mæt. "wi wɪl faɪn ɪt, mæt."

Rand shook his head. With Mat looking as healthy as he ever had, he had almost forgotten why he was along. To find the dagger. Let Ingtar have the Horn. I just want the dagger for Mat. "We will find it, Mat."

mæt skaʊld əɾ ɪm - wɪð ə snɪɹɪŋ ɡlæns fəɹ ɪz faɪn ɹɛd koʊt - ən tɝn əweɪ. ɹænd saɪd.

Mat scowled at him - with a sneering glance for his fine red coat - and turned away. Rand sighed.

"ɪt wɪl ɔl kʌm ɹaɪt, ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd kwaɪətli. "sʌmhaʊ, ɪt wɪl."

"It will all come right, Rand," Loial said quietly. "Somehow, it will."

ðə kɝən tʊk ðə fɛɹi əz ɪt wɑz hɔld aʊt fɹəm ðə bæŋk, tʌɡɪŋ ɪɾ əɡɛns ðə keɪbəl wɪð ə ʃɑɹp kɹik. ðə lænsɝz wɝ ɑd fɛɹimən, wɔkɪŋ ðə dɛk ɪn hɛlməts ən ɑɹmɝ, wɪð sɔɹdz ɑn ðɛɹ bæks, bʌt ðeɪ tʊk ðə fɛɹi aʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹɪvɝ wɛl ɪnʌf.

The current took the ferry as it was hauled out from the bank, tugging it against the cable with a sharp creak. The lancers were odd ferrymen, walking the deck in helmets and armor, with swords on their backs, but they took the ferry out into the river well enough.

"ðɪs ɪz haʊ wi lɛf hoʊm," pɛɹɪn sɛd sʌɾənli. "æt tɛɹən fɛɹi. ðə fɛɹimənz buts klʌŋkɪŋ ɑn ðə dɛk, ən ðə wɔɾɝ ɡɝɡəlɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə fɛɹi. ðɪs ɪz haʊ wi lɛft. ɪɾəl bi wɝs, ðɪs taɪm."

"This is how we left home," Perrin said suddenly. "At Taren Ferry. The ferrymen's boots clunking on the deck, and the water gurgling around the ferry. This is how we left. It will be worse, this time."

"haʊ kən ɪt bi wɝs?" ɹænd æskt. pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑɾ ænsɝ. hi sɝtʃt ðə fɑɹ bæŋk, ən ɪz ɡoʊldən aɪz ɔlmoʊst sim tə ʃaɪn, bʌt nɑt wɪð iɡɝnəs.

"How can it be worse?" Rand asked. Perrin did not answer. He searched the far bank, and his golden eyes almost seemed to shine, but not with eagerness.

æftɝ ə mɪnət, mæt æskt, "haʊ kən ɪt bi wɝs?"

After a minute, Mat asked, "How can it be worse?"

"ɪt wɪl bi. aɪ kən smɛl ɪt," wɑz ɔl pɛɹɪn wəd seɪ. hʊɹɪn aɪɾ ɪm nɝvəsli, bʌt ðən hʊɹɪn sim tə bi aɪɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ nɝvəsli sɪns ðeɪ hæd lɛft fæl dæɹə.

"It will be. I can smell it," was all Perrin would say. Hurin eyed him nervously, but then Hurin seemed to be eyeing everything nervously since they had left Fal Dara.

ðə fɛɹi bʌmpt əɡɛns ðə saʊθ bæŋk wɪð ə hɑloʊ θʌɾ ə staʊt plæŋks əɡɛns hɑɹd kleɪ, ɔlmoʊst ʌndɝ oʊvɝhæŋɪŋ tʃɹiz, ən ðə ʃaɪnɝənz u hæd bɪn hɔlɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹoʊp maʊntəd ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, ɪksɛp fəɹ tu ɪŋtʃɹ toʊl tə teɪk ðə fɛɹi bæk oʊvɝ fəɹ ði ʌðɝz. ðə ɹɛs fɑloʊɾ ɪŋtʃɹ ʌp ðə bæŋk.

The ferry bumped against the south bank with a hollow thud of stout planks against hard clay, almost under overhanging trees, and the Shienarans who had been hauling on the rope mounted their horses, except for two Ingtar told to take the ferry back over for the others. The rest followed Ingtar up the bank.

"fɪfti peɪsɪz tə ə bɪɡ stoʊnioʊk," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛɾ əz ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz. hi saʊndəd tu mæɾɝ-ʌv-fækt. ɪf ɹeɪɡən kəd nɑt spik ʌv ɪt. . . . səm ə ðə soʊlʒɝz iz ðə sɔɹdz ɑn ðɛɹ bæks, ən hɛl ðɛɹ lænsɪz ɹɛɾi.

"Fifty paces to a big stoneoak," Ingtar said as they rode into the trees. He sounded too matter-of-fact. If Ragan could not speak of it. . . . Some of the soldiers eased the swords on their backs, and held their lances ready.

ət fɝst ɹænd θɔt ðə fɪɡjɝz hæŋɪŋ baɪ ðɛɹ ɑɹmz fɹəm ðə θɪk ɡɹeɪ lɪmz ə ðə stoʊnioʊk wɝ skɑɹɛkɹoʊz. kɹɪmzən skɑɹɛkɹoʊz. ðən i ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə tu feɪsəz. tʃæŋɡʌ, ən ði ʌðɝ mæn u hæd bɪn ɑn ɡɑɹd wɪð hɪm. naɪdaʊ. aɪz stɛɹɪŋ, tiθ bɛɹɾ ɪn ə ɹɪktəs ə peɪn. ðeɪ hæd lɪvd ə lɔŋ taɪm æftɝ ɪt bɪɡæn.

At first Rand thought the figures hanging by their arms from the thick gray limbs of the stoneoak were scarecrows. Crimson scarecrows. Then he recognized the two faces. Changu, and the other man who had been on guard with him. Nidao. Eyes staring, teeth bared in a rictus of pain. They had lived a long time after it began.

pɛɹɪn meɪɾ ə saʊn ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt, nɪɹli ə ɡɹaʊl.

Perrin made a sound in his throat, nearly a growl.

"æz bæɾ əz ɛvɝ aɪv sin, maɪ lɔɹd," hʊɹɪn sɛd feɪnli. "æz bæɾ əz ɛvɝ aɪv smɛld, ɛksɛptɪŋ ðə dʌnʒən ət fæl dæɹə ðət naɪt."

"As bad as ever I've seen, my Lord," Hurin said faintly. "As bad as ever I've smelled, excepting the dungeon at Fal Dara that night."

fɹæntəkəli ɹænd sɔt ðə vɔɪd. ðə fleɪm sim tə ɡɛɾ ɪn ðə weɪ, ðə kwizi laɪt flʌɾɝɪŋ ɪn taɪm wɪð ɪz kənvʌlsɪv swɑloʊz, bʌɾ i pʊʃt ɑn əntɪl i hæd ɹæp hɪmsɛlf ɪn ɛmptinəs. ðə kwizinəs pʌlsd ɪn ðə vɔɪd wɪð hɪm, ðoʊ. nɑɾ aʊtsaɪd, fəɹ wʌns, bʌɾ ɪnsaɪd. noʊ wʌndɝ, lʊkɪŋ ət ðɪs. ðə θɔt skɪɾɝd əkɹɔs ðə vɔɪd laɪk ə dʒɹɑp ʌv wɔɾɝ ɑn ə hɑt ɡɹɪɾəl. wʌt hæpən tə ðɛm?

Frantically Rand sought the void. The flame seemed to get in the way, the queasy light fluttering in time with his convulsive swallows, but he pushed on until he had wrapped himself in emptiness. The queasiness pulsed in the void with him, though. Not outside, for once, but inside. No wonder, looking at this. The thought skittered across the void like a drop of water on a hot griddle. What happened to them?

"skɪn əlaɪv," hi hɝd sʌmwʌn bɪhaɪn ɪm seɪ, ən ðə saʊnz ə sʌmbɑɾi ɛls ɹɛtʃɪŋ. hi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz mæt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔl fɑɹ əweɪ fɹəm hɪm, ɪnsaɪd ðə vɔɪd. bʌt ðət nɔziəs flɪkɝɪŋ wɑz ɪn ðɛɹ, tu. hi θɔɾ i maɪt θɹoʊ ʌp hɪmsɛlf.

"Skinned alive," he heard someone behind him say, and the sounds of somebody else retching. He thought it was Mat, but it was all far away from him, inside the void. But that nauseous flickering was in there, too. He thought he might throw up himself.

"kʌɾ əm daʊn," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd hɑɹʃli. hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ə moʊmənt, ðən æɾəd, "bɛɹi ðɛm. wi kænɑt bi ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ðeɪ cʊɾə bɪn teɪkən pɹɪznɝ. ðeɪ kəɾ əv bɪn. lɛɾ əm noʊ ðə læst ɛmbɹeɪs ə ðə mʌðɝ, ət list." mɛn ɹoʊd fɔɹwɝd dʒɪnʒɝli wɪð naɪvz; ivən fəɹ bæɾəl-hɑɹdənd ʃaɪnɝənz ɪt wɑz noʊ izi tæsk, kʌɾɪŋ daʊn ðə fleɪd kɔɹpsəz ə mɛn ðeɪ nu.

"Cut them down," Ingtar said harshly. He hesitated a moment, then added, "Bury them. We cannot be sure they were Darkfriends. They could have been taken prisoner. They could have been. Let them know the last embrace of the mother, at least." Men rode forward gingerly with knives; even for battle-hardened Shienarans it was no easy task, cutting down the flayed corpses of men they knew.

"ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt, ɹænd?" ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd. "aɪ æm nɑt juz tə ðɪs iðɝ."

"Are you all right, Rand?" Ingtar said. "I am not used to this either."

"aɪ . . . æm ɔl ɹaɪt, ɪŋtʃɹ." ɹænd lɛt ðə vɔɪd vænɪʃ. hi fɛlt lɛs sɪk wɪθaʊɾ ɪt; hɪz stʌmək stɪl kɝɾəld, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz bɛɾɝ. ɪŋtʃɹ nɑɾəd ən tɝn ɪz hɔɹs soʊ hi kəd wɑtʃ ðə mɛn wɝkɪŋ.

"I . . . am all right, Ingtar." Rand let the void vanish. He felt less sick without it; his stomach still curdled, but it was better. Ingtar nodded and turned his horse so he could watch the men working.

ðə bɛɹiəl wɑz sɪmpəl. tu hoʊlz dʌɡ ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ən ðə bɑɾiz leɪɾ ɪn əz ðə ɹɛst ə ðə ʃaɪnɝənz wɑtʃt ɪn saɪləns. ðə ɡɹeɪv dɪɡɝz bɪɡæn ʃʌvlɪŋ ɝθ ɪndə ðə ɡɹeɪvz wɪð noʊ mɔɹ ədu.

The burial was simple. Two holes dug in the ground, and the bodies laid in as the rest of the Shienarans watched in silence. The grave diggers began shoveling earth into the graves with no more ado.

ɹænd wɑz ʃɑkt, bʌt lɔɪəl ɪkspleɪn sɔfli. "ʃaɪnɝənz bɪliv wi ɔl keɪm fɹəm ɝθ, ən mʌst ɹɪtɝn tə ɝθ. ðeɪ nɛvɝ juz kɔfɪnz əɹ ʃɹaʊdz, ən ðə bɑɾiz ɑɹ nɛvɝ kloʊðd. ði ɝθ mʌs hoʊl ðə bɑɾi. ðə læst ɛmbɹeɪs ə ðə mʌðɝ, ðeɪ kɔl ɪt. ən ðəɹ ɑɹ nɛvɝ ɛni wɝdz ɪksɛpt 'ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn ju, ən ðə kɹieɪɾɝ ʃɛltɝ ju. ðə læst ɛmbɹeɪs ə ðə mʌðɝ wɛlkəm jə hoʊm.' " lɔɪəl saɪɾ ən ʃʊk ɪz hjudʒ hɛd. "aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ɛniwʌn wɪl seɪ ðɛm ðɪs taɪm. noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ ɪŋtʃɹ sɛz, ɹænd, ðəɹ kænɑt bi mʌtʃ daʊt ðət tʃæŋɡʌ ən naɪdaʊ slu ðə ɡɑɹdz ət ðə dɔɡ ɡeɪɾ ən lɛt ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪndə ðə kip. ɪt hæd tə bi ðeɪ hu wɝ ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ ɔl ʌv ɪt."

Rand was shocked, but Loial explained softly. "Shienarans believe we all came from earth, and must return to earth. They never use coffins or shrouds, and the bodies are never clothed. The earth must hold the body. The last embrace of the mother, they call it. And there are never any words except 'The Light shine on you, and the Creator shelter you. The last embrace of the mother welcome you home.' " Loial sighed and shook his huge head. "I do not think anyone will say them this time. No matter what Ingtar says, Rand, there cannot be much doubt that Changu and Nidao slew the guards at the Dog Gate and let the Darkfriends into the keep. It had to be they who were responsible for all of it."

"ðɛn u ʃɑt ði æɹoʊ ət - ət ði æmɪɝlɪn?" ɹænd swɑloʊd. hu ʃɑɾ ət mi? lɔɪəl sɛd nʌθɪŋ.

"Then who shot the arrow at - at the Amyrlin?" Rand swallowed. Who shot at me? Loial said nothing.

ənoʊ ɝaɪvd wɪð ðə ɹɛst ə ðə mɛn ən ðə pækhɔɹsɪz əz ðə læst ɝθ wɑz biɪŋ ʃʌvəld ɑntu ðə ɡɹeɪvz. sʌmwʌn toʊld ɪm wʌt ðeɪ hæd faʊnd, ən ðə wʌn-aɪd mæn spæt. "ɡoʊt-kɪsɪŋ tʃɹɑləks də ðəɾ əlɔŋ ðə blaɪt, səmtaɪmz. wən ðeɪ wɑnə ʃeɪk jəɹ blʌɾi nɝv, əɹ fleɪmɪŋ wɔɹn jə nɑt tə fɑloʊ. bɝn mi ɪf ɪt wɝks hɪɹ, iðɝ."

Uno arrived with the rest of the men and the packhorses as the last earth was being shoveled onto the graves. Someone told him what they had found, and the one-eyed man spat. "Goat-kissing Trollocs do that along the Blight, sometimes. When they want to shake your bloody nerve, or flaming warn you not to follow. Burn me if it works here, either."

bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ əweɪ, ɪŋtʃɹ pɔzd ɑn ɪz hɔɹs bɪsaɪd ði ənmɑɹkt ɡɹeɪvz, tu maʊnz ə bɛɹ ɝθ ðət lʊk tu smɔl tə hoʊl mɛn. æftɝ ə moʊmən i sɛd, "ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn ju, ən ðə kɹieɪɾɝ ʃɛltɝ ju. ðə læst ɛmbɹeɪs ə ðə mʌðɝ wɛlkəm jə hoʊm." wən i ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛd, hi lʊkt əɾ itʃ mæn ɪn tɝn. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn ɛni feɪs, list ʌv ɔl ɑn ɪŋtʃɹz. "ðeɪ seɪv lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ ət tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp," hi sɛd. sɛvɹəl ə ðə lænsɝz nɑɾəd. ɪŋtʃɹ tɝn ɪz hɔɹs. "wɪtʃ weɪ, hʊɹɪn?"

Before they rode away, Ingtar paused on his horse beside the unmarked graves, two mounds of bare earth that looked too small to hold men. After a moment he said, "The Light shine on you, and the Creator shelter you. The last embrace of the mother welcome you home." When he raised his head, he looked at each man in turn. There was no expression on any face, least of all on Ingtar's. "They saved Lord Agelmar at Tarwin's Gap," he said. Several of the lancers nodded. Ingtar turned his horse. "Which way, Hurin?"

"saʊθ, maɪ lɔɹd."

"South, my Lord."

"teɪk ðə tʃɹeɪl! wi hʌnt!"

"Take the trail! We hunt!"

ðə fɔɹəst sun ɡeɪv weɪ tə dʒɛnli ɹoʊlɪŋ flætlænd, səmtaɪmz kɹɔs baɪ ə ʃæloʊ stʃɹim ðət hæd dʌɡ ɪtsɛlf ə haɪ-bæŋk tʃænəl, wɪð nɛvɝ mɔɹ ðən ə loʊ ɹaɪz əɹ ə skwɑt hɪl ðət bɛɹli dɪzɝv ðə neɪm. pɝfəkt kʌntʃɹi fəɹ ðə hɔɹsəz. ɪŋtʃɹ tʊk ædvæntɪdʒ ʌv ɪt, sɛɾɪŋ ə stɛɾi, ɡɹaʊnd-kʌvɝɪŋ peɪs. əkeɪʒənəli ɹænd sɔ wʌt maɪɾ əv bɪn ə fɑɹmhaʊs ɪn ðə dɪstəns, ən wʌns wʌɾ i θɔt wɑz ə vɪlədʒ, wɪð smoʊk ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm tʃɪmniz ə fju maɪlz ɔf ən sʌmθɪŋ flæʃɪŋ waɪɾ ɪn ðə sʌn, bʌt ðə lænd nɪɹ əm steɪɾ ɛmpti ʌv hjumən laɪf, lɔŋ swɑðz ʌv ɡɹæs dɑɾəd wɪð bɹʌʃ ən əkeɪʒənəl tʃɹiz, wɪð naʊ ən əɡɛn ə smɔl θɪkɪt, nɛvɝ mɔɹ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əkɹɔs.

The forest soon gave way to gently rolling flatland, sometimes crossed by a shallow stream that had dug itself a high-banked channel, with never more than a low rise or a squat hill that barely deserved the name. Perfect country for the horses. Ingtar took advantage of it, setting a steady, ground-covering pace. Occasionally Rand saw what might have been a farmhouse in the distance, and once what he thought was a village, with smoke rising from chimneys a few miles off and something flashing white in the sun, but the land near them stayed empty of human life, long swathes of grass dotted with brush and occasional trees, with now and again a small thicket, never more than a hundred paces across.

ɪŋtʃɹ pʊɾ aʊt skaʊts, tu mɛn ɹaɪɾɪŋ əhɛd, ɪn saɪɾ oʊnli wən ðeɪ tɑpt ən əkeɪʒənəl ɹaɪz. hi hæɾ ə sɪlvɝ wɪsəl hæŋɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk tə kɔl əm bæk ɪf hʊɹɪn sɛd ðə tʃɹeɪl hæd vɪɹd, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt. saʊθ. ɔlweɪz saʊθ.

Ingtar put out scouts, two men riding ahead, in sight only when they topped an occasional rise. He had a silver whistle hanging around his neck to call them back if Hurin said the trail had veered, but it did not. South. Always south.

"wi wɪl ɹitʃ ðə fild ə tɑlədɑɹ ɪn θɹi əɹ fɔɹ deɪz ət ðɪs ɹeɪt," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛɾ əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd. "ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɡɹeɪɾəst sɪŋɡəl vɪktɝi, wən ðə hæfmən lɛd ðə tʃɹɑləks aʊɾ ə ðə blaɪɾ əɡɛns hɪm. sɪks deɪz ən naɪts, ɪt læstəd, ən wən ɪt wɑz dʌn, ðə tʃɹɑləks flɛd bæk ɪndə ðə blaɪɾ ən nɛvɝ dɛɹd tʃælənʒ ɪm əɡɛn. hi ɹeɪzd ə mɑnjəmən ðəɹ tə hɪz vɪktɝi, ə spaɪɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd spænz haɪ. hi wəd nɑt lɛɾ əm pʊɾ ɪz oʊn neɪm ɑn ɪt, bʌt ɹæðɝ ðə neɪmz ʌv ɛvɹi mæn u fɛl, ən ə ɡoʊldən sʌn ət ðə tɑp, sɪmbəl ðət ðəɹ ðə laɪt hæd tʃɹaɪəmft oʊvɝ ðə ʃædoʊ."

"We will reach the field of Talidar in three or four days at this rate," Ingtar said as they rode. "Artur Hawkwing's greatest single victory, when the Halfmen led the Trollocs out of the Blight against him. Six days and nights, it lasted, and when it was done, the Trollocs fled back into the Blight and never dared challenge him again. He raised a monument there to his victory, a spire a hundred spans high. He would not let them put his own name on it, but rather the names of every man who fell, and a golden sun at the top, symbol that there the Light had triumphed over the Shadow."

"aɪ wəd laɪk tə si ðæt," lɔɪəl sɛd. "aɪ hæv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə ðɪs mɑnjəmənt."

"I would like to see that," Loial said. "I have never heard of this monument."

ɪŋtʃɹ wɑz saɪlən fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ən wən i spoʊk ɪz vɔɪs wɑz kwaɪət. "ɪɾ ɪz nɑt ðəɹ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, bɪldɝ. wən hɔkwɪŋ daɪd, ðə wʌnz u fɔɾ oʊvɝ ɪz ɛmpaɪɝ kəd nɑt bɛɹ tə liv ə mɑnjəmən tə ə vɪktɝi ʌv hɪz, ivən ɪf ɪt dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən ɪz neɪm. ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ lɛf bʌt ðə maʊnd wɛɹ ɪt stʊd. ɪn θɹi əɹ fɔɹ deɪz wi kən si ðæt, ət list." hɪz toʊn dɪd nɑɾ əlaʊ mʌtʃ kɑnvɝseɪʃən æftɝwɝdz.

Ingtar was silent for a moment, and when he spoke his voice was quiet. "It is not there any longer, Builder. When Hawkwing died, the ones who fought over his empire could not bear to leave a monument to a victory of his, even if it did not mention his name. There's nothing left but the mound where it stood. In three or four days we can see that, at least." His tone did not allow much conversation afterwards.

wɪð ðə sʌn hæŋɪŋ ɡoʊldən oʊvɝhɛd, ðeɪ pæst ə stʃɹʌktʃɝ, skwɛɹ ən meɪɾ ə plæstɝd bɹɪk, lɛs ðən ə maɪl fɹəm ðɛɹ pæθ. ɪt wɑz nɑt tɔl, noʊ mɔɹ ðən tu stɔɹiz stɪl stændɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ i sɔ, bʌɾ ɪt kʌvɝɾ ə ɡʊd haɪɾ ʌv ɡɹaʊnd. ən ɛɹ ə lɔŋ əbændənmən hʌŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt, ɹufs ɡɔn ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju stʃɹɛtʃəz ə dɑɹk taɪl klɪŋɪŋ tə bɪts ə ɹæftɝ, moʊst ə ðə wʌns-waɪt plæstɝ fɔlən tə bɛɹ ðə dɑɹk, wɛðɝd bɹɪk bɪniθ, wɔlz fɔlən tə ʃoʊ kɔɹtʃjɑɹdz ən dəkeɪɪŋ tʃeɪmbɝz ɪnsaɪd. bɹʌʃ, ən ivən tʃɹiz, ɡɹu ɪn ðə kɹæks ʌv wʌt hæd wʌns bɪn kɔɹtʃjɑɹdz.

With the sun hanging golden overhead, they passed a structure, square and made of plastered brick, less than a mile from their path. It was not tall, no more than two stories still standing anywhere he saw, but it covered a good hide of ground. An air of long abandonment hung about it, roofs gone except for a few stretches of dark tile clinging to bits of rafter, most of the once-white plaster fallen to bare the dark, weathered brick beneath, walls fallen to show courtyards and decaying chambers inside. Brush, and even trees, grew in the cracks of what had once been courtyards.

"ə mænɝ haʊs," ɪŋtʃɹ ɪkspleɪnd. ðə lɪɾəl hjumɝ i hæd ɹiɡeɪn sim tə feɪɾ əz i lʊkt ət ðə stʃɹʌktʃɝ. "wɛn hɑɹəd dɑkɑɹ stɪl stʊd, aɪ ɪkspɛk ðə mænɔɹmən fɑɹm ðɪs læn fəɹ ə liɡ ɝaʊnd. ɔɹtʃɝdz, meɪbi. ðə hɑɹdɑni lʌv ðɛɹ ɔɹtʃɝdz."

"A manor house," Ingtar explained. The little humor he had regained seemed to fade as he looked at the structure. "When Harad Dakar still stood, I expect the manorman farmed this land for a league around. Orchards, maybe. The Hardani loved their orchards."

"hɑɹəd dɑkɑɹ?" ɹænd sɛd, ən ɪŋtʃɹ snɔɹɾɪd.

"Harad Dakar?" Rand said, and Ingtar snorted.

"dʌz noʊ wʌn lɝn hɪstɝi ɛni lɔŋɡɝ? hɑɹəd dɑkɑɹ, ðə kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv hɑɹɾən, wɪtʃ neɪʃən ðɪs wʌns wɑz ðət wəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ əkɹɔs."

"Does no one learn history any longer? Harad Dakar, the capital city of Hardan, which nation this once was that we are riding across."

"aɪv sin ən oʊl mæp," ɹænd ɹɪplaɪɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs. "aɪ noʊ əbaʊt ðə neɪʃənz ðəɾ ɑɹən ðəɹ ɛnimɔɹ. mɑɹeɪɾoʊ, ən ɡoʊbən, ən kæɹələn. bʌt ðəɹ wɑzn ɛni hɑɹɾən ɑn ɪt."

"I've seen an old map," Rand replied in a tight voice. "I know about the nations that aren't there anymore. Maredo, and Goaban, and Caralain. But there wasn't any Hardan on it."

"ðɛɹ wɝ wʌns ʌðɝz ðəɾ ɑɹ ɡɔn naʊ, tu," lɔɪəl sɛd. "mɑɹ hæɾən, wɪtʃ ɪz naʊ hæɾən mɝk, ən ɑlməθ. kintɑɹə. ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz kʌɾ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɛmpaɪɝ ɪndə mɛni neɪʃənz, lɑɹdʒ ən smɔl. ðə smɔl wɝ ɡɑbəld ʌp baɪ ðə lɑɹdʒ, əɹ ɛls junaɪɾəd, laɪk ɔltɑɹə ən mʊɹændi. fɔɹs təɡɛðɝ wəd bi ə bɛɾɝ wɝd ðən junaɪɾəd, aɪ səpoʊz."

"There were once others that are gone now, too," Loial said. "Mar Haddon, which is now Haddon Mirk, and Almoth. Kintara. The War of the Hundred Years cut Artur Hawkwing's empire into many nations, large and small. The small were gobbled up by the large, or else united, like Altara and Murandy. Forced together would be a better word than united, I suppose."

"soʊ wʌt hæpən tə ðɛm?" mæt dɪmændəd. ɹænd hæd nɑt noʊɾəst pɛɹɪn ən mæt ɹaɪɾ ʌp tə dʒɔɪn ðɛm. ðeɪ hæd bɪn ət ðə ɹɪɹ, əz fɑɹ fɹəm ɹænd ælθɹ əz ðeɪ kəd ɡɛt, ðə læst i hæd sin.

"So what happened to them?" Mat demanded. Rand had not noticed Perrin and Mat ride up to join them. They had been at the rear, as far from Rand al'Thor as they could get, the last he had seen.

"ðeɪ kəd nɑt hoʊl təɡɛðɝ," ði oʊɡiɝ ɹɪplaɪd. "kɹɑps feɪld, əɹ tʃɹeɪd feɪld. pipəl feɪld. sʌmθɪŋ feɪld ɪn itʃ keɪs, ən ðə neɪʃən dwɪndəld. ɔfən neɪbɝɪŋ kʌntʃɹiz əbzɔɹb ðə lænd, wən ðə neɪʃənz wɝ ɡɔn, bʌt ðeɪ nɛvɝ læstəd, ðoʊz ænɛkseɪʃənz. ɪn taɪm, ðə læn tʃɹuli wɑz əbændənd. səm vɪlədʒəz hæŋ ɑn hɪɹ ən ðɛɹ, bʌt moʊsli ðeɪv ɔl ɡɔn tə wɪldɝnəs. ɪts nɪɹli θɹi hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz sɪns hɑɹəd dɑkɑɹ wɑz faɪnəli əbændənd, bʌɾ ivən bɪfɔɹ ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ə ʃɛl, wɪð ə kɪŋ u kəd nɑt kəntʃɹoʊl wʌt hæpən ɪnsaɪd ðə sɪɾi wɔlz. hɑɹəd dɑkɑɹ ɪtsɛlf ɪz kəmplitli ɡɔn naʊ, aɪ ʌndɝstænd. ɔl ðə taʊnz ən sɪɾiz ə hɑɹɾən ɑɹ ɡɔn, ðə stoʊn kɑɹɾɪd əweɪ baɪ fɑɹmɝz ən vɪlɪdʒɝz fəɹ ðɛɹ oʊn juz. moʊst ə ðə fɑɹmz ən vɪlədʒəz meɪd wɪð ɪɾ ɑɹ ɡɔn, tu. soʊ aɪ ɹɛd, ən aɪv sin nʌθɪŋ tə tʃeɪnʒ ɪt."

"They could not hold together," the Ogier replied. "Crops failed, or trade failed. People failed. Something failed in each case, and the nation dwindled. Often neighboring countries absorbed the land, when the nations were gone, but they never lasted, those annexations. In time, the land truly was abandoned. Some villages hang on here and there, but mostly they have all gone to wilderness. It is nearly three hundred years since Harad Dakar was finally abandoned, but even before that it was a shell, with a king who could not control what happened inside the city walls. Harad Dakar itself is completely gone now, I understand. All the towns and cities of Hardan are gone, the stone carted away by farmers and villagers for their own use. Most of the farms and villages made with it are gone, too. So I read, and I've seen nothing to change it."

"ɪt wɑz kwaɪɾ ə kwɔɹi, hɑɹəd dɑkɑɹ, fəɹ ɔlmoʊst ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd bɪɾɝli. "ðə pipəl lɛft, faɪnəli, ən ðən ðə sɪɾi wɑz hɔld əweɪ, stoʊn baɪ stoʊn. ɔl feɪɾəd əweɪ, ən wʌɾ əz nɑt ɡɔn ɪz feɪɾɪŋ. ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ɛvɹiwɛɹ, feɪɾɪŋ. ðəɹ ɪz hɑɹdli ə neɪʃən ðət tʃɹuli kəntʃɹoʊlz ðə læn ɪt kleɪmz ɑn ə mæp, ən ðəɹ ɪz hɑɹdli ə læn ðət kleɪmz tədeɪ ɑn ə mæp wʌɾ ɪt dɪɾ ivən ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz əɡoʊ. wən ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz ɛndəd, ə mæn ɹoʊd fɹəm wʌn neɪʃən ɪndə ənʌðɝ wɪθaʊɾ ɛn fɹəm ðə blaɪt tə ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz. naʊ wi kən ɹaɪd θɹu wɪldɝnəs kleɪm baɪ noʊ neɪʃən fəɹ ɔlmoʊs ðə hoʊl ə ðə lænd. wi ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz əv əɹ bæɾəl wɪð ðə blaɪt tə kip əs stʃɹɔŋ, ən hoʊl. pɝhæps ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ əv wʌt ðeɪ niɾəd tə kip əm stʃɹɔŋ. jə seɪ ðeɪ feɪld, bɪldɝ? jɛs, ðeɪ feɪld, ən wʌt neɪʃən stændɪŋ hoʊl tədeɪ wɪl feɪl təmɑɹoʊ? wəɹ biɪŋ swɛpt əweɪ, hjumənkaɪnd. swɛpt əweɪ laɪk flɑtsəm ɑn ə flʌd. haʊ lɔŋ əntɪl ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ lɛf bʌt ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz? haʊ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ wi, tu, ɡoʊ ʌndɝ, ən ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ lɛf bʌt tʃɹɑləks ən mɹdʒɹɑl ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz?"

"It was quite a quarry, Harad Dakar, for almost a hundred years," Ingtar said bitterly. "The people left, finally, and then the city was hauled away, stone by stone. All faded away, and what has not gone is fading. Everything, everywhere, fading. There is hardly a nation that truly controls the land it claims on a map, and there is hardly a land that claims today on a map what it did even a hundred years ago. When the War of the Hundred Years ended, a man rode from one nation into another without end from the Blight to the Sea of Storms. Now we can ride through wilderness claimed by no nation for almost the whole of the land. We in the Borderlands have our battle with the Blight to keep us strong, and whole. Perhaps they did not have what they needed to keep them strong. You say they failed, Builder? Yes, they failed, and what nation standing whole today will fail tomorrow? We are being swept away, humankind. Swept away like flotsam on a flood. How long until there is nothing left but the Borderlands? How long before we, too, go under, and there is nothing left but Trollocs and Myrddraal all the way to the Sea of Storms?"

ðəɹ wɑz ə ʃɑk saɪləns. nɑɾ ivən mæt bɹoʊk ɪt. ɪŋtʃɹ ɹoʊd lɔst ɪn ɪz oʊn dɑɹk θɔts.

There was a shocked silence. Not even Mat broke it. Ingtar rode lost in his own dark thoughts.

æftɝ ə taɪm ðə skaʊts keɪm ɡæləpɪŋ bæk, stʃɹeɪɾ ɪn ðə sæɾəlz, lænsɪz ɪɹɛkt əɡɛns ðə skaɪ. "ə vɪlədʒ əhɛd, maɪ lɔɹd. wi wɝ nɑt sin, bʌɾ ɪt laɪz dɝɛkli ɪn əɹ laɪn ə mɑɹtʃ."

After a time the scouts came galloping back, straight in the saddles, lances erect against the sky. "A village ahead, my Lord. We were not seen, but it lies directly in our line of march."

ɪŋtʃɹ ʃʊk hɪmsɛlf aʊɾ ə hɪz bɹaʊn stʌɾi, bʌt dɪd nɑt spik əntɪl ðeɪ hæd ɹitʃt ðə kɹɛst ʌv ə loʊ ɹɪdʒ lʊkɪŋ daʊn ɑn ðə vɪlədʒ, ən ðən ɪt wɑz oʊnli tə kəmæn ə hɔlt waɪl i dʌɡ ə lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs fɹəm ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz ən ɹeɪzd ɪt tə pɪɹ ət ðə vɪlədʒ.

Ingtar shook himself out of his brown study, but did not speak until they had reached the crest of a low ridge looking down on the village, and then it was only to command a halt while he dug a looking glass from his saddlebags and raised it to peer at the village.

ɹænd stʌɾid ðə vɪlədʒ wɪð ɪntʃɹəst. ɪt wɑz əz bɪɡ əz ɛmənz fild, ðoʊ ðət wɑz nɑt vɛɹi bɪɡ kəmpɛɹd tə səm ə ðə taʊnz i hæd sin sɪns livɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, mʌtʃ lɛs ðə sɪɾiz. ðə haʊsəz wɝ ɔl loʊ ən plæstɝd wɪð waɪt kleɪ, ən ðeɪ əpɪɹd tə hæv ɡɹæs ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɑn sloʊpɪŋ ɹufs. ə dʌzən wɪndmɪlz, skæɾɝd θɹu ðə vɪlədʒ, tɝn læzəli, ðɛɹ lɔŋ, klɔθ-kʌvɝɾ ɑɹmz flæʃɪŋ waɪɾ ɪn ðə sʌn. ə loʊ wɔl ɪnsɝkəl ðə vɪlədʒ, ɡɹæsi dɝɾ ən tʃɛs haɪ, ən aʊtsaɪd ðət wɑz ə waɪd dɪtʃ wɪð ʃɑɹpən steɪks θɪk ɪn ðə bɑɾəm. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɡeɪɾ ɪn ðə wʌn oʊpənɪŋ i kəd si ɪn ðə wɔl, bʌɾ i səpoʊzd ɪt kəd bi blɑkt izəli ɪnʌf wɪð ə kɑɹɾ əɹ wæɡən. hi kəd nɑt si ɛni pipəl.

Rand studied the village with interest. It was as big as Emond's Field, though that was not very big compared to some of the towns he had seen since leaving the Two Rivers, much less the cities. The houses were all low and plastered with white clay, and they appeared to have grass growing on sloping roofs. A dozen windmills, scattered through the village, turned lazily, their long, cloth-covered arms flashing white in the sun. A low wall encircled the village, grassy dirt and chest high, and outside that was a wide ditch with sharpened stakes thick in the bottom. There was no gate in the one opening he could see in the wall, but he supposed it could be blocked easily enough with a cart or wagon. He could not see any people.

"nɑɾ ivən ə dɔɡ ɪn saɪt," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd, ɹɪtɝnɪŋ ðə lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs tə hɪz sæɾəlbæɡz. "ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ ðeɪ dɪd nɑt si ju?" hi æsk ðə skaʊts.

"Not even a dog in sight," Ingtar said, returning the looking glass to his saddlebags. "Are you sure they did not see you?" he asked the scouts.

"nɑɾ ənlɛs ðeɪv ðə dɑɹk wʌnz oʊn lʌk, maɪ lɔɹd," wʌn ə ðə mɛn ɹɪplaɪd. "wi nɛvɝ kɹɛstəd ðə ɹaɪz. wi dɪdn si ɛniwʌn muvɪŋ ðən iðɝ, maɪ lɔɹd."

"Not unless they have the Dark One's own luck, my Lord," one of the men replied. "We never crested the rise. We didn't see anyone moving then either, my Lord."

ɪŋtʃɹ nɑɾəd. "ðə tʃɹeɪl, hʊɹɪn?"

Ingtar nodded. "The trail, Hurin?"

hʊɹɪn dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. "təwɔɹd ðə vɪlədʒ, maɪ lɔɹd. stʃɹeɪt tə ɪt, əz nɪɹ əz aɪ kən tɛl fɹəm hɪɹ."

Hurin drew a deep breath. "Toward the village, my Lord. Straight to it, as near as I can tell from here."

"wɑtʃ ʃɑɹp," ɪŋtʃɹ kəmændəd, ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪz ɹeɪnz. "æn də nɑt bɪliv ðət ðəɹ fɹɛnli dʒʌs kəz ðeɪ smaɪl. ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ɛniwʌn ðɛɹ." hi lɛɾ əm daʊn təwɔɹd ðə vɪlədʒ əɾ ə sloʊ wɔk, ən ɹitʃt ʌp tə lusən ɪz sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪts skæbɝd.

"Watch sharp," Ingtar commanded, gathering his reins. "And do not believe that they're friendly just because they smile. If there is anyone there." He led them down toward the village at a slow walk, and reached up to loosen his sword in its scabbard.

ɹænd hɝd ðə saʊnz ʌv ʌðɝz bɪhaɪn ɪm duɪŋ ðə seɪm. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, hi iz hɪz, tu. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə steɪ əlaɪv wɑz nɑt ðə seɪm əz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bi ə hɪɹoʊ, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd.

Rand heard the sounds of others behind him doing the same. After a moment, he eased his, too. Trying to stay alive was not the same as trying to be a hero, he decided.

"ju θɪŋk ðiz pipəl wəd hɛlp dɑɹkfɹɛnz?" pɛɹɪn æskt ɪŋtʃɹ. ðə ʃaɪnɝən wɑz sloʊ ɪn ænsɝɪŋ.

"You think these people would help Darkfriends?" Perrin asked Ingtar. The Shienaran was slow in answering.

"ðeɪ hæv noʊ ɡɹeɪt lʌv fəɹ ʃaɪnɝənz," hi sɛd faɪnəli. "ðeɪ θɪŋk wi ʃəd pɹətɛk ðɛm. ʌs, əɹ ðə kɛɹhinɪn. kɛɹhin dɪd kleɪm ðɪs lænd, wʌns ðə læs kɪŋ ə hɑɹɾən daɪd. ɔl ðə weɪ tə ði ɛɹɪnɪn, ðeɪ kleɪmd ɪt. ðeɪ kəd nɑt hoʊld ɪt, ðoʊ. ðeɪ ɡeɪv ʌp ðə kleɪm nɪɹli ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz əɡoʊ. ðə fju pipəl u stɪl laɪv hɪɹ doʊn əv tə wɝi əbaʊt tʃɹɑləks ðɪs fɑɹ saʊθ, bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ plɛnti ʌv hjumən bɹɪɡænz. ðæts waɪ ðeɪv ðə wɔl, ən ðə dɪtʃ. ɔl ðɛɹ vɪlədʒəz du. ðɛɹ filz wɪl bi hɪɾən ɪn hɑloʊz ɝaʊn hɪɹ, bʌt noʊ wʌn wɪl lɪv aʊtsaɪd ðə wɔl. ðeɪ wəd swɛɹ fiəlti tə ɛni kɪŋ u wəd ɡɪv əm ɪz pɹətɛkʃən, bʌt wɪv ɔl wi kən də əɡɛns ðə tʃɹɑləks. ðeɪ də nɑt lʌv əs fəɹ ɪt, ðoʊ." əz ðeɪ ɹitʃt ði oʊpənɪŋ ɪn ðə loʊ wɔl, hi æɾəd əɡɛn, "wɑtʃ ʃɑɹp!"

"They have no great love for Shienarans," he said finally. "They think we should protect them. Us, or the Cairhienin. Cairhien did claim this land, once the last King of Hardan died. All the way to the Erinin, they claimed it. They could not hold it, though. They gave up the claim nearly a hundred years ago. The few people who still live here don't have to worry about Trollocs this far south, but there are plenty of human brigands. That's why they have the wall, and the ditch. All their villages do. Their fields will be hidden in hollows around here, but no one will live outside the wall. They would swear fealty to any king who would give them his protection, but we have all we can do against the Trollocs. They do not love us for it, though." As they reached the opening in the low wall, he added again, "Watch sharp!"

ɔl ðə stʃɹits lɛd təwɔɹɾ ə vɪlədʒ skwɛɹ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn ɪn ðə stʃɹits, noʊ wʌn piɹɪŋ fɹəm ə wɪndoʊ. nɑɾ ivən ə dɔɡ muvd, nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə tʃɪkən. nʌθɪŋ lɪvɪŋ. oʊpən dɔɹz swʌŋ, kɹikɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪnd, kaʊntɝpɔɪn tə ðə ɹɪðmɪk skwik ə ðə wɪndmɪlz. ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz saʊndəd laʊɾ ɑn ðə pæk dɝɾ ə ðə stʃɹit.

All the streets led toward a village square, but there was no one in the streets, no one peering from a window. Not even a dog moved, not so much as a chicken. Nothing living. Open doors swung, creaking in the wind, counterpoint to the rhythmic squeak of the windmills. The horses' hooves sounded loud on the packed dirt of the street.

"laɪk ət ðə fɛɹi," hʊɹɪn mʌɾɝd, "bʌt dɪfɹənt." hi ɹoʊd hʌntʃt ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, hɛd daʊn əz ɪf i wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə haɪd bɪhaɪn ɪz oʊn ʃoʊldɝz. "vaɪələns dʌn, bʌt . . . aɪ doʊnt noʊ. ɪt wɑz bæd hɪɹ. ɪt smɛlz bæd."

"Like at the ferry," Hurin muttered, "but different." He rode hunched in his saddle, head down as if he were trying to hide behind his own shoulders. "Violence done, but . . . I don't know. It was bad here. It smells bad."

"ənoʊ," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd, "teɪk wʌn faɪl ən sɝtʃ ðə haʊsəz. ɪf jə faɪn ɛniwʌn, bɹɪŋ əm tə mi ɪn ðə skwɛɹ. də nɑt fɹaɪɾən əm ðɪs taɪm, ðoʊ. aɪ wɑn ænsɝz, nɑt pipəl ɹʌnɪŋ fəɹ ðɛɹ lɪvz." hi lɛd ði ʌðɝ soʊlʒɝz təwɔɹd ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə vɪlədʒ əz ənoʊ ɡɑɾ ɪz tɛn dɪsmaʊntɪd.

"Uno," Ingtar said, "take one file and search the houses. If you find anyone, bring them to me in the square. Do not frighten them this time, though. I want answers, not people running for their lives." He led the other soldiers toward the center of the village as Uno got his ten dismounted.

ɹænd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊnd. ðə kɹikɪŋ dɔɹz, ðə skwilɪŋ wɪndmɪlz, ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz, ɔl meɪd tu mʌtʃ nɔɪz, əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ nɑɾ ənʌðɝ saʊn ɪn ðə wɝld. hi skæn ðə haʊsəz. ðə kɝɾənz ɪn ən oʊpən wɪndoʊ biɾ əɡɛns ði aʊtsaɪɾ ə ðə haʊs. ðeɪ ɔl sim laɪfləs. wɪð ə saɪ hi ɡɑt daʊn ən wɔk tə ðə nɪɹəs haʊs, ðən stɑpt, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə dɔɹ.

Rand hesitated, looking around. The creaking doors, the squealing windmills, the horses' hooves, all made too much noise, as if there were not another sound in the world. He scanned the houses. The curtains in an open window beat against the outside of the house. They all seemed lifeless. With a sigh he got down and walked to the nearest house, then stopped, staring at the door.

ɪts dʒʌst ə dɔɹ. wʌɾ ɑɹ jə əfɹeɪɾ ʌv? hi wɪʃt i dɪd nɑt fil əz ɪf ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. hi pʊʃt ɪɾ oʊpən.

It's just a door. What are you afraid of? He wished he did not feel as if there was something waiting on the other side. He pushed it open.

ɪnsaɪd wɑz ə taɪɾi ɹum. əɹ hæd bɪn. ðə teɪbəl wɑz sɛt fəɹ ə mil, læɾɝ-bæk tʃɛɹz ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊnd, səm pleɪts ɔlɹɛɾi sɝvd. ə fju flaɪz bʌzd əbʌv boʊlz ə tɝnəps ən piz, ən mɔɹ kɹɔld ɑn ə koʊld ɹoʊst sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ɪts oʊn kəndʒild ɡɹis. ðəɹ wɑz ə slaɪs hæf kɑɹv fɹəm ðə ɹoʊst, ðə fɔɹk stɪl stændɪŋ stʌk ɪn ðə miɾ ən ðə kɑɹvɪŋ naɪf laɪɪŋ pɑɹtweɪ ɪn ðə plæɾɝ əz ɪf dʒɹɑpt. ɹænd stɛpt ɪnsaɪd.

Inside was a tidy room. Or had been. The table was set for a meal, ladder-back chairs gathered around, some plates already served. A few flies buzzed above bowls of turnips and peas, and more crawled on a cold roast sitting in its own congealed grease. There was a slice half carved from the roast, the fork still standing stuck in the meat and the carving knife lying partway in the platter as if dropped. Rand stepped inside.

blɪŋk.

Blink.

ə smaɪlɪŋ, bɔld-hɛɾəd mæn ɪn ɹʌf kloʊðz leɪɾ ə slaɪs ə miɾ ɑn ə pleɪt hɛl baɪ ə wʊmən wɪð ə wɔɹn feɪs. ʃi wɑz smaɪlɪŋ, tu, ðoʊ. ʃi æɾəd piz ən tɝnəps tə ðə pleɪɾ ən pæst ɪt tə wʌn ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən laɪnɪŋ ðə teɪbəl. ðəɹ wɝ hæf ə dʌzən tʃɪlʒɹən, bɔɪz ən ɡɝlz, fɹəm nɪɹli ɡɹoʊn daʊn tə bɛɹli tɔl ɪnʌf tə lʊk oʊvɝ ðə teɪbəl. ðə wʊmən sɛd sʌmθɪŋ, ən ðə ɡɝl teɪkɪŋ ðə pleɪt fɹəm əɹ læft. ðə mæn stɑɹɾəd tə kʌɾ ənʌðɝ slaɪs.

A smiling, bald-headed man in rough clothes laid a slice of meat on a plate held by a woman with a worn face. She was smiling, too, though. She added peas and turnips to the plate and passed it to one of the children lining the table. There were half a dozen children, boys and girls, from nearly grown down to barely tall enough to look over the table. The woman said something, and the girl taking the plate from her laughed. The man started to cut another slice.

sʌɾənli ənʌðɝ ɡɝl skɹimd, pɔɪntɪŋ ət ðə dɔɹ tə ðə stʃɹit. ðə mæn dʒɹɑp ðə kɑɹvɪŋ naɪf ən wɝld, ðən i skɹimd, tu, feɪs taɪt wɪð hɔɹɝ, ən snætʃt ʌp ə tʃaɪld. ðə wʊmən ɡɹæbd ənʌðɝ, ən moʊʃən dɛspɝətli tə ði ʌðɝz, hɝ maʊθ wɝkɪŋ fɹæntəkəli, saɪlənli. ðeɪ ɔl skɹæbəl təwɔɹɾ ə dɔɹ ɪn ðə bæk ə ðə ɹum.

Suddenly another girl screamed, pointing at the door to the street. The man dropped the carving knife and whirled, then he screamed, too, face tight with horror, and snatched up a child. The woman grabbed another, and motioned desperately to the others, her mouth working frantically, silently. They all scrabbled toward a door in the back of the room.

ðət dɔɹ bɝst oʊpən, ən -  blɪŋk.

That door burst open, and -  Blink.

ɹænd kəd nɑt muv. ðə flaɪz bʌzɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə teɪbəl saʊndəd laʊɾɝ. hɪz bɹɛθ meɪɾ ə klaʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz maʊθ.

Rand could not move. The flies buzzing over the table sounded louder. His breath made a cloud in front of his mouth.

blɪŋk.

Blink.

ə smaɪlɪŋ, bɔld-hɛɾəd mæn ɪn ɹʌf kloʊðz leɪɾ ə slaɪs ə miɾ ɑn ə pleɪt hɛl baɪ ə wʊmən wɪð ə wɔɹn feɪs. ʃi wɑz smaɪlɪŋ, tu, ðoʊ. ʃi æɾəd piz ən tɝnəps tə ðə pleɪɾ ən pæst ɪt tə wʌn ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən laɪnɪŋ ðə teɪbəl. ðəɹ wɝ hæf ə dʌzən tʃɪlʒɹən, bɔɪz ən ɡɝlz, fɹəm nɪɹli ɡɹoʊn daʊn tə bɛɹli tɔl ɪnʌf tə lʊk oʊvɝ ðə teɪbəl. ðə wʊmən sɛd sʌmθɪŋ, ən ðə ɡɝl teɪkɪŋ ðə pleɪt fɹəm əɹ læft. ðə mæn stɑɹɾəd tə kʌɾ ənʌðɝ slaɪs.

A smiling, bald-headed man in rough clothes laid a slice of meat on a plate held by a woman with a worn face. She was smiling, too, though. She added peas and turnips to the plate and passed it to one of the children lining the table. There were half a dozen children, boys and girls, from nearly grown down to barely tall enough to look over the table. The woman said something, and the girl taking the plate from her laughed. The man started to cut another slice.

sʌɾənli ənʌðɝ ɡɝl skɹimd, pɔɪntɪŋ ət ðə dɔɹ tə ðə stʃɹit. ðə mæn dʒɹɑp ðə kɑɹvɪŋ naɪf ən wɝld, ðən i skɹimd, tu, feɪs taɪt wɪð hɔɹɝ, ən snætʃt ʌp ə tʃaɪld. ðə wʊmən ɡɹæbd ənʌðɝ, ən moʊʃən dɛspɝətli tə ði ʌðɝz, hɝ maʊθ wɝkɪŋ fɹæntəkəli, saɪlənli. ðeɪ ɔl skɹæbəl təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ ɪn ðə bæk ə ðə ɹum.

Suddenly another girl screamed, pointing at the door to the street. The man dropped the carving knife and whirled, then he screamed, too, face tight with horror, and snatched up a child. The woman grabbed another, and motioned desperately to the others, her mouth working frantically, silently. They all scrabbled toward the door in the back of the room.

ðət dɔɹ bɝst oʊpən, ən -  blɪŋk.

That door burst open, and -  Blink.

ɹænd stʃɹʌɡəld, bʌɾ ɪz mʌsəlz sim fɹoʊzən. ðə ɹum wɑz koʊldɝ; hi wɑntəd tə ʃɪvɝ, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt muv ivən ðət mʌtʃ. flaɪz kɹɔld ɔl oʊvɝ ðə teɪbəl. hi ɡɹoʊp fəɹ ðə vɔɪd. ðə saʊɝ laɪt wɑz ðɛɹ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt kɛɹ. hi hæd tə -  blɪŋk.

Rand struggled, but his muscles seemed frozen. The room was colder; he wanted to shiver, but he could not move even that much. Flies crawled all over the table. He groped for the void. The sour light was there, but he did not care. He had to -  Blink.

ə smaɪlɪŋ, bɔld-hɛɾəd mæn ɪn ɹʌf kloʊðz leɪɾ ə slaɪs ə miɾ ɑn ə pleɪt hɛl baɪ ə wʊmən wɪð ə wɔɹn feɪs. ʃi wɑz smaɪlɪŋ, tu, ðoʊ. ʃi æɾəd piz ən tɝnəps tə ðə pleɪɾ ən pæst ɪt tə wʌn ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən laɪnɪŋ ðə teɪbəl. ðəɹ wɝ hæf ə dʌzən tʃɪlʒɹən, bɔɪz ən ɡɝlz, fɹəm nɪɹli ɡɹoʊn daʊn tə bɛɹli tɔl ɪnʌf tə lʊk oʊvɝ ðə teɪbəl. ðə wʊmən sɛd sʌmθɪŋ, ən ðə ɡɝl teɪkɪŋ ðə pleɪt fɹəm əɹ læft. ðə mæn stɑɹɾəd tə kʌɾ ənʌðɝ slaɪs.

A smiling, bald-headed man in rough clothes laid a slice of meat on a plate held by a woman with a worn face. She was smiling, too, though. She added peas and turnips to the plate and passed it to one of the children lining the table. There were half a dozen children, boys and girls, from nearly grown down to barely tall enough to look over the table. The woman said something, and the girl taking the plate from her laughed. The man started to cut another slice.

sʌɾənli ənʌðɝ ɡɝl skɹimd, pɔɪntɪŋ ət ðə dɔɹ tə ðə stʃɹit. ðə mæn dʒɹɑp ðə kɑɹvɪŋ naɪf ən wɝld, ðən i skɹimd, tu, feɪs taɪt wɪð hɔɹɝ, ən snætʃt ʌp ə tʃaɪld. ðə wʊmən ɡɹæbd ənʌðɝ, ən moʊʃən dɛspɝətli tə ði ʌðɝz, hɝ maʊθ wɝkɪŋ fɹæntəkəli, saɪlənli. ðeɪ ɔl skɹæbəl təwɔɹɾ ə dɔɹ ɪn ðə bæk ə ðə ɹum.

Suddenly another girl screamed, pointing at the door to the street. The man dropped the carving knife and whirled, then he screamed, too, face tight with horror, and snatched up a child. The woman grabbed another, and motioned desperately to the others, her mouth working frantically, silently. They all scrabbled toward a door in the back of the room.

ðət dɔɹ bɝst oʊpən, ən -  blɪŋk.

That door burst open, and -  Blink.

ðə ɹum wɑz fɹizɪŋ. soʊ koʊld. flaɪz blækən ðə teɪbəl; ðə wɔlz wɝ ə ʃɪftɪŋ mæs ə flaɪz, ðə flɔɹ, ðə silɪŋ, ɔl blæk wɪð ðɛm. ðeɪ kɹɔld ɑn ɹænd, kʌvɝɪŋ hɪm, kɹɔld oʊvɝ ɪz feɪs, hɪz aɪz, ɪndə hɪz noʊz, hɪz maʊθ. laɪt, hɛlp mi. koʊld. ðə flaɪz bʌz laɪk θʌndɝ. koʊld. ɪt pɛnətʃɹeɪɾəd ðə vɔɪd, mɑkɪŋ ði ɛmptinəs, ɛnkəsɪŋ ɪm ɪn aɪs. dɛspɝətli hi ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə flɪkɝɪŋ laɪt. hɪz stʌmək twɪstəd, bʌt ðə laɪt wɑz wɔɹm. wɔɹm. hɑt. hi wɑz hɑt.

The room was freezing. So cold. Flies blackened the table; the walls were a shifting mass of flies, the floor, the ceiling, all black with them. They crawled on Rand, covering him, crawled over his face, his eyes, into his nose, his mouth. Light, help me. Cold. The flies buzzed like thunder. Cold. It penetrated the void, mocking the emptiness, encasing him in ice. Desperately he reached for the flickering light. His stomach twisted, but the light was warm. Warm. Hot. He was hot.

sʌɾənli hi wɑz tɛɹɪŋ ət . . . sʌmθɪŋ. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt, əɹ haʊ. kɑbwɛbz meɪɾ ə stil. munbimz kɑɹv fɹəm stoʊn. ðeɪ kɹʌmbəld əɾ ɪz tʌtʃ, bʌɾ i nu hi hæd nɑt tʌtʃt ɛniθɪŋ. ðeɪ ʃɹɪvəld ən mɛltəd wɪð ðə hit ðət sɝdʒ θɹu hɪm, hit laɪk ə fɔɹdʒ faɪɝ, hit laɪk ðə wɝl bɝnɪŋ, hit laɪk -  ɪt wɑz ɡɔn. pæntɪŋ, hi lʊkt ɝaʊnd wɪð waɪɾ aɪz. ə fju flaɪz leɪ ɑn ðə hæf-kɑɹvd ɹoʊst, ɪn ðə plæɾɝ. dɛd flaɪz. sɪks flaɪz. oʊnli sɪks. ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ ɪn ðə boʊlz, hæf ə dʌzən taɪni blæk spɛks əmʌŋ ðə koʊl vɛdʒtəbəlz. ɔl dɛd. hi stæɡɝɾ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə stʃɹit.

Suddenly he was tearing at . . . something. He did not know what, or how. Cobwebs made of steel. Moonbeams carved from stone. They crumbled at his touch, but he knew he had not touched anything. They shriveled and melted with the heat that surged through him, heat like a forge fire, heat like the world burning, heat like -  It was gone. Panting, he looked around with wide eyes. A few flies lay on the half-carved roast, in the platter. Dead flies. Six flies. Only six. There were more in the bowls, half a dozen tiny black specks among the cold vegetables. All dead. He staggered out into the street.

mæt wɑz dʒʌs kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə haʊs əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹit, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd. "noʊbɑdi ðɛɹ," hi toʊl pɛɹɪn, stɪl ɑn ɪz hɔɹs. "ɪt lʊks laɪk ðeɪ dʒʌst ɡɑɾ ʌp ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə sʌpɝ ən wɔkt əweɪ."

Mat was just coming out of a house across the street, shaking his head. "Nobody there," he told Perrin, still on his horse. "It looks like they just got up in the middle of supper and walked away."

ə ʃaʊt keɪm fɹəm ðə skwɛɹ.

A shout came from the square.

"ðeɪv faʊn sʌmθɪŋ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, dɪɡɪŋ ɪz hilz ɪndə hɪz hɔɹsəz flæŋks. mæt skɹæmbəld ɪndə hɪz sæɾəl ən ɡæləpt æftɝ hɪm.

"They've found something," Perrin said, digging his heels into his horse's flanks. Mat scrambled into his saddle and galloped after him.

ɹænd maʊntəd ɹɛd mɔɹ sloʊli; ðə stæljən ʃaɪɾ əz ɪf filɪŋ ɪz əniz. hi ɡlænst ət ðə haʊsəz əz i ɹoʊd sloʊli təwɔɹd ðə skwɛɹ, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt meɪk hɪmsɛlf lʊk əɾ əm fəɹ lɔŋ. mæt wɛn ɪn wʌn, ən nʌθɪŋ hæpən tə hɪm. hi ɹizɑlv nɑt tə sɛt fʊɾ ɪnsaɪɾ ənʌðɝ haʊs ɪn ðət vɪlədʒ noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt. buɾɪŋ ɹɛd, hi kwɪkən ɪz peɪs.

Rand mounted Red more slowly; the stallion shied as if feeling his unease. He glanced at the houses as he rode slowly toward the square, but he could not make himself look at them for long. Mat went in one, and nothing happened to him. He resolved not to set foot inside another house in that village no matter what. Booting Red, he quickened his pace.

ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz stændɪŋ laɪk stætʃuz ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə lɑɹdʒ bɪldɪŋ wɪð waɪd dʌbəl dɔɹz. ɹænd dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt kəd bi ən ɪn; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn, fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ. pɝhæps ə vɪlədʒ miɾɪŋ pleɪs. hi dʒɔɪn ðə saɪlən sɝkəl, ən stɛɹɾ əlɔŋ wɪð ðə ɹɛst.

Everyone was standing like statues in front of a large building with wide double doors. Rand did not think it could be an inn; there was no sign, for one thing. Perhaps a village meeting place. He joined the silent circle, and stared along with the rest.

ðəɹ wɑz ə mæn spɹɛd-iɡəld əkɹɔs ðə dɔɹz wɪð θɪk spaɪks θɹu ɹɪsts ən ʃoʊldɝz. mɔɹ spaɪks hæd bɪn dʒɹɪvən ɪndə hɪz aɪz tə hoʊld ɪz hɛɾ ʌp. dɑɹk, dʒɹaɪd blʌd meɪd fænz daʊn ɪz tʃiks. skʌf mɑɹks ɑn ðə wʊd bɪhaɪn ɪz buts ʃoʊd ðəɾ i hæd bɪn əlaɪv wən ɪt wɑz dʌn. wən ɪt bɪɡæn, ɛniweɪ.

There was a man spread-eagled across the doors with thick spikes through wrists and shoulders. More spikes had been driven into his eyes to hold his head up. Dark, dried blood made fans down his cheeks. Scuff marks on the wood behind his boots showed that he had been alive when it was done. When it began, anyway.

ɹændz bɹɛθ kɑt. nɑɾ ə mæn. ðoʊz blæk kloʊðz, blækɝ ðən blæk, hæd nɛvɝ bɪn wɔɹn baɪ ɛni hjumən. ðə wɪn flæpt ən ɛn ə ðə kloʊk kɑt bɪhaɪn ðə bɑɾi - wɪtʃ ɪt dɪd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz, hi nu tu wɛl; ðə wɪn dɪd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz tʌtʃ ðoʊz kloʊðz - bʌt ðəɹ hæd nɛvɝ bɪn ɛni aɪz ɪn ðət peɪl, blʌdləs feɪs.

Rand's breath caught. Not a man. Those black clothes, blacker than black, had never been worn by any human. The wind flapped an end of the cloak caught behind the body - which it did not always, he knew too well; the wind did not always touch those clothes - but there had never been any eyes in that pale, bloodless face.

"mɹdʒɹɑl," hi bɹiðd, ən ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ɪz spikɪŋ ɹilist ɔl ði ʌðɝz. ðeɪ bɪɡæn tə muv əɡɛn, ən bɹið.

"Myrddraal," he breathed, and it was as if his speaking released all the others. They began to move again, and breathe.

"hu," mæt bɪɡæn, ən hæd tə stɑp tə swɑloʊ. "hu kəd də ðɪs tə ə feɪd?" hɪz vɔɪs skwikt ət ði ɛnd.

"Who," Mat began, and had to stop to swallow. "Who could do this to a Fade?" His voice squeaked at the end.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd. "aɪ də nɑt noʊ." hi lʊkt ɝaʊnd, ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ feɪsəz, əɹ pɝhæps kaʊntɪŋ tə bi ʃʊɹ ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz ðɛɹ. "æn aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk wɪl lɝn ɛniθɪŋ hɪɹ. wi ɹaɪd. maʊnt! hʊɹɪn, faɪn ðə tʃɹeɪl aʊɾ ə ðɪs pleɪs."

"I don't know," Ingtar said. "I do not know." He looked around, examining faces, or perhaps counting to be sure everyone was there. "And I do not think we will learn anything here. We ride. Mount! Hurin, find the trail out of this place."

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd. jɛs. wɪð plɛʒɝ. ðət weɪ, maɪ lɔɹd. ðəɹ stɪl hɛɾɪŋ saʊθ."

"Yes, my Lord. Yes. With pleasure. That way, my Lord. They're still heading south."

ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ əweɪ livɪŋ ðə dɛd mɹdʒɹɑl wɛɹ ɪt hʌŋ, ðə wɪn stɝɪŋ ɪts blæk kloʊk. hʊɹɪn wɑz fɝs bɪɑn ðə wɔl, nɑt weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ɪŋtʃɹ fəɹ ə tʃeɪnʒ, bʌt ɹænd keɪm kloʊs bɪhaɪn hɪm.

They rode away leaving the dead Myrddraal where it hung, the wind stirring its black cloak. Hurin was first beyond the wall, not waiting on Ingtar for a change, but Rand came close behind him.


tʃæptɝ ɪlɛvən


CHAPTER 11

ɡlɪmɝz ə ðə pæɾɝn


Glimmers of the Pattern

fəɹ wʌns, ɪŋtʃɹ kɔld ə hɔl tə ðə deɪz mɑɹtʃ wɪð ðə sʌn stɪl ɡoʊldən əbʌv ðə hɝaɪzən. ðə tʌfənd ʃaɪnɝənz wɝ filɪŋ ði ɪfɛks ʌv wʌt ðeɪ hæd sin ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ. ɪŋtʃɹ hæd nɑt stɑp soʊ ɝli bɪfɔɹ, ən ðə kæmpsaɪɾ i tʃoʊz hæd ðə lʊk ʌv ə pleɪs ðət kəd bi dɪfɛndəd. ɪt wɑz ə dip hɑloʊ, ɔlmoʊst ɹaʊnd, ən bɪɡ ɪnʌf tə hoʊld ɔl ðə mɛn ən hɔɹsəz kʌmfɝɾəbli. ə spɑɹs θɪkɪɾ ə skɹʌb oʊk ən lɛðɝlif kʌvɝd ði aʊɾɝ sloʊps. ðə ɹɪm ɪtsɛlf stʊd mɔɹ ðən haɪ ɪnʌf tə haɪɾ ɛniwʌn ɪn ðə kæmpsaɪɾ ivən wɪθaʊt ðə tʃɹiz. ðə haɪt nɪɹli pæs fəɹ ə hɪl, ɪn ðət kʌntʃɹi.

For once, Ingtar called a halt to the day's march with the sun still golden above the horizon. The toughened Shienarans were feeling the effects of what they had seen in the village. Ingtar had not stopped so early before, and the campsite he chose had the look of a place that could be defended. It was a deep hollow, almost round, and big enough to hold all the men and horses comfortably. A sparse thicket of scrub oak and leatherleaf covered the outer slopes. The rim itself stood more than high enough to hide anyone in the campsite even without the trees. The height nearly passed for a hill, in that country.

"ɔl aɪm blʌɾi seɪɪŋ," hi hɝɾ ənoʊ tɛl ɹeɪɡən əz ðeɪ dɪsmaʊntɪd, "ɪz ðəɾ aɪ blʌɾi sɔ hɝ, bɝn ju. dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ wi faʊn ðə ɡoʊt-kɪsɪŋ hæfmən. ðə seɪm fleɪmɪŋ wʊmən əz ət ðə fleɪmɪŋ fɛɹi. ʃi wɑz ðɛɹ, ən ðən ʃi blʌɾi wɑznt. jə seɪ wʌt jə blʌɾi wɑn tə, bʌt jə wɑtʃ haʊ jə fleɪmɪŋ seɪ ɪt, əɹ əl blʌɾi skɪn jə maɪsɛlf, ən bɝn ðə ɡoʊt-kɪsɪŋ haɪd, jə ʃip-ɡʌɾɪd mɪlk-dʒɹɪŋkɝ."

"All I'm bloody saying," he heard Uno tell Ragan as they dismounted, "is that I bloody saw her, burn you. Just before we found the goat-kissing Halfman. The same flaming woman as at the flaming ferry. She was there, and then she bloody wasn't. You say what you bloody want to, but you watch how you flaming say it, or I'll bloody skin you myself, and burn the goat-kissing hide, you sheep-gutted milk-drinker."

ɹænd pɔzd wɪð wʌn fʊɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ən ði ʌðɝ stɪl ɪn ðə stɝəp. ðə seɪm wʊmən? bʌt ðəɹ wɑzn ɛni wʊmən ət ðə fɛɹi, dʒʌst səm kɝɾənz bloʊɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪnd. ən ʃi kʊdn əv ɡɑɾən tə ðət vɪlədʒ əhɛɾ ʌv əs ɪf ðəɹ hæd bɪn. ðə vɪlədʒ. . . .

Rand paused with one foot on the ground and the other still in the stirrup. The same woman? But there wasn't any woman at the ferry, just some curtains blowing in the wind. And she couldn't have gotten to that village ahead of us if there had been. The village. . . .

hi ʃaɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə θɔt. ivən mɔɹ ðən ðə feɪd neɪl tə ðə dɔɹ, hi wɑntəd tə fɝɡɛt ðət ɹum, ən ðə flaɪz, ən ðə pipəl u wɝ ðəɹ ən nɑt ðɛɹ. ðə hæfmən hæd bɪn ɹil - ɛvɹibɑɾi hæd sin ðət - bʌt ðə ɹum. . . . meɪbi aɪm faɪnəli ɡoʊɪŋ mæd. hi wɪʃt mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz ðəɹ tə tɔk tə. wɪʃɪŋ fəɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. jə ɑɹ ə ful. jəɹ wɛl aʊɾ ə ðæt, naʊ steɪ aʊt. bʌɾ æm aɪ aʊt? wʌt hæpən ðɛɹ?

He shied away from the thought. Even more than the Fade nailed to the door, he wanted to forget that room, and the flies, and the people who were there and not there. The Halfman had been real - everybody had seen that - but the room. . . . Maybe I'm finally going mad. He wished Moiraine was there to talk to. Wishing for an Aes Sedai. You are a fool. You're well out of that, now stay out. But am I out? What happened there?

"pækhɔɹsɪz ən səplaɪz ɪn ðə mɪɾəl," ɪŋtʃɹ kəmændəɾ əz ðə lænsɝz wɛn əbaʊt sɛɾɪŋ ʌp kæmp. "ɹʌb ðə hɔɹsəz daʊn, ðən sæɾəl əm əɡɛn ɪn keɪs wi mʌs muv kwɪkli. ɛvɹi mæn slips baɪ hɪz maʊnt, ən ðɛɹəl bi noʊ faɪɝz tənaɪt. wɑtʃ tʃeɪnʒəz ɛvɹi tu aʊɝz. ənoʊ, aɪ wɑn skaʊts aʊt, əz fɑɹ əz ðeɪ kən ɹaɪɾ ən ɹɪtɝn bɪfɔɹ dɑɹk. aɪ wɑnə noʊ wʌɾ ɪz aʊt ðɛɹ."

"packhorses and supplies in the middle," Ingtar commanded as the lancers went about setting up camp. "Rub the horses down, then saddle them again in case we must move quickly. Every man sleeps by his mount, and there'll be no fires tonight. Watch changes every two hours. Uno, I want scouts out, as far as they can ride and return before dark. I want to know what is out there."

hiz filɪŋ ɪt, ɹænd θɔt. ɪɾ ɪzən dʒʌst səm dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən ə fju tʃɹɑləks ən meɪbi ə feɪɾ ɛnimɔɹ. dʒʌst səm dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən ə fju tʃɹɑləks, ən meɪbi ə feɪd! ivən ə fju deɪz bɪfɔɹ ðəɹ wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn ɛni "dʒʌst" əbaʊɾ ɪt. ivən ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, ivən wɪð ðə blaɪt lɛs ðən ə deɪz ɹaɪd, dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən tʃɹɑləks ən mɹdʒɹɑl hæd bɪn bæɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə naɪtmɛɹ, ðɛn. bɪfɔɹ i hæd sin ə mɹdʒɹɑl neɪl tə ə dɔɹ. wʌɾ ɪn ðə laɪt cʊɾə dʌn ðæt? wʌt nɑɾ ɪn ðə laɪt? bɪfɔɹ i hæd wɔkt ɪndə ə ɹum wɛɹ ə fæmli hæd hæd ðɛɹ sʌpɝ ən ðɛɹ læftɝ kʌɾ ɔf. aɪ mʌst əv ɪmædʒən ɪt. aɪ mʌs hæv. ivən ɪn ɪz oʊn hɛɾ i dɪd nɑt saʊn vɛɹi kənvɪnsɪŋ. hi hæd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən ðə wɪn ɑn ðə taʊɝ tɑp, əɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn seɪɪŋ -  "ɹænd?" hi dʒʌmpt əz ɪŋtʃɹ spoʊk əɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "ɑɹ jə gɑnə steɪ ɔl naɪt wɪð wʌn fʊɾ ɪn ðə stɝəp?"

He's feeling it, Rand thought. It isn't just some Darkfriends and a few Trollocs and maybe a Fade anymore. Just some Darkfriends and a few Trollocs, and maybe a Fade! Even a few days before there would not have been any "just" about it. Even in the Borderlands, even with the Blight less than a day's ride, Darkfriends and Trollocs and Myrddraal had been bad enough for a nightmare, then. Before he had seen a Myrddraal nailed to a door. What in the Light could have done that? What not in the Light? Before he had walked into a room where a family had had their supper and their laughter cut off. I must have imagined it. I must have. Even in his own head he did not sound very convincing. He had not imagined the wind on the tower top, or the Amyrlin saying -  "Rand?" He jumped as Ingtar spoke at his shoulder. "Are you going to stay all night with one foot in the stirrup?"

ɹænd pʊɾ ɪz ʌðɝ fʊɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. "ɪŋtʃɹ, wʌt hæpən bæk ət ðət vɪlədʒ?"

Rand put his other foot on the ground. "Ingtar, what happened back at that village?"

"tʃɹɑləks tʊk ðɛm. ðə seɪm əz ðə pipəl ət ðə fɛɹi. ðəɾ ɪz wʌt hæpənd. ðə feɪd. . . ." ɪŋtʃɹ ʃɹʌɡd ən stɛɹd daʊn əɾ ə flæt, kænvəs-ɹæp bʌndəl, lɑɹdʒ ən skwɛɹ, ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz; hi stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪɾ əz ɪf i sɔ hɪɾən sikɹəts i wəd ɹæðɝ nɑt noʊ. "ðə tʃɹɑləks tʊk əm fəɹ fud. ðeɪ də ɪɾ ɪn vɪlədʒəz ən fɑɹmz nɪɹ ðə blaɪt, tu, səmtaɪmz, ɪf ə ɹeɪd ɡɛts pæs ðə bɔɹɾɝ taʊɝz ɪn ðə naɪt. səmtaɪmz wi ɡɛt ðə pipəl bæk, ən səmtaɪmz nɑt. səmtaɪmz wi ɡɛɾ əm bæk ən ɔlmoʊst wɪʃ wi hædnt. tʃɹɑləks doʊn ɔlweɪz kɪl bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ stɑɹt bʊtʃɝɪŋ. ən hæfmən laɪk tə hæv ðɛɹ . . . fʌn. ðæts wɝs ðən wʌt ðə tʃɹɑləks du." hɪz vɔɪs wɑz əz stɛɾi əz ɪf i wɝ tɔkɪŋ ʌv ɛvɹi deɪ, ən pɝhæps i wɑz, fəɹ ə ʃaɪnɝən soʊlʒɝ.

"Trollocs took them. The same as the people at the ferry. That is what happened. The Fade. . . ." Ingtar shrugged and stared down at a flat, canvas-wrapped bundle, large and square, in his arms; he stared at it as if he saw hidden secrets he would rather not know. "The Trollocs took them for food. They do it in villages and farms near the Blight, too, sometimes, if a raid gets past the border towers in the night. Sometimes we get the people back, and sometimes not. Sometimes we get them back and almost wish we hadn't. Trollocs don't always kill before they start butchering. And Halfmen like to have their . . . fun. That's worse than what the Trollocs do." His voice was as steady as if he were talking of every day, and perhaps he was, for a Shienaran soldier.

ɹænd tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ tə stɛɾi hɪz stʌmək. "ðə feɪd bæk ðəɹ dɪdn əv ɛni fʌn, ɪŋtʃɹ. wʌt kəd neɪl ə mɹdʒɹɑl tə ə dɔɹ, əlaɪv?"

Rand took a deep breath to steady his stomach. "The Fade back there didn't have any fun, Ingtar. What could nail a Myrddraal to a door, alive?"

ɪŋtʃɹ hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd, ðən pʊʃt ðə bɪɡ bʌndəl ət ɹænd. "hɪɹ. mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ toʊl mi tə ɡɪv jə ðɪs ət ðə fɝs kæmp saʊθ ə ði ɛɹɪnɪn. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ ɪz ɪn ɪt, bʌt ʃi sɛd jə wəd niɾ ɪt. ʃi sɛd tə tɛl jə tə teɪk kɛɹ ʌv ɪt; jəɹ laɪf meɪ dɪpɛn ɑn ɪt."

Ingtar hesitated, shaking his head, then pushed the big bundle at Rand. "Here. Moiraine Sedai told me to give you this at the first camp south of the Erinin. I don't know what is in it, but she said you would need it. She said to tell you to take care of it; your life may depend on it."

ɹænd tʊk ɪt ɹɪlʌktənli; hɪz skɪn pɹɪkəld ət ðə tʌtʃ ə ðə kænvəs. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ sɑft ɪnsaɪd. klɔθ, meɪbi. hi hɛld ɪt dʒɪnʒɝli. hi dʌznt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðə mɹdʒɹɑl iðɝ. wʌt hæpən ɪn ðət ɹum? hi ɹilaɪz sʌɾənli ðət fəɹ hɪm, ðə feɪd, əɹ ivən ðət ɹum, wɑz pɹɛfɝəbəl tə θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt wʌt mɔɪɹeɪn maɪɾ əv sɛn hɪm.

Rand took it reluctantly; his skin prickled at the touch of the canvas. There was something soft inside. Cloth, maybe. He held it gingerly. He doesn't want to think about the Myrddraal either. What happened in that room? He realized suddenly that for him, the Fade, or even that room, was preferable to thinking about what Moiraine might have sent him.

"aɪ wɑz toʊl tə tɛl jə ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðəɾ ɪf ɛniθɪŋ hæpənz tə mi, ðə lænsɪz wɪl fɑloʊ ju."

"I was told to tell you at the same time that if anything happens to me, the lances will follow you."

"mi!" ɹænd ɡæspt, fɝɡɛɾɪŋ ðə bʌndəl ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls. ɪŋtʃɹ mɛɾ ɪz ɪnkɹɛdʒələs stɛɹ wɪð ə kɑm nɑd. "ðæts kɹeɪzi! aɪv nɛvɝ lɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ ə flɑk ə ʃip, ɪŋtʃɹ. ðeɪ wəd nɑt fɑloʊ mi ɛniweɪ. bɪsaɪdz, mɔɪɹeɪn kæn tɛl jə hu jəɹ sɛkən ɪz. ɪts ənoʊ."

"Me!" Rand gasped, forgetting the bundle and everything else. Ingtar met his incredulous stare with a calm nod. "That's crazy! I've never led anything but a flock of sheep, Ingtar. They would not follow me anyway. Besides, Moiraine can't tell you who your second is. It's Uno."

"ənoʊ ən aɪ wɝ kɔl tə lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ ðə mɔɹnɪŋ wi lɛft. mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ wɑz ðɛɹ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ u toʊl mi. jə ɑɹ sɛkənd, ɹænd."

"Uno and I were called to Lord Agelmar the morning we left. Moiraine Sedai was there, but it was Lord Agelmar who told me. You are second, Rand."

"bʌt waɪ, ɪŋtʃɹ? waɪ?" mɔɪɹeɪnz hænd wɑz bɹaɪɾ ən klɪɹ ɪn ɪt, hɝz ən ði æmɪɝlɪnz, pʊʃɪŋ ɪm əlɔŋ ðə pæθ ðeɪ hæd tʃoʊzən, bʌɾ i hæd tə æsk.

"But why, Ingtar? Why?" Moiraine's hand was bright and clear in it, hers and the Amyrlin's, pushing him along the path they had chosen, but he had to ask.

ðə ʃaɪnɝən lʊkt əz ɪf i dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ɪɾ iðɝ, bʌɾ i wɑz ə soʊlʒɝ, juz tə ɑd kəmænz ɪn ði ɛnləs wɔɹ əlɔŋ ðə blaɪt. "aɪ hɝd ɹumɝz fɹəm ðə wɪmənz əpɑɹtməns ðət jə wɝ ɹɪli eɪ. . . ." hi spɹɛd ɡɔntələɾəd hænz. "noʊ mæɾɝ. aɪ noʊ jə dɪnaɪ ɪt. dʒʌst əz jə dɪnaɪ ðə lʊk ə jəɹ oʊn feɪs. mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ sɛz jəɹ ə ʃɛpɝd, bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ sɔ ə ʃɛpɝd wɪð ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd. noʊ mæɾɝ. əl nɑt kleɪm aɪ wʊɾə tʃoʊzən jə maɪsɛlf, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk juv ɪɾ ɪn jə tə də wʌɾ ɪz niɾəd. jəl də jəɹ duɾi, ɪf ɪt kʌmz tə ɪt."

The Shienaran looked as if he did not understand it either, but he was a soldier, used to odd commands in the endless war along the Blight. "I heard rumors from the women's apartments that you were really a. . . ." He spread gauntleted hands. "No matter. I know you deny it. Just as you deny the look of your own face. Moiraine Sedai says you're a shepherd, but I never saw a shepherd with a heron-mark blade. No matter. I'll not claim I would have chosen you myself, but I think you have it in you to do what is needed. You will do your duty, if it comes to it."

ɹænd wɑntəd tə seɪ ɪt wɑz noʊ duɾi ʌv hɪz, bʌɾ ɪnstɛɾ i sɛd, "ənoʊ noʊz əbaʊt ðɪs. hu ɛls, ɪŋtʃɹ?"

Rand wanted to say it was no duty of his, but instead he said, "Uno knows about this. Who else, Ingtar?"

"ɔl ðə lænsɪz. wən wi ʃaɪnɝənz ɹaɪd, ɛvɹi mæn noʊz u ɪz nɛkst ɪn laɪn ɪf ðə mæn ɪn kəmæn fɔlz. ə tʃeɪn ənbɹoʊkən ɹaɪt daʊn tə ðə læs mæn lɛft, ivən ɪf hiz nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ ə hɔɹshoʊldɝ. ðət weɪ, jə si, ivən ɪf hiz ðə læs mæn, hiz nɑt dʒʌst ə stʃɹæɡəlɝ ɹʌnɪŋ ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə steɪ əlaɪv. hiz ðə kəmænd, ən duɾi kɔlz ɪm tə də wʌt mʌs bi dʌn. ɪf aɪ ɡoʊ tə ðə læst ɛmbɹeɪs ə ðə mʌðɝ, ðə duɾi ɪz jʊɹz. jəl faɪn ðə hɔɹn, ən jəl teɪk ɪt wɛɹ ɪt bɪlɔŋz. jə wɪl." ðəɹ wɑz ə pəkjuljɝ ɛmfəsəs ɪn ɪŋtʃɹz læst wɝdz.

"All the lances. When we Shienarans ride, every man knows who is next in line if the man in command falls. A chain unbroken right down to the last man left, even if he's nothing but a horseholder. That way, you see, even if he is the last man, he is not just a straggler running and trying to stay alive. He has the command, and duty calls him to do what must be done. If I go to the last embrace of the mother, the duty is yours. You will find the Horn, and you will take it where it belongs. You will." There was a peculiar emphasis in Ingtar's last words.

ðə bʌndəl ɪn ɹændz ɑɹmz sim tə weɪ tɛn stoʊn. laɪt, ʃi kəd bi ə hʌnʒɹəd liɡz ɔf, ən ʃi stɪl ɹitʃəz aʊɾ ən tʌɡz ðə liʃ. ðɪs weɪ, ɹænd. ðət weɪ. jəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ɹænd. "aɪ doʊnt wɑn ðə duɾi, ɪŋtʃɹ. əl nɑt teɪk ɪt. laɪt, aɪm dʒʌst ə ʃɛpɝd! waɪ woʊn ɛnibəɾi bɪliv ðæt?"

The bundle in Rand's arms seemed to weigh ten stone. Light, she could be a hundred leagues off, and she still reaches out and tugs the leash. This way, Rand. That way. You're the Dragon Reborn, Rand. "I don't want the duty, Ingtar. I will not take it. Light, I'm just a shepherd! Why won't anybody believe that?"

"ju wɪl də jəɹ duɾi, ɹænd. wən ðə mæn ət ðə tɑp ə ðə tʃeɪn feɪlz, ɛvɹiθɪŋ bɪloʊ hɪm fɔlz əpɑɹt. tu mʌtʃ ɪz fɔlɪŋ əpɑɹt. tu mʌtʃ ɔlɹɛɾi. pis feɪvɝ jəɹ sɔɹd, ɹænd ælθɹ."

"You will do your duty, Rand. When the man at the top of the chain fails, everything below him falls apart. Too much is falling apart. Too much already. Peace favor your sword, Rand al'Thor."

"ɪŋtʃɹ, aɪ - " bʌɾ ɪŋtʃɹ wɑz wɔkɪŋ əweɪ, kɔlɪŋ tə si ɪf ənoʊ hæd ðə skaʊts aʊt jɛt.

"Ingtar, I - " But Ingtar was walking away, calling to see if Uno had the scouts out yet.

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət ðə bʌndəl ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz ən lɪkt ɪz lɪps. hi wɑz əfɹeɪɾ i nu wʌt wɑz ɪn ɪt. hi wɑntəd tə lʊk, jɛɾ i wɑntəd tə θɹoʊ ɪɾ ɪn ə faɪɝ wɪθaʊɾ oʊpənɪŋ ɪt; hi θɔɾ i maɪt, ɪf i kəd bi ʃʊɹ ɪt wəd bɝn wɪθaʊɾ ɛniwʌn siɪŋ wʌt wɑz ɪnsaɪd, ɪf i kəd bi ʃʊɹ wʌt wɑz ɪnsaɪd wəd bɝn əɾ ɔl. bʌɾ i kəd nɑt lʊk ðɛɹ, wɛɹ ʌðɝ aɪz ðən ɪz maɪt si.

Rand stared at the bundle in his arms and licked his lips. He was afraid he knew what was in it. He wanted to look, yet he wanted to throw it in a fire without opening it; he thought he might, if he could be sure it would burn without anyone seeing what was inside, if he could be sure what was inside would burn at all. But he could not look there, where other eyes than his might see.

hi ɡlænst ɝaʊn ðə kæmp. ðə ʃaɪnɝənz wɝ ənloʊɾɪŋ ðə pæk ænəməlz, səm ɔlɹɛɾi hændɪŋ aʊɾ ə koʊl sʌpɝ ə dʒɹaɪd miɾ ən flætbɹɛd. mæt ən pɛɹɪn tɛndəd ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, ən lɔɪəl sæɾ ɑn ə stoʊn ɹiɾɪŋ ə bʊk, wɪð ɪz lɔŋ-stɛm paɪp klɛntʃt bɪtwin ɪz tiθ ən ə wɪsp ə smoʊk kɝlɪŋ əbʌv ɪz hɛd. ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə bʌndəl əz ɪf əfɹeɪɾ i maɪt dʒɹɑp ɪt, ɹænd snikt ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz.

He glanced around the camp. The Shienarans were unloading the pack animals, some already handing out a cold supper of dried meat and flatbread. Mat and Perrin tended their horses, and Loial sat on a stone reading a book, with his long-stemmed pipe clenched between his teeth and a wisp of smoke curling above his head. Gripping the bundle as if afraid he might drop it, Rand sneaked into the trees.

hi nɛlt ɪn ə smɔl klɪɹɪŋ ʃɛltɝd baɪ θɪk-foʊlidʒ bɹæntʃəz ən sɛt ðə bʌndəl ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. fəɹ ə taɪm i dʒʌst stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪt. ʃi wʊdn hæv. ʃi kʊdnt. ə smɔl vɔɪs ænsɝd, oʊ, jɛs, ʃi kʊd. ʃi kəɾ ən wʊd. faɪnəli hi sɛɾ əbaʊɾ əntiɪŋ ðə smɔl nɑts ɪn ðə kɔɹdz ðət baʊn ɪt. nit nɑts, taɪd wɪð ə pɹisɪʒən ðət spoʊk laʊdli ʌv mɔɪɹeɪnz oʊn hænd; noʊ sɝvən hæd dʌn ðɪs fəɹ hɝ. ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv dɛɹd lɛɾ ɛni sɝvən si.

He knelt in a small clearing sheltered by thick-foliaged branches and set the bundle on the ground. For a time he just stared at it. She wouldn't have. She couldn't. A small voice answered, Oh, yes, she could. She could and would. Finally he set about untying the small knots in the cords that bound it. Neat knots, tied with a precision that spoke loudly of Moiraine's own hand; no servant had done this for her. She would not have dared let any servant see.

wən i hæd ðə læs kɔɹɾ ənfæsənd, hi oʊpən aʊt wʌt wɑz foʊldəɾ ɪnsaɪd wɪð hænz ðət fɛl nʌm, ðən stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪt, hɪz maʊθ fʊl ə dʌst. ɪt wɑz ɔl ʌv wʌn pis, niðɝ woʊvən, nɔɹ daɪd, nɔɹ peɪntəd. ə bænɝ, waɪɾ əz snoʊ, bɪɡ ɪnʌf tə bi sin ðə lɛŋθ ʌv ə fild ə bæɾəl. ən əkɹɔs ɪt mɑɹtʃt ə ɹɪpəlɪŋ fɪɡjɝ laɪk ə sɝpən skeɪld ɪn ɡoʊld ən kɹɪmzən, bʌɾ ə sɝpənt wɪð fɔɹ skeɪld lɛɡz, itʃ tɪpt wɪð faɪv ɡoʊldən klɔz, ə sɝpənt wɪð aɪz laɪk ðə sʌn ən ə ɡoʊldən laɪənz meɪn. hi hæd sin ɪt wʌns bɪfɔɹ, ən mɔɪɹeɪn hæd toʊld ɪm wʌɾ ɪt wɑz. ðə bænɝ ə luz θɝɪn tɛləmən, luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝ, ɪn ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ. ðə bænɝ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən.

When he had the last cord unfastened, he opened out what was folded inside with hands that felt numb, then stared at it, his mouth full of dust. It was all of one piece, neither woven, nor dyed, nor painted. A banner, white as snow, big enough to be seen the length of a field of battle. And across it marched a rippling figure like a serpent scaled in gold and crimson, but a serpent with four scaled legs, each tipped with five golden claws, a serpent with eyes like the sun and a golden lion's mane. He had seen it once before, and Moiraine had told him what it was. The banner of Lews Therin Telamon, Lews Therin Kinslayer, in the War of the Shadow. The banner of the Dragon.

"lʊk ət ðæt! lʊk wʌt hiz ɡɑt, naʊ!" mæt bɝst ɪndə ðə klɪɹɪŋ. pɛɹɪn keɪm æftɝ ɪm mɔɹ sloʊli. "fɝs fænsi koʊts," mæt snɑɹəld, "ænd naʊ ə bænɝ! wɪl hɪɹ noʊ ɛn ə lɔɹɾɪŋ ɪt naʊ, wɪð - " mæt ɡɑt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə si ðə bænɝ klɪɹli, ən ɪz dʒɔ dʒɹɑpt. "laɪt!" hi stʌmbəl bæk ə stɛp. "bɝn mi!" hi hæd bɪn ðɛɹ, tu, wən mɔɪɹeɪn neɪm ðə bænɝ. soʊ hæd pɛɹɪn.

"Look at that! Look what he's got, now!" Mat burst into the clearing. Perrin came after him more slowly. "First fancy coats," Mat snarled, "and now a banner! We'll hear no end of lording it now, with - " Mat got close enough to see the banner clearly, and his jaw dropped. "Light!" He stumbled back a step. "Burn me!" He had been there, too, when Moiraine named the banner. So had Perrin.

æŋɡɝ bɔɪld ʌp ɪn ɹænd, æŋɡɝ ət mɔɪɹeɪn ən ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, pʊʃɪŋ hɪm, pʊlɪŋ hɪm. hi snætʃt ʌp ðə bænɝ ɪn boʊθ hænz ən ʃʊk ɪɾ ət mæt, wɝdz bɔɪlɪŋ aʊɾ ʌnkəntʃɹoʊləbli. "ðæts ɹaɪt! ðə dʒɹæɡənz bænɝ!" mæt tʊk ənʌðɝ stɛp bæk. "mɔɪɹeɪn wɑns mi tə bi ə pʌpəɾ ɑn tɑɹ vəlɑn stʃɹɪŋz, ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən fəɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃiz gɑnə pʊʃ ɪt daʊn maɪ θɹoʊt wʌtɛvɝ aɪ wɑnt. bʌt - aɪ - wɪl - nɑt - bi - juzd!"

Anger boiled up in Rand, anger at Moiraine and the Amyrlin Seat, pushing him, pulling him. He snatched up the banner in both hands and shook it at Mat, words boiling out uncontrollably. "That's right! The Dragon's banner!" Mat took another step back. "Moiraine wants me to be a puppet on Tar Valon strings, a false Dragon for the Aes Sedai. She's going to push it down my throat whatever I want. But - I - will - not - be - used!"

mæt hæd bækt ʌp əɡɛnst ə tʃɹi tʃɹʌŋk. "ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən?" hi swɑloʊd. "ju? ðət . . . ðæts kɹeɪzi."

Mat had backed up against a tree trunk. "A false Dragon?" He swallowed. "You? That . . . that's crazy."

pɛɹɪn hæd nɑt ɹitʃɹiɾəd. hi skwɑɾɪd daʊn wɪð ɪz θɪk ɑɹmz ɑn ɪz niz ən stʌɾid ɹænd wɪð ðoʊz bɹaɪt ɡoʊldən aɪz. ɪn ði ivnɪŋ ʃædoʊz ðeɪ sim tə ʃaɪn. "ɪf ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑn jə fəɹ ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən. . . ." hi pɔzd, fɹaʊnɪŋ, θɪŋkɪŋ θɪŋz θɹu. faɪnəli, hi sɛd kwaɪətli, "ɹænd, kən jə tʃænəl?" mæt ɡeɪv ə stʃɹæŋɡəld ɡæsp.

Perrin had not retreated. He squatted down with his thick arms on his knees and studied Rand with those bright golden eyes. In the evening shadows they seemed to shine. "If the Aes Sedai want you for a false Dragon. . . ." He paused, frowning, thinking things through. Finally, he said quietly, "Rand, can you channel?" Mat gave a strangled gasp.

ɹænd lɛt ðə bænɝ dʒɹɑp; hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊnli ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ nɑɾɪŋ wɛɹəli. "aɪ dɪd nɑɾ æsk fəɹ ɪt. aɪ doʊnt wɑn ɪt. bʌt. . . . bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk aɪ noʊ haʊ tə stɑp ɪt." ðə ɹum wɪð ðə flaɪz keɪm bæk ənbɪddən tə hɪz maɪnd. "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðəl lemi stɑp."

Rand let the banner drop; he hesitated only a moment before nodding wearily. "I did not ask for it. I don't want it. But. . . . But I do not think I know how to stop it." The room with the flies came back unbidden to his mind. "I don't think they'll let me stop."

"bɝn mi!" mæt bɹiðd. "blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz! ðəl kɪl ʌs, jə noʊ. ɔl ʌv ʌs. pɛɹɪn ən mi əz wɛl əz ju. ɪf ɪŋtʃɹ ən ði ʌðɝz faɪn aʊt, ðəl kʌɾ əɹ blʌɾi θɹoʊts fəɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. laɪt, ðəl pɹɑbli θɪŋk wi wɝ pɑɹɾ ə stilɪŋ ðə hɔɹn, ən kɪlɪŋ ðoʊz pipəl ɪn fæl dæɹə."

"Burn me!" Mat breathed. "Blood and bloody ashes! They'll kill us, you know. All of us. Perrin and me as well as you. If Ingtar and the others find out, they will cut our bloody throats for Darkfriends. Light, they'll probably think we were part of stealing the Horn, and killing those people in Fal Dara."

"ʃʌɾ ʌp, mæt," pɛɹɪn sɛd kɑmli.

"Shut up, Mat," Perrin said calmly.

"doʊn tɛl mi tə ʃʌɾ ʌp. ɪf ɪŋtʃɹ dʌzn kɪl ʌs, ɹænd wɪl ɡoʊ mæɾ ən də ɪt fəɹ hɪm. bɝn mi! bɝn mi!" mæt slɪd daʊn ðə tʃɹi tə sɪɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. "waɪ dɪdn ðeɪ dʒɛntəl ju? ɪf ði ɛɛs sədaɪ noʊ, waɪ dɪdn ðeɪ dʒɛntəl ju? aɪ nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə ðɛm lɛɾɪŋ ə mæn u kən wil ðə paʊɝ dʒʌst wɔk əweɪ."

"Don't tell me to shut up. If Ingtar doesn't kill us, Rand will go mad and do it for him. Burn me! Burn me!" Mat slid down the tree to sit on the ground. "Why didn't they gentle you? If the Aes Sedai know, why didn't they gentle you? I never heard of them letting a man who can wield the Power just walk away."

"ðeɪ doʊn ɔl noʊ," ɹænd saɪd. "ði æmɪɝlɪn - "

"They don't all know," Rand sighed. "The Amyrlin - "

"ði æmɪɝlɪn sit! ʃi noʊz? laɪt, noʊ wʌndɝ ʃi lʊkt ət mi soʊ stʃɹeɪnʒ."

"The Amyrlin Seat! She knows? Light, no wonder she looked at me so strange."

" - ən mɔɪɹeɪn toʊl mi ɪm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən ðən ðeɪ sɛɾ aɪ kəd ɡoʊ wɛɹɛvɝ aɪ wɑntəd. doʊn jə si, mæt? ðeɪ ɑɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə juz mi."

" - and Moiraine told me I'm the Dragon Reborn, and then they said I could go wherever I wanted. Don't you see, Mat? They are trying to use me."

"dʌzn tʃeɪnʒ jə biɪŋ eɪbəl tə tʃænəl," mæt mʌɾɝd. "ɪf aɪ wɝ ju, aɪd bi hæfweɪ tə ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən baɪ naʊ. ən aɪ wəd nɑt stɑp əntɪl aɪ faʊn sʌmpleɪs wɛɹ ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən nɛvɝ laɪkli tə bi ɛni. ən noʊ pipəl. aɪ min . . . wɛl. . . ."

"Doesn't change you being able to channel," Mat muttered. "If I were you, I'd be halfway to the Aryth Ocean by now. And I would not stop until I found someplace where there were no Aes Sedai, and never likely to be any. And no people. I mean . . . well. . . ."

"ʃʌɾ ʌp, mæt," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "waɪ ɑɹ jə hɪɹ, ɹænd? ðə lɔŋɡɝ jə steɪ ɝaʊn pipəl, ðə mɔɹ laɪkli ɪts sʌmbɑɾi wɪl faɪn aʊɾ ən sɛn fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɛɛs sədaɪ hu woʊn tɛl jə tə ɡoʊ ɑn əbaʊt jəɹ bɪznəs." hi pɔzd, skɹætʃɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ oʊvɝ ðæt. "æn mæts ɹaɪɾ əbaʊɾ ɪŋtʃɹ. aɪ doʊn daʊɾ i wəd neɪm jə dɑɹkfɹɛn ən kɪl ju. kɪl ɔl ʌv ʌs, meɪbi. hi simz tə laɪk ju, bʌt hid stɪl də ɪt, aɪ θɪŋk. ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən? soʊ wəd ði ʌðɝz. mæsimə wʊdnt nid ðət mʌtʃ ɪkskjus, fəɹ ju. soʊ waɪ ɑɹən jə ɡɔn?"

"Shut up, Mat," Perrin said. "Why are you here, Rand? The longer you stay around people, the more likely it is somebody will find out and send for Aes Sedai. Aes Sedai who won't tell you to go on about your business." He paused, scratching his head over that. "And Mat's right about Ingtar. I don't doubt he would name you Darkfriend and kill you. Kill all of us, maybe. He seems to like you, but he'd still do it, I think. A false Dragon? So would the others. Masema wouldn't need that much excuse, for you. So why aren't you gone?"

ɹænd ʃɹʌɡd. "aɪ wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ, bʌt fɝs ði æmɪɝlɪn keɪm, ən ðən ðə hɔɹn wɑz stoʊlən, ən ðə dæɡɝ, ən mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd mæt wɑz daɪɪŋ, ænd. . . . laɪt, aɪ θɔɾ aɪ kəd steɪ wɪð jə əntɪl wi faʊn ðə dæɡɝ, ət list; aɪ θɔɾ aɪ kəd hɛlp wɪð ðæt. meɪbi aɪ wɑz ɹɔŋ."

Rand shrugged. "I was going, but first the Amyrlin came, and then the Horn was stolen, and the dagger, and Moiraine said Mat was dying, and. . . . Light, I thought I could stay with you until we found the dagger, at least; I thought I could help with that. Maybe I was wrong."

"ju keɪm kəz ə ðə dæɡɝ?" mæt sɛd kwaɪətli. hi ɹʌbd ɪz noʊz ən ɡɹɪməst. "aɪ nɛvɝ θɔɾ ə ðæt. aɪ nɛvɝ θɔt jə wɑntəd tə. . . . ɑə! ɑɹ jə filɪŋ ɔl ɹaɪt? aɪ min, jə ɑɹənt ɡoʊɪŋ mæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi, ɑɹ ju?"

"You came because of the dagger?" Mat said quietly. He rubbed his nose and grimaced. "I never thought of that. I never thought you wanted to. . . . Aaaah! Are you feeling all right? I mean, you aren't going mad already, are you?"

ɹænd dʌɡ ə pɛbəl aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɹaʊn ən θɹu ɪɾ ət hɪm.

Rand dug a pebble out of the ground and threw it at him.

"aʊtʃ!" mæt ɹʌbd ɪz ɑɹm. "aɪ wɑz dʒʌst æskɪŋ. aɪ min, ɔl ðoʊz fænsi kloʊðz, ən ɔl ðət tɔk əbaʊt biɪŋ ə lɔɹd. wɛl, ðəɾ ɪzən ɪɡzækli ɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə hɛd."

"Ouch!" Mat rubbed his arm. "I was just asking. I mean, all those fancy clothes, and all that talk about being a lord. Well, that isn't exactly right in the head."

"aɪ wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ə ju, ful! aɪ wɑz əfɹeɪɾ aɪd ɡoʊ mæɾ ən hɝt ju." hɪz aɪz dʒɹɑp tə ðə bænɝ, ən ɪz vɔɪs loʊɝd. "aɪ wɪl, ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ɪf aɪ doʊn stɑp ɪt. laɪt, aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ tə stɑp ɪt."

"I was trying to get rid of you, fool! I was afraid I'd go mad and hurt you." His eyes dropped to the banner, and his voice lowered. "I will, eventually, if I don't stop it. Light, I don't know how to stop it."

"ðæɾ ɪz wʌɾ aɪm əfɹeɪɾ ʌv," mæt sɛd, stændɪŋ. "noʊ əfɛns, ɹænd, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk əl dʒʌst slip əz fɑɹ əweɪ fɹəm jə əz aɪ kæn, ɪf jə doʊn maɪnd. ðæts ɪf jə ɑɹ steɪɪŋ. aɪ hɝɾ əbaʊɾ ə fɛloʊ hu kəd tʃænəl, wʌns. ə mɝtʃəns ɡɑɹd toʊl mi. bɪfɔɹ ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ faʊn hɪm, hi woʊk wʌn mɔɹnɪŋ, ən ɪz hoʊl vɪlədʒ wɑz smæʃt flæt. ɔl ðə haʊsəz, ɔl ðə pipəl, ɛvɹiθɪŋ bʌt ðə bɛɾ i wɑz slipɪŋ ɪn, laɪk ə maʊntən hæd ɹoʊld oʊvɝ ðɛm."

"That is what I'm afraid of," Mat said, standing. "No offense, Rand, but I think I will just sleep as far away from you as I can, if you don't mind. That's if you are staying. I heard about a fellow who could channel, once. A merchant's guard told me. Before the Red Ajah found him, he woke one morning, and his whole village was smashed flat. All the houses, all the people, everything but the bed he was sleeping in, like a mountain had rolled over them."

pɛɹɪn sɛd, "ɪn ðət keɪs, mæt, jə ʃəd slip tʃik baɪ dʒaʊl wɪð hɪm."

Perrin said, "In that case, Mat, you should sleep cheek by jowl with him."

"aɪ meɪ bi ə ful, bʌɾ aɪ ɪntɛn tə bi ə laɪv ful." mæt hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, lʊkɪŋ saɪdweɪz ət ɹænd. "lʊk, aɪ noʊ jə keɪm əlɔŋ tə hɛlp mi, ən aɪm ɡɹeɪtfəl. aɪ ɹɪli æm. bʌt jə dʒʌst ɑɹ nɑt ðə seɪm ɛnimɔɹ. jə ʌndɝstæn ðæt, doʊn ju?" hi weɪɾəd əz ɪf i ɪkspɛktəɾ ən ænsɝ. nʌn keɪm. faɪnəli hi vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz, bæk təwɔɹd ðə kæmp.

"I may be a fool, but I intend to be a live fool." Mat hesitated, looking sideways at Rand. "Look, I know you came along to help me, and I am grateful. I really am. But you just are not the same anymore. You understand that, don't you?" He waited as if he expected an answer. None came. Finally he vanished into the trees, back toward the camp.

"wʌɾ əbaʊt ju?" ɹænd æskt.

"What about you?" Rand asked.

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ʃæɡi kɝlz swɪŋɪŋ. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ, ɹænd. jə ɑɹ ðə seɪm, bʌt ðən əɡɛn, jə ɑɹənt. ə mæn tʃænəlɪŋ; maɪ mʌðɝ juz tə fɹaɪɾən mi wɪð ðæt, wən aɪ wɑz lɪɾəl. aɪ dʒʌs də nɑt noʊ." hi stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ɪz hæn ən tʌtʃt ə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə bænɝ. "aɪ θɪŋk aɪ wəd bɝn ðɪs, əɹ bɛɹi ɪt, ɪf aɪ wɝ ju. ðən aɪd ɹʌn soʊ fɑɹ, soʊ fæst, noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ wəɾ ɛvɝ faɪn mi. mæt wɑz ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt ðæt." hi stʊɾ ʌp, skwɪntɪŋ ət ðə wɛstɝn skaɪ, bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə tɝn ɹɛd wɪð ðə sɪŋkɪŋ sʌn. "taɪm tə ɡɛt bæk tə ðə kæmp. jə θɪŋk ɑn wʌɾ aɪ sɛd, ɹænd. aɪd ɹʌn. bʌt meɪbi jə kæn ɹʌn. θɪŋk ə ðæt, tu." hɪz jɛloʊ aɪz sim tə lʊk ɪnwɝd, ən i saʊndəd taɪɝd. "səmtaɪmz jə kæn ɹʌn." ðən i wɑz ɡɔn, tu.

Perrin shook his head, shaggy curls swinging. "I don't know, Rand. You are the same, but then again, you aren't. A man channeling; my mother used to frighten me with that, when I was little. I just do not know." He stretched out his hand and touched a corner of the banner. "I think I would burn this, or bury it, if I were you. Then I'd run so far, so fast, no Aes Sedai would ever find me. Mat was right about that." He stood up, squinting at the western sky, beginning to turn red with the sinking sun. "Time to get back to the camp. You think on what I said, Rand. I'd run. But maybe you can't run. Think of that, too." His yellow eyes seemed to look inward, and he sounded tired. "Sometimes you can't run." Then he was gone, too.

ɹænd nɛl ðɛɹ, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə bænɝ spɹɛɾ aʊɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. "wɛl, səmtaɪmz jə kən ɹʌn," hi mʌɾɝd. "oʊnli, meɪbi ʃi ɡeɪv mi ðɪs tə meɪk mi ɹʌn. meɪbi ʃiz sʌmθɪŋ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ mi, ɪf aɪ ɹʌn. aɪ woʊn də wʌt ʃi wɑns. aɪ woʊnt. əl bɛɹi ɪt ɹaɪt hɪɹ. bʌt ʃi sɛd maɪ laɪf meɪ dɪpɛn ɑn ɪt, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ nɛvɝ laɪ soʊ jə kən si ɪt. . . ." sʌɾənli hɪz ʃoʊldɝz ʃʊk wɪð saɪlən læftɝ. "naʊ aɪm tɔkɪŋ tə maɪsɛlf. meɪbi aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ mæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi."

Rand knelt there, staring at the banner spread out on the ground. "Well, sometimes you can run," he muttered. "Only, maybe she gave me this to make me run. Maybe she has something waiting for me, if I run. I won't do what she wants. I won't. I'll bury it right here. But she said my life may depend on it, and Aes Sedai never lie so you can see it. . . ." Suddenly his shoulders shook with silent laughter. "Now I'm talking to myself. Maybe I am going mad already."

wən i ɹɪtɝn tə ðə kæmp, hi kæɹid ðə bænɝ ɹæpt ɪn ðə kænvəs wʌns mɔɹ, taɪd wɪð nɑts lɛs nit ðən mɔɪɹeɪnz hæd bɪn.

When he returned to the camp, he carried the banner wrapped in the canvas once more, tied with knots less neat than Moiraine's had been.

ðə laɪt hæd bɪɡʌn tə feɪl ən ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv ðə ɹɪm kʌvɝd hæf ðə hɑloʊ. ðə soʊlʒɝz wɝ sɛɾəlɪŋ ɪn, ɔl wɪð ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz baɪ ðɛɹ saɪdz, lænsɪz pɹɑp tə hænd. mæt ən pɛɹɪn wɝ bɛɾɪŋ daʊn əlɔŋsaɪd ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz. ɹænd ɡeɪv əm ə sæd lʊk, ðən fɛtʃt ɹɛd, stændɪŋ wɛɹ i hæd bɪn lɛft wɪð ɪz ɹeɪnz dæŋɡəlɪŋ, ən wɛn tə ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə hɑloʊ, wɛɹ hʊɹɪn hæd dʒɔɪn lɔɪəl. ði oʊɡiɝ hæd ɡɪvən oʊvɝ ɹɛɾɪŋ ən wɑz ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ðə hæf-bɛɹid stoʊn ɑn wɪtʃ i hæd bɪn sɪɾɪŋ, tʃɹeɪsɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ɑn ðə stoʊn wɪð ðə lɔŋ stɛm ə hɪz paɪp.

The light had begun to fail and the shadow of the rim covered half the hollow. The soldiers were settling in, all with their horses by their sides, lances propped to hand. Mat and Perrin were bedding down alongside their horses. Rand gave them a sad look, then fetched Red, standing where he had been left with his reins dangling, and went to the other side of the hollow, where Hurin had joined Loial. The Ogier had given over reading and was examining the half-buried stone on which he had been sitting, tracing something on the stone with the long stem of his pipe.

hʊɹɪn stʊɾ ən ɡeɪv ɹænd sʌmθɪŋ dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ə baʊ. "hoʊp jə doʊn maɪn mi meɪkɪŋ maɪ bɛd hɪɹ, lɔɹd - ʌ - ɹænd. aɪ wɑz dʒʌs lɪsnɪŋ tə ðə bɪldɝ hɪɹ."

Hurin stood and gave Rand something just short of a bow. "Hope you don't mind me making my bed here, Lord - uh - Rand. I was just listening to the Builder here."

"ðɛɹ jə ɑɹ, ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd. "ju noʊ, aɪ θɪŋk ðɪs stoʊn wɑz wɝkt wʌns. si, ɪts wɛðɝd, bʌɾ ɪt lʊks əz ɪf ɪt wɑz ə kɑləm ə səm kaɪnd. ən ðəɹ ɑɹ mɑɹkɪŋz, ɔlsoʊ. aɪ kæn kwaɪt meɪk əm aʊt, bʌt ðeɪ lʊk fəmɪljɝ, sʌmhaʊ."

"There you are, Rand," Loial said. "You know, I think this stone was worked once. See, it's weathered, but it looks as if it was a column of some kind. And there are markings, also. I can't quite make them out, but they look familiar, somehow."

"meɪbi jəl bi eɪbəl tə si ðɛm bɛɾɝ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ," ɹænd sɛd. hi pʊl ðə sæɾəlbæɡz fɹəm ɹɛd. "aɪl bi ɡlæɾ ə jəɹ kʌmpəni, hʊɹɪn." aɪm ɡlæɾ ʌv ɛnibəɾiz kʌmpəni hu ɪzən əfɹeɪɾ ə mi. haʊ mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ kən aɪ hæv ɪt, ðoʊ?

"Maybe you'll be able to see them better in the morning," Rand said. He pulled the saddlebags from Red. "I'll be glad of your company, Hurin." I'm glad of anybody's company who isn't afraid of me. How much longer can I have it, though?

hi ʃɪftəɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪndə wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə sæɾəlbæɡz - spɛɹ ʃɝts ən bɹitʃɪz ən wʊlən stɑkɪŋz, soʊɪŋ kɪt, tɪndɝ bɑks, tɪn pleɪɾ ən kʌp, ə ɡɹinwʊd bɑks wɪð naɪf ən fɔɹk ən spun, ə pækəɾ ə dʒɹaɪd miɾ ən flætbɹɛd fəɹ ɪmɝdʒənsi ɹæʃənz, ən ɔl ði ʌðɝ tʃɹævəlɝz nəsəsɹiz - ðən stʌf ðə kænvəs-ɹæp bænɝ ɪndə ði ɛmpti pɑkət. ɪt bʌlʒd, ðə stʃɹæps bɛɹli ɹitʃɪŋ ðə bʌkəlz, bʌt ðɛn, ði ʌðɝ saɪd bʌlʒd naʊ, tu. ɪt wəd du.

He shifted everything into one side of the saddlebags - spare shirts and breeches and woolen stockings, sewing kit, tinder box, tin plate and cup, a greenwood box with knife and fork and spoon, a packet of dried meat and flatbread for emergency rations, and all the other traveler's necessaries - then stuffed the canvas-wrapped banner into the empty pocket. It bulged, the straps barely reaching the buckles, but then, the other side bulged now, too. It would do.

lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn sim tə sɛns ɪz mud, livɪŋ ɪm ɪn saɪləns waɪl i stʃɹɪp sæɾəl ən bɹaɪɾəl fɹəm ɹɛd, ɹʌb ðə bɪɡ beɪ daʊn wɪð tʌfs ʌv ɡɹæs tɔɹn fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ðən ɹəsɑɾəld hɪm. ɹænd ɹəfjuz ðɛɹ ɔfɝ ə fud; hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i cʊɾə stʌmɑtʃt ðə bɛs mil i hæɾ ɛvɝ sin dʒʌs ðɛn. ɔl θɹi ʌv əm meɪd ðɛɹ bɛdz ðəɹ bɪsaɪd ðə stoʊn, ə sɪmpəl mæɾɝ ʌv ə blæŋkət foʊldəd fəɹ ə pɪloʊ ən kloʊk tə kʌvɝ.

Loial and Hurin seemed to sense his mood, leaving him in silence while he stripped saddle and bridle from Red, rubbed the big bay down with tufts of grass torn from the ground, then resaddled him. Rand refused their offer of food; he did not think he could have stomached the best meal he had ever seen just then. All three of them made their beds there beside the stone, a simple matter of a blanket folded for a pillow and cloak to cover.

ðə kæmp wɑz saɪlənt naʊ, bʌt ɹænd leɪ əweɪk pæs ðə fɔl ə fʊl dɑɹk. hɪz maɪn dɑɹɾɪd bæk ən fɔɹθ. ðə bænɝ. wʌɾ ɪz ʃi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk mi du? ðə vɪlədʒ. wʌt kəd kɪl ə feɪd laɪk ðæt? wɝst ʌv ɔl, ðə haʊs ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ. dɪɾ ɪt ɹɪli hæpən? æm aɪ ɡoʊɪŋ mæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi? də aɪ ɹʌn, əɹ də aɪ steɪ? aɪ hæv tə steɪ. aɪ hæv tə hɛlp mæt faɪn ðə dæɡɝ.

The camp was silent now, but Rand lay awake past the fall of full dark. His mind darted back and forth. The banner. What is she trying to make me do? The village. What could kill a Fade like that? Worst of all, the house in the village. Did it really happen? Am I going mad already? Do I run, or do I stay? I have to stay. I have to help Mat find the dagger.

ən ɪɡzɔstəd slip faɪnəli keɪm, ən wɪð slip, ənbɪddən, ðə vɔɪd sɝaʊndəd hɪm, flɪkɝɪŋ wɪð ən ənizi ɡloʊ ðət dɪstɝbd ɪz dʒɹimz.

An exhausted sleep finally came, and with sleep, unbidden, the void surrounded him, flickering with an uneasy glow that disturbed his dreams.

pdən feɪn stɛɹd nɔɹθwɝɾ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə naɪt, pæs ði oʊnli faɪɝ ɪn ɪz kæmp, smaɪlɪŋ ə fɪkst smaɪl ðət nɛvɝ tʌtʃt ɪz aɪz. hi stɪl θɔɾ ə hɪmsɛlf əz pdən feɪn - pdən feɪn wɑz ðə kɔɹ ə hɪm - bʌɾ i hæd bɪn tʃeɪnʒd, ən i nu ɪt. hi nu mɛni θɪŋz, naʊ, mɔɹ ðən ɛni ʌv ɪz oʊl mæstɝz kəd səspɛkt. hi hæd bɪn ə dɑɹkfɹɛn lɔŋ jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ bælzəmən sʌmən ɪm ən sɛɾ ɪm ɑn ðə tʃɹæk ə ðə θɹi jʌŋ mɛn fɹəm ɛmənz fild, dɪstɪlɪŋ wʌɾ i nu ʌv ðɛm, dɪstɪlɪŋ hɪm, ən fiɾɪŋ ði ɛsəns bæk soʊ ðəɾ i kəd fil ðɛm, smɛl wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪn, fɑloʊ wɛɹɛvɝ ðeɪ ɹæn. ɪspɛʃli ðə wʌn. ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm stɪl kɹɪnʒd, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ wʌt bælzəmən hæd dʌn tə hɪm, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə smɔl pɑɹt, hɪɾən, səpɹɛst. hi wɑz tʃeɪnʒd. fɑloʊɪŋ ðə θɹi hæd lɛɾ ɪm ɪndə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. hi hæd nɑt wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ, bʌɾ i hæd hæd tə oʊbeɪ. ðɛn. ən ɪn ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. . . .

Padan Fain stared northward out into the night, past the only fire in his camp, smiling a fixed smile that never touched his eyes. He still thought of himself as Padan Fain - Padan Fain was the core of him - but he had been changed, and he knew it. He knew many things, now, more than any of his old masters could suspect. He had been a Darkfriend long years before Ba'alzamon summoned him and set him on the track of the three young men from Emond's Field, distilling what he knew of them, distilling him, and feeding the essence back so that he could feel them, smell where they had been, follow wherever they ran. Especially the one. A part of him still cringed, remembering what Ba'alzamon had done to him, but it was a small part, hidden, suppressed. He was changed. Following the three had led him into Shadar Logoth. He had not wanted to go, but he had had to obey. Then. And in Shadar Logoth. . . .

feɪn dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ ən fɪŋɡɝd ðə ɹubi-hɪltɪd dæɡɝ əɾ ɪz bɛlt. ðət hæd kʌm fɹəm ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, tu. ɪt wɑz ði oʊnli wɛpən i kæɹid, ði oʊnli wʌn i niɾəd; ɪt fɛlt laɪk ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm. hi wɑz hoʊl wɪðɪn hɪmsɛlf, naʊ. ðət wɑz ɔl ðət mæɾɝd.

Fain drew a deep breath and fingered the ruby-hilted dagger at his belt. That had come from Shadar Logoth, too. It was the only weapon he carried, the only one he needed; it felt like a part of him. He was whole within himself, now. That was all that mattered.

hi kæst ə ɡlæns tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɪz faɪɝ. ðə twɛlv dɑɹkfɹɛnz u wɝ lɛft, ðɛɹ wʌns-faɪn kloʊðz naʊ ɹʌmpəld ən dɝɾi, hʌɾəld ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs tə wʌn saɪd, stɛɹɪŋ nɑɾ ət ðə faɪɝ, bʌɾ ət hɪm. ɑn ði ʌðɝ skwɑɾɪd ɪz tʃɹɑləks, twɛnti ɪn nʌmbɝ, ði ɔl-tu-hjumən aɪz ɪn ðoʊz ænəməl-twɪstəd mɛnz feɪsəz fɑloʊɪŋ ɪz ɛvɹi muv laɪk maɪs wɑtʃɪŋ ə kæt.

He cast a glance to either side of his fire. The twelve Darkfriends who were left, their once-fine clothes now rumpled and dirty, huddled in the darkness to one side, staring not at the fire, but at him. On the other squatted his Trollocs, twenty in number, the all-too-human eyes in those animal-twisted men's faces following his every move like mice watching a cat.

ɪt hæd bɪn ə stʃɹʌɡəl ət fɝst, weɪkɪŋ itʃ mɔɹnɪŋ tə faɪn hɪmsɛlf nɑt kəmplitli hoʊl, tə faɪn ðə mɹdʒɹɑl bæk ɪn kəmænd, ɹeɪdʒɪŋ ən dɪmændɪŋ ðeɪ ɡoʊ nɔɹθ, tə ðə blaɪt, tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl. bʌt bɪt baɪ bɪt ðoʊz mɔɹnɪŋz ʌv wiknəs ɡɹu ʃɔɹɾɝ, əntɪl. . . . hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə fil ə ðə hæmɝ ɪn ɪz hænd, dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ðə spaɪks ɪn, ən i smaɪld; ðɪs taɪm ɪt dɪd tʌtʃ ɪz aɪz, wɪð ðə dʒɔɪ ʌv swit mɛmɹi.

It had been a struggle at first, waking each morning to find himself not completely whole, to find the Myrddraal back in command, raging and demanding they go north, to the Blight, to Shayol Ghul. But bit by bit those mornings of weakness grew shorter, until. . . . He remembered the feel of the hammer in his hand, driving the spikes in, and he smiled; this time it did touch his eyes, with the joy of sweet memory.

wipɪŋ fɹəm ðə dɑɹk kɑɾ ɪz ɪɹ, ən ɪz smaɪl feɪɾəd. aɪ ʃəd nɛvɝ əv lɛt ðə tʃɹɑləks teɪk soʊ mɛni. ən ɪntaɪɝ vɪlədʒ tə sloʊ ðɛm daʊn. ɪf ðoʊz fju haʊsəz ət ðə fɛɹi hæd nɑt bɪn dɪzɝɾɪd, pɝhæps. . . . bʌt tʃɹɑləks wɝ ɡɹiɾi baɪ neɪtʃɝ, ən ɪn ðə jufɔɹiə ʌv wɑtʃɪŋ ðə mɹdʒɹɑl daɪ, hi hæd nɑt peɪɾ ətɛnʃən əz i ʃʊd.

Weeping from the dark caught his ear, and his smile faded. I should never have let the Trollocs take so many. An entire village to slow them down. If those few houses at the ferry had not been deserted, perhaps. . . . But Trollocs were greedy by nature, and in the euphoria of watching the Myrddraal die, he had not paid attention as he should.

hi ɡlænst ət ðə tʃɹɑləks. ɛni wʌn ə ðɛm wɑz nɪɹli twaɪs əz tɔl əz hi, stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə bɹeɪk ɪm tə flɪndɝz wɪð wʌn hænd, jɛt ðeɪ ɛdʒ bæk, stɪl kɹaʊtʃɪŋ. "kɪl ðɛm. ɔl. jə meɪ fid, bʌt ðən meɪk ə paɪl ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət ɹɪmeɪnz - fəɹ əɹ fɹɛnz tə faɪnd. pʊt ðə hɛdz ɑn tɑp. nitli, naʊ." hi læft, ən kʌɾ ɪɾ ɔf ʃɔɹt. "ɡoʊ!"

He glanced at the Trollocs. Any one of them was nearly twice as tall as he, strong enough to break him to flinders with one hand, yet they edged back, still crouching. "Kill them. All. You may feed, but then make a pile of everything that remains - for our friends to find. Put the heads on top. Neatly, now." He laughed, and cut it off short. "Go!"

ðə tʃɹɑləks skɹæmbəld əweɪ, dʒɹɔɪŋ saɪð-laɪk sɔɹdz ən ɹeɪzɪŋ spaɪkt æksiz. ɪn moʊməns ʃɹiks ən bɛloʊz ɹoʊz fɹəm wɛɹ ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz wɝ baʊnd. pliz fəɹ mɝsi ən tʃɪlʒɹənz skɹimz wɝ kʌɾ ɔf baɪ sɑləd θʌdz ən ənplɛzən skwɪʃɪŋ nɔɪzɪz, laɪk mɛlənz biɪŋ bɹoʊkən.

The Trollocs scrambled away, drawing scythe-like swords and raising spiked axes. In moments shrieks and bellows rose from where the villagers were bound. Pleas for mercy and children's screams were cut off by solid thuds and unpleasant squishing noises, like melons being broken.

feɪn tɝn ɪz bæk ɑn ðə kækɑfəni tə lʊk əɾ ɪz dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ðeɪ wɝ hɪz, tu, bɑɾi ən soʊl. sətʃ soʊlz əz ðeɪ hæd lɛft. ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm wɑz maɪɹɾ əz dipli əz i hæd bɪn, bɪfɔɹ i faʊn ɪz weɪ aʊt. ɛvɹi wʌn wɪð noʊwɛɹ tə ɡoʊ ɪksɛp tə fɑloʊ hɪm. ðɛɹ aɪz klʌŋ tə fɪɹfəl, pliɾɪŋ. "ju θɪŋk ðəl ɡɹoʊ hʌŋɡɹi əɡɛn bɪfɔɹ wi faɪn ənʌðɝ vɪlədʒ əɹ ə fɑɹm? ðeɪ meɪ. jə θɪŋk əl bi lɛɾɪŋ əm əv səm mɔɹ ə ju? wɛl, pɝhæps wʌn əɹ tu. ðəɹ ɑɹən ɛni mɔɹ hɔɹsəz tə spɛɹ."

Fain turned his back on the cacophony to look at his Darkfriends. They were his, too, body and soul. Such souls as they had left. Every one of them was mired as deeply as he had been, before he found his way out. Every one with nowhere to go except to follow him. Their eyes clung to fearful, pleading. "You think they will grow hungry again before we find another village or a farm? They may. You think I will be letting them have some more of you? Well, perhaps one or two. There aren't any more horses to spare."

"ði ʌðɝz wɝ oʊnli kɑmənɝz," wʌn wʊmən mænədʒd ɪn ən ənstɛɾi vɔɪs. dɝt stʃɹikt əɹ feɪs əbʌv ə faɪnli kʌt dʒɹɛs ðət mɑɹkt əɹ əz ə mɝtʃənt, ən wɛlθi. smɪɹz steɪn ðə ɡʊd ɡɹeɪ klɔθ, ən ə lɔŋ tɛɹ mɑɹɾ əɹ skɝt. "ðeɪ wɝ pɛzəns. wɪv sɝvd - aɪ hæv sɝvd - "

"The others were only commoners," one woman managed in an unsteady voice. Dirt streaked her face above a finely cut dress that marked her as a merchant, and wealthy. Smears stained the good gray cloth, and a long tear marred her skirt. "They were peasants. We have served - I have served - "

feɪn kʌɾ əɹ ɔf, hɪz izi toʊn meɪkɪŋ ɪz wɝdz ɔl ðə hɑɹɾɝ. "wʌɾ ɑɹ ju, tə mi? lɛs ðən pɛzəns. hɝd kæɾəl fəɹ ðə tʃɹɑləks, pɝhæps? ɪf jə wɑnə lɪv, kæɾəl, jə mʌs bi jusfəl."

Fain cut her off, his easy tone making his words all the harder. "What are you, to me? Less than peasants. Herd cattle for the Trollocs, perhaps? If you want to live, cattle, you must be useful."

ðə wʊmənz feɪs bɹoʊk. ʃi sɑbd, ən sʌɾənli ɔl ðə ɹɛst wɝ bæbəlɪŋ, tɛlɪŋ ɪm haʊ jusfəl ðeɪ wɝ, mɛn ən wɪmən u hæd hæɾ ɪnfluəns ən pəzɪʃən bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ kɔl tə fʊlfɪl ðɛɹ oʊðz ət fæl dæɹə. ðeɪ spɪld aʊt ðə neɪmz ʌv ɪmpɔɹɾənt, paʊɝfəl pipəl hum ðeɪ nu ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, ɪn kɛɹhin, ən ʌðɝ lænz. ðeɪ bæbəld ə ðə nɑlədʒ ðeɪ əloʊn hæɾ ə ðɪs læn əɹ ðæt, ʌv pəlɪɾəkəl sɪtʃueɪʃənz, əlaɪənsəz, ɪntʃɹiɡz, ɔl ðə θɪŋz ðeɪ kəd tɛl ɪm ɪf i lɛɾ əm sɝv hɪm. ðə nɔɪz ə ðɛm blɛndəd wɪð ðə saʊnz ə ðə tʃɹɑləks' slɔɾɝ ən fɪt ɹaɪɾ ɪn.

The woman's face broke. She sobbed, and suddenly all the rest were babbling, telling him how useful they were, men and women who had had influence and position before they were called to fulfill their oaths at Fal Dara. They spilled out the names of important, powerful people whom they knew in the Borderlands, in Cairhien, and other lands. They babbled of the knowledge they alone had of this land or that, of political situations, alliances, intrigues, all the things they could tell him if he let them serve him. The noise of them blended with the sounds of the Trollocs' slaughter and fit right in.

feɪn ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɔl ʌv ɪt - hi hæd noʊ fɪɹ ə tɝnɪŋ ɪz bæk ɑn ðɛm, nɑt sɪns ðeɪ hæd sin ðə feɪd dɛlt wɪð - ən wɛn tə hɪz pɹaɪz. nilɪŋ, hi ɹæn ɪz hænz oʊvɝ ði ɔɹneɪt, ɡoʊldən tʃɛst, filɪŋ ðə paʊɝ lɑkt ɪnsaɪd. hi hæd tə hæv ə tʃɹɑlɑk kæɹi ɪt - hi dɪd nɑt tʃɹʌs ðə hjumənz ɪnʌf tə loʊɾ ɪɾ ɑn ə hɔɹs ən pæksæɾəl; səm dʒɹimz ə paʊɝ maɪt bi stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə oʊvɝkʌm ivən fɪɹ ə hɪm, bʌt tʃɹɑləks nɛvɝ dʒɹimd ʌv ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛp kɪlɪŋ - ən i hæd nɑt jɛt pʌzəld aʊt haʊ tə oʊpən ɪt. bʌt ðət wəd kʌm. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wəd kʌm. ɛvɹiθɪŋ.

Fain ignored all of it - he had no fear of turning his back on them, not since they had seen the Fade dealt with - and went to his prize. Kneeling, he ran his hands over the ornate, golden chest, feeling the power locked inside. He had to have a Trolloc carry it - he did not trust the humans enough to load it on a horse and packsaddle; some dreams of power might be strong enough to overcome even fear of him, but Trollocs never dreamed of anything except killing - and he had not yet puzzled out how to open it. But that would come. Everything would come. Everything.

ənʃiðɪŋ ðə dæɡɝ, hi leɪɾ ɪɾ ətɑp ðə tʃɛs bɪfɔɹ sɛɾəlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf daʊn bɪsaɪd ðə faɪɝ. ðət bleɪd wɑz ə bɛɾɝ ɡɑɹd ðən tʃɹɑlɑk əɹ hjumən. ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl sin wʌt hæpənd wən i juzd ɪt, wʌns; nʌn wəd kʌm wɪðɪn ə spæn ə ðət bɛɹd bleɪd wɪθaʊɾ ɪz kəmænd, ən ðən ɹɪlʌktənli.

Unsheathing the dagger, he laid it atop the chest before settling himself down beside the fire. That blade was a better guard than Trolloc or human. They had all seen what happened when he used it, once; none would come within a span of that bared blade without his command, and then reluctantly.

laɪɪŋ ðəɹ ɪn ɪz blæŋkəts, hi stɛɹd nɔɹθwɝd. hi kəd nɑt fil ælθɹ, naʊ; ðə dɪstəns bɪtwin əm wɑz tu ɡɹeɪt. əɹ pɝhæps ælθɹ wɑz duɪŋ ɪz vænɪʃɪŋ tʃɹɪk. səmtaɪmz, ɪn ðə kip, ðə bɔɪ hæd sʌɾənli vænɪʃt fɹəm feɪnz sɛnsɪz. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ, bʌɾ ɔlweɪz ælθɹ keɪm bæk, dʒʌst əz sʌɾənli əz i hæd ɡɔn. hi wəd kʌm bæk ðɪs taɪm, tu.

Lying there in his blankets, he stared northward. He could not feel al'Thor, now; the distance between them was too great. Or perhaps al'Thor was doing his vanishing trick. Sometimes, in the keep, the boy had suddenly vanished from Fain's senses. He did not know how, but always al'Thor came back, just as suddenly as he had gone. He would come back this time, too.

"ðɪs taɪm jə kʌm tə mi, ɹænd ælθɹ. bɪfɔɹ, aɪ fɑloʊd jə laɪk ə dɔɡ dʒɹɪvən ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪl, bʌt naʊ jə fɑloʊ mi." hɪz læftɝ wɑz ə kækəl ðəɾ ivən i nu wɑz mæd, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt kɛɹ. mædnəs wɑz ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm, tu. "kʌm tə mi, ælθɹ. ðə dæns ɪz nɑɾ ivən bɪɡʌn jɛt. wɪl dæns ɑn toʊmən hɛd, ən əl bi fɹi ʌv ju. əl si jə dɛɾ ət læst."

"This time you come to me, Rand al'Thor. Before, I followed you like a dog driven on the trail, but now you follow me." His laughter was a cackle that even he knew was mad, but he did not care. Madness was a part of him, too. "Come to me, al'Thor. The dance is not even begun yet. We'll dance on Toman Head, and I'll be free of you. I'll see you dead at last."


tʃæptɝ twɛlv


CHAPTER 12

woʊvən ɪn ðə pæɾɝn


Woven in the Pattern

ɛɡwin hɝiɾ æftɝ nɪneɪiv təwɔɹd ðə nɑɾ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ ɝaʊn ði æmɪɝlɪn sits hɔɹs-bɔɹn pɑlɑnkwɪn, hɝ dɪzaɪɝ tə noʊ wʌt hæd kɑz ðə tɝmɔɪl ɪn fæl dæɹə kɛpt aʊtweɪɪŋ ivən əɹ wɝi oʊvɝ ɹænd. hi wɑz bɪɑn əɹ ɹitʃ, fəɹ ðə moʊmənt. bɛlə, hɝ ʃæɡi mɛɹ, wɑz wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪz hɔɹsəz, ən nɪneɪivz maʊnt, tu.

Egwene hurried after Nynaeve toward the knot of Aes Sedai around the Amyrlin Seat's horse-borne palanquin, her desire to know what had caused the turmoil in Fal Dara kept outweighing even her worry over Rand. He was beyond her reach, for the moment. Bela, her shaggy mare, was with the Aes Sedai's horses, and Nynaeve's mount, too.

ðə wɔɹɾɝz, hænz ɑn sɔɹd hɪls ən aɪz sɝtʃɪŋ ɛvɹiwɛɹ, meɪɾ ə stil sɝkəl ɝaʊn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə pɑlɑnkwɪn. ðeɪ wɝ ən aɪlən ə ɹɛləɾɪv kɑm ɪn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, wɛɹ ʃaɪnɝən soʊlʒɝz stɪl ɹæn əmɪd ðə kips hɔɹəfaɪɾ ɪnhæbəɾənts. ɛɡwin pʊʃt ɪn bɪsaɪd nɪneɪiv - ðə tu ʌv əm ɔl bʌɾ ɪɡnɔɹɾ æftɝ ə sɪŋɡəl ʃɑɹp ɡlæns fɹəm ðə wɔɹɾɝz; ɔl nu ðeɪ wəd bi livɪŋ wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn - ən kɑɾ ɪnʌf ɪn ðə kɹaʊdz mɝmɝz tə lɝn ʌv ən æɹoʊ ðət hæd flæʃt simɪŋli fɹəm noʊwɛɹ ən ə boʊmən jɛɾ ənkɔt.

The Warders, hands on sword hilts and eyes searching everywhere, made a steel circle around the Aes Sedai and the palanquin. They were an island of relative calm in the courtyard, where Shienaran soldiers still ran amid the keep's horrified inhabitants. Egwene pushed in beside Nynaeve - the two of them all but ignored after a single sharp glance from the Warders; all knew they would be leaving with the Amyrlin - and caught enough in the crowd's murmurs to learn of an arrow that had flashed seemingly from nowhere and a bowman yet uncaught.

ɛɡwin stɑpt, waɪd-aɪd, tu ʃɑkt ivən tə θɪŋk ðət ʃi wɑz sɝaʊndəd baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ən ətɛmpt ɑn ðə laɪf ə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ɪt wɛn bɪɑn θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv.

Egwene stopped, wide-eyed, too shocked even to think that she was surrounded by Aes Sedai. An attempt on the life of the Amyrlin Seat. It went beyond thinking of.

ði æmɪɝlɪn sæɾ ɪn əɹ pɑlɑnkwɪn wɪð ðə kɝɾənz dʒɹɔn bæk, ðə blʌdsteɪn ɹɪp ɪn əɹ sliv dʒɹɔɪŋ ɔl aɪz, ən feɪs daʊn lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ. "ju wɪl faɪn ðə boʊmən əɹ jəl nɑt, maɪ sʌn. iðɝ weɪ, maɪ bɪznəs ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn ɪz əz ɝdʒən əz ðəɾ ʌv ɪŋtʃɹ ɑn ɪz kwɛst. aɪ liv naʊ."

The Amyrlin sat in her palanquin with the curtains drawn back, the bloodstained rip in her sleeve drawing all eyes, and faced down Lord Agelmar. "You will find the bowman or you will not, my son. Either way, my business in Tar Valon is as urgent as that of Ingtar on his quest. I leave now."

"bʌt, mʌðɝ," eɪɡəlmɝ pɹətɛstəd, "ðɪs ətɛmpt ɑn jəɹ laɪf tʃeɪnʒəz ɛvɹiθɪŋ. wi stɪl də nɑt noʊ hu sɛn ðə mæn, əɹ waɪ. ən aʊɝ mɔɹ, ən əl əv ðə boʊmən ən ði ænsɝz fəɹ ju."

"But, Mother," Agelmar protested, "this attempt on your life changes everything. We still do not know who sent the man, or why. An hour more, and I will have the bowman and the answers for you."

ði æmɪɝlɪn bɑɹkt ə læf wɪð noʊ əmjuzmən ɪn ɪt. "jul nid slaɪɝ beɪɾ əɹ faɪnɝ nɛts tə kætʃ ðɪs fɪʃ, maɪ sʌn. baɪ ðə taɪm juv ðə mæn, ɪɾəl bi tu leɪɾ ɪn ðə deɪ fəɹ livɪŋ. ðəɹ ɑɹ tu mɛni hu wəd tʃɪɹ tə si mi dɛd fəɹ mi tə wɝi oʊvɝmək əbaʊt ðɪs wʌn. jə meɪ sɛn mi nuz ʌv wʌt jə faɪnd, ɪf jə faɪn ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl." hɝ aɪz tʃɹævəld ɝaʊn ðə taʊɝz oʊvɝlʊkɪŋ ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd, ən ðə ɹæmpɑɹts ən ɑɹtʃɝz' bælkəniz, stɪl dʒæmd wɪð pipəl, ðoʊ saɪlənt naʊ. ði æɹoʊ hæd tə hæv kʌm fɹəm wʌn ə ðoʊz pleɪsəz. "aɪ θɪŋk ðɪs boʊmən ɪz ɔlɹɛɾi flɛd fɹəm fæl dæɹə."

The Amyrlin barked a laugh with no amusement in it. "You'll need slyer bait or finer nets to catch this fish, my son. By the time you have the man, it will be too late in the day for leaving. There are too many who would cheer to see me dead for me to worry overmuch about this one. You may send me news of what you find, if you find anything at all." Her eyes traveled around the towers overlooking the courtyard, and the ramparts and archers' balconies, still jammed with people, though silent now. The arrow had to have come from one of those places. "I think this bowman is already fled from Fal Dara."

"bʌt, mʌðɝ - "

"But, Mother - "

ðə wʊmən ɪn ðə pɑlɑnkwɪn kʌɾ ɪm ɔf wɪð ə ʃɑɹp dʒɛstʃɝ ə faɪnæləɾi. nɑɾ ivən ðə lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə kəd pɹɛs ði æmɪɝlɪn sit tu fɑɹ. hɝ aɪz keɪm tə ɹɛst ɑn ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv, pɪɹsɪŋ aɪz ðət sim tə ɛɡwin tə bi siɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊt hɝsɛlf ðət ʃi wɑntəd tə kip sikɹət. ɛɡwin tʊk ə stɛp bæk, ðən kɑt hɝsɛlf ən dʒɹɑpt ə kɝtsi, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ðət wɝ pɹɑpɝ; noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ ɪkspleɪn tə hɝ ðə pɹoʊɾəkɑl ə miɾɪŋ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. nɪneɪiv kɛpt əɹ bæk stʃɹeɪɾ ən ɹɪtɝn ði æmɪɝlɪnz stɛɹ, bʌt ʃi fʌmbəl fəɹ ɛɡwinz hæn ən ɡɹɪpt əz hɑɹɾ əz ɛɡwin dɪd.

The woman in the palanquin cut him off with a sharp gesture of finality. Not even the Lord of Fal Dara could press the Amyrlin Seat too far. Her eyes came to rest on Egwene and Nynaeve, piercing eyes that seemed to Egwene to be seeing everything about herself that she wanted to keep secret. Egwene took a step back, then caught herself and dropped a curtsy, wondering if that were proper; no one had ever explained to her the protocol of meeting the Amyrlin Seat. Nynaeve kept her back straight and returned the Amyrlin's stare, but she fumbled for Egwene's hand and gripped as hard as Egwene did.

"soʊ ðiz ɑɹ jəɹ tu, mɔɪɹeɪn," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd. mɔɪɹeɪn ɡeɪv ðə bɛɹəs nɑd, ən ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ tɝn tə stɛɹ ət ðə tu wɪmən fɹəm ɛmənz fild. ɛɡwin swɑloʊd. ðeɪ ɔl lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ nu θɪŋz, θɪŋz ʌðɝ pipəl dɪd nɑt, ən ɪt wɑz noʊ hɛlp əɾ ɔl tə noʊ ðət ðeɪ tʃɹuli dɪd. "jɛs, aɪ sɛns ə faɪn spɑɹk ɪn itʃ ə ðɛm. bʌt wʌt wɪl kɪndəl fɹəm ɪt? ðæts ðə kwɛstʃən, ɪzən ɪt?"

"So these are your two, Moiraine," the Amyrlin said. Moiraine gave the barest nod, and the other Aes Sedai turned to stare at the two women from Emond's Field. Egwene swallowed. They all looked as if they knew things, things other people did not, and it was no help at all to know that they truly did. "Yes, I sense a fine spark in each of them. But what will kindle from it? That's the question, isn't it?"

ɛɡwinz maʊθ fɛl dʒɹaɪ əz dʌst. ʃi hæd sin mæstɝ pædwɪn, ðə kɑɹpəntɝ bæk hoʊm, lʊk əɾ ɪz tulz mʌtʃ ðə seɪm weɪ əz ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət ðə tu ʌv ðɛm. ðɪs wʌn fəɹ ðɪs pɝpəs, ðət wʌn fəɹ ðæt.

Egwene's mouth felt dry as dust. She had seen Master Padwhin, the carpenter back home, look at his tools much the same way as the Amyrlin was looking at the two of them. This one for this purpose, that one for that.

ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛɾ əbɹʌpli, "ɪɾ ɪz taɪm wi wɝ ɡɔn. tə hɔɹs. lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ ən aɪ kən seɪ wʌt nidz bi sɛd wɪθaʊt jə ɔl ɡɔkɪŋ laɪk nɑvəsɪz ɑn ə fɹideɪ. tə hɔɹs!"

The Amyrlin said abruptly, "It is time we were gone. To horse. Lord Agelmar and I can say what needs be said without you all gawking like novices on a freeday. To horse!"

əɾ əɹ kəmæn ðə wɔɹɾɝz skæɾɝd tə ðɛɹ maʊns, stɪl wɛɹi, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɔl bʌt lin, ɡlaɪɾɪd əweɪ fɹəm ðə pɑlɑnkwɪn tə ðɛɹ oʊn hɔɹsəz. əz ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv tɝn tə oʊbeɪ, ə sɝvən əpɪɹɾ ət lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝz ʃoʊldɝ wɪð ə sɪlvɝ tʃælɪs. eɪɡəlmɝ tʊk ɪt wɪð ə dɪsæɾəsfaɪd twɪs tə hɪz maʊθ.

At her command the Warders scattered to their mounts, still wary, and the Aes Sedai, all but Leane, glided away from the palanquin to their own horses. As Egwene and Nynaeve turned to obey, a servant appeared at Lord Agelmar's shoulder with a silver chalice. Agelmar took it with a dissatisfied twist to his mouth.

"wɪð ðɪs kʌp fɹəm maɪ hænd, mʌðɝ, teɪk maɪ wɪʃ ðət jə fɛɹ wɛl ɑn ðɪs deɪ, ən ɛvɹi. . . ."

"With this cup from my hand, Mother, take my wish that you fare well on this day, and every. . . ."

wʌtɛvɝ ɛls ðeɪ sɛd wɑz lɔs tə ɛɡwin əz ʃi skɹæmbəld ɑntu bɛlə. baɪ ðə taɪm ʃi hæd ɡɪvən ðə ʃæɡi mɛɹ ə pæt, ən ɝeɪnʒd əɹ skɝts, ðə pɑlɑnkwɪn wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi muvɪŋ təwɔɹd ði oʊpən ɡeɪts, ɪts hɔɹsəz stɛpɪŋ wɪθaʊt ɹeɪn əɹ lɛd. lin ɹoʊd bɪsaɪd ðə pɑlɑnkwɪn, hɝ stæf pɹɑpt əɾ əɹ stɝəp. ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv bɹɔt ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz əlɔŋ bɪhaɪnd wɪð ðə ɹɛst ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Whatever else they said was lost to Egwene as she scrambled onto Bela. By the time she had given the shaggy mare a pat, and arranged her skirts, the palanquin was already moving toward the open gates, its horses stepping without rein or lead. Leane rode beside the palanquin, her staff propped at her stirrup. Egwene and Nynaeve brought their horses along behind with the rest of the Aes Sedai.

ɹɔɹz ən tʃɪɹz fɹəm ðə kɹaʊdz laɪnɪŋ ðə taʊn stʃɹits ɡɹiɾəd ðə pɹəsɛʃən, ɔl bʌt dʒɹaʊnɪŋ ðə θʌndɝ ə ðə dʒɹʌmɝz ən ðə blɛɹ ə ðə tʃɹʌmpəɾɝz. wɔɹɾɝz lɛd ðə kɑləm, wɪð ðə bænɝ bɛɹɪŋ ðə waɪt fleɪm weɪvɪŋ ɪn ɹɪpəlz, ən ɹoʊd ɡɑɹɾ ɝaʊn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, kipɪŋ ðə mæs ə pipəl bæk; ɑɹtʃɝz ən pɪkmɛn, ðə fleɪm blæzən ɑn ðɛɹ tʃɛsts, fɑloʊd bɪhaɪn ɪn pɹɪsaɪs ɹæŋks. ðə tʃɹʌmpəts fɛl saɪlən əz ðə kɑləm waʊn ɪts weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊn ən tɝn saʊθwɝd, jɛt ðə saʊnz ə tʃɪɹɪŋ fɹəm wɪðɪn ðə taʊn fɑloʊd stɪl. ɛɡwin ɡlæns bæk ɔfən, əntɪl tʃɹiz ən hɪlz hɪd fæl dæɹəz wɔlz ən taʊɝz.

Roars and cheers from the crowds lining the town streets greeted the procession, all but drowning the thunder of the drummers and the blare of the trumpeters. Warders led the column, with the banner bearing the White Flame waving in ripples, and rode guard around the Aes Sedai, keeping the mass of people back; archers and pikemen, the Flame blazoned on their chests, followed behind in precise ranks. The trumpets fell silent as the column wound its way out of the town and turned southward, yet the sounds of cheering from within the town followed still. Egwene glanced back often, until trees and hills hid Fal Dara's walls and towers.

nɪneɪiv, ɹaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋsaɪd, ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ɹænd wɪl bi ɔl ɹaɪt. hiz lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ ən twɛnti lænsɪz wɪð hɪm. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ jə kən də əbaʊɾ ɪt. nʌθɪŋ iðɝ ʌv əs kən du." ʃi ɡlæns təwɔɹd mɔɪɹeɪn; ði ɛɛs sədaɪz tʃɹɪm waɪt mɛɹ ən lænz tɔl blæk stæljən meɪɾ ən ɑd pɛɹ ɔf tə wʌn saɪd baɪ ðɛmsɛlvz. "nɑt jɛt."

Nynaeve, riding alongside, shook her head. "Rand will be all right. He has Lord Ingtar and twenty lances with him. In any case, there is nothing you can do about it. Nothing either of us can do." She glanced toward Moiraine; the Aes Sedai's trim white mare and Lan's tall black stallion made an odd pair off to one side by themselves. "Not yet."

ðə kɑləm æŋɡəld wɛstwɝɾ əz ɪt tʃɹævəld, ən ɪt dɪd nɑt kʌvɝ ðə ɡɹaʊn kwɪkli. ivən fʊtmən ɪn hæf ɑɹmɝ kəd nɑt muv fæs θɹu ðə ʃaɪnɝən hɪlz, nɑɾ ən meɪnteɪn ðə peɪs fəɹ lɔŋ. stɪl, ðeɪ pʊʃt əz hɑɹɾ əz ðeɪ kʊd.

The column angled westward as it traveled, and it did not cover the ground quickly. Even footmen in half armor could not move fast through the Shienaran hills, not and maintain the pace for long. Still, they pushed as hard as they could.

kæmps keɪm leɪɾ itʃ naɪt, ði æmɪɝlɪn əlaʊɪŋ noʊ stɑp əntɪl bɛɹli ɪnʌf laɪt ɹɪmeɪn tə pɪtʃ ðə tɛns, flæɾənd waɪt doʊmz dʒʌs tɔl ɪnʌf tə stæn ɪn. itʃ pɛɹ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ fɹəm ðə seɪm ədʒɑ hæd wʌn, waɪl ði æmɪɝlɪn ən ðə kipɝ hæd tɛns tə ðɛmsɛlvz. mɔɪɹeɪn ʃɛɹd ðə tɛn ə hɝ tu sɪstɝz ə ðə blu. ðə soʊlʒɝz slɛpt ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪn ðɛɹ oʊn ɛnkæmpmənt, ən ðə wɔɹɾɝz ɹæp ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn ðɛɹ kloʊks nɪɹ ðə tɛns ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə hum ðeɪ wɝ bɑndəd. ðə tɛnt ʃɛɹd baɪ ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝz lʊkt ɑdli loʊnli wɪθaʊɾ ɛni wɔɹɾɝz, waɪl ðəɾ ə ðə ɡɹinz simd ɔlmoʊs fɛstɪv, ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔfən sɪɾɪŋ aʊtsaɪd lɔŋ pæs dɑɹk tə tɔk wɪð ðə fɔɹ wɔɹɾɝz ðeɪ hæd bɹɔt bɪtwin ðɛm.

Camps came late each night, the Amyrlin allowing no stop until barely enough light remained to pitch the tents, flattened white domes just tall enough to stand in. Each pair of Aes Sedai from the same Ajah had one, while the Amyrlin and the Keeper had tents to themselves. Moiraine shared the tent of her two sisters of the Blue. The soldiers slept on the ground in their own encampment, and the Warders wrapped themselves in their cloaks near the tents of the Aes Sedai to whom they were bonded. The tent shared by the Red sisters looked oddly lonely without any Warders, while that of the Greens seemed almost festive, the two Aes Sedai often sitting outside long past dark to talk with the four Warders they had brought between them.

læn keɪm wʌns tə ðə tɛn ɛɡwin ʃɛɹd wɪð nɪneɪiv, teɪkɪŋ ðə wɪzdəm ɪndə ðə naɪɾ ə lɪɾəl dɪstəns əweɪ. ɛɡwin pɪɹɾ ɝaʊn ðə tɛn flæp tə wɑtʃ. ʃi kəd nɑt hɪɹ wʌt ðeɪ sɛd, ɪksɛp ðət nɪneɪiv ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɪɹʌptəɾ ɪn æŋɡɝ ən keɪm stɔkɪŋ bæk tə ɹæp hɝsɛlf ɪn əɹ blæŋkəts ən ɹəfjuz tə tɔk əɾ ɔl. ɛɡwin θɔɾ əɹ tʃiks wɝ wɛt, ðoʊ ʃi hɪɾ əɹ feɪs wɪð ə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ blæŋkət. læn stʊd wɑtʃɪŋ ðə tɛn fɹəm ðə dɑɹknəs fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm bɪfɔɹ i wɛn əweɪ. æftɝ ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt kʌm əɡɛn.

Lan came once to the tent Egwene shared with Nynaeve, taking the Wisdom into the night a little distance away. Egwene peered around the tent flap to watch. She could not hear what they said, except that Nynaeve eventually erupted in anger and came stalking back to wrap herself in her blankets and refuse to talk at all. Egwene thought her cheeks were wet, though she hid her face with a corner of her blanket. Lan stood watching the tent from the darkness for a long time before he went away. After that he did not come again.

mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd nɑt kʌm nɪɹ ðɛm, ɡɪvɪŋ əm oʊnli ə nɑɾ ɪn pæsɪŋ. ʃi sim tə spɛn əɹ weɪkɪŋ aʊɝz spikɪŋ wɪð ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɔl bʌt ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝz, dʒɹɔɪŋ əm əsaɪd wʌn baɪ wʌn əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd. ði æmɪɝlɪn əlaʊd fju stɑps fəɹ ɹɛst, ən ðoʊz ʃɔɹt.

Moiraine did not come near them, giving them only a nod in passing. She seemed to spend her waking hours speaking with the other Aes Sedai, all but the Red sisters, drawing them aside one by one as they rode. The Amyrlin allowed few stops for rest, and those short.

"meɪbi ʃi dʌzn əv taɪm fəɹ əs ɛnimɔɹ," ɛɡwin əbzɝv sædli. mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz ðə wʌn ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃi nu. pɝhæps - ðoʊ ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk tə ədmɪɾ ɪt - ði oʊnli wʌn ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi kəd tʃɹʌst. "ʃi faʊn ʌs, ən wəɹ ɑn əɹ weɪ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. aɪ səpoʊz ʃiz ʌðɝ θɪŋz tə kənsɝn hɝ, naʊ."

"Maybe she doesn't have time for us anymore," Egwene observed sadly. Moiraine was the one Aes Sedai she knew. Perhaps - though she did not like to admit it - the only one she was sure she could trust. "She found us, and we are on our way to Tar Valon. I suppose she has other things to concern her, now."

nɪneɪiv snɔɹɾɪd sɔfli. "aɪl bɪliv ʃiz dʌn wɪð əs wən ʃiz dɛd - əɹ wi ɑɹ. ʃiz slaɪ, ðət wʌn."

Nynaeve snorted softly. "I'll believe she is done with us when she's dead - or we are. She is sly, that one."

ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ keɪm tə ðɛɹ tɛnt. ɛɡwin ɔlmoʊs dʒʌmpt aʊɾ ə hɝ skɪn ðət fɝs naɪɾ aʊɾ ə fæl dæɹə, wən ðə tɛn flæp wɑz pʊʃt əsaɪɾ ən ə plʌmp, skwɛɹ-feɪst ɛɛs sədaɪ, wɪð ɡɹeɪɪŋ hɛɹ ən ə veɪɡli dɪstʃɹæktəd lʊk ɪn əɹ dɑɹk aɪz, dʌkt ɪndə ðɛɹ tɛnt. ʃi ɡlænst ət ðə læntɝn hæŋɪŋ ət ðə haɪəs pɔɪn ə ðə tɛnt, ən ðə fleɪm ɹoʊz ə lɪɾəl haɪɝ. ɛɡwin θɔt ʃi fɛl sʌmθɪŋ, θɔt ʃi ɔlmoʊst sɔ sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wən ðə fleɪm ɡɹu bɹaɪɾɝ. mɔɪɹeɪn hæd toʊld əɹ ðət wʌn deɪ - wən ʃi hæd mɔɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ - ʃi wəd bi eɪbəl tə si wən ənʌðɝ wʊmən tʃænəld, ən tə tɛl ə wʊmən u kəd tʃænəl ivən ɪf ʃi dɪd nʌθɪŋ.

Other Aes Sedai came to their tent. Egwene almost jumped out of her skin that first night out of Fal Dara, when the tent flap was pushed aside and a plump, square-faced Aes Sedai, with graying hair and a vaguely distracted look in her dark eyes, ducked into their tent. She glanced at the lantern hanging at the highest point of the tent, and the flame rose a little higher. Egwene thought she felt something, thought she almost saw something about the Aes Sedai when the flame grew brighter. Moiraine had told her that one day - when she had more training - she would be able to see when another woman channeled, and to tell a woman who could channel even if she did nothing.

"aɪ æm vɛɹɪn mæθwɪn," ðə wʊmən sɛd wɪð ə smaɪl. "æn jə ɑɹ ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ ən nɪneɪiv ælmɛɹə. fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, wɪtʃ wɑz wʌns meɪnɛðɝən. stʃɹɔŋ blʌd, ðæt. ɪt sɪŋz."

"I am Verin Mathwin," the woman said with a smile. "And you are Egwene al'Vere and Nynaeve al'Maera. From the Two Rivers, which was once Manetheren. Strong blood, that. It sings."

ɛɡwin ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz wɪð nɪneɪiv əz ðeɪ ɡɑt tə ðɛɹ fit.

Egwene exchanged glances with Nynaeve as they got to their feet.

"ɪz ðɪs ə sʌmənz tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit?" ɛɡwin æskt.

"Is this a summons to the Amyrlin Seat?" Egwene asked.

vɛɹɪn læft. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæɾ ə smʌdʒ ʌv ɪŋk ɑn əɹ noʊz. "oʊ, maɪ, noʊ. ði æmɪɝlɪn əz mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋz tə dil wɪð ðən tu jʌŋ wɪmən u ɑɹ nɑɾ ivən nɑvəsɪz jɛt. ɔlðoʊ, jə nɛvɝ kən tɛl. jə boʊθ əv kənsɪɾɝəbəl pətɛnʃəl, ɪspɛʃli ju, nɪneɪiv. wʌn deɪ. . . ." ʃi pɔzd, ɹʌbɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝ θɔtfəli ɹaɪɾ ətɑp ði ɪŋk smʌdʒ. "bʌt ðɪs ɪz nɑt wʌn deɪ. aɪm hɪɹ tə ɡɪv jə ə lɛsən, ɛɡwin. juv bɪn poʊkɪŋ ɪn əhɛɾ ə jɝsɛlf, aɪ fɪɹ."

Verin laughed. The Aes Sedai had a smudge of ink on her nose. "Oh, my, no. The Amyrlin has more important things to deal with than two young women who are not even novices yet. Although, you never can tell. You both have considerable potential, especially you, Nynaeve. One day. . . ." She paused, rubbing a finger thoughtfully right atop the ink smudge. "But this is not one day. I am here to give you a lesson, Egwene. You have been poking in ahead of yourself, I fear."

nɝvəsli, ɛɡwin lʊkt ət nɪneɪiv. "wʌɾ əv aɪ dʌn? nʌθɪŋ ðəɾ aɪm əwɛɹ ʌv."

Nervously, Egwene looked at Nynaeve. "What have I done? Nothing that I'm aware of."

"oʊ, nʌθɪŋ ɹɔŋ. nɑɾ ɪɡzækli. sʌmwʌt deɪnʒɝəs, pɝhæps, bʌt nɑɾ ɪɡzækli ɹɔŋ." vɛɹɪn loʊɝd hɝsɛlf tə ðə kænvəs flɔɹ, foʊldɪŋ əɹ lɛɡz ʌndɝ hɝ. "sɪt, boʊθ ə ju. sɪt. aɪ doʊn min tə kɹeɪn maɪ nɛk." ʃi ʃɪftəɾ ɝaʊn əntɪl ʃi hæɾ ə kʌmftəɹbəl pəzɪʃən. "sɪt."

"Oh, nothing wrong. Not exactly. Somewhat dangerous, perhaps, but not exactly wrong." Verin lowered herself to the canvas floor, folding her legs under her. "Sit, both of you. Sit. I don't mean to crane my neck." She shifted around until she had a comfortable position. "Sit."

ɛɡwin sɛɾəld kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ əkɹɔs fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən dɪɾ əɹ bɛs nɑt tə lʊk ət nɪneɪiv. noʊ nid tə lʊk ɡɪlti əntɪl aɪ noʊ ɪf aɪ æm. ən meɪbi nɑt ðɛn. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪɾ aɪv dʌn ðæts deɪnʒɝəs bʌt nɑɾ ɪɡzækli ɹɔŋ?"

Egwene settled cross-legged across from the Aes Sedai and did her best not to look at Nynaeve. No need to look guilty until I know if I am. And maybe not then. "What is it I've done that's dangerous but not exactly wrong?"

"waɪ, juv bɪn tʃænəlɪŋ ðə paʊɝ, tʃaɪld."

"Why, you've been channeling the Power, child."

ɛɡwin kəɾ oʊnli ɡeɪp. nɪneɪiv bɝst aʊt, "ðæɾ ɪz ɹɪdɪkjələs. waɪ ɑɹ wi ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ɪf nɑt fəɹ ðæt?"

Egwene could only gape. Nynaeve burst out, "That is ridiculous. Why are we going to Tar Valon, if not for that?"

"mɔɪɹeɪn əz . . . aɪ min, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ hæz bɪn ɡɪvɪŋ mi lɛsənz," ɛɡwin mænədʒd.

"Moiraine has . . . I mean, Moiraine Sedai has been giving me lessons," Egwene managed.

vɛɹɪn hɛld ʌp əɹ hænz fəɹ kwaɪət, ən ðeɪ fɛl saɪlənt. ʃi maɪt sim veɪɡ, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, æftɝ ɔl. "tʃaɪld, dʒju θɪŋk ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪmiɾiətli titʃ ɛvɹi ɡɝl u sɛz ʃi wɑns tə bi wʌn ʌv əs haʊ tə tʃænəl? wɛl, aɪ səpoʊz jə ɑɹ nɑɾ ɪɡzækli ɛvɹi ɡɝl, bʌt dʒʌs ðə seɪm. . . ." ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd ɡɹeɪvli.

Verin held up her hands for quiet, and they fell silent. She might seem vague, but she was Aes Sedai, after all. "Child, do you think Aes Sedai immediately teach every girl who says she wants to be one of us how to channel? Well, I suppose you are not exactly every girl, but just the same. . . ." She shook her head gravely.

"ðɛn waɪ dɪd ʃi?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd. ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ lɛsənz fəɹ hɝ, ən ɛɡwin wɑz stɪl nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪf ɪt ɹæŋkəl nɪneɪiv əɹ nɑt.

"Then why did she?" Nynaeve demanded. There had been no lessons for her, and Egwene was still not sure if it rankled Nynaeve or not.

"bɪkɔz ɛɡwin hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi tʃænəld," vɛɹɪn sɛd peɪʃənli.

"Because Egwene had already channeled," Verin said patiently.

"soʊ. . . . soʊ hæv aɪ." nɪneɪiv dɪd nɑt saʊn hæpi əbaʊɾ ɪt.

"So. . . . So have I." Nynaeve did not sound happy about it.

"jɔɹ sɝkəmstænsəz ɑɹ dɪfɹənt, tʃaɪld. ðət jə ɑɹ stɪl əlaɪv ʃoʊz jə wɛðɝd ðə vɛɹiəs kɹaɪsiz, ən dɪɾ ɪɾ ɑn jəɹ oʊn. aɪ θɪŋk jə noʊ haʊ lʌki jə ɑɹ. ʌv ɛvɹi fɔɹ wɪmən fɔɹs tə də wʌt jə dɪd, oʊnli wʌn sɝvaɪvz. ʌv kɔɹs, waɪldɝz - " vɛɹɪn ɡɹɪməst. "fɝɡɪv mi, bʌɾ aɪm əfɹeɪd ðəɾ ɪz wʌt wi ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɔfən kɔl wɪmən hu, wɪθaʊɾ ɛni tʃɹeɪnɪŋ, hæv mænədʒ səm ɹʌf kəntʃɹoʊl - ɹændəm, ən bɛɹli ɪnʌf tə bi kɔl kəntʃɹoʊl, juʒəwəli, laɪk ju, bʌt stɪl kəntʃɹoʊl ʌv ə sɔɹt. waɪldɝz əv dɪfəkəltiz, ɪts tʃɹu. ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz ðeɪv bɪlt ʌp wɔlz tə kip ðɛmsɛlvz fɹəm noʊɪŋ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ, ən ðoʊz wɔlz ɪntɝfɪɹ wɪð kɑnʃəs kəntʃɹoʊl. ðə lɔŋɡɝ ðoʊz wɔlz əv tə bɪld, ðə hɑɹɾɝ ɪts tə tɛɹ əm daʊn, bʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ kən bi dɪmɑlɪʃt - wɛl, səm ə ðə moʊst ədɛp sɪstɝz ɛvɝ əv bɪn waɪldɝz."

"Your circumstances are different, child. That you are still alive shows you weathered the various crises, and did it on your own. I think you know how lucky you are. Of every four women forced to do what you did, only one survives. Of course, wilders - " Verin grimaced. "Forgive me, but I am afraid that is what we in the White Tower often call women who, without any training, have managed some rough control - random, and barely enough to be called control, usually, like you, but still control of a sort. Wilders have difficulties, it is true. Almost always they have built up walls to keep themselves from knowing what it was they were doing, and those walls interfere with conscious control. The longer those walls have to build, the harder it is to tear them down, but if they can be demolished - well, some of the most adept sisters ever have been wilders."

nɪneɪiv ʃɪftəɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli, ən lʊkt ət ði ɛntʃɹəns əz ɪf θɪŋkɪŋ ə livɪŋ.

Nynaeve shifted irritably, and looked at the entrance as if thinking of leaving.

"aɪ doʊn si wʌɾ ɛni ʌv ðəɾ əz tə də wɪð mi," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"I don't see what any of that has to do with me," Egwene said.

vɛɹɪn blɪŋkt ət hɝ, ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf wʌndɝɪŋ wɛɹ ʃi hæd kʌm fɹʌm. "wɪð ju? waɪ, nʌθɪŋ. jəɹ pɹɑbləm ɪz kwaɪt dɪfɹənt. moʊst ɡɝlz u wɑnə bɪkʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ - ivən moʊst ɡɝlz wɪð ðə siɾ ɪnsaɪd ðɛm, laɪk jə - ɑɹ əfɹeɪɾ ʌv ɪt, tu. ivən æftɝ ðeɪ ɹitʃ ðə taʊɝ, ivən æftɝ ðeɪv lɝnd wʌt tə də ən haʊ, fəɹ mʌnθs ðeɪ nid tə bi lɛd, stɛp baɪ stɛp, baɪ ə sɪstɝ, əɹ baɪ wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd. bʌt nɑt ju. fɹəm wʌt mɔɪɹeɪn tɛlz mi, jə lɛpt ɪndə ɪɾ əz sun əz jə nu jə kʊd, fʌmbəlɪŋ jəɹ weɪ θɹu ðə dɑɹk wɪð nɛvɝ ə θɔɾ ʌv wɛðɝ ðəɹ wɑz ə bɑɾəmləs pɪɾ ʌndɝ jəɹ nɛkst stɛp. oʊ, ðəɹ əv bɪn ʌðɝz laɪk ju; jə ɑɹ nɑt junik. mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz wʌn hɝsɛlf. wʌns ʃi nu wʌt jə hæd dʌn, ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ɪt bʌt fəɹ əɹ tə bɪɡɪn titʃɪŋ ju. dɪd mɔɪɹeɪn nɛvɝ ɪkspleɪn ɛni ʌv ðɪs tə ju?"

Verin blinked at her, almost as if wondering where she had come from. "With you? Why, nothing. Your problem is quite different. Most girls who want to become Aes Sedai - even most girls with the seed inside them, like you - are afraid of it, too. Even after they reach the Tower, even after they've learned what to do and how, for months they need to be led, step by step, by a sister, or by one of the Accepted. But not you. From what Moiraine tells me, you leaped into it as soon as you knew you could, fumbling your way through the dark with never a thought of whether there was a bottomless pit under your next step. Oh, there have been others like you; you are not unique. Moiraine was one herself. Once she knew what you had done, there was nothing for it but for her to begin teaching you. Did Moiraine never explain any of this to you?"

"nɛvɝ." ɛɡwin wɪʃt əɹ vɔɪs wɑz nɑt soʊ bɹɛθləs. "ʃi hæd . . . ʌðɝ mæɾɝz tə dil wɪð." nɪneɪiv snɔɹɾɪd sɔfli.

"Never." Egwene wished her voice was not so breathless. "She had . . . other matters to deal with." Nynaeve snorted softly.

"wɛl, mɔɪɹeɪn əz nɛvɝ bɪlivd ɪn tɛlɪŋ ɛniwʌn ɛniθɪŋ ðeɪ dɪd nɑt nid tə noʊ. noʊɪŋ sɝvz noʊ ɹil pɝpəs, bʌt ðɛn, niðɝ dʌz nɑt noʊɪŋ. maɪsɛlf, aɪ ɔlweɪz pɹəfɝ noʊɪŋ tə nɑt."

"Well, Moiraine has never believed in telling anyone anything they did not need to know. Knowing serves no real purpose, but then, neither does not knowing. Myself, I always prefer knowing to not."

"ɪz ðəɹ wʌn? ə pɪt, aɪ min?"

"Is there one? A pit, I mean?"

"ɑbviəsli nɑt soʊ fɑɹ," vɛɹɪn sɛd, tɪltɪŋ əɹ hɛd. "bʌt ðə nɛkst stɛp?" ʃi ʃɹʌɡd. "ju si, tʃaɪld, ðə mɔɹ jə tʃɹaɪ tə tʌtʃ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, ðə mɔɹ jə tʃɹaɪ tə tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ði iziɝ ɪt bɪkʌmz tə æktʃəli  də ɪt. jɛs, ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, jə stʃɹɛtʃ aʊt tə ðə sɔɹs ən mɔɹ ɔfən ðən ɪts ɪz laɪk ɡɹæspɪŋ əɾ ɛɹ. əɹ jə æktʃəli  tʌtʃ seɪaɪdɑɹ, bʌɾ ivən wən jə fil ðə wʌn paʊɝ floʊɪŋ θɹu ju, jə faɪn jə kən də nʌθɪŋ wɪð ɪt. əɹ jə də sʌmθɪŋ, ən ɪɾ ɪzənt wʌt jə ɪntɛndəɾ əɾ ɔl. ðəɾ ɪz ðə deɪnʒɝ. juʒəwəli, wɪð ɡaɪɾəns ən tʃɹeɪnɪŋ - ən ðə ɡɝlz oʊn fɪɹ sloʊɪŋ əɹ daʊn - ði əbɪləɾi tə tʌtʃ ðə sɔɹs ən ði əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ kʌm təɡɛðɝ wɪð ði əbɪləɾi tə ʃiz ʃi ɪz duɪŋ. bʌt jə bɪɡæn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tʃænəl wɪθaʊɾ ɛniwʌn ðəɹ tə titʃ jə ɛni kəntʃɹoʊl əɾ ɔl ʌv wʌt jə du. aɪ noʊ jə doʊn θɪŋk jəɹ vɛɹi fɑɹ əlɔŋ, ən jə ɑɹ nɑt, bʌt jə ɑɹ laɪk sʌmwʌn u hæz tɔt hɝsɛlf tə ɹʌn ʌp hɪlz - səmtaɪmz, ət list - wɪθaʊɾ ɛvɝ lɝnɪŋ haʊ tə ɹʌn daʊn ði ʌðɝ saɪd, əɹ tə wɔk. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ jə ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə fɔl, ɪf jə doʊn lɝn ðə ɹɛst ʌv aɪm aɪ æm nɑt tɔkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ laɪk wʌt hæpənz wən wʌn ə ðoʊz pʊɹ mɛn bɪɡɪnz jəl jə wɪl nɑt ɡoʊ mæd; jə woʊn daɪ, nɑt wɪð sɪstɝz tə titʃ ən ɡaɪd jə - bʌt wʌt maɪt jə də ɪntaɪɝli baɪ æksəɾənt, nɛvɝ minɪŋ tə?" fəɹ ən ɪnstən ðə veɪɡnɪs hæd dʒɹɑp fɹəm vɛɹɪnz aɪz. fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ɪt simd, ði ɛɛs sədaɪz ɡeɪz hæd flɪk fɹəm ɛɡwin tə nɪneɪiv əz ʃɑɹpli əz ði æmɪɝlɪnz hæd. "jɔɹ ɪneɪɾ əbɪləɾiz ɑɹ stʃɹɔŋ, ðəl ðeɪ wɪl ɡɹoʊ stʃɹɔŋɝ. jə mʌs lɝn tə kəntʃɹoʊl əm bɪfɔɹ jə hɑɹm jɝsɛlf, əɹ sʌmwʌn ɛls, əɹ ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni pipəl. ðəɾ ɪz wʌt mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə titʃ ju. ðəɾ əl aɪ wɪl tʃɹaɪ tə hɛlp jə wɪð tənaɪt, ən wʌɾ ə sɪstɝ wɪl hɛlp jə wɪð ɛvɹi naɪɾ əntɪl wi pʊt jə ɪndə ʃɛɹiəmz moʊst ʃiz ʃi ɪz mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz."

"Obviously not so far," Verin said, tilting her head. "But the next step?" She shrugged. "You see, child, the more you try to touch the True Source, the more you try to channel the One Power, the easier it becomes to actually do it. Yes, in the beginning, you stretch out to the Source and more often than not it is like grasping at air. Or you actually touch saidar, but even when you feel the One Power flowing through you, you find you can do nothing with it. Or you do something, and it isn't what you intended at all. That is the danger. Usually, with guidance and training - and the girl's own fear slowing her down - the ability to touch the Source and the ability to channel the Power come together with the ability to control what she is doing. But you began trying to channel without anyone there to teach you any control at all of what you do. I know you don't think you're very far along, and you are not, but you are like someone who has taught herself to run up hills - sometimes, at least - without ever learning how to run down the other side, or to walk. Sooner or later you are going to fall, if you don't learn the rest of it. Now, I am not talking about anything like what happens when one of those poor men begins channeling - you will not go mad; you won't die, not with sisters to teach and guide you - but what might you do entirely by accident, never meaning to?" For an instant the vagueness had dropped from Verin's eyes. For an instant, it seemed, the Aes Sedai's gaze had flicked from Egwene to Nynaeve as sharply as the Amyrlin's had. "Your innate abilities are strong, child, and they will grow stronger. You must learn to control them before you harm yourself, or someone else, or a great many people. That is what Moiraine was trying to teach you. That is what I will try to help you with tonight, and what a sister will help you with every night until we put you into Sheriam's most capable hands. She is Mistress of Novices."

ɛɡwin θɔt, kən ʃi noʊ əbaʊt ɹænd? ɪɾ ɪzən pɑsəbəl. ʃid nɛvɝ əv lɛɾ ɪm liv fæl dæɹə ɪf ʃi ivən səspɛktəd. bʌt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi hæd nɑɾ ɪmædʒənd wʌt ʃi sɔ. "θæŋk ju, vɛɹɪn sədaɪ. əl tʃɹaɪ."

Egwene thought, Can she know about Rand? It isn't possible. She'd never have let him leave Fal Dara if she even suspected. But she was sure she had not imagined what she saw. "Thank you, Verin Sedai. I will try."

nɪneɪiv ɹoʊz smuðli tə hɝ fit. "aɪ wɪl ɡoʊ sɪt baɪ ðə faɪɝ ən liv jə tu əloʊn."

Nynaeve rose smoothly to her feet. "I will go sit by the fire and leave you two alone."

"ju ʃəd steɪ," vɛɹɪn sɛd. "ju kəd pɹɑfət baɪ ɪt. fɹəm wʌt mɔɪɹeɪn əz toʊl mi, ɪt ʃəd teɪk oʊnli ə lɪɾəl tʃɹeɪnɪŋ fəɹ jə tə bi ɹeɪz tə ði æksɛptɪd."

"You should stay," Verin said. "You could profit by it. From what Moiraine has told me, it should take only a little training for you to be raised to the Accepted."

nɪneɪiv hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊnli ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd fɝmli. "aɪ θæŋk jə fəɹ ði ɔfɝ, bʌɾ aɪ kən weɪɾ əntɪl wi ɹitʃ tɑɹ vəlɑn. ɛɡwin, ɪf jə nid mi, əl bi - "

Nynaeve hesitated only a moment before shaking her head firmly. "I thank you for the offer, but I can wait until we reach Tar Valon. Egwene, if you need me, I will be - "

"baɪ ɛni ɡeɪdʒ," vɛɹɪn kʌɾ ɪn, "ju ɑɹ ə wʊmən ɡɹoʊn, nɪneɪiv. juʒəwəli, ðə jʌŋɡɝ ə nɑvəs, ðə bɛɾɝ ʃi dʌz. nɑt wɪð ðə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ nɛsəsɛɹəli, bʌt kəz ə nɑvəs ɪz ɪkspɛktəd tə də əz ʃiz toʊld, wən ʃiz toʊld ən wɪθaʊt kwɛstʃən. ɪts ɹɪli oʊnli ʌv jus wʌns ði æktʃəwəl tʃɹeɪnɪŋ əz ɹitʃt ə sɝɾən pɔɪnt - ə hɛzəteɪʃən ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ pleɪs ðɛn, əɹ ə daʊɾ ʌv wʌt juv bɪn toʊl tə du, kən əv tʃɹædʒɪk kɑnsəkwɛnsəz - bʌɾ ɪts bɛɾɝ tə fɑloʊ ðə dɪsəplən ɔl ðə taɪm. ði æksɛptɪd, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, ɑɹ ɪkspɛktəd tə kwɛstʃən θɪŋz, əz ɪts fɛl ðeɪ noʊ ɪnʌf tə noʊ wʌt kwɛstʃənz tə æsk ən wɛn. wɪtʃ dʒju θɪŋk jə wəd pɹəfɝ?"

"By any gauge," Verin cut in, "you are a woman grown, Nynaeve. Usually, the younger a novice, the better she does. Not with the training necessarily, but because a novice is expected to do as she is told, when she is told and without question. It is really only of use once the actual training has reached a certain point - a hesitation in the wrong place then, or a doubt of what you have been told to do, can have tragic consequences - but it is better to follow the discipline all the time. The Accepted, on the other hand, are expected to question things, as it is felt they know enough to know what questions to ask and when. Which do you think you would prefer?"

nɪneɪivz hænz taɪɾənd ɑn əɹ skɝt, ən ʃi lʊkt ət ðə tɛn flæp əɡɛn, fɹaʊnɪŋ. faɪnəli ʃi ɡeɪv ə ʃɔɹt nɑɾ ən sɛɾəld bæk daʊn ɑn ðə flɔɹ. "aɪ səpoʊz aɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl," ʃi sɛd.

Nynaeve's hands tightened on her skirt, and she looked at the tent flap again, frowning. Finally she gave a short nod and settled back down on the floor. "I suppose I might as well," she said.

"ɡʊd," vɛɹɪn sɛd. "naʊ. jə ɔlɹɛɾi noʊ ðɪs pɑɹt, ɛɡwin, bʌt fəɹ nɪneɪivz seɪk əl teɪk jə θɹu ɪt stɛp baɪ stɛp. ɪn taɪm, ɪɾəl bɪkʌm sɛkənd neɪtʃɝ - jəl də ɪɾ ɔl fæstɝ ðən jə kən θɪŋk ʌv ɪt - bʌt naʊ ɪts bɛs tə ɡoʊ sloʊli. kloʊs jəɹ aɪz, pliz. ɪt ɡoʊz bɛɾɝ ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ɪf juv noʊ dɪstʃɹækʃənz əɾ ɔl." ɛɡwin kloʊzd əɹ aɪz. ðəɹ wɑz ə pɔz. "nɪneɪiv," vɛɹɪn sɛd, "pliz kloʊs jəɹ aɪz. ɪɾəl ɹɪli ɡoʊ bɛɾɝ." ənʌðɝ pɔz. "θæŋk ju, tʃaɪld. naʊ, jə mʌst ɛmpti jɝsɛlf. ɛmpti jəɹ θɔts. ðəɹ ɪz oʊnli wʌn θɪŋ ɪn jəɹ maɪnd. ðə bʌɾ ʌv ə flaʊɝ. oʊnli ðæt. oʊnli ðə bʌd. jə kən si ɪɾ ɪn ɛvɹi dɪteɪl. jə kən smɛl ɪt. jə kən fil ɪt. ɛvɹi veɪn ʌv ɛvɹi lif, ɛvɹi kɝv ʌv ɛvɹi pɛɾəl. jə kən fil ðə sæp pʌlsɪŋ. fil ɪt. noʊ ɪt. bi ɪt. jə ən ðə bʌɾ ɑɹ ðə seɪm. jə ɑɹ wʌn. jə ɑɹ ðə bʌd."

"Good," Verin said. "Now. You already know this part, Egwene, but for Nynaeve's sake I will take you through it step by step. In time, it will become second nature - you will do it all faster than you can think of it - but now it is best to go slowly. Close your eyes, please. It goes better in the beginning if you have no distractions at all." Egwene closed her eyes. There was a pause. "Nynaeve," Verin said, "please close your eyes. It will really go better." Another pause. "Thank you, child. Now, you must empty yourself. Empty your thoughts. There is only one thing in your mind. The bud of a flower. Only that. Only the bud. You can see it in every detail. You can smell it. You can feel it. Every vein of every leaf, every curve of every petal. You can feel the sap pulsing. Feel it. Know it. Be it. You and the bud are the same. You are one. You are the bud."

hɝ vɔɪs dʒɹoʊn ɑn hɪpnɑɾəkəli, bʌɾ ɛɡwin noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɹɪli hɝd; ʃi hæd dʌn ðɪs ɛksɝsaɪz bɪfɔɹ, wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn. ɪt wɑz sloʊ, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn hæd sɛɾ ɪt wəd kʌm mɔɹ kwɪkli wɪð pɹæktəs. ɪnsaɪd hɝsɛlf, ʃi wɑz ə ɹoʊzbʌd, ɹɛd pɛɾəlz kɝl taɪtli. jɛt sʌɾənli ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. laɪt. laɪt pɹɛsɪŋ ɑn ðə pɛɾəlz. sloʊli ðə pɛɾəlz ənfoʊldəd, tɝnɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə laɪt, əbzɔɹbɪŋ ðə laɪt. ðə ɹoʊz ən ðə laɪt wɝ wʌn. ɛɡwin ən ðə laɪt wɝ wʌn. ʃi kəd fil ðə mɛɹəs tʃɹɪkəl ʌv ɪt sipɪŋ θɹu hɝ. ʃi stʃɹɛtʃt fəɹ mɔɹ, stʃɹeɪn fəɹ mɔɹ. . . .

Her voice droned on hypnotically, but Egwene no longer really heard; she had done this exercise before, with Moiraine. It was slow, but Moiraine had said it would come more quickly with practice. Inside herself, she was a rosebud, red petals curled tightly. Yet suddenly there was something else. Light. Light pressing on the petals. Slowly the petals unfolded, turning toward the light, absorbing the light. The rose and the light were one. Egwene and the light were one. She could feel the merest trickle of it seeping through her. She stretched for more, strained for more. . . .

ɪn ən ɪnstən ɪt wɑz ɔl ɡɔn, ɹoʊz ən laɪt. mɔɪɹeɪn hæɾ ɔlsoʊ sɛɾ ɪt kəd nɑt bi fɔɹst. wɪð ə saɪ, ʃi oʊpən əɹ aɪz. nɪneɪiv hæɾ ə ɡɹɪm lʊk ɑn əɹ feɪs. vɛɹɪn wɑz əz kɑm əz ɛvɝ.

In an instant it was all gone, rose and light. Moiraine had also said it could not be forced. With a sigh, she opened her eyes. Nynaeve had a grim look on her face. Verin was as calm as ever.

"ju kænɑt meɪk ɪt hæpən," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz seɪɪŋ. "ju mʌs lɛɾ ɪt hæpən. jə mʌst sɝɛndɝ tə ðə paʊɝ bɪfɔɹ jə kən kəntʃɹoʊl ɪt."

"You cannot make it happen," the Aes Sedai was saying. "You must let it happen. You must surrender to the Power before you can control it."

"ðɪs ɪz kəmplit fulɪʃnəs," nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd. "aɪ doʊn fil laɪk ə flaʊɝ. ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, aɪ fil laɪk ə blækθɝn bʊʃ. aɪ θɪŋk əl weɪt baɪ ðə faɪɝ æftɝ ɔl."

"This is complete foolishness," Nynaeve muttered. "I don't feel like a flower. If anything, I feel like a blackthorn bush. I think I will wait by the fire after all."

"æz jə wɪʃ," vɛɹɪn sɛd. "dɪɾ aɪ mɛnʃən ðət nɑvəsɪz də tʃɔɹz? ðeɪ wɑʃ dɪʃəz, skɹʌb flɔɹz, də lɔnʒɹi, sɝv ət teɪbəl, ɔl sɔɹts ə θɪŋz. aɪ maɪsɛlf θɪŋk ðə sɝvəns də ə bɛɾɝ dʒɑb ʌv ɪt baɪ fɑɹ, bʌɾ ɪts dʒɛnɝəli fɛl ðət sətʃ leɪbɝ bɪlz kɛɹɪktɝ. oʊ, jə ɑɹ steɪɪŋ? ɡʊd. wɛl, tʃaɪld, ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðəɾ ivən ə blækθɝn bʊʃ əz flaʊɝz səmtaɪmz, bjuɾəfəl ən waɪɾ əmʌŋ ðə θɔɹnz. wɪl tʃɹaɪ ɪt wʌn əɾ ə taɪm. naʊ, fɹəm ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, ɛɡwin. kloʊs jəɹ aɪz."

"As you wish," Verin said. "Did I mention that novices do chores? They wash dishes, scrub floors, do laundry, serve at table, all sorts of things. I myself think the servants do a better job of it by far, but it is generally felt that such labor builds character. Oh, you are staying? Good. Well, child, remember that even a blackthorn bush has flowers sometimes, beautiful and white among the thorns. We will try it one at a time. Now, from the beginning, Egwene. Close your eyes."

sɛvɹəl taɪmz bɪfɔɹ vɛɹɪn lɛft, ɛɡwin fɛl ðə floʊ ʌv ðə paʊɝ θɹu hɝ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɛvɝ vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋ, ən ðə moʊst ʃi mænədʒd wɪð ɪt wɑz tə pɹədus ə stɝ ɪn ði ɛɹ ðət meɪd ðə tɛn flæp stɝ slaɪtli. ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ə sniz cʊɾə dʌn əz mʌtʃ. ʃi hæd dʌn bɛɾɝ wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn; səmtaɪmz, ət list. ʃi wɪʃt ɪt wɑz mɔɪɹeɪn duɪŋ ðə titʃɪŋ.

Several times before Verin left, Egwene felt the flow of the Power through her, but it was never very strong, and the most she managed with it was to produce a stir in the air that made the tent flap stir slightly. She was sure a sneeze could have done as much. She had done better with Moiraine; sometimes, at least. She wished it was Moiraine doing the teaching.

nɪneɪiv nɛvɝ ivən fɛlt ə ɡlɪmɝ, əɹ soʊ ʃi sɛd. baɪ ði ɛn əɹ aɪz wɝ sɛɾ ən əɹ maʊθ soʊ taɪt ðəɾ ɛɡwin wɑz əfɹeɪd ʃi wɑz əbaʊt tə bɪɡɪn bɪɹeɪɾɪŋ vɛɹɪn əz ɪf ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ə vɪlədʒ wʊmən ɪntʃɹuɾɪŋ ɑn əɹ pɹaɪvəsi. bʌt vɛɹɪn sɪmpli toʊld əɹ tə kloʊz əɹ aɪz wʌns əɡɛn, ðɪs taɪm wɪθaʊɾ ɛɡwin.

Nynaeve never even felt a glimmer, or so she said. By the end her eyes were set and her mouth so tight that Egwene was afraid she was about to begin berating Verin as if the Aes Sedai were a village woman intruding on her privacy. But Verin simply told her to close her eyes once again, this time without Egwene.

ɛɡwin wɑz sɪɾɪŋ, wɑtʃɪŋ ði ʌðɝ tu bɪtwin əɹ jɔnz. ðə naɪt hæd ɡɹoʊn leɪt, wɛl pæs ðə taɪm ʃi wəd juʒəwəli bi əslip. nɪneɪiv wɔɹ ə feɪs laɪk wik-oʊl dɛθ, hɝ aɪz klæmpt ʃʌɾ əz ɪf ʃi nɛvɝ mɛn tə oʊpən əm ən əɹ hænz waɪt-nʌkəl fɪsts ɪn əɹ læp. ɛɡwin hoʊp ðə wɪzdəmz tɛmpɝ dɪd nɑt bɹeɪk lus, nɑɾ æftɝ ʃi hæd hɛld ɪt ðɪs lɔŋ.

Egwene was sitting, watching the other two between her yawns. The night had grown late, well past the time she would usually be asleep. Nynaeve wore a face like week-old death, her eyes clamped shut as if she never meant to open them and her hands white-knuckled fists in her lap. Egwene hoped the Wisdom's temper did not break loose, not after she had held it this long.

"fil ðə floʊ θɹu ju," vɛɹɪn wɑz seɪɪŋ. hɝ vɔɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, bʌt sʌɾənli ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡlim ɪn əɹ aɪz. "fil ðə floʊ. floʊ ʌv ðə paʊɝ. floʊ laɪk ə bɹiz, ə dʒɛntəl stɝɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ." ɛɡwin sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪt. ðɪs wɑz haʊ vɛɹɪn hæd ɡaɪɾəd əɹ itʃ taɪm ʃi hæɾ æktʃəli  hæd ðə paʊɝ floʊɪŋ θɹu hɝ. "ə sɑf bɹiz, ðə slaɪɾəst muvmən ʌv ɛɹ. sɑft."

"Feel the flow through you," Verin was saying. Her voice did not change, but suddenly there was a gleam in her eyes. "Feel the flow. Flow of the Power. Flow like a breeze, a gentle stirring in the air." Egwene sat up straight. This was how Verin had guided her each time she had actually had the Power flowing through her. "A soft breeze, the slightest movement of air. Soft."

əbɹʌpli ðə stæk blæŋkəts bɝst ɪndə fleɪm laɪk fætwʊd.

Abruptly the stacked blankets burst into flame like fatwood.

nɪneɪiv oʊpən əɹ aɪz wɪð ə jɛl. ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪf ʃi skɹimd əɹ nɑt. ɔl ɛɡwin nu wɑz ðət ʃi wɑz ɑn əɹ fit, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɪk ðə bɝnɪŋ blæŋkəts aʊtsaɪd bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ sɛt ðə tɛn ɑn faɪɝ. bɪfɔɹ ʃi mænədʒd ə sɛkən kɪk, ðə fleɪmz vænɪʃt, livɪŋ wɪspi smoʊk ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ə tʃɑɹd mæs ən ðə smɛl ə bɝnd wʊl.

Nynaeve opened her eyes with a yell. Egwene was not sure if she screamed or not. All Egwene knew was that she was on her feet, trying to kick the burning blankets outside before they set the tent on fire. Before she managed a second kick, the flames vanished, leaving wispy smoke rising from a charred mass and the smell of burned wool.

"wɛl," vɛɹɪn sɛd. "wɛl. aɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛk tə hæv tə daʊs ə faɪɝ. doʊn feɪn ɑn mi, tʃaɪld. ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt naʊ. aɪ tʊk kɛɹ ʌv ɪt."

"Well," Verin said. "Well. I did not expect to have to douse a fire. Don't faint on me, child. It's all right now. I took care of it."

"aɪ - aɪ wɑz æŋɡɹi." nɪneɪiv spoʊk θɹu tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ lɪps ɪn ə blʌdləs feɪs. "aɪ hɝd jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ə bɹiz, tɛlɪŋ mi wʌt tə du, ən faɪɝ dʒʌs pɑpt ɪndə maɪ hɛd. aɪ - aɪ dɪdn min tə bɝn ɛniθɪŋ. ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ə smɔl faɪɝ, ɪn - ɪn maɪ hɛd." ʃi ʃʌɾɝəd.

"I - I was angry." Nynaeve spoke through trembling lips in a bloodless face. "I heard you talking about a breeze, telling me what to do, and fire just popped into my head. I - I didn't mean to burn anything. It was just a small fire, in - in my head." She shuddered.

"aɪ səpoʊz ɪt wɑz ə smɔl faɪɝ, ət ðæt." vɛɹɪn bɑɹkt ə læf ðət wɑz ɡɔn wɪð ənʌðɝ lʊk ət nɪneɪivz feɪs. "ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt, tʃaɪld? ɪf jə fil ɪl, aɪ kæn. . . ." nɪneɪiv ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, ən vɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. "ɹɛst ɪz wʌt jə nid. boʊθ ə ju. aɪv wɝk jə tu hɑɹd. jə mʌst ɹɛst. ði æmɪɝlɪn wɪl əv əs ɔl ʌp ən əweɪ bɪfɔɹ fɝs laɪt." stændɪŋ, ʃi toʊd ðə tʃɑɹd blæŋkəts. "aɪ wɪl əv səm mɔɹ blæŋkəts bɹɔt tə ju. aɪ hoʊp ðɪs ʃoʊz boʊθ ə jə haʊ ɪmpɔɹɾənt kəntʃɹoʊl ɪz. jə mʌs lɝn tə də wʌt jə min tə du, ən nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ. əsaɪd fɹəm hɑɹmɪŋ sʌmwʌn ɛls, ɪf jə dʒɹɔ mɔɹ ə ðə paʊɝ ðən jə kən seɪfli hændəl - ən jə kænɑt hændəl mʌtʃ, jɛt; bʌɾ ɪɾəl ɡɹoʊ - ɪf jə dʒɹɔ tu mʌtʃ, jə kən dɪstʃɹɔɪ jɝsɛlf. jə kən daɪ. əɹ jə kən bɝn jɝsɛlf aʊt, dɪstʃɹɔɪ wʌɾ əbɪləɾi jə hæv." əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt toʊld əm ðeɪ wɝ wɔkɪŋ ə naɪf ɛdʒ, ʃi æɾəd ə tʃɪɹfəl "slip wɛl." wɪð ðæt, ʃi wɑz ɡɔn.

"I suppose it was a small fire, at that." Verin barked a laugh that was gone with another look at Nynaeve's face. "Are you all right, child? If you feel ill, I can. . . ." Nynaeve shook her head, and Verin nodded. "Rest is what you need. Both of you. I've worked you too hard. You must rest. The Amyrlin will have us all up and away before first light." Standing, she toed the charred blankets. "I will have some more blankets brought to you. I hope this shows both of you how important control is. You must learn to do what you mean to do, and nothing more. Aside from harming someone else, if you draw more of the Power than you can safely handle - and you cannot handle much, yet; but it will grow - if you draw too much, you can destroy yourself. You can die. Or you can burn yourself out, destroy what ability you have." As if she had not told them they were walking a knife edge, she added a cheerful "Sleep well." With that, she was gone.

ɛɡwin pʊɾ əɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊnd nɪneɪiv ən hʌɡd əɹ taɪt. "ɪɾ ɪz ɔl ɹaɪt, nɪneɪiv. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ nid tə bi fɹaɪɾənd. wʌns jə lɝn tə kəntʃɹoʊl - "

Egwene put her arms around Nynaeve and hugged her tight. "It is all right, Nynaeve. There is no need to be frightened. Once you learn to control - "

nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv ə kɹoʊkɪŋ læf. "aɪ æm nɑt fɹaɪɾənd." ʃi ɡlænst saɪdweɪz ət ðə smoʊkɪŋ blæŋkəts ən twɪtʃt əɹ aɪz əweɪ. "ɪt teɪks mɔɹ ðən ə lɪɾəl faɪɝ tə fɹaɪɾən mi." bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk ət ðə blæŋkəts əɡɛn, ivən wən ə wɔɹɾɝ keɪm tə teɪk əm əweɪ ən liv nu.

Nynaeve gave a croaking laugh. "I am not frightened." She glanced sideways at the smoking blankets and twitched her eyes away. "It takes more than a little fire to frighten me." But she did not look at the blankets again, even when a Warder came to take them away and leave new.

vɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt kʌm əɡɛn, əz ʃi hæd sɛd ʃi wəd nɑt. ɪndid, əz ðeɪ dʒɝniɾ ɑn, saʊθ ən wɛst, deɪ baɪ deɪ, əz fæst əz ðə fʊtmən kəd muv, vɛɹɪn peɪd ðə tu wɪmən fɹəm ɛmənz fil noʊ mɔɹ maɪn ðən mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd, ðən dɪɾ ɛni ʌv ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt pɹɪsaɪsli ənfɹɛnli, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ɹæðɝ dɪstən ən əluf, əz ɪf pɹiɑkjəpaɪd. ðɛɹ kulnəs haɪɾənd ɛɡwinz əniz, ən bɹɔt bæk ɔl ðə teɪlz ʃi hæd hɝɾ əz ə tʃaɪld.

Verin did not come again, as she had said she would not. Indeed, as they journeyed on, south and west, day by day, as fast as the footmen could move, Verin paid the two women from Emond's Field no more mind than Moiraine did, than did any of the Aes Sedai. They were not precisely unfriendly, the Aes Sedai, but rather distant and aloof, as if preoccupied. Their coolness heightened Egwene's unease, and brought back all the tales she had heard as a child.

hɝ mʌðɝ hæɾ ɔlweɪz toʊld əɹ ðə teɪlz əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ə lɑɾ ə ful mɛnz nɑnsɛns, bʌt niðɝ əɹ mʌðɝ nɔɹ ɛni ʌðɝ wʊmən ɪn ɛmənz fil hæɾ ɛvɝ mɛɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪfɔɹ mɔɪɹeɪn keɪm ðɛɹ. ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd spɛn ə ɡʊd dil ə taɪm wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn, ən mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz pɹuf tə hɝ ðət nɑɾ ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ laɪk ðə teɪlz. koʊl mənɪpjəleɪɾɝz ən mɝsələs dɪstʃɹɔɪɝz. bɹeɪkɝz ə ðə wɝld. ʃi nu naʊ ðət ðoʊz, ət list - ðə bɹeɪkɝz ə ðə wɝld - hæd bɪn meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ, wən ðəɹ wɝ sʌtʃ, ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt hɛlp ə ɡɹeɪt dil. nɑɾ ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ laɪk ðə teɪlz, bʌt haʊ mɛni, ən wɪtʃ?

Her mother had always told her the tales about Aes Sedai were a lot of fool men's nonsense, but neither her mother nor any other woman in Emond's Field had ever met an Aes Sedai before Moiraine came there. She herself had spent a good deal of time with Moiraine, and Moiraine was proof to her that not all Aes Sedai were like the tales. Cold manipulators and merciless destroyers. Breakers of the World. She knew now that those, at least - the Breakers of the World - had been male Aes Sedai, when there were such, in the Age of Legends, but it did not help a great deal. Not all Aes Sedai were like the tales, but how many, and which?

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hu keɪm tə ðə tɛn itʃ naɪt wɝ soʊ mɪks ðət ðeɪ dɪd nɑt hɛlp əɾ ɔl ɪn klɪɹɪŋ əɹ θɔts. ɑlviɛɝɪn wɑz əz kul ən bɪznɪslaɪk əz ə mɝtʃən kʌm tə baɪ wʊl ən təbæk, sɝpɹaɪz ðət nɪneɪiv wɑz pɑɹɾ ə ðə lɛsən bʌɾ æksɛptɪŋ, ʃɑɹp ɪn əɹ kɹɪɾɪsɪzəmz bʌɾ ɔlweɪz ɹɛɾi tə tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn. ɑlɑnə mɑsvɑni læft ən spɛn əz mʌtʃ taɪm tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə wɝld, ən mɛn, əz ʃi dɪd titʃɪŋ. ɑlɑnə ʃoʊd tu mʌtʃ ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ɹænd ən pɛɹɪn ən mæt fəɹ ɛɡwinz kʌmfɝt, ðoʊ. ɪspɛʃli ɹænd. wɝst ʌv ɔl wɑz liɑnʒɹɪn, ði oʊnli wʌn u wɔɹ əɹ ʃɔl; ði ʌðɝz hæɾ ɔl pækt əm əweɪ bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ fæl dæɹə. liɑnʒɹɪn sæt fɪŋɡɝɪŋ əɹ ɹɛd fɹɪnʒ ən tɔt lɪɾəl, ən ɹɪlʌktənli ət ðæt. ʃi kwɛstʃən ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn əkjuzd ʌv ə kɹaɪm, ən əɹ kwɛstʃənz wɝ ɔl əbaʊt ðə θɹi bɔɪz. ʃi kɛpt ɪɾ ʌp əntɪl nɪneɪiv θɹu hɝ aʊt - ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ waɪ nɪneɪiv dɪd soʊ - ən ðən ʃi lɛft wɪð ə wɔɹnɪŋ.

The Aes Sedai who came to the tent each night were so mixed that they did not help at all in clearing her thoughts. Alviarin was as cool and businesslike as a merchant come to buy wool and tabac, surprised that Nynaeve was part of the lesson but accepting, sharp in her criticisms but always ready to try again. Alanna Mosvani laughed and spent as much time talking about the world, and men, as she did teaching. Alanna showed too much interest in Rand and Perrin and Mat for Egwene's comfort, though. Especially Rand. Worst of all was Liandrin, the only one who wore her shawl; the others had all packed them away before leaving Fal Dara. Liandrin sat fingering her red fringe and taught little, and reluctantly at that. She questioned Egwene and Nynaeve as if they had been accused of a crime, and her questions were all about the three boys. She kept it up until Nynaeve threw her out - Egwene was not sure why Nynaeve did so - and then she left with a warning.

"wɑtʃ jʊɹsɛlvz, maɪ dɔɾɝz. jə ɑɹ ɪn jəɹ vɪlədʒ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ. naʊ jə dæbəl jəɹ toʊz wɛɹ ðəɹ ɑɹ θɪŋz tə baɪt ju."

"Watch yourselves, my daughters. You are in your village no longer. Now you dabble your toes where there are things to bite you."

faɪnəli ðə kɑləm ɹitʃt ðə vɪlədʒ ə mɛɾoʊ, ɑn ðə bæŋks ə ðə mɔɹə, wɪtʃ ɹæn əlɔŋ ðə bɔɹɾɝ bɪtwin ʃaɪnɝ ən ɝæfəl ən soʊ ɪndə ðə ɹɪvɝ ɛɹɪnɪn.

Finally the column reached the village of Medo, on the banks of the Mora, which ran along the border between Shienar and Arafel and so into the River Erinin.

ɛɡwin wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz ði ɛɛs sədaɪz kwɛstʃənz əbaʊt ɹænd ðət hæd meɪɾ əɹ stɑɹt dʒɹimɪŋ ə hɪm, ðəɾ ən wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt hɪm, əbaʊt wɛðɝ i ən ði ʌðɝz hæd hæd tə fɑloʊ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ɪndə ðə blaɪt. ðə dʒɹimz wɝ ɔlweɪz bæd, bʌɾ ət fɝs ðeɪ wɝ dʒʌs ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi sɔɹɾ ə naɪtmɛɹ. baɪ ðə naɪt ðeɪ ɹitʃt mɛɾoʊ, ðə dʒɹimz hæd tʃeɪnʒd, ðoʊ.

Egwene was sure it was the Aes Sedai's questions about Rand that had made her start dreaming of him, that and worrying about him, about whether he and the others had had to follow the Horn of Valere into the Blight. The dreams were always bad, but at first they were just the ordinary sort of nightmare. By the night they reached Medo, the dreams had changed, though.

"pɑɹɾən, ɛɛs sədaɪ," ɛɡwin æsk dɪfəɾəntli, "bʌɾ əv jə sin mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ?" ðə slɛndɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ weɪvd əɹ əweɪ ən hɝiɾ ɑn daʊn ðə kɹaʊɾəd, tɔɹtʃ-lɪt vɪlədʒ stʃɹit, kɔlɪŋ fəɹ sʌmwʌn tə bi kɛɹfəl wɪð əɹ hɔɹs. ðə wʊmən wɑz ə ðə jɛloʊ ədʒɑ, ðoʊ nɑt wɛɹɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl naʊ; ɛɡwin nu noʊ mɔɹ ə hɝ ðən ðæt, nɑɾ ivən əɹ neɪm.

"Pardon, Aes Sedai," Egwene asked diffidently, "but have you seen Moiraine Sedai?" The slender Aes Sedai waved her away and hurried on down the crowded, torch-lit village street, calling for someone to be careful with her horse. The woman was of the Yellow Ajah, though not wearing her shawl now; Egwene knew no more of her than that, not even her name.

mɛɾoʊ wɑz ə smɔl vɪlədʒ - ðoʊ ɛɡwin wɑz ʃɑk tə ɹilaɪz ðət wʌt ʃi naʊ θɔɾ ʌv əz ə "smɔl vɪlədʒ" wɑz əz bɪɡ əz ɛmənz fild - ən ɪt wɑz oʊvɝwɛlm naʊ wɪð mɛni mɔɹ aʊtsaɪɾɝz ðən ðəɹ wɝ ɪnhæbəɾənts. hɔɹsəz ən pipəl fɪl ðə nɛɹoʊ stʃɹits, dʒɑsəlɪŋ tə ðə dɑks pæs vɪlɪdʒɝz u nɛlt wɛnɛvɝ ən ənsiɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ spɛd baɪ. hɑɹʃ tɔɹtʃlaɪt lɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ðə tu dɑks dʒʌɾɪd aʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹɪvɝ mɔɹə laɪk stoʊn fɪŋɡɝz, ən itʃ hoʊstɪɾ ə pɛɹ ə smɔl, tu-mæstəd ʃɪps. ðɛɹ, hɔɹsəz wɝ biɪŋ hɔɪstəɾ ɑn bɔɹd baɪ bumz ən keɪbəlz ən kænvəs kɹeɪɾəlz ʌndɝ ðɛɹ bɛliz. mɔɹ ə ðə ʃɪps - haɪ-saɪɾəd ən staʊt, wɪð læntɝnz tɑpɪŋ ðɛɹ mæsts - kɹaʊɾəd ðə mun-stʃɹikt ɹɪvɝ, ɔlɹɛɾi loʊɾəd əɹ weɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ tɝn. ɹoʊboʊts fɛɹiɾ aʊɾ ɑɹtʃɝz ən pɪkmɛn, ðə ɹeɪz paɪks meɪkɪŋ ðə boʊts lʊk laɪk dʒaɪɡæntɪk pɹɪkəlbæks swɪmɪŋ ɑn ðə sɝfəs.

Medo was a small village - though Egwene was shocked to realize that what she now thought of as a "small village" was as big as Emond's Field - and it was overwhelmed now with many more outsiders than there were inhabitants. Horses and people filled the narrow streets, jostling to the docks past villagers who knelt whenever an unseeing Aes Sedai sped by. Harsh torchlight lit everything. The two docks jutted out into the River Mora like stone fingers, and each hosted a pair of small, two-masted ships. There, horses were being hoisted on board by booms and cables and canvas cradles under their bellies. More of the ships - high-sided and stout, with lanterns topping their masts - crowded the moon-streaked river, already loaded or waiting their turn. Rowboats ferried out archers and pikemen, the raised pikes making the boats look like gigantic pricklebacks swimming on the surface.

ɑn ðə lɛft-hæn dɑk ɛɡwin faʊn æneɪjə, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə loʊɾɪŋ ən tʃɪviɪŋ ðoʊz u wɝ nɑt muvɪŋ fæst ɪnʌf. ðoʊ ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sɛd mɔɹ ðən tu wɝdz tə ɛɡwin, æneɪjə sim dɪfɹən fɹəm ði ʌðɝz, mɔɹ laɪk ə wʊmən fɹəm hoʊm. ɛɡwin kəd pɪktʃɝ əɹ beɪkɪŋ ɪn əɹ kɪtʃən; ʃi kəd nɑt si ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz soʊ. "æneɪjə sədaɪ, hæv jə sin mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ? aɪ nid tə tɔk tə hɝ."

On the left-hand dock Egwene found Anaiya, watching the loading and chivying those who were not moving fast enough. Though she had never said more than two words to Egwene, Anaiya seemed different from the others, more like a woman from home. Egwene could picture her baking in her kitchen; she could not see any of the others so. "Anaiya Sedai, have you seen Moiraine Sedai? I need to talk to her."

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ lʊkt ɝaʊnd wɪð ən æbsən fɹaʊn. "wʌt? oʊ, ɪts ju, tʃaɪld. mɔɪɹeɪn ɪz ɡɔn. ən jəɹ fɹɛnd, nɪneɪiv, ɪz ɔlɹɛɾi aʊɾ ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝ kwin. aɪ hæd tə bʌndəl əɹ ɑntu ə boʊt maɪsɛlf, ʃaʊɾɪŋ ðət ʃi wəd nɑt ɡoʊ wɪθaʊt ju. laɪt, wʌɾ ə skɹæmbəl! jə ʃəd bi əbɔɹd, jɝsɛlf. faɪn ə boʊt ɡoʊɪŋ aʊt tə ðə ɹɪvɝ kwin. jə tu wɪl bi tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, soʊ maɪn jɝsɛlf wʌns jəɹ ɑn bɔɹd. noʊ sinz əɹ tæntʃɹəmz."

The Aes Sedai looked around with an absent frown. "What? Oh, it's you, child. Moiraine is gone. And your friend, Nynaeve, is already out on the River Queen. I had to bundle her onto a boat myself, shouting that she would not go without you. Light, what a scramble! You should be aboard, yourself. Find a boat going out to the River Queen. You two will be traveling with the Amyrlin Seat, so mind yourself once you're on board. No scenes or tantrums."

"wɪtʃ ʃɪp ɪz mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪz?"

"Which ship is Moiraine Sedai's?"

"mɔɪɹeɪn ɪzən ɑn ə ʃɪp, ɡɝl. ʃiz ɡɔn, tu deɪz ɡɔn, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn ɪz ɪn ə teɪkɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪt." æneɪjə ɡɹɪməst ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, ðoʊ moʊst ə hɝ ətɛnʃən wɑz stɪl ɑn ðə wɝkɝz. "fɝs mɔɪɹeɪn vænɪʃɪz wɪð læn, ðən liɑnʒɹɪn ɹaɪɾ ɑn mɔɪɹeɪnz hilz, ən ðən vɛɹɪn, nʌn ə ðɛm wɪð soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə wɝd fəɹ ɛniwʌn. vɛɹɪn dɪd nɑɾ ivən teɪk əɹ wɔɹɾɝ; toʊmɑs ɪz tʃuɪŋ neɪlz wɪð wɝi oʊvɝ hɝ." ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡlænst ət ðə skaɪ. ðə wæksɪŋ mun ʃoʊn wɪθaʊt ðə hɪnʒɹəns ə klaʊdz. "wi wɪl əv tə kɔl ðə wɪn əɡɛn, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn wɪl nɑt bi plizd wɪð ðæt, iðɝ. ʃi sɛz ʃi wɑns əs ɑn əɹ weɪ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪðɪn ən aʊɝ, ən ʃɪl bɹʊk noʊ dɪleɪz. aɪ wəd nɑt wɑnə bi mɔɪɹeɪn, əɹ liɑnʒɹɪn, əɹ vɛɹɪn, wən ʃi siz əm nɛkst. ðəl wɪʃ ðeɪ wɝ nɑvəsɪz əɡɛn. waɪ, tʃaɪld, wʌts ðə mæɾɝ?"

"Moiraine isn't on a ship, girl. She's gone, two days gone, and the Amyrlin is in a taking over it." Anaiya grimaced and shook her head, though most of her attention was still on the workers. "First Moiraine vanishes with Lan, then Liandrin right on Moiraine's heels, and then Verin, none of them with so much as a word for anyone. Verin did not even take her Warder; Tomas is chewing nails with worry over her." The Aes Sedai glanced at the sky. The waxing moon shone without the hindrance of clouds. "We will have to call the wind again, and the Amyrlin will not be pleased with that, either. She says she wants us on our way to Tar Valon within an hour, and she will brook no delays. I would not want to be Moiraine, or Liandrin, or Verin, when she sees them next. They'll wish they were novices again. Why, child, what's the matter?"

ɛɡwin dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. mɔɪɹeɪn ɡɔn? ʃi kæn bi! aɪ hæv tə tɛl sʌmbɑɾi, sʌmbɑɾi hu woʊn læf ət mi. ʃi ɪmædʒən æneɪjə bæk ɪn ɛmənz fild, lɪsnɪŋ tə hɝ dɔɾɝz pɹɑbləmz; ðə wʊmən fɪt ðə pɪktʃɝ. "æneɪjə sədaɪ, ɹænd ɪz ɪn tʃɹʌbəl."

Egwene drew a deep breath. Moiraine gone? She can't be! I have to tell somebody, somebody who won't laugh at me. She imagined Anaiya back in Emond's Field, listening to her daughter's problems; the woman fit the picture. "Anaiya Sedai, Rand is in trouble."

æneɪjə ɡeɪv əɹ ə kənsɪɾɝɪŋ lʊk. "ðæt tɔl bɔɪ fɹəm jəɹ vɪlədʒ? mɪsɪŋ ɪm ɔlɹɛɾi, ɑɹ ju? wɛl, aɪ ʃʊdn bi sɝpɹaɪzd ɪf hiz ɪn tʃɹʌbəl. jʌŋ mɛn ɪz eɪdʒ juʒəwəli ɑɹ. ðoʊ ɪt wɑz ði ʌðɝ wʌn - mæt? - hu hæd ðə lʊk ə tʃɹʌbəl. vɛɹi wɛl, tʃaɪld. aɪ doʊn min tə mɑk jə əɹ meɪk laɪt. wʌt kaɪndə tʃɹʌbəl, ən haʊ dʒju noʊ? hi ən lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ mʌst əv ðə hɔɹn ən bi bæk ɪn fæl dæɹə baɪ naʊ. əɹ ɛls ðeɪv hæd tə fɑloʊ ɪɾ ɪndə ðə blaɪt, ən ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ tə də əbaʊt ðæt."

Anaiya gave her a considering look. "That tall boy from your village? Missing him already, are you? Well, I shouldn't be surprised if he is in trouble. Young men his age usually are. Though it was the other one - Mat? - who had the look of trouble. Very well, child. I don't mean to mock you or make light. What kind of trouble, and how do you know? He and Lord Ingtar must have the Horn and be back in Fal Dara by now. Or else they've had to follow it into the Blight, and there's nothing to do about that."

"aɪ - aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðəɹ ɪn ðə blaɪt, əɹ bæk ɪn fæl dæɹə. aɪ hæɾ ə dʒɹim." ʃi sɛɾ ɪt hæf dɪfaɪənli. ɪt saʊndəd sɪli wən ʃi sɛɾ ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt hæd sim soʊ ɹil. ə naɪtmɛɹ fəɹ tʃɹu, bʌt ɹil. fɝs ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə mæn wɪð ə mæsk oʊvɝ ɪz feɪs, ən faɪɝ ɪn pleɪs ə hɪz aɪz. dɪspaɪt ðə mæsk, ʃi hæd θɔɾ i wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə si hɝ. hɪz lʊk hæd fɹaɪɾənd əɹ tɪl ʃi θɔɾ əɹ boʊnz wəd bɹeɪk fɹəm ʃɪvɝɪŋ, bʌt sʌɾənli hi vænɪʃt, ən ʃi sɔ ɹænd slipɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɹæpt ɪn ə kloʊk. ə wʊmən hæd bɪn stændɪŋ oʊvɝ hɪm, lʊkɪŋ daʊn. hɝ feɪs wɑz ɪn ʃædoʊ, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz sim tə ʃaɪn laɪk ðə mun, ən ɛɡwin hæd noʊn ʃi wɑz ivəl. ðən ðəɹ wɑz ə flæʃ ə laɪt, ən ðeɪ wɝ ɡɔn. boʊθ ə ðɛm. ən bɪhaɪn ɪɾ ɔl, ɔlmoʊs laɪk ənʌðɝ θɪŋ ɔltəɡɛðɝ, wɑz ðə fil ə deɪnʒɝ, əz ɪf ə tʃɹæp wɑz dʒʌs bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə snæp ʃʌɾ ɑn ən ʌnsəspɛktɪŋ læm, ə tʃɹæp wɪð mɛni dʒɔz. əz ðoʊ taɪm hæd sloʊd, ən ʃi kəd wɑtʃ ði aɪɝn dʒɔz kɹip kloʊsɝ təɡɛðɝ. ðə dʒɹim hæd nɑt feɪɾəd wɪð weɪkɪŋ, ðə weɪ dʒɹimz dɪd. ən ðə deɪnʒɝ fɛl soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ʃi stɪl wɑntəd tə lʊk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ - oʊnli sʌmhaʊ ʃi nu ðəɾ ɪt wɑz eɪmd ət ɹænd, nɑɾ ət hɝ.

"I - I don't think they're in the Blight, or back in Fal Dara. I had a dream." She said it half defiantly. It sounded silly when she said it, but it had seemed so real. A nightmare for true, but real. First there had been a man with a mask over his face, and fire in place of his eyes. Despite the mask, she had thought he was surprised to see her. His look had frightened her till she thought her bones would break from shivering, but suddenly he vanished, and she saw Rand sleeping on the ground, wrapped in a cloak. A woman had been standing over him, looking down. Her face was in shadow, but her eyes seemed to shine like the moon, and Egwene had known she was evil. Then there was a flash of light, and they were gone. Both of them. And behind it all, almost like another thing altogether, was the feel of danger, as if a trap was just beginning to snap shut on an unsuspecting lamb, a trap with many jaws. As though time had slowed, and she could watch the iron jaws creep closer together. The dream had not faded with waking, the way dreams did. And the danger felt so strong she still wanted to look over her shoulder - only somehow she knew that it was aimed at Rand, not at her.

ʃi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðə wʊmən hæd bɪn mɔɪɹeɪn, ən əpbɹeɪɾɪd hɝsɛlf fəɹ ðə θɔt. liɑnʒɹɪn fɪt ðət pɑɹt bɛɾɝ. əɹ pɝhæps ɑlɑnə; ʃi hæd bɪn ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ɹænd, tu.

She wondered if the woman had been Moiraine, and upbraided herself for the thought. Liandrin fit that part better. Or perhaps Alanna; she had been interested in Rand, too.

ʃi kəd nɑt bɹɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə tɛl æneɪjə. fɔɹməli, ʃi sɛd, "æneɪjə sədaɪ, aɪ noʊ ɪt saʊnz fulɪʃ, bʌt hiz ɪn deɪnʒɝ. ɡɹeɪt deɪnʒɝ. aɪ noʊ ɪt. aɪ kəd fil ɪt. aɪ stɪl kæn."

She could not bring herself to tell Anaiya. Formally, she said, "Anaiya Sedai, I know it sounds foolish, but he is in danger. Great danger. I know it. I could feel it. I still can."

æneɪjə wɔɹ ə θɔtfəl lʊk. "wɛl, naʊ," ʃi sɛd sɔfli, "ðæts ə pɑsəbɪləɾi əl weɪdʒɝ noʊ wʌn əz kənsɪɾɝd. jə meɪ bi ə dʒɹimɝ. ɪts ə smɔl tʃæns, tʃaɪld, bʌt. . . . wi hævən hæd wʌn ə ðoʊz ɪn - oʊ - fɔɹ əɹ faɪv hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz. ən dʒɹimɪŋ ɪz kloʊs lɪŋk tə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ. ɪf jə ɹɪli kən dʒɹim, ɪt meɪ bi ðət jə kən fɔɹtɛl, əz wɛl. ðət wəd bi ə fɪŋɡɝ ɪn ðə ɹɛdz' aɪ. ʌv kɔɹs, ɪt kəd bi dʒʌst ən ɔɹɾənɛɹi naɪtmɛɹ, bɹɔɾ ɑn baɪ ə leɪt naɪt, ən koʊl fud, ən əs tʃɹævlɪŋ soʊ hɑɹd sɪns wi lɛft fæl dæɹə. ən jə mɪsɪŋ jəɹ jʌŋ mæn. mʌtʃ mɔɹ laɪkli. jɛs, jɛs, tʃaɪld, aɪ noʊ. jə ɑɹ wɝiɾ əbaʊt hɪm. dɪd jəɹ dʒɹim ɪndəkeɪt wʌt kaɪndə deɪnʒɝ?"

Anaiya wore a thoughtful look. "Well, now," she said softly, "that's a possibility I'll wager no one has considered. You may be a Dreamer. It is a small chance, child, but. . . . We haven't had one of those in - oh - four or five hundred years. And Dreaming is close linked to Foretelling. If you really can Dream, it may be that you can Foretell, as well. That would be a finger in the Reds' eye. Of course, it could be just an ordinary nightmare, brought on by a late night, and cold food, and us traveling so hard since we left Fal Dara. And you missing your young man. Much more likely. Yes, yes, child, I know. You are worried about him. Did your dream indicate what kind of danger?"

ɛɡwin ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "hi dʒʌs vænɪʃt, ən aɪ fɛl deɪnʒɝ. ən ivəl. aɪ fɛlt ɪɾ ivən bɪfɔɹ i vænɪʃt." ʃi ʃɪvɝɾ ən ɹʌbd əɹ hænz təɡɛðɝ. "aɪ kən stɪl fil ɪt."

Egwene shook her head. "He just vanished, and I felt danger. And evil. I felt it even before he vanished." She shivered and rubbed her hands together. "I can still feel it."

"wɛl, wɪl tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt mɔɹ ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝ kwin. ɪf jə ɑɹ ə dʒɹimɝ, əl si juv ðə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ mɔɪɹeɪn ʃəd bi hɪɹ tə. . . . jə ðɛɹ!" ði ɛɛs sədaɪ bɑɹk sʌɾənli, ən ɛɡwin dʒʌmpt. ə tɔl mæn, hu hæd dʒʌst sæt daʊn ɑn ə kæsk ʌv waɪn, dʒʌmpt, tu. sɛvɹəl ʌðɝz kwɪkən ðɛɹ stɛp. "ðæts fəɹ loʊɾɪŋ əbɔɹd, nɑt ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn! wɪl tɔk ɑn ðə boʊt, tʃaɪld. noʊ, jə ful! jə kæn kæɹi ɪt baɪ jɝsɛlf! dʒju wɑnə hɝt jɝsɛlf?" æneɪjə wɛn stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ ɔf daʊn ðə dɑk, ɡɪvɪŋ ði ənfɔɹtʃənət vɪlɪdʒɝz ə ɹʌfɝ saɪɾ ə hɝ tʌŋ ðən ɛɡwin wʊɾə səspɛktəd ʃi hæd.

"Well, we will talk about it more on the River Queen. If you are a Dreamer, I will see you have the training Moiraine should be here to. . . . You there!" the Aes Sedai barked suddenly, and Egwene jumped. A tall man, who had just sat down on a cask of wine, jumped, too. Several others quickened their step. "That's for loading aboard, not resting on! We will talk on the boat, child. No, you fool! You can't carry it by yourself! Do you want to hurt yourself?" Anaiya went striding off down the dock, giving the unfortunate villagers a rougher side of her tongue than Egwene would have suspected she had.

ɛɡwin pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə dɑɹk, təwɔɹd ðə saʊθ. hi wɑz aʊt ðɛɹ, sʌmwɛɹ. nɑɾ ɪn fæl dæɹə, nɑɾ ɪn ðə blaɪt. ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt. hoʊld ɑn, jə wʊl-hɛɾəd ɪɾiət. ɪf jə ɡɛt jɝsɛlf kɪl bɪfɔɹ aɪ kən ɡɛt jə aʊɾ ə ðɪs, əl skɪn jə əlaɪv. ɪt dɪd nɑɾ əkɝ tə hɝ tə æsk haʊ ʃi wɑz gɑnə ɡɛɾ ɪm aʊɾ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ, ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn əz ʃi wɑz.

Egwene peered into the dark, toward the south. He was out there, somewhere. Not in Fal Dara, not in the Blight. She was sure of it. Hold on, you wool-headed idiot. If you get yourself killed before I can get you out of this, I will skin you alive. It did not occur to her to ask how she was going to get him out of anything, going to Tar Valon as she was.

snʌɡɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ɝaʊn hɝ, ʃi sɛɾ aʊt tə faɪn ə boʊt tə ðə ɹɪvɝ kwin.

Snugging her cloak around her, she set out to find a boat to the River Queen.


tʃæptɝ θɝtin


CHAPTER 13

fɹəm stoʊn tə stoʊn


From Stone to Stone

ðə laɪɾ ə ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn woʊk ɹænd, ən i wʌndɝɾ ɪf i wɝ dʒɹimɪŋ. hi sæɾ ʌp sloʊli, stɛɹɪŋ. ɛvɹiθɪŋ hæd tʃeɪnʒd, əɹ ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ðə sʌn ən ðə skaɪ wɝ əz i ɪkspɛktəd tə si, ɪf pæləɾ ən ɔl bʌt klaʊdləs. lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn stɪl leɪ ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɪm, ɹæpt ɪn ðɛɹ kloʊks əslip, ən ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz stɪl stʊd hɑbəld ə peɪs əweɪ, bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls wɑz ɡɔn. soʊlʒɝz, hɔɹsəz, hɪz fɹɛnz, ɛvɹiwʌn ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɡɔn.

The light of the rising sun woke Rand, and he wondered if he were dreaming. He sat up slowly, staring. Everything had changed, or almost everything. The sun and the sky were as he expected to see, if pallid and all but cloudless. Loial and Hurin still lay on either side of him, wrapped in their cloaks asleep, and their horses still stood hobbled a pace away, but everyone else was gone. Soldiers, horses, his friends, everyone and everything gone.

ðə hɑloʊ ɪtsɛlf hæd tʃeɪnʒd, tu, ən ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ɪt naʊ, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɑn ði ɛdʒ. ət ɹændz hɛd ɹoʊz ə ɡɹeɪ stoʊn sɪləndɝ, ɛvɹi bɪɾ ə θɹi spænz haɪ ən ə fʊl peɪs θɪk, kʌvɝd wɪð hʌnʒɹədz, pɝhæps θaʊzənz, ʌv dipli ɪnsaɪz daɪəɡɹæmz ən mɑɹkɪŋz ɪn səm læŋɡwədʒ i dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz. waɪt stoʊn peɪv ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə hɑloʊ, əz lɛvəl əz ə flɔɹ, pɑlɪʃt soʊ smuð ɪɾ ɔlmoʊst ɡlɪsənd. bɹɔd, haɪ stɛps ɹoʊz tə ðə ɹɪm ɪn kənsɛntʃɹɪk ɹɪŋz ə dɪfɹən kʌlɝd stoʊn. ən əbaʊt ðə ɹɪm, ðə tʃɹiz stʊd blækən ən twɪstəɾ əz ɪf ə faɪɹstɔɹm hæd ɹɔɹd θɹu ðɛm. ɛvɹiθɪŋ sim pəlɝ ðən ɪt ʃəd bi, dʒʌs laɪk ðə sʌn, mɔɹ səbdud, əz ɪf sin θɹu mɪst. oʊnli ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɪst. dʒʌs ðə θɹi ʌv əm ən ðə hɔɹsəz əpɪɹd tʃɹuli sɑləd. bʌt wən i tʌtʃt ðə stoʊn ʌndɝ hɪm, ɪt fɛl sɑləɾ ɪnʌf.

The hollow itself had changed, too, and they were in the middle of it now, no longer on the edge. At Rand's head rose a gray stone cylinder, every bit of three spans high and a full pace thick, covered with hundreds, perhaps thousands, of deeply incised diagrams and markings in some language he did not recognize. White stone paved the bottom of the hollow, as level as a floor, polished so smooth it almost glistened. Broad, high steps rose to the rim in concentric rings of different colored stone. And about the rim, the trees stood blackened and twisted as if a firestorm had roared through them. Everything seemed paler than it should be, just like the sun, more subdued, as if seen through mist. Only there was no mist. Just the three of them and the horses appeared truly solid. But when he touched the stone under him, it felt solid enough.

hi ɹitʃt aʊɾ ən ʃʊk lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn. "weɪk ʌp! weɪk ʌp ən tɛl mi aɪm dʒɹimɪŋ. pliz weɪk ʌp!"

He reached out and shook Loial and Hurin. "Wake up! Wake up and tell me I'm dreaming. Please wake up!"

"ɪz ɪt mɔɹnɪŋ ɔlɹɛɾi?" lɔɪəl bɪɡæn, sɪɾɪŋ ʌp, ðən ɪz maʊθ fɛl oʊpən, ən ɪz bɪɡ, ɹaʊn aɪz ɡɹu waɪɾɝ ən waɪɾɝ.

"Is it morning already?" Loial began, sitting up, then his mouth fell open, and his big, round eyes grew wider and wider.

hʊɹɪn woʊk wɪð ə stɑɹt, ðən lɛp tə hɪz fit, dʒʌmpɪŋ laɪk ə fli ɑn ə hɑt ɹɑk tə lʊk ðɪs weɪ, ðən ðæt. "wɛɹ ɑɹ wi? wʌts hæpənd? wɛɹ ɪz ɛvɹibɑɾi? wɛɹ ɑɹ wi, lɔɹd ɹænd?" hi sæŋk tə hɪz niz, ɹɪŋɪŋ ɪz hænz, bʌɾ ɪz aɪz stɪl dɑɹɾɪd. "wʌts hæpənd?"

Hurin woke with a start, then leaped to his feet, jumping like a flea on a hot rock to look this way, then that. "Where are we? What's happened? Where is everybody? Where are we, Lord Rand?" He sank to his knees, wringing his hands, but his eyes still darted. "What's happened?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ," ɹænd sɛd sloʊli. "aɪ wɑz hoʊpɪŋ ɪt wɑz ə dʒɹim, bʌt. . . . meɪbi ɪts ə dʒɹim." hi hæd hæɾ ɪkspɪɹiəns ə dʒɹimz ðət wɝ nɑt dʒɹimz, ɪkspɪɹiəns i wɑntəd niðɝ tə ɹɪpit nɔɹ tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ. hi stʊɾ ʌp kɛɹfəli. ɛvɹiθɪŋ steɪɾ əz ɪt wɑz.

"I don't know," Rand said slowly. "I was hoping it was a dream, but. . . . Maybe it is a dream." He had had experience of dreams that were not dreams, experience he wanted neither to repeat nor to remember. He stood up carefully. Everything stayed as it was.

"aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk soʊ," lɔɪəl sɛd. hi wɑz stʌɾiɪŋ ðə kɑləm, ən i dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ hæpi. hɪz lɔŋ aɪbɹaʊz sæɡd əkɹɔs ɪz tʃiks, ən ɪz tʌftəɾ ɪɹz sim tə hæv wɪltɪd. "aɪ θɪŋk ðɪs ɪz ðə seɪm stoʊn wi wɛn tə slip bɪsaɪd læs naɪt. aɪ θɪŋk aɪ noʊ wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz, naʊ." fəɹ wʌns, hi saʊndəd mɪzɝəbəl əbaʊt noʊɪŋ.

"I do not think so," Loial said. He was studying the column, and he did not appear happy. His long eyebrows sagged across his cheeks, and his tufted ears seemed to have wilted. "I think this is the same stone we went to sleep beside last night. I think I know what it is, now." For once, he sounded miserable about knowing.

"ðæts. . . ." noʊ. ðət biɪŋ ðə seɪm stoʊn wɑz noʊ mɔɹ kɹeɪzi ðən wʌɾ i kəd si ɝaʊn hɪm, mæt ən pɛɹɪn ən ðə ʃaɪnɝənz ɡɔn, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒd. aɪ θɔɾ aɪɾ ɪskeɪpt, bʌɾ ɪts stɑɹɾəd əɡɛn, ən ðɛɹz noʊ sətʃ θɪŋ əz kɹeɪzi ɛnimɔɹ. ənlɛs aɪ æm. hi lʊkt ət lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn. ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ æktɪŋ əz ɪf i wɝ mæd; ðeɪ sɔ ɪt, tu. sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə stɛps kɑɾ ɪz aɪ, ðə dɪfɹən kʌlɝz, sɛvən ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm blu tə ɹɛd. "wʌn fəɹ itʃ ədʒɑ," hi sɛd.

"That's. . . ." No. That being the same stone was no more crazy than what he could see around him, Mat and Perrin and the Shienarans gone, and everything changed. I thought I'd escaped, but it's started again, and there's no such thing as crazy anymore. Unless I am. He looked at Loial and Hurin. They were not acting as if he were mad; they saw it, too. Something about the steps caught his eye, the different colors, seven rising from blue to red. "One for each Ajah," he said.

"noʊ, lɔɹd ɹænd," hʊɹɪn moʊnd. "noʊ. ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd nɑt də ðɪs tə ʌs. ðeɪ wʊdnt! aɪ wɔk ɪn ðə laɪt."

"No, Lord Rand," Hurin moaned. "No. Aes Sedai would not do this to us. They wouldn't! I walk in the Light."

"wi ɔl du, hʊɹɪn," ɹænd sɛd. "ði ɛɛs sədaɪ woʊn hɝt ju." ənlɛs jə ɡɛɾ ɪn ðə weɪ. kəd ðɪs bi mɔɪɹeɪnz duɪŋ sʌmhaʊ? "lɔɪəl, jə sɛd jə noʊ wʌt ðə stoʊn ɪz. wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?"

"We all do, Hurin," Rand said. "The Aes Sedai won't hurt you." Unless you get in the way. Could this be Moiraine's doing somehow? "Loial, you said you know what the stone is. What is it?"

"aɪ sɛɾ aɪ θɪŋk aɪ noʊ, ɹænd. ðəɹ wɑz ə pis ʌv ən oʊl bʊk, dʒʌst ə fju peɪdʒəz, bʌt wʌn ə ðɛm hæɾ ə dʒɹɔɪŋ ə ðɪs stoʊn, ðɪs stoʊn" - ðəɹ wɑz ə dɪstɪŋk dɪfɝəns ɪn ðə weɪ hi sɛɾ ɪt ðət mɑɹkt ɪmpɔɹɾəns - "ɔɹ wʌn vɛɹi laɪk ɪt. ən ʌndɝniθ, ɪt sɛd, 'fɹʌm stoʊn tə stoʊn ɹʌn ðə laɪnz ʌv "ɪf," bɪtwin ðə wɝlz ðət maɪt bi.' "

"I said I think I know, Rand. There was a piece of an old book, just a few pages, but one of them had a drawing of this stone, this Stone" - there was a distinct difference in the way he said it that marked importance - "or one very like it. And underneath, it said, 'From Stone to Stone run the lines of "if," between the worlds that might be.' "

"wʌt dʌz ðət min, lɔɪəl? ɪt dʌzn meɪk ɛni sɛns."

"What does that mean, Loial? It doesn't make any sense."

ði oʊɡiɝ ʃʊk ɪz mæsɪv hɛd sædli. "ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə fju peɪdʒəz. pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt sɛɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, səm ə ðoʊz u kəd tʃɹævəl, ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ə ðɛm, kəd juz ðiz stoʊnz. ɪt dɪd nɑt seɪ haʊ, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk, fɹəm wʌɾ aɪ kəd pʌzəl aʊt, ðət pɝhæps ðoʊz ɛɛs sədaɪ juz ðə stoʊnz sʌmhaʊ tə dʒɝni tə ðoʊz wɝlz." hi ɡlænst ʌp ət ðə sɪɹd tʃɹiz ən pʊld ɪz aɪz daʊn əɡɛn kwɪkli, əz i dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt wʌt leɪ bɪɑn ðə ɹɪm. "jɛɾ ivən ɪf ɛɛs sədaɪ kən juz ðɛm, əɹ kʊd, wi hæd noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð əs tə tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ, soʊ aɪ doʊn si haʊ ɪt kən bi."

The Ogier shook his massive head sadly. "It was only a few pages. Part of it said Aes Sedai in the Age of Legends, some of those who could Travel, the most powerful of them, could use these Stones. It did not say how, but I think, from what I could puzzle out, that perhaps those Aes Sedai used the Stones somehow to journey to those worlds." He glanced up at the seared trees and pulled his eyes down again quickly, as he did not want to think about what lay beyond the rim. "Yet even if Aes Sedai can use them, or could, we had no Aes Sedai with us to channel the Power, so I don't see how it can be."

ɹændz skɪn pɹɪkəld. ɛɛs sədaɪ juz ðɛm. ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, wən ðəɹ wɝ meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ. hi hæɾ ə veɪɡ mɛmɹi ʌv ðə vɔɪd kloʊzɪŋ ɹaʊn ɪm əz i fɛl əslip, fɪld wɪð ðəɾ ənizi ɡloʊ. ən i ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə ɹum ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ, ən ðə laɪɾ i hæd ɹitʃt fəɹ tə ɪskeɪp. ɪf ðət wɑz ðə meɪl hæf ə tʃɹu sɔɹs. . . . noʊ, ɪt kæn bi. bʌt wʌɾ ɪf ɪɾ ɪz? laɪt, aɪ wɑz wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ tə ɹʌn əɹ nɑt, ən ɔl ðə taɪm ɪts ɹaɪɾ ɪnsaɪd maɪ hɛd. meɪbi aɪ bɹɔɾ əs hɪɹ. hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪt. "wɝlz ðət maɪt bi? aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd, lɔɪəl."

Rand's skin prickled. Aes Sedai used them. In the Age of Legends, when there were male Aes Sedai. He had a vague memory of the void closing round him as he fell asleep, filled with that uneasy glow. And he remembered the room in the village, and the light he had reached for to escape. If that was the male half of True Source. . . . No, it can't be. But what if it is? Light, I was wondering whether to run or not, and all the time it's right inside my head. Maybe I brought us here. He did not want to think about it. "Worlds that might be? I don't understand, Loial."

ði oʊɡiɝ ʃɹʌɡd mæsɪvli, ən ənizəli. "niðɝ də aɪ, ɹænd. moʊst ʌv ɪt saʊndəd laɪk ðɪs. 'ɪf ə wʊmən ɡoʊ lɛft, əɹ ɹaɪt, dʌz taɪmz floʊ dɪvaɪd? dʌz ðə wil ðən wiv tu pæɾɝnz? ə θaʊzənd, fəɹ itʃ ə hɝ tɝnɪŋz? əz mɛni əz ðə stɑɹz? ɪz wʌn ɹil, ði ʌðɝz mɪɹli ʃædoʊz ən ɹɪflɛkʃənz?' jə si, ɪt wɑz nɑt vɛɹi klɪɹ. meɪnli kwɛstʃənz, moʊst ʌv wɪtʃ sim tə kɑntʃɹədɪkt itʃ ʌðɝ. ən ðəɹ dʒʌst wɑzn mʌtʃ ʌv ɪt." hi wɛn bæk tə stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə kɑləm, bʌɾ i lʊkt əz ɪf i wɪʃt ɪt wəd ɡoʊ əweɪ. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ səpoʊz tə bi ə ɡʊd mɛni ʌv ðiz stoʊnz, skæɾɝd ɔl oʊvɝ ðə wɝld, əɹ ðəɹ wɝ, wʌns, bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ɛniwʌn faɪndɪŋ wʌn. aɪ nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ɛniwʌn faɪndɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ðɪs əɾ ɔl."

The Ogier shrugged massively, and uneasily. "Neither do I, Rand. Most of it sounded like this. 'If a woman go left, or right, does Time's flow divide? Does the Wheel then weave two Patterns? A thousand, for each of her turnings? As many as the stars? Is one real, the others merely shadows and reflections?' You see, it was not very clear. Mainly questions, most of which seemed to contradict each other. And there just wasn't much of it." He went back to staring at the column, but he looked as if he wished it would go away. "There are supposed to be a good many of these Stones, scattered all over the world, or there were, once, but I never heard of anyone finding one. I never heard of anyone finding anything like this at all."

"maɪ lɔɹd ɹænd?" naʊ ɑn ɪz fit, hʊɹɪn sim kɑmɝ, bʌɾ i klʌtʃt ɪz koʊɾ ət ðə weɪst wɪð boʊθ hænz, hɪz feɪs ɝdʒənt. "maɪ lɔɹd ɹænd, jəl ɡɛɾ əs bæk, woʊn ju? bæk wɛɹ wi bɪlɔŋ? aɪv ə waɪf, maɪ lɔɹd, ən tʃɪlʒɹən. mɛliəd teɪk ɪt bæɾ ɪnʌf, mi daɪɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪf ʃi dʌzn ivən əv maɪ bɑɾi tə ɡɪv tə ðə mʌðɝz ɛmbɹeɪs, ʃɪl ɡɹiv tə ði ɛn ə hɝ deɪz. jə ʌndɝstænd, maɪ lɔɹd. aɪ kæn liv əɹ nɑt noʊɪŋ. jəl ɡɛɾ əs bæk. ən ɪf aɪ daɪ, ɪf jə kæn teɪk əɹ maɪ bɑɾi, jəl lɛɾ əɹ noʊ, soʊ ʃiz ðæt, ət list." hi wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ kwɛstʃənɪŋ ət ði ɛnd. ə noʊɾ ə kɑnfəɾəns hæd kɹɛpt ɪndə hɪz vɔɪs.

"My Lord Rand?" Now on his feet, Hurin seemed calmer, but he clutched his coat at the waist with both hands, his face urgent. "My Lord Rand, you'll get us back, won't you? Back where we belong? I've a wife, my Lord, and children. Melia'd take it bad enough, me dying, but if she doesn't even have my body to give to the mother's embrace, she'll grieve to the end of her days. You understand, my Lord. I can't leave her not knowing. You'll get us back. And if I die, if you can't take her my body, you'll let her know, so she has that, at least." He was no longer questioning at the end. A note of confidence had crept into his voice.

ɹænd oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə seɪ əɡɛn i wɑz nɑɾ ə lɔɹd, ðən ʃʌɾ ɪt wɪθaʊt spikɪŋ. ðət wɑz hɑɹdli ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪnʌf tə mɛnʃən, naʊ. jə ɡɑɾ ɪm ɪndə ðɪs. hi wɑntəd tə dɪnaɪ ɪt, bʌɾ i nu wʌɾ i wɑz, nu hi kəd tʃænəl, ivən ɪf ɪɾ ɔlweɪz sim tə hæpən ɔl baɪ ɪtsɛlf. lɔɪəl sɛɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ juz ðə stoʊnz, ən ðət mɛn ðə wʌn paʊɝ. wʌt lɔɪəl sɛɾ i nu, jə kəd bi ʃʊɹ ʌv - ði oʊɡiɝ nɛvɝ kleɪm tə noʊ ɪf i dɪd nɑt - ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn ɛls nɪɹbaɪ hu kəd wil ðə paʊɝ. jə ɡɑɾ ɪm ɪndə ɪt, juv tə ɡɛɾ ɪm aʊt. juv tə tʃɹaɪ.

Rand opened his mouth to say again he was not a lord, then shut it without speaking. That was hardly important enough to mention, now. You got him into this. He wanted to deny it, but he knew what he was, knew he could channel, even if it always seemed to happen all by itself. Loial said Aes Sedai used the Stones, and that meant the One Power. What Loial said he knew, you could be sure of - the Ogier never claimed to know if he did not - and there was no one else nearby who could wield the Power. You got him into it, you have to get him out. You have to try.

"aɪ wɪl də maɪ bɛst, hʊɹɪn." ən kəz hʊɹɪn wɑz ʃaɪnɝən, hi æɾəd, "baɪ maɪ haʊs ən ɑnɝ. ə ʃɛpɝdz haʊs ən ə ʃɛpɝdz ɑnɝ, bʌɾ əl meɪk əm də əz wɛl əz ə lɔɹdz."

"I will do my best, Hurin." And because Hurin was Shienaran, he added, "By my House and honor. A shepherd's House and a shepherd's honor, but I'll make them do as well as a lord's."

hʊɹɪn lust ɪz hoʊld ɑn ɪz koʊt. ðə kɑnfəɾəns ɹitʃt ɪz aɪz, tu. hi baʊd dipli. "ɑnɝ tə sɝv, maɪ lɔɹd."

Hurin loosed his hold on his coat. The confidence reached his eyes, too. He bowed deeply. "Honor to serve, my Lord."

ɡɪlt ɹɪpəl θɹu ɹænd. hi θɪŋks jəl si hɪm hoʊm, naʊ, kəz ʃaɪnɝən lɔɹdz ɔlweɪz kip ðɛɹ wɝd. wʌɾ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ tə du, lɔɹd ɹænd? "nʌn ə ðæt, hʊɹɪn. ðɛɹəl bi noʊ boʊɪŋ. aɪm nɑt - " sʌɾənli hi nu hi kəd nɑt tɛl ðə mæn əɡɛn ðəɾ i wɑz nɑɾ ə lɔɹd. ɔl ðət wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ðə snɪfɝ təɡɛðɝ wɑz ɪz bɪlif ɪn ə lɔɹd, ən i kəd nɑt teɪk ðəɾ əweɪ, nɑt naʊ. nɑt hɪɹ. "noʊ boʊɪŋ," hi fɪnɪʃt ɔkwɝdli.

Guilt rippled through Rand. He thinks you'll see him home, now, because Shienaran lords always keep their word. What are you going to do, Lord Rand? "None of that, Hurin. There'll be no bowing. I'm not - " Suddenly he knew he could not tell the man again that he was not a lord. All that was holding the sniffer together was his belief in a lord, and he could not take that away, not now. Not here. "No bowing," he finished awkwardly.

"æz jə seɪ, lɔɹd ɹænd." hʊɹɪnz ɡɹɪn wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz waɪɾ əz wən ɹænd fɝs mɛt hɪm.

"As you say, Lord Rand." Hurin's grin was almost as wide as when Rand first met him.

ɹænd klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. "jɛs. wɛl, ðæts wʌɾ aɪ seɪ."

Rand cleared his throat. "Yes. Well, that's what I say."

ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, lɔɪəl kjʊɹiəs, hʊɹɪn kɑnfəɾənt, boʊθ weɪɾɪŋ tə si wʌɾ i wəd du. aɪ bɹɔɾ əm hɪɹ. aɪ mʌs hæv. soʊ aɪ hæv tə ɡɛɾ əm bæk. ən ðət minz. . . .

They were both watching him, Loial curious, Hurin confident, both waiting to see what he would do. I brought them here. I must have. So I have to get them back. And that means. . . .

dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, hi wɔkt əkɹɔs ðə waɪt peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz tə ðə sɪmbəl-kʌvɝd sɪləndɝ. smɔl laɪnz ə səm læŋɡwədʒ i dɪd nɑt noʊ sɝaʊndəɾ itʃ sɪmbəl, ɑd lɛɾɝz ðət floʊɾ ɪn kɝvz ən spaɪɹəlz, sʌɾənli tɝn tə dʒæɡd hʊks ən æŋɡəlz, ðən floʊɾ ɑn. ət list ɪt wɑz nɑt tʃɹɑlɑk skɹɪpt. ɹɪlʌktənli, hi pʊɾ ɪz hænz ɑn ðə kɑləm. ɪt lʊk laɪk ɛni dʒɹaɪ, pɑlɪʃt stoʊn, bʌɾ ɪt fɛl kjʊɹiəsli slɪk, laɪk ɔɪl mɛɾəl.

Drawing a deep breath, he walked across the white paving stones to the symbol-covered cylinder. Small lines of some language he did not know surrounded each symbol, odd letters that flowed in curves and spirals, suddenly turned to jagged hooks and angles, then flowed on. At least it was not Trolloc script. Reluctantly, he put his hands on the column. It looked like any dry, polished stone, but it felt curiously slick, like oiled metal.

hi kloʊzd ɪz aɪz ən fɔɹm ðə fleɪm. ðə vɔɪd keɪm sloʊli, hɛzɪɾəntli. hi nu hɪz oʊn fɪɹ wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ɪt bæk, fɪɹ ʌv wʌɾ i wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ. əz fæst əz i fɛd fɪɹ ɪndə ðə fleɪm, mɔɹ keɪm. aɪ kæn də ɪt. tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ. aɪ doʊnt wɑn tə. laɪt, ðəɹ əz tə bi ənʌðɝ weɪ. ɡɹɪmli hi fɔɹs ðə θɔts tə stɪlnəs. hi kəd fil swɛt biɾɪŋ ɑn ɪz feɪs. dətɝmənədli hi kɛpt ɑn, pʊʃɪŋ ɪz fɪɹz ɪndə ðə kənsumɪŋ fleɪm, meɪkɪŋ ɪt ɡɹoʊ, ən ɡɹoʊ. ən ðə vɔɪd wɑz ðɛɹ.

He closed his eyes and formed the flame. The void came slowly, hesitantly. He knew his own fear was holding it back, fear of what he was trying. As fast as he fed fear into the flame, more came. I can't do it. Channel the Power. I don't want to. Light, there has to be another way. Grimly he forced the thoughts to stillness. He could feel sweat beading on his face. Determinedly he kept on, pushing his fears into the consuming flame, making it grow, and grow. And the void was there.

ðə kɔɹ ə hɪm floʊɾəd ɪn ɛmptinəs. hi kəd si ðə laɪt - seɪɾɪn - ivən wɪð ɪz aɪz kloʊzd, fil ðə wɔɹmθ ʌv ɪt, sɝaʊndɪŋ hɪm, sɝaʊndɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, sʌfjuzɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ɪt weɪvɝd laɪk ə kændəl fleɪm sin θɹu ɔɪl peɪpɝ. ɹænsɪɾ ɔɪl. stɪŋkɪŋ ɔɪl.

The core of him floated in emptiness. He could see the light - saidin - even with his eyes closed, feel the warmth of it, surrounding him, surrounding everything, suffusing everything. It wavered like a candle flame seen through oiled paper. Rancid oil. Stinking oil.

hi ɹitʃt fəɹ ɪt - hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ hi ɹitʃt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ, ə muvmənt, ə stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə laɪt, təwɔɹd seɪɾɪn - ən kɑt nʌθɪŋ, əz ɪf ɹʌnɪŋ ɪz hænz θɹu wɔɾɝ. ɪt fɛlt laɪk ə slaɪmi pɑnd, skʌm floʊɾɪŋ ətɑp klin wɔɾɝ bɪloʊ, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt skup ʌp ɛni ʌv ðə wɔɾɝ. taɪm ən əɡɛn ɪt tʃɹɪkəl θɹu hɪz fɪŋɡɝz, nɑɾ ivən dʒɹɑpləts ə ðə wɔɾɝ ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ, oʊnli ðə slɪk skʌm, meɪkɪŋ ɪz skɪn kɹɔl.

He reached for it - he was not sure how he reached, but it was something, a movement, a stretching toward the light, toward saidin - and caught nothing, as if running his hands through water. It felt like a slimy pond, scum floating atop clean water below, but he could not scoop up any of the water. Time and again it trickled through his fingers, not even droplets of the water remaining, only the slick scum, making his skin crawl.

dɛspɝətli, hi tʃɹaɪd tə fɔɹm ən ɪmədʒ ə ðə hɑloʊ əz ɪt hæd bɪn, wɪð ɪŋtʃɹ ən ðə lænsɪz slipɪŋ baɪ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, wɪð mæt ən pɛɹɪn, ən ðə stoʊn laɪɪŋ bɛɹiɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ wʌn ɛnd. aʊtsaɪd ðə vɔɪɾ i fɔɹmd ɪt, klɪŋɪŋ tə ðə ʃɛl ʌv ɛmptinəs ðəɾ ɛnkloʊz hɪm. hi tʃɹaɪd tə lɪŋk ði ɪmədʒ wɪð ðə laɪt, tʃɹaɪd tə fɔɹs əm təɡɛðɝ. ðə hɑloʊ əz ɪt hæd bɪn, ən i ən lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn ðəɹ təɡɛðɝ. hɪz hɛd hɝt. təɡɛðɝ, wɪð mæt ən pɛɹɪn ən ðə ʃaɪnɝənz. bɝnɪŋ, ɪn ɪz hɛd. təɡɛðɝ!

Desperately, he tried to form an image of the hollow as it had been, with Ingtar and the lances sleeping by their horses, with Mat and Perrin, and the Stone lying buried except for one end. Outside the void he formed it, clinging to the shell of emptiness that enclosed him. He tried to link the image with the light, tried to force them together. The hollow as it had been, and he and Loial and Hurin there together. His head hurt. Together, with Mat and Perrin and the Shienarans. Burning, in his head. Together!

ðə vɔɪd ʃæɾɝd ɪndə ə θaʊzən ɹeɪzɝ ʃɑɹdz, slaɪsɪŋ ɪz maɪnd.

The void shattered into a thousand razor shards, slicing his mind.

ʃʌɾɝɪŋ, hi stæɡɝd bæk, waɪd-aɪd. hɪz hænz hɝt fɹəm pɹɛsɪŋ ðə stoʊn, ən ɪz ɑɹmz ən ʃoʊldɝz kwɪvɝd wɪð eɪkɪŋ; hɪz stʌmək lɝtʃt fɹəm ðə fil ə fɪlθ kʌvɝɪŋ hɪm, ən ɪz hɛd. . . . hi tʃɹaɪd tə stɛɾi hɪz bɹiðɪŋ. ðət hæd nɛvɝ hæpən bɪfɔɹ. wən ðə vɔɪd wɛnt, ɪt wɛn laɪk ə pɹɪk bʌbəl, dʒʌst ɡɔn, ɪn ə twɪŋkəlɪŋ. nɛvɝ bɹoʊkən laɪk ɡlæs. hɪz hɛd fɛl nʌm, əz ɪf ðə θaʊzən slæʃɪz hæd hæpən soʊ kwɪkli ðə peɪn hæd nɑt jɛt kʌm. bʌɾ ɛvɹi kʌt hæd fɛlt əz ɹil əz ɪf dʌn wɪð ə naɪf. hi tʌtʃt ɪz tɛmpəl, ən wɑz sɝpɹaɪz nɑt tə si blʌɾ ɑn ɪz fɪŋɡɝz.

Shuddering, he staggered back, wide-eyed. His hands hurt from pressing the Stone, and his arms and shoulders quivered with aching; his stomach lurched from the feel of filth covering him, and his head. . . . He tried to steady his breathing. That had never happened before. When the void went, it went like a pricked bubble, just gone, in a twinkling. Never broken like glass. His head felt numb, as if the thousand slashes had happened so quickly the pain had not yet come. But every cut had felt as real as if done with a knife. He touched his temple, and was surprised not to see blood on his fingers.

hʊɹɪn stɪl stʊd ðəɹ wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, stɪl kɑnfəɾənt. ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, ðə snɪfɝ simd mɔɹ ʃʊɹ baɪ ðə mɪnət. lɔɹd ɹænd wɑz duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ. ðət wɑz wʌt lɔɹdz wɝ fɔɹ. ðeɪ pɹətɛktəd ðə læn ən ðə pipəl wɪð ðɛɹ bɑɾiz ən ðɛɹ laɪvz, ən wən sʌmθɪŋ wɑz ɹɔŋ, ðeɪ sɛɾ ɪɾ æɹaɪɾ ən sɔ fɛɹnəs ən dʒʌstəs dʌn. əz lɔŋ əz ɹænd wɑz duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ, ɛniθɪŋ, hʊɹɪn wəɾ əv kɑnfəɾəns ðəɾ ɪt wəɾ ɔl kʌm ɹaɪɾ ɪn ði ɛnd. ðət wɑz wʌt lɔɹdz dɪd.

Hurin still stood there watching him, still confident. If anything, the sniffer seemed more sure by the minute. Lord Rand was doing something. That was what lords were for. They protected the land and the people with their bodies and their lives, and when something was wrong, they set it aright and saw fairness and justice done. As long as Rand was doing something, anything, Hurin would have confidence that it would all come right in the end. That was what lords did.

lɔɪəl hæɾ ə dɪfɹən lʊk, ə slaɪtli pʌzəl fɹaʊn, bʌɾ ɪz aɪz wɝ ɑn ɹænd, tu. ɹænd wʌndɝd wʌɾ i wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ.

Loial had a different look, a slightly puzzled frown, but his eyes were on Rand, too. Rand wondered what he was thinking.

"ɪt wɑz wɝθ ə tʃɹaɪ," hi toʊl ðɛm. ðə ɹænsɪɾ ɔɪl fil, ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd - laɪt, ɪts ɪnsaɪd mi! aɪ doʊnt wɑn ɪɾ ɪnsaɪd mi! - wɑz feɪɾɪŋ sloʊli, bʌɾ i stɪl θɔɾ i maɪt vɑmət. "aɪ wɪl tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn, ɪn ə fju mɪnəts."

"It was worth a try," he told them. The rancid oil feel, inside his head - Light, it's inside me! I don't want it inside me! - was fading slowly, but he still thought he might vomit. "I will try again, in a few minutes."

hi hoʊpt i saʊndəd kɑnfəɾənt. hi hæd noʊ aɪdiə haʊ ðə stoʊnz wɝkt, ɪf wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ hæɾ ɛni tʃæns ə səksɛs. meɪbi ðəɹ ɑɹ ɹulz fəɹ wɝkɪŋ ðɛm. meɪbi juv tə də sʌmθɪŋ spɛʃəl. laɪt, meɪbi jə kæn juz ðə seɪm stoʊn twaɪs, ɔɹ. . . . hi kʌɾ ɔf ðət laɪn ə θɔt. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɡʊɾ ɪn θɪŋkɪŋ laɪk ðæt. hi hæd tə də ɪt. lʊkɪŋ ət lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn, hi θɔɾ i nu wʌt læn hæd mɛn əbaʊt duɾi pɹɛsɪŋ daʊn laɪk ə maʊntən.

He hoped he sounded confident. He had no idea how the Stones worked, if what he was doing had any chance of success. Maybe there are rules for working them. Maybe you have to do something special. Light, maybe you can't use the same Stone twice, or. . . . He cut off that line of thought. There was no good in thinking like that. He had to do it. Looking at Loial and Hurin, he thought he knew what Lan had meant about duty pressing down like a mountain.

"maɪ lɔɹd, aɪ θɪŋk. . . ." hʊɹɪn lɛɾ ɪz wɝdz tʃɹeɪl ɔf, lʊkɪŋ əbæʃt fəɹ ə moʊmənt. "maɪ lɔɹd, meɪbi, ɪf wi faɪn ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz, wi kən meɪk wʌn ə ðɛm tɛl əs haʊ tə ɡɛt bæk."

"My Lord, I think. . . ." Hurin let his words trail off, looking abashed for a moment. "My Lord, maybe, if we find the Darkfriends, we can make one of them tell us how to get back."

"aɪ wəɾ æsk ə dɑɹkfɹɛn əɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn hɪmsɛlf ɪf aɪ θɔɾ aɪd ɡɛɾ ə tʃɹu ænsɝ bæk," ɹænd sɛd. "bʌt wəɹ ɔl ðəɹ ɪz. dʒʌst əs θɹi." dʒʌs mi. ɪm ðə wʌn u hæz tə də ɪt.

"I would ask a Darkfriend or the Dark One himself if I thought I'd get a true answer back," Rand said. "But we are all there is. Just us three." Just me. I'm the one who has to do it.

"wi kəd fɑloʊ ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪl, maɪ lɔɹd. ɪf wi kætʃ ðɛm. . . ."

"We could follow their trail, my Lord. If we catch them. . . ."

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət ðə snɪfɝ. "ju kən stɪl smɛl ðɛm?"

Rand stared at the sniffer. "You can still smell them?"

"aɪ kæn, maɪ lɔɹd." hʊɹɪn fɹaʊnd. "ɪts feɪnt, peɪl-laɪk, laɪk ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls hɪɹ, bʌɾ aɪ kən smɛl ðə tʃɹeɪl. ɹaɪɾ ʌp ðɛɹ." hi pɔɪntəd tə ðə ɹɪm ə ðə hɑloʊ. "aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstæn ɪt, maɪ lɔɹd, bʌt - læs naɪt, aɪ cʊɾə swɔɹn ðə tʃɹeɪl wɛn ɹaɪɾ ɑn baɪ ðə hɑloʊ bæk - bæk wɛɹ wi wɝ. wɛl, ɪts ɪn ðə seɪm pleɪs naʊ, oʊnli hɪɹ, ən feɪntɝ, laɪk aɪ sɛd. nɑɾ oʊld, nɑt feɪn laɪk ðæt, bʌt. . . . aɪ doʊnt noʊ, lɔɹd ɹænd, ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɪts ðɛɹ."

"I can, my Lord." Hurin frowned. "It's faint, pale-like, like everything else here, but I can smell the trail. Right up there." He pointed to the rim of the hollow. "I don't understand it, my Lord, but - Last night, I could have sworn the trail went right on by the hollow back - back where we were. Well, it's in the same place now, only here, and fainter, like I said. Not old, not faint like that, but. . . . I don't know, Lord Rand, except that it's there."

ɹænd kənsɪɾɝd. ɪf feɪn ən ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz wɝ hɪɹ - wɛɹɛvɝ hɪɹ wɑz - ðeɪ maɪt noʊ haʊ tə ɡɛt bæk. ðeɪ hæd tə, ɪf ðeɪ hæd ɹitʃt hɪɹ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs. ən ðeɪ hæd ðə hɔɹn, ən ðə dæɡɝ. mæt hæd tə hæv ðət dæɡɝ. fəɹ ðəɾ ɪf fəɹ nʌθɪŋ ɛls, hi hæd tə faɪn ðɛm. wʌt faɪnəli dɪsaɪɾɪd hɪm, hi wɑz əʃeɪm tə ɹilaɪz, wɑz ðəɾ i wɑz əfɹeɪd tə tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn. əfɹeɪd tə tʃɹaɪ tʃænəlɪŋ ðə paʊɝ. hi wɑz lɛs əfɹeɪɾ ə kənfɹʌntɪŋ dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən tʃɹɑləks wɪð oʊnli hʊɹɪn ən lɔɪəl ðən i wɑz ə ðæt.

Rand considered. If Fain and the Darkfriends were here - wherever here was - they might know how to get back. They had to, if they had reached here in the first place. And they had the Horn, and the dagger. Mat had to have that dagger. For that if for nothing else, he had to find them. What finally decided him, he was ashamed to realize, was that he was afraid to try again. Afraid to try channeling the Power. He was less afraid of confronting Darkfriends and Trollocs with only Hurin and Loial than he was of that.

"ðɛn wɪl ɡoʊ æftɝ ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz." hi tʃɹaɪd tə saʊnd ʃʊɹ, ðə weɪ læn wʊd, əɹ ɪŋtʃɹ. "ðə hɔɹn mʌs bi ɹəkʌvɝd. ɪf wi kæn pʌzəl aʊɾ ə weɪ tə teɪk ɪt fɹəm ðɛm, ət list wɪl noʊ wɛɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ wən wi faɪn ɪŋtʃɹ əɡɛn." ɪf oʊnli ðeɪ doʊn æsk haʊ wɝ gɑnə faɪn ɪm əɡɛn. "hʊɹɪn, meɪk ʃʊɹ ɪt ɹɪli ɪz ðə tʃɹeɪl wɝ æftɝ."

"Then we will go after the Darkfriends." He tried to sound sure, the way Lan would, or Ingtar. "The Horn must be recovered. If we can't puzzle out a way to take it from them, at least we will know where they are when we find Ingtar again." If only they don't ask how we're going to find him again. "Hurin, make sure it really is the trail we're after."

ðə snɪfɝ lɛpt ɪndə hɪz sæɾəl, iɡɝ tə bi duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ hɪmsɛlf, pɝhæps iɡɝ tə bi əweɪ fɹəm ðə hɑloʊ, ən skɹæmbəld ɪz hɔɹs ʌp ðə bɹɔd, kʌlɝd stɛps. ði ænəməlz hʊvz ɹæŋ laʊdli ɑn ðə stoʊn, bʌt ðeɪ meɪd nɑɾ ə mɑɹk.

The sniffer leaped into his saddle, eager to be doing something himself, perhaps eager to be away from the hollow, and scrambled his horse up the broad, colored steps. The animal's hooves rang loudly on the stone, but they made not a mark.

ɹænd stoʊd ɹɛdz hɑbəlz ɪn ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz - ðə bænɝ wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ; hi wəd nɑɾ əv maɪndəɾ ɪf ðət hæd bɪn lɛf bɪhaɪnd - ðən ɡæðɝɾ ɪz baʊ ən kwɪvɝ ən klaɪm tə ðə stæljənz bæk. ðə bʌndəl ə tɑm mɛɹɪlɪnz kloʊk meɪɾ ə maʊn bɪhaɪn ɪz sæɾəl.

Rand stowed Red's hobbles in his saddlebags - the banner was still there; he would not have minded if that had been left behind - then gathered his bow and quiver and climbed to the stallion's back. The bundle of Thom Merrilin's cloak made a mound behind his saddle.

lɔɪəl lɛɾ ɪz bɪɡ maʊn oʊvɝ tə hɪm; wɪð ði oʊɡiɝ stændɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, lɔɪəlz hɛd keɪm ɔlmoʊs tə ɹændz ʃoʊldɝ, ən ɪm ɪn ɪz sæɾəl. lɔɪəl stɪl lʊk pʌzəld.

Loial led his big mount over to him; with the Ogier standing on the ground, Loial's head came almost to Rand's shoulder, and him in his saddle. Loial still looked puzzled.

"ju θɪŋk wi ʃəd steɪ hɪɹ?" ɹænd sɛd. "tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn tə juz ðə stoʊn? ɪf ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɑɹ hɪɹ, ɪn pleɪs, wɪv tə faɪn ðɛm. wi kæn liv ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ɪn dɑɹkfɹɛn hænz; jə hɝd ði æmɪɝlɪn. ən wɪv tə ɡɛt ðət dæɡɝ bæk. mæt wɪl daɪ wɪθaʊɾ ɪt."

"You think we should stay here?" Rand said. "Try again to use the Stone? If the Darkfriends are here, in place, we have to find them. We can't leave the Horn of Valere in Darkfriend hands; you heard the Amyrlin. And we have to get that dagger back. Mat will die without it."

lɔɪəl nɑɾəd. "jɛs, ɹænd, wi du. bʌt, ɹænd, ðə stoʊnz. . . ."

Loial nodded. "Yes, Rand, we do. But, Rand, the Stones. . . ."

"wi wɪl faɪn ənʌðɝ. jə sɛd ðeɪ wɝ skæɾɝd ɔl oʊvɝ, ən ɪf ðəɹ ɔl laɪk ðɪs - ɔl ðɪs stoʊnwɝk ɝaʊn əm - ɪt ʃəd nɑt bi tu hɑɹd tə faɪnd wʌn."

"We will find another. You said they were scattered all over, and if they're all like this - all this stonework around them - it should not be too hard to find one."

"ɹænd, ðət fɹæɡmən sɛd ðə stoʊnz keɪm fɹəm ən oʊldɝ eɪdʒ ðən ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, ən ivən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ðən dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðɛm, ðoʊ ðeɪ juz ðɛm, səm ə ðə tʃɹuli paʊɝfəl dɪd. ðeɪ juzd əm wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ɹænd. haʊ dɪd jə θɪŋk tə juz ðɪs stoʊn tə teɪk əs bæk? əɹ ɛni ʌðɝ stoʊn wi faɪnd?"

"Rand, that fragment said the Stones came from an older Age than the Age of Legends, and even the Aes Sedai then did not understand them, though they used them, some of the truly powerful did. They used them with the One Power, Rand. How did you think to use this Stone to take us back? Or any other Stone we find?"

fəɹ ə moʊmən ɹænd kəɾ oʊnli stɛɹ ət ði oʊɡiɝ, θɪŋkɪŋ fæstɝ ðən i ɛvɝ hæɾ ɪn ɪz laɪf. "ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ oʊldɝ ðən ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, meɪbi ðə pipəl u bɪlt əm dɪdn juz ðə paʊɝ. ðəɹ mʌs bi ənʌðɝ weɪ. ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɡɑt hɪɹ, ən ðeɪ sɝɾənli kʊdn juz ðə paʊɝ. wʌtɛvɝ ðɪs ʌðɝ weɪ ɪz, əl faɪn ɪɾ aʊt. əl ɡɛɾ əs bæk, lɔɪəl." hi lʊkt ət ðə tɔl stoʊn kɑləm wɪð ɪts ɑd mɑɹkɪŋz, ən fɛlt ə pɹɪkəl ə fɪɹ. laɪt, ɪf oʊnli aɪ doʊn əv tə juz ðə paʊɝ tə də ɪt. "aɪ wɪl, lɔɪəl, aɪ pɹɑməs. wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ."

For a moment Rand could only stare at the Ogier, thinking faster than he ever had in his life. "If they are older than the Age of Legends, maybe the people who built them didn't use the Power. There must be another way. The Darkfriends got here, and they certainly couldn't use the Power. Whatever this other way is, I will find it out. I will get us back, Loial." He looked at the tall stone column with its odd markings, and felt a prickle of fear. Light, if only I don't have to use the Power to do it. "I will, Loial, I promise. One way or another."

ði oʊɡiɝ ɡeɪv ə daʊtfəl nɑd. hi swʌŋ ʌp ɑntu hɪz hjudʒ hɔɹs ən fɑloʊd ɹænd ʌp ðə stɛps tə dʒɔɪn hʊɹɪn əmʌŋ ðə blækən tʃɹiz.

The Ogier gave a doubtful nod. He swung up onto his huge horse and followed Rand up the steps to join Hurin among the blackened trees.

ðə læn stʃɹɛtʃt aʊt, loʊ ən ɹoʊlɪŋ, spɑɹsli fɔɹəstəd hɪɹ ən ðəɹ wɪð ɡɹæslæn bɪtwin, kɹɔs baɪ mɔɹ ðən wʌn stʃɹim. ɪn ðə mɪɾəl dɪstəns ɹænd θɔɾ i kəd si ənʌðɝ bɝn pætʃ. ɪt wɑz ɔl peɪl, ðə kʌlɝz wɑʃt. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn ʌv ɛniθɪŋ meɪd baɪ mɛn ɪksɛp ðə stoʊn sɝkəl bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ðə skaɪ wɑz ɛmpti, noʊ tʃɪmni smoʊk, noʊ bɝdz, oʊnli ə fju klaʊdz ən ðə peɪl jɛloʊ sʌn.

The land stretched out, low and rolling, sparsely forested here and there with grassland between, crossed by more than one stream. In the middle distance Rand thought he could see another burned patch. It was all pale, the colors washed. There was no sign of anything made by men except the stone circle behind them. The sky was empty, no chimney smoke, no birds, only a few clouds and the pale yellow sun.

wɝst ʌv ɔl, ðoʊ, ðə læn sim tə twɪs ði aɪ. wʌt wɑz kloʊs ət hæn lʊkt ɔl ɹaɪt, ən wʌt wɑz sin stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛɾ ɪn ðə dɪstəns. bʌt wɛnɛvɝ ɹænd tɝn ɪz hɛd, θɪŋz ðəɾ əpɪɹd dɪstənt wən sin fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ sim tə ɹʌʃ təwɔɹd hɪm, tə bi nɪɹɝ wən i stɛɹd stʃɹeɪɾ ət ðɛm. ɪt meɪd fəɹ dɪzinəs; ivən ðə hɔɹsəz wɪkɝd nɝvəsli ən ɹoʊl ðɛɹ aɪz. hi tʃɹaɪd muvɪŋ ɪz hɛd sloʊli; ði əpɛɹən muvmən ə θɪŋz ðət ʃʊɾə bɪn fɪkst wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ, bʌɾ ɪt sim tə hɛlp ə lɪɾəl.

Worst of all, though, the land seemed to twist the eye. What was close at hand looked all right, and what was seen straight ahead in the distance. But whenever Rand turned his head, things that appeared distant when seen from the corner of his eye seemed to rush toward him, to be nearer when he stared straight at them. It made for dizziness; even the horses whickered nervously and rolled their eyes. He tried moving his head slowly; the apparent movement of things that should have been fixed was still there, but it seemed to help a little.

"dɪd jəɹ pis ʌv ə bʊk seɪ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt ðɪs?" ɹænd æskt.

"Did your piece of a book say anything about this?" Rand asked.

lɔɪəl ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ðən swɑloʊd hɑɹɾ əz ɪf i wɪʃt i hæd kɛpt ɪt stɪl. "nʌθɪŋ."

Loial shook his head, then swallowed hard as if he wished he had kept it still. "Nothing."

"aɪ səpoʊz ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ tə də fəɹ ɪt. wɪtʃ weɪ, hʊɹɪn?"

"I suppose there's nothing to do for it. Which way, Hurin?"

"saʊθ, lɔɹd ɹænd." ðə snɪfɝ kɛpt ɪz aɪz ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

"South, Lord Rand." The sniffer kept his eyes on the ground.

"saʊθ, ðɛn." ðəɹ əz tə bi ə weɪ bæk bɪsaɪdz juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ. ɹænd hild ɹɛdz flæŋks. hi tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk ɪz vɔɪs laɪthɑɹɾɪd, əz ɪf i sɔ noʊ dɪfəkəlti əɾ ɔl ɪn wʌt ðeɪ wɝ əbaʊt. "wʌt wɑz ɪɾ ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd? θɹi əɹ fɔɹ deɪz tə ðət mɑnjəmən tə ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ? aɪ wʌndɝ ɪf ðəɾ ɪɡzɪsts hɪɹ, tu, ðə weɪ ðə stoʊnz du. ɪf ðɪs ɪz ə wɝl ðət kəd bi, meɪbi ɪts stɪl stændɪŋ. wʊdn ðət bi sʌmθɪŋ tə si, lɔɪəl?"

"South, then." There has to be a way back besides using the Power. Rand heeled Red's flanks. He tried to make his voice lighthearted, as if he saw no difficulty at all in what they were about. "What was it Ingtar said? Three or four days to that monument to Artur Hawkwing? I wonder if that exists here, too, the way the Stones do. If this is a world that could be, maybe it's still standing. Wouldn't that be something to see, Loial?"

ðeɪ ɹoʊd saʊθ.

They rode south.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹtin


CHAPTER 14

wʊlfbɹəðɝ


Wolfbrother

"ɡɔn?" ɪŋtʃɹ dɪmændəɾ ə ði ɛɹ. "æn maɪ ɡɑɹdz sɔ nʌθɪŋ. nʌθɪŋ! ðeɪ kænɑt dʒʌs bi ɡɔn!"

"Gone?" Ingtar demanded of the air. "And my guards saw nothing. Nothing! They cannot just be gone!"

lɪsnɪŋ, pɛɹɪn hʌntʃt ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ən lʊkt ət mæt, hu stʊɾ ə lɪɾəl weɪ ɔf fɹaʊnɪŋ ən mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf. ɑɹɡjuɪŋ wɪð hɪmsɛlf wɑz haʊ pɛɹɪn sɔ ɪt. ðə sʌn wɑz pikɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə hɝaɪzən, pæs taɪm fəɹ əm tə hæv bɪn ɹaɪɾɪŋ. ʃædoʊz leɪ lɔŋ əkɹɔs ðə hɑloʊ, stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ən θɪnd, bʌt stɪl laɪk ðə tʃɹiz ðət meɪd ðɛm. ðə pækhɔɹsɪz, loʊɾəd ən ɑn ðɛɹ lɛd laɪn, stæmpt ɪmpeɪʃənli, bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn stʊd baɪ hɪz maʊn ən weɪɾəd.

Listening, Perrin hunched his shoulders and looked at Mat, who stood a little way off frowning and muttering to himself. Arguing with himself was how Perrin saw it. The sun was peeking over the horizon, past time for them to have been riding. Shadows lay long across the hollow, stretched out and thinned, but still like the trees that made them. The packhorses, loaded and on their lead line, stamped impatiently, but everyone stood by his mount and waited.

ənoʊ keɪm stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ ʌp. "nɑɾ ə ɡoʊt-kɪsɪŋ tʃɹæk, maɪ lɔɹd." hi saʊndəɾ əfɛndəd; feɪljɝ tʌtʃt ɑn ɪz skɪl. "bɝn mi, nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə fleɪmɪŋ huf skɹeɪp. ðeɪ dʒʌs blʌɾi vænɪʃt."

Uno came striding up. "Not a goat-kissing track, my Lord." He sounded offended; failure touched on his skill. "Burn me, not so much as a flaming hoof scrape. They just bloody vanished."

"θɹi mɛn ən θɹi hɔɹsəz də nɑt dʒʌs vænɪʃ," ɪŋtʃɹ ɡɹaʊld. "ɡoʊ oʊvɝ ðə ɡɹaʊn əɡɛn, ənoʊ. ɪf ɛniwʌn kən faɪnd wɛɹ ðeɪ wɛnt, ɪts ju."

"Three men and three horses do not just vanish," Ingtar growled. "Go over the ground again, Uno. If anyone can find where they went, it's you."

"meɪbi ðeɪ dʒʌst ɹæn əweɪ," mæt sɛd. ənoʊ stɑpt ən ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɪm. laɪk hid kɝst ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, pɛɹɪn θɔt wʌndɝɪŋli.

"Maybe they just ran away," Mat said. Uno stopped and glared at him. Like he'd cursed an Aes Sedai, Perrin thought wonderingly.

"waɪ wəd ðeɪ ɹʌn əweɪ?" ɪŋtʃɹz vɔɪs wɑz deɪnʒɝəsli sɑft. "ɹænd, ðə bɪldɝ, maɪ snɪfɝ - maɪ snɪfɝ! - waɪ wəɾ ɛni ʌv əm ɹʌn, mʌtʃ lɛs ɔl θɹi?"

"Why would they run away?" Ingtar's voice was dangerously soft. "Rand, the Builder, my sniffer - my sniffer! - why would any of them run, much less all three?"

mæt ʃɹʌɡd. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ. ɹænd wɑz. . . ." pɛɹɪn wɑntəd tə θɹoʊ sʌmθɪŋ ət hɪm, hɪt hɪm, ɛniθɪŋ tə stɑp hɪm, bʌɾ ɪŋtʃɹ ən ənoʊ wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ. hi fɛlt ə flʌɾ ə ɹɪlif wən mæt hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən spɹɛɾ ɪz hænz ən mʌɾɝd, "aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ. aɪ dʒʌs θɔt meɪbi ðeɪ hæd."

Mat shrugged. "I don't know. Rand was. . . ." Perrin wanted to throw something at him, hit him, anything to stop him, but Ingtar and Uno were watching. He felt a flood of relief when Mat hesitated, then spread his hands and muttered, "I don't know why. I just thought maybe they had."

ɪŋtʃɹ ɡɹɪməst. "ɹæn əweɪ," hi ɡɹaʊld əz ɪf i dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪt fəɹ ən ɪnstənt. "ðə bɪldɝ kən ɡoʊ əz i wɪl, bʌt hʊɹɪn wəd nɑt ɹʌn əweɪ. ən niðɝ wəd ɹænd ælθɹ. hi wəd nɑt; hi noʊz ɪz duɾi, naʊ. ɡoʊ ɑn, ənoʊ. sɝtʃ ðə ɡɹaʊn əɡɛn." ənoʊ ɡeɪv ə hæf baʊ ən hɝiɾ əweɪ, sɔɹd hɪl bɑbɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ɪŋtʃɹ ɡɹʌmbəld, "waɪ wəd hʊɹɪn liv laɪk ðæt, ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə naɪt, wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd? hi noʊz wʌt wɝ əbaʊt. haʊ æm aɪ tə tʃɹæk ðɪs ʃædoʊ-spɔn fɪlθ wɪθaʊt hɪm? aɪ wəd ɡɪv ə θaʊzənd ɡoʊl kɹaʊnz fəɹ ə pæk ə tʃɹeɪl haʊnz. ɪf aɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ bɛɾɝ, aɪ wəd seɪ ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz mænədʒ ðɪs soʊ ðeɪ kən slɪp ist əɹ wɛst wɪθaʊt mi noʊɪŋ. pis, aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf aɪ də noʊ bɛɾɝ." hi stʌmpt ɔf æftɝ ənoʊ.

Ingtar grimaced. "Ran away," he growled as if he did not believe it for an instant. "The Builder can go as he will, but Hurin would not run away. And neither would Rand al'Thor. He would not; he knows his duty, now. Go on, Uno. Search the ground again." Uno gave a half bow and hurried away, sword hilt bobbing over his shoulder. Ingtar grumbled, "Why would Hurin leave like that, in the middle of the night, without a word? He knows what we're about. How am I to track this Shadow-spawned filth without him? I would give a thousand gold crowns for a pack of trail hounds. If I did not know better, I would say the Darkfriends managed this so they can slip east or west without me knowing. Peace, I don't know if I do know better." He stumped off after Uno.

pɛɹɪn ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli. ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz wɝ daʊtləs ɡɛɾɪŋ fɝðɝ əweɪ wɪð ɛvɹi mɪnət. ɡɛɾɪŋ fɝðɝ əweɪ, ən wɪð əm ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ - ən ðə dæɡɝ fɹəm ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðət ɹænd, wʌtɛvɝ i hæd bɪkʌm, wʌtɛvɝ hæd hæpən tə hɪm, wəɾ əbændən ðət tʃeɪs. bʌt wɛɹ dɪɾ i ɡoʊ, ən waɪ? lɔɪəl maɪt ɡoʊ wɪð ɹænd fəɹ fɹɛndʃɪp - bʌt waɪ hʊɹɪn?

Perrin shifted uneasily. The Darkfriends were doubtless getting further away with every minute. Getting further away, and with them the Horn of Valere - and the dagger from Shadar Logoth. He did not think that Rand, whatever he had become, whatever had happened to him, would abandon that chase. But where did he go, and why? Loial might go with Rand for friendship - but why Hurin?

"meɪbi hi dɪd ɹʌn əweɪ," hi mʌɾɝd, ðən lʊkt ɝaʊnd. noʊ wʌn əpɪɹd tə hæv hɝd; ivən mæt wɑz nɑt peɪɪŋ ɪm ɛni maɪnd. hi skɹʌbd ə hæn θɹu hɪz hɛɹ. ɪf ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd bɪn æftɝ ɪm tə bi ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən, hi wəɾ əv ɹʌn, tu. bʌt wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt ɹænd wɑz duɪŋ nʌθɪŋ tə hɛlp tʃɹæk ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz.

"Maybe he did run away," he muttered, then looked around. No one appeared to have heard; even Mat was not paying him any mind. He scrubbed a hand through his hair. If Aes Sedai had been after him to be a false Dragon, he would have run, too. But worrying about Rand was doing nothing to help track the Darkfriends.

ðəɹ wɑz ə weɪ, pɝhæps, ɪf i wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə teɪk ɪt. hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə teɪk ɪt. hi hæd bɪn ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ɪt, bʌt pɝhæps, naʊ, hi kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɹʌn. sɝvz mi ɹaɪt fəɹ wʌɾ aɪ toʊld ɹænd. aɪ wɪʃ aɪ kəd ɹʌn. ivən noʊɪŋ wʌɾ i kəd də tə hɛlp - wʌɾ i hæd tə də - hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd.

There was a way, perhaps, if he was willing to take it. He did not want to take it. He had been running away from it, but perhaps, now, he could no longer run. Serves me right for what I told Rand. I wish I could run. Even knowing what he could do to help - what he had to do - he hesitated.

noʊ wʌn wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. noʊ wʌn wəd noʊ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ siɪŋ ivən ɪf ðeɪ dɪd lʊk. faɪnəli, ɹɪlʌktənli, hi kloʊzd ɪz aɪz ən lɛt hɪmsɛlf dʒɹɪft, lɛɾ ɪz θɔts dʒɹɪft, aʊt, əweɪ fɹəm hɪm.

No one was looking at him. No one would know what they were seeing even if they did look. Finally, reluctantly, he closed his eyes and let himself drift, let his thoughts drift, out, away from him.

hi hæd tʃɹaɪd dɪnaɪɪŋ ɪt fɹəm ðə fɝst, lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ɪz aɪz bɪɡæn tə tʃeɪnʒ fɹəm dɑɹk bɹaʊn tə bɝnɪʃt ɡoʊldən jɛloʊ. ət ðət fɝs miɾɪŋ, ðət fɝst ɪnstən ə ɹɛkəɡnɪʃən, hi hæd ɹəfjuz tə bɪliv, ən i hæd ɹʌn fɹəm ðə ɹɛkəɡnɪʃən ɛvɝ sɪns. hi stɪl wɑntəd tə ɹʌn.

He had tried denying it from the first, long before his eyes began to change from dark brown to burnished golden yellow. At that first meeting, that first instant of recognition, he had refused to believe, and he had run from the recognition ever since. He still wanted to run.

hɪz θɔts dʒɹɪftəd, filɪŋ fəɹ wʌt mʌs bi aʊt ðɛɹ, wʌt wɑz ɔlweɪz aʊt ðəɹ ɪn kʌntʃɹi wɛɹ mɛn wɝ fju əɹ fɑɹ bɪtwin, filɪŋ fəɹ ɪz bɹʌðɝz. hi dɪd nɑt laɪk tə θɪŋk ə ðɛm ðət weɪ, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ.

His thoughts drifted, feeling for what must be out there, what was always out there in country where men were few or far between, feeling for his brothers. He did not like to think of them that way, but they were.

ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ i hæd bɪn əfɹeɪd ðət wʌɾ i dɪd hæd səm teɪn ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn, əɹ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ - ikwəli bæd fəɹ ə mæn u wɑntəd nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən tə bi ə blæksmɪθ ən lɪv ɪz laɪf ɪn ðə laɪt, ən ɪn pis. fɹəm ðət taɪm, hi nu sʌmθɪŋ ə haʊ ɹænd fɛlt, əfɹeɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf, filɪŋ ənklin. hi wɑz stɪl nɑt pæs ðəɾ ɪntaɪɝli. ðɪs θɪŋ i dɪd wɑz oʊldɝ ðən hjumənz juzɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ðoʊ, sʌmθɪŋ fɹəm ðə bɝθ ə taɪm. nɑt ðə paʊɝ, mɔɪɹeɪn hæd toʊl hɪm. sʌmθɪŋ lɔŋ vænɪʃt, naʊ kʌm əɡɛn. ɛɡwin nu, tu, ðoʊ hi wɪʃt ʃi dɪd nɑt. hi wɪʃt noʊ wʌn dɪd. hi hoʊpt ʃi hæd nɑt toʊld ɛniwʌn.

In the beginning he had been afraid that what he did had some taint of the Dark One, or of the One Power - equally bad for a man who wanted nothing more than to be a blacksmith and live his life in the Light, and in peace. From that time, he knew something of how Rand felt, afraid of himself, feeling unclean. He was still not past that entirely. This thing he did was older than humans using the One Power, though, something from the birth of Time. Not the Power, Moiraine had told him. Something long vanished, now come again. Egwene knew, too, though he wished she did not. He wished no one did. He hoped she had not told anyone.

kɑntækt. hi fɛl ðɛm, fɛlt ʌðɝ maɪnz. fɛlt ɪz bɹʌðɝz, ðə wʊlvz.

Contact. He felt them, felt other minds. Felt his brothers, the wolves.

ðɛɹ θɔts keɪm tə hɪm əz ə wɝlpul blɛn ʌv ɪmədʒəz ən ɪmoʊʃənz. ət fɝst i hæd nɑt bɪn eɪbəl tə meɪk aʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛp ðə ɹɔ ɪmoʊʃən, bʌt naʊ hɪz maɪn pʊt wɝdz tə ðɛm. wʊlfbɹəðɝ. sɝpɹaɪz. tu-lɛɡz ðət tɔks. ə feɪɾəd ɪmədʒ, dɪm wɪð taɪm, oʊl bɪɑn oʊld, ʌv mɛn ɹʌnɪŋ wɪð wʊlvz, tu pæks hʌntɪŋ təɡɛðɝ. wɪv hɝd ðɪs kʌmz əɡɛn. jə ɑɹ lɔŋ tuθ?

Their thoughts came to him as a whirlpool blend of images and emotions. At first he had not been able to make out anything except the raw emotion, but now his mind put words to them. Wolfbrother. Surprise. Two-legs that talks. A faded image, dim with time, old beyond old, of men running with wolves, two packs hunting together. We have heard this comes again. You are Long Tooth?

ɪt wɑz ə feɪn pɪktʃɝ ʌv ə mæn dʒɹɛst ɪn kloʊðz meɪɾ ə haɪdz, wɪð ə lɔŋ naɪf ɪn ɪz hænd, bʌɾ oʊvɝleɪɾ ɑn ði ɪmədʒ, mɔɹ sɛntʃɹəl, wɑz ə ʃæɡi wʊlf wɪð wʌn tuθ lɔŋɡɝ ðən ðə ɹɛst, ə stil tuθ ɡlimɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌnlaɪɾ əz ðə wʊlf lɛd ðə pæk ɪn ə dɛspɹɪt tʃɑɹdʒ θɹu dip snoʊ təwɔɹd ðə dɪɹ ðət wəd min laɪf ɪnstɛɾ ə sloʊ dɛθ baɪ stɑɹveɪʃən, ən ðə dɪɹ θɹæʃɪŋ tə ɹʌn ɪn paʊɾɝ tə ðɛɹ bɛliz, ən ðə sʌn ɡlɪntɪŋ ɑn ðə waɪɾ əntɪl ɪt hɝt ði aɪz, ən ðə wɪn haʊlɪŋ daʊn ðə pæsəz, swɝlɪŋ ðə faɪn snoʊ laɪk mɪst, ænd. . . . wʊlvz' neɪmz wɝ ɔlweɪz kɑmplɛks ɪmədʒəz.

It was a faint picture of a man dressed in clothes made of hides, with a long knife in his hand, but overlaid on the image, more central, was a shaggy wolf with one tooth longer than the rest, a steel tooth gleaming in the sunlight as the wolf led the pack in a desperate charge through deep snow toward the deer that would mean life instead of slow death by starvation, and the deer thrashing to run in powder to their bellies, and the sun glinting on the white until it hurt the eyes, and the wind howling down the passes, swirling the fine snow like mist, and. . . . Wolves' names were always complex images.

pɛɹɪn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə mæn. ɛlaɪəs mækɛɹə, hu hæd fɝst ɪntʃɹədust ɪm tə wʊlvz. səmtaɪmz i wɪʃt i hæd nɛvɝ mɛɾ ɛlaɪəs.

Perrin recognized the man. Elyas Machera, who had first introduced him to wolves. Sometimes he wished he had never met Elyas.

noʊ, hi θɔt, ən tʃɹaɪd tə pɪktʃɝ hɪmsɛlf ɪn ɪz maɪnd.

No, he thought, and tried to picture himself in his mind.

jɛs. wɪv hɝɾ ə ju.

Yes. We have heard of you.

ɪt wɑz nɑt ði ɪmədʒ i hæd meɪd, ə jʌŋ mæn wɪð hɛvi ʃoʊldɝz ən ʃæɡi, bɹaʊn kɝlz, ə jʌŋ mæn wɪð ən æks əɾ ɪz bɛlt, hu ʌðɝz θɔt muvd ən θɔt sloʊli. ðət mæn wɑz ðɛɹ, sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə maɪn pɪktʃɝ ðət keɪm fɹəm ðə wʊlvz, bʌt stʃɹɔŋɝ baɪ fɑɹ wɑz ə mæsɪv, waɪl bʊl wɪð kɝv hɔɹnz ə ʃaɪnɪŋ mɛɾəl, ɹʌnɪŋ θɹu ðə naɪt wɪð ðə spiɾ ən ɪɡzubɝəns ə juθ, kɝli-hɛɹd koʊt ɡlimɪŋ ɪn ðə munlaɪt, flɪŋɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɪn əmʌŋ waɪtkloʊks ɑn ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, wɪð ði ɛɹ kɹɪsp ən koʊld ən dɑɹk, ən blʌd soʊ ɹɛɾ ɑn ðə hɔɹnz, ænd. . . .

It was not the image he had made, a young man with heavy shoulders and shaggy, brown curls, a young man with an axe at his belt, who others thought moved and thought slowly. That man was there, somewhere in the mind picture that came from the wolves, but stronger by far was a massive, wild bull with curved horns of shining metal, running through the night with the speed and exuberance of youth, curly-haired coat gleaming in the moonlight, flinging himself in among Whitecloaks on their horses, with the air crisp and cold and dark, and blood so red on the horns, and. . . .

jʌŋ bʊl.

Young Bull.

fəɹ ə moʊmən pɛɹɪn lɔs ðə kɑntækt ɪn ɪz ʃɑk. hi hæd nɑt dʒɹim ðeɪ hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ə neɪm. hi wɪʃt i kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ haʊ hi hæɾ ɝn ɪt. hi tʌtʃt ði æks əɾ ɪz bɛlt, wɪð ɪts ɡlimɪŋ, hæf-mun bleɪd. laɪt hɛlp mi, aɪ kɪl tu mɛn. ðeɪ wʊɾə kɪl mi ivən kwɪkɝ, ən ɛɡwin, bʌt. . . .

For a moment Perrin lost the contact in his shock. He had not dreamed they had given him a name. He wished he could not remember how he had earned it. He touched the axe at his belt, with its gleaming, half-moon blade. Light help me, I killed two men. They would have killed me even quicker, and Egwene, but. . . .

pʊʃɪŋ ɔl ðəɾ əsaɪd - ɪt wɑz dʌn ən bɪhaɪn hɪm; hi hæd noʊ wɪʃ tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛni ʌv ɪt - hi ɡeɪv ðə wʊlvz ðə smɛl ə ɹænd, ʌv lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn, ən æskt ɪf ðeɪ hæd sɛntɪd ðə θɹi. ɪt wɑz wʌn ə ðə θɪŋz ðət hæd kʌm tə hɪm wɪð ðə tʃeɪnʒ ɪn ɪz aɪz; hi kəɾ aɪdɛntəfaɪ pipəl baɪ ðɛɹ smɛl ivən wən i kəd nɑt si ðɛm. hi kəd si mɔɹ ʃɑɹpli, tu, si ɪn ɛniθɪŋ bʌt pɪtʃ-dɑɹknəs. hi wɑz ɔlweɪz kɛɹfəl tə laɪt læmps əɹ kændəlz, naʊ, səmtaɪmz bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls θɔt ðeɪ wɝ niɾəd.

Pushing all that aside - it was done and behind him; he had no wish to remember any of it - he gave the wolves the smell of Rand, of Loial and Hurin, and asked if they had scented the three. It was one of the things that had come to him with the change in his eyes; he could identify people by their smell even when he could not see them. He could see more sharply, too, see in anything but pitch-darkness. He was always careful to light lamps or candles, now, sometimes before anyone else thought they were needed.

fɹəm ðə wʊlvz keɪm ə vju ʌv mɛn ɑn hɔɹsəz əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ðə hɑloʊ ɪn leɪt deɪ. ðət wɑz ðə læs ðeɪ hæd sin əɹ smɛld ə ɹænd əɹ ði ʌðɝ tu.

From the wolves came a view of men on horses approaching the hollow in late day. That was the last they had seen or smelled of Rand or the other two.

pɛɹɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ðə nɛkst stɛp wəd bi jusləs ənlɛs i toʊld ɪŋtʃɹ. ən mæt wɪl daɪ ɪf wi doʊn faɪn ðət dæɡɝ. bɝn ju, ɹænd, waɪ dɪd jə teɪk ðə snɪfɝ?

Perrin hesitated. The next step would be useless unless he told Ingtar. And Mat will die if we don't find that dagger. Burn you, Rand, why did you take the sniffer?

ðə wʌn taɪm i hæd ɡɔn tə ðə dʌnʒən, wɪð ɛɡwin, ðə smɛl ə feɪn hæd meɪɾ ɪz hɛɹ stæn ɑn ɛnd; nɑɾ ivən tʃɹɑləks smɛl soʊ faʊl. hi hæd wɑntəd tə ɹɪp θɹu ðə bɑɹz ə ðə sɛl ən tɛɹ ðə mæn əpɑɹt, ən faɪndɪŋ ðəɾ ɪnsaɪd hɪmsɛlf hæd fɹaɪɾənd ɪm mɔɹ ðən feɪn dɪd. tə mæsk feɪnz smɛl ɪn ɪz oʊn maɪnd, hi æɾəd ðə sɛn ə tʃɹɑləks bɪfɔɹ i haʊld əlaʊd.

The one time he had gone to the dungeon, with Egwene, the smell of Fain had made his hair stand on end; not even Trollocs smelled so foul. He had wanted to rip through the bars of the cell and tear the man apart, and finding that inside himself had frightened him more than Fain did. To mask Fain's smell in his own mind, he added the scent of Trollocs before he howled aloud.

fɹəm ðə dɪstəns keɪm ðə kɹaɪz ʌv ə wʊlfpæk, ən ɪn ðə hɑloʊ hɔɹsəz stæmpt ən wɪkɝd fɪɹfəli. səm ə ðə soʊlʒɝz fɪŋɡɝd ðɛɹ lɔŋ-bleɪɾɪd lænsɪz ən aɪd ðə ɹɪm ə ðə hɑloʊ ənizəli. ɪnsaɪd pɛɹɪnz hɛd, ɪt wɑz mʌtʃ wɝs. hi fɛl ðə ɹeɪdʒ ə ðə wʊlvz, ðə heɪt. ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli tu θɪŋz wʊlvz heɪɾəd. ɔl ɛls ðeɪ mɪɹli ɛndʒjʊɹd, bʌt faɪɝ ən tʃɹɑləks ðeɪ heɪɾəd, ən ðeɪ wəd ɡoʊ θɹu faɪɝ tə kɪl tʃɹɑləks.

From the distance came the cries of a wolfpack, and in the hollow horses stamped and whickered fearfully. Some of the soldiers fingered their long-bladed lances and eyed the rim of the hollow uneasily. Inside Perrin's head, it was much worse. He felt the rage of the wolves, the hate. There were only two things wolves hated. All else they merely endured, but fire and Trollocs they hated, and they would go through fire to kill Trollocs.

ivən mɔɹ ðən ðə tʃɹɑləks, feɪnz sɛn hæd pʊɾ əm ɪndə ə fɹɛnzi, əz ɪf ðeɪ smɛl sʌmθɪŋ ðət meɪd tʃɹɑləks sim nætʃɹəl ən ɹaɪt.

Even more than the Trollocs, Fain's scent had put them into a frenzy, as if they smelled something that made Trollocs seem natural and right.

wɛɹ?

Where?

ðə skaɪ ɹoʊld ɪn ɪz hɛd; ðə læn spʌn. ist ən wɛst, wʊlvz dɪd nɑt noʊ. ðeɪ nu ðə muvməns ə sʌn ən mun, ðə ʃɪft ə sizənz, ðə kɑntʊɹz ə ðə lænd. pɛɹɪn pʌzəld ɪɾ aʊt. saʊθ. ən sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ. ən iɡɝnəs tə kɪl ðə tʃɹɑləks. ðə wʊlvz wəd lɛt jʌŋ bʊl ʃɛɹ ɪn ðə kɪlɪŋ. hi kəd bɹɪŋ ðə tu-lɛɡz wɪð ðɛɹ hɑɹd skɪnz ɪf i wɑntəd, bʌt jʌŋ bʊl, ən smoʊk, ən tu dɪɹ, ən wɪntɝ dɔn, ən ɔl ðə ɹɛst ə ðə pæk wəd hʌn daʊn ðə twɪstəd wʌnz u hæd dɛɹd kʌm ɪndə ðɛɹ lænd. ði ɪnɛɾəbəl flɛʃ ən bɪɾɝ blʌd wəd bɝn ðə tʌŋ, bʌt ðeɪ mʌs bi kɪld. kɪl ðɛm. kɪl ðə twɪstəd wʌnz.

The sky rolled in his head; the land spun. East and west, wolves did not know. They knew the movements of sun and moon, the shift of seasons, the contours of the land. Perrin puzzled it out. South. And something more. An eagerness to kill the Trollocs. The wolves would let Young Bull share in the killing. He could bring the two-legs with their hard skins if he wanted, but Young Bull, and Smoke, and Two Deer, and Winter Dawn, and all the rest of the pack would hunt down the Twisted Ones who had dared come into their land. The inedible flesh and bitter blood would burn the tongue, but they must be killed. Kill them. Kill the Twisted Ones.

ðɛɹ fjʊɹi ɪnfɛktəd hɪm. hɪz lɪps pil bæk ɪn ə snɑɹl, ən i tʊk ə stɛp, tə dʒɔɪn ðɛm, ɹʌn wɪð əm ɪn ðə hʌnt, ɪn ðə kɪlɪŋ.

Their fury infected him. His lips peeled back in a snarl, and he took a step, to join them, run with them in the hunt, in the killing.

wɪð ən ɛfɝɾ i bɹoʊk ðə kɑntækt ɪksɛp fəɹ ə θɪn sɛns ðət ðə wʊlvz wɝ ðɛɹ. hi cʊɾə pɔɪntəd tə ðɛm əkɹɔs ði ɪntɝvinɪŋ dɪstəns. hi fɛl koʊld ɪnsaɪd. ɪm ə mæn, nɑɾ ə wʊlf. laɪt hɛlp mi, aɪm ə mæn!

With an effort he broke the contact except for a thin sense that the wolves were there. He could have pointed to them across the intervening distance. He felt cold inside. I'm a man, not a wolf. Light help me, I am a man!

"ɑɹ jə wɛl, pɛɹɪn?" mæt sɛd, muvɪŋ kloʊsɝ. hi saʊndəd ðə weɪ hi ɔlweɪz dɪd, flɪpənt - ən bɪɾɝ ʌndɝ ɪt, tu, ʌv leɪt - bʌɾ i lʊkt wɝid. "ðæɾ ɪz ɔl aɪ nid. ɹænd ɹʌn ɔf, ən ðən jə ɡɛt sɪk. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɛɹ əl faɪn ə wɪzdəm tə lʊk æftɝ jə aʊt hɪɹ. aɪ θɪŋk aɪ hæv səm wɪloʊbɑɹk ɪn maɪ sæɾəlbæɡz. aɪ kən meɪk jə səm wɪloʊbɑɹk ti, ɪf ɪŋtʃɹ lɛts əs steɪ ðət lɔŋ. sɝv jə ɹaɪɾ ɪf aɪ meɪk ɪt tu stʃɹɔŋ."

"Are you well, Perrin?" Mat said, moving closer. He sounded the way he always did, flippant - and bitter under it, too, of late - but he looked worried. "That is all I need. Rand run off, and then you get sick. I don't know where I'll find a Wisdom to look after you out here. I think I have some willowbark in my saddlebags. I can make you some willowbark tea, if Ingtar lets us stay that long. Serve you right if I make it too strong."

"aɪ . . . ɪm ɔl ɹaɪt, mæt." ʃeɪkɪŋ ɔf ɪz fɹɛnd, hi wɛn tə faɪn ɪŋtʃɹ. ðə ʃaɪnɝən lɔɹd wɑz skænɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊn ɑn ðə ɹɪm wɪð ənoʊ, ən ɹeɪɡən, ən mæsimə. ði ʌðɝz fɹaʊn əɾ ɪm əz i dʒɹu ɪŋtʃɹ əsaɪd. hi meɪd ʃʊɹ ənoʊ ən ðə ɹɛst wɝ tu fɑɹ əweɪ tə hɪɹ bɪfɔɹ i spoʊk. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɛɹ ɹænd əɹ ði ʌðɝz wɛnt, ɪŋtʃɹ, bʌt pdən feɪn ən ðə tʃɹɑləks - ən aɪ ɡɛs ðə ɹɛst ə ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz - ɑɹ stɪl hɛɾɪŋ saʊθ."

"I . . . I'm all right, Mat." Shaking off his friend, he went to find Ingtar. The Shienaran lord was scanning the ground on the rim with Uno, and Ragan, and Masema. The others frowned at him as he drew Ingtar aside. He made sure Uno and the rest were too far away to hear before he spoke. "I don't know where Rand or the others went, Ingtar, but Padan Fain and the Trollocs - and I guess the rest of the Darkfriends - are still heading south."

"haʊ dʒju noʊ ðɪs?" ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd.

"How do you know this?" Ingtar said.

pɛɹɪn dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. "wʊlvz toʊl mi." hi weɪɾəd, fəɹ wʌɾ i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ. læftɝ, skɔɹn, ən ækjəzeɪʃən ə biɪŋ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, ʌv biɪŋ mæd. dɪlɪbɝətli, hi tʌkt ɪz θʌmz bɪhaɪn ɪz bɛlt, əweɪ fɹəm ði æks. əl nɑt kɪl. nɑɾ əɡɛn. ɪf i tʃɹaɪz tə kɪl mi fəɹ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, əl ɹʌn, bʌɾ aɪ woʊn kɪl ɛnibəɾi ɛls.

Perrin drew a deep breath. "Wolves told me." He waited, for what he was not sure. Laughter, scorn, an accusation of being a Darkfriend, of being mad. Deliberately, he tucked his thumbs behind his belt, away from the axe. I will not kill. Not again. If he tries to kill me for a Darkfriend, I'll run, but I won't kill anybody else.

"aɪ hæv hɝɾ ə θɪŋz laɪk ðɪs," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd sloʊli, æftɝ ə moʊmənt. "ɹumɝz. ðəɹ wɑz ə wɔɹɾɝ, ə mæn kɔld ɛlaɪəs mækɛɹə, hu səm sɛd kəd tɔk tə wʊlvz. hi dɪsəpɪɹd jɪɹz əɡoʊ." hi sim tə kætʃ sʌmθɪŋ ɪn pɛɹɪnz aɪz. "ju noʊ hɪm?"

"I have heard of things like this," Ingtar said slowly, after a moment. "Rumors. There was a Warder, a man called Elyas Machera, who some said could talk to wolves. He disappeared years ago." He seemed to catch something in Perrin's eyes. "You know him?"

"aɪ noʊ hɪm," pɛɹɪn sɛd flætli. "hiz ðə wʌn. . . . aɪ doʊnt wɑnə tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt. aɪ dɪdn æsk fəɹ ɪt." ðæts wʌt ɹænd sɛd. laɪt, aɪ wɪʃ aɪ wɝ hoʊm wɝkɪŋ mæstɝ luhənz fɔɹdʒ.

"I know him," Perrin said flatly. "He's the one. . . . I don't want to talk about it. I didn't ask for it." That's what Rand said. Light, I wish I were home working Master Luhhan's forge.

"ðiz wʊlvz," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd, "ðeɪ wɪl tʃɹæk ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən tʃɹɑləks fəɹ ʌs?" pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. "ɡʊd. əl əv ðə hɔɹn, wʌtɛvɝ ɪt teɪks." ðə ʃaɪnɝən ɡlænst ɝaʊn əɾ ənoʊ ən ði ʌðɝz stɪl sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ tʃɹæks. "bɛɾɝ nɑt tə tɛl ɛniwʌn ɛls, ðoʊ. wʊlvz ɑɹ kənsɪɾɝd ɡʊd lʌk ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. tʃɹɑləks fɪɹ ðɛm. bʌt stɪl, bɛɾɝ tə kip ðɪs bɪtwin əs fəɹ ðə taɪm. səm ə ðɛm maɪt nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd."

"These wolves," Ingtar said, "they will track the Darkfriends and Trollocs for us?" Perrin nodded. "Good. I will have the Horn, whatever it takes." The Shienaran glanced around at Uno and the others still searching for tracks. "Better not to tell anyone else, though. Wolves are considered good luck in the Borderlands. Trollocs fear them. But still, better to keep this between us for the time. Some of them might not understand."

"aɪ wəɾ əz sun noʊbɑdi ɛls ɛvɝ faʊn aʊt," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"I would as soon nobody else ever found out," Perrin said.

"aɪ wɪl tɛl əm jə θɪŋk juv hʊɹɪnz tælənt. ðeɪ noʊ əbaʊt ðæt; ðəɹ izi wɪð ɪt. səm ə ðɛm sɔ jə ɹɪŋkəlɪŋ jəɹ noʊz bæk ɪn ðət vɪlədʒ, ən ət ðə fɛɹi. aɪv hɝd dʒoʊks əbaʊt jəɹ dɛləkət noʊz. jɛs. jə kip əs ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪl tədeɪ, ənoʊ wɪl si ɪnʌf ə ðɛɹ tʃɹæks tə kənfɝm ɪts ðə tʃɹeɪl, ən bɪfɔɹ naɪtfɔl ɛvɹi læs mæn wɪl bi ʃʊɹ jə ɑɹ ə snɪfɝ. əl əv ðə hɔɹn." hi ɡlænst ət ðə skaɪ, ən ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs. "deɪlaɪɾ ɪz weɪstɪŋ! tə hɔɹs!"

"I will tell them you think you have Hurin's talent. They know about that; they're easy with it. Some of them saw you wrinkling your nose back in that village, and at the ferry. I've heard jokes about your delicate nose. Yes. You keep us on the trail today, Uno will see enough of their tracks to confirm it is the trail, and before nightfall every last man will be sure you are a sniffer. I will have the Horn." He glanced at the sky, and raised his voice. "Daylight is wasting! To horse!"

tə pɛɹɪnz sɝpɹaɪz, ðə ʃaɪnɝənz sim tə æksɛpt ɪŋtʃɹz stɔɹi. ə fju ʌv əm lʊk skɛptəkəl - mæsimə wɛn soʊ fɑɹ əz tə spɪt - bʌɾ ənoʊ nɑɾəd θɔtfəli, ən ðət wɑz ɪnʌf fəɹ moʊst. mæt wɑz ðə hɑɹɾəst tə kənvɪns.

To Perrin's surprise, the Shienarans seemed to accept Ingtar's story. A few of them looked skeptical - Masema went so far as to spit - but Uno nodded thoughtfully, and that was enough for most. Mat was the hardest to convince.

"ə snɪfɝ! ju? jəɹ gɑnə tʃɹæk mɝɾɝɝz baɪ smɛl? pɛɹɪn, jə ɑɹ əz kɹeɪzi əz ɹænd. aɪm ði oʊnli seɪn wʌn lɛft fɹəm ɛmənz fild, wɪð ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv tʃɹɑɾɪŋ ɔf tə tɑɹ vəlɑn tə bɪkʌm - " hi kʌt hɪmsɛlf ʃɔɹt wɪð ən ənizi ɡlæns fəɹ ðə ʃaɪnɝənz.

"A sniffer! You? You're going to track murderers by smell? Perrin, you are as crazy as Rand. I am the only sane one left from Emond's Field, with Egwene and Nynaeve trotting off to Tar Valon to become - " He cut himself short with an uneasy glance for the Shienarans.

pɛɹɪn tʊk hʊɹɪnz pleɪs bɪsaɪɾ ɪŋtʃɹ əz ðə smɔl kɑləm ɹoʊd saʊθ. mæt kɛpt ʌp ə stʃɹɪŋ ə dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋ ɹɪmɑɹks, əntɪl ənoʊ faʊn ðə fɝs tʃɹæks lɛf baɪ tʃɹɑləks ən baɪ mɛn ɑn hɔɹsəz, bʌt pɛɹɪn peɪɾ ɪm lɪɾəl maɪnd. ɪt wɑz ɔl i kəd də tə kip ðə wʊlvz fɹəm dæʃɪŋ ɑn əhɛd tə kɪl ðə tʃɹɑləks. ðə wʊlvz kɛɹɾ oʊnli əbaʊt kɪlɪŋ ðə twɪstəd wʌnz; tə ðɛm, dɑɹkfɹɛnz wɝ noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ɛni ʌðɝ tu-lɛɡz. pɛɹɪn kəɾ ɔlmoʊst si ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz skæɾɝɪŋ ɪn ə dʌzən dɝɛkʃənz waɪl ðə wʊlvz slu tʃɹɑləks, ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ wɪð ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ wɪð ðə dæɡɝ. ən wʌns ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ dɛd, hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i kəɾ ɪntʃɹəs ðə wʊlvz ɪn tʃɹækɪŋ ðə hjumənz ivən ɪf i hæɾ ɛni aɪdiə wɪtʃ ə ðɛm tə tʃɹæk. hi hæɾ ə ɹʌnɪŋ ɑɹɡjəmənt wɪð ðɛm, ən swɛt kʌvɝɾ ɪz fɔɹhɛd lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ i ɡɑt ðə fɝs flæʃ ʌv ɪmədʒəz ðət tɝn ɪz stʌmək.

Perrin took Hurin's place beside Ingtar as the small column rode south. Mat kept up a string of disparaging remarks, until Uno found the first tracks left by Trollocs and by men on horses, but Perrin paid him little mind. It was all he could do to keep the wolves from dashing on ahead to kill the Trollocs. The wolves cared only about killing the Twisted Ones; to them, Darkfriends were no different from any other two-legs. Perrin could almost see the Darkfriends scattering in a dozen directions while the wolves slew Trollocs, running away with the Horn of Valere. Running away with the dagger. And once the Trollocs were dead, he did not think he could interest the wolves in tracking the humans even if he had any idea which of them to track. He had a running argument with them, and sweat covered his forehead long before he got the first flash of images that turned his stomach.

hi dʒɹu ɹeɪn, stɑpɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs dɛd. ði ʌðɝz dɪd ðə seɪm, lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, weɪɾɪŋ. hi stɛɹd stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛɾ ən kɝst sɔfli, bɪɾɝli.

He drew rein, stopping his horse dead. The others did the same, looking at him, waiting. He stared straight ahead and cursed softly, bitterly.

wʊlvz wəd kɪl mɛn, bʌt mɛn wɝ nɑɾ ə pɹəfɝd pɹeɪ. wʊlvz ɹɪmɛmbɝd ði oʊl hʌntɪŋ təɡɛðɝ, fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, ən tu-lɛɡz teɪstəd bæd, fəɹ ənʌðɝ. wʊlvz wɝ mɔɹ pɝtɪkjəlɝ əbaʊt ðɛɹ fud ðən i wəɾ əv bɪlivd. ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ it kɛɹiən, ənlɛs ðeɪ wɝ stɑɹvɪŋ, ən fju wəd kɪl mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ kəɾ it. wʌt pɛɹɪn fɛl fɹəm ðə wʊlvz kəd bɛs bi dɪskɹaɪbd əz dɪsɡʌst. ən ðəɹ wɝ ði ɪmədʒəz. hi kəd si ðɛm mʌtʃ mɔɹ klɪɹli ðən i wɪʃt. bɑɾiz, mɛn ən wɪmən ən tʃɪlʒɹən, hipt ən tʌmbəld əbaʊt. blʌd-soʊkt ɝθ tʃɝn baɪ hʊvz ən fɹɛnziɾ ətɛmps tə ɪskeɪp. tɔɹn flɛʃ. hɛdz sɛvɝd. vʌltʃɝz flæpɪŋ, ðɛɹ waɪt wɪŋz steɪn ɹɛd; blʌɾi, fɛðɝləs hɛdz tɛɹɪŋ ən ɡɔɹdʒɪŋ. hi bɹoʊk lus bɪfɔɹ ɪz stʌmək ɛmptiɾ ɪtsɛlf.

Wolves would kill men, but men were not a preferred prey. Wolves remembered the old hunting together, for one thing, and two-legs tasted bad, for another. Wolves were more particular about their food than he would have believed. They would not eat carrion, unless they were starving, and few would kill more than they could eat. What Perrin felt from the wolves could best be described as disgust. And there were the images. He could see them much more clearly than he wished. Bodies, men and women and children, heaped and tumbled about. Blood-soaked earth churned by hooves and frenzied attempts to escape. Torn flesh. Heads severed. Vultures flapping, their white wings stained red; bloody, featherless heads tearing and gorging. He broke loose before his stomach emptied itself.

əbʌv səm tʃɹiz ɪn ðə fɑɹ dɪstəns i kəd dʒʌs meɪk aʊt blæk spɛks wɝlɪŋ loʊ, dʒɹɑpɪŋ ðən ɹaɪzɪŋ əɡɛn. vʌltʃɝz faɪɾɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ mil.

Above some trees in the far distance he could just make out black specks whirling low, dropping then rising again. Vultures fighting over their meal.

"ðɛɹz sʌmθɪŋ bæɾ ʌp ðɛɹ." hi swɑloʊd, miɾɪŋ ɪŋtʃɹz ɡeɪz. haʊ kəɾ i fɪt tɛlɪŋ əm ɪndə ðə stɔɹi ʌv biɪŋ ə snɪfɝ? aɪ doʊnt wɑnə ɡɛt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə lʊk ət ðæt. bʌt ðəl wɑnə ɪnvɛstəɡeɪt wʌns ðeɪ kən si ðə vʌltʃɝz. aɪ hæv tə tɛl əm ɪnʌf soʊ ðəl sɝkəl ɝaʊnd. "ðə pipəl fɹəm ðət vɪlədʒ. . . . aɪ θɪŋk ðə tʃɹɑləks kɪl ðɛm."

"There's something bad up there." He swallowed, meeting Ingtar's gaze. How could he fit telling them into the story of being a sniffer? I don't want to get close enough to look at that. But they'll want to investigate once they can see the vultures. I have to tell them enough so they'll circle around. "The people from that village. . . . I think the Trollocs killed them."

ənoʊ bɪɡæn kɝsɪŋ kwaɪətli, ən səm ə ði ʌðɝ ʃaɪnɝənz mʌɾɝd tə ðɛmsɛlvz. nʌn ə ðɛm sim tə teɪk ɪz ənaʊnsmən əz ɑd, ðoʊ. lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ sɛɾ i wɑz ə snɪfɝ, ən snɪfɝz kəd smɛl kɪlɪŋ.

Uno began cursing quietly, and some of the other Shienarans muttered to themselves. None of them seemed to take his announcement as odd, though. Lord Ingtar said he was a sniffer, and sniffers could smell killing.

"æn ðəɹ ɪz sʌmwʌn fɑloʊɪŋ ʌs," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd.

"And there is someone following us," Ingtar said.

mæt tɝn ɪz hɔɹs iɡɝli. "meɪbi ɪts ɹænd. aɪ nu hi wʊdn ɹʌn aʊɾ ɑn mi."

Mat turned his horse eagerly. "Maybe it's Rand. I knew he wouldn't run out on me."

θɪn, skæɾɝd pʌfs ə dʌst ɹoʊz tə ðə nɔɹθ; ə hɔɹs wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ əkɹɔs pætʃəz wɛɹ ðə ɡɹæs ɡɹu θɪn. ðə ʃaɪnɝənz spɹɛɾ aʊt, lænsɪz ɹɛɾi, wɑtʃɪŋ ɪn ɔl dɝɛkʃənz. ɪt wɑz noʊ pleɪs tə bi kæʒəwəl əbaʊɾ ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ.

Thin, scattered puffs of dust rose to the north; a horse was running across patches where the grass grew thin. The Shienarans spread out, lances ready, watching in all directions. It was no place to be casual about a stranger.

ə spɛk əpɪɹd - ə hɔɹs ən ɹaɪɾɝ; ə wʊmən, tə pɛɹɪnz aɪz, lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls kəd dɪsɝn ðə ɹaɪɾɝ - ən kwɪkli dʒɹu kloʊsɝ. ʃi sloʊd tə ə tʃɹɑɾ əz ʃi keɪm ʌp ɑn ðɛm, fænɪŋ hɝsɛlf wɪð wʌn hænd. ə plʌmp, ɡɹeɪɪŋ wʊmən, wɪð əɹ kloʊk taɪd bɪhaɪn əɹ sæɾəl, hu blɪŋkt əɾ əm ɔl veɪɡli.

A speck appeared - a horse and rider; a woman, to Perrin's eyes, long before anyone else could discern the rider - and quickly drew closer. She slowed to a trot as she came up on them, fanning herself with one hand. A plump, graying woman, with her cloak tied behind her saddle, who blinked at them all vaguely.

"ðæts wʌn ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ," mæt sɛd dɪsəpɔɪntɪdli. "aɪ ɹɛkəɡnaɪz hɝ. vɛɹɪn."

"That's one of the Aes Sedai," Mat said disappointedly. "I recognize her. Verin."

"vɛɹɪn sədaɪ," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd ʃɑɹpli, ðən baʊd tə hɝ fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl.

"Verin Sedai," Ingtar said sharply, then bowed to her from his saddle.

"mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ sɛn mi, lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ," vɛɹɪn ənaʊnst wɪð ə sæɾəsfaɪd smaɪl. "ʃi θɔt jə maɪt nid mi. sətʃ ə ɡæləp aɪv hæd. aɪ θɔɾ aɪ maɪt nɑt kætʃ jə ʃɔɹɾ ə kɛɹhin. jə sɔ ðət vɪlədʒ, ʌv kɔɹs? oʊ, ðət wɑz vɛɹi næsti, wɑzn ɪt? ən ðət mɹdʒɹɑl. ðəɹ wɝ ɹeɪvənz ən kɹoʊz ɔl oʊvɝ ðə ɹuftɑps, bʌt nɛvɝ ə wʌn wɛnt nɪɹ ɪt, dɛɾ əz ɪt wɑz. aɪ hæd tə weɪv əweɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz oʊn weɪɾ ɪn flaɪz, ðoʊ, bɪfɔɹ aɪ kəd meɪk aʊt wʌɾ ɪt wɑz. ə ʃeɪm aɪ dɪd nɑɾ əv taɪm tə teɪk ɪt daʊn. aɪv nɛvɝ hæɾ ə tʃæns tə stʌɾi ə - " sʌɾənli hɝ aɪz nɛɹoʊd, ən ði æbsən mænɝ vænɪʃt laɪk smoʊk. "wɛɹ ɪz ɹænd ælθɹ?"

"Moiraine Sedai sent me, Lord Ingtar," Verin announced with a satisfied smile. "She thought you might need me. Such a gallop I've had. I thought I might not catch you short of Cairhien. You saw that village, of course? Oh, that was very nasty, wasn't it? And that Myrddraal. There were ravens and crows all over the rooftops, but never a one went near it, dead as it was. I had to wave away the Dark One's own weight in flies, though, before I could make out what it was. A shame I did not have time to take it down. I've never had a chance to study a - " Suddenly her eyes narrowed, and the absent manner vanished like smoke. "Where is Rand al'Thor?"

ɪŋtʃɹ ɡɹɪməst. "ɡɔn, vɛɹɪn sədaɪ. vænɪʃt læs naɪt, wɪθaʊɾ ə tʃɹeɪs. hɪm, ði oʊɡiɝ, ən hʊɹɪn, wʌn ə maɪ mɛn."

Ingtar grimaced. "Gone, Verin Sedai. Vanished last night, without a trace. Him, the Ogier, and Hurin, one of my men."

"ði oʊɡiɝ, lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ? ən jəɹ snɪfɝ wɛnt wɪð hɪm? wʌt wəd ðoʊz tu hæv ɪn kɑmən wɪð . . . ?" ɪŋtʃɹ ɡeɪpt ət hɝ, ən ʃi snɔɹɾɪd. "dɪd jə θɪŋk jə kəd kip sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðət sikɹət?" ʃi snɔɹɾɪd əɡɛn. "snɪfɝz. vænɪʃt, jə seɪ?"

"The Ogier, Lord Ingtar? And your sniffer went with him? What would those two have in common with . . . ?" Ingtar gaped at her, and she snorted. "Did you think you could keep something like that secret?" She snorted again. "Sniffers. Vanished, you say?"

"jɛs, vɛɹɪn sədaɪ." ɪŋtʃɹ saʊndəɾ ənsɛɾəld. ɪt wɑz nɛvɝ izi dɪskʌvɝɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ nu ðə sikɹəts jə wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip fɹəm ðɛm; pɛɹɪn hoʊp mɔɪɹeɪn hæd nɑt toʊld ɛniwʌn əbaʊt hɪm. "bʌɾ aɪ hæv - aɪ hæv ə nu snɪfɝ." ðə ʃaɪnɝən lɔɹd dʒɛstʃɝd tə pɛɹɪn. "ðɪs mæn simz tə hæv ði əbɪləɾi, ɔlsoʊ. əl faɪn ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, əz aɪ swɔɹ tə, hæv noʊ fɪɹ. jəɹ kʌmpəni wɪl bi wɛlkəm, ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪf jə wɪʃ tə ɹaɪd wɪð ʌs." tə pɛɹɪnz sɝpɹaɪz, hi dɪd nɑt saʊn əz ɪf i ɪntaɪɝli mɛn ɪt.

"Yes, Verin Sedai." Ingtar sounded unsettled. It was never easy discovering Aes Sedai knew the secrets you were trying to keep from them; Perrin hoped Moiraine had not told anyone about him. "But I have - I have a new sniffer." The Shienaran Lord gestured to Perrin. "This man seems to have the ability, also. I will find the Horn of Valere, as I swore to, have no fear. Your company will be welcome, Aes Sedai, if you wish to ride with us." To Perrin's surprise, he did not sound as if he entirely meant it.

vɛɹɪn ɡlænst ət pɛɹɪn, ən i ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli. "ə nu snɪfɝ, dʒʌst wən jə luz jəɹ oʊld wʌn. haʊ . . . pɹɑvədɛntʃəl. jə faʊnd noʊ tʃɹæks? noʊ, ʌv kɔɹs nɑt. jə sɛd noʊ tʃɹeɪs. ɑd. læs naɪt." ʃi twɪstəɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl, lʊkɪŋ bæk nɔɹθ, ən fəɹ ə moʊmən pɛɹɪn ɔlmoʊs θɔt ʃi wɑz gɑnə ɹaɪd bæk ðə weɪ ʃi hæd kʌm.

Verin glanced at Perrin, and he shifted uneasily. "A new sniffer, just when you lose your old one. How . . . providential. You found no tracks? No, of course not. You said no trace. Odd. Last night." She twisted in her saddle, looking back north, and for a moment Perrin almost thought she was going to ride back the way she had come.

ɪŋtʃɹ fɹaʊn ət hɝ. "ju θɪŋk ðɛɹ dɪsəpɪɹəns əz sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə hɔɹn, ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

Ingtar frowned at her. "You think their disappearance has something to do with the Horn, Aes Sedai?"

vɛɹɪn sɛɾəld bæk. "ðə hɔɹn? noʊ. noʊ, aɪ . . . θɪŋk nɑt. bʌɾ ɪts ɑd. vɛɹi ɑd. aɪ də nɑt laɪk ɑd θɪŋz əntɪl aɪ kən ʌndɝstæn ðɛm."

Verin settled back. "The Horn? No. No, I . . . think not. But it is odd. Very odd. I do not like odd things until I can understand them."

"aɪ kən əv tu mɛn ɛskɔɹt jə bæk tə wɛɹ ðeɪ dɪsəpɪɹd, vɛɹɪn sədaɪ. ðəl əv noʊ tʃɹʌbəl teɪkɪŋ jə ɹaɪt tə ɪt."

"I can have two men escort you back to where they disappeared, Verin Sedai. They will have no trouble taking you right to it."

"noʊ. ɪf jə seɪ ðeɪ vænɪʃt wɪθaʊɾ ə tʃɹeɪs. . . ." fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmənt ʃi stʌɾid ɪŋtʃɹ, hɝ feɪs ənɹiɾəbəl. "aɪ wɪl ɹaɪd wɪð ju. pɝhæps wɪl faɪn əm əɡɛn, əɹ ðəl faɪn ʌs. tɔk tə mi əz wi ɹaɪd, lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ. tɛl mi ɛvɹiθɪŋ jə kən əbaʊt ðə jʌŋ mæn. ɛvɹiθɪŋ i dɪd, ɛvɹiθɪŋ i sɛd."

"No. If you say they vanished without a trace. . . ." For a long moment she studied Ingtar, her face unreadable. "I will ride with you. Perhaps we will find them again, or they will find us. Talk to me as we ride, Lord Ingtar. Tell me everything you can about the young man. Everything he did, everything he said."

ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd ɔf ɪn ə dʒɪŋɡəl ə hɑɹnəs ən ɑɹmɝ, vɛɹɪn ɹaɪɾɪŋ kloʊs bɪsaɪɾ ɪŋtʃɹ ən kwɛstʃənɪŋ ɪm kloʊsli, bʌt tu loʊ tə bi oʊvɝhɝd. ʃi ɡeɪv pɛɹɪn ə lʊk wən i tʃɹaɪd tə meɪnteɪn ɪz pleɪs, ən i fɛl bæk.

They started off in a jingle of harness and armor, Verin riding close beside Ingtar and questioning him closely, but too low to be overheard. She gave Perrin a look when he tried to maintain his place, and he fell back.

"ɪts ɹænd ʃiz æftɝ," mæt mɝmɝd, "nɑt ðə hɔɹn."

"It's Rand she's after," Mat murmured, "not the Horn."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. wɛɹɛvɝ juv ɡɑɾən tə, ɹænd, steɪ ðɛɹ. ɪts seɪfɝ ðən hɪɹ.

Perrin nodded. Wherever you've gotten to, Rand, stay there. It's safer than here.


tʃæptɝ fɪftin


CHAPTER 15

kɪnsleɪɝ


Kinslayer

ðə weɪ ðə stʃɹeɪnʒli feɪɾəd dɪstən hɪlz sim tə slaɪd təwɔɹd ɹænd wən i lʊk stʃɹeɪɾ əɾ əm meɪɾ ɪz hɛd spɪn, ənlɛs i ɹæp hɪmsɛlf ɪn ðə vɔɪd. səmtaɪmz ði ɛmptinəs kɹɛpt ʌp ɑn ɪm ənəwɛɹz, bʌɾ i əvɔɪɾəd ɪt laɪk dɛθ. bɛɾɝ tə bi dɪzi ðən ʃɛɹ ðə vɔɪd wɪð ðəɾ ənizi laɪt. bɛɾɝ baɪ fɑɹ tə stɛɹ ət ðə feɪɾəd lænd. stɪl, hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə lʊk əɾ ɛniθɪŋ tu fɑɹ əweɪ ənlɛs ɪt leɪ ɹaɪɾ əhɛɾ ə ðɛm.

The way the strangely faded distant hills seemed to slide toward Rand when he looked straight at them made his head spin, unless he wrapped himself in the void. Sometimes the emptiness crept up on him unawares, but he avoided it like death. Better to be dizzy than share the void with that uneasy light. Better by far to stare at the faded land. Still, he tried not to look at anything too far away unless it lay right ahead of them.

hʊɹɪn wɔɹ ə fɪks lʊk əz i kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn snɪfɪŋ ðə tʃɹeɪl, əz ɪf i wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðə læn ðə tʃɹeɪl kɹɔst. wən ðə snɪfɝ dɪd noʊɾəs wʌt leɪ ɝaʊn ðɛm, hi wəd ɡɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən waɪp ɪz hænz ɑn ɪz koʊt, ðən pʊʃ ɪz noʊz fɔɹwɝd laɪk ə haʊnd, aɪz ɡleɪzɪŋ, ɪkskluɾɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls. lɔɪəl ɹoʊd slʌmpt ɪn ɪz sæɾəl ən fɹaʊn əz i ɡlænst ɝaʊnd, ɪɹz twɪtʃɪŋ ənizəli, mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf.

Hurin wore a fixed look as he concentrated on sniffing the trail, as if he were trying to ignore the land the trail crossed. When the sniffer did notice what lay around them, he would give a start and wipe his hands on his coat, then push his nose forward like a hound, eyes glazing, excluding everything else. Loial rode slumped in his saddle and frowned as he glanced around, ears twitching uneasily, muttering to himself.

əɡɛn ðeɪ kɹɔs læn blækən ən bɝnd, ivən ðə sɔɪl kɹʌntʃɪŋ ʌndɝ ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz əz ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn sɪɹd. ðə bɝn swɑðz, səmtaɪmz ə maɪl waɪd, səmtaɪmz oʊnli ə fju hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz, ɔl ɹæn ist ən wɛst əz stʃɹeɪɾ əz ən æɹoʊz flaɪt. twaɪs ɹænd sɔ ði ɛn ʌv ə bɝn, wʌns əz ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ oʊvɝ ɪt, wʌns əz ðeɪ pæs nɪɹbaɪ; ðeɪ teɪpɝd tə pɔɪns ət ði ɛnz. ət list, ði ɛnz i sɔ wɝ soʊ, bʌɾ i səspɛktəd ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ðə seɪm.

Again they crossed land blackened and burned, even the soil crunching under the horses' hooves as if it had been seared. The burned swathes, sometimes a mile wide, sometimes only a few hundred paces, all ran east and west as straight as an arrow's flight. Twice Rand saw the end of a burn, once as they rode over it, once as they passed nearby; they tapered to points at the ends. At least, the ends he saw were so, but he suspected they were all the same.

wʌns i hæd wɑtʃt wʌtli ɛldɪn dɛkɝeɪɾ ə kɑɹt fəɹ sʌndeɪ, bæk hoʊm ɪn ɛmənz fild, wʌt peɪntɪŋ ðə sinz ɪn bɹaɪt kʌlɝz, ən ði ɪntʃɹəkət skɹɑlwɝk ðət sɝaʊndəd ðɛm. fəɹ ðə bɔɹɾɝz, wʌt lɛt ðə pɔɪn ə hɪz bɹʌʃ tʌtʃ ðə kɑɹt, meɪkɪŋ ə θɪn laɪn ðət ɡɹu θɪkɝ əz i pɹɛs hɑɹɾɝ, ðən θɪnɝ əɡɛn əz i izd ʌp. ðət wɑz haʊ ðə læn lʊkt, əz ɪf sʌmwʌn hæd stʃɹikt ɪt wɪð ə mɑnstʃɹəs bɹʌʃ ə faɪɝ.

Once he had watched Whatley Eldin decorate a cart for Sunday, back home in Emond's Field, What painting the scenes in bright colors, and the intricate scrollwork that surrounded them. For the borders, What let the point of his brush touch the cart, making a thin line that grew thicker as he pressed harder, then thinner again as he eased up. That was how the land looked, as if someone had streaked it with a monstrous brush of fire.

nʌθɪŋ ɡɹu wɛɹ ðə bɝnz wɝ, ðoʊ səm bɝnz, ət list, hæd ðə fil ʌv ə θɪŋ lɔŋ dʌn. nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə hɪn ə tʃɑɹ ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ði ɛɹ ðɛɹ, nɑɾ ə wɪf ivən wən i lin daʊn tə bɹeɪk ɔf ə blæk twɪɡ ən smɛl ɪt. oʊld, jɛt nʌθɪŋ hæd kʌm ɪn tə ɹikleɪm ðə lænd. blæk ɡeɪv weɪ tə ɡɹin, ən ɡɹin tə blæk, əlɔŋ naɪf-ɛdʒ laɪnz.

Nothing grew where the burns were, though some burns, at least, had the feel of a thing long done. Not so much as a hint of char remained in the air there, not a whiff even when he leaned down to break off a black twig and smell it. Old, yet nothing had come in to reclaim the land. Black gave way to green, and green to black, along knife-edge lines.

ɪn ɪts oʊn weɪ, ðə ɹɛst ə ðə læn leɪ əz dɛɾ əz ðə bɝnz, ðoʊ ɡɹæs kʌvɝd ðə ɡɹaʊn ən livz kʌvɝd ðə tʃɹiz. ɛvɹiθɪŋ hæd ðət feɪɾəd lʊk, laɪk kloʊðz tu ɔfən wɑʃt ən tu lɔŋ lɛft ɪn ðə sʌn. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ bɝdz əɹ ænəməlz, nɑt ðət ɹænd sɔ əɹ hɝd. noʊ hɔk wilɪŋ ɪn ðə skaɪ, noʊ bɑɹk ʌv ə hʌntɪŋ fɑks, noʊ bɝd sɪŋɪŋ. nʌθɪŋ ɹʌsəld ɪn ðə ɡɹæs əɹ lɪɾ ɑn ə tʃɹi bɹæntʃ. noʊ biz, əɹ bʌɾɝflaɪz. sɛvɹəl taɪmz ðeɪ kɹɔst stʃɹimz, ðə wɔɾɝ ʃæloʊ, ðoʊ ɔfən ɪt hæd dʌɡ ɪtsɛlf ə dip ɡʌli wɪð stip bæŋks ðə hɔɹsəz hæd tə skɹæmbəl daʊn ən klaɪm ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. ðə wɔɾɝ ɹæn klɪɹ ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə mʌd ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz stɝd, bʌt nɛvɝ ə mɪnoʊ əɹ tædpoʊl ɹɪəld aʊɾ ə ðə ɹɔɪlɪŋ, nɑɾ ivən ə wɔɾɝspədɝ dænsɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə sɝfəs, əɹ ə hʌvɝɪŋ leɪsɪŋ.

In its own way, the rest of the land lay as dead as the burns, though grass covered the ground and leaves covered the trees. Everything had that faded look, like clothes too often washed and too long left in the sun. There were no birds or animals, not that Rand saw or heard. No hawk wheeling in the sky, no bark of a hunting fox, no bird singing. Nothing rustled in the grass or lit on a tree branch. No bees, or butterflies. Several times they crossed streams, the water shallow, though often it had dug itself a deep gulley with steep banks the horses had to scramble down and climb on the other side. The water ran clear except for the mud the horses' hooves stirred, but never a minnow or tadpole wriggled out of the roiling, not even a waterspider dancing across the surface, or a hovering lacewing.

ðə wɔɾɝ wɑz dʒɹɪŋkəbəl, wɪtʃ wɑz dʒʌst əz wɛl, sɪns ðɛɹ wɔɾɝbətəlz kəd nɑt læs fɝɛvɝ. ɹænd teɪstəɾ ɪt fɝst, ən meɪd lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn weɪt tə si ɪf ɛniθɪŋ hæpən tə hɪm bɪfɔɹ i lɛɾ əm dʒɹɪŋk. hi hæd ɡɑɾən əm ɪndə ðɪs; ɪt wɑz ɪz ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi. ðə wɔɾɝ wɑz kul ən wɛt, bʌt ðət wɑz ðə bɛs ðət kəd bi sɛd fəɹ ɪt. ɪt teɪstəd flæt, əz ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn bɔɪld. lɔɪəl meɪɾ ə feɪs, ən ðə hɔɹsəz dɪd nɑt laɪk ɪɾ iðɝ, ʃeɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ hɛdz ən dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ɹɪlʌktənli.

The water was drinkable, which was just as well, since their waterbottles could not last forever. Rand tasted it first, and made Loial and Hurin wait to see if anything happened to him before he let them drink. He had gotten them into this; it was his responsibility. The water was cool and wet, but that was the best that could be said for it. It tasted flat, as if it had been boiled. Loial made a face, and the horses did not like it either, shaking their heads and drinking reluctantly.

ðəɹ wɑz wʌn saɪn ə laɪf; ət list, ɹænd θɔɾ ɪt mʌs bi soʊ. twaɪs i sɔ ə wɪspi stʃɹik kɹɔlɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə skaɪ laɪk ə laɪn dʒɹɔn wɪð klaʊd. ðə laɪnz wɝ tu stʃɹeɪt tə bi nætʃɹəl, ɪt simd, bʌɾ i kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən wʌt maɪt meɪk ðɛm. hi dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən ðə laɪnz tə ði ʌðɝz. pɝhæps ðeɪ dɪd nɑt si, hʊɹɪn ɪntɛn ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪl əz i wɑz ən lɔɪəl dʒɹɔn ɪn ɑn hɪmsɛlf. ðeɪ sɛd nʌθɪŋ ə ðə laɪnz, əɾ ɛni ɹeɪt.

There was one sign of life; at least, Rand thought it must be so. Twice he saw a wispy streak crawling across the sky like a line drawn with cloud. The lines were too straight to be natural, it seemed, but he could not imagine what might make them. He did not mention the lines to the others. Perhaps they did not see, Hurin intent on the trail as he was and Loial drawn in on himself. They said nothing of the lines, at any rate.

wən ðeɪ hæd ɹɪɾən hæf ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, lɔɪəl əbɹʌpli swʌŋ daʊn fɹəm ɪz hjudʒ hɔɹs wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝɾ ən stʃɹoʊd tə ə stæn ə dʒɑnsbɹum, ðɛɹ tʃɹʌŋks splɪɾɪŋ ɪndə mɛni θɪk bɹæntʃəz, stɪf ən stʃɹeɪt, nɑɾ ə peɪs əbʌv ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ət ðə tɑp, ɔl splɪɾ əɡɛn, ɪndə ðə lifi bɹʌʃ ðət ɡeɪv əm ðɛɹ neɪm.

When they had ridden half the morning, Loial abruptly swung down from his huge horse without a word and strode to a stand of giantsbroom, their trunks splitting into many thick branches, stiff and straight, not a pace above the ground. At the top, all split again, into the leafy brush that gave them their name.

ɹænd pʊld ɹɛɾ ʌp ən stɑɹɾəd tə æsk wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ði oʊɡiɝz mænɝ, əz ɪf i hɪmsɛlf wɝ ənsɝɾən, kɛpt ɹænd saɪlənt. æftɝ stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə tʃɹi, lɔɪəl pʊɾ ɪz hænz ɑn ə tʃɹʌŋk ən bɪɡæn tə sɪŋ ɪn ə dip, sɑft ɹʌmbəl.

Rand pulled Red up and started to ask what he was doing, but something about the Ogier's manner, as if he himself were uncertain, kept Rand silent. After staring at the tree, Loial put his hands on a trunk and began to sing in a deep, soft rumble.

ɹænd hæd hɝɾ oʊɡiɝ tʃɹisɔŋ, wʌns, wən lɔɪəl hæd sʌŋ tə ə daɪɪŋ tʃɹi ən bɹɔɾ ɪt bæk tə laɪf, ən i hæd hɝɾ ə sʌŋ wʊd, ɑbʒɛkts ɹɔt fɹəm tʃɹiz baɪ ðə tʃɹisɔŋ. ðə tælənt wɑz feɪɾɪŋ, lɔɪəl sɛd, hi wɑz wʌn ə ðə fju hu hæd ði əbɪləɾi, naʊ; ðət wɑz wʌt meɪd sʌŋ wʊɾ ivən mɔɹ sɔɾ æftɝ ən tʃɹɛʒɝd. wən i hæd hɝd lɔɪəl sɪŋ bɪfɔɹ, ɪt hæd bɪn əz ɪf ði ɝθ ɪtsɛlf sæŋ, bʌt naʊ ði oʊɡiɝ mɝmɝɾ ɪz sɔŋ ɔlmoʊs dɪfəɾəntli, ən ðə læn ɛkoʊɾ ɪɾ ɪn ə wɪspɝ.

Rand had heard Ogier Treesong, once, when Loial had sung to a dying tree and brought it back to life, and he had heard of sung wood, objects wrought from trees by the Treesong. The Talent was fading, Loial said, he was one of the few who had the ability, now; that was what made sung wood even more sought after and treasured. When he had heard Loial sing before, it had been as if the earth itself sang, but now the Ogier murmured his song almost diffidently, and the land echoed it in a whisper.

ɪt sim pjʊɹ sɔŋ, mjuzɪk wɪθaʊt wɝdz, ət lis nʌn ðət ɹænd kəd meɪk aʊt; ɪf ðəɹ wɝ wɝdz, ðeɪ feɪɾəd ɪndə ðə mjuzɪk dʒʌst əz wɔɾɝ pɔɹz ɪndə ə stʃɹim. hʊɹɪn ɡæspt ən stɛɹd.

It seemed pure song, music without words, at least none that Rand could make out; if there were words, they faded into the music just as water pours into a stream. Hurin gasped and stared.

ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz lɔɪəl dɪd, əɹ haʊ; sɑft əz ðə sɔŋ wɑz, ɪt kɑɾ ɪm ʌp hɪpnɑɾəkəli, fɪlɪŋ ɪz maɪn ɔlmoʊs ðə weɪ ðə vɔɪd dɪd. lɔɪəl ɹæn ɪz bɪɡ hænz əlɔŋ ðə tʃɹʌŋk, sɪŋɪŋ, kɝɛsɪŋ wɪð ɪz vɔɪs əz wɛl əz ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. ðə tʃɹʌŋk naʊ sim smuðɝ, sʌmhaʊ, əz ɪf ɪz stʃɹoʊkɪŋ wɝ ʃeɪpɪŋ ɪt. ɹænd blɪŋkt. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðə pis lɔɪəl wɝkt ɑn hæd hæd bɹæntʃəz əɾ ɪts tɑp dʒʌs laɪk ði ʌðɝz, bʌt naʊ ɪt stɑpt ɪn ə ɹaʊndəɾ ɛn ɹaɪɾ əbʌv ði oʊɡiɝz hɛd. ɹænd oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, bʌt ðə sɔŋ kwaɪəɾəd hɪm. ɪt sim soʊ fəmɪljɝ, ðət sɔŋ, əz ɪf i ʃəd noʊ ɪt.

Rand was not sure what it was Loial did, or how; soft as the song was, it caught him up hypnotically, filling his mind almost the way the void did. Loial ran his big hands along the trunk, singing, caressing with his voice as well as his fingers. The trunk now seemed smoother, somehow, as if his stroking were shaping it. Rand blinked. He was sure the piece Loial worked on had had branches at its top just like the others, but now it stopped in a rounded end right above the Ogier's head. Rand opened his mouth, but the song quieted him. It seemed so familiar, that song, as if he should know it.

əbɹʌpli lɔɪəlz vɔɪs ɹoʊz tə ə klaɪmæks - ɔlmoʊst ə hɪm ə θæŋks, ɪt saʊndəd - ən ɛndəd, feɪɾɪŋ əz ə bɹiz feɪdz.

Abruptly Loial's voice rose to a climax - almost a hymn of thanks, it sounded - and ended, fading as a breeze fades.

"bɝn mi," hʊɹɪn bɹiðd. hi lʊk stʌnd. "bɝn mi, aɪ nɛvɝ hɝɾ ɛniθɪŋ laɪk. . . . bɝn mi."

"Burn me," Hurin breathed. He looked stunned. "Burn me, I never heard anything like. . . . Burn me."

ɪn ɪz hænz lɔɪəl hɛld ə stæf əz tɔl əz i wɑz ən əz θɪk əz ɹændz fɔɹɑɹm, smuð ən pɑlɪʃt. wɛɹ ðə tʃɹʌŋk hæd bɪn ɑn ðə dʒɑnsbɹum wɑz ə smɔl stɛm ə nu ɡɹoʊθ.

In his hands Loial held a staff as tall as he was and as thick as Rand's forearm, smooth and polished. Where the trunk had been on the giantsbroom was a small stem of new growth.

ɹænd tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. ɔlweɪz sʌmθɪŋ nu, ɔlweɪz sʌmθɪŋ aɪ dɪdn ɪkspɛkt, ən səmtaɪmz ɪɾ ɪzən hɔɹəbəl.

Rand took a deep breath. Always something new, always something I didn't expect, and sometimes it isn't horrible.

hi wɑtʃt lɔɪəl maʊnt, ɹɛstɪŋ ðə stæf əkɹɔs ɪz sæɾəl ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, ən wʌndɝd waɪ ði oʊɡiɝ wɑntəɾ ə stæf əɾ ɔl, sɪns ðeɪ wɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ. ðən i sɔ ðə θɪk ɹɑd, nɑɾ əz bɪɡ əz ɪt wɑz, bʌɾ ɪn ɹileɪʃən tə ði oʊɡiɝ, sɔ ðə weɪ lɔɪəl hændəld ɪt. "ə kɔɹɾɝstæf," hi sɛd, sɝpɹaɪzd. "aɪ dɪdnt noʊ oʊɡiɝ kæɹid wɛpənz, lɔɪəl."

He watched Loial mount, resting the staff across his saddle in front of him, and wondered why the Ogier wanted a staff at all, since they were riding. Then he saw the thick rod, not as big as it was, but in relation to the Ogier, saw the way Loial handled it. "A quarterstaff," he said, surprised. "I didn't know Ogier carried weapons, Loial."

"juʒəwəli wi də nɑt," ði oʊɡiɝ ɹɪplaɪɾ ɔlmoʊs kɝtli. "juʒəwəli. ðə pɹaɪs əz ɔlweɪz bɪn tu haɪ." hi hɛftəd ðə hjudʒ kɔɹɾɝstæf ən ɹɪŋkəld ɪz bɹɔd noʊz wɪð dɪsteɪst. "ɛldɝ heɪmən wəd ʃʊɹli seɪ aɪm pʊɾɪŋ ə lɔŋ hændəl ɑn maɪ æks, bʌɾ aɪm nɑt dʒʌs biɪŋ heɪsti əɹ ɹæʃ, ɹænd. ðɪs pleɪs. . . ." hi ʃɪvɝd, ən ɪz ɪɹz twɪtʃt.

"Usually we do not," the Ogier replied almost curtly. "Usually. The price has always been too high." He hefted the huge quarterstaff and wrinkled his broad nose with distaste. "Elder Haman would surely say I am putting a long handle on my axe, but I am not just being hasty or rash, Rand. This place. . . ." He shivered, and his ears twitched.

"wil faɪn əɹ weɪ bæk sun," ɹænd sɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə saʊn kɑnfəɾənt.

"We'll find our way back soon," Rand said, trying to sound confident.

lɔɪəl spoʊk əz ɪf i hæd nɑt hɝd. "ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪz . . . lɪŋkt, ɹænd. wɛðɝ ɪt laɪvz əɹ nɑt, wɛðɝ ɪt θɪŋks əɹ nɑt, ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðəɾ ɪz, fɪts təɡɛðɝ. ðə tʃɹi dʌz nɑt θɪŋk, bʌɾ ɪts pɑɹɾ ə ðə hoʊl, ən ðə hoʊl əz ə - ə filɪŋ. aɪ kæn ɪkspleɪn ɛni mɔɹ ðən aɪ kən ɪkspleɪn wʌt biɪŋ hæpi ɪz, bʌt. . . . ɹænd, ðɪs lænd wɑz ɡlæd fəɹ ə wɛpən tə bi meɪd. ɡlæd!"

Loial spoke as if he had not heard. "Everything is . . . linked, Rand. Whether it lives or not, whether it thinks or not, everything that is, fits together. The tree does not think, but it is part of the whole, and the whole has a - a feeling. I can't explain any more than I can explain what being happy is, but. . . . Rand, this land was glad for a weapon to be made. Glad!"

"ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn ʌs," hʊɹɪn mɝmɝd nɝvəsli, "æn ðə kɹieɪɾɝz hænd ʃɛltɝ ʌs. ðoʊ wi ɡoʊ tə ðə læst ɛmbɹeɪs ə ðə mʌðɝ, ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin əɹ weɪ." hi kɛpt ɹɪpiɾɪŋ ðə kæɾəkɪzəm əz ɪf ɪt hæɾ ə tʃɑɹm tə pɹətɛk hɪm.

"The Light shine on us," Hurin murmured nervously, "and the Creator's hand shelter us. Though we go to the last embrace of the mother, the Light illumine our way." He kept repeating the catechism as if it had a charm to protect him.

ɹænd ɹɪzɪstɪd ði ɪmpəls tə lʊk ɝaʊnd. hi dɛfənətli dɪd nɑt lʊk ʌp. ɔl ɪt wəd teɪk tə bɹeɪk əm ɔl wɑz ənʌðɝ ə ðoʊz smoʊki laɪnz əkɹɔs ðə skaɪ ɹaɪɾ ət ðət moʊmənt. "ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ hɪɹ tə hɝɾ ʌs," hi sɛd fɝmli. "ænd wɪl kip ə ɡʊd wɑtʃ ən meɪk ʃʊɹ nʌθɪŋ dʌz."

Rand resisted the impulse to look around. He definitely did not look up. All it would take to break them all was another of those smoky lines across the sky right at that moment. "There's nothing here to hurt us," he said firmly. "And we'll keep a good watch and make sure nothing does."

hi wɑntəd tə læf ət hɪmsɛlf, saʊndɪŋ soʊ sɝɾən. hi wɑz nɑt sɝɾən əbaʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ. bʌt wɑtʃɪŋ ði ʌðɝz - lɔɪəl wɪð ɪz tʌftəɾ ɪɹz dʒɹupɪŋ, ən hʊɹɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə lʊk əɾ ɛniθɪŋ - hi nu wʌn ə ðɛm hæd tə sim tə bi ʃʊɹ, ət list, əɹ fɪɹ ən ənsɝɾənti wəd bɹeɪk əm ɔl əpɑɹt. ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz. hi skwiz ðət θɔɾ aʊt. nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə wil. nʌθɪŋ tə wɪð tɑvɝən, əɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, əɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən. ɪts dʒʌs ðə weɪ ɪɾ ɪz, ðæts ɔl.

He wanted to laugh at himself, sounding so certain. He was not certain about anything. But watching the others - Loial with his tufted ears drooping, and Hurin trying not to look at anything - he knew one of them had to seem to be sure, at least, or fear and uncertainty would break them all apart. The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills. He squeezed that thought out. Nothing to do with the Wheel. Nothing to with ta'veren, or Aes Sedai, or the Dragon. It's just the way it is, that's all.

"lɔɪəl, ɑɹ jə dʌn hɪɹ?" ði oʊɡiɝ nɑɾəd, ɹɪɡɹɛtfəli ɹʌbɪŋ ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf. ɹænd tɝn tə hʊɹɪn. "du jə stɪl əv ðə tʃɹeɪl?"

"Loial, are you done here?" The Ogier nodded, regretfully rubbing the quarterstaff. Rand turned to Hurin. "Do you still have the trail?"

"aɪ du, lɔɹd ɹænd. aɪ də ðæt."

"I do, Lord Rand. I do that."

"ðɛn lɛts kip ɑn wɪð ɪt. wʌns wi faɪn feɪn ən ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz, waɪ, wɪl ɡoʊ hoʊm hɪɹoʊz, wɪð ðə dæɡɝ fəɹ mæt, ən ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. lɛɾ aʊt, hʊɹɪn." hɪɹoʊz? əl sɛɾəl fəɹ ɔl ʌv əs ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ əlaɪv.

"Then let's keep on with it. Once we find Fain and the Darkfriends, why, we'll go home heroes, with the dagger for Mat, and the Horn of Valere. Lead out, Hurin." Heroes? I'll settle for all of us getting out of here alive.

"aɪ də nɑt laɪk ðɪs pleɪs," ði oʊɡiɝ ənaʊns flætli. hi hɛl ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf əz ɪf i ɪkspɛktəd tə hæv tə juz ɪt sun.

"I do not like this place," the Ogier announced flatly. He held the quarterstaff as if he expected to have to use it soon.

"æz wɛl wi doʊn min tə steɪ hɪɹ, ðɛn, ɪzən ɪt?" ɹænd sɛd. hʊɹɪn bɑɹkt ə læf əz ɪf i hæd meɪɾ ə dʒoʊk, bʌt lɔɪəl ɡeɪv ɪm ə lɛvəl lʊk.

"As well we don't mean to stay here, then, isn't it?" Rand said. Hurin barked a laugh as if he had made a joke, but Loial gave him a level look.

"æz wɛl wi doʊnt, ɹænd."

"As well we don't, Rand."

jɛɾ əz ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ɑn saʊθwɝd, hi kəd si ðəɾ ɪz kæʒəwəl əsʌmpʃən ðət ðeɪ wəd ɡɛt hoʊm hæd pɪkt əm boʊθ ʌp ə lɪɾəl. hʊɹɪn sæɾ ə bɪt stʃɹeɪɾɝ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, ən lɔɪəlz ɪɹz dɪd nɑt sim soʊ wɪltɪd. ɪt wɑz noʊ taɪm əɹ pleɪs tə lɛɾ əm noʊ hi ʃɛɹd ðɛɹ fɪɹ, soʊ hi kɛpt ɪt tə hɪmsɛlf, ən fɔɾ ɪt baɪ hɪmsɛlf.

Yet as they rode on southward, he could see that his casual assumption that they would get home had picked them both up a little. Hurin sat a bit straighter in his saddle, and Loial's ears did not seem so wilted. It was no time or place to let them know he shared their fear, so he kept it to himself, and fought it by himself.

hʊɹɪn kɛpt ɪz hjumɝ θɹu ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, mɝmɝɪŋ, "æz wɛl wi doʊn min tə steɪ," ðən tʃʌklɪŋ, əntɪl ɹænd fɛlt laɪk tɛlɪŋ ɪm tə bi kwaɪət. təwɔɹd mɪddeɪ, ðə snɪfɝ dɪd fɔl saɪlənt, ðoʊ, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ən fɹaʊnɪŋ, ən ɹænd faʊn i wɪʃt ðə mæn wɑz stɪl ɹɪpiɾɪŋ ɪz wɝdz ən læfɪŋ.

Hurin kept his humor through the morning, murmuring, "As well we don't mean to stay," then chuckling, until Rand felt like telling him to be quiet. Toward midday, the sniffer did fall silent, though, shaking his head and frowning, and Rand found he wished the man was still repeating his words and laughing.

"ɪz ðəɹ sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ wɪð ðə tʃɹeɪl, hʊɹɪn?" hi æskt.

"Is there something wrong with the trail, Hurin?" he asked.

ðə snɪfɝ ʃɹʌɡd, lʊkɪŋ tʃɹʌbəld. "jɛs, lɔɹd ɹænd, ən ðən əɡɛn noʊ, əz jə maɪt seɪ."

The sniffer shrugged, looking troubled. "Yes, Lord Rand, and then again no, as you might say."

"ɪt mʌs bi wʌn əɹ ði ʌðɝ. hæv jə lɔs ðə tʃɹeɪl? noʊ ʃeɪm ɪf jə hæv. jə sɛɾ ɪt wɑz wik tə stɑɹt. ɪf wi kæn faɪn ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz, wɪl faɪn ənʌðɝ stoʊn ən ɡɛt bæk ðət weɪ." laɪt, ɛniθɪŋ bʌt ðæt. ɹænd kɛpt ɪz feɪs smuð. "ɪf dɑɹkfɹɛnz kən kʌm hɪɹ ən liv, soʊ kən wi."

"It must be one or the other. Have you lost the trail? No shame if you have. You said it was weak to start. If we can't find the Darkfriends, we will find another Stone and get back that way." Light, anything but that. Rand kept his face smooth. "If Darkfriends can come here and leave, so can we."

"oʊ, aɪ hævən lɔst ɪt, lɔɹd ɹænd. aɪ kən stɪl pɪk aʊt ðə stɪŋk ə ðɛm. ɪɾ ɪzən ðæt. ɪts dʒʌst. . . . ɪts. . . ." wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs, hʊɹɪn bɝst aʊt, "ɪts laɪk aɪm ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ɪt, lɔɹd ɹænd, ɪnstɛɾ ə smɛlɪŋ ɪt. bʌɾ aɪm nɑt. ðɛɹz dʌzənz ə tʃɹeɪlz kɹɔsɪŋ ɪɾ ɔl ðə taɪm, dʌzənz ən dʌzənz, ən ɔl sɔɹts ə smɛlz ə vaɪələns, səm ə ðɛm fɹɛʃ, ɔlmoʊst, oʊnli wɑʃt aʊt laɪk ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls. ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, ɹaɪɾ æftɝ wi lɛf ðə hɑloʊ, aɪ cʊɾə swɔɹn ðəɹ wɝ hʌnʒɹədz slɔɾɝd ɹaɪɾ ʌndɝ maɪ fit, dʒʌs mɪnəts bɪfɔɹ, bʌt ðəɹ wɝn ɛni bɑɾiz, ən nɑɾ ə mɑɹk ɑn ðə ɡɹæs bʌɾ əɹ oʊn hʊfpɹɪns. ə θɪŋ laɪk ðət kʊdn hæpən wɪθaʊt ðə ɡɹaʊn biɪŋ tɔɹn ʌp ən blʌɾid, bʌt ðəɹ wɑzn ə mɑɹk. ɪts ɔl laɪk ðæt, maɪ lɔɹd. bʌɾ aɪm fɑloʊɪŋ ðə tʃɹeɪl. aɪ æm. ðɪs pleɪs dʒʌst əz mi ɔl ɑn ɛdʒ. ðæts ɪt. ðət mʌs bi ɪt."

"Oh, I haven't lost it, Lord Rand. I can still pick out the stink of them. It isn't that. It's just. . . . It's. . . ." With a grimace, Hurin burst out, "It's like I'm remembering it, Lord Rand, instead of smelling it. But I'm not. There's dozens of trails crossing it all the time, dozens and dozens, and all sorts of smells of violence, some of them fresh, almost, only washed out like everything else. This morning, right after we left the hollow, I could have sworn there were hundreds slaughtered right under my feet, just minutes before, but there weren't any bodies, and not a mark on the grass but our own hoofprints. A thing like that couldn't happen without the ground being torn up and bloodied, but there wasn't a mark. It's all like that, my Lord. But I am following the trail. I am. This place just has me all on edge. That's it. That must be it."

ɹænd ɡlænst ət lɔɪəl - ði oʊɡiɝ dɪd kʌm ʌp wɪð ði ɑɾəst nɑlədʒ, ət taɪmz - bʌɾ i lʊkt əz pʌzəld əz hʊɹɪn. ɹænd meɪɾ ɪz vɔɪs mɔɹ kɑnfəɾənt ðən i fɛlt. "aɪ noʊ jə ɑɹ duɪŋ jəɹ bɛst, hʊɹɪn. wəɹ ɔl ʌv əs ɑn ɛdʒ. dʒʌs fɑloʊ əz bɛs jə kæn, ən wɪl faɪn ðɛm."

Rand glanced at Loial - the Ogier did come up with the oddest knowledge, at times - but he looked as puzzled as Hurin. Rand made his voice more confident than he felt. "I know you are doing your best, Hurin. We are all of us on edge. Just follow as best you can, and we'll find them."

"æz jə seɪ, lɔɹd ɹænd." hʊɹɪn buɾɪd ɪz hɔɹs fɔɹwɝd. "æz jə seɪ."

"As you say, Lord Rand." Hurin booted his horse forward. "As you say."

bʌt baɪ naɪtfɔl, ðəɹ wɑz stɪl noʊ saɪn ə ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ən hʊɹɪn sɛd ðə tʃɹeɪl wɑz feɪntɝ stɪl. ðə snɪfɝ kɛp mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf əbaʊt "ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ."

But by nightfall, there was still no sign of the Darkfriends, and Hurin said the trail was fainter still. The sniffer kept muttering to himself about "remembering."

ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ saɪn. ɹɪli noʊ saɪn. ɹænd wɑz nɑɾ əz ɡʊɾ ə tʃɹækɝ əz ənoʊ, bʌɾ ɛni bɔɪ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɑz ɪkspɛktəd tə tʃɹæk wɛl ɪnʌf tə faɪn ə lɔst ʃip, əɹ ə ɹæbət fəɹ dɪnɝ. hi hæd sin nʌθɪŋ. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf noʊ lɪvɪŋ θɪŋ hæɾ ɛvɝ dɪstɝb ðə læn bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ keɪm. ðəɹ ʃʊɾə bɪn sʌmθɪŋ ɪf ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz wɝ əhɛɾ ə ðɛm. bʌt hʊɹɪn kɛp fɑloʊɪŋ ðə tʃɹeɪl i sɛɾ i smɛld.

There had been no sign. Really no sign. Rand was not as good a tracker as Uno, but any boy in the Two Rivers was expected to track well enough to find a lost sheep, or a rabbit for dinner. He had seen nothing. It was as if no living thing had ever disturbed the land before they came. There should have been something if the Darkfriends were ahead of them. But Hurin kept following the trail he said he smelled.

əz ðə sʌn tʌtʃt ðə hɝaɪzən ðeɪ meɪd kæmp ɪn ə stæn ə tʃɹiz əntʌtʃt baɪ ðə bɝn, iɾɪŋ fɹəm ðɛɹ sæɾəlbæɡz. flætbɹɛɾ ən dʒɹaɪd mit wɑʃt daʊn wɪð flæt-teɪstɪŋ wɔɾɝ; hɑɹdli ə fɪlɪŋ mil, tʌf ən fɑɹ fɹəm teɪsti. ɹænd θɔt ðeɪ maɪɾ əv ɪnʌf fəɹ ə wik. æftɝ ðæt. . . . hʊɹɪn eɪt sloʊli, dətɝmənədli, bʌt lɔɪəl ɡʌlpt ɪz daʊn wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs ən sɛɾəld bæk wɪð ɪz paɪp, ðə bɪɡ kɔɹɾɝstæf kloʊs ət hænd. ɹænd kɛp ðɛɹ faɪɝ smɔl ən wɛl hɪɾən ɪn ðə tʃɹiz. feɪn ən ɪz dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən tʃɹɑləks maɪt bi kloʊs ɪnʌf tə si ə faɪɝ, fəɹ ɔl ə hʊɹɪnz wɝiz əbaʊt ði ɑdnəs ə ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪl.

As the sun touched the horizon they made camp in a stand of trees untouched by the burn, eating from their saddlebags. Flatbread and dried meat washed down with flat-tasting water; hardly a filling meal, tough and far from tasty. Rand thought they might have enough for a week. After that. . . . Hurin ate slowly, determinedly, but Loial gulped his down with a grimace and settled back with his pipe, the big quarterstaff close at hand. Rand kept their fire small and well hidden in the trees. Fain and his Darkfriends and Trollocs might be close enough to see a fire, for all of Hurin's worries about the oddness of their trail.

ɪt simd ɑd tə hɪm ðəɾ i hæd bɪɡʌn tə θɪŋk ə ðɛm əz feɪnz dɑɹkfɹɛnz, feɪnz tʃɹɑləks. feɪn wɑz dʒʌst ə mædmæn. ðən waɪ dɪd ðeɪ ɹɛskju hɪm? feɪn hæd bɪn pɑɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz skim tə faɪn hɪm. pɝhæps ɪt hæd sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðæt. ðən waɪ ɪz i ɹʌnɪŋ ɪnstɛɾ ə tʃeɪsɪŋ mi? ən wʌt kɪl ðət feɪd? wʌt hæpən ɪn ðət ɹum fʊl ə flaɪz? ən ðoʊz aɪz, wɑtʃɪŋ mi ɪn fæl dæɹə. ən ðət wɪnd, kætʃɪŋ mi laɪk ə biɾəl ɪn paɪn sæp. noʊ. noʊ, bælzəmən əz tə bi dɛd. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪt. mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪt, nɔɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn. stʌbɝnli, hi ɹəfjuz tə θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. ɔl i hæd tə θɪŋk əbaʊt naʊ wɑz faɪndɪŋ ðət dæɡɝ fəɹ mæt. faɪndɪŋ feɪn, ən ðə hɔɹn.

It seemed odd to him that he had begun to think of them as Fain's Darkfriends, Fain's Trollocs. Fain was just a madman. Then why did they rescue him? Fain had been part of the Dark One's scheme to find him. Perhaps it had something to do with that. Then why is he running instead of chasing me? And what killed that Fade? What happened in that room full of flies? And those eyes, watching me in Fal Dara. And that wind, catching me like a beetle in pine sap. No. No, Ba'alzamon has to be dead. The Aes Sedai did not believe it. Moiraine did not believe it, nor the Amyrlin. Stubbornly, he refused to think about it any longer. All he had to think about now was finding that dagger for Mat. Finding Fain, and the Horn.

ɪts nɛvɝ oʊvɝ, ælθɹ.

It's never over, al'Thor.

ðə vɔɪs wɑz laɪk ə θɪn bɹiz wɪspɝɪŋ ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd, ə θɪn, aɪsi mɝmɝ wɝkɪŋ ɪts weɪ ɪndə ðə kɹɛvəsɪz ə hɪz maɪnd. hi ɔlmoʊst sɔt ðə vɔɪd tə ɪskeɪp ɪt, bʌt ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ wʌt weɪɾəd fəɹ ɪm ðɛɹ, hi pʊʃt daʊn ðə dɪzaɪɝ.

The voice was like a thin breeze whispering in the back of his head, a thin, icy murmur working its way into the crevices of his mind. He almost sought the void to escape it, but remembering what waited for him there, he pushed down the desire.

ɪn ðə hæf dɑɹk ə twaɪlaɪt, hi wɝk ðə fɔɹmz wɪð ɪz sɔɹd, ðə weɪ læn hæd tɔt, ðoʊ wɪθaʊt ðə vɔɪd. pɑɹɾɪŋ ðə sɪlk. hʌmɪŋbɝd kɪsəz ðə hʌniɹoʊz. hɛɹən weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹʌʃəz, fəɹ bæləns. luzɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɪn ðə swɪft, ʃʊɹ muvməns, fɝɡɛɾɪŋ fəɹ ə taɪm wɛɹ i wɑz, hi wɝkt əntɪl swɛt kʌvɝd hɪm. jɛt wən i wɑz dʌn, ɪɾ ɔl keɪm bæk; nʌθɪŋ wɑz tʃeɪnʒd. ðə wɛðɝ wɑz nɑt koʊld, bʌɾ i ʃɪvɝɾ ən pʊld ɪz kloʊk ɝaʊn ɪm əz i hʌntʃt baɪ ðə faɪɝ. ði ʌðɝz kɑɾ ɪz mud, ən ðeɪ fɪnɪʃt iɾɪŋ kwɪkli ən ɪn saɪləns. noʊ wʌn kəmpleɪnd wən i kɪk dɝɾ oʊvɝ ðə læs fɪtfəl fleɪmz.

In the half dark of twilight, he worked the forms with his sword, the way Lan had taught, though without the void. Parting the Silk. Hummingbird Kisses the Honeyrose. Heron Wading in the Rushes, for balance. Losing himself in the swift, sure movements, forgetting for a time where he was, he worked until sweat covered him. Yet when he was done, it all came back; nothing was changed. The weather was not cold, but he shivered and pulled his cloak around him as he hunched by the fire. The others caught his mood, and they finished eating quickly and in silence. No one complained when he kicked dirt over the last fitful flames.

ɹænd tʊk ðə fɝst wɑtʃ hɪmsɛlf, wɔkɪŋ ði ɛdʒəz ə ðə kɑps wɪð ɪz baʊ, səmtaɪmz izɪŋ ɪz sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪts skæbɝd. ðə tʃɪl mun wɑz ɔlmoʊs fʊl, stændɪŋ haɪ ɪn ðə blæknəs, ən ðə naɪt wɑz əz saɪlən əz ðə deɪ hæd bɪn, əz ɛmpti. ɛmpti wɑz ðə ɹaɪt wɝd. ðə lænd wɑz əz ɛmpti əz ə dʌsti mɪlk kɹɑk. ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə bɪliv ðəɹ wɑz ɛniwʌn ɪn ðə hoʊl wɝld, ɪn ðɪs wɝld, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə θɹi ʌv ðɛm, hɑɹd tə bɪliv ivən ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz wɝ ðɛɹ, sʌmwɛɹ əhɛd.

Rand took the first watch himself, walking the edges of the copse with his bow, sometimes easing his sword in its scabbard. The chill moon was almost full, standing high in the blackness, and the night was as silent as the day had been, as empty. Empty was the right word. The land was as empty as a dusty milk crock. It was hard to believe there was anyone in the whole world, in this world, except for the three of them, hard to believe even the Darkfriends were there, somewhere ahead.

tə kip hɪmsɛlf kʌmpəni, hi ənɹæp tɑm mɛɹɪlɪnz kloʊk, ɪkspoʊzɪŋ ðə hɑɹp ən fluɾ ɪn ðɛɹ hɑɹd lɛðɝ keɪsəz ətɑp ðə mɛni-kʌlɝd pætʃəz. hi tʊk ðə ɡoʊld-ænd-sɪlvɝ flut fɹəm ɪts keɪs, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðə ɡlimən titʃɪŋ ɪm əz i fɪŋɡɝɾ ɪt, ən pleɪɾ ə fju noʊts ʌv "ðə wɪn ðət ʃeɪks ðə wɪloʊ," sɔfli soʊ əz nɑt tə weɪk ði ʌðɝz. ivən sɑft, ðə sæd saʊnd wɑz tu laʊɾ ɪn ðət pleɪs, tu ɹil. wɪð ə saɪ hi ɹipleɪs ðə fluɾ ən dɪɾ ʌp ðə bʌndəl əɡɛn.

To keep himself company, he unwrapped Thom Merrilin's cloak, exposing the harp and flute in their hard leather cases atop the many-colored patches. He took the gold-and-silver flute from its case, remembering the gleeman teaching him as he fingered it, and played a few notes of "The Wind That Shakes the Willow," softly so as not to wake the others. Even soft, the sad sound was too loud in that place, too real. With a sigh he replaced the flute and did up the bundle again.

hi hɛl ðə wɑtʃ lɔŋ ɪndə ðə naɪt, lɛɾɪŋ ði ʌðɝz slip. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ leɪɾ ɪt wɑz wən i sʌɾənli ɹilaɪzd ə fɑɡ hæd ɹɪzən. kloʊz tə ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪt leɪ, θɪk, meɪkɪŋ hʊɹɪn ən lɔɪəl ɪndɪstɪŋk maʊnz simɪŋ tə hʌmp aʊɾ ə klaʊdz. θɪnɝ haɪɝ ʌp, ɪt stɪl ʃɹaʊɾɪd ðə læn ɝaʊn ðɛm, haɪɾɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪksɛp ðə nɪɹəs tʃɹiz. ðə mun sim vjud θɹu wɔɾɝd sɪlk. ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl kəd kʌm ɹaɪɾ ʌp tə ðɛm ənsin. hi tʌtʃt ɪz sɔɹd.

He held the watch long into the night, letting the others sleep. He did not know how late it was when he suddenly realized a fog had risen. Close to the ground it lay, thick, making Hurin and Loial indistinct mounds seeming to hump out of clouds. Thinner higher up, it still shrouded the land around them, hiding everything except the nearest trees. The moon seemed viewed through watered silk. Anything at all could come right up to them unseen. He touched his sword.

"sɔɹdz də noʊ ɡʊɾ əɡɛns mi, luz θɝɪn. jə ʃəd noʊ ðæt."

"Swords do no good against me, Lews Therin. You should know that."

ðə fɑɡ swɝld ɝaʊn ɹændz fiɾ əz i spʌn, ðə sɔɹd kʌmɪŋ ɪndə hɪz hænz, hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪɾ əpɹaɪt bɪfɔɹ hɪm. ðə vɔɪd lɛpt ʌp ɪnsaɪd hɪm; fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, hi bɛɹli noʊɾəst ðə teɪntɪd laɪɾ ə seɪɾɪn.

The fog swirled around Rand's feet as he spun, the sword coming into his hands, heron-mark blade upright before him. The void leaped up inside him; for the first time, he barely noticed the tainted light of saidin.

ə ʃæɾoʊi fɪɡjɝ dʒɹu nɪɹɝ θɹu ðə mɪst, wɔkɪŋ wɪð ə tɔl stæf. bɪhaɪn ɪt, əz ɪf ðə ʃædoʊz ʃædoʊ wɝ væst, ðə fɑɡ dɑɹkən tɪl ɪt wɑz blækɝ ðən naɪt. ɹændz skɪn kɹɔld. kloʊsɝ ðə fɪɡjɝ keɪm, əntɪl ɪt ɹizɑlvd ɪndə ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə mæn, kloʊðd ən ɡlʌvd ɪn blæk, wɪð ə blæk sɪlk mæsk kʌvɝɪŋ ɪz feɪs, ən ðə ʃædoʊ keɪm wɪð ɪt. hɪz stæf wɑz blæk, tu, əz ɪf ðə wʊd hæd bɪn tʃɑɹd, jɛt smuð ən ʃaɪnɪŋ laɪk wɔɾɝ baɪ munlaɪt. fəɹ ən ɪnstən ði aɪhoʊlz ə ðə mæsk ɡloʊd, əz ɪf faɪɝz stʊd bɪhaɪn əm ɹæðɝ ðən aɪz, bʌt ɹænd dɪd nɑt nid ðət tə noʊ hu ɪt wɑz.

A shadowy figure drew nearer through the mist, walking with a tall staff. Behind it, as if the shadow's shadow were vast, the fog darkened till it was blacker than night. Rand's skin crawled. Closer the figure came, until it resolved into the shape of a man, clothed and gloved in black, with a black silk mask covering his face, and the shadow came with it. His staff was black, too, as if the wood had been charred, yet smooth and shining like water by moonlight. For an instant the eyeholes of the mask glowed, as if fires stood behind them rather than eyes, but Rand did not need that to know who it was.

"bælzəmən," hi bɹiðd. "ðɪs ɪz ə dʒɹim. ɪts tə bi. aɪ fɛl əslip, ən - "

"Ba'alzamon," he breathed. "This is a dream. It has to be. I fell asleep, and - "

bælzəmən læf laɪk ðə ɹɔɹ ʌv ən oʊpən fɝnəs. "ju ɔlweɪz tʃɹaɪ tə dɪnaɪ wʌɾ ɪz, luz θɝɪn. ɪf aɪ stʃɹɛtʃ aʊt maɪ hænd, aɪ kən tʌtʃ ju, kɪnsleɪɝ. aɪ kən ɔlweɪz tʌtʃ ju. ɔlweɪz ən ɛvɹiwɛɹ."

Ba'alzamon laughed like the roar of an open furnace. "You always try to deny what is, Lews Therin. If I stretch out my hand, I can touch you, Kinslayer. I can always touch you. Always and everywhere."

"aɪ æm nɑt ðə dʒɹæɡən! maɪ neɪm ɪz ɹænd æl' - !" ɹænd klæmpt ɪz tiθ ʃʌt tə stɑp hɪmsɛlf.

"I am not the Dragon! My name is Rand al' - !" Rand clamped his teeth shut to stop himself.

"oʊ, aɪ noʊ ðə neɪm jə juz naʊ, luz θɝɪn. aɪ noʊ ɛvɹi neɪm juv juz θɹu eɪdʒ æftɝ eɪdʒ, lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ jə wɝ ivən ðə kɪnsleɪɝ." bælzəmənz vɔɪs bɪɡæn tə ɹaɪz ɪn ɪntɛnsəɾi; səmtaɪmz ðə faɪɝz ə hɪz aɪz flɛɹd soʊ haɪ ðət ɹænd kəd si ðɛm θɹu ði oʊpənɪŋz ɪn ðə sɪlk mæsk, si ðɛm laɪk ɛnləs siz ə fleɪm. "aɪ noʊ ju, noʊ jəɹ blʌɾ ən jəɹ laɪn bæk tə ðə fɝst spɑɹk ə laɪf ðəɾ ɛvɝ wɑz, bæk tə ðə fɝs moʊmənt. jə kən nɛvɝ haɪd fɹəm mi. nɛvɝ! wəɹ taɪd təɡɛðɝ əz ʃʊɹli əz tu saɪdz ə ðə seɪm kɔɪn. ɔɹɾənɛɹi mɛn meɪ haɪɾ ɪn ðə swip ə ðə pæɾɝn, bʌt tɑvɝən stæn aʊt laɪk bikən faɪɝz ɑn ə hɪl, ən ju, jə stæn aʊɾ əz ɪf tɛn θaʊzənd ʃaɪnɪŋ æɹoʊz stʊɾ ɪn ðə skaɪ tə pɔɪn jə aʊt! jə ɑɹ maɪn, ən ɛvɝ ɪn ɹitʃ ə maɪ hænd!"

"Oh, I know the name you use now, Lews Therin. I know every name you have used through Age after Age, long before you were even the Kinslayer." Ba'alzamon's voice began to rise in intensity; sometimes the fires of his eyes flared so high that Rand could see them through the openings in the silk mask, see them like endless seas of flame. "I know you, know your blood and your line back to the first spark of life that ever was, back to the First Moment. You can never hide from me. Never! We are tied together as surely as two sides of the same coin. Ordinary men may hide in the sweep of the Pattern, but ta'veren stand out like beacon fires on a hill, and you, you stand out as if ten thousand shining arrows stood in the sky to point you out! You are mine, and ever in reach of my hand!"

"fɑðɝ ə laɪz!" ɹænd mænədʒd. dɪspaɪt ðə vɔɪd, hɪz tʌŋ wɑntəd tə kliv tə ðə ɹuf ə hɪz maʊθ. laɪt, pliz lɛɾ ɪt bi ə dʒɹim. ðə θɔt skɪɾɝd aʊtsaɪd ði ɛmptinəs. ivən wʌn ə ðoʊz dʒɹimz ðəɾ ɪzən ə dʒɹim. hi kæn ɹɪli bi stændɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə mi. ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪz sild ɪn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, sil baɪ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ ət ðə moʊmən ə kɹieɪʃən. . . . hi nu tu mʌtʃ ə ðə tʃɹuθ fəɹ ɪt tə hɛlp. "jɔɹ wɛl neɪmd! ɪf jə kəd dʒʌs teɪk mi, waɪ hævən ju? kəz jə kænɑt. aɪ wɔk ɪn ðə laɪt, ən jə kænɑt tʌtʃ mi!"

"Father of Lies!" Rand managed. Despite the void, his tongue wanted to cleave to the roof of his mouth. Light, please let it be a dream. The thought skittered outside the emptiness. Even one of those dreams that isn't a dream. He can't really be standing in front of me. The Dark One is sealed in Shayol Ghul, sealed by the Creator at the moment of Creation. . . . He knew too much of the truth for it to help. "You're well named! If you could just take me, why haven't you? Because you cannot. I walk in the Light, and you cannot touch me!"

bælzəmən lin ɑn ɪz stæf ən lʊkt ət ɹænd ə moʊmənt, ðən muv tə stæn oʊvɝ lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn, piɹɪŋ daʊn ət ðɛm. ðə væst ʃædoʊ muvd wɪð hɪm. hi dɪd nɑt dɪstɝb ðə fɑɡ, ɹænd sɔ - hi muvd, ðə stæf swʌŋ wɪð ɪz stɛps, bʌt ðə ɡɹeɪ mɪs dɪd nɑt swɝl ən ɛɾi ɝaʊn ɪz fiɾ əz ɪt dɪɾ ɝaʊn ɹænz. ðət ɡeɪv ɪm hɑɹt. pɝhæps bælzəmən ɹɪli wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz ə dʒɹim.

Ba'alzamon leaned on his staff and looked at Rand a moment, then moved to stand over Loial and Hurin, peering down at them. The vast shadow moved with him. He did not disturb the fog, Rand saw - he moved, the staff swung with his steps, but the gray mist did not swirl and eddy around his feet as it did around Rand's. That gave him heart. Perhaps Ba'alzamon really was not there. Perhaps it was a dream.

"ju faɪn ɑd fɑloʊɝz," bælzəmən mjuzd. "ju ɔlweɪz dɪd. ðiz tu. ðə ɡɝl u tʃɹaɪz tə wɑtʃ oʊvɝ ju. ə pʊɹ ɡɑɹɾiən ən wik, kɪnsleɪɝ. ɪf ʃi hæɾ ə laɪftaɪm tə ɡɹoʊ, ʃi wəd nɛvɝ ɡɹoʊ stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ jə tə haɪd bɪhaɪnd."

"You find odd followers," Ba'alzamon mused. "You always did. These two. The girl who tries to watch over you. A poor guardian and weak, Kinslayer. If she had a lifetime to grow, she would never grow strong enough for you to hide behind."

ɡɝl? hu? mɔɪɹeɪn ɪz ʃʊɹli nɑɾ ə ɡɝl. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt jə ɑɹ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt, fɑðɝ ə laɪz. jə laɪ, ən laɪ, ən ivən wən jə tɛl ðə tʃɹuθ, jə twɪst ɪt tə ə laɪ."

Girl? Who? Moiraine is surely not a girl. "I don't know what you are talking about, Father of Lies. You lie, and lie, and even when you tell the truth, you twist it to a lie."

"du aɪ, luz θɝɪn? jə noʊ wʌt jə ɑɹ, hu jə ɑɹ. aɪ hæv toʊl ju. ən soʊ hæv ðoʊz wɪmən ə tɑɹ vəlɑn." ɹænd ʃɪftəd, ən bælzəmən ɡeɪv ə læf, laɪk ə smɔl θʌndɝklæp. "ðeɪ θɪŋk ðɛmsɛlvz seɪf ɪn ðɛɹ waɪt taʊɝ, bʌt maɪ fɑloʊɝz nʌmbɝ ivən səm ə ðɛɹ oʊn. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kɔl mɔɪɹeɪn toʊl jə hu jə ɑɹ, dɪd ʃi nɑt? dɪd ʃi laɪ? əɹ ɪz ʃi wʌn ə maɪn? ðə waɪt taʊɝ minz tə juz jə laɪk ə haʊn ɑn ə liʃ. də aɪ laɪ? də aɪ laɪ wən aɪ seɪ jə sik ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ?" hi læft əɡɛn; kɑm ə ðə vɔɪɾ əɹ noʊ, ɪt wɑz ɔl ɹænd kəd də nɑt tə kʌvɝ ɪz ɪɹz. "səmtaɪmz oʊld ɛnəmiz faɪt soʊ lɔŋ ðət ðeɪ bɪkʌm ælaɪz ən nɛvɝ ɹilaɪz ɪt. ðeɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ stʃɹaɪk ət ju, bʌt ðeɪv bɪkʌm soʊ kloʊsli lɪŋkt ɪts əz ɪf jə ɡaɪɾəd ðə bloʊ jɝsɛlf."

"Do I, Lews Therin? You know what you are, who you are. I have told you. And so have those women of Tar Valon." Rand shifted, and Ba'alzamon gave a laugh, like a small thunderclap. "They think themselves safe in their White Tower, but my followers number even some of their own. The Aes Sedai called Moiraine told you who you are, did she not? Did she lie? Or is she one of mine? The White Tower means to use you like a hound on a leash. Do I lie? Do I lie when I say you seek the Horn of Valere?" He laughed again; calm of the void or no, it was all Rand could do not to cover his ears. "Sometimes old enemies fight so long that they become allies and never realize it. They think they strike at you, but they have become so closely linked it is as if you guided the blow yourself."

"ju doʊnt ɡaɪd mi," ɹænd sɛd. "aɪ dɪnaɪ ju."

"You don't guide me," Rand said. "I deny you."

"aɪ hæv ə θaʊzən stʃɹɪŋz taɪd tə ju, kɪnsleɪɝ, itʃ wʌn faɪnɝ ðən sɪlk ən stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən stil. taɪm əz taɪɾ ə θaʊzən kɔɹdz bɪtwin ʌs. ðə bæɾəl wi tu hæv fɔt - dʒju ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛni pɑɹɾ ə ðæt? juv ɛni ɡlɪmɝɪŋ ðət wɪv fɔt bɪfɔɹ, bæɾəlz wɪθaʊt nʌmbɝ bæk tə ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ə taɪm? aɪ noʊ mʌtʃ ðət jə də nɑt! ðət bæɾəl wɪl sun ɛnd. ðə læs bæɾəl ɪz kʌmɪŋ. ðə læst, luz θɝɪn. dʒju ɹɪli θɪŋk jə kən əvɔɪɾ ɪt? jə pʊɹ, ʃɪvɝɪŋ wɝm. jəl sɝv mi əɹ daɪ! ən ðɪs taɪm ðə saɪkəl wɪl nɑt bɪɡɪn ənu wɪð jəɹ dɛθ. ðə ɡɹeɪv bɪlɔŋz tə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk. ðɪs taɪm ɪf jə daɪ, jəl bi dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ʌɾɝli. ðɪs taɪm ðə wil wɪl bi bɹoʊkən wʌtɛvɝ jə du, ən ðə wɝld ɹimeɪd tə ə nu moʊld. sɝv mi! sɝv ʃeɪtɑn, əɹ bi dɪstʃɹɔɪd fɝɛvɝ!"

"I have a thousand strings tied to you, Kinslayer, each one finer than silk and stronger than steel. Time has tied a thousand cords between us. The battle we two have fought - do you remember any part of that? Do you have any glimmering that we have fought before, battles without number back to the beginning of Time? I know much that you do not! That battle will soon end. The Last Battle is coming. The last, Lews Therin. Do you really think you can avoid it? You poor, shivering worm. You will serve me or die! And this time the cycle will not begin anew with your death. The grave belongs to the Great Lord of the Dark. This time if you die, you will be destroyed utterly. This time the Wheel will be broken whatever you do, and the world remade to a new mold. Serve me! Serve Shai'tan, or be destroyed forever!"

wɪð ði ʌɾɝəns ə ðət neɪm, ði ɛɹ sim tə θɪkən. ðə dɑɹknəs bɪhaɪn bælzəmən swɛld ən ɡɹu, θɹɛɾənɪŋ tə swɑloʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ɹænd fɛlt ɪɾ ɪnɡʌlfɪŋ hɪm, koʊldɝ ðən aɪs ən hɑɾɝ ðən koʊlz boʊθ ət ðə seɪm taɪm, blækɝ ðən dɛθ, sʌkɪŋ ɪm ɪndə ðə dɛpθs ʌv ɪt, oʊvɝwɛlmɪŋ ðə wɝld.

With the utterance of that name, the air seemed to thicken. The darkness behind Ba'alzamon swelled and grew, threatening to swallow everything. Rand felt it engulfing him, colder than ice and hotter than coals both at the same time, blacker than death, sucking him into the depths of it, overwhelming the world.

hi ɡɹɪpt ɪz sɔɹd hɪl tɪl ɪz nʌkəlz hɝt. "aɪ dɪnaɪ ju, ən aɪ dɪnaɪ jəɹ paʊɝ. aɪ wɔk ɪn ðə laɪt. ðə laɪt pɹəzɝvz ʌs, ən wi ʃɛltɝ ɪn ðə pɑm ə ðə kɹieɪɾɝz hænd." hi blɪŋkt. bælzəmən stɪl stʊd ðɛɹ, ən ðə ɡɹeɪt dɑɹknəs stɪl hʌŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ɔl ðə ɹɛs hæd bɪn ɪluʒən.

He gripped his sword hilt till his knuckles hurt. "I deny you, and I deny your power. I walk in the Light. The Light preserves us, and we shelter in the palm of the Creator's hand." He blinked. Ba'alzamon still stood there, and the great darkness still hung behind him, but it was as if all the rest had been illusion.

"du jə wɑnə si maɪ feɪs?" ɪt wɑz ə wɪspɝ.

"Do you want to see my face?" It was a whisper.

ɹænd swɑloʊd. "noʊ."

Rand swallowed. "No."

"ju ʃʊd." ə ɡlʌv hænd wɛn tə ðə blæk mæsk.

"You should." A gloved hand went to the black mask.

"noʊ!"

"No!"

ðə mæsk keɪm əweɪ. ɪt wɑz ə mænz feɪs, hɔɹəbli bɝnd. jɛt bɪtwin ðə blæk-ɛdʒd, ɹɛd kɹɛvəsɪz kɹɔsɪŋ ðoʊz fitʃɝz, ðə skɪn lʊk hɛlθi ən smuð. dɑɹk aɪz lʊkt ət ɹænd; kɹuəl lɪps smaɪld wɪð ə flæʃ ʌv waɪt tiθ. "lʊk ət mi, kɪnsleɪɝ, ən si ðə hʌnʒɹədθ pɑɹɾ ə jəɹ oʊn feɪt." fəɹ ə moʊmən aɪz ən maʊθ bɪkeɪm dɔɹweɪz ɪndə ɛnləs kævɝnz ə faɪɝ. "ðɪs ɪz wʌt ðə paʊɝ əntʃɛkt kən du, ivən tə mi. bʌɾ aɪ hil, luz θɝɪn. aɪ noʊ ðə pæðz tə ɡɹeɪɾɝ paʊɝ. ɪɾəl bɝn jə laɪk ə mɔθ flaɪɪŋ ɪndə ə fɝnəs."

The mask came away. It was a man's face, horribly burned. Yet between the black-edged, red crevices crossing those features, the skin looked healthy and smooth. Dark eyes looked at Rand; cruel lips smiled with a flash of white teeth. "Look at me, Kinslayer, and see the hundredth part of your own fate." For a moment eyes and mouth became doorways into endless caverns of fire. "This is what the Power unchecked can do, even to me. But I heal, Lews Therin. I know the paths to greater power. It will burn you like a moth flying into a furnace."

"aɪ wɪl nɑt tʌtʃ ɪt!" ɹænd fɛl ðə vɔɪɾ ɝaʊn hɪm, fɛl seɪɾɪn. "aɪ woʊnt."

"I will not touch it!" Rand felt the void around him, felt saidin. "I won't."

"ju kænɑt stɑp jɝsɛlf."

"You cannot stop yourself."

"liv - mi - əloʊn!"

"Leave - me - ALONE!"

"paʊɝ." bælzəmənz vɔɪs bɪkeɪm sɑft, ɪnsɪnjueɪɾɪŋ. "ju kən əv paʊɝ əɡɛn, luz θɝɪn. jə ɑɹ lɪŋk tə ɪt naʊ, ðɪs moʊmənt. aɪ noʊ ɪt. aɪ kən si ɪt. fil ɪt, luz θɝɪn. fil ðə ɡloʊ ɪnsaɪd ju. fil ðə paʊɝ ðət kəd bi jʊɹz. ɔl jə mʌs də ɪz ɹitʃ aʊt fəɹ ɪt. bʌt ðə ʃædoʊ ɪz ðəɹ bɪtwin jə ən ɪt. mædnəs ən dɛθ. jə nid nɑt daɪ, luz θɝɪn, nɑɾ ɛvɝ əɡɛn."

"Power." Ba'alzamon's voice became soft, insinuating. "You can have power again, Lews Therin. You are linked to it now, this moment. I know it. I can see it. Feel it, Lews Therin. Feel the glow inside you. Feel the power that could be yours. All you must do is reach out for it. But the Shadow is there between you and it. Madness and death. You need not die, Lews Therin, not ever again."

"noʊ," ɹænd sɛd, bʌt ðə vɔɪs wɛn ɑn, bɝoʊɪŋ ɪndə hɪm.

"No," Rand said, but the voice went on, burrowing into him.

"aɪ kən titʃ jə tə kəntʃɹoʊl ðət paʊɝ soʊ ðəɾ ɪt dʌz nɑt dɪstʃɹɔɪ ju. noʊ wʌn ɛls laɪvz u kən titʃ jə ðæt. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk kən ʃɛltɝ jə fɹəm ðə mædnəs. ðə paʊɝ kən bi jʊɹz, ən jə kən lɪv fɝɛvɝ. fɝɛvɝ! ɔl jə mʌs də ɪn ɹɪtɝn ɪz sɝv. oʊnli sɝv. sɪmpəl wɝdz - aɪm jʊɹz, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd - ən paʊɝ wɪl bi jʊɹz. paʊɝ bɪɑn ɛniθɪŋ ðoʊz wɪmən ə tɑɹ vəlɑn dʒɹim ʌv, ən laɪf ɪtɝnəl, ɪf jəl oʊnli ɔfɝ jɝsɛlf ʌp ən sɝv."

"I can teach you to control that power so that it does not destroy you. No one else lives who can teach you that. The Great Lord of the Dark can shelter you from the madness. The power can be yours, and you can live forever. Forever! All you must do in return is serve. Only serve. Simple words - I am yours, Great Lord - and power will be yours. Power beyond anything those women of Tar Valon dream of, and life eternal, if you will only offer yourself up and serve."

ɹænd lɪkt ɪz lɪps. nɑt tə ɡoʊ mæd. nɑt tə daɪ. "nɛvɝ! aɪ wɔk ɪn ðə laɪt," hi ɡɹeɪɾɪd hɔɹsli, "æn jə kən nɛvɝ tʌtʃ mi!"

Rand licked his lips. Not to go mad. Not to die. "Never! I walk in the Light," he grated hoarsely, "and you can never touch me!"

"tʌtʃ ju, luz θɝɪn? tʌtʃ ju? aɪ kən kənsum ju! teɪst ɪɾ ən noʊ, əz aɪ nu!"

"Touch you, Lews Therin? Touch you? I can consume you! Taste it and know, as I knew!"

ðoʊz dɑɹk aɪz bɪkeɪm faɪɝ əɡɛn, ən ðət maʊθ, fleɪm ðət blɑsəmd ən ɡɹu əntɪl ɪt sim bɹaɪɾɝ ðən ə sʌmɝ sʌn. ɡɹu, ən sʌɾənli ɹændz sɔɹd ɡloʊɾ əz ɪf dʒʌs dʒɹɔn fɹəm ðə fɔɹdʒ. hi kɹaɪɾ aʊɾ əz ðə hɪl bɝn ɪz hænz, skɹimd ən dʒɹɑp ðə sɔɹd. ən ðə fɑɡ kɑt faɪɝ, faɪɝ ðət lɛpt, faɪɝ ðət bɝn ɛvɹiθɪŋ.

Those dark eyes became fire again, and that mouth, flame that blossomed and grew until it seemed brighter than a summer sun. Grew, and suddenly Rand's sword glowed as if just drawn from the forge. He cried out as the hilt burned his hands, screamed and dropped the sword. And the fog caught fire, fire that leaped, fire that burned everything.

jɛlɪŋ, ɹænd biɾ əɾ ɪz kloʊðz əz ðeɪ smoʊkt ən tʃɑɹɾ ən fɛl ɪn æʃəz, bit wɪð hænz ðət blækən ən ʃɹɪvəld əz neɪkəd flɛʃ kɹækt ən pild əweɪ ɪn ðə fleɪmz. hi skɹimd. peɪn biɾ ət ðə vɔɪɾ ɪnsaɪd hɪm, ən i tʃɹaɪd tə kɹɔl dipɝ ɪndə ði ɛmptinəs. ðə ɡloʊ wɑz ðɛɹ, ðə teɪntɪd laɪt dʒʌst aʊɾ ə saɪt. hæf mæd, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ kɛɹɪŋ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz, hi ɹitʃt fəɹ seɪɾɪn, tʃɹaɪd tə ɹæp ɪɾ ɝaʊn hɪm, tʃɹaɪd tə haɪɾ ɪn ɪt fɹəm ðə bɝnɪŋ ən ðə peɪn.

Yelling, Rand beat at his clothes as they smoked and charred and fell in ashes, beat with hands that blackened and shriveled as naked flesh cracked and peeled away in the flames. He screamed. Pain beat at the void inside him, and he tried to crawl deeper into the emptiness. The glow was there, the tainted light just out of sight. Half mad, no longer caring what it was, he reached for saidin, tried to wrap it around him, tried to hide in it from the burning and the pain.

əz sʌɾənli əz ðə faɪɝ bɪɡæn, ɪt wɑz ɡɔn. ɹænd stɛɹd wʌndɝɪŋli əɾ ɪz hæn stɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹɛd sliv ə hɪz koʊt. ðəɹ wɑz nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə sɪnʒ ɑn ðə wʊl. aɪ ɪmædʒən ɪɾ ɔl. fɹæntəkəli, hi lʊkt ɝaʊnd. bælzəmən wɑz ɡɔn. hʊɹɪn ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ɪz slip; ðə snɪfɝ ən lɔɪəl wɝ stɪl oʊnli tu maʊnz stɪkɪŋ ʌp aʊɾ ə ðə loʊ fɑɡ. aɪ dɪɾ ɪmædʒən ɪt.

As suddenly as the fire began, it was gone. Rand stared wonderingly at his hand sticking out of the red sleeve of his coat. There was not so much as a singe on the wool. I imagined it all. Frantically, he looked around. Ba'alzamon was gone. Hurin shifted in his sleep; the sniffer and Loial were still only two mounds sticking up out of the low fog. I did imagine it.

bɪfɔɹ ɹɪlif hæɾ ə tʃæns tə ɡɹoʊ, peɪn stæbd ɪz ɹaɪt hænd, ən i tɝn ɪɾ ʌp tə lʊk. ðəɹ əkɹɔs ðə pɑm wɑz bɹændɪɾ ə hɛɹən. ðə hɛɹən fɹəm ðə hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹd, æŋɡɹi ən ɹɛd, əz nitli dʌn əz ðoʊ dʒɹɔn wɪð ən ɑɹɾəsts skɪl.

Before relief had a chance to grow, pain stabbed his right hand, and he turned it up to look. There across the palm was branded a heron. The heron from the hilt of his sword, angry and red, as neatly done as though drawn with an artist's skill.

fʌmbəlɪŋ ə kɝtʃəf fɹəm ɪz koʊt pɑkət, hi ɹæpt ɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪz hænd. ðə hæn θɹɑbd, naʊ. ðə vɔɪd wəd hɛlp wɪð ðət - hi wɑz əwɛɹ ə peɪn ɪn ðə vɔɪd, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt fil ɪt - bʌɾ i pʊt ðə θɔɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛd. twaɪs naʊ, ənnoʊɪŋ - ən wʌns ɑn pɝpəs; hi kəd nɑt fɝɡɛt ðət - hi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ waɪl i wɑz ɪn ðə vɔɪd. ɪt wɑz wɪð ðət ðət bælzəmən wɑntəd tə tɛmp hɪm. ɪt wɑz ðət ðət mɔɪɹeɪn ən ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɑntəɾ ɪm tə du. hi wəd nɑt.

Fumbling a kerchief from his coat pocket, he wrapped it around his hand. The hand throbbed, now. The void would help with that - he was aware of pain in the void, but he did not feel it - but he put the thought out of his head. Twice now, unknowing - and once on purpose; he could not forget that - he had tried to channel the One Power while he was in the void. It was with that that Ba'alzamon wanted to tempt him. It was that that Moiraine and the Amyrlin Seat wanted him to do. He would not.


tʃæptɝ sɪkstin


CHAPTER 16

ɪn ðə mɪɹɝ ə dɑɹknəs


In the Mirror of Darkness

"ju ʃəd nɑɾ əv dʌn ɪt, lɔɹd ɹænd," hʊɹɪn sɛd wən ɹænd woʊk ði ʌðɝz dʒʌst ət deɪbɹeɪk. ðə sʌn jɛt hɪd bɪloʊ ðə hɝaɪzən, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz laɪɾ ɪnʌf tə si. ðə fɑɡ hæd mɛltəɾ əweɪ waɪl dɑɹk stɪl hɛld, feɪɾɪŋ ɹɪlʌktənli. "ɪf jə jus jɝsɛlf ʌp tə spɛɹ ʌs, maɪ lɔɹd, hu wɪl si tə ɡɛɾɪŋ əs hoʊm?"

"You should not have done it, Lord Rand," Hurin said when Rand woke the others just at daybreak. The sun yet hid below the horizon, but there was light enough to see. The fog had melted away while dark still held, fading reluctantly. "If you use yourself up to spare us, my Lord, who will see to getting us home?"

"aɪ niɾəd tə θɪŋk," ɹænd sɛd. nʌθɪŋ ʃoʊd ðə fɑɡ hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn, əɹ bælzəmən. hi fɪŋɡɝd ðə kɝtʃəf ɹæpt ɝaʊn ɪz ɹaɪt hænd. ðəɹ wɑz ðət tə pɹuv bælzəmən hæd bɪn ðɛɹ. hi wɑntəd tə bi əweɪ fɹəm ðɪs pleɪs. "taɪm tə bi ɪn ðə sæɾəl ɪf wəɹ gɑnə kætʃ feɪnz dɑɹkfɹɛnz. pæs taɪm. wi kən it flætbɹɛd waɪl wi ɹaɪd."

"I needed to think," Rand said. Nothing showed the fog had ever been, or Ba'alzamon. He fingered the kerchief wrapped around his right hand. There was that to prove Ba'alzamon had been there. He wanted to be away from this place. "Time to be in the saddle if we are going to catch Fain's Darkfriends. Past time. We can eat flatbread while we ride."

lɔɪəl pɔzd ɪn ði ækt ə stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ, hɪz ɑɹmz ɹitʃɪŋ əz haɪ əz hʊɹɪn cʊɾə stændɪŋ ɑn ɹændz ʃoʊldɝz. "jɔɹ hænd, ɹænd. wʌt hæpənd?"

Loial paused in the act of stretching, his arms reaching as high as Hurin could have standing on Rand's shoulders. "Your hand, Rand. What happened?"

"aɪ hɝɾ ɪt. ɪts nʌθɪŋ."

"I hurt it. It's nothing."

"aɪ hæv ə sɑv ɪn maɪ sæɾəlbæɡz - "

"I have a salve in my saddlebags - "

"ɪɾ ɪz nʌθɪŋ!" ɹænd nu hi saʊndəd hɑɹʃ, bʌt wʌn lʊk ət ðə bɹænd wəd ʃʊɹli bɹɪŋ kwɛstʃənz i dɪd nɑt wɑnə ænsɝ. "taɪmz weɪstɪŋ. lɛɾ əs bi ɑn əɹ weɪ." hi sɛɾ əbaʊt sæɾəlɪŋ ɹɛd, ɔkwɝdli kəz ə hɪz ɪnʒɝd hænd, ən hʊɹɪn dʒʌmp tə hɪz oʊn hɔɹs.

"It is nothing!" Rand knew he sounded harsh, but one look at the brand would surely bring questions he did not want to answer. "Time's wasting. Let us be on our way." He set about saddling Red, awkwardly because of his injured hand, and Hurin jumped to his own horse.

"noʊ nid tə bi soʊ tʌtʃi," lɔɪəl mʌɾɝd.

"No need to be so touchy," Loial muttered.

ə tʃɹæk, ɹænd dɪsaɪɾɪd əz ðeɪ sɛɾ aʊt, wəd bi sʌmθɪŋ nætʃɹəl ɪn ðət wɝld. ðəɹ wɝ tu mɛni ənnætʃɹəl θɪŋz ðɛɹ. ivən ə sɪŋɡəl hʊfpɹɪnt wəd bi wɛlkəm. feɪn ən ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən ðə tʃɹɑləks hæd tə liv səm mɑɹk. hi kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ðeɪ pæst oʊvɝ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk aʊɾ ɛni tʃɹeɪs ðət cʊɾə bɪn meɪd baɪ ənʌðɝ lɪvɪŋ θɪŋ.

A track, Rand decided as they set out, would be something natural in that world. There were too many unnatural things there. Even a single hoofprint would be welcome. Fain and the Darkfriends and the Trollocs had to leave some mark. He concentrated on the ground they passed over, trying to make out any trace that could have been made by another living thing.

ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ, nɑɾ ə tɝn stoʊn, nɑɾ ə dɪstɝb klɑɾ ə ɝθ. wʌns i lʊkt ət ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪhaɪn ðɛm, dʒʌs tə ɹiəʃʊɹ hɪmsɛlf ðət ðə læn dɪd teɪk hʊfpɹɪns; skɹeɪp tɝf ən bɛnt ɡɹæs mɑɹk ðɛɹ pæsədʒ pleɪnli, jɛɾ əhɛd ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɑz ʌndɪstɝbd. bʌt hʊɹɪn ɪnsɪstəɾ i kəd smɛl ðə tʃɹeɪl, feɪn ən θɪn, bʌt stɪl hɛɾɪŋ saʊθ.

There was nothing, not a turned stone, not a disturbed clod of earth. Once he looked at the ground behind them, just to reassure himself that the land did take hoofprints; scraped turf and bent grass marked their passage plainly, yet ahead the ground was undisturbed. But Hurin insisted he could smell the trail, faint and thin, but still heading south.

wʌns əɡɛn ðə snɪfɝ pʊɾ ɔl ɪz ətɛnʃənz ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪl i fɑloʊd, laɪk ə haʊn tʃɹækɪŋ dɪɹ, ən wʌns əɡɛn lɔɪəl ɹoʊd lɔst ɪn ɪz oʊn θɔts, mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf ən ɹʌbɪŋ ðə hjudʒ kɔɹɾɝstæf hɛld əkɹɔs ɪz sæɾəl ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm.

Once again the sniffer put all his attentions on the trail he followed, like a hound tracking deer, and once again Loial rode lost in his own thoughts, muttering to himself and rubbing the huge quarterstaff held across his saddle in front of him.

ðeɪ hæd nɑt bɪn ɹaɪɾɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ən aʊɝ wən ɹænd sɔ ðə spaɪɹ əhɛd. hi wɑz soʊ bɪzi wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ tʃɹæks ðət ðə teɪpɝɪŋ kɑləm ɔlɹɛɾi stʊd θɪk ən tɔl əbʌv ðə tʃɹiz ɪn ðə mɪɾəl dɪstəns wən i fɝs noʊɾəst ɪt. "aɪ wʌndɝ wʌt ðəɾ ɪz." ɪt leɪ dɝɛkli ɪn ðɛɹ pæθ.

They had not been riding more than an hour when Rand saw the spire ahead. He was so busy watching for tracks that the tapering column already stood thick and tall above the trees in the middle distance when he first noticed it. "I wonder what that is." It lay directly in their path.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ ɪt kən bi, ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd.

"I don't know what it can be, Rand," Loial said.

"ɪf ðɪs - ɪf ðɪs wɑz əɹ oʊn wɝld, lɔɹd ɹænd. . . ." hʊɹɪn ʃɪftəɾ ənkʌmftəbli ɪn ɪz sæɾəl. "wɛl, ðət mɑnjəmən lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ wɑz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt - ðə wʌn tə ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz vɪktɝi oʊvɝ ðə tʃɹɑləks - ɪt wɑz ə ɡɹeɪt spaɪɹ. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz tɔɹn daʊn ə θaʊzən jɪɹz əɡoʊ. ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ lɛf bʌɾ ə bɪɡ maʊnd, laɪk ə hɪl. aɪ sɔ ɪt, wən aɪ wɛn tə kɛɹhin fəɹ lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ."

"If this - if this was our own world, Lord Rand. . . ." Hurin shifted uncomfortably in his saddle. "Well, that monument Lord Ingtar was talking about - the one to Artur Hawkwing's victory over the Trollocs - it was a great spire. But it was torn down a thousand years ago. There's nothing left but a big mound, like a hill. I saw it, when I went to Cairhien for Lord Agelmar."

"əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ɪŋtʃɹ," lɔɪəl sɛd, "ðæɾ ɪz stɪl θɹi əɹ fɔɹ deɪz əhɛɾ ʌv ʌs. ɪf ɪts hɪɹ əɾ ɔl. aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ ɪt ʃəd bi. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðəɹ ɑɹ ɛni pipəl hɪɹ əɾ ɔl."

"According to Ingtar," Loial said, "that is still three or four days ahead of us. If it is here at all. I don't know why it should be. I don't think there are any people here at all."

ðə snɪfɝ pʊɾ ɪz aɪz bæk ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. "ðæts dʒʌst ɪt, ɪzən ɪt, bɪldɝ? noʊ pipəl, bʌt ðəɹ ɪts əhɛɾ ʌv ʌs. meɪbi wi ɔt tə kip klɪɹ ʌv ɪt, maɪ lɔɹd ɹænd. noʊ tɛlɪŋ wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz, əɹ huz ðɛɹ, ɪn ə pleɪs laɪk ðɪs."

The sniffer put his eyes back on the ground. "That's just it, isn't it, Builder? No people, but there it is ahead of us. Maybe we ought to keep clear of it, my Lord Rand. No telling what it is, or who's there, in a place like this."

ɹænd dʒɹʌmd ɪz fɪŋɡɝz ɑn ðə haɪ pɑməl ə hɪz sæɾəl fəɹ ə moʊmənt, θɪŋkɪŋ. "wi hæv tə stɪk əz kloʊs tə ðə tʃɹeɪl əz wi kæn," hi sɛd faɪnəli. "wi doʊn sim tə bi ɡɛɾɪŋ ɛni kloʊsɝ tə feɪn əz ɪɾ ɪz, ən aɪ doʊnt wɑnə luz mɔɹ taɪm, ɪf wi kən əvɔɪɾ ɪt. ɪf wi si ɛni pipəl, əɹ ɛniθɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi, ðən wɪl sɝkəl ɝaʊn əntɪl wi pɪk ɪɾ ʌp əɡɛn. bʌɾ əntɪl ðɛn, wi kip ɑn."

Rand drummed his fingers on the high pommel of his saddle for a moment, thinking. "We have to stick as close to the trail as we can," he said finally. "We don't seem to be getting any closer to Fain as it is, and I don't want to lose more time, if we can avoid it. If we see any people, or anything out of the ordinary, then we'll circle around until we pick it up again. But until then, we keep on."

"æz jə seɪ, maɪ lɔɹd." ðə snɪfɝ saʊndəɾ ɑd, ən i ɡeɪv ɹænd ə kwɪk, saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊk. "æz jə seɪ."

"As you say, my Lord." The sniffer sounded odd, and he gave Rand a quick, sidelong look. "As you say."

ɹænd fɹaʊn fəɹ ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ i ʌndɝstʊd, ən ðən ɪt wɑz ɪz tɝn tə saɪ. lɔɹdz dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspleɪn tə ðoʊz u fɑloʊd ðɛm, oʊnli tə ʌðɝ lɔɹdz. aɪ dɪdn æsk ɪm tə teɪk mi fəɹ ə blʌɾi lɔɹd. bʌɾ i dɪd, ə smɔl vɔɪs sim tə ænsɝ hɪm, ən jə lɛt hɪm. jə meɪd ðə tʃɔɪs; naʊ ðə duɾi ɪz jʊɹz.

Rand frowned for a moment before he understood, and then it was his turn to sigh. Lords did not explain to those who followed them, only to other lords. I didn't ask him to take me for a bloody lord. But he did, a small voice seemed to answer him, and you let him. You made the choice; now the duty is yours.

"teɪk ðə tʃɹeɪl, hʊɹɪn," ɹænd sɛd.

"Take the trail, Hurin," Rand said.

wɪð ə flæʃ ə ɹɪlivd ɡɹɪn, ðə snɪfɝ hild ɪz hɔɹs ɔnwɝd.

With a flash of relieved grin, the sniffer heeled his horse onward.

ðə wik sʌn klaɪmd əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd, ən baɪ ðə taɪm ɪt wɑz oʊvɝhɛd, ðeɪ wɝ oʊnli ə maɪl əɹ soʊ fɹəm ðə spaɪɹ. ðeɪ hæd ɹitʃt wʌn ə ðə stʃɹimz, ɪn ə ɡʌli ə peɪs dip, ən ði ɪntɝvinɪŋ tʃɹiz wɝ spɑɹs. ɹænd kəd si ðə maʊn ɪt wɑz bɪlt ɑn, laɪk ə ɹaʊnd, flæt-tɑp hɪl. ðə ɡɹeɪ spaɪɹ ɪtsɛlf ɹoʊz ət list ə hʌnʒɹəd spænz, ən i kəd dʒʌs meɪk aʊt naʊ ðət ðə tɑp wɑz kɑɹvd ɪn ðə laɪknəs ʌv ə bɝd wɪð aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt wɪŋz.

The weak sun climbed as they rode, and by the time it was overhead, they were only a mile or so from the spire. They had reached one of the streams, in a gully a pace deep, and the intervening trees were sparse. Rand could see the mound it was built on, like a round, flat-topped hill. The gray spire itself rose at least a hundred spans, and he could just make out now that the top was carved in the likeness of a bird with outstretched wings.

"ə hɔk," ɹænd sɛd. "ɪɾ ɪz hɔkwɪŋz mɑnjəmənt. ɪt mʌs bi. ðəɹ wɝ pipəl hɪɹ, wɛðɝ ðəɹ ɑɹ naʊ əɹ nɑt. ðeɪ dʒʌs bɪlt ɪɾ ɪn ənʌðɝ pleɪs hɪɹ, ən nɛvɝ tɔɹ ɪt daʊn. θɪŋk ʌv ɪt, hʊɹɪn. wən wi ɡɛt bæk, jəl bi eɪbəl tə tɛl əm wʌt ðə mɑnjəmən ɹɪli lʊk laɪk. ðəɹ wɪl oʊnli bi θɹi ʌv əs ɪn ðə hoʊl wɝld u hæv ɛvɝ sin ɪt."

"A hawk," Rand said. "It is Hawkwing's monument. It must be. There were people here, whether there are now or not. They just built it in another place here, and never tore it down. Think of it, Hurin. When we get back, you'll be able to tell them what the monument really looked like. There will only be three of us in the whole world who have ever seen it."

hʊɹɪn nɑɾəd. "jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd. maɪ tʃɪlʒɹən wəd laɪk tə hɪɹ ðət teɪl, ðɛɹ fɑðɝ siɪŋ hɔkwɪŋz spaɪɹ."

Hurin nodded. "Yes, my Lord. My children would like to hear that tale, their father seeing Hawkwing's spire."

"ɹænd," lɔɪəl bɪɡæn wɝidli.

"Rand," Loial began worriedly.

"wi kən ɡæləp ðə dɪstəns," ɹænd sɛd. "kʌm ɑn. ə ɡæləp wɪl də əs ɡʊd. ðɪs pleɪs meɪ bi dɛd, bʌt wɝ əlaɪv."

"We can gallop the distance," Rand said. "Come on. A gallop will do us good. This place may be dead, but we're alive."

"ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd, "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðəɾ ɪz ə - "

"Rand," Loial said, "I don't think that is a - "

nɑt weɪɾɪŋ tə hɪɹ, ɹænd dʌɡ hɪz buts ɪndə ɹɛdz flæŋks, ən ðə stæljən spɹæŋ fɔɹwɝd. hi splæʃt əkɹɔs ðə ʃæloʊ ɹɪbən ʌv wɔɾɝ ɪn tu stʃɹaɪdz, ðən skɹæbəld ʌp ðə fɑɹ saɪd. hʊɹɪn lɔntʃt ɪz hɔɹs ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn hɪm. ɹænd hɝd lɔɪəl kɔlɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðɛm, bʌɾ i læft, weɪv fəɹ ði oʊɡiɝ tə fɑloʊ, ən ɡæləpt ɑn. ɪf i kɛpt ɪz aɪz ɑn wʌn spɑt, ðə læn dɪd nɑt sim tə slɪp ən slaɪd soʊ bædli, ən ðə wɪn fɛlt ɡʊɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs.

Not waiting to hear, Rand dug his boots into Red's flanks, and the stallion sprang forward. He splashed across the shallow ribbon of water in two strides, then scrabbled up the far side. Hurin launched his horse right behind him. Rand heard Loial calling behind them, but he laughed, waved for the Ogier to follow, and galloped on. If he kept his eyes on one spot, the land did not seem to slip and slide so badly, and the wind felt good on his face.

ðə maʊn kʌvɝɾ ə ɡʊd tu haɪdz, bʌt ðə ɡɹæsi sloʊp ɹoʊz əɾ ən izi slænt. ðə ɡɹeɪ spaɪɹ ɹɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə skaɪ, skwɛɹɾ ən bɹɔɾ ɪnʌf dɪspaɪɾ ɪts haɪt tə sim mæsɪv, ɔlmoʊst skwɑt. ɹændz læftɝ daɪd, ən i pʊld ɹɛɾ ʌp, hɪz feɪs ɡɹɪm.

The mound covered a good two hides, but the grassy slope rose at an easy slant. The gray spire reared into the sky, squared and broad enough despite its height to seem massive, almost squat. Rand's laughter died, and he pulled Red up, his face grim.

"ɪz ðət hɔkwɪŋz mɑnjəmənt, lɔɹd ɹænd?" hʊɹɪn æskt ənizəli. "ɪt dʌzn lʊk ɹaɪt, sʌmhaʊ."

"Is that Hawkwing's monument, Lord Rand?" Hurin asked uneasily. "It doesn't look right, somehow."

ɹænd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə hɑɹʃ, æŋɡjəlɝ skɹɪp ðət kʌvɝd ðə feɪs ə ðə mɑnjəmənt, ən i ɹɛkəɡnaɪz səm ə ðə sɪmbəlz tʃɪzəld ɑn ðə bɹɛdθ, tʃɪzəld əz tɔl əz ə mæn. ðə hɔɹn skʌl ə ðə dɑvɑl tʃɹɑləks. ði aɪɝn fɪst ə ðə deɪmən. ðə tʃɹaɪɾənt ə ðə koʊbəl, ən ðə wɝlwɪn ə ði ɑfɹeɪt. ðəɹ wɑz ə hɔk, tu, kɑɹv nɪɹ ðə bɑɾəm. wɪð ə wɪŋspæn ə tɛn peɪsɪz, ɪt leɪ ɑn ɪts bæk, pɪɹs baɪ ə laɪtnɪŋ boʊlt, ən ɹeɪvənz pɛkt əɾ ɪts aɪz. ðə hjudʒ wɪŋz ətɑp ðə spaɪɹ sim tə blɑk ðə sʌn.

Rand recognized the harsh, angular script that covered the face of the monument, and he recognized some of the symbols chiseled on the breadth, chiseled as tall as a man. The horned skull of the Dha'vol Trollocs. The iron fist of the Dhai'mon. The trident of the Ko'bal, and the whirlwind of the Ahf'frait. There was a hawk, too, carved near the bottom. With a wingspan of ten paces, it lay on its back, pierced by a lightning bolt, and ravens pecked at its eyes. The huge wings atop the spire seemed to block the sun.

hi hɝd lɔɪəl ɡæləpɪŋ ʌp bɪhaɪn hɪm.

He heard Loial galloping up behind him.

"aɪ tʃɹaɪd tə tɛl ju, ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd. "ɪɾ ɪz ə ɹeɪvən, nɑɾ ə hɔk. aɪ kəd si ɪt klɪɹli." hʊɹɪn tɝn ɪz hɔɹs, ɹəfjuzɪŋ ivən tə lʊk ət ðə spaɪɹ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ.

"I tried to tell you, Rand," Loial said. "It is a raven, not a hawk. I could see it clearly." Hurin turned his horse, refusing even to look at the spire any longer.

"bʌt haʊ?" ɹænd sɛd. "ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ wʌn ə vɪktɝi oʊvɝ ðə tʃɹɑləks hɪɹ. ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd soʊ."

"But how?" Rand said. "Artur Hawkwing won a victory over the Trollocs here. Ingtar said so."

"nɑt hɪɹ," lɔɪəl sɛd sloʊli. "ɑbviəsli nɑt hɪɹ. 'fɹʌm stoʊn tə stoʊn ɹʌn ðə laɪnz ʌv ɪt, bɪtwin ðə wɝlz ðət maɪt bi.' aɪv bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ ɑn ɪt, ən aɪ bɪliv aɪ noʊ wʌt 'ðə wɝlz ðət maɪt bi' ɑɹ. meɪbi aɪ du. wɝlz əɹ wɝl maɪɾ əv bɪn ɪf θɪŋz hæd hæpən dɪfɹənli. meɪbi ðæts waɪ ɪts ɔl soʊ . . . wɑʃt-aʊt lʊkɪŋ. kəz ɪts ən 'ɪf,' ə 'meɪbi.' dʒʌst ə ʃædoʊ ʌv ðə ɹil wɝld. ɪn ðɪs wɝld, aɪ θɪŋk, ðə tʃɹɑləks wʌn. meɪbi ðæts waɪ wɪv nɑt sin ɛni vɪlədʒəz əɹ pipəl."

"Not here," Loial said slowly. "Obviously not here. 'From Stone to Stone run the lines of it, between the worlds that might be.' I've been thinking on it, and I believe I know what 'the worlds that might be' are. Maybe I do. Worlds our world might have been if things had happened differently. Maybe that's why it is all so . . . washed-out looking. Because it's an 'if,' a 'maybe.' Just a shadow of the real world. In this world, I think, the Trollocs won. Maybe that's why we have not seen any villages or people."

ɹændz skɪn kɹɔld. wɛɹ tʃɹɑləks wʌn, ðeɪ dɪd nɑt liv hjumənz əlaɪv ɪksɛp fəɹ fud. ɪf ðeɪ hæd wʌn əkɹɔs ən ɪntaɪɝ wɝld. . . . "ɪf ðə tʃɹɑləks hæd wʌn, ðeɪ wəd bi ɛvɹiwɛɹ. wiɾ əv sin ə θaʊzən ə ðɛm baɪ naʊ. wid bi dɛd sɪns jɛstɝdeɪ."

Rand's skin crawled. Where Trollocs won, they did not leave humans alive except for food. If they had won across an entire world. . . . "If the Trollocs had won, they would be everywhere. We'd have seen a thousand of them by now. We'd be dead since yesterday."

"aɪ də nɑt noʊ, ɹænd. pɝhæps, æftɝ ðeɪ kɪl ðə pipəl, ðeɪ kɪld wʌn ənʌðɝ. tʃɹɑləks lɪv tə kɪl. ðəɾ ɪz ɔl ðeɪ du; ðəɾ ɪz ɔl ðeɪ ɑɹ. aɪ dʒʌs doʊnt noʊ."

"I do not know, Rand. Perhaps, after they killed the people, they killed one another. Trollocs live to kill. That is all they do; that is all they are. I just don't know."

"lɔɹd ɹænd," hʊɹɪn sɛɾ əbɹʌpli, "sʌmθɪŋ muv daʊn ðɛɹ."

"Lord Rand," Hurin said abruptly, "something moved down there."

ɹænd wɝld ɪz hɔɹs, ɹɛɾi tə si tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ tʃɹɑləks, bʌt hʊɹɪn wɑz pɔɪntɪŋ bæk ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæd kʌm, ət nʌθɪŋ. "wʌt dɪd jə si, hʊɹɪn? wɛɹ?"

Rand whirled his horse, ready to see charging Trollocs, but Hurin was pointing back the way they had come, at nothing. "What did you see, Hurin? Where?"

ðə snɪfɝ lɛɾ ɪz ɑɹm dʒɹɑp. "ɹaɪɾ ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðət klʌmp ə tʃɹiz ðɛɹ, əbaʊɾ ə maɪl. aɪ θɔɾ ɪt wɑz . . . ə wʊmən . . . ən sʌmθɪŋ ɛls aɪ kʊdn meɪk aʊt, bʌt. . . ." hi ʃɪvɝd. "ɪts soʊ hɑɹd tə meɪk aʊt θɪŋz ðəɾ ɑɹən ʌndɝ jəɹ noʊz. ɑ, ðɪs pleɪs əz maɪ ɡʌts ɔl ɔwɝl. aɪm laɪkli ɪmædʒənɪŋ θɪŋz, maɪ lɔɹd. ðɪs ɪz ə pleɪs fəɹ kwɪɹ fænsiz." hɪz ʃoʊldɝz hʌntʃt əz ɪf i fɛl ðə spaɪɹ pɹɛsɪŋ ɑn ðɛm. "noʊ daʊɾ ɪt wɑz dʒʌs ðə wɪnd, maɪ lɔɹd."

The sniffer let his arm drop. "Right at the edge of that clump of trees there, about a mile. I thought it was . . . a woman . . . and something else I couldn't make out, but. . . ." He shivered. "It's so hard to make out things that aren't under your nose. Aaah, this place has my guts all awhirl. I'm likely imagining things, my Lord. This is a place for queer fancies." His shoulders hunched as if he felt the spire pressing on them. "No doubt it was just the wind, my Lord."

lɔɪəl sɛd, "ðɛɹz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls tə kənsɪɾɝ, aɪm əfɹeɪd." hi saʊndəd tʃɹʌbəld əɡɛn. hi pɔɪntəd saʊθwɝd. "wʌt dʒju si ɔf ðɛɹ?"

Loial said, "There's something else to consider, I'm afraid." He sounded troubled again. He pointed southward. "What do you see off there?"

ɹænd skwɪntɪɾ əɡɛns ðə weɪ θɪŋz fɑɹ ɔf sim tə slaɪd təwɔɹd hɪm. "læn laɪk wʌt wiv bɪn kɹɔsɪŋ. tʃɹiz. ðən səm hɪlz, ən maʊntənz. nʌθɪŋ ɛls. wʌt dʒju wɑn mi tə si?"

Rand squinted against the way things far off seemed to slide toward him. "Land like what we've been crossing. Trees. Then some hills, and mountains. Nothing else. What do you want me to see?"

"ðə maʊntənz," lɔɪəl saɪd. ðə tʌfs ɑn ɪz ɪɹz dʒɹupt, ən ði ɛnz ə hɪz aɪbɹaʊz wɝ daʊn ɑn ɪz tʃiks. "ðæɾ əz tə bi kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ, ɹænd. ðəɹ ɑɹən ɛni ʌðɝ maʊntənz ðeɪ kəd bi, ənlɛs ðɪs wɝld ɪz kəmplitli dɪfɹən fɹəm aʊɝz. bʌt kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ laɪz mɔɹ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd liɡz saʊθ ə ði ɛɹɪnɪn. ə ɡʊd bɪt mɔɹ. dɪstənsəz ɑɹ hɑɹd tə dʒʌdʒ ɪn ðɪs pleɪs, bʌt. . . . aɪ θɪŋk wɪl ɹitʃ əm bɪfɔɹ dɑɹk." hi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə seɪ ɛni mɔɹ. ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ əv kʌvɝɾ oʊvɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd liɡz ɪn lɛs ðən θɹi deɪz.

"The mountains," Loial sighed. The tufts on his ears drooped, and the ends of his eyebrows were down on his cheeks. "That has to be Kinslayer's Dagger, Rand. There aren't any other mountains they could be, unless this world is completely different from ours. But Kinslayer's Dagger lies more than a hundred leagues south of the Erinin. A good bit more. Distances are hard to judge in this place, but. . . . I think we will reach them before dark." He did not have to say any more. They could not have covered over a hundred leagues in less than three days.

wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ, ɹænd mʌɾɝd, "meɪbi ðɪs pleɪs ɪz laɪk ðə weɪz." hi hɝd hʊɹɪn moʊn, ən ɪnstənli ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd nɑt kipɪŋ ə ɹeɪn ɑn ɪz tʌŋ.

Without thinking, Rand muttered, "Maybe this place is like the Ways." He heard Hurin moan, and instantly regretted not keeping a rein on his tongue.

ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə plɛzən θɔt. ɛntɝ ə weɪɡeɪt - ðeɪ kəd bi faʊn dʒʌst aʊtsaɪɾ oʊɡiɝ stɛɾɪŋ, ən ɪn oʊɡiɝ ɡɹoʊvz - ɛntɝ ən wɔk fəɹ ə deɪ, ən jə kəd liv baɪ ənʌðɝ weɪɡeɪɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd liɡz fɹəm wɛɹ jə stɑɹɾəd. ðə weɪz wɝ dɑɹk, naʊ, ən faʊl, ən tə tʃɹævəl əm mɛn tə ɹɪsk dɛθ əɹ mædnəs. ivən feɪdz fɪɹd tə tʃɹævəl ðə weɪz.

It was not a pleasant thought. Enter a Waygate - they could be found just outside Ogier stedding, and in Ogier groves - enter and walk for a day, and you could leave by another Waygate a hundred leagues from where you started. The Ways were dark, now, and foul, and to travel them meant to risk death or madness. Even Fades feared to travel the Ways.

"ɪf ɪɾ ɪz, ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd sloʊli, "kæn ə mɪsstɛp kɪl əs hɪɹ, tu? ɑɹ ðəɹ θɪŋz wɪv nɑt jɛt sin ðət kən də wɝs ðən kɪl ʌs?" hʊɹɪn moʊn əɡɛn.

"If it is, Rand," Loial said slowly, "can a misstep kill us here, too? Are there things we have not yet seen that can do worse than kill us?" Hurin moaned again.

ðeɪ hæd bɪn dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ðə wɔɾɝ, ɹaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɑɾ ə kənsɝn ɪn ðə wɝld. ʌnkənsɝn wəd kɪl kwɪkli ɪn ðə weɪz. ɹænd swɑloʊd, hoʊpɪŋ ɪz stʌmək wəd sɛɾəl.

They had been drinking the water, riding along as if they had not a concern in the world. Unconcern would kill quickly in the Ways. Rand swallowed, hoping his stomach would settle.

"ɪɾ ɪz tu leɪt fəɹ wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt wʌɾ ɪz pæst," hi sɛd. "fɹʌm hɪɹ ɑn, ðoʊ, wɪl wɑtʃ əɹ stɛp." hi ɡlænst ət hʊɹɪn. ðə snɪfɝz hɛd hæd sʌŋk bɪtwin ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, ən ɪz aɪz dɑɹɾɪd əz ɪf i wʌndɝd wʌt wəd lip ət hɪm, ən fɹəm wɛɹ. ðə mæn hæd ɹʌn daʊn mɝɾɝɝz, bʌt ðɪs wɑz mɔɹ ðən i hæɾ ɛvɝ bɑɹɡən fɔɹ. "hoʊld ɑn tə jɝsɛlf, hʊɹɪn. wəɹ nɑt dɛd, jɛt, ən wi woʊn bi. wɪl dʒʌst əv tə bi kɛɹfəl fɹəm hɪɹ ɑn. ðæts ɔl."

"It is too late for worrying about what is past," he said. "From here on, though, we will watch our step." He glanced at Hurin. The sniffer's head had sunk between his shoulders, and his eyes darted as if he wondered what would leap at him, and from where. The man had run down murderers, but this was more than he had ever bargained for. "Hold on to yourself, Hurin. We are not dead, yet, and we won't be. We will just have to be careful from here on. That's all."

ɪt wɑz ət ðət moʊmən ðeɪ hɝd ðə skɹim, θɪn wɪð dɪstəns.

It was at that moment they heard the scream, thin with distance.

"ə wʊmən!" hʊɹɪn sɛd. ivən ðɪs mʌtʃ ðət wɑz nɔɹməl sim tə ɹaʊs ɪm ə lɪɾəl. "aɪ nu aɪ sɔ - "

"A woman!" Hurin said. Even this much that was normal seemed to rouse him a little. "I knew I saw - "

ənʌðɝ skɹim keɪm, mɔɹ dɛspɹɪt ðən ðə fɝst.

Another scream came, more desperate than the first.

"nɑɾ ənlɛs ʃi kən flaɪ," ɹænd sɛd. "ʃiz saʊθ ʌv ʌs." hi kɪkt ɹɛd tə ə dɛd ɹʌn ɪn tu stʃɹaɪdz.

"Not unless she can fly," Rand said. "She's south of us." He kicked Red to a dead run in two strides.

"bi kɛɹfəl jə sɛd!" lɔɪəl ʃaʊɾəd æftɝ hɪm. "laɪt, ɹænd, ɹɪmɛmbɝ! bi kɛɹfəl!"

"Be careful you said!" Loial shouted after him. "Light, Rand, remember! Be careful!"

ɹænd leɪ loʊ ɑn ɹɛdz bæk, lɛɾɪŋ ðə stæljən ɹʌn. ðə skɹimz dʒɹu hɪm ɑn. ɪt wɑz izi tə seɪ bi kɛɹfəl, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz tɛɹɝ ɪn ðət wʊmənz vɔɪs. ʃi dɪd nɑt saʊn əz ɪf ʃi hæd taɪm fəɹ ɪm tə bi kɛɹfəl. ɑn ði ɛdʒ ʌv ənʌðɝ stʃɹim, ɪn ə ʃɪɹ-bæŋk tʃænəl dipɝ ðən moʊst, hi dʒɹu ɹeɪn; ɹɛd skɪɾəd ɪn ə ʃaʊɝ ə stoʊnz ən dɝt. ðə skɹimz wɝ kʌmɪŋ. . . . ðɛɹ!

Rand lay low on Red's back, letting the stallion run. The screams drew him on. It was easy to say be careful, but there was terror in that woman's voice. She did not sound as if she had time for him to be careful. On the edge of another stream, in a sheer-banked channel deeper than most, he drew rein; Red skidded in a shower of stones and dirt. The screams were coming. . . . There!

hi tʊk ɪɾ ɔl ɪn əɾ ə ɡlæns. pɝhæps tu hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əweɪ, ðə wʊmən stʊd bɪsaɪɾ əɹ hɔɹs ɪn ðə stʃɹim, boʊθ ə ðɛm bækt əɡɛns ðə fɑɹ bæŋk. wɪð ə bɹoʊkən lɛŋθ ə bɹæntʃ, ʃi wɑz fɛndɪŋ ɔf ə snɑɹlɪŋ . . . sʌmθɪŋ. ɹænd swɑloʊd, stʌn fəɹ ə moʊmənt. ɪf ə fɹɑɡ wɝ əz bɪɡ əz ə bɛɹ, əɹ ɪf ə bɛɹ hæɾ ə fɹɑɡz ɡɹeɪ-ɡɹin haɪd, ɪt maɪt lʊk laɪk ðæt. ə bɪɡ bɛɹ.

He took it all in at a glance. Perhaps two hundred paces away, the woman stood beside her horse in the stream, both of them backed against the far bank. With a broken length of branch, she was fending off a snarling . . . something. Rand swallowed, stunned for a moment. If a frog were as big as a bear, or if a bear had a frog's gray-green hide, it might look like that. A big bear.

nɑt lɛɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf θɪŋk əbaʊt ðə kɹitʃɝ, hi lɛp tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ənlɪmbɝɪŋ ɪz baʊ. ɪf i tʊk ðə taɪm tə ɹaɪd kloʊsɝ, ɪt maɪt bi tu leɪt. ðə wʊmən wɑz bɛɹli kipɪŋ ðə . . . θɪŋ . . . ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə bɹæntʃ. ɪt wɑz ə fɛɹ dɪstəns - hi kɛp blɪŋkɪŋ əz i tʃɹaɪd tə dʒʌdʒ ɪt; ðə dɪstəns sim tə tʃeɪnʒ baɪ spænz ɛvɹi taɪm ðə θɪŋ muvd - jɛɾ ə bɪɡ tɑɹɡət. hɪz bændədʒ hæn meɪd dʒɹɔɪŋ ɑkwɝd, bʌɾ i hæɾ ən æɹoʊ lust ɔlmoʊs bɪfɔɹ ɪz fit wɝ sɛt.

Not letting himself think about the creature, he leaped to the ground, unlimbering his bow. If he took the time to ride closer, it might be too late. The woman was barely keeping the . . . thing . . . at the edge of the branch. It was a fair distance - he kept blinking as he tried to judge it; the distance seemed to change by spans every time the thing moved - yet a big target. His bandaged hand made drawing awkward, but he had an arrow loosed almost before his feet were set.

ðə ʃæf sæŋk ɪndə ðə lɛðɝi haɪd fəɹ hæf ɪts lɛŋθ, ən ðə kɹitʃɝ spʌn tə feɪs ɹænd. ɹænd tʊk ə stɛp bæk dɪspaɪt ðə dɪstəns. ðət hjudʒ, wɛdʒ-ʃeɪp hɛd hæd nɛvɝ bɪn ɑn ɛni ænəməl i kəɾ ɪmædʒən, nɔɹ ðət waɪd, hɔɹni-lɪp bik ʌv ə maʊθ, hʊk fəɹ ɹɪpɪŋ flɛʃ. ən ɪt hæd θɹi aɪz, smɔl, ən fɪɹs, ən ɹɪŋ baɪ hɑɹd-lʊkɪŋ ɹɪdʒəz. ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪtsɛlf, ðə θɪŋ baʊndəd təwɔɹɾ ɪm daʊn ðə stʃɹim ɪn ɡɹeɪt, splæʃɪŋ lips. tə ɹændz aɪ, səm ə ðə lips sim tə kʌvɝ twaɪs əz mʌtʃ dɪstəns əz ʌðɝz, ðoʊ hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ðə seɪm.

The shaft sank into the leathery hide for half its length, and the creature spun to face Rand. Rand took a step back despite the distance. That huge, wedge-shaped head had never been on any animal he could imagine, nor that wide, horny-lipped beak of a mouth, hooked for ripping flesh. And it had three eyes, small, and fierce, and ringed by hard-looking ridges. Gathering itself, the thing bounded toward him down the stream in great, splashing leaps. To Rand's eye, some of the leaps seemed to cover twice as much distance as others, though he was sure they were all the same.

"æn aɪ," ðə wʊmən kɔld. ʃi saʊndəd sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli kɑm, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ əɹ skɹimz. "ju mʌs hɪɾ ən aɪ tə kɪl ɪt."

"An eye," the woman called. She sounded surprisingly calm, considering her screams. "You must hit an eye to kill it."

hi dʒɹu ðə flɛtʃɪŋ ʌv ənʌðɝ æɹoʊ bæk tə hɪz ɪɹ. ɹɪlʌktənli, hi sɔt ðə vɔɪd; hi dɪd nɑt wɑn tə, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz fəɹ ðɪs ðət tæm hæd tɔt hɪm, ən i nu hi kəd nɛvɝ meɪk ðə ʃɑt wɪθaʊɾ ɪt. maɪ fɑðɝ, hi θɔt wɪð ə sɛns ə lɔs, ən ɛmptinəs fɪl hɪm. ðə kweɪvɝɪŋ laɪɾ ə seɪɾɪn wɑz ðɛɹ, bʌɾ i ʃʌɾ ɪɾ əweɪ. hi wɑz wʌn wɪð ðə baʊ, wɪð ði æɹoʊ, wɪð ðə mɑnstʃɹəs ʃeɪp lipɪŋ təwɔɹd hɪm. wʌn wɪð ðə taɪni aɪ. hi dɪd nɑɾ ivən fil ði æɹoʊ liv ðə bɑstʃɹɪŋ.

He drew the fletching of another arrow back to his ear. Reluctantly, he sought the void; he did not want to, but it was for this that Tam had taught him, and he knew he could never make the shot without it. My father, he thought with a sense of loss, and emptiness filled him. The quavering light of saidin was there, but he shut it away. He was one with the bow, with the arrow, with the monstrous shape leaping toward him. One with the tiny eye. He did not even feel the arrow leave the bowstring.

ðə kɹitʃɝ ɹoʊz ɪn ənʌðɝ baʊnd, ən ət ðə pik, ði æɹoʊ stʃɹʌk ɪts sɛntʃɹəl aɪ. ðə θɪŋ lændəd, faʊnteɪnɪŋ ənʌðɝ hjudʒ splæʃ ʌv wɔɾɝ ən mʌd. ɹɪpəlz spɹɛɾ aʊt fɹəm ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt muv.

The creature rose in another bound, and at the peak, the arrow struck its central eye. The thing landed, fountaining another huge splash of water and mud. Ripples spread out from it, but it did not move.

"wɛl ʃɑt, ən bɹeɪvli," ðə wʊmən kɔld. ʃi wɑz ɑn əɹ hɔɹs, ɹaɪɾɪŋ tə mit hɪm. ɹænd fɛl veɪɡli sɝpɹaɪz ðət ʃi hæd nɑt ɹʌn wʌns ðə θɪŋz ətɛnʃən wɑz daɪvɝɾɪd. ʃi ɹoʊd pæs ðə bʌlk, stɪl sɝaʊndəd baɪ ðə ɹɪpəlz ʌv ɪts daɪɪŋ, wɪθaʊɾ ivən ə daʊnwɝd ɡlæns, skɹæmbəld əɹ hɔɹs ʌp ðə bæŋk ən dɪsmaʊntɪd. "fju mɛn wəd stæn tə feɪs ðə tʃɑɹdʒ ʌv ə ɡɹoʊm, maɪ lɔɹd."

"Well shot, and bravely," the woman called. She was on her horse, riding to meet him. Rand felt vaguely surprised that she had not run once the thing's attention was diverted. She rode past the bulk, still surrounded by the ripples of its dying, without even a downward glance, scrambled her horse up the bank and dismounted. "Few men would stand to face the charge of a grolm, my Lord."

ʃi wɑz ɔl ɪn waɪt, hɝ dʒɹɛs dɪvaɪɾəd fəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ ən bɛltəɾ ɪn sɪlvɝ, ən əɹ buts, pikɪŋ aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ əɹ hɛmz, wɝ tuld ɪn sɪlvɝ, tu. ivən əɹ sæɾəl wɑz waɪt, ən sɪlvɝ-maʊntəd. hɝ snoʊi mɛɹ, wɪð ɪts ɑɹtʃt nɛk ən deɪnti stɛp, wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz tɔl əz ɹændz beɪ. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə wʊmən hɝsɛlf - ʃi wɑz pɝhæps nɪneɪivz eɪdʒ, hi θɔt - hu hɛld ɪz aɪz. ʃi wɑz tɔl, fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ; ə hæn tɔlɝ ən ʃi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs lʊk ɪm ɪn ði aɪz. fəɹ ənʌðɝ, ʃi wɑz bjuɾəfəl, aɪvɝi-peɪl skɪn kəntʃɹæstɪŋ ʃɑɹpli wɪð lɔŋ, naɪt-dɑɹk hɛɹ ən blæk aɪz. hi hæd sin bjuɾəfəl wɪmən. mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz bjuɾəfəl, ɪf kul, ən soʊ wɑz nɪneɪiv, wən əɹ tɛmpɝ dɪd nɑt ɡɛt ðə bɛɾɝ ə hɝ. ɛɡwin, ən ɪleɪn, ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ, wɝ itʃ ɪnʌf tə teɪk ə mænz bɹɛθ. bʌt ðɪs wʊmən. . . . hɪz tʌŋ stʌk tə ðə ɹuf ə hɪz maʊθ; hi fɛlt ɪz hɑɹt stɑɹt biɾɪŋ əɡɛn.

She was all in white, her dress divided for riding and belted in silver, and her boots, peeking out from under her hems, were tooled in silver, too. Even her saddle was white, and silver-mounted. Her snowy mare, with its arched neck and dainty step, was almost as tall as Rand's bay. But it was the woman herself - she was perhaps Nynaeve's age, he thought - who held his eyes. She was tall, for one thing; a hand taller and she could almost look him in the eyes. For another, she was beautiful, ivory-pale skin contrasting sharply with long, night-dark hair and black eyes. He had seen beautiful women. Moiraine was beautiful, if cool, and so was Nynaeve, when her temper did not get the better of her. Egwene, and Elayne, the Daughter-Heir of Andor, were each enough to take a man's breath. But this woman. . . . His tongue stuck to the roof of his mouth; he felt his heart start beating again.

"jɔɹ ɹɪteɪnɝz, maɪ lɔɹd?"

"Your retainers, my Lord?"

stɑɹɾəld, hi lʊkt ɝaʊnd. hʊɹɪn ən lɔɪəl hæd dʒɔɪn ðɛm. hʊɹɪn wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ðə weɪ ɹænd nu hi hæd bɪn, ən ivən ði oʊɡiɝ sim fæsəneɪɾəd. "maɪ fɹɛnz," hi sɛd. "lɔɪəl, ən hʊɹɪn. maɪ neɪm ɪz ɹænd. ɹænd ælθɹ."

Startled, he looked around. Hurin and Loial had joined them. Hurin was staring the way Rand knew he had been, and even the Ogier seemed fascinated. "My friends," he said. "Loial, and Hurin. My name is Rand. Rand al'Thor."

"aɪ hæv nɛvɝ θɔɾ ʌv ɪt bɪfɔɹ," lɔɪəl sɛɾ əbɹʌpli, saʊndɪŋ əz ɪf i wɝ tɔkɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf; "bʌɾ ɪf ðəɹ ɪz sətʃ ə θɪŋ əz pɝfək hjumən bjuɾi, ɪn feɪs ən fɔɹm, ðən jə - "

"I have never thought of it before," Loial said abruptly, sounding as if he were talking to himself; "but if there is such a thing as perfect human beauty, in face and form, then you - "

"lɔɪəl!" ɹænd ʃaʊɾəd. ði oʊɡiɝz ɪɹz stɪfən ɪn ɪmbɛɹəsmənt. ɹændz oʊn ɪɹz wɝ ɹɛd; lɔɪəlz wɝdz hæd bɪn tu kloʊs tə wʌɾ i hɪmsɛlf wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ.

"Loial!" Rand shouted. The Ogier's ears stiffened in embarrassment. Rand's own ears were red; Loial's words had been too close to what he himself was thinking.

ðə wʊmən læf mjuzɪkli, bʌt ðə nɛkst ɪnstənt ʃi wɑz ɔl ɹiɡəl fɔɹmæləɾi, laɪk ə kwin ɑn əɹ θɹoʊn. "aɪ æm kɔl səlin," ʃi sɛd. "ju hæv ɹɪsk jəɹ laɪf, ən seɪv maɪn. aɪm jʊɹz, lɔɹd ɹænd ælθɹ." ænd, tə ɹændz hɔɹɝ, ʃi nɛl bɪfɔɹ hɪm.

The woman laughed musically, but the next instant she was all regal formality, like a queen on her throne. "I am called Selene," she said. "You have risked your life, and saved mine. I am yours, Lord Rand al'Thor." And, to Rand's horror, she knelt before him.

nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət hʊɹɪn əɹ lɔɪəl, hi heɪstəli pʊld əɹ tə hɝ fit. "ə mæn u wɪl nɑt daɪ tə seɪv ə wʊmən ɪz noʊ mæn." ɪmiɾiətli hi dɪsɡɹeɪs hɪmsɛlf baɪ blʌʃɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ə ʃaɪnɝən seɪɪŋ, ən i nu ɪt saʊndəd pɑmpəs bɪfɔɹ ɪt wɑz aʊɾ ə hɪz maʊθ, bʌɾ əɹ mænɝ hæɾ ɪnfɛktəd hɪm, ən i kəd nɑt stɑp ɪt. "aɪ min. . . . ðəɾ ɪz, ɪt wɑz. . . ." ful, jə kæn tɛl ə wʊmən seɪvɪŋ əɹ laɪf wɑz nʌθɪŋ. "ɪt wɑz maɪ ɑnɝ." ðət saʊndəd veɪɡli ʃaɪnɝən ən fɔɹməl. hi hoʊpt ɪt wəd du; hɪz maɪnd wɑz əz blæŋk ʌv ɛniθɪŋ ɛls tə seɪ əz ɪf i wɝ stɪl ɪn ðə vɔɪd.

Not looking at Hurin or Loial, he hastily pulled her to her feet. "A man who will not die to save a woman is no man." Immediately he disgraced himself by blushing. It was a Shienaran saying, and he knew it sounded pompous before it was out of his mouth, but her manner had infected him, and he could not stop it. "I mean. . . . That is, it was. . . ." Fool, you can't tell a woman saving her life was nothing. "It was my honor." That sounded vaguely Shienaran and formal. He hoped it would do; his mind was as blank of anything else to say as if he were still in the void.

sʌɾənli hi bɪkeɪm kɑnʃəs ə hɝ aɪz ɑn hɪm. hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən hæd nɑt tʃeɪnʒd, bʌɾ əɹ dɑɹk aɪz meɪɾ ɪm fil əz ɪf i wɝ neɪkəd. ənbɪddən, ðə θɔt keɪm ə səlin wɪð noʊ kloʊðz. hɪz feɪs wɛn ɹɛɾ əɡɛn. "ɑ! ɑ, wɛɹ ɑɹ jə fɹʌm, səlin? wɪv nɑt sin ənʌðɝ hjumən biɪŋ sɪns wi keɪm hɪɹ. ɪz jəɹ taʊn nɪɹbaɪ?" ʃi lʊkt əɾ ɪm θɔtfəli, ən i stɛp bæk. hɝ lʊk meɪɾ ɪm tu əwɛɹ ə haʊ kloʊs tə hɝ i wɑz.

Suddenly he became conscious of her eyes on him. Her expression had not changed, but her dark eyes made him feel as if he were naked. Unbidden, the thought came of Selene with no clothes. His face went red again. "Aaah! Ah, where are you from, Selene? We have not seen another human being since we came here. Is your town nearby?" She looked at him thoughtfully, and he stepped back. Her look made him too aware of how close to her he was.

"aɪm nɑt fɹəm ðɪs wɝld, maɪ lɔɹd," ʃi sɛd. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ noʊ pipəl hɪɹ. nʌθɪŋ lɪvɪŋ ɪksɛp ðə ɡɹoʊm ən ə fju ʌðɝ kɹitʃɝz laɪk ðɛm. aɪm fɹəm kɛɹhin. ən əz tə haʊ aɪ keɪm hɪɹ, aɪ doʊnt noʊ, ɪɡzækli. aɪ wɑz aʊt ɹaɪɾɪŋ, ən aɪ stɑp tə næp, ən wən aɪ woʊk, maɪ hɔɹs ən aɪ wɝ hɪɹ. aɪ kən oʊnli hoʊp, maɪ lɔɹd, ðət jə kən seɪv mi əɡɛn, ən hɛlp mi ɡoʊ hoʊm."

"I'm not from this world, my Lord," she said. "There are no people here. Nothing living except the grolm and a few other creatures like them. I am from Cairhien. And as to how I came here, I don't know, exactly. I was out riding, and I stopped to nap, and when I woke, my horse and I were here. I can only hope, my Lord, that you can save me again, and help me go home."

"səlin, aɪm nɑɾ ə . . . ðəɾ ɪz, pliz kɔl mi ɹænd." hɪz ɪɹz fɛl hɑɾ əɡɛn. laɪt, ɪt woʊn hɝɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɪf ʃi θɪŋks ɪm ə lɔɹd. bɝn mi, ɪt woʊn hɝɾ ɛniθɪŋ.

"Selene, I am not a . . . that is, please call me Rand." His ears felt hot again. Light, it won't hurt anything if she thinks I'm a lord. Burn me, it won't hurt anything.

"ɪf jə wɪʃ ɪt . . . ɹænd." hɝ smaɪl meɪɾ ɪz θɹoʊt taɪɾən. "ju wɪl hɛlp mi?"

"If you wish it . . . Rand." Her smile made his throat tighten. "You will help me?"

"ʌv kɔɹs, aɪ wɪl." bɝn mi, bʌt ʃiz bjuɾəfəl. ən lʊkɪŋ ət mi laɪk ɪm ə hɪɹoʊ ɪn ə stɔɹi. hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd tə klɪɹ ɪɾ ə fulɪʃnəs. "bʌt fɝst wɪv tə faɪn ðə mɛn wəɹ fɑloʊɪŋ. əl tʃɹaɪ tə kip jə aʊɾ ə deɪnʒɝ, bʌt wi mʌs faɪn ðɛm. kʌmɪŋ wɪð əs wɪl bi bɛɾɝ ðən steɪɪŋ hɪɹ əloʊn."

"Of course, I will." Burn me, but she's beautiful. And looking at me like I'm a hero in a story. He shook his head to clear it of foolishness. "But first we have to find the men we are following. I'll try to keep you out of danger, but we must find them. Coming with us will be better than staying here alone."

fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi wɑz saɪlənt, hɝ feɪs blæŋk ən smuð; ɹænd hæd noʊ aɪdiə wʌt ʃi wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ, ɪksɛp ðət ʃi sim tə bi stʌɾiɪŋ ɪm ənu. "ə mæn ə duɾi," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. ə smɔl smaɪl tʌtʃt əɹ lɪps. "aɪ laɪk ðæt. jɛs. hu ɑɹ ðiz mɪskɹiəns jə fɑloʊ?"

For a moment she was silent, her face blank and smooth; Rand had no idea what she was thinking, except that she seemed to be studying him anew. "A man of duty," she said finally. A small smile touched her lips. "I like that. Yes. Who are these miscreants you follow?"

"dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən tʃɹɑləks, maɪ leɪɾi," hʊɹɪn bɝst aʊt. hi meɪɾ ən ɑkwɝd baʊ tə hɝ fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl. "ðeɪ dɪd mɝɾɝ ɪn fæl dæɹə kip ən stoʊl ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, maɪ leɪɾi, bʌt lɔɹd ɹænd wɪl fɛtʃ ɪt bæk."

"Darkfriends and Trollocs, my Lady," Hurin burst out. He made an awkward bow to her from his saddle. "They did murder in Fal Dara keep and stole the Horn of Valere, my Lady, but Lord Rand will fetch it back."

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət ðə snɪfɝ ɹufəli; hʊɹɪn ɡeɪv ə wik ɡɹɪn. soʊ mʌtʃ fəɹ sikɹəsi. ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ hɪɹ, hi səpoʊzd, bʌt wʌns bæk ɪn ðɛɹ wɝld. . . . "səlin, jə mʌs nɑt seɪ ɛniθɪŋ ə ðə hɔɹn tə ɛniwʌn. ɪf ɪt ɡɛts aʊt, wɪl əv ə hʌnʒɹəd pipəl ɑn əɹ hilz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛt ðə hɔɹn fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz."

Rand stared at the sniffer ruefully; Hurin gave a weak grin. So much for secrecy. It did not matter here, he supposed, but once back in their world. . . . "Selene, you must not say anything of the Horn to anyone. If it gets out, we'll have a hundred people on our heels trying to get the Horn for themselves."

"noʊ, ɪt wəd nɛvɝ du," səlin sɛd, "fɔɹ ðət tə fɔl ɪndə ðə ɹɔŋ hænz. ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. aɪ kəd nɑt tɛl jə haʊ ɔfən aɪv dʒɹimd ə tʌtʃɪŋ ɪt, hoʊldɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn maɪ hænz. jə mʌs pɹɑməs mi, wən juv ɪt, jəl lemi tʌtʃ ɪt."

"No, it would never do," Selene said, "for that to fall into the wrong hands. The Horn of Valere. I could not tell you how often I've dreamed of touching it, holding it in my hands. You must promise me, when you have it, you will let me touch it."

"bɪfɔɹ aɪ kən də ðæt, wɪv tə faɪn ɪt. wi hæd bɛɾɝ bi ɑn əɹ weɪ." ɹænd ɔfɝɾ ɪz hæn tə hɛlp əɹ maʊnt; hʊɹɪn skɹæmbəl daʊn tə hoʊld əɹ stɝəp. "wʌtɛvɝ ðət θɪŋ wɑz aɪ kɪld - ə ɡɹoʊm? - ðəɹ meɪ bi mɔɹ ə ðɛm ɝaʊnd." hɝ hænd wɑz fɝm - ðəɹ wɑz sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn əɹ ɡɹɪp - ən əɹ skɪn wɑz. . . . sɪlk? sʌmθɪŋ sɑftɝ, smuðɝ. ɹænd ʃɪvɝd.

"Before I can do that, we have to find it. We had better be on our way." Rand offered his hand to help her mount; Hurin scrambled down to hold her stirrup. "Whatever that thing was I killed - a grolm? - there may be more of them around." Her hand was firm - there was surprising strength in her grip - and her skin was. . . . Silk? Something softer, smoother. Rand shivered.

"ðɛɹ ɔlweɪz ɑɹ," səlin sɛd. ðə tɔl waɪt mɛɹ fɹɪskt ən bɛɹɾ əɹ tiθ wʌns ət ɹɛd, jɛt səlinz tʌtʃ ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz kwaɪəɾəd hɝ.

"There always are," Selene said. The tall white mare frisked and bared her teeth once at Red, yet Selene's touch on the reins quieted her.

ɹænd slʌŋ ɪz baʊ əkɹɔs ɪz bæk ən klaɪmd ɑntu ɹɛd. laɪt, haʊ kəɾ ɛniwʌnz skɪn bi soʊ sɑft? "hʊɹɪn, wɛɹz ðə tʃɹeɪl? hʊɹɪn? hʊɹɪn!"

Rand slung his bow across his back and climbed onto Red. Light, how could anyone's skin be so soft? "Hurin, where's the trail? Hurin? Hurin!"

ðə snɪfɝ ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, ən lɛft ɔf stɛɹɪŋ ət səlin. "jɛs, lɔɹd ɹænd. ɑ . . . ðə tʃɹeɪl. saʊθ, maɪ lɔɹd. stɪl saʊθ."

The sniffer gave a start, and left off staring at Selene. "Yes, Lord Rand. Ah . . . the trail. South, my Lord. Still south."

"ðɛn lɛts ɹaɪd." ɹænd ɡeɪv ən ənizi lʊk ət ðə ɡɹeɪ-ɡɹin bʌlk ə ðə ɡɹoʊm laɪɪŋ ɪn ðə stʃɹim. ɪt hæd bɪn bɛɾɝ bɪlivɪŋ ðeɪ wɝ ði oʊnli lɪvɪŋ θɪŋz ɪn ðət wɝld. "teɪk ðə tʃɹeɪl, hʊɹɪn."

"Then let's ride." Rand gave an uneasy look at the gray-green bulk of the grolm lying in the stream. It had been better believing they were the only living things in that world. "Take the trail, Hurin."

səlin ɹoʊɾ əlɔŋsaɪd ɹænd ət fɝst, tɔkɪŋ ə ðɪs ən ðæt, æskɪŋ ɪm kwɛstʃənz ən kɔlɪŋ ɪm lɔɹd. hæf ə dʌzən taɪmz i stɑɹɾəd tə tɛl əɹ i wɑz noʊ lɔɹd, oʊnli ə ʃɛpɝd, ən ɛvɹi taɪm, lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ, hi kəd nɑt ɡɛt ðə wɝdz aʊt. ə leɪɾi laɪk əɹ wəd nɑt tɔk ðə seɪm weɪ wɪð ə ʃɛpɝd, hi wɑz ʃʊɹ, ivən wʌn u hæd seɪvd əɹ laɪf.

Selene rode alongside Rand at first, talking of this and that, asking him questions and calling him lord. Half a dozen times he started to tell her he was no lord, only a shepherd, and every time, looking at her, he could not get the words out. A lady like her would not talk the same way with a shepherd, he was sure, even one who had saved her life.

"ju wɪl bi ə ɡɹeɪt mæn wən juv faʊn ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ," ʃi toʊl hɪm. "ə mæn fəɹ ðə lɛdʒənz. ðə mæn u saʊnz ðə hɔɹn wɪl meɪk ɪz oʊn lɛdʒənz."

"You will be a great man when you've found the Horn of Valere," she told him. "A man for the legends. The man who sounds the Horn will make his own legends."

"aɪ doʊnt wɑnə saʊn ɪt, ən aɪ doʊnt wɑnə bi pɑɹɾ ʌv ɛni lɛdʒənd." hi dɪd nɑt noʊ ɪf ʃi wɑz wɛɹɪŋ pɝfjum, bʌt ðəɹ sim tə bi ə sɛn tə hɝ, sʌmθɪŋ ðət fɪld ɪz hɛd wɪð hɝ. spaɪsəz, ʃɑɹp ən swit, tɪklɪŋ ɪz noʊz, meɪkɪŋ ɪm swɑloʊ.

"I don't want to sound it, and I don't want to be part of any legend." He did not know if she was wearing perfume, but there seemed to be a scent to her, something that filled his head with her. Spices, sharp and sweet, tickling his nose, making him swallow.

"ɛvɹi mæn wɑns tə bi ɡɹeɪt. jə kəd bi ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst mæn ɪn ɔl ði eɪdʒəz."

"Every man wants to be great. You could be the greatest man in all the Ages."

ɪt saʊndəd tu kloʊs tə wʌt mɔɪɹeɪn hæd sɛd. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wəd sɝɾənli stæn aʊt θɹu ði eɪdʒəz. "nɑt mi," hi sɛd fɝvənli. "aɪm dʒʌst" - hi θɔɾ ə hɝ skɔɹn ɪf i toʊld əɹ naʊ ðəɾ i wɑz oʊnli ə ʃɛpɝɾ æftɝ lɛɾɪŋ əɹ bɪliv i wɑz ə lɔɹd, ən tʃeɪnʒd wʌɾ i hæd bɪn gɑnə seɪ - "dʒʌs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn ɪt. ən tə hɛlp ə fɹɛnd."

It sounded too close to what Moiraine had said. The Dragon Reborn would certainly stand out through the Ages. "Not me," he said fervently. "I'm just" - he thought of her scorn if he told her now that he was only a shepherd after letting her believe he was a lord, and changed what he had been going to say - "just trying to find it. And to help a friend."

ʃi wɑz saɪlən ə moʊmənt, ðən sɛd, "juv hɝt jəɹ hænd."

She was silent a moment, then said, "You've hurt your hand."

"ɪɾ ɪz nʌθɪŋ." hi stɑɹɾəd tə pʊɾ ɪz ɪnʒɝd hæn ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz koʊt - ɪt θɹɑb fɹəm hoʊldɪŋ ðə ɹeɪnz - bʌt ʃi ɹitʃt aʊɾ ən tʊk ɪt.

"It is nothing." He started to put his injured hand inside his coat - it throbbed from holding the reins - but she reached out and took it.

hi wɑz soʊ sɝpɹaɪzd i lɛt hɝ, ən ðən ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə də ɪksɛpt iðɝ dʒɝk əweɪ ɹudli əɹ ɛls lɛɾ əɹ ənɹæp ðə kɝtʃəf. hɝ tʌtʃ fɛl kul ən ʃʊɹ. hɪz pɑm wɑz æŋɡɹəli ɹɛɾ ən pʌfi, bʌt ðə hɛɹən stɪl stʊɾ aʊt, pleɪnli ən klɪɹli.

He was so surprised he let her, and then there was nothing to do except either jerk away rudely or else let her unwrap the kerchief. Her touch felt cool and sure. His palm was angrily red and puffy, but the heron still stood out, plainly and clearly.

ʃi tʌtʃt ðə bɹænd wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ, bʌt meɪd noʊ kɑmɛn ɑn ɪt, nɑɾ ivən tə æsk haʊ hi hæd kʌm baɪ ɪt. "ðɪs kəd stɪfən jəɹ hæn ɪf ɪts ʌntɛndəd. aɪ hæv ən ɔɪnmənt ðət ʃəd hɛlp." fɹəm ə pɑkəɾ ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ kloʊk ʃi pɹədust ə smɔl stoʊn vaɪəl, ənstɑpt ɪt, ən bɪɡæn dʒɛnli ɹʌbɪŋ ə waɪt sɑv ɑn ðə bɝn əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd.

She touched the brand with a finger, but made no comment on it, not even to ask how he had come by it. "This could stiffen your hand if it's untended. I have an ointment that should help." From a pocket inside her cloak she produced a small stone vial, unstopped it, and began gently rubbing a white salve on the burn as they rode.

ði ɔɪnmənt fɛl koʊld ət fɝst, ðən sim tə mɛlt əweɪ wɔɹmli ɪndə hɪz flɛʃ. ən ɪt wɝkt əz wɛl əz nɪneɪivz ɔɪnmənts səmtaɪmz dɪd. hi stɛɹɾ ɪn əmeɪzmən əz ðə ɹɛdnəs feɪɾəd ən ðə swɛlɪŋ wɛn daʊn ʌndɝ əɹ stʃɹoʊkɪŋ fɪŋɡɝz.

The ointment felt cold at first, then seemed to melt away warmly into his flesh. And it worked as well as Nynaeve's ointments sometimes did. He stared in amazement as the redness faded and the swelling went down under her stroking fingers.

"sʌm mɛn," ʃi sɛd, nɑt ɹeɪzɪŋ əɹ aɪz fɹəm ɪz hænd, "tʃuz tə sik ɡɹeɪtnəs, waɪl ʌðɝz ɑɹ fɔɹs tə ɪt. ɪts ɔlweɪz bɛɾɝ tə tʃuz ðən tə bi fɔɹst. ə mæn huz fɔɹst ɪz nɛvɝ kəmplitli hɪz oʊn mæstɝ. hi mʌs dæns ɑn ðə stʃɹɪŋz ə ðoʊz u fɔɹs hɪm."

"Some men," she said, not raising her eyes from his hand, "choose to seek greatness, while others are forced to it. It is always better to choose than to be forced. A man who's forced is never completely his own master. He must dance on the strings of those who forced him."

ɹænd pʊld ɪz hæn fɹi. ðə bɹæn lʊkt ə wik oʊld əɹ mɔɹ, ɔl bʌt hild. "wʌt dʒju min?" hi dɪmændəd.

Rand pulled his hand free. The brand looked a week old or more, all but healed. "What do you mean?" he demanded.

ʃi smaɪld ət hɪm, ən i fɛlt əʃeɪmd ə hɪz aʊtbɝst. "waɪ, ðə hɔɹn, ʌv kɔɹs," ʃi sɛd kɑmli, pʊɾɪŋ əweɪ hɝ sɑv. hɝ mɛɹ, stɛpɪŋ əlɔŋ bɪsaɪd ɹɛd, wɑz tɔl ɪnʌf ðəɾ əɹ aɪz wɝ oʊnli ə lɪɾəl bɪloʊ ɹænz. "ɪf jə faɪn ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, ðəɹ wɪl bi noʊ əvɔɪɾɪŋ ɡɹeɪtnəs. bʌt wɪl ɪt bi fɔɹst ɑn ju, əɹ wɪl jə teɪk ɪt? ðæts ðə kwɛstʃən."

She smiled at him, and he felt ashamed of his outburst. "Why, the Horn, of course," she said calmly, putting away her salve. Her mare, stepping along beside Red, was tall enough that her eyes were only a little below Rand's. "If you find the Horn of Valere, there will be no avoiding greatness. But will it be forced on you, or will you take it? That's the question."

hi flɛkst ɪz hænd. ʃi saʊndəd soʊ mʌtʃ laɪk mɔɪɹeɪn. "ɑɹ jə ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

He flexed his hand. She sounded so much like Moiraine. "Are you Aes Sedai?"

səlinz aɪbɹaʊz lɪftəd; hɝ dɑɹk aɪz ɡlɪɾɝd ət hɪm, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs wɑz sɑft. "ɛɛs sədaɪ? aɪ? noʊ."

Selene's eyebrows lifted; her dark eyes glittered at him, but her voice was soft. "Aes Sedai? I? No."

"aɪ dɪdn min tə əfɛn ju. aɪm sɑɹi."

"I didn't mean to offend you. I'm sorry."

"əfɛn mi? aɪm nɑɾ əfɛndəd, bʌɾ ɪm noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ." hɝ lɪp kɝld ɪn ə snɪɹ; ivən ðət wɑz bjuɾəfəl. "ðeɪ kaʊɝ ɪn wʌt ðeɪ θɪŋk ɪz seɪfti wən ðeɪ kəd də soʊ mʌtʃ. ðeɪ sɝv wən ðeɪ kəd ɹul, lɛt mɛn faɪt wɔɹz wən ðeɪ kəd bɹɪŋ ɔɹɾɝ tə ðə wɝld. noʊ, nɛvɝ kɔl mi ɛɛs sədaɪ." ʃi smaɪld ən leɪɾ əɹ hæn ɑn ɪz ɑɹm tə ʃoʊ ʃi wɑz nɑɾ æŋɡɹi - hɝ tʌtʃ meɪɾ ɪm swɑloʊ - bʌɾ i wɑz ɹɪlivd wən ʃi lɛt ðə mɛɹ dʒɹɑp bæk bɪsaɪd lɔɪəl. hʊɹɪn bɑbd ɪz hɛɾ əɾ əɹ laɪk ən oʊl fæmli ɹɪteɪnɝ.

"Offend me? I am not offended, but I'm no Aes Sedai." Her lip curled in a sneer; even that was beautiful. "They cower in what they think is safety when they could do so much. They serve when they could rule, let men fight wars when they could bring order to the world. No, never call me Aes Sedai." She smiled and laid her hand on his arm to show she was not angry - her touch made him swallow - but he was relieved when she let the mare drop back beside Loial. Hurin bobbed his head at her like an old family retainer.

ɹænd wɑz ɹɪlivd, bʌɾ i mɪst əɹ pɹɛzəns, tu. ʃi wɑz oʊnli tu spænz əweɪ - hi twɪstəɾ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl tə stɛɹ ət hɝ, ɹaɪɾɪŋ baɪ lɔɪəlz saɪd; ði oʊɡiɝ wɑz bɛn hæf dʌbəl ɪn ɪz sæɾəl soʊ hi kəd tɔk wɪð əɹ - bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt ðə seɪm əz biɪŋ ɹaɪt ðəɹ bɪsaɪd hɪm, kloʊs ɪnʌf fəɹ ɪm tə smɛl əɹ hɛɾi sɛnt, kloʊs ɪnʌf tə tʌtʃ. hi sɛɾəld bæk æŋɡɹəli. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðəɾ i wɑntəd tə tʌtʃ hɝ, ɪɡzækli - hi ɹimaɪndəd hɪmsɛlf ðəɾ i lʌvd ɛɡwin; hi fɛlt ɡɪlti ət ðə nid fəɹ ɹimaɪndɪŋ - bʌt ʃi wɑz bjuɾəfəl, ən ʃi θɔɾ i wɑz ə lɔɹd, ən ʃi sɛɾ i kəd bi ə ɡɹeɪt mæn. hi ɑɹɡjud saʊɝli wɪð hɪmsɛlf ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd. mɔɪɹeɪn sɛz jə kən bi ɡɹeɪt, tu; ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. səlin ɪz nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðæts ɹaɪt; ʃiz ə kɛɹhinɪn noʊbəlwʊmən, ən jəɹ ə ʃɛpɝd. ʃi dʌznt noʊ ðæt. haʊ lɔŋ dʒju lɛɾ əɹ bɪliv ə laɪ? ɪts oʊnli tɪl wi ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðɪs pleɪs. ɪf wi ɡɛɾ aʊt. ɪf. ɑn ðət noʊt, hɪz θɔts səbsaɪɾɪd tə sʌlən saɪləns.

Rand was relieved, but he missed her presence, too. She was only two spans away - he twisted in his saddle to stare at her, riding by Loial's side; the Ogier was bent half double in his saddle so he could talk with her - but that was not the same as being right there beside him, close enough for him to smell her heady scent, close enough to touch. He settled back angrily. It was not that he wanted to touch her, exactly - he reminded himself that he loved Egwene; he felt guilty at the need for reminding - but she was beautiful, and she thought he was a lord, and she said he could be a great man. He argued sourly with himself inside his head. Moiraine says you can be great, too; the Dragon Reborn. Selene is not Aes Sedai. That's right; she's a Cairhienin noblewoman, and you're a shepherd. She doesn't know that. How long do you let her believe a lie? It's only till we get out of this place. If we get out. If. On that note, his thoughts subsided to sullen silence.

hi tʃɹaɪd tə kip ə wɑtʃ ɑn ðə kʌntʃɹi θɹu wɪtʃ ðeɪ ɹoʊd - ɪf səlin sɛd ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ ə ðoʊz θɪŋz . . . ðoʊz ɡɹoʊm . . . əbaʊt, hi bɪliv hɝ, ən hʊɹɪn wɑz tu ɪntɛn ɑn smɛlɪŋ ðə tʃɹeɪl tə noʊɾəs ɛniθɪŋ ɛls; lɔɪəl wɑz tu ɹæpt ʌp ɪn ɪz tɔk wɪð səlin tə si ɛniθɪŋ əntɪl ɪt bɪɾ ɪm ɑn ðə hil - bʌɾ ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə wɑtʃ. tɝnɪŋ ɪz hɛd tu kwɪkli meɪɾ ɪz aɪz wɔɾɝ; ə hɪl əɹ ə stæn ə tʃɹiz kəd sim ə maɪl ɔf wən sin fɹəm wʌn æŋɡəl ən oʊnli ə fju hʌnʒɹəd spænz wən sin fɹəm ənʌðɝ.

He tried to keep a watch on the country through which they rode - if Selene said there were more of those things . . . those grolm . . . about, he believed her, and Hurin was too intent on smelling the trail to notice anything else; Loial was too wrapped up in his talk with Selene to see anything until it bit him on the heel - but it was hard to watch. Turning his head too quickly made his eyes water; a hill or a stand of trees could seem a mile off when seen from one angle and only a few hundred spans when seen from another.

ðə maʊntənz wɝ ɡɹoʊɪŋ kloʊsɝ, ʌv ðət mʌtʃ i wɑz ʃʊɹ. kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ, lumɪŋ əɡɛns ðə skaɪ naʊ, ə sɔtuθ ɪkspæns ə snoʊ-kæpt piks. ðə læn ɝaʊn əm ɔlɹɛɾi ɹoʊz ɪn fʊthɪlz hɛɹəldɪŋ ðə kʌmɪŋ ə ðə maʊntənz. ðeɪ wəd ɹitʃ ði ɛdʒ ə ðə maʊntənz pɹɑpɝ wɛl bɪfɔɹ dɑɹk, pɝhæps ɪn oʊnli ənʌðɝ aʊɝ əɹ soʊ. mɔɹ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd liɡz ɪn lɛs ðən θɹi deɪz. wɝs ðən ðæt. wi spɛn moʊst ʌv ə deɪ saʊθ ə ði ɛɹɪnɪn ɪn ðə ɹil wɝld. oʊvɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd liɡz ɪn lɛs ðən tu deɪz, hɪɹ.

The mountains were growing closer, of that much he was sure. Kinslayer's Dagger, looming against the sky now, a sawtooth expanse of snow-capped peaks. The land around them already rose in foothills heralding the coming of the mountains. They would reach the edge of the mountains proper well before dark, perhaps in only another hour or so. More than a hundred leagues in less than three days. Worse than that. We spent most of a day south of the Erinin in the real world. Over a hundred leagues in less than two days, here.

"ʃi sɛz jə wɝ ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt ðɪs pleɪs, ɹænd."

"She says you were right about this place, Rand."

ɹænd ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt bɪfɔɹ i ɹilaɪz lɔɪəl hæd ɹɪɾən ʌp bɪsaɪd hɪm. hi lʊk fəɹ səlin ən faʊn əɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ wɪð hʊɹɪn; ðə snɪfɝ wɑz ɡɹɪnɪŋ ən dʌkɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ən ɔl bʌt nʌklɪŋ ɪz fɔɹhɛɾ əɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi sɛd. ɹænd ɡlænst saɪdweɪz ət ði oʊɡiɝ. "aɪm sɝpɹaɪz jə kəd lɛɾ əɹ ɡoʊ, ðə weɪ jə tu hæd jəɹ hɛdz təɡɛðɝ. wʌt dʒju min, aɪ wɑz ɹaɪt?"

Rand gave a start before he realized Loial had ridden up beside him. He looked for Selene and found her riding with Hurin; the sniffer was grinning and ducking his head and all but knuckling his forehead at everything she said. Rand glanced sideways at the Ogier. "I'm surprised you could let her go, the way you two had your heads together. What do you mean, I was right?"

"ʃi ɪz ə fæsəneɪɾɪŋ wʊmən, ɪzənt ʃi? səm ə ði ɛldɝz doʊnt noʊ əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi dʌz əbaʊt hɪstɝi - ɪspɛʃli ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz - ən əbaʊt - oʊ, jɛs. ʃi sɛz jə wɝ ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt ðə weɪz, ɹænd. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, səm ə ðɛm, stʌɾid wɝlz laɪk ðɪs, ən ðət stʌɾi wɑz ðə beɪsəs ə haʊ ðeɪ ɡɹu ðə weɪz. ʃi sɛz ðəɹ ɑɹ wɝlz wɛɹ ɪts taɪm ɹæðɝ ðən dɪstəns ðət tʃeɪnʒəz. spɛn ə deɪ ɪn wʌn ə ðoʊz, ən jə maɪt kʌm bæk tə faɪn ə jɪɹ əz pæst ɪn ðə ɹil wɝld, əɹ twɛnti. əɹ ɪt kəd bi ði ʌðɝ weɪ ɹaʊnd. ðoʊz wɝlz - ðɪs wʌn, ɔl ði ʌðɝz - ɑɹ ɹɪflɛkʃənz ə ðə ɹil wɝld, ʃi sɛz. ðɪs wʌn simz peɪl tə əs kəz ɪts ə wik ɹəflɛkʃən, ə wɝl ðət hæd lɪɾəl tʃæns ʌv ɛvɝ biɪŋ. ʌðɝz ɑɹ ɔlmoʊst əz laɪkli əz aʊɝz. ðoʊz ɑɹ əz sɑləɾ əz əɹ wɝld, ən əv pipəl. ðə seɪm pipəl, ʃi sɛz, ɹænd. ɪmædʒən ɪt! jə kəd ɡoʊ tə wʌn ə ðɛm ən mit jɝsɛlf. ðə pæɾɝn əz ɪnfənət vɛɹieɪʃən, ʃi sɛz, ən ɛvɹi vɛɹieɪʃən ðət kən bi, wɪl bi."

"She is a fascinating woman, isn't she? Some of the Elders don't know as much as she does about history - especially the Age of Legends - and about - oh, yes. She says you were right about the Ways, Rand. The Aes Sedai, some of them, studied worlds like this, and that study was the basis of how they grew the Ways. She says there are worlds where it is time rather than distance that changes. Spend a day in one of those, and you might come back to find a year has passed in the real world, or twenty. Or it could be the other way round. Those worlds - this one, all the others - are reflections of the real world, she says. This one seems pale to us because it is a weak reflection, a world that had little chance of ever being. Others are almost as likely as ours. Those are as solid as our world, and have people. The same people, she says, Rand. Imagine it! You could go to one of them and meet yourself. The Pattern has infinite variation, she says, and every variation that can be, will be."

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ðən wɪʃt i hæd nɑɾ əz ðə lændskeɪp flɪkɝd bæk ən fɔɹθ ən ɪz stʌmək lɝtʃt. hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "haʊ dʌz ʃi noʊ ɔl ðæt? jə noʊ əbaʊt mɔɹ θɪŋz ðən ɛnibəɾi aɪ ɛvɝ mɛt bɪfɔɹ, lɔɪəl, ən ɔl jə nu əbaʊt ðɪs wɝld əmaʊntɪd tə noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə ɹumɝ."

Rand shook his head, then wished he had not as the landscape flickered back and forth and his stomach lurched. He took a deep breath. "How does she know all that? You know about more things than anybody I ever met before, Loial, and all you knew about this world amounted to no more than a rumor."

"ʃiz kɛɹhinɪn, ɹænd. ðə ɹɔɪəl laɪbɹɛɹi ɪn kɛɹhin ɪz wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst ɪn ðə wɝld, pɝhæps ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst aʊtsaɪd tɑɹ vəlɑn. ði il spɛɹɾ ɪt dɪlɪbɝətli, jə noʊ, wən ðeɪ bɝn kɛɹhin. ðəl nɑt dɪstʃɹɔɪ ə bʊk. dɪd jə noʊ ðət ðeɪ - "

"She's Cairhienin, Rand. The Royal Library in Cairhien is one of the greatest in the world, perhaps the greatest outside Tar Valon. The Aiel spared it deliberately, you know, when they burned Cairhien. They will not destroy a book. Did you know that they - "

"aɪ doʊn kɛɹ əbaʊɾ ilmɛn," ɹænd sɛd hɑtli. "ɪf səlin noʊz soʊ mʌtʃ, aɪ hoʊp ʃi ɹɛd haʊ tə ɡɛɾ əs hoʊm fɹəm hɪɹ. aɪ wɪʃ səlin - "

"I don't care about Aielmen," Rand said hotly. "If Selene knows so much, I hope she read how to get us home from here. I wish Selene - "

"ju wɪʃ səlin wʌt?" ðə wʊmən læft əz ʃi dʒɔɪn ðɛm.

"You wish Selene what?" The woman laughed as she joined them.

ɹænd stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn ɡɔn mʌnθs; ðət wɑz haʊ hi fɛlt. "aɪ wɪʃ səlin wəd kʌm ɹaɪd wɪð mi səm mɔɹ," hi sɛd. lɔɪəl tʃʌkəld, ən ɹænd fɛlt ɪz feɪs bɝn.

Rand stared at her as if she had been gone months; that was how he felt. "I wish Selene would come ride with me some more," he said. Loial chuckled, and Rand felt his face burn.

səlin smaɪld, ən lʊkt ət lɔɪəl. "ju wɪl ɪkskjuz ʌs, ælɑntɪn."

Selene smiled, and looked at Loial. "You will excuse us, alantin."

ði oʊɡiɝ baʊɾ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl ən lɛɾ ɪz bɪɡ hɔɹs fɔl bæk, ðə tʌfs ɑn ɪz ɪɹz dʒɹupɪŋ wɪð ɹɪlʌktəns.

The Ogier bowed in his saddle and let his big horse fall back, the tufts on his ears drooping with reluctance.

fəɹ ə taɪm ɹænd ɹoʊɾ ɪn saɪləns, ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ səlinz pɹɛzəns. naʊ ən əɡɛn i lʊkt əɾ əɹ aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ. hi wɪʃt i kəd ɡɛɾ ɪz filɪŋz əbaʊɾ əɹ stʃɹeɪt. kəd ʃi bi ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, dɪspaɪɾ əɹ dɪnaɪəl? sʌmwʌn sɛn baɪ mɔɪɹeɪn tə pʊʃ ɪm əlɔŋ wʌtɛvɝ pæθ i wɑz mɛn tə fɑloʊ ɪn ði ɛɛs sədaɪz plænz? mɔɪɹeɪn kəd nɑɾ əv noʊn i wəd bi teɪkən tə ðɪs stʃɹeɪnʒ wɝld, ən noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ wʊɾə tʃɹaɪd tə fɛn ɔf ðət bist wɪð ə stɪk wən ʃi kəd stʃɹaɪk ɪt dɛɾ əɹ sɛn ɪt ɹʌnɪŋ wɪð ðə paʊɝ. wɛl. sɪns ʃi tʊk ɪm fəɹ ə lɔɹɾ ən noʊ wʌn ɪn kɛɹhin nu dɪfɹənt, hi maɪt kip ɑn lɛɾɪŋ əɹ θɪŋk ɪt. ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹli ðə moʊs bjuɾəfəl wʊmən i hæɾ ɛvɝ sin, ɪntɛlədʒən ən lɝnd, ən ʃi θɔɾ i wɑz bɹeɪv; wʌt mɔɹ kəɾ ə mæn æsk fɹəm ə waɪf? ðæts kɹeɪzi, tu. aɪd mɛɹi ɛɡwin ɪf aɪ kəd mɛɹi ɛniwʌn, bʌɾ aɪ kæn æsk ə wʊmən tə mɛɹi ə mæn huz gɑnə ɡoʊ mæd, meɪbi hɝt hɝ. bʌt səlin wɑz soʊ bjuɾəfəl.

For a time Rand rode in silence, enjoying Selene's presence. Now and again he looked at her out of the corner of his eye. He wished he could get his feelings about her straight. Could she be an Aes Sedai, despite her denial? Someone sent by Moiraine to push him along whatever path he was meant to follow in the Aes Sedai's plans? Moiraine could not have known he would be taken to this strange world, and no Aes Sedai would have tried to fend off that beast with a stick when she could strike it dead or send it running with the Power. Well. Since she took him for a lord and no one in Cairhien knew different, he might keep on letting her think it. She was surely the most beautiful woman he had ever seen, intelligent and learned, and she thought he was brave; what more could a man ask from a wife? That's crazy, too. I'd marry Egwene if I could marry anyone, but I can't ask a woman to marry a man who's going to go mad, maybe hurt her. But Selene was so beautiful.

ʃi wɑz stʌɾiɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd, hi sɔ. hi ɹɛɾid ðə wɝdz ɪn ɪz hɛd. noʊ, hi wɑz nɑɾ ə bleɪdmæstɝ, bʌɾ ɪz fɑðɝ hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ðə sɔɹd. tæm. laɪt, waɪ kʊdn jə ɹɪli bi maɪ fɑðɝ? hi skwɑʃt ðə θɔt ɹuθləsli.

She was studying his sword, he saw. He readied the words in his head. No, he was not a blademaster, but his father had given him the sword. Tam. Light, why couldn't you really be my father? He squashed the thought ruthlessly.

"ðæt wɑz ə mæɡnɪfəsənt ʃɑt," səlin sɛd.

"That was a magnificent shot," Selene said.

"noʊ, aɪm nɑɾ ə - " ɹænd bɪɡæn, ðən blɪŋkt. "ə ʃɑt?"

"No, I'm not a - " Rand began, then blinked. "A shot?"

"jɛs. ə taɪni tɑɹɡət, ðəɾ aɪ, muvɪŋ, əɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz. juv ə wʌndɝfəl hænd wɪð ðət baʊ."

"Yes. A tiny target, that eye, moving, at a hundred paces. You've a wonderful hand with that bow."

ɹænd ʃɪftəɾ ɔkwɝdli. "ɑ . . . θæŋk ju. ɪts ə tʃɹɪk maɪ fɑðɝ tɔt mi." hi toʊld əɹ əbaʊt ðə vɔɪd, əbaʊt haʊ tæm hæd tɔɾ ɪm haʊ tə juz ɪt wɪð ðə baʊ. hi ivən faʊn hɪmsɛlf tɛlɪŋ əɹ əbaʊt læn ən ɪz sɔɹd lɛsənz.

Rand shifted awkwardly. "Ah . . . thank you. It's a trick my father taught me." He told her about the void, about how Tam had taught him how to use it with the bow. He even found himself telling her about Lan and his sword lessons.

"ðə wʌnnəs," ʃi sɛd, saʊndɪŋ sæɾəsfaɪd. ʃi sɔ hɪz kwɛstʃənɪŋ lʊk ən æɾəd, "ðæɾ ɪz wʌɾ ɪts kɔld . . . ɪn səm pleɪsəz. ðə wʌnnəs. tə lɝn ðə fʊl jus ʌv ɪt, ɪts bɛs tə ɹæp ɪɾ ɝaʊn jə kəntɪnjuəsli, tə dwɛl ɪn ɪɾ əɾ ɔl taɪmz, əɹ soʊ aɪv hɝd."

"The Oneness," she said, sounding satisfied. She saw his questioning look and added, "That is what it is called . . . in some places. The Oneness. To learn the full use of it, it is best to wrap it around you continuously, to dwell in it at all times, or so I've heard."

hi dɪd nɑɾ ivən əv tə θɪŋk əbaʊt wʌt leɪ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪm ɪn ðə vɔɪd tə noʊ hɪz ænsɝ tə ðæt, bʌt wʌɾ i sɛd wɑz, "aɪl θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪt."

He did not even have to think about what lay waiting for him in the void to know his answer to that, but what he said was, "I'll think about it."

"wɛɹ ðɪs vɔɪɾ ə jʊɹz ɔl ðə taɪm, ɹænd ælθɹ, ən jəl lɝn jusəz fəɹ ɪt jə nɛvɝ səspɛktəd."

"Wear this void of yours all the time, Rand al'Thor, and you'll learn uses for it you never suspected."

"aɪ sɛɾ əl θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪt." ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ əɡɛn, bʌɾ i kʌɾ əɹ ɔf. "ju noʊ ɔl ðiz θɪŋz. əbaʊt ðə vɔɪd - ðə wʌnnəs, jə kɔl ɪt. əbaʊt ðɪs wɝld. lɔɪəl ɹidz bʊks ɔl ðə taɪm; hiz ɹɛd mɔɹ bʊks ðən aɪv ɛvɝ sin, ən hiz nɛvɝ sin ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ ə fɹæɡmən əbaʊt ðə stoʊnz."

"I said I will think about it." She opened her mouth again, but he cut her off. "You know all these things. About the void - the Oneness, you call it. About this world. Loial reads books all the time; he's read more books than I've ever seen, and he's never seen anything but a fragment about the Stones."

səlin dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp stʃɹeɪɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl. sʌɾənli ʃi ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm ə mɔɪɹeɪn, ən ə kwin mɔɹɡeɪs, wən ðeɪ wɝ æŋɡɹi.

Selene drew herself up straight in her saddle. Suddenly she reminded him of Moiraine, and of Queen Morgase, when they were angry.

"ðɛɹ wɑz ə bʊk ɹɪɾən əbaʊt ðiz wɝlz," ʃi sɛd taɪtli. "mɪɹɝz ə ðə wil. jə si, ði ælɑntɪn əz nɑt sin ɔl ðə bʊks ðəɾ ɑɹ."

"There was a book written about these worlds," she said tightly. "Mirrors of the Wheel. You see, the alantin has not seen all the books that are."

"wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs ælɑntɪn jə kɔl hɪm? aɪv nɛvɝ hɝd - "

"What is this alantin you call him? I've never heard - "

"ðə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn bɪsaɪd wɪtʃ aɪ woʊk ɪz ʌp ðɛɹ," səlin sɛd, pɔɪntɪŋ ɪndə ðə maʊntənz, ɔf tə ði ist ə ðɛɹ pæθ. ɹænd faʊn hɪmsɛlf wɪʃɪŋ fəɹ əɹ wɔɹmθ əɡɛn, ən əɹ smaɪlz. "ɪf jə teɪk mi tə ɪt, jə kən ɹɪtɝn mi tə maɪ hoʊm, əz jə pɹɑməst. wi kən ɹitʃ ɪɾ ɪn ən aʊɝ."

"The Portal Stone beside which I woke is up there," Selene said, pointing into the mountains, off to the east of their path. Rand found himself wishing for her warmth again, and her smiles. "If you take me to it, you can return me to my home, as you promised. We can reach it in an hour."

ɹænd bɛɹli lʊkt wɛɹ ʃi pɔɪntəd. juzɪŋ ðə stoʊn - pɔɹɾəl stoʊn, ʃi kɔld ɪt - mɛnt wildɪŋ ðə paʊɝ, ɪf i wɝ tə teɪk əɹ bæk tə ðə ɹil wɝld. "hʊɹɪn, haʊ ɪz ðə tʃɹeɪl?"

Rand barely looked where she pointed. Using the Stone - Portal Stone, she called it - meant wielding the Power, if he were to take her back to the real world. "Hurin, how is the trail?"

"feɪntɝ ðən ɛvɝ, lɔɹd ɹænd, bʌt stɪl ðɛɹ." ðə snɪfɝ spɛɹɾ ə kwɪk ɡɹɪn ən bɑb ə hɪz hɛd fəɹ səlin. "aɪ θɪŋk ɪts stɑɹɾɪŋ tə æŋɡəl ɔf tə ðə wɛst. ðɛɹz səm iziɝ pæsəz ðɛɹ, təwɔɹd ðə tɪp ə ðə dæɡɝ, əz aɪ ɹikɔl fɹəm wən aɪ wɛn tə kɛɹhin ðət taɪm."

"Fainter than ever, Lord Rand, but still there." The sniffer spared a quick grin and bob of his head for Selene. "I think it's starting to angle off to the west. There's some easier passes there, toward the tip of the Dagger, as I recall from when I went to Cairhien that time."

ɹænd saɪd. feɪn, əɹ wʌn ə hɪz dɑɹkfɹɛnz, hæz tə noʊ ənʌðɝ weɪ tə juz ðə stoʊnz. eɪ dɑɹkfɹɛn kʊdn juz ðə paʊɝ. "aɪ hæv tə fɑloʊ ðə hɔɹn, səlin."

Rand sighed. Fain, or one of his Darkfriends, has to know another way to use the Stones. A Darkfriend couldn't use the Power. "I have to follow the Horn, Selene."

"haʊ dʒju noʊ jəɹ pɹɛʃəs hɔɹn ɪz ivən ɪn ðɪs wɝld? kʌm wɪð mi, ɹænd. jəl faɪn jəɹ lɛdʒənd, aɪ pɹɑməs ju. kʌm wɪð mi."

"How do you know your precious Horn is even in this world? Come with me, Rand. You'll find your legend, I promise you. Come with me."

"ju kən juz ðə stoʊn, ðɪs pɔɹɾəl stoʊn, jɝsɛlf," hi sɛɾ æŋɡɹəli. bɪfɔɹ ðə wɝdz wɝ aʊɾ ə hɪz maʊθ i wɑntəɾ əm bæk. waɪ dʌz ʃi hæv tə kip tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt lɛdʒənz? stʌbɝnli, hi fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə ɡoʊ ɑn. "ðə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn dɪdn bɹɪŋ jə hɪɹ baɪ ɪtsɛlf. jə dɪɾ ɪt, səlin. ɪf jə meɪd ðə stoʊn bɹɪŋ jə hɪɹ, jə kən meɪk ɪt teɪk jə bæk. əl teɪk jə tə ɪt, bʌt ðən aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ ɑn æftɝ ðə hɔɹn."

"You can use the Stone, this Portal Stone, yourself," he said angrily. Before the words were out of his mouth he wanted them back. Why does she have to keep talking about legends? Stubbornly, he forced himself to go on. "The Portal Stone didn't bring you here by itself. You did it, Selene. If you made the Stone bring you here, you can make it take you back. I'll take you to it, but then I must go on after the Horn."

"aɪ noʊ nʌθɪŋ əbaʊt juzɪŋ ðə pɔɹɾəl stoʊnz, ɹænd. ɪf aɪ dɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ, aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz."

"I know nothing about using the Portal Stones, Rand. If I did anything, I don't know what it was."

ɹænd stʌɾid hɝ. ʃi sæɾ əɹ sæɾəl, stʃɹeɪt-bækt ən tɔl, dʒʌst əz ɹiɡəli əz bɪfɔɹ, bʌt sʌmhaʊ sɑftɝ, tu. pɹaʊd, jɛt vʌlnɝəbəl, ən niɾɪŋ hɪm. hi hæd pʊt nɪneɪivz eɪdʒ tə hɝ - ə hændfʊl ə jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən hɪmsɛlf - bʌɾ i hæd bɪn ɹɔŋ, hi ɹilaɪzd. ʃi wɑz mɔɹ ɪz oʊn eɪdʒ, ən bjuɾəfəl, ən ʃi niɾəd hɪm. ðə θɔt, dʒʌs ðə θɔt, ʌv ðə vɔɪd flɪkɝd θɹu hɪz hɛd, ən ə ðə laɪt. seɪɾɪn. tə juz ðə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn, hi mʌs dɪp hɪmsɛlf bæk ɪndə ðət teɪnt.

Rand studied her. She sat her saddle, straight-backed and tall, just as regally as before, but somehow softer, too. Proud, yet vulnerable, and needing him. He had put Nynaeve's age to her - a handful of years older than himself - but he had been wrong, he realized. She was more his own age, and beautiful, and she needed him. The thought, just the thought, of the void flickered through his head, and of the light. Saidin. To use the Portal Stone, he must dip himself back into that taint.

"steɪ wɪð mi, səlin," hi sɛd. "wil faɪn ðə hɔɹn, ən mæts dæɡɝ, ən wɪl faɪn ə weɪ bæk. aɪ pɹɑməs ju. dʒʌst steɪ wɪð mi."

"Stay with me, Selene," he said. "We'll find the Horn, and Mat's dagger, and we'll find a way back. I promise you. Just stay with me."

"ju ɔlweɪz. . . ." səlin dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ əz ɪf tə kɑm hɝsɛlf. "ju ɔlweɪz ɑɹ soʊ stʌbɝn. wɛl, aɪ kən ædmaɪɹ stʌbɝnnəs ɪn ə mæn. ðəɹ ɪz lɪɾəl tə ə mæn huz tu izəli bɪɾəbəl."

"You always. . . ." Selene drew a deep breath as if to calm herself. "You always are so stubborn. Well, I can admire stubbornness in a man. There is little to a man who's too easily biddable."

ɹænd kʌlɝd; ɪt wɑz tu mʌtʃ laɪk ðə θɪŋz ɛɡwin səmtaɪmz sɛd, ən ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl bʌt bɪn pɹɑməst ɪn mɛɹɪdʒ sɪns ðeɪ wɝ tʃɪlʒɹən. fɹəm səlin, ðə wɝdz, ən ðə dɝɛk lʊk ðət wɛnt wɪð ðɛm, wɝ ə ʃɑk. hi tɝn tə tɛl hʊɹɪn tə pɹɛs ɑn wɪð ðə tʃɹeɪl.

Rand colored; it was too much like the things Egwene sometimes said, and they had all but been promised in marriage since they were children. From Selene, the words, and the direct look that went with them, were a shock. He turned to tell Hurin to press on with the trail.

fɹəm bɪhaɪn əm keɪm ə dɪstənt, kɑfɪŋ ɡɹʌnt. bɪfɔɹ ɹænd kəd wɝl ɹɛd tə lʊk, ənʌðɝ bɑɹk saʊndəd, ən θɹi mɔɹ ɑn ɪts hilz. ət fɝst i kəd meɪk aʊt nʌθɪŋ əz ðə lændskeɪp sim tə weɪvɝ ɪn ɪz aɪz, bʌt ðən i sɔ ðɛm θɹu ðə waɪdspɹɛd stænz ə tʃɹiz, dʒʌs tɑpɪŋ ə hɪl. faɪv ʃeɪps, ɪt simd, oʊnli hæf ə maɪl dɪstənt, ə bɛɹ θaʊzən peɪsɪz ət moʊst, ən kʌmɪŋ ɪn θɝɾi-fʊt baʊnz.

From behind them came a distant, coughing grunt. Before Rand could whirl Red to look, another bark sounded, and three more on its heels. At first he could make out nothing as the landscape seemed to waver in his eyes, but then he saw them through the widespread stands of trees, just topping a hill. Five shapes, it seemed, only half a mile distant, a bare thousand paces at most, and coming in thirty-foot bounds.

"ɡɹoʊm," səlin sɛd kɑmli. "ə smɔl pæk, bʌt ðeɪv əɹ sɛnt, ɪt simz."

"Grolm," Selene said calmly. "A small pack, but they have our scent, it seems."


tʃæptɝ sɛvəntin


CHAPTER 17

tʃɔɪsəz


Choices

"wil ɹʌn fəɹ ɪt," ɹænd sɛd. "hʊɹɪn, kən jə ɡæləp ən stɪl fɑloʊ ðə tʃɹeɪl?"

"We'll run for it," Rand said. "Hurin, can you gallop and still follow the trail?"

"jɛs, lɔɹd ɹænd."

"Yes, Lord Rand."

"ðɛn pʊʃ ɑn. wɪl - "

"Then push on. We will - "

"ɪt woʊn də ɛni ɡʊd," səlin sɛd. hɝ waɪt mɛɹ wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn ə ðɛɹ maʊns nɑt dænsɪŋ ət ðə ɡɹʌf bɑɹks kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðə ɡɹoʊm. "ðeɪ doʊnt ɡɪv ʌp, nɑɾ ɛvɝ. wʌns ðeɪv jəɹ sɛnt, ɡɹoʊm kip kʌmɪŋ, deɪ ən naɪt, əntɪl ðeɪ ɹʌn jə daʊn. jə mʌs kɪl əm ɔl, əɹ faɪn ə weɪ tə ɡoʊ ɛlswɛɹ. ɹænd, ðə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn kən teɪk əs ɛlswɛɹ."

"It won't do any good," Selene said. Her white mare was the only one of their mounts not dancing at the gruff barks coming from the grolm. "They don't give up, not ever. Once they have your scent, grolm keep coming, day and night, until they run you down. You must kill them all, or find a way to go elsewhere. Rand, the Portal Stone can take us elsewhere."

"noʊ! wi kən kɪl ðɛm. aɪ kæn. aɪ ɔlɹɛɾi kɪld wʌn. ðəɹ ɑɹ oʊnli faɪv. ɪf aɪ kən dʒʌs faɪnd. . . ." hi kæst ɝaʊn fəɹ ðə spɑɾ i niɾəd, ən faʊn ɪt. "fɑloʊ mi!" dɪɡɪŋ ɪz hilz ɪn, hi sɛt ɹɛd tə ə ɡæləp, kɑnfəɾənt bɪfɔɹ i hɝd ðɛɹ hʊvz ðət ði ʌðɝz wəd kʌm.

"No! We can kill them. I can. I already killed one. There are only five. If I can just find. . . ." He cast around for the spot he needed, and found it. "Follow me!" Digging his heels in, he set Red to a gallop, confident before he heard their hooves that the others would come.

ðə pleɪs i hæd tʃoʊzən wɑz ə loʊ, ɹaʊn hɪl, bɛɹ ə tʃɹiz. nʌθɪŋ kəd kʌm kloʊs wɪθaʊɾ ɪm siɪŋ. hi swʌŋ daʊn fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl ən ənlɪmbɝɾ ɪz lɔŋboʊ. lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn dʒɔɪn ɪm ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ði oʊɡiɝ hɛftɪŋ ɪz hjudʒ kɔɹɾɝstæf, ðə snɪfɝ wɪð ɪz ʃɔɹt sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪz fɪst. niðɝ kɔɹɾɝstæf nɔɹ sɔɹd wəd bi ʌv mʌtʃ jus ɪf ðə ɡɹoʊm kloʊzd wɪð ðɛm. aɪ woʊn lɛɾ əm ɡɛt kloʊs.

The place he had chosen was a low, round hill, bare of trees. Nothing could come close without him seeing. He swung down from his saddle and unlimbered his longbow. Loial and Hurin joined him on the ground, the Ogier hefting his huge quarterstaff, the sniffer with his short sword in his fist. Neither quarterstaff nor sword would be of much use if the grolm closed with them. I won't let them get close.

"ðɪs ɹɪsk ɪz nɑt nɛsəsɛɹi," səlin sɛd. ʃi bɛɹli lʊk təwɔɹd ðə ɡɹoʊm, bɛndɪŋ fɹəm əɹ sæɾəl tə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn ɹænd. "wi kən izəli ɹitʃ ðə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn əhɛɾ ə ðɛm."

"This risk is not necessary," Selene said. She barely looked toward the grolm, bending from her saddle to concentrate on Rand. "We can easily reach the Portal Stone ahead of them."

"aɪ wɪl stɑp ðɛm." heɪstəli ɹænd kaʊntəd ði æɹoʊz ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ ɪn ɪz kwɪvɝ. eɪtin, itʃ əz lɔŋ əz ɪz ɑɹm, tɛn ə ðɛm wɪð pɔɪns laɪk tʃɪzəlz, dɪzaɪn tə dʒɹaɪv θɹu tʃɹɑlɑk ɑɹmɝ. ðeɪ wəd də əz wɛl fəɹ ɡɹoʊm əz fəɹ tʃɹɑləks. hi stʌk fɔɹ ə ðoʊz əpɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm; ə fɪfθ i nɑk tə ðə baʊ. "lɔɪəl, hʊɹɪn, jə kən də noʊ ɡʊd daʊn hɪɹ. maʊn ən bi ɹɛɾi tə teɪk səlin tə ðə stoʊn ɪf ɛni ɡɛt θɹu." hi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ i kəd kɪl wʌn ə ðə θɪŋz wɪð ɪz sɔɹd, ɪf ɪt keɪm tə ðæt. jə ɑɹ mæd! ivən ðə paʊɝ ɪz nɑɾ əz bæɾ əz ðɪs.

"I will stop them." Hastily Rand counted the arrows remaining in his quiver. Eighteen, each as long as his arm, ten of them with points like chisels, designed to drive through Trolloc armor. They would do as well for grolm as for Trollocs. He stuck four of those upright in the ground in front of him; a fifth he nocked to the bow. "Loial, Hurin, you can do no good down here. Mount and be ready to take Selene to the Stone if any get through." He wondered whether he could kill one of the things with his sword, if it came to that. You are mad! Even the Power is not as bad as this.

lɔɪəl sɛd sʌmθɪŋ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt hɪɹ; hi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi sikɪŋ ðə vɔɪd, əz mʌtʃ tə ɪskeɪp ɪz oʊn θɔts əz fəɹ nid. jə noʊ wʌts weɪɾɪŋ. bʌt ðɪs weɪ aɪ doʊn əv tə tʌtʃ ɪt. ðə ɡloʊ wɑz ðɛɹ, ðə laɪt dʒʌst aʊɾ ə saɪt. ɪt sim tə floʊ təwɔɹd hɪm, bʌt ði ɛmptinəs wɑz ɔl. θɔts dɑɹɾɪd əkɹɔs ðə sɝfəs ə ðə vɔɪd, vɪzəbəl ɪn ðət teɪntɪd laɪt. seɪɾɪn. ðə paʊɝ. mædnəs. dɛθ. ɛkstʃɹeɪniəs θɔts. hi wɑz wʌn wɪð ðə baʊ, wɪð ði æɹoʊ, wɪð ðə θɪŋz tɑpɪŋ ðə nɛkst ɹaɪz.

Loial said something, but he did not hear; he was already seeking the void, as much to escape his own thoughts as for need. You know what's waiting. But this way I don't have to touch it. The glow was there, the light just out of sight. It seemed to flow toward him, but the emptiness was all. Thoughts darted across the surface of the void, visible in that tainted light. Saidin. The Power. Madness. Death. Extraneous thoughts. He was one with the bow, with the arrow, with the things topping the next rise.

ðə ɡɹoʊm keɪm ɑn, oʊvɝɹitʃɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn ðɛɹ lips, faɪv ɡɹeɪt, lɛðɝi ʃeɪps, tʃɹɪpəl-aɪd, wɪð hɔɹni mɔz ɡeɪpɪŋ. ðɛɹ ɡɹʌntɪŋ kɔlz ɹɪbaʊndɪd fɹəm ðə vɔɪd, bɛɹli hɝd.

The grolm came on, overreaching one another in their leaps, five great, leathery shapes, triple-eyed, with horny maws gaping. Their grunting calls rebounded from the void, barely heard.

ɹænd wɑz nɑɾ əwɛɹ ə ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz baʊ, əɹ dʒɹɔɪŋ ðə flɛtʃɪŋ əɡɛnst ɪz tʃik, tə hɪz ɪɹ. hi wɑz wʌn wɪð ðə bists, wʌn wɪð ðə sɛntɝ aɪ ʌv ðə fɝst. ðən ði æɹoʊ wɑz ɡɔn. ðə fɝst ɡɹoʊm daɪd; wʌn ʌv ɪts kəmpænjənz lɛpt ɑn ɪɾ əz ɪt fɛl, bik ʌv ə maʊθ ɹɪpɪŋ ɡɑbɛts ə flɛʃ. ɪt snɑɹəld ət ði ʌðɝz, ən ðeɪ sɝkəld waɪd. bʌt ðeɪ keɪm ɑn, ən əz ɪf kəmpɛld, ɪɾ əbændən ɪts mil ən lɛpt æftɝ ðɛm, ɪts hɔɹni mɔ ɔlɹɛɾi blʌɾi.

Rand was not aware of raising his bow, or drawing the fletching against his cheek, to his ear. He was one with the beasts, one with the center eye of the first. Then the arrow was gone. The first grolm died; one of its companions leaped on it as it fell, beak of a mouth ripping gobbets of flesh. It snarled at the others, and they circled wide. But they came on, and as if compelled, it abandoned its meal and leaped after them, its horny maw already bloody.

ɹænd wɝk smuðli, ʌnkɑnʃəsli, nɑk ən ɹilis. nɑk ən ɹilis.

Rand worked smoothly, unconsciously, nock and release. Nock and release.

ðə fɪfθ æɹoʊ lɛft ɪz baʊ, ən i loʊɝɾ ɪt, stɪl dip ɪn ðə vɔɪd, əz ðə fɔɹθ ɡɹoʊm fɛl laɪk ə hjudʒ pʌpət wɪð ɪts stʃɹɪŋz kʌt. ðoʊ ðə faɪnəl æɹoʊ stɪl flu, sʌmhaʊ hi nu ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid fəɹ ənʌðɝ ʃɑt. ðə læs bis kəlæpst əz ɪf ɪts boʊnz hæd mɛltəd, ə fɛðɝd ʃæf dʒʌɾɪŋ fɹəm ɪts sɛntɝ aɪ. ɔlweɪz ðə sɛntɝ aɪ.

The fifth arrow left his bow, and he lowered it, still deep in the void, as the fourth grolm fell like a huge puppet with its strings cut. Though the final arrow still flew, somehow he knew there was no need for another shot. The last beast collapsed as if its bones had melted, a feathered shaft jutting from its center eye. Always the center eye.

"mæɡnɪfəsənt, lɔɹd ɹænd," hʊɹɪn sɛd. "aɪ . . . aɪv nɛvɝ sin ʃuɾɪŋ laɪk ðæt."

"Magnificent, Lord Rand," Hurin said. "I . . . I've never seen shooting like that."

ðə vɔɪd hɛld ɹænd. ðə laɪt kɔl tə hɪm, ən i . . . ɹitʃt . . . təwɔɹɾ ɪt. ɪt sɝaʊndəd hɪm, fɪl hɪm.

The void held Rand. The light called to him, and he . . . reached . . . toward it. It surrounded him, filled him.

"lɔɹd ɹænd?" hʊɹɪn tʌtʃt ɪz ɑɹm, ən ɹænd ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, ði ɛmptinəs fɪlɪŋ ʌp wɪð wʌt wɑz ɝaʊn hɪm. "ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt, maɪ lɔɹd?"

"Lord Rand?" Hurin touched his arm, and Rand gave a start, the emptiness filling up with what was around him. "Are you all right, my Lord?"

ɹænd bɹʌʃt ɪz fɔɹhɛd wɪð fɪŋɡɝtɪps. ɪt wɑz dʒɹaɪ; hi fɛlt əz ɪf ɪt ʃʊɾə bɪn kʌvɝd wɪð swɛt. "aɪ. . . . aɪm faɪn, hʊɹɪn."

Rand brushed his forehead with fingertips. It was dry; he felt as if it should have been covered with sweat. "I. . . . I'm fine, Hurin."

"ɪt ɡɹoʊz iziɝ itʃ taɪm jə də ɪt, aɪv hɝd," səlin sɛd. "ðə mɔɹ jə lɪv ɪn ðə wʌnnəs, ði iziɝ."

"It grows easier each time you do it, I've heard," Selene said. "The more you live in the Oneness, the easier."

ɹænd ɡlænst ət hɝ. "wɛl, aɪ woʊnt niɾ ɪɾ əɡɛn, nɑt fəɹ ə waɪl." wʌt hæpənd? aɪ wɑntəd tə. . . . hi stɪl wɑntəd tə, hi ɹilaɪzd wɪð hɔɹɝ. hi wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ bæk ɪndə ðə vɔɪd, wɑntəd tə fil ðət laɪt fɪlɪŋ ɪm əɡɛn. ɪt hæd simd əz ɪf i wɝ tʃɹuli əlaɪv ðɛn, sɪklinəs ən ɔl, ən naʊ wɑz oʊnli ən ɪməteɪʃən. noʊ, wɝs. hi hæd bɪn ɔlmoʊst əlaɪv, noʊɪŋ wʌt "əlaɪv" wəd bi laɪk. ɔl i hæd tə də wɑz ɹitʃ aʊt tə seɪɾɪn. . . .

Rand glanced at her. "Well, I won't need it again, not for a while." What happened? I wanted to. . . . He still wanted to, he realized with horror. He wanted to go back into the void, wanted to feel that light filling him again. It had seemed as if he were truly alive then, sickliness and all, and now was only an imitation. No, worse. He had been almost alive, knowing what "alive" would be like. All he had to do was reach out to saidin. . . .

"nɑɾ əɡɛn," hi mʌɾɝd. hi ɡeɪzd ɔf ət ðə dɛd ɡɹoʊm, faɪv mɑnstʃɹəs ʃeɪps laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. nɑt deɪnʒɝəs ɛnimɔɹ. "naʊ wi kən bi ɑn əɹ - "

"Not again," he muttered. He gazed off at the dead grolm, five monstrous shapes lying on the ground. Not dangerous anymore. "Now we can be on our - "

ə kɑfɪŋ bɑɹk, ɔl tu fəmɪljɝ, saʊndəd bɪɑn ðə dɛd ɡɹoʊm, bɪɑn ðə nɛks hɪl, ən ʌðɝz ænsɝɾ ɪt. stɪl mɔɹ keɪm, fɹəm ði ist, fɹəm ðə wɛst.

A coughing bark, all too familiar, sounded beyond the dead grolm, beyond the next hill, and others answered it. Still more came, from the east, from the west.

ɹænd hæf ɹeɪzd ɪz baʊ.

Rand half raised his bow.

"haʊ mɛni æɹoʊz juv lɛft?" səlin dɪmændəd. "kæn jə kɪl twɛnti ɡɹoʊm? θɝɾi? ə hʌnʒɹəd? wi mʌst ɡoʊ tə ðə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn."

"How many arrows do you have left?" Selene demanded. "Can you kill twenty grolm? Thirty? A hundred? We must go to the Portal Stone."

"ʃi ɪz ɹaɪt, ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd sloʊli. "ju də nɑɾ əv ɛni tʃɔɪs naʊ." hʊɹɪn wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ɹænd æŋkʃəsli. ðə ɡɹoʊm kɔld, ə skɔɹ ə bɑɹks oʊvɝlæpɪŋ.

"She is right, Rand," Loial said slowly. "You do not have any choice now." Hurin was watching Rand anxiously. The grolm called, a score of barks overlapping.

"ðə stoʊn," ɹænd əɡɹid ɹɪlʌktənli. æŋɡɹəli hi θɹu hɪmsɛlf bæk ɪndə hɪz sæɾəl, slʌŋ ðə baʊ ɑn ɪz bæk. "lɛɾ əs tə ðɪs stoʊn, səlin."

"The Stone," Rand agreed reluctantly. Angrily he threw himself back into his saddle, slung the bow on his back. "Lead us to this Stone, Selene."

wɪð ə nɑd ʃi tɝn əɹ mɛɹ ən hild ɪt tə ə tʃɹɑt. ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz fɑloʊd, ðeɪ iɡɝli, hi hoʊldɪŋ bæk. ðə bɑɹks ʌv ɡɹoʊm pɝsud ðɛm, hʌnʒɹədz ɪt simd. ɪt saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ðə ɡɹoʊm wɝ ɹeɪnʒd ɪn ə sɛmɪsɝkəl ɝaʊn ðɛm, kloʊzɪŋ ɪn fɹəm ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən bʌt ðə fɹʌnt.

With a nod she turned her mare and heeled it to a trot. Rand and the others followed, they eagerly, he holding back. The barks of grolm pursued them, hundreds it seemed. It sounded as if the grolm were ranged in a semicircle around them, closing in from every direction but the front.

swɪfli ən ʃʊɹli səlin lɛɾ əm θɹu ðə hɪlz. ðə læn ɹoʊz ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ə maʊntənz, sloʊps stipənɪŋ soʊ ðə hɔɹsəz skɹæmbəld oʊvɝ wɑʃt-aʊt-lʊkɪŋ ɹɑki aʊtkɹɑps ən ðə spɑɹs, feɪɾəd-lʊkɪŋ bɹʌʃ ðət klʌŋ tə ðɛm. ðə weɪ bɪkeɪm hɑɹɾɝ, ðə læn slæntɪŋ mɔɹ ən mɔɹ ʌpwɝd.

Swiftly and surely Selene led them through the hills. The land rose in the beginning of mountains, slopes steepening so the horses scrambled over washed-out-looking rocky outcrops and the sparse, faded-looking brush that clung to them. The way became harder, the land slanting more and more upward.

wɝ nɑt gɑnə meɪk ɪt, ɹænd θɔt, ðə fɪfθ taɪm ɹɛd slɪpt ən slɪd bækwɝdz ɪn ə ʃaʊɝ ə stoʊn. lɔɪəl θɹu hɪz kɔɹɾɝstæf əsaɪd; ɪt wəd bi ʌv noʊ jus əɡɛnst ɡɹoʊm, ən ɪɾ oʊnli sloʊd hɪm. ði oʊɡiɝ hæd ɡɪvən ʌp ɹaɪɾɪŋ; hi juzd wʌn hæn tə hɔl hɪmsɛlf ʌp, ən pʊld ɪz tɔl hɔɹs bɪhaɪn ɪm wɪð ði ʌðɝ. ðə hɛɹi-fɛtlɑkt ænəməl meɪd hɛvi ɡoʊɪŋ, bʌɾ iziɝ ðən wɪð lɔɪəl ɑn ɪts bæk. ɡɹoʊm bɑɹk bɪhaɪn ðɛm, kloʊsɝ naʊ.

We're not going to make it, Rand thought, the fifth time Red slipped and slid backwards in a shower of stone. Loial threw his quarterstaff aside; it would be of no use against grolm, and it only slowed him. The Ogier had given up riding; he used one hand to haul himself up, and pulled his tall horse behind him with the other. The hairy-fetlocked animal made heavy going, but easier than with Loial on its back. Grolm barked behind them, closer now.

ðən səlin dʒɹu ɹeɪn ən pɔɪntəd tə ə hɑloʊ nɛsəl bɪloʊ ðɛm ɪn ðə ɡɹænət. ɪt wɑz ɔl ðɛɹ, ðə sɛvən waɪd, kʌlɝd stɛɹz ɝaʊn ə peɪl flɔɹ, ən ðə tɔl stoʊn kɑləm ɪn ðə mɪɾəl.

Then Selene drew rein and pointed to a hollow nestled below them in the granite. It was all there, the seven wide, colored stairs around a pale floor, and the tall stone column in the middle.

ʃi dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ən lɛɾ əɹ mɛɹ ɪndə ðə hɑloʊ, daʊn ðə stɛɹz tə ðə kɑləm. ɪt lumd oʊvɝ hɝ. ʃi tɝn tə lʊk bæk ʌp ət ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz. ðə ɡɹoʊm ɡeɪv ðɛɹ ɡɹʌntɪŋ bɑɹks, skɔɹz ə ðɛm, laʊd. nɪɹ. "ðeɪ wɪl bi ɑn əs sun," ʃi sɛd. "ju mʌs juz ðə stoʊn, ɹænd. əɹ ɛls faɪn ə weɪ tə kɪl ɔl ðə ɡɹoʊm."

She dismounted and led her mare into the hollow, down the stairs to the column. It loomed over her. She turned to look back up at Rand and the others. The grolm gave their grunting barks, scores of them, loud. Near. "They will be on us soon," she said. "You must use the Stone, Rand. Or else find a way to kill all the grolm."

wɪð ə saɪ, ɹænd ɡɑt daʊn fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl ən lɛd ɹɛɾ ɪndə ðə hɑloʊ. lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn fɑloʊd heɪstəli. hi stɛɹɾ ət ðə sɪmbəl-kʌvɝd kɑləm, ðə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn, ənizəli. ʃi mʌs bi eɪbəl tə tʃænəl, ivən ɪf ʃi dʌznt noʊ ɪt, əɹ ɪt kʊdn əv bɹɔɾ əɹ hɪɹ. ðə paʊɝ dʌzn hɑɹm wɪmən. "ɪf ðɪs bɹɔt jə hɪɹ," hi bɪɡæn, bʌt ʃi ɪntɝʌptɪd hɪm.

With a sigh, Rand got down from his saddle and led Red into the hollow. Loial and Hurin followed hastily. He stared at the symbol-covered column, the Portal Stone, uneasily. She must be able to channel, even if she doesn't know it, or it couldn't have brought her here. The Power doesn't harm women. "If this brought you here," he began, but she interrupted him.

"aɪ noʊ wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz," ʃi sɛd fɝmli, "bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt noʊ haʊ tə juz ɪt. jə mʌs də wʌt mʌs bi dʌn." ʃi tʃɹeɪst wʌn sɪmbəl, ə lɪɾəl lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ði ʌðɝz, wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ. ə tʃɹaɪæŋɡəl stændɪŋ ɑn ɪts pɔɪn ɪnsaɪɾ ə sɝkəl. "ðɪs stænz fəɹ ðə tʃɹu wɝld, əɹ wɝld. aɪ bɪliv ɪɾəl hɛlp ɪf jə hoʊld ɪɾ ɪn jəɹ maɪnd waɪl ju. . . ." ʃi spɹɛɾ əɹ hænz əz ɪf ənʃʊɹ ɪɡzækli wʌɾ ɪt wɑz i wɑz səpoʊz tə du.

"I know what it is," she said firmly, "but I do not know how to use it. You must do what must be done." She traced one symbol, a little larger than the others, with a finger. A triangle standing on its point inside a circle. "This stands for the true world, our world. I believe it will help if you hold it in your mind while you. . . ." She spread her hands as if unsure exactly what it was he was supposed to do.

"ʌ . . . maɪ lɔɹd?" hʊɹɪn sɛd dɪfəɾəntli. "ðɛɹ ɪzən mʌtʃ taɪm." hi ɡlænst oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ət ðə ɹɪm ə ðə hɑloʊ. ðə bɑɹkɪŋ wɑz laʊɾɝ. "ðoʊz θɪŋz wɪl bi hɪɹ ɪn mɪnəts, naʊ." lɔɪəl nɑɾəd.

"Uh . . . my Lord?" Hurin said diffidently. "There isn't much time." He glanced over his shoulder at the rim of the hollow. The barking was louder. "Those things will be here in minutes, now." Loial nodded.

dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ɹænd pʊɾ ɪz hæn ɑn ðə sɪmbəl səlin hæd pɔɪntəɾ aʊt. hi lʊkt əɾ əɹ tə si ɪf i wɑz duɪŋ ɪt ɹaɪt, bʌt ʃi mɪɹli wɑtʃt, nɑɾ ivən ðə slaɪɾəst fɹaʊn ʌv wɝi ɹɪŋkəlɪŋ əɹ peɪl fɔɹhɛd. ʃiz kɑnfəɾənt jə kən seɪv hɝ. juv tə. ðə sɛn ə hɝ fɪld ɪz nɑstʃɹəlz.

Drawing a deep breath, Rand put his hand on the symbol Selene had pointed out. He looked at her to see if he was doing it right, but she merely watched, not even the slightest frown of worry wrinkling her pale forehead. She's confident you can save her. You have to. The scent of her filled his nostrils.

"ʌ . . . maɪ lɔɹd?"

"Uh . . . my Lord?"

ɹænd swɑloʊd, ən sɔt ðə vɔɪd. ɪt keɪm izəli, spɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp ɝaʊn ɪm wɪθaʊɾ ɛfɝt. ɛmptinəs. ɛmptinəs ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə laɪt, weɪvɝɪŋ ɪn ə weɪ ðət tɝn ɪz stʌmək. ɛmptinəs ɪksɛp fəɹ seɪɾɪn. bʌɾ ivən ðə kwizinəs wɑz dɪstənt. hi wɑz wʌn wɪð ðə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn. ðə kɑləm fɛl smuð ən slaɪtli ɔɪli ʌndɝ ɪz hænd, bʌt ðə tʃɹaɪæŋɡəl-ænd-sɝkəl simd wɔɹm əɡɛns ðə bɹæn ɑn ɪz pɑm. hæv tə ɡɛɾ əm tə seɪfti. hæv tə ɡɛɾ əm hoʊm. ðə laɪt dʒɹɪftəd təwɔɹd hɪm, ɪt simd, sɝaʊndəd hɪm, ən i . . . ɛmbɹeɪst . . . ɪt.

Rand swallowed, and sought the void. It came easily, springing up around him without effort. Emptiness. Emptiness except for the light, wavering in a way that turned his stomach. Emptiness except for saidin. But even the queasiness was distant. He was one with the Portal Stone. The column felt smooth and slightly oily under his hand, but the triangle-and-circle seemed warm against the brand on his palm. Have to get them to safety. Have to get them home. The light drifted toward him, it seemed, surrounded him, and he . . . embraced . . . it.

laɪt fɪl hɪm. hit fɪl hɪm. hi kəd si ðə stoʊn, si ði ʌðɝz wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm - lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn æŋkʃəsli, səlin ʃoʊɪŋ noʊ daʊt ðəɾ i kəd seɪv əɹ - bʌt ðeɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl nɑɾ əv bɪn ðɛɹ. ðə laɪt wɑz ɔl. ðə hiɾ ən ðə laɪt, sʌfjuzɪŋ ɪz lɪmz laɪk wɔɾɝ sɪŋkɪŋ ɪndə dʒɹaɪ sænd, fɪlɪŋ hɪm. ðə sɪmbəl bɝn əɡɛnst ɪz flɛʃ. hi tʃɹaɪd tə sʌk ɪɾ ɔl ɪn, ɔl ðə hit, ɔl ðə laɪt. ɔl. ðə sɪmbəl. . . .

Light filled him. Heat filled him. He could see the Stone, see the others watching him - Loial and Hurin anxiously, Selene showing no doubt that he could save her - but they might as well not have been there. The light was all. The heat and the light, suffusing his limbs like water sinking into dry sand, filling him. The symbol burned against his flesh. He tried to suck it all in, all the heat, all the light. All. The symbol. . . .

sʌɾənli, əz ɪf ðə sʌn hæd ɡɔn aʊt fəɹ ðə blɪŋk ʌv ən aɪ, ðə wɝl flɪkɝd. ən əɡɛn. ðə sɪmbəl wɑz ə laɪv koʊl ʌndɝ ɪz hænd; hi dʒɹæŋk ɪn ðə laɪt. ðə wɝl flɪkɝd. flɪkɝd. ɪt meɪɾ ɪm sɪk, ðət laɪt; ɪt wɑz wɔɾɝ tə ə mæn daɪɪŋ ə θɝst. flɪkɝ. hi sʌkt əɾ ɪt. ɪt meɪɾ ɪm wɑnə vɑmət; hi wɑntəɾ ɪɾ ɔl. flɪkɝ. ðə tʃɹaɪæŋɡəl-ænd-sɝkəl sɪɹd hɪm; hi kəd fil ɪt tʃæɹɪŋ ɪz hænd. flɪkɝ. hi wɑntəɾ ɪɾ ɔl! hi skɹimd, haʊlɪŋ wɪð peɪn, haʊlɪŋ wɪð wɑntɪŋ.

Suddenly, as if the sun had gone out for the blink of an eye, the world flickered. And again. The symbol was a live coal under his hand; he drank in the light. The world flickered. Flickered. It made him sick, that light; it was water to a man dying of thirst. Flicker. He sucked at it. It made him want to vomit; he wanted it all. Flicker. The triangle-and-circle seared him; he could feel it charring his hand. Flicker. He wanted it all! He screamed, howling with pain, howling with wanting.

flɪkɝ . . . flɪkɝ . . . flɪkɝflɪkɝflɪkɝ. . . .

Flicker . . . flicker . . . flickerflickerflicker. . . .

hænz pʊld ət hɪm; hi wɑz oʊnli veɪɡli əwɛɹ ə ðɛm. hi stæɡɝd bæk; ðə vɔɪd wɑz slɪpɪŋ əweɪ, ðə laɪt, ən ðə sɪknəs ðət twɪstəɾ ət hɪm. ðə laɪt. hi wɑtʃt ɪt ɡoʊ ɹɪɡɹɛtfəli. laɪt, ðæts kɹeɪzi tə wɑn ɪt. bʌɾ aɪ wɑz soʊ fʊl ʌv ɪt! aɪ wɑz soʊ. . . . deɪzd, hi stɛɹɾ ət səlin. ɪt wɑz ʃi hu hɛld ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, stɛɹd wʌndɝɪŋli ɪndə hɪz aɪz. hi ɹeɪzd ɪz hæn ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz feɪs. ðə hɛɹən bɹænd wɑz ðɛɹ, bʌt nʌθɪŋ ɛls. noʊ tʃɹaɪæŋɡəl-ænd-sɝkəl bɝn ɪndə hɪz flɛʃ.

Hands pulled at him; he was only vaguely aware of them. He staggered back; the void was slipping away, the light, and the sickness that twisted at him. The light. He watched it go regretfully. Light, that's crazy to want it. But I was so full of it! I was so. . . . Dazed, he stared at Selene. It was she who held his shoulders, stared wonderingly into his eyes. He raised his hand in front of his face. The heron brand was there, but nothing else. No triangle-and-circle burned into his flesh.

"ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl," səlin sɛd sloʊli. ʃi ɡlænst ət lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn. ði oʊɡiɝ lʊk stʌnd, hɪz aɪz əz bɪɡ əz pleɪts; ðə snɪfɝ wɑz skwɑɾɪŋ wɪð wʌn hæn ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, əz ɪf ənʃʊɹ i kəd səpɔɹt hɪmsɛlf ɛls. "ɔl ʌv əs hɪɹ, ən ɔl ʌv əɹ hɔɹsəz. ən jə də nɑɾ ivən noʊ wʌt jə dɪd. ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl."

"Remarkable," Selene said slowly. She glanced at Loial and Hurin. The Ogier looked stunned, his eyes as big as plates; the sniffer was squatting with one hand on the ground, as if unsure he could support himself else. "All of us here, and all of our horses. And you do not even know what you did. Remarkable."

"ɑɹ wi . . . ?" ɹænd bɪɡæn hɔɹsli, ən hæd tə stɑp tə swɑloʊ.

"Are we . . . ?" Rand began hoarsely, and had to stop to swallow.

"lʊk ɝaʊn ju," səlin sɛd. "juv bɹɔɾ əs hoʊm." ʃi ɡeɪv ə sʌɾən læf. "ju bɹɔɾ ɔl ʌv əs hoʊm."

"Look around you," Selene said. "You've brought us home." She gave a sudden laugh. "You brought all of us home."

fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ɹænd bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə hɪz sɝaʊndɪŋz əɡɛn. ðə hɑloʊ sɝaʊndəɾ əm wɪθaʊɾ ɛni stɛɹz, ðoʊ hɪɹ ən ðəɹ leɪ ə səspɪʃəsli smuð pis ə stoʊn, kʌlɝd ɹɛd, əɹ blu. ðə kɑləm leɪ əɡɛns ðə maʊntənsaɪd, hæf bɛɹiɾ ɪn ðə lus ɹɑk ʌv ə fɔl. ðə sɪmbəlz wɝ ənklɪɹ, hɪɹ; wɪn ən wɔɾɝ hæd wɝk lɔŋ ɑn ðɛm. ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ lʊkt ɹil. ðə kʌlɝz wɝ sɑləd, ðə ɡɹænəɾ ə stʃɹɔŋ ɡɹeɪ, ðə bɹʌʃ ɡɹin ən bɹaʊn. æftɝ ðəɾ ʌðɝ pleɪs, ɪt simd ɔlmoʊs tu vɪvəd.

For the first time Rand became aware of his surroundings again. The hollow surrounded them without any stairs, though here and there lay a suspiciously smooth piece of stone, colored red, or blue. The column lay against the mountainside, half buried in the loose rock of a fall. The symbols were unclear, here; wind and water had worked long on them. And everything looked real. The colors were solid, the granite a strong gray, the brush green and brown. After that other place, it seemed almost too vivid.

"hoʊm," ɹænd bɹiðd, ən ðən i wɑz læfɪŋ, tu. "wɝ hoʊm." lɔɪəlz læftɝ saʊndəd laɪk ə bʊl bɛloʊɪŋ. hʊɹɪn dænst ə keɪpɝ.

"Home," Rand breathed, and then he was laughing, too. "We're home." Loial's laughter sounded like a bull bellowing. Hurin danced a caper.

"ju dɪɾ ɪt," səlin sɛd, linɪŋ kloʊsɝ, əntɪl əɹ feɪs fɪld ɹændz aɪz. "aɪ nu ðət jə kʊd."

"You did it," Selene said, leaning closer, until her face filled Rand's eyes. "I knew that you could."

ɹændz læftɝ daɪd. "aɪ - aɪ səpoʊz aɪ dɪd." hi ɡlænst ət ðə fɔlən pɔɹɾəl stoʊn ən mænədʒd ə wik læf. "aɪ wɪʃ aɪ nu wʌɾ ɪt wɑz aɪ dɪd, ðoʊ."

Rand's laughter died. "I - I suppose I did." He glanced at the fallen Portal Stone and managed a weak laugh. "I wish I knew what it was I did, though."

səlin lʊk dip ɪndə hɪz aɪz. "pɝhæps wʌn deɪ jəl noʊ," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "ju ɑɹ ʃʊɹli dɛstɪn fəɹ ɡɹeɪt θɪŋz."

Selene looked deep into his eyes. "Perhaps one day you will know," she said softly. "You are surely destined for great things."

hɝ aɪz simd əz dɑɹk ən dip əz naɪt, əz sɑft əz vɛlvət. hɝ maʊθ. . . . ɪf aɪ kɪs hɝ. . . . hi blɪŋkt ən stɛp bæk hɝidli, klɪɹɪŋ ɪz θɹoʊt. "səlin, pliz doʊn tɛl ɛniwʌn əbaʊt ðɪs. əbaʊt ðə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn, ən mi. aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstæn ɪt, ən niðɝ wɪl ɛnibəɾi ɛls. jə noʊ haʊ pipəl ɑɹ əbaʊt θɪŋz ðeɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd."

Her eyes seemed as dark and deep as night, as soft as velvet. Her mouth. . . . If I kissed her. . . . He blinked and stepped back hurriedly, clearing his throat. "Selene, please don't tell anyone about this. About the Portal Stone, and me. I don't understand it, and neither will anybody else. You know how people are about things they don't understand."

hɝ feɪs wɔɹ noʊ ɪkspɹɛʃən əɾ ɔl. sʌɾənli hi wɪʃt vɛɹi mʌtʃ ðət mæt ən pɛɹɪn wɝ ðɛɹ. pɛɹɪn nu haʊ tə tɔk tə ɡɝlz, ən mæt kəd laɪ wɪð ə stʃɹeɪt feɪs. hi kəd mænədʒ niðɝ vɛɹi wɛl.

Her face wore no expression at all. Suddenly he wished very much that Mat and Perrin were there. Perrin knew how to talk to girls, and Mat could lie with a straight face. He could manage neither very well.

sʌɾənli səlin smaɪld, ən dʒɹɑpt ə hæf-mɑkɪŋ kɝtsi. "aɪ wɪl kip jəɹ sikɹət, maɪ lɔɹd ɹænd ælθɹ."

Suddenly Selene smiled, and dropped a half-mocking curtsy. "I will keep your secret, my Lord Rand al'Thor."

ɹænd ɡlænst ət hɝ, ən klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊɾ əɡɛn. ɪz ʃi æŋɡɹi wɪð mi? ʃid sɝɾənli bi æŋɡɹi ɪf aɪ hæd tʃɹaɪd tə kɪs hɝ. aɪ θɪŋk. hi wɪʃt ʃi wəd nɑt lʊk əɾ ɪm əz ʃi wɑz, əz ɪf ʃi nu wʌɾ i wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ. "hʊɹɪn, ɪz ðəɹ ɛni tʃæns ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz juz ðɪs stoʊn bɪfɔɹ ʌs?"

Rand glanced at her, and cleared his throat again. Is she angry with me? She'd certainly be angry if I had tried to kiss her. I think. He wished she would not look at him as she was, as if she knew what he was thinking. "Hurin, is there any chance the Darkfriends used this Stone before us?"

ðə snɪfɝ ʃʊk ɪz hɛd ɹufəli. "ðeɪ wɝ æŋɡlɪŋ tə ðə wɛst ə hɪɹ, lɔɹd ɹænd. ənlɛs ðiz pɔɹɾəl stoʊn θɪŋz ɑɹ mɔɹ kɑmən ðən aɪv sin, aɪd seɪ ðəɹ stɪl ɪn ðəɾ ʌðɝ wɝld. bʌɾ ɪt wʊdn teɪk mi ən aʊɝ tə tʃɛk ɪt. ðə lænz ðə seɪm hɪɹ əz ðɛɹ. aɪ kəd faɪn ðə pleɪs hɪɹ wɛɹ aɪ lɔs ðə tʃɹeɪl ðɛɹ, ɪf jə si wʌɾ aɪ min, ən si ɪf ðeɪv ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɔn baɪ."

The sniffer shook his head ruefully. "They were angling to the west of here, Lord Rand. Unless these Portal Stone things are more common than I've seen, I'd say they're still in that other world. But it wouldn't take me an hour to check it. The land's the same here as there. I could find the place here where I lost the trail there, if you see what I mean, and see if they've already gone by."

ɹænd ɡlænst ət ðə skaɪ. ðə sʌn - ə wʌndɝfəli stʃɹɔŋ sʌn, nɑt peɪl əɾ ɔl - sæt loʊ tə ðə wɛst, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ ðɛɹ ʃædoʊz aʊɾ əkɹɔs ðə hɑloʊ. ənʌðɝ aʊɝ wəd bɹɪŋ fʊl twaɪlaɪt. "ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ," hi sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪ fɪɹ wiv lɔs ðɛm." wi kæn luz ðət dæɡɝ! wi kænt! "səlin, ɪf ðæts ðə keɪs, ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ wɪl teɪk jə ɑn tə jəɹ hoʊm. ɪz ɪɾ ɪn ðə sɪɾi ʌv kɛɹhin ɪtsɛlf, əɹ . . . ?"

Rand glanced at the sky. The sun - a wonderfully strong sun, not pale at all - sat low to the west, stretching their shadows out across the hollow. Another hour would bring full twilight. "In the morning," he said. "But I fear we've lost them." We can't lose that dagger! We can't! "Selene, if that's the case, in the morning we will take you on to your home. Is it in the city of Cairhien itself, or . . . ?"

"ju meɪ nɑɾ əv lɔs ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ jɛt," səlin sɛd sloʊli. "æz jə noʊ, aɪ də noʊ ə fju θɪŋz əbaʊt ðoʊz wɝlz."

"You may not have lost the Horn of Valere yet," Selene said slowly. "As you know, I do know a few things about those worlds."

"mɪɹɝz ə ðə wil," lɔɪəl sɛd.

"Mirrors of the Wheel," Loial said.

ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə lʊk, ðən nɑɾəd. "jɛs. ɪɡzækli. ðoʊz wɝlz tʃɹuli ɑɹ mɪɹɝz ɪn ə weɪ, ɪspɛʃli ðə wʌnz wɛɹ ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ pipəl. səm ə ðɛm ɹəflɛkt oʊnli ɡɹeɪɾ ɪvɛns ɪn ðə tʃɹu wɝld, bʌt səm əv ə ʃædoʊ ʌv ðət ɹəflɛkʃən ivən bɪfɔɹ ði ɪvɛn əkɝz. ðə pæsədʒ ə ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ wəd sɝɾənli bi ə ɡɹeɪɾ ɪvɛnt. ɹɪflɛkʃənz ʌv wʌt wɪl bi ɑɹ feɪntɝ ðən ɹɪflɛkʃənz ʌv wʌɾ ɪz əɹ wʌt wɑz, dʒʌst əz hʊɹɪn sɛz ðə tʃɹeɪl i fɑloʊd wɑz feɪnt."

She gave him a look, then nodded. "Yes. Exactly. Those worlds truly are mirrors in a way, especially the ones where there are no people. Some of them reflect only great events in the true world, but some have a shadow of that reflection even before the event occurs. The passage of the Horn of Valere would certainly be a great event. Reflections of what will be are fainter than reflections of what is or what was, just as Hurin says the trail he followed was faint."

hʊɹɪn blɪŋkt ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. "ju min tə seɪ, maɪ leɪɾi, aɪv bɪn smɛlɪŋ wɛɹ ðoʊz dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə bi? ðə laɪt hɛlp mi, aɪ wʊdn laɪk ðæt. ɪts bæɾ ɪnʌf smɛlɪŋ wɛɹ vaɪələns əz bɪn, wɪθaʊt smɛlɪŋ wɛɹ ɪɾəl bi, tu. ðəɹ kæn bi mɛni spɑts wɛɹ ðəɹ woʊn bi səm kaɪndə vaɪələns, səm taɪm. ɪt wəd dʒɹaɪv mi kɹeɪzi, laɪk əz nɑt. ðət pleɪs wi dʒʌs lɛf nɪɹli dɪd. aɪ kəd smɛl ɪɾ ɔl ðə taɪm, ðɛɹ, kɪlɪŋ ən hɝɾɪŋ, ən ðə vaɪləst ivəl jə kəd θɪŋk ʌv. aɪ kəɾ ivən smɛl ɪɾ ɑn ʌs. ɑn ɔl ʌv ʌs. ivən ɑn ju, maɪ leɪɾi, ɪf jəl fɝɡɪv mi fəɹ seɪɪŋ soʊ. ɪt wɑz dʒʌs ðət pleɪs, twɪstɪŋ mi ðə weɪ ɪt twɪstəd jəɹ aɪ." hi ɡeɪv hɪmsɛlf ə ʃeɪk. "aɪm ɡlæd wɝ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ. aɪ kænt ɡɛɾ ɪɾ aʊɾ ə maɪ nɑstʃɹəlz jɛt, ɔl ðə weɪ."

Hurin blinked incredulously. "You mean to say, my Lady, I've been smelling where those Darkfriends are going to be? The Light help me, I wouldn't like that. It's bad enough smelling where violence has been, without smelling where it will be, too. There can't be many spots where there won't be some kind of violence, some time. It would drive me crazy, like as not. That place we just left nearly did. I could smell it all the time, there, killing and hurting, and the vilest evil you could think of. I could even smell it on us. On all of us. Even on you, my Lady, if you'll forgive me for saying so. It was just that place, twisting me the way it twisted your eye." He gave himself a shake. "I'm glad we're out of there. I can't get it out of my nostrils yet, all the way."

ɹænd ɹʌbd æbsənli ət ðə bɹæn ɑn ɪz pɑm. "wʌt dʒju θɪŋk, lɔɪəl? kəd wi ɹɪli bi əhɛɾ ə feɪnz dɑɹkfɹɛnz?"

Rand rubbed absently at the brand on his palm. "What do you think, Loial? Could we really be ahead of Fain's Darkfriends?"

ði oʊɡiɝ ʃɹʌɡd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ, ɹænd. aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɛni ʌv ðɪs. aɪ θɪŋk wəɹ bæk ɪn əɹ wɝld. aɪ θɪŋk wəɹ ɪn kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ. bɪɑn ðæt. . . ." hi ʃɹʌɡd əɡɛn.

The Ogier shrugged, frowning. "I don't know, Rand. I don't know anything about any of this. I think we are back in our world. I think we are in Kinslayer's Dagger. Beyond that. . . ." He shrugged again.

"wi ʃəd bi siɪŋ jə hoʊm, səlin," ɹænd sɛd. "jɔɹ pipəl wɪl bi wɝiɾ əbaʊt ju."

"We should be seeing you home, Selene," Rand said. "Your people will be worried about you."

"ə fju deɪz wɪl si ɪf aɪm ɹaɪt," ʃi sɛɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli. "hʊɹɪn kən faɪnd wɛɹ i lɛf ðə tʃɹeɪl; hi sɛd soʊ. wi kən wɑtʃ oʊvɝ ɪt. ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ kænɑt bi mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ ɹitʃɪŋ hɪɹ. ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, ɹænd. θɪŋk ʌv ɪt. ðə mæn u saʊnz ðə hɔɹn wɪl lɪv ɪn lɛdʒən fɝɛvɝ."

"A few days will see if I'm right," she said impatiently. "Hurin can find where he left the trail; he said so. We can watch over it. The Horn of Valere cannot be much longer reaching here. The Horn of Valere, Rand. Think of it. The man who sounds the Horn will live in legend forever."

"aɪ doʊnt wɑn ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð lɛdʒənz," hi sɛd ʃɑɹpli. bʌɾ ɪf ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɡɛt baɪ ju. . . . wʌɾ ɪf ɪŋtʃɹ lɔs ðɛm? ðən ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz əv ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ fɝɛvɝ, ən mæt daɪz. "ɔl ɹaɪt, ə fju deɪz. ət ðə wɝst, wɪl pɹɑbli miɾ ɪŋtʃɹ ən ði ʌðɝz. aɪ kæn ɪmædʒən ðeɪv stɑpt əɹ tɝn bæk dʒʌs kəz wi . . . wɛn əweɪ."

"I don't want anything to do with legends," he said sharply. But if the Darkfriends get by you. . . . What if Ingtar lost them? Then the Darkfriends have the Horn of Valere forever, and Mat dies. "All right, a few days. At the worst, we will probably meet Ingtar and the others. I can't imagine they've stopped or turned back just because we . . . went away."

"ə waɪz dɪsɪʒən, ɹænd," səlin sɛd, "ænd wɛl θɔɾ aʊt." ʃi tʌtʃt ɪz ɑɹm ən smaɪld, ən i faʊn hɪmsɛlf əɡɛn θɪŋkɪŋ ə kɪsɪŋ hɝ.

"A wise decision, Rand," Selene said, "and well thought out." She touched his arm and smiled, and he found himself again thinking of kissing her.

"ʌ . . . wi nid tə bi kloʊsɝ tə wɛɹ ðəl kʌm. ɪf ðeɪ də kʌm. hʊɹɪn, kən jə faɪn əs ə kæmp bɪfɔɹ dɑɹk, sʌmwɛɹ wi kən wɑtʃ ðə pleɪs wɛɹ jə lɔs ðə tʃɹeɪl?" hi ɡlænst ət ðə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn ən θɔɾ əbaʊt slipɪŋ nɪɹ ɪt, θɔɾ ə ðə weɪ ðə vɔɪd hæd kɹɛpt ʌp ɑn ɪm ɪn slip ðə læs taɪm, ən ðə laɪɾ ɪn ðə vɔɪd. "sʌmwɛɹ wɛl əweɪ fɹəm hɪɹ."

"Uh . . . we need to be closer to where they'll come. If they do come. Hurin, can you find us a camp before dark, somewhere we can watch the place where you lost the trail?" He glanced at the Portal Stone and thought about sleeping near it, thought of the way the void had crept up on him in sleep the last time, and the light in the void. "Somewhere well away from here."

"liv ɪɾ ɪn maɪ hænz, lɔɹd ɹænd." ðə snɪfɝ skɹæmbəl tə hɪz sæɾəl. "aɪ vaʊ, əl nɛvɝ slip əɡɛn wɪθaʊt fɝst aɪ si wʌt kaɪndə stoʊn ðəɹ ɪz nɪɹbaɪ."

"Leave it in my hands, Lord Rand." The sniffer scrambled to his saddle. "I vow, I'll never sleep again without first I see what kind of stone there is nearby."

əz ɹænd ɹoʊd ɹɛɾ ʌp aʊɾ ə ðə hɑloʊ, hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf wɑtʃɪŋ səlin mɔɹ ðən i dɪd hʊɹɪn. ʃi sim soʊ kul ən sɛlf-pəzɛst, noʊ oʊldɝ ðən hi, jɛt kwinli, bʌt wən ʃi smaɪld ət hɪm, əz ʃi dɪd dʒʌs ðɛn. . . . ɛɡwin wʊdn əv sɛɾ aɪ wɑz waɪz. ɛɡwin wʊɾə kɔl mi ə wʊlhɛd. ɪɹɪɾəbli, hi hild ɹɛdz flæŋks.

As Rand rode Red up out of the hollow, he found himself watching Selene more than he did Hurin. She seemed so cool and self-possessed, no older than he, yet queenly, but when she smiled at him, as she did just then. . . . Egwene wouldn't have said I was wise. Egwene would have called me a woolhead. Irritably, he heeled Red's flanks.


tʃæptɝ eɪtin


CHAPTER 18

tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ


To the White Tower

ɛɡwin bælənst ɑn ðə hilɪŋ dɛk əz ðə ɹɪvɝ kwin spɛd daʊn ðə waɪɾ ɛɹɪnɪn ʌndɝ klaʊd-dɑɹk skaɪz, seɪlz fʊl-bɛlid, waɪt fleɪm bænɝ wɪpɪŋ fjʊɹiəsli ət ðə meɪnməst. ðə wɪn hæd ɹɪzən əz sun əz ðə læst ə ðɛm wɑz əbɔɹd ðə ʃɪps, bæk ɪn mɛɾoʊ, ən ɪt hæd nɑt feɪld əɹ flæɡd fəɹ ən ɪnstən sɪns, deɪ əɹ naɪt. ðə ɹɪvɝ hæd bɪɡʌn tə ɹeɪs ɪn flʌd, əz ɪt stɪl dɪd, slæpɪŋ ðə ʃɪps əbaʊt waɪl ɪt dʒɹoʊv əm ɔnwɝd. wɪn ən ɹɪvɝ hæd nɑt sloʊd, ən niðɝ hæd ðə ʃɪps, ɔl klʌstɝd təɡɛðɝ. ðə ɹɪvɝ kwin lɛd, oʊnli ɹaɪt fəɹ ðə vɛsəl ðət kæɹid ði æmɪɝlɪn sit.

Egwene balanced on the heeling deck as the River Queen sped down the wide Erinin under cloud-dark skies, sails full-bellied, White Flame banner whipping furiously at the mainmast. The wind had risen as soon as the last of them was aboard the ships, back in Medo, and it had not failed or flagged for an instant since, day or night. The river had begun to race in flood, as it still did, slapping the ships about while it drove them onward. Wind and river had not slowed, and neither had the ships, all clustered together. The River Queen led, only right for the vessel that carried the Amyrlin Seat.

ðə hɛlmzmæn hɛld ɪz tɪlɝ ɡɹɪmli, fit plæntəɾ ən spɹɛd, ən seɪlɝz pæɾəd bɛɹfʊɾ ət ðɛɹ wɝk, ɪntɛn ɑn wʌt ðeɪ dɪd; wən ðeɪ ɡlænst ət ðə skaɪ əɹ ðə ɹɪvɝ, ðeɪ tɔɹ ðɛɹ aɪz əweɪ wɪð loʊ mʌɾɝz. ə vɪlədʒ wɑz dʒʌs feɪɾɪŋ fɹəm vju bɪhaɪnd, ən ə bɔɪ ɹeɪst əlɔŋ ðə bæŋk; hi hæd kɛpt ʌp wɪð ðə ʃɪps fəɹ ə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns, bʌt naʊ ðeɪ wɝ livɪŋ ɪm bɪhaɪnd. wən i vænɪʃt, ɛɡwin meɪɾ əɹ weɪ bɪloʊ.

The helmsman held his tiller grimly, feet planted and spread, and sailors padded barefoot at their work, intent on what they did; when they glanced at the sky or the river, they tore their eyes away with low mutters. A village was just fading from view behind, and a boy raced along the bank; he had kept up with the ships for a short distance, but now they were leaving him behind. When he vanished, Egwene made her way below.

ɪn ðə smɔl kæbən ðeɪ ʃɛɹd, nɪneɪiv ɡlɛɹɾ ʌp əɾ əɹ fɹəm əɹ nɛɹoʊ bɛd. "ðeɪ seɪ wɪl ɹitʃ tɑɹ vəlɑn tədeɪ. ðə laɪt hɛlp mi, bʌɾ əl bi ɡlæd tə pʊt fʊɾ ɑn læn əɡɛn ivən ɪf ɪts ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn." ðə ʃɪp lɝtʃt wɪð wɪn ən kɝənt, ən nɪneɪiv swɑloʊd. "aɪl nɛvɝ stɛp ɑn ə boʊɾ əɡɛn," ʃi sɛd bɹɛθləsli.

In the small cabin they shared, Nynaeve glared up at her from her narrow bed. "They say we'll reach Tar Valon today. The Light help me, but I'll be glad to put foot on land again even if it is in Tar Valon." The ship lurched with wind and current, and Nynaeve swallowed. "I'll never step on a boat again," she said breathlessly.

ɛɡwin ʃʊk ðə ɹɪvɝ spɹeɪ aʊɾ ə hɝ kloʊk ən hʌŋ ɪɾ ɑn ə pɛɡ baɪ ðə dɔɹ. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə bɪɡ kæbən - ðəɹ wɝ noʊ bɪɡ kæbənz ɑn ðə ʃɪp, ɪt simd, nɑɾ ivən ðə wʌn ði æmɪɝlɪn hæd teɪkən oʊvɝ fɹəm ðə kæptən, ðoʊ ðət wɑz lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ðə ɹɛst. wɪð ɪts tu bɛdz bɪlt ɪndə ðə wɔlz, ʃɛlvz bɪniθ əm ən kæbənəts əbʌv, ɛvɹiθɪŋ leɪ kloʊs tə hænd.

Egwene shook the river spray out of her cloak and hung it on a peg by the door. It was not a big cabin - there were no big cabins on the ship, it seemed, not even the one the Amyrlin had taken over from the captain, though that was larger than the rest. With its two beds built into the walls, shelves beneath them and cabinets above, everything lay close to hand.

ɪksɛp fəɹ kipɪŋ əɹ bæləns, ðə muvməns ə ðə ʃɪp dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ əɹ ðə weɪ ðeɪ dɪd nɪneɪiv; ʃi hæd ɡɪvən ʌp ɔfɝɪŋ nɪneɪiv fuɾ æftɝ ðə θɝd taɪm ðə wɪzdəm θɹu ðə boʊl ət hɝ. "aɪm wɝiɾ əbaʊt ɹænd," ʃi sɛd.

Except for keeping her balance, the movements of the ship did not bother her the way they did Nynaeve; she had given up offering Nynaeve food after the third time the Wisdom threw the bowl at her. "I'm worried about Rand," she said.

"aɪm wɝiɾ əbaʊɾ ɔl ə ðɛm," nɪneɪiv ɹɪplaɪd dʌli. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ʃi sɛd, "ənʌðɝ dʒɹim læs naɪt? ðə weɪ juv bɪn stɛɹɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ sɪns jə ɡɑɾ ʌp. . . ."

"I'm worried about all of them," Nynaeve replied dully. After a moment, she said, "Another dream last night? The way you've been staring at nothing since you got up. . . ."

ɛɡwin nɑɾəd. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn vɛɹi ɡʊɾ ət kipɪŋ θɪŋz fɹəm nɪneɪiv, ən ʃi hæd nɑt tʃɹaɪd wɪð ðə dʒɹimz. nɪneɪiv hæd tʃɹaɪd tə doʊs əɹ ət fɝst, əntɪl ʃi hɝd wʌn ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz ɪntʃɹəstəd; ðən ʃi bɪɡæn tə bɪliv. "ɪt wɑz laɪk ði ʌðɝz. dɪfɹənt, bʌt ðə seɪm. ɹænd ɪz ɪn səm kaɪndə deɪnʒɝ. aɪ noʊ ɪt. ən ɪts ɡɛɾɪŋ wɝs. hiz dʌn sʌmθɪŋ, əɹ hiz gɑnə də sʌmθɪŋ, ðət pʊts ɪm ɪn. . . ." ʃi dʒɹɑp daʊn ɑn əɹ bɛɾ ən lin təwɔɹd ði ʌðɝ wʊmən. "aɪ dʒʌst wɪʃ aɪ kəd meɪk səm sɛns ʌv ɪt."

Egwene nodded. She had never been very good at keeping things from Nynaeve, and she had not tried with the dreams. Nynaeve had tried to dose her at first, until she heard one of the Aes Sedai was interested; then she began to believe. "It was like the others. Different, but the same. Rand is in some kind of danger. I know it. And it is getting worse. He's done something, or he's going to do something, that puts him in. . . ." She dropped down on her bed and leaned toward the other woman. "I just wish I could make some sense of it."

"tʃænəlɪŋ?" nɪneɪiv sɛd sɔfli.

"Channeling?" Nynaeve said softly.

dɪspaɪt hɝsɛlf, ɛɡwin lʊkt ɝaʊn tə si ɪf ɛniwʌn wɑz ðəɹ tə hɪɹ. ðeɪ wɝ əloʊn, wɪð ðə dɔɹ kloʊzd, bʌt stɪl ʃi spoʊk dʒʌst əz sɔfli. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ. meɪbi." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tɛlɪŋ wʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd də - ʃi hæd sin ɪnʌf ɔlɹɛɾi tə meɪk əɹ bɪliv ɛvɹi stɔɹi ʌv ðɛɹ paʊɝz - ən ʃi wəd nɑt ɹɪsk ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ. aɪ woʊn ɹɪsk ɹænd. ɪf aɪ dɪd ɹaɪt, aɪd tɛl ðɛm, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn noʊz, ən ʃi hæzən sɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ. ən ɪts ɹænd! aɪ kænt. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt tə du."

Despite herself, Egwene looked around to see if anyone was there to hear. They were alone, with the door closed, but still she spoke just as softly. "I don't know. Maybe." There was no telling what Aes Sedai could do - she had seen enough already to make her believe every story of their powers - and she would not risk eavesdropping. I won't risk Rand. If I did right, I'd tell them, but Moiraine knows, and she hasn't said anything. And it's Rand! I can't. "I don't know what to do."

"hæz æneɪjə sɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ əbaʊt ðiz dʒɹimz?" nɪneɪiv sim tə meɪk ɪɾ ə pɔɪnt nɛvɝ tə æd ði ɑnɝɪfɪk sədaɪ, ivən wən ðə tu ʌv əm wɝ əloʊn. moʊst ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əpɪɹd nɑt tə kɛɹ, bʌt ðə hæbət hæɾ ɝn ə fju stʃɹeɪnʒ lʊks, ən səm hɑɹd wʌnz; ʃi wɑz gɑnə tʃɹeɪn ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, æftɝ ɔl.

"Has Anaiya said anything more about these dreams?" Nynaeve seemed to make it a point never to add the honorific Sedai, even when the two of them were alone. Most of the Aes Sedai appeared not to care, but the habit had earned a few strange looks, and some hard ones; she was going to train in the White Tower, after all.

" 'ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz,' " ɛɡwin kwoʊɾəd æneɪjə. " 'ðə bɔɪ ɪz fɑɹ əweɪ, tʃaɪld, ən ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ wi kən də əntɪl wi noʊ mɔɹ. əl si tə tɛstɪŋ jə maɪsɛlf wʌns wi ɹitʃ ðə waɪt taʊɝ, tʃaɪld.' ɑɡ! ʃi noʊz ðəɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðiz dʒɹimz. aɪ kən tɛl ʃi dʌz. aɪ laɪk ðə wʊmən, nɪneɪiv; aɪ du. bʌt ʃi woʊn tɛl mi wʌɾ aɪ wɑnə noʊ. ən aɪ kæn tɛl əɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. meɪbi ɪf aɪ kʊd. . . ."

" 'The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills,' " Egwene quoted Anaiya. " 'The boy is far away, child, and there's nothing we can do until we know more. I will see to testing you myself once we reach the White Tower, child.' Aaagh! She knows there is something in these dreams. I can tell she does. I like the woman, Nynaeve; I do. But she won't tell me what I want to know. And I can't tell her everything. Maybe if I could. . . ."

"ðə mæn ɪn ðə mæsk əɡɛn?"

"The man in the mask again?"

ɛɡwin nɑɾəd. sʌmhaʊ, ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz bɛɾɝ nɑt tə tɛl æneɪjə əbaʊt hɪm. ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən waɪ, bʌt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ. θɹi taɪmz ðə mæn huz aɪz wɝ faɪɝ hæd bɪn ɪn əɹ dʒɹimz itʃ taɪm wən ʃi dʒɹimd ə dʒɹim ðət kənvɪnst əɹ ɹænd wɑz ɪn deɪnʒɝ. hi ɔlweɪz wɔɹ ə mæsk əkɹɔs ɪz feɪs; səmtaɪmz ʃi kəd si hɪz aɪz, ən səmtaɪmz ʃi kəɾ oʊnli si faɪɝ wɛɹ ðeɪ ʃəd bi. "hi læft ət mi. ɪt wɑz soʊ . . . kəntɛmptʃuəs. əz ðoʊ aɪ wɝ ə pʌpi hi wɑz gɑnə hæv tə pʊʃ aʊɾ ə hɪz weɪ wɪð ɪz fʊt. ɪt fɹaɪɾənz mi. hi fɹaɪɾənz mi."

Egwene nodded. Somehow, she was sure it was better not to tell Anaiya about him. She could not imagine why, but she was sure. Three times the man whose eyes were fire had been in her dreams each time when she dreamed a dream that convinced her Rand was in danger. He always wore a mask across his face; sometimes she could see his eyes, and sometimes she could only see fire where they should be. "He laughed at me. It was so . . . contemptuous. As though I were a puppy he was going to have to push out of his way with his foot. It frightens me. He frightens me."

"ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ ɪts ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð ði ʌðɝ dʒɹimz, wɪð ɹænd? səmtaɪmz ə dʒɹim ɪz dʒʌst ə dʒɹim."

"Are you sure it has anything to do with the other dreams, with Rand? Sometimes a dream is just a dream."

ɛɡwin θɹu ʌp əɹ hænz. "æn səmtaɪmz, nɪneɪiv, jə saʊn dʒʌs laɪk æneɪjə sədaɪ!" ʃi pʊɾ ə spɛʃəl ɛmfəsəs ɑn ðə taɪɾəl, ən wɑz pliz tə si nɪneɪiv ɡɹɪmɑs.

Egwene threw up her hands. "And sometimes, Nynaeve, you sound just like Anaiya Sedai!" She put a special emphasis on the title, and was pleased to see Nynaeve grimace.

"ɪf aɪ ɛvɝ ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðɪs bɛd, ɛɡwin - "

"If I ever get out of this bed, Egwene - "

ə nɑk ət ðə dɔɹ kʌɾ ɔf wʌtɛvɝ nɪneɪiv hæd bɪn ɡoʊɪŋ tə seɪ. bɪfɔɹ ɛɡwin kəd spik əɹ muv, ði æmɪɝlɪn hɝsɛlf keɪm ɪn ən ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn hɝ. ʃi wɑz əloʊn, fəɹ ə wʌndɝ; ʃi sɛldəm lɛft əɹ kæbən, ən ðən ɔlweɪz wɪð lin əɾ əɹ saɪd, ən meɪbi ənʌðɝ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

A knock at the door cut off whatever Nynaeve had been going to say. Before Egwene could speak or move, the Amyrlin herself came in and shut the door behind her. She was alone, for a wonder; she seldom left her cabin, and then always with Leane at her side, and maybe another of the Aes Sedai.

ɛɡwin spɹæŋ tə hɝ fit. ðə ɹum wɑz ə lɪɾəl kɹaʊɾəd, wɪð θɹi ʌv əm ɪn ɪt.

Egwene sprang to her feet. The room was a little crowded, with three of them in it.

"boʊθ ə jə filɪŋ wɛl?" ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd tʃiɹəli. ʃi tɪltəɾ əɹ hɛɾ ət nɪneɪiv. "iɾɪŋ wɛl, tu, aɪ tʃɹʌst? ɪn ɡʊd tɛmpɝ?"

"Both of you feeling well?" the Amyrlin said cheerily. She tilted her head at Nynaeve. "Eating well, too, I trust? In good temper?"

nɪneɪiv stʃɹʌɡəl tə ə sɪɾɪŋ pəzɪʃən, wɪð əɹ bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl. "maɪ tɛmpɝ ɪz dʒʌs faɪn, θæŋk ju."

Nynaeve struggled to a sitting position, with her back against the wall. "My temper is just fine, thank you."

"wi ɑɹ ɑnɝd, mʌðɝ," ɛɡwin bɪɡæn, bʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn weɪvd əɹ tə saɪləns.

"We are honored, Mother," Egwene began, but the Amyrlin waved her to silence.

"ɪts ɡʊd tə bi ɑn ðə wɔɾɝ əɡɛn, bʌɾ ɪt ɡɹoʊz bɔɹɪŋ əz ə mɪl pɑn æftɝ ə waɪl wɪð nʌθɪŋ tə du." ðə ʃɪp hild, ən ʃi ʃɪftəɾ əɹ bæləns wɪθaʊt simɪŋ tə noʊɾəs. "aɪ wɪl ɡɪv jə jəɹ lɛsən tədeɪ." ʃi foʊldəd hɝsɛlf ɑntu ði ɛn ʌv ɛɡwinz bɛd, fit tʌkt ʌndɝ hɝ. "sɪt, tʃaɪld."

"It's good to be on the water again, but it grows boring as a mill pond after a while with nothing to do." The ship heeled, and she shifted her balance without seeming to notice. "I will give you your lesson today." She folded herself onto the end of Egwene's bed, feet tucked under her. "Sit, child."

ɛɡwin sæt, bʌt nɪneɪiv bɪɡæn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊʃ hɝsɛlf tə hɝ fit. "aɪ θɪŋk əl ɡoʊ ɑn dɛk."

Egwene sat, but Nynaeve began trying to push herself to her feet. "I think I will go on deck."

"aɪ sɛd, sɪt!" ði æmɪɝlɪnz vɔɪs kɹæk laɪk ə wɪp, bʌt nɪneɪiv kɛpt ɹaɪzɪŋ, weɪvɝɪŋ. ʃi stɪl hæd boʊθ hænz ɑn ðə bɛd, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɔlmoʊst əpɹaɪt. ɛɡwin hɛl hɝsɛlf ɹɛɾi tə kætʃ əɹ wən ʃi fɛl.

"I said, sit!" The Amyrlin's voice cracked like a whip, but Nynaeve kept rising, wavering. She still had both hands on the bed, but she was almost upright. Egwene held herself ready to catch her when she fell.

kloʊzɪŋ əɹ aɪz, nɪneɪiv sloʊli loʊɝd hɝsɛlf bæk tə ðə bɛd. "pɝhæps əl steɪ. ɪts noʊ daʊt wɪndi ʌp ðɛɹ."

Closing her eyes, Nynaeve slowly lowered herself back to the bed. "Perhaps I will stay. It is no doubt windy up there."

ði æmɪɝlɪn bɑɹkt ə læf. "ðeɪ toʊl mi jə hæɾ ə tɛmpɝ ɪn jə laɪk ə fɪʃɝ-bɝd wɪð ə boʊn ɪn ɪts θɹoʊt. səm ə ðɛm, tʃaɪld, seɪ jud də wɛl fəɹ səm taɪm əz ə nɑvəs, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ oʊl jə ɑɹ. aɪ seɪ, ɪf juv ði əbɪləɾi aɪ hɪɹ ʌv, jə dɪzɝv tə bi wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd." ʃi ɡeɪv ənʌðɝ læf. "aɪ ɔlweɪz bɪliv ɪn ɡɪvɪŋ pipəl wʌt ðeɪ dɪzɝv. jɛs. aɪ səspɛk jəl lɝn ə ɡɹeɪt dil wʌns jə ɹitʃ ðə waɪt taʊɝ."

The Amyrlin barked a laugh. "They told me you had a temper in you like a fisher-bird with a bone in its throat. Some of them, child, say you'd do well for some time as a novice, no matter how old you are. I say, if you have the ability I hear of, you deserve to be one of the Accepted." She gave another laugh. "I always believe in giving people what they deserve. Yes. I suspect you will learn a great deal once you reach the White Tower."

"aɪd ɹæðɝ wʌn ə ðə wɔɹɾɝz tɔt mi haʊ tə juz ə sɔɹd," nɪneɪiv ɡɹaʊld. ʃi swɑloʊd kənvʌlsɪvli, ən oʊpən əɹ aɪz. "ðɛɹ ɪz sʌmwʌn aɪd laɪk tə juz ɪɾ ɑn." ɛɡwin lʊkt əɾ əɹ ʃɑɹpli; dɪd nɪneɪiv min ði æmɪɝlɪn - wɪtʃ wɑz stupəd, ən deɪnʒɝəs bɪsaɪdz - əɹ læn? ʃi snæpt əɾ ɛɡwin ɛvɹi taɪm læn wɑz mɛnʃənd.

"I'd rather one of the Warders taught me how to use a sword," Nynaeve growled. She swallowed convulsively, and opened her eyes. "There is someone I'd like to use it on." Egwene looked at her sharply; did Nynaeve mean the Amyrlin - which was stupid, and dangerous besides - or Lan? She snapped at Egwene every time Lan was mentioned.

"ə sɔɹd?" ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd. "aɪ nɛvɝ θɔt sɔɹdz wɝ mʌtʃ juz - ivən ɪf juv ðə skɪl, tʃaɪld, ðəɹ ɑɹ ɔlweɪz mɛn u hæv əz mʌtʃ, ən ə dil mɔɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ - bʌɾ ɪf jə wɑn ə sɔɹd. . . ." ʃi hɛld ʌp əɹ hænd - ɛɡwin ɡæspt, ən ivən nɪneɪivz aɪz bʌlʒd - ən ðəɹ wɑz ə sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪt. wɪð bleɪɾ ən hɪlt ʌv ən ɑd bluɪʃ waɪt, ɪt lʊk sʌmhaʊ . . . koʊld. "meɪd fɹəm ði ɛɹ, tʃaɪld, wɪð ɛɹ. ɪts əz ɡʊɾ əz moʊst stil bleɪdz, bɛɾɝ ðən moʊst, bʌt stɪl nɑt mʌtʃ juz." ðə sɔɹd bɪkeɪm ə pɛɹɪŋ naɪf. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ʃɹɪŋkɪŋ; ɪt dʒʌst wɑz wʌn θɪŋ, ðən ði ʌðɝ. "ðɪs, naʊ, ɪz jusfəl." ðə pɛɹɪŋ naɪf tɝn tə mɪst, ən ðə mɪs feɪɾəd əweɪ. ði æmɪɝlɪn pʊɾ əɹ ɛmpti hæn bæk ɪn əɹ læp. "bʌɾ iðɝ teɪks mɔɹ ɛfɝt ðən ɪts wɝθ. bɛɾɝ, iziɝ, sɪmpli tə kæɹi ə ɡʊd naɪf wɪð ju. juv tə lɝn wən tə juz jəɹ əbɪləɾi, əz wɛl əz haʊ, ən wən ɪts bɛɾɝ tə də θɪŋz ðə weɪ ɛni ʌðɝ wʊmən wʊd. lɛɾ ə blæksmɪθ meɪk naɪvz fəɹ ɡʌɾɪŋ fɪʃ. juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ tu ɔfən ən tu fɹili, ən jə kən kʌm tə laɪk ɪt tu mʌtʃ. ðət weɪ laɪz deɪnʒɝ. jə bɪɡɪn tə wɑn mɔɹ ʌv ɪt, ən sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ jə ɹʌn ðə ɹɪsk ə dʒɹɔɪŋ mɔɹ ðən juv lɝn tə hændəl. ən ðət kən bɝn jə aʊt laɪk ə ɡʌɾɝd kændəl, əɹ - "

"A sword?" the Amyrlin said. "I never thought swords were much use - even if you have the skill, child, there are always men who have as much, and a deal more strength - but if you want a sword. . . ." She held up her hand - Egwene gasped, and even Nynaeve's eyes bulged - and there was a sword in it. With blade and hilt of an odd bluish white, it looked somehow . . . cold. "Made from the air, child, with Air. It's as good as most steel blades, better than most, but still not much use." The sword became a paring knife. There was no shrinking; it just was one thing, then the other. "This, now, is useful." The paring knife turned to mist, and the mist faded away. The Amyrlin put her empty hand back in her lap. "But either takes more effort than it is worth. Better, easier, simply to carry a good knife with you. You have to learn when to use your ability, as well as how, and when it's better to do things the way any other woman would. Let a blacksmith make knives for gutting fish. Use the One Power too often and too freely, and you can come to like it too much. That way lies danger. You begin to want more of it, and sooner or later you run the risk of drawing more than you've learned to handle. And that can burn you out like a guttered candle, or - "

"ɪf aɪ mʌs lɝn ɔl ðɪs," nɪneɪiv bɹoʊk ɪn stɪfli, "aɪ wəɾ əz sun lɝn sʌmθɪŋ jusfəl. ɔl ðɪs - ðɪs . . . 'meɪk ði ɛɹ stɝ, nɪneɪiv. laɪt ðə kændəl, nɪneɪiv. naʊ pʊɾ ɪɾ aʊt. laɪɾ ɪɾ əɡɛn.' pɑ!"

"If I must learn all this," Nynaeve broke in stiffly, "I would as soon learn something useful. All this - this . . . 'Make the air stir, Nynaeve. Light the candle, Nynaeve. Now put it out. Light it again.' Paah!"

ɛɡwin kloʊzd əɹ aɪz fəɹ ə moʊmənt. pliz, nɪneɪiv. pliz kip ə tʃɛk ɑn jəɹ tɛmpɝ. ʃi bɪɾ əɹ lɪp tə kip fɹəm seɪɪŋ ɪɾ aʊt laʊd.

Egwene closed her eyes for a moment. Please, Nynaeve. Please keep a check on your temper. She bit her lip to keep from saying it out loud.

ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz saɪlən fəɹ ə moʊmənt. "jusfəl," ʃi sɛɾ ət læst. "sʌmθɪŋ jusfəl. jə wɑntəɾ ə sɔɹd. səpoʊz ə mæn keɪm ət mi wɪð ə sɔɹd. wʌt wəɾ aɪ du? sʌmθɪŋ jusfəl, jə kən bi ʃʊɹ. ðɪs, aɪ θɪŋk."

The Amyrlin was silent for a moment. "Useful," she said at last. "Something useful. You wanted a sword. Suppose a man came at me with a sword. What would I do? Something useful, you can be sure. This, I think."

fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ɛɡwin θɔt ʃi sɔ ə ɡloʊ ɝaʊn ðə wʊmən ət ði ʌðɝ ɛn ə hɝ bɛd. ðən ði ɛɹ sim tə θɪkən; nʌθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒd ðəɾ ɛɡwin kəd si, bʌt ʃi kəd ʃʊɹli fil ɪt. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə lɪft əɹ ɑɹm; ɪt dɪd nɑt bʌdʒ ɛni mɔɹ ðən ɪf ʃi wɝ bɛɹid tə hɝ nɛk ɪn θɪk dʒɛli. nʌθɪŋ kəd muv ɪksɛpt əɹ hɛd.

For an instant, Egwene thought she saw a glow around the woman at the other end of her bed. Then the air seemed to thicken; nothing changed that Egwene could see, but she could surely feel it. She tried to lift her arm; it did not budge any more than if she were buried to her neck in thick jelly. Nothing could move except her head.

"ɹilis mi!" nɪneɪiv ɡɹeɪɾɪd. hɝ aɪz ɡlɛɹd, ən əɹ hɛd dʒɝk fɹəm saɪd tə saɪd, bʌt ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ sæɾ əz ɹɪdʒɪdli əz ə stætʃu. ɛɡwin ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn hɛld. "lɛt mi ɡoʊ!"

"Release me!" Nynaeve grated. Her eyes glared, and her head jerked from side to side, but the rest of her sat as rigidly as a statue. Egwene realized that she was not the only one held. "Let me go!"

"jusfəl, wʊdn jə seɪ? ən ɪts nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ ɛɹ." ði æmɪɝlɪn spoʊk ɪn ə kɑnvɝseɪʃənəl toʊn, əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɔl tʃæɾɪŋ oʊvɝ ti. "bɪɡ mæn, wɪð ɪz mʌsəlz ən ɪz sɔɹd, ən ðə sɔɹd dʌz ɪm əz mʌtʃ ɡʊɾ əz ðə hɛɹ ɑn ɪz tʃɛst."

"Useful, wouldn't you say? And it is nothing but Air." The Amyrlin spoke in a conversational tone, as if they were all chatting over tea. "Big man, with his muscles and his sword, and the sword does him as much good as the hair on his chest."

"lɛt mi ɡoʊ, aɪ seɪ!"

"Let me go, I say!"

"æn ɪf aɪ doʊn laɪk wɛɹ i ɪz, waɪ, aɪ kən pɪk ɪm ʌp." nɪneɪiv skwɔk fjʊɹiəsli əz ʃi sloʊli ɹoʊz, stɪl ɪn ə sɪɾɪŋ pəzɪʃən, əntɪl əɹ hɛɾ ɔlmoʊs tʌtʃt ðə silɪŋ. ði æmɪɝlɪn smaɪld. "aɪv ɔfən wɪʃt aɪ kəd juz ðɪs tə flaɪ. ðə ɹɛkɝdz seɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd flaɪ, ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹən klɪɹ ɑn haʊ, ɪɡzækli. nɑt ðɪs weɪ, ðoʊ. ɪt dʌznt wɝk laɪk ðæt. jə maɪt ɹitʃ aʊt wɪð jəɹ hænz ən pɪk ʌp ə tʃɛs ðət weɪz əz mʌtʃ əz jə du; jə lʊk stʃɹɔŋ. bʌt teɪk hoʊld ə jɝsɛlf haʊɛvɝ jə wɪl, jə kænɑt pɪk jɝsɛlf ʌp."

"And if I don't like where he is, why, I can pick him up." Nynaeve squawked furiously as she slowly rose, still in a sitting position, until her head almost touched the ceiling. The Amyrlin smiled. "I've often wished I could use this to fly. The records say Aes Sedai could fly, in the Age of Legends, but they aren't clear on how, exactly. Not this way, though. It doesn't work like that. You might reach out with your hands and pick up a chest that weighs as much as you do; you look strong. But take hold of yourself however you will, you cannot pick yourself up."

nɪneɪivz hɛd dʒɝk fjʊɹiəsli, bʌt nɑɾ ənʌðɝ mʌsəl ə hɝ twɪtʃt. "ðə laɪt bɝn ju, lemi ɡoʊ!"

Nynaeve's head jerked furiously, but not another muscle of her twitched. "The Light burn you, let me go!"

ɛɡwin swɑloʊd hɑɹɾ ən hoʊpt ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ɔlsoʊ tə bi lɪftəd.

Egwene swallowed hard and hoped she was not also to be lifted.

"soʊ," ði æmɪɝlɪn kəntɪnjud, "bɪɡ, hɛɹi mæn, ən soʊ fɔɹθ. hi kən də nʌθɪŋ tə mi, waɪl aɪ kən də ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl tə hɪm. waɪ, ɪf aɪ hæɾ ə maɪn tə" - ʃi lin fɔɹwɝd, hɝ aɪz ɪntɛn ɑn nɪneɪiv; sʌɾənli hɝ smaɪl dɪd nɑt sim vɛɹi fɹɛnli - "aɪ kəd tɝn ɪm ʌpsaɪd daʊn ən pæɾəl ɪz bɑɾəm. dʒʌs laɪk - " sʌɾənli ði æmɪɝlɪn flu bækwɝdz soʊ hɑɹɾ əɹ hɛd ɹɪbaʊndɪd fɹəm ðə wɔl, ən ðəɹ ʃi steɪd, əz ɪf sʌmθɪŋ wɝ pɹɛsɪŋ əɡɛns hɝ.

"So," the Amyrlin continued, "big, hairy man, and so forth. He can do nothing to me, while I can do anything at all to him. Why, if I had a mind to" - she leaned forward, her eyes intent on Nynaeve; suddenly her smile did not seem very friendly - "I could turn him upside down and paddle his bottom. Just like - " Suddenly the Amyrlin flew backwards so hard her head rebounded from the wall, and there she stayed, as if something were pressing against her.

ɛɡwin stɛɹd, hɝ maʊθ dʒɹaɪ. ðɪs ɪzən hæpənɪŋ. ɪɾ ɪzənt.

Egwene stared, her mouth dry. This isn't happening. It isn't.

"ðeɪ wɝ ɹaɪt," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd. hɝ vɔɪs saʊndəd stʃɹeɪnd, əz ðoʊ ʃi faʊn ɪt hɑɹd tə bɹið. "ðeɪ sɛd jə lɝn kwɪkli. ən ðeɪ sɛɾ ɪt tʊk jəɹ tɛmpɝ bɝnɪŋ tə ɡɛt tə ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv wʌt jə kən du." ʃi tʊk ə stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ bɹɛθ. "ʃæl wi ɹilis itʃ ʌðɝ təɡɛðɝ, tʃaɪld?"

"They were right," the Amyrlin said. Her voice sounded strained, as though she found it hard to breathe. "They said you learned quickly. And they said it took your temper burning to get to the heart of what you can do." She took a struggling breath. "Shall we release each other together, child?"

nɪneɪiv, floʊɾɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ wɪð əɹ aɪz əbleɪz, sɛd, "ju lemi ɡoʊ ɹaɪt naʊ, əɹ əl - " əbɹʌpli ə lʊk ʌv əmeɪzmən keɪm oʊvɝ əɹ feɪs, ə lʊk ə lɔs. hɝ maʊθ wɝk saɪlənli.

Nynaeve, floating in the air with her eyes ablaze, said, "You let me go right now, or I'll - " Abruptly a look of amazement came over her face, a look of loss. Her mouth worked silently.

ði æmɪɝlɪn sæɾ ʌp, wɝkɪŋ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. "ju doʊnt noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ jɛt, də ju, tʃaɪld? nɑt ðə hʌnʒɹədθ pɑɹɾ ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ. jə dɪd nɑt səspɛkt aɪ kəd kʌt jə ɔf fɹəm ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. jə kən stɪl fil ɪt ðɛɹ, bʌt jə kæn tʌtʃ ɪɾ ɛni mɔɹ ðən ə fɪʃ kən tʌtʃ ðə mun. wən jə lɝn ɪnʌf tə bi ɹeɪz tə fʊl sɪstɝhʊd, noʊ wʌn wʊmən wɪl bi eɪbəl tə də ðət tə ju. ðə stʃɹɔŋɝ jə bɪkʌm, ðə mɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪɾəl teɪk tə ʃil jə əɡɛns jəɹ wɪl. dʒju θɪŋk, naʊ, jə wɑnə lɝn?" nɪneɪiv pɹɛst əɹ maʊθ ʃʌɾ ɪn ə θɪn laɪn ən stɛɹɾ əɹ ɪn ði aɪ ɡɹɪmli. ði æmɪɝlɪn saɪd. "ɪf jə hæɾ ə hɛɹ lɛs pətɛnʃəl ðən jə du, tʃaɪld, aɪ wəd sɛn jə tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz ən tɛl əɹ tə kip jə ðə ɹɛst ə jəɹ laɪf. bʌt jəl ɡɛt wʌt jə dɪzɝv."

The Amyrlin sat up, working her shoulders. "You don't know everything yet, do you, child? Not the hundredth part of everything. You did not suspect I could cut you off from the True Source. You can still feel it there, but you can't touch it any more than a fish can touch the moon. When you learn enough to be raised to full sisterhood, no one woman will be able to do that to you. The stronger you become, the more Aes Sedai it will take to shield you against your will. Do you think, now, you want to learn?" Nynaeve pressed her mouth shut in a thin line and stared her in the eye grimly. The Amyrlin sighed. "If you had a hair less potential than you do, child, I would send you to the Mistress of Novices and tell her to keep you the rest of your life. But you will get what you deserve."

nɪneɪivz aɪz waɪɾənd, ən ʃi hæd dʒʌs taɪm tə stɑɹɾ ə jɛl bɪfɔɹ ʃi dʒɹɑpt, hɪɾɪŋ əɹ bɛd wɪð ə laʊd θʌd. ɛɡwin wɪnst; ðə mætʃɹəsəz wɝ θɪn, ən ðə wʊd bɪniθ hɑɹd. nɪneɪivz feɪs steɪd fɹoʊzən əz ʃi ʃɪftəd ðə weɪ ʃi sæt, dʒʌst ə fɹækʃən.

Nynaeve's eyes widened, and she had just time to start a yell before she dropped, hitting her bed with a loud thud. Egwene winced; the mattresses were thin, and the wood beneath hard. Nynaeve's face stayed frozen as she shifted the way she sat, just a fraction.

"ænd naʊ," ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd fɝmli, "ənlɛs jə wəd laɪk fɝðɝ dɛmənstʃɹeɪʃən, wɪl ɡɛɾ ɑn wɪð jəɹ lɛsən. kəntɪnju jəɹ lɛsən, wi maɪt seɪ."

"And now," the Amyrlin said firmly, "unless you would like further demonstration, we will get on with your lesson. Continue your lesson, we might say."

"mʌðɝ?" ɛɡwin sɛd feɪnli. ʃi stɪl kəd nɑt twɪtʃ bɪloʊ hɝ tʃɪn.

"Mother?" Egwene said faintly. She still could not twitch below her chin.

ði æmɪɝlɪn lʊkt əɾ əɹ kwɛstʃənɪŋli, ðən smaɪld. "oʊ. aɪm sɑɹi, tʃaɪld. jəɹ fɹɛnd wɑz ɑkjəpaɪɪŋ maɪ ətɛnʃən, aɪm əfɹeɪd." sʌɾənli ɛɡwin kəd muv əɡɛn; ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ ɑɹmz, dʒʌs tə kənvɪns hɝsɛlf ðət ʃi kʊd. "ɑɹ jə boʊθ ɹɛɾi tə lɝn?"

The Amyrlin looked at her questioningly, then smiled. "Oh. I am sorry, child. Your friend was occupying my attention, I'm afraid." Suddenly Egwene could move again; she raised her arms, just to convince herself that she could. "Are you both ready to learn?"

"jɛs, mʌðɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd kwɪkli.

"Yes, Mother," Egwene said quickly.

ði æmɪɝlɪn ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ ət nɪneɪiv.

The Amyrlin raised an eyebrow at Nynaeve.

æftɝ ə moʊmənt, nɪneɪiv sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs, "jɛs, mʌðɝ."

After a moment, Nynaeve said in a tight voice, "Yes, Mother."

ɛɡwin hivd ə saɪ ʌv ɹɪlif.

Egwene heaved a sigh of relief.

"ɡʊd. naʊ, ðɛn. ɛmpti jəɹ θɔts ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ bʌɾ ə flaʊɝ bʌd."

"Good. Now, then. Empty your thoughts of everything but a flower bud."

ɛɡwin wɑz swɛɾɪŋ baɪ ðə taɪm ði æmɪɝlɪn lɛft. ʃi hæd θɔt səm ə ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd bɪn hɑɹd titʃɝz, bʌt ðət smaɪlɪŋ, pleɪn-feɪst wʊmən koʊkst aʊɾ ɛvɹi læs dʒɹɑp ʌv ɛfɝt, dʒɹu ɪɾ aʊt, ən wən ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ lɛft, ʃi sim tə ɹitʃ ɪndə jə ən pʊld ɪɾ aʊt. ɪt hæd ɡɔn wɛl, ðoʊ. əz ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn ði æmɪɝlɪn, ɛɡwin ɹeɪzd wʌn hænd; ə taɪni fleɪm spɹæŋ tə laɪf, bælənst ə hɛɹbɹidθ əbʌv ðə tɪp ə hɝ fɔɹfɪŋɡɝ, ðən dæns fɹəm fɪŋɡɝɾɪp tə fɪŋɡɝɾɪp. ʃi wɑz nɑt səpoʊz tə də ðɪs wɪθaʊɾ ə titʃɝ - wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd, ət ðə vɛɹi list - tə wɑtʃ oʊvɝ hɝ, bʌt ʃi wɑz tu ɪksaɪɾəd əɾ əɹ pɹɑɡɹɛs tə peɪ ɛni maɪn tə ðæt.

Egwene was sweating by the time the Amyrlin left. She had thought some of the other Aes Sedai had been hard teachers, but that smiling, plain-faced woman coaxed out every last drop of effort, drew it out, and when there was nothing left, she seemed to reach into you and pulled it out. It had gone well, though. As the door closed behind the Amyrlin, Egwene raised one hand; a tiny flame sprang to life, balanced a hairbreadth above the tip of her forefinger, then danced from fingertip to fingertip. She was not supposed to do this without a teacher - one of the Accepted, at the very least - to watch over her, but she was too excited at her progress to pay any mind to that.

nɪneɪiv baʊndəd tə hɝ fiɾ ən θɹu hɝ pɪloʊ ət ðə kloʊzɪŋ dɔɹ. "ðæt - ðət vaɪl, kəntɛmptəbəl, mɪzɝəbəl - hæɡ! ðə laɪt bɝn hɝ! aɪd laɪk tə fiɾ əɹ tə ðə fɪʃ. aɪd laɪk tə doʊs əɹ wɪð θɪŋz ðət wəd tɝn əɹ ɡɹin fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ laɪf! aɪ doʊn kɛɹ ɪf ʃiz oʊld ɪnʌf tə bi maɪ mʌðɝ, ɪf aɪ hæɾ əɹ ɪn ɛmənz fild, ʃi wʊdn sɪt daʊn kʌmfɝɾəbli fɔɹ. . . ." hɝ tiθ ɡɹaʊn soʊ laʊdli ðəɾ ɛɡwin dʒʌmpt.

Nynaeve bounded to her feet and threw her pillow at the closing door. "That - that vile, contemptible, miserable - hag! The Light burn her! I'd like to feed her to the fish. I'd like to dose her with things that would turn her green for the rest of her life! I don't care if she's old enough to be my mother, if I had her in Emond's Field, she wouldn't sit down comfortably for. . . ." Her teeth ground so loudly that Egwene jumped.

lɛɾɪŋ ðə fleɪm daɪ, ɛɡwin pʊɾ əɹ aɪz fɝmli ɑn əɹ læp. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi kəd θɪŋk ʌv ə weɪ tə snik aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum wɪθaʊt kætʃɪŋ nɪneɪivz aɪ.

Letting the flame die, Egwene put her eyes firmly on her lap. She wished she could think of a way to sneak out of the room without catching Nynaeve's eye.

ðə lɛsən hæd nɑt ɡɔn wɛl fəɹ nɪneɪiv, kəz ʃi hæd hɛld əɹ tɛmpɝ ɑn ə taɪt lɛɾ əntɪl ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz ɡɔn. ʃi nɛvɝ kəd də vɛɹi mʌtʃ ənlɛs ʃi wɑz æŋɡɹi, ən ðən ɪɾ ɔl bɝst aʊɾ ə hɝ. æftɝ feɪljɝ əpɑn feɪljɝ, ði æmɪɝlɪn hæd dʌn ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi kəd tə ɹaʊs əɹ əɡɛn. ɛɡwin wɪʃt nɪneɪiv kəd fɝɡɛt ʃi hæd bɪn ðəɹ tə si əɹ hɪɹ ɛni ʌv ɪt.

The lesson had not gone well for Nynaeve, because she had held her temper on a tight lead until the Amyrlin was gone. She never could do very much unless she was angry, and then it all burst out of her. After failure upon failure, the Amyrlin had done everything she could to rouse her again. Egwene wished Nynaeve could forget she had been there to see or hear any of it.

nɪneɪiv stɔk stɪfli tə hɝ bɛɾ ən stʊd stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə wɔl bɪhaɪn ɪt, hɝ fɪs klɛntʃt əɾ əɹ saɪd. ɛɡwin lʊk lɔŋɪŋli ət ðə dɔɹ.

Nynaeve stalked stiffly to her bed and stood staring at the wall behind it, her fist clenched at her side. Egwene looked longingly at the door.

"ɪt wɑz nɑt jəɹ fɔlt," nɪneɪiv sɛd, ən ɛɡwin ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt.

"It was not your fault," Nynaeve said, and Egwene gave a start.

"nɪneɪiv, aɪ - "

"Nynaeve, I - "

nɪneɪiv tɝn tə lʊk daʊn ət hɝ. "ɪt wɑz nɑt jəɹ fɔlt," ʃi ɹɪpiɾɪd, saʊndɪŋ ʌnkənvɪnst. "bʌɾ ɪf jə ɛvɝ bɹið wʌn wɝd, əl - aɪl. . . ."

Nynaeve turned to look down at her. "It was not your fault," she repeated, sounding unconvinced. "But if you ever breathe one word, I'll - I'll. . . ."

"nɑɾ ə wɝd," ɛɡwin sɛd kwɪkli. "aɪ doʊn ivən ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛniθɪŋ tə bɹið ə wɝɾ əbaʊt."

"Not a word," Egwene said quickly. "I don't even remember anything to breathe a word about."

nɪneɪiv stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ ə moʊmən lɔŋɡɝ, ðən nɑɾəd. əbɹʌpli ʃi ɡɹɪməst. "laɪt, aɪ dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɛniθɪŋ teɪstəd wɝs ðən ɹɔ ʃipstɔŋ ɹut. əl ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt, ðə nɛks taɪm jə æk ðə ɡus, soʊ wɑtʃ jɝsɛlf."

Nynaeve stared at her a moment longer, then nodded. Abruptly she grimaced. "Light, I did not think anything tasted worse than raw sheepstongue root. I'll remember that, the next time you act the goose, so watch yourself."

ɛɡwin wɪnst. ðət hæd bɪn ðə fɝs θɪŋ ði æmɪɝlɪn hæd dʌn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹaʊs nɪneɪivz æŋɡɝ. ə dɑɹk ɡlɑb ə sʌmθɪŋ ðət ɡlɪsən laɪk ɡɹis ən smɛl vaɪl hæd sʌɾənli əpɪɹɾ ænd, waɪl ði æmɪɝlɪn hɛl nɪneɪiv wɪð ðə paʊɝ, hæd bɪn fɔɹst ɪndə ðə wɪzdəmz maʊð. ði æmɪɝlɪn hæɾ ivən hɛld əɹ noʊz tə meɪk əɹ swɑloʊ. ən nɪneɪiv ɹɪmɛmbɝd θɪŋz, ɪf ʃi hæd sin əm dʌn wʌns. ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðəɹ wɑz ɛni weɪ ʌv stɑpɪŋ əɹ ɪf ʃi tʊk ɪɾ ɪndə hɝ maɪn tə də ɪt; fəɹ ɔl əɹ oʊn səksɛs ɪn meɪkɪŋ ə fleɪm dæns, ʃi kəd nɛvɝ əv hɛl ði æmɪɝlɪn əɡɛnst ə wɔl. "æt lis biɪŋ ɑn ðə ʃɪp ɪzən meɪkɪŋ jə sɪk ɛnimɔɹ."

Egwene winced. That had been the first thing the Amyrlin had done trying to rouse Nynaeve's anger. A dark glob of something that glistened like grease and smelled vile had suddenly appeared and, while the Amyrlin held Nynaeve with the Power, had been forced into the Wisdom's mouth. The Amyrlin had even held her nose to make her swallow. And Nynaeve remembered things, if she had seen them done once. Egwene did not think there was any way of stopping her if she took it into her mind to do it; for all her own success in making a flame dance, she could never have held the Amyrlin against a wall. "At least being on the ship isn't making you sick anymore."

nɪneɪiv ɡɹʌntɪd, ðən ɡeɪv ə ʃɔɹt, ʃɑɹp læf. "aɪm tu æŋɡɹi tə bi sɪk." wɪð ənʌðɝ mɝθləs læf, ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "aɪm tu mɪzɝəbəl tə bi sɪk. laɪt, aɪ fil əz ɪf aɪv bɪn dʒɹæɡd θɹu ə nɑthoʊl bækwɝdz. ɪf ðəɾ ɪz wʌt nɑvəs tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɪz laɪk, jəl əv ɪnsɛntɪv tə lɝn kwɪkli."

Nynaeve grunted, then gave a short, sharp laugh. "I'm too angry to be sick." With another mirthless laugh, she shook her head. "I'm too miserable to be sick. Light, I feel as if I've been dragged through a knothole backwards. If that is what novice training is like, you will have incentive to learn quickly."

ɛɡwin skaʊld əɾ əɹ niz. kəmpɛɹd tə nɪneɪiv, ði æmɪɝlɪn hæɾ oʊnli koʊks hɝ, smaɪld əɾ əɹ səksɛsəz, sɪmpəθaɪzd wɪð əɹ feɪljɝz, ðən koʊkst əɡɛn. bʌɾ ɔl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd sɛd θɪŋz wəd bi dɪfɹən ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ; hɑɹɾɝ, ðoʊ ðeɪ wəd nɑt seɪ haʊ. ɪf ʃi hæd tə ɡoʊ θɹu wʌt nɪneɪiv hæd, deɪ æftɝ deɪ, ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi kəd stæn ɪt.

Egwene scowled at her knees. Compared to Nynaeve, the Amyrlin had only coaxed her, smiled at her successes, sympathized with her failures, then coaxed again. But all the Aes Sedai had said things would be different in the White Tower; harder, though they would not say how. If she had to go through what Nynaeve had, day after day, she did not think she could stand it.

sʌmθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒd ɪn ðə moʊʃən ə ðə ʃɪp. ðə ɹɑkɪŋ izd, ən fit θʌmpt ɑn ðə dɛk əbʌv ðɛɹ hɛdz. ə mæn ʃaʊɾəd sʌmθɪŋ ɛɡwin kəd nɑt kwaɪt meɪk aʊt.

Something changed in the motion of the ship. The rocking eased, and feet thumped on the deck above their heads. A man shouted something Egwene could not quite make out.

ʃi lʊkt ʌp ət nɪneɪiv. "du jə θɪŋk. . . . tɑɹ vəlɑn?"

She looked up at Nynaeve. "Do you think. . . . Tar Valon?"

"ðɛɹ ɪz oʊnli wʌn weɪ tə faɪn aʊt," nɪneɪiv ɹɪplaɪd, ən dətɝmənədli tʊk əɹ kloʊk fɹəm ɪts pɛɡ.

"There is only one way to find out," Nynaeve replied, and determinedly took her cloak from its peg.

wən ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə dɛk, seɪlɝz wɝ ɹʌnɪŋ ɛvɹiwɛɹ, hivɪŋ ət laɪnz, ʃɔɹɾənɪŋ seɪl, ɹɛɾiɪŋ lɔŋ swips. ðə wɪn hæd daɪd tə ə bɹiz, ən ðə klaʊdz wɝ skæɾɝɪŋ, naʊ.

When they reached the deck, sailors were running everywhere, heaving at lines, shortening sail, readying long sweeps. The wind had died to a breeze, and the clouds were scattering, now.

ɛɡwin ɹʌʃt tə ðə ɹeɪl. "ɪɾ ɪz! ɪts tɑɹ vəlɑn!" nɪneɪiv dʒɔɪn əɹ wɪð ən ɪkspɹɛʃənləs feɪs.

Egwene rushed to the rail. "It is! It is Tar Valon!" Nynaeve joined her with an expressionless face.

ði aɪlənd wɑz soʊ bɪɡ ɪt lʊk mɔɹ əz ɪf ðə ɹɪvɝ splɪɾ ɪn tu ðən kənteɪn ə bɪɾ ə lænd. bɹɪdʒəz ðət sim tə bi meɪɾ ə leɪs ɑɹtʃt fɹəm iðɝ bæŋk tə ði aɪlənd, kɹɔsɪŋ mɑɹʃi ɡɹaʊn əz wɛl əz ðə ɹɪvɝ. ðə wɔlz ə ðə sɪɾi, ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ wɔlz ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ɡlɪsənd waɪɾ əz ðə sʌn bɹoʊk θɹu ðə klaʊdz. ən ɑn ðə wɛs bæŋk, ɪts bɹoʊkən tɑp likɪŋ ə θɪn wɪsp ə smoʊk, dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊn ɹɪɹd blæk əɡɛns ðə skaɪ, wʌn maʊntən stændɪŋ əmʌŋ flæt lænz ən ɹoʊlɪŋ hɪlz. dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt, wɛɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən hæd daɪd. dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt, meɪd baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡənz daɪɪŋ.

The island was so big it looked more as if the river split in two than contained a bit of land. Bridges that seemed to be made of lace arched from either bank to the island, crossing marshy ground as well as the river. The walls of the city, the Shining Walls of Tar Valon, glistened white as the sun broke through the clouds. And on the west bank, its broken top leaking a thin wisp of smoke, Dragonmount reared black against the sky, one mountain standing among flat lands and rolling hills. Dragonmount, where the Dragon had died. Dragonmount, made by the Dragon's dying.

ɛɡwin wɪʃt ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ə ɹænd wən ʃi lʊkt ət ðə maʊntən. ə mæn tʃænəlɪŋ. laɪt, hɛlp hɪm.

Egwene wished she did not think of Rand when she looked at the mountain. A man channeling. Light, help him.

ðə ɹɪvɝ kwin pæs θɹu ə waɪɾ oʊpənɪŋ ɪn ə tɔl, sɝkjəlɝ wɔl ðət θɹʌst aʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹɪvɝ. ɪnsaɪd, wʌn lɔŋ wɔɹf sɝaʊndəɾ ə ɹaʊn hɑɹbɝ. seɪlɝz fɝl ðə læst seɪlz ən juz swips əloʊn tə muv ðə ʃɪp stɝn-fɝs tə ɪts dɑkɪŋ. ɝaʊn ðə lɔŋ wɔɹf, ði ʌðɝ ʃɪps ðət hæd kʌm daʊnɹɪvɝ wɝ naʊ biɪŋ snʌɡd ɪndə ðɛɹ bɝθs əmʌŋ ðə ʃɪps ɔlɹɛɾi ðɛɹ. ðə waɪt fleɪm bænɝ sɛt wɝkɝz skɝiɪŋ əlɔŋ ði ɔlɹɛɾi bɪzi wɔɹf.

The River Queen passed through a wide opening in a tall, circular wall that thrust out into the river. Inside, one long wharf surrounded a round harbor. Sailors furled the last sails and used sweeps alone to move the ship stern-first to its docking. Around the long wharf, the other ships that had come downriver were now being snugged into their berths among the ships already there. The White Flame banner set workers scurrying along the already busy wharf.

ði æmɪɝlɪn keɪm ɑn dɛk bɪfɔɹ ðə ʃɔɹ laɪnz wɝ taɪɾ ɔf, bʌt dɑkwɝkɝz ɹæn ə ɡæŋplæŋk əbɔɹɾ əz sun əz ʃi əpɪɹd. lin wɔkt əɾ əɹ saɪd, fleɪm-tɪp stæf ɪn hænd, ən ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑn ðə ʃɪp fɑloʊɾ əm əʃɔɹ. nʌn ə ðɛm soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlænst əɾ ɛɡwin əɹ nɪneɪiv. ɑn ðə wɔɹf ə dɛləɡeɪʃən ɡɹiɾəd ði æmɪɝlɪn - ʃɔld ɛɛs sədaɪ, boʊɪŋ fɔɹməli, kɪsɪŋ ði æmɪɝlɪnz ɹɪŋ. ðə wɔɹf bʌsəld, bɪtwin ʃɪps ənloʊɾɪŋ ən ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɝaɪvɪŋ; soʊlʒɝz fɔɹmd ʌp ɑn dɪsɛmbɑɹkɪŋ, mɛn sɛt bumz fəɹ kɑɹɡoʊ; tʃɹʌmpət flɝɪʃəz ɹæŋ fɹəm ðə wɔlz, kəmpiɾɪŋ wɪð tʃɪɹz fɹəm ði ɔnlʊkɝz.

The Amyrlin came on deck before the shore lines were tied off, but dockworkers ran a gangplank aboard as soon as she appeared. Leane walked at her side, flame-tipped staff in hand, and the other Aes Sedai on the ship followed them ashore. None of them so much as glanced at Egwene or Nynaeve. On the wharf a delegation greeted the Amyrlin - shawled Aes Sedai, bowing formally, kissing the Amyrlin's ring. The wharf bustled, between ships unloading and the Amyrlin Seat arriving; soldiers formed up on disembarking, men set booms for cargo; trumpet flourishes rang from the walls, competing with cheers from the onlookers.

nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv ə laʊd snɪf. "ɪt simz ðeɪv fɝɡɑɾən ʌs. kʌm əlɔŋ. wɪl si tə aʊɝsɛlvz."

Nynaeve gave a loud sniff. "It seems they've forgotten us. Come along. We'll see to ourselves."

ɛɡwin wɑz ɹɪlʌktən tə liv əɹ fɝst saɪɾ ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, bʌt ʃi fɑloʊd nɪneɪiv bɪloʊ tə ɡæðɝ ðɛɹ θɪŋz. wən ðeɪ keɪm bæk tɑpsaɪd, bʌndəlz ɪn ðɛɹ ɑɹmz, soʊlʒɝz ən tʃɹʌmpəts wɝ ɡɔn - ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, tu. mɛn wɝ swɪŋɪŋ bæk hætʃɪz əlɔŋ ðə dɛk ən loʊɝɪŋ keɪbəlz ɪndə ðə hoʊlz.

Egwene was reluctant to leave her first sight of Tar Valon, but she followed Nynaeve below to gather their things. When they came back topside, bundles in their arms, soldiers and trumpets were gone - and Aes Sedai, too. Men were swinging back hatches along the deck and lowering cables into the holds.

ɑn ðə dɛk, nɪneɪiv kɑɾ ə dɑkmənz ɑɹm, ə bɝli fɛloʊ ɪn ə kɔɹs bɹaʊn ʃɝt wɪð noʊ slivz. "aʊɝ hɔɹsəz," ʃi bɪɡæn.

On the deck, Nynaeve caught a dockman's arm, a burly fellow in a coarse brown shirt with no sleeves. "Our horses," she began.

"aɪm bɪzi," hi ɡɹaʊld, pʊlɪŋ fɹi. "hɔɹsəzəl ɔl bi tʊk tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ." hi lʊkt əm ʌp ən daʊn. "ɪf juv bɪznəs wɪð ðə taʊɝ, bɛs jə teɪk jʊɹsɛlvz ɑn. ɛɛs sədaɪ doʊn hoʊld wɪð nulɪŋz biɪŋ tɑɹɾi." ənʌðɝ mæn, ɹɛslɪŋ wɪð ə beɪl biɪŋ swʌŋ aʊɾ ə ðə hoʊld ɑn ə keɪbəl, ʃaʊɾəd tə hɪm, ən i lɛf ðə wɪmən wɪθaʊɾ ə bækwɝdz ɡlæns.

"I'm busy," he growled, pulling free. "Horses'll all be took to the White Tower." He looked them up and down. "If you've business with the Tower, best you take yourselves on. Aes Sedai don't hold with newlings being tardy." Another man, wrestling with a bale being swung out of the hold on a cable, shouted to him, and he left the women without a backwards glance.

ɛɡwin ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks wɪð nɪneɪiv. ɪt sim ðeɪ ɹɪli wɝ ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn.

Egwene exchanged looks with Nynaeve. It seemed they really were on their own.

nɪneɪiv stɔkt ɔf ðə ʃɪp wɪð ɡɹɪm dɪtɝməneɪʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs, bʌɾ ɛɡwin meɪɾ əɹ weɪ dɪdʒɛktɪdli daʊn ðə ɡæŋplæŋk ən θɹu ðə tɛɹi smɛl ðət hʌŋ oʊvɝ ðə wɔɹf. ɔl ðət tɔk əbaʊt wɑntɪŋ əs hɪɹ, ən naʊ ðeɪ doʊn sim tə kɛɹ.

Nynaeve stalked off the ship with grim determination on her face, but Egwene made her way dejectedly down the gangplank and through the tarry smell that hung over the wharf. All that talk about wanting us here, and now they don't seem to care.

bɹɔd stɛɹz lɛɾ ʌp fɹəm ðə dɑk tə ə waɪɾ ɑɹtʃ ə dɑɹk ɹɛdstoʊn. ɑn ɹitʃɪŋ ɪt, ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv stɑp tə stɛɹ.

Broad stairs led up from the dock to a wide arch of dark redstone. On reaching it, Egwene and Nynaeve stopped to stare.

ɛvɹi bɪldɪŋ simd ə pæləs, ðoʊ moʊst ə ðoʊz kloʊs tə ði ɑɹtʃ sim tə kənteɪn ɪnz əɹ ʃɑps, fɹəm ðə saɪnz oʊvɝ ðə dɔɹz. fænsɪfəl stoʊnwɝk wɑz ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ən ðə laɪnz ʌv wʌn stʃɹʌktʃɝ sim dɪzaɪn tə kɑmpləmən ən sɛɾ ɔf ðə nɛkst, liɾɪŋ ði aɪ əlɔŋ əz ɪf ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɝ pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌn væs dɪzaɪn. səm stʃɹʌktʃɝz dɪd nɑt lʊk laɪk bɪldɪŋz əɾ ɔl, bʌt laɪk dʒaɪɡæntɪk weɪvz bɹeɪkɪŋ, əɹ hjudʒ ʃɛlz, əɹ fænsɪfəl, waɪnd-skʌlptɪd klɪfs. ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ɑɹtʃ leɪ ə bɹɔd skwɛɹ, wɪð ə faʊntən ən tʃɹiz, ən ɛɡwin kəd si ənʌðɝ skwɛɹ fɝðɝ ɑn. əbʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɹoʊz ðə taʊɝz, tɔl ən ɡɹeɪsfəl, səm wɪð swipɪŋ bɹɪdʒəz bɪtwin ðɛm, haɪ ɪn ðə skaɪ. ən oʊvɝ ɔl ɹoʊz wʌn taʊɝ, haɪɝ ən waɪɾɝ ðən ɔl ðə ɹɛst, əz waɪɾ əz ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ wɔlz ðɛmsɛlvz.

Every building seemed a palace, though most of those close to the arch seemed to contain inns or shops, from the signs over the doors. Fanciful stonework was everywhere, and the lines of one structure seemed designed to complement and set off the next, leading the eye along as if everything were part of one vast design. Some structures did not look like buildings at all, but like gigantic waves breaking, or huge shells, or fanciful, wind-sculpted cliffs. Right in front of the arch lay a broad square, with a fountain and trees, and Egwene could see another square further on. Above everything rose the towers, tall and graceful, some with sweeping bridges between them, high in the sky. And over all rose one tower, higher and wider than all the rest, as white as the Shining Walls themselves.

"fɛɹ teɪks ðə bɹɛθ ət fɝst saɪt," sɛɾ ə wʊmənz vɔɪs bɪhaɪn ðɛm. "æt tɛnθ saɪt, fəɹ ðæt. ən ət hʌnʒɹədθ."

"Fair takes the breath at first sight," said a woman's voice behind them. "At tenth sight, for that. And at hundredth."

ɛɡwin tɝnd. ðə wʊmən wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ; ɛɡwin wɑz ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt, ðoʊ ʃi wɔɹ noʊ ʃɔl. noʊ wʌn ɛls hæd ðəɾ eɪdʒləs lʊk; ən ʃi hɛl hɝsɛlf wɪð ən əʃʊɹəns, ə kɑnfəɾəns ðət sim tə kənfɝm ɪt. ə ɡlæns əɾ əɹ hænd ʃoʊd ðə ɡoʊldən ɹɪŋ, ðə sɝpən baɪɾɪŋ ɪts oʊn teɪl. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz ə lɪɾəl plʌmp, wɪð ə wɔɹm smaɪl, ən wʌn ə ði ɑɾəst-əpɪɹɪŋ wɪmən ɛɡwin hæɾ ɛvɝ sin. hɝ plʌmpnəs kəd nɑt haɪd haɪ tʃikboʊnz, hɝ aɪz hæɾ ə tɪl tə ðɛm ən wɝ ðə klɪɹɪst, peɪləst ɡɹin, ən əɹ hɛɹ wɑz ɔlmoʊs ðə kʌlɝ ə faɪɝ. ɛɡwin bɛɹli stɑp hɝsɛlf fɹəm ɡɑəlɪŋ ət ðət hɛɹ, ðoʊz slaɪtli slæntəɾ aɪz.

Egwene turned. The woman was Aes Sedai; Egwene was sure of it, though she wore no shawl. No one else had that ageless look; and she held herself with an assurance, a confidence that seemed to confirm it. A glance at her hand showed the golden ring, the serpent biting its own tail. The Aes Sedai was a little plump, with a warm smile, and one of the oddest-appearing women Egwene had ever seen. Her plumpness could not hide high cheekbones, her eyes had a tilt to them and were the clearest, palest green, and her hair was almost the color of fire. Egwene barely stopped herself from goggling at that hair, those slightly slanted eyes.

"oʊɡiɝ bɪlt, ʌv kɔɹs," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛn ɑn, "æn ðɛɹ bɛst wɝk ɛvɝ, səm seɪ. wʌn ə ðə fɝst sɪɾiz bɪlt æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ. ðəɹ wɝn hæf ə θaʊzən pipəl hɪɹ ɔltəɡɛðɝ ðən - noʊ mɔɹ ðən twɛnti sɪstɝz - bʌt ðeɪ bɪl fəɹ wʌt wəd bi niɾəd."

"Ogier built, of course," the Aes Sedai went on, "and their best work ever, some say. One of the first cities built after the Breaking. There weren't half a thousand people here altogether then - no more than twenty sisters - but they built for what would be needed."

"ɪɾ ɪz ə lʌvli sɪɾi," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "wi ɑɹ səpoʊz tə ɡoʊ tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. wi keɪm hɪɹ fəɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ, bʌt noʊ wʌn simz tə kɛɹ ɪf wi ɡoʊ əɹ steɪ."

"It is a lovely city," Nynaeve said. "We are supposed to go to the White Tower. We came here for training, but no one seems to care if we go or stay."

"ðeɪ kɛɹ," ðə wʊmən sɛd, smaɪlɪŋ. "aɪ keɪm hɪɹ tə mit ju, bʌɾ aɪ wɑz dɪleɪd spikɪŋ wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn. aɪm ʃɛɹiəm, ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz."

"They care," the woman said, smiling. "I came here to meet you, but I was delayed speaking with the Amyrlin. I am Sheriam, the Mistress of Novices."

"aɪ æm nɑt tə bi ə nɑvəs," nɪneɪiv sɛɾ ɪn ə fɝm vɔɪs, bʌɾ ə lɪɾəl tu kwɪkli. "ði æmɪɝlɪn hɝsɛlf sɛɾ aɪ wɑz tə bi wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd."

"I am not to be a novice," Nynaeve said in a firm voice, but a little too quickly. "The Amyrlin herself said I was to be one of the Accepted."

"soʊ aɪ wɑz toʊld." ʃɛɹiəm saʊndəɾ əmjuzd. "aɪ hæv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ɪt biɪŋ dʌn soʊ bɪfɔɹ, bʌt ðeɪ seɪ jə ɑɹ . . . ɪksɛpʃənəl. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ðoʊ, ivən wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd kən bi kɔl tə maɪ stʌɾi. ɪt ɹikwaɪɝz mɔɹ bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə ɹulz ðən fəɹ ə nɑvəs, bʌɾ ɪts bɪn noʊn tə hæpən." ʃi tɝn tə ɛɡwin əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt sin nɪneɪiv fɹaʊn. "æn jə ɑɹ əɹ nu nɑvəs. ɪts ɔlweɪz ɡʊd tə si ə nɑvəs kʌm. wɪv tu fju, ðiz deɪz. jəl meɪk fɔɹɾi. oʊnli fɔɹɾi. ən noʊ mɔɹ ðən eɪɾ əɹ naɪn ə ðoʊz wɪl bi ɹeɪz tə ði æksɛptɪd. ðoʊ aɪ doʊn θɪŋk jəl əv tə wɝi əbaʊt ðət tu mʌtʃ, ɪf jə wɝk hɑɹɾ ən əplaɪ jɝsɛlf. ðə wɝk ɪz hɑɹd, ən ivən fəɹ wʌn wɪð ðə pətɛnʃəl ðeɪ tɛl mi jə hæv, ɪɾəl nɑt bi meɪɾ ɛni iziɝ. ɪf jə kænɑt stɪk tə ɪt, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ hɑɹɾ ɪɾ ɪz, əɹ ɪf jəl bɹeɪk ʌndɝ ðə stʃɹeɪn, bɛɾɝ wi faɪn ɪɾ aʊt naʊ, ən lɛt jə ɡoʊ ɑn jəɹ weɪ, ðən weɪɾ əntɪl jə ɑɹ ə fʊl sɪstɝ ən ʌðɝz ɑɹ dɪpɛndɪŋ ɑn ju. ən ɛɛs sədaɪz laɪf ɪz nɑɾ izi. hɪɹ, wɪl pɹipɛɹ jə fəɹ ɪt, ɪf juv ɪn jə wʌɾ ɪz ɹikwaɪɝd."

"So I was told." Sheriam sounded amused. "I have never heard of it being done so before, but they say you are . . . exceptional. Remember, though, even one of the Accepted can be called to my study. It requires more breaking of the rules than for a novice, but it has been known to happen." She turned to Egwene as if she had not seen Nynaeve frown. "And you are our new novice. It is always good to see a novice come. We have too few, these days. You will make forty. Only forty. And no more than eight or nine of those will be raised to the Accepted. Though I don't think you will have to worry about that too much, if you work hard and apply yourself. The work is hard, and even for one with the potential they tell me you have, it will not be made any easier. If you cannot stick to it, no matter how hard it is, or if you will break under the strain, better we find it out now, and let you go on your way, than wait until you are a full sister and others are depending on you. An Aes Sedai's life is not easy. Here, we will prepare you for it, if you have in you what is required."

ɛɡwin swɑloʊd. bɹeɪk ʌndɝ ðə stʃɹeɪn? "aɪ wɪl tʃɹaɪ, ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ," ʃi sɛd feɪnli. ən əl nɑt bɹeɪk.

Egwene swallowed. Break under the strain? "I will try, Sheriam Sedai," she said faintly. And I will not break.

nɪneɪiv lʊkt əɾ əɹ wɝidli. "ʃɛɹiəm. . . ." ʃi stɑpt ən tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ" - ʃi sim tə fɔɹs ði ɑnɝɪfɪk aʊt - "dʌz ɪɾ əv tə bi soʊ hɑɹɾ ɑn hɝ? flɛʃ ən blʌd kən oʊnli teɪk soʊ mʌtʃ. aɪ noʊ . . . sʌmθɪŋ . . . ʌv wʌt nɑvəsɪz mʌst ɡoʊ θɹu. ʃʊɹli ðɛɹz noʊ nid tə tʃɹaɪ tə bɹeɪk əɹ dʒʌs tə faɪn aʊt haʊ stʃɹɔŋ ʃi ɪz."

Nynaeve looked at her worriedly. "Sheriam. . . ." She stopped and took a deep breath. "Sheriam Sedai" - she seemed to force the honorific out - "does it have to be so hard on her? Flesh and blood can only take so much. I know . . . something . . . of what novices must go through. Surely there's no need to try to break her just to find out how strong she is."

"ju min wʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn dɪd tə jə tədeɪ?" nɪneɪivz bæk stɪfənd; ʃɛɹiəm lʊkt əz ðoʊ ʃi wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip əmjuzmən fɹəm əɹ feɪs. "aɪ toʊl jə aɪ spoʊk wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn. ɹɛs jəɹ wɝiz fəɹ jəɹ fɹɛnd. nɑvəs tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɪz hɑɹd, bʌt nɑt ðət hɑɹd. ðəɾ ɪz fəɹ ðə fɝs fju wiks ə biɪŋ wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd." nɪneɪivz maʊθ fɛl oʊpən; ɛɡwin θɔt ðə wɪzdəmz aɪz wɝ gɑnə kʌm ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛd. "tə kætʃ ðə fju hu maɪɾ əv slɪp θɹu nɑvəs tʃɹeɪnɪŋ wən ðeɪ ʃəd nɑt hæv. wi kænɑt ɹɪsk hævɪŋ wʌn ʌv əɹ nʌmbɝ - ə fʊl ɛɛs sədaɪ - hu wɪl bɹeɪk ʌndɝ ðə stʃɹɛs ə ðə wɝld aʊtsaɪd." ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡæðɝɾ əm boʊθ ʌp, ən ɑɹm ɝaʊn ðə ʃoʊldɝz ʌv itʃ. nɪneɪiv hɑɹdli sim tə ɹilaɪz wɛɹ ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ. "kʌm," ʃɛɹiəm sɛd, "aɪ wɪl si jə sɛɾəld ɪn jəɹ ɹumz. ðə waɪt taʊɝ əweɪts."

"You mean what the Amyrlin did to you today?" Nynaeve's back stiffened; Sheriam looked as though she were trying to keep amusement from her face. "I told you I spoke with the Amyrlin. Rest your worries for your friend. Novice training is hard, but not that hard. That is for the first few weeks of being one of the Accepted." Nynaeve's mouth fell open; Egwene thought the Wisdom's eyes were going to come right out of her head. "To catch the few who might have slipped through novice training when they should not have. We cannot risk having one of our number - a full Aes Sedai - who will break under the stress of the world outside." The Aes Sedai gathered them both up, an arm around the shoulders of each. Nynaeve hardly seemed to realize where she was going. "Come," Sheriam said, "I will see you settled in your rooms. The White Tower awaits."


tʃæptɝ naɪntin


CHAPTER 19

bɪniθ ðə dæɡɝ


Beneath the Dagger

naɪɾ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ wɑz koʊld, əz naɪts ɪn ðə maʊntənz ɑɹ ɔlweɪz koʊld. ðə wɪnd wɪp daʊn fɹəm ðə haɪ piks kæɹiɪŋ ði aɪsaɪnəs ə ðə snoʊkæps. ɹænd ʃɪftəɾ ɑn ðə hɑɹd ɡɹaʊnd, tʌɡɪŋ əɾ ɪz kloʊk ən blæŋkət, ən oʊnli hæf əslip. hɪz hænd wɛn tə hɪz sɔɹd, laɪɪŋ bɪsaɪd hɪm. wʌn mɔɹ deɪ, hi θɔt dʒɹaʊsəli. dʒʌst wʌn mɔɹ, ən ðən wi ɡoʊ. ɪf noʊ wʌn kʌmz təmɑɹoʊ, ɪŋtʃɹ əɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz wʌn, əl teɪk səlin tə kɛɹhin.

Night on the edge of Kinslayer's Dagger was cold, as nights in the mountains are always cold. The wind whipped down from the high peaks carrying the iciness of the snowcaps. Rand shifted on the hard ground, tugging at his cloak and blanket, and only half asleep. His hand went to his sword, lying beside him. One more day, he thought drowsily. Just one more, and then we go. If no one comes tomorrow, Ingtar or Darkfriends one, I'll take Selene to Cairhien.

hi hæd toʊl hɪmsɛlf ðət bɪfɔɹ. ɛvɹi deɪ ðeɪ hæd bɪn ðəɹ ɑn ðə maʊntənsaɪd, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə pleɪs wɛɹ hʊɹɪn sɛd ðə tʃɹeɪl hæd bɪn, ɪn ðəɾ ʌðɝ wɝld - wɛɹ səlin sɛd ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz wəd ʃʊɹli əpɪɹ ɪn ðɪs wɝld - hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf ɪt wɑz taɪm tə liv. ən səlin tɔkt ə ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, ən tʌtʃt ɪz ɑɹm, ən lʊkt ɪndə hɪz aɪz, ən bɪfɔɹ i nu ɪɾ i hæɾ əɡɹid tə jɛɾ ənʌðɝ deɪ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɛn ɑn.

He had told himself that before. Every day they had been there on the mountainside, watching the place where Hurin said the trail had been, in that other world - where Selene said the Darkfriends would surely appear in this world - he told himself it was time to leave. And Selene talked of the Horn of Valere, and touched his arm, and looked into his eyes, and before he knew it he had agreed to yet another day before they went on.

hi ʃɹʌɡd əɡɛns ðə tʃɪl ə ðə wɪnd, θɪŋkɪŋ ə səlin tʌtʃɪŋ ɪz ɑɹm ən lʊkɪŋ ɪndə hɪz aɪz. ɪf ɛɡwin sɔ ðæt, ʃid ʃɪɹ mi fəɹ ə ʃip, ən səlin, tu. ɛɡwin kəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bi ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn baɪ naʊ, lɝnɪŋ tə bi ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə nɛks taɪm ʃi siz mi, ʃɪl pɹɑbli tʃɹaɪ tə dʒɛntəl mi.

He shrugged against the chill of the wind, thinking of Selene touching his arm and looking into his eyes. If Egwene saw that, she'd shear me for a sheep, and Selene, too. Egwene could already be in Tar Valon by now, learning to be an Aes Sedai. The next time she sees me, she'll probably try to gentle me.

əz i ʃɪftəɾ oʊvɝ, hɪz hæn slɪd pæs ðə sɔɹɾ ən tʌtʃt ðə bʌndəl hoʊldɪŋ tɑm mɛɹɪlɪnz hɑɹp ən flut. ʌnkɑnʃəsli, hɪz fɪŋɡɝz taɪɾənd ɑn ðə ɡlimənz kloʊk. aɪ wɑz hæpi ðɛn, aɪ θɪŋk, ivən ɹʌnɪŋ fəɹ maɪ laɪf. pleɪɪŋ ðə flut fəɹ maɪ sʌpɝ. aɪ wɑz tu ɪɡnɝən tə noʊ wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. ðɛɹz noʊ tɝnɪŋ bæk.

As he shifted over, his hand slid past the sword and touched the bundle holding Thom Merrilin's harp and flute. Unconsciously, his fingers tightened on the gleeman's cloak. I was happy then, I think, even running for my life. Playing the flute for my supper. I was too ignorant to know what was going on. There's no turning back.

ʃɪvɝɪŋ, hi oʊpən ɪz aɪz. ði oʊnli laɪt keɪm fɹəm ðə weɪnɪŋ mun, nɑt fɑɹ pæs fʊl ən loʊ ɪn ðə skaɪ. ə faɪɝ wəd ɡɪv əm əweɪ tə ðoʊz fəɹ hum ðeɪ wɑtʃt. lɔɪəl mʌɾɝd ɪn ɪz slip, ə loʊ ɹʌmbəl. wʌn ə ðə hɔɹsəz stæmpt ə huf. hʊɹɪn hæd ðə fɝst wɑtʃ, fɹəm ə stoʊn aʊtkɹɑp ə lɪɾəl weɪ ʌp ðə maʊntən; hi wəd bi kʌmɪŋ tə weɪk ɹænd fəɹ ɪz tɝn, sun.

Shivering, he opened his eyes. The only light came from the waning moon, not far past full and low in the sky. A fire would give them away to those for whom they watched. Loial muttered in his sleep, a low rumble. One of the horses stamped a hoof. Hurin had the first watch, from a stone outcrop a little way up the mountain; he would be coming to wake Rand for his turn, soon.

ɹænd ɹoʊld oʊvɝ . . . ən stɑpt. ɪn ðə munlaɪɾ i kəd si ðə ʃeɪp ə səlin, bɛndɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz, hɝ hænz ɑn ðə bʌkəlz. hɝ waɪt dʒɹɛs ɡæðɝd ðə feɪn laɪt. "du jə nid sʌmθɪŋ?"

Rand rolled over . . . and stopped. In the moonlight he could see the shape of Selene, bending over his saddlebags, her hands on the buckles. Her white dress gathered the faint light. "Do you need something?"

ʃi ɡeɪv ə dʒʌmp, ən stɛɹd təwɔɹd hɪm. "ju - jə stɑɹɾəld mi."

She gave a jump, and stared toward him. "You - you startled me."

hi ɹoʊl tə hɪz fit, ʃɛɾɪŋ ðə blæŋkəɾ ən ɹæpɪŋ ðə kloʊk ɝaʊn hɪmsɛlf, ən wɛn tə hɝ. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ i hæd lɛf ðə sæɾəlbæɡz ɹaɪt baɪ hɪz saɪd wən i leɪ daʊn; hi ɔlweɪz kɛpt əm kloʊs. hi tʊk əm fɹəm hɝ. ɔl ðə bʌkəlz wɝ fæsənd, ivən ðoʊz ɑn ðə saɪd ðət hɛl ðə dæmɪŋ bænɝ. haʊ kən maɪ laɪf dɪpɛn ɑn kipɪŋ ɪt? ɪf ɛnibəɾi siz ɪɾ ən noʊz wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz, əl daɪ fəɹ hævɪŋ ɪt. hi pɪɹɾ əɾ əɹ səspɪʃəsli.

He rolled to his feet, shedding the blanket and wrapping the cloak around himself, and went to her. He was sure he had left the saddlebags right by his side when he lay down; he always kept them close. He took them from her. All the buckles were fastened, even those on the side that held the damning banner. How can my life depend on keeping it? If anybody sees it and knows what it is, I'll die for having it. He peered at her suspiciously.

səlin steɪd wɛɹ ʃi wɑz, lʊkɪŋ ʌp ət hɪm. ðə mun ɡlɪsən ɪn əɹ dɑɹk aɪz. "ɪt keɪm tə mi," ʃi sɛd, "ðæɾ aɪv bɪn wɛɹɪŋ ðɪs dʒɹɛs tu lɔŋ. aɪ kəd bɹʌʃ ɪt, ət list, ɪf aɪ hæd sʌmθɪŋ ɛls tə wɛɹ waɪl aɪ dɪd. wʌn ə jəɹ ʃɝts, pɝhæps."

Selene stayed where she was, looking up at him. The moon glistened in her dark eyes. "It came to me," she said, "that I've been wearing this dress too long. I could brush it, at least, if I had something else to wear while I did. One of your shirts, perhaps."

ɹænd nɑɾəd, filɪŋ ə sʌɾən ɹɪlif. hɝ dʒɹɛs lʊkt əz klin tə hɪm əz wən i fɝst sɔ hɝ, bʌɾ i nu ðəɾ ɪf ə spɑɾ əpɪɹɾ ɑn ɛɡwinz dʒɹɛs, nʌθɪŋ wəd də bʌt ðət ʃi klin ɪɾ ɪmiɾiətli. "ʌv kɔɹs." hi oʊpən ðə kəpeɪʃəs pɑkəɾ ɪndə wɪtʃ i hæd stʌft ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪksɛp ðə bænɝ ən pʊld aʊt wʌn ə ðə waɪt sɪlk ʃɝts.

Rand nodded, feeling a sudden relief. Her dress looked as clean to him as when he first saw her, but he knew that if a spot appeared on Egwene's dress, nothing would do but that she cleaned it immediately. "Of course." He opened the capacious pocket into which he had stuffed everything except the banner and pulled out one of the white silk shirts.

"θæŋk ju." hɝ hænz wɛn bɪhaɪn əɹ bæk. tə ðə bʌɾənz, hi ɹilaɪzd.

"Thank you." Her hands went behind her back. To the buttons, he realized.

aɪz waɪd, hi spʌn əweɪ fɹəm hɝ.

Eyes wide, he spun away from her.

"ɪf jə kəd hɛlp mi wɪð ðiz, ɪt wəd bi mʌtʃ iziɝ."

"If you could help me with these, it would be much easier."

ɹænd klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. "ɪt wəd nɑt bi pɹɑpɝ. ɪɾ ɪzən əz ɪf wi wɝ pɹɑməst, ɔɹ. . . ." stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ðæt! jə kən nɛvɝ mɛɹi ɛniwʌn. "ɪt dʒʌst wʊdn bi pɹɑpɝ."

Rand cleared his throat. "It would not be proper. It isn't as if we were promised, or. . . ." Stop thinking about that! You can never marry anyone. "It just wouldn't be proper."

hɝ sɑf læf sɛn ə ʃɪvɝ daʊn ɪz bæk, əz ɪf ʃi hæd ɹʌn ə fɪŋɡɝ əlɔŋ ɪz spaɪn. hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə lɪsən tə ðə ɹʌsəlɪŋz bɪhaɪn hɪm. hi sɛd, "ɑ . . . təmɑɹoʊ . . . təmɑɹoʊ, wɪl liv fəɹ kɛɹhin."

Her soft laugh sent a shiver down his back, as if she had run a finger along his spine. He tried not to listen to the rustlings behind him. He said, "Ah . . . tomorrow . . . tomorrow, we'll leave for Cairhien."

"ænd wʌɾ ə ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ?"

"And what of the Horn of Valere?"

"meɪbi wi wɝ ɹɔŋ. meɪbi ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt kʌmɪŋ hɪɹ əɾ ɔl. hʊɹɪn sɛz ðəɹ ɑɹ ə nʌmbɝ ə pæsəz θɹu kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ. ɪf ðeɪ wɛn oʊnli ə lɪɾəl fɝðɝ wɛst, ðeɪ də nɑɾ əv tə kʌm ɪndə ðə maʊntənz əɾ ɔl."

"Maybe we were wrong. Maybe they are not coming here at all. Hurin says there are a number of passes through Kinslayer's Dagger. If they went only a little further west, they do not have to come into the mountains at all."

"bʌt ðə tʃɹeɪl wi fɑloʊd keɪm hɪɹ. ðəl kʌm hɪɹ. ðə hɔɹn wɪl kʌm hɪɹ. jə meɪ tɝn ɝaʊnd, naʊ."

"But the trail we followed came here. They will come here. The Horn will come here. You may turn around, now."

"ju seɪ ðæt, bʌt wi doʊnt noʊ. . . ." hi tɝnd, ən ðə wɝdz daɪɾ ɪn ɪz maʊð. hɝ dʒɹɛs leɪ əkɹɔs əɹ ɑɹm, ən ʃi wɔɹ ɪz ʃɝt, hæŋɪŋ ɪn bæɡi foʊlz ɑn hɝ. ɪt wɑz ə lɔŋ-teɪld ʃɝt, meɪd fəɹ ɪz haɪt, bʌt ʃi wɑz tɔl fəɹ ə wʊmən. ðə bɑɾəm ʌv ɪt keɪm lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən hæfweɪ daʊn əɹ θaɪz. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əz ɪf i hæd nɛvɝ sin ə ɡɝlz lɛɡz bɪfɔɹ; ɡɝlz ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɔlweɪz taɪɾ ʌp ðɛɹ skɝts tə ɡoʊ weɪɾɪŋ ɪn wɔɾɝwʊd pɑnz. bʌt ðeɪ stɑp duɪŋ ɪt wɛl bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ oʊld ɪnʌf tə bɹeɪd ðɛɹ hɛɹ, ən ðɪs wɑz ɪn ðə dɑɹk, bɪsaɪdz. ðə munlaɪt sim tə meɪk əɹ skɪn ɡloʊ.

"You say that, but we don't know. . . ." He turned, and the words died in his mouth. Her dress lay across her arm, and she wore his shirt, hanging in baggy folds on her. It was a long-tailed shirt, made for his height, but she was tall for a woman. The bottom of it came little more than halfway down her thighs. It was not as if he had never seen a girl's legs before; girls in the Two Rivers always tied up their skirts to go wading in Waterwood ponds. But they stopped doing it well before they were old enough to braid their hair, and this was in the dark, besides. The moonlight seemed to make her skin glow.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt jə doʊnt noʊ, ɹænd?"

"What is it you don't know, Rand?"

ðə saʊn ə hɝ vɔɪs ənfɹoʊz ɪz dʒɔɪns. wɪð ə laʊd kɑf, hi wɝl tə feɪs ði ʌðɝ weɪ. "ɑ . . . aɪ θɪŋk . . . ɑ . . . aɪ . . . ɑ. . . ."

The sound of her voice unfroze his joints. With a loud cough, he whirled to face the other way. "Ah . . . I think . . . ah . . . I . . . ah. . . ."

"θɪŋk ə ðə ɡlɔɹi, ɹænd." hɝ hæn tʌtʃt ɪz bæk, ən i ɔlmoʊst ʃeɪm hɪmsɛlf wɪð ə skwik. "θɪŋk ə ðə ɡlɔɹi ðət wɪl kʌm tə ðə wʌn u faɪnz ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. haʊ pɹaʊɾ əl bi tə stæn bɪsaɪɾ ɪm u hoʊlz ðə hɔɹn. juv noʊ aɪdiə ðə haɪts wɪl skeɪl təɡɛðɝ, jə ən aɪ. wɪð ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ɪn jəɹ hænd, jə kən bi ə kɪŋ. jə kən bi ənʌðɝ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ. ju. . . ."

"Think of the glory, Rand." Her hand touched his back, and he almost shamed himself with a squeak. "Think of the glory that will come to the one who finds the Horn of Valere. How proud I'll be to stand beside him who holds the Horn. You have no idea the heights we will scale together, you and I. With the Horn of Valere in your hand, you can be a king. You can be another Artur Hawkwing. You. . . ."

"lɔɹd ɹænd!" hʊɹɪn pæntɪɾ ɪndə ðə kæmpsaɪt. "maɪ lɔɹd, ðeɪ. . . ." hi skɪɾəd tə ə hɔlt, sʌɾənli meɪkɪŋ ə ɡɝɡəlɪŋ saʊnd. hɪz aɪz dʒɹɑp tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ən i stʊd ɹɪŋɪŋ ɪz hænz. "fɝɡɪv mi, maɪ leɪɾi. aɪ dɪdn min tə. . . . aɪ. . . . fɝɡɪv mi."

"Lord Rand!" Hurin panted into the campsite. "My Lord, they. . . ." He skidded to a halt, suddenly making a gurgling sound. His eyes dropped to the ground, and he stood wringing his hands. "Forgive me, my Lady. I didn't mean to. . . . I. . . . Forgive me."

lɔɪəl sæɾ ʌp, hɪz blæŋkəɾ ən kloʊk fɔlɪŋ əweɪ. "wʌts hæpənɪŋ? ɪz ɪt maɪ tɝn tə wɑtʃ ɔlɹɛɾi?" hi lʊk təwɔɹd ɹænd ən səlin, ən ivən ɪn ðə munlaɪt ðə waɪɾənɪŋ ə hɪz aɪz wɑz pleɪn.

Loial sat up, his blanket and cloak falling away. "What's happening? Is it my turn to watch already?" He looked toward Rand and Selene, and even in the moonlight the widening of his eyes was plain.

ɹænd hɝd səlin saɪ bɪhaɪn hɪm. hi stɛpt əweɪ fɹəm hɝ, stɪl nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ. hɝ lɛɡz ɑɹ soʊ waɪt, soʊ smuð. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt, hʊɹɪn?" hi meɪɾ ɪz vɔɪs mɔɹ mɑɾɝət; wɑz i æŋɡɹi wɪð hʊɹɪn, hɪmsɛlf, əɹ səlin? noʊ ɹizən tə bi æŋɡɹi wɪð hɝ. "dɪd jə si sʌmθɪŋ, hʊɹɪn?"

Rand heard Selene sigh behind him. He stepped away from her, still not looking at her. Her legs are so white, so smooth. "What is it, Hurin?" He made his voice more moderate; was he angry with Hurin, himself, or Selene? No reason to be angry with her. "Did you see something, Hurin?"

ðə snɪfɝ spoʊk wɪθaʊt ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz aɪz. "ə faɪɝ, maɪ lɔɹd, daʊn ɪn ðə hɪlz. aɪ dɪdn si ɪɾ ət fɝst. ðeɪ meɪɾ ɪt smɔl, ən hɪɾ ɪt, bʌt ðeɪ hɪɾ ɪt fɹəm sʌmbɑɾi fɑloʊɪŋ ðɛm, nɑt sʌmbɑɾi əhɛd, ən ʌp əbʌv. tu maɪlz, lɔɹd ɹænd. lɛs ðən θɹi, fəɹ ʃʊɹ."

The sniffer spoke without raising his eyes. "A fire, my Lord, down in the hills. I didn't see it at first. They made it small, and hid it, but they hid it from somebody following them, not somebody ahead, and up above. Two miles, Lord Rand. Less than three, for sure."

"feɪn," ɹænd sɛd. "ɪŋtʃɹ wəd nɑt bi əfɹeɪɾ ʌv ɛniwʌn fɑloʊɪŋ hɪm. ɪt mʌs bi feɪn." sʌɾənli hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt tə du, naʊ. ðeɪ hæd bɪn weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ feɪn, bʌt naʊ ðət ðə mæn wɑz oʊnli ə maɪl əɹ soʊ əweɪ, hi wɑz ənsɝɾən. "ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. . . . ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, wɪl fɑloʊ. wən ɪŋtʃɹ ən ði ʌðɝz kætʃ ʌp, wɪl bi eɪbəl tə pɔɪn ɹaɪt tə ðɛm."

"Fain," Rand said. "Ingtar would not be afraid of anyone following him. It must be Fain." Suddenly he did not know what to do, now. They had been waiting for Fain, but now that the man was only a mile or so away, he was uncertain. "In the morning. . . . In the morning, we will follow. When Ingtar and the others catch up, we'll be able to point right to them."

"soʊ," səlin sɛd. "ju wɪl lɛt ðɪs ɪŋtʃɹ teɪk ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. ən ðə ɡlɔɹi."

"So," Selene said. "You will let this Ingtar take the Horn of Valere. And the glory."

"aɪ doʊnt wɑnt. . . ." wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ, hi tɝnd, ən ðəɹ ʃi wɑz, lɛɡz peɪl ɪn ðə munlaɪt, ən əz ʌnkənsɝn ðət ðeɪ wɝ bɛɹ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ əloʊn. əz ɪf wi wɝ əloʊn, ðə θɔt keɪm. ʃi wɑns ðə mæn u faɪnz ðə hɔɹn. "θɹi ʌv əs kænɑt teɪk ɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðɛm. ɪŋtʃɹ əz twɛnti lænsɪz wɪð hɪm."

"I don't want. . . ." Without thinking, he turned, and there she was, legs pale in the moonlight, and as unconcerned that they were bare as if she were alone. As if we were alone, the thought came. She wants the man who finds the Horn. "Three of us cannot take it away from them. Ingtar has twenty lances with him."

"ju doʊnt noʊ jə kænɑt teɪk ɪt. haʊ mɛni fɑloʊɝz dʌz ðɪs mæn hæv? jə doʊnt noʊ ðæt, iðɝ." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz kɑm, bʌɾ ɪntɛnt. "ju doʊn ivən noʊ ɪf ðiz mɛn kæmp daʊn ðəɹ də hæv ðə hɔɹn. ði oʊnli weɪ ɪz tə ɡoʊ daʊn jɝsɛlf ən si. teɪk ði ælɑntɪn; hɪz kaɪn əv ʃɑɹp aɪz, ivən baɪ munlaɪt. ən hiz ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ tə kæɹi ðə hɔɹn ɪn ɪts tʃɛst, ɪf jə meɪk ðə ɹaɪt dɪsɪʒən."

"You don't know you cannot take it. How many followers does this man have? You don't know that, either." Her voice was calm, but intent. "You don't even know if these men camped down there do have the Horn. The only way is to go down yourself and see. Take the alantin; his kind have sharp eyes, even by moonlight. And he has the strength to carry the Horn in its chest, if you make the right decision."

ʃiz ɹaɪt. jə də nɑt noʊ fəɹ ʃʊɹ ɪf ɪts feɪn. ə faɪn θɪŋ ɪt wəd bi tə hæv hʊɹɪn kæstɪŋ əbaʊt fəɹ ə tʃɹeɪl ðət wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ, ɔl ə ðɛm aʊɾ ɪn ði oʊpən ɪf ðə ɹil dɑɹkfɹɛnz dɪd faɪnəli kʌm. "aɪ wɪl ɡoʊ əloʊn," hi sɛd. "hʊɹɪn ən lɔɪəl wɪl stænd ɡɑɹd fəɹ ju."

She's right. You do not know for sure if it's Fain. A fine thing it would be to have Hurin casting about for a trail that was not there, all of them out in the open if the real Darkfriends did finally come. "I will go alone," he said. "Hurin and Loial will stand guard for you."

læfɪŋ, səlin keɪm tə hɪm soʊ ɡɹeɪsfəli ɪɾ ɔlmoʊst simd ʃi dænst. munʃæɾoʊz veɪld əɹ feɪs ɪn mɪstɝi əz ʃi lʊkt ʌp ət hɪm, ən mɪstɝi meɪɾ əɹ ivən mɔɹ bjuɾəfəl. "aɪ æm keɪpəbəl ʌv ɡɑɹɾɪŋ maɪsɛlf, əntɪl jə ɹɪtɝn tə pɹətɛk mi. teɪk ði ælɑntɪn."

Laughing, Selene came to him so gracefully it almost seemed she danced. Moonshadows veiled her face in mystery as she looked up at him, and mystery made her even more beautiful. "I am capable of guarding myself, until you return to protect me. Take the alantin."

"ʃi ɪz ɹaɪt, ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ. "aɪ kən si bɛɾɝ baɪ munlaɪt ðən ju. wɪð maɪ aɪz, wi meɪ nɑt nid tə ɡoʊ əz kloʊs əz jə wəɾ əloʊn."

"She is right, Rand," Loial said, rising. "I can see better by moonlight than you. With my eyes, we may not need to go as close as you would alone."

"vɛɹi wɛl." ɹænd stʃɹoʊɾ oʊvɝ tə hɪz sɔɹɾ ən bʌkəld ɪɾ əɾ ɪz weɪst. baʊ ən kwɪvɝ i lɛft wɛɹ ðeɪ leɪ; ə baʊ wɑz nɑɾ ə mʌtʃ jus ɪn ðə dɑɹk, ən i ɪntɛndəd tə lʊk, nɑt faɪt. "hʊɹɪn, ʃoʊ mi ðɪs faɪɝ."

"Very well." Rand strode over to his sword and buckled it at his waist. Bow and quiver he left where they lay; a bow was not of much use in the dark, and he intended to look, not fight. "Hurin, show me this fire."

ðə snɪfɝ lɛɾ ɪm skɹæmbəlɪŋ ʌp ðə sloʊp tə ði aʊtkɹɑp, laɪk ə hjudʒ stoʊn θʌm θɹʌst aʊɾ ə ðə maʊntən. ðə faɪɝ wɑz oʊnli ə spɛk - hi mɪst ɪt ðə fɝs taɪm hʊɹɪn pɔɪntəd. huɛvɝ hæd meɪɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt min fəɹ ɪt tə bi sin. hi fɪkst ɪɾ ɪn ɪz hɛd.

The sniffer led him scrambling up the slope to the outcrop, like a huge stone thumb thrust out of the mountain. The fire was only a speck - he missed it the first time Hurin pointed. Whoever had made it did not mean for it to be seen. He fixed it in his head.

baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ ɹɪtɝn tə ðə kæmp, lɔɪəl hæd sæɾəld ɹɛɾ ən ɪz oʊn hɔɹs. əz ɹænd klaɪm tə ðə beɪz bæk, səlin kɑɾ ɪz hænd. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə ɡlɔɹi," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ." ðə ʃɝt sim tə fɪɾ əɹ bɛɾɝ ðən i ɹɪkɔld, moʊldɪŋ ɪtsɛlf tə hɝ fɔɹm.

By the time they returned to the camp, Loial had saddled Red and his own horse. As Rand climbed to the bay's back, Selene caught his hand. "Remember the glory," she said softly. "Remember." The shirt seemed to fit her better than he recalled, molding itself to her form.

hi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ ən tʊk ɪz hæn bæk. "ɡɑɹɾ əɹ wɪð jəɹ laɪf, hʊɹɪn. lɔɪəl?" hi hild ɹɛdz flæŋks dʒɛnli. ði oʊɡiɝz bɪɡ maʊn plɑɾəd əlɔŋ bɪhaɪnd.

He drew a deep breath and took his hand back. "Guard her with your life, Hurin. Loial?" He heeled Red's flanks gently. The Ogier's big mount plodded along behind.

ðeɪ dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə muv kwɪkli. naɪt ʃɹaʊɾɪd ðə maʊntənsaɪd, ən mun-kæst ʃædoʊz meɪd fʊɾɪŋ ənsɝɾən. ɹænd kəd nɑt si ðə faɪɝ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ - noʊ daʊɾ ɪt wɑz bɛɾɝ hɪɾən fɹəm aɪz ɑn ðə seɪm lɛvəl - bʌɾ i hæɾ ɪts loʊkeɪʃən ɪn ɪz maɪnd. fəɹ sʌmwʌn u hæd lɝn tə hʌn ɪn ðə tæŋɡəl ə ðə wɛstwʊd, ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, faɪndɪŋ ðə faɪɝ wəd bi noʊ ɡɹeɪt dɪfəkəlti. ən wʌt ðɛn? səlinz feɪs lum bɪfɔɹ hɪm. haʊ pɹaʊɾ əl bi tə stæn bɪsaɪɾ ɪm u hoʊlz ðə hɔɹn.

They did not try to move quickly. Night shrouded the mountainside, and moon-cast shadows made footing uncertain. Rand could not see the fire any longer - no doubt it was better hidden from eyes on the same level - but he had its location in his mind. For someone who had learned to hunt in the tangle of the Westwood, in the Two Rivers, finding the fire would be no great difficulty. And what then? Selene's face loomed before him. How proud I'll be to stand beside him who holds the Horn.

"lɔɪəl," hi sɛd sʌɾənli, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə klɪɹ ɪz θɔts, "wʌts ðɪs ælɑntɪn ʃi kɔlz ju?"

"Loial," he said suddenly, trying to clear his thoughts, "what's this alantin she calls you?"

"ɪts ði oʊl tʌŋ, ɹænd." ði oʊɡiɝz hɔɹs pɪkt ɪts weɪ ənsɝteɪnli, bʌɾ i ɡaɪɾəd ɪɾ ɔlmoʊst əz ʃʊɹli əz ɪf ɪt wɝ deɪlaɪt. "ɪt minz bɹʌðɝ, ən ɪz ʃɔɹt fəɹ tiə ɑvɛn ælɑntɪn. bɹʌðɝ tə ðə tʃɹiz. tʃɹibɹəðɝ. ɪts vɛɹi fɔɹməl, bʌt ðɛn, aɪv hɝd ðə kɛɹhinɪn ɑɹ fɔɹməl. ðə noʊbəl haʊsəz ɑɹ, ət list. ðə kɑmən pipəl aɪ sɔ ðəɹ wɝ nɑt vɛɹi fɔɹməl əɾ ɔl."

"It's the Old Tongue, Rand." The Ogier's horse picked its way uncertainly, but he guided it almost as surely as if it were daylight. "It means Brother, and is short for tia avende alantin. Brother to the Trees. Treebrother. It is very formal, but then, I've heard the Cairhienin are formal. The noble Houses are, at least. The common people I saw there were not very formal at all."

ɹænd fɹaʊnd. ə ʃɛpɝd wəd nɑt bi vɛɹi æksɛptəbəl tə ə fɔɹməl kɛɹhinɪn noʊbəl haʊs. laɪt, mæts ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt ju. jəɹ kɹeɪzi, ən wɪð ə bɪɡ hɛd tə but. bʌɾ ɪf aɪ kəd mɛɹi. . . .

Rand frowned. A shepherd would not be very acceptable to a formal Cairhienin noble House. Light, Mat's right about you. You're crazy, and with a big head to boot. But if I could marry. . . .

hi wɪʃt i kəd stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ, ən bɪfɔɹ i ɹilaɪzd ɪt, ðə vɔɪd hæd fɔɹmd wɪðɪn hɪm, meɪkɪŋ θɔts dɪstən θɪŋz, əz ɪf pɑɹɾ ə sʌmwʌn ɛls. seɪɾɪn ʃoʊn ət hɪm, bɛkən tə hɪm. hi ɡɹɪɾɪd ɪz tiθ ən ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪt; ɪt wɑz laɪk ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ə bɝnɪŋ koʊl ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd, bʌɾ ət list i kəd hoʊld ɪɾ ət beɪ. bɛɹli. hi ɔlmoʊs lɛf ðə vɔɪd, bʌt ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz wɝ aʊt ðəɹ ɪn ðə naɪt, ən kloʊsɝ, naʊ. ən ðə tʃɹɑləks. hi niɾəd ði ɛmptinəs, niɾəd ivən ði ənizi kɑm ə ðə vɔɪd. aɪ doʊn əv tə tʌtʃ ɪt. aɪ doʊnt.

He wished he could stop thinking, and before he realized it, the void had formed within him, making thoughts distant things, as if part of someone else. Saidin shone at him, beckoned to him. He gritted his teeth and ignored it; it was like ignoring a burning coal inside his head, but at least he could hold it at bay. Barely. He almost left the void, but the Darkfriends were out there in the night, and closer, now. And the Trollocs. He needed the emptiness, needed even the uneasy calm of the void. I don't have to touch it. I don't.

æftɝ ə taɪm, hi ɹeɪn ɪn ɹɛd. ðeɪ stʊɾ ət ðə beɪs ʌv ə hɪl, ðə waɪd-skæɾɝd tʃɹiz ɑn ɪts sloʊps blæk ɪn ðə naɪt. "aɪ θɪŋk wi mʌs bi kloʊs baɪ naʊ," hi sɛd sɔfli. "bɛst wi ɡoʊ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ ɑn fʊt." hi slɪd fɹəm ðə sæɾəl ən taɪd ðə beɪz ɹeɪnz tə ə bɹæntʃ.

After a time, he reined in Red. They stood at the base of a hill, the wide-scattered trees on its slopes black in the night. "I think we must be close by now," he said softly. "Best we go the rest of the way on foot." He slid from the saddle and tied the bay's reins to a branch.

"ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt?" lɔɪəl wɪspɝd, klaɪmɪŋ daʊn. "ju saʊn ɑd."

"Are you all right?" Loial whispered, climbing down. "You sound odd."

"aɪm faɪn." hɪz vɔɪs saʊndəd taɪt, hi ɹilaɪzd. stʃɹɛtʃt. seɪɾɪn kɔl tə hɪm. noʊ! "bi kɛɹfəl. aɪ kæn bi ʃʊɹ ɪɡzækli haʊ fɑɹ ɪɾ ɪz, bʌt ðət faɪɝ ʃəd bi sʌmwɛɹ dʒʌst əhɛɾ ʌv ʌs. ɑn ðə hɪltɑp, aɪ θɪŋk." ði oʊɡiɝ nɑɾəd.

"I'm fine." His voice sounded tight, he realized. Stretched. Saidin called to him. No! "Be careful. I can't be sure exactly how far it is, but that fire should be somewhere just ahead of us. On the hilltop, I think." The Ogier nodded.

sloʊli ɹænd stoʊl fɹəm tʃɹi tə tʃɹi, pleɪsɪŋ itʃ fʊt kɛɹfəli, hoʊldɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd taɪt soʊ ɪt dɪd nɑt klæɾɝ əɡɛnst ə tʃɹi tʃɹʌŋk. hi wɑz ɡɹeɪtfəl fəɹ ðə læk ʌv ʌndɝɡɹoʊθ. lɔɪəl fɑloʊd laɪk ə bɪɡ ʃædoʊ; ɹænd kəd nɑt si mʌtʃ mɔɹ ə hɪm ðən ðæt. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz munʃæɾoʊz ən dɑɹknəs.

Slowly Rand stole from tree to tree, placing each foot carefully, holding his sword tight so it did not clatter against a tree trunk. He was grateful for the lack of undergrowth. Loial followed like a big shadow; Rand could not see much more of him than that. Everything was moonshadows and darkness.

sʌɾənli səm tʃɹɪk ə ðə munlaɪt ɹizɑlv ðə ʃædoʊz əhɛɾ ə hɪm, ən i fɹoʊz, tʌtʃɪŋ ðə ɹʌf boʊl ʌv ə lɛðɝlif. dɪm maʊnz ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪkeɪm mɛn ɹæpt ɪn blæŋkəts, ən əpɑɹt fɹəm əm ə ɡɹup ə lɑɹdʒɝ maʊnz. slipɪŋ tʃɹɑləks. ðeɪ hæd daʊs ðə faɪɝ. wʌn munbim, muvɪŋ θɹu ðə bɹæntʃəz, kɑɾ ə ʃaɪn ʌv ɡoʊld ən sɪlvɝ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, hæfweɪ bɪtwin ðə tu ɡɹups. ðə munlaɪt sim tə bɹaɪɾən; fəɹ ən ɪnstən i kəd si klɪɹli. ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə slipɪŋ mæn leɪ kloʊs baɪ tə ðə ɡlim, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt wʌt hɛld ɪz aɪ. ðə tʃɛst. ðə hɔɹn. ən sʌmθɪŋ ətɑp ɪt, ə pɔɪn ə ɹɛd flæʃɪŋ ɪn ðə munbim. ðə dæɡɝ! waɪ wəd feɪn pʊt . . . ?

Suddenly some trick of the moonlight resolved the shadows ahead of him, and he froze, touching the rough bole of a leatherleaf. Dim mounds on the ground became men wrapped in blankets, and apart from them a group of larger mounds. Sleeping Trollocs. They had doused the fire. One moonbeam, moving through the branches, caught a shine of gold and silver on the ground, halfway between the two groups. The moonlight seemed to brighten; for an instant he could see clearly. The shape of a sleeping man lay close by to the gleam, but that was not what held his eye. The chest. The Horn. And something atop it, a point of red flashing in the moonbeam. The dagger! Why would Fain put . . . ?

lɔɪəlz hjudʒ hæn sɛɾəld oʊvɝ ɹændz maʊθ, ən ə ɡʊd pɑɹɾ ə hɪz feɪs bɪsaɪdz. hi twɪstəd tə lʊk ət ði oʊɡiɝ. lɔɪəl pɔɪntəɾ ɔf tə hɪz ɹaɪt, sloʊli, əz ɪf moʊʃən maɪɾ ətʃɹækt ətɛnʃən.

Loial's huge hand settled over Rand's mouth, and a good part of his face besides. He twisted to look at the Ogier. Loial pointed off to his right, slowly, as if motion might attract attention.

ət fɝst ɹænd kəd nɑt si ɛniθɪŋ, ðən ə ʃædoʊ muvd, nɑt tɛn peɪsɪz əweɪ. ə tɔl, bʌlki ʃædoʊ, ən snaʊɾəd. ɹændz bɹɛθ kɑt. eɪ tʃɹɑlɑk. ɪt lɪftəɾ ɪts snaʊɾ əz ɪf snɪfɪŋ. səm ə ðɛm hʌntəd baɪ sɛnt.

At first Rand could not see anything, then a shadow moved, not ten paces away. A tall, bulky shadow, and snouted. Rand's breath caught. A Trolloc. It lifted its snout as if sniffing. Some of them hunted by scent.

fəɹ ən ɪnstən ðə vɔɪd weɪvɝd. sʌmwʌn stɝɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹkfɹɛn kæmp, ən ðə tʃɹɑlɑk tɝn tə pɪɹ ðət weɪ.

For an instant the void wavered. Someone stirred in the Darkfriend camp, and the Trolloc turned to peer that way.

ɹænd fɹoʊz, lɛɾɪŋ ðə kɑm ʌv ɛmptinəs ɛnvəloʊp hɪm. hɪz hænd wɑz ɑn ɪz sɔɹd, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʌv ɪt. ðə vɔɪd wɑz ɔl. wʌtɛvɝ hæpənd, hæpənd. hi wɑtʃt ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɪθaʊt blɪŋkɪŋ.

Rand froze, letting the calm of emptiness envelope him. His hand was on his sword, but he did not think of it. The void was all. Whatever happened, happened. He watched the Trolloc without blinking.

ə moʊmən lɔŋɡɝ ðə snaʊɾəd ʃædoʊ wɑtʃt ðə dɑɹkfɹɛn kæmp, ðɛn, əz ɪf sæɾəsfaɪd, foʊldəɾ ɪtsɛlf daʊn bɪsaɪɾ ə tʃɹi. ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli ə loʊ saʊnd, laɪk kɔɹs klɔθ ɹɪpɪŋ, dʒɹɪftəd fɹəm ɪt.

A moment longer the snouted shadow watched the Darkfriend camp, then, as if satisfied, folded itself down beside a tree. Almost immediately a low sound, like coarse cloth ripping, drifted from it.

lɔɪəl pʊɾ ɪz maʊθ kloʊs tə ɹændz ɪɹ. "ɪts əslip," hi wɪspɝɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli.

Loial put his mouth close to Rand's ear. "It's asleep," he whispered incredulously.

ɹænd nɑɾəd. tæm hæd toʊld ɪm tʃɹɑləks wɝ leɪzi, æp tə ɡɪv ʌp ɛni tæsk bʌt kɪlɪŋ ənlɛs fɪɹ kɛpt əm tə ɪt. hi tɝn bæk tə ðə kæmp.

Rand nodded. Tam had told him Trollocs were lazy, apt to give up any task but killing unless fear kept them to it. He turned back to the camp.

ɔl wɑz stɪl ən kwaɪət ðəɹ əɡɛn. ðə munbim noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ʃoʊn ɑn ðə tʃɛst, bʌɾ i nu naʊ wɪtʃ ʃædoʊ ɪt wɑz. hi kəd si ɪɾ ɪn ɪz maɪnd, floʊɾɪŋ bɪɑn ðə vɔɪd, ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ ɡoʊldən, tʃeɪst wɪð sɪlvɝ, ɪn ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪɾɪn. ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ən ðə dæɡɝ mæt niɾəd, boʊθ ɔlmoʊst wɪðɪn ɹitʃ ə hɪz hænd. səlinz feɪs dʒɹɪftəd wɪð ðə tʃɛst. ðeɪ kəd fɑloʊ feɪnz pɑɹɾi ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, ən weɪɾ əntɪl ɪŋtʃɹ dʒɔɪn ðɛm. ɪf ɪŋtʃɹ dɪd kʌm, ɪf i stɪl fɑloʊd ðə tʃɹeɪl wɪθaʊɾ ɪz snɪfɝ. noʊ, ðəɹ wəd nɛvɝ bi ə bɛɾɝ tʃæns. ɔl wɪðɪn ɹitʃ ə hɪz hænd. səlin wɑz weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə maʊntən.

All was still and quiet there again. The moonbeam no longer shone on the chest, but he knew now which shadow it was. He could see it in his mind, floating beyond the void, glittering golden, chased with silver, in the glow of saidin. The Horn of Valere and the dagger Mat needed, both almost within reach of his hand. Selene's face drifted with the chest. They could follow Fain's party in the morning, and wait until Ingtar joined them. If Ingtar did come, if he still followed the trail without his sniffer. No, there would never be a better chance. All within reach of his hand. Selene was waiting on the mountain.

moʊʃənɪŋ fəɹ lɔɪəl tə fɑloʊ, ɹænd dʒɹɑp tə hɪz bɛli ən kɹɔl təwɔɹd ðə tʃɛst. hi hɝd ði oʊɡiɝz mʌfəld ɡæsp, bʌɾ ɪz aɪz wɝ fɪkst ɑn ðət wʌn ʃæɾoʊd maʊn əhɛd.

Motioning for Loial to follow, Rand dropped to his belly and crawled toward the chest. He heard the Ogier's muffled gasp, but his eyes were fixed on that one shadowed mound ahead.

dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən tʃɹɑləks leɪ tə lɛft ən ɹaɪɾ ə hɪm, bʌt wʌns i hæd sin tæm stɔk kloʊs ɪnʌf tə ə dɪɹ tə pʊɾ ɪz hæn ɑn ɪts flæŋk bɪfɔɹ ði ænəməl baʊndəɾ ɔf; hi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə lɝn fɹəm tæm. mædnəs! ðə θɔt flu baɪ dɪmli, ɔlmoʊst aʊɾ ə ɹitʃ. ðɪs ɪz mædnəs! jə - ɑɹ - ɡoʊɪŋ - mæd! dɪm θɔts; sʌmwʌn ɛlsəz θɔts.

Darkfriends and Trollocs lay to left and right of him, but once he had seen Tam stalk close enough to a deer to put his hand on its flank before the animal bounded off; he had tried to learn from Tam. Madness! The thought flew by dimly, almost out of reach. This is madness! You - are - going - mad! Dim thoughts; someone else's thoughts.

sloʊli, saɪlənli, hi slaɪðɝd tə ðət wʌn spɛʃəl ʃædoʊ, ən pʊɾ aʊɾ ə hænd. ɔɹneɪt tʃɹeɪsɝiz wɝkt ɪn ɡoʊl mɛɾ ɪz tʌtʃ. ɪt wɑz ðə tʃɛs ðət hɛl ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. hɪz hæn tʌtʃt sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, ɑn ðə lɪd. ðə dæɡɝ, bɛɹ-bleɪɾɪd. ɪn ðə dɑɹk, hɪz aɪz waɪɾənd. ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ wʌɾ ɪt hæd dʌn tə mæt, hi dʒɝk bæk, ðə vɔɪd ʃɪftɪŋ wɪð ɪz ædʒəteɪʃən.

Slowly, silently, he slithered to that one special shadow, and put out a hand. Ornate traceries worked in gold met his touch. It was the chest that held the Horn of Valere. His hand touched something else, on the lid. The dagger, bare-bladed. In the dark, his eyes widened. Remembering what it had done to Mat, he jerked back, the void shifting with his agitation.

ðə mæn slipɪŋ nɪɹbaɪ - noʊ mɔɹ ðən tu peɪsɪz fɹəm ðə tʃɛst; noʊ wʌn ɛls leɪ soʊ kloʊs baɪ spænz - ɡɹoʊn ɪn ɪz slip ən θɹæʃt əɾ ɪz blæŋkəts. ɹænd əlaʊd ðə vɔɪd tə swip θɔɾ ən fɪɹ əweɪ. mɝmɝɪŋ ənizəli ɪn ɪz slip, ðə mæn stɪld.

The man sleeping nearby - no more than two paces from the chest; no one else lay so close by spans - groaned in his sleep and thrashed at his blankets. Rand allowed the void to sweep thought and fear away. Murmuring uneasily in his sleep, the man stilled.

ɹænd lɛɾ ɪz hænd ɡoʊ bæk tə ðə dæɡɝ, nɑt kwaɪt tʌtʃɪŋ ɪt. ɪt hæd nɑt hɑɹmd mæt ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. nɑt mʌtʃ, ət list; nɑt kwɪkli. ɪn wʌn swɪf moʊʃən i lɪftəd ðə dæɡɝ, stʌk ɪt bɪhaɪn ɪz bɛlt, ən pʊld ɪz hæn əweɪ, əz ɪf ɪt maɪt hɛlp tə mɪnəmaɪz ðə taɪm ɪt tʌtʃt ɪz bɛɹ skɪn. pɝhæps ɪt wʊd, ən mæt wəd daɪ wɪθaʊt ðə dæɡɝ. hi kəd fil ɪt ðɛɹ, ɔlmoʊst ə weɪt pʊlɪŋ ɪm daʊn, pɹɛsɪŋ əɡɛns hɪm. bʌɾ ɪn ðə vɔɪd sɛnseɪʃən wɑz əz dɪstən əz θɔt, ən ðə fil ə ðə dæɡɝ feɪɾəd kwɪkli tə sʌmθɪŋ i wɑz juz tə.

Rand let his hand go back to the dagger, not quite touching it. It had not harmed Mat in the beginning. Not much, at least; not quickly. In one swift motion he lifted the dagger, stuck it behind his belt, and pulled his hand away, as if it might help to minimize the time it touched his bare skin. Perhaps it would, and Mat would die without the dagger. He could feel it there, almost a weight pulling him down, pressing against him. But in the void sensation was as distant as thought, and the feel of the dagger faded quickly to something he was used to.

hi weɪstəɾ oʊnli ə moʊmən mɔɹ stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ʃædoʊ-ɹæp tʃɛst - ðə hɔɹn hæd tə bi ɪnsaɪd, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ tə oʊpən ɪɾ ən i kəd nɑt lɪft ɪt baɪ hɪmsɛlf - ðən i lʊkt ɝaʊn fəɹ lɔɪəl. hi faʊn ði oʊɡiɝ kɹaʊtʃt nɑt fɑɹ bɪhaɪn hɪm, mæsɪv hɛd swɪvəlɪŋ əz i pɪɹd bæk ən fɔɹθ fɹəm slipɪŋ hjumən dɑɹkfɹɛnz tə slipɪŋ tʃɹɑləks. ivən ɪn ðə naɪɾ ɪt wɑz pleɪn lɔɪəlz aɪz wɝ əz waɪɾ əz ðeɪ kəd ɡoʊ; ðeɪ lʊkt əz bɪɡ əz sɔsɝz ɪn ðə laɪɾ ə ðə mun. ɹænd ɹitʃt aʊɾ ən tʊk lɔɪəlz hænd.

He wasted only a moment more staring at the shadow-wrapped chest - the Horn had to be inside, but he did not know how to open it and he could not lift it by himself - then he looked around for Loial. He found the Ogier crouched not far behind him, massive head swiveling as he peered back and forth from sleeping human Darkfriends to sleeping Trollocs. Even in the night it was plain Loial's eyes were as wide as they could go; they looked as big as saucers in the light of the moon. Rand reached out and took Loial's hand.

ði oʊɡiɝ ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən ɡæspt. ɹænd pʊɾ ə fɪŋɡɝ əkɹɔs ɪz lɪps, sɛt lɔɪəlz hæn ɑn ðə tʃɛst, ən mɪm lɪftɪŋ. fəɹ ə taɪm - ɪt sim fɝɛvɝ, ɪn ðə naɪt, wɪð dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən tʃɹɑləks ɔl ɝaʊnd; ɪt kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn mɔɹ ðən hɑɹtbits - lɔɪəl stɛɹd. ðɛn, sloʊli, hi pʊɾ ɪz ɑɹmz ɝaʊn ðə ɡoʊldən tʃɛst ən stʊd. hi meɪɾ ɪt sim ɛfɝtləs.

The Ogier gave a start and gasped. Rand put a finger across his lips, set Loial's hand on the chest, and mimed lifting. For a time - it seemed forever, in the night, with Darkfriends and Trollocs all around; it could not have been more than heartbeats - Loial stared. Then, slowly, he put his arms around the golden chest and stood. He made it seem effortless.

ɛvɝ soʊ kɛɹfəli, ivən mɔɹ kɛɹfəli ðən i hæd kʌm ɪn, ɹænd bɪɡæn tə wɔk aʊɾ ə ðə kæmp, bɪhaɪn lɔɪəl ən ðə tʃɛst. boʊθ hænz ɑn ɪz sɔɹd, hi wɑtʃt ðə slipɪŋ dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ðə stɪl ʃeɪps ə ðə tʃɹɑləks. ɔl ðoʊz ʃæɾoʊd fɪɡjɝz bɪɡæn tə bi swɑloʊd dipɝ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs əz ðeɪ dʒɹu əweɪ. ɔlmoʊs fɹi. wiv dʌn ɪt!

Ever so carefully, even more carefully than he had come in, Rand began to walk out of the camp, behind Loial and the chest. Both hands on his sword, he watched the sleeping Darkfriends, the still shapes of the Trollocs. All those shadowed figures began to be swallowed deeper in the darkness as they drew away. Almost free. We've done it!

ðə mæn u hæd bɪn slipɪŋ nɪɹ ðə tʃɛst sʌɾənli sæɾ ʌp wɪð ə stʃɹæŋɡəl jɛl, ðən lɛp tə hɪz fit. "ɪts ɡɔn! weɪk, jə fɪlθ! ɪts ɡuun!" feɪnz vɔɪs; ivən ɪn ðə vɔɪd ɹænd ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ɪt. ði ʌðɝz skɹæmbəld ɪɹɛkt, dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən tʃɹɑləks, kɔlɪŋ tə noʊ wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ, ɡɹoʊlɪŋ ən snɑɹlɪŋ. feɪnz vɔɪs ɹoʊz tə ə haʊl. "aɪ noʊ ɪts ju, ælθɹ! jəɹ haɪɾɪŋ fɹəm mi, bʌɾ aɪ noʊ jə ɑɹ aʊt ðɛɹ! faɪn hɪm! faɪn hɪm! æltuʊʊɹ!" mɛn ən tʃɹɑləks skæɾɝd ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən.

The man who had been sleeping near the chest suddenly sat up with a strangled yell, then leaped to his feet. "It's gone! Wake, you filth! It's gooonnne!" Fain's voice; even in the void Rand recognized it. The others scrambled erect, Darkfriends and Trollocs, calling to know what was happening, growling and snarling. Fain's voice rose to a howl. "I know it is you, al'Thor! You're hiding from me, but I know you are out there! Find him! Find him! Al'Thoooor!" Men and Trollocs scattered in every direction.

ɹæpt ɪn ɛmptinəs, ɹænd kɛp muvɪŋ. ɔlmoʊs fɝɡɑɾən ɪn ɛntɝɪŋ ðə kæmp, seɪɾɪn pʌlsd ət hɪm.

Wrapped in emptiness, Rand kept moving. Almost forgotten in entering the camp, saidin pulsed at him.

"hi kænɑt si ʌs," lɔɪəl wɪspɝd loʊ. "wʌns wi ɹitʃ ðə hɔɹsəz - "

"He cannot see us," Loial whispered low. "Once we reach the horses - "

eɪ tʃɹɑlɑk lɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə dɑɹk ət ðɛm, kɹuəl iɡəlz bik ɪn ə mænz feɪs wɛɹ maʊθ ən noʊz ʃəɾ əv bɪn, saɪð-laɪk sɔɹɾ ɔlɹɛɾi wɪslɪŋ θɹu ði ɛɹ.

A Trolloc leaped out of the dark at them, cruel eagle's beak in a man's face where mouth and nose should have been, scythe-like sword already whistling through the air.

ɹænd muvd wɪθaʊt θɔt. hi wɑz wʌn wɪð ðə bleɪd. kæt dænsəz ɑn ðə wɔl. ðə tʃɹɑlɑk skɹimd əz ɪt fɛl, skɹimd əɡɛn əz ɪt daɪd.

Rand moved without thought. He was one with the blade. Cat Dances on the Wall. The Trolloc screamed as it fell, screamed again as it died.

"ɹʌn, lɔɪəl!" ɹænd kəmændəd. seɪɾɪn kɔl tə hɪm. "ɹʌn!"

"Run, Loial!" Rand commanded. Saidin called to him. "Run!"

hi wɑz dɪmli əwɛɹ ə lɔɪəl lʌmbɝɪŋ tə ən ɑkwɝd ɡæləp, bʌɾ ənʌðɝ tʃɹɑlɑk lum fɹəm ðə naɪt, bɔɹ-snaʊɾəd ən tʌskt, spaɪkt æks ɹeɪzd. smuðli ɹænd ɡlaɪɾɪd bɪtwin tʃɹɑlɑk ən oʊɡiɝ; lɔɪəl mʌst ɡɛt ðə hɔɹn əweɪ. hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz tɔlɝ ðən ɹænd, hæf əɡɛn əz waɪd, ðə tʃɹɑlɑk keɪm əɾ ɪm wɪð ə saɪlən snɑɹl. ðə kɔɹɾiɝ tæps ɪz fæn. noʊ skɹim, ðɪs taɪm. hi wɔk bækwɝdz æftɝ lɔɪəl, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə naɪt. seɪɾɪn sæŋ tə hɪm, sətʃ ə swit sɔŋ. ðə paʊɝ kəd bɝn əm ɔl, bɝn feɪn ən ɔl ðə ɹɛs tə sɪndɝz. noʊ!

He was dimly aware of Loial lumbering to an awkward gallop, but another Trolloc loomed from the night, boar-snouted and tusked, spiked axe raised. Smoothly Rand glided between Trolloc and Ogier; Loial must get the Horn away. Head and shoulders taller than Rand, half again as wide, the Trolloc came at him with a silent snarl. The Courtier Taps His Fan. No scream, this time. He walked backwards after Loial, watching the night. Saidin sang to him, such a sweet song. The Power could burn them all, burn Fain and all the rest to cinders. No!

tu mɔɹ tʃɹɑləks, wʊlf ən ɹæm, ɡlimɪŋ tiθ ən kɝlɪŋ hɔɹnz. lɪzɝɾ ɪn ðə θɔɹnbʊʃ. hi ɹoʊz smuðli fɹəm wʌn ni əz ðə sɛkən tɑpəld, hɔɹnz ɔlmoʊs bɹʌʃɪŋ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ðə sɔŋ ə seɪɾɪn kɝɛst ɪm wɪð sɪdʌkʃən, pʊld ɪm wɪð ə θaʊzən sɪlkən stʃɹɪŋz. bɝn əm ɔl wɪð ðə paʊɝ. noʊ. noʊ! bɛɾɝ dɛd ðən ðæt. ɪf aɪ wɝ dɛd, ɪt wəd bi dʌn wɪð.

Two more Trollocs, wolf and ram, gleaming teeth and curling horns. Lizard in the Thornbush. He rose smoothly from one knee as the second toppled, horns almost brushing his shoulder. The song of saidin caressed him with seduction, pulled him with a thousand silken strings. Burn them all with the Power. No. No! Better dead than that. If I were dead, it would be done with.

ə nɑɾ ə tʃɹɑləks keɪm ɪndə saɪt, hʌntɪŋ ənsɝteɪnli. θɹi ʌv ðɛm, fɔɹ. sʌɾənli wʌn pɔɪntəd tə ɹænd ən ɹeɪzd ə haʊl ðə ɹɛst ænsɝɾ əz ðeɪ tʃɑɹdʒd.

A knot of Trollocs came into sight, hunting uncertainly. Three of them, four. Suddenly one pointed to Rand and raised a howl the rest answered as they charged.

"lɛɾ ɪt bi dʌn wɪð!" ɹænd ʃaʊɾəd, ən lɛp tə mit ðɛm.

"Let it be done with!" Rand shouted, and leaped to meet them.

fəɹ ən ɪnstən sɝpɹaɪz sloʊd ðɛm, ðən ðeɪ keɪm ɑn wɪð ɡʌɾɝəl kɹaɪz ɡlifəl, blʌdθɝsti, sɔɹdz ən æksiz ɹeɪzd. hi dænst əmʌŋ əm tə ðə sɔŋ ə seɪɾɪn. hʌmɪŋbɝd kɪsəz ðə hʌniɹoʊz. soʊ kʌnɪŋ ðət sɔŋ, fɪlɪŋ hɪm. kæɾ ɑn hɑt sænd. ðə sɔɹd simd əlaɪv ɪn ɪz hænz əz ɪt hæd nɛvɝ bɪn bɪfɔɹ, ən i fɔɾ əz ɪf ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd kəd kip seɪɾɪn fɹəm hɪm. ðə hɛɹən spɹɛdz ɪts wɪŋz.

For an instant surprise slowed them, then they came on with guttural cries gleeful, bloodthirsty, swords and axes raised. He danced among them to the song of saidin. Hummingbird Kisses the Honeyrose. So cunning that song, filling him. Cat on Hot Sand. The sword seemed alive in his hands as it had never been before, and he fought as if a heron-mark blade could keep saidin from him. The Heron Spreads Its Wings.

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət ðə moʊʃənləs ʃeɪps ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ɝaʊn hɪm. "bɛɾɝ tə bi dɛd," hi mɝmɝd. hi ɹeɪzd ɪz aɪz, bæk ʌp ðə hɪl təwɔɹd wɛɹ ðə kæmp leɪ. feɪn wɑz ðɛɹ, ən dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ən mɔɹ tʃɹɑləks. tu mɛni tə faɪt. tu mɛni tə feɪs ən laɪv. hi tʊk ə stɛp ðət weɪ. ənʌðɝ.

Rand stared at the motionless shapes on the ground around him. "Better to be dead," he murmured. He raised his eyes, back up the hill toward where the camp lay. Fain was there, and Darkfriends, and more Trollocs. Too many to fight. Too many to face and live. He took a step that way. Another.

"ɹænd, kʌm ɑn!" lɔɪəlz ɝdʒənt, wɪspɝd kɔl dʒɹɪftəd θɹu ði ɛmptinəs tə hɪm. "fɔɹ laɪf ən ðə laɪt, ɹænd, kʌm ɑn!"

"Rand, come on!" Loial's urgent, whispered call drifted through the emptiness to him. "For life and the Light, Rand, come on!"

kɛɹfəli, ɹænd bɛn tə waɪp ɪz bleɪɾ ɑn ə tʃɹɑlɑks koʊt. ðɛn, əz fɔɹməli əz ɪf læn wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm tʃɹeɪn, hi ʃiðd ɪt.

Carefully, Rand bent to wipe his blade on a Trolloc's coat. Then, as formally as if Lan were watching him train, he sheathed it.

"ɹænd!"

"Rand!"

əz ðoʊ hi nu ʌv noʊ ɝdʒənsi, ɹænd dʒɔɪn lɔɪəl baɪ ðə hɔɹsəz. ði oʊɡiɝ wɑz taɪɪŋ ðə ɡoʊldən tʃɛst ətɑp ɪz sæɾəl wɪð stʃɹæps fɹəm ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz. hɪz kloʊk wɑz stʌft ʌndɝniθ tə hɛlp bæləns ðə tʃɛst ɑn ðə ɹaʊndəd sæɾəl sit.

As though he knew of no urgency, Rand joined Loial by the horses. The Ogier was tying the golden chest atop his saddle with straps from his saddlebags. His cloak was stuffed underneath to help balance the chest on the rounded saddle seat.

seɪɾɪn sæŋ noʊ mɔɹ. ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ, ðət stʌmək-tɝnɪŋ ɡloʊ, bʌɾ ɪt hɛl bæk əz ɪf i tʃɹuli hæd fɔɾ ɪɾ ɔf. wʌndɝɪŋli, hi lɛt ðə vɔɪd vænɪʃ. "aɪ θɪŋk aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ mæd," hi sɛd. sʌɾənli ɹilaɪzɪŋ wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ, hi pɪɹd bæk ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæd kʌm. ʃaʊts ən haʊlz keɪm fɹəm hæf ə dʌzən dɪfɹən dɝɛkʃənz; saɪnz ə sɝtʃ, bʌt nʌn ə pɝsut. jɛt. hi swʌŋ ʌp ɑntu ɹɛdz bæk.

Saidin sang no more. It was there, that stomach-turning glow, but it held back as if he truly had fought it off. Wonderingly, he let the void vanish. "I think I am going mad," he said. Suddenly realizing where they were, he peered back the way they had come. Shouts and howls came from half a dozen different directions; signs of search, but none of pursuit. Yet. He swung up onto Red's back.

"səmtaɪmz aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn hæf ʌv wʌt jə seɪ," lɔɪəl sɛd. "ɪf jə mʌst ɡoʊ mæd, kəɾ ɪɾ ət list weɪɾ əntɪl wəɹ bæk wɪð ðə leɪɾi səlin ən hʊɹɪn?"

"Sometimes I do not understand half of what you say," Loial said. "If you must go mad, could it at least wait until we are back with the Lady Selene and Hurin?"

"haʊ ɑɹ jə gɑnə ɹaɪd wɪð ðəɾ ɪn jəɹ sæɾəl?"

"How are you going to ride with that in your saddle?"

"aɪ wɪl ɹʌn!" ði oʊɡiɝ suɾəd ɪz wɝdz baɪ bɹeɪkɪŋ ɪndə ə kwɪk tʃɹɑt, pʊlɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs bɪhaɪn ɪm baɪ ðə ɹeɪnz. ɹænd fɑloʊd.

"I will run!" The Ogier suited his words by breaking into a quick trot, pulling his horse behind him by the reins. Rand followed.

ðə peɪs lɔɪəl sɛt wɑz əz fæst əz ə hɔɹs kəd tʃɹɑt. ɹænd wɑz ʃʊɹ ði oʊɡiɝ kəd nɑt kip ɪt fəɹ lɔŋ, bʌt lɔɪəlz fit dɪd nɑt flæɡ. ɹænd dɪsaɪɾɪd ðəɾ ɪz boʊst ʌv wʌns aʊtʃɹʌnɪŋ ə hɔɹs maɪt ɹɪli bi tʃɹu. naʊ ən əɡɛn lɔɪəl lʊk bɪhaɪn əm əz i ɹæn, bʌt ðə ʃaʊts ə dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən haʊlz ə tʃɹɑləks feɪɾəd wɪð dɪstəns.

The pace Loial set was as fast as a horse could trot. Rand was sure the Ogier could not keep it for long, but Loial's feet did not flag. Rand decided that his boast of once outrunning a horse might really be true. Now and again Loial looked behind them as he ran, but the shouts of Darkfriends and howls of Trollocs faded with distance.

ivən wən ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪɡæn tə sloʊp ʌpwɝdz mɔɹ ʃɑɹpli, lɔɪəlz peɪs bɛɹli sloʊd, ən i tʃɹɑɾəd ɪndə ðɛɹ kæmpsaɪɾ ɑn ðə maʊntənsaɪd wɪð oʊnli ə lɪɾəl hɑɹd bɹiðɪŋ.

Even when the ground began to slope upwards more sharply, Loial's pace barely slowed, and he trotted into their campsite on the mountainside with only a little hard breathing.

"ju hæv ɪt." səlinz vɔɪs wɑz ɪɡzʌltən əz əɹ ɡeɪz ɹɛstəɾ ɑn ði ɔɹnətli wɝk tʃɛst ɑn lɔɪəlz sæɾəl. ʃi wɑz wɛɹɪŋ əɹ oʊn dʒɹɛs əɡɛn; ɪt lʊkt əz waɪɾ əz nu snoʊ tə ɹænd. "aɪ nu jə wəd meɪk ðə ɹaɪt tʃɔɪs. meɪ aɪ . . . hæv ə lʊk əɾ ɪt?"

"You have it." Selene's voice was exultant as her gaze rested on the ornately worked chest on Loial's saddle. She was wearing her own dress again; it looked as white as new snow to Rand. "I knew you would make the right choice. May I . . . have a look at it?"

"dɪɾ ɛni ʌv əm fɑloʊ, maɪ lɔɹd?" hʊɹɪn æskt æŋkʃəsli. hi stɛɹɾ ət ðə tʃɛst wɪð ɑ, bʌɾ ɪz aɪz slɪɾ ɔf ɪndə ðə naɪt, daʊn ðə maʊntən. "ɪf ðeɪ fɑloʊd, wɪl əv tə muv kwɪk."

"Did any of them follow, my Lord?" Hurin asked anxiously. He stared at the chest with awe, but his eyes slid off into the night, down the mountain. "If they followed, we'll have to move quick."

"aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ðeɪ dɪd. ɡoʊ tə ði aʊtkɹɑp ən si ɪf jə kən si ɛniθɪŋ." ɹænd klaɪm daʊn fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl əz hʊɹɪn hɝiɾ ʌp ðə maʊntən. "səlin, aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ tə oʊpən ðə tʃɛst. lɔɪəl, də ju?" ði oʊɡiɝ ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

"I do not think they did. Go to the outcrop and see if you can see anything." Rand climbed down from his saddle as Hurin hurried up the mountain. "Selene, I don't know how to open the chest. Loial, do you?" The Ogier shook his head.

"lɛt mi tʃɹaɪ. . . ." ivən fəɹ ə wʊmən ə səlinz haɪt, lɔɪəlz sæɾəl wɑz haɪ əbʌv ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ʃi ɹitʃt ʌp tə tʌtʃ ðə faɪnli ɹɔt pæɾɝnz ɑn ðə tʃɛst, ɹæn əɹ hænz əkɹɔs ðɛm, pɹɛst. ðəɹ wɑz ə klɪk, ən ʃi pʊʃt ðə lɪɾ ʌp, lɛɾ ɪt fɔl oʊpən.

"Let me try. . . ." Even for a woman of Selene's height, Loial's saddle was high above the ground. She reached up to touch the finely wrought patterns on the chest, ran her hands across them, pressed. There was a click, and she pushed the lid up, let it fall open.

əz ʃi stʃɹɛtʃt ɑn tɪptoʊ tə pʊɾ ə hæn ɪnsaɪd, ɹænd ɹitʃt oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ən lɪftəɾ aʊt ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. hi hæd sin ɪt wʌns bɪfɔɹ, bʌt nɛvɝ tʌtʃt ɪt. ðoʊ bjuɾəfli meɪd, ɪt dɪd nɑt lʊk ə θɪŋ ʌv ɡɹeɪɾ eɪdʒ, əɹ paʊɝ. ə kɝld ɡoʊldən hɔɹn, ɡlimɪŋ ɪn ðə feɪn laɪt, wɪð ɪnleɪd sɪlvɝ skɹɪp floʊɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə maʊθ ə ðə bɛl. hi tʌtʃt ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ lɛɾɝz wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ. ðeɪ sim tə kætʃ ðə mun.

As she stretched on tiptoe to put a hand inside, Rand reached over her shoulder and lifted out the Horn of Valere. He had seen it once before, but never touched it. Though beautifully made, it did not look a thing of great age, or power. A curled golden horn, gleaming in the faint light, with inlaid silver script flowing around the mouth of the bell. He touched the strange letters with a finger. They seemed to catch the moon.

"tiə mi ɑveɪən mɔɹaɪɾɪn ɪeɪn veɪɾɪn," səlin sɛd. " 'ðə ɡɹeɪv ɪz noʊ bɑɹ tə maɪ kɔl.' jəl bi ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ɛvɝ wɑz."

"Tia mi aven Moridin isainde vadin," Selene said. " 'The grave is no bar to my call.' You will be greater than Artur Hawkwing ever was."

"aɪ æm teɪkɪŋ ɪt tə ʃaɪnɝ, tə lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ." ɪt ʃəd ɡoʊ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, hi θɔt, bʌɾ aɪm dʌn wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ. lɛɾ eɪɡəlmɝ əɹ ɪŋtʃɹ teɪk ɪt tə ðɛm. hi sɛt ðə hɔɹn bæk ɪn ðə tʃɛst; ɪt kæs bæk ðə munlaɪt, pʊl ði aɪ.

"I am taking it to Shienar, to Lord Agelmar." It should go to Tar Valon, he thought, but I'm done with Aes Sedai. Let Agelmar or Ingtar take it to them. He set the Horn back in the chest; it cast back the moonlight, pulled the eye.

"ðæɾ ɪz mædnəs," səlin sɛd.

"That is madness," Selene said.

ɹænd flɪntʃt ət ðə wɝd. "mæɾ əɹ nɑt, ɪts wʌɾ aɪm duɪŋ. aɪ toʊl ju, səlin, aɪ wɑnt noʊ pɑɹɾ ʌv ɡɹeɪtnəs. bæk ðɛɹ, aɪ θɔɾ aɪ dɪd. fəɹ ə waɪl, aɪ θɔɾ aɪ wɑntəd θɪŋz. . . ." laɪt, ʃiz soʊ bjuɾəfəl. ɛɡwin. səlin. aɪm nɑt wɝði ʌv iðɝ ə ðɛm. "sʌmθɪŋ sim tə teɪk hoʊld ə mi." seɪɾɪn keɪm fəɹ mi, bʌɾ aɪ fɔɾ ɪɾ ɔf wɪð ə sɔɹd. əɹ ɪz ðət mæd, tu? hi bɹið dipli. "ʃaɪnɝ ɪz wɛɹ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ bɪlɔŋz. əɹ ɪf nɑt ðɛɹ, lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ wɪl noʊ wʌt tə də wɪð ɪt."

Rand flinched at the word. "Mad or not, it is what I'm doing. I told you, Selene, I want no part of greatness. Back there, I thought I did. For a while, I thought I wanted things. . . ." Light, she's so beautiful. Egwene. Selene. I'm not worthy of either of them. "Something seemed to take hold of me." Saidin came for me, but I fought it off with a sword. Or is that mad, too? He breathed deeply. "Shienar is where the Horn of Valere belongs. Or if not there, Lord Agelmar will know what to do with it."

hʊɹɪn əpɪɹd fɹəm ʌp ðə maʊntən. "ðə faɪɝz ðəɹ əɡɛn, lɔɹd ɹænd, ən bɪɡɝ ðən ɛvɝ. ən aɪ θɔɾ aɪ hɝd ʃaʊɾɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ɔl daʊn ɪn ðə hɪlz. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðeɪv kʌm əpɑn ðə maʊntən, jɛt."

Hurin appeared from up the mountain. "The fire's there again, Lord Rand, and bigger than ever. And I thought I heard shouting. It was all down in the hills. I don't think they've come upon the mountain, yet."

"ju mɪsəndɝstæn mi, ɹænd," səlin sɛd. "ju kænɑt ɡoʊ bæk, naʊ. jə ɑɹ kəmɪɾəd. ðoʊz fɹɛnz ə ðə dɑɹk wɪl nɑt sɪmpli ɡoʊ əweɪ kəz juv teɪkən ðə hɔɹn fɹəm ðɛm. fɑɹ fɹəm ɪt. ənlɛs jə noʊ səm weɪ tə kɪl əm ɔl, ðəl bi hʌntɪŋ jə naʊ əz jə hʌntəɾ əm bɪfɔɹ."

"You misunderstand me, Rand," Selene said. "You cannot go back, now. You are committed. Those Friends of the Dark will not simply go away because you've taken the Horn from them. Far from it. Unless you know some way to kill them all, they will be hunting you now as you hunted them before."

"noʊ!" lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn lʊk sɝpɹaɪzd ət ɹændz viəməns. hi sɔfən ɪz toʊn. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɛni weɪ tə kɪl əm ɔl. ðeɪ kən lɪv fɝɛvɝ fəɹ ɔl ə mi."

"No!" Loial and Hurin looked surprised at Rand's vehemence. He softened his tone. "I don't know any way to kill them all. They can live forever for all of me."

səlinz lɔŋ hɛɹ ʃɪftəɾ ɪn weɪvz əz ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ðɛn jə kænɑt ɡoʊ bæk, oʊnli ɔnwɝd. jə kən ɹitʃ ðə seɪfti ʌv kɛɹhinz wɔlz lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ jə kəd ɹɪtɝn tə ʃaɪnɝ. dʌz ðə θɔɾ ʌv ə fju mɔɹ deɪz ɪn maɪ kʌmpəni sim soʊ oʊnɝəs?"

Selene's long hair shifted in waves as she shook her head. "Then you cannot go back, only onward. You can reach the safety of Cairhien's walls long before you could return to Shienar. Does the thought of a few more days in my company seem so onerous?"

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət ðə tʃɛst. səlinz kʌmpəni wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm bɝɾənsəm, bʌt nɪɹ əɹ i kəd nɑt hɛlp θɪŋkɪŋ θɪŋz i ʃəd nɑt. stɪl, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹaɪd bæk nɔɹθ mɛn ɹɪskɪŋ feɪn ən ɪz fɑloʊɝz. ʃi wɑz ɹaɪɾ ɪn ðæt. feɪn wəd nɛvɝ ɡɪv ʌp. ɪŋtʃɹ wəd nɑt ɡɪv ʌp, iðɝ. ɪf ɪŋtʃɹ keɪm ɑn saʊθwɝd, ən ɹænd nu ʌv noʊ ɹizən fəɹ ɪm tə tɝn əsaɪd, hi wəɾ ɝaɪv ət kɛɹhin, sun əɹ leɪt.

Rand stared at the chest. Selene's company was far from burdensome, but near her he could not help thinking things he should not. Still, trying to ride back north meant risking Fain and his followers. She was right in that. Fain would never give up. Ingtar would not give up, either. If Ingtar came on southward, and Rand knew of no reason for him to turn aside, he would arrive at Cairhien, soon or late.

"kɛɹhin," hi əɡɹid. "ju wɪl əv tə ʃoʊ mi wɛɹ jə laɪv, səlin. aɪv nɛvɝ bɪn tə kɛɹhin." hi ɹitʃt tə kloʊz ðə tʃɛst.

"Cairhien," he agreed. "You will have to show me where you live, Selene. I've never been to Cairhien." He reached to close the chest.

"ju tʊk sʌmθɪŋ ɛls fɹəm ðə fɹɛnz ə ðə dɑɹk?" səlin sɛd. "ju spoʊk ɝliɝ ʌv ə dæɡɝ."

"You took something else from the Friends of the Dark?" Selene said. "You spoke earlier of a dagger."

haʊ kəɾ aɪ fɝɡɛt? hi lɛf ðə tʃɛst əz ɪt wɑz ən pʊl ðə dæɡɝ fɹəm ɪz bɛlt. ðə bɛɹ bleɪd kɝv laɪk ə hɔɹn, ən ðə kwɪlənz wɝ ɡoʊldən sɝpəns. sɛɾ ɪn ðə hɪlt, ə ɹubi əz bɪɡ əz ɪz θʌmneɪl wɪŋk laɪk ən ivəl aɪ ɪn ðə munlaɪt. ɔɹneɪɾ əz ɪt wɑz, teɪntɪɾ əz i nu ɪt wɑz, ɪt fɛl noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ɛni ʌðɝ naɪf.

How could I forget? He left the chest as it was and pulled the dagger from his belt. The bare blade curved like a horn, and the quillons were golden serpents. Set in the hilt, a ruby as big as his thumbnail winked like an evil eye in the moonlight. Ornate as it was, tainted as he knew it was, it felt no different from any other knife.

"bi kɛɹfəl," səlin sɛd. "du nɑt kʌt jɝsɛlf."

"Be careful," Selene said. "Do not cut yourself."

ɹænd fɛlt ə ʃɪvɝ ɪnsaɪd. ɪf sɪmpli kæɹiɪŋ ɪt wɑz deɪnʒɝəs, hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə noʊ wʌɾ ə kʌt fɹəm ɪt wəd du. "ðɪs ɪz fɹəm ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ," hi toʊl ði ʌðɝz. "ɪt wɪl twɪs huɛvɝ kæɹiz ɪt fəɹ lɔŋ, teɪn əm tə ðə boʊn ðə weɪ ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ ɪz teɪntɪd. wɪθaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ hilɪŋ, ðət teɪnt wɪl kɪl, ɪvɛntʃəwəli."

Rand felt a shiver inside. If simply carrying it was dangerous, he did not want to know what a cut from it would do. "This is from Shadar Logoth," he told the others. "It will twist whoever carries it for long, taint them to the bone the way Shadar Logoth is tainted. Without Aes Sedai Healing, that taint will kill, eventually."

"soʊ ðəɾ ɪz wʌɾ eɪlz mæt," lɔɪəl sɛd sɔfli. "aɪ nɛvɝ səspɛktəd." hʊɹɪn stɛɹɾ ət ðə dæɡɝ ɪn ɹændz hæn ən waɪpt ɪz oʊn hænz ɑn ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz koʊt. ðə snɪfɝ dɪd nɑt lʊk hæpi.

"So that is what ails Mat," Loial said softly. "I never suspected." Hurin stared at the dagger in Rand's hand and wiped his own hands on the front of his coat. The sniffer did not look happy.

"nʌn ʌv əs mʌs hændəl ɪɾ ɛni mɔɹ ðən ɪz nɛsəsɛɹi," ɹænd wɛn ɑn. "aɪ wɪl faɪn səm weɪ tə kæɹi ɪt - "

"None of us must handle it any more than is necessary," Rand went on. "I will find some way to carry it - "

"ɪɾ ɪz deɪnʒɝəs." səlin fɹaʊn ət ðə bleɪɾ əz ɪf ðə sneɪks wɝ ɹil, ən pɔɪzənəs. "θɹoʊ ɪɾ əweɪ. liv ɪt, əɹ bɛɹi ɪɾ ɪf jə wɪʃ tə kip ɪt fɹəm ʌðɝ hænz, bʌt bi ɹɪɾ ʌv ɪt."

"It is dangerous." Selene frowned at the blade as if the snakes were real, and poisonous. "Throw it away. Leave it, or bury it if you wish to keep it from other hands, but be rid of it."

"mæt nidz ɪt," ɹænd sɛd fɝmli.

"Mat needs it," Rand said firmly.

"ɪɾ ɪz tu deɪnʒɝəs. jə sɛd soʊ jɝsɛlf."

"It is too dangerous. You said so yourself."

"hi nidz ɪt. ði æm . . . ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛɾ i wəd daɪ wɪθaʊɾ ɪt tə juz ɪn hilɪŋ hɪm." ðeɪ stɪl əv ə stʃɹɪŋ ɑn hɪm, bʌt ðɪs bleɪd wɪl kʌɾ ɪt. əntɪl aɪm ɹɪɾ ʌv ɪt, ən ðə hɔɹn, ðeɪv ə stʃɹɪŋ ɑn mi, bʌɾ əl nɑt dæns haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ðeɪ pʊl.

"He needs it. The Am . . . the Aes Sedai said he would die without it to use in Healing him." They still have a string on him, but this blade will cut it. Until I'm rid of it, and the Horn, they have a string on me, but I'll not dance however much they pull.

hi sɛt ðə dæɡɝ ɪn ðə tʃɛst, ɪnsaɪd ðə kɝl ə ðə hɔɹn - ðəɹ wɑz dʒʌst ɹum fəɹ ɪt - ən pʊl ðə lɪd daʊn. ɪt lɑkt wɪð ə ʃɑɹp snæp. "ðæt ʃəd ʃild əs fɹəm ɪt." hi hoʊpt ɪt wʊd. læn sɛd ðə taɪm tə saʊn moʊst ʃʊɹ wɑz wən jə wɝ list sɝɾən.

He set the dagger in the chest, inside the curl of the Horn - there was just room for it - and pulled the lid down. It locked with a sharp snap. "That should shield us from it." He hoped it would. Lan said the time to sound most sure was when you were least certain.

"ðə tʃɛst wɪl ʃʊɹli ʃild ʌs," səlin sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs. "ænd naʊ aɪ min tə fɪnɪʃ wʌɾ ɪz lɛft ə maɪ naɪts slip."

"The chest will surely shield us," Selene said in a tight voice. "And now I mean to finish what is left of my night's sleep."

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "wi ɑɹ tu kloʊs. feɪn simz eɪbəl tə faɪn mi, səmtaɪmz."

Rand shook his head. "We are too close. Fain seems able to find me, sometimes."

"sik ðə wʌnnəs ɪf jə ɑɹ əfɹeɪd," səlin sɛd.

"Seek the Oneness if you are afraid," Selene said.

"aɪ wɑnə bi əz fɑɹ fɹəm ðoʊz dɑɹkfɹɛnz kʌm mɔɹnɪŋ əz wi kən bi. əl sæɾəl jəɹ mɛɹ."

"I want to be as far from those Darkfriends come morning as we can be. I will saddle your mare."

"stʌbɝn!" ʃi saʊndəɾ æŋɡɹi, ən wən i lʊkt ət hɝ, hɝ maʊθ kɝvd ɪn ə smaɪl ðət nɛvɝ keɪm kloʊs tə hɝ dɑɹk aɪz. "ə stʌbɝn mæn ɪz bɛst, wʌns. . . ." hɝ vɔɪs tʃɹeɪld ɔf, ən ðət wɝid hɪm. wɪmən ɔfən sim tə liv θɪŋz ənsɛd, ən ɪn ɪz lɪməɾəd ɪkspɪɹiəns ɪt wɑz wʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt seɪ ðət pɹuv ðə moʊs tʃɹʌbəl. ʃi wɑtʃt ɪn saɪləns əz i slʌŋ əɹ sæɾəl ɑntu ðə waɪt mɛɹz bæk ən bɛn tə fæʃən ðə ɡɝθs.

"Stubborn!" She sounded angry, and when he looked at her, her mouth curved in a smile that never came close to her dark eyes. "A stubborn man is best, once. . . ." Her voice trailed off, and that worried him. Women often seemed to leave things unsaid, and in his limited experience it was what they did not say that proved the most trouble. She watched in silence as he slung her saddle onto the white mare's back and bent to fashion the girths.

"ɡæðɝ əm ɔl ɪn!" feɪn snɑɹəld. ðə ɡoʊt-snaʊɾəd tʃɹɑlɑk bækt əweɪ fɹəm hɪm. ðə faɪɝ, paɪl haɪ wɪð wʊd naʊ, lɪt ðə hɪltɑp wɪð flɪkɝɪŋ ʃædoʊz. hɪz hjumən fɑloʊɝz hʌɾəld nɪɹ ðə bleɪz, fɪɹfəl tə bi aʊɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk wɪð ðə ɹɛst ə ðə tʃɹɑləks. "ɡæðɝ ðɛm, ɛvɹi wʌn ðət stɪl laɪvz, ən ɪf ɛni θɪŋk tə ɹʌn, lɛɾ əm noʊ ðəl ɡɛt wʌt ðət wʌn ɡɑt." hi dʒɛstʃɝd tə ðə fɝs tʃɹɑlɑk ðət hæd bɹɔɾ ɪm wɝɾ ælθɹ wɑz nɑt tə bi faʊnd. ɪt stɪl snæpt ət ɡɹaʊn mʌɾid wɪð ɪts oʊn blʌd, hʊvz skɹeɪpɪŋ tʃɹɛntʃɪz əz ðeɪ dʒɝkt. "ɡoʊ," feɪn wɪspɝd, ən ðə ɡoʊt-snaʊɾəd tʃɹɑlɑk ɹæn ɪndə ðə naɪt.

"Gather them all in!" Fain snarled. The goat-snouted Trolloc backed away from him. The fire, piled high with wood now, lit the hilltop with flickering shadows. His human followers huddled near the blaze, fearful to be out in the dark with the rest of the Trollocs. "Gather them, every one that still lives, and if any think to run, let them know they'll get what that one got." He gestured to the first Trolloc that had brought him word al'Thor was not to be found. It still snapped at ground muddied with its own blood, hooves scraping trenches as they jerked. "Go," Fain whispered, and the goat-snouted Trolloc ran into the night.

feɪn ɡlæns kəntɛmptʃwəsli ət ði ʌðɝ hjumənz - ðəl əv ðɛɹ juzɪz stɪl - ðən tɝn tə stɛɹ ɪndə ðə naɪt, təwɔɹd kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ. ælθɹ wɑz ʌp ðɛɹ, sʌmwɛɹ, ɪn ðə maʊntənz. wɪð ðə hɔɹn. hɪz tiθ ɡɹeɪɾɪd ɑɾəbli ət ðə θɔt. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛɹ, ɪɡzækli, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ pʊld ɪm təwɔɹd ðə maʊntənz. təwɔɹɾ ælθɹ. ðət mʌtʃ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz . . . ɡɪft . . . ɹɪmeɪn tə hɪm. hi hæd hɑɹdli θɔɾ ʌv ɪt, hæd tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk ʌv ɪt, əntɪl sʌɾənli, æftɝ ðə hɔɹn wɑz ɡɔn - ɡɔn! - ælθɹ wɑz ðɛɹ, dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪm əz mit dʒɹɔz ə stɑɹvɪŋ dɔɡ.

Fain glanced contemptuously at the other humans - They'll have their uses still - then turned to stare into the night, toward Kinslayer's Dagger. Al'Thor was up there, somewhere, in the mountains. With the Horn. His teeth grated audibly at the thought. He did not know where, exactly, but something pulled him toward the mountains. Toward al'Thor. That much of the Dark One's . . . gift . . . remained to him. He had hardly thought of it, had tried not to think of it, until suddenly, after the Horn was gone - Gone! - al'Thor was there, drawing him as meat draws a starving dog.

"aɪ æm ə dɔɡ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ. ə dɔɡ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ!" hi hɝd ði ʌðɝz ʃɪftɪŋ ənizəli ɝaʊn ðə faɪɝ, bʌɾ i ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛm. "ju wɪl peɪ fəɹ wʌt wɑz dʌn tə mi, ælθɹ! ðə wɝld wɪl peɪ!" hi kækəld ət ðə naɪt wɪð mæd læftɝ. "ðə wɝld wɪl peɪ!"

"I am a dog no longer. A dog no longer!" He heard the others shifting uneasily around the fire, but he ignored them. "You will pay for what was done to me, al'Thor! The world will pay!" He cackled at the night with mad laughter. "The world will pay!"


tʃæptɝ twɛnti


CHAPTER 20

seɪɾɪn


Saidin

ɹænd kɛpt əm muvɪŋ θɹu ðə naɪt, əlaʊɪŋ oʊnli ə bɹif stɑp ət dɔn, tə ɹɛs ðə hɔɹsəz. ən tə əlaʊ lɔɪəl ɹɛst. wɪð ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ɪn ɪts ɡoʊld-ænd-sɪlvɝ tʃɛst ɑkjəpaɪɪŋ ɪz sæɾəl, ði oʊɡiɝ wɔkt əɹ tʃɹɑɾəd əhɛɾ ə hɪz bɪɡ hɔɹs, nɛvɝ kəmpleɪnɪŋ, nɛvɝ sloʊɪŋ ðɛm. sʌmtaɪm dʊɹɪŋ ðə naɪt ðeɪ hæd kɹɔs ðə bɔɹɾɝ ə kɛɹhin.

Rand kept them moving through the night, allowing only a brief stop at dawn, to rest the horses. And to allow Loial rest. With the Horn of Valere in its gold-and-silver chest occupying his saddle, the Ogier walked or trotted ahead of his big horse, never complaining, never slowing them. Sometime during the night they had crossed the border of Cairhien.

"aɪ wɑnə si ɪɾ əɡɛn," səlin sɛɾ əz ðeɪ hɔltəd. ʃi dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ən stʃɹoʊd tə lɔɪəlz hɔɹs. ðɛɹ ʃædoʊz, lɔŋ ən θɪn, pɔɪntəd wɛs fɹəm ðə sʌn dʒʌs pikɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə hɝaɪzən. "bɹɪŋ ɪt daʊn fəɹ mi, ælɑntɪn." lɔɪəl bɪɡæn tə əndu ðə stʃɹæps. "ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ."

"I want to see it again," Selene said as they halted. She dismounted and strode to Loial's horse. Their shadows, long and thin, pointed west from the sun just peeking over the horizon. "Bring it down for me, alantin." Loial began to undo the straps. "The Horn of Valere."

"noʊ," ɹænd sɛd, klaɪmɪŋ daʊn fɹəm ɹɛdz bæk. "lɔɪəl, noʊ." ði oʊɡiɝ lʊk fɹəm ɹænd tə səlin, hɪz ɪɹz twɪtʃɪŋ daʊtfəli, bʌɾ i tʊk ɪz hænz əweɪ.

"No," Rand said, climbing down from Red's back. "Loial, no." The Ogier looked from Rand to Selene, his ears twitching doubtfully, but he took his hands away.

"aɪ wɑnə si ðə hɔɹn," səlin dɪmændəd. ɹænd wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi wɑz noʊ oʊldɝ ðən hi, bʌɾ ət ðət moʊmənt ʃi sʌɾənli simd əz oʊld ən əz koʊld əz ðə maʊntənz, ən mɔɹ ɹiɡəl ðən kwin mɔɹɡeɪs əɾ əɹ hɔɾiəst.

"I want to see the Horn," Selene demanded. Rand was sure she was no older than he, but at that moment she suddenly seemed as old and as cold as the mountains, and more regal than Queen Morgase at her haughtiest.

"aɪ θɪŋk wi ʃəd kip ðə dæɡɝ ʃildɪd," ɹænd sɛd. "fɔɹ ɔl aɪ noʊ, lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪt meɪ bi əz bæɾ əz tʌtʃɪŋ ɪt. lɛɾ ɪt steɪ wɛɹ ɪts əntɪl aɪ kən pʊɾ ɪɾ ɪn mæts hænz. hi - hi kən teɪk ɪt tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ." ən wʌt pɹaɪs wɪl ðeɪ dɪmæn fəɹ ðət hilɪŋ? bʌɾ i hæzən ɛni tʃɔɪs. hi fɛlt ə lɪɾəl ɡɪlti oʊvɝ filɪŋ ɹɪlif ðət hi, ət list, wɑz θɹu wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪm dʌn wɪð ðɛm. wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ.

"I think we should keep the dagger shielded," Rand said. "For all I know, looking at it may be as bad as touching it. Let it stay where it is until I can put it in Mat's hands. He - he can take it to the Aes Sedai." And what price will they demand for that Healing? But he hasn't any choice. He felt a little guilty over feeling relief that he, at least, was through with Aes Sedai. I am done with them. One way or another.

"ðə dæɡɝ! ɔl jə sim tə kɛɹ əbaʊɾ ɪz ðət dæɡɝ. aɪ toʊl jə tə bi ɹɪɾ ʌv ɪt. ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, ɹænd."

"The dagger! All you seem to care about is that dagger. I told you to be rid of it. The Horn of Valere, Rand."

"noʊ."

"No."

ʃi keɪm tə hɪm, ə sweɪ ɪn əɹ wɔk ðət meɪɾ ɪm fil əz ɪf i hæd sʌmθɪŋ kɑɾ ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt. "ɔl aɪ wɑn ɪz tə si ɪɾ ɪn ðə laɪɾ ə deɪ. aɪ woʊn ivən tʌtʃ ɪt. jə hoʊld ɪt. ɪt wəd bi sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ mi tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ, jə hoʊldɪŋ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ɪn jəɹ hænz." ʃi tʊk ɪz hænz əz ʃi sɛɾ ɪt; hɝ tʌtʃ meɪɾ ɪz skɪn tɪŋɡəl ən ɪz maʊθ ɡoʊ dʒɹaɪ.

She came to him, a sway in her walk that made him feel as if he had something caught in his throat. "All I want is to see it in the light of day. I won't even touch it. You hold it. It would be something for me to remember, you holding the Horn of Valere in your hands." She took his hands as she said it; her touch made his skin tingle and his mouth go dry.

sʌmθɪŋ tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ - wən ʃi hæd ɡɔn. . . . hi kəd kloʊz ðə dæɡɝ ʌp əɡɛn əz sun əz ðə hɔɹn wɑz aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɛst. ɪt wəd bi sʌmθɪŋ tə hoʊl ðə hɔɹn ɪn ɪz hænz wɛɹ i kəd si ɪɾ ɪn ðə laɪt.

Something to remember - when she had gone. . . . He could close the dagger up again as soon as the Horn was out of the chest. It would be something to hold the Horn in his hands where he could see it in the light.

hi wɪʃt i nu mɔɹ ə ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən. ðə wʌn taɪm i hɝɾ ə mɝtʃəns ɡɑɹd tɛlɪŋ ə pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt, bæk ɪn ɛmənz fild, nɪneɪiv hæd bɹoʊkən ə bɹum əkɹɔs ðə mænz ʃoʊldɝz. nʌn ə ðə lɪɾəl i hæd hɝd mɛnʃən ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ.

He wished he knew more of the Prophecies of the Dragon. The one time he heard a merchant's guard telling a part of it, back in Emond's Field, Nynaeve had broken a broom across the man's shoulders. None of the little he had heard mentioned the Horn of Valere.

ɛɛs sədaɪ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk mi də wʌt ðeɪ wɑnt. səlin wɑz stɪl ɡeɪzɪŋ ɪntɛnli ɪndə hɪz aɪz, hɝ feɪs soʊ jʌŋ ən bjuɾəfəl ðəɾ i wɑntəd tə kɪs əɹ dɪspaɪt wʌɾ i wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ. hi hæd nɛvɝ sin ən ɛɛs sədaɪ æk ðə weɪ ʃi dɪd, ən ʃi lʊk jʌŋ, nɑɾ eɪdʒləs. ə ɡɝl maɪ eɪdʒ kʊdn bi ɛɛs sədaɪ. bʌt. . . .

Aes Sedai trying to make me do what they want. Selene was still gazing intently into his eyes, her face so young and beautiful that he wanted to kiss her despite what he was thinking. He had never seen an Aes Sedai act the way she did, and she looked young, not ageless. A girl my age couldn't be Aes Sedai. But. . . .

"səlin," hi sɛd sɔfli, "ɑɹ jə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

"Selene," he said softly, "are you an Aes Sedai?"

"ɛɛs sədaɪ," ʃi ɔlmoʊst spæt, flɪŋɪŋ ɪz hænz əweɪ. "ɛɛs sədaɪ! ɔlweɪz jə hɝl ðəɾ ət mi!" ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən smuðd əɹ dʒɹɛs, əz ɪf ɡæðɝɪŋ hɝsɛlf. "aɪ æm wʌɾ ən u aɪ æm. ən aɪm noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ!" ən ʃi ɹæp hɝsɛlf ɪn ə saɪlən koʊlnəs ðət meɪɾ ivən ðə mɔɹnɪŋ sʌn sim tʃɪl.

"Aes Sedai," she almost spat, flinging his hands away. "Aes Sedai! Always you hurl that at me!" She took a deep breath and smoothed her dress, as if gathering herself. "I am what and who I am. And I am no Aes Sedai!" And she wrapped herself in a silent coldness that made even the morning sun seem chill.

lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn bɔɹ ɪɾ ɔl wɪð əz ɡʊɾ ə ɡɹeɪs əz ðeɪ kəd mænədʒ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk kɑnvɝseɪʃən ən haɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ ɪmbɛɹəsmənt wən ʃi fɹoʊz əm wɪð ə lʊk. ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ɑn.

Loial and Hurin bore it all with as good a grace as they could manage, trying to make conversation and hiding their embarrassment when she froze them with a look. They rode on.

baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ meɪd kæmp ðət naɪt bɪsaɪɾ ə maʊntən stʃɹim ðət pɹəvaɪɾəd fɪʃ fəɹ ðɛɹ sʌpɝ, səlin sim tə hæv ɹiɡeɪn səm ə hɝ tɛmpɝ, tʃæɾɪŋ wɪð ði oʊɡiɝ əbaʊt bʊks, spikɪŋ kaɪnli tə hʊɹɪn.

By the time they made camp that night beside a mountain stream that provided fish for their supper, Selene seemed to have regained some of her temper, chatting with the Ogier about books, speaking kindly to Hurin.

ʃi bɛɹli spoʊk tə ɹænd, ðoʊ, ənlɛs i spoʊk fɝst, iðɝ ðəɾ ivnɪŋ əɹ ðə fɑloʊɪŋ deɪ əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd θɹu maʊntənz ðət ɹɪɹɾ ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðɛm laɪk hjudʒ, dʒæɡd ɡɹeɪ wɔlz, ɛvɝ klaɪmɪŋ. bʌt wɛnɛvɝ i lʊkt ət hɝ, ʃi wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm ən smaɪlɪŋ. səmtaɪmz ɪt wɑz ðə sɔɹɾ ə smaɪl ðət meɪɾ ɪm smaɪl bæk, səmtaɪmz ðə sɔɹt ðət meɪɾ ɪm klɪɹ ɪz θɹoʊɾ ən blʌʃ əɾ ɪz oʊn θɔts, ən səmtaɪmz ðə mɪstɪɹiəs, noʊɪŋ smaɪl ðəɾ ɛɡwin səmtaɪmz wɔɹ. ɪt wɑz ə kaɪndə smaɪl ðəɾ ɔlweɪz pʊɾ ɪz bæk ʌp - bʌɾ ət list ɪt wɑz ə smaɪl.

She barely spoke to Rand, though, unless he spoke first, either that evening or the following day as they rode through mountains that reared on either side of them like huge, jagged gray walls, ever climbing. But whenever he looked at her, she was watching him and smiling. Sometimes it was the sort of smile that made him smile back, sometimes the sort that made him clear his throat and blush at his own thoughts, and sometimes the mysterious, knowing smile that Egwene sometimes wore. It was a kind of smile that always put his back up - but at least it was a smile.

ʃi kæn bi ɛɛs sədaɪ.

She can't be Aes Sedai.

ðə weɪ bɪɡæn tə sloʊp daʊnwɝdz, ən wɪð ðə pɹɑməs ə twaɪlaɪɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ, kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ ət læst ɡeɪv weɪ tə hɪlz, ɹoʊlɪŋ ən ɹaʊnd, wɪð mɔɹ bɹʌʃ ðən tʃɹiz, mɔɹ θɪkəts ðən fɔɹəst. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹoʊd, dʒʌst ə dɝt tʃɹæk, sətʃ əz maɪt bi juz baɪ ə fju kɑɹts naʊ ən əɡɛn. filz kɑɹv səm ə ðə hɪlz ɪndə tɛɹəsəz, filz fʊl ə kɹɑps bʌɾ ɛmpti ʌv pipəl ət ðɪs aʊɝ. nʌn ə ðə skæɾɝd fɑɹm bɪldɪŋz leɪ kloʊs ɪnʌf tə ðə pæθ ðeɪ ɹoʊd fəɹ ɹænd tə meɪk aʊt mɔɹ ðən ðət ðeɪ wɝ ɔl meɪɾ ə stoʊn.

The way began to slope downwards, and with the promise of twilight in the air, Kinslayer's Dagger at last gave way to hills, rolling and round, with more brush than trees, more thickets than forest. There was no road, just a dirt track, such as might be used by a few carts now and again. Fields carved some of the hills into terraces, fields full of crops but empty of people at this hour. None of the scattered farm buildings lay close enough to the path they rode for Rand to make out more than that they were all made of stone.

wən i sɔ ðə vɪlədʒ əhɛd, laɪts ɔlɹɛɾi twɪŋkəld ɪn ə fju wɪndoʊz əɡɛns ðə kʌmɪŋ ə naɪt.

When he saw the village ahead, lights already twinkled in a few windows against the coming of night.

"wil slip ɪn bɛdz tənaɪt," hi sɛd.

"We'll sleep in beds tonight," he said.

"ðæɾ əl ɛndʒɔɪ, lɔɹd ɹænd." hʊɹɪn læft. lɔɪəl nɑɾəd əɡɹimənt.

"That I will enjoy, Lord Rand." Hurin laughed. Loial nodded agreement.

"ə vɪlədʒ ɪn," səlin snɪft. "dɝɾi, noʊ daʊt, ən fʊl ʌv ənwɑʃt mɛn swɪlɪŋ eɪl. waɪ kænt wi slip ʌndɝ ðə stɑɹz əɡɛn? aɪ faɪn aɪ ɛndʒɔɪ slipɪŋ ʌndɝ ðə stɑɹz."

"A village inn," Selene sniffed. "Dirty, no doubt, and full of unwashed men swilling ale. Why can't we sleep under the stars again? I find I enjoy sleeping under the stars."

"ju wəd nɑɾ ɛndʒɔɪ ɪɾ ɪf feɪn kɑɾ ʌp wɪð əs waɪl wi slɛpt," ɹænd sɛd, "hɪm ən ðoʊz tʃɹɑləks. hiz kʌmɪŋ æftɝ mi, səlin. æftɝ ðə hɔɹn, tu, bʌɾ ɪts mi hi kən faɪnd. waɪ dʒju θɪŋk aɪv kɛp sətʃ ə kloʊs wɑtʃ ðiz pæs naɪts?"

"You would not enjoy it if Fain caught up with us while we slept," Rand said, "him and those Trollocs. He's coming after me, Selene. After the Horn, too, but it is me he can find. Why do you think I've kept such a close watch these past nights?"

"ɪf feɪn kætʃəz ʌs, jəl dil wɪð hɪm." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz kuli kɑnfəɾənt. "æn ðəɹ kəd bi dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ, tu."

"If Fain catches us, you will deal with him." Her voice was coolly confident. "And there could be Darkfriends in the village, too."

"bʌɾ ivən ɪf ðeɪ nu hu wi ɑɹ, ðeɪ kæn də mʌtʃ wɪð ðə ɹɛst ə ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz ɝaʊnd. nɑɾ ənlɛs jə θɪŋk ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ ɪz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd."

"But even if they knew who we are, they can't do much with the rest of the villagers around. Not unless you think everyone in the village is a Darkfriend."

"æn ɪf ðeɪ dɪskʌvɝ jə kæɹi ðə hɔɹn? wɛðɝ jə wɑnt ɡɹeɪtnəs əɹ nɑt, ivən fɑɹmɝz dʒɹim ʌv ɪt."

"And if they discover you carry the Horn? Whether you want greatness or not, even farmers dream of it."

"ʃi ɪz ɹaɪt, ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd. "aɪ fɪɹ ivən fɑɹmɝz maɪt wɑnə teɪk ɪt."

"She is right, Rand," Loial said. "I fear even farmers might want to take it."

"ənɹoʊl jəɹ blæŋkət, lɔɪəl, ən θɹoʊ ɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə tʃɛst. kip ɪt kʌvɝd." lɔɪəl kəmplaɪd, ən ɹænd nɑɾəd. ɪt wɑz ɑbviəs ðəɹ wɑz ə bɑks əɹ tʃɛs bɪniθ ði oʊɡiɝz stʃɹaɪp blæŋkət, bʌt nʌθɪŋ sədʒɛstəɾ ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ðən ə tʃɹævəl tʃɛst. "maɪ leɪɾiz tʃɛst ə kloʊðz," ɹænd sɛd wɪð ə ɡɹɪn ən ə baʊ.

"Unroll your blanket, Loial, and throw it over the chest. Keep it covered." Loial complied, and Rand nodded. It was obvious there was a box or chest beneath the Ogier's striped blanket, but nothing suggested it was more than a travel chest. "My Lady's chest of clothes," Rand said with a grin and a bow.

səlin mɛɾ ɪz sæli wɪð saɪləns ən ən ənɹiɾəbəl lʊk. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd ɑn əɡɛn.

Selene met his sally with silence and an unreadable look. After a moment, they started on again.

ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli, ɔf tə ɹændz lɛft, ə ɡlɪɾɝ fɹəm ðə sɛɾɪŋ sʌn ɹəflɛktəd fɹəm sʌmθɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. sʌmθɪŋ lɑɹdʒ. sʌmθɪŋ vɛɹi lɑɹdʒ, baɪ ðə laɪɾ ɪt θɹu ʌp. kjʊɹiəs, hi tɝn ɪz hɔɹs ðət weɪ.

Almost immediately, off to Rand's left, a glitter from the setting sun reflected from something on the ground. Something large. Something very large, by the light it threw up. Curious, he turned his horse that way.

"maɪ lɔɹd?" hʊɹɪn sɛd. "ðə vɪlədʒ?"

"My Lord?" Hurin said. "The village?"

"aɪ dʒʌst wɑnə si ðɪs fɝst," ɹænd sɛd. ɪts bɹaɪɾɝ ðən sʌnlaɪɾ ɑn wɔɾɝ. wʌt kən ɪt bi?

"I just want to see this first," Rand said. It's brighter than sunlight on water. What can it be?

hɪz aɪz ɑn ðə ɹəflɛkʃən, hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd wən ɹɛd sʌɾənli stɑpt. ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə ɝdʒɪŋ ðə beɪ ɑn, hi ɹilaɪz ðət ðeɪ stʊɾ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ʌv ə kleɪ pɹɛsəpəs, əbʌv ə hjudʒ ɛkskəveɪʃən. moʊst ə ðə hɪl hæd bɪn dʌɡ əweɪ tə ə dɛpθ ʌv izəli ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz. sɝɾənli mɔɹ ðən wʌn hɪl hæd vænɪʃt, ən meɪbi səm fɑɹmɝz' filz, fəɹ ðə hoʊl wɑz ət lis tɛn taɪmz əz waɪɾ əz ɪt wɑz dip. ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ əpɪɹd tə hæv bɪn pæk hɑɹd tə ə ɹæmp. ðəɹ wɝ mɛn ɑn ðə bɑɾəm, ə dʌzən ə ðɛm, ɡɛɾɪŋ ə faɪɝ stɑɹɾəd; daʊn ðɛɹ, naɪt wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi dɪsɛndɪŋ. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ əmʌŋ əm ɑɹmɝ tɝn ðə laɪt, ən sɔɹdz swʌŋ ət ðɛɹ saɪdz. hi hɑɹdli ɡlænst ət ðɛm.

His eyes on the reflection, he was surprised when Red suddenly stopped. On the point of urging the bay on, he realized that they stood on the edge of a clay precipice, above a huge excavation. Most of the hill had been dug away to a depth of easily a hundred paces. Certainly more than one hill had vanished, and maybe some farmers' fields, for the hole was at least ten times as wide as it was deep. The far side appeared to have been packed hard to a ramp. There were men on the bottom, a dozen of them, getting a fire started; down there, night was already descending. Here and there among them armor turned the light, and swords swung at their sides. He hardly glanced at them.

aʊɾ ə ðə kleɪ ət ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə pɪt slæntəɾ ə dʒaɪɡæntɪk stoʊn hæn hoʊldɪŋ ə kɹɪstəl sfɪɹ, ən ɪt wɑz ðɪs ðət ʃoʊn wɪð ðə læst sʌnlaɪt. ɹænd ɡeɪpt ət ðə saɪz ʌv ɪt, ə smuð bɔl - hi wɑz ʃʊɹ nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə skɹætʃ mɑɹɾ ɪts sɝfəs - ət lis twɛnti peɪsɪz θɹu.

Out of the clay at the bottom of the pit slanted a gigantic stone hand holding a crystal sphere, and it was this that shone with the last sunlight. Rand gaped at the size of it, a smooth ball - he was sure not so much as a scratch marred its surface - at least twenty paces through.

səm dɪstəns əweɪ fɹəm ðə hænd, ə stoʊn feɪs ɪn pɹəpɔɹʃən hæd bɪn ənkʌvɝd. ə bɪɹɾəd mænz feɪs, ɪt θɹʌst aʊɾ ə ðə sɔɪl wɪð ðə dɪɡnəɾi ʌv væs jɪɹz; ðə bɹɔd fitʃɝz sim tə hoʊld wɪzdəm ən nɑlədʒ.

Some distance away from the hand, a stone face in proportion had been uncovered. A bearded man's face, it thrust out of the soil with the dignity of vast years; the broad features seemed to hold wisdom and knowledge.

ənsʌmənd, ðə vɔɪd fɔɹmd, hoʊl ən kəmpliɾ ɪn ən ɪnstənt, seɪɾɪn ɡloʊɪŋ, bɛkənɪŋ. soʊ ɪntɛnt wɑz i ɑn ðə feɪs ən ðə hæn ðəɾ i dɪd nɑɾ ivən ɹilaɪz wʌt hæd hæpənd. hi hæd wʌns hɝɾ ə ʃɪp kæptən spik ʌv ə dʒaɪən hæn hoʊldɪŋ ə hjudʒ kɹɪstəl sfɪɹ; beɪl doʊmən hæd kleɪmd ɪt stʌk aʊɾ ʌv ə hɪl ɑn ði aɪlən ə tʃɹɛmælkɪŋ.

Unsummoned, the void formed, whole and complete in an instant, saidin glowing, beckoning. So intent was he on the face and the hand that he did not even realize what had happened. He had once heard a ship captain speak of a giant hand holding a huge crystal sphere; Bayle Domon had claimed it stuck out of a hill on the island of Tremalking.

"ðɪs ɪz deɪnʒɝəs," səlin sɛd. "kʌm əweɪ, ɹænd."

"This is dangerous," Selene said. "Come away, Rand."

"aɪ bɪliv aɪ kən faɪn ə weɪ daʊn ðɛɹ," hi sɛɾ æbsənli. seɪɾɪn sæŋ tə hɪm. ðə hjudʒ bɔl sim tə ɡloʊ waɪt wɪð ðə laɪɾ ə ðə sɪŋkɪŋ sʌn. ɪt sim tə hɪm ðəɾ ɪn ðə dɛpθs ə ðə kɹɪstəl, laɪt swɝld ən dænst ɪn taɪm tə ðə sɔŋ ə seɪɾɪn. hi wʌndɝd waɪ ðə mɛn bɪloʊ dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə noʊɾəs.

"I believe I can find a way down there," he said absently. Saidin sang to him. The huge ball seemed to glow white with the light of the sinking sun. It seemed to him that in the depths of the crystal, light swirled and danced in time to the song of saidin. He wondered why the men below did not appear to notice.

səlin ɹoʊd kloʊs ən tʊk hoʊld ə hɪz ɑɹm. "pliz, ɹænd, jə mʌs kʌm əweɪ." hi lʊkt əɾ əɹ hænd, pʌzəld, ðən fɑloʊɾ əɹ ɑɹm ʌp tə hɝ feɪs. ʃi sim dʒɛnjəwənli wɝid, pɝhæps ivən əfɹeɪd. "ɪf ðɪs bæŋk dʌznt ɡɪv weɪ bɪniθ əɹ hɔɹsəz ən bɹeɪk əɹ nɛks wɪð ðə fɔl, ðoʊz mɛn ɑɹ ɡɑɹdz, ən noʊ wʌn pʊts ɡɑɹdz ɑn sʌmθɪŋ ðeɪ wɪʃ ɛvɹi pæsɝbaɪ tə ɪɡzæmɪn. wʌt ɡʊd wɪl ɪt dʒju tə əvɔɪd feɪn, ɪf səm lɔɹdz ɡɑɹdz ɝɛs ju? kʌm əweɪ."

Selene rode close and took hold of his arm. "Please, Rand, you must come away." He looked at her hand, puzzled, then followed her arm up to her face. She seemed genuinely worried, perhaps even afraid. "If this bank doesn't give way beneath our horses and break our necks with the fall, those men are guards, and no one puts guards on something they wish every passerby to examine. What good will it do you to avoid Fain, if some lord's guards arrest you? Come away."

sʌɾənli - ə dʒɹɪftɪŋ, dɪstən θɔt - hi ɹilaɪz ðət ðə vɔɪd sɝaʊndəd hɪm. seɪɾɪn sæŋ, ən ðə sfɪɹ pʌlsd - ivən wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ, hi kəd fil ɪt - ən ðə θɔt keɪm ðəɾ ɪf i sæŋ ðə sɔŋ seɪɾɪn sæŋ, ðət hjudʒ stoʊn feɪs wəɾ oʊpən ɪts maʊθ ən sɪŋ wɪð hɪm. wɪð ɪm ən wɪð seɪɾɪn. ɔl wʌn.

Suddenly - a drifting, distant thought - he realized that the void surrounded him. Saidin sang, and the sphere pulsed - even without looking, he could feel it - and the thought came that if he sang the song saidin sang, that huge stone face would open its mouth and sing with him. With him and with saidin. All one.

"pliz, ɹænd," səlin sɛd. "aɪ wɪl ɡoʊ tə ðə vɪlədʒ wɪð ju. aɪ woʊn mɛnʃən ðə hɔɹn əɡɛn. oʊnli kʌm əweɪ!"

"Please, Rand," Selene said. "I will go to the village with you. I won't mention the Horn again. Only come away!"

hi ɹilis ðə vɔɪd . . . ən ɪt dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ. seɪɾɪn kɹund, ən ðə laɪɾ ɪn ðə sfɪɹ bit laɪk ə hɑɹt. laɪk ɪz hɑɹt. lɔɪəl, hʊɹɪn, səlin, ðeɪ ɔl stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, bʌt ðeɪ simd əblɪviəs tə ðə ɡlɔɹiəs bleɪz fɹəm ðə kɹɪstəl. hi tʃɹaɪd tə pʊʃ ðə vɔɪɾ əweɪ. ɪt hɛld laɪk ɡɹænət; hi floʊɾəd ɪn ən ɛmptinəs əz hɑɹɾ əz stoʊn. ðə sɔŋ ə seɪɾɪn, ðə sɔŋ ə ðə sfɪɹ, hi kəd fil əm kwɪvɝɪŋ əlɔŋ ɪz boʊnz. ɡɹɪmli, hi ɹəfjuz tə ɡɪv ɪn, ɹitʃt dip ɪnsaɪd hɪmsɛlf . . . əl nɑt. . . .

He released the void . . . and it did not go. Saidin crooned, and the light in the sphere beat like a heart. Like his heart. Loial, Hurin, Selene, they all stared at him, but they seemed oblivious to the glorious blaze from the crystal. He tried to push the void away. It held like granite; he floated in an emptiness as hard as stone. The song of saidin, the song of the sphere, he could feel them quivering along his bones. Grimly, he refused to give in, reached deep inside himself . . . I will not. . . .

"ɹænd." hi dɪd nɑt noʊ huz vɔɪs ɪt wɑz.

"Rand." He did not know whose voice it was.

. . . ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə kɔɹ ə hu hi wɑz, ðə kɔɹ ʌv wʌɾ i wɑz . . .

. . . reached for the core of who he was, the core of what he was . . .

. . . wɪl nɑt . . .

. . . will not . . .

"ɹænd." ðə sɔŋ fɪl hɪm, fɪl ði ɛmptinəs.

"Rand." The song filled him, filled the emptiness.

. . . tʌtʃt stoʊn, hɑt fɹəm ə pɪɾiləs sʌn, koʊl fɹəm ə mɝsələs naɪt. . . .

. . . touched stone, hot from a pitiless sun, cold from a merciless night. . . .

. . . nɑt . . .

. . . not . . .

laɪt fɪl hɪm, blaɪndɪd hɪm.

Light filled him, blinded him.

"tɪl ʃeɪɾ ɪz ɡɔn," hi mʌmbəld, "tɪl wɔɾɝ ɪz ɡɔn . . ."

"Till shade is gone," he mumbled, "till water is gone . . ."

paʊɝ fɪl hɪm. hi wɑz wʌn wɪð ðə sfɪɹ.

Power filled him. He was one with the sphere.

". . . ɪndə ðə ʃædoʊ wɪð tiθ bɛɹd . . ."

". . . into the Shadow with teeth bared . . ."

ðə paʊɝ wɑz hɪz. ðə paʊɝ wɑz hɪz.

The power was his. The Power was his.

". . . tə spɪɾ ɪn saɪtblɪndɝz aɪ . . ."

". . . to spit in Sightblinder's eye . . ."

paʊɝ tə bɹeɪk ðə wɝld.

Power to Break the World.

". . . ɑn ðə læs deɪ!" ɪt keɪm aʊɾ əz ə ʃaʊt, ən ðə vɔɪd wɑz ɡɔn. ɹɛd ʃaɪɾ əɾ ɪz kɹaɪ; kleɪ kɹʌmbəld ʌndɝ ðə stæljənz huf, spɪlɪŋ ɪndə ðə pɪt. ðə bɪɡ beɪ wɛn tə hɪz niz. ɹænd lin fɔɹwɝd, ɡæðɝɪŋ ðə ɹeɪnz, ən ɹɛd skɹæmbəl tə seɪfti, əweɪ fɹəm ði ɛdʒ.

". . . on the last day!" It came out as a shout, and the void was gone. Red shied at his cry; clay crumbled under the stallion's hoof, spilling into the pit. The big bay went to his knees. Rand leaned forward, gathering the reins, and Red scrambled to safety, away from the edge.

ðeɪ wɝ ɔl stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm, hi sɔ. səlin, lɔɪəl, hʊɹɪn, ɔl ə ðɛm. "wʌt hæpənd?" ðə vɔɪd. . . . hi tʌtʃt ɪz fɔɹhɛd. ðə vɔɪd hæd nɑt ɡɔn wən i ɹilist ɪt, ən ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪɾɪn hæd ɡɹoʊn stʃɹɔŋɝ, ænd. . . . hi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ. seɪɾɪn. hi fɛl koʊld. "dɪɾ aɪ . . . də sʌmθɪŋ?" hi fɹaʊnd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ. "dɪɾ aɪ seɪ sʌmθɪŋ?"

They were all staring at him, he saw. Selene, Loial, Hurin, all of them. "What happened?" The void. . . . He touched his forehead. The void had not gone when he released it, and the glow of saidin had grown stronger, and. . . . He could not remember anything more. Saidin. He felt cold. "Did I . . . do something?" He frowned, trying to remember. "Did I say something?"

"ju dʒʌst sæt ðəɹ stɪf əz ə stætʃu," lɔɪəl sɛd, "mʌmbəlɪŋ tə jɝsɛlf noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ ɛniwʌn sɛd. aɪ kʊdn meɪk aʊt wʌt jə wɝ seɪɪŋ, nɑɾ əntɪl jə ʃaʊɾəd 'deɪ!' laʊɾ ɪnʌf tə weɪk ðə dɛɾ ən nɪɹli pʊt jəɹ hɔɹs oʊvɝ ði ɛdʒ. ɑɹ jə ɪl? jəɹ æktɪŋ mɔɹ ən mɔɹ ɑdli ɛvɹi deɪ."

"You just sat there stiff as a statue," Loial said, "mumbling to yourself no matter what anyone said. I couldn't make out what you were saying, not until you shouted 'day!' loud enough to wake the dead and nearly put your horse over the edge. Are you ill? You're acting more and more oddly every day."

"aɪm nɑt sɪk," ɹænd sɛd hɑɹʃli, ðən sɔfən ɪt. "aɪ æm ɔl ɹaɪt, lɔɪəl." səlin wɑtʃt ɪm wɛɹəli.

"I'm not sick," Rand said harshly, then softened it. "I am all right, Loial." Selene watched him warily.

fɹəm ðə pɪt keɪm ðə saʊn ə mɛn kɔlɪŋ, ðə wɝdz ɪndɪstɪŋɡwɪʃəbəl.

From the pit came the sound of men calling, the words indistinguishable.

"lɔɹd ɹænd," hʊɹɪn sɛd, "aɪ θɪŋk ðoʊz ɡɑɹdz əv faɪnəli noʊɾəst ʌs. ɪf ðeɪ noʊ ə weɪ ʌp ðɪs saɪd, ðeɪ kəd bi hɪɹ ɛni mɪnət."

"Lord Rand," Hurin said, "I think those guards have finally noticed us. If they know a way up this side, they could be here any minute."

"jɛs," səlin sɛd. "lɛɾ əs liv hɪɹ kwɪkli."

"Yes," Selene said. "Let us leave here quickly."

ɹænd ɡlænst ət ði ɛkskəveɪʃən, ðən əweɪ əɡɛn, kwɪkli. ðə ɡɹeɪt kɹɪstəl hɛl nʌθɪŋ ɪksɛpt ɹəflɛktəd laɪt fɹəm ði ivnɪŋ sʌn, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt wɑnə lʊk əɾ ɪt. hi kəɾ ɔlmoʊst ɹɪmɛmbɝ . . . sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə sfɪɹ. "aɪ doʊn si ɛni ɹizən tə weɪt fəɹ ðɛm. wi dɪdn də ɛniθɪŋ. lɛts faɪn ən ɪn." hi tɝn ɹɛd təwɔɹd ðə vɪlədʒ, ən ðeɪ sun lɛf pɪɾ ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɡɑɹdz bɪhaɪnd.

Rand glanced at the excavation, then away again, quickly. The great crystal held nothing except reflected light from the evening sun, but he did not want to look at it. He could almost remember . . . something about the sphere. "I don't see any reason to wait for them. We didn't do anything. Let's find an inn." He turned Red toward the village, and they soon left pit and shouting guards behind.

əz mɛni vɪlədʒəz dɪd, tʃɹɛmoʊnzin kʌvɝd ðə tɑp ʌv ə hɪl, bʌt laɪk ðə fɑɹmz ðeɪ hæd pæst, ðɪs hɪl hæd bɪn skʌlptɪɾ ɪndə tɛɹəsəz wɪð stoʊn ɹɪteɪnɪŋ wɔlz. skwɛɹ stoʊn haʊsəz sæɾ ɑn pɹɪsaɪs plɑts ə lænd, wɪð ɪɡzækt ɡɑɹɾənz bɪhaɪnd, əlɔŋ ə fju stʃɹeɪt stʃɹits ðət kɹɔst itʃ ʌðɝ ət ɹaɪɾ æŋɡəlz. ðə nəsɛsəɾi ʌv ə kɝv tə stʃɹits ɡoʊɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə hɪl sim bɪɡɹʌdʒd.

As many villages did, Tremonsien covered the top of a hill, but like the farms they had passed, this hill had been sculpted into terraces with stone retaining walls. Square stone houses sat on precise plots of land, with exact gardens behind, along a few straight streets that crossed each other at right angles. The necessity of a curve to streets going around the hill seemed begrudged.

jɛt ðə pipəl simd oʊpən ən fɹɛnli ɪnʌf, pɔzɪŋ tə nɑd tə itʃ ʌðɝ əz ðeɪ hɝiɾ əbaʊt ðɛɹ læs tʃɔɹz bɪfɔɹ naɪtfɔl. ðeɪ wɝ ə ʃɔɹt foʊk - nʌn tɔlɝ ðən ɹændz ʃoʊldɝ, ən fju əz tɔl əz hʊɹɪn - wɪð dɑɹk aɪz ən peɪl, nɛɹoʊ feɪsəz, ən dʒɹɛst ɪn dɑɹk kloʊðz ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju hu wɔɹ slæʃɪz ə kʌlɝ əkɹɔs ðə tʃɛst. smɛlz ə kʊkɪŋ - ɑdli spaɪst, tə ɹændz noʊz - fɪl ði ɛɹ, ðoʊ ə hændfʊl ʌv ɡʊdwaɪvz stɪl hʌŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ dɔɹz tə tɔk; ðə dɔɹz wɝ splɪt, soʊ ðə tɑp kəd stæn oʊpən waɪl ðə bɑɾəm wɑz kloʊzd. ðə pipəl aɪd ðə nukʌmɝz kjʊɹiəsli, wɪð noʊ saɪn ə hɑstɪləɾi. ə fju stɛɹɾ ə moʊmən lɔŋɡɝ ət lɔɪəl, ən oʊɡiɝ wɔkɪŋ əlɔŋsaɪɾ ə hɔɹs əz bɪɡ əz ə dɝən stæljən, bʌt nɛvɝ mɔɹ ðən ə moʊmən lɔŋɡɝ.

Yet the people seemed open and friendly enough, pausing to nod to each other as they hurried about their last chores before nightfall. They were a short folk - none taller than Rand's shoulder, and few as tall as Hurin - with dark eyes and pale, narrow faces, and dressed in dark clothes except for a few who wore slashes of color across the chest. Smells of cooking - oddly spiced, to Rand's nose - filled the air, though a handful of goodwives still hung over their doors to talk; the doors were split, so the top could stand open while the bottom was closed. The people eyed the newcomers curiously, with no sign of hostility. A few stared a moment longer at Loial, an Ogier walking alongside a horse as big as a Dhurran stallion, but never more than a moment longer.

ði ɪn, ət ðə vɛɹi tɑp ə ðə hɪl, wɑz stoʊn laɪk ɛvɹi ʌðɝ bɪldɪŋ ɪn ðə taʊn, ən pleɪnli mɑɹk baɪ ə peɪntəd saɪn hæŋɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə waɪd dɔɹz. ðə naɪn ɹɪŋz. ɹænd swʌŋ daʊn wɪð ə smaɪl ən taɪd ɹɛd tə wʌn ə ðə hɪtʃɪŋ poʊsts aʊt fɹʌnt. "ðə naɪn ɹɪŋz" hæd bɪn wʌn ə hɪz feɪvɹɪɾ ædvɛntʃɝ stɔɹiz wən i wɑz ə bɔɪ; hi səpoʊzd ɪt stɪl wɑz.

The inn, at the very top of the hill, was stone like every other building in the town, and plainly marked by a painted sign hanging over the wide doors. The Nine Rings. Rand swung down with a smile and tied Red to one of the hitching posts out front. "The Nine Rings" had been one of his favorite adventure stories when he was a boy; he supposed it still was.

səlin stɪl simd ənizi wən i hɛlpt əɹ dɪsmaʊnt. "ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt?" hi æskt. "aɪ dɪdn fɹaɪɾən jə bæk ðɛɹ, dɪɾ aɪ? ɹɛd wəd nɛvɝ fɔl oʊvɝ ə klɪf wɪð mi." hi wʌndɝd wʌt hæd ɹɪli hæpənd.

Selene still seemed uneasy when he helped her dismount. "Are you all right?" he asked. "I didn't frighten you back there, did I? Red would never fall over a cliff with me." He wondered what had really happened.

"ju tɛɹəfaɪd mi," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs, "æn aɪ də nɑt fɹaɪɾən izəli. jə cʊɾə kɪl jɝsɛlf, kɪld. . . ." ʃi smuðd əɹ dʒɹɛs. "ɹaɪd wɪð mi. tənaɪt. naʊ. bɹɪŋ ðə hɔɹn, ən əl steɪ baɪ jəɹ saɪd fɝɛvɝ. θɪŋk ʌv ɪt. mi baɪ jəɹ saɪd, ən ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ɪn jəɹ hænz. ən ðət wɪl oʊnli bi ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, aɪ pɹɑməs. wʌt mɔɹ kəd jə æsk fɔɹ?"

"You terrified me," she said in a tight voice, "and I do not frighten easily. You could have killed yourself, killed. . . ." She smoothed her dress. "Ride with me. Tonight. Now. Bring the Horn, and I will stay by your side forever. Think of it. Me by your side, and the Horn of Valere in your hands. And that will only be the beginning, I promise. What more could you ask for?"

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ kænt, səlin. ðə hɔɹn. . . ." hi lʊkt ɝaʊnd. ə mæn lʊkt aʊɾ ɪz wɪndoʊ əkɹɔs ðə weɪ, ðən twɪtʃt ðə kɝɾənz kloʊzd; ivnɪŋ dɑɹkən ðə stʃɹit, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn ɛls ɪn saɪt naʊ ɪksɛp lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn. "ðə hɔɹn ɪz nɑt maɪn. aɪ toʊl jə ðæt." ʃi tɝn əɹ bæk ɑn hɪm, hɝ waɪt kloʊk wɔlɪŋ ɪm ɔf əz ɪfɛktɪvli əz bɹɪks.

Rand shook his head. "I can't, Selene. The Horn. . . ." He looked around. A man looked out his window across the way, then twitched the curtains closed; evening darkened the street, and there was no one else in sight now except Loial and Hurin. "The Horn is not mine. I told you that." She turned her back on him, her white cloak walling him off as effectively as bricks.


tʃæptɝ twɛntiwʌn


CHAPTER 21

ðə naɪn ɹɪŋz


The Nine Rings

ɹænd ɪkspɛktəd ðə kɑmən ɹum tə bi ɛmpti, sɪns ɪt wɑz nɪɹli sʌpɝtaɪm, bʌt hæf ə dʌzən mɛn kɹaʊɾəd wʌn teɪbəl, dɪsɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛɹ dʒæks ʌv eɪl, ən ənʌðɝ sæt baɪ hɪmsɛlf oʊvɝ ə mil. ðoʊ ðə dɪsɝz kæɹid noʊ wɛpənz ɪn saɪɾ ən wɔɹ noʊ ɑɹmɝ, oʊnli pleɪn koʊts ən bɹitʃɪz ə dɑɹk blu, sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə weɪ ðeɪ hɛl ðɛmsɛlvz toʊld ɹænd ðeɪ wɝ soʊlʒɝz. hɪz aɪz wɛn tə ðə sɑlətɛɹi mæn. ən ɔfəsɝ, wɪð ðə tɑps ə hɪz haɪ buts tɝn daʊn, ən ɪz sɔɹd pɹɑpt əɡɛns ðə teɪbəl bɪsaɪɾ ɪz tʃɛɹ. ə sɪŋɡəl slæʃ ə ɹɛɾ ən wʌn ə jɛloʊ kɹɔs ðə tʃɛst ə ði ɔfəsɝz blu koʊt fɹəm ʃoʊldɝ tə ʃoʊldɝ, ən ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz hɛd wɑz ʃeɪvd, ðoʊ hɪz blæk hɛɹ hʌŋ lɔŋ ɪn ðə bæk. ðə soʊlʒɝz' hɛɹ wɑz klɪpt ʃɔɹt, əz ɪf ɪɾ ɔl hæd bɪn kʌɾ ʌndɝ ðə seɪm boʊl. ɔl sɛvən tɝn tə lʊk əz ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz keɪm ɪn.

Rand expected the common room to be empty, since it was nearly suppertime, but half a dozen men crowded one table, dicing among their jacks of ale, and another sat by himself over a meal. Though the dicers carried no weapons in sight and wore no armor, only plain coats and breeches of dark blue, something about the way they held themselves told Rand they were soldiers. His eyes went to the solitary man. An officer, with the tops of his high boots turned down, and his sword propped against the table beside his chair. A single slash of red and one of yellow crossed the chest of the officer's blue coat from shoulder to shoulder, and the front of his head was shaved, though his black hair hung long in the back. The soldiers' hair was clipped short, as if it all had been cut under the same bowl. All seven turned to look as Rand and the others came in.

ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz ə lin wʊmən wɪð ə lɔŋ noʊz ən ɡɹeɪɪŋ hɛɹ, bʌɾ əɹ ɹɪŋkəlz sim pɑɹɾ ə hɝ ɹɛɾi smaɪl mɔɹ ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. ʃi keɪm bʌsəlɪŋ ʌp, waɪpɪŋ əɹ hænz ɑn ə spɑtləs waɪɾ eɪpɹən. "ɡʊɾ ivən tə ju" - hɝ kwɪk aɪz tʊk ɪn ɹændz ɡoʊld-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɹɛd koʊt, ən səlinz faɪn waɪt dʒɹɛs - "maɪ lɔɹd, maɪ leɪɾi. aɪm mɑɡlɪn mædwən, maɪ lɔɹd. bi wɛlkəm tə ðə naɪn ɹɪŋz. ən ən oʊɡiɝ. nɑt mɛni ʌv jəɹ kaɪn kʌm ðɪs weɪ, fɹɛn oʊɡiɝ. wəd jə bi ʌp fɹəm stɛɾɪŋ tsəfu, ðɛn?"

The innkeeper was a lean woman with a long nose and graying hair, but her wrinkles seemed part of her ready smile more than anything else. She came bustling up, wiping her hands on a spotless white apron. "Good even to you" - her quick eyes took in Rand's gold-embroidered red coat, and Selene's fine white dress - "my Lord, my Lady. I am Maglin Madwen, my Lord. Be welcome to The Nine Rings. And an Ogier. Not many of your kind come this way, friend Ogier. Would you be up from Stedding Tsofu, then?"

lɔɪəl mænədʒd ən ɑkwɝd hæf baʊ ʌndɝ ðə weɪɾ ə ðə tʃɛst. "noʊ, ɡʊɾ ɪnkipɝ. aɪ kʌm ði ʌðɝ weɪ, fɹəm ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz."

Loial managed an awkward half bow under the weight of the chest. "No, good innkeeper. I come the other way, from the Borderlands."

"fɹʌm ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, jə seɪ. wɛl. ən ju, maɪ lɔɹd? fɝɡɪv mi fəɹ æskɪŋ, bʌt juv nɑt ðə lʊk ə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, ɪf jə doʊn maɪn maɪ seɪɪŋ ɪt."

"From the Borderlands, you say. Well. And you, my Lord? Forgive me for asking, but you've not the look of the Borderlands, if you don't mind my saying it."

"aɪm fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, mɪstʃɹəs mædwən, ɪn ændɝ." hi ɡlænst ət səlin - ʃi dɪd nɑt sim tə ədmɪɾ i ɪɡzɪstəd; hɝ lɛvəl lʊk bɛɹli ədmɪɾəd ðət ðə ɹum ɪɡzɪstəd, əɹ ɛniwʌn ɪn ɪt. "ðə leɪɾi səlin ɪz fɹəm kɛɹhin, fɹəm ðə kæpəɾəl, ən aɪm fɹəm ændɝ."

"I'm from the Two Rivers, Mistress Madwen, in Andor." He glanced at Selene - she did not seem to admit he existed; her level look barely admitted that the room existed, or anyone in it. "The Lady Selene is from Cairhien, from the capital, and I am from Andor."

"æz jə seɪ, maɪ lɔɹd." mɪstʃɹəs mædwənz ɡlæns flɪkɝd tə ɹændz sɔɹd; ðə bɹɑnz hɛɹənz wɝ pleɪn ɑn skæbɝɾ ən hɪlt. ʃi fɹaʊn slaɪtli, bʌɾ əɹ feɪs wɑz klɪɹ əɡɛn ɪn ə blɪŋk. "jul bi wɑntɪŋ ə mil fəɹ jɝsɛlf ən jəɹ bjuɾəfəl leɪɾi, ən jəɹ fɑloʊɝz. ən ɹumz, aɪ ɪkspɛkt. əl əv jəɹ hɔɹsəz sin tə. aɪv ə ɡʊd teɪbəl fəɹ ju, ɹaɪt ðɪs weɪ, ən pɔɹk wɪð jɛloʊ pɛpɝz ɑn ðə faɪɝ. wəd jə bi hʌntɪŋ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, ðɛn, maɪ lɔɹd, jə ən jəɹ leɪɾi?"

"As you say, my Lord." Mistress Madwen's glance flickered to Rand's sword; the bronze herons were plain on scabbard and hilt. She frowned slightly, but her face was clear again in a blink. "You'll be wanting a meal for yourself and your beautiful Lady, and your followers. And rooms, I expect. I'll have your horses seen to. I've a good table for you, right this way, and pork with yellow peppers on the fire. Would you be hunting the Horn of Valere, then, my Lord, you and your Lady?"

ɪn ði ækt ə fɑloʊɪŋ hɝ, ɹænd ɔlmoʊst stʌmbəld. "noʊ! waɪ wəd jə θɪŋk wi wɝ?"

In the act of following her, Rand almost stumbled. "No! Why would you think we were?"

"noʊ əfɛns, maɪ lɔɹd. wiv hæd tu θɹu hɪɹ ɔlɹɛɾi, ɔl pɑlɪʃt tə lʊk laɪk hɪɹoʊz - nɑt tə sədʒɛst ɛniθɪŋ ə ðə kaɪn əbaʊt ju, maɪ lɔɹd - ɪn ðə læs mʌnθ. nɑt mɛni stʃɹeɪnʒɝz kʌm hɪɹ, ɪksɛp tʃɹeɪɾɝz ʌp fɹəm ðə kæpəɾəl tə baɪ oʊts ən bɑɹli. aɪd nɑt səpoʊz ðə hʌn əz lɛft ɪljən, jɛt, bʌt meɪbi səm doʊn θɪŋk ðeɪ ɹɪli nid ðə blɛsɪŋ, ən ðəl ɡɛɾ ə dʒʌmp ɑn ði ʌðɝz baɪ mɪsɪŋ ɪt."

"No offense, my Lord. We've had two through here already, all polished to look like heroes - not to suggest anything of the kind about you, my Lord - in the last month. Not many strangers come here, except traders up from the capital to buy oats and barley. I'd not suppose the Hunt has left Illian, yet, but maybe some don't think they really need the blessing, and they'll get a jump on the others by missing it."

"wi ɑɹ nɑt hʌntɪŋ ðə hɔɹn, mɪstʃɹəs." ɹænd dɪd nɑt ɡlæns ət ðə bʌndəl ɪn lɔɪəlz ɑɹmz; ðə blæŋkət wɪð ɪts kʌlɝfəl stʃɹaɪps hʌŋ bʌntʃt oʊvɝ ði oʊɡiɝz θɪk ɑɹmz ən dɪsɡaɪz ðə tʃɛst wɛl. "wi ʃʊɹli ɑɹ nɑt. wəɹ ɑn əɹ weɪ tə ðə kæpəɾəl."

"We are not hunting the Horn, mistress." Rand did not glance at the bundle in Loial's arms; the blanket with its colorful stripes hung bunched over the Ogier's thick arms and disguised the chest well. "We surely are not. We are on our way to the capital."

"æz jə seɪ, maɪ lɔɹd. fɝɡɪv mi fəɹ æskɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪz jəɹ leɪɾi wɛl?"

"As you say, my Lord. Forgive me for asking, but is your Lady well?"

səlin lʊkt ət hɝ, ən spoʊk fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. "aɪ æm kwaɪt wɛl." hɝ vɔɪs lɛft ə tʃɪl ɪn ði ɛɹ ðət staɪfəl tɔk fəɹ ə moʊmənt.

Selene looked at her, and spoke for the first time. "I am quite well." Her voice left a chill in the air that stifled talk for a moment.

"jɔɹ nɑt kɛɹhinɪn, mɪstʃɹəs mædwən," hʊɹɪn sɛd sʌɾənli. bɝɾənd daʊn wɪð ðɛɹ sæɾəlbæɡz ən ɹændz bʌndəl, hi lʊk laɪk ə wɔkɪŋ bæɡədʒ kɑɹt. "pɑɹɾən, bʌt jə doʊn saʊn ɪt."

"You're not Cairhienin, Mistress Madwen," Hurin said suddenly. Burdened down with their saddlebags and Rand's bundle, he looked like a walking baggage cart. "Pardon, but you don't sound it."

mɪstʃɹəs mædwənz aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz, ən ʃi ʃɑɾ ə ɡlæns ət ɹænd, ðən ɡɹɪnd. "aɪ ʃʊɾə noʊn jud lɛt jəɹ mæn spik fɹili, bʌɾ aɪv ɡɹoʊn juz tə - " hɝ ɡlæns dɑɹɾɪd təwɔɹd ði ɔfəsɝ, hu hæd ɡɔn bæk tə hɪz oʊn mil. "laɪt, noʊ, aɪm nɑt kɛɹhinɪn, bʌt fəɹ maɪ sɪnz, aɪ mɛɹid wʌn. twɛnti-θɹi jɪɹz aɪ lɪvd wɪð hɪm, ən wən i daɪɾ ɑn mi - ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn ɪm - aɪ wɑz ɔl ɹɛɾi tə ɡoʊ bæk tə luɡɹd, bʌɾ i hæd ðə læs læf, hi dɪd. hi lɛf mi ði ɪn, ən ɪz bɹʌðɝ ðə mʌni, wən aɪ wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wəd bi ði ʌðɝ weɪ ɹaʊnd. tʃɹɪksəm ən skimɪŋ, bɛɹɪn wɑz, laɪk ɛvɹi mæn aɪv ɛvɝ noʊn, kɛɹhinɪn moʊst ʌv ɔl. wɪl jə bi siɾəd, maɪ lɔɹd? maɪ leɪɾi?"

Mistress Madwen's eyebrows rose, and she shot a glance at Rand, then grinned. "I should have known you'd let your man speak freely, but I've grown used to - " Her glance darted toward the officer, who had gone back to his own meal. "Light, no, I'm not Cairhienin, but for my sins, I married one. Twenty-three years I lived with him, and when he died on me - the Light shine on him - I was all ready to go back to Lugard, but he had the last laugh, he did. He left me the inn, and his brother the money, when I was sure it would be the other way round. Tricksome and scheming, Barin was, like every man I've ever known, Cairhienin most of all. Will you be seated, my Lord? My Lady?"

ði ɪnkipɝ ɡeɪv ə sɝpɹaɪz blɪŋk wən hʊɹɪn sæɾ ət teɪbəl wɪð əm - ən oʊɡiɝ, ɪt simd, wɑz wʌn θɪŋ, bʌt hʊɹɪn wɑz klɪɹli ə sɝvən ɪn əɹ aɪz. wɪð ənʌðɝ kwɪk lʊk ət ɹænd, ʃi bʌsəld ɔf tə ðə kɪtʃənz, ən sun sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz keɪm wɪð ðɛɹ mil, ɡɪɡəlɪŋ ən stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə lɔɹɾ ən ðə leɪɾi, ən ði oʊɡiɝ, tɪl mɪstʃɹəs mædwən tʃeɪst əm bæk tə ðɛɹ wɝk.

The innkeeper gave a surprised blink when Hurin sat at table with them - an Ogier, it seemed, was one thing, but Hurin was clearly a servant in her eyes. With another quick look at Rand, she bustled off to the kitchens, and soon serving girls came with their meal, giggling and staring at the lord and the lady, and the Ogier, till Mistress Madwen chased them back to their work.

ət fɝst, ɹænd stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪz fud daʊtfəli. ðə pɔɹk wɑz kʌɾ ɪn smɔl bɪts, mɪkst wɪð lɔŋ stʃɹɪps ə jɛloʊ pɛpɝz, ən piz, ən ə nʌmbɝ ə vɛdʒtəbəlz ən θɪŋz i dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz, ɔl ɪn səm sɔɹɾ ə klɪɹ, θɪk sɔs. ɪt smɛl swiɾ ən ʃɑɹp, boʊθ ət ðə seɪm taɪm. səlin oʊnli pɪkt ət hɝz, bʌt lɔɪəl wɑz iɾɪŋ wɪð ə wɪl.

At first, Rand stared at his food doubtfully. The pork was cut in small bits, mixed with long strips of yellow peppers, and peas, and a number of vegetables and things he did not recognize, all in some sort of clear, thick sauce. It smelled sweet and sharp, both at the same time. Selene only picked at hers, but Loial was eating with a will.

hʊɹɪn ɡɹɪn ət ɹænd oʊvɝ ɪz fɔɹk. "ðeɪ spaɪs ðɛɹ fuɾ ɑdli, kɛɹhinɪn du, lɔɹd ɹænd, bʌt fəɹ ɔl ðæt, ɪts nɑt bæd."

Hurin grinned at Rand over his fork. "They spice their food oddly, Cairhienin do, Lord Rand, but for all that, it's not bad."

"ɪt woʊn baɪt ju, ɹænd," lɔɪəl æɾəd.

"It won't bite you, Rand," Loial added.

ɹænd tʊk ə hɛzɪɾənt maʊθfʊl, ən ɔlmoʊst ɡæspt. ɪt teɪstəd dʒʌst əz ɪt smɛld, swiɾ ən ʃɑɹp təɡɛðɝ, ðə pɔɹk kɹɪsp ɑn ði aʊtsaɪɾ ən tɛndɝ ɪnsaɪd, ə dʌzən dɪfɹən fleɪvɝz, spaɪsəz, ɔl blɛndɪŋ ən kəntʃɹæstɪŋ. ɪt teɪstəd laɪk nʌθɪŋ i hæɾ ɛvɝ pʊɾ ɪn ɪz maʊθ bɪfɔɹ. ɪt teɪstəd wʌndɝfəl. hi klin ɪz pleɪt, ən wən mɪstʃɹəs mædwən ɹɪtɝnd wɪð ðə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz tə klɪɹ əweɪ, hi nɪɹli æsk fəɹ mɔɹ ðə weɪ lɔɪəl dɪd. səlinz wɑz stɪl hæf fʊl, bʌt ʃi moʊʃən kɝtli fəɹ wʌn ə ðə ɡɝlz tə teɪk ɪt.

Rand took a hesitant mouthful, and almost gasped. It tasted just as it smelled, sweet and sharp together, the pork crisp on the outside and tender inside, a dozen different flavors, spices, all blending and contrasting. It tasted like nothing he had ever put in his mouth before. It tasted wonderful. He cleaned his plate, and when Mistress Madwen returned with the serving girls to clear away, he nearly asked for more the way Loial did. Selene's was still half full, but she motioned curtly for one of the girls to take it.

"ə plɛʒɝ, fɹɛn oʊɡiɝ." ði ɪnkipɝ smaɪld. "ɪt teɪks ə lɑt tə fɪl ʌp wʌn ə ju. kætʃɹin, bɹɪŋ ənʌðɝ hɛlpɪŋ, ən bi kwɪk." wʌn ə ðə ɡɝlz dɑɹɾɪd əweɪ. mɪstʃɹəs mædwən tɝn əɹ smaɪl ɑn ɹænd. "maɪ lɔɹd, aɪ hæɾ ə mæn hɪɹ u pleɪd ðə bɪɾɝn, bʌɾ i mɛɹiɾ ə ɡɝl ɔf wʌn ə ðə fɑɹmz, ən ʃiz ɪm stʃɹʌmɪŋ ɹeɪnz bɪhaɪn ə plaʊ, naʊ. aɪ kʊdn hɛlp noʊɾɪsɪŋ wʌt lʊks laɪk ə flut keɪs stɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ə jəɹ mænz bʌndəl. sɪns maɪ mjuzɪʃənz ɡɔn, wəd jə lɛt jəɹ mæn feɪvɝ əs wɪð ə lɪɾəl mjuzɪk?"

"A pleasure, friend Ogier." The innkeeper smiled. "It takes a lot to fill up one of you. Catrine, bring another helping, and be quick." One of the girls darted away. Mistress Madwen turned her smile on Rand. "My Lord, I had a man here who played the bittern, but he married a girl off one of the farms, and she has him strumming reins behind a plow, now. I couldn't help noticing what looks like a flute case sticking out of your man's bundle. Since my musician's gone, would you let your man favor us with a little music?"

hʊɹɪn lʊkt ɪmbɛɹəst.

Hurin looked embarrassed.

"hi dʌzn pleɪ," ɹænd ɪkspleɪnd. "aɪ du."

"He doesn't play," Rand explained. "I do."

ðə wʊmən blɪŋkt. ɪɾ əpɪɹd lɔɹdz dɪd nɑt pleɪ ðə flut, ət lis nɑɾ ɪn kɛɹhin. "aɪ wɪðdʒɹɔ ðə ɹɪkwɛst, maɪ lɔɹd. laɪts oʊn tʃɹuθ, aɪ mɛnt noʊ əfɛns, aɪ əʃʊɹ ju. aɪd nɛvɝ æsk wʌn sətʃ əz jɝsɛlf tə bi pleɪɪŋ ɪn ə kɑmən ɹum."

The woman blinked. It appeared lords did not play the flute, at least not in Cairhien. "I withdraw the request, my Lord. Light's own truth, I meant no offense, I assure you. I'd never ask one such as yourself to be playing in a common room."

ɹænd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊnli ə moʊmənt. ɪt hæd bɪn tu lɔŋ sɪns i hæd pɹæktəs ðə flut ɹæðɝ ðən ðə sɔɹd, ən ðə kɔɪnz ɪn ɪz paʊtʃ wəd nɑt læs fɝɛvɝ. wʌns i wɑz ɹɪɾ ə hɪz fænsi kloʊðz - wʌns i tɝn ðə hɔɹn oʊvɝ tə ɪŋtʃɹ ən ðə dæɡɝ oʊvɝ tə mæt - hi wəd nid ðə flut tə ɝn ɪz sʌpɝ əɡɛn waɪl i sɝtʃt fəɹ sʌmwɛɹ seɪf fɹəm ɛɛs sədaɪ. ən seɪf fɹəm maɪsɛlf? sʌmθɪŋ dɪd hæpən bæk ðɛɹ. wʌt?

Rand hesitated only a moment. It had been too long since he had practiced the flute rather than the sword, and the coins in his pouch would not last forever. Once he was rid of his fancy clothes - once he turned the Horn over to Ingtar and the dagger over to Mat - he would need the flute to earn his supper again while he searched for somewhere safe from Aes Sedai. And safe from myself? Something did happen back there. What?

"aɪ doʊn maɪnd," hi sɛd. "hʊɹɪn, hæn mi ðə keɪs. dʒʌst slaɪɾ ɪɾ aʊt." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə ʃoʊ ə ɡlimənz kloʊk; ɪnʌf ənspoʊkən kwɛstʃənz ʃoʊn ɪn mɪstʃɹəs mædwənz dɑɹk aɪz əz ɪt wɑz.

"I don't mind," he said. "Hurin, hand me the case. Just slide it out." There was no need to show a gleeman's cloak; enough unspoken questions shone in Mistress Madwen's dark eyes as it was.

wɝkt ɡoʊl tʃeɪst wɪð sɪlvɝ, ði ɪnstʃɹəmən lʊk ðə sɔɹɾ ə lɔɹd maɪt pleɪ, ɪf lɔɹdz ɛniwɛɹ pleɪd ðə flut. ðə hɛɹən bɹændɪɾ ɑn ɪz ɹaɪt pɑm dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɝfɪɹ wɪð ɪz fɪŋɡɝɪŋ. səlinz sɑvz hæd wɝk soʊ wɛl i hɑɹdli θɔɾ ə ðə bɹæn ənlɛs i sɔ ɪt. jɛɾ ɪt wɑz ɪn ɪz θɔts naʊ, ən ʌnkɑnʃəsli hi bɪɡæn tə pleɪ "hɛɹən ɑn ðə wɪŋ."

Worked gold chased with silver, the instrument looked the sort a lord might play, if lords anywhere played the flute. The heron branded on his right palm did not interfere with his fingering. Selene's salves had worked so well he hardly thought of the brand unless he saw it. Yet it was in his thoughts now, and unconsciously he began to play "Heron on the Wing."

hʊɹɪn bɑbd ɪz hɛd tə ðə tun, ən lɔɪəl bit taɪm ɑn ðə teɪbəl wɪð ə θɪk fɪŋɡɝ. səlin lʊkt ət ɹænd əz ɪf wʌndɝɪŋ wʌɾ i wɑz - aɪm nɑɾ ə lɔɹd, maɪ leɪɾi. ɪm ə ʃɛpɝd, ən aɪ pleɪ ðə fluɾ ɪn kɑmən ɹumz - bʌt ðə soʊlʒɝz tɝn fɹəm ðɛɹ tɔk tə lɪsən, ən ði ɔfəsɝ kloʊz ðə wʊɾən kʌvɝ ə ðə bʊk i hæd bɪɡʌn ɹɛɾɪŋ. səlinz stɛɾi ɡeɪz stʃɹʌk ə stʌbɝn spɑɹk ɪnsaɪd ɹænd. dətɝmənədli hi əvɔɪɾəd ɛni sɔŋ ðət maɪt fɪɾ ɪn ə pæləs, əɹ ə lɔɹdz mænɝ. hi pleɪd "oʊnli wʌn bʌkəɾ ʌv wɔɾɝ" ən "ði oʊl tu ɹɪvɝz lif," "oʊl dʒæks ʌp ə tʃɹi" ən "ɡʊdmən pɹəkəts paɪp."

Hurin bobbed his head to the tune, and Loial beat time on the table with a thick finger. Selene looked at Rand as if wondering what he was - I'm not a lord, my Lady. I'm a shepherd, and I play the flute in common rooms - but the soldiers turned from their talk to listen, and the officer closed the wooden cover of the book he had begun reading. Selene's steady gaze struck a stubborn spark inside Rand. Determinedly he avoided any song that might fit in a palace, or a lord's manor. He played "Only One Bucket of Water" and "The Old Two Rivers Leaf," "Old Jak's Up a Tree" and "Goodman Priket's Pipe."

wɪð ðə læst, ðə sɪks soʊlʒɝz bɪɡæn tə sɪŋ ɪn ɹɔkəs toʊnz, ðoʊ nɑt ðə wɝdz ɹænd nu.

With the last, the six soldiers began to sing in raucous tones, though not the words Rand knew.

"wi ɹoʊd daʊn tə ɹɪvɝ aɪɹælɛl dʒʌs tə si ðə tɛɹən kʌm.

"We rode down to River Iralell just to see the Tairen come.

wi stʊɾ əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk wɪð ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ ə ðə sʌn.

We stood along the riverbank with the rising of the sun.

ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz blæk ðə sʌmɝ pleɪn, ðɛɹ bænɝz blæk ðə skaɪ.

Their horses blacked the summer plain, their banners blacked the sky.

bʌt wi stʊɾ əɹ ɡɹaʊn ɑn ðə bæŋks ə ɹɪvɝ aɪɹælɛl.

But we stood our ground on the banks of River Iralell.

oʊ, wi stʊɾ əɹ ɡɹaʊnd.

Oh, we stood our ground.

jɛs, wi stʊɾ əɹ ɡɹaʊnd.

Yes, we stood our ground.

stʊɾ əɹ ɡɹaʊn əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪvɝ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ."

Stood our ground along the river in the morning."

ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə fɝs taɪm ðət ɹænd hæd dɪskʌvɝɾ ə tun hæd dɪfɹənt wɝdz ən dɪfɹənt neɪmz ɪn dɪfɹən lænz, səmtaɪmz ivən ɪn vɪlədʒəz ɪn ðə seɪm lænd. hi pleɪɾ əlɔŋ wɪð əm əntɪl ðeɪ lɛt ðə wɝdz daɪ əweɪ, slæpɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝz ʃoʊldɝz ən meɪkɪŋ ɹud kɑmɛns ɑn wʌn ənʌðɝz sɪŋɪŋ.

It was not the first time that Rand had discovered a tune had different words and different names in different lands, sometimes even in villages in the same land. He played along with them until they let the words die away, slapping each other's shoulders and making rude comments on one another's singing.

wən ɹænd loʊɝd ðə flut, ði ɔfəsɝ ɹoʊz ən meɪɾ ə ʃɑɹp dʒɛstʃɝ. ðə soʊlʒɝz fɛl saɪlən ɪn mɪd-læf, skɹeɪp bæk ðɛɹ tʃɛɹz tə baʊ tə ði ɔfəsɝ wɪð hæn ɑn bɹɛst - ən tə ɹænd - ən lɛft wɪθaʊɾ ə bækwɝdz lʊk.

When Rand lowered the flute, the officer rose and made a sharp gesture. The soldiers fell silent in mid-laugh, scraped back their chairs to bow to the officer with hand on breast - and to Rand - and left without a backwards look.

ði ɔfəsɝ keɪm tə ɹændz teɪbəl ən baʊd, hæn tə hɑɹt; ðə ʃeɪvən fɹʌn ə hɪz hɛd lʊkt əz ɪf i hæd dʌstɪɾ ɪt wɪð waɪt paʊɾɝ. "ɡɹeɪs feɪvɝ ju, maɪ lɔɹd. aɪ tʃɹʌs ðeɪ dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ ju, sɪŋɪŋ əz ðeɪ dɪd. ðeɪ ɑɹ ə kɑmən sɔɹt, bʌt ðeɪ mɛnt noʊ ɪnsəlt, aɪ əʃʊɹ ju. aɪm ɔlʒɹɪn kɔldɛvwɪn, maɪ lɔɹd. kæptən ɪn ɪz mædʒəstiz sɝvəs, ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin hɪm." hɪz aɪz slɪɾ oʊvɝ ɹændz sɔɹd; ɹænd hæd ðə filɪŋ kɔldɛvwɪn hæd noʊɾəst ðə hɛɹənz əz sun əz i keɪm ɪn.

The officer came to Rand's table and bowed, hand to heart; the shaven front of his head looked as if he had dusted it with white powder. "Grace favor you, my Lord. I trust they did not bother you, singing as they did. They are a common sort, but they meant no insult, I assure you. I am Aldrin Caldevwin, my Lord. Captain in His Majesty's Service, the Light illumine him." His eyes slid over Rand's sword; Rand had the feeling Caldevwin had noticed the herons as soon as he came in.

"ðeɪ dɪdn ɪnsəl mi." ði ɔfəsɝz æksɛn ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm ə mɔɪɹeɪnz, pɹɪsaɪs ən ɛvɹi wɝd pɹənaʊns tə ɪts fʊl. dɪd ʃi ɹɪli lemi ɡoʊ? aɪ wʌndɝ ɪf ʃiz fɑloʊɪŋ mi. əɹ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ mi. "sɪt daʊn, kæptən. pliz." kɔldɛvwɪn dʒɹu ə tʃɛɹ fɹəm ənʌðɝ teɪbəl. "tɛl mi, kæptən, ɪf jə doʊn maɪnd. hæv jə sin ɛni ʌðɝ stʃɹeɪnʒɝz ɹisənli? ə leɪɾi, ʃɔɹɾ ən slɛndɝ, ən ə faɪɾɪŋ mæn wɪð blu aɪz. hiz tɔl, ən səmtaɪmz i wɛɹz ɪz sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz bæk."

"They didn't insult me." The officer's accent reminded him of Moiraine's, precise and every word pronounced to its full. Did she really let me go? I wonder if she's following me. Or waiting for me. "Sit down, Captain. Please." Caldevwin drew a chair from another table. "Tell me, Captain, if you don't mind. Have you seen any other strangers recently? A lady, short and slender, and a fighting man with blue eyes. He's tall, and sometimes he wears his sword on his back."

"aɪ hæv sin noʊ stʃɹeɪnʒɝz əɾ ɔl," hi sɛd, loʊɝɪŋ hɪmsɛlf stɪfli tə hɪz sit. "seɪvɪŋ jɝsɛlf ən jəɹ leɪɾi, maɪ lɔɹd. fju ʌv ðə noʊbɪləɾi ɛvɝ kʌm hɪɹ." hɪz aɪz flɪk təwɔɹd lɔɪəl wɪð ə mɪnət fɹaʊn; hʊɹɪn i ɪɡnɔɹd fəɹ ə sɝvənt.

"I have seen no strangers at all," he said, lowering himself stiffly to his seat. "Saving yourself and your Lady, my Lord. Few of the nobility ever come here." His eyes flicked toward Loial with a minute frown; Hurin he ignored for a servant.

"ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə θɔt."

"It was only a thought."

"ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, maɪ lɔɹd, aɪ min noʊ dɪsɹɪspɛkt, bʌt meɪ aɪ hɪɹ jəɹ neɪm? wɪv soʊ fju stʃɹeɪnʒɝz hɪɹ ðəɾ aɪ faɪn aɪ wɪʃ tə noʊ ɛvɹi wʌn."

"Under the Light, my Lord, I mean no disrespect, but may I hear your name? We have so few strangers here that I find I wish to know every one."

ɹænd ɡeɪv ɪt - hi kleɪm noʊ taɪɾəl, bʌt ði ɔfəsɝ sim nɑt tə noʊɾəs - ən sɛɾ əz i hæd tə ði ɪnkipɝ, "fɹʌm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ɪn ændɝ."

Rand gave it - he claimed no title, but the officer seemed not to notice - and said as he had to the innkeeper, "From the Two Rivers, in Andor."

"ə wʌnʒɹəs pleɪs aɪ hæv hɝd, lɔɹd ɹænd - aɪ meɪ kɔl jə soʊ? - ən faɪn mɛn, ði ændɝmən. noʊ kɛɹhinɪn əz ɛvɝ wɔɹn ə bleɪdmæstɝz sɔɹd soʊ jʌŋ əz ju. aɪ mɛt səm ændɝmən, wʌns, ðə kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz əmʌŋ ðɛm. aɪ də nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪz neɪm; ən ɪmbɛɹəsmənt. pɝhæps jə kəd feɪvɝ mi wɪð ɪt?"

"A wondrous place I have heard, Lord Rand - I may call you so? - and fine men, the Andormen. No Cairhienin has ever worn a blademaster's sword so young as you. I met some Andormen, once, the Captain-General of the Queen's Guards among them. I do not remember his name; an embarrassment. Perhaps you could favor me with it?"

ɹænd wɑz kɑnʃəs ə ðə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz ɪn ðə bækɡɹaʊnd, bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə klin ən swip. kɔldɛvwɪn simd oʊnli tə bi meɪkɪŋ kɑnvɝseɪʃən, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə pɹoʊbɪŋ kwɑləɾi tə hɪz lʊk. "ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn."

Rand was conscious of the serving girls in the background, beginning to clean and sweep. Caldevwin seemed only to be making conversation, but there was a probing quality to his look. "Gareth Bryne."

"ʌv kɔɹs. jʌŋ, tə hoʊl soʊ mʌtʃ ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi."

"Of course. Young, to hold so much responsibility."

ɹænd kɛpt ɪz vɔɪs lɛvəl. "ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn əz ɪnʌf ɡɹeɪ ɪn ɪz hɛɹ tə bi jəɹ fɑðɝ, kæptən."

Rand kept his voice level. "Gareth Bryne has enough gray in his hair to be your father, Captain."

"fɝɡɪv mi, maɪ lɔɹd ɹænd. aɪ mɛn tə seɪ ðəɾ i keɪm tə ɪt jʌŋ." kɔldɛvwɪn tɝn tə səlin, ən fəɹ ə moʊmən i oʊnli stɛɹd. hi ʃʊk hɪmsɛlf, faɪnəli, əz ɪf kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə tʃɹæns. "fɝɡɪv mi fəɹ lʊkɪŋ ət jə soʊ, maɪ leɪɾi, ən fɝɡɪv mi fəɹ spikɪŋ soʊ, bʌt ɡɹeɪs əz ʃʊɹli feɪvɝd ju. wɪl jə ɡɪmi ə neɪm tə pʊt tə sətʃ bjuɾi?"

"Forgive me, my Lord Rand. I meant to say that he came to it young." Caldevwin turned to Selene, and for a moment he only stared. He shook himself, finally, as if coming out of a trance. "Forgive me for looking at you so, my Lady, and forgive me for speaking so, but Grace has surely favored you. Will you give me a name to put to such beauty?"

dʒʌst əz səlin oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, wʌn ə ðə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz lɛɾ aʊɾ ə kɹaɪ ən dʒɹɑpt ə læmp ʃi wɑz teɪkɪŋ daʊn fɹəm ə ʃɛlf. ɔɪl splæɾɝd, ən kɑɾ ɪn ə pul ə fleɪm ɑn ðə flɔɹ. ɹænd lɛp tə hɪz fiɾ əlɔŋ wɪð ði ʌðɝz ət ðə teɪbəl, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ɛni ʌv əm kəd muv, mɪstʃɹəs mædwən əpɪɹd, ən ʃi ən ðə ɡɝl smʌðɝd ðə fleɪmz wɪð ðɛɹ eɪpɹənz.

Just as Selene opened her mouth, one of the serving girls let out a cry and dropped a lamp she was taking down from a shelf. Oil splattered, and caught in a pool of flame on the floor. Rand leaped to his feet along with the others at the table, but before any of them could move, Mistress Madwen appeared, and she and the girl smothered the flames with their aprons.

"aɪ hæv toʊl jə tə bi kɛɹfəl, kætʃɹin," ði ɪnkipɝ sɛd, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ naʊ-smʌɾi eɪpɹən ʌndɝ ðə ɡɝlz noʊz. "jul bi bɝnɪŋ ði ɪn daʊn, ən jɝsɛlf ɪn ɪt."

"I have told you to be careful, Catrine," the innkeeper said, shaking her now-smutty apron under the girl's nose. "You'll be burning the inn down, and yourself in it."

ðə ɡɝl simd ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə tɪɹz. "aɪ wɑz biɪŋ kɛɹfəl, mɪstʃɹəs, bʌɾ aɪ hæd sətʃ ə twɪnʒ ɪn maɪ ɑɹm."

The girl seemed on the point of tears. "I was being careful, Mistress, but I had such a twinge in my arm."

mɪstʃɹəs mædwən θɹu ʌp əɹ hænz. "ju ɔlweɪz əv səm ɪkskjus, ən jə stɪl bɹeɪk mɔɹ dɪʃəz ðən ɔl ðə ɹɛst. ɑ, ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt. klin ɪɾ ʌp, ən doʊn bɝn jɝsɛlf." ði ɪnkipɝ tɝn tə ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz, ɔl stɪl stændɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə teɪbəl. "aɪ hoʊp nʌn ə jə teɪk ðɪs əmɪs. ðə ɡɝl ɹɪli woʊn bɝn daʊn ði ɪn. ʃiz hɑɹɾ ɑn ðə dɪʃəz wən ʃi stɑɹts munɪŋ oʊvɝ səm jʌŋ fɛloʊ, bʌt ʃiz nɛvɝ mɪshændəld ə læmp bɪfɔɹ."

Mistress Madwen threw up her hands. "You always have some excuse, and you still break more dishes than all the rest. Ah, it's all right. Clean it up, and don't burn yourself." The innkeeper turned to Rand and the others, all still standing around the table. "I hope none of you take this amiss. The girl really won't burn down the inn. She's hard on the dishes when she starts mooning over some young fellow, but she's never mishandled a lamp before."

"aɪ wəd laɪk tə bi ʃoʊn tə maɪ ɹum. aɪ də nɑt fil wɛl æftɝ ɔl." səlin spoʊk ɪn kɛɹfəl toʊnz, əz ðoʊ ənsɝɾən ə hɝ stʌmək, bʌt dɪspaɪt ðət ʃi lʊkt ən saʊndəɾ əz kul ən kɑm əz ɛvɝ. "ðə dʒɝni, ən ðə faɪɝ."

"I would like to be shown to my room. I do not feel well after all." Selene spoke in careful tones, as though uncertain of her stomach, but despite that she looked and sounded as cool and calm as ever. "The journey, and the fire."

ði ɪnkipɝ klʌk laɪk ə mʌðɝ hɛn. "ʌv kɔɹs, maɪ leɪɾi. aɪ hæv ə faɪn ɹum fəɹ jə ən jəɹ lɔɹd. ʃæl aɪ fɛtʃ mʌðɝ kɛɹɛdwən? ʃiz ə faɪn hænd wɪð suðɪŋ ɝbz."

The innkeeper clucked like a mother hen. "Of course, my Lady. I have a fine room for you and your Lord. Shall I fetch Mother Caredwain? She has a fine hand with soothing herbs."

səlinz vɔɪs ʃɑɹpənd. "noʊ. ən aɪ wɪʃ ə ɹum baɪ maɪsɛlf."

Selene's voice sharpened. "No. And I wish a room by myself."

mɪstʃɹəs mædwən ɡlænst ət ɹænd, bʌt ðə nɛks moʊmənt ʃi wɑz boʊɪŋ səlin səlɪsəɾəsli təwɔɹd ðə stɛɹz. "æz jə wɪʃ, maɪ leɪɾi. laɪɾən, fɛtʃ ðə leɪɾiz θɪŋz laɪk ə ɡʊd ɡɝl, naʊ." wʌn ə ðə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz ɹæn tə teɪk səlinz sæɾəlbæɡz fɹəm hʊɹɪn, ən ðə wɪmən dɪsəpɪɹɾ əpstɛɹz, səlin stɪf-bækt ən saɪlənt.

Mistress Madwen glanced at Rand, but the next moment she was bowing Selene solicitously toward the stairs. "As you wish, my Lady. Lidan, fetch the Lady's things like a good girl, now." One of the serving girls ran to take Selene's saddlebags from Hurin, and the women disappeared upstairs, Selene stiff-backed and silent.

kɔldɛvwɪn stɛɹɾ æftɝ əm əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ ɡɔn, ðən ʃʊk hɪmsɛlf əɡɛn. hi weɪɾəd əntɪl ɹænd hæd siɾəd hɪmsɛlf bɪfɔɹ teɪkɪŋ ɪz tʃɛɹ əɡɛn. "fɝɡɪv mi, maɪ lɔɹd ɹænd, fəɹ stɛɹɪŋ soʊ ət jəɹ leɪɾi, bʌt ɡɹeɪs əz ʃʊɹli feɪvɝd jə ɪn hɝ. aɪ min noʊ ɪnsəlt."

Caldevwin stared after them until they were gone, then shook himself again. He waited until Rand had seated himself before taking his chair again. "Forgive me, my Lord Rand, for staring so at your Lady, but Grace has surely favored you in her. I mean no insult."

"nʌn teɪkən," ɹænd sɛd. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ɛvɹi mæn fɛl ðə weɪ hi dɪd wən ðeɪ lʊkt ət səlin. "æz aɪ wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ tə ðə vɪlədʒ, kæptən, aɪ sɔ ə hjudʒ sfɪɹ. kɹɪstəl, ɪt simd. wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?"

"None taken," Rand said. He wondered if every man felt the way he did when they looked at Selene. "As I was riding to the village, Captain, I saw a huge sphere. Crystal, it seemed. What is it?"

ðə kɛɹhinɪnz aɪz ʃɑɹpənd. "ɪɾ ɪz pɑɹɾ ə ðə stætʃu, maɪ lɔɹd ɹænd," hi sɛd sloʊli. hɪz ɡeɪz flɪkɝd təwɔɹd lɔɪəl; fəɹ ən ɪnstən i sim tə bi kənsɪɾɝɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ nu.

The Cairhienin's eyes sharpened. "It is part of the statue, my Lord Rand," he said slowly. His gaze flickered toward Loial; for an instant he seemed to be considering something new.

"stætʃu? aɪ sɔ ə hænd, ən ə feɪs, tu. ɪt mʌs bi hjudʒ."

"Statue? I saw a hand, and a face, too. It must be huge."

"ɪɾ ɪz, maɪ lɔɹd ɹænd. ən oʊld." kɔldɛvwɪn pɔzd. "fɹʌm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, soʊ aɪm toʊld."

"It is, my Lord Rand. And old." Caldevwin paused. "From the Age of Legends, so I am told."

ɹænd fɛlt ə tʃɪl. ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, wən jus ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ wɑz ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ɪf ðə stɔɹiz kəd bi bɪlivd. wʌt hæpən ðɛɹ? aɪ noʊ ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ.

Rand felt a chill. The Age of Legends, when use of the One Power was everywhere, if the stories could be believed. What happened there? I know there was something.

"ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz," lɔɪəl sɛd. "jɛs, ɪt mʌs bi. noʊ wʌn əz dʌn wɝk soʊ væst sɪns. ə ɡɹeɪt pis ʌv wɝk tə dɪɡ ðəɾ ʌp, kæptən." hʊɹɪn sæt saɪlənli, əz ɪf i nɑɾ oʊnli wɑz nɑt lɪsnɪŋ, bʌt wɑz nɑt ðəɹ əɾ ɔl.

"The Age of Legends," Loial said. "Yes, it must be. No one has done work so vast since. A great piece of work to dig that up, Captain." Hurin sat silently, as if he not only was not listening, but was not there at all.

kɔldɛvwɪn nɑɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli. "aɪ hæv faɪv hʌnʒɹəd leɪbɝɝz ɪn kæmp bɪɑn ðə dɪɡɪŋz, ən ivən soʊ ɪɾəl bi pæst sʌmɝz ɛn bɪfɔɹ wɪv ɪt klɪɹ. ðeɪ ɑɹ mɛn fɹəm ðə fɔɹɡeɪt. hæf maɪ wɝk ɪz tə kip əm dɪɡɪŋ, ən ði ʌðɝ hæf tə kip əm aʊɾ ə ðɪs vɪlədʒ. fɔɹɡeɪɾɝz əv ə fɑndnəs fəɹ dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ən kəɹaʊzəŋ, jə ʌndɝstænd, ən ðiz pipəl lɛd kwaɪət lɪvz." hɪz toʊn sɛɾ ɪz sɪmpəθiz wɝ ɔl wɪð ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz.

Caldevwin nodded reluctantly. "I have five hundred laborers in camp beyond the diggings, and even so it will be past summer's end before we have it clear. They are men from the Foregate. Half my work is to keep them digging, and the other half to keep them out of this village. Foregaters have a fondness for drinking and carousing, you understand, and these people lead quiet lives." His tone said his sympathies were all with the villagers.

ɹænd nɑɾəd. hi hæd noʊ ɪntʃɹəst ɪn fɔɹɡeɪɾɝz, huɛvɝ ðeɪ wɝ. "wʌt wɪl jə də wɪð ɪt?" ðə kæptən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, bʌt ɹænd oʊnli lʊk bæk əɾ ɪm əntɪl i spoʊk.

Rand nodded. He had no interest in Foregaters, whoever they were. "What will you do with it?" The captain hesitated, but Rand only looked back at him until he spoke.

"ɡɔlʒɹiən hɪmsɛlf əz ɔɹɾɝd ðəɾ ɪt bi teɪkən tə ðə kæpəɾəl."

"Galldrian himself has ordered that it be taken to the capital."

lɔɪəl blɪŋkt. "ə vɛɹi ɡɹeɪt pis ʌv wɝk, ðæt. aɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ sʌmθɪŋ ðət bɪɡ kəd bi muv soʊ fɑɹ."

Loial blinked. "A very great piece of work, that. I am not sure how something that big could be moved so far."

"hɪz mædʒəsti hæz ɔɹɾɝd ɪt," kɔldɛvwɪn sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "ɪt wɪl bi sɛɾ ʌp aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi, ə mɑnjəmən tə ðə ɡɹeɪtnəs ə kɛɹhin ən ə haʊs ɹieɪɾən. oʊɡiɝ ɑɹ nɑt ði oʊnli wʌnz u noʊ haʊ tə muv stoʊn." lɔɪəl lʊkt əbæʃt, ən ðə kæptən vɪzəbli kɑm hɪmsɛlf. "jɔɹ pɑɹɾən, fɹɛn oʊɡiɝ. aɪ spoʊk ɪn heɪst, ən ɹudli." hi stɪl saʊndəɾ ə lɪɾəl ɡɹʌf. "wɪl jə bi steɪɪŋ ɪn tʃɹɛmoʊnzin lɔŋ, maɪ lɔɹd ɹænd?"

"His Majesty has ordered it," Caldevwin said sharply. "It will be set up outside the city, a monument to the greatness of Cairhien and of House Riatin. Ogier are not the only ones who know how to move stone." Loial looked abashed, and the captain visibly calmed himself. "Your pardon, friend Ogier. I spoke in haste, and rudely." He still sounded a little gruff. "Will you be staying in Tremonsien long, my Lord Rand?"

"wi liv ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ," ɹænd sɛd. "wi ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə kɛɹhin."

"We leave in the morning," Rand said. "We are going to Cairhien."

"æz ɪt hæpənz, aɪm sɛndɪŋ səm ə maɪ mɛn bæk tə ðə sɪɾi təmɑɹoʊ. aɪ mʌst ɹoʊteɪt ðɛm; ðeɪ ɡɹoʊ steɪl æftɝ tu lɔŋ wɑtʃɪŋ mɛn swɪŋ pɪks ən ʃʌvəlz. jəl nɑt maɪn ɪf ðeɪ ɹaɪɾ ɪn jəɹ kʌmpəni?" hi pʊɾ ɪɾ əz ə kwɛstʃən, bʌɾ əz ɪf æksɛptəns wɝ ə fɔɹɡɔn kənkluʒən. mɪstʃɹəs mædwən əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðə stɛɹz, ən i ɹoʊz. "ɪf jəl ɪkskjuz mi, maɪ lɔɹd ɹænd, aɪ mʌs bi ʌp ɝli. əntɪl ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, ðɛn. ɡɹeɪs feɪvɝ ju." hi baʊd tə ɹænd, nɑɾəd tə lɔɪəl, ən lɛft.

"As it happens, I am sending some of my men back to the city tomorrow. I must rotate them; they grow stale after too long watching men swing picks and shovels. You will not mind if they ride in your company?" He put it as a question, but as if acceptance were a foregone conclusion. Mistress Madwen appeared on the stairs, and he rose. "If you will excuse me, my Lord Rand, I must be up early. Until the morning, then. Grace favor you." He bowed to Rand, nodded to Loial, and left.

əz ðə dɔɹz kloʊz bɪhaɪn ðə kɛɹhinɪn, ði ɪnkipɝ keɪm tə ðə teɪbəl.

As the doors closed behind the Cairhienin, the innkeeper came to the table.

"aɪ hæv jəɹ leɪɾi sɛɾəld, maɪ lɔɹd. ən aɪv ɡʊd ɹumz pɹipɛɹd fəɹ jə ən jəɹ mæn, ən ju, fɹɛn oʊɡiɝ." ʃi pɔzd, stʌɾiɪŋ ɹænd. "fɝɡɪv mi ɪf aɪ oʊvɝstɛp maɪsɛlf, maɪ lɔɹd, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk aɪ kən spik fɹili tə ə lɔɹɾ u lɛts ɪz mæn spik ʌp. ɪf aɪm ɹɔŋ . . . wɛl, aɪ min noʊ ɪnsəlt. fəɹ twɛnti-θɹi jɪɹz bɛɹɪn mædwən ən aɪ wɝ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ wən wi wɝn kɪsɪŋ, soʊ tə spik. ðæts baɪ weɪ ʌv seɪɪŋ aɪ hæv səm ɪkspɪɹiəns. ɹaɪt naʊ, jəɹ θɪŋkɪŋ jəɹ leɪɾi nɛvɝ wɑns tə si jə əɡɛn, bʌɾ ɪts maɪ weɪ ʌv θɪŋkɪŋ ðəɾ ɪf jə tæp ɑn əɹ dɔɹ tənaɪt, ʃɪl bi teɪkɪŋ jə ɪn. smaɪl ən seɪ ɪt wɑz jəɹ fɔlt, wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz əɹ nɑt."

"I have your Lady settled, my Lord. And I've good rooms prepared for you and your man, and you, friend Ogier." She paused, studying Rand. "Forgive me if I overstep myself, my Lord, but I think I can speak freely to a lord who lets his man speak up. If I'm wrong . . . well, I mean no insult. For twenty-three years Barin Madwen and I were arguing when we weren't kissing, so to speak. That's by way of saying I have some experience. Right now, you're thinking your Lady never wants to see you again, but it's my way of thinking that if you tap on her door tonight, she'll be taking you in. Smile and say it was your fault, whether it was or not."

ɹænd klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊɾ ən hoʊpt ɪz feɪs wɑz nɑt tɝnɪŋ ɹɛd. laɪt, ɛɡwin wəd kɪl mi ɪf ʃi nu aɪɾ ivən θɔɾ ʌv ɪt. ən səlin wəd kɪl mi ɪf aɪ dɪɾ ɪt. əɹ wəd ʃi? ðət dɪd meɪk ɪz tʃiks bɝn. "aɪ . . . θæŋk jə fəɹ jəɹ sədʒɛstʃən, mɪstʃɹəs mædwən. ðə ɹumz. . . ." hi əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ ət ðə blæŋkət-kʌvɝd tʃɛs baɪ lɔɪəlz tʃɛɹ; ðeɪ dɪd nɑt dɛɹ liv ɪt wɪθaʊt sʌmwʌn əweɪk ən ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ɪt. "wi θɹi wɪl ɔl slip ɪn ðə seɪm ɹum."

Rand cleared his throat and hoped his face was not turning red. Light, Egwene would kill me if she knew I'd even thought of it. And Selene would kill me if I did it. Or would she? That did make his cheeks burn. "I . . . thank you for your suggestion, Mistress Madwen. The rooms. . . ." He avoided looking at the blanket-covered chest by Loial's chair; they did not dare leave it without someone awake and guarding it. "We three will all sleep in the same room."

ði ɪnkipɝ lʊk stɑɹɾəld, bʌt ʃi ɹəkʌvɝd kwɪkli. "æz jə wɪʃ, maɪ lɔɹd. ðɪs weɪ, ɪf jə pliz."

The innkeeper looked startled, but she recovered quickly. "As you wish, my Lord. This way, if you please."

ɹænd fɑloʊɾ əɹ ʌp ðə stɛɹz. lɔɪəl kæɹid ðə tʃɛst ʌndɝ ɪts blæŋkət - ðə stɛɹz ɡɹoʊn ʌndɝ ðə weɪɾ ə hɪm ən ðə tʃɛs təɡɛðɝ, bʌt ði ɪnkipɝ sim tə θɪŋk ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ən oʊɡiɝz bʌlk - ən hʊɹɪn stɪl kæɹiɾ ɔl ðə sæɾəlbæɡz ən ðə bʌndəl kloʊk wɪð ðə hɑɹp ən flut.

Rand followed her up the stairs. Loial carried the chest under its blanket - the stairs groaned under the weight of him and the chest together, but the innkeeper seemed to think it was just an Ogier's bulk - and Hurin still carried all the saddlebags and the bundled cloak with the harp and flute.

mɪstʃɹəs mædwən hæɾ ə θɝd bɛd bɹɔɾ ɪn ən heɪstəli əsɛmbəld ən meɪɾ ʌp. wʌn ə ðə bɛdz ɔlɹɛɾi ðəɹ stʃɹɛtʃt nɪɹli fɹəm wɔl tə wɔl ɪn lɛŋθ, ən hæɾ ɑbviəsli bɪn mɛn fəɹ lɔɪəl fɹəm ðə stɑɹt. ðəɹ wɑz bɛɹli ɹum tə wɔk bɪtwin ðə bɛdz. əz sun əz ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz ɡɔn, ɹænd tɝn tə ði ʌðɝz. lɔɪəl hæd pʊʃt ðə stɪl-kʌvɝd tʃɛst ʌndɝ ɪz bɛɾ ən wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ ðə mætʃɹəs. hʊɹɪn wɑz sɛɾɪŋ aʊt ðə sæɾəlbæɡz.

Mistress Madwen had a third bed brought in and hastily assembled and made up. One of the beds already there stretched nearly from wall to wall in length, and had obviously been meant for Loial from the start. There was barely room to walk between the beds. As soon as the innkeeper was gone, Rand turned to the others. Loial had pushed the still-covered chest under his bed and was trying the mattress. Hurin was setting out the saddlebags.

"du iðɝ ə jə noʊ waɪ ðət kæptən wɑz soʊ səspɪʃəs ʌv ʌs? hi wɑz, aɪm ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt." hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ ɔlmoʊs θɪŋk i θɔt wi maɪt stil ðət stætʃu, ðə weɪ hi wɑz tɔkɪŋ."

"Do either of you know why that captain was so suspicious of us? He was, I'm sure of it." He shook his head. "I almost think he thought we might steal that statue, the way he was talking."

"deɪz deɪmɑɹ, lɔɹd ɹænd," hʊɹɪn sɛd. "ðə ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm. ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊzɪz, səm kɔl ɪt. ðɪs kɔldɛvwɪn θɪŋks jə mʌs bi duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ tə jəɹ ædvæntɪdʒ əɹ jə wʊdn bi hɪɹ. ən wʌtɛvɝ jəɹ duɪŋ maɪt bi tə hɪz dɪsədvæntɪdʒ, soʊ hiz tə bi kɛɹfəl."

"Daes Dae'mar, Lord Rand," Hurin said. "The Great Game. The Game of Houses, some call it. This Caldevwin thinks you must be doing something to your advantage or you wouldn't be here. And whatever you're doing might be to his disadvantage, so he has to be careful."

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. " 'ðə ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm'? wʌt ɡeɪm?"

Rand shook his head. " 'The Great Game'? What game?"

"ɪɾ ɪzən ə ɡeɪm əɾ ɔl, ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd fɹəm ɪz bɛd. hi hæd pʊld ə bʊk fɹəm ɪz pɑkət, bʌɾ ɪt leɪ ənoʊpən ɑn ɪz tʃɛst. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ mʌtʃ əbaʊɾ ɪt - oʊɡiɝ doʊn də sətʃ θɪŋz - bʌɾ aɪ hæv hɝɾ ʌv ɪt. ðə noʊbəlz ən ðə noʊbəl haʊsəz mənuvɝ fəɹ ædvæntɪdʒ. ðeɪ də θɪŋz ðeɪ θɪŋk wɪl hɛlp ðɛm, əɹ hɝɾ ən ɛnəmi, əɹ boʊθ. juʒəwəli, ɪts ɔl dʌn ɪn sikɹəsi, əɹ ɪf nɑt, ðeɪ tʃɹaɪ tə meɪk ɪt sim əz ɪf ðəɹ duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ʌðɝ ðən wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ." hi ɡeɪv wʌn tʌftəɾ ɪɹ ə pʌzəl skɹætʃ. "ivən noʊɪŋ wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz, aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstæn ɪt. ɛldɝ heɪmən ɔlweɪz sɛɾ ɪt wəd teɪk ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ maɪn ðən ɪz tə ʌndɝstæn ðə θɪŋz hjumənz du, ən aɪ doʊnt noʊ mɛni əz ɪntɛlədʒən əz ɛldɝ heɪmən. jə hjumənz ɑɹ ɑd."

"It isn't a game at all, Rand," Loial said from his bed. He had pulled a book from his pocket, but it lay unopened on his chest. "I don't know much about it - Ogier don't do such things - but I have heard of it. The nobles and the noble Houses maneuver for advantage. They do things they think will help them, or hurt an enemy, or both. Usually, it's all done in secrecy, or if not, they try to make it seem as if they're doing something other than what they are." He gave one tufted ear a puzzled scratch. "Even knowing what it is, I don't understand it. Elder Haman always said it would take a greater mind than his to understand the things humans do, and I don't know many as intelligent as Elder Haman. You humans are odd."

hʊɹɪn ɡeɪv ði oʊɡiɝ ə slæntəd lʊk, bʌɾ i sɛd, "hi hæz ðə ɹaɪɾ ə deɪz deɪmɑɹ, lɔɹd ɹænd. kɛɹhinɪn pleɪ ɪt mɔɹ ðən moʊst, ðoʊ ɔl sʌðɝnɝz du."

Hurin gave the Ogier a slanted look, but he said, "He has the right of Daes Dae'mar, Lord Rand. Cairhienin play it more than most, though all southerners do."

"ðiz soʊlʒɝz ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ," ɹænd sɛd. "ɑɹ ðeɪ pɑɹɾ ə kɔldɛvwɪn pleɪɪŋ ðɪs ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm? wi kæn əfɔɹd tə ɡɛt mɪkst ɪn ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ðæt." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə mɛnʃən ðə hɔɹn. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl tu əwɛɹ ʌv ɪts pɹɛzəns.

"These soldiers in the morning," Rand said. "Are they part of Caldevwin playing this Great Game? We can't afford to get mixed in anything like that." There was no need to mention the Horn. They were all too aware of its presence.

lɔɪəl ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ, ɹænd. hiz hjumən, soʊ ɪt kəd min ɛniθɪŋ."

Loial shook his head. "I don't know, Rand. He's human, so it could mean anything."

"hʊɹɪn?"

"Hurin?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ, iðɝ." hʊɹɪn saʊndəɾ əz wɝiɾ əz ði oʊɡiɝ lʊkt. "hi kəd bi duɪŋ dʒʌst wʌɾ i sɛd, ɔɹ. . . . ðæts ðə weɪ ʌv ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz. jə nɛvɝ noʊ. aɪ spɛn moʊst ə maɪ taɪm ɪn kɛɹhin ɪn ðə fɔɹɡeɪt, lɔɹd ɹænd, ən aɪ doʊnt noʊ mʌtʃ əbaʊt kɛɹhinɪn noʊbəlz, bʌt - wɛl, deɪz deɪmɑɹ kən bi deɪnʒɝəs ɛniwɛɹ, bʌɾ ɪspɛʃli ɪn kɛɹhin, aɪv hɝd." hi bɹaɪɾənd sʌɾənli. "ðə leɪɾi səlin, lɔɹd ɹænd. ʃɪl noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən mi əɹ ðə bɪldɝ. jə kən æsk əɹ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ."

"I don't know, either." Hurin sounded as worried as the Ogier looked. "He could be doing just what he said, or. . . . That's the way of the Game of Houses. You never know. I spent most of my time in Cairhien in the Foregate, Lord Rand, and I don't know much about Cairhienin nobles, but - well, Daes Dae'mar can be dangerous anywhere, but especially in Cairhien, I've heard." He brightened suddenly. "The Lady Selene, Lord Rand. She'll know better than me or the Builder. You can ask her in the morning."

bʌɾ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, səlin wɑz ɡɔn. wən ɹænd wɛn daʊn tə ðə kɑmən ɹum, mɪstʃɹəs mædwən hændəɾ ɪm ə sil pɑɹtʃmənt. "ɪf jəl fɝɡɪv mi, maɪ lɔɹd, jə ʃʊɾə lɪsən tə mi. jə ʃʊɾə tæpt ɑn jəɹ leɪɾiz dɔɹ."

But in the morning, Selene was gone. When Rand went down to the common room, Mistress Madwen handed him a sealed parchment. "If you'll forgive me, my Lord, you should have listened to me. You should have tapped on your Lady's door."

ɹænd weɪɾəd əntɪl ʃi wɛn əweɪ bɪfɔɹ i bɹoʊk ðə waɪt wæks sil. ðə wæks hæd bɪn ɪmpɹɛst wɪð ə kɹɛsən mun ən stɑɹz.

Rand waited until she went away before he broke the white wax seal. The wax had been impressed with a crescent moon and stars.

aɪ mʌs liv jə fəɹ ə taɪm. ðəɹ ɑɹ tu mɛni pipəl hɪɹ, ən aɪ də nɑt laɪk kɔldɛvwɪn. əl əweɪt jə ɪn kɛɹhin. nɛvɝ θɪŋk ðəɾ aɪm tu fɑɹ fɹəm ju. jəl bi ɪn maɪ θɔts ɔlweɪz, əz aɪ noʊ ðəɾ aɪm ɪn jʊɹz.

I must leave you for a time. There are too many people here, and I do not like Caldevwin. I will await you in Cairhien. Never think that I am too far from you. You will be in my thoughts always, as I know that I am in yours.

ɪt wɑz nɑt saɪnd, bʌt ðəɾ ɛləɡənt, floʊɪŋ skɹɪp hæd ðə lʊk ə səlin.

It was not signed, but that elegant, flowing script had the look of Selene.

hi foʊldəɾ ɪt kɛɹfəli ən pʊɾ ɪɾ ɪn ɪz pɑkət bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ aʊtsaɪd, wɛɹ hʊɹɪn hæd ðə hɔɹsəz weɪɾɪŋ.

He folded it carefully and put it in his pocket before going outside, where Hurin had the horses waiting.

kæptən kɔldɛvwɪn wɑz ðɛɹ, tu, wɪð ənʌðɝ, jʌŋɡɝ ɔfəsɝ ən fɪfti maʊntəd soʊlʒɝz kɹaʊɾɪŋ ðə stʃɹit. ðə tu ɔfəsɝz wɝ bɛɹ-hɛɾəd, bʌt wɔɹ stil-bækt ɡɔnləts, ən ɡoʊld-wɝk bɹɛstpleɪts stʃɹæpt oʊvɝ ðɛɹ blu koʊts. ə ʃɔɹt stæf wɑz fæsən tə ðə hɑɹnəs ɑn itʃ ɔfəsɝz bæk, bɛɹɪŋ ə smɔl, stɪf blu bænɝ əbʌv ɪz hɛd. kɔldɛvwɪnz bænɝ bɔɹ ə sɪŋɡəl waɪt stɑɹ, waɪl ðə jʌŋɡɝ mænz wɑz kɹɔs baɪ tu waɪt bɑɹz. ðeɪ wɝ ə ʃɑɹp kɑntʃɹæs tə ðə soʊlʒɝz ɪn ðɛɹ pleɪn ɑɹmɝ ən hɛlməts ðət lʊk laɪk bɛlz wɪð mɛɾəl kʌɾ əweɪ tə ɪkspoʊz ðɛɹ feɪsəz.

Captain Caldevwin was there, too, with another, younger officer and fifty mounted soldiers crowding the street. The two officers were bare-headed, but wore steel-backed gauntlets, and gold-worked breastplates strapped over their blue coats. A short staff was fastened to the harness on each officer's back, bearing a small, stiff blue banner above his head. Caldevwin's banner bore a single white star, while the younger man's was crossed by two white bars. They were a sharp contrast to the soldiers in their plain armor and helmets that looked like bells with metal cut away to expose their faces.

kɔldɛvwɪn baʊɾ əz ɹænd keɪm aʊɾ ə ði ɪn. "ɡʊd mɔɹnɪŋ tə ju; maɪ lɔɹd ɹænd. ðɪs ɪz ɛlɹəkeɪn tɑvəlɪn, hu wɪl kəmæn jəɹ ɛskɔɹt, ɪf aɪ meɪ kɔl ɪt ðæt." ði ʌðɝ ɔfəsɝ baʊd; hɪz hɛd wɑz ʃeɪvd əz kɔldɛvwɪnz wɑz. hi dɪd nɑt spik.

Caldevwin bowed as Rand came out of the inn. "Good morning to you; my Lord Rand. This is Elricain Tavolin, who will command your escort, if I may call it that." The other officer bowed; his head was shaved as Caldevwin's was. He did not speak.

"æn ɛskɔɹt wɪl bi wɛlkəm, kæptən," ɹænd sɛd, mænɪdʒɪŋ tə saʊn əɾ iz. feɪn wəd nɑt tʃɹaɪ ɛniθɪŋ əɡɛns fɪfti soʊlʒɝz, bʌt ɹænd wɪʃt i kəd bi sɝɾən ðeɪ wɝ oʊnli ən ɛskɔɹt.

"An escort will be welcome, Captain," Rand said, managing to sound at ease. Fain would not try anything against fifty soldiers, but Rand wished he could be certain they were only an escort.

ðə kæptən aɪd lɔɪəl, ɑn ɪz weɪ tə hɪz hɔɹs wɪð ðə blæŋkət-kʌvɝd tʃɛst. "ə hɛvi bɝɾən, oʊɡiɝ."

The captain eyed Loial, on his way to his horse with the blanket-covered chest. "A heavy burden, Ogier."

lɔɪəl ɔlmoʊs mɪst ə stɛp. "aɪ nɛvɝ laɪk tə bi fɑɹ fɹəm maɪ bʊks, kæptən." hɪz waɪd maʊθ flæʃt tiθ ɪn ə sɛlf-kɑnʃəs ɡɹɪn, ən i hɝid tə stʃɹæp ðə tʃɛst ɑntu hɪz sæɾəl.

Loial almost missed a step. "I never like to be far from my books, Captain." His wide mouth flashed teeth in a self-conscious grin, and he hurried to strap the chest onto his saddle.

kɔldɛvwɪn lʊkt ɝaʊnd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "jɔɹ leɪɾi ɪz nɑt daʊn jɛt. ən əɹ faɪn ænəməl ɪz nɑt hɪɹ."

Caldevwin looked around, frowning. "Your Lady is not down yet. And her fine animal is not here."

"ʃi lɛft ɔlɹɛɾi," ɹænd toʊl hɪm. "ʃi hæd tə ɡoʊ ɑn tə kɛɹhin kwɪkli, dʊɹɪŋ ðə naɪt."

"She left already," Rand told him. "She had to go on to Cairhien quickly, during the night."

kɔldɛvwɪnz aɪbɹaʊz lɪftəd. "dʊɹɪŋ ðə naɪt? bʌt maɪ mɛn. . . . fɝɡɪv mi, maɪ lɔɹd ɹænd." hi dʒɹu ðə jʌŋɡɝ ɔfəsɝ əsaɪd, wɪspɝɪŋ fjʊɹiəsli.

Caldevwin's eyebrows lifted. "During the night? But my men. . . . Forgive me, my Lord Rand." He drew the younger officer aside, whispering furiously.

"hi hæd ði ɪn wɑtʃt, lɔɹd ɹænd," hʊɹɪn wɪspɝd. "ðə leɪɾi səlin mʌst əv ɡɑɾən pæst əm ənsin sʌmhaʊ."

"He had the inn watched, Lord Rand," Hurin whispered. "The Lady Selene must have gotten past them unseen somehow."

ɹænd klaɪm tə ɹɛdz sæɾəl wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs. ɪf ðəɹ hæd bɪn ɛni tʃæns kɔldɛvwɪn dɪd nɑt səspɛkt əm ə sʌmθɪŋ, ɪt sim səlin hæd fɪnɪʃt ɪt. "tu mɛni pipəl, ʃi sɛz," hi mʌɾɝd. "ðɛɹəl bi mɔɹ pipəl baɪ fɑɹ ɪn kɛɹhin."

Rand climbed to Red's saddle with a grimace. If there had been any chance Caldevwin did not suspect them of something, it seemed Selene had finished it. "Too many people, she says," he muttered. "There'll be more people by far in Cairhien."

"ju sɛd sʌmθɪŋ, maɪ lɔɹd?"

"You said something, my Lord?"

ɹænd lʊkt ʌp əz tɑvəlɪn dʒɔɪn hɪm, maʊntəɾ ɑn ə tɔl, dʌst-kʌlɝd ɡɛldɪŋ. hʊɹɪn wɑz ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, tu, ən lɔɪəl stʊd bɪsaɪɾ ɪz bɪɡ hɔɹsəz hɛd. ðə soʊlʒɝz wɝ fɔɹmd ʌp ɪn ɹæŋks. kɔldɛvwɪn wɑz noʊwɛɹ tə bi sin.

Rand looked up as Tavolin joined him, mounted on a tall, dust-colored gelding. Hurin was in his saddle, too, and Loial stood beside his big horse's head. The soldiers were formed up in ranks. Caldevwin was nowhere to be seen.

"nʌθɪŋ ɪz hæpənɪŋ ðə weɪ aɪ ɪkspɛkt," ɹænd sɛd.

"Nothing is happening the way I expect," Rand said.

tɑvəlɪn ɡeɪv ɪm ə bɹif smaɪl, hɑɹdli mɔɹ ðən ə twɪtʃ ə hɪz lɪps. "ʃæl wi ɹaɪd, maɪ lɔɹd?"

Tavolin gave him a brief smile, hardly more than a twitch of his lips. "Shall we ride, my Lord?"

ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ pɹəsɛʃən hɛɾəd fəɹ ðə hɑɹd-pækt ɹoʊd ðət lɛd tə ðə sɪɾi ʌv kɛɹhin.

The strange procession headed for the hard-packed road that led to the city of Cairhien.


tʃæptɝ twɛntiɾu


CHAPTER 22

wɑtʃɝz


Watchers

nʌθɪŋ ɪz hæpənɪŋ əz aɪ ɪkspɛkt," mɔɪɹeɪn mʌɾɝd, nɑɾ ɪkspɛktɪŋ ən ænsɝ fɹəm læn. ðə lɔŋ, pɑlɪʃt teɪbəl bɪfɔɹ əɹ wɑz lɪɾɝd wɪð bʊks ən peɪpɝz, skɹoʊlz ən mænjəskɹɪps, mɛni ʌv əm dʌsti fɹəm lɔŋ stɔɹədʒ ən tæɾɝd wɪð eɪdʒ, səm oʊnli fɹæɡmɛns. ðə ɹum simd ɔlmoʊs meɪɾ ə bʊks ən mænjəskɹɪps, fɪlɪŋ ʃɛlvz ɪksɛpt wɛɹ ðəɹ wɝ dɔɹz əɹ wɪndoʊz əɹ ðə faɪɝpleɪs. ðə tʃɛɹz wɝ haɪ-bækt ən wɛl pæɾəd, bʌt hæf ə ðɛm, ən moʊst ə ðə smɔl teɪbəlz, hɛl bʊks, ən səm hæd bʊks ən skɹoʊlz tʌkt ʌndɝ ðɛm. oʊnli ðə klʌɾɝ ɪn fɹʌn ə mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz hɝz, ðoʊ.

Nothing is happening as I expect," Moiraine muttered, not expecting an answer from Lan. The long, polished table before her was littered with books and papers, scrolls and manuscripts, many of them dusty from long storage and tattered with age, some only fragments. The room seemed almost made of books and manuscripts, filling shelves except where there were doors or windows or the fireplace. The chairs were high-backed and well padded, but half of them, and most of the small tables, held books, and some had books and scrolls tucked under them. Only the clutter in front of Moiraine was hers, though.

ʃi ɹoʊz ən muv tə ðə wɪndoʊ, pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə naɪt təwɔɹd ðə laɪts ə ðə vɪlədʒ, nɑt fɑɹ ɔf. noʊ deɪnʒɝ ə pɝsut hɪɹ. noʊ wʌn wəɾ ɪkspɛkt əɹ tə kʌm hɪɹ. klɪɹ maɪ hɛd, ən bɪɡɪn əɡɛn, ʃi θɔt. ðəɾ ɪz ɔl ðəɹ ɪz tə du.

She rose and moved to the window, peered into the night toward the lights of the village, not far off. No danger of pursuit here. No one would expect her to come here. Clear my head, and begin again, she thought. That is all there is to do.

nʌn ə ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz hæɾ ɛni səspɪʃən ðət ðə tu ɛldɝli sɪstɝz lɪvɪŋ ɪn ðɪs snʌɡ haʊs wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. wʌn dɪd nɑt səspɛk sətʃ θɪŋz ɪn ə smɔl pleɪs laɪk taɪfænz wɛl, ə fɑɹmɪŋ kəmjunəɾi dip ɪn ðə ɡɹæsi pleɪnz ə ɝæfəl. ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz keɪm tə ðə sɪstɝz fəɹ ædvaɪs ɑn ðɛɹ pɹɑbləmz ən kjʊɹz fəɹ ðɛɹ ɪlz, ən væljuɾ əm əz wɪmən blɛsɪd baɪ ðə laɪt, bʌt noʊ mɔɹ. æɾɪliz ən vændin hæd ɡɔn ɪndə vɑləntɛɹi ɹitʃɹit təɡɛðɝ soʊ lɔŋ əɡoʊ ðət fju ivən ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðeɪ stɪl lɪvd.

None of the villagers had any suspicion that the two elderly sisters living in this snug house were Aes Sedai. One did not suspect such things in a small place like Tifan's Well, a farming community deep in the grassy plains of Arafel. The villagers came to the sisters for advice on their problems and cures for their ills, and valued them as women blessed by the Light, but no more. Adeleas and Vandene had gone into voluntary retreat together so long ago that few even in the White Tower remembered they still lived.

wɪð ðə wʌn ikwəli eɪdʒd wɔɹɾɝ u ɹɪmeɪn tə ðɛm, ðeɪ lɪv kwaɪətli, stɪl ɪntɛndɪŋ tə ɹaɪt ðə hɪstɝi ʌv ðə wɝl sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ, ən əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ kəɾ ɪnkluɾ ə bɪfɔɹ. wʌn deɪ. ɪn ðə mintaɪm, ðəɹ wɑz soʊ mʌtʃ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən tə ɡæðɝ, soʊ mɛni pʌzəlz tə sɑlv. ðɛɹ haʊs wɑz ðə pɝfək pleɪs fəɹ mɔɪɹeɪn tə faɪn ði ɪnfɝmeɪʃən ʃi niɾəd. ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ.

With the one equally aged Warder who remained to them, they lived quietly, still intending to write the history of the world since the Breaking, and as much as they could include of before. One day. In the meantime, there was so much information to gather, so many puzzles to solve. Their house was the perfect place for Moiraine to find the information she needed. Except that it was not there.

muvmən kɑɾ əɹ aɪ, ən ʃi tɝnd. læn wɑz laʊnʒɪŋ əɡɛns ðə jɛloʊ bɹɪk faɪɝpleɪs, əz ɪmpɝɾɝbəbəl əz ə boʊldɝ. "du jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə fɝs taɪm wi mɛt, læn?"

Movement caught her eye, and she turned. Lan was lounging against the yellow brick fireplace, as imperturbable as a boulder. "Do you remember the first time we met, Lan?"

ʃi wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ səm saɪn, əɹ ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv sin ðə kwɪk twɪtʃ ə hɪz aɪbɹaʊ. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɔfən ʃi kɑɾ ɪm baɪ sɝpɹaɪz. ðɪs wɑz ə sʌbʒɪkt niðɝ ə ðɛm ɛvɝ mɛnʃənd; nɪɹli twɛnti jɪɹz əɡoʊ ʃi hæd toʊld ɪm - wɪð ɔl ðə stɪf pɹaɪɾ ʌv wʌn stɪl jʌŋ ɪnʌf tə bi kɔl jʌŋ, ʃi ɹɪkɔld - ðət ʃi wəd nɛvɝ spik ʌv ɪɾ əɡɛn ən ɪkspɛktəd ðə seɪm saɪləns ə hɪm.

She was watching for some sign, or she would not have seen the quick twitch of his eyebrow. It was not often she caught him by surprise. This was a subject neither of them ever mentioned; nearly twenty years ago she had told him - with all the stiff pride of one still young enough to be called young, she recalled - that she would never speak of it again and expected the same silence of him.

"aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ," wɑz ɔl i sɛd.

"I remember," was all he said.

"æn stɪl noʊ əpɑlədʒi, aɪ səpoʊz? jə θɹu mi ɪndə ə pɑnd." ʃi dɪd nɑt smaɪl, ðoʊ ʃi kəd fil əmjuzmən əɾ ɪt, naʊ. "ɛvɹi stɪtʃ aɪ hæd wɑz soʊkt, ən ɪn wʌt jə bɔɹɾɝmɪn kɔl nu spɹɪŋ. aɪ nɪɹli fɹoʊz."

"And still no apology, I suppose? You threw me into a pond." She did not smile, though she could feel amusement at it, now. "Every stitch I had was soaked, and in what you Bordermen call new spring. I nearly froze."

"aɪ ɹikɔl aɪ bɪlt ə faɪɝ, tu, ən hʌŋ blæŋkəts soʊ jə kəd wɔɹm jɝsɛlf ɪn pɹaɪvəsi." hi poʊkt ət ðə bɝnɪŋ lɔɡz ən ɹɪtɝn ðə faɪɝtul tə ɪts hʊk. ivən sʌmɝ naɪts wɝ kul ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. "aɪ ɔlsoʊ ɹikɔl ðət waɪl aɪ slɛp ðət naɪt, jə dʌmp hæf ðə pɑn ɑn mi. ɪt wʊɾə seɪvd ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə ʃɪvɝɪŋ ɑn boʊθ əɹ pɑɹts ɪf jə hæd sɪmpli toʊl mi jə wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹæðɝ ðən dɛmənstʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ɪt. ɹæðɝ ðən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə sɛpɝeɪt mi fɹəm maɪ sɔɹd. nɑɾ ə ɡʊd weɪ tə ɪntʃɹədus jɝsɛlf tə ə bɔɹɾɝmən, ivən fəɹ ə jʌŋ wʊmən."

"I recall I built a fire, too, and hung blankets so you could warm yourself in privacy." He poked at the burning logs and returned the firetool to its hook. Even summer nights were cool in the Borderlands. "I also recall that while I slept that night, you dumped half the pond on me. It would have saved a great deal of shivering on both our parts if you had simply told me you were Aes Sedai rather than demonstrating it. Rather than trying to separate me from my sword. Not a good way to introduce yourself to a Borderman, even for a young woman."

"aɪ wɑz jʌŋ, ən əloʊn, ən jə wɝ əz lɑɹdʒ ðən əz jə ɑɹ naʊ, ən jəɹ fɪɹsnəs mɔɹ oʊpən. aɪ dɪd nɑt wɑn jə tə noʊ aɪ wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪt sim tə mi ət ðə taɪm jə maɪɾ ænsɝ maɪ kwɛstʃənz mɔɹ fɹili ɪf jə dɪd nɑt noʊ." ʃi fɛl saɪlən fəɹ ə moʊmənt, θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðə jɪɹz sɪns ðət miɾɪŋ. ɪt hæd bɪn ɡʊd tə faɪn ə kəmpænjən tə dʒɔɪn əɹ ɪn əɹ kwɛst. "ɪn ðə wiks ðət fɑloʊd, dɪd jə səspɛk ðəɾ aɪ wəɾ æsk jə tə bɑn tə mi? aɪ dɪsaɪɾɪd jə wɝ ðə wʌn ɪn ðə fɝs deɪ."

"I was young, and alone, and you were as large then as you are now, and your fierceness more open. I did not want you to know I was Aes Sedai. It seemed to me at the time you might answer my questions more freely if you did not know." She fell silent for a moment, thinking of the years since that meeting. It had been good to find a companion to join her in her quest. "In the weeks that followed, did you suspect that I would ask you to bond to me? I decided you were the one in the first day."

"aɪ nɛvɝ ɡɛst," hi sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "aɪ wɑz tu bɪzi wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf aɪ kəɾ ɛskɔɹt jə tə tʃeɪkɪn ən kip ə hoʊl skɪn. ə dɪfɹən sɝpɹaɪz jə hæd fəɹ mi ɛvɹi naɪt. ði æns aɪ ɹikɔl ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk aɪ hæd wʌn ɡʊd naɪts slip ðət hoʊl ɹaɪd."

"I never guessed," he said dryly. "I was too busy wondering if I could escort you to Chachin and keep a whole skin. A different surprise you had for me every night. The ants I recall in particular. I don't think I had one good night's sleep that whole ride."

ʃi pɝmɪɾəd hɝsɛlf ə smɔl smaɪl, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ. "aɪ wɑz jʌŋ," ʃi ɹɪpiɾɪd. "æn dʌz jəɹ bɑn tʃeɪf æftɝ ɔl ðiz jɪɹz? jə ɑɹ nɑɾ ə mæn tə wɛɹ ə liʃ izəli, ivən soʊ laɪɾ ə wʌn əz maɪn." ɪt wɑz ə stɪŋɪŋ kɑmɛnt; ʃi mɛn ɪt tə bi soʊ.

She permitted herself a small smile, remembering. "I was young," she repeated. "And does your bond chafe after all these years? You are not a man to wear a leash easily, even so light a one as mine." It was a stinging comment; she meant it to be so.

"noʊ." hɪz vɔɪs wɑz kul, bʌɾ i tʊk ʌp ðə faɪɝtul əɡɛn ən ɡeɪv ðə bleɪz ə fɪɹs poʊkɪŋ ɪt dɪd nɑt nid. spɑɹks kæskeɪɾɪd ʌp ðə tʃɪmni. "aɪ tʃoʊz fɹili, noʊɪŋ wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪnteɪld." ði aɪɝn ɹɑd klæɾɝd bæk ɑntu ɪts hʊk, ən i meɪɾ ə fɔɹməl baʊ. "ɑnɝ tə sɝv, mɔɪɹeɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪts bɪn ən wɪl bi soʊ, ɔlweɪz."

"No." His voice was cool, but he took up the firetool again and gave the blaze a fierce poking it did not need. Sparks cascaded up the chimney. "I chose freely, knowing what it entailed." The iron rod clattered back onto its hook, and he made a formal bow. "Honor to serve, Moiraine Aes Sedai. It has been and will be so, always."

mɔɪɹeɪn snɪft. "jɔɹ hjumɪlɪɾi, læn ɡeɪɾɪn, hæz ɔlweɪz bɪn mɔɹ ɛɹəɡəns ðən moʊs kɪŋz kəd mænədʒ wɪð ðɛɹ ɑɹmiz ət ðɛɹ bæks. fɹəm ðə fɝs deɪ aɪ mɛt ju, ɪts bɪn soʊ."

Moiraine sniffed. "Your humility, Lan Gaidin, has always been more arrogance than most kings could manage with their armies at their backs. From the first day I met you, it has been so."

"waɪ ɔl ðɪs tɔk ə deɪz pæst, mɔɪɹeɪn?"

"Why all this talk of days past, Moiraine?"

fəɹ ðə hʌnʒɹədθ taɪm - əɹ soʊ ɪt sim tə hɝ - ʃi kənsɪɾɝd ðə wɝdz tə juz. "bɪfɔɹ wi lɛf tɑɹ vəlɑn aɪ meɪɾ ɝeɪnʒmənts, ʃəɾ ɛniθɪŋ hæpən tə mi, fəɹ jəɹ bɑn tə pæs tə ənʌðɝ." hi stɛɹɾ ət hɝ, saɪlənt. "wɛn jə fil maɪ dɛθ, jəl faɪn jɝsɛlf kəmpɛl tə sik əɹ aʊɾ ɪmiɾiətli. aɪ də nɑt wɑn jə tə bi sɝpɹaɪz baɪ ɪt."

For the hundredth time - or so it seemed to her - she considered the words to use. "Before we left Tar Valon I made arrangements, should anything happen to me, for your bond to pass to another." He stared at her, silent. "When you feel my death, you will find yourself compelled to seek her out immediately. I do not want you to be surprised by it."

"kəmpɛld," hi bɹið sɔfli, æŋɡɹəli. "nɛvɝ wʌns əv jə juz maɪ bɑn tə kəmpɛl mi. aɪ θɔt jə mɔɹ ðən dɪsəpɹuvd ə ðæt."

"Compelled," he breathed softly, angrily. "Never once have you used my bond to compel me. I thought you more than disapproved of that."

"hæɾ aɪ lɛf ðɪs θɪŋ əndʌn, jə wəd bi fɹi ʌv ðə bɑn ət maɪ dɛθ, ən nɑɾ ivən maɪ stʃɹɔŋɡəs kəmæn tə jə wəd hoʊld. əl nɑɾ əlaʊ jə tə daɪ ɪn ə jusləs ətɛmp tə əvɛnʒ mi. ən əl nɑɾ əlaʊ jə tə ɹɪtɝn tə jəɹ ikwəli jusləs pɹaɪvət wɔɹ ɪn ðə blaɪt. ðə wɔɹ wi faɪɾ ɪz ðə seɪm wɔɹ, ɪf jə kəɾ oʊnli si ɪt soʊ, ən əl si ðət jə faɪɾ ɪt tə səm pɝpəs. niðɝ vɛnʒəns nɔɹ ən ənbɹaɪd dɛθ ɪn ðə blaɪt wɪl du."

"Had I left this thing undone, you would be free of the bond at my death, and not even my strongest command to you would hold. I will not allow you to die in a useless attempt to avenge me. And I will not allow you to return to your equally useless private war in the Blight. The war we fight is the same war, if you could only see it so, and I will see that you fight it to some purpose. Neither vengeance nor an unburied death in the Blight will do."

"æn dʒju fɔɹsi jəɹ dɛθ kʌmɪŋ sun?" hɪz vɔɪs wɑz kwaɪət, hɪz feɪs ɪkspɹɛʃənləs, boʊθ laɪk stoʊn ɪn ə dɛd wɪntɝ blɪzɝd. ɪt wɑz ə mænɝ ʃi hæd sin ɪn ɪm mɛni taɪmz, juʒəwəli wən i wɑz ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə vaɪələns. "hæv jə plæn sʌmθɪŋ, wɪθaʊt mi, ðət wɪl si jə dɛd?"

"And do you foresee your death coming soon?" His voice was quiet, his face expressionless, both like stone in a dead winter blizzard. It was a manner she had seen in him many times, usually when he was on the point of violence. "Have you planned something, without me, that will see you dead?"

"aɪ æm sʌɾənli ɡlæd ðəɹ ɪz noʊ pɑn ɪn ðɪs ɹum," ʃi mɝmɝd, ðən ɹeɪzd əɹ hænz wən i stɪfənd, əfɛndəɾ əɾ əɹ laɪt toʊn. "aɪ si maɪ dɛθ ɪn ɛvɹi deɪ, əz jə du. haʊ kəɾ aɪ nɑt, wɪð ðə tæsk wɪv fɑloʊd ðiz jɪɹz? naʊ, wɪð ɛvɹiθɪŋ kʌmɪŋ tə ə hɛd, aɪ mʌst si ɪɾ əz ivən mɔɹ pɑsəbəl."

"I am suddenly glad there is no pond in this room," she murmured, then raised her hands when he stiffened, offended at her light tone. "I see my death in every day, as you do. How could I not, with the task we have followed these years? Now, with everything coming to a head, I must see it as even more possible."

fəɹ ə moʊmən i stʌɾid ɪz hænz, lɑɹdʒ ən skwɛɹ. "aɪ hæd nɛvɝ θɔt," hi sɛd sloʊli, "ðæɾ aɪ maɪt nɑt bi ðə fɝst ʌv əs tə daɪ. sʌmhaʊ, ivən ət ðə wɝst, ɪɾ ɔlweɪz simd. . . ." əbɹʌpli hi skɹʌbd ɪz hænz əɡɛnst itʃ ʌðɝ. "ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ə tʃæns aɪ maɪt bi ɡɪvən laɪk ə pɛt læpdɔɡ, aɪ wəɾ ət lis laɪk tə noʊ tə hum aɪm biɪŋ ɡɪvən."

For a moment he studied his hands, large and square. "I had never thought," he said slowly, "that I might not be the first of us to die. Somehow, even at the worst, it always seemed. . . ." Abruptly he scrubbed his hands against each other. "If there is a chance I might be given like a pet lapdog, I would at least like to know to whom I am being given."

"aɪ hæv nɛvɝ sin jə əz ə pɛt," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd ʃɑɹpli, "ænd niðɝ dʌz maɪɹɛl."

"I have never seen you as a pet," Moiraine said sharply, "and neither does Myrelle."

"maɪɹɛl." hi ɡɹɪməst. "jɛs, ʃi wəɾ əv tə bi ɡɹin, əɹ ɛls səm slɪp ʌv ə ɡɝl dʒʌst ɹeɪz tə fʊl sɪstɝhʊd."

"Myrelle." He grimaced. "Yes, she would have to be Green, or else some slip of a girl just raised to full sisterhood."

"ɪf maɪɹɛl kən kip əɹ θɹi ɡeɪɾɪn ɪn laɪn, pɝhæps ʃiz ə tʃæns tə mænədʒ ju. ðoʊ ʃi wəd laɪk tə kip ju, aɪ noʊ, ʃiz pɹɑməs tə pæs jəɹ bɑn tə ənʌðɝ wən ʃi faɪnz wʌn u suts jə bɛɾɝ."

"If Myrelle can keep her three Gaidin in line, perhaps she has a chance to manage you. Though she would like to keep you, I know, she has promised to pass your bond to another when she finds one who suits you better."

"soʊ. nɑɾ ə pɛt bʌɾ ə pɑɹsəl. maɪɹɛl ɪz tə bi ə - ə kɛɹteɪkɝ! mɔɪɹeɪn, nɑɾ ivən ðə ɡɹinz tʃɹit ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz soʊ. noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ hæz pæst əɹ wɔɹɾɝz bɑn tə ənʌðɝ ɪn fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, bʌt jə ɪntɛn tə də ɪt tə mi nɑt wʌns, bʌt twaɪs!"

"So. Not a pet but a parcel. Myrelle is to be a - a caretaker! Moiraine, not even the Greens treat their Warders so. No Aes Sedai has passed her Warder's bond to another in four hundred years, but you intend to do it to me not once, but twice!"

"ɪɾ ɪz dʌn, ən əl nɑɾ əndu ɪt."

"It is done, and I will not undo it."

"ðə laɪt blaɪn mi, ɪf aɪm tə bi pæs fɹəm hæn tə hænd, dʒju ət list əv səm aɪdiə ɪn huz hæn əl ɛnd?"

"The Light blind me, if I am to be passed from hand to hand, do you at least have some idea in whose hand I will end?"

"wʌɾ aɪ də ɪz fəɹ jəɹ oʊn ɡʊd, ən pɝhæps ɪt meɪ bi fəɹ ənʌðɝz, əz wɛl. ɪt meɪ bi ðət maɪɹɛl wɪl faɪn ə slɪp ʌv ə ɡɝl dʒʌst ɹeɪz tə sɪstɝhʊd - wɑz ðət nɑt wʌt jə sɛd? - hu nidz ə wɔɹɾɝ hɑɹɾənd ɪn bæɾəl ən waɪz ɪn ðə weɪz ə ðə wɝld, ə slɪp ʌv ə ɡɝl u meɪ nid sʌmwʌn u wɪl θɹoʊ hɝ ɪndə ə pɑnd. juv mʌtʃ tə ɔfɝ, læn, ən tə si ɪt weɪstəɾ ɪn ən ənmɑɹkt ɡɹeɪv, əɹ lɛf tə ðə ɹeɪvənz, wən ɪt kəd ɡoʊ tə ə wʊmən u nidz ɪt wəd bi wɝs ðən ðə sɪn ʌv wɪtʃ ðə waɪtkloʊks pɹeɪt. jɛs, aɪ θɪŋk ʃɪl əv niɾ ə ju."

"What I do is for your own good, and perhaps it may be for another's, as well. It may be that Myrelle will find a slip of a girl just raised to sisterhood - was that not what you said? - who needs a Warder hardened in battle and wise in the ways of the world, a slip of a girl who may need someone who will throw her into a pond. You have much to offer, Lan, and to see it wasted in an unmarked grave, or left to the ravens, when it could go to a woman who needs it would be worse than the sin of which the Whitecloaks prate. Yes, I think she will have need of you."

lænz aɪz waɪɾənd slaɪtli; fəɹ ɪm ɪt wɑz ðə seɪm əz ənʌðɝ mæn ɡæspɪŋ ɪn ʃɑk sɝmaɪz. ʃi hæd sɛldəm sin ɪm soʊ ɔf bæləns. hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ twaɪs bɪfɔɹ i spoʊk. "æn u juv ɪn maɪn fəɹ ðɪs - "

Lan's eyes widened slightly; for him it was the same as another man gasping in shocked surmise. She had seldom seen him so off balance. He opened his mouth twice before he spoke. "And who do you have in mind for this - "

ʃi kʌɾ ɪm ɔf. "ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ ðə bɑn dʌz nɑt tʃeɪf, læn ɡeɪɾɪn? dʒju ɹilaɪz fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, oʊnli naʊ, ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ə ðət bɑnd, ðə dɛpθ ʌv ɪt? jə kəɾ ɛnd wɪð səm bʌɾɪŋ waɪt, ɔl lɑdʒɪk ən noʊ hɑɹt, əɹ wɪð ə jʌŋ bɹaʊn u siz jə əz nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ə pɛɹ ə hænz tə kæɹi hɝ bʊks ən skɛtʃəz. aɪ kən hæn jə wɛɹ aɪ wɪl, laɪk ə pɑɹsəl - əɹ ə læpdɔɡ - ən jə kən də noʊ mɔɹ ðən ɡoʊ. ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ ɪt dʌz nɑt tʃeɪf?"

She cut him off. "Are you sure the bond does not chafe, Lan Gaidin? Do you realize for the first time, only now, the strength of that bond, the depth of it? You could end with some budding White, all logic and no heart, or with a young Brown who sees you as nothing more than a pair of hands to carry her books and sketches. I can hand you where I will, like a parcel - or a lapdog - and you can do no more than go. Are you sure it does not chafe?"

"ɪz ðət wʌt ðɪs əz bɪn fɔɹ?" hi ɡɹeɪɾɪd. hɪz aɪz bɝn laɪk blu faɪɝ, ən ɪz maʊθ twɪstəd. æŋɡɝ; fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ɛvɝ ðət ʃi hæd sin, oʊpən æŋɡɝ ɛtʃt ɪz feɪs. "hæz ɔl ðɪs tɔk bɪn ə tɛst - ə tɛst! - tə si ɪf jə kəd meɪk maɪ bɑn ɹʌb? æftɝ ɔl ðɪs taɪm? fɹəm ðə deɪ aɪ plɛdʒ tə ju, aɪ hæv ɹɪɾən wɛɹ jə sɛd ɹaɪd, ivən wən aɪ θɔɾ ɪt fulɪʃ, ivən wən aɪ hæd ɹizən tə ɹaɪɾ ənʌðɝ weɪ. nɛvɝ dɪd jə nid maɪ bɑn tə fɔɹs mi. ɑn jəɹ wɝɾ aɪ hæv wɑtʃt jə wɔk ɪndə deɪnʒɝ ən kɛp maɪ hænz ət maɪ saɪdz wən aɪ wɑntəd nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən tə aʊt sɔɹɾ ən kɑɹv ə pæθ tə seɪfti fəɹ ju. æftɝ ðɪs, jə tɛs mi?"

"Is that what this has been for?" he grated. His eyes burned like blue fire, and his mouth twisted. Anger; for the first time ever that she had seen, open anger etched his face. "Has all this talk been a test - a test! - to see if you could make my bond rub? After all this time? From the day I pledged to you, I have ridden where you said ride, even when I thought it foolish, even when I had reason to ride another way. Never did you need my bond to force me. On your word I have watched you walk into danger and kept my hands at my sides when I wanted nothing more than to out sword and carve a path to safety for you. After this, you test me?"

"nɑɾ ə tɛst, læn. aɪ spoʊk pleɪnli, nɑt twɪstɪŋ, ən aɪ hæv dʌn əz aɪ sɛd. bʌɾ ət fæl dæɹə, aɪ bɪɡæn tə wʌndɝ ɪf jə wɝ stɪl hoʊli wɪð mi." ə wɛɹinɪs ɛntɝɾ ɪz aɪz. læn, fɝɡɪv mi. aɪ wəd nɑɾ əv kɹæk ðə wɔlz jə hoʊl soʊ hɑɹd, bʌɾ aɪ mʌs noʊ. "waɪ dɪd jə də əz jə dɪd wɪð ɹænd?" hi blɪŋkt; ɪt wɑz ɑbviəsli nɑt wʌɾ i ɪkspɛktəd. ʃi nu wʌɾ i hæd θɔt wɑz kʌmɪŋ, ən ʃi wəd nɑt lɛɾ ʌp naʊ ðəɾ i wɑz ɔf bæləns. "ju bɹɔɾ ɪm tə ði æmɪɝlɪn spikɪŋ ən æktɪŋ əz ə bɔɹɾɝ lɔɹɾ ən ə soʊlʒɝ bɔɹn. ɪt fɪt, ɪn ə weɪ, wɪð wʌɾ aɪ plæn fəɹ hɪm, bʌt jə ən aɪ nɛvɝ spoʊk ə titʃɪŋ ɪm ɛni ʌv ðæt. waɪ, læn?"

"Not a test, Lan. I spoke plainly, not twisting, and I have done as I said. But at Fal Dara, I began to wonder if you were still wholly with me." A wariness entered his eyes. Lan, forgive me. I would not have cracked the walls you hold so hard, but I must know. "Why did you do as you did with Rand?" He blinked; it was obviously not what he expected. She knew what he had thought was coming, and she would not let up now that he was off balance. "You brought him to the Amyrlin speaking and acting as a Border lord and a soldier born. It fit, in a way, with what I planned for him, but you and I never spoke of teaching him any of that. Why, Lan?"

"ɪt simd . . . ɹaɪt. ə jʌŋ wʊlfhn mʌs miɾ ɪz fɝst wʊlf sʌmdeɪ, bʌɾ ɪf ðə wʊlf siz ɪm əz ə pʌpi, ɪf i æks ðə pʌpi, ðə wʊlf wɪl ʃʊɹli kɪl hɪm. ðə wʊlfhn mʌs bi ə wʊlfhn ɪn ðə wʊlfs aɪz ivən mɔɹ ðən ɪn ɪz oʊn, ɪf hiz tə sɝvaɪv."

"It seemed . . . right. A young wolfhound must meet his first wolf someday, but if the wolf sees him as a puppy, if he acts the puppy, the wolf will surely kill him. The wolfhound must be a wolfhound in the wolf's eyes even more than in his own, if he is to survive."

"ɪz ðət haʊ jə si ɛɛs sədaɪ? ði æmɪɝlɪn? mi? wʊlvz aʊt tə pʊl daʊn jəɹ jʌŋ wʊlfhnd?" læn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ju noʊ wʌɾ i ɪz, læn. jə noʊ wʌɾ i mʌs bɪkʌm. mʌst. wʌɾ aɪ hæv wɝk fəɹ sɪns ðə deɪ jə ən aɪ mɛt, ən bɪfɔɹ. dʒju naʊ daʊt wʌɾ aɪ du?"

"Is that how you see Aes Sedai? The Amyrlin? Me? Wolves out to pull down your young wolfhound?" Lan shook his head. "You know what he is, Lan. You know what he must become. Must. What I have worked for since the day you and I met, and before. Do you now doubt what I do?"

"noʊ. noʊ, bʌt. . . ." hi wɑz ɹəkʌvɝɪŋ hɪmsɛlf, bɪldɪŋ ɪz wɔlz əɡɛn. bʌt ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ɹibɪl jɛt. "haʊ mɛni taɪmz əv jə sɛd ðət tɑvɝən pʊl ðoʊz ɝaʊn əm laɪk twɪɡz ɪn ə wɝlpul? pɝhæps aɪ wɑz pʊld, tu. aɪ oʊnli noʊ ðəɾ ɪt fɛlt ɹaɪt. ðoʊz fɑɹm foʊk niɾəd sʌmwʌn ɑn ðɛɹ saɪd. ɹænd dɪd, ət list. mɔɪɹeɪn, aɪ bɪliv ɪn wʌt jə du, ivən əz naʊ, wən aɪ noʊ nɑt hæf ʌv ɪt; bɪliv əz aɪ bɪliv ɪn ju. aɪ hæv nɑɾ æsk tə bi ɹilis fɹəm maɪ bɑnd, nɔɹ wɪl aɪ. wʌtɛvɝ jəɹ plænz fəɹ daɪɪŋ ən siɪŋ mi seɪfli - dɪspoʊzd ʌv - əl teɪk ɡɹeɪt plɛʒɝ ɪn kipɪŋ jə əlaɪv ən siɪŋ ðoʊz plænz, ət list, ɡoʊ fəɹ nʌθɪŋ."

"No. No, but. . . ." He was recovering himself, building his walls again. But they were not rebuilt yet. "How many times have you said that ta'veren pull those around them like twigs in a whirlpool? Perhaps I was pulled, too. I only know that it felt right. Those farm folk needed someone on their side. Rand did, at least. Moiraine, I believe in what you do, even as now, when I know not half of it; believe as I believe in you. I have not asked to be released from my bond, nor will I. Whatever your plans for dying and seeing me safely - disposed of - I will take great pleasure in keeping you alive and seeing those plans, at least, go for nothing."

"tɑvɝən," mɔɪɹeɪn saɪd. "pɝhæps ɪt wɑz ðæt. ɹæðɝ ðən ɡaɪɾɪŋ ə tʃɪp floʊɾɪŋ daʊn ə stʃɹim, aɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡaɪɾ ə lɔɡ θɹu ɹæpədz. ɛvɹi taɪm aɪ pʊʃ əɾ ɪt, ɪt pʊʃəz ət mi, ən ðə lɔɡ ɡɹoʊz lɑɹdʒɝ ðə fɑɹðɝ wi ɡoʊ. jɛɾ aɪ mʌst si ɪt θɹu tə ði ɛnd." ʃi ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl læf. "aɪ wɪl nɑt bi ənhæpi, maɪ oʊl fɹɛnd, ɪf jə mænədʒ tə pʊt ðoʊz plænz ɝaɪ. naʊ, pliz liv mi. aɪ nid tə bi əloʊn tə θɪŋk." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊnli ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ fəɹ ðə dɔɹ. ət ðə læs moʊmənt, ðoʊ, ʃi kəd nɑt lɛɾ ɪm ɡoʊ wɪθaʊt wʌn mɔɹ kwɛstʃən. "du jə ɛvɝ dʒɹim ə sʌmθɪŋ dɪfɹənt, læn?"

"Ta'veren," Moiraine sighed. "Perhaps it was that. Rather than guiding a chip floating down a stream, I am trying to guide a log through rapids. Every time I push at it, it pushes at me, and the log grows larger the farther we go. Yet I must see it through to the end." She gave a little laugh. "I will not be unhappy, my old friend, if you manage to put those plans awry. Now, please leave me. I need to be alone to think." He hesitated only a moment before turning for the door. At the last moment, though, she could not let him go without one more question. "Do you ever dream of something different, Lan?"

"ɔl mɛn dʒɹim. bʌɾ aɪ noʊ dʒɹimz fəɹ dʒɹimz. ðɪs" - hi tʌtʃt ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt - "ɪz ɹiæləɾi." ðə wɔlz wɝ bæk, əz haɪ ən hɑɹɾ əz ɛvɝ.

"All men dream. But I know dreams for dreams. This" - he touched his sword hilt - "is reality." The walls were back, as high and hard as ever.

fəɹ ə taɪm æftɝ i lɛft, mɔɪɹeɪn lin bæk ɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ, lʊkɪŋ ɪndə ðə faɪɝ. ʃi θɔɾ ə nɪneɪiv ən kɹæks ɪn ə wɔl. wɪθaʊt tʃɹaɪɪŋ, wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ, ðət jʌŋ wʊmən hæd pʊt kɹæks ɪn lænz wɔlz ən siɾəd ðə kɹæks wɪð kɹipɝz. læn θɔɾ i wɑz sɪkjʊɹ, ɪmpɹɪzən ɪn ɪz fɔɹtʃɹəs baɪ feɪɾ ən ɪz oʊn wɪʃɪz, bʌt sloʊli, peɪʃənli, ðə kɹipɝz wɝ tɛɹɪŋ daʊn ðə wɔlz tə bɛɹ ðə mæn wɪðɪn. ɔlɹɛɾi hi wɑz ʃɛɹɪŋ səm ə nɪneɪivz lɔɪəltiz; ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ i hæd bɪn ɪndɪfɹən tə ði ɛmənz fil foʊk, ɪksɛpt əz pipəl ɪn hum mɔɪɹeɪn hæd səm ɪntʃɹəst. nɪneɪiv hæd tʃeɪnʒd ðəɾ əz ʃi hæd tʃeɪnʒd læn.

For a time after he left, Moiraine leaned back in her chair, looking into the fire. She thought of Nynaeve and cracks in a wall. Without trying, without thinking what she was doing, that young woman had put cracks in Lan's walls and seeded the cracks with creepers. Lan thought he was secure, imprisoned in his fortress by fate and his own wishes, but slowly, patiently, the creepers were tearing down the walls to bare the man within. Already he was sharing some of Nynaeve's loyalties; in the beginning he had been indifferent to the Emond's Field folk, except as people in whom Moiraine had some interest. Nynaeve had changed that as she had changed Lan.

tə hɝ sɝpɹaɪz, mɔɪɹeɪn fɛlt ə flæʃ ə dʒɛləsi. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ fɛl ðət bɪfɔɹ, sɝɾənli nɑt fəɹ ɛni ʌv ðə wɪmən u hæd θɹoʊn ðɛɹ hɑɹts əɾ ɪz fit, əɹ ðoʊz u hæd ʃɛɹɾ ɪz bɛd. ɪndid, ʃi hæd nɛvɝ θɔɾ ə hɪm əz ən əbdʒɛkt ə dʒɛləsi, hæd nɛvɝ θɔt soʊ ʌv ɛni mæn. ʃi wɑz mɛɹid tə hɝ bæɾəl, əz i wɑz mɛɹid tə hɪz. bʌt ðeɪ hæd bɪn kəmpænjənz ɪn ðoʊz bæɾəlz fəɹ soʊ lɔŋ. hi hæd ɹɪɾən ə hɔɹs tə dɛθ, ðən ɹʌn hɪmsɛlf nɪɹli tə dɛθ, kæɹiɪŋ əɹ ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz ət ðə læst, tə æneɪjə fəɹ hilɪŋ. ʃi hæd tɛndəɾ ɪz wunz mɔɹ ðən wʌns, kipɪŋ wɪð əɹ ɑɹts ə laɪf i hæd bɪn ɹɛɾi tə θɹoʊ əweɪ tə seɪv hɝz. hi hæɾ ɔlweɪz sɛɾ i wɑz wɛɾəd wɪð dɛθ. naʊ ə nu bɹaɪd hæd kæptʃɝɾ ɪz aɪz, ðoʊ hi wɑz blaɪn tə ɪt. hi θɔɾ i stɪl stʊd stʃɹɔŋ bɪhaɪn ɪz wɔlz, bʌt nɪneɪiv hæd leɪs bɹaɪɾəl flaʊɝz ɪn ɪz hɛɹ. wəɾ i stɪl faɪn hɪmsɛlf eɪbəl tə kɔɹt dɛθ soʊ blaɪθli? mɔɪɹeɪn wʌndɝd wən i wəɾ æsk əɹ tə ɹilis ɪm fɹəm ɪz bɑnd. ən wʌt ʃi wəd də wən i dɪd.

To her surprise, Moiraine felt a flash of jealousy. She had never felt that before, certainly not for any of the women who had thrown their hearts at his feet, or those who had shared his bed. Indeed, she had never thought of him as an object of jealousy, had never thought so of any man. She was married to her battle, as he was married to his. But they had been companions in those battles for so long. He had ridden a horse to death, then run himself nearly to death, carrying her in his arms at the last, to Anaiya for Healing. She had tended his wounds more than once, keeping with her arts a life he had been ready to throw away to save hers. He had always said he was wedded with death. Now a new bride had captured his eyes, though he was blind to it. He thought he still stood strong behind his walls, but Nynaeve had laced bridal flowers in his hair. Would he still find himself able to court death so blithely? Moiraine wondered when he would ask her to release him from his bond. And what she would do when he did.

wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs, ʃi ɡɑt tə hɝ fit. ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt mæɾɝz. fɑɹ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt. hɝ aɪz ɹæn oʊvɝ ði oʊpən bʊks ən peɪpɝz kɹaʊɾɪŋ ðə ɹum. soʊ mɛni hɪns, bʌt noʊ ænsɝz.

With a grimace, she got to her feet. There were more important matters. Far more important. Her eyes ran over the open books and papers crowding the room. So many hints, but no answers.

vændin keɪm ɪn wɪð ə tipɑɾ ən kʌps ɑn ə tʃɹeɪ. ʃi wɑz slɛndɝ ən ɡɹeɪsfəl, wɪð ə stʃɹeɪt bæk, ən ðə hɛɹ ɡæðɝd nitli ət ðə neɪp ə hɝ nɛk wɑz ɔlmoʊst waɪt. ði eɪɡləsnəs ə hɝ smuð feɪs wɑz ðəɾ ə lɔŋ, lɔŋ jɪɹz. "aɪ wʊɾə hæd jeɪɛm bɹɪŋ ðɪs, ən nɑt dɪstɝb jə maɪsɛlf, bʌt hiz aʊɾ ɪn ðə bɑɹn pɹæktəsɪŋ wɪð ɪz sɔɹd." ʃi meɪɾ ə klʌkɪŋ saʊn əz ʃi pʊʃt ə bæɾɝd mænjəskɹɪpt əsaɪd tə sɛt ðə tʃɹeɪ ɑn ðə teɪbəl. "læn biɪŋ hɪɹ əz ɪm ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ hiz mɔɹ ðən ə ɡɑɹɾənɝ ən hændimæn. ɡeɪɾɪn ɑɹ soʊ stɪf-nɛkt. aɪ θɔt læn wəd stɪl bi hɪɹ; ðæts waɪ aɪ bɹɔɾ ən ɛkstʃɹə kʌp. hæv jə faʊnd wʌt jə wɝ sikɪŋ?"

Vandene came in with a teapot and cups on a tray. She was slender and graceful, with a straight back, and the hair gathered neatly at the nape of her neck was almost white. The agelessness of her smooth face was that of long, long years. "I would have had Jaem bring this, and not disturb you myself, but he's out in the barn practicing with his sword." She made a clucking sound as she pushed a battered manuscript aside to set the tray on the table. "Lan being here has him remembering he's more than a gardener and handyman. Gaidin are so stiff-necked. I thought Lan would still be here; that's why I brought an extra cup. Have you found what you were seeking?"

"aɪ æm nɑɾ ivən ʃʊɹ wʌɾ ɪts aɪm sikɪŋ." mɔɪɹeɪn fɹaʊnd, stʌɾiɪŋ ði ʌðɝ wʊmən. vændin wɑz ə ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ, nɑt bɹaʊn laɪk əɹ sɪstɝ, jɛt ðə tu ʌv əm hæd stʌɾid soʊ lɔŋ təɡɛðɝ ðət ʃi nu əz mʌtʃ ə hɪstɝi əz æɾɪliz.

"I am not even sure what it is I am seeking." Moiraine frowned, studying the other woman. Vandene was of the Green Ajah, not Brown like her sister, yet the two of them had studied so long together that she knew as much of history as Adeleas.

"wʌtɛvɝ ɪɾ ɪz, jə doʊn ivən sim tə noʊ wɛɹ tə lʊk." vændin ʃɪftəd səm ə ðə bʊks ən mænjəskɹɪps ɑn ðə teɪbəl, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd. "soʊ mɛni sʌbʒɪkts. ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz. ðə wɑtʃɝz oʊvɝ ðə weɪvz. ðə lɛdʒən ə ðə ɹɪtɝn. tu tʃɹiɾəsəz ɑn ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. θɹi ɑn dɑɹk pɹɑfəsi, ən - laɪt, hɪɹz sænθɹəz bʊk ɑn ðə fɔɹseɪkən. næsti, ðæt. əz næsti əz ðɪs ɑn ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. ən ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, ɪn θɹi tʃɹænzleɪʃənz ən ði ɝɪdʒənəl. mɔɪɹeɪn, wʌtɛvɝ ɑɹ jə æftɝ? ðə pɹɑfəsiz, aɪ kən ʌndɝstænd - wi hɪɹ səm nuz hɪɹ, ɹɪmoʊɾ əz wi ɑɹ. wi hɪɹ səm ʌv wʌts hæpənɪŋ ɪn ɪljən. ðɛɹz ivən ə ɹumɝ ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ ðət sʌmwʌn əz ɔlɹɛɾi faʊn ðə hɔɹn." ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd wɪð ə mænjəskɹɪpt ɑn ðə hɔɹn, ən kɔft ɪn ðə dʌs ðət ɹoʊz fɹəm ɪt. "aɪ dɪskaʊn ðæt, ʌv kɔɹs. ðəɹ wəd bi ɹumɝz. bʌt wʌt - ? noʊ. jə sɛd jə wɑntəd pɹaɪvəsi, ən əl ɡɪv ɪt tə ju."

"Whatever it is, you don't even seem to know where to look." Vandene shifted some of the books and manuscripts on the table, shaking her head. "So many subjects. The Trolloc Wars. The Watchers Over the Waves. The legend of the Return. Two treatises on the Horn of Valere. Three on dark prophecy, and - Light, here's Santhra's book on the Forsaken. Nasty, that. As nasty as this on Shadar Logoth. And the Prophecies of the Dragon, in three translations and the original. Moiraine, whatever are you after? The Prophecies, I can understand - we hear some news here, remote as we are. We hear some of what's happening in Illian. There's even a rumor in the village that someone has already found the Horn." She gestured with a manuscript on the Horn, and coughed in the dust that rose from it. "I discount that, of course. There would be rumors. But what - ? No. You said you wanted privacy, and I'll give it to you."

"stɑp ə moʊmənt," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, hɔltɪŋ ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə dɔɹ. "pɝhæps jə kən ænsɝ səm kwɛstʃənz fəɹ mi."

"Stop a moment," Moiraine said, halting the other Aes Sedai short of the door. "Perhaps you can answer some questions for me."

"aɪ wɪl tʃɹaɪ." vændin smaɪl sʌɾənli. "æɾɪliz kleɪmz aɪ ʃʊɾə tʃoʊzən bɹaʊn. æsk." ʃi pɔɹd tu kʌps ə ti ən hændəd wʌn tə mɔɪɹeɪn, ðən tʊk ə tʃɛɹ baɪ ðə faɪɝ.

"I will try." Vandene smiled suddenly. "Adeleas claims I should have chosen Brown. Ask." She poured two cups of tea and handed one to Moiraine, then took a chair by the fire.

stim kɝld oʊvɝ ðə kʌps waɪl mɔɪɹeɪn tʃoʊz əɹ kwɛstʃənz kɛɹfəli. tə faɪn ði ænsɝz, ən nɑt ɹɪvil tu mʌtʃ. "ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ɪz nɑt mɛnʃən ɪn ðə pɹɑfəsiz, bʌɾ ɪz ɪt lɪŋk tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɛniwɛɹ?"

Steam curled over the cups while Moiraine chose her questions carefully. To find the answers, and not reveal too much. "The Horn of Valere is not mentioned in the Prophecies, but is it linked to the Dragon anywhere?"

"noʊ. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə fæk ðət ðə hɔɹn mʌs bi faʊn bɪfɔɹ tɑɹmən ɡdən ən ðət ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪz səpoʊz tə faɪt ðə læs bæɾəl, ðəɹ ɪz noʊ lɪŋk bɪtwin əm əɾ ɔl." ðə waɪt-hɛɹd wʊmən sɪpt əɹ ti ən weɪɾəd.

"No. Except for the fact that the Horn must be found before Tarmon Gai'don and that the Dragon Reborn is supposed to fight the Last Battle, there is no link between them at all." The white-haired woman sipped her tea and waited.

"dʌz ɛniθɪŋ lɪŋk ðə dʒɹæɡən wɪð toʊmən hɛd?"

"Does anything link the Dragon with Toman Head?"

vændin hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "jɛs, ən noʊ. ðɪs ɪz ə boʊn bɪtwin æɾɪliz ən mi." hɝ vɔɪs tʊk ɑn ə lɛktʃɝɪŋ toʊn, ən fəɹ ə taɪm ʃi dɪd saʊn laɪk ə bɹaʊn. "ðɛɹ ɪz ə vɝs ɪn ði ɝɪdʒənəl ðət tʃɹænzleɪts lɪɾɝəli əz 'faɪv ɹaɪd fɔɹθ, ən fɔɹ ɹɪtɝn. əbʌv ðə wɑtʃɝz ʃæl i pɹoʊkleɪm hɪmsɛlf, bænɝd kɹɔs ðə skaɪ ɪn faɪɝ. . . .' wɛl, ɪt ɡoʊz ɑn. ðə pɔɪn ɪz, ðə wɝd mævɹən. aɪ seɪ ɪt ʃəd bi tʃɹænzleɪɾəd nɑt sɪmpli əz 'wɑtʃɝz,' wɪtʃ ɪz ævɹən. mævɹən əz mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾəns tə ɪt. aɪ seɪ ɪt minz ðə wɑtʃɝz oʊvɝ ðə weɪvz, ðoʊ ðeɪ kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz də maɪɹ ævɹən, ʌv kɔɹs, nɑt mævɹən. æɾɪliz tɛlz mi aɪm kwɪbəlɪŋ. bʌɾ aɪ bɪliv ɪt minz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɪl əpɪɹ sʌmwɛɹ əbʌv toʊmən hɛd, ɪn ɑɹæd dumən, əɹ sɑldɑiə. æɾɪliz meɪ θɪŋk aɪm fulɪʃ, bʌɾ aɪ lɪsən tə ɛvɹi skɹæp aɪ hɪɹ kʌmɪŋ fɹəm sɑldɑiə ðiz deɪz. mæzɹim teɪm kən tʃænəl, soʊ aɪ hɪɹ, ən əɹ sɪstɝz hævən mænədʒ tə kɔɹnɝ ɪm jɛt. ɪf ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪz ɹibɔɹn, ən ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ faʊnd, ðən ðə læs bæɾəl ɪz kʌmɪŋ sun. wi meɪ nɛvɝ fɪnɪʃ əɹ hɪstɝi." ʃi ɡeɪv ə ʃɪvɝ, ðən əbɹʌpli læft. "ɑd θɪŋ tə wɝi əbaʊt. aɪ səpoʊz aɪm bɪkʌmɪŋ mɔɹ ə bɹaʊn. hɔɹəbəl θɪŋ tə kɑntəmpleɪt. æsk jəɹ nɛks kwɛstʃən."

Vandene hesitated. "Yes, and no. This is a bone between Adeleas and me." Her voice took on a lecturing tone, and for a time she did sound like a Brown. "There is a verse in the original that translates literally as 'Five ride forth, and four return. Above the watchers shall he proclaim himself, bannered cross the sky in fire. . . .' Well, it goes on. The point is, the word ma'vron. I say it should be translated not simply as 'watchers,' which is a'vron. Ma'vron has more importance to it. I say it means the Watchers Over the Waves, though they call themselves Do Miere A'vron, of course, not Ma'vron. Adeleas tells me I am quibbling. But I believe it means the Dragon Reborn will appear somewhere above Toman Head, in Arad Doman, or Saldaea. Adeleas may think I'm foolish, but I listen to every scrap I hear coming from Saldaea these days. Mazrim Taim can channel, so I hear, and our sisters haven't managed to corner him yet. If the Dragon is Reborn, and the Horn of Valere found, then the Last Battle is coming soon. We may never finish our history." She gave a shiver, then abruptly laughed. "Odd thing to worry about. I suppose I am becoming more a Brown. Horrible thing to contemplate. Ask your next question."

"aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk jə nid wɝi əbaʊt teɪm," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾ æbsənli. ɪt wɑz ə lɪŋk wɪð toʊmən hɛd, haʊɛvɝ smɔl ən tɛnjəwəs. "hi wɪl bi dɛlt wɪð əz lɑɡən wɑz. wʌɾ ə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ?"

"I do not think you need worry about Taim," Moiraine said absently. It was a link with Toman Head, however small and tenuous. "He will be dealt with as Logain was. What of Shadar Logoth?"

"ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ!" vændin snɔɹɾɪd. "ɪn bɹif, ðə sɪɾi wɑz dɪstʃɹɔɪd baɪ ɪts oʊn heɪt, ɛvɹi lɪvɪŋ θɪŋ ɪksɛp mɔɹɾɪθ, ðə kaʊnsəlɝ u bɪɡæn ɪɾ ɔl, juzɪŋ ðə tæktɪks ə ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz əɡɛns ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ən i naʊ laɪz tʃɹæp ðəɹ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ə soʊl tə stil. ɪts nɑt seɪf tə ɛntɝ, ən nʌθɪŋ ɪn ðə sɪɾi ɪz seɪf tə tʌtʃ. bʌɾ ɛvɹi nɑvəs kloʊs tə biɪŋ æksɛptɪd noʊz əz mʌtʃ əz ðæt. ɪn fʊl, jəl əv tə steɪ hɪɹ ə mʌnθ ən lɪsən tə æɾɪliz lɛktʃɝ - ʃiz ðə tʃɹu nɑlədʒ ʌv ɪt - bʌɾ ivən aɪ kən tɛl jə ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪn ɪt. ðət pleɪs wɑz dɛɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ jʊɹiən stoʊnboʊ ɹoʊz fɹəm ði æʃəz ə ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, ən i laɪz kloʊsəs tə ɪɾ ɪn hɪstɝi ʌv ɔl ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡənz."

"Shadar Logoth!" Vandene snorted. "In brief, the city was destroyed by its own hate, every living thing except Mordeth, the councilor who began it all, using the tactics of the Darkfriends against the Darkfriends, and he now lies trapped there waiting for a soul to steal. It is not safe to enter, and nothing in the city is safe to touch. But every novice close to being Accepted knows as much as that. In full, you will have to stay here a month and listen to Adeleas lecture - she has the true knowledge of it - but even I can tell you there's nothing of the Dragon in it. That place was dead a hundred years before Yurian Stonebow rose from the ashes of the Trolloc Wars, and he lies closest to it in history of all the false Dragons."

mɔɪɹeɪn ɹeɪzd ə hænd. "aɪ dɪd nɑt spik klɪɹli, ən aɪ də nɑt spik ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, naʊ, ɹibɔɹn əɹ fɔls. kən jə θɪŋk ʌv ɛni ɹizən waɪ ə feɪd wəd teɪk sʌmθɪŋ ðət hæd kʌm fɹəm ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ?"

Moiraine raised a hand. "I did not speak clearly, and I do not speak of the Dragon, now, Reborn or false. Can you think of any reason why a Fade would take something that had come from Shadar Logoth?"

"nɑɾ ɪf ɪt nu ðə θɪŋ fəɹ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz. ðə heɪt ðət kɪld ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ wɑz heɪt ðeɪ θɔt tə juz əɡɛns ðə dɑɹk wʌn; ɪt wəd dɪstʃɹɔɪ ʃæɾoʊzpɔn əz ʃʊɹli əz ɪt wəd ðoʊz u wɔk ɪn ðə laɪt. ðeɪ ɹaɪtli fɪɹ ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ əz mʌtʃ əz wi."

"Not if it knew the thing for what it was. The hate that killed Shadar Logoth was hate they thought to use against the Dark One; it would destroy Shadowspawn as surely as it would those who walk in the Light. They rightly fear Shadar Logoth as much as we."

"ænd wʌt kən jə tɛl mi ʌv ðə fɔɹseɪkən?"

"And what can you tell me of the Forsaken?"

"ju də lip fɹəm sʌbʒɪkt tə səbdʒɛkt. aɪ kən tɛl jə lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən jə lɝn əz ə nɑvəs. noʊ wʌn noʊz mʌtʃ mɔɹ ə ðə neɪmləs ðən ðæt. dʒju ɪkspɛk mi tə ɹæmbəl ɑn wɪð wʌt wi boʊθ lɝn əz ɡɝlz?"

"You do leap from subject to subject. I can tell you little more than you learned as a novice. No one knows much more of the Nameless than that. Do you expect me to ramble on with what we both learned as girls?"

fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz saɪlənt. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə seɪ tu mʌtʃ, bʌt vændin ən æɾɪliz hæd mɔɹ nɑlədʒ ət ðɛɹ fɪŋɡɝtɪps ðən ɪɡzɪstəɾ ɛniwɛɹ ɛls bʌt ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən mɔɹ kɑmpləkeɪʃənz əweɪɾəd əɹ ðəɹ ðən ʃi kɛɹd tə dil wɪð naʊ. ʃi lɛt ðə neɪm slɪp bɪtwin əɹ lɪps əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ɪskeɪpɪŋ. "lænfɝ."

For an instant, Moiraine was silent. She did not want to say too much, but Vandene and Adeleas had more knowledge at their fingertips than existed anywhere else but the White Tower, and more complications awaited her there than she cared to deal with now. She let the name slip between her lips as if it were escaping. "Lanfear."

"fɔɹ wʌns," ði ʌðɝ wʊmən saɪd, "aɪ noʊ nɑɾ ə wɪt mɔɹ ðən aɪ dɪɾ əz ə nɑvəs. ðə dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪt ɹɪmeɪnz əz mʌtʃ ə mɪstɝi əz ɪf ʃi tʃɹuli hæd kloʊk hɝsɛlf ɪn dɑɹknəs." ʃi pɔzd, piɹɪŋ ɪndə hɝ kʌp, ən wən ʃi lʊkt ʌp, hɝ aɪz wɝ ʃɑɹp ɑn mɔɪɹeɪnz feɪs. "lænfɝ wɑz lɪŋk tə ðə dʒɹæɡən, tə luz θɝɪn tɛləmən. mɔɪɹeɪn, juv səm klu əz tə wɛɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən wɪl bi ɹibɔɹn? əɹ wɑz ɹibɔɹn? hæz i kʌm ɔlɹɛɾi?"

"For once," the other woman sighed, "I know not a whit more than I did as a novice. The Daughter of the Night remains as much a mystery as if she truly had cloaked herself in darkness." She paused, peering into her cup, and when she looked up, her eyes were sharp on Moiraine's face. "Lanfear was linked to the Dragon, to Lews Therin Telamon. Moiraine, do you have some clue as to where the Dragon will be Reborn? Or was Reborn? Has he come already?"

"ɪf aɪ dɪd," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd lɛvəli, "wʊɾ aɪ bi hɪɹ, ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ? ði æmɪɝlɪn noʊz əz mʌtʃ əz aɪ, ðəɾ aɪ swɛɹ. hæv jə ɹəsivd ə sʌmənz fɹəm hɝ?"

"If I did," Moiraine replied levelly, "would I be here, instead of in the White Tower? The Amyrlin knows as much as I, that I swear. Have you received a summons from her?"

"noʊ, ən aɪ səpoʊz wi wʊd. wən ðə taɪm kʌmz ðət wi mʌs feɪs ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ði æmɪɝlɪn wɪl niɾ ɛvɹi sɪstɝ, ɛvɹi æksɛptɪd, ɛvɹi nɑvəs u kən laɪɾ ə kændəl ənɡwaɪɾɪd." vændinz vɔɪs loʊɝd, mjuzɪŋ. "wɪð sətʃ paʊɝ əz hɪl wild, wi mʌst oʊvɝwɛlm ɪm bɪfɔɹ hiz ə tʃæns tə juz ɪɾ əɡɛnst ʌs, bɪfɔɹ i kən ɡoʊ mæɾ ən dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðə wɝld. jɛt fɝst wi mʌs lɛɾ ɪm feɪs ðə dɑɹk wʌn." ʃi læf mɝθləsli ət ðə lʊk ɑn mɔɪɹeɪnz feɪs. "aɪ æm nɑɾ ə ɹɛd. aɪv stʌɾid ðə pɹɑfəsiz ɪnʌf tə noʊ wi dɛɹ nɑt dʒɛntəl ɪm fɝst. ɪf wi kən dʒɛntəl hɪm. aɪ noʊ əz wɛl əz ju, əz wɛl əz ɛni sɪstɝ u kɛɹz tə faɪn aʊt, ðət ðə silz hoʊldɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl ɑɹ wikənɪŋ. ði ɪliɑnɝz kɔl ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn. fɔls dʒɹæɡənz əbaʊnd. ən tu ʌv ðɛm, lɑɡən ən naʊ ðɪs fɛloʊ ɪn sɑldɑiə, eɪbəl tə tʃænəl. wən wɑz ðə læs taɪm ðə ɹɛdz faʊn tu mɛn tʃænəlɪŋ ɪn lɛs ðən ə jɪɹ? wən dɪd ðeɪ læs faɪnd wʌn ɪn faɪv jɪɹz? nɑɾ ɪn maɪ laɪftaɪm, ən aɪm ə ɡʊd dil oʊldɝ ðən ju. ðə saɪnz ɑɹ ɛvɹiwɛɹ. tɑɹmən ɡdən ɪz kʌmɪŋ. ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɪl bɹeɪk fɹi. ən ðə dʒɹæɡən wɪl bi ɹibɔɹn." hɝ kʌp ɹæɾəld əz ʃi sɛɾ ɪt daʊn. "aɪ səpoʊz ðəɾ ɪz waɪ aɪ fɪɹd jə maɪɾ əv sin səm saɪn ə hɪm."

"No, and I suppose we would. When the time comes that we must face the Dragon Reborn, the Amyrlin will need every sister, every Accepted, every novice who can light a candle unguided." Vandene's voice lowered, musing. "With such power as he will wield, we must overwhelm him before he has a chance to use it against us, before he can go mad and destroy the world. Yet first we must let him face the Dark One." She laughed mirthlessly at the look on Moiraine's face. "I am not a Red. I've studied the Prophecies enough to know we dare not gentle him first. If we can gentle him. I know as well as you, as well as any sister who cares to find out, that the seals holding the Dark One in Shayol Ghul are weakening. The Illianers call the Great Hunt of the Horn. False Dragons abound. And two of them, Logain and now this fellow in Saldaea, able to channel. When was the last time the Reds found two men channeling in less than a year? When did they last find one in five years? Not in my lifetime, and I am a good deal older than you. The signs are everywhere. Tarmon Gai'don is coming. The Dark One will break free. And the Dragon will be Reborn." Her cup rattled as she set it down. "I suppose that is why I feared you might have seen some sign of him."

"hi wɪl kʌm," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd smuðli, "ænd wɪl də wʌt mʌs bi dʌn."

"He will come," Moiraine said smoothly, "and we will do what must be done."

"ɪf aɪ θɔɾ ɪt wəd də ɛni ɡʊd, aɪd pʊl æɾɪlizəz noʊz aʊɾ ə hɝ bʊk ən sɛɾ ɔf fəɹ ðə waɪt taʊɝ. bʌɾ aɪ faɪn aɪm ɡlæd tə bi hɪɹ wɛɹ aɪm ɪnstɛd. pɝhæps wɪl əv taɪm tə fɪnɪʃ əɹ hɪstɝi."

"If I thought it would do any good, I'd pull Adeleas's nose out of her book and set off for the White Tower. But I find I am glad to be here where I am instead. Perhaps we will have time to finish our history."

"aɪ hoʊp ðət jə wɪl, sɪstɝ."

"I hope that you will, Sister."

vændin ɹoʊz tə hɝ fit. "wɛl, aɪ hæv tæsks tə bi əbaʊt bɪfɔɹ bɛd. ɪf juv noʊ mɔɹ kwɛstʃənz, əl liv jə tə jəɹ stʌɾiz." bʌt ʃi pɔzd ən ɹɪvil ðət haʊɛvɝ lɔŋ ʃi hæd spɛnt wɪð bʊks, ʃi wɑz stɪl ə ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ. "ju ʃəd də sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt læn, mɔɪɹeɪn. ðə mæn ɪz ɹʌmbəlɪŋ ɪnsaɪd wɝs ðən dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, hɪl ɪɹʌpt. aɪv noʊn ɪnʌf mɛn tə si wən wʌn ɪz tʃɹʌbəld wɪð ə wʊmən. jə tu hæv bɪn təɡɛðɝ ə lɔŋ taɪm. pɝhæps hiz faɪnəli kʌm tə si jə ɑɹ ə wʊmən əz wɛl əz ɛɛs sədaɪ."

Vandene rose to her feet. "Well, I have tasks to be about before bed. If you have no more questions, I will leave you to your studies." But she paused and revealed that however long she had spent with books, she was still of the Green Ajah. "You should do something about Lan, Moiraine. The man is rumbling inside worse than Dragonmount. Sooner or later, he will erupt. I've known enough men to see when one is troubled with a woman. You two have been together a long time. Perhaps he has finally come to see you are a woman as well as Aes Sedai."

"læn siz mi əz wʌɾ aɪ æm, vændin. ɛɛs sədaɪ. ən stɪl əz ə fɹɛnd, aɪ hoʊp."

"Lan sees me as what I am, Vandene. Aes Sedai. And still as a friend, I hope."

"ju bluz. ɔlweɪz soʊ ɹɛɾi tə seɪv ðə wɝl ðət jə luz jʊɹsɛlvz."

"You Blues. Always so ready to save the world that you lose yourselves."

æftɝ ðə waɪt-hɛɹɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ lɛft, mɔɪɹeɪn ɡæðɝɾ əɹ kloʊk ænd, mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf, wɛn ɪndə ðə ɡɑɹɾən. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɪn wʌt vændin hæd sɛd ðət tʌɡd əɾ əɹ maɪnd, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz. ən ænsɝ, əɹ ə hɪn tə ən ænsɝ, fəɹ ə kwɛstʃən ʃi hæd nɑɾ æskt - bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt bɹɪŋ ðə kwɛstʃən tə maɪnd, iðɝ.

After the white-haired Aes Sedai left, Moiraine gathered her cloak and, muttering to herself, went into the garden. There was something in what Vandene had said that tugged at her mind, but she could not remember what it was. An answer, or a hint to an answer, for a question she had not asked - but she could not bring the question to mind, either.

ðə ɡɑɹɾən wɑz smɔl, laɪk ðə haʊs, bʌt niɾ ivən ɪn munlaɪɾ eɪɾəd baɪ ðə jɛloʊ ɡloʊ fɹəm ðə kɑɾədʒ wɪndoʊz, wɪð sændi wɔks bɪtwin kɛɹfəl bɛdz ə flaʊɝz. ʃi sɛɾəld əɹ kloʊk lusli ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz əɡɛns ðə sɑf kulnəs ə ðə naɪt. wʌt wɑz ði ænsɝ, ən wʌt wɑz ðə kwɛstʃən?

The garden was small, like the house, but neat even in moonlight aided by the yellow glow from the cottage windows, with sandy walks between careful beds of flowers. She settled her cloak loosely on her shoulders against the soft coolness of the night. What was the answer, and what was the question?

sæn kɹʌntʃt bɪhaɪn hɝ, ən ʃi tɝnd, θɪŋkɪŋ ɪt wɑz læn.

Sand crunched behind her, and she turned, thinking it was Lan.

ə ʃædoʊ lum dɪmli oʊnli ə fju peɪsɪz fɹəm hɝ, ə ʃædoʊ ðəɾ əpɪɹd tə bi ə tu-tɔl mæn ɹæpt ɪn ɪz kloʊk. bʌt ðə feɪs kɑt ðə mun, ɡɔnt-tʃikt, peɪl, wɪð blæk aɪz tu bɪɡ əbʌv ə pʌkɝd, ɹɛd-lɪp maʊð. ðə kloʊk oʊpənd, ənfoʊldɪŋ ɪndə ɡɹeɪt wɪŋz laɪk ə bæts.

A shadow loomed dimly only a few paces from her, a shadow that appeared to be a too-tall man wrapped in his cloak. But the face caught the moon, gaunt-cheeked, pale, with black eyes too big above a puckered, red-lipped mouth. The cloak opened, unfolding into great wings like a bat's.

noʊɪŋ ɪt wɑz tu leɪt, ʃi oʊpən hɝsɛlf tə seɪaɪdɑɹ, bʌt ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ bɪɡæn tə kɹun, ən ɪts sɑf hʌm fɪl hɝ, fɹæɡməntɪŋ əɹ wɪl. seɪaɪdɑɹ slɪpt əweɪ. ʃi fɛlt oʊnli ə veɪɡ sædnəs əz ʃi stɛp təwɔɹd ðə kɹitʃɝ; ðə dip kɹunɪŋ ðət dʒɹu hɝ kloʊsɝ səpɹɛs filɪŋ. waɪt, waɪt hænz - laɪk ə mænz hænz, bʌt tɪpt wɪð klɔz - ɹitʃt fəɹ hɝ, ən lɪps ðə kʌlɝ ə blʌd kɝvd ɪn ə tʃɹævəsti ʌv ə smaɪl, bɛɹɪŋ ʃɑɹp tiθ, bʌt dɪmli, soʊ dɪmli, ʃi nu ɪt wəd nɑt baɪɾ əɹ tɛɹ. fɪɹ ðə dʒɹæɡkɝz kɪs. wʌns ðoʊz lɪps tʌtʃt hɝ, ʃi wəd bi əz ɡʊɾ əz dɛd, tə bi dʒɹeɪn ə soʊl, ðən ə laɪf. huɛvɝ faʊn hɝ, ivən ɪf ðeɪ keɪm əz ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ lɛɾ əɹ fɔl, wəd faɪn ə kɔɹps wɪθaʊɾ ə mɑɹk ən koʊld əz ɪf dɛd tu deɪz. ən ɪf ðeɪ keɪm bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɑz dɛd, wʌt ðeɪ faʊnd wəd bi wɝs, ən nɑt ɹɪli hɝ əɾ ɔl ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. ðə kɹun pʊld əɹ wɪðɪn ɹitʃ ə ðoʊz peɪl hænz, ən ðə dʒɹæɡkɝz hɛd bɛn sloʊli təwɔɹd hɝ.

Knowing it was too late, she opened herself to saidar, but the Draghkar began to croon, and its soft hum filled her, fragmenting her will. Saidar slipped away. She felt only a vague sadness as she stepped toward the creature; the deep crooning that drew her closer suppressed feeling. White, white hands - like a man's hands, but tipped with claws - reached for her, and lips the color of blood curved in a travesty of a smile, baring sharp teeth, but dimly, so dimly, she knew it would not bite or tear. Fear the Draghkar's kiss. Once those lips touched her, she would be as good as dead, to be drained of soul, then of life. Whoever found her, even if they came as the Draghkar let her fall, would find a corpse without a mark and cold as if dead two days. And if they came before she was dead, what they found would be worse, and not really her at all any longer. The croon pulled her within reach of those pale hands, and the Draghkar's head bent slowly toward her.

ʃi fɛlt oʊnli ðə smɔləst sɝpɹaɪz wən ə sɔɹd bleɪd flæʃt oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ tə pɪɹs ðə dʒɹæɡkɝz bɹɛst, ən lɪɾəl mɔɹ wən ə sɛkən kɹɔst əɹ ʌðɝ ʃoʊldɝ tə stʃɹaɪk bɪsaɪd ðə fɝst.

She felt only the smallest surprise when a sword blade flashed over her shoulder to pierce the Draghkar's breast, and little more when a second crossed her other shoulder to strike beside the first.

deɪzd, sweɪɪŋ, ʃi wɑtʃt əz ɪf fɹəm ə ɡɹeɪt dɪstəns əz ðə kɹitʃɝ wɑz pʊʃt bæk, əweɪ fɹəm hɝ. læn keɪm ɪndə hɝ vju, ðən jeɪɛm, ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wɔɹɾɝz boʊni ɑɹmz hoʊldɪŋ ɪz bleɪɾ əz stʃɹeɪɾ ən tʃɹu əz ðə jʌŋɡɝ mænz. ðə dʒɹæɡkɝz peɪl hænz blʌɾid əz ðeɪ tɔɹ ət ðə ʃɑɹp stil, wɪŋz bəfeɪɪŋ ðə tu mɛn wɪð θʌndɝklæps. sʌɾənli, wundəɾ ən bliɾɪŋ, ɪt bɪɡæn tə kɹun əɡɛn. tə ðə wɔɹɾɝz.

Dazed, swaying, she watched as if from a great distance as the creature was pushed back, away from her. Lan came into her view, then Jaem, the gray-haired Warder's bony arms holding his blade as straight and true as the younger man's. The Draghkar's pale hands bloodied as they tore at the sharp steel, wings buffeting the two men with thunderclaps. Suddenly, wounded and bleeding, it began to croon again. To the Warders.

wɪð ən ɛfɝt, mɔɪɹeɪn ɡæðɝd hɝsɛlf; ʃi fɛlt ɔlmoʊst əz dʒɹeɪn əz ɪf ðə θɪŋ hæd mænədʒd ɪts kɪs. noʊ taɪm tə bi wik. ɪn ən ɪnstənt ʃi oʊpən hɝsɛlf tə seɪaɪdɑɹ ænd, əz ðə paʊɝ fɪl hɝ, stil hɝsɛlf tə tʌtʃ ðə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn dɝɛkli. ðə tu mɛn wɝ tu kloʊs; ɛniθɪŋ ɛls wəd hɑɹm ðɛm, əz wɛl. ivən juzɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ʃi nu ʃi wəd fil sɔɪl baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ.

With an effort, Moiraine gathered herself; she felt almost as drained as if the thing had managed its kiss. No time to be weak. In an instant she opened herself to saidar and, as the Power filled her, steeled herself to touch the Shadowspawn directly. The two men were too close; anything else would harm them, as well. Even using the One Power, she knew she would feel soiled by the Draghkar.

bʌɾ ivən əz ʃi bɪɡæn, læn kɹaɪɾ aʊt, "ɛmbɹeɪs dɛθ!" jeɪɛm ɛkoʊɾ ɪm fɝmli. "ɛmbɹeɪs dɛθ!" ən ðə tu mɛn stɛpt wɪðɪn ɹitʃ ə ðə dʒɹæɡkɝz tʌtʃ, dʒɹoʊv hoʊm ðɛɹ bleɪdz tə ðə hɪlt.

But even as she began, Lan cried out, "Embrace death!" Jaem echoed him firmly. "Embrace death!" And the two men stepped within reach of the Draghkar's touch, drove home their blades to the hilt.

θɹoʊɪŋ bæk ɪts hɛd, ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ bɛloʊd, ə ʃɹik ðət sim tə pɪɹs mɔɪɹeɪnz hɛd wɪð niɾəlz. ivən ɹæpt ɪn seɪaɪdɑɹ ʃi kəd fil ɪt. laɪk ə tʃɹi fɔlɪŋ, ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ tɑpəld, wʌn wɪŋ nɑkɪŋ jeɪɛm tə hɪz niz. læn sæɡd əz ɪf ɪɡzɔstəd.

Throwing back its head, the Draghkar bellowed, a shriek that seemed to pierce Moiraine's head with needles. Even wrapped in saidar she could feel it. Like a tree falling, the Draghkar toppled, one wing knocking Jaem to his knees. Lan sagged as if exhausted.

læntɝnz hɝid fɹəm ðə haʊs, bɔɹn baɪ vændin ən æɾɪliz.

Lanterns hurried from the house, borne by Vandene and Adeleas.

"wʌt wɑz ðət nɔɪz?" æɾɪliz dɪmændəd. ʃi wɑz ɔlmoʊst ə mɪɹɝ ɪmədʒ ə hɝ sɪstɝ. "hæz jeɪɛm ɡɔn ænd. . . ." ðə læntɝn laɪt fɛl ɑn ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ; hɝ vɔɪs tʃɹeɪld ɔf.

"What was that noise?" Adeleas demanded. She was almost a mirror image of her sister. "Has Jaem gone and. . . ." The lantern light fell on the Draghkar; her voice trailed off.

vændin tʊk mɔɪɹeɪnz hænz. "ɪt dɪd nɑt . . . ?" ʃi lɛf ðə kwɛstʃən ənfɪnɪʃt æz, tə mɔɪɹeɪnz aɪz, ə nɪmbəs sɝaʊndəd hɝ. filɪŋ stʃɹɛŋkθ floʊɪŋ ɪndə hɝ fɹəm ði ʌðɝ wʊmən, mɔɪɹeɪn wɪʃt, nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd də əz mʌtʃ fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz əz ðeɪ kəd fəɹ ʌðɝz.

Vandene took Moiraine's hands. "It did not . . . ?" She left the question unfinished as, to Moiraine's eyes, a nimbus surrounded her. Feeling strength flowing into her from the other woman, Moiraine wished, not for the first time, that Aes Sedai could do as much for themselves as they could for others.

"ɪt dɪd nɑt," ʃi sɛd ɡɹeɪtfəli. "si tə ðə ɡeɪɾɪn."

"It did not," she said gratefully. "See to the Gaidin."

læn lʊkt ət hɝ, maʊθ taɪt. "ɪf jə hæd nɑt meɪd mi soʊ æŋɡɹi aɪ hæd tə ɡoʊ wɝk fɔɹmz wɪð jeɪɛm, soʊ æŋɡɹi aɪ ɡeɪv ɪɾ ʌp tə kʌm bæk tə ðə haʊs. . . ."

Lan looked at her, mouth tight. "If you had not made me so angry I had to go work forms with Jaem, so angry I gave it up to come back to the house. . . ."

"bʌɾ aɪ dɪd," ʃi sɛd. "ðə pæɾɝn teɪks ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪndə ðə wivɪŋ." jeɪɛm wɑz mʌɾɝɪŋ, bʌt stɪl əlaʊɪŋ vændin tə si tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝ. hi wɑz ɔl boʊn ən tɛndən, jɛt lʊkt əz hɑɹɾ əz oʊld ɹuts.

"But I did," she said. "The Pattern takes everything into the weaving." Jaem was muttering, but still allowing Vandene to see to his shoulder. He was all bone and tendon, yet looked as hard as old roots.

"haʊ," æɾɪliz dɪmændəd, "kʊɾ ɛni kɹitʃɝ ə ðə ʃædoʊ kʌm soʊ kloʊs wɪθaʊɾ əs sɛnsɪŋ ɪt?"

"How," Adeleas demanded, "could any creature of the Shadow come so close without us sensing it?"

"ɪt wɑz wɔɹɾɪd," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd.

"It was warded," Moiraine said.

"ɪmpɑsəbəl," æɾɪliz snæpt. "oʊnli ə sɪstɝ kəd - " ʃi stɑpt, ən vændin tɝn fɹəm jeɪɛm tə lʊk ət mɔɪɹeɪn.

"Impossible," Adeleas snapped. "Only a sister could - " She stopped, and Vandene turned from Jaem to look at Moiraine.

mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd ðə wɝdz nʌn ə ðɛm wɑntəd tə hɪɹ. "ðə blæk ədʒɑ." ʃaʊts dʒɹɪftəd fɹəm ðə vɪlədʒ. "bɛs jə haɪd ðɪs" - ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd tə ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ, spɹɔld əkɹɔs ə flaʊɝ bɛd - "kwɪkli. ðəl bi kʌmɪŋ tə æsk ɪf jə nid hɛlp, bʌt siɪŋ ðɪs wɪl stɑɹt tɔk jəl nɑt laɪk."

Moiraine said the words none of them wanted to hear. "The Black Ajah." Shouts drifted from the village. "Best you hide this" - she gestured to the Draghkar, sprawled across a flower bed - "quickly. They will be coming to ask if you need help, but seeing this will start talk you will not like."

"jɛs, ʌv kɔɹs," æɾɪliz sɛd. "jeɪɛm, ɡoʊ ən mit ðɛm. tɛl əm jə doʊnt noʊ wʌt meɪd ðə nɔɪz, bʌɾ ɔl ɪz wɛl hɪɹ. sloʊ ðɛm daʊn." ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wɔɹɾɝ hɝiɾ ɪndə ðə naɪt təwɔɹd ðə saʊn ʌv əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ vɪlɪdʒɝz. æɾɪliz tɝn tə stʌɾi ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ə pʌzəlɪŋ pæsədʒ ɪn wʌn ə hɝ bʊks. "wɛðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ ɪnvɑlvd əɹ nɑt, wʌtɛvɝ cʊɾə bɹɔɾ ɪt hɪɹ?" vændin ɹəɡɑɹɾəd mɔɪɹeɪn saɪlənli.

"Yes, of course," Adeleas said. "Jaem, go and meet them. Tell them you don't know what made the noise, but all is well here. Slow them down." The gray-haired Warder hurried into the night toward the sound of approaching villagers. Adeleas turned to study the Draghkar as if it were a puzzling passage in one of her books. "Whether Aes Sedai are involved or not, whatever could have brought it here?" Vandene regarded Moiraine silently.

"aɪ fɪɹ aɪ mʌs liv ju," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "læn, wɪl jə ɹɛɾi ðə hɔɹsəz?" əz i lɛft, ʃi sɛd, "aɪ wɪl liv lɛɾɝz wɪð jə tə bi sɛn ɑn tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ɪf jəl ɝeɪnʒ ɪt." æɾɪliz nɑɾəd æbsənli, hɝ ətɛnʃən stɪl ɑn ðə θɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

"I fear I must leave you," Moiraine said. "Lan, will you ready the horses?" As he left, she said, "I will leave letters with you to be sent on to the White Tower, if you will arrange it." Adeleas nodded absently, her attention still on the thing on the ground.

"ænd wɪl jə faɪn jəɹ ænsɝz wɛɹ jə ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ?" vændin æskt.

"And will you find your answers where you are going?" Vandene asked.

"aɪ meɪ ɔlɹɛɾi hæv faʊnd wʌn aɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ aɪ sɔt. aɪ oʊnli hoʊp aɪm nɑt tu leɪt. əl nid pɛn ən pɑɹtʃmənt." ʃi dʒɹu vændin təwɔɹd ðə haʊs, livɪŋ æɾɪliz tə dil wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ.

"I may already have found one I did not know I sought. I only hope I am not too late. I will need pen and parchment." She drew Vandene toward the house, leaving Adeleas to deal with the Draghkar.


tʃæptɝ twɛntiθɹi


CHAPTER 23

ðə tɛstɪŋ


The Testing

nɪneɪiv wɛɹəli aɪd ðə hjudʒ tʃeɪmbɝ, fɑɹ bɪniθ ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən aɪd ʃɛɹiəm, əɾ əɹ saɪd, dʒʌst əz wɛɹəli. ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz simd ɪkspɛktənt, pɝhæps ivən ə lɪɾəl ɪmpeɪʃənt. ɪn əɹ fju deɪz ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, nɪneɪiv hæd sin oʊnli sɝɛnəɾi ɪn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ə smaɪlɪŋ æksɛptəns ʌv ɪvɛns kʌmɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ oʊn taɪm.

Nynaeve warily eyed the huge chamber, far beneath the White Tower, and eyed Sheriam, at her side, just as warily. The Mistress of Novices seemed expectant, perhaps even a little impatient. In her few days in Tar Valon, Nynaeve had seen only serenity in the Aes Sedai, and a smiling acceptance of events coming in their own time.

ðə doʊmd ɹum hæd bɪn kɑɹvd aʊɾ ə ðə bɛdʒɹɑk ə ði aɪlənd; ðə laɪɾ ə læmps ɑn tɔl stænz ɹəflɛktəd fɹəm peɪl, smuð stoʊn wɔlz. sɛntɝɾ ʌndɝ ðə doʊm wɑz ə θɪŋ meɪɾ ə θɹi ɹaʊndəd, sɪlvɝ ɑɹtʃəz, itʃ dʒʌs tɔl ɪnʌf tə wɔk ʌndɝ, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ə θɪk sɪlvɝ ɹɪŋ wɪð ðɛɹ ɛnz tʌtʃɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ. ɑɹtʃəz ən ɹɪŋ wɝ ɔl ʌv wʌn pis. ʃi kəd nɑt si wʌt leɪ ɪnsaɪd; ðəɹ ðə laɪt flɪkɝɾ ɑdli, ən meɪɾ əɹ stʌmək flʌɾɝ wɪð ɪɾ ɪf ʃi lʊk tu lɔŋ. wɛɹ ɑɹtʃ tʌtʃt ɹɪŋ, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ sæt kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ðə bɛɹ stoʊn ə ðə flɔɹ, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə sɪlvɝi kənstʃɹʌkʃən. ənʌðɝ stʊd nɪɹbaɪ, bɪsaɪɾ ə pleɪn teɪbəl ɑn wɪtʃ sæt θɹi lɑɹdʒ sɪlvɝ tʃæləsəz. itʃ, nɪneɪiv nu - əɹ ət list, ʃi hæd bɪn toʊld - wɑz fɪld wɪð klɪɹ wɔɾɝ. ɔl fɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɔɹ ðɛɹ ʃɔlz, əz ʃɛɹiəm dɪd; blu-fɹɪn fəɹ ʃɛɹiəm, ɹɛd fəɹ ðə swɔɹði wʊmən baɪ ðə teɪbəl, ɡɹin, waɪt, ən ɡɹeɪ fəɹ ðə θɹi ɝaʊn ði ɑɹtʃəz. nɪneɪiv stɪl wɔɹ wʌn ə ðə dʒɹɛsəz ʃi hæd bɪn ɡɪvən ɪn fæl dæɹə, peɪl ɡɹin ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð smɔl waɪt flaʊɝz.

The domed room had been carved out of the bedrock of the island; the light of lamps on tall stands reflected from pale, smooth stone walls. Centered under the dome was a thing made of three rounded, silver arches, each just tall enough to walk under, sitting on a thick silver ring with their ends touching each other. Arches and ring were all of one piece. She could not see what lay inside; there the light flickered oddly, and made her stomach flutter with it if she looked too long. Where arch touched ring, an Aes Sedai sat cross-legged on the bare stone of the floor, staring at the silvery construction. Another stood nearby, beside a plain table on which sat three large silver chalices. Each, Nynaeve knew - or at least, she had been told - was filled with clear water. All four Aes Sedai wore their shawls, as Sheriam did; blue-fringed for Sheriam, red for the swarthy woman by the table, green, white, and gray for the three around the arches. Nynaeve still wore one of the dresses she had been given in Fal Dara, pale green embroidered with small white flowers.

"fɝs jə liv mi tə stɛɹ ət maɪ θʌmz fɹəm mɔɹnɪŋ tə naɪt," nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd, "ænd naʊ ɪts ɔl ɪn ə ɹʌʃ."

"First you leave me to stare at my thumbs from morning to night," Nynaeve muttered, "and now it's all in a rush."

"ði aʊɝ weɪts ɑn noʊ wʊmən," ʃɛɹiəm ɹɪplaɪd. "ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz, ən wən ɪt wɪlz. peɪʃəns ɪz ə vɝtʃu ðət mʌs bi lɝnd, bʌt wi mʌst ɔl bi ɹɛɾi fəɹ ðə tʃeɪnʒ ʌv ən ɪnstənt."

"The hour waits on no woman," Sheriam replied. "The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills, and when it wills. Patience is a virtue that must be learned, but we must all be ready for the change of an instant."

nɪneɪiv tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə ɡlɛɹ. ðə moʊst ɪɹəteɪɾɪŋ θɪŋ ʃi hæd jɛt dɪskʌvɝɾ əbaʊt ðə fleɪm-hɛɹɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz ðət ʃi səmtaɪmz saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ kwoʊɾɪŋ seɪɪŋz ivən wən ʃi wɑz nɑt. "wʌɾ ɪz ðət θɪŋ?"

Nynaeve tried not to glare. The most irritating thing she had yet discovered about the flame-haired Aes Sedai was that she sometimes sounded as if she were quoting sayings even when she was not. "What is that thing?"

"ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil."

"A ter'angreal."

"wɛl, ðət tɛlz mi nʌθɪŋ. wʌt dʌz ɪt du?"

"Well, that tells me nothing. What does it do?"

"tɛɹæŋɡɹil də mɛni θɪŋz, tʃaɪld. laɪk æŋɡɹil ən sɑŋɡɹil, ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹɛmnəns ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ðət juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ðoʊ ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt kwaɪt soʊ ɹɛɹ əz ði ʌðɝ tu. waɪl səm tɛɹæŋɡɹil mʌs bi meɪd tə wɝk baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ, əz ðɪs wʌn mʌst, ʌðɝz wɪl də wʌt ðeɪ də sɪmpli wɪð ðə pɹɛzəns ʌv ɛni wʊmən u kən tʃænəl. ðəɹ ɑɹ ivən səpoʊz tə bi səm ðət wɪl fʌŋkʃən fəɹ ɛniwʌn əɾ ɔl. ənlaɪk æŋɡɹil ən sɑŋɡɹil, ðeɪ wɝ meɪd tə də spəsɪfɪk θɪŋz. wʌn ʌðɝ wɪv ɪn ðə taʊɝ meɪks oʊðz baɪndɪŋ. wən jə ɑɹ ɹeɪz tə fʊl sɪstɝhʊd, jəl teɪk jəɹ faɪnəl vaʊz hoʊldɪŋ ðət tɛɹæŋɡɹil. tə spik noʊ wɝd ðəɾ ɪz nɑt tʃɹu. tə meɪk noʊ wɛpən fəɹ wʌn mæn tə kɪl ənʌðɝ. nɛvɝ tə juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən ɪksɛpt əɡɛns dɑɹkfɹɛnz əɹ ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, əɹ ɪn ðə læst ɪkstʃɹim ə dɪfɛndɪŋ jəɹ oʊn laɪf, ðəɾ ə jəɹ wɔɹɾɝ, əɹ ðəɾ ʌv ənʌðɝ sɪstɝ."

"Ter'angreal do many things, child. Like angreal and sa'angreal, they are remnants of the Age of Legends that use the One Power, though they are not quite so rare as the other two. While some ter'angreal must be made to work by Aes Sedai, as this one must, others will do what they do simply with the presence of any woman who can channel. There are even supposed to be some that will function for anyone at all. Unlike angreal and sa'angreal, they were made to do specific things. One other we have in the Tower makes oaths binding. When you are raised to full sisterhood, you will take your final vows holding that ter'angreal. To speak no word that is not true. To make no weapon for one man to kill another. Never to use the One Power as a weapon except against Darkfriends or Shadowspawn, or in the last extreme of defending your own life, that of your Warder, or that of another sister."

nɪneɪiv ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. ɪt saʊndəɾ iðɝ laɪk tu mʌtʃ tə swɛɹ əɹ tu lɪɾəl, ən ʃi sɛd soʊ.

Nynaeve shook her head. It sounded either like too much to swear or too little, and she said so.

"wʌns, ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ nɑt ɹikwaɪɝd tə swɛɹ oʊðz. ɪt wɑz noʊn wʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ən wʌt ðeɪ stʊd fɔɹ, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid fəɹ mɔɹ. mɛni ʌv əs wɪʃ ɪt wɝ soʊ stɪl. bʌt ðə wil tɝnz, ən ðə taɪmz tʃeɪnʒ. ðət wi swɛɹ ðiz oʊðz, ðət wəɹ noʊn tə bi baʊnd, əlaʊz ðə neɪʃənz tə dil wɪð əs wɪθaʊt fɪɹɪŋ ðət wɪl θɹoʊ ʌp əɹ oʊn paʊɝ, ðə wʌn paʊɝ, əɡɛns ðɛm. bɪtwin ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz ən ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz wi meɪd ðiz tʃɔɪsəz, ən kəz ə ðɛm ðə waɪt taʊɝ stɪl stænz, ən wi kən stɪl də wʌt wi kən əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ." ʃɛɹiəm dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. "laɪt, tʃaɪld, aɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə titʃ jə wʌɾ ɛni ʌðɝ wʊmən stændɪŋ wɛɹ jə ɑɹ wʊɾə lɝn oʊvɝ ðə kɔɹs ə jɪɹz. ɪt kænɑt bi dʌn. tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɑɹ wʌt mʌs kənsɝn ju, naʊ. wi doʊnt noʊ waɪ ðeɪ wɝ meɪd. wi dɛɹ juz oʊnli ə hændfʊl ə ðɛm, ən ðə weɪz ɪn wɪtʃ wi də dɛɹ tə juz əm meɪ bi nʌθɪŋ laɪk ðə pɝpəsəz ðə meɪkɝz ɪntɛndəd. moʊst, wɪv lɝn tə əɹ kɑs tə əvɔɪd. oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz, noʊ fju ɛɛs sədaɪ hæv bɪn kɪld əɹ hæd ðɛɹ tælən bɝn aʊɾ ə ðɛm, lɝnɪŋ ðæt."

"Once, Aes Sedai were not required to swear oaths. It was known what Aes Sedai were and what they stood for, and there was no need for more. Many of us wish it were so still. But the Wheel turns, and the times change. That we swear these oaths, that we are known to be bound, allows the nations to deal with us without fearing that we will throw up our own power, the One Power, against them. Between the Trolloc Wars and the War of the Hundred Years we made these choices, and because of them the White Tower still stands, and we can still do what we can against the Shadow." Sheriam drew a deep breath. "Light, child, I am trying to teach you what any other woman standing where you are would have learned over the course of years. It cannot be done. Ter'angreal are what must concern you, now. We don't know why they were made. We dare use only a handful of them, and the ways in which we do dare to use them may be nothing like the purposes the makers intended. Most, we have learned to our cost to avoid. Over the years, no few Aes Sedai have been killed or had their Talent burned out of them, learning that."

nɪneɪiv ʃɪvɝd. "æn jə wɑn mi tə wɔk ɪndə ðɪs wʌn?" ðə laɪɾ ɪnsaɪd ði ɑɹtʃəz flɪkɝd lɛs, naʊ, bʌt ʃi kəd si wʌt leɪ ɪn ɪt noʊ bɛɾɝ.

Nynaeve shivered. "And you want me to walk into this one?" The light inside the arches flickered less, now, but she could see what lay in it no better.

"wi noʊ wʌt ðɪs wʌn dʌz. ɪɾəl bɹɪŋ jə feɪs-tə-feɪs wɪð jəɹ ɡɹeɪɾəst fɪɹz." ʃɛɹiəm smaɪl plɛzənli. "noʊ wʌn wɪl æsk jə wʌt juv feɪst; jə nid tɛl noʊ mɔɹ ðən jə wɪʃ. ɛvɹi wʊmənz fɪɹz ɑɹ əɹ oʊn pɹɑpɝɾi."

"We know what this one does. It will bring you face-to-face with your greatest fears." Sheriam smiled pleasantly. "No one will ask you what you have faced; you need tell no more than you wish. Every woman's fears are her own property."

veɪɡli, nɪneɪiv θɔɾ əbaʊɾ əɹ nɝvəsnəs kənsɝnɪŋ spaɪɾɝz, ɪspɛʃli ɪn ðə dɑɹk, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðət wɑz wʌt ʃɛɹiəm mɛnt. "aɪ dʒʌst wɔk θɹu wʌn ɑɹtʃ ən aʊɾ ənʌðɝ? θɹi taɪmz θɹu, ən ɪts dʌn?"

Vaguely, Nynaeve thought about her nervousness concerning spiders, especially in the dark, but she did not think that was what Sheriam meant. "I just walk through one arch and out another? Three times through, and it's done?"

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ ʃɔl wɪð ən ɪɹəteɪɾəd hɪtʃ ə hɝ ʃoʊldɝ. "ɪf jə wɪʃ tə bɔɪl ɪt daʊn ðət fɑɹ, jɛs," ʃi sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "aɪ toʊl jə ɑn ðə weɪ hɪɹ wʌt jə mʌs noʊ əbaʊt ðə sɛɹəmoʊni, əz mʌtʃ əz ɛniwʌn ɪz əlaʊd tə noʊ bɪfɔɹhænd. ɪf jə wɝ ə nɑvəs kʌm tə ðɪs, jə wəd noʊ ɪt baɪ hɑɹt, bʌt doʊnt wɝi əbaʊt meɪkɪŋ mɪsteɪks. əl ɹimaɪn ju, ɪf nɛsəsɛɹi. ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ jə ɑɹ ɹɛɾi tə feɪs ɪt? ɪf jə wɑnə stɑp naʊ, aɪ kən stɪl ɹaɪt jəɹ neɪm ɪn ðə nɑvəs bʊk."

The Aes Sedai adjusted her shawl with an irritated hitch of her shoulder. "If you wish to boil it down that far, yes," she said dryly. "I told you on the way here what you must know about the ceremony, as much as anyone is allowed to know beforehand. If you were a novice come to this, you would know it by heart, but don't worry about making mistakes. I will remind you, if necessary. Are you sure you are ready to face it? If you want to stop now, I can still write your name in the novice book."

"noʊ!"

"No!"

"vɛɹi wɛl, ðɛn. tu θɪŋz əl tɛl jə naʊ ðət noʊ wʊmən hɪɹz əntɪl ʃiz ɪn ðɪs ɹum. ðə fɝst ɪz ðɪs. wʌns jə bɪɡɪn, jə mʌs kəntɪnju tə ði ɛnd. ɹəfjuz tə ɡoʊ ɑn, ən noʊ mæɾɝ jəɹ pətɛnʃəl, jəl bi vɛɹi kaɪnli pʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ wɪð ɪnʌf sɪlvɝ tə səpɔɹt jə fəɹ ə jɪɹ, ən jəl nɛvɝ bi əlaʊd bæk." nɪneɪiv oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə seɪ ʃi wəd nɑt ɹəfjuz, bʌt ʃɛɹiəm kʌɾ əɹ ɔf wɪð ə ʃɑɹp dʒɛstʃɝ. "lɪsən, ən spik wən jə noʊ wʌt tə seɪ. sɛkənd. tə sik, tə stʃɹaɪv, ɪz tə noʊ deɪnʒɝ. jəl noʊ deɪnʒɝ hɪɹ. səm wɪmən əv ɛntɝd, ən nɛvɝ kʌm aʊt. wən ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɑz əlaʊd tə ɡɹoʊ kwaɪət, ðeɪ - wɝ - nɑt - ðɛɹ. ən ðeɪ wɝ nɛvɝ sin əɡɛn. ɪf jəl sɝvaɪv, jə mʌs bi stɛdfæst. fɔltɝ, feɪl, ænd. . . ." hɝ saɪləns wɑz mɔɹ ɛləkwən ðən ɛni wɝdz. "ðɪs ɪz jəɹ læs tʃæns, tʃaɪld. jə meɪ tɝn bæk naʊ, ɹaɪt naʊ, ən əl pʊt jəɹ neɪm ɪn ðə nɑvəs bʊk, ən jəl əv oʊnli wʌn mɑɹk əɡɛns ju. twaɪs mɔɹ jəl bi əlaʊd tə kʌm hɪɹ, ən oʊnli ət ðə θɝd ɹəfjuzəl wɪl jə bi pʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ. ɪts noʊ ʃeɪm tə ɹəfjuz. mɛni du. aɪ maɪsɛlf kəd nɑt də ɪt, maɪ fɝs taɪm hɪɹ. naʊ jə meɪ spik."

"Very well, then. Two things I will tell you now that no woman hears until she is in this room. The first is this. Once you begin, you must continue to the end. Refuse to go on, and no matter your potential, you will be very kindly put out of the Tower with enough silver to support you for a year, and you will never be allowed back." Nynaeve opened her mouth to say she would not refuse, but Sheriam cut her off with a sharp gesture. "Listen, and speak when you know what to say. Second. To seek, to strive, is to know danger. You will know danger here. Some women have entered, and never come out. When the ter'angreal was allowed to grow quiet, they - were - not - there. And they were never seen again. If you will survive, you must be steadfast. Falter, fail, and. . . ." Her silence was more eloquent than any words. "This is your last chance, child. You may turn back now, right now, and I will put your name in the novice book, and you will have only one mark against you. Twice more you will be allowed to come here, and only at the third refusal will you be put out of the Tower. It is no shame to refuse. Many do. I myself could not do it, my first time here. Now you may speak."

nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv ðə sɪlvɝ ɑɹtʃəz ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊk. ðə laɪɾ ɪn əm noʊ lɔŋɡɝ flɪkɝd; ðeɪ wɝ fɪld wɪð ə sɑft, waɪt ɡloʊ. tə lɝn wʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə lɝn, ʃi niɾəd ðə fɹiɾəm ə ði æksɛptɪd tə kwɛstʃən, tə stʌɾi ɑn əɹ oʊn, wɪð noʊ mɔɹ ɡaɪɾəns ðən ʃi æsk fɔɹ. aɪ mʌs meɪk mɔɪɹeɪn peɪ fəɹ wʌt ʃiz dʌn tə ʌs. aɪ mʌst. "aɪ æm ɹɛɾi."

Nynaeve gave the silver arches a sidelong look. The light in them no longer flickered; they were filled with a soft, white glow. To learn what she wanted to learn, she needed the freedom of the Accepted to question, to study on her own, with no more guidance than she asked for. I must make Moiraine pay for what she has done to us. I must. "I am ready."

ʃɛɹiəm stɑɹɾəd sloʊli ɪndə ðə tʃeɪmbɝ. nɪneɪiv wɛn bɪsaɪd hɝ.

Sheriam started slowly into the chamber. Nynaeve went beside her.

əz ɪf ðət wɝ ə sɪɡnəl, ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝ spoʊk ɪn laʊd, fɔɹməl toʊnz. "hum dʒju bɹɪŋ wɪð ju, sɪstɝ?" ðə θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ ɝaʊn ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil kəntɪnjud ðɛɹ ətɛnʃənz tə ɪt.

As if that were a signal, the Red sister spoke in loud, formal tones. "Whom do you bring with you, Sister?" The three Aes Sedai around the ter'angreal continued their attentions to it.

"wʌn u kʌmz əz ə kændəɾeɪt fəɹ æksɛptəns, sɪstɝ," ʃɛɹiəm ɹɪplaɪd dʒʌst əz fɔɹməli.

"One who comes as a candidate for Acceptance, Sister," Sheriam replied just as formally.

"ɪz ʃi ɹɛɾi?"

"Is she ready?"

"ʃi ɪz ɹɛɾi tə liv bɪhaɪnd wʌt ʃi wɑz, ænd, pæsɪŋ θɹu hɝ fɪɹz, ɡeɪn æksɛptəns."

"She is ready to leave behind what she was, and, passing through her fears, gain Acceptance."

"dʌz ʃi noʊ hɝ fɪɹz?"

"Does she know her fears?"

"ʃi hæz nɛvɝ feɪs ðɛm, bʌt naʊ ɪz wɪlɪŋ."

"She has never faced them, but now is willing."

"ðɛn lɛɾ əɹ feɪs wʌt ʃi fɪɹz."

"Then let her face what she fears."

ʃɛɹiəm stɑpt, tu spænz fɹəm ði ɑɹtʃəz, ən nɪneɪiv stɑpt wɪð hɝ. "jɔɹ dʒɹɛs," ʃɛɹiəm wɪspɝd, nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ.

Sheriam stopped, two spans from the arches, and Nynaeve stopped with her. "Your dress," Sheriam whispered, not looking at her.

nɪneɪivz tʃiks kʌlɝɾ ət fɝɡɛɾɪŋ ɔlɹɛɾi wʌt ʃɛɹiəm hæd toʊld əɹ ɑn ðə weɪ daʊn fɹəm əɹ ɹum. heɪstəli ʃi ɹimuvd əɹ kloʊðz, hɝ ʃuz ən stɑkɪŋz. fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fɝɡɛt ði ɑɹtʃəz ɪn foʊldɪŋ əɹ ɡɑɹməns ən pʊɾɪŋ əm nitli tə wʌn saɪd. ʃi tʌk lænz ɹɪŋ kɛɹfəli ʌndɝ əɹ dʒɹɛs; ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑn ɛniwʌn stɛɹɪŋ ət ðæt. ðən ʃi wɑz dʌn, ən ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ, stɪl weɪɾɪŋ.

Nynaeve's cheeks colored at forgetting already what Sheriam had told her on the way down from her room. Hastily she removed her clothes, her shoes and stockings. For a moment she could almost forget the arches in folding her garments and putting them neatly to one side. She tucked Lan's ring carefully under her dress; she did not want anyone staring at that. Then she was done, and the ter'angreal was still there, still waiting.

ðə stoʊn fɛl koʊld ʌndɝ əɹ bɛɹ fit, ən ʃi bɹoʊk aʊɾ ɔl oʊvɝ ɪn ɡus bʌmps, bʌt ʃi stʊd stʃɹeɪɾ ən bɹið sloʊli. ʃi wəd nɑt lɛɾ ɛni ʌv əm si ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪd.

The stone felt cold under her bare feet, and she broke out all over in goose bumps, but she stood straight and breathed slowly. She would not let any of them see she was afraid.

"ðə fɝs taɪm," ʃɛɹiəm sɛd, "ɪz fəɹ wʌt wɑz. ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst."

"The first time," Sheriam said, "is for what was. The way back will come but once. Be steadfast."

nɪneɪiv hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ðən ʃi stɛp fɔɹwɝd, θɹu ði ɑɹtʃ ən ɪndə ðə ɡloʊ. ɪt sɝaʊndəd hɝ, əz ɪf ði ɛɹ ɪtsɛlf wɝ ʃaɪnɪŋ, əz ɪf ʃi wɝ dʒɹaʊnɪŋ ɪn laɪt. ðə laɪt wɑz ɛvɹiwɛɹ. ðə laɪt wɑz ɛvɹiθɪŋ.

Nynaeve hesitated. Then she stepped forward, through the arch and into the glow. It surrounded her, as if the air itself were shining, as if she were drowning in light. The light was everywhere. The light was everything.

nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt wən ʃi ɹilaɪzd ʃi wɑz neɪkəd, ðən stɛɹɾ ɪn əmeɪzmənt. ə stoʊn wɔl stʊd tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɝ, twaɪs əz tɔl əz ʃi wɑz ən smuð, əz ɪf kɑɹvd. hɝ toʊz ɹɪəld ɑn dʌsti, ənivən stoʊn peɪvɪŋ. ðə skaɪ əbʌv sim flæɾ ən lɛɾən, fəɹ ɔl ðə læk ə klaʊdz, ən ðə sʌn hʌŋ oʊvɝhɛd swoʊlən ən ɹɛd. ɪn boʊθ dɝɛkʃənz wɝ oʊpənɪŋz ɪn ðə wɔl, ɡeɪtweɪz mɑɹk baɪ ʃɔɹt, skwɛɹ kɑləmz. ðə wɔlz nɛɹoʊɾ əɹ fild ə vju, bʌt ðə ɡɹaʊn sləp daʊn fɹəm wɛɹ ʃi stʊd, boʊθ ɪn fɹʌn ən bɪhaɪnd. θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪz ʃi kəd si mɔɹ θɪk wɔlz, ən pæsədʒəz bɪtwin. ʃi wɑz ɪn ə dʒaɪɡæntɪk meɪz.

Nynaeve gave a start when she realized she was naked, then stared in amazement. A stone wall stood to either side of her, twice as tall as she was and smooth, as if carved. Her toes wriggled on dusty, uneven stone paving. The sky above seemed flat and leaden, for all the lack of clouds, and the sun hung overhead swollen and red. In both directions were openings in the wall, gateways marked by short, square columns. The walls narrowed her field of view, but the ground sloped down from where she stood, both in front and behind. Through the gateways she could see more thick walls, and passages between. She was in a gigantic maze.

wɛɹ ɪz ðɪs? haʊ dɪɾ aɪ kʌm hɪɹ? laɪk ə dɪfɹən vɔɪs, ənʌðɝ θɔt keɪm. ðə weɪ aʊt wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns.

Where is this? How did I come here? Like a different voice, another thought came. The way out will come but once.

ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ɪf ðɛɹz oʊnli wʌn weɪ aʊt, əl nɑt faɪn ɪt stændɪŋ hɪɹ." ət lis ði ɛɹ wɑz wɔɹm ən dʒɹaɪ. "aɪ hoʊp aɪ faɪn səm kloʊðz bɪfɔɹ aɪ faɪn pipəl," ʃi mʌɾɝd.

She shook her head. "If there's only one way out, I'll not find it standing here." At least the air was warm and dry. "I hope I find some clothes before I find people," she muttered.

dɪmli, ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd pleɪɪŋ meɪzɪz ɑn peɪpɝ əz ə tʃaɪld; ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə tʃɹɪk tə faɪndɪŋ jəɹ weɪ aʊt, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt bɹɪŋ ɪt tə maɪnd. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn ðə pæst sim veɪɡ, əz ɪf ɪt hæd hæpən tə sʌmwʌn ɛls. tʃɹeɪlɪŋ ə hæn əlɔŋ ðə wɔl, ʃi stɑɹɾəd aʊt, dʌst ɹaɪzɪŋ ɪn pʌfs bɪniθ əɹ bɛɹ fit.

Dimly, she remembered playing mazes on paper as a child; there had been a trick to finding your way out, but she could not bring it to mind. Everything in the past seemed vague, as if it had happened to someone else. Trailing a hand along the wall, she started out, dust rising in puffs beneath her bare feet.

ət ðə fɝst oʊpənɪŋ ɪn ðə wɔl, ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf piɹɪŋ daʊn ənʌðɝ pæsədʒ ðət simd ɪndɪstɪŋɡwɪʃəbəl fɹəm ðə wʌn ʃi wɑz ɪn ɔlɹɛɾi. teɪkɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ʃi wɛn ɑn stʃɹeɪt, θɹu mɔɹ pæsədʒəz ðəɾ ɔl lʊkt ɪɡzækli əlaɪk. pɹɛzənli ʃi keɪm tə sʌmθɪŋ dɪfɹənt. ðə weɪ fɔɹkt. ʃi tʊk ðə lɛf tɝnɪŋ, ən ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɪt fɔɹkt əɡɛn. wʌns mɔɹ ʃi wɛn lɛft. ət ðə θɝd fɔɹk, lɛf bɹɔɾ əɹ tə ə blæŋk wɔl.

At the first opening in the wall, she found herself peering down another passage that seemed indistinguishable from the one she was in already. Taking a deep breath, she went on straight, through more passages that all looked exactly alike. Presently she came to something different. The way forked. She took the left turning, and eventually it forked again. Once more she went left. At the third fork, left brought her to a blank wall.

ɡɹɪmli ʃi wɔk bæk tə ðə læs fɔɹk ən wɛn ɹaɪt. ðɪs taɪm ɪt tʊk fɔɹ tɝnɪŋz ɹaɪt tə bɹɪŋ əɹ tə ə dɛɾ ɛnd. fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ʃi stʊd ɡlɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪt. "haʊ dɪɾ aɪ ɡɛt hɪɹ?" ʃi dɪmændəd laʊdli. "wɛɹ ɪz ðɪs pleɪs?" ðə weɪ aʊt wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns.

Grimly she walked back to the last fork and went right. This time it took four turnings right to bring her to a dead end. For a moment, she stood glaring at it. "How did I get here?" she demanded loudly. "Where is this place?" The way out will come but once.

wʌns mɔɹ ʃi tɝn bæk. ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðəɹ hæd tə bi ə tʃɹɪk tə ðə meɪz. ət ðə læs fɔɹk, ʃi wɛn lɛft, ðən ɹaɪɾ ət ðə nɛkst. dɪtɝmənd, ʃi kɛpt ɑn. lɛft, ðən ɹaɪt. stʃɹeɪɾ əntɪl ʃi keɪm tə ə fɔɹk. lɛft, ðən ɹaɪt.

Once more she turned back. She was sure there had to be a trick to the maze. At the last fork, she went left, then right at the next. Determined, she kept on. Left, then right. Straight until she came to a fork. Left, then right.

ɪt sim tə hɝ tə bi wɝkɪŋ. ət list, ʃi hæd ɡɔn pæst ə dʌzən fɔɹkɪŋz ðɪs taɪm wɪθaʊt faɪndɪŋ ən ɛnd. ʃi keɪm tə ənʌðɝ.

It seemed to her to be working. At least, she had gone past a dozen forkings this time without finding an end. She came to another.

aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ, ʃi kɑɾ ə flɪkɝ ə moʊʃən. wən ʃi tɝn tə lʊk, ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ðə dʌsti pæsədʒ bɪtwin smuð stoʊn wɔlz. ʃi stɑɹɾəd tə teɪk ðə lɛft fɔɹk . . . ən spʌn ɝaʊn əɾ ənʌðɝ ɡlɪmps ə muvmənt. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ðɛɹ, bʌt ðɪs taɪm ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ. ðəɹ hæd bɪn sʌmwʌn bɪhaɪn hɝ. wɑz sʌmwʌn. ʃi bɹoʊk ɪndə ə nɝvəs tʃɹɑɾ ɪn ði ɑpəzət dɝɛkʃən.

Out of the corner of her eye, she caught a flicker of motion. When she turned to look, there was only the dusty passage between smooth stone walls. She started to take the left fork . . . and spun around at another glimpse of movement. There was nothing there, but this time she was sure. There had been someone behind her. Was someone. She broke into a nervous trot in the opposite direction.

əɡɛn ən əɡɛn, naʊ, dʒʌst ət ði ɛdʒ ə vɪʒən daʊn ðɪs saɪd pæsədʒ əɹ ðæt, ʃi sɔ sʌmθɪŋ muv, tu kwɪk tə meɪk aʊt, ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd tɝn əɹ hɛd tə si ɪt pleɪnli. ʃi bɹoʊk ɪndə ə ɹʌn. fju bɔɪz hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə aʊtʃɹʌn əɹ wən ʃi wɑz ə ɡɝl ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz? wʌɾ ɪz ðæt?

Again and again, now, just at the edge of vision down this side passage or that, she saw something move, too quick to make out, gone before she could turn her head to see it plainly. She broke into a run. Few boys had been able to outrun her when she was a girl in the Two Rivers. The Two Rivers? What is that?

ə mæn stɛpt aʊt fɹəm ən oʊpənɪŋ əhɛɾ ə hɝ. hɪz dɑɹk kloʊðz hæɾ ə mʌsti, hæf-ɹɑɾɪd lʊk, ən i wɑz oʊld. oʊldɝ ðən oʊld. skɪn laɪk kɹeɪz pɑɹtʃmən kʌvɝɾ ɪz skʌl tu taɪtli, əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ noʊ flɛʃ bɪniθ. wɪspi tʌfs ə bɹɪɾəl hɛɹ kʌvɝɾ ə skæb skælp, ən ɪz aɪz wɝ soʊ sʌŋkən ðeɪ sim tə pɪɹ aʊɾ ə tu keɪvz.

A man stepped out from an opening ahead of her. His dark clothes had a musty, half-rotted look, and he was old. Older than old. Skin like crazed parchment covered his skull too tightly, as if there were no flesh beneath. Wispy tufts of brittle hair covered a scabbed scalp, and his eyes were so sunken they seemed to peer out of two caves.

ʃi skɪɾəd tə ə stɑp, ði ənivən peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz ɹʌf ʌndɝ əɹ fit.

She skidded to a stop, the uneven paving stones rough under her feet.

"aɪ æm eɪdʒɪnɝ," hi sɛd, smaɪlɪŋ, "æn aɪ hæv kʌm fəɹ ju."

"I am Aginor," he said, smiling, "and I have come for you."

hɝ hɑɹt tʃɹaɪd tə lip aʊɾ ə hɝ tʃɛst. wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən. "noʊ. noʊ, ɪt kænɑt bi!"

Her heart tried to leap out of her chest. One of the Forsaken. "No. No, it cannot be!"

"ju ɑɹ ə pɹɪɾi wʌn, ɡɝl. əl ɛndʒɔɪ ju."

"You are a pretty one, girl. I will enjoy you."

sʌɾənli nɪneɪiv ɹɪmɛmbɝd ʃi wɔɹ nɑɾ ə stɪtʃ. wɪð ə jɛlp ən ə feɪs ɹɛɾ oʊnli pɑɹtli fɹəm æŋɡɝ, ʃi dɑɹɾɪd əweɪ daʊn ðə nɪɹəs kɹɔsɪŋ pæsədʒ. kækəlɪŋ læftɝ pɝsud hɝ, ən ðə saʊn ʌv ə ʃʌflɪŋ ɹʌn ðət sim tə mætʃ əɹ bɛst spid, ən bɹɛθi pɹɑməsəz ʌv wʌɾ i wəd də wən i kɑt hɝ, pɹɑməsəz ðət kɝɾəld əɹ stʌmək ivən oʊnli hæf hɝd.

Suddenly Nynaeve remembered she wore not a stitch. With a yelp and a face red only partly from anger, she darted away down the nearest crossing passage. Cackling laughter pursued her, and the sound of a shuffling run that seemed to match her best speed, and breathy promises of what he would do when he caught her, promises that curdled her stomach even only half heard.

dɛspɝətli ʃi sɝtʃt fəɹ ə weɪ aʊt, piɹɪŋ fɹæntəkəli əz ʃi ɹæn wɪð fɪsts klɛntʃt. ðə weɪ aʊt wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ, oʊnli mɔɹ ə ði ɛnləs meɪz. əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi kəd ɹʌn, hɪz fɪlθi wɝdz keɪm ɔlweɪz ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn hɝ. sloʊli, fɪɹ tɝn kəmplitli tə æŋɡɝ.

Desperately she searched for a way out, peering frantically as she ran with fists clenched. The way out will come but once. Be steadfast. There was nothing, only more of the endless maze. As hard as she could run, his filthy words came always right behind her. Slowly, fear turned completely to anger.

"bɝn hɪm!" ʃi sɑbd. "ðə laɪt bɝn hɪm! hiz noʊ ɹaɪt!" wɪðɪn əɹ ʃi fɛlt ə flaʊɝɪŋ, ən oʊpənɪŋ ʌp, ən ənfoʊldɪŋ tə laɪt.

"Burn him!" she sobbed. "The Light burn him! He has no right!" Within her she felt a flowering, an opening up, an unfolding to light.

tiθ bɛɹd, ʃi tɝn tə feɪs əɹ pɝsuɝ dʒʌst əz eɪdʒɪnɝ əpɪɹd, læfɪŋ, ɪn ə lɝtʃɪŋ ɡæləp.

Teeth bared, she turned to face her pursuer just as Aginor appeared, laughing, in a lurching gallop.

"ju hæv noʊ ɹaɪt!" ʃi flʌŋ əɹ fɪs təwɔɹd hɪm, fɪŋɡɝz oʊpənɪŋ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ θɹoʊɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ. ʃi wɑz oʊnli hæf sɝpɹaɪz tə si ə bɔl ə faɪɝ liv əɹ hænd.

"You have no right!" She flung her fist toward him, fingers opening as if she were throwing something. She was only half surprised to see a ball of fire leave her hand.

ɪɾ ɪksploʊɾəd əɡɛnst eɪdʒɪnɝz tʃɛst, nɑkɪŋ ɪm tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. fəɹ oʊnli ən ɪnstən i spɹɔl ðɛɹ, ðən ɹoʊz, stæɡɝɪŋ. hi simd ʌnəwɛɹ ə ðə smoʊldɝɪŋ fɹʌn ə hɪz koʊt. "ju dɛɹ? jə dɛɹ!" hi kwɪvɝd, ən spɪɾəl lik daʊn ɪz tʃɪn.

It exploded against Aginor's chest, knocking him to the ground. For only an instant he sprawled there, then rose, staggering. He seemed unaware of the smoldering front of his coat. "You dare? You dare!" He quivered, and spittle leaked down his chin.

əbɹʌpli ðəɹ wɝ klaʊdz ɪn ðə skaɪ, θɹɛɾənɪŋ bɪloʊz ʌv ɡɹeɪ ən blæk. laɪtnɪŋ lɛp fɹəm ðə klaʊd, stʃɹeɪt fəɹ nɪneɪivz hɑɹt.

Abruptly there were clouds in the sky, threatening billows of gray and black. Lightning leaped from the cloud, straight for Nynaeve's heart.

ɪt sim tə hɝ, dʒʌs fəɹ ə hɑɹtbit, əz ɪf taɪm hæd sʌɾənli sloʊd, əz ðoʊ ðət hɑɹtbit tʊk fɝɛvɝ. ʃi fɛl ðə floʊ ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ - seɪaɪdɑɹ, keɪm ə dɪstən θɔt - fɛl ði ænsɝɪŋ floʊ ɪn ðə laɪtnɪŋ. ən ʃi ɔltɝd ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðə floʊ. taɪm lɛp fɔɹwɝd.

It seemed to her, just for a heartbeat, as if time had suddenly slowed, as though that heartbeat took forever. She felt the flow inside her - saidar, came a distant thought - felt the answering flow in the lightning. And she altered the direction of the flow. Time leaped forward.

wɪð ə kɹæʃ, ðə boʊlt ʃæɾɝd stoʊn əbʌv eɪdʒɪnɝz hɛd. ðə fɔɹseɪkənz sʌŋkən aɪz waɪɾənd, ən i tɑɾɝd bæk. "ju kænɑt! ɪt kænɑt bi!" hi lɛpt əweɪ əz laɪtnɪŋ stʃɹʌk wɛɹ i hæd stʊd, stoʊn ɪɹʌptɪŋ ɪn ə faʊntən ə ʃɑɹdz.

With a crash, the bolt shattered stone above Aginor's head. The Forsaken's sunken eyes widened, and he tottered back. "You cannot! It cannot be!" He leaped away as lightning struck where he had stood, stone erupting in a fountain of shards.

ɡɹɪmli nɪneɪiv stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd hɪm. ən eɪdʒɪnɝ flɛd.

Grimly Nynaeve started toward him. And Aginor fled.

seɪaɪdɑɹ wɑz ə tɔɹən ɹeɪsɪŋ θɹu hɝ. ʃi kəd fil ðə ɹɑks ɝaʊn hɝ, ən ði ɛɹ, fil ðə taɪni, floʊɪŋ bɪts ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ðət səfjuz ðɛm, ən meɪd ðɛm. ən ʃi kəd fil eɪdʒɪnɝ duɪŋ . . . sʌmθɪŋ, əz wɛl. dɪmli ʃi fɛlt ɪt, ən fɑɹ dɪstənt, əz ɪf ɪt wɝ sʌmθɪŋ ʃi kəd nɛvɝ tʃɹuli noʊ, bʌɾ ɝaʊn əɹ ʃi sɔ ði ɪfɛks ən nu ðɛm fəɹ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ.

Saidar was a torrent racing through her. She could feel the rocks around her, and the air, feel the tiny, flowing bits of the One Power that suffused them, and made them. And she could feel Aginor doing . . . something, as well. Dimly she felt it, and far distant, as if it were something she could never truly know, but around her she saw the effects and knew them for what they were.

ðə ɡɹaʊn ɹʌmbəld ən hivd ʌndɝ əɹ fit. wɔlz tɑpəld ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, paɪlz ə stoʊn tə blɑk əɹ weɪ. ʃi skɹæmbəld oʊvɝ ðɛm, ənkɛɹɪŋ ɪf ʃɑɹp ɹɑk kʌt hænz ən fit, ɔlweɪz kipɪŋ eɪdʒɪnɝ ɪn saɪt. ə wɪn ɹoʊz, haʊlɪŋ daʊn ðə pæsədʒəz əɡɛns hɝ, ɹeɪdʒɪŋ tɪl ɪt flæɾənd əɹ tʃiks ən meɪɾ əɹ aɪz wɔɾɝ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə nɑk əɹ daʊn; ʃi tʃeɪnʒd ðə floʊ, ən eɪdʒɪnɝ tʌmbəld əlɔŋ ðə pæsədʒweɪ laɪk ən əpɹuɾɪd bʊʃ. ʃi tʌtʃt ðə floʊ ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɹiɾɝɛktɪd ɪt, ən stoʊn wɔlz kəlæpst ɝaʊn eɪdʒɪnɝ, silɪŋ ɪm ɪn. laɪtnɪŋ fɛl wɪð əɹ ɡlɛɹ, stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ɝaʊn hɪm, stoʊn ɪksploʊɾɪŋ ɛvɝ kloʊsɝ ən kloʊsɝ. ʃi kəd fil ɪm faɪɾɪŋ tə pʊʃ ɪt bæk ət hɝ, bʌt fʊt baɪ fʊt ðə dæzəlɪŋ boʊls muv təwɔɹd ðə fɔɹseɪkən.

The ground rumbled and heaved under her feet. Walls toppled in front of her, piles of stone to block her way. She scrambled over them, uncaring if sharp rock cut hands and feet, always keeping Aginor in sight. A wind rose, howling down the passages against her, raging till it flattened her cheeks and made her eyes water, trying to knock her down; she changed the flow, and Aginor tumbled along the passageway like an uprooted bush. She touched the flow in the ground, redirected it, and stone walls collapsed around Aginor, sealing him in. Lightning fell with her glare, striking around him, stone exploding ever closer and closer. She could feel him fighting to push it back at her, but foot by foot the dazzling bolts moved toward the Forsaken.

sʌmθɪŋ ɡlimd ɔf tə hɝ ɹaɪt, sʌmθɪŋ ənkʌvɝd baɪ ðə kəlæpsɪŋ wɔlz.

Something gleamed off to her right, something uncovered by the collapsing walls.

nɪneɪiv kəd fil eɪdʒɪnɝ wikənɪŋ, fil ɪz ɛfɝts tə stʃɹaɪk əɾ əɹ ɡɹoʊ mɔɹ fibəl ən mɔɹ fɹæntɪk. jɛt sʌmhaʊ ʃi nu hi hæd nɑt ɡɪvən ʌp. ɪf ʃi lɛɾ ɪm ɡoʊ naʊ, hi wəd tʃeɪs æftɝ əɹ əz stʃɹɔŋli əz bɪfɔɹ, kənvɪnst ʃi wɑz tu wik tə dɪfiɾ ɪm æftɝ ɔl, tu wik tə stɑp ɪm fɹəm duɪŋ wɪð əɹ əz i wɪʃt.

Nynaeve could feel Aginor weakening, feel his efforts to strike at her grow more feeble and more frantic. Yet somehow she knew he had not given up. If she let him go now, he would chase after her as strongly as before, convinced she was too weak to defeat him after all, too weak to stop him from doing with her as he wished.

ə sɪlvɝ ɑɹtʃ stʊd wɛɹ stoʊn hæd bɪn, ən ɑɹtʃ fɪld wɪð sɑf sɪlvɝ ɹeɪdʒjəns. ðə weɪ bæk. . . .

A silver arch stood where stone had been, an arch filled with soft silver radiance. The way back. . . .

ʃi nu wən ðə fɔɹseɪkən əbændən ɪz ətæk, ðə moʊmənt wən ɔl ɪz ɛfɝts wɝ ɡɪvən oʊvɝ tə steɪvɪŋ əɹ ɔf. ən ɪz paʊɝ wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf, hi kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ dɪflɛkt əɹ bloʊz. naʊ hi hæd tə flɪŋ hɪmsɛlf əweɪ fɹəm ðə lipɪŋ ɡaʊts ə stoʊn θɹoʊn ʌp baɪ hɝ laɪtnɪŋ, ði ɪksploʊʒənz flɪŋɪŋ ɪm daʊn əɡɛn.

She knew when the Forsaken abandoned his attack, the moment when all his efforts were given over to staving her off. And his power was not enough, he could no longer deflect her blows. Now he had to fling himself away from the leaping gouts of stone thrown up by her lightning, the explosions flinging him down again.

ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst.

The way back will come but once. Be steadfast.

ðə laɪtnɪŋ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ fɛl. nɪneɪiv tɝn fɹəm ðə skɹæbəlɪŋ eɪdʒɪnɝ tə lʊk ət ði ɑɹtʃ. ʃi lʊk bæk əɾ eɪdʒɪnɝ, dʒʌst ɪn taɪm tə si hɪm kɹɔl aʊɾ ə saɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə maʊndɪd stoʊn ən dɪsəpɪɹ. ʃi hɪst ɪn fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. mʌtʃ ə ðə meɪz stɪl stʊd, ən ə hʌnʒɹəd nu pleɪsəz tə haɪɾ ɪn ðə ɹʌbəl ʃi ən ðə fɔɹseɪkən hæd meɪd. ɪt wəd teɪk taɪm tə faɪn ɪm əɡɛn, bʌt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt faɪn ɪm fɝst, hi wəd faɪn hɝ. ɪn ɪz fʊl stʃɹɛŋkθ, hi wəd kʌm ɑn əɹ wən ʃi list ɪkspɛktəd hɪm.

The lightning no longer fell. Nynaeve turned from the scrabbling Aginor to look at the arch. She looked back at Aginor, just in time to see him crawl out of sight over the mounded stone and disappear. She hissed in frustration. Much of the maze still stood, and a hundred new places to hide in the rubble she and the Forsaken had made. It would take time to find him again, but she was sure if she did not find him first, he would find her. In his full strength, he would come on her when she least expected him.

ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns.

The way back will come but once.

fɹaɪɾənd, ʃi lʊkt əɡɛn ən wɑz ɹɪliv tə si ði ɑɹtʃ stɪl ðɛɹ. ɪf ʃi kəd faɪn eɪdʒɪnɝ kwɪkli. . . .

Frightened, she looked again and was relieved to see the arch still there. If she could find Aginor quickly. . . .

bi stɛdfæst.

Be steadfast.

wɪð ə kɹaɪ ʌv θwɔɹɾəd æŋɡɝ, ʃi klaɪmd oʊvɝ ðə tʌmbəl stoʊn təwɔɹd ði ɑɹtʃ. "huɛvɝz ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ mi biɪŋ hɪɹ," ʃi mʌɾɝd, "aɪl meɪk əm wɪʃ ðeɪ hæd ɡɑɾən wʌɾ eɪdʒɪnɝ ɡɑt. əl - " ʃi stɛpt ɪndə ði ɑɹtʃ, ən ðə laɪɾ oʊvɝwɛlm hɝ.

With a cry of thwarted anger, she climbed over the tumbled stone toward the arch. "Whoever's responsible for me being here," she muttered, "I'll make them wish they had gotten what Aginor got. I'll - " She stepped into the arch, and the light overwhelmed her.

"aɪl - " nɪneɪiv stɛpt aʊɾ ə ði ɑɹtʃ ən stɑp tə stɛɹ. ɪt wɑz ɔl əz ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd - ðə sɪlvɝ tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðə tʃeɪmbɝ - bʌt ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ wɑz laɪk ə bloʊ, æbsən mɛmɹiz kɹæʃɪŋ bæk ɪndə hɝ hɛd. ʃi hæd kʌm aʊɾ ə ðə seɪm ɑɹtʃ baɪ wɪtʃ ʃi wɛn ɪn.

"I'll - " Nynaeve stepped out of the arch and stopped to stare. It was all as she remembered - the silver ter'angreal, the Aes Sedai, the chamber - but remembering was like a blow, absent memories crashing back into her head. She had come out of the same arch by which she went in.

ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝ ɹeɪzd wʌn ə ðə sɪlvɝ tʃæləsəz haɪ ən pɔɹɾ ə stʃɹim ə kul, klɪɹ wɔɾɝ oʊvɝ nɪneɪivz hɛd. "ju ɑɹ wɑʃt klin ʌv wʌt sɪn jə meɪ hæv dʌn," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪntoʊnd, "æn ə ðoʊz dʌn əɡɛns ju. jə ɑɹ wɑʃt klin ʌv wʌt kɹaɪm jə meɪ hæv kəmɪɾəd, ən ə ðoʊz kəmɪɾəd əɡɛns ju. jə kʌm tə əs wɑʃt klin ən pjʊɹ, ɪn hɑɹɾ ən soʊl."

The Red sister raised one of the silver chalices high and poured a stream of cool, clear water over Nynaeve's head. "You are washed clean of what sin you may have done," the Aes Sedai intoned, "and of those done against you. You are washed clean of what crime you may have committed, and of those committed against you. You come to us washed clean and pure, in heart and soul."

nɪneɪiv ʃɪvɝɾ əz ðə wɔɾɝ ɹæn daʊn əɹ bɑɾi, dʒɹɪpɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ.

Nynaeve shivered as the water ran down her body, dripping on the floor.

ʃɛɹiəm tʊk əɹ ɑɹm wɪð ə ɹɪliv smaɪl, bʌt ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz' vɔɪs ɡeɪv noʊ hɪn ə pæst wɝi. "ju də wɛl soʊ fɑɹ. kʌmɪŋ bæk ɪz duɪŋ wɛl. ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌt jəɹ pɝpəs ɪz, ən jəl kəntɪnju tə bi wɛl." ðə ɹɛdhɛd bɪɡæn tə liɾ əɹ ɝaʊn ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil tə ənʌðɝ ɑɹtʃ.

Sheriam took her arm with a relieved smile, but the Mistress of Novices' voice gave no hint of past worry. "You do well so far. Coming back is doing well. Remember what your purpose is, and you will continue to be well." The redhead began to lead her around the ter'angreal to another arch.

"ɪt wɑz soʊ ɹil," nɪneɪiv sɛɾ ɪn ə wɪspɝ. ʃi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ɹɪmɛmbɝ tʃænəlɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ əz izəli əz lɪftɪŋ əɹ hænd. ʃi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ eɪdʒɪnɝ, ən ðə θɪŋz ðə fɔɹseɪkən wɑntəd tə də tə hɝ. ʃi ʃɪvɝɾ əɡɛn. "wɑz ɪt ɹil?"

"It was so real," Nynaeve said in a whisper. She could remember everything, remember channeling the One Power as easily as lifting her hand. She could remember Aginor, and the things the Forsaken wanted to do to her. She shivered again. "Was it real?"

"noʊ wʌn noʊz," ʃɛɹiəm ɹɪplaɪd. "ɪt simz ɹil ɪn mɛmɹi, ən səm əv kʌm aʊt bɛɹɪŋ ði æktʃəwəl wunz ə hɝts teɪkən ɪnsaɪd. ʌðɝz əv bɪn kʌt tə ðə boʊn ɪnsaɪd, ən kʌm bæk wɪθaʊɾ ə mɑɹk. ɪts ɔl ʌv ɪt dɪfɹən ɛvɹi taɪm fəɹ ɛvɹi wʊmən u ɡoʊz ɪn. ði eɪntʃəns sɛd ðəɹ wɝ mɛni wɝlz. pɝhæps ðɪs tɛɹæŋɡɹil teɪks jə tə ðɛm. jɛɾ ɪf soʊ, ɪt dʌz soʊ ʌndɝ vɛɹi stʃɹɪnʒənt ɹulz fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ mɛn dʒʌs tə teɪk jə fɹəm wʌn pleɪs tə ənʌðɝ. aɪ bɪliv ɪts nɑt ɹil. bʌt ɹɪmɛmbɝ, wɛðɝ wʌt hæpənz ɪz ɹil əɹ nɑt, ðə deɪnʒɝ ɪz əz ɹil əz ə naɪf plʌnʒɪŋ ɪndə jəɹ hɑɹt."

"No one knows," Sheriam replied. "It seems real in memory, and some have come out bearing the actual wounds of hurts taken inside. Others have been cut to the bone inside, and come back without a mark. It is all of it different every time for every woman who goes in. The ancients said there were many worlds. Perhaps this ter'angreal takes you to them. Yet if so, it does so under very stringent rules for something meant just to take you from one place to another. I believe it is not real. But remember, whether what happens is real or not, the danger is as real as a knife plunging into your heart."

"aɪ tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ. ɪt wɑz soʊ izi."

"I channeled the Power. It was so easy."

ʃɛɹiəm mɪst ə stɛp. "ðæɾ ɪzən səpoʊz tə bi pɑsəbəl. jə ʃəd nɑɾ ivən ɹɪmɛmbɝ biɪŋ eɪbəl tə tʃænəl." ʃi stʌɾid nɪneɪiv. "æn jɛt jə ɑɹ nɑt hɑɹmd. aɪ kən stɪl sɛns ði əbɪləɾi ɪn ju, əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ɪɾ ɛvɝ wɑz."

Sheriam missed a step. "That isn't supposed to be possible. You should not even remember being able to channel." She studied Nynaeve. "And yet you are not harmed. I can still sense the ability in you, as strong as it ever was."

"ju saʊn əz ɪf ɪt wɝ deɪnʒɝəs," nɪneɪiv sɛd sloʊli, ən ʃɛɹiəm hɛzɪteɪɾɪd bɪfɔɹ ænsɝɪŋ.

"You sound as if it were dangerous," Nynaeve said slowly, and Sheriam hesitated before answering.

"ɪɾ ɪzən θɔt nɛsəsɛɹi tə ɡɪv ə wɔɹnɪŋ, sɪns jə ʃʊdn bi eɪbəl tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪt, bʌt. . . . ðɪs tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɑz faʊn dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz. wɪv ðə ɹɛkɝdz ʌv ɪts ɪɡzæməneɪʃən ɪn ði ɑɹkaɪvz. ðə fɝst sɪstɝ tə ɛntɝ wɑz wɔɹɾɪd əz stʃɹɔŋli əz ʃi kəd bi, sɪns noʊ wʌn nu wʌɾ ɪt wəd du. ʃi kɛpt əɹ mɛmɹiz, ən ʃi tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ wən ʃi wɑz θɹɛɾənd. ən ʃi keɪm aʊt wɪð əɹ əbɪləɾiz bɝn tə nʌθɪŋ, əneɪbəl tə tʃænəl, əneɪbəl ivən tə sɛns ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. ðə sɛkən tə ɡoʊ ɪn wɑz ɔlsoʊ wɔɹɾɪd, ən ʃi, tu, wɑz dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ɪn ðə seɪm weɪ. ðə θɝd wɛn ʌnpɹətɛktɪd, ɹɪmɛmbɝd nʌθɪŋ wʌns ʃi wɑz ɪnsaɪd, ən ɹɪtɝn ənhɑɹmd. ðəɾ ɪz wʌn ɹizən waɪ wi sɛn jə kəmplitli ʌnpɹətɛktɪd. nɪneɪiv, jə mʌs nɑt tʃænəl ɪnsaɪd ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil əɡɛn. aɪ noʊ ɪts hɑɹd tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛniθɪŋ, bʌt tʃɹaɪ."

"It isn't thought necessary to give a warning, since you shouldn't be able to remember it, but. . . . This ter'angreal was found during the Trolloc Wars. We have the records of its examination in the archives. The first sister to enter was warded as strongly as she could be, since no one knew what it would do. She kept her memories, and she channeled the One Power when she was threatened. And she came out with her abilities burned to nothing, unable to channel, unable even to sense the True Source. The second to go in was also warded, and she, too, was destroyed in the same way. The third went unprotected, remembered nothing once she was inside, and returned unharmed. That is one reason why we send you completely unprotected. Nynaeve, you must not channel inside the ter'angreal again. I know it is hard to remember anything, but try."

nɪneɪiv swɑloʊd. ʃi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ. "aɪ woʊn tʃænəl," ʃi sɛd. ɪf aɪ kən ɹɪmɛmbɝ nɑt tə. ʃi wɑntəd tə læf hɪstɛɹɪkli.

Nynaeve swallowed. She could remember everything, could remember not remembering. "I won't channel," she said. If I can remember not to. She wanted to laugh hysterically.

ðeɪ hæd ɹitʃt ðə nɛkst ɑɹtʃ. ðə ɡloʊ stɪl fɪld əm ɔl. ʃɛɹiəm ɡeɪv nɪneɪiv ə læst wɔɹnɪŋ lʊk, ən lɛft əɹ stændɪŋ əloʊn.

They had reached the next arch. The glow still filled them all. Sheriam gave Nynaeve a last warning look, and left her standing alone.

"ðə sɛkən taɪm ɪz fəɹ wʌɾ ɪz. ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst."

"The second time is for what is. The way back will come but once. Be steadfast."

nɪneɪiv stɛɹɾ ət ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ sɪlvɝ ɑɹtʃ. wʌɾ ɪz ɪn ðəɹ ðɪs taɪm? ði ʌðɝz wɝ weɪɾɪŋ, wɑtʃɪŋ. ʃi stɛp fɝmli θɹu ɪndə ðə laɪt.

Nynaeve stared at the shining silver arch. What is in there this time? The others were waiting, watching. She stepped firmly through into the light.

nɪneɪiv stɛɹd daʊn ət ðə pleɪn bɹaʊn dʒɹɛs ʃi wɔɹ wɪð sɝpɹaɪz, ðən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. waɪ wɑz ʃi stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ oʊn dʒɹɛs? ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns.

Nynaeve stared down at the plain brown dress she wore with surprise, then gave a start. Why was she staring at her own dress? The way back will come but once.

lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊn hɝ, ʃi smaɪld. ʃi stʊɾ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə ɡɹin ɪn ɛmənz fild, wɪð θætʃ-ɹuf haʊzɪz ɔl ɝaʊnd, ən ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪtsɛlf ɹoʊz ɪn ə ɡʌʃ fɹəm ðə stoʊn aʊtkɹɑp θɹʌstɪŋ ʌp θɹu ðə ɡɹæs ə ðə ɡɹin, ən ðə waɪn-spɹɪŋ wɔɾɝ ɹʌʃt ɔf ist ʌndɝ ðə wɪloʊz bɪsaɪd ði ɪn. ðə stʃɹits wɝ ɛmpti, bʌt moʊs pipəl wəd bi ət ðɛɹ tʃɔɹz ðɪs taɪm ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ.

Looking around her, she smiled. She stood on the edge of the Green in Emond's Field, with thatch-roofed houses all around, and the Winespring Inn right in front of her. The Winespring itself rose in a gush from the stone outcrop thrusting up through the grass of the Green, and the Wine-spring Water rushed off east under the willows beside the inn. The streets were empty, but most people would be at their chores this time of the morning.

lʊkɪŋ ət ði ɪn, hɝ smaɪl feɪɾəd. ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ ðən ən ɛɹ ə nəɡlɛkt əbaʊɾ ɪt, waɪtwɑʃ feɪɾəd, ə ʃʌɾɝ hæŋɪŋ lus, ðə ɹɑɾɪd ɛn ʌv ə ɹæftɝ ʃoʊɪŋ əɾ ə ɡæp ɪn ðə ɹuf taɪlz. wʌts ɡɑɾən ɪndə bɹæn? ɪz i spɛndɪŋ soʊ mʌtʃ taɪm biɪŋ meɪɝ hiz fɝɡɛɾɪŋ tə teɪk kɛɹ ə hɪz ɪn?

Looking at the inn, her smile faded. There was more than an air of neglect about it, whitewash faded, a shutter hanging loose, the rotted end of a rafter showing at a gap in the roof tiles. What's gotten into Bran? Is he spending so much time being Mayor he's forgetting to take care of his inn?

ði ɪn dɔɹ swʌŋ oʊpən, ən sɛn bui keɪm aʊt, stɑpɪŋ dɛd wən i sɔ hɝ. ði oʊl θætʃɝ wɑz əz nɑɹld əz ən oʊk ɹut, ən ðə lʊk i ɡeɪv əɹ wɑz dʒʌst əz fɹɛnli. "soʊ juv kʌm bæk, hæv ju? wɛl, jə maɪɾ əz wɛl bi ɔf əɡɛn."

The inn door swung open, and Cenn Buie came out, stopping dead when he saw her. The old thatcher was as gnarled as an oak root, and the look he gave her was just as friendly. "So you've come back, have you? Well, you might as well be off again."

ʃi fɹaʊn əz i spæɾ əɾ əɹ fiɾ ən hɝiɾ ɑn pæs hɝ; sɛn wɑz nɛvɝ ə plɛzən mæn, bʌɾ i wɑz sɛldəm oʊpənli ɹud. nɛvɝ tə hɝ, ət list. nɛvɝ tə hɝ feɪs. fɑloʊɪŋ ɪm wɪð əɹ aɪ, ʃi sɔ saɪnz ə nəɡlɛkt ɔl θɹu ðə vɪlədʒ, θætʃ ðət ʃʊɾə bɪn mɛndɪd, widz fɪlɪŋ jɑɹdz. ðə dɔɹ ɑn mɪstʃɹəs ɑlkɑɹz haʊs hʌŋ æslɑn ɑn ə bɹoʊkən hɪnʒ.

She frowned as he spat at her feet and hurried on past her; Cenn was never a pleasant man, but he was seldom openly rude. Never to her, at least. Never to her face. Following him with her eye, she saw signs of neglect all through the village, thatch that should have been mended, weeds filling yards. The door on Mistress al'Caar's house hung aslant on a broken hinge.

ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd, nɪneɪiv pʊʃt ɪndə ði ɪn. əl əv mɔɹ ðən wʌn wɝd wɪð bɹæn əbaʊt ðɪs.

Shaking her head, Nynaeve pushed into the inn. I'll have more than one word with Bran about this.

ðə kɑmən ɹum wɑz ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ ə loʊn wʊmən, hɝ θɪk, ɡɹeɪɪŋ bɹeɪd pʊld oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. ʃi wɑz waɪpɪŋ ə teɪbəl, bʌt fɹəm ðə weɪ ʃi stɛɹɾ ət ðə teɪbəltɑp, nɪneɪiv dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi wɑz əwɛɹ ʌv wʌt ʃi duɪŋ. ðə ɹum sim dʌsti.

The common room was empty except for a lone woman, her thick, graying braid pulled over her shoulder. She was wiping a table, but from the way she stared at the tabletop, Nynaeve did not think she was aware of what she doing. The room seemed dusty.

"mɛɹɪn?"

"Marin?"

mɛɹɪn ælvɪɹ dʒʌmpt, wʌn hæn klʌtʃɪŋ əɹ θɹoʊt, ən stɛɹd. ʃi lʊk jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən nɪneɪiv ɹɪmɛmbɝd. wɔɹn. "nɪneɪiv? nɪneɪiv! oʊ, ɪts ju. ɛɡwin? hæv jə bɹɔɾ ɛɡwin bæk? seɪ jə hæv."

Marin al'Vere jumped, one hand clutching her throat, and stared. She looked years older than Nynaeve remembered. Worn. "Nynaeve? Nynaeve! Oh, it is you. Egwene? Have you brought Egwene back? Say you have."

"aɪ. . . ." nɪneɪiv pʊɾ ə hæn tə hɝ hɛd. wɛɹ ɪz ɛɡwin? ɪt simd ʃi ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ. "noʊ. noʊ, aɪ hævən bɹɔɾ əɹ bæk." ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns.

"I. . . ." Nynaeve put a hand to her head. Where is Egwene? It seemed she should be able to remember. "No. No, I haven't brought her back." The way back will come but once.

mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ sæɡd ɪndə wʌn ə ðə stʃɹeɪt-bæk tʃɛɹz. "aɪ wɑz soʊ hoʊpɪŋ. ɛvɝ sɪns bɹæn daɪd. . . ."

Mistress al'Vere sagged into one of the straight-backed chairs. "I was so hoping. Ever since Bran died. . . ."

"bɹæn ɪz dɛd?" nɪneɪiv kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən ɪt; ðət bɹɔd, smaɪlɪŋ mæn hæɾ ɔlweɪz simd əz ɪf i wəd ɡoʊ ɑn fɝɛvɝ. "aɪ ʃʊɾə bɪn hɪɹ."

"Bran is dead?" Nynaeve could not imagine it; that broad, smiling man had always seemed as if he would go on forever. "I should have been here."

ði ʌðɝ wʊmən dʒʌmp tə hɝ fiɾ ən hɝid tə pɪɹ æŋkʃəsli θɹu ə wɪndoʊ ət ðə ɡɹin ən ðə vɪlədʒ. "ɪf mælɪnə noʊz jəɹ hɪɹ, ðəɹ wɪl bi tʃɹʌbəl. aɪ dʒʌs noʊ sɛn wɛn skɝiɪŋ ɔf tə faɪn hɝ. hiz ðə meɪɝ, naʊ."

The other woman jumped to her feet and hurried to peer anxiously through a window at the Green and the village. "If Malena knows you're here, there will be trouble. I just know Cenn went scurrying off to find her. He's the Mayor, now."

"sɛn? haʊ dɪɾ ivən ðoʊz wʊl-hɛɾəd mɛn tʃuz sɛn?"

"Cenn? How did even those wool-headed men choose Cenn?"

"ɪt wɑz mælɪnə. ʃi hæd ðə hoʊl wɪmənz sɝkəl æftɝ ðɛɹ hʌzbənz fəɹ hɪm." mɛɹɪn pɹɛst əɹ feɪs ɔlmoʊst əɡɛns ðə wɪndoʊ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lʊk ɛvɹi weɪ ət wʌns. "sɪli mɛn doʊn tɔk əbaʊt huz neɪm ðəɹ pʊɾɪŋ ɪn ðə bɑks bɪfɔɹhænd; aɪ səpoʊz ɛvɹi mæn u voʊɾəd fəɹ sɛn θɔɾ i wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn huz waɪf hæd bædʒɝɾ ɪm ɪndə ɪt. θɔt wʌn voʊt wəd meɪk noʊ dɪfɝəns. wɛl, ðeɪ lɝn bɛɾɝ. wi ɔl dɪd."

"It was Malena. She had the whole Women's Circle after their husbands for him." Marin pressed her face almost against the window, trying to look every way at once. "Silly men don't talk about whose name they're putting in the box beforehand; I suppose every man who voted for Cenn thought he was the only one whose wife had badgered him into it. Thought one vote would make no difference. Well, they learned better. We all did."

"hu ɪz ðɪs mælɪnə hu hæz ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl duɪŋ əɹ bɪɾɪŋ? aɪv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə hɝ."

"Who is this Malena who has the Women's Circle doing her bidding? I've never heard of her."

"ʃiz fɹəm wɑtʃ hɪl. ʃiz ðə wɪs. . . ." mɛɹɪn tɝn fɹəm ðə wɪndoʊ ɹɪŋɪŋ əɹ hænz. "mælɪnə eɪlɝz ðə wɪzdəm, nɪneɪiv. wən jə dɪdn kʌm bæk. . . . laɪt, aɪ hoʊp ʃi dʌzn faɪn aʊt jəɹ hɪɹ."

"She's from Watch Hill. She's the Wis. . . ." Marin turned from the window wringing her hands. "Malena Aylar's the Wisdom, Nynaeve. When you didn't come back. . . . Light, I hope she doesn't find out you're here."

nɪneɪiv ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɪn wʌndɝ. "mɛɹɪn, jəɹ əfɹeɪɾ ə hɝ. jə ɑɹ ʃeɪkɪŋ. wʌt kaɪndə wʊmən ɪz ʃi? waɪ dɪd ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl ɛvɝ tʃuz sʌmwʌn laɪk hɝ?"

Nynaeve shook her head in wonder. "Marin, you're afraid of her. You are shaking. What kind of woman is she? Why did the Women's Circle ever choose someone like her?"

mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ ɡeɪv ə bɪɾɝ læf. "wi mʌst əv bɪn mæd. mælɪnə keɪm daʊn tə si mævɹə mɔlən ðə deɪ bɪfɔɹ mævɹə hæd tə ɡoʊ bæk tə dɛvən ɹaɪd, ən ðət naɪt səm tʃɪlʒɹən tʊk sɪk, ən mælɪnə steɪd tə lʊk æftɝ ðɛm, ən ðən ðə ʃip stɑɹɾəd daɪɪŋ, ən mælɪnə tʊk kɛɹ ə ðæt, tu. ɪt dʒʌst sim nætʃɹəl tə tʃuz hɝ, bʌt. . . . ʃiz ə bʊli, nɪneɪiv. ʃi bɹaʊbits jə ɪndə duɪŋ wʌt ʃi wɑns. ʃi kips ət ju, ən kips ət ju, əntɪl jəɹ tu taɪɝd tə seɪ noʊ ɛnimɔɹ. ən wɝs. ʃi nɑkt ælsbɛt luhən daʊn."

Mistress al'Vere gave a bitter laugh. "We must have been mad. Malena came down to see Mavra Mallen the day before Mavra had to go back to Deven Ride, and that night some children took sick, and Malena stayed to look after them, and then the sheep started dying, and Malena took care of that, too. It just seemed natural to choose her, but. . . . She's a bully, Nynaeve. She browbeats you into doing what she wants. She keeps at you, and keeps at you, until you're too tired to say no anymore. And worse. She knocked Alsbet Luhhan down."

ə pɪktʃɝ flæʃt ɪn nɪneɪivz hɛɾ ʌv ælsbɛt luhən ən əɹ hʌzbənd, hɹəl, ðə blæksmɪθ. ʃi wɑz nɪɹli əz tɔl əz hɪm, ən staʊtli bɪlt, ðoʊ hænsəm. "ælsbɛts ɔlmoʊst əz stʃɹɔŋ əz hɹəl. aɪ kæn bɪliv. . . ."

A picture flashed in Nynaeve's head of Alsbet Luhhan and her husband, Haral, the blacksmith. She was nearly as tall as him, and stoutly built, though handsome. "Alsbet's almost as strong as Haral. I can't believe. . . ."

"mælɪnəz nɑɾ ə bɪɡ wʊmən, bʌt ʃiz - ʃiz fɪɹs, nɪneɪiv. ʃi biɾ ælsbɛɾ ɔl ɝaʊn ðə ɡɹin wɪð ə stɪk, ən nʌn ʌv əs u sɔ hæd ðə nɝv tə tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp ɪt. wən ðeɪ faʊn aʊt, bɹæn ən hɹəl sɛd ʃi hæd tə ɡoʊ, ivən ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɪntɝfɪɹɪŋ ɪn wɪmənz sɝkəl bɪznəs. aɪ θɪŋk səm ə ðə sɝkəl maɪɾ əv lɪsənd, bʌt bɹæn ən hɹəl boʊθ tʊk sɪk ðə seɪm naɪt, ən daɪd wɪðɪn ə deɪ ʌv itʃ ʌðɝ." mɛɹɪn bɪɾ əɹ lɪp ən lʊkt ɝaʊn ðə ɹum əz ɪf ʃi θɔt sʌmwʌn maɪt bi haɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ. hɝ vɔɪs loʊɝd. "mælɪnə mɪks mɛɾəsən fəɹ ðɛm. ʃi sɛɾ ɪt wɑz əɹ duɾi ivən ɪf ðeɪ hæd spoʊkən əɡɛns hɝ. aɪ sɔ. . . . aɪ sɔ ɡɹeɪ fɛnəl ɪn wʌt ʃi tʊk əweɪ wɪð hɝ."

"Malena's not a big woman, but she's - she's fierce, Nynaeve. She beat Alsbet all around the Green with a stick, and none of us who saw had the nerve to try to stop it. When they found out, Bran and Haral said she had to go, even if they were interfering in Women's Circle business. I think some of the Circle might have listened, but Bran and Haral both took sick the same night, and died within a day of each other." Marin bit her lip and looked around the room as if she thought someone might be hiding there. Her voice lowered. "Malena mixed medicine for them. She said it was her duty even if they had spoken against her. I saw. . . . I saw gray fennel in what she took away with her."

nɪneɪiv ɡæspt. "bʌt. . . . ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ, mɛɹɪn? ɑɹ jə sɝɾən?" ði ʌðɝ wʊmən nɑɾəd, hɝ feɪs ɹɪŋkəlɪŋ ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə tɪɹz. "mɛɹɪn, ɪf jə ivən səspɛktəd ðɪs wʊmən maɪɾ əv pɔɪzən bɹæn, haʊ kəd jə nɑt ɡoʊ tə ðə sɝkəl?"

Nynaeve gasped. "But. . . . Are you sure, Marin? Are you certain?" The other woman nodded, her face wrinkling on the point of tears. "Marin, if you even suspected this woman might have poisoned Bran, how could you not go to the Circle?"

"ʃi sɛd bɹæn ən hɹəl dɪdnt wɔk ɪn ðə laɪt," mɛɹɪn mʌmbəld, "tɔkɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɪzdəm ðə weɪ ðeɪ dɪd. ʃi sɛd ðət wɑz waɪ ðeɪ daɪd; ðə laɪɾ əbændən ðɛm. ʃi tɔks əbaʊt sɪn ɔl ðə taɪm. ʃi sɛd pəɾ ɑlkɑɹ sɪnd, tɔkɪŋ əɡɛnst əɹ æftɝ bɹæn ən hɹəl daɪd. ɔl i sɛd wɑz ʃi dɪdn əv ðə weɪ wɪð hilɪŋ jə dɪd, bʌt ʃi dʒɹu ðə dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ ɑn ɪz dɔɹ, ɹaɪɾ aʊt wɛɹ ɛvɹiwʌn kəd si hɝ wɪð ðə tʃɑɹkoʊl ɪn əɹ hænd. boʊθ ɪz bɔɪz wɝ dɛd bɪfɔɹ ðə wik wɑz aʊt - dʒʌs dɛd wən ðɛɹ mʌðɝ wɛn tə weɪk ðɛm. pʊɹ nɛlə. wi faʊn əɹ wɑndɝɪŋ, læfɪŋ ən kɹaɪɪŋ ɔl ət ðə seɪm taɪm, skɹimɪŋ ðət pət wɑz ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ən hid kɪld əɹ bɔɪz. pət hʌŋ hɪmsɛlf ðə nɛks deɪ." ʃi ʃʌɾɝəd, ən əɹ vɔɪs wɛn soʊ sɑf nɪneɪiv kəd bɛɹli hɪɹ ɪt. "aɪ hæv fɔɹ dɔɾɝz stɪl lɪvɪŋ ʌndɝ maɪ ɹuf. lɪvɪŋ, nɪneɪiv. dʒju ʌndɝstænd wʌɾ aɪm seɪɪŋ. ðəɹ stɪl əlaɪv, ən aɪ wɑnə kip əm əlaɪv."

"She said Bran and Haral didn't walk in the Light," Marin mumbled, "talking against the Wisdom the way they did. She said that was why they died; the Light abandoned them. She talks about sin all the time. She said Paet al'Caar sinned, talking against her after Bran and Haral died. All he said was she didn't have the way with Healing you did, but she drew the Dragon's Fang on his door, right out where everyone could see her with the charcoal in her hand. Both his boys were dead before the week was out - just dead when their mother went to wake them. Poor Nela. We found her wandering, laughing and crying all at the same time, screaming that Paet was the Dark One, and he'd killed her boys. Paet hung himself the next day." She shuddered, and her voice went so soft Nynaeve could barely hear it. "I have four daughters still living under my roof. Living, Nynaeve. Do you understand what I'm saying. They're still alive, and I want to keep them alive."

nɪneɪiv fɛl koʊl tə hɝ boʊnz. "mɛɹɪn, jə kæn əlaʊ ðɪs." ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst. ʃi pʊʃt ɪɾ əweɪ. "ɪf ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl stænz təɡɛðɝ, jə kən bi ɹɪɾ ə hɝ."

Nynaeve felt cold to her bones. "Marin, you can't allow this." The way back will come but once. Be steadfast. She pushed it away. "If the Women's Circle stands together, you can be rid of her."

"stæn təɡɛðɝ əɡɛns mælɪnə?" mɛɹɪnz læf wɑz nɪɹɝ ə sɑb. "wɝ ɔl əfɹeɪɾ ə hɝ. bʌt ʃiz ɡʊd wɪð ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. ðəɹ ɑɹ ɔlweɪz tʃɪlʒɹən sɪk ðiz deɪz, ɪt simz, bʌt mælɪnə dʌz ðə bɛst ʃi kæn. ɔlmoʊs noʊ wʌn ɛvɝ daɪɾ ə sɪknəs wən jə wɝ wɪzdəm."

"Stand together against Malena?" Marin's laugh was nearer a sob. "We're all afraid of her. But she's good with the children. There are always children sick these days, it seems, but Malena does the best she can. Almost no one ever died of sickness when you were Wisdom."

"mɛɹɪn, lɪsən tə mi. doʊn jə si waɪ ðəɹ ɑɹ ɔlweɪz tʃɪlʒɹən sɪk? ɪf ʃi kæn meɪk jə əfɹeɪɾ ə hɝ, ʃi meɪks jə θɪŋk jə niɾ əɹ fəɹ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. ʃiz duɪŋ ɪt, mɛɹɪn. dʒʌst əz ʃi dɪɾ ɪt tə bɹæn."

"Marin, listen to me. Don't you see why there are always children sick? If she can't make you afraid of her, she makes you think you need her for the children. She's doing it, Marin. Just as she did it to Bran."

"ʃi kʊdnt," mɛɹɪn bɹiðd. "ʃi wʊdnt. nɑt ðə lɪɾəl wʌnz."

"She couldn't," Marin breathed. "She wouldn't. Not the little ones."

"ʃi ɪz, mɛɹɪn." ðə weɪ bæk - nɪneɪiv səpɹɛs ðə θɔt ɹuθləsli. "ɪz ðəɹ ɛniwʌn ɪn ðə sɝkəl u ɪzən əfɹeɪd? ɛniwʌn u wɪl lɪsən?"

"She is, Marin." The way back - Nynaeve suppressed the thought ruthlessly. "Is there anyone in the Circle who isn't afraid? Anyone who will listen?"

ði ʌðɝ wʊmən sɛd, "noʊ wʌn u ɪzən əfɹeɪd. bʌt kɔɹɪn aɪɛlɪn maɪt lɪsən. ɪf ʃi dʌz, ʃi maɪt bɹɪŋ tu əɹ θɹi mɔɹ. nɪneɪiv, ɪf ɪnʌf ə ðə sɝkəl lɪsənz, wɪl jə bi əɹ wɪzdəm əɡɛn? aɪ θɪŋk jə meɪ bi ði oʊnli wʌn u woʊn bæk daʊn tə mælɪnə, ivən ɪf wi ɔl noʊ. jə doʊnt noʊ wʌt ʃiz laɪk."

The other woman said, "No one who isn't afraid. But Corin Ayellin might listen. If she does, she might bring two or three more. Nynaeve, if enough of the Circle listens, will you be our Wisdom again? I think you may be the only one who won't back down to Malena, even if we all know. You don't know what she's like."

"aɪ wɪl." ðə weɪ bæk - noʊ! ðiz ɑɹ maɪ pipəl! "ɡɛt jəɹ kloʊk, ən wɪl ɡoʊ tə kɔɹɪn."

"I will." The way back - No! These are my people! "Get your cloak, and we'll go to Corin."

mɛɹɪn wɑz hɛzɪɾənt əbaʊt livɪŋ ði ɪn, ən wʌns nɪneɪiv hæɾ əɹ aʊtsaɪd ʃi slʌŋk əlɔŋ fɹəm dɔɹstɛp tə dɔɹstɛp, kɹaʊtʃɪŋ ən wɑtʃɪŋ.

Marin was hesitant about leaving the inn, and once Nynaeve had her outside she slunk along from doorstep to doorstep, crouching and watching.

bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ hæfweɪ tə kɔɹɪn aɪɛlɪnz haʊs, nɪneɪiv sɔ ə tɔl, skɹɔni wʊmən stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ daʊn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɡɹin təwɔɹd ði ɪn, slæʃɪŋ ðə hɛdz ɔf widz wɪð ə θɪk wɪloʊ swɪtʃ. boʊni əz ʃi wɑz, ʃi hæɾ ə lʊk ʌv wɪɹi stʃɹɛŋkθ, ən ə sɛt, dɪtɝmən slæʃ ʌv ə maʊθ. sɛn bui skʌɾəld əlɔŋ ɪn əɹ weɪk.

Before they were halfway to Corin Ayellin's house, Nynaeve saw a tall, scrawny woman striding down the other side of the Green toward the inn, slashing the heads off weeds with a thick willow switch. Bony as she was, she had a look of wiry strength, and a set, determined slash of a mouth. Cenn Buie scuttled along in her wake.

"mælɪnə." mɛɹɪn pʊl nɪneɪiv ɪndə ðə speɪs bɪtwin tu haʊsəz, ən wɪspɝɾ əz ɪf əfɹeɪd ðə wʊmən maɪt hɪɹ əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹin. "aɪ nu sɛn wəd ɡoʊ tə hɝ."

"Malena." Marin pulled Nynaeve into the space between two houses, and whispered as if afraid the woman might hear across the Green. "I knew Cenn would go to her."

sʌmθɪŋ meɪd nɪneɪiv lʊk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. bɪhaɪn əɹ stʊɾ ə sɪlvɝ ɑɹtʃ, ɹitʃɪŋ fɹəm haʊs tə haʊs, ɡloʊɪŋ waɪtli. ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst.

Something made Nynaeve look over her shoulder. Behind her stood a silver arch, reaching from house to house, glowing whitely. The way back will come but once. Be steadfast.

mɛɹɪn ɡeɪv ə sɑf skɹim. "ʃiz sin ʌs. laɪt hɛlp ʌs, ʃiz kʌmɪŋ ðɪs weɪ!"

Marin gave a soft scream. "She's seen us. Light help us, she's coming this way!"

ðə tɔl wʊmən hæd tɝn əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹin, livɪŋ sɛn stændɪŋ ənsɝteɪnli. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ənsɝɾənti ɑn mælɪnəz feɪs. ʃi wɔk sloʊli, əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ noʊ hoʊp ʌv ɪskeɪp, ə kɹuəl smaɪl ɡɹoʊɪŋ wɪð ɛvɹi stɛp.

The tall woman had turned across the Green, leaving Cenn standing uncertainly. There was no uncertainty on Malena's face. She walked slowly, as if there were no hope of escape, a cruel smile growing with every step.

mɛɹɪn tʌɡd ət nɪneɪivz sliv. "wi hæv tə ɹʌn. wɪv tə haɪd. nɪneɪiv, kʌm ɑn. sɛn wɪl əv toʊld əɹ u jə ɑɹ. ʃi heɪts ɛniwʌn ivən tə spik ə ju."

Marin tugged at Nynaeve's sleeve. "We have to run. We have to hide. Nynaeve, come on. Cenn will have told her who you are. She hates anyone even to speak of you."

ðə sɪlvɝ ɑɹtʃ pʊl nɪneɪivz aɪz. ðə weɪ bæk. . . . ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ. ɪts nɑt ɹil. ʃi lʊkt ət mɛɹɪn; stɑɹk tɛɹɝ twɪstəd ðə wʊmənz feɪs. jə mʌs bi stɛdfæs tə sɝvaɪv.

The silver arch pulled Nynaeve's eyes. The way back. . . . She shook her head, trying to remember. It is not real. She looked at Marin; stark terror twisted the woman's face. You must be steadfast to survive.

"pliz, nɪneɪiv. ʃiz sin mi wɪð ju. ʃi - hæz - sin - mi! pliz, nɪneɪiv!"

"Please, Nynaeve. She's seen me with you. She - has - seen - me! Please, Nynaeve!"

mælɪnə keɪm kloʊsɝ, ɪmplækəbəl. maɪ pipəl. ði ɑɹtʃ ʃoʊn. ðə weɪ bæk. ɪts nɑt ɹil.

Malena came closer, implacable. My people. The arch shone. The way back. It is not real.

wɪð ə sɑb, nɪneɪiv tɔɹ əɹ ɑɹm aʊɾ ə mɛɹɪnz ɡɹæsp ən plʌnʒd təwɔɹd ðə sɪlvɝi ɡloʊ.

With a sob, Nynaeve tore her arm out of Marin's grasp and plunged toward the silvery glow.

mɛɹɪnz ʃɹik haʊndɪd hɝ. "fɔɹ ðə lʌv ə ðə laɪt, nɪneɪiv, hɛlp mi! hɛlp meɪn!"

Marin's shriek hounded her. "For the love of the Light, Nynaeve, help me! HELP ME!"

ðə ɡloʊ ɛnvɛləp hɝ.

The glow enveloped her.

* * * stɛɹɪŋ, nɪneɪiv stæɡɝɾ aʊɾ ə ði ɑɹtʃ, bɛɹli əwɛɹ ə ðə tʃeɪmbɝ əɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. mɛɹɪnz læs kɹaɪ stɪl ɹæŋ ɪn əɹ ɪɹz. ʃi dɪd nɑt flɪntʃ wən koʊld wɔɾɝ wɑz sʌɾənli pɔɹɾ oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd.

* * * Staring, Nynaeve staggered out of the arch, barely aware of the chamber or the Aes Sedai. Marin's last cry still rang in her ears. She did not flinch when cold water was suddenly poured over her head.

"ju ɑɹ wɑʃt klin ə fɔls pɹaɪd. jə ɑɹ wɑʃt klin ə fɔls æmbɪʃən. jə kʌm tə əs wɑʃt klin, ɪn hɑɹɾ ən soʊl." əz ðə ɹɛɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ stɛp bæk, ʃɛɹiəm keɪm tə teɪk nɪneɪivz ɑɹm.

"You are washed clean of false pride. You are washed clean of false ambition. You come to us washed clean, in heart and soul." As the Red Aes Sedai stepped back, Sheriam came to take Nynaeve's arm.

nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, ðən ɹilaɪzd u ɪt wɑz. ʃi siz ðə kɑlɝ ə ʃɛɹiəmz dʒɹɛs ɪn boʊθ hænz. "tɛl mi ɪt wɑz nɑt ɹil. tɛl mi!"

Nynaeve gave a start, then realized who it was. She seized the collar of Sheriam's dress in both hands. "Tell me it was not real. Tell me!"

"bæd?" ʃɛɹiəm pɹaɪɾ əɹ hænz lus əz ɪf ʃi wɝ juz tə ðɪs ɹiækʃən. "ɪɾ ɪz ɔlweɪz wɝs, ən ðə θɝɾ ɪz ðə wɝst ʌv ɔl."

"Bad?" Sheriam pried her hands loose as if she were used to this reaction. "It is always worse, and the third is the worst of all."

"aɪ lɛf maɪ fɹɛnd . . . aɪ lɛf maɪ pipəl . . . ɪn ðə pɪɾ ə dum tə kʌm bæk." pliz, laɪt, ɪt wɑz nɑt ɹil. aɪ dɪdn ɹɪli. . . . aɪ hæv tə meɪk mɔɪɹeɪn peɪ. aɪ hæv tə!

"I left my friend . . . I left my people . . . in the Pit of Doom to come back." Please, Light, it was not real. I didn't really. . . . I have to make Moiraine pay. I have to!

"ðɛɹ ɪz ɔlweɪz səm ɹizən nɑt tə ɹɪtɝn, sʌmθɪŋ tə pɹɪvɛn ju, əɹ dɪstʃɹæk ju. ðɪs tɛɹæŋɡɹil wivz tʃɹæps fəɹ jə fɹəm jəɹ oʊn maɪnd, wivz əm taɪɾ ən stʃɹɔŋ, hɑɹɾɝ ðən stil ən mɔɹ dɛdli ðən pɔɪzən. ðəɾ ɪz waɪ wi juz ɪɾ əz ə tɛst. jə mʌst wɑnə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ mɔɹ ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ɪn ðə hoʊl wɝld, ɪnʌf tə feɪs ɛniθɪŋ, faɪt fɹi ʌv ɛniθɪŋ, tə ətʃiv ɪt. ðə waɪt taʊɝ kænɑɾ æksɛp lɛs. wi dɪmæn ɪɾ ə ju."

"There is always some reason not to return, something to prevent you, or distract you. This ter'angreal weaves traps for you from your own mind, weaves them tight and strong, harder than steel and more deadly than poison. That is why we use it as a test. You must want to be Aes Sedai more than anything else in the whole world, enough to face anything, fight free of anything, to achieve it. The White Tower cannot accept less. We demand it of you."

"ju dɪmæn ə ɡɹeɪt dil." nɪneɪiv stɛɹɾ ət ðə θɝɾ ɑɹtʃ əz ðə ɹɛd-hɛɹɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ tʊk əɹ təwɔɹɾ ɪt. ðə θɝɾ ɪz ðə wɝst. "aɪm əfɹeɪd," ʃi wɪspɝd. wʌt kəd bi wɝs ðən wʌɾ aɪ dʒʌs dɪd?

"You demand a great deal." Nynaeve stared at the third arch as the red-haired Aes Sedai took her toward it. The third is the worst. "I'm afraid," she whispered. What could be worse than what I just did?

"ɡʊd," ʃɛɹiəm sɛd. "ju sik tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ, tə tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ. noʊ wʌn ʃəɾ əpɹoʊtʃ ðət wɪθaʊt fɪɹ ən ɑ. fɪɹ wɪl kip jə kɔʃəs; kɑʃən wɪl kip jə əlaɪv." ʃi tɝnd nɪneɪiv tə feɪs ði ɑɹtʃ, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt stɛp bæk ɪmiɾiətli. "noʊ wʌn wɪl fɔɹs jə tə ɛntɝ ə θɝd taɪm, tʃaɪld."

"Good," Sheriam said. "You seek to be Aes Sedai, to channel the One Power. No one should approach that without fear and awe. Fear will keep you cautious; caution will keep you alive." She turned Nynaeve to face the arch, but she did not step back immediately. "No one will force you to enter a third time, child."

nɪneɪiv lɪkt əɹ lɪps. "ɪf aɪ ɹɛfjus, jəl pʊt mi aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ ən nɛvɝ lemi kʌm bæk." ʃɛɹiəm nɑɾəd. "æn ðɪs ɪz ðə wɝst." ʃɛɹiəm nɑɾəd əɡɛn. nɪneɪiv dʒɹu bɹɛθ. "aɪ æm ɹɛɾi."

Nynaeve licked her lips. "If I refuse, you'll put me out of the Tower and never let me come back." Sheriam nodded. "And this is the worst." Sheriam nodded again. Nynaeve drew breath. "I am ready."

"ðə θɝd taɪm," ʃɛɹiəm ɪntoʊn fɔɹməli, "ɪz fəɹ wʌt wɪl bi. ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst."

"The third time," Sheriam intoned formally, "is for what will be. The way back will come but once. Be steadfast."

nɪneɪiv θɹu hɝsɛlf ət ði ɑɹtʃ ɪn ə ɹʌn.

Nynaeve threw herself at the arch in a run.

læfɪŋ, ʃi ɹæn θɹu swɝlɪŋ klaʊdz ə bʌɾɝflaɪz ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm waɪld-flaʊɝz ðət kʌvɝd ðə hɪltɑp mɛdoʊ wɪð ə ni-dip blæŋkəɾ ə kʌlɝ. hɝ ɡɹeɪ mɛɹ dæns nɝvəsli, ɹeɪnz dæŋɡəlɪŋ, ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə mɛdoʊ, ən nɪneɪiv stɑpt ɹʌnɪŋ soʊ əz nɑt tə fɹaɪɾən ði ænəməl mɔɹ. səm ə ðə bʌɾɝflaɪz sɛɾəld ɑn əɹ dʒɹɛs, ɑn flaʊɝz ʌv ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ən sid pɝlz, əɹ flɪɾɝd ɝaʊn ðə sæfaɪɝz ən munstoʊnz ɪn əɹ hɛɹ, hæŋɪŋ lus əbaʊɾ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz.

Laughing, she ran through swirling clouds of butterflies rising from wild-flowers that covered the hilltop meadow with a knee-deep blanket of color. Her gray mare danced nervously, reins dangling, at the edge of the meadow, and Nynaeve stopped running so as not to frighten the animal more. Some of the butterflies settled on her dress, on flowers of embroidery and seed pearls, or flittered around the sapphires and moonstones in her hair, hanging loose about her shoulders.

bɪloʊ ðə hɪl, ðə nɛkləs ə ðə θaʊzən leɪks spɹɛd θɹu ðə sɪɾi ʌv mɔlkiɝ, ɹəflɛktɪŋ ðə klaʊd-bɹʌʃɪŋ sɛvən taʊɝz, wɪð ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn bænɝz flaɪɪŋ ət ðɛɹ haɪts ɪn ðə mɪsts. ðə sɪɾi hæɾ ə θaʊzənd ɡɑɹɾənz, bʌt ʃi pɹəfɝd ðɪs waɪld ɡɑɹɾən ɑn ðə hɪltɑp. ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst.

Below the hill, the necklace of the Thousand Lakes spread through the city of Malkier, reflecting the cloud-brushing Seven Towers, with Golden Crane banners flying at their heights in the mists. The city had a thousand gardens, but she preferred this wild garden on the hilltop. The way back will come but once. Be steadfast.

ðə saʊn ə hʊvz meɪɾ əɹ tɝn.

The sound of hooves made her turn.

ælən mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən, kɪŋ ə mɔlkiɝ, lɛp fɹəm ðə bæk ə hɪz tʃɑɹdʒɝ ən stʃɹoʊl təwɔɹɾ əɹ θɹu ðə bʌɾɝflaɪz, læfɪŋ. hɪz feɪs hæd ðə lʊk ʌv ə hɑɹd mæn, bʌt ðə smaɪlz i wɔɹ fəɹ əɹ sɔfən ðə stoʊni pleɪnz.

Al'Lan Mandragoran, King of Malkier, leaped from the back of his charger and strolled toward her through the butterflies, laughing. His face had the look of a hard man, but the smiles he wore for her softened the stony planes.

ʃi ɡeɪpt ət hɪm, teɪkən baɪ sɝpɹaɪz wən i ɡæðɝɾ əɹ ɪndə hɪz ɑɹmz ən kɪs hɝ. fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi klʌŋ tə hɪm, lɔst, kɪsɪŋ ɪm bæk. hɝ fit dæŋɡəld ə fʊɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ.

She gaped at him, taken by surprise when he gathered her into his arms and kissed her. For a moment she clung to him, lost, kissing him back. Her feet dangled a foot in the air, and she did not care.

sʌɾənli ʃi pʊʃt ət hɪm, pʊld əɹ feɪs bæk. "noʊ." ʃi pʊʃt hɑɹɾɝ. "lɛt mi ɡoʊ. pʊt mi daʊn." pʌzəld, hi loʊɝɾ əɹ əntɪl əɹ fit tʌtʃt ɡɹaʊnd; ʃi bækt əweɪ fɹəm hɪm. "nɑt ðɪs," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ kænɑt feɪs ðɪs. ɛniθɪŋ bʌt ðɪs." pliz, lemi feɪs eɪdʒɪnɝ əɡɛn. mɛmɹi swɝld. eɪdʒɪnɝ? ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛɹ ðət θɔt hæd kʌm fɹʌm. mɛmɹi lɝtʃt ən tɪltəd, ʃɪftɪŋ fɹæɡməns laɪk bɹoʊkən aɪs ɑn ə flʌɾɪŋ ɹɪvɝ. ʃi klɔd fəɹ ðə pisəz, klɔd fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ tə hæŋ ɑn tə.

Suddenly she pushed at him, pulled her face back. "No." She pushed harder. "Let me go. Put me down." Puzzled, he lowered her until her feet touched ground; she backed away from him. "Not this," she said. "I cannot face this. Anything but this." Please, let me face Aginor again. Memory swirled. Aginor? She did not know where that thought had come from. Memory lurched and tilted, shifting fragments like broken ice on a flooding river. She clawed for the pieces, clawed for something to hang on to.

"ɑɹ jə wɛl, maɪ lʌv?" læn æskt wɝidli.

"Are you well, my love?" Lan asked worriedly.

"du nɑt kɔl mi ðæt! aɪm nɑt jəɹ lʌv! aɪ kænɑt mɛɹi ju!"

"Do not call me that! I am not your love! I cannot marry you!"

hi stɑɹɾəld əɹ baɪ θɹoʊɪŋ bæk ɪz hɛɾ ən ɹɔɹɪŋ wɪð læftɝ. "jɔɹ ɪmpləkeɪʃən ðət wəɹ nɑt mɛɹid maɪɾ əpsɛɾ əɹ tʃɪlʒɹən, waɪf. ən haʊ ɑɹ jə nɑt maɪ lʌv? aɪ hæv noʊ ʌðɝ, ən wɪl əv noʊ ʌðɝ."

He startled her by throwing back his head and roaring with laughter. "Your implication that we are not married might upset our children, wife. And how are you not my love? I have no other, and will have no other."

"aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ bæk." dɛspɝətli ʃi lʊk fəɹ ði ɑɹtʃ, faʊn oʊnli mɛdoʊ ən skaɪ. hɑɹɾɝ ðən stil ən mɔɹ dɛdli ðən pɔɪzən. læn. lænz beɪbiz. laɪt, hɛlp mi! "aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ bæk naʊ."

"I must go back." Desperately she looked for the arch, found only meadow and sky. Harder than steel and more deadly than poison. Lan. Lan's babies. Light, help me! "I must go back now."

"ɡoʊ bæk? wɛɹ? tə ɛmənz fild? ɪf jə wɪʃ ɪt. əl sɛn lɛɾɝz tə mɔɹɡeɪs, ən kəmæn ən ɛskɔɹt."

"Go back? Where? To Emond's Field? If you wish it. I'll send letters to Morgase, and command an escort."

"əloʊn," ʃi mʌɾɝd, stɪl sɝtʃɪŋ. wɛɹ ɪz ɪt? aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ. "aɪ woʊn bi tæŋɡəld ʌp ɪn ðɪs. aɪ kʊdn bɛɹ ɪt. nɑt ðɪs. aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ naʊ!"

"Alone," she muttered, still searching. Where is it? I have to go. "I won't be tangled up in this. I couldn't bear it. Not this. I have to go now!"

"tæŋɡəld ʌp ɪn wʌt, nɪneɪiv? wʌɾ ɪz ɪt jə kʊdn bɛɹ? noʊ, nɪneɪiv. jə kən ɹaɪɾ əloʊn hɪɹ ɪf jə wɪʃ ɪt, bʌɾ ɪf ðə kwin ə ðə mɔlkɪɹi keɪm tə ændɝ wɪθaʊɾ ə pɹɑpɝ ɛskɔɹt, mɔɹɡeɪs wəd bi skændəlaɪzd, ɪf nɑɾ əfɛndəd. jə doʊnt wɑnə əfɛn hɝ, də ju? aɪ θɔt jə tu wɝ fɹɛnz."

"Tangled up in what, Nynaeve? What is it you couldn't bear? No, Nynaeve. You can ride alone here if you wish it, but if the Queen of the Malkieri came to Andor without a proper escort, Morgase would be scandalized, if not offended. You don't want to offend her, do you? I thought you two were friends."

nɪneɪiv fɛlt əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn hɪɾ ɪn ðə hɛd, bloʊ æftɝ deɪzɪŋ bloʊ. "kwin?" ʃi sɛd hɛzɪɾəntli. "wi hæv beɪbiz?"

Nynaeve felt as if she had been hit in the head, blow after dazing blow. "Queen?" she said hesitantly. "We have babies?"

"ɑɹ jə sɝɾən jəɹ wɛl? aɪ θɪŋk aɪ hæd bɛɾɝ teɪk jə tə ʃɛɝinə sədaɪ."

"Are you certain you're well? I think I had better take you to Sharina Sedai."

"noʊ." ʃi bækt əweɪ fɹəm ɪm əɡɛn. "noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ." ɪɾ ɪzən ɹil. aɪ woʊn bi pʊld ɪndə ɪt ðɪs taɪm. aɪ woʊnt!

"No." She backed away from him again. "No Aes Sedai." It isn't real. I won't be pulled into it this time. I won't!

"vɛɹi wɛl," hi sɛd sloʊli. "æz maɪ waɪf, haʊ kəd jə nɑt bi kwin? wəɹ mɔlkɪɹi hɪɹ, nɑt saʊθlændɝz. jə wɝ kɹaʊn ɪn ðə sɛvən taʊɝz ət ðə seɪm taɪm wi ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɹɪŋz." ʌnkɑnʃəsli hi muvd ɪz lɛf hænd; ə pleɪn ɡoʊl bæn ɪnsɝkəld ɪz fɔɹfɪŋɡɝ. ʃi ɡlænst əɾ əɹ oʊn hænd, ət ðə ɹɪŋ ʃi nu wəd bi ðɛɹ; ʃi klæspt əɹ ʌðɝ hæn oʊvɝ ɪt, bʌt wɛðɝ tə dɪnaɪ ɪts pɹɛzəns baɪ haɪɾɪŋ ɪɾ əɹ tə hoʊld ɪt, ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv sɛd. "du jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ, naʊ?" hi wɛn ɑn. hi stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ə hæn əz ɪf tə bɹʌʃ əɹ tʃik, ən ʃi wɛn bæk ənʌðɝ sɪks stɛps. hi saɪd. "æz jə wɪʃ, maɪ lʌv. wɪv θɹi tʃɪlʒɹən, ðoʊ oʊnli wʌn kən pɹɑpɝli bi kɔld ə beɪbi. mæɹɪk ɪz ɔlmoʊs tə jəɹ ʃoʊldɝ ən kæn dɪsaɪɾ ɪf i laɪks hɔɹsəz əɹ bʊks bɛɾɝ. ɪlnɔɹ əz ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡʌn pɹæktəsɪŋ haʊ tə tɝn bɔɪz' hɛdz, wən ʃiz nɑt pɛstɝɪŋ ʃɛɝinə əbaʊt wən ʃɪl bi oʊld ɪnʌf tə ɡoʊ tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ."

"Very well," he said slowly. "As my wife, how could you not be Queen? We are Malkieri here, not southlanders. You were crowned in the Seven Towers at the same time we exchanged rings." Unconsciously he moved his left hand; a plain gold band encircled his forefinger. She glanced at her own hand, at the ring she knew would be there; she clasped her other hand over it, but whether to deny its presence by hiding it or to hold it, she could not have said. "Do you remember, now?" he went on. He stretched out a hand as if to brush her cheek, and she went back another six steps. He sighed. "As you wish, my love. We have three children, though only one can properly be called a baby. Maric is almost to your shoulder and can't decide if he likes horses or books better. Elnore has already begun practicing how to turn boys' heads, when she is not pestering Sharina about when she'll be old enough to go to the White Tower."

"ɪlnɔɹ wɑz maɪ mʌðɝz neɪm," ʃi sɛd sɔfli.

"Elnore was my mother's name," she said softly.

"soʊ jə sɛd wən jə tʃoʊz ɪt. nɪneɪiv - "

"So you said when you chose it. Nynaeve - "

"noʊ. əl nɑt bi pʊld ɪndə ɪt ðɪs taɪm. nɑt ðɪs. aɪ woʊnt!" bɪɑn hɪm, əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz bɪsaɪd ðə mɛdoʊ, ʃi sɔ ðə sɪlvɝ ɑɹtʃ. ðə tʃɹiz hæd hɪɾən ɪt bɪfɔɹ. ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. ʃi tɝn təwɔɹɾ ɪt. "aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ." hi kɑɾ əɹ hænd, ən ɪt wɑz əz ɪf əɹ fit hæd bɪkʌm ɹuɾəd ɪn stoʊn; ʃi kəd nɑt meɪk hɝsɛlf pʊl əweɪ.

"No. I will not be pulled into it this time. Not this. I won't!" Beyond him, among the trees beside the meadow, she saw the silver arch. The trees had hidden it before. The way back will come but once. She turned toward it. "I must go." He caught her hand, and it was as if her feet had become rooted in stone; she could not make herself pull away.

"aɪ də nɑt noʊ wʌɾ ɪz tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ ju, waɪf, bʌt wʌtɛvɝ ɪɾ ɪz, tɛl mi ən əl meɪk ɪt ɹaɪt. aɪ noʊ aɪm nɑt ðə bɛst ə hʌzbənz. aɪ wɑz ɔl hɑɹɾ ɛdʒəz wən aɪ faʊn ju, bʌt juv smuð səm ə ðɛm əweɪ, ət list."

"I do not know what is troubling you, wife, but whatever it is, tell me and I will make it right. I know I am not the best of husbands. I was all hard edges when I found you, but you've smoothed some of them away, at least."

"ju ɑɹ ðə vɛɹi bɛst ə hʌzbənz," ʃi mɝmɝd. tə hɝ hɔɹɝ, ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ɪm əz əɹ hʌzbənd, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ læftɝ ən tɪɹz, bɪɾɝ ɑɹɡjəməns ən swit meɪkɪŋ ʌp. ðeɪ wɝ dɪm mɛmɹiz, bʌt ʃi kəd fil əm ɡɹoʊɪŋ stʃɹɔŋɝ, wɔɹmɝ. "aɪ kænɑt." ði ɑɹtʃ stʊd ðɛɹ, oʊnli ə fju stɛps əweɪ. ðə weɪ bæk wɪl kʌm bʌt wʌns. bi stɛdfæst.

"You are the very best of husbands," she murmured. To her horror, she found herself remembering him as her husband, remembering laughter and tears, bitter arguments and sweet making up. They were dim memories, but she could feel them growing stronger, warmer. "I cannot." The arch stood there, only a few steps away. The way back will come but once. Be steadfast.

"aɪ də nɑt noʊ wʌɾ ɪz hæpənɪŋ, nɪneɪiv, bʌɾ aɪ fil əz ɪf aɪ wɝ luzɪŋ ju. aɪ kəd nɑt bɛɹ ðæt." hi pʊɾ ə hæn ɪn əɹ hɛɹ; kloʊzɪŋ əɹ aɪz, ʃi pɹɛst əɹ tʃik əɡɛnst ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. "steɪ wɪð mi, ɔlweɪz."

"I do not know what is happening, Nynaeve, but I feel as if I were losing you. I could not bear that." He put a hand in her hair; closing her eyes, she pressed her cheek against his fingers. "Stay with me, always."

"aɪ wɑnə steɪ," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "aɪ wɑnə steɪ wɪð ju." wən ʃi oʊpən əɹ aɪz, ði ɑɹtʃ wɑz ɡɔn . . . kʌm bʌt wʌns. "noʊ. noʊ!"

"I want to stay," she said softly. "I want to stay with you." When she opened her eyes, the arch was gone . . . come but once. "No. No!"

læn tɝn əɹ tə feɪs hɪm. "wʌt tʃɹʌbəlz ju? jə mʌs tɛl mi ɪf aɪm tə hɛlp."

Lan turned her to face him. "What troubles you? You must tell me if I'm to help."

"ðɪs ɪz nɑt ɹil."

"This is not real."

"nɑt ɹil? bɪfɔɹ aɪ mɛt ju, aɪ θɔt nʌθɪŋ ɪksɛp ðə sɔɹd wɑz ɹil. lʊk ɝaʊn ju, nɪneɪiv. ɪts ɹil. wʌtɛvɝ jə wɑnə bi ɹil, wi kən meɪk ɹil təɡɛðɝ, jə ən aɪ."

"Not real? Before I met you, I thought nothing except the sword was real. Look around you, Nynaeve. It is real. Whatever you want to be real, we can make real together, you and I."

wʌndɝɪŋli, ʃi dɪd lʊk ɝaʊnd. ðə mɛdoʊ wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ. ðə sɛvən taʊɝz stɪl stʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə θaʊzən leɪks. ði ɑɹtʃ wɑz ɡɔn, bʌt nʌθɪŋ ɛls hæd tʃeɪnʒd. aɪ kəd steɪ hɪɹ. wɪð læn. nʌθɪŋ əz tʃeɪnʒd. hɝ θɔts tɝnd. nʌθɪŋ əz tʃeɪnʒd. ɛɡwin ɪz əloʊn ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ɹænd wɪl tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ ən ɡoʊ mæd. ən wʌɾ ə mæt ən pɛɹɪn? kən ðeɪ teɪk bæk ɛni ʃɹɛɾ ə ðɛɹ laɪvz? ən mɔɪɹeɪn, hu tɔɹ ɔl əɹ lɪvz əpɑɹt, stɪl wɔks fɹi.

Wonderingly, she did look around. The meadow was still there. The Seven Towers still stood over the Thousand Lakes. The arch was gone, but nothing else had changed. I could stay here. With Lan. Nothing has changed. Her thoughts turned. Nothing has changed. Egwene is alone in the White Tower. Rand will channel the Power and go mad. And what of Mat and Perrin? Can they take back any shred of their lives? And Moiraine, who tore all our lives apart, still walks free.

"aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ bæk," ʃi wɪspɝd. əneɪbəl tə bɛɹ ðə peɪn ɑn ɪz feɪs, ʃi pʊl fɹi ʌv hɪm. dɪlɪbɝətli ʃi fɔɹmd ə flaʊɝ bʌɾ ɪn əɹ maɪnd, ə waɪt bʌɾ ɑn ə blækθɝn bɹæntʃ. ʃi meɪd ðə θɔɹnz ʃɑɹp ən kɹuəl, wɪʃɪŋ ðeɪ kəd pɪɹs əɹ flɛʃ, filɪŋ əz ɪf ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi hʌŋ ɪn ðə blækθɝnz bɹæntʃəz. ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪz vɔɪs dæns dʒʌst aʊɾ ə hɪɹɪŋ, tɛlɪŋ əɹ ɪt wɑz deɪnʒɝəs tə ətɛmp tə tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ. ðə bʌɾ oʊpənd, ən seɪaɪdɑɹ fɪld əɹ wɪð laɪt.

"I must go back," she whispered. Unable to bear the pain on his face, she pulled free of him. Deliberately she formed a flower bud in her mind, a white bud on a blackthorn branch. She made the thorns sharp and cruel, wishing they could pierce her flesh, feeling as if she already hung in the blackthorn's branches. Sheriam Sedai's voice danced just out of hearing, telling her it was dangerous to attempt to channel the Power. The bud opened, and saidar filled her with light.

"nɪneɪiv, tɛl mi wʌɾ ɪz ðə mæɾɝ."

"Nynaeve, tell me what is the matter."

lænz vɔɪs slɪɾ əkɹɔs əɹ kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən; ʃi ɹəfjuz tə lɛt hɝsɛlf hɪɹ ɪt. ðəɹ hæd tə bi ə weɪ bæk stɪl. stɛɹɪŋ ət wɛɹ ðə sɪlvɝ ɑɹtʃ hæd bɪn, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə faɪn səm tʃɹeɪs ʌv ɪt. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ.

Lan's voice slid across her concentration; she refused to let herself hear it. There had to be a way back still. Staring at where the silver arch had been, she tried to find some trace of it. There was nothing.

"nɪneɪiv . . ."

"Nynaeve . . ."

ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə pɪktʃɝ ði ɑɹtʃ ɪn əɹ maɪnd, tə ʃeɪp ɪɾ ən fɔɹm ɪt tə ðə læs dɪteɪl, kɝv ʌv ɡlimɪŋ mɛɾəl fɪld wɪð ə ɡloʊ laɪk snoʊi faɪɝ. ɪt sim tə weɪvɝ ðɛɹ, ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, fɝs ðəɹ bɪtwin əɹ ən ðə tʃɹiz, ðən nɑt, ðən ðɛɹ.

She tried to picture the arch in her mind, to shape it and form it to the last detail, curve of gleaming metal filled with a glow like snowy fire. It seemed to waver there, in front of her, first there between her and the trees, then not, then there.

". . . aɪ lʌv jə . . ."

". . . I love you . . ."

ʃi dʒɹu ət seɪaɪdɑɹ, dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ɪn ðə floʊ ʌv ðə wʌn paʊɝ tɪl ʃi θɔt ʃi wəd bɝst. ðə ɹeɪdʒjəns fɪlɪŋ hɝ, ʃaɪnɪŋ ɝaʊn hɝ, hɝɾ əɹ oʊn aɪz. ðə hit sim tə kənsum hɝ. ðə flɪkɝɪŋ ɑɹtʃ fɝmd, stɛɾid, stʊd hoʊl bɪfɔɹ hɝ. faɪɝ ən peɪn sim tə fɪl hɝ; hɝ boʊnz fɛlt əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ bɝnɪŋ; hɝ skʌl simd ə ɹɔɹɪŋ fɝnəs.

She drew at saidar, drinking in the flow of the One Power till she thought she would burst. The radiance filling her, shining around her, hurt her own eyes. The heat seemed to consume her. The flickering arch firmed, steadied, stood whole before her. Fire and pain seemed to fill her; her bones felt as if they were burning; her skull seemed a roaring furnace.

". . . wɪð ɔl maɪ hɑɹt."

". . . with all my heart."

ʃi ɹæn təwɔɹd ðə sɪlvɝ kɝv, nɑt lɛɾɪŋ hɝsɛlf lʊk bæk. ʃi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ðə bɪɾɝəst θɪŋ ʃi wəɾ ɛvɝ hɪɹ wɑz mɛɹɪn ælvɪɹz kɹaɪ fəɹ hɛlp əz nɪneɪiv əbændən hɝ, bʌt ðət wɑz hʌni bɪsaɪd ðə saʊn ə lænz æŋɡwɪʃt vɔɪs pɝsuɪŋ hɝ. "nɪneɪiv, pliz doʊn liv mi."

She ran toward the silver curve, not letting herself look back. She had been sure the bitterest thing she would ever hear was Marin al'Vere's cry for help as Nynaeve abandoned her, but that was honey beside the sound of Lan's anguished voice pursuing her. "Nynaeve, please don't leave me."

ðə waɪt ɡloʊ kənsum hɝ.

The white glow consumed her.

neɪkəd, nɪneɪiv stæɡɝd θɹu ði ɑɹtʃ ən fɛl tə hɝ niz, slæk-maʊðd ən sɑbɪŋ, tɪɹz stʃɹimɪŋ daʊn əɹ tʃiks. ʃɛɹiəm nɛl bɪsaɪd hɝ. ʃi ɡlɛɹɾ ət ðə ɹɛd-hɛɹɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ. "aɪ heɪt ju!" ʃi mænədʒ fɪɹsli, ɡʌlpɪŋ. "aɪ heɪɾ ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ!"

Naked, Nynaeve staggered through the arch and fell to her knees, slack-mouthed and sobbing, tears streaming down her cheeks. Sheriam knelt beside her. She glared at the red-haired Aes Sedai. "I hate you!" she managed fiercely, gulping. "I hate all Aes Sedai!"

ʃɛɹiəm ɡeɪv ə smɔl saɪ, ðən pʊl nɪneɪiv tə hɝ fit. "tʃaɪld, ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹi wʊmən u dʌz ðɪs sɛz mʌtʃ ðə seɪm θɪŋ. ɪts noʊ smɔl θɪŋ tə bi meɪd tə feɪs jəɹ fɪɹz. wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs?" ʃi sɛd ʃɑɹpli, tɝnɪŋ nɪneɪivz pɑmz ʌp.

Sheriam gave a small sigh, then pulled Nynaeve to her feet. "Child, almost every woman who does this says much the same thing. It is no small thing to be made to face your fears. What is this?" she said sharply, turning Nynaeve's palms up.

nɪneɪivz hænz kwɪvɝd wɪð ə sʌɾən peɪn ʃi hæd nɑt fɛl bɪfɔɹ. dʒɹɪvən θɹu ðə pɑm ʌv itʃ hænd, ɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə sɛntɝ, wɑz ə lɔŋ blæk θɔɹn. ʃɛɹiəm dʒɹu ðɛm aʊt kɛɹfəli; nɪneɪiv fɛl ðə kul hilɪŋ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪz tʌtʃ. wən itʃ θɔɹn keɪm fɹi, ɪt lɛft oʊnli ə smɔl skɑɹ ɑn fɹʌn ən bæk ə ðə hænd.

Nynaeve's hands quivered with a sudden pain she had not felt before. Driven through the palm of each hand, right in the center, was a long black thorn. Sheriam drew them out carefully; Nynaeve felt the cool Healing of the Aes Sedai's touch. When each thorn came free, it left only a small scar on front and back of the hand.

ʃɛɹiəm fɹaʊnd. "ðɛɹ ʃʊdn bi ɛni skɑɹɪŋ. ən haʊ dɪd jə oʊnli ɡɛt tu, ən boʊθ pleɪst soʊ pɹɪsaɪsli? ɪf jə tæŋɡəl jɝsɛlf ɪn ə blækθɝn bʊʃ, jə ʃəd bi kʌvɝd wɪð skɹætʃəz ən θɔɹnz."

Sheriam frowned. "There shouldn't be any scarring. And how did you only get two, and both placed so precisely? If you tangled yourself in a blackthorn bush, you should be covered with scratches and thorns."

"aɪ ʃʊd," nɪneɪiv əɡɹid bɪɾɝli. "meɪbi aɪ θɔɾ aɪ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi peɪɾ ɪnʌf."

"I should," Nynaeve agreed bitterly. "Maybe I thought I had already paid enough."

"ðɛɹ ɪz ɔlweɪz ə pɹaɪs," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əɡɹid. "kʌm, naʊ. juv peɪd ðə fɝs pɹaɪs. teɪk wʌt juv peɪd fɔɹ." ʃi ɡeɪv nɪneɪiv ə slaɪt pʊʃ fɔɹwɝd.

"There is always a price," the Aes Sedai agreed. "Come, now. You have paid the first price. Take what you have paid for." She gave Nynaeve a slight push forward.

nɪneɪiv ɹilaɪz ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə tʃeɪmbɝ. ði æmɪɝlɪn ɪn əɹ stʃɹaɪp stoʊl wɑz ðɛɹ, wɪð ə ʃɔl sɪstɝ fɹəm itʃ ədʒɑ ɹeɪnʒd tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɝ, ɔl ə ðɛm wɑtʃɪŋ nɪneɪiv. ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ʃɛɹiəmz ɪnstʃɹʌkʃən, nɪneɪiv tɑɾɝd fɔɹwɝɾ ən nɛl bɪfɔɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn. ɪt wɑz ʃi hu hɛl ðə læs tʃælɪs, ən ʃi tɪpt ɪt sloʊli oʊvɝ nɪneɪivz hɛd.

Nynaeve realized there were more Aes Sedai in the chamber. The Amyrlin in her striped stole was there, with a shawled sister from each Ajah ranged to either side of her, all of them watching Nynaeve. Remembering Sheriam's instruction, Nynaeve tottered forward and knelt before the Amyrlin. It was she who held the last chalice, and she tipped it slowly over Nynaeve's head.

"ju ɑɹ wɑʃt klin ə nɪneɪiv ælmɛɹə fɹəm ɛmənz fild. jə ɑɹ wɑʃt klin ʌv ɔl taɪz ðət baɪn jə tə ðə wɝld. jə kʌm tə əs wɑʃt klin, ɪn hɑɹɾ ən soʊl. jə ɑɹ nɪneɪiv ælmɛɹə, æksɛptɪɾ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ." hændɪŋ ðə tʃælɪs tə wʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz, ði æmɪɝlɪn dʒɹu nɪneɪiv tə hɝ fit. "ju ɑɹ sil tə ʌs, naʊ."

"You are washed clean of Nynaeve al'Maera from Emond's Field. You are washed clean of all ties that bind you to the world. You come to us washed clean, in heart and soul. You are Nynaeve al'Maera, Accepted of the White Tower." Handing the chalice to one of the sisters, the Amyrlin drew Nynaeve to her feet. "You are sealed to us, now."

ði æmɪɝlɪnz aɪz sim tə hoʊld ə dɑɹk ɡloʊ. nɪneɪivz ʃɪvɝ hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð biɪŋ neɪkəɾ ən wɛt.

The Amyrlin's eyes seemed to hold a dark glow. Nynaeve's shiver had nothing to do with being naked and wet.


tʃæptɝ twɛntifɔɹ


CHAPTER 24

nu fɹɛnz ən oʊld ɛnəmiz


New Friends and Old Enemies

ɛɡwin fɑloʊd ði æksɛptɪd θɹu ðə hɔlz ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. tæpəstʃɹiz ən peɪntɪŋz kʌvɝd wɔlz əz waɪɾ əz ði aʊtsaɪɾ ə ðə taʊɝ; pæɾɝnd taɪlz meɪd ðə flɔɹ. ði æksɛptɪdz waɪt dʒɹɛs wɑz ɪɡzækli laɪk hɝz, ɪksɛp fəɹ sɛvən nɛɹoʊ bænz ə kʌlɝ ət hɛm ən kʌfs. ɛɡwin fɹaʊnd, lʊkɪŋ ət ðət dʒɹɛs. sɪns jɛstɝdeɪ nɪneɪiv hæd wɔɹn ən æksɛptɪdz dʒɹɛs, ən ʃi sim tə hæv noʊ dʒɔɪ ʌv ɪt, nɔɹ ə ðə ɡoʊldən ɹɪŋ, ə sɝpən iɾɪŋ ɪts oʊn teɪl, ðət mɑɹkt əɹ lɛvəl. ðə fju taɪmz ɛɡwin hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə si ðə wɪzdəm, nɪneɪivz aɪz hæd simd ʃæɾoʊd, əz ɪf ʃi hæd sin θɪŋz ʃi wɪʃt wɪð ɔl əɹ hɑɹt nɑt tə hæv sin.

Egwene followed the Accepted through the halls of the White Tower. Tapestries and paintings covered walls as white as the outside of the tower; patterned tiles made the floor. The Accepted's white dress was exactly like hers, except for seven narrow bands of color at hem and cuffs. Egwene frowned, looking at that dress. Since yesterday Nynaeve had worn an Accepted's dress, and she seemed to have no joy of it, nor of the golden ring, a serpent eating its own tail, that marked her level. The few times Egwene had been able to see the Wisdom, Nynaeve's eyes had seemed shadowed, as if she had seen things she wished with all her heart not to have seen.

"ɪn hɪɹ," ði æksɛptɪd sɛd kɝtli, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ tə ə dɔɹ. neɪm peɪdʒɹə, ʃi wɑz ə ʃɔɹt, wɪɹi wʊmən, ə lɪɾəl oʊldɝ ðən nɪneɪiv, ən wɪð ə bɹɪsknəs ɔlweɪz ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. "jɔɹ ɡɪvən ðɪs taɪm kəz ɪts jəɹ fɝs deɪ, bʌɾ əl ɪkspɛk jə ɪn ðə skʌlɝi wən ðə ɡɔŋ saʊnz haɪ, ən nɑt wʌn moʊmən leɪɾɝ."

"In here," the Accepted said curtly, gesturing to a door. Named Pedra, she was a short, wiry woman, a little older than Nynaeve, and with a briskness always in her voice. "You're given this time because it is your first day, but I'll expect you in the scullery when the gong sounds High, and not one moment later."

ɛɡwin kɝtsid, ðən stʌk aʊɾ əɹ tʌŋ ət ði æksɛptɪdz ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ bæk. ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn oʊnli ði ivnɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðət ʃɛɹiəm hæd faɪnəli pʊɾ əɹ neɪm ɪn ðə nɑvəs bʊk, bʌɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ʃi nu ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk peɪdʒɹə. ʃi pʊʃt oʊpən ðə dɔɹ ən wɛn ɪn.

Egwene curtsied, then stuck out her tongue at the Accepted's retreating back. It might have been only the evening before that Sheriam had finally put her name in the novice book, but already she knew she did not like Pedra. She pushed open the door and went in.

ðə ɹum wɑz pleɪn ən smɔl, wɪð waɪt wɔlz, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə jʌŋ wʊmən, wɪð ɹɛɾɪʃ ɡoʊl hɛɹ spɪlɪŋ ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn wʌn ə tu hɑɹd bɛntʃɪz. ðə flɔɹ wɑz bɛɹ; nɑvəsɪz dɪd nɑt ɡɛt mʌtʃ jus ə ɹumz wɪð kɑɹpəts. ɛɡwin θɔt ðə ɡɝl wɑz əbaʊɾ əɹ oʊn eɪdʒ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə dɪɡnəɾi ən sɛlf-pəzɛʃən əbaʊɾ əɹ ðət meɪɾ əɹ sim oʊldɝ. ðə pleɪnli kʌt nɑvəs dʒɹɛs əpɪɹd sʌmhaʊ mɔɹ, ɑn hɝ. ɛləɡənt. ðət wɑz ɪt.

The room was plain and small, with white walls, and there was a young woman, with reddish gold hair spilling around her shoulders, sitting on one of two hard benches. The floor was bare; novices did not get much use of rooms with carpets. Egwene thought the girl was about her own age, but there was a dignity and self-possession about her that made her seem older. The plainly cut novice dress appeared somehow more, on her. Elegant. That was it.

"maɪ neɪm ɪz ɪleɪn," ʃi sɛd. ʃi tɪltəɾ əɹ hɛd, stʌɾiɪŋ ɛɡwin. "æn jə ɑɹ ɛɡwin. fɹəm ɛmənz fild, ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz." ʃi sɛɾ ɪɾ əz ɪf ɪt hæd səm səɡnɪfɪkəns, bʌt wɛn ɹaɪɾ ɑn ɛniweɪ. "sʌmwʌn u hæz bɪn hɪɹ ə lɪɾəl waɪl ɪz ɔlweɪz əsaɪn tə ə nu nɑvəs fəɹ ə fju deɪz, tə hɛlp əɹ faɪn əɹ weɪ. sɪt, pliz."

"My name is Elayne," she said. She tilted her head, studying Egwene. "And you are Egwene. From Emond's Field, in the Two Rivers." She said it as if it had some significance, but went right on anyway. "Someone who has been here a little while is always assigned to a new novice for a few days, to help her find her way. Sit, please."

ɛɡwin tʊk ði ʌðɝ bɛntʃ, feɪsɪŋ ɪleɪn. "aɪ θɔt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd titʃ mi, naʊ ðəɾ aɪm faɪnəli ə nɑvəs. bʌɾ ɔl ðæts hæpən soʊ fɑɹ ɪz ðət peɪdʒɹə woʊk mi ə ɡʊd tu aʊɝz bɪfɔɹ fɝs laɪɾ ən pʊt mi tə swipɪŋ ðə hɔlz. ʃi sɛz aɪ hæv tə hɛlp wɑʃ dɪʃəz æftɝ dɪnɝ, tu."

Egwene took the other bench, facing Elayne. "I thought the Aes Sedai would teach me, now that I'm finally a novice. But all that's happened so far is that Pedra woke me a good two hours before first light and put me to sweeping the halls. She says I have to help wash dishes after dinner, too."

ɪleɪn ɡɹɪməst. "aɪ heɪt wɑʃɪŋ dɪʃəz. aɪ nɛvɝ hæd tə - wɛl, ðət dʌzn mæɾɝ. jəl əv tʃɹeɪnɪŋ. fɹəm naʊ ɑn, jəl bi ət tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ət ðɪs aʊɝ ɛvɹi deɪ, əz ə mæɾɝ ə fækt. fɹəm bɹɛkfəst əntɪl haɪ, ðən əɡɛn fɹəm dɪnɝ tə tʃɹaɪn. ɪf jə ɑɹ ɪspɛʃli kwɪk əɹ ɪspɛʃli sloʊ, ðeɪ meɪ teɪk jə fɹəm sʌpɝ tə fʊl, əz wɛl, bʌt ðəɾ ɪz juʒəwəli fəɹ mɔɹ tʃɔɹz." ɪleɪnz blu aɪz tʊk ɑn ə θɔtfəl ɪkspɹɛʃən. "ju wɝ bɔɹn wɪð ɪt, wɝn ju?" ɛɡwin nɑɾəd. "jɛs, aɪ θɔɾ aɪ fɛlt ɪt. soʊ wɑz aɪ, bɔɹn wɪð ɪt. də nɑt bi dɪsəpɔɪntɪɾ ɪf jə dɪd nɑt noʊ. jəl lɝn tə fil ði əbɪləɾi ɪn ʌðɝ wɪmən. aɪ hæd ði ædvæntɪdʒ ʌv ɡɹoʊɪŋ ʌp ɝaʊn ən ɛɛs sədaɪ."

Elayne grimaced. "I hate washing dishes. I never had to - well, that doesn't matter. You will have training. From now on, you will be at training at this hour every day, as a matter of fact. From breakfast until High, then again from dinner to Trine. If you are especially quick or especially slow, they may take you from supper to Full, as well, but that is usually for more chores." Elayne's blue eyes took on a thoughtful expression. "You were born with it, weren't you?" Egwene nodded. "Yes, I thought I felt it. So was I, born with it. Do not be disappointed if you did not know. You will learn to feel the ability in other women. I had the advantage of growing up around an Aes Sedai."

ɛɡwin wɑntəd tə æsk əbaʊt ðət - hu ɡɹoʊz ʌp wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ? - bʌɾ ɪleɪn wɛn ɑn.

Egwene wanted to ask about that - Who grows up with Aes Sedai? - but Elayne went on.

"æn ɔlsoʊ də nɑt bi dɪsəpɔɪntɪɾ ɪf ɪt teɪks jə səm taɪm bɪfɔɹ jə kən ətʃiv ɛniθɪŋ. wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, aɪ min. ivən ðə sɪmpləs θɪŋ teɪks ə lɪɾəl taɪm. peɪʃəns ɪz ə vɝtʃu ðət mʌs bi lɝnd." hɝ noʊz ɹɪŋkəld. "ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ ɔlweɪz sɛz ðæt, ən ʃi dʌz əɹ bɛs tə meɪk əs ɔl lɝn ɪt, tu. tʃɹaɪ tə ɹʌn wən ʃi sɛz wɔk, ən ʃɪl əv jə ɪn əɹ stʌɾi bɪfɔɹ jə kən blɪŋk."

"And also do not be disappointed if it takes you some time before you can achieve anything. With the One Power, I mean. Even the simplest thing takes a little time. Patience is a virtue that must be learned." Her nose wrinkled. "Sheriam Sedai always says that, and she does her best to make us all learn it, too. Try to run when she says walk, and she'll have you in her study before you can blink."

"aɪv hæɾ ə fju lɛsənz ɔlɹɛɾi," ɛɡwin sɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə saʊn mɑɾəst. ʃi oʊpən hɝsɛlf tə seɪaɪdɑɹ - ðət pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt wɑz iziɝ naʊ - ən fɛl ðə wɔɹmθ sʌfjus əɹ bɑɾi. ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə tʃɹaɪ ðə bɪɡəs θɪŋ ʃi nu haʊ tə du. ʃi stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ əɹ hænd, ən ə ɡloʊɪŋ sfɪɹ fɔɹmd oʊvɝ ɪt, pjʊɹ laɪt. ɪt weɪvɝd - ʃi stɪl kəd nɑt mænədʒ tə hoʊld ɪt stɛɾi - bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ.

"I've had a few lessons already," Egwene said, trying to sound modest. She opened herself to saidar - that part of it was easier now - and felt the warmth suffuse her body. She decided to try the biggest thing she knew how to do. She stretched out her hand, and a glowing sphere formed over it, pure light. It wavered - she still could not manage to hold it steady - but it was there.

kɑmli, ɪleɪn hɛld aʊɾ əɹ hænd, ən ə bɔl ə laɪɾ əpɪɹɾ əbʌv əɹ pɑm. hɝz flɪkɝd, tu.

Calmly, Elayne held out her hand, and a ball of light appeared above her palm. Hers flickered, too.

æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ə feɪn laɪt ɡloʊɾ ɔl ɝaʊn ɪleɪn. ɛɡwin ɡæspt, ən əɹ bɔl vænɪʃt.

After a moment, a faint light glowed all around Elayne. Egwene gasped, and her ball vanished.

ɪleɪn ɡɪɡəl sʌɾənli, ən əɹ laɪt wɛn aʊt, boʊθ ðə sfɪɹ ən ðə laɪɾ ɝaʊn hɝ. "ju sɔ ɪɾ ɝaʊn mi?" ʃi sɛɾ ɪksaɪɾədli. "aɪ sɔ ɪɾ ɝaʊn ju. ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ sɛɾ aɪ wʊd, ɪvɛntʃəwəli. ðɪs wɑz ðə fɝs taɪm. fəɹ ju, tu?"

Elayne giggled suddenly, and her light went out, both the sphere and the light around her. "You saw it around me?" she said excitedly. "I saw it around you. Sheriam Sedai said I would, eventually. This was the first time. For you, too?"

ɛɡwin nɑɾəd, læfɪŋ əlɔŋ wɪð ði ʌðɝ ɡɝl. "aɪ laɪk ju, ɪleɪn. aɪ θɪŋk wɝ gɑnə bi fɹɛnz."

Egwene nodded, laughing along with the other girl. "I like you, Elayne. I think we're going to be friends."

"aɪ θɪŋk soʊ, tu, ɛɡwin. jə ɑɹ fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, fɹəm ɛmənz fild. dʒju noʊ ə bɔɪ neɪmd ɹænd ælθɹ?"

"I think so, too, Egwene. You are from the Two Rivers, from Emond's Field. Do you know a boy named Rand al'Thor?"

"aɪ noʊ hɪm." əbɹʌpli ɛɡwin faʊn hɝsɛlf ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ə teɪl ɹænd hæd toʊld, ə teɪl ʃi hæd nɑt bɪlivd, əbaʊt fɔlɪŋ ɔf ə wɔl ɪndə ə ɡɑɹɾən ən miɾɪŋ. . . . "jɔɹ ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ," ʃi ɡæspt.

"I know him." Abruptly Egwene found herself remembering a tale Rand had told, a tale she had not believed, about falling off a wall into a garden and meeting. . . . "You're the Daughter-Heir of Andor," she gasped.

"jɛs," ɪleɪn sɛd sɪmpli. "ɪf ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ əz mʌtʃ əz hɝɾ aɪd mɛnʃən ɪt, aɪ θɪŋk ʃi wəɾ əv mi ɪndə hɝ stʌɾi bɪfɔɹ aɪ fɪnɪʃt tɔkɪŋ."

"Yes," Elayne said simply. "If Sheriam Sedai as much as heard I'd mentioned it, I think she would have me into her study before I finished talking."

"ɛvɹiwʌn tɔks əbaʊt biɪŋ kɔl tə ʃɛɹiəmz stʌɾi. ivən ði æksɛptɪd. dʌz ʃi skoʊl soʊ fɪɹsli? ʃi simz kaɪnli tə mi."

"Everyone talks about being called to Sheriam's study. Even the Accepted. Does she scold so fiercely? She seems kindly to me."

ɪleɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ən wən ʃi spoʊk ɪt wɑz sloʊli, nɑt miɾɪŋ ɛɡwinz aɪ. "ʃi kips ə wɪloʊ swɪtʃ ɑn əɹ dɛsk. ʃi sɛz ɪf jə kæn lɝn tə fɑloʊ ðə ɹulz ɪn ə sɪvəlaɪzd weɪ, ʃɪl titʃ jə ənʌðɝ weɪ. ðəɹ ɑɹ soʊ mɛni ɹulz fəɹ nɑvəsɪz, ɪts vɛɹi hɑɹd nɑt tə bɹeɪk səm ə ðɛm," ʃi fɪnɪʃt.

Elayne hesitated, and when she spoke it was slowly, not meeting Egwene's eye. "She keeps a willow switch on her desk. She says if you can't learn to follow the rules in a civilized way, she will teach you another way. There are so many rules for novices, it is very hard not to break some of them," she finished.

"bʌt ðæts - ðæts hɔɹəbəl! aɪm nɑɾ ə tʃaɪld, ən niðɝ ɑɹ ju. aɪ woʊn bi tʃɹiɾəd əz wʌn."

"But that's - that's horrible! I'm not a child, and neither are you. I won't be treated as one."

"bʌt wəɹ tʃɪlʒɹən. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðə fʊl sɪstɝz, ɑɹ ðə ɡɹoʊn wɪmən. ði æksɛptɪɾ ɑɹ ðə jʌŋ wɪmən, oʊld ɪnʌf tə bi tʃɹʌstɪd wɪθaʊt sʌmwʌn lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz ɛvɹi moʊmənt. ən nɑvəsɪz ɑɹ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən, tə bi pɹətɛktəɾ ən kɛɹd fɔɹ, ɡaɪɾəd ɪn ðə weɪ ðeɪ ʃəd ɡoʊ, ən pʌnɪʃt wən ðeɪ də wʌt ðeɪ ʃəd nɑt. ðəɾ ɪz ðə weɪ ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ ɪkspleɪnz ɪt. noʊ wʌn ɪz gɑnə pʌnɪʃ jə oʊvɝ jəɹ lɛsənz, nɑɾ ənlɛs jə tʃɹaɪ sʌmθɪŋ juv bɪn toʊl nɑt tə. ɪts hɑɹd nɑt tə tʃɹaɪ, səmtaɪmz; jəl faɪn jə wɑnə tʃænəl əz mʌtʃ əz jə wɑnə bɹið. bʌɾ ɪf jə bɹeɪk tu mɛni dɪʃəz kəz jə ɑɹ deɪdʒɹimɪŋ wən jə ʃəd bi wɑʃɪŋ, ɪf jəɹ dɪsɹɪspɛkfəl tə ən æksɛptɪd, əɹ liv ðə taʊɝ wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən, əɹ spik tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪfɔɹ ʃi spiks tə ju, ɔɹ. . . . ði oʊnli θɪŋ tə də ɪz ðə bɛs jə kæn. ðəɹ ɪzən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls tə du."

"But we are children. The Aes Sedai, the full sisters, are the grown women. The Accepted are the young women, old enough to be trusted without someone looking over their shoulders every moment. And novices are the children, to be protected and cared for, guided in the way they should go, and punished when they do what they should not. That is the way Sheriam Sedai explains it. No one is going to punish you over your lessons, not unless you try something you've been told not to. It is hard not to try, sometimes; you will find you want to channel as much as you want to breathe. But if you break too many dishes because you are daydreaming when you should be washing, if you're disrespectful to an Accepted, or leave the Tower without permission, or speak to an Aes Sedai before she speaks to you, or. . . . The only thing to do is the best you can. There isn't anything else to do."

"ɪt saʊnz ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf ðəɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk əs wɑnə liv," ɛɡwin pɹətɛstəd.

"It sounds almost as if they're trying to make us want to leave," Egwene protested.

"ðeɪ ɑɹənt, bʌt ðən əɡɛn, ðeɪ ɑɹ. ɛɡwin, ðəɹ ɑɹ oʊnli fɔɹɾi nɑvəsɪz ɪn ðə taʊɝ. oʊnli fɔɹɾi, ən noʊ mɔɹ ðən sɛvən əɹ eɪt wɪl bɪkʌm æksɛptɪd. ðəɾ ɪz nɑɾ ɪnʌf, ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ sɛz. ʃi sɛz ðəɹ ɑɹ nɑɾ ɪnʌf ɛɛs sədaɪ naʊ tə də wʌt nidz tə bi dʌn. bʌt ðə taʊɝ wɪl nɑt . . . kænɑt . . . loʊɝ ɪts stændɝdz. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kænɑt teɪk ə wʊmən əz ə sɪstɝ ɪf ʃi dʌz nɑɾ əv ði əbɪləɾi, ən ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ, ən ðə dɪzaɪɝ. ðeɪ kænt ɡɪv ðə ɹɪŋ ən ðə ʃɔl tə wʌn u kænɑt tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ wɛl ɪnʌf, əɹ u wɪl əlaʊ hɝsɛlf tə bi ɪntɪmɪdeɪɾɪd, əɹ u wɪl tɝn bæk wən ðə ɹoʊd tɝnz ɹʌf. tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ən tɛstɪŋ teɪk kɛɹ ə ðə tʃænəlɪŋ, ən fəɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ ən dɪzaɪɝ. . . . wɛl, ɪf jə wɑnə ɡoʊ, ðəl lɛt ju. wʌns jə noʊ ɪnʌf ðət jə woʊn daɪ ʌv ɪɡnɝəns."

"They aren't, but then again, they are. Egwene, there are only forty novices in the Tower. Only forty, and no more than seven or eight will become Accepted. That is not enough, Sheriam Sedai says. She says there are not enough Aes Sedai now to do what needs to be done. But the Tower will not . . . cannot . . . lower its standards. The Aes Sedai cannot take a woman as a sister if she does not have the ability, and the strength, and the desire. They can't give the ring and the shawl to one who cannot channel the Power well enough, or who will allow herself to be intimidated, or who will turn back when the road turns rough. Training and testing take care of the channeling, and for strength and desire. . . . Well, if you want to go, they will let you. Once you know enough that you won't die of ignorance."

"aɪ səpoʊz," ɛɡwin sɛd sloʊli, "ʃɛɹiəm toʊld əs səm ə ðæt. aɪ nɛvɝ θɔɾ əbaʊt ðəɹ nɑt biɪŋ ɪnʌf ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðoʊ."

"I suppose," Egwene said slowly, "Sheriam told us some of that. I never thought about there not being enough Aes Sedai, though."

"ʃi hæz ə θɪɹi. ʃi sɛz wɪv kʌl hjumənkaɪnd. jə noʊ əbaʊt kʌlɪŋ? kʌɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə hɝd ðoʊz ænəməlz ðəɾ əv tʃɹeɪts jə doʊn laɪk?" ɛɡwin nɑɾəd ɪmpeɪʃənli; noʊ wʌn kəd ɡɹoʊ ʌp ɝaʊnd ʃip wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ əbaʊt kʌlɪŋ ðə flɑk. "ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ sɛz ðət wɪð ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ hʌntɪŋ daʊn mɛn u kəd tʃænəl fəɹ θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz, wəɹ kʌlɪŋ ði əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl aʊɾ ʌv əs ɔl. aɪ wəd nɑt mɛnʃən ðɪs ɝaʊn ɛni ɹɛdz, ɪf aɪ wɝ ju. ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ hæz bɪn ɪn mɔɹ ðən wʌn ʃaʊɾɪŋ mætʃ oʊvɝ ɪt, ən wəɹ oʊnli nɑvəsɪz."

"She has a theory. She says we have culled humankind. You know about culling? Cutting out of the herd those animals that have traits you don't like?" Egwene nodded impatiently; no one could grow up around sheep without knowing about culling the flock. "Sheriam Sedai says that with the Red Ajah hunting down men who could channel for three thousand years, we are culling the ability to channel out of us all. I would not mention this around any Reds, if I were you. Sheriam Sedai has been in more than one shouting match over it, and we are only novices."

"aɪ woʊnt."

"I won't."

ɪleɪn pɔzd, ən ðən sɛd, "ɪz ɹænd wɛl?"

Elayne paused, and then said, "Is Rand well?"

ɛɡwin fɛlt ə sʌɾən stæb ə dʒɛləsi - ɪleɪn wɑz vɛɹi pɹɪɾi - bʌɾ oʊvɝ ɪt keɪm ə stʃɹɔŋɝ stæb ə fɪɹ. ʃi wɛn oʊvɝ ðə lɪɾəl ʃi nu ʌv ɹændz wʌn miɾɪŋ wɪð ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ, ɹiəʃʊɹɪŋ hɝsɛlf: ɪleɪn kəd nɑt pɑsəbli noʊ ðət ɹænd kəd tʃænəl.

Egwene felt a sudden stab of jealousy - Elayne was very pretty - but over it came a stronger stab of fear. She went over the little she knew of Rand's one meeting with the Daughter-Heir, reassuring herself: Elayne could not possibly know that Rand could channel.

"ɛɡwin?"

"Egwene?"

"hi ɪz əz wɛl əz i kən bi." aɪ hoʊp i ɪz, ðə wʊl-hɛɾəd ɪɾiət. "hi wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ wɪð səm ʃaɪnɝən soʊlʒɝz ðə læst aɪ sɔ hɪm."

"He is as well as he can be." I hope he is, the wool-headed idiot. "He was riding with some Shienaran soldiers the last I saw him."

"ʃaɪnɝənz! hi toʊl mi hi wɑz ə ʃɛpɝd." ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "aɪ faɪn maɪsɛlf θɪŋkɪŋ ə hɪm ət ði ɑɾəst taɪmz. ɪleɪɾə θɪŋks hiz ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪn səm weɪ. ʃi dɪdn kʌm ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ən seɪ soʊ, bʌt ʃi ɔɹɾɝd ə sɝtʃ fəɹ hɪm, ən ʃi wɑz ɪn ə fjʊɹi wən ʃi lɝn i hæd lɛf keɪɛmlɪn."

"Shienarans! He told me he was a shepherd." She shook her head. "I find myself thinking of him at the oddest times. Elaida thinks he is important in some way. She didn't come right out and say so, but she ordered a search for him, and she was in a fury when she learned he had left Caemlyn."

"ɪleɪɾə?"

"Elaida?"

"ɪleɪɾə sədaɪ. maɪ mʌðɝz kaʊnsəlɝ. ʃiz ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ, bʌt mʌðɝ simz tə laɪk əɹ dɪspaɪt ðæt."

"Elaida Sedai. My mother's councilor. She is Red Ajah, but Mother seems to like her despite that."

ɛɡwinz maʊθ fɛl dʒɹaɪ. ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ, ən ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ɹænd. "aɪ - aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɛɹ i ɪz, naʊ. hi lɛft ʃaɪnɝ, ən aɪ doʊn θɪŋk i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ bæk."

Egwene's mouth felt dry. Red Ajah, and interested in Rand. "I - I don't know where he is, now. He left Shienar, and I don't think he was going back."

ɪleɪn ɡeɪv əɹ ə lɛvəl lʊk. "aɪ wəd nɑt tɛl ɪleɪɾə wɛɹ tə faɪn ɪm ɪf aɪ nu, ɛɡwin. hiz dʌn noʊ ɹɔŋ ðəɾ aɪ noʊ, ən aɪ fɪɹ ʃi wɑns tə juz ɪm ɪn səm mænɝ. ɛniweɪ, aɪv nɑt sin əɹ sɪns ðə deɪ wi ɝaɪvd, wɪð waɪtkloʊks dɔɡɪŋ əɹ tʃɹeɪl. ðeɪ ɑɹ stɪl kæmpt ɑn ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊn saɪd." əbɹʌpli ʃi baʊndəd tə hɝ fit. "lɛɾ əs tɔk ə hæpiɝ θɪŋz. ðəɹ ɑɹ tu ʌðɝz hɪɹ u noʊ ɹænd, ən aɪ wəd laɪk jə tə mit wʌn ə ðɛm." ʃi tʊk ɛɡwinz hæn ən pʊld əɹ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum.

Elayne gave her a level look. "I would not tell Elaida where to find him if I knew, Egwene. He has done no wrong that I know, and I fear she wants to use him in some manner. Anyway, I've not seen her since the day we arrived, with Whitecloaks dogging our trail. They are still camped on the Dragonmount side." Abruptly she bounded to her feet. "Let us talk of happier things. There are two others here who know Rand, and I would like you to meet one of them." She took Egwene's hand and pulled her out of the room.

"tu ɡɝlz? ɹænd simz tə miɾ ə lɑɾ ʌv ɡɝlz."

"Two girls? Rand seems to meet a lot of girls."

"m?" stɪl dʒɹɔɪŋ ɛɡwin daʊn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, ɪleɪn stʌɾid hɝ. "jɛs. wɛl. wʌn ə ðɛm ɪz ə leɪzi tʃɪt neɪmd ɛls ɡɹɪnwɛl. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ʃɪl bi hɪɹ lɔŋ. ʃi ʃɝks əɹ tʃɔɹz, ən ʃiz ɔlweɪz snikɪŋ ɔf tə wɑtʃ ðə wɔɹɾɝz pɹæktəs ðɛɹ sɔɹdz. ʃi sɛz ɹænd keɪm tə hɝ fɑðɝz fɑɹm, wɪð ə fɹɛn ə hɪz. mæt. ɪt simz ðeɪ pʊt noʊʃənz ə ðə wɝl bɪɑn ðə nɛks vɪlədʒ ɪndə hɝ hɛd, ən ʃi ɹæn əweɪ tə kʌm bi ən ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"Ummm?" Still drawing Egwene down the corridor, Elayne studied her. "Yes. Well. One of them is a lazy chit named Else Grinwell. I don't think she will be here long. She shirks her chores, and she is always sneaking off to watch the Warders practice their swords. She says Rand came to her father's farm, with a friend of his. Mat. It seems they put notions of the world beyond the next village into her head, and she ran away to come be an Aes Sedai."

"mɛn," ɛɡwin mʌɾɝd. "aɪ dæns ə fju dænsəz wɪð ə naɪs bɔɪ, ən ɹænd ɡoʊz ɝaʊn lʊkɪŋ laɪk ə dɔɡ wɪð ə sɔɹ tuθ, bʌɾ i - " ʃi kʌɾ ɔf əz ə mæn stɛpt ɪndə ðə hɔl əhɛɾ ə ðɛm. bɪsaɪd hɝ, ɪleɪn stɑpt, tu, ən əɹ hæn taɪɾənd ɑn ɛɡwinz.

"Men," Egwene muttered. "I dance a few dances with a nice boy, and Rand goes around looking like a dog with a sore tooth, but he - " She cut off as a man stepped into the hall ahead of them. Beside her, Elayne stopped, too, and her hand tightened on Egwene's.

ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ əlɑɹmɪŋ əbaʊt hɪm, əsaɪd fɹəm ðə sʌɾənnəs ə hɪz əpɪɹəns. hi wɑz tɔl ən hænsəm, ʃɔɹɾ ə mɪɾəl jɪɹz, wɪð lɔŋ, dɑɹk kɝlɪŋ hɛɹ, bʌɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz sæɡd, ən ðəɹ wɑz sædnəs ɪn ɪz aɪz. hi meɪd noʊ muv təwɔɹɾ ɛɡwin ən ɪleɪn, oʊnli stʊd lʊkɪŋ əɾ əm əntɪl wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪɾ əpɪɹɾ əɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ.

There was nothing alarming about him, aside from the suddenness of his appearance. He was tall and handsome, short of middle years, with long, dark curling hair, but his shoulders sagged, and there was sadness in his eyes. He made no move toward Egwene and Elayne, only stood looking at them until one of the Accepted appeared at his shoulder.

"ju ʃəd nɑt bi ɪn hɪɹ," ʃi sɛd tə hɪm, nɑɾ əŋkinli.

"You should not be in here," she said to him, not unkindly.

"aɪ wɑntəd tə wɔk." hɪz vɔɪs wɑz dip, ən əz sæɾ əz ɪz aɪz.

"I wanted to walk." His voice was deep, and as sad as his eyes.

"ju kən wɔk aʊɾ ɪn ðə ɡɑɹɾən, wɛɹ jə ɑɹ səpoʊz tə bi. ðə sʌnʃaɪn wɪl bi ɡʊd fəɹ ju."

"You can walk out in the garden, where you are supposed to be. The sunshine will be good for you."

ðə mæn ɹʌmbəld ə bɪɾɝ læf. "wɪð tu əɹ θɹi ʌv jə wɑtʃɪŋ maɪ ɛvɹi muv? jəɹ dʒʌst əfɹeɪɾ əl faɪn ə naɪf." ət ðə lʊk ɪn ði æksɛptɪdz aɪz, hi læft əɡɛn. "fɔɹ maɪsɛlf, wʊmən. fəɹ maɪsɛlf. lɛd mi tə jəɹ ɡɑɹɾən, ən jəɹ wɑtʃɪŋ aɪz."

The man rumbled a bitter laugh. "With two or three of you watching my every move? You're just afraid I'll find a knife." At the look in the Accepted's eyes, he laughed again. "For myself, woman. For myself. Lead me to your garden, and your watching eyes."

ði æksɛptɪd tʌtʃt ɪz ɑɹm laɪtli, ən lɛɾ ɪm əweɪ.

The Accepted touched his arm lightly, and led him away.

"lɑɡən," ɪleɪn sɛd wən i wɑz ɡɔn.

"Logain," Elayne said when he was gone.

"ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən!"

"The false Dragon!"

"hi hæz bɪn dʒɛntəld, ɛɡwin. hiz noʊ mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ðən ɛni ʌðɝ mæn, naʊ. bʌɾ aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ siɪŋ ɪm bɪfɔɹ, wən ɪt tʊk sɪks ɛɛs sədaɪ tə kip ɪm fɹəm wildɪŋ ðə paʊɝ ən dɪstʃɹɔɪɪŋ əs ɔl." ʃi ʃɪvɝd.

"He has been gentled, Egwene. He is no more dangerous than any other man, now. But I remember seeing him before, when it took six Aes Sedai to keep him from wielding the Power and destroying us all." She shivered.

ɛɡwin dɪd, tu. ðət wɑz wʌt ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ wəd də tə ɹænd.

Egwene did, too. That was what the Red Ajah would do to Rand.

"du ðeɪ ɔlweɪz əv tə bi dʒɛntəld?" ʃi æskt. ɪleɪn stɛɹɾ ət hɝ, maʊθ əɡeɪp, ən ʃi kwɪkli æɾəd, "ɪɾ ɪz dʒʌs ðəɾ aɪd θɪŋk ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd faɪn səm ʌðɝ weɪ tə dil wɪð ðɛm. æneɪjə ən mɔɪɹeɪn boʊθ sɛd ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst fits ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ɹikwaɪɝd mɛn ən wɪmən wɝkɪŋ təɡɛðɝ wɪð ðə paʊɝ. aɪ dʒʌs θɔt ðeɪd tʃɹaɪ tə faɪn ə weɪ."

"Do they always have to be gentled?" she asked. Elayne stared at her, mouth agape, and she quickly added, "It is just that I'd think the Aes Sedai would find some other way to deal with them. Anaiya and Moiraine both said the greatest feats of the Age of Legends required men and women working together with the Power. I just thought they'd try to find a way."

"wɛl, də nɑt lɛɾ ɛni ɹɛd sɪstɝ hɪɹ jə θɪŋkɪŋ ɪɾ əlaʊd. ɛɡwin, ðeɪ dɪd tʃɹaɪ. fəɹ θɹi hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz æftɝ ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɑz bɪlt, ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd. ðeɪ ɡeɪv ʌp kəz ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə faɪnd. kʌm ɑn. aɪ wɑn jə tə mit mɪn. nɑɾ ɪn ðə ɡɑɹɾən wɛɹ lɑɡən ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ, θæŋk ðə laɪt."

"Well, do not let any Red sister hear you thinking it aloud. Egwene, they did try. For three hundred years after the White Tower was built, they tried. They gave up because there was nothing to find. Come on. I want you to meet Min. Not in the garden where Logain is going, thank the Light."

ðə neɪm saʊndəd veɪɡli fəmɪljɝ tə ɛɡwin, ən wən ʃi sɔ ðə jʌŋ wʊmən, ʃi nu waɪ. ðəɹ wɑz ə nɛɹoʊ stʃɹim ɪn ðə ɡɑɹɾən, wɪð ə loʊ stoʊn bɹɪdʒ oʊvɝ ɪt, ən mɪn sæt kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ðə wɔl ə ðə bɹɪdʒ. ʃi wɔɹ ə mænz taɪt bɹitʃɪz ən bæɡi ʃɝt, ən wɪð əɹ dɑɹk hɛɹ kʌt ʃɔɹt ʃi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs pæs fəɹ ə bɔɪ, ðoʊ ən ʌnkɑmənli pɹɪɾi wʌn. ə ɡɹeɪ koʊt leɪ bɪsaɪɾ əɹ ɑn ðə koʊpɪŋ.

The name sounded vaguely familiar to Egwene, and when she saw the young woman, she knew why. There was a narrow stream in the garden, with a low stone bridge over it, and Min sat cross-legged on the wall of the bridge. She wore a man's tight breeches and baggy shirt, and with her dark hair cut short she could almost pass for a boy, though an uncommonly pretty one. A gray coat lay beside her on the coping.

"aɪ noʊ ju," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ju wɝkt ət ði ɪn ɪn bɛɹlən." ə laɪt bɹiz ɹɪfəl ðə wɔɾɝ bɪniθ ðə bɹɪdʒ, ən ɡɹeɪwɪŋz wɔɹbəld ɪn ðə tʃɹiz ə ðə ɡɑɹɾən.

"I know you," Egwene said. "You worked at the inn in Baerlon." A light breeze riffled the water beneath the bridge, and graywings warbled in the trees of the garden.

mɪn smaɪld. "æn jə wɝ wʌn ə ðoʊz u bɹɔt ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz daʊn ɑn əs tə bɝn ɪt daʊn. noʊ, doʊnt wɝi. ðə mɛsənʒɝ u keɪm tə fɛtʃ mi bɹɔɾ ɪnʌf ɡoʊl ðət mæstɝ fɪtʃ ɪz bɪldɪŋ ɪt bæk əɡɛn twaɪs əz bɪɡ. ɡʊd mɔɹnɪŋ, ɪleɪn. nɑt slævɪŋ oʊvɝ jəɹ lɛsənz? əɹ oʊvɝ səm pɑts?" ɪt wɑz sɛɾ ɪn ə bæntɝɪŋ toʊn, əz bɪtwin fɹɛnz, əz ɪleɪnz ænsɝɪŋ ɡɹɪn pɹuvd.

Min smiled. "And you were one of those who brought the Darkfriends down on us to burn it down. No, don't worry. The messenger who came to fetch me brought enough gold that Master Fitch is building it back again twice as big. Good morning, Elayne. Not slaving over your lessons? Or over some pots?" It was said in a bantering tone, as between friends, as Elayne's answering grin proved.

"aɪ si ʃɛɹiəm əz nɑt jɛt mænədʒ tə ɡɛt jə ɪndə ə dʒɹɛs."

"I see Sheriam has not yet managed to get you into a dress."

mɪnz læf wɑz wɪkəd. "ɪm noʊ nɑvəs." ʃi meɪɾ əɹ vɔɪs skwiki. "jɛs, ɛɛs sədaɪ. noʊ, ɛɛs sədaɪ. meɪ aɪ swip ənʌðɝ flɔɹ, ɛɛs sədaɪ? aɪ," ʃi sɛd, ɹɪzumɪŋ əɹ oʊn loʊ vɔɪs, "kloʊð maɪsɛlf ðə weɪ aɪ wɑnt." ʃi tɝn tə ɛɡwin. "ɪz ɹænd wɛl?"

Min's laugh was wicked. "I'm no novice." She made her voice squeaky. "Yes, Aes Sedai. No, Aes Sedai. May I sweep another floor, Aes Sedai? I," she said, resuming her own low voice, "clothe myself the way I want." She turned to Egwene. "Is Rand well?"

ɛɡwinz maʊθ taɪɾənd. hi ʃəd wɛɹ ɹæmz hɔɹnz laɪk ə tʃɹɑlɑk, ʃi θɔɾ æŋɡɹəli. "aɪ wɑz sɑɹi wən jəɹ ɪn kɑt faɪɝ, ən aɪm ɡlæd mæstɝ fɪtʃ wɑz eɪbəl tə ɹibɪld. waɪ hæv jə kʌm tə tɑɹ vəlɑn? ɪts klɪɹ jə də nɑt min tə bi ən ɛɛs sədaɪ." mɪn ɑɹtʃt ən aɪbɹaʊ ɪn wʌɾ ɛɡwin wɑz ʃʊɹ wɑz əmjuzmənt.

Egwene's mouth tightened. He should wear ram's horns like a Trolloc, she thought angrily. "I was sorry when your inn caught fire, and I am glad Master Fitch was able to rebuild. Why have you come to Tar Valon? It's clear you do not mean to be an Aes Sedai." Min arched an eyebrow in what Egwene was sure was amusement.

"ʃi laɪks hɪm," ɪleɪn ɪkspleɪnd.

"She likes him," Elayne explained.

"aɪ noʊ." mɪn ɡlænst əɾ ɛɡwin, ən fəɹ ən ɪnstən ɛɡwin θɔt ʃi sɔ sædnəs - əɹ ɹəɡɹɛt? - ɪn əɹ aɪz. "aɪ æm hɪɹ," mɪn sɛd kɛɹfəli, "bɪkɔz aɪ wɑz sɛn fɔɹ, ən wɑz ɡɪvən ðə tʃɔɪs bɪtwin ɹaɪɾɪŋ ən kʌmɪŋ taɪɾ ɪn ə sæk."

"I know." Min glanced at Egwene, and for an instant Egwene thought she saw sadness - or regret? - in her eyes. "I am here," Min said carefully, "because I was sent for, and was given the choice between riding and coming tied in a sack."

"ju ɔlweɪz ɪɡzædʒɝeɪɾ ɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ sɔ ðə lɛɾɝ, ən ʃi sɛz ɪt wɑz ə ɹɪkwɛst. mɪn siz θɪŋz, ɛɡwin. ðæts waɪ ʃiz hɪɹ; soʊ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kən stʌɾi haʊ ʃi dʌz ɪt. ɪɾ ɪzən ðə paʊɝ."

"You always exaggerate it," Elayne said. "Sheriam Sedai saw the letter, and she says it was a request. Min sees things, Egwene. That's why she's here; so the Aes Sedai can study how she does it. It isn't the Power."

"ɹɪkwɛst," mɪn snɔɹɾɪd. "wɛn ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹɪkwɛsts jəɹ pɹɛzəns, ɪts laɪk ə kəmæn fɹəm ə kwin wɪð ə hʌnʒɹəd soʊlʒɝz tə bæk ɪɾ ʌp."

"Request," Min snorted. "When an Aes Sedai requests your presence, it's like a command from a queen with a hundred soldiers to back it up."

"ɛvɹibɑɾi siz θɪŋz," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"Everybody sees things," Egwene said.

ɪleɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "nɑt laɪk mɪn. ʃi siz - ɔʊɹəz - ɝaʊn pipəl. ən ɪmədʒəz."

Elayne shook her head. "Not like Min. She sees - auras - around people. And images."

"nɑɾ ɔl ðə taɪm," mɪn pʊɾ ɪn. "nɑɾ ɝaʊn ɛvɹibɑɾi."

"Not all the time," Min put in. "Not around everybody."

"ænd ʃi kən ɹid θɪŋz əbaʊt jə fɹəm ðɛm, ðoʊ aɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ ʃi ɔlweɪz tɛlz ðə tʃɹuθ. ʃi sɛɾ aɪɾ əv tə ʃɛɹ maɪ hʌzbənd wɪð tu ʌðɝ wɪmən, ən aɪd nɛvɝ pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ðæt. ʃi dʒʌs læfs, ən sɛz ɪt wɑz nɛvɝ əɹ aɪdiə ʌv haʊ tə ɹʌn θɪŋz, iðɝ. bʌt ʃi sɛɾ aɪ wəd bi ə kwin bɪfɔɹ ʃi nu hu aɪ wɑz; ʃi sɛd ʃi sɔ ə kɹaʊn, ən ɪt wɑz ðə ɹoʊz kɹaʊn ʌv ændɝ."

"And she can read things about you from them, though I'm not sure she always tells the truth. She said I'd have to share my husband with two other women, and I'd never put up with that. She just laughs, and says it was never her idea of how to run things, either. But she said I would be a queen before she knew who I was; she said she saw a crown, and it was the Rose Crown of Andor."

dɪspaɪt hɝsɛlf, ɛɡwin æskt, "wʌt dʒju si wən jə lʊk ət mi?"

Despite herself, Egwene asked, "What do you see when you look at me?"

mɪn ɡlænst ət hɝ. "ə waɪt fleɪm, ænd. . . . oʊ, ɔl sɔɹts ə θɪŋz. ɪdnt noʊ wʌɾ ɪt minz."

Min glanced at her. "A white flame, and. . . . Oh, all sorts of things. Idon't know what it means."

"ʃi sɛz ðəɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil," ɪleɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "wʌn ə ðə θɪŋz ʃi sɛd ʃi sɔ lʊkɪŋ ət mi wɑz ə sɛvɝd hænd. nɑt maɪn, ʃi sɛz. ʃi kleɪmz ʃi dʌz nɑt noʊ wʌɾ ɪt minz, iðɝ."

"She says that a great deal," Elayne said dryly. "One of the things she said she saw looking at me was a severed hand. Not mine, she says. She claims she does not know what it means, either."

"bɪkɔz aɪ doʊnt," mɪn sɛd. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt hæf ʌv ɪt minz."

"Because I don't," Min said. "I don't know what half of it means."

ðə kɹʌntʃ ə buts ɑn ðə wɔk bɹɔɾ əm ɝaʊn tə lʊk ət tu jʌŋ mɛn wɪð ðɛɹ ʃɝts ən koʊts əkɹɔs ðɛɹ ɑɹmz, livɪŋ swɛɾi tʃɛsts bɛɹ, ən skæbɑɹɾɪd sɔɹdz ɪn ðɛɹ hænz. ɛɡwin faʊn hɝsɛlf stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə moʊs hænsəm mæn ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ sin. tɔl ən slɪm, bʌt hɑɹd, hi muvd wɪð ə kæt-laɪk ɡɹeɪs. ʃi sʌɾənli ɹilaɪzd i wɑz boʊɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ hænd - ʃi hæd nɑɾ ivən fɛlt ɪm teɪk ɪɾ ɪn ɪz - ən fʌmbəld ɪn əɹ maɪn fəɹ ðə neɪm ʃi hæd hɝd.

The crunch of boots on the walk brought them around to look at two young men with their shirts and coats across their arms, leaving sweaty chests bare, and scabbarded swords in their hands. Egwene found herself staring at the most handsome man she had ever seen. Tall and slim, but hard, he moved with a cat-like grace. She suddenly realized he was bowing over her hand - she had not even felt him take it in his - and fumbled in her mind for the name she had heard.

"ɡɑləd," ʃi mɝmɝd. hɪz dɑɹk aɪz stɛɹd bæk ɪndə hɝz. hi wɑz oʊldɝ ðən ʃi. oʊldɝ ðən ɹænd. ət ðə θɔɾ ə ɹænd, ʃi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən keɪm tə hɝsɛlf.

"Galad," she murmured. His dark eyes stared back into hers. He was older than she. Older than Rand. At the thought of Rand, she gave a start and came to herself.

"æn aɪm ɡɔɪn" - ði ʌðɝ jʌŋ mæn ɡɹɪnd - "sɪns aɪ doʊn θɪŋk jə hɝd ðə fɝs taɪm." mɪn wɑz ɡɹɪnɪŋ, tu, ən oʊnli ɪleɪn wɔɹ ə fɹaʊn.

"And I am Gawyn" - the other young man grinned - "since I don't think you heard the first time." Min was grinning, too, and only Elayne wore a frown.

ɛɡwin əbɹʌpli ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ əɹ hænd, stɪl hɛl baɪ ɡɑləd, ən fɹiɾ ɪt.

Egwene abruptly remembered her hand, still held by Galad, and freed it.

"ɪf jəɹ duɾiz əlaʊ," ɡɑləd sɛd, "aɪ wəd laɪk tə si jə əɡɛn, ɛɡwin. wi kəd wɔk, əɹ ɪf jə əbteɪn pɝmɪʃən tə liv ðə taʊɝ, wi kəd pɪknɪk aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi."

"If your duties allow," Galad said, "I would like to see you again, Egwene. We could walk, or if you obtain permission to leave the Tower, we could picnic outside the city."

"ðæt - ðət wəd bi naɪs." ʃi wɑz ənkʌmftəbli əwɛɹ ə ði ʌðɝz, mɪn ən ɡɔɪn stɪl wɪð ðɛɹ əmjuzd ɡɹɪnz, ɪleɪn stɪl wɪð əɹ skaʊl. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə sɛɾəl hɝsɛlf, tə θɪŋk ə ɹænd. hiz soʊ . . . bjuɾəfəl. ʃi ɡeɪv ə dʒʌmp, hæf əfɹeɪd ʃi hæd spoʊkən əlaʊd.

"That - that would be nice." She was uncomfortably aware of the others, Min and Gawyn still with their amused grins, Elayne still with her scowl. She tried to settle herself, to think of Rand. He's so . . . beautiful. She gave a jump, half afraid she had spoken aloud.

"əntɪl ðɛn." faɪnəli teɪkɪŋ ɪz aɪz fɹəm hɝz, ɡɑləd baʊd tə ɪleɪn. "sɪstɝ." laɪð əz ə bleɪd, hi stʃɹoʊld ɑn əkɹɔs ðə bɹɪdʒ.

"Until then." Finally taking his eyes from hers, Galad bowed to Elayne. "Sister." Lithe as a blade, he strolled on across the bridge.

"ðæt wʌn," mɪn mɝmɝd, piɹɪŋ æftɝ hɪm, "wɪl ɔlweɪz də wʌɾ ɪz ɹaɪt. noʊ mæɾɝ u ɪt hɝts."

"That one," Min murmured, peering after him, "will always do what is right. No matter who it hurts."

"sɪstɝ?" ɛɡwin sɛd. ɪleɪnz skaʊl hæd lɛsən oʊnli slaɪtli. "aɪ θɔɾ i wɑz jɔɹ. . . . aɪ min, ðə weɪ jəɹ fɹaʊnɪŋ. . . ." ʃi hæd θɔɾ ɪleɪn wɑz dʒɛləs, ən ʃi stɪl wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ.

"Sister?" Egwene said. Elayne's scowl had lessened only slightly. "I thought he was your. . . . I mean, the way you're frowning. . . ." She had thought Elayne was jealous, and she still was not sure.

"aɪ æm nɑɾ ɪz sɪstɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd fɝmli. "aɪ ɹəfjuz tə bi."

"I am not his sister," Elayne said firmly. "I refuse to be."

"aʊɝ fɑðɝ wɑz ɪz fɑðɝ," ɡɔɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "ju kænɑt dɪnaɪ ðæt, ənlɛs jə wɑnə kɔl mʌðɝ ə laɪɝ, ən ðæt, aɪ θɪŋk, wəd teɪk mɔɹ nɝv ðən wɪv bɪtwin ʌs."

"Our father was his father," Gawyn said dryly. "You cannot deny that, unless you want to call Mother a liar, and that, I think, would take more nerve than we have between us."

fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ɛɡwin ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i hæd ðə seɪm ɹɛɾɪʃ ɡoʊl hɛɹ əz ɪleɪn, ðoʊ dɑɹkən ən kɝl baɪ swɛt.

For the first time Egwene realized that he had the same reddish gold hair as Elayne, though darkened and curled by sweat.

"mɪn ɪz ɹaɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ɡɑləɾ əz nɑt ðə smɔləs pɑɹɾ ə hjumænɪɾi ɪn hɪm. hi teɪks ɹaɪɾ əbʌv mɝsi, əɹ pɪɾi, ɔɹ. . . . hiz noʊ mɔɹ hjumən ðən ə tʃɹɑlɑk."

"Min is right," Elayne said. "Galad has not the smallest part of humanity in him. He takes right above mercy, or pity, or. . . . He is no more human than a Trolloc."

ɡɔɪnz ɡɹɪn keɪm bæk. "aɪ də nɑt noʊ əbaʊt ðæt. nɑt fɹəm ðə weɪ hi wɑz lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɛɡwin, hɪɹ." hi kɑɾ əɹ lʊk, ən ɪz sɪstɝz, ən hɛld ʌp ɪz hænz əz ɪf tə fɛn əm ɔf wɪð ɪz ʃið sɔɹd. "bɪsaɪdz, hiz ðə bɛs hænd wɪð ə sɔɹɾ aɪv ɛvɝ sin. ðə wɔɹɾɝz oʊnli nid ʃoʊ hɪm sʌmθɪŋ wʌns, ən hiz lɝn ɪt. ðeɪ swɛt mi nɪɹli tə dɛθ tə lɝn hæf wʌt ɡɑləd dʌz wɪθaʊt tʃɹaɪɪŋ."

Gawyn's grin came back. "I do not know about that. Not from the way he was looking at Egwene, here." He caught her look, and his sister's, and held up his hands as if to fend them off with his sheathed sword. "Besides, he has the best hand with a sword I've ever seen. The Warders only need show him something once, and he's learned it. They sweat me nearly to death to learn half what Galad does without trying."

"æn biɪŋ ɡʊd wɪð ə sɔɹɾ ɪz ɪnʌf?" ɪleɪn snɪft. "mɛn! ɛɡwin, əz jə meɪ hæv ɡɛst, ðɪs dɪsɡɹəsfəli ənkloʊð lʌmɑks ɪz maɪ bɹʌðɝ. ɡɔɪn, ɛɡwin noʊz ɹænd ælθɹ. ʃiz fɹəm ðə seɪm vɪlədʒ."

"And being good with a sword is enough?" Elayne sniffed. "Men! Egwene, as you may have guessed, this disgracefully unclothed lummox is my brother. Gawyn, Egwene knows Rand al'Thor. She is from the same village."

"ɪz ʃi? wɑz i ɹɪli bɔɹn ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ɛɡwin?"

"Is she? Was he really born in the Two Rivers, Egwene?"

ɛɡwin meɪd hɝsɛlf nɑd kɑmli. wʌt dʌz i noʊ? "ʌv kɔɹs, hi wɑz. aɪ ɡɹu ʌp wɪð hɪm."

Egwene made herself nod calmly. What does he know? "Of course, he was. I grew up with him."

"ʌv kɔɹs," ɡɔɪn sɛd sloʊli. "sʌtʃ ə stʃɹeɪnʒ fɛloʊ. ə ʃɛpɝd, hi sɛd, ðoʊ hi nɛvɝ lʊkt əɹ æktəd laɪk ɛni ʃɛpɝɾ aɪ ɛvɝ sɔ. stʃɹeɪnʒ. aɪ hæv mɛɾ ɔl sɔɹts ə pipəl, ən ðeɪv mɛt ɹænd ælθɹ. səm də nɑɾ ivən noʊ hɪz neɪm, bʌt ðə dɪskɹɪpʃən kəd nɑt bi ɛniwʌn ɛls, ən hiz ʃɪftəɾ ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛɹ lɪvz. ðəɹ wɑz ən oʊl fɑɹmɝ u keɪm tə keɪɛmlɪn dʒʌs tə si lɑɡən, wən lɑɡən wɑz bɹɔt θɹu ɑn ɪz weɪ hɪɹ; jɛt ðə fɑɹmɝ steɪd tə stæn fəɹ mʌðɝ wən ðə ɹaɪəts stɑɹɾəd. kəz ʌv ə jʌŋ mæn ɔf tə si ðə wɝld, hu meɪɾ ɪm θɪŋk ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ tə laɪf ðən ɪz fɑɹm. ɹænd ælθɹ. jə kəɾ ɔlmoʊs θɪŋk i wɑz tɑvɝən. ɪleɪɾə ɪz sɝɾənli ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn hɪm. aɪ wʌndɝ ɪf miɾɪŋ ɪm wɪl ʃɪft əɹ laɪvz ɪn ðə pæɾɝn?"

"Of course," Gawyn said slowly. "Such a strange fellow. A shepherd, he said, though he never looked or acted like any shepherd I ever saw. Strange. I have met all sorts of people, and they've met Rand al'Thor. Some do not even know his name, but the description could not be anyone else, and he's shifted every one of their lives. There was an old farmer who came to Caemlyn just to see Logain, when Logain was brought through on his way here; yet the farmer stayed to stand for Mother when the riots started. Because of a young man off to see the world, who made him think there was more to life than his farm. Rand al'Thor. You could almost think he was ta'veren. Elaida is certainly interested in him. I wonder if meeting him will shift our lives in the Pattern?"

ɛɡwin lʊkt əɾ ɪleɪn ən mɪn. ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ əv ə klu ðət ɹænd ɹɪli wɑz tɑvɝən. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ ɹɪli θɔɾ əbaʊt ðət pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt bɪfɔɹ; hi wɑz ɹænd, ən i hæd bɪn kɝst wɪð ði əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl. bʌt tɑvɝən dɪd muv pipəl, wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɑntəd tə bi muvd əɹ nɑt. "aɪ ɹɪli də laɪk ju," ʃi sɛɾ əbɹʌpli, ɪnkluɾɪŋ boʊθ ɡɝlz ɪn əɹ dʒɛstʃɝ. "aɪ wɑnə bi jəɹ fɹɛnd."

Egwene looked at Elayne and Min. She was sure they could not have a clue that Rand really was ta'veren. She had never really thought about that part of it before; he was Rand, and he had been cursed with the ability to channel. But ta'veren did move people, whether they wanted to be moved or not. "I really do like you," she said abruptly, including both girls in her gesture. "I want to be your friend."

"æn aɪ wɑnə bi jʊɹz," ɪleɪn sɛd.

"And I want to be yours," Elayne said.

ɪmpʌlsɪvli, ɛɡwin hʌɡd hɝ, ən ðən mɪn dʒʌmp daʊn, ən ðə θɹi ʌv əm stʊd ðəɹ ɑn ðə bɹɪdʒ hʌɡɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ ɔl təɡɛðɝ.

Impulsively, Egwene hugged her, and then Min jumped down, and the three of them stood there on the bridge hugging one another all together.

"wi θɹi ɑɹ taɪd təɡɛðɝ," mɪn sɛd, "ænd wi kænɑt lɛɾ ɛni mæn ɡɛɾ ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv ðæt. nɑɾ ivən hɪm."

"We three are tied together," Min said, "and we cannot let any man get in the way of that. Not even him."

"wʊd wʌn ə jə maɪn tɛlɪŋ mi wʌt ðɪs ɪz ɔl əbaʊt?" ɡɔɪn ɪnkwaɪɝd dʒɛnli.

"Would one of you mind telling me what this is all about?" Gawyn inquired gently.

"ju wəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd," hɪz sɪstɝ sɛd, ən ðə θɹi ɡɝlz ɔl kɑɾ ə fɪɾ ə ðə ɡɪɡəlz.

"You would not understand," his sister said, and the three girls all caught a fit of the giggles.

ɡɔɪn skɹætʃt ɪz hɛd, ðən ʃʊk ɪt. "wɛl, ɪf ɪts ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɹænd ælθɹ, bi ʃʊɹ jə doʊn lɛɾ ɪleɪɾə hɪɹ ʌv ɪt. ʃiz bɪn ət mi laɪk ə waɪtkloʊk kwɛstʃənɝ θɹi taɪmz sɪns wi ɝaɪvd. aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ʃi minz ɪm ɛni - " hi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt; ðəɹ wɑz ə wʊmən kɹɔsɪŋ ðə ɡɑɹɾən, ə wʊmən ɪn ə ɹɛd-fɹɪnd ʃɔl. " 'neɪm ðə dɑɹk wʌn,' " hi kwoʊɾəd, " 'æn i əpɪɹz.' aɪ də nɑt niɾ ənʌðɝ lɛktʃɝ əbaʊt wɛɹɪŋ maɪ ʃɝt wən aɪm aʊɾ ə ðə pɹæktəs jɑɹdz. ɡʊd mɔɹnɪŋ tə jə ɔl."

Gawyn scratched his head, then shook it. "Well, if it has anything to do with Rand al'Thor, be sure you don't let Elaida hear of it. She has been at me like a Whitecloak Questioner three times since we arrived. I do not think she means him any - " He gave a start; there was a woman crossing the garden, a woman in a red-fringed shawl. " 'Name the Dark One,' " he quoted, " 'and he appears.' I do not need another lecture about wearing my shirt when I'm out of the practice yards. Good morning to you all."

ɪleɪɾə spɛɹɾ ə ɡlæns fəɹ ðə dɪpɑɹɾɪŋ ɡɔɪn əz ʃi keɪm ʌp ðə bɹɪdʒ. ʃi wɑz ə hænsəm wʊmən ɹæðɝ ðən bjuɾəfəl, ɛɡwin θɔt, bʌt ðəɾ eɪdʒləs lʊk mɑɹkt əɹ əz ʃʊɹli əz əɹ ʃɔl; oʊnli ðə nuəst-meɪd sɪstɝz lækt ɪt. wən əɹ ɡeɪz swɛpt oʊvɝ ɛɡwin, pɔzɪŋ oʊnli ə moʊmənt, ɛɡwin sʌɾənli sɔ ə hɑɹdnəs ɪn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz θɔɾ ə mɔɪɹeɪn əz stʃɹɔŋ, stil ʌndɝ sɪlk, bʌɾ ɪleɪɾə dɪspɛnst wɪð ðə sɪlk.

Elaida spared a glance for the departing Gawyn as she came up the bridge. She was a handsome woman rather than beautiful, Egwene thought, but that ageless look marked her as surely as her shawl; only the newest-made sisters lacked it. When her gaze swept over Egwene, pausing only a moment, Egwene suddenly saw a hardness in the Aes Sedai. She had always thought of Moiraine as strong, steel under silk, but Elaida dispensed with the silk.

"ɪleɪɾə," ɪleɪn sɛd, "ðɪs ɪz ɛɡwin. ʃi wɑz bɔɹn wɪð ðə siɾ ɪn hɝ, tu. ən ʃiz ɔlɹɛɾi hæd səm lɛsənz, soʊ ʃiz əz fɑɹ əlɔŋ əz aɪ æm. ɪleɪɾə?"

"Elaida," Elayne said, "this is Egwene. She was born with the seed in her, too. And she has already had some lessons, so she is as far along as I am. Elaida?"

ði ɛɛs sədaɪz feɪs wɑz blæŋk ən ənɹiɾəbəl. "ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, tʃaɪld, aɪm kaʊnsəlɝ tə ðə kwin jəɹ mʌðɝ, bʌt ðɪs ɪz ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən ju, ə nɑvəs." mɪn meɪɾ əz ɪf tə ɡoʊ, bʌɾ ɪleɪɾə stɑpt əɹ wɪð ə ʃɑɹp, "steɪ, ɡɝl. aɪ wəd spik wɪð ju."

The Aes Sedai's face was blank and unreadable. "In Caemlyn, child, I am councilor to the Queen your mother, but this is the White Tower, and you, a novice." Min made as if to go, but Elaida stopped her with a sharp, "Stay, girl. I would speak with you."

"aɪv noʊn jə ɔl maɪ laɪf, ɪleɪɾə," ɪleɪn sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. "ju wɑtʃt mi ɡɹoʊ ʌp, ən meɪd ðə ɡɑɹɾənz blum ɪn wɪntɝ soʊ aɪ kəd pleɪ."

"I've known you all my life, Elaida," Elayne said incredulously. "You watched me grow up, and made the gardens bloom in winter so I could play."

"tʃaɪld, ðəɹ jə wɝ ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ. hɪɹ jə ɑɹ ə nɑvəs. jə mʌs lɝn ðæt. jəl bi ɡɹeɪt wʌn deɪ, bʌt jə mʌs lɝn!"

"Child, there you were the Daughter-Heir. Here you are a novice. You must learn that. You will be great one day, but you must learn!"

"jɛs, ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"Yes, Aes Sedai."

ɛɡwin wɑz əstaʊndɪd. ɪf sʌmwʌn hæd snʌbd əɹ soʊ bɪfɔɹ ʌðɝz, ʃi wʊɾə bɪn ɪn ə fjʊɹi.

Egwene was astounded. If someone had snubbed her so before others, she would have been in a fury.

"naʊ, ɔf wɪð boʊθ ə ju." ə ɡɔŋ bɪɡæn tə toʊl, dip ən sɑnɝəs, ən ɪleɪɾə tɪltəɾ əɹ hɛd. ðə sʌn stʊd hæfweɪ tə ɪts pɪnəkəl. "haɪ," ɪleɪɾə sɛd. "ju mʌs hɝi, ɪf jə də nɑt wɑn fɝðɝ ædmɑnɪʃmənt. ən ɪleɪn? si ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz ɪn əɹ stʌɾi æftɝ jəɹ tʃɔɹz. ə nɑvəs dʌz nɑt spik tə ɛɛs sədaɪ ənlɛs bɪɾən tə. ɹʌn, boʊθ ə ju. jəl bi leɪt. ɹʌn!"

"Now, off with both of you." A gong began to toll, deep and sonorous, and Elaida tilted her head. The sun stood halfway to its pinnacle. "High," Elaida said. "You must hurry, if you do not want further admonishment. And Elayne? See the Mistress of Novices in her study after your chores. A novice does not speak to Aes Sedai unless bidden to. Run, both of you. You will be late. Run!"

ðeɪ ɹæn, hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ skɝts ʌp. ɛɡwin lʊkt əɾ ɪleɪn. ɪleɪn hæd tu spɑts ə kʌlɝ ɪn əɹ tʃiks ən ə dɪtɝmən lʊk ɑn əɹ feɪs.

They ran, holding their skirts up. Egwene looked at Elayne. Elayne had two spots of color in her cheeks and a determined look on her face.

"aɪ wɪl bi ɛɛs sədaɪ," ɪleɪn sɛd sɔfli, bʌɾ ɪt saʊndəd laɪk ə pɹɑməs.

"I will be Aes Sedai," Elayne said softly, but it sounded like a promise.

bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ɛɡwin hɝd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪɡɪn, "aɪ æm ɡɪvən tə ʌndɝstænd, ɡɝl, ðət jə wɝ bɹɔt hɪɹ baɪ mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ."

Behind them, Egwene heard the Aes Sedai begin, "I am given to understand, girl, that you were brought here by Moiraine Sedai."

ʃi wɑntəd tə steɪ ən lɪsən, tə hɪɹ ɪf ɪleɪɾə æskt əbaʊt ɹænd, bʌt haɪ ɹæŋ θɹu ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən ʃi wɑz sʌmən tə tʃɔɹz. ʃi ɹæn əz ʃi hæd bɪn kəmændəd tə ɹʌn.

She wanted to stay and listen, to hear if Elaida asked about Rand, but High rang through the White Tower, and she was summoned to chores. She ran as she had been commanded to run.

"aɪ wɪl bi ɛɛs sədaɪ," ʃi ɡɹaʊld. ɪleɪn flæʃt ə kwɪk smaɪl ʌv ʌndɝstændɪŋ, ən ðeɪ ɹæn fæstɝ.

"I will be Aes Sedai," she growled. Elayne flashed a quick smile of understanding, and they ran faster.

mɪnz ʃɝt klʌŋ tə hɝ wən ʃi faɪnəli lɛf ðə bɹɪdʒ. nɑt swɛt fɹəm ðə sʌn, bʌt fɹəm ðə hiɾ ʌv ɪleɪɾəz kwɛstʃənz. ʃi lʊkt oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz nɑt fɑloʊɪŋ hɝ, bʌɾ ɪleɪɾə wɑz noʊwɛɹ ɪn saɪt.

Min's shirt clung to her when she finally left the bridge. Not sweat from the sun, but from the heat of Elaida's questions. She looked over her shoulder to make sure the Aes Sedai was not following her, but Elaida was nowhere in sight.

haʊ dɪɾ ɪleɪɾə noʊ ðət mɔɪɹeɪn hæd sʌmən hɝ? mɪn hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ðət wɑz ə sikɹət noʊn oʊnli tə hɝ, mɔɪɹeɪn, ən ʃɛɹiəm. ən ɔl ðoʊz kwɛstʃənz əbaʊt ɹænd. ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn izi kipɪŋ ə smuð feɪs ən ə stɛɾi aɪ waɪl tɛlɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tə hɝ feɪs ðət ʃi hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə hɪm ən nu nʌθɪŋ ə hɪm. wʌt dʌz ʃi wɑnt wɪð hɪm? laɪt, wʌt dʌz mɔɪɹeɪn wɑnt wɪð hɪm? wʌɾ ɪz hi? laɪt, aɪ doʊnt wɑnə fɔl ɪn lʌv wɪð ə mæn aɪv oʊnli mɛt wʌns, ən ə fɑɹmbɔɪ ət ðæt.

How did Elaida know that Moiraine had summoned her? Min had been sure that was a secret known only to her, Moiraine, and Sheriam. And all those questions about Rand. It had not been easy keeping a smooth face and a steady eye while telling an Aes Sedai to her face that she had never heard of him and knew nothing of him. What does she want with him? Light, what does Moiraine want with him? What is he? Light, I don't want to fall in love with a man I've only met once, and a farmboy at that.

"mɔɪɹeɪn, ðə laɪt blaɪn ju," ʃi mʌɾɝd, "wʌtɛvɝ jə bɹɔt mi hɪɹ fɔɹ, kʌm aʊt fɹəm wɛɹɛvɝ jəɹ haɪɾɪŋ ən tɛl mi soʊ aɪ kən ɡoʊ!"

"Moiraine, the Light blind you," she muttered, "whatever you brought me here for, come out from wherever you're hiding and tell me so I can go!"

ði oʊnli ænsɝ wɑz ðə swit sɔŋ ə ðə ɡɹeɪwɪŋz. wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs ʃi wɛn ɪn sɝtʃ ʌv ə pleɪs tə kul ɔf.

The only answer was the sweet song of the graywings. With a grimace she went in search of a place to cool off.


tʃæptɝ twɛntifaɪv


CHAPTER 25

kɛɹhin


Cairhien

ðə sɪɾi ʌv kɛɹhin leɪ əkɹɔs hɪlz əɡɛns ðə ɹɪvɝ ɑlɡnjə, ən ɹændz fɝst saɪɾ ʌv ɪt keɪm fɹəm ðə hɪlz tə ðə nɔɹθ, baɪ ðə laɪɾ ə ðə mɪddeɪ sʌn. ɛlɹəkeɪn tɑvəlɪn ən ðə fɪfti kɛɹhinɪn soʊlʒɝz stɪl sim laɪk ɡɑɹdz tə hɪm - ðə mɔɹ sɪns kɹɔsɪŋ ðə bɹɪdʒ ət ðə ɡeɪɛlɪn; ðeɪ bɪkeɪm mɔɹ stɪf ðə fɝðɝ saʊθ ðeɪ ɹoʊd - bʌt lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə maɪnd, soʊ hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə. hi stʌɾid ðə sɪɾi, əz lɑɹdʒ əz ɛni hi hæd sin. fæt ʃɪps ən bɹɔd bɑɹdʒəz fɪl ðə ɹɪvɝ, ən tɔl ɡɹænɛɝiz spɹɔld əlɔŋ ðə fɑɹ bæŋk, bʌt kɛɹhin sim tə bi leɪɾ aʊɾ ɪn ə pɹɪsaɪs ɡɹɪd bɪhaɪn ɪts haɪ, ɡɹeɪ wɔlz. ðoʊz wɔlz ðɛmsɛlvz meɪɾ ə pɝfək skwɛɹ, wɪð wʌn saɪd hɑɹɾ əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪvɝ. ɪn dʒʌst əz ɪɡzækt ə pæɾɝn, taʊɝz ɹoʊz wɪðɪn ðə wɔlz, sɔɹɪŋ əz mʌtʃ əz twɛnti taɪmz ðə haɪɾ ə ðə wɔl, jɛɾ ivən fɹəm ðə hɪlz ɹænd kəd si ðəɾ itʃ wʌn ɛndəɾ ɪn ə dʒæɡd tɑp.

The city of Cairhien lay across hills against the River Alguenya, and Rand's first sight of it came from the hills to the north, by the light of the midday sun. Elricain Tavolin and the fifty Cairhienin soldiers still seemed like guards to him - the more since crossing the bridge at the Gaelin; they became more stiff the further south they rode - but Loial and Hurin did not appear to mind, so he tried not to. He studied the city, as large as any he had seen. Fat ships and broad barges filled the river, and tall granaries sprawled along the far bank, but Cairhien seemed to be laid out in a precise grid behind its high, gray walls. Those walls themselves made a perfect square, with one side hard along the river. In just as exact a pattern, towers rose within the walls, soaring as much as twenty times the height of the wall, yet even from the hills Rand could see that each one ended in a jagged top.

aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi wɔlz, sɝaʊndɪŋ əm fɹəm ɹɪvɝbæŋk tə ɹɪvɝbæŋk, leɪ ə wɔɹən ə stʃɹits, kɹɪskɹɔsɪŋ əɾ ɔl æŋɡəlz ən timɪŋ wɪð pipəl. fɔɹɡeɪt, ɹænd nu ɪt wɑz kɔld, fɹəm hʊɹɪn; wʌns ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə mɑɹkət vɪlədʒ fəɹ ɛvɹi sɪɾi ɡeɪt, bʌɾ oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl ɡɹoʊn ɪndə wʌn, ə hɑdʒpɑdʒ ə stʃɹits ən æliz ɡɹoʊɪŋ ʌp ɛvɹi wɪtʃ weɪ.

Outside the city walls, surrounding them from riverbank to riverbank, lay a warren of streets, crisscrossing at all angles and teeming with people. Foregate, Rand knew it was called, from Hurin; once there had been a market village for every city gate, but over the years they had all grown into one, a hodgepodge of streets and alleys growing up every which way.

əz ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz ɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðoʊz dɝt stʃɹits, tɑvəlɪn pʊt səm ə hɪz soʊlʒɝz tə klɪɹɪŋ ə pæθ θɹu ðə θɹɔŋ, ʃaʊɾɪŋ ən ɝdʒɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz fɔɹwɝɾ əz ɪf tə tʃɹæmpəl ɛni hu dɪd nɑt ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ kwɪkli. pipəl muvd əsaɪd wɪð noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə ɡlæns, əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ən ɛvɹideɪ əkɝəns. ɹænd faʊn hɪmsɛlf smaɪlɪŋ, ðoʊ.

As Rand and the others rode into those dirt streets, Tavolin put some of his soldiers to clearing a path through the throng, shouting and urging their horses forward as if to trample any who did not get out of the way quickly. People moved aside with no more than a glance, as if it were an everyday occurrence. Rand found himself smiling, though.

ðə fɔɹɡeɪt pipəlz kloʊðz wɝ ʃæbi mɔɹ ɔfən ðən nɑt, jɛt mʌtʃ ʌv ɪt wɑz kʌlɝfəl, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə ɹɔkəs bʌsəl ə laɪf tə ðə pleɪs. hɔkɝz kɹaɪd ðɛɹ wɛɹz, ən ʃɑpkipɝz kɔl fəɹ pipəl tə ɪɡzæmɪn ðə ɡʊdz dɪspleɪɾ ɑn teɪbəlz bɪfɔɹ ðɛɹ ʃɑps. bɑɹbɝz, fɹut-pɛdlɝz, naɪf-ʃɑɹpənɝz, mɛn ən wɪmən ɔfɝɪŋ ə dʌzən sɝvəsəz ən ə hʌnʒɹəd θɪŋz fəɹ seɪl, wɑndɝd θɹu ðə kɹaʊdz. mjuzɪk dʒɹɪftəd θɹu ðə bæbəl fɹəm mɔɹ ðən wʌn stʃɹʌktʃɝ; ət fɝst ɹænd θɔt ðeɪ wɝ ɪnz, bʌt ðə saɪnz aʊt fɹʌn ɔl ʃoʊd mɛn pleɪɪŋ fluts əɹ hɑɹps, tʌmbəlɪŋ əɹ dʒʌɡəlɪŋ, ən lɑɹdʒ əz ðeɪ wɝ, ðeɪ hæd noʊ wɪndoʊz. moʊst ə ðə bɪldɪŋz ɪn fɔɹɡeɪt sim tə bi wʊd, haʊɛvɝ bɪɡ ðeɪ wɝ, ən ə ɡʊd mɛni lʊk nu, ɪf pʊɹli meɪd. ɹænd ɡeɪpt ət sɛvɹəl ðət stʊd sɛvən stɔɹiz əɹ mɔɹ; ðeɪ sweɪd slaɪtli, ðoʊ ðə pipəl hɝiɪŋ ɪn ən aʊt dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs.

The Foregate people's clothes were shabby more often than not, yet much of it was colorful, and there was a raucous bustle of life to the place. Hawkers cried their wares, and shopkeepers called for people to examine the goods displayed on tables before their shops. Barbers, fruit-peddlers, knife-sharpeners, men and women offering a dozen services and a hundred things for sale, wandered through the crowds. Music drifted through the babble from more than one structure; at first Rand thought they were inns, but the signs out front all showed men playing flutes or harps, tumbling or juggling, and large as they were, they had no windows. Most of the buildings in Foregate seemed to be wood, however big they were, and a good many looked new, if poorly made. Rand gaped at several that stood seven stories or more; they swayed slightly, though the people hurrying in and out did not seem to notice.

"pɛzəns," tɑvəlɪn mʌɾɝd, stɛɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛɾ ɪn dɪsɡʌst. "lʊk ət ðɛm, kɝʌptɪd baɪ aʊtlænd weɪz. ðeɪ ʃəd nɑt bi hɪɹ."

"Peasants," Tavolin muttered, staring straight ahead in disgust. "Look at them, corrupted by outland ways. They should not be here."

"wɛɹ ʃəd ðeɪ bi?" ɹænd æskt. ðə kɛɹhinɪn ɔfəsɝ ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm ən spɝɾ ɪz hɔɹs fɔɹwɝd, flɑɡɪŋ ət ðə kɹaʊd wɪð ɪz kwɝt.

"Where should they be?" Rand asked. The Cairhienin officer glared at him and spurred his horse forward, flogging at the crowd with his quirt.

hʊɹɪn tʌtʃt ɹændz ɑɹm. "ɪt wɑz ði il wɔɹ, lɔɹd ɹænd." hi lʊk tə meɪk ʃʊɹ nʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz wɝ kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ. "mɛni ʌv ðə fɑɹmɝz wɝ əfɹeɪd tə ɡoʊ bæk tə ðɛɹ lænz nɪɹ ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld, ən ðeɪ ɔl keɪm hɪɹ, nɪɹ ɪnʌf. ðæts waɪ ɡɔlʒɹiən əz ðə ɹɪvɝ fʊl ʌv ɡɹeɪn bɑɹdʒəz ʌp fɹəm ændɝ ən tɛɹ. ðɛɹz noʊ kɹɑps kʌmɪŋ fɹəm fɑɹmz ɪn ði is kəz ðəɹ ɑɹən ɛni fɑɹmz ɛnimɔɹ. bɛs nɑt tə mɛnʃən ɪt tə ə kɛɹhinɪn ðoʊ, maɪ lɔɹd. ðeɪ laɪk tə pɹitɛn ðə wɔɹ nɛvɝ hæpənd, əɹ ət lis ðət ðeɪ wʌn ɪt."

Hurin touched Rand's arm. "It was the Aiel War, Lord Rand." He looked to make sure none of the soldiers were close enough to hear. "Many of the farmers were afraid to go back to their lands near the Spine of the World, and they all came here, near enough. That's why Galldrian has the river full of grain barges up from Andor and Tear. There's no crops coming from farms in the east because there aren't any farms anymore. Best not to mention it to a Cairhienin though, my Lord. They like to pretend the war never happened, or at least that they won it."

dɪspaɪt tɑvəlɪnz kwɝt, ðeɪ wɝ fɔɹs tə hɔlt waɪl ə stʃɹeɪnʒ pɹəsɛʃən kɹɔs ðɛɹ pæθ. hæf ə dʌzən mɛn, biɾɪŋ tæmbɔɝz ən dænsɪŋ, lɛd ðə weɪ fəɹ ə stʃɹɪŋ ə hjudʒ pʌpəts, itʃ hæf əɡɛn əz tɔl əz ðə mɛn u wɝkt əm wɪð lɔŋ poʊlz. dʒaɪən kɹaʊn fɪɡjɝz ə mɛn ən wɪmən ɪn lɔŋ, ɔɹneɪt ɹoʊbz baʊd tə ðə kɹaʊɾ əmɪd ðə ʃeɪps ə fænsɪfəl bists. ə laɪən wɪð wɪŋz. ə ɡoʊt, wɔkɪŋ ɑn ɪts haɪn lɛɡz, wɪð tu hɛdz, boʊθ ʌv wɪtʃ wɝ əpɛɹənli mɛn tə bi bɹiðɪŋ faɪɝ, fɹəm ðə kɹɪmzən stʃɹimɝz hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ðə tu maʊðz. sʌmθɪŋ ðət sim tə bi hæf kæɾ ən hæf iɡəl, ən ənʌðɝ wɪð ə bɛɹz hɛɾ ɑn ə mænz bɑɾi, wɪtʃ ɹænd tʊk tə bi ə tʃɹɑlɑk. ðə kɹaʊd tʃɪɹɾ ən læft əz ðeɪ pɹæns baɪ.

Despite Tavolin's quirt, they were forced to halt while a strange procession crossed their path. Half a dozen men, beating tambours and dancing, led the way for a string of huge puppets, each half again as tall as the men who worked them with long poles. Giant crowned figures of men and women in long, ornate robes bowed to the crowd amid the shapes of fanciful beasts. A lion with wings. A goat, walking on its hind legs, with two heads, both of which were apparently meant to be breathing fire, from the crimson streamers hanging from the two mouths. Something that seemed to be half cat and half eagle, and another with a bear's head on a man's body, which Rand took to be a Trolloc. The crowd cheered and laughed as they pranced by.

"mæn u meɪd ðət nɛvɝ sɔ ə tʃɹɑlɑk," hʊɹɪn ɡɹʌmbəld. "hɛdz tu bɪɡ, ən ɪts tu skɪni. laɪkli dɪdn bɪliv ɪn ðɛm, iðɝ, maɪ lɔɹd, ɛni mɔɹ ðən ɪn ðoʊz ʌðɝ θɪŋz. ði oʊnli mɑnstɝz ðiz fɔɹɡeɪt foʊk bɪliv ɪn ɑɹ il."

"Man who made that never saw a Trolloc," Hurin grumbled. "Head's too big, and it's too skinny. Likely didn't believe in them, either, my Lord, any more than in those other things. The only monsters these Foregate folk believe in are Aiel."

"ɑɹ ðeɪ hævɪŋ ə fɛstəvəl?" ɹænd æskt. hi dɪd nɑt si ɛni saɪn ʌv ɪɾ ʌðɝ ðən ðə pɹəsɛʃən, bʌɾ i θɔt ðət ðəɹ mʌs bi ə ɹizən fəɹ ðæt. tɑvəlɪn ɔɹɾɝd ɪz soʊlʒɝz fɔɹwɝɾ əɡɛn.

"Are they having a festival?" Rand asked. He did not see any sign of it other than the procession, but he thought that there must be a reason for that. Tavolin ordered his soldiers forward again.

"noʊ mɔɹ ðən ɛvɹi deɪ, ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd. wɔkɪŋ əlɔŋsaɪɾ ɪz hɔɹs, ðə blæŋkət-ɹæp tʃɛst stɪl stʃɹæp tə hɪz sæɾəl, ði oʊɡiɝ dʒɹu əz mɛni lʊks əz ðə pʌpəts hæd. səm ivən læft ən klæpt əz ðeɪ hæd fəɹ ðə pʌpəts. "aɪ fɪɹ ɡɔlʒɹiən kips ɪz pipəl kwaɪət baɪ ɛntɝteɪnɪŋ ðɛm. hi ɡɪvz ɡlimən ən mjuzɪʃənz ðə kɪŋz ɡɪft, ə baʊnti ɪn sɪlvɝ, tə pɝfɔɹm hɪɹ ɪn ðə fɔɹɡeɪt, ən i spɑnsɝz hɔɹs ɹeɪsəz daʊn baɪ ðə ɹɪvɝ ɛvɹi deɪ. ðəɹ ɑɹ faɪɹwɝks mɛni naɪts, tu." hi saʊndəd dɪsɡʌstəd. "ɛldɝ heɪmən sɛz ɡɔlʒɹiən ɪz ə dɪsɡɹeɪs." hi blɪŋkt, ɹilaɪzɪŋ wʌɾ i hæd sɛd, ən lʊkt ɝaʊn hɝidli tə si ɪf ɛni ʌv ðə soʊlʒɝz hæd hɝd. nʌn sim tə hæv.

"No more than every day, Rand," Loial said. Walking alongside his horse, the blanket-wrapped chest still strapped to his saddle, the Ogier drew as many looks as the puppets had. Some even laughed and clapped as they had for the puppets. "I fear Galldrian keeps his people quiet by entertaining them. He gives gleemen and musicians the King's Gift, a bounty in silver, to perform here in the Foregate, and he sponsors horse races down by the river every day. There are fireworks many nights, too." He sounded disgusted. "Elder Haman says Galldrian is a disgrace." He blinked, realizing what he had said, and looked around hurriedly to see if any of the soldiers had heard. None seemed to have.

"faɪɹwɝks," hʊɹɪn sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ. "ði ɪluməneɪɾɝz əv bɪlt ə tʃæptɝ haʊs hɪɹ, aɪv hɝd, ðə seɪm əz ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ. aɪ dɪdn hæf maɪn siɪŋ ðə faɪɹwɝks, wən aɪ wɑz hɪɹ bɪfɔɹ."

"Fireworks," Hurin said, nodding. "The Illuminators have built a chapter house here, I've heard, the same as in Tanchico. I didn't half mind seeing the fireworks, when I was here before."

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hi hæd nɛvɝ sin faɪɹwɝks ɪlæbɹəɾ ɪnʌf tə ɹikwaɪɝ ivən wʌn ɪluməneɪɾɝ. hi hæd hɝd ðeɪ oʊnli lɛf tæntʃəkoʊ tə pʊɾ ɑn dɪspleɪz fəɹ ɹulɝz. ɪt wɑz ə stʃɹeɪnʒ pleɪs i wɑz kʌmɪŋ tə.

Rand shook his head. He had never seen fireworks elaborate enough to require even one Illuminator. He had heard they only left Tanchico to put on displays for rulers. It was a strange place he was coming to.

ət ðə tɔl, skwɛɹ ɑɹtʃweɪ ʌv ðə sɪɾi ɡeɪt, tɑvəlɪn ɔɹɾɝd ə hɔlt ən dɪsmaʊntɪd baɪ ə skwɑt stoʊn bɪldɪŋ dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz. ɪt hæɾ æɹoʊ-slɪts ɪnstɛɾ ʌv wɪndoʊz, ən ə hɛvi, aɪɝn-baʊn dɔɹ.

At the tall, square archway of the city gate, Tavolin ordered a halt and dismounted by a squat stone building just inside the walls. It had arrow-slits instead of windows, and a heavy, iron-bound door.

"ə moʊmənt, maɪ lɔɹd ɹænd," ði ɔfəsɝ sɛd. tɔsɪŋ ɪz ɹeɪnz tə wʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz, hi dɪsəpɪɹɾ ɪnsaɪd.

"A moment, my Lord Rand," the officer said. Tossing his reins to one of the soldiers, he disappeared inside.

wɪð ə wɛɹi lʊk ət ðə soʊlʒɝz - ðeɪ sæt ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ɹɪdʒɪdli ɪn tu lɔŋ faɪlz; ɹænd wʌndɝd wʌt ðeɪ wəd də ɪf i ən lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn tʃɹaɪd tə liv - hi tʊk ði ɑpɝtunəɾi tə stʌɾi ðə sɪɾi ðət leɪ bɪfɔɹ hɪm.

With a wary look at the soldiers - they sat their horses rigidly in two long files; Rand wondered what they would do if he and Loial and Hurin tried to leave - he took the opportunity to study the city that lay before him.

kɛɹhin pɹɑpɝ wɑz ə ʃɑɹp kɑntʃɹæs tə ðə keɪɑɾɪk bʌsəl ə ðə fɔɹɡeɪt. bɹɔd, peɪv stʃɹits, waɪɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ðə pipəl ɪn əm sim fjuɝ ðən ðeɪ wɝ, kɹɔst itʃ ʌðɝ ət ɹaɪɾ æŋɡəlz. dʒʌst əz ɪn tʃɹɛmoʊnzin, ðə hɪlz hæd bɪn kɑɹvd ən tɛɹəs tə stʃɹeɪt laɪnz. kloʊz sɪdæn tʃɛɹz, səm wɪð smɔl pɛnəns bɛɹɪŋ ðə sɪdʒəl ʌv ə haʊs, muvd wɪð dɪlɪbɝætnəs, ən kæɹɪdʒɪz ɹoʊl daʊn ðə stʃɹits sloʊli. pipəl wɛn saɪlənli ɪn dɑɹk kloʊðz, wɪð noʊ bɹaɪt kʌlɝz ɪksɛp hɪɹ ən ðəɹ slæʃɪz əkɹɔs ðə bɹɛst ə koʊɾ əɹ dʒɹɛs. ðə mɔɹ slæʃɪz, ðə mɔɹ pɹaʊdli ðə wɛɹɝ muvd, bʌt noʊ wʌn læft, əɹ ivən smaɪld. ðə bɪldɪŋz ɑn ðɛɹ tɛɹəsəz wɝ ɔl ə stoʊn, ən ði ɔɹnəmɛnteɪʃən wɑz stʃɹeɪt-laɪn ən ʃɑɹp-æŋɡəld. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ hɔkɝz əɹ pɛdlɝz ɪn ðə stʃɹits, ən ivən ðə ʃɑps sim səbdud, wɪð oʊnli smɔl saɪnz ən noʊ wɛɹz dɪspleɪɾ aʊtsaɪd.

Cairhien proper was a sharp contrast to the chaotic bustle of the Foregate. Broad, paved streets, wide enough to make the people in them seem fewer than they were, crossed each other at right angles. Just as in Tremonsien, the hills had been carved and terraced to straight lines. Closed sedan chairs, some with small pennants bearing the sigil of a House, moved with deliberateness, and carriages rolled down the streets slowly. People went silently in dark clothes, with no bright colors except here and there slashes across the breast of coat or dress. The more slashes, the more proudly the wearer moved, but no one laughed, or even smiled. The buildings on their terraces were all of stone, and the ornamentation was straight-lined and sharp-angled. There were no hawkers or peddlers in the streets, and even the shops seemed subdued, with only small signs and no wares displayed outside.

hi kəd si ðə ɡɹeɪt taʊɝz mɔɹ klɪɹli, naʊ. skæfəlz ə læʃt poʊlz sɝaʊndəd ðɛm, ən wɝkmɪn swɔɹmd ɑn ðə skæfəldɪŋ, leɪɪŋ nu stoʊnz tə pʊʃ ðə taʊɝz haɪɝ stɪl.

He could see the great towers more clearly, now. Scaffolds of lashed poles surrounded them, and workmen swarmed on the scaffolding, laying new stones to push the towers higher still.

"ðə tɑpləs taʊɝz ə kɛɹhin," lɔɪəl mɝmɝd sædli. "wɛl, ðeɪ wɝ tɔl ɪnʌf tə wɔɹən ðə neɪm, wʌns. wən ði il tʊk kɛɹhin, əbaʊt ðə taɪm jə wɝ bɔɹn, ðə taʊɝz bɝnd, ən kɹækt, ən fɛl. aɪ doʊn si ɛni oʊɡiɝ əmʌŋ ðə stoʊnmeɪsɑnz. noʊ oʊɡiɝ kəd laɪk wɝkɪŋ hɪɹ - ðə kɛɹhinɪn wɑnt wʌt ðeɪ wɑnt, wɪθaʊɾ ɛmbɛlɪʃmənt - bʌt ðəɹ wɝ oʊɡiɝ wən aɪ wɑz hɪɹ bɪfɔɹ."

"The Topless Towers of Cairhien," Loial murmured sadly. "Well, they were tall enough to warrant the name, once. When the Aiel took Cairhien, about the time you were born, the towers burned, and cracked, and fell. I don't see any Ogier among the stonemasons. No Ogier could like working here - the Cairhienin want what they want, without embellishment - but there were Ogier when I was here before."

tɑvəlɪn keɪm aʊt, tʃɹeɪlɪŋ ənʌðɝ ɔfəsɝ ən tu klɝks, wʌn kæɹiɪŋ ə lɑɹdʒ, wʊd-baʊn lɛdʒɝ ən ði ʌðɝ ə tʃɹeɪ wɪð ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪmpləmɛns. ðə fɹʌn ə ði ɔfəsɝz hɛd wɑz ʃeɪvən laɪk tɑvəlɪnz, ðoʊ ədvænsɪŋ bɔlnəs sim tə hæv teɪkən mɔɹ hɛɹ ðən ðə ɹeɪzɝ. boʊθ ɔfəsɝz lʊk fɹəm ɹænd tə ðə tʃɛs hɪɾən baɪ lɔɪəlz stʃɹaɪp blæŋkəɾ ən bæk əɡɛn. niðɝ æskt wʌt wɑz ʌndɝ ðə blæŋkət. tɑvəlɪn hæd lʊkt əɾ ɪɾ ɔfən ɑn ðə weɪ fɹəm tʃɹɛmoʊnzin, bʌɾ i hæd nɛvɝ æskt, iðɝ. ðə bɔldɪŋ mæn lʊkt ət ɹændz sɔɹd, tu, ən pɝst ɪz lɪps fəɹ ən ɪnstənt.

Tavolin came out, trailing another officer and two clerks, one carrying a large, wood-bound ledger and the other a tray with writing implements. The front of the officer's head was shaven like Tavolin's, though advancing baldness seemed to have taken more hair than the razor. Both officers looked from Rand to the chest hidden by Loial's striped blanket and back again. Neither asked what was under the blanket. Tavolin had looked at it often on the way from Tremonsien, but he had never asked, either. The balding man looked at Rand's sword, too, and pursed his lips for an instant.

tɑvəlɪn ɡeɪv ði ʌðɝ ɔfəsɝz neɪm əz ɑsən sændɛɹ, ən ənaʊns laʊdli, "lɔɹd ɹænd ə haʊs ælθɹ, ɪn ændɝ, ən ɪz mæn, kɔl hʊɹɪn, wɪð lɔɪəl, ən oʊɡiɝ ə stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ." ðə klɝk wɪð ðə lɛdʒɝ oʊpən ɪɾ əkɹɔs ɪz tu ɑɹmz, ən sændɛɹ ɹoʊt ðə neɪmz ɪn ə ɹaʊn hænd.

Tavolin gave the other officer's name as Asan Sandair, and announced loudly, "Lord Rand of House al'Thor, in Andor, and his man, called Hurin, with Loial, an Ogier of Stedding Shangtai." The clerk with the ledger opened it across his two arms, and Sandair wrote the names in a round hand.

"ju mʌst ɹɪtɝn tə ðɪs ɡɑɹdhaʊs baɪ ðɪs seɪm aʊɝ təmɑɹoʊ, maɪ lɔɹd," sændɛɹ sɛd, livɪŋ ðə sændɪŋ tə ðə sɛkən klɝk, "ænd ɡɪv ðə neɪm ə ði ɪn wɛɹ jə ɑɹ steɪɪŋ."

"You must return to this guardhouse by this same hour tomorrow, my Lord," Sandair said, leaving the sanding to the second clerk, "and give the name of the inn where you are staying."

ɹænd lʊkt ət ðə steɪd stʃɹits ə kɛɹhin, ðən bæk ət ðə laɪvlinəs ə ðə fɔɹɡeɪt. "kæn jə tɛl mi ðə neɪm ʌv ə ɡʊɾ ɪn aʊt ðɛɹ?" hi nɑɾəd tə ðə fɔɹɡeɪt.

Rand looked at the staid streets of Cairhien, then back at the liveliness of the Foregate. "Can you tell me the name of a good inn out there?" He nodded to the Foregate.

hʊɹɪn meɪɾ ə fɹæntɪk st ən lin kloʊs. "ɪt wəd nɑt bi pɹɑpɝ, lɔɹd ɹænd," hi wɪspɝd. "ɪf jə steɪ ɪn ðə fɔɹɡeɪt, biɪŋ ə lɔɹɾ ən ɔl, ðəl bi ʃʊɹ jə ɑɹ ʌp tə sʌmθɪŋ."

Hurin made a frantic hsst and leaned close. "It would not be proper, Lord Rand," he whispered. "If you stay in the Foregate, being a lord and all, they'll be sure you are up to something."

ɹænd kəd si ðə snɪfɝ wɑz ɹaɪt. sændɛɹz maʊθ hæd dʒɹɑpt oʊpən ən tɑvəlɪnz bɹaʊz hæd ɹɪzən əɾ ɪz kwɛstʃən, ən ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ stɪl wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm ɪntɛnli. hi wɑntəd tə tɛl əm i wɑz nɑt pleɪɪŋ ðɛɹ ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm, bʌɾ ɪnstɛɾ i sɛd, "wi wɪl teɪk ɹumz ɪn ðə sɪɾi. wi kən ɡoʊ naʊ?"

Rand could see the sniffer was right. Sandair's mouth had dropped open and Tavolin's brows had risen at his question, and they were both still watching him intently. He wanted to tell them he was not playing their Great Game, but instead he said, "We will take rooms in the city. We can go now?"

"ʌv kɔɹs, maɪ lɔɹd ɹænd." sændɛɹ meɪɾ ə baʊ. "bʌt . . . ði ɪn?"

"Of course, my Lord Rand." Sandair made a bow. "But . . . the inn?"

"aɪ wɪl lɛt jə noʊ wən wi faɪnd wʌn." ɹænd tɝn ɹɛd, ðən pɔzd. səlinz noʊt kɹækəld ɪn ɪz pɑkət. "aɪ nid tə faɪn ə jʌŋ wʊmən fɹəm kɛɹhin. ðə leɪɾi səlin. ʃiz maɪ eɪdʒ, ən bjuɾəfəl. aɪ doʊnt noʊ hɝ haʊs."

"I will let you know when we find one." Rand turned Red, then paused. Selene's note crackled in his pocket. "I need to find a young woman from Cairhien. The Lady Selene. She is my age, and beautiful. I don't know her House."

sændɛɹ ən tɑvəlɪn ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks, ðən sændɛɹ sɛd, "aɪ wɪl meɪk ɪnkwaɪɝiz, maɪ lɔɹd. pɝhæps əl bi eɪbəl tə tɛl jə sʌmθɪŋ wən jə kʌm təmɑɹoʊ."

Sandair and Tavolin exchanged looks, then Sandair said, "I will make inquiries, my Lord. Perhaps I will be able to tell you something when you come tomorrow."

ɹænd nɑɾəd ən lɛd lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn ɪndə ðə sɪɾi. ðeɪ ətʃɹæktəd lɪɾəl noʊɾəs, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɝ fju ɹaɪɾɝz. ivən lɔɪəl ətʃɹæktəɾ ɔlmoʊs nʌn. ðə pipəl sim nɪɹli ɑstənteɪʃəs əbaʊt maɪndɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊn bɪznəs.

Rand nodded and led Loial and Hurin into the city. They attracted little notice, though there were few riders. Even Loial attracted almost none. The people seemed nearly ostentatious about minding their own business.

"wɪl ðeɪ teɪk ɪt ðə ɹɔŋ weɪ," ɹænd æsk hʊɹɪn, "maɪ æskɪŋ æftɝ səlin?"

"Will they take it the wrong way," Rand asked Hurin, "my asking after Selene?"

"hu kən seɪ wɪð kɛɹhinɪn, lɔɹd ɹænd? ðeɪ sim tə θɪŋk ɛvɹiθɪŋ əz tə də wɪð deɪz deɪmɑɹ."

"Who can say with Cairhienin, Lord Rand? They seem to think everything has to do with Daes Dae'mar."

ɹænd ʃɹʌɡd. hi fɛlt əz ɪf pipəl wɝ lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. hi kəd nɑt weɪt tə ɡɛɾ ə ɡʊd, pleɪn koʊɾ əɡɛn, ən stɑp pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi wʌɾ i wɑz nɑt.

Rand shrugged. He felt as if people were looking at him. He could not wait to get a good, plain coat again, and stop pretending to be what he was not.

hʊɹɪn nu sɛvɹəl ɪnz ɪn ðə sɪɾi, ðoʊ hɪz taɪm ɪn kɛɹhin hæd bɪn spɛn meɪnli ɪn ðə fɔɹɡeɪt. ðə snɪfɝ lɛɾ əm tə wʌn kɔl ðə dɪfɛndɝ ə ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl, ðə saɪn bɛɹɪŋ ə kɹaʊn mæn wɪð ɪz fʊɾ ɑn ənʌðɝ mænz tʃɛst ən ɪz sɔɹɾ ət ðə mænz θɹoʊt. ðə fɛloʊ ɑn ɪz bæk hæd ɹɛd hɛɹ.

Hurin knew several inns in the city, though his time in Cairhien had been spent mainly in the Foregate. The sniffer led them to one called The Defender of the Dragonwall, the sign bearing a crowned man with his foot on another man's chest and his sword at the man's throat. The fellow on his back had red hair.

ə hɑslɝ keɪm tə teɪk ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, dɑɹɾɪŋ kwɪk lʊks ət ɹænd ən ət lɔɪəl wən i θɔɾ i wɑz nɑɾ əbzɝvd. ɹænd toʊl hɪmsɛlf tə stɑp hævɪŋ fænsiz; nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə sɪɾi kəd bi pleɪɪŋ ðɪs ɡeɪm ə ðɛɹz. ən ɪf ðeɪ wɝ, hi wɑz noʊ pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt.

A hostler came to take their horses, darting quick looks at Rand and at Loial when he thought he was not observed. Rand told himself to stop having fancies; not everyone in the city could be playing this Game of theirs. And if they were, he was no part of it.

ðə kɑmən ɹum wɑz nit, wɪð ðə teɪbəlz leɪɾ aʊɾ əz stʃɹɪkli əz ðə sɪɾi, ən oʊnli ə fju pipəl ət ðɛm. ðeɪ ɡlænst ʌp ət ðə nukʌmɝz, ðən bæk tə ðɛɹ waɪn ɪmiɾiətli; ɹænd hæd ðə filɪŋ ðeɪ wɝ stɪl wɑtʃɪŋ, ðoʊ, ən lɪsnɪŋ. ə smɔl faɪɝ bɝn ɪn ðə bɪɡ faɪɝpleɪs, ðoʊ ðə deɪ wɑz wɔɹmɪŋ.

The common room was neat, with the tables laid out as strictly as the city, and only a few people at them. They glanced up at the newcomers, then back to their wine immediately; Rand had the feeling they were still watching, though, and listening. A small fire burned in the big fireplace, though the day was warming.

ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz ə plʌmp, ʌŋtʃwəs mæn wɪð ə sɪŋɡəl stʃɹaɪp ʌv ɡɹin əkɹɔs ɪz dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ koʊt. hi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ əɾ ɪz fɝst saɪɾ ə ðɛm, ən ɹænd wɑz nɑt sɝpɹaɪzd. lɔɪəl, wɪð ðə tʃɛst ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz ʌndɝ ɪts stʃɹaɪp blæŋkət, hæd tə dʌk ɪz hɛd tə meɪk ɪɾ ɪn θɹu ðə dɔɹ, hʊɹɪn wɑz bɝɾənd wɪð ɔl ðɛɹ sæɾəlbæɡz ən bʌndəlz, ən ɪz oʊn ɹɛd koʊt wɑz ə ʃɑɹp kɑntʃɹæs tə ðə sɑmbɝ kʌlɝz ðə pipəl ət ðə teɪbəlz wɔɹ.

The innkeeper was a plump, unctuous man with a single stripe of green across his dark gray coat. He gave a start at his first sight of them, and Rand was not surprised. Loial, with the chest in his arms under its striped blanket, had to duck his head to make it in through the door, Hurin was burdened with all their saddlebags and bundles, and his own red coat was a sharp contrast to the somber colors the people at the tables wore.

ði ɪnkipɝ tʊk ɪn ɹændz koʊɾ ən ɪz sɔɹd, ən ɪz ɔɪli smaɪl keɪm bæk. hi baʊd, wɑʃɪŋ ɪz smuð hænz. "fɝɡɪv mi, maɪ lɔɹd. ɪt wɑz dʒʌs ðət fəɹ ə moʊmən aɪ tʊk jə fəɹ - fɝɡɪv mi. maɪ bɹeɪn ɪz nɑt wʌɾ ɪt wɑz. jə wɪʃ ɹumz, maɪ lɔɹd?" hi æɾəd ənʌðɝ, lɛsɝ baʊ fəɹ lɔɪəl. "aɪ æm kɔl kueɪli, maɪ lɔɹd."

The innkeeper took in Rand's coat and his sword, and his oily smile came back. He bowed, washing his smooth hands. "Forgive me, my Lord. It was just that for a moment I took you for - Forgive me. My brain is not what it was. You wish rooms, my Lord?" He added another, lesser bow for Loial. "I am called Cuale, my Lord."

hi θɔɾ aɪ wɑz il, ɹænd θɔt saʊɝli. hi wɑntəd tə bi ɡɔn fɹəm kɛɹhin. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə wʌn pleɪs ɪŋtʃɹ maɪt faɪn ðɛm. ən səlin hæd sɛd ʃi wəd weɪt fəɹ ɪm ɪn kɛɹhin.

He thought I was Aiel, Rand thought sourly. He wanted to be gone from Cairhien. But it was the one place Ingtar might find them. And Selene had said she would wait for him in Cairhien.

ɪt tʊk ə lɪɾəl taɪm fəɹ ðɛɹ ɹumz tə bi ɹɛɾid, kueɪli ɪkspleɪnɪŋ wɪð tu mɛni smaɪlz ən baʊz ðəɾ ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi tə muv ə bɛd fəɹ lɔɪəl. ɹænd wɑntəɾ əm ɔl tə ʃɛɹ ə ɹum əɡɛn, bʌt bɪtwin ði ɪnkipɝz skændəlaɪz lʊks ən hʊɹɪnz ɪnsɪstəns - "wi hæv tə ʃoʊ ðiz kɛɹhinɪn wi noʊ wʌts ɹaɪɾ əz wɛl əz ðeɪ du, lɔɹd ɹænd" - ðeɪ ɛndəd wɪð tu, wʌn fəɹ ɪm əloʊn, wɪð ə kənɛktɪŋ dɔɹ.

It took a little time for their rooms to be readied, Cuale explaining with too many smiles and bows that it was necessary to move a bed for Loial. Rand wanted them all to share a room again, but between the innkeeper's scandalized looks and Hurin's insistence - "We have to show these Cairhienin we know what's right as well as they do, Lord Rand" - they ended with two, one for him alone, with a connecting door.

ðə ɹumz wɝ mʌtʃ ðə seɪm ɪksɛp ðət ðɛɹz hæd tu bɛdz, wʌn saɪz fəɹ ən oʊɡiɝ, waɪl ɪz hæɾ oʊnli wʌn bɛd, ən ðəɾ ɔlmoʊst əz bɪɡ əz ði ʌðɝ tu, wɪð mæsɪv skwɛɹ poʊsts ðət nɪɹli ɹitʃt ðə silɪŋ. hɪz tɔl-bækt, pæɾəd tʃɛɹ ən ðə wɑʃstænd wɝ skwɛɹ ən mæsɪv, tu, ən ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb stændɪŋ əɡɛnst ɪz wɔl wɑz kɑɹvd ɪn ə hɛvi, ɹɪdʒəd staɪl ðət meɪd ðə θɪŋ lʊk ɹɛɾi ɪnʌf tə fɔl oʊvɝ ɑn hɪm. ə pɛɹ ʌv wɪndoʊz saɪɾɪŋ ɪz bɛd lʊkt aʊɾ ɑn ðə stʃɹit, tu flɔɹz bɪloʊ.

The rooms were much the same except that theirs had two beds, one sized for an Ogier, while his had only one bed, and that almost as big as the other two, with massive square posts that nearly reached the ceiling. His tall-backed, padded chair and the washstand were square and massive, too, and the wardrobe standing against his wall was carved in a heavy, rigid style that made the thing look ready enough to fall over on him. A pair of windows siding his bed looked out on the street, two floors below.

əz sun əz ði ɪnkipɝ lɛft, ɹænd oʊpən ðə dɔɹ ən ədmɪɾəd lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn ɪndə hɪz ɹum. "ðɪs pleɪs nɔz ət mi," hi toʊl ðɛm. "ɛvɹibɑɾi lʊks ət jə əz ɪf ðeɪ θɪŋk jəɹ duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ. aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ bæk tə ðə fɔɹɡeɪt, fəɹ ən aʊɝ ɛniweɪ. ət lis ðə pipəl læf, ðɛɹ. wɪtʃ ə jə ɪz wɪlɪŋ tə teɪk ðə fɝst wɑtʃ ɑn ðə hɔɹn?"

As soon as the innkeeper left, Rand opened the door and admitted Loial and Hurin into his room. "This place gnaws at me," he told them. "Everybody looks at you as if they think you're doing something. I'm going back to the Foregate, for an hour anyway. At least the people laugh, there. Which of you is willing to take the first watch on the Horn?"

"aɪ wɪl steɪ," lɔɪəl sɛd kwɪkli. "aɪd laɪk ə tʃæns tə də ə lɪɾəl ɹɛɾɪŋ. dʒʌs kəz aɪ dɪdn si ɛni oʊɡiɝ dʌz nɑt min ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ stoʊnmeɪsɑnz daʊn fɹəm stɛɾɪŋ tsəfu. ɪts nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ðə sɪɾi."

"I will stay," Loial said quickly. "I'd like a chance to do a little reading. Just because I didn't see any Ogier does not mean there are no stonemasons down from Stedding Tsofu. It is not far from the city."

"aɪd θɪŋk jə wəd wɑnə mit ðɛm."

"I'd think you would want to meet them."

"ɑ . . . noʊ, ɹænd. ðeɪ æskt ɪnʌf kwɛstʃənz ðə læs taɪm əbaʊt waɪ aɪ wɑz aʊtsaɪɾ əloʊn əz ɪt wɑz. ɪf ðeɪv hæd wɝd fɹəm stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ. . . . wɛl, əl dʒʌst ɹɛs hɪɹ ən ɹɛd, aɪ θɪŋk."

"Ah . . . no, Rand. They asked enough questions the last time about why I was outside alone as it was. If they've had word from Stedding Shangtai. . . . Well, I will just rest here and read, I think."

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hi ɔfən fɝɡɑt ðət lɔɪəl hæd ɹʌn əweɪ fɹəm hoʊm, ɪn ɪfɛkt, tə si ðə wɝld. "wʌɾ əbaʊt ju, hʊɹɪn? ðɛɹz mjuzɪk ɪn ðə fɔɹɡeɪt, ən pipəl læfɪŋ. əl weɪdʒɝ noʊ wʌn ɪz pleɪɪŋ deɪz deɪmɑɹ ðɛɹ."

Rand shook his head. He often forgot that Loial had run away from home, in effect, to see the world. "What about you, Hurin? There's music in the Foregate, and people laughing. I'll wager no one is playing Daes Dae'mar there."

"aɪ wəd nɑt bi soʊ sɝɾən ə ðət maɪsɛlf, lɔɹd ɹænd. ɪn ɛni keɪs, aɪ θæŋk jə fəɹ ði ɪnvɪteɪʃən, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk nɑt. ðɛɹz soʊ mɛni faɪts - ən kɪlɪŋz, tu - ɪn fɔɹɡeɪt, ðəɾ ɪt stɪŋks, ɪf jə noʊ wʌɾ aɪ min. nɑt ðət ðəɹ laɪkli tə bɑðɝ ə lɔɹd, ʌv kɔɹs; ðə soʊlʒɝz wəd bi daʊn ɑn əm ɪf ðeɪ dɪd. bʌɾ ɪf ɪt plizɪz ju, aɪ wəd laɪk tə hæv ə dʒɹɪŋk ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum."

"I would not be so certain of that myself, Lord Rand. In any case, I thank you for the invitation, but I think not. There's so many fights - and killings, too - in Foregate, that it stinks, if you know what I mean. Not that they're likely to bother a lord, of course; the soldiers would be down on them if they did. But if it pleases you, I would like to have a drink in the common room."

"hʊɹɪn, jə doʊnt nid maɪ pɝmɪʃən fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ. jə noʊ ðæt."

"Hurin, you don't need my permission for anything. You know that."

"æz jə seɪ, maɪ lɔɹd." ðə snɪfɝ ɡeɪv ə sədʒɛstʃən ʌv ə baʊ.

"As you say, my Lord." The sniffer gave a suggestion of a bow.

ɹænd tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt liv kɛɹhin sun, hʊɹɪn wəd bi boʊɪŋ ən skɹeɪpɪŋ lɛft ən ɹaɪt. ən ɪf mæt ən pɛɹɪn sɔ ðæt, ðeɪ wəd nɛvɝ lɛɾ ɪm fɝɡɛɾ ɪt. "aɪ hoʊp nʌθɪŋ dɪleɪz ɪŋtʃɹ. ɪf i dʌzn kʌm kwɪkli, wɪl əv tə teɪk ðə hɔɹn bæk tə fæl dæɹə aʊɝsɛlvz." hi tʌtʃt səlinz noʊt θɹu hɪz koʊt. "wi wɪl əv tə. lɔɪəl, əl kʌm bæk soʊ jə kən si səm ə ðə sɪɾi."

Rand took a deep breath. If they did not leave Cairhien soon, Hurin would be bowing and scraping left and right. And if Mat and Perrin saw that, they would never let him forget it. "I hope nothing delays Ingtar. If he doesn't come quickly, we'll have to take the Horn back to Fal Dara ourselves." He touched Selene's note through his coat. "We will have to. Loial, I'll come back so you can see some of the city."

"aɪd ɹæðɝ nɑt ɹɪsk ɪt," lɔɪəl sɛd.

"I'd rather not risk it," Loial said.

hʊɹɪn əkʌmpənid ɹænd daʊnstɛɹz. əz sun əz ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə kɑmən ɹum, kueɪli wɑz boʊɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ɹænd, pʊʃɪŋ ə tʃɹeɪ ət hɪm. θɹi foʊldəɾ ən sil pɑɹtʃməns leɪ ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪ. ɹænd tʊk ðɛm, sɪns ðət wɑz wʌt ði ɪnkipɝ sim tə ɪntɛnd. ðeɪ wɝ ə faɪn ɡɹeɪɾ ə pɑɹtʃmənt, sɑft ən smuð tə hɪz tʌtʃ. ɪkspɛnsɪv.

Hurin accompanied Rand downstairs. As soon as they reached the common room, Cuale was bowing in front of Rand, pushing a tray at him. Three folded and sealed parchments lay on the tray. Rand took them, since that was what the innkeeper seemed to intend. They were a fine grade of parchment, soft and smooth to his touch. Expensive.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ ðiz?" hi æskt.

"What are these?" he asked.

kueɪli baʊɾ əɡɛn. "ɪnvɪteɪʃənz, ʌv kɔɹs, maɪ lɔɹd. fɹəm θɹi ʌv ðə noʊbəl haʊsəz." hi baʊd hɪmsɛlf əweɪ.

Cuale bowed again. "Invitations, of course, my Lord. From three of the noble Houses." He bowed himself away.

"hu wəd sɛn mi ɪnvɪteɪʃənz?" ɹænd tɝn əm oʊvɝ ɪn ɪz hænd. nʌn ə ðə mɛn ət ðə teɪbəlz lʊkt ʌp, bʌɾ i hæd ðə filɪŋ ðeɪ wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ dʒʌs ðə seɪm. hi dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə silz. nʌn wɑz ðə kɹɛsən mun ən stɑɹz səlin hæd juzd. "hu wəd noʊ aɪ wɑz hɪɹ?"

"Who would send me invitations?" Rand turned them over in his hand. None of the men at the tables looked up, but he had the feeling they were watching just the same. He did not recognize the seals. None was the crescent moon and stars Selene had used. "Who would know I was here?"

"ɛvɹiwʌn baɪ naʊ, lɔɹd ɹænd," hʊɹɪn sɛd kwaɪətli. hi sim tə fil aɪz wɑtʃɪŋ, tu. "ðə ɡɑɹdz ət ðə ɡeɪt wəd nɑt kip ðɛɹ maʊðz kloʊzd əbaʊɾ ən aʊtlæn lɔɹd kʌmɪŋ tə kɛɹhin. ðə hɑslɝ, ði ɪnkipɝ . . . ɛvɹibɑɾi tɛlz wʌt ðeɪ noʊ wɛɹ ðeɪ θɪŋk ɪɾəl də ðɛm ðə moʊst ɡʊd, maɪ lɔɹd."

"Everyone by now, Lord Rand," Hurin said quietly. He seemed to feel eyes watching, too. "The guards at the gate would not keep their mouths closed about an outland lord coming to Cairhien. The hostler, the innkeeper . . . everybody tells what they know where they think it will do them the most good, my Lord."

wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs, ɹænd tʊk tu stɛps ən hɝl ði ɪnvɪteɪʃənz ɪndə ðə faɪɝ. ðeɪ kɑɾ ɪmiɾiətli. "aɪ æm nɑt pleɪɪŋ deɪz deɪmɑɹ," hi sɛd, laʊdli ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn tə hɪɹ. nɑɾ ivən kueɪli lʊkt ət hɪm. "aɪv nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð jəɹ ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm. aɪm dʒʌs hɪɹ tə weɪt fəɹ səm fɹɛnz."

With a grimace, Rand took two steps and hurled the invitations into the fire. They caught immediately. "I am not playing Daes Dae'mar," he said, loudly enough for everyone to hear. Not even Cuale looked at him. "I've nothing to do with your Great Game. I am just here to wait for some friends."

hʊɹɪn kɑɾ ɪz ɑɹm. "pliz, lɔɹd ɹænd." hɪz vɔɪs wɑz ən ɝdʒənt wɪspɝ. "pliz doʊn də ðəɾ əɡɛn."

Hurin caught his arm. "Please, Lord Rand." His voice was an urgent whisper. "Please don't do that again."

"əɡɛn? jə ɹɪli θɪŋk əl ɹəsiv mɔɹ?"

"Again? You really think I'll receive more?"

"aɪm sɝɾən. laɪt, bʌt jə maɪn mi ʌv ðə taɪm teɪvə ɡɑt soʊ mæɾ əɾ ə hɔɹnɪt bʌzɪŋ ɹaʊn ɪz ɪɹz, hi kɪk ðə nɛst. juv laɪkli dʒʌs kənvɪnst ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə ɹum jə ɑɹ ɪn səm dip pɑɹɾ ə ðə ɡeɪm. ɪt mʌs bi dip, əz ðəl si ɪt, ɪf jə dɪnaɪ pleɪɪŋ əɾ ɔl. ɛvɹi lɔɹɾ ən leɪɾi ɪn kɛɹhin pleɪz ɪt." ðə snɪfɝ ɡlænst ət ði ɪnvɪteɪʃənz, kɝlɪŋ blækli ɪn ðə faɪɝ, ən wɪnst. "æn juv ʃʊɹli meɪɾ ɛnəmiz ə θɹi haʊsəz. nɑt ɡɹeɪt haʊsəz, əɹ ðeɪd nɑɾ əv muv soʊ kwɪkli, bʌt stɪl noʊbəl. jə mʌst ænsɝ ɛni mɔɹ ɪnvɪteɪʃənz jə ɹəsiv, maɪ lɔɹd. dɪklaɪn ɪf jəl - ðoʊ ðəl ɹɛd θɪŋz ɪndə huz ɪnvɪteɪʃənz jə də dɪklaɪn. ən ɪndə huz jə æksɛpt. ʌv kɔɹs, ɪf jə dɪklaɪn əm ɔl, əɹ æksɛpt əm ɔl - "

"I'm certain. Light, but you mind me of the time Teva got so mad at a hornet buzzing round his ears, he kicked the nest. You've likely just convinced everyone in the room you are in some deep part of the Game. It must be deep, as they'll see it, if you deny playing at all. Every lord and lady in Cairhien plays it." The sniffer glanced at the invitations, curling blackly in the fire, and winced. "And you have surely made enemies of three Houses. Not great Houses, or they'd not have moved so quickly, but still noble. You must answer any more invitations you receive, my Lord. Decline if you will - though they'll read things into whose invitations you do decline. And into whose you accept. Of course, if you decline them all, or accept them all - "

"aɪl əv noʊ pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt," ɹænd sɛd kwaɪətli. "wi ɑɹ livɪŋ kɛɹhin əz sun əz wi kæn." hi θɹʌst ɪz fɪsts ɪndə hɪz koʊt pɑkəts, ən fɛl səlinz noʊt kɹʌmpəl. pʊlɪŋ ɪɾ aʊt, hi smuðd ɪɾ ɑn ɪz koʊt fɹʌnt. "æz sun əz wi kæn," hi mʌɾɝd, pʊɾɪŋ ɪt bæk ɪn ɪz pɑkəɾ əɡɛn. "hæv jəɹ dʒɹɪŋk, hʊɹɪn."

"I'll have no part of it," Rand said quietly. "We are leaving Cairhien as soon as we can." He thrust his fists into his coat pockets, and felt Selene's note crumple. Pulling it out, he smoothed it on his coat front. "As soon as we can," he muttered, putting it back in his pocket again. "Have your drink, Hurin."

hi stɔkt aʊɾ æŋɡɹəli, nɑt ʃʊɹ wɛðɝ i wɑz æŋɡɹi wɪð hɪmsɛlf, əɹ wɪð kɛɹhin ən ɪts ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm, əɹ səlin fəɹ vænɪʃɪŋ, əɹ mɔɪɹeɪn. ʃi hæd stɑɹɾəd ɪɾ ɔl, stilɪŋ ɪz koʊts ən ɡɪvɪŋ ɪm ə lɔɹdz kloʊðz ɪnstɛd. ivən naʊ ðəɾ i kɔl hɪmsɛlf fɹi ʌv ðɛm, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ stɪl mænədʒ tə ɪntɝfɪɹ ɪn ɪz laɪf, ən wɪθaʊɾ ivən biɪŋ ðɛɹ.

He stalked out angrily, not sure whether he was angry with himself, or with Cairhien and its Great Game, or Selene for vanishing, or Moiraine. She had started it all, stealing his coats and giving him a lord's clothes instead. Even now that he called himself free of them, an Aes Sedai still managed to interfere in his life, and without even being there.

hi wɛn bæk θɹu ðə seɪm ɡeɪt baɪ wɪtʃ i hæɾ ɛntɝd ðə sɪɾi, sɪns ðət wɑz ðə weɪ hi nu. ə mæn stændɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə ɡɑɹdhaʊs tʊk noʊɾ ə hɪm - hɪz bɹaɪt koʊt mɑɹkt ɪm aʊt, əz wɛl əz ɪz haɪɾ əmʌŋ ðə kɛɹhinɪn - ən hɝiɾ ɪnsaɪd, bʌt ɹænd dɪd nɑt noʊɾəs. ðə læftɝ ən mjuzɪk ə ðə fɔɹɡeɪt wɝ pʊlɪŋ ɪm ɑn.

He went back through the same gate by which he had entered the city, since that was the way he knew. A man standing in front of the guardhouse took note of him - his bright coat marked him out, as well as his height among the Cairhienin - and hurried inside, but Rand did not notice. The laughter and music of the Foregate were pulling him on.

ɪf ɪz ɡoʊld-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɹɛd koʊt meɪɾ ɪm stæn aʊɾ ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz, ɪt fɪt ɹaɪɾ ɪndə ðə fɔɹɡeɪt. mɛni ʌv ðə mɛn mɪlɪŋ θɹu ðə kɹaʊɾəd stʃɹits wɝ dʒɹɛs dʒʌst əz dɑɹkli əz ðoʊz ɪn ðə sɪɾi, bʌt dʒʌst əz mɛni wɔɹ koʊts ə ɹɛd, əɹ blu, əɹ ɡɹin, əɹ ɡoʊld - səm bɹaɪɾ ɪnʌf tə bi ə tɪŋkɝz kloʊðz - ən ivən mɔɹ ə ðə wɪmən hæɾ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd dʒɹɛsəz ən kʌlɝd skɑɹvz əɹ ʃɔlz. moʊst ə ðə faɪnɝi wɑz tæɾɝd ən ɪl-fɪɾɪŋ, əz ɪf meɪd fəɹ sʌmwʌn ɛls ɝɪdʒənəli, bʌɾ ɪf səm ə ðoʊz u wɔɹ ɪɾ aɪɾ ɪz faɪn koʊt, nʌn sim tə teɪk ɪɾ əmɪs.

If his gold-embroidered red coat made him stand out inside the walls, it fit right into the Foregate. Many of the men milling through the crowded streets were dressed just as darkly as those in the city, but just as many wore coats of red, or blue, or green, or gold - some bright enough to be a Tinker's clothes - and even more of the women had embroidered dresses and colored scarves or shawls. Most of the finery was tattered and ill-fitting, as if made for someone else originally, but if some of those who wore it eyed his fine coat, none seemed to take it amiss.

wʌns i hæd tə stɑp fəɹ ənʌðɝ pɹəsɛʃən ə dʒaɪən pʌpəts. waɪl ðə dʒɹʌmɝz bit ðɛɹ tæmbɔɝz ən keɪpɝd, ə pɪɡ-feɪs tʃɹɑlɑk wɪð tʌsks fɔɾ ə mæn ɪn ə kɹaʊn. æftɝ ə fju dɛsəltɔɹi bloʊz, ðə tʃɹɑlɑk kəlæps tə læftɝ ən tʃɪɹz fɹəm ði ɔnlʊkɝz.

Once he had to stop for another procession of giant puppets. While the drummers beat their tambours and capered, a pig-faced Trolloc with tusks fought a man in a crown. After a few desultory blows, the Trolloc collapsed to laughter and cheers from the onlookers.

ɹænd ɡɹʌntɪd. ðeɪ doʊn daɪ soʊ izəli əz ðæt.

Rand grunted. They don't die so easily as that.

hi ɡlænst ɪndə wʌn ə ðə lɑɹdʒ, wɪndoʊləs bɪldɪŋz, stɑpɪŋ tə lʊk θɹu ðə dɔɹ. tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, ɪt sim tə bi wʌn hjudʒ ɹum, oʊpən tə ðə skaɪ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ən laɪnd wɪð bælkəniz, wɪð ə lɑɹdʒ deɪz ət wʌn ɛnd. hi hæd nɛvɝ sin əɹ hɝɾ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ɪt. pipəl dʒæm ðə bælkəniz ən ðə flɔɹ wɑtʃɪŋ pipəl pɝfɔɹm ɑn ðə deɪz. hi pikt ɪndə ʌðɝz əz i pæs ðɛm, ən sɔ dʒʌɡəlɝz, ən mjuzɪʃənz, ɛni nʌmbɝ ə tʌmblɝz, ən ivən ə ɡlimən, wɪð ɪz kloʊk ə pætʃəz, dɪkleɪmɪŋ ə stɔɹi fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn ɪn sɑnɝəs-vɔɪs haɪ tʃænt.

He glanced into one of the large, windowless buildings, stopping to look through the door. To his surprise, it seemed to be one huge room, open to the sky in the middle and lined with balconies, with a large dais at one end. He had never seen or heard of anything like it. People jammed the balconies and the floor watching people perform on the dais. He peeked into others as he passed them, and saw jugglers, and musicians, any number of tumblers, and even a gleeman, with his cloak of patches, declaiming a story from The Great Hunt of the Horn in sonorous-voice High Chant.

ðət meɪɾ ɪm θɪŋk ə tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn, ən i hɝiɾ ɑn. mɛmɹiz ə tɑm wɝ ɔlweɪz sæd. tɑm hæd bɪn ə fɹɛnd. ə fɹɛn u hæd daɪd fəɹ hɪm. waɪl aɪ ɹæn əweɪ ən lɛɾ ɪm daɪ.

That made him think of Thom Merrilin, and he hurried on. Memories of Thom were always sad. Thom had been a friend. A friend who had died for him. While I ran away and let him die.

ɪn ənʌðɝ ə ðə bɪɡ stʃɹʌktʃɝz, ə wʊmən ɪn vəlumənəs waɪt ɹoʊbz əpɪɹd tə meɪk θɪŋz vænɪʃ fɹəm wʌn bæskəɾ ən əpɪɹ ɪn ənʌðɝ, ðən dɪsəpɪɹ fɹəm əɹ hænz ɪn ɡɹeɪt pʌfs ə smoʊk. ðə kɹaʊd wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ uɾ ən eɪh laʊdli.

In another of the big structures, a woman in voluminous white robes appeared to make things vanish from one basket and appear in another, then disappear from her hands in great puffs of smoke. The crowd watching her oohed and aahed loudly.

"tu kɑpɝz, maɪ ɡʊd lɔɹd," ə ɹæɾi lɪɾəl mæn ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ sɛd. "tu kɑpɝz tə si ði ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"Two coppers, my good Lord," a ratty little man in the doorway said. "Two coppers to see the Aes Sedai."

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk soʊ." ɹænd ɡlæns bæk ət ðə wʊmən. ə waɪt dʌv hæɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn əɹ hænz. ɛɛs sədaɪ? "noʊ." hi ɡeɪv ðə ɹæɾi mæn ə smɔl baʊ ən lɛft.

"I don't think so." Rand glanced back at the woman. A white dove had appeared in her hands. Aes Sedai? "No." He gave the ratty man a small bow and left.

hi wɑz meɪkɪŋ ɪz weɪ θɹu ðə θɹɔŋ, wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt tə si nɛkst, wən ə dip vɔɪs, əkʌmpənid baɪ ðə plʌkɪŋ ʌv ə hɑɹp, dʒɹɪftəɾ aʊt fɹəm ə dɔɹweɪ wɪð ðə saɪn ʌv ə dʒʌɡəlɝ oʊvɝ ɪt.

He was making his way through the throng, wondering what to see next, when a deep voice, accompanied by the plucking of a harp, drifted out from a doorway with the sign of a juggler over it.

". . . koʊl bloʊz ðə wɪn daʊn ʃɑɹə pæs; koʊld laɪz ðə ɡɹeɪv ənmɑɹkt. jɛɾ ɛvɹi jɪɹ ət sʌndeɪ, əpɑn ðoʊz paɪl stoʊnz əpɪɹz ə sɪŋɡəl ɹoʊz, wʌn kɹɪstəl tɪɹdʒɹɑp laɪk du əpɑn ðə pɛɾəlz, leɪd baɪ ðə fɛɹ hæn ə dʌnsaɪnɪn, fəɹ ʃi kips fæs tə ðə bɑɹɡən meɪd baɪ ɹəɡoʊʃ iɡəl-aɪ."

". . . cold blows the wind down Shara Pass; cold lies the grave unmarked. Yet every year at Sunday, upon those piled stones appears a single rose, one crystal teardrop like dew upon the petals, laid by the fair hand of Dunsinin, for she keeps fast to the bargain made by Rogosh Eagle-eye."

ðə vɔɪs dʒɹu ɹænd laɪk ə ɹoʊp. hi pʊʃt θɹu ðə dɔɹweɪ əz əplɔz ɹoʊz wɪðɪn.

The voice drew Rand like a rope. He pushed through the doorway as applause rose within.

"tu kɑpɝz, maɪ ɡʊd lɔɹd," sɛɾ ə ɹæt-feɪs mæn u cʊɾə bɪn twɪn tə ði ʌðɝ. "tu kɑpɝz tə si - "

"Two coppers, my good Lord," said a rat-faced man who could have been twin to the other. "Two coppers to see - "

ɹænd dʌɡ aʊt səm kɔɪnz ən θɹʌst əm ət ðə mæn. hi wɔkt ɑn ɪn ə deɪz, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə mæn boʊɪŋ ɑn ðə deɪz tə ðə klæpɪŋ ə hɪz lɪsənɝz, kɹeɪɾəlɪŋ ɪz hɑɹp ɪn wʌn ɑɹm ən wɪð ði ʌðɝ spɹɛɾɪŋ ɪz pætʃ-kʌvɝd kloʊk əz ɪf tə tʃɹæp ɔl ðə saʊn ðeɪ meɪd. hi wɑz ə tɔl mæn, læŋki ən nɑt jʌŋ, wɪð lɔŋ mʌstæʃɪz əz waɪɾ əz ðə hɛɹ ɑn ɪz hɛd. ən wən i stʃɹeɪɾənd ən sɔ ɹænd, ði aɪz ðət waɪɾənd wɝ ʃɑɹp ən blu.

Rand dug out some coins and thrust them at the man. He walked on in a daze, staring at the man bowing on the dais to the clapping of his listeners, cradling his harp in one arm and with the other spreading his patch-covered cloak as if to trap all the sound they made. He was a tall man, lanky and not young, with long mustaches as white as the hair on his head. And when he straightened and saw Rand, the eyes that widened were sharp and blue.

"tɑm." ɹændz wɪspɝ wɑz lɔst ɪn ðə nɔɪz ə ðə kɹaʊd.

"Thom." Rand's whisper was lost in the noise of the crowd.

hoʊldɪŋ ɹændz aɪ, tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn nɑɾəd slaɪtli təwɔɹɾ ə smɔl dɔɹ bɪsaɪd ðə deɪz. ðən i wɑz boʊɪŋ əɡɛn, smaɪlɪŋ ən bæskɪŋ ɪn ði əplɔz.

Holding Rand's eye, Thom Merrilin nodded slightly toward a small door beside the dais. Then he was bowing again, smiling and basking in the applause.

ɹænd meɪɾ ɪz weɪ tə ðə dɔɹ ən θɹu ɪt. ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə smɔl hɔlweɪ, wɪð θɹi stɛps liɾɪŋ ʌp tə ðə deɪz. ɪn ði ʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən fɹəm ðə deɪz ɹænd kəd si ə dʒʌɡəlɝ pɹæktəsɪŋ wɪð kʌlɝd bɔlz, ən sɪks tʌmblɝz lɪmbɝɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz.

Rand made his way to the door and through it. It was only a small hallway, with three steps leading up to the dais. In the other direction from the dais Rand could see a juggler practicing with colored balls, and six tumblers limbering themselves.

tɑm əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðə stɛps, lɪmpɪŋ əz ðoʊ hɪz ɹaɪt lɛɡ dɪd nɑt bɛn əz wɛl əz ɪt hæd. hi aɪd ðə dʒʌɡəlɝ ən ðə tʌmblɝz, blu aʊɾ ɪz mʌstæʃɪz dɪsdeɪnfəli, ən tɝn tə ɹænd. "ɔl ðeɪ wɑnə hɪɹ ɪz ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn. jə wəd θɪŋk, wɪð ðə nuz fɹəm hæɾən mɝk ən sɑldɑiə, wʌn ə ðɛm wəɾ æsk fəɹ ðə kæɹæəθən saɪkəl. wɛl, meɪbi nɑt ðæt, bʌɾ aɪd peɪ maɪsɛlf tə tɛl sʌmθɪŋ ɛls." hi lʊkt ɹænd ʌp ən daʊn. "ju lʊk əz ɪf jəɹ duɪŋ wɛl, bɔɪ." hi fɪŋɡɝd ɹændz kɑlɝ ən pɝst ɪz lɪps. "vɛɹi wɛl."

Thom appeared on the steps, limping as though his right leg did not bend as well as it had. He eyed the juggler and the tumblers, blew out his mustaches disdainfully, and turned to Rand. "All they want to hear is The Great Hunt of the Horn. You would think, with the news from Haddon Mirk and Saldaea, one of them would ask for The Karaethon Cycle. Well, maybe not that, but I'd pay myself to tell something else." He looked Rand up and down. "You look as if you're doing well, boy." He fingered Rand's collar and pursed his lips. "Very well."

ɹænd kəd nɑt hɛlp læfɪŋ. "aɪ lɛft waɪtbɹɪdʒ ʃʊɹ jə wɝ dɛd. mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd jə wɝ stɪl əlaɪv, bʌɾ aɪ. . . . laɪt, tɑm, ɪts ɡʊd tə si jə əɡɛn! aɪ ʃʊɾə ɡɔn bæk tə hɛlp ju."

Rand could not help laughing. "I left Whitebridge sure you were dead. Moiraine said you were still alive, but I. . . . Light, Thom, it's good to see you again! I should have gone back to help you."

"bɪɡɝ ful ɪf jə hæd, bɔɪ. ðət feɪd" - hi lʊkt ɝaʊnd; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ, bʌɾ i loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs ɛniweɪ - "hæd noʊ ɪntʃɹəst ɪn mi. ɪt lɛf mi ə lɪɾəl pɹɛzən ʌv ə stɪf lɛɡ ən ɹæn ɔf æftɝ jə ən mæt. ɔl jə cʊɾə dʌn wɑz daɪ." hi pɔzd, lʊkɪŋ θɔtfəl. "mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾ aɪ wɑz stɪl əlaɪv, dɪd ʃi? ɪz ʃi wɪð ju, ðɛn?"

"Bigger fool if you had, boy. That Fade" - he looked around; there was no one close enough to hear, but he lowered his voice anyway - "had no interest in me. It left me a little present of a stiff leg and ran off after you and Mat. All you could have done was die." He paused, looking thoughtful. "Moiraine said I was still alive, did she? Is she with you, then?"

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, tɑm sim dɪsəpɔɪntɪd.

Rand shook his head. To his surprise, Thom seemed disappointed.

"tu bæd, ɪn ə weɪ. ʃiz ə faɪn wʊmən, ivən ɪf ʃi ɪz. . . ." hi lɛft ɪɾ ənsɛd. "soʊ ɪt wɑz mæt əɹ pɛɹɪn ʃi wɑz æftɝ. aɪ woʊn æsk wɪtʃ. ðeɪ wɝ ɡʊd bɔɪz, ən aɪ doʊnt wɑnə noʊ." ɹænd ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli, ən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt wən tɑm fɪkst ɪm wɪð ə boʊni fɪŋɡɝ. "wʌɾ aɪ də wɑnə noʊ ɪz, dʒju stɪl əv maɪ hɑɹp ən flut? aɪ wɑn əm bæk, bɔɪ. wʌɾ aɪ hæv naʊ ɑɹ nɑt fɪt fəɹ ə pɪɡ tə pleɪ."

"Too bad, in a way. She's a fine woman, even if she is. . . ." He left it unsaid. "So it was Mat or Perrin she was after. I won't ask which. They were good boys, and I don't want to know." Rand shifted uneasily, and gave a start when Thom fixed him with a bony finger. "What I do want to know is, do you still have my harp and flute? I want them back, boy. What I have now are not fit for a pig to play."

"aɪ hæv ðɛm, tɑm. əl bɹɪŋ əm tə ju, aɪ pɹɑməs. aɪ kæn bɪliv jə ɑɹ əlaɪv. ən aɪ kæn bɪliv jə ɑɹən ɪn ɪljən. ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn sɛɾɪŋ aʊt. ðə pɹaɪz fəɹ ðə bɛs tɛlɪŋ ə ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn. jə wɝ daɪɪŋ tə ɡoʊ."

"I have them, Thom. I'll bring them to you, I promise. I can't believe you are alive. And I can't believe you aren't in Illian. The Great Hunt setting out. The prize for the best telling of The Great Hunt of the Horn. You were dying to go."

tɑm snɔɹɾɪd. "æftɝ waɪtbɹɪdʒ? laɪkli aɪd daɪ ɪf aɪ dɪd ɡoʊ. ivən ɪf aɪ cʊɾə ɹitʃt ðə boʊt bɪfɔɹ ɪt seɪld, doʊmən ən ɪz hoʊl kɹu wəd bi spɹɛɾɪŋ ðə teɪl ɔl oʊvɝ ɪljən əbaʊt haʊ aɪ wɑz biɪŋ tʃeɪs baɪ tʃɹɑləks. ɪf ðeɪ sɔ ðə feɪd, əɹ hɝɾ ʌv ɪt, bɪfɔɹ doʊmən kʌɾ ɪz laɪnz. . . . moʊst ɪliɑnɝz θɪŋk tʃɹɑləks ən feɪdz ɑɹ feɪbəlz, bʌɾ ɪnʌf ʌðɝz maɪt wɑnə noʊ waɪ ə mæn wɑz pɝsud baɪ ðɛm tə meɪk ɪljən sʌmwʌt mɔɹ ðən ənkʌmftəɹbəl."

Thom snorted. "After Whitebridge? Likely I'd die if I did go. Even if I could have reached the boat before it sailed, Domon and his whole crew would be spreading the tale all over Illian about how I was being chased by Trollocs. If they saw the Fade, or heard of it, before Domon cut his lines. . . . Most Illianers think Trollocs and Fades are fables, but enough others might want to know why a man was pursued by them to make Illian somewhat more than uncomfortable."

"tɑm, aɪ hæv soʊ mʌtʃ tə tɛl ju."

"Thom, I have so much to tell you."

ðə ɡlimən kʌɾ ɪm ɔf. "leɪɾɝ, bɔɪ." hi wɑz ɪkstʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɡlɛɹz daʊn ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə hɔl wɪð ðə nɛɹoʊ-feɪs mæn fɹəm ðə dɔɹ. "ɪf aɪ doʊnt ɡoʊ bæk ən tɛl ənʌðɝ, hɪl noʊ daʊt sɛn ðə dʒʌɡəlɝ aʊt, ən ðət lɑt wɪl tɛɹ ðə hɔl daʊn ɝaʊn əɹ hɛdz. jə kʌm tə ðə bʌntʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪps, dʒʌs bɪɑn ðə dʒæŋɡaɪ ɡeɪt. aɪ hæv ə ɹum ðɛɹ. ɛniwʌn kən tɛl jə wɛɹ tə faɪn ɪt. əl bi ðəɹ ɪn ənʌðɝ aʊɝ əɹ soʊ. wʌn mɔɹ teɪl wɪl əv tə sæɾəsfaɪ ðɛm." hi stɑɹɾəd bæk ʌp ðə stɛps, flɪŋɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, "æn bɹɪŋ maɪ hɑɹp ən maɪ flut!"

The gleeman cut him off. "Later, boy." He was exchanging glares down the length of the hall with the narrow-faced man from the door. "If I don't go back and tell another, he will no doubt send the juggler out, and that lot will tear the hall down around our heads. You come to The Bunch of Grapes, just beyond the Jangai Gate. I have a room there. Anyone can tell you where to find it. I'll be there in another hour or so. One more tale will have to satisfy them." He started back up the steps, flinging over his shoulder, "And bring my harp and my flute!"


tʃæptɝ twɛntisɪks


CHAPTER 26

dɪskɔɹd


Discord

ɹænd dɑɹɾɪd θɹu ðə kɑmən ɹum ə ðə dɪfɛndɝ ə ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl ən hɝiɾ əpstɛɹz, ɡɹɪnɪŋ ət ðə stɑɹɾəld lʊk ði ɪnkipɝ hæd ɡɪvən hɪm. ɹænd wɑntəd tə ɡɹɪn əɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. tɑmz əlaɪv!

Rand darted through the common room of The Defender of the Dragonwall and hurried upstairs, grinning at the startled look the innkeeper had given him. Rand wanted to grin at everything. Thom's alive!

hi flʌŋ oʊpən ðə dɔɹ tə hɪz ɹum ən wɛn stʃɹeɪt tə ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb.

He flung open the door to his room and went straight to the wardrobe.

lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn pʊt ðɛɹ hɛdz ɪn fɹəm ði ʌðɝ ɹum, boʊθ ɪn ðɛɹ ʃɝtslivz ən wɪð paɪps ɪn ðɛɹ tiθ tʃɹeɪlɪŋ θɪn stʃɹimz ə smoʊk.

Loial and Hurin put their heads in from the other room, both in their shirtsleeves and with pipes in their teeth trailing thin streams of smoke.

"hæz sʌmθɪŋ hæpənd, lɔɹd ɹænd?" hʊɹɪn æskt æŋkʃəsli.

"Has something happened, Lord Rand?" Hurin asked anxiously.

ɹænd slʌŋ ðə bʌndəl meɪd fɹəm tɑmz kloʊk ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "ðə bɛs θɪŋ ðət kʊd, nɛks tə ɪŋtʃɹ kʌmɪŋ. tɑm mɛɹɪlɪnz əlaɪv. ən hiz hɪɹ, ɪn kɛɹhin."

Rand slung the bundle made from Thom's cloak on his shoulder. "The best thing that could, next to Ingtar coming. Thom Merrilin's alive. And he's here, in Cairhien."

"ðə ɡlimən jə toʊl mi əbaʊt?" lɔɪəl sɛd. "ðæɾ ɪz wʌndɝfəl, ɹænd. aɪ wəd laɪk tə mit hɪm."

"The gleeman you told me about?" Loial said. "That is wonderful, Rand. I would like to meet him."

"ðɛn kʌm wɪð mi, ɪf hʊɹɪnz wɪlɪŋ tə kip wɑtʃ əwaɪl."

"Then come with me, if Hurin's willing to keep watch awhile."

"ɪt wəd bi ə plɛʒɝ, lɔɹd ɹænd." hʊɹɪn tʊk ðə paɪp aʊɾ ə hɪz maʊθ. "ðæt lɑɾ ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum kɛp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʌmp mi - wɪθaʊt lɛɾɪŋ ɑn wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs - əbaʊɾ u jə ɑɹ, maɪ lɔɹd, ən waɪ wɝ ɪn kɛɹhin. aɪ toʊld əm wi wɝ weɪɾɪŋ hɪɹ tə mit fɹɛnz, bʌt biɪŋ kɛɹhinɪn, ðeɪ fɪɡjɝɾ aɪ wɑz haɪɾɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ dipɝ."

"It would be a pleasure, Lord Rand." Hurin took the pipe out of his mouth. "That lot in the common room kept trying to pump me - without letting on what they were doing, of course - about who you are, my Lord, and why we're in Cairhien. I told them we were waiting here to meet friends, but being Cairhienin, they figured I was hiding something deeper."

"lɛɾ əm θɪŋk wʌt ðeɪ wɑnt. kʌm ɑn, lɔɪəl."

"Let them think what they want. Come on, Loial."

"aɪ θɪŋk nɑt." ði oʊɡiɝ saɪd. "aɪ ɹɪli wəd ɹæðɝ steɪ hɪɹ." hi ɹeɪzd ə bʊk wɪð ə θɪk fɪŋɡɝ mɑɹkɪŋ ɪz pleɪs. "aɪ kən mit tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn səm ʌðɝ taɪm."

"I think not." The Ogier sighed. "I really would rather stay here." He raised a book with a thick finger marking his place. "I can meet Thom Merrilin some other time."

"lɔɪəl, jə kæn steɪ kupt ʌp ɪn hɪɹ fɝɛvɝ. wi də nɑɾ ivən noʊ haʊ lɔŋ wɪl bi ɪn kɛɹhin. ɛniweɪ, wi dɪdn si ɛni oʊɡiɝ. ən ɪf wi du, ðeɪ wəd nɑt bi hʌntɪŋ fəɹ ju, wəd ðeɪ?"

"Loial, you can't stay cooped up in here forever. We do not even know how long we'll be in Cairhien. Anyway, we didn't see any Ogier. And if we do, they would not be hunting for you, would they?"

"nɑt hʌntɪŋ, pɹɪsaɪsli, bʌt. . . . ɹænd, aɪ meɪ hæv bɪn tu heɪsti ɪn livɪŋ stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ ðə weɪ aɪ dɪd. wən aɪ də ɡoʊ hoʊm, aɪ meɪ bi ɪn ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə tʃɹʌbəl." hɪz ɪɹz wɪltɪd. "ivən ɪf aɪ weɪɾ əntɪl aɪm əz oʊld əz ɛldɝ heɪmən. pɝhæps aɪ kəd faɪn ən əbændən stɛɾɪŋ tə steɪ ɪn əntɪl ðɛn."

"Not hunting, precisely, but. . . . Rand, I may have been too hasty in leaving Stedding Shangtai the way I did. When I do go home, I may be in a great deal of trouble." His ears wilted. "Even if I wait until I'm as old as Elder Haman. Perhaps I could find an abandoned stedding to stay in until then."

"ɪf ɛldɝ heɪmən woʊn lɛt jə kʌm bæk, jə kən lɪv ɪn ɛmənz fild. ɪts ə pɹɪɾi pleɪs." ə bjuɾəfəl pleɪs.

"If Elder Haman won't let you come back, you can live in Emond's Field. It's a pretty place." A beautiful place.

"aɪ æm ʃʊɹ ɪɾ ɪz, ɹænd, bʌt ðət wəd nɛvɝ wɝk. jə si - "

"I am sure it is, Rand, but that would never work. You see - "

"wi wɪl tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt wən ɪt kʌmz tə ðæt, lɔɪəl. naʊ jə ɑɹ kʌmɪŋ tə si tɑm."

"We will talk about it when it comes to that, Loial. Now you are coming to see Thom."

ði oʊɡiɝ stʊd hæf əɡɛn əz tɔl əz ɹænd, bʌt ɹænd pʊʃt ɪm ɪndə hɪz lɔŋ tunɪk ən kloʊk ən daʊn ðə stɛɹz. wən ðeɪ keɪm paʊndɪŋ θɹu ðə kɑmən ɹum, ɹænd wɪŋkt ət ði ɪnkipɝ, ðən læft əɾ ɪz stɑɹɾəld lʊk. lɛɾ ɪm θɪŋk aɪm ɔf tə pleɪ hɪz blʌɾi ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm. lɛɾ ɪm θɪŋk wʌɾ i wɑns. tɑmz əlaɪv.

The Ogier stood half again as tall as Rand, but Rand pushed him into his long tunic and cloak and down the stairs. When they came pounding through the common room, Rand winked at the innkeeper, then laughed at his startled look. Let him think I'm off to play his bloody Great Game. Let him think what he wants. Thom's alive.

wʌns θɹu ðə dʒæŋɡaɪ ɡeɪt, ɪn ði ist wɔl ə ðə sɪɾi, ɛvɹiwʌn sim tə noʊ ðə bʌntʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪps. ɹænd ən lɔɪəl kwɪkli faʊn ðɛmsɛlvz ðɛɹ, ɑn ə stʃɹit ðət wɑz kwaɪət fəɹ ðə fɔɹɡeɪt, wɪð ðə sʌn hæfweɪ daʊn ði æftɝnun skaɪ.

Once through the Jangai Gate, in the east wall of the city, everyone seemed to know The Bunch of Grapes. Rand and Loial quickly found themselves there, on a street that was quiet for the Foregate, with the sun halfway down the afternoon sky.

ɪt wɑz ən oʊl θɹi-stɔɹi stʃɹʌktʃɝ, wʊɾən ən ɹɪkəɾi, bʌt ðə kɑmən ɹum wɑz klin ən fʊl ə pipəl. səm mɛn wɝ pleɪɪŋ ət daɪs ɪn wʌn kɔɹnɝ, ən səm wɪmən ət dɑɹts ɪn ənʌðɝ. hæf hæd ðə lʊk ə kɛɹhinɪn, slaɪɾ ən peɪl, bʌt ɹænd hɝɾ ændɔɝən æksɛns əz wɛl əz ʌðɝz i dɪd nɑt noʊ. ɔl wɔɹ ðə kloʊðz ə ðə fɔɹɡeɪt, ðoʊ, ə blɛn ə ðə staɪlz ə hæf ə dʌzən kʌntʃɹiz. ə fju lʊkt ɝaʊnd wən i ən lɔɪəl keɪm ɪn, bʌt ðeɪ ɔl tɝn bæk tə wʌt ðeɪ hæd bɪn duɪŋ.

It was an old three-story structure, wooden and rickety, but the common room was clean and full of people. Some men were playing at dice in one corner, and some women at darts in another. Half had the look of Cairhienin, slight and pale, but Rand heard Andoran accents as well as others he did not know. All wore the clothes of the Foregate, though, a blend of the styles of half a dozen countries. A few looked around when he and Loial came in, but they all turned back to what they had been doing.

ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz ə wʊmən wɪð hɛɹ əz waɪɾ əz tɑmz, ən ʃɑɹp aɪz ðət stʌɾid lɔɪəl əz wɛl əz ɹænd. ʃi wɑz nɑt kɛɹhinɪn, baɪ hɝ dɑɹk skɪn ən əɹ spitʃ. "tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn? aɪ, hiz ə ɹum. tɑp ə ðə stɛɹz, fɝs dɔɹ ɑn ðə ɹaɪt. laɪkli dinə wɪl lɛt jə weɪt fəɹ ɪm ðɛɹ" - ʃi aɪd ɹændz ɹɛd koʊt, wɪð ɪts hɛɹənz ɑn ðə haɪ kɑlɝ ən ɡoʊldən bɹæmbəlz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ʌp ðə slivz, ən ɪz sɔɹd - "maɪ lɔɹd."

The innkeeper was a woman with hair as white as Thom's, and sharp eyes that studied Loial as well as Rand. She was not Cairhienin, by her dark skin and her speech. "Thom Merrilin? Aye, he has a room. Top of the stairs, first door on the right. Likely Dena will let you wait for him there" - she eyed Rand's red coat, with its herons on the high collar and golden brambles embroidered up the sleeves, and his sword - "my Lord."

ðə stɛɹz kɹikt ʌndɝ ɹændz buts, lɛɾ əloʊn lɔɪəlz. ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪf ðə bɪldɪŋ wəd stæn ʌp mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ. hi faʊn ðə dɔɹ ən nɑkt, wʌndɝɪŋ u dinə wɑz.

The stairs creaked under Rand's boots, let alone Loial's. Rand was not sure if the building would stand up much longer. He found the door and knocked, wondering who Dena was.

"kʌm ɪn," ə wʊmənz vɔɪs kɔld. "aɪ kænɑɾ oʊpən ɪt fəɹ ju."

"Come in," a woman's voice called. "I cannot open it for you."

ɹænd oʊpən ðə dɔɹ hɛzɪɾəntli ən pʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪn. ə bɪɡ, ɹʌmpəl bɛd wɑz ʃʌvd əɡɛnst wʌn wɔl, ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə ɹum wɑz ɔl bʌt teɪkən ʌp baɪ ə pɛɹ ʌv wɔɹdʒɹoʊbz, sɛvɹəl bɹæs-baʊn tʃɹʌŋks ən tʃɛsts, ə teɪbəl ən tu wʊɾən tʃɛɹz. ðə slɛndɝ wʊmən sɪɾɪŋ kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ðə bɛd wɪð əɹ skɝts tʌkt ʌndɝ əɹ wɑz kipɪŋ sɪks kʌlɝd bɔlz spɪnɪŋ ɪn ə wil bɪtwin əɹ hænz.

Rand opened the door hesitantly and put his head in. A big, rumpled bed was shoved against one wall, and the rest of the room was all but taken up by a pair of wardrobes, several brass-bound trunks and chests, a table and two wooden chairs. The slender woman sitting cross-legged on the bed with her skirts tucked under her was keeping six colored balls spinning in a wheel between her hands.

"wʌtɛvɝ ɪɾ ɪz," ʃi sɛd, lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ dʒʌɡəlɪŋ, "liv ɪɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl. tɑm wɪl peɪ jə wən i kʌmz bæk."

"Whatever it is," she said, looking at her juggling, "leave it on the table. Thom will pay you when he comes back."

"ɑɹ jə dinə?" ɹænd æskt.

"Are you Dena?" Rand asked.

ʃi snætʃt ðə bɔlz aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ ən tɝn tə ɹəɡɑɹd hɪm. ʃi wɑz oʊnli ə hændfʊl ə jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən hi, pɹɪɾi, wɪð fɛɹ kɛɹhinɪn skɪn ən dɑɹk hɛɹ hæŋɪŋ lus tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝz. "aɪ də nɑt noʊ ju. ðɪs ɪz maɪ ɹum, maɪn ən tɑm mɛɹɪlɪnz."

She snatched the balls out of the air and turned to regard him. She was only a handful of years older than he, pretty, with fair Cairhienin skin and dark hair hanging loose to her shoulders. "I do not know you. This is my room, mine and Thom Merrilin's."

"ði ɪnkipɝ sɛd jə maɪt lɛɾ əs weɪt hɪɹ fəɹ tɑm," ɹænd sɛd. "ɪf jəɹ dinə?"

"The innkeeper said you might let us wait here for Thom," Rand said. "If you're Dena?"

"ʌs?" ɹænd muvd ɪndə ðə ɹum soʊ lɔɪəl kəd dʌk ɪnsaɪd, ən ðə jʌŋ wʊmənz aɪbɹaʊz lɪftəd. "soʊ ði oʊɡiɝ əv kʌm bæk. aɪm dinə. wʌt dʒju wɑnt?" ʃi lʊkt ət ɹændz koʊt soʊ dɪlɪbɝətli ðət ðə feɪljɝ tə æd "maɪ lɔɹd" hæd tə bi pɝpəsfəl, ðoʊ hɝ bɹaʊz wɛn ʌp əɡɛn ət ðə hɛɹənz ɑn ɪz skæbɝɾ ən sɔɹd hɪlt.

"Us?" Rand moved into the room so Loial could duck inside, and the young woman's eyebrows lifted. "So the Ogier have come back. I am Dena. What do you want?" She looked at Rand's coat so deliberately that the failure to add "my Lord" had to be purposeful, though her brows went up again at the herons on his scabbard and sword hilt.

ɹænd hɛftəd ðə bʌndəl i kæɹid. "aɪv bɹɔt tɑm bæk ɪz hɑɹp ən ɪz flut. ən aɪ wɑnə vɪzət wɪð hɪm," hi æɾəd kwɪkli; ʃi simd ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə tɛlɪŋ ɪm tə liv ðɛm. "aɪ hævən sin ɪm ɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm."

Rand hefted the bundle he carried. "I've brought Thom back his harp and his flute. And I want to visit with him," he added quickly; she seemed on the point of telling him to leave them. "I haven't seen him in a long time."

ʃi aɪd ðə bʌndəl. "tɑm ɔlweɪz moʊnz əbaʊt luzɪŋ ðə bɛs fluɾ ən ðə bɛs hɑɹp i ɛvɝ hæd. jə wəd θɪŋk i wɑz ə kɔɹt-bɑɹd, ðə weɪ hi kæɹiz ɑn. vɛɹi wɛl. jə kən weɪt, bʌɾ aɪ mʌs pɹæktəs. tɑm sɛz hɪl lemi pɝfɔɹm ɪn ðə hɔlz nɛkst wik." ʃi ɹoʊz ɡɹeɪsfəli ən tʊk wʌn ə ðə tu tʃɛɹz, moʊʃənɪŋ lɔɪəl tə sɪɾ ɑn ðə bɛd. "zɛɹə wəd meɪk tɑm peɪ fəɹ sɪks tʃɛɹz ɪf jə bɹoʊk wʌn ə ðiz, fɹɛn oʊɡiɝ."

She eyed the bundle. "Thom always moans about losing the best flute and the best harp he ever had. You would think he was a court-bard, the way he carries on. Very well. You can wait, but I must practice. Thom says he will let me perform in the halls next week." She rose gracefully and took one of the two chairs, motioning Loial to sit on the bed. "Zera would make Thom pay for six chairs if you broke one of these, friend Ogier."

ɹænd ɡeɪv ðɛɹ neɪmz əz i sæɾ ɪn ði ʌðɝ tʃɛɹ - ɪt kɹikt əlɑɹmɪŋli ʌndɝ ivən ɪz weɪt - ən æsk daʊtfəli, "ɑɹ jə tɑmz əpɹɛntəs?"

Rand gave their names as he sat in the other chair - it creaked alarmingly under even his weight - and asked doubtfully, "Are you Thom's apprentice?"

dinə ɡeɪv ə smɔl smaɪl. "ju maɪt seɪ ðæt." ʃi hæd ɹɪzumd əɹ dʒʌɡəlɪŋ, ən əɹ aɪz wɝ ɑn ðə wɝlɪŋ bɔlz.

Dena gave a small smile. "You might say that." She had resumed her juggling, and her eyes were on the whirling balls.

"aɪ hæv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ə wʊmən ɡlimən," lɔɪəl sɛd.

"I have never heard of a woman gleeman," Loial said.

"aɪ wɪl bi ðə fɝst." ðə wʌn bɪɡ sɝkəl bɪkeɪm tu smɔlɝ, oʊvɝlæpɪŋ sɝkəlz. "aɪ wɪl si ðə hoʊl wɝl bɪfɔɹ aɪm dʌn. tɑm sɛz wʌns wɪv ɪnʌf mʌni, wɪl ɡoʊ daʊn tə tɛɹ." ʃi swɪtʃt tə dʒʌɡəlɪŋ θɹi bɔlz ɪn itʃ hænd. "æn ðən meɪbi aʊt tə ðə si foʊks aɪlənz. ði æθɑn maɪɹ peɪ ɡlimən wɛl."

"I will be the first." The one big circle became two smaller, overlapping circles. "I will see the whole world before I am done. Thom says once we have enough money, we will go down to Tear." She switched to juggling three balls in each hand. "And then maybe out to the Sea Folk's islands. The Atha'an Miere pay gleemen well."

ɹænd aɪd ðə ɹum, wɪð ɔl ðə tʃɛsts ən tʃɹʌŋks. ɪt dɪd nɑt lʊk laɪk ðə ɹum ə sʌmwʌn ɪntɛndɪŋ tə muv ɑn sun. ðəɹ wɑz ivən ə flaʊɝ ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɪn ə pɑɾ ɑn ðə wɪndaʊsəl. hɪz ɡeɪz fɛl ɑn ðə sɪŋɡəl bɪɡ bɛd, wɛɹ lɔɪəl wɑz sɪɾɪŋ. ðɪs ɪz maɪ ɹum, maɪn ən tɑm mɛɹɪlɪnz. dinə ɡeɪv ɪm ə tʃælənʒɪŋ lʊk θɹu ðə lɑɹdʒ wil ʃi hæd ɹɪzumd. ɹændz feɪs ɹɛɾənd.

Rand eyed the room, with all the chests and trunks. It did not look like the room of someone intending to move on soon. There was even a flower growing in a pot on the windowsill. His gaze fell on the single big bed, where Loial was sitting. This is my room, mine and Thom Merrilin's. Dena gave him a challenging look through the large wheel she had resumed. Rand's face reddened.

hi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. "meɪbi wi ɔt tə weɪt daʊnstɛɹz," hi bɪɡæn wən ðə dɔɹ oʊpən ən tɑm keɪm ɪn wɪð ɪz kloʊk flæpɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪz æŋkəlz, pætʃəz flʌɾɝɪŋ. keɪs fluɾ ən hɑɹp hʌŋ ɑn ɪz bæk; ðə keɪsəz wɝ ɹɛɾɪʃ wʊd, pɑlɪʃt baɪ hænlɪŋ.

He cleared his throat. "Maybe we ought to wait downstairs," he began when the door opened and Thom came in with his cloak flapping around his ankles, patches fluttering. Cased flute and harp hung on his back; the cases were reddish wood, polished by handling.

dinə meɪd ðə bɔlz dɪsəpɪɹ ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ dʒɹɛs ən ɹæn tə θɹoʊ hɝ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn tɑmz nɛk, stændɪŋ ɑtɪptoʊ tə də ɪt. "aɪ mɪs ju," ʃi sɛd, ən kɪs hɪm.

Dena made the balls disappear inside her dress and ran to throw her arms around Thom's neck, standing atiptoe to do it. "I missed you," she said, and kissed him.

ðə kɪs wɛn ɑn fəɹ səm taɪm, soʊ lɔŋ ðət ɹænd wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə wʌndɝ ɪf i ən lɔɪəl ʃəd liv, bʌt dinə lɛɾ əɹ hilz dʒɹɑp tə ðə flɔɹ wɪð ə saɪ.

The kiss went on for some time, so long that Rand was beginning to wonder if he and Loial should leave, but Dena let her heels drop to the floor with a sigh.

"du jə noʊ wʌt ðət læk-wɪt sihænz dʌn naʊ, ɡɝl?" tɑm sɛd, lʊkɪŋ daʊn ət hɝ. "hiz teɪkən ɑn ə pæk ə laʊts u kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz 'pleɪɝz.' ðeɪ wɔk ɝaʊn pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi ɹəɡoʊʃ iɡəl-aɪ, ən blz, ən ɡeɪɾəl keɪn, ænd. . . . ɑɡ! ðeɪ hæŋ ə skɹæp ə peɪntəd kænvəs bɪhaɪn ðɛm, səpoʊz tə meɪk ði ɑɾiəns bɪliv ðiz fulz ɑɹ ɪn mətukɪn hɔl, əɹ ðə haɪ pæsəz ə ðə maʊntənz ə dum. aɪ meɪk ðə lɪsənɝ si ɛvɹi bænɝ, smɛl ɛvɹi bæɾəl, fil ɛvɹi ɪmoʊʃən. aɪ meɪk əm bɪliv ðeɪ ɑɹ ɡeɪɾəl keɪn. sihæn wɪl əv ɪz hɔl tɔɹn daʊn ɝaʊn ɪz ɪɹz ɪf i pʊts ðɪs lɑɾ ɑn tə fɑloʊ mi."

"Do you know what that lack-wit Seaghan's done now, girl?" Thom said, looking down at her. "He's taken on a pack of louts who call themselves 'players.' They walk around pretending to be Rogosh Eagle-eye, and Blaes, and Gaidal Cain, and. . . . Aaagh! They hang a scrap of painted canvas behind them, supposed to make the audience believe these fools are in Matuchin Hall, or the high passes of the Mountains of Dhoom. I make the listener see every banner, smell every battle, feel every emotion. I make them believe they are Gaidal Cain. Seaghan will have his hall torn down around his ears if he puts this lot on to follow me."

"tɑm, wɪv vɪzəɾɝz. lɔɪəl, sʌn ʌv ɑɹən sʌn ə hɑlən. oʊ, ən ə bɔɪ hu kɔlz hɪmsɛlf ɹænd ælθɹ."

"Thom, we have visitors. Loial, son of Arent son of Halan. Oh, and a boy who calls himself Rand al'Thor."

tɑm lʊkt oʊvɝ əɹ hɛɾ ət ɹænd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "liv əs fəɹ ə waɪl, dinə. hɪɹ." hi pɹɛst səm sɪlvɝ kɔɪnz ɪndə hɝ hænd. "jɔɹ naɪvz ɑɹ ɹɛɾi. waɪ doʊn jə ɡoʊ peɪ aɪvn fəɹ ðɛm?" hi bɹʌʃt əɹ smuð tʃik wɪð ə nɑɹl nʌkəl. "ɡoʊ ɑn. əl meɪk ɪɾ ʌp tə ju."

Thom looked over her head at Rand, frowning. "Leave us for a while, Dena. Here." He pressed some silver coins into her hand. "Your knives are ready. Why don't you go pay Ivon for them?" He brushed her smooth cheek with a gnarled knuckle. "Go on. I'll make it up to you."

ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə dɑɹk lʊk, bʌt ʃi tɔst əɹ kloʊk ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, mʌɾɝɪŋ, "aɪvn bɛɾɝ əv ðə bæləns ɹaɪt."

She gave him a dark look, but she tossed her cloak around her shoulders, muttering, "Ivon better have the balance right."

"ʃil bi ə bɑɹd wʌn deɪ," tɑm sɛd wɪð ə noʊɾ ə pɹaɪɾ æftɝ ʃi wɑz ɡɔn. "ʃi lɪsənz tə ə teɪl wʌns - wʌns oʊnli, maɪnd! - ən ʃiz ɪt ɹaɪt, nɑt dʒʌs ðə wɝdz, bʌɾ ɛvɹi nuɑns, ɛvɹi ɹɪðəm. ʃiz ə faɪn hæn ɑn ðə hɑɹp, ən ʃi pleɪd ðə flut bɛɾɝ ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi pɪkt ɪɾ ʌp ðən jə ɛvɝ dɪd." hi sɛt ðə wʊɾən ɪnstʃɹəmən keɪsəz ətɑp wʌn ə ðə lɑɹdʒɝ tʃɹʌŋks, ðən dʒɹɑpt ɪndə ðə tʃɛɹ ʃi hæɾ əbændənd. "wɛn aɪ pæs θɹu keɪɛmlɪn ɑn ðə weɪ hɪɹ, bɑzəl ɡɪl toʊl mi jud lɛft ɪn kʌmpəni wɪð ən oʊɡiɝ. əmʌŋ ʌðɝz." hi baʊd təwɔɹd lɔɪəl, ivən mænɪdʒɪŋ ə flɝɪʃ ə hɪz kloʊk dɪspaɪt ðə fæk ðəɾ i wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ɪt. "aɪ æm pliz tə mit ju, lɔɪəl, sʌn ʌv ɑɹən sʌn ə hɑlən."

"She'll be a bard one day," Thom said with a note of pride after she was gone. "She listens to a tale once - once only, mind! - and she has it right, not just the words, but every nuance, every rhythm. She has a fine hand on the harp, and she played the flute better the first time she picked it up than you ever did." He set the wooden instrument cases atop one of the larger trunks, then dropped into the chair she had abandoned. "When I passed through Caemlyn on the way here, Basel Gill told me you'd left in company with an Ogier. Among others." He bowed toward Loial, even managing a flourish of his cloak despite the fact that he was sitting on it. "I am pleased to meet you, Loial, son of Arent son of Halan."

"æn aɪ tə mit ju, tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn." lɔɪəl stʊd tə meɪk ɪz baʊ ɪn ɹɪtɝn; wən i stʃɹeɪɾənd, hɪz hɛɾ ɔlmoʊs bɹʌʃt ðə silɪŋ, ən i kwɪkli sæt daʊn əɡɛn. "ðə jʌŋ wʊmən sɛd ʃi wɑns tə bi ə ɡlimən."

"And I to meet you, Thom Merrilin." Loial stood to make his bow in return; when he straightened, his head almost brushed the ceiling, and he quickly sat down again. "The young woman said she wants to be a gleeman."

tɑmz hɛd ʃeɪk wɑz dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋ. "ðæts noʊ laɪf fəɹ ə wʊmən. nɑt mʌtʃ ʌv ə laɪf fəɹ ə mæn, fəɹ ðæt. wɑndɝɪŋ fɹəm taʊn tə taʊn, vɪlədʒ tə vɪlədʒ, wʌndɝɪŋ haʊ ðəl tʃɹaɪ tə tʃit jə ðɪs taɪm, hæf ðə taɪm wʌndɝɪŋ wɛɹ jəɹ nɛks mil ɪz kʌmɪŋ fɹʌm. noʊ, əl tɔk əɹ ɝaʊnd. ʃɪl bi kɔɹt-bɑɹd tə ə kɪŋ əɹ ə kwin bɪfɔɹ ʃiz dʌn. ɑə! jə dɪdn kʌm hɪɹ tə tɔk əbaʊt dinə. maɪ ɪnstʃɹəməns, bɔɪ. juv bɹɔt ðɛm?"

Thom's head shake was disparaging. "That's no life for a woman. Not much of a life for a man, for that. Wandering from town to town, village to village, wondering how they'll try to cheat you this time, half the time wondering where your next meal is coming from. No, I'll talk her around. She'll be court-bard to a king or a queen before she's done. Aaaah! You didn't come here to talk about Dena. My instruments, boy. You've brought them?"

ɹænd pʊʃt ðə bʌndəl əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəl. tɑm əndɪɾ ɪt hɝidli - hi blɪŋkt wən i sɔ ɪt wɑz ɪz oʊl kloʊk, ɔl kʌvɝd wɪð kʌlɝfəl pætʃəz laɪk ðə wʌn i wɔɹ - ən oʊpən ðə hɑɹd lɛðɝ flut keɪs, nɑɾɪŋ ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ɡoʊld-ænd-sɪlvɝ flut nɛsəld ɪnsaɪd.

Rand pushed the bundle across the table. Thom undid it hurriedly - he blinked when he saw it was his old cloak, all covered with colorful patches like the one he wore - and opened the hard leather flute case, nodding at the sight of the gold-and-silver flute nestled inside.

"aɪ ɝn maɪ bɛɾ ən milz wɪð ðəɾ æftɝ wi pɑɹɾəd," ɹænd sɛd.

"I earned my bed and meals with that after we parted," Rand said.

"aɪ noʊ," ðə ɡlimən ɹɪplaɪd dʒɹaɪli. "aɪ stɑpt ət səm ə ðə seɪm ɪnz, bʌɾ aɪ hæd tə meɪk də wɪð dʒʌɡəlɪŋ ən ə fju sɪmpəl stɔɹiz sɪns jə hæd maɪ - jə dɪdn tʌtʃ ðə hɑɹp?" hi pʊld oʊpən ði ʌðɝ dɑɹk lɛðɝ keɪs ən tʊk aʊɾ ə ɡoʊld-ænd-sɪlvɝ hɑɹp əz ɔɹneɪɾ əz ðə flut, kɹeɪɾəlɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn ɪz hænz laɪk ə beɪbi. "jɔɹ klʌmzi ʃifɝɾɝz fɪŋɡɝz wɝ nɛvɝ mɛn fəɹ ðə hɑɹp."

"I know," the gleeman replied dryly. "I stopped at some of the same inns, but I had to make do with juggling and a few simple stories since you had my - You didn't touch the harp?" He pulled open the other dark leather case and took out a gold-and-silver harp as ornate as the flute, cradling it in his hands like a baby. "Your clumsy sheepherder's fingers were never meant for the harp."

"aɪ dɪdn tʌtʃ ɪt," ɹænd əʃʊɹd hɪm.

"I didn't touch it," Rand assured him.

tɑm plʌk tu stʃɹɪŋz, wɪnsɪŋ. "æt lis jə wɝn ful ɪnʌf tə tʃɹaɪ kipɪŋ ɪt tund," hi mʌɾɝd. "kʊɾ əv ɹuən ɪt."

Thom plucked two strings, wincing. "At least you weren't fool enough to try keeping it tuned," he muttered. "Could have ruined it."

ɹænd lin əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəl təwɔɹd hɪm. "tɑm, jə wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ tə ɪljən, tə si ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn sɛɾ aʊt, ən bi wʌn ə ðə fɝs tə meɪk nu stɔɹiz əbaʊɾ ɪt, bʌt jə kʊdnt. wʌt wəd jə seɪ ɪf aɪ toʊl jə jə kəd stɪl bi ə pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt? ə bɪɡ pɑɹt?"

Rand leaned across the table toward him. "Thom, you wanted to go to Illian, to see the Great Hunt set out, and be one of the first to make new stories about it, but you couldn't. What would you say if I told you you could still be a part of it? A big part?"

lɔɪəl stɝɾ ənizəli. "ɹænd, ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ . . . ?" ɹænd weɪvd ɪm tə saɪləns, hɪz aɪz ɑn tɑm.

Loial stirred uneasily. "Rand, are you sure . . . ?" Rand waved him to silence, his eyes on Thom.

tɑm ɡlænst ət ði oʊɡiɝ ən fɹaʊnd. "ðæt wəd dɪpɛn ɑn wʌt pɑɹt, ən haʊ. ɪf juv ɹizən tə bɪliv wʌn ə ðə hʌntɝz ɪz kʌmɪŋ ðɪs weɪ. . . . aɪ səpoʊz ðeɪ cʊɾə lɛft ɪljən ɔlɹɛɾi, bʌt hid bi wiks ɹitʃɪŋ hɪɹ ɪf i ɹoʊd stʃɹeɪɾ ɑn, ən waɪ wəd hi? ɪz ðɪs wʌn ə ðə fɛloʊz u nɛvɝ wɛn tə ɪljən? hɪl nɛvɝ meɪk ɪɾ ɪndə ðə stɔɹiz wɪθaʊt ðə blɛsɪŋ, wʌtɛvɝ i dʌz."

Thom glanced at the Ogier and frowned. "That would depend on what part, and how. If you've reason to believe one of the Hunters is coming this way. . . . I suppose they could have left Illian already, but he'd be weeks reaching here if he rode straight on, and why would he? Is this one of the fellows who never went to Illian? He'll never make it into the stories without the blessing, whatever he does."

"ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ ɪf ðə hʌn əz lɛft ɪljən əɹ nɑt." ɹænd hɝd lɔɪəlz bɹɛθ kætʃ. "tɑm, wɪv ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ."

"It doesn't matter if the Hunt has left Illian or not." Rand heard Loial's breath catch. "Thom, we have the Horn of Valere."

fəɹ ə moʊmən ðəɹ wɑz dɛd saɪləns. tɑm bɹoʊk ɪt wɪð ə ɡɹeɪt ɡʌfɔ ʌv læftɝ. "ju tu hæv ðə hɔɹn? ə ʃɛpɝɾ ən ə bɪɹdləs oʊɡiɝ əv ðə hɔɹn ʌv. . . ." hi dʌbəld oʊvɝ, paʊndɪŋ ɪz ni. "ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ!"

For a moment there was dead silence. Thom broke it with a great guffaw of laughter. "You two have the Horn? A shepherd and a beardless Ogier have the Horn of. . . ." He doubled over, pounding his knee. "The Horn of Valere!"

"bʌt wi də hæv ɪt," lɔɪəl sɛd sɪɹiəsli.

"But we do have it," Loial said seriously.

tɑm dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. smɔl æftɝʃɑks ə læftɝ stɪl sim tə kætʃ ɪm ʌnəwɛɹ. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt jə faʊnd, bʌɾ aɪ kən teɪk jə tə tɛn tævɝnz wɛɹ ə fɛloʊ wɪl tɛl jə ðəɾ i noʊz ə mæn u noʊz ðə mæn huz ɔlɹɛɾi faʊn ðə hɔɹn, ən hɪl tɛl jə haʊ ɪt wɑz faʊnd, tu - əz lɔŋ əz jə baɪ hɪz eɪl. aɪ kən teɪk jə tə θɹi mɛn u wɪl sɛl jə ðə hɔɹn, ən swɛɹ ðɛɹ soʊlz ʌndɝ ðə laɪɾ ɪts ðə ɹil wʌn ən tʃɹu. ðəɹ ɪz ivən ə lɔɹɾ ɪn ðə sɪɾi hæz wʌɾ i kleɪmz ɪz ðə hɔɹn lɑkt ʌp ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz mænɝ. hi sɛz ɪts ə tʃɹɛʒɝ hændəd daʊn ɪn ɪz haʊs sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ. aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf ðə hʌntɝz wɪl ɛvɝ faɪn ðə hɔɹn, bʌt ðəl hʌn daʊn tɛn θaʊzən laɪz əlɔŋ ðə weɪ."

Thom drew a deep breath. Small aftershocks of laughter still seemed to catch him unaware. "I don't know what you found, but I can take you to ten taverns where a fellow will tell you that he knows a man who knows the man who's already found the Horn, and he will tell you how it was found, too - as long as you buy his ale. I can take you to three men who will sell you the Horn, and swear their souls under the Light it's the real one and true. There is even a lord in the city has what he claims is the Horn locked up inside his manor. He says it's a treasure handed down in his House since the Breaking. I don't know if the Hunters will ever find the Horn, but they will hunt down ten thousand lies along the way."

"mɔɪɹeɪn sɛz ɪts ðə hɔɹn," ɹænd sɛd.

"Moiraine says it's the Horn," Rand said.

tɑmz mɝθ wɑz kʌt ʃɔɹt. "ʃi dʌz, dʌz ʃi? aɪ θɔt jə sɛd ʃi wɑz nɑt wɪð ju."

Thom's mirth was cut short. "She does, does she? I thought you said she was not with you."

"ʃi ɪzənt, tɑm. aɪ hæv nɑt sin əɹ sɪns aɪ lɛft fæl dæɹə, ɪn ʃaɪnɝ, ən fəɹ ə mʌnθ bɪfɔɹ ðət ʃi sɛd noʊ mɔɹ ðən tu wɝdz təɡɛðɝ tə mi." hi kəd nɑt kip ðə bɪɾɝnəs aʊɾ ə hɪz vɔɪs. ən wən ʃi dɪd tɔk, aɪ wɪʃt ʃid kɛpt ɑn ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ mi. əl nɛvɝ dæns tə hɝ tun əɡɛn, ðə laɪt bɝn əɹ ən ɛvɹi ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. noʊ. nɑɾ ɛɡwin. nɑt nɪneɪiv. hi wɑz kɑnʃəs ə tɑm wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm kloʊsli. "ʃi ɪzən hɪɹ, tɑm. aɪ də nɑt noʊ wɛɹ ʃi ɪz, ən aɪ də nɑt kɛɹ."

"She isn't, Thom. I have not seen her since I left Fal Dara, in Shienar, and for a month before that she said no more than two words together to me." He could not keep the bitterness out of his voice. And when she did talk, I wished she'd kept on ignoring me. I'll never dance to her tune again, the Light burn her and every other Aes Sedai. No. Not Egwene. Not Nynaeve. He was conscious of Thom watching him closely. "She isn't here, Thom. I do not know where she is, and I do not care."

"wɛl, ət lis juv sɛns ɪnʌf tə kip ɪt sikɹət. ɪf jə hædnt, ɪt wəd bi ɔl oʊvɝ ðə fɔɹɡeɪt baɪ naʊ, ən hæf ə kɛɹhin wəd bi laɪɪŋ ɪn weɪt tə teɪk ɪɾ əweɪ. hæf ðə wɝld."

"Well, at least you have sense enough to keep it secret. If you hadn't, it would be all over the Foregate by now, and half of Cairhien would be lying in wait to take it away. Half the world."

"oʊ, wiv kɛpt ɪt sikɹət, tɑm. ən aɪ hæv tə bɹɪŋ ɪt bæk tə fæl dæɹə wɪθaʊt dɑɹkfɹɛnz əɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls teɪkɪŋ ɪɾ əweɪ. ðæts stɔɹi ɪnʌf fəɹ jə ɹaɪt ðɛɹ, ɪzən ɪt? aɪ kəd juz ə fɹɛn u noʊz ðə wɝld. juv bɪn ɛvɹiwɛɹ; jə noʊ θɪŋz aɪ kæn ivən ɪmædʒən. lɔɪəl ən hʊɹɪn noʊ mɔɹ ðən aɪ du, bʌt wɝ ɔl θɹi flaʊndɝɪŋ ɪn dip wɔɾɝ."

"Oh, we've kept it secret, Thom. And I have to bring it back to Fal Dara without Darkfriends or anyone else taking it away. That's story enough for you right there, isn't it? I could use a friend who knows the world. You've been everywhere; you know things I can't even imagine. Loial and Hurin know more than I do, but we're all three floundering in deep water."

"hʊɹɪn . . . ? noʊ, doʊn tɛl mi haʊ. aɪ də nɑt wɑnə noʊ." ðə ɡlimən pʊʃt bæk ɪz tʃɛɹ ən wɛn tə stɛɹ aʊɾ ə ðə wɪndoʊ. "ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. ðət minz ðə læs bæɾəl ɪz kʌmɪŋ. hu wɪl noʊɾəs? dɪd jə si ðə pipəl læfɪŋ ɪn ðə stʃɹits aʊt ðɛɹ? lɛt ðə ɡɹeɪn bɑɹdʒəz stɑp ə wik, ən ðeɪ woʊn læf. ɡɔlʒɹiən wɪl θɪŋk ðeɪv ɔl bɪkʌm il. ðə noʊbəlz ɔl pleɪ ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz, skimɪŋ tə ɡɛt kloʊs tə ðə kɪŋ, skimɪŋ tə ɡeɪn mɔɹ paʊɝ ðən ðə kɪŋ, skimɪŋ tə pʊl daʊn ɡɔlʒɹiən ən bi ðə nɛks kɪŋ. əɹ kwin. ðəl θɪŋk tɑɹmən ɡdən ɪz oʊnli ə plɔɪ ɪn ðə ɡeɪm." hi tɝn əweɪ fɹəm ðə wɪndoʊ. "aɪ doʊn səpoʊz jə ɑɹ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt sɪmpli ɹaɪɾɪŋ tə ʃaɪnɝ ən hændɪŋ ðə hɔɹn tə - hu? - ðə kɪŋ? waɪ ʃaɪnɝ? ðə lɛdʒənz ɔl taɪ ðə hɔɹn tə ɪljən."

"Hurin . . . ? No, don't tell me how. I do not want to know." The gleeman pushed back his chair and went to stare out of the window. "The Horn of Valere. That means the Last Battle is coming. Who will notice? Did you see the people laughing in the streets out there? Let the grain barges stop a week, and they won't laugh. Galldrian will think they've all become Aiel. The nobles all play the Game of Houses, scheming to get close to the King, scheming to gain more power than the King, scheming to pull down Galldrian and be the next King. Or Queen. They will think Tarmon Gai'don is only a ploy in the Game." He turned away from the window. "I don't suppose you are talking about simply riding to Shienar and handing the Horn to - who? - the King? Why Shienar? The legends all tie the Horn to Illian."

ɹænd lʊkt ət lɔɪəl. ði oʊɡiɝz ɪɹz wɝ sæɡɪŋ. "ʃaɪnɝ, kəz aɪ noʊ hu tə ɡɪv ɪt tə, ðɛɹ. ən ðəɹ ɑɹ tʃɹɑləks ən dɑɹkfɹɛnz æftɝ ʌs."

Rand looked at Loial. The Ogier's ears were sagging. "Shienar, because I know who to give it to, there. And there are Trollocs and Darkfriends after us."

"waɪ dʌz ðət nɑt sɝpɹaɪz mi? noʊ. aɪ meɪ bi ən oʊl ful, bʌɾ əl bi ən oʊl ful ɪn maɪ oʊn weɪ. jə teɪk ðə ɡlɔɹi, bɔɪ."

"Why does that not surprise me? No. I may be an old fool, but I will be an old fool in my own way. You take the glory, boy."

"tɑm - "

"Thom - "

"noʊ!"

"No!"

ðəɹ wɑz ə saɪləns, bɹoʊkən oʊnli baɪ ðə kɹikɪŋ ə ðə bɛɾ əz lɔɪəl ʃɪftəd. faɪnəli, ɹænd sɛd, "lɔɪəl, wəd jə maɪn livɪŋ tɑm ən mi əloʊn fəɹ ə bɪt? pliz?"

There was a silence, broken only by the creaking of the bed as Loial shifted. Finally, Rand said, "Loial, would you mind leaving Thom and me alone for a bit? Please?"

lɔɪəl lʊk sɝpɹaɪzd - ðə tʌfs ɑn ɪz ɪɹz wɛn ɔlmoʊs tə pɔɪns - bʌɾ i nɑɾəd ən ɹoʊz. "ðæt daɪs ɡeɪm ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum lʊkt ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ. pɝhæps ðəl lemi pleɪ." tɑm aɪd ɹænd səspɪʃəsli əz ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn ði oʊɡiɝ.

Loial looked surprised - the tufts on his ears went almost to points - but he nodded and rose. "That dice game in the common room looked interesting. Perhaps they will let me play." Thom eyed Rand suspiciously as the door closed behind the Ogier.

ɹænd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ðəɹ wɝ θɪŋz i niɾəd tə noʊ, θɪŋz i wɑz ʃʊɹ tɑm nu - ðə ɡlimən hæd wʌns sim tə noʊ ə ɡɹeɪt dil əbaʊɾ ə sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ nʌmbɝ ə θɪŋz - bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ tə æsk. "tɑm," hi sɛɾ ət læst, "ɑɹ ðəɹ ɛni bʊks ðəɾ əv ðə kæɹæəθən saɪkəl ɪn ðɛm?" iziɝ tə kɔl ɪt ðət ðən ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən.

Rand hesitated. There were things he needed to know, things he was sure Thom knew - the gleeman had once seemed to know a great deal about a surprising number of things - but he was not sure how to ask. "Thom," he said at last, "are there any books that have The Karaethon Cycle in them?" Easier to call it that than the Prophecies of the Dragon.

"ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪt laɪbɹɛɹiz," tɑm sɛd sloʊli. "ɛni nʌmbɝ ə tʃɹænzleɪʃənz, ən ivən ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, hɪɹ ən ðɛɹ." ɹænd stɑɹɾəd tə æsk ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ɛni weɪ fəɹ ɪm tə faɪnd wʌn, bʌt ðə ɡlimən wɛn ɑn. "ði oʊl tʌŋ əz mjuzɪk ɪn ɪt, bʌt tu mɛni ivən ə ðə noʊbəlz ɑɹ ɪmpeɪʃənt wɪð lɪsnɪŋ tə ɪt ðiz deɪz. noʊbəlz ɑɹ ɔl ɪkspɛktəd tə noʊ ði oʊl tʌŋ, bʌt mɛni oʊnli lɝn ɪnʌf tə ɪmpɹɛs pipəl u doʊnt. tʃɹænzleɪʃənz doʊn əv ðə seɪm saʊnd, ənlɛs ðəɹ ɪn haɪ tʃænt, ən səmtaɪmz ðət tʃeɪnʒəz minɪŋz ivən mɔɹ ðən moʊs tʃɹænzleɪʃənz. ðəɹ ɪz wʌn vɝs ɪn ðə saɪkəl - ɪt dʌzn skæn wɛl, tʃɹænzleɪɾəd wɝd fəɹ wɝd, bʌt ðɛɹz noʊ minɪŋ lɔst - ðət ɡoʊz laɪk ðɪs.

"In the great libraries," Thom said slowly. "Any number of translations, and even in the Old Tongue, here and there." Rand started to ask if there was any way for him to find one, but the gleeman went on. "The Old Tongue has music in it, but too many even of the nobles are impatient with listening to it these days. Nobles are all expected to know the Old Tongue, but many only learn enough to impress people who don't. Translations don't have the same sound, unless they're in High Chant, and sometimes that changes meanings even more than most translations. There is one verse in the Cycle - it doesn't scan well, translated word for word, but there's no meaning lost - that goes like this.

"twaɪs ən twaɪs ʃæl i bi mɑɹkt, twaɪs tə lɪv, ən twaɪs tə daɪ.

"Twice and twice shall he be marked, twice to live, and twice to die.

wʌns ðə hɛɹən, tə sɛɾ ɪz pæθ.

Once the heron, to set his path.

twaɪs ðə hɛɹən, tə neɪm ɪm tʃɹu.

Twice the heron, to name him true.

wʌns ðə dʒɹæɡən, fəɹ ɹimɛmbɹəns lɔst.

Once the Dragon, for remembrance lost.

twaɪs ðə dʒɹæɡən, fəɹ ðə pɹaɪs i mʌs peɪ."

Twice the Dragon, for the price he must pay."

hi ɹitʃt aʊɾ ən tʌtʃt ðə hɛɹənz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɑn ɹændz haɪ kɑlɝ.

He reached out and touched the herons embroidered on Rand's high collar.

fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ɹænd kəɾ oʊnli ɡeɪp ət hɪm, ən wən i kəd spik, hɪz vɔɪs wɑz ənstɛɾi. "ðə sɔɹd meɪks faɪv. hɪlt, skæbɝd, ən bleɪd." hi tɝn ɪz hæn daʊn ɑn ðə teɪbəl, haɪɾɪŋ ðə bɹæn ɑn ɪz pɑm. fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm sɪns səlinz sɑv hæd dʌn ɪts wɝk, hi kəd fil ɪt. nɑt hɝɾɪŋ, bʌɾ i nu ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ.

For a moment, Rand could only gape at him, and when he could speak, his voice was unsteady. "The sword makes five. Hilt, scabbard, and blade." He turned his hand down on the table, hiding the brand on his palm. For the first time since Selene's salve had done its work, he could feel it. Not hurting, but he knew it was there.

"soʊ ðeɪ du." tɑm bɑɹkt ə læf. "ðɛɹz ənʌðɝ kʌmz tə maɪnd.

"So they do." Thom barked a laugh. "There's another comes to mind.

"twaɪs dɔnz ðə deɪ wən ɪz blʌɾ ɪz ʃɛd.

"Twice dawns the day when his blood is shed.

wʌns fəɹ mɔɹnɪŋ, wʌns fəɹ bɝθ.

Once for mourning, once for birth.

ɹɛɾ ɑn blæk, ðə dʒɹæɡənz blʌd steɪnz ðə ɹɑk ə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl.

Red on black, the Dragon's blood stains the rock of Shayol Ghul.

ɪn ðə pɪɾ ə dum ʃæl ɪz blʌd fɹi mɛn fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊ."

In the Pit of Doom shall his blood free men from the Shadow."

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, dɪnaɪɪŋ, bʌt tɑm sim nɑt tə noʊɾəs. "aɪ doʊn si haʊ ə deɪ kən dɔn twaɪs, bʌt ðən ə lɑɾ ʌv ɪt dʌzn ɹɪli meɪk mʌtʃ sɛns. ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ wɪl nɛvɝ fɔl tɪl kælændɝ ɪz wildɪd baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, bʌt ðə sɔɹd ðət kænɑt bi tʌtʃt laɪz ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn, soʊ haʊ kən i wild ɪt fɝst, ɛ? wɛl, bi ðəɾ əz ɪt meɪ. aɪ səspɛkt ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd wɑnə meɪk ɪvɛns fɪt ðə pɹɑfəsiz əz kloʊsli əz ðeɪ kæn. daɪɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə blæstəd lænz wəd bi ə haɪ pɹaɪs tə peɪ fəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ əlɔŋ wɪð ðɛm."

Rand shook his head, denying, but Thom seemed not to notice. "I don't see how a day can dawn twice, but then a lot of it doesn't really make much sense. The Stone of Tear will never fall till Callandor is wielded by the Dragon Reborn, but the Sword That Cannot Be Touched lies in the Heart of the Stone, so how can he wield it first, eh? Well, be that as it may. I suspect Aes Sedai would want to make events fit the Prophecies as closely as they can. Dying somewhere in the Blasted Lands would be a high price to pay for going along with them."

ɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝt fəɹ ɹænd tə meɪk ɪz vɔɪs kɑm, bʌɾ i dɪɾ ɪt. "noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ juzɪŋ mi fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ. aɪ toʊl ju, ðə læst aɪ sɔ ʌv mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz ɪn ʃaɪnɝ. ʃi sɛɾ aɪ kəd ɡoʊ wɛɹ aɪ wɑntəd, ən aɪ lɛft."

It was an effort for Rand to make his voice calm, but he did it. "No Aes Sedai are using me for anything. I told you, the last I saw of Moiraine was in Shienar. She said I could go where I wanted, and I left."

"æn ðɛɹz noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð jə naʊ? nʌn əɾ ɔl?"

"And there's no Aes Sedai with you now? None at all?"

"nʌn."

"None."

tɑm nʌkəld ɪz dæŋɡəlɪŋ waɪt mʌstæʃɪz. hi sim sæɾəsfaɪd, ən ət ðə seɪm taɪm pʌzəld. "ðɛn waɪ æsk əbaʊt ðə pɹɑfəsiz? waɪ sɛn ði oʊɡiɝ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum?"

Thom knuckled his dangling white mustaches. He seemed satisfied, and at the same time puzzled. "Then why ask about the Prophecies? Why send the Ogier out of the room?"

"aɪ . . . dɪdnt wɑnə əpsɛt hɪm. hiz nɝvəs ɪnʌf əbaʊt ðə hɔɹn. ðæts wʌɾ aɪ wɑntəd tə æsk. ɪz ðə hɔɹn mɛnʃən ɪn ðə - ðə pɹɑfəsiz?" hi stɪl kəd nɑt meɪk hɪmsɛlf seɪ ɪɾ ɔl ðə weɪ aʊt. "ɔl ðiz fɔls dʒɹæɡənz, ən naʊ ðə hɔɹn ɪz faʊnd. ɛvɹibɑɾi θɪŋks ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ɪz səpoʊz tə sʌmən dɛd hɪɹoʊz tə faɪt ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪn ðə læs bæɾəl, ən ðə . . . ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn . . . ɪz səpoʊz tə faɪt ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪn ðə læs bæɾəl. ɪt sim nætʃɹəl ɪnʌf tə æsk."

"I . . . didn't want to upset him. He's nervous enough about the Horn. That's what I wanted to ask. Is the Horn mentioned in the - the Prophecies?" He still could not make himself say it all the way out. "All these false Dragons, and now the Horn is found. Everybody thinks the Horn of Valere is supposed to summon dead heroes to fight the Dark One in the Last Battle, and the . . . the Dragon Reborn . . . is supposed to fight the Dark One in the Last Battle. It seemed natural enough to ask."

"aɪ səpoʊz ɪɾ ɪz. nɑt mɛni noʊ ðəɾ əbaʊt ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn faɪɾɪŋ ðə læs bæɾəl, əɹ ɪf ðeɪ du, ðeɪ θɪŋk hɪl faɪɾ əlɔŋsaɪd ðə dɑɹk wʌn. nɑt mɛni ɹɛd ðə pɹɑfəsiz tə faɪn aʊt. wʌt wɑz ðət jə sɛɾ əbaʊt ðə hɔɹn? 'səpoʊz tə'?"

"I suppose it is. Not many know that about the Dragon Reborn fighting the Last Battle, or if they do, they think he'll fight alongside the Dark One. Not many read the Prophecies to find out. What was that you said about the Horn? 'Supposed to'?"

"aɪv lɝn ə fju θɪŋz sɪns wi pɑɹɾəd, tɑm. ðəl kʌm fəɹ huɛvɝ bloʊz ðə hɔɹn, ivən ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd."

"I've learned a few things since we parted, Thom. They will come for whoever blows the Horn, even a Darkfriend."

bʊʃi aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz nɪɹli tə tɑmz hɛɹlaɪn. "naʊ ðəɾ aɪ dɪdnt noʊ. juv lɝn ə fju θɪŋz."

Bushy eyebrows rose nearly to Thom's hairline. "Now that I didn't know. You have learned a few things."

"ɪt dʌzn min aɪ wəd lɛt ðə waɪt taʊɝ juz mi fəɹ ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən. aɪ doʊnt wɑn ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ, əɹ fɔls dʒɹæɡənz, əɹ ðə paʊɝ, ɔɹ. . . ." ɹænd bɪɾ ɪz tʌŋ. ɡɛt mæɾ ən jə stɑɹt bæbəlɪŋ. ful!

"It doesn't mean I would let the White Tower use me for a false Dragon. I don't want anything to do with Aes Sedai, or false Dragons, or the Power, or. . . ." Rand bit his tongue. Get mad and you start babbling. Fool!

"fɔɹ ə taɪm, bɔɪ, aɪ θɔt jə wɝ ðə wʌn mɔɪɹeɪn wɑntəd, ən aɪ ivən θɔɾ aɪ nu waɪ. jə noʊ, noʊ mæn tʃuzəz tə tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ. ɪts sʌmθɪŋ ðət hæpənz tə hɪm, laɪk ə dɪziz. jə kænɑt bleɪm ə mæn fəɹ fɔlɪŋ sɪk, ivən ɪf ɪt maɪt kɪl ju, tu."

"For a time, boy, I thought you were the one Moiraine wanted, and I even thought I knew why. You know, no man chooses to channel the Power. It is something that happens to him, like a disease. You cannot blame a man for falling sick, even if it might kill you, too."

"jɔɹ nɛfju kəd tʃænəl, kʊdn hi? jə toʊl mi ðət wɑz waɪ jə hɛlpt ʌs, kəz jəɹ nɛfju hæd hæd tʃɹʌbəl wɪð ðə waɪt taʊɝ ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊbɑdi tə hɛlp hɪm. ðɛɹz oʊnli wʌn kaɪndə tʃɹʌbəl mɛn kən əv wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"Your nephew could channel, couldn't he? You told me that was why you helped us, because your nephew had had trouble with the White Tower and there was nobody to help him. There's only one kind of trouble men can have with Aes Sedai."

tɑm stʌɾid ðə teɪbəltɑp, pɝsɪŋ ɪz lɪps. "aɪ doʊn səpoʊz ðəɹ ɪz ɛni jus ɪn dɪnaɪɪŋ ɪt. jə ʌndɝstænd, ɪts nɑt ðə kaɪndə θɪŋ ə mæn tɔks əbaʊt, hævɪŋ ə meɪl ɹɛləɾɪv u kəd tʃænəl. ɑɡ! ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ nɛvɝ ɡeɪv oʊɪn ə tʃæns. ðeɪ dʒɛntəl hɪm, ən ðən i daɪd. hi dʒʌst ɡeɪv ʌp wɑntɪŋ tə lɪv. . . ." hi ɛksheɪl sædli.

Thom studied the tabletop, pursing his lips. "I don't suppose there is any use in denying it. You understand, it is not the kind of thing a man talks about, having a male relative who could channel. Aaagh! The Red Ajah never gave Owyn a chance. They gentled him, and then he died. He just gave up wanting to live. . . ." He exhaled sadly.

ɹænd ʃɪvɝd. waɪ dɪdn mɔɪɹeɪn də ðət tə mi? "ə tʃæns, tɑm? dʒju min ðəɹ wɑz səm weɪ hi cʊɾə dɛlt wɪð ɪt? nɑt ɡɔn mæd? nɑt daɪd?"

Rand shivered. Why didn't Moiraine do that to me? "A chance, Thom? Do you mean there was some way he could have dealt with it? Not gone mad? Not died?"

"oʊɪn hɛld ɪɾ ɔf ɔlmoʊs θɹi jɪɹz. hi nɛvɝ hɝɾ ɛniwʌn. hi dɪdn juz ðə paʊɝ ənlɛs i hæd tə, ən ðən oʊnli tə hɛlp ɪz vɪlədʒ. hi. . . ." tɑm θɹu ʌp ɪz hænz. "aɪ səpoʊz ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tʃɔɪs. ðə pipəl wɛɹ i lɪv toʊl mi hi wɑz æktɪŋ stʃɹeɪnʒ ðət hoʊl læs jɪɹ. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt mʌtʃ wɑnə tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt, ən ðeɪ nɪɹli stoʊn mi wən ðeɪ faʊn aʊɾ aɪ wɑz ɪz ʌŋkəl. aɪ səpoʊz i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ mæd. bʌɾ i wɑz maɪ blʌd, bɔɪ. aɪ kæn lʌv ði ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ wʌt ðeɪ dɪd tə hɪm, ivən ɪf ðeɪ hæd tə. ɪf mɔɪɹeɪnz lɛt jə ɡoʊ, ðən jə ɑɹ wɛl aʊɾ ʌv ɪt."

"Owyn held it off almost three years. He never hurt anyone. He didn't use the Power unless he had to, and then only to help his village. He. . . ." Thom threw up his hands. "I suppose there was no choice. The people where he lived told me he was acting strange that whole last year. They did not much want to talk about it, and they nearly stoned me when they found out I was his uncle. I suppose he was going mad. But he was my blood, boy. I can't love the Aes Sedai for what they did to him, even if they had to. If Moiraine's let you go, then you are well out of it."

fəɹ ə moʊmən ɹænd wɑz saɪlənt. ful! ʌv kɔɹs ðɛɹz noʊ weɪ tə dil wɪð ɪt. jəɹ gɑnə ɡoʊ mæɾ ən daɪ wʌtɛvɝ jə du. bʌt bælzəmən sɛd -  "noʊ!" hi kʌlɝɾ ʌndɝ tɑmz skɹuɾəni. "aɪ min . . . aɪm aʊɾ ʌv ɪt, tɑm. bʌɾ aɪ stɪl əv ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. θɪŋk ʌv ɪt, tɑm. ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. ʌðɝ ɡlimən maɪt tɛl teɪlz əbaʊɾ ɪt, bʌt jə kəd seɪ jə hæɾ ɪɾ ɪn jəɹ hænz." hi ɹilaɪzd i saʊndəd laɪk səlin, bʌɾ ɔl ðət dɪd wɑz meɪk ɪm wʌndɝ wɛɹ ʃi wɑz. "ðɛɹz noʊbɑdi aɪd ɹæðɝ əv wɪð əs ðən ju, tɑm."

For a moment Rand was silent. Fool! Of course there's no way to deal with it. You're going to go mad and die whatever you do. But Ba'alzamon said -  "No!" He colored under Thom's scrutiny. "I mean . . . I am out of it, Thom. But I still have the Horn of Valere. Think of it, Thom. The Horn of Valere. Other gleemen might tell tales about it, but you could say you had it in your hands." He realized he sounded like Selene, but all that did was make him wonder where she was. "There's nobody I'd rather have with us than you, Thom."

tɑm fɹaʊn əz ɪf kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ɪt, bʌɾ ɪn ði ɛn i ʃʊk ɪz hɛd fɝmli. "bɔɪ, aɪ laɪk jə wɛl ɪnʌf, bʌt jə noʊ əz wɛl əz aɪ də ðəɾ aɪ oʊnli hɛlp bɪfɔɹ kəz ðəɹ wɑz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ mɪkst ɪn ɪt. sihæn dʌzn tʃɹaɪ tə tʃit mi mɔɹ ðən aɪ ɪkspɛkt, ən wɪð ðə kɪŋz ɡɪft æɾəd ɪn, aɪ kəd nɛvɝ ɝn əz mʌtʃ ɪn ðə vɪlədʒəz. tə maɪ vɛɹi ɡɹeɪt sɝpɹaɪz, dinə simz tə lʌv mi, ən - əz mʌtʃ ə sɝpɹaɪz - aɪ ɹɪtɝn ðə filɪŋ. naʊ, waɪ ʃəɾ aɪ liv ðət tə ɡoʊ bi tʃeɪs baɪ tʃɹɑləks ən dɑɹkfɹɛnz? ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ? oʊ, ɪts ə tɛmteɪʃən, əl ədmɪt, bʌt noʊ. noʊ, əl nɑt ɡɛt mɪkst ʌp ɪn ɪɾ əɡɛn."

Thom frowned as if considering it, but in the end he shook his head firmly. "Boy, I like you well enough, but you know as well as I do that I only helped before because there was an Aes Sedai mixed in it. Seaghan doesn't try to cheat me more than I expect, and with the King's Gift added in, I could never earn as much in the villages. To my very great surprise, Dena seems to love me, and - as much a surprise - I return the feeling. Now, why should I leave that to go be chased by Trollocs and Darkfriends? The Horn of Valere? Oh, it is a temptation, I'll admit, but no. No, I will not get mixed up in it again."

hi lin oʊvɝ tə pɪk ʌp wʌn ə ðə wʊɾən ɪnstʃɹəmən keɪsəz, lɔŋ ən nɛɹoʊ. wən i oʊpən ɪt, ə flut leɪ ɪnsaɪd, pleɪnli meɪd bʌt maʊntəd wɪð sɪlvɝ. hi kloʊzd ɪɾ əɡɛn ən slɪɾ ɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəl. "ju maɪt nid tə ɝn jəɹ sʌpɝ əɡɛn sʌmdeɪ, bɔɪ."

He leaned over to pick up one of the wooden instrument cases, long and narrow. When he opened it, a flute lay inside, plainly made but mounted with silver. He closed it again and slid it across the table. "You might need to earn your supper again someday, boy."

"aɪ maɪɾ ət ðæt," ɹænd sɛd. "æt list wi kən tɔk. əl bi ɪn - "

"I might at that," Rand said. "At least we can talk. I will be in - "

ðə ɡlimən wɑz ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd. "ə klin bɹeɪk ɪz bɛst, bɔɪ. ɪf jəɹ ɔlweɪz kʌmɪŋ ɝaʊnd, ivən ɪf jə nɛvɝ mɛnʃən ɪt, aɪ woʊn bi eɪbəl tə ɡɛt ðə hɔɹn aʊɾ ə maɪ hɛd. ən aɪ woʊn bi tæŋɡəld ɪn ɪt. aɪ woʊnt."

The gleeman was shaking his head. "A clean break is best, boy. If you're always coming around, even if you never mention it, I won't be able to get the Horn out of my head. And I won't be tangled in it. I won't."

æftɝ ɹænd lɛft, tɑm θɹu hɪz kloʊk ɑn ðə bɛɾ ən sæt wɪð ɪz ɛlboʊz ɑn ðə teɪbəl. ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. haʊ dɪd ðət fɑɹmbɔɪ faɪnd. . . . hi ʃʌɾ ɔf ðət laɪn ə θɔt. θɪŋk əbaʊt ðə hɔɹn tu lɔŋ, ən i wəd faɪn hɪmsɛlf ɹʌnɪŋ ɔf wɪð ɹænd tə kæɹi ɪt tə ʃaɪnɝ. ðət wəd meɪk ə stɔɹi, kæɹiɪŋ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ tə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz wɪð tʃɹɑləks ən dɑɹkfɹɛnz pɝsuɪŋ. skaʊlɪŋ, hi ɹimaɪndəd hɪmsɛlf ə dinə. ivən ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt lʌv hɪm, tælən sətʃ əz hɝz wɑz nɑt tə bi faʊn ɛvɹi deɪ. ən ʃi dɪd lʌv, ivən ɪf i kəd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə ɪmædʒən waɪ.

After Rand left, Thom threw his cloak on the bed and sat with his elbows on the table. The Horn of Valere. How did that farmboy find. . . . He shut off that line of thought. Think about the Horn too long, and he would find himself running off with Rand to carry it to Shienar. That would make a story, carrying the Horn of Valere to the Borderlands with Trollocs and Darkfriends pursuing. Scowling, he reminded himself of Dena. Even if she had not loved him, talent such as hers was not to be found every day. And she did love, even if he could not begin to imagine why.

"oʊl ful," hi mʌɾɝd.

"Old fool," he muttered.

"aɪ, ən oʊl ful," zɛɹə sɛd fɹəm ðə dɔɹ. hi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt; hi hæd bɪn soʊ əbzɔɹbd ɪn ɪz θɔts ðəɾ i hæd nɑt hɝd ðə dɔɹ oʊpən. hi hæd noʊn zɛɹə fəɹ jɪɹz, ɔf ən ɑn ɪn ɪz wɑndɝɪŋz, ən ʃi ɔlweɪz tʊk fʊl ædvæntɪdʒ ə ðə fɹɛndʃɪp tə spik əɹ maɪnd. "æn oʊl ful huz pleɪɪŋ ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz əɡɛn. ənlɛs maɪ ɪɹz ɑɹ feɪlɪŋ, ðət jʌŋ lɔɹɾ əz ðə saʊn ʌv ændɝ ɑn ɪz tʌŋ. hiz noʊ kɛɹhinɪn, ðæts fəɹ sɝɾən ʃʊɹ. deɪz deɪmɑɹ ɪz deɪnʒɝəs ɪnʌf wɪθaʊt lɛɾɪŋ ən aʊtlæn lɔɹd mɪks jə ɪn ɪz skimz."

"Aye, an old fool," Zera said from the door. He gave a start; he had been so absorbed in his thoughts that he had not heard the door open. He had known Zera for years, off and on in his wanderings, and she always took full advantage of the friendship to speak her mind. "An old fool who's playing the Game of Houses again. Unless my ears are failing, that young lord has the sound of Andor on his tongue. He's no Cairhienin, that's for certain sure. Daes Dae'mar is dangerous enough without letting an outland lord mix you in his schemes."

tɑm blɪŋkt, ðən kənsɪɾɝd ðə weɪ ɹænd hæd lʊkt. ðət koʊt hæd ʃʊɹli bɪn faɪn ɪnʌf fəɹ ə lɔɹd. hi wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ oʊld, lɛɾɪŋ θɪŋz laɪk ðət slɪp baɪ hɪm. ɹufəli, hi ɹilaɪzd i wɑz kənsɪɾɝɪŋ wɛðɝ tə tɛl zɛɹə ðə tʃɹuθ əɹ lɛɾ əɹ kəntɪnju θɪŋkɪŋ əz ʃi dɪd. ɔl ɪt teɪks ɪz tə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðə ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm, ən aɪ stɑɹt pleɪɪŋ ɪt. "ðə bɔɪ ɪz ə ʃɛpɝd, zɛɹə, fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz."

Thom blinked, then considered the way Rand had looked. That coat had surely been fine enough for a lord. He was growing old, letting things like that slip by him. Ruefully, he realized he was considering whether to tell Zera the truth or let her continue thinking as she did. All it takes is to think about the Great Game, and I start playing it. "The boy is a shepherd, Zera, from the Two Rivers."

ʃi læf skɔɹnfəli. "æn ɪm ðə kwin ʌv ɡildən. aɪ tɛl ju, ðə ɡeɪm əz ɡɹoʊn deɪnʒɝəs ɪn kɛɹhin ðə læs fju jɪɹz. nʌθɪŋ laɪk wʌt jə nu ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. ðəɹ ɑɹ mɝɾɝz dʌn, naʊ. jəl əv jəɹ θɹoʊt kʌt fəɹ ju, ɪf jə doʊnt wɑtʃ aʊt."

She laughed scornfully. "And I'm the Queen of Ghealdan. I tell you, the Game has grown dangerous in Cairhien the last few years. Nothing like what you knew in Caemlyn. There are murders done, now. You'll have your throat cut for you, if you don't watch out."

"aɪ tɛl ju, aɪm nɑɾ ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. ðæts ɔl twɛnti jɪɹz ɪn ðə pæst, nɪɹ ɪnʌf."

"I tell you, I am not in the Great Game any longer. That's all twenty years in the past, near enough."

"aɪ." ʃi dɪd nɑt saʊn əz ɪf ʃi bɪlivd ɪt. "bʌt bi ðəɾ əz ɪt meɪ, ən jʌŋ aʊtlæn lɔɹdz əsaɪd, juv bɪɡʌn pɝfɔɹmɪŋ ət ðə lɔɹdz' mænɝz."

"Aye." She did not sound as if she believed it. "But be that as it may, and young outland lords aside, you've begun performing at the lords' manors."

"ðeɪ peɪ wɛl."

"They pay well."

"æn ðəl pʊl jə ɪndə ðɛɹ plɑts əz sun əz ðeɪ si haʊ. ðeɪ si ə mæn, ən θɪŋk haʊ tə juz hɪm, əz nætʃɹəli əz bɹiðɪŋ. ðɪs jʌŋ lɔɹɾ ə jʊɹz woʊn hɛlp ju; ðəl iɾ ɪm əlaɪv."

"And they'll pull you into their plots as soon as they see how. They see a man, and think how to use him, as naturally as breathing. This young lord of yours won't help you; they will eat him alive."

hi ɡeɪv ʌp ɑn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənvɪns əɹ i wɑz aʊɾ ʌv ɪt. "ɪz ðət wʌt jə keɪm ʌp tə seɪ, zɛɹə?"

He gave up on trying to convince her he was out of it. "Is that what you came up to say, Zera?"

"aɪ. fɝɡɛt pleɪɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm, tɑm. mɛɹi dinə. ʃɪl teɪk ju, ðə mɔɹ ful hɝ, boʊni ən waɪt-hɛɹɾ əz jə ɑɹ. mɛɹi hɝ, ən fɝɡɛt ðɪs jʌŋ lɔɹɾ ən deɪz deɪmɑɹ."

"Aye. Forget playing the Great Game, Thom. Marry Dena. She'll take you, the more fool her, bony and white-haired as you are. Marry her, and forget this young lord and Daes Dae'mar."

"aɪ θæŋk jə fəɹ ði ædvaɪs," hi sɛd dʒɹaɪli. mɛɹi hɝ? bɝɾən əɹ wɪð ən oʊl hʌzbənd. ʃɪl nɛvɝ bi ə bɑɹd wɪð maɪ pæs hæŋɪŋ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk. "ɪf jə doʊn maɪnd, zɛɹə, aɪ wɑnə bi əloʊn fəɹ ə waɪl. aɪ pɝfɔɹm fəɹ leɪɾi ɑɹɪlɪn ən əɹ ɡɛsts tənaɪt, ən aɪ nid tə pɹipɛɹ."

"I thank you for the advice," he said dryly. Marry her? Burden her with an old husband. She'll never be a bard with my past hanging around her neck. "If you don't mind, Zera, I want to be alone for a while. I perform for Lady Arilyn and her guests tonight, and I need to prepare."

ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə snɔɹɾ ən ə ʃeɪk ə hɝ hɛɾ ən bæŋ ðə dɔɹ ʃʌt bɪhaɪn hɝ.

She gave him a snort and a shake of her head and banged the door shut behind her.

tɑm dʒɹʌmd ɪz fɪŋɡɝz ɑn ðə teɪbəl. koʊɾ əɹ noʊ koʊt, ɹænd wɑz stɪl oʊnli ə ʃɛpɝd. ɪf i hæd bɪn mɔɹ, ɪf i hæd bɪn wʌt tɑm wʌns səspɛktəd - ə mæn u kəd tʃænəl - niðɝ mɔɪɹeɪn nɔɹ ɛni ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ wəɾ ɛvɝ əv lɛɾ ɪm wɔk əweɪ ʌnʒəntəld. hɔɹn əɹ noʊ hɔɹn, ðə bɔɪ wɑz oʊnli ə ʃɛpɝd.

Thom drummed his fingers on the table. Coat or no coat, Rand was still only a shepherd. If he had been more, if he had been what Thom once suspected - a man who could channel - neither Moiraine nor any other Aes Sedai would ever have let him walk away ungentled. Horn or no Horn, the boy was only a shepherd.

"hi ɪz aʊɾ ʌv ɪt," hi sɛɾ əlaʊd, "æn soʊ æm aɪ."

"He is out of it," he said aloud, "and so am I."


tʃæptɝ twɛntisɛvən


CHAPTER 27

ðə ʃædoʊ ɪn ðə naɪt


The Shadow in the Night

"aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ɪt," lɔɪəl sɛd. "aɪ wɑz wɪnɪŋ, moʊst ə ðə taɪm. ən ðən dinə keɪm ɪn ən dʒɔɪn ðə ɡeɪm, ən ʃi wʌn ɪɾ ɔl ɹaɪt bæk. ɛvɹi tɔs. ʃi kɔld ɪɾ ə lɪɾəl lɛsən. wʌd ʃi min baɪ ðæt?"

"I do not understand it," Loial said. "I was winning, most of the time. And then Dena came in and joined the game, and she won it all right back. Every toss. She called it a little lesson. What did she mean by that?"

ɹænd ən ði oʊɡiɝ wɝ meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ θɹu ðə fɔɹɡeɪt, ðə bʌntʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪps bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ðə sʌn sæt loʊ ɪn ðə wɛst, ə ɹɛd bɔl hæf bɪloʊ ðə hɝaɪzən, θɹoʊɪŋ lɔŋ ʃædoʊz bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ðə stʃɹit wɑz ɛmpti seɪv fəɹ wʌn ə ðə bɪɡ pʌpəts, ə ɡoʊt-hɔɹn tʃɹɑlɑk wɪð ə sɔɹɾ əɾ ɪts bɛlt, kʌmɪŋ təwɔɹɾ əm wɪð faɪv mɛn wɝkɪŋ ðə poʊlz, bʌt saʊnz ə mɛɹəmən dʒɹɪftəd stɪl fɹəm ʌðɝ pɑɹts ə ðə fɔɹɡeɪt, wɛɹ ðə hɔlz ʌv ɛntɝteɪnmən ən ðə tævɝnz stʊd. hɪɹ, dɔɹz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi bɑɹɾ ən wɪndoʊz ʃʌɾɝd.

Rand and the Ogier were making their way through the Foregate, The Bunch of Grapes behind them. The sun sat low in the west, a red ball half below the horizon, throwing long shadows behind them. The street was empty save for one of the big puppets, a goat-horned Trolloc with a sword at its belt, coming toward them with five men working the poles, but sounds of merriment drifted still from other parts of the Foregate, where the halls of entertainment and the taverns stood. Here, doors were already barred and windows shuttered.

ɹænd stɑp fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə wʊɾən flut keɪs ən slʌŋ ɪɾ ɑn ɪz bæk. aɪ səpoʊz aɪ kʊdn ɪkspɛkt ɪm tə θɹoʊ oʊvɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ən kʌm wɪð mi, bʌɾ ət list i kəd tɔk tə mi. laɪt, aɪ wɪʃ ɪŋtʃɹ wəd ʃoʊ ʌp. hi stʌft ɪz hænz ɪn ɪz pɑkəts ən fɛl səlinz noʊt.

Rand stopped fingering the wooden flute case and slung it on his back. I suppose I couldn't expect him to throw over everything and come with me, but at least he could talk to me. Light, I wish Ingtar would show up. He stuffed his hands in his pockets and felt Selene's note.

"ju doʊn səpoʊz ʃi. . . ." lɔɪəl pɔzd ənkʌmftəbli. "ju doʊn səpoʊz ʃi tʃiɾəd, də ju? ɛvɹibɑɾi wɑz ɡɹɪnɪŋ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ klɛvɝ."

"You don't suppose she. . . ." Loial paused uncomfortably. "You don't suppose she cheated, do you? Everybody was grinning as if she were doing something clever."

ɹænd ʃɹʌɡd əɾ ɪz kloʊk. aɪ hæv tə teɪk ðə hɔɹn ən ɡoʊ. ɪf wi weɪt fəɹ ɪŋtʃɹ, ɛniθɪŋ kən hæpən. feɪn wɪl kʌm sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ. aɪ hæv tə steɪ əhɛɾ ə hɪm. ðə mɛn wɪð ðə pʌpət wɝ ɔlmoʊs tə ðɛm.

Rand shrugged at his cloak. I have to take the Horn and go. If we wait for Ingtar, anything can happen. Fain will come sooner or later. I have to stay ahead of him. The men with the puppet were almost to them.

"ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd sʌɾənli, "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðæts ə - "

"Rand," Loial said suddenly, "I don't think that's a - "

əbɹʌpli ðə mɛn lɛt ðɛɹ poʊlz klæɾɝ tə ðə pæk dɝt stʃɹit; ɪnstɛɾ ə kəlæpsɪŋ, ðə tʃɹɑlɑk lɛp fəɹ ɹænd wɪð aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt hænz.

Abruptly the men let their poles clatter to the packed dirt street; instead of collapsing, the Trolloc leaped for Rand with outstretched hands.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm tə θɪŋk. ɪnstɪŋk bɹɔt ðə sɔɹɾ aʊɾ ʌv ɪts ʃiθ ɪn ə flæʃɪŋ ɑɹk. ðə mun ɹaɪzəz oʊvɝ ðə leɪks. ðə tʃɹɑlɑk stæɡɝd bæk wɪð ə bʌbəlɪŋ kɹaɪ, snɑɹlɪŋ ivən əz ɪt fɛl.

There was no time to think. Instinct brought the sword out of its sheath in a flashing arc. The Moon Rises Over the Lakes. The Trolloc staggered back with a bubbling cry, snarling even as it fell.

fəɹ ən ɪnstən ɛvɹiwʌn stʊd fɹoʊzən. ðən ðə mɛn - ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ðeɪ hæd tə bi - lʊk fɹəm ðə tʃɹɑlɑk laɪɪŋ ɪn ðə stʃɹit tə ɹænd, wɪð ðə sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪz hænz ən lɔɪəl əɾ ɪz saɪd. ðeɪ tɝn ən ɹæn.

For an instant everyone stood frozen. Then the men - the Darkfriends, they had to be - looked from the Trolloc lying in the street to Rand, with the sword in his hands and Loial at his side. They turned and ran.

ɹænd wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə tʃɹɑlɑk, tu. ðə vɔɪd hæd sɝaʊndəɾ ɪm bɪfɔɹ ɪz hæn tʌtʃt hɪlt; seɪɾɪn ʃoʊn ɪn ɪz maɪnd, bɛkənɪŋ, sɪkənɪŋ. wɪð ən ɛfɝt, hi meɪd ðə vɔɪd vænɪʃ, ən lɪkt ɪz lɪps. wɪθaʊt ði ɛmptinəs, fɪɹ kɹɔld ɑn ɪz skɪn.

Rand was staring at the Trolloc, too. The void had surrounded him before his hand touched hilt; saidin shone in his mind, beckoning, sickening. With an effort, he made the void vanish, and licked his lips. Without the emptiness, fear crawled on his skin.

"lɔɪəl, wɪv tə ɡɛt bæk tə ði ɪn. hʊɹɪnz əloʊn, ən ðeɪ - " hi ɡɹʌntɪɾ əz i wɑz lɪftəɾ ɪndə ði ɛɹ baɪ ə θɪk ɑɹm lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə pɪn boʊθ ə hɪz tə hɪz tʃɛst. ə hɛɹi hænd ɡɹæbd ɪz θɹoʊt. hi kɑt saɪɾ ʌv ə tʌsk snaʊt dʒʌst oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd. ə ɹæŋk smɛl fɪld ɪz noʊz, ikwəl pɑɹts saʊɝ swɛɾ ən pɪɡsti.

"Loial, we have to get back to the inn. Hurin's alone, and they - " He grunted as he was lifted into the air by a thick arm long enough to pin both of his to his chest. A hairy hand grabbed his throat. He caught sight of a tusked snout just over his head. A rank smell filled his nose, equal parts sour sweat and pigsty.

əz kwɪkli əz ɪt hæd siz hɪm, ðə hæn əɾ ɪz θɹoʊt wɑz tɔɹn əweɪ. stʌnd, ɹænd stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪt, ət ðə θɪk oʊɡiɝ fɪŋɡɝz klʌtʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑks ɹɪst.

As quickly as it had seized him, the hand at his throat was torn away. Stunned, Rand stared at it, at the thick Ogier fingers clutching the Trolloc's wrist.

"hoʊld ɑn, ɹænd." lɔɪəlz vɔɪs saʊndəd stʃɹeɪnd. ði oʊɡiɝz ʌðɝ hæn keɪm ɝaʊn ən tʊk hoʊld ə ði ɑɹm stɪl hoʊldɪŋ ɹænd əbʌv ðə ɡɹaʊnd. "hoʊld ɑn."

"Hold on, Rand." Loial's voice sounded strained. The Ogier's other hand came around and took hold of the arm still holding Rand above the ground. "Hold on."

ɹænd wɑz ʃeɪkən fɹəm saɪd tə saɪɾ əz oʊɡiɝ ən tʃɹɑlɑk stʃɹʌɡəld. əbɹʌpli hi fɛl fɹi. stæɡɝɪŋ, hi tʊk tu stɛps tə ɡɛt klɪɹ ən tɝn bæk wɪð sɔɹd ɹeɪzd.

Rand was shaken from side to side as Ogier and Trolloc struggled. Abruptly he fell free. Staggering, he took two steps to get clear and turned back with sword raised.

stændɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðə bɔɹ-snaʊɾəd tʃɹɑlɑk, lɔɪəl hæɾ ɪt baɪ ɹɪst ən fɔɹɑɹm, hoʊldɪŋ ɪts ɑɹmz spɹɛd waɪd, bɹiðɪŋ hɑɹd wɪð ði ɛfɝt. ðə tʃɹɑlɑk snɑɹəld ɡʌtʃɝəli ɪn ðə hɑɹʃ tʃɹɑlɑk tʌŋ, θɹoʊɪŋ ɪts hɛd bæk ɪn ɛfɝts tə kætʃ lɔɪəl wɪð ə tʌsk. ðɛɹ buts skʌfəld əkɹɔs ðə dɝɾ ə ðə stʃɹit.

Standing behind the boar-snouted Trolloc, Loial had it by wrist and forearm, holding its arms spread wide, breathing hard with the effort. The Trolloc snarled gutturally in the harsh Trolloc tongue, throwing its head back in efforts to catch Loial with a tusk. Their boots scuffled across the dirt of the street.

ɹænd tʃɹaɪd tə faɪn ə pleɪs tə pʊɾ ɪz bleɪɾ ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɪθaʊt hɝɾɪŋ lɔɪəl, bʌɾ oʊɡiɝ ən tʃɹɑlɑk spʌn ɪn ðɛɹ ɹʌf dæns soʊ mʌtʃ ðəɾ i kəd faɪnd noʊ oʊpənɪŋ.

Rand tried to find a place to put his blade in the Trolloc without hurting Loial, but Ogier and Trolloc spun in their rough dance so much that he could find no opening.

wɪð ə ɡɹʌnt, ðə tʃɹɑlɑk pʊld ɪts lɛft ɑɹm fɹi, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ɪt kəd lus ɪtsɛlf kəmplitli, lɔɪəl snæpt ɪz oʊn ɑɹm ɝaʊn ɪts nɛk, hʌɡɪŋ ðə kɹitʃɝ kloʊz. ðə tʃɹɑlɑk klɔɾ əɾ ɪts sɔɹd; ðə saɪð-laɪk bleɪd hʌŋ ɑn ðə ɹɔŋ saɪd fəɹ lɛft-hændəd jus, bʌɾ ɪntʃ baɪ ɪntʃ ðə dɑɹk stil bɪɡæn slaɪɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə skæbɝd. ən stɪl ðeɪ θɹæʃt əbaʊt soʊ ðət ɹænd kəd nɑt stʃɹaɪk wɪθaʊt ɹɪskɪŋ lɔɪəl.

With a grunt, the Trolloc pulled its left arm free, but before it could loose itself completely, Loial snapped his own arm around its neck, hugging the creature close. The Trolloc clawed at its sword; the scythe-like blade hung on the wrong side for left-handed use, but inch by inch the dark steel began sliding out of the scabbard. And still they thrashed about so that Rand could not strike without risking Loial.

ðə paʊɝ. ðət kəd də ɪt. haʊ, hi dɪd nɑt noʊ, bʌɾ i nu nʌθɪŋ ɛls tə tʃɹaɪ. ðə tʃɹɑlɑk hæɾ ɪts sɔɹd hæf ənʃiðd. wən ðə kɝv bleɪd wɑz bɛɹ, ɪt wəd kɪl lɔɪəl.

The Power. That could do it. How, he did not know, but he knew nothing else to try. The Trolloc had its sword half unsheathed. When the curved blade was bare, it would kill Loial.

ɹɪlʌktənli, ɹænd fɔɹm ðə vɔɪd. seɪɾɪn ʃoʊn ət hɪm, pʊld ət hɪm. dɪmli, hi sim tə ɹikɔl ə taɪm wən ɪt hæd sʌŋ tə hɪm, bʌt naʊ ɪɾ oʊnli dʒɹu hɪm, ə flaʊɝz pɝfjum dʒɹɔɪŋ ə bi, ə mɪɾənz stɛntʃ dʒɹɔɪŋ ə flaɪ. hi oʊpən hɪmsɛlf ʌp, ɹitʃt fəɹ ɪt. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ðɛɹ. hi kəɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ laɪɾ ɪn tʃɹuθ. ðə teɪn slɪɾ ɔf ɑntu hɪm, sɔɪlɪŋ hɪm, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ floʊ ʌv laɪɾ ɪnsaɪd hɪm. dʒɹɪvən baɪ ə dɪstən dɛspɝeɪʃən, hi tʃɹaɪɾ əɡɛn ən əɡɛn. ən əɡɛn ən əɡɛn ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ðə teɪnt.

Reluctantly, Rand formed the void. Saidin shone at him, pulled at him. Dimly, he seemed to recall a time when it had sung to him, but now it only drew him, a flower's perfume drawing a bee, a midden's stench drawing a fly. He opened himself up, reached for it. There was nothing there. He could as well have been reaching for light in truth. The taint slid off onto him, soiling him, but there was no flow of light inside him. Driven by a distant desperation, he tried again and again. And again and again there was only the taint.

wɪð ə sʌɾən hiv, lɔɪəl θɹu ðə tʃɹɑlɑk əsaɪd, soʊ hɑɹd ðət ðə θɪŋ kɑɹtwild əɡɛns ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə bɪldɪŋ. ɪt stʃɹʌk, hɛdfɝst, wɪð ə laʊd kɹæk, ən slɪd daʊn ðə wɔl tə laɪ wɪð ɪts nɛk twɪstəɾ əɾ ən ɪmpɑsəbəl æŋɡəl. lɔɪəl stʊd stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪt, hɪz tʃɛs hivɪŋ.

With a sudden heave, Loial threw the Trolloc aside, so hard that the thing cartwheeled against the side of a building. It struck, headfirst, with a loud crack, and slid down the wall to lie with its neck twisted at an impossible angle. Loial stood staring at it, his chest heaving.

ɹænd lʊkt aʊɾ ə ði ɛmptinəs fəɹ ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ i ɹilaɪzd wʌt hæd hæpənd. əz sun əz i dɪd, ðoʊ, hi lɛt vɔɪɾ ən teɪntɪd laɪt ɡoʊ, ən hɝid tə lɔɪəlz saɪd.

Rand looked out of the emptiness for a moment before he realized what had happened. As soon as he did, though, he let void and tainted light go, and hurried to Loial's side.

"aɪ nɛvɝ . . . kɪl bɪfɔɹ, ɹænd." lɔɪəl dʒɹu ə ʃʌɾɝɪŋ bɹɛθ.

"I never . . . killed before, Rand." Loial drew a shuddering breath.

"ɪt wʊɾə kɪl jə ɪf jə hædnt," ɹænd toʊl hɪm. æŋkʃəsli, hi lʊkt ət ði æliz ən ʃʌɾɝd wɪndoʊz ən bɑɹd dɔɹz. wɛɹ ðəɹ wɝ tu tʃɹɑləks, ðəɹ hæd tə bi mɔɹ. "ɪm sɑɹi jə hæd tə də ɪt, lɔɪəl, bʌɾ ɪt wʊɾə kɪl boʊθ ʌv ʌs, əɹ wɝs."

"It would have killed you if you hadn't," Rand told him. Anxiously, he looked at the alleys and shuttered windows and barred doors. Where there were two Trollocs, there had to be more. "I'm sorry you had to do it, Loial, but it would have killed both of us, or worse."

"aɪ noʊ. bʌɾ aɪ kænɑt laɪk ɪt. ivən ə tʃɹɑlɑk." pɔɪntɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə sɛɾɪŋ sʌn, ði oʊɡiɝ sizd ɹændz ɑɹm. "ðɛɹz ənʌðɝ ə ðɛm."

"I know. But I cannot like it. Even a Trolloc." Pointing toward the setting sun, the Ogier seized Rand's arm. "There's another of them."

əɡɛns ðə sʌn, ɹænd kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt dɪteɪlz, bʌɾ ɪɾ əpɪɹd tə bi ənʌðɝ ɡɹup ə mɛn wɪð ə hjudʒ pʌpət, kʌmɪŋ təwɔɹd lɔɪəl ən hɪm. ɪksɛp ðət naʊ hi nu wʌt tə lʊk fɔɹ, ðə "pʌpət" muvd ɪts lɛɡz tu nætʃɹəli, ən ðə snaʊɾəd hɛd ɹoʊz tə snɪf ði ɛɹ wɪθaʊɾ ɛniwʌn lɪftɪŋ ə poʊl. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðə tʃɹɑlɑk ən dɑɹkfɹɛnz kəd si hɪm əmʌŋ ði ivnɪŋ ʃædoʊz, əɹ wʌt leɪ ɪn ðə stʃɹiɾ ɝaʊn hɪm; ðeɪ muv tu sloʊli fəɹ ðæt. jɛɾ ɪt wɑz pleɪn ðeɪ wɝ hʌntɪŋ, ən kʌmɪŋ kloʊsɝ.

Against the sun, Rand could not make out details, but it appeared to be another group of men with a huge puppet, coming toward Loial and him. Except that now he knew what to look for, the "puppet" moved its legs too naturally, and the snouted head rose to sniff the air without anyone lifting a pole. He did not think the Trolloc and Darkfriends could see him among the evening shadows, or what lay in the street around him; they moved too slowly for that. Yet it was plain they were hunting, and coming closer.

"feɪn noʊz aɪm aʊt hɪɹ sʌmwɛɹ," hi sɛd, heɪstəli waɪpɪŋ ɪz bleɪɾ ɑn ə dɛd tʃɹɑlɑks koʊt. "hiz sɛɾ əm tə faɪn mi. hiz əfɹeɪɾ ə ðə tʃɹɑləks biɪŋ sin, ðoʊ, əɹ i wʊdn əv əm dɪsɡaɪzd. ɪf wi kən ɹitʃ ə stʃɹit wɛɹ ðəɹ ɑɹ pipəl, wɪl bi seɪf. wɪv tə ɡɛt bæk tə hʊɹɪn. ɪf feɪn faɪnz hɪm, əloʊn wɪð ðə hɔɹn. . . ."

"Fain knows I am out here somewhere," he said, hastily wiping his blade on a dead Trolloc's coat. "He's set them to find me. He is afraid of the Trollocs being seen, though, or he wouldn't have them disguised. If we can reach a street where there are people, we'll be safe. We have to get back to Hurin. If Fain finds him, alone with the Horn. . . ."

hi pʊld lɔɪəl əlɔŋ tə ðə nɛks kɔɹnɝ ən tɝn təwɔɹd ðə nɪɹəst saʊnz ə læftɝ ən mjuzɪk, bʌt lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹitʃt ɪt, ənʌðɝ ɡɹup ə mɛn əpɪɹɾ əhɛɾ ə ðɛm ɪn ði ʌðɝwaɪz ɛmpti stʃɹit wɪð ə pʌpət ðət wɑz noʊ pʌpət. ɹænd ən lɔɪəl tʊk ðə nɛks tɝnɪŋ. ɪt lɛɾ ist.

He pulled Loial along to the next corner and turned toward the nearest sounds of laughter and music, but long before they reached it, another group of men appeared ahead of them in the otherwise empty street with a puppet that was no puppet. Rand and Loial took the next turning. It led east.

ɛvɹi taɪm ɹænd tʃɹaɪd tə ɹitʃ ðə mjuzɪk ən læftɝ, ðəɹ wɑz ə tʃɹɑlɑk ɪn ðə weɪ, ɔfən snɪfɪŋ ði ɛɹ fəɹ ə sɛnt. səm tʃɹɑləks hʌntəd baɪ sɛnt. səmtaɪmz, hɪɹ wɛɹ ðəɹ wɝ noʊ aɪz tə si, ə tʃɹɑlɑk stɔkt əloʊn. mɔɹ ðən wʌns i wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz wʌn i hæd sin bɪfɔɹ. ðeɪ wɝ kloʊzɪŋ ɪn, ən meɪkɪŋ ʃʊɹ i ən lɔɪəl dɪd nɑt liv ðə dɪzɝɾɪd stʃɹits wɪð ðɛɹ ʃʌɾɝd wɪndoʊz. sloʊli ðə tu ʌv əm wɝ fɔɹst ist, əweɪ fɹəm ðə sɪɾi ən hʊɹɪn, əweɪ fɹəm ʌðɝ pipəl, əlɔŋ nɛɹoʊ, sloʊli dɑɹkənɪŋ stʃɹits ðət ɹæn ɪn ɔl dɝɛkʃənz, ʌphɪl ən daʊn. ɹænd aɪd ðə haʊsəz ðeɪ pæst, ðə tɔl bɪldɪŋz kloʊzd ʌp taɪt fəɹ ðə naɪt, wɪð mɔɹ ðən ə lɪɾəl ɹəɡɹɛt. ivən ɪf i paʊndɪɾ ɑn ə dɔɹ əntɪl sʌmwʌn oʊpən ɪt, ivən ɪf ðeɪ tʊk lɔɪəl ən ɪm ɪn, nʌn ə ðə dɔɹz i sɔ wəd stɑp ə tʃɹɑlɑk. ɔl ðət wəd də wəd bi tə ɔfɝ ʌp mɔɹ vɪktəmz wɪð lɔɪəl ən hɪmsɛlf.

Every time Rand tried to reach the music and laughter, there was a Trolloc in the way, often sniffing the air for a scent. Some Trollocs hunted by scent. Sometimes, here where there were no eyes to see, a Trolloc stalked alone. More than once he was sure it was one he had seen before. They were closing in, and making sure he and Loial did not leave the deserted streets with their shuttered windows. Slowly the two of them were forced east, away from the city and Hurin, away from other people, along narrow, slowly darkening streets that ran in all directions, uphill and down. Rand eyed the houses they passed, the tall buildings closed up tight for the night, with more than a little regret. Even if he pounded on a door until someone opened it, even if they took Loial and him in, none of the doors he saw would stop a Trolloc. All that would do would be to offer up more victims with Loial and himself.

"ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd faɪnəli, "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊwɛɹ ɛls tə ɡoʊ."

"Rand," Loial said finally, "there is nowhere else to go."

ðeɪ hæd ɹitʃt ði istɝn ɛdʒ ə ðə fɔɹɡeɪt; ðə tɔl bɪldɪŋz tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðɛm wɝ ðə læst. laɪts ɪn wɪndoʊz ɑn ði ʌpɝ stɔɹiz mɑk hɪm, bʌt ðə loʊɝ flɔɹz wɝ ɔl ʃʌt taɪt. əhɛd leɪ ðə hɪlz, kloʊkt ɪn fɝs twaɪlaɪɾ ən bɛɹ ə soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə fɑɹmhaʊs. nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli ɛmpti, ðoʊ. hi kəd dʒʌs meɪk aʊt peɪl wɔlz sɝaʊndɪŋ wʌn ə ðə lɑɹdʒɝ hɪlz, pɝhæps ə maɪl əweɪ, ən bɪldɪŋz ɪnsaɪd.

They had reached the eastern edge of the Foregate; the tall buildings to either side of them were the last. Lights in windows on the upper stories mocked him, but the lower floors were all shut tight. Ahead lay the hills, cloaked in first twilight and bare of so much as a farmhouse. Not entirely empty, though. He could just make out pale walls surrounding one of the larger hills, perhaps a mile away, and buildings inside.

"wʌns ðeɪ pʊʃ əs aʊt ðɛɹ," lɔɪəl sɛd, "ðeɪ woʊn əv tə wɝi hu siz ðɛm."

"Once they push us out there," Loial said, "they won't have to worry who sees them."

ɹænd dʒɛstʃɝd tə ðə wɔlz ɝaʊn ðə hɪl. "ðoʊz ʃəd stɑp ə tʃɹɑlɑk. ɪt mʌs bi ə lɔɹdz mænɝ. meɪbi ðəl lɛɾ əs ɪn. ən oʊɡiɝ, ən ən aʊtlæn lɔɹd? ðɪs koʊɾ əz tə bi ɡʊd fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ." hi lʊk bæk daʊn ðə stʃɹit. noʊ tʃɹɑləks ɪn saɪt jɛt, bʌɾ i dʒɹu lɔɪəl ɝaʊn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə bɪldɪŋ ɛniweɪ.

Rand gestured to the walls around the hill. "Those should stop a Trolloc. It must be a lord's manner. Maybe they'll let us in. An Ogier, and an outland lord? This coat has to be good for something sooner or later." He looked back down the street. No Trollocs in sight yet, but he drew Loial around the side of the building anyway.

"aɪ θɪŋk ðəɾ ɪz ði ɪluməneɪɾɝz' tʃæptɝ haʊs, ɹænd. ɪluməneɪɾɝz ɡɑɹd ðɛɹ sikɹəts taɪtli. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðeɪ wəd lɛt ɡɔlʒɹiən hɪmsɛlf ɪnsaɪd ðɛɹ."

"I think that is the Illuminators' chapter house, Rand. Illuminators guard their secrets tightly. I don't think they would let Galldrian himself inside there."

"wʌt tʃɹʌbəl əv jə ɡɑɾən jɝsɛlf ɪndə naʊ?" sɛɾ ə fəmɪljɝ wʊmənz vɔɪs. ðəɹ wɑz sʌɾənli ə spaɪsi pɝfjum ɪn ði ɛɹ.

"What trouble have you gotten yourself into now?" said a familiar woman's voice. There was suddenly a spicy perfume in the air.

ɹænd stɛɹd: səlin stɛpt ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ ðeɪ hæd dʒʌst ɹaʊndəd, hɝ waɪt dʒɹɛs bɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə dɪmnəs. "haʊ dɪd jə ɡɛt hɪɹ? wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ hɪɹ? juv tə liv ɪmiɾiətli. ɹʌn! ðəɹ ɑɹ tʃɹɑləks æftɝ ʌs."

Rand stared: Selene stepped around the corner they had just rounded, her white dress bright in the dimness. "How did you get here? What are you doing here? You have to leave immediately. Run! There are Trollocs after us."

"soʊ aɪ sɔ." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz dʒɹaɪ, jɛt kul ən kəmpoʊzd. "aɪ keɪm tə faɪn ju, ən aɪ faɪn jə əlaʊɪŋ tʃɹɑləks tə hɝd jə laɪk ʃip. kən ðə mæn u pəzɛsəz ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi tʃɹiɾəd soʊ?"

"So I saw." Her voice was dry, yet cool and composed. "I came to find you, and I find you allowing Trollocs to herd you like sheep. Can the man who possesses the Horn of Valere let himself be treated so?"

"aɪ doʊn əv ɪt wɪð mi," hi snæpt, "æn aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ ɪt kəd hɛlp ɪf aɪ dɪd. ðə dɛd hɪɹoʊz ɑɹ nɑt səpoʊz tə kʌm bæk tə seɪv mi fɹəm tʃɹɑləks. səlin, juv tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ. naʊ!" hi pɪɹɾ ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ.

"I don't have it with me," he snapped, "and I don't know how it could help if I did. The dead heroes are not supposed to come back to save me from Trollocs. Selene, you have to get away. Now!" He peered around the corner.

nɑt mɔɹ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əweɪ, ə tʃɹɑlɑk wɑz stɪkɪŋ ɪts hɔɹn hɛd kɔʃəsli ɪndə ðə stʃɹit, smɛlɪŋ ðə naɪt. ə lɑɹdʒ ʃædoʊ baɪ ɪts saɪd hæd tə bi ənʌðɝ tʃɹɑlɑk, ən ðəɹ wɝ smɔlɝ ʃædoʊz, tu. dɑɹkfɹɛnz.

Not more than a hundred paces away, a Trolloc was sticking its horned head cautiously into the street, smelling the night. A large shadow by its side had to be another Trolloc, and there were smaller shadows, too. Darkfriends.

"tu leɪt," ɹænd mʌɾɝd. hi ʃɪftəd ðə flut keɪs tə pʊl ɔf ɪz kloʊk ən ɹæp ɪɾ ɝaʊn hɝ. ɪt wɑz lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə haɪɾ əɹ waɪt dʒɹɛs ɪntaɪɝli, ən tʃɹeɪl ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪsaɪdz. "jul əv tə hoʊl ðəɾ ʌp tə ɹʌn," hi toʊl hɝ. "lɔɪəl, ɪf ðeɪ woʊn lɛɾ əs ɪn, wɪl əv tə faɪn ə weɪ tə snik ɪn."

"Too late," Rand muttered. He shifted the flute case to pull off his cloak and wrap it around her. It was long enough to hide her white dress entirely, and trail on the ground besides. "You'll have to hold that up to run," he told her. "Loial, if they won't let us in, we will have to find a way to sneak in."

"bʌt, ɹænd - "

"But, Rand - "

"wʊd jə ɹæðɝ weɪt fəɹ ðə tʃɹɑləks?" hi ɡeɪv lɔɪəl ə pʊʃ tə stɑɹt hɪm, ən tʊk səlinz hæn tə fɑloʊ əɾ ə tʃɹɑt. "faɪn əs ə pæθ ðət woʊn bɹeɪk əɹ nɛks, lɔɪəl."

"Would you rather wait for the Trollocs?" He gave Loial a push to start him, and took Selene's hand to follow at a trot. "Find us a path that won't break our necks, Loial."

"jɔɹ lɛɾɪŋ jɝsɛlf bɪkʌm flʌstɝd," səlin sɛd. ʃi sim tə hæv lɛs tʃɹʌbəl fɑloʊɪŋ lɔɪəl ɪn ðə feɪlɪŋ laɪt ðən ɹænd dɪd. "sik ðə wʌnnəs, ən bi kɑm. wʌn u wəd bi ɡɹeɪt mʌst ɔlweɪz bi kɑm."

"You're letting yourself become flustered," Selene said. She seemed to have less trouble following Loial in the failing light than Rand did. "Seek the Oneness, and be calm. One who would be great must always be calm."

"ðə tʃɹɑləks maɪt hɪɹ ju," hi toʊl hɝ. "aɪ doʊnt wɑnt ɡɹeɪtnəs." hi θɔɾ i hɝɾ ən ɪɹəteɪɾəd ɡɹʌn fɹəm hɝ.

"The Trollocs might hear you," he told her. "I don't want greatness." He thought he heard an irritated grunt from her.

stoʊnz səmtaɪmz tɝn ʌndɝfʊt, bʌt ðə weɪ əkɹɔs ðə hɪlz wɑz nɑt hɑɹd dɪspaɪt ðə twaɪlaɪt ʃædoʊz. tʃɹiz, ən ivən bɹʌʃ, hæd lɔŋ sɪns bɪn klɪɹd fɹəm ðə hɪlz fəɹ faɪɝwʊd. nʌθɪŋ ɡɹu ɪksɛp ni-haɪ ɡɹæs ðət ɹʌsəl sɔfli ɝaʊn ðɛɹ lɛɡz. ə naɪt bɹiz keɪm ʌp sɔfli. ɹænd wɝid ðəɾ ɪt maɪt kæɹi ðɛɹ sɛn tə ðə tʃɹɑləks.

Stones sometimes turned underfoot, but the way across the hills was not hard despite the twilight shadows. Trees, and even brush, had long since been cleared from the hills for firewood. Nothing grew except knee-high grass that rustled softly around their legs. A night breeze came up softly. Rand worried that it might carry their scent to the Trollocs.

lɔɪəl stɑpt wən ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə wɔl; ɪt stʊd twaɪs əz haɪ əz ði oʊɡiɝ, ðə stoʊnz kʌvɝd wɪð ə waɪɾɪʃ plæstɝ. ɹænd pɪɹd bæk təwɔɹd ðə fɔɹɡeɪt. bænz ə laɪɾəd wɪndoʊz ɹitʃt aʊt laɪk spoʊks ʌv ə wil fɹəm ðə sɪɾi wɔlz.

Loial stopped when they reached the wall; it stood twice as high as the Ogier, the stones covered with a whitish plaster. Rand peered back toward the Foregate. Bands of lighted windows reached out like spokes of a wheel from the city walls.

"lɔɪəl," hi sɛd sɔfli, "kæn jə si ðɛm? ɑɹ ðeɪ fɑloʊɪŋ ʌs?"

"Loial," he said softly, "can you see them? Are they following us?"

ði oʊɡiɝ lʊkt ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðə fɔɹɡeɪt, ən nɑɾəd ənhæpəli. "aɪ oʊnli si səm ə ðə tʃɹɑləks, bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ kʌmɪŋ ðɪs weɪ. ɹʌnɪŋ. ɹænd, aɪ ɹɪli doʊn θɪŋk - "

The Ogier looked in the direction of the Foregate, and nodded unhappily. "I only see some of the Trollocs, but they are coming this way. Running. Rand, I really don't think - "

səlin kʌɾ ɪm ɔf. "ɪf i wɑns tə ɡoʊ ɪn, ælɑntɪn, hi nidz ə dɔɹ. sətʃ əz ðət wʌn." ʃi pɔɪntəd tə ə dɑɹk pætʃ ə lɪɾəl daʊn ðə wɔl. ivən wɪð əɹ tɛlɪŋ hɪm, ɹænd wɑz nɑt sɝɾən ɪt wɑz ə dɔɹ, bʌt wən ʃi stʃɹoʊd tə ɪɾ ən pʊld, ɪɾ oʊpənd.

Selene cut him off. "If he wants to go in, alantin, he needs a door. Such as that one." She pointed to a dark patch a little down the wall. Even with her telling him, Rand was not certain it was a door, but when she strode to it and pulled, it opened.

"ɹænd," lɔɪəl bɪɡæn.

"Rand," Loial began.

ɹænd pʊʃt ɪm tə ðə dɔɹ. "leɪɾɝ, lɔɪəl. ən sɔfli. wɝ haɪɾɪŋ, ɹɪmɛmbɝ?" hi ɡɑɾ əm ɪnsaɪɾ ən kloʊz ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ðəɹ wɝ bɹækəts fəɹ ə bɑɹ, bʌt noʊ bɑɹ tə bi sin. ɪt wəd nɑt stɑp ɛniwʌn, bʌt meɪbi ðə tʃɹɑləks wəd hɛzəteɪt tə kʌm ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz.

Rand pushed him to the door. "Later, Loial. And softly. We're hiding, remember?" He got them inside and closed the door behind them. There were brackets for a bar, but no bar to be seen. It would not stop anyone, but maybe the Trollocs would hesitate to come inside the walls.

ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ən æliweɪ liɾɪŋ ʌp ðə hɪl bɪtwin tu lɔŋ, loʊ wɪndoʊləs bɪldɪŋz. ət fɝst i θɔt ðeɪ wɝ stoʊn, tu, bʌt ðən i ɹilaɪz ðə waɪt plæstɝ hæd bɪn leɪɾ oʊvɝ wʊd. ɪt wɑz dɑɹk ɪnʌf naʊ fəɹ ðə mun ɹəflɛktɪŋ fɹəm ðə wɔlz tə ɡɪv ə sɛmbləns ə laɪt.

They were in an alleyway leading up the hill between two long, low windowless buildings. At first he thought they were stone, too, but then he realized the white plaster had been laid over wood. It was dark enough now for the moon reflecting from the walls to give a semblance of light.

"bɛɾɝ tə bi ɝɛstəd baɪ ði ɪluməneɪɾɝz ðən teɪkən baɪ tʃɹɑləks," hi mɝmɝd, stɑɹɾɪŋ ʌp ðə hɪl.

"Better to be arrested by the Illuminators than taken by Trollocs," he murmured, starting up the hill.

"bʌt ðəɾ ɪz wʌɾ aɪ wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tɛl ju," lɔɪəl pɹətɛstəd. "aɪv hɝd ði ɪluməneɪɾɝz kɪl ɪntʃɹuɾɝz. ðeɪ kip ðɛɹ sikɹəts hɑɹɾ ən fæst, ɹænd."

"But that is what I was trying to tell you," Loial protested. "I've heard the Illuminators kill intruders. They keep their secrets hard and fast, Rand."

ɹænd stɑp dɛɾ ən stɛɹd bæk ət ðə dɔɹ. ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ stɪl aʊt ðɛɹ. ət ðə wɝst, hjumənz hæd tə bi bɛɾɝ tə dil wɪð ðən tʃɹɑləks. hi maɪt bi eɪbəl tə tɔk ði ɪluməneɪɾɝz ɪndə lɛɾɪŋ əm ɡoʊ; tʃɹɑləks dɪd nɑt lɪsən bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kɪld. "aɪm sɑɹi aɪ ɡɑt jə ɪndə ðɪs, səlin."

Rand stopped dead and stared back at the door. The Trollocs were still out there. At the worst, humans had to be better to deal with than Trollocs. He might be able to talk the Illuminators into letting them go; Trollocs did not listen before they killed. "I'm sorry I got you into this, Selene."

"deɪnʒɝ ædz ə sɝɾən sʌmθɪŋ," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "æn soʊ fɑɹ, jə hændəl ɪt wɛl. ʃæl wi si wʌt wi faɪnd?" ʃi bɹʌʃt pæst ɪm ʌp ði æliweɪ. ɹænd fɑloʊd, ðə spaɪsi smɛl ə hɝ fɪlɪŋ ɪz nɑstʃɹəlz.

"Danger adds a certain something," she said softly. "And so far, you handle it well. Shall we see what we find?" She brushed past him up the alleyway. Rand followed, the spicy smell of her filling his nostrils.

ətɑp ðə hɪl, ði æliweɪ oʊpən ɑntu ə waɪɾ ɪkspæns ə smuðli flæɾənd kleɪ, ɔlmoʊst əz peɪl əz ðə plæstɝ ən nɪɹli sɝaʊndəd baɪ mɔɹ waɪt, wɪndoʊləs bɪldɪŋz wɪð ðə ʃædoʊz ə nɛɹoʊ æliz bɪtwin, bʌt tə ɹændz ɹaɪt stʊd wʌn bɪldɪŋ wɪð wɪndoʊz, laɪt fɔlɪŋ ɑntu ðə peɪl kleɪ. hi pʊl bæk ɪndə ðə ʃædoʊz ə ði æli əz ə mæn ən ə wʊmən əpɪɹd, wɔkɪŋ sloʊli əkɹɔs ði oʊpən speɪs.

Atop the hill, the alleyway opened onto a wide expanse of smoothly flattened clay, almost as pale as the plaster and nearly surrounded by more white, windowless buildings with the shadows of narrow alleys between, but to Rand's right stood one building with windows, light falling onto the pale clay. He pulled back into the shadows of the alley as a man and a woman appeared, walking slowly across the open space.

ðɛɹ kloʊðz wɝ sɝɾənli nɑt kɛɹhinɪn. ðə mæn wɔɹ bɹitʃɪz əz bæɡi əz ɪz ʃɝt slivz, boʊθ ɪn ə sɑf jɛloʊ, wɪð ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ɑn ðə lɛɡz ə hɪz bɹitʃɪz ən əkɹɔs ðə tʃɛst ə hɪz ʃɝt. ðə wʊmənz dʒɹɛs, wɝkt ɪlæbɹətli əkɹɔs ðə bɹɛst, simd ə peɪl ɡɹin, ən əɹ hɛɹ wɑz dʌn ɪn ə mʌltətuɾ ə ʃɔɹt bɹeɪdz.

Their clothes were certainly not Cairhienin. The man wore breeches as baggy as his shirt sleeves, both in a soft yellow, with embroidery on the legs of his breeches and across the chest of his shirt. The woman's dress, worked elaborately across the breast, seemed a pale green, and her hair was done in a multitude of short braids.

"ɔl ɪz ɪn ɹɛɾinəs, jə seɪ?" ðə wʊmən dɪmændəd. "ju ɑɹ sɝɾən, tɑmuz? ɔl?"

"All is in readiness, you say?" the woman demanded. "You are certain, Tammuz? All?"

ðə mæn spɹɛɾ ɪz hænz. "ɔlweɪz jə tʃɛk bɪhaɪn mi, ɑlʌdʒɹə. ɔl ɪz ɪn ɹɛɾinəs. ðə dɪspleɪ, ɪt kəd bi ɡɪvən ðɪs vɛɹi moʊmənt."

The man spread his hands. "Always you check behind me, Aludra. All is in readiness. The display, it could be given this very moment."

"ðə ɡeɪts ən dɔɹz, ðeɪ ɑɹ ɔl bɑɹd? ɔl ə ðə . . . ?" hɝ vɔɪs feɪɾəd əz ðeɪ muvd ɑn tə ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə laɪɾəd bɪldɪŋ.

"The gates and doors, they are all barred? All of the . . . ?" Her voice faded as they moved on to the far end of the lighted building.

ɹænd stʌɾid ði oʊpən ɛɹiə, ɹɛkəɡnaɪzɪŋ ɔlmoʊs nʌθɪŋ. ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ɪt, sɛvɹəl dʌzən əpɹaɪt tubz, itʃ nɪɹli əz tɔl əz i ən ə fʊɾ əɹ mɔɹ əkɹɔs, sæɾ ɑn lɑɹdʒ wʊɾən beɪsəz. fɹəm itʃ tub, ə dɑɹk, twɪstəd kɔɹd ɹæn əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹaʊn ən bɪhaɪn ə loʊ wɔl, pɝhæps θɹi peɪsɪz lɔŋ, ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪd. ɔl ɝaʊn ði oʊpən speɪs stʊɾ ə wɛltɝ ʌv wʊɾən ɹæks wɪð tʃɹɔfs ən tubz ən fɔɹk stɪks ən ə skɔɹ ʌv ʌðɝ θɪŋz.

Rand studied the open area, recognizing almost nothing. In the middle of it, several dozen upright tubes, each nearly as tall as he and a foot or more across, sat on large wooden bases. From each tube, a dark, twisted cord ran across the ground and behind a low wall, perhaps three paces long, on the far side. All around the open space stood a welter of wooden racks with troughs and tubes and forked sticks and a score of other things.

ɔl ðə faɪɹwɝks i hæɾ ɛvɝ sin kəd bi hɛld ɪn wʌn hænd, ən ðət wɑz əz mʌtʃ əz i nu, ɪksɛp ðət ðeɪ bɝst wɪð ə ɡɹeɪt ɹɔɹ, əɹ wɪzd əlɔŋ ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪn spaɪɹəlz ə spɑɹks, əɹ səmtaɪmz ʃɑɾ ɪndə ði ɛɹ. ðeɪ ɔlweɪz keɪm wɪð wɔɹnɪŋz fɹəm ði ɪluməneɪɾɝz ðəɾ oʊpənɪŋ wʌn kəd kɑz ɪt tə ɡoʊ ɔf. ɪn ɛni keɪs, faɪɹwɝks wɝ tu ɪkspɛnsɪv fəɹ ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl tə hæv əlaʊɾ ɛnibəɾi ənskɪl tə oʊpən wʌn. hi kəd wɛl ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə taɪm wən mæt hæd tʃɹaɪd tə də dʒʌs ðæt; ɪt wɑz nɪɹli ə wik bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn bʌt mæts oʊn mʌðɝ wəd spik tə hɪm. ði oʊnli θɪŋ ðət ɹænd faʊn fəmɪljɝ əɾ ɔl wɑz ðə kɔɹdz - ðə fjuzəz. ðæt, hi nu, wɑz wɛɹ jə sɛt ðə faɪɝ.

All the fireworks he had ever seen could be held in one hand, and that was as much as he knew, except that they burst with a great roar, or whizzed along the ground in spirals of sparks, or sometimes shot into the air. They always came with warnings from the Illuminators that opening one could cause it to go off. In any case, fireworks were too expensive for the Village Council to have allowed anybody unskilled to open one. He could well remember the time when Mat had tried to do just that; it was nearly a week before anyone but Mat's own mother would speak to him. The only thing that Rand found familiar at all was the cords - the fuses. That, he knew, was where you set the fire.

wɪð ə ɡlæns bæk ət ði ənbæɹɹd dɔɹ, hi moʊʃən ði ʌðɝz tə fɑloʊ ən stɑɹɾəd ɝaʊn ðə tubz. ɪf ðeɪ wɝ gɑnə faɪn ə pleɪs tə haɪd, hi wɑntəd tə bi əz fɑɹ fɹəm ðət dɔɹ əz i kʊd.

With a glance back at the unbarred door, he motioned the others to follow and started around the tubes. If they were going to find a place to hide, he wanted to be as far from that door as he could.

ɪt mɛn meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ bɪtwin ðə ɹæks, ən ɹænd hɛld ɪz bɹɛθ ɛvɹi taɪm i bɹʌʃt əɡɛnst wʌn. ðə θɪŋz ɪn əm ʃɪftəd wɪð ðə slaɪɾəst tʌtʃ, ɹætlɪŋ. ɔl ə ðɛm sim tə bi meɪɾ ʌv wʊd, wɪθaʊɾ ə pis ə mɛɾəl. hi kəɾ ɪmædʒən ðə ɹækɪɾ ɪf wʌn wɝ nɑkt oʊvɝ. hi aɪd ðə tɔl tubz wɛɹəli, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðə bæŋ meɪd baɪ wʌn ðə saɪz ə hɪz fɪŋɡɝ. ɪf ðoʊz wɝ faɪɹwɝks, hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə bi ðɪs kloʊs tə ðɛm.

It meant making their way between the racks, and Rand held his breath every time he brushed against one. The things in them shifted with the slightest touch, rattling. All of them seemed to be made of wood, without a piece of metal. He could imagine the racket if one were knocked over. He eyed the tall tubes warily, remembering the bang made by one the size of his finger. If those were fireworks, he did not want to be this close to them.

lɔɪəl mʌɾɝd tə hɪmsɛlf kəntɪnjuəli, ɪspɛʃli wən i bʌmpt wʌn ə ðə ɹæks, ðən stɑɹɾəd bæk soʊ fæs ðəɾ i bʌmpt ənʌðɝ. ði oʊɡiɝ kɹɛpt əlɔŋ ɪn ə klaʊɾ ə klæɾɝz ən mʌɾɝɪŋ.

Loial muttered to himself continually, especially when he bumped one of the racks, then started back so fast that he bumped another. The Ogier crept along in a cloud of clatters and muttering.

səlin wɑz noʊ lɛs ənɝvɪŋ. ʃi stʃɹoʊɾ əz kæʒəwəli əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɑn ə sɪɾi stʃɹit. ʃi dɪd nɑt bʌmp ɛniθɪŋ, dɪd nɑt meɪk ə saʊnd, bʌt ʃi ɔlsoʊ meɪd noʊ ɛfɝt tə kip ðə kloʊk kloʊzd. ðə waɪɾ ə hɝ dʒɹɛs sim bɹaɪɾɝ ðən ɔl ðə wɔlz təɡɛðɝ. hi pɪɹɾ ət ðə laɪɾəd wɪndoʊz, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ sʌmwʌn tə əpɪɹ. ɔl ɪt wəd teɪk wɑz wʌn; səlin kəd nɑt feɪl tə bi sin, ði əlɑɹm ɡɪvən.

Selene was no less unnerving. She strode as casually as if they were on a city street. She did not bump anything, did not make a sound, but she also made no effort to keep the cloak closed. The white of her dress seemed brighter than all the walls together. He peered at the lighted windows, waiting for someone to appear. All it would take was one; Selene could not fail to be seen, the alarm given.

ðə wɪndoʊz ɹɪmeɪn ɛmpti, ðoʊ. ɹænd wɑz dʒʌs bɹiðɪŋ ə saɪ ʌv ɹɪlif əz ðeɪ əpɹoʊtʃt ðə loʊ wɔl - ən ði æliz ən bɪldɪŋz bɪhaɪn ɪt - wən lɔɪəl bɹʌʃt əɡɛnst ənʌðɝ ɹæk, stændɪŋ ɹaɪt bɪsaɪd ðə wɔl. ɪt hɛl tɛn sɑft-lʊkɪŋ stɪks, əz lɔŋ əz ɹændz ɑɹm, wɪð θɪn stʃɹimz ə smoʊk ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ðɛɹ tɪps. ðə ɹæk meɪd hɑɹdli ə saʊnd wən ɪt fɛl, ðə smoʊldɝɪŋ stɪks spɹɔlɪŋ əkɹɔs wʌn ə ðə fjuzəz. wɪð ə kɹæklɪŋ hɪs, ðə fjuz bɝst ɪndə fleɪm, ən ðə fleɪm ɹeɪs təwɔɹd wʌn ə ðə tɔl tubz.

The windows remained empty, though. Rand was just breathing a sigh of relief as they approached the low wall - and the alleys and buildings behind it - when Loial brushed against another rack, standing right beside the wall. It held ten soft-looking sticks, as long as Rand's arm, with thin streams of smoke rising from their tips. The rack made hardly a sound when it fell, the smoldering sticks sprawling across one of the fuses. With a crackling hiss, the fuse burst into flame, and the flame raced toward one of the tall tubes.

ɹænd ɡɑɡəl fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ðən i tʃɹaɪd tə wɪspɝ ə ʃaʊt. "bɪhaɪn ðə wɔl!"

Rand goggled for an instant, then he tried to whisper a shout. "Behind the wall!"

səlin meɪɾ ən æŋɡɹi nɔɪz wən i bɔɹ əɹ tə ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪhaɪn ðə wɔl, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt kɛɹ. hi tʃɹaɪd tə spɹɛd hɪmsɛlf oʊvɝ əɹ pɹoʊtɛktɪvli əz lɔɪəl kɹaʊɾəd bɪsaɪd ðɛm. weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə tub tə bɝst, hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðəɹ wəd bi ɛniθɪŋ lɛft ə ðə wɔl. ðəɹ wɑz ə hɑloʊ θʌmp ðəɾ i fɛl θɹu ðə ɡɹaʊn əz mʌtʃ əz hɝd. kɔʃəsli, hi lɪftəd hɪmsɛlf ɔf ə səlin ɪnʌf tə pɪɹ ɝaʊn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə wɔl. ʃi fɪstɪɾ ɪm ɪn ðə ɹɪbz, hɑɹd, ən ɹɪəld aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪm wɪð ən oʊθ ɪn ə læŋɡwədʒ i dɪd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz, bʌɾ i wɑz bɪɑnd noʊɾɪsɪŋ.

Selene made an angry noise when he bore her to the ground behind the wall, but he did not care. He tried to spread himself over her protectively as Loial crowded beside them. Waiting for the tube to burst, he wondered if there would be anything left of the wall. There was a hollow thump that he felt through the ground as much as heard. Cautiously, he lifted himself off of Selene enough to peer around the edge of the wall. She fisted him in the ribs, hard, and wriggled out from under him with an oath in a language he did recognize, but he was beyond noticing.

ə tʃɹɪkəl ə smoʊk wɑz likɪŋ fɹəm ðə tɑp ʌv wʌn ə ðə tubz. ðət wɑz ɔl. hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd wʌndɝɪŋli. ɪf ðæts ɔl ðəɹ ɪz tə ɪt. . . .

A trickle of smoke was leaking from the top of one of the tubes. That was all. He shook his head wonderingly. If that's all there is to it. . . .

wɪð ə kɹæʃ laɪk θʌndɝ, ə hjudʒ flaʊɝ ə ɹɛɾ ən waɪt blum haɪ ɪn ðə naʊ dɑɹk skaɪ, ðən sloʊli bɪɡæn dʒɹɪftɪŋ əweɪ ɪn spɑɹkəlz.

With a crash like thunder, a huge flower of red and white bloomed high in the now dark sky, then slowly began drifting away in sparkles.

əz i ɡɑɡəld əɾ ɪt, ðə laɪɾəd bɪldɪŋ ɪɹʌptəd wɪð nɔɪz. ʃaʊɾɪŋ mɛn ən wɪmən fɪl ðə wɪndoʊz, stɛɹɪŋ ən pɔɪntɪŋ.

As he goggled at it, the lighted building erupted with noise. Shouting men and women filled the windows, staring and pointing.

ɹænd lɔŋɪŋli aɪd ðə dɑɹk æliweɪ, oʊnli ə dʌzən stɛps əweɪ. ən ðə fɝst stɛp wəd bi ɪn fʊl vju ʌv ðə pipəl ət ðə wɪndoʊz. paʊndɪŋ fit pɔɹd fɹəm ðə bɪldɪŋ.

Rand longingly eyed the dark alleyway, only a dozen steps away. And the first step would be in full view of the people at the windows. Pounding feet poured from the building.

hi pɹɛs lɔɪəl ən səlin bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl, hoʊpɪŋ ðeɪ lʊk laɪk dʒʌst ənʌðɝ ʃædoʊ. "bi stɪl ən bi saɪlənt," hi wɪspɝd. "ɪts əɹ oʊnli hoʊp."

He pressed Loial and Selene back against the wall, hoping they looked like just another shadow. "Be still and be silent," he whispered. "It's our only hope."

"səmtaɪmz," səlin sɛd kwaɪətli, "ɪf jə ɑɹ vɛɹi stɪl, noʊ wʌn kən si jə əɾ ɔl." ʃi dɪd nɑt saʊn ðə lis bɪt wɝid.

"Sometimes," Selene said quietly, "if you are very still, no one can see you at all." She did not sound the least bit worried.

buts θʌmp bæk ən fɔɹθ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə wɔl, ən vɔɪsəz wɝ ɹeɪzd ɪn æŋɡɝ. ɪspɛʃli ðə wʌn ɹænd ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd əz ɑlʌdʒɹə.

Boots thumped back and forth on the other side of the wall, and voices were raised in anger. Especially the one Rand recognized as Aludra.

"ju ɡɹeɪt bəfun, tɑmuz! jə ɡɹeɪt pɪɡ, ju! jəɹ mʌðɝ, ʃi wɑz ə ɡoʊt, tɑmuz! wʌn deɪ jəl kɪl əs ɔl."

"You great buffoon, Tammuz! You great pig, you! Your mother, she was a goat, Tammuz! One day you will kill us all."

"aɪ æm nɑt tə bleɪm fəɹ ðɪs, ɑlʌdʒɹə," ðə mæn pɹətɛstəd. "aɪ hæv bɪn ʃʊɹ tə pʊɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɛɹ ɪt bɪlɔŋd, ən ðə pʌŋks, ðeɪ wɝ - "

"I am not to blame for this, Aludra," the man protested. "I have been sure to put everything where it belonged, and the punks, they were - "

"ju wɪl nɑt spik tə mi, tɑmuz! ə ɡɹeɪt pɪɡ dʌz nɑt dɪzɝv tə spik laɪk ə hjumən!" ɑlʌdʒɹəz vɔɪs tʃeɪnʒd ɪn ænsɝ tə ənʌðɝ mænz kwɛstʃən. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ taɪm tə pɹipɛɹ ənʌðɝ. ɡɔlʒɹiən, hi mʌs bi sæɾəsfaɪd wɪð ðə ɹɛs fəɹ tənaɪt. ən wʌn ɝli. ən ju, tɑmuz! jəl sɛɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɹaɪt, ən təmɑɹoʊ jəl liv wɪð ðə kɑɹts tə baɪ ðə mənʊɹ. dʌz ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ɡoʊ ɹɔŋ ðɪs naɪt, əl nɑt tʃɹʌs jə əɡɛn ivən wɪð soʊ mʌtʃ əz ðə mənʊɹ!"

"You will not speak to me, Tammuz! A great pig does not deserve to speak like a human!" Aludra's voice changed in answer to another man's question. "There is no time to prepare another. Galldrian, he must be satisfied with the rest for tonight. And one early. And you, Tammuz! You will set everything right, and tomorrow you will leave with the carts to buy the manure. Does anything else go wrong this night, I will not trust you again even with so much as the manure!"

fʊtstɛps feɪɾəd bæk təwɔɹd ðə bɪldɪŋ tə ði əkʌmpnɪmən ʌv ɑlʌdʒɹəz mʌɾɝɪŋ. tɑmuz ɹɪmeɪnd, ɡɹoʊlɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ əbaʊt ði ənfɛɹnəs ʌv ɪɾ ɔl.

Footsteps faded back toward the building to the accompaniment of Aludra's muttering. Tammuz remained, growling under his breath about the unfairness of it all.

ɹænd stɑp bɹiðɪŋ əz ðə mæn keɪm oʊvɝ tə ɹaɪt ðə tɑpəl stænd. pɹɛs bæk ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz əɡɛns ðə wɔl, hi kəd si tɑmuzəz bæk ən ʃoʊldɝ. ɔl ðə mæn hæd tə də wɑz tɝn ɪz hɛd, ən i kəd nɑt mɪs siɪŋ ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz. stɪl kəmpleɪnɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf, tɑmuz ɝeɪnʒd ðə smoʊldɝɪŋ stɪks ɪn ðə stænd, ðən stɔkt ɔf təwɔɹd ðə bɪldɪŋ wɛɹ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls hæd ɡɔn.

Rand stopped breathing as the man came over to right the toppled stand. Pressed back in the shadows against the wall, he could see Tammuz's back and shoulder. All the man had to do was turn his head, and he could not miss seeing Rand and the others. Still complaining to himself, Tammuz arranged the smoldering sticks in the stand, then stalked off toward the building where everyone else had gone.

lɛɾɪŋ ɪz bɹɛθ ɡoʊ, ɹænd tʊk ə kwɪk lʊk æftɝ ðə mæn, ðən pʊl bæk ɪndə ðə ʃædoʊz. ə fju pipəl stɪl stʊɾ ət ðə wɪndoʊz. "wi kæn ɪkspɛkt ɛni mɔɹ lʌk tənaɪt," hi wɪspɝd.

Letting his breath go, Rand took a quick look after the man, then pulled back into the shadows. A few people still stood at the windows. "We can't expect any more luck tonight," he whispered.

"ɪɾ ɪz sɛd ɡɹeɪt mɛn meɪk ðɛɹ oʊn lʌk," səlin sɛd sɔfli.

"It is said great men make their own luck," Selene said softly.

"wɪl jə stɑp ðæt," hi toʊld əɹ wɛɹəli. hi wɪʃt ðə smɛl ə hɝ dɪd nɑt fɪl ɪz hɛd soʊ; ɪt meɪɾ ɪt hɑɹd tə θɪŋk klɪɹli. hi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə fil ə hɝ bɑɾi wən i pʊʃt əɹ daʊn - sɔfnəs ən fɝmnəs ɪn ə dɪstɝbɪŋ blɛnd - ən ðət dɪd nɑt hɛlp iðɝ.

"Will you stop that," he told her wearily. He wished the smell of her did not fill his head so; it made it hard to think clearly. He could remember the feel of her body when he pushed her down - softness and firmness in a disturbing blend - and that did not help either.

"ɹænd?" lɔɪəl wɑz piɹɪŋ ɝaʊn ði ɛn ə ðə wɔl əweɪ fɹəm ðə laɪɾəd bɪldɪŋ. "aɪ θɪŋk wi nid səm mɔɹ lʌk, ɹænd."

"Rand?" Loial was peering around the end of the wall away from the lighted building. "I think we need some more luck, Rand."

ɹænd ʃɪftəd tə lʊk oʊvɝ ði oʊɡiɝz ʃoʊldɝ. bɪɑn oʊpən speɪs, ɪn ði æliweɪ ðət lɛd tə ðə bɑɹləs dɔɹ, θɹi tʃɹɑləks wɝ piɹɪŋ kɔʃəsli aʊɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊz təwɔɹd ðə laɪɾəd wɪndoʊz. wʌn wʊmən wɑz stændɪŋ əɾ ə wɪndoʊ; ʃi dɪd nɑt sim tə si ðə tʃɹɑləks.

Rand shifted to look over the Ogier's shoulder. Beyond open space, in the alleyway that led to the barless door, three Trollocs were peering cautiously out of the shadows toward the lighted windows. One woman was standing at a window; she did not seem to see the Trollocs.

"soʊ," səlin sɛd kwaɪətli. "ɪt bɪkʌmz ə tʃɹæp. ðiz pipəl meɪ kɪl jə ɪf ðeɪ teɪk ju. ðə tʃɹɑləks ʃʊɹli wɪl. bʌt pɝhæps jə kən sleɪ ðə tʃɹɑləks tu kwɪkli fəɹ əm tə meɪk ɛni aʊtkɹaɪ. pɝhæps jə kən stɑp ðə pipəl fɹəm kɪlɪŋ jə tə pɹəzɝv ðɛɹ lɪɾəl sikɹəts. jə meɪ nɑt wɑnt ɡɹeɪtnəs, bʌɾ ɪɾəl teɪk ə ɡɹeɪt mæn tə də ðiz θɪŋz."

"So," Selene said quietly. "It becomes a trap. These people may kill you if they take you. The Trollocs surely will. But perhaps you can slay the Trollocs too quickly for them to make any outcry. Perhaps you can stop the people from killing you to preserve their little secrets. You may not want greatness, but it will take a great man to do these things."

"ju doʊn əv tə saʊn hæpi əbaʊɾ ɪt," ɹænd sɛd. hi tʃɹaɪd tə stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt haʊ ʃi smɛld, haʊ ʃi fɛlt, ən ðə vɔɪɾ ɔlmoʊst sɝaʊndəd hɪm. hi ʃʊk ɪɾ əweɪ. ðə tʃɹɑləks dɪd nɑt sim tə hæv loʊkeɪɾəd ðɛm, jɛt. hi sɛɾəld bæk, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə nɪɹəs dɑɹk æliweɪ. wʌns ðeɪ meɪɾ ə muv təwɔɹɾ ɪt, ðə tʃɹɑləks wəd ʃʊɹli si, ən soʊ wəd ðə wʊmən ət ðə wɪndoʊ. ɪt wəd bi ə ɹeɪs əz tə wɛðɝ tʃɹɑləks əɹ ɪluməneɪɾɝz ɹitʃt əm fɝst.

"You don't have to sound happy about it," Rand said. He tried to stop thinking about how she smelled, how she felt, and the void almost surrounded him. He shook it away. The Trollocs did not seem to have located them, yet. He settled back, staring at the nearest dark alleyway. Once they made a move toward it, the Trollocs would surely see, and so would the woman at the window. It would be a race as to whether Trollocs or Illuminators reached them first.

"jɔɹ ɡɹeɪtnəs wɪl meɪk mi hæpi." dɪspaɪt ðə wɝdz, səlin saʊndəɾ æŋɡɹi. "pɝhæps aɪ ʃəd liv jə tə faɪn jəɹ oʊn weɪ fəɹ ə taɪm. ɪf jəl nɑt teɪk ɡɹeɪtnəs wən ɪts ɪn jəɹ ɡɹæsp, pɝhæps jə dɪzɝv tə daɪ."

"Your greatness will make me happy." Despite the words, Selene sounded angry. "Perhaps I should leave you to find your own way for a time. If you'll not take greatness when it is in your grasp, perhaps you deserve to die."

ɹænd ɹəfjuz tə lʊk ət hɝ. "lɔɪəl, kən jə si ɪf ðɛɹz ənʌðɝ dɔɹ daʊn ðəɾ æli?"

Rand refused to look at her. "Loial, can you see if there's another door down that alley?"

ði oʊɡiɝ ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ðɛɹ ɪz tu mʌtʃ laɪt hɪɹ ən tu mʌtʃ dɑɹk ðɛɹ. ɪf aɪ wɝ ɪn ði æli, jɛs."

The Ogier shook his head. "There is too much light here and too much dark there. If I were in the alley, yes."

ɹænd fɪŋɡɝd ðə hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹd. "teɪk səlin. əz sun əz jə si ə dɔɹ - ɪf jə də - kɔl aʊt, ən əl fɑloʊ. ɪf ðəɹ ɪzən ə dɔɹ ət ði ɛnd, jəl əv tə lɪft əɹ soʊ ʃi kən ɹitʃ ðə tɑp ə ðə wɔl ən klaɪm oʊvɝ."

Rand fingered the hilt of his sword. "Take Selene. As soon as you see a door - if you do - call out, and I'll follow. If there isn't a door at the end, you will have to lift her so she can reach the top of the wall and climb over."

"ɔl ɹaɪt, ɹænd." lɔɪəl saʊndəd wɝid. "bʌt wən wi muv, ðoʊz tʃɹɑləks wɪl kʌm æftɝ ʌs, noʊ mæɾɝ u ɪz wɑtʃɪŋ. ivən ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ə dɔɹ, ðəl bi ɑn əɹ hilz."

"All right, Rand." Loial sounded worried. "But when we move, those Trollocs will come after us, no matter who is watching. Even if there is a door, they will be on our heels."

"ju lemi wɝi əbaʊt ðə tʃɹɑləks." θɹi ʌv ðɛm. aɪ maɪt də ɪt, wɪð ðə vɔɪd. ðə θɔɾ ə seɪɾɪn dɪsaɪɾɪd hɪm. tu mɛni stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz hæd hæpənd wən i lɛt ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs kʌm kloʊs. "aɪ wɪl fɑloʊ əz sun əz aɪ kæn. ɡoʊ." hi tɝn tə pɪɹ ɝaʊn ðə wɔl ət ðə tʃɹɑləks.

"You let me worry about the Trollocs." Three of them. I might do it, with the void. The thought of saidin decided him. Too many strange things had happened when he let the male half of the True Source come close. "I will follow as soon as I can. Go." He turned to peer around the wall at the Trollocs.

fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ, hi hæɾ ən ɪmpɹɛʃən ə lɔɪəlz bʌlk muvɪŋ, ʌv səlinz waɪt dʒɹɛs, hæf kʌvɝd baɪ hɪz kloʊk. wʌn ə ðə tʃɹɑləks bɪɑn ðə tubz pɔɪntəd tə ðɛm ɪksaɪɾədli, bʌt stɪl ðə θɹi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ɡlænsɪŋ ʌp ət ðə wɪndoʊ wɛɹ ðə wʊmən stɪl wɑtʃt. θɹi ʌv ðɛm. ðəɹ əz tə bi ə weɪ. nɑt ðə vɔɪd. nɑt seɪɾɪn.

From the corner of his eye, he had an impression of Loial's bulk moving, of Selene's white dress, half covered by his cloak. One of the Trollocs beyond the tubes pointed to them excitedly, but still the three hesitated, glancing up at the window where the woman still watched. Three of them. There has to be a way. Not the void. Not saidin.

"ðɛɹ ɪz ə dɔɹ!" keɪm lɔɪəlz sɑf kɔl. wʌn ə ðə tʃɹɑləks tʊk ə stɛp aʊɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊz, ən ði ʌðɝz fɑloʊd, ɡæðɝɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz. əz fɹəm ə dɪstəns, ɹænd hɝd ðə wʊmən ət ðə wɪndoʊ kɹaɪ aʊt, ən lɔɪəl ʃaʊɾəd sʌmθɪŋ.

"There is a door!" came Loial's soft call. One of the Trollocs took a step out of the shadows, and the others followed, gathering themselves. As from a distance, Rand heard the woman at the window cry out, and Loial shouted something.

wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ, ɹænd wɑz ɑn ɪz fit. hi hæd tə stɑp ðə tʃɹɑləks sʌmhaʊ, əɹ ðeɪ wəd ɹʌn ɪm daʊn, ən lɔɪəl ən səlin. hi snætʃt wʌn ə ðə smoʊldɝɪŋ stɪks ən hɝl hɪmsɛlf ət ðə nɪɹəs tub. ɪt tɪltəd, stɑɹɾəd tə fɔl oʊvɝ, ən i kɑt ðə skwɛɹ wʊɾən beɪs; ðə tub pɔɪntəd stʃɹeɪɾ ət ðə tʃɹɑləks. ðeɪ sloʊɾ ənsɝteɪnli - ðə wʊmən ət ðə wɪndoʊ skɹimd - ən ɹænd tʌtʃt ðə smoʊkɪŋ ɛn ə ðə stɪk tə ðə fjuz ɹaɪt wɛɹ ɪt dʒɔɪn ðə tub.

Without thinking, Rand was on his feet. He had to stop the Trollocs somehow, or they would run him down, and Loial and Selene. He snatched one of the smoldering sticks and hurled himself at the nearest tube. It tilted, started to fall over, and he caught the square wooden base; the tube pointed straight at the Trollocs. They slowed uncertainly - the woman at the window screamed - and Rand touched the smoking end of the stick to the fuse right where it joined the tube.

ðə hɑloʊ θʌmp keɪm ɪmiɾiətli, ən ðə θɪk wʊɾən beɪs slæmd əɡɛns hɪm, nɑkɪŋ ɪm daʊn. ə ɹɔɹ laɪk ə θʌndɝklæp bɹoʊk ðə naɪɾ ən ə blaɪndɪŋ bɝst ə laɪt tɔɹ əweɪ ðə dɑɹk.

The hollow thump came immediately, and the thick wooden base slammed against him, knocking him down. A roar like a thunderclap broke the night and a blinding burst of light tore away the dark.

blɪŋkɪŋ, ɹænd stæɡɝd tə hɪz fit, kɑfɪŋ ɪn θɪk, ækɹɪd smoʊk, ɪɹz ɹɪŋɪŋ. hi stɛɹɾ ɪn əmeɪzmənt. hæf ðə tubz ən ɔl ə ðə ɹæks leɪ ɑn ðɛɹ saɪdz, ən wʌn kɔɹnɝ ə ðə bɪldɪŋ bɪsaɪd wɪtʃ ðə tʃɹɑləks hæd stʊd wɑz sɪmpli ɡɔn, fleɪmz lɪkɪŋ əɾ ɛnz ə plæŋks ən ɹæftɝz. ʌv ðə tʃɹɑləks ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn.

Blinking, Rand staggered to his feet, coughing in thick, acrid smoke, ears ringing. He stared in amazement. Half the tubes and all of the racks lay on their sides, and one corner of the building beside which the Trollocs had stood was simply gone, flames licking at ends of planks and rafters. Of the Trollocs there was no sign.

θɹu ðə ɹɪŋɪŋ ɪn ɪz ɪɹz, ɹænd hɝd ʃaʊts fɹəm ði ɪluməneɪɾɝz ɪn ðə bɪldɪŋ. hi bɹoʊk ɪndə ə tɑɾɝɪŋ ɹʌn, lʌmbɝɾ ɪndə ði æli. hæfweɪ daʊn ɪɾ i stʌmbəld oʊvɝ sʌmθɪŋ ən ɹilaɪzd ɪt wɑz ɪz kloʊk. hi snætʃt ɪɾ ʌp wɪθaʊt pɔzɪŋ. bɪhaɪn hɪm, ðə kɹaɪz ə ði ɪluməneɪɾɝz fɪl ðə naɪt.

Through the ringing in his ears, Rand heard shouts from the Illuminators in the building. He broke into a tottering run, lumbered into the alley. Halfway down it he stumbled over something and realized it was his cloak. He snatched it up without pausing. Behind him, the cries of the Illuminators filled the night.

lɔɪəl wɑz baʊnsɪŋ ɪmpeɪʃənli ɑn ɪz fit bɪsaɪd ði oʊpən dɔɹ. ən i wɑz əloʊn.

Loial was bouncing impatiently on his feet beside the open door. And he was alone.

"wɛɹ ɪz səlin?" ɹænd dɪmændəd.

"Where is Selene?" Rand demanded.

"ʃi wɛn bæk, ɹænd. aɪ tʃɹaɪd tə ɡɹæb hɝ, ən ʃi slɪpt ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə maɪ hænz."

"She went back, Rand. I tried to grab her, and she slipped right out of my hands."

ɹænd tɝn bæk təwɔɹd ðə nɔɪz. θɹu ði ɪnsɛsən saʊn ɪn ɪz ɪɹz, səm ə ðə ʃaʊts wɝ bɛɹli dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃəbəl. ðəɹ wɑz laɪt ðɛɹ, naʊ, fɹəm ðə fleɪmz.

Rand turned back toward the noise. Through the incessant sound in his ears, some of the shouts were barely distinguishable. There was light there, now, from the flames.

"ðə sæn bʌkəts! fɛtʃ ðə sæn bʌkəts kwɪkli!"

"The sand buckets! Fetch the sand buckets quickly!"

"ðɪs ɪz dɪzæstɝ! dɪzæstɝ!"

"This is disaster! Disaster!"

"sʌm ə ðɛm wɛn ðət weɪ!"

"Some of them went that way!"

lɔɪəl ɡɹæbd ɹændz ʃoʊldɝ. "ju kænɑt hɛlp hɝ, ɹænd. nɑt baɪ biɪŋ teɪkən jɝsɛlf. wi mʌst ɡoʊ." sʌmwʌn əpɪɹɾ ət ði ɛn ə ði æli, ə ʃædoʊ aʊtlaɪn baɪ ðə ɡloʊ ʌv fleɪmz bɪhaɪnd, ən pɔɪntəd təwɔɹd ðɛm. "kʌm ɑn, ɹænd!"

Loial grabbed Rand's shoulder. "You cannot help her, Rand. Not by being taken yourself. We must go." Someone appeared at the end of the alley, a shadow outlined by the glow of flames behind, and pointed toward them. "Come on, Rand!"

ɹænd lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi pʊld aʊɾ ə ðə dɔɹ ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs. ðə faɪɝ feɪɾəd bɪhaɪn əm əntɪl ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə ɡloʊ ɪn ðə naɪt, ən ðə laɪts ə ðə fɔɹɡeɪt keɪm kloʊsɝ. ɹænd ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt mɔɹ tʃɹɑləks wəɾ əpɪɹ, sʌmθɪŋ i kəd faɪt. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ðə naɪt bɹiz ɹʌfəlɪŋ ðə ɡɹæs.

Rand let himself be pulled out of the door into the darkness. The fire faded behind them until it was only a glow in the night, and the lights of the Foregate came closer. Rand almost wished more Trollocs would appear, something he could fight. But there was only the night breeze ruffling the grass.

"aɪ tʃɹaɪd tə stɑp hɝ," lɔɪəl sɛd. ðəɹ wɑz ə lɔŋ saɪləns. "wi ɹɪli kʊdn əv dʌn ɛniθɪŋ. ðeɪ wəd dʒʌst əv teɪkən ʌs, tu."

"I tried to stop her," Loial said. There was a long silence. "We really couldn't have done anything. They would just have taken us, too."

ɹænd saɪd. "aɪ noʊ, lɔɪəl. jə dɪd wʌt jə kʊd." hi wɔk bækwɝdz ə fju stɛps, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ɡloʊ. ɪt sim lɛs; ði ɪluməneɪɾɝz mʌs bi pʊɾɪŋ aʊt ðə fleɪmz. "aɪ hæv tə hɛlp əɹ sʌmhaʊ." haʊ? seɪɾɪn? ðə paʊɝ? hi ʃɪvɝd. "aɪ hæv tə."

Rand sighed. "I know, Loial. You did what you could." He walked backwards a few steps, staring at the glow. It seemed less; the Illuminators must be putting out the flames. "I have to help her somehow." How? Saidin? The Power? He shivered. "I have to."

ðeɪ wɛn θɹu ðə fɔɹɡeɪt baɪ ðə laɪɾəd stʃɹits, ɹæpt ɪn ə saɪləns ðət ʃʌɾ aʊt ðə ɡeɪəɾi ɝaʊn ðɛm.

They went through the Foregate by the lighted streets, wrapped in a silence that shut out the gaiety around them.

wən ðeɪ ɛntɝd ðə dɪfɛndɝ ə ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl, ði ɪnkipɝ hɛld aʊɾ ɪz tʃɹeɪ wɪð ə sil pɑɹtʃmənt.

When they entered The Defender of the Dragonwall, the innkeeper held out his tray with a sealed parchment.

ɹænd tʊk ɪt, ən stɛɹɾ ət ðə waɪt sil. ə kɹɛsən mun ən stɑɹz. "hu lɛf ðɪs? wɛn?"

Rand took it, and stared at the white seal. A crescent moon and stars. "Who left this? When?"

"æn oʊld wʊmən, maɪ lɔɹd. nɑɾ ə kɔɹɾɝ ʌv ən aʊɝ ɡɔn. ə sɝvənt, ðoʊ ʃi dɪd nɑt seɪ fɹəm wʌt haʊs." kueɪli smaɪld əz ɪf ɪnvaɪɾɪŋ kɑnfəɾənsɪz.

"An old woman, my Lord. Not a quarter of an hour gone. A servant, though she did not say from what House." Cuale smiled as if inviting confidences.

"θæŋk ju," ɹænd sɛd, stɪl stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə sil. ði ɪnkipɝ wɑtʃt əm ɡoʊ əpstɛɹz wɪð ə θɔtfəl lʊk.

"Thank you," Rand said, still staring at the seal. The innkeeper watched them go upstairs with a thoughtful look.

hʊɹɪn tʊk ɪz paɪp aʊɾ ə hɪz maʊθ wən ɹænd ən lɔɪəl ɛntɝd ðə ɹum. hʊɹɪn hæɾ ɪz ʃɔɹt sɔɹɾ ən sɔɹd-bɹeɪkɝ ɑn ðə teɪbəl, waɪpɪŋ əm wɪð ən ɔɪli ɹæɡ. "ju wɝ lɔŋ wɪð ðə ɡlimən, maɪ lɔɹd. ɪz i wɛl?"

Hurin took his pipe out of his mouth when Rand and Loial entered the room. Hurin had his short sword and sword-breaker on the table, wiping them with an oily rag. "You were long with the gleeman, my Lord. Is he well?"

ɹænd ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. "wʌt? tɑm? jɛs hiz. . . ." hi bɹoʊk oʊpən ðə sil wɪð ɪz θʌm ən ɹɛd.

Rand gave a start. "What? Thom? Yes he's. . . ." He broke open the seal with his thumb and read.

wən aɪ θɪŋk aɪ noʊ wʌt jə ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə du, jə də sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. jə ɑɹ ə deɪnʒɝəs mæn. pɝhæps ɪɾəl nɑt bi lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ wəɹ təɡɛðɝ əɡɛn. θɪŋk ə ðə hɔɹn. θɪŋk ə ðə ɡlɔɹi. ən θɪŋk ə mi, fəɹ jə ɑɹ ɔlweɪz maɪn.

When I think I know what you are going to do, you do something else. You are a dangerous man. Perhaps it will not be long before we are together again. Think of the Horn. Think of the glory. And think of me, for you are always mine.

əɡɛn, ɪt bɔɹ noʊ sɪɡnətʃɝ bʌt ðə floʊɪŋ hæn ɪtsɛlf.

Again, it bore no signature but the flowing hand itself.

"ɑɹ ɔl wɪmən kɹeɪzi?" ɹænd dɪmændəɾ ə ðə silɪŋ. hʊɹɪn ʃɹʌɡd. ɹænd θɹu hɪmsɛlf ɪndə ði ʌðɝ tʃɛɹ, ðə wʌn saɪz fəɹ ən oʊɡiɝ; hɪz fit dæŋɡəld əbʌv ðə flɔɹ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt kɛɹ. hi stɛɹɾ ət ðə blæŋkət-kʌvɝd tʃɛst ʌndɝ ði ɛdʒ ə lɔɪəlz bɛd. θɪŋk ə ðə ɡlɔɹi. "aɪ wɪʃ ɪŋtʃɹ wəd kʌm."

"Are all women crazy?" Rand demanded of the ceiling. Hurin shrugged. Rand threw himself into the other chair, the one sized for an Ogier; his feet dangled above the floor, but he did not care. He stared at the blanket-covered chest under the edge of Loial's bed. Think of the glory. "I wish Ingtar would come."


tʃæptɝ twɛntieɪt


CHAPTER 28

eɪ nu θɹɛɾ ɪn ðə pæɾɝn


A New Thread in the Pattern

pɛɹɪn wɑtʃt ðə maʊntənz ə kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ ənkʌmftəbli əz i ɹoʊd. ðə weɪ stɪl slæntəɾ ʌpwɝdz, ən lʊkt əz ɪf ɪt wəd klaɪm fɝɛvɝ, ðoʊ hi θɔt ðə kɹɛst ə ðə pæs mʌs nɑt bi tu mʌtʃ fɝðɝ. tə wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə tʃɹeɪl, ðə læn sləpt ʃɑɹpli daʊn tə ə ʃæloʊ maʊntən stʃɹim, dæʃɪŋ ɪtsɛlf tə fɹɔθ oʊvɝ ʃɑɹp ɹɑks; tə ði ʌðɝ saɪd ðə maʊntənz ɹɪɹɾ ɪn ə sɪɹiz ə dʒæɡd klɪfs, laɪk fɹoʊzən stoʊn wɔɾɝfɔlz. ðə tʃɹeɪl ɪtsɛlf ɹæn θɹu filz ə boʊldɝz, səm ðə saɪz ʌv ə mænz hɛd, ən səm əz bɪɡ əz ə kɑɹt. ɪt wəd teɪk noʊ ɡɹeɪt skɪl tə haɪɾ ɪn ðæt.

Perrin watched the mountains of Kinslayer's Dagger uncomfortably as he rode. The way still slanted upwards, and looked as if it would climb forever, though he thought the crest of the pass must not be too much further. To one side of the trail, the land sloped sharply down to a shallow mountain stream, dashing itself to froth over sharp rocks; to the other side the mountains reared in a series of jagged cliffs, like frozen stone waterfalls. The trail itself ran through fields of boulders, some the size of a man's head, and some as big as a cart. It would take no great skill to hide in that.

ðə wʊlvz sɛd ðəɹ wɝ pipəl ɪn ðə maʊntənz. pɛɹɪn wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ səm ə feɪnz dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ðə wʊlvz dɪd nɑt noʊ, əɹ kɛɹ. ðeɪ oʊnli nu ðə twɪstəd wʌnz wɝ sʌmwɛɹ əhɛd. stɪl fɑɹ əhɛd, ðoʊ ɪŋtʃɹ hæd pɹɛs ðə kɑləm hɑɹd. pɛɹɪn noʊɾəst ðəɾ ənoʊ wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ðə maʊntənz ɝaʊn əm mʌtʃ ðə weɪ hi hɪmsɛlf wɑz.

The wolves said there were people in the mountains. Perrin wondered if they were some of Fain's Darkfriends. The wolves did not know, or care. They only knew the Twisted Ones were somewhere ahead. Still far ahead, though Ingtar had pressed the column hard. Perrin noticed that Uno was watching the mountains around them much the way he himself was.

mæt, hɪz baʊ slʌŋ əkɹɔs ɪz bæk, ɹoʊd wɪð simɪŋ ʌnkənsɝn, dʒʌɡəlɪŋ θɹi kʌlɝd bɔlz, jɛɾ i lʊk pəlɝ ðən i hæd. vɛɹɪn ɪɡzæmən ɪm tu ən θɹi taɪmz ə deɪ naʊ, fɹaʊnɪŋ, ən pɛɹɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi hæɾ ivən tʃɹaɪd hilɪŋ ət list wʌns, bʌɾ ɪt meɪd noʊ dɪfɝəns pɛɹɪn kəd si. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ʃi sim tə bi mɔɹ əbzɔɹbd ɪn sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt wɪtʃ ʃi dɪd nɑt spik.

Mat, his bow slung across his back, rode with seeming unconcern, juggling three colored balls, yet he looked paler than he had. Verin examined him two and three times a day now, frowning, and Perrin was sure she had even tried Healing at least once, but it made no difference Perrin could see. In any case, she seemed to be more absorbed in something about which she did not speak.

ɹænd, pɛɹɪn θɔt, lʊkɪŋ ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪz bæk. ʃi ɔlweɪz ɹoʊɾ ət ðə hɛɾ ə ðə kɑləm wɪð ɪŋtʃɹ, ən ʃi ɔlweɪz wɑntəɾ əm tə muv ivən fæstɝ ðən ðə ʃaɪnɝən lɔɹd wəɾ əlaʊ. sʌmhaʊ, ʃi noʊz əbaʊt ɹænd. ɪmədʒəz fɹəm ðə wʊlvz flɪkɝɾ ɪn ɪz hɛd - stoʊn fɑɹmhaʊsəz ən tɛɹəs vɪlədʒəz, ɔl bɪɑn ðə maʊntən piks; ðə wʊlvz sɔ ðɛm noʊ dɪfɹənli ðən ðeɪ sɔ hɪlz əɹ mɛdoʊz, ɪksɛpt wɪð ə filɪŋ ðət ðeɪ wɝ spɔɪld lænd. fəɹ ə moʊmən i faʊn hɪmsɛlf ʃɛɹɪŋ ðət ɹəɡɹɛt, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ pleɪsəz ðə tu-lɛɡz hæd lɔŋ sɪns əbændənd, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðə swɪft ɹʌʃ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz, ən ðə hæm-stʃɹɪŋɪŋ snæp ə hɪz dʒɔz əz ðə dɪɹ tʃɹaɪd tə fli, ænd. . . . wɪð ən ɛfɝɾ i pʊʃt ðə wʊlvz aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛd. ðiz ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ gɑnə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ɔl ʌv ʌs.

Rand, Perrin thought, looking at the Aes Sedai's back. She always rode at the head of the column with Ingtar, and she always wanted them to move even faster than the Shienaran lord would allow. Somehow, she knows about Rand. Images from the wolves flickered in his head - stone farmhouses and terraced villages, all beyond the mountain peaks; the wolves saw them no differently than they saw hills or meadows, except with a feeling that they were spoiled land. For a moment he found himself sharing that regret, remembering places the two-legs had long since abandoned, remembering the swift rush through the trees, and the ham-stringing snap of his jaws as the deer tried to flee, and. . . . With an effort he pushed the wolves out of his head. These Aes Sedai are going to destroy all of us.

ɪŋtʃɹ lɛɾ ɪz hɔɹs fɔl bæk bɪsaɪd pɛɹɪnz. səmtaɪmz, tə pɛɹɪnz aɪz, ðə kɹɛsən kɹɛst ɑn ðə ʃaɪnɝənz hɛlmət lʊk laɪk ə tʃɹɑlɑks hɔɹnz. ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd sɔfli, "tɛl mi əɡɛn wʌt ðə wʊlvz sɛd."

Ingtar let his horse fall back beside Perrin's. Sometimes, to Perrin's eyes, the crescent crest on the Shienaran's helmet looked like a Trolloc's horns. Ingtar said softly, "Tell me again what the wolves said."

"aɪv toʊl jə tɛn taɪmz," pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd.

"I've told you ten times," Perrin muttered.

"tɛl mi əɡɛn! ɛniθɪŋ aɪ meɪ hæv mɪst, ɛniθɪŋ ðət wɪl hɛlp mi faɪn ðə hɔɹn. . . ." ɪŋtʃɹ dʒɹu ə bɹɛθ ən lɛɾ ɪɾ aʊt sloʊli. "aɪ mʌs faɪn ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, pɛɹɪn. tɛl mi əɡɛn."

"Tell me again! Anything I may have missed, anything that will help me find the Horn. . . ." Ingtar drew a breath and let it out slowly. "I must find the Horn of Valere, Perrin. Tell me again."

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid fəɹ pɛɹɪn tə ɔɹɾɝ ɪɾ ɪn ɪz maɪnd, nɑɾ æftɝ soʊ mɛni ɹɛpətɪʃənz. hi dʒɹoʊn ɪɾ aʊt. "sʌmwʌn - əɹ sʌmθɪŋ - ətæk ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪn ðə naɪɾ ən kɪl ðoʊz tʃɹɑləks wi faʊnd." hɪz stʌmək noʊ lɔŋɡɝ lɝtʃt ət ðæt. ɹeɪvənz ən vʌltʃɝz wɝ mɛsi fiɾɝz. "ðə wʊlvz kɔl ɪm - əɹ ɪt - ʃæɾoʊkɪlɝ; aɪ θɪŋk ɪt wɑz ə mæn, bʌt ðeɪ wʊdnt ɡoʊ kloʊs ɪnʌf tə si klɪɹli. ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑɾ əfɹeɪɾ ə ðɪs ʃæɾoʊkɪlɝ; ɑ ɪz mɔɹ laɪk ɪt. ðeɪ seɪ ðə tʃɹɑləks naʊ fɑloʊ ʃæɾoʊkɪlɝ. ən ðeɪ seɪ feɪn ɪz wɪð ðɛm" - ivən æftɝ soʊ lɔŋ ðə ɹɪmɛmbɝd smɛl ə feɪn, ðə fil ə ðə mæn, meɪɾ ɪz maʊθ twɪst - "soʊ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz mʌs bi, tu."

There was no need for Perrin to order it in his mind, not after so many repetitions. He droned it out. "Someone - or something - attacked the Darkfriends in the night and killed those Trollocs we found." His stomach no longer lurched at that. Ravens and vultures were messy feeders. "The wolves call him - or it - Shadowkiller; I think it was a man, but they wouldn't go close enough to see clearly. They are not afraid of this Shadowkiller; awe is more like it. They say the Trollocs now follow Shadowkiller. And they say Fain is with them" - even after so long the remembered smell of Fain, the feel of the man, made his mouth twist - "so the rest of the Darkfriends must be, too."

"ʃæɾoʊkɪlɝ," ɪŋtʃɹ mɝmɝd. "sʌmθɪŋ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn, laɪk ə mɹdʒɹɑl? aɪ hæv sin θɪŋz ɪn ðə blaɪt ðət maɪt bi kɔld ʃæɾoʊkɪlɝz, bʌt. . . . dɪd ðeɪ si nʌθɪŋ ɛls?"

"Shadowkiller," Ingtar murmured. "Something of the Dark One, like a Myrddraal? I have seen things in the Blight that might be called Shadowkillers, but. . . . Did they see nothing else?"

"ðeɪ wəd nɑt kʌm kloʊs tə hɪm. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə feɪd. aɪv toʊl ju, ðəl kɪl ə feɪd kwɪkɝ ðən ðəl ə tʃɹɑlɑk, ivən ɪf ðeɪ luz hæf ðə pæk. ɪŋtʃɹ, ðə wʊlvz u sɔ ɪt pæs ðɪs tə ʌðɝz, ðən stɪl ʌðɝz, bɪfɔɹ ɪt ɹitʃt mi. aɪ kən oʊnli tɛl jə wʌt ðeɪ pæst ɑn, ən æftɝ soʊ mɛni tɛlɪŋz. . . ." hi lɛt ðə wɝdz daɪ əz ənoʊ dʒɔɪn ðɛm.

"They would not come close to him. It was not a Fade. I've told you, they will kill a Fade quicker than they will a Trolloc, even if they lose half the pack. Ingtar, the wolves who saw it passed this to others, then still others, before it reached me. I can only tell you what they passed on, and after so many tellings. . . ." He let the words die as Uno joined them.

"ilmən ɪn ðə ɹɑks," ðə wʌn-aɪd mæn sɛd kwaɪətli.

"Aielman in the rocks," the one-eyed man said quietly.

"ðɪs fɑɹ fɹəm ðə weɪst?" ɪŋtʃɹ sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. ənoʊ sʌmhaʊ mænədʒ tə lʊk əfɛndəd wɪθaʊt tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən, ən ɪŋtʃɹ æɾəd, "noʊ, aɪ doʊn daʊt ju. aɪm dʒʌst sɝpɹaɪzd."

"This far from the Waste?" Ingtar said incredulously. Uno somehow managed to look offended without changing his expression, and Ingtar added, "No, I don't doubt you. I am just surprised."

"hi fleɪmɪŋ wɑntəd mi tə si hɪm, əɹ aɪ laɪkli wʊdn hæv." ənoʊ saʊndəd dɪsɡʌstəɾ əɾ ædmɪɾɪŋ ɪt. "æn ɪz blʌɾi feɪs wɑzn veɪld, soʊ hiz nɑɾ aʊt fəɹ kɪlɪŋ. bʌt wən jə si wʌn blʌɾi il, ðɛɹz ɔlweɪz mɔɹ jə doʊnt." sʌɾənli hɪz aɪ waɪɾənd. "bɝn mi ɪf ɪt dʌzn lʊk laɪk i blʌɾi wɑns mɔɹ ðən tə bi sin." hi pɔɪntəd: ə mæn hæd stɛpt ɪndə ðə weɪ əhɛɾ ə ðɛm.

"He flaming wanted me to see him, or I likely wouldn't have." Uno sounded disgusted at admitting it. "And his bloody face wasn't veiled, so he's not out for killing. But when you see one bloody Aiel, there's always more you don't." Suddenly his eye widened. "Burn me if it doesn't look like he bloody wants more than to be seen." He pointed: a man had stepped into the way ahead of them.

ɪnstənli mæsiməz læns dʒɹɑp tə ə kaʊtʃ, ən i dʌɡ hɪz hilz ɪndə hɪz hɔɹs, lipɪŋ tə ə dɛd ɡæləp ɪn θɹi stʃɹaɪdz. hi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn; fɔɹ stil pɔɪns hɝɾəld təwɔɹd ðə mæn ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

Instantly Masema's lance dropped to a couch, and he dug his heels into his horse, leaping to a dead gallop in three strides. He was not the only one; four steel points hurtled toward the man on the ground.

"hoʊld!" ɪŋtʃɹ ʃaʊɾəd. "hoʊld, aɪ sɛd! əl əv ði ɪɹz ʌv ɛni mæn u dʌzn stɑp wɛɹ i stænz!"

"Hold!" Ingtar shouted. "Hold, I said! I'll have the ears of any man who doesn't stop where he stands!"

mæsimə pʊld ɪn ɪz hɔɹs vɪʃəsli, sɔɪŋ ðə ɹeɪnz. ði ʌðɝz ɔlsoʊ stɑpt, ɪn ə klaʊɾ ə dʌs nɑt tɛn peɪsɪz fɹəm ðə mæn, ðɛɹ lænsɪz stɪl hɛl stɛɾi ɑn ðə mænz tʃɛst. hi ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə weɪv əweɪ ðə dʌst əz ɪt dʒɹɪftəd təwɔɹd hɪm; ɪt wɑz ðə fɝs muv i hæd meɪd.

Masema pulled in his horse viciously, sawing the reins. The others also stopped, in a cloud of dust not ten paces from the man, their lances still held steady on the man's chest. He raised a hand to wave away the dust as it drifted toward him; it was the first move he had made.

hi wɑz ə tɔl mæn, wɪð skɪn dɑɹk fɹəm ðə sʌn ən ɹɛd hɛɹ kʌt ʃɔɹɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ ə teɪl ɪn ðə bæk ðət hʌŋ tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝz. fɹəm ɪz sɑft, leɪs ni-haɪ buts tə ðə klɔθ ɹæp lusli ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk, hɪz kloʊðz wɝ ɔl ɪn ʃeɪdz ə bɹaʊn ən ɡɹeɪ ðət wəd blɛn ɪndə ɹɑk əɹ ɝθ. ði ɛn ʌv ə ʃɔɹt hɔɹn baʊ pikt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ən ə kwɪvɝ bɹɪsəld wɪð æɹoʊz əɾ ɪz bɛlt ət wʌn saɪd. ə lɔŋ naɪf hʌŋ ət ði ʌðɝ. ɪn ɪz lɛf hæn i ɡɹɪpt ə ɹaʊn haɪd bʌkəlɝ ən θɹi ʃɔɹt spɪɹz, noʊ mɔɹ ðən hæf əz lɔŋ əz i wɑz tɔl, wɪð pɔɪns fʊli əz lɔŋ əz ðoʊz ə ðə ʃaɪnɝən lænsɪz.

He was a tall man, with skin dark from the sun and red hair cut short except for a tail in the back that hung to his shoulders. From his soft, laced knee-high boots to the cloth wrapped loosely around his neck, his clothes were all in shades of brown and gray that would blend into rock or earth. The end of a short horn bow peeked over his shoulder, and a quiver bristled with arrows at his belt at one side. A long knife hung at the other. In his left hand he gripped a round hide buckler and three short spears, no more than half as long as he was tall, with points fully as long as those of the Shienaran lances.

"aɪ hæv noʊ paɪpɝz tə pleɪ ðə tun," ðə mæn ənaʊnst wɪð ə smaɪl, "bʌɾ ɪf jə wɪʃ ðə dæns. . . ." hi dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ ɪz stæns, bʌt pɛɹɪn kɑɾ ə sʌɾən ɛɹ ə ɹɛɾinəs. "maɪ neɪm ɪz jɝaɪn, ʌv ðə tu spaɪɹz sɛpt ə ðə ɹn il. aɪm ə ɹɛd ʃild. ɹɪmɛmbɝ mi."

"I have no pipers to play the tune," the man announced with a smile, "but if you wish the dance. . . ." He did not change his stance, but Perrin caught a sudden air of readiness. "My name is Urien, of the Two Spires sept of the Reyn Aiel. I am a Red Shield. Remember me."

ɪŋtʃɹ dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ən wɔk fɔɹwɝd, ɹimuvɪŋ ɪz hɛlmət. pɛɹɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊnli ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ klaɪmɪŋ daʊn tə dʒɔɪn hɪm. hi kəd nɑt mɪs ðə tʃæns tə si ən il kloʊs ʌp. æktɪŋ laɪk ə blæk-veɪld il. ɪn stɔɹi æftɝ stɔɹi il wɝ əz dɛdli ən deɪnʒɝəs əz tʃɹɑləks - səm ivən sɛd ðeɪ wɝ ɔl dɑɹkfɹɛnz - bʌt jɝaɪnz smaɪl sʌmhaʊ dɪd nɑt lʊk deɪnʒɝəs dɪspaɪt ðə fæk ðəɾ i sim pɔɪz tə lip. hɪz aɪz wɝ blu.

Ingtar dismounted and walked forward, removing his helmet. Perrin hesitated only a moment before climbing down to join him. He could not miss the chance to see an Aiel close up. Acting like a black-veiled Aiel. In story after story Aiel were as deadly and dangerous as Trollocs - some even said they were all Darkfriends - but Urien's smile somehow did not look dangerous despite the fact that he seemed poised to leap. His eyes were blue.

"hi lʊks laɪk ɹænd." pɛɹɪn lʊkt ɝaʊn tə si ðət mæt hæd dʒɔɪn ðɛm, tu. "meɪbi ɪŋtʃɹz ɹaɪt," mæt æɾəd kwaɪətli. "meɪbi ɹænd ɪz ən il."

"He looks like Rand." Perrin looked around to see that Mat had joined them, too. "Maybe Ingtar's right," Mat added quietly. "Maybe Rand is an Aiel."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. "bʌɾ ɪt dʌzn tʃeɪnʒ ɛniθɪŋ."

Perrin nodded. "But it doesn't change anything."

"noʊ, ɪt dʌznt." mæt saʊndəɾ əz ɪf i wɝ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ bɪsaɪd wʌt pɛɹɪn mɛnt.

"No, it doesn't." Mat sounded as if he were talking about something beside what Perrin meant.

"wi ɑɹ boʊθ fɑɹ fɹəm əɹ hoʊmz," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd tə ði il, "ænd wi, ət list, hæv kʌm fəɹ ʌðɝ θɪŋz ðən faɪɾɪŋ." pɛɹɪn ɹɪvaɪzd ɪz əpɪnjən ə jɝaɪnz smaɪl; ðə mæn æktʃəli  lʊk dɪsəpɔɪntɪd.

"We are both far from our homes," Ingtar said to the Aiel, "and we, at least, have come for other things than fighting." Perrin revised his opinion of Urien's smile; the man actually looked disappointed.

"æz jə wɪʃ ɪt, ʃaɪnɝən." jɝaɪn tɝn tə vɛɹɪn, dʒʌst ɡɛɾɪŋ daʊn ɔf əɹ hɔɹs, ən meɪɾ ən ɑd baʊ, dɪɡɪŋ ðə pɔɪns ə hɪz spɪɹz ɪndə ðə ɡɹaʊn ən ɪkstɛndɪŋ ɪz ɹaɪt hænd, pɑm ʌp. hɪz vɔɪs bɪkeɪm ɹɪspɛkfəl. "waɪz wʌn, maɪ wɔɾɝ ɪz jʊɹz."

"As you wish it, Shienaran." Urien turned to Verin, just getting down off her horse, and made an odd bow, digging the points of his spears into the ground and extending his right hand, palm up. His voice became respectful. "Wise One, my water is yours."

vɛɹɪn hændəɾ əɹ ɹeɪnz tə wʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz. ʃi stʌɾid ði il əz ʃi keɪm kloʊsɝ. "waɪ dʒju kɔl mi ðæt? dʒju teɪk mi fəɹ ən il?"

Verin handed her reins to one of the soldiers. She studied the Aiel as she came closer. "Why do you call me that? Do you take me for an Aiel?"

"noʊ, waɪz wʌn. bʌt juv ðə lʊk ə ðoʊz u hæv meɪd ðə dʒɝni tə ɹɪɾiən ən sɝvaɪvd. ðə jɪɹz də nɑt tʌtʃ ðə waɪz wʌnz ɪn ðə seɪm weɪ əz ʌðɝ wɪmən, əɹ əz ðeɪ tʌtʃ mɛn."

"No, Wise One. But you have the look of those who have made the journey to Rhuidean and survived. The years do not touch the Wise Ones in the same way as other women, or as they touch men."

ən ɪksaɪɾəd lʊk əpɪɹɾ ɑn ði ɛɛs sədaɪz feɪs, bʌɾ ɪŋtʃɹ spoʊk ɪmpeɪʃənli. "wi ɑɹ fɑloʊɪŋ dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən tʃɹɑləks, jɝaɪn. hæv jə sin ɛni saɪn ə ðɛm?"

An excited look appeared on the Aes Sedai's face, but Ingtar spoke impatiently. "We are following Darkfriends and Trollocs, Urien. Have you seen any sign of them?"

"tʃɹɑləks? hɪɹ?" jɝaɪnz aɪz bɹaɪɾənd. "ɪɾ ɪz wʌn ə ðə saɪnz ðə pɹɑfəsiz spik ʌv. wən ðə tʃɹɑləks kʌm aʊɾ ə ðə blaɪɾ əɡɛn, wɪl liv ðə θɹi-foʊld læn ən teɪk bæk əɹ pleɪsəz ʌv oʊld." ðəɹ wɑz mʌɾɝɪŋ fɹəm ðə maʊntəd ʃaɪnɝənz. jɝaɪn aɪɾ əm wɪð ə pɹaɪd ðət meɪɾ ɪm sim tə bi lʊkɪŋ daʊn fɹəm ə haɪt.

"Trollocs? Here?" Urien's eyes brightened. "It is one of the signs the prophecies speak of. When the Trollocs come out of the Blight again, we will leave the Three-fold Land and take back our places of old." There was muttering from the mounted Shienarans. Urien eyed them with a pride that made him seem to be looking down from a height.

"ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd?" mæt sɛd.

"The Three-fold Land?" Mat said.

pɛɹɪn θɔɾ i lʊk stɪl pəlɝ; nɑt sɪk, ɪɡzækli, bʌɾ əz ɪf i hæd bɪn aʊɾ ə ðə sʌn tu lɔŋ.

Perrin thought he looked still paler; not sick, exactly, but as if he had been out of the sun too long.

"ju kɔl ɪt ðə weɪst," jɝaɪn sɛd. "tə əs ɪts ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd. ə ʃeɪpɪŋ stoʊn, tə meɪk ʌs; ə tɛstɪŋ ɡɹaʊnd, tə pɹuv əɹ wɝθ; ən ə pʌnɪʃmən fəɹ ðə sɪn."

"You call it the Waste," Urien said. "To us it is the Three-fold Land. A shaping stone, to make us; a testing ground, to prove our worth; and a punishment for the sin."

"wʌt sɪn?" mæt æskt. pɛɹɪn kɑɾ ɪz bɹɛθ, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə spɪɹz ɪn jɝaɪnz hæn tə flæʃ.

"What sin?" Mat asked. Perrin caught his breath, waiting for the spears in Urien's hand to flash.

ði il ʃɹʌɡd. "soʊ lɔŋ əɡoʊ ɪt wɑz, ðət nʌn ɹɪmɛmbɝ. ɪksɛp ðə waɪz wʌnz ən ðə klæn tʃifs, ən ðəl nɑt spik ʌv ɪt. ɪt mʌst əv bɪn ə vɛɹi ɡɹeɪt sɪn ɪf ðeɪ kænɑt bɹɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz tə tɛl ʌs, bʌt ðə kɹieɪɾɝ pʌnɪʃəz əs wɛl."

The Aiel shrugged. "So long ago it was, that none remember. Except the Wise Ones and the clan chiefs, and they will not speak of it. It must have been a very great sin if they cannot bring themselves to tell us, but the Creator punishes us well."

"tʃɹɑləks," ɪŋtʃɹ pɝsɪstəd. "hæv jə sin tʃɹɑləks?"

"Trollocs," Ingtar persisted. "Have you seen Trollocs?"

jɝaɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ wʊɾə kɪld əm ɪf aɪ hæd, bʌɾ aɪ hæv sin nʌθɪŋ bʌt ðə ɹɑks ən ðə skaɪ."

Urien shook his head. "I would have killed them if I had, but I have seen nothing but the rocks and the sky."

ɪŋtʃɹ ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, luzɪŋ ɪntʃɹəst, bʌt vɛɹɪn spoʊk, ʃɑɹp kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. "ðɪs ɹɪɾiən. wʌɾ ɪz ɪt? wɛɹ ɪz ɪt? haʊ ɑɹ ðə ɡɝlz tʃoʊzən tə ɡoʊ?"

Ingtar shook his head, losing interest, but Verin spoke, sharp concentration in her voice. "This Rhuidean. What is it? Where is it? How are the girls chosen to go?"

jɝaɪnz feɪs wɛn flæt, hɪz aɪz hʊɾɪd. "aɪ kænɑt spik ʌv ɪt, waɪz wʌn."

Urien's face went flat, his eyes hooded. "I cannot speak of it, Wise One."

ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf pɛɹɪnz hænd ɡɹɪpt ɪz æks. ðəɹ wɑz ðəɾ ɪn jɝaɪnz vɔɪs. ɪŋtʃɹ hæɾ ɔlsoʊ sɛt hɪmsɛlf, ɹɛɾi tə ɹitʃ fəɹ ɪz sɔɹd, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə stɝ əmʌŋ ðə maʊntəd mɛn. bʌt vɛɹɪn stɛpt ʌp tə ði il, əntɪl ʃi wɑz ɔlmoʊs tʌtʃɪŋ ɪz tʃɛst, ən lʊkt ʌp ɪndə hɪz feɪs.

In spite of himself Perrin's hand gripped his axe. There was that in Urien's voice. Ingtar had also set himself, ready to reach for his sword, and there was a stir among the mounted men. But Verin stepped up to the Aiel, until she was almost touching his chest, and looked up into his face.

"aɪ æm nɑɾ ə waɪz wʌn əz jə noʊ ðɛm, jɝaɪn," ʃi sɛɾ ɪnsɪstənli. "aɪ æm ɛɛs sədaɪ. tɛl mi wʌt jə kən seɪ ʌv ɹɪɾiən."

"I am not a Wise One as you know them, Urien," she said insistently. "I am Aes Sedai. Tell me what you can say of Rhuidean."

ðə mæn u hæd bɪn ɹɛɾi tə feɪs twɛnti mɛn naʊ lʊkt əz ɪf i wɪʃt fəɹ ən ɪskeɪp fɹəm ðɪs wʌn plʌmp wʊmən wɪð ɡɹeɪɪŋ hɛɹ. "aɪ . . . kən tɛl jə oʊnli wʌɾ ɪz noʊn tə ɔl. ɹɪɾiən laɪz ɪn ðə lænz ə ðə dʒɛn il, ðə θɝtinθ klæn. aɪ kænɑt spik ə ðɛm ɪksɛp tə neɪm ðɛm. nʌn meɪ ɡoʊ ðəɹ seɪv wɪmən u wɪʃ tə bɪkʌm waɪz wʌnz, əɹ mɛn u wɪʃ tə bi klæn tʃifs. pɝhæps ðə dʒɛn il tʃuz əmʌŋ ðɛm; aɪ də nɑt noʊ. mɛni ɡoʊ; fju ɹɪtɝn, ən ðoʊz ɑɹ mɑɹkt əz wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ - waɪz wʌnz, əɹ klæn tʃifs. noʊ mɔɹ kən aɪ seɪ, ɛɛs sədaɪ. noʊ mɔɹ."

The man who had been ready to face twenty men now looked as if he wished for an escape from this one plump woman with graying hair. "I . . . can tell you only what is known to all. Rhuidean lies in the lands of the Jenn Aiel, the thirteenth clan. I cannot speak of them except to name them. None may go there save women who wish to become Wise Ones, or men who wish to be clan chiefs. Perhaps the Jenn Aiel choose among them; I do not know. Many go; few return, and those are marked as what they are - Wise Ones, or clan chiefs. No more can I say, Aes Sedai. No more."

vɛɹɪn kəntɪnjud tə lʊk ʌp ət hɪm, pɝsɪŋ əɹ lɪps.

Verin continued to look up at him, pursing her lips.

jɝaɪn lʊkt ət ðə skaɪ əz ðoʊ hi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪt. "wɪl jə sleɪ mi naʊ, ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

Urien looked at the sky as though he was trying to remember it. "Will you slay me now, Aes Sedai?"

ʃi blɪŋkt. "wʌt?"

She blinked. "What?"

"wɪl jə sleɪ mi naʊ? wʌn ə ði oʊl pɹɑfəsiz sɛz ðəɾ ɪf ɛvɝ wi feɪl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əɡɛn, ðəl sleɪ ʌs. aɪ noʊ jəɹ paʊɝ ɪz ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən ðəɾ ə ðə waɪz wʌnz." ði il læf sʌɾənli, mɝθləsli. ðəɹ wɑz ə waɪld laɪɾ ɪn ɪz aɪz. "bɹɪŋ jəɹ laɪtnɪŋz, ɛɛs sədaɪ. əl dæns wɪð ðɛm."

"Will you slay me now? One of the old prophecies says that if ever we fail the Aes Sedai again, they will slay us. I know your power is greater than that of the Wise Ones." The Aiel laughed suddenly, mirthlessly. There was a wild light in his eyes. "Bring your lightnings, Aes Sedai. I will dance with them."

ði il θɔɾ i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə daɪ, ən i wɑz nɑɾ əfɹeɪd. pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪzd ɪz maʊθ wɑz oʊpən ən kloʊzd ɪt wɪð ə snæp.

The Aiel thought he was going to die, and he was not afraid. Perrin realized his mouth was open and closed it with a snap.

"wʌt wəɾ aɪ nɑt ɡɪv," vɛɹɪn mɝmɝd, ɡeɪzɪŋ ʌp ət jɝaɪn, "tə hæv jə ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. əɹ dʒʌst wɪlɪŋ tə tɔk. oʊ, bi stɪl, mæn. aɪ woʊn hɑɹm ju. ənlɛs jə min tə hɑɹm mi, wɪð jəɹ tɔk ə dænsɪŋ."

"What would I not give," Verin murmured, gazing up at Urien, "to have you in the White Tower. Or just willing to talk. Oh, be still, man. I won't harm you. Unless you mean to harm me, with your talk of dancing."

jɝaɪn simd əstaʊndɪd. hi lʊkt ət ðə ʃaɪnɝənz, sɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ɔl ɝaʊnd, əz ɪf i səspɛktəd səm tʃɹɪk. "ju ɑɹ nɑɾ ə meɪɾən ə ðə spɪɹ," hi sɛd sloʊli. "haʊ kəɾ aɪ stʃɹaɪk əɾ ə wʊmən u hæz nɑt wɛɾəd ðə spɪɹ? ɪts fɔɹbɪɾən ɪksɛp tə seɪv laɪf, ən ðən aɪ wəd teɪk wunz tə əvɔɪɾ ɪt."

Urien seemed astounded. He looked at the Shienarans, sitting their horses all around, as if he suspected some trick. "You are not a Maiden of the Spear," he said slowly. "How could I strike at a woman who has not wedded the spear? It is forbidden except to save life, and then I would take wounds to avoid it."

"waɪ ɑɹ jə hɪɹ, soʊ fɑɹ fɹəm jəɹ oʊn lænz?" ʃi æskt. "waɪ dɪd jə kʌm tə ʌs? jə cʊɾə ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə ɹɑks, ən wi wəd nɛvɝ əv noʊn jə wɝ ðɛɹ." ði il hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ən ʃi æɾəd, "tɛl oʊnli wʌt jə ɑɹ wɪlɪŋ tə seɪ. aɪ də nɑt noʊ wʌt jəɹ waɪz wʌnz du, bʌɾ əl nɑt hɑɹm ju, əɹ tʃɹaɪ tə fɔɹs ju."

"Why are you here, so far from your own lands?" she asked. "Why did you come to us? You could have remained in the rocks, and we would never have known you were there." The Aiel hesitated, and she added, "Tell only what you are willing to say. I do not know what your Wise Ones do, but I'll not harm you, or try to force you."

"soʊ ðə waɪz wʌnz seɪ," jɝaɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "jɛɾ ivən ə klæn tʃif mʌst əv ə stʃɹɔŋ bɛli tə əvɔɪd duɪŋ əz ðeɪ wɑnt." hi sim tə bi pɪkɪŋ ɪz wɝdz kɛɹfəli. "aɪ sɝtʃ fəɹ . . . sʌmwʌn. ə mæn." hɪz aɪ ɹæn əkɹɔs pɛɹɪn, mæt, ðə ʃaɪnɝənz, dɪsmɪsɪŋ əm ɔl. "hi hu kʌmz wɪð ðə dɔn. ɪts sɛd ðəɹ wɪl bi ɡɹeɪt saɪnz ən pɔɹtɛns ə hɪz kʌmɪŋ. aɪ sɔ ðət jə wɝ fɹəm ʃaɪnɝ baɪ jəɹ ɛskɔɹts ɑɹmɝ, ən jə hæd ðə lʊk ʌv ə waɪz wʌn, soʊ aɪ θɔt jə maɪɾ əv wɝɾ ʌv ɡɹeɪɾ ɪvɛns, ði ɪvɛns ðət maɪt hɛɹəl hɪm."

"So the Wise Ones say," Urien said dryly, "yet even a clan chief must have a strong belly to avoid doing as they want." He seemed to be picking his words carefully. "I search for . . . someone. A man." His eye ran across Perrin, Mat, the Shienarans, dismissing them all. "He Who Comes With the Dawn. It is said there will be great signs and portents of his coming. I saw that you were from Shienar by your escort's armor, and you had the look of a Wise One, so I thought you might have word of great events, the events that might herald him."

"ə mæn?" vɛɹɪnz vɔɪs wɑz sɑft, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz wɝ əz ʃɑɹp əz dæɡɝz. "wʌɾ ɑɹ ðiz saɪnz?"

"A man?" Verin's voice was soft, but her eyes were as sharp as daggers. "What are these signs?"

jɝaɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ɪɾ ɪz sɛd wɪl noʊ ðɛm wən wi hɪɹ ə ðɛm, əz wɪl noʊ hɪm wən wi si hɪm, fəɹ hɪl bi mɑɹkt. hɪl kʌm fɹəm ðə wɛst, bɪɑn ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld, bʌt bi ʌv əɹ blʌd. hɪl ɡoʊ tə ɹɪɾiən, ən lɛɾ əs aʊɾ ə ðə θɹi-foʊld lænd." hi tʊk ə spɪɹ ɪn ɪz ɹaɪt hænd. lɛðɝ ən mɛɾəl kɹikt əz soʊlʒɝz ɹitʃt fəɹ ðɛɹ sɔɹdz, ən pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪzd i hæd teɪkən hoʊld ə hɪz æks əɡɛn, bʌt vɛɹɪn weɪvd əm ɔl tə stɪlnəs wɪð ən ɪɹəteɪɾəd lʊk. ɪn ðə dɝt jɝaɪn skɹeɪpt ə sɝkəl wɪð ɪz spɪɹpɔɪnt, ðən dʒɹu əkɹɔs ɪɾ ə sɪnwəs laɪn. "ɪɾ ɪz sɛd ðəɾ ʌndɝ ðɪs saɪn, hɪl kɑŋkɝ."

Urien shook his head. "It is said we will know them when we hear of them, as we will know him when we see him, for he will be marked. He will come from the west, beyond the Spine of the World, but be of our blood. He will go to Rhuidean, and lead us out of the Three-fold Land." He took a spear in his right hand. Leather and metal creaked as soldiers reached for their swords, and Perrin realized he had taken hold of his axe again, but Verin waved them all to stillness with an irritated look. In the dirt Urien scraped a circle with his spearpoint, then drew across it a sinuous line. "It is said that under this sign, he will conquer."

ɪŋtʃɹ fɹaʊn ət ðə sɪmbəl, noʊ ɹɛkəɡnɪʃən ɑn ɪz feɪs, bʌt mæt mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ kɔɹsli ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, ən pɛɹɪn fɛlt ɪz maʊθ ɡoʊ dʒɹaɪ. ði eɪntʃən sɪmbəl ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Ingtar frowned at the symbol, no recognition on his face, but Mat muttered something coarsely under his breath, and Perrin felt his mouth go dry. The ancient symbol of the Aes Sedai.

vɛɹɪn skɹeɪp ðə mɑɹkɪŋ əweɪ wɪð əɹ fʊt. "aɪ kænɑt tɛl jə wɛɹ i ɪz, jɝaɪn," ʃi sɛd, "æn aɪ hæv hɝɾ ə noʊ saɪnz əɹ pɔɹtɛns tə ɡaɪd jə tə hɪm."

Verin scraped the marking away with her foot. "I cannot tell you where he is, Urien," she said, "and I have heard of no signs or portents to guide you to him."

"ðɛn əl kəntɪnju maɪ sɝtʃ." ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə kwɛstʃən, jɛt jɝaɪn weɪɾəd əntɪl ʃi nɑɾəd bɪfɔɹ i aɪd ðə ʃaɪnɝənz pɹaʊdli, tʃælənʒɪŋli, ðən tɝn ɪz bæk ɑn ðɛm. hi wɔkt əweɪ smuðli, ən vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə ɹɑks wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ bæk.

"Then I will continue my search." It was not a question, yet Urien waited until she nodded before he eyed the Shienarans proudly, challengingly, then turned his back on them. He walked away smoothly, and vanished into the rocks without looking back.

səm ə ðə soʊlʒɝz bɪɡæn mʌɾɝɪŋ. ənoʊ sɛd sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt "kɹeɪzi blʌɾi il," ən mæsimə ɡɹaʊl ðət ðeɪ ʃʊɾə lɛf ði il fəɹ ðə ɹeɪvənz.

Some of the soldiers began muttering. Uno said something about "crazy bloody Aiel," and Masema growled that they should have left the Aiel for the ravens.

"wi hæv weɪstəd væljəbəl taɪm," ɪŋtʃɹ ənaʊns laʊdli. "wi wɪl ɹaɪd hɑɹɾɝ tə meɪk ɪɾ ʌp."

"We have wasted valuable time," Ingtar announced loudly. "We will ride harder to make it up."

"jɛs," vɛɹɪn sɛd, "wi mʌst ɹaɪd hɑɹɾɝ."

"Yes," Verin said, "we must ride harder."

ɪŋtʃɹ ɡlænst ət hɝ, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə smʌdʒd ɡɹaʊnd, wɛɹ əɹ fʊt hæɾ əblɪɾɝeɪtɪd ðə sɪmbəl. "dɪsmaʊnt," hi ɔɹɾɝd. "ɑɹmɝ ɑn ðə pækhɔɹsɪz. wɝ ɪnsaɪd kɛɹhin, naʊ. wi də nɑt wɑn ðə kɛɹhinɪn θɪŋkɪŋ wɪv kʌm tə faɪt ðɛm. bi kwɪk əbaʊɾ ɪt!"

Ingtar glanced at her, but the Aes Sedai was staring at the smudged ground, where her foot had obliterated the symbol. "Dismount," he ordered. "Armor on the packhorses. We're inside Cairhien, now. We do not want the Cairhienin thinking we have come to fight them. Be quick about it!"

mæt lin kloʊs tə pɛɹɪn. "du jə . . . ? dʒju θɪŋk i wɑz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ɹænd? ɪts kɹeɪzi, aɪ noʊ, bʌɾ ivən ɪŋtʃɹ θɪŋks hiz il."

Mat leaned close to Perrin. "Do you . . . ? Do you think he was talking about Rand? It's crazy, I know, but even Ingtar thinks he's Aiel."

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɛvɹiθɪŋ əz bɪn kɹeɪzi sɪns wi ɡɑt mɪkst ʌp wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"I don't know," Perrin said. "Everything has been crazy since we got mixed up with Aes Sedai."

sɔfli, əz tə hɝsɛlf, vɛɹɪn spoʊk, stɪl stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ɡɹaʊnd. "ɪt mʌs bi ə pɑɹt, ən jɛt haʊ? dʌz ðə wil ə taɪm wiv θɹɛdz ɪndə ðə pæɾɝn ʌv wɪtʃ wi noʊ nʌθɪŋ? əɹ dʌz ðə dɑɹk wʌn tʌtʃ ðə pæɾɝn əɡɛn?"

Softly, as to herself, Verin spoke, still staring at the ground. "It must be a part, and yet how? Does the Wheel of Time weave threads into the Pattern of which we know nothing? Or does the Dark One touch the Pattern again?"

pɛɹɪn fɛlt ə tʃɪl.

Perrin felt a chill.

vɛɹɪn lʊkt ʌp ət ðə soʊlʒɝz ɹimuvɪŋ ðɛɹ ɑɹmɝ. "hɝi!" ʃi kəmændəd wɪð mɔɹ snæp ðən ɪŋtʃɹ ən ənoʊ kəmbaɪnd. "wi mʌs hɝi!"

Verin looked up at the soldiers removing their armor. "Hurry!" she commanded with more snap than Ingtar and Uno combined. "We must hurry!"


tʃæptɝ twɛntinaɪn


CHAPTER 29

sintʃæn


Seanchan

dʒɛəfɹæm bɔɹnhəld ɪɡnɔɹd ðə smɛl ə bɝnɪŋ haʊsəz ən ðə bɑɾiz ðət leɪ spɹɔld ɑn ðə dɝɾ ə ðə stʃɹit. baɪɑɝ ən ə waɪt-kloʊkt ɡɑɹɾ ʌv ə hʌnʒɹəd ɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə vɪlədʒ əɾ ɪz hilz, hæf ðə mɛn i hæd wɪð hɪm. hɪz lidʒən wɑz tu skæɾɝd fəɹ ɪz laɪkɪŋ, wɪð kwɛstʃənɝz hævɪŋ tu mɛni ʌv ðə kəmænz, bʌɾ ɪz ɔɹɾɝz hæd bɪn ɪksplɪsət: oʊbeɪ ðə kwɛstʃənɝz.

Geofram Bornhald ignored the smell of burning houses and the bodies that lay sprawled on the dirt of the street. Byar and a white-cloaked guard of a hundred rode into the village at his heels, half the men he had with him. His legion was too scattered for his liking, with Questioners having too many of the commands, but his orders had been explicit: Obey the Questioners.

ðəɹ hæd bɪn bʌt slaɪt ɹɪzɪstəns hɪɹ; oʊnli hæf ə dʌzən dwɛlɪŋz ɡeɪv ɔf kɑləmz ə smoʊk. ði ɪn wɑz stɪl stændɪŋ, hi sɔ, waɪt-plæstɝd stoʊn laɪk ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹi stʃɹʌktʃɝ ɑn ɑlməθ pleɪn.

There had been but slight resistance here; only half a dozen dwellings gave off columns of smoke. The inn was still standing, he saw, white-plastered stone like almost every structure on Almoth Plain.

ɹeɪnɪŋ ʌp bɪfɔɹ ði ɪn, hɪz aɪz wɛn pæs ðə pɹɪznɝz ɪz soʊlʒɝz hɛl nɪɹ ðə vɪlədʒ wɛl tə ðə lɔŋ ɡɪbət mɑɹɪŋ ðə vɪlədʒ ɡɹin. ɪt wɑz heɪstəli meɪd, oʊnli ə lɔŋ poʊl ɑn ʌpɹaɪts, bʌɾ ɪt hɛl θɝɾi bɑɾiz, ðɛɹ kloʊðz ɹʌfəl baɪ ðə bɹiz. ðəɹ wɝ smɔl bɑɾiz hæŋɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛɹ ɛldɝz. ivən baɪɑɝ stɛɹɾ ət ðəɾ ɪn dɪsbɪlif.

Reining up before the inn, his eyes went past the prisoners his soldiers held near the village well to the long gibbet marring the village green. It was hastily made, only a long pole on uprights, but it held thirty bodies, their clothes ruffled by the breeze. There were small bodies hanging among their elders. Even Byar stared at that in disbelief.

"muɔd!" hi ɹɔɹd. ə ɡɹɪzəl mæn tʃɹɑɾəd əweɪ fɹəm ðoʊz hoʊldɪŋ ðə pɹɪznɝz. muɔd hæd fɔlən ɪndə ðə hænz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnz, wʌns; hɪz skɑɹd feɪs tʊk ivən ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst əbæk. "ɪz ðɪs jəɹ wɝk, muɔd, əɹ ðə sintʃæn?"

"Muadh!" he roared. A grizzled man trotted away from those holding the prisoners. Muadh had fallen into the hands of Darkfriends, once; his scarred face took even the strongest aback. "Is this your work, Muadh, or the Seanchan?"

"niðɝ, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən." muɔdz vɔɪs wɑz ə hɔɹs, wɪspɝd ɡɹaʊl, ənʌðɝ livɪŋ ə ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz. hi sɛd noʊ mɔɹ.

"Neither, my Lord Captain." Muadh's voice was a hoarse, whispered growl, another leaving of the Darkfriends. He said no more.

bɔɹnhəl fɹaʊnd. "ʃʊɹli ðət lɑt dɪd nɑt də ɪt," hi sɛd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ tə ðə pɹɪznɝz. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən dɪd nɑt lʊk soʊ niɾ əz wən i hæd bɹɔɾ əm əkɹɔs tæɹɑbən, bʌt ðeɪ simd ɹɛɾi tə pɝeɪd kəmpɛɹd wɪð ðə ɹæbəl ðət kɹaʊtʃt ʌndɝ ðɛɹ wɑtʃfəl aɪz. mɛn ɪn ɹæɡz ən bɪts ʌv ɑɹmɝ, wɪð sʌlən feɪsəz. ɹɛmnəns ə ði ɑɹmi tæɹɑbən hæd sɛn əɡɛns ði ɪnveɪɾɝz ɑn toʊmən hɛd.

Bornhald frowned. "Surely that lot did not do it," he said, gesturing to the prisoners. The Children did not look so neat as when he had brought them across Tarabon, but they seemed ready to parade compared with the rabble that crouched under their watchful eyes. Men in rags and bits of armor, with sullen faces. Remnants of the army Tarabon had sent against the invaders on Toman Head.

muɔd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən sɛd kɛɹfəli, "ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz seɪ ðeɪ wɔɹ tæɹɑbənɝ kloʊks, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən. ðəɹ wɑz ə bɪɡ mæn əmʌŋ ðɛm, wɪð ɡɹeɪ aɪz ən ə lɔŋ mʌstæʃ, ðət saʊnz twɪn tə tʃaɪld ɪɹwɪn, ən ə jʌŋ læd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə haɪɾ ə pɹɪɾi feɪs bɪhaɪn ə jɛloʊ bɪɹd, hu fɔt wɪð ɪz lɛf hænd. saʊnz ɔlmoʊs laɪk tʃaɪld wwɑn, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən."

Muadh hesitated, then said carefully, "The villagers say they wore Taraboner cloaks, my Lord Captain. There was a big man among them, with gray eyes and a long mustache, that sounds twin to Child Earwin, and a young lad, trying to hide a pretty face behind a yellow beard, who fought with his left hand. Sounds almost like Child Wuan, my Lord Captain."

"kwɛstʃənɝz!" bɔɹnhəl spæt. ɪɹwɪn ən wwɑn wɝ əmʌŋ ðoʊz i hæd hæd tə hæn oʊvɝ tə ðə kwɛstʃənɝz' kəmænd. hi hæd sin kwɛstʃənɝ tæktɪks bɪfɔɹ, bʌt ðɪs wɑz ðə fɝs taɪm i hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn feɪst wɪð tʃɪlʒɹənz bɑɾiz.

"Questioners!" Bornhald spat. Earwin and Wuan were among those he had had to hand over to the Questioners' command. He had seen Questioner tactics before, but this was the first time he had ever been faced with children's bodies.

"ɪf maɪ lɔɹd kæptən sɛz soʊ." muɔd meɪɾ ɪt saʊn laɪk fɝvən əɡɹimənt.

"If my Lord Captain says so." Muadh made it sound like fervent agreement.

"kʌɾ əm daʊn," bɔɹnhəl sɛd wɛɹəli. "kʌɾ əm daʊn, ən meɪk ʃʊɹ ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz noʊ ðəɹ wɪl bi noʊ mɔɹ kɪlɪŋ." ənlɛs səm ful dɪsaɪdz tə bi bɹeɪv kəz ɪz wʊmən ɪz wɑtʃɪŋ, ən aɪ hæv tə meɪk ən ɪɡzæmpəl. hi dɪsmaʊntɪd, aɪɪŋ ðə pɹɪznɝz əɡɛn, əz muɔd hɝiɾ ɔf kɔlɪŋ fəɹ læɾɝz ən naɪvz. hi hæd mɔɹ tə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðən kwɛstʃənɝz' oʊvɝzɛləsnəs; hi wɪʃt i kəd stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt kwɛstʃənɝz ɔltəɡɛðɝ.

"Cut them down," Bornhald said wearily. "Cut them down, and make sure the villagers know there will be no more killing." Unless some fool decides to be brave because his woman is watching, and I have to make an example. He dismounted, eyeing the prisoners again, as Muadh hurried off calling for ladders and knives. He had more to think about than Questioners' overzealousness; he wished he could stop thinking about Questioners altogether.

"ðeɪ də nɑt pʊɾ ʌp mʌtʃ faɪt, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən," baɪɑɝ sɛd, "iðɝ ðiz tæɹɑbənɝz əɹ wʌɾ ɪz lɛft ə ðə dəmɑni. ðeɪ snæp laɪk kɔɹnɝd ɹæts, bʌt ɹʌn əz sun əz ɛniθɪŋ snæps bæk."

"They do not put up much fight, my Lord Captain," Byar said, "either these Taraboners or what is left of the Domani. They snap like cornered rats, but run as soon as anything snaps back."

"lɛɾ əs si haʊ wi də əɡɛns ði ɪnveɪɾɝz, baɪɑɝ, bɪfɔɹ wi lʊk daʊn ɑn ðiz mɛn, jɛs?" ðə pɹɪznɝz' feɪsəz bɔɹ ə dɪfiɾəd lʊk ðət hæd bɪn ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ ɪz mɛn keɪm. "hæv muɔd pɪk wʌn aʊt fəɹ mi." muɔdz feɪs wɑz ɪnʌf tə sɑfən moʊs mɛnz ɹizɑlv baɪ ɪtsɛlf. "æn ɔfəsɝ, pɹɛfɝəbli. wʌn u lʊks ɪntɛlədʒən ɪnʌf tə tɛl wʌt hiz sin wɪθaʊɾ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi, bʌt jʌŋ ɪnʌf nɑt tə hæv jɛt ɡɹoʊn ə fʊl bækboʊn. tɛl muɔd tə bi nɑt tu dʒɛntəl əbaʊɾ ɪt, jɛs? meɪk ðə fɛloʊ bɪliv ðəɾ aɪ min tə si wɝs hæpən tə hɪm ðən i ɛvɝ dʒɹimd ʌv, ənlɛs i kənvɪnsɪz mi ʌðɝwaɪz." hi tɔst ɪz ɹeɪnz tə wʌn ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ən stʃɹoʊɾ ɪndə ði ɪn.

"Let us see how we do against the invaders, Byar, before we look down on these men, yes?" The prisoners' faces bore a defeated look that had been there before his men came. "Have Muadh pick one out for me." Muadh's face was enough to soften most men's resolve by itself. "An officer, preferably. One who looks intelligent enough to tell what he has seen without embroidery, but young enough not to have yet grown a full backbone. Tell Muadh to be not too gentle about it, yes? Make the fellow believe that I mean to see worse happen to him than he ever dreamed of, unless he convinces me otherwise." He tossed his reins to one of the Children and strode into the inn.

ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz ðɛɹ, fəɹ ə wʌndɝ, ən əbsikwiəs, swɛɾɪŋ mæn, hɪz dɝɾi ʃɝt stʃɹeɪnɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz bɛli əntɪl ði ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɹɛd skɹɑlwɝk simd ɹɛɾi tə pɑp ɔf. bɔɹnhəld weɪv ðə mæn əweɪ; hi wɑz veɪɡli əwɛɹ ʌv ə wʊmən ən səm tʃɪlʒɹən hʌɾəlɪŋ ɪn ə dɔɹweɪ, əntɪl ðə fæɾ ɪnkipɝ ʃɛpɝɾɪd əm aʊt.

The innkeeper was there, for a wonder, an obsequious, sweating man, his dirty shirt straining over his belly until the embroidered red scrollwork seemed ready to pop off. Bornhald waved the man away; he was vaguely aware of a woman and some children huddling in a doorway, until the fat innkeeper shepherded them out.

bɔɹnhəl pʊld ɔf ɪz ɡɔnləts ən sæɾ ət wʌn ə ðə teɪbəlz. hi nu tu lɪɾəl əbaʊt ði ɪnveɪɾɝz, ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝz. ðət wɑz wʌɾ ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiwʌn kɔl ðɛm, ðoʊz u dɪd nɑt dʒʌs bæbəl əbaʊɾ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ. hi nu ðeɪ kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz ðə sintʃæn, ən heɪlin. hi hæɾ ɪnʌf ə ði oʊl tʌŋ tə noʊ ðə læɾɝ mɛn ðoʊz u kʌm bɪfɔɹ, əɹ ðə fɔɹʌnɝz. ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz ɹaɪædʒɛl, ðoʊz u kʌm hoʊm, ən spoʊk ə kɔɝɪn, ðə ɹɪtɝn. ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊst ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪm bɪliv ðə teɪlz ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɑɹmiz kʌm bæk. noʊ wʌn nu wɛɹ ðə sintʃæn hæd kʌm fɹʌm, ʌðɝ ðən ðət ðeɪ hæd lændəɾ ɪn ʃɪps. bɔɹnhəlz ɹɪkwɛsts fəɹ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən fɹəm ðə si foʊk hæd bɪn mɛt wɪð saɪləns. æmədɔɹ dɪd nɑt hoʊl ði æθɑn maɪɹ ɪn ɡʊd feɪvɝ, ən ði æɾətud wɑz ɹɪtɝnd wɪð ɪntʃɹəst. ɔl i nu ʌv ðə sintʃæn i hæd hɝd fɹəm mɛn laɪk ðoʊz aʊtsaɪd. bɹoʊkən, biɾən ɹæbəl u spoʊk, waɪd-aɪɾ ən swɛɾɪŋ, ʌv mɛn u keɪm ɪndə bæɾəl ɹaɪɾɪŋ mɑnstɝz əz ɔfən əz hɔɹsəz, hu fɔt wɪð mɑnstɝz baɪ ðɛɹ saɪdz, ən bɹɔɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ɹɛn ði ɝθ ʌndɝ ðɛɹ ɛnəmiz' fit.

Bornhald pulled off his gauntlets and sat at one of the tables. He knew too little about the invaders, the strangers. That was what almost everyone called them, those who did not just babble about Artur Hawkwing. He knew they called themselves the Seanchan, and Hailene. He had enough of the Old Tongue to know the latter meant Those Who Come Before, or the Forerunners. They also called themselves Rhyagelle, Those Who Come Home, and spoke of Corenne, the Return. It was almost enough to make him believe the tales of Artur Hawkwing's armies come back. No one knew where the Seanchan had come from, other than that they had landed in ships. Bornhald's requests for information from the Sea Folk had been met with silence. Amador did not hold the Atha'an Miere in good favor, and the attitude was returned with interest. All he knew of the Seanchan he had heard from men like those outside. Broken, beaten rabble who spoke, wide-eyed and sweating, of men who came into battle riding monsters as often as horses, who fought with monsters by their sides, and brought Aes Sedai to rend the earth under their enemies' feet.

ə saʊn ə buts ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ meɪɾ ɪm pʊɾ ɑn ə wʊlfɪʃ ɡɹɪn, bʌt baɪɑɝ wɑz nɑɾ əkʌmpənid baɪ muɔd. ðə tʃaɪld ə ðə laɪɾ u stʊd bɪsaɪd hɪm, bæk bɹeɪst ən hɛlməɾ ɪn ðə kɹʊk ə hɪz ɑɹm, wɑz dʒɛɹəl, hu bɔɹnhəld ɪkspɛktəd tə bi ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz əweɪ. oʊvɝ ɪz ɑɹmɝ, ðə jʌŋ mæn wɔɹ ə kloʊk ə dəmɑni kʌt, tʃɹɪmd wɪð blu, nɑt ðə waɪt kloʊk ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən.

A sound of boots in the doorway made him put on a wolfish grin, but Byar was not accompanied by Muadh. The Child of the Light who stood beside him, back braced and helmet in the crook of his arm, was Jeral, who Bornhald expected to be a hundred miles away. Over his armor, the young man wore a cloak of Domani cut, trimmed with blue, not the white cloak of the Children.

"muɔɾ ɪz tɔkɪŋ tə ə jʌŋ fɛloʊ naʊ, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən," baɪɑɝ sɛd. "tʃaɪl dʒɛɹəl əz dʒʌst ɹɪɾən ɪn wɪð ə mɛsədʒ."

"Muadh is talking to a young fellow now, my Lord Captain," Byar said. "Child Jeral has just ridden in with a message."

bɔɹnhəld weɪv fəɹ dʒɛɹəl tə bɪɡɪn.

Bornhald waved for Jeral to begin.

ðə jʌŋ mæn dɪd nɑɾ ʌnbɪnd. "ðə kɑmpləməns ə dʒeɪitʃɪm kæɹaɪɾɪn," hi stɑɹɾəd, lʊkɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, "hu ɡaɪdz ðə hæn ə ðə laɪɾ ɪn - "

The young man did not unbend. "The compliments of Jaichim Carridin," he started, looking straight ahead, "who guides the Hand of the Light in - "

"aɪ hæv noʊ niɾ ə ðə kwɛstʃənɝz kɑmpləməns," bɔɹnhəld ɡɹaʊld, ən sɔ ðə jʌŋ mænz stɑɹɾəld lʊk. dʒɛɹəl wɑz jʌŋ, jɛt. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, baɪɑɝ lʊkt ənkʌmftəɹbəl, əz wɛl. "ju wɪl ɡɪmi hɪz mɛsədʒ, jɛs? nɑt wɝd fəɹ wɝd, ənlɛs aɪ æsk ɪt. sɪmpli tɛl mi wʌɾ i wɑns."

"I have no need of the Questioner's compliments," Bornhald growled, and saw the young man's startled look. Jeral was young, yet. For that matter, Byar looked uncomfortable, as well. "You will give me his message, yes? Not word for word, unless I ask it. Simply tell me what he wants."

ðə tʃaɪld, sɛt tə ɹəsaɪt, swɑloʊd bɪfɔɹ i bɪɡæn. "maɪ lɔɹd kæptən, hi - hi sɛz jə ɑɹ muvɪŋ tu mɛni mɛn tu kloʊs tə toʊmən hɛd. hi sɛz ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɑn ɑlməθ pleɪn mʌs bi ɹuɾəd aʊt, ən jə ɑɹ - fɝɡɪv mi, lɔɹd kæptən - jə ɑɹ tə tɝn bæk ət wʌns ən ɹaɪd təwɔɹd ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə pleɪn." hi stʊd stɪfli, weɪɾɪŋ.

The Child, set to recite, swallowed before he began. "My Lord Captain, he - he says you are moving too many men too close to Toman Head. He says the Darkfriends on Almoth Plain must be rooted out, and you are - forgive me, Lord Captain - you are to turn back at once and ride toward the heart of the plain." He stood stiffly, waiting.

bɔɹnhəl stʌɾid hɪm. ðə dʌst ə ðə pleɪn steɪn dʒɛɹəlz feɪs əz wɛl əz ɪz kloʊk ən ɪz buts. "ɡoʊ ən ɡɛt jɝsɛlf sʌmθɪŋ tə it," bɔɹn-hɔl toʊl hɪm. "ðɛɹ ʃəd bi wɑʃ wɔɾɝ ɪn wʌn ə ðiz haʊsəz, ɪf jə wɪʃ ɪt. ɹɪtɝn tə mi ɪn ən aʊɝ. əl əv mɛsədʒəz fəɹ jə tə kæɹi." hi weɪv ðə jʌŋ mæn aʊt.

Bornhald studied him. The dust of the plain stained Jeral's face as well as his cloak and his boots. "Go and get yourself something to eat," Born-hald told him. "There should be wash water in one of these houses, if you wish it. Return to me in an hour. I will have messages for you to carry." He waved the young man out.

"ðə kwɛstʃənɝz meɪ bi ɹaɪt, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən," baɪɑɝ sɛd wən dʒɛɹəl wɑz ɡɔn. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ mɛni vɪlədʒəz skæɾɝd ɑn ðə pleɪn, ən ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz - "

"The Questioners may be right, my Lord Captain," Byar said when Jeral was gone. "There are many villages scattered on the plain, and the Darkfriends - "

bɔɹnhəlz hæn slæpɪŋ ðə teɪbəl kʌɾ ɪm ɔf. "wʌt dɑɹkfɹɛnz? aɪ hæv sin nʌθɪŋ ɪn ɛni vɪlədʒ hiz ɔɹɾɝd teɪkən ɪksɛp fɑɹmɝz ən kɹæfsmən wɝid ðət wɪl bɝn ðɛɹ lɪvəlɪhʊdz, ən ə fju oʊld wɪmən u tɛn ðə sɪk." baɪɑɝz feɪs wɑz ə stʌɾi ɪn læk ʌv ɪkspɹɛʃən; hi wɑz ɔlweɪz ɹɛɾiɝ ðən bɔɹnhəl tə si dɑɹkfɹɛnz. "æn tʃɪlʒɹən, baɪɑɝ? də tʃɪlʒɹən hɪɹ bɪkʌm dɑɹkfɹɛnz?"

Bornhald's hand slapping the table cut him off. "What Darkfriends? I have seen nothing in any village he has ordered taken except farmers and craftsmen worried that we will burn their livelihoods, and a few old women who tend the sick." Byar's face was a study in lack of expression; he was always readier than Bornhald to see Darkfriends. "And children, Byar? Do children here become Darkfriends?"

"ðə sɪnz ə ðə mʌðɝ ɑɹ vɪzəɾəd tə ðə fɪfθ dʒɛnɝeɪʃən," baɪɑɝ kwoʊɾəd, "æn ðə sɪnz ə ðə fɑðɝ tə ðə tɛnθ." bʌɾ i lʊkt ənizi. ivən baɪɑɝ hæd nɛvɝ kɪld ə tʃaɪld.

"The sins of the mother are visited to the fifth generation," Byar quoted, "and the sins of the father to the tenth." But he looked uneasy. Even Byar had never killed a child.

"hæz ɪt nɛvɝ əkɝd tə ju, baɪɑɝ, tə wʌndɝ waɪ kæɹaɪɾɪn əz teɪkən əweɪ əɹ bænɝz, ən ðə kloʊks ə ðə mɛn ðə kwɛstʃənɝz lɛd? ivən ðə kwɛstʃənɝz ðɛmsɛlvz əv pʊɾ ɔf ðə waɪt. ðɪs sədʒɛsts sʌmθɪŋ, jɛs?"

"Has it never occurred to you, Byar, to wonder why Carridin has taken away our banners, and the cloaks of the men the Questioners lead? Even the Questioners themselves have put off the white. This suggests something, yes?"

"hi mʌst əv ɪz ɹizənz, lɔɹd kæptən," baɪɑɝ sɛd sloʊli. "ðə kwɛstʃənɝz ɔlweɪz əv ɹizənz, ivən wən ðeɪ də nɑt tɛl ðə ɹɛst ʌv ʌs."

"He must have his reasons, Lord Captain," Byar said slowly. "The Questioners always have reasons, even when they do not tell the rest of us."

bɔɹnhəld ɹimaɪndəd hɪmsɛlf ðət baɪɑɝ wɑz ə ɡʊd soʊlʒɝ. "tʃɪlʒɹən tə ðə nɔɹθ wɛɹ tæɹɑbənɝ kloʊks, baɪɑɝ, ən ðoʊz tə ðə saʊθ dəmɑni. aɪ də nɑt laɪk wʌt ðɪs sədʒɛsts tə mi. ðəɹ ɑɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz hɪɹ, bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪn fɑlm, nɑɾ ɑn ðə pleɪn. wən dʒɛɹəl ɹaɪdz, hɪl nɑt ɹaɪɾ əloʊn. mɛsədʒəz wɪl ɡoʊ tə ɛvɹi ɡɹup ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən aɪ noʊ haʊ tə faɪnd. aɪ min tə teɪk ðə lidʒən ɑntu toʊmən hɛd, baɪɑɝ, ən si wʌt ðə tʃɹu dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ðiz sintʃæn, ɑɹ ʌp tə."

Bornhald reminded himself that Byar was a good soldier. "Children to the north wear Taraboner cloaks, Byar, and those to the south Domani. I do not like what this suggests to me. There are Darkfriends here, but they are in Falme, not on the plain. When Jeral rides, he will not ride alone. Messages will go to every group of the Children I know how to find. I mean to take the legion onto Toman Head, Byar, and see what the true Darkfriends, these Seanchan, are up to."

baɪɑɝ lʊk tʃɹʌbəld, bʌt bɪfɔɹ i kəd spik, muɔɾ əpɪɹd wɪð wʌn ə ðə pɹɪznɝz. ðə swɛɾɪŋ jʌŋ mæn ɪn ə bæɾɝd, ɔɹneɪt bɹɛstpleɪt ʃɑt fɹaɪɾənd lʊks ət muɔdz hɪɾiəs feɪs.

Byar looked troubled, but before he could speak, Muadh appeared with one of the prisoners. The sweating young man in a battered, ornate breastplate shot frightened looks at Muadh's hideous face.

bɔɹnhəl dʒɹu hɪz dæɡɝ ən bɪɡæn tʃɹɪmɪŋ ɪz neɪlz. hi hæd nɛvɝ ʌndɝstʊd waɪ ðət meɪd səm mɛn nɝvəs, bʌɾ i juzd ɪt dʒʌs ðə seɪm. ivən ɪz ɡɹændfɑðɝli smaɪl meɪd ðə pɹɪznɝz dɝɾi feɪs peɪl. "naʊ, jʌŋ mæn, jəl tɛl mi ɛvɹiθɪŋ jə noʊ əbaʊt ðiz stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, jɛs? ɪf jə nid tə θɪŋk ɑn wʌt tə seɪ, əl sɛn jə bæk aʊt wɪð tʃaɪl muɔd tə kənsɪɾɝ ɪt."

Bornhald drew his dagger and began trimming his nails. He had never understood why that made some men nervous, but he used it just the same. Even his grandfatherly smile made the prisoner's dirty face pale. "Now, young man, you will tell me everything you know about these strangers, yes? If you need to think on what to say, I will send you back out with Child Muadh to consider it."

ðə pɹɪznɝ dɑɹɾɪd ə waɪd-aɪd lʊk ət muɔd. ðən wɝdz bɪɡæn tə pɔɹ aʊɾ ə hɪm.

The prisoner darted a wide-eyed look at Muadh. Then words began to pour out of him.

ðə lɔŋ swɛlz ə ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən meɪd spɹeɪ ɹoʊl, bʌt doʊmənz spɹɛd fit bælənst ɪm əz i hɛl ðə lɔŋ tub ə ðə lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs tə hɪz aɪ ən stʌɾid ðə lɑɹdʒ vɛsəl ðət pɝsud ðɛm. pɝsud, ən wɑz sloʊli oʊvɝteɪkɪŋ. ðə wɪnd wɛɹ spɹeɪ ɹæn wɑz nɑt ðə bɛst əɹ ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst, bʌt wɛɹ ði ʌðɝ ʃɪp smæʃt ðə swɛlz ɪndə maʊntənz ə foʊm wɪð ɪts blʌf baʊ, ɪt kəd nɑɾ əv bloʊn bɛɾɝ. ðə koʊstlaɪn ə toʊmən hɛd lum tə ði ist, dɑɹk klɪfs ən nɛɹoʊ stʃɹɪps ə sænd. hi hæd nɑt kɛɹd tə teɪk spɹeɪ tu fɑɹ aʊt, ən naʊ hi fɪɹɾ i maɪt peɪ fəɹ ɪt.

The long swells of the Aryth Ocean made Spray roll, but Domon's spread feet balanced him as he held the long tube of the looking glass to his eye and studied the large vessel that pursued them. Pursued, and was slowly overtaking. The wind where Spray ran was not the best or the strongest, but where the other ship smashed the swells into mountains of foam with its bluff bow, it could not have blown better. The coastline of Toman Head loomed to the east, dark cliffs and narrow strips of sand. He had not cared to take Spray too far out, and now he feared he might pay for it.

"stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, kæptən?" jɑɹən hæd ðə saʊn ə swɛɾ ɪn ɪz vɔɪs. "ɪz ɪɾ ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝz' ʃɪp?"

"Strangers, Captain?" Yarin had the sound of sweat in his voice. "Is it a strangers' ship?"

doʊmən loʊɝd ðə lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs, bʌɾ ɪz aɪ stɪl sim fɪl baɪ ðət tɔl, skwɛɹ-lʊkɪŋ ʃɪp wɪð ɪts ɑd ɹɪb seɪlz. "sintʃæn," hi sɛd, ən hɝd jɑɹən ɡɹoʊn. hi dʒɹʌmd ɪz θɪk fɪŋɡɝz ɑn ðə ɹeɪl, ðən toʊl ðə hɛlmzmæn, "teɪk əɹ kloʊsɝ ɪn. ðət ʃɪp wɪl noʊ dɛɹ ɛntɝ ðə ʃæloʊ wɔɾɝz spɹeɪ kən seɪl."

Domon lowered the looking glass, but his eye still seemed filled by that tall, square-looking ship with its odd ribbed sails. "Seanchan," he said, and heard Yarin groan. He drummed his thick fingers on the rail, then told the helmsman, "Take her closer in. That ship will no dare enter the shallow waters Spray can sail."

jɑɹən ʃaʊɾəd kəmænz, ən kɹumɪn ɹæn tə hɔl ɪn bumz əz ðə hɛlmzmæn pʊt ðə tɪlɝ oʊvɝ, pɔɪntɪŋ ðə baʊ mɔɹ təwɔɹd ðə ʃɔɹlaɪn. spɹeɪ muv mɔɹ sloʊli, hɛɾɪŋ soʊ fɑɹ ɪndə ðə wɪnd, bʌt doʊmən wɑz ʃʊɹ i kəd ɹitʃ ʃoʊl wɔɾɝz bɪfɔɹ ði ʌðɝ vɛsəl keɪm ʌp ɑn hɪm. dɪɾ əɹ hoʊlz bi fʊl, ʃi kəd stɪl teɪk ʃæloʊɝ wɔɾɝ ðən ɛvɝ ðət ɡɹeɪt hʌl kæn.

Yarin shouted commands, and crewmen ran to haul in booms as the helmsman put the tiller over, pointing the bow more toward the shoreline. Spray moved more slowly, heading so far into the wind, but Domon was sure he could reach shoal waters before the other vessel came up on him. Did her holds be full, she could still take shallower water than ever that great hull can.

hɪz ʃɪp ɹoʊɾ ə lɪɾəl haɪɝ ɪn ðə wɔɾɝ ðən ʃi hæɾ ɑn seɪlɪŋ fɹəm tæntʃəkoʊ. ə θɝɾ ə ðə kɑɹɡoʊ ʌv faɪɹwɝks i hæd teɪkən ɑn ðəɹ wɑz ɡɔn, soʊld ɪn ðə fɪʃɪŋ vɪlədʒəz ɑn toʊmən hɛd, bʌt wɪð ðə sɪlvɝ ðət floʊd fəɹ ðə faɪɹwɝks hæd kʌm dɪstɝbɪŋ ɹɪpɔɹts. ðə pipəl spoʊk ə vɪzəts fɹəm ðə tɔl, bɑksi ʃɪps ə ði ɪnveɪɾɝz. wən sintʃæn ʃɪps æŋkɝɾ ɔf ðə koʊst, ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz u dʒɹu ʌp tə dɪfɛn ðɛɹ hoʊmz wɝ ɹɛn baɪ laɪtnɪŋ fɹəm ðə skaɪ waɪl smɔl boʊts wɝ stɪl fɛɹiɪŋ ði ɪnveɪɾɝz əʃɔɹ, ən ði ɝθ ɪɹʌptəɾ ɪn faɪɝ ʌndɝ ðɛɹ fit. doʊmən hæd θɔɾ i wɑz hɪɹɪŋ nɑnsɛns əntɪl i wɑz ʃoʊn ðə blækənd ɡɹaʊnd, ən i hæd sin ɪɾ ɪn tu mɛni vɪlədʒəz tə daʊɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. mɑnstɝz fɔt bɪsaɪd ðə sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz, nɑt ðət ðəɹ wɑz ɛvɝ mʌtʃ ɹɪzɪstəns lɛft, ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz sɛd, ən səm ivən kleɪm ðət ðə sintʃæn ðɛmsɛlvz wɝ mɑnstɝz, wɪð hɛdz laɪk hjudʒ ɪnsɛks.

His ship rode a little higher in the water than she had on sailing from Tanchico. A third of the cargo of fireworks he had taken on there was gone, sold in the fishing villages on Toman Head, but with the silver that flowed for the fireworks had come disturbing reports. The people spoke of visits from the tall, boxy ships of the invaders. When Seanchan ships anchored off the coast, the villagers who drew up to defend their homes were rent by lightning from the sky while small boats were still ferrying the invaders ashore, and the earth erupted in fire under their feet. Domon had thought he was hearing nonsense until he was shown the blackened ground, and he had seen it in too many villages to doubt any longer. Monsters fought beside the Seanchan soldiers, not that there was ever much resistance left, the villagers said, and some even claimed that the Seanchan themselves were monsters, with heads like huge insects.

ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ, noʊ wʌn hæɾ ivən noʊn wʌt ðeɪ kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz, ən ðə tæɹɑbənɝz spoʊk kɑnfəɾəntli ʌv ðɛɹ soʊlʒɝz dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ði ɪnveɪɾɝz ɪndə ðə si. bʌɾ ɪn ɛvɹi koʊstəl taʊn, ɪt wɑz dɪfɹənt. ðə sintʃæn toʊld əstɑnɪʃt pipəl ðeɪ mʌst swɛɹ əɡɛn oʊðz ðeɪ hæd fɔɹseɪkən, ðoʊ nɛvɝ dɪnɪŋ tə ɪkspleɪn wən ðeɪ hæd fɔɹseɪkən ðɛm, əɹ wʌt ði oʊðz mɛnt. ðə jʌŋ wɪmən wɝ teɪkən əweɪ wʌn baɪ wʌn tə bi ɪɡzæmənd, ən səm wɝ kæɹiɾ əbɔɹd ðə ʃɪps ən nɛvɝ sin əɡɛn. ə fju oʊldɝ wɪmən hæɾ ɔlsoʊ vænɪʃt, səm ə ðə ɡaɪdz ən hilɝz. nu meɪɝz wɝ tʃoʊzən baɪ ðə sintʃæn, ən nu kaʊnsəlz, ən ɛni hu pɹətɛstəd ðə dɪsəpɪɹənsɪz ə ðə wɪmən əɹ hævɪŋ noʊ vɔɪs ɪn ðə tʃuzɪŋ maɪt bi hʌŋ, əɹ bɝst sʌɾənli ɪndə fleɪm, əɹ bi bɹʌʃt əsaɪd laɪk jæpɪŋ dɑɡz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ ʌv tɛlɪŋ wɪtʃ ɪt wəd bi əntɪl ɪt wɑz tu leɪt.

In Tanchico, no one had even known what they called themselves, and the Taraboners spoke confidently of their soldiers driving the invaders into the sea. But in every coastal town, it was different. The Seanchan told astonished people they must swear again oaths they had forsaken, though never deigning to explain when they had forsaken them, or what the oaths meant. The young women were taken away one by one to be examined, and some were carried aboard the ships and never seen again. A few older women had also vanished, some of the Guides and Healers. New mayors were chosen by the Seanchan, and new Councils, and any who protested the disappearances of the women or having no voice in the choosing might be hung, or burst suddenly into flame, or be brushed aside like yapping dogs. There was no way of telling which it would be until it was too late.

ən wən ðə pipəl hæd bɪn θɝoʊli kaʊd, wən ðeɪ hæd bɪn meɪd tə nil ən swɛɹ, bɪwɪldɝd, tə oʊbeɪ ðə fɔɹʌnɝz, əweɪt ðə ɹɪtɝn, ən sɝv ðoʊz u kʌm hoʊm wɪð ðɛɹ lɪvz, ðə sintʃæn seɪld əweɪ ən juʒəwəli nɛvɝ ɹɪtɝnd. fɑlm, ɪt wɑz sɛd, wɑz ði oʊnli taʊn ðeɪ hɛl fæst.

And when the people had been thoroughly cowed, when they had been made to kneel and swear, bewildered, to obey the Forerunners, await the Return, and serve Those Who Come Home with their lives, the Seanchan sailed away and usually never returned. Falme, it was said, was the only town they held fast.

ɪn səm ə ðə vɪlədʒəz ðeɪ hæd lɛft, mɛn ən wɪmən kɹɛp bæk təwɔɹd ðɛɹ fɔɹmɝ laɪvz, tə ði ɪkstɛn ə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪlɛktɪŋ ðɛɹ kaʊnsəlz əɡɛn, bʌt moʊst aɪd ðə si nɝvəsli ən meɪd peɪl-tʃik pɹoʊɾɛsts ðət ðeɪ mɛn tə hoʊl tə ði oʊðz ðeɪ hæd bɪn meɪd tə swɛɹ ivən ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðɛm.

In some of the villages they had left, men and women crept back toward their former lives, to the extent of talking about electing their Councils again, but most eyed the sea nervously and made pale-cheeked protests that they meant to hold to the oaths they had been made to swear even if they did not understand them.

doʊmən hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə miɾɪŋ ɛni sintʃæn, ɪf i kəɾ əvɔɪɾ ɪt.

Domon had no intention of meeting any Seanchan, if he could avoid it.

hi wɑz ɹeɪzɪŋ ðə ɡlæs tə si wʌɾ i kəd meɪk aʊɾ ɑn ðə nɪɹɪŋ sintʃæn dɛks, wɛn, wɪð ə ɹɔɹ, ðə sɝfəs ə ðə si bɹoʊk ɪndə faʊnteɪnɪŋ wɔɾɝ ən fleɪm nɑɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz fɹəm ɪz lɑɹbɔɹd saɪd. bɪfɔɹ i hæɾ ivən bɪɡʌn tə ɡeɪp, ənʌðɝ kɑləm ə fleɪm splɪt ðə si ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd, ən əz i wɑz spɪnɪŋ tə stɛɹ ət ðæt, ənʌðɝ bɝst ʌp əhɛd. ði ɪɹʌpʃənz daɪɾ əz kwɪkli əz ðeɪ wɝ bɔɹn, spɹeɪ fɹəm əm bloʊn əkɹɔs ðə dɛk. wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪn, ðə si bʌbəld ən stimd əz ɪf bɔɪlɪŋ.

He was raising the glass to see what he could make out on the nearing Seanchan decks, when, with a roar, the surface of the sea broke into fountaining water and flame not a hundred paces from his larboard side. Before he had even begun to gape, another column of flame split the sea on the other side, and as he was spinning to stare at that, another burst up ahead. The eruptions died as quickly as they were born, spray from them blown across the deck. Where they had been, the sea bubbled and steamed as if boiling.

"wi . . . wɪl ɹitʃ ʃæloʊ wɔɾɝ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kən kloʊz wɪð ʌs," jɑɹən sɛd sloʊli. hi sim tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə lʊk ət ðə wɔɾɝ ɹɔɪlɪŋ ʌndɝ klaʊdz ə mɪst.

"We . . . we'll reach shallow water before they can close with us," Yarin said slowly. He seemed to be trying not to look at the water roiling under clouds of mist.

doʊmən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ dɪd, ðeɪ kən ʃæɾɝ ʌs, ivən də aɪ teɪk əɹ ɪndə ðə bɹeɪkɝz." hi ʃɪvɝd, θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðə fleɪm ɪnsaɪd ðə faʊntənz ʌv wɔɾɝ, ən ɪz hoʊlz fʊl ə faɪɹwɝks. "fɔɹtʃən pɹɪk mi, wi maɪt noʊ lɪv tə dʒɹaʊn." hi tʌɡd əɾ ɪz bɪɹɾ ən ɹʌbd ɪz bɛɹ ʌpɝ lɪp, ɹɪlʌktən tə ɡɪv ði ɔɹɾɝ - ðə vɛsəl ən wʌɾ ɪt kənteɪnd wɝ ɔl i hæɾ ɪn ðə wɝld - bʌt faɪnəli hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf spik. "bɹɪŋ əɹ ɪndə ðə wɪnd, jɑɹən, ən daʊn seɪl. kwɪkli, mæn, kwɪkli! bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ də θɪŋk wi stɪl tʃɹaɪ tə ɪskeɪp."

Domon shook his head. "Whatever they did, they can shatter us, even do I take her into the breakers." He shivered, thinking of the flame inside the fountains of water, and his holds full of fireworks. "Fortune prick me, we might no live to drown." He tugged at his beard and rubbed his bare upper lip, reluctant to give the order - the vessel and what it contained were all he had in the world - but finally he made himself speak. "Bring her into the wind, Yarin, and down sail. Quickly, man, quickly! Before they do think we still try to escape."

əz kɹumɪn ɹæn tə loʊɝ ðə tʃɹaɪæŋɡjəlɝ seɪlz, doʊmən tɝn tə wɑtʃ ðə sintʃæn ʃɪp əpɹoʊtʃ. spɹeɪ lɔs hɛdweɪ ən pɪtʃt ɪn ðə swɛlz. ði ʌðɝ vɛsəl stʊd tɔlɝ əbʌv ðə wɔɾɝ ðən doʊmənz ʃɪp, wɪð wʊɾən taʊɝz ət baʊ ən stɝn. mɛn wɝ ɪn ðə ɹɪɡɪŋ, ɹeɪzɪŋ ðoʊz stʃɹeɪnʒ seɪlz, ən ɑɹmɝd fɪɡjɝz stʊɾ ətɑp ðə taʊɝz. ə lɔŋboʊt wɑz pʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə saɪd, ən spɛd təwɔɹd spɹeɪ ʌndɝ tɛn ɔɹz. ɪt kæɹiɾ ɑɹmɝd ʃeɪps, ən - doʊmən fɹaʊn ɪn sɝpɹaɪz - tu wɪmən kɹaʊtʃt ɪn ðə stɝn. ðə lɔŋboʊt θʌmpt əɡɛnst spɹeɪz hʌl.

As crewmen ran to lower the triangular sails, Domon turned to watch the Seanchan ship approach. Spray lost headway and pitched in the swells. The other vessel stood taller above the water than Domon's ship, with wooden towers at bow and stern. Men were in the rigging, raising those strange sails, and armored figures stood atop the towers. A longboat was put over the side, and sped toward Spray under ten oars. It carried armored shapes, and - Domon frowned in surprise - two women crouched in the stern. The longboat thumped against Spray's hull.

ðə fɝs tə klaɪm ʌp wɑz wʌn ə ði ɑɹmɝd mɛn, ən doʊmən sɔ ɪmiɾiətli waɪ səm ə ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz kleɪm ðə sintʃæn ðɛmsɛlvz wɝ mɑnstɝz. ðə hɛlmət lʊk vɛɹi mʌtʃ laɪk səm mɑnstʃɹəs ɪnsɛks hɛd, wɪð θɪn ɹɛd plumz laɪk filɝz; ðə wɛɹɝ sim tə bi piɹɪŋ aʊt θɹu mændəbəlz. ɪt wɑz peɪntəɾ ən ɡɪldɪd tə ɪnkɹis ði ɪfɛkt, ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə mænz ɑɹmɝ wɑz ɔlsoʊ wɝkt wɪð peɪn ən ɡoʊld. oʊvɝlæpɪŋ pleɪts ɪn blæk ən ɹɛɾ aʊtlaɪnd wɪð ɡoʊl kʌvɝɾ ɪz tʃɛst ən ɹæn daʊn ði aʊtsaɪdz ə hɪz ɑɹmz ən ðə fɹʌns ə hɪz θaɪz. ivən ðə stil bæks ə hɪz ɡɔnləts wɝ ɹɛɾ ən ɡoʊld. wɛɹ i dɪd nɑt wɛɹ mɛɾəl, hɪz kloʊðz wɝ dɑɹk lɛðɝ. ðə tu-hændəd sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz bæk, wɪð ɪts kɝv bleɪd, wɑz skæbɑɹɾɪd ən hɪltɪɾ ɪn blæk-ænd-ɹɛd lɛðɝ.

The first to climb up was one of the armored men, and Domon saw immediately why some of the villagers claimed the Seanchan themselves were monsters. The helmet looked very much like some monstrous insect's head, with thin red plumes like feelers; the wearer seemed to be peering out through mandibles. It was painted and gilded to increase the effect, and the rest of the man's armor was also worked with paint and gold. Overlapping plates in black and red outlined with gold covered his chest and ran down the outsides of his arms and the fronts of his thighs. Even the steel backs of his gauntlets were red and gold. Where he did not wear metal, his clothes were dark leather. The two-handed sword on his back, with its curved blade, was scabbarded and hilted in black-and-red leather.

ðən ði ɑɹmɝd fɪɡjɝ ɹimuvd ɪz hɛlmət, ən doʊmən stɛɹd. hi wɑz ə wʊmən. hɝ dɑɹk hɛɹ wɑz kʌt ʃɔɹt, ən əɹ feɪs wɑz hɑɹd, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɪsteɪkɪŋ ɪt. hi hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə sətʃ ə θɪŋ, ɪksɛpt əmʌŋ ði il, ən il wɝ wɛl noʊn tə bi kɹeɪzd. dʒʌst əz dɪskənsɝɾɪŋ wɑz ðə fæk ðəɾ əɹ feɪs dɪd nɑt lʊk əz dɪfɹən əz i hæɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ ʌv ə sintʃæn. hɝ aɪz wɝ blu, ɪt wɑz tʃɹu, ən əɹ skɪn ɪksiɾɪŋli fɛɹ, bʌɾ i hæd sin boʊθ bɪfɔɹ. ɪf ðɪs wʊmən wɔɹ ə dʒɹɛs, noʊ wʌn wəd lʊk əɾ əɹ twaɪs. hi aɪɾ əɹ ən ɹɪvaɪzd ɪz əpɪnjən, ðət koʊl stɛɹ ən ðoʊz hɑɹd tʃiks wəd meɪk əɹ ɹɪmɑɹkt ɛniwɛɹ.

Then the armored figure removed his helmet, and Domon stared. He was a woman. Her dark hair was cut short, and her face was hard, but there was no mistaking it. He had never heard of such a thing, except among the Aiel, and Aiel were well known to be crazed. Just as disconcerting was the fact that her face did not look as different as he had expected of a Seanchan. Her eyes were blue, it was true, and her skin exceedingly fair, but he had seen both before. If this woman wore a dress, no one would look at her twice. He eyed her and revised his opinion, that cold stare and those hard cheeks would make her remarked anywhere.

ði ʌðɝ soʊlʒɝz fɑloʊd ðə wʊmən ɑntu ðə dɛk. doʊmən wɑz ɹɪliv tə si, wən səm ə ðɛm ɹimuv ðɛɹ stʃɹeɪnʒ hɛlməts, ðət ðeɪ, ət list, wɝ mɛn; mɛn wɪð blæk aɪz, əɹ bɹaʊn, hu cʊɾə ɡɔn ənnoʊɾɪst ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ əɹ ɪljən. hi hæd bɪɡʌn tə hæv vɪʒənz ʌv ɑɹmiz ə blu-aɪd wɪmən wɪð sɔɹdz. ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð sɔɹdz, hi θɔt, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðə si ɪɹʌptɪŋ.

The other soldiers followed the woman onto the deck. Domon was relieved to see, when some of them removed their strange helmets, that they, at least, were men; men with black eyes, or brown, who could have gone unnoticed in Tanchico or Illian. He had begun to have visions of armies of blue-eyed women with swords. Aes Sedai with swords, he thought, remembering the sea erupting.

ðə sintʃæn wʊmən sɝveɪd ðə ʃɪp ɛɹəɡənli, ðən pɪk doʊmən aʊɾ əz kæptən - ɪt hæd tə bi hɪm əɹ jɑɹən, baɪ ðɛɹ kloʊðz; ðə weɪ jɑɹən hæɾ ɪz aɪz kloʊzd ən wɑz mʌɾɝɪŋ pɹɛɹz ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ pɔɪntəd tə doʊmən - ən fɪkst ɪm wɪð ə stɛɹ laɪk ə spaɪk.

The Seanchan woman surveyed the ship arrogantly, then picked Domon out as captain - it had to be him or Yarin, by their clothes; the way Yarin had his eyes closed and was muttering prayers under his breath pointed to Domon - and fixed him with a stare like a spike.

"ɑɹ ðəɹ ɛni wɪmən əmʌŋ jəɹ kɹu əɹ pæsənʒɝz?" ʃi spoʊk wɪð ə sɑf slɝɪŋ ðət meɪɾ əɹ hɑɹd tə ʌndɝstænd, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə snæp ɪn əɹ vɔɪs ðət sɛd ʃi wɑz juz tə ɡɛɾɪŋ ænsɝz. "spik ʌp, mæn, ɪf jə ɑɹ ðə kæptən. ɪf nɑt, weɪk ðəɾ ʌðɝ ful ən tɛl ɪm tə spik."

"Are there any women among your crew or passengers?" She spoke with a soft slurring that made her hard to understand, but there was a snap in her voice that said she was used to getting answers. "Speak up, man, if you are the captain. If not, wake that other fool and tell him to speak."

"aɪ də bi kæptən, maɪ leɪɾi," doʊmən sɛd kɔʃəsli. hi hæd noʊ aɪdiə haʊ tə ædʒɹɛs hɝ, ən i dɪd nɑt wɑnə pʊɾ ə fʊt ɹɔŋ. "aɪ hæv noʊ pæsənʒɝz, ən ðəɹ bi noʊ wɪmən ɪn maɪ kɹu." hi θɔɾ ə ðə ɡɝlz ən wɪmən u hæd bɪn kæɹiɾ ɔf, ænd, nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, wʌndɝd wʌt ðiz foʊk wɑntəd wɪð ðɛm.

"I do be captain, my Lady," Domon said cautiously. He had no idea how to address her, and he did not want to put a foot wrong. "I have no passengers, and there be no women in my crew." He thought of the girls and women who had been carried off, and, not for the first time, wondered what these folk wanted with them.

ðə tu wɪmən dʒɹɛst əz wɪmən wɝ kʌmɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ðə lɔŋboʊt, wʌn dʒɹɔɪŋ ði ʌðɝ - doʊmən blɪŋkt - baɪ ə liʃ ə sɪlvɝi mɛɾəl əz ʃi klaɪmd əbɔɹd. ðə liʃ wɛn fɹəm ə bɹeɪslət wɔɹn baɪ ðə fɝst wʊmən tə ə kɑlɝ ɝaʊn ðə nɛk ə ðə sɛkənd. hi kəd nɑt tɛl wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz woʊvən əɹ dʒɔɪntəd - ɪt sim sʌmhaʊ tə bi boʊθ - bʌɾ ɪt wɑz klɪɹli ʌv ə pis wɪð boʊθ bɹeɪsləɾ ən kɑlɝ. ðə fɝst wʊmən ɡæðɝd ðə liʃ ɪn kɔɪlz əz ði ʌðɝ keɪm ɑntu ðə dɛk. ðə kɑlɝd wʊmən wɔɹ pleɪn dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ ən stʊd wɪð əɹ hænz foʊldəɾ ən əɹ aɪz ɑn ðə plæŋks ʌndɝ əɹ fit. ði ʌðɝ hæd ɹɛd pænəlz bɛɹɪŋ fɔɹkt, sɪlvɝ laɪtnɪŋ boʊls ɑn ðə bɹɛst ə hɝ blu dʒɹɛs ən ɑn ðə saɪdz ə hɝ skɝts, wɪtʃ ɛndəd ʃɔɹɾ ə ði æŋkəlz ə hɝ buts. doʊmən aɪd ðə wɪmən ənizəli.

The two women dressed as women were coming up from the longboat, one drawing the other - Domon blinked - by a leash of silvery metal as she climbed aboard. The leash went from a bracelet worn by the first woman to a collar around the neck of the second. He could not tell whether it was woven or jointed - it seemed somehow to be both - but it was clearly of a piece with both bracelet and collar. The first woman gathered the leash in coils as the other came onto the deck. The collared woman wore plain dark gray and stood with her hands folded and her eyes on the planks under her feet. The other had red panels bearing forked, silver lightning bolts on the breast of her blue dress and on the sides of her skirts, which ended short of the ankles of her boots. Domon eyed the women uneasily.

"spik sloʊli, mæn," ðə blu-aɪd wʊmən dɪmændəɾ ɪn əɹ slɝd spitʃ. ʃi keɪm əkɹɔs ðə dɛk tə kənfɹʌn hɪm, stɛɹɪŋ ʌp əɾ ɪm ən ɪn səm weɪ simɪŋ tɔlɝ ən lɑɹdʒɝ ðən hi. "ju ɑɹ ivən hɑɹɾɝ tə ʌndɝstæn ðən ðə ɹɛst ɪn ðɪs laɪt-fɔɹseɪkən lænd. ən aɪ meɪk noʊ kleɪm tə bi ʌv ðə blʌd. nɑt jɛt. æftɝ kɔɝɪn. . . . aɪm kæptən ɛdʒiənɪn."

"Speak slowly, man," the blue-eyed woman demanded in her slurred speech. She came across the deck to confront him, staring up at him and in some way seeming taller and larger than he. "You are even harder to understand than the rest in this Light-forsaken land. And I make no claim to be of the Blood. Not yet. After Corenne. . . . I am Captain Egeanin."

doʊmən ɹɪpiɾɪd hɪmsɛlf, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə spik sloʊli, ən æɾəd, "aɪ də bi ə pisfəl tʃɹeɪɾɝ, kæptən. aɪ min noʊ hɑɹm tə ju, ən aɪ hæv noʊ pɑɹɾ ɪn jəɹ wɔɹ." hi kəd nɑt hɛlp aɪɪŋ ðə tu wɪmən kənɛktəd baɪ ðə liʃ əɡɛn.

Domon repeated himself, trying to speak slowly, and added, "I do be a peaceful trader, Captain. I mean no harm to you, and I have no part in your war." He could not help eyeing the two women connected by the leash again.

"ə pisfəl tʃɹeɪɾɝ?" ɛdʒiənɪn mjuzd. "ɪn ðət keɪs, jəl bi fɹi tə ɡoʊ wʌns juv swɔɹn fiəlti əɡɛn." ʃi noʊɾəst ɪz ɡlænsɪz ən tɝn tə smaɪl ət ðə wɪmən wɪð ðə pɹaɪɾ ʌv oʊnɝʃɪp. "ju ædmaɪɹ maɪ deɪmeɪn? ʃi kɑs mi dɪɹ, bʌt ʃi wɑz wɝθ ɛvɹi kɔɪn. fju bʌt noʊbəlz oʊn ə deɪmeɪn, ən moʊst ɑɹ pɹɑpɝɾi ʌv ðə θɹoʊn. ʃiz stʃɹɔŋ, tʃɹeɪɾɝ. ʃi cʊɾə bɹoʊkən jəɹ ʃɪp tə splɪntɝz, hæɾ aɪ wɪʃt ɪt soʊ."

"A peaceful trader?" Egeanin mused. "In that case, you will be free to go once you have sworn fealty again." She noticed his glances and turned to smile at the women with the pride of ownership. "You admire my damane? She cost me dear, but she was worth every coin. Few but nobles own a damane, and most are property of the throne. She is strong, trader. She could have broken your ship to splinters, had I wished it so."

doʊmən stɛɹɾ ət ðə wɪmən ən ðə sɪlvɝ liʃ. hi hæd kənɛktəd ðə wʌn wɛɹɪŋ ðə laɪtnɪŋ wɪð ðə faɪɝi faʊntənz ɪn ðə si, ən əsumd ʃi wɑz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɛdʒiənɪn hæd dʒʌst sɛɾ ɪz hɛd wɝlɪŋ. noʊ wʌn kəd də ðət tə. . . . "ʃi ɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ?" hi sɛd dɪsbɪlivɪŋli.

Domon stared at the women and the silver leash. He had connected the one wearing the lightning with the fiery fountains in the sea, and assumed she was an Aes Sedai. Egeanin had just set his head whirling. No one could do that to. . . . "She is Aes Sedai?" he said disbelievingly.

hi nɛvɝ sɔ ðə kæʒəwəl bækhæn bloʊ kʌmɪŋ. hi stæɡɝɾ əz əɹ stil-bækt ɡɔnlət splɪɾ ɪz lɪp.

He never saw the casual backhand blow coming. He staggered as her steel-backed gauntlet split his lip.

"ðæt neɪm ɪz nɛvɝ spoʊkən," ɛdʒiənɪn sɛd wɪð ə deɪnʒɝəs sɔfnəs. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ oʊnli ðə deɪmeɪn, ðə liʃt wʌnz, ən naʊ ðeɪ sɝv ɪn tʃɹuθ əz wɛl əz neɪm." hɝ aɪz meɪɾ aɪs sim wɔɹm.

"That name is never spoken," Egeanin said with a dangerous softness. "There are only the damane, the Leashed Ones, and now they serve in truth as well as name." Her eyes made ice seem warm.

doʊmən swɑloʊd blʌɾ ən kɛpt ɪz hæn klɛntʃt əɾ ɪz saɪdz. ɪf i hæd hæɾ ə sɔɹd tə hænd, hi wəd nɑɾ əv lɛɾ ɪz kɹu tə slɔɾɝ əɡɛnst ə dʌzən ɑɹmɝd soʊlʒɝz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝt tə meɪk ɪz vɔɪs hʌmbəl. "aɪ mɛnt noʊ dɪsɹɪspɛkt, kæptən. aɪ noʊ nʌθɪŋ ə jə əɹ jəɹ weɪz. ɪf aɪ də əfɛnd, ɪts ɪɡnɝəns, noʊ ɪntɛntʃən."

Domon swallowed blood and kept his hand clenched at his sides. If he had had a sword to hand, he would not have led his crew to slaughter against a dozen armored soldiers, but it was an effort to make his voice humble. "I meant no disrespect, Captain. I know nothing of you or your ways. If I do offend, it is ignorance, no intention."

ʃi lʊkt ət hɪm, ðən sɛd, "ju ɑɹ ɔl ɪɡnɝənt, kæptən, bʌt jəl peɪ ðə dɛɾ ə jəɹ fɔɹfɑðɝz. ðɪs lænd wɑz aʊɝz, ən ɪɾəl bi aʊɝz əɡɛn. wɪð ðə ɹɪtɝn, ɪɾəl bi aʊɝz əɡɛn." doʊmən dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt tə seɪ - ʃʊɹli ʃi kən noʊ min ðət næɾɝɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ bi tʃɹu? - soʊ hi kɛpt ɪz maʊθ ʃʌt. "ju wɪl seɪl jəɹ vɛsəl tə fɑlm" - hi tʃɹaɪd tə pɹoʊtɛst, bʌɾ əɹ ɡlɛɹ saɪlənst ɪm - "wɛɹ jə ən jəɹ ʃɪp wɪl bi ɪɡzæmənd. ɪf jə ɑɹ noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə pisfəl tʃɹeɪɾɝ, əz jə kleɪm, jəl bi əlaʊd tə ɡoʊ jəɹ weɪ wən juv swɔɹn ði oʊðz."

She looked at him, then said, "You are all ignorant, Captain, but you will pay the debt of your forefathers. This land was ours, and it will be ours again. With the Return, it will be ours again." Domon did not know what to say - Surely she can no mean that nattering about Artur Hawkwing be true? - so he kept his mouth shut. "You will sail your vessel to Falme" - he tried to protest, but her glare silenced him - "where you and your ship will be examined. If you are no more than a peaceful trader, as you claim, you will be allowed to go your way when you have sworn the oaths."

"oʊðz, kæptən? wʌɾ oʊðz?"

"Oaths, Captain? What oaths?"

"tə oʊbeɪ, tə əweɪt, ən tə sɝv. jəɹ ænsɛstɝz ʃəɾ əv ɹɪmɛmbɝd."

"To obey, to await, and to serve. Your ancestors should have remembered."

ʃi ɡæðɝɾ əɹ pipəl - ɪksɛp fəɹ ə sɪŋɡəl mæn ɪn pleɪn ɑɹmɝ, wɪtʃ mɑɹkt ɪm ə loʊ ɹæŋk əz mʌtʃ əz ðə dɛpθ ə hɪz baʊ tə kæptən ɛdʒiənɪn - ən ðɛɹ lɔŋboʊt pʊld əweɪ təwɔɹd ðə lɑɹdʒɝ ʃɪp. ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ sintʃæn ɡeɪv noʊ ɔɹɾɝz, oʊnli sæt kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ðə dɛk ən bɪɡæn ʃɑɹpənɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd waɪl ðə kɹu pʊt seɪl ɑn ən ɡɑɾ ʌndɝ weɪ. hi sim tə hæv noʊ fɪɹ ət biɪŋ əloʊn, ən doʊmən wəɾ əv pɝsənəli θɹoʊn oʊvɝbɔɹɾ ɛni kɹumən u ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə hɪm, fəɹ əz spɹeɪ meɪɾ əɹ weɪ əlɔŋ ðə koʊst, ðə sintʃæn ʃɪp fɑloʊd, aʊɾ ɪn dipɝ wɔɾɝ. ðəɹ wɑz ə maɪl bɪtwin ðə tu vɛsəlz, bʌt doʊmən nu ðəɹ wɑz noʊ hoʊp ʌv ɪskeɪp, ən i mɛn tə dɪlɪvɝ ðə mæn bæk tə kæptən ɛdʒiənɪn əz seɪfli əz ɪf i hæd bɪn kɹæɾəld ɪn ɪz mʌðɝz ɑɹmz.

She gathered her people - except for a single man in plain armor, which marked him of low rank as much as the depth of his bow to Captain Egeanin - and their longboat pulled away toward the larger ship. The remaining Seanchan gave no orders, only sat cross-legged on the deck and began sharpening his sword while the crew put sail on and got under way. He seemed to have no fear at being alone, and Domon would have personally thrown overboard any crewman who raised a hand to him, for as Spray made her way along the coast, the Seanchan ship followed, out in deeper water. There was a mile between the two vessels, but Domon knew there was no hope of escape, and he meant to deliver the man back to Captain Egeanin as safely as if he had been cradled in his mother's arms.

ɪt wɑz ə lɔŋ pæsədʒ tə fɑlm, ən doʊmən faɪnəli pɝsweɪɾəd ðə sintʃæn tə tɔk, ə lɪɾəl. ə dɑɹk-aɪd mæn ɪn ɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz, wɪð ən oʊl skɑɹ əbʌv ɪz aɪz ən ənʌðɝ nɪkɪŋ ɪz tʃɪn, hɪz neɪm wɑz keɪbən, ən i hæd nʌθɪŋ bʌt kəntɛmp fəɹ ɛniwʌn ðɪs saɪɾ ə ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən. ðət ɡeɪv doʊmən ə moʊməns pɔz. meɪbi ðeɪ tʃɹuli də bi. . . . noʊ, ðət də bi mædnəs. keɪbənz spitʃ hæd ðə seɪm slɝ əz ɛdʒiənɪnz, bʌt wɛɹ hɝz wɑz sɪlk slaɪɾɪŋ əkɹɔs aɪɝn, hɪz wɑz lɛðɝ ɹæspɪŋ ɑn ɹɑk, ən moʊsli hi wɑntəd tə tɔk əbaʊt bæɾəlz, dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ, ən wɪmən i hæd noʊn. hæf ðə taɪm, doʊmən wɑz nɑt sɝɾən ɪf i wɝ spikɪŋ ə hɪɹ ən naʊ, əɹ ʌv wɛɹɛvɝ i hæd kʌm fɹʌm. ðə mæn wɑz sɝɾənli nɑt fɔɹθkʌmɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ doʊmən wɑntəd tə noʊ.

It was a long passage to Falme, and Domon finally persuaded the Seanchan to talk, a little. A dark-eyed man in his middle years, with an old scar above his eyes and another nicking his chin, his name was Caban, and he had nothing but contempt for anyone this side of the Aryth Ocean. That gave Domon a moment's pause. Maybe they truly do be. . . . No, that do be madness. Caban's speech had the same slur as Egeanin's, but where hers was silk sliding across iron, his was leather rasping on rock, and mostly he wanted to talk about battles, drinking, and women he had known. Half the time, Domon was not certain if he were speaking of here and now, or of wherever he had come from. The man was certainly not forthcoming about anything Domon wanted to know.

wʌns doʊmən æskt əbaʊt ðə deɪmeɪn. keɪbən ɹitʃt ʌp fɹəm wɛɹ i sæɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə hɛlmzmæn ən pʊt ðə pɔɪn ə hɪz sɔɹd tə doʊmənz θɹoʊt. "wɑtʃ wʌt jəɹ tʌŋ tʌtʃəz, əɹ jəl luz ɪt. ðæts ðə bɪznəs ə ðə blʌd, nɑt jəɹ kaɪnd. əɹ maɪn." hi ɡɹɪnd waɪl i sɛɾ ɪt, ən əz sun əz i wɑz dʌn, hi wɛn bæk tə slaɪɾɪŋ ə stoʊn əlɔŋ ɪz hɛvi, kɝv bleɪd.

Once Domon asked about the damane. Caban reached up from where he sat in front of the helmsman and put the point of his sword to Domon's throat. "Watch what your tongue touches, or you will lose it. That's the business of the Blood, not your kind. Or mine." He grinned while he said it, and as soon as he was done, he went back to sliding a stone along his heavy, curved blade.

doʊmən tʌtʃt ðə pɔɪn ə blʌd wɛlɪŋ əbʌv ɪz kɑlɝ ən ɹizɑlv nɑt tə æsk ðəɾ əɡɛn, ət list.

Domon touched the point of blood welling above his collar and resolved not to ask that again, at least.

ðə kloʊsɝ ðə tu vɛsəlz keɪm tə fɑlm, ðə mɔɹ ə ðə tɔl, skwɛɹ-lʊkɪŋ sintʃæn ʃɪps ðeɪ pæst, səm ʌndɝ seɪl, bʌt mɔɹ æŋkɝd. ɛvɹi wʌn wɑz blʌf-baʊɾ ən taʊɝd, əz bɪɡ əz ɛniθɪŋ doʊmən hæɾ ɛvɝ sin, ivən əmʌŋ ðə si foʊk. ə fju loʊkəl kɹæft, hi sɔ, wɪð ðɛɹ ʃɑɹp baʊz ən slæntəd seɪlz, dɑɹɾɪd əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹin swɛlz. ðə saɪt ɡeɪv ɪm kɑnfəɾəns ðəɾ ɛdʒiənɪn hæd spoʊkən ðə tʃɹuθ əbaʊt lɛɾɪŋ ɪm ɡoʊ fɹi.

The closer the two vessels came to Falme, the more of the tall, square-looking Seanchan ships they passed, some under sail, but more anchored. Every one was bluff-bowed and towered, as big as anything Domon had ever seen, even among the Sea Folk. A few local craft, he saw, with their sharp bows and slanted sails, darted across the green swells. The sight gave him confidence that Egeanin had spoken the truth about letting him go free.

wən spɹeɪ keɪm ʌp ɑn ðə hɛdlənd wɛɹ fɑlm stʊd, doʊmən ɡeɪpt ət ðə nʌmbɝz ə ðə sintʃæn ʃɪps æŋkɝɾ ɔf ðə hɑɹbɝ. hi tʃɹaɪd kaʊntɪŋ əm ən ɡeɪv ʌp əɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd, lɛs ðən hæfweɪ dʌn. hi hæd sin əz mɛni ʃɪps ɪn wʌn pleɪs bɪfɔɹ - ɪn ɪljən, ən tiɹ, ən ivən tæntʃəkoʊ - bʌt ðoʊz vɛsəlz hæɾ ɪnkluɾəd mɛni smɔlɝ kɹæft. mʌɾɝɪŋ ɡlʌmli tə hɪmsɛlf, hi tʊk spɹeɪ ɪndə ðə hɑɹbɝ, ʃɛpɝɾɪd baɪ hɝ ɡɹeɪt sintʃæn wɑtʃdɔɡ.

When Spray came up on the headland where Falme stood, Domon gaped at the numbers of the Seanchan ships anchored off the harbor. He tried counting them and gave up at a hundred, less than halfway done. He had seen as many ships in one place before - in Illian, and Tear, and even Tanchico - but those vessels had included many smaller craft. Muttering glumly to himself, he took Spray into the harbor, shepherded by her great Seanchan watchdog.

fɑlm stʊɾ ɑn ə spɪɾ ə læn ət ðə vɛɹi tɪp ə toʊmən hɛd, wɪð nʌθɪŋ fɝðɝ wɛst ʌv ɪɾ ɪksɛp ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən. haɪ klɪfs ɹæn tə ðə hɑɹbɝ maʊθ ɑn boʊθ saɪdz, ən ətɑp wʌn ə ðoʊz, wɛɹ ɛvɹi ʃɪp ɹʌnɪŋ ɪndə ðə hɑɹbɝ hæd tə pæs ʌndɝ ðɛm, stʊd ðə taʊɝz ə ðə wɑtʃɝz oʊvɝ ðə weɪvz. ə keɪdʒ hʌŋ oʊvɝ ðə saɪɾ ʌv wʌn ə ðə taʊɝz, wɪð ə mæn sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ɪt dɪspɑndənli, lɛɡz dæŋɡəlɪŋ θɹu ðə bɑɹz.

Falme stood on a spit of land at the very tip of Toman Head, with nothing further west of it except the Aryth Ocean. High cliffs ran to the harbor mouth on both sides, and atop one of those, where every ship running into the harbor had to pass under them, stood the towers of the Watchers Over the Waves. A cage hung over the side of one of the towers, with a man sitting in it despondently, legs dangling through the bars.

"hu ɪz ðæt?" doʊmən æskt.

"Who is that?" Domon asked.

keɪbən hæd faɪnəli ɡɪvən oʊvɝ ʃɑɹpənɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd, æftɝ doʊmən hæd bɪɡʌn tə wʌndɝ ɪf i mɛn tə ʃeɪv wɪð ɪt. ðə sintʃæn ɡlænst ʌp tə wɛɹ doʊmən pɔɪntəd. "oʊ. ðəɾ ɪz ðə fɝst wɑtʃɝ. nɑt ðə wʌn u sæɾ ɪn ðə tʃɛɹ wən wi fɝs keɪm, ʌv kɔɹs. ɛvɹi taɪm i daɪz, ðeɪ tʃuz ənʌðɝ, ən wi pʊɾ ɪm ɪn ðə keɪdʒ."

Caban had finally given over sharpening his sword, after Domon had begun to wonder if he meant to shave with it. The Seanchan glanced up to where Domon pointed. "Oh. That is the First Watcher. Not the one who sat in the chair when we first came, of course. Every time he dies, they choose another, and we put him in the cage."

"bʌt waɪ?" doʊmən dɪmændəd.

"But why?" Domon demanded.

keɪbənz ɡɹɪn ʃoʊd tu mɛni tiθ. "ðeɪ wɑtʃt fəɹ ðə ɹɔŋ θɪŋ, ən fɝɡɑt wən ðeɪ ʃʊɾə bɪn ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ."

Caban's grin showed too many teeth. "They watched for the wrong thing, and forgot when they should have been remembering."

doʊmən tɔɹ ɪz aɪz əweɪ fɹəm ðə sintʃæn. spɹeɪ slɪd daʊn ðə læst ɹil si swɛl ən ɪndə ðə kwaɪəɾɝ wɔɾɝz ə ðə hɑɹbɝ. aɪ də bi ə tʃɹeɪɾɝ, ən ɪts nʌn ə maɪ bɪznəs.

Domon tore his eyes away from the Seanchan. Spray slid down the last real sea swell and into the quieter waters of the harbor. I do be a trader, and it is none of my business.

fɑlm ɹoʊz fɹəm stoʊn dɑks ʌp ðə sloʊps ə ðə hɑloʊ ðət meɪd ðə hɑɹbɝ. doʊmən kəd nɑt dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ ðə dɑɹk stoʊn haʊsəz meɪɾ ʌp ə ɡʊdli saɪz taʊn əɹ ə smɔl sɪɾi. sɝɾənli hi sɔ noʊ bɪldɪŋ ɪn ɪt tə ɹaɪvəl ðə smɔləs pæləs ɪn ɪljən.

Falme rose from stone docks up the slopes of the hollow that made the harbor. Domon could not decide whether the dark stone houses made up a goodly sized town or a small city. Certainly he saw no building in it to rival the smallest palace in Illian.

hi ɡaɪɾəd spɹeɪ tə ə pleɪs ət wʌn ə ðə dɑks, ən wʌndɝd, waɪl ðə kɹu taɪd ðə ʃɪp fæst, ɪf ðə sintʃæn maɪt baɪ səm ə ðə faɪɹwɝks ɪn ɪz hoʊld. nʌn ə maɪ bɪznəs.

He guided Spray to a place at one of the docks, and wondered, while the crew tied the ship fast, if the Seanchan might buy some of the fireworks in his hold. None of my business.

tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, ɛdʒiənɪn hæd hɝsɛlf ɹoʊd tə ðə dɑk wɪð əɹ deɪmeɪn. ðəɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ wʊmən wɛɹɪŋ ðə bɹeɪslət ðɪs taɪm, wɪð ðə ɹɛd pænəlz ən fɔɹk laɪtnɪŋ ɑn əɹ dʒɹɛs, bʌt ðə deɪmeɪn wɑz ðə seɪm sæd-feɪst wʊmən u nɛvɝ lʊkt ʌp ənlɛs ði ʌðɝ spoʊk tə hɝ. ɛdʒiənɪn hæd doʊmən ən ɪz kɹu hɝɾɪd ɔf ðə ʃɪp tə sɪɾ ɑn ðə dɑk ʌndɝ ði aɪz ʌv ə pɛɹ ə hɝ soʊlʒɝz - ʃi sim tə θɪŋk noʊ mɔɹ wɝ niɾəd, ən doʊmən wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə ɑɹɡju wɪð əɹ - waɪl ʌðɝz sɝtʃt spɹeɪ ʌndɝ əɹ dɝɛkʃən. ðə deɪmeɪn wɑz pɑɹɾ ə ðə sɝtʃ.

To his surprise, Egeanin had herself rowed to the dock with her damane. There was another woman wearing the bracelet this time, with the red panels and forked lightning on her dress, but the damane was the same sad-faced woman who never looked up unless the other spoke to her. Egeanin had Domon and his crew herded off the ship to sit on the dock under the eyes of a pair of her soldiers - she seemed to think no more were needed, and Domon was not about to argue with her - while others searched Spray under her direction. The damane was part of the search.

daʊn ðə dɑk, ə θɪŋ əpɪɹd. doʊmən kəd θɪŋk ə noʊ ʌðɝ weɪ tə dɪskɹaɪb ɪt. ə hʌlkɪŋ kɹitʃɝ wɪð ə lɛðɝi, ɡɹeɪ-ɡɹin haɪɾ ən ə bik ʌv ə maʊθ ɪn ə wɛdʒ-ʃeɪp hɛd. ən θɹi aɪz. ɪt lʌmbɝɾ əlɔŋ bɪsaɪɾ ə mæn huz ɑɹmɝ bɔɹ θɹi peɪntəɾ aɪz, dʒʌs laɪk ðoʊz ə ðə kɹitʃɝ. ðə loʊkəl pipəl, dɑkmən ən seɪlɝz ɪn ɹʌfli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ʃɝts ən lɔŋ vɛsts tə ðɛɹ niz, ʃaɪɾ əweɪ əz ðə pɛɹ pæst, bʌt noʊ sintʃæn ɡeɪv əm ə sɛkənd ɡlæns. ðə mæn wɪð ðə bist sim tə bi dɝɛktɪŋ ɪt wɪð hæn sɪɡnəlz.

Down the dock, a thing appeared. Domon could think of no other way to describe it. A hulking creature with a leathery, gray-green hide and a beak of a mouth in a wedge-shaped head. And three eyes. It lumbered along beside a man whose armor bore three painted eyes, just like those of the creature. The local people, dockmen and sailors in roughly embroidered shirts and long vests to their knees, shied away as the pair passed, but no Seanchan gave them a second glance. The man with the beast seemed to be directing it with hand signals.

mæn ən kɹitʃɝ tɝn ɪn əmʌŋ ðə bɪldɪŋz, livɪŋ doʊmən stɛɹɪŋ ən ɪz kɹu mʌɾɝɪŋ tə ðɛmsɛlvz. ðə tu sintʃæn ɡɑɹdz snɪɹɾ əɾ əm saɪlənli. noʊ maɪ bɪznəs, doʊmən ɹimaɪndəd hɪmsɛlf. hɪz bɪznəs wɑz ɪz ʃɪp.

Man and creature turned in among the buildings, leaving Domon staring and his crew muttering to themselves. The two Seanchan guards sneered at them silently. No my business, Domon reminded himself. His business was his ship.

ði ɛɹ hæɾ ə fəmɪljɝ smɛl ə sɔlt wɔɾɝ ən pɪtʃ. hi ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli ɑn ðə stoʊn, hɑt fɹəm ðə sʌn, ən wʌndɝd wʌt ðə sintʃæn wɝ sɝtʃɪŋ fɔɹ. wʌt ðə deɪmeɪn wɑz sɝtʃɪŋ fɔɹ. wʌndɝd wʌt ðət θɪŋ hæd bɪn. ɡʌlz kɹaɪd, wilɪŋ əbʌv ðə hɑɹbɝ. hi θɔɾ ə ðə saʊnz ə keɪdʒ mæn maɪt meɪk. ɪts noʊ maɪ bɪznəs.

The air had a familiar smell of salt water and pitch. He shifted uneasily on the stone, hot from the sun, and wondered what the Seanchan were searching for. What the damane was searching for. Wondered what that thing had been. Gulls cried, wheeling above the harbor. He thought of the sounds a caged man might make. It is no my business.

ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɛdʒiənɪn lɛd ði ʌðɝz bæk ɑntu ðə dɑk. ðə sintʃæn kæptən hæd sʌmθɪŋ ɹæpt ɪn ə pis ə jɛloʊ sɪlk, doʊmən noʊɾəd wɛɹəli. sʌmθɪŋ smɔl ɪnʌf tə kæɹi ɪn wʌn hænd, bʌt wɪtʃ ʃi hɛl kɛɹfəli ɪn boʊθ.

Eventually Egeanin led the others back onto the dock. The Seanchan captain had something wrapped in a piece of yellow silk, Domon noted warily. Something small enough to carry in one hand, but which she held carefully in both.

hi ɡɑt tə hɪz fit - sloʊli, fəɹ ðə soʊlʒɝz' seɪk, ðoʊ ðɛɹ aɪz hɛl ðə seɪm kəntɛmp keɪbənz dɪd. "ju si, kæptən? aɪ də bi oʊnli ə pisfəl tʃɹeɪɾɝ. pɝhæps jəɹ pipəl wəd kɛɹ tə baɪ səm faɪɹwɝks?"

He got to his feet - slowly, for the soldiers' sake, though their eyes held the same contempt Caban's did. "You see, Captain? I do be only a peaceful trader. Perhaps your people would care to buy some fireworks?"

"pɝhæps, tʃɹeɪɾɝ." ðəɹ wɑz ən ɛɹ ə səpɹɛst ɪksaɪtmən əbaʊɾ əɹ ðət meɪɾ ɪm ənizi, ən əɹ nɛkst wɝdz ɪnkɹis ðə filɪŋ. "ju wɪl kʌm wɪð mi."

"Perhaps, trader." There was an air of suppressed excitement about her that made him uneasy, and her next words increased the feeling. "You will come with me."

ʃi toʊl tu soʊlʒɝz tə kʌm əlɔŋ, ən wʌn ə ðɛm ɡeɪv doʊmən ə pʊʃ tə ɡɛɾ ɪm stɑɹɾəd. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə ɹʌf ʃʌv; doʊmən hæd sin fɑɹmɝz pʊʃ ə kaʊ ɪn ðə seɪm weɪ tə meɪk ɪt muv. sɛɾɪŋ ɪz tiθ, hi fɑloʊɾ ɛdʒiənɪn.

She told two soldiers to come along, and one of them gave Domon a push to get him started. It was not a rough shove; Domon had seen farmers push a cow in the same way to make it move. Setting his teeth, he followed Egeanin.

ðə kɑbəlstoʊn stʃɹit klaɪm ðə sloʊp, livɪŋ ðə smɛl ə ðə hɑɹbɝ bɪhaɪnd. ðə sleɪt-ɹuf haʊsəz ɡɹu lɑɹdʒɝ ən tɔlɝ əz ðə stʃɹit klaɪmd. sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli fəɹ ə taʊn hɛl baɪ ɪnveɪɾɝz, ðə stʃɹits hɛl mɔɹ loʊkəl pipəl ðən sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz, ən naʊ ən əɡɛn ə kɝteɪn pɑlɑnkwɪn wɑz bɔɹn pæs baɪ bɛɹ-tʃɛstəd mɛn. ðə fɑlmɛn sim tə bi ɡoʊɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛɹ bɪznəs əz ɪf ðə sintʃæn wɝ nɑt ðɛɹ. əɹ ɔlmoʊs nɑt ðɛɹ. wən pɑlɑnkwɪn əɹ soʊlʒɝ pæst, boʊθ pʊɹ foʊk, wɪð oʊnli ə kɝlɪŋ laɪn əɹ tu wɝkt ɑn ðɛɹ dɝɾi kloʊðz, ən ðə ɹɪtʃɝ, wɪð ʃɝts, vɛsts, ən dʒɹɛsəz kʌvɝd fɹəm ʃoʊldɝ tə weɪst ɪn ɪntʃɹəkətli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd pæɾɝnz, baʊɾ ən ɹɪmeɪn bɛn əntɪl ðə sintʃæn wɝ ɡɔn. ðeɪ dɪd ðə seɪm fəɹ doʊmən ən ɪz ɡɑɹd. niðɝ ɛdʒiənɪn nɔɹ əɹ soʊlʒɝz soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlænst ət ðɛm.

The cobblestone street climbed the slope, leaving the smell of the harbor behind. The slate-roofed houses grew larger and taller as the street climbed. Surprisingly for a town held by invaders, the streets held more local people than Seanchan soldiers, and now and again a curtained palanquin was borne past by bare-chested men. The Falmen seemed to be going about their business as if the Seanchan were not there. Or almost not there. When palanquin or soldier passed, both poor folk, with only a curling line or two worked on their dirty clothes, and the richer, with shirts, vests, and dresses covered from shoulder to waist in intricately embroidered patterns, bowed and remained bent until the Seanchan were gone. They did the same for Domon and his guard. Neither Egeanin nor her soldiers so much as glanced at them.

doʊmən ɹilaɪzd wɪð ə sʌɾən ʃɑk ðət səm ə ðə loʊkəl pipəl ðeɪ pæst wɔɹ dæɡɝz ət ðɛɹ bɛls, ən ɪn ə fju keɪsəz sɔɹdz. hi wɑz soʊ sɝpɹaɪz ðəɾ i spoʊk wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ. "sʌm ə ðɛm bi ɑn jəɹ saɪd?"

Domon realized with a sudden shock that some of the local people they passed wore daggers at their belts, and in a few cases swords. He was so surprised that he spoke without thinking. "Some of them be on your side?"

ɛdʒiənɪn fɹaʊn oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ət hɪm, ɑbviəsli pʌzəld. wɪθaʊt sloʊɪŋ, ʃi lʊkt ət ðə pipəl ən nɑɾəd tə hɝsɛlf. "ju min ðə sɔɹdz. ðeɪ ɑɹ əɹ pipəl, naʊ, tʃɹeɪɾɝ; ðeɪv swɔɹn ði oʊðz." ʃi stɑpt əbɹʌpli, pɔɪntɪŋ əɾ ə tɔl, hɛvi-ʃoʊldɝd mæn wɪð ə hɛvəli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd vɛst ən ə sɔɹd swɪŋɪŋ ɑn ə pleɪn lɛðɝ bælʒɹɪk. "ju."

Egeanin frowned over her shoulder at him, obviously puzzled. Without slowing, she looked at the people and nodded to herself. "You mean the swords. They are our people, now, trader; they have sworn the oaths." She stopped abruptly, pointing at a tall, heavy-shouldered man with a heavily embroidered vest and a sword swinging on a plain leather baldric. "You."

ðə mæn hɔltəɾ ɪn mɪd-stɛp, wʌn fʊɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ ən ə fɹaɪɾənd lʊk sʌɾənli ɑn ɪz feɪs. ɪt wɑz ə hɑɹd feɪs, bʌɾ i lʊkt əz ɪf i wɑntəd tə ɹʌn. ɪnstɛd, hi tɝn tə hɝ ən baʊd, hænz ɑn niz, aɪz fɪkst ɑn əɹ buts. "haʊ meɪ ðɪs wʌn sɝv ðə kæptən?" hi æskt ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs.

The man halted in mid-step, one foot in the air and a frightened look suddenly on his face. It was a hard face, but he looked as if he wanted to run. Instead, he turned to her and bowed, hands on knees, eyes fixed on her boots. "How may this one serve the captain?" he asked in a tight voice.

"ju ɑɹ ə mɝtʃənt?" ɛdʒiənɪn sɛd. "ju hæv swɔɹn ði oʊðz?"

"You are a merchant?" Egeanin said. "You have sworn the oaths?"

"jɛs, kæptən. jɛs." hi dɪd nɑt teɪk ɪz aɪz fɹəm əɹ fit.

"Yes, Captain. Yes." He did not take his eyes from her feet.

"wʌt dʒju tɛl ðə pipəl wən jə teɪk jəɹ wæɡənz ɪnlænd?"

"What do you tell the people when you take your wagons inland?"

"ðæt ðeɪ mʌst oʊbeɪ ðə fɔɹʌnɝz, kæptən, əweɪt ðə ɹɪtɝn, ən sɝv ðoʊz u kʌm hoʊm."

"That they must obey the Forerunners, Captain, await the Return, and serve Those Who Come Home."

"æn dʒju nɛvɝ θɪŋk tə juz ðət sɔɹɾ əɡɛnst ʌs?"

"And do you never think to use that sword against us?"

ðə mænz hænz wɛnt waɪt-nʌkəld ɡɹɪpɪŋ ɪz niz, ən ðəɹ wɑz sʌɾənli swɛɾ ɪn ɪz vɔɪs. "aɪ hæv swɔɹn ði oʊðz, kæptən. aɪ oʊbeɪ, əweɪt, ən sɝv."

The man's hands went white-knuckled gripping his knees, and there was suddenly sweat in his voice. "I have sworn the oaths, Captain. I obey, await, and serve."

"ju si?" ɛdʒiənɪn sɛd, tɝnɪŋ tə doʊmən. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ ɹizən tə fɝbɪɾ əm wɛpənz. ðəɹ mʌs bi tʃɹeɪd, ən mɝtʃəns mʌs pɹətɛk ðɛmsɛlvz fɹəm bændəts. wi əlaʊ ðə pipəl tə kʌm ən ɡoʊ əz ðeɪ wɪl, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ oʊbeɪ, əweɪt, ən sɝv. ðɛɹ fɔɹfɑðɝz bɹoʊk ðɛɹ oʊðz, bʌt ðiz əv lɝn bɛɾɝ." ʃi stɑɹɾəd bæk ʌp ðə hɪl, ən ðə soʊlʒɝz pʊʃt doʊmən æftɝ hɝ.

"You see?" Egeanin said, turning to Domon. "There is no reason to forbid them weapons. There must be trade, and merchants must protect themselves from bandits. We allow the people to come and go as they will, so long as they obey, await, and serve. Their forefathers broke their oaths, but these have learned better." She started back up the hill, and the soldiers pushed Domon after her.

hi lʊk bæk ət ðə mɝtʃənt. ðə mæn steɪd bɛn əz i wɑz tɪl ɛdʒiənɪn wɑz tɛn peɪsɪz ʌp ðə stʃɹit, ðən i stʃɹeɪɾənd ən hɝid ði ʌðɝ weɪ, lipɪŋ daʊn ðə sloʊpɪŋ stʃɹit.

He looked back at the merchant. The man stayed bent as he was till Egeanin was ten paces up the street, then he straightened and hurried the other way, leaping down the sloping street.

ɛdʒiənɪn ən ɪz ɡɑɹdz dɪd nɑt lʊk ɝaʊnd, iðɝ, wən ə maʊntəd sintʃæn tʃɹup pæs ðɛm, klaɪmɪŋ ðə stʃɹit. ðə soʊlʒɝz ɹoʊd kɹitʃɝz ðət lʊkt ɔlmoʊs laɪk kæts ðə saɪz ə hɔɹsəz, bʌt wɪð lɪzɝdz' skeɪlz ɹɪpəlɪŋ bɹɑnz bɪniθ ðɛɹ sæɾəlz. klɔd fit ɡɹæsp ðə kɑbəlstoʊnz. ə θɹi-aɪd hɛd tɝn tə ɹəɡɑɹd doʊmən əz ðə tʃɹup klaɪm baɪ; əsaɪd fɹəm ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls, ɪt sim tu - noʊɪŋ - fəɹ doʊmənz pis ə maɪnd. hi stʌmbəld ən ɔlmoʊs fɛl. ɔl əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹit, ðə fɑlmɛn wɝ pɹɛsɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz bæk əɡɛns ðə fɹʌns ə ðə bɪldɪŋz, səm kloʊzɪŋ ðɛɹ aɪz. ðə sintʃæn peɪɾ əm noʊ hid.

Egeanin and his guards did not look around, either, when a mounted Seanchan troop passed them, climbing the street. The soldiers rode creatures that looked almost like cats the size of horses, but with lizards' scales rippling bronze beneath their saddles. Clawed feet grasped the cobblestones. A three-eyed head turned to regard Domon as the troop climbed by; aside from everything else, it seemed too - knowing - for Domon's peace of mind. He stumbled and almost fell. All along the street, the Falmen were pressing themselves back against the fronts of the buildings, some closing their eyes. The Seanchan paid them no heed.

doʊmən ʌndɝstʊd waɪ ðə sintʃæn kəɾ əlaʊ ðə pipəl əz mʌtʃ fɹiɾəm əz ðeɪ dɪd. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf i wʊɾə hæd nɝv ɪnʌf tə ɹɪzɪst. deɪmeɪn. mɑnstɝz. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ɛniθɪŋ tə stɑp ðə sintʃæn fɹəm mɑɹtʃɪŋ ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld. noʊ maɪ bɪznəs, hi ɹimaɪndəd hɪmsɛlf ɹʌfli, ən kənsɪɾɝd wɛðɝ ðəɹ wɑz ɛni weɪ tə əvɔɪd ðə sintʃæn ɪn ɪz fjutʃɝ tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ.

Domon understood why the Seanchan could allow the people as much freedom as they did. He wondered if he would have had nerve enough to resist. Damane. Monsters. He wondered if there was anything to stop the Seanchan from marching all the way to the Spine of the World. No my business, he reminded himself roughly, and considered whether there was any way to avoid the Seanchan in his future trading.

ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə tɑp ə ði ɪnklaɪn, wɛɹ ðə taʊn ɡeɪv weɪ tə hɪlz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taʊn wɔl. əhɛd wɝ ði ɪnz ðət sɝv mɝtʃəns u tʃɹeɪɾɪd ɪnlænd, ən wæɡən jɑɹdz ən steɪbəlz. hɪɹ, ðə haʊsəz wʊɾə meɪd ɹɪspɛktəbəl mænɝz fəɹ ðə maɪnɝ lɔɹdz ɪn ɪljən. ðə lɑɹdʒəst ə ðɛm hæɾ ən ɑnɝ ɡɑɹɾ ə sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz aʊt fɹʌnt, ən ə blu-ɛdʒ bænɝ bɛɹɪŋ ə ɡoʊldən, spɹɛd-wɪŋ hɔk ɹɪpəlɪŋ əbʌv ɪt. ɛdʒiənɪn sɝɛndɝɾ əɹ sɔɹɾ ən dæɡɝ bɪfɔɹ teɪkɪŋ doʊmən ɪnsaɪd. hɝ tu soʊlʒɝz ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə stʃɹit. doʊmən bɪɡæn tə swɛt. hi smɛld ə lɔɹɾ ɪn ðɪs; ɪt wɑz nɛvɝ ɡʊd tə də bɪznəs wɪð ə lɔɹɾ ɑn ðə lɔɹdz oʊn ɡɹaʊnd.

They reached the top of the incline, where the town gave way to hills. There was no town wall. Ahead were the inns that served merchants who traded inland, and wagon yards and stables. Here, the houses would have made respectable manors for the minor lords in Illian. The largest of them had an honor guard of Seanchan soldiers out front, and a blue-edged banner bearing a golden, spread-winged hawk rippling above it. Egeanin surrendered her sword and dagger before taking Domon inside. Her two soldiers remained in the street. Domon began to sweat. He smelled a lord in this; it was never good to do business with a lord on the lord's own ground.

ɪn ðə fɹʌn hɔl ɛdʒiənɪn lɛf doʊmən ət ðə dɔɹ ən spoʊk tə ə sɝvənt. ə loʊkəl mæn, dʒʌdʒɪŋ baɪ ðə fʊl slivz ə hɪz ʃɝɾ ən ðə spaɪɹəlz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst; doʊmən bɪlivd i kɑt ðə wɝdz "haɪ lɔɹd." ðə sɝvən hɝiɾ əweɪ, ɹɪtɝnɪŋ faɪnəli tə liɾ əm tə wʌt wɑz ʃʊɹli ðə lɑɹdʒəst ɹum ɪn ðə haʊs. ɛvɹi stɪk ə fɝnɪtʃɝ hæd bɪn klɪɹɾ aʊɾ ʌv ɪt, ivən ðə ɹʌɡz, ən ðə stoʊn flɔɹ wɑz pɑlɪʃt tə ə bɹaɪt ɡlim. foʊldɪŋ skɹinz peɪntəd wɪð stʃɹeɪnʒ bɝdz hɪd wɔlz ən wɪndoʊz.

In the front hall Egeanin left Domon at the door and spoke to a servant. A local man, judging by the full sleeves of his shirt and the spirals embroidered across his chest; Domon believed he caught the words "High Lord." The servant hurried away, returning finally to lead them to what was surely the largest room in the house. Every stick of furniture had been cleared out of it, even the rugs, and the stone floor was polished to a bright gleam. Folding screens painted with strange birds hid walls and windows.

ɛdʒiənɪn stɑp dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə ɹum. wən doʊmən tʃɹaɪd tə æsk wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ ən waɪ, ʃi saɪlənst ɪm wɪð ə sævədʒ ɡlɛɹ ən ə wɝdləs ɡɹaʊl. ʃi dɪd nɑt muv, bʌt ʃi simd ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə baʊnsɪŋ ɑn əɹ toʊz. ʃi hɛld wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz ʃi hæd teɪkən fɹəm ɪz ʃɪp əz ɪf ɪt wɝ pɹɛʃəs. hi tʃɹaɪd tə ɪmædʒən wʌɾ ɪt kəd bi.

Egeanin stopped just inside the room. When Domon tried to ask where they were and why, she silenced him with a savage glare and a wordless growl. She did not move, but she seemed on the point of bouncing on her toes. She held whatever it was she had taken from his ship as if it were precious. He tried to imagine what it could be.

sʌɾənli ə ɡɔŋ saʊndəd sɔfli, ən ðə sintʃæn wʊmən dʒɹɑp tə hɝ niz, sɛɾɪŋ ðə sɪlk-ɹæp sʌmθɪŋ kɛɹfəli bɪsaɪd hɝ. əɾ ə lʊk fɹəm hɝ, doʊmən ɡɑt daʊn əz wɛl. lɔɹdz hæd stʃɹeɪnʒ weɪz, ən i səspɛktəd sintʃæn lɔɹdz maɪɾ əv stʃɹeɪnʒɝ wʌnz ðən i nu.

Suddenly a gong sounded softly, and the Seanchan woman dropped to her knees, setting the silk-wrapped something carefully beside her. At a look from her, Domon got down as well. Lords had strange ways, and he suspected Seanchan lords might have stranger ones than he knew.

tu mɛn əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə ɹum. wʌn hæd ðə lɛf saɪɾ ə hɪz skælp ʃeɪvd, hɪz ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ peɪl ɡoʊldən hɛɹ bɹeɪɾɪd ən hæŋɪŋ daʊn oʊvɝ ɪz ɪɹ tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝ. hɪz dip jɛloʊ ɹoʊb wɑz dʒʌs lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə lɛt ðə toʊz ə jɛloʊ slɪpɝz pik aʊt wən i wɔkt. ði ʌðɝ wɔɹ ə blu sɪlk ɹoʊb, bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd wɪð bɝdz ən lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə tʃɹeɪl nɪɹli ə spæn ɑn ðə flɔɹ bɪhaɪn hɪm. hɪz hɛd wɑz ʃeɪv bɔld, ən ɪz fɪŋɡɝneɪlz wɝ ət list ən ɪntʃ lɔŋ, ðoʊz ɑn ðə fɝs tu fɪŋɡɝz ʌv itʃ hæn lækɝd blu. doʊmənz maʊθ dʒɹɑpt oʊpən.

Two men appeared in the doorway at the far end of the room. One had the left side of his scalp shaved, his remaining pale golden hair braided and hanging down over his ear to his shoulder. His deep yellow robe was just long enough to let the toes of yellow slippers peek out when he walked. The other wore a blue silk robe, brocaded with birds and long enough to trail nearly a span on the floor behind him. His head was shaved bald, and his fingernails were at least an inch long, those on the first two fingers of each hand lacquered blue. Domon's mouth dropped open.

"ju ɑɹ ɪn ðə pɹɛzəns ə ðə haɪ lɔɹd tʃɹɑk," ðə jɛloʊ-hɛɹd mæn ɪntoʊnd, "hu lidz ðoʊz u kʌm bɪfɔɹ, ən səkɹz ðə ɹɪtɝn."

"You are in the presence of the High Lord Turak," the yellow-haired man intoned, "who leads Those Who Come Before, and succors the Return."

ɛdʒiənɪn pɹɑstʃɹeɪɾɪd hɝsɛlf wɪð əɹ hænz əɾ əɹ saɪdz. doʊmən ɪməteɪɾɪd əɹ wɪð əlækɹəɾi. ivən ðə haɪ lɔɹdz ə tiɹ wəd noʊ dɪmæn ðɪs, hi θɔt. aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ, hi sɔ ɛdʒiənɪn kɪsɪŋ ðə flɔɹ. wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd ðəɹ wɑz ə lɪmət tə ɪməteɪʃən. ðeɪ kən noʊ si wɛðɝ aɪ də əɹ noʊ ɛniweɪ.

Egeanin prostrated herself with her hands at her sides. Domon imitated her with alacrity. Even the High Lords of Tear would no demand this, he thought. Out of the corner of his eye, he saw Egeanin kissing the floor. With a grimace, he decided there was a limit to imitation. They can no see whether I do or no anyway.

ɛdʒiənɪn sʌɾənli stʊd. hi stɑɹɾəd tə ɹaɪz əz wɛl, ən meɪɾ ɪɾ əz fɑɹ əz wʌn ni bɪfɔɹ ə ɡɹaʊl ɪn əɹ θɹoʊɾ ən ə skændəlaɪz lʊk ɑn ðə feɪs ə ðə mæn wɪð ðə bɹeɪd pʊɾ ɪm bæk daʊn, feɪs tə ðə flɔɹ ən mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. aɪ wəd noʊ də ðɪs fəɹ ðə kɪŋ ʌv ɪljən ən ðə kaʊnsəl ə naɪn təɡɛðɝ.

Egeanin suddenly stood. He started to rise as well, and made it as far as one knee before a growl in her throat and a scandalized look on the face of the man with the braid put him back down, face to the floor and muttering under his breath. I would no do this for the King of Illian and the Council of Nine together.

"jɔɹ neɪm ɪz ɛdʒiənɪn?" ɪt hæd tə bi ðə vɔɪs ə ðə mæn ɪn ðə blu ɹoʊb. hɪz slɝɪŋ spitʃ hæɾ ə ɹɪðəm ɔlmoʊs laɪk sɪŋɪŋ.

"Your name is Egeanin?" It had to be the voice of the man in the blue robe. His slurring speech had a rhythm almost like singing.

"aɪ wɑz soʊ neɪmd ɑn maɪ sɔɹd-deɪ, haɪ lɔɹd," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd hʌmbli.

"I was so named on my sword-day, High Lord," she replied humbly.

"ðɪs ɪz ə faɪn spɛsəmən, ɛdʒiənɪn. kwaɪt ɹɛɹ. dʒju wɪʃ ə peɪmənt?"

"This is a fine specimen, Egeanin. Quite rare. Do you wish a payment?"

"ðæt ðə haɪ lɔɹɾ ɪz plizd ɪz peɪmən ɪnʌf. aɪ lɪv tə sɝv, haɪ lɔɹd."

"That the High Lord is pleased is payment enough. I live to serve, High Lord."

"aɪ wɪl mɛnʃən jəɹ neɪm tə ði ɛmpɹɛs, ɛdʒiənɪn. æftɝ ðə ɹɪtɝn, nu neɪmz wɪl bi kɔl tə ðə blʌd. ʃoʊ jɝsɛlf fɪt, ən jə meɪ ʃɛd ðə neɪm ɛdʒiənɪn fəɹ ə haɪɝ."

"I will mention your name to the Empress, Egeanin. After the Return, new names will be called to the Blood. Show yourself fit, and you may shed the name Egeanin for a higher."

"ðə haɪ lɔɹɾ ɑnɝz mi."

"The High Lord honors me."

"jɛs. jə meɪ liv mi."

"Yes. You may leave me."

doʊmən kəd si nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ əɹ buts bækɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum, pɔzɪŋ əɾ ɪntɝvəlz fəɹ baʊz. ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn hɝ. ðəɹ wɑz ə lɔŋ saɪləns. hi wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ swɛt fɹəm ɪz fɔɹhɛd dʒɹɪp ɑntu ðə flɔɹ wən tʃɹɑk spoʊk əɡɛn.

Domon could see nothing but her boots backing out of the room, pausing at intervals for bows. The door closed behind her. There was a long silence. He was watching sweat from his forehead drip onto the floor when Turak spoke again.

"ju meɪ ɹaɪz, tʃɹeɪɾɝ."

"You may rise, trader."

doʊmən ɡɑt tə hɪz fit, ən sɔ wʌt tʃɹɑk hɛld ɪn ɪz lɔŋ-neɪl fɪŋɡɝz. ðə kwəndɪlɝ dɪsk ʃeɪpt ɪndə ði eɪntʃən sil ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ɛdʒiənɪnz ɹiækʃən wən i mɛnʃən ɛɛs sədaɪ, doʊmən bɪɡæn tə swɛɾ ɪn ɝnɪst. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ænəmɑsəɾi ɪn ðə haɪ lɔɹdz dɑɹk aɪz, oʊnli ə slaɪt kjʊɹiɑsəɾi, bʌt doʊmən dɪd nɑt tʃɹʌs lɔɹdz.

Domon got to his feet, and saw what Turak held in his long-nailed fingers. The cuendillar disk shaped into the ancient seal of the Aes Sedai. Remembering Egeanin's reaction when he mentioned Aes Sedai, Domon began to sweat in earnest. There was no animosity in the High Lord's dark eyes, only a slight curiosity, but Domon did not trust lords.

"du jə noʊ wʌt ðɪs ɪz, tʃɹeɪɾɝ?"

"Do you know what this is, trader?"

"noʊ, haɪ lɔɹd." doʊmənz ɹɪplaɪ wɑz əz stɛɾi əz ə ɹɑk; noʊ tʃɹeɪɾɝ læstəd lɔŋ u kəd nɑt laɪ wɪð ə stʃɹeɪt feɪs ən ən izi vɔɪs.

"No, High Lord." Domon's reply was as steady as a rock; no trader lasted long who could not lie with a straight face and an easy voice.

"æn jɛt jə kɛpt ɪɾ ɪn ə sikɹət pleɪs."

"And yet you kept it in a secret place."

"aɪ də kəlɛkt oʊl θɪŋz, haɪ lɔɹd, fɹəm taɪmz pæst. ðəɹ də bi ðoʊz u wəd stil sʌtʃ, dɪd ðeɪ leɪ izi tə hænd."

"I do collect old things, High Lord, from times past. There do be those who would steal such, did they lay easy to hand."

tʃɹɑk ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ðə blæk-ænd-waɪt dɪsk fəɹ ə moʊmənt. "ðɪs ɪz kwəndɪlɝ, tʃɹeɪɾɝ - dʒju noʊ ðət neɪm? - ən oʊldɝ ðən jə pɝhæps noʊ. kʌm wɪð mi."

Turak regarded the black-and-white disk for a moment. "This is cuendillar, trader - do you know that name? - and older than you perhaps know. Come with me."

doʊmən fɑloʊd ðə mæn kɔʃəsli, filɪŋ ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ ʃʊɹ ə hɪmsɛlf. wɪð ɛni lɔɹɾ ə ðə lænz i nu, ɪf ɡɑɹdz wɝ gɑnə bi sʌmənd, ðeɪ ɔlɹɛɾi wəɾ əv bɪn. bʌt ðə lɪɾəl i hæd sin ə sintʃæn toʊld ɪm ðeɪ dɪd nɑt də θɪŋz əz ʌðɝ mɛn dɪd. hi skuld ɪz feɪs tə stɪlnəs.

Domon followed the man cautiously, feeling a little more sure of himself. With any lord of the lands he knew, if guards were going to be summoned, they already would have been. But the little he had seen of Seanchan told him they did not do things as other men did. He schooled his face to stillness.

hi wɑz lɛɾ ɪndə ənʌðɝ ɹum. hi θɔt ðə fɝnɪtʃɝ hɪɹ hæd tə hæv bɪn bɹɔt baɪ tʃɹɑk. ɪt sim tə bi meɪɾ ə kɝvz, wɪð noʊ stʃɹeɪt laɪnz əɾ ɔl, ən ðə wʊd wɑz pɑlɪʃt tə bɹɪŋ aʊt stʃɹeɪnʒ ɡɹeɪnɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz wʌn tʃɛɹ, ɑn ə sɪlk kɑɹpət woʊvən ɪn bɝdz ən flaʊɝz, ən wʌn lɑɹdʒ kæbənət meɪɾ ɪn ə sɝkəl. foʊldɪŋ skɹinz meɪd nu wɔlz.

He was led into another room. He thought the furniture here had to have been brought by Turak. It seemed to be made of curves, with no straight lines at all, and the wood was polished to bring out strange graining. There was one chair, on a silk carpet woven in birds and flowers, and one large cabinet made in a circle. Folding screens made new walls.

ðə mæn wɪð ðə bɹeɪɾ oʊpən ðə dɔɹz ə ðə kæbənət tə ɹɪvil ʃɛlvz hoʊldɪŋ ən ɑɾ əsɔɹtmən ə fɪɡjɝinz, kʌps, boʊlz, veɪsəz, fɪfti dɪfɹən θɪŋz, noʊ tu əlaɪk ɪn saɪz əɹ ʃeɪp. doʊmənz bɹɛθ kɑɾ əz tʃɹɑk kɛɹfəli sɛt ðə dɪsk bɪsaɪɾ ɪts ɪɡzæk twɪn.

The man with the braid opened the doors of the cabinet to reveal shelves holding an odd assortment of figurines, cups, bowls, vases, fifty different things, no two alike in size or shape. Domon's breath caught as Turak carefully set the disk beside its exact twin.

"kwəndɪlɝ," tʃɹɑk sɛd. "ðæɾ ɪz wʌɾ aɪ kəlɛkt, tʃɹeɪɾɝ. oʊnli ði ɛmpɹɛs hɝsɛlf əz ə faɪnɝ kəlɛkʃən."

"Cuendillar," Turak said. "That is what I collect, trader. Only the Empress herself has a finer collection."

doʊmənz aɪz ɔlmoʊs pɑpt aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛd. ɪf ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɑn ðoʊz ʃɛlvz wɑz tʃɹuli kwəndɪlɝ, ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf tə baɪ ə kɪŋdəm, əɹ ət ðə lis tə faʊn ə ɡɹeɪt haʊs. ivən ə kɪŋ maɪt bɛɡɝ hɪmsɛlf tə baɪ soʊ mʌtʃ ʌv ɪt, ɪf i ivən nu wɛɹ tə faɪn soʊ mʌtʃ. hi pʊɾ ɑn ə smaɪl.

Domon's eyes almost popped out of his head. If everything on those shelves was truly cuendillar, it was enough to buy a kingdom, or at the least to found a great House. Even a king might beggar himself to buy so much of it, if he even knew where to find so much. He put on a smile.

"haɪ lɔɹd, pliz æksɛp ðɪs pis əz ə ɡɪft." hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə lɛɾ ɪt ɡoʊ, bʌt ðət wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən æŋɡɝɪŋ ðɪs sintʃæn. meɪbi ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz wɪl tʃeɪs ɪm naʊ. "aɪ də bi bʌɾ ə sɪmpəl tʃɹeɪɾɝ. aɪ wɑn oʊnli tə tʃɹeɪd. lemi seɪl, ən aɪ də pɹɑməs ðət - "

"High Lord, please accept this piece as a gift." He did not want to let it go, but that was better than angering this Seanchan. Maybe the Darkfriends will chase him now. "I do be but a simple trader. I want only to trade. Let me sail, and I do promise that - "

tʃɹɑks ɪkspɹɛʃən nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒd, bʌt ðə mæn wɪð ðə bɹeɪd kʌt doʊmən ɔf wɪð ə snæpt, "ənʃeɪvən dɔɡ! jə spik ʌv ɡɪvɪŋ ðə haɪ lɔɹd wʌt kæptən ɛdʒiənɪn əz ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɪvən. jə bɑɹɡən, əz ɪf ðə haɪ lɔɹd wɝ ə - ə mɝtʃənt! jəl bi fleɪɾ əlaɪv oʊvɝ naɪn deɪz, dɔɡ, ən - " ðə bɛɹəs moʊʃən ə tʃɹɑks fɪŋɡɝ saɪləns hɪm.

Turak's expression never changed, but the man with the braid cut Domon off with a snapped, "Unshaven dog! You speak of giving the High Lord what Captain Egeanin has already given. You bargain, as if the High Lord were a - a merchant! You will be flayed alive over nine days, dog, and - " The barest motion of Turak's finger silenced him.

"aɪ kænɑɾ əlaʊ jə tə liv mi, tʃɹeɪɾɝ," ðə haɪ lɔɹd sɛd. "ɪn ðɪs ʃæɾoʊd læn ʌv oʊθ-bɹeɪkɝz, aɪ faɪnd nʌn u kən kənvɝs wɪð ə mæn ə sɛnsɪbɪlɪɾiz. bʌt jə ɑɹ ə kəlɛktɝ. pɝhæps jəɹ kɑnvɝseɪʃən wɪl bi ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ." hi tʊk ðə tʃɛɹ, lɑlɪŋ bæk ɪn ɪts kɝvz tə stʌɾi doʊmən.

"I cannot allow you to leave me, trader," the High Lord said. "In this shadowed land of oath-breakers, I find none who can converse with a man of sensibilities. But you are a collector. Perhaps your conversation will be interesting." He took the chair, lolling back in its curves to study Domon.

doʊmən pʊɾ ɑn wʌɾ i hoʊpt wɑz ən ɪnɡɹeɪʃieɪɾɪŋ smaɪl. "haɪ lɔɹd, aɪ də bi ə sɪmpəl tʃɹeɪɾɝ, ə sɪmpəl mæn. aɪ də noʊ hæv ðə weɪ ʌv tɔkɪŋ wɪð ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz."

Domon put on what he hoped was an ingratiating smile. "High Lord, I do be a simple trader, a simple man. I do no have the way of talking with great Lords."

ðə mæn wɪð ðə bɹeɪd ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɪm, bʌt tʃɹɑk sim nɑt tə hɪɹ. fɹəm bɪhaɪnd wʌn ə ðə skɹinz, ə slɪm, pɹɪɾi jʌŋ wʊmən əpɪɹɾ ɑn kwɪk fit tə nil bɪsaɪd ðə haɪ lɔɹd, ɔfɝɪŋ ə lækɝd tʃɹeɪ bɛɹɪŋ ə sɪŋɡəl kʌp, θɪn ən hændəlləs, ʌv səm stimɪŋ blæk lɪkwəd. hɝ dɑɹk, ɹaʊn feɪs wɑz veɪɡli ɹɛmənɪsən ə ðə si foʊk. tʃɹɑk tʊk ðə kʌp kɛɹfəli ɪn ɪz lɔŋ-neɪl fɪŋɡɝz, nɛvɝ lʊkɪŋ ət ðə jʌŋ wʊmən, ən ɪnheɪl ðə fjumz. doʊmən tʊk wʌn lʊk ət ðə ɡɝl ən pʊld ɪz aɪz əweɪ wɪð ə stʃɹæŋɡəld ɡæsp; hɝ waɪt sɪlk ɹoʊb wɑz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð flaʊɝz, bʌt soʊ ʃɪɹ i kəd si ɹaɪt θɹu ɪt, ən ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ bɪniθ bʌɾ əɹ oʊn slɪmnəs.

The man with the braid glared at him, but Turak seemed not to hear. From behind one of the screens, a slim, pretty young woman appeared on quick feet to kneel beside the High Lord, offering a lacquered tray bearing a single cup, thin and handleless, of some steaming black liquid. Her dark, round face was vaguely reminiscent of the Sea Folk. Turak took the cup carefully in his long-nailed fingers, never looking at the young woman, and inhaled the fumes. Domon took one look at the girl and pulled his eyes away with a strangled gasp; her white silk robe was embroidered with flowers, but so sheer he could see right through it, and there was nothing beneath but her own slimness.

"ði ɝoʊmə ʌv kæf," tʃɹɑk sɛd, "ɪz ɔlmoʊst əz ɛndʒɔɪəbəl əz ðə fleɪvɝ. naʊ, tʃɹeɪɾɝ. aɪ hæv lɝn ðət kwəndɪlɝ ɪz ivən mɔɹ ɹɛɹ hɪɹ ðən ɪn sintʃæn. tɛl mi haʊ ə sɪmpəl tʃɹeɪɾɝ keɪm tə pəzɛs ə pis." hi sɪpt ɪz kæf ən weɪɾəd.

"The aroma of kaf," Turak said, "is almost as enjoyable as the flavor. Now, trader. I have learned that cuendillar is even more rare here than in Seanchan. Tell me how a simple trader came to possess a piece." He sipped his kaf and waited.

doʊmən tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən sɛɾ əbaʊt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə laɪ hɪz weɪ aʊɾ ə fɑlm.

Domon took a deep breath and set about trying to lie his way out of Falme.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾi


CHAPTER 30

deɪz deɪmɑɹ


Daes Dae'mar

ɪn ðə ɹum ʃɛɹd baɪ hʊɹɪn ən lɔɪəl, ɹænd pɪɹd θɹu ðə wɪndoʊ ət ði ɔɹɾɝd laɪnz ən tɛɹəsəz ə kɛɹhin, ðə stoʊn bɪldɪŋz ən sleɪt ɹufs. hi kəd nɑt si ði ɪluməneɪɾɝz' tʃæptɝ haʊs; ivən ɪf hjudʒ taʊɝz ən ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz' haʊsəz hæd nɑt bɪn ɪn ðə weɪ, ðə sɪɾi wɔlz wʊɾə pɹɪvɛntɪɾ ɪt. ði ɪluməneɪɾɝz wɝ ɑn ɛvɹiwʌnz tʌŋz ɪn ðə sɪɾi, ivən naʊ, deɪz æftɝ ðə naɪt wən ðeɪ hæd lɔftəɾ oʊnli wʌn naɪtfloʊɝ ɪndə ðə skaɪ, ən ðəɾ ɝli. ə dʌzən dɪfɹən vɝʒənz ə ðə skændəl wɝ biɪŋ toʊld, dɪskaʊntɪŋ maɪnɝ vɛɹieɪʃənz, bʌt nʌn kloʊs tə ðə tʃɹuθ.

In the room shared by Hurin and Loial, Rand peered through the window at the ordered lines and terraces of Cairhien, the stone buildings and slate roofs. He could not see the Illuminators' chapter house; even if huge towers and great lords' houses had not been in the way, the city walls would have prevented it. The Illuminators were on everyone's tongues in the city, even now, days after the night when they had lofted only one nightflower into the sky, and that early. A dozen different versions of the scandal were being told, discounting minor variations, but none close to the truth.

ɹænd tɝn əweɪ. hi hoʊp noʊ wʌn hæd bɪn hɝɾ ɪn ðə faɪɝ, bʌt ði ɪluməneɪɾɝz hæd nɑt soʊ fɑɹ ədmɪɾəd ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə faɪɝ. ðeɪ wɝ ə kloʊs-maʊð lɑɾ əbaʊt wʌt wɛn ɑn ɪnsaɪd ðɛɹ tʃæptɝ haʊs.

Rand turned away. He hoped no one had been hurt in the fire, but the Illuminators had not so far admitted there had been a fire. They were a close-mouthed lot about what went on inside their chapter house.

"aɪ wɪl teɪk ðə nɛkst wɑtʃ," hi toʊl hʊɹɪn, "æz sun əz aɪ kʌm bæk."

"I will take the next watch," he told Hurin, "as soon as I come back."

"ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ nid, maɪ lɔɹd." hʊɹɪn baʊɾ əz dipli əz ɛni kɛɹhinɪn. "aɪ kən kip wɑtʃ. tʃɹuli, maɪ lɔɹd nid nɑt tʃɹʌbəl hɪmsɛlf."

"There is no need, my Lord." Hurin bowed as deeply as any Cairhienin. "I can keep watch. Truly, my Lord need not trouble himself."

ɹænd dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ ən ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks wɪð lɔɪəl. ði oʊɡiɝ oʊnli ʃɹʌɡd. ðə snɪfɝ wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ mɔɹ fɔɹməl ɛvɹi deɪ ðeɪ ɹɪmeɪn ɪn kɛɹhin; ði oʊɡiɝ sɪmpli kɑmɛntəd ðət hjumənz ɔfən æktəɾ ɑdli.

Rand drew a deep breath and exchanged looks with Loial. The Ogier only shrugged. The sniffer was growing more formal every day they remained in Cairhien; the Ogier simply commented that humans often acted oddly.

"hʊɹɪn," ɹænd sɛd, "ju juz tə kɔl mi lɔɹd ɹænd, ən jə juz nɑt tə baʊ ɛvɹi taɪm aɪ lʊkt ət ju." aɪ wɑn ɪm tə ʌnbɪn ən kɔl mi lɔɹd ɹænd əɡɛn, hi θɔt wɪð əmeɪzmənt. lɔɹd ɹænd! laɪt, wɪv tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ bɪfɔɹ aɪ stɑɹt wɑntɪŋ ɪm tə baʊ. "wɪl jə pliz sɪt daʊn? jə meɪk mi taɪɝd, lʊkɪŋ ət ju."

"Hurin," Rand said, "you used to call me Lord Rand, and you used not to bow every time I looked at you." I want him to unbend and call me Lord Rand again, he thought with amazement. Lord Rand! Light, we have to get out of here before I start wanting him to bow. "Will you please sit down? You make me tired, looking at you."

hʊɹɪn stʊd wɪð ɪz bæk stɪf, jɛɾ əpɪɹd ɹɛɾi tə lip tə pɝfɔɹm ɛni tæsk ɹænd maɪt ɹɪkwɛst. hi niðɝ sæt daʊn nɔɹ ɹɪlæks naʊ. "ɪt wʊdn bi pɹɑpɝ, maɪ lɔɹd. wɪv tə ʃoʊ ðiz kɛɹhinɪn wi noʊ haʊ tə bi ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz pɹɑpɝ əz - "

Hurin stood with his back stiff, yet appeared ready to leap to perform any task Rand might request. He neither sat down nor relaxed now. "It wouldn't be proper, my Lord. We have to show these Cairhienin we know how to be every bit as proper as - "

"wɪl jə stɑp seɪɪŋ ðæt!" ɹænd ʃaʊɾəd.

"Will you stop saying that!" Rand shouted.

"æz jə wɪʃ, maɪ lɔɹd."

"As you wish, my Lord."

ɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝt fəɹ ɹænd nɑt tə saɪ əɡɛn. "hʊɹɪn, aɪm sɑɹi. aɪ ʃəd nɑɾ əv ʃaʊɾəd ət ju."

It was an effort for Rand not to sigh again. "Hurin, I'm sorry. I should not have shouted at you."

"ɪts jəɹ ɹaɪt, maɪ lɔɹd," hʊɹɪn sɛd sɪmpli. "ɪf aɪ doʊn də ðə weɪ jə wɑnt, ɪts jəɹ ɹaɪt tə ʃaʊt."

"It's your right, my Lord," Hurin said simply. "If I don't do the way you want, it's your right to shout."

ɹænd stɛp təwɔɹd ðə snɪfɝ wɪð ði ɪntɛntʃən ʌv ɡɹæbɪŋ ðə mænz kɑlɝ ən ʃeɪkɪŋ hɪm.

Rand stepped toward the sniffer with the intention of grabbing the man's collar and shaking him.

ə nɑk ɑn ðə kənɛktɪŋ dɔɹ tə ɹændz ɹum fɹoʊz əm ɔl, bʌt ɹænd wɑz pliz tə si ðət hʊɹɪn dɪd nɑt weɪt tə æsk pɝmɪʃən bɪfɔɹ pɪkɪŋ ʌp ɪz sɔɹd. ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd wɑz ət ɹændz weɪst; ɡoʊɪŋ aʊt, hi tʌtʃt ɪts hɪlt. hi weɪɾəd fəɹ lɔɪəl tə sit hɪmsɛlf ɑn ɪz lɔŋ bɛd, ɝeɪnʒɪŋ ɪz lɛɡz ən ðə teɪlz ə hɪz koʊt tə fɝðɝ əbskjʊɹ ðə blæŋkət-kʌvɝd tʃɛst ʌndɝ ðə bɛd, ðən jæŋkt oʊpən ðə dɔɹ.

A knock on the connecting door to Rand's room froze them all, but Rand was pleased to see that Hurin did not wait to ask permission before picking up his sword. The heron-mark blade was at Rand's waist; going out, he touched its hilt. He waited for Loial to seat himself on his long bed, arranging his legs and the tails of his coat to further obscure the blanket-covered chest under the bed, then yanked open the door.

ði ɪnkipɝ stʊd ðɛɹ, ɹɑkɪŋ wɪð iɡɝnəs ən pʊʃɪŋ ɪz tʃɹeɪ ət ɹænd. tu sil pɑɹtʃməns leɪ ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪ. "fɝɡɪv mi, maɪ lɔɹd," kueɪli sɛd bɹɛθləsli. "aɪ kəd nɑt weɪɾ əntɪl jə keɪm daʊn, ən ðən jə wɝ nɑɾ ɪn jəɹ oʊn ɹum, ən - ænd. . . . fɝɡɪv mi, bʌt. . . ." hi dʒɪɡɡəl ðə tʃɹeɪ.

The innkeeper stood there, rocking with eagerness and pushing his tray at Rand. Two sealed parchments lay on the tray. "Forgive me, my Lord," Cuale said breathlessly. "I could not wait until you came down, and then you were not in your own room, and - and. . . . Forgive me, but. . . ." He jiggled the tray.

ɹænd snætʃt ði ɪnvɪteɪʃənz - ðəɹ hæd bɪn soʊ mɛni - wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ ət ðɛm, tʊk ði ɪnkipɝz ɑɹm, ən tɝn ɪm təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ tə ðə hɔl. "θæŋk ju, mæstɝ kueɪli, fəɹ teɪkɪŋ ðə tʃɹʌbəl. ɪf jəl liv əs əloʊn, naʊ, pliz. . . ."

Rand snatched the invitations - there had been so many - without looking at them, took the innkeeper's arm, and turned him toward the door to the hall. "Thank you, Master Cuale, for taking the trouble. If you'll leave us alone, now, please. . . ."

"bʌt, maɪ lɔɹd," kueɪli pɹətɛstəd, "ðiz ɑɹ fɹəm - "

"But, my Lord," Cuale protested, "these are from - "

"θæŋk ju." ɹænd pʊʃt ðə mæn ɪndə ðə hɔl ən pʊl ðə dɔɹ ʃʌt fɝmli. hi tɔs ðə pɑɹtʃməns ɑntu ðə teɪbəl. "hi hæzən dʌn ðət bɪfɔɹ. lɔɪəl, dʒju θɪŋk i wɑz lɪsnɪŋ ət ðə dɔɹ bɪfɔɹ i nɑkt?"

"Thank you." Rand pushed the man into the hall and pulled the door shut firmly. He tossed the parchments onto the table. "He hasn't done that before. Loial, do you think he was listening at the door before he knocked?"

"ju ɑɹ stɑɹɾɪŋ tə θɪŋk laɪk ðiz kɛɹhinɪn." ði oʊɡiɝ læft, bʌɾ ɪz ɪɹz twɪtʃt θɔtfəli ən i æɾəd, "stɪl, hiz kɛɹhinɪn, soʊ hi meɪ wɛl əv bɪn. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk wi sɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ i ʃəd nɑɾ əv hɝd."

"You are starting to think like these Cairhienin." The Ogier laughed, but his ears twitched thoughtfully and he added, "Still, he is Cairhienin, so he may well have been. I don't think we said anything he should not have heard."

ɹænd tʃɹaɪd tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ. nʌn ə ðɛm hæd mɛnʃən ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, əɹ tʃɹɑləks, əɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. wən i faʊn hɪmsɛlf wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt kueɪli kəd meɪk ʌv wʌt ðeɪ æktʃəli  hæd sɛd, hi ɡeɪv hɪmsɛlf ə ʃeɪk. "ðɪs pleɪs ɪz ɡɛɾɪŋ tə ju, tu," hi mʌɾɝd tə hɪmsɛlf.

Rand tried to remember. None of them had mentioned the Horn of Valere, or Trollocs, or Darkfriends. When he found himself wondering what Cuale could make of what they actually had said, he gave himself a shake. "This place is getting to you, too," he muttered to himself.

"maɪ lɔɹd?" hʊɹɪn hæd pɪkt ʌp ðə sil pɑɹtʃməns ən wɑz ɡeɪzɪŋ waɪd-aɪɾ ət ðə silz. "maɪ lɔɹd, ðiz ɑɹ fɹəm lɔɹd bɑɹθeɪnz, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs dəmədʒɹd, ən fɹʌm" - hɪz vɔɪs dʒɹɑpt wɪð ɑ - "ðə kɪŋ."

"My Lord?" Hurin had picked up the sealed parchments and was gazing wide-eyed at the seals. "My Lord, these are from Lord Barthanes, High Seat of House Damodred, and from" - his voice dropped with awe - "the King."

ɹænd weɪvd əm əweɪ. "ðeɪ stɪl ɡoʊ ɪn ðə faɪɝ laɪk ðə ɹɛst. ənoʊpənd."

Rand waved them away. "They still go in the fire like the rest. Unopened."

"bʌt, maɪ lɔɹd!"

"But, my Lord!"

"hʊɹɪn," ɹænd sɛd peɪʃənli, "ju ən lɔɪəl bɪtwin juv ɪkspleɪn ðɪs ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm tə mi. ɪf aɪ ɡoʊ wɛɹɛvɝ ɪts ðeɪv ɪnvaɪɾəd mi, ðə kɛɹhinɪn wɪl ɹid sʌmθɪŋ ɪndə ɪɾ ən θɪŋk aɪm pɑɹɾ ə sʌmbɑɾiz plɑt. ɪf aɪ doʊnt ɡoʊ, ðəl ɹɛd sʌmθɪŋ ɪndə ðæt. ɪf aɪ sɛn bæk ən ænsɝ, ðəl dɪɡ fəɹ minɪŋ ɪn ɪt, ən ðə seɪm ɪf aɪ doʊn ænsɝ. ən sɪns hæf ə kɛɹhin əpɛɹənli spaɪz ɑn ði ʌðɝ hæf, ɛvɹibɑɾi noʊz wʌɾ aɪ du. aɪ bɝn ðə fɝs tu, ən əl bɝn ðiz, dʒʌs laɪk ɔl ði ʌðɝz." wʌn deɪ ðəɹ hæd bɪn twɛlv ɪn ðə paɪl i tɔst ɪndə ðə kɑmən-ɹum faɪɝpleɪs, silz ənbɹoʊkən. "wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ meɪk ʌv ɪt, ət list ɪts ðə seɪm fəɹ ɛvɹibɑɾi. aɪm nɑt fəɹ ɛniwʌn ɪn kɛɹhin, ən aɪm nɑɾ əɡɛnst ɛniwʌn."

"Hurin," Rand said patiently, "you and Loial between you have explained this Great Game to me. If I go wherever it is they've invited me, the Cairhienin will read something into it and think I am part of somebody's plot. If I don't go, they'll read something into that. If I send back an answer, they will dig for meaning in it, and the same if I don't answer. And since half of Cairhien apparently spies on the other half, everybody knows what I do. I burned the first two, and I will burn these, just like all the others." One day there had been twelve in the pile he tossed into the common-room fireplace, seals unbroken. "Whatever they make of it, at least it's the same for everybody. I am not for anyone in Cairhien, and I am not against anyone."

"aɪ hæv tʃɹaɪd tə tɛl ju," lɔɪəl sɛd, "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ɪt wɝks ðət weɪ. wʌtɛvɝ jə du, kɛɹhinɪn wɪl si səm sɔɹɾ ə plɑɾ ɪn ɪt. ət list, ðəɾ ɪz wʌɾ ɛldɝ heɪmən ɔlweɪz sɛd."

"I have tried to tell you," Loial said, "I don't think it works that way. Whatever you do, Cairhienin will see some sort of plot in it. At least, that is what Elder Haman always said."

hʊɹɪn hɛl ðə sild ɪnvɪteɪʃənz aʊt tə ɹænd əz ɪf ɔfɝɪŋ ɡoʊld. "maɪ lɔɹd, ðɪs wʌn bɛɹz ðə pɝsənəl sil ʌv ɡɔlʒɹiən. hɪz pɝsənəl sil, maɪ lɔɹd. ən ðɪs wʌn ðə pɝsənəl sil ə lɔɹd bɑɹθeɪnz, hu ɪz nɛks tə ðə kɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɪn paʊɝ. maɪ lɔɹd, bɝn ðiz, ən jə meɪk ɛnəmiz əz paʊɝfəl əz jə kən faɪnd. bɝnɪŋ ðɛmz wɝk soʊ fɑɹ kəz ði ʌðɝ haʊsəz ɑɹ ɔl weɪɾɪŋ tə si wʌt jəɹ ʌp tə, ən θɪŋkɪŋ jə mʌst əv paʊɝfəl ælaɪz tə ɹɪsk ɪnsʌltɪŋ ðɛm. bʌt lɔɹd bɑɹθeɪnz - ən ðə kɪŋ! ɪnsəl ðɛm, ən ðəl æk fəɹ ʃʊɹ."

Hurin held the sealed invitations out to Rand as if offering gold. "My Lord, this one bears the personal seal of Galldrian. His personal seal, my Lord. And this one the personal seal of Lord Barthanes, who is next to the King himself in power. My Lord, burn these, and you make enemies as powerful as you can find. Burning them's worked so far because the other Houses are all waiting to see what you're up to, and thinking you must have powerful allies to risk insulting them. But Lord Barthanes - and the King! Insult them, and they'll act for sure."

ɹænd skɹʌbd ɪz hænz θɹu hɪz hɛɹ. "wʌɾ ɪf aɪ ɹɛfjus əm boʊθ?"

Rand scrubbed his hands through his hair. "What if I refuse them both?"

"ɪt woʊnt wɝk, maɪ lɔɹd. ɛvɹi læs haʊs əz sɛn jə ən ɪnvɪteɪʃən, naʊ. ɪf jə dɪklaɪn ðiz - wɛl, fəɹ ʃʊɹ ət list wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ haʊsəz wɪl fɪɡjɝ, ɪf jəɹ nɑɾ əlaɪd wɪð ðə kɪŋ əɹ lɔɹd bɑɹθeɪnz, ðən ðeɪ kən ænsɝ jəɹ ɪnsəlt ə bɝnɪŋ ðɛɹ ɪnvɪteɪʃən. maɪ lɔɹd, aɪ hɪɹ ðə haʊsəz ɪn kɛɹhin jus kɪlɝz, naʊ. ə naɪf ɪn ðə stʃɹit. ən æɹoʊ fɹəm ə ɹuftɑp. pɔɪzən slɪpt ɪn jəɹ waɪn."

"It won't work, my Lord. Every last House has sent you an invitation, now. If you decline these - well, for sure at least one of the other Houses will figure, if you're not allied with the King or Lord Barthanes, then they can answer your insult of burning their invitation. My Lord, I hear the Houses in Cairhien use killers, now. A knife in the street. An arrow from a rooftop. Poison slipped in your wine."

"ju kəɾ æksɛpt əm boʊθ," lɔɪəl sədʒɛstəd. "aɪ noʊ jə doʊnt wɑn tə, ɹænd, bʌɾ ɪt maɪɾ ivən bi fʌn. ən ivnɪŋ əɾ ə lɔɹdz mænɝ, əɹ ivən ət ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs. ɹænd, ðə ʃaɪnɝənz bɪlivd ɪn ju."

"You could accept them both," Loial suggested. "I know you don't want to, Rand, but it might even be fun. An evening at a lord's manor, or even at the Royal Palace. Rand, the Shienarans believed in you."

ɹænd ɡɹɪməst. hi nu ɪt hæd bɪn tʃæns ðət ðə ʃaɪnɝənz θɔɾ i wɑz ə lɔɹd; ə tʃæns laɪknəs ə neɪmz, ə ɹumɝ əmʌŋ ðə sɝvəns, ən mɔɪɹeɪn ən ði æmɪɝlɪn stɝɪŋ ɪɾ ɔl. bʌt səlin hæd bɪlivd ɪt, tu. meɪbi ʃɪl bi ət wʌn ə ðiz.

Rand grimaced. He knew it had been chance that the Shienarans thought he was a lord; a chance likeness of names, a rumor among the servants, and Moiraine and the Amyrlin stirring it all. But Selene had believed it, too. Maybe she'll be at one of these.

hʊɹɪn wɑz ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd vaɪələnli, ðoʊ. "bɪldɝ, jə doʊnt noʊ deɪz deɪmɑɹ əz wɛl əz jə θɪŋk jə du. nɑt ðə weɪ ðeɪ pleɪ ɪɾ ɪn kɛɹhin, nɑt naʊ. wɪð moʊs haʊzɪz, ɪt wʊdn mæɾɝ. ivən wən ðəɹ plɑɾɪŋ əɡɛnst itʃ ʌðɝ tə ðə naɪf, ðeɪ æk laɪk ðeɪ ɑɹənt, aʊt wɛɹ ɛvɹibɑɾi kən si. bʌt nɑt ðiz tu. haʊs dəmədʒɹd hɛl ðə θɹoʊn əntɪl leɪmən lɔst ɪt, ən ðeɪ wɑn ɪt bæk. ðə kɪŋ wəd kɹʌʃ ðɛm, ɪf ðeɪ wɝnt nɪɹli əz paʊɝfəl əz i ɪz. jə kæn faɪn bɪɾɝɝ ɹaɪvəlz ðən haʊs ɹieɪɾən ən haʊs dəmədʒɹd. ɪf maɪ lɔɹɾ æksɛps boʊθ, boʊθ haʊsəz wɪl noʊ ɪɾ əz sun əz i sɛnz ɪz ænsɝz, ən ðəl boʊθ θɪŋk hiz pɑɹɾ ə səm plɑt baɪ ði ʌðɝ əɡɛns ðɛm. ðəl juz ðə naɪf ən ðə pɔɪzən əz kwɪk əz lʊk ət ju."

Hurin was shaking his head violently, though. "Builder, you don't know Daes Dae'mar as well as you think you do. Not the way they play it in Cairhien, not now. With most Houses, it wouldn't matter. Even when they're plotting against each other to the knife, they act like they aren't, out where everybody can see. But not these two. House Damodred held the throne until Laman lost it, and they want it back. The King would crush them, if they weren't nearly as powerful as he is. You can't find bitterer rivals than House Riatin and House Damodred. If my Lord accepts both, both Houses will know it as soon as he sends his answers, and they'll both think he's part of some plot by the other against them. They'll use the knife and the poison as quick as look at you."

"æn aɪ səpoʊz," ɹænd ɡɹaʊld, "ɪf aɪ oʊnli æksɛpt wʌn, ði ʌðɝ wɪl θɪŋk aɪm əlaɪd wɪð ðət haʊs." hʊɹɪn nɑɾəd. "æn ðəl pɹɑbli tʃɹaɪ tə kɪl mi tə stɑp wʌtɛvɝ aɪm ɪnvɑlvd ɪn." hʊɹɪn nɑɾəd əɡɛn. "ðɛn juv ɛni sədʒɛstʃən əz tə haʊ aɪ əvɔɪɾ ɛni ʌv əm wɑntɪŋ tə si mi dɛd?" hʊɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ wɪʃ aɪd nɛvɝ bɝn ðoʊz fɝs tu."

"And I suppose," Rand growled, "if I only accept one, the other will think I'm allied with that House." Hurin nodded. "And they will probably try to kill me to stop whatever I'm involved in." Hurin nodded again. "Then do you have any suggestion as to how I avoid any of them wanting to see me dead?" Hurin shook his head. "I wish I'd never burned those first two."

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd. bʌɾ ɪt wʊdn əv meɪd mʌtʃ dɪfɝəns, aɪm ɡɛsɪŋ. huɛvɝ jə æksɛptɪɾ əɹ ɹɪdʒɛktɪd, ðiz kɛɹhinɪn wəd si sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ɪt."

"Yes, my Lord. But it wouldn't have made much difference, I'm guessing. Whoever you accepted or rejected, these Cairhienin would see something in it."

ɹænd hɛld aʊɾ ɪz hænd, ən hʊɹɪn leɪd ðə tu foʊldəd pɑɹtʃməns ɪn ɪt. ðə wʌn wɑz sild, nɑt wɪð ðə tʃɹi ən kɹaʊn ə haʊs dəmədʒɹd, bʌt wɪð bɑɹθeɪnzəz tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ bɔɹ. ði ʌðɝ bɔɹ ɡɔlʒɹiənz stæɡ. pɝsənəl silz. əpɛɹənli hi hæd mænədʒ tə ɹaʊs ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ðə haɪəs kɔɹɾɝz baɪ duɪŋ nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl.

Rand held out his hand, and Hurin laid the two folded parchments in it. The one was sealed, not with the Tree and Crown of House Damodred, but with Barthanes's Charging Boar. The other bore Galldrian's Stag. Personal seals. Apparently he had managed to rouse interest in the highest quarters by doing nothing at all.

"ðiz pipəl ɑɹ kɹeɪzi," hi sɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə θɪŋk ʌv ə weɪ aʊɾ ə ðɪs.

"These people are crazy," he said, trying to think of a way out of this.

"jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd."

"Yes, my Lord."

"aɪ wɪl lɛɾ əm si mi ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum wɪð ðiz," hi sɛd sloʊli. wʌtɛvɝ wɑz sin ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum ət mɪddeɪ wɑz noʊn ɪn tɛn haʊsəz bɪfɔɹ naɪtfɔl, ən ɪn ɔl ə ðɛm baɪ deɪbɹeɪk nɛkst. "aɪ woʊn bɹeɪk ðə silz. ðət weɪ, ðəl noʊ aɪ hæv nɑɾ ænsɝɾ iðɝ wʌn jɛt. əz lɔŋ əz ðeɪ ɑɹ weɪɾɪŋ tə si wɪtʃ weɪ aɪ dʒʌmp, meɪbi aɪ kən ɝn ə fju mɔɹ deɪz. ɪŋtʃɹ əz tə kʌm sun. hiz tə."

"I will let them see me in the common room with these," he said slowly. Whatever was seen in the common room at midday was known in ten Houses before nightfall, and in all of them by daybreak next. "I won't break the seals. That way, they will know I have not answered either one yet. As long as they are waiting to see which way I jump, maybe I can earn a few more days. Ingtar has to come soon. He has to."

"naʊ ðəɾ ɪz θɪŋkɪŋ laɪk ə kɛɹhinɪn, maɪ lɔɹd," hʊɹɪn sɛd, ɡɹɪnɪŋ.

"Now that is thinking like a Cairhienin, my Lord," Hurin said, grinning.

ɹænd ɡeɪv ɪm ə saʊɝ lʊk, ðən stʌf ðə pɑɹtʃməns ɪndə hɪz pɑkəɾ ɑn tɑp ə səlinz lɛɾɝz. "lɛts ɡoʊ, lɔɪəl. meɪbi ɪŋtʃɹ əz ɝaɪvd."

Rand gave him a sour look, then stuffed the parchments into his pocket on top of Selene's letters. "Let's go, Loial. Maybe Ingtar has arrived."

wən i ən lɔɪəl ɹitʃt ðə kɑmən ɹum, noʊ mæn ən wʊmən ɪn ɪt lʊkt ət ɹænd. kueɪli wɑz pɑlɪʃɪŋ ə sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ əz ɪf ɪz laɪf dɪpɛndəɾ ɑn ɪts ɡlim. ðə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz hɝid bɪtwin ðə teɪbəlz əz ɪf ɹænd ən ði oʊɡiɝ dɪd nɑɾ ɪɡzɪst. ɛvɹi læs pɝsən ət ðə teɪbəlz stɛɹɾ ɪndə hɪz əɹ əɹ mʌɡ əz ɪf ðə sikɹəts ə paʊɝ leɪ ɪn waɪn əɹ eɪl. nɑt wʌn ə ðɛm sɛɾ ə wɝd.

When he and Loial reached the common room, no man and woman in it looked at Rand. Cuale was polishing a silver tray as if his life depended on its gleam. The serving girls hurried between the tables as if Rand and the Ogier did not exist. Every last person at the tables stared into his or her mug as if the secrets of power lay in wine or ale. Not one of them said a word.

æftɝ ə moʊmənt, hi pʊl ðə tu ɪnvɪteɪʃənz fɹəm ɪz pɑkəɾ ən stʌɾid ðə silz, ðən stʌk əm bæk. kueɪli ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl dʒʌmp əz ɹænd stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ. bɪfɔɹ ɪt kloʊz bɪhaɪn hɪm, hi hɝd kɑnvɝseɪʃən spɹɪŋ ʌp əɡɛn.

After a moment, he pulled the two invitations from his pocket and studied the seals, then stuck them back. Cuale gave a little jump as Rand started for the door. Before it closed behind him, he heard conversation spring up again.

ɹænd stʃɹoʊd daʊn ðə stʃɹit soʊ fæs ðət lɔɪəl dɪd nɑɾ əv tə ʃɔɹɾən ɪz stʃɹaɪd tə steɪ bɪsaɪd hɪm. "wi hæv tə faɪn ə weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi, lɔɪəl. ðɪs tʃɹɪk wɪð ði ɪnvɪteɪʃənz kænt wɝk mɔɹ ðən tu əɹ θɹi deɪz. ɪf ɪŋtʃɹ dʌzn kʌm baɪ ðɛn, wi mʌs liv ɛniweɪ."

Rand strode down the street so fast that Loial did not have to shorten his stride to stay beside him. "We have to find a way out of the city, Loial. This trick with the invitations can't work more than two or three days. If Ingtar doesn't come by then, we must leave anyway."

"əɡɹid," lɔɪəl sɛd.

"Agreed," Loial said.

"bʌt haʊ?"

"But how?"

lɔɪəl bɪɡæn tɪkɪŋ ɔf pɔɪns ɑn ɪz θɪk fɪŋɡɝz. "feɪn ɪz aʊt ðɛɹ, əɹ ðəɹ wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn tʃɹɑləks ɪn ðə fɔɹɡeɪt. ɪf wi ɹaɪɾ aʊt, ðəl bi ɑn əs əz sun əz wəɹ aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ə ðə sɪɾi. ɪf wi tʃɹævəl wɪð ə mɝtʃən tʃɹeɪn, ðəl sɝɾənli ətæk ɪt." noʊ mɝtʃənt wəɾ əv mɔɹ ðən faɪv əɹ sɪks ɡɑɹdz, ən ðeɪ wəd pɹɑbli ɹʌn əz sun əz ðeɪ sɔ ə tʃɹɑlɑk. "ɪf oʊnli wi nu haʊ mɛni tʃɹɑləks feɪn hæz, ən haʊ mɛni dɑɹkfɹɛnz. juv kʌɾ ɪz nʌmbɝz daʊn." hi dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən ðə tʃɹɑlɑk i hæd kɪld, bʌt fɹəm ɪz fɹaʊn, hɪz lɔŋ aɪbɹaʊz hæŋɪŋ daʊn ɑntu hɪz tʃiks, hi wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɪt.

Loial began ticking off points on his thick fingers. "Fain is out there, or there would not have been Trollocs in the Foregate. If we ride out, they will be on us as soon as we are out of sight of the city. If we travel with a merchant train, they'll certainly attack it." No merchant would have more than five or six guards, and they would probably run as soon as they saw a Trolloc. "If only we knew how many Trollocs Fain has, and how many Darkfriends. You have cut his numbers down." He did not mention the Trolloc he had killed, but from his frown, his long eyebrows hanging down onto his cheeks, he was thinking of it.

"ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ haʊ mɛni hi hæz," ɹænd sɛd. "tɛn ɑɹ əz bæɾ əz ə hʌnʒɹəd. ɪf tɛn tʃɹɑləks ətæk ʌs, aɪ doʊn θɪŋk wɪl ɡɛɾ əweɪ əɡɛn." hi əvɔɪɾəd θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðə weɪ hi maɪt, dʒʌs maɪt, dil wɪð tɛn tʃɹɑləks. ɪt hæd nɑt wɝkt wən i tʃɹaɪd tə hɛlp lɔɪəl, æftɝ ɔl.

"It doesn't matter how many he has," Rand said. "Ten are as bad as a hundred. If ten Trollocs attack us, I don't think we'll get away again." He avoided thinking of the way he might, just might, deal with ten Trollocs. It had not worked when he tried to help Loial, after all.

"aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk wi kʊd, iðɝ. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk wɪv mʌni tə teɪk pæsədʒ vɛɹi fɑɹ, bʌɾ ivən soʊ, ɪf wi tʃɹaɪd tə ɹitʃ ðə fɔɹɡeɪt dɑks - wɛl, feɪn mʌst əv dɑɹkfɹɛnz wɑtʃɪŋ. ɪf i θɔt wi wɝ teɪkɪŋ ʃɪp, aɪ doʊn bɪliv i wəd kɛɹ u sɔ ðə tʃɹɑləks. ivən ɪf wi fɔt fɹi ʌv əm sʌmhaʊ, wi wəɾ əv tə ɪkspleɪn aʊɝsɛlvz tə ðə sɪɾi ɡɑɹdz, ən ðeɪ wəd sɝɾənli nɑt bɪliv wi kænɑɾ oʊpən ðə tʃɛst, soʊ - "

"I do not think we could, either. I don't think we have money to take passage very far, but even so, if we tried to reach the Foregate docks - well, Fain must have Darkfriends watching. If he thought we were taking ship, I don't believe he would care who saw the Trollocs. Even if we fought free of them somehow, we would have to explain ourselves to the city guards, and they would certainly not believe we cannot open the chest, so - "

"wi ɑɹ nɑt lɛɾɪŋ ɛni kɛɹhinɪn si ðət tʃɛst, lɔɪəl."

"We are not letting any Cairhienin see that chest, Loial."

ði oʊɡiɝ nɑɾəd. "æn ðə sɪɾi dɑks ɑɹ noʊ ɡʊd, iðɝ." ðə sɪɾi dɑks wɝ ɹɪzɝv fəɹ ðə ɡɹeɪn bɑɹdʒəz ən ðə plɛʒɝ kɹæft ə ðə lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz. noʊ wʌn keɪm tə ðɛm wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən. wʌn kəd lʊk daʊn ɑn əm fɹəm ðə wɔl, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə dʒɹɑp ðət wəd bɹeɪk ivən lɔɪəlz nɛk. lɔɪəl wɪɡɡəld ɪz θʌm əz ɪf tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə θɪŋk ʌv ə pɔɪn fəɹ ðæt, tu. "aɪ səpoʊz ɪts tu bæd wi kænɑt ɹitʃ stɛɾɪŋ tsəfu. tʃɹɑləks wəd nɛvɝ kʌm ɪndə ə stɛɾɪŋ. bʌɾ aɪ doʊn səpoʊz ðeɪ wəd lɛɾ əs ɡɛt ðət fɑɹ wɪθaʊɾ ətækɪŋ."

The Ogier nodded. "And the city docks are no good, either." The city docks were reserved for the grain barges and the pleasure craft of the lords and ladies. No one came to them without permission. One could look down on them from the wall, but it was a drop that would break even Loial's neck. Loial wiggled his thumb as if trying to think of a point for that, too. "I suppose it is too bad we cannot reach Stedding Tsofu. Trollocs would never come into a stedding. But I don't suppose they would let us get that far without attacking."

ɹænd dɪd nɑɾ ænsɝ. ðeɪ hæd ɹitʃt ðə bɪɡ ɡɑɹdhaʊs dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə ɡeɪt baɪ wɪtʃ ðeɪ hæd fɝst ɛntɝd kɛɹhin. aʊtsaɪd, ðə fɔɹɡeɪt timd ən mɪld, ən ə pɛɹ ʌv ɡɑɹdz kɛpt wɑtʃ ɑn ðɛm. ɹænd θɔɾ ə mæn, dʒɹɛst ɪn wʌt hæd wʌns bɪn ɡʊd ʃaɪnɝən kloʊðz, dʌk bæk ɪndə ðə kɹaʊɾ ət ðə saɪɾ ə hɪm, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt bi ʃʊɹ. ðəɹ wɝ tu mɛni pipəl ɪn kloʊðz fɹəm tu mɛni lænz, ɔl ə ðɛm hɝiɪŋ. hi wɛn ʌp ðə stɛps ɪndə ðə ɡɑɹdhaʊs, pæs bɹɛstpleɪɾɪd ɡɑɹdz ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə dɔɹ.

Rand did not answer. They had reached the big guardhouse just inside the gate by which they had first entered Cairhien. Outside, the Foregate teemed and milled, and a pair of guards kept watch on them. Rand thought a man, dressed in what had once been good Shienaran clothes, ducked back into the crowd at the sight of him, but he could not be sure. There were too many people in clothes from too many lands, all of them hurrying. He went up the steps into the guardhouse, past breastplated guards on either side of the door.

ðə lɑɹdʒ æntəɹum hæd hɑɹd wʊɾən bɛntʃɪz fəɹ pipəl wɪð bɪznəs ðɛɹ, meɪnli foʊk weɪɾɪŋ wɪð ə hʌmbəl peɪʃəns, wɛɹɪŋ ðə pleɪn, dɑɹk ɡɑɹməns ðət mɑɹk ðə pʊɹɝ kɑmənɝz. ðəɹ wɝ ə fju fɔɹɡeɪɾɝz əmʌŋ ðɛm, pɪkt aʊt baɪ ʃæbaɪnəs ən bɹaɪt kʌlɝz, noʊ daʊt hoʊpɪŋ fəɹ pɝmɪʃən tə sik wɝk ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz.

The large anteroom had hard wooden benches for people with business there, mainly folk waiting with a humble patience, wearing the plain, dark garments that marked the poorer commoners. There were a few Foregaters among them, picked out by shabbiness and bright colors, no doubt hoping for permission to seek work inside the walls.

ɹænd wɛn stʃɹeɪt tə ðə lɔŋ teɪbəl ɪn ðə bæk ə ðə ɹum. ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn mæn siɾəd bɪhaɪn ɪt, nɑɾ ə soʊlʒɝ, wɪð wʌn ɡɹin bɑɹ əkɹɔs ɪz koʊt. ə plʌmp fɛloʊ huz skɪn lʊk tu taɪt, hi ədʒʌstəd dɑkjəməns ɑn ðə teɪbəl ən ʃɪftəd ðə pəzɪʃən ə hɪz ɪŋkwɛl twaɪs bɪfɔɹ lʊkɪŋ ʌp ət ɹænd ən lɔɪəl wɪð ə fɔls smaɪl.

Rand went straight to the long table in the back of the room. There was only one man seated behind it, not a soldier, with one green bar across his coat. A plump fellow whose skin looked too tight, he adjusted documents on the table and shifted the position of his inkwell twice before looking up at Rand and Loial with a false smile.

"haʊ meɪ aɪ hɛlp ju, maɪ lɔɹd?"

"How may I help you, my Lord?"

"ðə seɪm weɪ aɪ hoʊp jə kəd hɛlp mi jɛstɝdeɪ," ɹænd sɛd wɪð mɔɹ peɪʃəns ðən i fɛlt, "æn ðə deɪ bɪfɔɹ, ən ðə deɪ bɪfɔɹ ðæt. hæz lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ kʌm?"

"The same way I hoped you could help me yesterday," Rand said with more patience than he felt, "and the day before, and the day before that. Has Lord Ingtar come?"

"lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ, maɪ lɔɹd?"

"Lord Ingtar, my Lord?"

ɹænd tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən lɛɾ ɪɾ aʊt sloʊli. "lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ ə haʊs ʃɪnoʊwə, fɹəm ʃaɪnɝ. ðə seɪm mæn aɪ hæv æskt æftɝ ɛvɹi deɪ aɪv kʌm hɪɹ."

Rand took a deep breath and let it out slowly. "Lord Ingtar of House Shinowa, from Shienar. The same man I have asked after every day I've come here."

"noʊ wʌn ə ðət neɪm əz ɛntɝd ðə sɪɾi, maɪ lɔɹd."

"No one of that name has entered the city, my Lord."

"ɑɹ jə sɝɾən? doʊn jə nid tə lʊk ət jəɹ lɪsts, ət list?"

"Are you certain? Don't you need to look at your lists, at least?"

"maɪ lɔɹd, ðə lɪsts ə fɔɹənɝz u hæv kʌm tə kɛɹhin ɑɹ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd əmʌŋ ðə ɡɑɹdhaʊsɪz ət sʌnɹaɪz ən ət sʌnsɛt, ən aɪ ɪɡzæmɪn əm əz sun əz ðeɪ kʌm bɪfɔɹ mi. noʊ ʃaɪnɝən lɔɹɾ əz ɛntɝd kɛɹhin ɪn səm taɪm."

"My Lord, the lists of foreigners who have come to Cairhien are exchanged among the guardhouses at sunrise and at sunset, and I examine them as soon as they come before me. No Shienaran lord has entered Cairhien in some time."

"æn ðə leɪɾi səlin? bɪfɔɹ jə æsk əɡɛn, aɪ də nɑt noʊ hɝ haʊs. bʌɾ aɪv ɡɪvən jə hɝ neɪm, ən aɪ hæv dɪskɹaɪbd əɹ tə jə θɹi taɪmz. ɪzən ðəɾ ɪnʌf?"

"And the Lady Selene? Before you ask again, I do not know her House. But I've given you her name, and I have described her to you three times. Isn't that enough?"

ðə mæn spɹɛɾ ɪz hænz. "aɪ æm sɑɹi, maɪ lɔɹd. nɑt noʊɪŋ əɹ haʊs meɪks ɪt vɛɹi dɪfəkəlt." hi hæɾ ə blæn lʊk ɑn ɪz feɪs. ɹænd wʌndɝd wɛðɝ i wəd tɛl ivən ɪf i nu.

The man spread his hands. "I am sorry, my Lord. Not knowing her House makes it very difficult." He had a bland look on his face. Rand wondered whether he would tell even if he knew.

ə muvmən ət wʌn ə ðə dɔɹz bɪhaɪn ðə dɛsk kɑt ɹændz aɪ - ə mæn stɑɹɾɪŋ tə stɛp ɪndə ði æntəɹum, ðən tɝnɪŋ əweɪ hɝidli. "pɝhæps kæptən kɔldɛvwɪn kən hɛlp mi," ɹænd toʊl ðə klɝk.

A movement at one of the doors behind the desk caught Rand's eye - a man starting to step into the anteroom, then turning away hurriedly. "Perhaps Captain Caldevwin can help me," Rand told the clerk.

"kæptən kɔldɛvwɪn, maɪ lɔɹd?"

"Captain Caldevwin, my Lord?"

"aɪ dʒʌst sɔ hɪm bɪhaɪn ju."

"I just saw him behind you."

"aɪ æm sɑɹi, maɪ lɔɹd. ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ə kæptən kɔldɛvwɪn ɪn ðə ɡɑɹdhaʊs, aɪ wəd noʊ."

"I am sorry, my Lord. If there was a Captain Caldevwin in the guardhouse, I would know."

ɹænd stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm əntɪl lɔɪəl tʌtʃt ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "ɹænd, aɪ θɪŋk wi maɪɾ əz wɛl ɡoʊ."

Rand stared at him until Loial touched his shoulder. "Rand, I think we might as well go."

"θæŋk jə fəɹ jəɹ hɛlp," ɹænd sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs. "aɪ wɪl ɹɪtɝn təmɑɹoʊ."

"Thank you for your help," Rand said in a tight voice. "I will return tomorrow."

"ɪɾ ɪz maɪ plɛʒɝ tə də wʌɾ aɪ meɪ," ðə mæn sɛd wɪð ɪz fɔls smaɪl.

"It is my pleasure to do what I may," the man said with his false smile.

ɹænd stɔkt aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɑɹdhaʊs soʊ fæs ðət lɔɪəl hæd tə hɝi tə kætʃ ɪm ʌp ɪn ðə stʃɹit. "hi wɑz laɪɪŋ, jə noʊ, lɔɪəl." hi dɪd nɑt sloʊ daʊn, bʌt ɹæðɝ hɝiɾ əlɔŋ əz ɪf i kəd bɝn əweɪ səm ə hɪz fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən θɹu fɪzɪkəl ɪɡzɝʃən. "kɔldɛvwɪn wɑz ðɛɹ. hi kəd bi laɪɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɔl ʌv ɪt. ɪŋtʃɹ kəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bi hɪɹ, lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ʌs. əl bɛɾ i noʊz u səlin ɪz, tu."

Rand stalked out of the guardhouse so fast that Loial had to hurry to catch him up in the street. "He was lying, you know, Loial." He did not slow down, but rather hurried along as if he could burn away some of his frustration through physical exertion. "Caldevwin was there. He could be lying about all of it. Ingtar could already be here, looking for us. I'll bet he knows who Selene is, too."

"pɝhæps, ɹænd. deɪz deɪmɑɹ - "

"Perhaps, Rand. Daes Dae'mar - "

"laɪt, aɪm taɪɝɾ ə hɪɹɪŋ əbaʊt ðə ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm. aɪ doʊnt wɑnə pleɪ ɪt. aɪ də nɑt wɑnə bi ɛni pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt." lɔɪəl wɔk bɪsaɪd hɪm, seɪɪŋ nʌθɪŋ. "aɪ noʊ," ɹænd sɛɾ ət læst. "ðeɪ θɪŋk ɪm ə lɔɹd, ən ɪn kɛɹhin, ivən aʊtlæn lɔɹdz ɑɹ pɑɹɾ ə ðə ɡeɪm. aɪ wɪʃ aɪd nɛvɝ pʊɾ ɑn ðɪs koʊt." mɔɪɹeɪn, hi θɔt bɪɾɝli. ʃiz stɪl kɑzɪŋ mi tʃɹʌbəl. ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli, ðoʊ, ɪf ɹɪlʌktənli, hi ədmɪɾəd ðət ʃi kəd hɑɹdli bi bleɪm fəɹ ðɪs. ðəɹ hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn səm ɹizən tə pɹitɛn tə bi wʌɾ i wɑz nɑt. fɝs kipɪŋ hʊɹɪnz spɪɹəts ʌp, ən ðən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪmpɹɛs səlin. æftɝ səlin, ðəɹ hæd nɑt sim tə bi ɛni weɪ aʊɾ ʌv ɪt. hɪz stɛps sloʊɾ əntɪl i keɪm tə ə hɔlt. "wɛn mɔɪɹeɪn lemi ɡoʊ, aɪ θɔt θɪŋz wəd bi sɪmpəl əɡɛn. ivən tʃeɪsɪŋ æftɝ ðə hɔɹn, ivən wɪð - wɪð ɛvɹiθɪŋ, aɪ θɔɾ ɪt wəd bi sɪmpəl." ivən wɪð seɪɾɪn ɪnsaɪd jəɹ hɛd? "laɪt, wʌɾ aɪ wʊdnt ɡɪv tə hæv ɛvɹiθɪŋ bi sɪmpəl əɡɛn."

"Light, I'm tired of hearing about the Great Game. I don't want to play it. I do not want to be any part of it." Loial walked beside him, saying nothing. "I know," Rand said at last. "They think I'm a lord, and in Cairhien, even outland lords are part of the Game. I wish I'd never put on this coat." Moiraine, he thought bitterly. She's still causing me trouble. Almost immediately, though, if reluctantly, he admitted that she could hardly be blamed for this. There had always been some reason to pretend to be what he was not. First keeping Hurin's spirits up, and then trying to impress Selene. After Selene, there had not seemed to be any way out of it. His steps slowed until he came to a halt. "When Moiraine let me go, I thought things would be simple again. Even chasing after the Horn, even with - with everything, I thought it would be simple." Even with saidin inside your head? "Light, what I wouldn't give to have everything be simple again."

"tɑvɝən," lɔɪəl bɪɡæn.

"Ta'veren," Loial began.

"aɪ də nɑt wɑnə hɪɹ əbaʊt ðæt, iðɝ." ɹænd stɑɹɾəd ɔf əɡɛn əz fæst əz bɪfɔɹ. "ɔl aɪ wɑn ɪz tə ɡɪv ðə dæɡɝ tə mæt, ən ðə hɔɹn tə ɪŋtʃɹ." ðən wʌt? ɡoʊ mæd? daɪ? ɪf aɪ daɪ bɪfɔɹ aɪ ɡoʊ mæd, ət list aɪ woʊn hɝɾ ɛnibəɾi ɛls. bʌɾ aɪ doʊnt wɑnə daɪ, iðɝ. læn kən tɔk əbaʊt ʃiðɪŋ ðə sɔɹd, bʌɾ ɪm ə ʃɛpɝd, nɑɾ ə wɔɹɾɝ. "ɪf aɪ kən dʒʌs nɑt tʌtʃ ɪt," hi mʌɾɝd, "meɪbi aɪ kæn. . . . oʊɪn ɔlmoʊs meɪɾ ɪt."

"I do not want to hear about that, either." Rand started off again as fast as before. "All I want is to give the dagger to Mat, and the Horn to Ingtar." Then what? Go mad? Die? If I die before I go mad, at least I won't hurt anybody else. But I don't want to die, either. Lan can talk about Sheathing the Sword, but I'm a shepherd, not a Warder. "If I can just not touch it," he muttered, "maybe I can. . . . Owyn almost made it."

"wʌt, ɹænd? aɪ dɪdn hɪɹ ðæt."

"What, Rand? I didn't hear that."

"ɪt wɑz nʌθɪŋ," ɹænd sɛd wɛɹəli. "aɪ wɪʃ ɪŋtʃɹ wəd ɡɛt hɪɹ. ən mæt, ən pɛɹɪn."

"It was nothing," Rand said wearily. "I wish Ingtar would get here. And Mat, and Perrin."

ðeɪ wɔkt əlɔŋ ɪn saɪləns fəɹ ə taɪm, wɪð ɹænd lɔst ɪn θɔt. tɑmz nɛfju hæd læstəɾ ɔlmoʊs θɹi jɪɹz baɪ tʃænəlɪŋ oʊnli wən i θɔɾ i hæd tə. ɪf oʊɪn hæd mænədʒ tə lɪmət haʊ ɔfən i tʃænəld, ɪt mʌs bi pɑsəbəl tə nɑt tʃænəl əɾ ɔl, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ sɪdʌktɪv seɪɾɪn wɑz.

They walked along in silence for a time, with Rand lost in thought. Thom's nephew had lasted almost three years by channeling only when he thought he had to. If Owyn had managed to limit how often he channeled, it must be possible to not channel at all, no matter how seductive saidin was.

"ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd, "ðɛɹz ə faɪɝ ʌp əhɛd."

"Rand," Loial said, "there's a fire up ahead."

ɹænd ɡɑt ɹɪɾ ə hɪz ənwɛlkəm θɔts ən lʊkt ɔf ɪndə ðə sɪɾi, fɹaʊnɪŋ. ə θɪk kɑləm ə blæk smoʊk bɪloʊɾ ʌp əbʌv ðə ɹuftɑps. hi kəd nɑt si wʌt leɪ ət ðə beɪs ʌv ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz tu kloʊz tə ði ɪn.

Rand got rid of his unwelcome thoughts and looked off into the city, frowning. A thick column of black smoke billowed up above the rooftops. He could not see what lay at the base of it, but it was too close to the inn.

"dɑɹkfɹɛnz," hi sɛd, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə smoʊk. "tʃɹɑləks kæn kʌm ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz wɪθaʊt biɪŋ sin, bʌt dɑɹkfɹɛnz. . . . hʊɹɪn!" hi bɹoʊk ɪndə ə ɹʌn, lɔɪəl izəli kipɪŋ peɪs bɪsaɪd hɪm.

"Darkfriends," he said, staring at the smoke. "Trollocs can't come inside the walls without being seen, but Darkfriends. . . . Hurin!" He broke into a run, Loial easily keeping pace beside him.

ðə kloʊsɝ ðeɪ keɪm, ðə mɔɹ sɝɾən ɪt wɑz, əntɪl ðeɪ ɹaʊndəd ðə læst stoʊn-tɛɹəs kɔɹnɝ ən ðəɹ wɑz ðə dɪfɛndɝ ə ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl, smoʊk pɔɹɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ɪts ʌpɝ wɪndoʊz ən fleɪmz bɹeɪkɪŋ θɹu ðə ɹuf. ə kɹaʊd hæd ɡæðɝɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ɪn. kueɪli, ʃaʊɾɪŋ ən dʒʌmpɪŋ əbaʊt, wɑz dɝɛktɪŋ mɛn kæɹiɪŋ fɝnɪʃɪŋz aʊɾ ɪndə ðə stʃɹit. ə dʌbəl laɪn ə mɛn pæst ɪnsaɪd bʌkəts fɪld wɪð wɔɾɝ fɹəm ə wɛl daʊn ðə stʃɹiɾ ən ɛmpti bʌkəts bæk aʊt. moʊst ə ðə pipəl oʊnli stʊɾ ən wɑtʃt; ə nu ɡaʊɾ ə fleɪm bɝs θɹu ðə sleɪt ɹuf, ən ðeɪ ɡeɪv ə laʊɾ ɑə.

The closer they came, the more certain it was, until they rounded the last stone-terraced corner and there was The Defender of the Dragonwall, smoke pouring out of its upper windows and flames breaking through the roof. A crowd had gathered in front of the inn. Cuale, shouting and jumping about, was directing men carrying furnishings out into the street. A double line of men passed inside buckets filled with water from a well down the street and empty buckets back out. Most of the people only stood and watched; a new gout of flame burst through the slate roof, and they gave a loud aaaah.

ɹænd pʊʃt θɹu ðə kɹaʊd tə ði ɪnkipɝ. "wɛɹ ɪz hʊɹɪn?"

Rand pushed through the crowd to the innkeeper. "Where is Hurin?"

"kɛɹfəl wɪð ðət teɪbəl!" kueɪli ʃaʊɾəd. "du nɑt skɹeɪp ɪt!" hi lʊkt ət ɹænd ən blɪŋkt. hɪz feɪs wɑz smʌdʒd wɪð smoʊk. "maɪ lɔɹd? hu? jəɹ mænsɝvənt? aɪ də nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ siɪŋ hɪm, maɪ lɔɹd. noʊ daʊɾ i wɛn aʊt. də nɑt dʒɹɑp ðoʊz kændəlstɪks, ful! ðeɪ ɑɹ sɪlvɝ!" kueɪli dænst ɔf tə hɝæŋ ðə mɛn lʌɡɪŋ ɪz bɪlɔŋɪŋz aʊɾ ə ði ɪn.

"Careful with that table!" Cuale shouted. "Do not scrape it!" He looked at Rand and blinked. His face was smudged with smoke. "My Lord? Who? Your manservant? I do not remember seeing him, my Lord. No doubt he went out. Do not drop those candlesticks, fool! They are silver!" Cuale danced off to harangue the men lugging his belongings out of the inn.

"hʊɹɪn wʊdn əv ɡɔn aʊt," lɔɪəl sɛd. "hi wəd nɑɾ əv lɛf ðə. . . ." hi lʊkt ɝaʊn ən lɛft ɪɾ ənsɛd; səm ə ði ɔnlʊkɝz sim tə faɪn ən oʊɡiɝ əz ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ əz ðə faɪɝ.

"Hurin wouldn't have gone out," Loial said. "He would not have left the. . . ." He looked around and left it unsaid; some of the onlookers seemed to find an Ogier as interesting as the fire.

"aɪ noʊ," ɹænd sɛd, ən plʌnʒd ɪndə ði ɪn.

"I know," Rand said, and plunged into the inn.

ðə kɑmən ɹum hɑɹdli simd əz ɪf ðə bɪldɪŋ wɝ ɑn faɪɝ. ðə dʌbəl laɪn ə mɛn stʃɹɛtʃt ʌp ðə stɛɹz, pæsɪŋ ðɛɹ bʌkəts, ən ʌðɝz skɹæmbəl tə kæɹi aʊt wʌt fɝnɪtʃɝ wɑz lɛft, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɔɹ smoʊk daʊn hɪɹ ðən ɪf sʌmθɪŋ hæd bɪn bɝnɪŋ ðə kɪtʃən. əz ɹænd pɹɛst əpstɛɹz, ɪt bɪɡæn tə θɪkən. kɑfɪŋ, hi ɹæn ʌp ðə stɛps.

The common room hardly seemed as if the building were on fire. The double line of men stretched up the stairs, passing their buckets, and others scrambled to carry out what furniture was left, but there was no more smoke down here than if something had been burning the kitchen. As Rand pressed upstairs, it began to thicken. Coughing, he ran up the steps.

ðə laɪnz stɑpt ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə sɛkən lændɪŋ, mɛn hæfweɪ ʌp ðə stɛɹz hɝlɪŋ ðɛɹ wɔɾɝ ʌp ɪndə ə smoʊk-fɪl hɔlweɪ. fleɪmz lɪkɪŋ ʌp ðə wɔlz flɪkɝd ɹɛd θɹu ðə blæk smoʊk.

The lines stopped short of the second landing, men halfway up the stairs hurling their water up into a smoke-filled hallway. Flames licking up the walls flickered red through the black smoke.

wʌn ə ðə mɛn ɡɹæbd ɹændz ɑɹm. "ju kænɑt ɡoʊ ʌp ðɛɹ, maɪ lɔɹd. ɪts ɔl lɔst əbʌv hɪɹ. oʊɡiɝ, spik tə hɪm."

One of the men grabbed Rand's arm. "You cannot go up there, my Lord. It is all lost above here. Ogier, speak to him."

ɪt wɑz ðə fɝst ɹænd ɹilaɪz ðət lɔɪəl hæd fɑloʊd hɪm. "ɡoʊ bæk, lɔɪəl. əl bɹɪŋ ɪm aʊt."

It was the first Rand realized that Loial had followed him. "Go back, Loial. I'll bring him out."

"ju kænɑt kæɹi hʊɹɪn ən ðə tʃɛs boʊθ, ɹænd." ði oʊɡiɝ ʃɹʌɡd. "bɪsaɪdz, aɪ woʊn liv maɪ bʊks tə bɝn."

"You cannot carry Hurin and the chest both, Rand." The Ogier shrugged. "Besides, I won't leave my books to burn."

"ðɛn kip loʊ. ʌndɝ ðə smoʊk." ɹænd dʒɹɑp tə hɪz hænz ən niz ɑn ðə stɛɹz, ən skɹæmbəld ʌp ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ. ðəɹ wɑz klinɝ ɛɹ daʊn nɪɹ ðə flɔɹ; stɪl smoʊki ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪm kɑf, bʌɾ i kəd bɹið ɪt. jɛɾ ivən ði ɛɹ sim blɪstɝɪŋ hɑt. hi kəd nɑt ɡɛɾ ɪnʌf ʌv ɪt θɹu hɪz noʊz. hi bɹið θɹu hɪz maʊθ, ən fɛlt ɪz tʌŋ dʒɹaɪɪŋ.

"Then keep low. Under the smoke." Rand dropped to his hands and knees on the stairs, and scrambled up the rest of the way. There was cleaner air down near the floor; still smoky enough to make him cough, but he could breathe it. Yet even the air seemed blistering hot. He could not get enough of it through his nose. He breathed through his mouth, and felt his tongue drying.

səm ə ðə wɔɾɝ ðə mɛn θɹu lændəɾ ɑn hɪm, soʊkɪŋ ɪm tə ðə skɪn. ðə kulnəs wɑz oʊnli ə moʊməntɛɹi ɹɪlif; ðə hit keɪm ɹaɪt bæk. hi kɹɔld ɑn dətɝmənədli, əwɛɹ ə lɔɪəl bɪhaɪn ɪm oʊnli fɹəm ði oʊɡiɝz kɑfɪŋ.

Some of the water the men threw landed on him, soaking him to the skin. The coolness was only a momentary relief; the heat came right back. He crawled on determinedly, aware of Loial behind him only from the Ogier's coughing.

wʌn wɔl ə ðə hɔlweɪ wɑz ɔlmoʊst sɑləd fleɪm, ən ðə flɔɹ nɪɹ ɪt hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡʌn tə æd θɪn tɛnʒɹəlz tə ðə klaʊd ðət hʌŋ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd. hi wɑz ɡlæɾ i kəd nɑt si wʌt leɪ əbʌv ðə smoʊk. ɑmənəs kɹæklɪŋ toʊld ɪnʌf.

One wall of the hallway was almost solid flame, and the floor near it had already begun to add thin tendrils to the cloud that hung over his head. He was glad he could not see what lay above the smoke. Ominous crackling told enough.

ðə dɔɹ tə hʊɹɪnz ɹum hæd nɑt kɑt jɛt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz hɑɾ ɪnʌf ðəɾ i hæd tə tʃɹaɪ twaɪs bɪfɔɹ i kəd mænədʒ tə pʊʃ ɪɾ oʊpən. ðə fɝs θɪŋ tə miɾ ɪz aɪ wɑz hʊɹɪn, spɹɔld ɑn ðə flɔɹ. ɹænd kɹɔl tə ðə snɪfɝ ən lɪftəɾ ɪm ʌp. ðəɹ wɑz ə lʌmp ɑn ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz hɛd ðə saɪz ʌv ə plʌm.

The door to Hurin's room had not caught yet, but it was hot enough that he had to try twice before he could manage to push it open. The first thing to meet his eye was Hurin, sprawled on the floor. Rand crawled to the sniffer and lifted him up. There was a lump on the side of his head the size of a plum.

hʊɹɪn oʊpən ənfoʊkəst aɪz. "lɔɹd ɹænd?" hi mɝmɝd feɪnli. ". . . nɑk ət ðə dɔɹ . . . θɔɾ ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ɪnvi. . . ." hɪz aɪz ɹoʊl bæk ɪn ɪz hɛd. ɹænd fɛl fəɹ ə hɑɹtbit, ən sæɡd wɪð ɹɪlif wən i faʊn ɪt.

Hurin opened unfocused eyes. "Lord Rand?" he murmured faintly. ". . . knock at the door . . . thought it was more invi. . . ." His eyes rolled back in his head. Rand felt for a heartbeat, and sagged with relief when he found it.

"ɹænd. . . ." lɔɪəl kɔft. hi wɑz bɪsaɪɾ ɪz bɛd, wɪð ðə kʌvɝz θɹoʊn ʌp tə ɹɪvil ðə bɛɹ bɔɹdz ʌndɝniθ. ðə tʃɛst wɑz ɡɔn.

"Rand. . . ." Loial coughed. He was beside his bed, with the covers thrown up to reveal the bare boards underneath. The chest was gone.

əbʌv ðə smoʊk, ðə silɪŋ kɹikt, ən fleɪmɪŋ pisəz ʌv wʊd fɛl tə ðə flɔɹ.

Above the smoke, the ceiling creaked, and flaming pieces of wood fell to the floor.

ɹænd sɛd, "ɡɛt jəɹ bʊks. əl teɪk hʊɹɪn. hɝi." hi stɑɹɾəd tə dʒɹeɪp ðə lɪmp snɪfɝ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, bʌt lɔɪəl tʊk hʊɹɪn fɹəm hɪm.

Rand said, "Get your books. I will take Hurin. Hurry." He started to drape the limp sniffer over his shoulders, but Loial took Hurin from him.

"ðə bʊks wɪl əv tə bɝn, ɹænd. jə kæn kæɹi hɪm ən kɹɔl, ən ɪf jə stæn ʌp, jəl nɛvɝ ɹitʃ ðə stɛɹz." ði oʊɡiɝ pʊl hʊɹɪn ʌp ɑntu hɪz bɹɔd bæk, ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz hæŋɪŋ tə iðɝ saɪd. ðə silɪŋ ɡeɪv ə laʊd kɹæk. "wi mʌs hɝi, ɹænd."

"The books will have to burn, Rand. You can't carry him and crawl, and if you stand up, you will never reach the stairs." The Ogier pulled Hurin up onto his broad back, arms and legs hanging to either side. The ceiling gave a loud crack. "We must hurry, Rand."

"ɡoʊ, lɔɪəl. ɡoʊ, ən əl fɑloʊ."

"Go, Loial. Go, and I'll follow."

ði oʊɡiɝ kɹɔld ɪndə ðə hɔl wɪð ɪz bɝɾən, ən ɹænd stɑɹɾəd æftɝ hɪm. ðən i stɑpt, stɛɹɪŋ bæk ət ðə kənɛktɪŋ dɔɹ tə hɪz ɹum. ðə bænɝ wɑz stɪl ɪn ðɛɹ. ðə bænɝ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən. lɛɾ ɪt bɝn, hi θɔt, ən ən ænsɝɪŋ θɔt keɪm əz ɪf i hæd hɝd mɔɪɹeɪn seɪ ɪt. jəɹ laɪf meɪ dɪpɛn ɑn ɪt. ʃiz stɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə juz mi. jəɹ laɪf meɪ dɪpɛn ɑn ɪt. ɛɛs sədaɪ nɛvɝ laɪ.

The Ogier crawled into the hall with his burden, and Rand started after him. Then he stopped, staring back at the connecting door to his room. The banner was still in there. The banner of the Dragon. Let it burn, he thought, and an answering thought came as if he had heard Moiraine say it. Your life may depend on it. She's still trying to use me. Your life may depend on it. Aes Sedai never lie.

wɪð ə ɡɹoʊn, hi ɹoʊld əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ ən kɪkt oʊpən ðə dɔɹ tə hɪz ɹum.

With a groan, he rolled across the floor and kicked open the door to his room.

ði ʌðɝ ɹum wɑz ə mæs ə fleɪm. ðə bɛd wɑz ə bɑnfaɪɝ, ɹɛd ɹʌnɝz ɔlɹɛɾi kɹɔs ðə flɔɹ. ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ kɹɔlɪŋ əkɹɔs ðæt. ɡɛɾɪŋ tə hɪz fit, hi ɹæn kɹaʊtʃɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɹum, flɪntʃɪŋ fɹəm ðə hit, kɑfɪŋ, tʃoʊkɪŋ. stim ɹoʊz fɹəm ɪz dæmp koʊt. wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi bɝnɪŋ. hi snætʃt oʊpən ðə dɔɹ. hɪz sæɾəlbæɡz leɪ ɪnsaɪd, stɪl pɹətɛktəd fɹəm ðə faɪɝ, wʌn saɪd bʌlʒɪŋ wɪð ðə bænɝ ə luz θɝɪn tɛləmən, ðə wʊɾən flut keɪs bɪsaɪd ðɛm. fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. aɪ kəd stɪl lɛɾ ɪt bɝn.

The other room was a mass of flame. The bed was a bonfire, red runners already crossed the floor. There would be no crawling across that. Getting to his feet, he ran crouching into the room, flinching from the heat, coughing, choking. Steam rose from his damp coat. One side of the wardrobe was already burning. He snatched open the door. His saddlebags lay inside, still protected from the fire, one side bulging with the banner of Lews Therin Telamon, the wooden flute case beside them. For an instant, he hesitated. I could still let it burn.

ðə silɪŋ əbʌv ɪm ɡɹoʊnd. hi ɡɹæb sæɾəlbæɡz ən flut keɪs ən θɹu hɪmsɛlf bæk θɹu ðə dɔɹ, lændɪŋ ɑn ɪz niz əz bɝnɪŋ tɪmbɝz kɹæʃt wɛɹ i hæd stʊd. dʒɹæɡɪŋ ɪz bɝɾən, hi kɹɔld ɪndə ðə hɔl. ðə flɔɹ ʃʊk wɪð mɔɹ fɔlɪŋ bimz.

The ceiling above him groaned. He grabbed saddlebags and flute case and threw himself back through the door, landing on his knees as burning timbers crashed where he had stood. Dragging his burden, he crawled into the hall. The floor shook with more falling beams.

ðə mɛn wɪð ðə bʌkəts wɝ ɡɔn wən i ɹitʃt ðə stɛɹz. hi ɔl bʌt slɪd daʊn ðə stɛps tə ðə nɛks lændɪŋ, skɹæmbəl tə hɪz fiɾ ən ɹæn θɹu ðə naʊ-ɛmpti bɪldɪŋ ɪndə ðə stʃɹit. ði ɔnlʊkɝz stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, wɪð ɪz feɪs blækən ən ɪz koʊt kʌvɝd wɪð smʌt, bʌɾ i stæɡɝd tə wɛɹ lɔɪəl hæd pɹɑp hʊɹɪn əɡɛns ðə wɔl ʌv ə haʊs əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹit. ə wʊmən fɹəm ðə kɹaʊd wɑz waɪpɪŋ hʊɹɪnz feɪs wɪð ə klɔθ, bʌɾ ɪz aɪz wɝ stɪl kloʊzd, ən ɪz bɹɛθ keɪm ɪn hivz.

The men with the buckets were gone when he reached the stairs. He all but slid down the steps to the next landing, scrambled to his feet and ran through the now-empty building into the street. The onlookers stared at him, with his face blackened and his coat covered with smut, but he staggered to where Loial had propped Hurin against the wall of a house across the street. A woman from the crowd was wiping Hurin's face with a cloth, but his eyes were still closed, and his breath came in heaves.

"ɪz ðəɹ ə wɪzdəm nɪɹbaɪ?" ɹænd dɪmændəd. "hi nidz hɛlp." ðə wʊmən lʊkt əɾ ɪm blæŋkli, ən i tʃɹaɪd tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ði ʌðɝ neɪmz i hæd hɝd pipəl kɔl ðə wɪmən u wəd bi wɪsdəmz ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. "eɪ waɪz wʊmən? ə wʊmən jə kɔl mʌðɝ sʌmbɑɾi? ə wʊmən u noʊz ɝbz ən hilɪŋ?"

"Is there a Wisdom nearby?" Rand demanded. "He needs help." The woman looked at him blankly, and he tried to remember the other names he had heard people call the women who would be Wisdoms in the Two Rivers. "A Wise Woman? A woman you call Mother somebody? A woman who knows herbs and healing?"

"aɪ æm ə ɹiɾɝ, ɪf ðəɾ ɪz wʌt jə min," ðə wʊmən sɛd, "bʌɾ ɔl aɪ noʊ tə də fəɹ ðɪs wʌn ɪz tə meɪk ɪm kʌmftəɹbəl. sʌmθɪŋ ɪz bɹoʊkən ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd, aɪ fɪɹ."

"I am a Reader, if that is what you mean," the woman said, "but all I know to do for this one is to make him comfortable. Something is broken inside his head, I fear."

"ɹænd! ɪts ju!"

"Rand! It is you!"

ɹænd stɛɹd. ɪt wɑz mæt, liɾɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs θɹu ðə kɹaʊd, wɪð ɪz baʊ stʃɹʌŋ əkɹɔs ɪz bæk. eɪ mæt huz feɪs wɑz peɪl ən dʒɹɔn, bʌt stɪl mæt, ən ɡɹɪnɪŋ, ɪf wikli. ən bɪhaɪn ɪm keɪm pɛɹɪn, hɪz jɛloʊ aɪz ʃaɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə faɪɝ ən ɝnɪŋ əz mɛni lʊks əz ðə bleɪz. ən ɪŋtʃɹ, dɪsmaʊntɪŋ ɪn ə haɪ-kɑlɝd koʊɾ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɑɹmɝ, bʌt stɪl wɪð ɪz sɔɹd hɪl stɪkɪŋ ʌp oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ.

Rand stared. It was Mat, leading his horse through the crowd, with his bow strung across his back. A Mat whose face was pale and drawn, but still Mat, and grinning, if weakly. And behind him came Perrin, his yellow eyes shining in the fire and earning as many looks as the blaze. And Ingtar, dismounting in a high-collared coat instead of armor, but still with his sword hilt sticking up over his shoulder.

ɹænd fɛlt ə ʃɪvɝ ɹʌn θɹu hɪm. "ɪts tu leɪt," hi toʊl ðɛm. "ju keɪm tu leɪt." ən i sæt daʊn ɪn ðə stʃɹiɾ ən bɪɡæn tə læf.

Rand felt a shiver run through him. "It's too late," he told them. "You came too late." And he sat down in the street and began to laugh.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾiwʌn


CHAPTER 31

ɑn ðə sɛnt


On the Scent

ɹænd dɪd nɑt noʊ vɛɹɪn wɑz ðəɹ əntɪl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tʊk ɪz feɪs ɪn əɹ hænz. fəɹ ə moʊmən i kəd si wɝi ɪn əɹ feɪs, pɝhæps ivən fɪɹ, ən ðən sʌɾənli hi fɛlt əz ɪf i hæd bɪn daʊst wɪð koʊld wɔɾɝ, nɑt ðə wɛt bʌt ðə tɪŋɡəl. hi ɡeɪv wʌn əbɹʌpt ʃʌɾɝ ən stɑp læfɪŋ; ʃi lɛft ɪm tə kɹaʊtʃ oʊvɝ hʊɹɪn. ðə ɹiɾɝ wɑtʃt əɹ kɛɹfəli. soʊ dɪd ɹænd. wʌɾ ɪz ʃi duɪŋ hɪɹ? əz ɪf aɪ dɪdnt noʊ.

Rand did not know Verin was there until the Aes Sedai took his face in her hands. For a moment he could see worry in her face, perhaps even fear, and then suddenly he felt as if he had been doused with cold water, not the wet but the tingle. He gave one abrupt shudder and stopped laughing; she left him to crouch over Hurin. The Reader watched her carefully. So did Rand. What is she doing here? As if I didn't know.

"wɛɹ dɪd jə ɡoʊ?" mæt dɪmændəd hɔɹsli. "ju ɔl dʒʌs dɪsəpɪɹd, ən naʊ jəɹ ɪn kɛɹhin əhɛɾ ʌv ʌs. lɔɪəl?" ði oʊɡiɝ ʃɹʌɡd ənsɝteɪnli ən aɪd ðə kɹaʊd, hɪz ɪɹz twɪtʃɪŋ. hæf ðə pipəl hæd tɝn fɹəm ðə faɪɝ tə wɑtʃ ðə nukʌmɝz. ə fju ɛdʒ kloʊsɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lɪsən.

"Where did you go?" Mat demanded hoarsely. "You all just disappeared, and now you're in Cairhien ahead of us. Loial?" The Ogier shrugged uncertainly and eyed the crowd, his ears twitching. Half the people had turned from the fire to watch the newcomers. A few edged closer trying to listen.

ɹænd lɛt pɛɹɪn ɡɪv ɪm ə hæn ʌp. "haʊ dɪd jə faɪn ði ɪn?" hi ɡlænst ət vɛɹɪn, nilɪŋ wɪð əɹ hænz ɑn ðə snɪfɝz hɛd. "hɝ?"

Rand let Perrin give him a hand up. "How did you find the inn?" He glanced at Verin, kneeling with her hands on the sniffer's head. "Her?"

"ɪn ə weɪ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðə ɡɑɹdz ət ðə ɡeɪt wɑntəɾ əɹ neɪmz, ən ə fɛloʊ kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɑɹdhaʊs ɡeɪv ə dʒʌmp wən i hɝɾ ɪŋtʃɹz neɪm. hi sɛɾ i dɪdnt noʊ ɪt, bʌɾ i hæɾ ə smaɪl ðət ʃaʊɾəd 'laɪ' ə maɪl ɔf."

"In a way," Perrin said. "The guards at the gate wanted our names, and a fellow coming out of the guardhouse gave a jump when he heard Ingtar's name. He said he didn't know it, but he had a smile that shouted 'lie' a mile off."

"aɪ θɪŋk aɪ noʊ ðə mæn jə min," ɹænd sɛd. "hi smaɪlz ðət weɪ ɔl ðə taɪm."

"I think I know the man you mean," Rand said. "He smiles that way all the time."

"vɛɹɪn ʃoʊɾ ɪm əɹ ɹɪŋ," mæt pʊɾ ɪn, "ænd wɪspɝɾ ɪn ɪz ɪɹ." hi lʊkt ən saʊndəd sɪk, hɪz tʃiks flʌʃt ən taɪt, bʌɾ i mænədʒd ə ɡɹɪn. ɹænd hæd nɛvɝ noʊɾəst ɪz tʃikboʊnz bɪfɔɹ. "aɪ kʊdn hɪɹ wʌt ʃi sɛd, bʌɾ aɪ dɪdnt noʊ wɛðɝ ɪz aɪz wɝ gɑnə pɑp aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛɾ əɹ i wɑz gɑnə swɑloʊ hɪz tʌŋ fɝst. ɔl ʌv ə sʌɾən, hi kʊdn də ɪnʌf fəɹ ʌs. hi toʊld əs jə wɝ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ʌs, ən ɹaɪt wɛɹ jə wɝ steɪɪŋ. ɔfɝd tə ɡaɪɾ əs hɪmsɛlf, bʌɾ i ɹɪli lʊkt ɹɪlivd wən vɛɹɪn toʊld ɪm noʊ." hi snɔɹɾɪd. "lɔɹd ɹænd ə haʊs ælθɹ."

"Verin showed him her ring," Mat put in, "and whispered in his ear." He looked and sounded sick, his cheeks flushed and tight, but he managed a grin. Rand had never noticed his cheekbones before. "I couldn't hear what she said, but I didn't know whether his eyes were going to pop out of his head or he was going to swallow his tongue first. All of a sudden, he couldn't do enough for us. He told us you were waiting for us, and right where you were staying. Offered to guide us himself, but he really looked relieved when Verin told him no." He snorted. "Lord Rand of House al'Thor."

"ɪts tu lɔŋ ə stɔɹi tə ɪkspleɪn naʊ," ɹænd sɛd. "wɛɹ ɑɹ ənoʊ ən ðə ɹɛst? wɪl nid ðɛm."

"It's too long a story to explain now," Rand said. "Where are Uno and the rest? We will need them."

"ɪn ðə fɔɹɡeɪt." mæt fɹaʊn ət hɪm, ən wɛn ɑn sloʊli, "ənoʊ sɛd ðeɪd ɹæðɝ steɪ ðəɹ ðən ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz. fɹəm wʌɾ aɪ kən si, aɪd ɹæðɝ bi wɪð ðɛm. ɹænd, waɪ wɪl wi niɾ ənoʊ? hæv jə faʊnd . . . ðɛm?"

"In the Foregate." Mat frowned at him, and went on slowly, "Uno said they'd rather stay there than inside the walls. From what I can see, I'd rather be with them. Rand, why will we need Uno? Have you found . . . them?"

ɪt wɑz ðə moʊmən ɹænd ɹilaɪz sʌɾənli hi hæd bɪn əvɔɪɾɪŋ. hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən lʊkt ɪz fɹɛn ɪn ði aɪ. "mæt, aɪ hæd ðə dæɡɝ, ən aɪ lɔst ɪt. ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz tʊk ɪt bæk." hi hɝd ɡæsps fɹəm ðə kɛɹhinɪn lɪsnɪŋ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt kɛɹ. ðeɪ kəd pleɪ ðɛɹ ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm ɪf ðeɪ wɑntəd, bʌɾ ɪŋtʃɹ hæd kʌm, ən i wɑz fɪnɪʃt wɪð ɪɾ ət læst. "ðeɪ kæn əv ɡɔn fɑɹ, ðoʊ."

It was the moment Rand realized suddenly he had been avoiding. He took a deep breath and looked his friend in the eye. "Mat, I had the dagger, and I lost it. The Darkfriends took it back." He heard gasps from the Cairhienin listening, but he did not care. They could play their Great Game if they wanted, but Ingtar had come, and he was finished with it at last. "They can't have gone far, though."

ɪŋtʃɹ hæd bɪn saɪlənt, bʌt naʊ hi stɛp fɔɹwɝɾ ən ɡɹɪpt ɹændz ɑɹm. "ju hæɾ ɪt? ən ðə" - hi lʊkt ɝaʊn ət ði ɔnlʊkɝz - "ði ʌðɝ θɪŋ?"

Ingtar had been silent, but now he stepped forward and gripped Rand's arm. "You had it? And the" - he looked around at the onlookers - "the other thing?"

"ðeɪ tʊk ðət bæk, tu," ɹænd sɛd kwaɪətli. ɪŋtʃɹ paʊndɪɾ ə fɪst ɪndə hɪz pɑm ən tɝn əweɪ; səm ə ðə kɛɹhinɪn bækt ɔf fɹəm ðə lʊk ɑn ɪz feɪs.

"They took that back, too," Rand said quietly. Ingtar pounded a fist into his palm and turned away; some of the Cairhienin backed off from the look on his face.

mæt tʃuɾ ɪz lɪp, ðən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ dɪdnt noʊ ɪt wɑz faʊnd, soʊ ɪɾ ɪzən əz ɪf aɪ hæd lɔst ɪɾ əɡɛn. ɪts dʒʌst stɪl lɔst." ɪt wɑz pleɪn i wɑz spikɪŋ ə ðə dæɡɝ, nɑt ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. "wil faɪn ɪɾ əɡɛn. wɪv tu snɪfɝz, naʊ. pɛɹɪn ɪz wʌn, tu. hi fɑloʊd ðə tʃɹeɪl ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə fɔɹɡeɪt, æftɝ jə vænɪʃt wɪð hʊɹɪn ən lɔɪəl. aɪ θɔt jə maɪɾ əv dʒʌst ɹʌn ɔf . . . wɛl, jə noʊ wʌɾ aɪ min. wɛɹ dɪd jə ɡoʊ? aɪ stɪl doʊn ʌndɝstæn haʊ jə ɡɑt soʊ fɑɹ əhɛɾ ʌv ʌs. ðət fɛloʊ sɛd juv bɪn hɪɹ deɪz."

Mat chewed his lip, then shook his head. "I didn't know it was found, so it isn't as if I had lost it again. It is just still lost." It was plain he was speaking of the dagger, not the Horn of Valere. "We'll find it again. We have two sniffers, now. Perrin is one, too. He followed the trail all the way to the Foregate, after you vanished with Hurin and Loial. I thought you might have just run off . . . well, you know what I mean. Where did you go? I still don't understand how you got so far ahead of us. That fellow said you have been here days."

ɹænd ɡlænst ət pɛɹɪn - hiz ə snɪfɝ? - ən faʊn pɛɹɪn stʌɾiɪŋ ɪm ɪn ɹɪtɝn. hi θɔt pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ. ʃæɾoʊkɪlɝ? aɪ mʌst əv hɝɾ ɪm ɹɔŋ. pɛɹɪnz jɛloʊ ɡeɪz hɛld ɪm fəɹ ə moʊmənt, simɪŋ tə hoʊl sikɹəts əbaʊt hɪm. tɛlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf i wɑz hævɪŋ fænsiz - aɪm nɑt mæd. nɑt jɛt. - hi pʊld ɪz aɪz əweɪ.

Rand glanced at Perrin - He's a sniffer? - and found Perrin studying him in return. He thought Perrin muttered something. Shadowkiller? I must have heard him wrong. Perrin's yellow gaze held him for a moment, seeming to hold secrets about him. Telling himself he was having fancies - I'm not mad. Not yet. - he pulled his eyes away.

vɛɹɪn wɑz dʒʌs hɛlpɪŋ ə stɪl-ʃeɪki hʊɹɪn tə hɪz fit. "aɪ fil ɹaɪɾ əz ɡus fɛðɝz," hi wɑz seɪɪŋ. "stɪl ə lɪɾəl taɪɝd, bʌt. . . ." hi lɛt ðə wɝdz tʃɹeɪl ɔf, simɪŋ tə si hɝ fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, tə ɹilaɪz wʌt hæd hæpən fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm.

Verin was just helping a still-shaky Hurin to his feet. "I feel right as goose feathers," he was saying. "Still a little tired, but. . . ." He let the words trail off, seeming to see her for the first time, to realize what had happened for the first time.

"ðə taɪɹədnəs wɪl læst ə fju aʊɝz," ʃi toʊl hɪm. "ðə bɑɾi mʌst stʃɹeɪn tə hil ɪtsɛlf kwɪkli."

"The tiredness will last a few hours," she told him. "The body must strain to heal itself quickly."

ðə kɛɹhinɪn ɹiɾɝ ɹoʊz. "ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ʃi sɛd sɔfli. vɛɹɪn ɪnklaɪn əɹ hɛd, ən ðə ɹiɾɝ meɪɾ ə fʊl kɝtsi.

The Cairhienin Reader rose. "Aes Sedai?" she said softly. Verin inclined her head, and the Reader made a full curtsy.

əz kwaɪəɾ əz ðeɪ hæd bɪn, ðə wɝdz "ɛɛs sədaɪ" ɹæn θɹu ðə kɹaʊɾ ɪn toʊnz ɹeɪnʒɪŋ fɹəm ɑ tə fɪɹ tə aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ. ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ naʊ - nɑɾ ivən kueɪli ɡeɪv ɛni ətɛnʃən tə hɪz oʊn bɝnɪŋ ɪn - ən ɹænd θɔɾ ə lɪɾəl kɑʃən maɪt nɑt bi əmɪs æftɝ ɔl.

As quiet as they had been, the words "Aes Sedai" ran through the crowd in tones ranging from awe to fear to outrage. Everyone was watching now - not even Cuale gave any attention to his own burning inn - and Rand thought a little caution might not be amiss after all.

"du juv ɹumz jɛt?" hi æskt. "wi nid tə tɔk, ən wi kæn də ɪt hɪɹ."

"Do you have rooms yet?" he asked. "We need to talk, and we can't do it here."

"ə ɡʊɾ aɪdiə," vɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪ hæv steɪd hɪɹ bɪfɔɹ ət ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹi. wɪl ɡoʊ ðɛɹ."

"A good idea," Verin said. "I have stayed here before at The Great Tree. We will go there."

lɔɪəl wɛn tə fɛtʃ ðə hɔɹsəz - ði ɪn ɹuf hæd naʊ fɔlən ɪn kəmplitli, bʌt ðə steɪbəlz hæd nɑt bɪn tʌtʃt - ən sun ðeɪ wɝ meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ θɹu ðə stʃɹits, ɔl ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪksɛp fəɹ lɔɪəl, hu kleɪmd i hæd ɡɹoʊn juz tə wɔkɪŋ əɡɛn. pɛɹɪn hɛl ðə lɛd laɪn tə wʌn ə ðə pækhɔɹsɪz ðeɪ hæd bɹɔt saʊθ.

Loial went to fetch the horses - the inn roof had now fallen in completely, but the stables had not been touched - and soon they were making their way through the streets, all riding except for Loial, who claimed he had grown used to walking again. Perrin held the lead line to one of the packhorses they had brought south.

"hʊɹɪn," ɹænd sɛd, "haʊ sun kən jə bi ɹɛɾi tə fɑloʊ ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪl əɡɛn? kən jə fɑloʊ ɪt? ðə mɛn u hɪt jə ən stɑɹɾəd ðə faɪɝ lɛft ə tʃɹeɪl, dɪdn ðeɪ?"

"Hurin," Rand said, "how soon can you be ready to follow their trail again? Can you follow it? The men who hit you and started the fire left a trail, didn't they?"

"aɪ kən fɑloʊ ɪt naʊ, maɪ lɔɹd. ən aɪ kəd smɛl əm ɪn ðə stʃɹit. ɪt woʊn læs lɔŋ, ðoʊ. ðəɹ wɝn ɛni tʃɹɑləks, ən ðeɪ dɪdn kɪl ɛnibəɾi. dʒʌs mɛn, maɪ lɔɹd. dɑɹkfɹɛnz, aɪ səpoʊz, bʌt jə kæn ɔlweɪz bi ʃʊɹ ə ðət baɪ smɛl. ə deɪ, meɪbi, bɪfɔɹ ɪt feɪdz."

"I can follow it now, my Lord. And I could smell them in the street. It won't last long, though. There weren't any Trollocs, and they didn't kill anybody. Just men, my Lord. Darkfriends, I suppose, but you can't always be sure of that by smell. A day, maybe, before it fades."

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðeɪ kən oʊpən ðə tʃɛst iðɝ, ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd, "ɔɹ ðeɪ wəd dʒʌst əv teɪkən ðə hɔɹn. ɪt wəd bi mʌtʃ iziɝ tə teɪk ðəɾ ɪf ðeɪ kʊd, ɹæðɝ ðən ðə hoʊl tʃɛst."

"I don't think they can open the chest either, Rand," Loial said, "or they would just have taken the Horn. It would be much easier to take that if they could, rather than the whole chest."

ɹænd nɑɾəd. "ðeɪ mʌst əv pʊɾ ɪɾ ɪn ə kɑɹt, əɹ ɑn ə hɔɹs. wʌns ðeɪ ɡɛɾ ɪt bɪɑn ðə fɔɹɡeɪt, ðəl dʒɔɪn ðə tʃɹɑləks əɡɛn, fəɹ ʃʊɹ. jəl bi eɪbəl tə fɑloʊ ðət tʃɹeɪl, hʊɹɪn."

Rand nodded. "They must have put it in a cart, or on a horse. Once they get it beyond the Foregate, they'll join the Trollocs again, for sure. You will be able to follow that trail, Hurin."

"aɪ wɪl, maɪ lɔɹd."

"I will, my Lord."

"ðɛn jə ɹɛst əntɪl jəɹ fɪt," ɹænd toʊl hɪm. ðə snɪfɝ lʊk stɛɾiɝ, bʌɾ i ɹoʊd slʌmpt, ən ɪz feɪs wɑz wɪɹi. "æt bɛst, ðəl oʊnli bi ə fju aʊɝz əhɛɾ ʌv ʌs. ɪf wi ɹaɪd hɑɹd. . . ." sʌɾənli hi noʊɾəst ðət ði ʌðɝz wɝ lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, vɛɹɪn ən ɪŋtʃɹ, mæt ən pɛɹɪn. hi ɹilaɪzd wʌɾ i hæd bɪn duɪŋ, ən ɪz feɪs kʌlɝd. "aɪ æm sɑɹi, ɪŋtʃɹ. ɪts dʒʌs ðəɾ aɪv bɪkʌm juz tə biɪŋ ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ, aɪ səpoʊz. aɪm nɑt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə teɪk jəɹ pleɪs."

"Then you rest until you're fit," Rand told him. The sniffer looked steadier, but he rode slumped, and his face was weary. "At best, they will only be a few hours ahead of us. If we ride hard. . . ." Suddenly he noticed that the others were looking at him, Verin and Ingtar, Mat and Perrin. He realized what he had been doing, and his face colored. "I am sorry, Ingtar. It's just that I've become used to being in charge, I suppose. I'm not trying to take your place."

ɪŋtʃɹ nɑɾəd sloʊli. "mɔɪɹeɪn tʃoʊz wɛl wən ʃi meɪd lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ neɪm jə maɪ sɛkənd. pɝhæps ɪt wʊɾə bɪn bɛɾɝ ɪf ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hæd ɡɪvən jə ðə tʃɑɹdʒ." ðə ʃaɪnɝən bɑɹkt ə læf. "æt lis juv æktʃəli  mænədʒ tə tʌtʃ ðə hɔɹn."

Ingtar nodded slowly. "Moiraine chose well when she made Lord Agelmar name you my second. Perhaps it would have been better if the Amyrlin Seat had given you the charge." The Shienaran barked a laugh. "At least you have actually managed to touch the Horn."

æftɝ ðət ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ɪn saɪləns.

After that they rode in silence.

ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹi cʊɾə bɪn twɪn tə ðə dɪfɛndɝ ə ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl, ə tɔl stoʊn kjub ʌv ə bɪldɪŋ wɪð ə kɑmən ɹum pænəld ɪn dɑɹk wʊɾ ən dɛkɝeɪɾəd wɪð sɪlvɝ, ə lɑɹdʒ, pɑlɪʃt klɑk ɑn ðə mæntəl oʊvɝ ðə faɪɝpleɪs. ði ɪnkipɝ cʊɾə bɪn kueɪliz sɪstɝ. mɪstʃɹəs tidʒɹə hæd ðə seɪm slaɪtli plʌmp lʊk ən ðə seɪm ʌŋtʃwəs mænɝ - ən ðə seɪm ʃɑɹp aɪz, ðə seɪm ɛɹ ə lɪsnɪŋ tə wʌt wɑz bɪhaɪn ðə wɝdz jə spoʊk. bʌt tidʒɹə nu vɛɹɪn, ən əɹ wɛlkəmɪŋ smaɪl fəɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz wɔɹm; ʃi nɛvɝ mɛnʃən ɛɛs sədaɪ əlaʊd, bʌt ɹænd wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi nu.

The Great Tree could have been twin to The Defender of the Dragonwall, a tall stone cube of a building with a common room paneled in dark wood and decorated with silver, a large, polished clock on the mantel over the fireplace. The innkeeper could have been Cuale's sister. Mistress Tiedra had the same slightly plump look and the same unctuous manner - and the same sharp eyes, the same air of listening to what was behind the words you spoke. But Tiedra knew Verin, and her welcoming smile for the Aes Sedai was warm; she never mentioned Aes Sedai aloud, but Rand was sure she knew.

tidʒɹə ən ə swɔɹm ə sɝvəns sɔ tə ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ən sɛɾəld əm ɪn ðɛɹ ɹumz. ɹændz ɹum wɑz əz faɪn əz ðə wʌn ðət hæd bɝnd, bʌɾ i wɑz mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ðə bɪɡ kɑpɝ bæθtəb tu sɝvɪŋ mɛn ɹɛsəl θɹu ðə dɔɹ, ən ðə stimɪŋ bʌkəts ʌv wɔɾɝ skʌlɝi meɪdz bɹɔɾ ʌp fɹəm ðə kɪtʃən. wʌn lʊk ɪn ðə mɪɹɝ əbʌv ðə wɑʃstænd ʃoʊɾ ɪm ə feɪs ðət lʊkt əz ɪf i hæd ɹʌbd ɪt wɪð tʃɑɹkoʊl, ən ɪz koʊt hæd blæk smɪɹz əkɹɔs ðə ɹɛd wʊl.

Tiedra and a swarm of servants saw to their horses and settled them in their rooms. Rand's room was as fine as the one that had burned, but he was more interested in the big copper bathtub two serving men wrestled through the door, and the steaming buckets of water scullery maids brought up from the kitchen. One look in the mirror above the washstand showed him a face that looked as if he had rubbed it with charcoal, and his coat had black smears across the red wool.

hi stʃɹɪpt ɔf ən klaɪmd ɪndə ðə tʌb, bʌɾ i θɔɾ əz mʌtʃ əz wɑʃt. vɛɹɪn wɑz ðɛɹ. wʌn ə θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ ðəɾ i kəd tʃɹʌs nɑt tə tʃɹaɪ tə dʒɛntəl ɪm ðɛmsɛlvz, əɹ tɝn ɪm oʊvɝ tə ðoʊz u wʊd. əɹ soʊ ɪt simd, ət list. wʌn ə θɹi hu wɑntəɾ ɪm tə bɪliv i wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, tə juz ɪm əz ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən. ʃiz mɔɪɹeɪnz aɪz wɑtʃɪŋ mi, mɔɪɹeɪnz hæn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊl maɪ stʃɹɪŋz. bʌɾ aɪ hæv kʌt ðə stʃɹɪŋz.

He stripped off and climbed into the tub, but he thought as much as washed. Verin was there. One of three Aes Sedai that he could trust not to try to gentle him themselves, or turn him over to those who would. Or so it seemed, at least. One of three who wanted him to believe he was the Dragon Reborn, to use him as a false Dragon. She's Moiraine's eyes watching me, Moiraine's hand trying to pull my strings. But I have cut the strings.

hɪz sæɾəlbæɡz hæd bɪn bɹɔɾ ʌp, ən ə bʌndəl fɹəm ðə pæk hɔɹs kənteɪnɪŋ fɹɛʃ kloʊðz. hi taʊəld ɔf ən oʊpən ðə bʌndəl - ən saɪd. hi hæd fɝɡɑɾən ðət boʊθ ði ʌðɝ koʊts i hæd wɝ əz ɔɹneɪɾ əz ðə wʌn i hæd tɔst ɑn ðə bæk ʌv ə tʃɛɹ fəɹ ə meɪd tə klin. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, hi tʃoʊz ðə blæk koʊt, tə suɾ ɪz mud. sɪlvɝ hɛɹənz stʊɾ ɑn ðə haɪ kɑlɝ, ən sɪlvɝ ɹæpədz ɹæn daʊn ɪz slivz, wɔɾɝ bæɾɝd tə fɹɔθ əɡɛns dʒæɡd ɹɑks.

His saddlebags had been brought up, and a bundle from the pack horse containing fresh clothes. He toweled off and opened the bundle - and sighed. He had forgotten that both the other coats he had were as ornate as the one he had tossed on the back of a chair for a maid to clean. After a moment, he chose the black coat, to suit his mood. Silver herons stood on the high collar, and silver rapids ran down his sleeves, water battered to froth against jagged rocks.

tʃɹænsfɝɪŋ θɪŋz fɹəm ɪz oʊl koʊt tə hɪz nu, hi faʊn ðə pɑɹtʃməns. æbsənli, hi stʌf ði ɪnvɪteɪʃənz ɪn ɪz pɑkəɾ əz i stʌɾid səlinz tu lɛɾɝz. hi wʌndɝd haʊ hi cʊɾə bɪn sətʃ ə ful. ʃi wɑz ðə bjuɾəfəl jʌŋ dɔɾɝ ʌv ə noʊbəl haʊs. hi wɑz ə ʃɛpɝd hum ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə juz, ə mæn dum tə ɡoʊ mæɾ ɪf i dɪd nɑt daɪ fɝst. jɛɾ i kəd stɪl fil ðə pʊl ə hɝ dʒʌs lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ, kəɾ ɔlmoʊst smɛl ðə pɝfjum ə hɝ.

Transferring things from his old coat to his new, he found the parchments. Absently, he stuffed the invitations in his pocket as he studied Selene's two letters. He wondered how he could have been such a fool. She was the beautiful young daughter of a noble House. He was a shepherd whom Aes Sedai were trying to use, a man doomed to go mad if he did not die first. Yet he could still feel the pull of her just looking at her writing, could almost smell the perfume of her.

"aɪ æm ə ʃɛpɝd," hi toʊl ðə lɛɾɝz, "nɑɾ ə ɡɹeɪt mæn, ən ɪf aɪ kəd mɛɹi ɛniwʌn, ɪt wəd bi ɛɡwin, bʌt ʃi wɑns tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən haʊ kən aɪ mɛɹi ɛni wʊmən, lʌv ɛni wʊmən, wən əl ɡoʊ mæɾ ən meɪbi kɪl hɝ?"

"I am a shepherd," he told the letters, "not a great man, and if I could marry anyone, it would be Egwene, but she wants to be Aes Sedai, and how can I marry any woman, love any woman, when I'll go mad and maybe kill her?"

wɝdz kəd nɑt lɛsən ɪz mɛmɹi ʌv səlinz bjuɾi, ðoʊ, əɹ ðə weɪ ʃi meɪɾ ɪz blʌd ɡoʊ wɔɹm dʒʌs baɪ lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. ɪɾ ɔlmoʊst sim tə hɪm ðət ʃi wɑz ɪn ðə ɹum wɪð hɪm, ðəɾ i kəd smɛl əɹ pɝfjum, soʊ mʌtʃ soʊ ðəɾ i lʊkt ɝaʊnd, ən læf tə faɪn hɪmsɛlf əloʊn.

Words could not lessen his memory of Selene's beauty, though, or the way she made his blood go warm just by looking at him. It almost seemed to him that she was in the room with him, that he could smell her perfume, so much so that he looked around, and laughed to find himself alone.

"hævɪŋ fænsiz laɪk aɪm æɾəld ɔlɹɛɾi," hi mʌɾɝd.

"Having fancies like I'm addled already," he muttered.

əbɹʌpli hi tɪp bæk ðə mæntəl ə ðə læmp ɑn ðə bɛdsaɪd teɪbəl, lɪɾ ɪt, ən θɹʌs ðə lɛɾɝz ɪndə ðə fleɪm. aʊtsaɪd ði ɪn, ðə wɪn pɪkt ʌp tə ə ɹɔɹ, likɪŋ ɪn θɹu ðə ʃʌɾɝz ən fænɪŋ ðə fleɪmz tə ɪnɡʌlf ðə pɑɹtʃmənt. hɝidli hi tɔs ðə bɝnɪŋ lɛɾɝz ɪndə ðə koʊl hɑɹθ dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ðə faɪɝ ɹitʃt ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. hi weɪɾəd əntɪl ðə læs blækən kɝl wɛn aʊt bɪfɔɹ i bʌkəld ɑn ɪz sɔɹɾ ən lɛf ðə ɹum.

Abruptly he tipped back the mantle of the lamp on the bedside table, lit it, and thrust the letters into the flame. Outside the inn, the wind picked up to a roar, leaking in through the shutters and fanning the flames to engulf the parchment. Hurriedly he tossed the burning letters into the cold hearth just before the fire reached his fingers. He waited until the last blackened curl went out before he buckled on his sword and left the room.

vɛɹɪn hæd teɪkən ə pɹaɪvət daɪnɪŋ ɹum, wɛɹ ʃɛlvz əlɔŋ ðə dɑɹk wɔlz hɛld ivən mɔɹ sɪlvɝ ðən ðoʊz ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum. mæt wɑz dʒʌɡəlɪŋ θɹi bɔɪld ɛɡz ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əpɪɹ nɑnʃəlɑnt. ɪŋtʃɹ pɪɹɾ ɪndə ði ənlɪt faɪɝpleɪs, fɹaʊnɪŋ. lɔɪəl hæɾ ə fju bʊks fɹəm fæl dæɹə stɪl ɪn ɪz pɑkəts, ən wɑz ɹiɾɪŋ wʌn bɪsaɪɾ ə læmp.

Verin had taken a private dining room, where shelves along the dark walls held even more silver than those in the common room. Mat was juggling three boiled eggs and trying to appear nonchalant. Ingtar peered into the unlit fireplace, frowning. Loial had a few books from Fal Dara still in his pockets, and was reading one beside a lamp.

pɛɹɪn slaʊtʃt ət ðə teɪbəl, stʌɾiɪŋ ɪz hænz klæspt ɑn ðə teɪbəltɑp. tə hɪz noʊz, ðə ɹum smɛld ə biswæks juz tə pɑlɪʃ ðə pænəlɪŋ. ɪt wɑz hɪm, hi θɔt. ɹænd ɪz ðə ʃæɾoʊkɪlɝ. laɪt, wʌts hæpənɪŋ tə ɔl ʌv ʌs? hɪz hænz taɪɾənd ɪndə fɪsts, lɑɹdʒ ən skwɛɹ. ðiz hænz wɝ mɛn fəɹ ə smɪθs hæmɝ, nɑɾ ən æks.

Perrin slouched at the table, studying his hands clasped on the tabletop. To his nose, the room smelled of beeswax used to polish the paneling. It was him, he thought. Rand is the Shadowkiller. Light, what's happening to all of us? His hands tightened into fists, large and square. These hands were meant for a smith's hammer, not an axe.

hi ɡlænst ʌp əz ɹænd ɛntɝd. pɛɹɪn θɔɾ i lʊk dɪtɝmənd, sɛɾ ɑn səm kɔɹs ʌv ækʃən. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ moʊʃən ɹænd tə ə haɪ-bækt ɑɹmtʃɛɹ əkɹɔs fɹəm hɝ.

He glanced up as Rand entered. Perrin thought he looked determined, set on some course of action. The Aes Sedai motioned Rand to a high-backed armchair across from her.

"haʊ ɪz hʊɹɪn?" ɹænd æsk hɝ, ɝeɪnʒɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd soʊ hi kəd sɪt. "ɹɛstɪŋ?"

"How is Hurin?" Rand asked her, arranging his sword so he could sit. "Resting?"

"hi ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn ɡoʊɪŋ aʊt," ɪŋtʃɹ ænsɝd. "aɪ toʊld ɪm tə fɑloʊ ðə tʃɹeɪl oʊnli əntɪl i smɛl tʃɹɑləks. wi kən fɑloʊ ɪt fɹəm ðəɹ təmɑɹoʊ. əɹ dʒju wɑnə ɡoʊ æftɝ əm tənaɪt?"

"He insisted on going out," Ingtar answered. "I told him to follow the trail only until he smelled Trollocs. We can follow it from there tomorrow. Or do you want to go after them tonight?"

"ɪŋtʃɹ," ɹænd sɛɾ ənizəli, "aɪ ɹɪli wɑzn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə teɪk kəmænd. aɪ dʒʌs dɪdn θɪŋk." jɛt nɑɾ əz nɝvəsli əz i wəɾ əv wʌns, pɛɹɪn θɔt. ʃæɾoʊkɪlɝ. wɝ ɔl ʌv əs tʃeɪnʒɪŋ.

"Ingtar," Rand said uneasily, "I really wasn't trying to take command. I just didn't think." Yet not as nervously as he would have once, Perrin thought. Shadowkiller. We're all of us changing.

ɪŋtʃɹ dɪd nɑɾ ænsɝ, bʌɾ oʊnli kɛp stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə faɪɝpleɪs.

Ingtar did not answer, but only kept staring into the fireplace.

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ səm θɪŋz ðəɾ ɪntʃɹəs mi ɡɹeɪtli, ɹænd," vɛɹɪn sɛd kwaɪətli. "wʌn ɪz haʊ jə vænɪʃt fɹəm ɪŋtʃɹz kæmp wɪθaʊɾ ə tʃɹeɪs. ənʌðɝ ɪz haʊ jə ɝaɪvd ɪn kɛɹhin ə wik bɪfɔɹ ʌs. ðət klɝk wɑz vɛɹi klɪɹ ɑn ðæt. jə wʊɾə hæd tə flaɪ."

"There are some things that interest me greatly, Rand," Verin said quietly. "One is how you vanished from Ingtar's camp without a trace. Another is how you arrived in Cairhien a week before us. That clerk was very clear on that. You would have had to fly."

wʌn ə mæts ɛɡz hɪt ðə flɔɹ ən kɹækt. hi dɪd nɑt lʊk əɾ ɪt, ðoʊ. hi wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət ɹænd, ən ɪŋtʃɹ hæd tɝn ɝaʊnd. lɔɪəl pɹitɛndəd tə bi ɹiɾɪŋ stɪl, bʌɾ i wɔɹ ə wɝid lʊk, ən ɪz ɪɹz wɝ ʌp ɪn hɛɹi pɔɪns.

One of Mat's eggs hit the floor and cracked. He did not look at it, though. He was looking at Rand, and Ingtar had turned around. Loial pretended to be reading still, but he wore a worried look, and his ears were up in hairy points.

pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪzd i wɑz stɛɹɪŋ, tu. "wɛl, hi dɪd nɑt flaɪ," hi sɛd. "aɪ doʊn si ɛni wɪŋz. meɪbi hiz mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋz tə tɛl ʌs." vɛɹɪn ʃɪftəɾ əɹ ətɛnʃən tə hɪm, dʒʌs fəɹ ə moʊmənt. hi mænədʒ tə miɾ əɹ aɪz, bʌɾ i wɑz ðə fɝs tə lʊk əweɪ. ɛɛs sədaɪ. laɪt, waɪ wɝ wi ɛvɝ fulz ɪnʌf tə fɑloʊ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ? ɹænd ɡeɪv ɪm ə ɡɹeɪtfəl lʊk, tu, ən pɛɹɪn ɡɹɪn ət hɪm. hi wɑz nɑt ði oʊld ɹænd - hi sim tə hæv ɡɹoʊn ɪndə ðət fænsi koʊt; ɪt lʊkt ɹaɪɾ ɑn hɪm, naʊ - bʌɾ i wɑz stɪl ðə bɔɪ pɛɹɪn hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp wɪð. ʃæɾoʊkɪlɝ. ə mæn ðə wʊlvz hoʊld ɪn ɑ. ə mæn u kən tʃænəl.

Perrin realized he was staring, too. "Well, he did not fly," he said. "I don't see any wings. Maybe he has more important things to tell us." Verin shifted her attention to him, just for a moment. He managed to meet her eyes, but he was the first to look away. Aes Sedai. Light, why were we ever fools enough to follow an Aes Sedai? Rand gave him a grateful look, too, and Perrin grinned at him. He was not the old Rand - he seemed to have grown into that fancy coat; it looked right on him, now - but he was still the boy Perrin had grown up with. Shadowkiller. A man the wolves hold in awe. A man who can channel.

"aɪ doʊn maɪnd," ɹænd sɛd, ən toʊld ɪz teɪl sɪmpli.

"I don't mind," Rand said, and told his tale simply.

pɛɹɪn faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɡeɪpɪŋ. pɔɹɾəl stoʊnz. ʌðɝ wɝlz, wɛɹ ðə læn sim tə ʃɪft. hʊɹɪn fɑloʊɪŋ ðə tʃɹeɪl ʌv wɛɹ ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz wəd bi. ən ə bjuɾəfəl wʊmən ɪn dɪstʃɹɛs, dʒʌs laɪk wʌn ɪn ə ɡlimənz teɪl.

Perrin found himself gaping. Portal Stones. Other worlds, where the land seemed to shift. Hurin following the trail of where the Darkfriends would be. And a beautiful woman in distress, just like one in a gleeman's tale.

mæt ɡeɪv ə sɑft, wʌndɝɪŋ wɪsəl. "ænd ʃi bɹɔt jə bæk? baɪ wʌn ə ðiz - ðiz stoʊnz?"

Mat gave a soft, wondering whistle. "And she brought you back? By one of these - these Stones?"

ɹænd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd fəɹ ə sɛkənd. "ʃi mʌs hæv," hi sɛd. "soʊ jə si, ðæts haʊ wi ɡɑt soʊ fɑɹ əhɛɾ ə ju. wən feɪn keɪm, lɔɪəl ən aɪ mænədʒ tə stil bæk ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ɪn ðə naɪt, ən wi ɹoʊɾ ɑn tə kɛɹhin kəz aɪ dɪdn θɪŋk wi kəd meɪk ɪt pæst əm wʌns ðeɪ wɝ ɹaʊzd, ən aɪ nu ɪŋtʃɹ wəd kip kʌmɪŋ saʊθ æftɝ əm ən ɹitʃ kɛɹhin ɪvɛntʃəwəli."

Rand hesitated for a second. "She must have," he said. "So you see, that's how we got so far ahead of you. When Fain came, Loial and I managed to steal back the Horn of Valere in the night, and we rode on to Cairhien because I didn't think we could make it past them once they were roused, and I knew Ingtar would keep coming south after them and reach Cairhien eventually."

ʃæɾoʊkɪlɝ. ɹænd lʊkt ət hɪm, aɪz nɛɹoʊɪŋ, ən pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪzd i hæd spoʊkən ðə neɪm əlaʊd. əpɛɹənli nɑt laʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls tə hɪɹ, ðoʊ. noʊ wʌn ɛls ɡlænst ət hɪm. hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf wɑntɪŋ tə tɛl ɹænd əbaʊt ðə wʊlvz. aɪ noʊ əbaʊt ju. ɪts oʊnli fɛɹ jə noʊ maɪ sikɹət, tu. bʌt vɛɹɪn wɑz ðɛɹ. hi kəd nɑt seɪ ɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ.

Shadowkiller. Rand looked at him, eyes narrowing, and Perrin realized he had spoken the name aloud. Apparently not loud enough for anyone else to hear, though. No one else glanced at him. He found himself wanting to tell Rand about the wolves. I know about you. It's only fair you know my secret, too. But Verin was there. He could not say it in front of her.

"ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd, ə θɔtfəl ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs. "aɪ wəd vɛɹi mʌtʃ laɪk tə mit ðɪs ɡɝl. ɪf ʃi kən juz ə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn. . . . ivən ðət neɪm ɪz nɑt vɛɹi waɪdli noʊn." ʃi ɡeɪv hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk. "wɛl, ðəɾ ɪz fəɹ ənʌðɝ taɪm. ə tɔl ɡɝl ʃəd nɑt bi dɪfəkəl tə faɪn ɪn ðə kɛɹhinɪn haʊsəz. ɑ, hɪɹ ɪz əɹ mil."

"Interesting," the Aes Sedai said, a thoughtful expression on her face. "I would very much like to meet this girl. If she can use a Portal Stone. . . . Even that name is not very widely known." She gave herself a shake. "Well, that is for another time. A tall girl should not be difficult to find in the Cairhienin Houses. Aah, here is our meal."

pɛɹɪn smɛld læm ivən bɪfɔɹ mɪstʃɹəs tidʒɹə lɛɾ ɪn ə pɹəsɛʃən bɛɹɪŋ tʃɹeɪz ə fud. hɪz maʊθ wɔɾɝd mɔɹ fəɹ ðət ðən fəɹ ðə piz ən skwɑʃ, ðə kæɹəts ən kæbədʒ ðət keɪm wɪð ɪt, əɹ ðə hɑt kɹʌsti ɹoʊlz. hi stɪl faʊn vɛdʒtəbəlz teɪsti, bʌt səmtaɪmz, ʌv leɪt, hi dʒɹimd ə ɹɛd mit. nɑɾ ivən kʊkt, juʒəwəli. ɪt wɑz dɪskənsɝɾɪŋ tə faɪn hɪmsɛlf θɪŋkɪŋ ðət ðə naɪsli pɪŋk slaɪsəz ə læm ðət ði ɪnkipɝ kɑɹvd wɝ tu wɛl dʌn. hi fɝmli tʊk hɛlpɪŋz ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ən tu ʌv ðə læm.

Perrin smelled lamb even before Mistress Tiedra led in a procession bearing trays of food. His mouth watered more for that than for the peas and squash, the carrots and cabbage that came with it, or the hot crusty rolls. He still found vegetables tasty, but sometimes, of late, he dreamed of red meat. Not even cooked, usually. It was disconcerting to find himself thinking that the nicely pink slices of lamb that the innkeeper carved were too well done. He firmly took helpings of everything. And two of the lamb.

ɪt wɑz ə kwaɪət mil, wɪð ɛvɹiwʌn kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ɑn ɪz oʊn θɔts. pɛɹɪn faʊn ɪt peɪnfəl tə wɑtʃ mæt it. mæts æpətaɪt wɑz əz hɛlθi əz ɛvɝ, dɪspaɪt ðə fivɝɪʃ flʌʃ tə hɪz feɪs, ən ðə weɪ hi ʃʌvəl fuɾ ɪndə hɪz maʊθ meɪɾ ɪt lʊk laɪk ɪz læs mil bɪfɔɹ daɪɪŋ. pɛɹɪn kɛpt ɪz aɪz ɑn ɪz pleɪɾ əz mʌtʃ əz pɑsəbəl, ən wɪʃt ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ lɛft ɛmənz fild.

It was a quiet meal, with everyone concentrating on his own thoughts. Perrin found it painful to watch Mat eat. Mat's appetite was as healthy as ever, despite the feverish flush to his face, and the way he shoveled food into his mouth made it look like his last meal before dying. Perrin kept his eyes on his plate as much as possible, and wished they had never left Emond's Field.

æftɝ ðə meɪdz klɪɹd ðə teɪbəl ən lɛft əɡɛn, vɛɹɪn ɪnsɪstəd ðeɪ ɹɪmeɪn təɡɛðɝ əntɪl hʊɹɪn ɹɪtɝnd. "hi meɪ bɹɪŋ wɝd ðət wɪl min wi mʌs muv ət wʌns."

After the maids cleared the table and left again, Verin insisted they remain together until Hurin returned. "He may bring word that will mean we must move at once."

mæt ɹɪtɝn tə hɪz dʒʌɡəlɪŋ, ən lɔɪəl tə hɪz ɹiɾɪŋ. ɹænd æsk ði ɪnkipɝ ɪf ðəɹ wɝ ɛni mɔɹ bʊks, ən ʃi bɹɔɾ ɪm ðə tʃɹævəlz ə dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ. pɛɹɪn laɪk ðət wʌn, tu, wɪð ɪts stɔɹiz ʌv ædvɛntʃɝz əmʌŋ ðə si foʊk ən dʒɝniz tə ðə lænz bɪɑn ði il weɪst, wɛɹ sɪlk keɪm fɹʌm. hi dɪd nɑt fil laɪk ɹiɾɪŋ, ðoʊ, soʊ hi sɛɾ ʌp ə stoʊnz bɔɹɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl wɪð ɪŋtʃɹ. ðə ʃaɪnɝən pleɪd wɪð ə slæʃɪŋ, dɛɹɪŋ staɪl. pɛɹɪn hæɾ ɔlweɪz pleɪd dɔɡədli, ɡɪvɪŋ ɡɹaʊn ɹɪlʌktənli, bʌɾ i faʊn hɪmsɛlf pleɪsɪŋ ðə stoʊnz wɪð əz mʌtʃ ɹɛkləsnəs əz ɪŋtʃɹ. moʊst ə ðə ɡeɪmz ɛndəɾ ɪn ə dʒɹɔ, bʌɾ i mænədʒ tə wɪn əz mɛni əz ɪŋtʃɹ dɪd. ðə ʃaɪnɝən wɑz aɪɪŋ ɪm wɪð ə nu ɹɪspɛk baɪ ɝli ivnɪŋ, wən ðə snɪfɝ ɹɪtɝnd.

Mat returned to his juggling, and Loial to his reading. Rand asked the innkeeper if there were any more books, and she brought him The Travels of Jain Farstrider. Perrin liked that one, too, with its stories of adventures among the Sea Folk and journeys to the lands beyond the Aiel Waste, where silk came from. He did not feel like reading, though, so he set up a stones board on the table with Ingtar. The Shienaran played with a slashing, daring style. Perrin had always played doggedly, giving ground reluctantly, but he found himself placing the stones with as much recklessness as Ingtar. Most of the games ended in a draw, but he managed to win as many as Ingtar did. The Shienaran was eyeing him with a new respect by early evening, when the sniffer returned.

hʊɹɪnz ɡɹɪn wɑz ət ðə seɪm taɪm tʃɹaɪʌmfən ən pɝplɛkst. "aɪ faʊn ðɛm, lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ. lɔɹd ɹænd. aɪ tʃɹækt əm tə ðɛɹ lɛɹ."

Hurin's grin was at the same time triumphant and perplexed. "I found them, Lord Ingtar. Lord Rand. I tracked them to their lair."

"lɛɹ?" ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "ju min ðəɹ haɪɾɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ kloʊs baɪ?"

"Lair?" Ingtar said sharply. "You mean they're hiding somewhere close by?"

"aɪ, lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ. ðə wʌnz u tʊk ðə hɔɹn, aɪ fɑloʊd stʃɹeɪt ðɛɹ, ən ðəɹ wɑz tʃɹɑlɑk sɛn ɔl ɝaʊn ðə pleɪs, ðoʊ snikɪŋ əz ɪf ðeɪ dɪdn dɛɹ bi sin, ivən ðɛɹ. ən noʊ wʌndɝ." ðə snɪfɝ tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "ɪts ðə ɡɹeɪt mænɝ lɔɹd bɑɹθeɪnz dʒʌs fɪnɪʃt bɪldɪŋ."

"Aye, Lord Ingtar. The ones who took the Horn, I followed straight there, and there was Trolloc scent all around the place, though sneaking as if they didn't dare be seen, even there. And no wonder." The sniffer took a deep breath. "It's the great manor Lord Barthanes just finished building."

"lɔɹd bɑɹθeɪnz!" ɪŋtʃɹ ɪkskleɪmd. "bʌɾ i . . . hiz . . . hiz. . . ."

"Lord Barthanes!" Ingtar exclaimed. "But he . . . he's . . . he's. . . ."

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz əmʌŋ ðə haɪ əz wɛl əz ðə loʊ," vɛɹɪn sɛd smuðli. "ðə maɪɾi ɡɪv ðɛɹ soʊlz tə ðə ʃædoʊ əz ɔfən əz ðə wik." ɪŋtʃɹ skaʊld əz ɪf i dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk ə ðæt.

"There are Darkfriends among the high as well as the low," Verin said smoothly. "The mighty give their souls to the Shadow as often as the weak." Ingtar scowled as if he did not want to think of that.

"ðɛɹz ɡɑɹdz," hʊɹɪn wɛn ɑn. "wil nɑt ɡɛɾ ɪn wɪð twɛnti mɛn, nɑɾ ən ɡɛɾ aʊɾ əɡɛn. ə hʌnʒɹəd kəd də ɪt, bʌt tu wəd bi bɛɾɝ. ðæts wʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk, maɪ lɔɹd."

"There's guards," Hurin went on. "We'll not get in with twenty men, not and get out again. A hundred could do it, but two would be better. That's what I think, my Lord."

"wʌɾ əbaʊt ðə kɪŋ?" mæt dɪmændəd. "ɪf ðɪs bɑɹθeɪnz ɪz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, ðə kɪŋ wɪl hɛlp ʌs."

"What about the King?" Mat demanded. "If this Barthanes is a Darkfriend, the King will help us."

"aɪ æm kwaɪt ʃʊɹ," vɛɹɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "ðæt ɡɔlʒɹiən ɹieɪɾən wəd muv əɡɛns bɑɹθeɪnz dəmədʒɹɾ ɑn ðə ɹumɝ ðət bɑɹθeɪnz ɪz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, ən ɡlæɾ ə ði ɪkskjus. aɪm ɔlsoʊ kwaɪt ʃʊɹ ɡɔlʒɹiən wəd nɛvɝ lɛt ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ aʊɾ ə hɪz ɡɹæsp wʌns i hæɾ ɪt. hi wəd bɹɪŋ ɪɾ aʊɾ ɑn fistdeɪz tə ʃoʊ ðə pipəl ən tɛl əm haʊ ɡɹeɪɾ ən maɪɾi kɛɹhin ɪz, ən noʊ wʌn wəɾ ɛvɝ si ɪɾ ɛls."

"I am quite sure," Verin said dryly, "that Galldrian Riatin would move against Barthanes Damodred on the rumor that Barthanes is a Darkfriend, and glad of the excuse. I am also quite sure Galldrian would never let the Horn of Valere out of his grasp once he had it. He would bring it out on feastdays to show the people and tell them how great and mighty Cairhien is, and no one would ever see it else."

pɛɹɪn blɪŋkt wɪð ʃɑk. "bʌt ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ əz tə bi ðəɹ wən ðə læs bæɾəl ɪz fɔt. hi kʊdn dʒʌs kip ɪt."

Perrin blinked with shock. "But the Horn of Valere has to be there when the Last Battle is fought. He couldn't just keep it."

"aɪ noʊ lɪɾəl ə kɛɹhinɪn," ɪŋtʃɹ toʊl hɪm, "bʌɾ aɪv hɝɾ ɪnʌf ʌv ɡɔlʒɹiən. hi wəd fist əs ən θæŋk əs fəɹ ðə ɡlɔɹi wi hæd bɹɔt tə kɛɹhin. hi wəd stʌf əɹ pɑkəts wɪð ɡoʊld ən hip ɑnɝz ɑn əɹ hɛdz. ən ɪf wi tʃɹaɪd tə liv wɪð ðə hɔɹn, hid kʌɾ əɹ ɑnɝd hɛdz ɔf wɪθaʊt pɔzɪŋ tə teɪk ə bɹɛθ."

"I know little of Cairhienin," Ingtar told him, "but I've heard enough of Galldrian. He would feast us and thank us for the glory we had brought to Cairhien. He would stuff our pockets with gold and heap honors on our heads. And if we tried to leave with the Horn, he'd cut our honored heads off without pausing to take a breath."

pɛɹɪn ɹæn ə hæn θɹu hɪz hɛɹ. ðə mɔɹ i faʊn aʊɾ əbaʊt kɪŋz, ðə lɛs i laɪk ðɛm.

Perrin ran a hand through his hair. The more he found out about kings, the less he liked them.

"wʌɾ əbaʊt ðə dæɡɝ?" mæt æsk dɪfəɾəntli. "hi wʊdnt wɑn ðæt, wəd hi?" ɪŋtʃɹ ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɪm, ən i ʃɪftəɾ ənkʌmftəbli. "aɪ noʊ ðə hɔɹn ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt, bʌɾ aɪm nɑt gɑnə bi faɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə læs bæɾəl. ðət dæɡɝ. . . ."

"What about the dagger?" Mat asked diffidently. "He wouldn't want that, would he?" Ingtar glared at him, and he shifted uncomfortably. "I know the Horn is important, but I'm not going to be fighting in the Last Battle. That dagger. . . ."

vɛɹɪn ɹɛstəɾ əɹ hænz ɑn ði ɑɹmz ə hɝ tʃɛɹ. "ɡɔlʒɹiən ʃæl nɑɾ əv ɪt, iðɝ. wʌt wi niɾ ɪz səm weɪ ɪnsaɪd bɑɹθeɪnzəz mænɝ haʊs. ɪf wi kən oʊnli faɪn ðə hɔɹn, wi meɪ ɔlsoʊ faɪn ə weɪ tə teɪk ɪt bæk. jɛs, mæt, ən ðə dæɡɝ. wʌns ɪts noʊn ðəɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪz ɪn ðə sɪɾi - wɛl, aɪ juʒəwəli əvɔɪd ðiz θɪŋz, bʌɾ ɪf aɪ lɛt slɪp tə tidʒɹə ðəɾ aɪ wəd laɪk tə si bɑɹθeɪnzəz nu mænɝ, aɪ ʃəɾ əv ən ɪnvɪteɪʃən ɪn ə deɪ əɹ tu. ɪt ʃəd nɑt bi dɪfəkəl tə bɹɪŋ ət list səm ə ðə ɹɛst ə ju. wʌɾ ɪz ɪt, hʊɹɪn?"

Verin rested her hands on the arms of her chair. "Galldrian shall not have it, either. What we need is some way inside Barthanes's manor house. If we can only find the Horn, we may also find a way to take it back. Yes, Mat, and the dagger. Once it is known that an Aes Sedai is in the city - well, I usually avoid these things, but if I let slip to Tiedra that I would like to see Barthanes's new manor, I should have an invitation in a day or two. It should not be difficult to bring at least some of the rest of you. What is it, Hurin?"

ðə snɪfɝ hæd bɪn ɹɑkɪŋ æŋkʃəsli ɑn ɪz hilz fɹəm ðə moʊmənt ʃi mɛnʃən ən ɪnvɪteɪʃən. "lɔɹd ɹænd ɔlɹɛɾi hæz wʌn. fɹəm lɔɹd bɑɹθeɪnz."

The sniffer had been rocking anxiously on his heels from the moment she mentioned an invitation. "Lord Rand already has one. From Lord Barthanes."

pɛɹɪn stɛɹɾ ət ɹænd, ən i wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn.

Perrin stared at Rand, and he was not the only one.

ɹænd pʊl tu sil pɑɹtʃməns fɹəm ɪz koʊt pɑkəɾ ən hændəɾ əm tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd.

Rand pulled two sealed parchments from his coat pocket and handed them to the Aes Sedai without a word.

ɪŋtʃɹ keɪm tə lʊk wʌndɝɪŋli oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ət ðə silz. "bɑɹθeɪnz, ænd. . . . ən ɡɔlʒɹiən! ɹænd, haʊ dɪd jə kʌm baɪ ðiz? wʌɾ əv jə bɪn duɪŋ?"

Ingtar came to look wonderingly over her shoulder at the seals. "Barthanes, and. . . . And Galldrian! Rand, how did you come by these? What have you been doing?"

"nʌθɪŋ," ɹænd sɛd. "aɪ hævən dʌn ɛniθɪŋ. ðeɪ dʒʌst sɛn əm tə mi." ɪŋtʃɹ lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ. mæts maʊθ wɑz hæŋɪŋ oʊpən. "wɛl, ðeɪ dɪd dʒʌst sɛn ðɛm," ɹænd sɛd kwaɪətli. ðəɹ wɑz ə dɪɡnəɾi tə hɪm ðət pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ; ɹænd wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə ʃaɪnɝən lɔɹɾ əz ikwəlz.

"Nothing," Rand said. "I haven't done anything. They just sent them to me." Ingtar let out a long breath. Mat's mouth was hanging open. "Well, they did just send them," Rand said quietly. There was a dignity to him that Perrin did not remember; Rand was looking at the Aes Sedai and the Shienaran lord as equals.

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. jə ɑɹ fɪɾɪŋ ðət koʊt. wɝ ɔl tʃeɪnʒɪŋ.

Perrin shook his head. You are fitting that coat. We're all changing.

"lɔɹd ɹænd bɝn ɔl ðə ɹɛst," hʊɹɪn sɛd. "ɛvɹi deɪ ðeɪ keɪm, ən ɛvɹi deɪ hi bɝn ðɛm. əntɪl ðiz, ʌv kɔɹs. ɛvɹi deɪ fɹəm maɪtaɪɝ haʊsəz." hi saʊndəd pɹaʊd.

"Lord Rand burned all the rest," Hurin said. "Every day they came, and every day he burned them. Until these, of course. Every day from mightier Houses." He sounded proud.

"ðə wil ə taɪm wivz əs ɔl ɪndə ðə pæɾɝn əz ɪt wɪlz," vɛɹɪn sɛd, lʊkɪŋ ət ðə pɑɹtʃməns, "bʌt səmtaɪmz ɪt pɹəvaɪdz wʌt wi nid bɪfɔɹ wi noʊ wi niɾ ɪt."

"The Wheel of Time weaves us all into the Pattern as it wills," Verin said, looking at the parchments, "but sometimes it provides what we need before we know we need it."

kæʒəwəli ʃi kɹʌmpəl ðə kɪŋz ɪnvɪteɪʃən ən tɔst ɪɾ ɪndə ðə faɪɝpleɪs, wɛɹ ɪt leɪ waɪɾ ɑn ðə koʊld lɔɡz. bɹeɪkɪŋ ði ʌðɝ sil wɪð əɹ θʌm, ʃi ɹɛd. "jɛs. jɛs, ðɪs wɪl də vɛɹi wɛl."

Casually she crumpled the King's invitation and tossed it into the fireplace, where it lay white on the cold logs. Breaking the other seal with her thumb, she read. "Yes. Yes, this will do very well."

"haʊ kən aɪ ɡoʊ?" ɹænd æsk hɝ. "ðeɪ wɪl noʊ ɪm noʊ lɔɹd. aɪm ə ʃɛpɝd, ən ə fɑɹmɝ." ɪŋtʃɹ lʊk skɛptəkəl. "aɪ æm, ɪŋtʃɹ. aɪ toʊl jə aɪ æm." ɪŋtʃɹ ʃɹʌɡd; hi stɪl dɪd nɑt lʊk kənvɪnst. hʊɹɪn stɛɹɾ ət ɹænd wɪð flæt dɪsbɪlif.

"How can I go?" Rand asked her. "They will know I'm no lord. I am a shepherd, and a farmer." Ingtar looked skeptical. "I am, Ingtar. I told you I am." Ingtar shrugged; he still did not look convinced. Hurin stared at Rand with flat disbelief.

bɝn mi, pɛɹɪn θɔt, ɪf aɪ dɪdnt noʊ hɪm, aɪ wʊdn bɪliv ɪɾ iðɝ. mæt wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ɹænd wɪð ɪz hɛd tɪltəd, fɹaʊnɪŋ əz ɪf lʊkɪŋ ət sʌmθɪŋ i hæd nɛvɝ sin bɪfɔɹ. hi siz ɪt, tu, naʊ. "ju kən də ɪt, ɹænd," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ju kæn."

Burn me, Perrin thought, if I didn't know him, I wouldn't believe it either. Mat was watching Rand with his head tilted, frowning as if looking at something he had never seen before. He sees it, too, now. "You can do it, Rand," Perrin said. "You can."

"ɪt wɪl hɛlp," vɛɹɪn sɛd, "ɪf jə doʊn tɛl ɛvɹiwʌn wʌt jə ɑɹ nɑt. pipəl si wʌt ðeɪ ɪkspɛk tə si. bɪɑn ðæt, lʊk əm ɪn ði aɪ ən spik fɝmli. ðə weɪ juv bɪn tɔkɪŋ tə mi," ʃi æɾəd dʒɹaɪli, ən ɹændz tʃiks kʌlɝd, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt dʒɹɑp ɪz aɪz. "ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ wʌt jə seɪ. ðəl ətʃɹɪbjuɾ ɛniθɪŋ aʊɾ ə pleɪs tə jəɹ biɪŋ ən aʊtləndɝ. ɪɾəl ɔlsoʊ hɛlp ɪf jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə weɪ jə bɪheɪv bɪfɔɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn. ɪf jə ɑɹ ðəɾ ɛɹəɡənt, ðəl bɪliv jə ɑɹ ə lɔɹɾ ɪf jə wɛɹ ɹæɡz." mæt snɪkɝd.

"It will help," Verin said, "if you don't tell everyone what you are not. People see what they expect to see. Beyond that, look them in the eye and speak firmly. The way you have been talking to me," she added dryly, and Rand's cheeks colored, but he did not drop his eyes. "It doesn't matter what you say. They will attribute anything out of place to your being an outlander. It will also help if you remember the way you behaved before the Amyrlin. If you are that arrogant, they will believe you are a lord if you wear rags." Mat snickered.

ɹænd θɹu ʌp ɪz hænz. "ɔl ɹaɪt. əl də ɪt. bʌɾ aɪ stɪl θɪŋk ðəl noʊ faɪv mɪnəts æftɝ aɪ oʊpən maɪ maʊθ. wɛn?"

Rand threw up his hands. "All right. I'll do it. But I still think they will know five minutes after I open my mouth. When?"

"bɑɹθeɪnz əz æsk jə fəɹ faɪv dɪfɹən deɪts, ən wʌn ɪz təmɑɹoʊ naɪt."

"Barthanes has asked you for five different dates, and one is tomorrow night."

"təmɑɹoʊ!" ɪŋtʃɹ ɪksploʊɾəd. "ðə hɔɹn kəd bi fɪfti maɪlz daʊnɹɪvɝ baɪ təmɑɹoʊ naɪt, əɹ - "

"Tomorrow!" Ingtar exploded. "The Horn could be fifty miles downriver by tomorrow night, or - "

vɛɹɪn kʌɾ ɪm ɔf. "ənoʊ ən jəɹ soʊlʒɝz kən wɑtʃ ðə mænɝ. ɪf ðeɪ tʃɹaɪ tə teɪk ðə hɔɹn ɛniwɛɹ, wi kən izəli fɑloʊ, ən pɝhæps ɹɪtʃɹiv ɪt mɔɹ izəli ðən fɹəm ɪnsaɪd bɑɹθeɪnzəz wɔlz."

Verin cut him off. "Uno and your soldiers can watch the manor. If they try to take the Horn anywhere, we can easily follow, and perhaps retrieve it more easily than from inside Barthanes's walls."

"pɝhæps soʊ," ɪŋtʃɹ əɡɹid ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli. "aɪ dʒʌs də nɑt laɪk tə weɪt, naʊ ðət ðə hɔɹn ɪz ɔlmoʊst ɪn maɪ hænz. əl əv ɪt. aɪ mʌst! aɪ mʌst!"

"Perhaps so," Ingtar agreed grudgingly. "I just do not like to wait, now that the Horn is almost in my hands. I will have it. I must! I must!"

hʊɹɪn stɛɹɾ ət hɪm. "bʌt, lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ, ðəɾ ɪzən ðə weɪ. wʌt hæpənz, hæpənz, ən wʌɾ ɪz mɛn tə bi, wɪl - " ɪŋtʃɹz ɡlɛɹ kʌɾ ɪm ɔf, ðoʊ hi stɪl mʌɾɝd ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, "ɪɾ ɪzən ðə weɪ, tɔkɪŋ ʌv 'mʌst.' "

Hurin stared at him. "But, Lord Ingtar, that isn't the way. What happens, happens, and what is meant to be, will - " Ingtar's glare cut him off, though he still muttered under his breath, "It isn't the way, talking of 'must.' "

ɪŋtʃɹ tɝn bæk tə vɛɹɪn stɪfli. "vɛɹɪn sədaɪ, kɛɹhinɪn ɑɹ vɛɹi stʃɹɪkt ɪn ðɛɹ pɹoʊɾəkɑl. ɪf ɹænd dʌz nɑt sɛn ə ɹɪplaɪ, bɑɹθeɪnz meɪ bi soʊ ɪnsʌltɪd hɪl nɑt lɛɾ əs ɪn, ivən wɪð ðət pɑɹtʃmən ɪn əɹ hænz. bʌɾ ɪf ɹænd dʌz . . . wɛl, feɪn, ət list, noʊz hɪm. wi kəd bi wɔɹnɪŋ əm tə sɛɾ ə tʃɹæp."

Ingtar turned back to Verin stiffly. "Verin Sedai, Cairhienin are very strict in their protocol. If Rand does not send a reply, Barthanes may be so insulted he will not let us in, even with that parchment in our hands. But if Rand does . . . well, Fain, at least, knows him. We could be warning them to set a trap."

"wi wɪl sɝpɹaɪz ðɛm." hɝ bɹif smaɪl wɑz nɑt plɛzənt. "bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk bɑɹθeɪnz wɪl wɑnə si ɹænd ɪn ɛni keɪs. dɑɹkfɹɛn əɹ nɑt, aɪ daʊt hiz ɡɪvən ʌp plɑts əɡɛns ðə θɹoʊn. ɹænd, hi sɛz jə tʊk ən ɪntʃɹəst ɪn wʌn ə ðə kɪŋz pɹɑdʒɛks, bʌɾ i dʌzn seɪ wʌt. wʌt dʌz i min?"

"We will surprise them." Her brief smile was not pleasant. "But I think Barthanes will want to see Rand in any case. Darkfriend or not, I doubt he has given up plots against the throne. Rand, he says you took an interest in one of the King's projects, but he doesn't say what. What does he mean?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ," ɹænd sɛd sloʊli. "aɪ hævən dʌn ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl sɪns aɪ ɝaɪvd. weɪt. meɪbi hi minz ðə stætʃu. wi keɪm θɹu ə vɪlədʒ wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ dɪɡɪŋ ʌp ə hjudʒ stætʃu. fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, ðeɪ sɛd. ðə kɪŋ minz tə muv ɪt tə kɛɹhin, ðoʊ aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ hi kən muv sʌmθɪŋ ðət bɪɡ. bʌɾ ɔl aɪ dɪd wɑz æsk wʌɾ ɪt wɑz."

"I don't know," Rand said slowly. "I haven't done anything at all since I arrived. Wait. Maybe he means the statue. We came through a village where they were digging up a huge statue. From the Age of Legends, they said. The King means to move it to Cairhien, though I don't know how he can move something that big. But all I did was ask what it was."

"wi pæst ɪɾ ɪn ðə deɪ, ən dɪd nɑt stɑp tə æsk kwɛstʃənz." vɛɹɪn lɛt ði ɪnvɪteɪʃən fɔl ɪn əɹ læp. "nɑɾ ə waɪz θɪŋ fəɹ ɡɔlʒɹiən tə du, pɝhæps, ənɝθəŋ ðæt. nɑt ðət ðəɹ ɪz ɛni ɹil deɪnʒɝ, bʌɾ ɪts nɛvɝ waɪz fəɹ ðoʊz u doʊnt noʊ wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ duɪŋ tə mɛɾəl wɪð θɪŋz fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz."

"We passed it in the day, and did not stop to ask questions." Verin let the invitation fall in her lap. "Not a wise thing for Galldrian to do, perhaps, unearthing that. Not that there is any real danger, but it is never wise for those who don't know what they are doing to meddle with things from the Age of Legends."

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?" ɹænd æskt.

"What is it?" Rand asked.

"ə sɑŋɡɹil." ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ɹɪli nɑt vɛɹi ɪmpɔɹɾənt, bʌt pɛɹɪn sʌɾənli hæd ðə filɪŋ ðə tu ʌv əm hæɾ ɛntɝɾ ə pɹaɪvət kɑnvɝseɪʃən, seɪɪŋ θɪŋz noʊ wʌn ɛls kəd hɪɹ. "wʌn ʌv ə pɛɹ, ðə tu lɑɹdʒəst ɛvɝ meɪd, ðət wi noʊ ʌv. ən ən ɑd pɛɹ, əz wɛl. wʌn, stɪl bɛɹiɾ ɑn tʃɹɛmælkɪŋ, kən oʊnli bi juz baɪ ə wʊmən. ðɪs wʌn kən oʊnli bi juz baɪ ə mæn. ðeɪ wɝ meɪd dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə paʊɝz, tə bi ə wɛpən, bʌɾ ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ɛniθɪŋ tə bi θæŋkfəl fəɹ ɪn ði ɛn ə ðəɾ eɪdʒ əɹ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, ɪts ðət ði ɛn keɪm bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd bi juzd. təɡɛðɝ, ðeɪ maɪt wɛl bi paʊɝfəl ɪnʌf tə bɹeɪk ðə wɝld əɡɛn, pɝhæps ivən wɝs ðən ðə fɝs bɹeɪkɪŋ."

"A sa'angreal." She sounded as if it were really not very important, but Perrin suddenly had the feeling the two of them had entered a private conversation, saying things no one else could hear. "One of a pair, the two largest ever made, that we know of. And an odd pair, as well. One, still buried on Tremalking, can only be used by a woman. This one can only be used by a man. They were made during the War of the Powers, to be a weapon, but if there is anything to be thankful for in the end of that Age or the Breaking of the World, it is that the end came before they could be used. Together, they might well be powerful enough to Break the World again, perhaps even worse than the first Breaking."

pɛɹɪnz hænz taɪɾənd tə nɑts. hi əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ dɝɛkli ət ɹænd, bʌɾ ivən fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ hi kəd si ə waɪtnəs ɝaʊn ɹændz maʊθ. hi θɔt ɹænd maɪt bi əfɹeɪd, ən i dɪd nɑt bleɪm ɪm ə bɪt.

Perrin's hands tightened to knots. He avoided looking directly at Rand, but even from the corner of his eye he could see a whiteness around Rand's mouth. He thought Rand might be afraid, and he did not blame him a bit.

ɪŋtʃɹ lʊkt ʃeɪkən, əz wɛl i maɪt. "ðæt θɪŋ ʃəd bi bɛɹiɾ əɡɛn, ən əz dipli əz ðeɪ kən paɪl dɝɾ ən stoʊn. wʌt wʊɾə hæpən ɪf lɑɡən hæd faʊn ɪt? əɹ ɛni ɹɛtʃɪd mæn u kən tʃænəl, lɛɾ əloʊn wʌn kleɪmɪŋ hiz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. vɛɹɪn sədaɪ, jə mʌst wɔɹn ɡɔlʒɹiən wʌt hiz duɪŋ."

Ingtar looked shaken, as well he might. "That thing should be buried again, and as deeply as they can pile dirt and stone. What would have happened if Logain had found it? Or any wretched man who can channel, let alone one claiming he's the Dragon Reborn. Verin Sedai, you must warn Galldrian what he's doing."

"wʌt? oʊ, ðəɹ ɪz noʊ nid fəɹ ðæt, aɪ θɪŋk. ðə tu mʌs bi juzd ɪn junəsən tə hændəl ɪnʌf ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ tə bɹeɪk ðə wɝld - ðət wɑz ðə weɪ ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz; ə mæn ən ə wʊmən wɝkɪŋ təɡɛðɝ wɝ ɔlweɪz tɛn taɪmz əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ðeɪ wɝ əpɑɹt - ən wʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ tədeɪ wəɾ eɪɾ ə mæn ɪn tʃænəlɪŋ? wʌn baɪ ɪtsɛlf ɪz paʊɝfəl ɪnʌf, bʌɾ aɪ kən θɪŋk ə fju wɪmən stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə sɝvaɪv ðə floʊ θɹu ðə wʌn ɑn tʃɹɛmælkɪŋ. ði æmɪɝlɪn, ʌv kɔɹs. mɔɪɹeɪn, ən ɪleɪɾə. pɝhæps wʌn əɹ tu ʌðɝz. ən θɹi stɪl ɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ. əz fəɹ lɑɡən, ɪt wʊɾə teɪkən ɔl ɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ sɪmpli tə kip fɹəm biɪŋ bɝn tə ə sɪndɝ, wɪð nʌθɪŋ lɛft fəɹ duɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ. noʊ, ɪŋtʃɹ, aɪ doʊn θɪŋk jə nid wɝi. ət list, nɑɾ əntɪl ðə ɹil dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn pɹoʊkleɪmz hɪmsɛlf, ən ðən wɪl ɔl əv ɪnʌf tə wɝi əbaʊɾ əz ɪɾ ɪz. lɛɾ əs wɝi naʊ əbaʊt wʌt wi ʃæl də wən wəɹ ɪnsaɪd bɑɹθeɪnzəz mænɝ."

"What? Oh, there is no need for that, I think. The two must be used in unison to handle enough of the One Power to Break the World - that was the way in the Age of Legends; a man and a woman working together were always ten times as strong as they were apart - and what Aes Sedai today would aid a man in channeling? One by itself is powerful enough, but I can think of few women strong enough to survive the flow through the one on Tremalking. The Amyrlin, of course. Moiraine, and Elaida. Perhaps one or two others. And three still in training. As for Logain, it would have taken all his strength simply to keep from being burned to a cinder, with nothing left for doing anything. No, Ingtar, I don't think you need worry. At least, not until the real Dragon Reborn proclaims himself, and then we will all have enough to worry about as it is. Let us worry now about what we shall do when we are inside Barthanes's manor."

ʃi wɑz tɔkɪŋ tə ɹænd. pɛɹɪn nu ɪt, ən fɹəm ðə kwizi lʊk ɪn mæts aɪ, hi dɪd, tu. ivən lɔɪəl ʃɪftəd nɝvəsli ɪn ɪz tʃɛɹ. oʊ, laɪt, ɹænd, pɛɹɪn θɔt. laɪt, doʊn lɛɾ əɹ juz ju.

She was talking to Rand. Perrin knew it, and from the queasy look in Mat's eye, he did, too. Even Loial shifted nervously in his chair. Oh, Light, Rand, Perrin thought. Light, don't let her use you.

ɹændz hænz wɝ pɹɛsɪŋ ðə teɪbəltɑp soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ ɪz nʌkəlz wɝ waɪt, bʌɾ ɪz vɔɪs wɑz stɛɾi. hɪz aɪz nɛvɝ lɛf ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. "fɝst wɪv tə teɪk bæk ðə hɔɹn, ən ðə dæɡɝ. ən ðən ɪts dʌn, vɛɹɪn. ðən ɪts dʌn."

Rand's hands were pressing the tabletop so hard that his knuckles were white, but his voice was steady. His eyes never left the Aes Sedai. "First we have to take back the Horn, and the dagger. And then it is done, Verin. Then it is done."

wɑtʃɪŋ vɛɹɪnz smaɪl, smɔl ən mɪstɪɹiəs, pɛɹɪn fɛlt ə tʃɪl. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɹænd nu hæf wʌɾ i θɔɾ i dɪd. nɑt hæf.

Watching Verin's smile, small and mysterious, Perrin felt a chill. He did not think Rand knew half what he thought he did. Not half.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾitu


CHAPTER 32

deɪnʒɝəs wɝdz


Dangerous Words

lɔɹd bɑɹθeɪnzəz mænɝ kɹaʊtʃt laɪk ə hjudʒ toʊɾ ɪn ðə naɪt, kʌvɝɪŋ əz mʌtʃ ɡɹaʊn əz ə fɔɹtʃɹəs, wɪð ɔl ɪts wɔlz ən aʊtbɪldɪŋz. ɪt wɑz noʊ fɔɹtʃɹəs, ðoʊ, wɪð tɔl wɪndoʊz ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ən laɪts, ən ðə saʊnz ə mjuzɪk ən læftɝ dʒɹɪftɪŋ aʊt, jɛt ɹænd sɔ ɡɑɹdz muvɪŋ ɑn ðə taʊɝ tɑps ən əlɔŋ ðə ɹufwɔks, ən nʌn ə ðə wɪndoʊz wɝ kloʊs tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hi ɡɑt daʊn fɹəm ɹɛdz bæk ən smuðd ɪz koʊt, ədʒʌstəɾ ɪz sɔɹd bɛlt. ði ʌðɝz dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ɝaʊn hɪm, ət ðə fʊɾ ə bɹɔd, waɪtstoʊn stɛɹz liɾɪŋ ʌp tə ðə waɪd, hɛvəli kɑɹv dɔɹz ə ðə mænɝ.

Lord Barthanes's manor crouched like a huge toad in the night, covering as much ground as a fortress, with all its walls and outbuildings. It was no fortress, though, with tall windows everywhere, and lights, and the sounds of music and laughter drifting out, yet Rand saw guards moving on the tower tops and along the roofwalks, and none of the windows were close to the ground. He got down from Red's back and smoothed his coat, adjusted his sword belt. The others dismounted around him, at the foot of broad, whitestone stairs leading up to the wide, heavily carved doors of the manor.

tɛn ʃaɪnɝənz, ʌndɝ ənoʊ, meɪɾ ən ɛskɔɹt. ðə wʌn-aɪd mæn ɪkstʃeɪnʒd smɔl nɑdz wɪð ɪŋtʃɹ bɪfɔɹ teɪkɪŋ ɪz mɛn tə dʒɔɪn ði ʌðɝ ɛskɔɹts, wɛɹ eɪl hæd bɪn pɹəvaɪɾəd ən ə hoʊl ɑks wɑz ɹoʊstɪŋ ɑn ə spɪt baɪ ə bɪɡ faɪɝ.

Ten Shienarans, under Uno, made an escort. The one-eyed man exchanged small nods with Ingtar before taking his men to join the other escorts, where ale had been provided and a whole ox was roasting on a spit by a big fire.

ði ʌðɝ tɛn ʃaɪnɝənz hæd bɪn lɛf bɪhaɪnd, əlɔŋ wɪð pɛɹɪn. ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm hæd tə bi ðəɹ fəɹ ə pɝpəs, vɛɹɪn hæd sɛd, ən pɛɹɪn hæd noʊ pɝpəs tə sɝv ðɪs naɪt. ən ɛskɔɹt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi fəɹ dɪɡnəɾi ɪn kɛɹhinɪn aɪz, bʌt mɔɹ ðən tɛn wəd sim səspɪʃəs. ɹænd wɑz ðəɹ kəz i hæd ɹəsiv ði ɪnvɪteɪʃən. ɪŋtʃɹ hæd kʌm tə lɛn ðə pɹɛstiʒ ə hɪz taɪɾəl, waɪl lɔɪəl wɑz ðəɹ kəz oʊɡiɝ wɝ sɔɾ æftɝ ɪn ði ʌpɝ ɹitʃəz ə ðə kɛɹhinɪn noʊbɪləɾi. hʊɹɪn pɹitɛndəd tə bi ɪŋtʃɹz bɑdaɪsɝvənt. hɪz tʃɹu pɝpəs wɑz tə snɪf aʊt ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən tʃɹɑləks ɪf i kʊd; ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ʃəd nɑt bi fɑɹ fɹəm ðɛm. mæt, stɪl ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt, wɑz pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi ɹændz sɝvənt, sɪns i kəd fil ðə dæɡɝ wən ɪt wɑz kloʊs. ɪf hʊɹɪn feɪld, pɝhæps i kəd faɪn ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz.

The other ten Shienarans had been left behind, along with Perrin. Every one of them had to be there for a purpose, Verin had said, and Perrin had no purpose to serve this night. An escort was necessary for dignity in Cairhienin eyes, but more than ten would seem suspicious. Rand was there because he had received the invitation. Ingtar had come to lend the prestige of his title, while Loial was there because Ogier were sought after in the upper reaches of the Cairhienin nobility. Hurin pretended to be Ingtar's bodyservant. His true purpose was to sniff out the Darkfriends and Trollocs if he could; the Horn of Valere should not be far from them. Mat, still grumbling about it, was pretending to be Rand's servant, since he could feel the dagger when it was close. If Hurin failed, perhaps he could find the Darkfriends.

wən ɹænd hæɾ æsk vɛɹɪn waɪ ʃi wɑz ðɛɹ, ʃi hæɾ oʊnli smaɪld ən sɛd, "tə kip ðə ɹɛst ə jə aʊɾ ə tʃɹʌbəl."

When Rand had asked Verin why she was there, she had only smiled and said, "To keep the rest of you out of trouble."

əz ðeɪ maʊntəd ðə stɛɹz, mæt mʌɾɝd, "aɪ stɪl doʊn si waɪ aɪ hæv tə bi ə sɝvənt." hi ən hʊɹɪn fɑloʊd bɪhaɪn ði ʌðɝz. "bɝn mi, ɪf ɹænd kən bi ə lɔɹd, aɪ kən pʊɾ ɑn ə fænsi koʊt, tu."

As they mounted the stairs, Mat muttered, "I still don't see why I have to be a servant." He and Hurin followed behind the others. "Burn me, if Rand can be a lord, I can put on a fancy coat, too."

"ə sɝvənt," vɛɹɪn sɛd wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ bæk ət hɪm, "kæn ɡoʊ mɛni pleɪsəz ənʌðɝ mæn kænɑt, ən mɛni noʊbəlz wɪl nɑɾ ivən si hɪm. jə ən hʊɹɪn əv jəɹ tæsks."

"A servant," Verin said without looking back at him, "can go many places another man cannot, and many nobles will not even see him. You and Hurin have your tasks."

"bi kwaɪət naʊ, mæt," ɪŋtʃɹ pʊɾ ɪn, "ənlɛs jə wɑnə ɡɪv əs əweɪ." ðeɪ wɝ əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ðə dɔɹz, wɛɹ hæf ə dʌzən ɡɑɹdz stʊd wɪð ðə tʃɹi ən kɹaʊn ə haʊs dəmədʒɹɾ ɑn ðɛɹ tʃɛsts, ən ən ikwəl nʌmbɝ ə mɛn ɪn dɑɹk ɡɹin lɪvɝi wɪð tʃɹi ən kɹaʊn ɑn ðə sliv.

"Be quiet now, Mat," Ingtar put in, "unless you want to give us away." They were approaching the doors, where half a dozen guards stood with the Tree and Crown of House Damodred on their chests, and an equal number of men in dark green livery with Tree and Crown on the sleeve.

teɪkɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ɹænd pɹɑfɝd ði ɪnvɪteɪʃən. "aɪ æm lɔɹd ɹænd ə haʊs ælθɹ," hi sɛɾ ɔl ɪn ə ɹʌʃ, tə ɡɛɾ ɪɾ oʊvɝ wɪð. "æn ðiz ɑɹ maɪ ɡɛsts. vɛɹɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə bɹaʊn ədʒɑ. lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ ə haʊs ʃɪnoʊwə, ɪn ʃaɪnɝ. lɔɪəl, sʌn ʌv ɑɹən sʌn ə hɑlən, fɹəm stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ." lɔɪəl hæɾ æsk ðəɾ ɪz stɛɾɪŋ bi lɛft aʊɾ ʌv ɪt, bʌt vɛɹɪn ɪnsɪstəd ðeɪ niɾəd ɛvɹi bɪɾ ə fɔɹmæləɾi ðeɪ kəɾ ɔfɝ.

Taking a deep breath, Rand proffered the invitation. "I am Lord Rand of House al'Thor," he said all in a rush, to get it over with. "And these are my guests. Verin Aes Sedai of the Brown Ajah. Lord Ingtar of House Shinowa, in Shienar. Loial, son of Arent son of Halan, from Stedding Shangtai." Loial had asked that his stedding be left out of it, but Verin insisted they needed every bit of formality they could offer.

ðə sɝvən u hæd ɹitʃt fəɹ ði ɪnvɪteɪʃən wɪð ə pɝfʌŋktɝi baʊ ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl dʒɝk əɾ itʃ ədɪʃənəl neɪm; hɪz aɪz pɑpt ət vɛɹɪnz. ɪn ə stʃɹæŋɡəl vɔɪs i sɛd, "bi wɛlkəm ɪn haʊs dəmədʒɹd, maɪ lɔɹdz. bi wɛlkəm, ɛɛs sədaɪ. bi wɛlkəm, fɹɛn oʊɡiɝ." hi weɪv ði ʌðɝ sɝvəns tə oʊpən ðə dɔɹz waɪd, ən baʊd ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz ɪnsaɪd, wɛɹ i hɝidli pæs ði ɪnvɪteɪʃən tə ənʌðɝ lɪvɹid mæn ən wɪspɝɾ ɪn ɪz ɪɹ.

The servant who had reached for the invitation with a perfunctory bow gave a little jerk at each additional name; his eyes popped at Verin's. In a strangled voice he said, "Be welcome in House Damodred, my lords. Be welcome, Aes Sedai. Be welcome, friend Ogier." He waved the other servants to open the doors wide, and bowed Rand and the others inside, where he hurriedly passed the invitation to another liveried man and whispered in his ear.

ðɪs mæn hæd ðə tʃɹi ən kɹaʊn lɑɹdʒ ɑn ðə tʃɛst ə hɪz ɡɹin koʊt. "ɛɛs sədaɪ," hi sɛd, juzɪŋ ɪz lɔŋ stæf tə meɪk ə baʊ, ɔlmoʊs bɛndɪŋ ɪz hɛd tə hɪz niz, tə itʃ ə ðɛm ɪn tɝn. "maɪ lɔɹdz. fɹɛn oʊɡiɝ. aɪm kɔld æʃɪn. pliz tə fɑloʊ mi."

This man had the Tree and Crown large on the chest of his green coat. "Aes Sedai," he said, using his long staff to make a bow, almost bending his head to his knees, to each of them in turn. "My lords. Friend Ogier. I am called Ashin. Please to follow me."

ði aʊɾɝ hɔl hɛld oʊnli sɝvəns, bʌɾ æʃɪn lɛɾ əm tə ə ɡɹeɪt ɹum fɪld wɪð noʊbəlz, wɪð ə dʒʌɡəlɝ pɝfɔɹmɪŋ ət wʌn ɛn ən tʌmblɝz ət ði ʌðɝ. vɔɪsəz ən mjuzɪk kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ɛlswɛɹ sɛd ðiz wɝ nɑt ði oʊnli ɡɛsts, əɹ ði oʊnli ɛntɝteɪnməns. ðə noʊbəlz stʊɾ ɪn tuz, ən θɹiz ən fɔɹz, səmtaɪmz mɛn ən wɪmən təɡɛðɝ, səmtaɪmz oʊnli wʌn əɹ ði ʌðɝ, ɔlweɪz wɪð kɛɹfəl speɪs bɪtwin soʊ noʊ wʌn kəɾ oʊvɝhɪɹ wʌt wɑz sɛd. ðə ɡɛsts wɔɹ ðə dɑɹk kɛɹhinɪn kʌlɝz, itʃ wɪð bɹaɪt stʃɹaɪps ət lis hæfweɪ daʊn ɪz əɹ əɹ tʃɛst, ən səm hæɾ əm ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðɛɹ weɪsts. ðə wɪmən hæd ðɛɹ hɛɹ paɪl haɪ ɪn ɪlæbɹət taʊɝz ə kɝlz, ɛvɹi wʌn dɪfɹənt, ən ðɛɹ dɑɹk skɝts wɝ soʊ waɪd ðeɪ wʊɾə hæd tə tɝn saɪdweɪz tə pæs θɹu ɛni dɔɹweɪ nɛɹoʊɝ ðən ðoʊz ə ðə mænɝ. nʌn ə ðə mɛn hæd ðə ʃeɪv hɛdz ə soʊlʒɝz - ðeɪ ɔl wɔɹ dɑɹk vɛlvət hæts oʊvɝ lɔŋ hɛɹ, səm ʃeɪp laɪk bɛlz, ʌðɝz flæt - ən əz wɪð ðə wɪmən, leɪs ɹʌfəlz laɪk dɑɹk aɪvɝi ɔlmoʊs hɪd ðɛɹ hænz.

The outer hall held only servants, but Ashin led them to a great room filled with nobles, with a juggler performing at one end and tumblers at the other. Voices and music coming from elsewhere said these were not the only guests, or the only entertainments. The nobles stood in twos, and threes and fours, sometimes men and women together, sometimes only one or the other, always with careful space between so no one could overhear what was said. The guests wore the dark Cairhienin colors, each with bright stripes at least halfway down his or her chest, and some had them all the way to their waists. The women had their hair piled high in elaborate towers of curls, every one different, and their dark skirts were so wide they would have had to turn sideways to pass through any doorway narrower than those of the manor. None of the men had the shaved heads of soldiers - they all wore dark velvet hats over long hair, some shaped like bells, others flat - and as with the women, lace ruffles like dark ivory almost hid their hands.

æʃɪn ɹæpt ɪz stæf ən ənaʊnst əm ɪn ə laʊd vɔɪs, vɛɹɪn fɝst.

Ashin rapped his staff and announced them in a loud voice, Verin first.

ðeɪ dʒɹu ɛvɹi aɪ. vɛɹɪn wɔɹ əɹ bɹaʊn-fɹɪnd ʃɔl, ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɪn ɡɹeɪp vaɪnz; ði ənaʊnsmən ʌv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛn ə mɝmɝ θɹu ðə lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz, ən meɪd ðə dʒʌɡəlɝ dʒɹɑp wʌn ə hɪz hups, ðoʊ noʊ wʌn wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. lɔɪəl ɹəsivd ɔlmoʊst əz mɛni lʊks, ivən bɪfɔɹ æʃɪn spoʊk ɪz neɪm. dɪspaɪt ðə sɪlvɝ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ɑn kɑlɝ ən slivz, ði ʌðɝwaɪz ʌnɹiliv blæk ə ɹændz koʊt meɪɾ ɪm sim ɔlmoʊst stɑɹk bɪsaɪd ðə kɛɹhinɪn, ən ɪz ən ɪŋtʃɹz sɔɹdz dʒɹu mɛni ɡlænsɪz. nʌn ə ðə lɔɹdz əpɪɹd tə bi ɑɹmd. ɹænd hɝd ðə wɝdz "hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd" mɔɹ ðən wʌns. səm ə ðə ɡlænsɪz i wɑz ɹəsivɪŋ lʊk laɪk fɹaʊnz; hi səspɛktəd ðeɪ keɪm fɹəm mɛn i hæɾ ɪnsʌltɪd baɪ bɝnɪŋ ðɛɹ ɪnvɪteɪʃənz.

They drew every eye. Verin wore her brown-fringed shawl, embroidered in grape vines; the announcement of an Aes Sedai sent a murmur through the lords and ladies, and made the juggler drop one of his hoops, though no one was watching him any longer. Loial received almost as many looks, even before Ashin spoke his name. Despite the silver embroidery on collar and sleeves, the otherwise unrelieved black of Rand's coat made him seem almost stark beside the Cairhienin, and his and Ingtar's swords drew many glances. None of the lords appeared to be armed. Rand heard the words "heron-mark blade" more than once. Some of the glances he was receiving looked like frowns; he suspected they came from men he had insulted by burning their invitations.

ə slɪm, hænsəm mæn əpɹoʊtʃt. hi hæd lɔŋ, ɡɹeɪɪŋ hɛɹ, ən mʌltəhud stʃɹaɪps kɹɔs ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz dip ɡɹeɪ koʊt fɹəm ɪz nɛk ɔlmoʊs tə ðə hɛm dʒʌst əbʌv ɪz niz. hi wɑz ɪkstʃɹimli tɔl fəɹ ə kɛɹhinɪn, noʊ mɔɹ ðən hæf ə hɛd ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ɹænd, ən i hæɾ ə weɪ ʌv stændɪŋ ðət meɪɾ ɪm sim ivən tɔlɝ, wɪð ɪz tʃɪn ʌp soʊ hi sim tə bi lʊkɪŋ daʊn əɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls. hɪz aɪz wɝ blæk pɛbəlz. hi lʊkt wɛɹəli ət vɛɹɪn, ðoʊ.

A slim, handsome man approached. He had long, graying hair, and multihued stripes crossed the front of his deep gray coat from his neck almost to the hem just above his knees. He was extremely tall for a Cairhienin, no more than half a head shorter than Rand, and he had a way of standing that made him seem even taller, with his chin up so he seemed to be looking down at everyone else. His eyes were black pebbles. He looked warily at Verin, though.

"ɡɹeɪs ɑnɝz mi wɪð jəɹ pɹɛzəns, ɛɛs sədaɪ." bɑɹθeɪnz dəmədʒɹdz vɔɪs wɑz dip ən ʃʊɹ. hɪz ɡeɪz swɛpt əkɹɔs ði ʌðɝz. "aɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛk soʊ dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃt ə kʌmpəni. lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ. fɹɛn oʊɡiɝ." hɪz baʊ tə itʃ wɑz lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ə nɑɾ ə ðə hɛd; bɑɹθeɪnz nu ɪɡzækli haʊ paʊɝfəl i wɑz. "æn ju, maɪ jʌŋ lɔɹd ɹænd. jə ɪksaɪt mʌtʃ kɑmɛn ɪn ðə sɪɾi, ən ɪn ðə haʊsəz. pɝhæps wɪl əv ə tʃæns tə tɔk ðɪs naɪt." hɪz toʊn sɛd ðəɾ i wəd nɑt mɪs ɪɾ ɪf ðə tʃæns nɛvɝ keɪm, ðəɾ i hæd nɑt bɪn ɪksaɪɾəd tə ɛni kɑmɛnt, bʌɾ ɪz aɪz slɪɾ ə fɹækʃən bɪfɔɹ i kɑt ðɛm, tə ɪŋtʃɹ ən lɔɪəl, ən tə vɛɹɪn. "bi wɛlkəm." hi lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi dʒɹɔn əweɪ baɪ ə hænsəm wʊmən u leɪɾ ə bɛɹɪn hæn bɛɹiɾ ɪn leɪs ɑn ɪz ɑɹm, bʌɾ ɪz ɡeɪz dʒɹɪftəd bæk tə ɹænd əz i wɔkt əweɪ.

"Grace honors me with your presence, Aes Sedai." Barthanes Damodred's voice was deep and sure. His gaze swept across the others. "I did not expect so distinguished a company. Lord Ingtar. Friend Ogier." His bow to each was little more than a nod of the head; Barthanes knew exactly how powerful he was. "And you, my young Lord Rand. You excite much comment in the city, and in the Houses. Perhaps we will have a chance to talk this night." His tone said that he would not miss it if the chance never came, that he had not been excited to any comment, but his eyes slid a fraction before he caught them, to Ingtar and Loial, and to Verin. "Be welcome." He let himself be drawn away by a handsome woman who laid a beringed hand buried in lace on his arm, but his gaze drifted back to Rand as he walked away.

ðə mɝmɝ ə kɑnvɝseɪʃən pɪkt ʌp wʌns mɔɹ, ən ðə dʒʌɡəlɝ spʌn ɪz hups əɡɛn ɪn ə nɛɹoʊ lup ðəɾ ɔlmoʊst ɹitʃt ðə wɝk plæstɝ silɪŋ, ə ɡʊd fɔɹ spænz ʌp. ðə tʌmblɝz hæd nɛvɝ stɑpt; ə wʊmən lɛpt ɪndə ði ɛɹ fɹəm ðə kʌp hænz ʌv wʌn ə hɝ kəmpeɪtʃɹiəts, hɝ ɔɪl skɪn ʃaɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə laɪɾ ʌv ə hʌnʒɹəd læmps əz ʃi spʌn, ən lændəɾ ɑn əɹ fiɾ ɑn ðə hænz ʌv ə mæn u wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi stændɪŋ ətɑp ənʌðɝz ʃoʊldɝz. hi lɪftəɾ əɹ ʌp ɑn aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt ɑɹmz əz ðə mæn bɪloʊ ɹeɪzd ɪm ɪn ðə seɪm weɪ, ən ʃi spɹɛɾ əɹ ɑɹmz əz ɪf fəɹ əplɔz. nʌn ə ðə kɛɹhinɪn sim tə noʊɾəs.

The murmur of conversation picked up once more, and the juggler spun his hoops again in a narrow loop that almost reached the worked plaster ceiling, a good four spans up. The tumblers had never stopped; a woman leaped into the air from the cupped hands of one of her compatriots, her oiled skin shining in the light of a hundred lamps as she spun, and landed on her feet on the hands of a man who was already standing atop another's shoulders. He lifted her up on outstretched arms as the man below raised him in the same way, and she spread her arms as if for applause. None of the Cairhienin seemed to notice.

vɛɹɪn ən ɪŋtʃɹ dʒɹɪftəɾ ɪndə ðə kɹaʊd. ðə ʃaɪnɝən ɹəsivd ə fju wɛɹi lʊks; səm lʊkt ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð waɪɾ aɪz, ʌðɝz wɪð ðə wɝid fɹaʊnz ə ðoʊz faɪndɪŋ ə ɹæbɪd wʊlf wɪðɪn ɑɹmz ɹitʃ. ðə læɾɝ keɪm fɹəm mɛn mɔɹ ɔfən ðən wɪmən, ən səm ə ðə wɪmən spoʊk tə hɝ.

Verin and Ingtar drifted into the crowd. The Shienaran received a few wary looks; some looked at the Aes Sedai with wide eyes, others with the worried frowns of those finding a rabid wolf within arm's reach. The latter came from men more often than women, and some of the women spoke to her.

ɹænd ɹilaɪz ðət mæt ən hʊɹɪn hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi dɪsəpɪɹd tə ðə kɪtʃənz, wɛɹ ɔl ðə sɝvəns u hæd kʌm wɪð ðə ɡɛsts wəd bi ɡæðɝɪŋ əntɪl sɛn fɔɹ. hi hoʊp ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ əv tʃɹʌbəl snikɪŋ əweɪ.

Rand realized that Mat and Hurin had already disappeared to the kitchens, where all the servants who had come with the guests would be gathering until sent for. He hoped they would not have trouble sneaking away.

lɔɪəl bɛn daʊn tə spik fəɹ ɪz ɪɹ əloʊn. "ɹænd, ðəɹ ɪz ə weɪɡeɪt nɪɹbaɪ. aɪ kən fil ɪt."

Loial bent down to speak for his ear alone. "Rand, there is a Waygate nearby. I can feel it."

"ju min ðɪs wɑz ən oʊɡiɝ ɡɹoʊv?" ɹænd sɛd sɔfli, ən lɔɪəl nɑɾəd.

"You mean this was an Ogier grove?" Rand said softly, and Loial nodded.

"stɛɾɪŋ tsəfu hæd nɑt bɪn faʊn əɡɛn wən ɪt wɑz plæntəd, əɹ ði oʊɡiɝ u hɛlp bɪld ɑlkɛɹəhinælən wəd nɑɾ əv niɾəd ə ɡɹoʊv tə ɹimaɪn əm ə ðə stɛɾɪŋ. ðɪs wɑz ɔl fɔɹəst wən aɪ keɪm θɹu kɛɹhin bɪfɔɹ, ən bɪlɔŋ tə ðə kɪŋ."

"Stedding Tsofu had not been found again when it was planted, or the Ogier who helped build Al'cair'rahienallen would not have needed a grove to remind them of the stedding. This was all forest when I came through Cairhien before, and belonged to the King."

"bɑɹθeɪnz pɹɑbli tʊk ɪɾ əweɪ ɪn səm plɑt." ɹænd lʊkt ɝaʊn ðə ɹum nɝvəsli. ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz stɪl tɔkɪŋ, bʌt mɔɹ ðən ə fju wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ ði oʊɡiɝ ən hɪm. hi kəd nɑt si ɪŋtʃɹ. vɛɹɪn stʊɾ ət ðə sɛntɝ ʌv ə nɑɾ ʌv wɪmən. "aɪ wɪʃ wi kəd steɪ təɡɛðɝ."

"Barthanes probably took it away in some plot." Rand looked around the room nervously. Everyone was still talking, but more than a few were watching the Ogier and him. He could not see Ingtar. Verin stood at the center of a knot of women. "I wish we could stay together."

"vɛɹɪn sɛz nɑt, ɹænd. ʃi sɛz ɪt wəd meɪk əm ɔl səspɪʃəs ən æŋɡɹi, θɪŋkɪŋ wi wɝ hoʊldɪŋ aʊɝsɛlvz əluf. wɪv tə əleɪ səspɪʃən əntɪl mæt ən hʊɹɪn faɪnd wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ faɪnd."

"Verin says not, Rand. She says it would make them all suspicious and angry, thinking we were holding ourselves aloof. We have to allay suspicion until Mat and Hurin find whatever they find."

"aɪ hɝd wʌt ʃi sɛɾ əz wɛl əz ju, lɔɪəl. bʌɾ aɪ stɪl seɪ, ɪf bɑɹθeɪnz ɪz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, ðən i mʌs noʊ waɪ wɝ hɪɹ. ɡoʊɪŋ ɔf baɪ aʊɝsɛlvz ɪz dʒʌst æskɪŋ tə bi nɑkt ɑn ðə hɛd."

"I heard what she said as well as you, Loial. But I still say, if Barthanes is a Darkfriend, then he must know why we're here. Going off by ourselves is just asking to be knocked on the head."

"vɛɹɪn sɛz i woʊn də ɛniθɪŋ əntɪl i faɪnz aʊt wɛðɝ i kən meɪk jus ʌv ʌs. dʒʌs də wʌt ʃi toʊld ʌs, ɹænd. ɛɛs sədaɪ noʊ wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ əbaʊt." lɔɪəl wɔkt ɪndə ðə kɹaʊd, ɡæðɝɪŋ ə sɝkəl ə lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz bɪfɔɹ i hæd ɡɔn tɛn stɛps.

"Verin says he won't do anything until he finds out whether he can make use of us. Just do what she told us, Rand. Aes Sedai know what they are about." Loial walked into the crowd, gathering a circle of lords and ladies before he had gone ten steps.

ʌðɝz stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd ɹænd, naʊ ðəɾ i wɑz əloʊn, bʌɾ i tɝn ɪn ði ʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən ən hɝiɾ əweɪ. ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪ noʊ wʌt ðəɹ əbaʊt, bʌɾ aɪ wɪʃ aɪ dɪd. aɪ doʊn laɪk ðɪs. laɪt, bʌɾ aɪ wɪʃ aɪ nu ɪf ʃi wɑz tɛlɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ. ɛɛs sədaɪ nɛvɝ laɪ, bʌt ðə tʃɹuθ jə hɪɹ meɪ nɑt bi ðə tʃɹuθ jə θɪŋk ɪɾ ɪz.

Others started toward Rand, now that he was alone, but he turned in the other direction and hurried away. Aes Sedai may know what they're about, but I wish I did. I don't like this. Light, but I wish I knew if she was telling the truth. Aes Sedai never lie, but the truth you hear may not be the truth you think it is.

hi kɛp muvɪŋ tə əvɔɪd tɔkɪŋ wɪð ðə noʊbəlz. ðəɹ wɝ mɛni ʌðɝ ɹumz, ɔl fɪld wɪð lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz, ɔl wɪð ɛntɝteɪnɝz: θɹi dɪfɹənt ɡlimən ɪn ðɛɹ kloʊks, mɔɹ dʒʌɡəlɝz ən tʌmblɝz, ən mjuzɪʃənz pleɪɪŋ fluts, bɪɾɝnz, dʌlsɪmɝz, ən luts, plʌs faɪv dɪfɹən saɪzəz ə fɪɾəl, sɪks kaɪnz ə hɔɹn, stʃɹeɪɾ əɹ kɝvd əɹ kɝld, ən tɛn saɪzəz ə dʒɹʌm fɹəm tæmbɝ tə kɛɾəl. hi ɡeɪv səm ə ðə hɔɹn pleɪɝz ə sɛkən lʊk, ðoʊz wɪð kɝl hɔɹnz, bʌt ði ɪnstʃɹəməns wɝ ɔl pleɪn bɹæs.

He kept moving to avoid talking with the nobles. There were many other rooms, all filled with lords and ladies, all with entertainers: three different gleemen in their cloaks, more jugglers and tumblers, and musicians playing flutes, bitterns, dulcimers, and lutes, plus five different sizes of fiddle, six kinds of horn, straight or curved or curled, and ten sizes of drum from tambour to kettle. He gave some of the horn players a second look, those with curled horns, but the instruments were all plain brass.

ðeɪ wʊdn əv ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ aʊt hɪɹ, ful, hi θɔt. nɑɾ ənlɛs bɑɹθeɪnz minz tə hæv dɛd hɪɹoʊz kʌm əz pɑɹɾ ə ði ɛntɝteɪnmənt.

They wouldn't have the Horn of Valere out here, fool, he thought. Not unless Barthanes means to have dead heroes come as part of the entertainment.

ðəɹ wɑz ivən ə bɑɹɾ ɪn sɪlvɝ-wɝk tɛɹən buts ən ə jɛloʊ koʊt, stʃɹoʊlɪŋ θɹu ðə ɹumz plʌkɪŋ ɪz hɑɹp ən səmtaɪmz stɑpɪŋ tə dɪkleɪm ɪn haɪ tʃænt. hi ɡlɛɹd kəntɛmptʃwəsli ət ðə ɡlimən ən dɪd nɑt lɪŋɡɝ ɪn ðə ɹumz wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ, bʌt ɹænd sɔ lɪɾəl dɪfɝəns bɪtwin ɪm ən əm ɪksɛp fəɹ ðɛɹ kloʊðz.

There was even a bard in silver-worked Tairen boots and a yellow coat, strolling through the rooms plucking his harp and sometimes stopping to declaim in High Chant. He glared contemptuously at the gleemen and did not linger in the rooms where they were, but Rand saw little difference between him and them except for their clothes.

sʌɾənli bɑɹθeɪnz wɑz wɔkɪŋ baɪ ɹændz saɪd. ə lɪvɹid sɝvən ɪmiɾiətli ɔfɝɾ ɪz sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ wɪð ə baʊ. bɑɹθeɪnz tʊk ə bloʊn-ɡlæs ɡɑbləɾ ʌv waɪn. wɔkɪŋ bækwɝdz əhɛɾ ə ðɛm stɪl boʊɪŋ, ðə sɝvən hɛl ðə tʃɹeɪ təwɔɹd ɹænd əntɪl ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ðən mɛltəɾ ɪndə ðə kɹaʊd.

Suddenly Barthanes was walking by Rand's side. A liveried servant immediately offered his silver tray with a bow. Barthanes took a blown-glass goblet of wine. Walking backwards ahead of them still bowing, the servant held the tray toward Rand until Rand shook his head, then melted into the crowd.

"ju sim ɹɛsləs," bɑɹθeɪnz sɛd, sɪpɪŋ.

"You seem restless," Barthanes said, sipping.

"aɪ laɪk tə wɔk." ɹænd wʌndɝd haʊ tə fɑloʊ vɛɹɪnz ædvaɪs, ən ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ wʌt ʃi hæd sɛɾ əbaʊɾ ɪz vɪzət tə ði æmɪɝlɪn, hi sɛɾəld ɪndə kæt kɹɔsɪz ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd. hi nu noʊ mɔɹ ɛɹəɡənt weɪ tə wɔk ðən ðæt. bɑɹθeɪnzəz maʊθ taɪɾənd, ən ɹænd θɔt pɝhæps ðə lɔɹd faʊn ɪt tu ɛɹəɡənt, bʌt vɛɹɪnz ædvaɪs wɑz ɔl i hæd tə ɡoʊ baɪ, soʊ hi dɪd nɑt stɑp. tə teɪk səm ə ði ɛdʒ ɔf, hi sɛd plɛzənli, "ðɪs ɪz ə faɪn pɑɹɾi. juv mɛni fɹɛnz, ən aɪv nɛvɝ sin soʊ mɛni ɛntɝteɪnɝz."

"I like to walk." Rand wondered how to follow Verin's advice, and remembering what she had said about his visit to the Amyrlin, he settled into Cat Crosses the Courtyard. He knew no more arrogant way to walk than that. Barthanes's mouth tightened, and Rand thought perhaps the lord found it too arrogant, but Verin's advice was all he had to go by, so he did not stop. To take some of the edge off, he said pleasantly, "This is a fine party. You have many friends, and I've never seen so many entertainers."

"mɛni fɹɛnz," bɑɹθeɪnz əɡɹid. "ju kən tɛl ɡɔlʒɹiən haʊ mɛni, ən hu. səm ə ðə neɪmz maɪt sɝpɹaɪz hɪm."

"Many friends," Barthanes agreed. "You can tell Galldrian how many, and who. Some of the names might surprise him."

"aɪ hæv nɛvɝ mɛt ðə kɪŋ, lɔɹd bɑɹθeɪnz, ən aɪ doʊn ɪkspɛkt aɪ ɛvɝ wɪl."

"I have never met the King, Lord Barthanes, and I don't expect I ever will."

"ʌv kɔɹs. jə dʒʌs hæpən tə bi ɪn ðət flaɪspɛk vɪlədʒ. jə wɝ nɑt tʃɛkɪŋ ɑn ðə pɹɑɡɹɛs ə ɹitʃɹivɪŋ ðət stætʃu. ə ɡɹeɪɾ ʌndɝteɪkɪŋ, ðæt."

"Of course. You just happened to be in that flyspeck village. You were not checking on the progress of retrieving that statue. A great undertaking, that."

"jɛs." hi hæd bɪɡʌn θɪŋkɪŋ ə vɛɹɪn əɡɛn, wɪʃɪŋ ʃi hæd ɡɪvən ɪm səm ædvaɪs ɑn haʊ tə tɔk wɪð ə mæn u əsumd i wɑz laɪɪŋ. hi æɾəd wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ, "ɪts deɪnʒɝəs tə mɛɾəl wɪð θɪŋz fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ɪf jə doʊnt noʊ wʌt jə ɑɹ duɪŋ."

"Yes." He had begun thinking of Verin again, wishing she had given him some advice on how to talk with a man who assumed he was lying. He added without thinking, "It's dangerous to meddle with things from the Age of Legends if you don't know what you are doing."

bɑɹθeɪnz pɪɹɾ ɪndə hɪz waɪn, mjuzɪŋ əz ɪf ɹænd hæd dʒʌst sɛd sʌmθɪŋ pɹoʊfaʊnd. "ɑɹ jə seɪɪŋ jə də nɑt səpɔɹt ɡɔlʒɹiən ɪn ðɪs?" hi æsk faɪnəli.

Barthanes peered into his wine, musing as if Rand had just said something profound. "Are you saying you do not support Galldrian in this?" he asked finally.

"aɪ toʊl ju, aɪv nɛvɝ mɛt ðə kɪŋ."

"I told you, I've never met the King."

"jɛs, ʌv kɔɹs. aɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ ændɝmən pleɪɾ ət ðə ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm soʊ wɛl. wi də nɑt si mɛni hɪɹ ɪn kɛɹhin."

"Yes, of course. I did not know Andormen played at the Great Game so well. We do not see many here in Cairhien."

ɹænd tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ tə stɑp fɹəm tɛlɪŋ ðə mæn æŋɡɹəli ðəɾ i wɑz nɑt pleɪɪŋ ðɛɹ ɡeɪm. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ mɛni ɡɹeɪn bɑɹdʒəz fɹəm ændɝ ɪn ðə ɹɪvɝ."

Rand took a deep breath to stop from telling the man angrily that he was not playing their Game. "There are many grain barges from Andor in the river."

"mɝtʃəns ən tʃɹeɪɾɝz. hu noʊɾəsəz sətʃ əz ðeɪ? əz wɛl noʊɾəs ðə biɾəlz ɑn ðə livz." bɑɹθeɪnzəz vɔɪs kæɹiɾ ikwəl kəntɛmp fəɹ boʊθ biɾəlz ən mɝtʃəns, bʌt wʌns əɡɛn i fɹaʊn əz ɪf ɹænd hæd hɪntəɾ ət sʌmθɪŋ. "nɑt mɛni mɛn tʃɹævəl ɪn kʌmpəni wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ. jə sim tu jʌŋ tə bi ə wɔɹɾɝ. aɪ səpoʊz lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ ɪz vɛɹɪn sədaɪz wɔɹɾɝ?"

"Merchants and traders. Who notices such as they? As well notice the beetles on the leaves." Barthanes's voice carried equal contempt for both beetles and merchants, but once again he frowned as if Rand had hinted at something. "Not many men travel in company with Aes Sedai. You seem too young to be a Warder. I suppose Lord Ingtar is Verin Sedai's Warder?"

"wi ɑɹ u wi sɛd wi ɑɹ," ɹænd sɛd, ən ɡɹɪməst. ɪksɛp mi.

"We are who we said we are," Rand said, and grimaced. Except me.

bɑɹθeɪnz wɑz stʌɾiɪŋ ɹændz feɪs ɔlmoʊst oʊpənli. "jʌŋ. jʌŋ tə kæɹi ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd."

Barthanes was studying Rand's face almost openly. "Young. Young to carry a heron-mark blade."

"aɪ æm lɛs ðən ə jɪɹ oʊld," ɹænd sɛɾ ɔɾəmætɪkli, ən ɪmiɾiətli wɪʃt i hæɾ ɪt bæk. ɪt saʊndəd fulɪʃ, tə hɪz ɪɹ, bʌt vɛɹɪn hæd sɛɾ ækt əz i hæd wɪð ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ən ðət wɑz ði ænsɝ læn hæd ɡɪvən hɪm. eɪ bɔɹɾɝmən kənsɪɾɝd ðə deɪ hi wɑz ɡɪvən ɪz sɔɹd tə bi hɪz neɪmdeɪ.

"I am less than a year old," Rand said automatically, and immediately wished he had it back. It sounded foolish, to his ear, but Verin had said act as he had with the Amyrlin Seat, and that was the answer Lan had given him. A Borderman considered the day he was given his sword to be his nameday.

"soʊ. ən ændɔɝmən, ən jɛt bɔɹɾɝlənd-tʃɹeɪnd. əɹ ɪz ɪt wɔɹɾɝ-tʃɹeɪnd?" bɑɹθeɪnzəz aɪz nɛɹoʊd, stʌɾiɪŋ ɹænd. "aɪ ʌndɝstæn mɔɹɡeɪs əz oʊnli wʌn sʌn. neɪmd ɡɔɪn, aɪ hæv hɝd. jə mʌs bi mʌtʃ laɪk ɪm ɪn eɪdʒ."

"So. An Andorman, and yet Borderland-trained. Or is it Warder-trained?" Barthanes's eyes narrowed, studying Rand. "I understand Morgase has only one son. Named Gawyn, I have heard. You must be much like him in age."

"aɪ hæv mɛt hɪm," ɹænd sɛd kɔʃəsli.

"I have met him," Rand said cautiously.

"ðoʊz aɪz. ðət hɛɹ. aɪ hæv hɝd ði ændɔɝən ɹɔɪəl laɪn əz ɔlmoʊst il kʌlɝɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ hɛɹ ən aɪz."

"Those eyes. That hair. I have heard the Andoran royal line has almost Aiel coloring in their hair and eyes."

ɹænd stʌmbəld, ðoʊ ðə flɔɹ wɑz smuð mɑɹbəl. "aɪm nɑɾ il, lɔɹd bɑɹθeɪnz, ən aɪm nɑɾ ə ðə ɹɔɪəl laɪn, iðɝ."

Rand stumbled, though the floor was smooth marble. "I'm not Aiel, Lord Barthanes, and I'm not of the royal line, either."

"æz jə seɪ. juv ɡɪvən mi mʌtʃ tə θɪŋk ɑn. aɪ bɪliv wi meɪ faɪn kɑmən ɡɹaʊnd wən wi tɔk əɡɛn." bɑɹθeɪnz nɑɾəd ən ɹeɪzd ɪz ɡlæs ɪn ə smɔl səlut, ðən tɝn tə spik tə ə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn wɪð mɛni stʃɹaɪps ə kʌlɝ daʊn ɪz koʊt.

"As you say. You have given me much to think on. I believe we may find common ground when we talk again." Barthanes nodded and raised his glass in a small salute, then turned to speak to a gray-haired man with many stripes of color down his coat.

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ən muvd ɑn, əweɪ fɹəm mɔɹ kɑnvɝseɪʃən. ɪt hæd bɪn bæɾ ɪnʌf tɔkɪŋ tə wʌn kɛɹhinɪn lɔɹd; hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɹɪsk tu. bɑɹθeɪnz əpɪɹd tə faɪn dip minɪŋz ɪn ðə moʊs tʃɹɪviəl kɑmɛns. ɹænd ɹilaɪzd i hæd dʒʌs naʊ lɝn ɪnʌf ə deɪz deɪmɑɹ tə noʊ hi hæd noʊ aɪdiə əɾ ɔl haʊ ɪt wɑz pleɪd. mæt, hʊɹɪn, faɪn sʌmθɪŋ fæst, soʊ wi kən ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ. ðiz pipəl ɑɹ kɹeɪzi.

Rand shook his head and moved on, away from more conversation. It had been bad enough talking to one Cairhienin lord; he did not want to risk two. Barthanes appeared to find deep meanings in the most trivial comments. Rand realized he had just now learned enough of Daes Dae'mar to know he had no idea at all how it was played. Mat, Hurin, find something fast, so we can get out of here. These people are crazy.

ən ðən i ɛntɝɾ ənʌðɝ ɹum, ən ðə ɡlimən ət ði ɛn ʌv ɪt, stʃɹʌmɪŋ ɪz hɑɹp ən ɹisaɪɾɪŋ ə teɪl fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn, wɑz tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn. ɹænd stɑp dɛd. tɑm dɪd nɑt sim tə si hɪm, ðoʊ ðə ɡlimənz ɡeɪz pæst oʊvɝ ɪm twaɪs. ɪt sim ðət tɑm hæd mɛnt wʌɾ i sɛd. ə klin bɹeɪk.

And then he entered another room, and the gleeman at the end of it, strumming his harp and reciting a tale from The Great Hunt of the Horn, was Thom Merrilin. Rand stopped dead. Thom did not seem to see him, though the gleeman's gaze passed over him twice. It seemed that Thom had meant what he said. A clean break.

ɹænd tɝn tə ɡoʊ, bʌɾ ə wʊmən stɛp smuðli ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm ən pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn ɪz tʃɛst, ðə leɪs fɔlɪŋ bæk fɹəm ə sɑft ɹɪst. hɝ hɛd dɪd nɑt kwaɪt kʌm tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝ, bʌɾ əɹ tɔl ɝeɪ ʌv kɝlz izəli ɹitʃt əz haɪ əz ɪz aɪz. ðə haɪ nɛk ə hɝ ɡaʊn pʊt leɪs ɹʌfəlz ʌndɝ əɹ tʃɪn, ən stʃɹaɪps kʌvɝd ðə fɹʌn ə hɝ dɑɹk blu dʒɹɛs bɪloʊ hɝ bɹɛsts. "aɪ æm əleɪn tʃuliəndɝd, ən jə ɑɹ ðə feɪməs ɹænd ælθɹ. ɪn bɑɹθeɪnzəz oʊn mænɝ, aɪ səpoʊz hiz ðə ɹaɪt tə spik tə jə fɝst, bʌt wəɹ ɔl fæsəneɪɾəd baɪ wʌt wi hɪɹ ə ju. aɪ ivən hɪɹ ðət jə pleɪ ðə flut. kən ɪt bi tʃɹu?"

Rand turned to go, but a woman stepped smoothly in front of him and put a hand on his chest, the lace falling back from a soft wrist. Her head did not quite come to his shoulder, but her tall array of curls easily reached as high as his eyes. The high neck of her gown put lace ruffles under her chin, and stripes covered the front of her dark blue dress below her breasts. "I am Alaine Chuliandred, and you are the famous Rand al'Thor. In Barthanes's own manor, I suppose he has the right to speak to you first, but we are all fascinated by what we hear of you. I even hear that you play the flute. Can it be true?"

"aɪ pleɪ ðə flut." haʊ dɪd ʃi . . . ? kɔldɛvwɪn. laɪt, ɛvɹibɑɾi dʌz hɪɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn kɛɹhin. "ɪf jəl ɪkskjuz - "

"I play the flute." How did she . . . ? Caldevwin. Light, everybody does hear everything in Cairhien. "If you will excuse - "

"aɪ hæv hɝd ðət səm aʊtlæn lɔɹdz pleɪ mjuzɪk, bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ bɪlivd ɪt. aɪ wəd laɪk vɛɹi mʌtʃ tə hɪɹ jə pleɪ. pɝhæps jəl tɔk wɪð mi, ʌv ðɪs ən ðæt. bɑɹθeɪnz sim tə faɪn jəɹ kɑnvɝseɪʃən fæsəneɪɾɪŋ. maɪ hʌzbən spɛnz ɪz deɪz sæmplɪŋ ɪz oʊn vɪnjɝdz, ən livz mi kwaɪɾ əloʊn. hiz nɛvɝ ðəɹ tə tɔk wɪð mi."

"I have heard that some outland lords play music, but I never believed it. I would like very much to hear you play. Perhaps you will talk with me, of this and that. Barthanes seemed to find your conversation fascinating. My husband spends his days sampling his own vineyards, and leaves me quite alone. He is never there to talk with me."

"ju mʌs mɪs hɪm," ɹænd sɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɛdʒ ɝaʊn əɹ ən əɹ waɪd skɝts. ʃi ɡeɪv ə tɪŋkəlɪŋ læf əz ɪf i hæd sɛd ðə fʌniəs θɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝld.

"You must miss him," Rand said, trying to edge around her and her wide skirts. She gave a tinkling laugh as if he had said the funniest thing in the world.

ənʌðɝ wʊmən saɪɾəld ɪn bɪsaɪd ðə fɝst, ən ənʌðɝ hænd wɑz leɪɾ ɑn ɪz tʃɛst. ʃi wɔɹ əz mɛni stʃɹaɪps əz əleɪn, ən ðeɪ wɝ ʌv ən eɪdʒ, ə ɡʊd tɛn jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən hi. "du jə θɪŋk tə kip ɪm tə jɝsɛlf, əleɪn?" ðə tu wɪmən smaɪld əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ waɪl ðɛɹ aɪz θɹu dæɡɝz. ðə sɛkən tɝn əɹ smaɪl ɑn ɹænd. "aɪ æm bɪləveɪɪɹ əsiɛlɪn. ɑɹ ɔl ændɝmən soʊ tɔl? ən soʊ hænsəm?"

Another woman sidled in beside the first, and another hand was laid on his chest. She wore as many stripes as Alaine, and they were of an age, a good ten years older than he. "Do you think to keep him to yourself, Alaine?" The two women smiled at each other while their eyes threw daggers. The second turned her smile on Rand. "I am Belevaere Osiellin. Are all Andormen so tall? And so handsome?"

hi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. "ɑ . . . səm ɑɹ əz tɔl. pɑɹɾən mi, bʌɾ ɪf jəl - "

He cleared his throat. "Ah . . . some are as tall. Pardon me, but if you will - "

"aɪ sɔ jə tɔkɪŋ wɪð bɑɹθeɪnz. ðeɪ seɪ jə noʊ ɡɔlʒɹiən, əz wɛl. jə mʌs kʌm tə si mi, ən tɔk. maɪ hʌzbən ɪz vɪzəɾɪŋ əɹ ɪsteɪts ɪn ðə saʊθ."

"I saw you talking with Barthanes. They say you know Galldrian, as well. You must come to see me, and talk. My husband is visiting our estates in the south."

"ju hæv ðə sʌblɪɾi ʌv ə tævɝn wɛnk," əleɪn hɪst ət hɝ, ən ɪmiɾiətli wɑz smaɪlɪŋ ʌp ət ɹænd. "ʃi hæz noʊ pɑlɪʃ. noʊ mæn kəd laɪk ə wʊmən wɪð ə mænɝ soʊ ɹʌf. bɹɪŋ jəɹ flut tə maɪ mænɝ, ən wɪl tɔk. pɝhæps jəl titʃ mi tə pleɪ?"

"You have the sublety of a tavern wench," Alaine hissed at her, and immediately was smiling up at Rand. "She has no polish. No man could like a woman with a manner so rough. Bring your flute to my manor, and we will talk. Perhaps you will teach me to play?"

"wʌɾ əleɪn θɪŋks ʌv əz sʌɾəlti," bɪləveɪɪɹ sɛd switli, "ɪz bʌt læk ə kɝədʒ. ə mæn u wɛɹz ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk sɔɹd mʌs bi bɹeɪv. ðət tʃɹuli ɪz ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd, ɪz ɪt nɑt?"

"What Alaine thinks of as subtlety," Belevaere said sweetly, "is but lack of courage. A man who wears a heron-mark sword must be brave. That truly is a heron-mark blade, is it not?"

ɹænd tʃɹaɪd bækɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðɛm. "ɪf jəl dʒʌst ɪkskjuz mi, aɪ - " ðeɪ fɑloʊd stɛp fəɹ stɛp əntɪl ɪz bæk hɪt ðə wɔl; ðə wɪdθ ə ðɛɹ skɝts təɡɛðɝ meɪɾ ənʌðɝ wɔl ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm.

Rand tried backing away from them. "If you will just excuse me, I - " They followed step for step until his back hit the wall; the width of their skirts together made another wall in front of him.

hi dʒʌmpt əz ə θɝd wʊmən kɹaʊɾəd ɪn bɪsaɪd ði ʌðɝ tu, hɝ skɝts dʒɔɪnɪŋ ðɛɹz tə ðə wɔl ɑn ðət saɪd. ʃi wɑz oʊldɝ ðən ðeɪ, bʌt dʒʌst əz pɹɪɾi, wɪð ən əmjuz smaɪl ðət dɪd nɑt lɛsən ðə ʃɑɹpnəs ə hɝ aɪz. ʃi wɔɹ hæf əɡɛn əz mɛni stʃɹaɪps əz əleɪn ən bɪləveɪɪɹ; ðeɪ meɪd taɪni kɝtsiz ən ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ sʌlənli.

He jumped as a third woman crowded in beside the other two, her skirts joining theirs to the wall on that side. She was older than they, but just as pretty, with an amused smile that did not lessen the sharpness of her eyes. She wore half again as many stripes as Alaine and Belevaere; they made tiny curtsies and glared at her sullenly.

"ɑɹ ðiz tu spaɪɾɝz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tɔɪl jə ɪn ðɛɹ wɛbz?" ði oʊldɝ wʊmən læft. "hæf ðə taɪm ðeɪ tæŋɡəl ðɛmsɛlvz mɔɹ fɝmli ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls. kʌm wɪð mi, maɪ faɪn jʌŋ ændɔɝən, ən əl tɛl jə səm ə ðə tʃɹʌbəlz ðeɪ wəd ɡɪv ju. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, aɪ hæv noʊ hʌzbən tə wɝi əbaʊt. hʌzbənz ɔlweɪz meɪk tʃɹʌbəl."

"Are these two spiders trying to toil you in their webs?" The older woman laughed. "Half the time they tangle themselves more firmly than anyone else. Come with me, my fine young Andoran, and I will tell you some of the troubles they would give you. For one thing, I have no husband to worry about. Husbands always make trouble."

oʊvɝ əleɪnz hɛɾ i kəd si tɑm, stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ fɹəm ə baʊ tə noʊ əplɔz əɹ noʊɾəs wʌtsoʊɛvɝ. wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs ðə ɡlimən snætʃt ə ɡɑblət fɹəm ðə tʃɹeɪ ʌv ə stɑɹɾəld sɝvənt.

Over Alaine's head he could see Thom, straightening from a bow to no applause or notice whatsoever. With a grimace the gleeman snatched a goblet from the tray of a startled servant.

"aɪ si sʌmwʌn aɪ mʌst spik tə," ɹænd toʊl ðə wɪmən, ən skwizd aʊɾ ə ðə bɑks ðeɪ hæd pʊɾ ɪm ɪn dʒʌst əz ðə læst wʊmən ɹitʃt fəɹ ɪz ɑɹm. ɔl θɹi stɛɹɾ æftɝ ɪm əz i hɝid tə ðə ɡlimən.

"I see someone I must speak to," Rand told the women, and squeezed out of the box they had put him in just as the last woman reached for his arm. All three stared after him as he hurried to the gleeman.

tɑm aɪɾ ɪm oʊvɝ ðə lɪp ə ðə ɡɑblət, ðən tʊk ənʌðɝ lɔŋ swɑloʊ.

Thom eyed him over the lip of the goblet, then took another long swallow.

"tɑm, aɪ noʊ jə sɛɾ ə klin bɹeɪk, bʌɾ aɪ hæd tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðoʊz wɪmən. ɔl ðeɪ wɑntəd tə tɔk əbaʊt wɑz ðɛɹ hʌzbənz biɪŋ əweɪ, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi hɪntɪŋ əɾ ʌðɝ θɪŋz." tɑm tʃoʊkt ɑn ɪz waɪn, ən ɹænd slæpt ɪz bæk. "ju dʒɹɪŋk tu fæst, ən sʌmθɪŋ ɔlweɪz ɡoʊz daʊn ðə ɹɔŋ weɪ. tɑm, ðeɪ θɪŋk aɪm plɑɾɪŋ wɪð bɑɹθeɪnz, əɹ meɪbi ɡɔlʒɹiən, ən aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðəl bɪliv mi wən aɪ seɪ aɪm nɑt. aɪ dʒʌs niɾəd ən ɪkskjus tə liv ðɛm."

"Thom, I know you said a clean break, but I had to get away from those women. All they wanted to talk about was their husbands being away, but they were already hinting at other things." Thom choked on his wine, and Rand slapped his back. "You drink too fast, and something always goes down the wrong way. Thom, they think I am plotting with Barthanes, or maybe Galldrian, and I don't think they will believe me when I say I'm not. I just needed an excuse to leave them."

tɑm stʃɹoʊkt ɪz lɔŋ mʌstæʃɪz wɪð wʌn nʌkəl ən pɪɹɾ əkɹɔs ðə ɹum ət ðə θɹi wɪmən. ðeɪ wɝ stɪl stændɪŋ təɡɛðɝ, wɑtʃɪŋ ɹænd ən hɪm. "aɪ ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðoʊz θɹi, bɔɪ. bɹin tæbɔɹwɪn əloʊn wəd ɡɪv jə ən ɛdʒəkeɪʃən sətʃ əz ɛvɹi mæn ʃəɾ əv ət list wʌns ɪn ɪz laɪf, ɪf i kən lɪv θɹu ɪt. wɝiɾ əbaʊt ðɛɹ hʌzbənz. aɪ laɪk ðæt, bɔɪ." əbɹʌpli hɪz aɪz ʃɑɹpənd. "ju toʊl mi jə wɝ klɪɹ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ. hæf ðə tɔk hɪɹ tənaɪɾ ɪz ə ði ændɔɝən lɔɹɾ əpɪɹɪŋ wɪð noʊ wɔɹnɪŋ, ən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ əɾ ɪz saɪd. bɑɹθeɪnz ən ɡɔlʒɹiən. juv lɛt ðə waɪt taʊɝ pʊt jə ɪn ðə kʊkɪŋ pɑt ðɪs taɪm."

Thom stroked his long mustaches with one knuckle and peered across the room at the three women. They were still standing together, watching Rand and him. "I recognize those three, boy. Breane Taborwin alone would give you an education such as every man should have at least once in his life, if he can live through it. Worried about their husbands. I like that, boy." Abruptly his eyes sharpened. "You told me you were clear of Aes Sedai. Half the talk here tonight is of the Andoran lord appearing with no warning, and an Aes Sedai at his side. Barthanes and Galldrian. You've let the White Tower put you in the cooking pot this time."

"ʃi oʊnli keɪm jɛstɝdeɪ, tɑm. ən əz sun əz ðə hɔɹn ɪz seɪf, əl bi fɹi ʌv əm əɡɛn. aɪ min tə si tə ɪt."

"She only came yesterday, Thom. And as soon as the Horn is safe, I'll be free of them again. I mean to see to it."

"ju saʊn əz ɪf ɪɾ ɪzən seɪf naʊ," tɑm sɛd sloʊli. "ju dɪdn saʊn ðət weɪ bɪfɔɹ."

"You sound as if it isn't safe now," Thom said slowly. "You didn't sound that way before."

"dɑɹkfɹɛnz stoʊl ɪt, tɑm. ðeɪ bɹɔɾ ɪt hɪɹ. bɑɹθeɪnz ɪz wʌn ə ðɛm."

"Darkfriends stole it, Thom. They brought it here. Barthanes is one of them."

tɑm sim tə stʌɾi hɪz waɪn, bʌɾ ɪz aɪz dɑɹɾɪd tə meɪk ʃʊɹ noʊ wʌn wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf tə lɪsən. mɔɹ ðən ðə θɹi wɪmən wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ əm wɪð saɪdweɪz ɡlænsɪz waɪl pɹitɛndɪŋ tə tɔk əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, bʌɾ ɛvɹi nɑt meɪnteɪn ɪts dɪstəns fɹəm ɛvɹi ʌðɝ. stɪl, tɑm spoʊk sɔfli. "ə deɪnʒɝəs θɪŋ tə seɪ ɪf ɪɾ ɪzən tʃɹu, ən mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ɪf ɪɾ ɪz. ən ækjəzeɪʃən laɪk ðæt, əɡɛns ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl mæn ɪn ðə kɪŋdəm. . . . jə seɪ hiz ðə hɔɹn? aɪ səpoʊz jəɹ æftɝ maɪ hɛlp əɡɛn, naʊ ðət jəɹ tæŋɡəld wɪð ðə waɪt taʊɝ wʌns mɔɹ."

Thom seemed to study his wine, but his eyes darted to make sure no one was close enough to listen. More than the three women were watching them with sideways glances while pretending to talk among themselves, but every knot maintained its distance from every other. Still, Thom spoke softly. "A dangerous thing to say if it isn't true, and more dangerous if it is. An accusation like that, against the most powerful man in the kingdom. . . . You say he has the Horn? I suppose you're after my help again, now that you're tangled with the White Tower once more."

"noʊ." hi hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tɑm hæd bɪn ɹaɪt, ivən ɪf ðə ɡlimən dɪd nɑt noʊ waɪ. hi kəd nɑɾ ɪnvɑlv ɛniwʌn ɛls ɪn ɪz tʃɹʌbəlz. "aɪ dʒʌst wɑntəd tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðoʊz wɪmən."

"No." He had decided Thom had been right, even if the gleeman did not know why. He could not involve anyone else in his troubles. "I just wanted to get away from those women."

ðə ɡlimən blu aʊɾ ɪz mʌstæʃɪz, teɪkən əbæk. "wɛl. jɛs. ðəɾ ɪz wɛl. ðə læs taɪm aɪ hɛlp ju, aɪ ɡɑɾ ə lɪmp aʊɾ ʌv ɪt, ən jə sim tə hæv lɛt jɝsɛlf bi taɪd tə tɑɹ vəlɑn stʃɹɪŋz əɡɛn. jəl əv tə ɡɛt jɝsɛlf aʊɾ ʌv ɪt ðɪs taɪm." hi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf i wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənvɪns hɪmsɛlf.

The gleeman blew out his mustaches, taken aback. "Well. Yes. That is well. The last time I helped you, I got a limp out of it, and you seem to have let yourself be tied to Tar Valon strings again. You'll have to get yourself out of it this time." He sounded as if he were trying to convince himself.

"aɪ wɪl, tɑm. aɪ wɪl." dʒʌst əz sun əz ðə hɔɹn ɪz seɪf ən mæt əz ðət blʌɾi dæɡɝ bæk. mæt, hʊɹɪn, wɛɹ ɑɹ ju?

"I will, Thom. I will." Just as soon as the Horn is safe and Mat has that bloody dagger back. Mat, Hurin, where are you?

əz ɪf ðə θɔt hæd bɪn ə sʌmənz, hʊɹɪn əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə ɹum, aɪz sɝtʃɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz. ðeɪ lʊk θɹu hɪm; sɝvəns dɪd nɑɾ ɪɡzɪst ənlɛs niɾəd. wən i faʊn ɹænd ən tɑm, hi meɪɾ ɪz weɪ bɪtwin ðə smɔl klʌstɝz ə noʊbəlz ən baʊd tə ɹænd. "maɪ lɔɹd, aɪ wɑz sɛn tə tɛl ju. jəɹ mænsɝvən hæɾ ə fɔl ən twɪstəɾ ɪz ni. aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ bæd, maɪ lɔɹd."

As if the thought had been a summons, Hurin appeared in the room, eyes searching among the lords and ladies. They looked through him; servants did not exist unless needed. When he found Rand and Thom, he made his way between the small clusters of nobles and bowed to Rand. "My Lord, I was sent to tell you. Your manservant had a fall and twisted his knee. I don't know how bad, my Lord."

fəɹ ə moʊmən ɹænd stɛɹd bɪfɔɹ i ʌndɝstʊd. kɑnʃəs ʌv ɔl ði aɪz ɑn hɪm, hi spoʊk laʊdli ɪnʌf fəɹ ðə noʊbəlz kloʊsəs tə oʊvɝhɪɹ. "klʌmzi ful. wʌt ɡʊɾ ɪz i tə mi ɪf i kænt wɔk? aɪ səpoʊz aɪd bɛɾɝ kʌm si haʊ bædli hiz hɝt hɪmsɛlf."

For a moment Rand stared before he understood. Conscious of all the eyes on him, he spoke loudly enough for the nobles closest to overhear. "Clumsy fool. What good is he to me if he can't walk? I suppose I'd better come see how badly he's hurt himself."

ɪt sim tə bi ðə ɹaɪt θɪŋ tə seɪ. hʊɹɪn saʊndəd ɹɪlivd wən i baʊɾ əɡɛn ən sɛd, "æz maɪ lɔɹd wɪʃɪz. ɪf maɪ lɔɹd wɪl fɑloʊ mi?"

It seemed to be the right thing to say. Hurin sounded relieved when he bowed again and said, "As my Lord wishes. If my Lord will follow me?"

"ju pleɪ vɛɹi wɛl ət biɪŋ ə lɔɹd," tɑm sɛd sɔfli. "bʌt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðɪs. kɛɹhinɪn meɪ pleɪ deɪz deɪmɑɹ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə waɪt taʊɝ meɪd ðə ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs. wɑtʃ jɝsɛlf, bɔɪ." wɪð ə ɡlɛɹ ət ðə noʊbəlz, hi sɛɾ ɪz ɛmpti ɡɑbləɾ ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪ ʌv ə pæsɪŋ sɝvən ən stʃɹoʊld əweɪ, plʌkɪŋ ɪz hɑɹp. hi bɪɡæn ɹisaɪɾɪŋ ɡʊdwaɪf mili ən ðə sɪlk mɝtʃənt.

"You play very well at being a lord," Thom said softly. "But remember this. Cairhienin may play Daes Dae'mar, but it was the White Tower made the Great Game in the first place. Watch yourself, boy." With a glare at the nobles, he set his empty goblet on the tray of a passing servant and strolled away, plucking his harp. He began reciting Goodwife Mili and the Silk Merchant.

"lɛɾ ɑn, mæn," ɹænd toʊl hʊɹɪn, filɪŋ fulɪʃ. əz i fɑloʊd ðə snɪfɝ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum, hi kəd fil ði aɪz fɑloʊɪŋ hɪm.

"Lead on, man," Rand told Hurin, feeling foolish. As he followed the sniffer out of the room, he could feel the eyes following him.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾiθɹi


CHAPTER 33

eɪ mɛsədʒ fɹəm ðə dɑɹk


A Message from the Dark

"hæv jə faʊn ɪt?" ɹænd æskt əz i fɑloʊd hʊɹɪn daʊn ə kɹæmp flaɪɾ ə stɛɹz. ðə kɪtʃənz leɪ ɑn ðə loʊɝ lɛvəlz, ən ðə sɝvəns u hæd kʌm ətɛndɪŋ ðə ɡɛsts hæɾ ɔl bɪn sɛn ðɛɹ. "ɔɹ ɪz mæt ɹɪli hɝt?"

"Have you found it?" Rand asked as he followed Hurin down a cramped flight of stairs. The kitchens lay on the lower levels, and the servants who had come attending the guests had all been sent there. "Or is Mat really hurt?"

"oʊ, mæts faɪn, lɔɹd ɹænd." ðə snɪfɝ fɹaʊnd. "æt list, hi saʊnz ɔl ɹaɪt, ən i ɡɹʌmbəlz laɪk ə heɪl mæn. aɪ dɪdn min tə wɝi ju, bʌɾ aɪ niɾəd ə ɹizən fəɹ jə tə kʌm bɪloʊ. aɪ faʊn ðə tʃɹeɪl izi ɪnʌf. ðə mɛn u sɛt faɪɝ tə ði ɪn ɔl ɛntɝɾ ə wɔld ɡɑɹɾən bɪhaɪn ðə mænɝ. tʃɹɑləks dʒɔɪn ðɛm, wɛn ɪndə ðə ɡɑɹɾən wɪð ðɛm. sʌmtaɪm jɛstɝdeɪ, aɪ θɪŋk. meɪbi ivən naɪt bɪfɔɹ læst." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "lɔɹd ɹænd, ðeɪ dɪdn kʌm aʊɾ əɡɛn. ðeɪ mʌst stɪl bi ɪn ðɛɹ."

"Oh, Mat's fine, Lord Rand." The sniffer frowned. "At least, he sounds all right, and he grumbles like a hale man. I didn't mean to worry you, but I needed a reason for you to come below. I found the trail easy enough. The men who set fire to the inn all entered a walled garden behind the manor. Trollocs joined them, went into the garden with them. Sometime yesterday, I think. Maybe even night before last." He hesitated. "Lord Rand, they didn't come out again. They must still be in there."

ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə stɛɹz ðə saʊnz ə ðə sɝvəns ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz dʒɹɪftəd daʊn ðə hɔl, læftɝ ən sɪŋɪŋ. sʌmwʌn hæɾ ə bɪɾɝn, stʃɹʌmɪŋ ə ɹɔkəs tun tə klæpɪŋ ən ðə θʌmp ə dænsɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wɝk plæstɝ əɹ faɪn tæpəstʃɹiz hɪɹ, oʊnli bɛɹ stoʊn ən pleɪn wʊd. laɪɾ ɪn ðə hɔlz keɪm fɹəm ɹʌʃ tɔɹtʃɪz, smoʊkɪŋ ðə silɪŋ ən spɹɛd fɑɹ ɪnʌf əpɑɹt ðət ðə laɪt feɪɾəd bɪtwin ðɛm.

At the foot of the stairs the sounds of the servants enjoying themselves drifted down the hall, laughter and singing. Someone had a bittern, strumming a raucous tune to clapping and the thump of dancing. There was no worked plaster or fine tapestries here, only bare stone and plain wood. Light in the halls came from rush torches, smoking the ceiling and spread far enough apart that the light faded between them.

"aɪm ɡlæd jə ɑɹ tɔkɪŋ tə mi nætʃɹəli əɡɛn," ɹænd sɛd. "ðə weɪ juv bɪn boʊɪŋ ən skɹeɪpɪŋ, aɪ wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə θɪŋk jə wɝ mɔɹ kɛɹhinɪn ðən ðə kɛɹhinɪn."

"I'm glad you are talking to me naturally again," Rand said. "The way you have been bowing and scraping, I was beginning to think you were more Cairhienin than the Cairhienin."

hʊɹɪnz feɪs kʌlɝd. "wɛl, əz tə ðæt. . . ." hi ɡlæns daʊn ðə hɔl təwɔɹd ðə nɔɪz ən lʊkt əz ɪf i wɑntəd tə spɪt. "ðeɪ ɔl pɹitɛn tə bi soʊ pɹɑpɝ, bʌt. . . . lɔɹd ɹænd, ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm sɛz hiz lɔɪəl tə hɪz mæstɝ əɹ mɪstʃɹəs, bʌt ðeɪ ɔl hɪn ðəɹ wɪlɪŋ tə sɛl wʌt ðeɪ noʊ, əɹ əv hɝd. ən wən ðeɪv ə fju dʒɹɪŋks ɪn ðɛm, ðəl tɛl ju, ɔl wɪspɝɪŋ ɪn jəɹ ɪɹ, θɪŋz əbaʊt ðə lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz ðeɪ sɝv ðæɾəd fɛɹ meɪk jəɹ hɛɹ stæn ɑn ɛnd. aɪ noʊ ðəɹ kɛɹhinɪn, bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə sətʃ ɡoʊɪŋz ɑn."

Hurin's face colored. "Well, as to that. . . ." He glanced down the hall toward the noise and looked as if he wanted to spit. "They all pretend to be so proper, but. . . . Lord Rand, every one of them says he's loyal to his master or mistress, but they all hint they're willing to sell what they know, or have heard. And when they have a few drinks in them, they'll tell you, all whispering in your ear, things about the lords and ladies they serve that'd fair make your hair stand on end. I know they're Cairhienin, but I never heard of such goings on."

"wi wɪl bi aʊɾ ə hɪɹ sun, hʊɹɪn." ɹænd hoʊpt ɪt wɑz tʃɹu. "wɛɹ ɪz ðɪs ɡɑɹɾən?" hʊɹɪn tɝn daʊn ə saɪd hɔl liɾɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə bæk ə ðə mænɝ. "dɪd jə bɹɪŋ ɪŋtʃɹ ən ði ʌðɝz daʊn ɔlɹɛɾi?"

"We will be out of here soon, Hurin." Rand hoped it was true. "Where is this garden?" Hurin turned down a side hall leading toward the back of the manor. "Did you bring Ingtar and the others down already?"

ðə snɪfɝ ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ hæd lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi kɔɹnɝd baɪ sɪks əɹ sɛvən ə ðoʊz u kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz leɪɾiz. aɪ kʊdnt ɡɛt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə spik tə hɪm. ən vɛɹɪn sədaɪ wɑz wɪð bɑɹθeɪnz. ʃi ɡeɪv mi sətʃ ə lʊk wən aɪ keɪm nɪɹ, aɪ nɛvɝ ivən tʃɹaɪd tə tɛl hɝ."

The sniffer shook his head. "Lord Ingtar had let himself be cornered by six or seven of those who call themselves ladies. I couldn't get close enough to speak to him. And Verin Sedai was with Barthanes. She gave me such a look when I came near, I never even tried to tell her."

ðeɪ ɹaʊndəɾ ənʌðɝ kɔɹnɝ dʒʌs ðɛn, ən ðəɹ wɝ lɔɪəl ən mæt, ði oʊɡiɝ stændɪŋ ə lɪɾəl stup fəɹ ðə loʊɝ silɪŋ.

They rounded another corner just then, and there were Loial and Mat, the Ogier standing a little stooped for the lower ceiling.

lɔɪəlz ɡɹɪn ɔlmoʊst splɪɾ ɪz feɪs. "ðɛɹ jə ɑɹ. ɹænd, aɪ wɑz nɛvɝ soʊ ɡlæd tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm ɛniwʌn əz fɹəm ðoʊz pipəl əpstɛɹz. ðeɪ kɛpt æskɪŋ mi ɪf ði oʊɡiɝ wɝ kʌmɪŋ bæk, ən ɪf ɡɔlʒɹiən hæɾ əɡɹid tə peɪ wʌt wɑz oʊd. ɪt simz ðə ɹizən ɔl ði oʊɡiɝ stoʊnmeɪsɑnz lɛft ɪz kəz ɡɔlʒɹiən stɑpt peɪɪŋ ðɛm, ɪksɛpt wɪð pɹɑməsəz. aɪ kɛp tɛlɪŋ əm aɪ dɪdnt noʊ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt, bʌt hæf ə ðɛm sim tə θɪŋk ðəɾ aɪ wɑz laɪɪŋ, ən ði ʌðɝ hæf ðəɾ aɪ wɑz hɪntɪŋ ət sʌmθɪŋ."

Loial's grin almost split his face. "There you are. Rand, I was never so glad to get away from anyone as from those people upstairs. They kept asking me if the Ogier were coming back, and if Galldrian had agreed to pay what was owed. It seems the reason all the Ogier stonemasons left is because Galldrian stopped paying them, except with promises. I kept telling them I didn't know anything about it, but half of them seemed to think that I was lying, and the other half that I was hinting at something."

"wil bi aʊɾ ə hɪɹ sun," ɹænd əʃʊɹd hɪm. "mæt, ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt?" hɪz fɹɛnz feɪs lʊk mɔɹ hɑloʊ-tʃik ðən i ɹɪmɛmbɝd, ivən bæk ət ði ɪn, ən ɪz tʃikboʊnz mɔɹ pɹɑmənənt.

"We'll be out of here soon," Rand assured him. "Mat, are you all right?" His friend's face looked more hollow-cheeked than he remembered, even back at the inn, and his cheekbones more prominent.

"aɪ fil faɪn," mæt sɛd ɡɹʌmpəli, "bʌɾ aɪ sɝɾənli dɪdn əv ɛni tʃɹʌbəl livɪŋ ði ʌðɝ sɝvəns. ðə wʌnz u wɝn æskɪŋ ɪf jə stɑɹv mi θɔɾ aɪ wɑz sɪk ən dɪdnt wɑnə kʌm tu kloʊs."

"I feel fine," Mat said grumpily, "but I certainly didn't have any trouble leaving the other servants. The ones who weren't asking if you starved me thought I was sick and didn't want to come too close."

"hæv jə sɛns ðə dæɡɝ?" ɹænd æskt.

"Have you sensed the dagger?" Rand asked.

mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd ɡlʌmli. "ði oʊnli θɪŋ aɪv sɛnst ɪz ðət sʌmbɑɾiz wɑtʃɪŋ mi, moʊst ə ðə taɪm. ðiz pipəl ɑɹ əz bæɾ əz feɪdz fəɹ snikɪŋ ɝaʊnd. bɝn mi, aɪ nɪɹli dʒʌmpt aʊɾ ə maɪ skɪn wən hʊɹɪn toʊl mi hid loʊkeɪɾəd ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz' tʃɹeɪl. ɹænd, aɪ kæn fil ɪɾ əɾ ɔl, ən aɪv bɪn θɹu ðɪs blʌɾi bɪldɪŋ fɹəm ɹæftɝz tə beɪsmənt."

Mat shook his head glumly. "The only thing I've sensed is that somebody's watching me, most of the time. These people are as bad as Fades for sneaking around. Burn me, I nearly jumped out of my skin when Hurin told me he'd located the Darkfriends' trail. Rand, I can't feel it at all, and I've been through this bloody building from rafters to basement."

"ðæt dʌz nɑt min ɪɾ ɪzən hɪɹ, mæt. aɪ pʊɾ ɪɾ ɪn ðə tʃɛst wɪð ðə hɔɹn, ɹɪmɛmbɝ. meɪbi ðət kips jə fɹəm filɪŋ ɪt. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk feɪn noʊz haʊ tə oʊpən ɪt, ɛls hid nɑɾ əv ɡɔn tə ðə tʃɹʌbəl ə kæɹiɪŋ ðə weɪt wən i flɛd fæl dæɹə. ivən ðət mʌtʃ ɡoʊld ɪzən ɪmpɔɹɾənt bɪsaɪd ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. wən wi faɪn ðə hɔɹn, wɪl faɪn ðə dæɡɝ. jəl si."

"That does not mean it isn't here, Mat. I put it in the chest with the Horn, remember. Maybe that keeps you from feeling it. I don't think Fain knows how to open it, else he'd not have gone to the trouble of carrying the weight when he fled Fal Dara. Even that much gold isn't important beside the Horn of Valere. When we find the Horn, we will find the dagger. You'll see."

"æz lɔŋ əz aɪ doʊn əv tə pɹitɛn tə bi jəɹ sɝvən ɛnimɔɹ," mæt mʌɾɝd. "æz lɔŋ əz jə doʊnt ɡoʊ mæɾ ænd. . . ." hi lɛt ðə wɝdz daɪ wɪð ə twɪst ə hɪz maʊθ.

"As long as I don't have to pretend to be your servant anymore," Mat muttered. "As long as you don't go mad and. . . ." He let the words die with a twist of his mouth.

"ɹæn ɪz nɑt mæd, mæt," lɔɪəl sɛd. "ðə kɛɹhinɪn wəd nɛvɝ əv lɛɾ ɪm ɪn hɪɹ ɪf i wɝ nɑɾ ə lɔɹd. ðeɪ ɑɹ ðə wʌnz u ɑɹ mæd."

"Rand is not mad, Mat," Loial said. "The Cairhienin would never have let him in here if he were not a lord. They are the ones who are mad."

"aɪm nɑt mæd," ɹænd sɛd hɑɹʃli. "nɑt jɛt. hʊɹɪn, ʃoʊ mi ðɪs ɡɑɹɾən."

"I'm not mad," Rand said harshly. "Not yet. Hurin, show me this garden."

"ðɪs weɪ, lɔɹd ɹænd."

"This way, Lord Rand."

ðeɪ wɛn aʊɾ ɪndə ðə naɪt baɪ ə smɔl dɔɹ ðət ɹænd hæd tə dʌk tə ɡɛt θɹu; lɔɪəl wɑz fɔɹs tə bɛn oʊvɝ ən hʌntʃ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. ðəɹ wɑz ɪnʌf laɪɾ ɪn jɛloʊ pulz fɹəm ðə wɪndoʊz əbʌv fəɹ ɹænd tə meɪk aʊt bɹɪk wɔks bɪtwin skwɛɹ flaʊɝ bɛdz. ðə ʃædoʊz ə steɪbəlz ən ʌðɝ aʊtbɪldɪŋz bʌlkt ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs tə iðɝ saɪd. əkeɪʒənəl fɹæɡməns ə mjuzɪk dʒɹɪftəɾ aʊt, fɹəm ðə sɝvəns bɪloʊ əɹ fɹəm ðoʊz ɛntɝteɪnɪŋ ðɛɹ mæstɝz əbʌv.

They went out into the night by a small door that Rand had to duck to get through; Loial was forced to bend over and hunch his shoulders. There was enough light in yellow pools from the windows above for Rand to make out brick walks between square flower beds. The shadows of stables and other outbuildings bulked in the darkness to either side. Occasional fragments of music drifted out, from the servants below or from those entertaining their masters above.

hʊɹɪn lɛɾ əm əlɔŋ ðə wɔks əntɪl ivən ðə dɪm ɡloʊ feɪld ən ðeɪ meɪd ðɛɹ weɪ baɪ munlaɪɾ əloʊn, ðɛɹ buts kɹʌntʃɪŋ sɔfli ɑn ðə bɹɪk. bʊʃəz ðət wʊɾə bɪn bɹaɪt wɪð flaʊɝz baɪ deɪlaɪt naʊ meɪd stʃɹeɪnʒ hʌmps ɪn ðə dɑɹk. ɹænd fɪŋɡɝɾ ɪz sɔɹɾ ən dɪd nɑt lɛɾ ɪz aɪz steɪ ɑn ɛni wʌn spɑt tu lɔŋ. ə hʌnʒɹəd tʃɹɑləks kəd bi haɪɾɪŋ ɝaʊn əm ənsin. hi nu hʊɹɪn wʊɾə smɛl tʃɹɑləks ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ðɛɹ, bʌt ðət dɪd nɑt hɛlp ə ɡɹeɪt dil. ɪf bɑɹθeɪnz wɑz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, ðən ət list səm ə hɪz sɝvəns ən ɡɑɹdz hæd tə bi, tu, ən hʊɹɪn kəd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz smɛl ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd. dɑɹkfɹɛnz lipɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə naɪt wəd nɑt bi mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ðən tʃɹɑləks.

Hurin led them along the walks until even the dim glow failed and they made their way by moonlight alone, their boots crunching softly on the brick. Bushes that would have been bright with flowers by daylight now made strange humps in the dark. Rand fingered his sword and did not let his eyes stay on any one spot too long. A hundred Trollocs could be hiding around them unseen. He knew Hurin would have smelled Trollocs if they were there, but that did not help a great deal. If Barthanes was a Darkfriend, then at least some of his servants and guards had to be, too, and Hurin could not always smell a Darkfriend. Darkfriends leaping out of the night would not be much better than Trollocs.

"ðɛɹ, lɔɹd ɹænd," hʊɹɪn wɪspɝd, pɔɪntɪŋ.

"There, Lord Rand," Hurin whispered, pointing.

əhɛd, stoʊn wɔlz nɑt mʌtʃ haɪɝ ðən lɔɪəlz hɛɾ ɛnkloʊzd ə skwɛɹ pɝhæps fɪfti peɪsɪz ɑn ə saɪd. ɹænd kəd nɑt bi ʃʊɹ, ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz, bʌɾ ɪt lʊkt əz ɪf ðə ɡɑɹɾənz stʃɹɛtʃt ɑn bɪɑn ðə wɔlz. hi wʌndɝd waɪ bɑɹθeɪnz hæd bɪlt ə wɔld ɛnkloʊʒɝ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə hɪz ɡɑɹɾən. noʊ ɹuf ʃoʊɾ əbʌv ðə wɔl. waɪ wəd ðeɪ ɡoʊ ɪn ðəɹ ən steɪ?

Ahead, stone walls not much higher than Loial's head enclosed a square perhaps fifty paces on a side. Rand could not be sure, in the shadows, but it looked as if the gardens stretched on beyond the walls. He wondered why Barthanes had built a walled enclosure in the middle of his garden. No roof showed above the wall. Why would they go in there and stay?

lɔɪəl bɛn tə pʊɾ ɪz maʊθ kloʊs tə ɹændz ɪɹ. "aɪ toʊl jə ðɪs wɑz ɔl ən oʊɡiɝ ɡɹoʊv, wʌns. ɹænd, ðə weɪɡeɪɾ ɪz wɪðɪn ðət wɔl. aɪ kən fil ɪt."

Loial bent to put his mouth close to Rand's ear. "I told you this was all an Ogier grove, once. Rand, the Waygate is within that wall. I can feel it."

ɹænd hɝd mæt saɪ dɪspɛɹɪŋli. "wi kænt ɡɪv ʌp, mæt," hi sɛd.

Rand heard Mat sigh despairingly. "We can't give up, Mat," he said.

"aɪm nɑt ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp. aɪ dʒʌst əv ɪnʌf bɹeɪnz nɑt tə wɑnə tʃɹævəl ðə weɪz əɡɛn."

"I'm not giving up. I just have enough brains not to want to travel the Ways again."

"wi meɪ hæv tə," ɹænd toʊl hɪm. "ɡoʊ faɪn ɪŋtʃɹ ən vɛɹɪn. ɡɛɾ əm əloʊn sʌmhaʊ - aɪ doʊn kɛɹ haʊ - ən tɛl əm aɪ θɪŋk feɪn əz teɪkən ðə hɔɹn θɹu ə weɪɡeɪt. dʒʌs doʊn lɛɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls hɪɹ. ən ɹɪmɛmbɝ tə lɪmp; jə ɑɹ səpoʊz tə hæv hæɾ ə fɔl." ɪt wɑz ə wʌndɝ tə hɪm ðəɾ ivən feɪn wəd ɹɪsk ðə weɪz, bʌɾ ɪt sim ði oʊnli ænsɝ. ðeɪ wʊdn spɛn ə deɪ ən ə naɪt dʒʌst sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ, wɪθaʊɾ ə ɹuf oʊvɝ ðɛɹ hɛdz.

"We may have to," Rand told him. "Go find Ingtar and Verin. Get them alone somehow - I don't care how - and tell them I think Fain has taken the Horn through a Waygate. Just don't let anyone else hear. And remember to limp; you are supposed to have had a fall." It was a wonder to him that even Fain would risk the Ways, but it seemed the only answer. They wouldn't spend a day and a night just sitting in there, without a roof over their heads.

mæt swɛpt ə loʊ baʊ, ən ɪz vɔɪs wɑz hɛvi wɪð sɑɹkæzəm. "æt wʌns, maɪ lɔɹd. əz maɪ lɔɹd wɪʃɪz. ʃæl aɪ kæɹi jəɹ bænɝ, maɪ lɔɹd?" hi stɑɹɾəd bæk fəɹ ðə mænɝ, hɪz ɡɹʌmbəlz feɪɾɪŋ əweɪ. "naʊ aɪ hæv tə lɪmp. nɛkst ɪɾəl bi ə bɹoʊkən nɛk, ɔɹ. . . ."

Mat swept a low bow, and his voice was heavy with sarcasm. "At once, my Lord. As my Lord wishes. Shall I carry your banner, my Lord?" He started back for the manor, his grumbles fading away. "Now I have to limp. Next it'll be a broken neck, or. . . ."

"hiz dʒʌst wɝiɾ əbaʊt ðə dæɡɝ, ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd.

"He's just worried about the dagger, Rand," Loial said.

"aɪ noʊ," ɹænd sɛd. bʌt haʊ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ i tɛlz sʌmbɑɾi wʌɾ aɪ æm, nɑɾ ivən minɪŋ tə? hi kəd nɑt bɪliv mæt wəd bɪtʃɹeɪ hɪm ɑn pɝpəs; ðəɹ wɑz ðət mʌtʃ ə ðɛɹ fɹɛndʃɪp lɛft, ət list. "lɔɪəl, bus mi ʌp wɛɹ aɪ kən si oʊvɝ ðə wɔl."

"I know," Rand said. But how long before he tells somebody what I am, not even meaning to? He could not believe Mat would betray him on purpose; there was that much of their friendship left, at least. "Loial, boost me up where I can see over the wall."

"ɹænd, ɪf ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɑɹ stɪl - "

"Rand, if the Darkfriends are still - "

"ðeɪ ɑɹənt. bus mi ʌp, lɔɪəl."

"They aren't. Boost me up, Loial."

ðə θɹi ʌv əm muv kloʊs tə ðə wɔl, ən lɔɪəl meɪɾ ə stɝəp wɪð ɪz hænz fəɹ ɹændz fʊt. ði oʊɡiɝ stʃɹeɪɾənd izəli wɪð ðə weɪt, lɪftɪŋ ɹændz hɛd dʒʌs haɪ ɪnʌf tə si oʊvɝ ðə tɑp ə ðə wɔl.

The three of them moved close to the wall, and Loial made a stirrup with his hands for Rand's foot. The Ogier straightened easily with the weight, lifting Rand's head just high enough to see over the top of the wall.

ðə θɪn, weɪnɪŋ mun ɡeɪv lɪɾəl laɪt, ən moʊst ə ði ɛɹiə wɑz ɪn ʃædoʊ, bʌt ðəɹ dɪd nɑt sim tə bi ɛni flaʊɝz əɹ ʃɹʌbz ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔl skwɛɹ. oʊnli ə loʊn bɛntʃ ə peɪl mɑɹbəl, pleɪst əz ɪf wʌn mæn maɪt sɪɾ ɑn ɪt tə stɛɹ ət wʌt stʊɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə speɪs laɪk ə hjudʒ əpɹaɪt stoʊn slæb.

The thin, waning moon gave little light, and most of the area was in shadow, but there did not seem to be any flowers or shrubs inside the walled square. Only a lone bench of pale marble, placed as if one man might sit on it to stare at what stood in the middle of the space like a huge upright stone slab.

ɹænd kɑt ðə tɑp ə ðə wɔl ən pʊl hɪmsɛlf ʌp. lɔɪəl ɡeɪv ə loʊ st ən ɡɹæbd əɾ ɪz fʊt, bʌɾ i dʒɝk fɹi ən ɹoʊld oʊvɝ ðə wɔl, dʒɹɑpɪŋ ɪnsaɪd. ðəɹ wɑz kloʊs-kɹɑpt ɡɹæs ʌndɝ ɪz fit; hi θɔt veɪɡli ðət bɑɹθeɪnz mʌs lɛt ʃip ɪn, ət list. stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ʃæɾoʊd stoʊn slæb, ðə weɪɡeɪt, hi wɑz stɑɹɾəld tə hɪɹ buts θʌmp tə ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪsaɪd hɪm.

Rand caught the top of the wall and pulled himself up. Loial gave a low hsst and grabbed at his foot, but he jerked free and rolled over the wall, dropping inside. There was close-cropped grass under his feet; he thought vaguely that Barthanes must let sheep in, at least. Staring at the shadowed stone slab, the Waygate, he was startled to hear boots thump to the ground beside him.

hʊɹɪn klaɪm tə hɪz fit, dʌstɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɔf. "ju ʃəd bi kɛɹfəl duɪŋ ðæt, lɔɹd ɹænd. kəd bi ɛnibəɾi haɪɾɪŋ ɪn hɪɹ. əɹ ɛniθɪŋ." hi pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs wɪðɪn ðə wɔlz, filɪŋ əɾ ɪz bɛlt əz ɪf fəɹ ðə ʃɔɹt sɔɹɾ ən sɔɹd-bɹeɪkɝ i hæd hæd tə liv ət ði ɪn; sɝvəns dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ ɑɹmd ɪn kɛɹhin. "dʒʌmp ɪn ə hoʊl wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ, ən ðɛɹəl bi ə sneɪk ɪn ɪɾ ɛvɹi taɪm."

Hurin climbed to his feet, dusting himself off. "You should be careful doing that, Lord Rand. Could be anybody hiding in here. Or anything." He peered into the darkness within the walls, feeling at his belt as if for the short sword and sword-breaker he had had to leave at the inn; servants did not go armed in Cairhien. "Jump in a hole without looking, and there'll be a snake in it every time."

"ju wəd smɛl ðɛm," ɹænd sɛd.

"You would smell them," Rand said.

"meɪbi." ðə snɪfɝ ɪnheɪl dipli. "bʌɾ aɪ kən oʊnli smɛl wʌt ðeɪv dʌn, nɑt wʌt ðeɪ ɪntɛnd."

"Maybe." The sniffer inhaled deeply. "But I can only smell what they've done, not what they intend."

ðəɹ wɑz ə skɹeɪpɪŋ saʊn fɹəm oʊvɝ ɹændz hɛd, ən ðən lɔɪəl wɑz lɛɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf daʊn fɹəm ðə wɔl. ði oʊɡiɝ dɪd nɑɾ ivən əv tə stʃɹeɪɾən ɪz ɑɹmz kəmplitli bɪfɔɹ ɪz buts tʌtʃt ðə ɡɹaʊnd. "ɹæʃ," hi mʌɾɝd. "ju hjumənz ɑɹ ɔlweɪz soʊ ɹæʃ ən heɪsti. ən naʊ juv mi duɪŋ ɪt. ɛldɝ heɪmən wəd spik tə mi səvɪɹli, ən maɪ mʌðɝ. . . ." ðə dɑɹknəs hɪɾ ɪz feɪs, bʌt ɹænd wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪz ɪɹz wɝ twɪtʃɪŋ vɪɡɝəsli. "ɹænd, ɪf jə doʊn stɑɹt biɪŋ ə lɪɾəl kɛɹfəl, jə ɑɹ gɑnə ɡɛt mi ɪn tʃɹʌbəl."

There was a scraping sound from over Rand's head, and then Loial was letting himself down from the wall. The Ogier did not even have to straighten his arms completely before his boots touched the ground. "Rash," he muttered. "You humans are always so rash and hasty. And now you have me doing it. Elder Haman would speak to me severely, and my mother. . . ." The darkness hid his face, but Rand was sure his ears were twitching vigorously. "Rand, if you don't start being a little careful, you are going to get me in trouble."

ɹænd wɔk tə ðə weɪɡeɪt, wɔkt ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊn ɪt. ivən kloʊs ʌp ɪt lʊk laɪk nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ə θɪk skwɛɹ ə stoʊn, tɔlɝ ðən i wɑz. ðə bæk wɑz smuð ən kul tə ðə tʌtʃ - hi oʊnli bɹʌʃt ɪz hæn əɡɛnst ɪt kwɪkli - bʌt ðə fɹʌn hæd bɪn kɑɹv baɪ ən ɑɹɾəsts hænz. vaɪnz, livz, ən flaʊɝz kʌvɝɾ ɪt, itʃ soʊ faɪnli dʌn ðəɾ ɪn ðə dɪm munlaɪt ðeɪ simd ɔlmoʊst ɹil. hi fɛl ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɪt; ðə ɡɹæs hæd bɪn skɹeɪpt pɑɹtli əweɪ ɪn tu ɑɹks sətʃ əz ðoʊz ɡeɪts wəd meɪk ɪn oʊpənɪŋ.

Rand walked to the Waygate, walked all the way around it. Even close up it looked like nothing more than a thick square of stone, taller than he was. The back was smooth and cool to the touch - he only brushed his hand against it quickly - but the front had been carved by an artist's hands. Vines, leaves, and flowers covered it, each so finely done that in the dim moonlight they seemed almost real. He felt the ground in front of it; the grass had been scraped partly away in two arcs such as those gates would make in opening.

"ɪz ðəɾ ə weɪɡeɪt?" hʊɹɪn æskt ənsɝteɪnli. "aɪv hɝd tɛl ə ðɛm, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt. . . ." hi snɪf ði ɛɹ. "ðə tʃɹeɪl ɡoʊz ɹaɪt tə ɪɾ ən stɑps, lɔɹd ɹænd. haʊ ɑɹ wi gɑnə fɑloʊ ðɛm, naʊ? aɪv hɝɾ ɪf jə ɡoʊ θɹu ə weɪɡeɪt, jə kʌm aʊt mæd, ɪf jə kʌm aʊɾ əɾ ɔl."

"Is that a Waygate?" Hurin asked uncertainly. "I've heard tell of them, of course, but. . . ." He sniffed the air. "The trail goes right to it and stops, Lord Rand. How are we going to follow them, now? I've heard if you go through a Waygate, you come out mad, if you come out at all."

"ɪt kən bi dʌn, hʊɹɪn. aɪv dʌn ɪt, ən lɔɪəl, ən mæt ən pɛɹɪn." ɹænd nɛvɝ tʊk ɪz aɪz fɹəm ðə tæŋɡəlz ə livz ɑn ðə stoʊn. ðəɹ wɑz wʌn ənlaɪk ɛni ʌðɝ kɑɹv ðɛɹ, hi nu. ðə tʃɹɛfɔɪl lif ə feɪbəld ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə, ðə tʃɹi ʌv laɪf. hi pʊɾ ɪz hæn ɑn ɪt. "aɪl bɛt jə kən smɛl ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪl əlɔŋ ðə weɪz. wi kən fɑloʊ ɛniwɛɹ ðeɪ kən ɹʌn." ɪt wəd nɑt hɝt tə pɹuv tə hɪmsɛlf ðəɾ i kəd meɪk hɪmsɛlf stɛp θɹu ə weɪɡeɪt. "aɪl pɹuv ɪt tə ju." hi hɝd hʊɹɪn ɡɹoʊn. ðə lif wɑz wɝkt ɪn ðə stoʊn dʒʌst əz ði ʌðɝz wɝ, bʌɾ ɪt keɪm əweɪ ɪn ɪz hænd. lɔɪəl ɡɹoʊnd, tu.

"It can be done, Hurin. I've done it, and Loial, and Mat and Perrin." Rand never took his eyes from the tangles of leaves on the stone. There was one unlike any other carved there, he knew. The trefoil leaf of fabled Avendesora, the Tree of Life. He put his hand on it. "I'll bet you can smell their trail along the Ways. We can follow anywhere they can run." It would not hurt to prove to himself that he could make himself step through a Waygate. "I'll prove it to you." He heard Hurin groan. The leaf was worked in the stone just as the others were, but it came away in his hand. Loial groaned, too.

ɪn ən ɪnstən ði ɪluʒən ə lɪvɪŋ plæns sim sʌɾənli ɹil. stoʊn livz əpɪɹd tə stɝ wɪð ə bɹiz, flaʊɝz əpɪɹd tə hæv kʌlɝ ivən ɪn ðə dɑɹk. daʊn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə mæs ə laɪn əpɪɹd, ən ðə tu hævz ə ðə slæb swʌŋ sloʊli təwɔɹd ɹænd. hi stɛp bæk tə lɛɾ əm oʊpən. hi dɪd nɑt faɪn hɪmsɛlf lʊkɪŋ ət ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə wɔl skwɛɹ, bʌt niðɝ dɪɾ i si ðə dʌl sɪlvɝ ɹəflɛkʃən i ɹɪmɛmbɝd. ðə speɪs bɪtwin ði oʊpənɪŋ ɡeɪts wɑz ə blæk soʊ dɑɹk ɪt sim tə meɪk ðə naɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪt laɪɾɝ. ðə pɪtʃ-blæknəs uzd aʊt bɪtwin ðə stɪl-muvɪŋ ɡeɪts.

In an instant the illusion of living plants seemed suddenly real. Stone leaves appeared to stir with a breeze, flowers appeared to have color even in the dark. Down the center of the mass a line appeared, and the two halves of the slab swung slowly toward Rand. He stepped back to let them open. He did not find himself looking at the other side of the walled square, but neither did he see the dull silver reflection he remembered. The space between the opening gates was a black so dark it seemed to make the night around it lighter. The pitch-blackness oozed out between the still-moving gates.

ɹænd lɛp bæk wɪð ə ʃaʊt, dʒɹɑpɪŋ ði ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə lif ɪn ɪz heɪst, ən lɔɪəl kɹaɪɾ aʊt, "mætʃɪn ʃɪn. ðə blæk wɪnd."

Rand leaped back with a shout, dropping the Avendesora leaf in his haste, and Loial cried out, "Machin Shin. The Black Wind."

ðə saʊn ʌv wɪn fɪl ðɛɹ ɪɹz; ðə ɡɹæs stɝɾ ɪn ɹɪpəlz təwɔɹd ðə wɔlz, ən dɝt swɝld ʌp, sʌkt ɪndə ði ɛɹ. ən ɪn ðə wɪn ə θaʊzən ɪnseɪn vɔɪsəz sim tə kɹaɪ, tɛn θaʊzənd, oʊvɝlæpɪŋ, dʒɹaʊnɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ. ɹænd kəd meɪk aʊt səm ə ðɛm, ðoʊ hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə.

The sound of wind filled their ears; the grass stirred in ripples toward the walls, and dirt swirled up, sucked into the air. And in the wind a thousand insane voices seemed to cry, ten thousand, overlapping, drowning each other. Rand could make out some of them, though he tried not to.

. . . blʌd soʊ swit, soʊ swit tə dʒɹɪŋk ðə blʌd, ðə blʌd ðət dʒɹɪps, dʒɹɪps, dʒɹɑps soʊ ɹɛd; pɹɪɾi aɪz, faɪn aɪz, aɪ hæv noʊ aɪz, plʌk ði aɪz fɹəm aʊɾ ə jəɹ hɛd; ɡɹaɪn jəɹ boʊnz, splɪt jəɹ boʊnz ɪnsaɪd jəɹ flɛʃ, sʌk jəɹ mɛɹoʊ waɪl jə skɹim; skɹim, skɹim, sɪŋɪŋ skɹimz, sɪŋ jəɹ skɹimz. . . . ən wɝst ʌv ɔl, ə wɪspɝɪŋ θɹɛd θɹu ɔl ðə ɹɛst. ælθɹ. ælθɹ. ælθɹ.

. . . blood so sweet, so sweet to drink the blood, the blood that drips, drips, drops so red; pretty eyes, fine eyes, I have no eyes, pluck the eyes from out of your head; grind your bones, split your bones inside your flesh, suck your marrow while you scream; scream, scream, singing screams, sing your screams. . . . And worst of all, a whispering thread through all the rest. Al'Thor. Al'Thor. Al'Thor.

ɹænd faʊn ðə vɔɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪm ən ɛmbɹeɪst ɪt, nɛvɝ maɪndɪŋ ðə tæntəlaɪzɪŋ, sɪkənɪŋ ɡloʊ ʌv seɪɾɪn dʒʌst aʊɾ ə hɪz saɪt. ɡɹeɪɾəst ʌv ɔl ðə deɪnʒɝz əlɔŋ ðə weɪz wɑz ðə blæk wɪn ðət tʊk ðə soʊlz ə ðoʊz ɪt kɪld, ən dʒɹoʊv mæd ðoʊz ɪt lɛt lɪv, bʌt mætʃɪn ʃɪn wɑz ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə weɪz; ɪt kəd nɑt liv ðɛm. oʊnli ɪt wɑz floʊɪŋ ɪndə ðə naɪt, ən ðə blæk wɪn kɔld ɪz neɪm.

Rand found the void around him and embraced it, never minding the tantalizing, sickening glow of saidin just out of his sight. Greatest of all the dangers along the Ways was the Black Wind that took the souls of those it killed, and drove mad those it let live, but Machin Shin was a part of the Ways; it could not leave them. Only it was flowing into the night, and the Black Wind called his name.

ðə weɪɡeɪt wɑz nɑt jɛt fʊli oʊpən. ɪf ðeɪ kəɾ oʊnli pʊt ði ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə lif bæk. . . . hi sɔ lɔɪəl skɹæmbəlɪŋ ɑn ɪz hænz ən niz, fʌmbəlɪŋ ən sɝtʃɪŋ ðə ɡɹæs ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs.

The Waygate was not yet fully open. If they could only put the Avendesora leaf back. . . . He saw Loial scrambling on his hands and knees, fumbling and searching the grass in the darkness.

seɪɾɪn fɪl hɪm. hi fɛlt əz ɪf ɪz boʊnz wɝ vaɪbɹeɪɾɪŋ, fɛl ðə ɹɛd-hɑt, aɪs-koʊl floʊ ʌv ðə wʌn paʊɝ, fɛl tʃɹuli əlaɪv əz i nɛvɝ wɑz wɪθaʊɾ ɪt, fɛl ði ɔɪl-slɪk teɪnt. . . . noʊ! ən saɪlənli hi skɹim bæk ət hɪmsɛlf fɹəm bɪɑn ði ɛmptinəs, ɪts kʌmɪŋ fəɹ ju! ɪɾəl kɪl ɔl ʌv ʌs! hi hɝld ɪɾ ɔl ət ðə blæk bʌlʒ, stændɪŋ aʊɾ ə fʊl spæn fɹəm ðə weɪɡeɪt, naʊ. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðəɾ i hɝld, əɹ haʊ, bʌɾ ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðət dɑɹknəs blumd ə kɔɹʌskeɪɾɪŋ faʊntən ə laɪt.

Saidin filled him. He felt as if his bones were vibrating, felt the red-hot, ice-cold flow of the One Power, felt truly alive as he never was without it, felt the oil-slick taint. . . . No! And silently he screamed back at himself from beyond the emptiness, It's coming for you! It'll kill all of us! He hurled it all at the black bulge, standing out a full span from the Waygate, now. He did not know what it was that he hurled, or how, but in the heart of that darkness bloomed a coruscating fountain of light.

ðə blæk wɪnd ʃɹikt, tɛn θaʊzənd wɝdləs haʊlz ʌv æɡəni. sloʊli, ɡɪvɪŋ weɪ ɪntʃ baɪ ɹɪlʌktən ɪntʃ, ðə bʌlʒ lɛsənd; sloʊli ði uzɪŋ ɹɪvɝst, bæk ɪndə ðə stɪl-oʊpən weɪɡeɪt.

The Black Wind shrieked, ten thousand wordless howls of agony. Slowly, giving way inch by reluctant inch, the bulge lessened; slowly the oozing reversed, back into the still-open Waygate.

ðə paʊɝ ɹeɪs θɹu ɹænd ɪn ə tɔɹənt. hi kəd fil ðə lɪŋk bɪtwin hɪmsɛlf ən seɪɾɪn, laɪk ə ɹɪvɝ ɪn flʌd, bɪtwin hɪmsɛlf ən ðə pjʊɹ faɪɝ bleɪzɪŋ ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə blæk waɪnd, ə ɹeɪdʒɪŋ kæɾɝækt. ðə hiɾ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪm wɛn tə waɪt-hit, ən bɪɑnd, tə ə ʃɪmɝ ðət wʊɾə mɛltəd stoʊn ən veɪpɝaɪz stil ən meɪd ði ɛɹ bɝst ɪndə fleɪm. ðə koʊld ɡɹu tɪl ðə bɹɛθ ɪn ɪz lʌŋz ʃʊɾə fɹoʊzən sɑləɾ ən hɑɹɾ əz mɛɾəl. hi kəd fil ɪɾ oʊvɝwɛlmɪŋ hɪm, fil laɪf ɪɹoʊɾɪŋ laɪk ə sɑf kleɪ ɹɪvɝbæŋk, fil wʌt wɑz ɪm wɛɹɪŋ əweɪ.

The Power raced through Rand in a torrent. He could feel the link between himself and saidin, like a river in flood, between himself and the pure fire blazing in the heart of the Black Wind, a raging cataract. The heat inside him went to white-heat, and beyond, to a shimmer that would have melted stone and vaporized steel and made the air burst into flame. The cold grew till the breath in his lungs should have frozen solid and hard as metal. He could feel it overwhelming him, feel life eroding like a soft clay riverbank, feel what was him wearing away.

kæn stɑp! ɪf ɪt ɡɛts aʊt. . . . hæv tə kɪl ɪt! aɪ - kən - nɑt - stɑp! dɛspɝətli hi klʌŋ tə fɹæɡmɛns ə hɪmsɛlf. ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɹɔɹd θɹu hɪm; hi ɹoʊɾ ɪt laɪk ə tʃɪp ʌv wʊɾ ɪn ɹæpədz. ðə vɔɪd bɪɡæn tə mɛlt ən floʊ; ði ɛmptinəs stimd wɪð fɹizɪŋ koʊld.

Can't stop! If it gets out. . . . Have to kill it! I - can - not - stop! Desperately he clung to fragments of himself. The One Power roared through him; he rode it like a chip of wood in rapids. The void began to melt and flow; the emptiness steamed with freezing cold.

ðə moʊʃən ə ðə weɪɡeɪt hɔltəd, ən ɹɪvɝst.

The motion of the Waygate halted, and reversed.

ɹænd stɛɹd, ʃʊɹ, ɪn ðə dɪm θɔts floʊɾɪŋ aʊtsaɪd ðə vɔɪd, ðəɾ i wɑz oʊnli siɪŋ wʌɾ i wɑntəd tə si.

Rand stared, sure, in the dim thoughts floating outside the void, that he was only seeing what he wanted to see.

ðə ɡeɪts dʒɹɪftəd kloʊsɝ təɡɛðɝ, pʊʃɪŋ bæk mætʃɪn ʃɪn əz ɪf ðə blæk wɪn hæd sɑləd sʌbstəns. ði ɪnfɝnoʊ stɪl ɹɔɹɾ ɪn ɪts bɹɛst.

The gates drifted closer together, pushing back Machin Shin as if the Black Wind had solid substance. The inferno still roared in its breast.

wɪð ə veɪɡ, dɪstənt wʌndɝɪŋ, ɹænd sɔ lɔɪəl, stɪl ɑn hænz ən niz, bækɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə kloʊzɪŋ ɡeɪts.

With a vague, distant wondering, Rand saw Loial, still on hands and knees, backing away from the closing gates.

ðə ɡæp nɛɹoʊd, vænɪʃt. ðə livz ən vaɪnz mɝdʒd ɪndə ə sɑləd wɔl, ən wɝ stoʊn.

The gap narrowed, vanished. The leaves and vines merged into a solid wall, and were stone.

ɹænd fɛl ðə lɪŋk bɪtwin ɪm ən ðə faɪɝ snæp, ðə floʊ ʌv paʊɝ θɹu hɪm sis. ə moʊmən mɔɹ, ən ɪt wʊɾə swɛpt ɪm əweɪ kəmplitli. ʃeɪkɪŋ, hi dʒɹɑp tə hɪz niz. ɪt wɑz stɪl ðəɹ ɪnsaɪd. seɪɾɪn. noʊ lɔŋɡɝ floʊɪŋ, bʌt ðɛɹ, ɪn ə pul. hi wɑz ə pul ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ. hi tʃɹɛmbəld wɪð ɪt. hi kəd smɛl ðə ɡɹæs, ðə dɝt bɪniθ, ðə stoʊn ə ðə wɔlz. ivən ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs i kəd si itʃ bleɪɾ ʌv ɡɹæs, sɛpɹəɾ ən hoʊl, ɔl ə ðɛm ət wʌns. hi kəd fil itʃ mɪnut stɝɪŋ ə ði ɛɹ ɑn ɪz feɪs. hɪz tʌŋ kɝɾəld wɪð ðə teɪst ə ðə teɪnt; hɪz stʌmək nɑɾɪd ən spæzmd.

Rand felt the link between him and the fire snap, the flow of Power through him cease. A moment more, and it would have swept him away completely. Shaking, he dropped to his knees. It was still there inside. Saidin. No longer flowing, but there, in a pool. He was a pool of the One Power. He trembled with it. He could smell the grass, the dirt beneath, the stone of the walls. Even in the darkness he could see each blade of grass, separate and whole, all of them at once. He could feel each minute stirring of the air on his face. His tongue curdled with the taste of the taint; his stomach knotted and spasmed.

fɹæntəkəli hi klɔɾ ɪz weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə vɔɪd; stɪl ɑn ɪz niz, nɑt muvɪŋ, hi fɔt fɹi. ən ðən ɔl ðət wɑz lɛft wɑz ðə feɪɾɪŋ faʊlnəs ɑn ɪz tʌŋ, ən ðə kɹæmpɪŋ ɪn ɪz stʌmək, ən ðə mɛmɹi. soʊ - əlaɪv.

Frantically he clawed his way out of the void; still on his knees, not moving, he fought free. And then all that was left was the fading foulness on his tongue, and the cramping in his stomach, and the memory. So - alive.

"ju seɪvd ʌs, bɪldɝ." hʊɹɪn hæɾ ɪz bæk pɹɛst əɡɛns ðə wɔl, ən ɪz vɔɪs wɑz hɔɹs. "ðæt θɪŋ - ðət wɑz ðə blæk waɪnd? - ɪt wɑz wɝs ðən - wɑz ɪt gɑnə hɝl ðət faɪɝ əɾ ʌs? lɔɹd ɹænd! dɪɾ ɪt hɑɹm ju? dɪɾ ɪt tʌtʃ ju?" hi keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ əz ɹænd ɡɑt tə hɪz fit, hɛlpɪŋ ɪm ðə læs bɪt. lɔɪəl wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ ʌp, tu, dʌstɪŋ ɪz hænz ən ɪz niz.

"You saved us, Builder." Hurin had his back pressed against the wall, and his voice was hoarse. "That thing - that was the Black Wind? - it was worse than - was it going to hurl that fire at us? Lord Rand! Did it harm you? Did it touch you?" He came running as Rand got to his feet, helping him the last bit. Loial was getting up, too, dusting his hands and his knees.

"wil nɛvɝ fɑloʊ feɪn θɹu ðæt." ɹænd tʌtʃt lɔɪəlz ɑɹm. "θæŋk ju. jə dɪd seɪv ʌs." jə seɪv mi, ət list. ɪt wɑz kɪlɪŋ mi. kɪlɪŋ mi, ən ɪt fɛlt - wʌndɝfəl. hi swɑloʊd; ə feɪn tʃɹeɪs ə ðə teɪst stɪl koʊɾəd ɪz maʊθ. "aɪ wɑn sʌmθɪŋ tə dʒɹɪŋk."

"We'll never follow Fain through that." Rand touched Loial's arm. "Thank you. You did save us." You saved me, at least. It was killing me. Killing me, and it felt - wonderful. He swallowed; a faint trace of the taste still coated his mouth. "I want something to drink."

"aɪ oʊnli faʊn ðə lif ən pʊɾ ɪt bæk," lɔɪəl sɛd, ʃɹʌɡɪŋ. "ɪt sim ðəɾ ɪf wi kəd nɑt ɡɛt ðə weɪɡeɪt kloʊzd, ɪt wəd kɪl ʌs. aɪm əfɹeɪɾ aɪm nɑɾ ə vɛɹi ɡʊd hɪɹoʊ, ɹænd. aɪ wɑz soʊ əfɹeɪɾ aɪ kəd hɑɹdli θɪŋk."

"I only found the leaf and put it back," Loial said, shrugging. "It seemed that if we could not get the Waygate closed, it would kill us. I am afraid I'm not a very good hero, Rand. I was so afraid I could hardly think."

"wi wɝ boʊθ əfɹeɪd," ɹænd sɛd. "wi meɪ bi ə pʊɹ pɛɹ ə hɪɹoʊz, bʌt wəɹ wʌt ðəɹ ɪz. ɪts ə ɡʊd θɪŋ ɪŋtʃɹ ɪz wɪð ʌs."

"We were both afraid," Rand said. "We may be a poor pair of heroes, but we are what there is. It's a good thing Ingtar is with us."

"lɔɹd ɹænd," hʊɹɪn sɛd dɪfəɾəntli, "kʊd wi - liv, naʊ?"

"Lord Rand," Hurin said diffidently, "could we - leave, now?"

ðə snɪfɝ meɪɾ ə fʌs əbaʊt ɹænd ɡoʊɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə wɔl fɝst, wɪð nɑt noʊɪŋ u wɑz weɪɾɪŋ aʊtsaɪd, əntɪl ɹænd pɔɪntəɾ aʊt ðəɾ i hæd ði oʊnli wɛpən əmʌŋ ðɛm. ivən ðən hʊɹɪn dɪd nɑt sim tə laɪk lɛɾɪŋ lɔɪəl lɪft ɹænd tə kætʃ ðə tɑp ə ðə wɔl ən pʊl hɪmsɛlf oʊvɝ.

The sniffer made a fuss about Rand going over the wall first, with not knowing who was waiting outside, until Rand pointed out that he had the only weapon among them. Even then Hurin did not seem to like letting Loial lift Rand to catch the top of the wall and pull himself over.

ɹænd lændəɾ ɑn ɪz fit wɪð ə θʌd, lɪsnɪŋ ən piɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə naɪt. fəɹ ə moʊmən i θɔɾ i sɔ sʌmθɪŋ muv, hɝɾ ə but skɹeɪp ɑn ðə bɹɪk wɔk, bʌt niðɝ wɑz ɹɪpiɾɪd, ən i dɪsmɪst ɪɾ əz nɝvəsnəs. hi θɔt ðəɾ i hæɾ ə ɹaɪt tə bi nɝvəs. hi tɝn tə hɛlp hʊɹɪn daʊn.

Rand landed on his feet with a thud, listening and peering into the night. For a moment he thought he saw something move, heard a boot scrape on the brick walk, but neither was repeated, and he dismissed it as nervousness. He thought that he had a right to be nervous. He turned to help Hurin down.

"lɔɹd ɹænd," ðə snɪfɝ sɛɾ əz sun əz ɪz fit wɝ sɑlədli ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, "haʊ ɑɹ wi gɑnə fɑloʊ ðɛm naʊ? fɹəm wʌɾ aɪv hɝɾ ə ðoʊz θɪŋz, ðə hoʊl lɑɾ ə ðɛm kəd bi hæfweɪ əkɹɔs ðə wɝl baɪ naʊ, ɪn ɛni dɝɛkʃən."

"Lord Rand," the sniffer said as soon as his feet were solidly on the ground, "how are we going to follow them now? From what I've heard of those things, the whole lot of them could be halfway across the world by now, in any direction."

"vɛɹɪn wɪl noʊ ə weɪ." ɹænd sʌɾənli wɑntəd tə læf; tə faɪn ðə hɔɹn ən ðə dæɡɝ - ɪf ðeɪ kəd bi faʊnd, naʊ - hi hæd tə ɡoʊ bæk tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðeɪ hæd lɛɾ ɪm lus, ən naʊ hi hæd tə ɡoʊ bæk. "aɪ woʊn lɛt mæt daɪ wɪθaʊt tʃɹaɪɪŋ."

"Verin will know a way." Rand suddenly wanted to laugh; to find the Horn and the dagger - if they could be found, now - he had to go back to the Aes Sedai. They had let him loose, and now he had to go back. "I won't let Mat die without trying."

lɔɪəl dʒɔɪn ðɛm, ən ðeɪ wɛn bæk təwɔɹd ðə mænɝ, tə bi mɛɾ ət ðə smɔl dɔɹ baɪ mæt, hu oʊpən ɪt dʒʌst əz ɹænd ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə hændəl. "vɛɹɪn sɛz jəɹ nɑt tə də ɛniθɪŋ. ɪf hʊɹɪnz faʊnd wɛɹ ðə hɔɹn ɪz kɛpt, ðən ʃi sɛz ðæts ɔl wi kən du, naʊ. ʃi sɛz wɪl liv əz sun əz jə kʌm bæk, ən meɪk ə plæn. ən aɪ seɪ ðɪs ɪz ðə læs taɪm aɪ ɡoʊ ɹʌnɪŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ wɪð mɛsədʒəz. ɪf jə wɑnə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ tə sʌmbɑɾi, jə kən tɔk tə ðɛm jɝsɛlf fɹəm naʊ ɑn." mæt pɪɹd pæst əm ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs. "ɪz ðə hɔɹn aʊt ðəɹ sʌmwɛɹ? ɪn ən aʊtbɪldɪŋ? dɪd jə si ðə dæɡɝ?"

Loial joined them, and they went back toward the manor, to be met at the small door by Mat, who opened it just as Rand reached for the handle. "Verin says you're not to do anything. If Hurin's found where the Horn is kept, then she says that's all we can do, now. She says we'll leave as soon as you come back, and make a plan. And I say this is the last time I go running back and forth with messages. If you want to say something to somebody, you can talk to them yourself from now on." Mat peered past them into the darkness. "Is the Horn out there somewhere? In an outbuilding? Did you see the dagger?"

ɹænd tɝn ɪm ɝaʊn ən ɡɑɾ ɪm bæk ɪnsaɪd. "ɪɾ ɪzən ɪn ən aʊtbɪldɪŋ, mæt. aɪ hoʊp vɛɹɪn əz ə ɡʊɾ aɪdiə ʌv wʌt tə də naʊ; aɪ doʊn əv ɛni."

Rand turned him around and got him back inside. "It isn't in an outbuilding, Mat. I hope Verin has a good idea of what to do now; I don't have any."

mæt lʊkt əz ɪf i wɑntəd tə æsk kwɛstʃənz, bʌɾ i lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi pʊʃt əlɔŋ ðə dɪmli lɪt kɔɹəɾɝ. hi ivən ɹɪmɛmbɝd tə lɪmp əz ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd əpstɛɹz.

Mat looked as if he wanted to ask questions, but he let himself be pushed along the dimly lit corridor. He even remembered to limp as they started upstairs.

wən ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz ɹiɪntɝd ðə ɹumz fɪld wɪð noʊbəlz, ðeɪ ɹəsivd ə nʌmbɝ ə lʊks. ɹænd wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðeɪ sʌmhaʊ nu sʌmθɪŋ ʌv wʌt hæd hæpən aʊtsaɪd, əɹ ɪf i ʃʊɾə sɛn hʊɹɪn ən mæt tə ðə fɹʌn hɔl tə weɪt, bʌt ðən i ɹilaɪz ðə lʊks wɝ noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm wʌt ðeɪ hæd bɪn bɪfɔɹ, kjʊɹiəs ən kælkjəleɪɾɪŋ, wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt ðə lɔɹɾ ən ði oʊɡiɝ hæd bɪn ʌp tə. sɝvəns wɝ ɪnvɪzəbəl tə ðiz pipəl. noʊ wʌn tʃɹaɪd tə əpɹoʊtʃ ðɛm, sɪns ðeɪ wɝ təɡɛðɝ. ɪt sim ðəɹ wɝ pɹoʊɾəkɔlz tə kənspɪɹəsi ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm; ɛniwʌn maɪt tʃɹaɪ tə lɪsən tə ə pɹaɪvət kɑnvɝseɪʃən, bʌt ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ ɪntʃɹuɾ ɑn ɪt.

When Rand and the others reentered the rooms filled with nobles, they received a number of looks. Rand wondered if they somehow knew something of what had happened outside, or if he should have sent Hurin and Mat to the front hall to wait, but then he realized the looks were no different from what they had been before, curious and calculating, wondering what the lord and the Ogier had been up to. Servants were invisible to these people. No one tried to approach them, since they were together. It seemed there were protocols to conspiracy in the Great Game; anyone might try to listen to a private conversation, but they would not intrude on it.

vɛɹɪn ən ɪŋtʃɹ wɝ stændɪŋ təɡɛðɝ, ən ðʌs ɔlsoʊ əloʊn. ɪŋtʃɹ lʊkt ə lɪɾəl deɪzd. vɛɹɪn ɡeɪv ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝ θɹi ə bɹif ɡlæns, fɹaʊn ət ðɛɹ ɪkspɹɛʃənz, ðən ɹisɛɾəld əɹ ʃɔl ən stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ði ɛntʃɹi hɔl.

Verin and Ingtar were standing together, and thus also alone. Ingtar looked a little dazed. Verin gave Rand and the other three a brief glance, frowned at their expressions, then resettled her shawl and started for the entry hall.

əz ðeɪ ɹitʃt ɪt, bɑɹθeɪnz əpɪɹɾ əz ɪf sʌmwʌn hæd toʊld ɪm ðeɪ wɝ livɪŋ. "ju ɡoʊ soʊ sun? vɛɹɪn sədaɪ, kən aɪ nɑɾ ɛntʃɹit jə tə steɪ lɔŋɡɝ?"

As they reached it, Barthanes appeared as if someone had told him they were leaving. "You go so soon? Verin Sedai, can I not entreat you to stay longer?"

vɛɹɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "wi mʌst ɡoʊ, lɔɹd bɑɹθeɪnz. aɪv nɑt bɪn ɪn kɛɹhin ɪn səm jɪɹz. aɪ wɑz ɡlæɾ ə jəɹ ɪnvɪteɪʃən tə jʌŋ ɹænd. ɪts bɪn . . . ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ."

Verin shook her head. "We must go, Lord Barthanes. I've not been in Cairhien in some years. I was glad of your invitation to young Rand. It has been . . . interesting."

"ðɛn ɡɹeɪs si jə seɪfli tə jəɹ ɪn. ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹi, ɪz ɪt nɑt? pɝhæps jəl feɪvɝ mi wɪð jəɹ pɹɛzəns əɡɛn? jə wəɾ ɑnɝ mi, vɛɹɪn sədaɪ, ən ju, lɔɹd ɹænd, ən ju, lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ju, lɔɪəl, sʌn ʌv ɑɹən sʌn ə hɑlən." hɪz baʊ wɑz ə lɪɾəl dipɝ fəɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ðən fəɹ ði ʌðɝz, bʌt stɪl noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə slaɪɾ ɪnkləneɪʃən.

"Then Grace see you safely to your inn. The Great Tree, is it not? Perhaps you will favor me with your presence again? You would honor me, Verin Sedai, and you, Lord Rand, and you, Lord Ingtar, not to mention you, Loial, son of Arent son of Halan." His bow was a little deeper for the Aes Sedai than for the others, but still no more than a slight inclination.

vɛɹɪn nɑɾəd ɪn æknɑlɪdʒmənt. "pɝhæps. ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ju, lɔɹd bɑɹθeɪnz." ʃi tɝn fəɹ ðə dɔɹz.

Verin nodded in acknowledgment. "Perhaps. The Light illumine you, Lord Barthanes." She turned for the doors.

əz ɹænd muv tə fɑloʊ ði ʌðɝz, bɑɹθeɪnz kɑɾ ɪz sliv wɪð tu fɪŋɡɝz, hoʊldɪŋ ɪm bæk. mæt lʊkt əz ɪf i maɪt steɪ, tu, əntɪl hʊɹɪn pʊld ɪm tə dʒɔɪn vɛɹɪn ən ðə ɹɛst.

As Rand moved to follow the others, Barthanes caught his sleeve with two fingers, holding him back. Mat looked as if he might stay, too, until Hurin pulled him to join Verin and the rest.

"ju weɪɾ ivən dipɝ ɪn ðə ɡeɪm ðən aɪ θɔt," bɑɹθeɪnz sɛd sɔfli. "wɛn aɪ hɝd jəɹ neɪm, aɪ kəd nɑt bɪliv ɪt, jɛt jə keɪm, ən jə fɪt ðə dɪskɹɪpʃən, ænd. . . . aɪ wɑz ɡɪvən ə mɛsədʒ fəɹ ju. aɪ θɪŋk əl dɪlɪvɝ ɪɾ æftɝ ɔl."

"You wade even deeper in the Game than I thought," Barthanes said softly. "When I heard your name, I could not believe it, yet you came, and you fit the description, and. . . . I was given a message for you. I think I will deliver it after all."

ɹænd hæd fɛlt ə pɹɪklɪŋ əlɔŋ ɪz bækboʊn əz bɑɹθeɪnz spoʊk, bʌɾ ət ðə læst, hi stɛɹd. "ə mɛsədʒ? fɹəm hum? leɪɾi səlin?"

Rand had felt a prickling along his backbone as Barthanes spoke, but at the last, he stared. "A message? From whom? Lady Selene?"

"ə mæn. nɑt ðə sɔɹt fəɹ hum aɪ wəd juʒəwəli kæɹi mɛsədʒəz, bʌt hiz . . . sɝɾən . . . kleɪmz ɑn mi ðəɾ aɪ kænɑɾ ɪɡnɔɹ. hi ɡeɪv noʊ neɪm, bʌɾ i wɑz ə luɡɑɝɾɝ. ɑ! jə noʊ hɪm."

"A man. Not the sort for whom I would usually carry messages, but he has . . . certain . . . claims on me that I cannot ignore. He gave no name, but he was a Lugarder. Aaah! You know him."

"aɪ noʊ hɪm." feɪn lɛft ə mɛsədʒ? ɹænd lʊkt ɝaʊn ðə waɪd hɔl. mæt ən vɛɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ weɪɾɪŋ baɪ ðə dɔɹz. lɪvɹid sɝvəns stʊd stɪfli əlɔŋ ðə wɔlz, ɹɛɾi tə lip əɾ ə kəmæn jɛɾ əpɪɹɪŋ niðɝ tə hɪɹ nɔɹ si. ðə saʊnz ə ðə ɡæðɝɪŋ floʊɾəd fɹəm dipɝ ɪn ðə mænɝ. ɪt dɪd nɑt lʊk laɪk ə pleɪs wɛɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz maɪɾ ətæk. "wʌt mɛsədʒ?"

"I know him." Fain left a message? Rand looked around the wide hall. Mat and Verin and the others were waiting by the doors. Liveried servants stood stiffly along the walls, ready to leap at a command yet appearing neither to hear nor see. The sounds of the gathering floated from deeper in the manor. It did not look like a place where Darkfriends might attack. "What message?"

"hi sɛz hɪl weɪt fəɹ jə ɑn toʊmən hɛd. hiz wʌt jə sik, ən ɪf jə wɑn ɪt, jə mʌs fɑloʊ. ɪf jə ɹəfjuz tə fɑloʊ hɪm, hi sɛz hɪl haʊn jəɹ blʌd, ən jəɹ pipəl, ən ðoʊz jə lʌv əntɪl jəl feɪs hɪm. ɪt saʊnz mæd, ʌv kɔɹs, ə mæn laɪk ðət seɪɪŋ hɪl haʊn ə lɔɹd, ən jɛt, ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt hɪm. aɪ θɪŋk hiz mæd - hi ivən dɪnaɪd jə ɑɹ ə lɔɹd, əz ɛni aɪ kən pleɪnli si - bʌt ðəɹ ɪz stɪl sʌmθɪŋ. wʌɾ ɪz ɪɾ i kæɹiz wɪð hɪm, wɪð tʃɹɑləks tə ɡɑɹɾ ɪt? wʌɾ ɪz ɪt jə sik?" bɑɹθeɪnz simd ʃɑkt ət ðə dɝɛknəs ə hɪz oʊn kwɛstʃənz.

"He says he will wait for you on Toman Head. He has what you seek, and if you want it, you must follow. If you refuse to follow him, he says he will hound your blood, and your people, and those you love until you will face him. It sounds mad, of course, a man like that saying he will hound a lord, and yet, there was something about him. I think he is mad - he even denied you are a lord, as any eye can plainly see - but there is still something. What is it he carries with him, with Trollocs to guard it? What is it you seek?" Barthanes seemed shocked at the directness of his own questions.

"ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ju, lɔɹd bɑɹθeɪnz." ɹænd mænədʒd ə baʊ, bʌɾ ɪz lɛɡz wɑbəld əz i dʒɔɪn vɛɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz. hi wɑns mi tə fɑloʊ? ən hɪl hɝɾ ɛmənz fild, tæm, ɪf aɪ doʊnt. hi hæd noʊ daʊt feɪn kəd də ɪt, wəd də ɪt. ət list ɛɡwin ɪz seɪf, ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. hi hæd sɪkənɪŋ ɪmədʒəz ə tʃɹɑləks dɪsɛndɪŋ ɪn hɔɹdz ɑn ɛmənz fild, ʌv aɪləs feɪdz stɔkɪŋ ɛɡwin. bʌt haʊ kən aɪ fɑloʊ hɪm? haʊ?

"The Light illumine you, Lord Barthanes." Rand managed a bow, but his legs wobbled as he joined Verin and the others. He wants me to follow? And he'll hurt Emond's Field, Tam, if I don't. He had no doubt Fain could do it, would do it. At least Egwene is safe, in the White Tower. He had sickening images of Trollocs descending in hordes on Emond's Field, of eyeless Fades stalking Egwene. But how can I follow him? How?

ðən i wɑz aʊɾ ɪn ðə naɪt, maʊntɪŋ ɹɛd. vɛɹɪn ən ɪŋtʃɹ ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ ɔl ɔlɹɛɾi ɑn ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, ən ði ɛskɔɹɾ ə ʃaɪnɝənz wɑz kloʊzɪŋ ɹaʊn ðɛm.

Then he was out in the night, mounting Red. Verin and Ingtar and the others were all already on their horses, and the escort of Shienarans was closing round them.

"wʌt dɪd jə faɪnd?" vɛɹɪn dɪmændəd. "wɛɹ dʌz i kip ɪt?" hʊɹɪn klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt laʊdli, ən lɔɪəl ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ɪz haɪ sæɾəl. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pɪɹɾ ət ðɛm.

"What did you find?" Verin demanded. "Where does he keep it?" Hurin cleared his throat loudly, and Loial shifted in his high saddle. The Aes Sedai peered at them.

"feɪn əz teɪkən ðə hɔɹn tə toʊmən hɛd θɹu ə weɪɡeɪt," ɹænd sɛd dʌli. "baɪ ðɪs taɪm, hiz pɹɑbli ɔlɹɛɾi weɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ fəɹ mi."

"Fain has taken the Horn to Toman Head through a Waygate," Rand said dully. "By this time, he's probably already waiting there for me."

"wi wɪl spik ə ðɪs leɪɾɝ," vɛɹɪn sɛd, soʊ fɝmli ðət noʊ wʌn spoʊk əɾ ɔl ɑn ðə ɹaɪd bæk tə ðə sɪɾi, tə ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹi.

"We will speak of this later," Verin said, so firmly that no one spoke at all on the ride back to the city, to The Great Tree.

ənoʊ lɛft əm ðɛɹ, æftɝ ə kwaɪət wɝd fɹəm ɪŋtʃɹ, teɪkɪŋ ðə soʊlʒɝz bæk tə ðɛɹ ɪn ɪn ðə fɔɹɡeɪt. hʊɹɪn tʊk wʌn lʊk ət vɛɹɪnz sɛt feɪs baɪ ðə laɪɾ ə ðə kɑmən ɹum, mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊɾ eɪl, ən skɝid tə ə teɪbəl ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ, əloʊn. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ bɹʌʃt əsaɪd ði ɪnkipɝz səlɪsəɾəs hoʊps ðət ʃi hæɾ ɛndʒɔɪd hɝsɛlf, ən saɪlənli lɛd ɹænd ən ðə ɹɛs tə ðə pɹaɪvət daɪnɪŋ ɹum.

Uno left them there, after a quiet word from Ingtar, taking the soldiers back to their inn in the Foregate. Hurin took one look at Verin's set face by the light of the common room, muttered something about ale, and scurried to a table in a corner, alone. The Aes Sedai brushed aside the innkeeper's solicitous hopes that she had enjoyed herself, and silently led Rand and the rest to the private dining room.

pɛɹɪn lʊkt ʌp fɹəm ðə tʃɹævəlz ə dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ wən ðeɪ wɔkt ɪn, ən fɹaʊnd wən i sɔ ðɛɹ feɪsəz. "ɪt dɪdnt ɡoʊ wɛl, dɪɾ ɪt?" hi sɛd, kloʊzɪŋ ðə lɛðɝbaʊn bʊk. læmps ən biswæks kændəlz ɝaʊn ðə ɹum ɡeɪv ə ɡʊd laɪt; mɪstʃɹəs tidʒɹə tʃɑɹdʒ hɛvəli, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt stɪnt.

Perrin looked up from The Travels of Jain Farstrider when they walked in, and frowned when he saw their faces. "It didn't go well, did it?" he said, closing the leatherbound book. Lamps and beeswax candles around the room gave a good light; Mistress Tiedra charged heavily, but she did not stint.

vɛɹɪn kɛɹfəli foʊldəɾ əɹ ʃɔl ən leɪɾ ɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə bæk ʌv ə tʃɛɹ. "tɛl mi əɡɛn. ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz tʊk ðə hɔɹn θɹu ə weɪɡeɪt? ət bɑɹθeɪnzəz mænɝ?"

Verin carefully folded her shawl and laid it across the back of a chair. "Tell me again. The Darkfriends took the Horn through a Waygate? At Barthanes's manor?"

"ðə ɡɹaʊn ʌndɝ ðə mænɝ juz tə bi ən oʊɡiɝ ɡɹoʊv," lɔɪəl ɪkspleɪnd. "wɛn wi bɪlt. . . ." hɪz vɔɪs tʃɹeɪld ɔf ən ɪz ɪɹz wɪltɪɾ ʌndɝ əɹ lʊk.

"The ground under the manor used to be an Ogier grove," Loial explained. "When we built. . . ." His voice trailed off and his ears wilted under her look.

"hʊɹɪn fɑloʊɾ əm ɹaɪt tə ɪt." ɹænd wɛɹəli θɹu hɪmsɛlf ɪndə ə tʃɛɹ. aɪ hæv tə fɑloʊ mɔɹ ðən ɛvɝ, naʊ. bʌt haʊ? "aɪ oʊpən ɪt tə ʃoʊ hɪm i kəd stɪl fɑloʊ ðə tʃɹeɪl wɛɹɛvɝ ðeɪ wɛnt, ən ðə blæk wɪnd wɑz ðɛɹ. ɪt tʃɹaɪd tə ɹitʃ ʌs, bʌt lɔɪəl mænədʒ tə kloʊz ðə ɡeɪts bɪfɔɹ ɪt kəd kʌm ɔl ðə weɪ aʊt." hi kʌlɝɾ ə lɪɾəl ət ðæt, bʌt lɔɪəl hæd kloʊz ðə ɡeɪts, ən fəɹ ɔl i nu mætʃɪn ʃɪn maɪɾ əv meɪɾ ɪɾ aʊt wɪθaʊt ðæt. "ɪt wɑz stændɪŋ ɡɑɹd."

"Hurin followed them right to it." Rand wearily threw himself into a chair. I have to follow more than ever, now. But how? "I opened it to show him he could still follow the trail wherever they went, and the Black Wind was there. It tried to reach us, but Loial managed to close the gates before it could come all the way out." He colored a little at that, but Loial had closed the gates, and for all he knew Machin Shin might have made it out without that. "It was standing guard."

"ðə blæk wɪnd," mæt bɹiðd, fɹoʊzən hæfweɪ ɪndə ə tʃɛɹ. pɛɹɪn wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ɹænd, tu. soʊ wɝ vɛɹɪn ən ɪŋtʃɹ. mæt dʒɹɑpt ɪndə ðə tʃɛɹ wɪð ə θʌmp.

"The Black Wind," Mat breathed, frozen halfway into a chair. Perrin was staring at Rand, too. So were Verin and Ingtar. Mat dropped into the chair with a thump.

"ju mʌs bi mɪsteɪkən," vɛɹɪn sɛɾ ət læst. "mætʃɪn ʃɪn kəd nɑt bi juzd əz ə ɡɑɹd. noʊ wʌn kən kənstʃɹeɪn ðə blæk wɪn tə də ɛniθɪŋ."

"You must be mistaken," Verin said at last. "Machin Shin could not be used as a guard. No one can constrain the Black Wind to do anything."

"ɪts ə kɹitʃɝ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn," mæt sɛd nʌmbli. "ðeɪɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. meɪbi ðeɪ nu haʊ tə æsk ɪt fəɹ hɛlp, əɹ meɪk ɪt hɛlp."

"It's a creature of the Dark One," Mat said numbly. "They're Darkfriends. Maybe they knew how to ask it for help, or make it help."

"noʊ wʌn noʊz ɪɡzækli wʌt mætʃɪn ʃɪn ɪz," vɛɹɪn sɛd, "ənlɛs, pɝhæps, ɪts ði ɛsəns ə mædnəs ən kɹulti. ɪt kænɑt bi ɹizənd wɪð, mæt, əɹ bɑɹɡənd wɪð, əɹ tɔk tə. ɪt kænɑɾ ivən bi fɔɹst, nɑt baɪ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ lɪvɪŋ tədeɪ, ən pɝhæps nɑt baɪ ɛni hu ɛvɝ lɪvd. dʒju ɹɪli θɪŋk pdən feɪn kəd də wʌt tɛn ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd nɑt?" mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

"No one knows exactly what Machin Shin is," Verin said, "unless, perhaps, it is the essence of madness and cruelty. It cannot be reasoned with, Mat, or bargained with, or talked to. It cannot even be forced, not by any Aes Sedai living today, and perhaps not by any who ever lived. Do you really think Padan Fain could do what ten Aes Sedai could not?" Mat shook his head.

ðəɹ wɑz ən ɛɹ ə dɪspɛɹ ɪn ðə ɹum, ʌv hoʊp ən pɝpəs lɔst. ðə ɡoʊl ðeɪ hæd sɔt hæd vænɪʃt, ən ivən vɛɹɪnz feɪs wɔɹ ə flaʊndɝɪŋ ɪkspɹɛʃən.

There was an air of despair in the room, of hope and purpose lost. The goal they had sought had vanished, and even Verin's face wore a floundering expression.

"aɪd nɛvɝ əv θɔt feɪn hæd ðə kɝədʒ fəɹ ðə weɪz." ɪŋtʃɹ saʊndəɾ ɔlmoʊs maɪld, bʌt sʌɾənli hi bæŋd ɪz fɪst əɡɛns ðə wɔl. "aɪ də nɑt kɛɹ haʊ, əɹ ivən ɪf, mætʃɪn ʃɪn wɝks ɑn feɪnz bɪhæf. ðeɪv teɪkən ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ɪndə ðə weɪz, ɛɛs sədaɪ. baɪ naʊ ðeɪ kəd bi ɪn ðə blaɪt, əɹ hæfweɪ tə tɛɹ əɹ tæntʃəkoʊ, əɹ ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ði il weɪst. ðə hɔɹn ɪz lɔst. aɪm lɔst." hɪz hænz dʒɹɑp tə hɪz saɪdz, ən ɪz ʃoʊldɝz slʌmpt. "aɪ æm lɔst."

"I'd never have thought Fain had the courage for the Ways." Ingtar sounded almost mild, but suddenly he banged his fist against the wall. "I do not care how, or even if, Machin Shin works on Fain's behalf. They have taken the Horn of Valere into the Ways, Aes Sedai. By now they could be in the Blight, or halfway to Tear or Tanchico, or the other side of the Aiel Waste. The Horn is lost. I am lost." His hands dropped to his sides, and his shoulders slumped. "I am lost."

"feɪn ɪz teɪkɪŋ ɪt tə toʊmən hɛd," ɹænd sɛd, ən wɑz ɪmiɾiətli ði əbdʒɛkt ʌv ɔl aɪz əɡɛn.

"Fain is taking it to Toman Head," Rand said, and was immediately the object of all eyes again.

vɛɹɪn stʌɾid ɪm nɛɹoʊli. "ju sɛd ðət bɪfɔɹ. haʊ dʒju noʊ?"

Verin studied him narrowly. "You said that before. How do you know?"

"hi lɛft ə mɛsədʒ wɪð bɑɹθeɪnz," ɹænd sɛd.

"He left a message with Barthanes," Rand said.

"ə tʃɹɪk," ɪŋtʃɹ snɪɹd. "hid nɑt tɛl əs wɛɹ tə fɑloʊ."

"A trick," Ingtar sneered. "He'd not tell us where to follow."

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt ðə ɹɛst ə jə ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə du," ɹænd sɛd, "bʌɾ aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ tə toʊmən hɛd. aɪ hæv tə. aɪ liv ət fɝs laɪt."

"I don't know what the rest of you are going to do," Rand said, "but I am going to Toman Head. I have to. I leave at first light."

"bʌt, ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd, "ɪt wɪl teɪk əs mʌnθs tə ɹitʃ toʊmən hɛd. wʌt meɪks jə θɪŋk feɪn wɪl weɪt ðəɹ fəɹ ʌs?"

"But, Rand," Loial said, "it will take us months to reach Toman Head. What makes you think Fain will wait there for us?"

"hi wɪl weɪt." bʌt haʊ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ i dɪsaɪdz aɪm nɑt kʌmɪŋ? waɪ dɪɾ i sɛt ðət ɡɑɹɾ ɪf i wɑns mi tə fɑloʊ? "lɔɪəl, aɪ min tə ɹaɪɾ əz hɑɹɾ əz aɪ kæn, ən ɪf aɪ ɹaɪd ɹɛd tə dɛθ, əl baɪ ənʌðɝ hɔɹs, əɹ stil ənʌðɝ, ɪf aɪ hæv tə. ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ jə wɑnə kʌm?"

"He will wait." But how long before he decides I'm not coming? Why did he set that guard if he wants me to follow? "Loial, I mean to ride as hard as I can, and if I ride Red to death, I'll buy another horse, or steal another, if I have to. Are you sure you want to come?"

"aɪv steɪd wɪð jə ðɪs lɔŋ, ɹænd. waɪ wəɾ aɪ stɑp naʊ?" lɔɪəl pʊld aʊɾ ɪz paɪp ən paʊtʃ ən bɪɡæn θʌmɪŋ təbæk ɪndə ðə bɪɡ boʊl. "ju si, aɪ laɪk ju. aɪ wəd laɪk jə ivən ɪf jə wɝn tɑvɝən. meɪbi aɪ laɪk jə dɪspaɪɾ ɪt. jə də sim tə ɡɛt mi nɛk-dip ɪn hɑt wɔɾɝ. ɪn ɛni keɪs, aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ wɪð ju." hi sʌkt ɑn ðə paɪpɛstəm tə tɛs ðə dʒɹɔ, ðən tʊk ə splɪntɝ fɹəm ðə stoʊn dʒɑɹ ɑn ðə mæntəl ən θɹʌst ɪɾ ɪndə ə kændəl fleɪm fəɹ ə laɪt. "æn aɪ doʊn θɪŋk jə kən ɹɪli stɑp mi."

"I've stayed with you this long, Rand. Why would I stop now?" Loial pulled out his pipe and pouch and began thumbing tabac into the big bowl. "You see, I like you. I would like you even if you weren't ta'veren. Maybe I like you despite it. You do seem to get me neck-deep in hot water. In any case, I am going with you." He sucked on the pipestem to test the draw, then took a splinter from the stone jar on the mantel and thrust it into a candle flame for a light. "And I don't think you can really stop me."

"wɛl, ɪm ɡoʊɪŋ," mæt sɛd. "feɪn stɪl əz ðət dæɡɝ, soʊ aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ. bʌɾ ɔl ðət sɝvən bɪznəs ɛndəd tənaɪt."

"Well, I'm going," Mat said. "Fain still has that dagger, so I'm going. But all that servant business ended tonight."

pɛɹɪn saɪd, ən ɪntʃɹəspɛktɪv lʊk ɪn ɪz jɛloʊ aɪz. "aɪ səpoʊz əl kʌm əlɔŋ, tu." æftɝ ə moʊmənt, hi ɡɹɪnd. "sʌmbɑɾi hæz tə kip mæt aʊɾ ə tʃɹʌbəl."

Perrin sighed, an introspective look in his yellow eyes. "I suppose I'll come along, too." After a moment, he grinned. "Somebody has to keep Mat out of trouble."

"nɑɾ ivən ə klɛvɝ tʃɹɪk," ɪŋtʃɹ mʌɾɝd. "sʌmhaʊ, əl ɡɛt bɑɹθeɪnz əloʊn, ən əl lɝn ðə tʃɹuθ. aɪ min tə hæv ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, nɑt tʃeɪs dʒæk oʊ' ðə wɪsps."

"Not even a clever trick," Ingtar muttered. "Somehow, I'll get Barthanes alone, and I will learn the truth. I mean to have the Horn of Valere, not chase Jak o' the Wisps."

"ɪt meɪ nɑt bi ə tʃɹɪk," vɛɹɪn sɛd kɛɹfəli, simɪŋ tə stʌɾi ðə flɔɹ ʌndɝ əɹ toʊz. "ðɛɹ wɝ sɝɾən θɪŋz lɛft ɪn ðə dʌnʒənz ət fæl dæɹə, ɹaɪɾɪŋz ðəɾ ɪndəkeɪɾəd ə kənɛkʃən bɪtwin wʌt hæpən ðət naɪɾ ænd" - ʃi ɡeɪv ɹænd ə kwɪk ɡlæns ʌndɝ loʊɝd bɹaʊz - "toʊmən hɛd. aɪ stɪl də nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn əm kəmplitli, bʌɾ aɪ bɪliv wi mʌst ɡoʊ tə toʊmən hɛd. ən aɪ bɪliv wɪl faɪn ðə hɔɹn ðɛɹ."

"It may not be a trick," Verin said carefully, seeming to study the floor under her toes. "There were certain things left in the dungeons at Fal Dara, writings that indicated a connection between what happened that night and" - she gave Rand a quick glance under lowered brows - "Toman Head. I still do not understand them completely, but I believe we must go to Toman Head. And I believe we will find the Horn there."

"ivən ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə toʊmən hɛd," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd, "baɪ ðə taɪm wi ɹitʃ ɪt, feɪn əɹ wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz cʊɾə bloʊn ðə hɔɹn ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz, ən ðə hɪɹoʊz ɹɪtɝn fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪv wɪl ɹaɪd fəɹ ðə ʃædoʊ."

"Even if they are going to Toman Head," Ingtar said, "by the time we reach it, Fain or one of the other Darkfriends could have blown the Horn a hundred times, and the heroes returned from the grave will ride for the Shadow."

"feɪn cʊɾə bloʊn ðə hɔɹn ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz sɪns livɪŋ fæl dæɹə," vɛɹɪn toʊl hɪm. "æn aɪ θɪŋk i wəd hæv, ɪf i kəɾ oʊpən ðə tʃɛst. wʌt wi mʌst wɝi əbaʊɾ ɪz ðəɾ i maɪt faɪn sʌmwʌn u dʌz noʊ haʊ tə oʊpən ɪt. wi mʌs fɑloʊ hɪm əlɔŋ ðə weɪz."

"Fain could have blown the Horn a hundred times since leaving Fal Dara," Verin told him. "And I think he would have, if he could open the chest. What we must worry about is that he might find someone who does know how to open it. We must follow him along the Ways."

pɛɹɪnz hɛd keɪm ʌp ʃɑɹpli, ən mæt ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ɪz tʃɛɹ. lɔɪəl ɡeɪv ə loʊ moʊn.

Perrin's head came up sharply, and Mat shifted in his chair. Loial gave a low moan.

"ivən ɪf wi kəd sʌmhaʊ snik pæs bɑɹθeɪnzəz ɡɑɹdz," ɹænd sɛd, "aɪ θɪŋk wɪl faɪn mætʃɪn ʃɪn stɪl ðɛɹ. wi kænɑt juz ðə weɪz."

"Even if we could somehow sneak past Barthanes's guards," Rand said, "I think we'll find Machin Shin still there. We cannot use the Ways."

"haʊ mɛni ʌv əs kəd snik ɑntu bɑɹθeɪnzəz ɡɹaʊnz?" vɛɹɪn sɛd dɪsmɪsɪvli. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝ weɪɡeɪts. stɛɾɪŋ tsəfu laɪz nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ðə sɪɾi, saʊθ ən ist. ɪts ə jʌŋ stɛɾɪŋ, ɹiɾɪskʌvɝd oʊnli pɝhæps sɪks hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz əɡoʊ, bʌt ði oʊɡiɝ ɛldɝz wɝ stɪl ɡɹoʊɪŋ ðə weɪz, ðɛn. stɛɾɪŋ tsəfu wɪl əv ə weɪɡeɪt. ɪts ðəɹ ən wɪl ɹaɪɾ ət fɝs laɪt."

"How many of us could sneak onto Barthanes's grounds?" Verin said dismissively. "There are other Waygates. Stedding Tsofu lies not far from the city, south and east. It is a young stedding, rediscovered only perhaps six hundred years ago, but the Ogier Elders were still growing the Ways, then. Stedding Tsofu will have a Waygate. It is there and we will ride at first light."

lɔɪəl meɪɾ ə slaɪtli laʊɾɝ saʊnd, ən ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɛðɝ ɪt ɹəfɝd tə ðə weɪɡeɪɾ əɹ ðə stɛɾɪŋ.

Loial made a slightly louder sound, and Rand was not sure whether it referred to the Waygate or the stedding.

ɪŋtʃɹ stɪl dɪd nɑt sim kənvɪnst, bʌt vɛɹɪn wɑz əz smuð ən əz ɪmplækəbəl əz snoʊ slaɪɾɪŋ daʊn ə maʊntənsaɪd. "ju wɪl əv jəɹ soʊlʒɝz ɹɛɾi tə ɹaɪd, ɪŋtʃɹ. sɛn hʊɹɪn tə tɛl ənoʊ bɪfɔɹ i ɡoʊz tə bɛd. aɪ θɪŋk wi ʃəɾ ɔl ɡoʊ tə bɛɾ əz sun əz pɑsəbəl. ðiz dɑɹkfɹɛnz əv ɡeɪn ət list ə deɪ ɑn əs ɔlɹɛɾi, ən aɪ min tə meɪk ʌp əz mʌtʃ ʌv ɪɾ əz aɪ kən təmɑɹoʊ." soʊ fɝm wɑz ðə plʌmp ɛɛs sədaɪz mænɝ ðət ʃi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi hɝɾɪŋ ɪŋtʃɹ tə ðə dɔɹ bɪfɔɹ ʃi fɪnɪʃt spikɪŋ.

Ingtar still did not seem convinced, but Verin was as smooth and as implacable as snow sliding down a mountainside. "You will have your soldiers ready to ride, Ingtar. Send Hurin to tell Uno before he goes to bed. I think we should all go to bed as soon as possible. These Darkfriends have gained at least a day on us already, and I mean to make up as much of it as I can tomorrow." So firm was the plump Aes Sedai's manner that she was already herding Ingtar to the door before she finished speaking.

ɹænd fɑloʊd ði ʌðɝz aʊt, bʌɾ ət ðə dɔɹ i stɑp bɪsaɪd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən wɑtʃt mæt hɛɾɪŋ daʊn ðə kændəl-lɪt hɔl. "waɪ dʌz i lʊk laɪk ðæt?" hi æsk hɝ. "aɪ θɔt jə hil hɪm, ɪnʌf tə ɡɪv ɪm səm taɪm, ɛniweɪ."

Rand followed the others out, but at the door he stopped beside the Aes Sedai and watched Mat heading down the candle-lit hall. "Why does he look like that?" he asked her. "I thought you Healed him, enough to give him some time, anyway."

ʃi weɪɾəd əntɪl mæt ən ði ʌðɝz hæd tɝn ʌp ðə stɛɹz bɪfɔɹ spikɪŋ. "əpɛɹənli, ɪt dɪd nɑt wɝk soʊ wɛl əz wi bɪlivd. ðə sɪknəs teɪks ən ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ kɔɹs ɪn hɪm. hɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ ɹɪmeɪnz; hɪl kip ðət tə ði ɛnd, aɪ θɪŋk. bʌɾ ɪz bɑɾi weɪsts əweɪ. ənʌðɝ fju wiks, ət moʊst, aɪ wəd seɪ. jə si, ðəɹ ɪz ɹizən fəɹ heɪst."

She waited until Mat and the others had turned up the stairs before speaking. "Apparently, it did not work so well as we believed. The sickness takes an interesting course in him. His strength remains; he will keep that to the end, I think. But his body wastes away. Another few weeks, at most, I would say. You see, there is reason for haste."

"aɪ də nɑt niɾ ənʌðɝ spɝ, ɛɛs sədaɪ," ɹænd sɛd, meɪkɪŋ ðə taɪɾəl saʊn hɑɹd. mæt. ðə hɔɹn. feɪnz θɹɛt. laɪt, ɛɡwin! bɝn mi, aɪ doʊnt niɾ ənʌðɝ spɝ.

"I do not need another spur, Aes Sedai," Rand said, making the title sound hard. Mat. The Horn. Fain's threat. Light, Egwene! Burn me, I don't need another spur.

"ænd wʌɾ ə ju, ɹænd ælθɹ? dʒju fil wɛl? dʒju faɪɾ ɪt stɪl, əɹ əv jə jɛt sɝɛndɝd tə ðə wil?"

"And what of you, Rand al'Thor? Do you feel well? Do you fight it still, or have you yet surrendered to the Wheel?"

"aɪ ɹaɪd wɪð jə tə faɪn ðə hɔɹn," hi toʊl hɝ. "bɪɑn ðæt, ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ bɪtwin mi ən ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ. dʒju ʌndɝstæn mi? nʌθɪŋ!"

"I ride with you to find the Horn," he told her. "Beyond that, there is nothing between me and any Aes Sedai. Do you understand me? Nothing!"

ʃi dɪd nɑt spik, ən i wɔkt əweɪ fɹəm hɝ, bʌt wən i tɝn tə teɪk ðə stɛɹz ʃi wɑz stɪl wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, dɑɹk aɪz ʃɑɹp ən kənsɪɾɝɪŋ.

She did not speak, and he walked away from her, but when he turned to take the stairs she was still watching him, dark eyes sharp and considering.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾifɔɹ


CHAPTER 34

ðə wil wivz


The Wheel Weaves

ðə fɝs laɪɾ ə mɔɹnɪŋ ɔlɹɛɾi pɝl ðə skaɪ baɪ ðə taɪm tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn faʊn hɪmsɛlf tʃɹʌdʒɪŋ bæk tə ðə bʌntʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪps. ivən wɛɹ ðə hɔlz ən tævɝnz leɪ θɪkəst, ðəɹ wɑz ə bɹif taɪm wən ðə fɔɹɡeɪt leɪ kwaɪət, ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪts bɹɛθ. ɪn ɪz pɹɛzən mud, tɑm wəd nɑɾ əv noʊɾəst ɪf ði ɛmpti stʃɹit hæd bɪn ɑn faɪɝ.

The first light of morning already pearled the sky by the time Thom Merrilin found himself trudging back to The Bunch of Grapes. Even where the halls and taverns lay thickest, there was a brief time when the Foregate lay quiet, gathering its breath. In his present mood, Thom would not have noticed if the empty street had been on fire.

səm ə bɑɹθeɪnzəz ɡɛsts hæɾ ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn kipɪŋ ɪm lɔŋ æftɝ moʊs hæd ɡɔn, lɔŋ æftɝ bɑɹθeɪnz hæd teɪkən hɪmsɛlf tə bɛd. ɪt hæd bɪn ɪz oʊn fɔl fəɹ livɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn, tʃeɪnʒɪŋ tə ðə sɔɹɾ ə teɪlz i toʊld ən sɔŋz i sæŋ ɪn ðə vɪlədʒəz, "mɑɹə ən ðə θɹi fulɪʃ kɪŋz" ən haʊ susə teɪm dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ ən stɔɹiz ʌv ænlə ðə waɪz kaʊnsəlɝ. hi hæd mɛn ðə tʃɔɪsəz tə bi ə pɹaɪvət kɑmɛn ɑn ðɛɹ stupɪɾɪti, nɛvɝ dʒɹimɪŋ ɛni ʌv əm maɪt lɪsən, mʌtʃ lɛs bi ɪntʃɹiɡd. ɪntʃɹiɡd ɪn ə weɪ. ðeɪ hæd dɪmændəd mɔɹ ə ðə seɪm, bʌt ðeɪ hæd læft ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ pleɪsəz, ət ðə ɹɔŋ θɪŋz. ðeɪ hæd læft ət hɪm, tu, əpɛɹənli θɪŋkɪŋ i wəd nɑt noʊɾəs, əɹ ɛls ðəɾ ə fʊl pɝs stʌft ɪn ɪz pɑkət wəd hil ɛni wunz. hi hæɾ ɔlmoʊs θɹoʊn ɪɾ əweɪ twaɪs ɔlɹɛɾi.

Some of Barthanes's guests had insisted on keeping him long after most had gone, long after Barthanes had taken himself to bed. It had been his own fault for leaving The Great Hunt of the Horn, changing to the sort of tales he told and songs he sang in the villages, "Mara and the Three Foolish Kings" and How Susa Tamed Jain Farstrider and stories of Anla the Wise Councilor. He had meant the choices to be a private comment on their stupidity, never dreaming any of them might listen, much less be intrigued. Intrigued in a way. They had demanded more of the same, but they had laughed in the wrong places, at the wrong things. They had laughed at him, too, apparently thinking he would not notice, or else that a full purse stuffed in his pocket would heal any wounds. He had almost thrown it away twice already.

ðə hɛvi pɝs bɝnɪŋ ɪz pɑkəɾ ən pɹaɪd wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli ɹizən fəɹ ɪz mud, nɔɹ ivən ðə noʊbəlz' kəntɛmpt. ðeɪ hæɾ æskt kwɛstʃənz əbaʊt ɹænd, nɑɾ ivən bɑðɝɪŋ tə bi sʌɾəl wɪð ə mɪɹ ɡlimən. waɪ wɑz ɹænd ɪn kɛɹhin? waɪ hæɾ ən ændɔɝən lɔɹd teɪkən hɪm, ə ɡlimən, əsaɪd? tu mɛni kwɛstʃənz. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪz ænsɝz hæd bɪn klɛvɝ ɪnʌf. hɪz ɹiflɛksəz fəɹ ðə ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm wɝ ɹʌsti.

The heavy purse burning his pocket and pride was not the only reason for his mood, nor even the nobles' contempt. They had asked questions about Rand, not even bothering to be subtle with a mere gleeman. Why was Rand in Cairhien? Why had an Andoran lord taken him, a gleeman, aside? Too many questions. He was not sure his answers had been clever enough. His reflexes for the Great Game were rusty.

bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə bʌntʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪps, hi hæd ɡɔn tə ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹi; ɪt wɑz nɑt dɪfəkəl tə faɪnd wɛɹ sʌmwʌn wɑz steɪɪŋ ɪn kɛɹhin, ɪf jə pɹɛst ə pɑm əɹ tu wɪð sɪlvɝ. hi wɑz stɪl nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌɾ i hæɾ ɪntɛndəd tə seɪ. ɹænd wɑz ɡɔn wɪð ɪz fɹɛnz, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪt lɛft ə filɪŋ ə sʌmθɪŋ nɑt dʌn. ðə bɔɪz ɑn ɪz oʊn, naʊ. bɝn mi, aɪm aʊɾ ʌv ɪt!

Before turning toward The Bunch of Grapes, he had gone to The Great Tree; it was not difficult to find where someone was staying in Cairhien, if you pressed a palm or two with silver. He was still not sure what he had intended to say. Rand was gone with his friends, and the Aes Sedai. It left a feeling of something not done. The boy's on his own, now. Burn me, I'm out of it!

hi stʃɹoʊd θɹu ðə kɑmən ɹum, ɛmpti əz ɪt sɛldəm wɑz, ən tʊk ðə stɛps tu əɾ ə taɪm. ət list, hi tʃɹaɪd tə; hɪz ɹaɪt lɛɡ dɪd nɑt bɛnd wɛl, ən i nɪɹli fɛl. mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf, hi klaɪm ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ əɾ ə sloʊɝ peɪs, ən oʊpən ðə dɔɹ tə hɪz ɹum sɔfli, soʊ əz nɑt tə weɪk dinə.

He strode through the common room, empty as it seldom was, and took the steps two at a time. At least, he tried to; his right leg did not bend well, and he nearly fell. Muttering to himself, he climbed the rest of the way at a slower pace, and opened the door to his room softly, so as not to wake Dena.

dɪspaɪt hɪmsɛlf, hi smaɪld wən i sɔ hɝ laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə bɛd wɪð əɹ feɪs tɝn tə ðə wɔl, stɪl ɪn əɹ dʒɹɛs. fɛl əslip weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ mi. ful ɡɝl. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə kaɪnli θɔt; hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ðəɹ wɑz ɛniθɪŋ ʃi wəd də ðəɾ i wəd nɑt fɝɡɪv əɹ ɪkskjus. dəsaɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə spɝ ə ðə moʊmən ðət tənaɪt wɑz ðə naɪt hid lɛɾ əɹ pɝfɔɹm fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, hi loʊɝɾ ɪz hɑɹp keɪs tə ðə flɔɹ ən pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, tə weɪk əɹ ən tɛl hɝ.

Despite himself, he smiled when he saw her lying on the bed with her face turned to the wall, still in her dress. Fell asleep waiting for me. Fool girl. But it was a kindly thought; he was not sure there was anything she would do that he would not forgive or excuse. Deciding on the spur of the moment that tonight was the night he'd let her perform for the first time, he lowered his harp case to the floor and put a hand on her shoulder, to wake her and tell her.

ʃi ɹoʊld lɪmpli ɑntu hɝ bæk, stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ət hɪm, ɡleɪzd aɪz oʊpən waɪɾ əbʌv ðə ɡæʃ əkɹɔs əɹ θɹoʊt. ðə saɪɾ ə ðə bɛd ðət hæd bɪn hɪɾən baɪ hɝ bɑɾi wɑz dɑɹk ən sɑɾən.

She rolled limply onto her back, staring up at him, glazed eyes open wide above the gash across her throat. The side of the bed that had been hidden by her body was dark and sodden.

tɑmz stʌmək hivd; ɪf ɪz θɹoʊt hæd nɑt bɪn soʊ taɪɾ i kəd nɑt bɹið, hi wəɾ əv vɑməɾəd, əɹ skɹimd, əɹ boʊθ.

Thom's stomach heaved; if his throat had not been so tight he could not breathe, he would have vomited, or screamed, or both.

hi hæɾ oʊnli ðə kɹikɪŋ ʌv wɔɹdʒɹoʊb dɔɹz fəɹ wɔɹnɪŋ. hi spʌn, naɪvz kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪz slivz ən livɪŋ ɪz hænz ɪn ðə seɪm moʊʃən. ðə fɝs bleɪd tʊk ðə θɹoʊɾ ʌv ə fæt, bɔldɪŋ mæn wɪð ə dæɡɝ ɪn ɪz hænd; ðə mæn stʌmbəl bæk, blʌd bʌbəlɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪz klʌtʃɪŋ fɪŋɡɝz əz i tʃɹaɪd tə kɹaɪ aʊt.

He had only the creaking of wardrobe doors for warning. He spun, knives coming out of his sleeves and leaving his hands in the same motion. The first blade took the throat of a fat, balding man with a dagger in his hand; the man stumbled back, blood bubbling around his clutching fingers as he tried to cry out.

spɪnɪŋ ɑn ɪz bæd lɛɡ θɹu tɑmz ʌðɝ bleɪɾ ɔf, ðoʊ; ðə naɪf stʌk ɪn ðə ɹaɪt ʃoʊldɝ ʌv ə hɛvəli mʌsəl mæn wɪð skɑɹz ɑn ɪz feɪs, hu wɑz klaɪmɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ʌðɝ wɔɹdʒɹoʊb. ðə bɪɡ mænz naɪf dʒɹɑp fɹəm ə hæn ðət sʌɾənli wəd nɑt də wʌɾ i wɑntəd, ən i lʌmbɝd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ.

Spinning on his bad leg threw Thom's other blade off, though; the knife stuck in the right shoulder of a heavily muscled man with scars on his face, who was climbing out of the other wardrobe. The big man's knife dropped from a hand that suddenly would not do what he wanted, and he lumbered for the door.

bɪfɔɹ i kəd teɪk ə sɛkən stɛp, tɑm pɹədust ənʌðɝ naɪf ən slæʃt ɪm əkɹɔs ðə bæk ə hɪz lɛɡ. ðə bɪɡ mæn jɛld ən stʌmbəld, ən tɑm sizd ə hændfʊl ʌv ɡɹisi hɛɹ, slæmɪŋ ɪz feɪs əɡɛns ðə wɔl bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ; ðə mæn skɹimd əɡɛn əz ðə naɪf hɪl stɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪz ʃoʊldɝ hɪt ðə dɔɹ.

Before he could take a second step, Thom produced another knife and slashed him across the back of his leg. The big man yelled and stumbled, and Thom seized a handful of greasy hair, slamming his face against the wall beside the door; the man screamed again as the knife hilt sticking out of his shoulder hit the door.

tɑm θɹʌs ðə bleɪɾ ɪn ɪz hæn tə wɪðɪn ən ɪntʃ ə ðə mænz dɑɹk aɪ. ðə skɑɹz ɑn ðə bɪɡ mænz feɪs ɡeɪv ɪm ə hɑɹd lʊk, bʌɾ i stɛɹɾ ət ðə pɔɪnt wɪθaʊt blɪŋkɪŋ ən dɪd nɑt muv ə mʌsəl. ðə fæt mæn, laɪɪŋ hæf ɪn ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb, kɪkt ə læs kɪk ən wɑz stɪl.

Thom thrust the blade in his hand to within an inch of the man's dark eye. The scars on the big man's face gave him a hard look, but he stared at the point without blinking and did not move a muscle. The fat man, lying half in the wardrobe, kicked a last kick and was still.

"bɪfɔɹ aɪ kɪl ju," tɑm sɛd, "tɛl mi. waɪ?" hɪz vɔɪs wɑz kwaɪət, nʌm; hi fɛl nʌm ɪnsaɪd.

"Before I kill you," Thom said, "tell me. Why?" His voice was quiet, numb; he felt numb inside.

"ðə ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm," ðə mæn sɛd kwɪkli. hɪz æksɛnt wɑz ə ðə stʃɹits, ən ɪz kloʊðz əz wɛl, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ ə ʃeɪd tu faɪn, tu ənwɹn; hi hæd mɔɹ kɔɪn tə spɛn ðən ɛni fɔɹɡeɪɾɝ ʃʊd. "nʌθɪŋ əɡɛns jə pɝsənəl, jə si? ɪts dʒʌs ðə ɡeɪm."

"The Great Game," the man said quickly. His accent was of the streets, and his clothes as well, but they were a shade too fine, too unworn; he had more coin to spend than any Foregater should. "Nothing against you personal, you see? It is just the Game."

"ðə ɡeɪm? aɪm nɑt mɪkst ʌp ɪn deɪz deɪmɑɹ! hu wəd wɑnə kɪl mi fəɹ ðə ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm?" ðə mæn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. tɑm muvd ɪz bleɪd kloʊsɝ. ɪf ðə fɛloʊ blɪŋkt, hɪz aɪlæʃɪz wəd bɹʌʃ ðə pɔɪnt. "hu?"

"The Game? I'm not mixed up in Daes Dae'mar! Who would want to kill me for the Great Game?" The man hesitated. Thom moved his blade closer. If the fellow blinked, his eyelashes would brush the point. "Who?"

"bɑɹθeɪnz," keɪm ðə hɔɹs ænsɝ. "lɔɹd bɑɹθeɪnz. wi wəd nɑɾ əv kɪl ju. bɑɹθeɪnz wɑns ɪnfɝmeɪʃən. wi dʒʌst wɑntəd tə faɪn aʊt wʌt jə noʊ. ðəɹ kən bi ɡoʊld ɪn ɪt fəɹ ju. ə naɪs, fæt ɡoʊldən kɹaʊn fəɹ wʌt jə noʊ. meɪbi tu."

"Barthanes," came the hoarse answer. "Lord Barthanes. We would not have killed you. Barthanes wants information. We just wanted to find out what you know. There can be gold in it for you. A nice, fat golden crown for what you know. Maybe two."

"laɪɝ! aɪ wɑz ɪn bɑɹθeɪnzəz mænɝ læs naɪt, əz kloʊs tə hɪm əz aɪm tə ju. ɪf i wɑntəɾ ɛniθɪŋ ə mi, aɪd nɛvɝ əv lɛft əlaɪv."

"Liar! I was in Barthanes's manor last night, as close to him as I am to you. If he wanted anything of me, I'd never have left alive."

"aɪ tɛl ju, wɪv bɪn lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ju, əɹ ɛniwʌn u noʊz əbaʊt ðɪs ændɔɝən lɔɹd, fəɹ deɪz. aɪ nɛvɝ hɝd jəɹ neɪm əntɪl læs naɪt, daʊnstɛɹz. lɔɹd bɑɹθeɪnz ɪz dʒɛnɝəs. ɪt kəd bi faɪv kɹaʊnz."

"I tell you, we have been looking for you, or anyone who knows about this Andoran lord, for days. I never heard your name until last night, downstairs. Lord Barthanes is generous. It could be five crowns."

ðə mæn tʃɹaɪd tə pʊl ɪz hɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə naɪf ɪn tɑmz hænd, ən tɑm pʊʃt ɪm hɑɹɾɝ əɡɛns ðə wɔl. "wʌɾ ændɔɝən lɔɹd?" bʌɾ i nu. ðə laɪt hɛlp hɪm, hi nu.

The man tried to pull his head away from the knife in Thom's hand, and Thom pushed him harder against the wall. "What Andoran lord?" But he knew. The Light help him, he knew.

"ɹænd. ʌv haʊs ælθɹ. tɔl. jʌŋ. ə bleɪdmæstɝ, əɹ ət list i wɛɹz ðə sɔɹd. aɪ noʊ hi keɪm tə si ju. hɪm ən ən oʊɡiɝ, ən jə tɔkt. tɛl mi wʌt jə noʊ. aɪ maɪɾ ivən θɹoʊ ɪn ə kɹaʊn əɹ tu, maɪsɛlf."

"Rand. Of House al'Thor. Tall. Young. A blademaster, or at least he wears the sword. I know he came to see you. Him and an Ogier, and you talked. Tell me what you know. I might even throw in a crown or two, myself."

"ju ful," tɑm bɹiðd. dinə daɪd fəɹ ðɪs? oʊ, laɪt, ʃiz dɛd. hi fɛlt əz ɪf i wɑntəd tə kɹaɪ. "ðə bɔɪz ə ʃɛpɝd." ə ʃɛpɝɾ ɪn ə fænsi koʊt, wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ ɝaʊn ɪm laɪk biz ɝaʊn hʌniɹoʊsəz. "dʒʌst ə ʃɛpɝd." hi taɪɾənd ɪz ɡɹɪp ɪn ðə mænz hɛɹ.

"You fool," Thom breathed. Dena died for this? Oh, Light, she's dead. He felt as if he wanted to cry. "The boy's a shepherd." A shepherd in a fancy coat, with Aes Sedai around him like bees around honeyroses. "Just a shepherd." He tightened his grip in the man's hair.

"weɪt! weɪt! jə kən meɪk mɔɹ ðən ɛni faɪv kɹaʊnz, əɹ ivən tɛn. ə hʌnʒɹəd, mɔɹ laɪk. ɛvɹi haʊs wɑns tə noʊ əbaʊt ðɪs ɹænd ælθɹ. tu əɹ θɹi hæv əpɹoʊtʃt mi. wɪð wʌt jə noʊ, ən maɪ noʊɪŋ u wɑns tə noʊ ɪt, wi kəd boʊθ fɪl əɹ pɑkəts. ən ðəɹ əz bɪn ə wʊmən, ə leɪɾi, aɪ hæv sin mɔɹ ðən wʌns waɪl æskɪŋ æftɝ hɪm. ɪf wi kən faɪn aʊɾ u ʃiz . . . waɪ, wi kəd sɛl ðæt, tu."

"Wait! Wait! You can make more than any five crowns, or even ten. A hundred, more like. Every House wants to know about this Rand al'Thor. Two or three have approached me. With what you know, and my knowing who wants to know it, we could both fill our pockets. And there has been a woman, a lady, I have seen more than once while asking after him. If we can find out who she is . . . why, we could sell that, too."

"juv meɪd wʌn ɹil mɪsteɪk ɪn ɪɾ ɔl," tɑm sɛd.

"You've made one real mistake in it all," Thom said.

"mɪsteɪk?" ðə mænz fɑɹ hænd wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə slaɪd daʊn təwɔɹɾ ɪz bɛlt. noʊ daʊɾ i hæɾ ənʌðɝ dæɡɝ ðɛɹ. tɑm ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪt.

"Mistake?" The man's far hand was beginning to slide down toward his belt. No doubt he had another dagger there. Thom ignored it.

"ju ʃəd nɛvɝ əv tʌtʃt ðə ɡɝl."

"You should never have touched the girl."

ðə mænz hæn dɑɹɾɪd fəɹ ɪz bɛlt, ðən i ɡeɪv wʌn kənvʌlsɪv stɑɹɾ əz tɑmz naɪf wɛn hoʊm.

The man's hand darted for his belt, then he gave one convulsive start as Thom's knife went home.

tɑm lɛɾ ɪm fɔl oʊvɝ əweɪ fɹəm ðə dɔɹ ən stʊɾ ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ bɛndɪŋ taɪɹədli tə tʌɡ hɪz bleɪdz fɹi. ðə dɔɹ bæŋd oʊpən, ən i wɝld wɪð ə snɑɹl ɑn ɪz feɪs.

Thom let him fall over away from the door and stood a moment before bending tiredly to tug his blades free. The door banged open, and he whirled with a snarl on his face.

zɛɹə dʒɝk bæk, ə hæn tə hɝ θɹoʊt, stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm. "ðæt ful ɛlə dʒʌs toʊl mi," ʃi sɛɾ ənstɛɾəli, "ðæt tu ʌv bɑɹθeɪnzəz mɛn wɝ æskɪŋ æftɝ jə læs naɪt, ən wɪð wʌɾ aɪv hɝd ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. . . . aɪ θɔt jə sɛd jə dɪdn pleɪ ɪn ðə ɡeɪm ɛnimɔɹ."

Zera jerked back, a hand to her throat, staring at him. "That fool Ella just told me," she said unsteadily, "that two of Barthanes's men were asking after you last night, and with what I've heard this morning. . . . I thought you said you didn't play in the Game anymore."

"ðeɪ faʊn mi," hi sɛd wɛɹəli.

"They found me," he said wearily.

hɝ aɪz dʒɹɑp fɹəm ɪz feɪs ən waɪɾənd əz ðeɪ tʊk ɪn ðə bɑɾiz ə ðə tu mɛn. heɪstəli ʃi stɛpt ɪndə ðə ɹum, ʃʌɾɪŋ ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn hɝ. "ðɪs ɪz bæd, tɑm. jəl əv tə liv kɛɹhin." hɝ ɡeɪz fɛl ɑn ðə bɛd, ən əɹ bɹɛθ kɑt. "oʊ, noʊ. oʊ, noʊ. oʊ, tɑm, aɪm soʊ sɑɹi."

Her eyes dropped from his face and widened as they took in the bodies of the two men. Hastily she stepped into the room, shutting the door behind her. "This is bad, Thom. You'll have to leave Cairhien." Her gaze fell on the bed, and her breath caught. "Oh, no. Oh, no. Oh, Thom, I'm so sorry."

"aɪ kænɑt liv jɛt, zɛɹə." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən tɛndɝli dʒɹu ə blæŋkəɾ oʊvɝ dinə, kʌvɝɪŋ əɹ feɪs. "aɪ hæv ənʌðɝ mæn tə kɪl, fɝst."

"I cannot leave yet, Zera." He hesitated, then tenderly drew a blanket over Dena, covering her face. "I have another man to kill, first."

ði ɪnkipɝ ɡeɪv hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk ən pʊld əɹ aɪz əweɪ fɹəm ðə bɛd. hɝ vɔɪs wɑz mɔɹ ðən ə lɪɾəl bɹɛθi. "ɪf jə min bɑɹθeɪnz, jəɹ tu leɪt. ɛvɹibɑɾiz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. hiz dɛd. hɪz sɝvəns faʊn ɪm ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, tɔɹn tə pisəz ɪn ɪz bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ. ði oʊnli weɪ ðeɪ nu ɪt wɑz ɪm wɑz ɪz hɛd stʌk ɑn ə spaɪk oʊvɝ ðə faɪɝpleɪs." ʃi leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn ɪz ɑɹm. "tɑm, jə kæn haɪd ðət jə wɝ ðəɹ læs naɪt, nɑt fɹəm ɛnibəɾi hu wɑns tə noʊ. æd ðiz tu ɪn, ən ðɛɹz noʊbɑdi ɪn kɛɹhin u woʊn bɪliv jə wɝ ɪnvɑlvd." ðəɹ wɑz ə slaɪt kwɛstʃənɪŋ noʊɾ ɪn əɹ læst wɝdz, əz ɪf ʃi, tu, wɝ wʌndɝɪŋ.

The innkeeper gave herself a shake and pulled her eyes away from the bed. Her voice was more than a little breathy. "If you mean Barthanes, you're too late. Everybody's talking about it already. He is dead. His servants found him this morning, torn to pieces in his bedchamber. The only way they knew it was him was his head stuck on a spike over the fireplace." She laid a hand on his arm. "Thom, you can't hide that you were there last night, not from anybody who wants to know. Add these two in, and there's nobody in Cairhien who won't believe you were involved." There was a slight questioning note in her last words, as if she, too, were wondering.

"ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ, aɪ səpoʊz," hi sɛd dʌli. hi kəd nɑt stɑp lʊkɪŋ daʊn ət ðə blæŋkət-kʌvɝd ʃeɪp ɑn ðə bɛd. "pɝhæps əl ɡoʊ bæk tə ændɝ. tə keɪɛmlɪn."

"It doesn't matter, I suppose," he said dully. He could not stop looking down at the blanket-covered shape on the bed. "Perhaps I will go back to Andor. To Caemlyn."

ʃi tʊk ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, tɝnɪŋ ɪm əweɪ fɹəm ðə bɛd. "ju mɛn," ʃi saɪd, "ɔlweɪz θɪŋkɪŋ wɪð iðɝ jəɹ mʌsəlz əɹ jəɹ hɑɹts, ən nɛvɝ jəɹ hɛdz. keɪɛmlɪn ɪz əz bæɾ əz kɛɹhin, fəɹ ju. iðɝ pleɪs, jəl ɛn ʌp dɛd, əɹ ɪn pɹɪzən. dʒju θɪŋk ʃid wɑn ðæt? ɪf jə wɑnə ɑnɝ əɹ mɛmɹi, steɪ əlaɪv."

She took his shoulders, turning him away from the bed. "You men," she sighed, "always thinking with either your muscles or your hearts, and never your heads. Caemlyn is as bad as Cairhien, for you. Either place, you'll end up dead, or in prison. Do you think she'd want that? If you want to honor her memory, stay alive."

"wɪl jə teɪk kɛɹ ʌv. . . ." hi kəd nɑt seɪ ɪt. ɡɹoʊɪŋ oʊld, hi θɔt. ɡoʊɪŋ sɑft. hi pʊl ðə hɛvi pɝs fɹəm ɪz pɑkəɾ ən foʊldəɾ əɹ hænz ɝaʊn ɪt. "ðɪs ʃəd teɪk kɛɹ ʌv . . . ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ən hɛlp wən ðeɪ stɑɹɾ æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz əbaʊt mi, tu."

"Will you take care of. . . ." He could not say it. Growing old, he thought. Going soft. He pulled the heavy purse from his pocket and folded her hands around it. "This should take care of . . . everything. And help when they start asking questions about me, too."

"aɪ wɪl si tə ɛvɹiθɪŋ," ʃi sɛd dʒɛnli. "ju mʌst ɡoʊ, tɑm. naʊ."

"I will see to everything," she said gently. "You must go, Thom. Now."

hi nɑɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli, ən sloʊli bɪɡæn stʌfɪŋ ə fju θɪŋz ɪn ə sɛɾ ə sæɾəlbæɡz. waɪl i wɝkt, zɛɹə ɡɑɾ əɹ fɝs kloʊs lʊk ət ðə fæt mæn spɹɔl pɑɹtweɪ ɪn ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb, ən ʃi ɡeɪv ə laʊd ɡæsp. hi lʊkt əɾ əɹ ɪnkwaɪɝɪŋli; əz lɔŋ əz i hæd noʊn hɝ, ʃi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn wʌn tə ɡoʊ feɪn oʊvɝ blʌd.

He nodded reluctantly, and slowly began stuffing a few things in a set of saddlebags. While he worked, Zera got her first close look at the fat man sprawled partway in the wardrobe, and she gave a loud gasp. He looked at her inquiringly; as long as he had known her, she had never been one to go faint over blood.

"ðiz ɑɹən bɑɹθeɪnzəz mɛn, tɑm. ət list, ðət wʌn ɪzənt." ʃi nɑɾəd təwɔɹd ðə fæt mæn. "ɪts ðə wɝs kɛp sikɹəɾ ɪn kɛɹhin ðəɾ i wɝks fəɹ haʊs ɹieɪɾən. fəɹ ɡɔlʒɹiən."

"These aren't Barthanes's men, Thom. At least, that one isn't." She nodded toward the fat man. "It's the worst kept secret in Cairhien that he works for House Riatin. For Galldrian."

"ɡɔlʒɹiən," hi sɛd flætli. wʌɾ əz ðət blʌɾi ʃɛpɝd ɡɑɾən mi ɪntu? wʌɾ əv ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡɑɾən əs boʊθ ɪntu? bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɡɔlʒɹiənz mɛn mɝɾɝd hɝ.

"Galldrian," he said flatly. What has that bloody shepherd gotten me into? What have the Aes Sedai gotten us both into? But it was Galldrian's men murdered her.

ðəɹ mʌst əv bɪn sʌmθɪŋ ə hɪz θɔts ɑn ɪz feɪs. zɛɹə sɛd ʃɑɹpli, "dinə wɑns jə əlaɪv, jə ful! jə tʃɹaɪ tə kɪl ðə kɪŋ, ən jəl bi dɛd bɪfɔɹ jə ɡɛt wɪðɪn ə hʌnʒɹəd spænz ə hɪm, ɪf jə kʌm ðət kloʊs!"

There must have been something of his thoughts on his face. Zera said sharply, "Dena wants you alive, you fool! You try to kill the King, and you'll be dead before you get within a hundred spans of him, if you come that close!"

ə ɹɔɹ keɪm fɹəm ðə sɪɾi wɔlz, əz ɪf hæf ə kɛɹhin wɝ ʃaʊɾɪŋ. fɹaʊnɪŋ, tɑm pɪɹd fɹəm ɪz wɪndoʊ. bɪɑn ðə tɑp ə ðə ɡɹeɪ wɔlz əbʌv ðə ɹuftɑps ə ðə fɔɹɡeɪt, ə θɪk kɑləm ə smoʊk wɑz ɹaɪzɪŋ ɪndə ðə skaɪ. fɑɹ bɪɑn ðə wɔlz. bɪsaɪd ðə fɝs blæk pɪlɝ, ə fju ɡɹeɪ tɛnʒɹəlz kwɪkli ɡɹu ɪndə ənʌðɝ, ən mɔɹ wɪsps əpɪɹd fɝðɝ ɑn. hi ɛstəmeɪɾəd ðə dɪstəns ən tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ.

A roar came from the city walls, as if half of Cairhien were shouting. Frowning, Thom peered from his window. Beyond the top of the gray walls above the rooftops of the Foregate, a thick column of smoke was rising into the sky. Far beyond the walls. Beside the first black pillar, a few gray tendrils quickly grew into another, and more wisps appeared further on. He estimated the distance and took a deep breath.

"pɝhæps jə hæd bɛɾɝ θɪŋk əbaʊt livɪŋ, tu. ɪt lʊks əz ɪf sʌmwʌn ɪz faɪɹɪŋ ðə ɡɹænɛɝiz."

"Perhaps you had better think about leaving, too. It looks as if someone is firing the granaries."

"aɪ hæv lɪv θɹu ɹaɪəts bɪfɔɹ. ɡoʊ naʊ, tɑm." wɪð ə læs lʊk ət dinəz ʃɹaʊɾɪd fɔɹm, hi ɡæðɝɾ ɪz θɪŋz, bʌɾ əz i stɑɹɾəd tə liv, zɛɹə spoʊk əɡɛn. "ju hæv ə deɪnʒɝəs lʊk ɪn jəɹ aɪz, tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn. ɪmædʒən dinə sɪɾɪŋ hɪɹ, əlaɪv ən heɪl. θɪŋk wʌt ʃi wəd seɪ. wəd ʃi lɛt jə ɡoʊ ɔf ən ɡɛt jɝsɛlf kɪl tə noʊ pɝpəs?"

"I have lived through riots before. Go now, Thom." With a last look at Dena's shrouded form, he gathered his things, but as he started to leave, Zera spoke again. "You have a dangerous look in your eyes, Thom Merrilin. Imagine Dena sitting here, alive and hale. Think what she would say. Would she let you go off and get yourself killed to no purpose?"

"aɪm oʊnli ən oʊld ɡlimən," hi sɛd fɹəm ðə dɔɹ. ən ɹænd ælθɹ ɪz oʊnli ə ʃɛpɝd, bʌt wi boʊθ də wʌt wi mʌst. "hu kəɾ aɪ pɑsəbli bi deɪnʒɝəs tə?"

"I'm only an old gleeman," he said from the door. And Rand al'Thor is only a shepherd, but we both do what we must. "Who could I possibly be dangerous to?"

əz i pʊl ðə dɔɹ tə, haɪɾɪŋ hɝ, haɪɾɪŋ dinə, ə mɝθləs, wʊlfɪʃ ɡɹɪn keɪm ɑntu hɪz feɪs. hɪz lɛɡ hɝt, bʌɾ i bɛɹli fɛlt ɪɾ əz i hɝid pɝpəsfəli daʊn ðə stɛɹz ən aʊɾ ə ði ɪn.

As he pulled the door to, hiding her, hiding Dena, a mirthless, wolfish grin came onto his face. His leg hurt, but he barely felt it as he hurried purposefully down the stairs and out of the inn.

pdən feɪn ɹeɪn ɪn ɪz hɔɹs ətɑp ə hɪl əbʌv fɑlm, ɪn wʌn ə ðə fju spɑɹs θɪkəts ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ ɑn ðə hɪlz aʊtsaɪd ðə taʊn. ðə pæk hɔɹs bɛɹɪŋ ɪz pɹɛʃəs bɝɾən bʌmpt ɪz lɛɡ, ən i kɪkt ɪɾ ɪn ðə ɹɪbz wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ; ði ænəməl snɔɹɾɪd ən dʒɝk bæk tə ði ɛn ə ðə lɛɾ i hæd taɪd tə hɪz sæɾəl. ðə wʊmən hæd nɑt wɑntəd tə ɡɪv ʌp əɹ hɔɹs, noʊ mɔɹ ðən ɛni ʌv ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz u hæd fɑloʊɾ ɪm hæd wɑntəd tə bi lɛft əloʊn ɪn ðə hɪlz wɪð ðə tʃɹɑləks, wɪθaʊt feɪnz pɹətɛktɪŋ pɹɛzəns. hi hæd sɑlv boʊθ pɹɑbləmz izəli. miɾ ɪn ə tʃɹɑlɑk kʊkpɑt hæd noʊ niɾ ʌv ə hɔɹs. ðə wʊmənz kəmpænjənz hæd bɪn ʃeɪkən baɪ ðə dʒɝni əlɔŋ ðə weɪz, tə ə weɪɡeɪɾ aʊtsaɪɾ ə lɔŋ-əbændən stɛɾɪŋ ɑn toʊmən hɛd, ən wɑtʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑləks pɹipɛɹ ðɛɹ dɪnɝ hæd meɪd ðə sɝvaɪvɪŋ dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪkstʃɹimli bɪɾəbəl.

Padan Fain reined in his horse atop a hill above Falme, in one of the few sparse thickets remaining on the hills outside the town. The pack horse bearing his precious burden bumped his leg, and he kicked it in the ribs without looking; the animal snorted and jerked back to the end of the lead he had tied to his saddle. The woman had not wanted to give up her horse, no more than any of the Darkfriends who had followed him had wanted to be left alone in the hills with the Trollocs, without Fain's protecting presence. He had solved both problems easily. Meat in a Trolloc cookpot had no need of a horse. The woman's companions had been shaken by the journey along the Ways, to a Waygate outside a long-abandoned stedding on Toman Head, and watching the Trollocs prepare their dinner had made the surviving Darkfriends extremely biddable.

fɹəm ði ɛdʒ ə ðə tʃɹiz, feɪn stʌɾid ði ənwɔl taʊn ən snɪɹd. wʌn ʃɔɹt mɝtʃən tʃɹeɪn wɑz ɹʌmbəlɪŋ ɪn əmʌŋ ðə steɪbəlz ən hɔɹs lɑts ən wæɡən jɑɹdz ðət bɔɹɾɝd ðə taʊn, waɪl ənʌðɝ ɹʌmbəld aʊt, ɹeɪzɪŋ lɪɾəl dʌs fɹəm dɝt pæk baɪ mɛni jɪɹz ə sətʃ tʃɹæfɪk. ðə mɛn dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ðə wæɡənz ən ðə fju ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ əm wɝ ɔl loʊkəl mɛn baɪ ðɛɹ kloʊðɪŋ, jɛt ðə maʊntəd mɛn, ət list, hæd sɔɹdz ɑn bælʒɹɪks, ən ivən ə fju spɪɹz ən baʊz. ðə soʊlʒɝz i sɔ, ən ðəɹ wɝ fju, dɪd nɑt sim tə bi wɑtʃɪŋ ði ɑɹmd mɛn ðeɪ hæd səpoʊzədli kɑŋkɝd.

From the edge of the trees, Fain studied the unwalled town and sneered. One short merchant train was rumbling in among the stables and horse lots and wagon yards that bordered the town, while another rumbled out, raising little dust from dirt packed by many years of such traffic. The men driving the wagons and the few riding beside them were all local men by their clothing, yet the mounted men, at least, had swords on baldrics, and even a few spears and bows. The soldiers he saw, and there were few, did not seem to be watching the armed men they had supposedly conquered.

hi hæd lɝn sʌmθɪŋ ə ðiz pipəl, ðiz sintʃæn, ɪn ɪz deɪ ən ə naɪɾ ɑn toʊmən hɛd. ət list, əz mʌtʃ əz ðə dɪfiɾəd foʊk nu. ɪt wɑz nɛvɝ hɑɹd tə faɪn sʌmwʌn əloʊn, ən ðeɪ ɔlweɪz ænsɝd kwɛstʃənz pɹɑpɝli pʊt. mɛn ɡæðɝd mɔɹ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən ɑn ði ɪnveɪɾɝz, əz ɪf ðeɪ æktʃəli  bɪliv ðeɪ wəɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli də sʌmθɪŋ wɪð wʌt ðeɪ nu, bʌt ðeɪ səmtaɪmz tʃɹaɪd tə hoʊl bæk. wɪmən, baɪ ən lɑɹdʒ, simd ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn wɪð ðɛɹ lɪvz huɛvɝ ðɛɹ ɹulɝz wɝ, jɛt ðeɪ noʊɾəd dɪteɪlz mɛn dɪd nɑt, ən ðeɪ tɔk mɔɹ kwɪkli wʌns ðeɪ stɑp skɹimɪŋ. tʃɪlʒɹən tɔk ðə kwɪkɪst ʌv ɔl, bʌt ðeɪ sɛldəm sɛd mʌtʃ ðət wɑz wɝθwaɪl.

He had learned something of these people, these Seanchan, in his day and a night on Toman Head. At least, as much as the defeated folk knew. It was never hard to find someone alone, and they always answered questions properly put. Men gathered more information on the invaders, as if they actually believed they would eventually do something with what they knew, but they sometimes tried to hold back. Women, by and large, seemed interested in going on with their lives whoever their rulers were, yet they noted details men did not, and they talked more quickly once they stopped screaming. Children talked the quickest of all, but they seldom said much that was worthwhile.

hi hæd dɪskɑɹɾɪd θɹi kɔɹɾɝz ʌv wʌɾ i hæd hɝɾ əz nɑnsɛns ən ɹumɝz ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɪndə feɪbəlz, bʌɾ i tʊk səm ə ðoʊz kənkluʒənz bæk, naʊ. ɛniwʌn əɾ ɔl kəɾ ɛntɝ fɑlm, ɪɾ əpɪɹd. wɪð ə stɑɹt, hi sɔ ðə tʃɹuθ ʌv ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ "nɑnsɛns" əz twɛnti soʊlʒɝz ɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊn. hi kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt ðɛɹ maʊns klɪɹli, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ sɝɾənli nɑt hɔɹsəz. ðeɪ ɹæn wɪð ə fluəd ɡɹeɪs, ən ðɛɹ dɑɹk skɪnz sim tə hæv ə ɡlɪn ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ sʌn, əz ə skeɪlz. hi kɹeɪn ɪz nɛk tə wɑtʃ əm dɪsəpɪɹ ɪnlænd, ðən buɾɪd ɪz hɔɹs təwɔɹd ðə taʊn.

He had discarded three quarters of what he had heard as nonsense and rumors growing into fables, but he took some of those conclusions back, now. Anyone at all could enter Falme, it appeared. With a start, he saw the truth of a little more "nonsense" as twenty soldiers rode out of the town. He could not make out their mounts clearly, but they were certainly not horses. They ran with a fluid grace, and their dark skins seemed to have a glint in the morning sun, as of scales. He craned his neck to watch them disappear inland, then booted his horse toward the town.

ðə loʊkəl foʊk əmʌŋ ðə steɪbəlz ən pɑɹkt wæɡənz ən fɛns hɔɹs lɑts ɡeɪv ɪm noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə ɡlæns əɹ tu. hi hæd noʊ ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ðɛm, iðɝ; hi ɹoʊɾ ɑn ɪndə ðə taʊn, ɑntu ɪts kɑbəlstoʊn stʃɹits sloʊpɪŋ daʊn tə ðə hɑɹbɝ. hi kəd si ðə hɑɹbɝ klɪɹli, ən ðə lɑɹdʒ, ɑdli ʃeɪp sintʃæn ʃɪps æŋkɝd ðɛɹ. noʊ wʌn bɑðɝɾ ɪm əz i sɝtʃt stʃɹits ðət wɝ niðɝ kɹaʊɾəd nɔɹ ɛmpti. ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz hɪɹ. ðə pipəl hɝiɾ əbaʊt ðɛɹ bɪznəs wɪð aɪz daʊn, boʊɪŋ wɛnɛvɝ soʊlʒɝz pæst, bʌt ðə sintʃæn peɪɾ əm noʊ maɪnd. ɪɾ ɔl sim pisfəl ɑn ðə sɝfəs, dɪspaɪt ði ɑɹmɝd sintʃæn ɪn ðə stʃɹits ən ðə ʃɪps ɪn ðə hɑɹbɝ, bʌt feɪn kəd sɛns ðə tɛnʃən ʌndɝniθ. hi ɔlweɪz dɪd wɛl wɛɹ mɛn wɝ tɛns ən əfɹeɪd.

The local folk among the stables and parked wagons and fenced horse lots gave him no more than a glance or two. He had no interest in them, either; he rode on into the town, onto its cobblestone streets sloping down to the harbor. He could see the harbor clearly, and the large, oddly shaped Seanchan ships anchored there. No one bothered him as he searched streets that were neither crowded nor empty. There were more Seanchan soldiers here. The people hurried about their business with eyes down, bowing whenever soldiers passed, but the Seanchan paid them no mind. It all seemed peaceful on the surface, despite the armored Seanchan in the streets and the ships in the harbor, but Fain could sense the tension underneath. He always did well where men were tense and afraid.

hi keɪm tə ə lɑɹdʒ haʊs wɪð mɔɹ ðən ə dʌzən soʊlʒɝz stændɪŋ ɡɑɹd bɪfɔɹ ɪt. feɪn stɑpt ən dɪsmaʊntɪd. ɪksɛp fəɹ wʌn ɑbviəs ɔfəsɝ, moʊst wɔɹ ɑɹmɝ ʌv ʌnɹiliv blæk, ən ðɛɹ hɛlməts meɪɾ ɪm θɪŋk ə loʊkəsts' hɛdz. tu lɛðɝi-skɪn bists wɪð θɹi aɪz ən hɔɹni biks ɪnstɛɾ ə maʊðz flæŋk ðə fɹʌn dɔɹ, skwɑɾɪŋ laɪk kɹaʊtʃɪŋ fɹɑɡz; ðə soʊlʒɝ stændɪŋ baɪ itʃ ə ðə kɹitʃɝz hæd θɹi aɪz peɪntəɾ ɑn ðə bɹɛst ə hɪz ɑɹmɝ. feɪn aɪd ðə blu-bɔɹɾɝd bænɝ flæpɪŋ əbʌv ðə ɹuf, ðə spɹɛd-wɪŋ hɔk klʌtʃɪŋ laɪtnɪŋ boʊls, ən tʃɔɹɾəld ɪnsaɪd hɪmsɛlf.

He came to a large house with more than a dozen soldiers standing guard before it. Fain stopped and dismounted. Except for one obvious officer, most wore armor of unrelieved black, and their helmets made him think of locusts' heads. Two leathery-skinned beasts with three eyes and horny beaks instead of mouths flanked the front door, squatting like crouching frogs; the soldier standing by each of the creatures had three eyes painted on the breast of his armor. Fain eyed the blue-bordered banner flapping above the roof, the spread-winged hawk clutching lightning bolts, and chortled inside himself.

wɪmən wɛn ɪn ən aʊɾ ʌv ə haʊs əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹit, wɪmən lɪŋk baɪ sɪlvɝ liʃɪz, bʌɾ i ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛm. hi nu əbaʊt deɪmeɪn fɹəm ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz. ðeɪ maɪt bi ʌv səm jus leɪɾɝ, bʌt nɑt naʊ.

Women went in and out of a house across the street, women linked by silver leashes, but he ignored them. He knew about damane from the villagers. They might be of some use later, but not now.

ðə soʊlʒɝz wɝ lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, ɪspɛʃli ði ɔfəsɝ, huz ɑɹmɝ wɑz ɔl ɡoʊld ən ɹɛɾ ən ɡɹin.

The soldiers were looking at him, especially the officer, whose armor was all gold and red and green.

fɔɹsɪŋ ən ɪnɡɹeɪʃieɪɾɪŋ smaɪl ɑntu hɪz feɪs, feɪn meɪd hɪmsɛlf baʊ dipli. "maɪ lɔɹdz, aɪ hæv sʌmθɪŋ hɪɹ ðət wɪl ɪntʃɹəs jəɹ ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd. aɪ əʃʊɹ ju, hɪl wɑnə si ɪt, ən mi, pɝsənəli." hi dʒɛstʃɝd tə ðə skwɛɹɪʃ ʃeɪp ɑn ɪz pæk hɔɹs, stɪl ɹæpt ɪn ðə hjudʒ, stʃɹaɪp blæŋkəɾ ɪn wɪtʃ ɪz pipəl hæd faʊn ɪt.

Forcing an ingratiating smile onto his face, Fain made himself bow deeply. "My lords, I have something here that will interest your Great Lord. I assure you, he will want to see it, and me, personally." He gestured to the squarish shape on his pack horse, still wrapped in the huge, striped blanket in which his people had found it.

ði ɔfəsɝ stɛɹɾ ɪm ʌp ən daʊn. "ju saʊn ə fɔɹənɝ tə ðɪs lænd. hæv jə teɪkən ði oʊðz?"

The officer stared him up and down. "You sound a foreigner to this land. Have you taken the oaths?"

"aɪ oʊbeɪ, əweɪt, ən wɪl sɝv," feɪn ɹɪplaɪd smuðli. ɛvɹiwʌn i hæd kwɛstʃən spoʊk ə ði oʊðz, ðoʊ nʌn hæɾ ʌndɝstʊd wʌt ðeɪ mɛnt. ɪf ðiz pipəl wɑntəɾ oʊðz, hi wɑz pɹipɛɹd tə swɛɹ ɛniθɪŋ. hi hæd lɔŋ sɪns lɔs kaʊn ə ði oʊðz i hæd teɪkən.

"I obey, await, and will serve," Fain replied smoothly. Everyone he had questioned spoke of the oaths, though none had understood what they meant. If these people wanted oaths, he was prepared to swear anything. He had long since lost count of the oaths he had taken.

ði ɔfəsɝ moʊʃən tu ʌv ɪz mɛn tə si wʌt wɑz ʌndɝ ðə blæŋkət. sɝpɹaɪzd ɡɹʌns ət ðə weɪɾ əz ðeɪ lɪftəɾ ɪt daʊn fɹəm ðə pæksæɾəl tɝn tə ɡæsps wən ðeɪ stʃɹɪp ðə blæŋkəɾ əweɪ. ði ɔfəsɝ stɛɹd wɪð noʊ ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn ɪz feɪs ət ðə sɪlvɝ-wɝkt ɡoʊldən tʃɛst ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn ðə kɑbəlstoʊnz, ðən lʊkt ət feɪn. "ə ɡɪft fɪt fəɹ ði ɛmpɹɛs hɝsɛlf. jəl kʌm wɪð mi."

The officer motioned two of his men to see what was under the blanket. Surprised grunts at the weight as they lifted it down from the packsaddle turned to gasps when they stripped the blanket away. The officer stared with no expression on his face at the silver-worked golden chest resting on the cobblestones, then looked at Fain. "A gift fit for the Empress herself. You will come with me."

wʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz sɝtʃt feɪn ɹʌfli, bʌɾ i ɛndʒjʊɹɾ ɪɾ ɪn saɪləns, noʊɾɪŋ ðət ði ɔfəsɝ ən ðə tu soʊlʒɝz u tʊk ʌp ðə tʃɛst sɝɛndɝd ðɛɹ sɔɹdz ən dæɡɝz bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ɪnsaɪd. ɛniθɪŋ i kəd lɝn ə ðiz pipəl, haʊɛvɝ smɔl, maɪt hɛlp, ðoʊ hi wɑz kɑnfəɾənt ə hɪz plæn ɔlɹɛɾi. hi wɑz ɔlweɪz kɑnfəɾənt, bʌt nɛvɝ mɔɹ ðən wɛɹ lɔɹdz fɪɹɾ ən əsæsənz naɪf fɹəm ðɛɹ oʊn fɑloʊɝz.

One of the soldiers searched Fain roughly, but he endured it in silence, noting that the officer and the two soldiers who took up the chest surrendered their swords and daggers before going inside. Anything he could learn of these people, however small, might help, though he was confident of his plan already. He was always confident, but never more than where lords feared an assassin's knife from their own followers.

əz ðeɪ wɛn θɹu ðə dɔɹ, ði ɔfəsɝ fɹaʊn ət hɪm, ən fəɹ ə moʊmən feɪn wʌndɝd waɪ. ʌv kɔɹs. ðə bists. wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ wɝ, ðeɪ wɝ sɝɾənli noʊ wɝs ðən tʃɹɑləks, nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl bɪsaɪɾ ə mɹdʒɹɑl, ən i hæd nɑt ɡɪvən əm ə sɛkən lʊk. ɪt wɑz tu leɪt tə pɹitɛn tə bi əfɹeɪɾ ə ðɛm naʊ. bʌt ðə sintʃæn sɛd nʌθɪŋ, oʊnli lɛɾ ɪm dipɝ ɪndə ðə haʊs.

As they went through the door, the officer frowned at him, and for a moment Fain wondered why. Of course. The beasts. Whatever they were, they were certainly no worse than Trollocs, nothing at all beside a Myrddraal, and he had not given them a second look. It was too late to pretend to be afraid of them now. But the Seanchan said nothing, only led him deeper into the house.

ən soʊ feɪn faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɑn ɪz feɪs, ɪn ə ɹum bɛɹ ə fɝnɪʃɪŋz ɪksɛp fəɹ foʊldɪŋ skɹinz ðət hɪɾ ɪts wɔlz, waɪl ði ɔfəsɝ toʊl ðə haɪ lɔɹd tʃɹɑk ə hɪm ən ɪz ɔfɝɪŋ. sɝvəns bɹɔɾ ə teɪbəl ɑn wɪtʃ tə sɛt ðə tʃɛst soʊ ðə haɪ lɔɹd wəɾ əv noʊ nid tə stup; ɔl feɪn sɔ ʌv əm wɝ skɝiɪŋ slɪpɝz. hi baɪɾɪd ɪz taɪm ɪmpeɪʃənli. ɪvɛntʃəwəli ðəɹ wəd kʌm ə taɪm wən i wɑz nɑt ðə wʌn tə baʊ.

And so Fain found himself on his face, in a room bare of furnishings except for folding screens that hid its walls, while the officer told the High Lord Turak of him and his offering. Servants brought a table on which to set the chest so the High Lord would have no need to stoop; all Fain saw of them were scurrying slippers. He bided his time impatiently. Eventually there would come a time when he was not the one to bow.

ðən ðə soʊlʒɝz wɝ dɪsmɪst, ən feɪn toʊl tə ɹaɪz. hi dɪd soʊ sloʊli, stʌɾiɪŋ boʊθ ðə haɪ lɔɹd, wɪð ɪz ʃeɪvən hɛɾ ən ɪz lɔŋ fɪŋɡɝneɪlz ən ɪz blu sɪlk ɹoʊb bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd wɪð blɑsəmz, ən ðə mæn u stʊd bɪsaɪɾ ɪm wɪð ði ənʃeɪvən hæf ə hɪz peɪl hɛɹ ɪn ə lɔŋ bɹeɪd. feɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ ðə fɛloʊ ɪn ɡɹin wɑz oʊnli ə sɝvənt, haʊɛvɝ ɡɹeɪt, bʌt sɝvəns kəd bi jusfəl, ɪspɛʃli ɪf ðeɪ stʊd haɪ ɪn ðɛɹ mæstɝz saɪt.

Then the soldiers were dismissed, and Fain told to rise. He did so slowly, studying both the High Lord, with his shaven head and his long fingernails and his blue silk robe brocaded with blossoms, and the man who stood beside him with the unshaven half of his pale hair in a long braid. Fain was sure the fellow in green was only a servant, however great, but servants could be useful, especially if they stood high in their master's sight.

"ə mɑɹvələs ɡɪft." tʃɹɑks aɪz lɪftəd fɹəm ðə tʃɛs tə feɪn. ə sɛn ə ɹoʊzɪz wɑftɪd fɹəm ðə haɪ lɔɹd. "jɛt ðə kwɛstʃən æsks ɪtsɛlf; haʊ dɪd wʌn laɪk jə kʌm baɪ ə tʃɛs mɛni lɛsɝ lɔɹdz kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd? ɑɹ jə ə θif?"

"A marvelous gift." Turak's eyes lifted from the chest to Fain. A scent of roses wafted from the High Lord. "Yet the question asks itself; how did one like you come by a chest many lesser lords could not afford? Are you a thief?"

feɪn tʌɡd əɾ ɪz wɔɹn, nʌn-tu-klin koʊt. "ɪɾ ɪz səmtaɪmz nɛsəsɛɹi fəɹ ə mæn tə əpɪɹ lɛs ðən i ɪz, haɪ lɔɹd. maɪ pɹɛzənt ʃæbaɪnəs əlaʊd mi tə bɹɪŋ ðɪs tə jə ʌnməlɛstɪd. ðɪs tʃɛst ɪz oʊld, haɪ lɔɹd - əz oʊld əz ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz - ən wɪðɪn ɪt laɪz ə tʃɹɛʒɝ sətʃ əz fju aɪz əv ɛvɝ sin. sun - vɛɹi sun, haɪ lɔɹd - əl bi eɪbəl tə oʊpən ɪt, ən ɡɪv jə ðət wɪtʃ wɪl ɛneɪbəl jə tə teɪk ðɪs læn əz fɑɹ əz jə wɪʃ, tə ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld, ði il weɪst, ðə lænz bɪɑnd. nʌθɪŋ wɪl stæn əɡɛns ju, haɪ lɔɹd, wʌns aɪ - " hi kʌɾ ɔf əz tʃɹɑk bɪɡæn ɹʌnɪŋ ɪz lɔŋ-neɪl fɪŋɡɝz oʊvɝ ðə tʃɛst.

Fain tugged at his worn, none-too-clean coat. "It is sometimes necessary for a man to appear less than he is, High Lord. My present shabbiness allowed me to bring this to you unmolested. This chest is old, High Lord - as old as the Age of Legends - and within it lies a treasure such as few eyes have ever seen. Soon - very soon, High Lord - I will be able to open it, and give you that which will enable you to take this land as far as you wish, to the Spine of the World, the Aiel Waste, the lands beyond. Nothing will stand against you, High Lord, once I - " He cut off as Turak began running his long-nailed fingers over the chest.

"aɪ hæv sin tʃɛsts sətʃ əz ðɪs, tʃɛsts fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz," ðə haɪ lɔɹd sɛd, "ðoʊ nʌn soʊ faɪn. ðeɪ ɑɹ mɛn tə bi oʊpən oʊnli baɪ ðoʊz u noʊ ðə pæɾɝn, bʌɾ aɪ - ɑ!" hi pɹɛst əmʌŋ ði ɔɹneɪt wɝlz ən bɔsɪz, ðəɹ wɑz ə ʃɑɹp klɪk, ən i lɪftəd bæk ðə lɪd. ə flɪkɝ ʌv wʌt maɪɾ əv bɪn dɪsəpɔɪnmənt pæst əkɹɔs ɪz feɪs.

"I have seen chests such as this, chests from the Age of Legends," the High Lord said, "though none so fine. They are meant to be opened only by those who know the pattern, but I - ah!" He pressed among the ornate whorls and bosses, there was a sharp click, and he lifted back the lid. A flicker of what might have been disappointment passed across his face.

feɪn bɪt ði ɪnsaɪɾ ə hɪz maʊθ tɪl blʌd keɪm tə kip fɹəm snɑɹlɪŋ. ɪt lɛsən ɪz bɑɹɡɪnɪŋ pəzɪʃən ðəɾ i wɑz nɑt ðə wʌn u hæɾ oʊpən ðə tʃɛst. stɪl, ɔl ðə ɹɛs kəd ɡoʊ əz i hæd plæn ɪf i kəɾ oʊnli meɪk hɪmsɛlf bi peɪʃənt. bʌɾ i hæd bɪn peɪʃən soʊ lɔŋ.

Fain bit the inside of his mouth till blood came to keep from snarling. It lessened his bargaining position that he was not the one who had opened the chest. Still, all the rest could go as he had planned if he could only make himself be patient. But he had been patient so long.

"ðiz ɑɹ tʃɹɛʒɝz fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz?" tʃɹɑk sɛd, lɪftɪŋ aʊt ðə kɝl hɔɹn ɪn wʌn hæn ən ðə kɝv dæɡɝ wɪð ðə ɹubi ɪn ɪts ɡoʊldən hɪlt ɪn ði ʌðɝ. feɪn klʌtʃt ɪz hænz ɪn fɪsts əɾ ɪz saɪdz soʊ hi wəd nɑt ɡɹæb ðə dæɡɝ. "ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz," tʃɹɑk ɹɪpiɾɪd sɔfli, tʃɹeɪsɪŋ ðə sɪlvɝ skɹɪpt ɪnleɪɾ ɝaʊn ðə ɡoʊldən bɛl ə ðə hɔɹn wɪð ðə tɪp ə ðə dæɡɝz bleɪd. hɪz bɹaʊz ɹoʊz ɪn stɑɹɾəlmənt, ðə fɝst oʊpən ɪkspɹɛʃən feɪn hæd sin fɹəm hɪm, bʌɾ ɪn ðə nɛkst ɪnstən tʃɹɑks feɪs wɑz əz smuð əz ɛvɝ. "du juv ɛni aɪdiə wʌt ðɪs ɪz?"

"These are treasures from the Age of Legends?" Turak said, lifting out the curled Horn in one hand and the curved dagger with the ruby in its golden hilt in the other. Fain clutched his hands in fists at his sides so he would not grab the dagger. "The Age of Legends," Turak repeated softly, tracing the silver script inlaid around the golden bell of the Horn with the tip of the dagger's blade. His brows rose in startlement, the first open expression Fain had seen from him, but in the next instant Turak's face was as smooth as ever. "Do you have any idea what this is?"

"ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, haɪ lɔɹd," feɪn sɛd smuðli, pliz tə si ðə maʊθ ə ðə mæn wɪð ðə bɹeɪd dʒɹɑp oʊpən. tʃɹɑk oʊnli nɑɾəd əz ɪf tə hɪmsɛlf.

"The Horn of Valere, High Lord," Fain said smoothly, pleased to see the mouth of the man with the braid drop open. Turak only nodded as if to himself.

ðə haɪ lɔɹd tɝn əweɪ. feɪn blɪŋkt ən oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, ðɛn, əɾ ə ʃɑɹp dʒɛstʃɝ fɹəm ðə jɛloʊ-hɛɹd mæn, fɑloʊd wɪθaʊt spikɪŋ.

The High Lord turned away. Fain blinked and opened his mouth, then, at a sharp gesture from the yellow-haired man, followed without speaking.

ɪt wɑz ənʌðɝ ɹum wɪð ɔl ði ɝɪdʒənəl fɝnɪʃɪŋz ɡɔn, ɹipleɪs baɪ foʊldɪŋ skɹinz ən ə sɪŋɡəl tʃɛɹ feɪsɪŋ ə tɔl ɹaʊn kæbənət. stɪl hoʊldɪŋ ðə hɔɹn ən ðə dæɡɝ, tʃɹɑk lʊkt ət ðə kæbənət, ðən əweɪ. hi sɛd nʌθɪŋ, bʌt ði ʌðɝ sintʃæn snæp kwɪk ɔɹɾɝz, ən ɪn moʊməns mɛn ɪn pleɪn wʊlən ɹoʊbz əpɪɹd θɹu ə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn ðə skɹinz bɛɹɪŋ ənʌðɝ smɔl teɪbəl. ə jʌŋ wʊmən wɪð hɛɹ soʊ peɪl ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊst waɪt keɪm bɪhaɪn ðɛm, hɝ ɑɹmz fʊl ə smɔl stænz ə pɑlɪʃt wʊɾ ɪn vɛɹiəs saɪzəz ən ʃeɪps. hɝ ɡɑɹmənt wɑz waɪt sɪlk, ən soʊ θɪn ðət feɪn kəd si hɝ bɑɾi klɪɹli θɹu ɪt, bʌɾ i hæɾ aɪz oʊnli fəɹ ðə dæɡɝ. ðə hɔɹn wɑz ə minz tə ən ɛnd, bʌt ðə dæɡɝ wɑz ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm.

It was another room with all the original furnishings gone, replaced by folding screens and a single chair facing a tall round cabinet. Still holding the Horn and the dagger, Turak looked at the cabinet, then away. He said nothing, but the other Seanchan snapped quick orders, and in moments men in plain woolen robes appeared through a door behind the screens bearing another small table. A young woman with hair so pale it was almost white came behind them, her arms full of small stands of polished wood in various sizes and shapes. Her garment was white silk, and so thin that Fain could see her body clearly through it, but he had eyes only for the dagger. The Horn was a means to an end, but the dagger was a part of him.

tʃɹɑk bɹifli tʌtʃt wʌn ə ðə wʊɾən stænz ðə ɡɝl hɛld, ən ʃi pleɪst ɪɾ ɑn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə teɪbəl. ðə mɛn tɝn ðə tʃɛɹ tə feɪs ɪɾ ʌndɝ ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðə mæn wɪð ðə bɹeɪd. ðə loʊɝ sɝvəns' hɛɹ hʌŋ tə ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ðeɪ skɝiɾ aʊt wɪð baʊz ðəɾ ɔlmoʊs pʊt ðɛɹ hɛdz ɑn ðɛɹ niz.

Turak briefly touched one of the wooden stands the girl held, and she placed it on the center of the table. The men turned the chair to face it under the direction of the man with the braid. The lower servants' hair hung to their shoulders. They scurried out with bows that almost put their heads on their knees.

pleɪsɪŋ ðə hɔɹn ɑn ðə stæn soʊ ðəɾ ɪt stʊɾ əpɹaɪt, tʃɹɑk leɪd ðə dæɡɝ ɑn ðə teɪbəl ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɪɾ ən wɛn tə sɪɾ ɪn ðə tʃɛɹ.

Placing the Horn on the stand so that it stood upright, Turak laid the dagger on the table in front of it and went to sit in the chair.

feɪn kəd stæn ɪt noʊ lɔŋɡɝ. hi ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə dæɡɝ.

Fain could stand it no longer. He reached for the dagger.

ðə jɛloʊ-hɛɹd mæn kɑɾ ɪz ɹɪst ɪn ə kɹʌʃɪŋ ɡɹɪp. "ənʃeɪvən dɔɡ! noʊ ðət ðə hæn ðət tʌtʃəz ðə pɹɑpɝɾi ʌv ðə haɪ lɔɹɾ ənbɪddən ɪz kʌɾ ɔf."

The yellow-haired man caught his wrist in a crushing grip. "Unshaven dog! Know that the hand that touches the property of the High Lord unbidden is cut off."

"ɪɾ ɪz maɪn," feɪn ɡɹaʊld. peɪʃəns! soʊ lɔŋ.

"It is mine," Fain growled. Patience! So long.

tʃɹɑk, laʊnʒɪŋ bæk ɪn ðə tʃɛɹ, lɪftəd wʌn blu-lækɝd fɪŋɡɝneɪl, ən feɪn wɑz pʊld aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ soʊ ðə haɪ lɔɹd kəd vju ðə hɔɹn ʌnəbstʃɹʌktɪd.

Turak, lounging back in the chair, lifted one blue-lacquered fingernail, and Fain was pulled out of the way so the High Lord could view the Horn unobstructed.

"jʊɹz?" tʃɹɑk sɛd. "ɪnsaɪɾ ə tʃɛs jə kəd nɑɾ oʊpən? ɪf jə ɪntʃɹəs mi səfɪʃənli, aɪ meɪ ɡɪv jə ðə dæɡɝ. ivən ɪf ɪts fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, aɪ hæv noʊ ɪntʃɹəst ɪn sətʃ əz ðæt. bɪfɔɹ ɔl ɛls, jəl ænsɝ mi ə kwɛstʃən. waɪ hæv jə bɹɔt ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ tə mi?"

"Yours?" Turak said. "Inside a chest you could not open? If you interest me sufficiently, I may give you the dagger. Even if it is from the Age of Legends, I have no interest in such as that. Before all else, you will answer me a question. Why have you brought the Horn of Valere to me?"

feɪn aɪd ðə dæɡɝ lɔŋɪŋli ə moʊmən mɔɹ, ðən dʒɝkt ɪz ɹɪs fɹi ən ɹʌbd ɪɾ əz i baʊd. "ðæt jə meɪ saʊn ɪt, haɪ lɔɹd. ðən jə meɪ teɪk ɔl ə ðɪs lænd, ɪf jə wɪʃ. ɔl ə ðə wɝld. jə meɪ bɹeɪk ðə waɪt taʊɝ ən ɡɹaɪn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə dʌst, fəɹ ivən ðɛɹ paʊɝz kænɑt stɑp hɪɹoʊz kʌm bæk fɹəm ðə dɛd."

Fain eyed the dagger longingly a moment more, then jerked his wrist free and rubbed it as he bowed. "That you may sound it, High Lord. Then you may take all of this land, if you wish. All of the world. You may break the White Tower and grind the Aes Sedai to dust, for even their powers cannot stop heroes come back from the dead."

"aɪ æm tə saʊn ɪt." tʃɹɑks toʊn wɑz flæt. "æn bɹeɪk ðə waɪt taʊɝ. əɡɛn, waɪ? jə kleɪm tə oʊbeɪ, əweɪt, ən sɝv, bʌt ðɪs ɪz ə læn ʌv oʊθ-bɹeɪkɝz. waɪ dʒju ɡɪv jəɹ læn tə mi? juv səm pɹaɪvət kwɔɹəl wɪð ðiz . . . wɪmən?"

"I am to sound it." Turak's tone was flat. "And break the White Tower. Again, why? You claim to obey, await, and serve, but this is a land of oath-breakers. Why do you give your land to me? Do you have some private quarrel with these . . . women?"

feɪn tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk ɪz vɔɪs kənvɪnsɪŋ. peɪʃənt, laɪk ə wɝm bɔɹɪŋ fɹəm wɪðɪn. "haɪ lɔɹd, maɪ fæmli hæz pæs daʊn ə tʃɹədɪʃən, dʒɛnɝeɪʃən əpɑn dʒɛnɝeɪʃən. wi sɝv ðə haɪ kɪŋ, ɑɹɾɝ pɛndʒɹæɡ tænɹəl, ən wən i wɑz mɝɾɝd baɪ ðə wɪtʃəz ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, wi dɪd nɑɾ əbændən əɹ oʊðz. wən ʌðɝz wɔɹɾ ən tɔɹ əpɑɹt wʌɾ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ hæd meɪd, wi hɛl tə əɹ swɛɹɪŋ, ən sʌfɝd fəɹ ɪt, bʌt hɛl tə ɪt stɪl. ðɪs ɪz əɹ tʃɹədɪʃən, haɪ lɔɹd, hændəd fɑðɝ tə sʌn, ən mʌðɝ tə dɔɾɝ, daʊn ɔl ðə jɪɹz sɪns ðə haɪ kɪŋ wɑz mɝɾɝd. ðət wi əweɪt ðə ɹɪtɝn ə ði ɑɹmiz ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ sɛn əkɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən, ðət wi əweɪt ðə ɹɪtɝn ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz blʌd tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðə waɪt taʊɝ ən teɪk bæk wʌt wɑz ðə haɪ kɪŋz. ən wən ðə hɔkwɪŋz blʌd ɹɪtɝnz, wɪl sɝv ən ædvaɪz, əz wi dɪd fəɹ ðə haɪ kɪŋ. haɪ lɔɹd, ɪksɛp fəɹ ɪts bɔɹɾɝ, ðə bænɝ ðət flaɪz oʊvɝ ðɪs ɹuf ɪz ðə bænɝ ə luthɛɹ, ðə sʌn ɑɹɾɝ pɛndʒɹæɡ tænɹəl sɛnt wɪð ɪz ɑɹmiz əkɹɔs ði oʊʃən." feɪn dʒɹɑp tə hɪz niz, ɡɪvɪŋ ə ɡʊɾ ɪməteɪʃən ə biɪŋ oʊvɝwɛlmd. "haɪ lɔɹd, aɪ wɪʃ oʊnli tə sɝv ən ædvaɪz ðə blʌɾ ə ðə haɪ kɪŋ."

Fain tried to make his voice convincing. Patient, like a worm boring from within. "High Lord, my family has passed down a tradition, generation upon generation. We served the High King, Artur Paendrag Tanreall, and when he was murdered by the witches of Tar Valon, we did not abandon our oaths. When others warred and tore apart what Artur Hawkwing had made, we held to our swearing, and suffered for it, but held to it still. This is our tradition, High Lord, handed father to son, and mother to daughter, down all the years since the High King was murdered. That we await the return of the armies Artur Hawkwing sent across the Aryth Ocean, that we await the return of Artur Hawkwing's blood to destroy the White Tower and take back what was the High King's. And when the Hawkwing's blood returns, we will serve and advise, as we did for the High King. High Lord, except for its border, the banner that flies over this roof is the banner of Luthair, the son Artur Paendrag Tanreall sent with his armies across the ocean." Fain dropped to his knees, giving a good imitation of being overwhelmed. "High Lord, I wish only to serve and advise the blood of the High King."

tʃɹɑk wɑz saɪlən soʊ lɔŋ ðət feɪn bɪɡæn tə wʌndɝ ɪf i niɾəd fɝðɝ kənvɪnsɪŋ; hi wɑz ɹɛɾi wɪð mɔɹ, əz mʌtʃ əz wɑz ɹikwaɪɝd. faɪnəli, ðoʊ, ðə haɪ lɔɹd spoʊk. "ju sim tə noʊ wʌt nʌn, niðɝ ðə haɪ nɔɹ ðə loʊ, hæz spoʊkən sɪns saɪɾɪŋ ðɪs lænd. ðə pipəl hɪɹ spik ɪɾ əz wʌn ɹumɝ əmʌŋ tɛn, bʌt jə noʊ. aɪ kən si ɪɾ ɪn jəɹ aɪz, hɪɹ ɪɾ ɪn jəɹ vɔɪs. aɪ kəɾ ɔlmoʊs θɪŋk jə wɝ sɛn tə ɛntæŋɡəl mi ɪn ə tʃɹæp. bʌt hu, pəzɛsɪŋ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, wəd juz ɪt soʊ? nʌn ə ðoʊz ə ðə blʌɾ u keɪm wɪð ðə heɪlin cʊɾə hæd ðə hɔɹn, fəɹ ðə lɛdʒən sɛz ɪt wɑz hɪɾən ɪn ðɪs lænd. ən ʃʊɹli ɛni lɔɹɾ ə ðɪs lænd wəd juz ɪɾ əɡɛns mi ɹæðɝ ðən pʊɾ ɪɾ ɪn maɪ hænz. haʊ dɪd jə kʌm tə pəzɛs ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ? dʒju kleɪm tə bi ə hɪɹoʊ, əz ɪn ðə lɛdʒənd? hæv jə dʌn vælɝəs didz?"

Turak was silent so long that Fain began to wonder if he needed further convincing; he was ready with more, as much as was required. Finally, though, the High Lord spoke. "You seem to know what none, neither the high nor the low, has spoken since sighting this land. The people here speak it as one rumor among ten, but you know. I can see it in your eyes, hear it in your voice. I could almost think you were sent to entangle me in a trap. But who, possessing the Horn of Valere, would use it so? None of those of the Blood who came with the Hailene could have had the Horn, for the legend says it was hidden in this land. And surely any lord of this land would use it against me rather than put it in my hands. How did you come to possess the Horn of Valere? Do you claim to be a hero, as in the legend? Have you done valorous deeds?"

"aɪ æm noʊ hɪɹoʊ, haɪ lɔɹd." feɪn vɛntʃɝɾ ə sɛlf-dɛpɹəkeɪɾɪŋ smaɪl, bʌt tʃɹɑks feɪs dɪd nɑɾ ɔltɝ, ən i lɛɾ ɪt ɡoʊ. "ðə hɔɹn wɑz faʊn baɪ ən ænsɛstɝ ə maɪn dʊɹɪŋ ðə tɝmɔɪl æftɝ ðə haɪ kɪŋz dɛθ. hi nu haʊ tə oʊpən ðə tʃɛst, bʌt ðət sikɹət daɪd wɪð ɪm ɪn ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, ðət ɹɛn ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɛmpaɪɝ, soʊ ðəɾ ɔl wi hu fɑloʊɾ ɪm nu wɑz ðət ðə hɔɹn leɪ wɪðɪn ən wi mʌs kip ɪt seɪf əntɪl ðə haɪ kɪŋz blʌd ɹɪtɝnd."

"I am no hero, High Lord." Fain ventured a self-deprecating smile, but Turak's face did not alter, and he let it go. "The Horn was found by an ancestor of mine during the turmoil after the High King's death. He knew how to open the chest, but that secret died with him in the War of the Hundred Years, that rent Artur Hawkwing's empire, so that all we who followed him knew was that the Horn lay within and we must keep it safe until the High King's blood returned."

"ɔlmoʊs kəɾ aɪ bɪliv ju."

"Almost could I believe you."

"bɪliv, haɪ lɔɹd. wʌns jə saʊn ðə hɔɹn - "

"Believe, High Lord. Once you sound the Horn - "

"du nɑt ɹuən wʌt kənvɪnsɪŋ juv mænədʒ tə du. aɪ ʃæl nɑt saʊn ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. wən aɪ ɹɪtɝn tə sintʃæn, aɪ ʃæl pɹɛzən ɪt tə ði ɛmpɹɛs əz ðə tʃifɛst ə maɪ tʃɹoʊfiz. pɝhæps ði ɛmpɹɛs wɪl saʊn ɪt hɝsɛlf."

"Do not ruin what convincing you have managed to do. I shall not sound the Horn of Valere. When I return to Seanchan, I shall present it to the Empress as the chiefest of my trophies. Perhaps the Empress will sound it herself."

"bʌt, haɪ lɔɹd," feɪn pɹətɛstəd, "ju mʌst - " hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf laɪɪŋ ɑn ɪz saɪd, hɪz hɛd ɹɪŋɪŋ. oʊnli wən ɪz aɪz klɪɹd dɪɾ i si ðə mæn wɪð ðə peɪl bɹeɪd ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz nʌkəlz ən ɹilaɪz wʌt hæd hæpənd.

"But, High Lord," Fain protested, "you must - " He found himself lying on his side, his head ringing. Only when his eyes cleared did he see the man with the pale braid rubbing his knuckles and realize what had happened.

"sʌm wɝdz," ðə fɛloʊ sɛd sɔfli, "ɑɹ nɛvɝ juz tə ðə haɪ lɔɹd."

"Some words," the fellow said softly, "are never used to the High Lord."

feɪn dɪsaɪɾɪd haʊ ðə mæn wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə daɪ.

Fain decided how the man was going to die.

tʃɹɑk lʊk fɹəm feɪn tə ðə hɔɹn əz plɑtʃədli əz ɪf i hæd sin nʌθɪŋ. "pɝhæps əl ɡɪv jə tə ði ɛmpɹɛs əlɔŋ wɪð ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. ʃi maɪt faɪn jə əmjuzɪŋ, ə mæn u kleɪmz ɪz fæmli hɛl tʃɹu wɛɹ ɔl ʌðɝz bɹoʊk ðɛɹ oʊðz əɹ fɝɡɑt ðɛm."

Turak looked from Fain to the Horn as placidly as if he had seen nothing. "Perhaps I will give you to the Empress along with the Horn of Valere. She might find you amusing, a man who claims his family held true where all others broke their oaths or forgot them."

feɪn hɪɾ ɪz sʌɾən ɪleɪʃən ɪn ði ækt ə klaɪmɪŋ bæk tə hɪz fit. hi hæd nɑɾ ivən noʊn ə ði ɛɡzɪstəns ʌv ən ɛmpɹɛs əntɪl tʃɹɑk mɛnʃən hɝ, bʌɾ æksɛs tə ə ɹulɝ əɡɛn . . . ðəɾ oʊpənd nu pæðz, nu plænz. æksɛs tə ə ɹulɝ wɪð ðə maɪɾ ə ðə sintʃæn bɪniθ əɹ ən ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ɪn əɹ hænz. mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ðən meɪkɪŋ ðɪs tʃɹɑk ə ɡɹeɪt kɪŋ. hi kəd weɪt fəɹ səm pɑɹts ə hɪz plæn. sɔfli. mʌsnt lɛɾ ɪm noʊ haʊ mʌtʃ jə wɑn ɪt. æftɝ soʊ lɔŋ, ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ peɪʃəns wɪl nɑt hɝt. "æz ðə haɪ lɔɹd wɪʃɪz," hi sɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə saʊn laɪk ə mæn u oʊnli wɑntəd tə sɝv.

Fain hid his sudden elation in the act of climbing back to his feet. He had not even known of the existence of an Empress until Turak mentioned her, but access to a ruler again . . . that opened new paths, new plans. Access to a ruler with the might of the Seanchan beneath her and the Horn of Valere in her hands. Much better than making this Turak a Great King. He could wait for some parts of his plan. Softly. Mustn't let him know how much you want it. After so long, a little more patience will not hurt. "As the High Lord wishes," he said, trying to sound like a man who only wanted to serve.

"ju sim ɔlmoʊst iɡɝ," tʃɹɑk sɛd, ən feɪn bɛɹli səpɹɛst ə wɪns. "aɪ wɪl tɛl jə waɪ əl nɑt saʊn ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, əɹ ivən kip ɪt, ən pɝhæps ðət wɪl kjʊɹ jəɹ iɡɝnəs. aɪ də nɑt wɪʃ ə ɡɪft ə maɪn tə əfɛn ði ɛmpɹɛs baɪ hɪz ækʃənz; ɪf jəɹ iɡɝnəs kænɑt bi kjʊɹd, ɪɾəl nɛvɝ bi sæɾəsfaɪd, fəɹ jəl nɛvɝ liv ðiz ʃɔɹz. dʒju noʊ ðət huɛvɝ bloʊz ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ɪz lɪŋk tə ɪt ðɛɹæftɝ? ðət soʊ lɔŋ əz i əɹ ʃi lɪvz, ɪts noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə hɔɹn tə ɛni ʌðɝ?" hi dɪd nɑt saʊn əz ɪf i ɪkspɛktəɾ ænsɝz, ən ɪn ɛni keɪs, hi dɪd nɑt pɔz fəɹ ðɛm. "aɪ stæn twɛlfθ ɪn laɪn ə səksɛʃən tə ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn. ɪf aɪ kɛp ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, ɔl bɪtwin maɪsɛlf ən ðə θɹoʊn wəd θɪŋk aɪ mɛn tə bi fɝs hɪɹæftɝ, ən waɪl ði ɛmpɹɛs, ʌv kɔɹs, wɪʃɪz ðət wi kəntɛnd wɪð wʌn ənʌðɝ soʊ ðət ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst ən moʊs kʌnɪŋ wɪl fɑloʊ hɝ, ʃi kɝənli feɪvɝz əɹ sɛkən dɔɾɝ, ən ʃi wəd nɑt lʊk wɛl ɑn ɛni θɹɛt tə tuɑn. ɪf aɪ saʊndəɾ ɪt, ivən ɪf aɪ ðən leɪd ðɪs læn əɾ əɹ fit, ən ɛvɹi wʊmən ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ liʃt, ði ɛmpɹɛs, meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ, wəd ʃʊɹli bɪliv aɪ mɛn tə bi mɔɹ ðən mɪɹli hɝ ɛɹ."

"You seem almost eager," Turak said, and Fain barely suppressed a wince. "I will tell you why I will not sound the Horn of Valere, or even keep it, and perhaps that will cure your eagerness. I do not wish a gift of mine to offend the Empress by his actions; if your eagerness cannot be cured, it will never be satisfied, for you will never leave these shores. Do you know that whoever blows the Horn of Valere is linked to it thereafter? That so long as he or she lives, it is no more than a horn to any other?" He did not sound as if he expected answers, and in any case, he did not pause for them. "I stand twelfth in line of succession to the Crystal Throne. If I kept the Horn of Valere, all between myself and the throne would think I meant to be first hereafter, and while the Empress, of course, wishes that we contend with one another so that the strongest and most cunning will follow her, she currently favors her second daughter, and she would not look well on any threat to Tuon. If I sounded it, even if I then laid this land at her feet, and every woman in the White Tower leashed, the Empress, may she live forever, would surely believe I meant to be more than merely her heir."

feɪn stɑp hɪmsɛlf ʃɔɹɾ ə sədʒɛstɪŋ haʊ pɑsəbəl ðət wəd bi wɪð ði eɪɾ ə ðə hɔɹn. sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðə haɪ lɔɹdz vɔɪs sədʒɛstəd - əz hɑɹɾ əz feɪn faʊn ɪt tə bɪliv - ðəɾ i æktʃəli  mɛn ɪz wɪʃ fəɹ əɹ tə lɪv fɝɛvɝ. aɪ mʌs bi peɪʃənt. ə wɝm ɪn ðə ɹut.

Fain stopped himself short of suggesting how possible that would be with the aid of the Horn. Something in the High Lord's voice suggested - as hard as Fain found it to believe - that he actually meant his wish for her to live forever. I must be patient. A worm in the root.

"ði ɛmpɹɛsəz lɪsənɝz meɪ bi ɛniwɛɹ," tʃɹɑk kəntɪnjud. "ðeɪ meɪ bi ɛniwʌn. hwɑn wɑz bɔɹn ən ɹeɪzd ɪn ðə haʊs ʌv ələdɑn, ən ɪz fæmli fəɹ ɪlɛvən dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz bɪfɔɹ hɪm, jɛɾ ivən i kəd bi ə lɪsənɝ." ðə mæn wɪð ðə bɹeɪd hæf meɪɾ ə pɹətɛstɪŋ dʒɛstʃɝ, bɪfɔɹ dʒɝkɪŋ hɪmsɛlf bæk tə stɪlnəs. "ivən ə haɪ lɔɹɾ əɹ ə haɪ leɪɾi kən faɪn ðɛɹ dipəst sikɹəts noʊn tə lɪsənɝz, kən weɪk tə faɪn ðɛmsɛlvz ɔlɹɛɾi hændəɾ oʊvɝ tə ðə sikɝz fəɹ tʃɹuθ. tʃɹuθ ɪz ɔlweɪz dɪfəkəl tə faɪnd, bʌt ðə sikɝz spɛɹ noʊ peɪn ɪn ðɛɹ sɝtʃ, ən ðəl sɝtʃ əz lɔŋ əz ðeɪ θɪŋk ðəɹ ɪz nid. ðeɪ meɪk ɡɹeɪɾ ɛfɝts nɑt tə əlaʊ ə haɪ lɔɹɾ əɹ haɪ leɪɾi tə daɪ ɪn ðɛɹ kɛɹ, ʌv kɔɹs, fəɹ noʊ mænz hæn meɪ sleɪ wʌn ɪn huz veɪnz floʊz ðə blʌɾ ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ. ɪf ði ɛmpɹɛs mʌst ɔɹɾɝ sətʃ ə dɛθ, ði ənfɔɹtʃənət wʌn ɪz pleɪst əlaɪv ɪn ə sɪlkən bæɡ, ən ðət bæɡ hʌŋ oʊvɝ ðə saɪɾ ə ðə taʊɝ ə ðə ɹeɪvənz ən lɛf ðəɹ əntɪl ɪt ɹɑts əweɪ. noʊ sətʃ kɛɹ wəd bi teɪkən fəɹ wʌn sətʃ əz ju. ət ðə kɔɹɾ ə ðə naɪn munz, ɪn sindɑɹ, wʌn sətʃ əz jə kəd bi ɡɪvən tə ðə sikɝz fəɹ ə ʃɪft ə jəɹ aɪ, fəɹ ə mɪsspoʊkən wɝd, fəɹ ə wɪm. ɑɹ jə stɪl iɡɝ?"

"The Empress's Listeners may be anywhere," Turak continued. "They may be anyone. Huan was born and raised in the House of Aladon, and his family for eleven generations before him, yet even he could be a Listener." The man with the braid half made a protesting gesture, before jerking himself back to stillness. "Even a high lord or a high lady can find their deepest secrets known to Listeners, can wake to find themselves already handed over to the Seekers for Truth. Truth is always difficult to find, but the Seekers spare no pain in their search, and they will search as long as they think there is need. They make great efforts not to allow a high lord or high lady to die in their care, of course, for no man's hand may slay one in whose veins flows the blood of Artur Hawkwing. If the Empress must order such a death, the unfortunate one is placed alive in a silken bag, and that bag hung over the side of the Tower of the Ravens and left there until it rots away. No such care would be taken for one such as you. At the Court of the Nine Moons, in Seandar, one such as you could be given to the Seekers for a shift of your eye, for a misspoken word, for a whim. Are you still eager?"

feɪn mænədʒd ə tʃɹɛmbəl ɪn ɪz niz. "aɪ wɪʃ oʊnli tə sɝv ən ædvaɪz, haɪ lɔɹd. aɪ noʊ mʌtʃ ðət meɪ bi jusfəl." ðɪs kɔɹɾ ə sindɑɹ saʊndəɾ ə pleɪs wɛɹ ɪz plænz ən skɪlz wəd faɪn fɝɾəl sɔɪl.

Fain managed a tremble in his knees. "I wish only to serve and advise, High Lord. I know much that may be useful." This court of Seandar sounded a place where his plans and skills would find fertile soil.

"əntɪl aɪ seɪl bæk tə sintʃæn, jəl əmjuz mi wɪð jəɹ teɪlz ə jəɹ fæmli ən ɪts tʃɹədɪʃən. ɪts ə ɹɪlif tə faɪn ə sɛkən mæn ɪn ðɪs laɪt-fɔɹseɪkən læn u kən əmjuz mi, ivən ɪf jə boʊθ tɛl laɪz, əz aɪ səspɛkt. jə meɪ liv mi." noʊ ʌðɝ wɝd wɑz spoʊkən, bʌt ðə ɡɝl wɪð ðə nɪɹli waɪt hɛɹ ən ði ɔlmoʊst-tʃɹænspɛɹən ɹoʊb əpɪɹɾ ɑn kwɪk fit tə nil wɪð daʊnkæs hɛd bɪsaɪd ðə haɪ lɔɹd, ɔfɝɪŋ ə sɪŋɡəl stimɪŋ kʌp ɑn ə lækɝd tʃɹeɪ.

"Until I sail back to Seanchan, you will amuse me with your tales of your family and its tradition. It is a relief to find a second man in this Light-forsaken land who can amuse me, even if you both tell lies, as I suspect. You may leave me." No other word was spoken, but the girl with the nearly white hair and the almost-transparent robe appeared on quick feet to kneel with downcast head beside the High Lord, offering a single steaming cup on a lacquered tray.

"haɪ lɔɹd," feɪn sɛd. ðə mæn wɪð ðə bɹeɪd, hwɑn, tʊk hoʊld ə hɪz ɑɹm, bʌɾ i pʊld lus. hwɑnz maʊθ taɪɾənd æŋɡɹəli əz feɪn meɪɾ ɪz dipəs baʊ jɛt. əl kɪl ɪm sloʊli, jɛs. "haɪ lɔɹd, ðəɹ ɑɹ ðoʊz u fɑloʊ mi. ðeɪ min tə teɪk ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən wɝs, haɪ lɔɹd, ən ðeɪ kænɑt bi mɔɹ ðən ə deɪ əɹ tu bɪhaɪn mi."

"High Lord," Fain said. The man with the braid, Huan, took hold of his arm, but he pulled loose. Huan's mouth tightened angrily as Fain made his deepest bow yet. I will kill him slowly, yes. "High Lord, there are those who follow me. They mean to take the Horn of Valere. Darkfriends and worse, High Lord, and they cannot be more than a day or two behind me."

tʃɹɑk tʊk ə sɪp ə blæk lɪkwəd fɹəm ðə θɪn kʌp bælənst ɑn lɔŋ-neɪl fɪŋɡɝtɪps. "fju dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɹɪmeɪn ɪn sintʃæn. ðoʊz u sɝvaɪv ðə sikɝz fəɹ tʃɹuθ mit ði æks ə ðə hɛdzmən. ɪt maɪt bi əmjuzɪŋ tə miɾ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd."

Turak took a sip of black liquid from the thin cup balanced on long-nailed fingertips. "Few Darkfriends remain in Seanchan. Those who survive the Seekers for Truth meet the axe of the headsman. It might be amusing to meet a Darkfriend."

"haɪ lɔɹd, ðeɪ ɑɹ deɪnʒɝəs. ðeɪv tʃɹɑləks wɪð ðɛm. ðeɪ ɑɹ lɛd baɪ wʌn u kɔlz hɪmsɛlf ɹænd ælθɹ. ə jʌŋ mæn, bʌt vaɪl ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ bɪɑn bɪlif, wɪð ə laɪɪŋ, diviəs tʌŋ. ɪn mɛni pleɪsəz hiz kleɪm tə bi mɛni θɪŋz, bʌɾ ɔlweɪz ðə tʃɹɑləks kʌm wən hiz ðɛɹ, haɪ lɔɹd. ɔlweɪz ðə tʃɹɑləks kʌm . . . ən kɪl."

"High Lord, they are dangerous. They have Trollocs with them. They are led by one who calls himself Rand al'Thor. A young man, but vile in the Shadow beyond belief, with a lying, devious tongue. In many places he has claimed to be many things, but always the Trollocs come when he is there, High Lord. Always the Trollocs come . . . and kill."

"tʃɹɑləks," tʃɹɑk mjuzd. "ðɛɹ wɝ noʊ tʃɹɑləks ɪn sintʃæn. bʌt ði ɑɹmiz ə ðə naɪt hæɾ ʌðɝ ælaɪz. ʌðɝ θɪŋz. aɪ hæv ɔfən wʌndɝɾ ɪf ə ɡɹoʊm kəd kɪl ə tʃɹɑlɑk. əl əv wɑtʃ kɛp fəɹ jəɹ tʃɹɑləks ən jəɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑɾ ənʌðɝ laɪ. ðɪs lænd wɪɹiz mi wɪð bɔɹɾəm." hi saɪɾ ən ɪnheɪl ðə fjumz fɹəm ɪz kʌp.

"Trollocs," Turak mused. "There were no Trollocs in Seanchan. But the Armies of the Night had other allies. Other things. I have often wondered if a grolm could kill a Trolloc. I will have watch kept for your Trollocs and your Darkfriends, if they are not another lie. This land wearies me with boredom." He sighed and inhaled the fumes from his cup.

feɪn lɛt ðə ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ hwɑn pʊl ɪm aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum, hɑɹdli ivən lɪsnɪŋ tə ðə snɑɹəld lɛktʃɝ ɑn wʌt wəd hæpən ɪf i ɛvɝ əɡɛn feɪl tə liv lɔɹd tʃɹɑks pɹɛzəns wən ɡɪvən pɝmɪʃən tə də soʊ. hi bɛɹli noʊɾəst wən i wɑz pʊʃt ɪndə ðə stʃɹit wɪð ə kɔɪn ən ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz tə ɹɪtɝn ɑn ðə mɑɹoʊ. ɹænd ælθɹ wɑz hɪz, naʊ. əl si hɪm dɛɾ ət læst. ən ðən ðə wɝld wɪl peɪ fəɹ wʌt wɑz dʌn tə mi.

Fain let the grimacing Huan pull him out of the room, hardly even listening to the snarled lecture on what would happen if he ever again failed to leave Lord Turak's presence when given permission to do so. He barely noticed when he was pushed into the street with a coin and instructions to return on the morrow. Rand al'Thor was his, now. I will see him dead at last. And then the world will pay for what was done to me.

ɡɪɡəlɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, hi lɛɾ ɪz hɔɹsəz daʊn ɪndə ðə taʊn ɪn sɝtʃ ʌv ən ɪn.

Giggling under his breath, he led his horses down into the town in search of an inn.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾifaɪv


CHAPTER 35

stɛɾɪŋ tsəfu


Stedding Tsofu

ðə ɹɪvɝ hɪlz ɑn wɪtʃ ðə sɪɾi ʌv kɛɹhin stʊd ɡeɪv weɪ tə flæɾɝ lænz ən fɔɹəsts wən ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz hæd ɹɪɾən hæf ə deɪ, ðə ʃaɪnɝənz stɪl wɪð ðɛɹ ɑɹmɝ ɑn ðə pækhɔɹsɪz. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ɹoʊdz wɛɹ ðeɪ wɛnt, oʊnli ə skæɾɝɪŋ ə kɑɹt tʃɹæks, ən fju fɑɹmz əɹ vɪlədʒəz. vɛɹɪn pɹɛs fəɹ spid, ən ɪŋtʃɹ - ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ kɑnstənli ðət ðeɪ wɝ lɛɾɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz bi tʃɹɪkt, ðət feɪn wəd nɛvɝ əv toʊld əm wɛɹ i wɑz ɹɪli ɡoʊɪŋ, jɛt ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ ət ðə seɪm taɪm əbaʊt ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn ði ɑpəzət dɝɛkʃən fɹəm toʊmən hɛd, əz ɪf pɑɹɾ ə hɪm bɪlivd ən toʊmən hɛd wɝ nɑt mʌnθs əweɪ ɪksɛp baɪ ðə weɪ ðeɪ tʊk - ɪŋtʃɹ əblaɪdʒ hɝ. ðə ɡɹeɪ aʊl bænɝ flu ɑn ðə wɪn ə ðɛɹ pæsədʒ.

The river hills on which the city of Cairhien stood gave way to flatter lands and forests when Rand and the others had ridden half a day, the Shienarans still with their armor on the packhorses. There were no roads where they went, only a scattering of cart tracks, and few farms or villages. Verin pressed for speed, and Ingtar - grumbling constantly that they were letting themselves be tricked, that Fain would never have told them where he was really going, yet grumbling at the same time about riding in the opposite direction from Toman Head, as if part of him believed and Toman Head were not months away except by the way they took - Ingtar obliged her. The Gray Owl banner flew on the wind of their passage.

ɹænd ɹoʊd wɪð ɡɹɪm dɪtɝməneɪʃən, əvɔɪɾɪŋ kɑnvɝseɪʃən wɪð vɛɹɪn. hi hæd ðɪs θɪŋ tə də - ðɪs duɾi, ɪŋtʃɹ wʊɾə kɔld ɪt - ən ðən i kəd bi fɹi ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ wʌns ən fəɹ ɔl. pɛɹɪn sim tə ʃɛɹ sʌmθɪŋ ə hɪz mud, stɛɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛɾ ət nʌθɪŋ əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd. wən ðeɪ faɪnəli stɑp fəɹ ðə naɪɾ ət ði ɛdʒ ʌv ə fɔɹəst, wɪð fʊl dɑɹk ɔlmoʊst ɑn ðɛm, pɛɹɪn æsk lɔɪəl kwɛstʃənz əbaʊt ðə stɛɾɪŋ. tʃɹɑləks wəd nɑɾ ɛntɝ ə stɛɾɪŋ; wəd wʊlvz? lɔɪəl ɹɪplaɪd ʃɔɹtli ðəɾ ɪt wɑz oʊnli kɹitʃɝz ə ðə ʃædoʊ ðət wɝ ɹɪlʌktən tə ɛntɝ stɛɾɪŋ. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʌv kɔɹs, sɪns ðeɪ kəd nɑt tʌtʃ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs ɪnsaɪɾ ə stɛɾɪŋ, əɹ tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ði oʊɡiɝ hɪmsɛlf əpɪɹd ðə moʊst ɹɪlʌktən ʌv ɔl tə ɡoʊ tə stɛɾɪŋ tsəfu. mæt wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn u simd iɡɝ, ɔlmoʊs dɛspɝətli soʊ. hɪz skɪn lʊkt əz ɪf i hæd nɑt sin ðə sʌn ɪn ə jɪɹ, ən ɪz tʃiks hæd bɪɡʌn tə ɡoʊ hɑloʊ, ðoʊ hi sɛɾ i fɛlt ɹɛɾi tə ɹʌn ə fʊtʃɹeɪs. vɛɹɪn pʊɾ əɹ hænz ɑn ɪm fəɹ hilɪŋ bɪfɔɹ i ɹoʊld ɪndə hɪz blæŋkəts, ən əɡɛn bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ maʊntəd ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt meɪd noʊ dɪfɝəns ɪn haʊ hi lʊkt. ivən hʊɹɪn fɹaʊnd wən i lʊkt ət mæt.

Rand rode with grim determination, avoiding conversation with Verin. He had this thing to do - this duty, Ingtar would have called it - and then he could be free of Aes Sedai once and for all. Perrin seemed to share something of his mood, staring straight ahead at nothing as they rode. When they finally stopped for the night at the edge of a forest, with full dark almost on them, Perrin asked Loial questions about the stedding. Trollocs would not enter a stedding; would wolves? Loial replied shortly that it was only creatures of the Shadow that were reluctant to enter stedding. And Aes Sedai, of course, since they could not touch the True Source inside a stedding, or channel the One Power. The Ogier himself appeared the most reluctant of all to go to Stedding Tsofu. Mat was the only one who seemed eager, almost desperately so. His skin looked as if he had not seen the sun in a year, and his cheeks had begun to go hollow, though he said he felt ready to run a footrace. Verin put her hands on him for Healing before he rolled into his blankets, and again before they mounted their horses in the morning, but it made no difference in how he looked. Even Hurin frowned when he looked at Mat.

ðə sʌn stʊd haɪ ɑn ðə sɛkən deɪ wən vɛɹɪn sʌɾənli sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl ən lʊkt ɝaʊnd. bɪsaɪd hɝ, ɪŋtʃɹ ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt.

The sun stood high on the second day when Verin suddenly sat up straight in her saddle and looked around. Beside her, Ingtar gave a start.

ɹænd kəd nɑt si ɛniθɪŋ dɪfɹən əbaʊt ðə fɔɹəs naʊ sɝaʊndɪŋ ðɛm. ði ʌndɝɡɹoʊθ wɑz nɑt tu θɪk; ðeɪ hæd faʊn ən izi weɪ ʌndɝ ðə kænəpi ʌv oʊk ən hɪkɝi, blækɡəm ən bitʃ, pɪɹs hɪɹ ən ðəɹ baɪ ə tɔl paɪn əɹ lɛðɝlif, əɹ ðə waɪt slæʃ ʌv ə peɪpɝbɑɹk. bʌɾ əz i fɑloʊd ðɛm, hi sʌɾənli fɛlt ə tʃɪl pæs θɹu hɪm, əz ðoʊ hi hæd lɛpt ɪndə ə wɔɾɝwʊd pɑn ɪn wɪntɝ. ɪt flæʃt θɹu hɪm ən wɑz ɡɔn, livɪŋ bɪhaɪn ə filɪŋ ə ɹəfɹɛʃmənt. ən ðəɹ wɑz ə dʌl ən dɪstən sɛns ə lɔs, tu, ðoʊ hi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən ʌv wʌt.

Rand could not see anything different about the forest now surrounding them. The undergrowth was not too thick; they had found an easy way under the canopy of oak and hickory, blackgum and beech, pierced here and there by a tall pine or leatherleaf, or the white slash of a paperbark. But as he followed them, he suddenly felt a chill pass through him, as though he had leaped into a Waterwood pond in winter. It flashed through him and was gone, leaving behind a feeling of refreshment. And there was a dull and distant sense of loss, too, though he could not imagine of what.

ɛvɹi ɹaɪɾɝ, əz i ɹitʃt ðət pɔɪnt, ɡeɪv ə dʒɝk əɹ meɪd səm ɛkskləmeɪʃən. hʊɹɪnz maʊθ dʒɹɑpt oʊpən, ən ənoʊ wɪspɝd, "blʌɾi, fleɪmɪŋ. . . ." ðən i ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ əz ɪf i kəd nɑt θɪŋk ʌv ɛniθɪŋ ɛls tə seɪ. ðəɹ wɑz ə lʊk ə ɹɛkəɡnɪʃən ɪn pɛɹɪnz jɛloʊ aɪz.

Every rider, as he reached that point, gave a jerk or made some exclamation. Hurin's mouth dropped open, and Uno whispered, "Bloody, flaming. . . ." Then he shook his head as if he could not think of anything else to say. There was a look of recognition in Perrin's yellow eyes.

lɔɪəl tʊk ə dip, sloʊ bɹɛθ ən lɛɾ ɪɾ aʊt. "ɪt filz . . . ɡʊd . . . tə bi bæk ɪn ə stɛɾɪŋ."

Loial took a deep, slow breath and let it out. "It feels . . . good . . . to be back in a stedding."

fɹaʊnɪŋ, ɹænd lʊkt ɝaʊnd. hi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ ə stɛɾɪŋ tə bi sʌmhaʊ dɪfɹənt, bʌɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ ðət wʌn tʃɪl, ðə fɔɹəst wɑz ðə seɪm əz wʌt ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɹaɪɾɪŋ θɹu ɔl deɪ. ðəɹ wɑz ðə sʌɾən sɛns ə biɪŋ ɹɛstəd, ʌv kɔɹs. ðən ən oʊɡiɝ stɛpt aʊt fɹəm bɪhaɪn ən oʊk.

Frowning, Rand looked around. He had expected a stedding to be somehow different, but except for that one chill, the forest was the same as what they had been riding through all day. There was the sudden sense of being rested, of course. Then an Ogier stepped out from behind an oak.

ʃi wɑz ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən lɔɪəl - wɪtʃ mɛnt ʃi stʊd hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz tɔlɝ ðən ɹænd - bʌt wɪð ðə seɪm bɹɔd noʊz ən bɪɡ aɪz, ðə seɪm waɪd maʊθ ən tʌftəɾ ɪɹz. hɝ aɪbɹaʊz wɝ nɑt soʊ lɔŋ əz lɔɪəlz, ðoʊ, ən əɹ fitʃɝz sim dɛləkət bɪsaɪd hɪz, ðə tʌfs ɑn əɹ ɪɹz faɪnɝ. ʃi wɔɹ ə lɔŋ ɡɹin dʒɹɛs ən ə ɡɹin kloʊk ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð flaʊɝz, ən kæɹiɾ ə bʌntʃ ə sɪlvɝbɛl blɑsəmz əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn ɡæðɝɪŋ ðɛm. ʃi lʊkt əɾ əm kɑmli, weɪɾɪŋ.

She was shorter than Loial - which meant she stood head and shoulders taller than Rand - but with the same broad nose and big eyes, the same wide mouth and tufted ears. Her eyebrows were not so long as Loial's, though, and her features seemed delicate beside his, the tufts on her ears finer. She wore a long green dress and a green cloak embroidered with flowers, and carried a bunch of silverbell blossoms as if she had been gathering them. She looked at them calmly, waiting.

lɔɪəl skɹæmbəl daʊn fɹəm ɪz tɔl hɔɹs ən baʊd heɪstəli. ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz dɪd ðə seɪm, ɪf nɑt soʊ kwɪkli əz lɔɪəl; ivən vɛɹɪn ɪnklaɪn əɹ hɛd. lɔɪəl ɡeɪv ðɛɹ neɪmz fɔɹməli, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən ðə neɪm ə hɪz stɛɾɪŋ.

Loial scrambled down from his tall horse and bowed hastily. Rand and the others did the same, if not so quickly as Loial; even Verin inclined her head. Loial gave their names formally, but he did not mention the name of his stedding.

fəɹ ə moʊmən ði oʊɡiɝ ɡɝl - ɹænd wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi wɑz noʊ oʊldɝ ðən lɔɪəl - stʌɾid ðɛm, ðən smaɪld. "bi wɛlkəm tə stɛɾɪŋ tsəfu." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz ə laɪɾɝ vɝʒən ə lɔɪəlz, tu; ðə sɑftɝ ɹʌmbəl ʌv ə smɔlɝ bʌmbəlɪbi. "aɪ æm ɛɹɪθ, dɔɾɝ ʌv ivə dɔɾɝ ʌv eɪlɑɹ. bi wɛlkəm. wɪv hæd soʊ fju hjumən vɪzəɾɝz sɪns ðə stoʊnmeɪsɑnz lɛf kɛɹhin, ən naʊ soʊ mɛni ət wʌns. waɪ, wi ivən hæd səm ə ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl, ðoʊ, ʌv kɔɹs, ðeɪ lɛft wən ðə. . . . oʊ, aɪ tɔk tu mʌtʃ. əl teɪk jə tə ði ɛldɝz. oʊnli. . . ." ʃi sɝtʃt əmʌŋ əm fəɹ ðə wʌn ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ, ən sɛɾəld faɪnəli ɑn vɛɹɪn. "ɛɛs sədaɪ, juv soʊ mɛni mɛn wɪð ju, ən ɑɹmd. kəd jə pliz liv səm ə ðɛm aʊtsaɪd? fɝɡɪv mi, bʌɾ ɪts ɔlweɪz ənsɛɾəlɪŋ tə hæv vɛɹi mɛni ɑɹm hjumənz ɪn ðə stɛɾɪŋ ət wʌns."

For a moment the Ogier girl - Rand was sure she was no older than Loial - studied them, then smiled. "Be welcome to Stedding Tsofu." Her voice was a lighter version of Loial's, too; the softer rumble of a smaller bumblebee. "I am Erith, daughter of Iva daughter of Alar. Be welcome. We have had so few human visitors since the stonemasons left Cairhien, and now so many at once. Why, we even had some of the Traveling People, though, of course, they left when the. . . . Oh, I talk too much. I will take you to the Elders. Only. . . ." She searched among them for the one in charge, and settled finally on Verin. "Aes Sedai, you have so many men with you, and armed. Could you please leave some of them Outside? Forgive me, but it is always unsettling to have very many armed humans in the stedding at once."

"ʌv kɔɹs, ɛɹɪθ," vɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɪŋtʃɹ, wɪl jə si tə ɪt?"

"Of course, Erith," Verin said. "Ingtar, will you see to it?"

ɪŋtʃɹ ɡeɪv ɔɹɾɝz tə ənoʊ, ən soʊ ɪt wɑz ðəɾ i ən hʊɹɪn wɝ ði oʊnli ʃaɪnɝənz tə fɑloʊ ɛɹɪθ dipɝ ɪndə ðə stɛɾɪŋ.

Ingtar gave orders to Uno, and so it was that he and Hurin were the only Shienarans to follow Erith deeper into the stedding.

liɾɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs laɪk ði ʌðɝz, ɹænd lʊkt ʌp əz lɔɪəl keɪm kloʊsɝ, wɪð mɛni ɡlænsɪz əɾ ɛɹɪθ ʌp əhɛd wɪð vɛɹɪn ən ɪŋtʃɹ. hʊɹɪn wɔk mɪdweɪ bɪtwin, stɛɹɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪn əmeɪzmənt, ðoʊ ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ət wʌɾ ɪɡzækli. lɔɪəl bɛn tə spik kwaɪətli. "ɪz ʃi nɑt bjuɾəfəl, ɹænd? ən əɹ vɔɪs sɪŋz."

Leading his horse like the others, Rand looked up as Loial came closer, with many glances at Erith up ahead with Verin and Ingtar. Hurin walked midway between, staring around in amazement, though Rand was not sure at what exactly. Loial bent to speak quietly. "Is she not beautiful, Rand? And her voice sings."

mæt snɪkɝd, bʌt wən lɔɪəl lʊkt əɾ ɪm kwɛstʃənɪŋli, hi sɛd, "vɛɹi pɹɪɾi, lɔɪəl. ə lɪɾəl tɔl fəɹ maɪ teɪst, jə ʌndɝstænd, bʌt vɛɹi pɹɪɾi, aɪm ʃʊɹ."

Mat snickered, but when Loial looked at him questioningly, he said, "Very pretty, Loial. A little tall for my taste, you understand, but very pretty, I'm sure."

lɔɪəl fɹaʊn ənsɝteɪnli, bʌt nɑɾəd. "jɛs, ʃi ɪz." hɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən laɪɾənd. "ɪt dʌz fil ɡʊd tə bi bæk ɪn ə stɛɾɪŋ. nɑt ðət ðə lɔŋɪŋ wɑz teɪkɪŋ mi, jə ʌndɝstænd."

Loial frowned uncertainly, but nodded. "Yes, she is." His expression lightened. "It does feel good to be back in a stedding. Not that the Longing was taking me, you understand."

"ðə lɔŋɪŋ?" pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd, lɔɪəl."

"The Longing?" Perrin said. "I do not understand, Loial."

"wi oʊɡiɝ ɑɹ baʊn tə ðə stɛɾɪŋ, pɛɹɪn. ɪts sɛd ðət bɪfɔɹ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, wi kəd ɡoʊ wɛɹ wi wɪʃt fəɹ əz lɔŋ əz wi wɪʃt, laɪk jə hjumənz, bʌt ðət tʃeɪnʒd wɪð ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ. oʊɡiɝ wɝ skæɾɝd laɪk ɛvɹi ʌðɝ pipəl, ən ðeɪ kəd nɑt faɪn ɛni ʌv ðə stɛɾɪŋ əɡɛn. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz muvd, ɛvɹiθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒd. maʊntənz, ɹɪvɝz, ivən ðə siz."

"We Ogier are bound to the stedding, Perrin. It is said that before the Breaking of the World, we could go where we wished for as long as we wished, like you humans, but that changed with the Breaking. Ogier were scattered like every other people, and they could not find any of the stedding again. Everything was moved, everything changed. Mountains, rivers, even the seas."

"ɛvɹibɑɾi noʊz əbaʊt ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ," mæt sɛɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli. "wʌt dʌz ɪɾ əv tə də wɪð ðɪs - ðɪs lɔŋɪŋ?"

"Everybody knows about the Breaking," Mat said impatiently. "What does it have to do with this - this Longing?"

"ɪt wɑz dʊɹɪŋ ði ɛɡzaɪl, waɪl wi wɑndɝd lɔst, ðət ðə lɔŋɪŋ fɝs keɪm ɑn ʌs. ðə dɪzaɪɝ tə noʊ ðə stɛɾɪŋ wʌns mɔɹ, tə noʊ əɹ hoʊmz əɡɛn. mɛni daɪɾ ʌv ɪt." lɔɪəl ʃʊk ɪz hɛd sædli. "mɔɹ daɪd ðən lɪvd. wən wi faɪnəli bɪɡæn tə faɪn ðə stɛɾɪŋ əɡɛn, wʌn əɾ ə taɪm, ɪn ðə jɪɹz ə ðə kʌvənən ə ðə tɛn neɪʃənz, ɪt simd wi hæd dɪfiɾəd ðə lɔŋɪŋ ət læst, bʌɾ ɪt hæd tʃeɪnʒd ʌs, pʊt sidz ɪn ʌs. naʊ, ɪf ən oʊɡiɝ ɪz aʊtsaɪd tu lɔŋ, ðə lɔŋɪŋ kʌmz əɡɛn; hi bɪɡɪnz tə wikən, ən i daɪz ɪf i dʌz nɑt ɹɪtɝn."

"It was during the Exile, while we wandered lost, that the Longing first came on us. The desire to know the stedding once more, to know our homes again. Many died of it." Loial shook his head sadly. "More died than lived. When we finally began to find the stedding again, one at a time, in the years of the Covenant of the Ten Nations, it seemed we had defeated the Longing at last, but it had changed us, put seeds in us. Now, if an Ogier is Outside too long, the Longing comes again; he begins to weaken, and he dies if he does not return."

"du jə nid tə steɪ hɪɹ əwaɪl?" ɹænd æskt æŋkʃəsli. "ðɛɹz noʊ nid tə kɪl jɝsɛlf tə ɡoʊ wɪð ʌs."

"Do you need to stay here awhile?" Rand asked anxiously. "There's no need to kill yourself to go with us."

"aɪ wɪl noʊ ɪt wən ɪt kʌmz." lɔɪəl læft. "ɪt wɪl bi lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ɪts stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə kɑz hɑɹm tə mi. waɪ, dælɝ spɛn tɛn jɪɹz əmʌŋ ðə si foʊk wɪθaʊɾ ɛvɝ siɪŋ ə stɛɾɪŋ, ən ʃi keɪm seɪfli hoʊm."

"I will know it when it comes." Loial laughed. "It will be long before it is strong enough to cause harm to me. Why, Dalar spent ten years among the Sea Folk without ever seeing a stedding, and she came safely home."

ən oʊɡiɝ wʊmən əpɪɹɾ aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɹiz, pɔzɪŋ ə moʊmən tə spik wɪð ɛɹɪθ ən vɛɹɪn. ʃi lʊkt ɪŋtʃɹ ʌp ən daʊn ən sim tə dɪsmɪs hɪm, wɪtʃ meɪɾ ɪm blɪŋk. hɝ aɪz swɛpt əkɹɔs lɔɪəl, flɪkt oʊvɝ hʊɹɪn ən ði ɛmənz fildɝz, bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɛn ɔf ɪndə ðə fɔɹəst əɡɛn; lɔɪəl sim tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə haɪd bɪhaɪn ɪz hɔɹs. "bɪsaɪdz," hi sɛd, piɹɪŋ kɔʃəsli əkɹɔs ɪz sæɾəl æftɝ hɝ, "ɪɾ ɪz ə dʌl laɪf ɪn ðə stɛɾɪŋ kəmpɛɹd tə tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð θɹi tɑvɝən."

An Ogier woman appeared out of the trees, pausing a moment to speak with Erith and Verin. She looked Ingtar up and down and seemed to dismiss him, which made him blink. Her eyes swept across Loial, flicked over Hurin and the Emond's Fielders, before she went off into the forest again; Loial seemed to be trying to hide behind his horse. "Besides," he said, peering cautiously across his saddle after her, "it is a dull life in the stedding compared to traveling with three ta'veren."

"ɪf jə ɑɹ gɑnə stɑɹt ðəɾ əɡɛn," mæt mʌɾɝd, ən lɔɪəl spoʊk ʌp kwɪkli. "θɹi fɹɛnz, ðɛn. jə ɑɹ maɪ fɹɛnz, aɪ hoʊp."

"If you are going to start that again," Mat muttered, and Loial spoke up quickly. "Three friends, then. You are my friends, I hope."

"aɪ æm," ɹænd sɛd sɪmpli, ən pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd.

"I am," Rand said simply, and Perrin nodded.

mæt læft. "haʊ kəɾ aɪ nɑt bi fɹɛnz wɪð sʌmbɑɾi hu daɪsɪz soʊ bædli?" hi θɹu ʌp ɪz hænz wən ɹænd ən pɛɹɪn lʊkt ət hɪm. "oʊ, ɔl ɹaɪt. aɪ laɪk ju, lɔɪəl. jəɹ maɪ fɹɛnd. dʒʌs doʊnt ɡoʊ ɑn əbaʊt. . . . ɑ! səmtaɪmz jəɹ əz bæd tə bi ɝaʊn əz ɹænd." hɪz vɔɪs sæŋk tə ə mʌɾɝ. "æt list wɝ seɪf hɪɹ ɪn ə stɛɾɪŋ."

Mat laughed. "How could I not be friends with somebody who dices so badly?" He threw up his hands when Rand and Perrin looked at him. "Oh, all right. I like you, Loial. You're my friend. Just don't go on about. . . . Aaah! Sometimes you're as bad to be around as Rand." His voice sank to a mutter. "At least we're safe here in a stedding."

ɹænd ɡɹɪməst. hi nu wʌt mæt mɛnt. hɪɹ ɪn ə stɛɾɪŋ, wɛɹ aɪ kæn tʃænəl.

Rand grimaced. He knew what Mat meant. Here in a stedding, where I can't channel.

pɛɹɪn pʌntʃt mæts ʃoʊldɝ, bʌt lʊk sɑɹi ðəɾ i hæd wən mæt ɡɹɪməst əɾ ɪm wɪð ðət ɡɔn feɪs.

Perrin punched Mat's shoulder, but looked sorry that he had when Mat grimaced at him with that gaunt face.

ɪt wɑz ðə mjuzɪk ɹænd bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə fɝst, ənsin fluts ən fɪɾəlz ɪn ə dʒɑli tun ðət floʊɾəd θɹu ðə tʃɹiz, ən dip vɔɪsəz sɪŋɪŋ ən læfɪŋ.

It was the music Rand became aware of first, unseen flutes and fiddles in a jolly tune that floated through the trees, and deep voices singing and laughing.

"klɪɹ ðə fild, smuð ɪt loʊ.

"Clear the field, smooth it low.

lɛt noʊ wiɾ əɹ stʌbəl stænd.

Let no weed or stubble stand.

hɪɹ wi leɪbɝ, hɪɹ wi tɔɪl, hɪɹ ðə taʊɝɪŋ tʃɹiz wɪl ɡɹoʊ."

Here we labor, here we toil, here the towering trees will grow."

ɔlmoʊst ət ðə seɪm moʊmən i ɹilaɪz ðət ðə hjudʒ ʃeɪp i wɑz siɪŋ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz wɑz ɪtsɛlf ə tʃɹi, wɪð ə ɹɪdʒd, bʌtʃɹəs tʃɹʌŋk ðət mʌst əv bɪn twɛnti peɪsɪz θɪk. ɡeɪpɪŋ, hi fɑloʊɾ ɪɾ ʌp wɪð ɪz aɪz, ʌp θɹu ðə fɔɹəs kænəpi, tə bɹæntʃəz spɹɛɾɪŋ laɪk ðə tɑp ʌv ə dʒaɪɡæntɪk mʌʃɹum ə ɡʊd hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əbʌv ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ən bɪɑn ɪt wɝ tɔlɝ stɪl.

Almost at the same moment he realized that the huge shape he was seeing through the trees was itself a tree, with a ridged, buttressed trunk that must have been twenty paces thick. Gaping, he followed it up with his eyes, up through the forest canopy, to branches spreading like the top of a gigantic mushroom a good hundred paces above the ground. And beyond it were taller still.

"bɝn mi," mæt bɹiðd. "ju kəd bɪl tɛn haʊsəz fɹəm dʒʌst wʌn ə ðoʊz. fɪfti haʊsəz."

"Burn me," Mat breathed. "You could build ten houses from just one of those. Fifty houses."

"kʌt daʊn ə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹi?" lɔɪəl saʊndəd skændəlaɪzd, ən mɔɹ ðən ə lɪɾəl æŋɡɹi. hɪz ɪɹz wɝ stɪf ən stɪl, hɪz lɔŋ aɪbɹaʊz daʊn ɑn ɪz tʃiks. "wi nɛvɝ kʌt daʊn wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹiz, nɑɾ ənlɛs ɪt daɪz, ən ðeɪ ɔlmoʊs nɛvɝ du. fju sɝvaɪv ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ, bʌt səm ə ðə lɑɹdʒəst wɝ sidlɪŋz dʊɹɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz."

"Cut down a Great Tree?" Loial sounded scandalized, and more than a little angry. His ears were stiff and still, his long eyebrows down on his cheeks. "We never cut down one of the Great Trees, not unless it dies, and they almost never do. Few survived the Breaking, but some of the largest were seedlings during the Age of Legends."

"aɪm sɑɹi," mæt sɛd. "aɪ wɑz dʒʌst seɪɪŋ haʊ bɪɡ ðeɪ ɑɹ. aɪ woʊn hɝt jəɹ tʃɹiz." lɔɪəl nɑɾəd, simɪŋ mɑləfaɪd.

"I'm sorry," Mat said. "I was just saying how big they are. I won't hurt your trees." Loial nodded, seeming mollified.

mɔɹ oʊɡiɝ əpɪɹd naʊ, wɔkɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz. moʊst simd ɪntɛn ɑn wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ wɝ əbaʊt; ðoʊ ɔl lʊkt ət ðə nukʌmɝz, ən ivən ɡeɪv ə fɹɛnli nɑɾ əɹ ə smɔl baʊ, nʌn stɑpt əɹ spoʊk. ðeɪ hæɾ ə kjʊɹiəs weɪ ʌv muvɪŋ, ɪn səm mænɝ blɛndɪŋ ə kɛɹfəl dɪlɪbɝætnəs wɪð ən ɔlmoʊs tʃaɪldlaɪk kɛɹfɹi dʒɔɪfəlnəs. ðeɪ nu ən laɪkt u ən wʌt ðeɪ wɝ ən wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ, ən ðeɪ simd ət pis wɪð ðɛmsɛlvz ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɝaʊn ðɛm. ɹænd faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɛnviɪŋ ðɛm.

More Ogier appeared now, walking among the trees. Most seemed intent on whatever they were about; though all looked at the newcomers, and even gave a friendly nod or a small bow, none stopped or spoke. They had a curious way of moving, in some manner blending a careful deliberateness with an almost childlike carefree joyfulness. They knew and liked who and what they were and where they were, and they seemed at peace with themselves and everything around them. Rand found himself envying them.

fju ʌv ði oʊɡiɝ mɛn wɝ ɛni tɔlɝ ðən lɔɪəl, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz izi tə pɪk aʊt ði oʊldɝ mɛn; wʌn ən ɔl ðeɪ wɔɹ mʌstæʃɪz əz lɔŋ əz ðɛɹ dæŋɡəlɪŋ aɪbɹaʊz ən nɛɹoʊ bɪɹdz ʌndɝ ðɛɹ tʃɪnz. ɔl ə ðə jʌŋɡɝ wɝ smuð-ʃeɪvən, laɪk lɔɪəl. mɛni ʌv ðə mɛn wɝ ɪn ðɛɹ ʃɝtslivz, ən kæɹid ʃʌvəlz ən mæɾəks əɹ sɔz ən bʌkəts ə pɪtʃ; ði ʌðɝz wɔɹ pleɪn koʊts ðət bʌɾənd tə ðə nɛk ən flɛɹɾ əbaʊt ðɛɹ niz laɪk kɪls. ðə wɪmən sim tə feɪvɝ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd flaʊɝz, ən mɛni wɔɹ flaʊɝz ɪn ðɛɹ hɛɹ, tu. ði ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi wɑz lɪməɾəd tə ðə kloʊks ə ðə jʌŋɡɝ wɪmən; ði oʊldɝ wɪmənz dʒɹɛsəz wɝ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd, əz wɛl, ən səm wɪmən wɪð ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ hæd flaʊɝz ən vaɪnz fɹəm nɛk tə hɛm. ə hændfʊl ə ði oʊɡiɝ, wɪmən ən ɡɝlz fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt, dɪd sim tə teɪk spɛʃəl noʊɾəs ə lɔɪəl; hi wɔk stɛɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, ɪɹz twɪtʃɪŋ mɔɹ waɪldli ðə fɝðɝ ðeɪ wɛnt.

Few of the Ogier men were any taller than Loial, but it was easy to pick out the older men; one and all they wore mustaches as long as their dangling eyebrows and narrow beards under their chins. All of the younger were smooth-shaven, like Loial. Many of the men were in their shirtsleeves, and carried shovels and mattocks or saws and buckets of pitch; the others wore plain coats that buttoned to the neck and flared about their knees like kilts. The women seemed to favor embroidered flowers, and many wore flowers in their hair, too. The embroidery was limited to the cloaks of the younger women; the older women's dresses were embroidered, as well, and some women with gray hair had flowers and vines from neck to hem. A handful of the Ogier, women and girls for the most part, did seem to take special notice of Loial; he walked staring straight ahead, ears twitching more wildly the further they went.

ɹænd wɑz stɑɹɾəld tə si ən oʊɡiɝ əpɛɹənli wɔkɪŋ ʌp aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, aʊɾ ʌv wʌn ə ðə ɡɹæsi, waɪldflaʊɝ-kʌvɝd maʊnz ðət leɪ skæɾɝd ɔl əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz hɪɹ. ðən i sɔ wɪndoʊz ɪn ðə maʊnz, ən ən oʊɡiɝ wʊmən stændɪŋ ət wʌn əpɛɹənli ɹoʊlɪŋ ə pikɹʌst, ən ɹilaɪzd i wɑz lʊkɪŋ əɾ oʊɡiɝ haʊzɪz. ðə wɪndoʊ fɹeɪmz wɝ stoʊn, bʌt ðeɪ nɑɾ oʊnli sim nætʃɹəl fɔɹmeɪʃənz, ðeɪ əpɪɹd tə hæv bɪn skʌlptɪd baɪ wɪn ən wɔɾɝ oʊvɝ dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz.

Rand was startled to see an Ogier apparently walking up out of the ground, out of one of the grassy, wildflower-covered mounds that lay scattered all among the trees here. Then he saw windows in the mounds, and an Ogier woman standing at one apparently rolling a piecrust, and realized he was looking at Ogier houses. The window frames were stone, but they not only seemed natural formations, they appeared to have been sculpted by wind and water over generations.

ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹiz, wɪð ðɛɹ mæsɪv tʃɹʌŋks ən spɹɛɾɪŋ ɹuts əz θɪk əz hɔɹsəz, niɾəd ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə ɹum bɪtwin ðɛm, bʌt sɛvɹəl ɡɹu ɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə taʊn. dɝt ɹæmps tʊk ðə pæðz oʊvɝ ðə ɹuts. ɪn fækt, əsaɪd fɹəm ðə pæθweɪz, ði oʊnli weɪ tə tɛl taʊn fɹəm fɔɹəst əɾ ə ɡlæns wɑz ə lɑɹdʒ oʊpən speɪs ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə taʊn, ɝaʊnd wʌt kəɾ oʊnli bi ðə stʌmp ʌv wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹiz. nɪɹli ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əkɹɔs, ɪts sɝfəs wɑz pɑlɪʃt əz smuð əz ɛni flɔɹ, ən ðəɹ wɝ stɛps bɪlt ʌp tə ɪɾ ət sɛvɹəl pleɪsəz. ɹænd wɑz ɪmædʒənɪŋ haʊ tɔl ðət tʃɹi hæd bɪn wən ɛɹɪθ spoʊk laʊdli ɪnʌf fəɹ əm ɔl tə hɪɹ.

The Great Trees, with their massive trunks and spreading roots as thick as horses, needed a great deal of room between them, but several grew right in the town. Dirt ramps took the paths over the roots. In fact, aside from the pathways, the only way to tell town from forest at a glance was a large open space in the center of the town, around what could only be the stump of one of the Great Trees. Nearly a hundred paces across, its surface was polished as smooth as any floor, and there were steps built up to it at several places. Rand was imagining how tall that tree had been when Erith spoke loudly enough for them all to hear.

"hɪɹ kʌm əɹ ʌðɝ ɡɛsts."

"Here come our other guests."

θɹi hjumən wɪmən keɪm wɔkɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə hjudʒ stʌmp. ðə jʌŋɡəst wɑz kæɹiɪŋ ə wʊɾən boʊl.

Three human women came walking around the side of the huge stump. The youngest was carrying a wooden bowl.

"il," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd. "meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ. əz wɛl aɪ dɪd liv mæsimə wɪð ði ʌðɝz." jɛɾ i stɛpt əweɪ fɹəm vɛɹɪn ən ɛɹɪθ, ən ɹitʃt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ tə lusən ɪz sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪts skæbɝd.

"Aiel," Ingtar said. "Maidens of the Spear. As well I did leave Masema with the others." Yet he stepped away from Verin and Erith, and reached over his shoulder to loosen his sword in its scabbard.

ɹænd stʌɾid ði il wɪð ən ənizi kjʊɹiɑsəɾi. ðeɪ wɝ wʌt tu mɛni pipəl hæd tʃɹaɪd tə tɛl ɪm i wɑz. tu ʌv ðə wɪmən wɝ mətʃʊɹ, ði ʌðɝ lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ə ɡɝl, bʌɾ ɔl θɹi wɝ tɔl fəɹ wɪmən. ðɛɹ ʃɔɹt-kʌt hɛɹ ɹeɪnʒd fɹəm ə ɹɛɾɪʃ bɹaʊn tə ɔlmoʊst ɡoʊldən, wɪð ə nɛɹoʊ, ʃoʊldɝ-lɛŋθ teɪl lɛf lɔŋ ət ðə bæk. ðeɪ wɔɹ lus bɹitʃɪz tʌkt ɪndə sɑf buts, ən ɔl ðɛɹ kloʊðz wɝ səm ʃeɪɾ ə bɹaʊn əɹ ɡɹeɪ əɹ ɡɹin; hi θɔt ðə ɡɑɹməns wəd feɪɾ ɪndə ɹɑk əɹ wʊdz ɔlmoʊst əz wɛl əz ə wɔɹɾɝz kloʊk. ʃɔɹt baʊz poʊkt oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, kwɪvɝz ən lɔŋ naɪvz hʌŋ ət ðɛɹ bɛls, ən itʃ kæɹiɾ ə smɔl, ɹaʊnd ʃild ə haɪɾ ən ə klʌstɝ ə spɪɹz wɪð ʃɔɹt ʃæfs ən lɔŋ pɔɪns. ivən ðə jʌŋɡəs muvd wɪð ə ɡɹeɪs ðət sədʒɛstəd ʃi nu haʊ tə juz ðə wɛpənz ʃi kæɹid.

Rand studied the Aiel with an uneasy curiosity. They were what too many people had tried to tell him he was. Two of the women were mature, the other little more than a girl, but all three were tall for women. Their short-cut hair ranged from a reddish brown to almost golden, with a narrow, shoulder-length tail left long at the back. They wore loose breeches tucked into soft boots, and all their clothes were some shade of brown or gray or green; he thought the garments would fade into rock or woods almost as well as a Warder's cloak. Short bows poked over their shoulders, quivers and long knives hung at their belts, and each carried a small, round shield of hide and a cluster of spears with short shafts and long points. Even the youngest moved with a grace that suggested she knew how to use the weapons she carried.

əbɹʌpli ðə wɪmən bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə ði ʌðɝ hjumənz; ðeɪ simd əz stɑɹɾəld ət biɪŋ stɑɹɾəld əz ðeɪ dɪɾ ət ðə saɪɾ ə ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz, bʌt ðeɪ muv laɪk laɪtnɪŋ. ðə jʌŋɡəst wʌn ʃaʊɾəd, "ʃaɪnɝənz!" ən tɝn tə sɛt ðə boʊl kɛɹfəli bɪhaɪn hɝ. ði ʌðɝ tu kwɪkli lɪftəd bɹaʊn klɔθs fɹəm ɝaʊn ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ɹæpɪŋ əm ɝaʊn ðɛɹ hɛdz ɪnstɛd. ði oʊldɝ wɪmən wɝ ɹeɪzɪŋ blæk veɪlz əkɹɔs ðɛɹ feɪsəz, haɪɾɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ bʌt ðɛɹ aɪz, ən ðə jʌŋɡəst stʃɹeɪɾənd tə ɪməteɪt ðɛm. kɹaʊtʃɪŋ loʊ, ðeɪ ədvænst əɾ ə dɪlɪbɝɪt peɪs, ʃilz hɛl fɔɹwɝd wɪð ðɛɹ klʌstɝz ə spɪɹz, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə wʌn itʃ wʊmən hɛld ɹɛɾi ɪn əɹ ʌðɝ hænd.

Abruptly the women became aware of the other humans; they seemed as startled at being startled as they did at the sight of Rand and the others, but they moved like lightning. The youngest one shouted, "Shienarans!" and turned to set the bowl carefully behind her. The other two quickly lifted brown cloths from around their shoulders, wrapping them around their heads instead. The older women were raising black veils across their faces, hiding everything but their eyes, and the youngest straightened to imitate them. Crouching low, they advanced at a deliberate pace, shields held forward with their clusters of spears, except for the one each woman held ready in her other hand.

ɪŋtʃɹz sɔɹd keɪm aʊɾ ʌv ɪts ʃiθ. "stæn klɪɹ, ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɛɹɪθ, stæn klɪɹ." hʊɹɪn snætʃt aʊɾ ɪz sɔɹd-bɹeɪkɝ, weɪvɝd bɪtwin kʌdʒəl ən sɔɹd fəɹ ɪz ʌðɝ hænd; æftɝ ənʌðɝ ɡlæns ət ði ilz spɪɹz, hi tʃoʊz ðə sɔɹd.

Ingtar's sword came out of its sheath. "Stand clear, Aes Sedai. Erith, stand clear." Hurin snatched out his sword-breaker, wavered between cudgel and sword for his other hand; after another glance at the Aiel's spears, he chose the sword.

"ju mʌs nɑt," ði oʊɡiɝ ɡɝl pɹətɛstəd. ɹɪŋɪŋ əɹ hænz, ʃi tɝn fɹəm ɪŋtʃɹ tə ði il ən bæk. "ju mʌs nɑt."

"You must not," the Ogier girl protested. Wringing her hands, she turned from Ingtar to the Aiel and back. "You must not."

ɹænd ɹilaɪz ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd wɑz ɪn ɪz hænz. pɛɹɪn hæɾ ɪz æks hæf aʊɾ ə ðə lup əɾ ɪz bɛlt ən wɑz hɛzəteɪɾɪŋ, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd.

Rand realized the heron-mark blade was in his hands. Perrin had his axe half out of the loop at his belt and was hesitating, shaking his head.

"ɑɹ jə tu kɹeɪzi?" mæt dɪmændəd. hɪz baʊ stɪl slæntəɾ əkɹɔs ɪz bæk. "aɪ doʊn kɛɹ ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ il, ðəɹ wɪmən."

"Are you two crazy?" Mat demanded. His bow still slanted across his back. "I don't care if they are Aiel, they're women."

"stɑp ðɪs!" vɛɹɪn dɪmændəd. "stɑp ðɪs ɪmiɾiətli!" ði il nɛvɝ bɹoʊk stʃɹaɪd, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ klɛntʃt əɹ fɪsts ɪn fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən.

"Stop this!" Verin demanded. "Stop this immediately!" The Aiel never broke stride, and the Aes Sedai clenched her fists in frustration.

mæt muv bæk tə pʊɾ ə fʊɾ ɪn ɪz stɝəp. "aɪm livɪŋ," hi ənaʊnst. "ju hɪɹ mi? aɪm nɑt steɪɪŋ tə lɛɾ əm stɪk ðoʊz θɪŋz ɪn mi, ən aɪm nɑt gɑnə ʃuɾ ə wʊmən!"

Mat moved back to put a foot in his stirrup. "I'm leaving," he announced. "You hear me? I'm not staying to let them stick those things in me, and I am not going to shoot a woman!"

"ðə pækt!" lɔɪəl wɑz ʃaʊɾɪŋ. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə pækt!" ɪt hæd noʊ mɔɹ ɪfɛk ðən ðə kəntɪnjud pliz fɹəm vɛɹɪn ən ɛɹɪθ.

"The Pact!" Loial was shouting. "Remember the Pact!" It had no more effect than the continued pleas from Verin and Erith.

ɹænd noʊɾəst ðət boʊθ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ði oʊɡiɝ ɡɝl wɝ kipɪŋ wɛl aʊɾ ə ði ilz weɪ. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf mæt hæd ðə ɹaɪɾ aɪdiə. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i kəd hɝɾ ə wʊmən ivən ɪf ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɪl hɪm. wʌt dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪm wɑz ðə θɔt ðəɾ ivən ɪf i dɪd mænədʒ tə ɹitʃ ɹɛdz sæɾəl, ði il wɝ naʊ noʊ mɔɹ ðən θɝɾi peɪsɪz əweɪ. hi səspɛktəd ðoʊz ʃɔɹt spɪɹz kəd bi θɹoʊn ðət fɑɹ. əz ðə wɪmən keɪm kloʊsɝ, stɪl kɹaʊtʃɪŋ, spɪɹz ɹɛɾi, hi stɑpt wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt nɑt hɝɾɪŋ əm ən bɪɡæn wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt haʊ tə stɑp əm fɹəm hɝɾɪŋ hɪm.

Rand noticed that both the Aes Sedai and the Ogier girl were keeping well out of the Aiel's way. He wondered if Mat had the right idea. He was not sure he could hurt a woman even if she was trying to kill him. What decided him was the thought that even if he did manage to reach Red's saddle, the Aiel were now no more than thirty paces away. He suspected those short spears could be thrown that far. As the women came closer, still crouching, spears ready, he stopped worrying about not hurting them and began worrying about how to stop them from hurting him.

nɝvəsli, hi sɔt ðə vɔɪd, ən ɪt keɪm. ən ðə dɪstən θɔt floʊɾəd aʊtsaɪɾ ɪt ðəɾ ɪt wɑz oʊnli ðə vɔɪd. ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪɾɪn wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ. ði ɛmptinəs wɑz mɔɹ ɛmpti ðən i ɛvɝ ɹɪmɛmbɝd, væstɝ, laɪk ə hʌŋɡɝ ɡɹeɪɾ ɪnʌf tə kənsum hɪm. ə hʌŋɡɝ fəɹ mɔɹ; ðəɹ wɑz səpoʊz tə bi sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ.

Nervously, he sought the void, and it came. And the distant thought floated outside it that it was only the void. The glow of saidin was not there. The emptiness was more empty than he ever remembered, vaster, like a hunger great enough to consume him. A hunger for more; there was supposed to be something more.

əbɹʌpli ən oʊɡiɝ stʃɹoʊɾ ɪn bɪtwin ðə tu ɡɹups, hɪz nɛɹoʊ bɪɹd kwɪvɝɪŋ. "wʌɾ ɪz ðə minɪŋ ə ðɪs? pʊɾ ʌp jəɹ wɛpənz." hi saʊndəd skændəlaɪzd. "fɔɹ ju" - hɪz ɡlɛɹ tʊk ɪn ɪŋtʃɹ ən hʊɹɪn, ɹænd ən pɛɹɪn, ən dɪd nɑt spɛɹ mæt fəɹ ɔl ɪz ɛmpti hænz - "ðɛɹ ɪz səm ɪkskjus, bʌt fəɹ jə - " hi ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn ði il wɪmən, hu hæd stɑp ðɛɹ ədvæns. "hæv jə fɝɡɑɾən ðə pækt?"

Abruptly an Ogier strode in between the two groups, his narrow beard quivering. "What is the meaning of this? Put up your weapons." He sounded scandalized. "For you" - his glare took in Ingtar and Hurin, Rand and Perrin, and did not spare Mat for all his empty hands - "there is some excuse, but for you - " He rounded on the Aiel women, who had stopped their advance. "Have you forgotten the Pact?"

ðə wɪmən ənkʌvɝd ðɛɹ hɛdz ən feɪsəz soʊ heɪstəli ðəɾ ɪt sim ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɹitɛn ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ bɪn kʌvɝd. ðə ɡɝlz feɪs wɑz bɹaɪt ɹɛd, ən ði ʌðɝ wɪmən lʊkt əbæʃt. wʌn ə ði oʊldɝ wɪmən, ðə wʌn wɪð ðə ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ, sɛd, "fɝɡɪv ʌs, tʃɹibɹəðɝ. wi ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə pækt, ən wi wəd nɑɾ əv bɛɹd stil, bʌt wəɹ ɪn ðə læn ə ðə tʃɹikɪlɝz, wɛɹ ɛvɹi hæn ɪz əɡɛnst ʌs, ən wi sɔ ɑɹmd mɛn." hɝ aɪz wɝ ɡɹeɪ, ɹænd sɔ, laɪk ɪz oʊn.

The women uncovered their heads and faces so hastily that it seemed they were trying to pretend they had never been covered. The girl's face was bright red, and the other women looked abashed. One of the older women, the one with the reddish hair, said, "Forgive us, Treebrother. We remember the Pact, and we would not have bared steel, but we are in the land of the Treekillers, where every hand is against us, and we saw armed men." Her eyes were gray, Rand saw, like his own.

"ju ɑɹ ɪn ə stɛɾɪŋ, ɹiən," ði oʊɡiɝ sɛd dʒɛnli. "ɛvɹiwʌn ɪz seɪf ɪn ðə stɛɾɪŋ, lɪɾəl sɪstɝ. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ faɪɾɪŋ hɪɹ, ən noʊ hæn ɹeɪzd əɡɛnst ənʌðɝ." ʃi nɑɾəd, əʃeɪmd, ən ði oʊɡiɝ lʊkt əɾ ɪŋtʃɹ ən ði ʌðɝz.

"You are in a stedding, Rhian," the Ogier said gently. "Everyone is safe in the stedding, little sister. There is no fighting here, and no hand raised against another." She nodded, ashamed, and the Ogier looked at Ingtar and the others.

ɪŋtʃɹ ʃiðd ɪz sɔɹd, ən ɹænd dɪd ðə seɪm, ðoʊ nɑt soʊ kwɪkli əz hʊɹɪn, hu lʊkt ɔlmoʊst əz ɪmbɛɹəst əz ði il. pɛɹɪn hæd nɛvɝ ɡɑɾən ɪz æks ɔl ðə weɪ aʊt. əz i tʊk hæn fɹəm hɪlt, ɹænd lɛt ðə vɔɪd ɡoʊ, tu, ən ʃɪvɝd. ðə vɔɪd wɛnt, bʌɾ ɪt lɛf bɪhaɪn ə sloʊli feɪɾɪŋ ɛkoʊ ʌv ði ɛmptinəs ɔl θɹu hɪm, ən ə dɪzaɪɝ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ tə fɪl ɪt.

Ingtar sheathed his sword, and Rand did the same, though not so quickly as Hurin, who looked almost as embarrassed as the Aiel. Perrin had never gotten his axe all the way out. As he took hand from hilt, Rand let the void go, too, and shivered. The void went, but it left behind a slowly fading echo of the emptiness all through him, and a desire for something to fill it.

ði oʊɡiɝ tɝn tə vɛɹɪn ən baʊd. "ɛɛs sədaɪ, aɪm dʒun, sʌn ə ləsəl sʌn ə lɔd. aɪ hæv kʌm tə teɪk jə tə ði ɛldɝz. ðeɪ wəd noʊ waɪ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ kʌmz əmʌŋ ʌs, wɪð ɑɹmd mɛn ən wʌn ʌv əɹ oʊn juðz." lɔɪəl hʌntʃt ɪz ʃoʊldɝz əz ɪf tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪsəpɪɹ.

The Ogier turned to Verin and bowed. "Aes Sedai, I am Juin, son of Lacel son of Laud. I have come to take you to the Elders. They would know why an Aes Sedai comes among us, with armed men and one of our own youths." Loial hunched his shoulders as if trying to disappear.

vɛɹɪn ɡeɪv ði il ə ɹɪɡɹɛtfəl lʊk, əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə tɔk wɪð ðɛm, ðən moʊʃən dʒun tə lid, ən i tʊk əɹ əweɪ wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ wɝɾ əɹ ivən ðə fɝs lʊk ət lɔɪəl.

Verin gave the Aiel a regretful look, as if she wanted to talk with them, then motioned Juin to lead, and he took her away without another word or even the first look at Loial.

fəɹ ə fju moʊməns, ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz stʊd feɪsɪŋ ðə θɹi il wɪmən ənizəli. ət list, ɹænd nu hi wɑz ənizi. ɪŋtʃɹ sim stɛɾi əz ə stoʊn, wɪð noʊ mɔɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən ðən wʌn. ði il maɪɾ əv ənveɪl ðɛɹ feɪsəz, bʌt ðeɪ stɪl hæd spɪɹz ɪn ðɛɹ hænz, ən ðeɪ stʌɾid ðə fɔɹ mɛn əz ðoʊ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə si ɪnsaɪd ðɛm. ɹænd ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ ɹəsivd ɪnkɹisɪŋli æŋɡɹi lʊks. hi hɝd ðə jʌŋɡəst wʊmən mʌɾɝ, "hi ɪz wɛɹɪŋ ə sɔɹd," ɪn toʊnz ə mɪŋɡəl hɔɹɝ ən kəntɛmpt. ðən ðə θɹi wɝ livɪŋ, stɑpɪŋ tə ɹɪtʃɹiv ðə wʊɾən boʊl ən lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz ət ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz əntɪl ðeɪ vænɪʃt əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz.

For a few moments, Rand and the others stood facing the three Aiel women uneasily. At least, Rand knew he was uneasy. Ingtar seemed steady as a stone, with no more expression than one. The Aiel might have unveiled their faces, but they still had spears in their hands, and they studied the four men as though trying to see inside them. Rand in particular received increasingly angry looks. He heard the youngest woman mutter, "He is wearing a sword," in tones of mingled horror and contempt. Then the three were leaving, stopping to retrieve the wooden bowl and looking over their shoulders at Rand and the others until they vanished among the trees.

"meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ," ɪŋtʃɹ mʌɾɝd. "aɪ nɛvɝ θɔt ðeɪd stɑp wʌns ðeɪ veɪl ðɛɹ feɪsəz. sɝɾənli nɑt fəɹ ə fju wɝdz." hi lʊkt ət ɹænd ən ɪz tu fɹɛnz. "ju ʃəd si ə tʃɑɹdʒ baɪ ɹɛd ʃilz, əɹ stoʊn dɑɡz. əz izi tə stɑp əz ən ævəlæntʃ."

"Maidens of the Spear," Ingtar muttered. "I never thought they'd stop once they veiled their faces. Certainly not for a few words." He looked at Rand and his two friends. "You should see a charge by Red Shields, or Stone Dogs. As easy to stop as an avalanche."

"ðeɪ wəd nɑt bɹeɪk ðə pækt wʌns ɪt wɑz ɹɪkɔl tə ðɛm," ɛɹɪθ sɛd, smaɪlɪŋ. "ðeɪ keɪm fəɹ sʌŋ wʊd." ə noʊɾ ə pɹaɪɾ ɛntɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs. "wi hæv tu tʃɹisɪŋɝz ɪn stɛɾɪŋ tsəfu. ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹɛɹ, naʊ. aɪ hæv hɝd ðət stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ hæz ə jʌŋ tʃɹisɪŋʒɝ u ɪz vɛɹi tæləntəd, bʌt wɪv tu." lɔɪəl blʌʃt, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə noʊɾəs. "ɪf jəl kʌm wɪð mi, əl ʃoʊ jə wɛɹ jə meɪ weɪɾ əntɪl ði ɛldɝz əv spoʊkən."

"They would not break the Pact once it was recalled to them," Erith said, smiling. "They came for sung wood." A note of pride entered her voice. "We have two Treesingers in Stedding Tsofu. They are rare, now. I have heard that Stedding Shangtai has a young Treesinger who is very talented, but we have two." Loial blushed, but she did not appear to notice. "If you will come with me, I will show you where you may wait until the Elders have spoken."

əz ðeɪ fɑloʊd hɝ, pɛɹɪn mɝmɝd, "sʌŋ wʊd, maɪ lɛft fʊt. ðoʊz il ɑɹ sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ i hu kʌmz wɪð ðə dɔn."

As they followed her, Perrin murmured, "Sung wood, my left foot. Those Aiel are searching for He Who Comes With the Dawn."

ən mæt æɾəd dʒɹaɪli, "ðeɪɹ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ju, ɹænd."

And Mat added dryly, "They're looking for you, Rand."

"fɔɹ mi! ðəɾ ɪz kɹeɪzi. wʌt meɪks jə θɪŋk - "

"For me! That is crazy. What makes you think - "

hi kʌɾ ɔf əz ɛɹɪθ ʃoʊɾ əm daʊn ðə stɛps ʌv ə waɪldflaʊɝ-kʌvɝd haʊs əpɛɹənli sɛɾ əsaɪd fəɹ hjumən ɡɛsts. ðə ɹumz wɝ twɛnti peɪsɪz fɹəm stoʊn wɔl tə stoʊn wɔl, wɪð peɪntəd silɪŋz ə ɡʊd tu spænz əbʌv ðə flɔɹ, bʌt ði oʊɡiɝ hæd dʌn ðɛɹ bɛs meɪkɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ðət wəd bi kʌmftəɹbəl fəɹ hjumənz. ivən soʊ, ðə fɝnɪtʃɝ wɑz ə lɪɾəl tu lɑɹdʒ fəɹ kʌmfɝt, ðə tʃɛɹz tɔl ɪnʌf tə lɪft ə mænz hilz ɔf ðə flɔɹ, ðə teɪbəl haɪɝ ðən ɹændz weɪst. hʊɹɪn, ət list, cʊɾə wɔkt ɪɹɛkt ɪndə ðə stoʊn faɪɝpleɪs, wɪtʃ sim tə hæv bɪn wɔɹn baɪ wɔɾɝ ɹæðɝ ðən meɪd baɪ hænz. ɛɹɪθ aɪd lɔɪəl daʊtfəli, bʌɾ i weɪvd əweɪ hɝ kənsɝn ən pʊld wʌn ə ðə tʃɛɹz ɪndə ðə kɔɹnɝ list izəli sin fɹəm ðə dɔɹ.

He cut off as Erith showed them down the steps of a wildflower-covered house apparently set aside for human guests. The rooms were twenty paces from stone wall to stone wall, with painted ceilings a good two spans above the floor, but the Ogier had done their best making something that would be comfortable for humans. Even so, the furniture was a little too large for comfort, the chairs tall enough to lift a man's heels off the floor, the table higher than Rand's waist. Hurin, at least, could have walked erect into the stone fireplace, which seemed to have been worn by water rather than made by hands. Erith eyed Loial doubtfully, but he waved away her concern and pulled one of the chairs into the corner least easily seen from the door.

əz sun əz ði oʊɡiɝ ɡɝl lɛft, ɹænd ɡɑt mæt ən pɛɹɪn oʊvɝ tə wʌn saɪd. "wʌt dʒju min ðəɹ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ mi? waɪ? fəɹ wʌt ɹizən? ðeɪ lʊkt ɹaɪɾ ət mi, ən wɛn əweɪ."

As soon as the Ogier girl left, Rand got Mat and Perrin over to one side. "What do you mean they're looking for me? Why? For what reason? They looked right at me, and went away."

"ðeɪ lʊkt ət ju," mæt sɛd wɪð ə ɡɹɪn, "laɪk jə hædn beɪðd ɪn ə mʌnθ, ən hæd daʊs jɝsɛlf wɪð ʃipdɪp bɪsaɪdz." hɪz ɡɹɪn feɪɾəd. "bʌt ðeɪ kəd bi lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ju. wi mɛɾ ənʌðɝ il."

"They looked at you," Mat said with a grin, "like you hadn't bathed in a month, and had doused yourself with sheepdip besides." His grin faded. "But they could be looking for you. We met another Aiel."

ɹænd lɪsən ɪn ɡɹoʊɪŋ əmeɪzmən tə ðɛɹ teɪl ə ðə miɾɪŋ ɪn kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ. mæt toʊl moʊst ʌv ɪt, wɪð pɛɹɪn pʊɾɪŋ ɪn ə kɝɛktɪŋ wɝd naʊ ən əɡɛn wən i ɛmbɛlɪʃt tu mʌtʃ. mæt meɪɾ ə ɡɹeɪt ʃoʊ ʌv haʊ deɪnʒɝəs ði ilmən hæd bɪn, ən haʊ kloʊz ðə miɾɪŋ hæd kʌm tə ə faɪt.

Rand listened in growing amazement to their tale of the meeting in Kinslayer's Dagger. Mat told most of it, with Perrin putting in a correcting word now and again when he embellished too much. Mat made a great show of how dangerous the Aielman had been, and how close the meeting had come to a fight.

"æn sɪns jəɹ ði oʊnli il wi noʊ," hi fɪnɪʃt, "wɛl, ɪt kəd bi ju. ɪŋtʃɹ sɛz il nɛvɝ lɪv aʊtsaɪd ðə weɪst, soʊ jə mʌs bi ði oʊnli wʌn."

"And since you're the only Aiel we know," he finished, "well, it could be you. Ingtar says Aiel never live outside the Waste, so you must be the only one."

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðæts fʌni, mæt," ɹænd ɡɹaʊld. "aɪ æm nɑɾ ən il." ði æmɪɝlɪn sɛd jə ɑɹ. ɪŋtʃɹ θɪŋks jə ɑɹ. tæm sɛd. . . . hi wɑz sɪk, fivɝd. ðeɪ hæd sɛvɝd ðə ɹuts i hæd θɔɾ i hæd, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən tæm bɪtwin ðɛm, ðoʊ tæm hæd bɪn tu sɪk tə noʊ wʌɾ i wɑz seɪɪŋ. ðeɪ hæd kʌɾ ɪm lus tə tʌmbəl bɪfɔɹ ðə wɪnd, ðən ɔfɝɾ ɪm sʌmθɪŋ nu tə hoʊld ɑn tə. fɔls dʒɹæɡən. il. hi kəd nɑt kleɪm ðoʊz fəɹ ɹuts. hi wəd nɑt. "meɪbi aɪ doʊn bɪlɔŋ tə ɛniwʌn. bʌt ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɪz ði oʊnli hoʊm aɪ noʊ."

"I don't think that's funny, Mat," Rand growled. "I am not an Aiel." The Amyrlin said you are. Ingtar thinks you are. Tam said. . . . He was sick, fevered. They had severed the roots he had thought he had, the Aes Sedai and Tam between them, though Tam had been too sick to know what he was saying. They had cut him loose to tumble before the wind, then offered him something new to hold on to. False Dragon. Aiel. He could not claim those for roots. He would not. "Maybe I don't belong to anyone. But the Two Rivers is the only home I know."

"aɪ dɪdn min ɛniθɪŋ," mæt pɹətɛstəd. "ɪts dʒʌst. . . . bɝn mi, ɪŋtʃɹ sɛz jə ɑɹ. mæsimə sɛz jə ɑɹ. jɝaɪn cʊɾə bɪn jəɹ kʌzən, ən ɪf ɹiən pʊɾ ɑn ə dʒɹɛs ən sɛd ʃi wɑz jəɹ ænt, jud bɪliv ɪt jɝsɛlf. oʊ, ɔl ɹaɪt. doʊn lʊk ət mi laɪk ðæt, pɛɹɪn. ɪf i wɑns tə seɪ hi ɪzənt, ɔl ɹaɪt. wʌt dɪfɝəns dʌz ɪt meɪk, ɛniweɪ?" pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

"I didn't mean anything," Mat protested. "It's just. . . . Burn me, Ingtar says you are. Masema says you are. Urien could have been your cousin, and if Rhian put on a dress and said she was your aunt, you'd believe it yourself. Oh, all right. Don't look at me like that, Perrin. If he wants to say he isn't, all right. What difference does it make, anyway?" Perrin shook his head.

oʊɡiɝ ɡɝlz bɹɔt wɔɾɝ ən taʊəlz fəɹ wɑʃɪŋ feɪsəz ən hænz, ən tʃiz ən fɹuɾ ən waɪn, wɪð pjuɾɝ ɡoʊbləts ə lɪɾəl tu lɑɹdʒ tə bi kʌmftəɹbəl ɪn ðə hænd. ʌðɝ oʊɡiɝ wɪmən keɪm, tu, ðɛɹ dʒɹɛsəz ɔl ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd. wʌn baɪ wʌn ðeɪ əpɪɹd, ə dʌzən ə ðɛm ɔl toʊld, tə æsk ɪf ðə hjumənz wɝ kʌmftəɹbəl, ɪf ðeɪ niɾəd ɛniθɪŋ. itʃ tɝn əɹ ətɛnʃənz tə lɔɪəl dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ʃi lɛft. hi ɡeɪv ɪz ænsɝz ɹɪspɛkfəli bʌɾ ɪn əz fju wɝdz əz ɹænd hæɾ ɛvɝ hɝɾ ɪm juz, stændɪŋ wɪð ən oʊɡiɝ-saɪzd, wʊd-baʊn bʊk klʌtʃt tə hɪz tʃɛs laɪk ə ʃild, ən wən ðeɪ wɛnt, hi hʌɾəld ɪn ɪz tʃɛɹ wɪð ðə bʊk hɛld ʌp ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz feɪs. ðə bʊks ɪn ðə haʊs wɝ wʌn θɪŋ nɑt saɪz fəɹ hjumənz.

Ogier girls brought water and towels for washing faces and hands, and cheese and fruit and wine, with pewter goblets a little too large to be comfortable in the hand. Other Ogier women came, too, their dresses all embroidered. One by one they appeared, a dozen of them all told, to ask if the humans were comfortable, if they needed anything. Each turned her attentions to Loial just before she left. He gave his answers respectfully but in as few words as Rand had ever heard him use, standing with an Ogier-sized, wood-bound book clutched to his chest like a shield, and when they went, he huddled in his chair with the book held up in front of his face. The books in the house were one thing not sized for humans.

"dʒʌst smɛl ðɪs ɛɹ, lɔɹd ɹænd," hʊɹɪn sɛd, fɪlɪŋ ɪz lʌŋz wɪð ə smaɪl. hɪz fit dæŋɡəl fɹəm wʌn ə ðə tʃɛɹz ət ðə teɪbəl; hi swʌŋ əm laɪk ə bɔɪ. "aɪ nɛvɝ θɔt moʊs pleɪsəz smɛl bæd, bʌt ðɪs. . . . lɔɹd ɹænd, aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðɛɹz ɛvɝ bɪn ɛni kɪlɪŋ hɪɹ. nɑɾ ivən ɛni hɝɾɪŋ, ɪksɛp baɪ æksəɾənt."

"Just smell this air, Lord Rand," Hurin said, filling his lungs with a smile. His feet dangled from one of the chairs at the table; he swung them like a boy. "I never thought most places smelled bad, but this. . . . Lord Rand, I don't think there's ever been any killing here. Not even any hurting, except by accident."

"ðə stɛɾɪŋ ɑɹ səpoʊz tə bi seɪf fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn," ɹænd sɛd. hi wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ lɔɪəl. "ðæts wʌt ðə stɔɹiz seɪ, ɛniweɪ." hi swɑloʊɾ ə læs bɪɾ ʌv waɪt tʃiz ən wɛn oʊvɝ tə ði oʊɡiɝ. mæt fɑloʊd wɪð ə ɡɑbləɾ ɪn ɪz hænd. "wʌts ðə mæɾɝ, lɔɪəl?" ɹænd sɛd. "juv bɪn əz nɝvəs əz ə kæɾ ɪn ə dɔɡjɑɹɾ ɛvɝ sɪns wi keɪm hɪɹ."

"The stedding are supposed to be safe for everyone," Rand said. He was watching Loial. "That's what the stories say, anyway." He swallowed a last bit of white cheese and went over to the Ogier. Mat followed with a goblet in his hand. "What's the matter, Loial?" Rand said. "You've been as nervous as a cat in a dogyard ever since we came here."

"ɪɾ ɪz nʌθɪŋ," lɔɪəl sɛd, ɡɪvɪŋ ðə dɔɹ ən ənizi ɡlæns fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ.

"It is nothing," Loial said, giving the door an uneasy glance from the corner of his eye.

"ɑɹ jə əfɹeɪd ðəl faɪn aʊt jə lɛf stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən fɹəm jəɹ ɛldɝz?"

"Are you afraid they'll find out you left Stedding Shangtai without permission from your Elders?"

lɔɪəl lʊkt ɝaʊnd waɪldli, ðə tʌfs ɑn ɪz ɪɹz vaɪbɹeɪɾɪŋ. "doʊn seɪ ðæt," hi hɪst. "nɑt wɛɹ ɛniwʌn kən hɪɹ. ɪf ðeɪ faʊn aʊt. . . ." wɪð ə hɛvi saɪ, hi slʌmp bæk, lʊkɪŋ fɹəm ɹænd tə mæt. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ hjumənz də ɪt, bʌɾ əmʌŋ oʊɡiɝ. . . . ɪf ə ɡɝl siz ə bɔɪ ʃi laɪks, ʃi ɡoʊz tə hɝ mʌðɝ. əɹ səmtaɪmz ðə mʌðɝ siz sʌmwʌn ʃi θɪŋks ɪz suɾəbəl. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ɪf ðeɪ əɡɹi, ðə ɡɝlz mʌðɝ ɡoʊz tə ðə bɔɪz mʌðɝ, ən ðə nɛks θɪŋ ðə bɔɪ noʊz, hɪz mɛɹɪdʒ ɪz ɔl ɝeɪnʒd."

Loial looked around wildly, the tufts on his ears vibrating. "Don't say that," he hissed. "Not where anyone can hear. If they found out. . . ." With a heavy sigh, he slumped back, looking from Rand to Mat. "I don't know how humans do it, but among Ogier. . . . If a girl sees a boy she likes, she goes to her mother. Or sometimes the mother sees someone she thinks is suitable. In any case, if they agree, the girl's mother goes to the boy's mother, and the next thing the boy knows, his marriage is all arranged."

"dʌzn ðə bɔɪ hæv ɛni seɪ ɪn ɪt?" mæt æskt ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli.

"Doesn't the boy have any say in it?" Mat asked incredulously.

"nʌn. ðə wɪmən ɔlweɪz seɪ wi wəd spɛn əɹ lɪvz mɛɹid tə ðə tʃɹiz ɪf ɪt wɑz lɛf tə ʌs." lɔɪəl ʃɪftəd, ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ. "hæf ʌv əɹ mɛɹɪdʒɪz teɪk pleɪs bɪtwin stɛɾɪŋ; ɡɹups ə jʌŋ oʊɡiɝ vɪzət fɹəm stɛɾɪŋ tə stɛɾɪŋ soʊ ðeɪ kən si, ən bi sin. ɪf ðeɪ dɪskʌvɝ aɪm aʊtsaɪd wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən, ði ɛldɝz wɪl ɔlmoʊst sɝɾənli dɪsaɪɾ aɪ niɾ ə waɪf tə sɛɾəl mi daʊn. bɪfɔɹ aɪ noʊ ɪt, ðəl əv sɛn ə mɛsədʒ tə stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ, tə maɪ mʌðɝ, ən ʃɪl kʌm hɪɹ ən əv mi mɛɹid bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɑʃɪz ɔf ðə dʌst ə hɝ dʒɝni. ʃiz ɔlweɪz sɛɾ aɪm tu heɪsti ən niɾ ə waɪf. aɪ θɪŋk ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ wən aɪ lɛft. wʌtɛvɝ waɪf ʃi tʃuzəz fəɹ mi . . . wɛl, ɛni waɪf əɾ ɔl woʊn lemi ɡoʊ bæk aʊtsaɪɾ əntɪl aɪ hæv ɡɹeɪ ɪn maɪ bɪɹd. waɪvz ɔlweɪz seɪ noʊ mæn ʃəd bi əlaʊɾ aʊtsaɪɾ əntɪl hiz sɛɾəld ɪnʌf tə kəntʃɹoʊl ɪz tɛmpɝ."

"None. The women always say we would spend our lives married to the trees if it was left to us." Loial shifted, grimacing. "Half of our marriages take place between stedding; groups of young Ogier visit from stedding to stedding so they can see, and be seen. If they discover I'm Outside without permission, the Elders will almost certainly decide I need a wife to settle me down. Before I know it, they'll have sent a message to Stedding Shangtai, to my mother, and she will come here and have me married before she washes off the dust of her journey. She's always said I am too hasty and need a wife. I think she was looking when I left. Whatever wife she chooses for me . . . well, any wife at all won't let me go back Outside until I have gray in my beard. Wives always say no man should be allowed Outside until he's settled enough to control his temper."

mæt ɡeɪv ə ɡʌfɔ laʊɾ ɪnʌf tə dʒɹɔ ɛvɹi hɛd, bʌɾ ət lɔɪəlz fɹæntɪk dʒɛstʃɝ i spoʊk sɔfli. "əmʌŋ ʌs, mɛn də ðə tʃuzɪŋ, ən noʊ waɪf kən stɑp ə mæn duɪŋ wʌɾ i wɑns."

Mat gave a guffaw loud enough to draw every head, but at Loial's frantic gesture he spoke softly. "Among us, men do the choosing, and no wife can stop a man doing what he wants."

ɹænd fɹaʊnd, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ haʊ ɛɡwin hæd bɪɡʌn fɑloʊɪŋ ɪm ɝaʊnd wən ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ lɪɾəl. ɪt wɑz ðən ðət mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ hæd bɪɡʌn teɪkɪŋ ə spɛʃəl ɪntʃɹəst ɪn hɪm, mɔɹ ðən ɪn ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝ bɔɪz. leɪɾɝ, səm ɡɝlz wəd dæns wɪð ɪm ɑn fistdeɪz ən səm wəd nɑt, ən ðoʊz u wəd wɝ ɔlweɪz ɛɡwinz fɹɛnz, waɪl ðoʊz u wəd nɑt wɝ ɡɝlz ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt laɪk. hi ɔlsoʊ sim tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ teɪkɪŋ tæm əsaɪd - ən ʃi wɑz mʌɾɝɪŋ əbaʊt tæm nɑt hævɪŋ ə waɪf fəɹ əɹ tə tɔk tə! - ən æftɝ ðæt, tæm ən ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls hæɾ æktəɾ əz ɪf i ən ɛɡwin wɝ pɹɑməst, ivən ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd nɑt nɛl bɪfɔɹ ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl tə seɪ ðə wɝdz. hi hæd nɛvɝ θɔɾ əbaʊɾ ɪt ðɪs weɪ bɪfɔɹ; θɪŋz bɪtwin ɛɡwin ən ɪm hæɾ ɔlweɪz dʒʌst sim tə bi ðə weɪ ðeɪ wɝ, ən ðət wɑz ðæt.

Rand frowned, remembering how Egwene had begun following him around when they were both little. It was then that Mistress al'Vere had begun taking a special interest in him, more than in any of the other boys. Later, some girls would dance with him on feastdays and some would not, and those who would were always Egwene's friends, while those who would not were girls Egwene did not like. He also seemed to remember Mistress al'Vere taking Tam aside - And she was muttering about Tam not having a wife for her to talk to! - and after that, Tam and everyone else had acted as if he and Egwene were promised, even though they had not knelt before the Women's Circle to say the words. He had never thought about it this way before; things between Egwene and him had always just seemed to be the way they were, and that was that.

"aɪ θɪŋk wi də ɪt ðə seɪm weɪ," hi mʌɾɝd, ən wən mæt læft, hi æɾəd, "du jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ jəɹ fɑðɝ ɛvɝ duɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ jəɹ mʌðɝ ɹɪli dɪdnt wɑn ɪm tə?" mæt oʊpən ɪz maʊθ wɪð ə ɡɹɪn, ðən fɹaʊn θɔtfəli ən kloʊzd ɪɾ əɡɛn.

"I think we do it the same way," he muttered, and when Mat laughed, he added, "Do you remember your father ever doing anything your mother really didn't want him to?" Mat opened his mouth with a grin, then frowned thoughtfully and closed it again.

dʒun keɪm daʊn ðə stɛps fɹəm aʊtsaɪd. "ɪf jə pliz, wɪl ɔl ə jə kʌm wɪð mi? ði ɛldɝz wəd si ju." hi dɪd nɑt lʊk ət lɔɪəl, bʌt lɔɪəl stɪl ɔlmoʊs dʒɹɑp ðə bʊk.

Juin came down the steps from outside. "If you please, will all of you come with me? The Elders would see you." He did not look at Loial, but Loial still almost dropped the book.

"ɪf ði ɛldɝz tʃɹaɪ tə meɪk jə steɪ," ɹænd sɛd, "wil seɪ wi nid jə tə ɡoʊ wɪð ʌs."

"If the Elders try to make you stay," Rand said, "we'll say we need you to go with us."

"aɪl bɛɾ ɪɾ ɪzən əbaʊt jə əɾ ɔl," mæt sɛd. "aɪl bɛt ðeɪ ɑɹ dʒʌs gɑnə seɪ wi kən juz ðə weɪɡeɪt." hi ʃʊk hɪmsɛlf, ən ɪz vɔɪs fɛl ivən loʊɝ. "wi ɹɪli hæv tə də ɪt, doʊnt wi." ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə kwɛstʃən.

"I'll bet it isn't about you at all," Mat said. "I'll bet they are just going to say we can use the Waygate." He shook himself, and his voice fell even lower. "We really have to do it, don't we." It was not a question.

"steɪ ən ɡɛt mɛɹid, əɹ tʃɹævəl ðə weɪz." lɔɪəl ɡɹɪməst ɹufəli. "laɪf ɪz vɛɹi ənsɛɾəlɪŋ wɪð tɑvɝən fəɹ fɹɛnz."

"Stay and get married, or travel the Ways." Loial grimaced ruefully. "Life is very unsettling with ta'veren for friends."


tʃæptɝ θɝɾisɪks


CHAPTER 36

əmʌŋ ði ɛldɝz


Among the Elders

əz dʒun tʊk əm θɹu ði oʊɡiɝ taʊn, ɹænd sɔ ðət lɔɪəl wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ mɔɹ ən mɔɹ æŋkʃəs. lɔɪəlz ɪɹz wɝ əz stɪf əz ɪz bæk; hɪz aɪz ɡɹu bɪɡɝ ɛvɹi taɪm i sɔ ənʌðɝ oʊɡiɝ lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, ɪspɛʃli ðə wɪmən ən ɡɝlz, ən ə lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝ ə ðɛm dɪd sim tə teɪk noʊɾəs ə hɪm. hi lʊkt əz ɪf i ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪz oʊn ɛksəkjuʃən.

As Juin took them through the Ogier town, Rand saw that Loial was growing more and more anxious. Loial's ears were as stiff as his back; his eyes grew bigger every time he saw another Ogier looking at him, especially the women and girls, and a large number of them did seem to take notice of him. He looked as if he expected his own execution.

ðə bɪɹɾəd oʊɡiɝ dʒɛstʃɝd tə waɪd stɛps liɾɪŋ daʊn ɪndə ə ɡɹæsi maʊn ðət wɑz bɪɡɝ baɪ fɑɹ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ; ɪt wɑz ə hɪl, fəɹ ɔl pɹæktəkəl pɝpəsəz, ɔlmoʊst ət ðə beɪs ʌv wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹiz.

The bearded Ogier gestured to wide steps leading down into a grassy mound that was bigger by far than any other; it was a hill, for all practical purposes, almost at the base of one of the Great Trees.

"waɪ doʊn jə weɪɾ aʊt hɪɹ, lɔɪəl?" ɹænd sɛd.

"Why don't you wait out here, Loial?" Rand said.

"ði ɛldɝz - " dʒun bɪɡæn.

"The Elders - " Juin began.

" - pɹɑbli dʒʌst wɑnə si ðə ɹɛst ʌv ʌs," ɹænd fɪnɪʃt fəɹ hɪm.

" - Probably just want to see the rest of us," Rand finished for him.

"waɪ doʊn ðeɪ liv ɪm əloʊn," mæt pʊɾ ɪn.

"Why don't they leave him alone," Mat put in.

lɔɪəl nɑɾəd vɪɡɝəsli. "jɛs. jɛs, aɪ θɪŋk. . . ." ə nʌmbɝ ʌv oʊɡiɝ wɪmən wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, fɹəm waɪt-hɛɹd ɡɹændmʌðɝz tə dɔɾɝz ɛɹɪθs eɪdʒ, ə nɑɾ ə ðɛm tɔkɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz bʌt wɪð ɔl aɪz ɑn hɪm. hɪz ɪɹz dʒɝkt, bʌɾ i lʊkt ət ðə bɹɔd dɔɹ tə wɪtʃ ðə stoʊn stɛps lɛd daʊn, ən nɑɾəd əɡɛn. "jɛs, əl sɪɾ aʊt hɪɹ, ən əl ɹɛd. ðəɾ ɪz ɪt. əl ɹid." fʌmbəlɪŋ ɪn ɪz koʊt pɑkət, hi pɹədust ə bʊk. hi sɛɾəld hɪmsɛlf ɑn ðə maʊn bɪsaɪd ðə stɛps, ðə bʊk smɔl ɪn ɪz hænz, ən fɪkst ɪz aɪz ɑn ðə peɪdʒəz. "aɪ wɪl dʒʌst sɪt hɪɹ ən ɹɛɾ əntɪl jə kʌm aʊt." hɪz ɪɹz twɪtʃt əz ɪf i kəd fil ðə wɪmənz aɪz.

Loial nodded vigorously. "Yes. Yes, I think. . . ." A number of Ogier women were watching him, from white-haired grandmothers to daughters Erith's age, a knot of them talking among themselves but with all eyes on him. His ears jerked, but he looked at the broad door to which the stone steps led down, and nodded again. "Yes, I will sit out here, and I'll read. That is it. I will read." Fumbling in his coat pocket, he produced a book. He settled himself on the mound beside the steps, the book small in his hands, and fixed his eyes on the pages. "I will just sit here and read until you come out." His ears twitched as if he could feel the women's eyes.

dʒun ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ðən ʃɹʌɡd ən moʊʃən tə ðə stɛps əɡɛn. "ɪf jə pliz. ði ɛldɝz ɑɹ weɪɾɪŋ."

Juin shook his head, then shrugged and motioned to the steps again. "If you please. The Elders are waiting."

ðə hjudʒ, wɪndoʊləs ɹum ɪnsaɪd ðə maʊnd wɑz skeɪl fəɹ oʊɡiɝ, wɪð ə θɪk-bim silɪŋ mɔɹ ðən fɔɹ spænz ʌp; ɪt cʊɾə fɪɾ ɪn ɛni pæləs, fəɹ saɪz ət list. ðə sɛvən oʊɡiɝ siɾəd ɑn ðə deɪz dɝɛkli ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə dɔɹ meɪɾ ɪt ʃɹɪŋk ə lɪɾəl baɪ ðɛɹ saɪz, bʌt ɹænd stɪl fɛlt əz ɪf i wɝ ɪn ə kævɝn. ðə sɑmbɝ flɔɹstoʊnz wɝ smuð, ɪf lɑɹdʒ ən ɪɹɛɡjəlɝ ɪn ʃeɪp, bʌt ðə ɡɹeɪ wɔlz cʊɾə bɪn ðə ɹʌf saɪɾ ʌv ə klɪf. ðə silɪŋ bimz, ɹʌf-hjun əz ðeɪ wɝ, lʊk laɪk ɡɹeɪt ɹuts.

The huge, windowless room inside the mound was scaled for Ogier, with a thick-beamed ceiling more than four spans up; it could have fit in any palace, for size at least. The seven Ogier seated on the dais directly in front of the door made it shrink a little by their size, but Rand still felt as if he were in a cavern. The somber floorstones were smooth, if large and irregular in shape, but the gray walls could have been the rough side of a cliff. The ceiling beams, rough-hewn as they were, looked like great roots.

ɪksɛp fəɹ ə haɪ-bæk tʃɛɹ wɛɹ vɛɹɪn sæt feɪsɪŋ ðə deɪz, ði oʊnli fɝnɪʃɪŋz wɝ ðə hɛvi, vaɪn-kɑɹv tʃɛɹz ə ði ɛldɝz. ði oʊɡiɝ wʊmən ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə deɪz sæɾ ɪn ə tʃɛɹ ɹeɪzd ə lɪɾəl haɪɝ ðən ðoʊz ə ði ʌðɝz, θɹi bɪɹɾəd mɛn tə hɝ lɛft ɪn lɔŋ, flɛɹɪŋ koʊts, θɹi wɪmən tə hɝ ɹaɪɾ ɪn dʒɹɛsəz laɪk əɹ oʊn, ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɪn vaɪnz ən flaʊɝz fɹəm nɛklaɪn tə hɛm. ɔl hæɾ eɪdʒ feɪsəz ən pjʊɹ waɪt hɛɹ, ivən tə ðə tʌfs ɑn ðɛɹ ɪɹz, ən ən ɛɹ ə mæsɪv dɪɡnəɾi.

Except for a high-backed chair where Verin sat facing the dais, the only furnishings were the heavy, vine-carved chairs of the Elders. The Ogier woman in the middle of the dais sat in a chair raised a little higher than those of the others, three bearded men to her left in long, flaring coats, three women to her right in dresses like her own, embroidered in vines and flowers from neckline to hem. All had aged faces and pure white hair, even to the tufts on their ears, and an air of massive dignity.

hʊɹɪn ɡeɪpt əɾ əm oʊpənli, ən ɹænd fɛlt laɪk stɛɹɪŋ hɪmsɛlf. nɑɾ ivən vɛɹɪn hæd ði əpɪɹəns ʌv wɪzdəm ðət wɑz ɪn ði ɛldɝz' hjudʒ aɪz, nɔɹ mɔɹɡeɪs ɪn əɹ kɹaʊn ðɛɹ əθɔɹəɾi, nɔɹ mɔɪɹeɪn ðɛɹ kɑm sɝɛnəɾi. ɪŋtʃɹ wɑz ðə fɝs tə baʊ, əz fɔɹməli əz ɹænd hæɾ ɛvɝ sin fɹəm hɪm, waɪl ði ʌðɝz stɪl stʊd ɹuɾəd.

Hurin gaped at them openly, and Rand felt like staring himself. Not even Verin had the appearance of wisdom that was in the Elders' huge eyes, nor Morgase in her crown their authority, nor Moiraine their calm serenity. Ingtar was the first to bow, as formally as Rand had ever seen from him, while the others still stood rooted.

"aɪ æm eɪlɑɹ," ði oʊɡiɝ wʊmən ɑn ðə haɪəs tʃɛɹ sɛd wən ðeɪ hæd faɪnəli teɪkən ðɛɹ pleɪsəz bɪsaɪd vɛɹɪn, "ɛldəst ə ði ɛldɝz ə stɛɾɪŋ tsəfu. vɛɹɪn əz toʊld əs ðət juv nid tə juz ðə weɪɡeɪt hɪɹ. tə ɹɪkʌvɝ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ fɹəm dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪz ə ɡɹeɪt nid, ɪndid, bʌt wɪv əlaʊd nʌn tə tʃɹævəl ðə weɪz ɪn mɔɹ ðən wʌn hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz. niðɝ ʌs, nɔɹ ði ɛldɝz ʌv ɛni ʌðɝ stɛɾɪŋ."

"I am Alar," the Ogier woman on the highest chair said when they had finally taken their places beside Verin, "Eldest of the Elders of Stedding Tsofu. Verin has told us that you have need to use the Waygate here. To recover the Horn of Valere from Darkfriends is a great need, indeed, but we have allowed none to travel the Ways in more than one hundred years. Neither us, nor the Elders of any other stedding."

"aɪ wɪl faɪn ðə hɔɹn," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛɾ æŋɡɹəli. "aɪ mʌst. ɪf jəl nɑt pɝmɪɾ əs tə juz ðə weɪɡeɪt. . . ." hi fɛl saɪlən əz vɛɹɪn lʊkt ət hɪm, bʌt ðə skaʊl ɹɪmeɪn ɑn ɪz feɪs.

"I will find the Horn," Ingtar said angrily. "I must. If you will not permit us to use the Waygate. . . ." He fell silent as Verin looked at him, but the scowl remained on his face.

eɪlɑɹ smaɪld. "bi nɑt soʊ heɪsti, ʃaɪnɝən. jə hjumənz nɛvɝ teɪk taɪm fəɹ θɔt. oʊnli dɪsɪʒənz ɹitʃt ɪn kɑm kən bi ʃʊɹ." hɝ smaɪl feɪɾəd tə sɪɹiəsnəs, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs kɛpt ɪts oʊn mɛʒɝd kɑm. "ðə deɪnʒɝz ə ðə weɪz ɑɹ nɑt tə bi feɪst wɪð ə sɔɹɾ ɪn jəɹ hænd, nɑt tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ il əɹ ɹeɪvinɪŋ tʃɹɑləks. aɪ mʌs tɛl jə ðət tə ɛntɝ ðə weɪz ɪz tə ɹɪsk nɑɾ oʊnli dɛθ ən mædnəs, bʌt pɝhæps jəɹ vɛɹi soʊlz."

Alar smiled. "Be not so hasty, Shienaran. You humans never take time for thought. Only decisions reached in calm can be sure." Her smile faded to seriousness, but her voice kept its own measured calm. "The dangers of the Ways are not to be faced with a sword in your hand, not charging Aiel or ravening Trollocs. I must tell you that to enter the Ways is to risk not only death and madness, but perhaps your very souls."

"wi hæv sin mætʃɪn ʃɪn," ɹænd sɛd, ən mæt ən pɛɹɪn əɡɹid. ðeɪ kəd nɑt mænədʒ tə saʊn iɡɝ tə də ɪɾ əɡɛn.

"We have seen Machin Shin," Rand said, and Mat and Perrin agreed. They could not manage to sound eager to do it again.

"aɪ wɪl fɑloʊ ðə hɔɹn tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl ɪtsɛlf, ɪf nid bi," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd fɝmli. hʊɹɪn oʊnli nɑɾəd əz ɪf ɪnkluɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɪn ɪŋtʃɹz wɝdz.

"I will follow the Horn to Shayol Ghul itself, if need be," Ingtar said firmly. Hurin only nodded as if including himself in Ingtar's words.

"bɹɪŋ tʃɹəl," eɪlɑɹ kəmændəd, ən dʒun, hu hæd ɹɪmeɪn baɪ ðə dɔɹ, baʊɾ ən lɛft. "ɪɾ ɪz nɑɾ ɪnʌf," ʃi toʊl vɛɹɪn, "tə hɪɹ wʌt kən hæpən. jə mʌst si ɪt, noʊ ɪɾ ɪn jəɹ hɑɹt."

"Bring Trayal," Alar commanded, and Juin, who had remained by the door, bowed and left. "It is not enough," she told Verin, "to hear what can happen. You must see it, know it in your heart."

ðəɹ wɑz ən ənkʌmftəɹbəl saɪləns əntɪl dʒun ɹɪtɝnd, ən ɪt bɪkeɪm mɔɹ ənkʌmftəɹbəl stɪl əz tu oʊɡiɝ wɪmən fɑloʊd hɪm, ɡaɪɾɪŋ ə dɑɹk-bɪɹɾəd oʊɡiɝ ə mɪɾəl jɪɹz, hu ʃæmbəl bɪtwin əm əz ɪf i dɪd nɑt kwaɪt noʊ haʊ hɪz lɛɡz wɝkt. hɪz feɪs sæɡd, wɪθaʊɾ ɛni ɪkspɹɛʃən əɾ ɔl, ən ɪz bɪɡ aɪz wɝ veɪkən ən ənblɪŋkɪŋ, nɑt stɛɹɪŋ, nɑt lʊkɪŋ, nɑɾ ivən simɪŋ tə si. wʌn ə ðə wɪmən dʒɛnli waɪp dʒɹul fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz maʊθ. ðeɪ tʊk ɪz ɑɹmz tə stɑp hɪm; hɪz fʊt wɛn fɔɹwɝd, hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən fɛl bæk wɪð ə θʌmp. hi simd əz kɑntɛn tə stæn əz tə wɔk, əɹ ət list əz ənkɛɹɪŋ.

There was an uncomfortable silence until Juin returned, and it became more uncomfortable still as two Ogier women followed him, guiding a dark-bearded Ogier of middle years, who shambled between them as if he did not quite know how his legs worked. His face sagged, without any expression at all, and his big eyes were vacant and unblinking, not staring, not looking, not even seeming to see. One of the women gently wiped drool from the corner of his mouth. They took his arms to stop him; his foot went forward, hesitated, then fell back with a thump. He seemed as content to stand as to walk, or at least as uncaring.

"tʃɹəl wɑz wʌn ə ðə læst əmʌŋ əs tə ɡoʊ əlɔŋ ðə weɪz," eɪlɑɹ sɛd sɔfli. "hi keɪm aʊɾ əz jə si hɪm. wɪl jə tʌtʃ hɪm, vɛɹɪn?"

"Trayal was one of the last among us to go along the Ways," Alar said softly. "He came out as you see him. Will you touch him, Verin?"

vɛɹɪn ɡeɪv əɹ ə lɔŋ lʊk, ðən ɹoʊz ən stʃɹoʊd tə tʃɹəl. hi dɪd nɑt muv əz ʃi leɪɾ əɹ hænz ɑn ɪz waɪd tʃɛst, nɑɾ ivən ə flɪkɝ ʌv ən aɪ tə æknɑlɪdʒ əɹ tʌtʃ. wɪð ə ʃɑɹp hɪs, ʃi dʒɝk bæk, stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ət hɪm, ðən wɝl tə feɪs ði ɛldɝz. "hi ɪz . . . ɛmpti. ðɪs bɑɾi laɪvz, bʌt ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪt. nʌθɪŋ." ɛvɹi ɛldɝ wɔɹ ə lʊk ʌv ənbɛɹəbəl sædnəs.

Verin gave her a long look, then rose and strode to Trayal. He did not move as she laid her hands on his wide chest, not even a flicker of an eye to acknowledge her touch. With a sharp hiss, she jerked back, staring up at him, then whirled to face the Elders. "He is . . . empty. This body lives, but there is nothing inside it. Nothing." Every Elder wore a look of unbearable sadness.

"nʌθɪŋ," wʌn ə ði ɛldɝz tə eɪlɑɹz ɹaɪt sɛd sɔfli. hɝ aɪz sim tə hoʊld ɔl ðə peɪn tʃɹəlz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ kʊd. "noʊ maɪnd. noʊ soʊl. nʌθɪŋ ə tʃɹəl ɹɪmeɪnz bʌɾ ɪz bɑɾi."

"Nothing," one of the Elders to Alar's right said softly. Her eyes seemed to hold all the pain Trayal's no longer could. "No mind. No soul. Nothing of Trayal remains but his body."

"hi wɑz ə faɪn tʃɹisɪŋʒɝ," wʌn ə ðə mɛn saɪd.

"He was a fine Treesinger," one of the men sighed.

eɪlɑɹ moʊʃənd, ən ðə tu wɪmən tɝn tʃɹəl tə liɾ ɪm aʊt; ðeɪ hæd tə muv ɪm bɪfɔɹ i bɪɡæn tə wɔk.

Alar motioned, and the two women turned Trayal to lead him out; they had to move him before he began to walk.

"wi noʊ ðə ɹɪsks," vɛɹɪn sɛd. "bʌt wʌtɛvɝ ðə ɹɪsks, wi mʌs fɑloʊ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ."

"We know the risks," Verin said. "But whatever the risks, we must follow the Horn of Valere."

ði ɛldəs nɑɾəd. "ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. aɪ də nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ ɪts wɝs nuz ðəɾ ɪts ɪn dɑɹkfɹɛn hænz, əɹ ðəɾ ɪts bɪn faʊn əɾ ɔl." ʃi lʊk daʊn ðə ɹoʊ ʌv ɛldɝz; itʃ nɑɾəd ɪn tɝn, wʌn ə ðə mɛn tʌɡɪŋ ɪz bɪɹd daʊtfəli fɝst. "vɛɹi wɛl. vɛɹɪn tɛlz mi taɪm ɪz ɝdʒənt. əl ʃoʊ jə tə ðə weɪɡeɪt maɪsɛlf." ɹænd wɑz filɪŋ hæf ɹɪlivd ən hæf əfɹeɪd, wən ʃi æɾəd, "ju hæv wɪð jə ə jʌŋ oʊɡiɝ. lɔɪəl, sʌn ʌv ɑɹən sʌn ə hɑlən, fɹəm stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ. hiz fɑɹ fɹəm ɪz hoʊm."

The Eldest nodded. "The Horn of Valere. I do not know whether it is worse news that it is in Darkfriend hands, or that it has been found at all." She looked down the row of Elders; each nodded in turn, one of the men tugging his beard doubtfully first. "Very well. Verin tells me time is urgent. I will show you to the Waygate myself." Rand was feeling half relieved and half afraid, when she added, "You have with you a young Ogier. Loial, son of Arent son of Halan, from Stedding Shangtai. He is far from his home."

"wi nid hɪm," ɹænd sɛd kwɪkli. hɪz wɝdz sloʊɾ ʌndɝ sɝpɹaɪz stɛɹz fɹəm ði ɛldɝz ən vɛɹɪn, bʌɾ i wɛn ɑn stʌbɝnli. "wi niɾ ɪm tə ɡoʊ wɪð ʌs, ən i wɑns tə."

"We need him," Rand said quickly. His words slowed under surprised stares from the Elders and Verin, but he went on stubbornly. "We need him to go with us, and he wants to."

"lɔɪəlz ə fɹɛnd," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðət mæt sɛd, "hi dʌznt ɡɛɾ ɪn ðə weɪ, ən i kæɹiz ɪz oʊn weɪt." niðɝ ə ðɛm əpɪɹd kʌmftəɹbəl ət hævɪŋ ði ɛldɝz' foʊkəs ʃɪf tə ðɛm, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt bæk daʊn.

"Loial's a friend," Perrin said, at the same time that Mat said, "He doesn't get in the way, and he carries his own weight." Neither of them appeared comfortable at having the Elders' focus shift to them, but they did not back down.

"ɪz ðəɹ səm ɹizən i kænɑt kʌm wɪð ʌs?" ɪŋtʃɹ æskt. "æz mæt sɛz, hiz hɛld ɪz oʊn. aɪ doʊnt noʊ ðət wi nid hɪm, bʌɾ ɪf i wɑns tə kʌm, waɪ - ?"

"Is there some reason he cannot come with us?" Ingtar asked. "As Mat says, he has held his own. I don't know that we need him, but if he wants to come, why - ?"

"wi də nid hɪm," vɛɹɪn bɹoʊk ɪn smuðli. "fju ɛni lɔŋɡɝ noʊ ðə weɪz, bʌt lɔɪəl əz stʌɾid ðɛm. hi kən dɪsaɪfɝ ðə ɡaɪɾɪŋz."

"We do need him," Verin broke in smoothly. "Few any longer know the Ways, but Loial has studied them. He can decipher the Guidings."

eɪlɑɹ aɪɾ əm itʃ ɪn tɝn, ðən sɛɾəld tə ə stʌɾi ʌv ɹænd. ʃi lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi nu θɪŋz; ɔl ði ɛldɝz dɪd, bʌt ʃi moʊst ʌv ɔl. "vɛɹɪn sɛz jə ɑɹ tɑvɝən," ʃi sɛɾ ət læst, "æn aɪ kən fil ɪɾ ɪn ju. ðəɾ aɪ kən də soʊ minz ðət jə mʌs bi vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋli tɑvɝən ɪndid, fəɹ sətʃ tæləns ɛvɝ ɹʌn wikli ɪn ʌs, ɪf əɾ ɔl. hæv jə dʒɹɔn lɔɪəl, sʌn ʌv ɑɹən sʌn ə hɑlən, ɪndə tæmɹəleɪlən, ðə wɛb ðə pæɾɝn wivz ɝaʊn ju?"

Alar eyed them each in turn, then settled to a study of Rand. She looked as if she knew things; all the Elders did, but she most of all. "Verin says you are ta'veren," she said at last, "and I can feel it in you. That I can do so means that you must be very strongly ta'veren indeed, for such Talents ever run weakly in us, if at all. Have you drawn Loial, son of Arent son of Halan, into ta'maral'ailen, the Web the Pattern weaves around you?"

"aɪ. . . . aɪ dʒʌst wɑnə faɪn ðə hɔɹn ænd. . . ." ɹænd lɛt ðə ɹɛst ʌv ɪt daɪ. eɪlɑɹ hæd nɑt mɛnʃən mæts dæɡɝ. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ vɛɹɪn hæd toʊl ði ɛldɝz, əɹ hɛld ɪt bæk fəɹ səm ɹizən. "hi ɪz maɪ fɹɛnd, ɛldəst."

"I. . . . I just want to find the Horn and. . . ." Rand let the rest of it die. Alar had not mentioned Mat's dagger. He did not know whether Verin had told the Elders, or held it back for some reason. "He is my friend, Eldest."

"jɔɹ fɹɛnd," eɪlɑɹ sɛd. "hi ɪz jʌŋ baɪ əɹ weɪ ʌv θɪŋkɪŋ. jə ɑɹ jʌŋ, tu, bʌt tɑvɝən. jəl lʊk æftɝ hɪm, ən wən ðə wivɪŋ ɪz dʌn, jəl si ðəɾ i kʌmz seɪfli hoʊm tə stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ."

"Your friend," Alar said. "He is young by our way of thinking. You are young, too, but ta'veren. You will look after him, and when the weaving is done, you will see that he comes safely home to Stedding Shangtai."

"aɪ wɪl," hi toʊl hɝ. ɪt hæd ðə filɪŋ ʌv ə kəmɪtmənt, ðə swɛɹɪŋ ʌv ən oʊθ.

"I will," he told her. It had the feeling of a commitment, the swearing of an oath.

"ðɛn wɪl ɡoʊ tə ðə weɪɡeɪt."

"Then we will go to the Waygate."

aʊtsaɪd, lɔɪəl skɹæmbəl tə hɪz fit wən ðeɪ əpɪɹd, eɪlɑɹ ən vɛɹɪn liɾɪŋ. ɪŋtʃɹ sɛn hʊɹɪn ɔf əɾ ə ɹʌn tə fɛtʃ ənoʊ ən ði ʌðɝ soʊlʒɝz. lɔɪəl aɪd ði ɛldəst wɛɹəli, ðən fɛl ɪn wɪð ɹænd ət ðə ɹɪɹ ə ðə pɹəsɛʃən. ði oʊɡiɝ wɪmən u hæd bɪn wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm wɝ ɔl ɡɔn. "dɪd ði ɛldɝz seɪ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt mi? dɪd ʃi . . . ?" hi pɪɹɾ əɾ eɪlɑɹz bɹɔd bæk əz ʃi ɔɹɾɝd dʒun tə hæv ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz bɹɔt. ʃi stɑɹɾəd ɔf wɪð vɛɹɪn waɪl dʒun wɑz stɪl boʊɪŋ hɪmsɛlf əweɪ, bɛndɪŋ əɹ hɛd tə tɔk kwaɪətli.

Outside, Loial scrambled to his feet when they appeared, Alar and Verin leading. Ingtar sent Hurin off at a run to fetch Uno and the other soldiers. Loial eyed the Eldest warily, then fell in with Rand at the rear of the procession. The Ogier women who had been watching him were all gone. "Did the Elders say anything about me? Did she . . . ?" He peered at Alar's broad back as she ordered Juin to have their horses brought. She started off with Verin while Juin was still bowing himself away, bending her head to talk quietly.

"ʃi toʊld ɹænd tə teɪk kɛɹ ə ju," mæt toʊld lɔɪəl sɔləmli əz ðeɪ fɑloʊd, "æn si jə ɡɑt hoʊm seɪfli əz ə beɪb. aɪ doʊn si waɪ jə kæn steɪ hɪɹ ən ɡɛt mɛɹid."

"She told Rand to take care of you," Mat told Loial solemnly as they followed, "and see you got home safely as a babe. I don't see why you can't stay here and get married."

"ʃi sɛd jə kəd kʌm wɪð ʌs." ɹænd ɡlɛɹɾ ət mæt, wɪtʃ meɪd mæt kɔɹɾəl ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. ɪt saʊndəɾ ɑd, kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðət dʒɹɔn feɪs. lɔɪəl wɑz twɝlɪŋ ðə stɛm ʌv ə tʃɹuhɑɹt blɑsəm bɪtwin ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. "dɪd jə ɡoʊ pɪkɪŋ flaʊɝz?" ɹænd æskt.

"She said you could come with us." Rand glared at Mat, which made Mat chortle under his breath. It sounded odd, coming from that drawn face. Loial was twirling the stem of a trueheart blossom between his fingers. "Did you go picking flowers?" Rand asked.

"ɛɹɪθ ɡeɪv ɪt tə mi." lɔɪəl wɑtʃt ðə jɛloʊ pɛɾəlz spɪn. "ʃi ɹɪli ɪz vɛɹi pɹɪɾi, ivən ɪf mæt dʌz nɑt si ɪt."

"Erith gave it to me." Loial watched the yellow petals spin. "She really is very pretty, even if Mat does not see it."

"dʌz ðət min jə doʊnt wɑnə ɡoʊ wɪð əs æftɝ ɔl?"

"Does that mean you don't want to go with us after all?"

lɔɪəl ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. "wʌt? oʊ, noʊ. aɪ min, jɛs. aɪ də wɑnə ɡoʊ. ʃi oʊnli ɡeɪv mi ə flaʊɝ. dʒʌst ə flaʊɝ." hi tʊk ə bʊk aʊɾ ə hɪz pɑkət, ðoʊ, ən pɹɛs ðə blɑsəm ʌndɝ ðə fɹʌn kʌvɝ. əz i ɹɪtɝn ðə bʊk, hi mɝmɝd tə hɪmsɛlf, bɛɹli laʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɹænd tə hɪɹ, "ænd ʃi sɛɾ aɪ wɑz hænsəm, tu." mæt lɛɾ aʊɾ ə wiz ən dʌbəld oʊvɝ, stæɡɝɪŋ əlɔŋ klʌtʃɪŋ ɪz saɪdz, ən lɔɪəlz tʃiks kʌlɝd. "wɛl . . . ʃi sɛɾ ɪt. aɪ dɪdnt."

Loial gave a start. "What? Oh, no. I mean, yes. I do want to go. She only gave me a flower. Just a flower." He took a book out of his pocket, though, and pressed the blossom under the front cover. As he returned the book, he murmured to himself, barely loud enough for Rand to hear, "And she said I was handsome, too." Mat let out a wheeze and doubled over, staggering along clutching his sides, and Loial's cheeks colored. "Well . . . she said it. I didn't."

pɛɹɪn ɹæp mæt smɑɹtli ɑn ðə tɑp ə hɪz hɛd wɪð ɪz nʌkəlz. "noʊbɑdi ɛvɝ sɛd mæt wɑz hænsəm. hiz dʒʌs dʒɛləs."

Perrin rapped Mat smartly on the top of his head with his knuckles. "Nobody ever said Mat was handsome. He's just jealous."

"ðæts nɑt tʃɹu," mæt sɛd, stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ əbɹʌpli. "mɛɹisə aɪɛlɪn θɪŋks aɪm hænsəm. ʃi toʊl mi soʊ mɔɹ ðən wʌns."

"That's not true," Mat said, straightening abruptly. "Marisa Ayellin thinks I'm handsome. She told me so more than once."

"ɪz mɛɹisə pɹɪɾi?" lɔɪəl æskt.

"Is Marisa pretty?" Loial asked.

"ʃi hæz ə feɪs laɪk ə ɡoʊt," pɛɹɪn sɛd blænli. mæt tʃoʊkt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ ɪz pɹoʊɾɛsts aʊt.

"She has a face like a goat," Perrin said blandly. Mat choked, trying to get his protests out.

ɹænd ɡɹɪn ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf. mɛɹisə wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz pɹɪɾi əz ɛɡwin. ən ðɪs wɑz ɔlmoʊs laɪk oʊl taɪmz, ɔlmoʊs laɪk biɪŋ bæk hoʊm, bæntɝɪŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ, ən nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪn ðə wɝl ðən ə læf ən twɪɾɪŋ ði ʌðɝ fɛloʊ.

Rand grinned in spite of himself. Marisa was almost as pretty as Egwene. And this was almost like old times, almost like being back home, bantering back and forth, and nothing more important in the world than a laugh and twitting the other fellow.

əz ðeɪ meɪd ðɛɹ weɪ θɹu ðə taʊn, oʊɡiɝ ɡɹiɾəd ði ɛldəst, boʊɪŋ əɹ kɝtsiɪŋ, aɪɪŋ ðə hjumən vɪzəɾɝz wɪð ɪntʃɹəst. eɪlɑɹz sɛt feɪs kɛpt ɛniwʌn fɹəm stɑpɪŋ tə spik, ðoʊ. ði oʊnli θɪŋ ðəɾ ɪndəkeɪɾəd wən ðeɪ lɛf ðə taʊn wɑz ði æbsəns ə ðə maʊnz; ðəɹ wɝ stɪl oʊɡiɝ əbaʊt, ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ tʃɹiz, əɹ səmtaɪmz wɝkɪŋ wɪð pɪtʃ ən sɔ əɹ æks wɛɹ ðəɹ wɝ dɛd lɪmz əɹ wɛɹ ə tʃɹi niɾəd mɔɹ sʌnlaɪt. ðeɪ hændəl ðə tæsks tɛndɝli.

As they made their way through the town, Ogier greeted the Eldest, bowing or curtsying, eyeing the human visitors with interest. Alar's set face kept anyone from stopping to speak, though. The only thing that indicated when they left the town was the absence of the mounds; there were still Ogier about, examining trees, or sometimes working with pitch and saw or axe where there were dead limbs or where a tree needed more sunlight. They handled the tasks tenderly.

dʒun dʒɔɪn ðɛm, liɾɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, ən hʊɹɪn keɪm ɹaɪɾɪŋ wɪð ənoʊ ən ði ʌðɝ soʊlʒɝz, ən ðə pækhɔɹsɪz, dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ eɪlɑɹ pɔɪntəɾ ən sɛd, "ɪɾ ɪz oʊvɝ ðɛɹ." ðə bæntɝ daɪd.

Juin joined them, leading their horses, and Hurin came riding with Uno and the other soldiers, and the packhorses, just before Alar pointed and said, "It is over there." The banter died.

ɹænd fɛlt ə moʊməntɛɹi sɝpɹaɪz. ðə weɪɡeɪt hæd tə bi aʊtsaɪd ðə stɛɾɪŋ - ðə weɪz hæd bɪn bɪɡʌn wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ; ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn meɪɾ ɪnsaɪd - bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə ɪndəkeɪt ðeɪ hæd kɹɔs ðə baʊndɝi. ðən i ɹilaɪz ðəɹ wɑz ə dɪfɝəns; ðə sɛns ə sʌmθɪŋ lɔs ðəɾ i hæd fɛl sɪns ɛntɝɪŋ ðə stɛɾɪŋ wɑz ɡɔn. ðət ɡeɪv ɪm ənʌðɝ sɔɹɾ ə tʃɪl. seɪɾɪn wɑz ðəɹ əɡɛn. weɪɾɪŋ.

Rand felt a momentary surprise. The Waygate had to be Outside the stedding - the Ways had been begun with the One Power; they could not have been made inside - but there was nothing to indicate they had crossed the boundary. Then he realized there was a difference; the sense of something lost that he had felt since entering the stedding was gone. That gave him another sort of chill. Saidin was there again. Waiting.

eɪlɑɹ lɛɾ əm pæst ə tɔl oʊk, ən ðəɹ ɪn ə smɔl klɪɹɪŋ stʊd ðə bɪɡ slæb ə ðə weɪɡeɪt, ðə fɹʌn ʌv ɪt dɛləkətli wɝkt ɪn taɪtli woʊvən vaɪnz ən livz fɹəm ə hʌnʒɹəd dɪfɹən plæns. ɝaʊn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə klɪɹɪŋ ði oʊɡiɝ hæd bɪlt ə loʊ stoʊn koʊpɪŋ ðət simd əz ɪf ɪt hæd ɡɹoʊn ðɛɹ, sədʒɛstɪŋ ə sɝkəl ə ɹuts. ðə lʊk ʌv ɪt meɪd ɹænd ənkʌmftəɹbəl. ɪt tʊk ɪm ə moʊmən tə ɹilaɪz ðət ðə ɹuts sədʒɛstəd wɝ ðoʊz ə bɹæmbəl ən bɹaɪɝ, bɝnɪŋɡlif ən ɪtʃ oʊk. nɑt ðə sɔɹɾ ə plæns ɪndə wɪtʃ ɛniwʌn wəd wɑnə stʌmbəl.

Alar led them past a tall oak, and there in a small clearing stood the big slab of the Waygate, the front of it delicately worked in tightly woven vines and leaves from a hundred different plants. Around the edge of the clearing the Ogier had built a low stone coping that seemed as if it had grown there, suggesting a circle of roots. The look of it made Rand uncomfortable. It took him a moment to realize that the roots suggested were those of bramble and briar, burningleaf and itch oak. Not the sort of plants into which anyone would want to stumble.

ði ɛldəst stɑpt ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə koʊpɪŋ. "ðə wɔl ɪz mɛn tə wɔɹn əweɪ ɛni hu kʌmz hɪɹ. nɑt ðət mɛni ʌv əs du. aɪ maɪsɛlf wɪl nɑt kɹɔs ɪt. bʌt jə meɪ." dʒun dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ əz kloʊs əz ʃi dɪd; hi kɛpt ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz hænz ɑn ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz koʊt, ən wəd nɑt lʊk ət ðə weɪɡeɪt.

The Eldest stopped short of the coping. "The wall is meant to warn away any who comes here. Not that many of us do. I myself will not cross it. But you may." Juin did not go as close as she did; he kept rubbing his hands on the front of his coat, and would not look at the Waygate.

"θæŋk ju," vɛɹɪn toʊl hɝ. "ðə niɾ ɪz ɡɹeɪt, əɹ aɪ wəd nɑɾ əv æskt ɪt."

"Thank you," Verin told her. "The need is great, or I would not have asked it."

ɹænd tɛnst əz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ stɛpt oʊvɝ ðə koʊpɪŋ ən əpɹoʊtʃt ðə weɪɡeɪt. lɔɪəl tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən mʌɾɝd tə hɪmsɛlf. ənoʊ ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə soʊlʒɝz ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz ən lusən sɔɹdz ɪn ðɛɹ skæbɝdz. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə weɪz əɡɛnst wɪtʃ ə sɔɹd wəd bi ɛni jus, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ tə kənvɪns ðɛmsɛlvz ðeɪ wɝ ɹɛɾi. oʊnli ɪŋtʃɹ ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sim kɑm; ivən eɪlɑɹ ɡɹɪpt əɹ skɝt wɪð boʊθ hænz.

Rand tensed as the Aes Sedai stepped over the coping and approached the Waygate. Loial took a deep breath and muttered to himself. Uno and the rest of the soldiers shifted in their saddles and loosened swords in their scabbards. There was nothing along the Ways against which a sword would be any use, but it was something to convince themselves they were ready. Only Ingtar and the Aes Sedai seemed calm; even Alar gripped her skirt with both hands.

vɛɹɪn plʌk ði ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə lif, ən ɹænd lin fɔɹwɝɾ ɪntɛnli. hi nu ən ɝdʒ tə əsum ðə vɔɪd, tə bi wɛɹ i kəd ɹitʃ seɪɾɪn ɪf i niɾəd tə.

Verin plucked the Avendesora leaf, and Rand leaned forward intently. He knew an urge to assume the void, to be where he could reach saidin if he needed to.

ðə ɡɹinɝi kɑɹvd əkɹɔs ðə weɪɡeɪt stɝɾ ɪn ən ənfɛl bɹiz, livz flʌɾɝɪŋ əz ə ɡæp oʊpən daʊn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə mæs ən ðə tu hævz bɪɡæn tə swɪŋ oʊpən.

The greenery carved across the Waygate stirred in an unfelt breeze, leaves fluttering as a gap opened down the center of the mass and the two halves began to swing open.

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət ðə fɝs kɹæk. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ dʌl, sɪlvɝi ɹəflɛkʃən bɪhaɪn ɪt, oʊnli blæknəs blækɝ ðən pɪtʃ. "kloʊs ɪt!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. "ðə blæk wɪnd! kloʊs ɪt!"

Rand stared at the first crack. There was no dull, silvery reflection behind it, only blackness blacker than pitch. "Close it!" he shouted. "The Black Wind! Close it!"

vɛɹɪn tʊk wʌn stɑɹɾəld lʊk ən θɹʌs ðə θɹi-pɔɪntəd lif bæk ɪn əmʌŋ ɔl ðə vɛɹid livz ɔlɹɛɾi ðɛɹ; ɪt steɪd wən ʃi tʊk əɹ hæn əweɪ ən bæk təwɔɹd ðə koʊpɪŋ. əz sun əz ði ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə lif wɑz bæk ɪn ɪts pleɪs, ðə weɪɡeɪɾ ɪmiɾiətli bɪɡæn tə kloʊz. ðə kɹæk dɪsəpɪɹd, vaɪnz ən livz mɝdʒɪŋ, haɪɾɪŋ ðə blæknəs ə mætʃɪn ʃɪn, ən ðə weɪɡeɪt wɑz oʊnli stoʊn əɡɛn, ɪf stoʊn kɑɹvd ɪn ə nɪɹɝ sɛmbləns ə laɪf ðən sim pɑsəbəl.

Verin took one startled look and thrust the three-pointed leaf back in among all the varied leaves already there; it stayed when she took her hand away and backed toward the coping. As soon as the Avendesora leaf was back in its place, the Waygate immediately began to close. The crack disappeared, vines and leaves merging, hiding the blackness of Machin Shin, and the Waygate was only stone again, if stone carved in a nearer semblance of life than seemed possible.

eɪlɑɹ lɛɾ aʊɾ ə ʃʌɾɝɪŋ bɹɛθ. "mætʃɪn ʃɪn. soʊ kloʊs."

Alar let out a shuddering breath. "Machin Shin. So close."

"ɪt dɪdn tʃɹaɪ tə kʌm aʊt," ɹænd sɛd. dʒun meɪɾ ə stʃɹæŋɡəl saʊnd.

"It didn't try to come out," Rand said. Juin made a strangled sound.

"aɪ hæv toʊl ju," vɛɹɪn sɛd, "ðə blæk wɪn ɪz ə kɹitʃɝ ə ðə weɪz. ɪt kænɑt liv ðɛm." ʃi saʊndəd kɑm, bʌt ʃi stɪl waɪpt əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ skɝt. ɹænd oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, ðən ɡeɪv ɪɾ ʌp. "æn jɛt," ʃi wɛn ɑn, "aɪ wʌndɝ əɾ ɪt biɪŋ hɪɹ. fɝst ɪn kɛɹhin, naʊ hɪɹ. aɪ wʌndɝ." ʃi ɡeɪv ɹænd ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlæns ðət meɪɾ ɪm dʒʌmp. ðə lʊk wɑz soʊ kwɪk ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɛniwʌn ɛls noʊɾəst ɪt, bʌt tə ɹænd ɪt sim tə kənɛkt ɪm wɪð ðə blæk wɪnd.

"I have told you," Verin said, "the Black Wind is a creature of the Ways. It cannot leave them." She sounded calm, but she still wiped her hands on her skirt. Rand opened his mouth, then gave it up. "And yet," she went on, "I wonder at it being here. First in Cairhien, now here. I wonder." She gave Rand a sidelong glance that made him jump. The look was so quick that he did not think anyone else noticed it, but to Rand it seemed to connect him with the Black Wind.

"aɪ hæv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə ðɪs," eɪlɑɹ sɛd sloʊli, "mætʃɪn ʃɪn weɪɾɪŋ wən ə weɪɡeɪt wɑz oʊpənd. ɪɾ ɔlweɪz ɹoʊm ðə weɪz. bʌɾ ɪts bɪn lɔŋ, ən pɝhæps ðə blæk wɪn hʌŋɝz, ən hoʊps tə kætʃ səm ənwɛɹi wʌn ɛntɝɪŋ ə ɡeɪt. vɛɹɪn, əʃʊɹədli jə kænɑt juz ðɪs weɪɡeɪt. ən haʊɛvɝ ɡɹeɪt jəɹ nid, aɪ kænɑt seɪ aɪm sɑɹi. ðə weɪz bɪlɔŋ tə ðə ʃædoʊ, naʊ."

"I have never heard of this," Alar said slowly, "Machin Shin waiting when a Waygate was opened. It always roamed the Ways. But it has been long, and perhaps the Black Wind hungers, and hopes to catch some unwary one entering a gate. Verin, assuredly you cannot use this Waygate. And however great your need, I cannot say I am sorry. The Ways belong to the Shadow, now."

ɹænd fɹaʊn ət ðə weɪɡeɪt. kəɾ ɪt bi fɑloʊɪŋ mi? ðəɹ wɝ tu mɛni kwɛstʃənz. hæd feɪn sʌmhaʊ ɔɹɾɝd ðə blæk wɪnd? vɛɹɪn sɛɾ ɪt kəd nɑt bi dʌn. ən waɪ wəd feɪn dɪmæn ðəɾ i fɑloʊ, ðən tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp hɪm? hi oʊnli nu ðəɾ i bɪliv ðə mɛsədʒ. hi hæd tə ɡoʊ tə toʊmən hɛd. ɪf ðeɪ faʊn ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ən mæts dæɡɝ ʌndɝ ə bʊʃ təmɑɹoʊ, hi stɪl hæd tə ɡoʊ.

Rand frowned at the Waygate. Could it be following me? There were too many questions. Had Fain somehow ordered the Black Wind? Verin said it could not be done. And why would Fain demand that he follow, then try to stop him? He only knew that he believed the message. He had to go to Toman Head. If they found the Horn of Valere and Mat's dagger under a bush tomorrow, he still had to go.

vɛɹɪn stʊd wɪð aɪz ənfoʊkəst ɪn θɔt. mæt wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə koʊpɪŋ wɪð ɪz hɛɾ ɪn ɪz hænz, ən pɛɹɪn wɑtʃt ɪm wɝidli. lɔɪəl simd ɹɪliv ðət ðeɪ kəd nɑt juz ðə weɪɡeɪt, ən əʃeɪmd ət biɪŋ ɹɪlivd.

Verin stood with eyes unfocused in thought. Mat was sitting on the coping with his head in his hands, and Perrin watched him worriedly. Loial seemed relieved that they could not use the Waygate, and ashamed at being relieved.

"wi ɑɹ dʌn fəɹ hɪɹ," ɪŋtʃɹ ənaʊnst. "vɛɹɪn sədaɪ, aɪ fɑloʊd jə hɪɹ əɡɛns maɪ bɛɾɝ dʒʌdʒmənt, bʌɾ aɪ kən noʊ lɔŋɡɝ fɑloʊ. aɪ min tə ɹɪtɝn tə kɛɹhin. bɑɹθeɪnz kən tɛl mi wɛɹ ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz wɛnt, ən sʌmhaʊ əl meɪk ɪm də ɪt."

"We are done for here," Ingtar announced. "Verin Sedai, I followed you here against my better judgment, but I can no longer follow. I mean to return to Cairhien. Barthanes can tell me where the Darkfriends went, and somehow I will make him do it."

"feɪn wɛn tə toʊmən hɛd," ɹænd sɛd wɛɹəli. "ænd wɛɹ i wɛnt, ðæts wɛɹ ðə hɔɹn ɪz, ən ðə dæɡɝ."

"Fain went to Toman Head," Rand said wearily. "And where he went, that's where the Horn is, and the dagger."

"aɪ səpoʊz. . . ." pɛɹɪn ʃɹʌɡd ɹɪlʌktənli. "aɪ səpoʊz wi kəd tʃɹaɪ ənʌðɝ weɪɡeɪt. əɾ ənʌðɝ stɛɾɪŋ?"

"I suppose. . . ." Perrin shrugged reluctantly. "I suppose we could try another Waygate. At another stedding?"

lɔɪəl stʃɹoʊkt ɪz tʃɪn ən spoʊk kwɪkli, əz ɪf tə meɪk ʌp fəɹ ɪz ɹɪlif ət ðə feɪljɝ hɪɹ. "stɛɾɪŋ kæntwn laɪz dʒʌst əbʌv ðə ɹɪvɝ aɪɹælɛl, ən stɛɾɪŋ teɪaɪdʒɪŋ ɪz ist ʌv ɪɾ ɪn ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld. bʌt ðə weɪɡeɪɾ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, wɛɹ ðə ɡɹoʊv wɑz, ɪz kloʊsɝ, ən ðə ɡeɪɾ ɪn ðə ɡɹoʊv ət tɑɹ vəlɑn ɪz kloʊsəst ʌv ɔl."

Loial stroked his chin and spoke quickly, as if to make up for his relief at the failure here. "Stedding Cantoine lies just above the River Iralell, and Stedding Taijing is east of it in the Spine of the World. But the Waygate in Caemlyn, where the grove was, is closer, and the gate in the grove at Tar Valon is closest of all."

"wɪtʃɛvɝ weɪɡeɪt wi tʃɹaɪ tə juz," vɛɹɪn sɛɾ æbsənli, "aɪ fɪɹ wɪl faɪn mætʃɪn ʃɪn weɪɾɪŋ." eɪlɑɹ lʊkt əɾ əɹ kwɛstʃənɪŋli, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd noʊ mɔɹ ðəɾ ɛniwʌn kəd hɪɹ. ʃi mʌɾɝd tə hɝsɛlf ɪnstɛd, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ əz ɪf ɑɹɡjuɪŋ wɪð hɝsɛlf.

"Whichever Waygate we try to use," Verin said absently, "I fear we will find Machin Shin waiting." Alar looked at her questioningly, but the Aes Sedai said no more that anyone could hear. She muttered to herself instead, shaking her head as if arguing with herself.

"wʌt wi nid," hʊɹɪn sɛd dɪfəɾəntli, "ɪz wʌn ə ðoʊz pɔɹɾəl stoʊnz." hi lʊk tə eɪlɑɹ, ðən vɛɹɪn, ən wən niðɝ toʊld ɪm tə stɑp, hi wɛn ɑn, saʊndɪŋ ɪnkɹisɪŋli kɑnfəɾənt. "ðə leɪɾi səlin sɛd ðoʊz oʊld ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd stʌɾid ðoʊz wɝlz, ən ðət wɑz haʊ ðeɪ nu haʊ tə meɪk ðə weɪz. ən ðət pleɪs wi wɝ . . . wɛl, ɪɾ oʊnli tʊk əs tu deɪz - lɛs - tə tʃɹævəl ə hʌnʒɹəd liɡz. ɪf wi kəd juz ə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn tə ɡoʊ tə ðət wɝld, əɹ wʌn laɪk ɪt, waɪ, ɪɾəd teɪk noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə wik əɹ tu tə ɹitʃ ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən, ən wi kəd kʌm bæk ɹaɪɾ ɑn toʊmən hɛd. meɪbi ɪɾ ɪzən soʊ kwɪk əz ðə weɪz, bʌɾ ɪts ə lɔŋ saɪt kwɪkɝ ðən ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɔf wɛst. wʌt dʒju seɪ, lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ? lɔɹd ɹænd?"

"What we need," Hurin said diffidently, "is one of those Portal Stones." He looked to Alar, then Verin, and when neither told him to stop, he went on, sounding increasingly confident. "The Lady Selene said those old Aes Sedai had studied those worlds, and that was how they knew how to make the Ways. And that place we were . . . well, it only took us two days - less - to travel a hundred leagues. If we could use a Portal Stone to go to that world, or one like it, why, it'd take no more than a week or two to reach the Aryth Ocean, and we could come back right on Toman Head. Maybe it isn't so quick as the Ways, but it's a long sight quicker than riding off west. What do you say, Lord Ingtar? Lord Rand?"

vɛɹɪn ænsɝd hɪm. "wʌt jə sədʒɛs maɪt bi pɑsəbəl, snɪfɝ, bʌɾ əz wɛl hoʊp tə oʊpən ðɪs weɪɡeɪɾ əɡɛn ən faɪn mætʃɪn ʃɪn ɡɔn əz hoʊp tə faɪn ə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn. aɪ noʊ nʌn kloʊsɝ ðən ði il weɪst. ðoʊ wi kəd ɡoʊ bæk ɪndə kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ, ɪf ju, əɹ ɹænd, əɹ lɔɪəl θɪŋk jə kəd faɪn ðət stoʊn əɡɛn."

Verin answered him. "What you suggest might be possible, sniffer, but as well hope to open this Waygate again and find Machin Shin gone as hope to find a Portal Stone. I know none closer than the Aiel Waste. Though we could go back into Kinslayer's Dagger, if you, or Rand, or Loial think you could find that Stone again."

ɹænd lʊkt ət mæt. hɪz fɹɛn hæd lɪftəɾ ɪz hɛd hoʊpfəli ət ðɪs tɔk ə ðə stoʊnz. ə fju wiks, vɛɹɪn hæd sɛd. ɪf ðeɪ sɪmpli ɹoʊd wɛst, mæt wəd nɛvɝ lɪv tə si toʊmən hɛd.

Rand looked at Mat. His friend had lifted his head hopefully at this talk of the Stones. A few weeks, Verin had said. If they simply rode west, Mat would never live to see Toman Head.

"aɪ kən faɪn ɪt," ɹænd sɛd ɹɪlʌktənli. hi fɛlt əʃeɪmd. mæts ɡoʊɪŋ tə daɪ, dɑɹkfɹɛnz əv ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, feɪn wɪl hɝɾ ɛmənz fild ɪf jə doʊn fɑloʊ hɪm, ən jəɹ əfɹeɪd tə tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ. wʌns tə ɡoʊ ən wʌns tə kʌm bæk. twaɪs mɔɹ woʊn dʒɹaɪv jə mæd. wʌt ɹɪli meɪɾ ɪm əfɹeɪd, ðoʊ, wɑz ði iɡɝnəs ðət lɛpt ɪnsaɪɾ ɪm ət ðə θɔɾ ə tʃænəlɪŋ əɡɛn, ʌv filɪŋ ðə paʊɝ fɪl hɪm, ʌv filɪŋ tʃɹuli əlaɪv.

"I can find it," Rand said reluctantly. He felt ashamed. Mat's going to die, Darkfriends have the Horn of Valere, Fain will hurt Emond's Field if you don't follow him, and you're afraid to channel the Power. Once to go and once to come back. Twice more won't drive you mad. What really made him afraid, though, was the eagerness that leaped inside him at the thought of channeling again, of feeling the Power fill him, of feeling truly alive.

"aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðɪs," eɪlɑɹ sɛd sloʊli. "ðə pɔɹɾəl stoʊnz əv nɑt bɪn juz sɪns ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. aɪ dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðəɹ wɑz ɛniwʌn u stɪl nu haʊ tə juz ðɛm."

"I do not understand this," Alar said slowly. "The Portal Stones have not been used since the Age of Legends. I did not think there was anyone who still knew how to use them."

"ðə bɹaʊn ədʒɑ noʊz mɛni θɪŋz," vɛɹɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "æn aɪ noʊ haʊ ðə stoʊnz meɪ bi juzd."

"The Brown Ajah knows many things," Verin said dryly, "and I know how the Stones may be used."

ði ɛldəs nɑɾəd. "tʃɹuli ðəɹ ɑɹ wʌndɝz ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ ʌv wɪtʃ wi də nɑt dʒɹim. bʌɾ ɪf jə kən juz ə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn, ðəɹ ɪz noʊ nid fəɹ jə tə ɹaɪd tə kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ. ðəɹ ɪz ə stoʊn nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm wɛɹ wi stænd."

The Eldest nodded. "Truly there are wonders in the White Tower of which we do not dream. But if you can use a Portal Stone, there is no need for you to ride to Kinslayer's Dagger. There is a Stone not far from where we stand."

"ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz, ən ðə pæɾɝn pɹəvaɪdz wʌɾ ɪz nidfəl." ði æbsən lʊk dʒɹɑp fɹəm vɛɹɪnz feɪs ɔltəɡɛðɝ. "teɪk əs tə ɪt," ʃi sɛd bɹɪskli. "wi hæv lɔs mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf taɪm ɔlɹɛɾi."

"The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills, and the Pattern provides what is needful." The absent look dropped from Verin's face altogether. "Take us to it," she said briskly. "We have lost more than enough time already."


tʃæptɝ θɝɾisɛvən


CHAPTER 37

wʌt maɪt bi


What Might Be

eɪlɑɹ lɛɾ əm əweɪ fɹəm ðə weɪɡeɪɾ əɾ ə dɪɡnəfaɪd peɪs, ðoʊ dʒun simd mɔɹ ðən æŋkʃəs tə liv ðə weɪɡeɪt bɪhaɪnd. mæt, ət list, lʊkt əhɛɾ iɡɝli, ən hʊɹɪn sim kɑnfəɾənt, waɪl lɔɪəl əpɪɹd kənsɝn mɔɹ ðəɾ eɪlɑɹ maɪt tʃeɪnʒ əɹ maɪn əbaʊɾ ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ ðən əbaʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. ɹænd dɪd nɑt hɝi əz i pʊld ɹɛɾ əlɔŋ baɪ ðə ɹeɪnz. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk vɛɹɪn mɛn tə juz ðə stoʊn hɝsɛlf.

Alar led them away from the Waygate at a dignified pace, though Juin seemed more than anxious to leave the Waygate behind. Mat, at least, looked ahead eagerly, and Hurin seemed confident, while Loial appeared concerned more that Alar might change her mind about his going than about anything else. Rand did not hurry as he pulled Red along by the reins. He did not think Verin meant to use the Stone herself.

ðə ɡɹeɪ stoʊn kɑləm stʊɾ əpɹaɪt nɪɹ ə bitʃ ɔlmoʊst ə hʌnʒɹəd fit tɔl ən fɔɹ peɪsɪz θɪk; ɹænd wʊɾə θɔɾ ɪɾ ə bɪɡ tʃɹi bɪfɔɹ i sɔ ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹiz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wɔɹnɪŋ koʊpɪŋ hɪɹ, oʊnli ə fju waɪldflaʊɹz pʊʃɪŋ θɹu ðə lifi mʌltʃ ə ðə fɔɹəs flɔɹ. ðə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn ɪtsɛlf wɑz wɛðɝd, bʌt ðə sɪmbəlz kʌvɝɪŋ ɪt wɝ stɪl klɪɹ ɪnʌf tə meɪk aʊt.

The gray stone column stood upright near a beech almost a hundred feet tall and four paces thick; Rand would have thought it a big tree before he saw the Great Trees. There was no warning coping here, only a few wildflowers pushing through the leafy mulch of the forest floor. The Portal Stone itself was weathered, but the symbols covering it were still clear enough to make out.

ðə maʊntəd ʃaɪnɝən soʊlʒɝz spɹɛɾ aʊɾ ɪn ə lus sɝkəl ɝaʊn ðə stoʊn ən ðoʊz əfʊt.

The mounted Shienaran soldiers spread out in a loose circle around the Stone and those afoot.

"wi stʊɾ ɪɾ əpɹaɪt," eɪlɑɹ sɛd, "wɛn wi faʊn ɪt mɛni jɪɹz əɡoʊ, bʌt wi dɪd nɑt muv ɪt. ɪt . . . sim tə . . . ɹɪzɪs biɪŋ muvd." ʃi wɛn ɹaɪɾ ʌp tə ɪt, ən leɪɾ ə bɪɡ hæn ɑn ðə stoʊn. "aɪ hæv ɔlweɪz θɔɾ ʌv ɪɾ əz ə sɪmbəl ʌv wʌɾ əz bɪn lɔst, wʌɾ əz bɪn fɝɡɑɾən. ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, ɪt kəd bi stʌɾid ən sʌmwʌɾ ʌndɝstʊd. tə ʌs, ɪts oʊnli stoʊn."

"We stood it upright," Alar said, "when we found it many years ago, but we did not move it. It . . . seemed to . . . resist being moved." She went right up to it, and laid a big hand on the Stone. "I have always thought of it as a symbol of what has been lost, what has been forgotten. In the Age of Legends, it could be studied and somewhat understood. To us, it is only stone."

"mɔɹ ðən ðæt, aɪ hoʊp." vɛɹɪnz vɔɪs ɡɹu bɹɪskɝ. "ɛldəst, aɪ θæŋk jə fəɹ jəɹ hɛlp. fɝɡɪv əs fəɹ əɹ læk ə sɛɹəmoʊni ɪn livɪŋ ju, bʌt ðə wil weɪts fəɹ noʊ wʊmən. ət list wɪl noʊ lɔŋɡɝ dɪstɝb ðə pis ə jəɹ stɛɾɪŋ."

"More than that, I hope." Verin's voice grew brisker. "Eldest, I thank you for your help. Forgive us for our lack of ceremony in leaving you, but the Wheel waits for no woman. At least we will no longer disturb the peace of your stedding."

"wi kɔl ðə stoʊnmeɪsɑnz bæk fɹəm kɛɹhin," eɪlɑɹ sɛd, "bʌt wi stɪl hɪɹ wʌt hæpənz ɪn ðə wɝld aʊtsaɪd. fɔls dʒɹæɡənz. ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn. wi hɪɹ, ən ɪt pæsəz əs baɪ. aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk tɑɹmən ɡdən wɪl pæs əs baɪ, əɹ liv əs ɪn pis. fɛɹ jə wɛl, vɛɹɪn sədaɪ. ɔl ə ju, fɛɹ wɛl, ən meɪ jə ʃɛltɝ ɪn ðə pɑm ə ðə kɹieɪɾɝz hænd. dʒun." ʃi pɔzd oʊnli fəɹ ə ɡlæns ət lɔɪəl ən ə læst ædmənətɔɹi lʊk ət ɹænd, ən ðən ði oʊɡiɝ wɝ ɡɔn əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz.

"We called the stonemasons back from Cairhien," Alar said, "but we still hear what happens in the world Outside. False Dragons. The Great Hunt of the Horn. We hear, and it passes us by. I do not think Tarmon Gai'don will pass us by, or leave us in peace. Fare you well, Verin Sedai. All of you, fare well, and may you shelter in the palm of the Creator's hand. Juin." She paused only for a glance at Loial and a last admonitory look at Rand, and then the Ogier were gone among the trees.

ðəɹ wɑz ə kɹikɪŋ ə sæɾəlz əz ðə soʊlʒɝz ʃɪftəd. ɪŋtʃɹ lʊkt ɝaʊn ðə sɝkəl ðeɪ meɪd. "ɪz ðɪs nɛsəsɛɹi, vɛɹɪn sədaɪ? ivən ɪf ɪt kən bi dʌn. . . . wi də nɑɾ ivən noʊ ɪf ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɹɪli hæv teɪkən ðə hɔɹn tə toʊmən hɛd. aɪ stɪl bɪliv aɪ kən meɪk bɑɹθeɪnz - "

There was a creaking of saddles as the soldiers shifted. Ingtar looked around the circle they made. "Is this necessary, Verin Sedai? Even if it can be done. . . . We do not even know if the Darkfriends really have taken the Horn to Toman Head. I still believe I can make Barthanes - "

"ɪf wi kænɑt bi ʃʊɹ," vɛɹɪn sɛd maɪldli, kʌɾɪŋ ɪm ɔf, "ðɛn toʊmən hɛɾ ɪz əz ɡʊɾ ə pleɪs tə lʊk əz ɛni ʌðɝ. mɔɹ ðən wʌns aɪv hɝd jə seɪ jə wəd ɹaɪd tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl ɪf nid bi tə ɹɪkʌvɝ ðə hɔɹn. dʒju hoʊl bæk naʊ, ət ðɪs?" ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd tə ðə stoʊn ʌndɝ ðə smuð-bɑɹk tʃɹi.

"If we cannot be sure," Verin said mildly, cutting him off, "then Toman Head is as good a place to look as any other. More than once I've heard you say you would ride to Shayol Ghul if need be to recover the Horn. Do you hold back now, at this?" She gestured to the Stone under the smooth-barked tree.

ɪŋtʃɹz bæk stɪfənd. "aɪ hoʊl bæk ət nʌθɪŋ. teɪk əs tə toʊmən hɛɾ əɹ teɪk əs tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl. ɪf ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ laɪz ət ði ɛnd, əl fɑloʊ ju."

Ingtar's back stiffened. "I hold back at nothing. Take us to Toman Head or take us to Shayol Ghul. If the Horn of Valere lies at the end, I will follow you."

"ðæɾ ɪz wɛl, ɪŋtʃɹ. naʊ, ɹænd, juv bɪn tʃɹænspɔɹɾəd baɪ ə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn mɔɹ ɹisənli ðən aɪ. kʌm." ʃi moʊʃən tə hɪm, ən i lɛd ɹɛɾ oʊvɝ tə hɝ ət ðə stoʊn.

"That is well, Ingtar. Now, Rand, you have been transported by a Portal Stone more recently than I. Come." She motioned to him, and he led Red over to her at the Stone.

"juv juzd ə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn?" hi ɡlænst oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ noʊ wʌn ɛls wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ. "ðɛn jə doʊn min fəɹ mi tə." hi ɡeɪv ə ɹɪlivd ʃɹʌɡ.

"You've used a Portal Stone?" He glanced over his shoulder to make sure no one else was close enough to hear. "Then you don't mean for me to." He gave a relieved shrug.

vɛɹɪn lʊkt əɾ ɪm blænli. "aɪ hæv nɛvɝ juzd ə stoʊn; ðəɾ ɪz waɪ jəɹ jus ɪz mɔɹ ɹisən ðən maɪn. aɪm wɛl əwɛɹ ə maɪ lɪməts. aɪ wəd bi dɪstʃɹɔɪd bɪfɔɹ aɪ keɪm kloʊs tə tʃænəlɪŋ ɪnʌf paʊɝ tə wɝk ə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn. bʌɾ aɪ noʊ ə lɪɾəl ə ðɛm. ɪnʌf tə hɛlp ju, ə bɪt."

Verin looked at him blandly. "I have never used a Stone; that is why your use is more recent than mine. I am well aware of my limits. I would be destroyed before I came close to channeling enough Power to work a Portal Stone. But I know a little of them. Enough to help you, a bit."

"bʌɾ aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɛniθɪŋ." hi lɛɾ ɪz hɔɹs ɝaʊn ðə stoʊn, lʊkɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp ən daʊn. "ðə wʌn θɪŋ aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪz ðə sɪmbəl fəɹ əɹ wɝld. səlin ʃoʊd mi, bʌɾ aɪ doʊn si ɪt hɪɹ."

"But I don't know anything." He led his horse around the Stone, looking it up and down. "The one thing I remember is the symbol for our world. Selene showed me, but I don't see it here."

"ʌv kɔɹs nɑt. nɑɾ ɑn ə stoʊn ɪn əɹ wɝld; ðə sɪmbəlz ɑɹ eɪdz ɪn ɡɛɾɪŋ tə ə wɝld." ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "wʌt wəɾ aɪ nɑt ɡɪv tə tɔk wɪð ðɪs ɡɝl ə jʊɹz? əɹ bɛɾɝ, tə pʊt maɪ hænz ɑn əɹ bʊk. ɪts dʒɛnɝəli θɔt ðət noʊ kɑpi ʌv mɪɹɝz ə ðə wil sɝvaɪv ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ hoʊl. sɹəfɛl ɔlweɪz tɛlz mi ðəɹ ɑɹ mɔɹ bʊks ðət wi bɪliv lɔs ðən aɪ kəd kɹɛɾət weɪɾɪŋ tə bi faʊnd. wɛl, noʊ jus ɪn wɝiɪŋ oʊvɝ wʌɾ aɪ doʊnt noʊ. aɪ də noʊ səm θɪŋz. ðə sɪmbəlz ɑn ðə tɑp hæf ə ðə stoʊn stæn fəɹ wɝlz. nɑɾ ɔl ðə wɝlz ðət maɪt bi, ʌv kɔɹs. əpɛɹənli, nɑɾ ɛvɹi stoʊn kənɛks tə ɛvɹi wɝld, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz bɪliv ðət ðəɹ wɝ pɑsəbəl wɝlz noʊ stoʊnz əɾ ɔl tʌtʃt. dʒju si nʌθɪŋ ðət spɑɹks ə mɛmɹi?"

"Of course not. Not on a Stone in our world; the symbols are aids in getting to a world." She shook her head. "What would I not give to talk with this girl of yours? Or better, to put my hands on her book. It is generally thought that no copy of Mirrors of the Wheel survived the Breaking whole. Serafelle always tells me there are more books that we believe lost than I could credit waiting to be found. Well, no use in worrying over what I don't know. I do know some things. The symbols on the top half of the Stone stand for worlds. Not all the Worlds That Might Be, of course. Apparently, not every Stone connects to every world, and the Aes Sedai of the Age of Legends believed that there were possible worlds no Stones at all touched. Do you see nothing that sparks a memory?"

"nʌθɪŋ." ɪf i faʊn ðə ɹaɪt sɪmbəl, hi kəd juz ɪt tə faɪn feɪn ən ðə hɔɹn, tə seɪv mæt, tə stɑp feɪn hɝɾɪŋ ɛmənz fild. ɪf i faʊn ðə sɪmbəl, hi wəɾ əv tə tʌtʃ seɪɾɪn. hi wɑntəd tə seɪv mæt ən stɑp feɪn, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt wɑnə tʌtʃ seɪɾɪn. hi wɑz əfɹeɪd tə tʃænəl, ən i hʌŋɡɝd fəɹ ɪt laɪk ə stɑɹvɪŋ mæn fəɹ fud. "aɪ doʊn ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛniθɪŋ."

"Nothing." If he found the right symbol, he could use it to find Fain and the Horn, to save Mat, to stop Fain hurting Emond's Field. If he found the symbol, he would have to touch saidin. He wanted to save Mat and stop Fain, but he did not want to touch saidin. He was afraid to channel, and he hungered for it like a starving man for food. "I don't remember anything."

vɛɹɪn saɪd. "ðə sɪmbəlz ət ðə bɑɾəm ɪndəkeɪt stoʊnz əɾ ʌðɝ pleɪsəz. ɪf jə noʊ ðə tʃɹɪk ʌv ɪt, jə kəd teɪk ʌs, nɑt tə ðɪs seɪm stoʊn ɪn ənʌðɝ wɝld, bʌt tə wʌn ə ðoʊz ʌðɝz ðɛɹ, əɹ ivən tə wʌn ə ðɛm hɪɹ. ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ əkɪn tə tʃɹævlɪŋ, aɪ θɪŋk, bʌt dʒʌst əz noʊ wʌn ɹɪmɛmbɝz haʊ tə tʃɹævəl, noʊ wʌn ɹɪmɛmbɝz ðə tʃɹɪk. wɪθaʊt ðət nɑlədʒ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ ɪt maɪɾ izəli dɪstʃɹɔɪ əs ɔl." ʃi pɔɪntəd tə tu pɛɹəlɛl weɪvi laɪnz kɹɔs baɪ ən ɑd skwɪɡəl, kɑɹv loʊ ɑn ðə kɑləm. "ðæɾ ɪndəkeɪts ə stoʊn ɑn toʊmən hɛd. ɪts wʌn ə θɹi stoʊnz fəɹ wɪtʃ aɪ noʊ ðə sɪmbəl; ði oʊnli wʌn ə ðoʊz θɹi aɪv vɪzəɾəd. ən wʌɾ aɪ lɝnd - æftɝ nɪɹli biɪŋ kɑt baɪ ðə snoʊz ɪn ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst ən fɹizɪŋ maɪ weɪ əkɹɔs ɑlməθ pleɪn - wɑz æbsəlutli nʌθɪŋ. dʒju pleɪ ət daɪs, əɹ kɑɹdz, ɹænd ælθɹ?"

Verin sighed. "The symbols at the bottom indicate Stones at other places. If you know the trick of it, you could take us, not to this same Stone in another world, but to one of those others there, or even to one of them here. It was something akin to Traveling, I think, but just as no one remembers how to Travel, no one remembers the trick. Without that knowledge, trying it might easily destroy us all." She pointed to two parallel wavy lines crossed by an odd squiggle, carved low on the column. "That indicates a Stone on Toman Head. It is one of three Stones for which I know the symbol; the only one of those three I've visited. And what I learned - after nearly being caught by the snows in the Mountains of Mist and freezing my way across Almoth Plain - was absolutely nothing. Do you play at dice, or cards, Rand al'Thor?"

"mæts ðə ɡæmblɝ. waɪ?"

"Mat's the gambler. Why?"

"jɛs. wɛl, wɪl liv ɪm aʊɾ ə ðɪs, aɪ θɪŋk. ðiz ʌðɝ sɪmbəlz ɑɹ ɔlsoʊ noʊn tə mi."

"Yes. Well, we'll leave him out of this, I think. These other symbols are also known to me."

wɪð wʌn fɪŋɡɝ ʃi aʊtlaɪn ə ɹɛktæŋɡəl kənteɪnɪŋ eɪt kɑɹvɪŋz ðət wɝ mʌtʃ əlaɪk, ə sɝkəl ən ən æɹoʊ, bʌɾ ɪn hæf ði æɹoʊ wɑz kənteɪn ɪnsaɪd ðə sɝkəl, waɪl ɪn ði ʌðɝz ðə pɔɪn pɪɹs ðə sɝkəl θɹu. ði æɹoʊz pɔɪntəd lɛft, ɹaɪt, ʌp ən daʊn, ən sɝaʊndɪŋ itʃ sɝkəl wɑz ə dɪfɹən laɪn ʌv wʌt ɹænd wɑz ʃʊɹ wɑz skɹɪpt, ðoʊ ɪn noʊ læŋɡwədʒ i nu, ɔl kɝvɪŋ laɪnz ðət sʌɾənli bɪkeɪm dʒæɡd hʊks, ðən floʊɾ ɑn əɡɛn.

With one finger she outlined a rectangle containing eight carvings that were much alike, a circle and an arrow, but in half the arrow was contained inside the circle, while in the others the point pierced the circle through. The arrows pointed left, right, up and down, and surrounding each circle was a different line of what Rand was sure was script, though in no language he knew, all curving lines that suddenly became jagged hooks, then flowed on again.

"æt list," vɛɹɪn wɛn ɑn, "aɪ noʊ ðɪs mʌtʃ əbaʊt ðɛm. itʃ stænz fəɹ ə wɝld, ðə stʌɾi ʌv wɪtʃ lɛɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli tə ðə meɪkɪŋ ə ðə weɪz. ðiz ɑɹ nɑɾ ɔl ə ðə wɝlz stʌɾid, bʌt ði oʊnli wʌnz fəɹ wɪtʃ aɪ noʊ ðə sɪmbəlz. ðɪs ɪz wɛɹ ɡæmbəlɪŋ kʌmz ɪn. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ ɛni ʌv ðiz wɝlz ɪz laɪk. ɪts bɪliv ðəɹ ɑɹ wɝlz wɛɹ ə jɪɹ ɪz oʊnli ə deɪ hɪɹ, ən ʌðɝz wɛɹ ə deɪ ɪz ə jɪɹ hɪɹ. ðəɹ ɑɹ səpoʊz tə bi wɝlz wɛɹ ðə vɛɹi ɛɹ wəd kɪl əs əɾ ə bɹɛθ, ən wɝlz ðət bɛɹli hæv ɪnʌf ɹiæləɾi tə hoʊl təɡɛðɝ. aɪ wəd nɑt spɛkjəleɪɾ ɑn wʌt maɪt hæpən ɪf wi faʊn aʊɝsɛlvz ɪn wʌn ə ðoʊz. jə mʌs tʃuz. əz maɪ fɑðɝ wəɾ əv sɛd, ɪts taɪm tə ɹoʊl ðə daɪs."

"At least," Verin went on, "I know this much about them. Each stands for a world, the study of which led eventually to the making of the Ways. These are not all of the worlds studied, but the only ones for which I know the symbols. This is where gambling comes in. I don't know what any of these worlds is like. It is believed there are worlds where a year is only a day here, and others where a day is a year here. There are supposed to be worlds where the very air would kill us at a breath, and worlds that barely have enough reality to hold together. I would not speculate on what might happen if we found ourselves in one of those. You must choose. As my father would have said, it's time to roll the dice."

ɹænd stɛɹd, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd. "aɪ kəd kɪl ɔl ʌv ʌs, wʌtɛvɝ aɪ tʃuz."

Rand stared, shaking his head. "I could kill all of us, whatever I choose."

"ɑɹ jə nɑt wɪlɪŋ tə teɪk ðət ɹɪsk? fəɹ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ? fəɹ mæt?"

"Are you not willing to take that risk? For the Horn of Valere? For Mat?"

"waɪ ɑɹ jə soʊ wɪlɪŋ tə teɪk ɪt? aɪ doʊn ivən noʊ ɪf aɪ kən də ɪt. ɪt - ɪt dʌznt wɝk ɛvɹi taɪm aɪ tʃɹaɪ." hi nu noʊ wʌn hæd kʌm ɛni kloʊsɝ, bʌɾ i lʊkt ɛniweɪ. ɔl ə ðɛm weɪɾəd ɪn ə lus sɝkəl ɝaʊn ðə stoʊn, wɑtʃɪŋ, bʌt nɑt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə ivzdʒɹɑp. "səmtaɪmz seɪɾɪn ɪz dʒʌs ðɛɹ. aɪ kən fil ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt maɪɾ əz wɛl bi ɑn ðə mun əz fɑɹ əz tʌtʃɪŋ ɪt. ən ivən ɪf ɪt dʌz wɝk, wʌɾ ɪf aɪ teɪk əs sʌmpleɪs wi kæn bɹið? wʌt ɡʊd wɪl ðət də mæt? əɹ ðə hɔɹn?"

"Why are you so willing to take it? I don't even know if I can do it. It - it doesn't work every time I try." He knew no one had come any closer, but he looked anyway. All of them waited in a loose circle around the Stone, watching, but not close enough to eavesdrop. "Sometimes saidin is just there. I can feel it, but it might as well be on the moon as far as touching it. And even if it does work, what if I take us someplace we can't breathe? What good will that do Mat? Or the Horn?"

"ju ɑɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli. "oʊ, jə kən daɪ, bʌɾ aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðə pæɾɝn wɪl lɛt jə daɪ əntɪl ɪts dʌn wɪð ju. ðən əɡɛn, ðə ʃædoʊ laɪz ɑn ðə pæɾɝn, naʊ, ən u kən seɪ haʊ ðəɾ əfɛks ðə wivɪŋ? ɔl jə kən də ɪz fɑloʊ jəɹ dɛstəni."

"You are the Dragon Reborn," she said quietly. "Oh, you can die, but I don't think the Pattern will let you die until it is done with you. Then again, the Shadow lies on the Pattern, now, and who can say how that affects the weaving? All you can do is follow your destiny."

"aɪ æm ɹænd ælθɹ," hi ɡɹaʊld. "aɪ æm nɑt ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. aɪ woʊn bi ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən."

"I am Rand al'Thor," he growled. "I am not the Dragon Reborn. I won't be a false Dragon."

"ju ɑɹ wʌt jə ɑɹ. wɪl jə tʃuz, əɹ wɪl jə stæn hɪɹ əntɪl jəɹ fɹɛn daɪz?"

"You are what you are. Will you choose, or will you stand here until your friend dies?"

ɹænd hɝɾ ɪz tiθ ɡɹaɪndɪŋ ən fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə ənklɛntʃ ɪz dʒɔ. ðə sɪmbəlz kəɾ ɔl əv bɪn ɪɡzækli əlaɪk, fəɹ ɔl ðeɪ mɛn tə hɪm. ðə skɹɪp kəɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn ə tʃɪkənz skɹætʃɪŋz. ət læst i sɛɾəld ɑn wʌn, wɪð ən æɹoʊ pɔɪntɪŋ lɛf kəz ɪt pɔɪntəd təwɔɹd toʊmən hɛd, ən æɹoʊ ðət pɪɹs ðə sɝkəl kəz ɪt hæd bɹoʊkən fɹi, əz i wɑntəd tə. hi wɑntəd tə læf. sətʃ smɔl θɪŋz ɑn wɪtʃ tə ɡæmbəl ɔl ðɛɹ laɪvz.

Rand heard his teeth grinding and forced himself to unclench his jaw. The symbols could all have been exactly alike, for all they meant to him. The script could as well have been a chicken's scratchings. At last he settled on one, with an arrow pointing left because it pointed toward Toman Head, an arrow that pierced the circle because it had broken free, as he wanted to. He wanted to laugh. Such small things on which to gamble all their lives.

"kʌm kloʊsɝ," vɛɹɪn ɔɹɾɝd ði ʌðɝz. "ɪt wɪl bi bɛst ɪf jə ɑɹ nɪɹ." ðeɪ oʊbeɪd, wɪð oʊnli ə lɪɾəl hɛzəteɪʃən. "ɪɾ ɪz taɪm tə bɪɡɪn," ʃi sɛɾ əz ðeɪ ɡæðɝd ɹaʊnd.

"Come closer," Verin ordered the others. "It will be best if you are near." They obeyed, with only a little hesitation. "It is time to begin," she said as they gathered round.

ʃi θɹu bæk əɹ kloʊk ən pʊɾ əɹ hænz ɑn ðə kɑləm, bʌt ɹænd sɔ hɝ wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ. hi wɑz əwɛɹ ə nɝvəs kɑfɪŋ ən θɹoʊt-klɪɹɪŋ fɹəm ðə mɛn ɝaʊn ðə stoʊn, ə kɝs fɹəm ənoʊ ət sʌmwʌn hæŋɪŋ bæk, ə wik dʒoʊk fɹəm mæt, ə laʊd ɡʌlp fɹəm lɔɪəl. hi tʊk ðə vɔɪd.

She threw back her cloak and put her hands on the column, but Rand saw her watching him from the corner of her eye. He was aware of nervous coughing and throat-clearing from the men around the Stone, a curse from Uno at someone hanging back, a weak joke from Mat, a loud gulp from Loial. He took the void.

ɪt wɑz soʊ izi, naʊ. ðə fleɪm kənsum fɪɹ ən pæʃən ən wɑz ɡɔn ɔlmoʊs bɪfɔɹ i θɔt tə fɔɹm ɪt. ɡɔn, livɪŋ oʊnli ɛmptinəs, ən ʃaɪnɪŋ seɪɾɪn, sɪkənɪŋ, tæntəlaɪzɪŋ, stʌmək-tɝnɪŋ, sɪdʌktɪv. hi . . . ɹitʃt fəɹ ɪt . . . ən ɪt fɪl hɪm, meɪɾ ɪm əlaɪv. hi dɪd nɑt muv ə mʌsəl, bʌɾ i fɛlt əz ɪf i wɝ kwɪvɝɪŋ wɪð ðə ɹʌʃ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪndə hɪm. ðə sɪmbəl fɔɹmd ɪtsɛlf, ən æɹoʊ pɪɹsɪŋ ə sɝkəl, floʊɾɪŋ dʒʌs bɪɑn ðə vɔɪd, əz hɑɹɾ əz ðə stʌf ɪt wɑz kɑɹvd ɑn. hi lɛt ðə wʌn paʊɝ floʊ θɹu hɪm tə ðə sɪmbəl.

It was so easy, now. The flame consumed fear and passion and was gone almost before he thought to form it. Gone, leaving only emptiness, and shining saidin, sickening, tantalizing, stomach-turning, seductive. He . . . reached for it . . . and it filled him, made him alive. He did not move a muscle, but he felt as if he were quivering with the rush of the One Power into him. The symbol formed itself, an arrow piercing a circle, floating just beyond the void, as hard as the stuff it was carved on. He let the One Power flow through him to the symbol.

ðə sɪmbəl ʃɪmɝd, flɪkɝd.

The symbol shimmered, flickered.

"sʌmθɪŋ ɪz hæpənɪŋ," vɛɹɪn sɛd. "sʌmθɪŋ . . ."

"Something is happening," Verin said. "Something . . ."

ðə wɝl flɪkɝd.

The world flickered.

ði aɪɝn lɑk spʌn əkɹɔs ðə fɑɹmhaʊs flɔɹ, ən ɹænd dʒɹɑp ðə hɑt tikɛɾəl əz ə hjudʒ fɪɡjɝ wɪð ɹæmz hɔɹnz ɑn ɪts hɛd lumd ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ wɪð ðə dɑɹknəs ʌv wɪntɝnaɪt bɪhaɪn ɪt.

The iron lock spun across the farmhouse floor, and Rand dropped the hot teakettle as a huge figure with ram's horns on its head loomed in the doorway with the darkness of Winternight behind it.

"ɹʌn!" tæm ʃaʊɾəd. hɪz sɔɹd flæʃt, ən ðə tʃɹɑlɑk tɑpəld, bʌɾ ɪt ɡɹæpəld wɪð tæm əz ɪt fɛl, pʊlɪŋ ɪm daʊn.

"Run!" Tam shouted. His sword flashed, and the Trolloc toppled, but it grappled with Tam as it fell, pulling him down.

mɔɹ kɹaʊɾəd ɪn ət ðə dɔɹ, blæk-meɪld ʃeɪps wɪð hjumən feɪsəz dɪstɔɹɾəd wɪð mʌzəlz ən biks ən hɔɹnz, ɑdli kɝv sɔɹdz stæbɪŋ ət tæm əz i tʃɹaɪd tə stʃɹʌɡəl tə hɪz fit, spaɪkt æksiz swɪŋɪŋ, ɹɛd blʌɾ ɑn stil.

More crowded in at the door, black-mailed shapes with human faces distorted with muzzles and beaks and horns, oddly curved swords stabbing at Tam as he tried to struggle to his feet, spiked axes swinging, red blood on steel.

"fɑðɝ!" ɹænd skɹimd. klɔɪŋ ɪz bɛl naɪf fɹəm ɪts ʃiθ, hi θɹu hɪmsɛlf oʊvɝ ðə teɪbəl tə hɛlp ɪz fɑðɝ, ən skɹimd əɡɛn əz ðə fɝst sɔɹd ɹæn θɹu hɪz tʃɛst.

"Father!" Rand screamed. Clawing his belt knife from its sheath, he threw himself over the table to help his father, and screamed again as the first sword ran through his chest.

blʌd bʌbəld ʌp ɪndə hɪz maʊθ, ən ə vɔɪs wɪspɝɾ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd, aɪ hæv wʌn əɡɛn, luz θɝɪn.

Blood bubbled up into his mouth, and a voice whispered inside his head, I have won again, Lews Therin.

flɪkɝ.

Flicker.

ɹænd stʃɹʌɡəl tə hoʊl ðə sɪmbəl, dɪmli əwɛɹ ə vɛɹɪnz vɔɪs. ". . . ɪz nɑt . . ."

Rand struggled to hold the symbol, dimly aware of Verin's voice. ". . . is not . . ."

ðə paʊɝ flʌɾəd.

The Power flooded.

flɪkɝ.

Flicker.

ɹænd wɑz hæpi æftɝ i mɛɹiɾ ɛɡwin, ən tʃɹaɪd tə nɑt lɛt ðə mudz teɪk hɪm, ðə taɪmz wən i θɔt ðəɹ ʃʊɾə bɪn sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ, sʌmθɪŋ dɪfɹənt. nuz ə ðə wɝld aʊtsaɪd keɪm ɪndə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɪð pɛdlɝz, ən mɝtʃəns kʌm tə baɪ wʊl ən təbæk, ɔlweɪz nuz ə fɹɛʃ tʃɹʌbəlz, ʌv wɔɹz ən fɔls dʒɹæɡənz ɛvɹiwɛɹ. ðəɹ wɑz ə jɪɹ wən niðɝ mɝtʃəns nɔɹ pɛdlɝz keɪm, ən wən ðeɪ ɹɪtɝn ðə nɛks ðeɪ bɹɔt wɝd ðəɾ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɑɹmiz hæd kʌm bæk, əɹ ðɛɹ dɪsɛndəns, ət list. ði oʊl neɪʃənz wɝ bɹoʊkən, ɪt wɑz sɛd, ən ðə wɝlz nu mæstɝz, hu juz tʃeɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðɛɹ bæɾəlz, hæd tɔɹn daʊn ðə waɪt taʊɝ ən sɔltəd ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɛɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn hæd stʊd. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ mɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Rand was happy after he married Egwene, and tried to not let the moods take him, the times when he thought there should have been something more, something different. News of the world outside came into the Two Rivers with peddlers, and merchants come to buy wool and tabac, always news of fresh troubles, of wars and false Dragons everywhere. There was a year when neither merchants nor peddlers came, and when they returned the next they brought word that Artur Hawkwing's armies had come back, or their descendants, at least. The old nations were broken, it was said, and the world's new masters, who used chained Aes Sedai in their battles, had torn down the White Tower and salted the ground where Tar Valon had stood. There were no more Aes Sedai.

ɪɾ ɔl meɪd lɪɾəl dɪfɝəns ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. kɹɑps stɪl hæd tə bi plæntəd, ʃip ʃɪɹd, læmz tɛndəd. tæm hæd ɡɹændsʌnz ən ɡɹændɔɾɝz tə dændəl ɑn ɪz ni bɪfɔɹ i wɑz leɪd tə ɹɛs bɪsaɪɾ ɪz waɪf, ən ði oʊl fɑɹmhaʊs ɡɹu nu ɹumz. ɛɡwin bɪkeɪm wɪzdəm, ən moʊs θɔt ʃi wɑz ivən bɛɾɝ ðən ði oʊld wɪzdəm, nɪneɪiv ælmɛɹə, hæd bɪn. ɪt wɑz əz wɛl ʃi wɑz, fəɹ əɹ kjʊɹz ðət wɝk soʊ mɝækjələsli ɑn ʌðɝz wɝ oʊnli dʒʌst eɪbəl tə kip ɹænd əlaɪv fɹəm ðə sɪknəs ðət kɑnstənli sim tə θɹɛɾən hɪm. hɪz mudz ɡɹu wɝs, blækɝ, ən i ɹeɪdʒ ðət ðɪs wɑz nɑt wʌt wɑz mɛn tə bi. ɛɡwin ɡɹu fɹaɪɾənd wən ðə mudz wɝ ɑn hɪm, fəɹ stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz səmtaɪmz hæpənd wən i wɑz əɾ ɪz blikəst - laɪtnɪŋ stɔɹmz ʃi hæd nɑt hɝd lɪsnɪŋ tə ðə wɪnd, waɪldfaɪɝz ɪn ðə fɔɹəst - bʌt ʃi lʌvd ɪm ən kɛɹd fəɹ ɪm ən kɛpt ɪm seɪn, ðoʊ səm mʌɾɝd ðət ɹænd ælθɹ wɑz kɹeɪzi ən deɪnʒɝəs.

It all made little difference in the Two Rivers. Crops still had to be planted, sheep sheared, lambs tended. Tam had grandsons and granddaughters to dandle on his knee before he was laid to rest beside his wife, and the old farmhouse grew new rooms. Egwene became Wisdom, and most thought she was even better than the old Wisdom, Nynaeve al'Maera, had been. It was as well she was, for her cures that worked so miraculously on others were only just able to keep Rand alive from the sickness that constantly seemed to threaten him. His moods grew worse, blacker, and he raged that this was not what was meant to be. Egwene grew frightened when the moods were on him, for strange things sometimes happened when he was at his bleakest - lightning storms she had not heard listening to the wind, wildfires in the forest - but she loved him and cared for him and kept him sane, though some muttered that Rand al'Thor was crazy and dangerous.

wən ʃi daɪd, hi sæɾ əloʊn fəɹ lɔŋ aʊɝz baɪ hɝ ɡɹeɪv, tɪɹz soʊkɪŋ ɪz ɡɹeɪ-flɛk bɪɹd. hɪz sɪknəs keɪm bæk, ən i weɪstəd; hi lɔs ðə læs tu fɪŋɡɝz ɑn ɪz ɹaɪt hæn ən wʌn ɑn ɪz lɛft, hɪz ɪɹz lʊk laɪk skɑɹz, ən mɛn mʌɾɝd ðəɾ i smɛld ə dəkeɪ. hɪz blæknəs dipənd.

When she died, he sat alone for long hours by her grave, tears soaking his gray-flecked beard. His sickness came back, and he wasted; he lost the last two fingers on his right hand and one on his left, his ears looked like scars, and men muttered that he smelled of decay. His blackness deepened.

jɛt wən ðə daɪɹ nuz keɪm, nʌn ɹəfjuz tə æksɛpt ɪm ət ðɛɹ saɪd. tʃɹɑləks ən feɪdz ən θɪŋz əndʒɹimd ə hæd bɝst aʊɾ ə ðə blaɪt, ən ðə wɝlz nu mæstɝz wɝ biɪŋ θɹoʊn bæk, fəɹ ɔl ðə paʊɝz ðeɪ wildɪd. soʊ ɹænd tʊk ʌp ðə baʊ hi hæd dʒʌs fɪŋɡɝz ɪnʌf lɛf tə ʃuɾ ən lɪmpt wɪð ðoʊz u mɑɹtʃt nɔɹθ tə ðə ɹɪvɝ tɛɹən, mɛn fɹəm ɛvɹi vɪlədʒ, fɑɹm, ən kɔɹnɝ ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, wɪð ðɛɹ baʊz, ən æksiz, ən bɔɹspɪɪɹz, ən sɔɹdz ðət hæd leɪn ɹʌstɪŋ ɪn æɾɪks. ɹænd wɔɹ ə sɔɹd, tu, wɪð ə hɛɹən ɑn ðə bleɪd, ðəɾ i hæd faʊn æftɝ tæm daɪd, ðoʊ hi nu nʌθɪŋ ə haʊ tə juz ɪt. wɪmən keɪm, tu, ʃoʊldɝɪŋ wʌt wɛpənz ðeɪ kəd faɪnd, mɑɹtʃɪŋ əlɔŋsaɪd ðə mɛn. səm læft, seɪɪŋ ðət ðeɪ hæd ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ filɪŋ ðeɪ hæd dʌn ðɪs bɪfɔɹ.

Yet when the dire news came, none refused to accept him at their side. Trollocs and Fades and things undreamed of had burst out of the Blight, and the world's new masters were being thrown back, for all the powers they wielded. So Rand took up the bow he had just fingers enough left to shoot and limped with those who marched north to the River Taren, men from every village, farm, and corner of the Two Rivers, with their bows, and axes, and boarspears, and swords that had lain rusting in attics. Rand wore a sword, too, with a heron on the blade, that he had found after Tam died, though he knew nothing of how to use it. Women came, too, shouldering what weapons they could find, marching alongside the men. Some laughed, saying that they had the strange feeling they had done this before.

ən ət ðə tɛɹən ðə pipəl ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛt ði ɪnveɪɾɝz, ɛnləs ɹæŋks ə tʃɹɑləks lɛd baɪ naɪtmɛɹ feɪdz bɪniθ ə dɛd blæk bænɝ ðət sim tə it ðə laɪt. ɹænd sɔ ðət bænɝ ən θɔt ðə mædnəs hæd teɪkən ɪm əɡɛn, fəɹ ɪt sim ðət ðɪs wɑz wʌɾ i hæd bɪn bɔɹn fɔɹ, tə faɪt ðət bænɝ. hi sɛn ɛvɹi æɹoʊ əɾ ɪt, stʃɹeɪɾ əz ɪz skɪl ən ðə vɔɪd wəd sɝv, nɛvɝ wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt ðə tʃɹɑləks fɔɹsɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ, əɹ ðə mɛn ən wɪmən daɪɪŋ tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɪm. ɪt wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz tʃɹɑləks ðət ɹæn ɪm θɹu, bɪfɔɹ ɪt loʊp haʊlɪŋ fəɹ blʌd dipɝ ɪndə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ən əz i leɪ ɑn ðə bæŋk ə ðə tɛɹən, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə skaɪ sim tə ɡɹoʊ dɑɹk ət nun, bɹɛθ kʌmɪŋ ɛvɝ sloʊɝ, hi hɝɾ ə vɔɪs seɪ, aɪ hæv wʌn əɡɛn, luz θɝɪn.

And at the Taren the people of the Two Rivers met the invaders, endless ranks of Trollocs led by nightmare Fades beneath a dead black banner that seemed to eat the light. Rand saw that banner and thought the madness had taken him again, for it seemed that this was what he had been born for, to fight that banner. He sent every arrow at it, straight as his skill and the void would serve, never worrying about the Trollocs forcing their way across the river, or the men and women dying to either side of him. It was one of those Trollocs that ran him through, before it loped howling for blood deeper into the Two Rivers. And as he lay on the bank of the Taren, watching the sky seem to grow dark at noon, breath coming ever slower, he heard a voice say, I have won again, Lews Therin.

flɪkɝ.

Flicker.

ði æɹoʊ-ænd-sɝkəl kəntɔɹɾəd ɪndə pɛɹəlɛl weɪvi laɪnz, ən i fɔɾ ɪt bæk əɡɛn.

The arrow-and-circle contorted into parallel wavy lines, and he fought it back again.

vɛɹɪnz vɔɪs. ". . . ɹaɪt. sʌmθɪŋ . . ."

Verin's voice. ". . . right. Something . . ."

ðə paʊɝ ɹeɪdʒd.

The Power raged.

flɪkɝ.

Flicker.

tæm tʃɹaɪd tə kənsoʊl ɹænd wən ɛɡwin tʊk sɪk ən daɪd dʒʌst ə wik bɪfɔɹ ðɛɹ wɛɾɪŋ. nɪneɪiv tʃɹaɪd, tu, bʌt ʃi wɑz ʃeɪkən hɝsɛlf, sɪns fəɹ ɔl əɹ skɪl ʃi hæd noʊ aɪdiə wʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðət hæd kɪl ðə ɡɝl. ɹænd hæd sæɾ aʊtsaɪɾ ɛɡwinz haʊs waɪl ʃi daɪd, ən ðəɹ sim tə bi noʊwɛɹ ɪn ɛmənz fild i kəd ɡoʊ ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt stɪl hɪɹ əɹ skɹimɪŋ. hi nu hi kəd nɑt steɪ. tæm ɡeɪv ɪm ə sɔɹd wɪð ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd, ən ðoʊ hi ɪkspleɪn lɪɾəl ə haʊ ə ʃɛpɝɾ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz hæd kʌm baɪ sətʃ ə θɪŋ, hi tɔt ɹænd haʊ tə juz ɪt. ɑn ðə deɪ ɹænd lɛft, tæm ɡeɪv ɪm ə lɛɾɝ i sɛd maɪt ɡɛt ɹænd teɪkən ɪndə ði ɑɹmi ʌv ɪljən, ən hʌɡd hɪm, ən sɛd, "aɪv nɛvɝ hæɾ ənʌðɝ sʌn, əɹ wɑntəɾ ənʌðɝ. kʌm bæk wɪð ə waɪf laɪk aɪ dɪd, ɪf jə kæn, bɔɪ, bʌt kʌm bæk ɪn ɛni keɪs."

Tam tried to console Rand when Egwene took sick and died just a week before their wedding. Nynaeve tried, too, but she was shaken herself, since for all her skill she had no idea what it was that had killed the girl. Rand had sat outside Egwene's house while she died, and there seemed to be nowhere in Emond's Field he could go that he did not still hear her screaming. He knew he could not stay. Tam gave him a sword with a heron-mark blade, and though he explained little of how a shepherd in the Two Rivers had come by such a thing, he taught Rand how to use it. On the day Rand left, Tam gave him a letter he said might get Rand taken into the army of Illian, and hugged him, and said, "I've never had another son, or wanted another. Come back with a wife like I did, if you can, boy, but come back in any case."

ɹænd hæɾ ɪz mʌni stoʊlən ɪn bɛɹlən, ðoʊ, ən ɪz lɛɾɝ ʌv ɪntʃɹədʌkʃən, ən ɔlmoʊst ɪz sɔɹd, ən i mɛɾ ə wʊmən kɔl mɪn u toʊld ɪm sətʃ kɹeɪzi θɪŋz əbaʊt hɪmsɛlf ðəɾ i faɪnəli lɛf ðə sɪɾi tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm hɝ. ɪvɛntʃəwəli hɪz wɑndɝɪŋz bɹɔɾ ɪm tə keɪɛmlɪn, ən ðəɹ ɪz skɪl wɪð ðə sɔɹɾ ɝn ɪm ə pleɪs ɪn ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz. səmtaɪmz i faʊn hɪmsɛlf lʊkɪŋ ət ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ, ɪleɪn, ən ət sətʃ taɪmz i wɑz fɪld wɪð ɑd θɔts ðət ðɪs wɑz nɑt ðə weɪ θɪŋz wɝ səpoʊz tə bi, ðət ðəɹ ʃəd bi sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ tə hɪz laɪf. ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt lʊk ət hɪm, ʌv kɔɹs; ʃi mɛɹiɾ ə tɛɹən pɹɪns, ðoʊ ʃi dɪd nɑt sim hæpi ɪn ɪt. ɹænd wɑz dʒʌst ə soʊlʒɝ, wʌns ə ʃɛpɝd fɹəm ə smɔl vɪlədʒ soʊ fɑɹ təwɔɹd ðə wɛstɝn bɔɹɾɝ ðəɾ oʊnli laɪnz ɑn ə mæp ɛni lɔŋɡɝ tʃɹuli kənɛktəɾ ɪt tə ændɝ. bɪsaɪdz, hi hæɾ ə dɑɹk ɹɛpjəteɪʃən, əz ə mæn ə vaɪələn mudz.

Rand had his money stolen in Baerlon, though, and his letter of introduction, and almost his sword, and he met a woman called Min who told him such crazy things about himself that he finally left the city to get away from her. Eventually his wanderings brought him to Caemlyn, and there his skill with the sword earned him a place in the Queen's Guards. Sometimes he found himself looking at the Daughter-Heir, Elayne, and at such times he was filled with odd thoughts that this was not the way things were supposed to be, that there should be something more to his life. Elayne did not look at him, of course; she married a Tairen prince, though she did not seem happy in it. Rand was just a soldier, once a shepherd from a small village so far toward the western border that only lines on a map any longer truly connected it to Andor. Besides, he had a dark reputation, as a man of violent moods.

səm sɛɾ i wɑz mæd, ən ɪn ɔɹɾənɛɹi taɪmz pɝhæps nɑɾ ivən ɪz skɪl wɪð ðə sɔɹd wʊɾə kɛpt ɪm ɪn ðə ɡɑɹd, bʌt ðiz wɝ nɑɾ ɔɹɾənɛɹi taɪmz. fɔls dʒɹæɡənz spɹæŋ ʌp laɪk widz. ɛvɹi taɪm wʌn wɑz teɪkən daʊn, tu mɔɹ pɹoʊkleɪm ðɛmsɛlvz, əɹ θɹi, tɪl ɛvɹi neɪʃən wɑz tɔɹn baɪ wɔɹ. ən ɹændz stɑɹ ɹoʊz, fəɹ i hæd lɝn ðə sikɹəɾ ə hɪz mædnəs, ə sikɹəɾ i nu hi hæd tə kip ən dɪd. hi kəd tʃænəl. ðəɹ wɝ ɔlweɪz pleɪsəz, taɪmz, ɪn ə bæɾəl wən ə lɪɾəl tʃænəlɪŋ, nɑt bɪɡ ɪnʌf tə bi noʊɾəst ɪn ðə kənfjuʒən, kəd meɪk lʌk. səmtaɪmz ɪt wɝkt, ðɪs tʃænəlɪŋ, ən səmtaɪmz nɑt, bʌɾ ɪt wɝkt ɔfən ɪnʌf. hi nu hi wɑz mæd, ən dɪd nɑt kɛɹ. ə weɪstɪŋ sɪknəs keɪm ɑn hɪm, ən i dɪd nɑt kɛɹ əbaʊt ðæt, iðɝ, ən niðɝ dɪɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls, fəɹ wɝd hæd kʌm ðəɾ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɑɹmiz hæd ɹɪtɝn tə ɹikleɪm ðə lænd.

Some said he was mad, and in ordinary times perhaps not even his skill with the sword would have kept him in the Guard, but these were not ordinary times. False Dragons sprang up like weeds. Every time one was taken down, two more proclaimed themselves, or three, till every nation was torn by war. And Rand's star rose, for he had learned the secret of his madness, a secret he knew he had to keep and did. He could channel. There were always places, times, in a battle when a little channeling, not big enough to be noticed in the confusion, could make luck. Sometimes it worked, this channeling, and sometimes not, but it worked often enough. He knew he was mad, and did not care. A wasting sickness came on him, and he did not care about that, either, and neither did anyone else, for word had come that Artur Hawkwing's armies had returned to reclaim the land.

ɹænd lɛɾ ə θaʊzən mɛn wən ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz kɹɔs ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst - hi nɛvɝ θɔɾ ə tɝnɪŋ əsaɪd tə vɪzət ðə tu ɹɪvɝz; hi sɛldəm θɔɾ ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz əɾ ɔl, ɛnimɔɹ - ən i kəmændəd ðə ɡɑɹd wən ðə ʃæɾɝd ɹɛmnəns ɹitʃɹiɾəd bæk əkɹɔs ðə maʊntənz. ðə lɛŋθ ʌv ændɝ i fɔɾ ən fɛl bæk, əmɪd hɔɹdz ə fliɪŋ ɹɛfjudʒiz, əntɪl ət læst i keɪm tə keɪɛmlɪn. mɛni ʌv ðə pipəl ə keɪɛmlɪn hæd flɛɾ ɔlɹɛɾi, ən mɛni kaʊnsəl ði ɑɹmi tə ɹitʃɹit fɝðɝ, bʌɾ ɪleɪn wɑz kwin, naʊ, ən vaʊd ʃi wəd nɑt liv keɪɛmlɪn. ʃi wəd nɑt lʊk əɾ ɪz ɹuən feɪs, skɑɹd baɪ hɪz sɪknəs, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt liv hɝ, ən soʊ wʌt wɑz lɛft ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz pɹipɛɹd tə dɪfɛn ðə kwin waɪl əɹ pipəl ɹæn.

Rand led a thousand men when the Queen's Guards crossed the Mountains of Mist - he never thought of turning aside to visit the Two Rivers; he seldom thought of the Two Rivers at all, anymore - and he commanded the Guard when the shattered remnants retreated back across the mountains. The length of Andor he fought and fell back, amid hordes of fleeing refugees, until at last he came to Caemlyn. Many of the people of Caemlyn had fled already, and many counseled the army to retreat further, but Elayne was Queen, now, and vowed she would not leave Caemlyn. She would not look at his ruined face, scarred by his sickness, but he could not leave her, and so what was left of the Queen's Guards prepared to defend the Queen while her people ran.

ðə paʊɝ keɪm tə hɪm dʊɹɪŋ ðə bæɾəl fəɹ keɪɛmlɪn, ən i hɝld laɪtnɪŋ ən faɪɝ əmʌŋ ði ɪnveɪɾɝz, ən splɪt ði ɝθ ʌndɝ ðɛɹ fit, jɛt ðə filɪŋ keɪm əɡɛn, tu, ðəɾ i hæd bɪn bɔɹn fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. fəɹ ɔl i dɪd, ðəɹ wɝ tu mɛni ʌv ði ɛnəmi tə stɑp, ən ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ hæd ðoʊz u kəd tʃænəl. ət læst, ə laɪtnɪŋ boʊl hɝld ɹænd fɹəm ðə pæləs wɔl, bɹoʊkən, bliɾɪŋ, ən bɝnd, ən əz ɪz læs bɹɛθ ɹæɾəld ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt, hi hɝɾ ə vɔɪs wɪspɝ, aɪ hæv wʌn əɡɛn, luz θɝɪn.

The Power came to him during the battle for Caemlyn, and he hurled lightning and fire among the invaders, and split the earth under their feet, yet the feeling came again, too, that he had been born for something else. For all he did, there were too many of the enemy to stop, and they also had those who could channel. At last, a lightning bolt hurled Rand from the Palace wall, broken, bleeding, and burned, and as his last breath rattled in his throat, he heard a voice whisper, I have won again, Lews Therin.

flɪkɝ.

Flicker.

ɹænd stʃɹʌɡəl tə hoʊl ðə vɔɪɾ əz ɪt kwɪvɝɾ ʌndɝ ðə hæmɝ bloʊz ə ðə wɝl flɪkɝɪŋ, tə hoʊl ðə wʌn sɪmbəl əz ə θaʊzən ə ðɛm dɑɹɾɪd əlɔŋ ðə sɝfəs ə ðə vɔɪd. hi stʃɹʌɡəl tə hoʊld ɑn tə ɛni wʌn sɪmbəl.

Rand struggled to hold the void as it quivered under the hammer blows of the world flickering, to hold the one symbol as a thousand of them darted along the surface of the void. He struggled to hold on to any one symbol.

". . . ɪz ɹɔŋ!" vɛɹɪn skɹimd.

". . . is wrong!" Verin screamed.

ðə paʊɝ wɑz ɛvɹiθɪŋ.

The Power was everything.

flɪkɝ. flɪkɝ. flɪkɝ. flɪkɝ. flɪkɝ. flɪkɝ.

Flicker. Flicker. Flicker. Flicker. Flicker. Flicker.

hi wɑz ə soʊlʒɝ. hi wɑz ə ʃɛpɝd. hi wɑz ə bɛɡɝ, ən ə kɪŋ. hi wɑz fɑɹmɝ, ɡlimən, seɪlɝ, kɑɹpəntɝ. hi wɑz bɔɹn, lɪvd, ən daɪɾ ən il. hi daɪd mæd, hi daɪd ɹɑɾɪŋ, hi daɪɾ ə sɪknəs, æksəɾənt, eɪdʒ. hi wɑz ɛksəkjuɾəd, ən mʌltətʃjudz tʃɪɹɾ ɪz dɛθ. hi pɹoʊkleɪm hɪmsɛlf ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ən flʌŋ ɪz bænɝ əkɹɔs ðə skaɪ; hi ɹæn fɹəm ðə paʊɝ ən hɪd; hi lɪvd ən daɪd nɛvɝ noʊɪŋ. hi hɛld ɔf ðə mædnəs ən ðə sɪknəs fəɹ jɪɹz; hi səkʌm bɪtwin tu wɪntɝz. səmtaɪmz mɔɪɹeɪn keɪm ən tʊk ɪm əweɪ fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, əloʊn əɹ wɪð ðoʊz ə hɪz fɹɛnz u hæd sɝvaɪvd wɪntɝnaɪt; səmtaɪmz ʃi dɪd nɑt. səmtaɪmz ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ keɪm fəɹ hɪm. səmtaɪmz ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ. ɛɡwin mɛɹid hɪm; ɛɡwin, stɝn-feɪst ɪn ðə stoʊl ə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, lɛd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hu dʒɛntəl hɪm; ɛɡwin, wɪð tɪɹz ɪn əɹ aɪz, plʌnʒd ə dæɡɝ ɪndə hɪz hɑɹt, ən i θæŋkt əɹ əz i daɪd. hi lʌvd ʌðɝ wɪmən, mɛɹiɾ ʌðɝ wɪmən. ɪleɪn, ən mɪn, ən ə fɛɹ-hɛɹd fɑɹmɝz dɔɾɝ mɛɾ ɑn ðə ɹoʊd tə keɪɛmlɪn, ən wɪmən i hæd nɛvɝ sin bɪfɔɹ i lɪv ðoʊz laɪvz. ə hʌnʒɹəd laɪvz. mɔɹ. soʊ mɛni hi kəd nɑt kaʊn ðɛm. ən ət ði ɛn ʌv ɛvɹi laɪf, əz i leɪ daɪɪŋ, əz i dʒɹu hɪz faɪnəl bɹɛθ, ə vɔɪs wɪspɝɾ ɪn ɪz ɪɹ. aɪ hæv wʌn əɡɛn, luz θɝɪn. flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ flɪkɝ.

He was a soldier. He was a shepherd. He was a beggar, and a king. He was farmer, gleeman, sailor, carpenter. He was born, lived, and died an Aiel. He died mad, he died rotting, he died of sickness, accident, age. He was executed, and multitudes cheered his death. He proclaimed himself the Dragon Reborn and flung his banner across the sky; he ran from the Power and hid; he lived and died never knowing. He held off the madness and the sickness for years; he succumbed between two winters. Sometimes Moiraine came and took him away from the Two Rivers, alone or with those of his friends who had survived Winternight; sometimes she did not. Sometimes other Aes Sedai came for him. Sometimes the Red Ajah. Egwene married him; Egwene, stern-faced in the stole of the Amyrlin Seat, led the Aes Sedai who gentled him; Egwene, with tears in her eyes, plunged a dagger into his heart, and he thanked her as he died. He loved other women, married other women. Elayne, and Min, and a fair-haired farmer's daughter met on the road to Caemlyn, and women he had never seen before he lived those lives. A hundred lives. More. So many he could not count them. And at the end of every life, as he lay dying, as he drew his final breath, a voice whispered in his ear. I have won again, Lews Therin. Flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker flicker.

ðə vɔɪd vænɪʃt, kɑntækt wɪð seɪɾɪn flɛd, ən ɹænd fɛl wɪð ə θʌd ðət wʊɾə nɑk ðə bɹɛθ aʊɾ ə hɪm ɪf i hæd nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn hæf nʌm. hi fɛlt ɹʌf stoʊn ʌndɝ ɪz tʃik, ən ɪz hænz. ɪt wɑz koʊld.

The void vanished, contact with saidin fled, and Rand fell with a thud that would have knocked the breath out of him if he had not already been half numb. He felt rough stone under his cheek, and his hands. It was cold.

hi wɑz əwɛɹ ə vɛɹɪn, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ fɹəm əɹ bæk tə hænz ən niz. hi hɝd sʌmwʌn vɑmət ɹʌfli, ən ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛd. ənoʊ wɑz nilɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, skɹʌbɪŋ ðə bæk ə hɪz hæn əkɹɔs ɪz maʊθ. ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz daʊn, ən ðə hɔɹsəz stʊd stɪf-lɛɡəɾ ən kwɪvɝɪŋ, aɪz waɪld ən ɹoʊlɪŋ. ɪŋtʃɹ hæɾ ɪz sɔɹɾ aʊt, ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə hɪl soʊ hɑɹd ðə bleɪd ʃʊk, stɛɹɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ. lɔɪəl sæt spɹɔld, waɪd-aɪɾ ən stʌnd. mæt wɑz hʌɾəld ɪn ə bɔl wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz ɹæpt ɝaʊn ɪz hɛd, ən pɛɹɪn hæɾ ɪz fɪŋɡɝz dʌɡ ɪndə hɪz feɪs əz ɪf i wɑntəd tə ɹɪp əweɪ wʌtɛvɝ i hæd sin, əɹ pɝhæps ɹɪp aʊt ði aɪz ðət hæd sin ɪt. nʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz wɝ ɛni bɛɾɝ. mæsimə wɛpt oʊpənli, tɪɹz stʃɹimɪŋ daʊn ɪz feɪs, ən hʊɹɪn wɑz lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊn əz ɪf fəɹ ə pleɪs tə ɹʌn.

He was aware of Verin, struggling from her back to hands and knees. He heard someone vomit roughly, and raised his head. Uno was kneeling on the ground, scrubbing the back of his hand across his mouth. Everyone was down, and the horses stood stiff-legged and quivering, eyes wild and rolling. Ingtar had his sword out, gripping the hilt so hard the blade shook, staring at nothing. Loial sat sprawled, wide-eyed and stunned. Mat was huddled in a ball with his arms wrapped around his head, and Perrin had his fingers dug into his face as if he wanted to rip away whatever he had seen, or perhaps rip out the eyes that had seen it. None of the soldiers were any better. Masema wept openly, tears streaming down his face, and Hurin was looking around as if for a place to run.

"wʌt . . . ?" ɹænd stɑp tə swɑloʊ. hi wɑz laɪɪŋ ɑn ɹʌf, wɛðɝd stoʊn hæf bɛɹiɾ ɪn ðə dɝt. "wʌt hæpənd?"

"What . . . ?" Rand stopped to swallow. He was lying on rough, weathered stone half buried in the dirt. "What happened?"

"ə sɝdʒ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ." ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tɑɾɝd tə hɝ fiɾ ən pʊld əɹ kloʊk taɪt wɪð ə ʃɪvɝ. "ɪt wɑz əz ɪf wi wɝ biɪŋ fɔɹst . . . pʊʃt. . . . ɪt sim tə kʌm aʊɾ ə noʊwɛɹ. jə mʌs lɝn tə kəntʃɹoʊl ɪt. jə mʌst! ðət mʌtʃ ə ðə paʊɝ kəd bɝn jə tə ə sɪndɝ."

"A surge of the One Power." The Aes Sedai tottered to her feet and pulled her cloak tight with a shiver. "It was as if we were being forced . . . pushed. . . . It seemed to come out of nowhere. You must learn to control it. You must! That much of the Power could burn you to a cinder."

"vɛɹɪn, aɪ. . . . aɪ lɪvd. . . . aɪ wɑz. . . ." hi ɹilaɪz ðə stoʊn ʌndɝ ɪm wɑz ɹaʊndəd. ðə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn. heɪstəli, ʃɑkəli, hi pʊʃt hɪmsɛlf tə hɪz fit. "vɛɹɪn, aɪ lɪvd ən daɪd, aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ mɛni taɪmz. ɛvɹi taɪm ɪt wɑz dɪfɹənt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz mi. ɪt wɑz mi."

"Verin, I. . . . I lived. . . . I was. . . ." He realized the stone under him was rounded. The Portal Stone. Hastily, shakily, he pushed himself to his feet. "Verin, I lived and died, I don't know how many times. Every time it was different, but it was me. It was me."

"ðə laɪnz ðət dʒɔɪn ðə wɝlz ðət maɪt bi, leɪd baɪ ðoʊz u nu ðə nʌmbɝz ə keɪɑs." vɛɹɪn ʃʌɾɝəd; ʃi sim tə bi tɔkɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf. "aɪv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ɪt, bʌt ðəɹ ɪz noʊ ɹizən wi wəd nɑt bi bɔɹn ɪn ðoʊz wɝlz, jɛt ðə laɪvz wi lɪvd wəd bi dɪfɹən laɪvz. ʌv kɔɹs. dɪfɹən lɪvz fəɹ ðə dɪfɹənt weɪz θɪŋz maɪɾ əv hæpənd."

"The Lines that join the Worlds That Might Be, laid by those who knew the Numbers of Chaos." Verin shuddered; she seemed to be talking to herself. "I've never heard it, but there is no reason we would not be born in those worlds, yet the lives we lived would be different lives. Of course. Different lives for the different ways things might have happened."

"ɪz ðət wʌt hæpənd? aɪ . . . wi . . . sɔ haʊ əɹ laɪvz kəɾ əv bɪn?" aɪ hæv wʌn əɡɛn, luz θɝɪn. noʊ! aɪm ɹænd ælθɹ!

"Is that what happened? I . . . we . . . saw how our lives could have been?" I have won again, Lews Therin. No! I am Rand al'Thor!

vɛɹɪn ɡeɪv hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk ən lʊkt ət hɪm. "dʌz ɪt sɝpɹaɪz jə ðət jəɹ laɪf maɪt ɡoʊ dɪfɹənli ɪf jə meɪd dɪfɹən tʃɔɪsəz, əɹ dɪfɹən θɪŋz hæpən tə ju? ðoʊ aɪ nɛvɝ θɔɾ aɪ - wɛl. ði ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ ɪz, wəɹ hɪɹ. ðoʊ nɑɾ əz wi hoʊpt."

Verin gave herself a shake and looked at him. "Does it surprise you that your life might go differently if you made different choices, or different things happened to you? Though I never thought I - Well. The important thing is, we are here. Though not as we hoped."

"wɛɹ ɪz hɪɹ?" hi dɪmændəd. ðə wʊdz ə stɛɾɪŋ tsəfu wɝ ɡɔn, ɹipleɪs baɪ ɹoʊlɪŋ lænd. ðəɹ sim tə bi fɔɹəs nɑt fɑɹ tə ðə wɛst, ən ə fju hɪlz. ɪt hæd bɪn haɪ ɪn ðə deɪ wən ðeɪ ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn ðə stoʊn ɪn ðə stɛɾɪŋ bʌt hɪɹ ðə sʌn stʊd loʊ təwɔɹɾ æftɝnun ɪn ə ɡɹeɪ skaɪ. ðə hændfʊl ə tʃɹiz nɪɹbaɪ wɝ bɛɹ bɹæntʃt, əɹ ɛls hɛld ə fju livz bɹaɪt wɪð kʌlɝ. ə koʊld wɪnd ɡʌstɪd fɹəm ði ist, sɛndɪŋ livz skɝiɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

"Where is here?" he demanded. The woods of Stedding Tsofu were gone, replaced by rolling land. There seemed to be forest not far to the west, and a few hills. It had been high in the day when they gathered around the Stone in the stedding but here the sun stood low toward afternoon in a gray sky. The handful of trees nearby were bare branched, or else held a few leaves bright with color. A cold wind gusted from the east, sending leaves scurrying across the ground.

"toʊmən hɛd," vɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðɪs ɪz ðə stoʊn aɪ vɪzəɾəd. jə ʃəd nɑɾ əv tʃɹaɪd tə bɹɪŋ əs dɝɛkli hɪɹ. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt wɛn ɹɔŋ - aɪ doʊn səpoʊz aɪ ɛvɝ wɪl - bʌt fɹəm ðə tʃɹiz, aɪ wəd seɪ ɪts wɛl ɪndə leɪɾ ɔɾəm. ɹænd, wi hævənt ɡeɪn ɛni taɪm baɪ ɪt. wiv lɔs taɪm. aɪ wəd seɪ wɪv izəli spɛn fɔɹ mʌnθs ɪn kʌmɪŋ hɪɹ."

"Toman Head," Verin said. "This is the Stone I visited. You should not have tried to bring us directly here. I don't know what went wrong - I don't suppose I ever will - but from the trees, I would say it is well into late autumn. Rand, we haven't gained any time by it. We've lost time. I would say we have easily spent four months in coming here."

"bʌɾ aɪ dɪdnt - "

"But I didn't - "

"ju mʌs lemi ɡaɪd jə ɪn ðiz θɪŋz. aɪ kænɑt titʃ ju, ɪts tʃɹu, bʌt pɝhæps aɪ kən ət lis kip jə fɹəm kɪlɪŋ jɝsɛlf - ən ðə ɹɛst ʌv əs - baɪ oʊvɝɹitʃɪŋ. ivən ɪf jə də nɑt kɪl jɝsɛlf, ɪf ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn bɝnz hɪmsɛlf aʊt laɪk ə ɡʌɾɝɪŋ kændəl, hu wɪl feɪs ðə dɑɹk wʌn ðɛn?" ʃi dɪd nɑt weɪt fəɹ ɪm tə ɹɪnu hɪz pɹoʊɾɛsts, bʌt wɛn tə ɪŋtʃɹ ɪnstɛd.

"You must let me guide you in these things. I cannot teach you, it's true, but perhaps I can at least keep you from killing yourself - and the rest of us - by overreaching. Even if you do not kill yourself, if the Dragon Reborn burns himself out like a guttering candle, who will face the Dark One then?" She did not wait for him to renew his protests, but went to Ingtar instead.

ðə ʃaɪnɝən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt wən ʃi tʌtʃt ɪz ɑɹm, ən lʊkt əɾ əɹ wɪð fɹæntɪk aɪz. "aɪ wɔk ɪn ðə laɪt," hi sɛd hɔɹsli. "aɪ wɪl faɪn ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ən pʊl daʊn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌlz paʊɝ. aɪ wɪl!"

The Shienaran gave a start when she touched his arm, and looked at her with frantic eyes. "I walk in the Light," he said hoarsely. "I will find the Horn of Valere and pull down Shayol Ghul's power. I will!"

"ʌv kɔɹs jə wɪl," ʃi sɛd suðɪŋli. ʃi tʊk ɪz feɪs ɪn əɹ hænz, ən i dʒɹu ə sʌɾən bɹɛθ, əbɹʌpli ɹəkʌvɝɪŋ fɹəm wʌtɛvɝ hæd hɛl hɪm. ɪksɛp ðət mɛmɹi stɪl leɪ ɪn ɪz aɪz. "ðɛɹ," ʃi sɛd. "ðæt wɪl də fəɹ ju. əl si haʊ aɪ kən hɛlp ðə ɹɛst. wi meɪ stɪl ɹɪkʌvɝ ðə hɔɹn, bʌɾ əɹ pæθ əz nɑt ɡɹoʊn smuðɝ."

"Of course you will," she said soothingly. She took his face in her hands, and he drew a sudden breath, abruptly recovering from whatever had held him. Except that memory still lay in his eyes. "There," she said. "That will do for you. I will see how I can help the rest. We may still recover the Horn, but our path has not grown smoother."

əz ʃi stɑɹɾəd ɝaʊn əmʌŋ ði ʌðɝz, stɑpɪŋ bɹifli baɪ itʃ, ɹænd wɛn tə hɪz fɹɛnz. wən i tʃɹaɪd tə stʃɹeɪɾən mæt, mæt dʒɝkt ən stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, ðən ɡɹæbd ɹændz koʊt wɪð boʊθ hænz. "ɹænd, aɪd nɛvɝ tɛl ɛniwʌn əbaʊt - əbaʊt ju. aɪ wʊdn bɪtʃɹeɪ ju. juv tə bɪliv ðæt!" hi lʊkt wɝs ðən ɛvɝ, bʌt ɹænd θɔɾ ɪt wɑz moʊsli fɹaɪt.

As she started around among the others, stopping briefly by each, Rand went to his friends. When he tried to straighten Mat, Mat jerked and stared at him, then grabbed Rand's coat with both hands. "Rand, I'd never tell anyone about - about you. I wouldn't betray you. You have to believe that!" He looked worse than ever, but Rand thought it was mostly fright.

"aɪ du," ɹænd sɛd. hi wʌndɝd wʌt lɪvz mæt hæd lɪvd, ən wʌɾ i hæd dʌn. hi mʌst əv toʊl sʌmwʌn, əɹ i wʊdn bi soʊ æŋkʃəs əbaʊɾ ɪt. hi kəd nɑt hoʊld ɪɾ əɡɛns hɪm. ðoʊz hæd bɪn ʌðɝ mæts, nɑt ðɪs wʌn. bɪsaɪdz, æftɝ səm ə ði ɔltɝnəɾɪvz i hæd sin fəɹ hɪmsɛlf. . . . "aɪ bɪliv ju. pɛɹɪn?"

"I do," Rand said. He wondered what lives Mat had lived, and what he had done. He must have told someone, or he wouldn't be so anxious about it. He could not hold it against him. Those had been other Mats, not this one. Besides, after some of the alternatives he had seen for himself. . . . "I believe you. Perrin?"

ðə kɝli-hɛɹd juθ dʒɹɑpt ɪz hænz fɹəm ɪz feɪs wɪð ə saɪ. ɹɛd mɑɹks skɔɹɾ ɪz fɔɹhɛɾ ən tʃiks wɛɹ ɪz neɪlz hæd dʌɡ ɪn. hɪz jɛloʊ aɪz hɪɾ ɪz θɔts. "wi doʊn əv mɛni tʃɔɪsəz ɹɪli, də wi, ɹænd? wʌtɛvɝ hæpənz, wʌtɛvɝ wi du, səm θɪŋz ɑɹ ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz ðə seɪm." hi lɛɾ aʊɾ ənʌðɝ lɔŋ bɹɛθ. "wɛɹ ɑɹ wi? ɪz ðɪs wʌn ə ðoʊz wɝlz jə ən hʊɹɪn wɝ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt?"

The curly-haired youth dropped his hands from his face with a sigh. Red marks scored his forehead and cheeks where his nails had dug in. His yellow eyes hid his thoughts. "We don't have many choices really, do we, Rand? Whatever happens, whatever we do, some things are almost always the same." He let out another long breath. "Where are we? Is this one of those worlds you and Hurin were talking about?"

"ɪts toʊmən hɛd," ɹænd toʊl hɪm. "ɪn əɹ wɝld. əɹ soʊ vɛɹɪn sɛz. ən ɪts ɔɾəm."

"It's Toman Head," Rand told him. "In our world. Or so Verin says. And it is autumn."

mæt lʊkt wɝid. "haʊ kəd - ? noʊ, aɪ doʊnt wɑnə noʊ haʊ ɪt hæpənd. bʌt haʊ ɑɹ wi gɑnə faɪn feɪn ən ðə dæɡɝ naʊ? hi kəd bi ɛniwɛɹ baɪ ðɪs taɪm."

Mat looked worried. "How could - ? No, I don't want to know how it happened. But how are we going to find Fain and the dagger now? He could be anywhere by this time."

"hiz hɪɹ," ɹænd əʃʊɹd hɪm. hi hoʊpt i wɑz ɹaɪt. feɪn hæd hæd taɪm tə teɪk ʃɪp fəɹ ɛnipleɪs i wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ. taɪm tə ɹaɪd tə ɛmənz fild. əɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn. pliz, laɪt, hi dɪdnt ɡɛt taɪɝɾ ʌv weɪɾɪŋ. ɪf hiz hɝɾ ɛɡwin, əɹ ɛnibəɾi ɪn ɛmənz fild, aɪl. . . . laɪt bɝn mi, aɪ tʃɹaɪd tə kʌm ɪn taɪm.

"He's here," Rand assured him. He hoped he was right. Fain had had time to take ship for anyplace he wanted to go. Time to ride to Emond's Field. Or Tar Valon. Please, Light, he didn't get tired of waiting. If he's hurt Egwene, or anybody in Emond's Field, I'll. . . . Light burn me, I tried to come in time.

"ðə lɑɹdʒɝ taʊnz ɑn toʊmən hɛɾ ɑɹ ɔl wɛst ə hɪɹ," vɛɹɪn ənaʊns laʊdli ɪnʌf fəɹ ɔl tə hɪɹ. ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz ɑn ðɛɹ fiɾ əɡɛn, ɪksɛp fəɹ ɹænd ən ɪz tu fɹɛnz; ʃi keɪm ən pʊɾ əɹ hænz ɑn mæt əz ʃi spoʊk. "nɑt ðət ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛni vɪlədʒəz lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə kɔl taʊnz. ɪf wəɹ tə faɪn ɛni tʃɹeɪs ə ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz, tə ðə wɛst ɪz ðə pleɪs tə bɪɡɪn. ən aɪ θɪŋk wi ʃəd nɑt weɪs ðə deɪlaɪt sɪɾɪŋ hɪɹ."

"The larger towns on Toman Head are all west of here," Verin announced loudly enough for all to hear. Everyone was on their feet again, except for Rand and his two friends; she came and put her hands on Mat as she spoke. "Not that there are many villages large enough to call towns. If we are to find any trace of the Darkfriends, to the west is the place to begin. And I think we should not waste the daylight sitting here."

wən mæt blɪŋkt ən stʊɾ ʌp - hi stɪl lʊkt ɪl, bʌɾ i muv spɹɪli - ʃi pʊɾ əɹ hænz ɑn pɛɹɪn. ɹænd bækt əweɪ wən ʃi ɹitʃt fəɹ hɪm.

When Mat blinked and stood up - he still looked ill, but he moved spryly - she put her hands on Perrin. Rand backed away when she reached for him.

"doʊn bi fulɪʃ," ʃi toʊl hɪm.

"Don't be foolish," she told him.

"aɪ doʊnt wɑn jəɹ hɛlp," hi sɛd kwaɪətli. "ɔɹ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ hɛlp."

"I don't want your help," he said quietly. "Or any Aes Sedai help."

hɝ lɪps twɪtʃt. "æz jə wɪʃ."

Her lips twitched. "As you wish."

ðeɪ maʊntəɾ ɪmiɾiətli ən ɹoʊd wɛst, livɪŋ ðə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn bɪhaɪnd. noʊ wʌn pɹətɛstəd, ɹænd list ʌv ɔl. laɪt, lemi nɑt bi tu leɪt.

They mounted immediately and rode west, leaving the Portal Stone behind. No one protested, Rand least of all. Light, let me not be too late.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾieɪt


CHAPTER 38

pɹæktəs


Practice

sɪɾɪŋ kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn əɹ bɛɾ ɪn əɹ waɪt dʒɹɛs, ɛɡwin meɪd θɹi taɪni bɔlz ə laɪt wiv pæɾɝnz əbʌv əɹ hænz. ʃi wɑz nɑt səpoʊz tə də ðɪs wɪθaʊɾ ət list wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd tə supɝvaɪz, bʌt nɪneɪiv, ɡlɛɹɪŋ ən stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ ʌp ən daʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə smɔl faɪɝpleɪs, dɪɾ æftɝ ɔl wɛɹ ðə sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɡɪvən tə ði æksɛptɪd, ən əɹ waɪt dʒɹɛs hæd ðə kʌlɝd ɹɪŋz ɛnsɝkəlɪŋ ðə hɛm, ivən ɪf ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əlaʊd tə tʃɹaɪ tə titʃ ɛniwʌn jɛt. ən ɛɡwin hæd faʊn oʊvɝ ðiz læs θɝtin wiks ðət ʃi kəd nɑt ɹɪzɪst. ʃi nu haʊ izi ɪt wɑz tə tʌtʃ seɪaɪdɑɹ naʊ. ʃi kəɾ ɔlweɪz fil ɪt ðɛɹ, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ hɝ, laɪk ðə smɛl ə pɝfjum əɹ ðə fil ə sɪlk, dʒɹɔɪŋ hɝ, dʒɹɔɪŋ hɝ. ən wʌns ʃi dɪd tʌtʃ ɪt, ʃi kəd ɹɛɹli stɑp fɹəm tʃænəlɪŋ, əɹ ət lis tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə. ʃi feɪld ɔlmoʊst əz ɔfən əz ʃi səksiɾəd, bʌt ðət wɑz oʊnli ənʌðɝ spɝ tə kip ɑn.

Sitting cross-legged on her bed in her white dress, Egwene made three tiny balls of light weave patterns above her hands. She was not supposed to do this without at least one of the Accepted to supervise, but Nynaeve, glaring and striding up and down in front of the small fireplace, did after all wear the Serpent ring given to the Accepted, and her white dress had the colored rings encircling the hem, even if she was not allowed to try to teach anyone yet. And Egwene had found over these last thirteen weeks that she could not resist. She knew how easy it was to touch saidar now. She could always feel it there, waiting for her, like the smell of perfume or the feel of silk, drawing her, drawing her. And once she did touch it, she could rarely stop from channeling, or at least trying to. She failed almost as often as she succeeded, but that was only another spur to keep on.

ɪɾ ɔfən fɹaɪɾənd hɝ. haʊ mʌtʃ ʃi wɑntəd tə tʃænəl fɹaɪɾənd hɝ, ən haʊ dʒɹæb ən dʒɹɪɹi ʃi fɛlt wən ʃi wɑz nɑt tʃænəlɪŋ, kəmpɛɹd tə wən ʃi wɑz. ʃi wɑntəd tə dʒɹɪŋk ɪɾ ɔl ɪn, dɪspaɪt ðə kɔʃənz əbaʊt bɝnɪŋ hɝsɛlf aʊt, ən ðət wɑntɪŋ fɹaɪɾənd əɹ moʊst ʌv ɔl. səmtaɪmz ʃi wɪʃt ʃi hæd nɛvɝ kʌm tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. bʌt ðə fɹaɪt kəd nɑt meɪk əɹ stɑp fəɹ lɔŋ, ɛni mɔɹ ðən ðə fɪɹ ə biɪŋ kɑt baɪ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ baɪ ɛni ʌv ði æksɛptɪd bɪsaɪd nɪneɪiv.

It often frightened her. How much she wanted to channel frightened her, and how drab and dreary she felt when she was not channeling, compared to when she was. She wanted to drink it all in, despite the cautions about burning herself out, and that wanting frightened her most of all. Sometimes she wished she had never come to Tar Valon. But the fright could not make her stop for long, any more than the fear of being caught by an Aes Sedai or by any of the Accepted beside Nynaeve.

ɪt wɑz seɪf ɪnʌf hɪɹ, ðoʊ, ɪn əɹ oʊn ɹum. mɪn wɑz ðɛɹ, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə θɹi-lɛɡəd stul wɑtʃɪŋ hɝ, bʌt ʃi nu mɪn wɛl ɪnʌf naʊ tə noʊ mɪn wəd nɛvɝ ɹipɔɹt hɝ. ʃi θɔt ʃi wɑz lʌki tə hæv meɪd tu ɡʊd fɹɛnz sɪns kʌmɪŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn.

It was safe enough here, though, in her own room. Min was there, sitting on the three-legged stool watching her, but she knew Min well enough now to know Min would never report her. She thought she was lucky to have made two good friends since coming to Tar Valon.

ɪt wɑz ə lɪɾəl, wɪndoʊləs ɹum, əz ɔl nɑvəsɪz' ɹumz wɝ. θɹi ʃɔɹt peɪsɪz tʊk nɪneɪiv fɹəm wɔl tə waɪt-plæstɝd wɔl; nɪneɪivz oʊn ɹum wɑz mʌtʃ lɑɹdʒɝ, bʌt sɪns ʃi hæd meɪd noʊ fɹɛnz əmʌŋ ði ʌðɝ æksɛptɪd, ʃi keɪm tə ɛɡwinz ɹum wən ʃi niɾəd sʌmwʌn tə tɔk tə, ivən əz naʊ wən ʃi dɪd nɑt tɔk əɾ ɔl. ðə taɪni faɪɝ ɑn ðə nɛɹoʊ hɑɹθ hændəli kɛp ðə fɝs tʃɪl ʌv əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ɔɾəm ət beɪ, ðoʊ ɛɡwin wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wəd nɑt sɝv soʊ wɛl wən wɪntɝ keɪm. ə smɔl teɪbəl fəɹ stʌɾi kəmpliɾəd ðə fɝnɪʃɪŋz, ən əɹ bɪlɔŋɪŋz hʌŋ nitli ɑn ə ɹoʊ ʌv pɛɡz ɑn ðə wɔl əɹ sæɾ ɑn ðə ʃɔɹt ʃɛlf əbʌv ðə teɪbəl. nɑvəsɪz wɝ juʒəwəli kɛp tu bɪzi tə spɛn taɪm ɪn ðɛɹ ɹumz, bʌt tədeɪ wɑz ə fɹideɪ, oʊnli ðə θɝd sɪns ʃi ən nɪneɪiv hæd kʌm tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ.

It was a little, windowless room, as all novices' rooms were. Three short paces took Nynaeve from wall to white-plastered wall; Nynaeve's own room was much larger, but since she had made no friends among the other Accepted, she came to Egwene's room when she needed someone to talk to, even as now when she did not talk at all. The tiny fire on the narrow hearth handily kept the first chill of approaching autumn at bay, though Egwene was sure it would not serve so well when winter came. A small table for study completed the furnishings, and her belongings hung neatly on a row of pegs on the wall or sat on the short shelf above the table. Novices were usually kept too busy to spend time in their rooms, but today was a freeday, only the third since she and Nynaeve had come to the White Tower.

"ɛls wɑz meɪkɪŋ kæfs aɪz ət ɡɑləd tədeɪ waɪl i wɑz wɝkɪŋ wɪð ðə wɔɹɾɝz," mɪn sɛd, ɹɑkɪŋ ðə stul ɑn tu lɛɡz.

"Else was making calf's eyes at Galad today while he was working with the Warders," Min said, rocking the stool on two legs.

ðə smɔl bɔlz fɔltɝd fəɹ ən ɪnstən əbʌv ɛɡwinz hænz. "ʃi kən lʊk ət huɛvɝ ʃi wɑns," ɛɡwin sɛd kæʒəwəli. "aɪ kæn ɪmædʒən waɪ aɪ wəd bi ɪntʃɹəstəd."

The small balls faltered for an instant above Egwene's hands. "She can look at whoever she wants," Egwene said casually. "I can't imagine why I would be interested."

"noʊ ɹizən, aɪ səpoʊz. hiz ɑfli hænsəm, ɪf jə doʊn maɪn ɪm biɪŋ soʊ ɹɪdʒəd. vɛɹi naɪs tə lʊk æt, ɪspɛʃli wɪð ɪz ʃɝɾ ɔf."

"No reason, I suppose. He is awfully handsome, if you don't mind him being so rigid. Very nice to look at, especially with his shirt off."

ðə bɔlz spʌn fjʊɹiəsli. "aɪ sɝɾənli hæv noʊ dɪzaɪɝ tə lʊk ət ɡɑləd, wɪð əɹ wɪθaʊɾ ɪz ʃɝt."

The balls spun furiously. "I certainly have no desire to look at Galad, with or without his shirt."

"aɪ ʃʊdn tiz ju," mɪn sɛd kɑntʃɹɪtli. "aɪm sɑɹi fəɹ ðæt. bʌt jə də laɪk tə lʊk əɾ ɪm - doʊnt ɡɹɪmɑs ət mi laɪk ðət - ən soʊ dʌz nɪɹli ɛvɹi wʊmən ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ u ɪzən ə ɹɛd. aɪv sin ɛɛs sədaɪ daʊn ət ðə pɹæktəs jɑɹdz wən hiz wɝkɪŋ fɔɹmz, ɪspɛʃli ɡɹinz. tʃɛkɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz, ðeɪ seɪ, bʌɾ aɪ doʊn si soʊ mɛni wən ɡɑləɾ ɪzən ðɛɹ. ivən ðə kʊks ən meɪdz kʌm aʊt tə wɑtʃ hɪm."

"I shouldn't tease you," Min said contritely. "I'm sorry for that. But you do like to look at him - don't grimace at me like that - and so does nearly every woman in the White Tower who isn't a Red. I've seen Aes Sedai down at the practice yards when he's working forms, especially Greens. Checking on their Warders, they say, but I don't see so many when Galad isn't there. Even the cooks and maids come out to watch him."

ðə bɔlz stɑp dɛd, ən fəɹ ə moʊmən ɛɡwin stɛɹɾ ət ðɛm. ðeɪ vænɪʃt. sʌɾənli ʃi ɡɪɡəld. "hi ɪz ɡʊd-lʊkɪŋ, ɪzən hi? ivən wən i wɔks i lʊks əz ɪf hiz dænsɪŋ." ðə kʌlɝ ɪn əɹ tʃiks dipənd. "aɪ noʊ aɪ ʃʊdn stɛɹ ət hɪm, bʌɾ aɪ kæn hɛlp maɪsɛlf."

The balls stopped dead, and for a moment Egwene stared at them. They vanished. Suddenly she giggled. "He is good-looking, isn't he? Even when he walks he looks as if he's dancing." The color in her cheeks deepened. "I know I shouldn't stare at him, but I can't help myself."

"aɪ kæn iðɝ," mɪn sɛd, "æn aɪ kən si wʌt hiz laɪk."

"I can't either," Min said, "and I can see what he is like."

"bʌɾ ɪf hiz ɡʊd - ?"

"But if he is good - ?"

"ɛɡwin, ɡɑləɾ ɪz soʊ ɡʊd hid meɪk jə tɛɹ jəɹ hɛɹ aʊt. hid hɝɾ ə pɝsən kəz i hæd tə sɝv ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ ɡʊd. hi wʊdn ivən noʊɾəs u wɑz hɝt, kəz hid bi soʊ ɪntɛn ɑn ði ʌðɝ, bʌɾ ɪf i dɪd, hi wəɾ ɪkspɛkt əm tə ʌndɝstæn ən θɪŋk ɪt wɑz ɔl wɛl ən ɹaɪt."

"Egwene, Galad is so good he'd make you tear your hair out. He'd hurt a person because he had to serve a greater good. He wouldn't even notice who was hurt, because he'd be so intent on the other, but if he did, he would expect them to understand and think it was all well and right."

"aɪ səpoʊz jə noʊ," ɛɡwin sɛd. ʃi hæd sin mɪnz əbɪləɾi tə lʊk ət pipəl ən ɹɛɾ ɔl sɔɹts ə θɪŋz əbaʊt ðɛm; mɪn dɪd nɑt tɛl ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi sɔ, ən ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz si ɛniθɪŋ, bʌt ðəɹ hæd bɪn ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛɡwin tə bɪliv. ʃi ɡlænst ət nɪneɪiv - ði ʌðɝ wʊmən wɑz stɪl peɪsɪŋ, mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf - ðən ɹitʃt fəɹ seɪaɪdɑɹ əɡɛn ən ɹɪzumd əɹ dʒʌɡəlɪŋ ɪn ə dɛsəltɔɹi fæʃən.

"I suppose you know," Egwene said. She had seen Min's ability to look at people and read all sorts of things about them; Min did not tell everything she saw, and she did not always see anything, but there had been enough for Egwene to believe. She glanced at Nynaeve - the other woman was still pacing, muttering to herself - then reached for saidar again and resumed her juggling in a desultory fashion.

mɪn ʃɹʌɡd. "aɪ ɡɛs aɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl tɛl ju. hi dɪdn ivən noʊɾəs wʌɾ ɛls wɑz duɪŋ. hi æskt əɹ ɪf ʃi nu wɛðɝ jə maɪt bi wɔkɪŋ ðə saʊθ ɡɑɹɾən æftɝ sʌpɝ, sɪns tədeɪ ɪz ə fɹideɪ. aɪ fɛl sɑɹi fəɹ hɝ."

Min shrugged. "I guess I might as well tell you. He didn't even notice what Else was doing. He asked her if she knew whether you might be walking the South Garden after supper, since today is a freeday. I felt sorry for her."

"pʊɹ ɛls," ɛɡwin mɝmɝd, ən ðə bɔlz ə laɪt bɪkeɪm mɔɹ laɪvli əbʌv əɹ hænz. mɪn læft.

"Poor Else," Egwene murmured, and the balls of light became more lively above her hands. Min laughed.

ðə dɔɹ bæŋd oʊpən, kɑt baɪ ðə wɪnd. ɛɡwin ɡeɪv ə jɛlp ən lɛt ðə bɔlz vænɪʃ bɪfɔɹ ʃi sɔ ɪt wɑz oʊnli ɪleɪn.

The door banged open, caught by the wind. Egwene gave a yelp and let the balls vanish before she saw it was only Elayne.

ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ pʊʃt ðə dɔɹ ʃʌɾ ən hʌŋ ʌp əɹ kloʊk ɑn ə pɛɡ. "aɪ dʒʌs hɝd," ʃi sɛd. "ðə ɹumɝz ɑɹ tʃɹu. kɪŋ ɡɔlʒɹiən ɪz dɛd. ðət meɪks ɪɾ ə wɔɹ ə səksɛʃən."

The golden-haired Daughter-Heir of Andor pushed the door shut and hung up her cloak on a peg. "I just heard," she said. "The rumors are true. King Galldrian is dead. That makes it a war of succession."

mɪn snɔɹɾɪd. "sɪvəl wɔɹ. wɔɹ ə səksɛʃən. ə lɑɾ ə sɪli neɪmz fəɹ ðə seɪm θɪŋ. dʒju maɪn ɪf wi doʊn tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt? ðæts ɔl wi hɪɹ. wɔɹ ɪn kɛɹhin. wɔɹ ɑn toʊmən hɛd. ðeɪ meɪ hæv kɑt ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən ɪn sɑldɑiə, bʌt ðɛɹz stɪl wɔɹ ɪn tɛɹ. moʊst ʌv ɪts ɹumɝz, ɛniweɪ. jɛstɝdeɪ, aɪ hɝd wʌn ə ðə kʊks seɪɪŋ ʃid hɝɾ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ wɑz mɑɹtʃɪŋ ɑn tæntʃəkoʊ. ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ!"

Min snorted. "Civil war. War of succession. A lot of silly names for the same thing. Do you mind if we don't talk about it? That's all we hear. War in Cairhien. War on Toman Head. They may have caught the false Dragon in Saldaea, but there's still war in Tear. Most of it is rumors, anyway. Yesterday, I heard one of the cooks saying she'd heard Artur Hawkwing was marching on Tanchico. Artur Hawkwing!"

"aɪ θɔt jə dɪd nɑt wɑnə tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"I thought you did not want to talk about it," Egwene said.

"aɪ sɔ lɑɡən," ɪleɪn sɛd. "hi wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ə bɛntʃ ɪn ði ɪnɝ kɔɹt, kɹaɪɪŋ. hi ɹæn wən i sɔ mi. aɪ kænɑt hɛlp filɪŋ sɑɹi fəɹ hɪm."

"I saw Logain," Elayne said. "He was sitting on a bench in the Inner Court, crying. He ran when he saw me. I cannot help feeling sorry for him."

"bɛɾɝ i kɹaɪz ðən ðə ɹɛst ʌv ʌs, ɪleɪn," mɪn sɛd.

"Better he cries than the rest of us, Elayne," Min said.

"aɪ noʊ wʌɾ i ɪz," ɪleɪn sɛd kɑmli. "ɔɹ ɹæðɝ, wʌɾ i wɑz. hi ɪzən ɛnimɔɹ, ən aɪ kən fil sɑɹi fəɹ hɪm."

"I know what he is," Elayne said calmly. "Or rather, what he was. He isn't anymore, and I can feel sorry for him."

ɛɡwin slʌmp bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl. ɹænd. lɑɡən ɔlweɪz meɪɾ əɹ θɪŋk ə ɹænd. ʃi hæd nɑt dʒɹimd əbaʊɾ ɪm ɪn mʌnθs, naʊ, nɑt ðə kaɪndə dʒɹimz ʃi hæd hæɾ ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝ kwin. æneɪjə stɪl meɪɾ əɹ ɹaɪt daʊn ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi dʒɹimd, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tʃɛkt əm fəɹ saɪnz, əɹ kənɛkʃənz tə ɪvɛns, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nɛvɝ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt ɹænd ɪksɛp dʒɹimz ðæt, æneɪjə sɛd, mɛnt ʃi mɪs hɪm. ɑdli, ʃi fɛlt ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf i wɝ nɑt ðəɹ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, əz ɪf i hæd sis tə ɪɡzɪst, əlɔŋ wɪð əɹ dʒɹimz, ə fju wiks æftɝ ɹitʃɪŋ ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ən aɪ sɪt θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt haʊ naɪsli ɡɑləd wɔks, ʃi θɔt bɪɾɝli. ɹænd əz tə bi ɔl ɹaɪt. ɪf hid bɪn kɑɾ ən dʒɛntəld, aɪɾ əv hɝd sʌmθɪŋ.

Egwene slumped back against the wall. Rand. Logain always made her think of Rand. She had not dreamed about him in months, now, not the kind of dreams she had had on the River Queen. Anaiya still made her write down everything she dreamed, and the Aes Sedai checked them for signs, or connections to events, but there was never anything about Rand except dreams that, Anaiya said, meant she missed him. Oddly, she felt almost as if he were not there any longer, as if he had ceased to exist, along with her dreams, a few weeks after reaching the White Tower. And I sit thinking about how nicely Galad walks, she thought bitterly. Rand has to be all right. If he'd been caught and gentled, I'd have heard something.

ðət sɛn ə tʃɪl θɹu hɝ, əz ɪt nɛvɝ feɪl tə du, ðə θɔɾ ə ɹænd biɪŋ dʒɛntəld, ɹænd wipɪŋ ən wɑntɪŋ tə daɪ əz lɑɡən dɪd.

That sent a chill through her, as it never failed to do, the thought of Rand being gentled, Rand weeping and wanting to die as Logain did.

ɪleɪn sæt daʊn bɪsaɪɾ əɹ ɑn ðə bɛd, tʌkɪŋ əɹ fiɾ ʌp ʌndɝ hɝ. "ɪf jə ɑɹ munɪŋ oʊvɝ ɡɑləd, ɛɡwin, jəl əv noʊ sɪmpəθi fɹəm mi. əl əv nɪneɪiv doʊs jə wɪð wʌn ə ðoʊz hɔɹəbəl kənkɑkʃənz ʃiz ɔlweɪz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt." ʃi fɹaʊn ət nɪneɪiv, hu hæd teɪkən noʊ noʊɾəs ə hɝ ɛntʃɹəns. "wʌɾ ɪz ðə mæɾɝ wɪð hɝ? doʊn tɛl mi ʃiz stɑɹɾəd saɪɪŋ æftɝ ɡɑləd, tu!"

Elayne sat down beside her on the bed, tucking her feet up under her. "If you are mooning over Galad, Egwene, you will have no sympathy from me. I'll have Nynaeve dose you with one of those horrible concoctions she's always talking about." She frowned at Nynaeve, who had taken no notice of her entrance. "What is the matter with her? Don't tell me she has started sighing after Galad, too!"

"aɪ wʊdn bɑðɝ hɝ." mɪn lin təwɔɹd ðə tu ʌv əm ən loʊɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs. "ðæt skɪni æksɛptɪɾ aɪɹɛlə toʊld əɹ ʃi wɑz əz klʌmzi əz ə kaʊ ən hæd hæf ðə tæləns, ən nɪneɪiv klaʊuɾəd əɹ ɪɹ." ɪleɪn wɪnst. "ɪɡzækli," mɪn mɝmɝd. "ðeɪ hæɾ əɹ ʌp tə ʃɛɹiəmz stʌɾi bɪfɔɹ jə kəd blɪŋk, ən ʃi hæzən bɪn fɪt tə lɪv wɪð sɪns."

"I wouldn't bother her." Min leaned toward the two of them and lowered her voice. "That skinny Accepted Irella told her she was as clumsy as a cow and had half the Talents, and Nynaeve clouted her ear." Elayne winced. "Exactly," Min murmured. "They had her up to Sheriam's study before you could blink, and she hasn't been fit to live with since."

əpɛɹənli mɪn hæd nɑt dʒɹɑpt əɹ vɔɪs ɪnʌf, fəɹ ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡɹaʊl fɹəm nɪneɪiv. sʌɾənli ðə dɔɹ wɪpt oʊpən wʌns mɔɹ, ən ə ɡeɪl haʊld ɪndə ðə ɹum. ɪt dɪd nɑt ɹʌfəl ðə blæŋkəts ɑn ɛɡwinz bɛd, bʌt mɪn ən ðə stul tɑpəld, tə ɹoʊl əɡɛns ðə wɔl. ɪmiɾiətli ðə wɪn daɪd, ən nɪneɪiv stʊd wɪð ə stʃɹɪkən lʊk ɑn əɹ feɪs.

Apparently Min had not dropped her voice enough, for there was a growl from Nynaeve. Suddenly the door whipped open once more, and a gale howled into the room. It did not ruffle the blankets on Egwene's bed, but Min and the stool toppled, to roll against the wall. Immediately the wind died, and Nynaeve stood with a stricken look on her face.

ɛɡwin hɝid tə ðə dɔɹ ən pikt aʊt. ðə nundeɪ sʌn wɑz bɝnɪŋ ɔf ðə læst ɹimaɪndɝz ə læs naɪts ɹeɪnstɔɹm. ðə stɪl-dæmp bælkəni ɝaʊn ðə nɑvəsɪz' kɔɹt wɑz ɛmpti, ðə lɔŋ ɹoʊ ʌv dɔɹz tə nɑvəsɪz' ɹumz ɔl ʃʌt. ðə nɑvəsɪz u hæd teɪkən ædvæntɪdʒ ə ðə fɹideɪ tə ɛndʒɔɪ ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn ðə ɡɑɹɾənz wɝ noʊ daʊt kætʃɪŋ ʌp ɑn ðɛɹ slip. noʊ wʌn kəɾ əv sin. ʃi kloʊz ðə dɔɹ ən tʊk əɹ pleɪs bɪsaɪɾ ɪleɪn əɡɛn əz nɪneɪiv hɛlp mɪn tə hɝ fit.

Egwene hurried to the door and peeked out. The noonday sun was burning off the last reminders of last night's rainstorm. The still-damp balcony around the Novices' Court was empty, the long row of doors to novices' rooms all shut. The novices who had taken advantage of the freeday to enjoy themselves in the gardens were no doubt catching up on their sleep. No one could have seen. She closed the door and took her place beside Elayne again as Nynaeve helped Min to her feet.

"aɪm sɑɹi, mɪn," nɪneɪiv sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs. "səmtaɪmz maɪ tɛmpɝ. . . . aɪ kæn æsk jə tə fɝɡɪv mi, nɑt fəɹ ðɪs." ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "ɪf jə wɑnə ɹipɔɹt mi tə ʃɛɹiəm, əl ʌndɝstænd. aɪ dɪzɝv ɪt."

"I'm sorry, Min," Nynaeve said in a tight voice. "Sometimes my temper. . . . I can't ask you to forgive me, not for this." She took a deep breath. "If you want to report me to Sheriam, I will understand. I deserve it."

ɛɡwin wɪʃt ʃi hæd nɑt hɝd ðəɾ ædmɪʃən; nɪneɪiv kəd ɡɹoʊ pɹɪkli oʊvɝ sətʃ θɪŋz. sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ ɑn wɪtʃ tə foʊkəs, sʌmθɪŋ nɪneɪiv kəd bɪliv ʃi hæd hæɾ əɹ ətɛnʃən ɑn, ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf tʌtʃɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ wʌns mɔɹ, ən bɪɡæn dʒʌɡəlɪŋ ðə bɔlz ə laɪɾ əɡɛn. ɪleɪn kwɪkli dʒɔɪn hɝ; ɛɡwin sɔ ðə ɡloʊ fɔɹm ɝaʊn ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ivən bɪfɔɹ θɹi taɪni bɔlz əpɪɹɾ əbʌv əɹ hænz. ðeɪ bɪɡæn tə pæs ðə lɪɾəl ɡloʊɪŋ sfɪɹz bæk ən fɔɹθ ɪn ɪnkɹisɪŋli ɪntʃɹəkət pæɾɝnz. səmtaɪmz wʌn wɪŋkt aʊɾ əz wʌn ɡɝl əɹ ði ʌðɝ feɪl tə meɪnteɪn ɪɾ əz ɪt keɪm tə hɝ, ðən wɪŋk bæk ə lɪɾəl ɔltɝɾ ɪn kʌlɝ əɹ saɪz.

Egwene wished she had not heard that admission; Nynaeve could grow prickly over such things. Searching for something on which to focus, something Nynaeve could believe she had had her attention on, she found herself touching saidar once more, and began juggling the balls of light again. Elayne quickly joined her; Egwene saw the glow form around the Daughter-Heir even before three tiny balls appeared above her hands. They began to pass the little glowing spheres back and forth in increasingly intricate patterns. Sometimes one winked out as one girl or the other failed to maintain it as it came to her, then winked back a little altered in color or size.

ðə wʌn paʊɝ fɪld ɛɡwin wɪð laɪf. ʃi smɛl ðə feɪn ɹoʊz ɝoʊmə ʌv soʊp fɹəm ɪleɪnz mɔɹnɪŋ bæθ. ʃi kəd fil ðə ɹʌf plæstɝ ə ðə wɔlz, ðə smuð stoʊnz ə ðə flɔɹ, əz wɛl əz ʃi kəd ðə bɛd wɛɹ ʃi sæt. ʃi kəd hɪɹ mɪn ən nɪneɪiv bɹið, mʌtʃ lɛs ðɛɹ kwaɪət wɝdz.

The One Power filled Egwene with life. She smelled the faint rose aroma of soap from Elayne's morning bath. She could feel the rough plaster of the walls, the smooth stones of the floor, as well as she could the bed where she sat. She could hear Min and Nynaeve breathe, much less their quiet words.

"ɪf ɪt kʌmz tə fɝɡɪvɪŋ," mɪn sɛd, "meɪbi jə ʃəd fɝɡɪv mi. juv ə tɛmpɝ, ən aɪ hæv ə bɪɡ maʊθ. əl fɝɡɪv jə ɪf jə fɝɡɪv mi." wɪð mɝmɝz ʌv "fɝɡɪvən" ðət saʊndəd mɛn ɑn boʊθ saɪdz, ðə tu wɪmən hʌɡd. "bʌɾ ɪf jə də ɪɾ əɡɛn," mɪn sɛd wɪð ə læf, "aɪ maɪt klaʊt jəɹ ɪɹ."

"If it comes to forgiving," Min said, "maybe you should forgive me. You have a temper, and I have a big mouth. I will forgive you if you forgive me." With murmurs of "forgiven" that sounded meant on both sides, the two women hugged. "But if you do it again," Min said with a laugh, "I might clout your ear."

"nɛks taɪm," nɪneɪiv ɹɪplaɪd, "aɪ wɪl θɹoʊ sʌmθɪŋ ət ju." ʃi wɑz læfɪŋ, tu, bʌɾ əɹ læftɝ sist əbɹʌpli əz əɹ aɪ fɛl ɑn ɛɡwin ən ɪleɪn. "ju tu stɑp ðæt, əɹ ðəɹ wɪl bi sʌmwʌn ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz. tu sʌmoʊnz."

"Next time," Nynaeve replied, "I will throw something at you." She was laughing, too, but her laughter ceased abruptly as her eye fell on Egwene and Elayne. "You two stop that, or there will be someone going to the Mistress of Novices. Two someones."

"nɪneɪiv, jə wʊdnt!" ɛɡwin pɹətɛstəd. wən ʃi sɔ ðə lʊk ɪn nɪneɪivz aɪz, ðoʊ, ʃi heɪstəli sɛvɝɾ ɔl kɑntækt wɪð seɪaɪdɑɹ. "vɛɹi wɛl. aɪ bɪliv ju. ðɛɹz noʊ nid tə pɹuv ɪt."

"Nynaeve, you wouldn't!" Egwene protested. When she saw the look in Nynaeve's eyes, though, she hastily severed all contact with saidar. "Very well. I believe you. There's no need to prove it."

"wi hæv tə pɹæktəs," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ðeɪ æsk mɔɹ ən mɔɹ ʌv ʌs. ɪf wi dɪd nɑt pɹæktəs ɑn əɹ oʊn, wi wəd nɛvɝ kip ʌp." hɝ feɪs ʃoʊd kɑm kəmpoʊʒɝ, bʌt ʃi hæd lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ əz heɪstəli əz ɛɡwin hɝsɛlf hæd.

"We have to practice," Elayne said. "They ask more and more of us. If we did not practice on our own, we would never keep up." Her face showed calm composure, but she had let go of saidar as hastily as Egwene herself had.

"ænd wʌt hæpənz wən jə dʒɹɔ tu mʌtʃ," nɪneɪiv æskt, "æn ðɛɹz noʊ wʌn ðəɹ tə stɑp ju? aɪ wɪʃ jə wɝ mɔɹ əfɹeɪd. aɪ æm. doʊn jə θɪŋk aɪ noʊ wʌɾ ɪts laɪk fəɹ ju? ɪts ɔlweɪz ðɛɹ, ən jə wɑnə fɪl jɝsɛlf wɪð ɪt. səmtaɪmz ɪts ɔl aɪ kən də tə meɪk maɪsɛlf stɑp; aɪ wɑn ɔl ʌv ɪt. aɪ noʊ ɪt wəd bɝn mi tə ə kɹɪsp, ən aɪ wɑn ɪɾ ɛniweɪ." ʃi ʃɪvɝd. "aɪ dʒʌst wɪʃ jə wɝ mɔɹ əfɹeɪd."

"And what happens when you draw too much," Nynaeve asked, "and there's no one there to stop you? I wish you were more afraid. I am. Don't you think I know what it is like for you? It's always there, and you want to fill yourself with it. Sometimes it is all I can do to make myself stop; I want all of it. I know it would burn me to a crisp, and I want it anyway." She shivered. "I just wish you were more afraid."

"aɪ æm əfɹeɪd," ɛɡwin sɛd wɪð ə saɪ. "aɪm tɛɹəfaɪd. bʌɾ ɪt dʌzn sim tə hɛlp. wʌɾ əbaʊt ju, ɪleɪn?"

"I am afraid," Egwene said with a sigh. "I'm terrified. But it doesn't seem to help. What about you, Elayne?"

"ði oʊnli θɪŋ ðət tɛɹəfaɪz mi," ɪleɪn sɛɾ ɛɹəli, "ɪz wɑʃɪŋ dɪʃəz. ɪt simz əz ɪf aɪ hæv tə wɑʃ dɪʃəz ɛvɹi deɪ." ɛɡwin θɹu hɝ pɪloʊ ət hɝ. ɪleɪn pʊld ɪɾ ɔf əɹ hɛɾ ən θɹu ɪt bæk, bʌt ðən əɹ ʃoʊldɝz slʌmpt. "oʊ, vɛɹi wɛl. aɪm soʊ skɛɹɾ aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ maɪ tiθ ɑɹ nɑt tʃæɾɝɪŋ. ɪleɪɾə toʊl mi aɪd bi soʊ fɹaɪɾənd ðəɾ aɪ wəd wɑnə ɹʌn əweɪ wɪð ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl, bʌɾ aɪ dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. ə mæn u dʒɹoʊv ɑksən əz hɑɹɾ əz ðeɪ dʒɹaɪv əs wəd bi ʃʌnd. aɪm taɪɝɾ ɔl ðə taɪm. aɪ weɪk ʌp taɪɝɾ ən ɡoʊ tə bɛɾ ɪɡzɔstəd, ən səmtaɪmz aɪm soʊ əfɹeɪd ðəɾ əl slɪp ən tʃænəl mɔɹ ə ðə paʊɝ ðən aɪ kən hændəl ðəɾ aɪ. . . ." piɹɪŋ ɪndə hɝ læp, ʃi lɛt ðə wɝdz tʃɹeɪl ɔf.

"The only thing that terrifies me," Elayne said airily, "is washing dishes. It seems as if I have to wash dishes every day." Egwene threw her pillow at her. Elayne pulled it off her head and threw it back, but then her shoulders slumped. "Oh, very well. I am so scared I don't know why my teeth are not chattering. Elaida told me I'd be so frightened that I would want to run away with the Traveling People, but I did not understand. A man who drove oxen as hard as they drive us would be shunned. I am tired all the time. I wake up tired and go to bed exhausted, and sometimes I'm so afraid that I will slip and channel more of the Power than I can handle that I. . . ." Peering into her lap, she let the words trail off.

ɛɡwin nu wʌt ʃi hæd nɑt spoʊkən. ðɛɹ ɹumz leɪ ɹaɪt nɛks tə itʃ ʌðɝ, ən əz ɪn mɛni ʌv ðə nɑvəs ɹumz, ə smɔl hoʊl hæd lɔŋ əɡoʊ bɪn bɔɹd θɹu ðə wɔl bɪtwin, tu smɔl tə bi sin ənlɛs jə nu wɛɹ tə lʊk, bʌt jusfəl fəɹ tɔk æftɝ ðə læmps wɝ ɪkstɪŋɡwɪʃt, wən ðə ɡɝlz kəd nɑt liv ðɛɹ ɹumz. ɛɡwin hæd hɝɾ ɪleɪn kɹaɪɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə slip mɔɹ ðən wʌns, ən ʃi hæd noʊ daʊt ðəɾ ɪleɪn hæd hɝɾ əɹ oʊn kɹaɪɪŋ.

Egwene knew what she had not spoken. Their rooms lay right next to each other, and as in many of the novice rooms, a small hole had long ago been bored through the wall between, too small to be seen unless you knew where to look, but useful for talk after the lamps were extinguished, when the girls could not leave their rooms. Egwene had heard Elayne crying herself to sleep more than once, and she had no doubt that Elayne had heard her own crying.

"ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl ɑɹ tɛmptɪŋ," nɪneɪiv əɡɹid, "bʌt wɛɹɛvɝ jə ɡoʊ, ɪɾəl nɑt tʃeɪnʒ wʌt jə kən du. jə kænɑt ɹʌn fɹəm seɪaɪdɑɹ." ʃi dɪd nɑt saʊn əz ɪf ʃi laɪkt wʌt ʃi wɑz seɪɪŋ.

"The Traveling People are tempting," Nynaeve agreed, "but wherever you go, it will not change what you can do. You cannot run from saidar." She did not sound as if she liked what she was saying.

"wʌt dʒju si, mɪn?" ɪleɪn sɛd. "ɑɹ wi ɔl gɑnə bi paʊɝfəl ɛɛs sədaɪ, əɹ wɪl wi spɛn ðə ɹɛst ʌv əɹ lɪvz wɑʃɪŋ dɪʃəz əz nɑvəsɪz, ɔɹ. . . ." ʃi ʃɹʌɡd ənkʌmftəbli əz ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə vɔɪs ðə θɝɾ ɔltɝnəɾɪv ðət keɪm tə maɪnd. sɛn hoʊm. pʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ. tu nɑvəsɪz hæd bɪn pʊɾ aʊt sɪns ɛɡwin keɪm, ən ɛvɹiwʌn spoʊk ə ðɛm ɪn wɪspɝz, əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ dɛd.

"What do you see, Min?" Elayne said. "Are we all going to be powerful Aes Sedai, or will we spend the rest of our lives washing dishes as novices, or. . . ." She shrugged uncomfortably as if she did not want to voice the third alternative that came to mind. Sent home. Put out of the Tower. Two novices had been put out since Egwene came, and everyone spoke of them in whispers, as if they were dead.

mɪn ʃɪftəɾ ɑn əɹ stul. "aɪ doʊn laɪk ɹiɾɪŋ fɹɛnz," ʃi mʌɾɝd. "fɹɛndʃɪp ɡɛts ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv ðə ɹɛɾɪŋ. ɪt meɪks mi tʃɹaɪ tə pʊt ðə bɛs feɪs ɑn wʌɾ aɪ si. ðæts waɪ aɪ doʊn də ɪt fəɹ jə θɹi ɛnimɔɹ. ɛniweɪ, nʌθɪŋ əz tʃeɪnʒd əbaʊt jə ðəɾ aɪ kæn. . . ." ʃi skwɪntɪɾ ət ðɛm, ən sʌɾənli fɹaʊnd. "ðæts nu," ʃi bɹiðd.

Min shifted on her stool. "I don't like reading friends," she muttered. "Friendship gets in the way of the reading. It makes me try to put the best face on what I see. That's why I don't do it for you three anymore. Anyway, nothing has changed about you that I can. . . ." She squinted at them, and suddenly frowned. "That's new," she breathed.

"wʌt?" nɪneɪiv æskt ʃɑɹpli.

"What?" Nynaeve asked sharply.

mɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd bɪfɔɹ ænsɝɪŋ. "deɪnʒɝ. jə ɑɹ ɔl ɪn səm kaɪndə deɪnʒɝ. əɹ jəl bi, vɛɹi sun. aɪ kæn meɪk ɪɾ aʊt, bʌɾ ɪts deɪnʒɝ."

Min hesitated before answering. "Danger. You are all in some kind of danger. Or you will be, very soon. I can't make it out, but it is danger."

"ju si," nɪneɪiv sɛd tə ðə tu ɡɝlz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə bɛd. "ju mʌs teɪk kɛɹ. wi ɔl mʌst. jə mʌs boʊθ pɹɑməs nɑt tə tʃænəl əɡɛn wɪθaʊt sʌmwʌn tə ɡaɪd ju."

"You see," Nynaeve said to the two girls sitting on the bed. "You must take care. We all must. You must both promise not to channel again without someone to guide you."

"aɪ doʊnt wɑnə tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪɾ ɛnimɔɹ," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"I don't want to talk about it anymore," Egwene said.

ɪleɪn nɑɾəd iɡɝli. "jɛs. lɛts tɔk əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. mɪn, ɪf jə pʊɾ ɑn ə dʒɹɛs, əl weɪdʒɝ ɡɔɪn wəɾ æsk jə tə ɡoʊ wɔkɪŋ wɪð hɪm. jə noʊ hiz bɪn lʊkɪŋ ət ju, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ðə bɹitʃɪz ən ðə mænz koʊt pʊɾ ɪm ɔf."

Elayne nodded eagerly. "Yes. Let's talk about something else. Min, if you put on a dress, I'll wager Gawyn would ask you to go walking with him. You know he's been looking at you, but I think the breeches and the man's coat put him off."

"aɪ dʒɹɛs ðə weɪ aɪ laɪk, ən aɪ woʊn tʃeɪnʒ fəɹ ə lɔɹd, ivən ɪf hiz jəɹ bɹʌðɝ." mɪn spoʊk æbsənli, stɪl skwɪntɪŋ əɾ əm ən fɹaʊnɪŋ; ɪt wɑz ə kɑnvɝseɪʃən ðeɪ hæd hæd bɪfɔɹ. "səmtaɪmz ɪts jusfəl tə pæs əz ə bɔɪ."

"I dress the way I like, and I won't change for a lord, even if he is your brother." Min spoke absently, still squinting at them and frowning; it was a conversation they had had before. "Sometimes it is useful to pass as a boy."

"noʊ wʌn u lʊks twaɪs bɪlivz jə ɑɹ ə bɔɪ." ɪleɪn smaɪld.

"No one who looks twice believes you are a boy." Elayne smiled.

ɛɡwin wɑz ənkʌmftəɹbəl. ɪleɪn wɑz fɔɹsɪŋ ə sɛmbləns ʌv ɡeɪəɾi, mɪn wɑz hɑɹdli peɪɪŋ ətɛnʃən, ən nɪneɪiv lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə wɔɹn əm əɡɛn.

Egwene was uncomfortable. Elayne was forcing a semblance of gaiety, Min was hardly paying attention, and Nynaeve looked as if she wanted to warn them again.

wən ðə dɔɹ swʌŋ oʊpən wʌns mɔɹ, ɛɡwin baʊndəd tə hɝ fit tə kloʊz ɪt, ɡɹeɪtfəl fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ tə də bɪsaɪdz wɑtʃ ði ʌðɝz pɹitɛnd. bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹitʃt ɪt, ðoʊ, ə dɑɹk-aɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð əɹ blɑn hɛɹ dʌn ɪn ə mʌltətuɾ ə bɹeɪdz stɛpt ɪndə ðə ɹum. ɛɡwin blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, əz mʌtʃ əɾ ɪt biɪŋ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ əz ət liɑnʒɹɪn. ʃi hæd nɑt hɝd ðət liɑnʒɹɪn hæd ɹɪtɝn tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, bʌt bɪɑn ðæt, nɑvəsɪz wɝ sɛn fəɹ ɪf ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑntəd ðɛm; ɪt kəd min noʊ ɡʊd, ə sɪstɝ kʌmɪŋ hɝsɛlf.

When the door swung open once more, Egwene bounded to her feet to close it, grateful for something to do besides watch the others pretend. Before she reached it, though, a dark-eyed Aes Sedai with her blond hair done in a multitude of braids stepped into the room. Egwene blinked in surprise, as much at it being any Aes Sedai as at Liandrin. She had not heard that Liandrin had returned to the White Tower, but beyond that, novices were sent for if an Aes Sedai wanted them; it could mean no good, a sister coming herself.

ðə ɹum wɑz kɹaʊɾəd wɪð faɪv wɪmən ɪn ɪt. liɑnʒɹɪn pɔz tə ədʒʌst əɹ ɹɛd-fɹɪnd ʃɔl, aɪɪŋ ðɛm. mɪn dɪd nɑt muv, bʌɾ ɪleɪn ɹoʊz, ən ðə θɹi stændɪŋ kɝtsid, ðoʊ nɪneɪiv bɛɹli flɛkst əɹ ni. ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt θɪŋk nɪneɪiv wəɾ ɛvɝ ɡɹoʊ juz tə hævɪŋ ʌðɝz ɪn əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ hɝ.

The room was crowded with five women in it. Liandrin paused to adjust her red-fringed shawl, eyeing them. Min did not move, but Elayne rose, and the three standing curtsied, though Nynaeve barely flexed her knee. Egwene did not think Nynaeve would ever grow used to having others in authority over her.

liɑnʒɹɪnz aɪz sɛɾəld ɑn nɪneɪiv. "ænd waɪ ɑɹ jə hɪɹ, ɪn ðə nɑvəsɪz' kɔɹɾɝz, tʃaɪld?" hɝ toʊn wɑz aɪs.

Liandrin's eyes settled on Nynaeve. "And why are you here, in the novices' quarters, child?" Her tone was ice.

"aɪ æm vɪzəɾɪŋ wɪð fɹɛnz," nɪneɪiv sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs. æftɝ ə moʊmənt ʃi æɾəd ə bɪleɪɾɪd, "liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ."

"I am visiting with friends," Nynaeve said in a tight voice. After a moment she added a belated, "Liandrin Sedai."

"ði æksɛptɪd, ðeɪ kən əv noʊ fɹɛnz əmʌŋ ðə nɑvəsɪz. ðɪs jə ʃʊɾə lɝn baɪ ðɪs taɪm, tʃaɪld. bʌɾ ɪts əz wɛl ðəɾ aɪ faɪn jə hɪɹ. jə ən ju" - hɝ fɪŋɡɝ stæbd əɾ ɪleɪn ən mɪn - "wɪl ɡoʊ."

"The Accepted, they can have no friends among the novices. This you should have learned by this time, child. But it is as well that I find you here. You and you" - her finger stabbed at Elayne and Min - "will go."

"aɪ wɪl ɹɪtɝn leɪɾɝ." mɪn ɹoʊz kæʒəwəli, meɪkɪŋ ə ɡɹeɪt ʃoʊ ʌv biɪŋ ɪn noʊ hɝi tə oʊbeɪ, ən stʃɹoʊl baɪ liɑnʒɹɪn wɪð ə ɡɹɪn, ʌv wɪtʃ liɑnʒɹɪn tʊk noʊ noʊɾəs əɾ ɔl. ɪleɪn ɡeɪv ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv ə wɝid lʊk bɪfɔɹ ʃi dʒɹɑpt ə kɝtsi ən lɛft.

"I will return later." Min rose casually, making a great show of being in no hurry to obey, and strolled by Liandrin with a grin, of which Liandrin took no notice at all. Elayne gave Egwene and Nynaeve a worried look before she dropped a curtsy and left.

æftɝ ɪleɪn kloʊz ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn hɝ, liɑnʒɹɪn stʊd stʌɾiɪŋ ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv. ɛɡwin bɪɡæn tə fɪdʒɪɾ ʌndɝ ðə skɹuɾəni, bʌt nɪneɪiv hɛl hɝsɛlf stʃɹeɪt, wɪð oʊnli ə lɪɾəl haɪɾənɪŋ ə hɝ kʌlɝ.

After Elayne closed the door behind her, Liandrin stood studying Egwene and Nynaeve. Egwene began to fidget under the scrutiny, but Nynaeve held herself straight, with only a little heightening of her color.

"ju tu ɑɹ fɹəm ðə seɪm vɪlədʒ əz ðə bɔɪz u tʃɹævəld wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn. ɪz ɪt nɑt soʊ?" liɑnʒɹɪn sɛd sʌɾənli.

"You two are from the same village as the boys who traveled with Moiraine. Is it not so?" Liandrin said suddenly.

"du juv səm wɝɾ ə ɹænd?" ɛɡwin æskt iɡɝli. liɑnʒɹɪn ɑɹtʃt ən aɪbɹaʊ ət hɝ. "fɝɡɪv mi, ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ fɝɡɛt maɪsɛlf."

"Do you have some word of Rand?" Egwene asked eagerly. Liandrin arched an eyebrow at her. "Forgive me, Aes Sedai. I forget myself."

"hæv jə wɝɾ ə ðɛm?" nɪneɪiv sɛd, dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ə dɪmænd. ði æksɛptɪd hæd noʊ ɹul əbaʊt nɑt spikɪŋ tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ əntɪl spoʊkən tə.

"Have you word of them?" Nynaeve said, just short of a demand. The Accepted had no rule about not speaking to an Aes Sedai until spoken to.

"ju hæv kənsɝn fəɹ ðɛm. ðəɾ ɪz ɡʊd. ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪn deɪnʒɝ, ən jə maɪt bi eɪbəl tə hɛlp ðɛm."

"You have concern for them. That is good. They are in danger, and you might be able to help them."

"haʊ dʒju noʊ ðəɹ ɪn tʃɹʌbəl?" ðəɹ wɑz noʊ daʊɾ əbaʊt ðə dɪmæn ɪn nɪneɪivz vɔɪs ðɪs taɪm.

"How do you know they're in trouble?" There was no doubt about the demand in Nynaeve's voice this time.

liɑnʒɹɪnz ɹoʊzbʌd maʊθ taɪɾənd, bʌɾ əɹ toʊn dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ. "ðoʊ jə ɑɹ nɑɾ əwɛɹ ʌv ɪt, mɔɪɹeɪn əz sɛn lɛɾɝz tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ kənsɝnɪŋ ju. mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ, ʃi wɝiz əbaʊt ju, ən əbaʊt jəɹ jʌŋ . . . fɹɛnz. ðiz bɔɪz, ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪn deɪnʒɝ. dʒju wɪʃ tə hɛlp ðɛm, əɹ liv əm tə ðɛɹ feɪt?"

Liandrin's rosebud mouth tightened, but her tone did not change. "Though you are not aware of it, Moiraine has sent letters to the White Tower concerning you. Moiraine Sedai, she worries about you, and about your young . . . friends. These boys, they are in danger. Do you wish to help them, or leave them to their fate?"

"jɛs," ɛɡwin sɛd, ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðət nɪneɪiv sɛd, "wʌt kaɪndə tʃɹʌbəl? waɪ dʒju kɛɹ əbaʊt hɛlpɪŋ ðɛm?" nɪneɪiv ɡlænst ət ðə ɹɛd fɹɪnʒ ɑn liɑnʒɹɪnz ʃɔl. "æn aɪ θɔt jə dɪdn laɪk mɔɪɹeɪn."

"Yes," Egwene said, at the same time that Nynaeve said, "What kind of trouble? Why do you care about helping them?" Nynaeve glanced at the red fringe on Liandrin's shawl. "And I thought you didn't like Moiraine."

"du nɑt pɹɪzum tu mʌtʃ, tʃaɪld," liɑnʒɹɪn sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "tə bi æksɛptɪɾ ɪz nɑt tə bi ə sɪstɝ. æksɛptɪɾ ən nɑvəsɪz əlaɪk lɪsən wən ə sɪstɝ spiks, ən də əz ðeɪ ɑɹ toʊld." ʃi dʒɹu ə bɹɛθ ən wɛn ɑn; hɝ toʊn wɑz koʊldi sɝin əɡɛn, bʌɾ æŋɡɹi waɪt spɑts mɑɹɾ əɹ tʃiks. "sʌmdeɪ, aɪm ʃʊɹ, jəl sɝv ə kɑz, ən jəl lɝn ðən ðət tə sɝv ɪt jə mʌst wɝk ivən wɪð ðoʊz hum jə dɪslaɪk. aɪ tɛl jə aɪ hæv wɝkt wɪð mɛni wɪð hum aɪ wəd nɑt ʃɛɹ ə ɹum ɪf ɪt wɝ lɛf tə mi əloʊn. wəd jə nɑt wɝk əlɔŋsaɪd ðə wʌn jə heɪɾəd wɝst, ɪf ɪt wəd seɪv jəɹ fɹɛnz?"

"Do not presume too much, child," Liandrin said sharply. "To be Accepted is not to be a sister. Accepted and novices alike listen when a sister speaks, and do as they are told." She drew a breath and went on; her tone was coldy serene again, but angry white spots marred her cheeks. "Someday, I am sure, you will serve a cause, and you will learn then that to serve it you must work even with those whom you dislike. I tell you I have worked with many with whom I would not share a room if it were left to me alone. Would you not work alongside the one you hated worst, if it would save your friends?"

nɪneɪiv nɑɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli. "bʌt jə stɪl hævən toʊld əs wʌt kaɪndə deɪnʒɝ ðəɹ ɪn. liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ."

Nynaeve nodded reluctantly. "But you still haven't told us what kind of danger they're in. Liandrin Sedai."

"ðə deɪnʒɝ kʌmz fɹəm ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl. ðeɪ ɑɹ hʌntəd, əz aɪ ʌndɝstæn ðeɪ wʌns bɪfɔɹ wɝ. ɪf jəl kʌm wɪð mi, səm deɪnʒɝz, ət list, meɪ bi ɪlɪməneɪɾəd. də nɑɾ æsk haʊ, fəɹ aɪ kænɑt tɛl ju, bʌɾ aɪ tɛl jə flætli ɪts soʊ."

"The danger comes from Shayol Ghul. They are hunted, as I understand they once before were. If you will come with me, some dangers, at least, may be eliminated. Do not ask how, for I cannot tell you, but I tell you flatly it is so."

"wi wɪl kʌm, liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"We will come, Liandrin Sedai," Egwene said.

"kʌm wɛɹ?" nɪneɪiv sɛd. ɛɡwin ʃɑɾ əɹ ən ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd lʊk.

"Come where?" Nynaeve said. Egwene shot her an exasperated look.

"toʊmən hɛd."

"Toman Head."

ɛɡwinz maʊθ fɛl oʊpən, ən nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd, "ðɛɹz ə wɔɹ ɑn toʊmən hɛd. dʌz ðɪs deɪnʒɝ əv sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɑɹmiz?"

Egwene's mouth fell open, and Nynaeve muttered, "There's a war on Toman Head. Does this danger have something to do with Artur Hawkwing's armies?"

"ju bɪliv ɹumɝz, tʃaɪld? bʌɾ ivən ɪf ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹu, ɪz ðəɾ ɪnʌf tə stɑp ju? aɪ θɔt jə kɔl ðiz mɛn fɹɛnz." ə twɪs tə liɑnʒɹɪnz wɝdz sɛd ʃi wəd nɛvɝ də ðə seɪm.

"You believe rumors, child? But even if they were true, is that enough to stop you? I thought you called these men friends." A twist to Liandrin's words said she would never do the same.

"wi wɪl kʌm," ɛɡwin sɛd. nɪneɪiv oʊpən əɹ maʊθ əɡɛn, bʌɾ ɛɡwin wɛn ɹaɪɾ ɑn. "wi wɪl ɡoʊ, nɪneɪiv. ɪf ɹænd nidz əɹ hɛlp - ən mæt, ən pɛɹɪn - wɪv tə ɡɪv ɪt."

"We will come," Egwene said. Nynaeve opened her mouth again, but Egwene went right on. "We will go, Nynaeve. If Rand needs our help - and Mat, and Perrin - we have to give it."

"aɪ noʊ ðæt," nɪneɪiv sɛd, "bʌt wʌɾ aɪ wɑnə noʊ ɪz, waɪ ʌs? wʌt kən wi də ðət mɔɪɹeɪn - əɹ ju, liɑnʒɹɪn - kænɑt?"

"I know that," Nynaeve said, "but what I want to know is, why us? What can we do that Moiraine - or you, Liandrin - cannot?"

ðə waɪt ɡɹu ɪn liɑnʒɹɪnz tʃiks - ɛɡwin ɹilaɪz nɪneɪiv hæd fɝɡɑɾən ði ɑnɝɪfɪk ɪn ədʒɹɛsɪŋ əɹ - bʌt wʌt ʃi sɛd wɑz, "ju tu kʌm fɹəm ðɛɹ vɪlədʒ. ɪn səm weɪ aɪ də nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli ʌndɝstænd, jə ɑɹ kənɛktəd tə ðɛm. bɪɑn ðæt, aɪ kænɑt seɪ. ən noʊ mɔɹ ə jəɹ fulɪʃ kwɛstʃənz wɪl aɪ ænsɝ. wɪl jə kʌm wɪð mi fəɹ ðɛɹ seɪk?" ʃi pɔz fəɹ ðɛɹ əsɛnt; ə vɪzəbəl tɛnʃən lɛft əɹ wən ðeɪ nɑɾəd. "ɡʊd. jəl mit mi ət ðə nɔɹðɝnmoʊst ɛdʒ ə ði oʊɡiɝ ɡɹoʊv wʌn aʊɝ bɪfɔɹ sʌnsɛt wɪð jəɹ hɔɹsəz ən wʌtɛvɝ jəl nid fəɹ ðə dʒɝni. tɛl noʊ wʌn ə ðɪs."

The white grew in Liandrin's cheeks - Egwene realized Nynaeve had forgotten the honorific in addressing her - but what she said was, "You two come from their village. In some way I do not entirely understand, you are connected to them. Beyond that, I cannot say. And no more of your foolish questions will I answer. Will you come with me for their sake?" She paused for their assent; a visible tension left her when they nodded. "Good. You will meet me at the northernmost edge of the Ogier grove one hour before sunset with your horses and whatever you will need for the journey. Tell no one of this."

"wi ɑɹ nɑt səpoʊz tə liv ðə taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən," nɪneɪiv sɛd sloʊli.

"We are not supposed to leave the Tower grounds without permission," Nynaeve said slowly.

"ju hæv maɪ pɝmɪʃən. tɛl noʊ wʌn. noʊ wʌn əɾ ɔl. ðə blæk ədʒɑ wɔks ðə hɔlz ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ."

"You have my permission. Tell no one. No one at all. The Black Ajah walks the halls of the White Tower."

ɛɡwin ɡæspt, ən hɝɾ ən ɛkoʊd ɡæsp fɹəm nɪneɪiv, bʌt nɪneɪiv ɹəkʌvɝd kwɪkli. "aɪ θɔɾ ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪnaɪd ði ɛɡzɪstəns ʌv - ʌv ðæt."

Egwene gasped, and heard an echoed gasp from Nynaeve, but Nynaeve recovered quickly. "I thought all Aes Sedai denied the existence of - of that."

liɑnʒɹɪnz maʊθ taɪɾənd ɪndə ə snɪɹ. "mɛni du, bʌt tɑɹmən ɡdən əpɹoʊtʃɪz, ən ðə taɪm livz wən dɪnaɪəlz kən bi meɪd. ðə blæk ədʒɑ, ɪts ði ɑpəzəɾ ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ fəɹ wɪtʃ ðə taʊɝ stænz, bʌɾ ɪɾ ɪɡzɪsts, tʃaɪld. ɪts ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ɛni wʊmən kəd bɪlɔŋ tə ɪt, ən ɪt sɝvz ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ɪf jəɹ fɹɛnz ɑɹ pɝsud baɪ ðə ʃædoʊ, dʒju θɪŋk ðə blæk ədʒɑ wɪl liv jə əlaɪv ən fɹi tə hɛlp ðɛm? tɛl noʊ wʌn - noʊ wʌn! - əɹ jə meɪ nɑt lɪv tə ɹitʃ toʊmən hɛd. wʌn aʊɝ bɪfɔɹ sʌnsɛt. də nɑt feɪl mi." wɪð ðæt, ʃi wɑz ɡɔn, ðə dɔɹ kloʊzɪŋ fɝmli bɪhaɪn hɝ.

Liandrin's mouth tightened into a sneer. "Many do, but Tarmon Gai'don approaches, and the time leaves when denials can be made. The Black Ajah, it is the opposite of everything for which the Tower stands, but it exists, child. It is everywhere, any woman could belong to it, and it serves the Dark One. If your friends are pursued by the Shadow, do you think the Black Ajah will leave you alive and free to help them? Tell no one - no one! - or you may not live to reach Toman Head. One hour before sunset. Do not fail me." With that, she was gone, the door closing firmly behind her.

ɛɡwin kəlæpst ɑntu hɝ bɛd wɪð əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ niz. "nɪneɪiv, ʃiz ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ. ʃi kænt noʊ əbaʊt ɹænd. ɪf ʃi dɪd. . . ."

Egwene collapsed onto her bed with her hands on her knees. "Nynaeve, she's Red Ajah. She can't know about Rand. If she did. . . ."

"ʃi kænɑt noʊ," nɪneɪiv əɡɹid. "aɪ wɪʃ aɪ nu waɪ ə ɹɛd wɑntəd tə hɛlp. əɹ waɪ ʃiz wɪlɪŋ tə wɝk wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn. aɪɾ əv swɔɹn niðɝ ə ðɛm wəd ɡɪv ði ʌðɝ wɔɾɝ ɪf ʃi wɝ daɪɪŋ ə θɝst."

"She cannot know," Nynaeve agreed. "I wish I knew why a Red wanted to help. Or why she's willing to work with Moiraine. I'd have sworn neither of them would give the other water if she were dying of thirst."

"ju θɪŋk ʃiz laɪɪŋ?"

"You think she's lying?"

"ʃi ɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ," nɪneɪiv sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "aɪl weɪdʒɝ maɪ bɛst sɪlvɝ pɪn əɡɛnst ə blubɛɹi ðəɾ ɛvɹi wɝd ʃi sɛd wɑz tʃɹu. bʌɾ aɪ wʌndɝ ɪf wi hɝd wʌt wi θɔt wi dɪd."

"She is Aes Sedai," Nynaeve said dryly. "I'll wager my best silver pin against a blueberry that every word she said was true. But I wonder if we heard what we thought we did."

"ðə blæk ədʒɑ." ɛɡwin ʃɪvɝd. "ðɛɹ wɑz noʊ mɪsteɪkɪŋ wʌt ʃi sɛɾ əbaʊt ðæt, ðə laɪt hɛlp ʌs."

"The Black Ajah." Egwene shivered. "There was no mistaking what she said about that, the Light help us."

"noʊ mɪsteɪkɪŋ," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ænd ʃiz fɔɹstɑld əs æskɪŋ ɛniwʌn fəɹ ædvaɪs, kəz æftɝ ðæt, hu kən wi tʃɹʌst? ðə laɪt hɛlp əs ɪndid."

"No mistaking," Nynaeve said. "And she's forestalled us asking anyone for advice, because after that, who can we trust? The Light help us indeed."

mɪn ən ɪleɪn keɪm bʌsəlɪŋ ɪn, slæmɪŋ ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn ðɛm. "ɑɹ jə ɹɪli ɡoʊɪŋ?" mɪn æskt, ən ɪleɪn dʒɛstʃɝd təwɔɹd ðə taɪni hoʊl ɪn ðə wɔl əbʌv ɛɡwinz bɛd, seɪɪŋ, "wi lɪsən fɹəm maɪ ɹum. wi hɝɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ."

Min and Elayne came bustling in, slamming the door behind them. "Are you really going?" Min asked, and Elayne gestured toward the tiny hole in the wall above Egwene's bed, saying, "We listened from my room. We heard everything."

ɛɡwin ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz wɪð nɪneɪiv, wʌndɝɪŋ haʊ mʌtʃ ðeɪ hæɾ oʊvɝhɝd, ən sɔ ðə seɪm kənsɝn ɑn nɪneɪivz feɪs. ɪf ðeɪ mænədʒ tə saɪfɝ aʊɾ əbaʊt ɹænd. . . .

Egwene exchanged glances with Nynaeve, wondering how much they had overheard, and saw the same concern on Nynaeve's face. If they manage to cipher out about Rand. . . .

"ju hæv tə kip ðɪs tə jʊɹsɛlvz," nɪneɪiv kɑʃən ðɛm. "aɪ səpoʊz liɑnʒɹɪn əz ɝeɪnʒd pɝmɪʃən fɹəm ʃɛɹiəm fəɹ əs tə ɡoʊ, bʌɾ ivən ɪf ʃi hæzənt, ivən ɪf ðeɪ stɑɹt sɝtʃɪŋ ðə taʊɝ fɹəm tɑp tə bɑɾəm fəɹ əs təmɑɹoʊ, jə mʌsnt seɪ ə wɝd."

"You have to keep this to yourselves," Nynaeve cautioned them. "I suppose Liandrin has arranged permission from Sheriam for us to go, but even if she hasn't, even if they start searching the Tower from top to bottom for us tomorrow, you mustn't say a word."

"kip ɪt tə maɪsɛlf?" mɪn sɛd. "noʊ fɪɹ ɑn ðæt. aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ wɪð ju. ɔl aɪ də ɔl deɪ ɪz tʃɹaɪ tə ɪkspleɪn tə wʌn bɹaʊn sɪstɝ əɹ ənʌðɝ sʌmθɪŋ aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstæn maɪsɛlf. aɪ kæn ivən ɡoʊ fəɹ ə wɔk wɪθaʊt ði æmɪɝlɪn hɝsɛlf pɑpɪŋ aʊɾ ən æskɪŋ mi tə ɹid huɛvɝ wi si. wən ðət wʊmən æsks jə tə də sʌmθɪŋ, ðəɹ dʌzn sim tə bi ɛni weɪ aʊɾ ʌv ɪt. aɪ mʌst əv ɹɛd hæf ðə waɪt taʊɝ fəɹ hɝ, bʌt ʃi ɔlweɪz wɑns ənʌðɝ dɛmənstʃɹeɪʃən. ɔl aɪ niɾəd wɑz ən ɪkskjus tə liv, ən ðɪs ɪz ɪt." hɝ feɪs wɔɹ ə lʊk ə dɪtɝməneɪʃən ðəɾ əlaʊd noʊ ɑɹɡjəmənt.

"Keep it to myself?" Min said. "No fear on that. I'm going with you. All I do all day is try to explain to one Brown sister or another something I don't understand myself. I can't even go for a walk without the Amyrlin herself popping out and asking me to read whoever we see. When that woman asks you to do something, there doesn't seem to be any way out of it. I must have read half the White Tower for her, but she always wants another demonstration. All I needed was an excuse to leave, and this is it." Her face wore a look of determination that allowed no argument.

ɛɡwin wʌndɝd waɪ mɪn wɑz soʊ dɪtɝmən tə ɡoʊ wɪð əm ɹæðɝ ðən sɪmpli livɪŋ ɑn əɹ oʊn, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæd taɪm tə də mɔɹ ðən wʌndɝ, ɪleɪn sɛd, "aɪ æm ɡoʊɪŋ, tu."

Egwene wondered why Min was so determined to go with them rather than simply leaving on her own, but before she had time to do more than wonder, Elayne said, "I am going, too."

"ɪleɪn," nɪneɪiv sɛd dʒɛnli, "ɛɡwin ən aɪ ɑɹ ðə bɔɪz' kɪθ fɹəm ɛmənz fild. jə ɑɹ ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ. ɪf jə dɪsəpɪɹ fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ, waɪ, ɪt - ɪt kəd stɑɹɾ ə wɔɹ."

"Elayne," Nynaeve said gently, "Egwene and I are the boys' kith from Emond's Field. You are the Daughter-Heir of Andor. If you disappear from the White Tower, why, it - it could start a war."

"mʌðɝ wʊdn stɑɹɾ ə wɔɹ wɪð tɑɹ vəlɑn ɪf ðeɪ dʒɹaɪɾ ən sɔltəd mi, wɪtʃ ðeɪ meɪ bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə du. ɪf jə θɹi kən ɡoʊ ɔf ən əv ən ædvɛntʃɝ, jə nidn θɪŋk aɪm gɑnə steɪ hɪɹ ən wɑʃ dɪʃəz, ən skɹʌb flɔɹz, ən əv səm æksɛptɪd bɪɹeɪɾɪŋ mi kəz aɪ dɪdn meɪk ðə faɪɝ ði ɪɡzækt ʃeɪɾ ə blu ʃi wɑntəd. ɡɔɪn wɪl daɪ fɹəm ɛnvi wən i faɪnz aʊt." ɪleɪn ɡɹɪn ən ɹitʃt oʊvɝ tə tʌɡ pleɪfəli əɾ ɛɡwinz hɛɹ. "bɪsaɪdz, ɪf jə liv ɹænd laɪɪŋ əbaʊt lus, aɪ maɪɾ əv ə tʃæns tə pɪk ɪm ʌp."

"Mother wouldn't start a war with Tar Valon if they dried and salted me, which they may be trying to do. If you three can go off and have an adventure, you needn't think I am going to stay here and wash dishes, and scrub floors, and have some Accepted berating me because I didn't make the fire the exact shade of blue she wanted. Gawyn will die from envy when he finds out." Elayne grinned and reached over to tug playfully at Egwene's hair. "Besides, if you leave Rand lying about loose, I might have a chance to pick him up."

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk iðɝ ʌv əs ɪz gɑnə hæv hɪm," ɛɡwin sɛd sædli.

"I don't think either of us is going to have him," Egwene said sadly.

"ðɛn wɪl faɪn huɛvɝ i dʌz tʃuz ən meɪk əɹ laɪf mɪzɝəbəl. bʌɾ i kʊdn bi ful ɪnʌf tə tʃuz sʌmwʌn ɛls wən i kəɾ əv wʌn ʌv ʌs. oʊ, pliz smaɪl, ɛɡwin. aɪ noʊ hiz jʊɹz. aɪ dʒʌs fil" - ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ðə wɝd - "fɹi. aɪv nɛvɝ hæɾ ən ædvɛntʃɝ. əl bɛt wi woʊn iðɝ ʌv əs kɹaɪ aʊɝsɛlvz tə slip ɑn ən ædvɛntʃɝ. ən ɪf wi du, wɪl meɪk ʃʊɹ ðə ɡlimən liv ðət pɑɹɾ aʊt."

"Then we'll find whoever he does choose and make her life miserable. But he couldn't be fool enough to choose someone else when he could have one of us. Oh, please smile, Egwene. I know he's yours. I just feel" - she hesitated, searching for the word - "free. I've never had an adventure. I'll bet we won't either of us cry ourselves to sleep on an adventure. And if we do, we will make sure the gleemen leave that part out."

"ðɪs ɪz fulɪʃnəs," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "wi ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə toʊmən hɛd. juv hɝd ðə nuz, ən ðə ɹumɝz. ɪɾəl bi deɪnʒɝəs. jə mʌst steɪ hɪɹ."

"This is foolishness," Nynaeve said. "We are going to Toman Head. You've heard the news, and the rumors. It will be dangerous. You must stay here."

"aɪ hɝd wʌt liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ sɛɾ əbaʊt ðə - ðə blæk ədʒɑ, tu." ɪleɪnz vɔɪs dʒɹɑpt ɔlmoʊs tə ə wɪspɝ ət ðət neɪm. "haʊ seɪf wɪl aɪ bi hɪɹ, ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ hɪɹ? ɪf mʌðɝ ivən səspɛktəd ðə blæk ədʒɑ ɹɪli ɪɡzɪstəd, ʃi wəd pɪtʃ mi ɪndə ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə bæɾəl tə ɡɛt mi əweɪ fɹəm ðɛm."

"I heard what Liandrin Sedai said about the - the Black Ajah, too." Elayne's voice dropped almost to a whisper at that name. "How safe will I be here, if they are here? If Mother even suspected the Black Ajah really existed, she would pitch me into the middle of a battle to get me away from them."

"bʌt, ɪleɪn - "

"But, Elayne - "

"ðɛɹ ɪz oʊnli wʌn weɪ fəɹ jə tə stɑp mi kʌmɪŋ. ðəɾ ɪz tə tɛl ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz. wɪl meɪk ə pɹɪɾi pɪktʃɝ, ɔl θɹi ʌv əs laɪn ʌp ɪn əɹ stʌɾi. ɔl fɔɹ ʌv ʌs. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk mɪn wəɾ ɪskeɪp fɹəm sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðɪs. soʊ sɪns jə ɑɹ nɑt gɑnə tɛl ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ, aɪm kʌmɪŋ, tu."

"There is only one way for you to stop me coming. That is to tell the Mistress of Novices. We will make a pretty picture, all three of us lined up in her study. All four of us. I don't think Min would escape from something like this. So since you are not going to tell Sheriam Sedai, I am coming, too."

nɪneɪiv θɹu ʌp əɹ hænz. "pɝhæps jə kən seɪ sʌmθɪŋ tə kənvɪns hɝ," ʃi toʊl mɪn.

Nynaeve threw up her hands. "Perhaps you can say something to convince her," she told Min.

mɪn hæd bɪn linɪŋ əɡɛns ðə dɔɹ, skwɪntɪŋ əɾ ɪleɪn, ən naʊ ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "aɪ θɪŋk ʃiz tə kʌm əz mʌtʃ əz ðə ɹɛst ə ju. ðə ɹɛst ʌv ʌs. aɪ kən si ðə deɪnʒɝ ɝaʊn ɔl ə jə mɔɹ klɪɹli, naʊ. nɑt klɪɹli ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪɾ aʊt, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ɪts sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð jə dəsaɪɾɪŋ tə ɡoʊ. ðæts waɪ ɪts klɪɹɝ; kəz ɪts mɔɹ sɝɾən."

Min had been leaning against the door, squinting at Elayne, and now she shook her head. "I think she has to come as much as the rest of you. The rest of us. I can see the danger around all of you more clearly, now. Not clearly enough to make it out, but I think it has something to do with you deciding to go. That's why it is clearer; because it is more certain."

"ðæts noʊ ɹizən fəɹ əɹ tə kʌm," nɪneɪiv sɛd, bʌt mɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ əɡɛn.

"That's no reason for her to come," Nynaeve said, but Min shook her head again.

"ʃi ɪz lɪŋk tə - tə ðoʊz bɔɪz əz mʌtʃ əz ju, əɹ ɛɡwin, əɹ mi. ʃiz pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt, nɪneɪiv, wʌtɛvɝ ɪɾ ɪz. pɑɹɾ ə ðə pæɾɝn, aɪ səpoʊz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd seɪ."

"She is linked to - to those boys as much as you, or Egwene, or me. She's part of it, Nynaeve, whatever it is. Part of the Pattern, I suppose an Aes Sedai would say."

ɪleɪn sim teɪkən əbæk, ən ɪntʃɹəstəd, tu. "aɪ æm? wʌt pɑɹt, mɪn?"

Elayne seemed taken aback, and interested, too. "I am? What part, Min?"

"aɪ kæn si ɪt klɪɹli." mɪn lʊkt ət ðə flɔɹ. "səmtaɪmz aɪ wɪʃ aɪ kʊdn ɹid pipəl əɾ ɔl. moʊs pipəl ɑɹən sæɾəsfaɪd wɪð wʌɾ aɪ si ɛniweɪ."

"I can't see it clearly." Min looked at the floor. "Sometimes I wish I couldn't read people at all. Most people aren't satisfied with what I see anyway."

"ɪf wəɹ ɔl ɡoʊɪŋ," nɪneɪiv sɛd, "ðɛn wi hæd bɛs bi əbaʊt meɪkɪŋ plænz." haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ʃi maɪɾ ɑɹɡju bɪfɔɹhænd, wʌns ə kɔɹs ʌv ækʃən hæd bɪn dɪsaɪɾɪd, nɪneɪiv ɔlweɪz wɛn ɹaɪt tə ðə pɹæktəkælɪɾiz: wʌt ðeɪ hæd tə teɪk wɪð ðɛm, ən haʊ koʊld ɪt wəd bi baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ ɹitʃt toʊmən hɛd, ən haʊ ðeɪ kəd ɡɛt ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz fɹəm ðə steɪbəlz wɪθaʊt biɪŋ stɑpt.

"If we are all going," Nynaeve said, "then we had best be about making plans." However much she might argue beforehand, once a course of action had been decided, Nynaeve always went right to the practicalities: what they had to take with them, and how cold it would be by the time they reached Toman Head, and how they could get their horses from the stables without being stopped.

lɪsnɪŋ tə hɝ, ɛɡwin kəd nɑt hɛlp wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt ðə deɪnʒɝ wɑz ðət mɪn sɔ fəɹ ðɛm, ən wʌt deɪnʒɝ θɹɛɾənd ɹænd. ʃi nu ʌv oʊnli wʌn deɪnʒɝ ðət kəd θɹɛɾən hɪm, ən ɪt meɪɾ əɹ koʊl tə θɪŋk ʌv ɪt. hoʊld ɑn, ɹænd. hoʊld ɑn, jə wʊl-hɛɾəd ɪɾiət. əl hɛlp jə sʌmhaʊ.

Listening to her, Egwene could not help wondering what the danger was that Min saw for them, and what danger threatened Rand. She knew of only one danger that could threaten him, and it made her cold to think of it. Hold on, Rand. Hold on, you wool-headed idiot. I'll help you somehow.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾinaɪn


CHAPTER 39

flaɪt fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ


Flight from the White Tower

ɛɡwin ən ɪleɪn ɪnklaɪn ðɛɹ hɛdz bɹifli tə itʃ ɡɹup ʌv wɪmən ðeɪ pæst əz ðeɪ meɪd ðɛɹ weɪ θɹu ðə taʊɝ. ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊd θɪŋ ðəɹ wɝ soʊ mɛni wɪmən fɹəm aʊtsaɪɾ ɪn ðə taʊɝ tədeɪ, ɛɡwin θɔt, tu mɛni fəɹ itʃ tə hæv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ ən æksɛptɪd fəɹ ɛskɔɹt. əloʊn əɹ ɪn smɔl ɡɹups, ɡɑɹbd ɹɪtʃli əɹ pʊɹli, ɪn dʒɹɛs fɹəm hæf ə dʌzən dɪfɹən lænz, səm stɪl dʌsti fɹəm ðɛɹ dʒɝni tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ðeɪ kɛp tə ðɛmsɛlvz ən weɪɾəd ðɛɹ tɝn tə æsk ðɛɹ kwɛstʃənz ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, əɹ pɹizɛn ðɛɹ pətɪʃənz. səm wɪmən - leɪɾiz əɹ mɝtʃəns əɹ mɝtʃəns' waɪvz - hæd fimeɪl sɝvəns wɪð ðɛm. ivən ə fju mɛn hæd kʌm wɪð pətɪʃənz, stændɪŋ baɪ ðɛmsɛlvz, lʊkɪŋ ənʃʊɹ əbaʊt biɪŋ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən aɪɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls ənizəli.

Egwene and Elayne inclined their heads briefly to each group of women they passed as they made their way through the Tower. It was a good thing there were so many women from outside in the Tower today, Egwene thought, too many for each to have an Aes Sedai or an Accepted for escort. Alone or in small groups, garbed richly or poorly, in dress from half a dozen different lands, some still dusty from their journey to Tar Valon, they kept to themselves and waited their turn to ask their questions of the Aes Sedai, or present their petitions. Some women - ladies or merchants or merchants' wives - had female servants with them. Even a few men had come with petitions, standing by themselves, looking unsure about being in the White Tower, and eyeing everyone else uneasily.

ɪn ðə lɛd, nɪneɪiv kɛpt əɹ aɪz pɝpəsfəli əhɛd, hɝ kloʊk swɝlɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ, wɔkɪŋ əz ɪf ʃi nu wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ - wɪtʃ ʃi dɪd, əz lɔŋ əz noʊ wʌn stɑpt əm - ən hæɾ ə pɝfəkt ɹaɪt tə ɡoʊ ðəɹ - wɪtʃ wɑz ə dɪfɹən mæɾɝ ɔltəɡɛðɝ, ʌv kɔɹs. dʒɹɛs naʊ ɪn ðə kloʊðz ðeɪ hæd bɹɔt tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ðeɪ sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt lʊk laɪk ɹɛzəɾənts ə ðə taʊɝ. itʃ hæd tʃoʊzən əɹ bɛs dʒɹɛs ðət hæɾ ə skɝt dɪvaɪɾəd fəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ, ən kloʊks ə faɪn wʊl ɹɪtʃ wɪð ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi. əz lɔŋ əz ðeɪ kɛpt əweɪ fɹəm ɔl u maɪt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz əm - ðeɪ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi dɑdʒ sɛvɹəl u nu ðɛɹ feɪsəz - ɛɡwin θɔt ðeɪ maɪt meɪk ɪt.

In the lead, Nynaeve kept her eyes purposefully ahead, her cloak swirling behind her, walking as if she knew where they were going - which she did, as long as no one stopped them - and had a perfect right to go there - which was a different matter altogether, of course. Dressed now in the clothes they had brought to Tar Valon, they certainly did not look like residents of the Tower. Each had chosen her best dress that had a skirt divided for riding, and cloaks of fine wool rich with embroidery. As long as they kept away from all who might recognize them - they had already dodged several who knew their faces - Egwene thought they might make it.

"ðɪs wəd də bɛɾɝ fəɹ ə tɝn ɪn səm lɔɹdz pɑɹk ðən ə ɹaɪd tə toʊmən hɛd," nɪneɪiv hæd sɛd dʒɹaɪli əz ɛɡwin hɛlpt əɹ wɪð ðə bʌɾənz ʌv ə ɡɹeɪ sɪlk wɪð θɹɛd-ʌv-ɡoʊld wɝk ən pɝl flaʊɝz əkɹɔs ðə bʊzəm ən daʊn ðə slivz, "bʌɾ ɪt meɪ əlaʊ əs tə liv ənnoʊɾɪst."

"This would do better for a turn in some lord's park than a ride to Toman Head," Nynaeve had said dryly as Egwene helped her with the buttons of a gray silk with thread-of-gold work and pearled flowers across the bosom and down the sleeves, "but it may allow us to leave unnoticed."

naʊ ɛɡwin ʃɪftəɾ əɹ kloʊk ən smuðd əɹ oʊn ɡoʊld-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd, ɡɹin sɪlk dʒɹɛs ən ɡlænst əɾ ɪleɪn, ɪn blu slæʃt wɪð kɹim, hoʊpɪŋ nɪneɪiv hæd bɪn ɹaɪt. soʊ fɑɹ, ɛvɹiwʌn hæd teɪkən əm fəɹ pətɪʃənɝz, noʊbəlz, əɹ ət list wɪmən ʌv wɛlθ, bʌɾ ɪt sim ðət ðeɪ ʃəd stæn aʊt. ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə ɹilaɪz waɪ; ʃi fɛlt ənkʌmftəɹbəl ɪn ðə faɪn dʒɹɛs æftɝ wɛɹɪŋ ə nɑvəsəz pleɪn waɪt fəɹ ðə pæs fju mʌnθs.

Now Egwene shifted her cloak and smoothed her own gold-embroidered, green silk dress and glanced at Elayne, in blue slashed with cream, hoping Nynaeve had been right. So far, everyone had taken them for petitioners, nobles, or at least women of wealth, but it seemed that they should stand out. She was surprised to realize why; she felt uncomfortable in the fine dress after wearing a novice's plain white for the past few months.

ə lɪɾəl klʌstɝ ə vɪlədʒ wɪmən ɪn staʊt, dɑɹk wʊlənz dʒɹɑp kɝtsiz əz ðeɪ pæst. ɛɡwin ɡlæns bæk ət mɪn əz sun əz ðeɪ wɝ bɪɑnd. mɪn hæd kɛpt əɹ bɹitʃɪz ən bæɡi mænz ʃɝɾ ʌndɝ ə bɔɪz bɹaʊn kloʊk ən koʊt, wɪð ən oʊld, waɪd-bɹɪm hæt pʊl daʊn oʊvɝ əɹ ʃɔɹt hɛɹ. "wʌn ʌv əs əz tə bi ðə sɝvənt," ʃi hæd sɛd, læfɪŋ. "wɪmən dʒɹɛs ðə weɪ jə ɑɹ ɔlweɪz əv ət list wʌn. jəl wɪʃ jə hæd maɪ bɹitʃɪz ɪf wɪv tə ɹʌn." ʃi wɑz bɝɾənd wɪð fɔɹ sɛts ə sæɾəlbæɡz bʌlʒɪŋ wɪð wɔɹm kloʊðz, fəɹ ɪt wəd ʃʊɹli bi wɪntɝ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹɪtɝnd. ðəɹ wɝ ɔlsoʊ pækɪts ə fud pɪlfɝd fɹəm ðə kɪtʃənz, ɪnʌf tə læst əntɪl ðeɪ kəd baɪ mɔɹ.

A little cluster of village women in stout, dark woolens dropped curtsies as they passed. Egwene glanced back at Min as soon as they were beyond. Min had kept her breeches and baggy man's shirt under a boy's brown cloak and coat, with an old, wide-brimmed hat pulled down over her short hair. "One of us has to be the servant," she had said, laughing. "Women dressed the way you are always have at least one. You'll wish you had my breeches if we have to run." She was burdened with four sets of saddlebags bulging with warm clothes, for it would surely be winter before they returned. There were also packets of food pilfered from the kitchens, enough to last until they could buy more.

"ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ aɪ kæn kæɹi səm ə ðoʊz, mɪn?" ɛɡwin æsk sɔfli.

"Are you sure I can't carry some of those, Min?" Egwene asked softly.

"ðeɪɹ dʒʌst ɑkwɝd," mɪn sɛd wɪð ə ɡɹɪn, "nɑt hɛvi." ʃi sim tə θɪŋk ɪt wɑz ɔl ə ɡeɪm, əɹ ɛls wɑz pɹitɛndɪŋ tə θɪŋk soʊ. "æn pipəl wəd bi ʃʊɹ tə wʌndɝ waɪ ə faɪn leɪɾi sətʃ əz jɝsɛlf wɑz kæɹiɪŋ əɹ oʊn sæɾəlbæɡz. jə kən kæɹi jʊɹz - ən maɪn, tu, ɪf jə wɑnt - wʌns wi - " hɝ ɡɹɪn vænɪʃt, ən ʃi wɪspɝd fɪɹsli, "ɛɛs sədaɪ!"

"They're just awkward," Min said with a grin, "not heavy." She seemed to think it was all a game, or else was pretending to think so. "And people would be sure to wonder why a fine lady such as yourself was carrying her own saddlebags. You can carry yours - and mine, too, if you want - once we - " Her grin vanished, and she whispered fiercely, "Aes Sedai!"

ɛɡwin wɪpt əɹ aɪz fɔɹwɝd. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð lɔŋ, smuð blæk hɛɹ ən eɪdʒd-aɪvɝi skɪn wɑz kʌmɪŋ təwɔɹɾ əm daʊn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, lɪsnɪŋ tə ə wʊmən wɛɹɪŋ ɹʌf fɑɹm kloʊðz ən ə pætʃt kloʊk. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd nɑt sin əm jɛt, bʌɾ ɛɡwin ɹɛkəɡnaɪz hɝ; tɑkimə, ʌv ðə bɹaʊn ədʒɑ, hu tɔt ðə hɪstɝi ʌv ðə waɪt taʊɝ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən u kəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz wʌn ə hɝ pjupəlz əɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz.

Egwene whipped her eyes forward. An Aes Sedai with long, smooth black hair and aged-ivory skin was coming toward them down the corridor, listening to a woman wearing rough farm clothes and a patched cloak. The Aes Sedai had not seen them yet, but Egwene recognized her; Takima, of the Brown Ajah, who taught the history of the White Tower and Aes Sedai, and who could recognize one of her pupils at a hundred paces.

nɪneɪiv tɝn daʊn ə saɪd hɔl wɪθaʊt bɹeɪkɪŋ stʃɹaɪd, bʌt ðəɹ wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd, ə læŋki wʊmən wɪð ə pɝmənən fɹaʊn, hɝid pæst əm hɔlɪŋ ə ɹɛd-feɪs nɑvəs baɪ ði ɪɹ.

Nynaeve turned down a side hall without breaking stride, but there one of the Accepted, a lanky woman with a permanent frown, hurried past them hauling a red-faced novice by the ear.

ɛɡwin hæd tə swɑloʊ bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd spik. "ðæt wɑz aɪɹɛlə, ən ɛls. dɪd ðeɪ noʊɾəs ʌs?" ʃi kəd nɑt meɪk hɝsɛlf lʊk bæk tə si.

Egwene had to swallow before she could speak. "That was Irella, and Else. Did they notice us?" She could not make herself look back to see.

"noʊ," mɪn sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt. "ɔl ðeɪ sɔ wɑz əɹ kloʊðz." ɛɡwin lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ, ɹɪliv bɹɛθ, ən hɝd wʌn fɹəm nɪneɪiv, tu.

"No," Min said after a moment. "All they saw was our clothes." Egwene let out a long, relieved breath, and heard one from Nynaeve, too.

"maɪ hɑɹt meɪ bɝs bɪfɔɹ wi ɹitʃ ðə steɪbəlz," ɪleɪn mɝmɝd. "ɪz ðɪs wʌɾ ən ædvɛntʃɝ ɪz laɪk ɔl ðə taɪm, ɛɡwin? jəɹ hɑɹɾ ɪn jəɹ maʊθ, ən jəɹ stʌmək ɪn jəɹ fit?"

"My heart may burst before we reach the stables," Elayne murmured. "Is this what an adventure is like all the time, Egwene? Your heart in your mouth, and your stomach in your feet?"

"aɪ səpoʊz ɪɾ ɪz," ɛɡwin sɛd sloʊli. ʃi faʊn ɪt hɑɹd tə θɪŋk ðət ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə taɪm wən ʃi hæd bɪn iɡɝ tə hæv ən ædvɛntʃɝ, tə də sʌmθɪŋ deɪnʒɝəs ən ɪksaɪɾɪŋ laɪk ðə pipəl ɪn stɔɹiz. naʊ ʃi θɔt ði ɪksaɪɾɪŋ pɑɹt wɑz wʌt jə ɹɪmɛmbɝd wən jə lʊk bæk, ən ðə stɔɹiz lɛft aʊɾ ə ɡʊd dil ʌv ənplɛzəntnəs. ʃi toʊld ɪleɪn əz mʌtʃ.

"I suppose it is," Egwene said slowly. She found it hard to think that there had been a time when she had been eager to have an adventure, to do something dangerous and exciting like the people in stories. Now she thought the exciting part was what you remembered when you looked back, and the stories left out a good deal of unpleasantness. She told Elayne as much.

"stɪl," ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ sɛd fɝmli, "aɪ hæv nɛvɝ hæɾ ɛni ɹil ɪksaɪtmən bɪfɔɹ, ən nɛvɝ laɪkli tə əz lɔŋ əz mʌðɝ əz ɛni seɪ ɪn ɪt, wɪtʃ ʃɪl əntɪl aɪ teɪk ðə θɹoʊn maɪsɛlf."

"Still," the Daughter-Heir said firmly, "I have never had any real excitement before, and never likely to as long as Mother has any say in it, which she will until I take the throne myself."

"ju tu bi kwaɪət," nɪneɪiv sɛd. ðeɪ wɝ əloʊn ɪn ðə hɔl fəɹ ə tʃeɪnʒ, wɪð noʊ wʌn ɪn saɪɾ ɪn iðɝ dɝɛkʃən. ʃi pɔɪntəd tə ə nɛɹoʊ flaɪɾ ə stɛɹz ɡoʊɪŋ daʊn. "ðæt ʃəd bi wʌt wi wɑnt. ɪf aɪ hævənt ɡɑɾən tɝn ɝaʊn kəmplitli, wɪð ɔl ðə twɪsts ən tɝnz wiv meɪd."

"You two be quiet," Nynaeve said. They were alone in the hall for a change, with no one in sight in either direction. She pointed to a narrow flight of stairs going down. "That should be what we want. If I haven't gotten turned around completely, with all the twists and turns we've made."

ʃi tʊk ðə stɛɹz əz ɪf ʃi wɝ sɝɾən ɛniweɪ, ən ði ʌðɝz fɑloʊd. ʃʊɹli ɪnʌf, ðə smɔl dɔɹ ət ðə bɑɾəm lɛɾ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə dʌsti jɑɹɾ ə ðə saʊθ steɪbəl, wɛɹ nɑvəsɪz' hɔɹsəz wɝ kɛpt, fəɹ ðoʊz u hæd ðɛm, əntɪl ðeɪ hæd niɾ ə maʊns əɡɛn, wɪtʃ wɑz dʒɛnɝəli nɑɾ əntɪl ðeɪ bɪkeɪm æksɛptɪɾ əɹ wɝ sɛn hoʊm. ðə ɡlimɪŋ bʌlk ə ðə taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf ɹoʊz bɪhaɪn ðɛm; ðə taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz spɹɛɾ oʊvɝ ə ɡʊd mɛni haɪdz ə lænd, wɪð ɪts oʊn wɔlz haɪɝ ðən səm sɪɾi wɔlz.

She took the stairs as if she were certain anyway, and the others followed. Surely enough, the small door at the bottom let out into the dusty yard of the South Stable, where novices' horses were kept, for those who had them, until they had need of mounts again, which was generally not until they became Accepted or were sent home. The gleaming bulk of the Tower itself rose behind them; the Tower grounds spread over a good many hides of land, with its own walls higher than some city walls.

nɪneɪiv stʃɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə steɪbəl əz ɪf ʃi oʊn ɪt. ɪt hæɾ ə klin smɛl ə heɪ ən hɔɹs, ən tu lɔŋ ɹoʊz ə stɔlz ɹæn bæk ɪndə ʃædoʊz bɑɹd wɪð laɪt fɹəm ðə vɛns əbʌv. fəɹ ə wʌndɝ, ʃæɡi bɛlə ən nɪneɪivz ɡɹeɪ mɛɹ stʊɾ ɪn stɔlz nɪɹ ðə dɔɹz. bɛlə pʊɾ əɹ noʊz oʊvɝ ðə stɔl dɔɹ ən wɪkɝd sɔfli tə ɛɡwin. ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn ɡɹum ɪn ɛvəɾəns, ə plɛzənt-lʊkɪŋ fɛloʊ wɪð ɡɹeɪ ɪn ɪz bɪɹd, tʃuɪŋ ə stʃɹɔ.

Nynaeve strode into the stable as if she owned it. It had a clean smell of hay and horse, and two long rows of stalls ran back into shadows barred with light from the vents above. For a wonder, shaggy Bela and Nynaeve's gray mare stood in stalls near the doors. Bela put her nose over the stall door and whickered softly to Egwene. There was only one groom in evidence, a pleasant-looking fellow with gray in his beard, chewing a straw.

"wi wɪl əv əɹ hɔɹsəz sæɾəld," nɪneɪiv toʊld ɪm ɪn əɹ moʊs kəmændɪŋ toʊn. "ðoʊz tu. mɪn, faɪn jəɹ hɔɹs ən ɪleɪnz." mɪn dʒɹɑp ðə sæɾəlbæɡz ən dʒɹu ɪleɪn dipɝ ɪndə ðə steɪbəlz.

"We will have our horses saddled," Nynaeve told him in her most commanding tone. "Those two. Min, find your horse and Elayne's." Min dropped the saddlebags and drew Elayne deeper into the stables.

ðə steɪbəlmən fɹaʊn æftɝ əm ən sloʊli tʊk ðə stʃɹɔ fɹəm ɪz maʊθ. "ðɛɹ mʌs bi səm mɪsteɪk, maɪ leɪɾi. ðoʊz ænəməlz - "

The stableman frowned after them and slowly took the straw from his mouth. "There must be some mistake, my Lady. Those animals - "

" - ɑɹ aʊɝz," nɪneɪiv sɛd fɝmli, foʊldɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz soʊ ðət ðə sɝpən ɹɪŋ wɑz ɑbviəs. "ju wɪl sæɾəl əm naʊ."

" - are ours," Nynaeve said firmly, folding her arms so that the Serpent ring was obvious. "You will saddle them now."

ɛɡwin hɛld əɹ bɹɛθ; ɪt wɑz ə læst-dɪtʃ plæn, ðət nɪneɪiv wəd tʃɹaɪ tə pæs əz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪf ðeɪ hæd dɪfəkəltiz wɪð ɛniwʌn u maɪɾ æktʃəli  æksɛpt əɹ əz wʌn. noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ æksɛptɪd wʊd, ʌv kɔɹs, ən pɹɑbli nɑɾ ivən ə nɑvəs, bʌɾ ə steɪbəlmən. . . .

Egwene held her breath; it was a last-ditch plan, that Nynaeve would try to pass as an Aes Sedai if they had difficulties with anyone who might actually accept her as one. No Aes Sedai or Accepted would, of course, and probably not even a novice, but a stableman. . . .

ðə mæn blɪŋkt ət nɪneɪivz ɹɪŋ, ðən ət hɝ. "aɪ wɑz toʊl tu," hi sɛɾ ət læst, saʊndɪŋ ʌnɪmpɹɛst. "wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪɾ ən ə nɑvəs. wɑznt nʌθɪŋ sɛɾ əbaʊt fɔɹ ə ju."

The man blinked at Nynaeve's ring, then at her. "I was told two," he said at last, sounding unimpressed. "One of the Accepted and a novice. Wasn't nothing said about four of you."

ɛɡwin fɛlt laɪk læfɪŋ. ʌv kɔɹs liɑnʒɹɪn wəd nɑɾ əv bɪlivd əm eɪbəl tə ɡɛt ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz baɪ ðɛmsɛlvz.

Egwene felt like laughing. Of course Liandrin would not have believed them able to get their horses by themselves.

nɪneɪiv lʊk dɪsəpɔɪntɪd, ən əɹ vɔɪs ʃɑɹpənd. "ju tʃɹɑt ðoʊz hɔɹsəz aʊɾ ən sæɾəl ðɛm, əɹ jəl əv niɾ ə liɑnʒɹɪnz hilɪŋ, ɪf ʃɪl ɡɪv ɪt tə ju."

Nynaeve looked disappointed, and her voice sharpened. "You trot those horses out and saddle them, or you'll have need of Liandrin's Healing, if she will give it to you."

ðə ɡɹum maʊð liɑnʒɹɪnz neɪm, bʌt wʌn lʊk ət nɪneɪivz feɪs ən i sɔ tə ðə hɔɹsəz wɪð noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə mʌɾɝ əɹ tu, nɑt laʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛni bʌt hɪmsɛlf tə hɪɹ. mɪn ən ɪleɪn keɪm bæk wɪð ðɛɹ oʊn maʊns dʒʌst əz i fɪnɪʃt taɪɾənɪŋ ðə sɛkənd ɡɝθ. mɪnz wɑz ə tɔl dʌst-kʌlɝd ɡɛldɪŋ, ɪleɪnz ə beɪ mɛɹ wɪð ən ɑɹtʃt nɛk.

The groom mouthed Liandrin's name, but one look at Nynaeve's face and he saw to the horses with no more than a mutter or two, not loud enough for any but himself to hear. Min and Elayne came back with their own mounts just as he finished tightening the second girth. Min's was a tall dust-colored gelding, Elayne's a bay mare with an arched neck.

wən ðeɪ wɝ maʊntəd, nɪneɪiv ədʒɹɛs hɝsɛlf tə ðə steɪbəlmən əɡɛn. "noʊ daʊt jə wɝ toʊl tə kip ðɪs kwaɪət, ən ðət hæzən tʃeɪnʒd wɛðɝ wəɹ tu əɹ tu hʌnʒɹəd. ɪf jə θɪŋk ɪt hæz, θɪŋk əbaʊt wʌt liɑnʒɹɪn wɪl də ɪf jə tɔk wʌt jə wɝ toʊl tə kip kwaɪət."

When they were mounted, Nynaeve addressed herself to the stableman again. "No doubt you were told to keep this quiet, and that hasn't changed whether we are two or two hundred. If you think it has, think about what Liandrin will do if you talk what you were told to keep quiet."

əz ðeɪ wɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ aʊt, ɪleɪn tɔst ɪm ə kɔɪn ən mɝmɝd, "fɔɹ jəɹ tʃɹʌbəl, ɡʊdmən. juv dʌn wɛl." aʊtsaɪd, ʃi kɑɾ ɛɡwinz aɪ ən smaɪld. "mʌðɝ sɛz ə stɪk ən hʌni ɔlweɪz wɝk bɛɾɝ ðən ə stɪk əloʊn."

As they were riding out, Elayne tossed him a coin and murmured, "For your trouble, goodman. You have done well." Outside, she caught Egwene's eye and smiled. "Mother says a stick and honey always work better than a stick alone."

"aɪ hoʊp wi doʊnt niɾ iðɝ wɪð ðə ɡɑɹdz," ɛɡwin sɛd. "aɪ hoʊp liɑnʒɹɪn spoʊk tə ðɛm, tu."

"I hope we don't need either with the guards," Egwene said. "I hope Liandrin spoke to them, too."

ət tɑɹləmənz ɡeɪt, ðoʊ, pɪɹsɪŋ ðə tɔl saʊθ wɔl ə ðə taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tɛlɪŋ ɪf ɛniwʌn hæd spoʊkən tə ðə ɡɑɹdz əɹ nɑt. ðeɪ weɪv ðə fɔɹ wɪmən θɹu wɪð noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə ɡlæns ən ə kɝsɝi baʊ. ɡɑɹdz wɝ mɛn tə kip aʊt ðoʊz u wɝ deɪnʒɝəs; əpɛɹənli ðiz hæd noʊ ɔɹɾɝz əbaʊt kipɪŋ ɛniwʌn ɪn.

At Tarlomen's Gate, though, piercing the tall south wall of the Tower grounds, there was no telling if anyone had spoken to the guards or not. They waved the four women through with no more than a glance and a cursory bow. Guards were meant to keep out those who were dangerous; apparently these had no orders about keeping anyone in.

ə kul ɹɪvɝ bɹiz ɡeɪv əm ən ɪkskjus tə pʊl ʌp ðə hʊdz ə ðɛɹ kloʊks əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd sloʊli θɹu ðə stʃɹits ə ðə sɪɾi. ðə ɹɪŋ ə ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz' hʊvz ɑn ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz wɑz lɔst ɪn ðə mɝmɝ ə ðə kɹaʊdz fɪlɪŋ ðə stʃɹits ən ðə mjuzɪk ðət keɪm fɹəm səm ə ðə bɪldɪŋz ðeɪ pæst. pipəl dʒɹɛst ɪn ɡɑɹməns fɹəm ɛvɹi lænd, fɹəm ðə dɑɹk ən sɑmbɝ moʊɾ ə kɛɹhin tə ðə bɹaɪt, bɹɪljən kʌlɝz ə ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl, ən ɛvɹi staɪl ɪn bɪtwin, splɪɾ ɝaʊn ðə hɔɹswɪmən laɪk ə ɹɪvɝ ɝaʊn ə ɹɑk, bʌt ðeɪ stɪl kəd nɑt muv ət mɔɹ ðən ə sloʊ wɔk.

A cool river breeze gave them an excuse to pull up the hoods of their cloaks as they rode slowly through the streets of the city. The ring of their horses' hooves on the paving stones was lost in the murmur of the crowds filling the streets and the music that came from some of the buildings they passed. People dressed in garments from every land, from the dark and somber mode of Cairhien to the bright, brilliant colors of the Traveling People, and every style in between, split around the horsewomen like a river around a rock, but they still could not move at more than a slow walk.

ɛɡwin ɡeɪv noʊ ətɛnʃən tə ðə fæbjələs taʊɝz wɪð ðɛɹ skaɪ-bɔɹn bɹɪdʒəz əɹ ðə bɪldɪŋz ðət lʊk mɔɹ laɪk bɹeɪkɪŋ weɪvz, əɹ wɪnd-skʌlptɪd klɪfs, əɹ fænsɪfəl ʃɛlz, ðən ɛniθɪŋ meɪd fɹəm stoʊn. ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔfən wɛn ɪndə ðə sɪɾi, ən ɪn ðət kɹaʊd ðeɪ kəd kʌm feɪs-tə-feɪs wɪð wʌn bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ nu ɪt. æftɝ ə taɪm ʃi ɹilaɪz ði ʌðɝ wɪmən wɝ kipɪŋ əz kloʊz ə wɑtʃ əz ʃi, bʌt ʃi stɪl fɛl mɔɹ ðən ə ɡlɪmɝ ə ɹɪlif wən ði oʊɡiɝ ɡɹoʊv keɪm ɪndə vju.

Egwene gave no attention to the fabulous towers with their sky-borne bridges or the buildings that looked more like breaking waves, or wind-sculpted cliffs, or fanciful shells, than anything made from stone. Aes Sedai often went into the city, and in that crowd they could come face-to-face with one before they knew it. After a time she realized the other women were keeping as close a watch as she, but she still felt more than a glimmer of relief when the Ogier grove came into view.

ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹiz wɝ naʊ vɪzəbəl bɪɑn ðə ɹuftɑps, ðɛɹ spɹɛɾɪŋ tɑps ə hʌnʒɹəd spænz ən mɔɹ ɪn ði ɛɹ. taʊɝɪŋ oʊks ən ɛlmz, lɛðɝlifs ən fɹz, wɝ dwɔɹf bɪniθ ðɛm. ə wɔl ə sɔɹts ɛnkʌmpəs ðə ɡɹoʊv, wɪtʃ wɑz ə ɡʊd tu maɪlz əkɹɔs, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz oʊnli ən ɛnləs sɪɹiz ə spaɪɹəlɪŋ stoʊn ɑɹtʃəz, itʃ faɪv spænz haɪ ən twaɪs əz waɪd. baɪ ði aʊɾɝ saɪɾ ə ðə wɔl, kæɹɪdʒɪz, kɑɹts, ən pipəl bʌsəld əlɔŋ ə stʃɹit, waɪl ɪnsaɪd leɪ ə wɪldɝnəs ə sɔɹts. ðə ɡɹoʊv hæd niðɝ ðə teɪm lʊk ʌv ə pɑɹk nɔɹ ðə kəmplit hæfəzɝdnəs ə ðə fɔɹəs dɛpθs. ɹæðɝ, ɪt sim tə bi ði aɪdil ə neɪtʃɝ, əz ɪf ðɪs wɝ ðə pɝfəkt wʊdz, ðə moʊs bjuɾəfəl fɔɹəs ðət kəd bi. səm ə ðə livz hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡʌn tə tɝn, ən ivən ðə smɔl swɑðz ʌv ɔɹənʒ ən jɛloʊ ən ɹɛɾ əmʌŋ ðə ɡɹin sim tə ɛɡwin tə bi ɪɡzækli ðə weɪ ɔɾəm foʊlɪdʒ ʃəd lʊk.

The Great Trees were now visible beyond the rooftops, their spreading tops a hundred spans and more in the air. Towering oaks and elms, leatherleafs and firs, were dwarfed beneath them. A wall of sorts encompassed the grove, which was a good two miles across, but it was only an endless series of spiraling stone arches, each five spans high and twice as wide. By the outer side of the wall, carriages, carts, and people bustled along a street, while inside lay a wilderness of sorts. The grove had neither the tame look of a park nor the complete haphazardness of the forest depths. Rather, it seemed to be the ideal of nature, as if this were the perfect woods, the most beautiful forest that could be. Some of the leaves had already begun to turn, and even the small swathes of orange and yellow and red among the green seemed to Egwene to be exactly the way autumn foliage should look.

ə fju pipəl stʃɹoʊl dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ði oʊpən ɑɹtʃəz, ən noʊ wʌn lʊk twaɪs wən ðə fɔɹ wɪmən ɹoʊɾ ɪn ʌndɝ ðə tʃɹiz. ðə sɪɾi wɑz kwɪkli lɔs tə vju, ivən ðə saʊnz ʌv ɪt sɔfənd, ðən blɑkt, baɪ ðə ɡɹoʊv. ɪn ðə speɪs ə tɛn stʃɹaɪdz ðeɪ sim tə bi maɪlz fɹəm ðə nɪɹəs taʊn.

A few people strolled just inside the open arches, and no one looked twice when the four women rode in under the trees. The city was quickly lost to view, even the sounds of it softened, then blocked, by the grove. In the space of ten strides they seemed to be miles from the nearest town.

"ðə nɔɹθ ɛdʒ ə ðə ɡɹoʊv, ʃi sɛd," nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd, piɹɪŋ ɝaʊnd. "ðɛɹ ɪzən ɛni pɔɪn ʌv ɪt fɝðɝ nɔɹθ ðən - " ʃi kʌɾ ɔf əz tu hɔɹsəz bɝs fɹəm ə kɑps ə blæk ɛldɝ, ə dɑɹk, ɡlɔsi mɛɹ wɪð ə ɹaɪɾɝ ən ə laɪtli leɪɾən pæk hɔɹs.

"The north edge of the grove, she said," Nynaeve muttered, peering around. "There isn't any point of it further north than - " She cut off as two horses burst from a copse of black elder, a dark, glossy mare with a rider and a lightly laden pack horse.

ðə dɑɹk mɛɹ ɹɪɹd, pɔɪŋ ði ɛɹ, əz liɑnʒɹɪn ɹeɪn əɹ hɑɹʃli. ði ɛɛs sədaɪz feɪs wɔɹ fjʊɹi laɪk ə mæsk. "aɪ toʊl jə nɑt tə tɛl ɛniwʌn ə ðɪs! nɑɾ ɛniwʌn!" ɛɡwin noʊɾəst poʊl-læntɝnz ɑn ðə pæk hɔɹs, ən θɔɾ ɪɾ ɑd.

The dark mare reared, pawing the air, as Liandrin reined her harshly. The Aes Sedai's face wore fury like a mask. "I told you not to tell anyone of this! Not anyone!" Egwene noticed pole-lanterns on the pack horse, and thought it odd.

"ðiz ɑɹ fɹɛnz," nɪneɪiv bɪɡæn, hɝ bæk stɪfənɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪleɪn bɹoʊk ɪn ɑn hɝ.

"These are friends," Nynaeve began, her back stiffening, but Elayne broke in on her.

"fɝɡɪv ʌs, liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt tɛl ʌs; wi oʊvɝhɝd. wi dɪd nɑt min tə lɪsən tə ɛniθɪŋ wi ʃəd nɑt hæv, bʌt wi dɪɾ oʊvɝhɪɹ. ən wi wɑnə hɛlp ɹænd ælθɹ, tu. ən ði ʌðɝ bɔɪz, ʌv kɔɹs," ʃi æɾəd kwɪkli.

"Forgive us, Liandrin Sedai. They did not tell us; we overheard. We did not mean to listen to anything we should not have, but we did overhear. And we want to help Rand al'Thor, too. And the other boys, of course," she added quickly.

liɑnʒɹɪn pɪɹɾ əɾ ɪleɪn ən mɪn. ðə leɪɾ æftɝnun sʌnlaɪt, slæntɪŋ θɹu ðə bɹæntʃəz, ʃæɾoʊd ðɛɹ feɪsəz bɪniθ ðə hʊdz ə ðɛɹ kloʊks. "soʊ," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli, stɪl wɑtʃɪŋ ðoʊz tu. "aɪ hæd meɪɾ ɝeɪnʒmənts fəɹ jə tə bi teɪkən kɛɹ ʌv, bʌɾ əz jə ɑɹ hɪɹ, jə ɑɹ hɪɹ. fɔɹ kən meɪk ðɪs dʒɝni əz wɛl əz tu."

Liandrin peered at Elayne and Min. The late afternoon sunlight, slanting through the branches, shadowed their faces beneath the hoods of their cloaks. "So," she said finally, still watching those two. "I had made arrangements for you to be taken care of, but as you are here, you are here. Four can make this journey as well as two."

"teɪkən kɛɹ ʌv, liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ?" ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd."

"Taken care of, Liandrin Sedai?" Elayne said. "I do not understand."

"tʃaɪld, jə ən ðəɾ ʌðɝ ɑɹ noʊn əz fɹɛnz ə ðiz tu. dʒju nɑt θɪŋk ðəɹ ɑɹ ðoʊz u wəd kwɛstʃən jə wən ðeɪ ɑɹ faʊn tə bi ɡɔn? dʒju bɪliv ðə blæk ədʒɑ wəd bi dʒɛntəl wɪð jə dʒʌs kəz jə ɑɹ ɛɹ tə ə θɹoʊn? hæd jə ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, jə maɪt nɑɾ əv lɪv ðə naɪt." ðət saɪlənst əm ɔl fəɹ ə moʊmənt, bʌt liɑnʒɹɪn wild əɹ hɔɹs ən kɔld, "fɑloʊ mi!"

"Child, you and that other are known as friends of these two. Do you not think there are those who would question you when they are found to be gone? Do you believe the Black Ajah would be gentle with you just because you are heir to a throne? Had you remained in the White Tower, you might not have lived the night." That silenced them all for a moment, but Liandrin wheeled her horse and called, "Follow me!"

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ lɛɾ əm dipɝ ɪndə ðə ɡɹoʊv, əntɪl ðeɪ keɪm tə ə tɔl fɛns ə staʊɾ aɪɝnwɝk tɑpt wɪð ə hɛdʒ ə ɹeɪzɝ-ʃɑɹp spaɪks. kɝvɪŋ slaɪtli, əz ɪf ɪɾ ɛnkloʊzd ə lɑɹdʒ ɛɹiə, ðə fɛns ɹæn aʊɾ ə saɪɾ əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz tə lɛft ən ɹaɪt. ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡeɪɾ ɪn ðə fɛns, sɪkjʊɹd wɪð ə bɪɡ lɑk. liɑnʒɹɪn ənfæsən ðɪs wɪð ə lɑɹdʒ ki ʃi pɹədus fɹəm əɹ kloʊk, moʊʃən əm θɹu, ðən ɹilɑkt ɪt bɪhaɪn əm ən ɹoʊɾ ɑn əhɛɾ ɪmiɾiətli. ə skwɝəl tʃɪɾɝd əɾ əm fɹəm ə bɹæntʃ oʊvɝhɛd, ən fɹəm sʌmwɛɹ keɪm ðə ʃɑɹp dʒɹʌmɪŋ ʌv ə wʊdpɛkɝ.

The Aes Sedai led them deeper into the grove, until they came to a tall fence of stout ironwork topped with a hedge of razor-sharp spikes. Curving slightly, as if it enclosed a large area, the fence ran out of sight among the trees to left and right. There was a gate in the fence, secured with a big lock. Liandrin unfastened this with a large key she produced from her cloak, motioned them through, then relocked it behind them and rode on ahead immediately. A squirrel chittered at them from a branch overhead, and from somewhere came the sharp drumming of a woodpecker.

"wɛɹ ɑɹ wi ɡoʊɪŋ?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd. liɑnʒɹɪn dɪd nɑɾ ænsɝ, ən nɪneɪiv lʊkt æŋɡɹəli ət ði ʌðɝz. "waɪ ɑɹ wi dʒʌst ɹaɪɾɪŋ dipɝ ɪndə ðiz wʊdz? wɪv tə kɹɔs ə bɹɪdʒ, əɹ ɛls teɪk ʃɪp, ɪf wɝ gɑnə liv tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən ðəɹ ɪzən ɛni bɹɪdʒ əɹ ʃɪp ɪn - "

"Where are we going?" Nynaeve demanded. Liandrin did not answer, and Nynaeve looked angrily at the others. "Why are we just riding deeper into these woods? We have to cross a bridge, or else take ship, if we're going to leave Tar Valon, and there isn't any bridge or ship in - "

"ðɛɹ ɪz ðɪs," liɑnʒɹɪn ənaʊnst. "ðə fɛns, ɪt kips əweɪ ðoʊz u maɪt hɑɹm ðɛmsɛlvz, bʌt wɪv ə nid ðɪs deɪ." wʌt ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd tə wɑz ə tɔl, θɪk slæb ʌv wʌt sim tə bi stoʊn, stændɪŋ ɑn ɛdʒ, wʌn saɪd kɑɹvd ɪntʃɹəkətli ɪn vaɪnz ən livz.

"There is this," Liandrin announced. "The fence, it keeps away those who might harm themselves, but we have a need this day." What she gestured to was a tall, thick slab of what seemed to be stone, standing on edge, one side carved intricately in vines and leaves.

ɛɡwinz θɹoʊt taɪɾənd; sʌɾənli ʃi nu waɪ liɑnʒɹɪn hæd bɹɔt læntɝnz, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk wʌt ʃi nu. ʃi hɝd nɪneɪiv wɪspɝ, "eɪ weɪɡeɪt." ðeɪ boʊθ ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə weɪz ɔl tu wɛl.

Egwene's throat tightened; suddenly she knew why Liandrin had brought lanterns, and she did not like what she knew. She heard Nynaeve whisper, "A Waygate." They both remembered the Ways all too well.

"wi dɪɾ ɪt wʌns," ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf əz mʌtʃ əz nɪneɪiv. "wi kən də ɪɾ əɡɛn." ɪf ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz niɾ ʌs, wɪv tə hɛlp ðɛm. ðæts ɔl ðəɹ ɪz tə ɪt.

"We did it once," she told herself as much as Nynaeve. "We can do it again." If Rand and the others need us, we have to help them. That's all there is to it.

"ɪz ðət ɹɪli . . . ?" mɪn bɪɡæn ɪn ə tʃoʊk vɔɪs ən kəd nɑt fɪnɪʃ.

"Is that really . . . ?" Min began in a choked voice and could not finish.

"eɪ weɪɡeɪt," ɪleɪn bɹiðd. "aɪ dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðə weɪz kəd bi juzd ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. ət list, aɪ dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðɛɹ jus wɑz əlaʊd."

"A Waygate," Elayne breathed. "I did not think the Ways could be used any longer. At least, I did not think their use was allowed."

liɑnʒɹɪn hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ən plʌk ðə tʃɹɛfɔɪl ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə lif aʊɾ ə ðə kɑɹvɪŋ; laɪk tu hjudʒ dɔɹz woʊvən ə lɪvɪŋ vaɪnz, ðə ɡeɪts wɝ swɪŋɪŋ oʊpən, ɹɪvilɪŋ wʌɾ əpɪɹd tə bi ə dʌl, sɪlvɝi mɪɹɝ ðət ɡeɪv ðɛɹ ɹɪflɛkʃənz bæk dɪmli.

Liandrin had already dismounted and plucked the trefoil Avendesora leaf out of the carving; like two huge doors woven of living vines, the gates were swinging open, revealing what appeared to be a dull, silvery mirror that gave their reflections back dimly.

"ju də nɑɾ əv tə kʌm," liɑnʒɹɪn sɛd. "ju kən weɪt hɪɹ fəɹ mi, seɪfli ɛnkloʊz baɪ ðə fɛns əntɪl aɪ kʌm fəɹ ju. əɹ pɝhæps ðə blæk ədʒɑ wɪl faɪn jə bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls." hɝ smaɪl wɑz nɑt plɛzənt. bɪhaɪn hɝ, ðə weɪɡeɪt keɪm oʊpən tə ɪts fʊləst ən stɑpt.

"You do not have to come," Liandrin said. "You can wait here for me, safely enclosed by the fence until I come for you. Or perhaps the Black Ajah will find you before anyone else." Her smile was not pleasant. Behind her, the Waygate came open to its fullest and stopped.

"aɪ dɪd nɑt seɪ aɪ wʊdn kʌm," ɪleɪn sɛd, bʌt ʃi ɡeɪv ðə ʃæɾoʊd wʊdz ə lɪŋɡɝɪŋ lʊk.

"I did not say I wouldn't come," Elayne said, but she gave the shadowed woods a lingering look.

"ɪf wəɹ gɑnə də ðɪs," mɪn sɛd hɔɹsli, "ðɛn lɛts də ɪt." ʃi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə weɪɡeɪt, ən ɛɡwin θɔt ʃi hɝɾ əɹ mʌɾɝ, "ðə laɪt bɝn ju, ɹænd ælθɹ."

"If we are going to do this," Min said hoarsely, "then let's do it." She was staring at the Waygate, and Egwene thought she heard her mutter, "The Light burn you, Rand al'Thor."

"aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ læst," liɑnʒɹɪn sɛd. "ɔl ə ju, ɪn. əl fɑloʊ." ʃi wɑz aɪɪŋ ðə wʊdz naʊ, tu, əz ɪf ʃi θɔt sʌmwʌn maɪt bi fɑloʊɪŋ ðɛm. "kwɪkli! kwɪkli!"

"I must go last," Liandrin said. "All of you, in. I will follow." She was eyeing the woods now, too, as if she thought someone might be following them. "Quickly! Quickly!"

ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt liɑnʒɹɪn ɪkspɛktəd tə si, bʌɾ ɪf ɛniwʌn əɾ ɔl keɪm ðeɪ wəd pɹɑbli stɑp əm fɹəm juzɪŋ ðə weɪɡeɪt. ɹænd, jə wʊl-hɛɾəd ɪɾiət, ʃi θɔt, waɪ kæn jə dʒʌst wʌns ɡɛt jɝsɛlf ɪndə səm kaɪndə tʃɹʌbəl ðət dʌzn fɔɹs mi tə æk laɪk ðə hɛɹoʊən ɪn ə stɔɹi?

Egwene did not know what Liandrin expected to see, but if anyone at all came they would probably stop them from using the Waygate. Rand, you wool-headed idiot, she thought, why can't you just once get yourself into some kind of trouble that doesn't force me to act like the heroine in a story?

ʃi dʌɡ hɝ hilz ɪndə bɛləz flæŋks, ən ðə ʃæɡi mɛɹ, ɹɛstɪv fɹəm tu mʌtʃ taɪm ɪn ə steɪbəl, lɛp fɔɹwɝd.

She dug her heels into Bela's flanks, and the shaggy mare, restive from too much time in a stable, leaped forward.

"sloʊli!" nɪneɪiv ʃaʊɾəd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz tu leɪt.

"Slowly!" Nynaeve shouted, but it was too late.

ɛɡwin ən bɛlə sɝdʒ təwɔɹd ðɛɹ oʊn dʌl ɹɪflɛkʃənz; tu ʃæɡi hɔɹsəz tʌtʃt noʊzɪz, əpɪɹd tə floʊ ɪndə itʃ ʌðɝ. ðən ɛɡwin wɑz mɝdʒɪŋ ɪndə hɝ oʊn ɪmədʒ wɪð ən aɪsi ʃɑk. taɪm sim tə stʃɹɛtʃ aʊt, əz ɪf ðə koʊl kɹɛpt oʊvɝ əɹ baɪ ðə wɪdθ ʌv wʌn hɛɹ əɾ ə taɪm, ən ɛvɹi hɛɹ tʊk mɪnəts.

Egwene and Bela surged toward their own dull reflections; two shaggy horses touched noses, appeared to flow into each other. Then Egwene was merging into her own image with an icy shock. Time seemed to stretch out, as if the cold crept over her by the width of one hair at a time, and every hair took minutes.

sʌɾənli bɛlə wɑz stʌmbəlɪŋ ɪn pɪtʃ-blæknəs, muvɪŋ soʊ fæs ðə mɛɹ ɔlmoʊs pɪtʃt oʊvɝ ɑn əɹ hɛd. ʃi kɑt hɝsɛlf ən stʊd tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ əz ɛɡwin dɪsmaʊntɪd hɝidli, filɪŋ ðə mɛɹz lɛɡz ɪn ðə dɑɹk tə si ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn hɝt. ʃi wɑz ɔlmoʊst ɡlæɾ ə ðə dɑɹk, tə haɪɾ əɹ kɹɪmzən feɪs. ʃi nu ðət taɪm əz wɛl əz dɪstəns wɝ dɪfɹən ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ʌv ə weɪɡeɪt; ʃi hæd muv bɪfɔɹ θɪŋkɪŋ.

Suddenly Bela was stumbling in pitch-blackness, moving so fast the mare almost pitched over on her head. She caught herself and stood trembling as Egwene dismounted hurriedly, feeling the mare's legs in the dark to see if she had been hurt. She was almost glad of the dark, to hide her crimson face. She knew that time as well as distance were different the other side of a Waygate; she had moved before thinking.

ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ðə blæknəs ɝaʊn əɹ ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə ɹɛktæŋɡəl ə ði oʊpən weɪɡeɪt, laɪk ə wɪndoʊ ʌv smoʊkt ɡlæs wən sin fɹəm ðɪs saɪd. ɪt lɛt noʊ laɪɾ ɪn - ðə blæk sim tə pɹɛs ɹaɪɾ ʌp əɡɛnst ɪt - bʌt θɹu ɪɾ ɛɡwin kəd si ði ʌðɝz, muvɪŋ baɪ ðə sloʊəst ɪŋkɹəməns, laɪk fɪɡjɝz ɪn ə naɪtmɛɹ. nɪneɪiv wɑz ɪnsɪstɪŋ ɑn hændɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə poʊl-læntɝnz ən laɪɾɪŋ ðɛm; liɑnʒɹɪn wɑz æksiɾɪŋ wɪð ə bæd ɡɹeɪs, əpɛɹənli ɪnsɪstɪŋ ɑn spid.

There was only the blackness around her in every direction, except for the rectangle of the open Waygate, like a window of smoked glass when seen from this side. It let no light in - the black seemed to press right up against it - but through it Egwene could see the others, moving by the slowest increments, like figures in a nightmare. Nynaeve was insisting on handing around the pole-lanterns and lighting them; Liandrin was acceding with a bad grace, apparently insisting on speed.

wən nɪneɪiv keɪm ðoʊ ðə weɪɡeɪt - liɾɪŋ əɹ ɡɹeɪ mɛɹ sloʊli, ɛvɝ soʊ sloʊli - ɛɡwin ɔlmoʊst ɹæn tə hʌɡ hɝ, ən ət lis hæf ə hɝ filɪŋ wɑz fəɹ ðə læntɝn nɪneɪiv kæɹid. ðə læntɝn meɪɾ ə smɔlɝ pul ə laɪt ðən ɪt ʃəɾ əv - ðə dɑɹknəs pɹɛst əɡɛns ðə laɪt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɔɹs ɪt bæk ɪndə ðə læntɝn - bʌɾ ɛɡwin hæd bɪɡʌn tə fil ðət dɑɹknəs pɹɛsɪŋ əɡɛns hɝ, əz ɪf ɪt hæd weɪt. ɪnstɛd, ʃi kəntɛntəd hɝsɛlf wɪð seɪɪŋ, "bɛləz ɔl ɹaɪt, ən aɪ dɪd nɑt bɹeɪk maɪ nɛk ðə weɪ aɪ dɪzɝv tə."

When Nynaeve came though the Waygate - leading her gray mare slowly, ever so slowly - Egwene almost ran to hug her, and at least half of her feeling was for the lantern Nynaeve carried. The lantern made a smaller pool of light than it should have - the darkness pressed against the light, trying to force it back into the lantern - but Egwene had begun to feel that darkness pressing against her, as if it had weight. Instead, she contented herself with saying, "Bela's all right, and I did not break my neck the way I deserved to."

wʌns ðəɹ hæd bɪn laɪɾ əlɔŋ ðə weɪz, bɪfɔɹ ðə teɪn ɑn ðə paʊɝ wɪð wɪtʃ ðeɪ hæd fɝs bɪn meɪd, ðə teɪn ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɑn seɪɾɪn, hæd bɪɡʌn tə kɝʌp ðɛm.

Once there had been light along the Ways, before the taint on the Power with which they had first been made, the taint of the Dark One on saidin, had begun to corrupt them.

nɪneɪiv θɹʌs ðə poʊl ə ðə læntɝn ɪndə hɝ hænz ən tɝn tə pʊl ənʌðɝ fɹəm ʌndɝ əɹ sæɾəl ɡɝθ. "æz lɔŋ əz jə noʊ jə dɪzɝv tə," ʃi mɝmɝd, "ðɛn jə dɪdn dɪzɝv tə." sʌɾənli ʃi tʃʌkəld. "səmtaɪmz aɪ θɪŋk ɪt wɑz seɪɪŋz laɪk ðət mɔɹ ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ðət kɹieɪɾəd ðə taɪɾəl ʌv wɪzdəm. wɛl, hɪɹz ənʌðɝ. jə bɹeɪk jəɹ nɛk, ən əl si ɪt mɛndɪd dʒʌst soʊ aɪ kən bɹeɪk ɪɾ əɡɛn."

Nynaeve thrust the pole of the lantern into her hands and turned to pull another from under her saddle girth. "As long as you know you deserved to," she murmured, "then you didn't deserve to." Suddenly she chuckled. "Sometimes I think it was sayings like that more than anything else that created the title of Wisdom. Well, here's another. You break your neck, and I'll see it mended just so I can break it again."

ɪt wɑz sɛd laɪtli, ən ɛɡwin faʊn hɝsɛlf læfɪŋ, tu - əntɪl ʃi ɹɪkɔld wɛɹ ʃi wɑz. nɪneɪivz əmjuzmən dɪd nɑt læs lɔŋ iðɝ.

It was said lightly, and Egwene found herself laughing, too - until she recalled where she was. Nynaeve's amusement did not last long either.

mɪn ən ɪleɪn keɪm ðoʊ ðə weɪɡeɪt hɛzɪɾəntli, liɾɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ən kæɹiɪŋ læntɝnz, ɑbviəsli ɪkspɛktɪŋ tə faɪn mɑnstɝz weɪɾɪŋ ət ðə list. ðeɪ lʊkt ɹɪlivd, ət fɝst, tə faɪnd nʌθɪŋ bʌt dɑɹknəs, bʌt ði əpɹɛsɪvnəs ʌv ɪt sun hæɾ əm ʃɪftɪŋ nɝvəsli fɹəm fʊt tə fʊt. liɑnʒɹɪn ɹipleɪs ði ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə lif ən ɹoʊd θɹu ðə kloʊzɪŋ weɪɡeɪt liɾɪŋ ðə pæk hɔɹs.

Min and Elayne came though the Waygate hesitantly, leading their horses and carrying lanterns, obviously expecting to find monsters waiting at the least. They looked relieved, at first, to find nothing but darkness, but the oppressiveness of it soon had them shifting nervously from foot to foot. Liandrin replaced the Avendesora leaf and rode through the closing Waygate leading the pack horse.

liɑnʒɹɪn dɪd nɑt weɪt fəɹ ðə ɡeɪt tə fɪnɪʃ kloʊzɪŋ, bʌt tɔs ðə lɛd laɪn ə ðə pæk hɔɹs tə mɪn wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝɾ ən stɑɹɾəd əlɔŋ ə waɪt laɪn, dɪmli meɪɾ aʊt baɪ ðə laɪɾ ə hɝ læntɝn, liɾɪŋ ɪndə ðə weɪz. ðə flɔɹ sim tə bi stoʊn, iɾən ən pɪɾəd baɪ æsəd. ɛɡwin skɹæmbəl hɝidli ɑntu bɛləz bæk, bʌt ʃi wɑz noʊ kwɪkɝ tə fɑloʊ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls. ðəɹ sim tə bi nʌθɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝld ɪksɛp ðə ɹʌf flɔɹ ʌndɝ ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz.

Liandrin did not wait for the gate to finish closing, but tossed the lead line of the pack horse to Min without a word and started along a white line, dimly made out by the light of her lantern, leading into the Ways. The floor seemed to be stone, eaten and pitted by acid. Egwene scrambled hurriedly onto Bela's back, but she was no quicker to follow the Aes Sedai than anyone else. There seemed to be nothing in the world except the rough floor under the horses' hooves.

stʃɹeɪɾ əz ən æɹoʊ ðə waɪt laɪn lɛd θɹu ðə dɑɹk tə ə lɑɹdʒ stoʊn slæb kʌvɝd wɪð oʊɡiɝ skɹɪpt ɪnleɪɾ ɪn sɪlvɝ. ðə seɪm pɑkɪŋ ðət mɑɹk ðə flɔɹ ɔlsoʊ bɹoʊk ðə skɹɪpt ɪn pleɪsəz.

Straight as an arrow the white line led through the dark to a large stone slab covered with Ogier script inlaid in silver. The same pocking that marked the floor also broke the script in places.

"eɪ ɡaɪɾɪŋ," ɪleɪn mɝmɝd, twɪstɪŋ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl tə lʊk ɝaʊn ənizəli. "ɪleɪɾə tɔt mi ə lɪɾəl əbaʊt ðə weɪz. ʃi wəd nɑt seɪ mʌtʃ. nɑɾ ɪnʌf," ʃi æɾəd ɡlʌmli. "ɔɹ meɪbi tu mʌtʃ."

"A Guiding," Elayne murmured, twisting in her saddle to look around uneasily. "Elaida taught me a little about the Ways. She would not say much. Not enough," she added glumly. "Or maybe too much."

kɑmli liɑnʒɹɪn kəmpɛɹd ðə ɡaɪɾɪŋ wɪð ə pɑɹtʃmənt, ðən stʌft ɪt bæk ɪndə ə pɑkəɾ ə hɝ kloʊk bɪfɔɹ ɛɡwin kəd ɡɛɾ ə lʊk.

Calmly Liandrin compared the Guiding with a parchment, then stuffed it back into a pocket of her cloak before Egwene could get a look.

ðɛɹ læntɝnz' laɪt stɑpt əbɹʌpli ɹæðɝ ðən feɪɾɪŋ aʊɾ ət ði ɛdʒəz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛɡwin tə si ə θɪk stoʊn bəlʌstʃɹeɪd, iɾən əweɪ ɪn pleɪsəz, əz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ lɛɾ əm əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɡaɪɾɪŋ. ən aɪlənd, ɪleɪn kɔld ɪt; ðə dɑɹknəs meɪd dʒʌdʒɪŋ ði aɪlənz saɪz dɪfəkəlt, bʌɾ ɛɡwin θɔɾ ɪt maɪt bi ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əkɹɔs.

Their lanterns' light stopped abruptly rather than fading out at the edges, but it was enough for Egwene to see a thick stone balustrade, eaten away in places, as the Aes Sedai led them away from the Guiding. An Island, Elayne called it; the darkness made judging the Island's size difficult, but Egwene thought it might be a hundred paces across.

stoʊn bɹɪdʒəz ən ɹæmps pɪɹs ðə bəlʌstʃɹeɪd, itʃ wɪð ə stoʊn poʊs bɪsaɪɾ ɪt mɑɹkt wɪð ə sɪŋɡəl laɪn ɪn oʊɡiɝ skɹɪpt. ðə bɹɪdʒəz sim tə ɑɹtʃ aʊɾ ɪndə nʌθɪŋ. ðə ɹæmps lɛɾ ʌp əɹ daʊn. ɪt wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl tə si mɔɹ ðən ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ʌv ɛni ʌv ðɛm, əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd pæst.

Stone bridges and ramps pierced the balustrade, each with a stone post beside it marked with a single line in Ogier script. The bridges seemed to arch out into nothing. The ramps led up or down. It was impossible to see more than the beginning of any of them, as they rode past.

pɔzɪŋ oʊnli tə aɪ ðə stoʊn poʊsts, liɑnʒɹɪn tʊk ə ɹæmp ðət lɛd daʊn, ən kwɪkli ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ bʌt ðə ɹæmp ən ðə dɑɹknəs. ə dæmpənɪŋ saɪləns hʌŋ oʊvɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ; ɛɡwin hæd ðə filɪŋ ðəɾ ivən ðə klæɾɝ ə ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz ɑn ðə ɹʌf stoʊn dɪd nɑt tʃɹævəl vɛɹi fɑɹ bɪɑn ðə laɪt.

Pausing only to eye the stone posts, Liandrin took a ramp that led down, and quickly there was nothing but the ramp and the darkness. A dampening silence hung over everything; Egwene had the feeling that even the clatter of the horses' hooves on the rough stone did not travel very far beyond the light.

daʊn ən daʊn ðə ɹæmp ɹæn, kɝvɪŋ bæk ɑn ɪtsɛlf, əntɪl ɪt ɹitʃt ənʌðɝ aɪlənd, wɪð ɪts bɹoʊkən bəlʌstʃɹeɪd bɪtwin bɹɪdʒəz ən ɹæmps, ɪts ɡaɪɾɪŋ ðət liɑnʒɹɪn kəmpɛɹd wɪð əɹ pɑɹtʃmənt. ði aɪlən sim laɪk sɑləd stoʊn, dʒʌst əz ðə fɝst wʌn hæd. ɛɡwin wɪʃt ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ðət ðə fɝst aɪlənd wɑz dɝɛkli oʊvɝ ðɛɹ hɛdz.

Down and down the ramp ran, curving back on itself, until it reached another Island, with its broken balustrade between bridges and ramps, its Guiding that Liandrin compared with her parchment. The Island seemed like solid stone, just as the first one had. Egwene wished she was not sure that the first Island was directly over their heads.

nɪneɪiv spoʊk ʌp sʌɾənli, vɔɪsɪŋ ɛɡwinz θɔts. hɝ vɔɪs saʊndəd stɛɾi, bʌt ʃi pɔz tə swɑloʊ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ɪt.

Nynaeve spoke up suddenly, voicing Egwene's thoughts. Her voice sounded steady, but she paused to swallow in the middle of it.

"ɪt - ɪt maɪt bi," ɪleɪn sɛd feɪnli. hɝ aɪz ɹoʊld ʌpwɝdz, ən kwɪkli dʒɹɑpt əɡɛn. "ɪleɪɾə sɛz ðə ɹulz ə neɪtʃɝ də nɑt hoʊld ɪn ðə weɪz. ət list, nɑt ðə weɪ ðeɪ də aʊtsaɪd."

"It - it might be," Elayne said faintly. Her eyes rolled upwards, and quickly dropped again. "Elaida says the rules of nature do not hold in the Ways. At least, not the way they do outside."

"laɪt!" mɪn mʌɾɝd, ðən ɹeɪzd əɹ vɔɪs. "haʊ lɔŋ dʒju min əs tə steɪ ɪn hɪɹ?"

"Light!" Min muttered, then raised her voice. "How long do you mean us to stay in here?"

ði ɛɛs sədaɪz hʌni-kʌlɝd bɹeɪdz swʌŋ əz ʃi tɝn tə ɹəɡɑɹd ðɛm. "əntɪl aɪ teɪk jə aʊt," ʃi sɛd flætli. "ðə mɔɹ jə bɑðɝ mi, ðə lɔŋɡɝ ðət wɪl bi." ʃi bɛn bæk tə stʌɾiɪŋ ðə pɑɹtʃmən ən ðə ɡaɪɾɪŋ.

The Aes Sedai's honey-colored braids swung as she turned to regard them. "Until I take you out," she said flatly. "The more you bother me, the longer that will be." She bent back to studying the parchment and the Guiding.

ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz fɛl saɪlənt.

Egwene and the others fell silent.

liɑnʒɹɪn pʊʃt ɑn fɹəm ɡaɪɾɪŋ tə ɡaɪɾɪŋ, baɪ ɹæmps ən bɹɪdʒəz ðət sim tə ɹʌn ənsəpɔɹɾɪd θɹu ði ɛnləs dɑɹk. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ peɪd vɛɹi lɪɾəl hid tə ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm, ən ɛɡwin faʊn hɝsɛlf wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ liɑnʒɹɪn wəd tɝn bæk tə sɝtʃ ɪf wʌn ə ðɛm fɛl bɪhaɪnd. ði ʌðɝz pɝhæps hæd ðə seɪm θɔt, fəɹ ðeɪ ɔl ɹoʊd bʌntʃt taɪtli ɑn ðə dɑɹk mɛɹz hilz.

Liandrin pushed on from Guiding to Guiding, by ramps and bridges that seemed to run unsupported through the endless dark. The Aes Sedai paid very little heed to the rest of them, and Egwene found herself wondering whether Liandrin would turn back to search if one of them fell behind. The others perhaps had the same thought, for they all rode bunched tightly on the dark mare's heels.

ɛɡwin wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi stɪl fɛl ði ətʃɹækʃən ə seɪaɪdɑɹ, boʊθ ðə pɹɛzəns ə ðə fimeɪl hæf ə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs ən ðə dɪzaɪɝ tə tʌtʃ ɪt, tə tʃænəl ɪts floʊ. sʌmhaʊ, ʃi hæd θɔt ðə ʃædoʊz teɪn ɑn ðə weɪz wəd haɪɾ ɪt fɹəm hɝ. ʃi kəd sɛns ðət teɪnt, æftɝ ə fæʃən. ɪt wɑz feɪn ən hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð seɪaɪdɑɹ, bʌt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðət ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs hɪɹ wəd bi laɪk bɛɹɪŋ əɹ ɑɹm tə faʊl, ɡɹisi smoʊk ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə ɹitʃ ə klin kʌp. wʌtɛvɝ ʃi dɪd wəd bi teɪntɪd. fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ɪn wiks ʃi hæd noʊ tʃɹʌbəl əɾ ɔl ɪn ɹɪzɪstɪŋ ði ətʃɹækʃən ə seɪaɪdɑɹ.

Egwene was surprised to realize that she still felt the attraction of saidar, both the presence of the female half of the True Source and the desire to touch it, to channel its flow. Somehow, she had thought the Shadow's taint on the Ways would hide it from her. She could sense that taint, after a fashion. It was faint and had nothing to do with saidar, but she was sure that reaching for the True Source here would be like baring her arm to foul, greasy smoke in order to reach a clean cup. Whatever she did would be tainted. For the first time in weeks she had no trouble at all in resisting the attraction of saidar.

ɪt wɑz wɛl ɪndə wʌt wʊɾə bɪn naɪɾ ɪn ðə wɝld aʊtsaɪd ðə weɪz wɛn, ɑn ən aɪlənd, liɑnʒɹɪn əbɹʌpli dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ən ənaʊns ðət ðeɪ wəd hɔl fəɹ sʌpɝ ən slip, ən ðət ðəɹ wɑz fuɾ ɑn ðə pæk hɔɹs.

It was well into what would have been night in the world outside the Ways when, on an Island, Liandrin abruptly dismounted and announced that they would halt for supper and sleep, and that there was food on the pack horse.

"pɑɹsəl ɪɾ aʊt," ʃi sɛd, nɑt bɑðɝɪŋ tə əsaɪn ðə tæsk. "ɪt wɪl teɪk əs ðə bɛɾɝ pɑɹɾ ə tu deɪz tə ɹitʃ toʊmən hɛd. aɪ wəd nɑɾ əv jə ɝaɪv hʌŋɡɹi ɪf jə wɝ tu fulɪʃ nɑt tə bɹɪŋ fud jʊɹsɛlvz." bɹɪskli ʃi ənsæɾəld ən hɑbəld əɹ mɛɹ, bʌt ðən ʃi sæt daʊn ɑn əɹ sæɾəl ən weɪɾəd fəɹ wʌn ə ðɛm tə bɹɪŋ əɹ sʌmθɪŋ tə it.

"Parcel it out," she said, not bothering to assign the task. "It will take us the better part of two days to reach Toman Head. I would not have you arrive hungry if you were too foolish not to bring food yourselves." Briskly she unsaddled and hobbled her mare, but then she sat down on her saddle and waited for one of them to bring her something to eat.

ɪleɪn tʊk liɑnʒɹɪn əɹ flætbɹɛɾ ən tʃiz. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪɾ ɪɾ ɑbviəs ðət ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑn ðɛɹ kʌmpəni, soʊ ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm eɪt ðɛɹ bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz ə lɪɾəl əpɑɹt fɹəm hɝ, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz dʒɹɔn kloʊs təɡɛðɝ. ðə dɑɹknəs bɪɑn ðɛɹ læntɝnz meɪɾ ə pʊɹ sɔs.

Elayne took Liandrin her flatbread and cheese. The Aes Sedai made it obvious that she did not want their company, so the rest of them ate their bread and cheese a little apart from her, sitting on their saddles drawn close together. The darkness beyond their lanterns made a poor sauce.

æftɝ ə taɪm, ɛɡwin sɛd, "liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ, wʌɾ ɪf wi ɪnkaʊntɝ ðə blæk wɪnd?" mɪn maʊðd ðə wɝd kwɛstʃənɪŋli, bʌɾ ɪleɪn ɡeɪv ə skwik. "mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ sɛɾ ɪt kəd nɑt bi kɪld, əɹ ivən hɝt vɛɹi mʌtʃ, ən aɪ kən fil ðə teɪn ɑn ðɪs pleɪs weɪɾɪŋ tə twɪst ɛniθɪŋ wi də wɪð ðə paʊɝ."

After a time, Egwene said, "Liandrin Sedai, what if we encounter the Black Wind?" Min mouthed the word questioningly, but Elayne gave a squeak. "Moiraine Sedai said it could not be killed, or even hurt very much, and I can feel the taint on this place waiting to twist anything we do with the Power."

"ju wɪl nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz θɪŋk ə ðə sɔɹs ənlɛs aɪ tɛl jə tə," liɑnʒɹɪn sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "waɪ, ɪf wʌn sətʃ əz jə tʃɹaɪd tə tʃænəl hɪɹ, ɪn ðə weɪz, jə maɪt wɛl ɡoʊ əz mæɾ əz ə mæn. juv nɑt ðə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ tə dil wɪð ðə teɪn ə ðoʊz mɛn u meɪd ðɪs. ɪf ðə blæk wɪn əpɪɹz, əl dil wɪð ɪt." ʃi pɝst əɹ lɪps, stʌɾiɪŋ ə lʌmp ʌv waɪt tʃiz. "mɔɪɹeɪn dʌz nɑt noʊ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ʃi θɪŋks." ʃi pɑp ðə tʃiz ɪndə hɝ maʊθ wɪð ə smaɪl.

"You will not so much as think of the Source unless I tell you to," Liandrin said sharply. "Why, if one such as you tried to channel here, in the Ways, you might well go as mad as a man. You have not the training to deal with the taint of those men who made this. If the Black Wind appears, I will deal with it." She pursed her lips, studying a lump of white cheese. "Moiraine does not know so much as she thinks." She popped the cheese into her mouth with a smile.

"aɪ də nɑt laɪk hɝ," ɛɡwin mʌɾɝd, loʊ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd nɑt hɪɹ.

"I do not like her," Egwene muttered, low enough to make sure the Aes Sedai could not hear.

"ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn kən wɝk wɪð hɝ," nɪneɪiv sɛd kwaɪətli, "soʊ kən wi. nɑt ðəɾ aɪ laɪk mɔɪɹeɪn ɛni bɛɾɝ ðən aɪ də liɑnʒɹɪn, bʌɾ ɪf ðəɹ mɛɾəlɪŋ wɪð ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz əɡɛn. . . ." ʃi fɛl saɪlənt, hɪtʃɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ʌp. ðə dɑɹknəs wɑz nɑt koʊld, bʌɾ ɪt simd əz ɪf ɪt ʃəd bi.

"If Moiraine can work with her," Nynaeve said quietly, "so can we. Not that I like Moiraine any better than I do Liandrin, but if they're meddling with Rand and the others again. . . ." She fell silent, hitching her cloak up. The darkness was not cold, but it seemed as if it should be.

"wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs blæk wɪnd?" mɪn æskt. wən ɪleɪn hæɾ ɪkspleɪnd, wɪð ə ɡɹeɪt dil ʌv wʌɾ ɪleɪɾə hæd sɛɾ ən wʌɾ əɹ mʌðɝ hæd sɛd, mɪn saɪd. "ðə pæɾɝn əz ə ɡɹeɪt dil tə ænsɝ fɔɹ. aɪ doʊnt noʊ ðəɾ ɛni mæn ɪz wɝθ ðɪs."

"What is this Black Wind?" Min asked. When Elayne had explained, with a great deal of what Elaida had said and what her mother had said, Min sighed. "The Pattern has a great deal to answer for. I don't know that any man is worth this."

"ju dɪd nɑɾ əv tə kʌm," ɛɡwin ɹimaɪndəd hɝ. "ju cʊɾə ɡɔn əɾ ɛni taɪm. noʊ wʌn wʊɾə tʃɹaɪd tə stɑp jə livɪŋ ðə taʊɝ."

"You did not have to come," Egwene reminded her. "You could have gone at any time. No one would have tried to stop you leaving the Tower."

"oʊ, aɪ cʊɾə wɑndɝɾ ɔf," mɪn sɛd ɹaɪli. "æz izəli əz ju, əɹ ɪleɪn. ðə pæɾɝn dʌzn mʌtʃ kɛɹ wʌt wi wɑnt. ɛɡwin, wʌɾ ɪf, æftɝ ɔl jə ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ θɹu fəɹ hɪm, ɹænd dʌzn mɛɹi ju? wʌɾ ɪf i mɛɹiz səm wʊmən juv nɛvɝ sin bɪfɔɹ, əɹ ɪleɪn, əɹ mi? wʌt ðɛn?"

"Oh, I could have wandered off," Min said wryly. "As easily as you, or Elayne. The Pattern doesn't much care what we want. Egwene, what if, after all you are going through for him, Rand doesn't marry you? What if he marries some woman you've never seen before, or Elayne, or me? What then?"

ɪleɪn tʃɔɹɾəld. "mʌðɝ wəd nɛvɝ əpɹuv."

Elayne chortled. "Mother would never approve."

ɛɡwin wɑz saɪlən fəɹ ə taɪm. ɹænd maɪt nɑt lɪv tə mɛɹi ɛniwʌn. ən ɪf i dɪd. . . . ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən ɹænd hɝɾɪŋ ɛniwʌn. nɑɾ ivən æftɝ hiz ɡɔn mæd? ðəɹ hæd tə bi səm weɪ tə stɑp ðæt, səm weɪ tə tʃeɪnʒ ɪt; ɛɛs sədaɪ nu soʊ mʌtʃ, kəd də soʊ mʌtʃ. ɪf ðeɪ kəd stɑp ɪt, waɪ doʊn ðeɪ? ði oʊnli ænsɝ wɑz kəz ðeɪ kəd nɑt, ən ðət wɑz nɑt ðə wʌn ʃi wɑntəd.

Egwene was silent for a time. Rand might not live to marry anyone. And if he did. . . . She could not imagine Rand hurting anyone. Not even after he's gone mad? There had to be some way to stop that, some way to change it; Aes Sedai knew so much, could do so much. If they could stop it, why don't they? The only answer was because they could not, and that was not the one she wanted.

ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə pʊt laɪtnəs ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. "aɪ doʊn səpoʊz əl mɛɹi hɪm. ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛldəm də mɛɹi, jə noʊ. bʌɾ aɪ wəd nɑt sɛt maɪ hɑɹɾ ɑn ɪm ɪf wɝ ju. əɹ ju, ɪleɪn. aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk. . . ." hɝ vɔɪs kɑt, ən ʃi kɔf tə kʌvɝ ɪt. "aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk hɪl ɛvɝ mɛɹi. bʌɾ ɪf i dʌz, aɪ wɪʃ wɛl tə huɛvɝ ɛnz ʌp wɪð hɪm, ivən wʌn ə ju." ʃi θɔt ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ʃi mɛn ɪt. "hi ɪz stʌbɝn əz ə mjul, ən ɹɔŋhɛɾɪd tə ə fɔlt, bʌt hiz dʒɛntəl." hɝ vɔɪs ʃʊk, bʌt ʃi mænədʒ tə tɝn ðə kweɪvɝ ɪndə ə læf.

She tried to put lightness in her voice. "I don't suppose I will marry him. Aes Sedai seldom do marry, you know. But I would not set my heart on him if were you. Or you, Elayne. I do not think. . . ." Her voice caught, and she coughed to cover it. "I do not think he will ever marry. But if he does, I wish well to whoever ends up with him, even one of you." She thought she sounded as if she meant it. "He is stubborn as a mule, and wrongheaded to a fault, but he is gentle." Her voice shook, but she managed to turn the quaver into a laugh.

"haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ jə seɪ jə də nɑt kɛɹ," ɪleɪn sɛd, "aɪ θɪŋk juɾ əpɹuv lɛs ðən mʌðɝ wʊd. hiz ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ, ɛɡwin. mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ ðən ɛni mæn aɪv ɛvɝ mɛt, ivən ɪf hiz ə ʃɛpɝd. ɪf jə ɑɹ sɪli ɪnʌf tə θɹoʊ hɪm əweɪ, jəl əv oʊnli jɝsɛlf tə bleɪm ɪf aɪ dɪsaɪd tə feɪs daʊn jə ən mʌðɝ boʊθ. ɪt wəd nɑt bi ðə fɝs taɪm ðə pɹɪns ʌv ændɝ hæd noʊ taɪɾəl bɪfɔɹ i wɛd. bʌt jə woʊn bi ðət sɪli, soʊ doʊn tʃɹaɪ tə pɹitɛn jə wɪl. noʊ daʊt jəl tʃuz ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ, ən meɪk ɪm wʌn ə jəɹ wɔɹɾɝz. ði oʊnli ɡɹinz aɪ noʊ wɪð oʊnli wʌn wɔɹɾɝ ɑɹ mɛɹid tə ðɛm."

"However much you say you do not care," Elayne said, "I think you'd approve less than Mother would. He is interesting, Egwene. More interesting than any man I've ever met, even if he is a shepherd. If you are silly enough to throw him away, you will have only yourself to blame if I decide to face down you and Mother both. It would not be the first time the Prince of Andor had no title before he wed. But you won't be that silly, so don't try to pretend you will. No doubt you will choose the Green Ajah, and make him one of your Warders. The only Greens I know with only one Warder are married to them."

ɛɡwin meɪd hɝsɛlf ɡoʊ əlɔŋ wɪð ɪt, seɪɪŋ ɪf ʃi dɪd bɪkʌm ə ɡɹin ʃi wʊɾə tɛn wɔɹɾɝz.

Egwene made herself go along with it, saying if she did become a Green she would have ten Warders.

mɪn wɑtʃt hɝ, fɹaʊnɪŋ, ən nɪneɪiv wɑtʃt mɪn θɔtfəli. ðeɪ ɔl fɛl saɪlən baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ tʃeɪnʒd ɪndə mɔɹ suɾəbəl kloʊðz fəɹ tʃɹævlɪŋ, fɹəm ðɛɹ sæɾəlbæɡz. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ izi, kipɪŋ spɪɹəts ʌp ɪn ðət pleɪs.

Min watched her, frowning, and Nynaeve watched Min thoughtfully. They all fell silent by the time they changed into more suitable clothes for traveling, from their saddlebags. It was not easy, keeping spirits up in that place.

slip keɪm sloʊli tə ɛɡwin, fɪtfəli, ən ɪt wɑz fɪld wɪð bæd dʒɹimz. ʃi dɪd nɑt dʒɹim ə ɹænd, bʌɾ ə ðə mæn huz aɪz wɝ faɪɝ. hɪz feɪs wɑz nɑt mæsk ðɪs taɪm, ən ɪt wɑz hɔɹəbəl wɪð ɔlmoʊs hil bɝnz. hi oʊnli lʊkt əɾ əɹ ən læft, bʌt ðət wɑz wɝs ðən ðə dʒɹimz ðət fɑloʊd, ðə dʒɹimz ə biɪŋ lɔst ɪn ðə weɪz fɝɛvɝ, ðə wʌnz wɛɹ ðə blæk wɪnd wɑz tʃeɪsɪŋ hɝ. ʃi wɑz ɡɹeɪtfəl wən ðə toʊ ʌv liɑnʒɹɪnz ɹaɪɾɪŋ but dʌɡ ɪndə hɝ ɹɪbz tə weɪkən hɝ; ʃi fɛlt əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt slɛpt əɾ ɔl.

Sleep came slowly to Egwene, fitfully, and it was filled with bad dreams. She did not dream of Rand, but of the man whose eyes were fire. His face was not masked this time, and it was horrible with almost healed burns. He only looked at her and laughed, but that was worse than the dreams that followed, the dreams of being lost in the Ways forever, the ones where the Black Wind was chasing her. She was grateful when the toe of Liandrin's riding boot dug into her ribs to waken her; she felt as if she had not slept at all.

liɑnʒɹɪn pʊʃt əm hɑɹd θɹu ðə nɛks deɪ, əɹ wʌt pæs fəɹ deɪ, wɪð oʊnli ðɛɹ læntɝnz fəɹ ə sʌn, nɑt lɛɾɪŋ əm stɑp fəɹ slip əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ sweɪɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz. stoʊn meɪɾ ə hɑɹd bɛd, bʌt liɑnʒɹɪn ɹaʊzd əm ɹuθləsli æftɝ ə fju aʊɝz, hɑɹdli weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ əm tə maʊn bɪfɔɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɑn. ɹæmps ən bɹɪdʒəz, aɪlənz ən ɡaɪɾɪŋz. ɛɡwin sɔ soʊ mɛni ʌv əm ɪn ðət pɪtʃ-dɑɹk ðət ʃi lɔs kaʊnt. ʃi hæd lɔŋ sɪns lɔst ɛni kaʊn ʌv aʊɝz əɹ ə deɪz. liɑnʒɹɪn əlaʊɾ oʊnli bɹif hɔls tə iɾ ən ɹɛs ðə hɔɹsəz, ən ðə dɑɹknəs weɪd daʊn ɑn ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ðeɪ slʌmpt ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz laɪk sæks ʌv ɡɹeɪn, ɪksɛp fəɹ liɑnʒɹɪn. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ simd ʌnəfɛktɪd baɪ taɪɹədnəs, əɹ ðə dɑɹk. ʃi wɑz əz fɹɛʃ əz ʃi hæd bɪn bæk ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən əz koʊld. ʃi wəd nɑt lɛɾ ɛniwʌn ɡlɪmps ðə pɑɹtʃmənt ʃi kəmpɛɹd tə ðə ɡaɪɾɪŋz, stʌfɪŋ ɪɾ əweɪ wɪð ə kɝt, "ɪɾ ɪz nʌθɪŋ jə wəɾ ʌndɝstænd," wən nɪneɪiv æskt.

Liandrin pushed them hard through the next day, or what passed for day, with only their lanterns for a sun, not letting them stop for sleep until they were swaying in their saddles. Stone made a hard bed, but Liandrin roused them ruthlessly after a few hours, hardly waiting for them to mount before riding on. Ramps and bridges, Islands and Guidings. Egwene saw so many of them in that pitch-dark that she lost count. She had long since lost any count of hours or of days. Liandrin allowed only brief halts to eat and rest the horses, and the darkness weighed down on their shoulders. They slumped in their saddles like sacks of grain, except for Liandrin. The Aes Sedai seemed unaffected by tiredness, or the dark. She was as fresh as she had been back in the White Tower, and as cold. She would not let anyone glimpse the parchment she compared to the Guidings, stuffing it away with a curt, "It is nothing you would understand," when Nynaeve asked.

ən ðɛn, waɪl ɛɡwin blɪŋkt wɛɹəli, liɑnʒɹɪn wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ə ɡaɪɾɪŋ, nɑt təwɔɹɾ ənʌðɝ bɹɪdʒ əɹ ɹæmp, bʌt daʊn ə pɪɾəd waɪt laɪn ðət lɛɾ ɔf ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs. ɛɡwin stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ fɹɛnz, ən ðən ðeɪ ɔl hɝid tə fɑloʊ. əhɛd, baɪ ðə laɪɾ ə hɝ læntɝn, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɹimuvɪŋ ði ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə lif fɹəm ðə kɑɹvɪŋz ɑn ə weɪɡeɪt.

And then, while Egwene blinked wearily, Liandrin was riding away from a Guiding, not toward another bridge or ramp, but down a pitted white line that led off into the darkness. Egwene stared at her friends, and then they all hurried to follow. Ahead, by the light of her lantern, the Aes Sedai was already removing the Avendesora leaf from the carvings on a Waygate.

"wi ɑɹ hɪɹ," liɑnʒɹɪn sɛd, smaɪlɪŋ. "aɪ hæv bɹɔt jə ət læs tə wɛɹ jə mʌst ɡoʊ."

"We are here," Liandrin said, smiling. "I have brought you at last to where you must go."


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾi


CHAPTER 40

deɪmeɪn


Damane

ɛɡwin dɪsmaʊntɪɾ əz ðə weɪɡeɪɾ oʊpənd, ən wən liɑnʒɹɪn moʊʃən əm θɹu, ʃi lɛd ðə ʃæɡi mɛɹ kɛɹfəli aʊt. ivən soʊ, ʃi ən bɛlə boʊθ stʌmbəld ɪn bɹʌʃ flæɾənd baɪ ði oʊpənɪŋ weɪɡeɪɾ əz ðeɪ sʌɾənli sim tə bi muvɪŋ ivən mɔɹ sloʊli. ə skɹin ə dɛns ʃɹʌbz hæd sɝaʊndəɾ ən hɪɾən ðə weɪɡeɪt. ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli ə fju tʃɹiz kloʊs baɪ, ən ə mɔɹnɪŋ bɹiz ɹʌfəl foʊlɪdʒ wɪð ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ kʌlɝ ðən ðə livz hæd hæɾ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn.

Egwene dismounted as the Waygate opened, and when Liandrin motioned them through, she led the shaggy mare carefully out. Even so, she and Bela both stumbled in brush flattened by the opening Waygate as they suddenly seemed to be moving even more slowly. A screen of dense shrubs had surrounded and hidden the Waygate. There were only a few trees close by, and a morning breeze ruffled foliage with a little more color than the leaves had had in Tar Valon.

wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ fɹɛnz ɪmɝdʒ æftɝ hɝ, ʃi hæd bɪn stændɪŋ ðəɹ ə ɡʊd mɪnət bɪfɔɹ ʃi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ðəɾ ʌðɝz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ðɛɹ, dʒʌst aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɡeɪts. wən ʃi dɪd noʊɾəs əm ʃi stɛɹɾ ənsɝteɪnli; ðeɪ wɝ əz ɑɾ ə ɡɹup əz ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ sin, ən ʃi hæd hɝd tu mɛni ɹumɝz ə ðə wɔɹ ɑn toʊmən hɛd.

Watching her friends emerge after her, she had been standing there a good minute before she became aware that others were already there, just out of sight on the other side of the gates. When she did notice them she stared uncertainly; they were as odd a group as she had ever seen, and she had heard too many rumors of the war on Toman Head.

ɑɹmɝd mɛn, ət lis fɪfti ʌv ðɛm, wɪð oʊvɝlæpɪŋ stil pleɪts daʊn ðɛɹ tʃɛsts ən dʌl blæk hɛlməts ʃeɪp laɪk ɪnsɛks' hɛdz, sæt ðɛɹ sæɾəlz əɹ stʊd bɪsaɪd ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ ən ði ɪmɝdʒɪŋ wɪmən, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə weɪɡeɪt, mʌɾɝɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz. ði oʊnli bæɹhɛɾɪd mæn əmʌŋ ðɛm, ə tɔl, dɑɹk-feɪst, hʊk-noʊz fɛloʊ stændɪŋ wɪð ə ɡɪldɪd-ænd-peɪntəd hɛlməɾ ɑn ɪz hɪp, lʊkt əstɑnɪʃt ət wʌɾ i wɑz siɪŋ. ðəɹ wɝ wɪmən wɪð ðə soʊlʒɝz, tu. tu wɔɹ pleɪn, dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ dʒɹɛsəz ən waɪd sɪlvɝ kɑlɝz, ən stʊd stɛɹɪŋ ɪntɛnli ət ðoʊz kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪɡeɪt, itʃ wɪð ənʌðɝ wʊmən kloʊs bɪhaɪn əɹ əz ɪf ɹɛɾi tə spik ɪndə hɝ ɪɹ. tu ʌðɝ wɪmən, stændɪŋ ə lɪɾəl əpɑɹt, wɔɹ waɪd, dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts ðət keɪm wɛl ʃɔɹɾ ə ðɛɹ æŋkəlz, ən pænəlz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð fɔɹk laɪtnɪŋ boʊls ɑn ðɛɹ boʊsəmz ən skɝts. ɑɾəst ʌv ɔl wɑz ðə læst wʊmən, ɹɪklaɪnɪŋ ɑn ə pɑlɑnkwɪn bɔɹn baɪ eɪt mʌskjəlɝ, bɛɹ-tʃɛstəd mɛn ɪn bæɡi blæk tʃɹaʊzɝz. ðə saɪdz ə hɝ skælp wɝ ʃeɪv soʊ ðəɾ oʊnli ə waɪd kɹɛst ə blæk hɛɹ ɹɪmeɪn tə fɔl daʊn əɹ bæk. ə lɔŋ, kɹim-kʌlɝd ɹoʊb wɝkt ɪn flaʊɝz ən bɝdz ɑn blu oʊvəlz wɑz kɛɹfəli ɝeɪnʒd tə ʃoʊ hɝ skɝts ə pliɾɪd waɪt, ən əɹ fɪŋɡɝneɪlz wɝ ə ɡʊɾ ɪntʃ lɔŋ, ðə fɝs tu ɑn itʃ hæn lækɝd blu.

Armored men, at least fifty of them, with overlapping steel plates down their chests and dull black helmets shaped like insects' heads, sat their saddles or stood beside their horses, staring at her and the emerging women, staring at the Waygate, muttering among themselves. The only bareheaded man among them, a tall, dark-faced, hook-nosed fellow standing with a gilded-and-painted helmet on his hip, looked astonished at what he was seeing. There were women with the soldiers, too. Two wore plain, dark gray dresses and wide silver collars, and stood staring intently at those coming out of the Waygate, each with another woman close behind her as if ready to speak into her ear. Two other women, standing a little apart, wore wide, divided skirts that came well short of their ankles, and panels embroidered with forked lightning bolts on their bosoms and skirts. Oddest of all was the last woman, reclining on a palanquin borne by eight muscular, bare-chested men in baggy black trousers. The sides of her scalp were shaved so that only a wide crest of black hair remained to fall down her back. A long, cream-colored robe worked in flowers and birds on blue ovals was carefully arranged to show her skirts of pleated white, and her fingernails were a good inch long, the first two on each hand lacquered blue.

"liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ," ɛɡwin æskt ənizəli, "du jə noʊ hu ðiz pipəl ɑɹ?" hɝ fɹɛnz fɪŋɡɝd ðɛɹ ɹeɪnz əz ɪf wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ tə maʊn ən ɹʌn, bʌt liɑnʒɹɪn ɹipleɪs ði ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə lif ən stɛp fɔɹwɝd kɑnfəɾəntli əz ðə weɪɡeɪt bɪɡæn tə kloʊz.

"Liandrin Sedai," Egwene asked uneasily, "do you know who these people are?" Her friends fingered their reins as if wondering whether to mount and run, but Liandrin replaced the Avendesora leaf and stepped forward confidently as the Waygate began to close.

"ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ?" liɑnʒɹɪn sɛd, meɪkɪŋ ɪt hæfweɪ bɪtwin ə kwɛstʃən ən steɪtmənt.

"The High Lady Suroth?" Liandrin said, making it halfway between a question and statement.

ðə wɪmən ɑn ðə pɑlɑnkwɪn nɑɾəd fɹækʃənəli. "ju ɑɹ liɑnʒɹɪn." hɝ spitʃ wɑz slɝd, ən ɪt tʊk ɛɡwin ə moʊmən tə ʌndɝstænd. "ɛɛs sədaɪ," sjuɹɔθ æɾəd wɪð ə twɪs tə hɝ lɪps, ən ə mɝmɝ ɹoʊz əmʌŋ ðə soʊlʒɝz. "wi mʌs bi dʌn hɪɹ kwɪkli, liɑnʒɹɪn. ðəɹ ɑɹ pətʃɹoʊlz, ən ɪt wəd nɑt də tə bi faʊnd. jə wəɾ ɛndʒɔɪ ði ətɛnʃənz ə ðə sikɝz fəɹ tʃɹuθ noʊ mɔɹ ðən aɪ. aɪ min tə bi bæk ɪn fɑlm bɪfɔɹ tʃɹɑk noʊz aɪm ɡɔn."

The women on the palanquin nodded fractionally. "You are Liandrin." Her speech was slurred, and it took Egwene a moment to understand. "Aes Sedai," Suroth added with a twist to her lips, and a murmur rose among the soldiers. "We must be done here quickly, Liandrin. There are patrols, and it would not do to be found. You would enjoy the attentions of the Seekers for Truth no more than I. I mean to be back in Falme before Turak knows I am gone."

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd. "wʌɾ ɪz ʃi tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt, liɑnʒɹɪn?"

"What are you talking about?" Nynaeve demanded. "What is she talking about, Liandrin?"

liɑnʒɹɪn leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn nɪneɪivz ʃoʊldɝ ən wʌn ɑn ɛɡwinz. "ðiz ɑɹ ðə tu ʌv hum jə wɝ toʊld. ən ðəɹ ɪz ənʌðɝ." ʃi nɑɾəd təwɔɹɾ ɪleɪn. "ʃi ɪz ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ."

Liandrin laid a hand on Nynaeve's shoulder and one on Egwene's. "These are the two of whom you were told. And there is another." She nodded toward Elayne. "She is the Daughter-Heir of Andor."

ðə tu wɪmən wɪð ðə laɪtnɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ dʒɹɛsəz wɝ əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ðə pɑɹɾi ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə weɪɡeɪt - ðeɪ kæɹid kɔɪlz ə səm sɪlvɝi mɛɾəl ɪn ðɛɹ hænz, ɛɡwin noʊɾəst - ən ðə bæɹhɛɾɪd soʊlʒɝ keɪm wɪð ðɛm. hi dɪd nɑt pʊɾ ə hænd nɪɹ ðə sɔɹd hɪl stɪkɪŋ ʌp əbʌv ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ən i wɔɹ ə kæʒəwəl smaɪl, bʌɾ ɛɡwin stɪl wɑtʃt ɪm nɛɹoʊli. liɑnʒɹɪn ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ʌv ædʒəteɪʃən; ʌðɝwaɪz ɛɡwin wʊɾə dʒʌmpt ɑntu bɛlə ɹaɪt ðɛn.

The two women with the lightning on their dresses were approaching the party in front of the Waygate - they carried coils of some silvery metal in their hands, Egwene noticed - and the bareheaded soldier came with them. He did not put a hand near the sword hilt sticking up above his shoulder, and he wore a casual smile, but Egwene still watched him narrowly. Liandrin gave no sign of agitation; otherwise Egwene would have jumped onto Bela right then.

"liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ," ʃi sɛɾ ɝdʒənli, "hu ɑɹ ðiz pipəl? ɑɹ ðeɪ hɪɹ tə hɛlp ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz, tu?"

"Liandrin Sedai," she said urgently, "who are these people? Are they here to help Rand and the others, too?"

ðə hʊk-noʊz mæn sʌɾənli siz mɪn ən ɪleɪn baɪ ðə skɹʌfs ə ðɛɹ nɛks, ən ɪn ðə nɛkst ɪnstən ɛvɹiθɪŋ sim tə hæpən ət wʌns. ðə mæn jɛld ə kɝs, ən ə wʊmən skɹimd, əɹ pɝhæps mɔɹ ðən wʌn wʊmən; ɛɡwin kəd nɑt bi ʃʊɹ. əbɹʌpli ðə bɹiz wɑz ə ɡeɪl ðət wɪpt əweɪ liɑnʒɹɪnz æŋɡɹi ʃaʊɾ ɪn klaʊdz ə dɝɾ ən livz ən meɪd ðə tʃɹiz bɛn ən ɡɹoʊn. hɔɹsəz ɹɪɹɾ ən wɪnid ʃɹɪli. ən wʌn ə ðə wɪmən ɹitʃt aʊɾ ən fæsən sʌmθɪŋ ɝaʊn ɛɡwinz nɛk.

The hook-nosed man suddenly seized Min and Elayne by the scruffs of their necks, and in the next instant everything seemed to happen at once. The man yelled a curse, and a woman screamed, or perhaps more than one woman; Egwene could not be sure. Abruptly the breeze was a gale that whipped away Liandrin's angry shout in clouds of dirt and leaves and made the trees bend and groan. Horses reared and whinnied shrilly. And one of the women reached out and fastened something around Egwene's neck.

kloʊk flæpɪŋ laɪk ə seɪl, ɛɡwin bɹeɪst əɡɛns ðə wɪn ən tʌɡd ət wʌt fɛlt laɪk ə kɑlɝ ə smuð mɛɾəl. ɪt wəd nɑt bʌdʒ; ʌndɝ əɹ fɹæntɪk fɪŋɡɝz, ɪt fɛlt ɔl ʌv wʌn pis, ðoʊ ʃi nu ɪt hæd tə hæv səm kaɪndə klæsp. ðə sɪlvɝi kɔɪlz ðə wʊmən hæd kæɹid naʊ tʃɹeɪld oʊvɝ ɛɡwinz ʃoʊldɝ, ðɛɹ ʌðɝ ɛn dʒɔɪnɪŋ ə bɹaɪt bɹeɪsləɾ ɑn ðə wʊmənz lɛft ɹɪst. bɔlɪŋ əɹ fɪs taɪtli, ɛɡwin hɪt ðə wʊmən əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi kʊd, ɹaɪɾ ɪn əɹ aɪ - ən stæɡɝɾ ən fɛl tə hɝ niz hɝsɛlf, hɛd ɹɪŋɪŋ. ɪt fɛlt əz ɪf ə lɑɹdʒ mæn hæd stʃɹʌk əɹ ɪn ðə feɪs.

Cloak flapping like a sail, Egwene braced against the wind and tugged at what felt like a collar of smooth metal. It would not budge; under her frantic fingers, it felt all of one piece, though she knew it had to have some kind of clasp. The silvery coils the woman had carried now trailed over Egwene's shoulder, their other end joining a bright bracelet on the woman's left wrist. Balling her fist tightly, Egwene hit the woman as hard as she could, right in her eye - and staggered and fell to her knees herself, head ringing. It felt as if a large man had struck her in the face.

wən ʃi kəd si stʃɹeɪt wʌns mɔɹ, ðə wɪn hæd daɪd. ə nʌmbɝ ə hɔɹsəz wɑndɝd lus, bɛlə ən ɪleɪnz mɛɹ əmʌŋ ðɛm, ən səm ə ðə soʊlʒɝz wɝ kɝsɪŋ ən pɪkɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ʌp ɔf ðə ɡɹaʊnd. liɑnʒɹɪn wɑz kɑmli bɹʌʃɪŋ dʌst ən livz fɹəm əɹ dʒɹɛs. mɪn nɛlt, səpɔɹɾɪŋ hɝsɛlf wɪð əɹ hænz, ɡɹɑdʒəli tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹaɪz fɝðɝ. ðə hʊk-noʊz mæn stʊɾ oʊvɝ hɝ, hɪz hæn dʒɹɪpɪŋ blʌd. mɪnz naɪf leɪ dʒʌst aʊɾ ə hɝ ɹitʃ, ðə bleɪd steɪn ɹɛɾ əlɔŋ wʌn saɪd. nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn wɝ noʊwɛɹ tə bi sin, ən nɪneɪivz mɛɹ wɑz ɡɔn, tu. soʊ wɝ səm ə ðə soʊlʒɝz, ən wʌn ə ðə pɛɹz ʌv wɪmən. ði ʌðɝ tu wɝ stɪl ðɛɹ, ən ɛɡwin kəd si naʊ ðət ðeɪ wɝ lɪŋk baɪ ə sɪlvɝ kɔɹd dʒʌs laɪk ðə wʌn ðət stɪl dʒɔɪn əɹ tə ðə wʊmən stændɪŋ oʊvɝ hɝ.

When she could see straight once more, the wind had died. A number of horses wandered loose, Bela and Elayne's mare among them, and some of the soldiers were cursing and picking themselves up off the ground. Liandrin was calmly brushing dust and leaves from her dress. Min knelt, supporting herself with her hands, groggily trying to rise further. The hook-nosed man stood over her, his hand dripping blood. Min's knife lay just out of her reach, the blade stained red along one side. Nynaeve and Elayne were nowhere to be seen, and Nynaeve's mare was gone, too. So were some of the soldiers, and one of the pairs of women. The other two were still there, and Egwene could see now that they were linked by a silver cord just like the one that still joined her to the woman standing over her.

ðət wʊmən wɑz ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ tʃik əz ʃi skwɑɾɪd bɪsaɪɾ ɛɡwin; ðəɹ wɑz ə bɹuz ɔlɹɛɾi kʌmɪŋ ʌp ɝaʊn əɹ lɛft aɪ. wɪð lɔŋ, dɑɹk hɛɹ ən bɪɡ bɹaʊn aɪz, ʃi wɑz pɹɪɾi, ən pɝhæps əz mʌtʃ əz tɛn jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən nɪneɪiv. "jɔɹ fɝs lɛsən," ʃi sɛɾ ɛmfæɾɪkli. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ænəmɑsəɾi ɪn əɹ vɔɪs, bʌt wʌɾ ɔlmoʊst saʊndəd laɪk fɹɛnlinɪs. "aɪ wɪl nɑt pʌnɪʃ jə fɝðɝ ðɪs taɪm, sɪns aɪ ʃʊɾə bɪn ɑn ɡɑɹd wɪð ə nuli kɑt deɪmeɪn. noʊ ðɪs. jə ɑɹ ə deɪmeɪn, ə liʃt wʌn, ən aɪm ə sʌldəm, ə hoʊldɝ ə ðə liʃ. wən deɪmeɪn ən sʌldəm ɑɹ dʒɔɪnd, wʌtɛvɝ hɝt ðə sʌldəm filz, ðə deɪmeɪn filz twaɪs oʊvɝ. ivən tə dɛθ. soʊ jə mʌst ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət jə meɪ nɛvɝ stʃɹaɪk əɾ ə sʌldəm ɪn ɛni weɪ, ən jə mʌs pɹətɛk jəɹ sʌldəm ivən mɔɹ ðən jɝsɛlf. aɪm ɹɛnə. haʊ ɑɹ jə kɔld?"

That woman was rubbing her cheek as she squatted beside Egwene; there was a bruise already coming up around her left eye. With long, dark hair and big brown eyes, she was pretty, and perhaps as much as ten years older than Nynaeve. "Your first lesson," she said emphatically. There was no animosity in her voice, but what almost sounded like friendliness. "I will not punish you further this time, since I should have been on guard with a newly caught damane. Know this. You are a damane, a Leashed One, and I am a sul'dam, a Holder of the Leash. When damane and sul'dam are joined, whatever hurt the sul'dam feels, the damane feels twice over. Even to death. So you must remember that you may never strike at a sul'dam in any way, and you must protect your sul'dam even more than yourself. I am Renna. How are you called?"

"aɪ æm nɑt . . . wʌt jə sɛd," ɛɡwin mʌɾɝd. ʃi pʊld ət ðə kɑlɝ əɡɛn; ɪt ɡeɪv noʊ mɔɹ ðən bɪfɔɹ. ʃi θɔɾ ə nɑkɪŋ ðə wʊmən daʊn ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɹaɪ ðə bɹeɪslət fɹəm əɹ ɹɪst, bʌt ɹɪdʒɛktɪɾ ɪt. ivən ɪf ðə soʊlʒɝz dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp əɹ - ən soʊ fɑɹ ðeɪ sim tə bi ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ əɹ ən ɹɛnə ɔltəɡɛðɝ - ʃi hæd ðə sɪŋkɪŋ filɪŋ ðə wʊmən wɑz tɛlɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ. tʌtʃɪŋ əɹ lɛft aɪ bɹɔɾ ə wɪns; ɪt dɪd nɑt fil pʌfi, soʊ pɝhæps ʃi wɑz nɑɾ æktʃəli  ɡɹoʊɪŋ ə bɹuz tə mætʃ ɹɛnəz, bʌɾ ɪt stɪl hɝt. hɝ lɛft aɪ, ən ɹɛnəz lɛft aɪ. ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ vɔɪs. "liɑnʒɹɪn sədaɪ? waɪ ɑɹ jə lɛɾɪŋ əm də ðɪs?" liɑnʒɹɪn dʌstɪɾ əɹ hænz təɡɛðɝ, nɛvɝ lʊkɪŋ ɪn əɹ dɝɛkʃən.

"I am not . . . what you said," Egwene muttered. She pulled at the collar again; it gave no more than before. She thought of knocking the woman down and trying to pry the bracelet from her wrist, but rejected it. Even if the soldiers did not try to stop her - and so far they seemed to be ignoring her and Renna altogether - she had the sinking feeling the woman was telling the truth. Touching her left eye brought a wince; it did not feel puffy, so perhaps she was not actually growing a bruise to match Renna's, but it still hurt. Her left eye, and Renna's left eye. She raised her voice. "Liandrin Sedai? Why are you letting them do this?" Liandrin dusted her hands together, never looking in her direction.

"ðə vɛɹi fɝs θɪŋ jə mʌs lɝn," ɹɛnə sɛd, "ɪz tə də ɪɡzækli əz jə ɑɹ toʊld, ən wɪθaʊt dɪleɪ."

"The very first thing you must learn," Renna said, "is to do exactly as you are told, and without delay."

ɛɡwin ɡæspt. sʌɾənli hɝ skɪn bɝn ən pɹɪkəld əz ɪf ʃi hæd ɹoʊld ɪn stɪŋɪŋ nɛɾəlz, fɹəm ðə soʊlz ə hɝ fit tə hɝ skælp. ʃi tɔst əɹ hɛɾ əz ðə bɝnɪŋ sɛnseɪʃən ɪnkɹist.

Egwene gasped. Suddenly her skin burned and prickled as if she had rolled in stinging nettles, from the soles of her feet to her scalp. She tossed her head as the burning sensation increased.

"mɛni sʌldəm," ɹɛnə wɛn ɑn ɪn ðəɾ ɔlmoʊs fɹɛnli toʊn, "du nɑt bɪliv deɪmeɪn ʃəd bi əlaʊd neɪmz, əɹ ət list oʊnli neɪmz ðeɪ ɑɹ ɡɪvən. bʌɾ aɪm ðə wʌn u tʊk ju, soʊ əl bi ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ ə jəɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ, ən əl əlaʊ jə tə kip jəɹ oʊn neɪm. ɪf jə də nɑt dɪspliz mi tu fɑɹ. aɪm maɪldli əpsɛt wɪð jə naʊ. dʒju ɹɪli wɪʃ tə kip ɑn əntɪl aɪm æŋɡɹi?"

"Many sul'dam," Renna went on in that almost friendly tone, "do not believe damane should be allowed names, or at least only names they are given. But I am the one who took you, so I will be in charge of your training, and I will allow you to keep your own name. If you do not displease me too far. I am mildly upset with you now. Do you really wish to keep on until I am angry?"

kwɪvɝɪŋ, ɛɡwin ɡɹɪɾɪd əɹ tiθ. hɝ neɪlz dʌɡ ɪndə hɝ pɑmz wɪð ði ɛfɝɾ ə nɑt skɹætʃɪŋ waɪldli. ɪɾiət! ɪts oʊnli jəɹ neɪm. "ɛɡwin," ʃi mænədʒ tə ɡɛɾ aʊt. "aɪ æm ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ." ɪnstənli ðə bɝnɪŋ ɪtʃ wɑz ɡɔn. ʃi lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ, ənstɛɾi bɹɛθ.

Quivering, Egwene gritted her teeth. Her nails dug into her palms with the effort of not scratching wildly. Idiot! It's only your name. "Egwene," she managed to get out. "I am Egwene al'Vere." Instantly the burning itch was gone. She let out a long, unsteady breath.

"ɛɡwin," ɹɛnə sɛd. "ðæɾ ɪz ə ɡʊd neɪm." ən tə ɛɡwinz hɔɹɝ, ɹɛnə pæɾəd əɹ ɑn ðə hɛɾ əz ʃi wəɾ ə dɔɡ.

"Egwene," Renna said. "That is a good name." And to Egwene's horror, Renna patted her on the head as she would a dog.

ðæt, ʃi ɹilaɪzd, wɑz wʌt ʃi hæd dɪtɛktəɾ ɪn ðə wʊmənz vɔɪs - ə sɝɾən ɡʊd wɪl fəɹ ə dɔɡ ɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ, nɑt kwaɪt ðə fɹɛnlinɪs wʌn maɪɾ əv təwɔɹɾ ənʌðɝ hjumən biɪŋ.

That, she realized, was what she had detected in the woman's voice - a certain good will for a dog in training, not quite the friendliness one might have toward another human being.

ɹɛnə tʃʌkəld. "naʊ jə ɑɹ ivən æŋɡɹiɝ. ɪf jə ɪntɛn tə stʃɹaɪk ət mi əɡɛn, ɹɪmɛmbɝ tə meɪk ɪɾ ə smɔl bloʊ, fəɹ jəl fil ɪt twaɪs əz hɑɹɾ əz aɪ. də nɑɾ ətɛmp tə tʃænəl; ðət jəl nɛvɝ də wɪθaʊt maɪ ɪkspɹɛs kəmænd."

Renna chuckled. "Now you are even angrier. If you intend to strike at me again, remember to make it a small blow, for you will feel it twice as hard as I. Do not attempt to channel; that you will never do without my express command."

ɛɡwinz aɪ θɹɑbd. ʃi pʊʃt hɝsɛlf tə hɝ fiɾ ən tʃɹaɪd tə ɪɡnɔɹ ɹɛnə, əz mʌtʃ əz ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl tə ɪɡnɔɹ sʌmwʌn u hɛld ə liʃ fæsən tə ə kɑlɝ ɝaʊn jəɹ nɛk. hɝ tʃiks bɝnd wən ði ʌðɝ wʊmən tʃʌkəld əɡɛn. ʃi wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ tə mɪn, bʌt ði əmaʊn ə liʃ ɹɛnə hæd lɛɾ aʊt wəd nɑt ɹitʃ ðət fɑɹ. ʃi kɔl sɔfli, "mɪn, ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt?"

Egwene's eye throbbed. She pushed herself to her feet and tried to ignore Renna, as much as it was possible to ignore someone who held a leash fastened to a collar around your neck. Her cheeks burned when the other woman chuckled again. She wanted to go to Min, but the amount of leash Renna had let out would not reach that far. She called softly, "Min, are you all right?"

sɪɾɪŋ sloʊli bæk ɑn əɹ hilz, mɪn nɑɾəd, ðən pʊɾ ə hæn tə hɝ hɛɾ əz ɪf ʃi wɪʃt ʃi hæd nɑt muvd ɪt.

Sitting slowly back on her heels, Min nodded, then put a hand to her head as if she wished she had not moved it.

dʒæɡd laɪtnɪŋ kɹækəld əkɹɔs ðə klɪɹ skaɪ, ðən stʃɹʌk əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz səm dɪstəns ɔf. ɛɡwin dʒʌmpt, ən sʌɾənli smaɪld. nɪneɪiv wɑz stɪl fɹi, ən ɪleɪn. ɪf ɛniwʌn kəd fɹi hɝ ən mɪn, nɪneɪiv kʊd. hɝ smaɪl feɪɾəd ɪndə ə ɡlɛɹ fəɹ liɑnʒɹɪn. fəɹ wʌtɛvɝ ðə ɹizən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd bɪtʃɹeɪd ðɛm, ðəɹ wəd bi ə ɹɛkənɪŋ. sʌmdeɪ. sʌmhaʊ. ðə ɡlɛɹ dɪd noʊ ɡʊd; liɑnʒɹɪn dɪd nɑt lʊk əweɪ fɹəm ðə pɑlɑnkwɪn.

Jagged lightning crackled across the clear sky, then struck among the trees some distance off. Egwene jumped, and suddenly smiled. Nynaeve was still free, and Elayne. If anyone could free her and Min, Nynaeve could. Her smile faded into a glare for Liandrin. For whatever the reason the Aes Sedai had betrayed them, there would be a reckoning. Someday. Somehow. The glare did no good; Liandrin did not look away from the palanquin.

ðə bɛɹ-tʃɛstəd mɛn nɛlt, loʊɝɪŋ ðə pɑlɑnkwɪn tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ən sjuɹɔθ stɛp daʊn, kɛɹfəli ɝeɪnʒɪŋ əɹ ɹoʊb, ðən pɪkt əɹ weɪ tə liɑnʒɹɪn ɑn sɑft-slɪpɝd fit. ðə tu wɪmən wɝ mʌtʃ ʌv ə saɪz. bɹaʊn aɪz stɛɹd lɛvəli ɪndə blæk.

The bare-chested men knelt, lowering the palanquin to the ground, and Suroth stepped down, carefully arranging her robe, then picked her way to Liandrin on soft-slippered feet. The two women were much of a size. Brown eyes stared levelly into black.

"ju wɝ tə bɹɪŋ mi tu," sjuɹɔθ sɛd. "ɪnstɛd, aɪ hæv oʊnli wʌn, waɪl tu ɹʌn lus, wʌn ə ðɛm mɔɹ paʊɝfəl baɪ fɑɹ ðən aɪ hæd bɪn lɛd tə bɪliv. ʃɪl ətʃɹækt ɛvɹi pətʃɹoʊl ʌv aʊɝz wɪðɪn tu liɡz."

"You were to bring me two," Suroth said. "Instead, I have only one, while two run loose, one of them more powerful by far than I had been led to believe. She will attract every patrol of ours within two leagues."

"aɪ bɹɔt jə θɹi," liɑnʒɹɪn sɛd kɑmli. "ɪf jə kænɑt mænədʒ tə hoʊl ðɛm, pɝhæps əɹ mæstɝ ʃəd faɪn ənʌðɝ əmʌŋ jə tə sɝv hɪm. jə teɪk fɹaɪɾ ət tʃɹaɪfəlz. ɪf pətʃɹoʊlz kʌm, kɪl ðɛm."

"I brought you three," Liandrin said calmly. "If you cannot manage to hold them, perhaps our master should find another among you to serve him. You take fright at trifles. If patrols come, kill them."

laɪtnɪŋ flæʃt əɡɛn ɪn ðə nɪɹ dɪstəns, ən moʊməns leɪɾɝ sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔɹd laɪk θʌndɝ nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm wɛɹ ɪt stʃɹʌk; ə klaʊɾ ə dʌst ɹoʊz ɪndə ði ɛɹ. niðɝ liɑnʒɹɪn nɔɹ sjuɹɔθ tʊk ɛni noʊɾəs.

Lightning flashed again in the near distance, and moments later something roared like thunder not far from where it struck; a cloud of dust rose into the air. Neither Liandrin nor Suroth took any notice.

"aɪ kəd stɪl ɹɪtɝn tə fɑlm wɪð tu nu deɪmeɪn," sjuɹɔθ sɛd. "ɪt ɡɹivz mi tə əlaʊ ən . . . ɛɛs sədaɪ" - ʃi twɪstəd ðə wɝdz laɪk ə kɝs - "tə wɔk fɹi."

"I could still return to Falme with two new damane," Suroth said. "It grieves me to allow an . . . Aes Sedai" - she twisted the words like a curse - "to walk free."

liɑnʒɹɪnz feɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, bʌɾ ɛɡwin sɔ ə nɪmbəs əbɹʌpli ɡloʊ ɝaʊn hɝ.

Liandrin's face did not change, but Egwene saw a nimbus abruptly glow around her.

"bɪwɛɹ, haɪ leɪɾi," ɹɛnə kɔld. "ʃi stænz ɹɛɾi!"

"Beware, High Lady," Renna called. "She stands ready!"

ðəɹ wɑz ə stɝ əmʌŋ ðə soʊlʒɝz, ə ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ sɔɹdz ən lænsɪz, bʌt sjuɹɔθ oʊnli stipəld əɹ hænz, smaɪlɪŋ ət liɑnʒɹɪn oʊvɝ əɹ lɔŋ neɪlz. "ju wɪl meɪk noʊ muv əɡɛns mi, liɑnʒɹɪn. əɹ mæstɝ wəd dɪsəpɹuv, əz aɪm ʃʊɹli niɾəd hɪɹ mɔɹ ðən ju, ən jə fɪɹ ɪm mɔɹ ðən jə fɪɹ biɪŋ meɪd deɪmeɪn."

There was a stir among the soldiers, a reaching for swords and lances, but Suroth only steepled her hands, smiling at Liandrin over her long nails. "You will make no move against me, Liandrin. Our master would disapprove, as I am surely needed here more than you, and you fear him more than you fear being made damane."

liɑnʒɹɪn smaɪld, ðoʊ waɪt spɑts mɑɹkt əɹ tʃiks wɪð æŋɡɝ. "æn ju, sjuɹɔθ, fɪɹ ɪm mɔɹ ðən jə fɪɹ mi bɝnɪŋ jə tə ə sɪndɝ wɛɹ jə stænd."

Liandrin smiled, though white spots marked her cheeks with anger. "And you, Suroth, fear him more than you fear me burning you to a cinder where you stand."

"dʒʌst soʊ. wi boʊθ fɪɹ hɪm. jɛɾ ivən əɹ mæstɝz nidz wɪl tʃeɪnʒ wɪð taɪm. ɔl mɛɹəθdəmeɪn wɪl bi liʃt ɪvɛntʃəwəli. pɝhæps əl bi ðə wʌn u pleɪsəz ðə kɑlɝ ɝaʊn jəɹ lʌvli θɹoʊt."

"Just so. We both fear him. Yet even our master's needs will change with time. All marath'damane will be leashed eventually. Perhaps I will be the one who places the collar around your lovely throat."

"æz jə seɪ, sjuɹɔθ. əɹ mæstɝz nidz wɪl tʃeɪnʒ. əl ɹimaɪn jə ʌv ɪɾ ɑn ðə deɪ wən jə nil tə mi."

"As you say, Suroth. Our master's needs will change. I will remind you of it on the day when you kneel to me."

ə tɔl lɛðɝlif pɝhæps ə maɪl əweɪ sʌɾənli bɪkeɪm ə ɹɔɹɪŋ tɔɹtʃ.

A tall leatherleaf perhaps a mile away suddenly became a roaring torch.

"ðɪs ɡɹoʊz taɪɝsəm," sjuɹɔθ sɛd. "ɛlbɑɹ, ɹikɔl ðɛm." ðə hʊk-noʊz mæn pɹədust ə hɔɹn noʊ bɪɡɝ ðən ɪz fɪst; ɪt meɪɾ ə hɔɹs, pɪɹsɪŋ kɹaɪ.

"This grows tiresome," Suroth said. "Elbar, recall them." The hook-nosed man produced a horn no bigger than his fist; it made a hoarse, piercing cry.

"ju mʌs faɪn ðə wʊmən nɪneɪiv," liɑnʒɹɪn sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "ɪleɪn ɪz ə noʊ ɪmpɔɹɾəns, bʌt boʊθ ðə wʊmən ən ðɪs ɡɝl hɪɹ mʌs bi teɪkən wɪð jə ɑn jəɹ ʃɪps wən jə seɪl."

"You must find the woman Nynaeve," Liandrin said sharply. "Elayne is of no importance, but both the woman and this girl here must be taken with you on your ships when you sail."

"aɪ noʊ vɛɹi wɛl wʌɾ əz bɪn kəmændəd, mɛɹəθdəmeɪn, ðoʊ aɪ wəd ɡɪv mʌtʃ tə noʊ waɪ."

"I know very well what has been commanded, marath'damane, though I would give much to know why."

"haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ jə wɝ toʊld, tʃaɪld," liɑnʒɹɪn snɪɹd, "ðæɾ ɪz haʊ mʌtʃ jə ɑɹ əlaʊd tə noʊ. ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət jə sɝv ən oʊbeɪ. ðiz tu mʌs bi ɹimuv tə ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən ən kɛp ðɛɹ."

"However much you were told, child," Liandrin sneered, "that is how much you are allowed to know. Remember that you serve and obey. These two must be removed to the other side of the Aryth Ocean and kept there."

sjuɹɔθ snɪft. "aɪ wɪl nɑt ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ tə faɪn ðɪs nɪneɪiv. maɪ jusfəlnəs tə əɹ mæstɝ wɪl bi əɾ ən ɛn ɪf tʃɹɑk hænz mi oʊvɝ tə ðə sikɝz fəɹ tʃɹuθ." liɑnʒɹɪn oʊpən əɹ maʊθ æŋɡɹəli, bʌt sjuɹɔθ ɹəfjuz tə əlaʊ hɝ ə wɝd. "ðə wʊmən wɪl nɑt ɹɪmeɪn fɹi fəɹ lɔŋ. niðɝ ə ðɛm wɪl. wən wi seɪl əɡɛn, wɪl teɪk wɪð əs ɛvɹi wʊmən ɑn ðɪs mɪzɝəbəl spɪɾ ə læn u kən tʃænəl ivən slaɪtli, liʃt ən kɑlɝd. ɪf jə wɪʃ tə ɹɪmeɪn ən sɝtʃ fəɹ hɝ, də soʊ. pətʃɹoʊlz wɪl bi hɪɹ sun, θɪŋkɪŋ tə ɛnɡeɪdʒ ðə ɹæbəl ðət stɪl haɪdz ɪn ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd. səm pətʃɹoʊlz teɪk deɪmeɪn wɪð ðɛm, ən ðəl nɑt kɛɹ wʌt mæstɝ jə sɝv. ʃəd jə sɝvaɪv ði ɪnkaʊntɝ, ðə liʃ ən kɑlɝ wɪl titʃ jə ə nu laɪf, ən aɪ də nɑt bɪliv əɹ mæstɝ wɪl tʃɹʌbəl tə dɪlɪvɝ wʌn fulɪʃ ɪnʌf tə lɛt hɝsɛlf bi teɪkən."

Suroth sniffed. "I will not remain here to find this Nynaeve. My usefulness to our master will be at an end if Turak hands me over to the Seekers for Truth." Liandrin opened her mouth angrily, but Suroth refused to allow her a word. "The woman will not remain free for long. Neither of them will. When we sail again, we will take with us every woman on this miserable spit of land who can channel even slightly, leashed and collared. If you wish to remain and search for her, do so. Patrols will be here soon, thinking to engage the rabble that still hides in the countryside. Some patrols take damane with them, and they will not care what master you serve. Should you survive the encounter, the leash and collar will teach you a new life, and I do not believe our master will trouble to deliver one foolish enough to let herself be taken."

"ɪf iðɝ ɪz əlaʊd tə ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ," liɑnʒɹɪn sɛd taɪtli, "aʊɝ mæstɝ wɪl tʃɹʌbəl hɪmsɛlf wɪð ju, sjuɹɔθ. teɪk əm boʊθ, əɹ peɪ ðə pɹaɪs." ʃi stʃɹoʊd tə ðə weɪɡeɪt, klʌtʃɪŋ ðə ɹeɪnz ə hɝ mɛɹ. sun ɪt wɑz kloʊzɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ.

"If either is allowed to remain here," Liandrin said tightly, "our master will trouble himself with you, Suroth. Take them both, or pay the price." She strode to the Waygate, clutching the reins of her mare. Soon it was closing behind her.

ðə soʊlʒɝz u hæd ɡɔn æftɝ nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn keɪm ɡæləpɪŋ bæk wɪð ðə tu wɪmən lɪŋk baɪ liʃ, kɑlɝ, ən bɹeɪslət, ðə deɪmeɪn ən ðə sʌldəm ɹaɪɾɪŋ saɪd baɪ saɪd. θɹi mɛn lɛd hɔɹsəz wɪð bɑɾiz əkɹɔs ðə sæɾəlz. ɛɡwin fɛlt ə sɝdʒ ə hoʊp wən ʃi ɹilaɪz ðə bɑɾiz ɔl wɔɹ ɑɹmɝ. ðeɪ hæd nɑt kɑt nɪneɪiv əɹ ɪleɪn, iðɝ wʌn.

The soldiers who had gone after Nynaeve and Elayne came galloping back with the two women linked by leash, collar, and bracelet, the damane and the sul'dam riding side by side. Three men led horses with bodies across the saddles. Egwene felt a surge of hope when she realized the bodies all wore armor. They had not caught Nynaeve or Elayne, either one.

mɪn stɑɹɾəd tə ɹaɪz tə hɝ fit, bʌt ðə hʊk-noʊz mæn plæntəɾ ə but bɪtwin əɹ ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz ən dʒɹoʊv əɹ tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ɡæspɪŋ fəɹ bɹɛθ, ʃi twɪtʃt ðəɹ wikli. "aɪ bɛɡ pɝmɪʃən tə spik, haɪ leɪɾi," hi sɛd. sjuɹɔθ meɪɾ ə smɔl moʊʃən wɪð əɹ hænd, ən i wɛn ɑn. "ðɪs pɛzən kʌt mi, haɪ leɪɾi. ɪf ðə haɪ leɪɾi hæz noʊ jus fəɹ əɹ . . . ?" sjuɹɔθ moʊʃən slaɪtli əɡɛn, ɔlɹɛɾi tɝnɪŋ əweɪ, ən i ɹitʃt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ fəɹ ðə hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹd.

Min started to rise to her feet, but the hook-nosed man planted a boot between her shoulder blades and drove her to the ground. Gasping for breath, she twitched there weakly. "I beg permission to speak, High Lady," he said. Suroth made a small motion with her hand, and he went on. "This peasant cut me, High Lady. If the High Lady has no use for her . . . ?" Suroth motioned slightly again, already turning away, and he reached over his shoulder for the hilt of his sword.

"noʊ!" ɛɡwin ʃaʊɾəd. ʃi hɝd ɹɛnə kɝs sɔfli, ən sʌɾənli ðə bɝnɪŋ ɪtʃ kʌvɝɾ əɹ skɪn əɡɛn, wɝs ðən bɪfɔɹ, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt stɑp. "pliz! haɪ leɪɾi, pliz! ʃiz maɪ fɹɛnd!" peɪn sətʃ əz ʃi hæd nɛvɝ noʊn ɹækt əɹ θɹu ðə bɝnɪŋ. ɛvɹi mʌsəl nɑɾɪd ən kɹæmpt; ʃi pɪtʃt ɑn əɹ feɪs ɪn ðə dɝt, mulɪŋ, bʌt ʃi kəd stɪl si ɛlbɑɹz hɛvi, kɝv bleɪd kʌm fɹi ʌv ɪts ʃiθ, si hɪm ɹeɪz ɪt wɪð boʊθ hænz. "pliz! oʊ, mɪn!"

"No!" Egwene shouted. She heard Renna curse softly, and suddenly the burning itch covered her skin again, worse than before, but she did not stop. "Please! High Lady, please! She is my friend!" Pain such as she had never known wracked her through the burning. Every muscle knotted and cramped; she pitched on her face in the dirt, mewling, but she could still see Elbar's heavy, curved blade come free of its sheath, see him raise it with both hands. "Please! Oh, Min!"

əbɹʌpli, ðə peɪn wɑz ɡɔn əz ɪf ɪt hæd nɛvɝ bɪn; oʊnli ðə mɛmɹi ɹɪmeɪnd. sjuɹɔθs blu vɛlvət slɪpɝz, dɝt-steɪnd naʊ, əpɪɹɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ feɪs, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz əɾ ɛlbɑɹ ðət ʃi stɛɹd. hi stʊd ðəɹ wɪð ɪz sɔɹɾ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛɾ ən ɔl ɪz weɪɾ ɑn ðə fʊɾ ɑn mɪnz bæk . . . ən i dɪd nɑt muv.

Abruptly, the pain was gone as if it had never been; only the memory remained. Suroth's blue velvet slippers, dirt-stained now, appeared in front of her face, but it was at Elbar that she stared. He stood there with his sword over his head and all his weight on the foot on Min's back . . . and he did not move.

"ðɪs pɛzən ɪz jəɹ fɹɛnd?" sjuɹɔθ sɛd.

"This peasant is your friend?" Suroth said.

ɛɡwin stɑɹɾəd tə ɹaɪz, bʌɾ əɾ ə sɝpɹaɪzd ɑɹtʃɪŋ ə sjuɹɔθs aɪbɹaʊ, ʃi ɹɪmeɪn laɪɪŋ wɛɹ ʃi wɑz ən oʊnli ɹeɪzd əɹ hɛd. ʃi hæd tə seɪv mɪn. ɪf ɪt minz ɡɹɔvəlɪŋ. . . . ʃi pɑɹɾəd əɹ lɪps ən hoʊpt əɹ ɡɹɪɾɪd tiθ wəd pæs fəɹ ə smaɪl. "jɛs, haɪ leɪɾi."

Egwene started to rise, but at a surprised arching of Suroth's eyebrow, she remained lying where she was and only raised her head. She had to save Min. If it means groveling. . . . She parted her lips and hoped her gritted teeth would pass for a smile. "Yes, High Lady."

"æn ɪf aɪ spɛɹ hɝ, ɪf aɪ əlaʊ hɝ tə vɪzət jə əkeɪʒənəli, jəl wɝk hɑɹɾ ən lɝn əz jə ɑɹ tɔt?"

"And if I spare her, if I allow her to visit you occasionally, you will work hard and learn as you are taught?"

"aɪ wɪl, haɪ leɪɾi." ʃi wʊɾə pɹɑməs mʌtʃ mɔɹ tə kip ðət sɔɹd fɹəm splɪɾɪŋ mɪnz skʌl. əl ivən kip ɪt, ʃi θɔt saʊɝli, əz lɔŋ əz aɪ hæv tə.

"I will, High Lady." She would have promised much more to keep that sword from splitting Min's skull. I'll even keep it, she thought sourly, as long as I have to.

"pʊt ðə ɡɝl ɑn əɹ hɔɹs, ɛlbɑɹ," sjuɹɔθ sɛd. "taɪ hɝ ɑn, ɪf ʃi kænɑt sɪɾ əɹ sæɾəl. ɪf ðɪs deɪmeɪn pɹuvz ə dɪsəpɔɪnmənt, pɝhæps ðən əl lɛt juv ðə hɛɾ ə ðə ɡɝl." ʃi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi muvɪŋ təwɔɹɾ əɹ pɑlɑnkwɪn.

"Put the girl on her horse, Elbar," Suroth said. "Tie her on, if she cannot sit her saddle. If this damane proves a disappointment, perhaps then I will let you have the head of the girl." She was already moving toward her palanquin.

ɹɛnə pʊld ɛɡwin ɹʌfli tə hɝ fiɾ ən pʊʃt əɹ təwɔɹd bɛlə, bʌɾ ɛɡwin hæɾ aɪz oʊnli fəɹ mɪn. ɛlbɑɹ wɑz noʊ dʒɛnlɝ wɪð mɪn ðən ɹɛnə wɪð hɝ, bʌt ʃi θɔt mɪn wɑz ɔl ɹaɪt. ət lis mɪn ʃɹʌɡd ɔf ɛlbɑɹz ətɛmp tə taɪ hɝ əkɹɔs əɹ sæɾəl ən klaɪmd ɑntu hɝ ɡɛldɪŋ wɪð oʊnli ə lɪɾəl hɛlp.

Renna pulled Egwene roughly to her feet and pushed her toward Bela, but Egwene had eyes only for Min. Elbar was no gentler with Min than Renna with her, but she thought Min was all right. At least Min shrugged off Elbar's attempt to tie her across her saddle and climbed onto her gelding with only a little help.

ði ɑd pɑɹɾi stɑɹɾəd ɔf, wɛstwɝd, wɪð sjuɹɔθ liɾɪŋ ən ɛlbɑɹ slaɪtli tə ðə ɹɪɹ ə hɝ pɑlɑnkwɪn, bʌt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hiɾ ɛni sʌmənz ɪmiɾiətli. ɹɛnə ən ɛɡwin ɹoʊɾ ət ðə bæk wɪð mɪn, ən ði ʌðɝ sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn, bɪhaɪn ðə soʊlʒɝz. ðə wʊmən u hæɾ əpɛɹənli mɛn tə kɑlɝ nɪneɪiv fɑndəl ðə kɔɪl sɪlvɝ liʃ ʃi stɪl kæɹiɾ ən lʊkt æŋɡɹi. spɑɹs fɔɹəs kʌvɝd ðə ɹoʊlɪŋ lænd, ən ðə smoʊk ə ðə bɝnɪŋ lɛðɝlif wɑz sun oʊnli ə smʌdʒ ɪn ðə skaɪ bɪhaɪn ðɛm.

The odd party started off, westward, with Suroth leading and Elbar slightly to the rear of her palanquin, but close enough to heed any summons immediately. Renna and Egwene rode at the back with Min, and the other sul'dam and damane, behind the soldiers. The woman who had apparently meant to collar Nynaeve fondled the coiled silver leash she still carried and looked angry. Sparse forest covered the rolling land, and the smoke of the burning leatherleaf was soon only a smudge in the sky behind them.

"ju wɝ ɑnɝd," ɹɛnə sɛɾ æftɝ ə taɪm, "hævɪŋ ðə haɪ leɪɾi spik tə ju. ənʌðɝ taɪm, aɪ wəd lɛt jə wɛɹ ə ɹɪbən tə mɑɹk ði ɑnɝ. bʌt sɪns jə bɹɔɾ əɹ ətɛnʃən ɑn jɝsɛlf. . . ."

"You were honored," Renna said after a time, "having the High Lady speak to you. Another time, I would let you wear a ribbon to mark the honor. But since you brought her attention on yourself. . . ."

ɛɡwin kɹaɪɾ aʊɾ əz ə swɪtʃ sim tə læʃ əkɹɔs əɹ bæk, ðən ənʌðɝ əkɹɔs əɹ lɛɡ, hɝ ɑɹm. fɹəm ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən ðeɪ sim tə kʌm; ʃi nu ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə blɑk, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt hɛlp θɹoʊɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz əbaʊɾ əz ɪf tə stɑp ðə bloʊz. ʃi bɪɾ əɹ lɪp tə staɪfəl əɹ moʊnz, bʌt tɪɹz stɪl ɹoʊl daʊn əɹ tʃiks. bɛlə wɪniɾ ən dænst, bʌt ɹɛnəz ɡɹɪp ɑn ðə sɪlvɝ liʃ kɛpt əɹ fɹəm kæɹiɪŋ ɛɡwin əweɪ. nʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz ivən lʊk bæk.

Egwene cried out as a switch seemed to lash across her back, then another across her leg, her arm. From every direction they seemed to come; she knew there was nothing to block, but she could not help throwing her arms about as if to stop the blows. She bit her lip to stifle her moans, but tears still rolled down her cheeks. Bela whinnied and danced, but Renna's grip on the silver leash kept her from carrying Egwene away. None of the soldiers even looked back.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ tə hɝ?" mɪn ʃaʊɾəd. "ɛɡwin? stɑp ɪt!"

"What are you doing to her?" Min shouted. "Egwene? Stop it!"

"ju lɪv ɑn sʌfɝæns . . . mɪn, ɪz ɪt?" ɹɛnə sɛd maɪldli. "lɛt ðɪs bi ə lɛsən fəɹ jə əz wɛl. soʊ lɔŋ əz jə tʃɹaɪ tə ɪntɝfɪɹ, ɪɾəl nɑt stɑp."

"You live on sufferance . . . Min, is it?" Renna said mildly. "Let this be a lesson for you as well. So long as you try to interfere, it will not stop."

mɪn ɹeɪzd ə fɪst, ðən lɛɾ ɪt fɔl. "aɪ woʊn ɪntɝfɪɹ. oʊnli, pliz, stɑp ɪt. ɛɡwin, aɪm sɑɹi."

Min raised a fist, then let it fall. "I won't interfere. Only, please, stop it. Egwene, I'm sorry."

ði ənsin bloʊz wɛn ɑn fəɹ ə fju moʊməns mɔɹ, əz ɪf tə ʃoʊ mɪn əɹ ɪntɝvɛntʃən hæd dʌn nʌθɪŋ, ðən sist, bʌɾ ɛɡwin kəd nɑt stɑp ʃʌɾɝɪŋ. ðə peɪn dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ əweɪ ðɪs taɪm. ʃi pʊʃt bæk ðə sliv ə hɝ dʒɹɛs, θɪŋkɪŋ tə si wɛlz; hɝ skɪn wɑz ənmɑɹkt, bʌt ðə fil ə ðɛm wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ. ʃi swɑloʊd. "ɪt wɑz nɑt jəɹ fɔlt, mɪn." bɛlə tɔst əɹ hɛd, aɪz ɹoʊlɪŋ, ən ɛɡwin pæɾəd ðə mɛɹz ʃæɡi nɛk. "ɪt wɑzn jʊɹz, iðɝ."

The unseen blows went on for a few moments more, as if to show Min her intervention had done nothing, then ceased, but Egwene could not stop shuddering. The pain did not go away this time. She pushed back the sleeve of her dress, thinking to see weals; her skin was unmarked, but the feel of them was still there. She swallowed. "It was not your fault, Min." Bela tossed her head, eyes rolling, and Egwene patted the mare's shaggy neck. "It wasn't yours, either."

"ɪt wɑz jəɹ fɔlt, ɛɡwin," ɹɛnə sɛd. ʃi saʊndəd soʊ peɪʃənt, dilɪŋ soʊ kaɪnli wɪð sʌmwʌn u wɑz tu dɛns tə si ðə ɹaɪt, ðəɾ ɛɡwin wɑntəd tə skɹim. "wɛn ə deɪmeɪn ɪz pʌnɪʃt, ɪts ɔlweɪz əɹ fɔlt, ivən ɪf ʃi dʌz nɑt noʊ waɪ. ə deɪmeɪn mʌst æntɪsəpeɪt wʌɾ əɹ sʌldəm wɑns. bʌt ðɪs taɪm, jə də noʊ waɪ. deɪmeɪn ɑɹ laɪk fɝnɪtʃɝ, əɹ tulz, ɔlweɪz ðəɹ ɹɛɾi tə bi juzd, bʌt nɛvɝ pʊʃɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz fɔɹwɝd fəɹ ətɛnʃən. ɪspɛʃli nɑt fəɹ ði ətɛnʃən ʌv wʌn ə ðə blʌd."

"It was your fault, Egwene," Renna said. She sounded so patient, dealing so kindly with someone who was too dense to see the right, that Egwene wanted to scream. "When a damane is punished, it is always her fault, even if she does not know why. A damane must anticipate what her sul'dam wants. But this time, you do know why. Damane are like furniture, or tools, always there ready to be used, but never pushing themselves forward for attention. Especially not for the attention of one of the Blood."

ɛɡwin bɪɾ əɹ lɪp əntɪl ʃi teɪstəd blʌd. ðɪs ɪz ə naɪtmɛɹ. ɪt kæn bi ɹil. waɪ dɪd liɑnʒɹɪn də ðɪs? waɪ ɪz ðɪs hæpənɪŋ? "meɪ . . . meɪ aɪ æsk ə kwɛstʃən?"

Egwene bit her lip until she tasted blood. This is a nightmare. It can't be real. Why did Liandrin do this? Why is this happening? "May . . . may I ask a question?"

"ʌv mi, jə meɪ." ɹɛnə smaɪld. "mɛni sʌldəm wɪl wɛɹ jəɹ bɹeɪsləɾ oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz - ðəɹ ɑɹ ɔlweɪz mɛni mɔɹ sʌldəm ðən deɪmeɪn - ən səm wəɾ əv jəɹ haɪɾ ɪn stʃɹɪps ɪf jə tʊk jəɹ aɪz ɔf ðə flɔɹ əɹ oʊpən jəɹ maʊθ wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən, bʌɾ aɪ si noʊ ɹizən nɑt tə lɛt jə spik, soʊ lɔŋ əz jə ɑɹ kɛɹfəl ɪn wʌt jə seɪ." wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ sʌldəm snɔɹɾɪd laʊdli; ʃi wɑz lɪŋk tə ə pɹɪɾi, dɑɹk-hɛɹd wʊmən ɪn əɹ mɪɾəl jɪɹz u kɛpt əɹ aɪz ɑn əɹ hænz.

"Of me, you may." Renna smiled. "Many sul'dam will wear your bracelet over the years - there are always many more sul'dam than damane - and some would have your hide in strips if you took your eyes off the floor or opened your mouth without permission, but I see no reason not to let you speak, so long as you are careful in what you say." One of the other sul'dam snorted loudly; she was linked to a pretty, dark-haired woman in her middle years who kept her eyes on her hands.

"liɑnʒɹɪn" - ɛɡwin wəd nɑt ɡɪv əɹ ði ɑnɝɪfɪk, nɑɾ ɛvɝ əɡɛn - "æn ðə haɪ leɪɾi spoʊk ʌv ə mæstɝ ðeɪ boʊθ sɝv." ðə θɔt keɪm ɪndə hɝ hɛɾ ʌv ə mæn wɪð ɔlmoʊs hil bɝnz mɑɹɪŋ ɪz feɪs, ən aɪz ən maʊθ ðət səmtaɪmz tɝn tə faɪɝ, bʌɾ ivən ɪf i wɑz oʊnli ə fɪɡjɝ ɪn əɹ dʒɹimz ðət sim tu hɔɹəbəl tə kɑntəmpleɪt. "hu ɪz hi? wʌt dʌz i wɑnt wɪð mi ən - ən mɪn?" ʃi nu ɪt wɑz sɪli tə əvɔɪd neɪmɪŋ nɪneɪiv - ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɛni ʌv ðiz pipəl wəd fɝɡɛɾ əɹ dʒʌs kəz əɹ neɪm wɑz nɑt mɛnʃənd, ɪspɛʃli ðə blu-aɪd sʌldəm stʃɹoʊkɪŋ əɹ ɛmpti liʃ - bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ði oʊnli weɪ ʃi kəd θɪŋk ə faɪɾɪŋ bæk ət ðə moʊmənt.

"Liandrin" - Egwene would not give her the honorific, not ever again - "and the High Lady spoke of a master they both serve." The thought came into her head of a man with almost healed burns marring his face, and eyes and mouth that sometimes turned to fire, but even if he was only a figure in her dreams that seemed too horrible to contemplate. "Who is he? What does he want with me and - and Min?" She knew it was silly to avoid naming Nynaeve - she did not think any of these people would forget her just because her name was not mentioned, especially the blue-eyed sul'dam stroking her empty leash - but it was the only way she could think of fighting back at the moment.

"ði əfɛɹz ə ðə blʌd," ɹɛnə sɛd, "ɑɹ nɑt fəɹ mi tə teɪk noʊɾəs ʌv, ən sɝɾənli nɑt fəɹ ju. ðə haɪ leɪɾi wɪl tɛl mi wʌt ʃi wɪʃɪz mi tə noʊ, ən əl tɛl jə wʌɾ aɪ wɪʃ jə tə noʊ. ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ðət jə hɪɹ əɹ si mʌs bi tə jə əz ɪf ɪt nɛvɝ wɑz sɛd, əz ɪf ɪt nɛvɝ hæpənd. ðɪs weɪ laɪz seɪfti, moʊst ɪspɛʃli fəɹ ə deɪmeɪn. deɪmeɪn ɑɹ tu væljəbəl tə bi kɪld aʊɾ ə hænd, bʌt jə maɪt faɪn jɝsɛlf nɑɾ oʊnli saʊnli pʌnɪʃt, bʌɾ əbsɛn ə tʌŋ tə spik əɹ hænz tə ɹaɪt. deɪmeɪn kən də wʌt ðeɪ mʌst wɪθaʊt ðiz θɪŋz."

"The affairs of the Blood," Renna said, "are not for me to take notice of, and certainly not for you. The High Lady will tell me what she wishes me to know, and I will tell you what I wish you to know. Anything else that you hear or see must be to you as if it never was said, as if it never happened. This way lies safety, most especially for a damane. Damane are too valuable to be killed out of hand, but you might find yourself not only soundly punished, but absent a tongue to speak or hands to write. Damane can do what they must without these things."

ɛɡwin ʃɪvɝd, ðoʊ ði ɛɹ wɑz nɑt vɛɹi koʊld. pʊlɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ʌp ɑntu hɝ ʃoʊldɝz, hɝ hæn bɹʌʃt ðə liʃ, ən ʃi dʒɝkt əɾ ɪt fɪtfəli. "ðɪs ɪz ə hɔɹəbəl θɪŋ. haʊ kən jə də ðɪs tə ɛniwʌn? wʌt dɪziz maɪn ɛvɝ θɔɾ ʌv ɪt?"

Egwene shivered, though the air was not very cold. Pulling her cloak up onto her shoulders, her hand brushed the leash, and she jerked at it fitfully. "This is a horrible thing. How can you do this to anyone? What diseased mind ever thought of it?"

ðə blu-aɪd sʌldəm wɪð ði ɛmpti liʃ ɡɹaʊld, "ðɪs wʌn kəd də wɪθaʊɾ əɹ tʌŋ ɔlɹɛɾi, ɹɛnə."

The blue-eyed sul'dam with the empty leash growled, "This one could do without her tongue already, Renna."

ɹɛnə oʊnli smaɪl peɪʃənli. "haʊ ɪz ɪt hɔɹəbəl? kəd wi əlaʊ ɛniwʌn tə ɹʌn lus u kən də wʌɾ ə deɪmeɪn kæn? səmtaɪmz mɛn ɑɹ bɔɹn u wəd bi mɛɹəθdəmeɪn ɪf ðeɪ wɝ wɪmən - ɪts soʊ hɪɹ ɔlsoʊ, aɪ hæv hɝd - ən ðeɪ mʌs bi kɪld, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ðə wɪmən də nɑt ɡoʊ mæd. bɛɾɝ fəɹ əm tə bɪkʌm deɪmeɪn ðən meɪk tʃɹʌbəl kəntɛndɪŋ fəɹ paʊɝ. əz fəɹ ðə maɪn ðət fɝs θɔɾ ə ði æɾəm, ɪt wɑz ðə maɪn ʌv ə wʊmən u kɔl hɝsɛlf ɛɛs sədaɪ."

Renna only smiled patiently. "How is it horrible? Could we allow anyone to run loose who can do what a damane can? Sometimes men are born who would be marath'damane if they were women - it is so here also, I have heard - and they must be killed, of course, but the women do not go mad. Better for them to become damane than make trouble contending for power. As for the mind that first thought of the a'dam, it was the mind of a woman who called herself Aes Sedai."

ɛɡwin nu ɪnkɹədulɪɾi mʌs bi peɪntɪŋ əɹ feɪs, kəz ɹɛnə læft oʊpənli. "wɛn luthɛɹ pɛndʒɹæɡ mɑndwɪn, sʌn ə ðə hɔkwɪŋ, fɝs feɪs ði ɑɹmiz ə ðə naɪt, hi faʊn mɛni əmʌŋ əm u kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðeɪ kəntɛndɪd fəɹ paʊɝ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ən juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɑn ðə fild ə bæɾəl. wʌn sʌtʃ, ə wʊmən neɪm din, hu θɔt ʃi kəd də bɛɾɝ sɝvɪŋ ði ɛmpɝɝ - hi wɑz nɑɾ ɛmpɝɝ ðɛn, ʌv kɔɹs - sɪns i hæd noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ɪz ɑɹmiz, keɪm tə hɪm wɪð ə dɪvaɪs ʃi hæd meɪd, ðə fɝst æɾəm, fæsən tə ðə nɛk ʌv wʌn ə hɝ sɪstɝz. ðoʊ ðət wʊmən dɪd nɑt wɑnə sɝv luthɛɹ, ði æɾəm ɹikwaɪɝɾ əɹ tə sɝv. din meɪd mɔɹ æɾəm, ðə fɝst sʌldəm wɝ faʊnd, ən wɪmən kæptʃɝɾ u kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪskʌvɝd ðət ðeɪ wɝ ɪn fækt oʊnli mɛɹəθdəmeɪn, ðoʊz u mʌs bi liʃt. ɪts sɛd ðət wən ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz liʃt, dinz skɹimz ʃʊk ðə taʊɝz ə mɪdnaɪt, bʌɾ ə kɔɹs ʃi, tu, wɑz ə mɛɹəθdəmeɪn, ən mɛɹəθdəmeɪn kænɑt bi əlaʊd tə ɹʌn fɹi. pɝhæps jəl bi wʌn ə ðoʊz u hæz ði əbɪləɾi tə meɪk æɾəm. ɪf soʊ, jəl bi pæmpɝd, jə meɪ ɹɛst əʃʊɹd."

Egwene knew incredulity must be painting her face, because Renna laughed openly. "When Luthair Paendrag Mondwin, son of the Hawkwing, first faced the Armies of the Night, he found many among them who called themselves Aes Sedai. They contended for power among themselves and used the One Power on the field of battle. One such, a woman named Deain, who thought she could do better serving the Emperor - he was not Emperor then, of course - since he had no Aes Sedai in his armies, came to him with a device she had made, the first a'dam, fastened to the neck of one of her sisters. Though that woman did not want to serve Luthair, the a'dam required her to serve. Deain made more a'dam, the first sul'dam were found, and women captured who called themselves Aes Sedai discovered that they were in fact only marath'damane, Those Who Must Be Leashed. It is said that when she herself was leashed, Deain's screams shook the Towers of Midnight, but of course she, too, was a marath'damane, and marath'damane cannot be allowed to run free. Perhaps you will be one of those who has the ability to make a'dam. If so, you will be pampered, you may rest assured."

ɛɡwin lʊk jɝnɪŋli ət ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd θɹu wɪtʃ ðeɪ ɹoʊd. ðə lænd wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ɹaɪz ɪn loʊ hɪlz, ən ðə θɪn fɔɹəs hæd dwɪndəl tə skæɾɝd θɪkəts, bʌt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi kəd luz hɝsɛlf ɪn ðɛm. "æm aɪ səpoʊz tə lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə biɪŋ pæmpɝd laɪk ə pɛt dɔɡ?" ʃi sɛd bɪɾɝli. "ə laɪftaɪm ə biɪŋ tʃeɪn tə mɛn ən wɪmən u θɪŋk aɪm səm kaɪndə ænəməl?"

Egwene looked yearningly at the countryside through which they rode. The land was beginning to rise in low hills, and the thin forest had dwindled to scattered thickets, but she was sure she could lose herself in them. "Am I supposed to look forward to being pampered like a pet dog?" she said bitterly. "A lifetime of being chained to men and women who think I am some kind of animal?"

"nɑt mɛn." ɹɛnə tʃʌkəld. "ɔl sʌldəm ɑɹ wɪmən. ɪf ə mæn pʊɾ ɑn ðɪs bɹeɪslət, moʊst ə ðə taɪm ɪt wəd bi noʊ dɪfɹən ðən ɪf ɪt wɝ hæŋɪŋ ɑn ə pɛɡ ɑn ðə wɔl."

"Not men." Renna chuckled. "All sul'dam are women. If a man put on this bracelet, most of the time it would be no different than if it were hanging on a peg on the wall."

"æn səmtaɪmz," ðə blu-aɪd sʌldəm pʊɾ ɪn hɑɹʃli, "ju ən i wəd boʊθ daɪ skɹimɪŋ." ðə wʊmən hæd ʃɑɹp fitʃɝz ən ə taɪt, θɪn-lɪp maʊθ, ən ɛɡwin ɹilaɪz ðəɾ æŋɡɝ wɑz əpɛɹənli hɝ pɝmənən ɪkspɹɛʃən. "fɹʌm taɪm tə taɪm ði ɛmpɹɛs pleɪz wɪð lɔɹdz baɪ lɪŋkɪŋ əm tə ə deɪmeɪn. ɪt meɪks ðə lɔɹdz swɛɾ ən ɛntɝteɪnz ðə kɔɹɾ ə ðə naɪn munz. ðə lɔɹd nɛvɝ noʊz əntɪl ɪts dʌn wɛðɝ hɪl lɪv əɹ daɪ, ən niðɝ dʌz ðə deɪmeɪn." hɝ læf wɑz vɪʃəs.

"And sometimes," the blue-eyed sul'dam put in harshly, "you and he would both die screaming." The woman had sharp features and a tight, thin-lipped mouth, and Egwene realized that anger was apparently her permanent expression. "From time to time the Empress plays with lords by linking them to a damane. It makes the lords sweat and entertains the Court of the Nine Moons. The lord never knows until it is done whether he will live or die, and neither does the damane." Her laugh was vicious.

"oʊnli ði ɛmpɹɛs kən əfɔɹd tə weɪs deɪmeɪn ɪn sətʃ ə weɪ, ælwɪn," ɹɛnə snæpt, "æn aɪ də nɑt min tə tʃɹeɪn ðɪs deɪmeɪn oʊnli tə hæv əɹ θɹoʊn əweɪ."

"Only the Empress can afford to waste damane in such a way, Alwhin," Renna snapped, "and I do not mean to train this damane only to have her thrown away."

"aɪ hæv nɑt sin ɛni tʃɹeɪnɪŋ əɾ ɔl soʊ fɑɹ, ɹɛnə. oʊnli ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə tʃæɾɝ, əz ɪf jə ən ðɪs deɪmeɪn wɝ ɡɝlhʊd fɹɛnz."

"I have not seen any training at all so far, Renna. Only a great deal of chatter, as if you and this damane were girlhood friends."

"pɝhæps ɪts taɪm tə si wʌt ʃi kən du," ɹɛnə sɛd, stʌɾiɪŋ ɛɡwin. "du juv ɪnʌf kəntʃɹoʊl jɛt tə tʃænəl ət ðət dɪstəns?" ʃi pɔɪntəd tə ə tɔl oʊk stændɪŋ əloʊn ɑn ə hɪltɑp.

"Perhaps it is time to see what she can do," Renna said, studying Egwene. "Do you have enough control yet to channel at that distance?" She pointed to a tall oak standing alone on a hilltop.

ɛɡwin fɹaʊn ət ðə tʃɹi, pɝhæps hæf ə maɪl fɹəm ðə laɪn fɑloʊd baɪ ðə soʊlʒɝz ən sjuɹɔθs pɑlɑnkwɪn. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ tʃɹaɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ mʌtʃ bɪɑn ɑɹmz ɹitʃ, bʌt ʃi θɔɾ ɪt maɪt bi pɑsəbəl. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ," ʃi sɛd.

Egwene frowned at the tree, perhaps half a mile from the line followed by the soldiers and Suroth's palanquin. She had never tried anything much beyond arm's reach, but she thought it might be possible. "I don't know," she said.

"tʃɹaɪ," ɹɛnə toʊl hɝ. "fil ðə tʃɹi. fil ðə sæp ɪn ðə tʃɹi. aɪ wɑn jə tə meɪk ɪɾ ɔl nɑɾ oʊnli hɑt, bʌt soʊ hɑt ðəɾ ɛvɹi dʒɹɑp ə sæp ɪn ɛvɹi bɹæntʃ flæʃɪz tə stim ɪn ən ɪnstənt. də ɪt."

"Try," Renna told her. "Feel the tree. Feel the sap in the tree. I want you to make it all not only hot, but so hot that every drop of sap in every branch flashes to steam in an instant. Do it."

ɛɡwin wɑz ʃɑk tə dɪskʌvɝ ən ɝdʒ tə də əz ɹɛnə kəmændəd. ʃi hæd nɑt tʃænəld, əɹ ivən tʌtʃt seɪaɪdɑɹ, ɪn tu deɪz; ðə dɪzaɪɝ tə fɪl hɝsɛlf wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ meɪɾ əɹ ʃɪvɝ. "aɪ" - ɪn hæf ə hɑɹtbit ʃi dɪskɑɹɾɪd "wɪl nɑt"; ðə wɛlz ðət wɝ nɑt ðəɹ stɪl bɝn tu ʃɑɹpli fəɹ əɹ tə bi kwaɪt ðət fulɪʃ - "kænɑt," ʃi fɪnɪʃt ɪnstɛd. "ɪɾ ɪz tu fɑɹ, ən aɪv nɛvɝ dʌn ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ðət bɪfɔɹ."

Egwene was shocked to discover an urge to do as Renna commanded. She had not channeled, or even touched saidar, in two days; the desire to fill herself with the One Power made her shiver. "I" - in half a heartbeat she discarded "will not"; the weals that were not there still burned too sharply for her to be quite that foolish - "cannot," she finished instead. "It is too far, and I've never done anything like that before."

wʌn ə ðə sʌldəm læft ɹɔkəsli, ən ælwɪn sɛd, "ʃi nɛvɝ ivən tʃɹaɪd."

One of the sul'dam laughed raucously, and Alwhin said, "She never even tried."

ɹɛnə ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɔlmoʊst sædli. "wɛn wʌn əz bɪn ə sʌldəm lɔŋ ɪnʌf," ʃi toʊld ɛɡwin, "wʌn lɝnz tə tɛl mɛni θɪŋz əbaʊt deɪmeɪn ivən wɪθaʊt ðə bɹeɪslət, bʌt wɪð ðə bɹeɪslət wʌn kən ɔlweɪz tɛl wɛðɝ ə deɪmeɪn əz tʃɹaɪd tə tʃænəl. jə mʌs nɛvɝ laɪ tə mi, əɹ tə ɛni sʌldəm, nɑɾ ivən baɪ ə hɛɹ."

Renna shook her head almost sadly. "When one has been a sul'dam long enough," she told Egwene, "one learns to tell many things about damane even without the bracelet, but with the bracelet one can always tell whether a damane has tried to channel. You must never lie to me, or to any sul'dam, not even by a hair."

sʌɾənli ði ɪnvɪzəbəl swɪtʃəz wɝ bæk, stʃɹaɪkɪŋ əɾ əɹ ɛvɹiwɛɹ. jɛlɪŋ, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə hɪt ɹɛnə, bʌt ðə sʌldəm kæʒəwəli nɑkt əɹ fɪst əweɪ, ən ɛɡwin fɛlt əz ɪf ɹɛnə hæd hɪɾ əɹ ɑɹm wɪð ə stɪk. ʃi dʌɡ hɝ hilz ɪndə bɛləz flæŋks, bʌt ðə sʌldəmz ɡɹɪp ɑn ðə liʃ nɪɹli pʊld əɹ aʊɾ ə hɝ sæɾəl. fɹæntəkəli ʃi ɹitʃt fəɹ seɪaɪdɑɹ, minɪŋ tə hɝt ɹɛnə ɪnʌf tə meɪk əɹ stɑp, dʒʌs ðə kaɪndə hɝt ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd bɪn ɡɪvən. ðə sʌldəm ʃʊk əɹ hɛd ɹaɪli; ɛɡwin haʊld əz əɹ oʊn skɪn wɑz sʌɾənli skɔldɪd. nɑɾ əntɪl ʃi flɛd fɹəm seɪaɪdɑɹ kəmplitli dɪd ðə bɝn bɪɡɪn tə feɪd, ən ði ənsin bloʊz nɛvɝ sist əɹ sloʊd. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə ʃaʊt ðət ʃi wəd tʃɹaɪ, ɪf oʊnli ɹɛnə wəd stɑp, bʌɾ ɔl ʃi kəd mænədʒ wɑz tə skɹim ən ɹɪð.

Suddenly the invisible switches were back, striking at her everywhere. Yelling, she tried to hit Renna, but the sul'dam casually knocked her fist away, and Egwene felt as if Renna had hit her arm with a stick. She dug her heels into Bela's flanks, but the sul'dam's grip on the leash nearly pulled her out of her saddle. Frantically she reached for saidar, meaning to hurt Renna enough to make her stop, just the kind of hurt she herself had been given. The sul'dam shook her head wryly; Egwene howled as her own skin was suddenly scalded. Not until she fled from saidar completely did the burn begin to fade, and the unseen blows never ceased or slowed. She tried to shout that she would try, if only Renna would stop, but all she could manage was to scream and writhe.

dɪmli, ʃi wɑz əwɛɹ ə mɪn ʃaʊɾɪŋ æŋɡɹəli ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹaɪd tə hɝ saɪd, ʌv ælwɪn tɛɹɪŋ mɪnz ɹeɪnz fɹəm əɹ hænz, ʌv ənʌðɝ sʌldəm spikɪŋ ʃɑɹpli tə hɝ deɪmeɪn, hu lʊkt ət mɪn. ən ðən mɪn wɑz jɛlɪŋ, tu, ɑɹmz flæpɪŋ əz ɪf tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə wɔɹɾ ɔf bloʊz əɹ biɾ əweɪ stɪŋɪŋ ɪnsɛks. ɪn əɹ oʊn peɪn, mɪnz sim dɪstənt.

Dimly, she was aware of Min shouting angrily and trying to ride to her side, of Alwhin tearing Min's reins from her hands, of another sul'dam speaking sharply to her damane, who looked at Min. And then Min was yelling, too, arms flapping as if trying to ward off blows or beat away stinging insects. In her own pain, Min's seemed distant.

ðɛɹ kɹaɪz təɡɛðɝ wɝ ɪnʌf tə meɪk səm ə ðə soʊlʒɝz twɪst ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz. æftɝ wʌn lʊk, ðeɪ læft ən tɝn bæk. haʊ sʌldəm dɛlt wɪð deɪmeɪn wɑz noʊ əfɛɹ ə ðɛɹz.

Their cries together were enough to make some of the soldiers twist in their saddles. After one look, they laughed and turned back. How sul'dam dealt with damane was no affair of theirs.

tə ɛɡwin ɪt sim tə ɡoʊ ɑn fɝɛvɝ, bʌɾ ət læs ðəɹ wɑz ən ɛnd. ʃi leɪ spɹɔld wikli əkɹɔs ðə kæntəl ə hɝ sæɾəl, tʃiks wɛt wɪð tɪɹz, sɑbɪŋ ɪndə bɛləz meɪn. ðə mɛɹ wɪkɝɾ ənizəli.

To Egwene it seemed to go on forever, but at last there was an end. She lay sprawled weakly across the cantle of her saddle, cheeks wet with tears, sobbing into Bela's mane. The mare whickered uneasily.

"ɪɾ ɪz ɡʊd ðət juv spɪɹət," ɹɛnə sɛd kɑmli. "ðə bɛs deɪmeɪn ɑɹ ðoʊz u hæv spɪɹət tə bi ʃeɪpt ən moʊldəd."

"It is good that you have spirit," Renna said calmly. "The best damane are those who have spirit to be shaped and molded."

ɛɡwin skwizd əɹ aɪz ʃʌt. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi kəd kloʊz əɹ ɪɹz, tu, tə ʃʌɾ aʊt ɹɛnəz vɔɪs. aɪ hæv tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ. aɪ hæv tə, bʌt haʊ? nɪneɪiv, hɛlp mi. laɪt, sʌmbɑɾi hɛlp mi.

Egwene squeezed her eyes shut. She wished she could close her ears, too, to shut out Renna's voice. I have to get away. I have to, but how? Nynaeve, help me. Light, somebody help me.

"ju wɪl bi wʌn ə ðə bɛst," ɹɛnə sɛɾ ɪn toʊnz ə sæɾəsfækʃən. hɝ hæn stʃɹoʊkt ɛɡwinz hɛɹ, ə mɪstʃɹəs suðɪŋ əɹ dɔɡ.

"You will be one of the best," Renna said in tones of satisfaction. Her hand stroked Egwene's hair, a mistress soothing her dog.

nɪneɪiv lin aʊɾ ə hɝ sæɾəl tə pɪɹ ɝaʊn ðə skɹin ə pɹɪkli lift ʃɹʌbz. skæɾɝd tʃɹiz mɛɾ əɹ aɪz, səm wɪð livz tɝnɪŋ kʌlɝ. ði ɪkspænsɪz ʌv ɡɹæs ən bɹʌʃ bɪtwin simd ɛmpti. nʌθɪŋ muv ðət ʃi kəd si ɪksɛp ðə θɪnɪŋ kɑləm ə smoʊk, weɪvɝɪŋ ɪn ə bɹiz, fɹəm ðə lɛðɝlif.

Nynaeve leaned out of her saddle to peer around the screen of prickly leafed shrubs. Scattered trees met her eyes, some with leaves turning color. The expanses of grass and brush between seemed empty. Nothing moved that she could see except the thinning column of smoke, wavering in a breeze, from the leatherleaf.

ðət hæd bɪn əɹ wɝk, ðə lɛðɝlif, ən wʌns ðə laɪtnɪŋ kɔl fɹəm ə klɪɹ skaɪ, ən ə fju ʌðɝ θɪŋz ʃi hæd nɑt θɔt tə tʃɹaɪ əntɪl ðoʊz tu wɪmən tʃɹaɪɾ əm ɑn hɝ. ʃi θɔt ðeɪ mʌst wɝk təɡɛðɝ ɪn səm weɪ, ðoʊ ʃi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðɛɹ ɹileɪʃən tə itʃ ʌðɝ, əpɛɹənli liʃt əz ðeɪ wɝ. wʌn wɔɹ ə kɑlɝ, bʌt ði ʌðɝ wɑz tʃeɪn əz ʃʊɹli əz ʃi. wʌt nɪneɪiv wɑz ʃʊɹ ʌv wɑz ðət wʌn əɹ boʊθ wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ hæɾ ə klɪɹ ɪnʌf saɪɾ ə ðɛm tə si ðə ɡloʊ ʌv tʃænəlɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt hæd tə bi.

That had been her work, the leatherleaf, and once the lightning called from a clear sky, and a few other things she had not thought to try until those two women tried them on her. She thought they must work together in some way, though she could not understand their relation to each other, apparently leashed as they were. One wore a collar, but the other was chained as surely as she. What Nynaeve was sure of was that one or both were Aes Sedai. She had never had a clear enough sight of them to see the glow of channeling, but it had to be.

əl sɝɾənli teɪk plɛʒɝ ɪn tɛlɪŋ ʃɛɹiəm əbaʊt ðɛm, ʃi θɔt dʒɹaɪli. ɛɛs sədaɪ doʊn juz ðə paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən, də ðeɪ?

I'll certainly take pleasure in telling Sheriam about them, she thought dryly. Aes Sedai don't use the Power as a weapon, do they?

ʃi sɝɾənli hæd. ʃi hæɾ ət lis nɑk ðə tu wɪmən daʊn wɪð ðət laɪtnɪŋ stʃɹaɪk, ən ʃi hæd sin wʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz, əɹ ɪz bɑɾi ɹæðɝ, bɝn fɹəm ðə bɔl ə faɪɝ ʃi meɪɾ ən hɝld ət ðɛm. bʌt ʃi hæd nɑt sin ɛni ʌv ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝz əɾ ɔl ɪn səm taɪm naʊ.

She certainly had. She had at least knocked the two women down with that lightning strike, and she had seen one of the soldiers, or his body rather, burn from the ball of fire she made and hurled at them. But she had not seen any of the strangers at all in some time now.

swɛt biɾɪd ɑn əɹ fɔɹhɛd, ən ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɔl fɹəm ɪɡzɝʃən. hɝ kɑntækt wɪð seɪaɪdɑɹ wɑz ɡɔn, ən ʃi kəd nɑt bɹɪŋ ɪt bæk. ɪn ðət fɝs fjʊɹi ʌv noʊɪŋ ðət liɑnʒɹɪn hæd bɪtʃɹeɪd ðɛm, seɪaɪdɑɹ hæd bɪn ðəɹ ɔlmoʊs bɪfɔɹ ʃi nu ɪt, ðə wʌn paʊɝ flʌɾɪŋ hɝ. ɪt hæd simd ʃi kəd də ɛniθɪŋ. ən əz lɔŋ əz ðeɪ hæd tʃeɪs hɝ, ɹeɪdʒ ət biɪŋ hʌntəd laɪk ən ænəməl hæd fjuəl hɝ. naʊ ðə tʃeɪs hæd vænɪʃt. ðə lɔŋɡɝ ʃi hæd ɡɔn wɪθaʊt siɪŋ ən ɛnəmi ət hum ʃi kəd stʃɹaɪk, ðə mɔɹ ʃi hæd bɪɡʌn tə wɝi ðət ðeɪ maɪt bi snikɪŋ ʌp ɑn əɹ sʌmhaʊ, ən ðə mɔɹ ʃi hæd hæd taɪm tə wɝi əbaʊt wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ tə ɛɡwin, ən ɪleɪn, ən mɪn. naʊ ʃi wɑz fɔɹs tə ədmɪt ðət wʌt ʃi fɛl moʊst wɑz fɪɹ. fɪɹ fəɹ ðɛm, fɪɹ fəɹ hɝsɛlf. ɪt wɑz æŋɡɝ ʃi niɾəd.

Sweat beaded on her forehead, and it was not all from exertion. Her contact with saidar was gone, and she could not bring it back. In that first fury of knowing that Liandrin had betrayed them, saidar had been there almost before she knew it, the One Power flooding her. It had seemed she could do anything. And as long as they had chased her, rage at being hunted like an animal had fueled her. Now the chase had vanished. The longer she had gone without seeing an enemy at whom she could strike, the more she had begun to worry that they might be sneaking up on her somehow, and the more she had had time to worry about what was happening to Egwene, and Elayne, and Min. Now she was forced to admit that what she felt most was fear. Fear for them, fear for herself. It was anger she needed.

sʌmθɪŋ stɝd bɪhaɪn ə tʃɹi.

Something stirred behind a tree.

hɝ bɹɛθ kɑt, ən ʃi fʌmbəl fəɹ seɪaɪdɑɹ, bʌɾ ɔl ði ɛksɝsaɪzəz ʃɛɹiəm ən ði ʌðɝz hæd tɔt hɝ, ɔl ðə blɑsəmz ənfoʊldɪŋ ɪn əɹ maɪnd, ɔl ði ɪmædʒən stʃɹimz ðət ʃi hɛld laɪk ɹɪvɝbɑŋks, dɪd noʊ ɡʊd. ʃi kəd fil ɪt, sɛns ðə sɔɹs, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt tʌtʃ ɪt.

Her breath caught, and she fumbled for saidar, but all the exercises Sheriam and the others had taught her, all the blossoms unfolding in her mind, all the imagined streams that she held like riverbanks, did no good. She could feel it, sense the Source, but she could not touch it.

ɪleɪn stɛp fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðə tʃɹi ɪn ə wɛɹi kɹaʊtʃ, ən nɪneɪiv sæɡd wɪð ɹɪlif. ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹz dʒɹɛs wɑz dɝɾi ən tɔɹn, hɝ ɡoʊldən hɛɹ wɑz ə tæŋɡəl ə snɑɹlz ən livz, ən əɹ sɝtʃɪŋ aɪz wɝ əz waɪɾ əz ðoʊz ʌv ə fɹaɪɾənd fɔn, bʌt ʃi hɛld əɹ ʃɔɹt-bleɪɾɪd dæɡɝ ɪn ə stɛɾi hænd. nɪneɪiv pɪkt ʌp əɹ ɹeɪnz ən ɹoʊɾ ɪndə ði oʊpən.

Elayne stepped from behind the tree in a wary crouch, and Nynaeve sagged with relief. The Daughter-Heir's dress was dirty and torn, her golden hair was a tangle of snarls and leaves, and her searching eyes were as wide as those of a frightened fawn, but she held her short-bladed dagger in a steady hand. Nynaeve picked up her reins and rode into the open.

ɪleɪn ɡeɪv ə kənvʌlsɪv dʒʌmp, ðən əɹ hænd wɛn tə hɝ θɹoʊɾ ən ʃi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. nɪneɪiv dɪsmaʊntɪd, ən ðə tu wɪmən hʌɡd, teɪkɪŋ kʌmfɝɾ ɪn hævɪŋ faʊn itʃ ʌðɝ.

Elayne gave a convulsive jump, then her hand went to her throat and she drew a deep breath. Nynaeve dismounted, and the two women hugged, taking comfort in having found each other.

"fɔɹ ə moʊmənt," ɪleɪn sɛɾ əz ðeɪ faɪnəli stɛpt əpɑɹt, "aɪ θɔt jə wɝ. . . . dʒju noʊ wɛɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ? ðəɹ wɝ tu mɛn fɑloʊɪŋ mi. ənʌðɝ fju mɪnəts ən ðeɪ wʊɾə kɑt mi, bʌɾ ə hɔɹn saʊndəɾ ən ðeɪ tɝn ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ən ɡæləpt ɔf. ðeɪ kəd si mi, nɪneɪiv, ən ðeɪ dʒʌs lɛft."

"For a moment," Elayne said as they finally stepped apart, "I thought you were. . . . Do you know where they are? There were two men following me. Another few minutes and they would have caught me, but a horn sounded and they turned their horses and galloped off. They could see me, Nynaeve, and they just left."

"aɪ hɝɾ ɪt, tu, ən aɪ hævən sin ɛni ʌv əm sɪns. hæv jə sin ɛɡwin, əɹ mɪn?"

"I heard it, too, and I haven't seen any of them since. Have you seen Egwene, or Min?"

ɪleɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, slʌmpɪŋ tə sɪɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. "nɑt sɪns. . . . ðət mæn hɪt mɪn, nɑkt əɹ daʊn. ən wʌn ə ðoʊz wɪmən wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊt sʌmθɪŋ ɝaʊn ɛɡwinz nɛk. aɪ sɔ ðət mʌtʃ bɪfɔɹ aɪ ɹæn. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðeɪ ɡɑɾ əweɪ, nɪneɪiv. aɪ ʃʊɾə dʌn sʌmθɪŋ. mɪn kʌt ðə hæn ðət wɑz hoʊldɪŋ mi, ən ɛɡwin. . . . aɪ dʒʌst ɹæn, nɪneɪiv. aɪ ɹilaɪzd aɪ wɑz fɹi, ən aɪ ɹæn. mʌðɝ hæd bɛɾɝ mɛɹi ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn ən əv ənʌðɝ dɔɾɝ əz sun əz ʃi kæn. aɪm nɑt fɪt tə teɪk ðə θɹoʊn."

Elayne shook her head, slumping to sit on the ground. "Not since. . . . That man hit Min, knocked her down. And one of those women was trying to put something around Egwene's neck. I saw that much before I ran. I don't think they got away, Nynaeve. I should have done something. Min cut the hand that was holding me, and Egwene. . . . I just ran, Nynaeve. I realized I was free, and I ran. Mother had better marry Gareth Bryne and have another daughter as soon as she can. I am not fit to take the throne."

"doʊn bi ə ɡus," nɪneɪiv sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ, aɪ hæv ə pækəɾ ə ʃipstɔŋ ɹuɾ əmʌŋ maɪ ɝbz." ɪleɪn hæɾ əɹ hɛɾ ɪn əɹ hænz; ðə ʒaɪb dɪd nɑɾ ivən pɹədus ə mɝmɝ. "lɪsən tə mi, ɡɝl. dɪd jə si mi steɪ tə faɪt twɛnti əɹ θɝɾi ɑɹmd mɛn, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ? ɪf jə hæd weɪɾəd, ðə moʊs laɪkli θɪŋ baɪ fɑɹ ɪz ðət jə wəd bi ə pɹɪznɝ, tu. ɪf ðeɪ dɪdn dʒʌs kɪl ju. ðeɪ sim tə bi ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ɛɡwin ən mi fəɹ səm ɹizən. ðeɪ maɪt nɑɾ əv kɛɹd wɛðɝ jə ɹɪmeɪn əlaɪv əɹ nɑt." waɪ ɑɹ ðeɪ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ɛɡwin ən mi? waɪ əs ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ? waɪ dɪd liɑnʒɹɪn də ðɪs? waɪ? ʃi hæd noʊ mɔɹ ænsɝz naʊ ðən ʃi hæd hæd ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi æsk hɝsɛlf ðiz kwɛstʃənz.

"Don't be a goose," Nynaeve said sharply. "Remember, I have a packet of sheepstongue root among my herbs." Elayne had her head in her hands; the gibe did not even produce a murmur. "Listen to me, girl. Did you see me stay to fight twenty or thirty armed men, not to mention the Aes Sedai? If you had waited, the most likely thing by far is that you would be a prisoner, too. If they didn't just kill you. They seemed to be interested in Egwene and me for some reason. They might not have cared whether you remained alive or not." Why are they interested in Egwene and me? Why us in particular? Why did Liandrin do this? Why? She had no more answers now than she had had the first time she asked herself these questions.

"ɪf aɪ hæd daɪd tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hɛlp əm - " ɪleɪn bɪɡæn.

"If I had died trying to help them - " Elayne began.

" - jud bi dɛd. ən lɪɾəl ɡʊd jud bi ðɛn, tə jɝsɛlf əɹ ðɛm. naʊ ɡɛɾ ɑn jəɹ fiɾ ən bɹʌʃ ɔf jəɹ dʒɹɛs." nɪneɪiv ɹʌmɪɡd ɪn əɹ sæɾəlbæɡz fəɹ ə hɛɹbɹʌʃ. "æn fɪks jəɹ hɛɹ."

" - you'd be dead. And little good you'd be then, to yourself or them. Now get on your feet and brush off your dress." Nynaeve rummaged in her saddlebags for a hairbrush. "And fix your hair."

ɪleɪn ɡɑɾ ʌp sloʊli, ən tʊk ðə bɹʌʃ wɪð ə smɔl læf. "ju saʊn laɪk lini, maɪ oʊl nɝs." ʃi bɪɡæn tə ɹʌn ðə bɹʌʃ θɹu hɝ hɛɹ, wɪnsɪŋ əz tæŋɡəlz pʊld. "bʌt haʊ ɑɹ wi gɑnə hɛlp ðɛm, nɪneɪiv? jə meɪ bi əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ə fʊl sɪstɝ wən jə ɑɹ æŋɡɹi, bʌt ðeɪv wɪmən u kən tʃænəl, tu. aɪ kænɑt θɪŋk ðəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ðeɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl bi. wi də nɑɾ ivən noʊ ɪn wɪtʃ dɝɛkʃən ðeɪ tʊk ðɛm."

Elayne got up slowly, and took the brush with a small laugh. "You sound like Lini, my old nurse." She began to run the brush through her hair, wincing as tangles pulled. "But how are we going to help them, Nynaeve? You may be as strong as a full sister when you are angry, but they have women who can channel, too. I cannot think they're Aes Sedai, but they might as well be. We do not even know in which direction they took them."

"wɛst," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ðæt kɹitʃɝ sjuɹɔθ mɛnʃən fɑlm, ən ðæts əz fɑɹ wɛst ɑn toʊmən hɛɾ əz jə kən ɡoʊ. wɪl ɡoʊ tə fɑlm. aɪ hoʊp liɑnʒɹɪn ɪz ðɛɹ. əl meɪk əɹ kɝs ðə deɪ hɝ mʌðɝ leɪɾ aɪz ɑn əɹ fɑðɝ. bʌt fɝst aɪ θɪŋk wi hæd bɛɾɝ faɪn səm kloʊðz ə ðə kʌntʃɹi. aɪv sin tæɹɑbənɝ ən dəmɑni wɪmən ɪn ðə taʊɝ, ən wʌt ðeɪ wɛɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ laɪk wʌt wɪv ɑn. wi wəd stæn aʊɾ ɪn fɑlm əz stʃɹeɪnʒɝz."

"West," Nynaeve said. "That creature Suroth mentioned Falme, and that's as far west on Toman Head as you can go. We will go to Falme. I hope Liandrin is there. I will make her curse the day her mother laid eyes on her father. But first I think we had better find some clothes of the country. I've seen Taraboner and Domani women in the Tower, and what they wear is nothing like what we have on. We would stand out in Falme as strangers."

"aɪ wəd nɑt maɪn ə dəmɑni dʒɹɛs - ðoʊ mʌðɝ wəd ʃʊɹli hæv ə fɪɾ ɪf ʃi ɛvɝ faʊn aʊɾ aɪd wɔɹn wʌn, ən lini wəd nɛvɝ lemi hɪɹ ði ɛn ʌv ɪt - bʌɾ ivən ɪf wi faɪn ə vɪlədʒ, kən wi əfɔɹd nu dʒɹɛsəz? aɪ hæv noʊ aɪdiə haʊ mʌtʃ mʌni jə hæv, bʌɾ aɪ hæv oʊnli tɛn ɡoʊl mɑɹks ən pɝhæps twaɪs ðəɾ ɪn sɪlvɝ. ðət wɪl kip əs tu əɹ θɹi wiks, bʌɾ aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt wɪl də æftɝ ðæt."

"I would not mind a Domani dress - though Mother would surely have a fit if she ever found out I'd worn one, and Lini would never let me hear the end of it - but even if we find a village, can we afford new dresses? I have no idea how much money you have, but I have only ten gold marks and perhaps twice that in silver. That will keep us two or three weeks, but I don't know what we will do after that."

"ə fju mʌnθs əz ə nɑvəs ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn," nɪneɪiv sɛd, læfɪŋ, "hæz nɑt stɑp jə θɪŋkɪŋ laɪk ði ɛɹ tə ə θɹoʊn. aɪ doʊn əv ə tɛnθ wʌt jə du, bʌɾ ɔltəɡɛðɝ ɪɾəl kip əs tu əɹ θɹi mʌnθs, ɪn kʌmfɝt. lɔŋɡɝ, ɪf wəɹ kɛɹfəl. aɪ hæv noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə baɪɪŋ əs dʒɹɛsəz, ən ðeɪ woʊn bi nu ɪn ɛni keɪs. maɪ ɡɹeɪ sɪlk dʒɹɛs wɪl də əs səm ɡʊd, wɪð ɔl ðoʊz pɝlz ən ðət ɡoʊl θɹɛd. ɪf aɪ kæn faɪn ə wʊmən u wɪl tʃɹeɪɾ əs itʃ tu əɹ θɹi stɝɾi tʃeɪnʒəz fəɹ ðæt, əl ɡɪv jə ðɪs ɹɪŋ, ən əl bi ðə nɑvəs." ʃi swʌŋ ʌp ɪndə hɝ sæɾəl ən ɹitʃt ə hæn daʊn tə pʊl ɪleɪn ʌp bɪhaɪn hɝ.

"A few months as a novice in Tar Valon," Nynaeve said, laughing, "has not stopped you thinking like the heir to a throne. I don't have a tenth what you do, but altogether it will keep us two or three months, in comfort. Longer, if we are careful. I have no intention of buying us dresses, and they won't be new in any case. My gray silk dress will do us some good, with all those pearls and that gold thread. If I can't find a woman who will trade us each two or three sturdy changes for that, I will give you this ring, and I will be the novice." She swung up into her saddle and reached a hand down to pull Elayne up behind her.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ wi gɑnə də wən wi ɹitʃ fɑlm?" ɪleɪn æskt əz ʃi sɛɾəld ɑn ðə mɛɹz ɹʌmp.

"What are we going to do when we reach Falme?" Elayne asked as she settled on the mare's rump.

"aɪ woʊnt noʊ ðəɾ əntɪl wəɹ ðɛɹ." nɪneɪiv pɔzd, lɛɾɪŋ ðə hɔɹs stænd. "ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ jə wɑnə də ðɪs? ɪɾəl bi deɪnʒɝəs."

"I won't know that until we are there." Nynaeve paused, letting the horse stand. "Are you sure you want to do this? It will be dangerous."

"mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ðən ɪts fəɹ ɛɡwin ən mɪn? ðeɪ wəd kʌm æftɝ əs ɪf əɹ sɝkəmstænsəz wɝ ɹɪvɝst; aɪ noʊ ðeɪ wʊd. ɑɹ wi gɑnə steɪ hɪɹ ɔl deɪ?" ɪleɪn dʌɡ hɝ hilz ɪn, ən ðə mɛɹ stɑɹɾəd ɔf.

"More dangerous than it is for Egwene and Min? They would come after us if our circumstances were reversed; I know they would. Are we going to stay here all day?" Elayne dug her heels in, and the mare started off.

nɪneɪiv tɝn ðə hɔɹs əntɪl ðə sʌn, stɪl ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ɪts nundeɪ kɹɛst, ʃoʊn ət ðɛɹ bæks. "wi ɑɹ gɑnə hæv tə bi kɔʃəs. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wi noʊ kən ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ə wʊmən u kən tʃænəl dʒʌs baɪ biɪŋ wɪðɪn ɑɹmz lɛŋθ ə hɝ. ðiz ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪ bi eɪbəl tə pɪk əs aʊɾ ʌv ə kɹaʊɾ ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ʌs, ən wi hæd bɛɾɝ əsum ðeɪ ɑɹ." ðeɪ wɝ sɝɾənli lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ɛɡwin ən mi. bʌt waɪ?

Nynaeve turned the horse until the sun, still short of its noonday crest, shone at their backs. "We are going to have to be cautious. The Aes Sedai we know can recognize a woman who can channel just by being within arm's length of her. These Aes Sedai may be able to pick us out of a crowd if they are looking for us, and we had better assume they are." They were certainly looking for Egwene and me. But why?

"jɛs, kɔʃəs. jə wɝ ɹaɪt bɪfɔɹ, tu. wɪl nɑt də ðɛm ɛni ɡʊd lɛɾɪŋ aʊɝsɛlvz bi kɑɾ əz wɛl." ɪleɪn wɑz saɪlən fəɹ ə moʊmənt. "du jə θɪŋk ɪt wɑz ɔl laɪz, nɪneɪiv? wʌt liɑnʒɹɪn toʊld əs əbaʊt ɹænd biɪŋ ɪn deɪnʒɝ? ən ði ʌðɝz? ɛɛs sədaɪ də nɑt laɪ."

"Yes, cautious. You were right before, too. We will not do them any good letting ourselves be caught as well." Elayne was silent for a moment. "Do you think it was all lies, Nynaeve? What Liandrin told us about Rand being in danger? And the others? Aes Sedai do not lie."

ɪt wɑz nɪneɪivz tɝn tə bi saɪlənt, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ʃɛɹiəm tɛlɪŋ əɹ ə ði oʊðz ə wʊmən tʊk ɑn biɪŋ ɹeɪz tə fʊl sɪstɝhʊd, oʊðz spoʊkən hoʊldɪŋ ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðət baʊn əɹ tə kip ðɛm. tə spik noʊ wɝd ðəɾ ɪz nɑt tʃɹu. ðət wɑz wʌn, bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn nu ðət ðə tʃɹuθ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd maɪt nɑt bi ðə tʃɹuθ jə θɔt jə hɝd. "aɪ ɪkspɛkt ɹænd ɪz wɔɹmɪŋ ɪz fiɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝz faɪɝ ɪn fæl dæɹə ðɪs mɪnət," ʃi sɛd. aɪ kænt wɝi əbaʊt hɪm, naʊ. aɪ hæv tə θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɛɡwin ən mɪn.

It was Nynaeve's turn to be silent, remembering Sheriam telling her of the oaths a woman took on being raised to full sisterhood, oaths spoken holding a ter'angreal that bound her to keep them. To speak no word that is not true. That was one, but everyone knew that the truth an Aes Sedai said might not be the truth you thought you heard. "I expect Rand is warming his feet in front of Lord Agelmar's fire in Fal Dara this minute," she said. I can't worry about him, now. I have to think about Egwene and Min.

"aɪ səpoʊz i ɪz," ɪleɪn sɛd wɪð ə saɪ. ʃi ʃɪftəd bɪhaɪn ðə sæɾəl. "ɪf ɪts vɛɹi fɑɹ tə fɑlm, nɪneɪiv, aɪ ɪkspɛk tə ɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə sæɾəl hæf ðə taɪm. ðɪs ɪz nɑɾ ə vɛɹi kʌmftəɹbəl sit. wɪl nɛvɝ ɹitʃ fɑlm əɾ ɔl ɪf jə lɛt ðɪs hɔɹs sɛɾ əɹ oʊn peɪs ðə hoʊl weɪ."

"I suppose he is," Elayne said with a sigh. She shifted behind the saddle. "If it is very far to Falme, Nynaeve, I expect to ride in the saddle half the time. This is not a very comfortable seat. We will never reach Falme at all if you let this horse set her own pace the whole way."

nɪneɪiv buɾɪd ðə mɛɹ tə ə kwɪk tʃɹɑt, ən ɪleɪn jɛlpt ən kɑɾ əɾ əɹ kloʊk. nɪneɪiv toʊl hɝsɛlf ðət ʃi wəd teɪk ə tɝn ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn ən nɑt kəmpleɪn ɪf ɪleɪn pʊt ðə hɔɹs tə ə ɡæləp, bʌt fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt ʃi ɪɡnɔɹd ðə ɡæsps ə ðə wʊmən baʊnsɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ. ʃi wɑz tu bɪzi hoʊpɪŋ ðət baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ ɹitʃt fɑlm, ʃi kəd stɑp biɪŋ əfɹeɪɾ ən stɑɹt biɪŋ æŋɡɹi.

Nynaeve booted the mare to a quick trot, and Elayne yelped and caught at her cloak. Nynaeve told herself that she would take a turn riding behind and not complain if Elayne put the horse to a gallop, but for the most part she ignored the gasps of the woman bouncing behind her. She was too busy hoping that by the time they reached Falme, she could stop being afraid and start being angry.

ðə bɹiz fɹɛʃənd, kul ən bɹɪsk wɪð ə hɪn ə koʊl jɛt tə kʌm.

The breeze freshened, cool and brisk with a hint of cold yet to come.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾiwʌn


CHAPTER 41

dɪsəɡɹiməns


Disagreements

θʌndɝ ɹʌmbəld əkɹɔs ðə sleɪt-dɑɹk æftɝnun skaɪ. ɹænd pʊl ðə hʊɾ ə hɪz kloʊk fɝðɝ ʌp, hoʊpɪŋ tə kip ət list səm ə ðə koʊld ɹeɪn ɔf. ɹɛd stɛp θɹu mʌɾi pʌɾəlz dɔɡədli. ðə hʊd hʌŋ sɑɾən ɝaʊn ɹændz hɛd, əz ðə ɹɛst ə ðə kloʊk dɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, ən ɪz faɪn blæk koʊt wɑz dʒʌst əz wɛt, ən əz koʊld. ðə tɛmpɹətʃɝ wəd nɑɾ əv fɑɹ tə dʒɹɑp bɪfɔɹ snoʊ əɹ slit keɪm daʊn ɪnstɛɾ ə ɹeɪn. snoʊ wəd fɔl sun, əɡɛn; ðə pipəl ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ ðeɪ hæd pæs θɹu sɛd tu snoʊz hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi kʌm ðɪs jɪɹ. ʃɪvɝɪŋ, ɹænd ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt ɪt wɑz snoʊɪŋ. ðɛn, ət list, hi wəd nɑt bi soʊk tə ðə skɪn.

Thunder rumbled across the slate-dark afternoon sky. Rand pulled the hood of his cloak further up, hoping to keep at least some of the cold rain off. Red stepped through muddy puddles doggedly. The hood hung sodden around Rand's head, as the rest of the cloak did around his shoulders, and his fine black coat was just as wet, and as cold. The temperature would not have far to drop before snow or sleet came down instead of rain. Snow would fall soon, again; the people in the village they had passed through said two snows had already come this year. Shivering, Rand almost wished it was snowing. Then, at least, he would not be soaked to the skin.

ðə kɑləm plɑɾəd əlɔŋ, kipɪŋ ə wɛɹi aɪ ɑn ðə ɹoʊlɪŋ kʌntʃɹi. ɪŋtʃɹz ɡɹeɪ aʊl hʌŋ hɛvəli ivən wən ðə wɪnd ɡʌstɪd. hʊɹɪn səmtaɪmz pʊld ɪz kaʊl bæk tə snɪf ði ɛɹ; hi sɛd niðɝ ɹeɪn nɔɹ koʊl hæɾ ɛni ɪfɛkt ɑn ə tʃɹeɪl, sɝɾənli nɑɾ ɑn ðə kaɪndə tʃɹeɪl i wɑz sikɪŋ, bʌt soʊ fɑɹ ðə snɪfɝ hæd faʊnd nʌθɪŋ. bɪhaɪn hɪm, ɹænd hɝɾ ənoʊ mʌɾɝ ə kɝs. lɔɪəl kɛp tʃɛkɪŋ ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz; hi dɪd nɑt sim tə maɪnd ɡɛɾɪŋ wɛt hɪmsɛlf, bʌɾ i wɝid kəntɪnjuəli əbaʊɾ ɪz bʊks. ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz mɪzɝəbəl ɪksɛp fəɹ vɛɹɪn, hu əpɪɹd tu lɔst ɪn θɔt tə ivən noʊɾəs ðəɾ əɹ hʊd hæd slɪd bæk, ɪkspoʊzɪŋ əɹ feɪs tə ðə ɹeɪn.

The column plodded along, keeping a wary eye on the rolling country. Ingtar's Gray Owl hung heavily even when the wind gusted. Hurin sometimes pulled his cowl back to sniff the air; he said neither rain nor cold had any effect on a trail, certainly not on the kind of trail he was seeking, but so far the sniffer had found nothing. Behind him, Rand heard Uno mutter a curse. Loial kept checking his saddlebags; he did not seem to mind getting wet himself, but he worried continually about his books. Everyone was miserable except for Verin, who appeared too lost in thought to even notice that her hood had slid back, exposing her face to the rain.

"kæn jə də sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðɪs?" ɹænd dɪmændəɾ ə hɝ. ə smɔl vɔɪs ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd toʊld ɪm i kəd də ɪt hɪmsɛlf. ɔl i nid də wɑz ɛmbɹeɪs seɪɾɪn. soʊ swit, ðə kɔl ə seɪɾɪn. tə bi fɪld wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, tə bi wʌn wɪð ðə stɔɹm. tɝn ðə skaɪz tə sʌnlaɪt, əɹ ɹaɪd ðə stɔɹm əz ɪt ɹeɪdʒd, wɪp ɪt tə fjʊɹi ən skaʊɝ toʊmən hɛd klin fɹəm ðə si tə ðə pleɪn. ɛmbɹeɪs seɪɾɪn. hi səpɹɛs ðə lɔŋɪŋ ɹuθləsli.

"Can't you do something about this?" Rand demanded of her. A small voice in the back of his head told him he could do it himself. All he need do was embrace saidin. So sweet, the call of saidin. To be filled with the One Power, to be one with the storm. Turn the skies to sunlight, or ride the storm as it raged, whip it to fury and scour Toman Head clean from the sea to the plain. Embrace saidin. He suppressed the longing ruthlessly.

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. "wʌt? oʊ. aɪ səpoʊz. ə lɪɾəl. aɪ kʊdn stɑp ə stɔɹm ðɪs bɪɡ, nɑt baɪ maɪsɛlf - ɪt kʌvɝz tu mʌtʃ ɛɹiə - bʌɾ aɪ kəd lɛsən ɪt sʌm. wɛɹ wi ɑɹ, ət list." ʃi waɪpt ɹeɪn fɹəm əɹ feɪs, sim tə ɹilaɪz fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ðəɾ əɹ hʊd hæd slɪpt, ən pʊld ɪt bæk ʌp æbsənli.

The Aes Sedai gave a start. "What? Oh. I suppose. A little. I couldn't stop a storm this big, not by myself - it covers too much area - but I could lessen it some. Where we are, at least." She wiped rain from her face, seemed to realize for the first time that her hood had slipped, and pulled it back up absently.

"ðɛn waɪ doʊn ju?" mæt sɛd. ðə ʃɪvɝɪŋ feɪs piɹɪŋ aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪz hʊd lʊkt ət dɛθs dɔɹ, bʌɾ ɪz vɔɪs wɑz vɪɡɝəs.

"Then why don't you?" Mat said. The shivering face peering out from under his hood looked at death's door, but his voice was vigorous.

"bɪkɔz ɪf aɪ juz ðət mʌtʃ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ kloʊsɝ ðən tɛn maɪlz wəd noʊ sʌmwʌn hæd tʃænəld. wi doʊnt wɑnə bɹɪŋ ðiz sintʃæn daʊn ɑn əs wɪð səm ə ðɛɹ deɪmeɪn." hɝ maʊθ taɪɾənd æŋɡɹəli.

"Because if I used that much of the One Power, any Aes Sedai closer than ten miles would know someone had channeled. We don't want to bring these Seanchan down on us with some of their damane." Her mouth tightened angrily.

ðeɪ hæd lɝn ə lɪɾəl ə ði ɪnveɪɾɝz ɪn ðət vɪlədʒ, kɔld əɾəənz mɪl, ðoʊ moʊst ʌv wʌt ðeɪ hæd hɝd hætʃt mɔɹ kwɛstʃənz ðən ɪɾ ænsɝd. ðə pipəl hæd bæbəld wʌn moʊmən ən klæmp ðɛɹ maʊðz ʃʌt ðə nɛkst, tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ ən lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ðeɪ ɔl ʃʊk wɪð fɪɹ ðət ðə sintʃæn wəd ɹɪtɝn wɪð ðɛɹ mɑnstɝz ən ðɛɹ deɪmeɪn. ðət wɪmən u ʃʊɾə bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ɪnstɛd liʃt laɪk ænəməlz fɹaɪɾənd ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz ivən mɔɹ ðən ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ kɹitʃɝz ðə sintʃæn kəmændəd, θɪŋz ðə foʊk ʌv əɾəənz mɪl kəɾ oʊnli dɪskɹaɪb ɪn wɪspɝz əz kʌmɪŋ fɹəm naɪtmɛɹz. ən wɝst ʌv ɔl, ði ɪɡzæmpəlz ðə sintʃæn hæd meɪd bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ stɪl tʃɪl ðə pipəl tə ðɛɹ mɛɹoʊ. ðeɪ hæd bɛɹid ðɛɹ dɛd, bʌt ðeɪ fɪɹd tə klin əweɪ ðə lɑɹdʒ tʃɑɹd pætʃ ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ skwɛɹ. nʌn ə ðɛm wəd seɪ wʌt hæd hæpən ðɛɹ, bʌt hʊɹɪn hæd vɑməɾəd əz sun əz ðeɪ ɛntɝd ðə vɪlədʒ, ən i wəd nɑt ɡoʊ nɪɹ ðə blækənd ɡɹaʊnd.

They had learned a little of the invaders in that village, called Atuan's Mill, though most of what they had heard hatched more questions than it answered. The people had babbled one moment and clamped their mouths shut the next, trembling and looking over their shoulders. They all shook with fear that the Seanchan would return with their monsters and their damane. That women who should have been Aes Sedai were instead leashed like animals frightened the villagers even more than the strange creatures the Seanchan commanded, things the folk of Atuan's Mill could only describe in whispers as coming from nightmares. And worst of all, the examples the Seanchan had made before leaving still chilled the people to their marrow. They had buried their dead, but they feared to clean away the large charred patch in the village square. None of them would say what had happened there, but Hurin had vomited as soon as they entered the village, and he would not go near the blackened ground.

əɾəənz mɪl hæd bɪn hæf dɪzɝɾɪd. səm hæd flɛd tə fɑlm, θɪŋkɪŋ ðə sintʃæn wəd nɑt bi soʊ hɑɹʃ ɪn ə taʊn ðeɪ hɛl fæst, ən ʌðɝz hæd ɡɔn ist. mɔɹ hæd sɛd ðeɪ wɝ θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɪt. ðəɹ wɑz faɪɾɪŋ ɑn ɑlməθ pleɪn, tæɹɑbənɝz bæɾəlɪŋ dəmɑni ɪt wɑz sɛd, bʌt sətʃ haʊsəz ən bɑɹnz əz wɝ bɝn ðəɹ wɝ kɪndəl baɪ tɔɹtʃɪz ɪn ðə hænz ə mɛn. ivən ə wɔɹ wɑz iziɝ tə feɪs ðən wʌt ðə sintʃæn hæd dʌn, wʌt ðeɪ maɪt du.

Atuan's Mill had been half deserted. Some had fled to Falme, thinking the Seanchan would not be so harsh in a town they held fast, and others had gone east. More had said they were thinking of it. There was fighting on Almoth Plain, Taraboners battling Domani it was said, but such houses and barns as were burned there were kindled by torches in the hands of men. Even a war was easier to face than what the Seanchan had done, what they might do.

"waɪ dɪd feɪn bɹɪŋ ðə hɔɹn hɪɹ?" pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd. ðə kwɛstʃən hæd bɪn æsk baɪ itʃ ə ðɛm ət wʌn taɪm əɹ ənʌðɝ, ən noʊ wʌn hæɾ ən ænsɝ. "ðɛɹz wɔɹ, ən ðiz sintʃæn, ən ðɛɹ mɑnstɝz. waɪ hɪɹ?"

"Why did Fain bring the Horn here?" Perrin muttered. The question had been asked by each of them at one time or another, and no one had an answer. "There's war, and these Seanchan, and their monsters. Why here?"

ɪŋtʃɹ tɝn ɪn ɪz sæɾəl tə lʊk bæk ət ðɛm. hɪz feɪs əpɪɹɾ ɔlmoʊst əz hæɡɝɾ əz mæts. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ɔlweɪz mɛn u si tʃænsəz fəɹ ðɛɹ oʊn ædvæntɪdʒ ɪn ðə kənfjuʒən ʌv wɔɹ. feɪn ɪz wʌn laɪk ðæt. noʊ daʊɾ i θɪŋks tə stil ðə hɔɹn əɡɛn, fɹəm ðə dɑɹk wʌn ðɪs taɪm, ən juz ɪt fəɹ ɪz oʊn pɹɑfət."

Ingtar turned in his saddle to look back at them. His face appeared almost as haggard as Mat's. "There are always men who see chances for their own advantage in the confusion of war. Fain is one like that. No doubt he thinks to steal the Horn again, from the Dark One this time, and use it for his own profit."

"ðə fɑðɝ ə laɪz nɛvɝ leɪz sɪmpəl plænz," vɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɪt meɪ bi ðəɾ i wɑns feɪn tə bɹɪŋ ðə hɔɹn hɪɹ fəɹ səm ɹizən noʊn oʊnli ɪn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl."

"The Father of Lies never lays simple plans," Verin said. "It may be that he wants Fain to bring the Horn here for some reason known only in Shayol Ghul."

"mɑnstɝz," mæt snɔɹɾɪd. hɪz tʃiks wɝ sʌŋkən, naʊ, hɪz aɪz hɑloʊ. ðəɾ i saʊndəd hɛlθi oʊnli meɪɾ ɪt wɝs. "ðeɪ sɔ səm tʃɹɑləks, əɹ ə feɪd, ɪf jə æsk mi. wɛl, waɪ nɑt? ɪf ðə sintʃæn əv ɛɛs sədaɪ faɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðɛm, waɪ nɑt feɪdz ən tʃɹɑləks?" hi kɑt vɛɹɪn stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm ən flɪntʃt. "wɛl, ðeɪ ɑɹ, ɑn liʃɪz əɹ nɑt. ðeɪ kən tʃænəl, ən ðət meɪks əm ɛɛs sədaɪ." hi ɡlænst ət ɹænd ən ɡeɪv ə ɹæɡəd læf. "ðæt meɪks jə ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðə laɪt hɛlp əs ɔl."

"Monsters," Mat snorted. His cheeks were sunken, now, his eyes hollow. That he sounded healthy only made it worse. "They saw some Trollocs, or a Fade, if you ask me. Well, why not? If the Seanchan have Aes Sedai fighting for them, why not Fades and Trollocs?" He caught Verin staring at him and flinched. "Well, they are, on leashes or not. They can channel, and that makes them Aes Sedai." He glanced at Rand and gave a ragged laugh. "That makes you Aes Sedai, the Light help us all."

mæsimə keɪm ɡæləpɪŋ fɹəm əhɛd, θɹu ðə mʌɾ ən ðə stɛɾi ɹeɪn. "ðɛɹ ɪz ənʌðɝ vɪlədʒ əhɛd, maɪ lɔɹd," hi sɛɾ əz i pʊld ɪn bɪsaɪɾ ɪŋtʃɹ. hɪz aɪz oʊnli swɛpt pæst ɹænd, bʌt ðeɪ taɪɾənd, ən i dɪd nɑt lʊk ət ɹænd əɡɛn. "ɪts ɛmpti, maɪ lɔɹd. noʊ vɪlɪdʒɝz, noʊ sintʃæn, noʊbɑdi əɾ ɔl. ðə haʊsəz ɔl lʊk saʊnd, ðoʊ, ɪksɛp fəɹ tu əɹ θɹi ðət . . . wɛl, ðeɪ ɑɹən ðəɹ ɛnimɔɹ, maɪ lɔɹd."

Masema came galloping from ahead, through the mud and the steady rain. "There is another village ahead, my Lord," he said as he pulled in beside Ingtar. His eyes only swept past Rand, but they tightened, and he did not look at Rand again. "It's empty, my Lord. No villagers, no Seanchan, nobody at all. The houses all look sound, though, except for two or three that . . . well, they aren't there anymore, my Lord."

ɪŋtʃɹ ɹeɪzd ɪz hæn ən sɪɡnəl fəɹ ə tʃɹɑt.

Ingtar raised his hand and signaled for a trot.

ðə vɪlədʒ mæsimə hæd faʊn kʌvɝd ðə sloʊps ʌv ə hɪl, wɪð ə peɪv skwɛɹ ət ðə tɑp ɝaʊn ə sɝkəl ə stoʊn wɔlz. ðə haʊsəz wɝ ə stoʊn, ɔl flæt-ɹuft ən fju mɔɹ ðən ə sɪŋɡəl stɔɹi. θɹi ðət hæd bɪn lɑɹdʒɝ, əlɔŋ wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə skwɛɹ, wɝ oʊnli hips ə blækən ɹʌbəl; ʃæɾɝd tʃʌŋks ə stoʊn ən ɹuf bimz leɪ skæɾɝd əkɹɔs ðə skwɛɹ. ə fju ʃʌɾɝz bæŋd wən ðə wɪnd ɡʌstɪd.

The village Masema had found covered the slopes of a hill, with a paved square at the top around a circle of stone walls. The houses were of stone, all flat-roofed and few more than a single story. Three that had been larger, along one side of the square, were only heaps of blackened rubble; shattered chunks of stone and roof beams lay scattered across the square. A few shutters banged when the wind gusted.

ɪŋtʃɹ dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ði oʊnli lɑɹdʒ bɪldɪŋ stɪl stændɪŋ. ðə kɹikɪŋ saɪn əbʌv ɪts dɔɹ bɔɹ ə wʊmən dʒʌɡəlɪŋ stɑɹz, bʌt noʊ neɪm; ɹeɪn keɪm ɔf ðə kɔɹnɝz ɪn tu stɛɾi dʒɹɪzəlz. vɛɹɪn hɝiɾ ɪnsaɪd waɪl ɪŋtʃɹ spoʊk. "ənoʊ, sɝtʃ ɛvɹi haʊs. ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ɛniwʌn lɛft, pɝhæps ðeɪ kən tɛl əs wʌt hæpən hɪɹ, ən meɪbi ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ əbaʊt ðiz sintʃæn. ən ɪf ðɛɹz ɛni fud, bɹɪŋ ðæt, tu. ən blæŋkəts." ənoʊ nɑɾəd ən bɪɡæn tɛlɪŋ ɔf mɛn. ɪŋtʃɹ tɝn tə hʊɹɪn. "wʌt dʒju smɛl? dɪd feɪn kʌm θɹu hɪɹ?"

Ingtar dismounted in front of the only large building still standing. The creaking sign above its door bore a woman juggling stars, but no name; rain came off the corners in two steady drizzles. Verin hurried inside while Ingtar spoke. "Uno, search every house. If there is anyone left, perhaps they can tell us what happened here, and maybe a little more about these Seanchan. And if there's any food, bring that, too. And blankets." Uno nodded and began telling off men. Ingtar turned to Hurin. "What do you smell? Did Fain come through here?"

hʊɹɪn, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz noʊz, ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "nɑt hɪm, maɪ lɔɹd, ən nɑt ðə tʃɹɑləks, niðɝ. huɛvɝ dɪd ðət lɛft ə stɛntʃ, ðoʊ." hi pɔɪntəd tə ðə ɹɛkədʒ ðət hæd bɪn haʊzɪz. "ɪt wɑz kɪlɪŋ, maɪ lɔɹd. ðəɹ wɝ pipəl ɪn ðɛɹ."

Hurin, rubbing his nose, shook his head. "Not him, my Lord, and not the Trollocs, neither. Whoever did that left a stench, though." He pointed to the wreckage that had been houses. "It was killing, my Lord. There were people in there."

"sintʃæn," ɪŋtʃɹ ɡɹaʊld. "lɛts ɡɛɾ ɪnsaɪd. ɹeɪɡən, faɪn səm sɔɹɾ ə steɪbəl fəɹ ðə hɔɹsəz."

"Seanchan," Ingtar growled. "Let's get inside. Ragan, find some sort of stable for the horses."

vɛɹɪn ɔlɹɛɾi hæd faɪɝz ɡoʊɪŋ ɪn boʊθ ə ðə bɪɡ faɪɝpleɪsəz, əɾ iðɝ ɛn ə ðə kɑmən ɹum, ən wɑz wɔɹmɪŋ əɹ hænz ət wʌn, hɝ sɑɾən kloʊk spɹɛɾ aʊɾ ɑn wʌn ə ðə teɪbəlz dɑɾɪŋ ðə taɪl flɔɹ. ʃi hæd faʊn ə fju kændəlz, tu, naʊ bɝnɪŋ ɑn ə teɪbəl stʌk ɪn ðɛɹ oʊn tæloʊ. ɛmptinəs ən kwaɪət, ɪksɛp fəɹ ði əkeɪʒənəl ɡɹʌmbəl ə θʌndɝ, æɾəd tə ðə flɪkɝɪŋ ʃædoʊz tə ɡɪv ðə pleɪs ə kævɝnəs fil. ɹænd tɔst ɪz ikwəli wɛt kloʊk ən koʊɾ ɑn ə teɪbəl ən dʒɔɪn hɝ. oʊnli lɔɪəl simd mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn tʃɛkɪŋ ɪz bʊks ðən ɪn wɔɹmɪŋ hɪmsɛlf.

Verin already had fires going in both of the big fireplaces, at either end of the common room, and was warming her hands at one, her sodden cloak spread out on one of the tables dotting the tiled floor. She had found a few candles, too, now burning on a table stuck in their own tallow. Emptiness and quiet, except for the occasional grumble of thunder, added to the flickering shadows to give the place a cavernous feel. Rand tossed his equally wet cloak and coat on a table and joined her. Only Loial seemed more interested in checking his books than in warming himself.

"wi wɪl nɛvɝ faɪn ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ðɪs weɪ," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd. "θɹi deɪz sɪns wi . . . sɪns wi ɝaɪv hɪɹ" - hi ʃʌɾɝəd ən skɹʌbd ə hæn θɹu hɪz hɛɹ; ɹænd wʌndɝd wʌt ðə ʃaɪnɝən hæd sin ɪn ɪz ʌðɝ lɪvz - "ənʌðɝ tu, ət list, tə fɑlm, ən wɪv nɑt faʊn soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə hɛɹ ə feɪn əɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ðəɹ ɑɹ skɔɹz ə vɪlədʒəz əlɔŋ ðə koʊst. hi cʊɾə ɡɔn tə ɛni ʌv əm ən teɪkən ʃɪp ɛniwɛɹ baɪ naʊ. ɪf i wɑz ɛvɝ hɪɹ."

"We will never find the Horn of Valere this way," Ingtar said. "Three days since we . . . since we arrived here" - he shuddered and scrubbed a hand through his hair; Rand wondered what the Shienaran had seen in his other lives - "another two, at least, to Falme, and we have not found so much as a hair of Fain or Darkfriends. There are scores of villages along the coast. He could have gone to any of them and taken ship anywhere by now. If he was ever here."

"hi ɪz hɪɹ," vɛɹɪn sɛd kɑmli, "æn i wɛn tə fɑlm."

"He is here," Verin said calmly, "and he went to Falme."

"æn hiz stɪl hɪɹ," ɹænd sɛd. weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ mi. pliz, laɪt, hiz stɪl weɪɾɪŋ.

"And he's still here," Rand said. Waiting for me. Please, Light, he's still waiting.

"hʊɹɪn stɪl hæzən kɑɾ ə wɪf ə hɪm," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd. ðə snɪfɝ ʃɹʌɡd əz ɪf i fɛl hɪmsɛlf ət fɔl fəɹ ðə feɪljɝ. "waɪ wəɾ i tʃuz fɑlm? ɪf ðoʊz vɪlɪdʒɝz ɑɹ tə bi bɪlivd, fɑlm ɪz hɛl baɪ ðiz sintʃæn. aɪ wəd ɡɪv maɪ bɛs haʊn tə noʊ hu ðeɪ ɑɹ, ən wɛɹ ðeɪ keɪm fɹʌm."

"Hurin still hasn't caught a whiff of him," Ingtar said. The sniffer shrugged as if he felt himself at fault for the failure. "Why would he choose Falme? If those villagers are to be believed, Falme is held by these Seanchan. I would give my best hound to know who they are, and where they came from."

"hu ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪz nɑɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə ʌs." vɛɹɪn nɛlt ən ənfæsən əɹ sæɾəlbæɡz, pʊlɪŋ aʊt dʒɹaɪ kloʊðz. "æt list wɪv ɹumz ɪn wɪtʃ tə tʃeɪnʒ əɹ kloʊðz, ðoʊ ɪɾəl də əs lɪɾəl ɡʊɾ ənlɛs ðə wɛðɝ tʃeɪnʒəz. ɪŋtʃɹ, ɪt meɪ wɛl bi ðət wʌt ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz toʊld əs ɪz ɹaɪt, ðət ðeɪ ɑɹ ðə dɪsɛndəns ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɑɹmiz kʌm bæk. wʌt mæɾɝz ɪz ðət pdən feɪn əz ɡɔn tə fɑlm. ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋz ɪn ðə dʌnʒən ət fæl dæɹə - "

"Who they are is not important to us." Verin knelt and unfastened her saddlebags, pulling out dry clothes. "At least we have rooms in which to change our clothes, though it will do us little good unless the weather changes. Ingtar, it may well be that what the villagers told us is right, that they are the descendants of Artur Hawkwing's armies come back. What matters is that Padan Fain has gone to Falme. The writings in the dungeon at Fal Dara - "

" - nɛvɝ mɛnʃən feɪn. fɝɡɪv mi, ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ðət cʊɾə bɪn ə tʃɹɪk əz izəli əz dɑɹk pɹɑfəsi. aɪ kæn bɪliv ivən tʃɹɑləks wəd bi stupəɾ ɪnʌf tə tɛl əs ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðeɪ wɝ gɑnə də bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ dɪɾ ɪt."

" - never mentioned Fain. Forgive me, Aes Sedai, but that could have been a trick as easily as dark prophecy. I can't believe even Trollocs would be stupid enough to tell us everything they were going to do before they did it."

ʃi twɪstəd tə lʊk ʌp ət hɪm. "ænd wʌt dʒju min tə du, ɪf jəl nɑt teɪk maɪ ædvaɪs?"

She twisted to look up at him. "And what do you mean to do, if you will not take my advice?"

"aɪ min tə hæv ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd fɝmli. "fɝɡɪv mi, bʌɾ aɪ hæv tə tʃɹʌs maɪ oʊn sɛnsɪz bɪfɔɹ səm wɝdz skɹɔl baɪ ə tʃɹɑlɑk . . ."

"I mean to have the Horn of Valere," Ingtar said firmly. "Forgive me, but I have to trust my own senses before some words scrawled by a Trolloc . . ."

"eɪ mɹdʒɹɑl, ʃʊɹli," vɛɹɪn mɝmɝd, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑɾ ivən pɔz.

"A Myrddraal, surely," Verin murmured, but he did not even pause.

". . . əɹ ə dɑɹkfɹɛn simɪŋ tə bɪtʃɹeɪ hɪmsɛlf aʊɾ ə hɪz oʊn maʊθ. aɪ min tə kɔɹɾɝ ðə ɡɹaʊn əntɪl hʊɹɪn smɛlz ə tʃɹeɪl əɹ wi faɪn feɪn ɪn ðə flɛʃ. aɪ mʌst əv ðə hɔɹn, vɛɹɪn sədaɪ. aɪ mʌst!"

". . . or a Darkfriend seeming to betray himself out of his own mouth. I mean to quarter the ground until Hurin smells a trail or we find Fain in the flesh. I must have the Horn, Verin Sedai. I must!"

"ðæɾ ɪzən ðə weɪ," hʊɹɪn sɛd sɔfli. "nɑt 'mʌst.' wʌt hæpənz, hæpənz." noʊ wʌn peɪɾ ɪm ɛni maɪnd.

"That isn't the way," Hurin said softly. "Not 'must.' What happens, happens." No one paid him any mind.

"wi ɔl mʌst," vɛɹɪn mɝmɝd, piɹɪŋ ɪndə hɝ sæɾəlbæɡz, "jɛt səm θɪŋz meɪ bi ivən mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən ðæt."

"We all must," Verin murmured, peering into her saddlebags, "yet some things may be even more important than that."

ʃi dɪd nɑt seɪ mɔɹ, bʌt ɹænd ɡɹɪməst. hi lɔŋ tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm əɹ ən əɹ pɹɑdz ən hɪns. aɪm nɑt ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. laɪt, bʌɾ aɪ wɪʃ aɪ kəd dʒʌst ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm ɛɛs sədaɪ kəmplitli. "ɪŋtʃɹ, aɪ θɪŋk aɪm ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɑn tə fɑlm. feɪn ɪz ðəɹ - ɪm ʃʊɹ hiz - ən ɪf aɪ doʊn kʌm sun, hi - hɪl də sʌmθɪŋ tə hɝɾ ɛmənz fild." hi hæd nɑt mɛnʃən ðət pɑɹt bɪfɔɹ.

She did not say more, but Rand grimaced. He longed to get away from her and her prods and hints. I am not the Dragon Reborn. Light, but I wish I could just get away from Aes Sedai completely. "Ingtar, I think I'm riding on to Falme. Fain is there - I'm sure he is - and if I don't come soon, he - he will do something to hurt Emond's Field." He had not mentioned that part before.

ðeɪ ɔl stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, mæt ən pɛɹɪn fɹaʊnɪŋ, wɝid bʌt kənsɪɾɝɪŋ; vɛɹɪn əz ɪf ʃi hæd dʒʌst sin ə nu pis æɾəd tə ə pʌzəl. lɔɪəl lʊkt əstɑnɪʃt, ən hʊɹɪn sim kənfjuzd. ɪŋtʃɹ wɑz oʊpənli dɪsbɪlivɪŋ.

They all stared at him, Mat and Perrin frowning, worried but considering; Verin as if she had just seen a new piece added to a puzzle. Loial looked astonished, and Hurin seemed confused. Ingtar was openly disbelieving.

"waɪ wəɾ i də ðæt?" ðə ʃaɪnɝən sɛd.

"Why would he do that?" the Shienaran said.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ," ɹænd laɪd, "bʌt ðət wɑz pɑɹɾ ə ðə mɛsədʒ i lɛft wɪð bɑɹθeɪnz."

"I don't know," Rand lied, "but that was part of the message he left with Barthanes."

"æn dɪd bɑɹθeɪnz seɪ feɪn wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə fɑlm?" ɪŋtʃɹ dɪmændəd. "noʊ. ɪt wʊdn mæɾɝ ɪf i hæd." hi ɡeɪv ə bɪɾɝ læf. "dɑɹkfɹɛnz laɪ əz nætʃɹəli əz ðeɪ bɹið."

"And did Barthanes say Fain was going to Falme?" Ingtar demanded. "No. It wouldn't matter if he had." He gave a bitter laugh. "Darkfriends lie as naturally as they breathe."

"ɹænd," mæt sɛd, "ɪf aɪ nu haʊ tə stɑp feɪn fɹəm hɝɾɪŋ ɛmənz fild, aɪ wʊd. ɪf aɪ wɑz ʃʊɹ i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə. bʌɾ aɪ nid ðət dæɡɝ, ɹænd, ən hʊɹɪn əz ðə bɛs tʃæns ə faɪndɪŋ ɪt."

"Rand," Mat said, "if I knew how to stop Fain from hurting Emond's Field, I would. If I was sure he was going to. But I need that dagger, Rand, and Hurin has the best chance of finding it."

"aɪ wɪl ɡoʊ wɛɹɛvɝ jə ɡoʊ, ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd. hi hæd fɪnɪʃt meɪkɪŋ ʃʊɹ ðə bʊks wɝ dʒɹaɪ ən wɑz teɪkɪŋ ɔf ɪz sɑɾən koʊt. "bʌɾ aɪ doʊn si wɛɹ ə fju mɔɹ deɪz wɪl tʃeɪnʒ ɛniθɪŋ wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ, naʊ. tʃɹaɪ biɪŋ ə lɪɾəl lɛs heɪsti fəɹ wʌns."

"I will go wherever you go, Rand," Loial said. He had finished making sure the books were dry and was taking off his sodden coat. "But I don't see where a few more days will change anything one way or another, now. Try being a little less hasty for once."

"ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ tə mi wɛðɝ wi ɡoʊ tə fɑlm naʊ, leɪɾɝ, əɹ nɛvɝ," pɛɹɪn sɛd wɪð ə ʃɹʌɡ, "bʌɾ ɪf feɪn ɹɪli ɪz θɹɛɾənɪŋ ɛmənz fild . . . wɛl, mæts ɹaɪt. hʊɹɪn ɪz ðə bɛst weɪ tə faɪn hɪm."

"It doesn't matter to me whether we go to Falme now, later, or never," Perrin said with a shrug, "but if Fain really is threatening Emond's Field . . . well, Mat's right. Hurin is the best way to find him."

"aɪ kən faɪn hɪm, lɔɹd ɹænd," hʊɹɪn pʊɾ ɪn. "lɛt mi ɡɛt wʌn snɪf ə hɪm, ən əl teɪk jə ɹaɪt tə hɪm. ðɛɹz nɛvɝ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls lɛft ə tʃɹeɪl laɪk hɪz."

"I can find him, Lord Rand," Hurin put in. "Let me get one sniff of him, and I'll take you right to him. There's never anything else left a trail like his."

"ju mʌs meɪk jəɹ oʊn tʃɔɪs, ɹænd," vɛɹɪn sɛd kɛɹfəli, "bʌt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət fɑlm ɪz hɛl baɪ ɪnveɪɾɝz əbaʊt hum wi stɪl noʊ nɛks tə nʌθɪŋ. ɪf jə ɡoʊ tə fɑlm əloʊn, jə meɪ faɪn jɝsɛlf ə pɹɪznɝ, əɹ wɝs, ən ðət wɪl sɝv nʌθɪŋ. aɪm ʃʊɹ wʌtɛvɝ tʃɔɪs jə meɪk wɪl bi ðə ɹaɪt wʌn."

"You must make your own choice, Rand," Verin said carefully, "but remember that Falme is held by invaders about whom we still know next to nothing. If you go to Falme alone, you may find yourself a prisoner, or worse, and that will serve nothing. I am sure whatever choice you make will be the right one."

"tɑvɝən," lɔɪəl ɹʌmbəld.

"Ta'veren," Loial rumbled.

ɹænd θɹu ʌp ɪz hænz.

Rand threw up his hands.

ənoʊ keɪm ɪn fɹəm ðə skwɛɹ, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɹeɪn ɔf ɪz kloʊk.

Uno came in from the square, shaking rain off his cloak.

"nɑɾ ə fleɪmɪŋ soʊl tə bi faʊnd, maɪ lɔɹd. lʊks tə mi laɪk ðeɪ ɹæn laɪk stʃɹaɪpt pɪɡz. laɪvstɑks ɔl ɡɔn, ən ðəɹ ɪzən ə blʌɾi kɑɹɾ əɹ wæɡən lɛft, iðɝ. hæf ðə haʊsəz ɑɹ stʃɹɪp tə ðə fleɪmɪŋ flɔɹz. əl weɪdʒɝ maɪ nɛks mʌnθs peɪ jə kəd fɑloʊ ðɛm baɪ ðə blʌɾi fɝnɪtʃɝ ðeɪ tɔst ɑn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ɹoʊd wən ðeɪ ɹilaɪzd ɪt wɑz oʊnli weɪɪŋ daʊn ðɛɹ fleɪmɪŋ wæɡənz."

"Not a flaming soul to be found, my Lord. Looks to me like they ran like striped pigs. Livestock's all gone, and there isn't a bloody cart or wagon left, either. Half the houses are stripped to the flaming floors. I'll wager my next month's pay you could follow them by the bloody furniture they tossed on the side of the road when they realized it was only weighing down their flaming wagons."

"wʌɾ əbaʊt kloʊðz?" ɪŋtʃɹ æskt.

"What about clothes?" Ingtar asked.

ənoʊ blɪŋkt ɪz wʌn aɪ ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. "dʒʌst ə fju bɪts ən pisəz, maɪ lɔɹd. meɪnli wʌt ðeɪ dɪdn θɪŋk wɑz blʌɾi wɝθ teɪkɪŋ wɪð ðɛm."

Uno blinked his one eye in surprise. "Just a few bits and pieces, my Lord. Mainly what they didn't think was bloody worth taking with them."

"ðeɪ wɪl əv tə du. hʊɹɪn, aɪ min tə dʒɹɛs jə ən ə fju mɔɹ əz loʊkəl pipəl, əz mɛni əz wi kən mænədʒ, soʊ jə woʊn stæn aʊt. aɪ wɑn jə tə swɪŋ waɪd, nɔɹθ ən saʊθ, əntɪl jə kɹɔs ðə tʃɹeɪl." mɔɹ soʊlʒɝz wɝ kʌmɪŋ ɪn, ən ðeɪ ɔl ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn ɪŋtʃɹ ən hʊɹɪn tə lɪsən.

"They will have to do. Hurin, I mean to dress you and a few more as local people, as many as we can manage, so you won't stand out. I want you to swing wide, north and south, until you cross the trail." More soldiers were coming in, and they all gathered around Ingtar and Hurin to listen.

ɹænd lin ɪz hænz ɑn ðə mæntəl oʊvɝ ðə faɪɝpleɪs ən stɛɹɾ ɪndə ðə fleɪmz. ðeɪ meɪɾ ɪm θɪŋk ə bælzəmənz aɪz. "ðɛɹ ɪzən mʌtʃ taɪm," hi sɛd. "aɪ fil . . . sʌmθɪŋ . . . pʊlɪŋ mi tə fɑlm, ən ðəɹ ɪzən mʌtʃ taɪm." hi sɔ vɛɹɪn wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, ən æɾəd hɑɹʃli, "nɑt ðæt. ɪts feɪn aɪ hæv tə faɪnd. ɪts nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð . . . ðæt."

Rand leaned his hands on the mantel over the fireplace and stared into the flames. They made him think of Ba'alzamon's eyes. "There isn't much time," he said. "I feel . . . something . . . pulling me to Falme, and there isn't much time." He saw Verin watching him, and added harshly, "Not that. It's Fain I have to find. It has nothing to do with . . . that."

vɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. "ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz, ən wəɹ ɔl woʊvən ɪndə ðə pæɾɝn. feɪn əz bɪn hɪɹ wiks bɪfɔɹ ʌs, pɝhæps mʌnθs. ə fju mɔɹ deɪz wɪl meɪk lɪɾəl dɪfɝəns ɪn wʌtɛvɝ ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ tə hæpən."

Verin nodded. "The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills, and we are all woven into the Pattern. Fain has been here weeks before us, perhaps months. A few more days will make little difference in whatever is going to happen."

"aɪm gɑnə ɡɛt səm slip," hi mʌɾɝd, pɪkɪŋ ʌp ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz. "ðeɪ kæn əv kæɹiɾ ɔf ɔl ðə bɛdz."

"I'm going to get some sleep," he muttered, picking up his saddlebags. "They can't have carried off all the beds."

əpstɛɹz, hi dɪd faɪn bɛdz, bʌɾ oʊnli ə fju stɪl hæd mætʃɹəsəz, ən ðoʊz soʊ lʌmpi hi θɔɾ ɪt maɪt bi mɔɹ kʌmftəɹbəl tə slip ɑn ðə flɔɹ. faɪnəli hi tʃoʊz ə bɛd wɛɹ ðə mætʃɹəs sɪmpli sæɡd ɪn ðə mɪɾəl. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɛls ɪn ðə ɹum ɪksɛpt wʌn wʊɾən tʃɛɹ ən ə teɪbəl wɪð ə ɹɪkəɾi lɛɡ.

Upstairs, he did find beds, but only a few still had mattresses, and those so lumpy he thought it might be more comfortable to sleep on the floor. Finally he chose a bed where the mattress simply sagged in the middle. There was nothing else in the room except one wooden chair and a table with a rickety leg.

hi tʊk ɔf ɪz wɛt θɪŋz, pʊɾɪŋ ɑn ə dʒɹaɪ ʃɝɾ ən bɹitʃɪz bɪfɔɹ laɪɪŋ daʊn, sɪns ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ʃits əɹ blæŋkəts, ən pɹɑpt ɪz sɔɹd bɪsaɪd ðə hɛɾ ə ðə bɛd. ɹaɪli, hi θɔt ðət ði oʊnli θɪŋ dʒɹaɪ hi hæd fəɹ ə kʌvɝlət wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡənz bænɝ; hi lɛft ɪt seɪfli bʌkəld ɪnsaɪd ðə sæɾəlbæɡz.

He took off his wet things, putting on a dry shirt and breeches before lying down, since there were no sheets or blankets, and propped his sword beside the head of the bed. Wryly, he thought that the only thing dry he had for a coverlet was the Dragon's banner; he left it safely buckled inside the saddlebags.

ɹeɪn dʒɹʌmd ɑn ðə ɹuf, ən θʌndɝ ɡɹaʊld oʊvɝhɛd, ən naʊ ən əɡɛn ə laɪtnɪŋ flæʃ lɪt ðə wɪndoʊz. ʃɪvɝɪŋ, hi ɹoʊl ðɪs weɪ ən ðəɾ ɑn ðə mætʃɹəs, sikɪŋ səm kʌmftəɹbəl weɪ tə laɪ, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ðə bænɝ wəd nɑt də fəɹ ə blæŋkəɾ æftɝ ɔl, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf i ʃəd ɹaɪɾ ɑn tə fɑlm.

Rain drummed on the roof, and thunder growled overhead, and now and again a lightning flash lit the windows. Shivering, he rolled this way and that on the mattress, seeking some comfortable way to lie, wondering if the banner would not do for a blanket after all, wondering if he should ride on to Falme.

hi ɹoʊl tə hɪz ʌðɝ saɪd, ən bælzəmən wɑz stændɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə tʃɛɹ wɪð ðə pjʊɹ waɪt lɛŋθ ə ðə dʒɹæɡənz bænɝ ɪn ɪz hænz. ðə ɹum sim dɑɹkɝ ðɛɹ, əz ɪf bælzəmən stʊɾ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ʌv ə klaʊɾ ʌv ɔɪli blæk smoʊk. nɪɹli hil bɝnz kɹɪskɹɔst ɪz feɪs, ən əz ɹænd lʊkt, hɪz pɪtʃ-dɑɹk aɪz vænɪʃt fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ɹipleɪs baɪ ɛnləs kævɝnz ə faɪɝ. ɹændz sæɾəlbæɡz leɪ baɪ hɪz fit, bʌkəlz əndʌn, flæp θɹoʊn bæk wɛɹ ðə bænɝ hæd bɪn hɪɾən.

He rolled to his other side, and Ba'alzamon was standing beside the chair with the pure white length of the Dragon's banner in his hands. The room seemed darker there, as if Ba'alzamon stood on the edge of a cloud of oily black smoke. Nearly healed burns crisscrossed his face, and as Rand looked, his pitch-dark eyes vanished for an instant, replaced by endless caverns of fire. Rand's saddlebags lay by his feet, buckles undone, flap thrown back where the banner had been hidden.

"ðə taɪm kʌmz kloʊsɝ, luz θɝɪn. ə θaʊzən θɹɛdz dʒɹɔ taɪt, ən sun jəl bi taɪɾ ən tʃɹæpt, sɛt tə ə kɔɹs jə kænɑt tʃeɪnʒ. mædnəs. dɛθ. bɪfɔɹ jə daɪ, wɪl jə wʌns mɔɹ kɪl ɛvɹiθɪŋ jə lʌv?"

"The time comes closer, Lews Therin. A thousand threads draw tight, and soon you will be tied and trapped, set to a course you cannot change. Madness. Death. Before you die, will you once more kill everything you love?"

ɹænd ɡlænst ət ðə dɔɹ, bʌɾ i meɪd noʊ muv ɪksɛp tə sɪɾ ʌp ɑn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə bɛd. wʌt ɡʊd tə tʃɹaɪ ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm ðə dɑɹk wʌn? hɪz θɹoʊt fɛlt laɪk sænd. "aɪ æm nɑt ðə dʒɹæɡən, fɑðɝ ə laɪz!" hi sɛd hɔɹsli.

Rand glanced at the door, but he made no move except to sit up on the side of the bed. What good to try running from the Dark One? His throat felt like sand. "I am not the Dragon, Father of Lies!" he said hoarsely.

ðə dɑɹknəs bɪhaɪn bælzəmən ɹɔɪld, ən fɝnəsəz ɹɔɹɾ əz bælzəmən læft. "ju ɑnɝ mi. ən bɪlɪɾəl jɝsɛlf. aɪ noʊ jə tu wɛl. aɪ hæv feɪs jə ə θaʊzən taɪmz. ə θaʊzən taɪmz ə θaʊzənd. aɪ noʊ jə tə jəɹ mɪzɝəbəl soʊl, luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝ." hi læft əɡɛn; ɹænd pʊɾ ə hæn ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz feɪs əɡɛns ðə hiɾ ə ðət faɪɝi maʊθ.

The darkness behind Ba'alzamon roiled, and furnaces roared as Ba'alzamon laughed. "You honor me. And belittle yourself. I know you too well. I have faced you a thousand times. A thousand times a thousand. I know you to your miserable soul, Lews Therin Kinslayer." He laughed again; Rand put a hand in front of his face against the heat of that fiery mouth.

"wʌt dʒju wɑnt? əl nɑt sɝv ju. əl nɑt də ɛniθɪŋ ðət jə wɑnt. əl daɪ fɝst!"

"What do you want? I will not serve you. I will not do anything that you want. I'll die first!"

"ju wɪl daɪ, wɝm! haʊ mɛni taɪmz əv jə daɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə spæn ə ði eɪdʒəz, ful, ən haʊ mʌtʃ əz dɛθ əveɪl ju? ðə ɡɹeɪv ɪz koʊld ən loʊnli, seɪv fəɹ ðə wɝmz. ðə ɡɹeɪv ɪz maɪn. ðɪs taɪm ðəɹ wɪl bi noʊ ɹibɝθ fəɹ ju. ðɪs taɪm ðə wil ə taɪm wɪl bi bɹoʊkən ən ðə wɝld ɹimeɪɾ ɪn ði ɪmədʒ ə ðə ʃædoʊ. ðɪs taɪm jəɹ dɛθ wɪl bi fɝɛvɝ! wɪtʃ wɪl jə tʃuz? dɛθ ɛvɝlæstɪŋ? əɹ laɪf ɪtɝnəl - ən paʊɝ!"

"You will die, worm! How many times have you died across the span of the Ages, fool, and how much has death availed you? The grave is cold and lonely, save for the worms. The grave is mine. This time there will be no rebirth for you. This time the Wheel of Time will be broken and the world remade in the image of the Shadow. This time your death will be forever! Which will you choose? Death everlasting? Or life eternal - and power!"

ɹænd hɑɹdli ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i wɑz ɑn ɪz fit. ðə vɔɪd hæd sɝaʊndəd hɪm, seɪɾɪn wɑz ðɛɹ, ən ðə wʌn paʊɝ floʊɾ ɪndə hɪm. ðət fækt ɔlmoʊs kɹæk ði ɛmptinəs. wɑz ðɪs ɹil? wɑz ɪɾ ə dʒɹim? kəɾ i tʃænəl ɪn ə dʒɹim? bʌt ðə tɔɹən ɹʌʃɪŋ ɪndə hɪm swɛpt əweɪ hɪz daʊts. hi hɝld ɪɾ ət bælzəmən, hɝl ðə pjʊɹ wʌn paʊɝ, ðə fɔɹs ðət tɝn ðə wil ə taɪm, ə fɔɹs ðət kəd meɪk siz bɝn ən it maʊntənz.

Rand hardly realized that he was on his feet. The void had surrounded him, saidin was there, and the One Power flowed into him. That fact almost cracked the emptiness. Was this real? Was it a dream? Could he channel in a dream? But the torrent rushing into him swept away his doubts. He hurled it at Ba'alzamon, hurled the pure One Power, the force that turned the Wheel of Time, a force that could make seas burn and eat mountains.

bælzəmən tʊk hæf ə stɛp bæk, hoʊldɪŋ ðə bænɝ klʌtʃt bɪfɔɹ hɪm. fleɪmz lɛpt ɪn ɪz waɪɾ aɪz ən maʊθ, ən ðə dɑɹknəs sim tə kloʊk ɪm ɪn ʃædoʊ. ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ. ðə paʊɝ sæŋk ɪndə ðət blæk mɪst ən vænɪʃt, soʊkt ʌp laɪk wɔɾɝ ɑn pɑɹtʃt sænd.

Ba'alzamon took half a step back, holding the banner clutched before him. Flames leaped in his wide eyes and mouth, and the darkness seemed to cloak him in shadow. In the Shadow. The Power sank into that black mist and vanished, soaked up like water on parched sand.

ɹænd dʒɹu ɑn seɪɾɪn, pʊl fəɹ mɔɹ, ən stɪl mɔɹ. hɪz flɛʃ sim soʊ koʊld ɪt mʌst ʃæɾɝ əɾ ə tʌtʃ; ɪt bɝn əz ɪf ɪt mʌs bɔɪl əweɪ. hɪz boʊnz fɛlt ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə kɹɪspɪŋ tə koʊl kɹɪstəl æʃ. hi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ; ɪt wɑz laɪk dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ laɪf ɪtsɛlf.

Rand drew on saidin, pulled for more, and still more. His flesh seemed so cold it must shatter at a touch; it burned as if it must boil away. His bones felt on the point of crisping to cold crystal ash. He did not care; it was like drinking life itself.

"ful!" bælzəmən ɹɔɹd. "ju wɪl dɪstʃɹɔɪ jɝsɛlf!"

"Fool!" Ba'alzamon roared. "You will destroy yourself!"

mæt. ðə θɔt floʊɾəd sʌmwɛɹ bɪɑn ðə kənsumɪŋ flʌd. ðə dæɡɝ. ðə hɔɹn. feɪn. ɛmənz fild. aɪ kæn daɪ jɛt.

Mat. The thought floated somewhere beyond the consuming flood. The dagger. The Horn. Fain. Emond's Field. I can't die yet.

hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ hi dɪɾ ɪt, bʌt sʌɾənli ðə paʊɝ wɑz ɡɔn, ən seɪɾɪn, ən ðə vɔɪd. ʃʌɾɝɪŋ ʌnkəntʃɹoʊləbli, hi fɛl tə hɪz niz bɪsaɪd ðə bɛd, ɑɹmz ɹæpt ɝaʊn hɪmsɛlf ɪn ə veɪn ɛfɝt tə stɑp ðɛɹ twɪtʃɪŋ.

He was not sure how he did it, but suddenly the Power was gone, and saidin, and the void. Shuddering uncontrollably, he fell to his knees beside the bed, arms wrapped around himself in a vain effort to stop their twitching.

"ðæɾ ɪz bɛɾɝ, luz θɝɪn." bælzəmən tɔs ðə bænɝ tə ðə flɔɹ ən pʊɾ ɪz hænz ɑn ðə tʃɛɹ bæk; wɪsps ə smoʊk ɹoʊz fɹəm bɪtwin ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. ðə ʃædoʊ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɛnkʌmpəs hɪm. "ðɛɹ ɪz jəɹ bænɝ, kɪnsleɪɝ. mʌtʃ ɡʊd wɪl ɪt də ju. ə θaʊzən stʃɹɪŋz leɪɾ oʊvɝ ə θaʊzən jɪɹz əv dʒɹɔn jə hɪɹ. tɛn θaʊzənd woʊvən θɹuaʊt ði eɪdʒəz taɪ jə laɪk ə ʃip fəɹ slɔɾɝ. ðə wil ɪtsɛlf hoʊlz jə pɹɪznɝ tə jəɹ feɪɾ eɪdʒ æftɝ eɪdʒ. bʌɾ aɪ kən sɛt jə fɹi. jə kaʊɝɪŋ kɝ, aɪ əloʊn ɪn ði ɪntaɪɝ wɝl kən titʃ jə haʊ tə wil ðə paʊɝ. aɪ əloʊn kən stɑp ɪt kɪlɪŋ jə bɪfɔɹ juv ə tʃæns tə ɡoʊ mæd. aɪ əloʊn kən stɑp ðə mædnəs. juv sɝv mi bɪfɔɹ. sɝv mi əɡɛn, luz θɝɪn, əɹ bi dɪstʃɹɔɪd fɝɛvɝ!"

"That is better, Lews Therin." Ba'alzamon tossed the banner to the floor and put his hands on the chair back; wisps of smoke rose from between his fingers. The shadow no longer encompassed him. "There is your banner, Kinslayer. Much good will it do you. A thousand strings laid over a thousand years have drawn you here. Ten thousand woven throughout the Ages tie you like a sheep for slaughter. The Wheel itself holds you prisoner to your fate Age after Age. But I can set you free. You cowering cur, I alone in the entire world can teach you how to wield the Power. I alone can stop it killing you before you have a chance to go mad. I alone can stop the madness. You have served me before. Serve me again, Lews Therin, or be destroyed forever!"

"maɪ neɪm," ɹænd fɔɹs bɪtwin tʃæɾɝɪŋ tiθ, "ɪz ɹænd ælθɹ." hɪz ʃɪvɝɪŋ fɔɹst ɪm tə skwiz ɪz aɪz ʃʌt, ən wən i oʊpən əm əɡɛn, hi wɑz əloʊn.

"My name," Rand forced between chattering teeth, "is Rand al'Thor." His shivering forced him to squeeze his eyes shut, and when he opened them again, he was alone.

bælzəmən wɑz ɡɔn. ðə ʃædoʊ wɑz ɡɔn. hɪz sæɾəlbæɡz stʊɾ əɡɛns ðə tʃɛɹ wɪð ðə bʌkəlz dʌn ʌp ən wʌn saɪd bʌlʒɪŋ wɪð ðə bʌlk ə ðə dʒɹæɡənz bænɝ, dʒʌst əz i hæd lɛft ɪt. bʌɾ ɑn ðə tʃɛɹ bæk, tɛnʒɹəlz ə smoʊk stɪl ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə tʃɑɹɾ ɪmpɹɛʃənz ə fɪŋɡɝz.

Ba'alzamon was gone. The shadow was gone. His saddlebags stood against the chair with the buckles done up and one side bulging with the bulk of the Dragon's banner, just as he had left it. But on the chair back, tendrils of smoke still rose from the charred impressions of fingers.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾitu


CHAPTER 42

fɑlm


Falme

nɪneɪiv pɹɛst ɪleɪn bæk ɪndə ðə nɛɹoʊ æliweɪ bɪtwin ə klɔθ mɝtʃəns ʃɑp ən ə pɑɾɝz wɝks əz ðə pɛɹ ʌv wɪmən lɪŋk baɪ ə sɪlvɝi liʃ pæs baɪ, hɛɾɪŋ daʊn ðə kɑbəlstoʊn stʃɹit təwɔɹd fɑlm hɑɹbɝ. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt dɛɹ əlaʊ ðət pɛɹ tə kʌm tu kloʊz. ðə pipəl ɪn ðə stʃɹit meɪd weɪ fəɹ ðoʊz tu ivən mɔɹ kwɪkli ðən ðeɪ dɪd fəɹ sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz, əɹ ði əkeɪʒənəl noʊbəlz pɑlɑnkwɪn, θɪkli kɝteɪnd naʊ ðət ðə deɪz wɝ koʊld. ivən ðə stʃɹiɾ ɑɹɾəsts dɪd nɑɾ ɔfɝ tə dʒɹɔ ðɛm ɪn tʃɔks əɹ pɛnsəlz, ɔlðoʊ ðeɪ pɛstɝɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls. nɪneɪivz maʊθ taɪɾənd əz əɹ aɪz fɑloʊd ðə sʌldəm ən ðə deɪmeɪn θɹu ðə kɹaʊd. ivən æftɝ wiks ɪn ðə taʊn, ðə saɪt sɪkən hɝ. pɝhæps ɪt sɪkən əɹ mɔɹ, naʊ. ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən duɪŋ ðət tə ɛni wʊmən, nɑɾ ivən mɔɪɹeɪn əɹ liɑnʒɹɪn.

Nynaeve pressed Elayne back into the narrow alleyway between a cloth merchant's shop and a potter's works as the pair of women linked by a silvery leash passed by, heading down the cobblestone street toward Falme harbor. They did not dare allow that pair to come too close. The people in the street made way for those two even more quickly than they did for Seanchan soldiers, or the occasional noble's palanquin, thickly curtained now that the days were cold. Even the street artists did not offer to draw them in chalks or pencils, although they pestered everyone else. Nynaeve's mouth tightened as her eyes followed the sul'dam and the damane through the crowd. Even after weeks in the town, the sight sickened her. Perhaps it sickened her more, now. She could not imagine doing that to any woman, not even Moiraine or Liandrin.

wɛl, meɪbi liɑnʒɹɪn, ʃi ədmɪɾəd saʊɝli. səmtaɪmz, ət naɪt, ɪn ðə smɔl, smɛli ɹum ðə tu ʌv əm hæd ɹɛntəɾ əbʌv ə fɪʃmɑŋɡɝ, ʃi θɔɾ ʌv wʌt ʃi wəd laɪk tə də tə liɑnʒɹɪn wən ʃi ɡɑɾ əɹ hænz ɑn hɝ. liɑnʒɹɪn ivən mɔɹ ðən sjuɹɔθ. mɔɹ ðən wʌns ʃi hæd bɪn ʃɑkt əɾ əɹ oʊn kɹulti, ivən waɪl ʃi wɑz dɪlaɪɾəd əɾ əɹ ɪnvɛntɪvnəs.

Well, maybe Liandrin, she admitted sourly. Sometimes, at night, in the small, smelly room the two of them had rented above a fishmonger, she thought of what she would like to do to Liandrin when she got her hands on her. Liandrin even more than Suroth. More than once she had been shocked at her own cruelty, even while she was delighted at her inventiveness.

stɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ðə pɛɹ ɪn saɪt, hɝ aɪz fɛl ɑn ə boʊni mæn, wɛl daʊn ðə stʃɹit, bɪfɔɹ ðə ʃɪftɪŋ θɹɔŋ hɪɾ ɪm əɡɛn. ʃi hæɾ oʊnli ə flæʃ ʌv ə bɪɡ noʊz ɪn ə nɛɹoʊ feɪs. hi wɔɹ ə ɹɪtʃ bɹɑnz vɛlvət ɹoʊb ə sintʃæn kʌɾ oʊvɝ ɪz kloʊðz, bʌt ʃi θɔt ðəɾ i wɑz noʊ sintʃæn, ðoʊ ðə sɝvən fɑloʊɪŋ ɪm wɑz, ən ə sɝvən ə haɪ dɪɡɹi, wɪð wʌn tɛmpəl ʃeɪvd. ðə loʊkəl pipəl hæd nɑt teɪkən tə sintʃæn fæʃənz, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ðət wʌn. ðət lʊk laɪk pdən feɪn, ʃi θɔɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. ɪt kʊdn bi. nɑt hɪɹ.

Still trying to keep the pair in sight, her eyes fell on a bony man, well down the street, before the shifting throng hid him again. She had only a flash of a big nose in a narrow face. He wore a rich bronze velvet robe of Seanchan cut over his clothes, but she thought that he was no Seanchan, though the servant following him was, and a servant of high degree, with one temple shaved. The local people had not taken to Seanchan fashions, particularly that one. That looked like Padan Fain, she thought incredulously. It couldn't be. Not here.

"nɪneɪiv," ɪleɪn sɛd sɔfli, "kʊd wi muv ɑn, naʊ? ðət fɛloʊ sɛlɪŋ æpəlz ɪz lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪz teɪbəl əz ɪf hiz θɪŋkɪŋ i hæd mɔɹ ə fju moʊməns əɡoʊ, ən aɪ wəd nɑt wɑn ɪm wʌndɝɪŋ wʌɾ aɪ hæv ɪn maɪ pɑkəts."

"Nynaeve," Elayne said softly, "could we move on, now? That fellow selling apples is looking at his table as if he's thinking he had more a few moments ago, and I would not want him wondering what I have in my pockets."

ðeɪ boʊθ wɔɹ lɔŋ koʊts meɪɾ ə ʃipskɪn, wɪð ðə flis tɝn ɪn ən bɹaɪt ɹɛd spaɪɹəlz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd əkɹɔs ðə bɹɛst. ɪt wɑz kʌntʃɹi ɡɑɹb, bʌɾ ɪt pæst wɛl ɪnʌf ɪn fɑlm, wɛɹ mɛni pipəl hæd kʌm ɪn fɹəm ðə fɑɹmz ən vɪlədʒəz. əmʌŋ soʊ mɛni stʃɹeɪnʒɝz ðə tu ʌv əm hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə sɪŋk ɪn ənnoʊɾɪst. nɪneɪiv hæd koʊmd aʊɾ əɹ bɹeɪd, ən əɹ ɡoʊld ɹɪŋ, ðə sɝpən iɾɪŋ ɪts oʊn teɪl, naʊ nɛsəld ʌndɝ əɹ dʒɹɛs bɪsaɪd lænz hɛvi ɹɪŋ ɑn ðə lɛðɝ kɔɹɾ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk.

They both wore long coats made of sheepskin, with the fleece turned in and bright red spirals embroidered across the breast. It was country garb, but it passed well enough in Falme, where many people had come in from the farms and villages. Among so many strangers the two of them had been able to sink in unnoticed. Nynaeve had combed out her braid, and her gold ring, the serpent eating its own tail, now nestled under her dress beside Lan's heavy ring on the leather cord around her neck.

ðə lɑɹdʒ pɑkəts ʌv ɪleɪnz koʊt bʌlʒd səspɪʃəsli.

The large pockets of Elayne's coat bulged suspiciously.

"ju stoʊl ðoʊz æpəlz?" nɪneɪiv hɪs kwaɪətli, pʊlɪŋ ɪleɪn aʊɾ ɪndə ðə kɹaʊɾəd stʃɹit. "ɪleɪn, wi doʊn əv tə stil. nɑt jɛt, ɛniweɪ."

"You stole those apples?" Nynaeve hissed quietly, pulling Elayne out into the crowded street. "Elayne, we don't have to steal. Not yet, anyway."

"noʊ? haʊ mʌtʃ mʌni də wɪv lɛft? juv bɪn 'nɑt hʌŋɡɹi' vɛɹi ɔfən ət miltaɪmz ðə læs fju deɪz."

"No? How much money do we have left? You have been 'not hungry' very often at mealtimes the last few days."

"wɛl, aɪm nɑt hʌŋɡɹi," nɪneɪiv snæpt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðə hɑloʊ ɪn əɹ mɪɾəl. ɛvɹiθɪŋ kɑs kənsɪɾɝəbli mɔɹ ðən ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd; ʃi hæd hɝd loʊkəl pipəl kəmpleɪnɪŋ əbaʊt haʊ pɹaɪsəz hæd ɹɪzən sɪns ðə sintʃæn keɪm. "ɡɪv mi wʌn ə ðoʊz." ði æpəl ɪleɪn dʌɡ aʊɾ ə hɝ pɑkət wɑz smɔl ən hɑɹd, bʌɾ ɪt kɹʌntʃt wɪð ə dɪlɪʃəs switnəs wən nɪneɪiv bɪɾ ɪndə ɪt. ʃi lɪk ðə dʒus fɹəm əɹ lɪps. "haʊ dɪd jə mænədʒ tə - " ʃi dʒɝkt ɪleɪn tə ə hɔlt ən pɪɹɾ ɪndə hɝ feɪs. "dɪd jə . . . ? dɪd jə . . . ?" ʃi kəd nɑt θɪŋk ʌv ə weɪ tə seɪ ɪt wɪð soʊ mɛni stʃɹimɪŋ baɪ, bʌɾ ɪleɪn ʌndɝstʊd.

"Well, I am not hungry," Nynaeve snapped, trying to ignore the hollow in her middle. Everything cost considerably more than she had expected; she had heard local people complaining about how prices had risen since the Seanchan came. "Give me one of those." The apple Elayne dug out of her pocket was small and hard, but it crunched with a delicious sweetness when Nynaeve bit into it. She licked the juice from her lips. "How did you manage to - " She jerked Elayne to a halt and peered into her face. "Did you . . . ? Did you . . . ?" She could not think of a way to say it with so many streaming by, but Elayne understood.

"oʊnli ə lɪɾəl. aɪ meɪd ðət stæk ʌv oʊl mɛlənz wɪð ðə sɑf spɑts fɔl, ən wən i stɑɹɾəd pʊɾɪŋ əm bæk. . . ." ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən əv ðə ɡɹeɪs, əz nɪneɪiv sɔ ɪt, tə blʌʃ əɹ lʊk ɪmbɛɹəst. ʌnkənsɝnədli iɾɪŋ wʌn ə ði æpəlz, ʃi ʃɹʌɡd. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ nid tə fɹaʊn ət mi laɪk ðæt. aɪ lʊkt kɛɹfəli tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ deɪmeɪn kloʊs." ʃi snɪft. "ɪf aɪ wɝ biɪŋ hɛl pɹɪznɝ, aɪ wəd nɑt hɛlp maɪ kæptɝz faɪn ʌðɝ wɪmən tə ɛnslɑv. ɔlðoʊ, ðə weɪ ðiz fɑlmɛn bɪheɪv, jə wəd θɪŋk ðeɪ wɝ laɪflɔŋ sɝvəns ə ðoʊz u ʃəd bi ðɛɹ ɛnəmiz tə ðə dɛθ." ʃi lʊkt ɝaʊnd, oʊpənli kəntɛmptʃuəs, ət ðə pipəl hɝiɪŋ baɪ; ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl tə fɑloʊ ðə pæθ ʌv ɛni sintʃæn, ivən kɑmən soʊlʒɝz ən ivən əɾ ə dɪstəns, baɪ ðə ɹɪpəlz ə boʊɪŋ. "ðeɪ ʃəd ɹɪzɪst. ðeɪ ʃəd faɪt bæk."

"Only a little. I made that stack of old melons with the soft spots fall, and when he started putting them back. . . ." She did not even have the grace, as Nynaeve saw it, to blush or look embarrassed. Unconcernedly eating one of the apples, she shrugged. "There is no need to frown at me like that. I looked carefully to make sure there was no damane close." She sniffed. "If I were being held prisoner, I would not help my captors find other women to enslave. Although, the way these Falmen behave, you would think they were lifelong servants of those who should be their enemies to the death." She looked around, openly contemptuous, at the people hurrying by; it was possible to follow the path of any Seanchan, even common soldiers and even at a distance, by the ripples of bowing. "They should resist. They should fight back."

"haʊ? əɡɛnst . . . ðæt."

"How? Against . . . that."

ðeɪ hæd tə stɛp tə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə stʃɹiɾ əlɔŋ wɪð ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls əz ə sintʃæn pətʃɹoʊl nɪɹd, klaɪmɪŋ fɹəm ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðə hɑɹbɝ. nɪneɪiv mænədʒ ðə baʊ, hænz ɑn niz, wɪð feɪs skul tə ə pɝfək smuðnəs; ɪleɪn wɑz sloʊɝ, ən meɪɾ əɹ baʊ wɪð ə dɪsteɪsfəl twɪst ə hɝ maʊθ.

They had to step to the side of the street along with everyone else as a Seanchan patrol neared, climbing from the direction of the harbor. Nynaeve managed the bow, hands on knees, with face schooled to a perfect smoothness; Elayne was slower, and made her bow with a distasteful twist of her mouth.

ðəɹ wɝ twɛnti ɑɹmɝd mɛn ən wɪmən ɪn ðə pətʃɹoʊl, ɹaɪɾɪŋ hɔɹsəz, fəɹ wɪtʃ nɪneɪiv wɑz ɡɹeɪtfəl. ʃi kəd nɑt bɪkʌm juz tə siɪŋ pipəl ɹaɪɾɪŋ θɪŋz ðət lʊk laɪk bɹɑnz-skeɪld, teɪləs kæts, ən ə ɹaɪɾɝ ɑn wʌn ə ðə flaɪɪŋ bists wɑz ɔlweɪz ɪnʌf tə meɪk əɹ fil dɪzi; ʃi wɑz ɡlæd ðəɹ wɝ soʊ fju ʌv ðɛm. stɪl, tu liʃt kɹitʃɝz tʃɹɑɾəd əlɔŋ wɪð ðə pətʃɹoʊl, laɪk wɪŋɡləs bɝdz wɪð kɔɹs lɛðɝ skɪn, ən ʃɑɹp biks haɪɝ əbʌv ðə kɑbəlstoʊnz ðən ðə hɛlməɾɪd hɛdz ə ðə soʊlʒɝ. ðɛɹ lɔŋ, sɪnjui lɛɡz lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ kəd ɹʌn fæstɝ ðən ɛni hɔɹs.

There were twenty armored men and women in the patrol, riding horses, for which Nynaeve was grateful. She could not become used to seeing people riding things that looked like bronze-scaled, tailless cats, and a rider on one of the flying beasts was always enough to make her feel dizzy; she was glad there were so few of them. Still, two leashed creatures trotted along with the patrol, like wingless birds with coarse leather skin, and sharp beaks higher above the cobblestones than the helmeted heads of the soldier. Their long, sinewy legs looked as if they could run faster than any horse.

ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd sloʊli æftɝ ðə sintʃæn wɝ ɡɔn. səm ə ðoʊz u hæd baʊd fəɹ ðə pətʃɹoʊl keɪm kloʊs tə ɹʌnɪŋ; noʊ wʌn wɑz kʌmftəɹbəl ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə sintʃænz bists ɪksɛp ðə sintʃæn ðɛmsɛlvz. "ɪleɪn," ʃi sɛd sɔfli əz ðeɪ ɹɪzum ðɛɹ klaɪm, "ɪf wəɹ kɑt, aɪ swɛɹ ðət bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kɪl ʌs, əɹ də wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ du, əl bɛɡ ðɛm ɑn bɛndɪd niz tə lemi stʃɹaɪp jə fɹəm tɑp tə bɑɾəm wɪð ðə staʊɾəst swɪtʃ aɪ kən faɪnd! ɪf jə stɪl kæn lɝn tə bi kɛɹfəl, meɪbi ɪts taɪm tə θɪŋk əbaʊt sɛndɪŋ jə bæk tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, əɹ hoʊm tə keɪɛmlɪn, əɹ ɛniwɛɹ bʌt hɪɹ."

She straightened slowly after the Seanchan were gone. Some of those who had bowed for the patrol came close to running; no one was comfortable at the sight of the Seanchan's beasts except the Seanchan themselves. "Elayne," she said softly as they resumed their climb, "if we are caught, I swear that before they kill us, or do whatever they do, I will beg them on bended knees to let me stripe you from top to bottom with the stoutest switch I can find! If you still can't learn to be careful, maybe it's time to think about sending you back to Tar Valon, or home to Caemlyn, or anywhere but here."

"aɪ æm kɛɹfəl. ət list aɪ lʊk tə bi ʃʊɹ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ deɪmeɪn kloʊs baɪ. wʌɾ əbaʊt ju? aɪ hæv sin jə tʃænəl wɪð wʌn ɪn pleɪn saɪt."

"I am careful. At least I looked to be sure there was no damane close by. What about you? I have seen you channel with one in plain sight."

"aɪ meɪd ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wɝn lʊkɪŋ ət mi," nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd. ʃi hæd hæd tə bɔl ʌp ɔl əɹ æŋɡɝ ət wɪmən biɪŋ tʃeɪn laɪk ænəməlz tə mænədʒ ɪt. "æn aɪ oʊnli dɪɾ ɪt wʌns. ən ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə tʃɹɪkəl."

"I made sure they weren't looking at me," Nynaeve muttered. She had had to ball up all her anger at women being chained like animals to manage it. "And I only did it once. And it was only a trickle."

"ə tʃɹɪkəl? wi hæd tə spɛn θɹi deɪz haɪɾɪŋ ɪn əɹ ɹum bɹiðɪŋ fɪʃ waɪl ðeɪ sɝtʃt ðə taʊn fəɹ huɛvɝ hæd dʌn ɪt. dʒju kɔl ðət biɪŋ kɛɹfəl?"

"A trickle? We had to spend three days hiding in our room breathing fish while they searched the town for whoever had done it. Do you call that being careful?"

"aɪ hæd tə noʊ ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ə weɪ tə ənfæstən ðoʊz kɑlɝz." ʃi θɔt ðəɹ wɑz. ʃi wəɾ əv tə tɛst wʌn mɔɹ kɑlɝ ət lis bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɑz sɝɾən, ən ʃi wɑz nɑt lʊkɪŋ fɔɹwɝd tə ɪt. ʃi hæd θɔt, laɪk ɪleɪn, ðət ðə deɪmeɪn mʌst ɔl bi pɹɪznɝz iɡɝ tə ɪskeɪp, bʌɾ ɪt hæd bɪn ðə wʊmən ɪn ðə kɑlɝ u ɹeɪz ðə pɹaɪ.

"I had to know if there was a way to unfasten those collars." She thought there was. She would have to test one more collar at least before she was certain, and she was not looking forward to it. She had thought, like Elayne, that the damane must all be prisoners eager to escape, but it had been the woman in the collar who raised the pry.

ə mæn pʊʃɪŋ ə bæɹoʊ ðət bʌmpt oʊvɝ ðə kɑbəlstoʊnz pæs baɪ ðɛm, kɹaɪɪŋ ɪz sɝvəsəz tə ʃɑɹpən sɪzɝz ən naɪvz. "ðeɪ ʃəd ɹɪzɪst, sʌmhaʊ," ɪleɪn ɡɹaʊld. "ðeɪ ækt əz ɪf ðeɪ də nɑt si ɛniθɪŋ ðət hæpənz ɝaʊn əm ɪf ðɛɹz ə sintʃæn ɪn ɪt."

A man pushing a barrow that bumped over the cobblestones passed by them, crying his services to sharpen scissors and knives. "They should resist, somehow," Elayne growled. "They act as if they do not see anything that happens around them if there's a Seanchan in it."

nɪneɪiv oʊnli saɪd. ɪt dɪd nɑt hɛlp ðət ʃi θɔɾ ɪleɪn wɑz ət lis pɑɹtli ɹaɪt. ət fɝst ʃi hæd θɔt səm ə ðə fɑlmɛn səbmɪʃən, ət list, mʌs bi ə poʊz, bʌt ʃi hæd faʊnd noʊ ɛvəɾəns ʌv ɛni ɹɪzɪstəns əɾ ɔl. ʃi hæd lʊkt ət fɝst, hoʊpɪŋ tə faɪn hɛlp ɪn fɹiɪŋ ɛɡwin ən mɪn, bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn tʊk fɹaɪɾ ət ðə mɛɹəs hɪn ðət ðeɪ maɪɾ əpoʊz ðə sintʃæn, ən ʃi stɑpt æskɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ʃi dʒɹu ðə ɹɔŋ sɔɹɾ ʌv ətɛnʃən. ɪn tʃɹuθ, ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən haʊ ðə pipəl kəd faɪt. mɑnstɝz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. haʊ kən jə faɪt mɑnstɝz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ?

Nynaeve only sighed. It did not help that she thought Elayne was at least partly right. At first she had thought some of the Falmen submission, at least, must be a pose, but she had found no evidence of any resistance at all. She had looked at first, hoping to find help in freeing Egwene and Min, but everyone took fright at the merest hint that they might oppose the Seanchan, and she stopped asking before she drew the wrong sort of attention. In truth, she could not imagine how the people could fight. Monsters and Aes Sedai. How can you fight monsters and Aes Sedai?

əhɛd stʊd faɪv tɔl stoʊn haʊsəz, əmʌŋ ðə lɑɹdʒəst ɪn ðə taʊn, ɔl təɡɛðɝ meɪkɪŋ ʌp ə blɑk. wʌn stʃɹit ʃɔɹɾ ə ðɛm, nɪneɪiv faʊn ən æliweɪ bɪsaɪɾ ə teɪlɝ ʃɑp, wɛɹ ðeɪ kəd kip ən aɪ ɑn səm ə ðə tɔl haʊsəz' ɛntʃɹənsəz, ət list. ɪt wɑz nɑt pɑsəbəl tə si ɛvɹi dɔɹ ət wʌns - ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɹɪsk lɛɾɪŋ ɪleɪn ɡoʊ ɔf ɑn əɹ oʊn tə wɑtʃ mɔɹ - bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt waɪz tə ɡoʊ ɛni kloʊsɝ. əbʌv ðə ɹuftɑps, ɑn ðə nɛkst stʃɹit, ðə ɡoʊldən hɔk bænɝ ə ðə haɪ lɔɹd tʃɹɑk flæpt ɪn ðə wɪnd.

Ahead stood five tall stone houses, among the largest in the town, all together making up a block. One street short of them, Nynaeve found an alleyway beside a tailor shop, where they could keep an eye on some of the tall houses' entrances, at least. It was not possible to see every door at once - she did not want to risk letting Elayne go off on her own to watch more - but it was not wise to go any closer. Above the rooftops, on the next street, the golden hawk banner of the High Lord Turak flapped in the wind.

oʊnli wɪmən wɛn ɪn əɹ aʊɾ ə ðoʊz haʊsəz, ən moʊst ə ðoʊz wɝ sʌldəm, əloʊn əɹ wɪð deɪmeɪn ɪn toʊ. ðə bɪldɪŋz hæd bɪn teɪkən oʊvɝ baɪ ðə sintʃæn tə haʊs ðə deɪmeɪn. ɛɡwin hæd tə bi ɪn ðɛɹ, ən laɪkli mɪn; ðeɪ hæd faʊnd noʊ saɪn ə mɪn soʊ fɑɹ, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl ʃi wɑz əz hɪɾən baɪ ðə kɹaʊdz əz ðeɪ. nɪneɪiv hæd hɝd mɛni teɪlz ʌv wɪmən ən ɡɝlz biɪŋ sizd ɑn ðə stʃɹits əɹ bɹɔɾ ɪn fɹəm ðə vɪlədʒəz; ðeɪ ɔl wɛn ɪndə ðoʊz haʊsəz, ən ɪf ðeɪ wɝ sin əɡɛn, ðeɪ wɔɹ ə kɑlɝ.

Only women went in or out of those houses, and most of those were sul'dam, alone or with damane in tow. The buildings had been taken over by the Seanchan to house the damane. Egwene had to be in there, and likely Min; they had found no sign of Min so far, though it was possible she was as hidden by the crowds as they. Nynaeve had heard many tales of women and girls being seized on the streets or brought in from the villages; they all went into those houses, and if they were seen again, they wore a collar.

sɛɾəlɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɑn ə kɹeɪt bɪsaɪɾ ɪleɪn, ʃi dʌɡ ɪndə ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz koʊt fəɹ ə hændfʊl ə ðə smɔl æpəlz. ðəɹ wɝ fjuɝ loʊkəl foʊk ɪn ðə stʃɹits hɪɹ. ɛvɹiwʌn nu wʌt ðə haʊsəz wɝ, ən ɛvɹiwʌn əvɔɪɾəd ðɛm, dʒʌst əz ðeɪ əvɔɪɾəd ðə steɪbəlz wɛɹ ðə sintʃæn kɛp ðɛɹ bists. ɪt wɑz nɑt dɪfəkəl tə kip ən aɪ ɑn ðə dɔɹz θɹu speɪsəz bɪtwin ðə pæsɝzbi. dʒʌs tu wɪmən stɑpɪŋ fəɹ ə baɪt; dʒʌs tu mɔɹ pipəl u kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə iɾ əɾ ən ɪn. nʌθɪŋ tə ətʃɹæk mɔɹ ðən ə pæsɪŋ ɡlæns.

Settling herself on a crate beside Elayne, she dug into the other woman's coat for a handful of the small apples. There were fewer local folk in the streets here. Everyone knew what the houses were, and everyone avoided them, just as they avoided the stables where the Seanchan kept their beasts. It was not difficult to keep an eye on the doors through spaces between the passersby. Just two women stopping for a bite; just two more people who could not afford to eat at an inn. Nothing to attract more than a passing glance.

iɾɪŋ məkænɪkli, nɪneɪiv tʃɹaɪd wʌns mɔɹ tə plæn. biɪŋ eɪbəl tə oʊpən ðə kɑlɝ - ɪf ʃi ɹɪli kəd - dɪd noʊ ɡʊɾ əɾ ɔl ənlɛs ʃi kəd ɹitʃ ɛɡwin. ði æpəlz dɪd nɑt teɪst soʊ swiɾ ɛnimɔɹ.

Eating mechanically, Nynaeve tried once more to plan. Being able to open the collar - if she really could - did no good at all unless she could reach Egwene. The apples did not taste so sweet anymore.

fɹəm ðə nɛɹoʊ wɪndoʊ ʌv əɹ taɪni ɹum ʌndɝ ði ivz, wʌn ʌv ə nʌmbɝ ɹʌfli wɔl təɡɛðɝ fɹəm wʌtɛvɝ hæd bɪn ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ, ɛɡwin kəd si ðə ɡɑɹɾən wɛɹ deɪmeɪn wɝ biɪŋ wɔk baɪ ðɛɹ sʌldəm. ɪt hæd bɪn sɛvɹəl ɡɑɹɾənz bɪfɔɹ ðə sintʃæn nɑk daʊn ðə wɔlz ðət sɛpɝeɪɾəd əm ən tʊk ðə bɪɡ haʊsəz tə kip ðɛɹ deɪmeɪn. ðə tʃɹiz wɝ ɔl bʌt lifləs, bʌt ðə deɪmeɪn wɝ stɪl teɪkən aʊt fəɹ ɛɹ, wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɑntəɾ ɪɾ əɹ nɑt. ɛɡwin wɑtʃt ðə ɡɑɹɾən kəz ɹɛnə wɑz daʊn ðɛɹ, tɔkɪŋ wɪð ənʌðɝ sʌldəm, ən əz lɔŋ əz ʃi kəd si ɹɛnə, ðən ɹɛnə wɑz nɑt gɑnə ɛntɝ ən sɝpɹaɪz hɝ.

From the narrow window of her tiny room under the eaves, one of a number roughly walled together from whatever had been there before, Egwene could see the garden where damane were being walked by their sul'dam. It had been several gardens before the Seanchan knocked down the walls that separated them and took the big houses to keep their damane. The trees were all but leafless, but the damane were still taken out for air, whether they wanted it or not. Egwene watched the garden because Renna was down there, talking with another sul'dam, and as long as she could see Renna, then Renna was not going to enter and surprise her.

səm ʌðɝ sʌldəm maɪt kʌm - ðəɹ wɝ mɛni mɔɹ sʌldəm ðən deɪmeɪn, ən ɛvɹi sʌldəm wɑntəɾ əɹ tɝn wɛɹɪŋ ə bɹeɪslət; ðeɪ kɔld ɪt biɪŋ kəmplit - bʌt ɹɛnə stɪl hæd tʃɑɹdʒ ə hɝ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ, ən ɪt wɑz ɹɛnə hu wɔɹ əɹ bɹeɪslət fɔɹ taɪmz aʊɾ ə faɪv. ɪf ɛniwʌn keɪm, ðeɪ wəd faɪnd noʊ ɪmpɛɾəmənt tə ɛntɝɪŋ. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ lɑks ɑn ðə dɔɹz ə deɪmeɪnz ɹumz. ɛɡwinz ɹum hɛld oʊnli ə hɑɹd, nɛɹoʊ bɛd, ə wɑʃstænd wɪð ə tʃɪpt pɪtʃɝ ən boʊl, wʌn tʃɛɹ ən ə smɔl teɪbəl, bʌɾ ɪt hæd noʊ ɹum fəɹ mɔɹ. deɪmeɪn hæd noʊ niɾ ə kʌmfɝt, əɹ pɹaɪvəsi, əɹ pəzɛʃənz. deɪmeɪn wɝ pəzɛʃənz. mɪn hæɾ ə ɹum dʒʌs laɪk ðɪs, ɪn ənʌðɝ haʊs, bʌt mɪn kəd kʌm ən ɡoʊ əz ʃi wʊd, əɹ ɔlmoʊst əz ʃi wʊd. sintʃæn wɝ ɡɹeɪt wʌnz fəɹ ɹulz; ðeɪ hæd mɔɹ, fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn, ðən ðə waɪt taʊɝ dɪd fəɹ nɑvəsɪz.

Some other sul'dam might come - there were many more sul'dam than damane, and every sul'dam wanted her turn wearing a bracelet; they called it being complete - but Renna still had charge of her training, and it was Renna who wore her bracelet four times out of five. If anyone came, they would find no impediment to entering. There were no locks on the doors of damane's rooms. Egwene's room held only a hard, narrow bed, a washstand with a chipped pitcher and bowl, one chair and a small table, but it had no room for more. Damane had no need of comfort, or privacy, or possessions. Damane were possessions. Min had a room just like this, in another house, but Min could come and go as she would, or almost as she would. Seanchan were great ones for rules; they had more, for everyone, than the White Tower did for novices.

ɛɡwin stʊd fɑɹ bæk fɹəm ðə wɪndoʊ. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑn ɛni ʌv ðə wɪmən bɪloʊ tə lʊk ʌp ən si ðə ɡloʊ ðət ʃi nu sɝaʊndəɾ əɹ əz ʃi tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ, pɹoʊbɪŋ dɛləkətli ət ðə kɑlɝ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk, sɝtʃɪŋ fjuɾɪlli; ʃi kəd nɑɾ ivən tɛl wɛðɝ ðə bænd wɑz woʊvən əɹ meɪɾ ə lɪŋks - səmtaɪmz ɪt simd wʌn, səmtaɪmz ði ʌðɝ - bʌɾ ɪt simd ɔl ʌv ə pis ɔl ðə taɪm. ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə taɪni tʃɹɪkəl ə ðə paʊɝ, ðə mɛɹəs dʒɹɪp ðət ʃi kəɾ ɪmædʒən, bʌɾ ɪt stɪl biɾɪd swɛɾ ɑn əɹ feɪs ən meɪɾ əɹ stʌmək klɛntʃ. ðət wɑz wʌn ə ðə pɹɑpɝɾiz ə ði æɾəm; ɪf ə deɪmeɪn tʃɹaɪd tə tʃænəl wɪθaʊɾ ə sʌldəm wɛɹɪŋ əɹ bɹeɪslət, ʃi fɛl sɪk, ən ðə mɔɹ ə ðə paʊɝ ʃi tʃænəld, ðə sɪkɝ ʃi bɪkeɪm. laɪɾɪŋ ə kændəl bɪɑn ðə ɹitʃ ə hɝ ɑɹm wʊɾə meɪɾ ɛɡwin vɑmət. wʌns ɹɛnə hæɾ ɔɹɾɝd əɹ tə dʒʌɡəl əɹ taɪni bɔlz ə laɪt wɪð ðə bɹeɪslət laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə teɪbəl. ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ stɪl meɪɾ əɹ ʃʌɾɝ.

Egwene stood far back from the window. She did not want any of the women below to look up and see the glow that she knew surrounded her as she channeled the One Power, probing delicately at the collar around her neck, searching futilely; she could not even tell whether the band was woven or made of links - sometimes it seemed one, sometimes the other - but it seemed all of a piece all the time. It was only a tiny trickle of the Power, the merest drip that she could imagine, but it still beaded sweat on her face and made her stomach clench. That was one of the properties of the a'dam; if a damane tried to channel without a sul'dam wearing her bracelet, she felt sick, and the more of the Power she channeled, the sicker she became. Lighting a candle beyond the reach of her arm would have made Egwene vomit. Once Renna had ordered her to juggle her tiny balls of light with the bracelet lying on the table. Remembering still made her shudder.

naʊ, ðə sɪlvɝ liʃ sneɪkt əkɹɔs ðə bɛɹ flɔɹ ən ʌp ði ənpeɪntɪd wʊɾən wɔl tə wɛɹ ðə bɹeɪslət hʌŋ ɑn ə pɛɡ. ðə saɪɾ ʌv ɪt hæŋɪŋ ðəɹ meɪɾ əɹ dʒɔz klɛntʃ wɪð fjʊɹi. ə dɔɡ liʃt soʊ kɛɹləsli cʊɾə ɹʌn əweɪ. ɪf ə deɪmeɪn muvd əɹ bɹeɪsləɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ə fʊt fɹəm wɛɹ ɪt hæd læs bɪn tʌtʃt baɪ ə sʌldəm. . . . ɹɛnə hæd meɪɾ əɹ də ðæt, tu - hæd meɪɾ əɹ kæɹi hɝ oʊn bɹeɪsləɾ əkɹɔs ðə ɹum. əɹ tʃɹaɪ tə. ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt hæɾ oʊnli bɪn mɪnəts bɪfɔɹ ðə sʌldəm snæp ðə bɹeɪslət fɝmli ɑn əɹ oʊn ɹɪst, bʌt tə ɛɡwin ðə skɹimɪŋ ən ðə kɹæmps ðət hæd hæɾ əɹ ɹaɪðɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ hæd sim tə ɡoʊ ɑn fəɹ aʊɝz.

Now, the silver leash snaked across the bare floor and up the unpainted wooden wall to where the bracelet hung on a peg. The sight of it hanging there made her jaws clench with fury. A dog leashed so carelessly could have run away. If a damane moved her bracelet as much as a foot from where it had last been touched by a sul'dam. . . . Renna had made her do that, too - had made her carry her own bracelet across the room. Or try to. She was sure it had only been minutes before the sul'dam snapped the bracelet firmly on her own wrist, but to Egwene the screaming and the cramps that had had her writhing on the floor had seemed to go on for hours.

sʌmwʌn tæpt ət ðə dɔɹ, ən ɛɡwin dʒʌmpt, bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹilaɪzd ɪt kəd nɑt bi ə sʌldəm. nʌn ə ðɛm wəd nɑk fɝst. ʃi lɛt seɪaɪdɑɹ ɡoʊ, ɛniweɪ; ʃi wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə fil dɪsaɪɾədli ɪl. "mɪn?"

Someone tapped at the door, and Egwene jumped, before she realized it could not be a sul'dam. None of them would knock first. She let saidar go, anyway; she was beginning to feel decidedly ill. "Min?"

"hɪɹ aɪm fəɹ maɪ wikli vɪzət," mɪn ənaʊnst əz ʃi slɪpt ɪnsaɪɾ ən ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ. hɝ tʃɪɹaɪnəs saʊndəɾ ə lɪɾəl fɔɹst, bʌt ʃi ɔlweɪz dɪd wʌt ʃi kəd tə kip ɛɡwinz spɪɹəts ʌp. "haʊ dʒju laɪk ɪt?" ʃi spʌn ɪn ə lɪɾəl sɝkəl, ʃoʊɪŋ ɔf əɹ dɑɹk ɡɹin wʊl dʒɹɛs ə sintʃæn kʌt. ə hɛvi, mætʃɪŋ kloʊk hʌŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ɑɹm. ðəɹ wɑz ivən ə ɡɹin ɹɪbən kætʃɪŋ ʌp əɹ dɑɹk hɛɹ, ðoʊ hɝ hɛɹ wɑz hɑɹdli lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɪt. hɝ naɪf wɑz stɪl ɪn ɪts ʃiθ əɾ əɹ weɪst, ðoʊ. ɛɡwin hæd bɪn sɝpɹaɪzd wən mɪn fɝst ʃoʊɾ ʌp wɛɹɪŋ ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt sim ðə sintʃæn tʃɹʌstɪɾ ɛvɹiwʌn. əntɪl ðeɪ bɹoʊk ə ɹul.

"Here I am for my weekly visit," Min announced as she slipped inside and shut the door. Her cheeriness sounded a little forced, but she always did what she could to keep Egwene's spirits up. "How do you like it?" She spun in a little circle, showing off her dark green wool dress of Seanchan cut. A heavy, matching cloak hung over her arm. There was even a green ribbon catching up her dark hair, though her hair was hardly long enough for it. Her knife was still in its sheath at her waist, though. Egwene had been surprised when Min first showed up wearing it, but it seemed the Seanchan trusted everyone. Until they broke a rule.

"ɪts pɹɪɾi," ɛɡwin sɛd kɔʃəsli. "bʌt, waɪ?"

"It's pretty," Egwene said cautiously. "But, why?"

"aɪ hævənt ɡɔn oʊvɝ tə ði ɛnəmi, ɪf ðəɾ ɪz wʌt jə ɑɹ θɪŋkɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ðɪs, əɹ ɛls faɪn sʌmpleɪs tə steɪ aʊɾ ɪn ðə taʊn, ən meɪbi nɑt bi eɪbəl tə vɪzət jə əɡɛn." ʃi stɑɹɾəd tə stʃɹæɾəl ðə tʃɛɹ əz ʃi wəɾ əv ɪn bɹitʃɪz, ɡeɪv ə ɹaɪ ʃeɪk ə hɝ hɛd, ən tɝn ɪɾ ɝaʊn tə sɪt. " 'ɛvɹiwʌn əz ə pleɪs ɪn ðə pæɾɝn,' " ʃi mɪmɪkt, " 'æn ðə pleɪs ʌv ɛvɹiwʌn mʌs bi ɹɛɾəli əpɛɹənt.' ðəɾ oʊl hæɡ muleɪən əpɛɹənli ɡɑt taɪɝɾ ə nɑt noʊɪŋ wʌt maɪ pleɪs wɑz ɑn saɪɾ ən dɪsaɪɾɪd aɪ ɹæŋkt wɪð ðə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz. ʃi ɡeɪv mi ðə tʃɔɪs. jə ʃəd si səm ə ðə θɪŋz sintʃæn sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz wɛɹ, ðə wʌnz u sɝv ðə lɔɹdz. ɪt maɪt bi fʌn, bʌt nɑɾ ənlɛs aɪ wɑz bɪtʃɹɑθd, ɔɹ, bɛɾɝ jɛt, mɛɹid. wɛl, ðɛɹz noʊ ɡoʊɪŋ bæk. nɑt jɛt, ɛniweɪ. muleɪən bɝn maɪ koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz." ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ tə ʃoʊ wʌt ʃi θɔɾ ə ðæt, ʃi pɪkt ʌp ə ɹɑk fɹəm ə smɔl paɪl ɑn ðə teɪbəl ən baʊnst ɪt fɹəm hæn tə hænd. "ɪɾ ɪzən soʊ bæd," ʃi sɛd wɪð ə læf, "ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɪts bɪn soʊ lɔŋ sɪns aɪ wɔɹ skɝts ðəɾ aɪ kip tʃɹɪpɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛm."

"I haven't gone over to the enemy, if that is what you are thinking. It was this, or else find someplace to stay out in the town, and maybe not be able to visit you again." She started to straddle the chair as she would have in breeches, gave a wry shake of her head, and turned it around to sit. " 'Everyone has a place in the Pattern,' " she mimicked, " 'and the place of everyone must be readily apparent.' That old hag Mulaen apparently got tired of not knowing what my place was on sight and decided I ranked with the serving girls. She gave me the choice. You should see some of the things Seanchan serving girls wear, the ones who serve the lords. It might be fun, but not unless I was betrothed, or, better yet, married. Well, there's no going back. Not yet, anyway. Mulaen burned my coat and breeches." Grimacing to show what she thought of that, she picked up a rock from a small pile on the table and bounced it from hand to hand. "It isn't so bad," she said with a laugh, "except that it has been so long since I wore skirts that I keep tripping over them."

ɛɡwin hæd hæd tə wɑtʃ əɹ kloʊðz biɪŋ bɝnd, tu, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðət lʌvli ɡɹin sɪlk. ɪt hæd meɪɾ əɹ ɡlæd ʃi hæd nɑt bɹɔt mɔɹ ə ðə kloʊðz ðə leɪɾi əmælisə hæd ɡɪvən hɝ, ðoʊ ʃi maɪt nɛvɝ si ɛni ʌv ðɛm, əɹ ðə waɪt taʊɝ, əɡɛn. wʌt ʃi hæɾ ɑn naʊ wɑz ðə seɪm dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ ɔl deɪmeɪn wɔɹ. deɪmeɪn əv noʊ pəzɛʃənz, ɪt hæd bɪn ɪkspleɪn tə hɝ. ðə dʒɹɛs ə deɪmeɪn wɛɹz, ðə fud ʃi its, ðə bɛd ʃi slips ɪn, ɑɹ ɔl ɡɪfs fɹəm əɹ sʌldəm. ɪf ə sʌldəm tʃuzəz ðəɾ ə deɪmeɪn slip ɑn ðə flɔɹ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɪn ə bɛd, əɹ ɪn ə stɔl ɪn ə steɪbəl, ɪts pjʊɹli ðə tʃɔɪs ə ðə sʌldəm. muleɪən, hu hæd tʃɑɹdʒ ə ðə deɪmeɪn kɔɹɾɝz, hæɾ ə dʒɹoʊnɪŋ neɪzəl vɔɪs, bʌt ʃi wɑz ʃɑɹp wɪð ɛni deɪmeɪn u dɪd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛvɹi wɝɾ ə hɝ bɔɹɪŋ lɛktʃɝz.

Egwene had had to watch her clothes being burned, too, including that lovely green silk. It had made her glad she had not brought more of the clothes the Lady Amalisa had given her, though she might never see any of them, or the White Tower, again. What she had on now was the same dark gray all damane wore. Damane have no possessions, it had been explained to her. The dress a damane wears, the food she eats, the bed she sleeps in, are all gifts from her sul'dam. If a sul'dam chooses that a damane sleep on the floor instead of in a bed, or in a stall in a stable, it is purely the choice of the sul'dam. Mulaen, who had charge of the damane quarters, had a droning nasal voice, but she was sharp with any damane who did not remember every word of her boring lectures.

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðəɹ wɪl bi ɛni ɡoʊɪŋ bæk fəɹ mi ɛvɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd, saɪɪŋ, sɪŋkɪŋ daʊn ɑn əɹ bɛd. ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd tə ðə ɹɑks ɑn ðə teɪbəl. "ɹɛnə ɡeɪv mi ə tɛst, jɛstɝdeɪ. aɪ pɪkt aʊt ðə pis ʌv aɪɝn ɔɹ, ən ðə kɑpɝ ɔɹ, blaɪndfoʊldɪd, ɛvɹi taɪm ʃi mɪkst əm ʌp. ʃi lɛft əm ɔl hɪɹ tə ɹimaɪn mi ʌv maɪ səksɛs. ʃi sim tə θɪŋk ɪt wɑz səm kaɪndə ɹɪwɔɹd tə bi ɹimaɪndəd."

"I don't think there will be any going back for me ever," Egwene said, sighing, sinking down on her bed. She gestured to the rocks on the table. "Renna gave me a test, yesterday. I picked out the piece of iron ore, and the copper ore, blindfolded, every time she mixed them up. She left them all here to remind me of my success. She seemed to think it was some kind of reward to be reminded."

"ɪt dʌzn sim ɛni wɝs ðən ðə ɹɛst - nɑt nɪɹli əz bæɾ əz meɪkɪŋ θɪŋz ɪksploʊd laɪk faɪɹwɝks - bʌt kʊdn juv laɪd? toʊld əɹ jə dɪdnt noʊ wɪtʃ wɑz wɪtʃ?"

"It doesn't seem any worse than the rest - not nearly as bad as making things explode like fireworks - but couldn't you have lied? Told her you didn't know which was which?"

"ju stɪl də nɑt noʊ wʌt ðɪs ɪz laɪk." ɛɡwin tʌɡd ət ðə kɑlɝ; pʊlɪŋ dɪd noʊ mɔɹ ɡʊd ðən tʃænəlɪŋ hæd. "wɛn ɹɛnə ɪz wɛɹɪŋ ðət bɹeɪslət, ʃi noʊz wʌɾ aɪm duɪŋ wɪð ðə paʊɝ, ən wʌɾ aɪm nɑt. səmtaɪmz ʃi ivən simz tə noʊ wən ʃi ɪzənt wɛɹɪŋ ɪt; ʃi sɛz sʌldəm dɪvɛləp - ən əfɪnəɾi, ʃi kɔlz ɪt - æftɝ ə waɪl." ʃi saɪd. "noʊ wʌn ivən θɔt tə tɛs mi ɑn ðɪs ɝliɝ. ɝθ ɪz wʌn ə ðə faɪv paʊɝz ðət wɑz stʃɹɔŋɡəst ɪn mɛn. wən aɪ pɪkt aʊt ðoʊz ɹɑks, ʃi tʊk mi aʊtsaɪd ðə taʊn, ən aɪ wɑz eɪbəl tə pɔɪn ɹaɪt tə ən əbændən aɪɝn maɪn. ɪt wɑz ɔl oʊvɝɡɹoʊn, ən ðəɹ wɑzn ɛni oʊpənɪŋ tə bi sin əɾ ɔl, bʌt wʌns aɪ nu haʊ, aɪ kəd fil ði aɪɝn ɔɹ stɪl ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ðəɹ hæzən bɪn ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪt wɝθ wɝkɪŋ ɪn ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, bʌɾ aɪ nu ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ. aɪ kʊdn laɪ tə hɝ, mɪn. ʃi nu aɪ hæd sɛns ðə maɪn əz sun əz aɪ dɪd. ʃi wɑz soʊ ɪksaɪɾəd, ʃi pɹɑməs mi ə pʊɾɪŋ wɪð maɪ sʌpɝ." ʃi fɛlt əɹ tʃiks ɡɹoʊɪŋ hɑt, ɪn æŋɡɝ ən ɪmbɛɹəsmənt. "əpɛɹənli," ʃi sɛd bɪɾɝli, "aɪ æm naʊ tu væljəbəl tə bi weɪstəd meɪkɪŋ θɪŋz ɪksploʊd. ɛni deɪmeɪn kən də ðæt; oʊnli ə hændfʊl kən faɪn ɔɹz ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. laɪt, aɪ heɪt meɪkɪŋ θɪŋz ɪksploʊd, bʌɾ aɪ wɪʃ ðət wɑz ɔl aɪ kəd du."

"You still do not know what this is like." Egwene tugged at the collar; pulling did no more good than channeling had. "When Renna is wearing that bracelet, she knows what I am doing with the Power, and what I am not. Sometimes she even seems to know when she isn't wearing it; she says sul'dam develop - an affinity, she calls it - after a while." She sighed. "No one even thought to test me on this earlier. Earth is one of the Five Powers that was strongest in men. When I picked out those rocks, she took me outside the town, and I was able to point right to an abandoned iron mine. It was all overgrown, and there wasn't any opening to be seen at all, but once I knew how, I could feel the iron ore still in the ground. There hasn't been enough to make it worth working in a hundred years, but I knew it was there. I couldn't lie to her, Min. She knew I had sensed the mine as soon as I did. She was so excited, she promised me a pudding with my supper." She felt her cheeks growing hot, in anger and embarrassment. "Apparently," she said bitterly, "I am now too valuable to be wasted making things explode. Any damane can do that; only a handful can find ores in the ground. Light, I hate making things explode, but I wish that was all I could do."

ðə kʌlɝ ɪn əɹ tʃiks dipənd. ʃi dɪd heɪɾ ɪt, meɪkɪŋ tʃɹiz tɛɹ ðɛmsɛlvz tə splɪntɝz ən ði ɝθ ɪɹʌpt; ðət wɑz mɛn fəɹ bæɾəl, fəɹ kɪlɪŋ, ən ʃi wɑntəd noʊ pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. jɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ ðə sintʃæn lɛɾ əɹ də wɑz ənʌðɝ tʃæns tə tʌtʃ seɪaɪdɑɹ, tə fil ðə paʊɝ floʊɪŋ θɹu hɝ. ʃi heɪɾəd ðə θɪŋz ɹɛnə ən ði ʌðɝ sʌldəm meɪɾ əɹ du, bʌt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðət ʃi kəd hændəl mʌtʃ mɔɹ ə ðə paʊɝ naʊ ðən ʃi kəd bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ tɑɹ vəlɑn. ʃi sɝɾənli nu ʃi kəd də θɪŋz wɪð ɪt ðət noʊ sɪstɝ ɪn ðə taʊɝ hæɾ ɛvɝ θɔɾ ə duɪŋ; ðeɪ nɛvɝ θɔɾ ə tɛɹɪŋ ði ɝθ əpɑɹt tə kɪl mɛn.

The color in her cheeks deepened. She did hate it, making trees tear themselves to splinters and the earth erupt; that was meant for battle, for killing, and she wanted no part of it. Yet anything the Seanchan let her do was another chance to touch saidar, to feel the Power flowing through her. She hated the things Renna and the other sul'dam made her do, but she was sure that she could handle much more of the Power now than she could before leaving Tar Valon. She certainly knew she could do things with it that no sister in the Tower had ever thought of doing; they never thought of tearing the earth apart to kill men.

"pɝhæps jə woʊn əv tə wɝi əbaʊɾ ɛni ʌv ɪt mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ," mɪn sɛd, ɡɹɪnɪŋ. "aɪv faʊn əs ə ʃɪp, ɛɡwin. ðə kæptən əz bɪn hɛl hɪɹ baɪ ðə sintʃæn, ən hiz əbaʊt ɹɛɾi tə seɪl wɪð əɹ wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən."

"Perhaps you won't have to worry about any of it much longer," Min said, grinning. "I've found us a ship, Egwene. The captain has been held here by the Seanchan, and he is about ready to sail with or without permission."

"ɪf hɪl teɪk ju, mɪn, ɡoʊ wɪð hɪm," ɛɡwin sɛd wɛɹəli. "aɪ toʊl jə aɪm væljəbəl, naʊ. ɹɛnə sɛz ɪn ə fju deɪz ðəɹ sɛndɪŋ ə ʃɪp bæk tə sintʃæn. dʒʌs tə teɪk mi."

"If he will take you, Min, go with him," Egwene said wearily. "I told you I'm valuable, now. Renna says in a few days they're sending a ship back to Seanchan. Just to take me."

mɪnz ɡɹɪn vænɪʃt, ən ðeɪ stɛɹɾ əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ. sʌɾənli mɪn hɝld əɹ ɹɑk ət ðə paɪl ɑn ðə teɪbəl, skæɾɝɪŋ ðɛm. "ðɛɹ əz tə bi ə weɪ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ. ðəɹ əz tə bi ə weɪ tə teɪk ðət blʌɾi θɪŋ ɔf jəɹ nɛk!"

Min's grin vanished, and they stared at each other. Suddenly Min hurled her rock at the pile on the table, scattering them. "There has to be a way out of here. There has to be a way to take that bloody thing off your neck!"

ɛɡwin lin əɹ hɛd bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl. "ju noʊ ðə sintʃæn əv kəlɛktəɾ ɛvɹi wʊmən ðeɪv bɪn eɪbəl tə faɪn u kən tʃænəl ivən ə spɛk. ðeɪ kʌm fɹəm ɔl oʊvɝ, nɑt dʒʌs fɹəm hɪɹ ɪn fɑlm, bʌt fɹəm ðə fɪʃɪŋ vɪlədʒəz, ən fɹəm fɑɹmɪŋ taʊnz ɪnlænd. tæɹɑbənɝ ən dəmɑni wɪmən, pæsənʒɝz ɔf ʃɪps ðeɪv stɑpt. ðəɹ ɑɹ tu ɛɛs sədaɪ əmʌŋ ðɛm."

Egwene leaned her head back against the wall. "You know the Seanchan have collected every woman they've been able to find who can channel even a speck. They come from all over, not just from here in Falme, but from the fishing villages, and from farming towns inland. Taraboner and Domani women, passengers off ships they've stopped. There are two Aes Sedai among them."

"ɛɛs sədaɪ!" mɪn ɪkskleɪmd. baɪ hæbət ʃi lʊkt ɝaʊn tə meɪk ʃʊɹ noʊ sintʃæn hæɾ oʊvɝhɝɾ əɹ seɪɪŋ ðət neɪm. "ɛɡwin, ɪf ðəɹ ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ hɪɹ, ðeɪ kən hɛlp ʌs. lemi tɔk tə ðɛm, ən - "

"Aes Sedai!" Min exclaimed. By habit she looked around to make sure no Seanchan had overheard her saying that name. "Egwene, if there are Aes Sedai here, they can help us. Let me talk to them, and - "

"ðeɪ kæn ivən hɛlp ðɛmsɛlvz, mɪn. aɪ oʊnli tɔk tə wʌn - hɝ neɪm ɪz ɹaɪmə; ðə sʌldəm doʊn kɔl əɹ ðæt, bʌt ðæts əɹ neɪm; ʃi wɑntəd tə meɪk ʃʊɹ aɪ nu ɪt - ən ʃi toʊl mi ðəɹ ɪz ənʌðɝ. ʃi toʊl mi ɪn bɪtwin baʊts ə tɪɹz. ʃiz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ʃi wɑz kɹaɪɪŋ, mɪn! ʃiz ə kɑlɝ ɑn əɹ nɛk, ðeɪ meɪk əɹ ænsɝ tə pʊɹə, ən ʃi kæn də ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ əbaʊɾ ɪt ðən aɪ kæn. ðeɪ kæptʃɝɾ əɹ wən fɑlm fɛl. ʃi wɑz kɹaɪɪŋ kəz ʃiz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə stɑp faɪɾɪŋ əɡɛnst ɪt, kəz ʃi kænɑt teɪk biɪŋ pʌnɪʃt ɛnimɔɹ. ʃi wɑz kɹaɪɪŋ kəz ʃi wɑns tə teɪk əɹ oʊn laɪf, ən ʃi kænɑɾ ivən də ðət wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən. laɪt, aɪ noʊ haʊ ʃi filz!"

"They can't even help themselves, Min. I only talked to one - her name is Ryma; the sul'dam don't call her that, but that's her name; she wanted to make sure I knew it - and she told me there is another. She told me in between bouts of tears. She's Aes Sedai, and she was crying, Min! She has a collar on her neck, they make her answer to Pura, and she can't do anything more about it than I can. They captured her when Falme fell. She was crying because she's beginning to stop fighting against it, because she cannot take being punished anymore. She was crying because she wants to take her own life, and she cannot even do that without permission. Light, I know how she feels!"

mɪn ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli, smuðɪŋ əɹ dʒɹɛs wɪð sʌɾənli nɝvəs hænz. "ɛɡwin, jə doʊnt wɑn tə. . . . ɛɡwin, jə mʌs nɑt θɪŋk ə hɑɹmɪŋ jɝsɛlf. əl ɡɛt jə aʊt sʌmhaʊ. aɪ wɪl!"

Min shifted uneasily, smoothing her dress with suddenly nervous hands. "Egwene, you don't want to. . . . Egwene, you must not think of harming yourself. I will get you out somehow. I will!"

"aɪ æm nɑt gɑnə kɪl maɪsɛlf," ɛɡwin sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "ivən ɪf aɪ kʊd. lemi hæv jəɹ naɪf. kʌm ɑn. aɪ woʊn hɝt maɪsɛlf. dʒʌs hæn ɪt tə mi."

"I am not going to kill myself," Egwene said dryly. "Even if I could. Let me have your knife. Come on. I won't hurt myself. Just hand it to me."

mɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd bɪfɔɹ sloʊli teɪkɪŋ əɹ naɪf fɹəm ɪts ʃiθ əɾ əɹ weɪst. ʃi hɛld ɪɾ aʊt wɛɹəli, ɑbviəsli ɹɛɾi tə lip ɪf ɛɡwin tʃɹaɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ.

Min hesitated before slowly taking her knife from its sheath at her waist. She held it out warily, obviously ready to leap if Egwene tried anything.

ɛɡwin tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə hɪlt. ə sɑf kwɪvɝ ɹæn θɹu ðə mʌsəlz ə hɝ ɑɹm. əz əɹ hæn keɪm wɪðɪn ə fʊɾ ə ðə naɪf, ə kɹæmp sʌɾənli kəntɔɹɾəd əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. aɪz fɪkst, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə fɔɹs əɹ hæn kloʊsɝ. ðə kɹæmp sizd əɹ hoʊl ɑɹm, nɑɾɪŋ mʌsəlz tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝ. wɪð ə ɡɹoʊn, ʃi sæŋk bæk, ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ ɑɹm ən kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ əɹ θɔts ɑn nɑt tʌtʃɪŋ ðə naɪf. sloʊli, ðə peɪn bɪɡæn tə lɛsən.

Egwene took a deep breath and reached for the hilt. A soft quiver ran through the muscles of her arm. As her hand came within a foot of the knife, a cramp suddenly contorted her fingers. Eyes fixed, she tried to force her hand closer. The cramp seized her whole arm, knotting muscles to her shoulder. With a groan, she sank back, rubbing her arm and concentrating her thoughts on not touching the knife. Slowly, the pain began to lessen.

mɪn stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. "wʌt . . . ? aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd."

Min stared at her incredulously. "What . . . ? I don't understand."

"deɪmeɪn ɑɹ nɑɾ əlaʊd tə tʌtʃ ə wɛpən ʌv ɛni kaɪnd." ʃi wɝkt əɹ ɑɹm, filɪŋ ðə taɪtnəs ɡoʊ. "ivən əɹ miɾ ɪz kʌt fəɹ ʌs. aɪ doʊnt wɑnə hɝt maɪsɛlf, bʌɾ aɪ kəd nɑɾ ɪf aɪ dɪd wɑn tə. noʊ deɪmeɪn ɪz ɛvɝ lɛft əloʊn wɛɹ ʃi maɪt dʒʌmp fɹəm ə haɪt - ðət wɪndoʊ ɪz neɪld ʃʌt - əɹ θɹoʊ hɝsɛlf ɪn ə ɹɪvɝ."

"Damane are not allowed to touch a weapon of any kind." She worked her arm, feeling the tightness go. "Even our meat is cut for us. I don't want to hurt myself, but I could not if I did want to. No damane is ever left alone where she might jump from a height - that window is nailed shut - or throw herself in a river."

"wɛl, ðæts ə ɡʊd θɪŋ. aɪ min. . . . oʊ, aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ aɪ min. ɪf jə kəd dʒʌmp ɪn ə ɹɪvɝ, jə maɪɾ ɪskeɪp."

"Well, that's a good thing. I mean. . . . Oh, I don't know what I mean. If you could jump in a river, you might escape."

ɛɡwin wɛn ɑn dʌli, əz ɪf ði ʌðɝ wʊmən hæd nɑt spoʊkən. "ðeɪ ɑɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ mi, mɪn. ðə sʌldəm ən ði æɾəm ɑɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ mi. aɪ kænɑt tʌtʃ ɛniθɪŋ aɪ ivən θɪŋk ʌv əz ə wɛpən. ə fju wiks əɡoʊ aɪ kənsɪɾɝd hɪɾɪŋ ɹɛnə oʊvɝ ðə hɛd wɪð ðət pɪtʃɝ, ən aɪ kəd nɑt pɔɹ wɑʃ wɔɾɝ fəɹ θɹi deɪz. wʌns aɪd θɔɾ ʌv ɪt ðət weɪ, aɪ nɑɾ oʊnli hæd tə stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt hɪɾɪŋ əɹ wɪð ɪt, aɪ hæd tə kənvɪns maɪsɛlf aɪ wəd nɛvɝ, ʌndɝ ɛni sɝkəmstænsəz, hɪɾ əɹ wɪð ɪt bɪfɔɹ aɪ kəd tʌtʃ ɪɾ əɡɛn. ʃi nu wʌt hæd hæpənd, toʊl mi wʌɾ aɪ hæd tə du, ən wəd nɑt lemi wɑʃ ɛniwɛɹ ɪksɛpt wɪð ðət pɪtʃɝ ən boʊl. jə ɑɹ lʌki ɪt hæpən bɪtwin jəɹ vɪzəɾɪŋ deɪz. ɹɛnə meɪd ʃʊɹ aɪ spɛn ðoʊz deɪz swɛɾɪŋ fɹəm ðə taɪm aɪ woʊk tə ðə taɪm aɪ fɛl əslip, ɪɡzɔstəd. aɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪt ðɛm, bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ mi əz ʃʊɹli əz ðəɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ pʊɹə." ʃi klæpt ə hæn tə hɝ maʊθ, moʊnɪŋ θɹu hɝ tiθ. "hɝ neɪm ɪz ɹaɪmə. aɪ hæv tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ əɹ neɪm, nɑt ðə neɪm ðeɪv pʊɾ ɑn hɝ. ʃiz ɹaɪmə, ən ʃiz jɛloʊ ədʒɑ, ən ʃiz fɔɾ əm əz lɔŋ ən əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi kʊd. ɪts noʊ fɔlt ə hɝz ðət ʃi hæzən ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ lɛf tə faɪɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. aɪ wɪʃ aɪ nu hu ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝ ɪz ðət ɹaɪmə mɛnʃənd. aɪ wɪʃ aɪ nu hɝ neɪm. ɹɪmɛmbɝ boʊθ ʌv ʌs, mɪn. ɹaɪmə, ʌv ðə jɛloʊ ədʒɑ, ən ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ. nɑɾ ɛɡwin ðə deɪmeɪn; ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ ʌv ɛmənz fild. wɪl jə də ðæt?"

Egwene went on dully, as if the other woman had not spoken. "They are training me, Min. The sul'dam and the a'dam are training me. I cannot touch anything I even think of as a weapon. A few weeks ago I considered hitting Renna over the head with that pitcher, and I could not pour wash water for three days. Once I'd thought of it that way, I not only had to stop thinking about hitting her with it, I had to convince myself I would never, under any circumstances, hit her with it before I could touch it again. She knew what had happened, told me what I had to do, and would not let me wash anywhere except with that pitcher and bowl. You are lucky it happened between your visiting days. Renna made sure I spent those days sweating from the time I woke to the time I fell asleep, exhausted. I am trying to fight them, but they are training me as surely as they're training Pura." She clapped a hand to her mouth, moaning through her teeth. "Her name is Ryma. I have to remember her name, not the name they've put on her. She is Ryma, and she's Yellow Ajah, and she has fought them as long and as hard as she could. It is no fault of hers that she hasn't the strength left to fight any longer. I wish I knew who the other sister is that Ryma mentioned. I wish I knew her name. Remember both of us, Min. Ryma, of the Yellow Ajah, and Egwene al'Vere. Not Egwene the damane; Egwene al'Vere of Emond's Field. Will you do that?"

"stɑp ɪt!" mɪn snæpt. "ju stɑp ɪt ɹaɪt ðɪs ɪnstənt! ɪf jə ɡɛt ʃɪpt ɔf tə sintʃæn, əl bi ɹaɪt ðəɹ wɪð ju. bʌɾ aɪ doʊn θɪŋk jə wɪl. jə noʊ aɪv ɹɛd ju, ɛɡwin. aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstæn moʊst ʌv ɪt - aɪ ɔlmoʊs nɛvɝ də - bʌɾ aɪ si θɪŋz aɪm ʃʊɹ lɪŋk jə tə ɹænd, ən pɛɹɪn, ən mæt, ən - jɛs, ivən ɡɑləd, ðə laɪt hɛlp jə fəɹ ə ful. haʊ kən ɛni ʌv ðət hæpən ɪf ðə sintʃæn teɪk jə ɔf əkɹɔs ði oʊʃən?"

"Stop it!" Min snapped. "You stop it right this instant! If you get shipped off to Seanchan, I'll be right there with you. But I don't think you will. You know I've read you, Egwene. I don't understand most of it - I almost never do - but I see things I am sure link you to Rand, and Perrin, and Mat, and - yes, even Galad, the Light help you for a fool. How can any of that happen if the Seanchan take you off across the ocean?"

"meɪbi ðəɹ gɑnə kɑŋkɝ ðə hoʊl wɝld, mɪn. ɪf ðeɪ kɑŋkɝ ðə wɝld, ðɛɹz noʊ ɹizən ɹænd ən ɡɑləɾ ən ðə ɹɛs kəd nɑɾ ɛn ʌp ɪn sintʃæn."

"Maybe they're going to conquer the whole world, Min. If they conquer the world, there's no reason Rand and Galad and the rest could not end up in Seanchan."

"ju nɪni-hɛɾəd ɡus!"

"You ninny-headed goose!"

"aɪ æm biɪŋ pɹæktəkəl," ɛɡwin sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "aɪ doʊn ɪntɛn tə stɑp faɪɾɪŋ, nɑɾ əz lɔŋ əz aɪ kən bɹið, bʌɾ aɪ doʊn si ɛni hoʊp ðəɾ əl ɛvɝ əv ði æɾəm ɔf mi, iðɝ. dʒʌst əz aɪ doʊn si ɛni hoʊp ðəɾ ɛniwʌn ɪz gɑnə stɑp ðə sintʃæn. mɪn, ɪf ðɪs ʃɪp kæptən wɪl teɪk ju, ɡoʊ wɪð hɪm. ət lis ðən wʌn ʌv əs wɪl bi fɹi."

"I am being practical," Egwene said sharply. "I don't intend to stop fighting, not as long as I can breathe, but I don't see any hope that I'll ever have the a'dam off me, either. Just as I don't see any hope that anyone is going to stop the Seanchan. Min, if this ship captain will take you, go with him. At least then one of us will be free."

ðə dɔɹ swʌŋ oʊpən, ən ɹɛnə stɛpt ɪn.

The door swung open, and Renna stepped in.

ɛɡwin dʒʌmp tə hɝ fiɾ ən baʊd ʃɑɹpli, əz dɪd mɪn. ðə taɪni ɹum wɑz kɹaʊɾəd fəɹ boʊɪŋ, bʌt sintʃæn ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn pɹoʊɾəkɑl bɪfɔɹ kʌmfɝt.

Egwene jumped to her feet and bowed sharply, as did Min. The tiny room was crowded for bowing, but Seanchan insisted on protocol before comfort.

"jɔɹ vɪzəɾɪŋ deɪ, ɪz ɪt?" ɹɛnə sɛd. "aɪ hæd fɝɡɑɾən. wɛl, ðəɹ ɪz tʃɹeɪnɪŋ tə bi dʌn ivən ɑn vɪzəɾɪŋ deɪz."

"Your visiting day, is it?" Renna said. "I had forgotten. Well, there is training to be done even on visiting days."

ɛɡwin wɑtʃt ʃɑɹpli əz ðə sʌldəm tʊk daʊn ðə bɹeɪslət, oʊpən ɪt, ən fæsən ɪɾ əɡɛn ɝaʊn əɹ ɹɪst. ʃi kəd nɑt si haʊ ɪt wɑz dʌn. ɪf ʃi cʊɾə pɹoʊbd wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ʃi wəd hæv, bʌt ɹɛnə wʊɾə noʊn ðəɾ ɪmiɾiətli. əz ðə bɹeɪslət kloʊzd ɝaʊn ɹɛnəz ɹɪst ə lʊk keɪm ɑntu ðə sʌldəmz feɪs ðət meɪɾ ɛɡwinz hɑɹt sɪŋk.

Egwene watched sharply as the sul'dam took down the bracelet, opened it, and fastened it again around her wrist. She could not see how it was done. If she could have probed with the One Power, she would have, but Renna would have known that immediately. As the bracelet closed around Renna's wrist a look came onto the sul'dam's face that made Egwene's heart sink.

"ju hæv bɪn tʃænəlɪŋ." ɹɛnəz vɔɪs wɑz dɪsɛptɪvli maɪld; ðəɹ wɑz ə spɑɹk ʌv æŋɡɝ ɪn əɹ aɪz. "ju noʊ ðəɾ ɪz fɔɹbɪɾən ɪksɛpt wən wəɹ kəmplit." ɛɡwin wɛɾ əɹ lɪps. "pɝhæps aɪ hæv bɪn tu liniənt wɪð ju. pɝhæps jə bɪliv ðət kəz jə ɑɹ væljəbəl naʊ, jəl bi əlaʊd laɪsəns. aɪ θɪŋk aɪ meɪɾ ə mɪsteɪk lɛɾɪŋ jə kip jəɹ oʊl neɪm. aɪ hæɾ ə kɪɾən kɔl tuli wən aɪ wɑz ə tʃaɪld. fɹəm naʊ ɑn, jəɹ neɪm ɪz tuli. jəl ɡoʊ naʊ, mɪn. jəɹ vɪzəɾɪŋ deɪ wɪð tuli ɪz ɛndəd."

"You have been channeling." Renna's voice was deceptively mild; there was a spark of anger in her eyes. "You know that is forbidden except when we are complete." Egwene wet her lips. "Perhaps I have been too lenient with you. Perhaps you believe that because you are valuable now, you will be allowed license. I think I made a mistake letting you keep your old name. I had a kitten called Tuli when I was a child. From now on, your name is Tuli. You will go now, Min. Your visiting day with Tuli is ended."

mɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊnli lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ wʌn æŋɡwɪʃt lʊk əɾ ɛɡwin bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ. nʌθɪŋ mɪn kəd seɪ əɹ də wəd də ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛp meɪk mæɾɝz wɝs, bʌɾ ɛɡwin kəd nɑt hɛlp lʊkɪŋ lɔŋɪŋli ət ðə dɔɹ əz ɪt kloʊz bɪhaɪn əɹ fɹɛnd.

Min hesitated only long enough for one anguished look at Egwene before leaving. Nothing Min could say or do would do anything except make matters worse, but Egwene could not help looking longingly at the door as it closed behind her friend.

ɹɛnə tʊk ðə tʃɛɹ, fɹaʊnɪŋ əɾ ɛɡwin. "aɪ mʌs pʌnɪʃ jə səvɪɹli fəɹ ðɪs. wɪl boʊθ bi kɔl tə ðə kɔɹɾ ə ðə naɪn munz - jə fəɹ wʌt jə kən du; aɪ əz jəɹ sʌldəm ən tʃɹeɪnɝ - ən əl nɑɾ əlaʊ jə tə dɪsɡɹeɪs mi ɪn ði aɪz ə ði ɛmpɹɛs. əl stɑp wən jə tɛl mi haʊ mʌtʃ jə lʌv biɪŋ deɪmeɪn ən haʊ oʊbiɾiənt jəl bi æftɝ ðɪs. ænd, tuli. meɪk mi bɪliv ɛvɹi wɝd."

Renna took the chair, frowning at Egwene. "I must punish you severely for this. We will both be called to the Court of the Nine Moons - you for what you can do; I as your sul'dam and trainer - and I will not allow you to disgrace me in the eyes of the Empress. I will stop when you tell me how much you love being damane and how obedient you will be after this. And, Tuli. Make me believe every word."


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾiθɹi


CHAPTER 43

eɪ plæn


A Plan

aʊtsaɪɾ ɪn ðə loʊ-silɪŋɡd hɔlweɪ, mɪn dʌɡ hɝ neɪlz ɪndə hɝ pɑmz ət ðə fɝs pɪɹsɪŋ kɹaɪ fɹəm ðə ɹum. ʃi tʊk ə stɛp təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd stɑp hɝsɛlf, ən wən ʃi dɪd stɑp, tɪɹz spɹæŋ ʌp ɪn əɹ aɪz. laɪt hɛlp mi, ɔl aɪ kən də ɪz meɪk ɪt wɝs. ɛɡwin, aɪm sɑɹi. aɪm sɑɹi.

Outside in the low-ceilinged hallway, Min dug her nails into her palms at the first piercing cry from the room. She took a step toward the door before she could stop herself, and when she did stop, tears sprang up in her eyes. Light help me, all I can do is make it worse. Egwene, I'm sorry. I'm sorry.

filɪŋ wɝs ðən jusləs, ʃi pɪkt ʌp əɹ skɝts ən ɹæn, ən ɛɡwinz skɹimz pɝsud hɝ. ʃi kəd nɑt meɪk hɝsɛlf steɪ, ən livɪŋ meɪɾ əɹ fil ə kaʊɝd. hæf blaɪnd wɪð wipɪŋ, ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf ɪn ðə stʃɹit bɪfɔɹ ʃi nu ɪt. ʃi hæɾ ɪntɛndəd tə ɡoʊ bæk tə hɝ ɹum, bʌt naʊ ʃi kəd nɑt də ɪt. ʃi kəd nɑt stæn ðə θɔt ðəɾ ɛɡwin wɑz biɪŋ hɝt waɪl ʃi sæt wɔɹm ən seɪf ʌndɝ ðə nɛkst ɹuf. skɹʌbɪŋ ðə tɪɹz fɹəm əɹ aɪz, ʃi swɛpt əɹ kloʊk ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz ən stɑɹɾəd daʊn ðə stʃɹit. ɛvɹi taɪm ʃi klɪɹɾ əɹ aɪz, nu tɪɹz bɪɡæn tʃɹɪklɪŋ əlɔŋ əɹ tʃiks. ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əkʌstəm tə wipɪŋ oʊpənli, bʌt ðən ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əkʌstəm tə filɪŋ soʊ hɛlpləs, soʊ jusləs. ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛɹ ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ, oʊnli ðəɾ ɪt hæd tə bi əz fɑɹ əz ʃi kəd ɹitʃ fɹəm ɛɡwinz kɹaɪz.

Feeling worse than useless, she picked up her skirts and ran, and Egwene's screams pursued her. She could not make herself stay, and leaving made her feel a coward. Half blind with weeping, she found herself in the street before she knew it. She had intended to go back to her room, but now she could not do it. She could not stand the thought that Egwene was being hurt while she sat warm and safe under the next roof. Scrubbing the tears from her eyes, she swept her cloak around her shoulders and started down the street. Every time she cleared her eyes, new tears began trickling along her cheeks. She was not accustomed to weeping openly, but then she was not accustomed to feeling so helpless, so useless. She did not know where she was going, only that it had to be as far as she could reach from Egwene's cries.

"mɪn!"

"Min!"

ðə loʊ-pɪtʃt ʃaʊt bɹɔɾ əɹ ʌp ʃɔɹt. ət fɝst, ʃi kəd nɑt meɪk aʊɾ u hæd kɔld. ɹɛləɾɪvli fju pipəl wɔk ðə stʃɹit ðɪs kloʊs tə wɛɹ ðə deɪmeɪn wɝ haʊzd. əsaɪd fɹəm ə loʊn mæn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪntʃɹəs tu sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz ɪn baɪɪŋ ðə pɪktʃɝ i wəd dʒɹɔ ʌv əm wɪð ɪz kʌlɝd tʃɔks, ɛvɹiwʌn loʊkəl tʃɹaɪd tə stɛp əlɔŋ kwɪkli wɪθaʊɾ æktʃəli  əpɪɹɪŋ tə ɹʌn. ə pɛɹ ə sʌldəm stʃɹoʊl baɪ, deɪmeɪn tʃɹeɪlɪŋ bɪhaɪnd wɪð aɪz daʊn; ðə sintʃæn wɪmən wɝ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt haʊ mɛni mɔɹ mɛɹəθdəmeɪn ðeɪ ɪkspɛktəd tə faɪn bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ seɪld. mɪnz aɪz pæst ɹaɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə tu wɪmən ɪn lɔŋ flis koʊts, ðən swʌŋ bæk ɪn wʌndɝ əz ðeɪ keɪm təwɔɹd hɝ. "nɪneɪiv? ɪleɪn?"

The low-pitched shout brought her up short. At first, she could not make out who had called. Relatively few people walked the street this close to where the damane were housed. Aside from a lone man trying to interest two Seanchan soldiers in buying the picture he would draw of them with his colored chalks, everyone local tried to step along quickly without actually appearing to run. A pair of sul'dam strolled by, damane trailing behind with eyes down; the Seanchan women were talking about how many more marath'damane they expected to find before they sailed. Min's eyes passed right over the two women in long fleece coats, then swung back in wonder as they came toward her. "Nynaeve? Elayne?"

"nʌn ʌðɝ." nɪneɪivz smaɪl wɑz stʃɹeɪnd; boʊθ wɪmən hæd taɪɾ aɪz, əz ɪf ðeɪ fɔt wɝid fɹaʊnz. mɪn θɔt ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin ɛniθɪŋ əz wʌndɝfəl əz ðə saɪɾ ə ðɛm. "ðæt kʌlɝ bɪkʌmz ju," nɪneɪiv kəntɪnjud. "ju ʃʊɾə teɪkən ʌp dʒɹɛsəz lɔŋ sɪns. ðoʊ aɪv θɔɾ ə bɹitʃɪz maɪsɛlf sɪns aɪ sɔ ðɛm ɑn ju." hɝ vɔɪs ʃɑɹpən əz ʃi dʒɹu kloʊs ɪnʌf tə si mɪnz feɪs. "wʌɾ ɪz ðə mæɾɝ?"

"None other." Nynaeve's smile was strained; both women had tight eyes, as if they fought worried frowns. Min thought she had never seen anything as wonderful as the sight of them. "That color becomes you," Nynaeve continued. "You should have taken up dresses long since. Though I've thought of breeches myself since I saw them on you." Her voice sharpened as she drew close enough to see Min's face. "What is the matter?"

"juv bɪn kɹaɪɪŋ," ɪleɪn sɛd. "hæz sʌmθɪŋ hæpən tə ɛɡwin?"

"You've been crying," Elayne said. "Has something happened to Egwene?"

mɪn ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən lʊk bæk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. ə sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn keɪm daʊn ðə stɛps ʃi hæd juzd ən tɝn ði ʌðɝ weɪ, təwɔɹd ðə steɪbəlz ən hɔɹs jɑɹdz. ənʌðɝ wʊmən wɪð ðə laɪtnɪŋ pænəlz ɑn əɹ dʒɹɛs stʊɾ ət ðə tɑp ə ðə stɛɹz tɔkɪŋ wɪð sʌmwʌn stɪl ɪnsaɪd. mɪn ɡɹæbd əɹ fɹɛnz baɪ ði ɑɹmz ən hɝiɾ əm daʊn ðə stʃɹit təwɔɹd ðə hɑɹbɝ. "ɪts deɪnʒɝəs fəɹ jə tu hɪɹ. laɪt, ɪts deɪnʒɝəs fəɹ jə tə bi ɪn fɑlm. ðəɹ ɑɹ deɪmeɪn ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ən ɪf ðeɪ faɪn ju. . . . jə də noʊ wʌt deɪmeɪn ɑɹ? oʊ, jə doʊnt noʊ haʊ ɡʊɾ ɪts tə si jə boʊθ."

Min gave a start and looked back over her shoulder. A sul'dam and damane came down the steps she had used and turned the other way, toward the stables and horse yards. Another woman with the lightning panels on her dress stood at the top of the stairs talking with someone still inside. Min grabbed her friends by the arms and hurried them down the street toward the harbor. "It's dangerous for you two here. Light, it's dangerous for you to be in Falme. There are damane everywhere, and if they find you. . . . You do know what damane are? Oh, you don't know how good it is to see you both."

"aɪ ɪmædʒən əbaʊɾ əz hæf əz ɡʊɾ əz ɪts tə si ju," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "du jə noʊ wɛɹ ɛɡwin ɪz? ɪz ʃi ɪn wʌn ə ðoʊz bɪldɪŋz? ɪz ʃi ɔl ɹaɪt?"

"I imagine about as half as good as it is to see you," Nynaeve said. "Do you know where Egwene is? Is she in one of those buildings? Is she all right?"

mɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ə fɹækʃən bɪfɔɹ seɪɪŋ, "ʃiz əz wɛl əz kən bi ɪkspɛktəd." mɪn kəd si ɪɾ ɔl tu wɛl, ɪf ʃi toʊld əm wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ tə ɛɡwin ɹaɪt ðət moʊmənt. nɪneɪiv wɑz əz laɪkli əz nɑt tə ɡoʊ stɔɹmɪŋ bæk ɪn ən ətɛmp tə stɑp ɪt. laɪt, lɛɾ ɪt bi oʊvɝ baɪ naʊ. laɪt, meɪk əɹ bɛn əɹ stʌbɝn nɛk dʒʌst wʌns bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɔlmoʊs bɹeɪk ɪt fɝst. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ tə ɡɛɾ əɹ aʊt, ðoʊ. aɪ faʊn ə ʃɪp kæptən u aɪ θɪŋk wɪl teɪk əs ɪf wi kən ɹitʃ ɪz ʃɪp wɪð əɹ - hi woʊn hɛlp ənlɛs wi meɪk ɪt ðət fɑɹ, ən aɪ kænɑt seɪ aɪ bleɪm ɪm - bʌɾ aɪ hæv noʊ aɪdiə haʊ tə də ivən ðət mʌtʃ."

Min hesitated a fraction before saying, "She's as well as can be expected." Min could see it all too well, if she told them what was happening to Egwene right that moment. Nynaeve was as likely as not to go storming back in an attempt to stop it. Light, let it be over by now. Light, make her bend her stubborn neck just once before they almost break it first. "I don't know how to get her out, though. I found a ship captain who I think will take us if we can reach his ship with her - he won't help unless we make it that far, and I cannot say I blame him - but I have no idea how to do even that much."

"ə ʃɪp," nɪneɪiv sɛd θɔtfəli. "aɪ hæd mɛn tə sɪmpli ɹaɪɾ ist, bʌɾ aɪ mʌst seɪ aɪv wɝiɾ əbaʊɾ ɪt. əz nɪɹli əz aɪ kən meɪk aʊt, wi wəɾ əv tə bi ɔlmoʊst ɔf toʊmən hɛd bɪfɔɹ wi wɝ klɪɹ ə sintʃæn pətʃɹoʊlz kəmplitli, ən ðən ðɛɹz səpoʊz tə bi faɪɾɪŋ ə səm sɔɹɾ ɑn ɑlməθ pleɪn. aɪ nɛvɝ θɔɾ ʌv ə ʃɪp. wɪv hɔɹsəz, ən wi də nɑɾ əv mʌni fəɹ pæsədʒ. haʊ mʌtʃ dʌz ðɪs mæn wɑnt?"

"A ship," Nynaeve said thoughtfully. "I had meant to simply ride east, but I must say I've worried about it. As nearly as I can make out, we would have to be almost off Toman Head before we were clear of Seanchan patrols completely, and then there's supposed to be fighting of some sort on Almoth Plain. I never thought of a ship. We have horses, and we do not have money for passage. How much does this man want?"

mɪn ʃɹʌɡd. "aɪ nɛvɝ ɡɑt ðət fɑɹ. wi doʊn əv ɛni mʌni, iðɝ. aɪ θɔɾ aɪ kəd pʊɾ ɔf peɪɪŋ əntɪl æftɝ wi seɪl. æftɝwɝdz . . . wɛl, aɪ doʊn θɪŋk hɪl pʊɾ ɪndə ɛni pɔɹt wɛɹ ðəɹ ɑɹ sintʃæn. wɛɹɛvɝ i θɹu əs ɔf, ɪt wəɾ əv tə bi bɛɾɝ ðən hɪɹ. ðə pɹɑbləm ɪz kənvɪnsɪŋ ɪm tə seɪl əɾ ɔl. hi wɑns tə, bʌt ðeɪ pətʃɹoʊl ɔf ðə hɑɹbɝ, tu, ən ðəɹ ɪz noʊ weɪ ʌv tɛlɪŋ ɪf ðɛɹz ə deɪmeɪn ɑn wʌn ə ðɛɹ ʃɪps əntɪl ɪts tu leɪt. 'ɡɪv mi ə deɪmeɪn ə maɪ oʊn ɑn maɪ dɛk,' hi sɛz, 'æn əl seɪl ðɪs ɪnstənt.' ðən i stɑɹts tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt dʒɹæfs ən ʃoʊlz ən li ʃɔɹz. aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstæn ɛni ʌv ðæt, bʌɾ əz lɔŋ əz aɪ smaɪl ən nɑɾ ɛvɹi naʊ ən ðɛn, hi kips tɔkɪŋ, ən aɪ θɪŋk ɪf aɪ kən kip ɪm tɔkɪŋ lɔŋ ɪnʌf, hɪl tɔk hɪmsɛlf ɪndə seɪlɪŋ." ʃi dʒɹu ə ʃʌɾɝɪŋ bɹɛθ; hɝ aɪz stɑɹɾəd stɪŋɪŋ əɡɛn. "oʊnli, aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðɛɹz taɪm tə lɛɾ ɪm tɔk hɪmsɛlf ɪndə ɪɾ ɛnimɔɹ. nɪneɪiv, ðəɹ gɑnə sɛn ɛɡwin bæk tə sintʃæn, ən sun."

Min shrugged. "I never got that far. We don't have any money, either. I thought I could put off paying until after we sail. Afterwards . . . well, I don't think he'll put into any port where there are Seanchan. Wherever he threw us off, it would have to be better than here. The problem is convincing him to sail at all. He wants to, but they patrol off the harbor, too, and there is no way of telling if there's a damane on one of their ships until it's too late. 'Give me a damane of my own on my deck,' he says, 'and I will sail this instant.' Then he starts talking about drafts and shoals and lee shores. I don't understand any of that, but as long as I smile and nod every now and then, he keeps talking, and I think if I can keep him talking long enough, he'll talk himself into sailing." She drew a shuddering breath; her eyes started stinging again. "Only, I don't think there's time to let him talk himself into it anymore. Nynaeve, they're going to send Egwene back to Seanchan, and soon."

ɪleɪn ɡæspt. "bʌt, waɪ?"

Elayne gasped. "But, why?"

"ʃi ɪz eɪbəl tə faɪn ɔɹ," mɪn sɛd mɪzɝəbli. "ə fju deɪz, ʃi sɛz, ən aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf ə fju deɪz ɪz ɪnʌf fəɹ ðɪs mæn tə kənvɪns hɪmsɛlf tə seɪl. ivən ɪf ɪɾ ɪz, haʊ də wi teɪk ðət ʃædoʊ-spɔn kɑlɝ ɔf hɝ? haʊ də wi ɡɛɾ əɹ aʊɾ ə ðə haʊs?"

"She is able to find ore," Min said miserably. "A few days, she says, and I don't know if a few days is enough for this man to convince himself to sail. Even if it is, how do we take that Shadow-spawned collar off her? How do we get her out of the house?"

"aɪ wɪʃ ɹænd wɝ hɪɹ." ɪleɪn saɪd, ən wən ðeɪ boʊθ lʊkt ət hɝ, ʃi blʌʃt ən kwɪkli æɾəd, "wɛl, hi dʌz əv ə sɔɹd. aɪ wɪʃ wi hæd sʌmbɑɾi wɪð ə sɔɹd. tɛn ə ðɛm. ə hʌnʒɹəd."

"I wish Rand were here." Elayne sighed, and when they both looked at her, she blushed and quickly added, "Well, he does have a sword. I wish we had somebody with a sword. Ten of them. A hundred."

"ɪɾ ɪzən sɔɹdz əɹ bɹɔn wi nid naʊ," nɪneɪiv sɛd, "bʌt bɹeɪnz. mɛn juʒəwəli θɪŋk wɪð ðə hɛɹ ɑn ðɛɹ tʃɛsts." ʃi tʌtʃt əɹ tʃɛst æbsənli, əz ɪf filɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ θɹu hɝ koʊt. "moʊst ə ðɛm du."

"It isn't swords or brawn we need now," Nynaeve said, "but brains. Men usually think with the hair on their chests." She touched her chest absently, as if feeling something through her coat. "Most of them do."

"wi wəd niɾ ən ɑɹmi," mɪn sɛd. "ə lɑɹdʒ ɑɹmi. ðə sintʃæn wɝ aʊtnʌmbɝd wən ðeɪ feɪs ðə tæɹɑbənɝz, ən ðə dəmɑni, ən ðeɪ wʌn ɛvɹi bæɾəl izəli, fɹəm wʌɾ aɪ hɪɹ." ʃi hɝidli pʊl nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn tə ði ɑpəzət saɪɾ ə ðə stʃɹiɾ əz ə deɪmeɪn ən sʌldəm klaɪm pæst əm ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. ʃi wɑz ɹɪliv ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid fəɹ ɝdʒɪŋ; ði ʌðɝ tu wɑtʃt ðə lɪŋkt wɪmən ɡoʊ əz wɛɹəli əz ʃi. "sɪns wi doʊn əv ən ɑɹmi, ðə θɹi ʌv əs wɪl əv tə də ɪt. aɪ hoʊp wʌn ə jə kən θɪŋk ə sʌmθɪŋ aɪ hævənt; aɪv ɹæk maɪ bɹeɪnz, ən aɪ ɔlweɪz stʌmbəl wən ɪt kʌmz tə ði æɾəm, ðə liʃ ən kɑlɝ. sʌldəm doʊn laɪk ɛniwʌn wɑtʃɪŋ tu kloʊsli wən ðeɪ oʊpən ðɛm. aɪ θɪŋk aɪ kən ɡɛt jə ɪnsaɪd, ɪf ðət wɪl hɛlp. wʌn ə ju, ɛniweɪ. ðeɪ θɪŋk ə mi əz ə sɝvənt, bʌt sɝvəns meɪ hæv vɪzəɾɝz, əz lɔŋ əz ðeɪ kip tə ðə sɝvəns' kɔɹɾɝz."

"We would need an army," Min said. "A large army. The Seanchan were outnumbered when they faced the Taraboners, and the Domani, and they won every battle easily, from what I hear." She hurriedly pulled Nynaeve and Elayne to the opposite side of the street as a damane and sul'dam climbed past them on the other side. She was relieved there was no need for urging; the other two watched the linked women go as warily as she. "Since we don't have an army, the three of us will have to do it. I hope one of you can think of something I haven't; I've wracked my brains, and I always stumble when it comes to the a'dam, the leash and collar. Sul'dam don't like anyone watching too closely when they open them. I think I can get you inside, if that will help. One of you, anyway. They think of me as a servant, but servants may have visitors, as long as they keep to the servants' quarters."

nɪneɪiv wɔɹ ə θɔtfəl fɹaʊn, bʌɾ əɹ feɪs klɪɹɾ ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli, teɪkɪŋ ɑn ə pɝpəsfəl lʊk. "doʊn jə wɝi, mɪn. aɪ hæv ə fju aɪdiəz. aɪ hæv nɑt spɛn maɪ taɪm hɪɹ aɪdli. jə teɪk mi tə ðɪs mæn. ɪf hiz ɛni hɑɹɾɝ tə hændəl ðən ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl wɪð ðɛɹ bæks ʌp, əl it ðɪs koʊt."

Nynaeve wore a thoughtful frown, but her face cleared almost immediately, taking on a purposeful look. "Don't you worry, Min. I have a few ideas. I have not spent my time here idly. You take me to this man. If he is any harder to handle than the Village Council with their backs up, I will eat this coat."

ɪleɪn nɑɾəd, ɡɹɪnɪŋ, ən mɪn fɛl ðə fɝst ɹil hoʊp ʃi hæd hæd sɪns ɝaɪvɪŋ ɪn fɑlm. fəɹ ən ɪnstən mɪn faʊn hɝsɛlf ɹiɾɪŋ ði ɔʊɹəz ə ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən. ðəɹ wɑz deɪnʒɝ, bʌt ðət wɑz tə bi ɪkspɛktəd - ən nu θɪŋz, tu, əmʌŋ ði ɪmədʒəz ʃi hæd sin bɪfɔɹ; ɪt wɑz laɪk ðæt, səmtaɪmz. ə mænz ɹɪŋ ə hɛvi ɡoʊl floʊɾəd əbʌv nɪneɪivz hɛd, ən əbʌv ɪleɪnz, ə ɹɛd-hɑɾ aɪɝn ən ən æks. ðeɪ mɛn tʃɹʌbəl, ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ, bʌɾ ɪt sim dɪstənt, sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə fjutʃɝ. oʊnli fəɹ ə moʊmən dɪd ðə ɹɛɾɪŋ læst, ən ðən ɔl ʃi sɔ wɑz ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv, wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ ɪkspɛktənli.

Elayne nodded, grinning, and Min felt the first real hope she had had since arriving in Falme. For an instant Min found herself reading the auras of the other two women. There was danger, but that was to be expected - and new things, too, among the images she had seen before; it was like that, sometimes. A man's ring of heavy gold floated above Nynaeve's head, and above Elayne's, a red-hot iron and an axe. They meant trouble, she was sure, but it seemed distant, somewhere in the future. Only for a moment did the reading last, and then all she saw was Elayne and Nynaeve, watching her expectantly.

"ɪts daʊn nɪɹ ðə hɑɹbɝ," ʃi sɛd.

"It's down near the harbor," she said.

ðə sloʊpɪŋ stʃɹit bɪkeɪm mɔɹ kɹaʊɾəd ðə fɝðɝ daʊn ðeɪ wɛnt. stʃɹit pɛdlɝz ɹʌbd ɛlboʊz wɪð mɝtʃəns u hæd bɹɔt wæɡənz ɪn fɹəm ði ɪnlæn vɪlədʒəz ən wəd nɑt ɡoʊ aʊɾ əɡɛn əntɪl wɪntɝ hæd kʌm ən ɡɔn, hɔkɝz wɪð ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪz kɔl tə ðə pæsɝzbi, fɑlmɛn ɪn ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd kloʊks bɹʌʃt pæs fɑɹm fæmliz ɪn hɛvi flis koʊts. mɛni pipəl hæd flɛd hɪɹ fɹəm vɪlədʒəz fɝðɝ fɹəm ðə koʊst. mɪn sɔ noʊ pɔɪn tə ɪt - ðeɪ hæd lɛp fɹəm ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ʌv ə vɪzət fɹəm ðə sintʃæn tə ðə sɝɾənti ʌv sintʃæn ɔl ɝaʊn əm - bʌt ʃi hæd hɝd wʌt ðə sintʃæn dɪd wən ðeɪ fɝs keɪm tə ə vɪlədʒ, ən ʃi kəd nɑt bleɪm ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz tu mʌtʃ fəɹ fɪɹɪŋ ənʌðɝ əpɪɹəns. ɛvɹiwʌn baʊd wən sintʃæn wɔk pæst əɹ ə kɝteɪn pɑlɑnkwɪn wɑz kæɹid baɪ ʌp ðə stip stʃɹit.

The sloping street became more crowded the further down they went. Street peddlers rubbed elbows with merchants who had brought wagons in from the inland villages and would not go out again until winter had come and gone, hawkers with their trays called to the passersby, Falmen in embroidered cloaks brushed past farm families in heavy fleece coats. Many people had fled here from villages further from the coast. Min saw no point to it - they had leaped from the possibility of a visit from the Seanchan to the certainty of Seanchan all around them - but she had heard what the Seanchan did when they first came to a village, and she could not blame the villagers too much for fearing another appearance. Everyone bowed when Seanchan walked past or a curtained palanquin was carried by up the steep street.

mɪn wɑz ɡlæd tə si nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn nu əbaʊt ðə boʊɪŋ. bɛɹ-tʃɛstəd bɛɹɝz peɪd noʊ mɔɹ maɪn tə ðə pipəl u bɛn ðɛmsɛlvz ðən dɪɾ ɛɹəɡənt, ɑɹmɝd soʊlʒɝz, bʌt feɪljɝ tə baʊ wəd ʃʊɹli kætʃ ðɛɹ aɪz.

Min was glad to see Nynaeve and Elayne knew about the bowing. Bare-chested bearers paid no more mind to the people who bent themselves than did arrogant, armored soldiers, but failure to bow would surely catch their eyes.

ðeɪ tɔkt ə lɪɾəl əz ðeɪ muv daʊn ðə stʃɹit, ən ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd ət fɝs tə lɝn ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɪn ðə taʊn oʊnli ə fju deɪz lɛs ðən ɛɡwin ən hɝsɛlf. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ðoʊ, ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪt wɑz noʊ wʌndɝ ðeɪ hæd nɑt mɛɾ ɝliɝ, nɑt wɪð ðə kɹaʊdz ɪn ðə stʃɹits. ʃi hæd bɪn ɹɪlʌktən tə spɛn taɪm fɝðɝ fɹəm ɛɡwin ðən wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi; ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ðə fɪɹ ðət ʃi wəd ɡoʊ fəɹ əɹ əlaʊd vɪzəɾ ən faɪn ɛɡwin ɡɔn. ən naʊ ʃɪl bi. ənlɛs nɪneɪiv kən θɪŋk ə sʌmθɪŋ.

They talked a little as they moved down the street, and she was surprised at first to learn they had been in the town only a few days less than Egwene and herself. After a moment, though, she decided it was no wonder they had not met earlier, not with the crowds in the streets. She had been reluctant to spend time further from Egwene than was necessary; there was always the fear that she would go for her allowed visit and find Egwene gone. And now she will be. Unless Nynaeve can think of something.

ðə smɛl ə sɔlt ən pɪtʃ ɡɹu hɛvi ɪn ði ɛɹ, ən ɡʌlz kɹaɪd, wilɪŋ oʊvɝhɛd. seɪlɝz əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə θɹɔŋ, mɛni stɪl bɛɹfʊt dɪspaɪt ðə koʊld.

The smell of salt and pitch grew heavy in the air, and gulls cried, wheeling overhead. Sailors appeared in the throng, many still barefoot despite the cold.

ði ɪn hæd bɪn heɪstəli ɹineɪm ðə θɹi plʌm blɑsəmz, bʌt pɑɹɾ ə ðə wɝd "wɑtʃɝ" stɪl ʃoʊd θɹu ðə slæpdæʃ peɪnt wɝk ɑn ðə saɪn. dɪspaɪt ðə kɹaʊdz aʊtsaɪd, ðə kɑmən ɹum wɑz lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən hæf fʊl; pɹaɪsəz wɝ tu haɪ fəɹ mɛni pipəl tə əfɔɹd taɪm sɪɾɪŋ oʊvɝ eɪl. ɹɔɹɪŋ faɪɝz ɑn hɑɹθs əɾ iðɝ ɛn ə ðə ɹum wɔɹmd ɪt, ən ðə fæɾ ɪnkipɝ wɑz ɪn ɪz ʃɝtslivz. hi aɪd ðə θɹi wɪmən, fɹaʊnɪŋ, ən mɪn θɔɾ ɪt wɑz əɹ sintʃæn dʒɹɛs ðət stɑpt ɪm fɹəm tɛlɪŋ əm tə liv. nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn, ɪn ðɛɹ fɑɹm wɪmənz koʊts, sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt lʊk əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd mʌni tə spɛnd.

The inn had been hastily renamed The Three Plum Blossoms, but part of the word "Watcher" still showed through the slapdash paint work on the sign. Despite the crowds outside, the common room was little more than half full; prices were too high for many people to afford time sitting over ale. Roaring fires on hearths at either end of the room warmed it, and the fat innkeeper was in his shirtsleeves. He eyed the three women, frowning, and Min thought it was her Seanchan dress that stopped him from telling them to leave. Nynaeve and Elayne, in their farm women's coats, certainly did not look as if they had money to spend.

ðə mæn ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ fəɹ wɑz əloʊn əɾ ə teɪbəl ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ, ɪn ɪz əkʌstəm pleɪs, mʌɾɝɪŋ ɪndə hɪz waɪn. "du juv taɪm tə tɔk, kæptən doʊmən?" ʃi sɛd.

The man she was looking for was alone at a table in a corner, in his accustomed place, muttering into his wine. "Do you have time to talk, Captain Domon?" she said.

hi lʊkt ʌp, bɹʌʃɪŋ ə hæn əkɹɔs ɪz bɪɹd wən i sɔ ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn. ʃi stɪl θɔɾ ɪz bɛɹ ʌpɝ lɪp lʊkt ɑd wɪð ðə bɪɹd. "soʊ jə də bɹɪŋ fɹɛnz tə dʒɹɪŋk ʌp maɪ kɔɪn, də ju? wɛl, ðət sintʃæn lɔɹd bɑt maɪ kɑɹɡoʊ, soʊ kɔɪn aɪ hæv. sɪt." ɪleɪn dʒʌmpt əz i sʌɾənli bɛloʊd, "ɪnkipɝ! mʌld waɪn hɪɹ!"

He looked up, brushing a hand across his beard when he saw she was not alone. She still thought his bare upper lip looked odd with the beard. "So you do bring friends to drink up my coin, do you? Well, that Seanchan lord bought my cargo, so coin I have. Sit." Elayne jumped as he suddenly bellowed, "Innkeeper! Mulled wine here!"

"ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt," mɪn toʊl hɝ, teɪkɪŋ ə pleɪs ɑn ði ɛn ʌv wʌn ə ðə bɛntʃɪz ət ðə teɪbəl. "hi oʊnli lʊks ən saʊnz laɪk ə bɛɹ." ɪleɪn sæt daʊn ɑn ði ʌðɝ ɛnd, lʊkɪŋ daʊtfəl.

"It's all right," Min told her, taking a place on the end of one of the benches at the table. "He only looks and sounds like a bear." Elayne sat down on the other end, looking doubtful.

"ə bɛɹ, də aɪ bi?" doʊmən læft. "meɪbi aɪ du. bʌt wʌɾ ə ju, ɡɝl? hæv jə ɡɪvən oʊvɝ θɔɾ ə livɪŋ? ðət dʒɹɛs də lʊk sintʃæn tə mi."

"A bear, do I be?" Domon laughed. "Maybe I do. But what of you, girl? Have you given over thought of leaving? That dress do look Seanchan to me."

"nɛvɝ!" mɪn sɛd fɪɹsli, bʌt ði əpɪɹəns ʌv ə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝl wɪð ðə stimɪŋ, spaɪst waɪn meɪɾ əɹ fɔl saɪlənt.

"Never!" Min said fiercely, but the appearance of a serving girl with the steaming, spiced wine made her fall silent.

doʊmən wɑz dʒʌst əz wɛɹi. hi weɪɾəd əntɪl ðə ɡɝl hæd ɡɔn wɪð ɪz kɔɪnz bɪfɔɹ seɪɪŋ, "fɔɹtʃən pɹɪk mi, ɡɝl, aɪ min noʊ əfɛns. moʊs pipəl oʊnli wɑnə ɡoʊ ɑn wɪð ðɛɹ lɪvz, wɛðɝ ðɛɹ lɔɹdz bi sintʃæn əɹ ɛni ʌðɝ."

Domon was just as wary. He waited until the girl had gone with his coins before saying, "Fortune prick me, girl, I mean no offense. Most people only want to go on with their lives, whether their lords be Seanchan or any other."

nɪneɪiv lin əɹ fɹɑɹmz ɑn ðə teɪbəl. "wi ɔlsoʊ wɑnə ɡoʊ ɑn wɪð əɹ lɪvz, kæptən, bʌt wɪθaʊɾ ɛni sintʃæn. aɪ ʌndɝstæn jə ɪntɛn tə seɪl sun."

Nynaeve leaned her forearms on the table. "We also want to go on with our lives, Captain, but without any Seanchan. I understand you intend to sail soon."

"aɪ wəd seɪl tədeɪ, ɪf aɪ kʊd," doʊmən sɛd ɡlʌmli. "ɛvɹi tu əɹ θɹi deɪz ðət tʃɹɑk də sɛn fəɹ mi tə tɛl ɪm teɪlz ə ði oʊl θɪŋz aɪ hæv sin. də aɪ lʊk ə ɡlimən tə ju? aɪ dɪd θɪŋk aɪ kəd spɪn ə teɪl əɹ tu ən bi ɑn maɪ weɪ, bʌt naʊ aɪ θɪŋk wən aɪ noʊ ɛntɝteɪn ɪm ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, ɪt bi ən ivən weɪdʒɝ wɛðɝ i də lemi ɡoʊ əɹ əv maɪ hɛd kʌɾ ɔf. ðə mæn də lʊk sɑft, bʌɾ i bi əz hɑɹɾ əz aɪɝn, ən əz koʊldhɑɹɾɪd."

"I would sail today, if I could," Domon said glumly. "Every two or three days that Turak do send for me to tell him tales of the old things I have seen. Do I look a gleeman to you? I did think I could spin a tale or two and be on my way, but now I think when I no entertain him any longer, it be an even wager whether he do let me go or have my head cut off. The man do look soft, but he be as hard as iron, and as coldhearted."

"kæn jəɹ ʃɪp əvɔɪd ðə sintʃæn?" nɪneɪiv æskt.

"Can your ship avoid the Seanchan?" Nynaeve asked.

"fɔɹtʃən pɹɪk mi, kəɾ aɪ meɪk ɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə hɑɹbɝ wɪθaʊɾ ə deɪmeɪn ɹɪps spɹeɪ tə splɪntɝz, aɪ kæn. ɪf aɪ də noʊ lɛɾ ə sintʃæn ʃɪp wɪð ə deɪmeɪn kʌm tu kloʊs wʌns aɪ də meɪk ðə si. ðəɹ bi ʃoʊl wɔɾɝz ɔl əlɔŋ ðɪs koʊst, ən spɹeɪ də hæv ə ʃæloʊ dʒɹæft. aɪ kən teɪk əɹ ɪndə wɔɾɝz ðoʊz lʌmbɝɪŋ sintʃæn hʌlks kən noʊ ɹɪsk. ðeɪ mʌs bi wɛɹi ʌv ðə wɪnz kloʊs ɪnʃɔɹ ðɪs taɪm ə jɪɹ, ən wʌns aɪ də hæv spɹeɪ - "

"Fortune prick me, could I make it out of the harbor without a damane rips Spray to splinters, I can. If I do no let a Seanchan ship with a damane come too close once I do make the sea. There be shoal waters all along this coast, and Spray do have a shallow draft. I can take her into waters those lumbering Seanchan hulks can no risk. They must be wary of the winds close inshore this time of year, and once I do have Spray - "

nɪneɪiv kʌɾ ɪm ɔf. "ðɛn wɪl teɪk pæsədʒ wɪð ju, kæptən. ðəɹ wɪl bi fɔɹ ʌv ʌs, ən əl ɪkspɛk jə tə bi ɹɛɾi tə seɪl əz sun əz wəɹ əbɔɹd."

Nynaeve cut him off. "Then we will take passage with you, Captain. There will be four of us, and I will expect you to be ready to sail as soon as we are aboard."

doʊmən skɹʌbd ə fɪŋɡɝ əkɹɔs ɪz ʌpɝ lɪp ən pɪɹɾ ɪndə hɪz waɪn. "wɛl, əz tə ðæt, ðəɹ stɪl də bi ðə mæɾɝ ʌv ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə hɑɹbɝ, jə si. ðiz deɪmeɪn - "

Domon scrubbed a finger across his upper lip and peered into his wine. "Well, as to that, there still do be the matter of getting out of the harbor, you see. These damane - "

"wʌɾ ɪf aɪ tɛl jə jəl seɪl wɪð sʌmθɪŋ bɛɾɝ ðən deɪmeɪn?" nɪneɪiv sɛd sɔfli. mɪnz aɪz waɪɾənd əz ʃi ɹilaɪzd wʌt nɪneɪiv ɪntɛndəd.

"What if I tell you you will sail with something better than damane?" Nynaeve said softly. Min's eyes widened as she realized what Nynaeve intended.

ɔlmoʊst ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, ɪleɪn mɝmɝd, "æn jə tɛl mi tə bi kɛɹfəl."

Almost under her breath, Elayne murmured, "And you tell me to be careful."

doʊmən hæɾ aɪz oʊnli fəɹ nɪneɪiv, ən ðeɪ wɝ wɛɹi aɪz. "wʌt dʒju min?" hi wɪspɝd.

Domon had eyes only for Nynaeve, and they were wary eyes. "What do you mean?" he whispered.

nɪneɪiv oʊpən əɹ koʊt tə fʌmbəl ət ðə bæk ə hɝ nɛk, faɪnəli pʊlɪŋ aʊɾ ə lɛðɝ kɔɹd ðət hæd bɪn tʌkt ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ dʒɹɛs. tu ɡoʊld ɹɪŋz hʌŋ ɑn ðə kɔɹd. mɪn ɡæspt wən ʃi sɔ wʌn - ɪt wɑz ðə hɛvi mænz ɹɪŋ ʃi hæd sin wən ʃi ɹɛd nɪneɪiv ɪn ðə stʃɹit - bʌt ʃi nu ɪt wɑz ði ʌðɝ, slaɪɾɝ ən meɪd fəɹ ə wʊmənz slɛndɝ fɪŋɡɝ, ðət meɪd doʊmənz aɪz bʌlʒ. ə sɝpən baɪɾɪŋ ɪts oʊn teɪl.

Nynaeve opened her coat to fumble at the back of her neck, finally pulling out a leather cord that had been tucked inside her dress. Two gold rings hung on the cord. Min gasped when she saw one - it was the heavy man's ring she had seen when she read Nynaeve in the street - but she knew it was the other, slighter and made for a woman's slender finger, that made Domon's eyes bulge. A serpent biting its own tail.

"ju noʊ wʌt ðɪs minz," nɪneɪiv sɛd, stɑɹɾɪŋ tə slɪp ðə sɝpən ɹɪŋ fɹəm ðə kɔɹd, bʌt doʊmən kloʊzd ɪz hæn oʊvɝ ɪt.

"You know what this means," Nynaeve said, starting to slip the Serpent ring from the cord, but Domon closed his hand over it.

"pʊɾ ɪɾ əweɪ." hɪz aɪz dɑɹɾɪd ənizəli; noʊ wʌn wɑz lʊkɪŋ əɾ əm ðət mɪn kəd si, bʌɾ i lʊkt əz ɪf i θɔɾ ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz stɛɹɪŋ. "ðæt ɹɪŋ də bi deɪnʒɝəs. ɪf ɪt bi sin. . . ."

"Put it away." His eyes darted uneasily; no one was looking at them that Min could see, but he looked as if he thought everyone was staring. "That ring do be dangerous. If it be seen. . . ."

"æz lɔŋ əz jə noʊ wʌɾ ɪt minz," nɪneɪiv sɛd wɪð ə kɑm ðət meɪd mɪn ɛnviəs. ʃi pʊl ðə kɔɹd fɹəm doʊmənz hæn ən ɹɛtaɪɾ ɪɾ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk.

"As long as you know what it means," Nynaeve said with a calm that made Min envious. She pulled the cord from Domon's hand and retied it around her neck.

"aɪ noʊ," hi sɛd hɔɹsli. "aɪ də noʊ wʌɾ ɪt minz. meɪbi ðəɹ də bi ə tʃæns ɪf ju. . . . fɔɹ, jə seɪ? ðɪs ɡɝl u də laɪk tə lɪsən tə maɪ tʌŋ wæɡ, ʃi də bi wʌn ə ðə fɔɹ, aɪ teɪk ɪt. ən ju, ænd. . . ." hi fɹaʊn əɾ ɪleɪn. "ʃʊɹli ðɪs tʃaɪld ɪz noʊ - noʊ wʌn laɪk ju."

"I know," he said hoarsely. "I do know what it means. Maybe there do be a chance if you. . . . Four, you say? This girl who do like to listen to my tongue wag, she do be one of the four, I take it. And you, and. . . ." He frowned at Elayne. "Surely this child is no - no one like you."

ɪleɪn stʃɹeɪɾənd æŋɡɹəli, bʌt nɪneɪiv pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn əɹ ɑɹm ən smaɪl suðɪŋli ət doʊmən. "ʃi tʃɹævəlz wɪð mi, kæptən. jə maɪt bi sɝpɹaɪz baɪ wʌt wi kən də ivən bɪfɔɹ wi ɝn ðə ɹaɪt tə ə ɹɪŋ. wən wi seɪl, jəl əv θɹi ɑn jəɹ ʃɪp u kən faɪt deɪmeɪn ɪf nid bi."

Elayne straightened angrily, but Nynaeve put a hand on her arm and smiled soothingly at Domon. "She travels with me, Captain. You might be surprised by what we can do even before we earn the right to a ring. When we sail, you will have three on your ship who can fight damane if need be."

"θɹi," hi bɹiðd. "ðɛɹ də bi ə tʃæns. meɪbi. . . ." hɪz feɪs bɹaɪɾənd fəɹ ə moʊmənt, bʌɾ əz i lʊkt ət ðɛm, ɪt ɡɹu sɪɹiəs əɡɛn. "aɪ ʃəd teɪk jə tə spɹeɪ ɹaɪt naʊ ən kæst ɔf, bʌt fɔɹtʃən pɹɪk mi ɪf aɪ kən noʊ tɛl jə wʌt jə feɪs hɪɹ ɪf jə steɪ, ən meɪbi ivən ɪf jə ɡoʊ wɪð mi. lɪsən tə mi, ən mɑɹk wʌɾ aɪ də seɪ." hi tʊk ənʌðɝ kɔʃəs lʊk ɝaʊnd, ən stɪl loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs ən tʃoʊz ɪz wɝdz kɛɹfəli. "aɪ dɪd si ə - ə wʊmən u wɔɹ ə ɹɪŋ laɪk ðət teɪkən baɪ ðə sintʃæn. ə pɹɪɾi, slɛndɝ lɪɾəl wʊmən ʃi wɑz, wɪð ə bɪɡ wɔɹ - ə bɪɡ mæn wɪð əɹ u dɪd lʊk əz ɪf i dɪd noʊ haʊ tə juz ɪz sɔɹd. wʌn ə ðɛm mʌst əv bɪn kɛɹləs, fəɹ ðə sintʃæn dɪɾ əv ən æmbʊʃ leɪd fəɹ ðɛm. ðə bɪɡ mæn pʊt sɪks, sɛvən soʊlʒɝz ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪfɔɹ i dɪd daɪ hɪmsɛlf. ðə - ðə wʊmən. . . . sɪks deɪmeɪn ðeɪ dɪd pʊɾ ɝaʊn hɝ, stɛpɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði æliz ʌv ə sʌɾən. aɪ dɪd θɪŋk ʃi wəd . . . də sʌmθɪŋ - jə noʊ wʌɾ aɪ min - bʌt. . . . aɪ noʊ nʌθɪŋ ə ðiz θɪŋz. wʌn moʊmənt ʃi dɪd lʊk əz ɪf ʃi wəd dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðɛm ɔl, ðən ə lʊk ə hɔɹɝ dɪd kʌm ɑn əɹ feɪs, ən ʃi dɪd skɹim."

"Three," he breathed. "There do be a chance. Maybe. . . ." His face brightened for a moment, but as he looked at them, it grew serious again. "I should take you to Spray right now and cast off, but Fortune prick me if I can no tell you what you face here if you stay, and maybe even if you go with me. Listen to me, and mark what I do say." He took another cautious look around, and still lowered his voice and chose his words carefully. "I did see a - a woman who wore a ring like that taken by the Seanchan. A pretty, slender little woman she was, with a big War - a big man with her who did look as if he did know how to use his sword. One of them must have been careless, for the Seanchan did have an ambush laid for them. The big man put six, seven soldiers on the ground before he did die himself. The - the woman. . . . Six damane they did put around her, stepping out of the alleys of a sudden. I did think she would . . . do something - you know what I mean - but. . . . I know nothing of these things. One moment she did look as if she would destroy them all, then a look of horror did come on her face, and she did scream."

"ðeɪ kʌɾ əɹ ɔf fɹəm ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs." ɪleɪnz feɪs wɑz waɪt.

"They cut her off from the True Source." Elayne's face was white.

"noʊ mæɾɝ," nɪneɪiv sɛd kɑmli. "wi wɪl nɑɾ əlaʊ ðə seɪm tə bi dʌn tə ʌs."

"No matter," Nynaeve said calmly. "We will not allow the same to be done to us."

"aɪ, meɪæp ɪɾəl bi əz jə seɪ. bʌɾ əl ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪɾ əntɪl aɪ daɪ. ɹaɪmə, hɛlp mi. ðəɾ ɪz wʌt ʃi dɪd skɹim. ən wʌn ə ðə deɪmeɪn dɪd fɔl daʊn kɹaɪɪŋ, ən ðeɪ dɪd pʊt wʌn ə ðoʊz kɑlɝz ɑn ðə nɛk ə ðə . . . wʊmən, ən aɪ . . . aɪ dɪd ɹʌn." hi ʃɹʌɡd, ən ɹʌbd ɪz noʊz, ən pɪɹɾ ɪndə hɪz waɪn. "aɪ hæv sin θɹi wɪmən teɪkən, ən aɪ hæv noʊ stʌmək fəɹ ɪt. aɪ wəd liv maɪ eɪdʒd ɡɹændmʌðɝ stændɪŋ ɑn ðə dɑk tə seɪl fɹəm hɪɹ, bʌɾ aɪ dɪɾ əv tə tɛl ju."

"Aye, mayhap it will be as you say. But I will remember it until I die. Ryma, help me. That is what she did scream. And one of the damane did fall down crying, and they did put one of those collars on the neck of the . . . woman, and I . . . I did run." He shrugged, and rubbed his nose, and peered into his wine. "I have seen three women taken, and I have no stomach for it. I would leave my aged grandmother standing on the dock to sail from here, but I did have to tell you."

"ɛɡwin sɛd ðeɪv tu pɹɪznɝz," mɪn sɛd sloʊli. "ɹaɪmə, ə jɛloʊ, ən ʃi dɪdnt noʊ hu ði ʌðɝ ɪz." nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv əɹ ə ʃɑɹp lʊk, ən ʃi fɛl saɪlənt, blʌʃɪŋ. fɹəm ðə lʊk ɑn doʊmənz feɪs, ɪt hæd nɑt fɝðɝd ðɛɹ kɑz ɛni tə tɛl ɪm ðə sintʃæn hɛl tu ɛɛs sədaɪ, nɑt dʒʌst wʌn.

"Egwene said they have two prisoners," Min said slowly. "Ryma, a Yellow, and she didn't know who the other is." Nynaeve gave her a sharp look, and she fell silent, blushing. From the look on Domon's face, it had not furthered their cause any to tell him the Seanchan held two Aes Sedai, not just one.

jɛɾ əbɹʌpli hi stɛɹɾ ət nɪneɪiv ən tʊk ə lɔŋ ɡʌlp ʌv waɪn. "du ðət bi waɪ jə ɑɹ hɪɹ? tə fɹi . . . ðoʊz tu? jə dɪd seɪ ðəɹ wəd bi θɹi ʌv ju."

Yet abruptly he stared at Nynaeve and took a long gulp of wine. "Do that be why you are here? To free . . . those two? You did say there would be three of you."

"ju noʊ wʌt jə nid tə noʊ," nɪneɪiv toʊld ɪm bɹɪskli. "ju mʌs bi ɹɛɾi tə seɪl ɑn ði ɪnstən ɛnitaɪm ɪn ðə nɛks tu əɹ θɹi deɪz. wɪl jə də ɪt, əɹ wɪl jə ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ tə si ɪf ðəl kʌɾ ɔf jəɹ hɛɾ æftɝ ɔl? ðəɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝ ʃɪps, kæptən, ən aɪ min tə hæv pæsədʒ əʃʊɹɾ ɑn wʌn ə ðɛm tədeɪ."

"You know what you need to know," Nynaeve told him briskly. "You must be ready to sail on the instant anytime in the next two or three days. Will you do it, or will you remain here to see if they will cut off your head after all? There are other ships, Captain, and I mean to have passage assured on one of them today."

mɪn hɛld əɹ bɹɛθ; ʌndɝ ðə teɪbəl, hɝ fɪŋɡɝz wɝ nɑɾɪd.

Min held her breath; under the table, her fingers were knotted.

faɪnəli, doʊmən nɑɾəd. "aɪ wɪl bi ɹɛɾi."

Finally, Domon nodded. "I will be ready."

wən ðeɪ ɹɪtɝn tə ðə stʃɹit, mɪn wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə si nɪneɪiv sæɡ əɡɛns ðə fɹʌn ə ði ɪn əz sun əz ðə dɔɹ kloʊzd. "ɑɹ jə ɪl, nɪneɪiv?" ʃi æskt æŋkʃəsli.

When they returned to the street, Min was surprised to see Nynaeve sag against the front of the inn as soon as the door closed. "Are you ill, Nynaeve?" she asked anxiously.

nɪneɪiv dʒɹu ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ ən stʊɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪt, tʌɡɪŋ əɾ əɹ koʊt. "wɪð səm pipəl," ʃi sɛd, "ju hæv tə bi sɝɾən. ɪf jə ʃoʊ ðɛm wʌn ɡlɪmɝ ə daʊt, ðəl swip jə ɔf ɪn səm dɝɛkʃən jə doʊnt wɑnə ɡoʊ. laɪt, bʌɾ aɪ wɑz əfɹeɪɾ i wɑz gɑnə seɪ noʊ. kʌm, wɪv plænz jɛt tə meɪk. ðəɹ ɑɹ stɪl wʌn əɹ tu smɔl pɹɑbləmz tə wɝk aʊt."

Nynaeve drew a long breath and stood up straight, tugging at her coat. "With some people," she said, "you have to be certain. If you show them one glimmer of doubt, they'll sweep you off in some direction you don't want to go. Light, but I was afraid he was going to say no. Come, we have plans yet to make. There are still one or two small problems to work out."

"aɪ hoʊp jə doʊn maɪn fɪʃ, mɪn," ɪleɪn sɛd.

"I hope you don't mind fish, Min," Elayne said.

wʌn əɹ tu smɔl pɹɑbləmz? mɪn θɔɾ əz ʃi fɑloʊd ðɛm. ʃi hoʊp vɛɹi mʌtʃ ðət nɪneɪiv wɑz nɑt dʒʌs biɪŋ sɝɾən əɡɛn.

One or two small problems? Min thought as she followed them. She hoped very much that Nynaeve was not just being certain again.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾifɔɹ


CHAPTER 44

faɪv wɪl ɹaɪd fɔɹθ


Five Will Ride Forth

pɛɹɪn aɪd ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz wɛɹəli, sɛlf-kɑnʃəsli hɪtʃɪŋ əɾ ə tu-ʃɔɹt kloʊk, ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɑn ðə tʃɛst ən wɪð səm hoʊlz ɪn ɪt nɑɾ ivən pætʃt, bʌt nʌn ə ðɛm ɡeɪv ɪm ə sɛkənd ɡlæns dɪspaɪɾ ɪz stʃɹeɪnʒ mɪks ə kloʊðz ən ði æks ɑn ɪz hɪp. hʊɹɪn hæɾ ə koʊt wɪð blu spaɪɹəlz əkɹɔs ðə tʃɛst ʌndɝ ɪz kloʊk, ən mæt wɔɹ ə pɛɹ ə bæɡi tʃɹaʊzɝz ðət meɪd bʌntʃəz wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ stʌft ɪndə hɪz buts. ðət hæd bɪn ɔl ðeɪ hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə faɪn ðət wəd fɪt bæk ɪn ði əbændən vɪlədʒ. pɛɹɪn wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðɪs wʌn wəd bi əbændən sun. hæf ðə stoʊn haʊsəz wɝ ɛmpti, ən ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ɪn, ʌp ðə dɝt stʃɹit fɹəm ðɛm, θɹi ɑks kɑɹts, loʊɾəd tu hɛvəli ɪn ɡɹeɪt maʊnz ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ kʌvɝd wɪð ɹoʊp kænvəs, stʊd wɪð fæmliz ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn ðɛm.

Perrin eyed the villagers warily, self-consciously hitching at a too-short cloak, embroidered on the chest and with some holes in it not even patched, but none of them gave him a second glance despite his strange mix of clothes and the axe on his hip. Hurin had a coat with blue spirals across the chest under his cloak, and Mat wore a pair of baggy trousers that made bunches where they were stuffed into his boots. That had been all they had been able to find that would fit back in the abandoned village. Perrin wondered if this one would be abandoned soon. Half the stone houses were empty, and in front of the inn, up the dirt street from them, three ox carts, loaded too heavily in great mounds and everything covered with roped canvas, stood with families gathered around them.

əz i wɑtʃt ðɛm, hʌɾəlɪŋ təɡɛðɝ ən seɪɪŋ ðɛɹ ɡʊdbaɪz tə ðoʊz u wɝ steɪɪŋ, ət lis fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ, pɛɹɪn dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪt wɑz nɑt læk ʌv ɪntʃɹəst ɪn stʃɹeɪnʒɝz ɑn ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz' pɑɹt; ðeɪ wɝ kɛɹfəli əvɔɪɾɪŋ lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪm ən ði ʌðɝz. ðiz pipəl hæd lɝnd nɑt tə ʃoʊ kjʊɹiɑsəɾi əbaʊt stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, ivən stʃɹeɪnʒɝz u wɝ ɑbviəsli nɑt sintʃæn. stʃɹeɪnʒɝz maɪt bi deɪnʒɝəs ðiz deɪz ɑn toʊmən hɛd. ðeɪ hæɾ ɪnkaʊntɝd ðə seɪm stuɾiəs ɪndɪfɝəns ɪn ʌðɝ vɪlədʒəz. ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ taʊnz hɪɹ wɪðɪn ə fju liɡz ə ðə koʊst, ɛvɹi wʌn hoʊldɪŋ ɪtsɛlf ɪndɪpɛndənt. əɾ ɛni ɹeɪt, ðeɪ hæɾ əntɪl ðə sintʃæn keɪm.

As he watched them, huddling together and saying their goodbyes to those who were staying, at least for the time being, Perrin decided it was not lack of interest in strangers on the villagers' part; they were carefully avoiding looking at him and the others. These people had learned not to show curiosity about strangers, even strangers who were obviously not Seanchan. Strangers might be dangerous these days on Toman Head. They had encountered the same studious indifference in other villages. There were more towns here within a few leagues of the coast, every one holding itself independent. At any rate, they had until the Seanchan came.

"aɪ seɪ ɪts taɪm tə ɡoʊ ɡɛt ðə hɔɹsəz," mæt sɛd, "bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ dɪsaɪd tə stɑɹɾ æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz. ðəɹ əz tə bi ə fɝs taɪm fəɹ ɪt."

"I say it's time to go get the horses," Mat said, "before they decide to start asking questions. There has to be a first time for it."

hʊɹɪn wɑz stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ə bɪɡ, blækən sɝkəl ʌv ɡɹaʊn ðət mɑɹd ðə bɹaʊn ɡɹæs ə ðə vɪlədʒ ɡɹin. ɪt hæɾ ə wɛðɝd lʊk, bʌt noʊ wʌn hæd dʌn ɛniθɪŋ tə ɪɹeɪs ɪt. "meɪbi sɪks əɹ eɪt mʌnθs əɡoʊ," hi mʌɾɝd, "æn ɪt stɪl stɪŋks. ðə hoʊl vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl ən ðɛɹ fæmliz. waɪ wəd ðeɪ də ə θɪŋ laɪk ðæt?"

Hurin was staring at a big, blackened circle of ground that marred the brown grass of the village green. It had a weathered look, but no one had done anything to erase it. "Maybe six or eight months ago," he muttered, "and it still stinks. The whole Village Council and their families. Why would they do a thing like that?"

"hu noʊz waɪ ðeɪ də ɛniθɪŋ?" mæt mʌɾɝd. "sintʃæn doʊn sim tə niɾ ə ɹizən fəɹ kɪlɪŋ pipəl. nʌn aɪ kən fɪɡjɝ aʊt, ɛniweɪ."

"Who knows why they do anything?" Mat muttered. "Seanchan don't seem to need a reason for killing people. None I can figure out, anyway."

pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə lʊk ət ðə tʃɑɹd pætʃ. "hʊɹɪn, ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ əbaʊt feɪn? hʊɹɪn?" ɪt hæd bɪn hɑɹd tə meɪk ðə snɪfɝ lʊk əɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls sɪns ðeɪ ɛntɝd ðə vɪlədʒ. "hʊɹɪn!"

Perrin tried not to look at the charred patch. "Hurin, are you sure about Fain? Hurin?" It had been hard to make the sniffer look at anything else since they entered the village. "Hurin!"

"wʌt? oʊ. feɪn. jɛs." hʊɹɪnz nɑstʃɹəlz flɛɹd, ən ɹaɪɾ əweɪ hi ɹɪŋkəld ɪz noʊz. "ðɛɹz noʊ mɪsteɪkɪŋ ðæt, ivən oʊld əz ɪɾ ɪz. meɪks ə mɹdʒɹɑl smɛl laɪk ɹoʊzɪz. hi pæs θɹu hɪɹ ɔl ɹaɪt, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk i wɑz əloʊn. noʊ tʃɹɑləks, ɛniweɪ, ən ɪf i hæɾ ɛni dɑɹkfɹɛnz wɪð hɪm, ðeɪ hædn bɪn ʌp tə mʌtʃ leɪtli."

"What? Oh. Fain. Yes." Hurin's nostrils flared, and right away he wrinkled his nose. "There's no mistaking that, even old as it is. Makes a Myrddraal smell like roses. He passed through here all right, but I think he was alone. No Trollocs, anyway, and if he had any Darkfriends with him, they hadn't been up to much lately."

ðəɹ wɑz səm sɔɹɾ ʌv ædʒəteɪʃən ʌp baɪ ði ɪn, pipəl ʃaʊɾɪŋ ən pɔɪntɪŋ. nɑɾ ət pɛɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝ tu, bʌɾ ət sʌmθɪŋ pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt si ɪn ðə loʊ hɪlz ist ə ðə vɪlədʒ.

There was some sort of agitation up by the inn, people shouting and pointing. Not at Perrin and the other two, but at something Perrin could not see in the low hills east of the village.

"kæn wi ɡɛt ðə hɔɹsəz naʊ?" mæt sɛd. "ðæt kəd bi sintʃæn."

"Can we get the horses now?" Mat said. "That could be Seanchan."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd, ən ðeɪ bɹoʊk ɪndə ə ɹʌn fəɹ wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd taɪd ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz bɪhaɪn ən əbændən haʊs. əz mæt ən hʊɹɪn dɪsəpɪɹɾ ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə haʊs, pɛɹɪn lʊk bæk təwɔɹd ði ɪn ən stɑpt ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt wɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪndə taʊn, ə lɔŋ kɑləm ə ðɛm.

Perrin nodded, and they broke into a run for where they had tied their horses behind an abandoned house. As Mat and Hurin disappeared around the corner of the house, Perrin looked back toward the inn and stopped in astonishment. The Children of the Light were riding into town, a long column of them.

hi lɛpt æftɝ ði ʌðɝz. "waɪtkloʊks!"

He leaped after the others. "Whitecloaks!"

ðeɪ weɪstəɾ oʊnli ən ɪnstən stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm ɪn dɪsbɪlif bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ skɹæmbəlɪŋ ɪndə ðɛɹ sæɾəlz. kipɪŋ haʊsəz bɪtwin əm ən ðə meɪn stʃɹiɾ ə ðə vɪlədʒ, ðə θɹi ɡæləpt aʊɾ ə ðə vɪlədʒ wɛstwɝd, wɑtʃɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz fəɹ pɝsut. ɪŋtʃɹ hæd toʊld əm tə əvɔɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ ðət maɪt sloʊ ðɛm daʊn, ən waɪtkloʊks æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz wəd sɝɾənli də ðæt, ivən ɪf ðeɪ kəd mænədʒ ænsɝz ðət sæɾəsfaɪd. pɛɹɪn kɛpt ən ivən kloʊsɝ wɑtʃ ðən ði ʌðɝ tu; hi hæɾ ɪz oʊn ɹizənz fəɹ nɑt wɑntɪŋ tə mit waɪtkloʊks. ði æks ɪn maɪ hænz. laɪt, wʌɾ aɪ wʊdnt ɡɪv tə tʃeɪnʒ ðæt.

They wasted only an instant staring at him in disbelief before they were scrambling into their saddles. Keeping houses between them and the main street of the village, the three galloped out of the village westward, watching over their shoulders for pursuit. Ingtar had told them to avoid anything that might slow them down, and Whitecloaks asking questions would certainly do that, even if they could manage answers that satisfied. Perrin kept an even closer watch than the other two; he had his own reasons for not wanting to meet Whitecloaks. The axe in my hands. Light, what I wouldn't give to change that.

ðə laɪtli wʊɾɪd hɪlz sun hɪd ðə vɪlədʒ, ən pɛɹɪn bɪɡæn tə θɪŋk meɪbi ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tʃeɪsɪŋ əm æftɝ ɔl. hi ɹeɪn ɪn ən moʊʃən ði ʌðɝ tu tə stɑp. wən ðeɪ dɪd, aɪɪŋ ɪm kwɛstʃənɪŋli, hi lɪsənd. hɪz ɪɹz wɝ ʃɑɹpɝ ðən ðeɪ wʌns hæd bɪn, bʌɾ i hɝd noʊ saʊnz ə hʊfbits.

The lightly wooded hills soon hid the village, and Perrin began to think maybe there was nothing chasing them after all. He reined in and motioned the other two to stop. When they did, eyeing him questioningly, he listened. His ears were sharper than they once had been, but he heard no sounds of hoofbeats.

ɹɪlʌktənli, hi ɹitʃt aʊt wɪð ɪz maɪn ɪn sɝtʃ ʌv wʊlvz. ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli hi faʊn ðɛm, ə smɔl pæk laɪɪŋ ʌp fəɹ ðə deɪ ɪn ðə hɪlz əbʌv ðə vɪlədʒ ðeɪ hæd dʒʌs lɛft. ðəɹ wɝ moʊməns ʌv əstɑnɪʃmən soʊ stʃɹɔŋ i ɔlmoʊs θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ɪz oʊn; ðiz wʊlvz hæd hɝd ɹumɝz, bʌt ðeɪ hæd nɑt ɹɪli bɪliv ðəɹ wɝ tu-lɛɡz u kəd tɔk tə ðɛɹ kaɪnd. hi swɛɾɪd θɹu ðə mɪnəts ɪt tʊk tə ɡɛt pæst ɪntʃɹədusɪŋ hɪmsɛlf - hi ɡeɪv ði ɪmədʒ ə jʌŋ bʊl ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf, ən æɾəd ɪz oʊn smɛl, əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə kʌstəm əmʌŋ wʊlvz; wʊlvz wɝ ɡɹeɪt wʌnz fəɹ fɔɹmæləɾiz ɑn fɝs miɾɪŋz - bʌt faɪnəli hi mænədʒ tə ɡɛɾ ɪz kwɛstʃən θɹu. ðeɪ ɹɪli hæd noʊ ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ɛni tu-lɛɡz u kəd nɑt tɔk tə ðɛm, bʌɾ ət læs ðeɪ ɡlaɪɾɪd daʊn tə teɪk ə lʊk, ənsin baɪ ðə dʌl aɪz ə ðə tu-lɛɡz.

Reluctantly, he reached out with his mind in search of wolves. Almost immediately he found them, a small pack lying up for the day in the hills above the village they had just left. There were moments of astonishment so strong he almost thought it was his own; these wolves had heard rumors, but they had not really believed there were two-legs who could talk to their kind. He sweated through the minutes it took to get past introducing himself - he gave the image of Young Bull in spite of himself, and added his own smell, according to the custom among wolves; wolves were great ones for formalities on first meetings - but finally he managed to get his question through. They really had no interest in any two-legs who could not talk to them, but at last they glided down to take a look, unseen by the dull eyes of the two-legs.

æftɝ ə taɪm, ɪmədʒəz keɪm bæk tə hɪm, wʌt ðə wʊlvz sɔ. waɪt-kloʊk mɛn ɑn hɔɹsəz kɹaʊɾɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə vɪlədʒ, ɹaɪɾɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə haʊsəz, ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪt, bʌt nʌn livɪŋ. ɪspɛʃli nɑt wɛstwɝd. ðə wʊlvz sɛɾ ɔl ðeɪ smɛl muvɪŋ wɛst wɑz hɪmsɛlf ən tu ʌðɝ tu-lɛɡz wɪð θɹi ʌv ðə hɑɹd-fʊɾɪd tɔl wʌnz.

After a time, images came back to him, what the wolves saw. White-cloaked men on horses crowding around the village, riding among the houses, riding around it, but none leaving. Especially not westward. The wolves said all they smelled moving west was himself and two other two-legs with three of the hard-footed tall ones.

pɛɹɪn lɛt ɡoʊ ðə kɑntækt wɪð ðə wʊlvz ɡɹeɪtfəli. hi wɑz əwɛɹ ə hʊɹɪn ən mæt lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm.

Perrin let go the contact with the wolves gratefully. He was aware of Hurin and Mat looking at him.

"ðeɪ ɑɹən fɑloʊɪŋ," hi sɛd.

"They aren't following," he said.

"haʊ kən jə bi ʃʊɹ?" mæt dɪmændəd.

"How can you be sure?" Mat demanded.

"aɪ æm!" hi snæpt, ðən mɔɹ sɔfli, "aɪ dʒʌst æm."

"I am!" he snapped, then more softly, "I just am."

mæt oʊpən ɪz maʊθ ən kloʊzd ɪɾ əɡɛn, ən faɪnəli sɛd, "wɛl, ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹən kʌmɪŋ æftɝ ʌs, aɪ seɪ wi ɡoʊ bæk tə ɪŋtʃɹ ən ɡɛɾ ɑn feɪnz tʃɹeɪl. ðət dæɡɝ ɪzən kʌmɪŋ ɛni kloʊsɝ dʒʌst stændɪŋ hɪɹ."

Mat opened his mouth and closed it again, and finally said, "Well, if they aren't coming after us, I say we go back to Ingtar and get on Fain's trail. That dagger isn't coming any closer just standing here."

"wi kæn pɪk ɪɾ ʌp əɡɛn ðɪs kloʊs tə ðət vɪlədʒ," hʊɹɪn sɛd. "nɑt wɪθaʊt ɹɪskɪŋ ɹʌnɪŋ ɪndə waɪtkloʊks. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ wəɾ əpɹiʃieɪt ðæt, ən nɑt vɛɹɪn sədaɪ, niðɝ."

"We can't pick it up again this close to that village," Hurin said. "Not without risking running into Whitecloaks. I don't think Lord Ingtar would appreciate that, and not Verin Sedai, neither."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. "wil fɑloʊ ɪɾ ɑn ə fju maɪlz, ɛniweɪ. bʌt kip ə kloʊs lʊkaʊt. wi kæn bi tu fɑɹ fɹəm fɑlm, naʊ. ɪt woʊn də ɛni ɡʊd tə əvɔɪd ðə waɪtkloʊks ən ɹaɪd ɹaɪɾ ɪndə ə sintʃæn pətʃɹoʊl."

Perrin nodded. "We'll follow it on a few miles, anyway. But keep a close lookout. We can't be too far from Falme, now. It won't do any good to avoid the Whitecloaks and ride right into a Seanchan patrol."

əz ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd aʊɾ əɡɛn, hi kəd nɑt hɛlp wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt waɪtkloʊks wɝ duɪŋ ðɛɹ.

As they started out again, he could not help wondering what Whitecloaks were doing there.

dʒɛəfɹæm bɔɹnhəl pɪɹd daʊn ðə vɪlədʒ stʃɹit, sɪɾɪŋ ɪz sæɾəl waɪl ðə lidʒən spɹɛd θɹu ðə smɔl taʊn ən sɝaʊndəɾ ɪt. ðəɹ hæd bɪn sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə hɛvi-ʃoʊldɝd mæn u hæd dæʃt aʊɾ ə saɪt, sʌmθɪŋ ðət tɪkəld ɪz mɛmɹi. jɛs, ʌv kɔɹs. ðə læɾ u kleɪm tə bi ə blæksmɪθ. wʌt wɑz ɪz neɪm?

Geofram Bornhald peered down the village street, sitting his saddle while the legion spread through the small town and surrounded it. There had been something about the heavy-shouldered man who had dashed out of sight, something that tickled his memory. Yes, of course. The lad who claimed to be a blacksmith. What was his name?

baɪɑɝ pʊld ʌp ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, hæn ɑn hɑɹt. "ðə vɪlədʒ ɪz sɪkjʊɹd, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən."

Byar pulled up in front of him, hand on heart. "The village is secured, my Lord Captain."

vɪlɪdʒɝz ɪn hɛvi ʃipskɪn koʊts mɪld ənizəli əz waɪt-kloʊk soʊlʒɝz hɝɾɪd əm təɡɛðɝ nɪɹ ði oʊvɝloʊɾɪd kɑɹts ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ɪn. kɹaɪɪŋ tʃɪlʒɹən klʌŋ tə ðɛɹ mʌðɝz' skɝts, bʌt noʊ wʌn lʊk dɪfaɪənt. dʌl aɪz stɛɹɾ aʊɾ ə ði ədʌl feɪsəz, weɪɾɪŋ pæsɪvli fəɹ wʌtɛvɝ wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə hæpən. fəɹ ðət mʌtʃ, bɔɹnhəld wɑz ɡɹeɪtfəl. hi hæd noʊ ɹil dɪzaɪɝ tə meɪk ən ɪɡzæmpəl ʌv ɛni ʌv ðiz pipəl, ən noʊ wɪʃ əɾ ɔl tə weɪs taɪm.

Villagers in heavy sheepskin coats milled uneasily as white-cloaked soldiers herded them together near the overloaded carts in front of the inn. Crying children clung to their mothers' skirts, but no one looked defiant. Dull eyes stared out of the adult faces, waiting passively for whatever was going to happen. For that much, Bornhald was grateful. He had no real desire to make an example of any of these people, and no wish at all to waste time.

dɪsmaʊntɪŋ, hi tɔst ɪz ɹeɪnz tə wʌn ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. "si ðət ðə mɛn ɑɹ fɛd, baɪɑɝ. pʊt ðə pɹɪznɝz ɪn ði ɪn wɪð əz mʌtʃ fuɾ ən wɔɾɝ əz ðeɪ kən kæɹi, ðən neɪl ɔl ðə dɔɹz ən ʃʌɾɝz kloʊzd. meɪk əm θɪŋk aɪm livɪŋ səm mɛn tə stænd ɡɑɹd, jɛs?"

Dismounting, he tossed his reins to one of the Children. "See that the men are fed, Byar. Put the prisoners in the inn with as much food and water as they can carry, then nail all the doors and shutters closed. Make them think I am leaving some men to stand guard, yes?"

baɪɑɝ tʌtʃt ɪz hɑɹɾ əɡɛn ən wild ɪz hɔɹs tə ʃaʊɾ ɔɹɾɝz. ðə hɝɾɪŋ bɪɡæn ənu, ɪndə ðə flæt-ɹuft ɪn, waɪl ʌðɝ tʃɪlʒɹən ɹænsæk haʊsəz sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ hæmɝz ən neɪlz.

Byar touched his heart again and wheeled his horse to shout orders. The herding began anew, into the flat-roofed inn, while other Children ransacked houses searching for hammers and nails.

wɑtʃɪŋ ðə sʌlən feɪsəz ðət faɪl pæs hɪm, bɔɹnhəl θɔɾ ɪt ʃəd bi tu əɹ θɹi deɪz bɪfɔɹ ɛni ʌv əm faʊn ɪnʌf kɝədʒ tə bɹeɪk aʊɾ ə ði ɪn ən faɪn ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ɡɑɹdz. tu əɹ θɹi deɪz wɑz ɔl i niɾəd, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə ɹɪsk əlɝɾɪŋ ðə sintʃæn tə hɪz pɹɛzəns naʊ.

Watching the sullen faces that filed past him, Bornhald thought it should be two or three days before any of them found enough courage to break out of the inn and find there were no guards. Two or three days was all he needed, but he did not intend to risk alerting the Seanchan to his presence now.

livɪŋ ɪnʌf mɛn bɪhaɪn tə meɪk ðə kwɛstʃənɝz bɪliv ɪz ɪntaɪɝ lidʒən wɑz stɪl skæɾɝd əkɹɔs ɑlməθ pleɪn, hi hæd bɹɔt mɔɹ ðən ə θaʊzən ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən nɪɹli ðə lɛŋθ ə toʊmən hɛd wɪθaʊt ɡɪvɪŋ əlɑɹm, soʊ fɑɹ əz i nu. θɹi skɝmɪʃɪz wɪð sintʃæn pətʃɹoʊlz hæɾ ɛndəd kwɪkli. ðə sintʃæn hæd ɡɹoʊn juz tə feɪsɪŋ ɔlɹɛɾi dɪfiɾəd ɹæbəl; ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt hæd bɪn ə dɛdli sɝpɹaɪz. jɛt ðə sintʃæn nu haʊ tə faɪt laɪk ðə dɑɹk wʌnz hɔɹdz, ən i kəd nɑt hɛlp ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðə wʌn skɝmɪʃ ðət hæd kɑst ɪm bɛɾɝ ðən fɪfti mɛn. hi wɑz stɪl nɑt ʃʊɹ wɪtʃ ə ðə tu æɹoʊ-ɹɪɾəld wɪmən i hæd stɛɹɾ əɾ æftɝwɝdz hæd bɪn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Leaving enough men behind to make the Questioners believe his entire legion was still scattered across Almoth Plain, he had brought more than a thousand of the Children nearly the length of Toman Head without giving alarm, so far as he knew. Three skirmishes with Seanchan patrols had ended quickly. The Seanchan had grown used to facing already defeated rabble; the Children of the Light had been a deadly surprise. Yet the Seanchan knew how to fight like the Dark One's hordes, and he could not help remembering the one skirmish that had cost him better than fifty men. He was still not sure which of the two arrow-riddled women he had stared at afterwards had been the Aes Sedai.

"baɪɑɝ!" wʌn ə bɔɹnhəlz mɛn hændəɾ ɪm wɔɾɝ ɪn ə pɑɾɝi kʌp fɹəm wʌn ə ðə kɑɹts; ɪt wɑz aɪsi ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt.

"Byar!" One of Bornhald's men handed him water in a pottery cup from one of the carts; it was icy in his throat.

ðə ɡɔnt-feɪs mæn swʌŋ daʊn fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl. "jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən?"

The gaunt-faced man swung down from his saddle. "Yes, my Lord Captain?"

"wɛn aɪ ɛnɡeɪdʒ ði ɛnəmi, baɪɑɝ," bɔɹnhəl sɛd sloʊli, "ju wɪl nɑt teɪk pɑɹt. jəl wɑtʃ fɹəm ə dɪstəns, ən jəl kæɹi wɝd tə maɪ sʌn ʌv wʌt hæpənz."

"When I engage the enemy, Byar," Bornhald said slowly, "you will not take part. You will watch from a distance, and you will carry word to my son of what happens."

"bʌt maɪ lɔɹd kæptən - !"

"But my Lord Captain - !"

"ðæɾ ɪz maɪ ɔɹɾɝ, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ!" hi snæpt. "ju wɪl oʊbeɪ, jɛs?"

"That is my order, Child Byar!" he snapped. "You will obey, yes?"

baɪɑɝz bæk stɪfənd, ən i stɛɹd stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd. "æz jə kəmænd, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən."

Byar's back stiffened, and he stared straight ahead. "As you command, my Lord Captain."

bɔɹnhəl stʌɾid ɪm fəɹ ə moʊmənt. ðə mæn wəd də əz i wɑz toʊld, bʌɾ ɪt wəd bi bɛɾɝ tə ɡɪv ɪm ənʌðɝ ɹizən ðən lɛɾɪŋ deɪn noʊ haʊ hɪz fɑðɝ hæd daɪd. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əz ɪf i dɪd nɑɾ əv nɑlədʒ ðət wɑz ɝdʒənli niɾəd ɪn æmədɔɹ. sɪns ðət skɝmɪʃ wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ - wɑz ɪt wʌn ə ðɛm, əɹ boʊθ? θɝɾi sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz, ɡʊd faɪɾɝz, ən tu wɪmən kɑs mi twaɪs ðə kæʒəwəltiz ðeɪ dɪd. - sɪns ðɛn, hi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪkspɛktəd tə lɪv tə liv toʊmən hɛd. ɪn ðə smɔl tʃæns ðə sintʃæn dɪd nɑt si tə ɪt, vɛɹi laɪkli ðə kwɛstʃənɝz wʊd.

Bornhald studied him for a moment. The man would do as he was told, but it would be better to give him another reason than letting Dain know how his father had died. It was not as if he did not have knowledge that was urgently needed in Amador. Since that skirmish with the Aes Sedai - Was it one of them, or both? Thirty Seanchan soldiers, good fighters, and two women cost me twice the casualties they did. - since then, he no longer expected to live to leave Toman Head. In the small chance the Seanchan did not see to it, very likely the Questioners would.

"wɛn juv faʊn maɪ sʌn - hi ʃəd bi wɪð lɔɹd kæptən imən vɑldə nɪɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn - ən toʊl hɪm, jəl ɹaɪd tə æmədɔɹ, ən ɹipɔɹt tə ðə lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ. tə peɪdʒɹən naɪl pɝsənəli, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ. jəl tɛl ɪm wʌt wɪv lɝn ə ðə sintʃæn; əl ɹaɪɾ ɪɾ aʊt fəɹ ju. bi ʃʊɹ i ʌndɝstænz ðət wi kən noʊ lɔŋɡɝ kaʊn ɑn ðə tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪtʃəz biɪŋ kɑntɛnt wɪð mənɪpjəleɪɾɪŋ ɪvɛns fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz. ɪf ðeɪ faɪɾ oʊpənli fəɹ ðə sintʃæn, wɪl ʃʊɹli feɪs əm ɛlswɛɹ." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ðət læst wɑz ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt ʌv ɔl. ðeɪ hæd tə noʊ ʌndɝ ðə doʊm ə tʃɹuθ ðət fəɹ ɔl ðɛɹ vɔntɪɾ oʊðz, ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd mɑɹtʃ ɪndə bæɾəl. ɪt ɡeɪv ɪm ə sɪŋkɪŋ filɪŋ, ə wɝld wɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ wildɪd ðə paʊɝ ɪn bæɾəl; hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ðəɾ i wəd ɹəɡɹɛt livɪŋ ɪt. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz wʌn mɔɹ mɛsədʒ i wɑntəd kæɹid tə æmədɔɹ. "ænd, baɪɑɝ . . . tɛl peɪdʒɹən naɪl haʊ wi wɝ juz baɪ ðə kwɛstʃənɝz."

"When you have found my son - he should be with Lord Captain Eamon Valda near Tar Valon - and told him, you will ride to Amador, and report to the Lord Captain Commander. To Pedron Niall personally, Child Byar. You will tell him what we have learned of the Seanchan; I will write it out for you. Be sure he understands that we can no longer count on the Tar Valon witches being content with manipulating events from the shadows. If they fight openly for the Seanchan, we will surely face them elsewhere." He hesitated. That last was the most important of all. They had to know under the Dome of Truth that for all their vaunted oaths, Aes Sedai would march into battle. It gave him a sinking feeling, a world where Aes Sedai wielded the Power in battle; he was not sure that he would regret leaving it. But there was one more message he wanted carried to Amador. "And, Byar . . . tell Pedron Niall how we were used by the Questioners."

"æz jə kəmænd, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən," baɪɑɝ sɛd, bʌt bɔɹnhəl saɪɾ ət ði ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn ɪz feɪs. ðə mæn dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. tə baɪɑɝ, ɔɹɾɝz wɝ tə bi oʊbeɪd wɛðɝ ðeɪ keɪm fɹəm ðə lɔɹd kæptən əɹ ðə kwɛstʃənɝz, wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ wɝ.

"As you command, my Lord Captain," Byar said, but Bornhald sighed at the expression on his face. The man did not understand. To Byar, orders were to be obeyed whether they came from the Lord Captain or the Questioners, whatever they were.

"aɪ wɪl ɹaɪt ðəɾ aʊt fəɹ jə tə hæn tə peɪdʒɹən naɪl əz wɛl," hi sɛd. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ mʌtʃ ɡʊɾ ɪt wəd də ɪn ɛni keɪs. ə θɔt keɪm tə hɪm, ən i fɹaʊn ət ði ɪn, wɛɹ səm ə hɪz mɛn wɝ laʊdli hæmɝɪŋ neɪlz θɹu ʃʌɾɝz ən dɔɹz. "pɛɹɪn," hi mʌɾɝd. "ðæt wɑz ɪz neɪm. pɛɹɪn, fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz."

"I will write that out for you to hand to Pedron Niall as well," he said. He was not sure how much good it would do in any case. A thought came to him, and he frowned at the inn, where some of his men were loudly hammering nails through shutters and doors. "Perrin," he muttered. "That was his name. Perrin, from the Two Rivers."

"ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən?"

"The Darkfriend, my Lord Captain?"

"pɝhæps, baɪɑɝ." hi wɑz nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli sɝɾən, hɪmsɛlf, bʌt ʃʊɹli ə mæn u sim tə hæv wʊlvz faɪt fəɹ ɪm kəd bi nʌθɪŋ ɛls. sɝɾənli, ðɪs pɛɹɪn hæd kɪl tu ʌv ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. "aɪ θɔɾ aɪ sɔ hɪm wən wi ɹoʊɾ ɪn, bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛniwʌn əmʌŋ ðə pɹɪznɝz u lʊk laɪk ə blæksmɪθ."

"Perhaps, Byar." He was not entirely certain, himself, but surely a man who seemed to have wolves fight for him could be nothing else. Certainly, this Perrin had killed two of the Children. "I thought I saw him when we rode in, but I do not remember anyone among the prisoners who looked like a blacksmith."

"ðɛɹ blæksmɪθ lɛft ə mʌnθ əɡoʊ, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən. səm ə ðɛm wɝ kəmpleɪnɪŋ ðət ðeɪɾ əv bɪn ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ wi keɪm ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɑt hæd tə mɛn ðɛɹ kɑɹtwilz ðɛmsɛlvz. dʒju bɪliv ɪt wɑz ðə mæn pɛɹɪn, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən?"

"Their blacksmith left a month ago, my Lord Captain. Some of them were complaining that they'd have been gone before we came if they had not had to mend their cartwheels themselves. Do you believe it was the man Perrin, my Lord Captain?"

"huɛvɝ ɪt wɑz, hiz nɑɾ əkaʊntəd fɔɹ, noʊ? ən i meɪ kæɹi wɝɾ ʌv əs tə ðə sintʃæn."

"Whoever it was, he is not accounted for, no? And he may carry word of us to the Seanchan."

"eɪ dɑɹkfɹɛnd wəd ʃʊɹli də soʊ, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən."

"A Darkfriend would surely do so, my Lord Captain."

bɔɹnhəld ɡʌlp ðə læst ə ðə wɔɾɝ ən tɔs ðə kʌp əsaɪd. "ðɛɹ wɪl bi noʊ mil fəɹ ðə mɛn hɪɹ, baɪɑɝ. əl nɑt lɛt ðiz sintʃæn kætʃ mi næpɪŋ, wɛðɝ ɪts pɛɹɪn ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz əɹ sʌmwʌn ɛls u wɔɹnz ðɛm. maʊn ðə lidʒən, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ!"

Bornhald gulped the last of the water and tossed the cup aside. "There will be no meal for the men here, Byar. I will not let these Seanchan catch me napping, whether it is Perrin of the Two Rivers or someone else who warns them. Mount the legion, Child Byar!"

fɑɹ əbʌv ðɛɹ hɛdz, ə hjudʒ, wɪŋd ʃeɪp sɝkəld, ənnoʊɾɪst.

Far above their heads, a huge, winged shape circled, unnoticed.

ɪn ðə klɪɹɪŋ əmɪd ðə hɪltɑp θɪkɪt wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd meɪd ðɛɹ kæmp, ɹænd wɝk ðə fɔɹmz wɪð ɪz sɔɹd. hi wɑntəd tə kip fɹəm θɪŋkɪŋ. hi hæd hæɾ ɪz tʃænsəz tə sɝtʃ wɪð hʊɹɪn fəɹ feɪnz tʃɹeɪl; ðeɪ ɔl hæd, ɪn tuz ən θɹiz soʊ ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ ətʃɹækt ətɛnʃən, ən ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl faʊnd nʌθɪŋ soʊ fɑɹ. naʊ ðeɪ weɪɾəd fəɹ mæt ən pɛɹɪn tə kʌm bæk wɪð ðə snɪfɝ; ðeɪ ʃʊɾə bɪn bæk aʊɝz əɡoʊ.

In the clearing amid the hilltop thicket where they had made their camp, Rand worked the forms with his sword. He wanted to keep from thinking. He had had his chances to search with Hurin for Fain's trail; they all had, in twos and threes so they would not attract attention, and they had all found nothing so far. Now they waited for Mat and Perrin to come back with the sniffer; they should have been back hours ago.

lɔɪəl wɑz ɹiɾɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tɛlɪŋ ɪf ɪz ɪɹ-twɪtʃɪŋ wɑz oʊvɝ ɪz bʊk əɹ ðə skaʊɾɪŋ pɑɹɾiz leɪtnəs, bʌɾ ənoʊ ən moʊst ə ðə ʃaɪnɝən soʊlʒɝz sæt tɛnsli, ɔɪlɪŋ ðɛɹ sɔɹdz, əɹ kɛpt wɑtʃ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz əz ɪf ðeɪ ɪkspɛktəd sintʃæn tə əpɪɹ ɛni moʊmənt. oʊnli vɛɹɪn əpɪɹɾ ʌnkənsɝnd. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sæɾ ɑn ə lɔɡ bɪsaɪd ðɛɹ smɔl faɪɝ, mɝmɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf ən ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə dɝt wɪð ə lɔŋ stɪk; ɛvɹi soʊ ɔfən ʃi wəd ʃeɪk əɹ hɛɾ ən skɹʌb ɪɾ ɔl aʊt wɪð əɹ fʊɾ ən stɑɹɾ oʊvɝ əɡɛn. ɔl ðə hɔɹsəz wɝ sæɾəld ən ɹɛɾi tə ɡoʊ, ðə ʃaɪnɝənz' ænəməlz itʃ taɪd tə ə læns dʒɹɪvən ɪndə ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

Loial was reading, of course, and there was no telling if his ear-twitching was over his book or the scouting party's lateness, but Uno and most of the Shienaran soldiers sat tensely, oiling their swords, or kept watch through the trees as if they expected Seanchan to appear any moment. Only Verin appeared unconcerned. The Aes Sedai sat on a log beside their small fire, murmuring to herself and writing in the dirt with a long stick; every so often she would shake her head and scrub it all out with her foot and start over again. All the horses were saddled and ready to go, the Shienarans' animals each tied to a lance driven into the ground.

"hɛɹən weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹʌʃəz," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd. hi sæt wɪð ɪz bæk əɡɛnst ə tʃɹi, slaɪɾɪŋ ə ʃɑɹpənɪŋ stoʊn əlɔŋ ɪz sɔɹɾ ən wɑtʃɪŋ ɹænd. "ju ʃəd nɑt bi bɑðɝɪŋ wɪð ðət wʌn. ɪt livz jə kəmplitli oʊpən."

"Heron Wading in the Rushes," Ingtar said. He sat with his back against a tree, sliding a sharpening stone along his sword and watching Rand. "You should not be bothering with that one. It leaves you completely open."

fəɹ ən ɪnstən ɹænd bælənst ɑn ðə bɔl ʌv wʌn fʊt, sɔɹd hɛld ɹɪvɝst ɪn boʊθ hænz oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd, ðən ʃɪftəd smuðli tə ði ʌðɝ fʊt. "læn sɛz ɪts ɡʊd fəɹ dɪvɛləpɪŋ bæləns." ɪt wɑz nɑɾ izi kipɪŋ ɪz bæləns. ɪn ðə vɔɪɾ ɪɾ ɔfən simd i kəd meɪnteɪn ɪz ikwəlɪbɹiəm ətɑp ə ɹoʊlɪŋ boʊldɝ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt dɛɹ əsum ðə vɔɪd. hi wɑntəd tə tu mʌtʃ tə tʃɹʌs hɪmsɛlf.

For an instant Rand balanced on the ball of one foot, sword held reversed in both hands over his head, then shifted smoothly to the other foot. "Lan says it's good for developing balance." It was not easy keeping his balance. In the void it often seemed he could maintain his equilibrium atop a rolling boulder, but he did not dare assume the void. He wanted to too much to trust himself.

"wʌt jə pɹæktəs tu ɔfən, jə jus wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ. jəl pʊt jəɹ sɔɹɾ ɪn ði ʌðɝ mæn wɪð ðæt, ɪf jəɹ kwɪk, bʌt nɑt bɪfɔɹ hiz ɪz θɹu jəɹ ɹɪbz. jə ɑɹ pɹæktəkli ɪnvaɪɾɪŋ hɪm. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk aɪ kəd si ə mæn feɪs mi soʊ oʊpən ən nɑt pʊt maɪ sɔɹɾ ɪn hɪm, ivən noʊɪŋ i maɪt stʃɹaɪk hoʊm ət mi ɪf aɪ dɪd."

"What you practice too often, you use without thinking. You will put your sword in the other man with that, if you're quick, but not before he has his through your ribs. You are practically inviting him. I don't think I could see a man face me so open and not put my sword in him, even knowing he might strike home at me if I did."

"ɪts oʊnli fəɹ bæləns, ɪŋtʃɹ." ɹænd weɪvɝɾ ɑn wʌn fʊt, ən hæd tə pʊt ði ʌðɝ daʊn tə kip fɹəm fɔlɪŋ. hi slæm ðə bleɪɾ ɪndə ɪts skæbɝɾ ən pɪkt ʌp ðə ɡɹeɪ kloʊk ðət hæd bɪn ɪz dɪsɡaɪz. ɪt wɑz mɔθ-iɾən, ən ɹæɡəɾ ɝaʊn ðə bɑɾəm, bʌt laɪnd wɪð θɪk flis, ən ðə wɪnd wɑz pɪkɪŋ ʌp, koʊld ən aʊɾ ə ðə wɛst. "aɪ wɪʃ ðeɪd kʌm bæk."

"It's only for balance, Ingtar." Rand wavered on one foot, and had to put the other down to keep from falling. He slammed the blade into its scabbard and picked up the gray cloak that had been his disguise. It was moth-eaten, and ragged around the bottom, but lined with thick fleece, and the wind was picking up, cold and out of the west. "I wish they'd come back."

əz ɪf ɪz wɪʃ hæd bɪn ə sɪɡnəl, ənoʊ spoʊk ʌp wɪð kwaɪəɾ ɝdʒənsi. "blʌɾi hɔɹsmən kʌmɪŋ, maɪ lɔɹd." skæbɝdz ɹæɾəld əz mɛn u dɪd nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hæv ðɛɹ bleɪdz aʊt bɛɹd ðɛm. səm lɛpt ɪndə ðɛɹ sæɾəlz, snætʃɪŋ ʌp lænsɪz.

As if his wish had been a signal, Uno spoke up with quiet urgency. "Bloody horsemen coming, my Lord." Scabbards rattled as men who did not already have their blades out bared them. Some leaped into their saddles, snatching up lances.

ðə tɛnʃən feɪɾəd əz hʊɹɪn lɛd ði ʌðɝz ɪndə ðə klɪɹɪŋ əɾ ə tʃɹɑt, ən keɪm əɡɛn əz i spoʊk. "wi faʊn ðə tʃɹeɪl, lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ."

The tension faded as Hurin led the others into the clearing at a trot, and came again as he spoke. "We found the trail, Lord Ingtar."

"wi fɑloʊɾ ɪɾ ɔlmoʊs tə fɑlm," mæt sɛɾ əz i dɪsmaʊntɪd. ə flʌʃ ɪn ɪz peɪl tʃiks simd ə mɑkɪŋ ə hɛlθ; ðə skɪn wɑz taɪɾ oʊvɝ ɪz skʌl. ðə ʃaɪnɝənz ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊnd, əz ɪksaɪɾəd əz i wɑz. "ɪts dʒʌs feɪn, bʌt ðəɹ ɪzən ɛniwɛɹ ɛls i kəd bi ɡoʊɪŋ. hi mʌst əv ðə dæɡɝ."

"We followed it almost to Falme," Mat said as he dismounted. A flush in his pale cheeks seemed a mocking of health; the skin was tight over his skull. The Shienarans gathered around, as excited as he was. "It's just Fain, but there isn't anywhere else he could be going. He must have the dagger."

"wi faʊnd waɪtkloʊks, tu," pɛɹɪn sɛd, swɪŋɪŋ daʊn fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl. "hʌnʒɹədz ə ðɛm."

"We found Whitecloaks, too," Perrin said, swinging down from his saddle. "Hundreds of them."

"waɪtkloʊks?" ɪŋtʃɹ ɪkskleɪmd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "hɪɹ? wɛl, ɪf ðeɪ də nɑt tʃɹʌbəl ʌs, wɪl nɑt tʃɹʌbəl ðɛm. pɝhæps ɪf ðə sintʃæn ɑɹ ɑkjəpaɪd wɪð ðɛm, ɪɾəl hɛlp əs ɹitʃ ðə hɔɹn." hɪz aɪz fɛl ɑn vɛɹɪn, stɪl siɾəd baɪ ðə faɪɝ. "aɪ səpoʊz jəl tɛl mi aɪ ʃʊɾə lɪsən tə ju, ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə mæn dɪd ɡoʊ tə fɑlm."

"Whitecloaks?" Ingtar exclaimed, frowning. "Here? Well, if they do not trouble us, we will not trouble them. Perhaps if the Seanchan are occupied with them, it will help us reach the Horn." His eyes fell on Verin, still seated by the fire. "I suppose you will tell me I should have listened to you, Aes Sedai. The man did go to Falme."

"ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz," vɛɹɪn sɛd plɑtʃədli. "wɪð tɑvɝən, wʌt hæpənz ɪz wʌt wɑz mɛn tə hæpən. ɪt meɪ bi ðə pæɾɝn dɪmændəd ðiz ɛkstʃɹə deɪz. ðə pæɾɝn pʊts ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn ɪts pleɪs pɹɪsaɪsli, ən wən wi tʃɹaɪ tə ɔltɝ ɪt, ɪspɛʃli ɪf tɑvɝən ɑɹ ɪnvɑlvd, ðə wivɪŋ tʃeɪnʒəz tə pʊɾ əs bæk ɪndə ðə pæɾɝn əz wi wɝ mɛn tə bi." ðəɹ wɑz ən ənizi saɪləns ðət ʃi dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs; ʃi skɛtʃt ɑn aɪdli wɪð ðə stɪk. "naʊ, haʊɛvɝ, aɪ θɪŋk pɝhæps wi ʃəd meɪk plænz. ðə pæɾɝn əz bɹɔɾ əs tə fɑlm ət læst. ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ əz bɪn teɪkən tə fɑlm."

"The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills," Verin said placidly. "With ta'veren, what happens is what was meant to happen. It may be the Pattern demanded these extra days. The Pattern puts everything in its place precisely, and when we try to alter it, especially if ta'veren are involved, the weaving changes to put us back into the Pattern as we were meant to be." There was an uneasy silence that she did not seem to notice; she sketched on idly with the stick. "Now, however, I think perhaps we should make plans. The Pattern has brought us to Falme at last. The Horn of Valere has been taken to Falme."

ɪŋtʃɹ skwɑɾɪd əkɹɔs ðə faɪɝ fɹəm hɝ. "wɛn ɪnʌf pipəl seɪ ðə seɪm θɪŋ, aɪ tɛn tə bɪliv ɪt, ən ðə loʊkəl pipəl seɪ ðə sintʃæn də nɑt sim tə kɛɹ u kʌmz əɹ ɡoʊz ɪn fɑlm. əl teɪk hʊɹɪn ən ə fju ʌðɝz ɪndə ðə taʊn. wʌns i fɑloʊz feɪnz tʃɹeɪl tə ðə hɔɹn . . . wɛl, ðən wi ʃæl si wʌt wi ʃæl si."

Ingtar squatted across the fire from her. "When enough people say the same thing, I tend to believe it, and the local people say the Seanchan do not seem to care who comes or goes in Falme. I will take Hurin and a few others into the town. Once he follows Fain's trail to the Horn . . . well, then we shall see what we shall see."

wɪð əɹ fʊt, vɛɹɪn skɹʌbd aʊɾ ə wil ʃi hæd dʒɹɔn ɪn ðə dɝt. ɪn ɪts pleɪs ʃi dʒɹu tu ʃɔɹt laɪnz ðət tʌtʃt ət wʌn ɛnd. "ɪŋtʃɹ ən hʊɹɪn. ən mæt, əz i kən sɛns ðə dæɡɝ ɪf i kʌmz kloʊs ɪnʌf. jə də wɑnə ɡoʊ, doʊn ju, mæt?"

With her foot, Verin scrubbed out a wheel she had drawn in the dirt. In its place she drew two short lines that touched at one end. "Ingtar and Hurin. And Mat, as he can sense the dagger if he comes close enough. You do want to go, don't you, Mat?"

mæt əpɪɹd tɔɹn, bʌɾ i ɡeɪv ə dʒɝki nɑd. "aɪ hæv tə, doʊn aɪ? aɪ hæv tə faɪn ðət dæɡɝ."

Mat appeared torn, but he gave a jerky nod. "I have to, don't I? I have to find that dagger."

ə θɝd laɪn meɪɾ ə bɝd tʃɹæk. vɛɹɪn lʊk saɪdweɪz ət ɹænd.

A third line made a bird track. Verin looked sideways at Rand.

"aɪl ɡoʊ," hi sɛd. "ðæɾ ɪz waɪ aɪ keɪm." ən ɑd laɪɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ði ɛɛs sədaɪz aɪz, ə noʊɪŋ ɡlɪmɝ ðət meɪɾ ɪm ənizi. "tə hɛlp mæt faɪn ðə dæɡɝ," hi sɛd ʃɑɹpli, "æn ɪŋtʃɹ faɪn ðə hɔɹn." ən feɪn, hi æɾəd tə hɪmsɛlf. aɪ hæv tə faɪn feɪn ɪf ɪɾ ɪzən ɔlɹɛɾi tu leɪt.

"I'll go," he said. "That is why I came." An odd light appeared in the Aes Sedai's eyes, a knowing glimmer that made him uneasy. "To help Mat find the dagger," he said sharply, "and Ingtar find the Horn." And Fain, he added to himself. I have to find Fain if it isn't already too late.

vɛɹɪn skɹætʃt ə fɔɹθ laɪn, tɝnɪŋ ðə bɝd tʃɹæk tə ə lɑpsaɪɾɪd stɑɹ. "æn u ɛls?" ʃi sɛd sɔfli. ʃi hɛl ðə stɪk pɔɪzd.

Verin scratched a fourth line, turning the bird track to a lopsided star. "And who else?" she said softly. She held the stick poised.

"mi," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ə hɛɹ bɪfɔɹ lɔɪəl tʃaɪmd ɪn wɪð, "aɪ θɪŋk aɪ wəd laɪk tə ɡoʊ, tu," ən ənoʊ ən ði ʌðɝ ʃaɪnɝənz ɔl bɪɡæn klæmɝɪŋ tə dʒɔɪn.

"Me," Perrin said, a hair before Loial chimed in with, "I think I would like to go, too," and Uno and the other Shienarans all began clamoring to join.

"pɛɹɪn spoʊk fɝst," vɛɹɪn sɛd, əz ɪf ðət sɛɾəld ɪt. ʃi æɾəd ə fɪfθ laɪn ən dʒɹu ə sɝkəl ɝaʊn ɔl faɪv. ðə hɛɹ ɑn ɹændz nɛk stɝd; ɪt wɑz ðə seɪm wil ʃi hæd ɹʌbd aʊɾ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs. "faɪv ɹaɪd fɔɹθ," ʃi mɝmɝd.

"Perrin spoke first," Verin said, as if that settled it. She added a fifth line and drew a circle around all five. The hair on Rand's neck stirred; it was the same wheel she had rubbed out in the first place. "Five ride forth," she murmured.

"aɪ ɹɪli wəd laɪk tə si fɑlm," lɔɪəl sɛd. "aɪv nɛvɝ sin ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən. bɪsaɪdz, aɪ kən kæɹi ðə tʃɛst, ɪf ðə hɔɹn ɪz stɪl ɪn ɪt."

"I really would like to see Falme," Loial said. "I've never seen the Aryth Ocean. Besides, I can carry the chest, if the Horn is still in it."

"jud bɛɾɝ ɪnklud mi ət list, maɪ lɔɹd," ənoʊ sɛd. "ju ən lɔɹd ɹænd wɪl niɾ ənʌðɝ sɔɹɾ ət jəɹ bæks ɪf ðoʊz blʌɾi sintʃæn tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp ju." ðə ɹɛst ə ðə soʊlʒɝz ɹʌmbəl ðə seɪm sɛntəmənt.

"You'd better include me at least, my Lord," Uno said. "You and Lord Rand will need another sword at your backs if those bloody Seanchan try to stop you." The rest of the soldiers rumbled the same sentiment.

"du nɑt bi sɪli," vɛɹɪn sɛd ʃɑɹpli. hɝ stɛɹ saɪlənst əm ɔl. "ɔl ə jə kænɑt ɡoʊ. noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ənkɛɹɪŋ ðə sintʃæn ɑɹ əbaʊt stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, ðəl ʃʊɹli teɪk noʊɾəs ə twɛnti soʊlʒɝz, ən jə lʊk laɪk nʌθɪŋ ɛls ivən wɪθaʊɾ ɑɹmɝ. ən wʌn əɹ tu ʌv jəl meɪk noʊ dɪfɝəns. faɪv ɪz fju ɪnʌf tə ɛntɝ wɪθaʊɾ ətʃɹæktɪŋ ətɛnʃən, ən ɪts fɪɾɪŋ ðət θɹi ʌv əm ʃəd bi ðə θɹi tɑvɝən əmʌŋ ʌs. noʊ, lɔɪəl, jə mʌst steɪ bɪhaɪnd, tu. ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ oʊɡiɝ ɑn toʊmən hɛd. jə wəɾ ətʃɹækt əz mɛni aɪz əz ɔl ðə ɹɛs pʊt təɡɛðɝ."

"Do not be silly," Verin said sharply. Her stare silenced them all. "All of you cannot go. No matter how uncaring the Seanchan are about strangers, they will surely take notice of twenty soldiers, and you look like nothing else even without armor. And one or two of you will make no difference. Five is few enough to enter without attracting attention, and it is fitting that three of them should be the three ta'veren among us. No, Loial, you must stay behind, too. There are no Ogier on Toman Head. You would attract as many eyes as all the rest put together."

"wʌɾ əbaʊt ju?" ɹænd æskt.

"What about you?" Rand asked.

vɛɹɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ju fɝɡɛt ðə deɪmeɪn." hɝ maʊθ twɪstəɾ ɝaʊn ðə wɝɾ ɪn dɪsteɪst. "ði oʊnli weɪ aɪ kəd hɛlp jə wəd bi ɪf aɪ tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ, ən ðət wəd bi noʊ hɛlp əɾ ɔl ɪf aɪ bɹɔt ðoʊz daʊn ɑn ju. ivən ɪf ðeɪ wɝ nɑt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə si, wʌn maɪt wɛl fil ə wʊmən - əɹ ə mæn, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ - tʃænəlɪŋ, ɪf kɛɹ wɑz nɑt teɪkən tə kip ðə paʊɝ tʃænəl smɔl." ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk ət ɹænd; tə hɪm, ʃi simd ɑstənteɪʃəs ɪn nɑt duɪŋ soʊ, ən mæt ən pɛɹɪn wɝ sʌɾənli ɪntɛn ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn fit.

Verin shook her head. "You forget the damane." Her mouth twisted around the word in distaste. "The only way I could help you would be if I channeled the Power, and that would be no help at all if I brought those down on you. Even if they were not close enough to see, one might well feel a woman - or a man, for that matter - channeling, if care was not taken to keep the Power channeled small." She did not look at Rand; to him, she seemed ostentatious in not doing so, and Mat and Perrin were suddenly intent on their own feet.

"ə mæn," ɪŋtʃɹ snɔɹɾɪd. "vɛɹɪn sədaɪ, waɪ æd pɹɑbləmz? wɪv ɪnʌf ɔlɹɛɾi wɪθaʊt səpoʊzɪŋ mɛn tʃænəlɪŋ. bʌɾ ɪt wəd bi wɛl ɪf jə wɝ ðɛɹ. ɪf wɪv niɾ ə jə - "

"A man," Ingtar snorted. "Verin Sedai, why add problems? We have enough already without supposing men channeling. But it would be well if you were there. If we have need of you - "

"noʊ, jə faɪv mʌst ɡoʊ əloʊn." hɝ fʊt skɹʌbd əkɹɔs ðə wil dʒɹɔn ɪn ðə dɝt, pɑɹʃəli əbliɾɝeɪtɪŋ ɪt. ʃi stʌɾid itʃ ə ðɛm ɪn tɝn, ɪntɛn ən fɹaʊnɪŋ. "faɪv wɪl ɹaɪd fɔɹθ."

"No, you five must go alone." Her foot scrubbed across the wheel drawn in the dirt, partially obliterating it. She studied each of them in turn, intent and frowning. "Five will ride forth."

fəɹ ə moʊmən ɪt sim ðəɾ ɪŋtʃɹ wəɾ æsk əɡɛn, bʌt miɾɪŋ əɹ lɛvəl ɡeɪz, hi ʃɹʌɡd ən tɝn tə hʊɹɪn. "haʊ lɔŋ tə ɹitʃ fɑlm?"

For a moment it seemed that Ingtar would ask again, but meeting her level gaze, he shrugged and turned to Hurin. "How long to reach Falme?"

ðə snɪfɝ skɹætʃt ɪz hɛd. "ɪf wi lɛf naʊ ən ɹoʊd θɹu ðə naɪt, wi kəd bi ðəɹ baɪ sʌnɹaɪz təmɑɹoʊ mɔɹnɪŋ."

The sniffer scratched his head. "If we left now and rode through the night, we could be there by sunrise tomorrow morning."

"ðɛn ðəɾ ɪz wʌt wɪl du. əl weɪs noʊ mɔɹ taɪm. ɔl ə jə sæɾəl jəɹ hɔɹsəz. ənoʊ, aɪ wɑn jə tə bɹɪŋ ði ʌðɝz əlɔŋ bɪhaɪn ʌs, bʌt kip aʊɾ ə saɪt, ən də nɑt lɛɾ ɛniwʌn. . . ."

"Then that is what we will do. I'll waste no more time. All of you saddle your horses. Uno, I want you to bring the others along behind us, but keep out of sight, and do not let anyone. . . ."

ɹænd pɪɹɾ ət ðə skɛtʃt wil əz ɪŋtʃɹ wɛn ɑn wɪð ɪz ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz. ɪt wɑz ə bɹoʊkən wil, naʊ, wɪð oʊnli fɔɹ spoʊks. fəɹ səm ɹizən ðət meɪɾ ɪm ʃɪvɝ. hi ɹilaɪz vɛɹɪn wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, dɑɹk aɪz bɹaɪɾ ən ɪntɛn laɪk ə bɝdz. ɪt tʊk ən ɛfɝt tə pʊl ɪz ɡeɪz əweɪ ən bɪɡɪn ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪz θɪŋz təɡɛðɝ.

Rand peered at the sketched wheel as Ingtar went on with his instructions. It was a broken wheel, now, with only four spokes. For some reason that made him shiver. He realized Verin was watching him, dark eyes bright and intent like a bird's. It took an effort to pull his gaze away and begin getting his things together.

jəɹ lɛɾɪŋ fænsiz teɪk ju, hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf ɪɹɪɾəbli. ʃi kæn də ɛniθɪŋ ɪf ʃi ɪzən ðɛɹ.

You're letting fancies take you, he told himself irritably. She can't do anything if she isn't there.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾifaɪv


CHAPTER 45

bleɪdmæstɝ


Blademaster

ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn pʊʃt ɪts kɹɪmzən ɛdʒ əbʌv ðə hɝaɪzən ən sɛn lɔŋ ʃædoʊz daʊn ðə kɑbəlstoʊn stʃɹits ə fɑlm təwɔɹd ðə hɑɹbɝ. ə si bɹiz bɛn ðə smoʊk ə bɹɛkfəs kʊk faɪɝz ɪnlæn fɹəm ðə tʃɪmniz. oʊnli ði ɝli ɹaɪzɝz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi aʊɾ ə dɔɹz, ðɛɹ bɹɛθ meɪkɪŋ stim ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ koʊld. kəmpɛɹd tə ðə kɹaʊdz ðət wəd fɪl ðə stʃɹits ɪn ənʌðɝ aʊɝ, ðə taʊn sim nɪɹli ɛmpti.

The rising sun pushed its crimson edge above the horizon and sent long shadows down the cobblestone streets of Falme toward the harbor. A sea breeze bent the smoke of breakfast cook fires inland from the chimneys. Only the early risers were already out of doors, their breath making steam in the morning cold. Compared to the crowds that would fill the streets in another hour, the town seemed nearly empty.

sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ən ʌpɛndəd bæɹəl ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə stɪl-kloʊzd aɪɝənmɑŋɡɝz ʃɑp, nɪneɪiv wɔɹmd əɹ hænz ʌndɝ əɹ ɑɹmz ən sɝveɪɾ əɹ ɑɹmi. mɪn sæɾ ɑn ə dɔɹstɛp əkɹɔs ðə weɪ, swɑðd ɪn əɹ sintʃæn kloʊk ən iɾɪŋ ə ɹɪŋkəl plʌm, ən ɪleɪn ɪn əɹ flis koʊt hʌɾəld ət ði ɛdʒ ʌv ən æli dʒʌs daʊn ðə stʃɹit fɹəm hɝ. ə lɑɹdʒ sæk, pɪlfɝd fɹəm ðə dɑks, leɪ nitli foʊldəd bɪsaɪd mɪn. maɪ ɑɹmi, nɪneɪiv θɔt ɡɹɪmli. bʌt ðəɹ ɪzən ɛnibəɾi ɛls.

Sitting on an upended barrel in front of a still-closed ironmonger's shop, Nynaeve warmed her hands under her arms and surveyed her army. Min sat on a doorstep across the way, swathed in her Seanchan cloak and eating a wrinkled plum, and Elayne in her fleece coat huddled at the edge of an alley just down the street from her. A large sack, pilfered from the docks, lay neatly folded beside Min. My army, Nynaeve thought grimly. But there isn't anybody else.

ʃi kɑt saɪɾ ʌv ə sʌldəm ən ə deɪmeɪn klaɪmɪŋ ðə stʃɹit, ə jɛloʊ-hɛɹd wʊmən wɛɹɪŋ ðə bɹeɪsləɾ ən ə dɑɹk wʊmən ðə kɑlɝ, boʊθ jɔnɪŋ slipəli. ðə fju fɑlmɛn ʃɛɹɪŋ ðə stʃɹit wɪð əm əvɝɾəd ðɛɹ aɪz ən ɡeɪv əm ə waɪd bɝθ. əz fɑɹ əz ʃi kəd si daʊn təwɔɹd ðə hɑɹbɝ, ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ənʌðɝ sintʃæn. ʃi dɪd nɑt tɝn əɹ hɛd ði ʌðɝ weɪ. ɪnstɛd, ʃi stʃɹɛtʃt ən ʃɹʌɡd əz ɪf wɝkɪŋ koʊld ʃoʊldɝz bɪfɔɹ sɛɾəlɪŋ bæk əz ʃi hæd bɪn.

She caught sight of a sul'dam and a damane climbing the street, a yellow-haired woman wearing the bracelet and a dark woman the collar, both yawning sleepily. The few Falmen sharing the street with them averted their eyes and gave them a wide berth. As far as she could see down toward the harbor, there was not another Seanchan. She did not turn her head the other way. Instead, she stretched and shrugged as if working cold shoulders before settling back as she had been.

mɪn tɔst əɹ hæf-iɾən plʌm əsaɪd, ɡlæns kæʒəwəli ʌp ðə stʃɹit, ən lin bæk ɑn ðə dɔɹpoʊst. ðə weɪ wɑz klɪɹ ðɛɹ, tu, əɹ ʃi wʊɾə pʊɾ əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ niz. mɪn hæd stɑɹɾəd ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ hænz nɝvəsli, ən nɪneɪiv ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɪleɪn wɑz naʊ baʊnsɪŋ iɡɝli ɑn əɹ toʊz.

Min tossed her half-eaten plum aside, glanced casually up the street, and leaned back on the doorpost. The way was clear there, too, or she would have put her hands on her knees. Min had started rubbing her hands nervously, and Nynaeve realized that Elayne was now bouncing eagerly on her toes.

ɪf ðeɪ ɡɪv əs əweɪ, əl θʌmp boʊθ ðɛɹ hɛdz. bʌt ʃi nu ɪf ðeɪ wɝ dɪskʌvɝd, ɪt wəd bi ðə sintʃæn u wəd seɪ wʌt hæpən tə ɔl θɹi ʌv ðɛm. ʃi wɑz ɔl tu əwɛɹ ðət ʃi hæd noʊ ɹil noʊʃən ʌv wɛðɝ wʌt ʃi plænd wəd wɝk əɹ nɑt. ɪt kəɾ izəli bi hɝ oʊn feɪljɝ ðət wəd ɡɪv əm əweɪ. wʌns əɡɛn ʃi ɹizɑlv ðəɾ ɪf ɛniθɪŋ wɛn ɹɔŋ, ʃi wəd sʌmhaʊ pʊl ətɛnʃən tə hɝsɛlf waɪl mɪn ən ɪleɪn ɪskeɪpt. ʃi hæd toʊld əm tə ɹʌn ɪf ɛniθɪŋ wɛn ɹɔŋ, ən lɛɾ əm θɪŋk ʃi wəd ɹʌn, tu. wʌt ʃi wəd də ðɛn, ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ. ɪksɛpt aɪ woʊn lɛɾ əm teɪk mi əlaɪv. pliz, laɪt, nɑt ðæt.

If they give us away, I'll thump both their heads. But she knew if they were discovered, it would be the Seanchan who would say what happened to all three of them. She was all too aware that she had no real notion of whether what she planned would work or not. It could easily be her own failure that would give them away. Once again she resolved that if anything went wrong, she would somehow pull attention to herself while Min and Elayne escaped. She had told them to run if anything went wrong, and let them think she would run, too. What she would do then, she did not know. Except I won't let them take me alive. Please, Light, not that.

sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn keɪm ʌp ðə stʃɹiɾ əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ bɹækəɾɪd baɪ ðə θɹi weɪɾɪŋ wɪmən. ə dʌzən fɑlmɛn wɔkt waɪɾ ə ðə lɪŋk pɛɹ.

Sul'dam and damane came up the street until they were bracketed by the three waiting women. A dozen Falmen walked wide of the linked pair.

nɪneɪiv ɡæðɝɾ ɔl ə hɝ æŋɡɝ. liʃt wʌnz ən liʃ hoʊldɝz. ðeɪ hæd pʊt ðɛɹ fɪlθi kɑlɝ ɑn ɛɡwinz nɛk, ən ðeɪ wəd pʊɾ ɪɾ ɑn hɝz, ən ɪleɪnz, ɪf ðeɪ kʊd. ʃi hæd meɪd mɪn tɛl əɹ haʊ sʌldəm ɛnfɔɹs ðɛɹ wɪl. ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ mɪn hæd kɛp səm bæk, ðə wɝst, bʌt wʌt ʃi toʊld wɑz ɪnʌf tə hit nɪneɪiv tə waɪt-hɑt fjʊɹi. ɪn ən ɪnstən ə waɪt blɑsəm ɑn ə blæk, θɔɹni bɹæntʃ hæɾ oʊpən tə laɪt, tə seɪaɪdɑɹ, ən ðə wʌn paʊɝ fɪl hɝ. ʃi nu ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡloʊ ɝaʊn hɝ, fəɹ ðoʊz u kəd si ɪt. ðə peɪl-skɪn sʌldəm ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, ən ðə dɑɹk deɪmeɪnz maʊθ fɛl oʊpən, bʌt nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv əm noʊ tʃæns. ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə tʃɹɪkəl ə ðə paʊɝ ðət ʃi tʃænəld, bʌt ʃi kɹækt ɪt, ə wɪp snæpɪŋ ə dʌs moʊɾ aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ.

Nynaeve gathered all of her anger. Leashed Ones and Leash Holders. They had put their filthy collar on Egwene's neck, and they would put it on hers, and Elayne's, if they could. She had made Min tell her how sul'dam enforced their will. She was sure Min had kept some back, the worst, but what she told was enough to heat Nynaeve to white-hot fury. In an instant a white blossom on a black, thorny branch had opened to light, to saidar, and the One Power filled her. She knew there was a glow around her, for those who could see it. The pale-skinned sul'dam gave a start, and the dark damane's mouth fell open, but Nynaeve gave them no chance. It was only a trickle of the Power that she channeled, but she cracked it, a whip snapping a dust mote out of the air.

ðə sɪlvɝ kɑlɝ spɹæŋ oʊpən ən klæɾɝd tə ðə kɑbəlstoʊnz. nɪneɪiv hivd ə saɪ ʌv ɹɪlif ivən əz ʃi lɛp tə hɝ fit.

The silver collar sprang open and clattered to the cobblestones. Nynaeve heaved a sigh of relief even as she leaped to her feet.

ðə sʌldəm stɛɹɾ ət ðə fɔlən kɑlɝ əz ɪf əɾ ə pɔɪzənəs sneɪk. ðə deɪmeɪn pʊɾ ə ʃeɪkɪŋ hæn tə hɝ θɹoʊt, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ðə wʊmən ɪn ðə laɪtnɪŋ-mɑɹk dʒɹɛs hæd taɪm tə muv, ðə deɪmeɪn tɝn ən pʌntʃt əɹ ɪn ðə feɪs; ðə sʌldəmz niz bʌkəld, ən ʃi ɔlmoʊs fɛl.

The sul'dam stared at the fallen collar as if at a poisonous snake. The damane put a shaking hand to her throat, but before the woman in the lightning-marked dress had time to move, the damane turned and punched her in the face; the sul'dam's knees buckled, and she almost fell.

"ɡʊd fəɹ ju!" ɪleɪn ʃaʊɾəd. ʃi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɹʌnɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, tu, ən soʊ wɑz mɪn.

"Good for you!" Elayne shouted. She was already running forward, too, and so was Min.

bɪfɔɹ ɛni ʌv əm ɹitʃt ðə tu wɪmən, ðə deɪmeɪn tʊk wʌn stɑɹɾəld lʊk ɝaʊnd, ðən ɹæn əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi kʊd.

Before any of them reached the two women, the damane took one startled look around, then ran as hard as she could.

"wi woʊn hɝt ju!" ɪleɪn kɔld æftɝ hɝ. "wi ɑɹ fɹɛnz!"

"We won't hurt you!" Elayne called after her. "We are friends!"

"bi kwaɪət!" nɪneɪiv hɪst. ʃi pɹədust ə hændfʊl ə ɹæɡz fɹəm əɹ pɑkəɾ ən ɹuθləsli stʌft əm ɪndə ðə ɡeɪpɪŋ maʊθ ə ðə stɪl-stæɡɝɪŋ sʌldəm. mɪn heɪstəli ʃʊk aʊt ðə sæk ɪn ə klaʊɾ ə dʌst ən plʌnʒd ɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə sʌldəmz hɛd, ʃɹaʊɾɪŋ ðə wʊmən tə ðə weɪst. "wi ɑɹ ɔlɹɛɾi ətʃɹæktɪŋ tu mʌtʃ ətɛnʃən."

"Be quiet!" Nynaeve hissed. She produced a handful of rags from her pocket and ruthlessly stuffed them into the gaping mouth of the still-staggering sul'dam. Min hastily shook out the sack in a cloud of dust and plunged it over the sul'dam's head, shrouding the woman to the waist. "We are already attracting too much attention."

ɪt wɑz tʃɹu, ən jɛt nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli tʃɹu. ðə fɔɹ ə ðɛm stʊɾ ɪn ə ɹæpədli ɛmptiɪŋ stʃɹit, bʌt ðə pipəl u hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə bi ɛlswɛɹ wɝ əvɔɪɾɪŋ lʊkɪŋ ət ðɛm. nɪneɪiv hæd bɪn kaʊntɪŋ ɑn ðət - pipəl duɪŋ ðɛɹ bɛs tə ɪɡnɔɹ ɛniθɪŋ ðət hæd tə də wɪð sintʃæn - tə ɡeɪn əm ə fju moʊməns. ðeɪ wəd tɔk ɪvɛntʃəwəli, bʌɾ ɪn wɪspɝz; ɪt maɪt teɪk aʊɝz fəɹ ðə sintʃæn tə lɝn ɛniθɪŋ hæd hæpənd.

It was true, and yet not entirely true. The four of them stood in a rapidly emptying street, but the people who had decided to be elsewhere were avoiding looking at them. Nynaeve had been counting on that - people doing their best to ignore anything that had to do with Seanchan - to gain them a few moments. They would talk eventually, but in whispers; it might take hours for the Seanchan to learn anything had happened.

ðə hʊɾɪd wʊmən bɪɡæn tə stʃɹʌɡəl, meɪkɪŋ ɹæɡ-mʌfəld ʃaʊts fɹəm ðə sæk, bʌt nɪneɪiv ən mɪn θɹu ðɛɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn əɹ ən ɹɛsəld əɹ təwɔɹɾ ə nɪɹbaɪ æli. ðə liʃ ən kɑlɝ tʃɹeɪld əkɹɔs ðə kɑbəlstoʊnz bɪhaɪn ðɛm, klɪŋkɪŋ.

The hooded woman began to struggle, making rag-muffled shouts from the sack, but Nynaeve and Min threw their arms around her and wrestled her toward a nearby alley. The leash and collar trailed across the cobblestones behind them, clinking.

"pɪk ɪɾ ʌp," nɪneɪiv snæpt əɾ ɪleɪn. "ɪt woʊn baɪt ju!"

"Pick it up," Nynaeve snapped at Elayne. "It won't bite you!"

ɪleɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ðən ɡæðɝd ðə sɪlvɝ mɛɾəl dʒɪnʒɝli, əz ɪf ʃi fɪɹɾ ɪt vɛɹi wɛl maɪt. nɪneɪiv fɛl səm sɪmpəθi, bʌt nɑt mʌtʃ; ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɹɛstəɾ ɑn itʃ ə ðɛm duɪŋ əz ðeɪ hæd plænd.

Elayne took a deep breath, then gathered the silver metal gingerly, as if she feared it very well might. Nynaeve felt some sympathy, but not much; everything rested on each of them doing as they had planned.

ðə sʌldəm kɪkt ən tʃɹaɪd tə θɹoʊ hɝsɛlf fɹi, bʌt bɪtwin ðɛm, nɪneɪiv ən mɪn fɔɹst əɹ əlɔŋ, daʊn ði æli ɪndə ənʌðɝ, slaɪtli waɪɾɝ pæsədʒ bɪhaɪn haʊsəz, tə jɛɾ ənʌðɝ æli ən ət læst ɪndə ə ɹʌf wʊɾən ʃɛd ðət hæɾ əpɛɹənli wʌns haʊz tu hɔɹsəz, baɪ ðə stɔlz. fju kəɾ əfɔɹd tə kip hɔɹsəz sɪns ðə sintʃæn keɪm, ən ɪn ə deɪ ʌv nɪneɪivz wɑtʃɪŋ, noʊ wʌn hæd ɡɔn nɪɹ ɪt. ði ɪntɪɹiɝ hæɾ ə mʌsti dʌstinəs ðət spoʊk ʌv əbændənmənt. əz sun əz ðeɪ wɝ ɪnsaɪd, ɪleɪn dʒɹɑp ðə sɪlvɝ liʃ ən waɪpt əɹ hænz ɑn səm stʃɹɔ.

The sul'dam kicked and tried to throw herself free, but between them, Nynaeve and Min forced her along, down the alley into another, slightly wider passage behind houses, to yet another alley and at last into a rough wooden shed that had apparently once housed two horses, by the stalls. Few could afford to keep horses since the Seanchan came, and in a day of Nynaeve's watching, no one had gone near it. The interior had a musty dustiness that spoke of abandonment. As soon as they were inside, Elayne dropped the silver leash and wiped her hands on some straw.

nɪneɪiv tʃænəld ənʌðɝ tʃɹɪkəl, ən ðə bɹeɪslət fɛl tə ðə dɝt flɔɹ. ðə sʌldəm skwæld ən hɝl hɝsɛlf əbaʊt.

Nynaeve channeled another trickle, and the bracelet fell to the dirt floor. The sul'dam squalled and hurled herself about.

"ɹɛɾi?" nɪneɪiv æskt. ði ʌðɝ tu nɑɾəd, ən ðeɪ jæŋk ðə sækɪŋ ɔf ðɛɹ pɹɪznɝ.

"Ready?" Nynaeve asked. The other two nodded, and they yanked the sacking off their prisoner.

ðə sʌldəm wizd, blu aɪz tɪɹi fɹəm dʌst, bʌɾ əɹ ɹɛd feɪs wɑz ɹɛɾ əz mʌtʃ fɹəm æŋɡɝ əz fɹəm ðə sæk. ʃi dɑɹɾɪd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ, bʌt ðeɪ kɑɾ əɹ ɪn ðə fɝst stɛp. ʃi wɑz nɑt wik, jɛt ðeɪ wɝ θɹi, ən wən ðeɪ wɝ dʌn ðə sʌldəm wɑz stʃɹɪp tə hɝ ʃɪft ən laɪɪŋ ɪn wʌn ə ðə stɔlz, baʊn hæn ən fʊt wɪð staʊt kɔɹd, wɪð ənʌðɝ pis ə kɔɹd tə kip əɹ fɹəm fɔɹsɪŋ ðə ɡæɡ aʊt.

The sul'dam wheezed, blue eyes teary from dust, but her red face was red as much from anger as from the sack. She darted for the door, but they caught her in the first step. She was not weak, yet they were three, and when they were done the sul'dam was stripped to her shift and lying in one of the stalls, bound hand and foot with stout cord, with another piece of cord to keep her from forcing the gag out.

suðɪŋ ə pʌfi lɪp, mɪn aɪd ðə laɪtnɪŋ-pænəl dʒɹɛs ən sɑf buts ðeɪ hæd leɪɾ aʊt. "ɪt maɪt fɪt ju, nɪneɪiv. ɪt woʊn fɪɾ ɪleɪn əɹ mi." ɪleɪn wɑz pɪkɪŋ stʃɹɔ aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛɹ.

Soothing a puffy lip, Min eyed the lightning-paneled dress and soft boots they had laid out. "It might fit you, Nynaeve. It won't fit Elayne or me." Elayne was picking straw out of her hair.

"aɪ kən si ðæt. jə wɝ nɛvɝ ə tʃɔɪs ɛniweɪ, nɑt ɹɪli. ðeɪ noʊ jə tu wɛl." nɪneɪiv hɝidli ɹimuvd əɹ oʊn kloʊðz. ʃi tɔst əm əsaɪɾ ən dɑn ðə sʌldəmz dʒɹɛs. mɪn hɛlpt wɪð ðə bʌɾənz.

"I can see that. You were never a choice anyway, not really. They know you too well." Nynaeve hurriedly removed her own clothes. She tossed them aside and donned the sul'dam's dress. Min helped with the buttons.

nɪneɪiv wɪɡɡəld əɹ toʊz ɪn ðə buts; ðeɪ wɝ ə lɪɾəl taɪt. ðə dʒɹɛs wɑz taɪt, tu, əkɹɔs ðə bʊzəm, ən lus ɛlswɛɹ. ðə hɛm hʌŋ ɔlmoʊs tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, loʊɝ ðən sʌldəm wɔɹ ðɛm, bʌt ðə fɪt wʊɾə bɪn ivən wɝs ɑn ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz. snætʃɪŋ ʌp ðə bɹeɪslət, ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən kloʊzd ɪɾ ɝaʊn əɹ lɛft ɹɪst. ði ɛnz mɝdʒd, ən ɪt sim sɑləd. ɪt dɪd nɑt fil laɪk ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛpt ə bɹeɪslət. ʃi hæd bɪn əfɹeɪd ðəɾ ɪt wʊd.

Nynaeve wiggled her toes in the boots; they were a little tight. The dress was tight, too, across the bosom, and loose elsewhere. The hem hung almost to the ground, lower than sul'dam wore them, but the fit would have been even worse on any of the others. Snatching up the bracelet, she took a deep breath and closed it around her left wrist. The ends merged, and it seemed solid. It did not feel like anything except a bracelet. She had been afraid that it would.

"ɡɛt ðə dʒɹɛs, ɪleɪn." ðeɪ hæd daɪɾ ə pɛɹ ə dʒɹɛsəz - wʌn ə hɝz ən wʌn ʌv ɪleɪnz - tə ðə ɡɹeɪ deɪmeɪn wɝ, əɹ əz kloʊs əz ðeɪ kəd mænədʒ, ən hɪɾən əm hɪɹ. ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt muv ɪksɛp tə stɛɹ ət ði oʊpən kɑlɝ ən lɪk əɹ lɪps. "ɪleɪn, juv tə wɛɹ ɪt. tu mɛni ʌv əm əv sin mɪn fəɹ əɹ tə də ɪt. aɪ wʊɾə wɔɹn ɪt, ɪf ðɪs dʒɹɛs hæd fɪt jə ɪnstɛd." ʃi θɔt ʃi wʊɾə ɡɔn mæɾ ɪf ʃi hæd hæd tə wɛɹ ðə kɑlɝ; ðət wɑz waɪ ʃi kəd nɑt meɪk əɹ vɔɪs ʃɑɹp wɪð ɪleɪn naʊ.

"Get the dress, Elayne." They had dyed a pair of dresses - one of hers and one of Elayne's - to the gray damane were, or as close as they could manage, and hidden them here. Elayne did not move except to stare at the open collar and lick her lips. "Elayne, you have to wear it. Too many of them have seen Min for her to do it. I would have worn it, if this dress had fit you instead." She thought she would have gone mad if she had had to wear the collar; that was why she could not make her voice sharp with Elayne now.

"aɪ noʊ." ɪleɪn saɪd. "aɪ dʒʌst wɪʃ aɪ nu mɔɹ ʌv wʌɾ ɪt dʌz tə ju." ʃi dʒɹu hɝ ɹɛd-ɡoʊl hɛɹ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ. "mɪn, hɛlp mi, pliz." mɪn bɪɡæn ənduɪŋ ðə bʌɾənz daʊn ðə bæk ə hɝ dʒɹɛs.

"I know." Elayne sighed. "I just wish I knew more of what it does to you." She drew her red-gold hair out of the way. "Min, help me, please." Min began undoing the buttons down the back of her dress.

nɪneɪiv mænədʒ tə pɪk ʌp ðə sɪlvɝ kɑlɝ wɪθaʊt flɪntʃɪŋ. "ðɛɹ ɪz wʌn weɪ tə faɪn aʊt." wɪð oʊnli ə moʊmən ə hɛzəteɪʃən, ʃi bɛn ən snæpt ɪɾ ɝaʊn ðə nɛk ə ðə sʌldəm. ʃi dɪzɝvz ɪɾ ɪf ɛniwʌn dʌz, ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf fɝmli. "ʃi maɪt bi eɪbəl tə tɛl əs sʌmθɪŋ jusfəl, ɛniweɪ." ðə blu-aɪd wʊmən ɡlænst ət ðə liʃ tʃɹeɪlɪŋ fɹəm əɹ nɛk tə nɪneɪivz ɹɪst, ðən ɡlɛɹɾ ʌp əɾ əɹ kəntɛmptʃwəsli.

Nynaeve managed to pick up the silver collar without flinching. "There is one way to find out." With only a moment of hesitation, she bent and snapped it around the neck of the sul'dam. She deserves it if anyone does, she told herself firmly. "She might be able to tell us something useful, anyway." The blue-eyed woman glanced at the leash trailing from her neck to Nynaeve's wrist, then glared up at her contemptuously.

"ɪt dʌznt wɝk ðət weɪ," mɪn sɛd, bʌt nɪneɪiv bɛɹli hɝd.

"It doesn't work that way," Min said, but Nynaeve barely heard.

ʃi wɑz . . . əwɛɹ . . . ʌv ði ʌðɝ wʊmən, əwɛɹ ʌv wʌt ʃi wɑz filɪŋ, kɔɹd dɪɡɪŋ ɪndə hɝ æŋkəlz ən ɪndə hɝ ɹɪsts bɪhaɪn əɹ bæk, ðə ɹæŋk fɪʃ teɪst ə ðə ɹæɡz ɪn əɹ maʊθ, stʃɹɔ pɹɪkɪŋ əɹ θɹu ðə θɪn klɔθ ə hɝ ʃɪft. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əz ɪf ʃi, nɪneɪiv, fɛl ðiz θɪŋz, bʌɾ ɪn əɹ hɛd wɑz ə lʌmp ə sɛnseɪʃənz ðət ʃi nu bɪlɔŋ tə ðə sʌldəm.

She was . . . aware . . . of the other woman, aware of what she was feeling, cord digging into her ankles and into her wrists behind her back, the rank fish taste of the rags in her mouth, straw pricking her through the thin cloth of her shift. It was not as if she, Nynaeve, felt these things, but in her head was a lump of sensations that she knew belonged to the sul'dam.

ʃi swɑloʊd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪɡnɔɹ əm - ðeɪ wəd nɑt ɡoʊ əweɪ - ən ədʒɹɛs ðə baʊnd wʊmən. "aɪ woʊn hɝt jə ɪf jə ænsɝ maɪ kwɛstʃənz tʃɹuθfəli. wi ɑɹən sintʃæn. bʌɾ ɪf jə laɪ tə mi. . . ." ʃi lɪftəd ðə liʃ θɹɛɾənɪŋli.

She swallowed, trying to ignore them - they would not go away - and addressed the bound woman. "I won't hurt you if you answer my questions truthfully. We aren't Seanchan. But if you lie to me. . . ." She lifted the leash threateningly.

ðə wʊmənz ʃoʊldɝz ʃʊk, ən əɹ maʊθ kɝld ɝaʊn ðə ɡæɡ ɪn ə snɪɹ. ɪt tʊk nɪneɪiv ə moʊmən tə ɹilaɪz ðə sʌldəm wɑz læfɪŋ.

The woman's shoulders shook, and her mouth curled around the gag in a sneer. It took Nynaeve a moment to realize the sul'dam was laughing.

hɝ maʊθ taɪɾənd, bʌt ðən ə θɔt keɪm tə hɝ. ðət bʌndəl ə sɛnseɪʃən ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ hɛd sim tə bi ɛvɹiθɪŋ fɪzɪkəl ðət ði ʌðɝ wʊmən fɛlt. ɪkspɛɹəmɛntəli, ʃi tʃɹaɪɾ æɾɪŋ tə ɪt.

Her mouth tightened, but then a thought came to her. That bundle of sensation inside her head seemed to be everything physical that the other woman felt. Experimentally, she tried adding to it.

aɪz sʌɾənli bʌlʒɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛd, ðə sʌldəm ɡeɪv ə kɹaɪ ðət ðə ɡæɡ oʊnli pɑɹʃəli stɑpt. fænɪŋ əɹ hænz bɪhaɪn əɹ əz ɪf tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə wɔɹɾ ɔf sʌmθɪŋ, ʃi hʌmp θɹu ðə stʃɹɔ ɪn ə veɪn ɛfɝt tə ɪskeɪp.

Eyes suddenly bulging out of her head, the sul'dam gave a cry that the gag only partially stopped. Fanning her hands behind her as if trying to ward off something, she humped through the straw in a vain effort to escape.

nɪneɪiv ɡeɪpt, ən heɪstəli ɹɪd hɝsɛlf ə ði ɛkstʃɹə filɪŋz ʃi hæɾ æɾəd. ðə sʌldəm sæɡd, wipɪŋ.

Nynaeve gaped, and hastily rid herself of the extra feelings she had added. The sul'dam sagged, weeping.

"wʌt. . . . wʌd jə . . . də tə hɝ?" ɪleɪn æsk feɪnli. mɪn oʊnli stɛɹd, hɝ maʊθ hæŋɪŋ oʊpən.

"What. . . . What did you . . . do to her?" Elayne asked faintly. Min only stared, her mouth hanging open.

nɪneɪiv ænsɝd ɡɹʌflaɪ. "ðə seɪm θɪŋ ʃɛɹiəm dɪd tə jə wən jə θɹu ə kʌp ət mɛɹɪθ." laɪt, bʌt ðɪs ɪz ə fɪlθi θɪŋ.

Nynaeve answered gruffly. "The same thing Sheriam did to you when you threw a cup at Marith." Light, but this is a filthy thing.

ɪleɪn ɡʌlp laʊdli. "oʊ."

Elayne gulped loudly. "Oh."

"bʌɾ ən æɾəm ɪzən səpoʊz tə wɝk ðət weɪ," mɪn sɛd. "ðeɪ ɔlweɪz kleɪmd ɪt woʊnt wɝk ɑn ɛni wʊmən u kænɑt tʃænəl."

"But an a'dam isn't supposed to work that way," Min said. "They always claimed it won't work on any woman who cannot channel."

"aɪ də nɑt kɛɹ haʊ ɪts səpoʊz tə wɝk, soʊ lɔŋ əz ɪt dʌz." nɪneɪiv siz ðə sɪlvɝ mɛɾəl liʃ ɹaɪt wɛɹ ɪt dʒɔɪn ðə kɑlɝ, ən pʊl ðə wʊmən ʌp ɪnʌf tə lʊk əɹ ɪn ði aɪz. fɹaɪɾənd aɪz, ʃi sɔ. "ju lɪsən tə mi, ən lɪsən wɛl. aɪ wɑn ænsɝz, ən ɪf aɪ doʊnt ɡɛt ðɛm, əl meɪk jə θɪŋk aɪ hæv hæd ðə haɪɾ ɔf ju." stɑɹk tɛɹɝ ɹoʊld əkɹɔs ðə wʊmənz feɪs, ən nɪneɪivz stʌmək hivd əz ʃi sʌɾənli ɹilaɪz ðə sʌldəm hæd teɪkən əɹ lɪɾɝəli. ɪf ʃi θɪŋks aɪ kæn, ɪts kəz ʃi noʊz. ðəɾ ɪz wʌt ðiz liʃɪz ɑɹ fɔɹ. ʃi tʊk fɝm hoʊld ə hɝsɛlf tə stɑp fɹəm klɔɪŋ ðə bɹeɪsləɾ ɔf əɹ ɹɪst. ɪnstɛd, ʃi hɑɹɾənd əɹ feɪs. "ɑɹ jə ɹɛɾi tə ænsɝ mi? əɹ dʒju nid mɔɹ kənvɪnsɪŋ?"

"I do not care how it is supposed to work, so long as it does." Nynaeve seized the silver metal leash right where it joined the collar, and pulled the woman up enough to look her in the eyes. Frightened eyes, she saw. "You listen to me, and listen well. I want answers, and if I don't get them, I'll make you think I have had the hide off you." Stark terror rolled across the woman's face, and Nynaeve's stomach heaved as she suddenly realized the sul'dam had taken her literally. If she thinks I can, it's because she knows. That is what these leashes are for. She took firm hold of herself to stop from clawing the bracelet off her wrist. Instead, she hardened her face. "Are you ready to answer me? Or do you need more convincing?"

ðə fɹæntɪk hɛd-ʃeɪkɪŋ wɑz ænsɝ ɪnʌf. wən nɪneɪiv ɹimuv ðə ɡæɡ, ðə wʊmən oʊnli pɔz tə swɑloʊ wʌns bɪfɔɹ bæbəlɪŋ, "aɪ wɪl nɑt ɹipɔɹt ju. aɪ swɛɹ ɪt. oʊnli teɪk ðɪs fɹəm maɪ nɛk. aɪ hæv ɡoʊld. teɪk ɪt. aɪ swɛɹ, əl nɛvɝ tɛl ɛniwʌn."

The frantic head-shaking was answer enough. When Nynaeve removed the gag, the woman only paused to swallow once before babbling, "I will not report you. I swear it. Only take this from my neck. I have gold. Take it. I swear, I will never tell anyone."

"bi kwaɪət," nɪneɪiv snæpt, ən ðə wʊmən ʃʌɾ əɹ maʊθ ɪmiɾiətli. "wʌɾ ɪz jəɹ neɪm?"

"Be quiet," Nynaeve snapped, and the woman shut her mouth immediately. "What is your name?"

"sɛɾə. pliz. əl ænsɝ ju, bʌt pliz teɪk - ɪt - ɔf! ɪf ɛniwʌn siz ɪɾ ɑn mi. . . ." sɛɾəz aɪz ɹoʊl daʊn tə stɛɹ ət ðə liʃ, ðən skwizd ʃʌt. "pliz?" ʃi wɪspɝd.

"Seta. Please. I will answer you, but please take - it - off! If anyone sees it on me. . . ." Seta's eyes rolled down to stare at the leash, then squeezed shut. "Please?" she whispered.

nɪneɪiv ɹilaɪz sʌmθɪŋ. ʃi kəd nɛvɝ meɪk ɪleɪn wɛɹ ðət kɑlɝ.

Nynaeve realized something. She could never make Elayne wear that collar.

"bɛst wi ɡɛɾ ɑn wɪð ɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd fɝmli. ʃi wɑz daʊn tə hɝ ʃɪft, tu, naʊ. "ɡɪv mi ə moʊmən tə pʊt ðɪs ʌðɝ dʒɹɛs ɑn, ən - "

"Best we get on with it," Elayne said firmly. She was down to her shift, too, now. "Give me a moment to put this other dress on, and - "

"pʊt jəɹ oʊn kloʊðz bæk ɑn," nɪneɪiv sɛd.

"Put your own clothes back on," Nynaeve said.

"sʌmwʌn əz tə pɹitɛn tə bi ə deɪmeɪn," ɪleɪn sɛd, "ɔɹ wɪl nɛvɝ ɹitʃ ɛɡwin. ðət dʒɹɛs fɪts ju, ən ɪt kænɑt bi mɪn. ðət livz mi."

"Someone has to pretend to be a damane," Elayne said, "or we will never reach Egwene. That dress fits you, and it cannot be Min. That leaves me."

"aɪ sɛd pʊt jəɹ kloʊðz ɑn. wɪv sʌmbɑɾi tə bi əɹ liʃt wʌn." nɪneɪiv tʌɡd ət ðə liʃ ðət hɛl sɛɾə, ən ðə sʌldəm ɡæspt.

"I said put your clothes on. We have somebody to be our Leashed One." Nynaeve tugged at the leash that held Seta, and the sul'dam gasped.

"noʊ! noʊ, pliz! ɪf ɛniwʌn siz mi - " ʃi kʌɾ ɔf ət nɪneɪivz koʊl stɛɹ.

"No! No, please! If anyone sees me - " She cut off at Nynaeve's cold stare.

"æz fɑɹ əz aɪm kənsɝnd, jə ɑɹ wɝs ðən ə mɝɾɝɝ, wɝs ðən ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd. aɪ kæn θɪŋk ʌv ɛniθɪŋ wɝs ðən ju. ðə fæk ðəɾ aɪ hæv tə wɛɹ ðɪs θɪŋ ɑn maɪ ɹɪst, tə bi ðə seɪm əz jə fəɹ ivən ən aʊɝ, sɪkənz mi. soʊ ɪf jə θɪŋk ðəɹ ɪz ɛniθɪŋ əl bɔk ət duɪŋ tə ju, θɪŋk əɡɛn. jə doʊnt wɑnə bi sin? ɡʊd. niðɝ də wi. noʊ wʌn ɹɪli lʊks əɾ ə deɪmeɪn, ðoʊ. əz lɔŋ əz jə kip jəɹ hɛd daʊn ðə weɪ ə liʃt wʌn ɪz səpoʊz tə, noʊ wʌn wɪl ivən noʊɾəs ju. bʌt jə hæd bɛɾɝ də ðə bɛs jə kən tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðə ɹɛst ʌv əs ɑɹənt noʊɾəst, iðɝ. ɪf wi ɑɹ, jə ʃʊɹli wɪl bi sin, ən ɪf ðəɾ ɪz nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə hoʊl ju, aɪ pɹɑməs jə əl meɪk jə kɝs ðə fɝs kɪs jəɹ mʌðɝ ɛvɝ ɡeɪv jəɹ fɑðɝ. də wi ʌndɝstæn itʃ ʌðɝ?"

"As far as I am concerned, you are worse than a murderer, worse than a Darkfriend. I can't think of anything worse than you. The fact that I have to wear this thing on my wrist, to be the same as you for even an hour, sickens me. So if you think there is anything I'll balk at doing to you, think again. You don't want to be seen? Good. Neither do we. No one really looks at a damane, though. As long as you keep your head down the way a Leashed One is supposed to, no one will even notice you. But you had better do the best you can to make sure the rest of us aren't noticed, either. If we are, you surely will be seen, and if that is not enough to hold you, I promise you I'll make you curse the first kiss your mother ever gave your father. Do we understand each other?"

"jɛs," sɛɾə sɛd feɪnli. "aɪ swɛɹ ɪt."

"Yes," Seta said faintly. "I swear it."

nɪneɪiv hæd tə ɹimuv ðə bɹeɪsləɾ ɪn ɔɹɾɝ fəɹ əm tə slaɪɾ ɪleɪnz ɡɹeɪ-daɪd dʒɹɛs daʊn ðə liʃ ən oʊvɝ sɛɾəz hɛd. ɪt dɪd nɑt fɪt ðə wʊmən wɛl, biɪŋ lus ət ðə bʊzəm ən taɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə hɪps, bʌt nɪneɪivz wʊɾə bɪn əz bæd, ən tu ʃɔɹt bɪsaɪdz. nɪneɪiv hoʊpt pipəl ɹɪli dɪd nɑt lʊk ət deɪmeɪn. ʃi pʊt ðə bɹeɪslət bæk ɑn ɹɪlʌktənli.

Nynaeve had to remove the bracelet in order for them to slide Elayne's gray-dyed dress down the leash and over Seta's head. It did not fit the woman well, being loose at the bosom and tight across the hips, but Nynaeve's would have been as bad, and too short besides. Nynaeve hoped people really did not look at damane. She put the bracelet back on reluctantly.

ɪleɪn ɡæðɝɾ ʌp nɪneɪivz kloʊðz, ɹæp ði ʌðɝ daɪd dʒɹɛs ɝaʊn ðɛm, ən meɪɾ ə bʌndəl, ə bʌndəl fəɹ ə wʊmən ɪn fɑɹm kloʊðz tə bi kæɹiɪŋ əz ʃi fɑloʊɾ ə sʌldəm ən ə deɪmeɪn. "ɡɔɪn wɪl iɾ ɪz hɑɹɾ aʊt wən i hɪɹz əbaʊt ðɪs," ʃi sɛd, ən læft. ɪt saʊndəd fɔɹst.

Elayne gathered up Nynaeve's clothes, wrapped the other dyed dress around them, and made a bundle, a bundle for a woman in farm clothes to be carrying as she followed a sul'dam and a damane. "Gawyn will eat his heart out when he hears about this," she said, and laughed. It sounded forced.

nɪneɪiv lʊkt əɾ əɹ kloʊsli, ðən ət mɪn. ɪt wɑz taɪm fəɹ ðə deɪnʒɝəs pɑɹt. "ɑɹ jə ɹɛɾi?"

Nynaeve looked at her closely, then at Min. It was time for the dangerous part. "Are you ready?"

ɪleɪnz smaɪl feɪɾəd. "aɪ æm ɹɛɾi."

Elayne's smile faded. "I am ready."

"ɹɛɾi," mɪn sɛd kɝtli.

"Ready," Min said curtly.

"wɛɹ ɑɹ jə . . . wi . . . ɡoʊɪŋ?" sɛɾə sɛd, kwɪkli æɾɪŋ, "ɪf aɪ meɪ æsk?"

"Where are you . . . we . . . going?" Seta said, quickly adding, "If I may ask?"

"ɪntu ðə laɪənz' dɛn," ɪleɪn toʊl hɝ.

"Into the lions' den," Elayne told her.

"tə dæns wɪð ðə dɑɹk wʌn," mɪn sɛd.

"To dance with the Dark One," Min said.

nɪneɪiv saɪɾ ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə seɪ ɪz, wəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ wɛɹ ɔl ðə deɪmeɪn ɑɹ kɛpt, ən wi ɪntɛn tə fɹi wʌn ə ðɛm."

Nynaeve sighed and shook her head. "What they are trying to say is, we are going where all the damane are kept, and we intend to free one of them."

sɛɾə wɑz stɪl ɡeɪpɪŋ ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt wən ðeɪ hʌsəld əɹ aʊɾ ə ðə ʃɛd.

Seta was still gaping in astonishment when they hustled her out of the shed.

beɪl doʊmən wɑtʃt ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn fɹəm ðə dɛk ə hɪz ʃɪp. ðə dɑks wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə bʌsəl, ðoʊ ðə stʃɹits liɾɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ðə hɑɹbɝ stʊd lɑɹdʒli ɛmpti. ə ɡʌl pɝtʃt ɑn ə paɪlɪŋ stɛɹɾ ət hɪm; ɡʌlz hæd pɪɾiləs aɪz.

Bayle Domon watched the rising sun from the deck of his ship. The docks were already beginning to bustle, though the streets leading up from the harbor stood largely empty. A gull perched on a piling stared at him; gulls had pitiless eyes.

"ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ əbaʊt ðɪs, kæptən?" jɑɹən æskt. "ɪf ðə sintʃæn wʌndɝ wʌt wɝ ɔl duɪŋ əbɔɹd - "

"Are you sure about this, Captain?" Yarin asked. "If the Seanchan wonder what we're all doing aboard - "

"ju dʒʌs meɪk sɝɾən ðəɹ də bi ən æks nɪɹ ɛvɹi mʊɹɪŋ laɪn," doʊmən sɛd kɝtli. "ænd, jɑɹən? də ɛni mæn tʃɹaɪ tə kʌɾ ə laɪn bɪfɔɹ ðoʊz wɪmən ɑɹ əbɔɹd, əl splɪɾ ɪz skʌl."

"You just make certain there do be an axe near every mooring line," Domon said curtly. "And, Yarin? Do any man try to cut a line before those women are aboard, I will split his skull."

"wʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ doʊn kʌm, kæptən? wʌɾ ɪf ɪts sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz ɪnstɛd?"

"What if they don't come, Captain? What if it's Seanchan soldiers instead?"

"sɛɾəl jəɹ baʊəlz, mæn! ɪf soʊlʒɝz kʌm, əl meɪk ə ɹʌn fəɹ ðə hɑɹbɝ maʊθ, ən ðə laɪɾ əv mɝsi ɑn əs ɔl. bʌɾ əntɪl soʊlʒɝz də kʌm, aɪ min tə weɪt fəɹ ðoʊz wɪmən. naʊ ɡoʊ lʊk əz ɪf jə ɑɹ noʊ duɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ."

"Settle your bowels, man! If soldiers come, I will make a run for the harbor mouth, and the Light have mercy on us all. But until soldiers do come, I mean to wait for those women. Now go look as if you are no doing anything."

doʊmən tɝn bæk tə piɹɪŋ ʌp ɪndə ðə taʊn, təwɔɹd wɛɹ ðə deɪmeɪn wɝ hɛld. hɪz fɪŋɡɝz dʒɹʌmd ə nɝvəs tætu ɑn ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ.

Domon turned back to peering up into the town, toward where the damane were held. His fingers drummed a nervous tattoo on the railing.

ðə bɹiz fɹəm ðə si bɹɔt ðə smɛl ə bɹɛkfəs kʊk faɪɝz tə ɹændz noʊz, ən tʃɹaɪd tə flæp əɾ ɪz mɔθ-iɾən kloʊk, bʌɾ i hɛld ɪt kloʊzd wɪð wʌn hæn əz ɹɛd nɪɹd ðə taʊn. ðəɹ hæd nɑt bɪn ə koʊt tə fɪɾ ɪm ɪn ðə kloʊðz ðeɪ hæd faʊnd, ən i θɔɾ ɪt bɛs tə kip ðə faɪn sɪlvɝ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ɑn ɪz slivz ən ðə hɛɹənz ɑn ɪz kɑlɝ hɪɾən. ðə sintʃæn æɾətud təwɔɹd kɑŋkɝd pipəl kæɹiɪŋ wɛpənz maɪt nɑɾ ɪkstɛn tə ðoʊz wɪð hɛɹən-mɑɹk sɔɹdz, iðɝ.

The breeze from the sea brought the smell of breakfast cook fires to Rand's nose, and tried to flap at his moth-eaten cloak, but he held it closed with one hand as Red neared the town. There had not been a coat to fit him in the clothes they had found, and he thought it best to keep the fine silver embroidery on his sleeves and the herons on his collar hidden. The Seanchan attitude toward conquered people carrying weapons might not extend to those with heron-mark swords, either.

ðə fɝst ʃædoʊz ə mɔɹnɪŋ stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ əhɛɾ ə hɪm. hi kəd dʒʌst si hʊɹɪn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn əmʌŋ ðə wæɡən jɑɹdz ən hɔɹs lɑts. oʊnli wʌn əɹ tu mɛn muvd əmʌŋ ðə laɪnz ə mɝtʃənt wæɡənz, ən ðeɪ wɔɹ ðə lɔŋ eɪpɹənz ʌv wilɹaɪts əɹ blæksmɪθs. ɪŋtʃɹ, ðə fɝst ɪn, wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi aʊɾ ə saɪt. pɛɹɪn ən mæt fɑloʊd bɪhaɪn ɹænd ət speɪst ɪntɝvəlz. hi dɪd nɑt lʊk bæk tə tʃɛk ɑn ðɛm. ðəɹ wɑz nɑt səpoʊz tə bi ɛniθɪŋ tə kənɛk ðɛm; faɪv mɛn kʌmɪŋ ɪndə fɑlm əɾ ən ɝli aʊɝ, bʌt nɑt təɡɛðɝ.

The first shadows of morning stretched out ahead of him. He could just see Hurin riding in among the wagon yards and horse lots. Only one or two men moved among the lines of merchant wagons, and they wore the long aprons of wheelwrights or blacksmiths. Ingtar, the first in, was already out of sight. Perrin and Mat followed behind Rand at spaced intervals. He did not look back to check on them. There was not supposed to be anything to connect them; five men coming into Falme at an early hour, but not together.

ðə hɔɹs lɑts sɝaʊndəd hɪm, hɔɹsəz ɔlɹɛɾi kɹaʊɾɪŋ ðə fɛnsəz, weɪɾɪŋ tə bi fɛd. hʊɹɪn pʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ aʊt fɹəm bɪtwin tu steɪbəlz, ðɛɹ dɔɹz stɪl kloʊzd ən bɑɹd, sɔ ɹænd ən moʊʃən tə hɪm bɪfɔɹ dʌkɪŋ bæk. ɹænd tɝn ðə beɪ stæljən ðət weɪ.

The horse lots surrounded him, horses already crowding the fences, waiting to be fed. Hurin put his head out from between two stables, their doors still closed and barred, saw Rand and motioned to him before ducking back. Rand turned the bay stallion that way.

hʊɹɪn stʊd hoʊldɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs baɪ ðə ɹeɪnz. hi hæɾ ɑn wʌn ə ðə lɔŋ vɛsts ɪnstɛɾ ə hɪz koʊt, ən dɪspaɪt ðə hɛvi kloʊk ðət hɪɾ ɪz ʃɔɹt sɔɹɾ ən sɔɹd-bɹeɪkɝ, hi ʃɪvɝd wɪð ðə koʊld. "lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹz bæk ðɛɹ," hi sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ daʊn ðə nɛɹoʊ pæsədʒ. "hi sɛz wɪl liv ðə hɔɹsəz hɪɹ ən ɡoʊ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ ɑn fʊt." əz ɹænd dɪsmaʊntɪd, ðə snɪfɝ æɾəd, "feɪn wɛn ɹaɪt daʊn ðət stʃɹit, lɔɹd ɹænd. aɪ kən ɔlmoʊst smɛl ɪt fɹəm hɪɹ."

Hurin stood holding his horse by the reins. He had on one of the long vests instead of his coat, and despite the heavy cloak that hid his short sword and sword-breaker, he shivered with the cold. "Lord Ingtar's back there," he said, nodding down the narrow passage. "He says we'll leave the horses here and go the rest of the way on foot." As Rand dismounted, the sniffer added, "Fain went right down that street, Lord Rand. I can almost smell it from here."

ɹænd lɛd ɹɛd daʊn ðə weɪ tə wɛɹ ɪŋtʃɹ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi taɪɾ ɪz oʊn hɔɹs bɪhaɪn ðə steɪbəl. ðə ʃaɪnɝən dɪd nɑt lʊk vɛɹi mʌtʃ ə lɔɹɾ ɪn ə dɝɾi flis koʊt wɪð hoʊlz wɔɹn θɹu ðə lɛðɝ ɪn sɛvɹəl pleɪsəz, ən ɪz sɔɹd lʊkt ɑd bɛltəɾ oʊvɝ ɪt. hɪz aɪz hæɾ ə fivɝɪʃ ɪntɛnsəɾi.

Rand led Red down the way to where Ingtar had already tied his own horse behind the stable. The Shienaran did not look very much a lord in a dirty fleece coat with holes worn through the leather in several places, and his sword looked odd belted over it. His eyes had a feverish intensity.

taɪɪŋ ɹɛɾ əlɔŋsaɪɾ ɪŋtʃɹz stæljən, ɹænd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊvɝ ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz. hi hæd nɑt bɪn eɪbəl tə liv ðə bænɝ bɪhaɪnd. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɛni ʌv ðə soʊlʒɝz wʊɾə ɡɔn ɪndə ðə bæɡz, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt seɪ ðə seɪm fəɹ vɛɹɪn, nɔɹ pɹɪdɪkt wʌt ʃi wəd də ɪf ʃi faʊn ðə bænɝ. stɪl, ɪt meɪɾ ɪm ənizi tə hæv ɪt wɪð hɪm. hi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə liv ðə sæɾəlbæɡz taɪd bɪhaɪn ɪz sæɾəl.

Tying Red alongside Ingtar's stallion, Rand hesitated over his saddlebags. He had not been able to leave the banner behind. He did not think any of the soldiers would have gone into the bags, but he could not say the same for Verin, nor predict what she would do if she found the banner. Still, it made him uneasy to have it with him. He decided to leave the saddlebags tied behind his saddle.

mæt dʒɔɪn ðɛm, ən ə fju moʊməns leɪɾɝ hʊɹɪn keɪm wɪð pɛɹɪn. mæt wɔɹ bæɡi tʃɹaʊzɝz stʌft ɪndə ðə tɑps ə hɪz buts, ən pɛɹɪn ɪz tu-ʃɔɹt kloʊk. ɹænd θɔt ðeɪ ɔl lʊk laɪk vɪlənəs bɛɡɝz, bʌt ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl pæs lɑɹdʒli ənnoʊɾɪst ɪn ðə vɪlədʒəz.

Mat joined them, and a few moments later Hurin came with Perrin. Mat wore baggy trousers stuffed into the tops of his boots, and Perrin his too-short cloak. Rand thought they all looked like villainous beggars, but they had all passed largely unnoticed in the villages.

"naʊ," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd. "lɛɾ əs si wʌt wi si."

"Now," Ingtar said. "Let us see what we see."

ðeɪ stʃɹoʊld aʊt tə ðə dɝt stʃɹiɾ əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd noʊ pɝtɪkjəlɝ dɛstəneɪʃən ɪn maɪnd, tɔkɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, ən æmbəl pæs ðə wæɡən jɑɹdz ɑntu sloʊpɪŋ kɑbəlstoʊn stʃɹits. ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌɾ i hɪmsɛlf sɛd, mʌtʃ lɛs ɛniwʌn ɛls. ɪŋtʃɹz plæn hæd bɪn fəɹ əm tə lʊk laɪk ɛni ʌðɝ ɡɹup ə mɛn wɔkɪŋ təɡɛðɝ, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ ɔl tu fju pipəl aʊt-ʌv-dɔɹz. faɪv mɛn meɪɾ ə kɹaʊɾ ɑn ðoʊz koʊl mɔɹnɪŋ stʃɹits.

They strolled out to the dirt street as if they had no particular destination in mind, talking among themselves, and ambled past the wagon yards onto sloping cobblestone streets. Rand was not sure what he himself said, much less anyone else. Ingtar's plan had been for them to look like any other group of men walking together, but there were all too few people out-of-doors. Five men made a crowd on those cold morning streets.

ðeɪ wɔkt ɪn ə bʌntʃ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz hʊɹɪn u lɛd ðɛm, snɪfɪŋ ði ɛɹ ən tɝnɪŋ ʌp ðɪs stʃɹiɾ ən daʊn ðæt. ðə ɹɛs tɝnd wən i dɪd, əz ɪf ðət wɑz wʌt ðeɪ hæɾ ɪntɛndəɾ ɔl əlɔŋ. "hiz kɹɪskɹɔs ðɪs taʊn," hʊɹɪn mʌɾɝd, ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ. "hɪz smɛl ɪz ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ən ɪt stɪŋks soʊ, ɪts hɑɹd tə tɛl oʊl fɹəm nu. ət list aɪ noʊ hiz stɪl hɪɹ. səm ʌv ɪt kænɑt bi oʊldɝ ðən ə deɪ əɹ tu, ɪm ʃʊɹ. aɪm ʃʊɹ," hi æɾəd lɛs daʊtfəli.

They walked in a bunch, but it was Hurin who led them, sniffing the air and turning up this street and down that. The rest turned when he did, as if that was what they had intended all along. "He's crisscrossed this town," Hurin muttered, grimacing. "His smell is everywhere, and it stinks so, it's hard to tell old from new. At least I know he's still here. Some of it cannot be older than a day or two, I'm sure. I am sure," he added less doubtfully.

ə fju mɔɹ pipəl bɪɡæn tə əpɪɹ, hɪɹ ə fɹut pɛdlɝ sɛɾɪŋ ɪz wɛɹz ɑn teɪbəlz, ðəɹ ə fɛloʊ hɝiɪŋ əlɔŋ wɪð ə bɪɡ ɹoʊl ə pɑɹtʃməns ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹm ən ə skɛtʃ-bɔɹd slʌŋ əkɹɔs ɪz bæk, ə naɪf-ʃɑɹpənɝ ɔɪlɪŋ ðə ʃæft ə hɪz ɡɹaɪndɪŋ wil ɑn ɪts bæɹoʊ. tu wɪmən wɔk baɪ, hɛɾəd ði ʌðɝ weɪ, wʌn wɪð daʊnkæst aɪz ən ə sɪlvɝ kɑlɝ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk, ði ʌðɝ, ɪn ə dʒɹɛs wɝkt wɪð laɪtnɪŋ boʊls, hoʊldɪŋ ə kɔɪl sɪlvɝ liʃ.

A few more people began to appear, here a fruit peddler setting his wares on tables, there a fellow hurrying along with a big roll of parchments under his arm and a sketch-board slung across his back, a knife-sharpener oiling the shaft of his grinding wheel on its barrow. Two women walked by, headed the other way, one with downcast eyes and a silver collar around her neck, the other, in a dress worked with lightning bolts, holding a coiled silver leash.

ɹændz bɹɛθ kɑt; ɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝt nɑt tə lʊk bæk ət ðɛm.

Rand's breath caught; it was an effort not to look back at them.

"wɑz ðət . . . ?" mæts aɪz wɝ oʊpən waɪd, stɛɹɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə hɑloʊz ə hɪz aɪ sɑkəts. "wɑz ðəɾ ə deɪmeɪn?"

"Was that . . . ?" Mat's eyes were open wide, staring out of the hollows of his eye sockets. "Was that a damane?"

"ðæɾ ɪz ðə weɪ ðeɪ wɝ dɪskɹaɪbd," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd kɝtli. "hʊɹɪn, ɑɹ wi gɑnə wɔk ɛvɹi stʃɹiɾ ɪn ðɪs ʃædoʊ-kɝs taʊn?"

"That is the way they were described," Ingtar said curtly. "Hurin, are we going to walk every street in this Shadow-cursed town?"

"hiz bɪn ɛvɹiwɛɹ, lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ," hʊɹɪn sɛd. "hɪz stɛntʃ ɪz ɛvɹiwɛɹ." ðeɪ hæd kʌm ɪndə ən ɛɹiə wɛɹ ðə stoʊn haʊsəz wɝ θɹi ən fɔɹ stɔɹiz haɪ, əz bɪɡ əz ɪnz.

"He's been everywhere, Lord Ingtar," Hurin said. "His stench is everywhere." They had come into an area where the stone houses were three and four stories high, as big as inns.

ðeɪ ɹaʊndəɾ ə kɔɹnɝ, ən ɹænd wɑz teɪkən əbæk baɪ ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə skɔɹ ə sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz stændɪŋ ɡɑɹɾ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə bɪɡ haʊs ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə stʃɹit - ən baɪ ðə saɪɾ ə tu wɪmən ɪn laɪtnɪŋ-mɑɹk dʒɹɛsəz tɔkɪŋ ɑn ðə dɔɹstɛps ʌv ənʌðɝ əkɹɔs fɹəm ɪt. ə bænɝ flæpt ɪn ðə wɪn oʊvɝ ðə haʊs ðə soʊlʒɝz pɹətɛktəd; ə ɡoʊldən hɔk klʌtʃɪŋ laɪtnɪŋ boʊls. nʌθɪŋ mɑɹkt aʊt ðə haʊs wɛɹ ðə wɪmən tɔkt ɪksɛp ðɛmsɛlvz. ði ɔfəsɝz ɑɹmɝ wɑz ɹisplɛndən ɪn ɹɛɾ ən blæk ən ɡoʊld, hɪz hɛlmət ɡɪldɪɾ ən peɪntəd tə lʊk laɪk ə spaɪɾɝz hɛd. ðən ɹænd sɔ ðə tu bɪɡ, lɛðɝi-skɪnd ʃeɪps kɹaʊtʃt əmʌŋ ðə soʊlʒɝz ən mɪst ə stɛp.

They rounded a corner, and Rand was taken aback by the sight of a score of Seanchan soldiers standing guard in front of a big house on one side of the street - and by the sight of two women in lightning-marked dresses talking on the doorsteps of another across from it. A banner flapped in the wind over the house the soldiers protected; a golden hawk clutching lightning bolts. Nothing marked out the house where the women talked except themselves. The officer's armor was resplendent in red and black and gold, his helmet gilded and painted to look like a spider's head. Then Rand saw the two big, leathery-skinned shapes crouched among the soldiers and missed a step.

ɡɹoʊm. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɪsteɪkɪŋ ðoʊz wɛdʒ-ʃeɪp hɛdz wɪð ðɛɹ θɹi aɪz. ðeɪ kæn bi. pɝhæps i wɑz ɹɪli əslip, ən ðɪs wɑz ɔl ə naɪtmɛɹ. meɪbi wi hævən ivən lɛft fəɹ fɑlm, jɛt.

Grolm. There was no mistaking those wedge-shaped heads with their three eyes. They can't be. Perhaps he was really asleep, and this was all a nightmare. Maybe we haven't even left for Falme, yet.

ði ʌðɝz stɛɹɾ ət ðə bists əz ðeɪ wɔk pæs ðə ɡɑɹɾəd haʊs.

The others stared at the beasts as they walked past the guarded house.

"wʌɾ ɪn ðə neɪm ə ðə laɪɾ ɑɹ ðeɪ?" mæt æskt.

"What in the name of the Light are they?" Mat asked.

hʊɹɪnz aɪz simd əz bɪɡ əz ɪz feɪs. "lɔɹd ɹænd, ðeɪɹ. . . . ðoʊz ɑɹ. . . ."

Hurin's eyes seemed as big as his face. "Lord Rand, they're. . . . Those are. . . ."

"ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ," ɹænd sɛd. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, hʊɹɪn nɑɾəd.

"It doesn't matter," Rand said. After a moment, Hurin nodded.

"wi ɑɹ hɪɹ fəɹ ðə hɔɹn," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd, "nɑt tə stɛɹ ət sintʃæn mɑnstɝz. kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn faɪndɪŋ feɪn, hʊɹɪn."

"We are here for the Horn," Ingtar said, "not to stare at Seanchan monsters. Concentrate on finding Fain, Hurin."

ðə soʊlʒɝz bɛɹli ɡlænst ət ðɛm. ðə stʃɹit ɹæn stʃɹeɪt daʊn tə ðə ɹaʊn hɑɹbɝ. ɹænd kəd si ʃɪps æŋkɝd daʊn ðɛɹ; tɔl, skwɛɹ-lʊkɪŋ ʃɪps wɪð haɪ mæsts, smɔl ɪn ðət dɪstəns.

The soldiers barely glanced at them. The street ran straight down to the round harbor. Rand could see ships anchored down there; tall, square-looking ships with high masts, small in that distance.

"hiz bɪn hɪɹ ə lɑt." hʊɹɪn skɹʌbd əɾ ɪz noʊz wɪð ðə bæk ə hɪz hænd. "ðə stʃɹit stɪŋks ə leɪɝ ɑn leɪɝ ɑn leɪɝ ə hɪm. aɪ θɪŋk i maɪɾ əv bɪn hɪɹ əz leɪɾ əz jɛstɝdeɪ, lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ. meɪbi læs naɪt."

"He's been here a lot." Hurin scrubbed at his nose with the back of his hand. "The street stinks of layer on layer on layer of him. I think he might have been here as late as yesterday, Lord Ingtar. Maybe last night."

mæt sʌɾənli klʌtʃt ɪz koʊt wɪð boʊθ hænz. "ɪts ɪn ðɛɹ," hi wɪspɝd. hi tɝn ɝaʊn ən wɔk bækwɝdz, piɹɪŋ ət ðə tɔl haʊs wɪð ðə bænɝ. "ðə dæɡɝ ɪz ɪn ðɛɹ. aɪ dɪdn ivən noʊɾəs ɪt bɪfɔɹ, kəz ə ðoʊz - ðoʊz θɪŋz, bʌɾ aɪ kən fil ɪt."

Mat suddenly clutched his coat with both hands. "It's in there," he whispered. He turned around and walked backwards, peering at the tall house with the banner. "The dagger is in there. I didn't even notice it before, because of those - those things, but I can feel it."

pɛɹɪn poʊkt ə fɪŋɡɝ ɪn ɪz ɹɪbz. "wɛl, stɑp ðət bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ stɑɹt wʌndɝɪŋ waɪ jəɹ ɡɑəlɪŋ əɾ əm laɪk ə ful."

Perrin poked a finger in his ribs. "Well, stop that before they start wondering why you're goggling at them like a fool."

ɹænd ɡlænst oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ði ɔfəsɝ wɑz lʊkɪŋ æftɝ ðɛm.

Rand glanced over his shoulder. The officer was looking after them.

mæt tɝn bæk ɝaʊn sʌlənli. "ɑɹ wi dʒʌs gɑnə kip ɑn wɔkɪŋ? ɪts ɪn ðɛɹ, aɪ tɛl ju."

Mat turned back around sullenly. "Are we just going to keep on walking? It's in there, I tell you."

"ðə hɔɹn ɪz wʌt wəɹ æftɝ," ɪŋtʃɹ ɡɹaʊld. "aɪ min tə faɪn feɪn ən meɪk ɪm tɛl mi wɛɹ ɪɾ ɪz." hi dɪd nɑt sloʊ daʊn.

"The Horn is what we are after," Ingtar growled. "I mean to find Fain and make him tell me where it is." He did not slow down.

mæt sɛd nʌθɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪz ɪntaɪɝ feɪs wɑz ə pli.

Mat said nothing, but his entire face was a plea.

aɪ hæv tə faɪn feɪn, tu, ɹænd θɔt. aɪ hæv tə. bʌt wən i lʊkt ət mæts feɪs, hi sɛd, "ɪŋtʃɹ, ɪf ðə dæɡɝ ɪz ɪn ðət haʊs, feɪn laɪkli ɪz, tu. aɪ kæn si hɪm lɛɾɪŋ ðə dæɡɝ əɹ ðə hɔɹn, iðɝ wʌn, fɑɹ aʊɾ ə hɪz saɪt."

I have to find Fain, too, Rand thought. I have to. But when he looked at Mat's face, he said, "Ingtar, if the dagger is in that house, Fain likely is, too. I can't see him letting the dagger or the Horn, either one, far out of his sight."

ɪŋtʃɹ stɑpt. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, hi sɛd, "ɪt kəd bi, bʌt wɪl nɛvɝ noʊ fɹəm aʊt hɪɹ."

Ingtar stopped. After a moment, he said, "It could be, but we will never know from out here."

"wi kəd wɑtʃ fəɹ ɪm tə kʌm aʊt," ɹænd sɛd. "ɪf i kʌmz aʊɾ ət ðɪs taɪm ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, ðən i spɛn ðə naɪt ðɛɹ. ən əl weɪdʒɝ wɛɹ i slips ɪz wɛɹ ðə hɔɹn ɪz. ɪf i dʌz kʌm aʊt, wi kən bi bæk tə vɛɹɪn baɪ mɪddeɪ ən əv ə plæn meɪd bɪfɔɹ naɪtfɔl."

"We could watch for him to come out," Rand said. "If he comes out at this time of the morning, then he spent the night there. And I'll wager where he sleeps is where the Horn is. If he does come out, we can be back to Verin by midday and have a plan made before nightfall."

"aɪ də nɑt min tə weɪt fəɹ vɛɹɪn," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd, "ænd niðɝ wɪl aɪ weɪt fəɹ naɪt. aɪv weɪɾəd tu lɔŋ ɔlɹɛɾi. aɪ min tə hæv ðə hɔɹn ɪn maɪ hænz bɪfɔɹ ðə sʌn sɛts əɡɛn."

"I do not mean to wait for Verin," Ingtar said, "and neither will I wait for night. I've waited too long already. I mean to have the Horn in my hands before the sun sets again."

"bʌt wi doʊnt noʊ, ɪŋtʃɹ."

"But we don't know, Ingtar."

"aɪ noʊ ðə dæɡɝ ɪz ɪn ðɛɹ," mæt sɛd.

"I know the dagger is in there," Mat said.

"æn hʊɹɪn sɛz feɪn wɑz hɪɹ læs naɪt." ɪŋtʃɹ oʊvɝɹoʊd hʊɹɪnz ətɛmps tə kwɑləfaɪ ðæt. "ɪɾ ɪz ðə fɝs taɪm juv bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə seɪ ɛniθɪŋ kloʊsɝ ðən ə deɪ əɹ tu. wəɹ gɑnə teɪk bæk ðə hɔɹn naʊ. naʊ!"

"And Hurin says Fain was here last night." Ingtar overrode Hurin's attempts to qualify that. "It is the first time you have been willing to say anything closer than a day or two. We are going to take back the Horn now. Now!"

"haʊ?" ɹænd sɛd. ði ɔfəsɝ wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wɑtʃɪŋ ðɛm, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ stɪl ət lis twɛnti soʊlʒɝz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə bɪldɪŋ. ən ə pɛɹ ʌv ɡɹoʊm. ðɪs ɪz mædnəs. ðəɹ kæn bi ɡɹoʊm hɪɹ. θɪŋkɪŋ ɪt dɪd nɑt meɪk ðə bists dɪsəpɪɹ, ðoʊ.

"How?" Rand said. The officer was no longer watching them, but there were still at least twenty soldiers in front of the building. And a pair of grolm. This is madness. There can't be grolm here. Thinking it did not make the beasts disappear, though.

"ðɛɹ sim tə bi ɡɑɹɾənz bɪhaɪn ɔl ðiz haʊsəz," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd, lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊn θɔtfəli. "ɪf wʌn ə ðoʊz æliz ɹʌnz baɪ ə ɡɑɹɾən wɔl. . . . səmtaɪmz mɛn ɑɹ soʊ bɪzi ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðɛɹ fɹʌnt, ðeɪ nəɡlɛk ðɛɹ bæk. kʌm." hi hɛɾəd stʃɹeɪt fəɹ ðə nɪɹəs nɛɹoʊ pæsədʒ bɪtwin tu ʌv ðə tɔl haʊsəz. hʊɹɪn ən mæt tʃɹɑɾəd ɹaɪɾ æftɝ hɪm.

"There seem to be gardens behind all these houses," Ingtar said, looking around thoughtfully. "If one of those alleys runs by a garden wall. . . . Sometimes men are so busy guarding their front, they neglect their back. Come." He headed straight for the nearest narrow passage between two of the tall houses. Hurin and Mat trotted right after him.

ɹænd ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks wɪð pɛɹɪn - hɪz kɝli-hɛɹd fɹɛnd ɡeɪv ə ɹɪzaɪnd ʃɹʌɡ - ən ðeɪ fɑloʊd, tu.

Rand exchanged looks with Perrin - his curly-haired friend gave a resigned shrug - and they followed, too.

ði æli wɑz bɛɹli waɪɾɝ ðən ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, bʌɾ ɪt ɹæn bɪtwin haɪ ɡɑɹɾən wɔlz əntɪl ɪt kɹɔst ənʌðɝ æli bɪɡ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə pʊʃbæɹoʊ əɹ smɔl kɑɹt. ðət wɑz kɑbəlstoʊnd, tu, bʌɾ oʊnli ðə bæks ə bɪldɪŋz lʊk daʊn ɑn ɪt, ʃʌɾɝd wɪndoʊz ən ɪkspænsɪz ə stoʊn, ən ðə haɪ bæk wɔlz ʌv ɡɑɹɾənz oʊvɝtɑp baɪ nɪɹli lifləs bɹæntʃəz.

The alley was barely wider than their shoulders, but it ran between high garden walls until it crossed another alley big enough for a pushbarrow or small cart. That was cobblestoned, too, but only the backs of buildings looked down on it, shuttered windows and expanses of stone, and the high back walls of gardens overtopped by nearly leafless branches.

ɪŋtʃɹ lɛɾ əm əlɔŋ ðəɾ æli əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ ɑpəzət ðə weɪvɪŋ bænɝ. teɪkɪŋ ɪz stil-bækt ɡɔnləts fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt, hi pʊɾ əm ɑn ən lɛpt ʌp tə kætʃ ðə tɑp ə ðə wɔl, ðən pʊl hɪmsɛlf ʌp ɪnʌf tə pik oʊvɝ. hi ɹipɔɹɾəd ɪn ə loʊ mɑnətoʊn. "tʃɹiz. flaʊɝ bɛdz. wɔks. ðəɹ ɪzən ə soʊl tə bi - weɪt! ə ɡɑɹd. wʌn mæn. hi ɪzən ivən wɛɹɪŋ ɪz hɛlmət. kaʊn tə fɪfti, ðən fɑloʊ mi." hi swʌŋ ə but tə ðə tɑp ə ðə wɔl ən ɹoʊld oʊvɝ ɪnsaɪd, dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ɹænd kəd seɪ ə wɝd.

Ingtar led them along that alley until they were opposite the waving banner. Taking his steel-backed gauntlets from under his coat, he put them on and leaped up to catch the top of the wall, then pulled himself up enough to peek over. He reported in a low monotone. "Trees. Flower beds. Walks. There isn't a soul to be - Wait! A guard. One man. He isn't even wearing his helmet. Count to fifty, then follow me." He swung a boot to the top of the wall and rolled over inside, disappearing before Rand could say a word.

mæt bɪɡæn tə kaʊn sloʊli. ɹænd hɛld ɪz bɹɛθ. pɛɹɪn fɪŋɡɝɾ ɪz æks, ən hʊɹɪn ɡɹɪp ðə hɪls ə hɪz wɛpənz.

Mat began to count slowly. Rand held his breath. Perrin fingered his axe, and Hurin gripped the hilts of his weapons.

". . . fɪfti." hʊɹɪn skɹæmbəld ʌp ən oʊvɝ ðə wɔl bɪfɔɹ ðə wɝd wɑz wɛl aʊɾ ə mæts maʊθ. pɛɹɪn wɛn ɹaɪt bɪsaɪd hɪm.

". . . fifty." Hurin scrambled up and over the wall before the word was well out of Mat's mouth. Perrin went right beside him.

ɹænd θɔt mæt maɪt nid səm hɛlp - hi lʊk soʊ peɪl ən dʒɹɔn - bʌɾ i ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ʌv ɪɾ əz i skɹæmbəld ʌp. ðə stoʊn wɔl pɹəvaɪɾəd plɛnti ʌv hændhoʊlz, ən moʊməns leɪɾɝ ɹænd wɑz kɹaʊtʃt ɑn ði ɪnsaɪd wɪð mæt ən pɛɹɪn ən hʊɹɪn.

Rand thought Mat might need some help - he looked so pale and drawn - but he gave no sign of it as he scrambled up. The stone wall provided plenty of handholds, and moments later Rand was crouched on the inside with Mat and Perrin and Hurin.

ðə ɡɑɹɾən wɑz ɪn ðə ɡɹɪp ə dip ɔɾəm, flaʊɝ bɛdz ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju ɛvɝɡɹin ʃɹʌbz, tʃɹi bɹæntʃəz nɪɹli bɛɹ. ðə wɪn ðət ɹɪpəl ðə bænɝ stɝd dʌst əkɹɔs ðə flæɡstoʊn wɔks. fəɹ ə moʊmən ɹænd kəd nɑt faɪn ɪŋtʃɹ. ðən i sɔ ðə ʃaɪnɝən, flæɾ əɡɛns ðə bæk wɔl ə ðə haʊs, moʊʃənɪŋ əm ɑn wɪð sɔɹɾ ɪn hænd.

The garden was in the grip of deep autumn, flower beds empty except for a few evergreen shrubs, tree branches nearly bare. The wind that rippled the banner stirred dust across the flagstone walks. For a moment Rand could not find Ingtar. Then he saw the Shienaran, flat against the back wall of the house, motioning them on with sword in hand.

ɹænd ɹæn ɪn ə kɹaʊtʃ, mɔɹ kɑnʃəs ə ðə wɪndoʊz blæŋkli piɹɪŋ daʊn fɹəm ðə haʊs ðən ə hɪz fɹɛnz ɹʌnɪŋ bɪsaɪd hɪm. ɪt wɑz ə ɹɪlif tə pɹɛs hɪmsɛlf əɡɛns ðə haʊs bɪsaɪɾ ɪŋtʃɹ.

Rand ran in a crouch, more conscious of the windows blankly peering down from the house than of his friends running beside him. It was a relief to press himself against the house beside Ingtar.

mæt kɛp mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf, "ɪts ɪn ðɛɹ. aɪ kən fil ɪt."

Mat kept muttering to himself, "It's in there. I can feel it."

"wɛɹ ɪz ðə ɡɑɹd?" ɹænd wɪspɝd.

"Where is the guard?" Rand whispered.

"dɛd," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd. "ðə mæn wɑz oʊvɝkɑnfɪɾənt. hi nɛvɝ ivən tʃɹaɪd tə ɹeɪz ə kɹaɪ. aɪ hɪɾ ɪz bɑɾi ʌndɝ wʌn ə ðoʊz bʊʃəz."

"Dead," Ingtar said. "The man was overconfident. He never even tried to raise a cry. I hid his body under one of those bushes."

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət hɪm. ðə sintʃæn wɑz oʊvɝkɑnfɪɾənt? ði oʊnli θɪŋ ðət kɛpt ɪm fɹəm ɡoʊɪŋ bæk ɹaɪt ðən wɑz mæts æŋɡwɪʃt mɝmɝz.

Rand stared at him. The Seanchan was overconfident? The only thing that kept him from going back right then was Mat's anguished murmurs.

"wi ɑɹ ɔlmoʊs ðɛɹ." ɪŋtʃɹ saʊndəɾ əz ɪf i wɝ spikɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf, tu. "ɔlmoʊs ðɛɹ. kʌm."

"We are almost there." Ingtar sounded as if he were speaking to himself, too. "Almost there. Come."

ɹænd dʒɹu hɪz sɔɹɾ əz ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd ʌp ðə bæk stɛps. hi wɑz əwɛɹ ə hʊɹɪn ənlɪmbɝɪŋ ɪz ʃɔɹt-bleɪɾɪd sɔɹɾ ən nɑtʃt sɔɹd-bɹeɪkɝ, ən pɛɹɪn ɹɪlʌktənli dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪz æks fɹəm ðə lup ɑn ɪz bɛlt.

Rand drew his sword as they started up the back steps. He was aware of Hurin unlimbering his short-bladed sword and notched sword-breaker, and Perrin reluctantly drawing his axe from the loop on his belt.

ðə hɔlweɪ ɪnsaɪd wɑz nɛɹoʊ. ə hæf-oʊpən dɔɹ tə ðɛɹ ɹaɪt smɛld laɪk ə kɪtʃən. sɛvɹəl pipəl wɝ muvɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪn ðət ɹum; ðəɹ wɑz ən ɪndɪstɪŋɡwɪʃəbəl saʊn ə vɔɪsəz, ən əkeɪʒənəli ðə sɑf klæɾɝ ʌv ə pɑt lɪd.

The hallway inside was narrow. A half-open door to their right smelled like a kitchen. Several people were moving about in that room; there was an indistinguishable sound of voices, and occasionally the soft clatter of a pot lid.

ɪŋtʃɹ moʊʃən mæt tə lid, ən ðeɪ kɹɛp baɪ ðə dɔɹ. ɹænd wɑtʃt ðə nɛɹoʊɪŋ oʊpənɪŋ əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ ɝaʊn ðə nɛks kɔɹnɝ.

Ingtar motioned Mat to lead, and they crept by the door. Rand watched the narrowing opening until they were around the next corner.

ə slɛndɝ jʌŋ wʊmən wɪð dɑɹk hɛɹ keɪm aʊɾ ʌv ə dɔɹ əhɛɾ ə ðɛm, kæɹiɪŋ ə tʃɹeɪ wɪð wʌn kʌp. ðeɪ ɔl fɹoʊz. ʃi tɝn ði ʌðɝ weɪ wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ dɝɛkʃən. ɹændz aɪz waɪɾənd. hɝ lɔŋ waɪt ɹoʊb wɑz ɔl bʌt tʃɹænspɛɹənt. ʃi vænɪʃt ɝaʊn ənʌðɝ kɔɹnɝ.

A slender young woman with dark hair came out of a door ahead of them, carrying a tray with one cup. They all froze. She turned the other way without looking in their direction. Rand's eyes widened. Her long white robe was all but transparent. She vanished around another corner.

"dɪd jə si ðæt?" mæt sɛd hɔɹsli. "ju kəd si ɹaɪt θɹu - "

"Did you see that?" Mat said hoarsely. "You could see right through - "

ɪŋtʃɹ klæpt ə hæn oʊvɝ mæts maʊθ ən wɪspɝd, "kip jəɹ maɪn ɑn waɪ wəɹ hɪɹ. naʊ faɪn ɪt. faɪn ðə hɔɹn fəɹ mi."

Ingtar clapped a hand over Mat's mouth and whispered, "Keep your mind on why we are here. Now find it. Find the Horn for me."

mæt pɔɪntəd tə ə nɛɹoʊ sɛɾ ʌv waɪndɪŋ stɛɹz. ðeɪ klaɪmd ə flaɪt, ən i lɛɾ əm təwɔɹd ðə fɹʌn ə ðə haʊs. ðə fɝnɪʃɪŋz ɪn ðə hɔlweɪz wɝ spɑɹs, ən simd ɔl kɝvz. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ ə tæpəstʃɹi hʌŋ ɑn ə wɔl, əɹ ə foʊldɪŋ skɹin stʊɾ əɡɛnst ɪt, itʃ peɪntəd wɪð ə fju bɝdz ɑn bɹæntʃəz, əɹ ə flaʊɝ əɹ tu. ə ɹɪvɝ floʊɾ əkɹɔs wʌn skɹin, bʌɾ əsaɪd fɹəm ɹɪpəlɪŋ wɔɾɝ ən nɛɹoʊ stʃɹɪps ə ɹɪvɝbæŋk, ðə ɹɛst ʌv ɪt wɑz blæŋk.

Mat pointed to a narrow set of winding stairs. They climbed a flight, and he led them toward the front of the house. The furnishings in the hallways were sparse, and seemed all curves. Here and there a tapestry hung on a wall, or a folding screen stood against it, each painted with a few birds on branches, or a flower or two. A river flowed across one screen, but aside from rippling water and narrow strips of riverbank, the rest of it was blank.

ɔl ɝaʊn əm ɹænd kəd hɪɹ ðə saʊnz ə pipəl stɝɪŋ, slɪpɝz skʌfɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ, sɑf mɝmɝz ə spitʃ. hi dɪd nɑt si ɛniwʌn, bʌɾ i kəɾ ɪmædʒən ɪɾ ɔl tu wɛl, sʌmwʌn stɛpɪŋ ɪndə ðə hɔl tə si faɪv slɪŋkɪŋ mɛn wɪð wɛpənz ɪn ðɛɹ hænz, ʃaʊɾɪŋ ən əlɑɹm. . . .

All around them Rand could hear the sounds of people stirring, slippers scuffing on the floor, soft murmurs of speech. He did not see anyone, but he could imagine it all too well, someone stepping into the hall to see five slinking men with weapons in their hands, shouting an alarm. . . .

"ɪn ðɛɹ," mæt wɪspɝd, pɔɪntɪŋ tə ə bɪɡ pɛɹ ə slaɪɾɪŋ dɔɹz əhɛd, kɑɹv hændhoʊlz ðɛɹ oʊnli ɔɹnəmɛnteɪʃən. "æt list, ðə dæɡɝ ɪz."

"In there," Mat whispered, pointing to a big pair of sliding doors ahead, carved handholds their only ornamentation. "At least, the dagger is."

ɪŋtʃɹ lʊkt ət hʊɹɪn; ðə snɪfɝ slɪd ðə dɔɹz oʊpən, ən ɪŋtʃɹ lɛp θɹu wɪð ɪz sɔɹd ɹɛɾi. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn ðɛɹ. ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz hɝiɾ ɪnsaɪd, ən hʊɹɪn kwɪkli kloʊz ðə dɔɹz bɪhaɪn ðɛm.

Ingtar looked at Hurin; the sniffer slid the doors open, and Ingtar leaped through with his sword ready. There was no one there. Rand and the others hurried inside, and Hurin quickly closed the doors behind them.

peɪntəd skɹinz hɪɾ ɔl ðə wɔlz ən ɛni ʌðɝ dɔɹz, ən veɪl ðə laɪt kʌmɪŋ θɹu wɪndoʊz ðət hæd tə oʊvɝlʊk ðə stʃɹit. ət wʌn ɛn ə ðə bɪɡ ɹum stʊɾ ə tɔl, sɝkjəlɝ kæbənət. ət ði ʌðɝ wɑz ə smɔl teɪbəl, ðə loʊn tʃɛɹ ɑn ðə kɑɹpət tɝn tə feɪs ɪt. ɹænd hɝɾ ɪŋtʃɹ ɡæsp, bʌɾ i oʊnli fɛlt laɪk hivɪŋ ə saɪ ʌv ɹɪlif. ðə kɝlɪŋ ɡoʊldən hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ sæɾ ɑn ə stæn ɑn ðə teɪbəl. bɪloʊ ɪt, ðə ɹubi ɪn ðə hɪlt ə ði ɔɹneɪt dæɡɝ kɑt ðə laɪt.

Painted screens hid all the walls and any other doors, and veiled the light coming through windows that had to overlook the street. At one end of the big room stood a tall, circular cabinet. At the other was a small table, the lone chair on the carpet turned to face it. Rand heard Ingtar gasp, but he only felt like heaving a sigh of relief. The curling golden Horn of Valere sat on a stand on the table. Below it, the ruby in the hilt of the ornate dagger caught the light.

mæt dɑɹɾɪd tə ðə teɪbəl, snætʃɪŋ hɔɹn ən dæɡɝ. "wi hæv ɪt," hi kɹoʊd, ʃeɪkɪŋ ðə dæɡɝ ɪn ɪz fɪst. "wi hæv boʊθ ə ðɛm."

Mat darted to the table, snatching Horn and dagger. "We have it," he crowed, shaking the dagger in his fist. "We have both of them."

"nɑt soʊ laʊd," pɛɹɪn sɛd wɪð ə wɪns. "wi doʊn əv əm aʊɾ ə hɪɹ, jɛt." hɪz hænz wɝ bɪzi ɑn ðə hæft ə hɪz æks; ðeɪ sim tə wɑnə bi hoʊldɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ɛls.

"Not so loud," Perrin said with a wince. "We don't have them out of here, yet." His hands were busy on the haft of his axe; they seemed to want to be holding something else.

"ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ." ðəɹ wɑz ʃɪɹ ɑ ɪn ɪŋtʃɹz vɔɪs. hi tʌtʃt ðə hɔɹn hɛzɪɾəntli, tʃɹeɪsɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝ əlɔŋ ðə sɪlvɝ skɹɪpt ɪnleɪɾ ɝaʊn ðə bɛl ən maʊðɪŋ ðə tʃɹænzleɪʃən, ðən pʊld ɪz hæn bæk wɪð ə ʃɪvɝ ʌv ɪksaɪtmənt. "ɪɾ ɪz. baɪ ðə laɪt, ɪɾ ɪz! aɪm seɪvd."

"The Horn of Valere." There was sheer awe in Ingtar's voice. He touched the Horn hesitantly, tracing a finger along the silver script inlaid around the bell and mouthing the translation, then pulled his hand back with a shiver of excitement. "It is. By the Light, it is! I am saved."

hʊɹɪn wɑz muvɪŋ ðə skɹinz ðət hɪd ðə wɪndoʊz. hi ʃʌv ðə læst aʊɾ ə hɪz weɪ ən pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə stʃɹit bɪloʊ. "ðoʊz soʊlʒɝz ɑɹ ɔl stɪl ðɛɹ, lʊkɪŋ laɪk ðeɪv tʊk ɹut." hi ʃʌɾɝəd. "ðoʊz . . . θɪŋz, tu."

Hurin was moving the screens that hid the windows. He shoved the last out of his way and peered into the street below. "Those soldiers are all still there, looking like they've took root." He shuddered. "Those . . . things, too."

ɹænd wɛn tə dʒɔɪn hɪm. ðə tu bists wɝ ɡɹoʊm; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ dɪnaɪɪŋ ɪt. "haʊ dɪd ðeɪ. . . ." əz i lɪftəɾ ɪz aɪz fɹəm ðə stʃɹit, wɝdz daɪd. hi wɑz lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ə wɔl ɪndə ðə ɡɑɹɾən ə ðə bɪɡ haʊs əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹit. hi kəd si wɛɹ fɝðɝ wɔlz hæd bɪn tɔɹn daʊn, dʒɔɪnɪŋ ʌðɝ ɡɑɹɾənz tə ɪt. wɪmən sæɾ ɑn bɛntʃɪz ðɛɹ, əɹ stʃɹoʊld əlɔŋ ðə wɔks, ɔlweɪz ɪn pɛɹz. wɪmən lɪŋkt, nɛk tə ɹɪst, baɪ sɪlvɝ liʃɪz. wʌn ə ðə wɪmən wɪð ə kɑlɝ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk lʊkt ʌp. hi wɑz tu fɑɹ tə meɪk aʊɾ əɹ feɪs klɪɹli, bʌt fəɹ ən ɪnstən ɪt sim ðət ðɛɹ aɪz mɛt, ən i nu. ðə blʌd dʒɹeɪn fɹəm ɪz feɪs. "ɛɡwin," hi bɹiðd.

Rand went to join him. The two beasts were grolm; there was no denying it. "How did they. . . ." As he lifted his eyes from the street, words died. He was looking over a wall into the garden of the big house across the street. He could see where further walls had been torn down, joining other gardens to it. Women sat on benches there, or strolled along the walks, always in pairs. Women linked, neck to wrist, by silver leashes. One of the women with a collar around her neck looked up. He was too far to make out her face clearly, but for an instant it seemed that their eyes met, and he knew. The blood drained from his face. "Egwene," he breathed.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt?" mæt sɛd. "ɛɡwin ɪz seɪf ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn. aɪ wɪʃ aɪ wɝ."

"What are you talking about?" Mat said. "Egwene is safe in Tar Valon. I wish I were."

"ʃiz hɪɹ," ɹænd sɛd. ðə tu wɪmən wɝ tɝnɪŋ, wɔkɪŋ təwɔɹd wʌn ə ðə bɪldɪŋz ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ðə dʒɔɪnd ɡɑɹɾənz. "ʃi ɪz ðɛɹ, ɹaɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹit. oʊ, laɪt, ʃiz wɛɹɪŋ wʌn ə ðoʊz kɑlɝz!"

"She's here," Rand said. The two women were turning, walking toward one of the buildings on the far side of the joined gardens. "She is there, right across the street. Oh, Light, she's wearing one of those collars!"

"ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ?" pɛɹɪn sɛd. hi keɪm tə pɪɹ fɹəm ðə wɪndoʊ. "aɪ doʊn si hɝ, ɹænd. ən - ən aɪ kəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz əɹ ɪf aɪ dɪd, ivən ət ðɪs dɪstəns."

"Are you sure?" Perrin said. He came to peer from the window. "I don't see her, Rand. And - and I could recognize her if I did, even at this distance."

"aɪ æm ʃʊɹ," ɹænd sɛd. ðə tu wɪmən dɪsəpɪɹɾ ɪndə wʌn ə ðə haʊsəz ðət feɪs ðə nɛkst stʃɹiɾ oʊvɝ. hɪz stʌmək wɑz twɪstəɾ ɪndə ə nɑt. ʃiz səpoʊz tə bi seɪf. ʃiz səpoʊz tə bi ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. "aɪ hæv tə ɡɛɾ əɹ aʊt. ðə ɹɛst ə jə - "

"I am sure," Rand said. The two women disappeared into one of the houses that faced the next street over. His stomach was twisted into a knot. She is supposed to be safe. She's supposed to be in the White Tower. "I have to get her out. The rest of you - "

"soʊ!" ðə slɝɪŋ vɔɪs wɑz əz sɑft əz ðə saʊn ə ðə dɔɹz slaɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ tʃɹæks. "ju ɑɹ nɑɾ u aɪ ɪkspɛktəd."

"So!" The slurring voice was as soft as the sound of the doors sliding in their tracks. "You are not who I expected."

fəɹ ə bɹif moʊmənt, ɹænd stɛɹd. ðə tɔl mæn wɪð ðə ʃeɪvən hɛɾ u hæd stɛpt ɪndə ðə ɹum wɔɹ ə lɔŋ, tʃɹeɪlɪŋ blu ɹoʊb, ən ɪz fɪŋɡɝneɪlz wɝ soʊ lɔŋ ðət ɹænd wʌndɝɾ ɪf i kəd hændəl ɛniθɪŋ. ðə tu mɛn stændɪŋ əbsɪkwiəsli bɪhaɪn ɪm hæɾ oʊnli hæf ðɛɹ dɑɹk hɛɹ ʃeɪvd, ðə ɹɛs hæŋɪŋ ɪn ə dɑɹk bɹeɪd daʊn itʃ mænz ɹaɪt tʃik. wʌn ə ðɛm kɹæɾəld ə ʃið sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz.

For a brief moment, Rand stared. The tall man with the shaven head who had stepped into the room wore a long, trailing blue robe, and his fingernails were so long that Rand wondered if he could handle anything. The two men standing obsequiously behind him had only half their dark hair shaved, the rest hanging in a dark braid down each man's right cheek. One of them cradled a sheathed sword in his arms.

ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə moʊmən i hæd fəɹ stɛɹɪŋ, ðən skɹinz tɑpəl tə ɹɪvil, əɾ iðɝ ɛn ə ðə ɹum, ə dɔɹweɪ kɹaʊɾəd wɪð fɔɹ əɹ faɪv sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz, bæɹhɛɾɪd bʌɾ ɑɹmɝd, ən sɔɹdz ɪn hænd.

It was only a moment he had for staring, then screens toppled to reveal, at either end of the room, a doorway crowded with four or five Seanchan soldiers, bareheaded but armored, and swords in hand.

"ju ɑɹ ɪn ðə pɹɛzəns ə ðə haɪ lɔɹd tʃɹɑk," ðə mæn u kæɹid ðə sɔɹd bɪɡæn, stɛɹɪŋ ət ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz æŋɡɹəli, bʌɾ ə bɹif moʊʃən ʌv ə fɪŋɡɝ wɪð ə blu-lækɝd neɪl kʌɾ ɪm ʃɔɹt. ði ʌðɝ sɝvən stɛp fɔɹwɝd wɪð ə baʊ ən bɪɡæn ənduɪŋ tʃɹɑks ɹoʊb.

"You are in the presence of the High Lord Turak," the man who carried the sword began, staring at Rand and the others angrily, but a brief motion of a finger with a blue-lacquered nail cut him short. The other servant stepped forward with a bow and began undoing Turak's robe.

"wɛn wʌn ə maɪ ɡɑɹdz wɑz faʊn dɛd," ðə ʃeɪvən-hɛɾəd mæn sɛd kɑmli, "aɪ səspɛktəd ðə mæn u kɔlz hɪmsɛlf feɪn. aɪ hæv bɪn səspɪʃəs ə hɪm sɪns hwɑn daɪd soʊ mɪstɪɹiəsli, ən hiz ɔlweɪz wɑntəd ðət dæɡɝ." hi hɛld aʊɾ ɪz ɑɹmz fəɹ ðə sɝvən tə ɹimuv ɪz ɹoʊb. dɪspaɪɾ ɪz sɑft, ɔlmoʊst-sɪŋɪŋ vɔɪs, hɑɹd mʌsəlz ɹoʊpt ɪz ɑɹmz ən smuð tʃɛst, wɪtʃ wɑz bɛɹ tə ə blu sæʃ hoʊldɪŋ waɪd, waɪt tʃɹaʊzɝz ðət simd meɪɾ ə hʌnʒɹədz ə plits. hi saʊndəɾ ənɪntʃɹəstəd, ən ɪndɪfɹən tə ðə bleɪdz ɪn ðɛɹ hænz. "ænd naʊ tə faɪn stʃɹeɪnʒɝz wɪð nɑɾ oʊnli ðə dæɡɝ, bʌt ðə hɔɹn. ɪɾəl pliz mi tə kɪl wʌn əɹ tu ʌv jə fəɹ dɪstɝbɪŋ maɪ mɔɹnɪŋ. ðoʊz u sɝvaɪv wɪl tɛl mi ʌv u jə ɑɹ ən waɪ jə keɪm." hi stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ə hænd wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ - ðə mæn wɪð ðə skæbɑɹɾɪd sɔɹd leɪd ðə hɪlt ɪn ðə hænd - ən dʒɹu ðə hɛvi, kɝv bleɪd. "aɪ wəd nɑɾ əv ðə hɔɹn dæmədʒd."

"When one of my guards was found dead," the shaven-headed man said calmly, "I suspected the man who calls himself Fain. I have been suspicious of him since Huan died so mysteriously, and he has always wanted that dagger." He held out his arms for the servant to remove his robe. Despite his soft, almost-singing voice, hard muscles roped his arms and smooth chest, which was bare to a blue sash holding wide, white trousers that seemed made of hundreds of pleats. He sounded uninterested, and indifferent to the blades in their hands. "And now to find strangers with not only the dagger, but the Horn. It will please me to kill one or two of you for disturbing my morning. Those who survive will tell me of who you are and why you came." He stretched out a hand without looking - the man with the scabbarded sword laid the hilt in the hand - and drew the heavy, curved blade. "I would not have the Horn damaged."

tʃɹɑk ɡeɪv noʊ ʌðɝ sɪɡnəl, bʌt wʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz stɔkt ɪndə ðə ɹum ən ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə hɔɹn. ɹænd dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ i ʃəd læf, əɹ nɑt. ðə mæn wɔɹ ɑɹmɝ, bʌɾ ɪz ɛɹəɡən feɪs simd əz əblɪviəs tə ðɛɹ wɛpənz əz tʃɹɑk wɑz.

Turak gave no other signal, but one of the soldiers stalked into the room and reached for the Horn. Rand did not know whether he should laugh, or not. The man wore armor, but his arrogant face seemed as oblivious to their weapons as Turak was.

mæt pʊɾ ən ɛn tə ɪt. əz ðə sintʃæn ɹitʃt aʊɾ ɪz hænd, mæt slæʃt ɪt wɪð ðə ɹubi-hɪltɪd dæɡɝ. wɪð ə kɝs, ðə soʊlʒɝ lɛp bæk, lʊkɪŋ sɝpɹaɪzd. ən ðən i skɹimd. ɪt tʃɪl ðə ɹum, hɛld ɛvɹiwʌn wɛɹ ðeɪ stʊɾ ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt. ðə tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ hæn i hɛld ʌp ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz feɪs wɑz tɝnɪŋ blæk, dɑɹknəs kɹipɪŋ aʊtwɝdz fɹəm ðə bliɾɪŋ ɡæʃ ðət kɹɔst ɪz pɑm. hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ waɪɾ ən haʊld, klɔɪŋ əɾ ɪz ɑɹm, ðən ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. kɪkɪŋ, dʒɝkɪŋ, hi tɑpəl tə ðə flɔɹ, θɹæʃɪŋ ɑn ðə sɪlkən kɑɹpət, ʃɹikɪŋ əz ɪz feɪs ɡɹu blæk ən ɪz dɑɹk aɪz bʌlʒd laɪk oʊvɝɹaɪp plʌmz, əntɪl ə dɑɹk, swoʊlən tʌŋ ɡæɡd hɪm. hi twɪtʃt, tʃoʊkɪŋ ɹæədli, hilz dʒɹʌmɪŋ, ən dɪd nɑt muv əɡɛn. ɛvɹi bɪɾ ə hɪz ɪkspoʊz flɛʃ wɑz blæk əz pjutʃɹɪd pɪtʃ ən lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə bɝst əɾ ə tʌtʃ.

Mat put an end to it. As the Seanchan reached out his hand, Mat slashed it with the ruby-hilted dagger. With a curse, the soldier leaped back, looking surprised. And then he screamed. It chilled the room, held everyone where they stood in astonishment. The trembling hand he held up in front of his face was turning black, darkness creeping outwards from the bleeding gash that crossed his palm. He opened his mouth wide and howled, clawing at his arm, then his shoulder. Kicking, jerking, he toppled to the floor, thrashing on the silken carpet, shrieking as his face grew black and his dark eyes bulged like overripe plums, until a dark, swollen tongue gagged him. He twitched, choking raggedly, heels drumming, and did not move again. Every bit of his exposed flesh was black as putrid pitch and looked ready to burst at a touch.

mæt lɪkt ɪz lɪps ən swɑloʊd; hɪz ɡɹɪp ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli ɑn ðə dæɡɝ. ivən tʃɹɑk stɛɹd, oʊpənməðd.

Mat licked his lips and swallowed; his grip shifted uneasily on the dagger. Even Turak stared, openmouthed.

"ju si," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd sɔfli, "wi ɑɹ noʊ izi mit." sʌɾənli hi lɛpt oʊvɝ ðə kɔɹps, təwɔɹd ðə soʊlʒɝz stɪl ɡɑəlɪŋ ət wʌt wɑz lɛft ə ðə mæn u hæd stʊɾ ət ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz oʊnli moʊməns bɪfɔɹ. "ʃɪnoʊwə!" hi kɹaɪd. "fɑloʊ mi!" hʊɹɪn lɛpt æftɝ hɪm, ən ðə soʊlʒɝz fɛl bæk bɪfɔɹ ðɛm, ðə saʊnz ə stil ɑn stil ɹaɪzɪŋ.

"You see," Ingtar said softly, "we are no easy meat." Suddenly he leaped over the corpse, toward the soldiers still goggling at what was left of the man who had stood at their shoulders only moments before. "Shinowa!" he cried. "Follow me!" Hurin leaped after him, and the soldiers fell back before them, the sounds of steel on steel rising.

ðə sintʃæn ət ði ʌðɝ ɛn ə ðə ɹum stɑɹɾəd fɔɹwɝɾ əz ɪŋtʃɹ muvd, bʌt ðən ðeɪ wɝ fɔlɪŋ bæk, tu, bɪfɔɹ mæts θɹʌstɪŋ dæɡɝ ivən mɔɹ ðən fɹəm ði æks pɛɹɪn swʌŋ wɪð wɝdləs snɑɹlz.

The Seanchan at the other end of the room started forward as Ingtar moved, but then they were falling back, too, before Mat's thrusting dagger even more than from the axe Perrin swung with wordless snarls.

ɪn ðə speɪs ə hɑɹtbits, ɹænd stʊɾ əloʊn, feɪsɪŋ tʃɹɑk, hu hɛld ɪz bleɪɾ əpɹaɪt bɪfɔɹ hɪm. hɪz moʊmən ə ʃɑk wɑz ɡɔn. hɪz aɪz wɝ ʃɑɹp ɑn ɹændz feɪs; ðə blæk ən swoʊlən bɑɾi ʌv wʌn ə hɪz soʊlʒɝz maɪɾ əz wɛl nɑɾ əv ɪɡzɪstəd. ɪt dɪd nɑt sim tə ɪɡzɪs fəɹ ðə tu sɝvəns, iðɝ, ɛni mɔɹ ðən ɹænd ən ɪz sɔɹɾ ɪɡzɪstəd, əɹ ðə saʊnz ə faɪɾɪŋ, feɪɾɪŋ naʊ fɹəm ðə ɹumz tə iðɝ saɪɾ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə haʊs. ðə sɝvəns hæd bɪɡʌn kɑmli foʊldɪŋ tʃɹɑks ɹoʊb əz sun əz ðə haɪ lɔɹd tʊk ɪz sɔɹd, ən hæd nɑt lʊkt ʌp ivən fəɹ ðə dɛd soʊlʒɝz ʃɹiks; naʊ ðeɪ nɛl bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ ən wɑtʃt wɪð ɪmpæsɪv aɪz.

In the space of heartbeats, Rand stood alone, facing Turak, who held his blade upright before him. His moment of shock was gone. His eyes were sharp on Rand's face; the black and swollen body of one of his soldiers might as well not have existed. It did not seem to exist for the two servants, either, any more than Rand and his sword existed, or the sounds of fighting, fading now from the rooms to either side out into the house. The servants had begun calmly folding Turak's robe as soon as the High Lord took his sword, and had not looked up even for the dead soldier's shrieks; now they knelt beside the door and watched with impassive eyes.

"aɪ səspɛktəɾ ɪt maɪt kʌm tə jə ən mi." tʃɹɑk spʌn ɪz bleɪɾ izəli, ə fʊl sɝkəl wʌn weɪ, ðən ði ʌðɝ, hɪz lɔŋ-neɪl fɪŋɡɝz muvɪŋ dɛləkətli ɑn ðə hɪlt. hɪz fɪŋɡɝneɪlz dɪd nɑt sim tə hæmpɝ ɪm əɾ ɔl. "ju ɑɹ jʌŋ. lɛɾ əs si wʌɾ ɪz ɹikwaɪɝd tə ɝn ðə hɛɹən ɑn ðɪs saɪɾ ə ði oʊʃən."

"I suspected it might come to you and me." Turak spun his blade easily, a full circle one way, then the other, his long-nailed fingers moving delicately on the hilt. His fingernails did not seem to hamper him at all. "You are young. Let us see what is required to earn the heron on this side of the ocean."

sʌɾənli ɹænd sɔ. stændɪŋ tɔl ɑn tʃɹɑks bleɪd wɑz ə hɛɹən. wɪð ðə lɪɾəl tʃɹeɪnɪŋ i hæd, hi wɑz feɪs-tə-feɪs wɪð ə ɹil bleɪdmæstɝ. heɪstəli hi tɔs ðə flis-laɪn kloʊk əsaɪd, ɹɪɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ʌv weɪɾ ən ɛnkʌmbɹəns. tʃɹɑk weɪɾəd.

Suddenly Rand saw. Standing tall on Turak's blade was a heron. With the little training he had, he was face-to-face with a real blademaster. Hastily he tossed the fleece-lined cloak aside, ridding himself of weight and encumbrance. Turak waited.

ɹænd dɛspɝətli wɑntəd tə sik ðə vɔɪd. ɪt wɑz pleɪn i wəd niɾ ɛvɹi ʃɹɛɾ ʌv əbɪləɾi hi kəd mʌstɝ, ən ivən ðən ɪz tʃænsəz ə livɪŋ ðə ɹum əlaɪv wəd bi smɔl. hi hæd tə liv əlaɪv. ɛɡwin wɑz ɔlmoʊs kloʊs ɪnʌf fəɹ ɪm tə ʃaʊt tə hɝ, ən i hæd tə fɹi hɝ, sʌmhaʊ. bʌt seɪɾɪn weɪɾəd ɪn ðə vɔɪd. ðə θɔt meɪɾ ɪz hɑɹt lip wɪð iɡɝnəs ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðəɾ ɪt tɝn ɪz stʌmək. bʌt dʒʌst əz kloʊs əz ɛɡwin wɝ ðoʊz ʌðɝ wɪmən. deɪmeɪn. ɪf i tʌtʃt seɪɾɪn, ən ɪf i kəd nɑt stɑp hɪmsɛlf tʃænəlɪŋ, ðeɪ wəd noʊ, vɛɹɪn hæd toʊl hɪm. noʊ ən wʌndɝ. soʊ mɛni, soʊ kloʊs. hi maɪt sɝvaɪv tʃɹɑk oʊnli tə daɪ feɪsɪŋ deɪmeɪn, ən i kəd nɑt daɪ bɪfɔɹ ɛɡwin wɑz fɹi. ɹænd ɹeɪzd ɪz bleɪd.

Rand desperately wanted to seek the void. It was plain he would need every shred of ability he could muster, and even then his chances of leaving the room alive would be small. He had to leave alive. Egwene was almost close enough for him to shout to her, and he had to free her, somehow. But saidin waited in the void. The thought made his heart leap with eagerness at the same time that it turned his stomach. But just as close as Egwene were those other women. Damane. If he touched saidin, and if he could not stop himself channeling, they would know, Verin had told him. Know and wonder. So many, so close. He might survive Turak only to die facing damane, and he could not die before Egwene was free. Rand raised his blade.

tʃɹɑk ɡlaɪɾɪd təwɔɹɾ ɪm ɑn saɪlən fit. bleɪd ɹæŋ ɑn bleɪd laɪk hæmɝ ɑn ænvəl.

Turak glided toward him on silent feet. Blade rang on blade like hammer on anvil.

fɹəm ðə fɝst ɪt wɑz klɪɹ tə ɹænd ðət ðə mæn wɑz tɛstɪŋ hɪm, pʊʃɪŋ oʊnli hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə si wʌɾ i kəd du, ðən pʊʃɪŋ ə lɪɾəl hɑɹɾɝ, ðən dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl hɑɹɾɝ stɪl. ɪt wɑz kwɪk ɹɪsts ən kwɪk fit ðət kɛpt ɹænd əlaɪv əz mʌtʃ əz skɪl. wɪθaʊt ðə vɔɪd, hi wɑz ɔlweɪz hæf ə hɑɹtbit bɪhaɪnd. ðə tɪp ə tʃɹɑks hɛvi sɔɹd meɪɾ ə stɪŋɪŋ tʃɹɛntʃ dʒʌst ʌndɝ ɪz lɛft aɪ. ə flæp ə koʊt sliv hʌŋ əweɪ fɹəm ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ðə dɑɹkɝ fəɹ biɪŋ wɛt. ʌndɝ ə nit slæʃ bɪniθ ɪz ɹaɪɾ ɑɹm, pɹɪsaɪs əz ə teɪlɝz kʌt, hi kəd fil wɔɹm dæmpnəs spɹɛɾɪŋ daʊn ɪz ɹɪbz.

From the first it was clear to Rand that the man was testing him, pushing only hard enough to see what he could do, then pushing a little harder, then just a little harder still. It was quick wrists and quick feet that kept Rand alive as much as skill. Without the void, he was always half a heartbeat behind. The tip of Turak's heavy sword made a stinging trench just under his left eye. A flap of coat sleeve hung away from his shoulder, the darker for being wet. Under a neat slash beneath his right arm, precise as a tailor's cut, he could feel warm dampness spreading down his ribs.

ðəɹ wɑz dɪsəpɔɪnmənt ɑn ðə haɪ lɔɹdz feɪs. hi stɛp bæk wɪð ə dʒɛstʃɝ ə dɪsɡʌst. "wɛɹ dɪd jə faɪn ðət bleɪd, bɔɪ? əɹ də ðeɪ hɪɹ tʃɹuli əwɔɹd ðə hɛɹən tə ðoʊz noʊ mɔɹ skɪl ðən ju? noʊ mæɾɝ. meɪk jəɹ pis. ɪts taɪm tə daɪ." hi keɪm ɑn əɡɛn.

There was disappointment on the High Lord's face. He stepped back with a gesture of disgust. "Where did you find that blade, boy? Or do they here truly award the heron to those no more skilled than you? No matter. Make your peace. It is time to die." He came on again.

ðə vɔɪɾ ɛnvɛləpt ɹænd. seɪɾɪn floʊd təwɔɹd hɪm, ɡloʊɪŋ wɪð ðə pɹɑməs ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ, bʌɾ i ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪt. ɪt wɑz noʊ mɔɹ dɪfəkəl ðən ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ə bɑɹb θɔɹn twɪstɪŋ ɪn ɪz flɛʃ. hi ɹəfjuz tə bi fɪld wɪð ðə paʊɝ, ɹəfjuz tə bi wʌn wɪð ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. hi wɑz wʌn wɪð ðə sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪz hænz, wʌn wɪð ðə flɔɹ bɪniθ ɪz fit, wʌn wɪð ðə wɔlz. wʌn wɪð tʃɹɑk.

The void enveloped Rand. Saidin flowed toward him, glowing with the promise of the One Power, but he ignored it. It was no more difficult than ignoring a barbed thorn twisting in his flesh. He refused to be filled with the Power, refused to be one with the male half of the True Source. He was one with the sword in his hands, one with the floor beneath his feet, one with the walls. One with Turak.

hi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə fɔɹmz ðə haɪ lɔɹd juzd; ðeɪ wɝ ə lɪɾəl dɪfɹən fɹəm wʌɾ i hæd bɪn tɔt, bʌt nɑɾ ɪnʌf. ðə swɑloʊ teɪks flaɪt mɛt pɑɹɾɪŋ ðə sɪlk. mun ɑn ðə wɔɾɝ mɛt ðə wʊd ɡɹaʊs dænsəz. ɹɪbən ɪn ði ɛɹ mɛt stoʊnz fɔlɪŋ fɹəm ðə klɪf. ðeɪ muvd əbaʊt ðə ɹum əz ɪn ə dæns, ən ðɛɹ mjuzɪk wɑz stil əɡɛnst stil.

He recognized the forms the High Lord used; they were a little different from what he had been taught, but not enough. The Swallow Takes Flight met Parting the Silk. Moon on the Water met The Wood Grouse Dances. Ribbon in the Air met Stones Falling From the Cliff. They moved about the room as in a dance, and their music was steel against steel.

dɪsəpɔɪnmənt ən dɪsɡʌs feɪɾəd fɹəm tʃɹɑks dɑɹk aɪz, ɹipleɪs baɪ sɝpɹaɪz, ðən kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən. swɛɾ əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðə haɪ lɔɹdz feɪs əz i pɹɛst ɹænd hɑɹɾɝ. laɪtnɪŋ ə θɹi pɹɔŋz mɛt lif ɑn ðə bɹiz.

Disappointment and disgust faded from Turak's dark eyes, replaced by surprise, then concentration. Sweat appeared on the High Lord's face as he pressed Rand harder. Lightning of Three Prongs met Leaf on the Breeze.

ɹændz θɔts floʊɾəd aʊtsaɪd ðə vɔɪd, əpɑɹt fɹəm hɪmsɛlf, hɑɹdli noʊɾəst. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf. hi feɪst ə bleɪd-mæstɝ, ən wɪð ðə vɔɪɾ ən ɛvɹi aʊns ə hɪz skɪl i wɑz bɛɹli mænɪdʒɪŋ tə hoʊld ɪz oʊn. bɛɹli. hi hæd tə ɛn ɪt bɪfɔɹ tʃɹɑk faɪnəli dɪd. seɪɾɪn? noʊ! səmtaɪmz ɪts nɛsəsɛɹi tə ʃið ðə sɔɹɾ ɪn jəɹ oʊn flɛʃ. bʌt ðət wəd nɑt hɛlp ɛɡwin, iðɝ. hi hæd tə ɛn ɪt naʊ. naʊ.

Rand's thoughts floated outside the void, apart from himself, hardly noticed. It was not enough. He faced a blade-master, and with the void and every ounce of his skill he was barely managing to hold his own. Barely. He had to end it before Turak finally did. Saidin? No! Sometimes it is necessary to Sheathe the Sword in your own flesh. But that would not help Egwene, either. He had to end it now. Now.

tʃɹɑks aɪz waɪɾənd əz ɹænd ɡlaɪɾɪd fɔɹwɝd. soʊ fɑɹ i hæɾ oʊnli dɪfɛndəd; naʊ hi ətækt, ɔl aʊt. ðə bɔɹ ɹʌʃəz daʊn ðə maʊntən. ɛvɹi muvmən ə hɪz bleɪd wɑz ən ətɛmp tə ɹitʃ ðə haɪ lɔɹd; naʊ ɔl tʃɹɑk kəd də wɑz ɹitʃɹiɾ ən dɪfɛnd, daʊn ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə ɹum, ɔlmoʊs tə ðə dɔɹ.

Turak's eyes widened as Rand glided forward. So far he had only defended; now he attacked, all out. The Boar Rushes Down the Mountain. Every movement of his blade was an attempt to reach the High Lord; now all Turak could do was retreat and defend, down the length of the room, almost to the door.

ɪn ən ɪnstənt, waɪl tʃɹɑk stɪl tʃɹaɪd tə feɪs ðə bɔɹ, ɹænd tʃɑɹdʒd. ðə ɹɪvɝ ʌndɝkʌts ðə bæŋk. hi dʒɹɑp tə wʌn ni, bleɪd slæʃɪŋ əkɹɔs. hi dɪd nɑt nid tʃɹɑks ɡæsp, əɹ ðə fil ə ɹɪzɪstəns tə hɪz kʌt tə noʊ. hi hɝd tu θʌmps ən tɝn ɪz hɛd, noʊɪŋ wʌɾ i wəd si. hi lʊk daʊn ðə lɛŋθ ə hɪz bleɪd, wɛɾ ən ɹɛd, tə wɛɹ ðə haɪ lɔɹd leɪ, sɔɹd tʌmbəl fɹəm ɪz lɪmp hænd, ə dɑɹk dæmpnəs steɪnɪŋ ðə bɝdz woʊvən ɪn ðə kɑɹpəɾ ʌndɝ ɪz bɑɾi. tʃɹɑks aɪz wɝ stɪl oʊpən, bʌɾ ɔlɹɛɾi fɪlmd wɪð dɛθ.

In an instant, while Turak still tried to face the Boar, Rand charged. The River Undercuts the Bank. He dropped to one knee, blade slashing across. He did not need Turak's gasp, or the feel of resistance to his cut to know. He heard two thumps and turned his head, knowing what he would see. He looked down the length of his blade, wet and red, to where the High Lord lay, sword tumbled from his limp hand, a dark dampness staining the birds woven in the carpet under his body. Turak's eyes were still open, but already filmed with death.

ðə vɔɪd ʃʊk. hi hæd feɪs tʃɹɑləks bɪfɔɹ, feɪst ʃæɾoʊzpɔn. nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ hæɾ i kənfɹʌntəɾ ə hjumən biɪŋ wɪð ə sɔɹɾ ɪksɛpt ɪn pɹæktəs əɹ blʌf. aɪ dʒʌs kɪld ə mæn. ðə vɔɪd ʃʊk, ən seɪɾɪn tʃɹaɪd tə fɪl hɪm.

The void shook. He had faced Trollocs before, faced Shadowspawn. Never before had he confronted a human being with a sword except in practice or bluff. I just killed a man. The void shook, and saidin tried to fill him.

dɛspɝətli hi klɔd fɹi, bɹiðɪŋ hɑɹɾ əz i lʊkt ɝaʊnd. hi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt wən i sɔ ðə tu sɝvəns stɪl nilɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ. hi hæd fɝɡɑɾən ðɛm, ən naʊ hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt tə də əbaʊt ðɛm. niðɝ mæn əpɪɹɾ ɑɹmd, jɛɾ ɔl ðeɪ hæd tə də wɑz ʃaʊt. . . .

Desperately he clawed free, breathing hard as he looked around. He gave a start when he saw the two servants still kneeling beside the door. He had forgotten them, and now he did not know what to do about them. Neither man appeared armed, yet all they had to do was shout. . . .

ðeɪ nɛvɝ lʊkt ət hɪm, əɹ əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ. ɪnstɛd, ðeɪ stɛɹd saɪlənli ət ðə haɪ lɔɹdz bɑɾi. ðeɪ pɹədus dæɡɝz fɹəm ʌndɝ ðɛɹ ɹoʊbz, ən i taɪɾənd ɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn ðə sɔɹd, bʌɾ itʃ mæn pleɪs ðə pɔɪn tə hɪz oʊn bɹɛst. "fɹʌm bɝθ tə dɛθ," ðeɪ ɪntoʊn ɪn junəsən, "aɪ sɝv ðə blʌd." ən plʌnʒd ðə dæɡɝz ɪndə ðɛɹ oʊn hɑɹts. ðeɪ foʊldəd fɔɹwɝɾ ɔlmoʊs pisfəli, hɛdz tə ðə flɔɹ əz ɪf boʊɪŋ dipli tə ðɛɹ lɔɹd.

They never looked at him, or at each other. Instead, they stared silently at the High Lord's body. They produced daggers from under their robes, and he tightened his grip on the sword, but each man placed the point to his own breast. "From birth to death," they intoned in unison, "I serve the Blood." And plunged the daggers into their own hearts. They folded forward almost peacefully, heads to the floor as if bowing deeply to their lord.

ɹænd stɛɹɾ əɾ əm ɪn dɪsbɪlif. mæd, hi θɔt. meɪbi əl ɡoʊ mæd, bʌt ðeɪ ɔlɹɛɾi wɝ.

Rand stared at them in disbelief. Mad, he thought. Maybe I will go mad, but they already were.

hi wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ tə hɪz fit ʃɑkəli wən ɪŋtʃɹ ən ði ʌðɝz keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ bæk. ðeɪ ɔl bɔɹ nɪks ən kʌts; ðə lɛðɝ ʌv ɪŋtʃɹz koʊt wɑz steɪn ɪn mɔɹ ðən wʌn pleɪs. mæt stɪl hæd ðə hɔɹn ən ɪz dæɡɝ, ɪts bleɪd dɑɹkɝ ðən ðə ɹubi ɪn ɪts hɪlt. pɛɹɪnz æks wɑz ɹɛd, tu, ən i lʊkt əz ɪf i maɪt bi sɪk əɾ ɛni moʊmənt.

He was getting to his feet shakily when Ingtar and the others came running back. They all bore nicks and cuts; the leather of Ingtar's coat was stained in more than one place. Mat still had the Horn and his dagger, its blade darker than the ruby in its hilt. Perrin's axe was red, too, and he looked as if he might be sick at any moment.

"ju dɛlt wɪð ðɛm?" ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd, lʊkɪŋ ət ðə bɑɾiz. "ðɛn wɝ dʌn, ɪf noʊ əlɑɹm ɪz ɡɪvən. ðoʊz fulz nɛvɝ kɹaɪd fəɹ hɛlp, nɑt wʌns."

"You dealt with them?" Ingtar said, looking at the bodies. "Then we're done, if no alarm is given. Those fools never cried for help, not once."

"aɪ wɪl si ɪf ðə ɡɑɹdz hɝɾ ɛniθɪŋ," hʊɹɪn sɛd, ən dɑɹɾɪd fəɹ ðə wɪndoʊ.

"I will see if the guards heard anything," Hurin said, and darted for the window.

mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ɹænd, ðiz pipəl ɑɹ kɹeɪzi. aɪ noʊ aɪv sɛd ðət bɪfɔɹ, bʌt ðiz pipəl ɹɪli ɑɹ. ðoʊz sɝvəns. . . ." ɹænd hɛld ɪz bɹɛθ, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl kɪl ðɛmsɛlvz. mæt sɛd, "wɛnɛvɝ ðeɪ sɔ əs faɪɾɪŋ, ðeɪ fɛl ɑn ðɛɹ niz, pʊt ðɛɹ feɪsəz tə ðə flɔɹ, ən ɹæp ðɛɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn ðɛɹ hɛdz. ðeɪ nɛvɝ muvd, əɹ kɹaɪɾ aʊt; nɛvɝ tʃɹaɪd tə hɛlp ðə soʊlʒɝz, əɹ ɡɪv ən əlɑɹm. ðəɹ stɪl ðɛɹ, əz fɑɹ əz aɪ noʊ."

Mat shook his head. "Rand, these people are crazy. I know I've said that before, but these people really are. Those servants. . . ." Rand held his breath, wondering if they had all killed themselves. Mat said, "Whenever they saw us fighting, they fell on their knees, put their faces to the floor, and wrapped their arms around their heads. They never moved, or cried out; never tried to help the soldiers, or give an alarm. They're still there, as far as I know."

"aɪ wəd nɑt kaʊn ɑn əm steɪɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ niz," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "wi ɑɹ livɪŋ naʊ, əz fæst əz wi kən ɹʌn."

"I would not count on them staying on their knees," Ingtar said dryly. "We are leaving now, as fast as we can run."

"ju ɡoʊ," ɹænd sɛd. "ɛɡwin - "

"You go," Rand said. "Egwene - "

"ju ful!" ɪŋtʃɹ snæpt. "wi hæv wʌt wi keɪm fɔɹ. ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. ðə hoʊp ə sælveɪʃən. wʌt kən wʌn ɡɝl kaʊnt, ivən ɪf jə lʌv hɝ, əlɔŋsaɪd ðə hɔɹn, ən wʌɾ ɪt stænz fɔɹ?"

"You fool!" Ingtar snapped. "We have what we came for. The Horn of Valere. The hope of salvation. What can one girl count, even if you love her, alongside the Horn, and what it stands for?"

"ðə dɑɹk wʌn kən əv ðə hɔɹn fəɹ ɔl aɪ kɛɹ! wʌt dʌz faɪndɪŋ ðə hɔɹn kaʊn ɪf ðəfɝst əbændən ɛɡwin tə ðɪs? ɪf aɪ dɪd ðæt, ðə hɔɹn kʊdn seɪv mi. ðə kɹieɪɾɝ kʊdn seɪv mi. aɪ wəd dæm maɪsɛlf."

"The Dark One can have the Horn for all I care! What does finding the Horn count if I abandon Egwene to this? If I did that, the Horn couldn't save me. The Creator couldn't save me. I would damn myself."

ɪŋtʃɹ stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, hɪz feɪs ənɹiɾəbəl. "ju min ðəɾ ɪɡzækli, doʊn ju?"

Ingtar stared at him, his face unreadable. "You mean that exactly, don't you?"

"sʌmθɪŋz hæpənɪŋ aʊt hɪɹ," hʊɹɪn sɛɾ ɝdʒənli. "ə mæn dʒʌs keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ ʌp, ən ðəɹ ɔl mɪlɪŋ laɪk fɪʃ ɪn ə bʌkət. weɪt. ði ɔfəsɝ ɪz kʌmɪŋ ɪnsaɪd!"

"Something's happening out here," Hurin said urgently. "A man just came running up, and they're all milling like fish in a bucket. Wait. The officer is coming inside!"

"ɡoʊ!" ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd. hi tʃɹaɪd tə teɪk ðə hɔɹn, bʌt mæt wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɹʌnɪŋ. ɹænd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, bʌɾ ɪŋtʃɹ ɡɹæbd ɪz ɑɹm ən pʊld ɪm ɪndə ðə hɔl. ði ʌðɝz wɝ stʃɹimɪŋ æftɝ mæt; pɛɹɪn oʊnli ɡeɪv ɹænd wʌn peɪn lʊk bɪfɔɹ i wɛnt. "ju kænɑt seɪv ðə ɡɝl ɪf jə stæn hɪɹ ən daɪ!"

"Go!" Ingtar said. He tried to take the Horn, but Mat was already running. Rand hesitated, but Ingtar grabbed his arm and pulled him into the hall. The others were streaming after Mat; Perrin only gave Rand one pained look before he went. "You cannot save the girl if you stand here and die!"

hi ɹæn wɪð ðɛm. pɑɹɾ ə hɪm heɪɾəd hɪmsɛlf fəɹ ɹʌnɪŋ, bʌɾ ənʌðɝ pɑɹt wɪspɝd, əl kʌm bæk. əl fɹi hɝ sʌmhaʊ.

He ran with them. Part of him hated himself for running, but another part whispered, I'll come back. I'll free her somehow.

baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə nɛɹoʊ, waɪndɪŋ stɛɹkeɪs, hi kəd hɪɹ ə mænz dip vɔɪs ɹeɪzd ɪn ðə fɹʌn pɑɹɾ ə ðə haʊs, æŋɡɹəli dɪmændɪŋ ðət sʌmwʌn stæn ʌp ən spik. ə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝl ɪn əɹ nɪɹli tʃɹænspɛɹən ɹoʊb nɛlt ət ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə stɛɹz, ən ə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən ɔl ɪn waɪt wʊl, wɪð ə lɔŋ flaʊɝi eɪpɹən, nɛl baɪ ðə kɪtʃən dɔɹ. ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ ɪɡzækli əz mæt hæd dɪskɹaɪbd, feɪsəz tə ðə flɔɹ ən ɑɹmz ɹæpt ɝaʊn ðɛɹ hɛdz, ən ðeɪ dɪd nɑt stɝ ə hɛɹ əz ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz hɝid baɪ. hi wɑz ɹɪliv tə si ðə moʊʃənz ə bɹiðɪŋ.

By the time they reached the bottom of the narrow, winding staircase, he could hear a man's deep voice raised in the front part of the house, angrily demanding that someone stand up and speak. A serving girl in her nearly transparent robe knelt at the bottom of the stairs, and a gray-haired woman all in white wool, with a long floury apron, knelt by the kitchen door. They were both exactly as Mat had described, faces to the floor and arms wrapped around their heads, and they did not stir a hair as Rand and the others hurried by. He was relieved to see the motions of breathing.

ðeɪ kɹɔs ðə ɡɑɹɾən əɾ ə dɛd ɹʌn, klaɪmɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə bæk wɔl ɹæpədli. ɪŋtʃɹ kɝst wən mæt tɔs ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ əhɛɾ ə hɪm, ən tʃɹaɪɾ əɡɛn tə teɪk ɪt wən i dʒɹɑpt aʊtsaɪd, bʌt mæt snætʃt ɪɾ ʌp wɪð ə kwɪk, "ɪɾ ɪzən ivən skɹætʃt," ən skæmpɝɾ ʌp ði æli.

They crossed the garden at a dead run, climbing over the back wall rapidly. Ingtar cursed when Mat tossed the Horn of Valere ahead of him, and tried again to take it when he dropped outside, but Mat snatched it up with a quick, "It isn't even scratched," and scampered up the alley.

mɔɹ ʃaʊts ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə haʊs ðeɪ hæd dʒʌs lɛft; ə wʊmən skɹimd, ən sʌmwʌn bɪɡæn toʊlɪŋ ə ɡɔŋ.

More shouts rose from the house they had just left; a woman screamed, and someone began tolling a gong.

əl kʌm bæk fəɹ hɝ. sʌmhaʊ. ɹænd spɛɾ æftɝ ði ʌðɝz əz fæst əz i kʊd.

I will come back for her. Somehow. Rand sped after the others as fast as he could.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾisɪks


CHAPTER 46

tə kʌm aʊɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊ


To Come Out of the Shadow

nɪneɪiv ən ði ʌðɝz hɝd dɪstənt ʃaʊts əz ðeɪ əpɹoʊtʃt ðə bɪldɪŋz wɛɹ ðə deɪmeɪn wɝ haʊzd. ðə kɹaʊdz wɝ bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə pɪk ʌp, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə nɝvəsnəs tə ðə pipəl ɪn ðə stʃɹit, ən ɛkstʃɹə kwɪknəs tə ðɛɹ stɛp, ən ɛkstʃɹə wɛɹinɪs ɪn ðə weɪ ðeɪ ɡlæns pæs nɪneɪiv, ɪn əɹ laɪtnɪŋ-pænəl dʒɹɛs, ən ðə wʊmən ʃi hɛl baɪ ə sɪlvɝ liʃ.

Nynaeve and the others heard distant shouts as they approached the buildings where the damane were housed. The crowds were beginning to pick up, and there was a nervousness to the people in the street, an extra quickness to their step, an extra wariness in the way they glanced past Nynaeve, in her lightning-paneled dress, and the woman she held by a silver leash.

ʃɪftɪŋ əɹ bʌndəl nɝvəsli, ɪleɪn pɪɹd təwɔɹd ðə nɔɪz ə ʃaʊts, wʌn stʃɹiɾ oʊvɝ, wɛɹ ðə ɡoʊldən hɔk klʌtʃɪŋ laɪtnɪŋ ɹɪpəld ɪn ðə wɪnd. "wʌɾ ɪz hæpənɪŋ?"

Shifting her bundle nervously, Elayne peered toward the noise of shouts, one street over, where the golden hawk clutching lightning rippled in the wind. "What is happening?"

"nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ʌs," nɪneɪiv sɛd fɝmli.

"Nothing to do with us," Nynaeve said firmly.

"ju hoʊp," mɪn æɾəd. "æn soʊ də aɪ." ʃi ɪnkɹist əɹ peɪs, hɝiɪŋ ʌp ðə stɛps əhɛɾ ə ði ʌðɝz, ən dɪsəpɪɹɾ ɪnsaɪd ðə tɔl stoʊn haʊs.

"You hope," Min added. "And so do I." She increased her pace, hurrying up the steps ahead of the others, and disappeared inside the tall stone house.

nɪneɪiv ʃɔɹɾənd əɹ ɡɹɪp ɑn ðə liʃ. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ, sɛɾə, jə wɑn əs tə meɪk ɪt θɹu ðɪs seɪfli əz mʌtʃ əz wi du."

Nynaeve shortened her grip on the leash. "Remember, Seta, you want us to make it through this safely as much as we do."

"aɪ du," ðə sintʃæn wʊmən sɛd fɝvənli. ʃi kɛpt əɹ tʃɪn ɑn əɹ tʃɛst, tə haɪɾ əɹ feɪs. "aɪ wɪl kɑz jə noʊ tʃɹʌbəl, aɪ swɛɹ."

"I do," the Seanchan woman said fervently. She kept her chin on her chest, to hide her face. "I will cause you no trouble, I swear."

əz ðeɪ tɝn ʌp ðə ɡɹeɪ stoʊn stɛps, ə sʌldəm ən ə deɪmeɪn əpɪɹɾ ət ðə hɛɾ ə ðə stɛɹz, kʌmɪŋ daʊn əz ðeɪ wɛn ʌp. æftɝ wʌn ɡlæns tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðə wʊmən ɪn ðə kɑlɝ wɑz nɑɾ ɛɡwin, nɪneɪiv dɪd nɑt lʊk əɾ əm əɡɛn. ʃi juz ði æɾəm tə kip sɛɾə kloʊs baɪ hɝ saɪd, soʊ ɪf ðə deɪmeɪn sɛns ði əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl ɪn wʌn ə ðɛm, ʃi wəd θɪŋk ɪt wɑz sɛɾə. ʃi fɛl swɛt tʃɹɪklɪŋ daʊn əɹ spaɪn, ðoʊ, əntɪl ʃi ɹilaɪz ðeɪ wɝ peɪɪŋ əɹ noʊ mɔɹ ətɛnʃən ðən ʃi ɡeɪv ðɛm. ɔl ðeɪ sɔ wɑz ə dʒɹɛs wɪð laɪtnɪŋ pænəlz ən ə ɡɹeɪ dʒɹɛs, ðə wɪmən wɛɹɪŋ əm lɪŋk baɪ ðə sɪlvɝ lɛŋθ ʌv ən æɾəm. dʒʌst ənʌðɝ liʃ hoʊldɝ wɪð ə liʃt wʌn, ən ə loʊkəl ɡɝl hɝiɪŋ əlɔŋ bɪhaɪnd wɪð ə bʌndəl bɪlɔŋɪŋ tə ðə sʌldəm.

As they turned up the gray stone steps, a sul'dam and a damane appeared at the head of the stairs, coming down as they went up. After one glance to make sure the woman in the collar was not Egwene, Nynaeve did not look at them again. She used the a'dam to keep Seta close by her side, so if the damane sensed the ability to channel in one of them, she would think it was Seta. She felt sweat trickling down her spine, though, until she realized they were paying her no more attention than she gave them. All they saw was a dress with lightning panels and a gray dress, the women wearing them linked by the silver length of an a'dam. Just another Leash Holder with a Leashed One, and a local girl hurrying along behind with a bundle belonging to the sul'dam.

nɪneɪiv pʊʃt oʊpən ðə dɔɹ, ən ðeɪ wɛn ɪn.

Nynaeve pushed open the door, and they went in.

wʌtɛvɝ ði ɪksaɪtmən bɪniθ tʃɹɑks bænɝ, ɪt dɪd nɑɾ ɪkstɛn hɪɹ, nɑt jɛt. ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli wɪmən muvɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪn ði ɛntʃɹi hɔl, ɔl izəli pleɪs baɪ ðɛɹ dʒɹɛs. θɹi ɡɹeɪ-dʒɹɛs deɪmeɪn, wɪð sʌldəm wɛɹɪŋ ðə bɹeɪslɪts. tu wɪmən ɪn dʒɹɛsəz pænəld wɪð fɔɹk laɪtnɪŋ stʊd tɔkɪŋ, ən θɹi kɹɔs ðə hɔl əloʊn. fɔɹ dʒɹɛs laɪk mɪn, ɪn pleɪn dɑɹk wʊlənz, hɝiɾ ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ wɪð tʃɹeɪz.

Whatever the excitement beneath Turak's banner, it did not extend here, not yet. There were only women moving about in the entry hall, all easily placed by their dress. Three gray-dressed damane, with sul'dam wearing the bracelets. Two women in dresses paneled with forked lightning stood talking, and three crossed the hall alone. Four dressed like Min, in plain dark woolens, hurried on their way with trays.

mɪn stʊd weɪɾɪŋ daʊn ði ɛntʃɹi hɔl wən ðeɪ wɛn ɪn; ʃi ɡlænst əɾ əm wʌns, ðən stɑɹɾəd dipɝ ɪndə ðə haʊs. nɪneɪiv ɡaɪɾəd sɛɾə daʊn ðə hɔl æftɝ mɪn, wɪð ɪleɪn skɝiɪŋ əlɔŋ ɪn ðɛɹ weɪk. noʊ wʌn ɡeɪv əm ə sɛkənd ɡlæns, ɪt sim tə nɪneɪiv, bʌt ʃi θɔt ðə tʃɹɪkəl ə swɛt daʊn əɹ bækboʊn maɪt bɪkʌm ə ɹɪvɝ sun. ʃi kɛp sɛɾə muvɪŋ kwɪkli soʊ noʊ wʌn wəɾ əv ə tʃæns fəɹ ə ɡʊd lʊk - əɹ wɝs, ə kwɛstʃən. wɪð əɹ aɪz fɪkst ɑn əɹ toʊz, sɛɾə niɾəd soʊ lɪɾəl ɝdʒɪŋ ðət nɪneɪiv θɔt ʃi wʊɾə bɪn ɹʌnɪŋ ɪf nɑt fəɹ ðə fɪzɪkəl ɹɪstʃɹeɪn ə ðə liʃ.

Min stood waiting down the entry hall when they went in; she glanced at them once, then started deeper into the house. Nynaeve guided Seta down the hall after Min, with Elayne scurrying along in their wake. No one gave them a second glance, it seemed to Nynaeve, but she thought the trickle of sweat down her backbone might become a river soon. She kept Seta moving quickly so no one would have a chance for a good look - or worse, a question. With her eyes fixed on her toes, Seta needed so little urging that Nynaeve thought she would have been running if not for the physical restraint of the leash.

nɪɹ ðə bæk ə ðə haʊs, mɪn tʊk ə nɛɹoʊ stɛɹz ðət spaɪɹəld ʌpwɝdz. nɪneɪiv pʊʃt sɛɾə ʌp ɪɾ əhɛɾ ə hɝ, ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə fɔɹθ flɔɹ. ðə silɪŋz wɝ loʊ, ðɛɹ, ðə hɔlz ɛmpti ən saɪlən ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə sɑf saʊnz ʌv wipɪŋ. wipɪŋ sim tə fɪt ði ɛɹ ə ðə tʃɪli hɔlz.

Near the back of the house, Min took a narrow stairs that spiraled upwards. Nynaeve pushed Seta up it ahead of her, all the way to the fourth floor. The ceilings were low, there, the halls empty and silent except for the soft sounds of weeping. Weeping seemed to fit the air of the chilly halls.

"ðɪs pleɪs . . ." ɪleɪn bɪɡæn, ðən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ɪt filz. . . ."

"This place . . ." Elayne began, then shook her head. "It feels. . . ."

"jɛs, ɪt dʌz," nɪneɪiv sɛd ɡɹɪmli. ʃi ɡlɛɹɾ ət sɛɾə, hu kɛpt əɹ feɪs daʊn. ə pælɝ ə fɪɹ meɪd ðə sintʃæn wʊmənz skɪn pəlɝ ðən ɪt wɑz nɔɹməli.

"Yes, it does," Nynaeve said grimly. She glared at Seta, who kept her face down. A pallor of fear made the Seanchan woman's skin paler than it was normally.

wɝdləsli, mɪn oʊpən ə dɔɹ ən wɛn ɪn, ən ðeɪ fɑloʊd. ðə ɹum bɪɑn hæd bɪn dɪvaɪɾəd ɪndə smɔlɝ ɹumz baɪ ɹʌfli meɪd wʊɾən wɔlz, wɪð ə nɛɹoʊ hɔlweɪ ɹʌnɪŋ tə ə wɪndoʊ. nɪneɪiv kɹaʊɾəd æftɝ mɪn əz ʃi hɝid tə ðə læs dɔɹ ɑn ðə ɹaɪɾ ən pʊʃt ɪn.

Wordlessly, Min opened a door and went in, and they followed. The room beyond had been divided into smaller rooms by roughly made wooden walls, with a narrow hallway running to a window. Nynaeve crowded after Min as she hurried to the last door on the right and pushed in.

ə slɛndɝ, dɑɹk-hɛɹd ɡɝl ɪn ɡɹeɪ sæɾ əɾ ə smɔl teɪbəl wɪð əɹ hɛd ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn foʊldəɾ ɑɹmz, bʌɾ ivən bɪfɔɹ ʃi lʊkt ʌp, nɪneɪiv nu ɪt wɑz ɛɡwin. ə ɹɪbən ə ʃaɪnɪŋ mɛɾəl ɹæn fɹəm ðə sɪlvɝ kɑlɝ ɝaʊn ɛɡwinz nɛk tə ə bɹeɪslət hæŋɪŋ ɑn ə pɛɡ ɑn ðə wɔl. hɝ aɪz waɪɾənd ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðɛm, hɝ maʊθ wɝkɪŋ saɪlənli. əz ɪleɪn kloʊz ðə dɔɹ, ɛɡwin ɡeɪv ə sʌɾən ɡɪɡəl, ən pɹɛst əɹ hænz tə hɝ maʊθ tə staɪfəl ɪt. ðə taɪni ɹum wɑz mɔɹ ðən kɹaʊɾəd wɪð ɔl ə ðɛm ɪn ɪt.

A slender, dark-haired girl in gray sat at a small table with her head resting on folded arms, but even before she looked up, Nynaeve knew it was Egwene. A ribbon of shining metal ran from the silver collar around Egwene's neck to a bracelet hanging on a peg on the wall. Her eyes widened at the sight of them, her mouth working silently. As Elayne closed the door, Egwene gave a sudden giggle, and pressed her hands to her mouth to stifle it. The tiny room was more than crowded with all of them in it.

"aɪ noʊ aɪm nɑt dʒɹimɪŋ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə kwɪvɝɪŋ vɔɪs, "bɪkɔz ɪf aɪ wɑz dʒɹimɪŋ, jud bi ɹænd ən ɡɑləɾ ɑn tɔl stæljənz. aɪ hæv bɪn dʒɹimɪŋ. aɪ θɔt ɹænd wɑz hɪɹ. aɪ kʊdn si hɪm, bʌɾ aɪ θɔt. . . ." hɝ vɔɪs tʃɹeɪld ɔf.

"I know I'm not dreaming," she said in a quivering voice, "because if I was dreaming, you'd be Rand and Galad on tall stallions. I have been dreaming. I thought Rand was here. I couldn't see him, but I thought. . . ." Her voice trailed off.

"ɪf jud ɹæðɝ weɪt fəɹ əm . . ." mɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli.

"If you'd rather wait for them . . ." Min said dryly.

"oʊ, noʊ. noʊ, jə ɑɹ ɔl bjuɾəfəl, ðə moʊs bjuɾəfəl θɪŋ aɪv ɛvɝ sin. wɛɹ dɪd jə kʌm fɹʌm? haʊ dɪd jə də ɪt? ðət dʒɹɛs, nɪneɪiv, ən ði æɾəm, ən u ɪz. . . ." ʃi ɡeɪv ən əbɹʌp skwik. "ðæts sɛɾə. haʊ . . . ?" hɝ vɔɪs hɑɹɾənd soʊ ðət nɪneɪiv bɛɹli ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ɪt. "aɪd laɪk tə pʊɾ əɹ ɪn ə pɑɾ ə bɔɪlɪŋ wɔɾɝ." sɛɾə hæɾ əɹ aɪz skwizd ʃʌt, ən əɹ hænz klʌtʃt əɹ skɝts; ʃi wɑz tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ.

"Oh, no. No, you are all beautiful, the most beautiful thing I've ever seen. Where did you come from? How did you do it? That dress, Nynaeve, and the a'dam, and who is. . . ." She gave an abrupt squeak. "That's Seta. How . . . ?" Her voice hardened so that Nynaeve barely recognized it. "I'd like to put her in a pot of boiling water." Seta had her eyes squeezed shut, and her hands clutched her skirts; she was trembling.

"wʌɾ əv ðeɪ dʌn tə ju?" ɪleɪn ɪkskleɪmd. "wʌt kəd ðeɪ də tə meɪk jə wɑn sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðæt?"

"What have they done to you?" Elayne exclaimed. "What could they do to make you want something like that?"

ɛɡwin nɛvɝ tʊk əɹ aɪz ɔf ðə sintʃæn wʊmən. "aɪd laɪk tə meɪk əɹ fil ɪt. ðæts wʌt ʃi dɪd tə mi, meɪd mi fil laɪk aɪ wɑz nɛk dip ɪn. . . ." ʃi ʃʌɾɝəd. "ju də nɑt noʊ wʌɾ ɪts laɪk wɛɹɪŋ wʌn ə ðiz, ɪleɪn. jə doʊnt noʊ wʌt ðeɪ kən də tə ju. aɪ kən nɛvɝ dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ sɛɾə ɪz wɝs ðən ɹɛnə, bʌt ðəɹ ɔl heɪtfəl."

Egwene never took her eyes off the Seanchan woman. "I'd like to make her feel it. That's what she did to me, made me feel like I was neck deep in. . . ." She shuddered. "You do not know what it is like wearing one of these, Elayne. You don't know what they can do to you. I can never decide whether Seta is worse than Renna, but they're all hateful."

"aɪ θɪŋk aɪ noʊ," nɪneɪiv sɛd kwaɪətli. ʃi kəd fil ðə swɛt soʊkɪŋ sɛɾəz skɪn, ðə koʊl tʃɹɛmɝz ðət ʃʊk əɹ lɪmz. ðə jɛloʊ-hɛɹd sintʃæn wɑz tɛɹəfaɪd. ɪt wɑz ɔl ʃi kəd də nɑt tə meɪk sɛɾəz tɛɹɝz kʌm tʃɹu ðən ən ðɛɹ.

"I think I know," Nynaeve said quietly. She could feel the sweat soaking Seta's skin, the cold tremors that shook her limbs. The yellow-haired Seanchan was terrified. It was all she could do not to make Seta's terrors come true then and there.

"kæn jə teɪk ðɪs ɔf ə mi?" ɛɡwin æskt, tʌtʃɪŋ ðə kɑlɝ. "ju mʌs bi eɪbəl tə ɪf jə kəd pʊt ðət wʌn ɑn - "

"Can you take this off of me?" Egwene asked, touching the collar. "You must be able to if you could put that one on - "

nɪneɪiv tʃænəld, ə pɪnpɔɪn tʃɹɪkəl. ðə kɑlɝ ɑn ɛɡwinz nɛk pɹəvaɪɾəd æŋɡɝ ɪnʌf, ən ɪf ɪt hæd nɑt, sɛɾəz fɪɹ, ðə nɑlədʒ ə haʊ dɪzɝvd ɪt tʃɹuli wɑz, ən əɹ oʊn nɑlədʒ ʌv wʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə də tə ðə wʊmən, wʊɾə dʌn ɪt. ðə kɑlɝ spɹæŋ oʊpən ən fɛl əweɪ fɹəm ɛɡwinz θɹoʊt. wɪð ən ɪkspɹɛʃən ʌv wʌndɝ, ɛɡwin tʌtʃt əɹ nɛk.

Nynaeve channeled, a pinpoint trickle. The collar on Egwene's neck provided anger enough, and if it had not, Seta's fear, the knowledge of how deserved it truly was, and her own knowledge of what she wanted to do to the woman, would have done it. The collar sprang open and fell away from Egwene's throat. With an expression of wonder, Egwene touched her neck.

"pʊɾ ɑn maɪ dʒɹɛs ən koʊt," nɪneɪiv toʊl hɝ. ɪleɪn wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ənbʌnlɪŋ ðə kloʊðz ɑn ðə bɛd. "wi wɪl wɔk aʊɾ ə hɪɹ, ən noʊ wʌn wɪl ivən noʊɾəs ju." ʃi kənsɪɾɝd hoʊldɪŋ əɹ kɑntækt wɪð seɪaɪdɑɹ - ʃi wɑz sɝɾənli æŋɡɹi ɪnʌf, ən ɪt fɛl soʊ wʌndɝfəl - bʌt, ɹɪlʌktənli, ʃi lɛɾ ɪt ɡoʊ. ðɪs wɑz ðə wʌn pleɪs ɪn fɑlm wɛɹ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tʃæns ʌv ə sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn kʌmɪŋ tə ɪnvɛstəɡeɪɾ ɪf ðeɪ sɛnst sʌmwʌn tʃænəlɪŋ, bʌt ðeɪ wəd sɝɾənli də soʊ ɪf ə deɪmeɪn sɔ ə wʊmən ʃi θɔt wɑz ə sʌldəm wɪð ðə ɡloʊ ʌv tʃænəlɪŋ ɝaʊn hɝ. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ jə ɑɹənt ɡɔn ɔlɹɛɾi. əloʊn hɪɹ, ivən ɪf jə kəd nɑt fɪɡjɝ aʊt haʊ tə ɡɛt ðət θɪŋ ɔf ju, jə kəɾ əv dʒʌs pɪkt ɪɾ ʌp ən ɹʌn."

"Put on my dress and coat," Nynaeve told her. Elayne was already unbundling the clothes on the bed. "We will walk out of here, and no one will even notice you." She considered holding her contact with saidar - she was certainly angry enough, and it felt so wonderful - but, reluctantly, she let it go. This was the one place in Falme where there was no chance of a sul'dam and damane coming to investigate if they sensed someone channeling, but they would certainly do so if a damane saw a woman she thought was a sul'dam with the glow of channeling around her. "I don't know why you aren't gone already. Alone here, even if you could not figure out how to get that thing off you, you could have just picked it up and run."

əz mɪn ən ɪleɪn hɝidli hɛlpt əɹ tʃeɪnʒ ɪndə nɪneɪivz oʊl dʒɹɛs, ɛɡwin ɪkspleɪn əbaʊt muvɪŋ ðə bɹeɪslət fɹəm wɛɹ ə sʌldəm lɛft ɪt, ən haʊ tʃænəlɪŋ meɪɾ əɹ sɪk ənlɛs ə sʌldəm wɔɹ ðə bɹeɪslət. dʒʌs ðət mɔɹnɪŋ ʃi hæd dɪskʌvɝd haʊ ðə kɑlɝ kəd bi oʊpənd wɪθaʊt ðə paʊɝ - ən faʊn ðət tʌtʃɪŋ ðə kætʃ wɪð ði ɪntɛntʃən ʌv oʊpənɪŋ ɪt meɪɾ əɹ hænd nɑɾ ɪndə jusləsnəs. ʃi kəd tʌtʃ ɪɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi wɑntəd soʊ lɔŋ əz ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʌv ənduɪŋ ðə kætʃ; ðə mɛɹəs hɪn ə ðæt, ðoʊ, ænd. . . .

As Min and Elayne hurriedly helped her change into Nynaeve's old dress, Egwene explained about moving the bracelet from where a sul'dam left it, and how channeling made her sick unless a sul'dam wore the bracelet. Just that morning she had discovered how the collar could be opened without the Power - and found that touching the catch with the intention of opening it made her hand knot into uselessness. She could touch it as much as she wanted so long as she did not think of undoing the catch; the merest hint of that, though, and. . . .

nɪneɪiv fɛl sɪk hɝsɛlf. ðə bɹeɪsləɾ ɑn əɹ ɹɪs meɪɾ əɹ sɪk. ɪt wɑz tu hɔɹəbəl. ʃi wɑntəɾ ɪɾ ɔf əɹ ɹɪs bɪfɔɹ ʃi lɝn mɔɹ əbaʊɾ æɾəm, bɪfɔɹ ʃi pɝhæps lɝn sʌmθɪŋ ðət wəd meɪk əɹ fil sɔɪl fɝɛvɝ fəɹ hævɪŋ wɔɹn ɪt.

Nynaeve felt sick herself. The bracelet on her wrist made her sick. It was too horrible. She wanted it off her wrist before she learned more about a'dam, before she perhaps learned something that would make her feel soiled forever for having worn it.

ənfæsənɪŋ ðə sɪlvɝ kʌf, ʃi pʊld ɪt lus, snæpt ɪt kloʊzd, ən hʌŋ ɪɾ ɑn wʌn ə ðə pɛɡz. "doʊn θɪŋk ðət minz jə kən ʃaʊt fəɹ hɛlp naʊ." ʃi ʃʊk ə fɪst ʌndɝ sɛɾəz noʊz. "aɪ kən stɪl meɪk jə wɪʃ jə wɝ nɛvɝ bɔɹn ɪf jə oʊpən jəɹ maʊθ, ən aɪ də nɑt nid ðət blʌɾi . . . θɪŋ."

Unfastening the silver cuff, she pulled it loose, snapped it closed, and hung it on one of the pegs. "Don't think that means you can shout for help now." She shook a fist under Seta's nose. "I can still make you wish you were never born if you open your mouth, and I do not need that bloody . . . thing."

"ju - jə də nɑt min tə liv mi hɪɹ wɪð ɪt," sɛɾə sɛɾ ɪn ə wɪspɝ. "ju kænɑt. taɪ mi. ɡæɡ mi soʊ aɪ kænɑt ɡɪv ən əlɑɹm. pliz!"

"You - you do not mean to leave me here with it," Seta said in a whisper. "You cannot. Tie me. Gag me so I cannot give an alarm. Please!"

ɛɡwin ɡeɪv ə mɝθləs læf. "liv ɪɾ ɑn hɝ. ʃi woʊn kɔl fəɹ hɛlp ivən wɪθaʊɾ ə ɡæɡ. jə hæd bɛɾɝ hoʊp huɛvɝ faɪnz jəl ɹimuv ði æɾəm ən kip jəɹ lɪɾəl sikɹət, sɛɾə. jəɹ dɝɾi sikɹət, ɪzən ɪt?"

Egwene gave a mirthless laugh. "Leave it on her. She won't call for help even without a gag. You had better hope whoever finds you will remove the a'dam and keep your little secret, Seta. Your dirty secret, isn't it?"

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt?" ɪleɪn sɛd.

"What are you talking about?" Elayne said.

"aɪ hæv θɔɾ əbaʊɾ ɪɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil," ɛɡwin sɛd. "θɪŋkɪŋ wɑz ɔl aɪ kəd də wən ðeɪ lɛf mi əloʊn ʌp hɪɹ. sʌldəm kleɪm ðeɪ dɪvɛləp ən əfɪnəɾi æftɝ ə fju jɪɹz. moʊst ə ðɛm kən tɛl wən ə wʊmən ɪz tʃænəlɪŋ wɛðɝ ðəɹ liʃt tə hɝ əɹ nɑt. aɪ wɑznt ʃʊɹ, bʌt sɛɾə pɹuvz ɪt."

"I have thought about it a great deal," Egwene said. "Thinking was all I could do when they left me alone up here. Sul'dam claim they develop an affinity after a few years. Most of them can tell when a woman is channeling whether they're leashed to her or not. I wasn't sure, but Seta proves it."

"pɹuvz wʌt?" ɪleɪn dɪmændəd, ən ðən əɹ aɪz waɪɾənd ɪn sʌɾən ɹiləzeɪʃən, bʌɾ ɛɡwin wɛn ɑn.

"Proves what?" Elayne demanded, and then her eyes widened in sudden realization, but Egwene went on.

"nɪneɪiv, æɾəm oʊnli wɝk ɑn wɪmən u kən tʃænəl. doʊn jə si? sʌldəm kən tʃænəl ðə seɪm əz deɪmeɪn." sɛɾə ɡɹoʊn θɹu hɝ tiθ, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ ɪn vaɪələn dɪnaɪəl. "ə sʌldəm wəd daɪ bɪfɔɹ ædmɪɾɪŋ ʃi kəd tʃænəl, ivən ɪf ʃi nu, ən ðeɪ nɛvɝ tʃɹeɪn ði əbɪləɾi, soʊ ðeɪ kænɑt də ɛniθɪŋ wɪð ɪt, bʌt ðeɪ kən tʃænəl."

"Nynaeve, a'dam only work on women who can channel. Don't you see? Sul'dam can channel the same as damane." Seta groaned through her teeth, shaking her head in violent denial. "A sul'dam would die before admitting she could channel, even if she knew, and they never train the ability, so they cannot do anything with it, but they can channel."

"aɪ toʊl ju," mɪn sɛd. "ðæt kɑlɝ ʃʊdn əv wɝkt ɑn hɝ." ʃi wɑz duɪŋ ʌp ðə læs bʌɾənz daʊn ɛɡwinz bæk. "ɛni wʊmən u kʊdn tʃænəl wəd bi eɪbəl tə bit jə sɪli waɪl jə tʃɹaɪd tə kəntʃɹoʊl əɹ wɪð ɪt."

"I told you," Min said. "That collar shouldn't have worked on her." She was doing up the last buttons down Egwene's back. "Any woman who couldn't channel would be able to beat you silly while you tried to control her with it."

"haʊ kən ðət bi?" nɪneɪiv sɛd. "aɪ θɔt ðə sintʃæn pʊt liʃɪz ɑn ɛni wʊmən u kən tʃænəl."

"How can that be?" Nynaeve said. "I thought the Seanchan put leashes on any woman who can channel."

"ɔl ə ðoʊz ðeɪ faɪnd," ɛɡwin toʊl hɝ. "bʌt ðoʊz ðeɪ kən faɪn ɑɹ laɪk ju, ən mi, ən ɪleɪn. wi wɝ bɔɹn wɪð ɪt, ɹɛɾi tə tʃænəl wɛðɝ ɛniwʌn tɔɾ əs əɹ nɑt. bʌt wʌɾ əbaʊt sintʃæn ɡɝlz u ɑɹən bɔɹn wɪð ði əbɪləɾi, bʌɾ u kəd bi tɔt? nɑt dʒʌst ɛni wʊmən kən bɪkʌm ə - ə liʃ hoʊldɝ. ɹɛnə θɔt ʃi wɑz biɪŋ fɹɛnli tɛlɪŋ mi əbaʊɾ ɪt. ɪts əpɛɹənli ə fistdeɪ ɪn sintʃæn vɪlədʒəz wən ðə sʌldəm kʌm tə tɛs ðə ɡɝlz. ðeɪ wɑnə faɪn ɛni laɪk jə ən mi, ən liʃ ðɛm, bʌt ðeɪ lɛɾ ɔl ði ʌðɝz pʊɾ ɑn ə bɹeɪslət tə si ɪf ðeɪ kən fil wʌt ðə pʊɹ wʊmən ɪn ðə kɑlɝ filz. ðoʊz u kən ɑɹ teɪkən əweɪ tə bi tʃɹeɪn əz sʌldəm. ðeɪ ɑɹ ðə wɪmən u kəd bi tɔt."

"All of those they find," Egwene told her. "But those they can find are like you, and me, and Elayne. We were born with it, ready to channel whether anyone taught us or not. But what about Seanchan girls who aren't born with the ability, but who could be taught? Not just any woman can become a - a Leash Holder. Renna thought she was being friendly telling me about it. It is apparently a feastday in Seanchan villages when the sul'dam come to test the girls. They want to find any like you and me, and leash them, but they let all the others put on a bracelet to see if they can feel what the poor woman in the collar feels. Those who can are taken away to be trained as sul'dam. They are the women who could be taught."

sɛɾə wɑz moʊnɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. "noʊ. noʊ. noʊ." oʊvɝ ən oʊvɝ əɡɛn.

Seta was moaning under her breath. "No. No. No." Over and over again.

"aɪ noʊ ʃiz hɔɹəbəl," ɪleɪn sɛd, "bʌɾ aɪ fil əz ɪf aɪ ʃəd hɛlp əɹ sʌmhaʊ. ʃi kəd bi wʌn ʌv əɹ sɪstɝz, oʊnli ðə sintʃæn əv twɪstəɾ ɪɾ ɔl."

"I know she is horrible," Elayne said, "but I feel as if I should help her somehow. She could be one of our sisters, only the Seanchan have twisted it all."

nɪneɪiv oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə seɪ ðeɪ hæd bɛɾɝ wɝi əbaʊt hɛlpɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, ən ðə dɔɹ oʊpənd.

Nynaeve opened her mouth to say they had better worry about helping themselves, and the door opened.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn hɪɹ?" ɹɛnə dɪmændəd, stɛpɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɹum. "æn ɑɾiəns?" ʃi stɛɹɾ ət nɪneɪiv, hænz ɑn hɪps. "aɪ nɛvɝ ɡeɪv pɝmɪʃən fəɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls tə lɪŋk wɪð maɪ pɛt, tuli. aɪ də nɑɾ ivən noʊ hu jə - " hɝ aɪz fɛl ɑn ɛɡwin - ɛɡwin wɛɹɪŋ nɪneɪivz dʒɹɛs ɪnstɛɾ ə deɪmeɪn ɡɹeɪ. ɛɡwin wɪð noʊ kɑlɝ ɝaʊn əɹ θɹoʊt - ən əɹ aɪz ɡɹu əz bɪɡ əz sɔsɝz. ʃi nɛvɝ hæɾ ə tʃæns tə jɛl.

"What is going on here?" Renna demanded, stepping into the room. "An audience?" She stared at Nynaeve, hands on hips. "I never gave permission for anyone else to link with my pet, Tuli. I do not even know who you - " Her eyes fell on Egwene - Egwene wearing Nynaeve's dress instead of damane gray. Egwene with no collar around her throat - and her eyes grew as big as saucers. She never had a chance to yell.

bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls kəd muv, ɛɡwin snætʃt ðə pɪtʃɝ fɹəm əɹ wɑʃstæn ən smæʃt ɪɾ ɪndə ɹɛnəz mɪdʒɹəf. ðə pɪtʃɝ ʃæɾɝd, ən ðə sʌldəm lɔst ɔl əɹ bɹɛθ ɪn ə ɡɝɡəlɪŋ ɡæsp ən dʌbəld oʊvɝ. əz ʃi fɛl, ɛɡwin lɛpt ɑn əɹ wɪð ə snɑɹl, ʃʌvɪŋ əɹ flæt, ɡɹæbɪŋ fəɹ ðə kɑlɝ ʃi hæd wɔɹn wɛɹ ɪt stɪl leɪ ɑn ðə flɔɹ, snæpɪŋ ɪɾ ɝaʊn ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz nɛk. wɪð wʌn dʒɝk ɑn ðə sɪlvɝ liʃ, ɛɡwin pʊl ðə bɹeɪslət fɹəm ðə pɛɡ ən fɪɾəd ɪt tə hɝ oʊn ɹɪst. hɝ lɪps wɝ pʊl bæk fɹəm əɹ tiθ, hɝ aɪz fɪkst ɑn ɹɛnəz feɪs wɪð ə tɛɹəbəl kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən. nilɪŋ ɑn ðə sʌldəmz ʃoʊldɝz, ʃi pɹɛs boʊθ hænz oʊvɝ ðə wʊmənz maʊθ. ɹɛnə ɡeɪv ə tʃɹəmɛndəs kənvʌlʃən, ən əɹ aɪz bʌlʒd ɪn əɹ feɪs; hɔɹs saʊnz keɪm fɹəm əɹ θɹoʊt, skɹimz hɛl bæk baɪ ɛɡwinz hænz; hɝ hilz dʒɹʌmd ɑn ðə flɔɹ.

Before anyone else could move, Egwene snatched the pitcher from her washstand and smashed it into Renna's midriff. The pitcher shattered, and the sul'dam lost all her breath in a gurgling gasp and doubled over. As she fell, Egwene leaped on her with a snarl, shoving her flat, grabbing for the collar she had worn where it still lay on the floor, snapping it around the other woman's neck. With one jerk on the silver leash, Egwene pulled the bracelet from the peg and fitted it to her own wrist. Her lips were pulled back from her teeth, her eyes fixed on Renna's face with a terrible concentration. Kneeling on the sul'dam's shoulders, she pressed both hands over the woman's mouth. Renna gave a tremendous convulsion, and her eyes bulged in her face; hoarse sounds came from her throat, screams held back by Egwene's hands; her heels drummed on the floor.

"stɑp ɪt, ɛɡwin!" nɪneɪiv ɡɹæbd ɛɡwinz ʃoʊldɝz, pʊlɪŋ əɹ ɔf ə ði ʌðɝ wʊmən. "ɛɡwin, stɑp ɪt! ðəɾ ɪzənt wʌt jə wɑnt!" ɹɛnə leɪ ɡɹeɪ-feɪst ən pæntɪŋ, stɛɹɪŋ waɪldli ət ðə silɪŋ.

"Stop it, Egwene!" Nynaeve grabbed Egwene's shoulders, pulling her off of the other woman. "Egwene, stop it! That isn't what you want!" Renna lay gray-faced and panting, staring wildly at the ceiling.

sʌɾənli ɛɡwin θɹu hɝsɛlf əɡɛns nɪneɪiv, sɑbɪŋ ɹæədli əɾ əɹ bɹɛst. "ʃi hɝt mi, nɪneɪiv. ʃi hɝt mi. ðeɪ ɔl dɪd. ðeɪ hɝt mi, ən hɝt mi, əntɪl aɪ dɪd wʌt ðeɪ wɑntəd. aɪ heɪt ðɛm. aɪ heɪɾ əm fəɹ hɝɾɪŋ mi, ən aɪ heɪɾ əm kəz aɪ kʊdn stɑp əm fɹəm meɪkɪŋ mi də wʌt ðeɪ wɑntəd."

Suddenly Egwene threw herself against Nynaeve, sobbing raggedly at her breast. "She hurt me, Nynaeve. She hurt me. They all did. They hurt me, and hurt me, until I did what they wanted. I hate them. I hate them for hurting me, and I hate them because I couldn't stop them from making me do what they wanted."

"aɪ noʊ," nɪneɪiv sɛd dʒɛnli. ʃi smuðd ɛɡwinz hɛɹ. "ɪɾ ɪz ɔl ɹaɪt tə heɪt ðɛm, ɛɡwin. ɪɾ ɪz. ðeɪ dɪzɝv ɪt. bʌɾ ɪɾ ɪzən ɔl ɹaɪt tə lɛɾ əm meɪk jə laɪk ðeɪ ɑɹ."

"I know," Nynaeve said gently. She smoothed Egwene's hair. "It is all right to hate them, Egwene. It is. They deserve it. But it isn't all right to let them make you like they are."

sɛɾəz hænz wɝ pɹɛs tə hɝ feɪs. ɹɛnə tʌtʃt ðə kɑlɝ əɾ əɹ θɹoʊt dɪsbɪlivɪŋli, wɪð ə ʃeɪkɪŋ hænd.

Seta's hands were pressed to her face. Renna touched the collar at her throat disbelievingly, with a shaking hand.

ɛɡwin stʃɹeɪɾənd, bɹʌʃɪŋ əɹ tɪɹz əweɪ kwɪkli. "aɪm nɑt. aɪm nɑt laɪk ðɛm." ʃi ɔlmoʊs klɔd ðə bɹeɪsləɾ ɔf ə hɝ ɹɪst ən θɹu ɪt daʊn. "aɪm nɑt. bʌɾ aɪ wɪʃ aɪ kəd kɪl ðɛm."

Egwene straightened, brushing her tears away quickly. "I'm not. I am not like them." She almost clawed the bracelet off of her wrist and threw it down. "I'm not. But I wish I could kill them."

"ðeɪ dɪzɝv ɪt." mɪn wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ɡɹɪmli ət ðə tu sʌldəm.

"They deserve it." Min was staring grimly at the two sul'dam.

"ɹænd wəd kɪl sʌmwʌn u dɪɾ ə θɪŋ laɪk ðæt," ɪleɪn sɛd. ʃi sim tə bi stilɪŋ hɝsɛlf. "aɪ æm ʃʊɹ i wʊd."

"Rand would kill someone who did a thing like that," Elayne said. She seemed to be steeling herself. "I am sure he would."

"pɝhæps ðeɪ du," nɪneɪiv sɛd, "æn pɝhæps i wʊd. bʌt mɛn ɔfən mɪsteɪk ɹivɛnʒ ən kɪlɪŋ fəɹ dʒʌstəs. ðeɪ sɛldəm əv ðə stʌmək fəɹ dʒʌstəs." ʃi hæɾ ɔfən sæɾ ɪn dʒʌdʒmənt wɪð ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl. səmtaɪmz mɛn keɪm bɪfɔɹ ðɛm, θɪŋkɪŋ wɪmən maɪt ɡɪv əm ə bɛɾɝ hɪɹɪŋ ðən ðə mɛn ə ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl, bʌt mɛn ɔlweɪz θɔt ðeɪ kəd sweɪ ðə dɪsɪʒən wɪð ɛləkwəns, əɹ pliz fəɹ mɝsi. ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl ɡeɪv mɝsi wɛɹ ɪt wɑz dɪzɝvd, bʌt dʒʌstəs ɔlweɪz, ən ɪt wɑz ðə wɪzdəm u pɹənaʊnst ɪt. ʃi pɪkt ʌp ðə bɹeɪsləɾ ɛɡwin hæd dɪskɑɹɾɪd ən kloʊzd ɪt. "aɪ wəd fɹi ɛvɹi wʊmən hɪɹ, ɪf aɪ kʊd, ən dɪstʃɹɔɪ ɛvɹi læst wʌn ə ðiz. bʌt sɪns aɪ kænɑt. . . ." ʃi slɪp ðə bɹeɪsləɾ oʊvɝ ðə seɪm pɛɡ ðət hɛl ði ʌðɝ wʌn, ðən ədʒɹɛs hɝsɛlf tə ðə sʌldəm. nɑt liʃ hoʊldɝz ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf. "pɝhæps, ɪf jə ɑɹ vɛɹi kwaɪət, jəl bi lɛft əloʊn hɪɹ lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə mænədʒ tə ɹimuv ðə kɑlɝz. ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz, ən ɪt meɪ bi ðət juv dʌn ɪnʌf ɡʊd tə kaʊntɝbæləns ði ivəl juv dʌn, ɪnʌf ðət jəl bi əlaʊd tə ɹimuv ðɛm. ɪf nɑt, jəl bi faʊnd, ɪvɛntʃəwəli. ən aɪ θɪŋk huɛvɝ faɪnz jəl æsk ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni kwɛstʃənz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹimuv ðoʊz kɑlɝz. aɪ θɪŋk pɝhæps jəl lɝn ət fɝs hæn ðə laɪf juv ɡɪvən tə ʌðɝ wɪmən. ðəɾ ɪz dʒʌstəs," ʃi æɾəd, tə ði ʌðɝz.

"Perhaps they do," Nynaeve said, "and perhaps he would. But men often mistake revenge and killing for justice. They seldom have the stomach for justice." She had often sat in judgment with the Women's Circle. Sometimes men came before them, thinking women might give them a better hearing than the men of the Village Council, but men always thought they could sway the decision with eloquence, or pleas for mercy. The Women's Circle gave mercy where it was deserved, but justice always, and it was the Wisdom who pronounced it. She picked up the bracelet Egwene had discarded and closed it. "I would free every woman here, if I could, and destroy every last one of these. But since I cannot. . . ." She slipped the bracelet over the same peg that held the other one, then addressed herself to the sul'dam. Not Leash Holders any longer, she told herself. "Perhaps, if you are very quiet, you will be left alone here long enough to manage to remove the collars. The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills, and it may be that you've done enough good to counterbalance the evil you have done, enough that you will be allowed to remove them. If not, you will be found, eventually. And I think whoever finds you will ask a great many questions before they remove those collars. I think perhaps you will learn at first hand the life you have given to other women. That is justice," she added, to the others.

ɹɛnə wɔɹ ə fɪkst stɛɹ ə hɔɹɝ. sɛɾəz ʃoʊldɝz ʃʊk əz ʃi sɑbd ɪndə hɝ hænz. nɪneɪiv hɑɹɾənd əɹ hɑɹt - ɪts dʒʌstəs, ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf. ɪts - ən hɝɾɪd ði ʌðɝz aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum.

Renna wore a fixed stare of horror. Seta's shoulders shook as she sobbed into her hands. Nynaeve hardened her heart - It is justice, she told herself. It is - and herded the others out of the room.

noʊ wʌn peɪɾ ɛni mɔɹ ətɛnʃən tə ðɛm ɡoʊɪŋ aʊt ðən ðeɪ hæd kʌmɪŋ ɪn. nɪneɪiv səpoʊzd ʃi hæd ðə sʌldəm dʒɹɛs tə θæŋk fəɹ ðæt, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt weɪt tə tʃeɪnʒ ɪndə sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. ðə dɝɾiəst ɹæɡ wəd fil klinɝ ɑn əɹ skɪn.

No one paid any more attention to them going out than they had coming in. Nynaeve supposed she had the sul'dam dress to thank for that, but she could not wait to change into something else. Anything else. The dirtiest rag would feel cleaner on her skin.

ðə ɡɝlz wɝ saɪlənt, wɔkɪŋ kloʊs bɪhaɪn hɝ, əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ aʊɾ ɑn ðə kɑbəlstoʊn stʃɹiɾ əɡɛn. ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ ɪf ɪt wɑz wʌt ʃi hæd dʌn əɹ ðə fɪɹ ðət sʌmwʌn maɪt stɑp ðɛm. ʃi skaʊld. wəd ðeɪv fɛl bɛɾɝ ɪf ʃi hæd lɛɾ əm wɝk ðɛmsɛlvz ʌp tə kʌɾɪŋ ðə wɪmənz θɹoʊts?

The girls were silent, walking close behind her, until they were out on the cobblestone street again. She did not know if it was what she had done or the fear that someone might stop them. She scowled. Would they have felt better if she had let them work themselves up to cutting the women's throats?

"hɔɹsəz," ɛɡwin sɛd. "wi wɪl nid hɔɹsəz. aɪ noʊ ðə steɪbəl wɛɹ ðeɪ tʊk bɛlə, bʌɾ aɪ doʊn θɪŋk wi kən ɡɛt tə hɝ."

"Horses," Egwene said. "We will need horses. I know the stable where they took Bela, but I don't think we can get to her."

"wi hæv tə liv bɛlə hɪɹ," nɪneɪiv toʊl hɝ. "wi ɑɹ livɪŋ baɪ ʃɪp."

"We have to leave Bela here," Nynaeve told her. "We are leaving by ship."

"wɛɹ ɪz ɛvɹibɑɾi?" mɪn sɛd, ən sʌɾənli nɪneɪiv ɹilaɪz ðə stʃɹit wɑz ɛmpti.

"Where is everybody?" Min said, and suddenly Nynaeve realized the street was empty.

ðə kɹaʊdz wɝ ɡɔn, nɑɾ ə saɪn ə ðɛm tə bi sin; ɛvɹi ʃɑp ən wɪndoʊ əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹit wɝ ʃʌɾɝd taɪt. bʌɾ ʌp ðə stʃɹit fɹəm ðə hɑɹbɝ keɪm ə fɔɹmeɪʃən ə sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz, ə hʌnʒɹəd əɹ mɔɹ ɪn ɔɹɾɝd ɹæŋks, wɪð ən ɔfəsɝ ət ðɛɹ hɛɾ ɪn ɪz peɪntəɾ ɑɹmɝ. ðeɪ wɝ stɪl hæfweɪ daʊn ðə stʃɹit fɹəm ðə wɪmən, bʌt ðeɪ mɑɹtʃt wɪð ə ɡɹɪm, ɪmplækəbəl stɛp, ən ɪt sim tə nɪneɪiv ðəɾ ɛvɹi aɪ wɑz fɪkst ɑn hɝ. ðæts ɹɪdɪkjələs. aɪ kæn si ðɛɹ aɪz ɪnsaɪd ðoʊz hɛlməts, ən ɪf ɛnibəɾi hæd ɡɪvən ən əlɑɹm, ɪt wəd bi bɪhaɪn ʌs. ʃi stɑpt ɛniweɪ.

The crowds were gone, not a sign of them to be seen; every shop and window along the street were shuttered tight. But up the street from the harbor came a formation of Seanchan soldiers, a hundred or more in ordered ranks, with an officer at their head in his painted armor. They were still halfway down the street from the women, but they marched with a grim, implacable step, and it seemed to Nynaeve that every eye was fixed on her. That's ridiculous. I can't see their eyes inside those helmets, and if anybody had given an alarm, it would be behind us. She stopped anyway.

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ mɔɹ bɪhaɪn ʌs," mɪn mɝmɝd. nɪneɪiv kəd hɪɹ ðoʊz buts, naʊ. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɪtʃ wɪl ɹitʃ əs fɝst."

"There are more behind us," Min murmured. Nynaeve could hear those boots, now. "I don't know which will reach us first."

nɪneɪiv tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "ðeɪ ɑɹ nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ʌs." ʃi lʊk bɪɑn ði əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ soʊlʒɝz, tə ðə hɑɹbɝ, fɪld wɪð tɔl, bɑksi sintʃæn ʃɪps. ʃi kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt spɹeɪ; ʃi pɹeɪɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ, ən ɹɛɾi. "wi wɪl wɔk ɹaɪt pæs ðɛm." laɪt, aɪ hoʊp wi kæn.

Nynaeve took a deep breath. "They are nothing to do with us." She looked beyond the approaching soldiers, to the harbor, filled with tall, boxy Seanchan ships. She could not make out Spray; she prayed it was still there, and ready. "We will walk right past them." Light, I hope we can.

"wʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ wɑn jə tə dʒɔɪn ðɛm, nɪneɪiv?" ɪleɪn æskt. "ju ɑɹ wɛɹɪŋ ðət dʒɹɛs. ɪf ðeɪ stɑɹɾ æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz. . . ."

"What if they want you to join them, Nynaeve?" Elayne asked. "You are wearing that dress. If they start asking questions. . . ."

"aɪ wɪl nɑt ɡoʊ bæk," ɛɡwin sɛd ɡɹɪmli. "aɪl daɪ fɝst. lemi ʃoʊ ðɛm wʌt ðeɪv tɔt mi." tə nɪneɪivz aɪ, ə ɡoʊldən nɪmbəs sʌɾənli sim tə sɝaʊn hɝ.

"I will not go back," Egwene said grimly. "I'll die first. Let me show them what they've taught me." To Nynaeve's eye, a golden nimbus suddenly seemed to surround her.

"noʊ!" ʃi sɛd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz tu leɪt.

"No!" she said, but it was too late.

wɪð ə ɹɔɹ laɪk θʌndɝ, ðə stʃɹiɾ ʌndɝ ðə fɝst ɹæŋks ə sintʃæn ɪɹʌptəd, dɝɾ ən kɑbəlstoʊnz ən ɑɹmɝd mɛn θɹoʊn əsaɪd laɪk spɹeɪ fɹəm ə faʊntən. stɪl ɡloʊɪŋ, ɛɡwin spʌn tə stɛɹ ʌp ðə stʃɹit, ən ðə θʌndɝəs ɹɔɹ wɑz ɹɪpiɾɪd. dɝt ɹeɪn daʊn ɑn ðə wɪmən. ʃaʊɾɪŋ sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz skæɾɝd ɪn ɡʊɾ ɔɹɾɝ tə ʃɛltɝ ɪn æliz ən bɪhaɪn stups. ɪn moʊməns ðeɪ wɝ ɔl aʊɾ ə saɪt, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðoʊz u leɪ ɝaʊn ðə tu lɑɹdʒ hoʊlz mɑɹɪŋ ðə stʃɹit. səm ə ðoʊz stɝd fibli, ən moʊnz dʒɹɪftəɾ əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹit.

With a roar like thunder, the street under the first ranks of Seanchan erupted, dirt and cobblestones and armored men thrown aside like spray from a fountain. Still glowing, Egwene spun to stare up the street, and the thunderous roar was repeated. Dirt rained down on the women. Shouting Seanchan soldiers scattered in good order to shelter in alleys and behind stoops. In moments they were all out of sight, except for those who lay around the two large holes marring the street. Some of those stirred feebly, and moans drifted along the street.

nɪneɪiv θɹu ʌp əɹ hænz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lʊk ɪn boʊθ dɝɛkʃənz ət wʌns. "ju ful! wəɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə ətʃɹækt ətɛnʃən!" ðəɹ wɑz noʊ hoʊp ə ðət naʊ. ʃi oʊnli hoʊp ðeɪ kəd mænədʒ tə wɝk ðɛɹ weɪ ɝaʊn ðə soʊlʒɝz tə ðə hɑɹbɝ θɹu ði æliz. ðə deɪmeɪn mʌs noʊ, tu, naʊ. ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ əv mɪs ðæt.

Nynaeve threw up her hands, trying to look in both directions at once. "You fool! We are trying not to attract attention!" There was no hope of that now. She only hoped they could manage to work their way around the soldiers to the harbor through the alleys. The damane must know, too, now. They could not have missed that.

"aɪ woʊnt ɡoʊ bæk tə ðət kɑlɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd fɪɹsli. "aɪ woʊnt!"

"I won't go back to that collar," Egwene said fiercely. "I won't!"

"lʊk aʊt!" mɪn ʃaʊɾəd.

"Look out!" Min shouted.

wɪð ə ʃɹɪl waɪn, ə faɪɝbɔl əz bɪɡ əz ə hɔɹs ɑɹtʃt ɪndə ði ɛɹ oʊvɝ ðə ɹuftɑps ən bɪɡæn tə fɔl. dɝɛkli təwɔɹd ðɛm.

With a shrill whine, a fireball as big as a horse arched into the air over the rooftops and began to fall. Directly toward them.

"ɹʌn!" nɪneɪiv ʃaʊɾəd, ən θɹu hɝsɛlf ɪndə ə daɪv təwɔɹd ðə nɪɹəst æliweɪ, bɪtwin tu ʃʌɾɝd ʃɑps.

"Run!" Nynaeve shouted, and threw herself into a dive toward the nearest alleyway, between two shuttered shops.

ʃi lændəɾ ɔkwɝdli ɑn əɹ stʌmək wɪð ə ɡɹʌnt, luzɪŋ hæf əɹ bɹɛθ, əz ðə faɪɝbɔl stʃɹʌk. hɑt wɪnd wɑʃt oʊvɝ əɹ daʊn ðə nɛɹoʊ pæsədʒ. ɡʌlpɪŋ ɛɹ, ʃi ɹoʊld ɑntu hɝ bæk ən stɛɹd bæk ɪndə ðə stʃɹit.

She landed awkwardly on her stomach with a grunt, losing half her breath, as the fireball struck. Hot wind washed over her down the narrow passage. Gulping air, she rolled onto her back and stared back into the street.

ðə kɑbəlstoʊnz wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪn stændɪŋ wɝ tʃɪpt ən kɹækt ən blækən ɪn ə sɝkəl tɛn peɪsɪz əkɹɔs. ɪleɪn wɑz kɹaʊtʃt dʒʌst ɪnsaɪɾ ənʌðɝ æli ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə stʃɹit. ʌv mɪn ən ɛɡwin, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn. nɪneɪiv klæpt ə hæn tə hɝ maʊθ ɪn hɔɹɝ.

The cobblestones where they had been standing were chipped and cracked and blackened in a circle ten paces across. Elayne was crouched just inside another alley on the other side of the street. Of Min and Egwene, there was no sign. Nynaeve clapped a hand to her mouth in horror.

ɪleɪn sim tə ʌndɝstænd wʌt ʃi wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ. ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʃʊk əɹ hɛd vaɪələnli ən pɔɪntəd daʊn ðə stʃɹit. ðeɪ hæd ɡɔn ðət weɪ.

Elayne seemed to understand what she was thinking. The Daughter-Heir shook her head violently and pointed down the street. They had gone that way.

nɪneɪiv hivd ə saɪ ʌv ɹɪlif ðəɾ ɪmiɾiətli tɝn tə ə ɡɹaʊl. ful ɡɝl! wi cʊɾə ɡɑɾən baɪ ðɛm! ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɹɪkɹɪmɪneɪʃənz, ðoʊ. ʃi skuɾɪd tə ðə kɔɹnɝ ən pɪɹd kɔʃəsli ɝaʊn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə bɪldɪŋ.

Nynaeve heaved a sigh of relief that immediately turned to a growl. Fool girl! We could have gotten by them! There was no time for recriminations, though. She scooted to the corner and peered cautiously around the edge of the building.

ə hɛd-saɪz faɪɝbɔl flæʃt daʊn ðə stʃɹit təwɔɹd hɝ. ʃi lɛp bæk dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ɪɾ ɪksploʊɾəd əɡɛns ðə kɔɹnɝ wɛɹ əɹ oʊn hɛd hæd bɪn, ʃaʊɝɪŋ əɹ wɪð stoʊn tʃɪps.

A head-sized fireball flashed down the street toward her. She leaped back just before it exploded against the corner where her own head had been, showering her with stone chips.

æŋɡɝ hæɾ əɹ əwɑʃ ɪn ðə wʌn paʊɝ bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɑz əwɛɹ ʌv ɪt. laɪtnɪŋ flæʃt aʊɾ ə ðə skaɪ, stʃɹaɪkɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ ʌp ðə stʃɹit wɪð ə kɹæʃ nɪɹ ði ɔɹədʒən ə ðə faɪɝbɔl. ənʌðɝ dʒæɡd boʊl splɪt ðə skaɪ, ən ðən ʃi wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn ði æli. bɪhaɪn hɝ, laɪtnɪŋ læns ðə maʊθ ə ði æli.

Anger had her awash in the One Power before she was aware of it. Lightning flashed out of the sky, striking somewhere up the street with a crash near the origin of the fireball. Another jagged bolt split the sky, and then she was running down the alley. Behind her, lightning lanced the mouth of the alley.

ɪf doʊmən dʌzn əv ðət ʃɪp weɪɾɪŋ, aɪl. . . . laɪt, lɛɾ əs ɔl ɹitʃ ɪt seɪfli.

If Domon doesn't have that ship waiting, I'll. . . . Light, let us all reach it safely.

beɪl doʊmən dʒɝkt ɪɹɛkt əz laɪtnɪŋ stʃɹikt əkɹɔs ðə sleɪt-ɡɹeɪ skaɪ, stʃɹaɪkɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə taʊn, ðən əɡɛn. ðəɹ də noʊ bi ɪnʌf klaʊdz fəɹ ðæt!

Bayle Domon jerked erect as lightning streaked across the slate-gray sky, striking somewhere in the town, then again. There do no be enough clouds for that!

sʌmθɪŋ ɹʌmbəld laʊdli ʌp ɪn ðə taʊn, ən ə bɔl ə faɪɝ smæʃt ɪndə ə ɹuftɑp dʒʌst əbʌv ðə dɑks, θɹoʊɪŋ splɪntɝd sleɪts ɪn waɪɾ ɑɹks. ðə dɑks hæɾ ɛmptid ðɛmsɛlvz ə pipəl ə waɪl bæk, ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju sintʃæn; ðeɪ ɹæn waɪldli, naʊ, dʒɹɔɪŋ sɔɹdz ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ. ə mæn əpɪɹd fɹəm wʌn ə ðə wɛɹhaʊzɪz wɪð ə ɡɹoʊm əɾ ɪz saɪd, ɹʌnɪŋ tə kip ʌp wɪð ðə bists lɔŋ lips əz ðeɪ vænɪʃt ɪndə wʌn ə ðə stʃɹits liɾɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ðə wɔɾɝ.

Something rumbled loudly up in the town, and a ball of fire smashed into a rooftop just above the docks, throwing splintered slates in wide arcs. The docks had emptied themselves of people a while back, except for a few Seanchan; they ran wildly, now, drawing swords and shouting. A man appeared from one of the warehouses with a grolm at his side, running to keep up with the beast's long leaps as they vanished into one of the streets leading up from the water.

wʌn ə doʊmənz kɹumɪn dʒʌmp fəɹ ən æks ən swʌŋ ɪt haɪ oʊvɝ ə mʊɹɪŋ keɪbəl.

One of Domon's crewmen jumped for an axe and swung it high over a mooring cable.

ɪn tu stʃɹaɪdz, doʊmən siz ði əpɹeɪzd æks wɪð wʌn hæn ən ðə mænz θɹoʊt wɪð ði ʌðɝ. "spɹeɪ də steɪ tɪl aɪ də seɪ seɪl, æɛdwɪn koʊl!"

In two strides, Domon seized the upraised axe with one hand and the man's throat with the other. "Spray do stay till I do say sail, Aedwin Cole!"

"ðeɪɹ ɡoʊɪŋ mæd, kæptən!" jɑɹən ʃaʊɾəd. ən ɪksploʊʒən sɛn ɛkoʊz ɹʌmbəlɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə hɑɹbɝ, sɛndɪŋ ðə ɡʌlz ɪndə skɹimɪŋ sɝkəlz, ən laɪtnɪŋ flɪkɝɾ əɡɛn, kɹæʃɪŋ tə ɝθ ɪnsaɪd fɑlm. "ðə deɪmeɪn wɪl kɪl əs ɔl! lɛɾ əs ɡoʊ waɪl ðəɹ bɪzi kɪlɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ. ðəl nɛvɝ noʊɾəs əs tɪl wəɹ ɡɔn!"

"They're going mad, Captain!" Yarin shouted. An explosion sent echoes rumbling across the harbor, sending the gulls into screaming circles, and lightning flickered again, crashing to earth inside Falme. "The damane will kill us all! Let us go while they're busy killing one another. They will never notice us till we are gone!"

"aɪ dɪd ɡɪv maɪ wɝd," doʊmən sɛd. hi ɹɛntʃt ði æks fɹəm koʊlz hæn ən θɹu ɪt klæɾɝɪŋ ɑntu ðə dɛk. "aɪ dɪd ɡɪv maɪ wɝd." hɝi, wʊmən, hi θɔt, ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ wʌtɛvɝ jə bi. hɝi!

"I did give my word," Domon said. He wrenched the axe from Cole's hand and threw it clattering onto the deck. "I did give my word." Hurry, woman, he thought, Aes Sedai or whatever you be. Hurry!

dʒɛəfɹæm bɔɹnhəld aɪd ðə laɪtnɪŋ flæʃɪŋ oʊvɝ fɑlm ən dɪsmɪst ɪt fɹəm ɪz maɪnd. səm hjudʒ flaɪɪŋ kɹitʃɝ - wʌn ə ðə sintʃæn mɑnstɝz, noʊ daʊt - flu waɪldli tə ɪskeɪp ðə boʊls. ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ə stɔɹm, ɪt wəd hɪndɝ ðə sintʃæn əz mʌtʃ əz ɪt dɪd hɪm. nɪɹli tʃɹiləs hɪlz, ə fju tɑp baɪ spɑɹs θɪkəts, stɪl hɪd ðə taʊn fɹəm hɪm, ən ɪm fɹəm ɪt.

Geofram Bornhald eyed the lightning flashing over Falme and dismissed it from his mind. Some huge flying creature - one of the Seanchan monsters, no doubt - flew wildly to escape the bolts. If there was a storm, it would hinder the Seanchan as much as it did him. Nearly treeless hills, a few topped by sparse thickets, still hid the town from him, and him from it.

hɪz θaʊzən mɛn leɪ spɹɛɾ aʊt tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɪm, wʌn lɔŋ, maʊntəd ɹæŋk ɹɪpəlɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə hɑloʊz bɪtwin hɪlz. ðə koʊld wɪn tɔs ðɛɹ waɪt kloʊks ən flæp ðə bænɝ ət bɔɹnhəlz saɪd, ðə weɪvi-ɹeɪd ɡoʊldən sʌn ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt.

His thousand men lay spread out to either side of him, one long, mounted rank rippling along the hollows between hills. The cold wind tossed their white cloaks and flapped the banner at Bornhald's side, the wavy-rayed golden sun of the Children of the Light.

"ɡoʊ naʊ, baɪɑɝ," hi kəmændəd. ðə ɡɔnt-feɪs mæn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ən bɔɹnhəl pʊɾ ə snæp ɪndə hɪz vɔɪs. "aɪ sɛd, ɡoʊ, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ!"

"Go now, Byar," he commanded. The gaunt-faced man hesitated, and Bornhald put a snap into his voice. "I said, go, Child Byar!"

baɪɑɝ tʌtʃt hæn tə hɑɹɾ ən baʊd. "æz jə kəmænd, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən." hi tɝn ɪz hɔɹs əweɪ, ɛvɹi laɪn ə hɪm ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɹɪlʌktəns.

Byar touched hand to heart and bowed. "As you command, my Lord Captain." He turned his horse away, every line of him shouting reluctance.

bɔɹnhəl pʊt baɪɑɝ aʊɾ ə hɪz maɪnd. hi hæd dʌn wʌɾ i kʊd, ðɛɹ. hi ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs. "ðə lidʒən wɪl ədvæns əɾ ə wɔk!"

Bornhald put Byar out of his mind. He had done what he could, there. He raised his voice. "The legion will advance at a walk!"

wɪð ə kɹik ə sæɾəlz ðə lɔŋ laɪn ʌv waɪt-kloʊk mɛn muv sloʊli təwɔɹd fɑlm.

With a creak of saddles the long line of white-cloaked men moved slowly toward Falme.

ɹænd pɪɹɾ ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ ət ði əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ sintʃæn, ðən dʌk bæk ɪndə ðə nɛɹoʊ æli bɪtwin tu steɪbəlz wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs. ðeɪ wəd bi ðəɹ sun. ðəɹ wɑz blʌd kɹʌstɪɾ ɑn ɪz tʃik. ðə kʌts i hæd fɹəm tʃɹɑk bɝnd, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə bi dʌn fəɹ əm naʊ. laɪtnɪŋ flæʃt əkɹɔs ðə skaɪ əɡɛn; hi fɛl ðə ɹʌmbəl ʌv ɪts plʌmət θɹu hɪz buts. wʌɾ ɪn ðə neɪm ə ðə laɪɾ ɪz hæpənɪŋ?

Rand peered around the corner at the approaching Seanchan, then ducked back into the narrow alley between two stables with a grimace. They would be there soon. There was blood crusted on his cheek. The cuts he had from Turak burned, but there was nothing to be done for them now. Lightning flashed across the sky again; he felt the rumble of its plummet through his boots. What in the name of the Light is happening?

"kloʊs?" ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd. "ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ mʌs bi seɪvd, ɹænd." dɪspaɪt ðə sintʃæn, dɪspaɪt ðə laɪtnɪŋ ən stʃɹeɪnʒ ɪksploʊʒənz daʊn ɪn ðə taʊn pɹɑpɝ, hi sim pɹiɑkjəpaɪd wɪð ɪz oʊn θɔts. mæt ən pɛɹɪn ən hʊɹɪn wɝ daʊn ət ði ʌðɝ ɛn ə ði æli, wɑtʃɪŋ ənʌðɝ sintʃæn pətʃɹoʊl. ðə pleɪs wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd lɛf ðə hɔɹsəz wɑz kloʊs, naʊ, ɪf ðeɪ kəɾ oʊnli ɹitʃ ɪt.

"Close?" Ingtar said. "The Horn of Valere must be saved, Rand." Despite the Seanchan, despite the lightning and strange explosions down in the town proper, he seemed preoccupied with his own thoughts. Mat and Perrin and Hurin were down at the other end of the alley, watching another Seanchan patrol. The place where they had left the horses was close, now, if they could only reach it.

"ʃiz ɪn tʃɹʌbəl," ɹænd mʌɾɝd. ɛɡwin. ðəɹ wɑz ən ɑd filɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd, əz ɪf pisəz ə hɪz laɪf wɝ ɪn deɪnʒɝ. ɛɡwin wɑz wʌn pis, wʌn θɹɛɾ ə ðə kɔɹd ðət meɪɾ ɪz laɪf, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝz, ən i kəd fil əm θɹɛɾənd. daʊn ðɛɹ, ɪn fɑlm. ən ɪf ɛni ʌv ðoʊz θɹɛdz wɑz dɪstʃɹɔɪd, hɪz laɪf wəd nɛvɝ bi kəmplit, ðə weɪ ɪt wɑz mɛn tə bi. hi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ɪt, bʌt ðə filɪŋ wɑz ʃʊɹ ən sɝɾən.

"She's in trouble," Rand muttered. Egwene. There was an odd feeling in his head, as if pieces of his life were in danger. Egwene was one piece, one thread of the cord that made his life, but there were others, and he could feel them threatened. Down there, in Falme. And if any of those threads was destroyed, his life would never be complete, the way it was meant to be. He did not understand it, but the feeling was sure and certain.

"wʌn mæn kəd hoʊl fɪfti hɪɹ," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd. ðə tu steɪbəlz stʊd kloʊs təɡɛðɝ, wɪð bɛɹli ɹum fəɹ ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm tə stæn saɪd baɪ saɪd bɪtwin ðɛm. "wʌn mæn hoʊldɪŋ fɪfti əɾ ə nɛɹoʊ pæsədʒ. nɑɾ ə bæd weɪ tə daɪ. sɔŋz əv bɪn meɪɾ əbaʊt lɛs."

"One man could hold fifty here," Ingtar said. The two stables stood close together, with barely room for the pair of them to stand side by side between them. "One man holding fifty at a narrow passage. Not a bad way to die. Songs have been made about less."

"ðɛɹz noʊ nid fəɹ ðæt," ɹænd sɛd. "aɪ hoʊp." ə ɹuftɑp ɪn ðə taʊn ɪksploʊɾəd. haʊ æm aɪ gɑnə ɡɛt bæk ɪn hɪɹ? aɪ hæv tə ɹitʃ hɝ. ɹitʃ ðɛm? ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd, hi pikt ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ əɡɛn. ðə sintʃæn wɝ kloʊsɝ, stɪl kʌmɪŋ.

"There's no need for that," Rand said. "I hope." A rooftop in the town exploded. How am I going to get back in here? I have to reach her. Reach them? Shaking his head, he peeked around the corner again. The Seanchan were closer, still coming.

"aɪ nɛvɝ nu wʌɾ i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə du," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd sɔfli, əz ɪf tɔkɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf. hi hæɾ ɪz sɔɹɾ aʊt, tɛstɪŋ ði ɛdʒ wɪð ɪz θʌm. "ə peɪl lɪɾəl mæn jə dɪdn sim tə ɹɪli noʊɾəs ivən wən jə wɝ lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. teɪk ɪm ɪnsaɪd fæl dæɹə, aɪ wɑz toʊld, ɪnsaɪd ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs. aɪ dɪd nɑt wɑn tə, bʌɾ aɪ hæd tə də ɪt. jə ʌndɝstænd? aɪ hæd tə. aɪ nɛvɝ nu wʌɾ i ɪntɛndəɾ əntɪl i ʃɑt ðəɾ æɹoʊ. aɪ stɪl doʊnt noʊ ɪf ɪt wɑz mɛn fəɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn, əɹ fəɹ ju."

"I never knew what he was going to do," Ingtar said softly, as if talking to himself. He had his sword out, testing the edge with his thumb. "A pale little man you didn't seem to really notice even when you were looking at him. Take him inside Fal Dara, I was told, inside the fortress. I did not want to, but I had to do it. You understand? I had to. I never knew what he intended until he shot that arrow. I still don't know if it was meant for the Amyrlin, or for you."

ɹænd fɛlt ə tʃɪl. hi stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪŋtʃɹ. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə seɪɪŋ?" hi wɪspɝd.

Rand felt a chill. He stared at Ingtar. "What are you saying?" he whispered.

stʌɾiɪŋ ɪz bleɪd, ɪŋtʃɹ dɪd nɑt sim tə hɪɹ. "hjumənkaɪn ɪz biɪŋ swɛpt əweɪ ɛvɹiwɛɹ. neɪʃənz feɪl ən vænɪʃ. dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɑɹ ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ən nʌn ə ðiz saʊθlændɝz sim tə noʊɾəs əɹ kɛɹ. wi faɪt tə hoʊl ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, tə kip əm seɪf ɪn ðɛɹ haʊsəz, ən ɛvɹi jɪɹ, dɪspaɪɾ ɔl wi kən du, ðə blaɪɾ ədvænsəz. ən ðiz saʊθlændɝz θɪŋk tʃɹɑləks ɑɹ mɪθs, ən mɹdʒɹɑl ə ɡlimənz teɪl." hi fɹaʊn ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ɪt sim ði oʊnli weɪ. wi wəd bi dɪstʃɹɔɪd fəɹ nʌθɪŋ, dɪfɛndɪŋ pipəl u də nɑɾ ivən noʊ, əɹ kɛɹ. ɪt sim lɑdʒɪkəl. waɪ ʃəd wi bi dɪstʃɹɔɪd fəɹ ðɛm, wən wi kəd meɪk əɹ oʊn pis? bɛɾɝ ðə ʃædoʊ, aɪ θɔt, ðən jusləs əblɪviən, laɪk kæɹələn, əɹ hɑɹɾən, ɔɹ. . . . ɪt sim soʊ lɑdʒɪkəl, ðɛn."

Studying his blade, Ingtar did not seem to hear. "Humankind is being swept away everywhere. Nations fail and vanish. Darkfriends are everywhere, and none of these southlanders seem to notice or care. We fight to hold the Borderlands, to keep them safe in their houses, and every year, despite all we can do, the Blight advances. And these southlanders think Trollocs are myths, and Myrddraal a gleeman's tale." He frowned and shook his head. "It seemed the only way. We would be destroyed for nothing, defending people who do not even know, or care. It seemed logical. Why should we be destroyed for them, when we could make our own peace? Better the Shadow, I thought, than useless oblivion, like Caralain, or Hardan, or. . . . It seemed so logical, then."

ɹænd ɡɹæbd ɪŋtʃɹz ləpɛlz. "ju ɑɹən meɪkɪŋ ɛni sɛns." hi kæn min wʌt hiz seɪɪŋ. hi kænt. "seɪ ɪt pleɪn, wʌtɛvɝ jə min. jə ɑɹ tɔkɪŋ kɹeɪzi!"

Rand grabbed Ingtar's lapels. "You aren't making any sense." He can't mean what he's saying. He can't. "Say it plain, whatever you mean. You are talking crazy!"

fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ɪŋtʃɹ lʊkt ət ɹænd. hɪz aɪz ʃoʊn wɪð ənʃt tɪɹz. "ju ɑɹ ə bɛɾɝ mæn ðən aɪ. ʃɛpɝɾ əɹ lɔɹd, ə bɛɾɝ mæn. ðə pɹɑfəsi sɛz, 'lɛɾ u saʊnz mi θɪŋk nɑɾ ʌv ɡlɔɹi, bʌɾ oʊnli sælveɪʃən.' ɪt wɑz maɪ sælveɪʃən aɪ wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv. aɪ wəd saʊn ðə hɔɹn, ən lɛd ðə hɪɹoʊz ə ði eɪdʒəz əɡɛnst ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl. ʃʊɹli ðət wʊɾə bɪn ɪnʌf tə seɪv mi. noʊ mæn kən wɔk soʊ lɔŋ ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ ðəɾ i kænɑt kʌm əɡɛn tə ðə laɪt. ðəɾ ɪz wʌt ðeɪ seɪ. ʃʊɹli ðət wʊɾə bɪn ɪnʌf tə wɑʃ əweɪ wʌɾ aɪ hæv bɪn, ən dʌn."

For the first time Ingtar looked at Rand. His eyes shone with unshed tears. "You are a better man than I. Shepherd or lord, a better man. The prophecy says, 'Let who sounds me think not of glory, but only salvation.' It was my salvation I was thinking of. I would sound the Horn, and lead the heroes of the Ages against Shayol Ghul. Surely that would have been enough to save me. No man can walk so long in the Shadow that he cannot come again to the Light. That is what they say. Surely that would have been enough to wash away what I have been, and done."

"oʊ, laɪt, ɪŋtʃɹ." ɹænd ɹilist ɪz hoʊld ɑn ði ʌðɝ mæn ən sæɡd bæk əɡɛns ðə steɪbəl wɔl. "aɪ θɪŋk. . . . aɪ θɪŋk wɑntɪŋ tə ɪz ɪnʌf. aɪ θɪŋk ɔl juv tə də ɪz stɑp biɪŋ . . . wʌn ə ðɛm." ɪŋtʃɹ flɪntʃt əz ɪf ɹænd hæd sɛɾ ɪɾ aʊt laʊd. dɑɹkfɹɛnd.

"Oh, Light, Ingtar." Rand released his hold on the other man and sagged back against the stable wall. "I think. . . . I think wanting to is enough. I think all you have to do is stop being . . . one of them." Ingtar flinched as if Rand had said it out loud. Darkfriend.

"ɹænd, wən vɛɹɪn bɹɔɾ əs hɪɹ wɪð ðə pɔɹɾəl stoʊn, aɪ - aɪ lɪvd ʌðɝ laɪvz. səmtaɪmz aɪ hɛl ðə hɔɹn, bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ saʊndəɾ ɪt. aɪ tʃɹaɪd tə ɪskeɪp wʌɾ aɪd bɪkʌm, bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ dɪd. ɔlweɪz ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls ɹikwaɪɝɾ ə mi, ɔlweɪz sʌmθɪŋ wɝs ðən ðə læst, əntɪl aɪ wɑz. . . . jə wɝ ɹɛɾi tə ɡɪv ɪɾ ʌp tə seɪv ə fɹɛnd. θɪŋk nɑɾ ʌv ɡlɔɹi. oʊ, laɪt, hɛlp mi."

"Rand, when Verin brought us here with the Portal Stone, I - I lived other lives. Sometimes I held the Horn, but I never sounded it. I tried to escape what I'd become, but I never did. Always there was something else required of me, always something worse than the last, until I was. . . . You were ready to give it up to save a friend. Think not of glory. Oh, Light, help me."

ɹænd dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt tə seɪ. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ɛɡwin hæd toʊld ɪm ʃi hæd mɝɾɝd tʃɪlʒɹən. tu hɔɹəbəl tə bi bɪlivd. tu hɔɹəbəl fəɹ ɛniwʌn tə ədmɪt tə ənlɛs ɪt wɑz tʃɹu. tu hɔɹəbəl.

Rand did not know what to say. It was as if Egwene had told him she had murdered children. Too horrible to be believed. Too horrible for anyone to admit to unless it was true. Too horrible.

æftɝ ə taɪm, ɪŋtʃɹ spoʊk əɡɛn, fɝmli. "ðɛɹ əz tə bi ə pɹaɪs, ɹænd. ðəɹ ɪz ɔlweɪz ə pɹaɪs. pɝhæps aɪ kən peɪ ɪt hɪɹ."

After a time, Ingtar spoke again, firmly. "There has to be a price, Rand. There is always a price. Perhaps I can pay it here."

"ɪŋtʃɹ, aɪ - "

"Ingtar, I - "

"ɪɾ ɪz ɛvɹi mænz ɹaɪt, ɹænd, tə tʃuz wən tə ʃið ðə sɔɹd. ivən wʌn laɪk mi."

"It is every man's right, Rand, to choose when to Sheathe the Sword. Even one like me."

bɪfɔɹ ɹænd kəd seɪ ɛniθɪŋ, hʊɹɪn keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn ði æli. "ðə pətʃɹoʊl tɝn əsaɪd," hi sɛd hɝidli, "daʊn ɪndə ðə taʊn. ðeɪ sim tə bi ɡæðɝɪŋ daʊn ðɛɹ. mæt ən pɛɹɪn wɛn ɑn." hi tʊk ə kwɪk lʊk daʊn ðə stʃɹiɾ ən pʊl bæk. "wid bɛɾɝ də ðə seɪm, lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ, lɔɹd ɹænd. ðoʊz bʌɡ-hɛɾəd sintʃæn ɑɹ ɔlmoʊs hɪɹ."

Before Rand could say anything, Hurin came running down the alley. "The patrol turned aside," he said hurriedly, "down into the town. They seem to be gathering down there. Mat and Perrin went on." He took a quick look down the street and pulled back. "We'd better do the same, Lord Ingtar, Lord Rand. Those bug-headed Seanchan are almost here."

"ɡoʊ, ɹænd," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd. hi tɝn tə feɪs ðə stʃɹiɾ ən dɪd nɑt lʊk ət ɹænd əɹ hʊɹɪn əɡɛn. "teɪk ðə hɔɹn wɛɹ ɪt bɪlɔŋz. aɪ ɔlweɪz nu ði æmɪɝlɪn ʃʊɾə ɡɪvən jə ðə tʃɑɹdʒ. bʌɾ ɔl aɪ ɛvɝ wɑntəd wɑz tə kip ʃaɪnɝ hoʊl, tə kip əs fɹəm biɪŋ swɛpt əweɪ ən fɝɡɑɾən."

"Go, Rand," Ingtar said. He turned to face the street and did not look at Rand or Hurin again. "Take the Horn where it belongs. I always knew the Amyrlin should have given you the charge. But all I ever wanted was to keep Shienar whole, to keep us from being swept away and forgotten."

"aɪ noʊ, ɪŋtʃɹ." ɹænd dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. "ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn ju, lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ ə haʊs ʃɪnoʊwə, ən meɪ jə ʃɛltɝ ɪn ðə pɑm ə ðə kɹieɪɾɝz hænd." hi tʌtʃt ɪŋtʃɹz ʃoʊldɝ. "ðə læst ɛmbɹeɪs ə ðə mʌðɝ wɛlkəm jə hoʊm." hʊɹɪn ɡæspt.

"I know, Ingtar." Rand drew a deep breath. "The Light shine on you, Lord Ingtar of House Shinowa, and may you shelter in the palm of the Creator's hand." He touched Ingtar's shoulder. "The last embrace of the mother welcome you home." Hurin gasped.

"θæŋk ju," ɪŋtʃɹ sɛd sɔfli. ə tɛnʃən sim tə ɡoʊ aʊɾ ə hɪm. fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm sɪns ðə naɪɾ ə ðə tʃɹɑlɑk ɹeɪɾ ɑn fæl dæɹə, hi stʊɾ əz i hæd wən ɹænd fɝst sɔ hɪm, kɑnfəɾənt ən ɹɪlækst. kɑntɛnt.

"Thank you," Ingtar said softly. A tension seemed to go out of him. For the first time since the night of the Trolloc raid on Fal Dara, he stood as he had when Rand first saw him, confident and relaxed. Content.

ɹænd tɝn ən faʊn hʊɹɪn stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm, stɛɹɪŋ ət boʊθ ə ðɛm. "ɪɾ ɪz taɪm fəɹ əs tə ɡoʊ."

Rand turned and found Hurin staring at him, staring at both of them. "It is time for us to go."

"bʌt lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ - "

"But Lord Ingtar - "

" - dʌz wʌt hiz tə," ɹænd sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "bʌt wi ɡoʊ." hʊɹɪn nɑɾəd, ən ɹænd tʃɹɑɾəd æftɝ hɪm. ɹænd kəd hɪɹ ðə stɛɾi tʃɹɛɾ ə ðə sintʃænz buts, naʊ. hi dɪd nɑt lʊk bæk.

" - does what he has to," Rand said sharply. "But we go." Hurin nodded, and Rand trotted after him. Rand could hear the steady tread of the Seanchan's boots, now. He did not look back.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾisɛvən


CHAPTER 47

ðə ɡɹeɪv ɪz noʊ bɑɹ tə maɪ kɔl


The Grave Is No Bar to My Call

mæt ən pɛɹɪn wɝ maʊntəd baɪ ðə taɪm ɹænd ən hʊɹɪn ɹitʃt ðɛm. fɑɹ bɪhaɪn hɪm, ɹænd hɝɾ ɪŋtʃɹz vɔɪs ɹaɪz. "ðə laɪt, ən ʃɪnoʊwə!" ðə klæʃ ə stil dʒɔɪn ðə ɹɔɹ ʌv ʌðɝ vɔɪsəz.

Mat and Perrin were mounted by the time Rand and Hurin reached them. Far behind him, Rand heard Ingtar's voice rise. "The Light, and Shinowa!" The clash of steel joined the roar of other voices.

"wɛɹz ɪŋtʃɹ?" mæt ʃaʊɾəd. "wʌts ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn?" hi hæd ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ læʃt tə ðə haɪ pɑməl ə hɪz sæɾəl əz ɪf ɪt wɝ dʒʌst ɛni hɔɹn, bʌt ðə dæɡɝ wɑz ɪn ɪz bɛlt, ðə ɹubi-tɪp hɪl kʌpt pɹoʊtɛktɪvli ɪn ə peɪl hæn ðət simd meɪɾ ə nʌθɪŋ bʌt boʊn ən sɪnu.

"Where's Ingtar?" Mat shouted. "What's going on?" He had the Horn of Valere lashed to the high pommel of his saddle as if it were just any horn, but the dagger was in his belt, the ruby-tipped hilt cupped protectively in a pale hand that seemed made of nothing but bone and sinew.

"hiz daɪɪŋ," ɹænd sɛd hɑɹʃli əz i swʌŋ ɑntu ɹɛdz bæk.

"He's dying," Rand said harshly as he swung onto Red's back.

"ðɛn wɪv tə hɛlp hɪm," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "mæt kən teɪk ðə hɔɹn ən ðə dæɡɝ ɑn tə - "

"Then we have to help him," Perrin said. "Mat can take the Horn and the dagger on to - "

"hi ɪz duɪŋ ɪt soʊ wi kən ɔl ɡɛɾ əweɪ," ɹænd sɛd. fəɹ ðæt, tu. "wi wɪl ɔl teɪk ðə hɔɹn tə vɛɹɪn, ən ðən jə kən hɛlp əɹ teɪk ɪt wɛɹɛvɝ ʃi sɛz ɪt bɪlɔŋz."

"He is doing it so we can all get away," Rand said. For that, too. "We will all take the Horn to Verin, and then you can help her take it wherever she says it belongs."

"wʌt dʒju min?" pɛɹɪn æskt. ɹænd dʌɡ hɪz hilz ɪndə ðə beɪz flæŋks, ən ɹɛd lɛpt əweɪ təwɔɹd ðə hɪlz bɪɑn ðə taʊn.

"What do you mean?" Perrin asked. Rand dug his heels into the bay's flanks, and Red leaped away toward the hills beyond the town.

"ðə laɪt, ən ʃɪnoʊwə!" ɪŋtʃɹz ʃaʊt sɔɹɾ æftɝ hɪm, saʊndɪŋ tʃɹaɪʌmfənt, ən laɪtnɪŋ kɹæʃt əkɹɔs ðə skaɪ ɪn ænsɝ.

"The Light, and Shinowa!" Ingtar's shout soared after him, sounding triumphant, and lightning crashed across the sky in answer.

ɹænd wɪpt ɹɛd wɪð ɪz ɹeɪnz, ðən leɪ əɡɛns ðə stæljənz nɛk əz ðə beɪ leɪɾ aʊɾ ɪn ə dɛd ɹʌn, meɪn ən teɪl stʃɹimɪŋ. hi wɪʃt i dɪd nɑt fil əz ɪf i wɝ ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ɪŋtʃɹz kɹaɪ, ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm wʌɾ i wɑz səpoʊz tə du. ɪŋtʃɹ, ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd. aɪ doʊn kɛɹ. hi wɑz stɪl maɪ fɹɛnd. ðə beɪz ɡæləp kəd nɑt teɪk ɪm əweɪ fɹəm ɪz oʊn θɔts. dɛθ ɪz laɪɾɝ ðən ə fɛðɝ, duɾi hɛviɝ ðən ə maʊntən. soʊ mɛni duɾiz. ɛɡwin. ðə hɔɹn. feɪn. mæt ən ɪz dæɡɝ. waɪ kæn ðəɹ dʒʌs bi wʌn əɾ ə taɪm? aɪ hæv tə teɪk kɛɹ ʌv ɔl ə ðɛm. oʊ, laɪt, ɛɡwin!

Rand whipped Red with his reins, then lay against the stallion's neck as the bay laid out in a dead run, mane and tail streaming. He wished he did not feel as if he were running away from Ingtar's cry, running from what he was supposed to do. Ingtar, a Darkfriend. I don't care. He was still my friend. The bay's gallop could not take him away from his own thoughts. Death is lighter than a feather, duty heavier than a mountain. So many duties. Egwene. The Horn. Fain. Mat and his dagger. Why can't there just be one at a time? I have to take care of all of them. Oh, Light, Egwene!

hi ɹeɪn ɪn soʊ sʌɾənli ðət ɹɛd slɪd tə ə hɔlt, sɪɾɪŋ bæk ɑn ɪz hɔntʃɪz. ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ə skænti kɑps ə bɛɹ-bɹæntʃt tʃɹiz ətɑp wʌn ə ðə hɪlz oʊvɝlʊkɪŋ fɑlm. ði ʌðɝz ɡæləpt ʌp bɪhaɪn hɪm.

He reined in so suddenly that Red slid to a halt, sitting back on his haunches. They were in a scanty copse of bare-branched trees atop one of the hills overlooking Falme. The others galloped up behind him.

"wʌt dʒju min?" pɛɹɪn dɪmændəd. "wi kən hɛlp vɛɹɪn teɪk ðə hɔɹn wɛɹ ɪts səpoʊz tə ɡoʊ? wɛɹ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ tə bi?"

"What do you mean?" Perrin demanded. "We can help Verin take the Horn where it's supposed to go? Where are you going to be?"

"meɪbi hiz ɡoʊɪŋ mæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi," mæt sɛd. "hi wʊdnt wɑnə steɪ wɪð əs ɪf i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ mæd. wəd ju, ɹænd?"

"Maybe he's going mad already," Mat said. "He wouldn't want to stay with us if he was going mad. Would you, Rand?"

"ju θɹi teɪk ðə hɔɹn tə vɛɹɪn," ɹænd sɛd. ɛɡwin. soʊ mɛni θɹɛdz, ɪn soʊ mʌtʃ deɪnʒɝ. soʊ mɛni duɾiz. "ju də nɑt nid mi."

"You three take the Horn to Verin," Rand said. Egwene. So many threads, in so much danger. So many duties. "You do not need me."

mæt kɝɛs ðə dæɡɝz hɪlt. "ðæts ɔl vɛɹi wɛl, bʌt wʌɾ əbaʊt ju? bɝn mi, jə kæn bi ɡoʊɪŋ mæd jɛt. jə kænt!" hʊɹɪn ɡeɪpt ət ðɛm, nɑɾ ʌndɝstændɪŋ hæf ʌv ɪt.

Mat caressed the dagger's hilt. "That's all very well, but what about you? Burn me, you can't be going mad yet. You can't!" Hurin gaped at them, not understanding half of it.

"aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ bæk," ɹænd sɛd. "aɪ ʃəd nɛvɝ əv lɛft." sʌmhaʊ, ðət dɪd nɑt saʊn ɪɡzækli ɹaɪɾ ɪn ɪz oʊn ɪɹz; ɪt dɪd nɑt fil ɹaɪɾ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd. "aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ bæk. naʊ." ðət saʊndəd bɛɾɝ. "ɛɡwin ɪz stɪl ðɛɹ, ɹɪmɛmbɝ. wɪð wʌn ə ðoʊz kɑlɝz ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk."

"I'm going back," Rand said. "I should never have left." Somehow, that did not sound exactly right in his own ears; it did not feel right inside his head. "I have to go back. Now." That sounded better. "Egwene is still there, remember. With one of those collars around her neck."

"ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ?" mæt sɛd. "aɪ nɛvɝ sɔ hɝ. ɑə! ɪf jə seɪ ʃiz ðɛɹ, ðən ʃiz ðɛɹ. wɪl ɔl teɪk ðə hɔɹn tə vɛɹɪn, ən ðən wɪl ɔl ɡoʊ bæk fəɹ hɝ. jə doʊn θɪŋk aɪ wəd liv əɹ ðɛɹ, də ju?"

"Are you sure?" Mat said. "I never saw her. Aaaah! If you say she is there, then she's there. We'll all take the Horn to Verin, and then we will all go back for her. You don't think I would leave her there, do you?"

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. θɹɛdz. duɾiz. hi fɛlt əz ɪf i wɝ əbaʊt tə ɪksploʊd laɪk ə faɪɝwɝk. laɪt, wʌts hæpənɪŋ tə mi? "mæt, vɛɹɪn mʌs teɪk jə ən ðət dæɡɝ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, soʊ jə kən faɪnəli bi fɹi ʌv ɪt. jə doʊn əv ɛni taɪm tə weɪst."

Rand shook his head. Threads. Duties. He felt as if he were about to explode like a firework. Light, what's happening to me? "Mat, Verin must take you and that dagger to Tar Valon, so you can finally be free of it. You don't have any time to waste."

"seɪvɪŋ ɛɡwin ɪzənt weɪstɪŋ taɪm!" bʌt mæts hæn hæd taɪɾənd ɑn ðə dæɡɝ tɪl ɪt ʃʊk.

"Saving Egwene isn't wasting time!" But Mat's hand had tightened on the dagger till it shook.

"wi ɑɹən ɛni ʌv əs ɡoʊɪŋ bæk," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "nɑt jɛt. lʊk." hi pɔɪntəd bæk təwɔɹd fɑlm.

"We aren't any of us going back," Perrin said. "Not yet. Look." He pointed back toward Falme.

ðə wæɡən jɑɹdz ən hɔɹs lɑts wɝ tɝnɪŋ blæk wɪð sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz, θaʊzənz ə ðɛm ɹæŋk ɑn ɹæŋk, wɪð tʃɹups ə kævəlɹi ɹaɪɾɪŋ skeɪl bists əz wɛl əz ɑɹmɝd mɛn ɑn hɔɹsəz, kʌlɝfəl ɡɑnfənənz mɑɹkɪŋ ði ɔfəsɝz. ɡɹoʊm dɑɾəd ðə ɹæŋks, ən ʌðɝ stʃɹeɪnʒ kɹitʃɝz, ɔlmoʊs bʌt nɑt kwaɪt laɪk mɑnstʃɹəs bɝdz ən lɪzɝdz, ən ɡɹeɪt θɪŋz laɪk nʌθɪŋ i kəd dɪskɹaɪb, wɪð ɡɹeɪ, ɹɪŋkəl skɪn ən hjudʒ tʌsks. əɾ ɪntɝvəlz əlɔŋ ðə laɪnz stʊd sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn baɪ ðə skɔɹ. ɹænd wʌndɝɾ ɪf ɛɡwin wɝ wʌn ə ðɛm. ɪn ðə taʊn bɪhaɪn ðə soʊlʒɝz, ə ɹuftɑp stɪl ɪksploʊɾəd naʊ ən əɡɛn, ən laɪtnɪŋ stɪl stʃɹik ðə skaɪ. tu flaɪɪŋ bists, wɪð lɛðɝi wɪŋz twɛnti spænz tɪp tə tɪp, sɔɹd haɪ oʊvɝhɛd, kipɪŋ wɛl əweɪ fɹəm wɛɹ ðə bɹaɪt boʊls dænst.

The wagon yards and horse lots were turning black with Seanchan soldiers, thousands of them rank on rank, with troops of cavalry riding scaled beasts as well as armored men on horses, colorful gonfanons marking the officers. Grolm dotted the ranks, and other strange creatures, almost but not quite like monstrous birds and lizards, and great things like nothing he could describe, with gray, wrinkled skin and huge tusks. At intervals along the lines stood sul'dam and damane by the score. Rand wondered if Egwene were one of them. In the town behind the soldiers, a rooftop still exploded now and again, and lightning still streaked the sky. Two flying beasts, with leathery wings twenty spans tip to tip, soared high overhead, keeping well away from where the bright bolts danced.

"ɔl ðət fəɹ ʌs?" mæt sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. "hu də ðeɪ θɪŋk wi ɑɹ?"

"All that for us?" Mat said incredulously. "Who do they think we are?"

ən ænsɝ keɪm tə ɹænd, bʌɾ i ʃʌvd ɪɾ əweɪ bɪfɔɹ ɪt hæɾ ə tʃæns tə fɔɹm kəmplitli.

An answer came to Rand, but he shoved it away before it had a chance to form completely.

"wi ɑɹənt ɡoʊɪŋ ði ʌðɝ weɪ iðɝ, lɔɹd ɹænd," hʊɹɪn sɛd. "waɪtkloʊks. hʌnʒɹədz ə ðɛm."

"We aren't going the other way either, Lord Rand," Hurin said. "Whitecloaks. Hundreds of them."

ɹænd wild ɪz hɔɹs tə lʊk wɛɹ ðə snɪfɝ wɑz pɔɪntɪŋ. ə lɔŋ, waɪt-kloʊk laɪn ɹɪpəl sloʊli təwɔɹɾ əm əkɹɔs ðə hɪlz.

Rand wheeled his horse to look where the sniffer was pointing. A long, white-cloaked line rippled slowly toward them across the hills.

"lɔɹd ɹænd," hʊɹɪn mʌɾɝd, "ɪf ðət lɑt leɪz ən aɪ ɑn ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, wɪl nɛvɝ ɡɛɾ ɪt kloʊs tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. wɪl nɛvɝ ɡɛt kloʊs tə ɪɾ əɡɛn aʊɝsɛlvz."

"Lord Rand," Hurin muttered, "if that lot lays an eye on the Horn of Valere, we'll never get it close to an Aes Sedai. We'll never get close to it again ourselves."

"meɪbi ðæts waɪ ðə sintʃæn ɑɹ ɡæðɝɪŋ," mæt sɛd hoʊpfəli. "bɪkɔz ə ðə waɪtkloʊks. meɪbi ɪt dʌzn əv ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð əs əɾ ɔl."

"Maybe that's why the Seanchan are gathering," Mat said hopefully. "Because of the Whitecloaks. Maybe it doesn't have anything to do with us at all."

"wɛðɝ ɪt dʌz əɹ nɑt," pɛɹɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "ðɛɹ ɪz gɑnə bi ə bæɾəl hɪɹ ɪn ə fju mɪnəts."

"Whether it does or not," Perrin said dryly, "there is going to be a battle here in a few minutes."

"iðɝ saɪd kəd kɪl ʌs," hʊɹɪn sɛd, "ivən ɪf ðeɪ nɛvɝ si ðə hɔɹn. ɪf ðeɪ du. . . ."

"Either side could kill us," Hurin said, "even if they never see the Horn. If they do. . . ."

ɹænd kəd nɑt mænədʒ tə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðə waɪtkloʊks, əɹ ðə sintʃæn. aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ bæk. hæv tə. hi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, hi ɹilaɪzd. ðeɪ ɔl wɝ. ðə kɝld, ɡoʊldən hɔɹn hʌŋ ət mæts pɑməl, ðə foʊkəs ʌv ɛvɹi aɪ.

Rand could not manage to think about the Whitecloaks, or the Seanchan. I have to go back. Have to. He was staring at the Horn of Valere, he realized. They all were. The curled, golden Horn hung at Mat's pommel, the focus of every eye.

"ɪɾ əz tə bi ðəɹ ət ðə læs bæɾəl," mæt sɛd, lɪkɪŋ ɪz lɪps. "nʌθɪŋ sɛz ɪt kæn bi juz bɪfɔɹ ðɛn." hi pʊl ðə hɔɹn fɹi ʌv ɪts læʃɪŋz ən lʊkt əɾ əm æŋkʃəsli. "nʌθɪŋ sɛz ɪt kænt."

"It has to be there at the Last Battle," Mat said, licking his lips. "Nothing says it can't be used before then." He pulled the Horn free of its lashings and looked at them anxiously. "Nothing says it can't."

noʊ wʌn ɛls sɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ. ɹænd dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i kəd spik; hɪz oʊn θɔts wɝ tu ɝdʒən tə əlaʊ ɹum fəɹ spitʃ. hæv tə ɡoʊ bæk. hæv tə ɡoʊ bæk. ðə lɔŋɡɝ i lʊkt ət ðə hɔɹn, ðə mɔɹ ɝdʒən ɪz θɔts bɪkeɪm. hæv tə. hæv tə.

No one else said anything. Rand did not think he could speak; his own thoughts were too urgent to allow room for speech. Have to go back. Have to go back. The longer he looked at the Horn, the more urgent his thoughts became. Have to. Have to.

mæts hænd ʃʊk əz i ɹeɪz ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ tə hɪz lɪps.

Mat's hand shook as he raised the Horn of Valere to his lips.

ɪt wɑz ə klɪɹ noʊt, ɡoʊldən əz ðə hɔɹn wɑz ɡoʊldən. ðə tʃɹiz ɝaʊn əm sim tə ɹɛzəneɪt wɪð ɪt, ən ðə ɡɹaʊn ʌndɝ ðɛɹ fit, ðə skaɪ oʊvɝhɛd. ðət wʌn lɔŋ saʊn ɛnkʌmpəst ɛvɹiθɪŋ.

It was a clear note, golden as the Horn was golden. The trees around them seemed to resonate with it, and the ground under their feet, the sky overhead. That one long sound encompassed everything.

aʊɾ ə noʊwɛɹ, ə fɑɡ bɪɡæn tə ɹaɪz. fɝs θɪn wɪsps hæŋɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, ðən θɪkɝ bɪloʊz, ən θɪkɝ, əntɪl ɪt blæŋkəɾɪd ðə læn laɪk klaʊdz.

Out of nowhere, a fog began to rise. First thin wisps hanging in the air, then thicker billows, and thicker, until it blanketed the land like clouds.

dʒɛəfɹæm bɔɹnhəl stɪfən ɪn ɪz sæɾəl əz ə saʊn fɪl ði ɛɹ, soʊ swiɾ i wɑntəd tə læf, soʊ mɔɹnfəl i wɑntəd tə kɹaɪ. ɪt sim tə kʌm fɹəm ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən ət wʌns. ə mɪs bɪɡæn tə ɹaɪz, ɡɹoʊɪŋ ivən əz i wɑtʃt.

Geofram Bornhald stiffened in his saddle as a sound filled the air, so sweet he wanted to laugh, so mournful he wanted to cry. It seemed to come from every direction at once. A mist began to rise, growing even as he watched.

ðə sintʃæn. ðeɪ ɑɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ. ðeɪ noʊ wəɹ hɪɹ.

The Seanchan. They are trying something. They know we are here.

ɪt wɑz tu sun, ðə taʊn tu fɑɹ, bʌɾ i dʒɹu hɪz sɔɹd - ə klæɾɝ ə skæbɝdz ɹæn daʊn ðə ɹæŋk ə hɪz hæf lidʒən - ən kɔld, "ðə lidʒən wɪl ədvæns əɾ ə tʃɹɑt."

It was too soon, the town too far, but he drew his sword - a clatter of scabbards ran down the rank of his half legion - and called, "The legion will advance at a trot."

ðə fɑɡ kʌvɝɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, naʊ, bʌɾ i nu fɑlm wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ, əhɛd. ðə peɪs ə ðə hɔɹsəz pɪkt ʌp; hi kəd nɑt si ðɛm, bʌɾ i kəd hɪɹ.

The fog covered everything, now, but he knew Falme was still there, ahead. The pace of the horses picked up; he could not see them, but he could hear.

əbɹʌpli ðə ɡɹaʊn əhɛd flu ʌp wɪð ə ɹɔɹ, ʃaʊɝɪŋ ɪm wɪð dɝɾ ən pɛbəlz. fɹəm ðə waɪt blaɪndnəs tə hɪz ɹaɪɾ i hɝɾ ənʌðɝ ɹɔɹ, ən mɛn ən hɔɹsəz skɹimd, ðən fɹəm ɪz lɛft, ən əɡɛn. əɡɛn. θʌndɝ ən skɹimz, hɪɾən baɪ ðə fɑɡ.

Abruptly the ground ahead flew up with a roar, showering him with dirt and pebbles. From the white blindness to his right he heard another roar, and men and horses screamed, then from his left, and again. Again. Thunder and screams, hidden by the fog.

"ðə lidʒən wɪl tʃɑɹdʒ!" hɪz hɔɹs lɛp fɔɹwɝɾ əz i dʌɡ ɪn ɪz hilz, ən i hɝd ðə ɹɔɹ əz ðə lidʒən, əz mʌtʃ ʌv ɪɾ əz stɪl lɪvd, fɑloʊd.

"The legion will charge!" His horse leaped forward as he dug in his heels, and he heard the roar as the legion, as much of it as still lived, followed.

θʌndɝ ən skɹimz, ɹæpt ɪn waɪtnəs.

Thunder and screams, wrapped in whiteness.

hɪz læs θɔt wɑz ɹəɡɹɛt. baɪɑɝ wəd nɑt bi eɪbəl tə tɛl ɪz sʌn deɪn haʊ hi hæd daɪd.

His last thought was regret. Byar would not be able to tell his son Dain how he had died.

ɹænd kəd nɑt si ðə tʃɹiz ɝaʊn əm ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. mæt hæd loʊɝd ðə hɔɹn, aɪz waɪd wɪð ɑ, bʌt ðə saʊn ʌv ɪt stɪl ɹæŋ ɪn ɹændz ɪɹz. ðə fɑɡ hɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn ɹoʊlɪŋ weɪvz əz waɪɾ əz ðə faɪnəs blitʃt wʊl, jɛt ɹænd kəd si. hi kəd si, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz mæd. fɑlm floʊɾəd sʌmwɛɹ bɪniθ hɪm, ɪts lændwɝd bɔɹɾɝ blæk wɪð ðə sintʃæn ɹæŋks, laɪtnɪŋ ɹɪpɪŋ ɪts stʃɹits. fɑlm hʌŋ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd. ðəɹ waɪtkloʊks tʃɑɹdʒd ən daɪɾ əz ði ɝθ oʊpən ɪn faɪɝ bɪniθ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz' hʊvz. ðəɹ mɛn ɹæn əbaʊt ðə dɛks ə tɔl, skwɛɹ ʃɪps ɪn ðə hɑɹbɝ, ən ɑn wʌn ʃɪp, ə fəmɪljɝ ʃɪp, fɪɹfəl mɛn weɪɾəd. hi kəɾ ivən ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə feɪs ə ðə kæptən. beɪl doʊmən. hi klʌtʃt ɪz hɛd wɪð boʊθ hænz. ðə tʃɹiz wɝ hɪɾən, bʌɾ i kəd stɪl si itʃ ə ði ʌðɝz klɪɹli. hʊɹɪn æŋkʃəs. mæt mʌɾɝɪŋ, fɪɹfəl. pɛɹɪn lʊkɪŋ əz ɪf i nu ðɪs wɑz mɛn tə bi. ðə fɑɡ ɹɔɪld ʌp ɔl ɝaʊn ðɛm.

Rand could not see the trees around them any longer. Mat had lowered the Horn, eyes wide with awe, but the sound of it still rang in Rand's ears. The fog hid everything in rolling waves as white as the finest bleached wool, yet Rand could see. He could see, but it was mad. Falme floated somewhere beneath him, its landward border black with the Seanchan ranks, lightning ripping its streets. Falme hung over his head. There Whitecloaks charged and died as the earth opened in fire beneath their horses' hooves. There men ran about the decks of tall, square ships in the harbor, and on one ship, a familiar ship, fearful men waited. He could even recognize the face of the captain. Bayle Domon. He clutched his head with both hands. The trees were hidden, but he could still see each of the others clearly. Hurin anxious. Mat muttering, fearful. Perrin looking as if he knew this was meant to be. The fog roiled up all around them.

hʊɹɪn ɡæspt. "lɔɹd ɹænd!" ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid fəɹ ɪm tə pɔɪnt.

Hurin gasped. "Lord Rand!" There was no need for him to point.

daʊn ðə bɪloʊɪŋ fɑɡ, əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə maʊntən, ɹoʊd ʃeɪps ɑn hɔɹsəz. ət fɝs ðə dɛns mɪsts hɪd mɔɹ ðən ðæt, bʌt sloʊli ðeɪ keɪm kloʊsɝ, ən ɪt wɑz ɹændz tɝn tə ɡæsp. hi nu ðɛm. mɛn, nɑɾ ɔl ɪn ɑɹmɝ, ən wɪmən. ðɛɹ kloʊðz ən ðɛɹ wɛpənz keɪm fɹəm ɛvɹi eɪdʒ, bʌɾ i nu ðɛm ɔl.

Down the billowing fog, as if it were the side of a mountain, rode shapes on horses. At first the dense mists hid more than that, but slowly they came closer, and it was Rand's turn to gasp. He knew them. Men, not all in armor, and women. Their clothes and their weapons came from every Age, but he knew them all.

ɹəɡoʊʃ iɡəl-aɪ, ə fɑðɝli lʊkɪŋ mæn wɪð waɪt hɛɹ ən aɪz soʊ ʃɑɹp əz tə meɪk ɪz neɪm mɪɹli ə hɪnt. ɡeɪɾəl keɪn, ə swɔɹði mæn wɪð ðə hɪls ə hɪz tu sɔɹdz stɪkɪŋ əbʌv ɪz bɹɔd ʃoʊldɝz. ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd bɝdʒɪt, wɪð əɹ ɡlimɪŋ sɪlvɝ baʊ ən kwɪvɝ bɹɪsəlɪŋ wɪð sɪlvɝ æɹoʊz. mɔɹ. hi nu ðɛɹ feɪsəz, nu ðɛɹ neɪmz. bʌɾ i hɝɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd neɪmz wən i lʊkt əɾ itʃ feɪs, səm soʊ dɪfɹən i dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz əm əz neɪmz əɾ ɔl, ðoʊ hi nu ðeɪ wɝ. maɪkəl ɪnstɛɾ ə mɪkəl. pætʃɹɪk ɪnstɛɾ ə peɪədʒɹɪɡ. ɔskɝ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv oʊɾɝɪn.

Rogosh Eagle-eye, a fatherly looking man with white hair and eyes so sharp as to make his name merely a hint. Gaidal Cain, a swarthy man with the hilts of his two swords sticking above his broad shoulders. Golden-haired Birgitte, with her gleaming silver bow and quiver bristling with silver arrows. More. He knew their faces, knew their names. But he heard a hundred names when he looked at each face, some so different he did not recognize them as names at all, though he knew they were. Michael instead of Mikel. Patrick instead of Paedrig. Oscar instead of Otarin.

hi nu ðə mæn u ɹoʊɾ ət ðɛɹ hɛd, tu. tɔl ən hʊk-noʊzd, wɪð dɑɹk, dip-sɛɾ aɪz, hɪz ɡɹeɪt sɔɹd dʒʌstəs əɾ ɪz saɪd. ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ.

He knew the man who rode at their head, too. Tall and hook-nosed, with dark, deep-set eyes, his great sword Justice at his side. Artur Hawkwing.

mæt ɡeɪpt əɾ əm əz ðeɪ ɹeɪn ɪn bɪfɔɹ ɪm ən ði ʌðɝz. "ɪz ðɪs . . . ? ɪz ðɪs ɔl ə ju?" ðeɪ wɝ lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd, ɹænd sɔ, ən ɹilaɪz ðət sʌmhaʊ hi hæd noʊn ðət ðeɪ wəd bi. hʊɹɪnz maʊθ hʌŋ oʊpən; hɪz aɪz bʌlʒd ɔlmoʊst aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛd.

Mat gaped at them as they reined in before him and the others. "Is this . . . ? Is this all of you?" They were little more than a hundred, Rand saw, and realized that somehow he had known that they would be. Hurin's mouth hung open; his eyes bulged almost out of his head.

"ɪt teɪks mɔɹ ðən bɹeɪvɝi tə baɪn ə mæn tə ðə hɔɹn." ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz vɔɪs wɑz dip ən kæɹiɪŋ, ə vɔɪs juz tə ɡɪvɪŋ kəmænz.

"It takes more than bravery to bind a man to the Horn." Artur Hawkwing's voice was deep and carrying, a voice used to giving commands.

"ɔɹ ə wʊmən," bɝdʒɪt sɛd ʃɑɹpli.

"Or a woman," Birgitte said sharply.

"ɔɹ ə wʊmən," hɔkwɪŋ əɡɹid. "oʊnli ə fju ɑɹ baʊn tə ðə wil, spʌn aʊɾ əɡɛn ən əɡɛn tə wɝk ðə wɪl ə ðə wil ɪn ðə pæɾɝn ə ði eɪdʒəz. jə kəd tɛl hɪm, luz θɝɪn, kəd jə bʌt ɹɪmɛmbɝ wən jə wɔɹ flɛʃ." hi wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət ɹænd.

"Or a woman," Hawkwing agreed. "Only a few are bound to the Wheel, spun out again and again to work the will of the Wheel in the Pattern of the Ages. You could tell him, Lews Therin, could you but remember when you wore flesh." He was looking at Rand.

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, bʌɾ i wəd nɑt weɪs taɪm wɪð dɪnaɪəlz. "ɪnveɪɾɝz əv kʌm, mɛn u kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz sintʃæn, hu juz tʃeɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn bæɾəl. ðeɪ mʌs bi dʒɹɪvən bæk ɪndə ðə si. ən - ən ðəɹ ɪz ə ɡɝl. ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ. ə nɑvəs fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ðə sintʃæn əv əɹ pɹɪznɝ. jə mʌs hɛlp mi fɹi hɝ."

Rand shook his head, but he would not waste time with denials. "Invaders have come, men who call themselves Seanchan, who use chained Aes Sedai in battle. They must be driven back into the sea. And - and there is a girl. Egwene al'Vere. A novice from the White Tower. The Seanchan have her prisoner. You must help me free her."

tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, sɛvɹəl ə ðə smɔl hoʊs bɪhaɪn ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ tʃʌkəld, ən bɝdʒɪt, tɛstɪŋ əɹ bɑstʃɹɪŋ, læft. "ju ɔlweɪz tʃuz wɪmən u kɑz jə tʃɹʌbəl, luz θɝɪn." ɪt hæɾ ə fɑn saʊnd, əz bɪtwin oʊl fɹɛnz.

To his surprise, several of the small host behind Artur Hawkwing chuckled, and Birgitte, testing her bowstring, laughed. "You always choose women who cause you trouble, Lews Therin." It had a fond sound, as between old friends.

"maɪ neɪm ɪz ɹænd ælθɹ," hi snæpt. "ju hæv tə hɝi. ðəɹ ɪzən mʌtʃ taɪm."

"My name is Rand al'Thor," he snapped. "You have to hurry. There isn't much time."

"taɪm?" bɝdʒɪt sɛd, smaɪlɪŋ. "wi hæv ɔl ə taɪm." ɡeɪɾəl keɪn dʒɹɑpt ɪz ɹeɪnz ænd, ɡaɪɾɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs wɪð ɪz niz, dʒɹu ə sɔɹɾ ɪn iðɝ hænd. ɔl əlɔŋ ðə smɔl bæn ə hɪɹoʊz ðəɹ wɑz ən ənʃiðɪŋ ə sɔɹdz, ən ənlɪmbɝɪŋ ə baʊz, ə hɛftɪŋ ə spɪɹz ən æksiz.

"Time?" Birgitte said, smiling. "We have all of time." Gaidal Cain dropped his reins and, guiding his horse with his knees, drew a sword in either hand. All along the small band of heroes there was an unsheathing of swords, an unlimbering of bows, a hefting of spears and axes.

dʒʌstəs ʃoʊn laɪk ə mɪɹɝ ɪn ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɡɔntələɾəd fɪst. "aɪ hæv fɔt baɪ jəɹ saɪd taɪmz bɪɑnd nʌmbɝ, luz θɝɪn, ən feɪs jə əz mɛni mɔɹ. ðə wil spɪnz əs aʊt fəɹ ɪts pɝpəsəz, nɑɾ aʊɝz, tə sɝv ðə pæɾɝn. aɪ noʊ ju, ɪf jə də nɑt noʊ jɝsɛlf. wɪl dʒɹaɪv ðiz ɪnveɪɾɝz aʊt fəɹ ju." hɪz wɔɹhɔɹs pɹænst, ən i lʊkt ɝaʊnd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "sʌmθɪŋ ɪz ɹɔŋ hɪɹ. sʌmθɪŋ hoʊlz mi." sʌɾənli hi tɝn ɪz ʃɑɹp-aɪd ɡeɪz ɑn ɹænd. "ju ɑɹ hɪɹ. hæv jə ðə bænɝ?" ə mɝmɝ ɹæn θɹu ðoʊz bɪhaɪn hɪm.

Justice shone like a mirror in Artur Hawkwing's gauntleted fist. "I have fought by your side times beyond number, Lews Therin, and faced you as many more. The Wheel spins us out for its purposes, not ours, to serve the Pattern. I know you, if you do not know yourself. We will drive these invaders out for you." His warhorse pranced, and he looked around, frowning. "Something is wrong here. Something holds me." Suddenly he turned his sharp-eyed gaze on Rand. "You are here. Have you the banner?" A murmur ran through those behind him.

"jɛs." ɹænd tɔɹ oʊpən ðə stʃɹæps ə hɪz sæɾəlbæɡz ən pʊld aʊt ðə dʒɹæɡənz bænɝ. ɪt fɪld ɪz hænz ən hʌŋ ɔlmoʊs tə hɪz stæljənz niz. ðə mɝmɝ əmʌŋ ðə hɪɹoʊz ɹoʊz.

"Yes." Rand tore open the straps of his saddlebags and pulled out the Dragon's banner. It filled his hands and hung almost to his stallion's knees. The murmur among the heroes rose.

"ðə pæɾɝn wivz ɪtsɛlf ɝaʊn əɹ nɛks laɪk hɔltɝz," ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ sɛd. "ju ɑɹ hɪɹ. ðə bænɝ ɪz hɪɹ. ðə wiv ə ðɪs moʊmən ɪz sɛt. wɪv kʌm tə ðə hɔɹn, bʌt wi mʌs fɑloʊ ðə bænɝ. ən ðə dʒɹæɡən." hʊɹɪn meɪɾ ə feɪn saʊn əz ɪf ɪz θɹoʊt hæd sizd.

"The Pattern weaves itself around our necks like halters," Artur Hawkwing said. "You are here. The banner is here. The weave of this moment is set. We have come to the Horn, but we must follow the banner. And the Dragon." Hurin made a faint sound as if his throat had seized.

"bɝn mi," mæt bɹiðd. "ɪts tʃɹu. bɝn mi!"

"Burn me," Mat breathed. "It's true. Burn me!"

pɛɹɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊnli ən ɪnstən bɪfɔɹ swɪŋɪŋ daʊn ɔf ɪz hɔɹs ən stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪndə ðə mɪst. ðəɹ keɪm ə tʃɑpɪŋ saʊnd, ən wən i ɹɪtɝnd, hi kæɹiɾ ə stʃɹeɪt lɛŋθ ə sæpəlɪŋ ʃɔɹn ʌv ɪts bɹæntʃəz. "ɡɪv ɪt tə mi, ɹænd," hi sɛd ɡɹeɪvli. "ɪf ðeɪ niɾ ɪt. . . . ɡɪv ɪt tə mi."

Perrin hesitated only an instant before swinging down off his horse and striding into the mist. There came a chopping sound, and when he returned, he carried a straight length of sapling shorn of its branches. "Give it to me, Rand," he said gravely. "If they need it. . . . Give it to me."

heɪstəli, ɹænd hɛlpt ɪm taɪ ðə bænɝ tə ðə poʊl. wən pɛɹɪn ɹimaʊntɪd, poʊl ɪn hænd, ə kɝən ʌv ɛɹ sim tə ɹɪpəl ðə peɪl lɛŋθ ə ðə bænɝ, soʊ ðə sɝpəntaɪn dʒɹæɡən əpɪɹd tə muv, əlaɪv. ðə wɪn dɪd nɑt tʌtʃ ðə hɛvi fɑɡ, oʊnli ðə bænɝ.

Hastily, Rand helped him tie the banner to the pole. When Perrin remounted, pole in hand, a current of air seemed to ripple the pale length of the banner, so the serpentine Dragon appeared to move, alive. The wind did not touch the heavy fog, only the banner.

"ju steɪ hɪɹ," ɹænd toʊl hʊɹɪn. "wɛn ɪts oʊvɝ. . . . jəl bi seɪf, hɪɹ."

"You stay here," Rand told Hurin. "When it's over. . . . You will be safe, here."

hʊɹɪn dʒɹu hɪz ʃɔɹt sɔɹd, hoʊldɪŋ ɪɾ əz ɪf ɪt maɪɾ æktʃəli  bi ʌv səm jus fɹəm hɔɹsbæk. "bɛɡɪŋ jəɹ pɑɹɾən, lɔɹd ɹænd, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk nɑt. aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstæn ðə tɛnθ pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌɾ aɪv hɝd . . . əɹ wʌɾ aɪm siɪŋ" - hɪz vɔɪs dʒɹɑp tə ə mʌɾɝ bɪfɔɹ pɪkɪŋ ʌp əɡɛn - "bʌɾ aɪv kʌm ðɪs fɑɹ, ən aɪ θɪŋk əl ɡoʊ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ."

Hurin drew his short sword, holding it as if it might actually be of some use from horseback. "Begging your pardon, Lord Rand, but I think not. I don't understand the tenth part of what I've heard . . . or what I'm seeing" - his voice dropped to a mutter before picking up again - "but I've come this far, and I think I'll go the rest of the way."

ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ klæp ðə snɪfɝ ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ. "səmtaɪmz ðə wil ædz tə əɹ nʌmbɝ, fɹɛnd. pɝhæps jəl faɪn jɝsɛlf əmʌŋ ʌs, wʌn deɪ." hʊɹɪn sæɾ ʌp əz ɪf i hæd bɪn ɔfɝɾ ə kɹaʊn. hɔkwɪŋ baʊd fɔɹməli fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl tə ɹænd. "wɪð jəɹ pɝmɪʃən . . . lɔɹd ɹænd. tʃɹʌmpəɾɝ, wɪl jə ɡɪv əs mjuzɪk ɑn ðə hɔɹn? fɪɾɪŋ ðət ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ʃəd sɪŋ əs ɪndə bæɾəl. bænɝmən, wɪl jə ədvæns?"

Artur Hawkwing clapped the sniffer on the shoulder. "Sometimes the Wheel adds to our number, friend. Perhaps you will find yourself among us, one day." Hurin sat up as if he had been offered a crown. Hawkwing bowed formally from his saddle to Rand. "With your permission . . . Lord Rand. Trumpeter, will you give us music on the Horn? Fitting that the Horn of Valere should sing us into battle. Bannerman, will you advance?"

mæt saʊndəd ðə hɔɹn əɡɛn, lɔŋ ən haɪ - ðə mɪsts ɹæŋ wɪð ɪt - ən pɛɹɪn hild ɪz hɔɹs fɔɹwɝd. ɹænd dʒɹu ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪɾ ən ɹoʊd bɪtwin ðɛm.

Mat sounded the Horn again, long and high - the mists rang with it - and Perrin heeled his horse forward. Rand drew the heron-mark blade and rode between them.

hi kəd si nʌθɪŋ bʌt θɪk bɪloʊz ʌv waɪt, bʌt sʌmhaʊ hi kəd stɪl si wʌɾ i hæd bɪfɔɹ, tu. fɑlm, wɛɹ sʌmwʌn juz ðə paʊɝ ɪn ðə stʃɹits, ən ðə hɑɹbɝ, ən ðə sintʃæn hoʊst, ən ðə daɪɪŋ waɪtkloʊks, ɔl ʌv ɪt bɪniθ hɪm, ɔl ə hɪm hæŋɪŋ əbʌv, ɔl ʌv ɪt dʒʌst əz ɪt hæd bɪn. ɪt simd əz ɪf noʊ taɪm əɾ ɔl hæd pæst sɪns ðə hɔɹn wɑz fɝs bloʊn, əz ðoʊ taɪm hæd pɔzd waɪl ðə hɪɹoʊz ænsɝd ðə kɔl ən naʊ ɹɪzum kaʊntɪŋ.

He could see nothing but thick billows of white, but somehow he could still see what he had before, too. Falme, where someone used the Power in the streets, and the harbor, and the Seanchan host, and the dying Whitecloaks, all of it beneath him, all of him hanging above, all of it just as it had been. It seemed as if no time at all had passed since the Horn was first blown, as though time had paused while the heroes answered the call and now resumed counting.

ðə waɪl kɹaɪz mæt ɹʌŋ fɹəm ðə hɔɹn ɛkoʊɾ ɪn ðə fɑɡ, ən ðə dʒɹʌmɪŋ ə hʊvz əz ðə hɔɹsəz pɪkt ʌp spid. ɹænd tʃɑɹdʒd ɪndə ðə mɪsts, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf i nu wɛɹ i wɑz hɛɾəd. ðə klaʊdz θɪkənd, haɪɾɪŋ ðə fɑɹ ɛnz ə ðə ɹæŋk ə hɪɹoʊz ɡæləpɪŋ tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɪm, əbskjʊɹɪŋ mɔɹ ən mɔɹ, tɪl i kəd si oʊnli mæt ən pɛɹɪn ən hʊɹɪn klɪɹli. hʊɹɪn kɹaʊtʃt loʊ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, waɪd-aɪd, ɝdʒɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs ɑn. mæt saʊndɪŋ ðə hɔɹn, ən læfɪŋ bɪtwin. pɛɹɪn, hɪz jɛloʊ aɪz ɡloʊɪŋ, ðə dʒɹæɡənz bænɝ stʃɹimɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm. ðən ðeɪ wɝ ɡɔn, tu, ən ɹænd ɹoʊɾ ɑn əloʊn, əz ɪt simd.

The wild cries Mat wrung from the Horn echoed in the fog, and the drumming of hooves as the horses picked up speed. Rand charged into the mists, wondering if he knew where he was headed. The clouds thickened, hiding the far ends of the rank of heroes galloping to either side of him, obscuring more and more, till he could see only Mat and Perrin and Hurin clearly. Hurin crouched low in his saddle, wide-eyed, urging his horse on. Mat sounding the Horn, and laughing between. Perrin, his yellow eyes glowing, the Dragon's banner streaming behind him. Then they were gone, too, and Rand rode on alone, as it seemed.

ɪn ə weɪ, hi kəd stɪl si ðɛm, bʌt naʊ ɪt wɑz ðə weɪ hi kəd si fɑlm, ən ðə sintʃæn. hi kəd nɑt tɛl wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ, əɹ wɛɹ i wɑz. hi taɪɾənd ɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn ɪz sɔɹd, pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə mɪsts əhɛd. hi tʃɑɹdʒd əloʊn θɹu ðə fɑɡ, ən sʌmhaʊ hi nu ðət wɑz haʊ ɪt wɑz mɛn tə bi.

In a way, he could still see them, but now it was the way he could see Falme, and the Seanchan. He could not tell where they were, or where he was. He tightened his grip on his sword, peered into the mists ahead. He charged alone through the fog, and somehow he knew that was how it was meant to be.

sʌɾənli bælzəmən wɑz bɪfɔɹ ɪm ɪn ðə mɪsts, θɹoʊɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmz waɪd.

Suddenly Ba'alzamon was before him in the mists, throwing his arms wide.

ɹɛd ɹɪɹd waɪldli, hɝlɪŋ ɹænd fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl. ɹænd klʌŋ tə hɪz sɔɹd dɛspɝətli əz i sɔɹd. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə hɑɹd lændɪŋ. ɪn fækt, hi θɔt wɪð ə sɛns ʌv wʌndɝ ðəɾ ɪt wɑz vɛɹi mʌtʃ laɪk lændɪŋ ɑn . . . nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl. wʌn ɪnstən i wɑz seɪlɪŋ θɹu ðə mɪsts, ən ðə nɛkst i wɑz nɑt.

Red reared wildly, hurling Rand from his saddle. Rand clung to his sword desperately as he soared. It was not a hard landing. In fact, he thought with a sense of wonder that it was very much like landing on . . . nothing at all. One instant he was sailing through the mists, and the next he was not.

wən i klaɪm tə hɪz fit, hɪz hɔɹs wɑz ɡɔn, bʌt bælzəmən wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ɪm wɪð ə lɔŋ, blæk-tʃɑɹd stæf ɪn ɪz hænz. ðeɪ wɝ əloʊn, oʊnli ðeɪ ən ðə ɹoʊlɪŋ fɑɡ. bɪhaɪn bælzəmən wɑz ʃædoʊ. ðə mɪst wɑz nɑt dɑɹk bɪhaɪn hɪm; ðɪs blæknəs ɪkskluɾəd ðə waɪt fɑɡ.

When he climbed to his feet, his horse was gone, but Ba'alzamon was still there, striding toward him with a long, black-charred staff in his hands. They were alone, only they and the rolling fog. Behind Ba'alzamon was shadow. The mist was not dark behind him; this blackness excluded the white fog.

ɹænd wɑz əwɛɹ ə ði ʌðɝ θɪŋz, tu. ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ən ði ʌðɝ hɪɹoʊz miɾɪŋ ðə sintʃæn ɪn dɛns fɑɡ. pɛɹɪn, wɪð ðə bænɝ, swɪŋɪŋ ɪz æks mɔɹ tə fɛn ɔf ðoʊz u tʃɹaɪd tə ɹitʃ ɪm ðən hɑɹm ðɛm. mæt, stɪl bloʊɪŋ waɪl noʊts ɑn ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. hʊɹɪn daʊn fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl, faɪɾɪŋ wɪð ʃɔɹt sɔɹɾ ən sɔɹd-bɹeɪkɝ ɪn ðə weɪ hi nu. ɪt simd əz ɪf ðə sintʃæn nʌmbɝz wəɾ oʊvɝwɛlm əm ɪn wʌn ɹʌʃ, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz ðə dɑɹk-ɑɹmɝd sintʃæn u fɛl bæk.

Rand was aware of the other things, too. Artur Hawkwing and the other heroes meeting the Seanchan in dense fog. Perrin, with the banner, swinging his axe more to fend off those who tried to reach him than harm them. Mat, still blowing wild notes on the Horn of Valere. Hurin down from his saddle, fighting with short sword and sword-breaker in the way he knew. It seemed as if the Seanchan numbers would overwhelm them in one rush, yet it was the dark-armored Seanchan who fell back.

ɹænd wɛn fɔɹwɝd tə mit bælzəmən. ɹɪlʌktənli, hi əsum ðə vɔɪd, ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, wɑz fɪld wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ʌðɝ weɪ. pɝhæps i hæd noʊ tʃæns əɡɛns ðə dɑɹk wʌn, bʌt wʌtɛvɝ tʃæns i dɪɾ əv leɪ ɪn ðə paʊɝ. ɪt soʊkt ɪndə hɪz lɪmz, sim tə sʌfjus ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊt hɪm, hɪz kloʊðz, hɪz sɔɹd. hi fɛlt əz ɪf i ʃəd bi ɡloʊɪŋ laɪk ðə sʌn. ɪt θɹɪl hɪm; ɪt meɪɾ ɪm wɑnə vɑmət.

Rand went forward to meet Ba'alzamon. Reluctantly, he assumed the void, reached for the True Source, was filled with the One Power. There was no other way. Perhaps he had no chance against the Dark One, but whatever chance he did have lay in the Power. It soaked into his limbs, seemed to suffuse everything about him, his clothes, his sword. He felt as if he should be glowing like the sun. It thrilled him; it made him want to vomit.

"ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə maɪ weɪ," hi ɡɹeɪɾɪd. "aɪ æm nɑt hɪɹ fəɹ ju!"

"Get out of my way," he grated. "I am not here for you!"

"ðə ɡɝl?" bælzəmən læft. hɪz maʊθ tɝn tə fleɪm. hɪz bɝnz wɝ ɔl bʌt hild, livɪŋ oʊnli ə fju pɪŋk skɑɹz ðət wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi feɪɾɪŋ. hi lʊk laɪk ə hænsəm mæn ə mɪɾəl jɪɹz. ɪksɛp fəɹ ɪz maʊθ, ən ɪz aɪz. "wɪtʃ wʌn, luz θɝɪn? jəl nɑɾ əv ɛniwʌn tə hɛlp jə ðɪs taɪm. jə ɑɹ maɪn, əɹ jə ɑɹ dɛd. ɪn wɪtʃ keɪs, jə ɑɹ maɪn ɛniweɪ."

"The girl?" Ba'alzamon laughed. His mouth turned to flame. His burns were all but healed, leaving only a few pink scars that were already fading. He looked like a handsome man of middle years. Except for his mouth, and his eyes. "Which one, Lews Therin? You will not have anyone to help you this time. You are mine, or you are dead. In which case, you are mine anyway."

"laɪɝ!" ɹænd snɑɹəld. hi stʃɹʌk ət bælzəmən, bʌt ðə stæf ə tʃɑɹd wʊd tɝn ɪz bleɪɾ ɪn ə ʃaʊɝ ə spɑɹks. "fɑðɝ ə laɪz!"

"Liar!" Rand snarled. He struck at Ba'alzamon, but the staff of charred wood turned his blade in a shower of sparks. "Father of Lies!"

"ful! dɪd ðoʊz ʌðɝ fulz jə sʌmənd nɑt tɛl jə hu jə ɑɹ?" ðə faɪɝz ə bælzəmənz feɪs ɹɔɹd wɪð læftɝ.

"Fool! Did those other fools you summoned not tell you who you are?" The fires of Ba'alzamon's face roared with laughter.

ivən floʊɾɪŋ ɪn ɛmptinəs, ɹænd fɛlt ə tʃɪl. wəd ðeɪv laɪd? aɪ doʊnt wɑnə bi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. hi fɝmd ɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn ɪz sɔɹd. pɑɹɾɪŋ ðə sɪlk, bʌt bælzəmən biɾ ɛvɹi kʌɾ əsaɪd; spɑɹks flu əz fɹəm ə blæksmɪθs fɔɹdʒ ən hæmɝ. "aɪ hæv bɪznəs ɪn fɑlm, ən nʌn wɪð ju. nɛvɝ wɪð ju," ɹænd sɛd. aɪ hæv tə hoʊld ɪz ətɛnʃən əntɪl ðeɪ kən fɹi ɛɡwin. ɪn ðəɾ ɑd weɪ, hi kəd si ðə bæɾəl ɹeɪdʒ əmʌŋ ðə fɑɡ-ʃɹaʊɾɪd wæɡən jɑɹdz ən hɔɹs lɑts.

Even floating in emptiness, Rand felt a chill. Would they have lied? I don't want to be the Dragon Reborn. He firmed his grip on his sword. Parting the Silk, but Ba'alzamon beat every cut aside; sparks flew as from a blacksmith's forge and hammer. "I have business in Falme, and none with you. Never with you," Rand said. I have to hold his attention until they can free Egwene. In that odd way, he could see the battle rage among the fog-shrouded wagon yards and horse lots.

"ju pɪɾəfəl ɹɛtʃ. juv saʊndəd ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. jə ɑɹ lɪŋk tə ɪt, naʊ. dʒju θɪŋk ðə wɝmz ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɪl ɛvɝ ɹilis ju, naʊ? ðəl pʊt tʃeɪnz ɝaʊn jəɹ nɛk soʊ hɛvi jəl nɛvɝ kʌt ðɛm."

"You pitiful wretch. You have sounded the Horn of Valere. You are linked to it, now. Do you think the worms of the White Tower will ever release you, now? They will put chains around your neck so heavy you will never cut them."

ɹænd wɑz soʊ sɝpɹaɪzd i fɛlt ɪɾ ɪnsaɪd ðə vɔɪd. hi dʌznt noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. hi dʌznt noʊ! hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt mʌst ʃoʊ ɑn ɪz feɪs. tə kʌvɝ ɪt, hi ɹʌʃt ət bælzəmən. hʌmɪŋbɝd kɪsəz ðə hʌniɹoʊz. ðə mun ɑn ðə wɔɾɝ. ðə swɑloʊ ɹaɪdz ði ɛɹ. laɪtnɪŋ ɑɹtʃt bɪtwin sɔɹɾ ən stæf. kɔɹʌskeɪɾɪŋ ɡlɪɾɝ ʃaʊɝd ðə fɑɡ. jɛt bælzəmən fɛl bæk, hɪz aɪz bleɪzɪŋ ɪn fjʊɹiəs fɝnəsəz.

Rand was so surprised he felt it inside the void. He doesn't know everything. He doesn't know! He was sure it must show on his face. To cover it, he rushed at Ba'alzamon. Hummingbird Kisses the Honeyrose. The Moon on the Water. The Swallow Rides the Air. Lightning arched between sword and staff. Coruscating glitter showered the fog. Yet Ba'alzamon fell back, his eyes blazing in furious furnaces.

ət ði ɛdʒ ə hɪz əwɛɹnəs, ɹænd sɔ ðə sintʃæn fɔlɪŋ bæk ɪn ðə stʃɹits ə fɑlm, faɪɾɪŋ dɛspɝətli. deɪmeɪn tɔɹ ði ɝθ wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, bʌɾ ɪt kəd nɑt hɑɹm ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ, nɔɹ ði ʌðɝ hɪɹoʊz ə ðə hɔɹn.

At the edge of his awareness, Rand saw the Seanchan falling back in the streets of Falme, fighting desperately. Damane tore the earth with the One Power, but it could not harm Artur Hawkwing, nor the other heroes of the Horn.

"wɪl jə ɹɪmeɪn ə slʌɡ bɪniθ ə ɹɑk?" bælzəmən snɑɹəld. ðə dɑɹknəs bɪhaɪn ɪm bɔɪld ən stɝd. "ju kɪl jɝsɛlf waɪl wi stæn hɪɹ. ðə paʊɝ ɹeɪdʒɪz ɪn ju. ɪt bɝnz ju. ɪts kɪlɪŋ ju! aɪ əloʊn ɪn ɔl ðə wɝl kən titʃ jə haʊ tə kəntʃɹoʊl ɪt. sɝv mi, ən laɪv. sɝv mi, əɹ daɪ!"

"Will you remain a slug beneath a rock?" Ba'alzamon snarled. The darkness behind him boiled and stirred. "You kill yourself while we stand here. The Power rages in you. It burns you. It is killing you! I alone in all the world can teach you how to control it. Serve me, and live. Serve me, or die!"

"nɛvɝ!" hæv tə hoʊld ɪm lɔŋ ɪnʌf. hɝi, hɔkwɪŋ. hɝi! hi lɔntʃt hɪmsɛlf ət bælzəmən əɡɛn. ðə dʌv teɪks flaɪt. ðə fɔlɪŋ lif.

"Never!" Have to hold him long enough. Hurry, Hawkwing. Hurry! He launched himself at Ba'alzamon again. The Dove Takes Flight. The Falling Leaf.

ðɪs taɪm ɪt wɑz i hu wɑz dʒɹɪvən bæk. dɪmli, hi sɔ ðə sintʃæn faɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ bæk ɪn əmʌŋ ðə steɪbəlz. hi ɹidʌbəld ɪz ɛfɝts. ðə kɪŋfɪʃɝ teɪks ə sɪlvɝbæk. ðə sintʃæn ɡeɪv weɪ tə ə tʃɑɹdʒ, ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ən pɛɹɪn saɪd baɪ saɪɾ ɪn ðə væn. bʌndəlɪŋ stʃɹɔ. bælzəmən kɑɾ ɪz bloʊ ɪn ə faʊntən laɪk kɹɪmzən faɪɝəfliz, ən i hæd tə lip əweɪ bɪfɔɹ ðə stæf splɪɾ ɪz hɛd; ðə wɪn ə ðə bloʊ ɹʌfəld ɪz hɛɹ. ðə sintʃæn sɝdʒ fɔɹwɝd. stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ðə spɑɹk. spɑɹks flu laɪk heɪl, bælzəmən dʒʌmp fɹəm ɪz stʃɹoʊk, ən ðə sintʃæn wɝ dʒɹɪvən bæk tə ðə kɑbəlstoʊn stʃɹits.

This time it was he who was driven back. Dimly, he saw the Seanchan fighting their way back in among the stables. He redoubled his efforts. The Kingfisher Takes a Silverback. The Seanchan gave way to a charge, Artur Hawkwing and Perrin side by side in the van. Bundling Straw. Ba'alzamon caught his blow in a fountain like crimson fireflies, and he had to leap away before the staff split his head; the wind of the blow ruffled his hair. The Seanchan surged forward. Striking the Spark. Sparks flew like hail, Ba'alzamon jumped from his stroke, and the Seanchan were driven back to the cobblestone streets.

ɹænd wɑntəd tə haʊl əlaʊd. sʌɾənli hi nu ðət ðə tu bæɾəlz wɝ lɪŋkt. wən i ədvænst, ðə hɪɹoʊz kɔl baɪ ðə hɔɹn dʒɹoʊv ðə sintʃæn bæk; wən i fɛl bæk, ðə sintʃæn ɹoʊz ʌp.

Rand wanted to howl aloud. Suddenly he knew that the two battles were linked. When he advanced, the heroes called by the Horn drove the Seanchan back; when he fell back, the Seanchan rose up.

"ðeɪ wɪl nɑt seɪv ju," bælzəmən sɛd. "ðoʊz u maɪt seɪv jəl bi kæɹid fɑɹ əkɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən. ɪf ɛvɝ jə si ðɛm əɡɛn, ðəl bi kɑlɝd sleɪvz, ən ðəl dɪstʃɹɔɪ jə fəɹ ðɛɹ nu mæstɝz."

"They will not save you," Ba'alzamon said. "Those who might save you will be carried far across the Aryth Ocean. If ever you see them again, they will be collared slaves, and they will destroy you for their new masters."

ɛɡwin. aɪ kæn lɛɾ əm də ðət tə hɝ.

Egwene. I can't let them do that to her.

bælzəmənz vɔɪs ɹoʊɾ oʊvɝ ɪz θɔts. "ju hæv oʊnli wʌn sælveɪʃən, ɹænd ælθɹ. luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝ. aɪm jəɹ oʊnli sælveɪʃən. sɝv mi, ən əl ɡɪv jə ðə wɝld. ɹɪzɪst, ən əl dɪstʃɹɔɪ jə əz aɪ hæv soʊ ɔfən bɪfɔɹ. bʌt ðɪs taɪm əl dɪstʃɹɔɪ jə tə jəɹ vɛɹi soʊl, dɪstʃɹɔɪ jə ʌɾɝli ən fɝɛvɝ."

Ba'alzamon's voice rode over his thoughts. "You have only one salvation, Rand al'Thor. Lews Therin Kinslayer. I am your only salvation. Serve me, and I will give you the world. Resist, and I will destroy you as I have so often before. But this time I will destroy you to your very soul, destroy you utterly and forever."

aɪ hæv wʌn əɡɛn, luz θɝɪn. ðə θɔt wɑz bɪɑn ðə vɔɪd, jɛɾ ɪt tʊk ən ɛfɝt tə ɪɡnɔɹ ɪt, nɑt tə θɪŋk ʌv ɔl ðə laɪvz wɛɹ i hæd hɝɾ ɪt. hi ʃɪftəɾ ɪz sɔɹd, ən bælzəmən ɹɛɾid ɪz stæf.

I have won again, Lews Therin. The thought was beyond the void, yet it took an effort to ignore it, not to think of all the lives where he had heard it. He shifted his sword, and Ba'alzamon readied his staff.

fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ɹænd ɹilaɪz ðət bælzəmən æktəɾ əz ɪf ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd kəd hɑɹm hɪm. stil kæn hɝt ðə dɑɹk wʌn. bʌt bælzəmən wɑtʃt ðə sɔɹd wɛɹəli. ɹænd wɑz wʌn wɪð ðə sɔɹd. hi kəd fil ɛvɹi pɑɹɾəkəl ʌv ɪt, taɪni bɪts ə θaʊzən taɪmz tu smɔl tə bi sin wɪð ði aɪ. ən i kəd fil ðə paʊɝ ðət səfjuzd ɪm ɹʌnɪŋ ɪndə ðə sɔɹd, əz wɛl, θɹɛɾɪŋ θɹu ði ɪntʃɹəkət meɪtʃɹɪsəz ɹɔt baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə paʊɝ.

For the first time Rand realized that Ba'alzamon acted as if the heron-mark blade could harm him. Steel can't hurt the Dark One. But Ba'alzamon watched the sword warily. Rand was one with the sword. He could feel every particle of it, tiny bits a thousand times too small to be seen with the eye. And he could feel the Power that suffused him running into the sword, as well, threading through the intricate matrices wrought by Aes Sedai during the War of Power.

ɪt wɑz ənʌðɝ vɔɪs i hɝd ðɛn. lænz vɔɪs. ðəɹ wɪl kʌm ə taɪm wən jə wɑn sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən jə wɑn laɪf. ɪŋtʃɹz vɔɪs. ɪts ɛvɹi mænz ɹaɪt tə tʃuz wən tə ʃið ðə sɔɹd. ðə pɪktʃɝ fɔɹmd ʌv ɛɡwin, kɑlɝd, lɪvɪŋ əɹ laɪf əz ə deɪmeɪn. θɹɛdz ə maɪ laɪf ɪn deɪnʒɝ. ɛɡwin. ɪf hɔkwɪŋ ɡɛts ɪndə fɑlm, hi kən seɪv hɝ. bɪfɔɹ i nu ɪt, hi hæd teɪkən ðə fɝs pəzɪʃən ə hɛɹən weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹʌʃəz, bælənst ɑn wʌn fʊt, sɔɹd ɹeɪz haɪ, oʊpən ən dɪfɛnsləs. dɛθ ɪz laɪɾɝ ðən ə fɛðɝ, duɾi hɛviɝ ðən ə maʊntən.

It was another voice he heard then. Lan's voice. There will come a time when you want something more than you want life. Ingtar's voice. It is every man's right to choose when to Sheathe the Sword. The picture formed of Egwene, collared, living her life as a damane. Threads of my life in danger. Egwene. If Hawkwing gets into Falme, he can save her. Before he knew it, he had taken the first position of Heron Wading in the Rushes, balanced on one foot, sword raised high, open and defenseless. Death is lighter than a feather, duty heavier than a mountain.

bælzəmən stɛɹɾ ət hɪm. "waɪ ɑɹ jə ɡɹɪnɪŋ laɪk ən ɪɾiət, ful? dʒju nɑt noʊ aɪ kən dɪstʃɹɔɪ jə ʌɾɝli?"

Ba'alzamon stared at him. "Why are you grinning like an idiot, fool? Do you not know I can destroy you utterly?"

ɹænd fɛlt ə kɑmnəs bɪɑn ðəɾ ə ðə vɔɪd. "aɪ wɪl nɛvɝ sɝv ju, fɑðɝ ə laɪz. ɪn ə θaʊzən laɪvz, aɪ nɛvɝ hæv. aɪ noʊ ðæt. aɪm ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt. kʌm. ɪts taɪm tə daɪ."

Rand felt a calmness beyond that of the void. "I will never serve you, Father of Lies. In a thousand lives, I never have. I know that. I'm sure of it. Come. It is time to die."

bælzəmənz aɪz waɪɾənd; fəɹ ən ɪnstən ðeɪ wɝ fɝnəsəz ðət pʊt swɛɾ ɑn ɹændz feɪs. ðə blæknəs bɪhaɪn bælzəmən bɔɪld ʌp ɝaʊn hɪm, ən ɪz feɪs hɑɹɾənd. "ðɛn daɪ, wɝm!" hi stʃɹʌk wɪð ðə stæf, əz wɪð ə spɪɹ.

Ba'alzamon's eyes widened; for an instant they were furnaces that put sweat on Rand's face. The blackness behind Ba'alzamon boiled up around him, and his face hardened. "Then die, worm!" He struck with the staff, as with a spear.

ɹænd skɹimd əz i fɛlt ɪt pɪɹs ɪz saɪd, bɝnɪŋ laɪk ə waɪt-hɑt poʊkɝ. ðə vɔɪd tʃɹɛmbəld, bʌɾ i hɛld ɑn wɪð ðə læst ə hɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ, ən dʒɹoʊv ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪɾ ɪndə bælzəmənz hɑɹt. bælzəmən skɹimd, ən ðə dɑɹk bɪhaɪn ɪm skɹimd. ðə wɝld ɪksploʊɾəd ɪn faɪɝ.

Rand screamed as he felt it pierce his side, burning like a white-hot poker. The void trembled, but he held on with the last of his strength, and drove the heron-mark blade into Ba'alzamon's heart. Ba'alzamon screamed, and the dark behind him screamed. The world exploded in fire.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾieɪt


CHAPTER 48

fɝs kleɪmɪŋ


First Claiming

mɪn stʃɹʌɡəld ʌp ðə kɑbəlstoʊn stʃɹit, pʊʃɪŋ θɹu kɹaʊdz ðət stʊd waɪt-feɪst ən stɛɹɪŋ, ðoʊz u wɝ nɑt skɹimɪŋ hɪstɛɹɪkli. ə fju ɹæn, simɪŋli wɪθaʊɾ ɛni aɪdiə ʌv wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɹʌnɪŋ, bʌt moʊs muv laɪk pʊɹli hændəl pʌpəts, mɔɹ əfɹeɪd tə ɡoʊ ðən tə steɪ. ʃi sɝtʃt ðə feɪsəz, hoʊpɪŋ tə faɪn ɛɡwin, əɹ ɪleɪn, əɹ nɪneɪiv, bʌɾ ɔl ʃi sɔ wɝ fɑlmɛn. ən ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ dʒɹɔɪŋ əɹ ɑn, əz ʃʊɹli əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ə stʃɹɪŋ taɪd tə hɝ.

Min struggled up the cobblestone street, pushing through crowds that stood white-faced and staring, those who were not screaming hysterically. A few ran, seemingly without any idea of where they were running, but most moved like poorly handled puppets, more afraid to go than to stay. She searched the faces, hoping to find Egwene, or Elayne, or Nynaeve, but all she saw were Falmen. And there was something drawing her on, as surely as if she had a string tied to her.

wʌns ʃi tɝn tə lʊk bæk. sintʃæn ʃɪps bɝn ɪn ðə hɑɹbɝ, ən ʃi kəd si mɔɹ ɪn fleɪmz ɔf ðə hɑɹbɝ maʊð. mɛni skwɛɹɪʃ vɛsəlz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi smɔl əɡɛns ðə sɛɾɪŋ sʌn, seɪlɪŋ wɛst əz fæst əz deɪmeɪn kəd meɪk ðə wɪnz dʒɹaɪv ðɛm, ən wʌn smɔl ʃɪp wɑz biɾɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə hɑɹbɝ, tɪltɪŋ tə kætʃ ə wɪn tə teɪk ɪɾ əlɔŋ ðə koʊst. spɹeɪ. ʃi dɪd nɑt bleɪm beɪl doʊmən fəɹ nɑt weɪɾɪŋ lɔŋɡɝ, nɑɾ æftɝ wʌt ʃi hæd sin; ʃi θɔɾ ɪɾ ə wʌndɝ i hæd ɹɪmeɪn soʊ lɔŋ.

Once she turned to look back. Seanchan ships burned in the harbor, and she could see more in flames off the harbor mouth. Many squarish vessels were already small against the setting sun, sailing west as fast as damane could make the winds drive them, and one small ship was beating away from the harbor, tilting to catch a wind to take it along the coast. Spray. She did not blame Bayle Domon for not waiting longer, not after what she had seen; she thought it a wonder he had remained so long.

ðəɹ wɑz wʌn sintʃæn vɛsəl ɪn ðə hɑɹbɝ nɑt bɝnɪŋ, ðoʊ ɪts taʊɝz wɝ blæk fɹəm faɪɝz ɔlɹɛɾi ɪkstɪŋɡwɪʃt. əz ðə tɔl ʃɪp kɹɛp təwɔɹd ðə hɑɹbɝ maʊð, ə fɪɡjɝ ɑn hɔɹsbæk sʌɾənli əpɪɹɾ ɝaʊn ðə klɪfs skɝɾɪŋ ðə hɑɹbɝ. ɹaɪɾɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə wɔɾɝ. mɪnz maʊθ fɛl oʊpən. sɪlvɝ ɡlɪɾɝd əz ðə fɪɡjɝ ɹeɪzd ə baʊ; ə stʃɹik ə sɪlvɝ læns tə ðə bɑksi ʃɪp, ə ɡlimɪŋ laɪn kənɛktɪŋ baʊ ən ʃɪp. wɪð ə ɹɔɹ ʃi kəd hɪɹ ivən ət ðət dɪstəns, faɪɝ ɪnɡʌlf ðə fɔɹtaʊɝ ənu, ən seɪlɝz ɹʌʃt əbaʊt ðə dɛk.

There was one Seanchan vessel in the harbor not burning, though its towers were black from fires already extinguished. As the tall ship crept toward the harbor mouth, a figure on horseback suddenly appeared around the cliffs skirting the harbor. Riding across the water. Min's mouth fell open. Silver glittered as the figure raised a bow; a streak of silver lanced to the boxy ship, a gleaming line connecting bow and ship. With a roar she could hear even at that distance, fire engulfed the foretower anew, and sailors rushed about the deck.

mɪn blɪŋkt, ən wən ʃi lʊkt əɡɛn, ðə maʊntəd fɪɡjɝ wɑz ɡɔn. ðə ʃɪp stɪl sloʊli meɪd weɪ təwɔɹd ði oʊʃən, ðə kɹu faɪɾɪŋ ðə fleɪmz.

Min blinked, and when she looked again, the mounted figure was gone. The ship still slowly made way toward the ocean, the crew fighting the flames.

ʃi ɡeɪv hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk ən stɑɹɾəd tə klaɪm ðə stʃɹiɾ əɡɛn. ʃi hæd sin tu mʌtʃ ðət deɪ fəɹ sʌmwʌn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ə hɔɹs əkɹɔs wɔɾɝ tə bi mɔɹ ðən ə moʊməntɛɹi dɪstʃɹækʃən. ivən ɪf ɪt ɹɪli wɑz bɝdʒɪɾ ən əɹ baʊ. ən ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ. aɪ dɪd si hɪm. aɪ dɪd.

She gave herself a shake and started to climb the street again. She had seen too much that day for someone riding a horse across water to be more than a momentary distraction. Even if it really was Birgitte and her bow. And Artur Hawkwing. I did see him. I did.

ɪn fɹʌn ʌv wʌn ə ðə tɔl stoʊn bɪldɪŋz, ʃi stɑpt ənsɝteɪnli, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə pipəl u bɹʌʃt pæst əɹ əz ɪf stʌnd. ɪt wɑz ɪn ðɛɹ, sʌmwɛɹ, ðət ʃi hæd tə ɡoʊ. ʃi ɹʌʃt ʌp ðə stɛɹz ən pʊʃt oʊpən ðə dɔɹ.

In front of one of the tall stone buildings, she stopped uncertainly, ignoring the people who brushed past her as if stunned. It was in there, somewhere, that she had to go. She rushed up the stairs and pushed open the door.

noʊ wʌn tʃɹaɪd tə stɑp hɝ. əz fɑɹ əz ʃi kəd tɛl, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn ɪn ðə haʊs. moʊst ə fɑlm wɑz aʊɾ ɪn ðə stʃɹits, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl ɡɔn mæd təɡɛðɝ. ʃi wɛn ɑn θɹu ðə haʊs, ɪndə ðə ɡɑɹɾən bɪhaɪnd, ən ðəɹ i wɑz.

No one tried to stop her. As far as she could tell, there was no one in the house. Most of Falme was out in the streets, trying to decide whether they had all gone mad together. She went on through the house, into the garden behind, and there he was.

ɹænd leɪ spɹɔld ɑn ɪz bæk ʌndɝ ən oʊk, feɪs peɪl ən aɪz kloʊzd, lɛf hænd ɡɹɪpɪŋ ə hɪl ðəɾ ɛndəɾ ɪn ə fʊɾ ə bleɪd ðəɾ əpɪɹd tə hæv bɪn mɛltəɾ ət ði ɛnd. hɪz tʃɛst ɹoʊz ən fɛl tu sloʊli, ən nɑt wɪð ðə ɹɛɡjəlɝ ɹɪðəm ə sʌmwʌn bɹiðɪŋ nɔɹməli.

Rand lay sprawled on his back under an oak, face pale and eyes closed, left hand gripping a hilt that ended in a foot of blade that appeared to have been melted at the end. His chest rose and fell too slowly, and not with the regular rhythm of someone breathing normally.

teɪkɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ tə kɑm hɝsɛlf, ʃi wɛn tə si wʌt ʃi kəd də fəɹ hɪm. fɝst wɑz tə ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ə ðət stʌb ʌv ə bleɪd; hi kəd hɝt hɪmsɛlf, əɹ hɝ, ɪf i stɑɹɾəd θɹæʃɪŋ. ʃi pɹaɪɾ ɪz hæn oʊpən, ən wɪnst wən ðə hɪl stʌk tə hɪz pɑm. ʃi tɔst ɪɾ əsaɪd wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs. ðə hɛɹən ɑn ðə hɪl hæd bɹændɪɾ ɪtsɛlf ɪndə hɪz hænd. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɑbviəs tə hɝ ðət ðət wɑz nɑt wʌt hæɾ ɪm laɪɪŋ ðəɹ ʌnkɑnʃəs. haʊ dɪɾ i kʌm baɪ ðæt? nɪneɪiv kən pʊɾ ə sɑv ɑn ɪt leɪɾɝ.

Taking a deep breath to calm herself, she went to see what she could do for him. First was to get rid of that stub of a blade; he could hurt himself, or her, if he started thrashing. She pried his hand open, and winced when the hilt stuck to his palm. She tossed it aside with a grimace. The heron on the hilt had branded itself into his hand. But it was obvious to her that that was not what had him lying there unconscious. How did he come by that? Nynaeve can put a salve on it later.

ə heɪsti ɪɡzæməneɪʃən ʃoʊd ðət moʊst ə hɪz kʌts ən bɹuzəz wɝ nɑt nu - ət list, ðə blʌd hæd hæd taɪm tə dʒɹaɪ ɪn ə kɹʌst, ən ðə bɹuzəz hæd stɑɹɾəd tə tɝn jɛloʊ ət ði ɛdʒəz - bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə hoʊl bɝn θɹu hɪz koʊɾ ɑn ðə lɛf saɪd. oʊpənɪŋ ɪz koʊt, ʃi pʊld ʌp ɪz ʃɝt. bɹɛθ wɪsəl θɹu hɝ tiθ. ðəɹ wɑz ə waʊn bɝn ɪndə hɪz saɪd, bʌɾ ɪt hæd kɔɾɝaɪzd ɪtsɛlf. wʌt ʃʊk əɹ wɑz ðə fil ə hɪz flɛʃ. ɪt hæɾ ə tʌtʃ ʌv aɪs ɪn ɪt; hi meɪd ði ɛɹ sim wɔɹm.

A hasty examination showed that most of his cuts and bruises were not new - at least, the blood had had time to dry in a crust, and the bruises had started to turn yellow at the edges - but there was a hole burned through his coat on the left side. Opening his coat, she pulled up his shirt. Breath whistled through her teeth. There was a wound burned into his side, but it had cauterized itself. What shook her was the feel of his flesh. It had a touch of ice in it; he made the air seem warm.

ɡɹæbɪŋ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, ʃi bɪɡæn tə dʒɹæɡ hɪm təwɔɹd ðə haʊs. hi hʌŋ lɪmp, ə dɛd weɪt. "ɡɹeɪt lʌmɑks," ʃi ɡɹʌntɪd. "ju kʊdn bi ʃɔɹt, ən laɪt, kəd ju? juv tə hæv ɔl ðət lɛɡ ən ʃoʊldɝ. aɪ ɔt tə lɛt jə laɪ aʊt hɪɹ."

Grabbing his shoulders, she began to drag him toward the house. He hung limp, a dead weight. "Great lummox," she grunted. "You couldn't be short, and light, could you? You have to have all that leg and shoulder. I ought to let you lie out here."

bʌt ʃi stʃɹʌɡəld ʌp ðə stɛps, kɛɹfəl nɑt tə bʌmp ɪm ɛni mɔɹ ðən ʃi kəɾ əvɔɪd, ən pʊld ɪm ɪnsaɪd. livɪŋ ɪm dʒʌst wɪðɪn ðə dɔɹ, ʃi nʌkəl ðə smɔl ə hɝ bæk, mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf əbaʊt ðə pæɾɝn, ən meɪɾ ə heɪsti sɝtʃ. ðəɹ wɑz ə smɔl bɛdʒɹum ɪn ðə bæk ə ðə haʊs, pɝhæps ə sɝvəns ɹum, wɪð ə bɛd paɪl haɪ wɪð blæŋkəts, ən lɔɡz ɔlɹɛɾi leɪɾ ɑn ðə hɑɹθ. ɪn moʊməns, ʃi hæd ðə blæŋkəts θɹoʊn bæk ən ðə faɪɝ lɪt, əz wɛl əz ə læmp ɑn ðə bɛdsaɪd teɪbəl. ðən ʃi wɛn bæk fəɹ ɹænd.

But she struggled up the steps, careful not to bump him any more than she could avoid, and pulled him inside. Leaving him just within the door, she knuckled the small of her back, muttering to herself about the Pattern, and made a hasty search. There was a small bedroom in the back of the house, perhaps a servant's room, with a bed piled high with blankets, and logs already laid on the hearth. In moments, she had the blankets thrown back and the fire lit, as well as a lamp on the bedside table. Then she went back for Rand.

ɪt wɑz noʊ smɔl tæsk ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪm tə ðə ɹum, əɹ ʌp ɑntu ðə bɛd, bʌt ʃi mænədʒd ɪt wɪð oʊnli ə lɪɾəl hɑɹd bɹiðɪŋ, ən kʌvɝɾ ɪm ʌp. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ʃi stʌk ə hæn ʌndɝ ðə blæŋkəts; ʃi wɪnst ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. ðə ʃits wɝ aɪsi koʊld; hi hæd noʊ bɑɾi wɔɹmθ fəɹ ðə blæŋkəts tə hoʊld. wɪð ə pʊt-əpɑn saɪ, ʃi ɹɪəld ʌndɝ ðə kʌvɝz bɪsaɪd hɪm. faɪnəli, ʃi pʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɑn əɹ ɑɹm. hɪz aɪz wɝ stɪl kloʊzd, hɪz bɹiðɪŋ ɹæɡəd, bʌt ʃi θɔɾ i wəd bi dɛd baɪ ðə taɪm ʃi keɪm bæk ɪf ʃi lɛf tə faɪnd nɪneɪiv. hi nidz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʃi θɔt. ɔl aɪ kən də ɪz tʃɹaɪ tə ɡɪv ɪm ə lɪɾəl wɔɹmθ.

It was no small task getting him to the room, or up onto the bed, but she managed it with only a little hard breathing, and covered him up. After a moment, she stuck a hand under the blankets; she winced and shook her head. The sheets were icy cold; he had no body warmth for the blankets to hold. With a put-upon sigh, she wriggled under the covers beside him. Finally, she put his head on her arm. His eyes were still closed, his breathing ragged, but she thought he would be dead by the time she came back if she left to find Nynaeve. He needs an Aes Sedai, she thought. All I can do is try to give him a little warmth.

fəɹ ə taɪm ʃi stʌɾid ɪz feɪs. ɪt wɑz oʊnli hɪz feɪs ʃi sɔ; ʃi kəd nɛvɝ ɹɛɾ ɛniwʌn u wɑz nɑt kɑnʃəs. "aɪ laɪk oʊldɝ mɛn," ʃi toʊl hɪm. "aɪ laɪk mɛn wɪð ɛdʒəkeɪʃən, ən wɪt. aɪ hæv noʊ ɪntʃɹəst ɪn fɑɹmz, əɹ ʃip, əɹ ʃɛpɝdz. ɪspɛʃli bɔɪ ʃɛpɝdz." wɪð ə saɪ, ʃi smuð bæk ðə hɛɹ fɹəm ɪz feɪs; hi hæd sɪlki hɛɹ. "bʌt ðɛn, jə ɑɹən ə ʃɛpɝd, ɑɹ ju? nɑɾ ɛnimɔɹ. laɪt, waɪ dɪd ðə pæɾɝn əv tə kætʃ mi ʌp wɪð ju? waɪ kʊdn aɪ hæv sʌmθɪŋ seɪf ən sɪmpəl, laɪk biɪŋ ʃɪpɹɛkt wɪð noʊ fuɾ ən ə dʌzən hʌŋɡɹi ilmɛn?"

For a time she studied his face. It was only his face she saw; she could never read anyone who was not conscious. "I like older men," she told him. "I like men with education, and wit. I have no interest in farms, or sheep, or shepherds. Especially boy shepherds." With a sigh, she smoothed back the hair from his face; he had silky hair. "But then, you aren't a shepherd, are you? Not anymore. Light, why did the Pattern have to catch me up with you? Why couldn't I have something safe and simple, like being shipwrecked with no food and a dozen hungry Aielmen?"

ðəɹ wɑz ə saʊn ɪn ðə hɔl, ən ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ hɛɾ əz ðə dɔɹ oʊpənd. ɛɡwin stʊd ðɛɹ, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əm baɪ ðə laɪɾ ə ðə faɪɝ ən ðə læmp. "oʊ," wɑz ɔl ʃi sɛd.

There was a sound in the hall, and she raised her head as the door opened. Egwene stood there, staring at them by the light of the fire and the lamp. "Oh," was all she said.

mɪnz tʃiks kʌlɝd. waɪ æm aɪ bɪheɪvɪŋ laɪk aɪv dʌn sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ? ful! "aɪ . . . aɪm kipɪŋ ɪm wɔɹm. hiz ʌnkɑnʃəs, ən hiz əz koʊld əz aɪs."

Min's cheeks colored. Why am I behaving like I've done something wrong? Fool! "I . . . I'm keeping him warm. He is unconscious, and he's as cold as ice."

ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt kʌm ɛni fɝðɝ ɪndə ðə ɹum. "aɪ - aɪ fɛlt ɪm pʊlɪŋ ət mi. niɾɪŋ mi. ɪleɪn fɛlt ɪt, tu. aɪ θɔɾ ɪt mʌs bi sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð - wɪð wʌɾ i ɪz, bʌt nɪneɪiv dɪdn fil ɛniθɪŋ." ʃi dʒɹu ə dip, ənstɛɾi bɹɛθ. "ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv ɑɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ ðə hɔɹsəz. wi faʊn bɛlə. ðə sintʃæn lɛf moʊst ə ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz bɪhaɪnd. nɪneɪiv sɛz wi ʃəd ɡoʊ əz sun əz wi kæn, ən - ænd. . . . mɪn, jə noʊ wʌɾ i ɪz, doʊn ju, naʊ?"

Egwene did not come any further into the room. "I - I felt him pulling at me. Needing me. Elayne felt it, too. I thought it must be something to do with - with what he is, but Nynaeve didn't feel anything." She drew a deep, unsteady breath. "Elayne and Nynaeve are getting the horses. We found Bela. The Seanchan left most of their horses behind. Nynaeve says we should go as soon as we can, and - and. . . . Min, you know what he is, don't you, now?"

"aɪ noʊ." mɪn wɑntəd tə teɪk əɹ ɑɹm fɹəm ʌndɝ ɹændz hɛd, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt meɪk hɝsɛlf muv. "aɪ θɪŋk aɪ du, ɛniweɪ. wʌtɛvɝ i ɪz, hiz hɝt. aɪ kən də nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ɪm ɪksɛp kip ɪm wɔɹm. meɪbi nɪneɪiv kæn."

"I know." Min wanted to take her arm from under Rand's head, but she could not make herself move. "I think I do, anyway. Whatever he is, he is hurt. I can do nothing for him except keep him warm. Maybe Nynaeve can."

"mɪn, jə noʊ . . . jə də noʊ ðəɾ i kænɑt mɛɹi. hi ɪzənt . . . seɪf . . . fəɹ ɛni ʌv ʌs, mɪn."

"Min, you know . . . you do know that he cannot marry. He isn't . . . safe . . . for any of us, Min."

"spik fəɹ jɝsɛlf," mɪn sɛd. ʃi pʊld ɹændz feɪs əɡɛnst əɹ bɹɛst. "ɪts laɪk ɪleɪn sɛd. jə tɔst ɪm əsaɪd fəɹ ðə waɪt taʊɝ. wʌt ʃəd jə kɛɹ ɪf aɪ pɪk ɪm ʌp?"

"Speak for yourself," Min said. She pulled Rand's face against her breast. "It's like Elayne said. You tossed him aside for the White Tower. What should you care if I pick him up?"

ɛɡwin lʊkt əɾ əɹ fəɹ wʌt simd ə lɔŋ taɪm. nɑɾ ət ɹænd, nɑɾ əɾ ɔl, oʊnli ət hɝ. ʃi fɛlt əɹ feɪs ɡɹoʊɪŋ hɑɾɝ ən wɑntəd tə lʊk əweɪ, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt.

Egwene looked at her for what seemed a long time. Not at Rand, not at all, only at her. She felt her face growing hotter and wanted to look away, but she could not.

"aɪ wɪl bɹɪŋ nɪneɪiv," ɛɡwin sɛd faɪnəli, ən wɔkt aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum wɪð əɹ bæk stʃɹeɪɾ ən əɹ hɛd haɪ.

"I will bring Nynaeve," Egwene said finally, and walked out of the room with her back straight and her head high.

mɪn wɑntəd tə kɔl aʊt, tə ɡoʊ æftɝ hɝ, bʌt ʃi leɪ ðəɹ əz ɪf fɹoʊzən. fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd tɪɹz stʌŋ əɹ aɪz. ɪts wʌɾ əz tə bi. aɪ noʊ ɪt. aɪ ɹɛɾ ɪɾ ɪn ɔl ə ðɛm. laɪt, aɪ doʊnt wɑnə bi pɑɹɾ ə ðɪs. "ɪts ɔl jəɹ fɔlt," ʃi toʊld ɹændz stɪl ʃeɪp. "noʊ, ɪɾ ɪzənt. bʌt jəl peɪ fəɹ ɪt, aɪ θɪŋk. wɝ ɔl kɑt laɪk flaɪz ɪn ə spaɪɾɝwɛb. wʌɾ ɪf aɪ toʊld əɹ ðɛɹz ənʌðɝ wʊmən jɛt tə kʌm, wʌn ʃi dʌzn ivən noʊ? fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, wʌt wəd jə θɪŋk ə ðæt, maɪ faɪn lɔɹd ʃɛpɝd? jə ɑɹən bæd-lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɔl, bʌt. . . . laɪt, aɪ doʊn ivən noʊ ɪf aɪm ðə wʌn jəl tʃuz. aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf aɪ wɑn jə tə tʃuz mi. əɹ wɪl jə tʃɹaɪ tə dændəl ɔl θɹi ʌv əs ɑn jəɹ ni? ɪt meɪ nɑt bi jəɹ fɔlt, ɹænd ælθɹ, bʌɾ ɪɾ ɪzən fɛɹ."

Min wanted to call out, to go after her, but she lay there as if frozen. Frustrated tears stung her eyes. It's what has to be. I know it. I read it in all of them. Light, I don't want to be part of this. "It's all your fault," she told Rand's still shape. "No, it isn't. But you will pay for it, I think. We're all caught like flies in a spiderweb. What if I told her there's another woman yet to come, one she doesn't even know? For that matter, what would you think of that, my fine Lord Shepherd? You aren't bad-looking at all, but. . . . Light, I don't even know if I am the one you'll choose. I don't know if I want you to choose me. Or will you try to dandle all three of us on your knee? It may not be your fault, Rand al'Thor, but it isn't fair."

"nɑt ɹænd ælθɹ," sɛɾ ə mjuzɪkəl vɔɪs fɹəm ðə dɔɹ. "luz θɝɪn tɛləmən. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn."

"Not Rand al'Thor," said a musical voice from the door. "Lews Therin Telamon. The Dragon Reborn."

mɪn stɛɹd. ʃi wɑz ðə moʊs bjuɾəfəl wʊmən mɪn hæɾ ɛvɝ sin, wɪð peɪl, smuð skɪn, ən lɔŋ, blæk hɛɹ, ən aɪz əz dɑɹk əz naɪt. hɝ dʒɹɛs wɑz ə waɪt ðət wəd meɪk snoʊ sim dɪnʒi, bɛltəɾ ɪn sɪlvɝ. ɔl əɹ dʒuəlɹi wɑz sɪlvɝ. mɪn fɛl hɝsɛlf bɹɪsəl. "wʌt dʒju min? hu ɑɹ ju?"

Min stared. She was the most beautiful woman Min had ever seen, with pale, smooth skin, and long, black hair, and eyes as dark as night. Her dress was a white that would make snow seem dingy, belted in silver. All her jewelry was silver. Min felt herself bristle. "What do you mean? Who are you?"

ðə wʊmən keɪm tə stæn oʊvɝ ðə bɛd - hɝ muvməns wɝ soʊ ɡɹeɪsfəl, mɪn fɛlt ə stæb ʌv ɛnvi, ðoʊ ʃi hæd nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ ɛnviɾ ɛni wʊmən ɛniθɪŋ - ən smuðd ɹændz hɛɹ əz ɪf mɪn wɝ nɑt ðɛɹ. "hi dʌzn bɪliv jɛt, aɪ θɪŋk. hi noʊz, bʌɾ i dʌz nɑt bɪliv. aɪ hæv ɡaɪɾəd ɪz stɛps, pʊʃt hɪm, pʊl hɪm, ɪntaɪs hɪm. hi wɑz ɔlweɪz stʌbɝn, bʌt ðɪs taɪm əl ʃeɪp hɪm. ɪʃəml θɪŋks i kəntʃɹoʊlz ɪvɛns, bʌɾ aɪ du." hɝ fɪŋɡɝ bɹʌʃt ɹændz fɔɹhɛɾ əz ɪf dʒɹɔɪŋ ə mɑɹk; mɪn θɔɾ ənizəli ðəɾ ɪt lʊk laɪk ðə dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ. ɹænd stɝd, mɝmɝɪŋ, ðə fɝst saʊn əɹ muvmən i hæd meɪd sɪns ʃi faʊn hɪm.

The woman came to stand over the bed - her movements were so graceful, Min felt a stab of envy, though she had never before envied any woman anything - and smoothed Rand's hair as if Min were not there. "He doesn't believe yet, I think. He knows, but he does not believe. I have guided his steps, pushed him, pulled him, enticed him. He was always stubborn, but this time I will shape him. Ishamael thinks he controls events, but I do." Her finger brushed Rand's forehead as if drawing a mark; Min thought uneasily that it looked like the Dragon's Fang. Rand stirred, murmuring, the first sound or movement he had made since she found him.

"hu ɑɹ ju?" mɪn dɪmændəd. ðə wʊmən lʊkt ət hɝ, oʊnli lʊkt, bʌt ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf ʃɹɪŋkɪŋ bæk ɪndə ðə pɪloʊz, klʌtʃɪŋ ɹænd tə hɝ fɪɹsli.

"Who are you?" Min demanded. The woman looked at her, only looked, but she found herself shrinking back into the pillows, clutching Rand to her fiercely.

"aɪ æm kɔld lænfɝ, ɡɝl."

"I am called Lanfear, girl."

mɪnz maʊθ wɑz əbɹʌpli soʊ dʒɹaɪ ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv spoʊkən ɪf əɹ laɪf dɪpɛndəɾ ɑn ɪt. wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən! noʊ! laɪt, noʊ! ɔl ʃi kəd də wɑz ʃeɪk əɹ hɛd. ðə dɪnaɪəl meɪd lænfɝ smaɪl.

Min's mouth was abruptly so dry she could not have spoken if her life depended on it. One of the Forsaken! No! Light, no! All she could do was shake her head. The denial made Lanfear smile.

"luz θɝɪn wɑz ən ɪz maɪn, ɡɝl. tɛn ɪm wɛl fəɹ mi əntɪl aɪ kʌm fəɹ hɪm." ən ʃi wɑz ɡɔn.

"Lews Therin was and is mine, girl. Tend him well for me until I come for him." And she was gone.

mɪn ɡeɪpt. wʌn moʊmənt ʃi wɑz ðɛɹ, ðən ʃi wɑz ɡɔn. mɪn dɪskʌvɝd ʃi wɑz hʌɡɪŋ ɹændz ʌnkɑnʃəs fɔɹm taɪtli. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi dɪd nɑt fil əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəɾ ɪm tə pɹətɛk hɝ.

Min gaped. One moment she was there, then she was gone. Min discovered she was hugging Rand's unconscious form tightly. She wished she did not feel as if she wanted him to protect her.

ɡɔn feɪs sɛt wɪð ɡɹɪm pɝpəs, baɪɑɝ ɡæləpt wɪð ðə sɪŋkɪŋ sʌn bɪhaɪn ɪm ən nɛvɝ lʊk bæk. hi hæd sin ɔl i niɾəd tə, ɔl i kəd wɪð ðəɾ əkɝs fɑɡ. ðə lidʒən wɑz dɛd, lɔɹd kæptən dʒɛəfɹæm bɔɹnhəld wɑz dɛd, ən ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn ɛkspləneɪʃən fəɹ ðæt; dɑɹkfɹɛnz hæd bɪtʃɹeɪd ðɛm, dɑɹkfɹɛnz laɪk ðət pɛɹɪn ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ðət wɝɾ i hæd tə kæɹi tə deɪn bɔɹnhəld, ðə lɔɹd kæptənz sʌn, wɪð ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt wɑtʃɪŋ tɑɹ vəlɑn. bʌɾ i hæd wɝs tə tɛl, ən tə nʌn lɛs ðən peɪdʒɹən naɪl hɪmsɛlf. hi hæd tə tɛl wʌɾ i hæd sin ɪn ðə skaɪ əbʌv fɑlm. hi flɑɡd ɪz hɔɹs wɪð ɪz ɹeɪnz ən nɛvɝ lʊk bæk.

Gaunt face set with grim purpose, Byar galloped with the sinking sun behind him and never looked back. He had seen all he needed to, all he could with that accursed fog. The legion was dead, Lord Captain Geofram Bornhald was dead, and there was only one explanation for that; Darkfriends had betrayed them, Darkfriends like that Perrin of the Two Rivers. That word he had to carry to Dain Bornhald, the Lord Captain's son, with the Children of the Light watching Tar Valon. But he had worse to tell, and to none less than Pedron Niall himself. He had to tell what he had seen in the sky above Falme. He flogged his horse with his reins and never looked back.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾinaɪn


CHAPTER 49

wʌt wɑz mɛn tə bi


What Was Meant to Be

ɹænd oʊpən ɪz aɪz ən faʊn hɪmsɛlf stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ət sʌnlaɪt slæntɪŋ θɹu ðə bɹæntʃəz ʌv ə lɛðɝlif, ɪts bɹɔd, tʌf livz stɪl ɡɹin dɪspaɪt ðə taɪm ə jɪɹ. ðə wɪn stɝɪŋ ðə livz kæɹiɾ ə hɪn ə snoʊ, kʌm naɪtfɔl. hi leɪ ɑn ɪz bæk, ən i kəd fil blæŋkəts kʌvɝɪŋ ɪm ʌndɝ ɪz hænz. hɪz koʊɾ ən ʃɝt sim tə bi ɡɔn, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ wɑz baɪndɪŋ ɪz tʃɛst, ən ɪz lɛf saɪd hɝt. hi tɝn ɪz hɛd, ən mɪn wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm. hi ɔlmoʊs dɪd nɑt noʊ hɝ, wɛɹɪŋ skɝts. ʃi smaɪld ənsɝteɪnli.

Rand opened his eyes and found himself staring up at sunlight slanting through the branches of a leatherleaf, its broad, tough leaves still green despite the time of year. The wind stirring the leaves carried a hint of snow, come nightfall. He lay on his back, and he could feel blankets covering him under his hands. His coat and shirt seemed to be gone, but something was binding his chest, and his left side hurt. He turned his head, and Min was sitting there on the ground, watching him. He almost did not know her, wearing skirts. She smiled uncertainly.

"mɪn. ɪts ju. wɛɹ dɪd jə kʌm fɹʌm? wɛɹ ɑɹ wi?" hɪz mɛmɹi keɪm ɪn flæʃɪz ən pætʃəz. oʊl θɪŋz i kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ, bʌt ðə læs fju deɪz sim laɪk bɪts ə bɹoʊkən mɪɹɝ, spɪnɪŋ θɹu hɪz maɪnd, ʃoʊɪŋ ɡlɪmpsɪz ðət wɝ ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ i kəd si ðɛm klɪɹli.

"Min. It is you. Where did you come from? Where are we?" His memory came in flashes and patches. Old things he could remember, but the last few days seemed like bits of broken mirror, spinning through his mind, showing glimpses that were gone before he could see them clearly.

"fɹʌm fɑlm," ʃi sɛd. "wɝ faɪv deɪz ist ə ðɛɹ, naʊ, ən juv bɪn əslip ɔl ðət taɪm."

"From Falme," she said. "We're five days east of there, now, and you've been asleep all that time."

"fɑlm." mɔɹ mɛmɹi. mæt hæd bloʊn ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. "ɛɡwin! ɪz ʃi . . . ? dɪd ðeɪ fɹi hɝ?" hi hɛld ɪz bɹɛθ.

"Falme." More memory. Mat had blown the Horn of Valere. "Egwene! Is she . . . ? Did they free her?" He held his breath.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt 'ðeɪ' jə min, bʌt ʃiz fɹi. wi fɹiɾ əɹ aʊɝsɛlvz."

"I don't know what 'they' you mean, but she's free. We freed her ourselves."

"wi? aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd." ʃiz fɹi. ət list ʃiz -  "nɪneɪiv, ən ɪleɪn, ən mi."

"We? I don't understand." She's free. At least she is -  "Nynaeve, and Elayne, and me."

"nɪneɪiv? ɪleɪn? haʊ? jə wɝ ɔl ɪn fɑlm?" hi stʃɹʌɡəl tə sɪɾ ʌp, bʌt ʃi pʊʃt ɪm bæk daʊn izəli ən steɪd ðɛɹ, hænz ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, aɪz ɪntɛn ɑn ɪz feɪs. "wɛɹ ɪz ʃi?"

"Nynaeve? Elayne? How? You were all in Falme?" He struggled to sit up, but she pushed him back down easily and stayed there, hands on his shoulders, eyes intent on his face. "Where is she?"

"ɡɔn." mɪnz feɪs kʌlɝd. "ðeɪɹ ɔl ɡɔn. ɛɡwin, ən nɪneɪiv, ən mæt, ən hʊɹɪn, ən vɛɹɪn. hʊɹɪn dɪdnt wɑnə liv ju, ɹɪli. ðəɹ ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv bæk tə ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə taʊɝ, ən mæt fəɹ wʌtɛvɝ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæv tə də əbaʊt ðət dæɡɝ. ðeɪ tʊk ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ wɪð ðɛm. aɪ kæn bɪliv aɪ æktʃəli  sɔ ɪt."

"Gone." Min's face colored. "They're all gone. Egwene, and Nynaeve, and Mat, and Hurin, and Verin. Hurin didn't want to leave you, really. They're on their way to Tar Valon. Egwene and Nynaeve back to their training in the Tower, and Mat for whatever the Aes Sedai have to do about that dagger. They took the Horn of Valere with them. I can't believe I actually saw it."

"ɡɔn," hi mʌɾɝd. "ʃi dɪdn ivən weɪt tɪl aɪ woʊk ʌp." ðə ɹɛɾ ɪn mɪnz tʃiks dipənd, ən ʃi sæt bæk, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ læp.

"Gone," he muttered. "She didn't even wait till I woke up." The red in Min's cheeks deepened, and she sat back, staring at her lap.

hi ɹeɪzd ɪz hænz tə ɹʌn əm oʊvɝ ɪz feɪs, ən stɑpt, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪz pɑmz ɪn ʃɑk. ðəɹ wɑz ə hɛɹən bɹændɪɾ əkɹɔs ɪz lɛf pɑm, tu, naʊ, tə mætʃ ðə wʌn ɑn ɪz ɹaɪt, ɛvɹi laɪn klin ən tʃɹu. wʌns ðə hɛɹən tə sɛɾ ɪz pæθ; twaɪs ðə hɛɹən tə neɪm ɪm tʃɹu. "noʊ!"

He raised his hands to run them over his face, and stopped, staring at his palms in shock. There was a heron branded across his left palm, too, now, to match the one on his right, every line clean and true. Once the heron to set his path; Twice the heron to name him true. "No!"

"ðeɪ ɑɹ ɡɔn," ʃi sɛd. "seɪɪŋ 'noʊ' woʊn tʃeɪnʒ ɪt."

"They are gone," she said. "Saying 'no' won't change it."

hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. sʌmθɪŋ toʊld ɪm ðə peɪn ɪn ɪz saɪd wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. hi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ biɪŋ ɪnʒɝd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. hi stɑɹɾəd tə lɪft ɪz blæŋkəts tə lʊk, bʌt ʃi slæpt ɪz hænz əweɪ.

He shook his head. Something told him the pain in his side was important. He could not remember being injured, but it was important. He started to lift his blankets to look, but she slapped his hands away.

"ju kæn də ɛni ɡʊd wɪð ðæt. ɪɾ ɪzən hild ɔl ðə weɪ, jɛt. vɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd hilɪŋ, bʌt ʃi sɛɾ ɪt dɪdnt wɝk ðə weɪ ɪt ʃʊd." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, nɪbəlɪŋ əɹ lɪp. "mɔɪɹeɪn sɛz nɪneɪiv mʌst əv dʌn sʌmθɪŋ, əɹ jə wʊdn əv lɪv tɪl wi kæɹid jə tə vɛɹɪn, bʌt nɪneɪiv sɛz ʃi wɑz tu fɹaɪɾənd tə laɪɾ ə kændəl. ðəɹ ɪz . . . sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ wɪð jəɹ waʊnd. jəl əv tə weɪt fəɹ ɪt tə hil nætʃɹəli." ʃi sim tʃɹʌbəld.

"You can't do any good with that. It isn't healed all the way, yet. Verin tried Healing, but she said it didn't work the way it should." She hesitated, nibbling her lip. "Moiraine says Nynaeve must have done something, or you wouldn't have lived till we carried you to Verin, but Nynaeve says she was too frightened to light a candle. There is . . . something wrong with your wound. You will have to wait for it to heal naturally." She seemed troubled.

"mɔɪɹeɪn ɪz hɪɹ?" hi bɑɹkt ə bɪɾɝ læf. "wɛn jə sɛd vɛɹɪn wɑz ɡɔn, aɪ θɔɾ aɪ wɑz fɹi ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ əɡɛn."

"Moiraine is here?" He barked a bitter laugh. "When you said Verin was gone, I thought I was free of Aes Sedai again."

"aɪ æm hɪɹ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. ʃi əpɪɹd, ɔl ɪn blu ən əz sɝin əz ɪf ʃi stʊɾ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, stʃɹoʊlɪŋ ʌp tə stæn oʊvɝ hɪm. mɪn wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɹænd hæd ði ɑd filɪŋ ðət ʃi mɛn tə pɹətɛkt ɪm fɹəm mɔɪɹeɪn.

"I am here," Moiraine said. She appeared, all in blue and as serene as if she stood in the White Tower, strolling up to stand over him. Min was frowning at the Aes Sedai. Rand had the odd feeling that she meant to protect him from Moiraine.

"aɪ wɪʃ jə wɝn hɪɹ," hi toʊl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. "æz fɑɹ əz aɪm kənsɝnd, jə kən ɡoʊ bæk tə wɛɹɛvɝ juv bɪn haɪɾɪŋ ən steɪ ðɛɹ."

"I wish you weren't here," he told the Aes Sedai. "As far as I am concerned, you can go back to wherever you've been hiding and stay there."

"aɪ hæv nɑt bɪn haɪɾɪŋ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd kɑmli. "aɪ hæv bɪn duɪŋ wʌɾ aɪ kʊd, hɪɹ ɑn toʊmən hɛd, ən ɪn fɑlm. ɪt wɑz lɪɾəl ɪnʌf, ðoʊ aɪ lɝn mʌtʃ. aɪ feɪl tə ɹɛskju tu ʌv maɪ sɪstɝz bɪfɔɹ ðə sintʃæn hɝɾɪd əm ɑntu ðə ʃɪps wɪð ðə liʃt wʌnz, bʌɾ aɪ dɪd wʌɾ aɪ kʊd."

"I have not been hiding," Moiraine said calmly. "I have been doing what I could, here on Toman Head, and in Falme. It was little enough, though I learned much. I failed to rescue two of my sisters before the Seanchan herded them onto the ships with the Leashed Ones, but I did what I could."

"wʌt jə kʊd. jə sɛn vɛɹɪn tə ʃɛpɝd mi, bʌɾ ɪm noʊ ʃip, mɔɪɹeɪn. jə sɛɾ aɪ kəd ɡoʊ wɛɹ aɪ wɑntəd, ən aɪ min tə ɡoʊ wɛɹ jə ɑɹ nɑt."

"What you could. You sent Verin to shepherd me, but I'm no sheep, Moiraine. You said I could go where I wanted, and I mean to go where you are not."

"aɪ dɪd nɑt sɛn vɛɹɪn." mɔɪɹeɪn fɹaʊnd. "ʃi dɪd ðəɾ ɑn əɹ oʊn. jə ɑɹ ʌv ɪntʃɹəs tə ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni pipəl, ɹænd. dɪd feɪn faɪn ju, əɹ jə hɪm?"

"I did not send Verin." Moiraine frowned. "She did that on her own. You are of interest to a great many people, Rand. Did Fain find you, or you him?"

ðə sʌɾən tʃeɪnʒ ə tɑpɪk tʊk ɪm baɪ sɝpɹaɪz. "feɪn? noʊ. ə faɪn hɪɹoʊ aɪ meɪk. aɪ tʃɹaɪd tə ɹɛskju ɛɡwin, ən mɪn dɪɾ ɪt bɪfɔɹ mi. feɪn sɛɾ i wəd hɝɾ ɛmənz fild ɪf aɪ dɪdn feɪs hɪm, ən aɪ nɛvɝ leɪɾ aɪz ɑn hɪm. dɪɾ i ɡoʊ wɪð ðə sintʃæn, tu?"

The sudden change of topic took him by surprise. "Fain? No. A fine hero I make. I tried to rescue Egwene, and Min did it before me. Fain said he would hurt Emond's Field if I didn't face him, and I never laid eyes on him. Did he go with the Seanchan, too?"

mɔɪɹeɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "aɪ də nɑt noʊ. aɪ wɪʃ aɪ dɪd. bʌɾ ɪts əz wɛl jə dɪd nɑt faɪn hɪm, nɑɾ əntɪl jə noʊ wʌɾ i ɪz, ət list."

Moiraine shook her head. "I do not know. I wish I did. But it is as well you did not find him, not until you know what he is, at least."

"hiz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd."

"He's a Darkfriend."

"mɔɹ ðən ðæt. wɝs ðən ðæt. pdən feɪn wɑz ðə dɑɹk wʌnz kɹitʃɝ tə ðə dɛpθs ə hɪz soʊl, bʌɾ aɪ bɪliv ðəɾ ɪn ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ i fɛl əfaʊl ə mɔɹɾɪθ, hu wɑz əz vaɪl ɪn faɪɾɪŋ ðə ʃædoʊ əz ɛvɝ ðə ʃædoʊ ɪtsɛlf wɑz. mɔɹɾɪθ tʃɹaɪd tə kənsum feɪnz soʊl, tə hæv ə hjumən bɑɾi əɡɛn, bʌt faʊn ə soʊl ðət hæd bɪn tʌtʃt dɝɛkli baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ən wʌt ɹɪzʌltɪd. . . . wʌt ɹɪzʌltɪd wɑz niðɝ pdən feɪn nɔɹ mɔɹɾɪθ, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ fɑɹ mɔɹ ivəl, ə blɛn ə ðə tu. feɪn - lɛɾ əs kɔl ɪm ðət - ɪz mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ðən jə kən bɪliv. jə maɪt nɑɾ əv sɝvaɪv sətʃ ə miɾɪŋ, ən ɪf jə hæd, jə maɪɾ əv bɪn wɝs ðən tɝn tə ðə ʃædoʊ."

"More than that. Worse than that. Padan Fain was the Dark One's creature to the depths of his soul, but I believe that in Shadar Logoth he fell afoul of Mordeth, who was as vile in fighting the Shadow as ever the Shadow itself was. Mordeth tried to consume Fain's soul, to have a human body again, but found a soul that had been touched directly by the Dark One, and what resulted. . . . What resulted was neither Padan Fain nor Mordeth, but something far more evil, a blend of the two. Fain - let us call him that - is more dangerous than you can believe. You might not have survived such a meeting, and if you had, you might have been worse than turned to the Shadow."

"ɪf hiz əlaɪv, ɪf i dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ wɪð ðə sintʃæn, aɪ hæv tə - " hi kʌɾ ɔf əz ʃi pɹədust ɪz hɛɹən-mɑɹk sɔɹd fɹəm ʌndɝ əɹ kloʊk. ðə bleɪɾ ɛndəɾ əbɹʌpli ə fʊt fɹəm ðə hɪlt, əz ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn mɛltəd. mɛmɹi keɪm kɹæʃɪŋ bæk. "aɪ kɪl hɪm," hi sɛd sɔfli. "ðɪs taɪm aɪ kɪl hɪm."

"If he is alive, if he did not go with the Seanchan, I have to - " He cut off as she produced his heron-mark sword from under her cloak. The blade ended abruptly a foot from the hilt, as if it had been melted. Memory came crashing back. "I killed him," he said softly. "This time I killed him."

mɔɪɹeɪn pʊt ðə ɹuən sɔɹɾ əsaɪd laɪk ðə jusləs θɪŋ ɪt naʊ wɑz, ən waɪpt əɹ hænz təɡɛðɝ. "ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪz nɑt sleɪn soʊ izəli. ðə mɪɹ fæk ðəɾ i əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə skaɪ əbʌv fɑlm ɪz mɔɹ ðən mɪɹli tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ. hi ʃəd nɑt bi eɪbəl tə də ðæt, ɪf hiz baʊn əz wi bɪliv. ən ɪf hiz nɑt, waɪ hæz i nɑt dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ əs ɔl?" mɪn stɝɾ ənizəli.

Moiraine put the ruined sword aside like the useless thing it now was, and wiped her hands together. "The Dark One is not slain so easily. The mere fact that he appeared in the sky above Falme is more than merely troubling. He should not be able to do that, if he is bound as we believe. And if he is not, why has he not destroyed us all?" Min stirred uneasily.

"ɪn ðə skaɪ?" ɹænd sɛɾ ɪn wʌndɝ.

"In the sky?" Rand said in wonder.

"boʊθ ə ju," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "jɔɹ bæɾəl tʊk pleɪs əkɹɔs ðə skaɪ, ɪn fʊl vju ʌv ɛvɹi soʊl ɪn fɑlm. pɝhæps ɪn ʌðɝ taʊnz ɑn toʊmən hɛd, tu, ɪf hæf wʌɾ aɪ hɪɹ ɪz tə bi bɪlivd."

"Both of you," Moiraine said. "Your battle took place across the sky, in full view of every soul in Falme. Perhaps in other towns on Toman Head, too, if half what I hear is to be believed."

"wi - wi sɔ ɪɾ ɔl," mɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə feɪn vɔɪs. ʃi pʊɾ ə hæn oʊvɝ wʌn ə ɹændz kʌmfɝɾɪŋli.

"We - we saw it all," Min said in a faint voice. She put a hand over one of Rand's comfortingly.

mɔɪɹeɪn ɹitʃt ʌndɝ əɹ kloʊk əɡɛn ən keɪm aʊt wɪð ə ɹoʊl pɑɹtʃmənt, wʌn ə ðə lɑɹdʒ ʃits sətʃ əz ðə stʃɹiɾ ɑɹɾəsts ɪn fɑlm juzd. ðə tʃɔks wɝ ə lɪɾəl smʌdʒd wən ʃi ənfɝld ɪt, bʌt ðə pɪktʃɝ wɑz stɪl klɪɹ ɪnʌf. ə mæn huz feɪs wɑz ə sɑləd fleɪm fɔt wɪð ə stæf əɡɛnst ənʌðɝ wɪð ə sɔɹɾ əmʌŋ klaʊdz wɛɹ laɪtnɪŋ dænst, ən bɪhaɪn əm ɹɪpəl ðə dʒɹæɡən bænɝ. ɹændz feɪs wɑz izəli ɹɛkəɡnaɪzəbəl.

Moiraine reached under her cloak again and came out with a rolled parchment, one of the large sheets such as the street artists in Falme used. The chalks were a little smudged when she unfurled it, but the picture was still clear enough. A man whose face was a solid flame fought with a staff against another with a sword among clouds where lightning danced, and behind them rippled the Dragon banner. Rand's face was easily recognizable.

"haʊ mɛni hæv sin ðæt?" hi dɪmændəd. "tɛɹ ɪɾ ʌp. bɝn ɪt."

"How many have seen that?" he demanded. "Tear it up. Burn it."

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ lɛt ðə pɑɹtʃmən ɹoʊl bæk ʌp. "ɪt wəd də noʊ ɡʊd, ɹænd. aɪ bɑt ðət tu deɪz ɡɔn, ɪn ə vɪlədʒ wi pæs θɹu. ðəɹ ɑɹ hʌnʒɹədz ə ðɛm, pɝhæps θaʊzənz, ən ðə teɪl ɪz biɪŋ toʊld ɛvɹiwɛɹ ə haʊ ðə dʒɹæɡən bæɾəld ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪn ðə skaɪz əbʌv fɑlm."

The Aes Sedai let the parchment roll back up. "It would do no good, Rand. I bought that two days gone, in a village we passed through. There are hundreds of them, perhaps thousands, and the tale is being told everywhere of how the Dragon battled the Dark One in the skies above Falme."

ɹænd lʊkt ət mɪn. ʃi nɑɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli, ən skwizd ɪz hænd. ʃi lʊk fɹaɪɾənd, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt flɪntʃ əweɪ. aɪ wʌndɝ ɪf ðæts waɪ ɛɡwin lɛft. ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt tə liv.

Rand looked at Min. She nodded reluctantly, and squeezed his hand. She looked frightened, but she did not flinch away. I wonder if that's why Egwene left. She was right to leave.

"ðə pæɾɝn wivz ɪtsɛlf ɝaʊn jə ivən mɔɹ taɪtli," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ju nid mi naʊ mɔɹ ðən ɛvɝ."

"The Pattern weaves itself around you even more tightly," Moiraine said. "You need me now more than ever."

"aɪ doʊnt nid ju," hi sɛd hɑɹʃli, "æn aɪ doʊnt wɑn ju. əl nɑɾ əv ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðɪs." hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd biɪŋ kɔld luz θɝɪn; nɑɾ oʊnli baɪ bælzəmən, bʌt baɪ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ. "aɪ woʊnt. laɪt, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪz səpoʊz tə bɹeɪk ðə wɝld əɡɛn, tə tɛɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ əpɑɹt. əl nɑt bi ðə dʒɹæɡən."

"I don't need you," he said harshly, "and I don't want you. I will not have anything to do with this." He remembered being called Lews Therin; not only by Ba'alzamon, but by Artur Hawkwing. "I won't. Light, the Dragon is supposed to Break the World again, to tear everything apart. I will not be the Dragon."

"ju ɑɹ wʌt jə ɑɹ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ɔlɹɛɾi jə stɝ ðə wɝld. ðə blæk ədʒɑ hæz ɹɪvild ɪtsɛlf fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ɪn tu θaʊzən jɪɹz. ɑɹæd dumən ən tæɹɑbən wɝ ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk ʌv wɔɹ, ən ɪɾəl bi wɝs wən nuz ə fɑlm ɹitʃəz ðɛm. kɛɹhin ɪz ɪn sɪvəl wɔɹ."

"You are what you are," Moiraine said. "Already you stir the world. The Black Ajah has revealed itself for the first time in two thousand years. Arad Doman and Tarabon were on the brink of war, and it will be worse when news of Falme reaches them. Cairhien is in civil war."

"aɪ dɪd nʌθɪŋ ɪn kɛɹhin," hi pɹətɛstəd. "ju kæn bleɪm ðəɾ ɑn mi."

"I did nothing in Cairhien," he protested. "You can't blame that on me."

"duɪŋ nʌθɪŋ wɑz ɔlweɪz ə plɔɪ ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm," ʃi sɛd wɪð ə saɪ, "æn ɪspɛʃli əz ðeɪ pleɪ ɪt naʊ. jə wɝ ðə spɑɹk, ən kɛɹhin ɪksploʊɾəd laɪk ən ɪluməneɪɾɝz faɪɝwɝk. wʌt dʒju θɪŋk wɪl hæpən wən wɝɾ ə fɑlm ɹitʃəz ɑɹæd dumən ən tæɹɑbən? ðəɹ əv ɔlweɪz bɪn mɛn wɪlɪŋ tə pɹoʊkleɪm fəɹ ɛni mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf ðə dʒɹæɡən, bʌt ðeɪv nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ hæd sətʃ saɪnz əz ðɪs. ðəɹ ɪz mɔɹ. hɪɹ." ʃi tɔst ə paʊtʃ ɑn ɪz tʃɛst.

"Doing nothing was always a ploy in the Great Game," she said with a sigh, "and especially as they play it now. You were the spark, and Cairhien exploded like an Illuminator's firework. What do you think will happen when word of Falme reaches Arad Doman and Tarabon? There have always been men willing to proclaim for any man who called himself the Dragon, but they have never before had such signs as this. There is more. Here." She tossed a pouch on his chest.

hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ oʊpənɪŋ ɪt. wɪðɪn leɪ ʃɑɹdz ʌv wʌt sim tə bi blæk-ænd-waɪt ɡleɪz pɑɾɝi. hi hæd sin ðɛɹ laɪk bɪfɔɹ. "ənʌðɝ sil ɑn ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən," hi mʌmbəld. mɪn ɡæspt; hɝ ɡɹɪp ɑn ɪz hæn sɔt kʌmfɝt, naʊ, ɹæðɝ ðən ɔfɝɪŋ ɪt.

He hesitated a moment before opening it. Within lay shards of what seemed to be black-and-white glazed pottery. He had seen their like before. "Another seal on the Dark One's prison," he mumbled. Min gasped; her grip on his hand sought comfort, now, rather than offering it.

"tu," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "θɹi ʌv ðə sɛvən ɑɹ bɹoʊkən naʊ. ðə wʌn aɪ hæd, ən tu aɪ faʊn ɪn ðə haɪ lɔɹdz dwɛlɪŋ ɪn fɑlm. wən ɔl sɛvən ɑɹ bɹoʊkən, pɝhæps ivən bɪfɔɹ, ðə pætʃ mɛn pʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə hoʊl ðeɪ dʒɹɪld ɪndə ðə pɹɪzən ðə kɹieɪɾɝ meɪd wɪl bi tɔɹn əsʌndɝ, ən ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɪl wʌns mɔɹ bi eɪbəl tə pʊɾ ɪz hæn θɹu ðət hoʊl ən tʌtʃ ðə wɝld. ən ði oʊnli hoʊp ə ðə wɝld ɪz ðət ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɪl bi ðəɹ tə feɪs hɪm."

"Two," Moiraine said. "Three of the seven are broken now. The one I had, and two I found in the High Lord's dwelling in Falme. When all seven are broken, perhaps even before, the patch men put over the hole they drilled into the prison the Creator made will be torn asunder, and the Dark One will once more be able to put his hand through that hole and touch the world. And the only hope of the world is that the Dragon Reborn will be there to face him."

mɪn tʃɹaɪd tə stɑp ɹænd fɹəm θɹoʊɪŋ bæk ðə blæŋkəts, bʌɾ i pʊʃt əɹ dʒɛnli əsaɪd. "aɪ nid tə wɔk." ʃi hɛlpt ɪm ʌp, bʌt wɪð ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni saɪz ən ɡɹʌmbəlz əbaʊɾ ɪm meɪkɪŋ ɪz waʊnd wɝs. hi dɪskʌvɝd ðəɾ ɪz tʃɛst wɑz ɹæpt ɹaʊnd wɪð bændədʒəz. mɪn dʒɹeɪpt wʌn ə ðə blæŋkəts əbaʊɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz laɪk ə kloʊk.

Min tried to stop Rand from throwing back the blankets, but he pushed her gently aside. "I need to walk." She helped him up, but with a great many sighs and grumbles about him making his wound worse. He discovered that his chest was wrapped round with bandages. Min draped one of the blankets about his shoulders like a cloak.

fəɹ ə moʊmən i stʊd stɛɹɪŋ daʊn ət ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk sɔɹd, wʌt wɑz lɛft ʌv ɪt, laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. tæmz sɔɹd. maɪ fɑðɝz sɔɹd. ɹɪlʌktənli, mɔɹ ɹɪlʌktənli ðən i hæɾ ɛvɝ dʌn ɛniθɪŋ ɪn ɪz laɪf, hi lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv ðə hoʊp ðəɾ i wəd dɪskʌvɝ tæm ɹɪli wɑz ɪz fɑðɝ. ɪt fɛlt əz ɪf i wɝ tɛɹɪŋ ɪz hɑɹɾ aʊt. bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ ðə weɪ hi fɛlt əbaʊt tæm, ən ɛmənz fild wɑz ði oʊnli hoʊm i hæɾ ɛvɝ noʊn. feɪn ɪz ði ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ. aɪ hæv wʌn duɾi lɛft. stɑpɪŋ hɪm.

For a moment he stood staring down at the heron-mark sword, what was left of it, lying on the ground. Tam's sword. My father's sword. Reluctantly, more reluctantly than he had ever done anything in his life, he let go of the hope that he would discover Tam really was his father. It felt as if he were tearing his heart out. But it did not change the way he felt about Tam, and Emond's Field was the only home he had ever known. Fain is the important thing. I have one duty left. Stopping him.

ðə tu wɪmən hæd tə səpɔɹt hɪm, wʌn ɑn iðɝ ɑɹm, daʊn tə wɛɹ ðə kæmpfaɪɝz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi bɝnɪŋ, nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ə ɹoʊɾ ə hɑɹd-pæk dɝt. lɔɪəl wɑz ðɛɹ, ɹiɾɪŋ ə bʊk, tə seɪl bɪɑn ðə sʌnsɛt, ən pɛɹɪn, stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə wʌn ə ðə faɪɝz. ðə ʃaɪnɝənz wɝ meɪkɪŋ pɹɛpɝeɪʃənz fəɹ ðɛɹ ivnɪŋ mil. læn sæɾ ʌndɝ ə tʃɹi ʃɑɹpənɪŋ ɪz bɛl naɪf; ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɡeɪv ɹænd ə kɛɹfəl lʊk, ðən ə nɑd.

The two women had to support him, one on either arm, down to where the campfires were already burning, not far from a road of hard-packed dirt. Loial was there, reading a book, To Sail Beyond the Sunset, and Perrin, staring into one of the fires. The Shienarans were making preparations for their evening meal. Lan sat under a tree sharpening his belt knife; the Warder gave Rand a careful look, then a nod.

ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, tu. ðə dʒɹæɡən bænɝ ɹɪpəld ɑn ðə wɪn oʊvɝ ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə kæmp. sʌmwɛɹ ðeɪ hæd faʊn ə pɹɑpɝ stæf tə ɹipleɪs pɛɹɪnz sæpəlɪŋ.

There was something else, too. The Dragon banner rippled on the wind over the middle of the camp. Somewhere they had found a proper staff to replace Perrin's sapling.

ɹænd dɪmændəd, "wʌɾ ɪz ðət duɪŋ aʊt wɛɹ ɛnibəɾi hu pæsəz baɪ kən si ɪt?"

Rand demanded, "What is that doing out where anybody who passes by can see it?"

"ɪɾ ɪz tu leɪt tə haɪd, ɹænd," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz tu leɪt fəɹ jə tə haɪd."

"It is too late to hide, Rand," Moiraine said. "It was always too late for you to hide."

"ju doʊn əv tə pʊɾ ʌp ə saɪn seɪɪŋ 'hɪɹ aɪ æm,' iðɝ. əl nɛvɝ faɪn feɪn ɪf sʌmbɑɾi kɪlz mi kəz ə ðət bænɝ." hi tɝn tə lɔɪəl ən pɛɹɪn. "aɪm ɡlæd jə steɪd. aɪ wəɾ əv ʌndɝstʊɾ ɪf jə hædnt."

"You don't have to put up a sign saying 'here I am,' either. I'll never find Fain if somebody kills me because of that banner." He turned to Loial and Perrin. "I'm glad you stayed. I would have understood if you hadn't."

"waɪ wəɾ aɪ nɑt steɪ?" lɔɪəl sɛd. "ju ɑɹ ivən mɔɹ tɑvɝən ðən aɪ bɪlivd, tʃɹu, bʌt jə ɑɹ stɪl maɪ fɹɛnd. aɪ hoʊp jə ɑɹ stɪl maɪ fɹɛnd." hɪz ɪɹz twɪtʃt ənsɝteɪnli.

"Why would I not stay?" Loial said. "You are even more ta'veren than I believed, true, but you are still my friend. I hope you are still my friend." His ears twitched uncertainly.

"aɪ æm," ɹænd sɛd. "fɔɹ əz lɔŋ əz ɪts seɪf fəɹ jə tə bi ɝaʊn mi, ən ivən æftɝ, tu." ði oʊɡiɝz ɡɹɪn nɪɹli splɪɾ ɪz feɪs ɪn tu.

"I am," Rand said. "For as long as it's safe for you to be around me, and even after, too." The Ogier's grin nearly split his face in two.

"aɪm steɪɪŋ əz wɛl," pɛɹɪn sɛd. ðəɹ wɑz ə noʊɾ ə ɹɛzəɡneɪʃən, əɹ æksɛptəns, ɪn ɪz vɔɪs. "ðə wil wivz əs taɪɾ ɪn ðə pæɾɝn, ɹænd. hu wʊɾə θɔɾ ɪt, bæk ɪn ɛmənz fild?"

"I'm staying as well," Perrin said. There was a note of resignation, or acceptance, in his voice. "The Wheel weaves us tight in the Pattern, Rand. Who would have thought it, back in Emond's Field?"

ðə ʃaɪnɝənz wɝ ɡæðɝɪŋ ɝaʊnd. tə ɹændz sɝpɹaɪz, ðeɪ ɔl fɛl tə ðɛɹ niz. ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm wɑtʃt hɪm.

The Shienarans were gathering around. To Rand's surprise, they all fell to their knees. Every one of them watched him.

"wi wəd plɛdʒ aʊɝsɛlvz tə ju," ənoʊ sɛd. ði ʌðɝz nilɪŋ wɪð ɪm nɑɾəd.

"We would pledge ourselves to you," Uno said. The others kneeling with him nodded.

"jɔɹ oʊðz ɑɹ tə ɪŋtʃɹ, ən lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ," ɹænd pɹətɛstəd. "ɪŋtʃɹ daɪd wɛl, ənoʊ. hi daɪd soʊ ðə ɹɛst ʌv əs kəɾ ɪskeɪp wɪð ðə hɔɹn." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə tɛl əm əɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls ðə ɹɛst. hi hoʊp ðəɾ ɪŋtʃɹ hæd faʊn ðə laɪɾ əɡɛn. "tɛl lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ ðət wən jə ɹɪtɝn tə fæl dæɹə."

"Your oaths are to Ingtar, and Lord Agelmar," Rand protested. "Ingtar died well, Uno. He died so the rest of us could escape with the Horn." There was no need to tell them or anyone else the rest. He hoped that Ingtar had found the Light again. "Tell Lord Agelmar that when you return to Fal Dara."

"ɪɾ ɪz sɛd," ðə wʌn-aɪd mæn sɛd kɛɹfəli, "ðæt wən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪz ɹibɔɹn, hɪl bɹeɪk ɔl oʊðz, ʃæɾɝ ɔl taɪz. nʌθɪŋ hoʊlz ʌs, naʊ. wi wəd ɡɪv əɹ oʊðz tə ju." hi dʒɹu hɪz sɔɹɾ ən leɪɾ ɪt bɪfɔɹ hɪm, hɪl təwɔɹd ɹænd, ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə ʃaɪnɝənz dɪd ðə seɪm.

"It is said," the one-eyed man said carefully, "that when the Dragon is Reborn, he will break all oaths, shatter all ties. Nothing holds us, now. We would give our oaths to you." He drew his sword and laid it before him, hilt toward Rand, and the rest of the Shienarans did the same.

"ju bæɾəld ðə dɑɹk wʌn," mæsimə sɛd. mæsimə, hu heɪɾəd hɪm. mæsimə, hu lʊkt əɾ ɪm əz ɪf siɪŋ ə vɪʒən ə ðə laɪt. "aɪ sɔ ju, lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. aɪ sɔ. aɪm jəɹ mæn, tə ðə dɛθ." hɪz dɑɹk aɪz ʃoʊn wɪð fɝvɝ.

"You battled the Dark One," Masema said. Masema, who hated him. Masema, who looked at him as if seeing a vision of the Light. "I saw you, Lord Dragon. I saw. I am your man, to the death." His dark eyes shone with fervor.

"ju mʌs tʃuz, ɹænd," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ðə wɝld wɪl bi bɹoʊkən wɛðɝ jə bɹeɪk ɪɾ əɹ nɑt. tɑɹmən ɡdən wɪl kʌm, ən ðəɾ əloʊn wɪl tɛɹ ðə wɝld əpɑɹt. wɪl jə stɪl tʃɹaɪ tə haɪd fɹəm wʌt jə ɑɹ, ən liv ðə wɝl tə feɪs ðə læs bæɾəl ʌndɪfɛndəd? tʃuz."

"You must choose, Rand," Moiraine said. "The world will be broken whether you break it or not. Tarmon Gai'don will come, and that alone will tear the world apart. Will you still try to hide from what you are, and leave the world to face the Last Battle undefended? Choose."

ðeɪ wɝ ɔl wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, ɔl weɪɾɪŋ. dɛθ ɪz laɪɾɝ ðən ə fɛðɝ, duɾi hɛviɝ ðən ə maʊntən. hi meɪɾ ɪz dɪsɪʒən.

They were all watching him, all waiting. Death is lighter than a feather, duty heavier than a mountain. He made his decision.


tʃæptɝ fɪfti


CHAPTER 50

æftɝ


After

baɪ ʃɪp ən hɔɹs ðə stɔɹiz spɹɛd, baɪ mɝtʃənt wæɡən ən mæn ɑn fʊt, toʊld ən ɹitoʊld, tʃeɪnʒɪŋ jɛɾ ɔlweɪz əlaɪk ət ðə hɑɹt, tə ɑɹæd dumən ən tæɹɑbən ən bɪɑnd, ʌv saɪnz ən pɔɹtɛns ɪn ðə skaɪ əbʌv fɑlm. ən mɛn pɹoʊkleɪm ðɛmsɛlvz fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən, ən ʌðɝ mɛn stʃɹʌk əm daʊn ən wɝ stʃɹʌk daʊn ɪn tɝn.

By ship and horse the stories spread, by merchant wagon and man on foot, told and retold, changing yet always alike at the heart, to Arad Doman and Tarabon and beyond, of signs and portents in the sky above Falme. And men proclaimed themselves for the Dragon, and other men struck them down and were struck down in turn.

ʌðɝ teɪlz spɹɛd, ʌv ə kɑləm ðət ɹoʊd fɹəm ðə sɪŋkɪŋ sʌn əkɹɔs ɑlməθ pleɪn. ə hʌnʒɹəd bɔɹɾɝmɪn, ɪt wɑz sɛd. noʊ, ə θaʊzənd. noʊ, ə θaʊzən hɪɹoʊz kʌm bæk fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪv tə ænsɝ ðə kɔl ə ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. tɛn θaʊzənd. ðeɪ hæd dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ə lidʒən ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪɾ ɪntaɪɝ. ðeɪ hæd θɹoʊn ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɹɪtɝn ɑɹmiz bæk ɪndə ðə si. ðeɪ wɝ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɑɹmiz ɹɪtɝnd. təwɔɹd ðə maʊntənz ðeɪ ɹoʊd, təwɔɹd ðə dɔn.

Other tales spread, of a column that rode from the sinking sun across Almoth Plain. A hundred Bordermen, it was said. No, a thousand. No, a thousand heroes come back from the grave to answer the call of the Horn of Valere. Ten thousand. They had destroyed a legion of the Children of the Light entire. They had thrown Artur Hawkwing's returned armies back into the sea. They were Artur Hawkwing's armies returned. Toward the mountains they rode, toward the dawn.

jɛt wʌn θɪŋ ɛvɹi teɪl hæd ðə seɪm. ət ðɛɹ hɛd ɹoʊɾ ə mæn huz feɪs hæd bɪn sin ɪn ðə skaɪ əbʌv fɑlm, ən ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ʌndɝ ðə bænɝ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

Yet one thing every tale had the same. At their head rode a man whose face had been seen in the sky above Falme, and they rode under the banner of the Dragon Reborn.

ən mɛn kɹaɪɾ aʊt tə ðə kɹieɪɾɝ, seɪɪŋ, oʊ laɪɾ ə ðə hɛvənz, laɪɾ ə ðə wɝld, lɛt ðə pɹɑməst wʌn bi bɔɹn ə ðə maʊntən, əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə pɹɑfəsiz, əz i wɑz ɪn eɪdʒəz pæst ən wɪl bi ɪn eɪdʒəz tə kʌm. lɛt ðə pɹɪns ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ sɪŋ tə ðə læn ðət ɡɹin θɪŋz wɪl ɡɹoʊ ən ðə væliz ɡɪv fɔɹθ læmz. lɛt ði ɑɹm ə ðə lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɔn ʃɛltɝ əs fɹəm ðə dɑɹk, ən ðə ɡɹeɪt sɔɹɾ ə dʒʌstəs dɪfɛn ʌs. lɛt ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹaɪɾ əɡɛn ɑn ðə wɪnz ə taɪm.

And men cried out to the Creator, saying, O Light of the Heavens, Light of the World, let the Promised One be born of the mountain, according to the Prophecies, as he was in Ages past and will be in Ages to come. Let the Prince of the Morning sing to the land that green things will grow and the valleys give forth lambs. Let the arm of the Lord of the Dawn shelter us from the Dark, and the great sword of justice defend us. Let the Dragon ride again on the winds of time.

 - fɹəm tʃɹəl dʒɹiənɑn ti kələmən, ðə saɪkəl ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, ɔθɝ ənnoʊn, ðə fɔɹθ eɪdʒ ði ɛn ə ðə sɛkən bʊk ə ðə wil ə taɪm ɡlɔsɝi eɪ noʊɾ ɑn deɪts ɪn ðɪs ɡlɔsɝi. θɹi sɪstəmz ə ɹəkɔɹɾɪŋ deɪts əv bɪn ɪn dʒɛnɝəl jus sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. ðə fɝst ɹəkɔɹɾəd jɪɹz æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ (æb). sɪns ðə jɪɹz ə ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ən ɪmiɾiətli æftɝ wɝ jɪɹz ʌv ɔlmoʊs toʊɾəl keɪɑs, ən sɪns ðɪs kæləndɝ wɑz ədɑptəɾ ə ɡʊd hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz æftɝ ði ɛn ə ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ, ɪts stɑɹɾɪŋ pɔɪnt wɑz ɑɹbɪtʃɹɛɹəli əsaɪnd. ət ði ɛn ə ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz mɛni ɹɛkɝdz hæd bɪn lɔst, soʊ mʌtʃ soʊ ðət ðəɹ wɑz ɑɹɡjəmən əbaʊt ði ɪɡzæk jɪɹ ʌndɝ ði oʊl sɪstəm. ə nu kæləndɝ wɑz ðɛɹfɔɹ ɪstæblɪʃt, deɪɾɪŋ fɹəm ði ɛn ə ðə wɔɹz ən sɛləbɹeɪɾɪŋ ðə səpoʊz fɹiɾəm ə ðə wɝl fɹəm ðə tʃɹɑlɑk θɹɛt. ðɪs sɛkən kæləndɝ ɹəkɔɹɾəd itʃ jɪɹ əz fɹi jɪɹ (fi). æftɝ ðə dɪsɹʌpʃən, dɛθ, ən dɪstʃɹʌkʃən kɑz baɪ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, ə θɝd kæləndɝ keɪm ɪndə biɪŋ. ðɪs kæləndɝ, ʌv ðə nu ɛɹə (nəbɹæskə), ɪz kɝənli ɪn jus.

 - from Charal Drianaan te Calamon, The Cycle of the Dragon, Author unknown, the Fourth Age The End of the Second Book of The Wheel of Time GLOSSARY A Note on Dates in This Glossary. Three systems of recording dates have been in general use since the Breaking of the World. The first recorded years After the Breaking (AB). Since the years of the Breaking and immediately after were years of almost total chaos, and since this calendar was adopted a good hundred years after the end of the Breaking, its starting point was arbitrarily assigned. At the end of the Trolloc Wars many records had been lost, so much so that there was argument about the exact year under the old system. A new calendar was therefore established, dating from the end of the Wars and celebrating the supposed freedom of the world from the Trolloc threat. This second calendar recorded each year as Free Year (FY). After the disruption, death, and destruction caused by the War of the Hundred Years, a third calendar came into being. This calendar, of the New Era (NE), is currently in use.

æɾəm (aɪ-dæm): ə dɪvaɪs, kənsɪstɪŋ ʌv ə kɑlɝ ən ə bɹeɪslət lɪŋk baɪ ə sɪlvɝi mɛɾəl liʃ, ðət meɪ bi juz tə kəntʃɹoʊl, əɡɛnst əɹ wɪl, ɛni wʊmən u kən tʃænəl. ðə kɑlɝ ɪz wɔɹn baɪ ðə deɪmeɪn, ðə bɹeɪslət baɪ ðə sʌldəm. si ɔlsoʊ deɪmeɪn; sʌldəm.

a'dam (AYE-dam): A device, consisting of a collar and a bracelet linked by a silvery metal leash, that may be used to control, against her will, any woman who can channel. The collar is worn by the damane, the bracelet by the sul'dam. See also damane; sul'dam.

ɛɛs sədaɪ (aɪɛz sɛ-dɪaɪ): wildɝz ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ. sɪns ðə taɪm ə mædnəs, ɔl sɝvaɪvɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ wɪmən. waɪdli dɪstʃɹʌstəɾ ən fɪɹd, ivən heɪɾəd, ðeɪ ɑɹ bleɪm baɪ mɛni fəɹ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, ən ɑɹ θɔt tə mɛɾəl ɪn ði əfɛɹz ə neɪʃənz. ət ðə seɪm taɪm, fju ɹulɝz wɪl bi wɪθaʊɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ædvaɪzɝ, ivən ɪn lænz wɛɹ ði ɛɡzɪstəns ə sətʃ ə kənɛkʃən mʌs bi kɛp sikɹət. si ɔlsoʊ ədʒɑ; æmɪɝlɪn sit; taɪm ə mædnəs.

Aes Sedai (EYEZ seh-DEYE): Wielders of the One Power. Since the Time of Madness, all surviving Aes Sedai are women. Widely distrusted and feared, even hated, they are blamed by many for the Breaking of the World, and are thought to meddle in the affairs of nations. At the same time, few rulers will be without an Aes Sedai advisor, even in lands where the existence of such a connection must be kept secret. See also Ajah; Amyrlin Seat; Time of Madness.

eɪɡəlmɝ; lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ ə haʊs dʒəɡəd (æɡ-ɛl-mɑɹ; dʒɑ-ɡæd): lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə. hɪz saɪn ɪz θɹi ɹʌnɪŋ ɹɛd fɑksəz.

Agelmar; Lord Agelmar of House Jagad (AGH-el-mar; JAH-gad): Lord of Fal Dara. His sign is three running red foxes.

eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz: ði eɪdʒ ɛndəd baɪ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ ən ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. ə taɪm wən ɛɛs sədaɪ pɝfɔɹmd wʌndɝz naʊ oʊnli dʒɹimd ʌv. si ɔlsoʊ wil ə taɪm; bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld; wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ.

Age of Legends: The Age ended by the War of the Shadow and the Breaking of the World. A time when Aes Sedai performed wonders now only dreamed of. See also Wheel of Time; Breaking of the World; War of the Shadow.

il (aɪ-il): ðə pipəl ə ði il weɪst. fɪɹs ən hɑɹɾi. ɔlsoʊ kɔld ilmɛn. ðeɪ veɪl ðɛɹ feɪsəz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kɪl, ɡɪvɪŋ ɹaɪz tə ðə seɪɪŋ "æktɪŋ laɪk ə blæk-veɪld il" tə dɪskɹaɪb sʌmwʌn u ɪz biɪŋ vaɪələnt. dɛdli wɔɹiɝz wɪð wɛpənz əɹ wɪð nʌθɪŋ bʌt ðɛɹ bɛɹ hænz, ðəl nɑt tʌtʃ ə sɔɹd. ðɛɹ paɪpɝz pleɪ ðɛm ɪndə bæɾəl wɪð ðə mjuzɪk ə dænsəz, ən ilmɛn kɔl bæɾəl "ðə dæns." si ɔlsoʊ il wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz; il weɪst.

Aiel (eye-EEL): The people of the Aiel Waste. Fierce and hardy. Also called Aielmen. They veil their faces before they kill, giving rise to the saying "acting like a black-veiled Aiel" to describe someone who is being violent. Deadly warriors with weapons or with nothing but their bare hands, they will not touch a sword. Their pipers play them into battle with the music of dances, and Aielmen call battle "the Dance." See also Aiel warrior societies; Aiel Waste.

il wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz: il wɔɹiɝz ɑɹ ɔl mɛmbɝz ʌv wʌn ə ðə wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz, sətʃ əz ðə stoʊn dɑɡz, ðə ɹɛd ʃilz, əɹ ðə meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ. itʃ səsaɪəɾi hæz ɪts oʊn kʌstəmz, ən səmtaɪmz spəsɪfɪk duɾiz. fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl, ɹɛd ʃilz ækt əz pəlis. stoʊn dɑɡz ɔfən vaʊ nɑt tə ɹitʃɹit wʌns bæɾəl əz bɪn dʒɔɪnd, ən wɪl daɪ tə ðə læs mæn ɪf nɛsəsɛɹi tə fʊlfɪl ðɪs vaʊ. ðə klænz ə ði il fɹikwənli faɪɾ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, bʌt mɛmbɝz ə ðə seɪm səsaɪəɾi wɪl nɑt faɪt wʌn ənʌðɝ ivən ɪf ðɛɹ klænz ɑɹ duɪŋ soʊ. ɪn ðɪs weɪ, ðəɹ ɑɹ ɔlweɪz laɪnz ə kɑntæk bɪtwin ðə klænz ivən wən ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪn oʊpən wɔɹfɛɹ. si ɔlsoʊ il; il weɪst; fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ.

Aiel warrior societies: Aiel warriors are all members of one of the warrior societies, such as the Stone Dogs, the Red Shields, or the Maidens of the Spear. Each society has its own customs, and sometimes specific duties. For example, Red Shields act as police. Stone Dogs often vow not to retreat once battle has been joined, and will die to the last man if necessary to fulfill this vow. The clans of the Aiel frequently fight among themselves, but members of the same society will not fight one another even if their clans are doing so. In this way, there are always lines of contact between the clans even when they are in open warfare. See also Aiel; Aiel Waste; Far Dareis Mai.

il weɪst: ðə hɑɹʃ, ɹʌɡəd, ən ɔl-bʌt-wɔɾɝləs læn ist ə ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld. fju aʊtsaɪɾɝz vɛntʃɝ ðɛɹ, nɑɾ oʊnli kəz wɔɾɝ ɪz ɔlmoʊst ɪmpɑsəbəl tə faɪn fəɹ wʌn nɑt bɔɹn ðɛɹ, bʌt kəz ði il kənsɪɾɝ ðɛmsɛlvz ət wɔɹ wɪð ɔl ʌðɝ pipəlz ən də nɑt wɛlkəm stʃɹeɪnʒɝz.

Aiel Waste: The harsh, rugged, and all-but-waterless land east of the Spine of the World. Few outsiders venture there, not only because water is almost impossible to find for one not born there, but because the Aiel consider themselves at war with all other peoples and do not welcome strangers.

ədʒɑ (ɑ-dʒɑ): səsaɪəɾiz əmʌŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə wɪtʃ ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪksɛp ði æmɪɝlɪn sit bɪlɔŋ. ðeɪ ɑɹ dɛzɪɡneɪɾɪd baɪ kʌlɝz: blu, ɹɛd, waɪt, ɡɹin, bɹaʊn, jɛloʊ, ən ɡɹeɪ. itʃ fɑloʊz ə spəsɪfɪk fəlɑsəfi ʌv ðə jus ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ən ðə pɝpəsəz ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl, ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ bɛnz ɔl ɪts ɛnɝdʒiz tə faɪndɪŋ mɛn u ɑɹ ətɛmptɪŋ tə wil ðə paʊɝ ən tə dʒɛntəlɪŋ ðɛm. ðə bɹaʊn ədʒɑ, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, fɔɹseɪks ɪnvɑlvmənt wɪð ðə məndeɪn wɝld ən dɛɾɪkeɪts ɪtsɛlf tə sikɪŋ nɑlədʒ. ðəɹ ɑɹ ɹumɝz (hɑtli dɪnaɪd, ən nɛvɝ seɪfli mɛnʃən ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ) ʌv ə blæk ədʒɑ, dɛɾəkeɪtəd tə sɝvɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn.

Ajah (AH-jah): Societies among the Aes Sedai to which all Aes Sedai except the Amyrlin Seat belong. They are designated by colors: Blue, Red, White, Green, Brown, Yellow, and Gray. Each follows a specific philosophy of the use of the One Power and the purposes of the Aes Sedai. For example, the Red Ajah bends all its energies to finding men who are attempting to wield the Power and to gentling them. The Brown Ajah, on the other hand, forsakes involvement with the mundane world and dedicates itself to seeking knowledge. There are rumors (hotly denied, and never safely mentioned in front of any Aes Sedai) of a Black Ajah, dedicated to serving the Dark One.

ɑlɑnə mɑsvɑni (ɑ-læn-nɑ mɔs-væn-ni): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ.

Alanna Mosvani (ah-LAN-nah mos-VANH-nie): An Aes Sedai of the Green Ajah.

ælɑntɪn (ɑ-læn-tɪn): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "bɹʌðɝ;" ʃɔɹt fəɹ tiə ɑvɛn ælɑntɪn, "bɹʌðɝ tə ðə tʃɹiz;" "tʃɹibɹəðɝ."

alantin (ah-LANH-tin): In the Old Tongue, "Brother;" short for tia avende alantin, "Brother to the Trees;" "Treebrother."

eɪlɑɹ (aɪ-lɑɹ): ɛldəst ə ði ɛldɝz ə stɛɾɪŋ tsəfu.

Alar (AYE-lahr): Eldest of the Elders of Stedding Tsofu.

ɑldib (ɑl-dib): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "wɛst waɪnd," ðə wɪn ðət bɹɪŋz ðə spɹɪŋ ɹeɪnz.

Aldieb (ahl-DEEB): In the Old Tongue, "West Wind," the wind that brings the spring rains.

ɑlmɹə, nɪneɪiv (ɑl-miɝ-ɑ, naɪ-niv): ə wʊmən fɹəm ɛmənz fild, ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz dɪstʃɹɪkt ʌv ændɝ (æn-dɔɹ).

al'Meara, Nynaeve (ahl-MEER-ah, NIGH-neev): A woman from Emond's Field, in the Two Rivers district of Andor (AN-door).

ælθɹ, ɹænd (ɑl-θɔɹ, ɹænd): ə jʌŋ mæn fɹəm ɛmənz fild, wʌns ə ʃɛpɝd.

al'Thor, Rand (ahl-THOR, RAND): A young man from Emond's Field, once a shepherd.

ælvɪɹ, ɛɡwin (ɑl-vɪɹ, ɛ-ɡweɪn): ə jʌŋ wʊmən fɹəm ɛmənz fild.

al'Vere, Egwene (ahl-VEER, eh-GWAIN): A young woman from Emond's Field.

əmælisə, leɪɾi (ɑ-mɑ-li-sɑ): ʃaɪnɝən ə haʊs dʒəɡəd; lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝz sɪstɝ.

Amalisa, Lady (ah-mah-LEE-sah): Shienaran of House Jagad; Lord Agelmar's sister.

æmɪɝlɪn sit (ɑm-ɛɹ-lɪn sit): (wʌn) ðə taɪɾəl ə ðə liɾɝ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪlɛktəd fəɹ laɪf baɪ ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, ðə haɪəs kaʊnsəl ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, wɪtʃ kənsɪsts ə θɹi ɹɛpɹəzɛntəɾɪvz (kɔl sɪɾɝz) fɹəm itʃ ə ðə sɛvən ədʒəz. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hæz, θiɝɛɾɪkəli ət list, ɔlmoʊst səpɹim əθɔɹəɾi əmʌŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ɹæŋks soʊʃəli əz ði ikwəl ʌv ə kɪŋ əɹ kwin. ə slaɪtli lɛs fɔɹməl jusədʒ ɪz sɪmpli ði æmɪɝlɪn. (tu) ðə θɹoʊn əpɑn wɪtʃ ðə liɾɝ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɪts.

Amyrlin Seat (AHM-ehr-lin SEAT): (1) The title of the leader of the Aes Sedai. Elected for life by the Hall of the Tower, the highest council of the Aes Sedai, which consists of three representatives (called Sitters) from each of the seven Ajahs. The Amyrlin Seat has, theoretically at least, almost supreme authority among the Aes Sedai, and ranks socially as the equal of a king or queen. A slightly less formal usage is simply the Amyrlin. (2) The throne upon which the leader of the Aes Sedai sits.

æneɪjə (ɑ-naɪ-jɑ): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə blu ədʒɑ.

Anaiya (ah-NYE-yah): An Aes Sedai of the Blue Ajah.

æŋɡɹil (æn-ɡɹi-ɑl): ə vɛɹi ɹɛɹ əbdʒɛk ðəɾ əlaʊz ɛniwʌn keɪpəbəl ə tʃænəlɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ tə hændəl ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ əmaʊn ə ðə paʊɝ ðən wəd bi seɪfli pɑsəbəl əneɪɾɪd. ɹɛmnəns ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, ðə minz ə ðɛɹ meɪkɪŋ ɪz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ noʊn. fju ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ɛɡzɪstəns. si ɔlsoʊ sɑŋɡɹil; tɛɹæŋɡɹil.

angreal (anh-gree-AHL): A very rare object that allows anyone capable of channeling the One Power to handle a greater amount of the Power than would be safely possible unaided. Remnants of the Age of Legends, the means of their making is no longer known. Few remain in existence. See also sa'angreal; ter'angreal.

ɑɹæd dumən (ɑ-ɹɑd du-mæn): ə neɪʃən ɑn ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən.

Arad Doman (AH-rahd do-MAHN): A nation on the Aryth Ocean.

ɝæfəl (ɑ-ɹɑ-fɛl): wʌn ə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz.

Arafel (AH-rah-fehl): One of the Borderlands.

ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə (ɑ-vɛn-dɛ-soʊ-ɹɑ): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə tʃɹi ʌv laɪf." mɛnʃən ɪn mɛni stɔɹiz ən lɛdʒənz.

Avendesora (AH-vehn-deh-SO-rah): In the Old Tongue, "the Tree of Life." Mentioned in many stories and legends.

eɪbɑɹə, pɛɹɪn (eɪ-bɛɹ-ɑ, pɛɹ-ɹɪn): ə jʌŋ mæn fɹəm ɛmənz fild, fɔɹmɝli ə blæksmɪθs əpɹɛntəs.

Aybara, Perrin (ay-BAHR-ah, PEHR-rihn): A young man from Emond's Field, formerly a blacksmith's apprentice.

bælzəmən (bɑ-ɑl-zɑ-moʊn): ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk tʌŋ, "hɑɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk." bɪliv tə bi ðə tʃɹɑlɑk neɪm fəɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn. si ɔlsoʊ dɑɹk wʌn; tʃɹɑləks.

Ba'alzamon (bah-AHL-zah-mon): In the Trolloc tongue, "Heart of the Dark." Believed to be the Trolloc name for the Dark One. See also Dark One; Trollocs.

bɑɹθeɪnz, lɔɹd, ʌv haʊs dəmədʒɹd (bɛɹ-ðæn-nɛs): kɛɹhinɪn lɔɹd, sɛkən oʊnli tə ðə kɪŋ ɪn paʊɝ. hɪz pɝsənəl saɪn ɪz ðə tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ bɔɹ. ðə saɪn ə haʊs dəmədʒɹɾ ɪz ðə kɹaʊn ən tʃɹi.

Barthanes, Lord, of House Damodred (bahr-THAN-nehs): Cairhienin lord, second only to the king in power. His personal sign is the Charging Boar. The sign of House Damodred is the Crown and Tree.

bɛl taɪn (bɛl taɪn): spɹɪŋ fɛstəvəl sɛləbɹeɪɾɪŋ ði ɛn ʌv wɪntɝ, ðə fɝst spɹaʊɾɪŋ ə kɹɑps, ən ðə bɝθ ə ðə fɝs læmz.

Bel Tine (BEHL TINE): Spring festival celebrating the end of winter, the first sprouting of crops, and the birth of the first lambs.

bɪtʃɹeɪɝ ə hoʊp: si ɪʃəml.

Betrayer of Hope: See Ishamael.

bɝdʒɪt (bɝ-dʒit-tɛ): ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd hɛɹoʊən ə lɛdʒən ən ə hʌnʒɹəd ɡlimənz teɪlz, ʃi hæɾ ə sɪlvɝ baʊ ən sɪlvɝ æɹoʊz, wɪð wɪtʃ ʃi nɛvɝ mɪst.

Birgitte (ber-GEET-teh): Golden-haired heroine of legend and a hundred gleemen's tales, she had a silver bow and silver arrows, with which she never missed.

bɪɾɝn (-tɛɹn): ə mjuzɪkəl ɪnstʃɹəmən ðət meɪ hæv sɪks, naɪn, əɹ twɛlv stʃɹɪŋz, ən ɪz hɛl flæɾ ɑn ðə niz ən pleɪd baɪ plʌkɪŋ əɹ stʃɹʌmɪŋ.

bittern (BIHT-tehrn): A musical instrument that may have six, nine, or twelve strings, and is held flat on the knees and played by plucking or strumming.

blæstəd lænz: dɛsəleɪɾɪd lænz sɝaʊndɪŋ ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, bɪɑn ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt.

Blasted Lands: Desolated lands surrounding Shayol Ghul, beyond the Great Blight.

blaɪt, ðə: si ɡɹeɪt blaɪt, ðə.

Blight, the: See Great Blight, the.

bɔɹɾɝlændz, ðə: ðə neɪʃənz bɔɹɾɝɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt. sɑldɑiə, ɝæfəl, kændɝ, ən ʃaɪnɝ.

Borderlands, the: The nations bordering the Great Blight. Saldaea, Arafel, Kandor, and Shienar.

bɔɹnhəld, dʒɛəfɹæm (-hɑld, -ɹæm): eɪ lɔɹd kæptən ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt.

Bornhald, Geofram (BOHRN-hahld, JEHF-rahm): A Lord Captain of the Children of the Light.

bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, ðə: dʊɹɪŋ ðə taɪm ə mædnəs, meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæd ɡɔn ɪnseɪn, ən u kəd wil ðə wʌn paʊɝ tə ə dɪɡɹi naʊ ənnoʊn, tʃeɪnʒd ðə feɪs ə ði ɝθ. ðeɪ kɑzd ɡɹeɪɾ ɝθkweɪks, lɛvəld oʊl maʊntən ɹeɪnʒəz ən ɹeɪz nu maʊntənz, lɪftəd dʒɹaɪ lænd wɛɹ siz hæd bɪn ən meɪd ði oʊʃən ɹʌʃ ɪn wɛɹ dʒɹaɪ læn hæd bɪn. mɛni pɑɹts ə ðə wɝld wɝ kəmplitli dɪpɑpjəleɪɾɪd, ən ðə sɝvaɪvɝz wɝ skæɾɝd laɪk dʌst ɑn ðə wɪnd. ðɪs dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ɪz ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪn stɔɹiz, lɛdʒənz, ən hɪstɝi əz ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. si ɔlsoʊ taɪm ə mædnəs.

Breaking of the World, the: During the Time of Madness, male Aes Sedai who had gone insane, and who could wield the One Power to a degree now unknown, changed the face of the earth. They caused great earthquakes, leveled old mountain ranges and raised new mountains, lifted dry land where seas had been and made the ocean rush in where dry land had been. Many parts of the world were completely depopulated, and the survivors were scattered like dust on the wind. This destruction is remembered in stories, legends, and history as the Breaking of the World. See also Time of Madness.

baɪɑɝ, jɹət (baɪ-ɑɹ, dʒɑ-ɹɛt): ən ɔfəsɝ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt.

Byar, Jaret (BY-ahr, JAH-ret): An officer of the Children of the Light.

keɪɛmlɪn (keɪm-lɪn): ðə kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv ændɝ.

Caemlyn (KAYM-lihn): The capital city of Andor.

kɛɹhin (kaɪ-ɹi-ɛn): boʊθ ə neɪʃən əlɔŋ ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld ən ðə kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv ðət neɪʃən. ðə sɪɾi wɑz bɝn ən luɾəd dʊɹɪŋ ði il wɔɹ (naɪnsɛvənsɪksnaɪnsɛvəneɪt ni). ðə saɪn ə kɛɹhin ɪz ə mɛni-ɹeɪd ɡoʊldən sʌn ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ðə bɑɾəm ʌv ə fild ə skaɪ blu.

Cairhien (KEYE-ree-EHN): Both a nation along the Spine of the World and the capital city of that nation. The city was burned and looted during the Aiel War (976978 NE). The sign of Cairhien is a many-rayed golden sun rising from the bottom of a field of sky blue.

kæɹələn (kɑ-ɹɑ-leɪn): wʌn ə ðə neɪʃənz ɹʌŋ fɹəm ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɛmpaɪɝ dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz. ɪt wikən ðɛɹæftɝ, ən ðə læs tʃɹeɪsəz vænɪʃt əbaʊt faɪvhʌnʒɹəd ni.

Caralain (KAH-rah-layn): One of the nations wrung from Artur Hawkwing's empire during the War of the Hundred Years. It weakened thereafter, and the last traces vanished about 500 NE.

kɔθən, mæt (kɔ-θɑn, mæt): ə jʌŋ mæn fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. fʊl neɪm: meɪtʃɹim (mæt-ɹɪm) kɔθən.

Cauthon, Mat (CAW-thon, MAT): A young man from the Two Rivers. Full name: Matrim (MAT-rihm) Cauthon.

tʃænəl: (vɝb) tə kəntʃɹoʊl ðə floʊ ʌv ðə wʌn paʊɝ. si ɔlsoʊ wʌn paʊɝ.

channel: (verb) To control the flow of the One Power. See also One Power.

tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt: ə səsaɪəɾi hoʊldɪŋ stʃɹɪkt əsɛɾɪk bɪlifs, dɛɾəkeɪtəd tə ðə dɪfiɾ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn ən ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ʌv ɔl dɑɹkfɹɛnz. faʊndəd dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz baɪ lɑthɛɹ mæntəlɝ (loʊ-θheɪɹ mæn-ti-lɑɹ) tə pɹɑsələtaɪz əɡɛns ði ɪnkɹisɪŋ nʌmbɝz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ðeɪ ɪvɑlv dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ɪndə ə kəmplitli mɪlətɛɹi ɔɹɡənəzeɪʃən, ɪkstʃɹimli ɹɪdʒəɾ ɪn ðɛɹ bɪlifs, ən kəmplitli sɝɾən ðəɾ oʊnli ðeɪ noʊ ðə tʃɹuθ ən ðə ɹaɪt. ðeɪ heɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðɛm, ən ɛni hu səpɔɹɾ əɹ bɪfɹɛn ðɛm, dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ðeɪ ɑɹ noʊn dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋli əz waɪtkloʊks. ðɛɹ saɪn ɪz ə ɡoʊldən sʌnbɝst ɑn ə fild ʌv waɪt.

Children of the Light: A society holding strict ascetic beliefs, dedicated to the defeat of the Dark One and the destruction of all Darkfriends. Founded during the War of the Hundred Years by Lothair Mantelar (LOH-thayr MAHN-tee-LAHR) to proselytize against the increasing numbers of Darkfriends, they evolved during the war into a completely military organization, extremely rigid in their beliefs, and completely certain that only they know the truth and the right. They hate Aes Sedai, considering them, and any who support or befriend them, Darkfriends. They are known disparagingly as Whitecloaks. Their sign is a golden sunburst on a field of white.

kɹɑnəkəlz, kipɝ ə ðə: sɛkən ɪn əθɔɹəɾi tə ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ əmʌŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʃi ɔlsoʊ æks əz sɛkɹətɛɹi tə ði æmɪɝlɪn. tʃoʊzən fəɹ laɪf baɪ ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, ən juʒəwəli ʌv ðə seɪm ədʒɑ əz ði æmɪɝlɪn. si ɔlsoʊ æmɪɝlɪn sit; ədʒɑ.

Chronicles, Keeper of the: Second in authority to the Amyrlin Seat among the Aes Sedai, she also acts as secretary to the Amyrlin. Chosen for life by the Hall of the Tower, and usually of the same Ajah as the Amyrlin. See also Amyrlin Seat; Ajah.

kɔɝɪn (koʊ-ɹin-nɛ): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ɹɪtɝn," əɹ "ðə ɹɪtɝn."

Corenne (koh-REEN-neh): In the Old Tongue, "Return," or "the Return."

kʌvənən ə ðə tɛn neɪʃənz: ə junjən fɔɹmd ɪn ðə sɛntʃɝiz æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld wən neɪʃənz wɝ fɝst ɹɛkɹieɪɾɪd (sɝkə θɹihʌnʒɹəd æb). dɛɾəkeɪtəd tə ðə dɪfiɾ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. bɹoʊkən əpɑɹt baɪ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz. si ɔlsoʊ tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz.

Covenant of the Ten Nations: A union formed in the centuries after the Breaking of the World when nations were first recreated (circa 300 AB). Dedicated to the defeat of the Dark One. Broken apart by the Trolloc Wars. See also Trolloc Wars.

kwəndɪlɝ (kweɪn-dɝ-jɑɹ): ɔlsoʊ noʊn əz hɑɹtstoʊn. si hɑɹtstoʊn.

cuendillar (CWAIN-der-yar): Also known as heartstone. See heartstone.

deɪz deɪmɑɹ (dɑ-ɛs deɪ-mɑɹ): ðə ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm, ɔlsoʊ noʊn əz ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz. neɪm ɡɪvən ðə skimɪŋ, plɑts, ən mənɪpjəleɪʃənz fəɹ ædvæntɪdʒ baɪ ðə noʊbəl haʊsəz. ɡɹeɪt vælju ɪz ɡɪvən tə sʌɾəlti, tə eɪmɪŋ ət wʌn θɪŋ waɪl simɪŋ tə eɪm əɾ ənʌðɝ, ən tə ətʃivɪŋ ɛnz wɪð ðə lis vɪzəbəl ɛfɝt.

Daes Dae'mar (DAH-ess day-MAR): The Great Game, also known as the Game of Houses. Name given the scheming, plots, and manipulations for advantage by the noble Houses. Great value is given to subtlety, to aiming at one thing while seeming to aim at another, and to achieving ends with the least visible effort.

daɪ ʃæn (daɪ ʃæn): ə taɪɾəl ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz minɪŋ daɪəɾɪmd bæɾəl lɔɹd. si ɔlsoʊ bɔɹɾɝlændz.

Dai Shan (DYE SHAN): A title in the Borderlands meaning Diademed Battle Lord. See also Borderlands.

deɪmeɪn (dɑ-mæn-i): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "liʃt wʌnz." wɪmən u kən tʃænəl u ɑɹ hɛl pɹɪznɝ baɪ æɾəm ən juz baɪ ðə sintʃæn fəɹ mɛni pɝpəsəz, tʃifɛst ə ðiz biɪŋ əz wɛpənz ɪn bæɾəl. si ɔlsoʊ sintʃæn; æɾəm; sʌldəm.

damane (dah-MAHN-ee): In the Old Tongue, "Leashed Ones." Women who can channel who are held prisoner by a'dam and used by the Seanchan for many purposes, chiefest of these being as weapons in battle. See also Seanchan; a'dam; sul'dam.

dəmədʒɹd, lɔɹd ɡɑleɪdɛdʒɹəd (dæm-oʊ-dʒɹɛd, ɡɑ-lɑd-ɛ-dʒɹaɪd): hæf-bɹʌðɝ tə ɪleɪn ən ɡɔɪn. hɪz saɪn ɪz ə wɪŋ sɪlvɝ sɔɹd, pɔɪn daʊn.

Damodred, Lord Galadedrid (DAHM-oh-drehd, gah-LAHD-eh-drihd): Half-brother to Elayne and Gawyn. His sign is a winged silver sword, point down.

dɑɹkfɹɛnz: ðoʊz u fɑloʊ ðə dɑɹk wʌn ən bɪliv ðəl ɡeɪn ɡɹeɪt paʊɝ ən ɹɪwɔɹdz, ən ivən ɪmɔɹtælɪɾi, wən hiz fɹid fɹəm ɪz pɹɪzən.

Darkfriends: Those who follow the Dark One and believe they will gain great power and rewards, and even immortality, when he is freed from his prison.

dɑɹk wʌn: moʊs kɑmən neɪm, juzd ɪn ɛvɹi lænd, fəɹ ʃeɪtɑn. ðə sɔɹs ʌv ivəl, æntɪθəsəs ə ðə kɹieɪɾɝ. ɪmpɹɪzən baɪ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ ət ðə moʊmən ə kɹieɪʃən ɪn ə pɹɪzən ət ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl. ən ətɛmp tə fɹi hɪm fɹəm ðət pɹɪzən bɹɔɾ əbaʊt ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ, ðə teɪntɪŋ ə seɪɾɪn, ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, ən ði ɛn ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz.

Dark One: Most common name, used in every land, for Shai'tan. The source of evil, antithesis of the Creator. Imprisoned by the Creator at the moment of Creation in a prison at Shayol Ghul. An attempt to free him from that prison brought about the War of the Shadow, the tainting of saidin, the Breaking of the World, and the end of the Age of Legends.

dɑɹk wʌn, neɪmɪŋ ðə: seɪɪŋ ðə tʃɹu neɪm ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn (ʃeɪtɑn) dʒɹɔz ɪz ətɛnʃən, ɪnɛvəɾəbli bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪl fɔɹtʃən ət bɛst, dɪzæstɝ ət wɝst. fəɹ ðət ɹizən, mɛni jufəmɪzəmz ɑɹ juzd, əmʌŋ əm ðə dɑɹk wʌn, fɑðɝ ə laɪz, saɪtblɪndɝ, lɔɹɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪv, ʃɛpɝɾ ə ðə naɪt, hɑɹtsbeɪn, hɑɹtfæŋ, ɡɹæsbɝnɝ, ən lifblaɪɾɝ. sʌmwʌn u simz tə bi ɪnvaɪɾɪŋ ɪl fɔɹtʃən ɪz ɔfən sɛd tə bi "neɪmɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn."

Dark One, naming the: Saying the true name of the Dark One (Shai'tan) draws his attention, inevitably bringing ill fortune at best, disaster at worst. For that reason, many euphemisms are used, among them the Dark One, Father of Lies, Sightblinder, Lord of the Grave, Shepherd of the Night, Heartsbane, Heartfang, Grassburner, and Leafblighter. Someone who seems to be inviting ill fortune is often said to be "naming the Dark One."

dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ: taɪɾəl ə ði ɛɹ tə ðə θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ. ði ɛldəs dɔɾɝ ə ðə kwin səksidz əɹ mʌðɝ ɑn ðə θɹoʊn. wɪθaʊɾ ə sɝvaɪvɪŋ dɔɾɝ, ðə θɹoʊn ɡoʊz tə ðə nɪɹəs fimeɪl blʌd ɹileɪʃən ə ðə kwin.

Daughter-Heir: Title of the heir to the throne of Andor. The eldest daughter of the queen succeeds her mother on the throne. Without a surviving daughter, the throne goes to the nearest female blood relation of the queen.

dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪt: si lænfɝ.

Daughter of the Night: See Lanfear.

doʊm ə tʃɹuθ: ɡɹeɪɾ ɑɾiəns hɔl ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, loʊkeɪɾəd ɪn æmədɔɹ (ɑ-mɑ-dɔɹ), ðə kæpəɾəl ʌv ɑmɑdɪʃiə (ɑ-mɑ-di-tʃi-ɑ). ðəɹ ɪz ə kɪŋ ʌv ɑmɑdɪʃiə, bʌt ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ɹul ɪn ɔl bʌt neɪm. si ɔlsoʊ tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt.

Dome of Truth: Great audience hall of the Children of the Light, located in Amador (AH-mah-door), the capital of Amadicia (AH-mah-DEE-cee-ah). There is a King of Amadicia, but the Children rule in all but name. See also Children of the Light.

də maɪɹ ævɹən (doʊ mi-ɛɹ ə-vɹɔn): si wɑtʃɝz oʊvɝ ðə weɪvz.

Do Miere A'vron (DOH me-EHR a-VRAWN): See Watchers Over the Waves.

doʊmən, beɪl (doʊ-moʊn, beɪl): ðə kæptən ə ðə spɹeɪ, hu kəlɛks oʊl θɪŋz.

Domon, Bayle (DOH-mon, BAIL): The captain of the Spray, who collects old things.

dʒɹæɡkɝ (dʒɹæ-kɑɹ): ə kɹitʃɝ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn, meɪɾ ɝɪdʒənəli baɪ twɪstɪŋ hjumən stɑk. eɪ dʒɹæɡkɝ əpɪɹz tə bi ə lɑɹdʒ mæn wɪð bæt-laɪk wɪŋz, huz skɪn ɪz tu peɪl ən huz aɪz ɑɹ tu lɑɹdʒ. ðə dʒɹæɡkɝz sɔŋ kən dʒɹɔ ɪts pɹeɪ tə ɪt, səpɹɛsɪŋ ðə vɪktəmz wɪl. ðəɹ ɪz ə seɪɪŋ: "ðə kɪs ə ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ ɪz dɛθ." ɪt dʌz nɑt baɪt, bʌɾ ɪts kɪs wɪl kənsum fɝs ðə soʊl ʌv ɪts vɪktəm, ən ðən ɪts laɪf.

Draghkar (DRAGH-kahr): A creature of the Dark One, made originally by twisting human stock. A Draghkar appears to be a large man with bat-like wings, whose skin is too pale and whose eyes are too large. The Draghkar's song can draw its prey to it, suppressing the victim's will. There is a saying: "The kiss of the Draghkar is death." It does not bite, but its kiss will consume first the soul of its victim, and then its life.

dʒɹæɡən, fɔls: əkeɪʒənəli mɛn kleɪm tə bi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən səmtaɪmz wʌn ə ðɛm ɡeɪnz fɑloʊɪŋ ɪnʌf tə ɹikwaɪɝ ən ɑɹmi tə pʊɾ ɪt daʊn. səm əv bɪɡʌn wɔɹz ðəɾ ɪnvɑlv mɛni neɪʃənz. oʊvɝ ðə sɛntʃɝiz moʊst ə ðiz əv bɪn mɛn əneɪbəl tə tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ, bʌɾ ə fju kəd də soʊ. ɔl, haʊɛvɝ, iðɝ dɪsəpɪɹɾ əɹ wɝ kæptʃɝɾ əɹ kɪld wɪθaʊt fʊlfɪlɪŋ ɛni ʌv ðə pɹɑfəsiz kənsɝnɪŋ ðə ɹibɝθ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən. ðiz mɛn ɑɹ kɔl fɔls dʒɹæɡənz. əmʌŋ ðoʊz u kəd tʃænəl, ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl wɝ ɹɑoʊlɪn dɑɹksbeɪn (θɹiθɝɾifaɪvθɝdisɪksæb), jʊɹiən stoʊnboʊ (sɝkə wʌnθɹizɪɹoʊzɪɹoʊwʌnθɹizɪɹoʊeɪɾ æb), dɑviən (fi θɹihʌnʒɹədfɪftiwʌn), ɡɛɹ əmɑlɑsən (fi naɪnθɹinaɪnfɔɹθɹi), ən lɑɡən (naɪnhʌnʒɹədnaɪntisɛvən ni). si ɔlsoʊ dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

Dragon, false: Occasionally men claim to be the Dragon Reborn, and sometimes one of them gains following enough to require an army to put it down. Some have begun wars that involved many nations. Over the centuries most of these have been men unable to channel the One Power, but a few could do so. All, however, either disappeared or were captured or killed without fulfilling any of the Prophecies concerning the Rebirth of the Dragon. These men are called false Dragons. Among those who could channel, the most powerful were Raolin Darksbane (33536AB), Yurian Stonebow (circa 13001308 AB), Davian (FY 351), Guaire Amalasan (FY 93943), and Logain (997 NE). See also Dragon Reborn.

dʒɹæɡən, pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə: lɪɾəl noʊn ən sɛldəm spoʊkən ʌv, ðə pɹɑfəsiz, ɡɪvən ɪn ðə kæɹæəθən saɪkəl, fɔɹtɛl ðət ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɪl bi fɹiɾ əɡɛn tə tʌtʃ ðə wɝld. ən ðət luz θɝɪn tɛləmən, ðə dʒɹæɡən, bɹeɪkɝ ə ðə wɝld, wɪl bi ɹibɔɹn tə faɪt tɑɹmən ɡdən, ðə læs bæɾəl əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ. si ɔlsoʊ dʒɹæɡən, ðə.

Dragon, Prophecies of the: Little known and seldom spoken of, the Prophecies, given in The Karaethon Cycle, foretell that the Dark One will be freed again to touch the world. And that Lews Therin Telamon, the Dragon, Breaker of the World, will be reborn to fight Tarmon Gai'don, the Last Battle against the Shadow. See also Dragon, the.

dʒɹæɡən, ðə: ðə neɪm baɪ wɪtʃ luz θɝɪn tɛləmən wɑz noʊn dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ. ɪn ðə mædnəs ðəɾ oʊvɝtʊk ɔl meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ, luz θɝɪn kɪld ɛvɹi lɪvɪŋ pɝsən u kæɹiɾ ɛni ʌv ɪz blʌd, əz wɛl əz ɛvɹiwʌn i lʌvd, ðʌs ɝnɪŋ ðə neɪm kɪnsleɪɝ. si ɔlsoʊ dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn; dʒɹæɡən, pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə.

Dragon, the: The name by which Lews Therin Telamon was known during the War of the Shadow. In the madness that overtook all male Aes Sedai, Lews Therin killed every living person who carried any of his blood, as well as everyone he loved, thus earning the name Kinslayer. See also Dragon Reborn; Dragon, Prophecies of the.

dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn: əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə pɹɑfəsi ən lɛdʒən ðə dʒɹæɡən wɪl bi bɔɹn əɡɛn ət mænkaɪnz ɡɹeɪɾəst aʊɝ ə nid tə seɪv ðə wɝld. ðɪs ɪz nɑt sʌmθɪŋ pipəl lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə, boʊθ kəz ðə pɹɑfəsiz seɪ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɪl bɹɪŋ ə nu bɹeɪkɪŋ tə ðə wɝld ən kəz luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝ, ðə dʒɹæɡən, ɪz ə neɪm tə meɪk mɛn ʃʌɾɝ, ivən mɔɹ ðən θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz æftɝ ɪz dɛθ. si ɔlsoʊ dʒɹæɡən, ðə; dʒɹæɡən, fɔls; dʒɹæɡən, pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə.

Dragon Reborn: According to prophecy and legend the Dragon will be born again at mankind's greatest hour of need to save the world. This is not something people look forward to, both because the Prophecies say the Dragon Reborn will bring a new Breaking to the world and because Lews Therin Kinslayer, the Dragon, is a name to make men shudder, even more than three thousand years after his death. See also Dragon, the; Dragon, false; Dragon, Prophecies of the.

dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ, ðə: ə staɪlaɪz mɑɹk ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə tɪɹdʒɹɑp bælənst ɑn ɪts pɔɪnt. skɹɔld ɑn ə dɔɹ əɹ ə haʊs, ɪts ən ækjəzeɪʃən ʌv ivəl əɡɛns ðə pipəl ɪnsaɪd, əɹ ən ətɛmp tə bɹɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz ətɛnʃən, ən ðʌs hɑɹm, tə ðɛm.

Dragon's Fang, the: A stylized mark in the shape of a teardrop balanced on its point. Scrawled on a door or a house, it is an accusation of evil against the people inside, or an attempt to bring the Dark One's attention, and thus harm, to them.

dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz: ðoʊz mɛn ən wɪmən hu, eɪbəl tə tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ, wɛn oʊvɝ tə ðə ʃædoʊ dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, æktɪŋ əz kəmændɝz ə ðə tʃɹɑlɑk fɔɹsɪz.

Dreadlords: Those men and women who, able to channel the One Power, went over to the Shadow during the Trolloc Wars, acting as commanders of the Trolloc forces.

ɪleɪɾə (ɛ-laɪ-dɑ): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ hu ædvaɪzɪz kwin mɔɹɡeɪs ʌv ændɝ. ʃi səmtaɪmz əz ðə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ. si ɔlsoʊ fɔɹtɛlɪŋ.

Elaida (eh-LY-da): An Aes Sedai of the Red Ajah who advises Queen Morgase of Andor. She sometimes has the Foretelling. See also Foretelling.

ɪleɪn (i-leɪn): kwin mɔɹɡeɪsəz dɔɾɝ, ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ tə ðə θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ. hɝ saɪn ɪz ə ɡoʊldən lɪli.

Elayne (ee-LAIN): Queen Morgase's daughter, the Daughter-Heir to the Throne of Andor. Her sign is a golden lily.

feɪn, pdən (feɪn, pɑd-æn): ə mæn ɪmpɹɪzən əz ə dɑɹkfɹɛn ɪn fæl dæɹə kip.

Fain, Padan (FAIN, PAHD-ahn): A man imprisoned as a Darkfriend in Fal Dara keep.

fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ (fɑɹ dɑ-ɹaɪz maɪ): lɪɾɝəli "meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ." ə wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾi ʌv ði il, wɪtʃ, ənlaɪk ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz, ədmɪts wɪmən ən oʊnli wɪmən. eɪ meɪɾən meɪ nɑt mɛɹi ən ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə səsaɪəɾi, nɔɹ meɪ ʃi faɪt waɪl kæɹiɪŋ ə tʃaɪld. ɛni tʃaɪl bɔɹn tə ə meɪɾən ɪz ɡɪvən tə ənʌðɝ wʊmən tə ɹeɪz, ɪn sətʃ ə weɪ ðət noʊ wʌn noʊz u ðə tʃaɪlz mʌðɝ wɑz. ("ju meɪ bɪlɔŋ tə noʊ mæn, nɔɹ meɪ ɛni mæn bɪlɔŋ tə ju, nɔɹ ɛni tʃaɪld. ðə spɪɹ ɪz jəɹ lʌvɝ, jəɹ tʃaɪld, ən jəɹ laɪf.") ðiz tʃɪlʒɹən ɑɹ tʃɹɛʒɝd, fəɹ ɪts pɹɑfəsaɪd ðəɾ ə tʃaɪl bɔɹn ʌv ə meɪɾən wɪl junaɪt ðə klænz ən ɹɪtɝn ði il tə ðə ɡɹeɪtnəs ðeɪ nu dʊɹɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. si ɔlsoʊ il; il wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz.

Far Dareis Mai (FAHR DAH-rize MY): Literally "Maidens of the Spear." A warrior society of the Aiel, which, unlike any of the others, admits women and only women. A Maiden may not marry and remain in the society, nor may she fight while carrying a child. Any child born to a Maiden is given to another woman to raise, in such a way that no one knows who the child's mother was. ("You may belong to no man, nor may any man belong to you, nor any child. The spear is your lover, your child, and your life.") These children are treasured, for it is prophesied that a child born of a Maiden will unite the clans and return the Aiel to the greatness they knew during the Age of Legends. See also Aiel; Aiel warrior societies.

faɪv paʊɝz, ðə: ðəɹ ɑɹ θɹɛdz tə ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ən itʃ pɝsən u kən tʃænəl kən juʒəwəli ɡɹæsp səm θɹɛdz bɛɾɝ ðən ʌðɝz. ðiz θɹɛdz ɑɹ neɪmd əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə sɔɹts ə θɪŋz ðət kən bi dʌn juzɪŋ əm - ɝθ, ɛɹ, faɪɝ, wɔɾɝ, ən spɪɹət - ən ɑɹ kɔl ðə faɪv paʊɝz. ɛni wildɝ ə ðə paʊɝ wɪl əv ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ dɪɡɹi ʌv stʃɹɛŋkθ wɪð wʌn, əɹ pɑsəbli tu, ʌv ðiz, ən lɛsɝ stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ði ʌðɝz. səm fju meɪ hæv ɡɹeɪt stʃɹɛŋkθ wɪð θɹi, bʌt sɪns ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz noʊ wʌn əz hæd ɡɹeɪt stʃɹɛŋkθ wɪð ɔl faɪv. ivən ðən ðɪs wɑz ɪkstʃɹimli ɹɛɹ. ðə dɪɡɹi ʌv stʃɹɛŋkθ kən vɛɹi ɡɹeɪtli bɪtwin ɪndəvɪdʒəwəlz, soʊ ðət səm u kən tʃænəl ɑɹ mʌtʃ stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ʌðɝz. pɝfɔɹmɪŋ sɝɾən æks wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɹikwaɪɝz əbɪləɾi ɪn wʌn əɹ mɔɹ ə ðə faɪv paʊɝz. fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl, stɑɹɾɪŋ əɹ kəntʃɹoʊlɪŋ ə faɪɝ ɹikwaɪɝz faɪɝ, ən əfɛktɪŋ ðə wɛðɝ ɹikwaɪɝz ɛɹ ən wɔɾɝ, waɪl hilɪŋ ɹikwaɪɝz wɔɾɝ ən spɪɹət. waɪl spɪɹət wɑz faʊn ikwəli ɪn mɛn ən ɪn wɪmən, ɡɹeɪɾ əbɪləɾi wɪð ɝθ ænslæʃɔɹ faɪɝ wɑz faʊn mʌtʃ mɔɹ ɔfən əmʌŋ mɛn; wɪð wɔɾɝ ænslæʃɔɹ ɛɹ əmʌŋ wɪmən. ðəɹ wɝ ɪksɛpʃənz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz soʊ ɔfən soʊ ðəɾ ɝθ ən faɪɝ keɪm tə bi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd əz meɪl paʊɝz, ɛɹ ən wɔɾɝ əz fimeɪl. dʒɛnɝəli, noʊ əbɪləɾi ɪz kənsɪɾɝd stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ, ðoʊ ðəɹ ɪz ə seɪɪŋ əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ: "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ ɹɑk soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ðət wɔɾɝ ən wɪn kænɑt wɛɹ ɪɾ əweɪ, noʊ faɪɝ soʊ fɪɹs ðət wɔɾɝ kænɑt kwɛntʃ ɪɾ əɹ wɪn snʌf ɪɾ aʊt." ɪt ʃəd bi noʊɾəd ðɪs seɪɪŋ keɪm ɪndə jus lɔŋ æftɝ ðə læs meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz dɛd. ɛni ɪkwɪvələn seɪɪŋ əmʌŋ meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪz lɔŋ lɔst.

Five Powers, the: There are threads to the One Power, and each person who can channel can usually grasp some threads better than others. These threads are named according to the sorts of things that can be done using them - Earth, Air, Fire, Water, and Spirit - and are called the Five Powers. Any wielder of the Power will have a greater degree of strength with one, or possibly two, of these, and lesser strength in the others. Some few may have great strength with three, but since the Age of Legends no one has had great strength with all five. Even then this was extremely rare. The degree of strength can vary greatly between individuals, so that some who can channel are much stronger than others. Performing certain acts with the One Power requires ability in one or more of the Five Powers. For example, starting or controlling a fire requires Fire, and affecting the weather requires Air and Water, while Healing requires Water and Spirit. While Spirit was found equally in men and in women, great ability with Earth and/or Fire was found much more often among men; with Water and/or Air among women. There were exceptions, but it was so often so that Earth and Fire came to be regarded as male Powers, Air and Water as female. Generally, no ability is considered stronger than any other, though there is a saying among Aes Sedai: "There is no rock so strong that water and wind cannot wear it away, no fire so fierce that water cannot quench it or wind snuff it out." It should be noted this saying came into use long after the last male Aes Sedai was dead. Any equivalent saying among male Aes Sedai is long lost.

fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn: ðə sɪmbəl ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ə staɪlaɪzd ɹɛpɹəzɛnteɪʃən ʌv ə fleɪm; ə waɪt tɪɹdʒɹɑp wɪð ðə pɔɪn ʌpwɝd.

Flame of Tar Valon: The symbol of Tar Valon, the Amyrlin Seat, and the Aes Sedai. A stylized representation of a flame; a white teardrop with the point upward.

fɔɹseɪkən, ðə: neɪm ɡɪvən tə θɝtin ə ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ɛɛs sədaɪ ɛvɝ noʊn, hu wɛn oʊvɝ tə ðə dɑɹk wʌn dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ ɪn ɹɪtɝn fəɹ ðə pɹɑməs ʌv ɪmɔɹtælɪɾi. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə boʊθ lɛdʒən ən fɹæɡməntɛɹi ɹɛkɝdz, ðeɪ wɝ ɪmpɹɪzən əlɔŋ wɪð ðə dɑɹk wʌn wən ɪz pɹɪzən wɑz ɹisild. ðɛɹ neɪmz ɑɹ stɪl juz tə fɹaɪɾən tʃɪlʒɹən.

Forsaken, the: Name given to thirteen of the most powerful Aes Sedai ever known, who went over to the Dark One during the War of the Shadow in return for the promise of immortality. According to both legend and fragmentary records, they were imprisoned along with the Dark One when his prison was resealed. Their names are still used to frighten children.

ɡeɪɾɪn (ɡaɪ-din): lɪɾɝəli, "bɹʌðɝ tə bæɾəlz." ə taɪɾəl juz baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ ðə wɔɹɾɝz. si ɔlsoʊ wɔɹɾɝ.

Gaidin (GYE-deen): Literally, "Brother to Battles." A title used by Aes Sedai for the Warders. See also Warder.

ɡɑləd (ɡɑ-lɑd): si dəmədʒɹd, lɔɹd ɡɑleɪdɛdʒɹəd.

Galad (gah-LAHD): See Damodred, Lord Galadedrid.

ɡɔlʒɹiən su ɹieɪɾən ɹi (ɡɑl-dʒɹi-æn su ɹeɪaɪ-ɑ-tɪn ɹi): lɪɾɝəli, ɡɔlʒɹiən ə haʊs ɹieɪɾən, kɪŋ. kɪŋ ə kɛɹhin. si ɔlsoʊ kɛɹhin.

Galldrian su Riatin Rie (GAHL-dree-ahn soo REYE-ah-tin REE): Literally, Galldrian of House Riatin, King. King of Cairhien. See also Cairhien.

ɡeɪm ə haʊzɪz, ðə: si deɪz deɪmɑɹ.

Game of Houses, the: See Daes Dae'mar.

ɡɔɪn (ɡɑ-wɪn): kwin mɔɹɡeɪsəz sʌn, ən ɪleɪnz bɹʌðɝ. hɪz saɪn ɪz ə waɪt bɔɹ.

Gawyn (GAH-wihn): Queen Morgase's son, and Elayne's brother. His sign is a white boar.

dʒɛntəlɪŋ: ði ækt, pɝfɔɹm baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʌv ʃʌɾɪŋ ɔf ə meɪl u kən tʃænəl fɹəm ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ðɪs ɪz nɛsəsɛɹi kəz ɛni mæn u lɝnz tə tʃænəl wɪl ɡoʊ ɪnseɪn fɹəm ðə teɪn ɑn seɪɾɪn ən wɪl ɔlmoʊst sɝɾənli də hɔɹəbəl θɪŋz wɪð ðə paʊɝ ɪn ɪz mædnəs. ə mæn u hæz bɪn dʒɛntəl kən stɪl sɛns ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, bʌɾ i kænɑt tʌtʃ ɪt. wʌtɛvɝ mædnəs əz kʌm bɪfɔɹ dʒɛntəlɪŋ ɪz ɝɛstəd baɪ ði ækt ə dʒɛntəlɪŋ, bʌt nɑt kjʊɹd baɪ ɪt, ən ɪf ɪts dʌn sun ɪnʌf dɛθ kən bi əvɝɾəd. si ɔlsoʊ wʌn paʊɝ, ðə; stɪlɪŋ.

gentling: The act, performed by Aes Sedai, of shutting off a male who can channel from the One Power. This is necessary because any man who learns to channel will go insane from the taint on saidin and will almost certainly do horrible things with the Power in his madness. A man who has been gentled can still sense the True Source, but he cannot touch it. Whatever madness has come before gentling is arrested by the act of gentling, but not cured by it, and if it is done soon enough death can be averted. See also One Power, the; stilling.

ɡlimən: ə tʃɹævlɪŋ stɔɹitɛlɝ, mjuzɪʃən, dʒʌɡəlɝ, tʌmblɝ, ən ɔl-ɝaʊn ɛntɝteɪnɝ. noʊn baɪ ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪdmɑɹk kloʊks ə mɛni-kʌlɝd pætʃəz, ðeɪ pɝfɔɹm meɪnli ɪn ðə vɪlədʒəz ən smɔlɝ taʊnz.

gleeman: A traveling storyteller, musician, juggler, tumbler, and all-around entertainer. Known by their trademark cloaks of many-colored patches, they perform mainly in the villages and smaller towns.

ɡoʊbən (ɡoʊ-ɑ-bæn): wʌn ə ðə neɪʃənz ɹʌŋ fɹəm ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɛmpaɪɝ dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz. ɪt wikənd, ən feɪɾəd əweɪ əpɹɑksəmətli faɪvhʌnʒɹəd ni. si ɔlsoʊ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ; wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz.

Goaban (GO-ah-banh): One of the nations wrung from Artur Hawkwing's empire during the War of the Hundred Years. It weakened, and faded away approximately 500 NE. See also Artur Hawkwing; War of the Hundred Years.

ɡɹeɪt blaɪt, ðə: ə ɹidʒən ɪn ðə fɑɹ nɔɹθ, ɪntaɪɝli kɝʌptɪd baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ə hɔn ə tʃɹɑləks, mɹdʒɹɑl, ən ʌðɝ kɹitʃɝz ə ðə ʃædoʊ.

Great Blight, the: A region in the far north, entirely corrupted by the Dark One. A haunt of Trollocs, Myrddraal, and other creatures of the Shadow.

ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm, ðə: si deɪz deɪmɑɹ.

Great Game, the: See Daes Dae'mar.

ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn, ðə: ə saɪkəl ə stɔɹiz kənsɝnɪŋ ðə lɛdʒəndɛɹi sɝtʃ fəɹ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, ɪn ðə jɪɹz bɪtwin ði ɛn ə ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz ən ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ə ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz. ɪf toʊld ɪn ɪts ɪntaɪɝɾi, ðə saɪkəl wəd teɪk mɛni deɪz.

Great Hunt of the Horn, The: A cycle of stories concerning the legendary search for the Horn of Valere, in the years between the end of the Trolloc Wars and the beginning of the War of the Hundred Years. If told in its entirety, the cycle would take many days.

ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk: ðə neɪm baɪ wɪtʃ dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɹəfɝ tə ðə dɑɹk wʌn, kleɪmɪŋ ðət tə juz ɪz tʃɹu neɪm wəd bi blæsfəməs.

Great Lord of the Dark: The name by which Darkfriends refer to the Dark One, claiming that to use his true name would be blasphemous.

ɡɹeɪt sɝpənt: ə sɪmbəl fəɹ taɪm ən ɪtɝnəɾi, eɪntʃən bɪfɔɹ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz bɪɡæn, kənsɪstɪŋ ʌv ə sɝpən iɾɪŋ ɪts oʊn teɪl. ə ɹɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ə ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɪz əwɔɹɾəd tə wɪmən u hæv bɪn ɹeɪz tə ði æksɛptɪɾ əmʌŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Great Serpent: A symbol for time and eternity, ancient before the Age of Legends began, consisting of a serpent eating its own tail. A ring in the shape of the Great Serpent is awarded to women who have been raised to the Accepted among the Aes Sedai.

heɪlin (haɪ-li-nɛ): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðoʊz u kʌm bɪfɔɹ," əɹ "fɔɹʌnɝz."

Hailene (heye-LEE-neh): In the Old Tongue, "Those Who Come Before," or "Forerunners."

hæfmən: si mɹdʒɹɑl.

Halfman: See Myrddraal.

hɑɹɾən: wʌn ə ðə neɪʃənz ɹʌŋ fɹəm ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɛmpaɪɝ, naʊ lɔŋ fɝɡɑɾən. ɪt leɪ bɪtwin kɛɹhin ən ʃaɪnɝ.

Hardan: One of the nations wrung from Artur Hawkwing's empire, now long forgotten. It lay between Cairhien and Shienar.

hɔkwɪŋ, ɑɹɾɝ: ə lɛdʒəndɛɹi kɪŋ (ɹul fi naɪnfɔɹθɹinaɪnnaɪnfɔɹ) hu junaɪɾəd ɔl ðə lænz wɛst ə ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld. hi ivən sɛn ɑɹmiz əkɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən (fi naɪnhʌnʒɹədnaɪntitu), bʌɾ ɔl kɑntækt wɪð ðiz wɑz lɔst əɾ ɪz dɛθ, wɪtʃ sɛɾ ɔf ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz. hɪz saɪn wɑz ə ɡoʊldən hɔk ɪn flaɪt. si ɔlsoʊ wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz.

Hawkwing, Artur: A legendary king (ruled FY 943994) who united all the lands west of the Spine of the World. He even sent armies across the Aryth Ocean (FY 992), but all contact with these was lost at his death, which set off the War of the Hundred Years. His sign was a golden hawk in flight. See also War of the Hundred Years.

hɑɹtstoʊn: ən ɪndəstʃɹʌktɪbəl sʌbstəns kɹieɪɾəd dʊɹɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ɛni fɔɹs juzd ɪn ən ətɛmp tə bɹeɪk ɪts əbzɔɹbd, meɪkɪŋ hɑɹtstoʊn stʃɹɔŋɝ. si ɔlsoʊ kwəndɪlɝ.

heartstone: An indestructible substance created during the Age of Legends. Any force used in an attempt to break it is absorbed, making heartstone stronger. See also cuendillar.

haɪd: ə junəɾ ʌv ɛɹiə fəɹ mɛʒɝɪŋ lænd, ikwəl tə wʌnhʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz baɪ wʌnhʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz.

hide: A unit of area for measuring land, equal to 100 paces by 100 paces.

hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ (vɑ-lɪɹ): ðə lɛdʒəndɛɹi əbdʒɛkt ə ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn. ðə hɔɹn səpoʊzədli kən kɔl bæk dɛd hɪɹoʊz fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪv tə faɪɾ əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ.

Horn of Valere (vah-LEER): The legendary object of the Great Hunt of the Horn. The Horn supposedly can call back dead heroes from the grave to fight against the Shadow.

hʌnʒɹəd kəmpænjənz, ðə: wʌn hʌnʒɹəd meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ, əmʌŋ ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, hu, lɛd baɪ luz θɝɪn tɛləmən, lɔntʃt ðə faɪnəl stʃɹoʊk ðəɾ ɛndəd ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ baɪ silɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn bæk ɪndə hɪz pɹɪzən. ðə dɑɹk wʌnz kaʊntɝstʃɹoʊk teɪntɪd seɪɾɪn; ðə hʌnʒɹəd kəmpænjənz wɛn mæɾ ən bɪɡæn ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. si ɔlsoʊ taɪm ə mædnəs; bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld; tʃɹu sɔɹs; wʌn paʊɝ.

Hundred Companions, the: One hundred male Aes Sedai, among the most powerful of the Age of Legends, who, led by Lews Therin Telamon, launched the final stroke that ended the War of the Shadow by sealing the Dark One back into his prison. The Dark One's counterstroke tainted saidin; the Hundred Companions went mad and began the Breaking of the World. See also Time of Madness; Breaking of the World; True Source; One Power.

hʊɹɪn (hju-ɹɪn): eɪ ʃaɪnɝən u hæz ði əbɪləɾi tə smɛl wɛɹ vaɪələns əz bɪn dʌn, ən tə fɑloʊ ðə sɛn ə ðoʊz u dɪɾ ɪt. kɔld ə "snɪfɝ," hi sɝvz ðə kɪŋz dʒʌstəs ɪn fæl dæɹə, ɪn ʃaɪnɝ.

Hurin (HEW-rhin): A Shienaran who has the ability to smell where violence has been done, and to follow the scent of those who did it. Called a "sniffer," he serves the King's justice in Fal Dara, in Shienar.

ɪljən (ɪl-li-æn): ə ɡɹeɪt pɔɹɾ ɑn ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv ðə neɪʃən ə ðə seɪm neɪm.

Illian (IHL-lee-ahn): A great port on the Sea of Storms, capital city of the nation of the same name.

ɪŋtʃɹ, lɔɹd, ʌv haʊs ʃɪnoʊwə (ɪŋ-tɑɹ); (ʃi-noʊ-wɑ): eɪ ʃaɪnɝən wɔɹiɝ. hɪz saɪn ɪz ðə ɡɹeɪ aʊl.

Ingtar, Lord, of House Shinowa (IHNG-tahr); (shih-NOH-wah): A Shienaran warrior. His sign is the Gray Owl.

ɪʃəml (ɪ-ʃɑ-meɪ-ɛl): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "bɪtʃɹeɪɝ ə hoʊp." wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən. neɪm ɡɪvən tə ðə liɾɝ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hu wɛn oʊvɝ tə ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪn ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ. ɪts sɛd ðəɾ ivən i fɝɡɑɾ ɪz tʃɹu neɪm. si ɔlsoʊ fɔɹseɪkən.

Ishamael (ih-SHAH-may-EHL): In the Old Tongue, "Betrayer of Hope." One of the Forsaken. Name given to the leader of the Aes Sedai who went over to the Dark One in the War of the Shadow. It is said that even he forgot his true name. See also Forsaken.

kæɹæəθən saɪkəl, ðə (kɑ-ɹi-ɑ-θɑn): si dʒɹæɡən, pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə.

Karaethon Cycle, The (ka-REE-ah-thon): See Dragon, Prophecies of the.

kɪθ: kloʊs fɹɛnz ən əkweɪntənsɪz.

kith: Close friends and acquaintances.

leɪmən (leɪ-mæn): ə kɪŋ ə kɛɹhin, ʌv haʊs dəmədʒɹd, hu lɔst ɪz θɹoʊn ən laɪf ɪn ði il wɔɹ.

Laman (LAY-mahn): A king of Cairhien, of House Damodred, who lost his throne and life in the Aiel War.

læn; ælən mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən (ɑl-læn mæn-dʒɹæɡ-ɔɹ-æn): eɪ wɔɹɾɝ, bɑndəd tə mɔɪɹeɪn. ʌnkɹoʊn kɪŋ ə mɔlkiɝ, daɪ ʃæn, ən ðə læst sɝvaɪvɪŋ mɔlkɪɹi lɔɹd. si ɔlsoʊ wɔɹɾɝ; mɔɪɹeɪn; mɔlkiɝ; daɪ ʃæn.

Lan; al'Lan Mandragoran (AHL-LAN man-DRAG-or-an): A Warder, bonded to Moiraine. Uncrowned King of Malkier, Dai Shan, and the last surviving Malkieri lord. See also Warder; Moiraine; Malkier; Dai Shan.

lænfɝ (læn-fɪɹ): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪt." wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən, pɝhæps ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl nɛks tə ɪʃəml. ənlaɪk ði ʌðɝ fɔɹseɪkən, ʃi tʃoʊz ðɪs neɪm hɝsɛlf. ʃiz sɛd tə hæv bɪn ɪn lʌv wɪð luz θɝɪn tɛləmən. si ɔlsoʊ fɔɹseɪkən; dʒɹæɡən, ðə.

Lanfear (LAN-fear): In the Old Tongue, "Daughter of the Night." One of the Forsaken, perhaps the most powerful next to Ishamael. Unlike the other Forsaken, she chose this name herself. She is said to have been in love with Lews Therin Telamon. See also Forsaken; Dragon, the.

liɡ: si lɛŋθ, junəts ʌv.

league: See Length, units of.

lin (li-æn-ɛ): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə blu ədʒɑ, ən kipɝ ə ðə kɹɑnəkəlz. si ɔlsoʊ ədʒɑ; kɹɑnəkəlz, kipɝ ə ðə.

Leane (lee-AHN-eh): An Aes Sedai of the Blue Ajah, and Keeper of the Chronicles. See also Ajah; Chronicles, Keeper of the.

liʃt wʌnz: si deɪmeɪn.

Leashed Ones: See damane.

lɛŋθ, junəts ʌv: tɛn ɪntʃəz ikwəlz θɹi hænz ikwəlz wʌn fʊt; θɹi fiɾ ikwəlz wʌn peɪs; tu peɪsɪz ikwəlz wʌn spæn; wʌnθaʊzən spænz ikwəlz wʌn maɪl; fɔɹ maɪlz ikwəlz wʌn liɡ.

Length, units of: 10 inches = 3 hands = 1 foot; 3 feet = 1 pace; 2 paces = 1 span; 1000 spans = 1 mile; 4 miles = 1 league.

luz θɝɪn tɛləmən; luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝ: si dʒɹæɡən, ðə.

Lews Therin Telamon; Lews Therin Kinslayer: See Dragon, the.

liɑnʒɹɪn (li-æn-dʒɹɪn): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ, fɹəm tæɹɑbən.

Liandrin (lee-AHN-drihn): An Aes Sedai of the Red Ajah, from Tarabon.

lɑɡən (loʊ-ɡeɪn): ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən, dʒɛntəl baɪ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Logain (loh-GAYN): A false Dragon, gentled by the Aes Sedai.

lɔɪəl (lɔɪ-ɑl): ən oʊɡiɝ fɹəm stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ.

Loial (LOY-ahl): An Ogier from Stedding Shangtai.

luk; lɔɹd luk ə haʊs mæntʃɹ (luk; mæn-ti-ɑɹ): tɪɡɹeɪnz bɹʌðɝ. hɪz dɪsəpɪɹəns ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt (naɪnhʌnʒɹədsɛvəntiwʌn ni) ɪz bɪliv tə bi kənɛktəd tə tɪɡɹeɪnz leɪɾɝ dɪsəpɪɹəns. hɪz saɪn wɑz ən eɪkɔɹn.

Luc; Lord Luc of House Mantear (LUKE; MAN-tee-ahr): Tigraine's brother. His disappearance in the Great Blight (971 NE) is believed to be connected to Tigraine's later disappearance. His sign was an acorn.

luthɛɹ: si mɑndwɪn, luthɛɹ pɛndʒɹæɡ.

Luthair: See Mondwin, Luthair Paendrag.

mɔlkiɝ (mɑl-kiɪɹ): ə neɪʃən, wʌns wʌn ə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, naʊ kənsum baɪ ðə blaɪt. ðə saɪn ə mɔlkiɝ wɑz ə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn ɪn flaɪt.

Malkier (mahl-KEER): A nation, once one of the Borderlands, now consumed by the Blight. The sign of Malkier was a golden crane in flight.

meɪnɛðɝən (mæn--ɛɹ-ɛn): wʌn ə ðə tɛn neɪʃənz ðət meɪd ðə sɛkən kʌvənənt, ən ɔlsoʊ ðə kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv ðət neɪʃən. boʊθ sɪɾi ən neɪʃən wɝ ʌɾɝli dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz.

Manetheren (mahn-EHTH-ehr-ehn): One of the Ten Nations that made the Second Covenant, and also the capital city of that nation. Both city and nation were utterly destroyed in the Trolloc Wars.

mɛɹəθdəmeɪn (mɑ-ɹɑθdə-mæn-i): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðoʊz u mʌs bi liʃt." tɝm juz baɪ ðə sintʃæn fəɹ wɪmən u kən tʃænəl, bʌɾ u hæv nɑt jɛt bɪn kæptʃɝɾ ən kɑlɝd. si ɔlsoʊ deɪmeɪn; æɾəm; sintʃæn.

marath'damane (MAH-rahth'dah-MAHN-ee): In the Old Tongue, "Those Who Must Be Leashed." Term used by the Seanchan for women who can channel, but who have not yet been captured and collared. See also damane; a'dam; Seanchan.

mæsimə (mɑ-si-mɑ): eɪ ʃaɪnɝən soʊlʒɝ u heɪts il.

Masema (mah-SEE-mah): A Shienaran soldier who hates Aiel.

mæʃiɑɹə (mɑ-ʃi-ɑ-ɹɑ): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "bɪlʌvd," bʌt minɪŋ ə lʌv ðəɾ ɪz lɔs bɪɑn ɹɪdimɪŋ.

mashiara (mah-shee-AH-rah): In the Old Tongue, "beloved," but meaning a love that is lost beyond redeeming.

mɛɹɪlɪn, tɑm (mɛɹ-ɹɪ-lɪn, tɑm): ə ɡlimən.

Merrilin, Thom (MER-rih-lihn, TOM): A gleeman.

maɪl: si lɛŋθ, junəts ʌv.

mile: See Length, units of.

mɪn (mɪn): ə jʌŋ wʊmən wɪð ði əbɪləɾi tə ɹid ði ɔʊɹəz ʃi səmtaɪmz siz sɝaʊndɪŋ pipəl.

Min (MIN): A young woman with the ability to read the auras she sometimes sees surrounding people.

mɔɪɹeɪn (mwɑ-ɹeɪn): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə blu ədʒɑ.

Moiraine (mwah-RAIN): An Aes Sedai of the Blue Ajah.

mɑndwɪn, luthɛɹ pɛndʒɹæɡ (lu-thɛɹ peɪ-ɛn-dʒɹæɡ moʊn-dwɪn): sʌn ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ, hi kəmændəd ði ɑɹmiz hɔkwɪŋ sɛn əkɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən. hɪz bænɝ wɑz ə ɡoʊldən, spɹɛd-wɪŋ hɔk klʌtʃɪŋ laɪtnɪŋ boʊls. si ɔlsoʊ hɔkwɪŋ, ɑɹɾɝ.

Mondwin, Luthair Paendrag (LEW-thair PAY-ehn-DRAG MON-dwihn): Son of Artur Hawkwing, he commanded the armies Hawkwing sent across the Aryth Ocean. His banner was a golden, spread-winged hawk clutching lightning bolts. See also Hawkwing, Artur.

mɔɹɾɪθ (mʊɹ-dɛθ): kaʊnsəlɝ u tɝn ðə sɪɾi ʌv ɑɹɪdhɔl tə juz dɑɹkfɹɛnz' weɪz əɡɛns ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ðʌs bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪts dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ən ɝnɪŋ ɪɾ ə nu neɪm, ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ ("wɛɹ ðə ʃædoʊ weɪts"). oʊnli wʌn θɪŋ sɝvaɪvz ɪn ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ bɪsaɪd ðə heɪt ðət kɪld ɪt, ən ðəɾ ɪz mɔɹɾɪθ hɪmsɛlf, baʊn ɪn ðə ɹuənz fəɹ tu θaʊzən jɪɹz, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ sʌmwʌn tə kʌm huz soʊl i kən kənsum ən soʊ teɪk ɑn nu flɛʃ.

Mordeth (MOOR-death): Councilor who turned the city of Aridhol to use Darkfriends' ways against the Darkfriends, thus bringing its destruction and earning it a new name, Shadar Logoth ("Where the Shadow Waits"). Only one thing survives in Shadar Logoth beside the hate that killed it, and that is Mordeth himself, bound in the ruins for two thousand years, waiting for someone to come whose soul he can consume and so take on new flesh.

mɔɹɡeɪs (mʊɹ-ɡeɪz): kwin ʌv ændɝ, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs tʃɹəkənd (-ɑnd).

Morgase (moor-GAYZ): Queen of Andor, High Seat of House Trakand (TRAHK-ahnd).

mɹdʒɹɑl (-dʒɹɑl): kɹitʃɝz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn, kəmændɝz ə ðə tʃɹɑləks. twɪstəɾ ɔfspɹɪŋ ə tʃɹɑləks ɪn wɪtʃ ðə hjumən stɑk juz tə kɹieɪt ðə tʃɹɑləks əz ɹisɝfəst, bʌt teɪntɪd baɪ ði ivəl ðət meɪd ðə tʃɹɑləks. fɪzɪkəli ðeɪ ɑɹ laɪk mɛn ɪksɛp ðeɪv noʊ aɪz, bʌt kən si laɪk iɡəlz ɪn laɪɾ əɹ dɑɹk. ðeɪv sɝɾən paʊɝz stɛmɪŋ fɹəm ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ði əbɪləɾi tə kɑz pɛɹəlaɪzɪŋ fɪɹ wɪð ə lʊk ən ði əbɪləɾi tə vænɪʃ wɛɹɛvɝ ðəɹ ɑɹ ʃædoʊz. wʌn ə ðɛɹ fju noʊn wiknəsəz ɪz ðət ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹɪlʌktən tə kɹɔs ɹʌnɪŋ wɔɾɝ. ɪn dɪfɹən lænz ðeɪ ɑɹ noʊn baɪ mɛni neɪmz, əmʌŋ əm hæfmən, ði aɪləs, ʃæɾoʊmən, lɝks, ən feɪdz.

Myrddraal (MUHRD-draal): Creatures of the Dark One, commanders of the Trollocs. Twisted offspring of Trollocs in which the human stock used to create the Trollocs has resurfaced, but tainted by the evil that made the Trollocs. Physically they are like men except they have no eyes, but can see like eagles in light or dark. They have certain powers stemming from the Dark One, including the ability to cause paralyzing fear with a look and the ability to vanish wherever there are shadows. One of their few known weaknesses is that they are reluctant to cross running water. In different lands they are known by many names, among them Halfmen, the Eyeless, Shadowmen, Lurks, and Fades.

naɪl, peɪdʒɹən (naɪ-ɔl, peɪ-dʒɹɑn): lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. si ɔlsoʊ tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt.

Niall, Pedron (NEYE-awl, PAY-drohn): Lord Captain Commander of the Children of the Light. See also Children of the Light.

nɪʃʊɹə, leɪɾi (ɛnaɪeɪtʃ-su-ɹɑ): eɪ ʃaɪnɝən noʊbəlwʊmən, ən wʌn ə ðə leɪɾi əmælisəz ətɛndəns.

Nisura, Lady (nih-SOO-rah): A Shienaran noblewoman, and one of the Lady Amalisa's attendants.

wʌn paʊɝ, ðə: ðə paʊɝ dʒɹɔn fɹəm ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. ðə væs mədʒɔɹəɾi ʌv pipəl ɑɹ kəmplitli əneɪbəl tə lɝn tə tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ə vɛɹi smɔl nʌmbɝ kən bi tɔt tə tʃænəl, ən ən ivən taɪniɝ nʌmbɝ əv ði əbɪləɾi ɪnbɔɹn. fəɹ ðiz fju ðəɹ ɪz noʊ nid tə bi tɔt; ðəl tʌtʃ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs ən tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɑnə əɹ nɑt, pɝhæps wɪθaʊɾ ivən ɹilaɪzɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ duɪŋ. ðɪs ɪnbɔɹn əbɪləɾi juʒəwəli mænəfɛsts ɪtsɛlf ɪn leɪɾ æɾəlɛsəns əɹ ɝli ədʌlthʊd. ɪf kəntʃɹoʊl ɪz nɑt tɔt, əɹ sɛlf-lɝnd (ɪkstʃɹimli dɪfəkəlt, wɪð ə səksɛs ɹeɪɾ ʌv oʊnli wʌn ɪn fɔɹ), dɛθ ɪz sɝɾən. sɪns ðə taɪm ə mædnəs, noʊ mæn əz bɪn eɪbəl tə tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ wɪθaʊɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɡoʊɪŋ kəmplitli, hɔɹəbli mæd, ən ðɛn, ivən ɪf hiz lɝn səm kəntʃɹoʊl, daɪɪŋ fɹəm ə weɪstɪŋ sɪknəs ðət kɑzəz ðə sʌfɝɝ tə ɹɑɾ əlaɪv, ə sɪknəs kɑzd, əz ɪz ðə mædnəs, baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz teɪn ɑn seɪɾɪn. fəɹ ə wʊmən ðə dɛθ ðət kʌmz wɪθaʊt kəntʃɹoʊl ə ðə paʊɝ ɪz lɛs hɔɹəbəl, bʌɾ ɪts dɛθ dʒʌs ðə seɪm. ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝtʃ fəɹ ɡɝlz wɪð ði ɪnbɔɹn əbɪləɾi əz mʌtʃ tə seɪv ðɛɹ laɪvz əz tə ɪnkɹis ɛɛs sədaɪ nʌmbɝz, ən fəɹ mɛn wɪð ɪɾ ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə stɑp ðə tɛɹəbəl θɪŋz ðeɪ ɪnɛvəɾəbli də wɪð ðə paʊɝ ɪn ðɛɹ mædnəs. si ɔlsoʊ tʃænəl; taɪm ə mædnəs; tʃɹu sɔɹs.

One Power, the: The power drawn from the True Source. The vast majority of people are completely unable to learn to channel the One Power. A very small number can be taught to channel, and an even tinier number have the ability inborn. For these few there is no need to be taught; they will touch the True Source and channel the Power whether they want to or not, perhaps without even realizing what they are doing. This inborn ability usually manifests itself in late adolescence or early adulthood. If control is not taught, or self-learned (extremely difficult, with a success rate of only one in four), death is certain. Since the Time of Madness, no man has been able to channel the Power without eventually going completely, horribly mad, and then, even if he has learned some control, dying from a wasting sickness that causes the sufferer to rot alive, a sickness caused, as is the madness, by the Dark One's taint on saidin. For a woman the death that comes without control of the Power is less horrible, but it is death just the same. Aes Sedai search for girls with the inborn ability as much to save their lives as to increase Aes Sedai numbers, and for men with it in order to stop the terrible things they inevitably do with the Power in their madness. See also channel; Time of Madness; True Source.

pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ: ðə wil ə taɪm wivz ðə θɹɛdz ə hjumən lɪvz ɪndə ðə pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ, ɔfən kɔl sɪmpli ðə pæɾɝn, wɪtʃ fɔɹmz ðə sʌbstəns ə ɹiæləɾi fəɹ ðəɾ eɪdʒ. si ɔlsoʊ tɑvɝən.

Pattern of an Age: The Wheel of Time weaves the threads of human lives into the Pattern of an Age, often called simply the Pattern, which forms the substance of reality for that Age. See also ta'veren.

paʊɝz, ðə faɪv: si faɪv paʊɝz.

Powers, the Five: See Five Powers.

kwɛstʃənɝz, ðə: ən ɔɹɾɝ wɪðɪn ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. ðɛɹ əvaʊd pɝpəsəz ɑɹ tə dɪskʌvɝ ðə tʃɹuθ ɪn dɪspjəteɪʃənz ən tə ənkʌvɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ɪn ðə sɝtʃ fəɹ tʃɹuθ ən ðə laɪt, ðɛɹ nɔɹməl mɛθəɾ ʌv ɪnkwaɪɹi ɪz baɪ tɔɹtʃɝ; ðɛɹ nɔɹməl æɾətud ðət ðeɪ noʊ ðə tʃɹuθ ɔlɹɛɾi ən mʌst oʊnli meɪk ðɛɹ vɪktəm kənfɛs tə ɪt. ðə kwɛstʃənɝz ɹəfɝ tə ðɛmsɛlvz əz ðə hæn ə ðə laɪt, ðə hæn ðət dɪɡz aʊt tʃɹuθ, ən ət taɪmz ækt əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɪntaɪɝli sɛpɹət fɹəm ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ən ðə kaʊnsəl ə ði ənɔɪntəd, wɪtʃ kəmænz ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. ðə hɛɾ ə ðə kwɛstʃənɝz ɪz ðə haɪ ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ, hu sɪts ɑn ðə kaʊnsəl ə ði ənɔɪntəd. ðɛɹ saɪn ɪz ə blʌd-ɹɛd ʃɛpɝdz kɹʊk.

Questioners, the: An order within the Children of the Light. Their avowed purposes are to discover the truth in disputations and to uncover Darkfriends. In the search for truth and the Light, their normal method of inquiry is by torture; their normal attitude that they know the truth already and must only make their victim confess to it. The Questioners refer to themselves as the Hand of the Light, the Hand that digs out truth, and at times act as if they were entirely separate from the Children and the Council of the Anointed, which commands the Children. The head of the Questioners is the High Inquisitor, who sits on the Council of the Anointed. Their sign is a blood-red shepherd's crook.

ɹeɪɡən (ɹɑ-ɡæn): eɪ ʃaɪnɝən wɔɹiɝ.

Ragan (rah-GAHN): A Shienaran warrior.

ɹɛd ʃilz: si il wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz.

Red Shields: See Aiel warrior societies.

ɹɛnə (ɹin-nɑ): eɪ sintʃæn wʊmən; ə sʌldəm. si ɔlsoʊ sintʃæn; sʌldəm.

Renna (REEN-nah): A Seanchan woman; a sul'dam. See also Seanchan; sul'dam.

ɹaɪædʒɛl (ɹiaɪ-ɑ-ɡɛl): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðoʊz u kʌm hoʊm," əɹ "hoʊmkəmɝz."

Rhyagelle (rheye-ah-GEHL): In the Old Tongue, "Those Who Come Home," or "Homecomers."

sɑŋɡɹil (sɑ-æn-ɡɹi-ɑl): ɛni wʌn ʌv ə nʌmbɝ ʌv ɑbʒɛkts ðəɾ əlaʊ ən ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl tə tʃænəl mʌtʃ mɔɹ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ðən wəɾ ʌðɝwaɪz bi pɑsəbəl əɹ seɪf. ə sɑŋɡɹil ɪz laɪk ʌntu, bʌt mʌtʃ mɔɹ paʊɝfəl ðæn, ən æŋɡɹil. ði əmaʊn ə ðə paʊɝ ðət kən bi wildɪd wɪð ə sɑŋɡɹil kəmpɛɹz tə ði əmaʊn ə ðə paʊɝ ðət kən bi hændəld wɪð ən æŋɡɹil əz ðə paʊɝ wildɪd wɪð ði eɪɾ ʌv ən æŋɡɹil dʌz tə ði əmaʊn ə ðə paʊɝ ðət kən bi hændəld əneɪɾɪd. ɹɛmnəns ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, ðə minz ə meɪkɪŋ sɑŋɡɹil ɪz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ noʊn. oʊnli ə hændfʊl ɹɪmeɪn, fɑɹ fjuɝ ivən ðən æŋɡɹil.

sa'angreal (SAH-ahn-GREE-ahl): Any one of a number of objects that allow an individual to channel much more of the One Power than would otherwise be possible or safe. A sa'angreal is like unto, but much more powerful than, an angreal. The amount of the Power that can be wielded with a sa'angreal compares to the amount of the Power that can be handled with an angreal as the Power wielded with the aid of an angreal does to the amount of the Power that can be handled unaided. Remnants of the Age of Legends, the means of making sa'angreal is no longer known. Only a handful remain, far fewer even than angreal.

seɪaɪdɑɹ (sɑ-ɪ-dɑɹ): seɪɾɪn (sɑ-ɪ-din): si tʃɹu sɔɹs.

saidar (sah-ih-DAHR): saidin (sah-ih-DEEN): See True Source.

sɑldɑiə (sɑl-deɪ-i-ɑ): wʌn ə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz.

Saldaea (sahl-DAY-ee-ah): One of the Borderlands.

sɑntʃ, sɪuən (sæn-tʃeɪ, swɑn): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ fɔɹmɝli ʌv ðə blu ədʒɑ. ɹeɪz tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit naɪnhʌnʒɹədeɪtieɪt ni. ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɪz ʌv ɔl ədʒəz, ən ə nʌn.

Sanche, Siuan (SAHN-chay, swahn): An Aes Sedai formerly of the Blue Ajah. Raised to the Amyrlin Seat 988 NE. The Amyrlin Seat is of all Ajahs, and of none.

si foʊk: mɔɹ pɹɑpɝli, ði æθɑn maɪɹ (ə-θɑ-æn mi-ɛɹ), ðə pipəl ə ðə si. ɪnhæbəɾənts ʌv aɪlənz ɪn ði ɛɹɪθ (ɑ-ɹɪθ) oʊʃən ən ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, ðeɪ spɛn lɪɾəl taɪm ɑn ðoʊz aɪlənz, lɪvɪŋ moʊst ə ðɛɹ laɪvz ɑn ðɛɹ ʃɪps. moʊst sibɔɹn tʃɹeɪɾ ɪz kæɹid baɪ ðə si foʊks ʃɪps.

Sea Folk: More properly, the Atha'an Miere (a-tha-AHN mee-AIR), the People of the Sea. Inhabitants of islands in the Aryth (AH-rihth) Ocean and the Sea of Storms, they spend little time on those islands, living most of their lives on their ships. Most seaborne trade is carried by the Sea Folk's ships.

sintʃæn (ʃɔn-tʃæn): (wʌn) dɪsɛndəns ə ði ɑɹmiz ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ sɛn əkɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən, hu hæv ɹɪtɝn tə ɹikleɪm ðə lænz ə ðɛɹ fɔɹfɑðɝz. (tu) ðə læn fɹəm wɪtʃ ðə sintʃæn kʌm. si ɔlsoʊ heɪlin; kɔɝɪn; ɹaɪædʒɛl.

Seanchan (SHAWN-CHAN): (1) Descendants of the armies Artur Hawkwing sent across the Aryth Ocean, who have returned to reclaim the lands of their forefathers. (2) The land from which the Seanchan come. See also Hailene; Corenne; Rhyagelle.

sindɑɹ (ʃɔn-dɑɹ): kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv sintʃæn, wɛɹ ði ɛmpɹɛs sɪts ɑn ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn ɪn ðə kɔɹɾ ə ðə naɪn munz.

Seandar (shawn-DAHR): Capital city of Seanchan, where the Empress sits on the Crystal Throne in the Court of the Nine Moons.

səlin (sɛ-lin): ə wʊmən mɛɾ ɑn ðə dʒɝni tə kɛɹhin.

Selene (seh-LEEN): A woman met on the journey to Cairhien.

sɛɾə (si-tɑ): eɪ sintʃæn wʊmən; ə sʌldəm. si ɔlsoʊ sintʃæn; sʌldəm.

Seta (SEE-tah): A Seanchan woman; a sul'dam. See also Seanchan; sul'dam.

ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ (ʃɑ-dɑɹ loʊ-ɡɑθ): ə sɪɾi əbændən ən ʃʌn sɪns ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz. ɪts teɪntɪd ɡɹaʊnd, ən nɑɾ ə pɛbəl ʌv ɪts seɪf. si ɔlsoʊ mɔɹɾɪθ.

Shadar Logoth (SHAH-dahr LOH-goth): A city abandoned and shunned since the Trolloc Wars. It is tainted ground, and not a pebble of it is safe. See also Mordeth.

ʃeɪtɑn (ʃeɪ-ɪ-tæn): si dɑɹk wʌn.

Shai'tan (SHAY-ih-TAN): See Dark One.

ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl (ʃeɪ-əl ɡul): ə maʊntən ɪn ðə blæstəd lænz, ðə saɪɾ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən.

Shayol Ghul (SHAY-ol GHOOL): A mountain in the Blasted Lands, the site of the Dark One's prison.

ʃɛɹiəm (ʃɪɹ-i-ɑm): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə blu ədʒɑ. ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ.

Sheriam (SHEER-ee-ahm): An Aes Sedai of the Blue Ajah. The Mistress of Novices in the White Tower.

ʃaɪnɝ (ʃaɪ-nɑɹ): wʌn ə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. ðə saɪn ə ʃaɪnɝ ɪz ə stupɪŋ blæk hɔk.

Shienar (shy-NAHR): One of the Borderlands. The sign of Shienar is a stooping black hawk.

ʃoʊufə (ʃu-fɑ): ə ɡɑɹmən ə ði il, ə klɔθ, juʒəwəli ðə kʌlɝ ə sæn əɹ ɹɑk, ðət ɹæps ɝaʊn ðə hɛɾ ən nɛk, livɪŋ oʊnli ðə feɪs bɛɹ.

shoufa (SHOO-fah): A garment of the Aiel, a cloth, usually the color of sand or rock, that wraps around the head and neck, leaving only the face bare.

spæn: si lɛŋθ, junəts ʌv.

span: See Length, units of.

spaɪn ə ðə wɝld, ðə: ə taʊɝɪŋ maʊntən ɹeɪnʒ, wɪð oʊnli ə fju pæsəz, wɪtʃ sɛpɝeɪts ði il weɪs fɹəm ðə lænz tə ðə wɛst.

Spine of the World, the: A towering mountain range, with only a few passes, which separates the Aiel Waste from the lands to the west.

stɛɾɪŋ (stɛd-dɪŋ): ən oʊɡiɝ (oʊhaɪoʊ-ɡɪɹ) hoʊmlænd. mɛni stɛɾɪŋ əv bɪn əbændən sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. ðeɪ ɑɹ ʃildɪɾ ɪn səm weɪ, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ʌndɝstʊd, soʊ ðət wɪðɪn əm noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ kən tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ, nɔɹ ivən sɛns ðət ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs ɪɡzɪsts. ətɛmps tə wil ðə wʌn paʊɝ fɹəm aʊtsaɪɾ ə stɛɾɪŋ əv noʊ ɪfɛkt ɪnsaɪɾ ə stɛɾɪŋ baʊndɝi. noʊ tʃɹɑlɑk wɪl ɛntɝ ə stɛɾɪŋ ənlɛs dʒɹɪvən, ən ivən ə mɹdʒɹɑl wɪl də soʊ oʊnli ət ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst niɾ ən ðən wɪð ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst ɹɪlʌktəns ən dɪsteɪst. ivən dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ɪf tʃɹuli dɛɾəkeɪtəd, fil ənkʌmftəɹbəl wɪðɪn ə stɛɾɪŋ.

stedding (STEHD-ding): An Ogier (OH-geer) homeland. Many stedding have been abandoned since the Breaking of the World. They are shielded in some way, no longer understood, so that within them no Aes Sedai can channel the One Power, nor even sense that the True Source exists. Attempts to wield the One Power from outside a stedding have no effect inside a stedding boundary. No Trolloc will enter a stedding unless driven, and even a Myrddraal will do so only at the greatest need and then with the greatest reluctance and distaste. Even Darkfriends, if truly dedicated, feel uncomfortable within a stedding.

stɪlɪŋ: ði ækt, pɝfɔɹm baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʌv ʃʌɾɪŋ ɔf ə wʊmən u kən tʃænəl fɹəm ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ə wʊmən u hæz bɪn stɪl kən sɛns ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, bʌt ʃi kænɑt tʌtʃ ɪt. si ɔlsoʊ wʌn paʊɝ, ðə; dʒɛntəlɪŋ.

stilling: the act, performed by Aes Sedai, of shutting off a woman who can channel from the One Power. A woman who has been stilled can sense the True Source, but she cannot touch it. See also One Power, the; gentling.

stoʊn dɑɡz: si il wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz.

Stone Dogs: See Aiel warrior societies.

sʌldəm (sul-dæm): ə wʊmən u hæz pæs ðə tɛsts tə ʃoʊ ðət ʃi kən wɛɹ ðə bɹeɪsləɾ ʌv ən æɾəm ən ðʌs kəntʃɹoʊl ə deɪmeɪn. si ɔlsoʊ æɾəm; deɪmeɪn.

sul'dam (SUHL-DAHM): A woman who has passed the tests to show that she can wear the bracelet of an a'dam and thus control a damane. See also a'dam; damane.

sʌndeɪ: ə fistdeɪ ən fɛstəvəl ɪn mɪdsʌmɝ, sɛləbɹeɪɾəd ɪn mɛni pɑɹts ə ðə wɝld.

Sunday: A feastday and festival in midsummer, celebrated in many parts of the world.

sʌŋ wʊd: si tʃɹisɪŋʒɝ.

sung wood: See Treesinger.

sjuɹɔθ, haɪ leɪɾi (su-ɹɔθ): eɪ sintʃæn noʊbəlwʊmən ə haɪ dɪɡɹi.

Suroth, High Lady (SUE-roth): A Seanchan noblewoman of high degree.

teɪʃɝ (taɪ-ʃɑɹ): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "tʃɹu blʌɾ ʌv."

Tai'shar (TIE-SHAHR): In the Old Tongue, "True blood of."

tæmɹəleɪlən (tɑ-mɑɹ-ɑl-aɪ-lɛn): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "wɛb ə dɛstəni." ə ɡɹeɪt tʃeɪnʒ ɪn ðə pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ, sɛntɝɾ ɝaʊnd wʌn əɹ mɔɹ pipəl u ɑɹ tɑvɝən. si ɔlsoʊ pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ; tɑvɝən.

ta'maral'ailen (tah-MAHR-ahl-EYE-lehn): In the Old Tongue, "Web of Destiny." A great change in the Pattern of an Age, centered around one or more people who are ta'veren. See also Pattern of an Age; ta'veren.

tænɹəl, ɑɹɾɝ pɛndʒɹæɡ (tæn-ɹi-ɑl, ɑɹ-tʃɹ peɪ-ɛn-dʒɹæɡ): si hɔkwɪŋ, ɑɹɾɝ.

Tanreall, Artur Paendrag (tahn-REE-ahl, AHR-tuhr PAY-ehn-DRAG): See Hawkwing, Artur.

tɑɹmən ɡdən (tɑɹ-mɑn ɡeɪ-dɑn): ðə læs bæɾəl. si ɔlsoʊ dʒɹæɡən, pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə; hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ.

Tarmon Gai'don (TAHR-mohn GAY-dohn): The Last Battle. See also Dragon, Prophecies of the; Horn of Valere.

tɑɹ vəlɑn (tɑɹ vɑ-lɑn): ə sɪɾi ɑn ən aɪlən ɪn ðə ɹɪvɝ ɛɹɪnɪn. ðə sɛntɝ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ paʊɝ, ən loʊkeɪʃən ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ.

Tar Valon (TAHR VAH-lon): A city on an island in the River Erinin. The center of Aes Sedai power, and location of the White Tower.

tɑvɝən (tɑ-vɪɹ-ɛn): ə pɝsən ɝaʊn hum ðə wil ə taɪm wivz ɔl sɝaʊndɪŋ laɪf-θɹɛdz, pɝhæps ɔl laɪf-θɹɛdz, tə fɔɹm ə wɛb ə dɛstəni. si ɔlsoʊ pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ.

ta'veren (tah-VEER-ehn): A person around whom the Wheel of Time weaves all surrounding life-threads, perhaps all life-threads, to form a Web of Destiny. See also Pattern of an Age.

tɛɹ (tɪɹ): ə ɡɹeɪt sipɔɹɾ ɑn ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz.

Tear (TEER): A great seaport on the Sea of Storms.

tɛləmən, luz θɝɪn (tɛl-ɑ-moʊn, luz θɛ-ɹɪn): si dʒɹæɡən, ðə.

Telamon, Lews Therin (TEHL-ah-mon, LOOZ THEH-rihn): See Dragon, the.

tɛɹæŋɡɹil (tɪɹ-æn-ɡɹi-ɑl): ɛni wʌn ʌv ə nʌmbɝ ə ɹɛmnəns ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ðət juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ənlaɪk æŋɡɹil ən sɑŋɡɹil, itʃ tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɑz meɪd tə də ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ θɪŋ. fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl, wʌn meɪks oʊðz teɪkən wɪðɪn ɪt baɪndɪŋ. səm ɑɹ juz baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ðɛɹ ɝɪdʒənəl pɝpəsəz ɑɹ lɑɹdʒli ənnoʊn. səm wɪl kɪl əɹ dɪstʃɹɔɪ ði əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl ʌv ɛni wʊmən u juzɪz ðɛm. si ɔlsoʊ æŋɡɹil; sɑŋɡɹil.

ter'angreal (TEER-ahn-GREE-ahl): Any one of a number of remnants of the Age of Legends that use the One Power. Unlike angreal and sa'angreal, each ter'angreal was made to do a particular thing. For example, one makes oaths taken within it binding. Some are used by Aes Sedai, but their original purposes are largely unknown. Some will kill or destroy the ability to channel of any woman who uses them. See also angreal; sa'angreal.

tiə ɑvɛn ælɑntɪn (ti-ɑ ɑ-vɛn-deɪ ɑ-læn-tɪn): "bɹʌðɝ tə ðə tʃɹiz."

tia avende alantin (TEE-ah ah-VEN-day ah-LANH-tin): "Brother to the Trees."

tiə mi ɑveɪən mɔɹaɪɾɪn ɪeɪn veɪɾɪn: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə ɡɹeɪv ɪz noʊ bɑɹ tə maɪ kɔl." ɪnskɹɪpʃən ɑn ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ. si ɔlsoʊ hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ.

Tia mi aven Moridin isainde vadin: In the Old Tongue, "The grave is no bar to my call." Inscription on the Horn of Valere. See also Horn of Valere.

tɪɡɹeɪn (ti-ɡɹeɪn): əz dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ, ʃi mɛɹid tɑɹɪŋɡeɪl dəmədʒɹɾ ən bɔɹ ɪz sʌn ɡɑleɪdɛdʒɹəd. hɝ dɪsəpɪɹəns ɪn naɪnhʌnʒɹədsɛvəntitu ni, ʃɔɹtli æftɝ əɹ bɹʌðɝ luk vænɪʃt ɪn ðə blaɪt, lɛd tə ðə stʃɹʌɡəl ɪn ændɝ kɔl ðə səksɛʃən, ən kɑz ði ɪvɛns ɪn kɛɹhin ðəɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli bɹɔɾ ɑn ði il wɔɹ. hɝ saɪn wɑz ə wʊmənz hænd ɡɹɪpɪŋ ə θɔɹni ɹoʊz stɛm wɪð ə waɪt blɑsəm.

Tigraine (tee-GRAIN): As Daughter-Heir of Andor, she married Taringail Damodred and bore his son Galadedrid. Her disappearance in 972 NE, shortly after her brother Luc vanished in the Blight, led to the struggle in Andor called the Succession, and caused the events in Cairhien that eventually brought on the Aiel War. Her sign was a woman's hand gripping a thorny rose stem with a white blossom.

taɪm ə mædnəs: ðə jɪɹz æftɝ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz kaʊntɝstʃɹoʊk teɪntɪd ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, wən meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛn mæɾ ən bɹoʊk ðə wɝld. ði ɪɡzæk dʊɹeɪʃən ə ðɪs pɪɹiəɾ ɪz ənnoʊn, bʌɾ ɪts bɪliv tə hæv læstəd nɪɹli wʌn hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz. ɪɾ ɛndəd kəmplitli oʊnli wɪð ðə dɛθ ə ðə læs meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ. si ɔlsoʊ hʌnʒɹəd kəmpænjənz; tʃɹu sɔɹs; wʌn paʊɝ; bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld.

Time of Madness: The years after the Dark One's counterstroke tainted the male half of the True Source, when male Aes Sedai went mad and Broke the World. The exact duration of this period is unknown, but it is believed to have lasted nearly one hundred years. It ended completely only with the death of the last male Aes Sedai. See also Hundred Companions; True Source; One Power; Breaking of the World.

tɪŋkɝz: si tuætɑn.

Tinkers: See Tuatha'an.

tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl: si tuætɑn.

Traveling People: See Tuatha'an.

tʃɹi, ðə: si ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə.

Tree, the: See Avendesora.

tʃɹikɪlɝz: ən il neɪm fəɹ ðə kɛɹhinɪn, ɔlweɪz sɛɾ ɪn toʊnz ə hɔɹɝ ən dɪsɡʌst.

Treekillers: An Aiel name for the Cairhienin, always said in tones of horror and disgust.

tʃɹisɪŋʒɝ: ən oʊɡiɝ u hæz ði əbɪləɾi tə sɪŋ tə tʃɹiz (kɔld "tʃɹisɔŋ"), iðɝ hilɪŋ ðɛm, əɹ hɛlpɪŋ əm tə ɡɹoʊ ən flaʊɝ, əɹ meɪkɪŋ θɪŋz fɹəm ðə wʊd wɪθaʊt dæmɪdʒɪŋ ðə tʃɹi. ɑbʒɛkts meɪɾ ɪn ðɪs mænɝ ɑɹ kɔld "sʌŋ wʊd" ən ɑɹ haɪli pɹaɪzd. fju oʊɡiɝ ɹɪmeɪn u ɑɹ tʃɹisɪŋɝz; ðə tælən simz tə bi daɪɪŋ aʊt.

Treesinger: An Ogier who has the ability to sing to trees (called "treesong"), either healing them, or helping them to grow and flower, or making things from the wood without damaging the tree. Objects made in this manner are called "sung wood" and are highly prized. Few Ogier remain who are Treesingers; the Talent seems to be dying out.

tʃɹisɔŋ: si tʃɹisɪŋʒɝ.

treesong: See Treesinger.

tʃɹɑləks (tʃɹæl-loʊks): kɹitʃɝz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn, kɹieɪɾəd dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ. hjudʒ ɪn stætʃɝ, ðeɪ ɑɹ ə twɪstəd blɛn ʌv ænəməl ən hjumən stɑk. vɪʃəs baɪ neɪtʃɝ, ðeɪ kɪl fəɹ ðə pjʊɹ plɛʒɝ ə kɪlɪŋ. dəsitfəl ɪn ði ɪkstʃɹim, ðeɪ kænɑt bi tʃɹʌstɪɾ ənlɛs koʊɝs baɪ fɪɹ. ðeɪ ɑɹ dɪvaɪɾəd ɪndə tʃɹaɪb-laɪk bænz, əmʌŋ əm ðə dɑvɑl, ðə koʊbəl, ən ðə deɪmən.

Trollocs (TRAHL-lohks): Creatures of the Dark One, created during the War of the Shadow. Huge in stature, they are a twisted blend of animal and human stock. Vicious by nature, they kill for the pure pleasure of killing. Deceitful in the extreme, they cannot be trusted unless coerced by fear. They are divided into tribe-like bands, among them the Dha'vol, the Ko'bal, and the Dhai'mon.

tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz: ə sɪɹiz ʌv wɔɹz, bɪɡɪnɪŋ əbaʊt wʌnθaʊzən æb ən læstɪŋ mɔɹ ðən θɹi hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, dʊɹɪŋ wɪtʃ tʃɹɑlɑk ɑɹmiz ɹævɪdʒ ðə wɝld. ɪvɛntʃəwəli ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ sleɪn əɹ dʒɹɪvən bæk ɪndə ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt, bʌt səm neɪʃənz sis tə ɪɡzɪst, waɪl ʌðɝz wɝ ɔlmoʊs dɪpɑpjəleɪɾɪd. ɔl ɹɛkɝdz ə ðə taɪm ɑɹ fɹæɡməntɛɹi. si ɔlsoʊ kʌvənən ə ðə tɛn neɪʃənz.

Trolloc Wars: A series of wars, beginning about 1000 AB and lasting more than three hundred years, during which Trolloc armies ravaged the world. Eventually the Trollocs were slain or driven back into the Great Blight, but some nations ceased to exist, while others were almost depopulated. All records of the time are fragmentary. See also Covenant of the Ten Nations.

tʃɹu sɔɹs: ðə dʒɹaɪvɪŋ fɔɹs ə ðə junəvɝs, wɪtʃ tɝnz ðə wil ə taɪm. ɪts dɪvaɪɾəd ɪndə ə meɪl hæf (seɪɾɪn) ən ə fimeɪl hæf (seɪaɪdɑɹ), wɪtʃ wɝk ət ðə seɪm taɪm wɪð ən əɡɛnst itʃ ʌðɝ. oʊnli ə mæn kən dʒɹɔ ɑn seɪɾɪn, oʊnli ə wʊmən ɑn seɪaɪdɑɹ. sɪns ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ə ðə taɪm ə mædnəs, seɪɾɪn əz bɪn teɪntɪd baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz tʌtʃ. si ɔlsoʊ wʌn paʊɝ.

True Source: The driving force of the universe, which turns the Wheel of Time. It is divided into a male half (saidin) and a female half (saidar), which work at the same time with and against each other. Only a man can draw on saidin, only a woman on saidar. Since the beginning of the Time of Madness, saidin has been tainted by the Dark One's touch. See also One Power.

tuætɑn (tu-ɑ-θɑ-æn): ə wɑndɝɪŋ foʊk, ɔlsoʊ noʊn əz ðə tɪŋkɝz ən əz ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl, hu lɪv ɪn bɹaɪtli peɪntəd wæɡənz ən fɑloʊ ə toʊɾəli pæsɪfɪs fəlɑsəfi kɔl ðə weɪ ʌv ðə lif. θɪŋz mɛndɪd baɪ tɪŋkɝz ɑɹ ɔfən bɛɾɝ ðən nu. ðeɪ ɑɹ əmʌŋ ðə fju hu kən kɹɔs ði il weɪst ʌnməlɛstɪd, fəɹ ði il stʃɹɪkli əvɔɪɾ ɔl kɑntækt wɪð ðɛm.

Tuatha'an (too-AH-thah-AHN): A wandering folk, also known as the Tinkers and as the Traveling People, who live in brightly painted wagons and follow a totally pacifist philosophy called the Way of the Leaf. Things mended by Tinkers are often better than new. They are among the few who can cross the Aiel Waste unmolested, for the Aiel strictly avoid all contact with them.

tʃɹɑk, haɪ lɔɹɾ ə haʊs ələdɑn (tu-ɹæk; æl-ɑ-dɑn): eɪ sintʃæn ə haɪ dɪɡɹi, kəmændɝ ə ðə heɪlin. si ɔlsoʊ sintʃæn; heɪlin.

Turak, High Lord of House Aladon (TOO-rak; AL-ah-dohn): A Seanchan of high degree, commander of the Hailene. See also Seanchan; Hailene.

vɛɹɪn (vɛɹ-ɪn): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə bɹaʊn ədʒɑ.

Verin (VEHR-ihn): An Aes Sedai of the Brown Ajah.

wɔɹɾɝ: ə wɔɹiɝ bɑndəd tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə bɑndɪŋ ɪz ə θɪŋ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ən baɪ ɪɾ i ɡeɪnz sətʃ ɡɪfs əz kwɪk hilɪŋ, ði əbɪləɾi tə ɡoʊ lɔŋ pɪɹiədz wɪθaʊt fud, wɔɾɝ, əɹ ɹɛst, ən ði əbɪləɾi tə sɛns ðə teɪn ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn əɾ ə dɪstəns. soʊ lɔŋ əz ə wɔɹɾɝ lɪvz, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə hum hiz bɑndəd noʊz hiz əlaɪv haʊɛvɝ fɑɹ əweɪ hi ɪz, ən wən i daɪz ʃɪl noʊ ðə moʊmən ən mænɝ ə hɪz dɛθ. waɪl moʊst ədʒəz bɪliv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪ hæv wʌn wɔɹɾɝ bɑndəd tə hɝ əɾ ə taɪm, ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ ɹəfjuzəz tə bɑn ɛni wɔɹɾɝz əɾ ɔl, waɪl ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ bɪliv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪ bɑn əz mɛni wɔɹɾɝz əz ʃi wɪʃɪz. ɛθɪkəli ðə wɔɹɾɝ mʌst æksid tə ðə bɑndɪŋ; bʌɾ ɪts bɪn noʊn tə bi dʌn ɪnvoʊlʌntɝɪli. wʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡeɪn fɹəm ðə bɑndɪŋ ɪz ə kloʊsli hɛl sikɹət. si ɔlsoʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Warder: A warrior bonded to an Aes Sedai. The bonding is a thing of the One Power, and by it he gains such gifts as quick healing, the ability to go long periods without food, water, or rest, and the ability to sense the taint of the Dark One at a distance. So long as a Warder lives, the Aes Sedai to whom he is bonded knows he is alive however far away he is, and when he dies she will know the moment and manner of his death. While most Ajahs believe an Aes Sedai may have one Warder bonded to her at a time, the Red Ajah refuses to bond any Warders at all, while the Green Ajah believe an Aes Sedai may bond as many Warders as she wishes. Ethically the Warder must accede to the bonding; but it has been known to be done involuntarily. What the Aes Sedai gain from the bonding is a closely held secret. See also Aes Sedai.

wɔɹ ə paʊɝ: si wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ.

War of Power: See War of the Shadow.

wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz: ə sɪɹiz ʌv oʊvɝlæpɪŋ wɔɹz əmʌŋ kɑnstənli ʃɪftɪŋ əlaɪənsəz, pɹɪsɪpɪteɪɾɪd baɪ ðə dɛθ ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ən ðə ɹɪzʌltɪŋ stʃɹʌɡəl fəɹ ɪz ɛmpaɪɝ. ɪt læstəd fɹəm fi naɪnhʌnʒɹədnaɪntifɔɹ tə fi wʌnθaʊzəndwʌnhʌnʒɹədsɛvəntin. ðə wɔɹ dɪpɑpjəleɪɾɪd lɑɹdʒ pɑɹts ə ðə lænz bɪtwin ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən ən ði il weɪst, fɹəm ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz tə ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt. soʊ ɡɹeɪt wɑz ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ðəɾ oʊnli fɹæɡməntɛɹi ɹɛkɝdz ə ðə taɪm ɹɪmeɪn. ði ɛmpaɪɝ ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ wɑz pʊld əpɑɹɾ ɪn ðə wɔɹz, ən ðə neɪʃənz ə ðə pɹɛzən deɪ wɝ fɔɹmd. si ɔlsoʊ hɔkwɪŋ, ɑɹɾɝ.

War of the Hundred Years: A series of overlapping wars among constantly shifting alliances, precipitated by the death of Artur Hawkwing and the resulting struggle for his empire. It lasted from FY 994 to FY 1117. The war depopulated large parts of the lands between the Aryth Ocean and the Aiel Waste, from the Sea of Storms to the Great Blight. So great was the destruction that only fragmentary records of the time remain. The empire of Artur Hawkwing was pulled apart in the wars, and the nations of the present day were formed. See also Hawkwing, Artur.

wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ: ɔlsoʊ noʊn əz ðə wɔɹ ə paʊɝ, ɪɾ ɛndəd ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ɪt bɪɡæn ʃɔɹtli æftɝ ði ətɛmp tə fɹi ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ən sun ɪnvɑlv ðə hoʊl wɝld. ɪn ə wɝld wɛɹ ivən ðə mɛmɹi ʌv wɔɹ hæd bɪn fɝɡɑɾən, ɛvɹi fæsəɾ ʌv wɔɹ wɑz ɹiɾɪskʌvɝd, ɔfən twɪstəd baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz tʌtʃ ɑn ðə wɝld, ən ðə wʌn paʊɝ wɑz juzd əz ə wɛpən. ðə wɔɹ wɑz ɛndəd baɪ ðə ɹisilɪŋ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪndə hɪz pɹɪzən. si ɔlsoʊ hʌnʒɹəd kəmpænjənz, ðə; dʒɹæɡən, ðə.

War of the Shadow: Also known as the War of Power, it ended the Age of Legends. It began shortly after the attempt to free the Dark One, and soon involved the whole world. In a world where even the memory of war had been forgotten, every facet of war was rediscovered, often twisted by the Dark One's touch on the world, and the One Power was used as a weapon. The war was ended by the resealing of the Dark One into his prison. See also Hundred Companions, the; Dragon, the.

wɑtʃɝz oʊvɝ ðə weɪvz: ə ɡɹup u bɪliv ðət ði ɑɹmiz ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ sɛn əkɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən wɪl wʌn deɪ ɹɪtɝn, ən soʊ kip wɑtʃ fɹəm ðə taʊn ə fɑlm (fɑl-meɪ) ɑn toʊmən hɛd.

Watchers Over the Waves: A group who believe that the armies Artur Hawkwing sent across the Aryth Ocean will one day return, and so keep watch from the town of Falme (FAHL-may) on Toman Head.

wɛb ə dɛstəni: si tæmɹəleɪlən.

Web of Destiny: See ta'maral'ailen.

weɪt, junəts ʌv: tɛn aʊnsəz ikwəlz wʌn paʊnd; tɛn paʊnz ikwəlz wʌn stoʊn; tɛn stoʊn ikwəlz wʌn hʌnʒɹədweɪt; tɛn hʌnʒɹədweɪt ikwəlz wʌn tʌn.

Weight, units of: 10 ounces = 1 pound; 10 pounds = 1 stone; 10 stone = 1 hundredweight; 10 hundredweight = 1 ton.

wil ə taɪm, ðə: taɪm ɪz ə wil wɪð sɛvən spoʊks, itʃ spoʊk ən eɪdʒ. əz ðə wil tɝnz, ði eɪdʒəz kʌm ən ɡoʊ, itʃ livɪŋ mɛmɹiz ðət feɪd tə lɛdʒənd, ðən tə mɪθ, ən ɑɹ fɝɡɑɾən baɪ ðə taɪm ðəɾ eɪdʒ kʌmz əɡɛn. ðə pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ ɪz slaɪtli dɪfɹən itʃ taɪm ən eɪdʒ kʌmz, ən itʃ taɪm ɪts sʌbʒɪkt tə ɡɹeɪɾɝ tʃeɪnʒ, bʌɾ itʃ taɪm ɪts ðə seɪm eɪdʒ.

Wheel of Time, the: Time is a wheel with seven spokes, each spoke an Age. As the Wheel turns, the Ages come and go, each leaving memories that fade to legend, then to myth, and are forgotten by the time that Age comes again. The Pattern of an Age is slightly different each time an Age comes, and each time it is subject to greater change, but each time it is the same Age.

waɪtkloʊks: si tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt.

Whitecloaks: See Children of the Light.

waɪt taʊɝ: ðə pæləs ə ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən ðə pleɪs wɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ tʃɹeɪnd.

White Tower: The palace of the Amyrlin Seat in Tar Valon, and the place where Aes Sedai are trained.

wɪzdəm: ɪn vɪlədʒəz, ə wʊmən tʃoʊzən baɪ ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl fəɹ əɹ nɑlədʒ ə sətʃ θɪŋz əz hilɪŋ, ən fɔɹtɛlɪŋ ðə wɛðɝ, əz wɛl əz fəɹ kɑmən ɡʊd sɛns. ə pəzɪʃən ʌv ɡɹeɪt ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi ən əθɔɹəɾi, boʊθ æktʃəwəl ən ɪmplaɪd. ʃiz dʒɛnɝəli kənsɪɾɝd ði ikwəl ə ðə meɪɝ, dʒʌst əz ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl ɪz ði ikwəl ə ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl. ənlaɪk ðə meɪɝ, ðə wɪzdəm ɪz tʃoʊzən fəɹ laɪf, ən ɪts vɛɹi ɹɛɹ fəɹ ə wɪzdəm tə bi ɹimuv fɹəm ɔfəs bɪfɔɹ əɹ dɛθ. dɪpɛndɪŋ ɑn ðə lænd, ʃi meɪ ɪnstɛɾ əv ənʌðɝ taɪɾəl, sətʃ əz ɡaɪd, hilɝ, waɪz wʊmən, əɹ ɹiɾɝ.

Wisdom: In villages, a woman chosen by the Women's Circle for her knowledge of such things as healing, and foretelling the weather, as well as for common good sense. A position of great responsibility and authority, both actual and implied. She is generally considered the equal of the mayor, just as the Women's Circle is the equal of the Village Council. Unlike the mayor, the Wisdom is chosen for life, and it is very rare for a Wisdom to be removed from office before her death. Depending on the land, she may instead have another title, such as Guide, Healer, Wise Woman, or Reader.

əbaʊt ði ɔθɝ ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən wɑz bɔɹn ɪn naɪntinfɔɹɾieɪt ɪn tʃɑɹlstən, saʊθ kɛɹəlaɪnə. hi tɔt hɪmsɛlf tə ɹid wən i wɑz fɔɹ wɪð ði ɪnsɪdɛntəl eɪɾ ʌv ə twɛlv-jɪɹz-oʊldɝ bɹʌðɝ, ən wɑz tæklɪŋ mɑɹk tweɪn ən dʒulz vɝn baɪ faɪv. hi wɑz ə ɡɹædʒəwəɾ ə ðə sɪɾədɛl, ðə mɪlətɛɹi kɑlɪdʒ ə saʊθ kɛɹəlaɪnə, wɪð ə dɪɡɹi ɪn fɪzɪks. hi sɝv tu tʊɹz ɪn viɛtnɑm wɪð ðə juɛs. ɑɹmi; əmʌŋ ɪz dɛkɝeɪʃənz ɑɹ ðə dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃt flaɪɪŋ kɹɔs wɪð bɹɑnz oʊk lif klʌstɝ, ðə bɹɑnz stɑɹ wɪð "vi" ən bɹɑnz oʊk lif klʌstɝ, ən tu viɛt næm ɛz ɡæləntʃɹi kɹɔsɪz wɪð pɑm. ə hɪstɝi bʌf, hi ɔlsoʊ ɹoʊt dæns ən θiəɾɝ kɹɪɾɪsɪzəm. hi ɛndʒɔɪd ði aʊtdɔɹ spɔɹts ə hʌntɪŋ, fɪʃɪŋ, ən seɪlɪŋ, ən ði ɪndɔɹ spɔɹts ə poʊkɝ, tʃɛs, pul, ən paɪp kəlɛktɪŋ. hi bɪɡæn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn naɪntinsɛvəntisɛvən ən kəntɪnjuɾ əntɪl ɪz dɛθ ɑn sɛptɛmbɝ sɪkstinθ, tuθaʊzənsɛvən.

About the Author Robert Jordan was born in 1948 in Charleston, South Carolina. He taught himself to read when he was four with the incidental aid of a twelve-years-older brother, and was tackling Mark Twain and Jules Verne by five. He was a graduate of The Citadel, The Military College of South Carolina, with a degree in physics. He served two tours in Vietnam with the U.S. Army; among his decorations are the Distinguished Flying Cross with bronze oak leaf cluster, the Bronze Star with "V" and bronze oak leaf cluster, and two Viet nam ese Gallantry Crosses with Palm. A history buff, he also wrote dance and theater criticism. He enjoyed the outdoor sports of hunting, fishing, and sailing, and the indoor sports of poker, chess, pool, and pipe collecting. He began writing in 1977 and continued until his death on September 16, 2007.

