pɹeɪz fəɹ ðə wil ə taɪm "ənlaɪk səm ə ði ɔθɝz ə mɛɡə-sɑɡəz, dʒɔɹɾən tʃuzəz ɪz wɝdz wɪð kɛɹ, kɹieɪɾɪŋ pipəl ən ɪvɛns ðəɾ əv ɝn ɪm ən ɪnɔɹməs ɹiɾɝʃɪp. fəɹ ʃɪɹ ɪmædʒəneɪʃən ən stɔɹitɛlɪŋ skɪl . . . ðə wil ə taɪm naʊ ɹaɪvəlz toʊkinz ðə lɔɹɾ ə ðə ɹɪŋz."

Praise for THE WHEEL OF TIME "Unlike some of the authors of mega-sagas, Jordan chooses his words with care, creating people and events that have earned him an enormous readership. For sheer imagination and storytelling skill . . . The Wheel of Time now rivals Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings."

 - pʌblɪʃɝz wikli (stɑɹd ɹivju)

 - Publishers Weekly (starred review)

"dʒɔɹɾən səksidz ɪn kæɹiɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ ɪz stʌnɪŋ wɝld-bɪldɪŋ ɪn ðɪs dɪteɪl stɔɹi ʌv ə stʃɹʌɡəl bɪtwin ɡʊɾ ən ivəl. ðə stɔɹi kəntɪnjuz wɪð ɪts mɪɹiəd θɹɛdz ən sʌbplɑts, kæɹiɪŋ ðə ɹiɾɝ ɪnɛksɝəbli təwɔɹɾ ən ʌnpɹɪdɪktəbəl kənkluʒən."

"Jordan succeeds in carrying forward his stunning world-building in this detailed story of a struggle between good and evil. The story continues with its myriad threads and subplots, carrying the reader inexorably toward an unpredictable conclusion."

 -  saɪt "ðə bæɾəl sinz əv ðə bɹɛθləs ɝdʒənsi ʌv fɝsthæn ɪkspɪɹiəns, ən ði . . . ivəl leɪst ɪndə ðə fɔɹsɪz ʌv ɡʊd, ðə deɪnʒɝz leɪɾənt ɪn ɛni pɹɑməst sælveɪʃən, ðə sɛns ə ði ʌnəvɔɪɾəbəl ɔnslɔɾ ʌv ʌnpɹɪdɪktəbəl ɪvɛns bɛɹ ðə mɑɹks ʌv əmɛɹəkən næʃənəl ɪkspɪɹiəns dʊɹɪŋ ðə læs θɹi di keɪdz."

 - SF Site "The battle scenes have the breathless urgency of firsthand experience, and the . . . evil laced into the forces of good, the dangers latent in any promised salvation, the sense of the unavoidable onslaught of unpredictable events bear the marks of American national experience during the last three de cades."

 - ðə nu jɔɹk taɪmz "hɪz ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪz dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃt . . . baɪ ðə ɹɪtʃnəs ʌv ɪts fæbɹɪk, wɪð ɔl ðə tʃɑɹm ən nɑivəteɪ ʌv ðə bɹʌðɝz ɡɹɪm ən ðə soʊʃəlslæʃmɔɹəl kɑməntɛɹi ʌv hʌksliz bɹeɪv nu wɝld. wɪð ɪz wɛl-flɛʃt-aʊt kæɹɪktɝz, dɑɹk ɪmədʒɹi, kɑmɪk ɹɪlif, vɪvəd lændskeɪps, ən ə fæsəneɪɾɪŋ sɛns ə taɪmləsnəs, dʒɔɹɾən əz kɹieɪɾəd ə kɑmplɛks lɪɾɝətʃɝ wɪð ə læŋɡwədʒ ən ɹiæləɾi ɔl ɪts oʊn."

 - The New York Times "His writing is distinguished . . . by the richness of its fabric, with all the charm and naivete of the Brothers Grimm and the social/moral commentary of Huxley's Brave New World. With his well-fleshed-out characters, dark imagery, comic relief, vivid landscapes, and a fascinating sense of timelessness, Jordan has created a complex literature with a language and reality all its own."

 - bɹustɝ mɪltən ɹɑbɝtsən, bʊkpɪdʒ "θɹuaʊt dʒɔɹɾənz pɹiɛmənən haɪ-fæntəsi sɑɡə . . . ðə kæɹɪktɝz (maɪnɝ əz wɛl əz meɪdʒɝ), ðə wɝld, ən ðə sɔɹs ə paʊɝz əv ɹɪmeɪn ɹɪmɑɹkəbli ɹɪtʃ ən kənsɪstənt - noʊ min fit. . . . əmɪɾ ɔl ðə stɝm ʌn dʒɹæŋ, haʊɛvɝ, ɪz ə faɪnli tun kɑmɪk stʃɹeɪn ðət boʊθ lɛvənz ðə stɔɹi ən ædz tə ɪts dɪvɛləpmənt. ə meɪdʒɝ fæntəsi ɛpɪk."

 - Brewster Milton Robertson, BookPage "Throughout Jordan's preeminent high-fantasy saga . . . the characters (minor as well as major), the world, and the source of powers have remained remarkably rich and consistent - no mean feat. . . . Amid all the Sturm und Drang, however, is a finely tuned comic strain that both leavens the story and adds to its development. A major fantasy epic."

 - bʊklɪst "tʃɹuθ ɪz nɑɾ oʊnli stʃɹeɪnʒɝ, ɪts ɹɪtʃɝ ðən fɪkʃən, bʌt dʒɔɹɾənz fɪkʃənəl junəvɝs əpɹoʊtʃɪz ðə vɝaɪəɾi ən kəmplɛksəɾi ʌv ðə ɹil. . . . plɔtlaɪnz [ɑɹ] stʃɹʌmd wɪð ɹɛzəneɪɾɪŋ lɔŋ-weɪv ɹɪðəmz sʌmθɪŋ laɪk beɪɾoʊvənz ɝɔɪkə."

 - Booklist "Truth is not only stranger, it's richer than fiction, but Jordan's fictional universe approaches the variety and complexity of the real. . . . Plotlines [are] strummed with resonating long-wave rhythms something like Beethoven's Eroica."

 - ɹɑbɝt nɑks,  nuzpeɪpɝz "ædvɛntʃɝ ən mɪstɝi ən dɑɹk θɪŋz ðət muv ɪn ðə naɪt - ə kɑmbəneɪʃən ə ɹɑbən hʊɾ ən stivən kɪŋ ðəɾ ɪz hɑɹd tə ɹɪzɪst . . . fɝðɝmɔɹ, dʒɔɹɾən meɪks ðə ɹiɾɝ . . . pʊt daʊn ðə bʊk ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ ðə weɪt fəɹ ðə nɛks taɪɾəl ɪn ðə sɪɹiz."

 - Robert Knox, MPG Newspapers "Adventure and mystery and dark things that move in the night - a combination of Robin Hood and Stephen King that is hard to resist . . . Furthermore, Jordan makes the reader . . . put down the book regretting the wait for the next title in the series."

 - mɪlwɔki sɛntənəl "ðə wil ə taɪm [ɪz] ɹæpədli bɪkʌmɪŋ ðə dɪfɪnɪɾɪv əmɛɹəkən fæntəsi sɑɡə. ɪts ə fæntəsi teɪl sɛldəm ikwəld ən stɪl lɛs ɔfən sɝpæst ɪn ɪŋɡlɪʃ."

 - Milwaukee Sentinel "The Wheel of Time [is] rapidly becoming the definitive American fantasy saga. It is a fantasy tale seldom equaled and still less often surpassed in English."

 - ʃəkɑɡoʊ sʌn-taɪmz "kæn ɹɛkəmɛn stɑɹɾɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ bʌɾ ət ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, bʌt ðə vɑljumz oʊnli ɡɛt ɹɪtʃɝ əz ðeɪ ɡoʊ əlɔŋ."

 - Chicago Sun-Times "Can't recommend starting anywhere but at the beginning, but the volumes only get richer as they go along."

 - loʊkəs "ɪn ðə dɛkeɪdz sɪns dʒeɪ ɑɹ ɑɹ toʊkinz lɔɹɾ ə ðə ɹɪŋz tʃɹɪlədʒi wɑz pʌblɪʃt, mɛni fæntəsi ɹaɪɾɝz əv tʃɹaɪd tə kæptʃɝ ðə spɪɹəɾ ə ðət sɛmənəl wɝk. waɪl mɛni hæv bɪn eɪbəl tə ɪməteɪt ðə staɪl, dɪvɛləp ə sɪməlɝli swɪft ən kɑmplɛks plɑt, ən kɹieɪt kənvɪnsɪŋ kæɹɪktɝz, nʌn hæd kæptʃɝd ðə spɪɹəɾ ə smɔl mɛn ən maɪɾi, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ əɡɛnst ə fɔɹs ʌv oʊvɝwɛlmɪŋ ivəl. ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən hæz."

 - Locus "In the decades since J. R. R. Tolkien's Lord of the Rings trilogy was published, many fantasy writers have tried to capture the spirit of that seminal work. While many have been able to imitate the style, develop a similarly swift and complex plot, and create convincing characters, none had captured the spirit of small men and mighty, struggling against a force of overwhelming evil. Robert Jordan has."

 - ɑɾəwɑ sɪɾəzən "mædʒɪk ən peɪsɪŋ ən dɪteɪl ən hjumən ɪnvɑlvmənt, wɪð ə sɝɾən sʌɾəlti ʌv pɹɛzənteɪʃən ən ə ɡɹæn sɛntʃɹəl vɪʒən. ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən . . . ɪz ə lɑɾ ə ɹaɪɾɝ!"

 - Ottawa Citizen "Magic and pacing and detail and human involvement, with a certain subtlety of presentation and a grand central vision. Robert Jordan . . . is a lot of writer!"

 - pɪɹz ænθəni "dʒɔɹɾən əz ə paʊɝfəl vɪʒən ʌv ɡʊɾ ən ivəl - bʌt wʌt stʃɹaɪks mi əz moʊs plɛʒɝəbəl . . . ɪz ɔl ðə fæsəneɪɾɪŋ pipəl muvɪŋ θɹu ə ɹɪtʃ ən ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ wɝld."

 - Piers Anthony "Jordan has a powerful vision of good and evil - but what strikes me as most pleasurable . . . is all the fascinating people moving through a rich and interesting world."

 - ɔɹsən skɑt kɑɹd "dʒɔɹɾənz kæɹɪktɝz [ɑɹ] flɛʃt aʊt wɪð ðə stʃɹɛŋkθs ən wiknəsəz ə ɹil mɛn ən wɪmən. . . . ɪnvoʊks ði ɛnd-ʌv-ðə-wɝl mɪljʊ ʌv stivən kɪŋz ðə stænd."

 - Orson Scott Card "Jordan's characters [are] fleshed out with the strengths and weaknesses of real men and women. . . . Invokes the end-of-the-world milieu of Stephen King's The Stand."

 - ðə poʊst ən kɝiɝ (tʃɑɹlstən, saʊθ kɛɹəlaɪnə)

 - The Post and Courier (Charleston, South Carolina)

"dʒɔɹɾən ɹaɪts wɪð ðə stɑɹk vɪʒən ə laɪɾ ən dɑɹknəs, ən səmtaɪmz tʃaɪldlaɪk sɛns ʌv wʌndɝ, ðət pɝmieɪts dʒeɪ ɑɹ ɑɹ toʊkinz wɝks. hɪz staɪl ɪz ʌndbeɪɾəbli hɪz oʊn."

"Jordan writes with the stark vision of light and darkness, and sometimes childlike sense of wonder, that permeates J. R. R. Tolkien's works. His style is undebatably his own."

 - ðə pɪtsbɝɡ pɹɛs "dʒɔɹɾənz mʌltɪvəljum ɛpɪk kəntɪnjuz tə lɪv ʌp tə ɪts haɪ æmbɪʃənz. kɑmplɛks plɑɾɪŋ, ən ɝeɪ ʌv stʃɹɔŋ kæɹɪktɝz, lævɪʃ dɪteɪl, ən ə pænɝæmɪk skoʊp meɪk ðɪs sɪɹiz ə fis fəɹ fæntəsi əfɪʃənɑɾoʊz. . . . ɹɪtʃli dɪteɪld ən vɪvədli ɪmædʒənd."

 - The Pittsburgh Press "Jordan's multivolume epic continues to live up to its high ambitions. Complex plotting, an array of strong characters, lavish detail, and a panoramic scope make this series a feast for fantasy aficionados. . . . Richly detailed and vividly imagined."

 - laɪbɹɛɹi dʒɝnəl "dʒɔɹɾənz ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪz klɪɹ ən ɪz vɪʒən ɪz fæsəneɪɾɪŋ, əz ɑɹ ðə fəlɑsəfiz ðət ɹʌn ɪz kæɹɪktɝz. ən spikɪŋ ə kæɹɪktɝz, ə mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ bʌntʃ aɪ wəd bi hɑɹd pʊt tə neɪm."

 - Library Journal "Jordan's writing is clear and his vision is fascinating, as are the philosophies that run his characters. And speaking of characters, a more interesting bunch I would be hard put to name."

 - saɪəns fɪkʃən ɹivju "ðə kɑmplɛks fəlɑsəfi bɪhaɪn ðə wil ə taɪm sɪɹiz ɪz ɪkspaʊndəd soʊ sɪmpli ðə ɹiɾɝ ɔfən ɡɪvz ə stɑɹɾ ə sɝpɹaɪz ət ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ðə ɹil wɝld. ɹændz ædvɛntʃɝz ɑɹ nɑt fɪnɪʃt ən niðɝ ɪz ðɪs θɪŋkɪŋ-pɝsənz fæntəsi sɪɹiz."

 - Science Fiction Review "The complex philosophy behind The Wheel of Time series is expounded so simply the reader often gives a start of surprise at returning to the real world. Rand's adventures are not finished and neither is this thinking-person's fantasy series."

 - bɹʌnzwɪk sɛntənəl (ɔstʃɹeɪljə)

 - Brunswick Sentinel (Australia)

"ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən kən ɹaɪt wʌn hɛl ʌv ə stɔɹi. . . . [hi] kips ðə səspɛns əkjuɾ ən ðə sɝpɹaɪzəz ən ɪnvɛnʃən bjuɾəfli peɪst. kəmpɛlɪŋ. ən ɪɡzɪlɝeɪɾɪŋ ɪkspɪɹiəns."

"Robert Jordan can write one hell of a story. . . . [He] keeps the suspense acute and the surprises and invention beautifully paced. Compelling. An exhilarating experience."

 - aɪzək æsɪmɑvz saɪəns fɪkʃən mæɡəzin ðə wil ə taɪm baɪ ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝl ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ðə ʃædoʊ ɹaɪzɪŋ ðə faɪɝz ə hɛvən lɔɹɾ ə keɪɑs eɪ kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz ðə pæθ ə dæɡɝz wɪntɝz hɑɹt kɹɔsɹoʊdz ə twaɪlaɪt naɪf ə dʒɹimz baɪ ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən ən bɹændən sændɝsən ðə ɡæðɝɪŋ stɔɹm ðə pæθ ə dæɡɝz ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən ðɪs ɪz ə wɝk ə fɪkʃən. ɔl ə ðə kæɹɪktɝz, ɔɹɡənəzeɪʃənz, ən ɪvɛns pɔɹtʃɹeɪɾ ɪn ðɪs nɑvəl ɑɹ iðɝ pɹɑɾəkts ə ði ɔθɝz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən əɹ ɑɹ juz fɪktɪʃəsli.

 - Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine THE WHEEL OF TIME by Robert Jordan The Eye of the World The Great Hunt The Dragon Reborn The Shadow Rising The Fires of Heaven Lord of Chaos A Crown of Swords The Path of Daggers Winter's Heart Crossroads of Twilight Knife of Dreams by Robert Jordan and Brandon Sanderson The Gathering Storm THE PATH OF DAGGERS ROBERT JORDAN This is a work of fiction. All of the characters, organizations, and events portrayed in this novel are either products of the author's imagination or are used fictitiously.

ðə pæθ ə dæɡɝz kɑpiɹaɪt  naɪntinnaɪntieɪt baɪ ðə bændɝsnætʃ ɡɹup, ɪŋk.

THE PATH OF DAGGERS Copyright  1998 by The Bandersnatch Group, Inc.

ðə fɹeɪzəz "ðə wil ə taɪm" ən "ðə dʒɹæɡən ɛbɔɝn," ən ðə sneɪk-wil sɪmbəl, ɑɹ tʃɹeɪdmɑɹks ə ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən.

The phrases "The Wheel of Time" and "The Dragon RebornTM," and the snake-wheel symbol, are trademarks of Robert Jordan.

ɔl ɹaɪts ɹɪzɝvd.

All rights reserved.

fɹʌntispis baɪ dʒuli bɛl mæp baɪ ɛlisə mɪtʃəl ɪntɪɹiɝ ɪləstʃɹeɪʃənz baɪ mæθju si nilsən ən ɛlisə mɪtʃəl eɪ tɔɹ bʊk pʌblɪʃt baɪ tɑm doʊɝɾi əsoʊsiɪts,  wʌnhʌnʒɹədsɛvəntifaɪv fɪfθ ævənu nu jɔɹk, nujɔɹk wʌnzɪɹoʊzɪɹoʊwʌnzɪɹoʊ

Frontispiece by Julie Bell Map by Ellisa Mitchell Interior illustrations by Matthew C. Nielsen and Ellisa Mitchell A Tor Book Published by Tom Doherty Associates, LLC 175 Fifth Avenue New York, NY 10010

wwwtɔɹ-fɔɹdʒkɑm tɔɹ ɪz ə ɹɛdʒəstɝd tʃɹeɪdmɑɹk ə tɑm doʊɝɾi əsoʊsiɪts, .

www.tor-forge.com Tor is a registered trademark of Tom Doherty Associates, LLC.

 naɪnsɛvəneɪt-wʌn-fɔɹθaʊzəntuhʌndʒɹədnaɪntinaɪn-sɪkszɪɹoʊfaɪvnaɪn-faɪv

ISBN 978-1-4299-6059-5

fɝst ədɪʃən: ɑktoʊbɝ naɪntinnaɪntieɪt

First Edition: October 1998

fɝst i-bʊk ədɪʃən: meɪ twɛntiɾɛn

First E-book Edition: May 2010

mænjəfæktʃɝɾ ɪn ðə junaɪɾəd steɪts ʌv əmɛɹəkə fəɹ hɛɹiət maɪ laɪt, maɪ laɪf, maɪ hɑɹt, fɝɛvɝ kɑntɛns mæp pɹoʊlɑɡ: dɪsɛptɪv əpɪɹənsəz wʌn tə kip ðə bɑɹɡən tu ənwivɪŋ θɹi eɪ plɛzən ɹaɪd fɔɹ eɪ kwaɪət pleɪs faɪv ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ stɔɹm sɪks θɹɛdz sɛvən eɪ ɡoʊtpən eɪɾ eɪ sɪmpəl kʌntʃɹi wʊmən naɪn tæŋɡəlz tɛn tʃeɪnʒəz ɪlɛvən kwɛstʃənz ən ən oʊθ twɛlv nu əlaɪənsəz θɝtin floʊɾɪŋ laɪk snoʊ fɔɹtin mɛsədʒ fɹəm ðə l fɪftin stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ɹɪɾən lɔ sɪkstin ʌnɪkspɛktɪɾ æbsənsəz sɛvəntin aʊɾ ɑn ði aɪs eɪtin eɪ pəkjuljɝ kɔlɪŋ naɪntin ðə lɔ twɛnti ɪndə ændɝ twɛntiwʌn ænsɝɪŋ ðə sʌmənz twɛntiɾu ɡæðɝɪŋ klaʊdz twɛntiθɹi fɑɡ ʌv wɔɹ, stɔɹm ə bæɾəl twɛntifɔɹ eɪ taɪm fəɹ aɪɝn twɛntifaɪv ən ənwɛlkəm ɹɪtɝn twɛntisɪks ði ɛkstʃɹə bɪt twɛntisɛvən ðə bɑɹɡən twɛntieɪt kɹɪmsɑnθɝn twɛntinaɪn eɪ kʌp ə slip θɝɾi bɪɡɪnɪŋz θɝɾiwʌn æftɝ ɡlɔsɝi hu wəd sʌp wɪð ðə maɪɾi mʌs klaɪm ðə pæθ ə dæɡɝz.

Manufactured in the United States of America For Harriet My light, my life, my heart, forever CONTENTS MAP PROLOGUE: Deceptive Appearances 1 To Keep the Bargain 2 Unweaving 3 A Pleasant Ride 4 A Quiet Place 5 The Breaking Storm 6 Threads 7 A Goatpen 8 A Simple Country Woman 9 Tangles 10 Changes 11 Questions and an Oath 12 New Alliances 13 Floating Like Snow 14 Message from the M'Hael 15 Stronger Than Written Law 16 Unexpected Absences 17 Out on the Ice 18 A Peculiar Calling 19 The Law 20 Into Andor 21 Answering the Summons 22 Gathering Clouds 23 Fog of War, Storm of Battle 24 A Time for Iron 25 An Unwelcome Return 26 The Extra Bit 27 The Bargain 28 Crimsonthorn 29 A Cup of Sleep 30 Beginnings 31 After GLOSSARY Who would sup with the mighty must climb the path of daggers.

 - ənɑnəməs noʊteɪʃən faʊn ɪŋkt ɪn ðə mɑɹdʒən ʌv ə mænjəskɹɪp hɪstɝi (bɪliv tə deɪt tə ðə taɪm ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ)

 - Anonymous notation found inked in the margin of a manuscript history (believed to date to the time of Artur Hawkwing)

ʌv ðə læs deɪz ə ðə təvən kənkleɪvz ɑn ðə haɪts, ɔl pæðz ɑɹ peɪvd wɪð dæɡɝz.

of the last days of the Tovan Conclaves On the heights, all paths are paved with daggers.

 - oʊl sintʃæn seɪɪŋ 
 - Old Seanchan saying 
pɹoʊlɑɡ dɪsɛptɪv əpɪɹənsəz



PROLOGUE Deceptive Appearances

ɛθɛniɛl hæd sin maʊntənz loʊɝ ðən ðiz mɪsneɪm blæk hɪlz, ɡɹeɪt lɑpsaɪɾɪd hips ə hæf-bɛɹid boʊldɝz, wɛbd wɪð stip twɪstɪŋ pæsəz. ə nʌmbɝ ə ðoʊz pæsəz wʊɾə ɡɪvən ə ɡoʊt pɔz. jə kəd tʃɹævəl θɹi deɪz θɹu dʒɹaʊt-wɪðɝd fɔɹəsts ən bɹaʊn-ɡɹæs mɛdoʊz wɪθaʊt siɪŋ ə sɪŋɡəl saɪn ə hjumən hæbəteɪʃən, ðən sʌɾənli faɪn jɝsɛlf wɪðɪn hæf ə deɪ ʌv sɛvən əɹ eɪt taɪni vɪlədʒəz, ɔl ɪɡnɝən ə ðə wɝld. ðə blæk hɪlz wɝ ə ɹʌɡəd pleɪs fəɹ fɑɹmɝz, əweɪ fɹəm ðə tʃɹeɪd ɹuts, ən hɑɹʃɝ naʊ ðən juʒəwəl. ə ɡɔn lɛpɝd ðət ʃʊɾə vænɪʃt ət ðə saɪɾ ə mɛn wɑtʃt fɹəm ə stip sloʊp, nɑt fɔɹɾi peɪsɪz əweɪ, əz ʃi ɹoʊd pæst wɪð əɹ ɑɹmɝɾ ɛskɔɹt. wɛstwɝd, vʌltʃɝz wil peɪʃən sɝkəlz laɪk ən oʊmən. nɑɾ ə klaʊd mɑɹd ðə blʌd-ɹɛd sʌn, jɛt ðəɹ wɝ klaʊdz ʌv ə sɔɹt. wən ðə wɔɹm wɪn blu, ɪt ɹeɪzd wɔlz ə dʌst.

Ethenielle had seen mountains lower than these misnamed Black Hills, great lopsided heaps of half-buried boulders, webbed with steep twisting passes. A number of those passes would have given a goat pause. You could travel three days through drought-withered forests and brown-grassed meadows without seeing a single sign of human habitation, then suddenly find yourself within half a day of seven or eight tiny villages, all ignorant of the world. The Black Hills were a rugged place for farmers, away from the trade routes, and harsher now than usual. A gaunt leopard that should have vanished at the sight of men watched from a steep slope, not forty paces away, as she rode past with her armored escort. Westward, vultures wheeled patient circles like an omen. Not a cloud marred the blood-red sun, yet there were clouds of a sort. When the warm wind blew, it raised walls of dust.

wɪð fɪfti ʌv əɹ bɛs mɛn əɾ əɹ hilz, ɛθɛniɛl ɹoʊɾ ʌnkənsɝnədli, ən ənhɝidli. ənlaɪk əɹ nɪɹ-lɛdʒəndɛɹi ænsɛstɝ sʊɹɑsə, ʃi hæd noʊ ɪluʒən ðət ðə wɛðɝ wəd hiɾ əɹ wɪʃɪz dʒʌs kəz ʃi hɛl ðə θɹoʊn ə ðə klaʊdz, waɪl əz fəɹ heɪst. . . . ðɛɹ kɛɹfəli koʊɾɪd, kloʊsli ɡɑɹɾəd lɛɾɝz hæɾ əɡɹiɾ ɑn ði ɔɹɾɝ ə mɑɹtʃ, ən ðət hæd bɪn dɪtɝmən baɪ itʃ pɝsənz nid tə tʃɹævəl wɪθaʊɾ ətʃɹæktɪŋ noʊɾəs. nɑɾ ən izi tæsk. səm hæd θɔɾ ɪɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl.

With fifty of her best men at her heels, Ethenielle rode unconcernedly, and unhurriedly. Unlike her near-legendary ancestor Surasa, she had no illusion that the weather would heed her wishes just because she held the Throne of the Clouds, while as for haste. . . . Their carefully coded, closely guarded letters had agreed on the order of march, and that had been determined by each person's need to travel without attracting notice. Not an easy task. Some had thought it impossible.

fɹaʊnɪŋ, ʃi kənsɪɾɝd ðə lʌk ðət hæd lɛɾ əɹ kʌm ðɪs fɑɹ wɪθaʊt hævɪŋ tə kɪl ɛniwʌn, əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðoʊz flaɪspɛk vɪlədʒəz ivən wən ɪt mɛn deɪz æɾəd tə ðə dʒɝni. ðə fju oʊɡiɝ stɛɾɪŋ pɹizɛntəd noʊ pɹɑbləm - oʊɡiɝ peɪd lɪɾəl hid tə wʌt hæpən əmʌŋ hjumənz, moʊs taɪmz, ən lɛs ðən juʒəwəl ə leɪt, ɪt simd - bʌt ðə vɪlədʒəz. . . . ðeɪ wɝ tu smɔl tə hoʊld aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz fəɹ ðə waɪt taʊɝ, əɹ fəɹ ðɪs fɛloʊ hu kleɪm tə bi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn - pɝhæps i wɑz; ʃi kəd nɑt dɪsaɪd wɪtʃ weɪ wəd bi wɝs - tu smɔl, jɛt pɛdlɝz dɪd pæs θɹu, ɪvɛntʃəwəli. pɛdlɝz kæɹiɾ əz mʌtʃ ɡɑsəp əz tʃɹeɪd ɡʊdz, ən ðeɪ spoʊk tə pipəl u spoʊk tə ʌðɝ pipəl, ɹumɝ floʊɪŋ laɪk ən ɛvɝ-bɹæntʃɪŋ ɹɪvɝ, θɹu ðə blæk hɪlz ən ɪndə ðə wɝld aʊtsaɪd. wɪð ə fju wɝdz, ə sɪŋɡəl ʃɛpɝɾ u hæɾ ɪskeɪp noʊɾəs kəd laɪɾ ə sɪɡnəl faɪɝ sin faɪv hʌnʒɹəd liɡz ɔf. ðə sɔɹɾ ə sɪɡnəl faɪɝ ðət sɛt wʊdz ən ɡɹæslænz əfleɪm. ən sɪɾiz, meɪbi. neɪʃənz.

Frowning, she considered the luck that had let her come this far without having to kill anyone, avoiding those flyspeck villages even when it meant days added to the journey. The few Ogier stedding presented no problem - Ogier paid little heed to what happened among humans, most times, and less than usual of late, it seemed - but the villages. . . . They were too small to hold eyes-and-ears for the White Tower, or for this fellow who claimed to be the Dragon Reborn - perhaps he was; she could not decide which way would be worse - too small, yet peddlers did pass through, eventually. Peddlers carried as much gossip as trade goods, and they spoke to people who spoke to other people, rumor flowing like an ever-branching river, through the Black Hills and into the world outside. With a few words, a single shepherd who had escaped notice could light a signal fire seen five hundred leagues off. The sort of signal fire that set woods and grasslands aflame. And cities, maybe. Nations.

"dɪɾ aɪ meɪk ðə ɹaɪt tʃɔɪs, sɹeɪlə?" vɛkst ət hɝsɛlf, ɛθɛniɛl ɡɹɪməst. ʃi maɪt nɑt bi ə ɡɝl ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, bʌɾ əɹ fju ɡɹeɪ hɛɹz hɑɹdli kaʊntəɾ əɹ oʊld ɪnʌf tə lɛɾ əɹ maɪnləs tʌŋ flæp ɪn ðə bɹiz. ðə dɪsɪʒən wɑz meɪd. ɪt hæd bɪn ɑn əɹ maɪnd, ðoʊ. laɪts tʃɹuθ, ʃi wɑz nɑt soʊ ʌnkənsɝn əz ʃi wɑntəd tə bi.

"Did I make the right choice, Serailla?" Vexed at herself, Ethenielle grimaced. She might not be a girl any longer, but her few gray hairs hardly counted her old enough to let her mindless tongue flap in the breeze. The decision was made. It had been on her mind, though. Light's truth, she was not so unconcerned as she wanted to be.

ɛθɛniɛlz fɝs kaʊnsəlɝ hild əɹ dʌn mɛɹ kloʊsɝ tə ðə kwinz slik blæk ɡɛldɪŋ. ɹaʊn feɪs plæsəd, dɑɹk aɪz kənsɪɾɝɪŋ, leɪɾi sɹeɪlə cʊɾə bɪn ə fɑɹmwaɪf sʌɾənli stʌk ɪndə ə noʊbəlwʊmənz ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs, bʌt ðə maɪn bɪhaɪn ðoʊz pleɪn, swɛɾi fitʃɝz wɑz əz ʃɑɹp əz ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪz. "ði ʌðɝ tʃɔɪsəz oʊnli kæɹid dɪfɹən ɹɪsks, nɑt lɛsɝ," ʃi sɛd smuðli. staʊt jɛɾ əz ɡɹeɪsfəl ɪn əɹ sæɾəl əz ʃi wɑz ət dænsɪŋ, sɹeɪlə wɑz ɔlweɪz smuð. nɑɾ ɔɪli, əɹ fɔls; dʒʌs kəmplitli ənflæpəbəl. "wʌtɛvɝ ðə tʃɹuθ, mædʒəsti, ðə waɪt taʊɝ əpɪɹz tə bi pɛɹəlaɪzd əz wɛl əz ʃæɾɝd. jə cʊɾə sæt wɑtʃɪŋ ðə blaɪt waɪl ðə wɝl kɹʌmbəl bɪhaɪn ju. jə kəɾ əv ɪf jə wɝ sʌmwʌn ɛls."

Ethenielle's First Councilor heeled her dun mare closer to the Queen's sleek black gelding. Round face placid, dark eyes considering, Lady Serailla could have been a farmwife suddenly stuck into a noblewoman's riding dress, but the mind behind those plain, sweaty features was as sharp as any Aes Sedai's. "The other choices only carried different risks, not lesser," she said smoothly. Stout yet as graceful in her saddle as she was at dancing, Serailla was always smooth. Not oily, or false; just completely unflappable. "Whatever the truth, Majesty, the White Tower appears to be paralyzed as well as shattered. You could have sat watching the Blight while the world crumbled behind you. You could have if you were someone else."

ðə sɪmpəl nid tə ækt. wɑz ðət wʌt hæd bɹɔɾ əɹ hɪɹ? wɛl, ɪf ðə waɪt taʊɝ wəd nɑɾ əɹ kəd nɑt də wʌt hæd tə bi dʌn, ðən sʌmwʌn mʌst. wʌt ɡʊd tə ɡɑɹd ðə blaɪɾ ɪf ðə wɝl dɪd kɹʌmbəl bɪhaɪn hɝ?

The simple need to act. Was that what had brought her here? Well, if the White Tower would not or could not do what had to be done, then someone must. What good to guard the Blight if the world did crumble behind her?

ɛθɛniɛl lʊk tə ðə slɛndɝ mæn ɹaɪɾɪŋ əɾ əɹ ʌðɝ saɪd, waɪt stʃɹiks əɾ ɪz tɛmpəlz ɡɪvɪŋ ɪm ə supɝsɪliəs ɛɹ, ði ɔɹnətli ʃið sɔɹɾ ə kaɪɹukən ɹɛstɪŋ ɪn ðə kɹʊk ʌv wʌn ɑɹm. ɪt wɑz kɔl ðə sɔɹɾ ə kaɪɹukən, əɾ ɛni ɹeɪt, ən ðə feɪbəld wɔɹiɝ kwin ʌv ɛɹæmeɪɛl maɪɾ əv kæɹiɾ ɪt. ðə bleɪd wɑz eɪntʃənt, səm sɛd paʊɝ-ɹɔt. ðə tu-hændəd hɪlt leɪ təwɔɹɾ əɹ əz tʃɹədɪʃən dɪmændəd, ðoʊ ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə tʃɹaɪ juzɪŋ ə sɔɹd laɪk səm faɪɝ-bɹeɪn sɑldəiən. ə kwin wɑz səpoʊz tə θɪŋk, lɛd, ən kəmænd, wɪtʃ noʊ wʌn kəd mænədʒ waɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə də wʌɾ ɛni soʊlʒɝ ɪn əɹ ɑɹmi kəd də bɛɾɝ. "æn ju, sɔɹdbɛɹɝ?" ʃi sɛd. "du juv ɛni kwɑmz ət ðɪs leɪɾ aʊɝ?"

Ethenielle looked to the slender man riding at her other side, white streaks at his temples giving him a supercilious air, the ornately sheathed Sword of Kirukan resting in the crook of one arm. It was called the Sword of Kirukan, at any rate, and the fabled warrior Queen of Aramaelle might have carried it. The blade was ancient, some said Power-wrought. The two-handed hilt lay toward her as tradition demanded, though she herself was not about to try using a sword like some fire-brained Saldaean. A queen was supposed to think, lead, and command, which no one could manage while trying to do what any soldier in her army could do better. "And you, Swordbearer?" she said. "Do you have any qualms at this late hour?"

lɔɹd bɔldhɛɹ twɪstəɾ ɪn ɪz ɡoʊld-wɝk sæɾəl tə ɡlæns bæk ət ðə bænɝz kæɹid baɪ hɔɹsmən bɪhaɪn ðɛm, keɪst ɪn tuld lɛðɝ ən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd vɛlvət. "aɪ doʊn laɪk haɪɾɪŋ u aɪ æm, mædʒəsti," hi sɛd fʌsəli, stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ ɝaʊnd. "ðə wɝld wɪl noʊ əs sun ɪnʌf, ən wʌt wiv dʌn. əɹ tʃɹaɪd tə du. wɪl ɛn dɛɾ əɹ ɪn ðə hɪstɝiz əɹ boʊθ, soʊ ðeɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl noʊ wʌt neɪmz tə ɹaɪt." bɔldhɛɹ hæɾ ə baɪɾɪŋ tʌŋ, ən i əfɛktəd tə kɛɹ mɔɹ fəɹ mjuzɪk ən ɪz kloʊðz ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls - ðət wɛl-kʌt blu koʊt wɑz ðə θɝɾ i hæd wɔɹn ɔlɹɛɾi tədeɪ - bʌɾ əz wɪð sɹeɪlə, əpɪɹənsəz dɪsivd. ðə sɔɹdbɛɹɝ tə ðə θɹoʊn ə ðə klaʊdz bɔɹ ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾiz mʌtʃ hɛviɝ ðən ðət sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪts dʒuəl skæbɝd. sɪns ðə dɛθ ə hɝ hʌzbən səm twɛnti jɪɹz əɡoʊ, bɔldhɛɹ hæd kəmændəd ði ɑɹmiz ə kændɝ fəɹ əɹ ɪn ðə fild, ən moʊst ə hɝ soʊlʒɝz wʊɾə fɑloʊɾ ɪm tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl ɪtsɛlf. hi wɑz nɑt kaʊntəɾ əmʌŋ ðə ɡɹeɪt kæptənz, bʌɾ i nu wən tə faɪɾ ən wən nɑt, əz wɛl əz haʊ tə wɪn.

Lord Baldhere twisted in his gold-worked saddle to glance back at the banners carried by horsemen behind them, cased in tooled leather and embroidered velvet. "I don't like hiding who I am, Majesty," he said fussily, straightening around. "The world will know us soon enough, and what we've done. Or tried to do. We'll end dead or in the histories or both, so they might as well know what names to write." Baldhere had a biting tongue, and he affected to care more for music and his clothes than anything else - that well-cut blue coat was the third he had worn already today - but as with Serailla, appearances deceived. The Swordbearer to the Throne of the Clouds bore responsibilities much heavier than that sword in its jeweled scabbard. Since the death of her husband some twenty years ago, Baldhere had commanded the armies of Kandor for her in the field, and most of her soldiers would have followed him to Shayol Ghul itself. He was not counted among the great captains, but he knew when to fight and when not, as well as how to win.

"ðə miɾɪŋ pleɪs mʌs bi dʒʌst əhɛd," sɹeɪlə sɛd sʌɾənli, dʒʌst əz ɛθɛniɛl sɔ ðə skaʊt bɔldhɛɹ hæd sɛn fɔɹwɝd, ə slaɪ fɛloʊ neɪm loʊməz u wɔɹ ə fɑkshɛd kɹɛst ɑn ɪz hɛlmət, ɹeɪn ɪn ətɑp ðə pik ə ðə pæs əhɛd. wɪð ɪz læns slæntəd, hi meɪd ði ɑɹm dʒɛstʃɝ fəɹ "əsɛmbli pɔɪn ɪn saɪt."

"The meeting place must be just ahead," Serailla said suddenly, just as Ethenielle saw the scout Baldhere had sent forward, a sly fellow named Lomas who wore a foxhead crest on his helmet, rein in atop the peak of the pass ahead. With his lance slanted, he made the arm gesture for "assembly point in sight."

bɔldhɛɹ swʌŋ ɪz hɛvi-ʃoʊldɝd ɡɛldɪŋ ən bɛloʊɾ ə kəmæn fəɹ ði ɛskɔɹt tə hɔlt - hi kəd bɛloʊ, wən i hæɾ ə maɪn tə - ðən spɝd ðə beɪ tə kætʃ ʌp tə hɝ ən sɹeɪlə. ɪt wɑz tə bi ə miɾɪŋ bɪtwin lɔŋ-stændɪŋ ælaɪz, bʌɾ əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd pæs loʊməz, bɔldhɛɹ ɡeɪv ðə lin-feɪs mæn ə kɝɾ ɔɹɾɝ tə "wɑtʃ ən ɹileɪ"; ʃəɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɡoʊ ɹɔŋ, loʊməz wəd sɪɡnəl ði ɛskɔɹt fɔɹwɝd tə bɹɪŋ ðɛɹ kwin aʊt.

Baldhere swung his heavy-shouldered gelding and bellowed a command for the escort to halt - he could bellow, when he had a mind to - then spurred the bay to catch up to her and Serailla. It was to be a meeting between long-standing allies, but as they rode past Lomas, Baldhere gave the lean-faced man a curt order to "Watch and relay"; should anything go wrong, Lomas would signal the escort forward to bring their queen out.

ɛθɛniɛl saɪd feɪnli wən sɹeɪlə nɑɾəd əpɹuvəl ət ðə kəmænd. ælaɪz ə lɔŋ stændɪŋ, jɛt ðə taɪmz bɹɛd səspɪʃən laɪk flaɪz ɑn ə mɪɾən. wʌt ðeɪ wɝ əbaʊt stɝd ðə hip ən sɛt ðə flaɪz swɝlɪŋ. tu mɛni ɹulɝz tə ðə saʊθ hæd daɪɾ əɹ vænɪʃt ɪn ðə læs jɪɹ fəɹ əɹ tə fil ɛni kʌmfɝɾ ɪn wɛɹɪŋ ə kɹaʊn. tu mɛni lænz hæd bɪn smæʃt əz θɝoʊli əz ən ɑɹmi ʌv tʃɹɑləks kəɾ əv ətʃivd. huɛvɝ i wɑz, ðɪs ælθɹ fɛloʊ hæd mʌtʃ tə ænsɝ fɔɹ. mʌtʃ.

Ethenielle sighed faintly when Serailla nodded approval at the command. Allies of long standing, yet the times bred suspicion like flies on a midden. What they were about stirred the heap and set the flies swirling. Too many rulers to the south had died or vanished in the last year for her to feel any comfort in wearing a crown. Too many lands had been smashed as thoroughly as an army of Trollocs could have achieved. Whoever he was, this al'Thor fellow had much to answer for. Much.

bɪɑn loʊməz ðə pæs oʊpən ɪndə ə ʃæloʊ boʊl ɔlmoʊs tu smɔl tə bi neɪmd ə væli, wɪð tʃɹiz tu waɪdli speɪs tə bi kɔld ə θɪkɪt. lɛðɝlif ən blu fɝ ən θɹi-niɾəl paɪn hɛl tə səm ɡɹin əlɔŋ wɪð ə fju oʊks, bʌt ðə ɹɛst wɝ ʃiðd ɪn bɹaʊn ɪf nɑt bɛɹ-bɹæntʃt. tə ðə saʊθ, haʊɛvɝ, leɪ wʌt hæd meɪd ðɪs spɑɾ ə ɡʊd tʃɔɪs fəɹ miɾɪŋ. ə slɛndɝ spaɪɹ laɪk ə kɑləm ʌv ɡlimɪŋ ɡoʊldən leɪs leɪ slæntɪŋ ən pɑɹtli bɛɹiɾ ɪn ðə bɛɹ hɪlsaɪd, ə ɡʊd sɛvənti peɪsɪz ʌv ɪt ʃoʊɪŋ əbʌv ðə tʃɹitɑps. ɛvɹi tʃaɪld ɪn ðə blæk hɪlz oʊld ɪnʌf tə ɹʌn ɔf liɾɪŋ stʃɹɪŋz nu ʌv ɪt, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ə vɪlədʒ ɪnsaɪd fɔɹ deɪz' tʃɹævəl, nɔɹ wəɾ ɛniwʌn kʌm wɪðɪn tɛn maɪlz wɪlɪŋli. ðə stɔɹiz ə ðɪs pleɪs spoʊk ə mæd vɪʒənz, ʌv ðə dɛd wɔkɪŋ, ən dɛθ ət tʌtʃɪŋ ðə spaɪɹ.

Beyond Lomas the pass opened into a shallow bowl almost too small to be named a valley, with trees too widely spaced to be called a thicket. Leatherleaf and blue fir and three-needle pine held to some green along with a few oaks, but the rest were sheathed in brown if not bare-branched. To the south, however, lay what had made this spot a good choice for meeting. A slender spire like a column of gleaming golden lace lay slanting and partly buried in the bare hillside, a good seventy paces of it showing above the treetops. Every child in the Black Hills old enough to run off leading strings knew of it, but there was not a village inside four days' travel, nor would anyone come within ten miles willingly. The stories of this place spoke of mad visions, of the dead walking, and death at touching the spire.

ɛθɛniɛl dɪd nɑt kənsɪɾɝ hɝsɛlf fænsɪfəl, jɛt ʃi ʃɪvɝd slaɪtli. niɑn sɛd ðə spaɪɹ wɑz ə fɹæɡmən fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, ən hɑɹmləs. wɪð lʌk, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd noʊ ɹizən tə ɹikɔl ðət kɑnvɝseɪʃən ə jɪɹz əɡoʊ. ə pɪɾi ðə dɛd kəd nɑt bi meɪd tə wɔk, hɪɹ. lɛdʒən sɛd kaɪɹukən hæd bɪhɛɾɪd ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən wɪð əɹ oʊn hænz, ən bɔɹn tu sʌnz baɪ ənʌðɝ mæn u kəd tʃænəl. əɹ meɪbi ðə seɪm wʌn. ʃi maɪɾ əv noʊn haʊ tə ɡoʊ əbaʊt ðɛɹ pɝpəs ən sɝvaɪv.

Ethenielle did not consider herself fanciful, yet she shivered slightly. Nianh said the spire was a fragment from the Age of Legends, and harmless. With luck, the Aes Sedai had no reason to recall that conversation of years ago. A pity the dead could not be made to walk, here. Legend said Kirukan had beheaded a false Dragon with her own hands, and borne two sons by another man who could channel. Or maybe the same one. She might have known how to go about their purpose and survive.

əz ɪkspɛktəd, ðə fɝs pɛɹ ə ðoʊz ɛθɛniɛl hæd kʌm tə mit wɑz weɪɾɪŋ, itʃ wɪð tu ətɛndəns. peɪɾɝ nækɪmən hæd mɛni mɔɹ kɹisɪz ɪn ɪz lɔŋ feɪs ðən ðə stʌnɪŋli hænsəm oʊldɝ mæn ʃi hæɾ ədmaɪɝɾ əz ə ɡɝl, nɑt tə mɛnʃən tu lɪɾəl hɛɹ ən moʊst ə ðət ɡɹeɪ. fɔɹtʃənətli hi hæd ɹɪlɪŋkwɪʃt ði ɝæfɛlɪn fæʃən fəɹ bɹeɪdz ən wɔɹ ɪz hɛɹ kʌt ʃɔɹt. bʌɾ i sæɾ ɪz sæɾəl stʃɹeɪt-bækt, hɪz ʃoʊldɝz niɾəd noʊ pæɾɪŋ ɪn ðəɾ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɡɹin sɪlk koʊt, ən ʃi nu hi stɪl kəd wil ðə sɔɹɾ əɾ ɪz hɪp wɪð vɪɡɝ ən skɪl. isɑɹ toʊdʒiɾə, skwɛɹ-feɪst ən ɪz skælp ʃeɪvd ɪksɛp fəɹ ə waɪt tɑpnɑt, hɪz pleɪn koʊt ðə kʌlɝ ʌv oʊl bɹɑnz, wɑz ə hɛd ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ðə kɪŋ ə ɝæfəl, ən slaɪɾɝ, jɛɾ i meɪd peɪɾɝ lʊk ɔlmoʊst sɑft. isɑɹ ə ʃaɪnɝ dɪd nɑt skaʊl - ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, ə tʌtʃ ə sædnəs sim pɝmənən ɪn ɪz aɪz - bʌɾ i maɪɾ əv bɪn meɪd fɹəm ðə seɪm mɛɾəl əz ðə lɔŋ sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz bæk. ʃi tʃɹʌstɪd boʊθ mɛn - ən hoʊp ðɛɹ fəmɪljəl kənɛkʃənz hɛlp sɪkjʊɹ ðət tʃɹʌst. əlaɪənsəz baɪ mɛɹɪdʒ hæɾ ɔlweɪz baʊn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz təɡɛðɝ əz mʌtʃ əz ðɛɹ wɔɹ əɡɛns ðə blaɪt dɪd, ən ʃi hæɾ ə dɔɾɝ wɛd tə isɑɹz θɝd sʌn ən ə sʌn tə peɪɾɝz feɪvɹɪt ɡɹændɔɾɝ, əz wɛl əz ə bɹʌðɝ ən tu sɪstɝz mɛɹiɾ ɪndə ðɛɹ haʊsəz.

As expected, the first pair of those Ethenielle had come to meet was waiting, each with two attendants. Paitar Nachiman had many more creases in his long face than the stunningly handsome older man she had admired as a girl, not to mention too little hair and most of that gray. Fortunately he had relinquished the Arafellin fashion for braids and wore his hair cut short. But he sat his saddle straight-backed, his shoulders needed no padding in that embroidered green silk coat, and she knew he still could wield the sword at his hip with vigor and skill. Easar Togita, square-faced and his scalp shaved except for a white topknot, his plain coat the color of old bronze, was a head shorter than the King of Arafel, and slighter, yet he made Paitar look almost soft. Easar of Shienar did not scowl - if anything, a touch of sadness seemed permanent in his eyes - but he might have been made from the same metal as the long sword on his back. She trusted both men - and hoped their familial connections helped secure that trust. Alliances by marriage had always bound the Borderlands together as much as their war against the Blight did, and she had a daughter wed to Easar's third son and a son to Paitar's favorite granddaughter, as well as a brother and two sisters married into their Houses.

ðɛɹ kəmpænjənz əpɪɹɾ əz dɪfɹən əz ðɛɹ kɪŋz. əz ɔlweɪz, ɪʃɪɡɑɹi tɛɝeɪʒn lʊk dʒʌst ɹɪzən fɹəm ə stupɝ æftɝ ə dʒɹʌŋkən fist, əz fæɾ ə mæn əz ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ sin ɪn ə sæɾəl; hɪz faɪn ɹɛd koʊt wɑz ɹʌmpəld, hɪz aɪz blɪɹi, hɪz tʃiks ənʃeɪvən. baɪ kɑntʃɹæst, kɹəl ʃiænɹi, tɔl ən lin, ən nɪɹli əz ɛləɡən əz bɔldhɛɹ dɪspaɪt ðə dʌst ən swɛɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs, wɪð sɪlvɝ bɛlz ɑn ɪz but tɑps ən ɡlʌvz əz wɛl əz fæsən tə hɪz bɹeɪdz; hi wɔɹ ɪz juʒəwəl ɪkspɹɛʃən ə dɪsæɾɪsfækʃən ən hæɾ ə weɪ ʌv ɔlweɪz piɹɪŋ kuli daʊn ɪz pɹɑmənənt noʊz əɾ ɛniwʌn bʌt peɪɾɝ. ʃiænɹi ɹɪli wɑz ə ful ɪn mɛni weɪz - ɝæfɛlɪn kɪŋz ɹɛɹli meɪd mʌtʃ pɹitɛns ə lɪsnɪŋ tə kaʊnsəlɝz, ɹilaɪɪŋ ɪnstɛɾ ɑn ðɛɹ kwinz - bʌɾ i wɑz mɔɹ ðən i əpɪɹɾ əɾ ə ɡlæns. eɪɡəlmɝ dʒəɡəd cʊɾə bɪn ə lɑɹdʒɝ vɝʒən ʌv isɑɹ, ə sɪmpəl, pleɪnli ɡɑɹb mæn ə stil ən stoʊn wɪð mɔɹ wɛpənz hʌŋ əbaʊɾ ɪm ðən bɔldhɛɹ kæɹid, sʌɾən dɛθ weɪɾɪŋ tə bi ənliʃt, waɪl ɑləsun tʃulɪn wɑz əz slɪm əz sɹeɪlə wɑz staʊt, əz pɹɪɾi əz sɹeɪlə wɑz pleɪn, ən əz faɪɝi əz sɹeɪlə wɑz kɑm. ɑləsun sim bɔɹn tə hɝ faɪn, blu sɪlks. ɪt wɑz wɛl tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət dʒʌdʒɪŋ sɹeɪlə baɪ hɝ sɝfəs wɑz ə mɪsteɪk, tu.

Their companions appeared as different as their kings. As always, Ishigari Terasian looked just risen from a stupor after a drunken feast, as fat a man as she had ever seen in a saddle; his fine red coat was rumpled, his eyes bleary, his cheeks unshaven. By contrast, Kyril Shianri, tall and lean, and nearly as elegant as Baldhere despite the dust and sweat on his face, with silver bells on his boot tops and gloves as well as fastened to his braids; he wore his usual expression of dissatisfaction and had a way of always peering coolly down his prominent nose at anyone but Paitar. Shianri really was a fool in many ways - Arafellin kings rarely made much pretense of listening to councilors, relying instead on their queens - but he was more than he appeared at a glance. Agelmar Jagad could have been a larger version of Easar, a simple, plainly garbed man of steel and stone with more weapons hung about him than Baldhere carried, sudden death waiting to be unleashed, while Alesune Chulin was as slim as Serailla was stout, as pretty as Serailla was plain, and as fiery as Serailla was calm. Alesune seemed born to her fine, blue silks. It was well to remember that judging Serailla by her surface was a mistake, too.

"pis ən ðə laɪt feɪvɝ ju, ɛθɛniɛl ə kændɝ," isɑɹ sɛd ɡɹʌflaɪ əz ɛθɛniɛl ɹeɪn ɪn bɪfɔɹ ðɛm, ən ət ðə seɪm taɪm peɪɾɝ ɪntoʊnd, "ðə laɪɾ ɛmbɹeɪs ju, ɛθɛniɛl ə kændɝ." peɪɾɝ stɪl hæɾ ə vɔɪs tə meɪk wɪmənz hɑɹts bit fæstɝ. ən ə waɪf u nu hi wɑz hɝz tə hɪz butsoʊlz; ɛθɛniɛl daʊɾɪd ðət mɛnuki hæɾ ɛvɝ hæɾ ə dʒɛləs moʊmən ɪn əɹ laɪf, əɹ kɑz fəɹ wʌn.

"Peace and the Light favor you, Ethenielle of Kandor," Easar said gruffly as Ethenielle reined in before them, and at the same time Paitar intoned, "The Light embrace you, Ethenielle of Kandor." Paitar still had a voice to make women's hearts beat faster. And a wife who knew he was hers to his bootsoles; Ethenielle doubted that Menuki had ever had a jealous moment in her life, or cause for one.

ʃi meɪɾ əɹ oʊn ɡɹiɾɪŋz dʒʌst əz ʃɔɹt, ɛndɪŋ wɪð ə dɝɛkt "aɪ hoʊp juv kʌm ðɪs fɑɹ wɪθaʊt dɪtɛkʃən."

She made her own greetings just as short, ending with a direct "I hope you've come this far without detection."

isɑɹ snɔɹɾɪd ən lin ɑn ɪz kæntəl, aɪɪŋ əɹ ɡɹɪmli. ə hɑɹd mæn, bʌɾ ɪlɛvən jɪɹz wɪɾoʊd ən stɪl mɔɹnɪŋ. hi hæd ɹɪɾən poʊətʃɹi fəɹ ɪz waɪf. ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz mɔɹ ðən ðə sɝfəs. "ɪf wiv bɪn sin, ɛθɛniɛl," hi ɡɹʌmbəld, "ðɛn wi maɪɾ əz wɛl tɝn bæk naʊ."

Easar snorted and leaned on his cantle, eyeing her grimly. A hard man, but eleven years widowed and still mourning. He had written poetry for his wife. There was always more than the surface. "If we've been seen, Ethenielle," he grumbled, "then we might as well turn back now."

"ju spik ə tɝnɪŋ bæk ɔlɹɛɾi?" bɪtwin ɪz toʊn ən ə flɪp ə hɪz tæsɛld ɹeɪnz, ʃiænɹi mænədʒ tə kəmbaɪn dɪsdeɪn wɪð bɛɹli ɪnʌf səvɪləɾi tə fɔɹstɔl ə tʃælənʒ. ivən soʊ, eɪɡəlmɝ stʌɾid ɪm koʊldli, ʃɪftɪŋ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl slaɪtli, ə mæn ɹɪkɔlɪŋ wɛɹ itʃ ə hɪz wɛpənz wɑz pleɪst. oʊld ælaɪz ɪn mɛni bæɾəlz əlɔŋ ðə blaɪt, bʌt ðoʊz nu səspɪʃənz swɝld.

"You speak of turning back already?" Between his tone and a flip of his tasseled reins, Shianri managed to combine disdain with barely enough civility to forestall a challenge. Even so, Agelmar studied him coldly, shifting in his saddle slightly, a man recalling where each of his weapons was placed. Old allies in many battles along the Blight, but those new suspicions swirled.

ɑləsun meɪɾ əɹ maʊn dæns, ə ɡɹeɪ mɛɹ əz tɔl əz ə wɔɹhɔɹs. ðə θɪn waɪt stʃɹiks ɪn əɹ lɔŋ blæk hɛɹ sʌɾənli sim kɹɛsts ɑn ə hɛlmət, ən əɹ aɪz meɪɾ ɪɾ izi tə fɝɡɛt ðət ʃaɪnɝən wɪmən niðɝ tʃɹeɪnd wɪð wɛpənz nɔɹ fɔt duəlz. hɝ taɪɾəl wɑz sɪmpli ʃætʃjən ə ðə ɹɔɪəl haʊshoʊld, jɛt huɛvɝ bɪlivd ɛni ʃætʃjənz ɪnfluəns stɑpt əɾ ɔɹɾɝɪŋ ðə kʊks ən meɪdz ən vɪktʃueɪlɝz meɪɾ ə ɡɹeɪv ɛɹɝ. "fulhɑɹdinəs ɪz nɑt kɝədʒ, lɔɹd ʃiænɹi. wi liv ðə blaɪɾ ɔl bʌɾ ənɡɑɹɾɪd, ən ɪf wi feɪl, meɪbi ivən ɪf wi səksid, səm ʌv əs kəd faɪn əɹ hɛdz ɑn spaɪks. pɝhæps ɔl ʌv əs wɪl. ðə waɪt taʊɝ meɪ wɛl si tə ɪɾ ɪf ðɪs ælθɹ dʌz nɑt."

Alesune made her mount dance, a gray mare as tall as a warhorse. The thin white streaks in her long black hair suddenly seemed crests on a helmet, and her eyes made it easy to forget that Shienaran women neither trained with weapons nor fought duels. Her title was simply shatayan of the royal household, yet whoever believed any shatayan's influence stopped at ordering the cooks and maids and victualers made a grave error. "Foolhardiness is not courage, Lord Shianri. We leave the Blight all but unguarded, and if we fail, maybe even if we succeed, some of us could find our heads on spikes. Perhaps all of us will. The White Tower may well see to it if this al'Thor does not."

"ðə blaɪt simz ɔlmoʊst əslip," tɛɝeɪʒn mʌɾɝd, wɪskɝz ɹæspɪŋ əz i ɹʌbd ɪz flɛʃi tʃɪn. "aɪv nɛvɝ sin ɪt soʊ kwaɪət."

"The Blight seems almost asleep," Terasian muttered, whiskers rasping as he rubbed his fleshy chin. "I've never seen it so quiet."

"ðə ʃædoʊ nɛvɝ slips," dʒəɡəd pʊɾ ɪn kwaɪətli, ən tɛɝeɪʒn nɑɾəd əz ɪf ðæt, tu, wɑz sʌmθɪŋ tə kənsɪɾɝ. eɪɡəlmɝ wɑz ðə bɛs dʒɛnɝəl ə ðɛm ɔl, wʌn ə ðə bɛs tə bi faʊn ɛniwɛɹ, bʌt tɛɝeɪʒnz pleɪs ət peɪɾɝz ɹaɪt hæn hæd nɑt kʌm kəz i wɑz ə ɡʊd dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ kəmpænjən.

"The Shadow never sleeps," Jagad put in quietly, and Terasian nodded as if that, too, was something to consider. Agelmar was the best general of them all, one of the best to be found anywhere, but Terasian's place at Paitar's right hand had not come because he was a good drinking companion.

"wʌɾ aɪv lɛf bɪhaɪn kən ɡɑɹd ðə blaɪt ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz kʌmɪŋ əɡɛn," ɛθɛniɛl sɛɾ ɪn ə fɝm vɔɪs. "aɪ tʃɹʌs juv ɔl dʌn əz wɛl. ɪt hɑɹdli mæɾɝz, ðoʊ. dʌz ɛniwʌn bɪliv wi tʃɹuli kən tɝn bæk naʊ?" ʃi meɪd ðət læs kwɛstʃən dʒɹaɪ, ɪkspɛktɪŋ noʊ ænsɝ, bʌt ʃi ɹəsivd wʌn.

"What I've left behind can guard the Blight short of the Trolloc Wars coming again," Ethenielle said in a firm voice. "I trust you've all done as well. It hardly matters, though. Does anyone believe we truly can turn back now?" She made that last question dry, expecting no answer, but she received one.

"tɝn bæk?" ə jʌŋ wʊmənz haɪ vɔɪs dɪmændəd bɪhaɪn hɝ. tɛnoʊbiə ʌv sɑldɑiə ɡæləpt ɪndə ðə ɡæðɝɪŋ, dʒɹɔɪŋ əɹ waɪt ɡɛldɪŋ ʌp soʊ ðəɾ i ɹɪɹd flæmbɔɪənli. θɪk laɪnz ə pɝlz mɑɹtʃt daʊn ðə dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ slivz ə hɝ nɛɹoʊ-skɝɾɪd ɹaɪɾɪŋ hæbət, waɪl ɹɛd-ænd-ɡoʊld ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi swɝl θɪkli tə ɛmfəsaɪz ðə nɛɹoʊnəs ə hɝ weɪst ən ðə ɹaʊndnəs ə hɝ bʊzəm. tɔl fəɹ ə wʊmən, ʃi mænədʒ tə bi pɹɪɾi ɪf nɑt bjuɾəfəl dɪspaɪɾ ə noʊz ðət wɑz oʊvɝboʊld ət bɛst. lɑɹdʒ tɪltəɾ aɪz ʌv ə dɑɹk dip blu sɝɾənli hɛlpt, bʌt soʊ dɪɾ ə kɑnfəɾəns ɪn hɝsɛlf soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ðət ʃi sim tə ɡloʊ wɪð ɪt. əz ɪkspɛktəd, ðə kwin ə sɑldɑiə wɑz əkʌmpəniɾ oʊnli baɪ kæliən ɹæmzən, wʌn ə hɝ numɝəs ʌŋkəlz, ə skɑɹɾ ən ɡɹɪzəl mæn wɪð ðə feɪs ʌv ən iɡəl ən θɪk mʌstæʃɪz ðət kɝv daʊn ɝaʊn ɪz maʊθ. tɛnoʊbiə kæzɑɾi tɑlɝeɪɾəd ðə kaʊnsəl ə soʊlʒɝz, bʌt noʊ wʌn ɛls. "aɪ wɪl nɑt tɝn bæk," ʃi wɛn ɑn fɪɹsli, "wʌtɛvɝ ðə ɹɛst ə jə du. aɪ sɛn maɪ dɪɹ ʌŋkəl dævɹæm tə bɹɪŋ mi ðə hɛɾ ə ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən mæzɹim teɪm, ən naʊ hi ən teɪm boʊθ fɑloʊ ðɪs ælθɹ, ɪf aɪ kən bɪliv hæf wʌɾ aɪ hɪɹ. aɪ hæv kloʊs tə fɪfti θaʊzən mɛn bɪhaɪn mi, ən wʌtɛvɝ jə dɪsaɪd, əl nɑt tɝn bæk əntɪl maɪ ʌŋkəl ən ælθɹ lɝn ɪɡzækli hu ɹulz sɑldɑiə."

"Turn back?" a young woman's high voice demanded behind her. Tenobia of Saldaea galloped into the gathering, drawing her white gelding up so that he reared flamboyantly. Thick lines of pearls marched down the dark gray sleeves of her narrow-skirted riding habit, while red-and-gold embroidery swirled thickly to emphasize the narrowness of her waist and the roundness of her bosom. Tall for a woman, she managed to be pretty if not beautiful despite a nose that was overbold at best. Large tilted eyes of a dark deep blue certainly helped, but so did a confidence in herself so strong that she seemed to glow with it. As expected, the Queen of Saldaea was accompanied only by Kalyan Ramsin, one of her numerous uncles, a scarred and grizzled man with the face of an eagle and thick mustaches that curved down around his mouth. Tenobia Kazadi tolerated the counsel of soldiers, but no one else. "I will not turn back," she went on fiercely, "whatever the rest of you do. I sent my dear Uncle Davram to bring me the head of the false Dragon Mazrim Taim, and now he and Taim both follow this al'Thor, if I can believe half what I hear. I have close to fifty thousand men behind me, and whatever you decide, I will not turn back until my uncle and al'Thor learn exactly who rules Saldaea."

ɛθɛniɛl ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz wɪð sɹeɪlə ən bɔldhɛɹ waɪl peɪɾɝ ən isɑɹ bɪɡæn tɛlɪŋ tɛnoʊbiə ðət ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ mɛn tə kip ɑn. sɹeɪlə ɡeɪv əɹ hɛd ðə smɔləst ʃeɪk, meɪd ðə slaɪɾəst ʃɹʌɡ. bɔldhɛɹ ɹoʊld ɪz aɪz oʊpənli. ɛθɛniɛl hæd nɑɾ ɪɡzækli hoʊp tɛnoʊbiə maɪt dɪsaɪɾ ət ðə læs tə steɪ əweɪ, bʌt ðə ɡɝl wəd ʃʊɹli meɪk dɪfəkəltiz.

Ethenielle exchanged glances with Serailla and Baldhere while Paitar and Easar began telling Tenobia that they also meant to keep on. Serailla gave her head the smallest shake, made the slightest shrug. Baldhere rolled his eyes openly. Ethenielle had not exactly hoped Tenobia might decide at the last to stay away, but the girl would surely make difficulties.

sɑldəiənz wɝ ə stʃɹeɪnʒ lɑt - ɛθɛniɛl hæɾ ɔfən wʌndɝd haʊ hɝ sɪstɝ ɪnoʊni mænədʒ soʊ wɛl mɛɹid tə jɛɾ ənʌðɝ ə tɛnoʊbiəz ʌŋkəlz - jɛt tɛnoʊbiə kæɹid ðət stʃɹeɪnʒnəs tə ɪkstʃɹimz. jə ɪkspɛktəd ʃoʊinəs fɹəm ɛni sɑldəiən, bʌt tɛnoʊbiə tʊk dɪlaɪɾ ɪn ʃɑkɪŋ dəmɑni ən meɪkɪŋ ɔltɑɹənz sim dʒɹæb. sɑldəiən tɛmpɝz wɝ lɛdʒəndɛɹi; hɝz wɑz waɪldfaɪɝ ɪn ə haɪ wɪnd, ən jə kəd nɛvɝ tɛl wʌt wəd pɹəvaɪd ðə spɑɹk. ɛθɛniɛl dɪd nɑɾ ivən wɑnə θɪŋk ə ðə dɪfəkəlti ɪn ɡɛɾɪŋ ðə wʊmən tə lɪsən tə ɹizən wən ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑn tə; oʊnli dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn eɪbəl tə də ðæt. ən ðən ðəɹ wɑz ðə kwɛstʃən ə mɛɹɪdʒ.

Saldaeans were a strange lot - Ethenielle had often wondered how her sister Einone managed so well married to yet another of Tenobia's uncles - yet Tenobia carried that strangeness to extremes. You expected showiness from any Saldaean, but Tenobia took delight in shocking Domani and making Altarans seem drab. Saldaean tempers were legendary; hers was wildfire in a high wind, and you could never tell what would provide the spark. Ethenielle did not even want to think of the difficulty in getting the woman to listen to reason when she did not want to; only Davram Bashere had ever been able to do that. And then there was the question of marriage.

tɛnoʊbiə wɑz stɪl jʌŋ, ðoʊ jɪɹz pæs ði eɪdʒ ʃi ʃʊɾə wɛd - mɛɹɪdʒ wɑz ə duɾi fəɹ ɛni mɛmbɝ ʌv ə ɹulɪŋ haʊs, ðə mɔɹ soʊ fəɹ ə ɹulɝ; əlaɪənsəz hæd tə bi meɪd, ən ɛɹ pɹəvaɪɾəd - jɛɾ ɛθɛniɛl hæd nɛvɝ kənsɪɾɝd ðə ɡɝl fəɹ ɛni ʌv əɹ oʊn sʌnz. tɛnoʊbiəz ɹɪkwaɪɹməns fəɹ ə hʌzbənd wɝ ɑn ə lɛvəl wɪð ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls əbaʊt hɝ. hi mʌs bi eɪbəl tə feɪs ən sleɪ ə dʌzən mɹdʒɹɑl ət wʌns. waɪl pleɪɪŋ ðə hɑɹp ən kəmpoʊzɪŋ poʊətʃɹi. hi mʌs bi eɪbəl tə kɑnfaʊn skɑlɝz waɪl ɹaɪɾɪŋ ə hɔɹs daʊn ə ʃɪɹ klɪf. əɹ pɝhæps ʌp ɪt. ʌv kɔɹs i wəɾ əv tə dɪfɝ tə hɝ - ʃi wɑz ə kwin, æftɝ ɔl - ɪksɛp ðət səmtaɪmz tɛnoʊbiə wəɾ ɪkspɛkt ɪm tə ɪɡnɔɹ wʌtɛvɝ ʃi sɛɾ ən tɔs əɹ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ðə ɡɝl wɑntəɾ ɪɡzækli ðæt! ən ðə laɪt hɛlp ɪm ɪf i tʃoʊz tə tɔs wən ʃi wɑntəd dɛfɝəns, əɹ tə dɪfɝ wən ʃi wɑntəd ði ʌðɝ. ʃi nɛvɝ sɛɾ ɛni ʌv ðɪs ɹaɪɾ aʊt, bʌɾ ɛni wʊmən wɪð wɪts u hæd hɝɾ əɹ tɔk əbaʊt mɛn kəd pis ɪt təɡɛðɝ ɪn ʃɔɹɾ ɔɹɾɝ. tɛnoʊbiə wəd daɪ ə meɪɾən. wɪtʃ mɛn əɹ ʌŋkəl dævɹæm wəd səksid, ɪf ʃi lɛft ɪm əlaɪv æftɝ ðɪs, əɹ ɛls dævɹæmz ɛɹ.

Tenobia was still young, though years past the age she should have wed - marriage was a duty for any member of a ruling House, the more so for a ruler; alliances had to be made, an heir provided - yet Ethenielle had never considered the girl for any of her own sons. Tenobia's requirements for a husband were on a level with everything else about her. He must be able to face and slay a dozen Myrddraal at once. While playing the harp and composing poetry. He must be able to confound scholars while riding a horse down a sheer cliff. Or perhaps up it. Of course he would have to defer to her - she was a queen, after all - except that sometimes Tenobia would expect him to ignore whatever she said and toss her over his shoulder. The girl wanted exactly that! And the Light help him if he chose to toss when she wanted deference, or to defer when she wanted the other. She never said any of this right out, but any woman with wits who had heard her talk about men could piece it together in short order. Tenobia would die a maiden. Which meant her uncle Davram would succeed, if she left him alive after this, or else Davram's heir.

ə wɝd kɑɾ ɛθɛniɛlz ɪɹ ən dʒɝkt əɹ əpɹaɪɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl. ʃi ʃʊɾə bɪn peɪɪŋ ətɛnʃən; tu mʌtʃ wɑz ət steɪk. "ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ʃi sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "wʌɾ əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ?" seɪv fəɹ peɪɾɝz, ðɛɹ waɪt taʊɝ ædvaɪzɝz hæɾ ɔl lɛft ət nuz ə ðə tʃɹʌbəlz ɪn ðə taʊɝ, hɝ oʊn niɑn ən isɑɹz səlɪŋ vænɪʃɪŋ wɪθaʊɾ ə tʃɹeɪs. ɪf ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd ɡeɪn ə hɪn ə ðɛɹ plænz. . . . wɛl, ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔlweɪz hæd plænz ə ðɛɹ oʊn. ɔlweɪz. ʃi wəd dɪslaɪk dɪskʌvɝɪŋ ðət ʃi wɑz pʊɾɪŋ əɹ hænz ɪndə tu hɔɹnɪts nɛsts, nɑt dʒʌst wʌn.

A word caught Ethenielle's ear and jerked her upright in her saddle. She should have been paying attention; too much was at stake. "Aes Sedai?" she said sharply. "What about Aes Sedai?" Save for Paitar's, their White Tower advisors had all left at news of the troubles in the Tower, her own Nianh and Easar's Aisling vanishing without a trace. If Aes Sedai had gained a hint of their plans. . . . Well, Aes Sedai always had plans of their own. Always. She would dislike discovering that she was putting her hands into two hornet's nests, not just one.

peɪɾɝ ʃɹʌɡd, lʊkɪŋ ə tʃɹaɪfəl ɪmbɛɹəst. ðət wɑz noʊ smɔl tʃɹɪk fəɹ hɪm; hi, laɪk sɹeɪlə, lɛt nʌθɪŋ ʌpsɛt hɪm. "ju hɑɹdli ɪkspɛktəd mi tə liv koʊlɑdɑɹə bɪhaɪnd, ɛθɛniɛl," hi sɛɾ ɪn suðɪŋ toʊnz, "ivən ɪf aɪ cʊɾə kɛp ðə pɹɛpɝeɪʃənz fɹəm hɝ." ʃi hæd nɑt; hɪz feɪvɹɪt sɪstɝ wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən kaɪɹunə hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ə dip fɑndnəs fəɹ ðə taʊɝ. ɛθɛniɛl hæd nɑɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪt, bʌt ʃi hæd hoʊpt. "koʊlɑdɑɹə hæd vɪzəɾɝz," hi kəntɪnjud. "sɛvən ə ðɛm. bɹɪŋɪŋ əm əlɔŋ sim pɹuɾənt, ʌndɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz. fɔɹtʃənətli, ðeɪ ɹikwaɪɝ lɪɾəl kənvɪnsɪŋ. nʌn, ɪn tʃɹuθ."

Paitar shrugged, looking a trifle embarrassed. That was no small trick for him; he, like Serailla, let nothing upset him. "You hardly expected me to leave Coladara behind, Ethenielle," he said in soothing tones, "even if I could have kept the preparations from her." She had not; his favorite sister was Aes Sedai, and Kiruna had given him a deep fondness for the Tower. Ethenielle had not expected it, but she had hoped. "Coladara had visitors," he continued. "Seven of them. Bringing them along seemed prudent, under the circumstances. Fortunately, they require little convincing. None, in truth."

"ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ən pɹəzɝv əɹ soʊlz," ɛθɛniɛl bɹiðd, ən hɝd nɪɹ ɛkoʊz fɹəm sɹeɪlə ən bɔldhɛɹ. "eɪt sɪstɝz, peɪɾɝ? eɪt?" ðə waɪt taʊɝ ʃʊɹli nu ɛvɹi muv ðeɪ ɪntɛndəd, naʊ.

"The Light illumine and preserve our souls," Ethenielle breathed, and heard near echos from Serailla and Baldhere. "Eight sisters, Paitar? Eight?" The White Tower surely knew every move they intended, now.

"æn aɪ hæv faɪv mɔɹ," tɛnoʊbiə pʊɾ ɪn əz ɪf ənaʊnsɪŋ ʃi hæɾ ə nu pɛɹ ə slɪpɝz. "ðeɪ faʊn mi dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ aɪ lɛf sɑldɑiə. baɪ tʃæns, aɪm ʃʊɹ; ðeɪ əpɪɹɾ əz sɝpɹaɪzd əz aɪ wɑz. wʌns ðeɪ lɝnd wʌɾ aɪ wɑz duɪŋ - aɪ stɪl doʊnt noʊ haʊ ðeɪ dɪd, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd - wʌns ðeɪ lɝnd, aɪ wɑz ʃʊɹ ðeɪd ɡoʊ skɝiɪŋ tə faɪn məmɑɹə." hɝ bɹaʊz fɝoʊɾ ɪn ə moʊməntɛɹi ɡlɛɹ. ɪleɪɾə hæd mɪskælkjəleɪɾɪd bædli ɪn sɛndɪŋ ə sɪstɝ tə tʃɹaɪ bʊliɪŋ tɛnoʊbiə. "ɪnstɛd," ʃi fɪnɪʃt, "ɪlaɪsiən ən ðə ɹɛst wɝ mɔɹ ɪntɛn ɑn sikɹəsi ðən aɪ."

"And I have five more," Tenobia put in as if announcing she had a new pair of slippers. "They found me just before I left Saldaea. By chance, I'm sure; they appeared as surprised as I was. Once they learned what I was doing - I still don't know how they did, but they did - once they learned, I was sure they'd go scurrying to find Memara." Her brows furrowed in a momentary glare. Elaida had miscalculated badly in sending a sister to try bullying Tenobia. "Instead," she finished, "Illeisien and the rest were more intent on secrecy than I."

"ivən soʊ," ɛθɛniɛl ɪnsɪstəd. "θɝtin sɪstɝz. ɔl ðəɾ ɪz niɾəd ɪz fəɹ wʌn ə ðɛm tə faɪn səm weɪ tə sɛn ə mɛsədʒ. ə fju laɪnz. ə soʊlʒɝ əɹ ə meɪɾ ɪntɪmɪdeɪɾɪd. dʌz ɛni ʌv jə θɪŋk jə kən stɑp ðɛm?"

"Even so," Ethenielle insisted. "Thirteen sisters. All that is needed is for one of them to find some way to send a message. A few lines. A soldier or a maid intimidated. Does any of you think you can stop them?"

"ðə daɪs ɑɹ aʊɾ ə ðə kʌp," peɪɾɝ sɛd sɪmpli. wʌt wɑz dʌn, wɑz dʌn. ɝæfɛlɪn wɝ ɔlmoʊst əz ɑɾ əz sɑldəiənz, ɪn ɛθɛniɛlz bʊk.

"The dice are out of the cup," Paitar said simply. What was done, was done. Arafellin were almost as odd as Saldaeans, in Ethenielle's book.

"fɑɹðɝ saʊθ," isɑɹ æɾəd, "ɪt meɪ bi wɛl tə hæv θɝtin ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð ʌs." ðət bɹɔɾ ə saɪləns waɪl ði ɪmpləkeɪʃənz hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ. noʊ wʌn wɑntəd tə vɔɪs ðɛm. ðɪs wɑz fɑɹ dɪfɹən fɹəm feɪsɪŋ ðə blaɪt.

"Farther south," Easar added, "it may be well to have thirteen Aes Sedai with us." That brought a silence while the implications hung in the air. No one wanted to voice them. This was far different from facing the Blight.

tɛnoʊbiə ɡeɪv ə sʌɾən, ʃɑkɪŋ læf. hɝ ɡɛldɪŋ tʃɹaɪd tə dæns, bʌt ʃi sɛɾəld hɪm. "aɪ min tə pɹɛs saʊθ əz fæst əz aɪ kæn, bʌɾ aɪ ɪnvaɪt jə ɔl tə daɪn wɪð mi ɪn maɪ kæmp tənaɪt. jə kən spik wɪð ɪlaɪsiən ən əɹ fɹɛnz, ən si wɛðɝ jəɹ dʒʌdʒmən mætʃəz maɪn. pɝhæps təmɑɹoʊ naɪt wi kən ɔl ɡæðɝ ɪn peɪɾɝz kæmp ən kwɛstʃən ɪz koʊlɑdɑɹəz fɹɛnz." ðə sədʒɛstʃən wɑz soʊ sɛnsəbəl, soʊ ɑbviəsli nɛsəsɛɹi, ðəɾ ɪt bɹɔɾ ɪnstən əɡɹimənt. ən ðən tɛnoʊbiə æɾəd, əz ɪf ən æftɝθɑt, "maɪ ʌŋkəl kæliən wəd bi ɑnɝɾ ɪf jə əlaʊɾ ɪm tə sɪt bɪsaɪd jə tənaɪt, ɛθɛniɛl. hi ædmaɪɹz jə ɡɹeɪtli."

Tenobia gave a sudden, shocking laugh. Her gelding tried to dance, but she settled him. "I mean to press south as fast as I can, but I invite you all to dine with me in my camp tonight. You can speak with Illeisien and her friends, and see whether your judgment matches mine. Perhaps tomorrow night we can all gather in Paitar's camp and question his Coladara's friends." The suggestion was so sensible, so obviously necessary, that it brought instant agreement. And then Tenobia added, as if an afterthought, "My uncle Kalyan would be honored if you allowed him to sit beside you tonight, Ethenielle. He admires you greatly."

ɛθɛniɛl ɡlæns təwɔɹd kæliən ɹæmzən - ðə fɛloʊ hæd sæɾ ɪz hɔɹs saɪlənli bɪhaɪn tɛnoʊbiə, nɛvɝ spikɪŋ, hɑɹdli simɪŋ tə bɹið - ʃi mɪɹli ɡlænst ət hɪm, ən fəɹ ən ɪnstən ðət ɡɹɪzəld iɡəl ənhʊɾɪd ɪz aɪz. fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ʃi sɔ sʌmθɪŋ ʃi hæd nɑt sin sɪns əɹ bɹɪs daɪd, ə mæn lʊkɪŋ nɑɾ əɾ ə kwin, bʌɾ əɾ ə wʊmən. ðə ʃɑk ʌv ɪt wɑz ə bloʊ teɪkɪŋ əɹ bɹɛθ. tɛnoʊbiəz aɪz dɑɹɾɪd fɹəm əɹ ʌŋkəl tə ɛθɛniɛl, hɝ taɪni smaɪl kwaɪt sæɾəsfaɪd.

Ethenielle glanced toward Kalyan Ramsin - the fellow had sat his horse silently behind Tenobia, never speaking, hardly seeming to breathe - she merely glanced at him, and for an instant that grizzled eagle unhooded his eyes. For an instant, she saw something she had not seen since her Brys died, a man looking not at a queen, but at a woman. The shock of it was a blow taking her breath. Tenobia's eyes darted from her uncle to Ethenielle, her tiny smile quite satisfied.

aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ flɛɹɾ ɪn ɛθɛniɛl. ðət smaɪl meɪɾ ɪɾ ɔl klɪɹ əz spɹɪŋ wɔɾɝ, ɪf kæliənz aɪz hæd nɑt. ðɪs tʃɪɾ ʌv ə ɡɝl θɔt tə mɛɹi ɔf ðɪs fɛloʊ tə hɝ? ðɪs tʃaɪl pɹəzum tə . . . ? sʌɾənli, ɹufəlnəs ɹipleɪs fjʊɹi. ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd bɪn jʌŋɡɝ wən ʃi ɝeɪnʒd əɹ wɪɾoʊd sɪstɝ næzɛlz wɛɾɪŋ. ə mæɾɝ ə steɪt, jɛt næzɛl hæd kʌm tə lʌv lɔɹɾ ɪzmɪk dɪspaɪɾ ɔl əɹ pɹoʊɾɛsts ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. ɛθɛniɛl hæd bɪn ɝeɪnʒɪŋ ʌðɝz' mɛɹɪdʒɪz fəɹ soʊ lɔŋ ðət ʃi hæd nɛvɝ kənsɪɾɝd ðəɾ əɹ oʊn wəd meɪk ə vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋ taɪ. ʃi lʊkt ət kæliən əɡɛn, ə lɔŋɡɝ lʊk. hɪz lɛðɝi feɪs wɑz ɔl pɹɑpɝ ɹɪspɛkt wʌns mɔɹ, jɛt ʃi sɔ hɪz aɪz əz ðeɪ hæd bɪn. ɛni kɑnsɔɹt ʃi tʃoʊz wəɾ əv tə bi ə hɑɹd mæn, bʌt ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz dɪmændəɾ ə tʃæns ə lʌv fəɹ əɹ tʃɪlʒɹənz mɛɹɪdʒɪz, ɪf nɑɾ əɹ sɪblɪŋz', ən ʃi wəd də noʊ lɛs fəɹ hɝsɛlf.

Outrage flared in Ethenielle. That smile made it all clear as spring water, if Kalyan's eyes had not. This chit of a girl thought to marry off this fellow to her? This child presumed to . . . ? Suddenly, ruefulness replaced fury. She herself had been younger when she arranged her widowed sister Nazelle's wedding. A matter of state, yet Nazelle had come to love Lord Ismic despite all her protests in the beginning. Ethenielle had been arranging others' marriages for so long that she had never considered that her own would make a very strong tie. She looked at Kalyan again, a longer look. His leathery face was all proper respect once more, yet she saw his eyes as they had been. Any consort she chose would have to be a hard man, but she had always demanded a chance of love for her children's marriages, if not her siblings', and she would do no less for herself.

"ɪnstɛɾ ʌv weɪstɪŋ deɪlaɪɾ ɑn tʃæɾɝ," ʃi sɛd, mɔɹ bɹɛθləs ðən ʃi kəɾ əv wɪʃt, "lɛɾ əs də wʌt wi keɪm fɔɹ." ðə laɪt sɪɹ əɹ soʊl, ʃi wɑz ə wʊmən ɡɹoʊn, nɑɾ ə ɡɝl miɾɪŋ ə pɹəspɛktɪv suɾɝ fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. "wɛl?" ʃi dɪmændəd. ðɪs taɪm, hɝ toʊn wɑz suɾəbli fɝm.

"Instead of wasting daylight on chatter," she said, more breathless than she could have wished, "let us do what we came for." The Light sear her soul, she was a woman grown, not a girl meeting a prospective suitor for the first time. "Well?" she demanded. This time, her tone was suitably firm.

ɔl ə ðɛɹ əɡɹiməns hæd bɪn meɪɾ ɪn ðoʊz kɛɹfəl lɛɾɝz, ən ɔl ə ðɛɹ plænz wəɾ əv tə bi mɑɾəfaɪd əz ðeɪ muv saʊθ ən sɝkəmstænsəz tʃeɪnʒd. ðɪs miɾɪŋ hæɾ oʊnli wʌn ɹil pɝpəs, ə sɪmpəl ən eɪntʃən sɛɹəmoʊni ʌv ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz ðət hæd bɪn ɹəkɔɹɾəd oʊnli sɛvən taɪmz ɪn ɔl ðə jɪɹz sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ. ə sɪmpəl sɛɹəmoʊni ðət wəd kəmɪɾ əm bɪɑn ɛniθɪŋ wɝdz kəd du, haʊɛvɝ stʃɹɔŋ. ðə ɹulɝz muv ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz kloʊsɝ waɪl ði ʌðɝz dʒɹu bæk.

All of their agreements had been made in those careful letters, and all of their plans would have to be modified as they moved south and circumstances changed. This meeting had only one real purpose, a simple and ancient ceremony of the Borderlands that had been recorded only seven times in all the years since the Breaking. A simple ceremony that would commit them beyond anything words could do, however strong. The rulers moved their horses closer while the others drew back.

ɛθɛniɛl hɪst əz əɹ bɛl naɪf slæʃt əkɹɔs əɹ lɛf pɑm. tɛnoʊbiə læft ət kʌɾɪŋ hɝz. peɪɾɝ ən isɑɹ maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn plʌkɪŋ splɪntɝz. fɔɹ hænz ɹitʃt aʊɾ ən mɛt, ɡɹɪpt, hɑɹts blʌd mɪŋɡəlɪŋ, dʒɹɪpɪŋ tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, soʊkɪŋ ɪndə ðə stoʊni dɝt. "wi ɑɹ wʌn, tə ðə dɛθ," isɑɹ sɛd, ən ðeɪ ɔl spoʊk wɪð hɪm. "wi ɑɹ wʌn, tə ðə dɛθ." baɪ blʌɾ ən sɔɪl, ðeɪ wɝ kəmɪɾəd. naʊ ðeɪ hæd tə faɪn ɹænd ælθɹ. ən də wʌt niɾəd tə bi dʌn. wʌtɛvɝ ðə pɹaɪs.

Ethenielle hissed as her belt knife slashed across her left palm. Tenobia laughed at cutting hers. Paitar and Easar might as well have been plucking splinters. Four hands reached out and met, gripped, heart's blood mingling, dripping to the ground, soaking into the stony dirt. "We are one, to the death," Easar said, and they all spoke with him. "We are one, to the death." By blood and soil, they were committed. Now they had to find Rand al'Thor. And do what needed to be done. Whatever the price.

wʌns ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðət tɝænə kəd sɪɾ ʌp ɑn ðə kʊʃən əneɪɾɪd, vɛɹɪn ɹoʊz ən lɛf ðə slʌmpt waɪt sɪstɝ sɪpɪŋ wɔɾɝ. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə sɪp, ɛniweɪ. tɝænəz tiθ tʃæɾɝd ɑn ðə sɪlvɝ kʌp, wɪtʃ wɑz noʊ sɝpɹaɪz. ðə tɛns ɛntʃɹɪweɪ stʊd loʊ ɪnʌf ðət vɛɹɪn hæd tə dʌk ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə pʊɾ əɹ hɛɾ aʊt. wɪɹinəs ɔɡɝɾ ɪndə hɝ bæk wən ʃi bɛnt. ʃi hæd noʊ fɪɹ ə ðə wʊmən ʃɪvɝɪŋ bɪhaɪn əɹ ɪn ə kɔɹs blæk wʊlən ɹoʊb. vɛɹɪn hɛl ðə ʃild ɑn əɹ taɪt, ən ʃi daʊɾɪd tɝænə pəzɛst ɪnʌf stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn əɹ lɛɡz ət ðə moʊmən tə kɑntəmpleɪt lipɪŋ ɑn əɹ fɹəm bɪhaɪnd, ivən ɪf sətʃ ən ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl θɔɾ əkɝd tə hɝ. waɪts dʒʌs dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðət weɪ. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ɪn tɝænəz kəndɪʃən, ɪt wɑz daʊtfəl ʃi wəd bi eɪbəl tə tʃænəl ə hɛɹ fəɹ sɛvɹəl aʊɝz jɛt, ivən ɪf ʃi wɝ nɑt ʃildɪd.

Once she was sure that Turanna could sit up on the cushion unaided, Verin rose and left the slumped White sister sipping water. Trying to sip, anyway. Turanna's teeth chattered on the silver cup, which was no surprise. The tent's entryway stood low enough that Verin had to duck in order to put her head out. Weariness augered into her back when she bent. She had no fear of the woman shivering behind her in a coarse black woolen robe. Verin held the shield on her tight, and she doubted Turanna possessed enough strength in her legs at the moment to contemplate leaping on her from behind, even if such an incredible thought occurred to her. Whites just did not think that way. For that matter, in Turanna's condition, it was doubtful she would be able to channel a hair for several hours yet, even if she were not shielded.

ði il kæmp kʌvɝd ðə hɪlz ðət hɪd kɛɹhin, loʊ ɝθ-kʌlɝd tɛns fɪlɪŋ ðə speɪs bɪtwin ðə fju tʃɹiz lɛf stændɪŋ ðɪs kloʊs tə ðə sɪɾi. feɪn klaʊdz ə dʌs hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, bʌt niðɝ dʌs nɔɹ hit nɔɹ ðə ɡlɛɹ ʌv ən æŋɡɹi sʌn bɑðɝd ði il əɾ ɔl. bʌsəl ən pɝpəs fɪl ðə kæmp tə ikwəl ɛni sɪɾi. wɪðɪn əɹ saɪt wɝ mɛn bʊtʃɝɪŋ ɡeɪm ən pætʃɪŋ tɛns, ʃɑɹpənɪŋ naɪvz ən meɪkɪŋ ðə sɑf buts ðeɪ ɔl wɔɹ, wɪmən kʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ oʊpən faɪɝz, beɪkɪŋ, wɝkɪŋ smɔl lumz, lʊkɪŋ æftɝ səm ə ðə fju tʃɪlʒɹən ɪn ðə kæmp. ɛvɹiwɛɹ waɪt-ɹoʊbd ɡeɪʃeɪn dɑɹɾɪd əbaʊt kæɹiɪŋ bɝɾənz, əɹ stʊd biɾɪŋ ɹʌɡz, əɹ tɛndəd pækhɔɹsɪz ən mjulz. noʊ hɔkɝz əɹ ʃɑpkipɝz. əɹ kɑɹts ən kæɹɪdʒɪz, ʌv kɔɹs. ə sɪɾi? ɪt wɑz mɔɹ laɪk ə θaʊzən vɪlədʒəz ɡæðɝɾ ɪn wʌn spɑt, ðoʊ mɛn ɡɹeɪtli aʊtnʌmbɝd wɪmən ænd, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə blæksmɪθs meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ ænvəlz ɹɪŋ, nɪɹli ɛvɹi mæn nɑɾ ɪn waɪt kæɹid wɛpənz. moʊst ə ðə wɪmən dɪd, əz wɛl.

The Aiel camp covered the hills that hid Cairhien, low earth-colored tents filling the space between the few trees left standing this close to the city. Faint clouds of dust hung in the air, but neither dust nor heat nor the glare of an angry sun bothered the Aiel at all. Bustle and purpose filled the camp to equal any city. Within her sight were men butchering game and patching tents, sharpening knives and making the soft boots they all wore, women cooking over open fires, baking, working small looms, looking after some of the few children in the camp. Everywhere white-robed gai'shain darted about carrying burdens, or stood beating rugs, or tended packhorses and mules. No hawkers or shopkeepers. Or carts and carriages, of course. A city? It was more like a thousand villages gathered in one spot, though men greatly outnumbered women and, except for the blacksmiths making their anvils ring, nearly every man not in white carried weapons. Most of the women did, as well.

ðə nʌmbɝz sɝɾənli ikwəld wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪt sɪɾiz', mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf tə ɛnvəloʊp ə fju ɛɛs sədaɪ pɹɪznɝz kəmplitli, jɛt vɛɹɪn sɔ ə blæk-ɹoʊbd wʊmən plɑɾɪŋ əweɪ nɑt fɪfti peɪsɪz ɔf, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə pʊl ə weɪst-haɪ paɪl ə ɹɑks bɪhaɪn əɹ ɑn ə kaʊaɪd. ðə dip kaʊl hɪɾ əɹ feɪs, bʌt noʊ wʌn ɪn ðə kæmp ɪksɛp ðə kæptɪv sɪstɝz wɔɹ ðoʊz blæk ɹoʊbz. eɪ waɪz wʌn stʃɹoʊld əlɔŋ kloʊs tə ðə haɪd, ɡloʊɪŋ wɪð ðə paʊɝ əz ʃi ʃildɪd ðə pɹɪznɝ, waɪl ə pɛɹ ə meɪɾənz flæŋk ðə sɪstɝ, juzɪŋ swɪtʃəz tə ɝdʒ əɹ ɑn wɛnɛvɝ ʃi fɔltɝd. vɛɹɪn wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ʃi hæd bɪn mɛn tə si. ðət vɛɹi mɔɹnɪŋ ʃi hæd pæst ə waɪld-aɪd kɔɪɹən seɪldən, swɛt stʃɹimɪŋ daʊn əɹ feɪs, wɪð ə waɪz wʌn ən tu tɔl ilmɛn fəɹ ɛskɔɹɾ ən ə lɑɹdʒ bæskət hipt wɪð sæn bɛndɪŋ əɹ bæk əz ʃi stæɡɝɾ ʌp ə sloʊp. jɛstɝdeɪ ɪt hæd bɪn sɝin nɛmdɑl. ðeɪ hæd sɛɾ əɹ muvɪŋ hænfəlz ʌv wɔɾɝ fɹəm wʌn haɪd bʌkət tə ənʌðɝ bɪsaɪɾ ɪt, swɪtʃt əɹ tə muv fæstɝ, ðən swɪtʃt əɹ fəɹ ɛvɹi dʒɹɑp spɪld wən ðə wɔɾɝ spɪl kəz ðeɪ wɝ swɪtʃɪŋ əɹ tə muv fæstɝ. sɝin hæd stoʊlən ə moʊmən tə æsk vɛɹɪn waɪ, ðoʊ nɑɾ əz ɪf ʃi ɪkspɛktəɾ ɛni ænsɝ. vɛɹɪn sɝɾənli hæd nɑt bɪn eɪbəl tə səplaɪ wʌn bɪfɔɹ ðə meɪɾənz dʒɹoʊv sɝin bæk tə hɝ jusləs leɪbɝ.

The numbers certainly equaled one of the great cities', more than enough to envelope a few Aes Sedai prisoners completely, yet Verin saw a black-robed woman plodding away not fifty paces off, struggling to pull a waist-high pile of rocks behind her on a cowhide. The deep cowl hid her face, but no one in the camp except the captive sisters wore those black robes. A Wise One strolled along close to the hide, glowing with the Power as she shielded the prisoner, while a pair of Maidens flanked the sister, using switches to urge her on whenever she faltered. Verin wondered whether she had been meant to see. That very morning she had passed a wild-eyed Coiren Saeldain, sweat streaming down her face, with a Wise One and two tall Aielmen for escort and a large basket heaped with sand bending her back as she staggered up a slope. Yesterday it had been Sarene Nemdahl. They had set her moving handfuls of water from one hide bucket to another beside it, switched her to move faster, then switched her for every drop spilled when the water spilled because they were switching her to move faster. Sarene had stolen a moment to ask Verin why, though not as if she expected any answer. Verin certainly had not been able to supply one before the Maidens drove Sarene back to her useless labor.

ʃi səpɹɛst ə saɪ. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, ʃi kəd nɑt tʃɹuli laɪk siɪŋ sɪstɝz tʃɹiɾəd soʊ, wʌtɛvɝ ðə ɹizənz əɹ nid, ən fəɹ ənʌðɝ, ɪt wɑz ɑbviəs ðəɾ ə fɛɹ nʌmbɝ ə ðə waɪz wʌnz wɑntəd. . . . wʌt? fəɹ əɹ tə noʊ ðət biɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ kaʊntəd fəɹ nʌθɪŋ hɪɹ? ɹɪdɪkjələs. ðət hæd bɪn meɪɾ əbʌndənli klɪɹ deɪz əɡoʊ. pɝhæps ðət ʃi kəd bi pʊɾ ɪndə ə blæk ɹoʊb, tu? fəɹ ðə taɪm ʃi θɔt ʃi wɑz seɪf fɹəm ðæt, ət list, bʌt ðə waɪz wʌnz hɪɾ ə nʌmbɝ ə sikɹəts ʃi hæd jɛt tə pʌzəl aʊt, ðə smɔləst ə ðɛm haʊ ðɛɹ haɪɝɑɹki wɝkt. vɛɹi mʌtʃ ðə smɔləst, jɛt laɪf ən ə hoʊl skɪn leɪ ɹæpt ɪnsaɪd ðət wʌn. wɪmən u ɡeɪv kəmænz səmtaɪmz tʊk əm fɹəm ðə vɛɹi wɪmən ðeɪ hæd bɪn kəmændɪŋ ɝliɝ, ən ðən leɪɾɝ ɪt wɑz tɝn əbaʊɾ əɡɛn, ɔl wɪθaʊt ɹaɪm əɹ ɹizən ðət ʃi kəd si. noʊ wʌn ɛvɝ ɔɹɾɝd sɔɹɪliə, ðoʊ, ən ɪn ðət maɪt laɪ seɪfti. ʌv ə sɔɹt.

She suppressed a sigh. For one thing, she could not truly like seeing sisters treated so, whatever the reasons or need, and for another, it was obvious that a fair number of the Wise Ones wanted. . . . What? For her to know that being Aes Sedai counted for nothing here? Ridiculous. That had been made abundantly clear days ago. Perhaps that she could be put into a black robe, too? For the time she thought she was safe from that, at least, but the Wise Ones hid a number of secrets she had yet to puzzle out, the smallest of them how their hierarchy worked. Very much the smallest, yet life and a whole skin lay wrapped inside that one. Women who gave commands sometimes took them from the very women they had been commanding earlier, and then later it was turned about again, all without rhyme or reason that she could see. No one ever ordered Sorilea, though, and in that might lie safety. Of a sort.

ʃi kəd nɑt hɛlp ə sɝdʒ ə sæɾəsfækʃən. ɝli ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌn pæləs, sɔɹɪliə hæd dɪmændəd tə noʊ wʌt ʃeɪmd wɛtləndɝz moʊst. kaɪɹunə ən ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd; ðeɪ meɪd noʊ ɹil ɛfɝts tə si wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ aʊt hɪɹ, pɝhæps fɪɹɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ maɪt lɝn, fɪɹɪŋ ðə stʃɹeɪnz nɑlədʒ maɪt pʊɾ ɑn ðɛɹ oʊðz. ðeɪ stɪl stʃɹʌɡəl tə dʒʌstəfaɪ teɪkɪŋ ðə pæθ feɪt hæd pʊʃt əm daʊn, bʌt vɛɹɪn ɔlɹɛɾi hæd ɹizənz fəɹ ðə pæθ ʃi fɑloʊd, ən pɝpəs. ʃi ɔlsoʊ hæɾ ə lɪst ɪn əɹ paʊtʃ, ɹɛɾi tə hæn tə sɔɹɪliə wən ðeɪ wɝ əloʊn. noʊ nid tə lɛt ði ʌðɝz noʊ. səm ə ðə kæptɪvz ʃi hæd nɛvɝ mɛt, bʌt ʃi θɔt ðət fəɹ moʊst wɪmən, ðət lɪst sʌmd ʌp ðə wiknəsəz sɔɹɪliə wɑz sikɪŋ. laɪf wɑz gɑnə ɡɹoʊ mʌtʃ mɔɹ dɪfəkəl fəɹ ðə wɪmən ɪn blæk. ən əɹ oʊn ɛfɝts wəd bi eɪɾəd noʊ ɛnd, wɪð lʌk.

She could not help a surge of satisfaction. Early this morning in the Sun Palace, Sorilea had demanded to know what shamed wetlanders most. Kiruna and the other sisters did not understand; they made no real efforts to see what was happening out here, perhaps fearing what they might learn, fearing the strains knowledge might put on their oaths. They still struggled to justify taking the path fate had pushed them down, but Verin already had reasons for the path she followed, and purpose. She also had a list in her pouch, ready to hand to Sorilea when they were alone. No need to let the others know. Some of the captives she had never met, but she thought that for most women, that list summed up the weaknesses Sorilea was seeking. Life was going to grow much more difficult for the women in black. And her own efforts would be aided no end, with luck.

tu ɡɹeɪt hʌlkɪŋ ilmɛn, itʃ ən æks hændəl waɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə ʃoʊldɝz, sæt ɹaɪɾ aʊtsaɪd ðə tɛnt, simɪŋli əbzɔɹbd ɪn ə ɡeɪm ə kæts kɹeɪɾəl, bʌt ðeɪ hæd lʊkt ɝaʊn ɪmiɾiətli wən əɹ hɛɾ əpɪɹd θɹu ðə tɛntflæps. kɔɹæm hæd ɹɪzən laɪk ə sɝpən ʌnkɔɪlɪŋ fəɹ ɔl ə hɪz saɪz, ən mɛndæn weɪɾəd oʊnli tə tʌk ðə stʃɹɪŋ əweɪ. hæd ʃi bɪn stændɪŋ stʃɹeɪt, hɝ hɛd bɛɹli wʊɾə ɹitʃt ðə tʃɛst ʌv iðɝ. ʃi cʊɾə tɝn əm boʊθ ʌpsaɪd daʊn ən pæɾəld ðɛm, ʌv kɔɹs. hæd ʃi dɛɹd. ʃi hæd bɪn tɛmptəd fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm. ðeɪ wɝ əɹ əsaɪnd ɡaɪdz, hɝ pɹətɛkʃən əɡɛns mɪsʌndɝstændɪŋz ɪn ðə kæmp. ən daʊtləs ðeɪ ɹipɔɹɾəd ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi sɛɾ əɹ dɪd. ɪn səm weɪz ʃi wʊɾə pɹəfɝd tə hæv toʊmɑs wɪð hɝ, bʌɾ oʊnli sʌm. kipɪŋ sikɹəts fɹəm jəɹ wɔɹɾɝ wɑz fɑɹ mɔɹ dɪfəkəl ðən kipɪŋ əm fɹəm stʃɹeɪnʒɝz.

Two great hulking Aielmen, each an axe handle wide across the shoulders, sat right outside the tent, seemingly absorbed in a game of cat's cradle, but they had looked around immediately when her head appeared through the tentflaps. Coram had risen like a serpent uncoiling for all of his size, and Mendan waited only to tuck the string away. Had she been standing straight, her head barely would have reached the chest of either. She could have turned them both upside down and paddled them, of course. Had she dared. She had been tempted from time to time. They were her assigned guides, her protection against misunderstandings in the camp. And doubtless they reported everything she said or did. In some ways she would have preferred to have Tomas with her, but only some. Keeping secrets from your Warder was far more difficult than keeping them from strangers.

"pliz tɛl koʊlɪndə ðəɾ aɪm dʌn wɪð tɝænə nɔɝəl," ʃi toʊl kɔɹæm, "æn æsk əɹ tə sɛn keɪɾɝin ɔlɹuɾɪn tə mi." ʃi wɑntəd tə dil fɝst wɪð ðə sɪstɝz u hæd noʊ wɔɹɾɝz. hi nɑɾəd wʌns bɪfɔɹ tʃɹɑɾɪŋ ɔf wɪθaʊt spikɪŋ. ðiz ilmɛn wɝ nɑt mʌtʃ fəɹ səvɪləɾi.

"Please tell Colinda that I'm done with Turanna Norill," she told Coram, "and ask her to send Katerine Alruddin to me." She wanted to deal first with the sisters who had no Warders. He nodded once before trotting off without speaking. These Aielmen were not much for civility.

mɛndæn sɛɾəld ɪndə ə kɹaʊtʃ, wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ wɪð stɑɹtlɪŋli blu aɪz. wʌn ə ðɛm steɪd wɪð əɹ noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ʃi sɛd. ə stʃɹɪp ə ɹɛd klɔθ wɑz taɪɾ ɝaʊn mɛndænz tɛmpəlz ən mɑɹkt wɪð ði eɪntʃən sɪmbəl ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ. laɪk ði ʌðɝ mɛn u wɔɹ ðæt, laɪk ðə meɪɾənz, hi sim tə bi weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ əɹ tə meɪk ə mɪsteɪk. wɛl, ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ðə fɝst, ən ə ɡɹeɪt weɪ fɹəm ðə moʊs deɪnʒɝəs. sɛvənti-wʌn jɪɹz hæd pæst sɪns ʃi hæd læs meɪɾ ə sɪɹiəs mɪsteɪk.

Mendan settled into a crouch, watching her with startlingly blue eyes. One of them stayed with her no matter what she said. A strip of red cloth was tied around Mendan's temples and marked with the ancient symbol of Aes Sedai. Like the other men who wore that, like the Maidens, he seemed to be waiting for her to make a mistake. Well, they were not the first, and a great way from the most dangerous. Seventy-one years had passed since she had last made a serious mistake.

ʃi ɡeɪv mɛndæn ə dɪlɪbɝətli veɪɡ smaɪl ən stɑɹɾəd tə pʊl bæk ɪndə ðə tɛnt, wən sʌɾənli sʌmθɪŋ kɑɾ əɹ aɪ ən hɛld əɹ laɪk ə vaɪs. ɪf ði ilmən hæd tʃɹaɪd tə kʌɾ əɹ θɹoʊt ɹaɪt ðɛn, ʃi maɪt nɑɾ əv noʊɾəst.

She gave Mendan a deliberately vague smile and started to pull back into the tent, when suddenly something caught her eye and held her like a vise. If the Aielman had tried to cut her throat right then, she might not have noticed.

nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm wɛɹ ʃi stʊd stupt oʊvɝ ɪn ðə maʊθ ə ðə tɛnt, naɪn əɹ tɛn wɪmən nɛlt ɪn ə ɹoʊ, ɹoʊlɪŋ ðə ɡɹaɪndstoʊnz ɑn flæt stoʊn hændmɪlz mʌtʃ laɪk ðoʊz ɑn ɛni aɪsəleɪɾəd fɑɹmz. ʌðɝ wɪmən bɹɔt ɡɹeɪn ɪn bæskəts ən tʊk əweɪ ðə kɔɹs flaʊɝ. ðə naɪn əɹ tɛn wɪmən nɛlt ɪn dɑɹk skɝts ən peɪl blaʊsəz, foʊldəd skɑɹvz hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ hɛɹ bæk. wʌn, noʊɾɪsəbli ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ðə ɹɛst, ði oʊnli wʌn wɪð hɛɹ ðət dɪd nɑt hæŋ tə hɝ weɪst əɹ bɪloʊ, wɔɹ nɑɾ ivən ə sɪŋɡəl nɛkləs əɹ bɹeɪslət. ʃi ɡlænst ʌp, ðə ɹɪzɛnmənt ɑn əɹ sʌn-pɪŋkən feɪs ʃɑɹpənɪŋ əz ʃi mɛt vɛɹɪnz ɡeɪz. oʊnli fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ðoʊ, bɪfɔɹ ʃi kɹɪnʒd hɝidli tə hɝ tæsk.

Not far from where she stood stooped over in the mouth of the tent, nine or ten women knelt in a row, rolling the grindstones on flat stone handmills much like those on any isolated farms. Other women brought grain in baskets and took away the coarse flour. The nine or ten women knelt in dark skirts and pale blouses, folded scarves holding their hair back. One, noticeably shorter than the rest, the only one with hair that did not hang to her waist or below, wore not even a single necklace or bracelet. She glanced up, the resentment on her sun-pinkened face sharpening as she met Verin's gaze. Only for an instant, though, before she cringed hurriedly to her task.

vɛɹɪn dʒɝk bæk ɪndə ðə tɛnt, hɝ stʌmək ɹɔɪlɪŋ kwizəli. ɝɡən wɑz ɡɹin ədʒɑ. əɹ ɹæðɝ, hæd bɪn ɡɹin, bɪfɔɹ ɹænd ælθɹ stɪl hɝ. biɪŋ ʃildɪd dʌld ən fʌz ðə bɑn tə jəɹ wɔɹɾɝ, bʌt biɪŋ stɪl snæpt ɪɾ əz ʃʊɹli əz dɛθ. wʌn ə ɝɡənz tu əpɛɹənli hæd fɔlən oʊvɝ dɛd fɹəm ðə ʃɑk, ən ði ʌðɝ hæd daɪd tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɪl θaʊzənz ʌv il wɪθaʊt meɪkɪŋ ɛni ɛfɝt tə ɪskeɪp. vɛɹi laɪkli ɝɡən wɪʃt ʃi ɔlsoʊ wɝ dɛd. stɪld. vɛɹɪn pɹɛs boʊθ hænz tə hɝ mɪɾəl. ʃi wəd nɑt sɪk ʌp. ʃi hæd sin wɝs ðən ə stɪld wʊmən. mʌtʃ wɝs.

Verin jerked back into the tent, her stomach roiling queasily. Irgain was Green Ajah. Or rather, had been Green, before Rand al'Thor stilled her. Being shielded dulled and fuzzed the bond to your Warder, but being stilled snapped it as surely as death. One of Irgain's two apparently had fallen over dead from the shock, and the other had died trying to kill thousands of Aiel without making any effort to escape. Very likely Irgain wished she also were dead. Stilled. Verin pressed both hands to her middle. She would not sick up. She had seen worse than a stilled woman. Much worse.

"ðɛɹz noʊ hoʊp, ɪz ðɛɹ?" tɝænə mʌɾɝd ɪn ə θɪk vɔɪs. ʃi wɛp saɪlənli, stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə sɪlvɝ kʌp ɪn əɹ tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ hænz ət sʌmθɪŋ dɪstən ən hɔɹəfaɪɪŋ. "noʊ hoʊp."

"There's no hope, is there?" Turanna muttered in a thick voice. She wept silently, staring into the silver cup in her trembling hands at something distant and horrifying. "No hope."

"ðɛɹ ɪz ɔlweɪz ə weɪ ɪf jə oʊnli lʊk fəɹ ɪt," vɛɹɪn sɛd, æbsənli pæɾɪŋ ðə wʊmənz ʃoʊldɝ. "ju mʌst ɔlweɪz lʊk."

"There is always a way if you only look for it," Verin said, absently patting the woman's shoulder. "You must always look."

hɝ θɔts ɹeɪst, ən nʌn tʌtʃt tɝænə. ɝɡənz stɪlɪŋ meɪɾ əɹ bɛli fil fʊl ə ɹænsɪd ɡɹis, ðə laɪt nu. bʌt wʌt wɑz ðə wʊmən duɪŋ ɡɹaɪndɪŋ ɡɹeɪn? ən dʒɹɛs laɪk ði il wɪmən! hæd ʃi bɪn pʊt tə wɝk dʒʌs ðəɹ soʊ vɛɹɪn kəd si? fulɪʃ kwɛstʃən; ivən wɪð ə tɑvɝən əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ɹænd ælθɹ oʊnli ə fju maɪlz əweɪ, ðəɹ wɑz səm lɪmət tə ðə nʌmbɝ ə koʊɪnsəɾənsɪz ʃi wəɾ æksɛpt. hæd ʃi mɪskælkjəleɪɾɪd? ət wɝst, ɪt kəd nɑt bi ə lɑɹdʒ ɛɹɝ. oʊnli, smɔl mɪsteɪks səmtaɪmz pɹuvd əz feɪɾəl əz lɑɹdʒ. haʊ lɔŋ kəd ʃi hoʊld aʊɾ ɪf sɔɹɪliə dɪsaɪɾɪd tə bɹeɪk hɝ? ə dɪstʃɹɛsɪŋli ʃɔɹt taɪm, ʃi səspɛktəd. ɪn səm weɪz, sɔɹɪliə wɑz əz hɑɹɾ əz ɛniwʌn ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ mɛt. ən nɑɾ ə θɪŋ ʃi kəd seɪ ðət wəd stɑp ɪt. ə wɝi fəɹ ənʌðɝ deɪ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪnt ɡɛɾɪŋ əhɛɾ ə hɝsɛlf.

Her thoughts raced, and none touched Turanna. Irgain's stilling made her belly feel full of rancid grease, the Light knew. But what was the woman doing grinding grain? And dressed like the Aiel women! Had she been put to work just there so Verin could see? Foolish question; even with a ta'veren as strong as Rand al'Thor only a few miles away, there was some limit to the number of coincidences she would accept. Had she miscalculated? At worst, it could not be a large error. Only, small mistakes sometimes proved as fatal as large. How long could she hold out if Sorilea decided to break her? A distressingly short time, she suspected. In some ways, Sorilea was as hard as anyone she had ever met. And not a thing she could say that would stop it. A worry for another day. There was no point getting ahead of herself.

nilɪŋ, ʃi pʊɾ ə lɪɾəl ɛfɝɾ ɪndə kʌmfɝɾɪŋ tɝænə, bʌt nɑt tu mʌtʃ. suðɪŋ wɝdz ðət saʊndəɾ əz hɑloʊ tə hɝ əz ðeɪ dɪd tə tɝænə, dʒʌdʒɪŋ baɪ ðə bliknəs ɪn əɹ aɪz. nʌθɪŋ kəd tʃeɪnʒ tɝænəz sɝkəmstænsəz ɪksɛp tɝænə, ən ðət hæd tə kʌm fɹəm wɪðɪn hɝsɛlf. ðə waɪt sɪstɝ dʒʌst wɛp hɑɹɾɝ, meɪkɪŋ noʊ saʊn əz əɹ ʃoʊldɝz ʃʊk, tɪɹz stʃɹimɪŋ daʊn əɹ feɪs. ði ɛntʃɹi ʌv tu waɪz wʌnz ən ə pɛɹ ə jʌŋ ilmɛn u kəd nɑt stʃɹeɪɾən ʌp ɪnsaɪd ðə tɛnt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ə ɹɪlif. fəɹ vɛɹɪn, ɛniweɪ. ʃi ɹoʊz ən kɝtsid smuðli, bʌt nʌn ə ðɛm hæɾ ɛni ɪntʃɹəst ɪn hɝ.

Kneeling, she put a little effort into comforting Turanna, but not too much. Soothing words that sounded as hollow to her as they did to Turanna, judging by the bleakness in her eyes. Nothing could change Turanna's circumstances except Turanna, and that had to come from within herself. The White sister just wept harder, making no sound as her shoulders shook, tears streaming down her face. The entry of two Wise Ones and a pair of young Aielmen who could not straighten up inside the tent was something of a relief. For Verin, anyway. She rose and curtsied smoothly, but none of them had any interest in her.

deɪvinə wɑz ə ɡɹin-aɪd wʊmən wɪð jɛloʊ-ɹɛd hɛɹ, loʊseɪn ɡɹeɪ-aɪd wɪð dɑɹk hɛɹ ðəɾ oʊnli ʃoʊd ɡlɪns ə ɹɛɾ ɪn ðə sʌn, boʊθ hɛd-ænd-ʃoʊldɝz tɔlɝ ðən ʃi, boʊθ wɛɹɪŋ ði ɪkspɹɛʃənz ʌv wɪmən ɡɪvən ə ɡɹaɪmi tæsk ðeɪ wɪʃt ɑn sʌmwʌn ɛls. niðɝ kəd tʃænəl stʃɹɔŋli ɪnʌf tə hæv ɛni sɝɾənti ʌv hoʊldɪŋ tɝænə baɪ hɝsɛlf, bʌt ðeɪ lɪŋkt əz ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd bɪn fɔɹmɪŋ sɝkəlz ɔl ðɛɹ lɪvz, ðə laɪɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ ɝaʊnd wʌn simɪŋ tə blɛnd wɪð ðəɾ ɝaʊn ði ʌðɝ dɪspaɪt ðə fæk ðət ðeɪ stʊɾ əpɑɹt. vɛɹɪn fɔɹst əɹ feɪs ɪndə ə smaɪl tə kip fɹəm fɹaʊnɪŋ. wɛɹ hæd ðeɪ lɝn ðæt? ʃi wʊɾə weɪdʒɝɾ ɔl ʃi pəzɛs ðət ðeɪ hæd nɑt noʊn haʊ oʊnli ə fju deɪz əɡoʊ.

Daviena was a green-eyed woman with yellow-red hair, Losaine gray-eyed with dark hair that only showed glints of red in the sun, both head-and-shoulders taller than she, both wearing the expressions of women given a grimy task they wished on someone else. Neither could channel strongly enough to have any certainty of holding Turanna by herself, but they linked as though they had been forming circles all their lives, the light of saidar around one seeming to blend with that around the other despite the fact that they stood apart. Verin forced her face into a smile to keep from frowning. Where had they learned that? She would have wagered all she possessed that they had not known how only a few days ago.

ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɛn kwɪkli ðɛn, ən smuðli. əz ðə kɹaʊtʃɪŋ mɛn lɪftəd tɝænə tə hɝ fit baɪ ði ɑɹmz, ʃi lɛt ðə sɪlvɝ kʌp fɔl. ɛmpti, lʌkəli fəɹ hɝ. ʃi dɪd nɑt stʃɹʌɡəl, wɪtʃ wɑz dʒʌst əz wɛl, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðəɾ iðɝ cʊɾə kæɹiɾ əɹ ɔf ʌndɝ wʌn ɑɹm laɪk ə sæk ʌv ɡɹeɪn, bʌɾ əɹ maʊθ hʌŋ oʊpən, ɪmɪɾɪŋ ə wɝdləs kinɪŋ. ði il peɪd noʊ hid. deɪvinə, foʊkəsɪŋ ðə sɝkəl, əsum ðə ʃild, ən vɛɹɪn lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv ðə sɔɹs kəmplitli. nʌn ə ðɛm tʃɹʌstɪɾ əɹ ɪnʌf tə lɛɾ əɹ hoʊl seɪaɪdɑɹ wɪθaʊɾ ə noʊn ɹizən, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ oʊðz ʃi hæd swɔɹn. niðɝ əpɪɹd tə noʊɾəs, bʌt ðeɪ ʃʊɹli wʊɾə hæd ʃi hɛld ɑn. ðə mɛn hɔl tɝænə əweɪ, hɝ bɛɹ fit dʒɹæɡɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə leɪɝd kɑɹpəts ðət flɔɹd ðə tɛnt, ən ðə waɪz wʌnz fɑloʊɾ əm aʊt. ən ðət wɑz ðæt. wʌt kəd bi dʌn wɪð tɝænə hæd bɪn dʌn.

Everything went quickly then, and smoothly. As the crouching men lifted Turanna to her feet by the arms, she let the silver cup fall. Empty, luckily for her. She did not struggle, which was just as well, considering that either could have carried her off under one arm like a sack of grain, but her mouth hung open, emitting a wordless keening. The Aiel paid no heed. Daviena, focusing the circle, assumed the shield, and Verin let go of the Source completely. None of them trusted her enough to let her hold saidar without a known reason, no matter what oaths she had sworn. Neither appeared to notice, but they surely would have had she held on. The men hauled Turanna away, her bare feet dragging across the layered carpets that floored the tent, and the Wise Ones followed them out. And that was that. What could be done with Turanna had been done.

lɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ, vɛɹɪn sæɡd ɑntu wʌn ə ðə bɹaɪt, tæsɛl kʊʃənz. ə faɪn ɡoʊldən ɹoʊpwɝk tʃɹeɪ sæɾ ɑn ðə kɑɹpəts nɛks tə hɝ. fɪlɪŋ wʌn ə ðə mɪsmætʃt sɪlvɝ kʌps fɹəm ə pjuɾɝ pɪtʃɝ, ʃi dʒɹæŋk dipli. ðɪs wɑz θɝsti wɝk, ən taɪɹɪŋ. aʊɝz ə deɪlaɪt ɹɪmeɪnd, jɛt ʃi fɛlt əz ɪf ʃi hæd kæɹiɾ ə hɛvi tʃɛs twɛnti maɪlz. oʊvɝ hɪlz. ðə kʌp wɛn bæk ɑntu ðə tʃɹeɪ, ən ʃi pʊl ðə smɔl, lɛðɝ-baʊnd noʊtbʊk fɹəm bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛlt. ɪɾ ɔlweɪz tʊk ə lɪɾəl taɪm fəɹ əm tə fɛtʃ ðoʊz ʃi æsk fɔɹ. ə fju moʊməns tə pɝuz əɹ noʊts - ən meɪk səm - wəd nɑt bi əmɪs.

Letting out a long breath, Verin sagged onto one of the bright, tasseled cushions. A fine golden ropework tray sat on the carpets next to her. Filling one of the mismatched silver cups from a pewter pitcher, she drank deeply. This was thirsty work, and tiring. Hours of daylight remained, yet she felt as if she had carried a heavy chest twenty miles. Over hills. The cup went back onto the tray, and she pulled the small, leather-bound notebook from behind her belt. It always took a little time for them to fetch those she asked for. A few moments to peruse her notes - and make some - would not be amiss.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid fəɹ noʊts əbaʊt ðə kæptɪvz, bʌt ðə sʌɾən əpɪɹəns ə kædzueɪn məleɪdʒɹɪn, θɹi deɪz əɡoʊ naʊ, ɡeɪv kɑz fəɹ kənsɝn. wʌt wɑz kædzueɪn æftɝ? ðə wʊmənz kəmpænjənz kəd bi dɪsmɪst, bʌt kædzueɪn hɝsɛlf wɑz ə lɛdʒənd, ən ivən ðə bəlivəbəl pɑɹts ə ðə lɛdʒən meɪɾ əɹ vɛɹi deɪnʒɝəs ɪndid. deɪnʒɝəs ən ʌnpɹɪdɪktəbəl. ʃi tʊk ə pɛn fɹəm ðə smɔl wʊɾən ɹaɪɾɪŋ keɪs ʃi ɔlweɪz kæɹid, ɹitʃt təwɔɹd ðə stɑpɝɾ ɪŋk bɑɾəl ɪn ɪts skæbɝd. ən ənʌðɝ waɪz wʌn ɛntɝd ðə tɛnt.

There was no need for notes about the captives, but the sudden appearance of Cadsuane Melaidhrin, three days ago now, gave cause for concern. What was Cadsuane after? The woman's companions could be dismissed, but Cadsuane herself was a legend, and even the believable parts of the legend made her very dangerous indeed. Dangerous and unpredictable. She took a pen from the small wooden writing case she always carried, reached toward the stoppered ink bottle in its scabbard. And another Wise One entered the tent.

vɛɹɪn skɹæmbəl tə hɝ fit soʊ kwɪkli ðət ʃi dʒɹɑpt əɹ noʊtbʊk. ɛɹən kəd nɑt tʃænəl əɾ ɔl, jɛt vɛɹɪn meɪɾ ə mʌtʃ dipɝ kɝtsi fəɹ ðə ɡɹeɪɪŋ wʊmən ðən ʃi hæd fəɹ deɪvinə ən loʊseɪn. ət ðə bɑɾəm ə hɝ dɪp, ʃi lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv əɹ skɝts tə ɹitʃ fəɹ əɹ bʊk, bʌɾ ɛɹənz fɪŋɡɝz ɹitʃt ɪt fɝst. vɛɹɪn stʃɹeɪɾənd, kɑmli wɑtʃɪŋ ðə tɔlɝ wʊmən θʌm θɹu ðə peɪdʒəz.

Verin scrambled to her feet so quickly that she dropped her notebook. Aeron could not channel at all, yet Verin made a much deeper curtsy for the graying woman than she had for Daviena and Losaine. At the bottom of her dip, she let go of her skirts to reach for her book, but Aeron's fingers reached it first. Verin straightened, calmly watching the taller woman thumb through the pages.

skaɪ blu aɪz mɛt hɝz. ə wɪntɝ skaɪ. "sʌm pɹɪɾi dʒɹɔɪŋz ən ə ɡɹeɪt dil əbaʊt plæns ən flaʊɝz," ɛɹən sɛd koʊldli. "aɪ si nʌθɪŋ kənsɝnɪŋ ðə kwɛstʃənz jə wɝ sɛn tə æsk." ʃi θɹʌs ðə bʊk ət vɛɹɪn mɔɹ ðən hændəɾ ɪt tə hɝ.

Sky blue eyes met hers. A winter sky. "Some pretty drawings and a great deal about plants and flowers," Aeron said coldly. "I see nothing concerning the questions you were sent to ask." She thrust the book at Verin more than handed it to her.

"θæŋk ju, waɪz wʌn," vɛɹɪn sɛd mikli, tʌkɪŋ ðə bʊk bæk seɪfli bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛlt. ʃi ivən æɾəd ənʌðɝ kɝtsi fəɹ ɡʊd mɛʒɝ, dʒʌst əz dip əz ðə fɝst. "aɪ hæv ðə hæbəɾ ə noʊɾɪŋ daʊn wʌɾ aɪ si." wʌn deɪ ʃi wəɾ əv tə ɹaɪɾ aʊt ðə saɪfɝ ʃi juzd ɪn əɹ noʊtbʊks - ə laɪftaɪmz wɝθ ə ðɛm fɪl kʌbɝdz ən tʃɛsts ɪn əɹ ɹumz əbʌv ðə waɪt taʊɝ laɪbɹɛɹi - wʌn deɪ, bʌt ʃi hoʊp nɑt sun. "æz fəɹ ði . . . ʌm . . . pɹɪznɝz, soʊ fɑɹ ðeɪ ɔl seɪ vɛɹieɪʃənz ə ðə seɪm θɪŋ. ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn wɑz tə bi haʊzd ɪn ðə taʊɝ əntɪl ðə læs bæɾəl. hɪz . . . ʌm . . . mɪstʃɹitmənt . . . bɪɡæn kəz ʌv ən ɪskeɪp ətɛmpt. bʌt jə noʊ ðəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi, ʌv kɔɹs. nɛvɝ fɪɹ, ðoʊ; aɪm ʃʊɹ əl lɝn mɔɹ." ɔl tʃɹu, ɪf nɑɾ ɔl ə ðə tʃɹuθ; ʃi hæd sin tu mɛni sɪstɝz daɪ tə ɹɪsk sɛndɪŋ ʌðɝz tə ðə ɡɹeɪv wɪθaʊɾ ə vɛɹi ɡʊd ɹizən. ðə tʃɹʌbəl wɑz dəsaɪɾɪŋ wʌt maɪt kɑz ðət ɹɪsk. ðə mænɝ ə jʌŋ ælθɹz kɪdnæpɪŋ, baɪ ən ɛmbəsi səpoʊzədli tʃɹiɾɪŋ wɪð hɪm, ɛnɹeɪdʒ ði il tə ðə pɔɪn ə mɝɾɝ, jɛt wʌt ʃi kɔld ɪz "mɪstʃɹitmənt" bɛɹli æŋɡɝɾ əm əɾ ɔl əz fɑɹ əz ʃi kəd tɛl.

"Thank you, Wise One," Verin said meekly, tucking the book back safely behind her belt. She even added another curtsy for good measure, just as deep as the first. "I have the habit of noting down what I see." One day she would have to write out the cipher she used in her notebooks - a lifetime's worth of them filled cupboards and chests in her rooms above the White Tower library - one day, but she hoped not soon. "As for the . . . um . . . prisoners, so far they all say variations of the same thing. The Car'a'carn was to be housed in the Tower until the Last Battle. His . . . um . . . mistreatment . . . began because of an escape attempt. But you know that already, of course. Never fear, though; I'm sure I will learn more." All true, if not all of the truth; she had seen too many sisters die to risk sending others to the grave without a very good reason. The trouble was deciding what might cause that risk. The manner of young al'Thor's kidnapping, by an embassy supposedly treating with him, enraged the Aiel to the point of murder, yet what she called his "mistreatment" barely angered them at all as far as she could tell.

ɡoʊld ən aɪvɝi bɹeɪslɪts klæɾɝd sɔfli əz ɛɹən ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ dɑɹk ʃɔl. ʃi pɪɹd daʊn əz ðoʊ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹid vɛɹɪnz θɔts. ɛɹən sim tə stæn haɪ əmʌŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz, ən waɪl vɛɹɪn əkeɪʒənəli hæd sin ə smaɪl kɹis ðoʊz dɑɹk-tæn tʃiks, ə wɔɹm ən izi smaɪl, ɪt wɑz nɛvɝ dɝɛktəɾ əɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. wi nɛvɝ səspɛktəd ðət jə wəd bi ðə wʌnz tə feɪl, ʃi hæd toʊl vɛɹɪn sʌmwʌt mɝkəli. ðəɹ hæd bɪn nʌθɪŋ ənklɪɹ ɪn ðə ɹɛst ʌv ɪt, haʊɛvɝ. ɛɛs sədaɪ hæv noʊ ɑnɝ. ɡɪmi wʌn hɛɹ ə səspɪʃən, ən əl stʃɹæp jə tɪl jə kænɑt stænd, wɪð maɪ oʊn hænz. ɡɪmi tu hɛɹz, ən əl steɪk jə aʊt fəɹ ðə vʌltʃɝz ən ði æns. vɛɹɪn blɪŋkt ʌp ət hɝ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əpɪɹ oʊpən. ən mik; ʃi mʌs nɑt fɝɡɛt mik. dɑsəl, ən kəmplaɪənt. ʃi dɪd nɑt fil fɪɹ. ɪn əɹ taɪm ʃi hæd feɪs hɑɹɾɝ stɛɹz, fɹəm wɪmən - ən mɛn - wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɛɹənz slɪm kəmpʌŋkʃən əbaʊɾ ɛndɪŋ əɹ laɪf. bʌɾ ə ɡʊd dil ʌv ɛfɝt hæd ɡɔn ɪndə biɪŋ sɛn tə æsk ðoʊz kwɛstʃənz. ʃi kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə weɪst ɪt naʊ. ɪf oʊnli ðiz il lɛt mɔɹ ʃoʊ ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz.

Gold and ivory bracelets clattered softly as Aeron adjusted her dark shawl. She peered down as though trying to read Verin's thoughts. Aeron seemed to stand high among the Wise Ones, and while Verin occasionally had seen a smile crease those dark-tanned cheeks, a warm and easy smile, it was never directed at an Aes Sedai. We never suspected that you would be the ones to fail, she had told Verin somewhat murkily. There had been nothing unclear in the rest of it, however. Aes Sedai have no honor. Give me one hair of suspicion, and I will strap you till you cannot stand, with my own hands. Give me two hairs, and I will stake you out for the vultures and the ants. Verin blinked up at her, trying to appear open. And meek; she must not forget meek. Docile, and compliant. She did not feel fear. In her time she had faced harder stares, from women - and men - without so much as Aeron's slim compunction about ending her life. But a good deal of effort had gone into being sent to ask those questions. She could not afford to waste it now. If only these Aiel let more show on their faces.

əbɹʌpli ʃi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ðət ðeɪ wɝ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ əloʊn ɪn ðə tɛnt. tu fleɪksən-hɛɹd meɪɾənz hæɾ ɛntɝd wɪð ə blæk-ɹoʊbd wʊmən ə hænd ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən iðɝ. ðeɪ wɝ hæf-hoʊldɪŋ əɹ əpɹaɪt. ət wʌn saɪd stʊd taɪəlɪn, ə læŋki ɹɛdhɛd wɛɹɪŋ ə ɡɹɪm ɪkspɹɛʃən bɪhaɪn ðə laɪɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ, ʃildɪŋ ðə blæk-ɹoʊb pɹɪznɝ. ðə sɪstɝz hɛɹ hʌŋ ɪn swɛt-soʊkt ɹɪŋləts tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝz ən stʃɹænz ðət klʌŋ tə hɝ feɪs, wɪtʃ bɔɹ soʊ mʌtʃ dɝt ðət vɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz əɹ ət fɝst. haɪ tʃikboʊnz, bʌt nɑt vɛɹi haɪ, ə noʊz wɪð dʒʌs ðə hɪn ʌv ə hʊk tə ɪt, ən ðə slaɪɾəst tɪl tə ðə bɹaʊn aɪz. . . . bɛldaɪn. bɛldaɪn nɪɹæm. ʃi hæɾ ɪnstʃɹʌktəd ðə ɡɝl ɪn ə fju nɑvəs klæsəz.

Abruptly she became aware that they were no longer alone in the tent. Two flaxen-haired Maidens had entered with a black-robed woman a hand shorter than either. They were half-holding her upright. At one side stood Tialin, a lanky redhead wearing a grim expression behind the light of saidar, shielding the black-robed prisoner. The sister's hair hung in sweat-soaked ringlets to her shoulders and strands that clung to her face, which bore so much dirt that Verin did not recognize her at first. High cheekbones, but not very high, a nose with just the hint of a hook to it, and the slightest tilt to the brown eyes. . . . Beldeine. Beldeine Nyram. She had instructed the girl in a few novice classes.

"ɪf aɪ meɪ æsk," ʃi sɛd kɛɹfəli, "waɪ wɑz ʃi bɹɔt? aɪ æsk fəɹ ənʌðɝ." bɛldaɪn hæd noʊ wɔɹɾɝ dɪspaɪt biɪŋ ɡɹin - ʃi hæd bɪn ɹeɪz tə ðə ʃɔl bɛɹli θɹi jɪɹz əɡoʊ, ən ɡɹinz wɝ ɔfən ɪspɛʃli tʃuzi əbaʊt ðɛɹ fɝst - bʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd bɹɪŋɪŋ huɛvɝ ðeɪ səlɛktəd, ðə nɛks maɪɾ əv tu əɹ θɹi wɔɹɾɝz. ʃi θɔt ʃi kəd dil wɪð tu mɔɹ tədeɪ, bʌt nɑɾ ɪf iðɝ hæɾ ivən wʌn wɔɹɾɝ. ən ʃi daʊɾɪd ðeɪ wəd ɡɪv əɹ ə sɛkən tʃæns əɾ ɛni ʌv ðɛm.

"If I may ask," she said carefully, "why was she brought? I asked for another." Beldeine had no Warder despite being Green - she had been raised to the shawl barely three years ago, and Greens were often especially choosy about their first - but if they started bringing whoever they selected, the next might have two or three Warders. She thought she could deal with two more today, but not if either had even one Warder. And she doubted they would give her a second chance at any of them.

"keɪɾɝin ɔlɹuɾɪn ɪskeɪp læs naɪt," taɪəlɪn nɪɹli spæt, ən vɛɹɪn ɡæspt.

"Katerine Alruddin escaped last night," Tialin nearly spat, and Verin gasped.

"ju lɛɾ əɹ ɪskeɪp?" ʃi bɝst aʊt wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ. taɪɹədnəs ɡeɪv noʊ ɪkskjus, bʌt ðə wɝdz spɪl fɹəm əɹ tʌŋ bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd stɑp ðɛm. "haʊ kəd jə bi soʊ fulɪʃ? ʃiz ɹɛd! ən niðɝ ə kaʊɝd nɔɹ wik ɪn ðə paʊɝ! ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn kəd bi ɪn deɪnʒɝ! waɪ wɝ wi nɑt toʊld ə ðɪs wən ɪt hæpənd?"

"You let her escape?" she burst out without thinking. Tiredness gave no excuse, but the words spilled from her tongue before she could stop them. "How could you be so foolish? She's Red! And neither a coward nor weak in the Power! The Car'a'carn could be in danger! Why were we not told of this when it happened?"

"ɪt wɑz nɑt dɪskʌvɝɾ əntɪl ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ," wʌn ə ðə meɪɾənz ɡɹaʊld. hɝ aɪz cʊɾə bɪn pɑlɪʃt sæfaɪɝz. "eɪ waɪz wʌn ən tu kɔɹ dɛɹeɪ wɝ pɔɪzənd, ən ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn u bɹɔɾ əm dʒɹɪŋk wɑz faʊnd wɪð ɪz θɹoʊt kʌt."

"It was not discovered until this morning," one of the Maidens growled. Her eyes could have been polished sapphires. "A Wise One and two Cor Darei were poisoned, and the gai'shain who brought them drink was found with his throat cut."

ɛɹən ɑɹtʃt ən aɪbɹaʊ ət ðə meɪɾən koʊldli. "dɪd ʃi spik tə ju, kæɹəhuən?" boʊθ meɪɾənz sʌɾənli bɪkeɪm ɪnɡɹoʊst ɪn ðə tæsk ə kipɪŋ bɛldaɪn ɑn əɹ fit. ɛɹən mɪɹli ɡlænst ət taɪəlɪn, bʌt ðə ɹɛd-hɛɹd waɪz wʌn loʊɝɾ əɹ ɡeɪz. vɛɹɪn wɑz ðə nɛkst ɹəsɪpiən ə ðoʊz ətɛnʃənz. "jɔɹ kənsɝn fəɹ ɹænd ælθɹ dʌz jə . . . ɑnɝ," ɛɹən sɛd ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli. "hi wɪl bi ɡɑɹɾəd. juv noʊ nid tə noʊ mɔɹ. əɹ soʊ mʌtʃ." əbɹʌpli hɝ toʊn hɑɹɾənd. "bʌɾ əpɹɛntəsɪz də nɑt juz ðət toʊn wɪð waɪz wʌnz, vɛɹɪn mæθwɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ." ðə læst wɝdz wɝ ə snɪɹ.

Aeron arched an eyebrow at the Maiden coldly. "Did she speak to you, Carahuin?" Both Maidens suddenly became engrossed in the task of keeping Beldeine on her feet. Aeron merely glanced at Tialin, but the red-haired Wise One lowered her gaze. Verin was the next recipient of those attentions. "Your concern for Rand al'Thor does you . . . honor," Aeron said grudgingly. "He will be guarded. You have no need to know more. Or so much." Abruptly her tone hardened. "But apprentices do not use that tone with Wise Ones, Verin Mathwin Aes Sedai." The last words were a sneer.

smʌðɝɪŋ ə saɪ, vɛɹɪn ɔl bʌt fɛl ɪndə ənʌðɝ dip kɝtsi, ə pɑɹɾ ə hɝ wɪʃɪŋ ʃi wɝ ivən əz slɪm əz ʃi hæd bɪn ɑn ɝaɪvɪŋ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ʃi wɑz nɑt ɹɪli kənstʃɹʌktəd fəɹ ɔl ðɪs bɛndɪŋ ən bɑbɪŋ. "fɝɡɪv mi, waɪz wʌn," ʃi sɛd hʌmbli. ɪskeɪpt! ðə sɝkəmstænsəz meɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ pleɪn, tə hɝ ɪf nɑt tə ði il. "æpɹɪhɛnʃən mʌst əv lusən maɪ wɪts." ə pɪɾi ʃi hæd noʊ weɪ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ keɪɾɝin mɛt wɪð ə feɪɾəl æksəɾənt. "aɪ wɪl də maɪ bɛs tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪn ðə fjutʃɝ." nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ðə flɪkɝ ʌv ən aɪlæʃ toʊld wɛðɝ ɛɹən æksɛptɪd ðæt. "meɪ aɪ əsum əɹ ʃild, waɪz wʌn?"

Smothering a sigh, Verin all but fell into another deep curtsy, a part of her wishing she were even as slim as she had been on arriving in the White Tower. She was not really constructed for all this bending and bobbing. "Forgive me, Wise One," she said humbly. Escaped! The circumstances made everything plain, to her if not to the Aiel. "Apprehension must have loosened my wits." A pity she had no way to make sure Katerine met with a fatal accident. "I will do my best to remember in the future." Not so much as the flicker of an eyelash told whether Aeron accepted that. "May I assume her shield, Wise One?"

ɛɹən nɑɾəd wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ ət taɪəlɪn, ən vɛɹɪn kwɪkli ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs, teɪkɪŋ ʌp ðə ʃil taɪəlɪn ɹilist. ɪt nɛvɝ sis tə əmeɪz əɹ ðət wɪmən u kəd nɑt tʃænəl ɡeɪv ɔɹɾɝz soʊ fɹili tə wɪmən u kʊd. taɪəlɪn wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ wikɝ ɪn ðə paʊɝ ðən vɛɹɪn, jɛt ʃi wɑtʃt ɛɹən nɪɹli əz wɛɹəli əz ðə meɪɾənz dɪd, ən wən ðə meɪɾənz hɝiɾ aʊɾ ə ðə tɛn əɾ ə dʒɛstʃɝ ʌv ɛɹənz hænd, livɪŋ bɛldaɪn weɪvɝɪŋ wɛɹ ʃi stʊd, taɪəlɪn wɑz oʊnli ə stɛp bɪhaɪnd.

Aeron nodded without looking at Tialin, and Verin quickly embraced the Source, taking up the shield Tialin released. It never ceased to amaze her that women who could not channel gave orders so freely to women who could. Tialin was not much weaker in the Power than Verin, yet she watched Aeron nearly as warily as the Maidens did, and when the Maidens hurried out of the tent at a gesture of Aeron's hand, leaving Beldeine wavering where she stood, Tialin was only a step behind.

ɛɹən dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ, haʊɛvɝ, nɑɾ ɪmiɾiətli. "ju wɪl nɑt spik ə keɪɾɝin ɔlɹuɾɪn tə ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn," ʃi sɛd. "hi hæz ɪnʌf tə ɑkjəpaɪ hɪz θɔts wɪθaʊt ɡɪvɪŋ ɪm tʃɹaɪfəlz tə wɝi oʊvɝ."

Aeron did not go, however, not immediately. "You will not speak of Katerine Alruddin to the Car'a'carn," she said. "He has enough to occupy his thoughts without giving him trifles to worry over."

"aɪ wɪl seɪ nʌθɪŋ tə hɪm əbaʊt hɝ," vɛɹɪn əɡɹid kwɪkli. tʃɹaɪfəlz? eɪ ɹɛd wɪð keɪɾɝinz stʃɹɛŋkθ wɑz noʊ tʃɹaɪfəl. pɝhæps ə noʊt. ɪt niɾəd θɔt.

"I will say nothing to him about her," Verin agreed quickly. Trifles? A Red with Katerine's strength was no trifle. Perhaps a note. It needed thought.

"bi sɝɾən tə hoʊl jəɹ tʌŋ, vɛɹɪn mæθwɪn, əɹ jəl juz ɪt tə haʊl."

"Be certain to hold your tongue, Verin Mathwin, or you will use it to howl."

ðəɹ sim nʌθɪŋ tə seɪ tə ðæt, soʊ vɛɹɪn kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn miknəs ən dɑsɪləɾi, meɪkɪŋ jɛɾ ənʌðɝ kɝtsi. hɝ niz wɑntəd tə ɡɹoʊn.

There seemed nothing to say to that, so Verin concentrated on meekness and docility, making yet another curtsy. Her knees wanted to groan.

wʌns ɛɹən dɪpɑɹɾəd, vɛɹɪn əlaʊd hɝsɛlf ə saɪ ʌv ɹɪlif. ʃi hæd bɪn əfɹeɪɾ ɛɹən ɪntɛndəd tə ɹɪmeɪn. ɡeɪnɪŋ pɝmɪʃən tə bi əloʊn wɪð ðə pɹɪznɝz hæd ɹikwaɪɝd nɪɹli əz mʌtʃ ɛfɝɾ əz ɡɛɾɪŋ sɔɹɪliə ən æmɪz tə dɪsaɪd ðeɪ niɾəd tə bi kwɛstʃənd, ən baɪ sʌmwʌn ɪntəmət wɪð ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ɪf ðeɪ ɛvɝ lɝn ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɡaɪɾəd tə ðət dɪsɪʒən. . . . ɪt wɑz ə wɝi fəɹ ənʌðɝ deɪ. ʃi sim tə bi paɪlɪŋ ʌp ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni ʌv ðoʊz.

Once Aeron departed, Verin allowed herself a sigh of relief. She had been afraid Aeron intended to remain. Gaining permission to be alone with the prisoners had required nearly as much effort as getting Sorilea and Amys to decide they needed to be questioned, and by someone intimate with the White Tower. If they ever learned they had been guided to that decision. . . . It was a worry for another day. She seemed to be piling up a great many of those.

"ðɛɹz ɪnʌf wɔɾɝ tə wɑʃ jəɹ feɪs ən hænz, ət list," ʃi toʊl bɛldaɪn maɪldli. "æn ɪf jə wɪʃ, əl hil ju." ɛvɹi sɪstɝ ʃi hæɾ ɪntɝvjud hæd kæɹiɾ ət list ə fju wɛls. ði il dɪd nɑt bit ðə pɹɪznɝz ɪksɛp fəɹ spɪlɪŋ wɔɾɝ əɹ bɔkɪŋ əɾ ə tæsk - ðə hɔɾiəst wɝdz ə dɪfaɪəns ɝn oʊnli skɔɹnfəl læftɝ, ɪf ðət - bʌt ðə blæk-ɹoʊbd wɪmən wɝ hɝɾɪd laɪk ænəməlz, ə tæp ə ðə swɪtʃ fəɹ ɡoʊ əɹ tɝn əɹ stɑp, ən ə hɑɹɾɝ tæp ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ oʊbeɪ kwɪkli ɪnʌf. hilɪŋ meɪɾ ʌðɝ θɪŋz iziɝ, tu.

"There's enough water to wash your face and hands, at least," she told Beldeine mildly. "And if you wish, I will Heal you." Every sister she had interviewed had carried at least a few welts. The Aiel did not beat the prisoners except for spilling water or balking at a task - the haughtiest words of defiance earned only scornful laughter, if that - but the black-robed women were herded like animals, a tap of the switch for go or turn or stop, and a harder tap if they did not obey quickly enough. Healing made other things easier, too.

fɪlθi, swɛɾi, weɪvɝɪŋ laɪk ə ɹiɾ ɪn ðə wɪnd, bɛldaɪn kɝld əɹ lɪp. "aɪ wəd ɹæðɝ blid tə dɛθ ðən bi hil baɪ ju!" ʃi spæt. "meɪbi aɪ ʃʊɾə ɪkspɛktəd tə si jə ɡɹɔvəlɪŋ tə ðiz waɪldɝz, ðiz sævədʒəz, bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ θɔt jə wəd stup tə ɹɪvilɪŋ taʊɝ sikɹəts! ðət ɹæŋks wɪð tʃɹizən, vɛɹɪn! wɪð ɹɪbɛljən!" ʃi ɡɹʌntɪd kəntɛmptʃwəsli. "aɪ səpoʊz ɪf jə dɪdnt ʃaɪ ət ðæt, jəl stɑp ət nʌθɪŋ! wʌɾ ɛls əv jə ən ði ʌðɝz tɔɾ əm bɪsaɪdz lɪŋkɪŋ?"

Filthy, sweaty, wavering like a reed in the wind, Beldeine curled her lip. "I would rather bleed to death than be Healed by you!" she spat. "Maybe I should have expected to see you groveling to these wilders, these savages, but I never thought you would stoop to revealing Tower secrets! That ranks with treason, Verin! With rebellion!" She grunted contemptuously. "I suppose if you didn't shy at that, you'll stop at nothing! What else have you and the others taught them besides linking?"

vɛɹɪn klɪkt əɹ tʌŋ ɪɹɪɾəbli, nɑt bɑðɝɪŋ tə sɛt ðə jʌŋ wʊmən stʃɹeɪt. hɝ nɛk ætʃt fɹəm lʊkɪŋ ʌp əɾ il - fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ivən bɛldaɪn stʊɾ ə hæn əɹ mɔɹ tɔlɝ ðən ʃi - hɝ niz ætʃt fɹəm kɝtsiɪŋ, ən ɪntaɪɝli tu mɛni wɪmən u ʃəd noʊ bɛɾɝ hæd flʌŋ blaɪn kəntɛmpt ən fulɪʃ pɹaɪɾ əɾ əɹ tədeɪ. hu ʃəd noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ðəɾ ə sɪstɝ hæd tə wɛɹ mɛni feɪsəz ɪn ðə wɝld? jə kəd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz oʊvɝeɪ pipəl, əɹ blʌdʒən ðɛm, iðɝ. bɪsaɪdz, fɑɹ bɛɾɝ tə bɪheɪv əz ə nɑvəs ðən bi pʌnɪʃt laɪk wʌn, ɪspɛʃli wən ɪɾ ɝn jə oʊnli peɪn ən hjumɪlieɪʃən. ivən kaɪɹunə hæd tə si ðə sɛns ə ðəɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli.

Verin clicked her tongue irritably, not bothering to set the young woman straight. Her neck ached from looking up at Aiel - for that matter, even Beldeine stood a hand or more taller than she - her knees ached from curtsying, and entirely too many women who should know better had flung blind contempt and foolish pride at her today. Who should know better than an Aes Sedai that a sister had to wear many faces in the world? You could not always overawe people, or bludgeon them, either. Besides, far better to behave as a novice than be punished like one, especially when it earned you only pain and humiliation. Even Kiruna had to see the sense of that eventually.

"sɪt daʊn bɪfɔɹ jə fɔl daʊn," ʃi sɛd, suɾɪŋ əɹ oʊn wɝdz. "lɛt mi ɡɛs wʌt juv bɪn duɪŋ tədeɪ. baɪ ɔl ðət dɝt, aɪd seɪ dɪɡɪŋ ə hoʊl. wɪð jəɹ bɛɹ hænz, əɹ dɪd ðeɪ lɛt jə juz ə spun? wən ðeɪ dɪsaɪɾ ɪts fɪnɪʃt, ðəl dʒʌs meɪk jə fɪl ɪɾ əɡɛn, jə noʊ. naʊ, lemi si. ɛvɹi pɑɹt wʌn kən si ʌv jə ɪz ɡɹʌbi, bʌt ðət ɹoʊb ɪz klin, soʊ aɪ ɪkspɛk ðeɪ hæd jə dɪɡɪŋ ɪn jəɹ skɪn. ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ jə doʊnt wɑn hilɪŋ? sʌnbɝn kən bi peɪnfəl." ʃi fɪld ənʌðɝ kʌp wɪð wɔɾɝ ən wɑftɪɾ ɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə tɛn ɑn ə floʊ ʌv ɛɹ tə hʌvɝ ɪn fɹʌn ə bɛldaɪn. "jɔɹ θɹoʊt mʌs bi pɑɹtʃt."

"Sit down before you fall down," she said, suiting her own words. "Let me guess what you've been doing today. By all that dirt, I'd say digging a hole. With your bare hands, or did they let you use a spoon? When they decide it's finished, they will just make you fill it again, you know. Now, let me see. Every part I can see of you is grubby, but that robe is clean, so I expect they had you digging in your skin. Are you sure you don't want Healing? Sunburn can be painful." She filled another cup with water and wafted it across the tent on a flow of Air to hover in front of Beldeine. "Your throat must be parched."

ðə jʌŋ ɡɹin stɛɹɾ ənstɛɾəli ət ðə kʌp fəɹ ə moʊmənt; ðən sʌɾənli hɝ lɛɡz ɡeɪv weɪ ən ʃi kəlæpst ɑntu ə kʊʃən wɪð ə bɪɾɝ læf. "ðeɪ . . . wɔɾɝ mi fɹikwənli." ʃi læft əɡɛn, ðoʊ vɛɹɪn kəd nɑt si ðə dʒoʊk. "æz mʌtʃ əz aɪ wɑnt, soʊ lɔŋ əz aɪ swɑloʊ ɪɾ ɔl." stʌɾiɪŋ vɛɹɪn æŋɡɹəli, ʃi pɔzd, ðən wɛn ɑn ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs. "ðæt dʒɹɛs lʊks vɛɹi naɪs ɑn ju. ðeɪ bɝn maɪn; aɪ sɔ ðɛm. ðeɪ stoʊl ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪksɛp ðɪs." ʃi tʌtʃt ðə ɡoʊldən ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɝaʊn əɹ lɛft fɔɹfɪŋɡɝ, ə bɹaɪt ɡoʊldən ɡlim əmʌŋ ðə dɝt. "aɪ səpoʊz ðeɪ kʊdn faɪn kwaɪɾ ɪnʌf nɝv fəɹ ðæt. aɪ noʊ wʌt ðəɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə du, vɛɹɪn, ən ɪt woʊnt wɝk. nɑt wɪð mi, nɑt wɪð ɛni ʌv ʌs!"

The young Green stared unsteadily at the cup for a moment; then suddenly her legs gave way and she collapsed onto a cushion with a bitter laugh. "They . . . water me frequently." She laughed again, though Verin could not see the joke. "As much as I want, so long as I swallow it all." Studying Verin angrily, she paused, then went on in a tight voice. "That dress looks very nice on you. They burned mine; I saw them. They stole everything except this." She touched the golden Great Serpent around her left forefinger, a bright golden gleam among the dirt. "I suppose they couldn't find quite enough nerve for that. I know what they're trying to do, Verin, and it won't work. Not with me, not with any of us!"

ʃi wɑz stɪl ɑn əɹ ɡɑɹd. vɛɹɪn sɛt ðə kʌp daʊn ɑn ðə flaʊɝd kɑɹpət bɪsaɪd bɛldaɪn, ðən tʊk ʌp əɹ oʊn ən sɪp bɪfɔɹ spikɪŋ. "oʊ? wʌɾ ɑɹ ðeɪ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə du?"

She was still on her guard. Verin set the cup down on the flowered carpet beside Beldeine, then took up her own and sipped before speaking. "Oh? What are they trying to do?"

ðɪs taɪm, ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz læf wɑz bɹɪɾəl əz wɛl əz hɑɹʃ. "bɹeɪk ʌs, ən jə noʊ ɪt! meɪk əs swɛɹ oʊðz tə ælθɹ, ðə weɪ jə dɪd. oʊ, vɛɹɪn, haʊ kəd ju? swɛɹɪŋ fiəlti! ən wɝs, tə ə mæn, tə hɪm! ivən ɪf jə kəd bɹɪŋ jɝsɛlf tə ɹəbɛl əɡɛns ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, əɡɛns ðə waɪt taʊɝ . . ." ʃi meɪd ðə tu saʊn mʌtʃ ðə seɪm. ". . . haʊ kəd jə də ðæt!"

This time, the other woman's laugh was brittle as well as harsh. "Break us, and you know it! Make us swear oaths to al'Thor, the way you did. Oh, Verin, how could you? Swearing fealty! And worse, to a man, to him! Even if you could bring yourself to rebel against the Amyrlin Seat, against the White Tower . . ." She made the two sound much the same. ". . . how could you do that!"

fəɹ ə moʊmən vɛɹɪn wʌndɝd wɛðɝ θɪŋz wəd bi bɛɾɝ ɪf ðə wɪmən naʊ hɛld ɪn ði il kæmp hæd bɪn kɑɾ ʌp əz ʃi hæd bɪn, ə wʊdtʃɪp ɪn ðə mɪlɹɑs ə ɹænd ælθɹz tɑvɝən swɝl, wɝdz pɔɹɪŋ fɹəm əɹ maʊθ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ hæd taɪm tə fɔɹm ɪn əɹ bɹeɪn. nɑt wɝdz ʃi kəd nɛvɝ əv sɛɾ ɑn əɹ oʊn - ðət wɑz nɑt haʊ tɑvɝən əfɛktəd jə - bʌt wɝdz ʃi maɪt pɑsəbli hæv sɛd wʌn taɪm ɪn ə θaʊzən ʌndɝ ðoʊz sɝkəmstænsəz, wʌn taɪm ɪn tɛn θaʊzənd. noʊ, ði ɑɹɡjəməns hæd bɪn lɔŋ ən hɑɾ oʊvɝ wɛðɝ oʊðz ɡɪvən ɪn ðət weɪ hæd tə bi kɛpt; ən ði ɑɹɡjəməns oʊvɝ haʊ tə kip əm stɪl kəntɪnjud. mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ əz ɪt wɑz. æbsənli ʃi fɪŋɡɝɾ ə hɑɹd ʃeɪp ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ bɛl paʊtʃ, ə smɔl bɹutʃ, ə tʃɹænslusən stoʊn kɑɹvd ɪndə wʌɾ əpɪɹd tə bi ə lɪli wɪð tu mɛni pɛɾəlz. ʃi nɛvɝ wɔɹ ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn aʊɾ ə hɝ ɹitʃ ɪn nɪɹli fɪfti jɪɹz.

For a moment Verin wondered whether things would be better if the women now held in the Aiel camp had been caught up as she had been, a woodchip in the millrace of Rand al'Thor's ta'veren swirl, words pouring from her mouth before they had time to form in her brain. Not words she could never have said on her own - that was not how ta'veren affected you - but words she might possibly have said one time in a thousand under those circumstances, one time in ten thousand. No, the arguments had been long and hot over whether oaths given in that way had to be kept; and the arguments over how to keep them still continued. Much better as it was. Absently she fingered a hard shape inside her belt pouch, a small brooch, a translucent stone carved into what appeared to be a lily with too many petals. She never wore it, but it had not been out of her reach in nearly fifty years.

"ju ɑɹ dætsæŋ, bɛldaɪn. jə mʌst əv hɝd ðæt." ʃi dɪd nɑt nid bɛldaɪnz kɝt nɑd; tɛlɪŋ ðə dɪspaɪzd wʌn wɑz pɑɹɾ ʌv il lɔ, laɪk pɹənaʊnsɪŋ sɛntəns. ðət mʌtʃ ʃi nu, ɪf vɛɹi lɪɾəl mɔɹ. "jɔɹ kloʊðz, ən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ðət wəd bɝn, wɝ pʊt tə ðə faɪɝ kəz noʊ il wəɾ oʊn ɛniθɪŋ ðət wʌns bɪlɔŋ tə ə dætsæŋ. ðə ɹɛst wɑz hæk tə pisəz əɹ hæmɝɾ ɪndə skɹæp, ivən ðə dʒuəlɹi jə hæd wɪð ju, ən bɛɹiɾ ʌndɝ ə pɪt dʌɡ fəɹ ə dʒeɪks."

"You are da'tsang, Beldeine. You must have heard that." She did not need Beldeine's curt nod; telling the despised one was part of Aiel law, like pronouncing sentence. That much she knew, if very little more. "Your clothes, and anything else that would burn, were put to the fire because no Aiel would own anything that once belonged to a da'tsang. The rest was hacked to pieces or hammered into scrap, even the jewelry you had with you, and buried under a pit dug for a jakes."

"maɪ . . . ? maɪ hɔɹs?" bɛldaɪn æskt æŋkʃəsli.

"My . . . ? My horse?" Beldeine asked anxiously.

"ðeɪ dɪdn kɪl ðə hɔɹsəz, bʌɾ aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɛɹ jʊɹz ɪz." biɪŋ ɹɪɾən baɪ sʌmwʌn ɪn ðə sɪɾi, pɹɑbli, əɹ pɝhæps ɡɪvən tə ən æʃəmən. tɛlɪŋ əɹ ðət maɪt də mɔɹ hɑɹm ðən ɡʊd. vɛɹɪn sim tə ɹikɔl ðət bɛldaɪn wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz jʌŋ wɪmən u hæd vɛɹi dip filɪŋz fəɹ hɔɹsəz. "ðeɪ lɛt jə kip ðə ɹɪŋ tə ɹimaɪn jə ʌv u jə wɝ, ən ɪnkɹis jəɹ ʃeɪm. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɛðɝ ðeɪ wəd lɛt jə swɛɹ tə mæstɝ ælθɹ ɪf jə bɛɡd. ɪt wəd teɪk sʌmθɪŋ ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl ɑn jəɹ pɑɹt, aɪ θɪŋk."

"They didn't kill the horses, but I don't know where yours is." Being ridden by someone in the city, probably, or perhaps given to an Asha'man. Telling her that might do more harm than good. Verin seemed to recall that Beldeine was one of those young women who had very deep feelings for horses. "They let you keep the ring to remind you of who you were, and increase your shame. I don't know whether they would let you swear to Master al'Thor if you begged. It would take something incredible on your part, I think."

"aɪ woʊnt! nɛvɝ!" ðə wɝdz ɹæŋ hɑloʊ, ðoʊ, ən bɛldaɪnz ʃoʊldɝz slʌmpt. ʃi wɑz ʃeɪkən, bʌt nɑt səfɪʃənli.

"I won't! Never!" The words rang hollow, though, and Beldeine's shoulders slumped. She was shaken, but not sufficiently.

vɛɹɪn pʊɾ ɑn ə wɔɹm smaɪl. ə fɛloʊ hæd wʌns toʊld əɹ ðəɾ əɹ smaɪl meɪɾ ɪm θɪŋk ə hɪz dɪɹ mʌðɝ. ʃi hoʊpt i hæd nɑt bɪn laɪɪŋ əbaʊt ðæt, ət list. hi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə slaɪɾ ə dæɡɝ bɪtwin əɹ ɹɪbz ə lɪɾəl leɪɾɝ, ən əɹ smaɪl hæd bɪn ðə læs θɪŋ i ɛvɝ sɔ. "aɪ kæn θɪŋk ə ðə ɹizən jə wʊd. noʊ, aɪ fɪɹ wʌt juv tə lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə ɪz jusləs leɪbɝ. ðæts ʃeɪmɪŋ, tə ðɛm. boʊn ʃeɪmɪŋ. ʌv kɔɹs, ɪf ðeɪ ɹilaɪz jə doʊn si ɪt ðət weɪ. . . . oʊ, maɪ. əl weɪdʒɝ jə dɪdn laɪk dɪɡɪŋ wɪθaʊɾ ɛni kloʊðz ɑn, ivən wɪð meɪɾənz fəɹ ɡɑɹdz, bʌt θɪŋk ʌv, seɪ, stændɪŋ ɪn ə tɛn fʊl ə mɛn ðət weɪ?" bɛldaɪn flɪntʃt. vɛɹɪn pɹæɾəld ɑn; ʃi hæd dɪvɛləpt pɹæɾəlɪŋ tə sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ə tælənt. "ðeɪɾ oʊnli meɪk jə stæn ðɛɹ, ʌv kɔɹs. dætsæŋ ɑɹən əlaʊd tə də ɛniθɪŋ jusfəl ənlɛs ðɛɹz ɡɹeɪt nid, ən ən ilmən wəɾ əz sun pʊɾ ɪz ɑɹm ɝaʊn ə ɹɑɾɪŋ kɑɹkəs æz. . . . wɛl, ðæts nɑɾ ə plɛzən θɔt, ɪz ɪt? ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðæts wʌt juv tə lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə. aɪ noʊ jəl ɹɪzɪst əz lɔŋ əz jə kæn, ðoʊ ɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌt ðəɹ ɪz tə ɹɪzɪst. ðeɪ woʊn tʃɹaɪ tə ɡɛɾ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən aʊɾ ə ju, əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ðət pipəl juʒəwəli də wɪð pɹɪznɝz. bʌt ðeɪ woʊn lɛt jə ɡoʊ, nɑɾ ɛvɝ, əntɪl ðəɹ ʃʊɹ ðə ʃeɪm ɪz soʊ dip ɪn jə ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ ɛls lɛft. nɑɾ ɪf ɪt teɪks ðə ɹɛst ə jəɹ laɪf."

Verin put on a warm smile. A fellow had once told her that her smile made him think of his dear mother. She hoped he had not been lying about that, at least. He had tried to slide a dagger between her ribs a little later, and her smile had been the last thing he ever saw. "I can't think of the reason you would. No, I fear what you have to look forward to is useless labor. That's shaming, to them. Bone shaming. Of course, if they realize you don't see it that way. . . . Oh, my. I'll wager you didn't like digging without any clothes on, even with Maidens for guards, but think of, say, standing in a tent full of men that way?" Beldeine flinched. Verin prattled on; she had developed prattling to something of a Talent. "They'd only make you stand there, of course. Da'tsang aren't allowed to do anything useful unless there's great need, and an Aielman would as soon put his arm around a rotting carcass as. . . . Well, that's not a pleasant thought, is it? In any case, that's what you have to look forward to. I know you'll resist as long as you can, though I'm not sure what there is to resist. They won't try to get information out of you, or anything that people usually do with prisoners. But they won't let you go, not ever, until they're sure the shame is so deep in you there's nothing else left. Not if it takes the rest of your life."

bɛldaɪnz lɪps muv saʊnləsli, bʌt ʃi maɪɾ əz wɛl əv spoʊkən ðə wɝdz. ðə ɹɛst ə maɪ laɪf. ʃɪftɪŋ ənkʌmftəbli ɑn əɹ kʊʃən, ʃi ɡɹɪməst. sʌnbɝn əɹ wɛls əɹ sɪmpli ði eɪk ʌv ʌnəkʌstəmd wɝk. "wi wɪl bi ɹɛskjud," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. "ði æmɪɝlɪn woʊn liv ʌs. . . . wɪl bi ɹɛskjud, əɹ wɪl - wɪl bi ɹɛskjud!" snætʃɪŋ ʌp ðə sɪlvɝ kʌp fɹəm bɪsaɪd hɝ, ʃi tɪltəɾ əɹ hɛd bæk tə ɡʌlp əntɪl ɪt wɑz ɛmpti, ðən θɹʌst ɪɾ aʊt fəɹ mɔɹ. vɛɹɪn floʊɾəd ðə pjuɾɝ pɪtʃɝ oʊvɝ ən sɛɾ ɪt daʊn soʊ ðə jʌŋ wʊmən kəd pɔɹ fəɹ hɝsɛlf.

Beldeine's lips moved soundlessly, but she might as well have spoken the words. The rest of my life. Shifting uncomfortably on her cushion, she grimaced. Sunburn or welts or simply the ache of unaccustomed work. "We will be rescued," she said finally. "The Amyrlin won't leave us. . . . We'll be rescued, or we'll - We will be rescued!" Snatching up the silver cup from beside her, she tilted her head back to gulp until it was empty, then thrust it out for more. Verin floated the pewter pitcher over and set it down so the young woman could pour for herself.

"ɔɹ jəl ɪskeɪp?" vɛɹɪn sɛd, ən bɛldaɪnz dɝɾi hænz dʒɝkt, splæʃɪŋ wɔɾɝ daʊn ðə saɪdz ə ðə kʌp. "ɹɪli, naʊ. juv əz mʌtʃ tʃæns ə ðəɾ əz jə də ʌv ɹɛskju. jəɹ sɝaʊndəd baɪ ən ɑɹmi ʌv il. ən əpɛɹənli ælθɹ kən kɔl ʌp ə fju hʌnʒɹəd ə ðoʊz æʃəmən wɛnɛvɝ i wɑns, tə hʌn jə daʊn." ði ʌðɝ wʊmən ʃɪvɝɾ ət ðæt, ən vɛɹɪn nɪɹli dɪd. ðət lɪɾəl mɛs ʃʊɾə bɪn stɑpt əz sun əz ɪt stɑɹɾəd. "noʊ, aɪ fɪɹ jə mʌs meɪk jəɹ oʊn weɪ, sʌmhaʊ. dil wɪð θɪŋz əz ðeɪ ɑɹ. jə ɑɹ kwaɪɾ əloʊn ɪn ðɪs. aɪ noʊ ðeɪ doʊn lɛt jə spik tə ði ʌðɝz. kwaɪɾ əloʊn," ʃi saɪd. waɪɾ aɪz stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ əz ðeɪ maɪɾ əv əɾ ə ɹɛɾ æɾɝ. "ðɛɹz noʊ nid tə meɪk ɪt wɝs ðən ɪt mʌs bi. lemi hil ju."

"Or you'll escape?" Verin said, and Beldeine's dirty hands jerked, splashing water down the sides of the cup. "Really, now. You have as much chance of that as you do of rescue. You're surrounded by an army of Aiel. And apparently al'Thor can call up a few hundred of those Asha'man whenever he wants, to hunt you down." The other woman shivered at that, and Verin nearly did. That little mess should have been stopped as soon as it started. "No, I fear you must make your own way, somehow. Deal with things as they are. You are quite alone in this. I know they don't let you speak to the others. Quite alone," she sighed. Wide eyes stared at her as they might have at a red adder. "There's no need to make it worse than it must be. Let me Heal you."

ʃi bɛɹli weɪɾəd fəɹ ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz pɪɾəfəl nɑd bɪfɔɹ muvɪŋ tə nil bɪsaɪɾ əɹ ən pleɪs hænz ɑn bɛldaɪnz hɛd. ðə jʌŋ wʊmən wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz ɹɛɾi əz ʃi kəd bi. oʊpənɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə mɔɹ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ, vɛɹɪn woʊv ðə floʊz ə hilɪŋ, ən ðə ɡɹin ɡæspt ən kwɪvɝd. ðə hæf-fɪl kʌp dʒɹɑp fɹəm əɹ hænz, ən ə fleɪlɪŋ ɑɹm nɑk ðə pɪtʃɝ ɑntu ɪts saɪd. naʊ ʃi wɑz əz ɹɛɾi əz ʃi kəd bi.

She barely waited for the other woman's pitiful nod before moving to kneel beside her and place hands on Beldeine's head. The young woman was almost as ready as she could be. Opening herself to more of saidar, Verin wove the flows of Healing, and the Green gasped and quivered. The half-filled cup dropped from her hands, and a flailing arm knocked the pitcher onto its side. Now she was as ready as she could be.

ɪn ðə moʊməns ə kənfjuʒən ðət ɡɹɪpt ɛniwʌn æftɝ biɪŋ hild, waɪl bɛldaɪn stɪl blɪŋkt ən tʃɹaɪd tə kʌm bæk tə hɝsɛlf, vɛɹɪn oʊpən hɝsɛlf fɝðɝ, oʊpən hɝsɛlf θɹu ðə kɑɹvd-flaʊɝ æŋɡɹil ɪn əɹ paʊtʃ. nɑɾ ə vɛɹi paʊɝfəl æŋɡɹil, bʌɾ ɪnʌf, ən ʃi niɾəd ɛvɹi bɪɾ ə ði ɛkstʃɹə paʊɝ ɪt ɡeɪv əɹ fəɹ ðɪs. ðə floʊz ʃi bɪɡæn wivɪŋ bɔɹ noʊ ɹɪzɛmbləns tə hilɪŋ. spɪɹət pɹɪdɑməneɪɾɪd baɪ fɑɹ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz waɪn ən wɔɾɝ, faɪɝ ən ɝθ, ðə læst ə səm dɪfəkəlti fəɹ hɝ, ən ivən ðə sknz ə spɪɹət hæd tə bi dɪvaɪɾəd əɡɛn ən əɡɛn, pleɪst wɪð ən ɪntʃɹəkəsi tə bɑɡɡəl ə wivɝ ə faɪn kɑɹpəts. ivən ɪf ə waɪz wʌn poʊkt əɹ hɛɾ ɪndə ðə tɛnt, wɪð ðə smɔləst ə lʌk ʃi wəd nɑt pəzɛs ðə ɹɛɹ tælənt niɾəd tə ɹilaɪz wʌt vɛɹɪn wɑz duɪŋ. ðəɹ wəd stɪl bi dɪfəkəltiz, pɝhæps peɪnfəl dɪfəkəltiz wʌn weɪ ən ənʌðɝ, bʌt ʃi kəd lɪv wɪð ɛniθɪŋ ʃɔɹɾ ə tʃɹu dɪskʌvɝi.

In the moments of confusion that gripped anyone after being Healed, while Beldeine still blinked and tried to come back to herself, Verin opened herself further, opened herself through the carved-flower angreal in her pouch. Not a very powerful angreal, but enough, and she needed every bit of the extra Power it gave her for this. The flows she began weaving bore no resemblance to Healing. Spirit predominated by far, but there was Wind and Water, Fire and Earth, the last of some difficulty for her, and even the skeins of Spirit had to be divided again and again, placed with an intricacy to boggle a weaver of fine carpets. Even if a Wise One poked her head into the tent, with the smallest of luck she would not possess the rare Talent needed to realize what Verin was doing. There would still be difficulties, perhaps painful difficulties one way and another, but she could live with anything short of true discovery.

"wʌt . . . ?" bɛldaɪn sɛd dʒɹaʊsəli. hɝ hɛd wʊɾə lɑld ɪksɛp fəɹ vɛɹɪnz ɡɹɪp, ən əɹ aɪlɪdz wɝ hæf-kloʊzd. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə . . . ? wʌɾ ɪz hæpənɪŋ?"

"What . . . ?" Beldeine said drowsily. Her head would have lolled except for Verin's grip, and her eyelids were half-closed. "What are you . . . ? What is happening?"

"nʌθɪŋ ðət wɪl hɑɹm ju," vɛɹɪn toʊld əɹ ɹiəʃɝɪŋli. ðə wʊmən maɪt daɪ ɪnsaɪd ðə jɪɹ, əɹ ɪn tɛn, əz ə ɹɪzʌlt ə ðɪs, bʌt ðə wiv ɪtsɛlf wəd nɑt hɑɹm hɝ. "aɪ pɹɑməs ju, ðɪs ɪz seɪf ɪnʌf tə juz ɑn ən ɪnfənt." ʌv kɔɹs, ðət dɪpɛndəɾ ɑn wʌt jə dɪd wɪð ɪt.

"Nothing that will harm you," Verin told her reassuringly. The woman might die inside the year, or in ten, as a result of this, but the weave itself would not harm her. "I promise you, this is safe enough to use on an infant." Of course, that depended on what you did with it.

ʃi niɾəd tə leɪ ðə floʊz ɪn pleɪs θɹɛd baɪ θɹɛd, bʌt tɔkɪŋ sim tə hɛlp ɹæðɝ ðən hɪndɝ. ən tu lɔŋ ə saɪləns maɪt ɹaʊs səspɪʃən, ɪf əɹ twɪn ɡɑɹɾiənz wɝ lɪsnɪŋ. hɝ aɪz dɑɹɾɪd fɹikwənli tə ðə dæŋɡəlɪŋ dɔɹflæps. ʃi wɑntəd səm ænsɝz ʃi hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə ʃɛɹɪŋ, ænsɝz nʌn ə ðə wɪmən ʃi kwɛstʃənd wɝ laɪkli tə ɡɪv fɹili ivən ɪf ðeɪ nu ðɛm. wʌn ə ðə smɔlɝ ɪfɛks ə ðɪs wiv wɑz tə lusən ðə tʌŋ ən oʊpən ðə maɪn əz wɛl əz ɛni ɝb ɛvɝ kʊd, ən ɪfɛk ðət keɪm ɑn kwɪkli.

She needed to lay the flows in place thread by thread, but talking seemed to help rather than hinder. And too long a silence might rouse suspicion, if her twin guardians were listening. Her eyes darted frequently to the dangling doorflaps. She wanted some answers she had no intention of sharing, answers none of the women she questioned were likely to give freely even if they knew them. One of the smaller effects of this weave was to loosen the tongue and open the mind as well as any herb ever could, an effect that came on quickly.

dʒɹɑpɪŋ əɹ vɔɪs ɔlmoʊs tə ə wɪspɝ, ʃi kəntɪnjud. "ði ælθɹ bɔɪ simz tə θɪŋk hiz səpɔɹɾɝz ə səm kaɪn ɪnsaɪd ðə waɪt taʊɝ, bɛldaɪn. ɪn sikɹət, ʌv kɔɹs; ðeɪ mʌs bi." ivən ə mæn wɪð ɪz ɪɹ pɹɛs tə ðə fæbɹɪk ə ðə tɛnt ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə hɪɹ oʊnli ðət ðeɪ wɝ tɔkɪŋ. "tɛl mi ɛniθɪŋ jə noʊ əbaʊt ðɛm."

Dropping her voice almost to a whisper, she continued. "The al'Thor boy seems to think he has supporters of some kind inside the White Tower, Beldeine. In secret, of course; they must be." Even a man with his ear pressed to the fabric of the tent should be able to hear only that they were talking. "Tell me anything you know about them."

"səpɔɹɾɝz?" bɛldaɪn mɝmɝd, ətɛmptɪŋ ə fɹaʊn ðət sim bɪɑn əɹ əbɪləɾi. ʃi stɝd, ðoʊ ɪt hɑɹdli dɪzɝv ðə wɝɾ ædʒəteɪʃən, fibəl ən ənkoʊɔɹɾəneɪtɪd. "fɔɹ hɪm? əmʌŋ ðə sɪstɝz? ɪt kæn bi. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðoʊz ə jə hu. . . . haʊ kəd ju, vɛɹɪn? waɪ dɪdn jə faɪɾ ɪt?"

"Supporters?" Beldeine murmured, attempting a frown that seemed beyond her ability. She stirred, though it hardly deserved the word agitation, feeble and uncoordinated. "For him? Among the sisters? It can't be. Except for those of you who. . . . How could you, Verin? Why didn't you fight it?"

vɛɹɪn tsk veɪksədli. nɑt fəɹ ðə fulɪʃ sədʒɛstʃən ðət ʃi ʃʊɾə fɔɾ ə tɑvɝən. ðə bɔɪ sim soʊ sɝɾən. waɪ? ʃi kɛpt əɹ vɔɪs loʊ. "du juv noʊ səspɪʃənz, bɛldaɪn? dɪd jə hɪɹ noʊ ɹumɝz bɪfɔɹ jə lɛf tɑɹ vəlɑn? noʊ wɪspɝz? noʊ wʌn u hɪntəɾ əɾ əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ɪm dɪfɹənli? tɛl mi."

Verin tsked vexedly. Not for the foolish suggestion that she should have fought a ta'veren. The boy seemed so certain. Why? She kept her voice low. "Do you have no suspicions, Beldeine? Did you hear no rumors before you left Tar Valon? No whispers? No one who hinted at approaching him differently? Tell me."

"noʊ wʌn. hu kəd . . . ? noʊ wʌn wʊd. . . . aɪ ədmaɪɝd kaɪɹunə soʊ." ðəɹ wɑz ə hɪn ə lɔs ɪn bɛldaɪnz slipi vɔɪs, ən tɪɹz likɪŋ fɹəm əɹ aɪz meɪd tʃɹæks θɹu ðə dɝt. oʊnli vɛɹɪnz hænz kɛpt əɹ sɪɾɪŋ əpɹaɪt.

"No one. Who could . . . ? No one would. . . . I admired Kiruna so." There was a hint of loss in Beldeine's sleepy voice, and tears leaking from her eyes made tracks through the dirt. Only Verin's hands kept her sitting upright.

vɛɹɪn kəntɪnjud tə leɪ daʊn ðə θɹɛdz ə hɝ wivɪŋ, aɪz flæʃɪŋ fɹəm əɹ wɝk tə ðə dɔɹflæps ən bæk. ʃi fɛlt ə lɪɾəl laɪk swɛɾɪŋ hɝsɛlf. sɔɹɪliə maɪt dɪsaɪd ʃi niɾəd hɛlp wɪð ðə kwɛstʃənɪŋ. ʃi maɪt bɹɪŋ aʊt wʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz fɹəm ðə sʌn pæləs. ʃəɾ ɛni sɪstɝ lɝn ə ðɪs, stɪlɪŋ wɑz ə vɛɹi ɹil pɑsəbɪləɾi. "soʊ jə wɝ gɑnə dɪlɪvɝ ɪm tə ɪleɪɾə nitli wɑʃt ən wɛl-bɪheɪvd," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə slaɪtli laʊɾɝ toʊn. ðə kwaɪət hæd ɡɔn ɑn tu lɔŋ. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑn ðət pɛɹ aʊtsaɪd ɹipɔɹɾɪŋ ðət ʃi wɑz wɪspɝɪŋ wɪð ðə pɹɪznɝz.

Verin continued to lay down the threads of her weaving, eyes flashing from her work to the doorflaps and back. She felt a little like sweating herself. Sorilea might decide she needed help with the questioning. She might bring out one of the sisters from the Sun Palace. Should any sister learn of this, stilling was a very real possibility. "So you were going to deliver him to Elaida neatly washed and well-behaved," she said in a slightly louder tone. The quiet had gone on too long. She did not want that pair outside reporting that she was whispering with the prisoners.

"aɪ kʊdnt . . . spik aʊt . . . əɡɛnst ɡəlinəz dɪsɪʒən. ʃi lɛd . . . baɪ ði æmɪɝlɪnz kəmænd." bɛldaɪn ʃɪftəɾ əɡɛn, wikli. hɝ vɔɪs wɑz stɪl dʒɹimi, bʌɾ ɪt pɪkt ʌp ən ædʒəteɪɾəd ɛdʒ. hɝ aɪlɪdz flʌɾɝd. "hi hæd tə . . . bi meɪd . . . tə oʊbeɪ! hi hæd tə bi! ʃʊdn əv bɪn . . . tʃɹiɾəd soʊ hɑɹʃli. laɪk pʊɾɪŋ . . . hɪm tə . . . kwɛstʃən. ɹɔŋ."

"I couldn't . . . speak out . . . against Galina's decision. She led . . . by the Amyrlin's command." Beldeine shifted again, weakly. Her voice was still dreamy, but it picked up an agitated edge. Her eyelids fluttered. "He had to . . . be made . . . to obey! He had to be! Shouldn't have been . . . treated so harshly. Like putting . . . him to . . . question. Wrong."

vɛɹɪn snɔɹɾɪd. ɹɔŋ? dɪzæstʃɹəs wɑz mɔɹ laɪk ɪt. ə dɪzæstɝ fɹəm ðə fɝst. naʊ ðə mæn lʊkt əɾ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔlmoʊs ðə weɪ ɛɹən dɪd. ən ɪf ðeɪ hæd səksiɾəd ɪn kæɹiɪŋ ɪm tə tɑɹ vəlɑn? ə tɑvɝən laɪk ɹænd ælθɹ æktʃəli  ɪnsaɪd ðə waɪt taʊɝ? ə θɔt tə meɪk ə stoʊn tʃɹɛmbəl. haʊɛvɝ ɪt hæd tɝn aʊt, dɪzæstɝ wəd ʃʊɹli hæv bɪn tu maɪld ə wɝd. ðə pɹaɪs peɪɾ ət dəməaɪz wɛlz wɑz smɔl ɪnʌf, fəɹ əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðæt.

Verin snorted. Wrong? Disastrous was more like it. A disaster from the first. Now the man looked at any Aes Sedai almost the way Aeron did. And if they had succeeded in carrying him to Tar Valon? A ta'veren like Rand al'Thor actually inside the White Tower? A thought to make a stone tremble. However it had turned out, disaster would surely have been too mild a word. The price paid at Dumai's Wells was small enough, for avoiding that.

ʃi wɛn ɑn æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz ɪn ə toʊn ðət kəd bi hɝd klɪɹli baɪ ɛniwʌn lɪsnɪŋ aʊtsaɪd. æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi hæɾ ænsɝz fɔɹ, ən əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðoʊz tu deɪnʒɝəs tə bi ænsɝd. ʃi peɪd lɪɾəl hid tə ðə wɝdz kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɝ maʊθ əɹ tə bɛldaɪnz ɹɪplaɪz. meɪnli ʃi kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn əɹ wivɪŋ.

She went on asking questions in a tone that could be heard clearly by anyone listening outside. Asking questions she already had answers for, and avoiding those too dangerous to be answered. She paid little heed to the words coming out of her mouth or to Beldeine's replies. Mainly she concentrated on her weaving.

ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni θɪŋz hæd kæptʃɝɾ əɹ ɪntʃɹəst oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz, nɑɾ ɔl stʃɹɪkli əpɹuvd ə baɪ ðə taʊɝ. ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹi waɪldɝ u keɪm tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ fəɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ - boʊθ tʃɹu waɪldɝz, hu ɹɪli hæd bɪɡʌn titʃɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, ən ɡɝlz u mɪɹli hæd stɑɹɾəd tʌtʃɪŋ ðə sɔɹs kəz ðə spɑɹk bɔɹn ɪn əm hæd kwɪkən ɑn ɪts oʊn; fəɹ səm sɪstɝz, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹil dɪfɝəns - nɪɹli ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðoʊz waɪldɝz hæd kɹieɪɾəd ət list wʌn tʃɹɪk fəɹ hɝsɛlf, ən ðoʊz tʃɹɪks ɔlmoʊst ɪnvɛɹiəbli fɛl ʌndɝ wʌn ə tu hɛɾɪŋz. ə weɪ tə lɪsən ɪn ɑn ʌðɝ pipəlz kɑnvɝseɪʃənz, əɹ ə weɪ ʌv meɪkɪŋ pipəl də əz ðeɪ wɑntəd.

A great many things had captured her interest over the years, not all strictly approved of by the Tower. Almost every wilder who came to the White Tower for training - both true wilders, who really had begun teaching themselves, and girls who merely had started touching the Source because the spark born in them had quickened on its own; for some sisters, there was no real difference - nearly every one of those wilders had created at least one trick for herself, and those tricks almost invariably fell under one of two headings. A way to listen in on other people's conversations, or a way of making people do as they wanted.

ðə fɝst, ðə taʊɝ dɪd nɑt kɛɹ mʌtʃ əbaʊt. ivən ə waɪldɝ u hæd ɡeɪn kənsɪɾɝəbəl kəntʃɹoʊl ɑn əɹ oʊn kwɪkli lɝn ðəɾ əz lɔŋ əz ʃi wɔɹ nɑvəs waɪt, ʃi wɑz nɑt tə soʊ mʌtʃ əz tʌtʃ seɪaɪdɑɹ wɪθaʊɾ ə sɪstɝ əɹ wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd stændɪŋ oʊvɝ hɝ. wɪtʃ dɪd tɛn tə lɪməɾ ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ ɹæðɝ ʃɑɹpli. ði ʌðɝ tʃɹɪk, haʊɛvɝ, smɛl tu əkɪn tə fɔɹbɪɾən kəmpʌlʃən. oʊ, ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ə weɪ tə meɪk fɑðɝ ɡɪv əɹ dʒɹɛsəz əɹ tʃɹɪŋkəts i dɪd nɑt wɑnə baɪ, əɹ meɪk mʌðɝ əpɹuv ə jʌŋ mɛn ʃi ɔɹɾənɛɹəli ɹæn ɔf, θɪŋz ə ðət neɪtʃɝ, bʌt ðə taʊɝ ɹuɾəd ðə tʃɹɪk aʊt moʊst ɪfɛktɪvli. mɛni ʌv ðə ɡɝlz ən wɪmən vɛɹɪn hæd spoʊkən tə oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz kəd nɑt meɪk ðɛmsɛlvz fɔɹm ðə wivz, mʌtʃ lɛs juz ðɛm, ən ə fɛɹ nʌmbɝ kəd nɑɾ ivən meɪk ðɛmsɛlvz ɹɪmɛmbɝ haʊ. fɹəm bɪts ən pisəz ən skɹæps ə hæf-ɹɪmɛmbɝd wivz kɹieɪɾəd baɪ əntʃɹeɪnd ɡɝlz fəɹ vɛɹi lɪməɾəd pɝpəsəz, vɛɹɪn hæd ɹikənstʃɹʌktɪɾ ə θɪŋ fɔɹbɪɾən baɪ ðə taʊɝ sɪns ɪts faʊndɪŋ. ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ɪt hæd bɪn sɪmpəl kjʊɹiɑsəɾi ɑn əɹ pɑɹt. kjʊɹiɑsəɾi, ʃi θɔt ɹaɪli, wɝkɪŋ ət ðə wiv ɑn bɛldaɪn, hæz meɪd mi klaɪm ɪndə mɔɹ ðən wʌn pɪklɪŋ kɛɾəl. jusfəlnəs keɪm leɪɾɝ.

The first, the Tower did not care much about. Even a wilder who had gained considerable control on her own quickly learned that as long as she wore novice white, she was not to so much as touch saidar without a sister or one of the Accepted standing over her. Which did tend to limit eavesdropping rather sharply. The other trick, however, smelled too akin to forbidden Compulsion. Oh, it was just a way to make Father give her dresses or trinkets he did not want to buy, or make Mother approve of young men she ordinarily ran off, things of that nature, but the Tower rooted the trick out most effectively. Many of the girls and women Verin had spoken to over the years could not make themselves form the weaves, much less use them, and a fair number could not even make themselves remember how. From bits and pieces and scraps of half-remembered weaves created by untrained girls for very limited purposes, Verin had reconstructed a thing forbidden by the Tower since its founding. In the beginning it had been simple curiosity on her part. Curiosity, she thought wryly, working at the weave on Beldeine, has made me climb into more than one pickling kettle. Usefulness came later.

"aɪ səpoʊz ɪleɪɾə mɛn tə kip ɪm daʊn ɪn ði oʊpən sɛlz," ʃi sɛd kənvɝseɪʃənəli. ðə ɡɹɪl-wɔl sɛlz wɝ ɪntɛndəd fəɹ mɛn u kəd tʃænəl, əz wɛl əz ɪnɪʃiəts ə ðə taʊɝ ʌndɝ kloʊs ɝɛst, waɪldɝz u hæd kleɪm tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ɛniwʌn ɛls u mʌs bi boʊθ kənfaɪn ən blɑkt ɔf fɹəm ðə sɔɹs. "nɑɾ ə kʌmftəɹbəl pleɪs fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. noʊ pɹaɪvəsi. dʒju bɪliv hiz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, bɛldaɪn?" ðɪs taɪm ʃi pɔz tə lɪsən.

"I suppose Elaida meant to keep him down in the open cells," she said conversationally. The grill-walled cells were intended for men who could channel, as well as initiates of the Tower under close arrest, wilders who had claimed to be Aes Sedai, and anyone else who must be both confined and blocked off from the Source. "Not a comfortable place for the Dragon Reborn. No privacy. Do you believe he is the Dragon Reborn, Beldeine?" This time she paused to listen.

"jɛs." ðə wɝd wɑz ə lɔŋ hɪs, ən bɛldaɪn ɹoʊl fɹaɪɾənd aɪz təwɔɹd vɛɹɪnz feɪs. "jɛs . . . bʌɾ i mʌst . . . bi kɛpt . . . seɪf. ðə wɝld . . . mʌs bi . . . seɪf . . . fɹəm hɪm."

"Yes." The word was a long hiss, and Beldeine rolled frightened eyes toward Verin's face. "Yes . . . but he must . . . be kept . . . safe. The world . . . must be . . . safe . . . from him."

ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ. ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl sɛd ðə wɝl hæd tə bi kɛp seɪf fɹəm hɪm; wʌt wɑz ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ wɑz ðoʊz u θɔɾ i niɾəd pɹətɛkʃən, tu. səm u hæd sɛd ðæt, sɝpɹaɪz hɝ.

Interesting. They had all said the world had to be kept safe from him; what was interesting was those who thought he needed protection, too. Some who had said that, surprised her.

tə vɛɹɪnz aɪz, ðə wiv ʃi hæd meɪd ɹɪzɛmbəl nʌθɪŋ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə hæphæzɝd tæŋɡəl ə feɪnli ɡloʊɪŋ tʃɹænspɛɹən θɹɛdz ɔl bʌndəld ɝaʊn bɛldaɪnz hɛd, wɪð fɔɹ θɹɛdz ə spɪɹət tʃɹeɪlɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə mɛs. tu ʌv ðoʊz, ɑpəzət wʌn ənʌðɝ, ʃi pʊld, ən ðə tæŋɡəl kəlæpst slaɪtli, fɔlɪŋ ɪnwɝd, ɪndə sʌmθɪŋ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ʌv ɔɹɾɝ. bɛldaɪnz aɪz ʃɑɾ oʊpən waɪd, stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə fɑɹ dɪstəns.

To Verin's eyes, the weave she had made resembled nothing so much as a haphazard tangle of faintly glowing transparent threads all bundled around Beldeine's head, with four threads of Spirit trailing out of the mess. Two of those, opposite one another, she pulled, and the tangle collapsed slightly, falling inward, into something on the edge of order. Beldeine's eyes shot open wide, staring into the far distance.

ɪn ə fɝm, loʊ vɔɪs, vɛɹɪn ɡeɪv əɹ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz. mɔɹ laɪk sədʒɛstʃənz, ðoʊ ʃi fɹeɪzd əm əz kəmænz. bɛldaɪn wəɾ əv tə faɪn ɹizənz wɪðɪn hɝsɛlf tə oʊbeɪ; ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt, ðən ɔl ðɪs hæd bɪn soʊ mʌtʃ weɪstəɾ ɛfɝt.

In a firm, low voice, Verin gave her instructions. More like suggestions, though she phrased them as commands. Beldeine would have to find reasons within herself to obey; if she did not, then all this had been so much wasted effort.

wɪð ðə faɪnəl wɝdz, vɛɹɪn pʊl ði ʌðɝ tu θɹɛdz ə spɪɹət, ən ðə tæŋɡəl kəlæps fɝðɝ. ðɪs taɪm, ðoʊ, ɪt fɛl ɪndə wʌt sim pɝfəkt ɔɹɾɝ, ə pæɾɝn mɔɹ pɹɪsaɪs, mɔɹ kɑmpləkeɪɾəd ðən ðə moʊst ɪntʃɹəkət leɪs, ən kəmplit, taɪɾ ɔf baɪ ðə seɪm ækʃən ðət bɪɡæn ɪts ʃɹɪŋkɪŋ. ðɪs taɪm, ɪt kəntɪnjud tə fɔl ɪnwɝɾ ɑn ɪtsɛlf, ɪnwɝɾ ɝaʊn bɛldaɪnz hɛd. ðoʊz feɪnli ɡloʊɪŋ θɹɛdz sæŋk ɪndə hɝ, vænɪʃt. hɝ aɪz ɹoʊl bæk ɪn əɹ hɛd, ən ʃi bɪɡæn tə θɹæʃ, lɪmz kwɪvɝɪŋ. vɛɹɪn hɛld əɹ əz dʒɛnli əz ʃi kʊd, bʌt bɛldaɪnz hɛd stɪl wɪp fɹəm saɪd tə saɪd, ən əɹ bɛɹ hilz dʒɹʌmd ɑn ðə kɑɹpəts. sun, oʊnli ðə moʊs kɛɹfəl dɛlvɪŋ wəd tɛl ðəɾ ɛniθɪŋ hæd bɪn dʌn, ən nɑɾ ivən ðət wəɾ aɪdɛntəfaɪ ðə wiv. vɛɹɪn hæd tɛstəd ðət kɛɹfəli, ən ɪf ʃi dɪd seɪ soʊ hɝsɛlf, nʌn sɝpæst əɹ ət dɛlvɪŋ.

With the final words, Verin pulled the other two threads of Spirit, and the tangle collapsed further. This time, though, it fell into what seemed perfect order, a pattern more precise, more complicated than the most intricate lace, and complete, tied off by the same action that began its shrinking. This time, it continued to fall inward on itself, inward around Beldeine's head. Those faintly glowing threads sank into her, vanished. Her eyes rolled back in her head, and she began to thrash, limbs quivering. Verin held her as gently as she could, but Beldeine's head still whipped from side to side, and her bare heels drummed on the carpets. Soon, only the most careful Delving would tell that anything had been done, and not even that would identify the weave. Verin had tested that carefully, and if she did say so herself, none surpassed her at Delving.

ʌv kɔɹs ðə θɪŋ wɑz nɑt tʃɹuli kəmpʌlʃən əz eɪntʃən tɛksts dɪskɹaɪbd ɪt. ðə wivɪŋ wɛnt wɪð peɪnfəl sloʊnəs, kɑbəl təɡɛðɝ əz ɪt wɑz, ən ðəɹ wɑz ðət nid fəɹ ə ɹizən. ɪt hɛlpt ə ɡɹeɪt dil ɪf ði əbdʒɛkt ə ðə wiv wɑz ɪmoʊʃnəli vʌlnɝəbəl, bʌt tʃɹʌst wɑz æbsəlutli ɪsɛnʃəl. ivən kætʃɪŋ sʌmwʌn baɪ sɝpɹaɪz dɪd noʊ ɡʊɾ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ səspɪʃəs. ðət fækt kʌt daʊn ɪts jusfəlnəs wɪð mɛn kənsɪɾɝəbli; vɛɹi fju mɛn læk səspɪʃən ɝaʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Of course the thing was not truly Compulsion as ancient texts described it. The weaving went with painful slowness, cobbled together as it was, and there was that need for a reason. It helped a great deal if the object of the weave was emotionally vulnerable, but trust was absolutely essential. Even catching someone by surprise did no good if they were suspicious. That fact cut down its usefulness with men considerably; very few men lacked suspicion around Aes Sedai.

dɪstʃɹʌst əsaɪd, mɛn wɝ vɛɹi bæd sʌbʒɪkts, ənfɔɹtʃənətli. ʃi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ. moʊst ə ðoʊz ɡɝlz' wivz hæd bɪn ɪntɛndəd fəɹ ðɛɹ fɑðɝz əɹ ʌðɝ mɛn. ɛni stʃɹɔŋ pɝsənælɪɾi maɪt bɪɡɪn tə kwɛstʃən ɪz oʊn ækʃənz - əɹ ivən fɝɡɛt duɪŋ ðɛm, wɪtʃ lɛd tə ənʌðɝ sɛɾ ə pɹɑbləmz - bʌɾ ɔl θɪŋz biɪŋ ikwəl, mɛn wɝ mʌtʃ mɔɹ laɪkli tə. mʌtʃ mɔɹ laɪkli. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz ðə səspɪʃən əɡɛn. waɪ, wʌns ə mæn hæɾ ivən ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə wivz biɪŋ woʊvən ɑn hɪm, ɪf nɑt ði ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz ʃi hæd ɡɪvən hɪm. sətʃ ə lɑɾ ə bɑðɝ ðət kɑzd! nɑt sʌmθɪŋ ʃi wəd ɹɪsk əɡɛn.

Distrust aside, men were very bad subjects, unfortunately. She could not understand why. Most of those girls' weaves had been intended for their fathers or other men. Any strong personality might begin to question his own actions - or even forget doing them, which led to another set of problems - but all things being equal, men were much more likely to. Much more likely. Perhaps it was the suspicion again. Why, once a man had even remembered the weaves being woven on him, if not the instructions she had given him. Such a lot of bother that caused! Not something she would risk again.

ət læs bɛldaɪnz kənvʌlʃənz lɛsənd, stɑpt. ʃi ɹeɪzd ə fɪlθi hæn tə hɝ hɛd. "wʌt - ? wʌt hæpənd?" ʃi sɛd, ɔlmoʊst ɪnɔɾəbli. "dɪɾ aɪ feɪnt?" fɔɝɡɛtfəlnəs wɑz ənʌðɝ ɡʊd pɔɪn əbaʊt ðə wiv, nɑɾ ʌnɪkspɛktɪdli. æftɝ ɔl, fɑðɝ mʌs nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət jə sʌmhaʊ meɪɾ ɪm baɪ ðəɾ ɪkspɛnsɪv dʒɹɛs.

At last Beldeine's convulsions lessened, stopped. She raised a filthy hand to her head. "What - ? What happened?" she said, almost inaudibly. "Did I faint?" Forgetfulness was another good point about the weave, not unexpectedly. After all, Father must not remember that you somehow made him buy that expensive dress.

"ðə hiɾ ɪz vɛɹi bæd," vɛɹɪn sɛd, hɛlpɪŋ əɹ tə sɪɾ ʌp əɡɛn. "aɪ hæv fɛlt laɪt-hɛɾəd maɪsɛlf wʌns əɹ twaɪs tədeɪ." fɹəm wɪɹinəs, nɑt hit. hænlɪŋ ðət mʌtʃ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ tʊk ɪɾ aʊɾ ə ju, ɪspɛʃli wən jə hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi dʌn ɪt fɔɹ taɪmz tədeɪ. ði æŋɡɹil dɪd nʌθɪŋ tə bʌfɝ ði ɪfɛks wʌns jə stɑp juzɪŋ ɪt. ʃi cʊɾə juzd ə stɛɾiɪŋ hæn hɝsɛlf. "aɪ θɪŋk ðæts əbaʊɾ ɪnʌf. ɪf jəɹ feɪntɪŋ, pɝhæps ðəl faɪn sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ jə tə də aʊɾ ə ðə sʌn." ðə pɹɑspɛk dɪd nɑt sim tə tʃɪɹ bɛldaɪn əɾ ɔl.

"The heat is very bad," Verin said, helping her to sit up again. "I have felt light-headed myself once or twice today." From weariness, not heat. Handling that much of saidar took it out of you, especially when you had already done it four times today. The angreal did nothing to buffer the effects once you stopped using it. She could have used a steadying hand herself. "I think that's about enough. If you're fainting, perhaps they'll find something for you to do out of the sun." The prospect did not seem to cheer Beldeine at all.

ɹʌbɪŋ ðə smɔl ə hɝ bæk, vɛɹɪn stʌk əɹ hɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðə tɛnt. kɔɹæm ən mɛndæn stɑp ðɛɹ ɡeɪm ə kæts kɹeɪɾəl wʌns mɔɹ; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn ðəɾ iðɝ hæd lɪsənd, bʌt ʃi wəd nɑt weɪdʒɝ əɹ laɪf ɑn ɪt. ʃi toʊld əm ðət ʃi wɑz fɪnɪʃt wɪð bɛldaɪn ænd, æftɝ ə moʊməns θɔt, æɾəd ðət ʃi niɾəd ənʌðɝ pɪtʃɝ ʌv wɔɾɝ sɪns bɛldaɪn hæɾ oʊvɝtɝn hɝz. boʊθ mɛnz feɪsəz dɑɹkən bɪniθ ðɛɹ tænz. ðət wəd bi pæst əlɔŋ tə ðə waɪz wʌn u keɪm fəɹ bɛldaɪn. ɪt wəd sɝv əz sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ tə hɛlp əɹ ɹitʃ əɹ dɪsɪʒən.

Rubbing the small of her back, Verin stuck her head out of the tent. Coram and Mendan stopped their game of cat's cradle once more; there was no sign that either had listened, but she would not wager her life on it. She told them that she was finished with Beldeine and, after a moment's thought, added that she needed another pitcher of water since Beldeine had overturned hers. Both men's faces darkened beneath their tans. That would be passed along to the Wise One who came for Beldeine. It would serve as something more to help her reach her decision.

ðə sʌn stɪl hæɾ ə lɔŋ weɪ tə fɔl tə ðə hɝaɪzən, bʌt ði eɪk ɪn əɹ bæk toʊld əɹ ɪt wɑz taɪm tə stɑp fəɹ ðə deɪ. ʃi kəd stɪl də wʌn mɔɹ sɪstɝ, bʌɾ ɪf ʃi dɪd, baɪ mɔɹnɪŋ ʃi wəd fil ɪɾ ɪn ɛvɹi mʌsəl. hɝ aɪz fɛl ɑn ɝɡən, naʊ wɪð ðə wɪmən kæɹiɪŋ bæskəts tə ðə hændmɪlz. haʊ wəɾ əɹ laɪf əv ɡɔn ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn soʊ kjʊɹiəs, vɛɹɪn wʌndɝd. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, ʃi wʊɾə mɛɹiɾ idwɪn ən ɹɪmeɪn ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ʃi wəd bi lɔŋ dɛd, fəɹ ənʌðɝ, ən ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ʃi hæd nɛvɝ hæd, ən əɹ ɡɹæntʃɪlʒɹən, tu.

The sun still had a long way to fall to the horizon, but the ache in her back told her it was time to stop for the day. She could still do one more sister, but if she did, by morning she would feel it in every muscle. Her eyes fell on Irgain, now with the women carrying baskets to the handmills. How would her life have gone if she had not been so curious, Verin wondered. For one thing, she would have married Eadwin and remained in Far Madding instead of going to the White Tower. She would be long dead, for another, and the children she had never had, and her grandchildren, too.

wɪð ə saɪ, ʃi tɝn bæk tə kɔɹæm. "wɛn mɛndæn ɹɪtɝnz, wəd jə ɡoʊ tɛl koʊlɪndə ðəɾ aɪ wəd laɪk tə si ɝɡən fɑteɪmd?" ðə peɪn ɪn əɹ mʌsəlz təmɑɹoʊ wəd bi ə smɔl pɛnəns fəɹ bɛldaɪnz sʌfɝɪŋ oʊvɝ ðət spɪld wɔɾɝ, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt waɪ ʃi dɪɾ ɪt, əɹ ivən əɹ kjʊɹiɑsəɾi, ɹɪli. ʃi stɪl hæɾ ə tæsk. sʌmhaʊ, ʃi hæd tə kip jʌŋ ɹænd əlaɪv əntɪl ɪt wɑz taɪm fəɹ ɪm tə daɪ.

With a sigh, she turned back to Coram. "When Mendan returns, would you go tell Colinda that I would like to see Irgain Fatamed?" The pain in her muscles tomorrow would be a small penance for Beldeine's suffering over that spilled water, but that was not why she did it, or even her curiosity, really. She still had a task. Somehow, she had to keep young Rand alive until it was time for him to die.

ðə ɹum maɪɾ əv bɪn ɪn ə ɡɹæn pæləs, ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɪt hæd niðɝ wɪndoʊz nɔɹ dɔɹz. ðə faɪɝ ɑn ə ɡoʊldən mɑɹbəl hɑɹθ ɡeɪv noʊ hit, ən ðə fleɪmz dɪd nɑt kənsum ðə lɔɡz. ðə mæn siɾəd əɾ ə teɪbəl wɪð ɡɪldɪd lɛɡz, sɛntɝɾ ɑn ə sɪlk kɑɹpət woʊvən wɪð ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ θɹɛdz ʌv ɡoʊld ən sɪlvɝ, kɛɹd lɪɾəl fəɹ ðə tʃɹæpɪŋz ə ðɪs eɪdʒ. ðeɪ wɝ nɛsəsɛɹi tə ɪmpɹɛs; noʊ mɔɹ. nɑt ðəɾ i ɹɪli niɾəd mɔɹ ðən hɪmsɛlf tə oʊvɝeɪ ðə stɪfəs pɹaɪd. hi kɔl hɪmsɛlf mɔɹaɪɾɪn, ən ʃʊɹli noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ hæd mɔɹ ɹaɪt tə neɪm hɪmsɛlf dɛθ.

The room might have been in a grand palace, except that it had neither windows nor doors. The fire on a golden marble hearth gave no heat, and the flames did not consume the logs. The man seated at a table with gilded legs, centered on a silk carpet woven with glittering threads of gold and silver, cared little for the trappings of this Age. They were necessary to impress; no more. Not that he really needed more than himself to overawe the stiffest pride. He called himself Moridin, and surely no one had ever had more right to name himself Death.

fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm i aɪdli stʃɹoʊkt wʌn ə ðə tu maɪntʃɹæps ðət hʌŋ ɑn pleɪn sɪlkən kɔɹdz ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk. əɾ ɪz tʌtʃ, ðə blʌd-ɹɛd kɹɪstəl ə ðə kɔɹsvɹə pʌlsd, swɝlz muvɪŋ ɪn ɛnləs dɛpθs laɪk ðə biɾɪŋ ʌv ə hɑɹt. hɪz ɹil ətɛnʃən wɑz ɑn ðə ɡeɪm leɪɾ aʊt bɪfɔɹ ɪm ɑn ðə teɪbəl, θɝɾi-θɹi ɹɛd pisəz ən θɝɾi-θɹi ɡɹin ɝeɪɾ əkɹɔs ə pleɪɪŋ sɝfəs ə θɝtin skwɛɹz baɪ θɝtin. ə ɹeɪ-kɹieɪʃən ə ði ɝli steɪdʒəz ʌv ə feɪməs ɡeɪm. ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt pis, ðə fɪʃɝ, blæk-ænd-waɪt laɪk ðə pleɪɪŋ sɝfəs, stɪl weɪɾəd ɪn ɪts stɑɹɾɪŋ pleɪs ɑn ðə sɛntʃɹəl skwɛɹ. ə kɑmplɛks ɡeɪm, ʃɝə, eɪntʃən lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə wɔɹ ə paʊɝ. ʃɝə, tʃɝən, ən nɔɹi, ðə ɡeɪm naʊ kɔl sɪmpli "stoʊnz," itʃ hæɾ ædhɪɹəns u kleɪmd ɪɾ ɛnkʌmpəst ɔl ðə sʌɾəltiz ə laɪf, bʌt mɔɹaɪɾɪn hæɾ ɔlweɪz feɪvɝd ʃɝə. oʊnli naɪn pipəl lɪvɪŋ ivən ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə ɡeɪm. hi hæd bɪn ə mæstɝ ʌv ɪt. mʌtʃ mɔɹ kɑmplɛks ðən tʃɝən əɹ nɔɹi. ðə fɝst əbdʒɛkt wɑz kæptʃɝ ə ðə fɪʃɝ. oʊnli ðən dɪd ðə ɡeɪm tʃɹuli bɪɡɪn.

From time to time he idly stroked one of the two mindtraps that hung on plain silken cords around his neck. At his touch, the blood-red crystal of the cour'souvra pulsed, swirls moving in endless depths like the beating of a heart. His real attention was on the game laid out before him on the table, thirty-three red pieces and thirty-three green arrayed across a playing surface of thirteen squares by thirteen. A re-creation of the early stages of a famous game. The most important piece, the Fisher, black-and-white like the playing surface, still waited in its starting place on the central square. A complex game, sha'rah, ancient long before the War of Power. Sha'rah, tcheran, and no'ri, the game now called simply "stones," each had adherents who claimed it encompassed all the subtleties of life, but Moridin had always favored sha'rah. Only nine people living even remembered the game. He had been a master of it. Much more complex than tcheran or no'ri. The first object was capture of the Fisher. Only then did the game truly begin.

ə sɝvən əpɹoʊtʃt, ə slɪm ɡɹeɪsfəl jʌŋ mæn klæɾ ɔl ɪn waɪt, ɪmpɑsəbli hænsəm, boʊɪŋ əz i pɹizɛntəɾ ə kɹɪstəl ɡɑbləɾ ɑn ə sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ. hi smaɪld, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt tʌtʃ ɪz blæk aɪz, aɪz mɔɹ laɪfləs ðən sɪmpli dɛd. moʊs mɛn wʊɾə fɛlt ənkʌmftəɹbəl hævɪŋ ðət ɡeɪz ɑn ðɛm. mɔɹaɪɾɪn mɪɹli tʊk ðə ɡɑbləɾ ən moʊʃən ðə sɝvən əweɪ. ðə vɪntnɝz ə ðɪs taɪm pɹədust səm ɛksələnt waɪnz. hi dɪd nɑt dʒɹɪŋk, ðoʊ.

A servant approached, a slim graceful young man clad all in white, impossibly handsome, bowing as he presented a crystal goblet on a silver tray. He smiled, but it did not touch his black eyes, eyes more lifeless than simply dead. Most men would have felt uncomfortable having that gaze on them. Moridin merely took the goblet and motioned the servant away. The vintners of this time produced some excellent wines. He did not drink, though.

ðə fɪʃɝ hɛld ɪz ətɛnʃən, beɪɾɪŋ hɪm. sɛvɹəl pisəz hæd vɛɹiɪŋ muvz, bʌɾ oʊnli ðə fɪʃɝz ætʃɹəbjuts ɔltɝɾ əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə wɛɹ ɪt stʊd; ɑn ə waɪt skwɛɹ, wik ɪn ətæk jɛɾ ædʒəl ən fɑɹ-ɹeɪnʒɪŋ ɪn ɪskeɪp; ɑn blæk, stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ətæk bʌt sloʊ ən vʌlnɝəbəl. wən mæstɝz pleɪd, ðə fɪʃɝ tʃeɪnʒd saɪdz mɛni taɪmz bɪfɔɹ ði ɛnd. ðə ɡɹin-ænd-ɹɛd ɡoʊl-ɹoʊ ðət sɝaʊndəd ðə pleɪɪŋ sɝfəs kəd bi θɹɛɾənd baɪ ɛni pis, bʌɾ oʊnli ðə fɪʃɝ kəd muv ɑntu ɪt. nɑt ðəɾ i wɑz seɪf, ivən ðɛɹ; ðə fɪʃɝ wɑz nɛvɝ seɪf. wən ðə fɪʃɝ wɑz jʊɹz, jə tʃɹaɪd tə muv ɪm tə ə skwɛɹ ə jəɹ kʌlɝ bɪhaɪn jəɹ əpoʊnəns ɛn ə ðə bɔɹd. ðət wɑz vɪktɝi, ði iziəst weɪ, bʌt nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn. wən jəɹ əpoʊnən hɛl ðə fɪʃɝ, jə ətɛmptəd tə liv ɪm noʊ tʃɔɪs fəɹ ðə fɪʃɝ bʌt tə muv ɑntu jəɹ kʌlɝ. ɛniwɛɹ əɾ ɔl əlɔŋ ðə ɡoʊl-ɹoʊ wəd du; hoʊldɪŋ ðə fɪʃɝ kəd bi mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ðən nɑt. ʌv kɔɹs, ðəɹ wɑz ə θɝd pæθ tə vɪktɝi ɪn ʃɝə, ɪf jə tʊk ɪt bɪfɔɹ lɛɾɪŋ jɝsɛlf bi tʃɹæpt. ðə ɡeɪm ɔlweɪz dɪdʒɛnɝeɪɾɪd ɪn ə blʌɾi meɪleɪ, ðɛn, vɪktɝi kʌmɪŋ oʊnli wɪð kəmpliɾ ənaɪəleɪʃən ə jəɹ ɛnəmi. hi hæd tʃɹaɪd ðæt, wʌns, ɪn dɛspɝeɪʃən, bʌt ði ətɛmp hæd feɪld. peɪnfəli.

The Fisher held his attention, baiting him. Several pieces had varying moves, but only the Fisher's attributes altered according to where it stood; on a white square, weak in attack yet agile and far-ranging in escape; on black, strong in attack but slow and vulnerable. When masters played, the Fisher changed sides many times before the end. The green-and-red goal-row that surrounded the playing surface could be threatened by any piece, but only the Fisher could move onto it. Not that he was safe, even there; the Fisher was never safe. When the Fisher was yours, you tried to move him to a square of your color behind your opponent's end of the board. That was victory, the easiest way, but not the only one. When your opponent held the Fisher, you attempted to leave him no choice for the Fisher but to move onto your color. Anywhere at all along the goal-row would do; holding the Fisher could be more dangerous than not. Of course, there was a third path to victory in sha'rah, if you took it before letting yourself be trapped. The game always degenerated in a bloody melee, then, victory coming only with complete annihilation of your enemy. He had tried that, once, in desperation, but the attempt had failed. Painfully.

fjʊɹi bɔɪl sʌɾənli ɪn mɔɹaɪɾɪnz hɛd, ən blæk flɛks swæm əkɹɔs ɪz aɪz əz i siz ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ. ɛkstəsi ðəɾ əmaʊntɪd tə peɪn θʌndɝd θɹu hɪm. hɪz hæn kloʊzd ɝaʊn ðə tu maɪntʃɹæps, ən ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ kloʊzd ɝaʊn ðə fɪʃɝ, snætʃɪŋ ɪɾ ɪndə ði ɛɹ, ə hɛɹ fɹəm kɹʌʃɪŋ ɪt tə paʊɾɝ, kɹʌʃɪŋ ðə paʊɾɝ aʊɾ ʌv ɛɡzɪstəns. ðə ɡɑblət ʃæɾɝd ɪn ɪz hænd. hɪz ɡɹɪp bɔɹɾɝd ɑn kɹʌʃɪŋ ðə kɔɹsvɹə. ðə sæɑ wɝ ə blɪzɝɾ ə blæk, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt hɪndɝ ɪz saɪt. ðə fɪʃɝ wɑz ɔlweɪz wɝkt əz ə mæn, ə bændɪdʒ blaɪndɪŋ ɪz aɪz ən wʌn hæn pɹɛs tə hɪz saɪd, ə fju dʒɹɑps ə blʌd dʒɹɪpɪŋ θɹu hɪz fɪŋɡɝz. ðə ɹizənz, laɪk ðə sɔɹs ə ðə neɪm, wɝ lɔst ɪn ðə mɪst ə taɪm. ðət tʃɹʌbəld ɪm səmtaɪmz, ɛnɹeɪdʒ hɪm, wʌt nɑlədʒ maɪt bi lɔst ɪn ðə tɝnɪŋz ə ðə wil, nɑlədʒ i niɾəd, nɑlədʒ i hæɾ ə ɹaɪt tə. ə ɹaɪt!

Fury boiled suddenly in Moridin's head, and black flecks swam across his eyes as he seized the True Power. Ecstasy that amounted to pain thundered through him. His hand closed around the two mindtraps, and the True Power closed around the Fisher, snatching it into the air, a hair from crushing it to powder, crushing the powder out of existence. The goblet shattered in his hand. His grip bordered on crushing the cour'souvra. The saa were a blizzard of black, but they did not hinder his sight. The Fisher was always worked as a man, a bandage blinding his eyes and one hand pressed to his side, a few drops of blood dripping through his fingers. The reasons, like the source of the name, were lost in the mist of time. That troubled him sometimes, enraged him, what knowledge might be lost in the turnings of the Wheel, knowledge he needed, knowledge he had a right to. A right!

sloʊli hi sɛt ðə fɪʃɝ bæk ɑn ðə bɔɹd. sloʊli hɪz fɪŋɡɝz ʌnkɝl fɹəm ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹsvɹə. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid fəɹ dɪstʃɹʌkʃən. jɛt. aɪsi kɑm ɹipleɪst ɹeɪdʒ ɪn ðə blɪŋk ʌv ən aɪ. blʌɾ ən waɪn dʒɹɪp fɹəm ɪz ɡæʃt hænd, ənnoʊɾɪst. pɝhæps ðə fɪʃɝ dɪd kʌm fɹəm səm dɪm ɹɛmnən ʌv ə mɛmɹi ʌv ɹænd ælθɹ, ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv ə ʃædoʊ. ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ. hi ɹilaɪzd i wɑz læfɪŋ, ən meɪd noʊ ɛfɝt tə stɑp. ɑn ðə bɔɹd, ðə fɪʃɝ stʊd weɪɾɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ ɡeɪm, ælθɹ muvd ɔlɹɛɾi tə hɪz wɪʃɪz. ən sun, naʊ. . . . ɪt wɑz vɛɹi hɑɹd tə luz ə ɡeɪm wən jə pleɪd boʊθ saɪdz ə ðə bɔɹd. mɔɹaɪɾɪn læf soʊ hɑɹd ðət tɪɹz ɹoʊl daʊn ɪz feɪs, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑɾ əwɛɹ ə ðɛm.

Slowly he set the Fisher back on the board. Slowly his fingers uncurled from around the cour'souvra. There was no need for destruction. Yet. Icy calm replaced rage in the blink of an eye. Blood and wine dripped from his gashed hand, unnoticed. Perhaps the Fisher did come from some dim remnant of a memory of Rand al'Thor, the shadow of a shadow. It did not matter. He realized he was laughing, and made no effort to stop. On the board, the Fisher stood waiting, but in the greater game, al'Thor moved already to his wishes. And soon, now. . . . It was very hard to lose a game when you played both sides of the board. Moridin laughed so hard that tears rolled down his face, but he was not aware of them.


tʃæptɝ wʌn


CHAPTER 1

tə kip ðə bɑɹɡən


To Keep the Bargain

ðə wil ə taɪm tɝnz, ən eɪdʒəz kʌm ən pæs, livɪŋ mɛmɹiz ðət bɪkʌm lɛdʒənd. lɛdʒən feɪdz tə mɪθ, ən ivən mɪθ ɪz lɔŋ fɝɡɑɾən wən ði eɪdʒ ðət ɡeɪv ɪt bɝθ kʌmz əɡɛn. ɪn wʌn eɪdʒ, kɔl ðə θɝɾ eɪdʒ baɪ sʌm, ən eɪdʒ jɛt tə kʌm, ən eɪdʒ lɔŋ pæst, ə wɪn ɹoʊz əbʌv ðə ɡɹeɪt maʊntənəs aɪlən ə tʃɹɛmælkɪŋ. ðə wɪnd wɑz nɑt ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. ðəɹ ɑɹ niðɝ bɪɡɪnɪŋz nɔɹ ɛndɪŋz tə ðə tɝnɪŋ ə ðə wil ə taɪm. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə bɪɡɪnɪŋ.

The Wheel of Time turns, and Ages come and pass, leaving memories that become legend. Legend fades to myth, and even myth is long forgotten when the Age that gave it birth comes again. In one Age, called the Third Age by some, an Age yet to come, an Age long past, a wind rose above the great mountainous island of Tremalking. The wind was not the beginning. There are neither beginnings nor endings to the turning of the Wheel of Time. But it was a beginning.

is ðə wɪn blu əkɹɔs tʃɹɛmælkɪŋ, wɛɹ ðə fɛɹ-skɪn æmɑjɹ fɑɹm ðɛɹ filz, ən meɪd faɪn ɡlæs ən pɔɹsələn, ən fɑloʊd ðə pis ə ðə wɔɾɝ weɪ. ði æmɑjɹ ɪɡnɔɹd ðə wɝl bɪɑn ðɛɹ skæɾɝd aɪlənz, fəɹ ðə wɔɾɝ weɪ tɔt ðət ðɪs wɝld wɑz oʊnli ɪluʒən, ə mɪɹɝd ɹəflɛkʃən ə bɪlif, jɛt səm wɑtʃt ðə wɪn kæɹi dʌst ən dip sʌmɝ hit wɛɹ koʊld wɪntɝ ɹeɪnz ʃəd bi fɔlɪŋ, ən ðeɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝd teɪlz hɝd fɹəm ði æθɑn maɪɹ. teɪlz ə ðə wɝl bɪɑnd, ən wʌt pɹɑfəsi sɛd wɑz tə kʌm. səm lʊk tə ə hɪl wɛɹ ə mæsɪv stoʊn hæn ɹoʊz fɹəm ði ɝθ, hoʊldɪŋ ə klɪɹ kɹɪstəl sfɪɹ lɑɹdʒɝ ðən mɛni haʊsəz. ði æmɑjɹ hæd ðɛɹ oʊn pɹɑfəsiz, ən səm ə ðoʊz spoʊk ə ðə hæn ən ðə sfɪɹ. ən ði ɛn ʌv ɪluʒənz.

East the wind blew across Tremalking, where the fair-skinned Amayar farmed their fields, and made fine glass and porcelain, and followed the peace of the Water Way. The Amayar ignored the world beyond their scattered islands, for the Water Way taught that this world was only illusion, a mirrored reflection of belief, yet some watched the wind carry dust and deep summer heat where cold winter rains should be falling, and they remembered tales heard from the Atha'an Miere. Tales of the world beyond, and what prophecy said was to come. Some looked to a hill where a massive stone hand rose from the earth, holding a clear crystal sphere larger than many houses. The Amayar had their own prophecies, and some of those spoke of the hand and the sphere. And the end of illusions.

ɔnwɝd ðə wɪn blu ɪndə ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, istwɝd bɪniθ ə sɪɹɪŋ sʌn ɪn ə skaɪ əbændən baɪ klaʊdz, wɪpɪŋ ðə tɑps ʌv ɡɹin si swɛlz, bæɾəlɪŋ wɪnz fɹəm ðə saʊθ ən wɛstwɝd wɪnz, ʃɪɹɪŋ ən swɝlɪŋ əz ðə wɔɾɝz bɪloʊ hivd. nɑt jɛt ðə stɔɹmz ʌv wɪntɝz hɑɹt, ðoʊ wɪntɝ ʃʊɾə bɪn hæf ɡɔn, mʌtʃ lɛs ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ stɔɹmz ʌv ə daɪɪŋ sʌmɝ, bʌt wɪnz ən kɝəns ðət kəd bi juz baɪ oʊʃən-fɛɹiŋ foʊk tə koʊst ɝaʊn ðə kɑntənən fɹəm wɝlz ɛn tə min ən bɪɑnd, ðən bæk əɡɛn. istwɝd ðə wɪn haʊld, oʊvɝ ɹoʊlɪŋ oʊʃən wɛɹ ðə ɡɹeɪt weɪlz ɹoʊz ən saʊndəd, ən flaɪɪŋ fɪʃ sɔɹɾ ɑn aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt fɪnz tu peɪsɪz ən mɔɹ əkɹɔs, istwɝd, naʊ wɝlɪŋ nɔɹθ, ist ən nɔɹθ, oʊvɝ smɔl flits ə fɪʃɪŋ ʃɪps dʒɹæɡɪŋ ðɛɹ nɛts ɪn ðə ʃæloʊɝ siz. səm ə ðoʊz fɪʃɝmɪn stʊd ɡeɪpɪŋ, hænz aɪɾəl ɑn ðə laɪnz, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ə hjudʒ ɝeɪ ʌv tɔl vɛsəlz ən smɔlɝ ðət pɝpəsfəli ɹoʊd ðə wɪnz hɑɹd bɹɛθ, ʃæɾɝɪŋ swɛlz wɪð blʌf baʊz, slaɪsɪŋ swɛlz wɪð nɛɹoʊ, ðɛɹ bænɝ ə ɡoʊldən hɔk wɪð təlɑnz klʌtʃɪŋ laɪtnɪŋ, ə mʌltətuɾ ə stʃɹimɪŋ bænɝz laɪk pɔɹtɛns ə stɔɹm. ist ən nɔɹθ ən ɑn, ən ðə wɪn ɹitʃt ðə bɹɔd, ʃɪp-fɪl hɑɹbɝ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ, wɛɹ hʌnʒɹədz ə si foʊk vɛsəlz ɹoʊɾ əz ðeɪ dɪɾ ɪn mɛni pɔɹts, əweɪɾɪŋ wɝɾ ə ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ, ðə tʃoʊzən wʌn.

Onward the wind blew into the Sea of Storms, eastward beneath a searing sun in a sky abandoned by clouds, whipping the tops of green sea swells, battling winds from the south and westward winds, shearing and swirling as the waters below heaved. Not yet the storms of winter's heart, though winter should have been half gone, much less the greater storms of a dying summer, but winds and currents that could be used by ocean-faring folk to coast around the continent from World's End to Mayene and beyond, then back again. Eastward the wind howled, over rolling ocean where the great whales rose and sounded, and flying fish soared on outstretched fins two paces and more across, eastward, now whirling north, east and north, over small fleets of fishing ships dragging their nets in the shallower seas. Some of those fishermen stood gaping, hands idle on the lines, staring at a huge array of tall vessels and smaller that purposefully rode the wind's hard breath, shattering swells with bluff bows, slicing swells with narrow, their banner a golden hawk with talons clutching lightning, a multitude of streaming banners like portents of storm. East and north and on, and the wind reached the broad, ship-filled harbor of Ebou Dar, where hundreds of Sea Folk vessels rode as they did in many ports, awaiting word of the Coramoor, the Chosen One.

əkɹɔs ðə hɑɹbɝ ðə wɪn ɹɔɹd, tɔsɪŋ smɔl ʃɪps ən lɑɹdʒ, əkɹɔs ðə sɪɾi ɪtsɛlf, ɡlimɪŋ waɪt bɪniθ ði ənfɛɾɝd sʌn, spaɪɹz ən wɔlz ən kʌlɝ-ɹɪŋ doʊmz, stʃɹits ən kənælz bʌsəlɪŋ wɪð ðə stɔɹid sʌðɝn ɪndəstʃɹi. ɝaʊn ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ doʊmz ən slɛndɝ taʊɝz ə ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs ðə wɪn swɝld, kæɹiɪŋ ðə tæŋ ə sɔlt, lɪftɪŋ ðə flæɡ ʌv ɔltɑɹə, tu ɡoʊldən lɛpɝdz ɑn ə fild ə ɹɛɾ ən blu, ən ðə bænɝz ə ɹulɪŋ haʊs mɪtsoʊbɑɹ, ðə sɔɹɾ ən æŋkɝ, ɡɹin ɑn waɪt. nɑt jɛt ðə stɔɹm, bʌɾ ə hɑɹbɪnʒɝ ə stɔɹmz.

Across the harbor the wind roared, tossing small ships and large, across the city itself, gleaming white beneath the unfettered sun, spires and walls and color-ringed domes, streets and canals bustling with the storied southern industry. Around the shining domes and slender towers of the Tarasin Palace the wind swirled, carrying the tang of salt, lifting the flag of Altara, two golden leopards on a field of red and blue, and the banners of ruling House Mitsobar, the Sword and Anchor, green on white. Not yet the storm, but a harbinger of storms.

skɪn pɹɪkəl bɪtwin eɪvinhəz ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz əz ʃi stʃɹoʊɾ əhɛɾ ə hɝ kəmpænjənz θɹu pæləs hɔlweɪz taɪld ɪn dʌzənz ə plizɪŋ bɹaɪt hjuz. ə sɛns ə biɪŋ wɑtʃt ðət ʃi hæd læs fɛlt waɪl stɪl wɛd tə ðə spɪɹ. ɪmædʒəneɪʃən, ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf. ɪmædʒəneɪʃən ən noʊɪŋ ðəɹ ɑɹ ɛnəmiz əbaʊɾ aɪ kænɑt feɪs! nɑt soʊ lɔŋ əɡoʊ ðət kɹɔlɪŋ sɛnseɪʃən hæd mɛn sʌmwʌn maɪt bi ɪntɛndɪŋ tə kɪl hɝ. dɛθ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə fɪɹ - ɛvɹiwʌn daɪd, tədeɪ əɹ ɑn ənʌðɝ - bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə daɪ laɪk ə ɹæbət kɪkɪŋ ɪn ə snɛɹ. ʃi hæd toʊ tə mit.

Skin prickled between Aviendha's shoulder blades as she strode ahead of her companions through palace hallways tiled in dozens of pleasing bright hues. A sense of being watched that she had last felt while still wed to the spear. Imagination, she told herself. Imagination and knowing there are enemies about I cannot face! Not so long ago that crawling sensation had meant someone might be intending to kill her. Death was nothing to fear - everyone died, today or on another - but she did not want to die like a rabbit kicking in a snare. She had toh to meet.

sɝvəns skɝid baɪ kloʊs əlɔŋ ðə wɔlz, bɑbɪŋ baʊz ən kɝtsiz, dʒɹɑpɪŋ ðɛɹ aɪz ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf ðeɪ ʌndɝstʊd ðə ʃeɪm ə ðə laɪvz ðeɪ lɪvd, jɛt ʃʊɹli ɪt kəd nɑt bi ðɛm ðət meɪɾ əɹ wɑnə twɪst əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ʃi hæd tʃɹaɪd skulɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə si sɝvəns, bʌɾ ivən naʊ, wɪð ðə skɪn kɹipɪŋ ɑn əɹ bæk, hɝ ɡeɪz slɪɾ ɝaʊn ðɛm. ɪt hæd tə bi ɪmædʒəneɪʃən, ən nɝvz. ðɪs wɑz ə deɪ fəɹ ɪmædʒəneɪʃən ən nɝvz.

Servants scurried by close along the walls, bobbing bows and curtsies, dropping their eyes almost as if they understood the shame of the lives they lived, yet surely it could not be them that made her want to twist her shoulders. She had tried schooling herself to see servants, but even now, with the skin creeping on her back, her gaze slid around them. It had to be imagination, and nerves. This was a day for imagination and nerves.

ənlaɪk ðə sɝvəns, ɹɪtʃ sɪlk tæpəstʃɹiz snæɡd əɾ əɹ aɪ, ən ðə ɡɪldɪd stænd-læmps ən silɪŋ læmps laɪnɪŋ ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz. peɪpɝ-θɪn pɔɹsələn ɪn ɹɛdz ən jɛloʊz ən ɡɹinz ən bluz stʊɾ ɪn wɔl nɪtʃɪz ən tɔl oʊpən-wɝk kæbənəts əlɔŋsaɪɾ ɔɹnəməns ʌv ɡoʊld ən sɪlvɝ, aɪvɝi ən kɹɪstəl, skɔɹz əpɑn skɔɹz ə boʊlz ən veɪsəz ən kæskəts ən stætʃuɛts. oʊnli ðə moʊs bjuɾəfəl tʃɹuli kɑɾ əɹ ɡeɪz; wʌtɛvɝ wɛtləndɝz θɔt, bjuɾi hɛl mɔɹ wɝθ ðən ɡoʊld. ðəɹ wɑz mʌtʃ bjuɾi hɪɹ. ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv maɪndəd teɪkɪŋ əɹ ʃɛɹ ə ðə fɪfθ fɹəm ðɪs pleɪs.

Unlike the servants, rich silk tapestries snagged at her eye, and the gilded stand-lamps and ceiling lamps lining the corridors. Paper-thin porcelain in reds and yellows and greens and blues stood in wall niches and tall open-work cabinets alongside ornaments of gold and silver, ivory and crystal, scores upon scores of bowls and vases and caskets and statuettes. Only the most beautiful truly caught her gaze; whatever wetlanders thought, beauty held more worth than gold. There was much beauty here. She would not have minded taking her share of the fifth from this place.

vɛkst wɪð hɝsɛlf, ʃi fɹaʊnd. ðət wɑz nɑɾ ən ɑnɝəbəl θɔt bɪniθ ə ɹuf ðət hæɾ ɔfɝɾ əɹ ʃeɪɾ ən wɔɾɝ fɹili. wɪθaʊt sɛɹəmoʊni, tʃɹu, bʌɾ ɔlsoʊ wɪθaʊt dɛɾ əɹ blʌd, stil əɹ nid. jɛt bɛɾɝ ðət ðən θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ə smɔl bɔɪ əloʊn sʌmwɛɹ aʊɾ ɪn ðɪs kɝʌp sɪɾi. ɛni sɪɾi wɑz kɝʌpt - ʌv ðət mʌtʃ ʃi wɑz sɝɾən, naʊ, hævɪŋ sin səm pɑɹɾ ə fɔɹ - bʌɾ ɛbu dɑɹ wɑz ðə læst wɛɹ ʃi wʊɾə lɛɾ ə tʃaɪld ɹʌn lus. wʌt ʃi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd wɑz waɪ θɔts ʌv oʊlvɝ keɪm ənlɛs ʃi wɝk tə əvɔɪd ðɛm. hi wɑz noʊ pɑɹɾ ə ðə toʊ ʃi hæd tə ɪleɪn, ən tə ɹænd ælθɹ. eɪ ʃeɪɾoʊ spɪɹ hæd teɪkən ɪz fɑðɝ, stɑɹveɪʃən ən hɑɹdʃɪp ɪz mʌðɝ, jɛt hæɾ ɪt bɪn əɹ oʊn spɪɹ ðət tʊk boʊθ, ðə bɔɪ wɑz stɪl ə tʃɹikɪlɝ, kɛɹhinɪn. waɪ ʃəd ʃi fɹɛɾ oʊvɝ ə tʃaɪl fɹəm ðət blʌd? waɪ? ʃi ətɛmptəd tə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn ðə wiv ʃi wɑz tə meɪk, bʌɾ ɔlðoʊ ʃi hæd pɹæktəst ʌndɝ ɪleɪnz aɪ əntɪl ʃi cʊɾə fɔɹmd ɪt slipɪŋ, oʊlvɝz waɪd-maʊð feɪs ɪntʃɹuɾəd. bɝdʒɪt wɝiɾ əbaʊɾ ɪm ivən mɔɹ ðən ʃi, bʌt bɝdʒɪts bɹɛs hɛld ə stʃɹeɪnʒli sɑf hɑɹt fəɹ smɔl bɔɪz, ɪspɛʃli ʌɡli wʌnz.

Vexed with herself, she frowned. That was not an honorable thought beneath a roof that had offered her shade and water freely. Without ceremony, true, but also without debt or blood, steel or need. Yet better that than thinking about a small boy alone somewhere out in this corrupt city. Any city was corrupt - of that much she was certain, now, having seen some part of four - but Ebou Dar was the last where she would have let a child run loose. What she could not understand was why thoughts of Olver came unless she worked to avoid them. He was no part of the toh she had to Elayne, and to Rand al'Thor. A Shaido spear had taken his father, starvation and hardship his mother, yet had it been her own spear that took both, the boy was still a treekiller, Cairhienin. Why should she fret over a child from that blood? Why? She attempted to concentrate on the weave she was to make, but although she had practiced under Elayne's eye until she could have formed it sleeping, Olver's wide-mouthed face intruded. Birgitte worried about him even more than she, but Birgitte's breast held a strangely soft heart for small boys, especially ugly ones.

saɪɪŋ, eɪvinhə ɡeɪv ʌp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪɡnɔɹ əɹ kəmpænjənz' kɑnvɝseɪʃən bɪhaɪn hɝ, ðoʊ ɪɹɪteɪʃən kɹækəl θɹu ɪt laɪk hit laɪtnɪŋ. ivən ðət wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən əpsɛɾɪŋ hɝsɛlf oʊvɝ ə sʌn ə tʃɹikɪlɝz. oʊθbɹeɪkɝz. ə dɪspaɪz blʌd ðə wɝld wəd bi bɛɾɝ ɔf wɪθaʊt. noʊ kənsɝn əɹ wɝi ʌv hɝz. nʌn. mæt kɔθən wəd faɪn ðə bɔɪ ɪn ɛni keɪs. hi kəd faɪn ɛniθɪŋ, ɪt simd. ən lɪsnɪŋ sɛɾəld hɝ, sʌmhaʊ. ðə pɹɪklɪŋ feɪɾəd əweɪ.

Sighing, Aviendha gave up trying to ignore her companions' conversation behind her, though irritation crackled through it like heat lightning. Even that was better than upsetting herself over a son of treekillers. Oathbreakers. A despised blood the world would be better off without. No concern or worry of hers. None. Mat Cauthon would find the boy in any case. He could find anything, it seemed. And listening settled her, somehow. The prickling faded away.

"aɪ doʊn laɪk ɪt wʌn bɪt!" nɪneɪiv wɑz mʌɾɝɪŋ, kəntɪnjuɪŋ ən ɑɹɡjəmən bɪɡʌn bæk ɪn ðɛɹ ɹumz. "nɑɾ ə bɪt, læn, dʒju hɪɹ mi?" ʃi hæɾ ənaʊnst əɹ dɪslaɪk ət lis twɛnti taɪmz ɔlɹɛɾi, bʌt nɪneɪiv nɛvɝ sɝɛndɝd dʒʌs kəz ʃi hæd lɔst. ʃɔɹɾ ən dɑɹk-aɪd, ʃi stʃɹoʊd fɪɹsli, kɪkɪŋ əɹ dɪvaɪɾəd blu skɝts, wʌn hæn ɹaɪzɪŋ tə hʌvɝ nɪɹ əɹ θɪk, weɪst-lɔŋ bɹeɪd, ðən θɹʌs daʊn fɝmli bɪfɔɹ ɹaɪzɪŋ əɡɛn. nɪneɪiv kɛpt ə taɪt hoʊld ɑn æŋɡɝ ən ɪɹɪteɪʃən wən læn wɑz ɝaʊnd. əɹ tʃɹaɪd tə. ən ɪnɔɹɾənɪt pɹaɪd fɪld əɹ əbaʊt mɛɹiɪŋ hɪm. ðə kloʊs-fɪɾɪŋ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd blu koʊɾ oʊvɝ əɹ jɛloʊ-slæʃt sɪlk ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs hʌŋ oʊpən, ʃoʊɪŋ fɑɹ tu mʌtʃ bʊzəm ɪn ðə wɛtləndɝ weɪ, dʒʌst soʊ ʃi kəd dɪspleɪ hɪz hɛvi ɡoʊl fɪŋɡɝ ɹɪŋ ɑn ə faɪn tʃeɪn ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk. "ju hæv noʊ ɹaɪt tə pɹɑməs tə teɪk kɛɹ ə mi laɪk ðæt, læn mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən," ʃi wɛn ɑn fɝmli. "aɪ æm nɑɾ ə pɔɹsələn fɪɡjɝin!"

"I don't like it one bit!" Nynaeve was muttering, continuing an argument begun back in their rooms. "Not a bit, Lan, do you hear me?" She had announced her dislike at least twenty times already, but Nynaeve never surrendered just because she had lost. Short and dark-eyed, she strode fiercely, kicking her divided blue skirts, one hand rising to hover near her thick, waist-long braid, then thrust down firmly before rising again. Nynaeve kept a tight hold on anger and irritation when Lan was around. Or tried to. An inordinate pride filled her about marrying him. The close-fitting embroidered blue coat over her yellow-slashed silk riding dress hung open, showing far too much bosom in the wetlander way, just so she could display his heavy gold finger ring on a fine chain around her neck. "You have no right to promise to take care of me like that, Lan Mandragoran," she went on firmly. "I am not a porcelain figurine!"

hi peɪst əɾ əɹ saɪd, ə mæn ə pɹɑpɝ saɪz, taʊɝɪŋ hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz ən mɔɹ əbʌv hɝ, ði aɪ-ɹɛntʃɪŋ kloʊk ʌv ə wɔɹɾɝ hæŋɪŋ daʊn ɪz bæk. hɪz feɪs sim hæk fɹəm stoʊn, ən ɪz ɡeɪz weɪd ðə θɹɛɾ ɪn ɛvɹi sɝvən u pæst, ɪɡzæmən ɛvɹi kɹɔsɪŋ kɔɹəɾɝ ən wɔl nɪtʃ fəɹ hɪɾən ətækɝz. ɹɛɾinəs ɹeɪɾieɪtəd fɹəm hɪm, ə laɪən ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk ə hɪz tʃɑɹdʒ. eɪvinhə hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp ɝaʊn deɪnʒɝəs mɛn, bʌt nɛvɝ wʌn tə mætʃ ənælaɪn. hæd dɛθ bɪn ə mæn, ʃi wʊɾə bɪn hɪm.

He paced at her side, a man of proper size, towering head and shoulders and more above her, the eye-wrenching cloak of a Warder hanging down his back. His face seemed hacked from stone, and his gaze weighed the threat in every servant who passed, examined every crossing corridor and wall niche for hidden attackers. Readiness radiated from him, a lion on the brink of his charge. Aviendha had grown up around dangerous men, but never one to match Aan'allein. Had death been a man, she would have been him.

"ju ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən aɪm ə wɔɹɾɝ," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə dip, lɛvəl vɔɪs. "teɪkɪŋ kɛɹ ə jə ɪz maɪ duɾi." hɪz toʊn sɔfənd, kənflɪktɪŋ ʃɑɹpli wɪð ɪz æŋɡjəlɝ feɪs ən blik, nɛvɝ-tʃeɪnʒɪŋ aɪz. "bɪsaɪdz, kɛɹɪŋ fəɹ jə ɪz maɪ hɑɹts dɪzaɪɝ, nɪneɪiv. jə kən æsk əɹ dɪmæn ɛniθɪŋ ə mi, bʌt nɛvɝ tə lɛt jə daɪ wɪθaʊt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə seɪv ju. ðə deɪ jə daɪ, aɪ daɪ."

"You are Aes Sedai, and I am a Warder," he said in a deep, level voice. "Taking care of you is my duty." His tone softened, conflicting sharply with his angular face and bleak, never-changing eyes. "Besides, caring for you is my heart's desire, Nynaeve. You can ask or demand anything of me, but never to let you die without trying to save you. The day you die, I die."

ðət læst i hæd nɑt sɛd bɪfɔɹ, nɑɾ ɪn eɪvinhəz hɪɹɪŋ, ən ɪt hɪt nɪneɪiv laɪk ə bloʊ tə ðə stʌmək; hɝ aɪz stɑɹɾəd hæf aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛd, ən əɹ maʊθ wɝk saʊnləsli. ʃi əpɪɹd tə ɹɪkʌvɝ kwɪkli, ðoʊ, əz ɔlweɪz. pɹitɛndɪŋ tə ɹisɛɾəl əɹ blu-plum hæt, ə ɹɪdɪkjələs θɪŋ laɪk ə stʃɹeɪnʒ bɝd ɹustɪŋ ətɑp əɹ hɛd, ʃi ʃɑɾ ə ɡlæns əɾ ɪm fɹəm bɪniθ ðə waɪd bɹɪm.

That last he had not said before, not in Aviendha's hearing, and it hit Nynaeve like a blow to the stomach; her eyes started half out of her head, and her mouth worked soundlessly. She appeared to recover quickly, though, as always. Pretending to resettle her blue-plumed hat, a ridiculous thing like a strange bird roosting atop her head, she shot a glance at him from beneath the wide brim.

eɪvinhə hæd bɪɡʌn tə səspɛk ðət ði ʌðɝ wʊmən ɔfən juz saɪləns ən səpoʊzədli səɡnɪfɪkən lʊks tə kʌvɝ ɪɡnɝəns. ʃi səspɛktəd. nɪneɪiv nu lɪɾəl mɔɹ əbaʊt mɛn, əbaʊt dilɪŋ wɪð wʌn mæn, ðən ʃi dɪd hɝsɛlf. feɪsɪŋ əm wɪð naɪvz ən spɪɹz wɑz mʌtʃ iziɝ ðən lʌvɪŋ wʌn. mʌtʃ iziɝ. haʊ dɪd wɪmən mænədʒ biɪŋ mɛɹid tə ðɛm? eɪvinhə hæɾ ə dɛspɹɪt nid tə lɝn, ən noʊ aɪdiə haʊ. mɛɹid tə ənælaɪn oʊnli ə deɪ, nɪneɪiv hæd tʃeɪnʒd mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən sɪmpli ɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kəntʃɹoʊl əɹ tɛmpɝ. ʃi sim tə flɪt fɹəm stɑɹɾəlmənt tə ʃɑk, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ʃi ətɛmptəd tə haɪɾ ɪt. ʃi fɛl ɪndə dʒɹimənəs əɾ ɑd moʊməns, blʌʃt əɾ ɪnɑkjuəs kwɛstʃənz, ən - ʃi dɪnaɪd ðɪs fɪɹsli, ivən wən eɪvinhə hæd sin əɹ - ʃi ɡɪɡəld oʊvɝ nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lɝn ɛniθɪŋ fɹəm nɪneɪiv.

Aviendha had begun to suspect that the other woman often used silence and supposedly significant looks to cover ignorance. She suspected. Nynaeve knew little more about men, about dealing with one man, than she did herself. Facing them with knives and spears was much easier than loving one. Much easier. How did women manage being married to them? Aviendha had a desperate need to learn, and no idea how. Married to Aan'allein only a day, Nynaeve had changed much more than simply in trying to control her temper. She seemed to flit from startlement to shock, however much she attempted to hide it. She fell into dreaminess at odd moments, blushed at innocuous questions, and - she denied this fiercely, even when Aviendha had seen her - she giggled over nothing at all. There was no point in trying to learn anything from Nynaeve.

"aɪ səpoʊz jəɹ gɑnə tɛl mi əbaʊt wɔɹɾɝz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ əɡɛn, əz wɛl," ɪleɪn sɛd kuli tə bɝdʒɪt. "wɛl, jə ən aɪ ɑɹən mɛɹid. aɪ ɪkspɛk jə tə ɡɑɹd maɪ bæk, bʌɾ əl nɑɾ əv jə meɪkɪŋ pɹɑməsəz əbaʊt mi bɪhaɪn ɪt." ɪleɪn wɔɹ ɡɑɹməns əz ɪnəpɹoʊpɹiɪɾ əz nɪneɪivz, ə ɡoʊld-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɛbu dɑɹi ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs ʌv ɡɹin sɪlk, suɾəbli haɪ-nɛk bʌt wɪð ən oʊvəl oʊpənɪŋ ðət bɛɹd ði ɪnɝ sloʊps ə hɝ bɹɛsts. wɛtləndɝz spləɾɝd ət ðə mɛnʃən ʌv ə swɛt tɛn əɹ biɪŋ ənkloʊðd ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɡeɪʃeɪn, ðən wɔkt əbaʊt hæf-ɪkspoʊzd wɛɹ ɛni stʃɹeɪnʒɝ kəd si. eɪvinhə dɪd nɑt ɹɪli maɪn fəɹ nɪneɪiv, bʌɾ ɪleɪn wɑz əɹ nɪɹ-sɪstɝ. ən wəd bi mɔɹ, ʃi hoʊpt.

"I suppose you're going to tell me about Warders and Aes Sedai again, as well," Elayne said coolly to Birgitte. "Well, you and I aren't married. I expect you to guard my back, but I will not have you making promises about me behind it." Elayne wore garments as inappropriate as Nynaeve's, a gold-embroidered Ebou Dari riding dress of green silk, suitably high-necked but with an oval opening that bared the inner slopes of her breasts. Wetlanders spluttered at the mention of a sweat tent or being unclothed in front of gai'shain, then walked about half-exposed where any stranger could see. Aviendha did not really mind for Nynaeve, but Elayne was her near-sister. And would be more, she hoped.

ðə ɹeɪz hilz ə bɝdʒɪts buts meɪɾ əɹ ɔlmoʊst ə hæn tɔlɝ ðən nɪneɪiv, ɪf stɪl ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ɪleɪn əɹ eɪvinhə. ɪn dɑɹk blu koʊɾ ən waɪd ɡɹin tʃɹaʊzɝz, ʃi kæɹid hɝsɛlf wɪð mʌtʃ ə ðə seɪm wɛɹəli kɑnfəɾənt ɹɛɾinəs əz læn, ðoʊ ɪt simd mɔɹ kæʒəwəl ɪn hɝ. ə lɛpɝd laɪɪŋ ɑn ə ɹɑk, ən nɑt nɪɹli soʊ leɪzi əz ʃi əpɪɹd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ æɹoʊ nɑkt ɪn ðə baʊ bɝdʒɪt kæɹid, bʌt fəɹ ɔl əɹ stʃɹoʊl ən smaɪlz, ʃi kəɾ əv ə ʃæft aʊɾ ə ðə kwɪvɝ əɾ əɹ weɪs bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn kəd blɪŋk, ən bi lusɪŋ əɹ θɝd bɪfɔɹ ɛnibəɾi ɛls cʊɾə fɪɾəd ə sɛkən tə bɑstʃɹɪŋ.

The raised heels of Birgitte's boots made her almost a hand taller than Nynaeve, if still shorter than Elayne or Aviendha. In dark blue coat and wide green trousers, she carried herself with much of the same warily confident readiness as Lan, though it seemed more casual in her. A leopard lying on a rock, and not nearly so lazy as she appeared. There was no arrow nocked in the bow Birgitte carried, but for all her stroll and smiles, she could have a shaft out of the quiver at her waist before anyone could blink, and be loosing her third before anybody else could have fitted a second to bowstring.

ʃi ɡeɪv ɪleɪn ə ɹaɪ ɡɹɪn ən ə ʃeɪk ə hɝ hɛd ðət swʌŋ ə ɡoʊldən bɹeɪɾ əz lɔŋ ən θɪk əz nɪneɪivz dɑɹk wʌn. "aɪ pɹɑməs tə jəɹ feɪs, nɑt bɪhaɪn jəɹ bæk," ʃi sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "wɛn juv lɝn ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ, aɪ woʊn əv tə tɛl jə əbaʊt wɔɹɾɝz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ." ɪleɪn snɪft ən lɪftəɾ əɹ tʃɪn hɔɾəli, bʌsiɪŋ hɝsɛlf wɪð ðə ɹɪbənz ə hɝ hæt, wɪtʃ wɑz kʌvɝd wɪð lɔŋ ɡɹin plumz ən wɝs ðən nɪneɪivz. "pɝhæps ə ɡɹeɪt dil mɔɹ," bɝdʒɪɾ æɾəd. "jɔɹ taɪɪŋ ənʌðɝ nɑɾ ɪn ðət baʊ."

She gave Elayne a wry grin and a shake of her head that swung a golden braid as long and thick as Nynaeve's dark one. "I promised to your face, not behind your back," she said dryly. "When you've learned a little more, I won't have to tell you about Warders and Aes Sedai." Elayne sniffed and lifted her chin haughtily, busying herself with the ribbons of her hat, which was covered with long green plumes and worse than Nynaeve's. "Perhaps a great deal more," Birgitte added. "You're tying another knot in that bow."

hæɾ ɪleɪn nɑt bɪn əɹ nɪɹ-sɪstɝ, eɪvinhə wʊɾə læft ət ðə kɹɪmzən ðət flʌɾəd əɹ tʃiks. tʃɹɪpɪŋ sʌmwʌn u tʃɹaɪd tə wɔk tu haɪ wɑz ɔlweɪz fʌn, əɹ wɑtʃɪŋ ɪt dʌn, ən ivən ə ʃɔɹt fɔl wɑz wɝθ ə læf. əz ɪt wɑz, ʃi lɛvəld ə fɝm stɛɹ ət bɝdʒɪt, ə pɹɑməs ðət mɔɹ maɪt bɹɪŋ ɹɛtʃɹəbjuʃən. ʃi laɪk ðə wʊmən dɪspaɪɾ ɔl əɹ sikɹəts, bʌt ðə dɪfɝəns bɪtwin ə fɹɛn ən ə nɪɹ-sɪstɝ wɑz ə θɪŋ ðiz wɛtləndɝz simd əneɪbəl tə kɑmpɹihɛnd. bɝdʒɪɾ oʊnli smaɪld, ɡlænsɪŋ fɹəm əɹ tə ɪleɪn, ən mɝmɝɾ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. eɪvinhə kɑt ðə wɝd "kɪɾənz." wɝs, ɪt saʊndəd fɑnd. ɛvɹiwʌn mʌst əv hɝd. ɛvɹiwʌn!

Had Elayne not been her near-sister, Aviendha would have laughed at the crimson that flooded her cheeks. Tripping someone who tried to walk too high was always fun, or watching it done, and even a short fall was worth a laugh. As it was, she leveled a firm stare at Birgitte, a promise that more might bring retribution. She liked the woman despite all her secrets, but the difference between a friend and a near-sister was a thing these wetlanders seemed unable to comprehend. Birgitte only smiled, glancing from her to Elayne, and murmured under her breath. Aviendha caught the word "kittens." Worse, it sounded fond. Everyone must have heard. Everyone!

"wʌts ɡɑɾən ɪndə ju, eɪvinhə?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd, pɹɑɾɪŋ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ wɪð ə stɪf fɪŋɡɝ. "du jə ɪntɛn tə stæn ðəɹ blʌʃɪŋ ɔl deɪ? wəɹ ɪn ə hɝi."

"What's gotten into you, Aviendha?" Nynaeve demanded, prodding her shoulder with a stiff finger. "Do you intend to stand there blushing all day? We are in a hurry."

oʊnli ðən dɪɾ eɪvinhə ɹilaɪz baɪ ðə hiɾ ɪn əɹ feɪs ðət ʃi mʌs bi əz ɹɛɾ əz ɪleɪn. ən stændɪŋ stɪl əz stoʊn bɪsaɪdz, wən ðeɪ hæd nid fəɹ heɪst. kʌt baɪ ə wɝd, laɪk ə ɡɝl nuli wɛɾəd tə ðə spɪɹ ən ənjuz tə ðə bæntɝ əmʌŋ meɪɾənz. ʃi hæɾ ɔlmoʊs twɛnti jɪɹz, ən ʃi wɑz bɪheɪvɪŋ laɪk ə tʃaɪl pleɪɪŋ wɪð əɹ fɝs baʊ. ðəɾ æɾəd fleɪmz tə hɝ tʃiks. wɪtʃ wɑz waɪ ʃi ɔl bʌt lɛpt ɝaʊn ðə nɛks tɝnɪŋ ən vɛɹi nɪɹli ɹæn hɛdlɔŋ ɪndə tɛslɪn bɑɹədɑn.

Only then did Aviendha realize by the heat in her face that she must be as red as Elayne. And standing still as stone besides, when they had need for haste. Cut by a word, like a girl newly wedded to the spear and unused to the banter among Maidens. She had almost twenty years, and she was behaving like a child playing with her first bow. That added flames to her cheeks. Which was why she all but leaped around the next turning and very nearly ran headlong into Teslyn Baradon.

skɪɾɪŋ ɔkwɝdli ɑn ɹɛd-ænd-ɡɹin flɔɹ taɪlz, eɪvinhə hæf-fɛl bækwɝd, kætʃɪŋ hɝsɛlf əɡɛnst ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv. ðɪs taɪm ʃi mænədʒ nɑt tə blʌʃ hɝsɛlf tə faɪɝ, bʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə. ʃi wɑz ʃeɪmɪŋ əɹ nɪɹ-sɪstɝ əz mʌtʃ əz hɝsɛlf. ɪleɪn ɔlweɪz hɛld əɹ kəmpoʊʒɝ, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt. lʌkəli, tɛslɪn bɑɹədɑn tʊk ði ɪnkaʊntɝ lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ.

Skidding awkwardly on red-and-green floor tiles, Aviendha half-fell backward, catching herself against Elayne and Nynaeve. This time she managed not to blush herself to fire, but she wanted to. She was shaming her near-sister as much as herself. Elayne always held her composure, no matter what. Luckily, Teslyn Baradon took the encounter little better.

ðə ʃɑɹp-feɪst wʊmən ɹikɔɪld ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, ɡeɪpɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd stɑp hɝsɛlf, ðən ʃɪftɪŋ əɹ nɛɹoʊ ʃoʊldɝz ɪɹɪɾəbli. ɡɔn tʃiks ən ə nɛɹoʊ noʊz hɪd ði eɪdʒləs kwɑləɾi ʌv ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝz fitʃɝz, ən əɹ ɹɛd dʒɹɛs, bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd ɪn ə blu ðət wɑz nɪɹli blæk, oʊnli meɪɾ əɹ əpɪɹ boʊniɝ, jɛt ʃi kwɪkli ɡæðɝɾ ə klæn ɹufməstʃɹəsəz sɛlf-pəzɛʃən, dɑɹk bɹaʊn aɪz əz kul əz dip ʃædoʊz. ðeɪ slɪd pæst eɪvinhə dɪsmɪsɪvli, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ læn laɪk ə tul ʃi hæd noʊ jus fɔɹ, bɝn ə bɹif moʊmən ət bɝdʒɪt. moʊst ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪsəpɹuvd ə bɝdʒɪt biɪŋ ə wɔɹɾɝ, ðoʊ nʌn kəd ɡɪv ə ɹizən bɪɑn saʊɝ mʌɾɝz əbaʊt tʃɹədɪʃən. ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv, haʊɛvɝ, ðə wʊmən fɪks baɪ tɝnz. eɪvinhə cʊɾə tʃɹæk jɛstɝdeɪz wɪn bɪfɔɹ ɹiɾɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ ɑn tɛslɪn bɑɹədɑnz feɪs naʊ.

The sharp-faced woman recoiled in surprise, gaping before she could stop herself, then shifting her narrow shoulders irritably. Gaunt cheeks and a narrow nose hid the ageless quality of the Red sister's features, and her red dress, brocaded in a blue that was nearly black, only made her appear bonier, yet she quickly gathered a clan roofmistress's self-possession, dark brown eyes as cool as deep shadows. They slid past Aviendha dismissively, ignoring Lan like a tool she had no use for, burned a brief moment at Birgitte. Most Aes Sedai disapproved of Birgitte being a Warder, though none could give a reason beyond sour mutters about tradition. Elayne and Nynaeve, however, the woman fixed by turns. Aviendha could have tracked yesterday's wind before reading anything on Teslyn Baradon's face now.

"aɪ dɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi tɛl mɛɝɪlɪl," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə θɪk ɪliɑnɝ æksɛnt, "bʌɾ aɪ meɪ əz wɛl pʊt jəɹ maɪnz ət ɹɛst, ɔlsoʊ. wʌtɛvɝ . . . mɪstʃəf . . . jə də bi əbaʊt, dʒoʊlin ən əl noʊ ɪntɝfɪɹ. aɪ dɪd si tə ðæt. ɪleɪɾə meɪ nɛvɝ lɝn ʌv ɪt, ɪf jə də hæv səm kɛɹ. stɑp ɡeɪpɪŋ ət mi laɪk kɑɹp, tʃɪlʒɹən," ʃi æɾəd wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs ə dɪsteɪst. "aɪ bi niðɝ blaɪnd nɔɹ dɛf. aɪ də noʊ ʌv si foʊk wɪndfɪndɝz ɪn ðə pæləs, ən sikɹət miɾɪŋz wɪð kwin taɪlɪn. ən ʌðɝ θɪŋz." ðət θɪn maʊθ taɪɾənd, ən ðoʊ hɝ toʊn ɹɪmeɪn sɝin, hɝ dɑɹk ɡeɪz flɛɹd wɪð æŋɡɝ. "ju wɪl peɪ dɪɹli jɛt fəɹ ðoʊz ʌðɝ θɪŋz, jə ən ðoʊz u də əlaʊ jə tə pleɪ ət biɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌɾ əl lʊk əsaɪd fəɹ naʊ. ətoʊnmən kən weɪt."

"I did already tell Merilille," she said in a thick Illianer accent, "but I may as well put your minds at rest, also. Whatever . . . mischief . . . you do be about, Joline and I will no interfere. I did see to that. Elaida may never learn of it, if you do have some care. Stop gaping at me like carp, children," she added with a grimace of distaste. "I be neither blind nor deaf. I do know of Sea Folk Windfinders in the palace, and secret meetings with Queen Tylin. And other things." That thin mouth tightened, and though her tone remained serene, her dark gaze flared with anger. "You will pay dearly yet for those other things, you and those who do allow you to play at being Aes Sedai, but I will look aside for now. Atonement can wait."

nɪneɪiv tʊk ə taɪt ɡɹɪp ɑn əɹ bɹeɪd, bæk stʃɹeɪt, hɛd haɪ, ən əɹ oʊn aɪz bleɪzd. ʌndɝ dɪfɹən sɝkəmstænsəz eɪvinhə maɪɾ əv faʊn səm sɪmpəθi fəɹ ðə tɑɹɡəɾ ə ðə tʌŋ-læʃɪŋ pleɪnli əbaʊt tə ɪɹʌpt. nɪneɪivz tʌŋ kæɹid mɔɹ spaɪnz ðən ə hɛɹ-niɾəl sɛɡeɪd, ən ʃɑɹpɝ wʌnz. koʊldli, eɪvinhə kənsɪɾɝd ðɪs wʊmən u θɔt ʃi kəd lʊk ɹaɪt θɹu hɝ. eɪ waɪz wʌn dɪd nɑt stup tə θɹæʃɪŋ sʌmwʌn wɪð əɹ fɪsts, bʌt ʃi wɑz stɪl oʊnli ən əpɹɛntəs; pɝhæps ɪt wəd nɑt kɑst əɹ dʒi ɪf ʃi dʒʌs bɹuz ðɪs tɛslɪn bɑɹədɑn ə lɪɾəl. ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə ɡɪv ðə ɹɛd sɪstɝ ə tʃæns tə dɪfɛn hɝsɛlf ət ðə seɪm ɪnstənt nɪneɪiv oʊpən hɝz, jɛɾ ɪleɪn spoʊk fɝst.

Nynaeve took a tight grip on her braid, back straight, head high, and her own eyes blazed. Under different circumstances Aviendha might have found some sympathy for the target of the tongue-lashing plainly about to erupt. Nynaeve's tongue carried more spines than a hair-needle segade, and sharper ones. Coldly, Aviendha considered this woman who thought she could look right through her. A Wise One did not stoop to thrashing someone with her fists, but she was still only an apprentice; perhaps it would not cost her ji if she just bruised this Teslyn Baradon a little. She opened her mouth to give the Red sister a chance to defend herself at the same instant Nynaeve opened hers, yet Elayne spoke first.

"wʌt wəɹ əbaʊt, tɛslɪn," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə tʃɪl vɔɪs, "ɪz nʌn ə jəɹ bɪznəs." ʃi, tu, stʊd stʃɹeɪt, hɝ aɪz blu aɪs; ə tʃæns ɹeɪ ʌv laɪt fɹəm ə haɪ wɪndoʊ kɑɾ əɹ ɡoʊldən-ɹɛd kɝlz, simɪŋ tə sɛɾ əm əfaɪɹ. ɹaɪt ðɛn, ɪleɪn cʊɾə meɪɾ ə ɹuf-mɪstʃɹəs sim ə ɡoʊðɝd wɪð tu mʌtʃ uskaɪ ɪn əɹ bɛli. ɪt wɑz ə skɪl ʃi hoʊnd wɛl. ʃi dɪlɪvɝɾ itʃ wɝd wɪð koʊl kɹɪstəl dɪɡnəɾi. "ju hæv noʊ ɹaɪt tə ɪntɝfɪɹ ɪn ɛniθɪŋ wi du, ɪn ɛniθɪŋ ðəɾ ɛni sɪstɝ dʌz. noʊ ɹaɪt wʌtsoʊɛvɝ. soʊ pʊl jəɹ noʊz aʊɾ ʌv əɹ koʊts, jə sʌmɝ hæm, ən bi ɡlæd wi də nɑt tʃuz tə teɪk ɪʃu wɪð jə səpɔɹɾɪŋ ə jusɝpɝ ɑn ði æmɪɝlɪn sit."

"What we are about, Teslyn," she said in a chill voice, "is none of your business." She, too, stood straight, her eyes blue ice; a chance ray of light from a high window caught her golden-red curls, seeming to set them afire. Right then, Elayne could have made a roof-mistress seem a goatherd with too much oosquai in her belly. It was a skill she honed well. She delivered each word with cold crystal dignity. "You have no right to interfere in anything we do, in anything that any sister does. No right whatsoever. So pull your nose out of our coats, you summer ham, and be glad we do not choose to take issue with you supporting a usurper on the Amyrlin Seat."

pɝplɛkst, eɪvinhə ɡlænst saɪdweɪz əɾ əɹ nɪɹ-sɪstɝ. pʊl əɹ noʊz aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ koʊts? ʃi ən ɪleɪn, ət list, wɝ nɑt wɛɹɪŋ koʊts. ə sʌmɝ hæm? wʌd ðət min? wɛtləndɝz ɔfən sɛd pəkjuljɝ θɪŋz, bʌt ði ʌðɝ wɪmən ɔl lʊkt əz pʌzəld əz ʃi. oʊnli læn, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪleɪn əskæns, əpɪɹd tə ʌndɝstænd, ən i simd . . . stɑɹɾəld. ən pɝhæps əmjuzd. ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl tə tɛl; ənælaɪn kəntʃɹoʊld ɪz fitʃɝz wɛl.

Perplexed, Aviendha glanced sideways at her near-sister. Pull her nose out of their coats? She and Elayne, at least, were not wearing coats. A summer ham? What did that mean? Wetlanders often said peculiar things, but the other women all looked as puzzled as she. Only Lan, staring at Elayne askance, appeared to understand, and he seemed . . . startled. And perhaps amused. It was difficult to tell; Aan'allein controlled his features well.

tɛslɪn bɑɹədɑn snɪft, pɪntʃɪŋ əɹ feɪs ivən taɪɾɝ. eɪvinhə wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ hɑɹd tə kɔl ðiz pipəl baɪ oʊnli pɑɹɾ ə ðɛɹ neɪmz ðə weɪ ðeɪ ðɛmsɛlvz dɪd - wən ʃi juzd ə hoʊl neɪm, ðeɪ θɔt ʃi wɑz əpsɛt! - bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə ɪmædʒən biɪŋ soʊ ɪntəmət wɪð tɛslɪn bɑɹədɑn. "aɪ wɪl liv jə fulɪʃ tʃɪlʒɹən tə jəɹ bɪznəs," ðə wʊmən ɡɹaʊld. "bi ʃʊɹ jə də noʊ ɡɛt jəɹ noʊzɪz kɑɾ ɪn ə wɝs kɹæk ðən ðeɪ ɔlɹɛɾi də bi."

Teslyn Baradon sniffed, pinching her face even tighter. Aviendha was trying hard to call these people by only part of their names the way they themselves did - when she used a whole name, they thought she was upset! - but she could not begin to imagine being so intimate with Teslyn Baradon. "I will leave you foolish children to your business," the woman growled. "Be sure you do no get your noses caught in a worse crack than they already do be."

əz ʃi tɝn tə ɡoʊ, ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ skɝts ɡɹænli, nɪneɪiv kɑɾ əɹ ɑɹm. wɛtləndɝz juʒəwəli lɛɾ ɪmoʊʃən ɡɪl ðɛɹ feɪsəz, ən nɪneɪivz wɑz ði ɪmədʒ ə kɑnflɪkt, æŋɡɝ stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə bɹeɪk θɹu fɪks dɪtɝməneɪʃən. "weɪt, tɛslɪn," ʃi sɛd ɹɪlʌktənli. "ju ən dʒoʊlin meɪ bi ɪn deɪnʒɝ. aɪ toʊl taɪlɪn, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ʃi meɪ bi əfɹeɪd tə tɛl ɛniwʌn ɛls. ənwɪlɪŋ, ɛniweɪ. ɪts nʌθɪŋ ɛnibəɾi ɹɪli wɑns tə tɔk əbaʊt." ʃi dʒɹu ə lɔŋ, dip bɹɛθ, ən ɪf ʃi wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ ə hɝ oʊn fɪɹz ɪn ðə mæɾɝ, ʃi hæd kɑz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ʃeɪm ɪn filɪŋ fɪɹ, oʊnli ɪn ɡɪvɪŋ weɪ tə ɪt, əɹ lɛɾɪŋ ɪt ʃoʊ. eɪvinhə fɛlt ə flʌɾɝ ɪn əɹ oʊn bɛli əz nɪneɪiv wɛn ɑn. "mɑɡiɾin əz bɪn hɪɹ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ. ʃi maɪt stɪl bi. ən meɪbi ənʌðɝ ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən, tu. wɪð ə ɡoʊləm, ə kaɪndə ʃæɾoʊzpɔn ðə paʊɝ woʊn tʌtʃ. ɪt lʊks laɪk ə mæn, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz meɪd, ən meɪd tə kɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ. stil dʌzn sim tə hɝɾ ɪɾ iðɝ, ən ɪt kən skwiz θɹu ə maʊshoʊl. ðə blæk ədʒɑ ɪz hɪɹ, əz wɛl. ən ðɛɹz ə stɔɹm kʌmɪŋ, ə bæd stɔɹm. oʊnli ɪɾ ɪzən ə stɔɹm, nɑt wɛðɝ. aɪ kən fil ɪt; ðæts ə skɪl aɪ hæv, ə tælənt, meɪbi. ðɛɹz deɪnʒɝ hɛɾəd fəɹ ɛbu dɑɹ, ən tʃɹʌbəl wɝs ðən ɛni wɪn əɹ ɹeɪn əɹ laɪtnɪŋ."

As she turned to go, gathering her skirts grandly, Nynaeve caught her arm. Wetlanders usually let emotion gild their faces, and Nynaeve's was the image of conflict, anger struggling to break through fixed determination. "Wait, Teslyn," she said reluctantly. "You and Joline may be in danger. I told Tylin, but I think she may be afraid to tell anyone else. Unwilling, anyway. It's nothing anybody really wants to talk about." She drew a long, deep breath, and if she was thinking of her own fears in the matter, she had cause. There was no shame in feeling fear, only in giving way to it, or letting it show. Aviendha felt a flutter in her own belly as Nynaeve went on. "Moghedien has been here in Ebou Dar. She might still be. And maybe another of the Forsaken, too. With a gholam, a kind of Shadowspawn the Power won't touch. It looks like a man, but it was made, and made to kill Aes Sedai. Steel doesn't seem to hurt it either, and it can squeeze through a mousehole. The Black Ajah is here, as well. And there's a storm coming, a bad storm. Only it isn't a storm, not weather. I can feel it; that's a skill I have, a Talent, maybe. There's danger headed for Ebou Dar, and trouble worse than any wind or rain or lightning."

"ðə fɔɹseɪkən, ə stɔɹm ðəɾ ɪz noʊ ə stɔɹm, ən səm ʃæɾoʊzpɔn aɪ dɪd nɛvɝ hɪɹ ə bɪfɔɹ," tɛslɪn bɑɹədɑn sɛd ɹaɪli. "nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə blæk ədʒɑ. laɪt! ðə blæk ədʒɑ! ən ðə dɑɹk wʌn hɪmsɛlf, pɝhæps?" hɝ twɪstəd smaɪl wɑz ɹeɪzɝ θɪn. ʃi plʌk nɪneɪivz hæn fɹəm əɹ sliv kəntɛmptʃwəsli. "wɛn jə də bi bæk ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɛɹ jə bɪlɔŋ, ɪn waɪɾ əz jə ɔl tʃɹuli bɪlɔŋ, jəl lɝn noʊ tə weɪs jəɹ aʊɝz wɪð waɪl fænsiz. əɹ tə kæɹi jəɹ teɪlz tə sɪstɝz." ɹʌnɪŋ əɹ aɪz oʊvɝ ðɛm, ən wʌns mɔɹ skɪpɪŋ pæst eɪvinhə, ʃi ɡeɪv ə laʊd snɪf ən mɑɹtʃt ɔf daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ soʊ kwɪkli ðət sɝvəns hæd tə lip fɹəm əɹ pæθ.

"The Forsaken, a storm that is no a storm, and some Shadowspawn I did never hear of before," Teslyn Baradon said wryly. "Not to mention the Black Ajah. Light! The Black Ajah! And the Dark One himself, perhaps?" Her twisted smile was razor thin. She plucked Nynaeve's hand from her sleeve contemptuously. "When you do be back in the White Tower where you belong, in white as you all truly belong, you will learn no to waste your hours with wild fancies. Or to carry your tales to sisters." Running her eyes over them, and once more skipping past Aviendha, she gave a loud sniff and marched off down the hallway so quickly that servants had to leap from her path.

"ðæt wʊmən əz ðə nɝv tə . . . !" nɪneɪiv spləɾɝd, ɡlɛɹɪŋ æftɝ ðə ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ wʊmən ən stʃɹæŋɡəlɪŋ əɹ bɹeɪd wɪð boʊθ hænz. "æftɝ aɪ meɪd maɪsɛlf . . . !" ʃi ɔlmoʊs tʃoʊkt ɑn əɹ splin. "wɛl, aɪ tʃɹaɪd." ən naʊ ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd ði ətɛmpt, baɪ ðə saʊnd.

"That woman has the nerve to . . . !" Nynaeve spluttered, glaring after the retreating woman and strangling her braid with both hands. "After I made myself . . . !" She almost choked on her spleen. "Well, I tried." And now regretted the attempt, by the sound.

"ju dɪd," ɪleɪn əɡɹid wɪð ə ʃɑɹp nɑd, "æn mɔɹ ðən ʃi dɪzɝvz. dɪnaɪɪŋ ðət wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ! aɪ woʊn pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ðəɾ ɛnimɔɹ! aɪ woʊnt!" hɝ vɔɪs hæɾ oʊnli sim koʊl bɪfɔɹ; naʊ ɪt wɑz koʊld, ən ɡɹɪm.

"You did," Elayne agreed with a sharp nod, "and more than she deserves. Denying that we're Aes Sedai! I won't put up with that anymore! I won't!" Her voice had only seemed cold before; now it was cold, and grim.

"kæn wʌn laɪk ðət bi tʃɹʌstɪd?" eɪvinhə mʌɾɝd. "meɪbi wi ʃəd bi ʃʊɹ ʃi kænɑɾ ɪntɝfɪɹ." ʃi ɪɡzæmən əɹ fɪst; tɛslɪn bɑɹədɑn wəd si ðæt. ðə wʊmən dɪzɝv tə bi kɑt baɪ ðə ʃæɾoʊsuld, baɪ mɑɡiɾin əɹ ənʌðɝ. fulz dɪzɝvd wʌtɛvɝ ðɛɹ fulɪʃnəs bɹɔt.

"Can one like that be trusted?" Aviendha muttered. "Maybe we should be sure she cannot interfere." She examined her fist; Teslyn Baradon would see that. The woman deserved to be caught by the Shadowsouled, by Moghedien or another. Fools deserved whatever their foolishness brought.

nɪneɪiv əpɪɹd tə kənsɪɾɝ ðə sədʒɛstʃən, bʌt wʌt ʃi sɛd wɑz "ɪf aɪ dɪdnt noʊ bɛɾɝ, aɪd θɪŋk ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə tɝn ɑn ɪleɪɾə." ʃi klɪkt əɹ tʌŋ ɪn ɛksæspɝeɪʃən.

Nynaeve appeared to consider the suggestion, but what she said was "If I didn't know better, I'd think she was ready to turn on Elaida." She clicked her tongue in exasperation.

"ju kən dɪzi jɝsɛlf tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹid ðə kɝəns ɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ pɑlətɪks." ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt seɪ nɪneɪiv ʃəd noʊ ðət baɪ naʊ, bʌɾ əɹ toʊn dɪd. "ivən ə ɹɛd maɪt bi tɝnɪŋ əɡɛnst ɪleɪɾə, fəɹ səm ɹizən wi kæn bɪɡɪn tə ɪmædʒən. əɹ ʃi kəd bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk əs loʊɝ əɹ ɡɑɹd, soʊ ʃi kən sʌmhaʊ tʃɹɪk əs ɪndə pʊɾɪŋ aʊɝsɛlvz ɪndə ɪleɪɾəz hænz. əɹ - "

"You can dizzy yourself trying to read the currents in Aes Sedai politics." Elayne did not say Nynaeve should know that by now, but her tone did. "Even a Red might be turning against Elaida, for some reason we can't begin to imagine. Or she could be trying to make us lower our guard, so she can somehow trick us into putting ourselves into Elaida's hands. Or - "

læn kɔft. "ɪf ɛni ʌv ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑɹ kʌmɪŋ," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə vɔɪs laɪk pɑlɪʃt stoʊn, "ðeɪ kəd bi hɪɹ ɛni moʊmənt. əɹ ðət ɡoʊləm kʊd. ɪn iðɝ keɪs, ɪt wəd bi bɛs tə bi ɛlswɛɹ."

Lan coughed. "If any of the Forsaken are coming," he said in a voice like polished stone, "they could be here any moment. Or that gholam could. In either case, it would be best to be elsewhere."

"wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɔlweɪz ə lɪɾəl peɪʃəns," bɝdʒɪt mɝmɝɾ əz ðoʊ kwoʊɾɪŋ. "bʌt ðə wɪndfɪndɝz doʊn sim tə hæv ɛni," ʃi kəntɪnjud, "soʊ jə maɪt də wɛl tə fɝɡɛt tɛslɪn ən ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɹɪneɪl."

"With Aes Sedai, always a little patience," Birgitte murmured as though quoting. "But the Windfinders don't seem to have any," she continued, "so you might do well to forget Teslyn and remember Renaile."

ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv tɝn stɛɹz ɑn ðə wɔɹɾɝz koʊld ɪnʌf tə ɡɪv tɛn stoʊn dɑɡz pɔz. niðɝ laɪkt ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm ðə ʃæɾoʊsuld ən ðɪs ɡoʊləm, fəɹ ɔl ðeɪ wɝ ðə wʌnz u hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tʃɔɪs. sɝɾənli niðɝ laɪk biɪŋ ɹimaɪndəd ðət ðeɪ niɾəd tə ɹʌn tə mit ðə wɪndfɪndɝz ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz tə ɪskeɪp ðə fɔɹseɪkən. eɪvinhə wʊɾə stʌɾid ðoʊz lʊks - waɪz wʌnz dɪd wɪð ə ɡlæns əɹ ə fju wɝdz wʌt ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz niɾəd ðə θɹɛɾ ə spɪɹ əɹ fɪs fɔɹ, oʊnli ðeɪ juʒəwəli dɪɾ ɪt fæstɝ ən wɪð mɔɹ səksɛs - ʃi wʊɾə stʌɾid ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv, ɪksɛp ðət ðɛɹ ɡlɛɹz hæd noʊ vɪzəbəl ɪfɛkt ɑn ðə pɛɹ əɾ ɔl. bɝdʒɪt ɡɹɪn ən kʌɾ əɹ aɪz təwɔɹd læn, hu ʃɹʌɡd bæk əɾ əɹ wɪð ɑbviəs fɔɹbɛɹəns.

Elayne and Nynaeve turned stares on the Warders cold enough to give ten Stone Dogs pause. Neither liked running from the Shadowsouled and this gholam, for all they were the ones who had decided there was no choice. Certainly neither liked being reminded that they needed to run to meet the Windfinders almost as much as to escape the Forsaken. Aviendha would have studied those looks - Wise Ones did with a glance or a few words what she had always needed the threat of spear or fist for, only they usually did it faster and with more success - she would have studied Elayne and Nynaeve, except that their glares had no visible effect on the pair at all. Birgitte grinned and cut her eyes toward Lan, who shrugged back at her with obvious forbearance.

ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv oʊvɝ. ənhɝidli, ən ənnɛsəsɛɹəli, stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ ðɛɹ skɝts, ðeɪ itʃ tʊk wʌn ʌv eɪvinhəz ɑɹmz bɪfɔɹ sɛɾɪŋ ɔf əɡɛn wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə ɡlæns tə si ðət ðə wɔɹɾɝz fɑloʊd. nɑt ðəɾ ɪleɪn niɾəd tə, wɪð ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑnd. əɹ nɪneɪiv, ɪf nɑt fəɹ ðə seɪm ɹizən; ənælaɪnz bɑn maɪt bɪlɔŋ tə ənʌðɝ, bʌɾ ɪz hɑɹt hʌŋ əlɔŋsaɪɾ ɪz ɹɪŋ ɑn ðət tʃeɪn ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk. ðeɪ meɪɾ ə ɡɹeɪt ʃoʊ ʌv stʃɹoʊlɪŋ kæʒəwəli, ənwɪlɪŋ tə lɛt bɝdʒɪɾ ən læn θɪŋk ðeɪ hæd bɪn bɹɔt tə hɝi, jɛt ðə tʃɹuθ wɑz, ðeɪ dɪd wɔk fæstɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ.

Elayne and Nynaeve gave over. Unhurriedly, and unnecessarily, straightening their skirts, they each took one of Aviendha's arms before setting off again without so much as a glance to see that the Warders followed. Not that Elayne needed to, with the Warder bond. Or Nynaeve, if not for the same reason; Aan'allein's bond might belong to another, but his heart hung alongside his ring on that chain around her neck. They made a great show of strolling casually, unwilling to let Birgitte and Lan think they had been brought to hurry, yet the truth was, they did walk faster than before.

əz ɪf tə meɪk ʌp fəɹ ðæt, ðeɪ tʃæɾəd wɪð dɪlɪbɝɪɾ aɪɾəlnəs, tʃuzɪŋ ðə moʊs fɹɪvələs sʌbʒɪkts. ɪleɪn ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd nɑt hævɪŋ ə tʃæns tə tʃɹuli si ðə fɛstəvəl ə bɝdz, dʒʌs jɛstɝdeɪ, ən nɛvɝ ɡeɪv ə blʌʃ fəɹ ðə skænt ɡɑɹməns mɛni pipəl hæd wɔɹn. nɪneɪiv dɪd nɑt blʌʃ iðɝ, bʌt ʃi kwɪkli bɪɡæn tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə fist ʌv ɛmbɝz, tə bi hɛl ðət naɪt. səm ə ðə sɝvəns kleɪm ðəɹ wəd bi faɪɹwɝks, səpoʊzədli meɪd baɪ ə ɹɛfjʊdʒi ɪluməneɪɾɝ. sɛvɹəl tʃɹævlɪŋ ʃoʊz hæd kʌm tə ðə sɪɾi wɪð ðɛɹ stʃɹeɪnʒ ænəməlz ən ækɹəbæts, wɪtʃ ɪntʃɹəstəd boʊθ ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv, sɪns ðeɪ hæd spɛn səm taɪm wɪð sətʃ ə ʃoʊ. ðeɪ tɔkt ə simstʃɹəsəz, ən ðə vɝaɪəɾiz ə leɪs əveɪləbəl ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ən ðə dɪfɹən kwɑləɾiz ə sɪlk ən lɪnən ðət kəd bi bɑt, ən eɪvinhə faʊn hɝsɛlf ɹɪspɑndɪŋ wɪð plɛʒɝ tə kɑmɛns ɑn haʊ wɛl əɹ ɡɹeɪ sɪlk ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs lʊkt ɑn hɝ, ən ði ʌðɝ ɡɑɹməns ɡɪvən tə hɝ baɪ taɪlɪn kwɪntɑɹə, faɪn wʊlənz ən sɪlks, ən ðə stɑkɪŋz ən ʃɪfs tə ɡoʊ wɪð ðɛm, ən dʒuəlɹi. ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv ɔlsoʊ hæd ɹəsivd ɪkstʃɹævəɡənt ɡɪfs. ɔl təɡɛðɝ ðɛɹ pɹizɛns fɪld ə nʌmbɝ ə tʃɛsts ən bʌndəlz ðət hæd bɪn kæɹid daʊn tə ðə steɪbəlz baɪ sɝvəns, əlɔŋ wɪð ðɛɹ sæɾəlbæɡz.

As if to make up for that, they chatted with deliberate idleness, choosing the most frivolous subjects. Elayne regretted not having a chance to truly see the Festival of Birds, just yesterday, and never gave a blush for the scant garments many people had worn. Nynaeve did not blush either, but she quickly began talking about the Feast of Embers, to be held that night. Some of the servants claimed there would be fireworks, supposedly made by a refugee Illuminator. Several traveling shows had come to the city with their strange animals and acrobats, which interested both Elayne and Nynaeve, since they had spent some time with such a show. They talked of seamstresses, and the varieties of lace available in Ebou Dar, and the different qualities of silk and linen that could be bought, and Aviendha found herself responding with pleasure to comments on how well her gray silk riding dress looked on her, and the other garments given to her by Tylin Quintara, fine woolens and silks, and the stockings and shifts to go with them, and jewelry. Elayne and Nynaeve also had received extravagant gifts. All together their presents filled a number of chests and bundles that had been carried down to the stables by servants, along with their saddlebags.

"waɪ ɑɹ jə skaʊlɪŋ, eɪvinhə?" ɪleɪn æskt, ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ ə pæɾ ɑn ði ɑɹm ən ə smaɪl. "doʊnt wɝi. jə noʊ ðə wiv; jəl də dʒʌs faɪn."

"Why are you scowling, Aviendha?" Elayne asked, giving her a pat on the arm and a smile. "Don't worry. You know the weave; you will do just fine."

nɪneɪiv lin əɹ hɛd kloʊs ən wɪspɝd, "aɪl fɪks jə ə ti wən aɪ hæv ə tʃæns. aɪ noʊ sɛvɹəl ðət wɪl suð jəɹ stʌmək. əɹ ɛni wʊmənz tʃɹʌbəlz." ʃi pæɾəd eɪvinhəz ɑɹm, tu.

Nynaeve leaned her head close and whispered, "I'll fix you a tea when I have a chance. I know several that will soothe your stomach. Or any woman's troubles." She patted Aviendha's arm, too.

ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. noʊ kʌmfɝɾɪŋ wɝdz əɹ tiz wəd kjʊɹ wʌɾ eɪl hɝ. ʃi wɑz ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ tɔk ə leɪs ən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi! ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ tə ɡɹaʊl ɪn dɪsɡʌst əɹ weɪl ɪn dɪspɛɹ. ʃi wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ sɑft. nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ ɪn əɹ laɪf hæd ʃi lʊkt əɾ ə wʊmənz dʒɹɛs ɪksɛp tə θɪŋk wɛɹ ɪt maɪt bi haɪɾɪŋ ə wɛpən, nɛvɝ tə noʊɾəs ðə kʌlɝ ən kʌt, əɹ θɪŋk haʊ ɪt wəd lʊk ɑn hɝ. ɪt wɑz pæs taɪm tə bi əweɪ fɹəm ðɪs sɪɾi, əweɪ fɹəm wɛtləndɝ pæləsəz. sun ʃi wəd stɑɹt sɪmpɝɪŋ. ʃi hæd nɑt sin ɪleɪn əɹ nɪneɪiv də ðæt, bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn nu wɛtləndɝ wɪmən sɪmpɝd, ən ɪt wɑz ɑbviəs ʃi hæd bɪkʌm əz wik əz ɛni mɪlk-wɔɾɝ wɛtləndɝ. stʃɹoʊlɪŋ ɑɹm-ɪn-ɑɹm, tʃæɾɪŋ əbaʊt leɪs! haʊ wɑz ʃi tə ɹitʃ əɹ bɛl naɪf ɪf sʌmwʌn ətæk ðɛm? ə naɪf maɪt bi jusləs əɡɛns ðə laɪkliəst əseɪləns, bʌt ʃi hæd hæd feɪθ ɪn stil lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ʃi nu ʃi kəd tʃænəl. ʃəɾ ɛniwʌn tʃɹaɪ tə hɑɹm ɪleɪn əɹ nɪneɪiv - ɪspɛʃli ɪleɪn, bʌt ʃi hæd pɹɑməs mæt kɔθən tə pɹətɛkt əm boʊθ əz ʃʊɹli əz bɝdʒɪɾ ən ənælaɪn hæd - ʃəɾ ɛniwʌn tʃɹaɪ, ʃi wəd plæn stil ɪn ðɛɹ hɑɹts. leɪs! əz ðeɪ wɔkt, ʃi wɛpt ɪnsaɪɾ ət haʊ sɑft ʃi hæd bɪkʌm.

They did not understand. No comforting words or teas would cure what ailed her. She was enjoying talk of lace and embroidery! She did not know whether to growl in disgust or wail in despair. She was growing soft. Never before in her life had she looked at a woman's dress except to think where it might be hiding a weapon, never to notice the color and cut, or think how it would look on her. It was past time to be away from this city, away from wetlander palaces. Soon she would start simpering. She had not seen Elayne or Nynaeve do that, but everyone knew wetlander women simpered, and it was obvious she had become as weak as any milk-water wetlander. Strolling arm-in-arm, chatting about lace! How was she to reach her belt knife if someone attacked them? A knife might be useless against the likeliest assailants, but she had had faith in steel long before she knew she could channel. Should anyone try to harm Elayne or Nynaeve - especially Elayne, but she had promised Mat Cauthon to protect them both as surely as Birgitte and Aan'allein had - should anyone try, she would plant steel in their hearts. Lace! As they walked, she wept inside at how soft she had become.

hjudʒ, pɛɹd steɪbəl dɔɹz fɹʌntɪd θɹi saɪdz ə ðə pæləsəz lɑɹdʒəst steɪbliɑɹd, ðə dɔɹweɪz kɹaʊɾəd baɪ sɝvəns ɪn ɡɹin-ænd-waɪt lɪvɝi. bɪhaɪn əm ɪn ðə waɪt stoʊn steɪbəlz weɪɾəd hɔɹsəz, sæɾəld əɹ loʊɾəd wɪð wɪkɝ pænɪɝz. sibɝdz wild ən kɹaɪɾ oʊvɝhɛd, ən ənplɛzən ɹimaɪndɝ ə haʊ mʌtʃ wɔɾɝ leɪ nɪɹbaɪ. hit ʃɪmɝɾ ʌp fɹəm peɪl peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz tɛnʃən ðət θɪkən ði ɛɹ. eɪvinhə hæd sin blʌd spɪld wɛɹ ðəɹ wɑz lɛs stʃɹeɪn.

Huge, paired stable doors fronted three sides of the palace's largest stableyard, the doorways crowded by servants in green-and-white livery. Behind them in the white stone stables waited horses, saddled or loaded with wicker panniers. Seabirds wheeled and cried overhead, an unpleasant reminder of how much water lay nearby. Heat shimmered up from pale paving stones, but it was tension that thickened the air. Aviendha had seen blood spilled where there was less strain.

ɹɪneɪl dɪn kəlɑn, ɪn ɹɛɾ ən jɛloʊ sɪlks, ɑɹmz kɹɔst ɛɹəɡənli bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts, stʊd bɪfɔɹ naɪntin mɔɹ bɛɹfʊt wɪmən wɪð tætud hænz ən bɹaɪtli kʌlɝd blaʊsəz, moʊst ɪn tʃɹaʊzɝz ən lɔŋ sæʃɪz dʒʌst əz bɹɪljənt. swɛt ɡlɪsnɪŋ ɑn dɑɹk feɪsəz dɪd nɑt lɛsən ðɛɹ ɡɹeɪv dɪɡnəɾi. səm snɪft ət leɪsi ɡoʊl bɑksəz, fɪld wɪð hɛvi sɛnt, ðət hʌŋ əbaʊt ðɛɹ nɛks. faɪv fæt ɡoʊld ɹɪŋz pɪɹst itʃ ə ɹɪneɪl dɪn kəlɑnz ɪɹz, ə tʃeɪn fɹəm wʌn dʒɹɪpɪŋ mədæljənz əz ɪt ɹæn əkɹɔs əɹ lɛf tʃik tə ə ɹɪŋ ɪn əɹ noʊz. ðə θɹi wɪmən kloʊs bɪhaɪn əɹ itʃ wɔɹ eɪɾ ɪɹɪŋz ən slaɪtli fjuɝ bɪts ə dæŋɡəlɪŋ ɡoʊld. ðət wɑz haʊ ðə si foʊk mɑɹkt ɹæŋk əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, wɪð ðə wɪmən ət list. ɔl dɪfɝd tə ɹɪneɪl dɪn kəlɑn, wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ, bʌɾ ivən ðə tu əpɹɛntəsɪz ət ðə ɹɪɹ, ɪn dɑɹk tʃɹaʊzɝz ən lɪnən blaʊsəz ɪnstɛɾ ə sɪlk, æɾəd ðɛɹ oʊn ɡoʊldən ʃɪmɝz tə ði ɛɹ. wən eɪvinhə ən ði ʌðɝz əpɪɹd, ɹɪneɪl dɪn kəlɑn ɑstənteɪʃəsli lʊk tə ðə sʌn, pæst ɪts nun pik. hɝ aɪbɹaʊz klaɪmd əz ʃi dɝɛktəɾ əɹ ɡeɪz bæk tə ðɛm, aɪz blæk əz əɹ waɪt-wɪŋ hɛɹ, ə dɪmændɪŋ stɛɹ ʌv ɪmpeɪʃəns soʊ laʊd ʃi maɪɾ əz wɛl əv ʃaʊɾəd.

Renaile din Calon, in red and yellow silks, arms crossed arrogantly beneath her breasts, stood before nineteen more barefoot women with tattooed hands and brightly colored blouses, most in trousers and long sashes just as brilliant. Sweat glistening on dark faces did not lessen their grave dignity. Some sniffed at lacy gold boxes, filled with heavy scent, that hung about their necks. Five fat gold rings pierced each of Renaile din Calon's ears, a chain from one dripping medallions as it ran across her left cheek to a ring in her nose. The three women close behind her each wore eight earrings and slightly fewer bits of dangling gold. That was how the Sea Folk marked rank among themselves, with the women at least. All deferred to Renaile din Calon, Windfinder to the Mistress of the Ships to the Atha'an Miere, but even the two apprentices at the rear, in dark trousers and linen blouses instead of silk, added their own golden shimmers to the air. When Aviendha and the others appeared, Renaile din Calon ostentatiously looked to the sun, past its noon peak. Her eyebrows climbed as she directed her gaze back to them, eyes black as her white-winged hair, a demanding stare of impatience so loud she might as well have shouted.

ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv stɑpt ʃɔɹt, dʒɹæɡɪŋ eɪvinhə tə ən əbɹʌp hɔlt. ðeɪ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd wɝid ɡlænsɪz pæs hɝ, ən dip saɪz. ʃi dɪd nɑt si haʊ ðeɪ wɝ tə ɪskeɪp. ɑbləɡeɪʃən baʊn əɹ nɪɹ-sɪstɝ ən nɪneɪiv hæn ən fʊt, ən ðeɪ ðɛmsɛlvz hæd taɪd ðə nɑts taɪt.

Elayne and Nynaeve stopped short, dragging Aviendha to an abrupt halt. They exchanged worried glances past her, and deep sighs. She did not see how they were to escape. Obligation bound her near-sister and Nynaeve hand and foot, and they themselves had tied the knots tight.

"aɪl si tə ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl," nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, ən ɪleɪn sɛd, ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ staʊtli, "aɪl meɪk ʃʊɹ ðə sɪstɝz ɑɹ ɹɛɾi."

"I'll see to the Knitting Circle," Nynaeve muttered under her breath, and Elayne said, a little more stoutly, "I'll make sure the sisters are ready."

ɹilisɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz, ðeɪ wɛn ɪn ɑpəzət dɝɛkʃənz, hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ skɝts ʌp tə stɛp kwɪkli ən fɑloʊd baɪ bɝdʒɪɾ ən læn. ðət lɛft əɹ feɪsɪŋ ɹɪneɪl dɪn kəlɑnz ɡeɪz əloʊn, ði iɡəl stɛɹ ʌv ə wʊmən u nu ʃi hɛl ðə haɪ ɡɹaʊn ən kəd nɑt bi dɪslɑdʒd. fɔɹtʃənətli, ðə wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps kwɪkli tɝn tə hɝ kəmpænjənz, soʊ kwɪkli ðət ði ɛnz ə hɝ lɔŋ jɛloʊ sæʃ swʌŋ waɪd. ði ʌðɝ wɪndfɪndɝz ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn hɝ, ɪntɛn ɑn əɹ kwaɪət wɝdz. hɪɾɪŋ əɹ ivən wʌns wəd ʃʊɹli ɹuən ɛvɹiθɪŋ. eɪvinhə tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə ɡlɛɹ ət ðɛm, bʌɾ əz mʌtʃ ʃi ətɛmptəd tə lʊk ɛlswɛɹ, hɝ aɪz ɹɪtɝnd. noʊ wʌn hæd ðə ɹaɪt tə kætʃ əɹ nɪɹ-sɪstɝ ɪn ə klf stɪk. noʊz ɹɪŋz! ə ɡʊd ɡɹɪp ɑn ðət tʃeɪn, ən ɹɪneɪl dɪn kəlɑn blu stɑɹ wəd wɛɹ ə vɛɹi dɪfɹən ɪkspɹɛʃən.

Releasing her arms, they went in opposite directions, holding their skirts up to step quickly and followed by Birgitte and Lan. That left her facing Renaile din Calon's gaze alone, the eagle stare of a woman who knew she held the high ground and could not be dislodged. Fortunately, the Windfinder to the Mistress of the Ships quickly turned to her companions, so quickly that the ends of her long yellow sash swung wide. The other Windfinders gathered around her, intent on her quiet words. Hitting her even once would surely ruin everything. Aviendha tried not to glare at them, but as much she attempted to look elsewhere, her eyes returned. No one had the right to catch her near-sister in a cleft stick. Nose rings! A good grip on that chain, and Renaile din Calon Blue Star would wear a very different expression.

klʌstɝd təɡɛðɝ ət wʌn ɛn ə ðə steɪbliɑɹd, taɪni mɛɝɪlɪl ʃiændɪvɪn ən fɔɹ mɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔlsoʊ ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ðə wɪndfɪndɝz, moʊst wɪð ənɔɪəns ɪl-kənsil bɪhaɪn kul sɝɛnəɾi. ivən slɛndɝ waɪt-hɛɹd vændin neɪmɛl ən əɹ mɪɹɝ-ɪmədʒ fɝst-sɪstɝ æɾɪliz, hu juʒəwəli lʊk ðə moʊst ɪmpɝɾɝbəbəl ə ðɛm ɔl. naʊ ən ðən wʌn əɹ ənʌðɝ ədʒʌstəɾ ə θɪn lɪnən dʌst-kloʊk əɹ bɹʌʃt ət dɪvaɪɾəd sɪlk skɝts. sʌɾən ɡʌsts dɪd ɹeɪz ə lɪɾəl dʌst ən stɝ ðə kʌlɝ-ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊks ə ðə faɪv wɔɹɾɝz dʒʌst ət ðɛɹ bæks, jɛt klɪɹli ənɔɪəns muv ðɛɹ hænz. oʊnli sɝaɪðə, stændɪŋ ɡɑɹɾ oʊvɝ ə lɑɹdʒ waɪt dɪsk-ʃeɪp bʌndəl, dɪd nɑt twɪtʃ, bʌt ʃi fɹaʊnd. mɛɝɪlɪlz . . . meɪd . . . pɔl, skaʊl fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hiɾɪdli dɪsəpɹuvd ə ðə bɑɹɡən ðət hæd bɹɔt ði æθɑn maɪɹ fɹəm ðɛɹ ʃɪps ən ɡɪvən əm ə ɹaɪt tə stɛɹ əɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð dɪmændɪŋ ɪmpeɪʃəns, bʌt ðət bɑɹɡən taɪd ðə sɪstɝz' tʌŋz ən tʃoʊkt əm ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn ɪɹɪteɪʃən. wɪtʃ ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd tə haɪd; ðeɪ maɪɾ əv səksiɾəd wɪð ðə wɛtləndɝz. ðə θɝd ɡɹup ʌv wɪmən, ɪn ə taɪt nɑɾ ət ði ɑpəzəɾ ɛn ə ðə jɑɹd, ɝn ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ ə ðɛɹ stʌɾi.

Clustered together at one end of the stableyard, tiny Merilille Ceandevin and four more Aes Sedai also regarded the Windfinders, most with annoyance ill-concealed behind cool serenity. Even slender white-haired Vandene Namelle and her mirror-image first-sister Adeleas, who usually looked the most imperturbable of them all. Now and then one or another adjusted a thin linen dust-cloak or brushed at divided silk skirts. Sudden gusts did raise a little dust and stir the color-shifting cloaks of the five Warders just at their backs, yet clearly annoyance moved their hands. Only Sareitha, standing guard over a large white disc-shaped bundle, did not twitch, but she frowned. Merilille's . . . maid . . . Pol, scowled from behind them. The Aes Sedai heatedly disapproved of the bargain that had brought the Atha'an Miere from their ships and given them a right to stare at Aes Sedai with demanding impatience, but that bargain tied the sisters' tongues and choked them on their own irritation. Which they tried to hide; they might have succeeded with the wetlanders. The third group of women, in a tight knot at the opposite end of the yard, earned almost as much of their study.

ɹin kɔɹli ən ði ʌðɝ tɛn sɝvaɪvɝz ə ðə kɪnz nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl stɝɾ ənizəli ʌndɝ ðət dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ skɹuɾəni, dæbɪŋ ðɛɹ swɛɾi feɪsəz wɪð ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd hæŋkɝtʃəfs, ədʒʌstɪŋ ðɛɹ bɹɔd, kʌlɝfəl stʃɹɔ hæts, smuðɪŋ soʊbɝ wʊlən skɝts soʊn ʌp ɑn wʌn saɪd tə ɪkspoʊz leɪɝz ə pɛɾikoʊts əz bɹaɪɾ əz ðə si foʊks ɡɑɹb. ɪn pɑɹɾ ɪt wɑz ðə stɛɹz ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ðət hæɾ əm ʃɪftɪŋ fɹəm fʊt tə fʊt; fɪɹ ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən ən ðə ɡoʊləm æɾəd tə ɪt, ən soʊ dɪɾ ʌðɝ θɪŋz. ðə nɛɹoʊ, plʌnʒɪŋ nɛklinz ə ðoʊz dʒɹɛsəz ʃʊɾə bɪn ɪnʌf. moʊst ə ðiz wɪmən ʃoʊɾ ət list ə fju laɪnz ɑn ðɛɹ tʃiks, jɛt ðeɪ lʊk laɪk ɡɝlz kɑt wɪð ðɛɹ hænz fʊl ə stoʊlən nʌtbɹɛd. ɔl bʌt staʊt sumeɪkoʊ, fɪsts plæntəɾ ɑn bɹɔd hɪps, hu mɛt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ stɛɹ fəɹ stɛɹ. ə bɹaɪt ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ sɝaʊndəd wʌn ə ðɛɹ nʌmbɝ, kɝstʃən, hu kɛpt ɡlænsɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. wɪð ə peɪl feɪs pɝhæps tɛn jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən nɪneɪivz, ʃi əpɪɹɾ aʊɾ ə pleɪs əmʌŋ ði ʌðɝz. ðət feɪs ɡɹu waɪɾɝ ɛvɹi taɪm əɹ blæk aɪz mɛt ðoʊz ʌv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Reanne Corly and the other ten survivors of the Kin's Knitting Circle stirred uneasily under that disapproving scrutiny, dabbing their sweaty faces with embroidered handkerchiefs, adjusting their broad, colorful straw hats, smoothing sober woolen skirts sewn up on one side to expose layers of petticoats as bright as the Sea Folk's garb. In part it was the stares of the Aes Sedai that had them shifting from foot to foot; fear of the Forsaken and the gholam added to it, and so did other things. The narrow, plunging necklines of those dresses should have been enough. Most of these women showed at least a few lines on their cheeks, yet they looked like girls caught with their hands full of stolen nutbread. All but stout Sumeko, fists planted on broad hips, who met the Aes Sedai stare for stare. A bright glow of saidar surrounded one of their number, Kirstian, who kept glancing over her shoulder. With a pale face perhaps ten years older than Nynaeve's, she appeared out of place among the others. That face grew whiter every time her black eyes met those of an Aes Sedai.

nɪneɪiv hɝid tə ðə wɪmən u lɛd ðə kɪn, hɝ feɪs bimɪŋ ɛnkɝɪdʒmənt, ən ɹin ən ði ʌðɝz smaɪld wɪð vɪzəbəl ɹɪlif. mɑɹɾ ə lɪɾəl, tʃɹu, baɪ ðə saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlænsɪz ðeɪ dɝɛktəɾ ət læn; hɪm ðeɪ ɹəɡɑɹɾəd əz ðə wʊlf i ɹɪzɛmbəld. nɪneɪiv, haʊɛvɝ, wɑz ðə ɹizən sumeɪkoʊ dɪd nɑt wɪlt laɪk ðə ɹɛst wɛnɛvɝ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡlænst ɪn əɹ dɝɛkʃən. ʃi hæd vaʊd tə titʃ ðoʊz wɪmən ðət ðeɪ pəzɛs bækboʊnz, ðoʊ eɪvinhə dɪd nɑt kəmplitli ʌndɝstænd waɪ. nɪneɪiv wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ hɝsɛlf; noʊ waɪz wʌn wəɾ ɛvɝ tɛl ɛniwʌn tə stæn ʌp tə waɪz wʌnz.

Nynaeve hurried to the women who led the Kin, her face beaming encouragement, and Reanne and the others smiled with visible relief. Marred a little, true, by the sidelong glances they directed at Lan; him they regarded as the wolf he resembled. Nynaeve, however, was the reason Sumeko did not wilt like the rest whenever an Aes Sedai glanced in her direction. She had vowed to teach those women that they possessed backbones, though Aviendha did not completely understand why. Nynaeve was Aes Sedai herself; no Wise One would ever tell anyone to stand up to Wise Ones.

haʊɛvɝ wɛl ðət maɪt bi wɝkɪŋ wɪð ɹɪspɛk tə ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ivən sumeɪkoʊ wɔɹ ə slaɪtli fɔnɪŋ ɛɹ fəɹ nɪneɪiv. ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl faʊn ɪt stʃɹeɪnʒ, tə seɪ ðə list, ðət wɪmən əz jʌŋ əz ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv ɔɹɾɝz tə ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən wɝ oʊbeɪd. eɪvinhə hɝsɛlf faʊn ɪt pəkjuljɝ; haʊ kəd stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ðə paʊɝ, sʌmθɪŋ jə wɝ bɔɹn wɪð əz ʃʊɹli əz jəɹ aɪz, weɪ mɔɹ hɛvəli ðən ði ɑnɝ ðət jɪɹz kəd bɹɪŋ? jɛt ði oʊldɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪɾ oʊbeɪ, ən fəɹ ðə kɪnswɪmən, ðət wɑz ɪnʌf. iin, nɪɹli əz tɔl əz eɪvinhə hɝsɛlf ən ɔlmoʊst əz dɑɹk əz ðə si foʊk, ɹɪtɝnd nɪneɪivz ɛvɹi ɡlæns wɪð ən əbsikwiəs smaɪl, waɪl dmænə, waɪt stʃɹikɪŋ əɹ bɹaɪt ɹɛd hɛɹ, dʌkt əɹ hɛd kɑnstənli ʌndɝ nɪneɪivz aɪz, ən jɛloʊ-hɛɹd sɪbɛlə hɪd nɝvəs ɡɪɡəlz bɪhaɪn ə hænd. dɪspaɪt ðɛɹ ɛbu dɑɹi ɡɑɹməns, oʊnli tæmɑɹlə, lin ən ɑləv-skɪnd, wɑz ɔltɑɹən, ən nɑɾ ivən fɹəm ðə sɪɾi.

However well that might be working with respect to the other Aes Sedai, even Sumeko wore a slightly fawning air for Nynaeve. The Knitting Circle found it strange, to say the least, that women as young as Elayne and Nynaeve gave orders to the other Aes Sedai and were obeyed. Aviendha herself found it peculiar; how could strength in the Power, something you were born with as surely as your eyes, weigh more heavily than the honor that years could bring? Yet the older Aes Sedai did obey, and for the Kinswomen, that was enough. Ieine, nearly as tall as Aviendha herself and almost as dark as the Sea Folk, returned Nynaeve's every glance with an obsequious smile, while Dimana, white streaking her bright red hair, ducked her head constantly under Nynaeve's eyes, and yellow-haired Sibella hid nervous giggles behind a hand. Despite their Ebou Dari garments, only Tamarla, lean and olive-skinned, was Altaran, and not even from the city.

ðeɪ pɑɹɾəd əz sun əz nɪneɪiv keɪm kloʊs, ɹɪvilɪŋ ə wʊmən ɑn əɹ niz, ɹɪsts baʊn bɪhaɪn hɝ, ə lɛðɝ sæk kʌvɝɪŋ əɹ hɛd, ən əɹ faɪn kloʊðz tɔɹn ən dʌsti. ʃi wɑz əz mʌtʃ ðə ɹizən fəɹ ðɛɹ ʌnizinəs əz mɛɝɪlɪlz fɹaʊnz əɹ ðə fɔɹseɪkən. pɝhæps mɔɹ.

They parted as soon as Nynaeve came close, revealing a woman on her knees, wrists bound behind her, a leather sack covering her head, and her fine clothes torn and dusty. She was as much the reason for their uneasiness as Merilille's frowns or the Forsaken. Perhaps more.

tæmɑɹlə dʒɹæɡd ðə hʊɾ ɔf, livɪŋ ðə wʊmənz θɪn, bid-stʌɾɪd bɹeɪdz tæŋɡəld; ɪspæn ʃɛfɹ tʃɹaɪd tə ɹaɪz, ən mænədʒ tə ɹitʃ ən ɑkwɝd kɹaʊtʃ bɪfɔɹ ʃi stæɡɝɾ ən sæŋk bæk daʊn, blɪŋkɪŋ ən ɡɪɡəlɪŋ fulɪʃli. swɛt ɹæn daʊn əɹ tʃiks, ən ə fju bɹuzəz fɹəm əɹ kæptʃɝ mɑɹɾ əɹ eɪdʒləs fitʃɝz. ʃi hæd bɪn tʃɹiɾəd tu dʒɛnli fəɹ əɹ kɹaɪmz, tə eɪvinhəz maɪnd.

Tamarla dragged the hood off, leaving the woman's thin, bead-studded braids tangled; Ispan Shefar tried to rise, and managed to reach an awkward crouch before she staggered and sank back down, blinking and giggling foolishly. Sweat ran down her cheeks, and a few bruises from her capture marred her ageless features. She had been treated too gently for her crimes, to Aviendha's mind.

ði ɝbz nɪneɪiv hæd fɔɹs daʊn ðə wʊmənz θɹoʊt stɪl fɑɡd əɹ wɪts əz wɛl əz wikənɪŋ əɹ niz, bʌt kɝstʃən hɛld ə ʃild ɑn əɹ wɪð ɛvɹi ʃɹɛɾ ə ðə paʊɝ ʃi kəd sʌmən. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tʃæns ðə ʃæɾoʊɹʌnɝ maɪɾ ɪskeɪp - ivən hæd ʃi nɑt bɪn doʊzd, kɝstʃən wɑz əz stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ðə paʊɝ əz ɹin, stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən moʊst ɛɛs sədaɪ eɪvinhə hæd mɛt - jɛɾ ivən sumeɪkoʊ plʌkt əɹ skɝts nɝvəsli ən əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ ət ðə nilɪŋ wʊmən.

The herbs Nynaeve had forced down the woman's throat still fogged her wits as well as weakening her knees, but Kirstian held a shield on her with every shred of the Power she could summon. There was no chance the Shadowrunner might escape - even had she not been dosed, Kirstian was as strong in the Power as Reanne, stronger than most Aes Sedai Aviendha had met - yet even Sumeko plucked her skirts nervously and avoided looking at the kneeling woman.

"ʃʊɹli ðə sɪstɝz ʃəɾ əv hɝ, naʊ." ɹinz haɪ-pɪtʃt vɔɪs kæɹid, ənstɛɾi ɪnʌf tə bɪlɔŋ tə ðə blæk sɪstɝ kɝstʃən ʃildɪd. "nɪneɪiv sədaɪ, wi . . . wi ʃəd nɑt bi ɡɑɹ - ʌ - ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ ʌv . . . ən ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"Surely the sisters should have her, now." Reanne's high-pitched voice carried, unsteady enough to belong to the Black sister Kirstian shielded. "Nynaeve Sedai, we . . . we should not be guar - uh - in charge of . . . an Aes Sedai."

"ðæts ɹaɪt," sumeɪkoʊ pʊɾ ɪn kwɪkli. ən æŋkʃəsli. "ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃəɾ əv hɝ, naʊ." sɪbɛlə ɛkoʊd hɝ, ən nɑdz ən mɝmɝz ʌv əɡɹimən ɹɪpəl θɹu ðə kɪnswɪmən. ðeɪ bɪlivd ɪn ðɛɹ boʊnz ðət ðeɪ stʊd fɑɹ bɪloʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ; vɛɹi laɪkli ðeɪ wʊɾə tʃoʊzən ɡɑɹɾɪŋ tʃɹɑləks oʊvɝ hoʊldɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ.

"That's right," Sumeko put in quickly. And anxiously. "The Aes Sedai should have her, now." Sibella echoed her, and nods and murmurs of agreement rippled through the Kinswomen. They believed in their bones that they stood far below Aes Sedai; very likely they would have chosen guarding Trollocs over holding an Aes Sedai.

ðə dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ stɛɹz fɹəm mɛɝɪlɪl ən ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz tʃeɪnʒd wʌns ɪspæn ʃɛfɹz feɪs wɑz ɹɪvild. sɝaɪðə toʊmɑɹz, hu hæd wɔɹn əɹ bɹaʊn-fɹɪnd ʃɔl oʊnli ə fju jɪɹz ən stɪl dɪd nɑɾ əv ði eɪdʒləs əpɪɹəns, ɡlɛɹd wɪð ə dɪsɡʌs ðət ʃʊɾə fleɪd ðə ʃæɾoʊɹʌnɝ ət fɪfti peɪsɪz. æɾɪliz ən vændin, hænz taɪɾənɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ skɝts, əpɪɹd tə stʃɹʌɡəl wɪð heɪtʃɹəd fəɹ ðə wʊmən u hæd bɪn ðɛɹ sɪstɝ ən bɪtʃɹeɪd ðɛm. jɛt ðə stɛɹz ðeɪ ɡeɪv ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl wɝ nɑt ðət mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ. ðeɪ, tu, nu ɪn ðɛɹ hɑɹts ðət ðə kɪn stʊɾ ə vɛɹi lɔŋ weɪ bɪloʊ ðɛm. ðəɹ wɑz mʌtʃ mɔɹ tə ɪt ðən ðæt, bʌt ðə bɪtʃɹeɪɝ hæd bɪn wʌn ə ðɛɹ oʊn, ən noʊ wʌn bʌt ðeɪ hæd ðə ɹaɪt tə hɝ. eɪvinhə əɡɹid. eɪ meɪɾən u bɪtʃɹeɪɾ əɹ spɪɹ-sɪstɝz dɪd nɑt daɪ kwɪkli əɹ ʌn-ʃeɪmd.

The disapproving stares from Merilille and the other sisters changed once Ispan Shefar's face was revealed. Sareitha Tomares, who had worn her brown-fringed shawl only a few years and still did not have the ageless appearance, glared with a disgust that should have flayed the Shadowrunner at fifty paces. Adeleas and Vandene, hands tightening on their skirts, appeared to struggle with hatred for the woman who had been their sister and betrayed them. Yet the stares they gave the Knitting Circle were not that much better. They, too, knew in their hearts that the Kin stood a very long way below them. There was much more to it than that, but the betrayer had been one of their own, and no one but they had the right to her. Aviendha agreed. A Maiden who betrayed her spear-sisters did not die quickly or un-shamed.

nɪneɪiv pʊl ðə sæk bæk daʊn oʊvɝ ɪspæn ʃɛfɹz hɛd wɪð səm fɔɹs. "juv dʌn wɛl soʊ fɑɹ, ən jəl kəntɪnju tə də wɛl," ʃi toʊl ðə kɪnswɪmən fɝmli. "ɪf ʃi ʃoʊz saɪnz ə kʌmɪŋ ɹaʊnd, pɔɹ səm mɔɹ ə ðət mɪkstʃɝ daʊn hɝ. ɪɾəl kip əɹ ɡɪɾi əz ə ɡoʊt fʊl ʌv eɪl. hoʊld əɹ noʊz, ɪf ʃi tʃɹaɪz nɑt tə swɑloʊ. ivən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪl swɑloʊ ɪf jə hoʊld əɹ noʊz ən θɹɛɾən tə bɑks əɹ ɪɹz."

Nynaeve pulled the sack back down over Ispan Shefar's head with some force. "You've done well so far, and you'll continue to do well," she told the Kinswomen firmly. "If she shows signs of coming round, pour some more of that mixture down her. It'll keep her giddy as a goat full of ale. Hold her nose, if she tries not to swallow. Even an Aes Sedai will swallow if you hold her nose and threaten to box her ears."

ɹinz dʒɔ dʒɹɑpt ən əɹ aɪz spɹæŋ waɪd, laɪk moʊst ə hɝ kəmpænjənz'. sumeɪkoʊ nɑɾəd, bʌt sloʊli, ən ɡɑɡəl nɪɹli əz mʌtʃ əz ði ʌðɝz. wən kɪnswɪmən sɛɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðeɪ maɪɾ əv bɪn neɪmɪŋ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ. ðə θɔɾ ə hoʊldɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪz noʊz, ivən ə ʃæɾoʊɹʌnɝz, peɪntəd ðɛɹ feɪsəz wɪð hɔɹɝ.

Reanne's jaw dropped and her eyes sprang wide, like most of her companions'. Sumeko nodded, but slowly, and goggled nearly as much as the others. When Kinswomen said Aes Sedai, they might have been naming the Creator. The thought of holding an Aes Sedai's nose, even a Shadowrunner's, painted their faces with horror.

baɪ ðə pɑpɪŋ aɪz əmʌŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðeɪ laɪk ðə noʊʃən ivən lɛs. mɛɝɪlɪl oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, stɛɹɪŋ ət nɪneɪiv, bʌt dʒʌs ðən ɪleɪn ɹitʃt hɝ, ən ðə ɡɹeɪ sɪstɝ ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn əɹ ɪnstɛd, spɛɹɪŋ bɛɹli ə sɪŋɡəl dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ fɹaʊn fəɹ bɝdʒɪt. ɪt wɑz ə mɛʒɝ ə hɝ ædʒəteɪʃən ðəɾ əɹ vɔɪs ɹoʊz ɹæðɝ ðən dʒɹɑpɪŋ; nɔɹməli mɛɝɪlɪl wɑz vɛɹi dɪskɹit. "ɪleɪn, jə mʌst spik tə nɪneɪiv. ðoʊz wɪmən ɑɹ kənfjuzd ən fɹaɪɾənd aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ wɪts ɔlɹɛɾi. ɪt woʊn hɛlp ɪf ʃi ʌpsɛts əm ivən mɔɹ. ɪf ði æmɪɝlɪn sit ɹɪli dʌz ɪntɛn tə əlaʊ ðɛm tə ɡoʊ tə ðə taʊɝ," ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd sloʊli, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪnaɪ ðæt, ən pɝhæps ə ɡɹeɪt dil ɛls, "ɪf ʃi dʌz min tə, ðeɪ mʌst əv ə klɪɹ pɪktʃɝ ə ðɛɹ pleɪsəz, ən - "

By the popping eyes among the Aes Sedai, they liked the notion even less. Merilille opened her mouth, staring at Nynaeve, but just then Elayne reached her, and the Gray sister rounded on her instead, sparing barely a single disapproving frown for Birgitte. It was a measure of her agitation that her voice rose rather than dropping; normally Merilille was very discreet. "Elayne, you must speak to Nynaeve. Those women are confused and frightened out of their wits already. It won't help if she upsets them even more. If the Amyrlin Seat really does intend to allow them to go to the Tower," she shook her head slowly, trying to deny that, and perhaps a great deal else, "if she does mean to, they must have a clear picture of their places, and - "

"ði æmɪɝlɪn dʌz," ɪleɪn kʌɾ əɹ ɔf. fɹəm nɪneɪiv, ə fɝm toʊn wɑz ə fɪst ʃeɪkən ʌndɝ jəɹ noʊz; fɹəm ɪleɪn, ɪt wɑz kɑm sɝɾənti. "ðeɪ wɪl əv ðɛɹ tʃæns tə tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn, ən ɪf ðeɪ feɪl, ðeɪ stɪl wɪl nɑt bi sɛn əweɪ. noʊ wʊmən u kən tʃænəl wɪl bi kʌɾ ɔf fɹəm ðə taʊɝ əɡɛn. ðəl ɔl bi ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ."

"The Amyrlin does," Elayne cut her off. From Nynaeve, a firm tone was a fist shaken under your nose; from Elayne, it was calm certainty. "They will have their chance to try again, and if they fail, they still will not be sent away. No woman who can channel will be cut off from the Tower again. They will all be a part of the White Tower."

fɪŋɡɝɪŋ əɹ bɛl naɪf aɪdli, eɪvinhə wʌndɝɾ əbaʊt ðæt. ɛɡwin, ɪleɪnz æmɪɝlɪn sit, sɛd mʌtʃ ðə seɪm. ʃi wɑz ə fɹɛnd, tu, bʌt ʃi hæd ɹæpt əɹ hɑɹɾ ɝaʊn biɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. eɪvinhə hɝsɛlf dɪd nɑt wɑnə bi pɑɹɾ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ʃi vɛɹi mʌtʃ daʊɾɪd ðət sɔɹɪliə əɹ ɛni ʌðɝ waɪz wʌn dɪd, iðɝ.

Fingering her belt knife idly, Aviendha wondered about that. Egwene, Elayne's Amyrlin Seat, said much the same. She was a friend, too, but she had wrapped her heart around being Aes Sedai. Aviendha herself did not want to be part of the White Tower. She very much doubted that Sorilea or any other Wise One did, either.

mɛɝɪlɪl saɪɾ ən foʊldəɾ əɹ hænz, jɛt fəɹ ɔl əɹ aʊtwɝɾ æksɛptəns, ʃi stɪl fɝɡɑt tə loʊɝ əɹ vɔɪs. "æz jə seɪ, ɪleɪn. bʌɾ əbaʊɾ ɪspæn. wi sɪmpli kænɑɾ əlaʊ - "

Merilille sighed and folded her hands, yet for all her outward acceptance, she still forgot to lower her voice. "As you say, Elayne. But about Ispan. We simply cannot allow - "

ɪleɪn ɹeɪzd ə hænd ʃɑɹpli. kəmæn ɹipleɪs mɪɹ sɝɾənti. "sis, mɛɝɪlɪl. juv ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz tə wɑtʃ. ðəɾ ɪz ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛniwʌn. ɪɾəl bi ɪnʌf fəɹ ju."

Elayne raised a hand sharply. Command replaced mere certainty. "Cease, Merilille. You have the Bowl of the Winds to watch. That is enough for anyone. It will be enough for you."

mɛɝɪlɪl oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, ðən kloʊzd ɪɾ əɡɛn ən baʊɾ əɹ hɛd slaɪtli ɪn ækwiɛsəns. ʌndɝ ɪleɪnz stɛɾi ɡeɪz, ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ bɛn ðɛɹz, tu. ɪf səm dɪspleɪd ɹɪlʌktəns, haʊɛvɝ smɔl, nɑɾ ɔl dɪd. sɝaɪðə hɝidli pɪkt ʌp ðə dɪsk-ʃeɪp bʌndəl, ɹæpt ɪn leɪɝz ʌv waɪt sɪlk, ðət hæd bɪn laɪɪŋ baɪ hɝ fit. hɝ ɑɹmz bɛɹli wɛn ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊn əz ʃi hɛl ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz tə hɝ bʊzəm, smaɪlɪŋ æŋkʃəsli əɾ ɪleɪn əz ɪf tə ʃoʊ ðət ʃi ɹɪli wɑz kipɪŋ ə kloʊs aɪ ɑn ɪt.

Merilille opened her mouth, then closed it again and bowed her head slightly in acquiescence. Under Elayne's steady gaze, the other Aes Sedai bent theirs, too. If some displayed reluctance, however small, not all did. Sareitha hurriedly picked up the disc-shaped bundle, wrapped in layers of white silk, that had been lying by her feet. Her arms barely went all the way around as she held the Bowl of the Winds to her bosom, smiling anxiously at Elayne as if to show that she really was keeping a close eye on it.

ðə si foʊk wɪmən stɛɹd hʌŋɡɹəli ət ðə bʌndəl, ɔlmoʊs linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. eɪvinhə wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn sɝpɹaɪz tə si ðɛm lip əkɹɔs ðə stoʊnz tə siz ðə boʊl. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɔ ðə seɪm, pleɪnli. sɝaɪðə klʌtʃt ðə waɪt pɑɹsəl mɔɹ taɪtli, ən mɛɝɪlɪl æktʃəli  stɛp bɪtwin əɹ ən ði æθɑn maɪɹ. smuð ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪsəz taɪɾənd wɪð ði ɛfɝɾ ə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ ɪkspɹɛʃənləs. ðeɪ bɪliv ðə boʊl ʃəd bɪlɔŋ tə ðɛm; ɔl θɪŋz ðət juzd əɹ mənɪpjəleɪɾɪd ðə wʌn paʊɝ bɪlɔŋ tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪn ðɛɹ aɪz, noʊ mæɾɝ u hæpən tə pəzɛs əm ət ðə moʊmənt. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ðə bɑɹɡən.

The Sea Folk women stared hungrily at the bundle, almost leaning forward. Aviendha would not have been surprised to see them leap across the stones to seize the Bowl. The Aes Sedai saw the same, plainly. Sareitha clutched the white parcel more tightly, and Merilille actually stepped between her and the Atha'an Miere. Smooth Aes Sedai faces tightened with the effort of remaining expressionless. They believed the Bowl should belong to them; all things that used or manipulated the One Power belonged to the White Tower in their eyes, no matter who happened to possess them at the moment. But there was the bargain.

"ðə sʌn muvz, ɛɛs sədaɪ," ɹɪneɪl dɪn kəlɑn ənaʊns laʊdli, "æn deɪnʒɝ θɹɛɾənz. soʊ jə meɪnteɪn. ɪf jə θɪŋk tə wɝm fɹi ɪn səm fæʃən baɪ dɪleɪɪŋ, θɪŋk twaɪs ən əɡɛn. tʃɹaɪ tə bɹeɪk ðə bɑɹɡən, ən baɪ maɪ fɑðɝz hɑɹt, əl ɹɪtɝn tə ðə ʃɪps ət wʌns. ən kleɪm ðə boʊl fəɹ ɹɪdʒɹɛs. ɪt wɑz aʊɝz fɹəm ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ."

"The sun moves, Aes Sedai," Renaile din Calon announced loudly, "and danger threatens. So you maintain. If you think to worm free in some fashion by delaying, think twice and again. Try to break the bargain, and by my father's heart, I will return to the ships at once. And claim the Bowl for redress. It was ours from the Breaking."

"ju wɑtʃ jəɹ tʌŋ wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ," ɹin bɑɹkt, skændəlaɪzd ɪndɪɡneɪʃən fɹəm əɹ blu stʃɹɔ hæt tə ðə staʊt ʃuz pikɪŋ fɹəm bɪniθ əɹ ɡɹin-ænd-waɪt pɛɾikoʊts.

"You watch your tongue with Aes Sedai," Reanne barked, scandalized indignation from her blue straw hat to the stout shoes peeking from beneath her green-and-white petticoats.

ɹɪneɪl dɪn kəlɑnz maʊθ kɝld ɪndə ə snɪɹ. "ðə dʒɛlifɪʃ əv tʌŋz, ɪt simz. ə sɝpɹaɪz ðeɪ kən juz ðɛm, ðoʊ, wən noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡeɪv pɝmɪʃən."

Renaile din Calon's mouth curled into a sneer. "The jellyfish have tongues, it seems. A surprise they can use them, though, when no Aes Sedai gave permission."

ɪn ən ɪnstən ðə steɪbliɑɹd wɑz fʊl ə ʃaʊɾəd ɪnsʌls flaɪɪŋ bɪtwin kɪn ən æθɑn maɪɹ, "waɪldɝ" ən "spaɪnləs" ən ɡɹoʊɪŋ wɝs, stʃɹaɪɾənt kɹaɪz ðət bɛɹid mɛɝɪlɪlz ətɛmps tə hʌʃ ɹin ən əɹ kəmpænjənz ɑn wʌn hæn ən suð ðə si foʊk ɑn ði ʌðɝ. sɛvɹəl wɪndfɪndɝz stɑp fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə dæɡɝz θɹʌs bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ sæʃɪz ən ɡɹɪp hɪls ɪnstɛd. ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ spɹæŋ ʌp ɝaʊn fɝst wʌn ðən ənʌðɝ ə ðə bɹaɪtli klæd wɪmən. ðə kɪnswɪmən lʊk stɑɹɾəld, ðoʊ ɪt dɪd nɑt sloʊ ðɛɹ taɪɹeɪd, bʌt sumeɪkoʊ ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs, ðən tæmɑɹlə, ðən wɪləwi, doʊ-aɪd tʃɪlɛɹz, ən sun ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm ən ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðə wɪndfɪndɝz ʃoʊn waɪl wɝdz flu ən tɛmpɝz bɔɪld.

In an instant the stableyard was full of shouted insults flying between Kin and Atha'an Miere, "wilder" and "spineless" and growing worse, strident cries that buried Merilille's attempts to hush Reanne and her companions on one hand and soothe the Sea Folk on the other. Several Windfinders stopped fingering the daggers thrust behind their sashes and gripped hilts instead. The glow of saidar sprang up around first one then another of the brightly clad women. The Kinswomen looked startled, though it did not slow their tirade, but Sumeko embraced the Source, then Tamarla, then willowy, doe-eyed Chilares, and soon every one of them and every one of the Windfinders shone while words flew and tempers boiled.

eɪvinhə wɑntəd tə ɡɹoʊn. ɛni moʊmən blʌd wəd bɪɡɪn tə floʊ. ʃi wəd fɑloʊ ɪleɪnz lɛd, bʌɾ əɹ nɪɹ-sɪstɝ wɑz ɡlɛɹɪŋ koʊl fjʊɹi ət wɪndfɪndɝz ən nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl əlaɪk. ɪleɪn hæd smɔl peɪʃəns wɪð stupɪɾɪti, ɪn hɝsɛlf əɹ ʌðɝz, ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɪnsʌls wən ən ɛnəmi maɪt bi kʌmɪŋ wɑz ðə wɝst sɔɹt. eɪvinhə tʊk ə fɝm ɡɹɪp ɑn əɹ bɛl naɪf, ðən æftɝ ə moʊmən ɛmbɹeɪst seɪaɪdɑɹ; laɪf ən dʒɔɪ fɪld əɹ tə nɪɹ wipɪŋ. waɪz wʌnz oʊnli juz ðə paʊɝ wən wɝdz hæd feɪld, bʌt niðɝ wɝdz nɔɹ stil wəd də hɪɹ. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi hæd səm aɪdiə ʌv u tə kɪl fɝst.

Aviendha wanted to groan. Any moment blood would begin to flow. She would follow Elayne's lead, but her near-sister was glaring cold fury at Windfinders and Knitting Circle alike. Elayne had small patience with stupidity, in herself or others, and shouting insults when an enemy might be coming was the worst sort. Aviendha took a firm grip on her belt knife, then after a moment embraced saidar; life and joy filled her to near weeping. Wise Ones only used the Power when words had failed, but neither words nor steel would do here. She wished she had some idea of who to kill first.

"ɪnʌf!" nɪneɪivz pɪɹsɪŋ ʃɹik slaɪs ðə wɝdz ʃɔɹɾ ɑn ɛvɹi tʌŋ. əstɑnɪʃt feɪsəz swɪvəl təwɔɹd hɝ. hɝ hɛd swʌŋ deɪnʒɝəsli, ən ʃi stæbd ə fɪŋɡɝ ət ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl. "stɑp bɪheɪvɪŋ laɪk tʃɪlʒɹən!" ɔlðoʊ ʃi hæd mɑɾɝeɪtɪd əɹ toʊn, ɪt wɑz baɪ hɛɹz. "ɔɹ dʒju min tə skwɑbəl əntɪl ðə fɔɹseɪkən kʌm tə skup ʌp ðə boʊl ən ʌs? ən ju," ðət fɪŋɡɝ θɹʌst ət ðə wɪndfɪndɝz, "stɑp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹɪɡəl aʊɾ ə jəɹ əɡɹimənt! jə woʊnt ɡɛt ðə boʊl əntɪl juv mɛɾ ɛvɹi læst wɝd! doʊn θɪŋk jə wɪl!" nɪneɪiv swʌŋ ɹaʊn ɑn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. "æn jə . . . !" mɛt baɪ kul sɝpɹaɪz, hɝ floʊ ʌv wɝdz teɪpɝɾ ɔf ɪndə ə saʊɝ ɡɹʌnt. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd nɑt dʒɔɪn ɪn ðə ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɪksɛp tə tʃɹaɪ kwaɪəɾɪŋ ɪt. nʌn ʃoʊn wɪð ðə laɪɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ.

"Enough!" Nynaeve's piercing shriek sliced the words short on every tongue. Astonished faces swiveled toward her. Her head swung dangerously, and she stabbed a finger at the Knitting Circle. "Stop behaving like children!" Although she had moderated her tone, it was by hairs. "Or do you mean to squabble until the Forsaken come to scoop up the Bowl and us? And you," that finger thrust at the Windfinders, "stop trying to wriggle out of your agreement! You won't get the Bowl until you've met every last word! Don't think you will!" Nynaeve swung round on the Aes Sedai. "And you . . . !" Met by cool surprise, her flow of words tapered off into a sour grunt. The Aes Sedai had not joined in the shouting except to try quieting it. None shone with the light of saidar.

ðət wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə kɑm nɪneɪiv kəmplitli, ʌv kɔɹs. ʃi tʌɡd fɪɹsli əɾ əɹ hæt, pleɪnli stɪl fʊl ʌv æŋɡɝ ʃi wɑntəd tə lus. bʌt ðə kɪnswɪmən wɝ stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz ɪn ɹɛd-feɪst ʃəɡɹɪn, ən ivən ðə wɪndfɪndɝz əpɪɹɾ ə lɪɾəl əbæʃt - ə lɪɾəl - mʌɾɝɪŋ tə ðɛmsɛlvz jɛt ɹəfjuzɪŋ kwaɪt tə mit nɪneɪivz ɡlɛɹ. ðə ɡloʊ wɪŋkt aʊɾ ɝaʊnd wʌn wʊmən æftɝ ənʌðɝ, əntɪl oʊnli eɪvinhə stɪl hɛl tə ðə sɔɹs.

That was not enough to calm Nynaeve completely, of course. She tugged fiercely at her hat, plainly still full of anger she wanted to loose. But the Kinswomen were staring at the paving stones in red-faced chagrin, and even the Windfinders appeared a little abashed - a little - muttering to themselves yet refusing quite to meet Nynaeve's glare. The glow winked out around one woman after another, until only Aviendha still held to the Source.

ʃi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ əz ɪleɪn tʌtʃt əɹ ɑɹm. ʃi wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ sɑft. lɛɾɪŋ pipəl snik ʌp ɑn hɝ, dʒʌmpɪŋ əɾ ə tʌtʃ.

She gave a start as Elayne touched her arm. She was getting soft. Letting people sneak up on her, jumping at a touch.

"ðɪs kɹaɪsəs simz tə bi wɛðɝd," ɪleɪn mɝmɝd. "pɝhæps ɪts taɪm tə ɡoʊ bɪfɔɹ ðə nɛks bɹeɪks aʊt." ə tʌtʃ ə kʌlɝ ɪn əɹ tʃiks wɑz ði oʊnli saɪn ðət ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn æŋɡɹi. ən ə bɪɾ ɪn bɝdʒɪts; ðə tu ɹəflɛktəd wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn səm weɪz sɪns ðə bɑndɪŋ.

"This crisis seems to be weathered," Elayne murmured. "Perhaps it's time to go before the next breaks out." A touch of color in her cheeks was the only sign that she had ever been angry. And a bit in Birgitte's; the two reflected one another in some ways since the bonding.

"pæs taɪm," eɪvinhə əɡɹid. mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ, ən ʃi wəd bi ə mɪlk-hɑɹɾəd wɛtləndɝ.

"Past time," Aviendha agreed. Much longer, and she would be a milk-hearted wetlander.

ɛvɹi aɪ fɑloʊɾ əz ʃi wɔkt aʊɾ ɪndə ði oʊpən speɪs ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə steɪbliɑɹd, tə ðə spɑt ʃi hæd stʌɾid ən fɛlt əntɪl ʃi nu ɪt wɪð əɹ aɪlɪdz kloʊzd. ðəɹ wɑz ə dʒɔɪ ɪn hoʊldɪŋ ðə paʊɝ, ə dʒɔɪ ɪn wɝkɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ, ðət ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv pʊɾ ɪndə wɝdz. tə kənteɪn seɪaɪdɑɹ, tə bi kənteɪn baɪ ɪt, wɑz tə sim əlaɪv bɪɑn ɛni ʌðɝ taɪm. ə dɪluʒən, ðə waɪz wʌnz sɛd, əz fɔls ən deɪnʒɝəs əz ə mɝɑʒ ʌv wɔɾɝ ɪn ðə tɝmul, jɛɾ ɪt simd mɔɹ ɹil ðən ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz bɪniθ əɹ fit. ʃi fɔt ði ɝdʒ tə dʒɹɔ mɔɹ; ɔlɹɛɾi ʃi hɛl nɪɹli əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi kʊd. ɛvɹiwʌn kɹaʊɾəd kloʊs əz ʃi bɪɡæn tə wiv ðə floʊz.

Every eye followed as she walked out into the open space in the center of the stableyard, to the spot she had studied and felt until she knew it with her eyelids closed. There was a joy in holding the Power, a joy in working saidar, that she could not have put into words. To contain saidar, to be contained by it, was to seem alive beyond any other time. A delusion, the Wise Ones said, as false and dangerous as a mirage of water in the Termool, yet it seemed more real than the paving stones beneath her feet. She fought the urge to draw more; already she held nearly as much as she could. Everyone crowded close as she began to weave the flows.

ðət ðəɹ wɝ θɪŋz mɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd nɑt də stɪl stɑɹɾəld eɪvinhə, æftɝ ɔl ʃi hæd sin. sɛvɹəl ə ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl wɝ stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf, bʌɾ oʊnli sumeɪkoʊ ænd, sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, ɹin oʊpənli stʌɾid wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ. sumeɪkoʊ wɛn soʊ fɑɹ əz tə ʃɹʌɡ ɔf ði ɛnkɝɪdʒɪŋ pæts nɪneɪiv tʃɹaɪd tə ɡɪv əɹ - wɪtʃ ɝn ə lʊk ə stɑɹɾəld ɪndɪɡneɪʃən fɹəm nɪneɪiv ðət sumeɪkoʊ, hɝ ɡeɪz fɪkst ɑn eɪvinhə, nɛvɝ sɔ. ɔl ə ðə wɪndfɪndɝz hæd səfɪʃən stʃɹɛŋkθ. ðeɪ wɑtʃt əz hʌŋɡɹəli əz ðeɪ hæd stɛɹɾ ət ðə boʊl. ðə bɑɹɡən ɡeɪv əm ɛvɹi ɹaɪt.

That there were things many Aes Sedai could not do still startled Aviendha, after all she had seen. Several of the Knitting Circle were strong enough, but only Sumeko and, surprisingly, Reanne openly studied what she was doing. Sumeko went so far as to shrug off the encouraging pats Nynaeve tried to give her - which earned a look of startled indignation from Nynaeve that Sumeko, her gaze fixed on Aviendha, never saw. All of the Windfinders had sufficient strength. They watched as hungrily as they had stared at the Bowl. The bargain gave them every right.

eɪvinhə foʊkəst, ən ðə floʊz woʊv təɡɛðɝ, kɹieɪɾɪŋ aɪdɛntəɾi bɪtwin ðɪs pleɪs ən ðə pleɪs ʃi ən ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv hæd tʃoʊzən ɑn ə mæp. ʃi dʒɛstʃɝɾ əz ðoʊ oʊpənɪŋ tɛntflæps. ðət wɑz noʊ pɑɹɾ ə ðə wiv ɪleɪn hæd tɔt hɝ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊst ɔl ʃi kəd ɹikɔl ʌv wʌt ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd dʌn, lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ɛɡwin meɪɾ əɹ fɝst ɡeɪtweɪ. ðə floʊz koʊəlɛst ɪndə ə sɪlvɝi, vɝɾɪkəl slæʃ ðət ɹoʊteɪɾɪd ən bɪkeɪm ən oʊpənɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, tɔlɝ ðən ə mæn ən dʒʌst əz waɪd. bɪɑn leɪ ə lɑɹdʒ klɪɹɪŋ sɝaʊndəd baɪ tʃɹiz twɛnti əɹ θɝɾi fit haɪ, maɪlz nɔɹθ ə ðə sɪɾi, ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ. ni-haɪ bɹaʊn ɡɹæs keɪm ɹaɪɾ ʌp tə ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, sweɪɪŋ θɹu ɪn ə smɔl bɹiz; ɪt hæd nɑt tʃɹuli tɝnd, oʊnli sim tə. səm ə ðoʊz bleɪdz wɝ slaɪs klinli, ðoʊ, səm lɛŋθwaɪz. ði ɛdʒəz ʌv ən oʊpənɪŋ ɡeɪtweɪ meɪɾ ə ɹeɪzɝ sim dʌl.

Aviendha focused, and the flows wove together, creating identity between this place and the place she and Elayne and Nynaeve had chosen on a map. She gestured as though opening tentflaps. That was no part of the weave Elayne had taught her, but it was almost all she could recall of what she herself had done, long before Egwene made her first gateway. The flows coalesced into a silvery, vertical slash that rotated and became an opening in the air, taller than a man and just as wide. Beyond lay a large clearing surrounded by trees twenty or thirty feet high, miles north of the city, on the far side of the river. Knee-high brown grass came right up to the gateway, swaying through in a small breeze; it had not truly turned, only seemed to. Some of those blades were sliced cleanly, though, some lengthwise. The edges of an opening gateway made a razor seem dull.

ðə ɡeɪtweɪ fɪld əɹ wɪð dɪsæɾɪsfækʃən. ɪleɪn kəd meɪk ðɪs wiv wɪð oʊnli ə pɑɹɾ ə hɝ stʃɹɛŋkθ, jɛt fəɹ səm ɹizən ɪt ɹikwaɪɝɾ ɔl bʌɾ ə fɹækʃən ʌv eɪvinhəz. ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi cʊɾə woʊvən ə lɑɹdʒɝ, əz lɑɹdʒ əz ɪleɪn kʊd, juzɪŋ ðə wivz ʃi hæd meɪd wɪθaʊt θɔt waɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪskeɪp ɹænd ælθɹ wʌt simd ə vɛɹi lɔŋ taɪm əɡoʊ, bʌt noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ɔfən ʃi tʃɹaɪd, oʊnli skɹæps keɪm bæk tə hɝ. ʃi fɛl noʊ ɛnvi - ɹæðɝ, ʃi tʊk pɹaɪɾ ɪn əɹ nɪɹ-sɪstɝz əkɑmplɪʃməns - bʌɾ əɹ oʊn feɪljɝ meɪd ʃeɪm sɝdʒ ɪn əɹ hɑɹt. sɔɹɪliə əɹ æmɪz wəd bi hɑɹɾ ɑn hɝ, ɪf ðeɪ nu ðæt. əbaʊt ðə ʃeɪm. tu mʌtʃ pɹaɪd, ðeɪ wəd kɔl ɪt. æmɪz ʃəɾ ʌndɝstænd; ʃi hæd bɪn ə meɪɾən. ðəɹ wɑz ʃeɪm ɪn feɪlɪŋ ət wʌt jə ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə du. ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt hæd tə hoʊl ðə wiv, ʃi wʊɾə ɹʌn əweɪ soʊ noʊ wʌn kəd si hɝ.

The gateway filled her with dissatisfaction. Elayne could make this weave with only a part of her strength, yet for some reason it required all but a fraction of Aviendha's. She was sure she could have woven a larger, as large as Elayne could, using the weaves she had made without thought while trying to escape Rand al'Thor what seemed a very long time ago, but no matter how often she tried, only scraps came back to her. She felt no envy - rather, she took pride in her near-sister's accomplishments - but her own failure made shame surge in her heart. Sorilea or Amys would be hard on her, if they knew that. About the shame. Too much pride, they would call it. Amys should understand; she had been a Maiden. There was shame in failing at what you should be able to do. If she had not had to hold the weave, she would have run away so no one could see her.

ðə dɪpɑɹtʃɝ hæd bɪn kɛɹfəli plænd, ən ðə hoʊl steɪbliɑɹd spɹæŋ ɪndə moʊʃən əz sun əz ðə ɡeɪtweɪ oʊpən fʊli. tu ʌv ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl pʊl ðə hʊɾɪd ʃæɾoʊɹʌnɝ tə hɝ fit, ən ðə wɪndfɪndɝz hɝidli fɔɹmd ə laɪn bɪhaɪn ɹɪneɪl dɪn kəlɑn. ðə sɝvəns bɪɡæn bɹɪŋɪŋ hɔɹsəz aʊɾ ə ðə steɪbəlz. læn, bɝdʒɪt, ən wʌn ə kɛɝinz wɔɹɾɝz, ə læŋki mæn kɔl sɪɛɹəl ɑɹdʒunə, ɪmiɾiətli dɑɹɾɪd θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, wʌn bɪhaɪn ði ʌðɝ. laɪk fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ, wɔɹɾɝz ɔlweɪz kleɪm ðə ɹaɪt tə skaʊɾ əhɛd. eɪvinhəz fiɾ ɪtʃt tə ɹʌn æftɝ ðɛm, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪnt. ənlaɪk ɪleɪn, ʃi kəd nɑt muv mɔɹ ðən faɪv əɹ sɪks stɛps wɪθaʊt ðɪs wiv bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə wikən, ən ðə seɪm ɪf ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə taɪ ɪɾ ɔf. ɪt wɑz vɛɹi fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾɪŋ.

The departure had been carefully planned, and the whole stableyard sprang into motion as soon as the gateway opened fully. Two of the Knitting Circle pulled the hooded Shadowrunner to her feet, and the Windfinders hurriedly formed a line behind Renaile din Calon. The servants began bringing horses out of the stables. Lan, Birgitte, and one of Careane's Warders, a lanky man called Cieryl Arjuna, immediately darted through the gateway, one behind the other. Like Far Dareis Mai, Warders always claimed the right to scout ahead. Aviendha's feet itched to run after them, but there was no point. Unlike Elayne, she could not move more than five or six steps without this weave beginning to weaken, and the same if she tried to tie it off. It was very frustrating.

ðɪs taɪm ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹil ɛkspɛkteɪʃən ə deɪnʒɝ, soʊ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ fɑloʊɾ ɪmiɾiətli, ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv əz wɛl. fɑɹmz dɑɾəd ðət tʃɹiɾ ɛɹiə θɪkli, ən ə wɑndɝɪŋ ʃɛpɝɾ əɹ ə jʌŋ kʌpəl sikɪŋ pɹaɪvəsi maɪt nid ɡaɪɾəns əweɪ fɹəm siɪŋ tu mʌtʃ, bʌt noʊ ʃæɾoʊsuld əɹ ʃæɾoʊɹʌnɝ kəd noʊ ðət klɪɹɪŋ; oʊnli ʃi, ɪleɪn, ən nɪneɪiv dɪd, ən ðeɪ hæd nɑt spoʊkən ɪn ðə tʃuzɪŋ, fəɹ fɪɹ ʌv ivzdʒɹɑpɝz. stændɪŋ ɪn ði oʊpənɪŋ, ɪleɪn ɡeɪv eɪvinhə ə kwɛstʃənɪŋ lʊk, bʌɾ eɪvinhə moʊʃən əɹ tə ɡoʊ ɑn. plænz wɝ mɛn tə bi fɑloʊɾ ənlɛs ðəɹ wɑz ɹizən tə tʃeɪnʒ ðɛm.

This time there was no real expectation of danger, so the Aes Sedai followed immediately, Elayne and Nynaeve as well. Farms dotted that treed area thickly, and a wandering shepherd or a young couple seeking privacy might need guidance away from seeing too much, but no Shadowsouled or Shadowrunner could know that clearing; only she, Elayne, and Nynaeve did, and they had not spoken in the choosing, for fear of eavesdroppers. Standing in the opening, Elayne gave Aviendha a questioning look, but Aviendha motioned her to go on. Plans were meant to be followed unless there was reason to change them.

ðə wɪndfɪndɝz bɪɡæn faɪlɪŋ sloʊli θɹu tə ðə klɪɹɪŋ, itʃ sʌɾənli ɪɹəsəluɾ əz ʃi əpɹoʊtʃt ðɪs θɪŋ ʃi hæd nɛvɝ dʒɹimd ʌv, teɪkɪŋ ə bɹɛθ bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɛntɝd. ən əbɹʌpli, ðə pɹɪklɪŋ ɹɪtɝnd.

The Windfinders began filing slowly through to the clearing, each suddenly irresolute as she approached this thing she had never dreamed of, taking a breath before she entered. And abruptly, the prickling returned.

eɪvinhəz aɪz ɹoʊz tə ðə wɪndoʊz oʊvɝlʊkɪŋ ðə steɪbliɑɹd. ɛniwʌn maɪt bi hɪɾən bɪhaɪn ðə waɪt skɹinz ʌv ɪntʃɹəkət ɹɔɾ aɪɝn ən pɪɹswɝk kɑɹvɪŋ. taɪlɪn hæɾ ɔɹɾɝd ðə sɝvəns tə steɪ əweɪ fɹəm ðoʊz wɪndoʊz, bʌɾ u wəd stɑp tɛslɪn, əɹ dʒoʊlin, ɔɹ. . . . sʌmθɪŋ meɪɾ əɹ lʊk haɪɝ, tə ðə doʊmz ən taʊɝz. nɛɹoʊ wɔks ɹɪŋ səm ə ðoʊz slɪm spaɪɹz, ən ɑn wʌn, vɛɹi haɪ, wɑz ə blæk ʃeɪp hæloʊd baɪ ə ʃɑɹp nɪmbəs fɹəm ðə sʌn bɪhaɪnd. ə mæn.

Aviendha's eyes rose to the windows overlooking the stableyard. Anyone might be hidden behind the white screens of intricate wrought iron and piercework carving. Tylin had ordered the servants to stay away from those windows, but who would stop Teslyn, or Joline, or. . . . Something made her look higher, to the domes and towers. Narrow walks ringed some of those slim spires, and on one, very high, was a black shape haloed by a sharp nimbus from the sun behind. A man.

hɝ bɹɛθ kɑt. nʌθɪŋ ɪn ɪz stæns, hænz ɑn ðə stoʊn ɹeɪlɪŋ, spoʊk ə deɪnʒɝ, jɛt ʃi nu hi wɑz ðə wʌn u pʊt ðət kɹɔlɪŋ bɪtwin əɹ ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz. wʌn ə ðə ʃæɾoʊsuld wəd nɑt stæn ðəɹ sɪmpli wɑtʃɪŋ, bʌt ðət kɹitʃɝ, ðət ɡoʊləm. . . . aɪs fɔɹmd ɪn əɹ bɛli. hi kəd bi dʒʌst ə pæləs sɝvənt. hi kəd bi, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪt. noʊ ʃeɪm ɪn noʊɪŋ fɪɹ.

Her breath caught. Nothing in his stance, hands on the stone railing, spoke of danger, yet she knew he was the one who put that crawling between her shoulder blades. One of the Shadowsouled would not stand there simply watching, but that creature, that gholam. . . . Ice formed in her belly. He could be just a palace servant. He could be, but she did not believe it. No shame in knowing fear.

æŋkʃəsli ʃi ɡlænst ət ðə wɪmən stɪl ɛdʒɪŋ θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ wɪð æɡənaɪzɪŋ sloʊnəs. hæf ðə si foʊk wɝ ɡɔn, ən ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl weɪɾəd bɪhaɪn ðə ɹɛst wɪð ðə ʃæɾoʊɹʌnɝ fɝmli ɪn hænd, ðɛɹ oʊn əniz ət ðə pæsədʒ wɔɹɪŋ wɪð ɹɪzɛnmənt ðət ðə si foʊk wɪmən wɝ əlaʊd tə ɡoʊ fɝst. ɪf ʃi vɔɪst əɹ səspɪʃənz, ðə kɪnswɪmən ʃʊɹli wəd ɹʌn - mɪɹ mɛnʃən ə ðə ʃæɾoʊsuld dʒɹaɪd ðɛɹ maʊðz ən tɝn ðɛɹ baʊəlz tə wɔɾɝ - waɪl ðə wɪndfɪndɝz maɪt wɛl tʃɹaɪ tə kleɪm ðə boʊl stʃɹeɪɾəweɪ. wɪð ðɛm, ðə boʊl stʊɾ əbʌv ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. bʌɾ oʊnli ə blaɪn ful stʊd skɹætʃɪŋ hɝsɛlf waɪl ə laɪən kɹɛpt ʌp ɑn ðə hɝd ʃi hæd bɪn sɛt tə ɡɑɹd. ʃi kɑt wʌn ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ baɪ ə ɹɛd sɪlk sliv.

Anxiously she glanced at the women still edging through the gateway with agonizing slowness. Half the Sea Folk were gone, and the Knitting Circle waited behind the rest with the Shadowrunner firmly in hand, their own unease at the passage warring with resentment that the Sea Folk women were allowed to go first. If she voiced her suspicions, the Kinswomen surely would run - mere mention of the Shadowsouled dried their mouths and turned their bowels to water - while the Windfinders might well try to claim the Bowl straightaway. With them, the Bowl stood above anything else. But only a blind fool stood scratching herself while a lion crept up on the herd she had been set to guard. She caught one of the Atha'an Miere by a red silk sleeve.

"tɛl ɪleɪn - " ə feɪs laɪk smuð blæk stoʊn tɝn tə hɝ; ðə wʊmən sʌmhaʊ meɪd fʊl lɪps sim θɪn; hɝ aɪz wɝ blæk pɛbəlz, flæɾ ən hɑɹd. wʌt mɛsədʒ kəd ʃi sɛn ðət wəd nɑt bɹɪŋ daʊn ɔl ðə tʃɹʌbəlz ʃi fɪɹd fɹəm ðɛm? "tɛl ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv tə bi wɛɹi. tɛl əm ɛnəmiz ɔlweɪz kʌm wən jə list wɑn ðɛm. jə mʌst seɪ ðɪs tə hɝ, wɪθaʊt feɪl." ðə wɪndfɪndɝ nɑɾəd wɪð bɛɹli kənsild ɪmpeɪʃəns, bʌt sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, ʃi weɪɾəd fəɹ eɪvinhə tə ɹilis əɹ bɪfɔɹ meɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛzɪɾənt weɪ θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ.

"Tell Elayne - " A face like smooth black stone turned to her; the woman somehow made full lips seem thin; her eyes were black pebbles, flat and hard. What message could she send that would not bring down all the troubles she feared from them? "Tell Elayne and Nynaeve to be wary. Tell them enemies always come when you least want them. You must say this to her, without fail." The Windfinder nodded with barely concealed impatience, but surprisingly, she waited for Aviendha to release her before making her hesitant way through the gateway.

ðə wɔk ʌp ɑn ðə taʊɝ stʊɾ ɛmpti. eɪvinhə fɛl noʊ ɹɪlif. hi kəd bi ɛniwɛɹ. meɪkɪŋ ɪz weɪ daʊn tə ðə steɪbliɑɹd. huɛvɝ i wɑz, wʌtɛvɝ i wɑz, hi wɑz deɪnʒɝəs; ðɪs wɑz nɑɾ ə dʌst-fʌnəl dænsɪŋ ɪn əɹ ɪmædʒəneɪʃən. ðə læs fɔɹ wɔɹɾɝz hæd fɔɹmd ə skwɛɹ ɝaʊn ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, ə ɡɑɹɾ u wəd bi læs tə liv, ən mʌtʃ əz ʃi dɪspaɪz ðɛɹ sɔɹdz, ʃi wɑz ɡɹeɪtfəl ðət sʌmwʌn ðəɹ bɪsaɪdz hɝsɛlf nu ðə jus ə ʃɑɹp mɛɾəl. nɑt ðət ðeɪ wəɾ əv ɛni mɔɹ tʃæns əɡɛnst ə ɡoʊləm, əɹ wɝs, wʌn ə ðə ʃæɾoʊsuld, ðən ðə sɝvəns weɪɾɪŋ wɪð ðə hɔɹsəz. əɹ ðən ʃi hɝsɛlf.

The walk up on the tower stood empty. Aviendha felt no relief. He could be anywhere. Making his way down to the stableyard. Whoever he was, whatever he was, he was dangerous; this was not a dust-funnel dancing in her imagination. The last four Warders had formed a square around the gateway, a guard who would be last to leave, and much as she despised their swords, she was grateful that someone there besides herself knew the use of sharp metal. Not that they would have any more chance against a gholam, or worse, one of the Shadowsouled, than the servants waiting with the horses. Or than she herself.

ɡɹɪmli ʃi dʒɹu ðə paʊɝ, əntɪl ðə switnəs ə seɪaɪdɑɹ ɡɹu nɪɹ tə peɪn. ə hɛɹ bɪɑnd, ən peɪn wəɾ ɔlmoʊs bɪkʌm blaɪndɪŋ æɡəni fəɹ ðə moʊməns niɾəd tə daɪ əɹ luz ði əbɪləɾi kəmplitli. wəd ðoʊz ʃʌflɪŋ wɪmən kwɪkən ðɛɹ fit! noʊ ʃeɪm ɪn filɪŋ fɪɹ, bʌt ʃi wɑz vɛɹi mʌtʃ əfɹeɪd ðət hɝz wɑz peɪntəɾ ɑn əɹ feɪs.

Grimly she drew the Power, until the sweetness of saidar grew near to pain. A hair beyond, and pain would almost become blinding agony for the moments needed to die or lose the ability completely. Would those shuffling women quicken their feet! No shame in feeling fear, but she was very much afraid that hers was painted on her face.


tʃæptɝ tu


CHAPTER 2

ənwivɪŋ


Unweaving

ɪleɪn stɛp tə wʌn saɪɾ əz sun əz ʃi wɑz θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, bʌt nɪneɪiv tʃɹæmpəld əkɹɔs ðə klɪɹɪŋ, kɪkɪŋ ʌp bɹaʊn ɡɹæshɑpɝz fɹəm ðə dɛd ɡɹæs ən piɹɪŋ ðɪs weɪ ən ðət fəɹ ɛvəɾəns ə ðə wɔɹɾɝz. ʌv wʌn wɔɹɾɝ, ɛniweɪ. ə bɹaɪt ɹɛd bɝd flæʃt əkɹɔs ðə klɪɹɪŋ ən wɑz ɡɔn. nʌθɪŋ ɛls muvd ɪksɛp ðə sɪstɝz; ə skwɝəl bɑɹk sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə moʊsli lifləs tʃɹiz, ən ðən ðəɹ wɑz saɪləns. tə ɪleɪn ɪt simd ɪmpɑsəbəl ðoʊz θɹi cʊɾə pæs ðɪs weɪ wɪθaʊt livɪŋ pæðz əz waɪɾ əz ðət bɪhaɪnd nɪneɪiv, jɛt ʃi kəd nɑt meɪk aʊɾ ɛni saɪn ðət ðeɪ hæd bɪn ðəɹ əɾ ɔl.

Elayne stepped to one side as soon as she was through the gateway, but Nynaeve trampled across the clearing, kicking up brown grasshoppers from the dead grass and peering this way and that for evidence of the Warders. Of one Warder, anyway. A bright red bird flashed across the clearing and was gone. Nothing else moved except the sisters; a squirrel barked somewhere in the mostly leafless trees, and then there was silence. To Elayne it seemed impossible those three could have passed this way without leaving paths as wide as that behind Nynaeve, yet she could not make out any sign that they had been there at all.

ʃi sɛns bɝdʒɪt sʌmwɛɹ ɔf tə hɝ lɛft, ɹʌfli saʊθwɛst ʃi θɔt, ən filɪŋ kwaɪt kɑntɛnt, klɪɹli ɪn noʊ ɪmiɾiət deɪnʒɝ. kɛɝin, pɑɹɾ ʌv ə pɹətɛktɪv sɝkəl ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn sɝaɪðə ən ðə boʊl, kɑkt əɹ hɛɾ ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf lɪsnɪŋ. əpɛɹənli hɝ sɪɛɹəl wɑz tə ðə saʊθist. wɪtʃ mɛn læn wɑz nɔɹθ. ɑdli ɪnʌf, nɔɹθ wɑz ðə dɝɛkʃən nɪneɪiv hæd sɛɾəld daʊn tə wɑtʃ, ɔl ðə waɪl mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. pɝhæps biɪŋ mɛɹid hæd kɹieɪɾəd səm sɛns ə hɪm ɪn hɝ. mɔɹ laɪkli, ʃi hæd noʊɾəst ə tʃɹæk ðəɾ ɪskeɪpt ɪleɪn. nɪneɪiv wɑz əz skɪld ət wʊdskɹæft əz ʃi wɑz wɪð ɝbz.

She sensed Birgitte somewhere off to her left, roughly southwest she thought, and feeling quite content, clearly in no immediate danger. Careane, part of a protective circle gathered around Sareitha and the Bowl, cocked her head almost as if listening. Apparently her Cieryl was to the southeast. Which meant Lan was north. Oddly enough, north was the direction Nynaeve had settled down to watch, all the while muttering under her breath. Perhaps being married had created some sense of him in her. More likely, she had noticed a track that escaped Elayne. Nynaeve was as skilled at woodscraft as she was with herbs.

fɹəm wɛɹ ɪleɪn stʊɾ ət fɝst, eɪvinhə wɑz klɪɹli vɪzəbəl θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, stʌɾiɪŋ ðə pæləs ɹuftɑps əz ɪf ʃi ɪkspɛktəɾ ən æmbʊʃ. baɪ hɝ stæns, ʃi cʊɾə bɪn kæɹiɪŋ spɪɹz, ɹɛɾi tə lip ɪndə bæɾəl ɪn əɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs. ʃi meɪɾ ɪleɪn smaɪl, haɪɾɪŋ haʊ dɪstʃɹɛst ʃi wɑz əbaʊɾ əɹ pɹɑbləmz wɪð ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, soʊ mʌtʃ bɹeɪvɝ ðən ʃi hɝsɛlf. bʌɾ ət ðə seɪm taɪm ʃi kəd nɑt hɛlp wɝiɪŋ. eɪvinhə wɑz bɹeɪv, ən noʊ wʌn ɪleɪn nu wɑz bɛɾɝ eɪbəl tə kip əɹ hɛd. ʃi ɔlsoʊ maɪt dɪsaɪd ðət dʒiɾoʊ ɹikwaɪɝɾ əɹ tə faɪt wən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tʃæns ɪksɛpt ɪn ɹʌnɪŋ. ðə laɪɾ ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊn soʊ bɹaɪtli ɪt wɑz ɑbviəs ʃi kəd nɑt dʒɹɔ mʌtʃ mɔɹ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ. ɪf wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən dɪɾ əpɪɹ. . . .

From where Elayne stood at first, Aviendha was clearly visible through the gateway, studying the palace rooftops as if she expected an ambush. By her stance, she could have been carrying spears, ready to leap into battle in her riding dress. She made Elayne smile, hiding how distressed she was about her problems with the gateway, so much braver than she herself. But at the same time she could not help worrying. Aviendha was brave, and no one Elayne knew was better able to keep her head. She also might decide that ji'e'toh required her to fight when there was no chance except in running. The light around her shone so brightly it was obvious she could not draw much more of saidar. If one of the Forsaken did appear. . . .

aɪ ʃʊɾə steɪd wɪð hɝ. ɪleɪn ɹɪdʒɛktɪd ðə θɔɾ ɪmiɾiətli. wʌtɛvɝ ɪkskjus ʃi ɡeɪv, eɪvinhə wəd noʊ ðə tʃɹuθ, ən ʃi wɑz tʌtʃi əz ə mæn, səmtaɪmz. moʊst ə ðə taɪm. ɪspɛʃli wən ɪt bɔɹ əpɑn əɹ ɑnɝ. wɪð ə saɪ, ɪleɪn lɛt ði æθɑn maɪɹ kɹaʊɾ əɹ fɑɹðɝ fɹəm ðə ɡeɪtweɪ əz ðeɪ faɪl θɹu. ʃi steɪd kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ ɛni ʃaʊɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd, ðoʊ. kloʊs ɪnʌf tə lip tə eɪvinhəz eɪɾ ɪn ə hɑɹtbit. ən fəɹ ənʌðɝ ɹizən.

I should have stayed with her. Elayne rejected the thought immediately. Whatever excuse she gave, Aviendha would know the truth, and she was touchy as a man, sometimes. Most of the time. Especially when it bore upon her honor. With a sigh, Elayne let the Atha'an Miere crowd her farther from the gateway as they filed through. She stayed close enough to hear any shout on the other side, though. Close enough to leap to Aviendha's aid in a heartbeat. And for another reason.

ðə wɪndfɪndɝz keɪm θɹu ɪn ɔɹɾɝ ə ɹæŋk, stʃɹaɪvɪŋ tə kip ðɛɹ feɪsəz smuð, bʌɾ ivən ɹɪneɪl ɹɪlæks taɪt ʃoʊldɝz wʌns əɹ bɛɹ fit wɝ biɾɪŋ daʊn ðə tɔl bɹaʊn ɡɹæs. səm ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl ʃɪvɝ, kwɪkli səpɹɛst, əɹ ɡlæns bæk wɪð ɹaʊn aɪz ət ði oʊpənɪŋ hæŋɪŋ ɪn mɪdɛɹ. wʌn ən ɔl, ðeɪ stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪleɪn səspɪʃəsli əz ðeɪ stɛp baɪ hɝ, ən tu əɹ θɹi oʊpən ðɛɹ maʊðz, pɝhæps tə æsk wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ, pɝhæps tə æsk - əɹ tɛl - hɝ tə muv. ʃi wɑz dʒʌst əz ɡlæd ðət ðeɪ hɝiɾ ɑn ɪn oʊbiɾiəns tə ɹɪneɪlz kɝɾ ɝdʒɪŋz. ðeɪ wəɾ əv ðɛɹ tʃæns tə tɛl ɛɛs sədaɪ wʌt tə də sun ɪnʌf; ɪt dɪd nɑɾ əv tə stɑɹt wɪð hɝ.

The Windfinders came through in order of rank, striving to keep their faces smooth, but even Renaile relaxed tight shoulders once her bare feet were beating down the tall brown grass. Some gave a little shiver, quickly suppressed, or glanced back with round eyes at the opening hanging in midair. One and all, they stared at Elayne suspiciously as they stepped by her, and two or three opened their mouths, perhaps to ask what she was doing, perhaps to ask - or tell - her to move. She was just as glad that they hurried on in obedience to Renaile's curt urgings. They would have their chance to tell Aes Sedai what to do soon enough; it did not have to start with her.

ðət θɔt meɪɾ əɹ stʌmək sɪŋk, ən ðə nʌmbɝ ə ðɛm meɪɾ əɹ ʃeɪk əɹ hɛd. ðeɪ hæd ðə nɑlədʒ ʌv wɛðɝ tə juz ðə boʊl pɹɑpɝli, jɛɾ ivən ɹɪneɪl əɡɹid - ɪf ɹɪlʌktənli - ðət ðə mɔɹ paʊɝ dɝɛktəd θɹu ðə boʊl, ðə bɛɾɝ ðə tʃænsəz ə biɪŋ eɪbəl tə hil ðə wɛðɝ. ɪt mʌs bi dɝɛktəd wɪð ə pɹisɪʒən ɪmpɑsəbəl ɪksɛp fəɹ wʌn wʊmən əloʊn əɹ ə sɝkəl, ðoʊ. ə fʊl sɝkəl ə θɝtin ɪt hæd tə bi. ðət θɝtin sɝɾənli wəɾ ɪnklud nɪneɪiv ən eɪvinhə ən ɪleɪn hɝsɛlf, ən pɹɑbli ə fju ʌv ðə kɪn, bʌt ɹɪneɪl pleɪnli ɪntɛndəd tə dʒʌmp ɑn ðə pɑɹɾ ə ðə bɑɹɡən ðət sɛd ðeɪ wəd bi əlaʊd tə lɝn ɛni əbɪləɾiz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd titʃ. ðə ɡeɪtweɪ hæd bɪn ðə fɝst, ən fɔɹmɪŋ ə sɝkəl wəd bi ðə sɛkənd. ə wʌndɝ ʃi hæd nɑt bɹɔɾ ɛvɹi wɪndfɪndɝ ɪn ðə hɑɹbɝ. ɪmædʒən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dil wɪð θɹi əɹ fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd ə ðiz wɪmən! ɪleɪn ɔfɝɾ ə smɔl pɹɛɹ ə θæŋks ðət ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli twɛnti.

That thought made her stomach sink, and the number of them made her shake her head. They had the knowledge of weather to use the Bowl properly, yet even Renaile agreed - if reluctantly - that the more Power directed through the Bowl, the better the chances of being able to heal the weather. It must be directed with a precision impossible except for one woman alone or a circle, though. A full circle of thirteen it had to be. That thirteen certainly would include Nynaeve and Aviendha and Elayne herself, and probably a few of the Kin, but Renaile plainly intended to jump on the part of the bargain that said they would be allowed to learn any abilities the Aes Sedai could teach. The gateway had been the first, and forming a circle would be the second. A wonder she had not brought every Windfinder in the harbor. Imagine trying to deal with three or four hundred of these women! Elayne offered a small prayer of thanks that there were only twenty.

ʃi wɑz nɑt stændɪŋ ðəɹ tə kaʊn ðɛm, ðoʊ. əz itʃ wɪndfɪndɝ pæst, bɛɹli mɔɹ ðən ə peɪs əweɪ, ʃi lɛt hɝsɛlf fil ðə wʊmənz stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ðə paʊɝ. ɝliɝ ðəɹ hæd bɪn taɪm tə ɡɛt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə oʊnli ə hændfʊl, wʌt wɪð ɔl ðə tʃɹʌbəl ə kənvɪnsɪŋ ɹɪneɪl tə kʌm əɾ ɔl. əpɛɹənli ətʃivɪŋ ɹæŋk əmʌŋ ðə wɪndfɪndɝz hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð iðɝ eɪdʒ əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ; ɹɪneɪl wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst ivən ɪn ðə fɝs θɹi əɹ fɔɹ, waɪl wʌn wʊmən təwɔɹd ðə ɹɪɹ, sɛnaɪn, hæd wɛðɝd tʃiks ən θɪkli ɡɹeɪd hɛɹ. stʃɹeɪnʒli, baɪ ðə mɑɹks ɪn əɹ ɪɹz ɪt sim ðət sɛnaɪn maɪt wʌns əv wɔɹn mɔɹ ðən sɪks ɪɹɪŋz, ən θɪkɝ wʌnz ðən ʃi dɪd naʊ.

She was not standing there to count them, though. As each Windfinder passed, barely more than a pace away, she let herself feel the woman's strength in the Power. Earlier there had been time to get close enough to only a handful, what with all the trouble of convincing Renaile to come at all. Apparently achieving rank among the Windfinders had nothing to do with either age or strength; Renaile was far from the strongest even in the first three or four, while one woman toward the rear, Senine, had weathered cheeks and thickly grayed hair. Strangely, by the marks in her ears it seemed that Senine might once have worn more than six earrings, and thicker ones than she did now.

ɪleɪn sɔɹɾɪd ən stɔɹɾ əweɪ feɪsəz ən ðə neɪmz ʃi nu wɪð ə ɡɹoʊɪŋ sɛns ə kəmpleɪsənsi. ðə wɪndfɪndɝz maɪɾ əv sɪkjʊɹɾ ən ʌpɝ hæn ə sɔɹts, ən ʃi ən nɪneɪiv maɪt bi ɪn dip tʃɹʌbəl, vɛɹi dip, wɪð boʊθ ɛɡwin ən ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ wʌns ðə tɝmz ə ðɛɹ bɑɹɡən bɪkeɪm noʊn, bʌt nʌn ə ðiz wɪmən wəd stæn pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli haɪ əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. sɝɾənli nɑt loʊ, bʌt nɑt haɪ. ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf nɑt tə fil smʌɡ - ɪt tʃeɪnʒd nʌθɪŋ ɪn wʌt ðeɪ hæɾ əɡɹid - jɛɾ ɪt wɑz vɛɹi hɑɹd nɑt tə. ðiz wɝ ðə bɛs ði æθɑn kəd pɹədus, æftɝ ɔl. hɪɹ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ɛniweɪ. ən ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm, fɹəm kɹɪn, wɪð əɹ stoʊni blæk stɛɹ, tə ɹɪneɪl hɝsɛlf, wʊɾə lɪsənd wən ʃi spoʊk ən stʊd wən ʃi ɛntɝɾ ə ɹum. ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən bɪheɪvɪŋ əz ðeɪ ʃʊd.

Elayne sorted and stored away faces and the names she knew with a growing sense of complacency. The Windfinders might have secured an upper hand of sorts, and she and Nynaeve might be in deep trouble, very deep, with both Egwene and the Hall of the Tower once the terms of their bargain became known, but none of these women would stand particularly high among Aes Sedai. Certainly not low, but not high. She told herself not to feel smug - it changed nothing in what they had agreed - yet it was very hard not to. These were the best the Atha'an could produce, after all. Here in Ebou Dar, anyway. And if they had been Aes Sedai, every one of them, from Kurin, with her stony black stare, to Renaile herself, would have listened when she spoke and stood when she entered a room. If they were Aes Sedai and behaving as they should.

ən ðən ði ɛn ə ðə laɪn əpɪɹd, ən ʃi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ əz ə jʌŋ wɪndfɪndɝ ɔf wʌn ə ðə smɔlɝ ʃɪps pæs hɝ, ə ɹaʊnd-tʃikt wʊmən kɔld ɹeɪnɪn, ɪn pleɪn blu sɪlks, wɪð bɛɹli ə hæf-dʌzən ɔɹnəməns hæŋɪŋ fɹəm əɹ noʊz tʃeɪn. ðə tu əpɹɛntəsɪz, bɔɪɪʃli slɪm tɑlɑn ən bɪɡ-aɪd mɛtʃɹə, skɝiɾ ət ðə vɛɹi teɪl wɪð hɛɹiɾ ɪkspɹɛʃənz. ðeɪ hæd nɑɾ ɝn ðə noʊz ɹɪŋ jɛt, mʌtʃ lɛs ðə tʃeɪn, ən oʊnli ə sɪŋɡəl θɪn ɡoʊld ɪɹɪŋ ɪn ðə lɛft ɪɹ bæləns ðə θɹi ɪn ðə ɹaɪt. hɝ aɪz fɑloʊd ðə θɹi ʌv əm dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ə stɛɹɪŋ. pɝhæps nɑt ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ɪt, ət ðæt.

And then the end of the line appeared, and she gave a start as a young Windfinder off one of the smaller ships passed her, a round-cheeked woman called Rainyn, in plain blue silks, with barely a half-dozen ornaments hanging from her nose chain. The two apprentices, boyishly slim Talaan and big-eyed Metarra, scurried at the very tail with harried expressions. They had not earned the nose ring yet, much less the chain, and only a single thin gold earring in the left ear balanced the three in the right. Her eyes followed the three of them just short of staring. Perhaps not short of it, at that.

ði æθɑn maɪɹ klʌstɝd wɪð ɹɪneɪl əɡɛn, moʊst, laɪk hɝ, ɡlɛɹɪŋ hʌŋɡɹəli ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə boʊl. ðə læs θɹi wɪmən stʊɾ ət ðə ɹɪɹ, ði əpɹɛntəsɪz wɪð ði ɛɹ ə ðoʊz ənsɝɾən wɛðɝ ðeɪ hæɾ ə ɹaɪt tə bi ðəɹ əɾ ɔl, ɹeɪnɪn foʊldɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz ɪn ɪməteɪʃən ə ɹɪneɪl, jɛt duɪŋ lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ ðən ði ʌðɝ tu. ðə wɪndfɪndɝ ɑn ə dɑɹɾɝ, ðə list ə ðə si foʊk vɛsəlz, laɪkli sɛldəm faʊn hɝsɛlf ɪn kʌmpəni wɪð ðə wɪndfɪndɝ tə hɝ klæn weɪvməstʃɹəs, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps. ɹeɪnɪn wɑz izəli əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ləleɪn əɹ ɹoʊmændə, ən mɛtʃɹə ɑn ə lɛvəl wɪð ɪleɪn hɝsɛlf, waɪl tɑlɑn. . . . tɑlɑn, soʊ mik ɪn əɹ ɹɛd lɪnən blaʊs, wɪð aɪz ðət sim pɝmənənli daʊnkæst, keɪm vɛɹi kloʊs tə nɪneɪiv. vɛɹi kloʊs. mɔɹ, ɪleɪn nu ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd nɑt jɛt ɹitʃt əɹ fʊl pətɛnʃəl, ən niðɝ hæd nɪneɪiv. haʊ kloʊs wɝ mɛtʃɹə ən tɑlɑn? ʃi hæd ɡɹoʊn əkʌstəm tə noʊɪŋ ðəɾ oʊnli nɪneɪiv ən ðə fɔɹseɪkən wɝ stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ʃi. wɛl, ɛɡwin, bʌt ʃi hæd bɪn fɔɹst, ən əɹ oʊn pətɛnʃəl, ən eɪvinhəz, mætʃt ɛɡwinz. soʊ mʌtʃ fəɹ kəmpleɪsənsi, ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf ɹufəli. lini wʊɾə sɛɾ ɪt wɑz wʌt ʃi dɪzɝv fəɹ teɪkɪŋ θɪŋz fəɹ ɡɹæntəd.

The Atha'an Miere clustered with Renaile again, most, like her, glaring hungrily at the Aes Sedai and the Bowl. The last three women stood at the rear, the apprentices with the air of those uncertain whether they had a right to be there at all, Rainyn folding her arms in imitation of Renaile, yet doing little better than the other two. The Windfinder on a darter, the least of the Sea Folk vessels, likely seldom found herself in company with the Windfinder to her clan Wavemistress, not to mention the Windfinder to the Mistress of the Ships. Rainyn was easily as strong as Lelaine or Romanda, and Metarra on a level with Elayne herself, while Talaan. . . . Talaan, so meek in her red linen blouse, with eyes that seemed permanently downcast, came very close to Nynaeve. Very close. More, Elayne knew she herself had not yet reached her full potential, and neither had Nynaeve. How close were Metarra and Talaan? She had grown accustomed to knowing that only Nynaeve and the Forsaken were stronger than she. Well, Egwene, but she had been forced, and her own potential, and Aviendha's, matched Egwene's. So much for complacency, she told herself ruefully. Lini would have said it was what she deserved for taking things for granted.

læfɪŋ sɔfli ət hɝsɛlf, ɪleɪn tɝn bæk tə tʃɛk ɑn eɪvinhə, bʌt ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl stʊd ɹuɾəd tə wʌn spɑɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, twɪtʃɪŋ ət koʊl stɛɹz fɹəm kɛɝin ən sɝaɪðə. ɔl bʌt sumeɪkoʊ, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt muv əweɪ iðɝ fəɹ ɔl ðət ʃi hæd mɛt ðə sɪstɝz' ɡeɪzəz. kɝstʃən əpɪɹd ɹɛɾi tə bɝst ɪndə tɪɹz.

Laughing softly at herself, Elayne turned back to check on Aviendha, but the Knitting Circle stood rooted to one spot in front of the gateway, twitching at cold stares from Careane and Sareitha. All but Sumeko, and she did not move away either for all that she had met the sisters' gazes. Kirstian appeared ready to burst into tears.

səpɹɛsɪŋ ə saɪ, ɪleɪn hɝɾɪd ðə kɪnswɪmən aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ ʌv ðə steɪbəl foʊk weɪɾɪŋ tə bɹɪŋ ðə hɔɹsəz θɹu. ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl wɛn əlɔŋ laɪk ʃip - ʃi wɑz ðə ʃɛpɝd, mɛɝɪlɪl ən ðə ɹɛs ðə wʊlvz - ən ðeɪ wʊɾə muv fæstɝ ɪf nɑt fəɹ ɪspæn.

Suppressing a sigh, Elayne herded the Kinswomen out of the way of the stable folk waiting to bring the horses through. The Knitting Circle went along like sheep - she was the shepherd, Merilille and the rest the wolves - and they would have moved faster if not for Ispan.

feɪmɛl, wʌn ʌv oʊnli fɔɹ əmʌŋ ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl wɪθaʊɾ ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪ əɹ waɪɾ ɪn əɹ hɛɹ, ən ɪldeɪs, ə fɪɹs-aɪd wʊmən wən ʃi wɑz nɑt lʊkɪŋ əɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, hɛld ɪspæn baɪ ði ɑɹmz. ðeɪ kəd nɑt sim tə dɪsaɪd bɪtwin hoʊldɪŋ əɹ fɝmli ɪnʌf tə kip əɹ əpɹaɪɾ ən nɑt klʌtʃɪŋ əɹ tu taɪtli, wɪð ðə ɹɪzʌl ðət ðə blæk sɪstɝ muvd ɪn ə bɑbɪŋ fæʃən, sæɡɪŋ hæfweɪ tə hɝ niz wən ðeɪ lusən ðɛɹ ɡɹɪps, ðən pʊl bæk ʌp dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ʃi fɛl kəmplitli.

Famelle, one of only four among the Knitting Circle without a touch of gray or white in her hair, and Eldase, a fierce-eyed woman when she was not looking at an Aes Sedai, held Ispan by the arms. They could not seem to decide between holding her firmly enough to keep her upright and not clutching her too tightly, with the result that the Black sister moved in a bobbing fashion, sagging halfway to her knees when they loosened their grips, then pulled back up just before she fell completely.

"fɝɡɪv mi, ɛɛs sədaɪ," feɪmɛl kɛp mɝmɝɪŋ tə ɪspæn wɪð ə feɪn tæɹɑbənɝ æksɛnt. "oʊ, aɪm sɑɹi, ɛɛs sədaɪ." ɪldeɪs wɪnst ən ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl moʊn ɛvɹi taɪm ɪspæn stʌmbəld. dʒʌst əz ɪf ɪspæn hæd nɑt hɛlp mɝɾɝ tu ʌv ðɛɹ nʌmbɝ ən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu haʊ mɛni ʌðɝz. ðeɪ wɝ fʌsɪŋ oʊvɝ ə wʊmən u wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə daɪ. ðə kɪlɪŋz ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ ðəɾ ɪspæn hæd kənspaɪɝɾ ət wɝ ɪnʌf tə kəndɛm əɹ baɪ ðɛmsɛlvz.

"Forgive me, Aes Sedai," Famelle kept murmuring to Ispan with a faint Taraboner accent. "Oh, I am sorry, Aes Sedai." Eldase winced and gave a little moan every time Ispan stumbled. Just as if Ispan had not helped murder two of their number and the Light alone knew how many others. They were fussing over a woman who was going to die. The killings in the White Tower that Ispan had conspired at were enough to condemn her by themselves.

"teɪk əɹ oʊvɝ ðəɹ sʌmwɛɹ," ɪleɪn toʊl ðɛm, weɪvɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɡeɪtweɪ ɪndə ðə klɪɹɪŋ. ðeɪ oʊbeɪd, bɑbɪŋ kɝtsiz ən nɪɹli dʒɹɑpɪŋ ɪspæn, mɝmɝɪŋ əpɑlədʒiz tə ɪleɪn ən tə ðə hʊɾɪd pɹɪznɝ. ɹin ən ðə ɹɛst skɝiɾ əlɔŋ, æŋkʃəsli aɪɪŋ ðə sɪstɝz ɝaʊn mɛɝɪlɪl.

"Take her over there somewhere," Elayne told them, waving away from the gateway into the clearing. They obeyed, bobbing curtsies and nearly dropping Ispan, murmuring apologies to Elayne and to the hooded prisoner. Reanne and the rest scurried along, anxiously eyeing the sisters around Merilille.

ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli ðə wɔɹ ʌv ɡlɛɹz stɑɹɾəd ʌp əɡɛn, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ət ðə kɪnswɪmən, ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl ət ðə wɪndfɪndɝz, ən ði æθɑn maɪɹ əɾ ɛnibəɾi ðɛɹ aɪz fɛl ɑn. ɪleɪn klæmpt əɹ tiθ ʃʌt. ʃi wɑz nɑt gɑnə ʃaʊɾ ət ðɛm. nɪneɪiv ɔlweɪz ɡɑt bɛɾɝ ɹɪzʌls wɪð jɛlz, ɛniweɪ. bʌt ʃi dɪd wɑnə ʃeɪk səm sɛns ɪndə ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm, ʃeɪk əm əntɪl ðɛɹ tiθ ɹæɾəld. ɪnkluɾɪŋ nɪneɪiv, hu wɑz səpoʊz tə bi ɡɛɾɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn ɔɹɡənaɪzd ɪnstɛɾ ə stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz. bʌt wʌɾ ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn ɹænd u wɑz gɑnə daɪ ənlɛs ʃi kəd faɪn ə weɪ tə seɪv hɪm?

Almost immediately the war of glares started up again, the Aes Sedai at the Kinswomen, the Knitting Circle at the Windfinders, and the Atha'an Miere at anybody their eyes fell on. Elayne clamped her teeth shut. She was not going to shout at them. Nynaeve always got better results with yells, anyway. But she did want to shake some sense into every one of them, shake them until their teeth rattled. Including Nynaeve, who was supposed to be getting everyone organized instead of staring into the trees. But what if it had been Rand who was going to die unless she could find a way to save him?

sʌɾənli tɪɹz tʃɹɛmbəld ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə fɔlɪŋ, stɪŋɪŋ əɹ aɪz. ɹænd wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə daɪ, ən ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ʃi kəd də tə stɑp ɪt. pil ði æpəl ɪn jəɹ hænd, ɡɝl, nɑt ðə wʌn ɑn ðə tʃɹi, liniz θɪn vɔɪs sim tə wɪspɝ ɪn əɹ ɪɹ. tɪɹz ɑɹ fəɹ æftɝ; ðeɪ dʒʌst weɪs taɪm bɪfɔɹ.

Suddenly tears trembled on the edge of falling, stinging her eyes. Rand was going to die, and there was nothing she could do to stop it. Peel the apple in your hand, girl, not the one on the tree, Lini's thin voice seemed to whisper in her ear. Tears are for after; they just waste time before.

"θæŋk ju, lini," ɪleɪn mɝmɝd. hɝ oʊl nɝs wɑz ən ɪɹəteɪɾɪŋ wʊmən səmtaɪmz, nɛvɝ ædmɪɾɪŋ ðəɾ ɛni ʌv əɹ tʃɑɹdʒəz hæd ɹɪli ɡɹoʊn ʌp, bʌɾ əɹ ædvaɪs wɑz ɔlweɪz ɡʊd. dʒʌs kəz nɪneɪiv wɑz slækɪŋ əɹ duɾiz wɑz noʊ ɹizən fəɹ ɪleɪn tə slæk hɝz.

"Thank you, Lini," Elayne murmured. Her old nurse was an irritating woman sometimes, never admitting that any of her charges had really grown up, but her advice was always good. Just because Nynaeve was slacking her duties was no reason for Elayne to slack hers.

sɝvəns hæd stɑɹɾəd tʃɹɑɾɪŋ hɔɹsəz θɹu ɹaɪɾ ɑn ðə hilz ə ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl, bɪɡɪnɪŋ wɪð ðə pækhɔɹsɪz. nʌn ə ðoʊz fɝst ænəməlz kæɹiɾ ɛniθɪŋ soʊ fɹɪvələs əz kloʊðz. ðeɪ kəd wɔk ɪf ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ hɔɹsəz niɾəd tə bi əbændən ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, ən wɛɹ wʌt ðeɪ stʊɾ ʌp ɪn ɪf ðə ɹɛst ə ðə pæk ænəməlz hæd tə bi lɛf bɪhaɪnd, bʌt wʌt wɑz ɑn ðoʊz fɝs hɔɹsəz kəd nɑt bi lɛft fəɹ ðə fɔɹseɪkən. ɪleɪn moʊʃən ðə lɛðɝ-tʃikt wʊmən liɾɪŋ ðə vɛɹi fɝs tə fɑloʊ hɝ əsaɪd, aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ ʌv ði ʌðɝz.

Servants had started trotting horses through right on the heels of the Knitting Circle, beginning with the packhorses. None of those first animals carried anything so frivolous as clothes. They could walk if the riding horses needed to be abandoned on the other side of the gateway, and wear what they stood up in if the rest of the pack animals had to be left behind, but what was on those first horses could not be left for the Forsaken. Elayne motioned the leather-cheeked woman leading the very first to follow her aside, out of the way of the others.

əntiɪŋ ən tɔsɪŋ bæk ðə stɪf kænvəs kʌvɝ ɑn wʌn ə ðə waɪd wɪkɝ pænɪɝz ɹɪvild ə ɡɹeɪt hip ʌv wʌɾ əpɪɹd tə bi ɹʌbɪʃ stʌft ɪn ɛvɹi wɪtʃ weɪ, ɹaɪɾ ʌp tə ðə tɑp, səm ʌv ɪt ɹæpt ɪn klɔθ ðət wɑz fɔlɪŋ tə pisəz. ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt pɹɑbli wɑz ɹʌbɪʃ. ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ, ɪleɪn bɪɡæn sɔɹɾɪŋ. ə ɹʌstəd bɹɛstpleɪt kwɪkli wɛn ɑntu ðə ɡɹaʊnd, əlɔŋ wɪð ə bɹoʊkən teɪbəl lɛɡ, ə kɹæk plæɾɝ, ə bædli dɛntɪd pjuɾɝ pɪtʃɝ, ən ə boʊlt ə ɹɑɾɪd, ʌnaɪɾentəfaɪəbəl klɔθ ðəɾ ɔlmoʊs bɹoʊk əpɑɹɾ ɪn əɹ hænz.

Untying and tossing back the stiff canvas cover on one of the wide wicker panniers revealed a great heap of what appeared to be rubbish stuffed in every which way, right up to the top, some of it wrapped in cloth that was falling to pieces. The greater part of it probably was rubbish. Embracing saidar, Elayne began sorting. A rusted breastplate quickly went onto the ground, along with a broken table leg, a cracked platter, a badly dented pewter pitcher, and a bolt of rotted, unidentifiable cloth that almost broke apart in her hands.

ðə stɔɹɹum wɛɹ ðeɪ faʊn ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz hæd bɪn stʌft fʊl, θɪŋz ðət ʃʊɾə bɪn ɑn ə ɹɛfjus hip dʒʌmbəld ɪn wɪð mɔɹ ɑbʒɛkts ə ðə paʊɝ ðən dʒʌs ðə boʊl, səm ɪn biɾəl-ɹɪdəld kæsks əɹ tʃɛsts, səm kɛɹləsli stækt. fəɹ hʌnʒɹədz ən hʌnʒɹədz ə jɪɹz ðə kɪn hæd hɪɾən əweɪ ɔl θɪŋz ðeɪ faʊn ðət wɝ kənɛktəd tə ðə paʊɝ, fɪɹfəl ə juzɪŋ əm ən fɪɹfəl ə dɪlɪvɝɪŋ əm tə ɛɛs sədaɪ. əntɪl ðət vɛɹi mɔɹnɪŋ. ðɪs wɑz ðə fɝs tʃæns ɪleɪn hæd hæd tə si wʌt wɑz wɝθ kipɪŋ. ðə laɪt sɛn ðət ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz hæd nɑt ɡɑɾən əweɪ wɪð ɛniθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt; ðeɪ hæd teɪkən sʌm, bʌt sɝɾənli lɛs ðən ə kɔɹɾɝ ʌv wʌt ðə ɹum hæd hɛld, ɹʌbɪʃ ɪnkluɾəd. ðə laɪt sɛnd ʃi faʊn sʌmθɪŋ ðeɪ kəd juz. pipəl hæd daɪd tə bɹɪŋ ðiz θɪŋz aʊɾ ə ðə ɹæhəd.

The storeroom where they found the Bowl of the Winds had been stuffed full, things that should have been on a refuse heap jumbled in with more objects of the Power than just the Bowl, some in beetle-riddled casks or chests, some carelessly stacked. For hundreds and hundreds of years the Kin had hidden away all things they found that were connected to the Power, fearful of using them and fearful of delivering them to Aes Sedai. Until that very morning. This was the first chance Elayne had had to see what was worth keeping. The Light send that the Darkfriends had not gotten away with anything important; they had taken some, but certainly less than a quarter of what the room had held, rubbish included. The Light send she found something they could use. People had died to bring these things out of the Rahad.

ʃi dɪd nɑt tʃænəl, dʒʌs hɛl ðə paʊɝ əz ʃi lɪftəɾ itʃ aɪɾəm. ə tʃɪp kleɪ kʌp, θɹi bɹoʊkən pleɪts, ə tʃaɪlz mɔθ-iɾən dʒɹɛs, ən ən oʊl but wɪð ə hoʊl wɔɹn θɹu ðə saɪɾ ɔl fɛl tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ə stoʊn kɑɹvɪŋ ə lɪɾəl lɑɹdʒɝ ðən əɹ hænd - ɪt fɛlt laɪk stoʊn; ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn ə kɑɹvɪŋ, ðoʊ ɪt dɪd nɑɾ ɪɡzækli lʊk kɑɹvd, fəɹ səm ɹizən - ɔl dip blu kɝvz veɪɡli laɪk ɹuts. ɪt sim tə wɔɹm feɪnli əɾ əɹ tʌtʃ; ɪt hɛld ə . . . ɹɛzənəns . . . tə seɪaɪdɑɹ. ðət wɑz ðə kloʊsəst wɝd ʃi kəd θɪŋk ʌv. wʌɾ ɪt wɑz mɛn tə du, ʃi hæd noʊ aɪdiə, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɪθaʊɾ ɛni daʊt. ɪt wɛn ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə hɝ, əweɪ fɹəm ðə paɪl ə ɹʌbɪʃ.

She did not channel, just held the Power as she lifted each item. A chipped clay cup, three broken plates, a child's moth-eaten dress, and an old boot with a hole worn through the side all fell to the ground. A stone carving a little larger than her hand - it felt like stone; it might have been a carving, though it did not exactly look carved, for some reason - all deep blue curves vaguely like roots. It seemed to warm faintly at her touch; it held a . . . resonance . . . to saidar. That was the closest word she could think of. What it was meant to do, she had no idea, but it was a ter'angreal without any doubt. It went on the other side of her, away from the pile of rubbish.

ðə hip ə ɹɛfjus kəntɪnjud tə ɡɹoʊ, bʌt soʊ dɪd ði ʌðɝ, ɪf mɔɹ sloʊli, θɪŋz ðət hæd nʌθɪŋ ɪn kɑmən ɪksɛp ðə feɪnt wɔɹmθ ən ðə sɛns ʌv ɛkoʊɪŋ ðə paʊɝ. ə smɔl bɑks ðət fɛlt laɪk aɪvɝi, kʌvɝɾ ɪn weɪvɝɪŋ ɹɛɾ ən ɡɹin stʃɹaɪps; ʃi sɛɾ ɪt daʊn kɛɹfəli wɪθaʊɾ oʊpənɪŋ ðə hɪnʒd lɪd. jə kəd nɛvɝ tɛl wʌt maɪt tʃɹɪɡɝ ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil. ə blæk ɹɑd noʊ θɪkɝ ðən əɹ lɪɾəl fɪŋɡɝ, ə peɪs ɪn lɛŋθ, stɪf jɛt soʊ flɛksəbəl ʃi θɔt ʃi cʊɾə dʌbəld ɪɾ ɪndə ə sɝkəl. ə taɪni stɑpɝd vaɪəl ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn kɹɪstəl, wɪð ə dɑɹk ɹɛd lɪkwəɾ ɪnsaɪd. ðə fɪɡjɝ ʌv ə staʊt, bɪɹɾəd mæn wɪð ə dʒɑli smaɪl, hoʊldɪŋ ə bʊk; tu fit tɔl, ɪɾ əpɪɹd tə bi eɪdʒ-dɑɹkən bɹɑnz ən tʊk boʊθ ə hɝ hænz tə muv. ʌðɝ θɪŋz. moʊst wɑz tʃɹæʃ, ðoʊ. ən nʌn wɑz wʌt ʃi tʃɹuli wɑntəd. nɑt jɛt.

The heap of refuse continued to grow, but so did the other, if more slowly, things that had nothing in common except the faint warmth and the sense of echoing the Power. A small box that felt like ivory, covered in wavering red and green stripes; she set it down carefully without opening the hinged lid. You could never tell what might trigger a ter'angreal. A black rod no thicker than her little finger, a pace in length, stiff yet so flexible she thought she could have doubled it into a circle. A tiny stoppered vial that might have been crystal, with a dark red liquid inside. The figure of a stout, bearded man with a jolly smile, holding a book; two feet tall, it appeared to be age-darkened bronze and took both of her hands to move. Other things. Most was trash, though. And none was what she truly wanted. Not yet.

"ɪz ðɪs ðə taɪm tə bi duɪŋ ðæt?" nɪneɪiv æskt. ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd heɪstəli fɹəm ðə smɔl klʌstɝ ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ ən ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ hæn ɑn əɹ skɝt. "ðæt ɹɑd filz laɪk . . . peɪn," ʃi mʌɾɝd. ðə hɑɹd-feɪst wʊmən hoʊldɪŋ ðə pækhɔɹsəz hɛd blɪŋkt ət ðə ɹɑɾ ən ɛdʒd əweɪ.

"Is this the time to be doing that?" Nynaeve asked. She straightened hastily from the small cluster of ter'angreal, grimacing and rubbing her hand on her skirt. "That rod feels like . . . pain," she muttered. The hard-faced woman holding the packhorse's head blinked at the rod and edged away.

ɪleɪn aɪd ðə ɹɑd - nɪneɪivz əkeɪʒənəl ɪmpɹɛʃənz əbaʊɾ ɑbʒɛkts ʃi tʌtʃt kəd bi jusfəl - bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt stɑp sɔɹɾɪŋ. ðəɹ hæd bɪn tu mʌtʃ peɪn leɪtli tə niɾ ɛni mɔɹ, ʃʊɹli. nɑt ðət wʌt nɪneɪiv sɛnst wɑz ɔlweɪz ðət stʃɹeɪtfɔɹwɝd. ðə ɹɑd maɪɾ əv bɪn pɹɛzənt wən ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə peɪn wɑz kɑzd wɪθaʊt biɪŋ ðə kɑz ɪn ɪtsɛlf. ðə pæniɝ wɑz ɔlmoʊst ɛmpti; səm ʌv wʌt wɑz ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə hɔɹs wəɾ əv tə bi ʃɪftəd tə bæləns ðə weɪt. "ɪf ðɛɹz ən æŋɡɹil ɪn ðɪs sʌmwɛɹ, nɪneɪiv, aɪ wəd laɪk tə faɪn ɪt bɪfɔɹ mɑɡiɾin tæps wʌn ʌv əs ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ."

Elayne eyed the rod - Nynaeve's occasional impressions about objects she touched could be useful - but she did not stop sorting. There had been too much pain lately to need any more, surely. Not that what Nynaeve sensed was always that straightforward. The rod might have been present when a great deal of pain was caused without being the cause in itself. The pannier was almost empty; some of what was on the other side of the horse would have to be shifted to balance the weight. "If there's an angreal in this somewhere, Nynaeve, I would like to find it before Moghedien taps one of us on the shoulder."

nɪneɪiv ɡɹʌntɪd saʊɝli, bʌt ʃi pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə wɪkɝ bæskət.

Nynaeve grunted sourly, but she peered into the wicker basket.

dʒɹɑpɪŋ ənʌðɝ teɪbəl lɛɡ - ðət meɪd θɹi, nʌn ʌv wɪtʃ mætʃt - ɪleɪn spɛɹɾ ə ɡlæns fəɹ ðə klɪɹɪŋ. ɔl ə ðə pækhɔɹsɪz wɝ aʊt, ən ðə maʊns wɝ kʌmɪŋ θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, naʊ, fɪlɪŋ ði oʊpən speɪs bɪtwin ðə tʃɹiz wɪð bʌsəl ən kənfjuʒən. mɛɝɪlɪl ən ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔlɹɛɾi sæt ðɛɹ sæɾəlz, bɛɹli kənsilɪŋ ðɛɹ ɪmpeɪʃəns tə bi ɔf, waɪl pɔl fʌs hɝidli wɪð əɹ mɪstʃɹəsəz sæɾəlbæɡz, bʌt ðə wɪndfɪndɝz.

Dropping another table leg - that made three, none of which matched - Elayne spared a glance for the clearing. All of the packhorses were out, and the mounts were coming through the gateway, now, filling the open space between the trees with bustle and confusion. Merilille and the other Aes Sedai already sat their saddles, barely concealing their impatience to be off, while Pol fussed hurriedly with her mistress's saddlebags, but the Windfinders.

ɡɹeɪsfəl əfʊt, ɡɹeɪsfəl ɑn ðɛɹ ʃɪps, ðeɪ wɝ ənjuz tə hɔɹsəz. ɹɪneɪl wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə maʊn fɹəm ðə ɹɔŋ saɪd, ən ðə dʒɛntəl beɪ mɛɹ tʃoʊzən fəɹ əɹ dænst sloʊ sɝkəlz ɝaʊn ðə lɪvɹid mæn u wɑz ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə bɹaɪɾəl wɪð wʌn hænd waɪl tʌɡɪŋ ɪz hɛɹ ɪn fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən wɪð ði ʌðɝ ən veɪnli tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɝɛk ðə wɪndfɪndɝ. tu ʌv ðə steɪbəlwɪmən wɝ ətɛmptɪŋ tə hɔɪs dɔɹəl, hu sɝv ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs ə klæn soʊmɝɪn, ɪndə hɝ sæɾəl, waɪl ə θɝd, hoʊldɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪz hɛd, wɔɹ ðə taɪt feɪs ə sʌmwʌn tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə læf. ɹeɪnɪn wɑz ɑn ðə bæk ʌv ə lɛɡi bɹaʊn ɡɛldɪŋ, bʌt sʌmhaʊ wɪθaʊɾ iðɝ fʊɾ ɪn ðə stɝəps əɹ ðə ɹeɪnz ɪn əɹ hænz ən hævɪŋ kənsɪɾɝəbəl tʃɹʌbəl faɪndɪŋ ɛni ʌv ðɛm. ən ðoʊz θɹi sim tə bi hævɪŋ ði iziəs taɪm ʌv ɪt. hɔɹsəz wɪniɾ ən dænst ən ɹoʊl ðɛɹ aɪz, ən wɪndfɪndɝz ʃaʊɾəd kɝsɪz ɪn vɔɪsəz ðət cʊɾə bɪn hɝɾ oʊvɝ ə ɡeɪl. wʌn ə ðɛm nɑkt ə sɝvɪŋ mæn flæt wɪð əɹ fɪst, ən θɹi mɔɹ steɪbəl foʊk wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kætʃ maʊns ðət hæd ɡɑɾən fɹi.

Graceful afoot, graceful on their ships, they were unused to horses. Renaile was trying to mount from the wrong side, and the gentle bay mare chosen for her danced slow circles around the liveried man who was gripping the bridle with one hand while tugging his hair in frustration with the other and vainly trying to correct the Windfinder. Two of the stablewomen were attempting to hoist Dorile, who served the Wavemistress of Clan Somarin, into her saddle, while a third, holding the gray's head, wore the tight face of someone trying not to laugh. Rainyn was on the back of a leggy brown gelding, but somehow without either foot in the stirrups or the reins in her hands and having considerable trouble finding any of them. And those three seemed to be having the easiest time of it. Horses whinnied and danced and rolled their eyes, and Windfinders shouted curses in voices that could have been heard over a gale. One of them knocked a serving man flat with her fist, and three more stable folk were trying to catch mounts that had gotten free.

ðəɹ wɑz ɔlsoʊ wʌt ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd tə si, ɪf nɪneɪiv wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ kipɪŋ əɹ pɹaɪvət wɑtʃ. læn stʊd baɪ hɪz blæk wɔɹhɔɹs, mændɑɹb, dɪvaɪɾɪŋ ɪz ɡeɪz bɪtwin ðə tʃɹilaɪn, ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, ən nɪneɪiv. bɝdʒɪt keɪm stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə wʊdz ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd, ən ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ, sɪɛɹəl, tʃɹɑɾəd fɹəm ðə tʃɹiz, bʌt wɪð noʊ sɛns ə ɝdʒənsi. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ aʊt ðəɹ tə θɹɛɾən əɹ ɪnkənvinjəns ðɛm.

There was also what she had expected to see, if Nynaeve was no longer keeping her private watch. Lan stood by his black warhorse, Mandarb, dividing his gaze between the treeline, the gateway, and Nynaeve. Birgitte came striding out of the woods shaking her head, and a moment later, Cieryl, trotted from the trees, but with no sense of urgency. There was nothing out there to threaten or inconvenience them.

nɪneɪiv wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ hɝ, aɪbɹaʊz ɹeɪz haɪ.

Nynaeve was watching her, eyebrows raised high.

"aɪ dɪdn seɪ ɛniθɪŋ," ɪleɪn sɛd. hɝ hæn kloʊzd ɑn sʌmθɪŋ smɔl, ɹæpt ɪn ɹɑɾɪŋ klɔθ ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn waɪt wʌns. əɹ bɹaʊn. ʃi nu ɪmiɾiətli wʌt wɑz ɪnsaɪd.

"I didn't say anything," Elayne said. Her hand closed on something small, wrapped in rotting cloth that might have been white once. Or brown. She knew immediately what was inside.

"ə ɡʊd θɪŋ fəɹ ju," nɪneɪiv ɡɹʌmbəld, nɑt kwaɪt fɑɹ ɪnʌf ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. "aɪ kæn əbaɪd wɪmən u poʊk ðɛɹ noʊzɪz ɪndə ʌðɝ pipəlz bɪznəs." ɪleɪn lɛɾ ɪt pæs wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə stɑɹt; ʃi wɑz pɹaʊd ðət ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə baɪɾ əɹ tʌŋ.

"A good thing for you," Nynaeve grumbled, not quite far enough under her breath. "I can't abide women who poke their noses into other people's business." Elayne let it pass without so much as a start; she was proud that she did not have to bite her tongue.

stʃɹɪpɪŋ əweɪ ðə dəkeɪd klɔθ ɹɪvild ə smɔl æmbɝ bɹutʃ ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə tɝɾəl. ɪt lʊk laɪk æmbɝ, ɛniweɪ, ən ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn æmbɝ wʌns, bʌt wən ʃi oʊpən hɝsɛlf tə ðə sɔɹs θɹu ɪt, seɪaɪdɑɹ ɹʌʃt ɪndə hɝ, ə tɔɹən kəmpɛɹd tə wʌt ʃi kəd dʒɹɔ seɪfli ɑn əɹ oʊn. nɑɾ ə stʃɹɔŋ æŋɡɹil, bʌt fɑɹ bɛɾɝ ðən nʌθɪŋ. wɪð ɪt, ʃi kəd hændəl twaɪs əz mʌtʃ ə ðə paʊɝ əz nɪneɪiv, ən nɪneɪiv hɝsɛlf wəd də bɛɾɝ stɪl. ɹilisɪŋ ði ɛkstʃɹə floʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ, ʃi slɪp ðə bɹutʃ ɪndə hɝ bɛl paʊtʃ wɪð ə smaɪl ə dɪlaɪɾ ən wɛn bæk tə sɝtʃɪŋ. wɛɹ ðəɹ wɑz wʌn, ðəɹ maɪt bi mɔɹ. ən naʊ ðət ʃi hæd wʌn tə stʌɾi, ʃi maɪt bi eɪbəl tə ɹizən aʊt haʊ tə meɪk ən æŋɡɹil. ðət wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ʃi hæd wɪʃt fɔɹ. ɪt wɑz ɔl ʃi kəd də nɑt tə teɪk ðə bɹutʃ aʊɾ əɡɛn ən bɪɡɪn pɹoʊbɪŋ ɪt ɹaɪt ðɛɹ.

Stripping away the decayed cloth revealed a small amber brooch in the shape of a turtle. It looked like amber, anyway, and it might have been amber once, but when she opened herself to the Source through it, saidar rushed into her, a torrent compared to what she could draw safely on her own. Not a strong angreal, but far better than nothing. With it, she could handle twice as much of the Power as Nynaeve, and Nynaeve herself would do better still. Releasing the extra flow of saidar, she slipped the brooch into her belt pouch with a smile of delight and went back to searching. Where there was one, there might be more. And now that she had one to study, she might be able to reason out how to make an angreal. That was something she had wished for. It was all she could do not to take the brooch out again and begin probing it right there.

vændin hæd bɪn aɪɪŋ nɪneɪiv ən əɹ fəɹ səm taɪm, ən naʊ ʃi hild əɹ slæb-saɪɾəd ɡɛldɪŋ oʊvɝ tə ðɛm ən dɪsmaʊntɪd. ðə ɡɹum ət ðə pækhɔɹsəz hɛd mænədʒd ə disən ɪf ɑkwɝd kɝtsi, mɔɹ ðən ʃi hæd fəɹ ɪleɪn əɹ nɪneɪiv. "jɔɹ biɪŋ kɛɹfəl," vændin sɛd tə ɪleɪn, "æn ðæts vɛɹi ɡʊd. bʌɾ ɪt maɪt bi bɛɾɝ tə liv ðiz θɪŋz əloʊn əntɪl ðəɹ ɪn ðə taʊɝ."

Vandene had been eyeing Nynaeve and her for some time, and now she heeled her slab-sided gelding over to them and dismounted. The groom at the packhorse's head managed a decent if awkward curtsy, more than she had for Elayne or Nynaeve. "You're being careful," Vandene said to Elayne, "and that's very good. But it might be better to leave these things alone until they're in the Tower."

ɪleɪnz maʊθ taɪɾənd. ɪn ðə taʊɝ? əntɪl ðeɪ kəd bi ɪɡzæmən baɪ sʌmwʌn ɛls, wɑz wʌt ʃi mɛnt. sʌmwʌn oʊldɝ ən səpoʊzədli mɔɹ ɪkspɪɹiənst. "aɪ də noʊ wʌɾ aɪm duɪŋ, vændin. aɪ hæv meɪd tɛɹæŋɡɹil, æftɝ ɔl. noʊbɑdi ɛls lɪvɪŋ əz dʌn ðæt." ʃi hæd tɔt ðə beɪsɪks tə səm sɪstɝz, bʌt noʊ wʌn hæd mænədʒ ðə tʃɹɪk ʌv ɪt baɪ ðə taɪm ʃi lɛft fəɹ ɛbu dɑɹ.

Elayne's mouth tightened. In the Tower? Until they could be examined by someone else, was what she meant. Someone older and supposedly more experienced. "I do know what I'm doing, Vandene. I have made ter'angreal, after all. Nobody else living has done that." She had taught the basics to some sisters, but no one had managed the trick of it by the time she left for Ebou Dar.

ði oʊldɝ ɡɹin nɑɾəd, flɪpɪŋ əɹ ɹeɪnz aɪdli əɡɛns ðə pɑm ə hɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɡlʌv. "mɑɹtin dʒənæɾə ɔlsoʊ nu wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ, soʊ aɪ ʌndɝstænd," ʃi sɛd kæʒəwəli. "ʃi wɑz ðə læst sɪstɝ tə ɹɪli meɪk ə bɪznəs ə stʌɾiɪŋ tɛɹæŋɡɹil. ʃi dɪɾ ɪt fəɹ oʊvɝ fɔɹɾi jɪɹz, ɔlmoʊs fɹəm ðə taɪm ʃi ɹitʃt ðə ʃɔl. ʃi wɑz kɛɹfəl, tu, soʊ aɪ wɑz toʊld. ðən wʌn deɪ, mɑɹtinz meɪd faʊn əɹ ʌnkɑnʃəs ɑn ðə flɔɹ ə hɝ sɪɾɪŋ ɹum. bɝn aʊt." ivən ɪn ə kɑnvɝseɪʃənəl toʊn, ðoʊz wɝdz wɝ ə ʃɑɹp slæp. vændinz vɔɪs dɪd nɑɾ ɔltɝ ə hɛɹ, ðoʊ. "hɝ wɔɹɾɝ wɑz dɛd fɹəm ðə ʃɑk. nɑɾ ənjuʒəwəl ɪn keɪsəz laɪk ðæt. wən mɑɹtin keɪm tə, θɹi deɪz leɪɾɝ, ʃi kʊdn ɹikɔl wʌt ʃi hæd bɪn wɝkɪŋ wɪð. ʃi kʊdn ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə pɹisiɾɪŋ wik əɾ ɔl. ðət wɑz mɔɹ ðən twɛnti-faɪv jɪɹz əɡoʊ, ən noʊ wʌn sɪns əz hæd ðə nɝv tə tʌtʃ ɛni ʌv ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðət wɝ ɪn əɹ ɹumz. hɝ noʊts mɛnʃən ɛvɹi læst wʌn, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi hæd dɪskʌvɝd wɑz ɪnɑkjuəs, ɪnəsənt, ivən fɹɪvələs, bʌt. . . ." vændin ʃɹʌɡd. "ʃi faʊn sʌmθɪŋ ʃi wɑzn ɪkspɛktɪŋ."

The older Green nodded, flipping her reins idly against the palm of her riding glove. "Martine Janata also knew what she was doing, so I understand," she said casually. "She was the last sister to really make a business of studying ter'angreal. She did it for over forty years, almost from the time she reached the shawl. She was careful, too, so I was told. Then one day, Martine's maid found her unconscious on the floor of her sitting room. Burned out." Even in a conversational tone, those words were a sharp slap. Vandene's voice did not alter a hair, though. "Her Warder was dead from the shock. Not unusual in cases like that. When Martine came to, three days later, she couldn't recall what she had been working with. She couldn't remember the preceding week at all. That was more than twenty-five years ago, and no one since has had the nerve to touch any of the ter'angreal that were in her rooms. Her notes mentioned every last one, and everything she had discovered was innocuous, innocent, even frivolous, but. . . ." Vandene shrugged. "She found something she wasn't expecting."

ɪleɪn pikt ət bɝdʒɪt, ən faʊn bɝdʒɪt lʊkɪŋ bæk ət hɝ. ʃi dɪd nɑt nid tə si ðə wɝid fɹaʊn ɑn ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz feɪs; ɪt wɑz mɪɹɝɾ ɪn əɹ maɪnd, ɪn ðə smɔl pætʃ ə hɝ maɪn ðət wɑz bɝdʒɪɾ ən ɪn ðə ɹɛst. bɝdʒɪt fɛlt əɹ wɝi, ən ʃi fɛl bɝdʒɪts, əntɪl səmtaɪmz ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə seɪ wɪtʃ wɑz wɪtʃ. ʃi ɹɪsk mɔɹ ðən hɝsɛlf. bʌt ʃi dɪd noʊ wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ. mɔɹ ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls ðɛɹ, ət list. ən ivən ɪf nʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən əpɪɹd, ðeɪ niɾəd ɔl ði æŋɡɹil ʃi kəd faɪnd.

Elayne peeked at Birgitte, and found Birgitte looking back at her. She did not need to see the worried frown on the other woman's face; it was mirrored in her mind, in the small patch of her mind that was Birgitte and in the rest. Birgitte felt her worry, and she felt Birgitte's, until sometimes it was hard to say which was which. She risked more than herself. But she did know what she was doing. More than anyone else there, at least. And even if none of the Forsaken appeared, they needed all the angreal she could find.

"wʌt hæpən tə mɑɹtin?" nɪneɪiv æskt kwaɪətli. "æftɝwɝd, aɪ min." ʃi kəd sɛldəm hɪɹ ʌv ɛniwʌn biɪŋ hɝt wɪθaʊt wɑntɪŋ tə hil ðɛm; ʃi wɑntəd tə hil ɛvɹiθɪŋ.

"What happened to Martine?" Nynaeve asked quietly. "Afterward, I mean." She could seldom hear of anyone being hurt without wanting to Heal them; she wanted to Heal everything.

vændin ɡɹɪməst. ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn ðə wʌn tə bɹɪŋ ʌp mɑɹtin, bʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd nɑt laɪk tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt wɪmən u hæd bɪn bɝn aʊɾ əɹ stɪld. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt laɪk ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðɛm. "ʃi vænɪʃt wʌns ʃi wɑz wɛl ɪnʌf tə slɪp aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ," ʃi sɛd hɝidli. "ði ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪz ðət ʃi wɑz kɔʃəs. aɪ nɛvɝ mɛt hɝ, bʌɾ aɪv bɪn toʊld ʃi tʃɹiɾəd ɛvɹi tɛɹæŋɡɹil əz ɪf ʃi hæd noʊ aɪdiə wʌɾ ɪt maɪt də nɛkst, ivən ðə wʌn ðət meɪks ðə klɔθ fəɹ wɔɹɾɝz' kloʊks, ən noʊbɑdi hæz ɛvɝ bɪn eɪbəl tə meɪk ðət də ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. ʃi wɑz kɛɹfəl, ən ɪt dɪɾ əɹ noʊ ɡʊd."

Vandene grimaced. She might have been the one to bring up Martine, but Aes Sedai did not like talking about women who had been burned out or stilled. They did not like remembering them. "She vanished once she was well enough to slip out of the Tower," she said hurriedly. "The important thing to remember is that she was cautious. I never met her, but I've been told she treated every ter'angreal as if she had no idea what it might do next, even the one that makes the cloth for Warders' cloaks, and nobody has ever been able to make that do anything else. She was careful, and it did her no good."

nɪneɪiv leɪɾ ən ɑɹm əkɹɔs ðə nɪɹli ɛmpti pæniɝ. "meɪbi jə ɹɪli ʃʊd," ʃi bɪɡæn.

Nynaeve laid an arm across the nearly empty pannier. "Maybe you really should," she began.

"noʊ-oʊ-oʊ-oʊ!" mɛɝɪlɪl ʃɹikt.

"No-o-o-o!" Merilille shrieked.

ɪleɪn spʌn, ɪnstɪŋktɪvli oʊpənɪŋ hɝsɛlf θɹu ði æŋɡɹil əɡɛn, oʊnli hæf kɑnʃəs ə seɪaɪdɑɹ flʌɾɪŋ ɪndə nɪneɪiv ən vændin. ðə ɡloʊ ʌv ðə paʊɝ spɹæŋ ʌp ɝaʊn ɛvɹi wʊmən ɪn ðə klɪɹɪŋ u kəɾ ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs. mɛɝɪlɪl wɑz stʃɹeɪnɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl, aɪz bʌlʒɪŋ, wʌn hæn ɹitʃɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ɡeɪtweɪ. ɪleɪn fɹaʊnd. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ðəɹ ɪksɛpt eɪvinhə, ən ðə læs fɔɹ wɔɹɾɝz, stɑɹɾəld ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv wɔkɪŋ əweɪ, sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ðə θɹɛt wɪð sɔɹdz hæf-dʒɹɔn. ðən ʃi ɹilaɪzd wʌɾ eɪvinhə wɑz duɪŋ ən nɪɹli lɔst seɪaɪdɑɹ ɪn əɹ ʃɑk.

Elayne spun, instinctively opening herself through the angreal again, only half conscious of saidar flooding into Nynaeve and Vandene. The glow of the Power sprang up around every woman in the clearing who could embrace the Source. Merilille was straining forward in her saddle, eyes bulging, one hand reaching toward the gateway. Elayne frowned. There was nothing there except Aviendha, and the last four Warders, startled in the middle of walking away, searching for the threat with swords half-drawn. Then she realized what Aviendha was doing and nearly lost saidar in her shock.

ðə ɡeɪtweɪ tʃɹɛmbəld əz eɪvinhə kɛɹfəli pɪkt əpɑɹt ðə wiv ðət hæd meɪɾ ɪt. ɪt ʃɪvɝɾ ən flɛkst, ði ɛdʒəz weɪvɝɪŋ. ðə læs floʊz keɪm lus, ən ɪnstɛɾ ʌv wɪŋkɪŋ aʊt, ði oʊpənɪŋ ʃɪmɝd, ðə vju θɹu ɪɾ ə ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd feɪɾɪŋ əweɪ əntɪl ɪɾ ɪvæpɝeɪɾəd laɪk mɪst ɪn ðə sʌn.

The gateway trembled as Aviendha carefully picked apart the weave that had made it. It shivered and flexed, the edges wavering. The last flows came loose, and instead of winking out, the opening shimmered, the view through it of the courtyard fading away until it evaporated like mist in the sun.

"ðæɾ ɪz ɪmpɑsəbəl!" ɹɪneɪl sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. ən əstɑnɪʃt mɝmɝ ʌv əɡɹimən bɹoʊk aʊɾ əmʌŋ ðə wɪndfɪndɝz. ðə kɪnswɪmən ɡeɪpt əɾ eɪvinhə, maʊðz wɝkɪŋ saʊnləsli.

"That is impossible!" Renaile said incredulously. An astonished murmur of agreement broke out among the Windfinders. The Kinswomen gaped at Aviendha, mouths working soundlessly.

ɪleɪn nɑɾəd sloʊli ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf. klɪɹli ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl, bʌt wʌn ə ðə fɝs θɪŋz ʃi hæd bɪn toʊld əz ə nɑvəs wɑz ðət nɛvɝ, ɛvɝ, ʌndɝ ɛni sɝkəmstænsəz wɑz ʃi tə tʃɹaɪ wʌɾ eɪvinhə hæd dʒʌs dʌn. pɪkɪŋ əpɑɹɾ ə wiv, ɛni wiv, ɹæðɝ ðən sɪmpli lɛɾɪŋ ɪt dɪsəpeɪt, kəd nɑt bi dʌn, ʃi hæd bɪn toʊld, nɑt wɪθaʊɾ ɪnɛvəɾəbəl dɪzæstɝ. ɪnɛvəɾəbəl.

Elayne nodded slowly in spite of herself. Clearly it was possible, but one of the first things she had been told as a novice was that never, ever, under any circumstances was she to try what Aviendha had just done. Picking apart a weave, any weave, rather than simply letting it dissipate, could not be done, she had been told, not without inevitable disaster. Inevitable.

"ju ful ɡɝl!" vændin snæpt, hɝ feɪs ə θʌndɝhɛd. ʃi stʃɹoʊd təwɔɹɾ eɪvinhə dʒɹæɡɪŋ əɹ ɡɛldɪŋ bɪhaɪnd. "du jə ɹilaɪz wʌt jə ɔlmoʊs dɪd? wʌn slɪp - wʌn! - ən ðɛɹz noʊ seɪɪŋ wʌt ðə wiv wɪl snæp ɪntu, əɹ wʌɾ ɪɾəl du! jə kəɾ əv kəmplitli dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ fəɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz! faɪv hʌnʒɹəd! ɛvɹiθɪŋ! jə cʊɾə bɝn jɝsɛlf aʊɾ ən - "

"You fool girl!" Vandene snapped, her face a thunderhead. She strode toward Aviendha dragging her gelding behind. "Do you realize what you almost did? One slip - one! - and there's no saying what the weave will snap into, or what it will do! You could have completely destroyed everything for a hundred paces! Five hundred! Everything! You could have burned yourself out and - "

"ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi," eɪvinhə kʌɾ ɪn. ə bæbəl ɪɹʌptəd fɹəm ðə maʊntəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ kɹaʊɾɪŋ ɝaʊn əɹ ən vændin, bʌt ʃi ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ əm ən ɹeɪzd əɹ vɔɪs oʊvɝ ðɛɹz. "aɪ noʊ ðə deɪnʒɝz, vændin neɪmɛl, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi. ɪz ðɪs ənʌðɝ θɪŋ jə ɛɛs sədaɪ kænɑt du? ðə waɪz wʌnz seɪ ɛni wʊmən kən lɝn, ɪf ʃiz tɔt, səm wɪmən mɔɹ ən səm lɛs, bʌɾ ɛni wʊmən, ɪf ʃi kən pɪk aʊɾ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi." ʃi dɪd nɑt kwaɪt snɪɹ. nɑt kwaɪt.

"It was necessary," Aviendha cut in. A babble erupted from the mounted Aes Sedai crowding around her and Vandene, but she glared at them and raised her voice over theirs. "I know the dangers, Vandene Namelle, but it was necessary. Is this another thing you Aes Sedai cannot do? The Wise Ones say any woman can learn, if she is taught, some women more and some less, but any woman, if she can pick out embroidery." She did not quite sneer. Not quite.

"ðɪs ɪz nɑɾ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi, ɡɝl!" mɛɝɪlɪlz vɔɪs wɑz dip wɪntɝ aɪs. "wʌtɛvɝ soʊ-kɔl tʃɹeɪnɪŋ jə ɹəsivd əmʌŋ jəɹ pipəl, jə kænɑt pɑsəbli noʊ wʌt jə ɑɹ pleɪɪŋ wɪð! jəl pɹɑməs mi - swɛɹ tə mi! - ðət jəl nɛvɝ də ðɪs əɡɛn!"

"This is not embroidery, girl!" Merilille's voice was deep winter ice. "Whatever so-called training you received among your people, you cannot possibly know what you are playing with! You will promise me - swear to me! - that you will never do this again!"

"hɝ neɪm ʃəd bi ɪn ðə nɑvəs bʊk," sɝaɪðə sɛd fɝmli, ɡlɛɹɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə boʊl stɪl hɛl fɝmli tə hɝ bʊzəm. "aɪv ɔlweɪz sɛɾ ɪt. ʃi ʃəd bi ɛntɝɾ ɪn ðə bʊk." kɛɝin nɑɾəd, hɝ stɝn ɡeɪz mɛʒɝɪŋ eɪvinhə fəɹ ə nɑvəs dʒɹɛs.

"Her name should be in the novice book," Sareitha said firmly, glaring across the Bowl still held firmly to her bosom. "I've always said it. She should be entered in the book." Careane nodded, her stern gaze measuring Aviendha for a novice dress.

"ðæt maɪt nɑt bi nɛsəsɛɹi fəɹ ðə moʊmənt," æɾɪliz toʊld eɪvinhə, linɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl, "bʌt jə mʌs lɛt jɝsɛlf bi ɡaɪɾəd baɪ ʌs." ðə bɹaʊn sɪstɝz toʊn wɑz mʌtʃ maɪldɝ ðən ði ʌðɝz', jɛt ʃi wɑz nɑt meɪkɪŋ ə sədʒɛstʃən.

"That might not be necessary for the moment," Adeleas told Aviendha, leaning forward in her saddle, "but you must let yourself be guided by us." The Brown sister's tone was much milder than the others', yet she was not making a suggestion.

ə mʌnθ əɹ soʊ ɝliɝ, eɪvinhə maɪɾ əv bɪɡʌn tə wɪlt ʌndɝ ɔl ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪsəpɹuvəl, bʌt nɑt naʊ. ɪleɪn hɝidli pʊʃt ɪn əmʌŋ ðə hɔɹsəz bɪfɔɹ əɹ fɹɛn dɪsaɪɾɪd tə dʒɹɔ ðə naɪf ʃi wɑz fɑndəlɪŋ. əɹ tə də sʌmθɪŋ wɝs. "meɪbi sʌmbɑɾi ʃəɾ æsk waɪ ʃi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi," ʃi sɛd, slɪpɪŋ ən ɑɹm ɝaʊn eɪvinhəz ʃoʊldɝz əz mʌtʃ tə kip əɹ ɑɹmz əɾ əɹ saɪdz əz fəɹ kʌmfɝt.

A month or so earlier, Aviendha might have begun to wilt under all that Aes Sedai disapproval, but not now. Elayne hurriedly pushed in among the horses before her friend decided to draw the knife she was fondling. Or to do something worse. "Maybe somebody should ask why she thought it was necessary," she said, slipping an arm around Aviendha's shoulders as much to keep her arms at her sides as for comfort.

eɪvinhə dɪd nɑt kwaɪɾ ɪnkluɾ əɹ ɪn ði ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd lʊk ʃi ɡeɪv ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz. "ðɪs livz noʊ ɹɛzədu," ʃi sɛd peɪʃənli. tu peɪʃənli. "ðə ɹɛzəduz ʌv ə wiv ðɪs lɑɹdʒ maɪt bi ɹɛd tu deɪz fɹəm naʊ."

Aviendha did not quite include her in the exasperated look she gave the other sisters. "This leaves no residue," she said patiently. Too patiently. "The residues of a weave this large might be read two days from now."

mɛɝɪlɪl snɔɹɾɪd, ə vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋ saʊn tə kʌm fɹəm ðət slaɪt bɑɾi. "ðæɾ ɪz ə ɹɛɹ tælənt, ɡɝl. niðɝ tɛslɪn nɔɹ dʒoʊlin əz ɪt. əɹ dʒju il waɪldɝz ɔl lɝn ðəɾ əz wɛl?"

Merilille snorted, a very strong sound to come from that slight body. "That is a rare Talent, girl. Neither Teslyn nor Joline has it. Or do you Aiel wilders all learn that as well?"

"fju kən də ɪt," eɪvinhə ədmɪɾəd kɑmli. "bʌɾ aɪ kæn." ðət pɹədust ə dɪfɹən sɔɹɾ ə stɛɹ, fɹəm ɪleɪn əz wɛl; ɪt wɑz ə vɛɹi ɹɛɹ tælənt. ʃi dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs. "du jə kleɪm ðət nʌn ə ðə ʃæɾoʊsuld kæn?" ʃi wɛn ɑn. ðə taɪtnəs ə hɝ ʃoʊldɝ ʌndɝ ɪleɪnz hæn sɛd ʃi wɑz nɑt soʊ kul əz ʃi pɹitɛndəd. "ɑɹ jə sətʃ fulz ðət jə liv tʃɹæks fəɹ jəɹ ɛnəmiz tə fɑloʊ? ɛni hu kəd ɹid ðə ɹɛzəduz kəd meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ tə ðɪs spɑt."

"Few can do it," Aviendha admitted calmly. "But I can." That produced a different sort of stare, from Elayne as well; it was a very rare Talent. She did not seem to notice. "Do you claim that none of the Shadowsouled can?" she went on. The tightness of her shoulder under Elayne's hand said she was not so cool as she pretended. "Are you such fools that you leave tracks for your enemies to follow? Any who could read the residues could make a gateway to this spot."

ðət wʊɾə teɪkən ɡɹeɪt dɛkstɛɹəɾi, vɛɹi ɡɹeɪt dɛkstɛɹəɾi, bʌt ðə sədʒɛstʃən wɑz ɪnʌf tə liv mɛɝɪlɪl blɪŋkɪŋ. æɾɪliz oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, ðən kloʊzd ɪt wɪθaʊt spikɪŋ, ən vændin fɹaʊn θɔtfəli. sɝaɪðə sɪmpli lʊkt wɝid. hu kəd seɪ wʌt tæləns ðə fɔɹseɪkən hæd, wʌt skɪl?

That would have taken great dexterity, very great dexterity, but the suggestion was enough to leave Merilille blinking. Adeleas opened her mouth, then closed it without speaking, and Vandene frowned thoughtfully. Sareitha simply looked worried. Who could say what Talents the Forsaken had, what skill?

stʃɹeɪnʒli, ɔl ðə fɪɹsnəs dʒɹeɪn aʊɾ ʌv eɪvinhə. hɝ aɪz fɛl, hɝ ʃoʊldɝz lusənd. "pɝhæps aɪ ʃəd nɑɾ əv teɪkən ðə ɹɪsk," ʃi mʌɾɝd. "wɪð ðət mæn wɑtʃɪŋ mi, aɪ kəd nɑt θɪŋk klɪɹli, ən wən i dɪsəpɪɹd. . . ." ə lɪɾəl ə hɝ spɪɹət ɹɪtɝnd, bʌt nɑɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil. "aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ə mæn kəd ɹid maɪ wivz," ʃi sɛd tə ɪleɪn, "bʌɾ ɪf i wɑz wʌn ə ðə ʃæɾoʊsuld, əɹ ivən ðə ɡoʊləm. . . . ðə ʃæɾoʊsuld noʊ mɔɹ ðən ɛni ʌv ʌs. ɪf aɪ wɑz ɹɔŋ, aɪ hæv ɡɹeɪt toʊ. bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk aɪ wɑz. aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ɪt."

Strangely, all the fierceness drained out of Aviendha. Her eyes fell, her shoulders loosened. "Perhaps I should not have taken the risk," she muttered. "With that man watching me, I could not think clearly, and when he disappeared. . . ." A little of her spirit returned, but not a great deal. "I do not think a man could read my weaves," she said to Elayne, "but if he was one of the Shadowsouled, or even the gholam. . . . The Shadowsouled know more than any of us. If I was wrong, I have great toh. But I do not think I was. I do not think it."

"wʌt mæn?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd. hɝ hæt hæd bɪn nɑkt əskju ɪn pʊʃɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə hɔɹsəz, ən ðæt, wɪð ðə taɪt fɹaʊn ʃi dɝɛktəɾ əɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪmpɑɹʃəli, meɪɾ əɹ lʊk ɹɛɾi fəɹ ə faɪt. pɝhæps ʃi wɑz. kɛɝinz ɡɛldɪŋ æksədɛntəli nʌdʒd əɹ wɪð ə ʃoʊldɝ, ən ʃi swɑɾɪd ðə blu dʌnz noʊz.

"What man?" Nynaeve demanded. Her hat had been knocked askew in pushing among the horses, and that, with the tight frown she directed at everyone impartially, made her look ready for a fight. Perhaps she was. Careane's gelding accidentally nudged her with a shoulder, and she swatted the blue dun's nose.

"ə sɝvənt," mɛɝɪlɪl sɛd dɪsmɪsɪvli. "wʌtɛvɝ ɔɹɾɝz taɪlɪn ɡeɪv, ɔltɑɹən sɝvəns ɑɹ ən ɪndɪpɛndən lɑt. əɹ pɝhæps əɹ sʌn; ðət bɔɪ ɪz tu kjʊɹiəs baɪ hæf."

"A servant," Merilille said dismissively. "Whatever orders Tylin gave, Altaran servants are an independent lot. Or perhaps her son; that boy is too curious by half."

ðə sɪstɝz ɝaʊn əɹ nɑɾəd, ən kɛɝin sɛd, "wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən wəd hɑɹdli hæv stʊɾ ən wɑtʃt. jə sɛd soʊ jɝsɛlf." ʃi wɑz pæɾɪŋ əɹ ɡɛldɪŋz nɛk ən fɹaʊnɪŋ əkjuzɪŋli ət nɪneɪiv - kɛɝin wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz u ɡeɪv əɹ hɔɹs ðə sɔɹɾ ʌv əfɛkʃən moʊs pipəl ɹɪzɝv fəɹ ɪnfəns - ʃi wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ ət nɪneɪiv, ən nɪneɪiv tʊk ðə wɝdz fəɹ hɝ, tu.

The sisters around her nodded, and Careane said, "One of the Forsaken would hardly have stood and watched. You said so yourself." She was patting her gelding's neck and frowning accusingly at Nynaeve - Careane was one of those who gave her horse the sort of affection most people reserved for infants - she was frowning at Nynaeve, and Nynaeve took the words for her, too.

"meɪbi ɪt wɑz ə sɝvənt, ən meɪbi ɪt wɑz bɛslən. meɪbi." nɪneɪivz snɪf sɛd ʃi dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪt. əɹ ðət ʃi wɑntəɾ əm tə bɪliv ʃi dɪd nɑt; ʃi kəd tɛl jə tə jəɹ feɪs ðət jə wɝ ə blaɪn ɪɾiət, jɛt lɛɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls seɪ ɪt, ən ʃi wəd dɪfɛn jə əntɪl ʃi wɛn hɔɹs. ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi dɪd nɑt sim ɹɛɾi tə dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ ʃi laɪkt eɪvinhə, bʌt ʃi dɛfənətli dɪd nɑt laɪk ði oʊldɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi tʌɡd əɹ hæɾ ɔlmoʊst stʃɹeɪt, ən əɹ fɹaʊn swɛpt əkɹɔs ðɛm, ðən stɑɹɾəd oʊvɝ. "wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz bɛslən əɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ðɛɹz noʊ kɔl tə stæn hɪɹ ɔl deɪ. wi nid tə ɡɛt ɹɛɾi ən muv ɑn tə ðə fɑɹm. wɛl? muv!" ʃi klæpt əɹ hænz ʃɑɹpli, ən ivən vændin ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl stɑɹt.

"Maybe it was a servant, and maybe it was Beslan. Maybe." Nynaeve's sniff said she did not believe it. Or that she wanted them to believe she did not; she could tell you to your face that you were a blind idiot, yet let anyone else say it, and she would defend you until she went hoarse. Of course, she did not seem ready to decide whether she liked Aviendha, but she definitely did not like the older Aes Sedai. She tugged her hat almost straight, and her frown swept across them, then started over. "Whether it was Beslan or the Dark One, there's no call to stand here all day. We need to get ready and move on to the farm. Well? Move!" She clapped her hands sharply, and even Vandene gave a little start.

ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl pɹɛpɝeɪʃən lɛf tə də wən ðə sɪstɝz muv ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz əweɪ. læn ən ði ʌðɝ wɔɹɾɝz hæd nɑt sæɾ ɑn ðɛɹ hilz wʌns ðeɪ ɹilaɪz ðəɹ wɑz noʊ deɪnʒɝ. səm ə ðə sɝvəns hæd ɡɔn bæk θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ bɪfɔɹ eɪvinhə dɪspoʊzd ʌv ɪt, bʌt ðə ɹɛst stʊd wɪð ðə θɹi dʌzən əɹ soʊ pækhɔɹsɪz, əkeɪʒənəli ɡlænsɪŋ ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, klɪɹli wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt mɑɹvəl ðeɪ maɪt pɹədus nɛkst. ðə wɪndfɪndɝz wɝ ɔl maʊntəd, ɪf ɔkwɝdli, ən hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ ɹeɪnz əz ðoʊ ɪkspɛktɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz tə boʊlt ɛni moʊmənt, əɹ pɝhæps spɹaʊt wɪŋz ən teɪk flaɪt. soʊ wɝ ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl, wɪð ə ɡʊd dil mɔɹ ɡɹeɪs, ʌnkənsɝn ðət ðɛɹ skɝts ən pɛɾikoʊts wɝ pʊʃt ʌp pæs ðɛɹ niz, ən wɪð ɪspæn stɪl hʊɾɪd ən taɪɾ əkɹɔs ə sæɾəl laɪk ə sæk. ʃi kəd nɑt pɑsəbli hæv sæɾ əpɹaɪɾ ɑn ə hɔɹs, jɛɾ ivən sumeɪkoʊz aɪz pɑpt wɛnɛvɝ ðeɪ tʌtʃt hɝ.

There was little preparation left to do when the sisters moved their horses away. Lan and the other Warders had not sat on their heels once they realized there was no danger. Some of the servants had gone back through the gateway before Aviendha disposed of it, but the rest stood with the three dozen or so packhorses, occasionally glancing at the Aes Sedai, clearly wondering what marvel they might produce next. The Windfinders were all mounted, if awkwardly, and holding their reins as though expecting their horses to bolt any moment, or perhaps sprout wings and take flight. So were the Knitting Circle, with a good deal more grace, unconcerned that their skirts and petticoats were pushed up past their knees, and with Ispan still hooded and tied across a saddle like a sack. She could not possibly have sat upright on a horse, yet even Sumeko's eyes popped whenever they touched her.

ɡlɛɹɪŋ əbaʊt hɝ, nɪneɪiv lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə tʌŋ-læʃ ɛvɹibɑɾi ɪndə duɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi dʌn, bʌɾ oʊnli əntɪl læn hændəɾ əɹ ðə ɹeɪnz ə hɝ plʌmp bɹaʊn mɛɹ. ʃi hæɾ æɾəməntli ɹəfjuz ðə ɡɪft ʌv ə bɛɾɝ hɔɹs fɹəm taɪlɪn. hɝ hæn tʃɹɛmbəld ə lɪɾəl wən ɪt tʌtʃt lænz, ən əɹ feɪs tʃeɪnʒd kʌlɝ əz ʃi swɑloʊd ði æŋɡɝ ʃi hæd bɪn əbaʊt tə ənliʃ. wən i ɔfɝɾ ə hæn fəɹ əɹ fʊt, ʃi stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm fəɹ ə moʊmən əz ɪf wʌndɝɪŋ wʌɾ i wɑz əbaʊt, ðən kʌlɝɾ əɡɛn wən i bustɪɾ əɹ tə hɝ sæɾəl. ɪleɪn kəɾ oʊnli ʃeɪk əɹ hɛd. ʃi hoʊpt ʃi dɪd nɑt tɝn ɪndə ən ɪɾiət wən ʃi mɛɹid. ɪf ʃi mɛɹid.

Glaring about her, Nynaeve looked ready to tongue-lash everybody into doing what they had already done, but only until Lan handed her the reins of her plump brown mare. She had adamantly refused the gift of a better horse from Tylin. Her hand trembled a little when it touched Lan's, and her face changed color as she swallowed the anger she had been about to unleash. When he offered a hand for her foot, she stared at him for a moment as if wondering what he was about, then colored again when he boosted her to her saddle. Elayne could only shake her head. She hoped she did not turn into an idiot when she married. If she married.

bɝdʒɪt bɹɔɾ əɹ sɪlvɝi-ɡɹeɪ mɛɹ ən ðə jɛloʊ dʌn eɪvinhə ɹoʊd, bʌt ʃi sim tə ʌndɝstæn ðəɾ ɪleɪn wɑntəɾ ə pɹaɪvət wɝd wɪð eɪvinhə. ʃi nɑɾəd ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf ɪleɪn hæd spoʊkən, swʌŋ ʌp ɑntu hɝ maʊs-kʌlɝd ɡɛldɪŋ, ən ɹoʊd tə wɛɹ ði ʌðɝ wɔɹɾɝz wɝ weɪɾɪŋ. ðeɪ ɡɹiɾəd əɹ wɪð nɑdz ən bɪɡæn dɪskʌsɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ɪn loʊ vɔɪsəz. baɪ ðə ɡlænsɪz dɝɛktəɾ ət ðə sɪstɝz, ðə "sʌmθɪŋ" hæd tə də wɪð teɪkɪŋ kɛɹ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑntəd kɛɹ teɪkən əɹ nɑt. ɪnkluɾɪŋ hɝsɛlf, ɪleɪn noʊɾəd ɡɹɪmli. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm naʊ fəɹ ðæt, ðoʊ. eɪvinhə stʊd fɪdlɪŋ wɪð əɹ hɔɹsəz ɹeɪnz, stɛɹɪŋ ət ði ænəməl laɪk ə nɑvəs stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ə kɪtʃən fʊl ʌv ɡɹisi pɑts. vɛɹi laɪkli, eɪvinhə sɔ smɔl dɪfɝəns bɪtwin hævɪŋ tə skɹʌb pɑts ən hævɪŋ tə ɹaɪd.

Birgitte brought her silvery-gray mare and the yellow dun Aviendha rode, but she seemed to understand that Elayne wanted a private word with Aviendha. She nodded almost as if Elayne had spoken, swung up onto her mouse-colored gelding, and rode to where the other Warders were waiting. They greeted her with nods and began discussing something in low voices. By the glances directed at the sisters, the "something" had to do with taking care of Aes Sedai whether Aes Sedai wanted care taken or not. Including herself, Elayne noted grimly. There was no time now for that, though. Aviendha stood fiddling with her horse's reins, staring at the animal like a novice staring at a kitchen full of greasy pots. Very likely, Aviendha saw small difference between having to scrub pots and having to ride.

snʌɡɪŋ əɹ ɡɹin ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɡlʌvz, ɪleɪn kæʒəwəli ʃɪftəd laɪoʊnəs tə blɑk əm fɹəm ði ʌðɝz' vju, ðən tʌtʃt eɪvinhəz ɑɹm. "tɔkɪŋ tə æɾɪliz əɹ vændin maɪt hɛlp," ʃi sɛd dʒɛnli. ʃi hæd tə bi vɛɹi kɛɹfəl hɪɹ, əz kɛɹfəl əz wɪð ɛni tɛɹæŋɡɹil. "ðeɪɹ oʊld ɪnʌf tə noʊ mɔɹ ðən jə maɪt səspɛkt. ðəɹ əz tə bi ə ɹizən juv bɪn . . . hævɪŋ tʃɹʌbəl . . . wɪð tʃɹævlɪŋ." ðət wɑz ə maɪld weɪ ʌv pʊɾɪŋ ɪt. eɪvinhə ɔlmoʊs hæd feɪl tə meɪk ðə wiv wɝk əɾ ɔl, ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. kɛɹfəl. eɪvinhə wɑz fɑɹ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən ɛni tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɛvɝ kəd bi. "ðeɪ maɪt bi eɪbəl tə hɛlp."

Snugging her green riding gloves, Elayne casually shifted Lioness to block them from the others' view, then touched Aviendha's arm. "Talking to Adeleas or Vandene might help," she said gently. She had to be very careful here, as careful as with any ter'angreal. "They're old enough to know more than you might suspect. There has to be a reason you've been . . . having trouble . . . with Traveling." That was a mild way of putting it. Aviendha almost had failed to make the weave work at all, in the beginning. Careful. Aviendha was far more important than any ter'angreal ever could be. "They might be able to help."

"haʊ kən ðeɪ?" eɪvinhə stɛɹd stɪfli ət ðə sæɾəl ɑn əɹ ɡɛldɪŋ. "ðeɪ kænɑt tʃɹævəl. haʊ kəɾ ɛni ʌv əm noʊ haʊ tə hɛlp?" əbɹʌpli hɝ ʃoʊldɝz slʌmpt, ən ʃi tɝn əɹ hɛd tə ɪleɪn. ʃɑkɪŋli, ənʃt tɪɹz ɡlɪsən ɪn əɹ ɡɹin aɪz. "ðæɾ ɪzən ðə tʃɹuθ, ɪleɪn. nɑt ðə hoʊl tʃɹuθ. ðeɪ kænɑt hɛlp, bʌt. . . . jə ɑɹ maɪ nɪɹ-sɪstɝ; juv ðə ɹaɪt tə noʊ. ðeɪ θɪŋk aɪ pænɪkt əɾ ə sɝvənt. ɪf aɪ æsk fəɹ hɛlp, ɪt mʌst ɔl kʌm aʊt. ðəɾ aɪ tʃɹævəld wʌns tə ɹʌn fɹəm ə mæn, ə mæn aɪ hoʊpt ɪn maɪ soʊl wəd kætʃ mi. tə ɹʌn laɪk ə ɹæbət. tə ɹʌn, wɑntɪŋ tə bi kɑt. haʊ kəɾ aɪ lɛɾ əm noʊ sətʃ ʃeɪm? ivən ɪf ðeɪ ɹɪli kəd hɛlp, haʊ kəɾ aɪ?"

"How can they?" Aviendha stared stiffly at the saddle on her gelding. "They cannot Travel. How could any of them know how to help?" Abruptly her shoulders slumped, and she turned her head to Elayne. Shockingly, unshed tears glistened in her green eyes. "That isn't the truth, Elayne. Not the whole truth. They cannot help, but. . . . You are my near-sister; you have the right to know. They think I panicked at a servant. If I ask for help, it must all come out. That I Traveled once to run from a man, a man I hoped in my soul would catch me. To run like a rabbit. To run, wanting to be caught. How could I let them know such shame? Even if they really could help, how could I?"

ɪleɪn wɪʃt ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ. əbaʊt ðə kætʃɪŋ pɑɹt, ət list. əbaʊt ðə fæk ðət ɹænd hæd kɑt hɝ. snætʃɪŋ ðə flɛks ə dʒɛləsi ðət sʌɾənli wɝ floʊɾɪŋ θɹu hɝ, ʃi pʊʃt əm ɪndə ə sæk ən stʌft ɪɾ ɪndə ðə bæk ə hɝ hɛd. ðən ʃi dʒʌmpt ʌp ən daʊn ɑn ɪt fəɹ ɡʊd mɛʒɝ. wən ə wʊmən pleɪz ðə ful, lʊk fəɹ ðə mæn. ðət wɑz wʌn ə liniz feɪvɹɪts. ənʌðɝ wɑz, kɪɾənz tæŋɡəl jəɹ jɑɹn, mɛn tæŋɡəl jəɹ wɪts, ən ɪts sɪmpəl əz bɹiðɪŋ fəɹ boʊθ. ʃi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. "noʊ wʌn wɪl noʊ fɹəm mi, eɪvinhə. əl hɛlp jə əz mʌtʃ əz aɪ kæn. ɪf aɪ kən fɪɡjɝ aʊt haʊ." nɑt ðət ðəɹ wɑz mʌtʃ ʃi kəd θɪŋk tə du. eɪvinhə wɑz ɹɪmɑɹkəbli kwɪk ət siɪŋ haʊ wivz wɝ fɔɹmd, mʌtʃ kwɪkɝ ðən ʃi hɝsɛlf.

Elayne wished she did not know. About the catching part, at least. About the fact that Rand had caught her. Snatching the flecks of jealousy that suddenly were floating through her, she pushed them into a sack and stuffed it into the back of her head. Then she jumped up and down on it for good measure. When a woman plays the fool, look for the man. That was one of Lini's favorites. Another was, Kittens tangle your yarn, men tangle your wits, and it's simple as breathing for both. She drew a deep breath. "No one will know from me, Aviendha. I'll help you as much as I can. If I can figure out how." Not that there was much she could think to do. Aviendha was remarkably quick at seeing how weaves were formed, much quicker than she herself.

eɪvinhə mɪɹli nɑɾəd ən skɹæmbəl klʌmsəli ɪndə hɝ sæɾəl, ʃoʊɪŋ ə bɪt mɔɹ ɡɹeɪs ðən ðə si foʊk. "ðɛɹ wɑz ə mæn wɑtʃɪŋ, ɪleɪn, ən i wɑz noʊ sɝvənt." lʊkɪŋ ɪleɪn ɹaɪɾ ɪn ði aɪ, ʃi æɾəd, "hi fɹaɪɾənd mi." ən ædmɪʃən ʃi laɪkli wʊɾə meɪd tə noʊ wʌn ɛls ɪn ðə wɝld.

Aviendha merely nodded and scrambled clumsily into her saddle, showing a bit more grace than the Sea Folk. "There was a man watching, Elayne, and he was no servant." Looking Elayne right in the eye, she added, "He frightened me." An admission she likely would have made to no one else in the world.

"wɝ seɪf fɹəm ɪm naʊ, huɛvɝ i wɑz," ɪleɪn sɛd, tɝnɪŋ laɪoʊnəs tə fɑloʊ nɪneɪiv ən læn fɹəm ðə klɪɹɪŋ. ɪn tʃɹuθ, ɪt vɛɹi laɪkli hæd bɪn ə sɝvənt, bʌt ʃi wəd nɛvɝ tɛl ðət tə ɛniwʌn, eɪvinhə list ʌv ɔl. "wɝ seɪf, ən ɪn ə fju mɔɹ aʊɝz, wɪl ɹitʃ ðə kɪnz fɑɹm, wɪl juz ðə boʊl, ən ðə wɝld wɪl bi ɹaɪɾ əɡɛn." wɛl, sʌmwʌt. ðə sʌn sim loʊɝ ðən ɪt hæɾ ɪn ðə steɪbliɑɹd, bʌt ʃi nu ðət wɑz oʊnli ɪmædʒəneɪʃən. fəɹ wʌns, ðeɪ hæd ɡeɪn ə klɪɹ dʒʌmp ɑn ðə ʃædoʊ.

"We're safe from him now, whoever he was," Elayne said, turning Lioness to follow Nynaeve and Lan from the clearing. In truth, it very likely had been a servant, but she would never tell that to anyone, Aviendha least of all. "We're safe, and in a few more hours, we will reach the Kin's farm, we'll use the Bowl, and the world will be right again." Well, somewhat. The sun seemed lower than it had in the stableyard, but she knew that was only imagination. For once, they had gained a clear jump on the Shadow.

fɹəm bɪhaɪn ə skɹin ʌv waɪt ɹɔɾ aɪɝn, mɔɹaɪɾɪn wɑtʃt ðə læst ə ðə hɔɹsəz vænɪʃ θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, ən ðən ðə tɔl jʌŋ wʊmən ən ðə fɔɹ wɔɹɾɝz. ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl ðeɪ wɝ kæɹiɪŋ əweɪ səm aɪɾəm i kəd juz - ən æŋɡɹil ətun tə mɛn, pɝhæps - bʌt ðə tʃænsəz wɝ smɔl. fəɹ ðə ɹɛst, ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst laɪklihʊd wɑz ðət ðeɪ wəd kɪl ðɛmsɛlvz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʌzəl aʊt haʊ tə juz ðɛm. sɑmaɪl wɑz ə ful tə hæv ɹɪsk soʊ mʌtʃ tə siz ə kəlɛkʃən ə noʊ wʌn nu wʌt. bʌt ðɛn, sɑmaɪl hæd nɛvɝ bɪn hæf əz klɛvɝ əz i θɔt. hi hɪmsɛlf wəd nɑt dɪsɹʌpt ɪz oʊn plænz mɪɹli ɑn ði ɔf tʃæns, tə si wʌt skɹæps ə sɪvəlɪzeɪʃən i kəd faɪnd. oʊnli aɪɾəl kjʊɹiɑsəɾi hæd bɹɔɾ ɪm hɪɹ. hi laɪk tə noʊ wʌɾ ʌðɝz θɔɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz dʒɹɔs.

From behind a screen of white wrought iron, Moridin watched the last of the horses vanish through the gateway, and then the tall young woman and the four Warders. It was possible they were carrying away some item he could use - an angreal attuned to men, perhaps - but the chances were small. For the rest, the ter'angreal, the greatest likelihood was that they would kill themselves trying to puzzle out how to use them. Sammael was a fool to have risked so much to seize a collection of no one knew what. But then, Sammael had never been half as clever as he thought. He himself would not disrupt his own plans merely on the off chance, to see what scraps of civilization he could find. Only idle curiosity had brought him here. He liked to know what others thought important. But it was dross.

hi wɑz əbaʊt tə tɝn əweɪ wən ði aʊtlaɪnz ə ðə ɡeɪtweɪ sʌɾənli bɪɡæn tə flɛks ən tʃɹɛmbəl. tʃɹænsfɪkst, hi wɑtʃt əntɪl ði oʊpənɪŋ sɪmpli - mɛltəd. hi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn ə mæn tə ɡɪv weɪ tə ɑbsɛnɪɾiz, bʌt sɛvɹəl ɹoʊz ɪn ɪz maɪnd. wʌt hæd ðə wʊmən dʌn? ðiz bɑɹbɝəs ɹʌstɪks ɔfɝd tu mɛni sɝpɹaɪzəz. ə weɪ tə hil biɪŋ sɛvɝd, haʊɛvɝ ɪmpɝfɪkli. ðət wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl! ɪksɛp ðət ðeɪ hæd dʌn ɪt. ɪnvɑləntɛɹi ɹɪŋz. ðoʊz wɔɹɾɝz ən ðə bɑn ðeɪ ʃɛɹd wɪð ðɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ. hi hæd noʊn ə ðət fəɹ ə lɔŋ, lɔŋ taɪm, bʌt wɛnɛvɝ i θɔɾ i hæd ðə mɛʒɝ ə ðɛm, ðiz pɹɪmɪɾɪvz ɹɪvil səm nu skɪl, dɪd sʌmθɪŋ ðət noʊ wʌn ɪn ɪz oʊn eɪdʒ hæd dʒɹimd ʌv. sʌmθɪŋ ðə pɪnəkəl ə sɪvəlɪzeɪʃən hæd nɑt noʊn! wʌt hæd ðə ɡɝl dʌn?

He was about to turn away when the outlines of the gateway suddenly began to flex and tremble. Transfixed, he watched until the opening simply - melted. He had never been a man to give way to obscenities, but several rose in his mind. What had the woman done? These barbarous rustics offered too many surprises. A way to Heal being severed, however imperfectly. That was impossible! Except that they had done it. Involuntary rings. Those Warders and the bond they shared with their Aes Sedai. He had known of that for a long, long time, but whenever he thought he had the measure of them, these primitives revealed some new skill, did something that no one in his own Age had dreamed of. Something the pinnacle of civilization had not known! What had the girl done?

"ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ?"

"Great Master?"

mɔɹaɪɾɪn bɛɹli tɝn ɪz hɛd fɹəm ðə wɪndoʊ. "jɛs, mæɾɪk?" hɝ soʊl bi dæmd, wʌt hæd ðə ɡɝl dʌn?

Moridin barely turned his head from the window. "Yes, Madic?" Her soul be damned, what had the girl done?

ðə bɔldɪŋ mæn ɪn ɡɹin-ænd-waɪɾ u hæd slɪpt ɪndə ðə smɔl ɹum baʊd dipli bɪfɔɹ fɔlɪŋ tə hɪz niz. wʌn ə ði ʌpɝ sɝvəns ɪn ðə pæləs, mæɾɪk, wɪð ɪz lɔŋ feɪs, pəzɛst ə pɑmpəs dɪɡnəɾi ðəɾ i tʃɹaɪd tə meɪnteɪn ivən naʊ. mɔɹaɪɾɪn hæd sin mɛn u stʊd fɑɹ haɪɝ də fɑɹ wɝs. "ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ, aɪ hæv lɝnd wʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ bɹɔt tə ðə pæləs ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. ɪts sɛd ðeɪ faʊn ə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹɛʒɝ hɪɾən ɪn eɪntʃən deɪz, ɡoʊld ən dʒuəlz ən hɑɹtstoʊn, ɑɹɾəfækts fɹəm ʃioʊɾə ən ɛɹən ən ivən ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ðəɹ ɑɹ sɛd tə bi θɪŋz əmʌŋ əm ðət juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ɪts sɛd ðət wʌn kən kəntʃɹoʊl ðə wɛðɝ. noʊ wʌn noʊz wɛɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ, ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ. ðə pæləs ɪz ækwaɪvɝ wɪð tɔk, bʌt tɛn tʌŋz neɪm tɛn dɪfɹən dɛstəneɪʃənz."

The balding man in green-and-white who had slipped into the small room bowed deeply before falling to his knees. One of the upper servants in the palace, Madic, with his long face, possessed a pompous dignity that he tried to maintain even now. Moridin had seen men who stood far higher do far worse. "Great Master, I have learned what the Aes Sedai brought to the palace this morning. It is said they found a great treasure hidden in ancient days, gold and jewels and heartstone, artifacts from Shiota and Eharon and even the Age of Legends. There are said to be things among them that use the One Power. It is said that one can control the weather. No one knows where they are going, Great Master. The palace is aquiver with talk, but ten tongues name ten different destinations."

mɔɹaɪɾɪn wɛn bæk tə stʌɾiɪŋ ðə steɪbliɑɹd bɪloʊ əz sun əz mæɾɪk spoʊk. ɹɪdɪkjələs teɪlz ʌv ɡoʊld ən kwəndɪlɝ hɛl noʊ ɪntʃɹəst. nʌθɪŋ wəd meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ bɪheɪv ðət weɪ. ənlɛs. . . . kəd ʃi æktʃəli  hæv ənɹævəl ðə wɛb? dɛθ hɛl noʊ fɪɹ fəɹ hɪm. koʊldli hi kənsɪɾɝd ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ðəɾ i hæd bɪn wɪðɪn saɪɾ ʌv ən ənɹævəlɪŋ wɛb. wʌn ðət hæd bɪn ənmeɪd səksɛsfəli. ənʌðɝ ɪmpɔsɪbɪlɪɾi kæʒəwəli ɔfɝɾ ʌp baɪ ðiz . . .

Moridin went back to studying the stableyard below as soon as Madic spoke. Ridiculous tales of gold and cuendillar held no interest. Nothing would make a gateway behave that way. Unless. . . . Could she actually have unraveled the web? Death held no fear for him. Coldly he considered the possibility that he had been within sight of an unraveling web. One that had been unmade successfully. Another impossibility casually offered up by these . . .

sʌmθɪŋ mæɾɪk hæd sɛd kɑɾ ɪz ɪɹ. "ðə wɛðɝ, mæɾɪk?" ðə ʃædoʊz ə ðə pæləs spaɪɹz hæd bɛɹli lɛŋθən fɹəm ðɛɹ beɪsəz, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ə klaʊd tə ʃil ðə beɪkɪŋ sɪɾi.

Something Madic had said caught his ear. "The weather, Madic?" The shadows of the palace spires had barely lengthened from their bases, but there was not a cloud to shield the baking city.

"jɛs, ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ. ɪts kɔl ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz."

"Yes, Great Master. It is called the Bowl of the Winds."

ðə neɪm mɛnt nʌθɪŋ tə hɪm. bʌt . . . ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil tə kəntʃɹoʊl ðə wɛðɝ. . . . ɪn ɪz oʊn eɪdʒ, wɛðɝ hæd bɪn kɛɹfəli ɹɛɡjəleɪɾəd wɪð ðə jus ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil. wʌn ə ðə sɝpɹaɪzəz ə ðɪs eɪdʒ - wʌn ə ðə smɔlɝ, ɪt hæd simd - wɑz ðət ðəɹ wɝ ðoʊz u kəd mənɪpjəleɪt wɛðɝ tə ə dɪɡɹi ðət ʃʊɾə ɹikwaɪɝd wʌn ə ðoʊz tɛɹæŋɡɹil. wʌn sətʃ dɪvaɪs ʃəd nɑt bi ɪnʌf tə əfɛkt ivən ə lɑɹdʒ pɑɹɾ ʌv ə sɪŋɡəl kɑntənənt. bʌt wʌt kəd ðiz wɪmən də wɪð ɪt? wʌt? ɪf ðeɪ juzd ə ɹɪŋ?

The name meant nothing to him. But . . . a ter'angreal to control the weather. . . . In his own Age, weather had been carefully regulated with the use of ter'angreal. One of the surprises of this Age - one of the smaller, it had seemed - was that there were those who could manipulate weather to a degree that should have required one of those ter'angreal. One such device should not be enough to affect even a large part of a single continent. But what could these women do with it? What? If they used a ring?

hi siz ðə tʃɹu. paʊɝ wɪθaʊt θɔt, ðə sæɑ bɪloʊɪŋ blæk əkɹɔs ɪz saɪt. hɪz fɪŋɡɝz taɪɾənd ɪn ðə ɹɔt-aɪɝn ɡɹɪl əkɹɔs ðə wɪndoʊ; ðə mɛɾəl ɡɹoʊnd, twɪstɪŋ, nɑt fɹəm ɪz ɡɹɪp bʌt fɹəm ðə tɛnʒɹəlz ə ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ, dʒɹɔn fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd hɪmsɛlf, ðət ɹɛðd ɝaʊn ðə ɡɹɪlwɝk, flɛksɪŋ əz i flɛkst ɪz hæn ɪn æŋɡɝ. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd wəd nɑt bi plizd. hi hæd stʃɹeɪn fɹəm ɪz pɹɪzən tə tʌtʃ ðə wɝld ɪnʌf tə fɪks ðə sizənz ɪn pleɪs. hi wɑz ɪmpeɪʃən tə tʌtʃ ðə wɝl mɔɹ, tə ʃæɾɝ ðə vɔɪd ðət kənteɪn hɪm, ən i wəd nɑt bi plizd. ɹeɪdʒ ɛnvɛləp mɔɹaɪɾɪn, blʌd paʊndɪŋ ɪn ɪz ɪɹz. ə moʊmən pæst, hi hæd nɑt kɛɹd wɛɹ ðoʊz wɪmən wɛnt, bʌt naʊ. . . . sʌmwɛɹ fɑɹ fɹəm hɪɹ. pipəl fliɪŋ ɹæn əz fɑɹ ən əz fæst əz ðeɪ kʊd. sʌmwɛɹ ðeɪ fɛl seɪf. noʊ jus sɛndɪŋ mæɾɪk tə æsk kwɛstʃənz, noʊ jus skwizɪŋ ɛniwʌn hɪɹ; ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn ful ɪnʌf tə liv ɛniwʌn bɪhaɪn əlaɪv u nu ðɛɹ dɛstəneɪʃən. nɑt tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. tə ælθɹ? tə ðət bæn ə ɹɛbəl ɛɛs sədaɪ? ɪn ɔl θɹi pleɪsəz i hæɾ aɪz, səm ðət dɪd nɑt noʊ ðeɪ sɝv hɪm. ɔl wəd sɝv hɪm, bɪfɔɹ ði ɛnd. hi wəd nɑɾ əlaʊ tʃæns slɪps tə spɔɪl ɪz plænz naʊ.

He seized the True. Power without thought, the saa billowing black across his sight. His fingers tightened in the wrought-iron grille across the window; the metal groaned, twisting, not from his grip but from the tendrils of the True Power, drawn from the Great Lord himself, that wreathed around the grillework, flexing as he flexed his hand in anger. The Great Lord would not be pleased. He had strained from his prison to touch the world enough to fix the seasons in place. He was impatient to touch the world more, to shatter the void that contained him, and he would not be pleased. Rage enveloped Moridin, blood pounding in his ears. A moment past, he had not cared where those women went, but now. . . . Somewhere far from here. People fleeing ran as far and as fast as they could. Somewhere they felt safe. No use sending Madic to ask questions, no use squeezing anyone here; they would not have been fool enough to leave anyone behind alive who knew their destination. Not to Tar Valon. To al'Thor? To that band of rebel Aes Sedai? In all three places he had eyes, some that did not know they served him. All would serve him, before the end. He would not allow chance slips to spoil his plans now.

əbɹʌpli hi hɝd sʌmθɪŋ ʌðɝ ðən ðə θʌndɝɪŋ dʒɹʌmbiɾ ə hɪz oʊn fjʊɹi. ə bʌbəlɪŋ saʊnd. hi lʊkt ət mæɾɪk kjʊɹiəsli, ən stɛp bæk fɹəm ðə spɹɛɾɪŋ pʌɾəl ɑn ðə flɔɹ. ɪt sim ðəɾ ɪn ɪz æŋɡɝ i hæd sizd ət mɔɹ ðən ðə ɹɔt-aɪɝn skɹin wɪð ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ. ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl haʊ mʌtʃ blʌd kəd bi skwiz fɹəm ə hjumən bɑɾi.

Abruptly he heard something other than the thundering drumbeat of his own fury. A bubbling sound. He looked at Madic curiously, and stepped back from the spreading puddle on the floor. It seemed that in his anger he had seized at more than the wrought-iron screen with the True Power. Remarkable how much blood could be squeezed from a human body.

hi lɛt wʌt ɹɪmeɪn ə ðə mæn fɔl wɪθaʊt ɹəɡɹɛt; ɪndid, θɪŋkɪŋ oʊnli ðət wən mæɾɪk wɑz faʊnd, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd ʃʊɹli bi bleɪmd. ə smɔl ədɪʃən tə ðə keɪɑs ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝld. ɹɪpɪŋ ə hoʊl ɪn ðə fæbɹɪk ə ðə pæɾɝn, hi tʃɹævəld wɪð ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ. hi hæd tə faɪn ðoʊz wɪmən bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ juz ðɪs boʊl ə ðə wɪnz. ən feɪlɪŋ ðæt. . . . hi dɪslaɪk pipəl mɛɾəlɪŋ wɪð ɪz kɛɹfəli leɪd plænz. ðoʊz u dɪd soʊ ən lɪvd, lɪv tə peɪ.

He let what remained of the man fall without regret; indeed, thinking only that when Madic was found, the Aes Sedai would surely be blamed. A small addition to the chaos growing in the world. Ripping a hole in the fabric of the Pattern, he Traveled with the True Power. He had to find those women before they used this Bowl of the Winds. And failing that. . . . He disliked people meddling with his carefully laid plans. Those who did so and lived, lived to pay.

ðə ɡoʊləm stɛpt ɪndə ðə ɹum kɔʃəsli, nɑstʃɹəlz ɔlɹɛɾi twɪtʃɪŋ wɪð ðə sɛn ə stɪl hɑt blʌd. ðə lɪvɪd bɝn ɑn ɪts tʃik sim laɪk ə laɪv koʊl. ðə ɡoʊləm əpɪɹd tə bi mɪɹli ə slɛndɝ mæn, ə lɪɾəl tɔlɝ ðən ævɝɪdʒ ɪn ðɪs taɪm, jɛɾ ɪt hæd nɛvɝ ɪnkaʊntɝɾ ɛniθɪŋ ðət kəd hɑɹm ɪt. əntɪl ðət mæn wɪð ðə mədæljən. wʌt maɪɾ əv bɪn smaɪl əɹ snɑɹl bɛɹɾ ɪts tiθ. kjʊɹiəs, ɪt pɪɹɾ ɝaʊn ðə ɹum, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ bɪɑn ðə kɹʌʃt kɔɹps ɑn ðə flɔɹ taɪlz. ən ə . . . fil . . . ʌv sʌmθɪŋ. nɑt ðə wʌn paʊɝ, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ ðət meɪɾ ɪt . . . ɪtʃ, ɪf nɑt kwaɪɾ ɪn ðə seɪm weɪ. kjʊɹiɑsəɾi hæd bɹɔɾ ɪt hɪɹ. pɑɹts ə ðə ɡɹɪl oʊvɝ ðə wɪndoʊ wɝ kɹʌʃt, pʊlɪŋ ðə hoʊl θɪŋ lus ət ðə saɪdz. ðə ɡoʊləm sim tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ sʌmθɪŋ ðət meɪɾ ɪɾ ɪtʃ ɪn ðət mænɝ, jɛt soʊ mʌtʃ ʌv wʌɾ ɪt ɹɪkɔld wɑz fɑɡd ən dɪm. ðə wɝl hæd tʃeɪnʒd, əz ɪt simd, ɪn ðə blɪŋk ʌv ən aɪ. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə wɝld ʌv wɔɹ ən kɪlɪŋ ɑn ə hjudʒ skeɪl, wɪð wɛpənz ðət ɹitʃt əkɹɔs maɪlz, əkɹɔs θaʊzənz ə maɪlz, ən ðən ðəɹ wɑz . . . ðɪs. bʌt ðə ɡoʊləm hæd nɑt tʃeɪnʒd. ɪt wɑz stɪl ðə moʊs deɪnʒɝəs wɛpən ʌv ɔl.

The gholam stepped into the room cautiously, nostrils already twitching with the scent of still hot blood. The livid burn on its cheek seemed like a live coal. The gholam appeared to be merely a slender man, a little taller than average in this time, yet it had never encountered anything that could harm it. Until that man with the medallion. What might have been smile or snarl bared its teeth. Curious, it peered around the room, but there was nothing beyond the crushed corpse on the floor tiles. And a . . . feel . . . of something. Not the One Power, but something that made it . . . itch, if not quite in the same way. Curiosity had brought it here. Parts of the grille over the window were crushed, pulling the whole thing loose at the sides. The gholam seemed to remember something that made it itch in that manner, yet so much of what it recalled was fogged and dim. The world had changed, as it seemed, in the blink of an eye. There had been a world of war and killing on a huge scale, with weapons that reached across miles, across thousands of miles, and then there was . . . this. But the gholam had not changed. It was still the most dangerous weapon of all.

ɪts nɑstʃɹəlz flɛɹɾ əɡɛn, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz nɑt baɪ sɛn ðəɾ ɪt tʃɹæk ðoʊz u kəd tʃænəl. ðə wʌn paʊɝ hæd bɪn juz bɪloʊ, ən maɪlz tə ðə nɔɹθ. tə fɑloʊ, əɹ nɑt? ðə mæn u hæd wundəɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt wɪð ðɛm; ɪt hæd meɪd ʃʊɹ ə ðət bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ ðə haɪ væntədʒ pleɪs. ðə wʌn u kəmændəɾ ɪt wɑntəd ðə mæn u hæd wundəɾ ɪt dɛd pɝhæps əz mʌtʃ əz i dɪd ðə wɪmən, bʌt ðə wɪmən wɝ ən iziɝ tɑɹɡət. ðə wɪmən hæd bɪn neɪmd, tu, ən fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ, ɪt wɑz kənstʃɹeɪnd. fəɹ ɪts ɪntaɪɝ ɛɡzɪstəns ɪt hæd bɪn kəmpɛl tə oʊbeɪ wʌn əɹ ənʌðɝ hjumən, bʌɾ ɪts maɪn hɛl ðə kɑnsɛpt ə nɑt biɪŋ kənstʃɹeɪnd. ɪt mʌs fɑloʊ ðə wɪmən. ɪt wɑntəd tə fɑloʊ. ðə moʊmən ə dɛθ, wən ɪt fɛl ði əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl vænɪʃ əlɔŋ wɪð laɪf, pɹədust ɛkstəsi. ɹæptʃɝ. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz hʌŋɡɹi, tu, ən ðəɹ wɑz taɪm. wɛɹ ðeɪ kəd ɹʌn, ɪt kəd fɑloʊ. sɛɾəlɪŋ fludli bɪsaɪd ðə mæŋɡəl bɑɾi, ɪt bɪɡæn tə fid. fɹɛʃ blʌd, hɑt blʌd, wɑz ə nəsɛsəɾi, bʌt hjumən blʌɾ ɔlweɪz hɛl ðə swiɾəst seɪvɝ.

Its nostrils flared again, though it was not by scent that it tracked those who could channel. The One Power had been used below, and miles to the north. To follow, or not? The man who had wounded it was not with them; it had made sure of that before leaving the high vantage place. The one who commanded it wanted the man who had wounded it dead perhaps as much as he did the women, but the women were an easier target. The women had been named, too, and for the time being, it was constrained. For its entire existence it had been compelled to obey one or another human, but its mind held the concept of not being constrained. It must follow the women. It wanted to follow. The moment of death, when it felt the ability to channel vanish along with life, produced ecstasy. Rapture. But it was hungry, too, and there was time. Where they could run, it could follow. Settling fluidly beside the mangled body, it began to feed. Fresh blood, hot blood, was a necessity, but human blood always held the sweetest savor.


tʃæptɝ θɹi


CHAPTER 3

eɪ plɛzən ɹaɪd


A Pleasant Ride

fɑɹmz ən pæstʃɝz ən ɑləv ɡɹoʊvz kʌvɝd moʊst ə ðə læn ɝaʊn ɛbu dɑɹ, bʌt mɛni smɔl fɔɹəsts stʃɹɛtʃt ə fju maɪlz əkɹɔs əz wɛl, ən waɪl ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɑz mʌtʃ flæɾɝ ðən ðə ɹænən hɪlz tə ðə saʊθ, ɪt ɹoʊld ən səmtaɪmz ɹoʊz ɪn ə pɹɑmənəns ʌv ə hʌnʒɹəd fiɾ əɹ haɪɝ, səfɪʃən tə kæs dip ʃædoʊz ɪn ði æftɝnun sʌn. ɔl ɪn ɔl, ðə kʌntʃɹi pɹəvaɪɾəd mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf kʌvɝ tə kip ənwɔntɪɾ aɪz fɹəm wʌt maɪɾ əv pæst əz səm ɑd mɝtʃəns pæk tʃɹeɪn, nɪɹli fɪfti pipəl maʊntəɾ ən ɔlmoʊst əz mɛni əfʊt, ɪspɛʃli wən ɪt hæd wɔɹɾɝz tə faɪn ənfɹikwəntɪd pæðz θɹu ði ʌndɝɡɹoʊθ. ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt saɪɾ ə mɑɹk ə hjumən hæbəteɪʃən bɪɑn ə fju ɡoʊts kɹɑpɪŋ ɑn səm ə ðə hɪlz.

Farms and pastures and olive groves covered most of the land around Ebou Dar, but many small forests stretched a few miles across as well, and while the ground was much flatter than the Rhannon Hills to the south, it rolled and sometimes rose in a prominence of a hundred feet or higher, sufficient to cast deep shadows in the afternoon sun. All in all, the country provided more than enough cover to keep unwanted eyes from what might have passed as some odd merchant's pack train, nearly fifty people mounted and almost as many afoot, especially when it had Warders to find unfrequented paths through the undergrowth. Elayne did not sight a mark of human habitation beyond a few goats cropping on some of the hills.

ivən plæns ən tʃɹiz juz tə hit wɝ bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə wɪðɝ ən daɪ, jɛɾ əɾ ɛni ʌðɝ taɪm ʃi maɪɾ əv ɛndʒɔɪd mɪɹli siɪŋ ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd. ɪt cʊɾə bɪn ə θaʊzən liɡz fɹəm ðə lænd ʃi hæd sin ɹaɪɾɪŋ daʊn ði ʌðɝ bæŋk ə ði ɪldɑɹ. ðə hɪlz wɝ stʃɹeɪnʒ, nɑbi ʃeɪps, əz ðoʊ skwiz təɡɛðɝ baɪ hjudʒ, kɛɹləs hænz. flɑks ə bɹɪljənli hjud bɝdz sɔɹɾ ʌp ət ðɛɹ pæsɪŋ, ən ə dʌzən sɔɹts ə hʌmɪŋbɝdz flɪɾɪd əweɪ fɹəm ðə hɔɹsəz, hʌvɝɪŋ dʒuəlz ɑn blɝd wɪŋz. θɪk vaɪnz hʌŋ laɪk ɹoʊps ɪn səm pleɪsəz, ən ðəɹ wɝ tʃɹiz wɪð bʌndəlz ə nɛɹoʊ fɹɑnz ət ðə tɑp fəɹ foʊlɪdʒ, ən θɪŋz ðət lʊk laɪk ɡɹin fɛðɝ dʌstɝz əz tɔl əz ə mæn. ə hændfʊl ə plæns, ful baɪ ðə hit, stʃɹʌɡəl tə pʊɾ aʊt blɑsəmz, bɹaɪt ɹɛdz ən vɪvəd jɛloʊz, səm twaɪs əz waɪɾ əz əɹ tu hænz. ðɛɹ pɝfjum wɑz lʌʃ ən - "sʌltʃɹi" keɪm tə maɪnd. ʃi sɔ səm boʊldɝz ʃi wʊɾə weɪdʒɝd hæd wʌns bɪn toʊz ɑn ə stætʃu, ðoʊ waɪ ɛniwʌn wəd meɪk ə stætʃu ðət lɑɹdʒ wɪð bɛɹ fit ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən, ən ənʌðɝ taɪm ðə weɪ lɛd θɹu ə fɔɹəst ə θɪk fluɾəd stoʊnz əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz, ðə wɛðɝd stʌmps ə kɑləmz, mɛni tɑpəld ən ɔl lɔŋ sɪns maɪn ɔlmoʊs tə ðə ɡɹaʊn fəɹ ðɛɹ stoʊn baɪ loʊkəl fɑɹmɝz. ə plɛzən ɹaɪd dɪspaɪt ðə dʌs ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz ɹeɪz fɹəm pɑɹtʃt sɔɪl. ðə hit dɪd nɑt tʌtʃ hɝ, ʌv kɔɹs, ən ðəɹ wɝ nɑt vɛɹi mɛni flaɪz. ɔl ðə deɪnʒɝz leɪ bɪhaɪn ðɛm; ðeɪ hæɾ aʊtʃɹʌn ðə fɔɹseɪkən, ən noʊ tʃæns ɛni ʌv əm əɹ ðɛɹ sɝvəns kəd kætʃ ʌp naʊ. ɪt cʊɾə bɪn ə plɛzən ɹaɪd, ɪksɛpt. . . .

Even plants and trees used to heat were beginning to wither and die, yet at any other time she might have enjoyed merely seeing the countryside. It could have been a thousand leagues from the land she had seen riding down the other bank of the Eldar. The hills were strange, knobby shapes, as though squeezed together by huge, careless hands. Flocks of brilliantly hued birds soared up at their passing, and a dozen sorts of hummingbirds flitted away from the horses, hovering jewels on blurred wings. Thick vines hung like ropes in some places, and there were trees with bundles of narrow fronds at the top for foliage, and things that looked like green feather dusters as tall as a man. A handful of plants, fooled by the heat, struggled to put out blossoms, bright reds and vivid yellows, some twice as wide as her two hands. Their perfume was lush and - "sultry" came to mind. She saw some boulders she would have wagered had once been toes on a statue, though why anyone would make a statue that large with bare feet she could not imagine, and another time the way led through a forest of thick fluted stones among the trees, the weathered stumps of columns, many toppled and all long since mined almost to the ground for their stone by local farmers. A pleasant ride despite the dust the horses' hooves raised from parched soil. The heat did not touch her, of course, and there were not very many flies. All the dangers lay behind them; they had outrun the Forsaken, and no chance any of them or their servants could catch up now. It could have been a pleasant ride, except. . . .

fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, eɪvinhə lɝn ðət ðə mɛsədʒ ʃi hæd sɛn əbaʊɾ ɛnəmiz kʌmɪŋ wən list ɪkspɛktəd hæd nɑt bɪn dɪlɪvɝd. ət fɝst ɪleɪn fɛlt ɹɪlif əɾ ɛniθɪŋ tə tʃeɪnʒ ðə tɑpɪk fɹəm ɹænd. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə dʒɛləsi kʌm bæk; ɹæðɝ, mɔɹ ən mɔɹ ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf wɑntɪŋ wʌɾ eɪvinhə hæd ʃɛɹd wɪð hɪm. nɑt dʒɛləsi. ɛnvi. ʃi wəɾ ɔlmoʊst əv pɹəfɝd ði ʌðɝ. ðən ʃi bɪɡæn ɹɪli hɪɹɪŋ wʌɾ əɹ fɹɛnd wɑz seɪɪŋ ɪn ə loʊ mɑnətoʊn, ən ðə hɛɹ ɑn ðə bæk ə hɝ nɛk tʃɹaɪd tə stænd.

For one thing, Aviendha learned that the message she had sent about enemies coming when least expected had not been delivered. At first Elayne felt relief at anything to change the topic from Rand. It was not the jealousy come back; rather, more and more she found herself wanting what Aviendha had shared with him. Not jealousy. Envy. She would almost have preferred the other. Then she began really hearing what her friend was saying in a low monotone, and the hair on the back of her neck tried to stand.

"ju kæn də ðæt," ʃi pɹətɛstəd, ɹeɪnɪŋ əɹ hɔɹs kloʊsɝ tə eɪvinhəz. æktʃəli , ʃi səpoʊzd eɪvinhə wəd nɑɾ əv mʌtʃ tʃɹʌbəl dʒɹʌbɪŋ kɹɪn, əɹ taɪɪŋ əɹ ʌp, əɹ ɛni ʌv ðə ɹɛst. ɪf ði ʌðɝ si foʊk wɪmən stʊd stɪl fəɹ ɪt, ɛniweɪ. "wi kæn stɑɹɾ ə wɔɹ wɪð ðɛm, sɝɾənli nɑt bɪfɔɹ wi juz ðə boʊl. ən nɑɾ oʊvɝ ðɪs," ʃi æɾəd heɪstəli. "nɑɾ əɾ ɔl." ðeɪ sɝɾənli wɝ gɑnə tə stɑɹɾ ə wɔɹ bɪfɔɹ əɹ æftɝ ðə boʊl wɑz juzd. nɑt dʒʌs kəz ðə wɪndfɪndɝz wɝ bɪheɪvɪŋ mɔɹ haɪ-hændɪdli baɪ ði aʊɝ. nɑt dʒʌs bɪkɔz. . . . dʒɹɔɪŋ bɹɛθ, ʃi hɝiɾ ɑn. "ɪf ʃi hæd toʊl mi, aɪ wəd nɑɾ əv noʊn wʌt jə mɛnt. aɪ ʌndɝstænd waɪ jə kʊdn spik mɔɹ klɪɹli, bʌt jə də si, doʊn ju?"

"You can't do that," she protested, reining her horse closer to Aviendha's. Actually, she supposed Aviendha would not have much trouble drubbing Kurin, or tying her up, or any of the rest. If the other Sea Folk women stood still for it, anyway. "We can't start a war with them, certainly not before we use the Bowl. And not over this," she added hastily. "Not at all." They certainly were not going to start a war before or after the Bowl was used. Not just because the Windfinders were behaving more high-handedly by the hour. Not just because. . . . Drawing breath, she hurried on. "If she had told me, I would not have known what you meant. I understand why you couldn't speak more clearly, but you do see, don't you?"

eɪvinhə ɡlɛɹɾ əhɛɾ ət nʌθɪŋ, æbsənli bɹʌʃɪŋ flaɪz əweɪ fɹəm əɹ feɪs. "wɪθaʊt feɪl, aɪ toʊl hɝ," ʃi ɡɹʌmbəld. "wɪθaʊt feɪl! wʌɾ ɪf i hæd bɪn wʌn ə ðə ʃæɾoʊsuld? wʌɾ ɪf i hæd mænədʒ tə ɡɛt baɪ mi θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, ən jə wɪð noʊ wɔɹnɪŋ? wʌɾ ɪf . . . ?" ʃi tɝn ə sʌɾənli fɝlɔɹn ɡeɪz ɑn ɪleɪn. "aɪ wɪl baɪt maɪ naɪf," ʃi sɛd sædli, "bʌt maɪ lɪvɝ meɪ bɝs fəɹ ɪt."

Aviendha glared ahead at nothing, absently brushing flies away from her face. "Without fail, I told her," she grumbled. "Without fail! What if he had been one of the Shadowsouled? What if he had managed to get by me through the gateway, and you with no warning? What if . . . ?" She turned a suddenly forlorn gaze on Elayne. "I will bite my knife," she said sadly, "but my liver may burst for it."

ɪleɪn wɑz əbaʊt tə seɪ ðət swɑloʊɪŋ əɹ æŋɡɝ wɑz ðə ɹaɪt θɪŋ tə də ən ʃi kəd pɪtʃ əz lɑɹdʒ ə fɪɾ əz ʃi wɑntəd soʊ lɔŋ əz ʃi dɪd nɑt hɝl ɪɾ ət ði æθɑn maɪɹ - ðət wɑz wʌɾ ɔl ðəɾ əbaʊt naɪvz ən lɪvɝz mɛnt - bʌt bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəɾ oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, æɾɪliz bɹɔɾ əɹ ɹeɪnʒi ɡɹeɪ ʌp ɑn əɹ ʌðɝ saɪd. ðə waɪt-hɛɹd sɪstɝ hæɾ əkwaɪɝɾ ə nu sæɾəl ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ə ɡɔɾi θɪŋ wɝkt wɪð sɪlvɝ ɑn pɑməl ən kæntəl. ðə flaɪz sim tə əvɔɪd hɝ, fəɹ səm ɹizən, ðoʊ ʃi wɔɹ ə sɛn əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ɛni ʌv ðə flaʊɝz.

Elayne was about to say that swallowing her anger was the right thing to do and she could pitch as large a fit as she wanted so long as she did not hurl it at the Atha'an Miere - that was what all that about knives and livers meant - but before she could open her mouth, Adeleas brought her rangy gray up on her other side. The white-haired sister had acquired a new saddle in Ebou Dar, a gaudy thing worked with silver on pommel and cantle. The flies seemed to avoid her, for some reason, though she wore a scent as strong as any of the flowers.

"pɑɹɾən mi. aɪ kəd nɑt hɛlp oʊvɝhɪɹɪŋ ðət læst." æɾɪliz dɪd nɑt saʊn əɾ ɔl əpɑlədʒɛɾɪk, ən ɪleɪn wʌndɝd dʒʌs haʊ mʌtʃ ʃi hæɾ oʊvɝhɝd. ʃi fɛlt əɹ tʃiks kʌlɝɪŋ. səm ʌv wʌɾ eɪvinhə hæd sɛɾ əbaʊt ɹænd hæd bɪn ɹɪmɑɹkəbli fɹæŋk ən stʃɹeɪtfɔɹwɝd. səm ʌv wʌt ʃi hæd sɛd hæd bɪn, tu. ɪt wɑz wʌn θɪŋ tə tɔk ðət weɪ wɪð jəɹ nɪɹəs fɹɛnd, kwaɪɾ ənʌðɝ tə səspɛk sʌmwʌn ɛls hæd bɪn lɪsnɪŋ. eɪvinhə sim tə fil ðə seɪm weɪ; ʃi dɪd nɑt blʌʃ, bʌt ðə saʊɝ lʊk ʃi ʃɑɾ ət ðə bɹaʊn wʊɾə dʌn nɪneɪiv pɹaʊd.

"Pardon me. I could not help overhearing that last." Adeleas did not sound at all apologetic, and Elayne wondered just how much she had overheard. She felt her cheeks coloring. Some of what Aviendha had said about Rand had been remarkably frank and straightforward. Some of what she had said had been, too. It was one thing to talk that way with your nearest friend, quite another to suspect someone else had been listening. Aviendha seemed to feel the same way; she did not blush, but the sour look she shot at the Brown would have done Nynaeve proud.

æɾɪliz mɪɹli smaɪld, ə veɪɡ smaɪl əz blæn əz wɔɾɝ sup. "ɪt maɪt bi bɛst ɪf jə ɡeɪv jəɹ fɹɛn ðəɹ fɹi ɹeɪn wɪð ði æθɑn maɪɹ." ʃi pɪɹd pæst ɪleɪn əɾ eɪvinhə, blɪŋkɪŋ. "wɛl, ə lus ɹeɪn. pʊɾɪŋ ðə fɪɹ ə ðə laɪɾ ɪndə ðɛm ɔt tə bi səfɪʃənt. ðəɹ ɔlmoʊs ðəɹ ɔlɹɛɾi, ɪn keɪs jə hævənt noʊɾəst. ðəɹ mʌtʃ mɔɹ wɛɹi ʌv ðə 'sævədʒ' il - fɝɡɪv mi, eɪvinhə - ðən ðeɪ ɑɹ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ. mɛɝɪlɪl wʊɾə sədʒɛstəɾ ɪt, bʌɾ əɹ ɪɹz ɑɹ stɪl bɝnɪŋ."

Adeleas merely smiled, a vague smile as bland as water soup. "It might be best if you gave your friend there free rein with the Atha'an Miere." She peered past Elayne at Aviendha, blinking. "Well, a loose rein. Putting the fear of the Light into them ought to be sufficient. They're almost there already, in case you haven't noticed. They're much more wary of the 'savage' Aiel - forgive me, Aviendha - than they are of Aes Sedai. Merilille would have suggested it, but her ears are still burning."

eɪvinhəz feɪs ɹɛɹli ɡeɪv mʌtʃ əweɪ, bʌt ɹaɪt ðən ʃi lʊkt əz pʌzəld əz ɪleɪn fɛlt. ɪleɪn twɪstəɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl tə fɹaʊn bɪhaɪn hɝ. mɛɝɪlɪl ɹoʊɾ əbɹɛst wɪð vændin, kɛɝin, ən sɝaɪðə nɑt fɑɹ bæk, ɔl vɛɹi stuɾiəsli lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛpt ɪleɪn. bɪɑn ðə sɪstɝz wɝ ðə si foʊk, stɪl ɪn sɪŋɡəl faɪl, ən ðən wəd kʌm ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl, kipɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz aʊɾ ə saɪt fəɹ ðə moʊmən dʒʌst əhɛɾ ə ðə pækhɔɹsɪz. ðeɪ wɝ θɹɛɾɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ θɹu ðə ɡleɪdz ə tʃɹʌŋkeɪɾɪd kɑləmz. fɪfti əɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd lɔŋ-teɪld ɹɛd-ænd-ɡɹin bɝdz wɪŋd oʊvɝ ðɛɹ hɛdz, fɪlɪŋ ði ɛɹ wɪð tʃæɾɝɪŋ kɹaɪz.

Aviendha's face rarely gave much away, but right then she looked as puzzled as Elayne felt. Elayne twisted in her saddle to frown behind her. Merilille rode abreast with Vandene, Careane, and Sareitha not far back, all very studiously looking at anything except Elayne. Beyond the sisters were the Sea Folk, still in single file, and then would come the Knitting Circle, keeping themselves out of sight for the moment just ahead of the packhorses. They were threading their way through the glades of truncated columns. Fifty or a hundred long-tailed red-and-green birds winged over their heads, filling the air with chattering cries.

"waɪ?" ɪleɪn æskt kɝtli. ɪt sim fulɪʃ tə æd tə ðə tɝmɔɪl ɔlɹɛɾi bʌbəlɪŋ dʒʌs bɪloʊ ðə sɝfəs - ən səmtaɪmz ɑn ðə sɝfəs - bʌt ʃi hæd sin noʊ hɪn ə ðə ful ɪn æɾɪliz. ðə bɹaʊn sɪstɝz aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz ɪn əpɛɹən sɝpɹaɪz. meɪbi ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd; æɾɪliz juʒəwəli θɔɾ ɛniwʌn ʃəd si wʌt ʃi sɔ. meɪbi.

"Why?" Elayne asked curtly. It seemed foolish to add to the turmoil already bubbling just below the surface - and sometimes on the surface - but she had seen no hint of the fool in Adeleas. The Brown sister's eyebrows rose in apparent surprise. Maybe she was surprised; Adeleas usually thought anyone should see what she saw. Maybe.

"waɪ? tə ɹɪstɔɹ ə lɪɾəl bæləns, ðəɾ ɪz waɪ. ɪf ði æθɑn maɪɹ fil ðeɪ niɾ əs tə pɹətɛkt əm fɹəm ən il, ɪt maɪt bi ə jusfəl bæləns əɡɛnst. . . ." æɾɪliz pɔz slaɪtli, sʌɾənli əbzɔɹbd ɪn ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ peɪl ɡɹeɪ skɝts. ". . . ʌðɝ θɪŋz."

"Why? To restore a little balance, that is why. If the Atha'an Miere feel they need us to protect them from an Aiel, it might be a useful balance against. . . ." Adeleas paused slightly, suddenly absorbed in adjusting her pale gray skirts. ". . . other things."

ɪleɪnz feɪs taɪɾənd. ʌðɝ θɪŋz. ðə bɑɹɡən wɪð ðə si foʊk wɑz wʌɾ æɾɪliz mɛnt. "ju meɪ ɹaɪd wɪð ði ʌðɝz," ʃi sɛd kuli.

Elayne's face tightened. Other things. The bargain with the Sea Folk was what Adeleas meant. "You may ride with the others," she said coolly.

æɾɪliz meɪd noʊ pɹoʊɾɛst, noʊ ətɛmps tə pɹɛs əɹ ɑɹɡjəmənt. ʃi dʒʌst ɪnklaɪn əɹ hɛɾ ən lɛɾ əɹ hɔɹs fɔl bæk. hɝ smɔl smaɪl nɛvɝ ɔltɝɾ ə wɪt. ði oʊldɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ æksɛptɪd ðət nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn stʊɾ əbʌv əm ən spoʊk wɪð ɛɡwinz əθɔɹəɾi ət ðɛɹ bæks, bʌt ðə tʃɹuθ wɑz, ðət tʃeɪnʒd lɪɾəl bɪɑn ðə sɝfəs. pɝhæps nʌθɪŋ. ðeɪ wɝ aʊtwɝdli ɹɪspɛkfəl, ðeɪ oʊbeɪd, ən jɛt. . . .

Adeleas made no protest, no attempts to press her argument. She just inclined her head and let her horse fall back. Her small smile never altered a whit. The older Aes Sedai accepted that Nynaeve and Elayne stood above them and spoke with Egwene's authority at their backs, but the truth was, that changed little beyond the surface. Perhaps nothing. They were outwardly respectful, they obeyed, and yet. . . .

æftɝ ɔl wɑz sɛɾ ən dʌn, ɪleɪn, ət list, wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ əɾ ən eɪdʒ wən moʊst ɪnɪʃiəts ə ðə taʊɝ stɪl wɔɹ nɑvəs waɪɾ ən vɛɹi fju hæd ɹitʃt ði æksɛptɪd. ən ʃi ən nɪneɪiv hæɾ əɡɹid tə ðət bɑɹɡən, hɑɹdli ə dɪspleɪ ʌv wɪzdəm ən əkjumən. nɑt dʒʌs ðə si foʊk ɡɛɾɪŋ ðə boʊl, bʌt twɛnti sɪstɝz ɡoʊɪŋ tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ, sʌbʒɪkt tə ðɛɹ lɔz, ɹikwaɪɝd tə titʃ ɛniθɪŋ ðə wɪndfɪndɝz wɑntəd tə lɝn ən əneɪbəl tə liv əntɪl ʌðɝz keɪm tə ɹipleɪs ðɛm. wɪndfɪndɝz əlaʊd tə ɛntɝ ðə taʊɝ əz ɡɛsts, əlaʊd tə lɝn wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ wɪʃt, liv wɛnɛvɝ ðeɪ wɪʃt. ðoʊz əloʊn wəd meɪk ðə hɔl skɹim, ən pɹɑbli ɛɡwin əz wɛl, jɛt ðə ɹɛst. . . . ɛvɹi læst wʌn ə ði oʊldɝ sɪstɝz θɔt ʃi wʊɾə faʊn ə weɪ ɝaʊn meɪkɪŋ ðət bɑɹɡən. pɝhæps ðeɪ ɹɪli kəd hæv. ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪt, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ.

After all was said and done, Elayne, at least, was Aes Sedai at an age when most initiates of the Tower still wore novice white and very few had reached the Accepted. And she and Nynaeve had agreed to that bargain, hardly a display of wisdom and acumen. Not just the Sea Folk getting the Bowl, but twenty sisters going to the Atha'an Miere, subject to their laws, required to teach anything the Windfinders wanted to learn and unable to leave until others came to replace them. Windfinders allowed to enter the Tower as guests, allowed to learn whatever they wished, leave whenever they wished. Those alone would make the Hall scream, and probably Egwene as well, yet the rest. . . . Every last one of the older sisters thought she would have found a way around making that bargain. Perhaps they really could have. Elayne did not believe it, but she was not sure.

ʃi dɪd nɑt seɪ ɛniθɪŋ tə eɪvinhə, bʌɾ æftɝ ə fju moʊməns, ði ʌðɝ wʊmən spoʊk. "ɪf aɪ kən sɝv ɑnɝ ən hɛlp jə ət ðə seɪm taɪm, aɪ də nɑt kɛɹ wɛðɝ ɪt sɝvz səm ɛɛs sədaɪ ɛnd." ʃi nɛvɝ sim tə teɪk ɪɾ ɪn ðəɾ ɪleɪn wɑz ɔlsoʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ, nɑt kəmplitli.

She did not say anything to Aviendha, but after a few moments, the other woman spoke. "If I can serve honor and help you at the same time, I do not care whether it serves some Aes Sedai end." She never seemed to take it in that Elayne was also Aes Sedai, not completely.

ɪleɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən nɑɾəd. sʌmθɪŋ hæd tə bi dʌn tə tɛmpɝ ðə si foʊk. mɛɝɪlɪl ən ði ʌðɝz hæd dɪspleɪɾ ə ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl fɔɹbɛɹəns soʊ fɑɹ, bʌt haʊ lɔŋ wəd ðət læst? nɪneɪiv maɪɾ ɪksploʊd, wʌns ʃi æktʃəli  tɝn əɹ ətɛnʃənz tə ðə wɪndfɪndɝz. mæɾɝz hæd tə bi kɛpt əz smuð əz pɑsəbəl fəɹ əz lɔŋ əz pɑsəbəl, bʌɾ ɪf ði æθɑn maɪɹ wɛn ɑn bɪlivɪŋ ðeɪ kəd stɛɹ daʊn ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðəɹ wəd bi tʃɹʌbəl. laɪf wɑz mɔɹ kɑmplɛks ðən ʃi hæɾ ɪmædʒən bæk ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ mɛni lɛsənz ʃi hæd ɹəsivd əz dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ. soʊ mʌtʃ mɔɹ kɑmpləkeɪɾəd sɪns ʃi ɛntɝd ðə taʊɝ.

Elayne hesitated, then nodded. Something had to be done to temper the Sea Folk. Merilille and the others had displayed a remarkable forbearance so far, but how long would that last? Nynaeve might explode, once she actually turned her attentions to the Windfinders. Matters had to be kept as smooth as possible for as long as possible, but if the Atha'an Miere went on believing they could stare down any Aes Sedai, there would be trouble. Life was more complex than she had imagined back in Caemlyn, no matter how many lessons she had received as Daughter-Heir. So much more complicated since she entered the Tower.

"dʒʌs doʊn bi tu . . . ɛmfæɾɪk," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "æn pliz əv ə kɛɹ. ðəɹ ɑɹ twɛnti ʌv ðɛm, æftɝ ɔl, ən oʊnli wʌn ə ju. aɪ wʊdnt wɑn ɛniθɪŋ tə hæpən bɪfɔɹ aɪ kəd hɛlp ju." eɪvinhə ɡeɪv əɹ ə ɡɹɪn wɪð ə ɡʊd bɪɾ ʌv wʊlf ɪn ɪɾ ən dʒɹu hɝ dʌn mɛɹ ɔf ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə stoʊnz tə weɪt fəɹ ði æθɑn maɪɹ.

"Just don't be too . . . emphatic," she said softly. "And please have a care. There are twenty of them, after all, and only one of you. I wouldn't want anything to happen before I could help you." Aviendha gave her a grin with a good bit of wolf in it and drew her dun mare off at the edge of the stones to wait for the Atha'an Miere.

fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm ɪleɪn ɡlæns bæk, bʌɾ ɔl ʃi sɔ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz wɑz eɪvinhə ɹaɪɾɪŋ nɛks tə kɹɪn, spikɪŋ kwaɪt kɑmli ən nɑɾ ivən lʊkɪŋ ət ðə si foʊk wʊmən. sɝɾənli nɑt ɡlɛɹɪŋ, ðoʊ kɹɪn sim tə stɛɹ əɾ əɹ wɪð kənsɪɾɝəbəl əstɑnɪʃmənt. wən eɪvinhə θʌmpt əɹ hɔɹs bæk ʌp tə dʒɔɪn ɪleɪn, flæpɪŋ əɹ ɹeɪnz - ʃi wəd nɛvɝ bi ə hɔɹswʊmən - kɹɪn ɹoʊd fɔɹwɝd tə spik wɪð ɹɪneɪl, ən ə ʃɔɹt taɪm leɪɾɝ ɹɪneɪl æŋɡɹəli sɛn ɹeɪnɪn tə ðə hɛɾ ə ðə kɑləm.

From time to time Elayne glanced back, but all she saw through the trees was Aviendha riding next to Kurin, speaking quite calmly and not even looking at the Sea Folk woman. Certainly not glaring, though Kurin seemed to stare at her with considerable astonishment. When Aviendha thumped her horse back up to join Elayne, flapping her reins - she would never be a horsewoman - Kurin rode forward to speak with Renaile, and a short time later Renaile angrily sent Rainyn to the head of the column.

ðə moʊs dʒunjɝ ə ðə wɪndfɪndɝz sæɾ əɹ hɔɹs ivən mɔɹ ɔkwɝdli ðən eɪvinhə, hum ʃi pɹitɛndəd tə ɪɡnɔɹ ɑn ɪleɪnz ʌðɝ saɪd dʒʌst əz ʃi ɪɡnɔɹd ðə smɔl ɡɹin flaɪz bʌzɪŋ ɝaʊn əɹ dɑɹk feɪs. "ɹɪneɪl dɪn kəlɑn blu stɑɹ," ʃi sɛd stɪfli, "dɪmænz ðət jə snʌb ɪn ði il wʊmən, ɪleɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ." eɪvinhə ɡɹɪn tuthəli ət hɝ, ən ɹeɪnɪn mʌst əv bɪn wɑtʃɪŋ ət list ə lɪɾəl, kəz əɹ tʃiks ɹɛɾənd bɪniθ ðə ʃin ə swɛt.

The most junior of the Windfinders sat her horse even more awkwardly than Aviendha, whom she pretended to ignore on Elayne's other side just as she ignored the small green flies buzzing around her dark face. "Renaile din Calon Blue Star," she said stiffly, "demands that you snub in the Aiel woman, Elayne Aes Sedai." Aviendha grinned toothily at her, and Rainyn must have been watching at least a little, because her cheeks reddened beneath the sheen of sweat.

"tɛl ɹɪneɪl ðəɾ eɪvinhə ɪz nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ," ɪleɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "aɪ wɪl æsk əɹ tə bi kɛɹfəl," noʊ laɪ ðɛɹ; ʃi hæd, ən wəɾ əɡɛn, "bʌɾ aɪ kæn meɪk əɹ də ɛniθɪŋ." ɑn ɪmpəls, ʃi æɾəd, "ju noʊ haʊ il ɑɹ." ðə si foʊk hæd səm vɛɹi ɑɾ aɪdiəz ə haʊ ði il wɝ. ɹeɪnɪn stɛɹd waɪd-aɪɾ əɾ ə stɪl-ɡɹɪnɪŋ eɪvinhə, hɝ feɪs ɡoʊɪŋ ɡɹeɪ, ðən dʒɝkt əɹ hɔɹs ɝaʊn ən ɡæləp bæk tə ɹɪneɪl, baʊnsɪŋ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl.

"Tell Renaile that Aviendha is not Aes Sedai," Elayne replied. "I will ask her to be careful," no lie there; she had, and would again, "but I can't make her do anything." On impulse, she added, "You know how Aiel are." The Sea Folk had some very odd ideas of how the Aiel were. Rainyn stared wide-eyed at a still-grinning Aviendha, her face going gray, then jerked her horse around and galloped back to Renaile, bouncing in her saddle.

eɪvinhə ɡeɪv ə pliz tʃʌkəl, bʌɾ ɪleɪn wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðə hoʊl noʊʃən hæd bɪn ə mɪsteɪk. ivən wɪð ə ɡʊd θɝɾi peɪsɪz bɪtwin ðɛm, ʃi kəd si ɹɪneɪlz feɪs swɛl ʌp ət ɹeɪnɪnz ɹipɔɹt, ən ði ʌðɝz bɪɡæn tə bʌz laɪk biz. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt lʊk fɹaɪɾənd, ðeɪ lʊkt æŋɡɹi, ən ðə ɡlɛɹz ðeɪ dɝɛktəɾ ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əhɛɾ ə ðɛm ɡɹu beɪlfəl. nɑɾ əɾ eɪvinhə, ət ðə sɪstɝz. æɾɪliz nɑɾəd θɔtfəli wən ʃi sɔ ðæt, ən mɛɝɪlɪl dʒʌs bɛɹli feɪl tə haɪɾ ə smaɪl. ət lis ðeɪ wɝ plizd.

Aviendha gave a pleased chuckle, but Elayne wondered whether the whole notion had been a mistake. Even with a good thirty paces between them, she could see Renaile's face swell up at Rainyn's report, and the others began to buzz like bees. They did not look frightened, they looked angry, and the glares they directed at the Aes Sedai ahead of them grew baleful. Not at Aviendha, at the sisters. Adeleas nodded thoughtfully when she saw that, and Merilille just barely failed to hide a smile. At least they were pleased.

ɪf ðət hæd bɪn ði oʊnli ɪnsəɾənt dʊɹɪŋ ðə ɹaɪɾ ɪt wʊɾə teɪkən ði ɛdʒ ɔf ɛni ɛndʒɔɪmən ə flaʊɝz ən bɝdz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ivən ðə fɝst. bɪɡɪnɪŋ ʃɔɹtli æftɝ livɪŋ ðə klɪɹɪŋ, ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl hæd meɪd ðɛɹ weɪ fɔɹwɝd tə ɪleɪn wʌn baɪ wʌn, ɔl bʌt kɝstʃən, ən noʊ daʊt ʃi wʊɾə kʌm tu hæd ʃi nɑt bɪn ɔɹɾɝd tə kip ɪspæn ʃildɪd. wʌn baɪ wʌn ðeɪ keɪm, itʃ hɛzɪɾənt, smaɪlɪŋ timɝəsli əntɪl ɪleɪn wɑntəd tə tɛl əm tə æk ðɛɹ eɪdʒəz. ðeɪ sɝɾənli meɪd noʊ dɪmænz, ən ðeɪ wɝ tu smɑɹt tə æsk stʃɹeɪɾ aʊt fəɹ wʌɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hæd bɪn dɪnaɪd, bʌt ðeɪ faʊn ʌðɝ pæðz.

If that had been the only incident during the ride it would have taken the edge off any enjoyment of flowers and birds, but it was not even the first. Beginning shortly after leaving the clearing, the Knitting Circle had made their way forward to Elayne one by one, all but Kirstian, and no doubt she would have come too had she not been ordered to keep Ispan shielded. One by one they came, each hesitant, smiling timorously until Elayne wanted to tell them to act their ages. They certainly made no demands, and they were too smart to ask straight out for what already had been denied, but they found other paths.

"ɪɾ əkɝd tə mi," ɹin sɛd bɹaɪtli, "ðæt jə mʌst wɑnə kwɛstʃən ɪspæn sədaɪ kwaɪɾ ɝdʒənli. hu kən seɪ wʌɾ ɛls ʃi wɑz ʌp tə ɪn ðə sɪɾi bɪsaɪdz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn ðə stɔɹɹum?" ʃi pɹitɛndəd tə dʒʌs bi meɪkɪŋ kɑnvɝseɪʃən, bʌt fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm ʃi dɑɹɾɪd kwɪk lʊks əɾ ɪleɪn tə si haʊ ʃi wɑz teɪkɪŋ ɪt. "aɪm ʃʊɹ wɪl teɪk oʊvɝ ən aʊɝ tə ɹitʃ ðə fɑɹm, ðə weɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ, pɝhæps tu, ən jə sɝɾənli doʊnt wɑnə weɪs tu aʊɝz. ði ɝbz nɪneɪiv sədaɪ ɡeɪv əɹ meɪk əɹ kwaɪt tɔkəɾɪv, ən aɪm ʃʊɹ ʃi wəd sɪɾ ʌp fəɹ sɪstɝz."

"It occurred to me," Reanne said brightly, "that you must want to question Ispan Sedai quite urgently. Who can say what else she was up to in the city besides trying to find the storeroom?" She pretended to just be making conversation, but from time to time she darted quick looks at Elayne to see how she was taking it. "I'm sure we'll take over an hour to reach the farm, the way we're going, perhaps two, and you certainly don't want to waste two hours. The herbs Nynaeve Sedai gave her make her quite talkative, and I'm sure she would sit up for sisters."

ðə bɹaɪt smaɪl feɪɾəd wən ɪleɪn sɛd ðət kwɛstʃənɪŋ ɪspæn kəd weɪɾ ən wʊd. laɪt, dɪd ðeɪ ɹɪli ɪkspɛkt ɛniwʌn tə æsk kwɛstʃənz ɹaɪɾɪŋ θɹu fɔɹəsts ɑn pæðz ðət bɛɹli dɪzɝv ðə neɪm? ɹin ɹoʊd bæk tə ði ʌðɝ kɪnswɪmən mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf.

The bright smile faded when Elayne said that questioning Ispan could wait and would. Light, did they really expect anyone to ask questions riding through forests on paths that barely deserved the name? Reanne rode back to the other Kinswomen muttering to herself.

"fɝɡɪvnəs, ɪleɪn sədaɪ," tʃɪlɛɹz mɝmɝɾ ə ʃɔɹt taɪm leɪɾɝ, ðə tʃɹeɪsəz ə mʊɹændi klɪŋɪŋ tə hɝ æksɛnt. hɝ ɡɹin stʃɹɔ hæt mætʃt səm ə hɝ leɪɝd pɛɾikoʊts ɪɡzækli. "jɔɹ fɝɡɪvnəs, ɪf aɪ ɪntʃɹud." ʃi dɪd nɑt wɛɹ ðə ɹɛd bɛlt ʌv ə waɪz wʊmən; moʊst ə ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl dɪd nɑt. ɪvɑɹə wɑz ə ɡoʊldsmɪθ, ən ɪldeɪs səplaɪd lækɹwɛɹ tə ðə mɝtʃəns fəɹ ɛkspɔɹt; tʃɪlɛɹz wɑz ə ɹʌɡ sɛlɝ, waɪl ɹin hɝsɛlf ɝeɪnʒd ʃɪpɪŋ fəɹ smɔl tʃɹeɪɾɝz. səm wɝkt ət sɪmpəl tæsks - kɝstʃən ɹæn ə taɪni wivɝz ʃɑp, ən dmænə wɑz ə simstʃɹɪs, ðoʊ ə pɹɑspɝəs wʌn - bʌt ðɛn, ɪn ðə kɔɹs ə ðɛɹ lɪvz, ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl fɑloʊd mɛni kɹæfs. ən juz mɛni neɪmz. "ɪspæn sədaɪ əpɪɹz tə bi ənwɛl," tʃɪlɛɹz sɛd, ʃɪftɪŋ ənizəli ɪn əɹ sæɾəl. "pɝhæps ði ɝbz ɑɹ əfɛktɪŋ əɹ mɔɹ ðən nɪneɪiv sədaɪ θɔt. ɪt wəd bi tɛɹəbəl ɪf ɛniθɪŋ hæpən tə hɝ. bɪfɔɹ ʃi kən bi kwɛstʃənd, aɪ min. pɝhæps ðə sɪstɝz wəd lʊk ət hɝ? hilɪŋ, jə noʊ. . . ." ʃi tʃɹeɪld ɔf, blɪŋkɪŋ ðoʊz bɪɡ bɹaʊn aɪz nɝvəsli. əz wɛl ʃi maɪt, wɪð sumeɪkoʊ əmʌŋ əɹ kəmpænjənz.

"Forgiveness, Elayne Sedai," Chilares murmured a short time later, the traces of Murandy clinging to her accent. Her green straw hat matched some of her layered petticoats exactly. "Your forgiveness, if I intrude." She did not wear the red belt of a Wise Woman; most of the Knitting Circle did not. Ivara was a goldsmith, and Eldase supplied lacquerware to the merchants for export; Chilares was a rug seller, while Reanne herself arranged shipping for small traders. Some worked at simple tasks - Kirstian ran a tiny weaver's shop, and Dimana was a seamstress, though a prosperous one - but then, in the course of their lives, they had all followed many crafts. And used many names. "Ispan Sedai appears to be unwell," Chilares said, shifting uneasily in her saddle. "Perhaps the herbs are affecting her more than Nynaeve Sedai thought. It would be terrible if anything happened to her. Before she can be questioned, I mean. Perhaps the sisters would look at her? Healing, you know. . . ." She trailed off, blinking those big brown eyes nervously. As well she might, with Sumeko among her companions.

ə ɡlæns bæk ʃoʊd ðə staʊt wʊmən stændɪŋ ɪn əɹ stɝəps tə pɪɹ pæs ðə wɪndfɪndɝz, əntɪl ʃi sɔ ɪleɪn lʊkɪŋ ən sæt bæk daʊn hɝidli. sumeɪkoʊ, hu nu mɔɹ ə hilɪŋ ðən ɛni sɪstɝ ɪksɛp nɪneɪiv. pɝhæps mɔɹ ðən nɪneɪiv. ɪleɪn sɪmpli pɔɪntəd tə ðə ɹɪɹ əntɪl tʃɪlɛɹz kʌlɝɾ ən ɹeɪn əɹ maʊn ɝaʊnd.

A glance back showed the stout woman standing in her stirrups to peer past the Windfinders, until she saw Elayne looking and sat back down hurriedly. Sumeko, who knew more of Healing than any sister except Nynaeve. Perhaps more than Nynaeve. Elayne simply pointed to the rear until Chilares colored and reined her mount around.

mɛɝɪlɪl dʒɔɪn ɪleɪn oʊnli moʊməns æftɝ ɹin lɛft, ən ðə ɡɹeɪ sɪstɝ meɪɾ ə mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ pɹitɛns ət sɪmpəl tʃæt ðən ðə kɪnswʊmən hæd. ɪn əɹ mænɝ ə spikɪŋ, ət list, ʃi wɑz pɔɪz ɪtsɛlf. wʌt ʃi hæd tə seɪ wɑz ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ. "aɪ wʌndɝ haʊ tʃɹʌstwɝði ðoʊz wɪmən ɑɹ, ɪleɪn." hɝ lɪps pɝst ɪn dɪsteɪst əz ʃi bɹʌʃt dʌs fɹəm əɹ dɪvaɪɾəd blu skɝts wɪð ə ɡlʌv hænd. "ðeɪ seɪ ðeɪ də nɑt teɪk ɪn waɪldɝz, bʌt ɹin hɝsɛlf meɪ wɛl bi ə waɪldɝ, wʌtɛvɝ ʃi kleɪmz əbaʊt feɪlɪŋ əɹ tɛs fəɹ æksɛptɪd. sumeɪkoʊ, əz wɛl, ən sɝɾənli kɝstʃən." ə slaɪt fɹaʊn fəɹ kɝstʃən, ə dɪsmɪsɪv ʃeɪk ə hɝ hɛd. "ju mʌst əv noʊɾəst haʊ ʃi lips əɾ ɛni mɛnʃən ə ðə taʊɝ. ʃi noʊz noʊ mɔɹ ðən ʃi maɪɾ əv pɪkt ʌp ɪn kɑnvɝseɪʃən wɪð sʌmwʌn u ɹɪli wɑz pʊɾ aʊt." mɛɝɪlɪl saɪd, ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ wʌt ʃi hæd tə seɪ; ʃi ɹɪli wɑz vɛɹi ɡʊd. "hæv jə kənsɪɾɝd ðət ðeɪ meɪ bi laɪɪŋ əbaʊɾ ʌðɝ θɪŋz? ðeɪ kəd bi dɑɹkfɹɛnz, fəɹ ɔl wi noʊ, əɹ dups ə dɑɹkfɹɛnz. pɝhæps nɑt, bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ hɑɹdli tə bi tʃɹʌstɪd vɛɹi fɑɹ. aɪ bɪliv ðəɹ ɪz ə fɑɹm, wɛðɝ ðeɪ ɹɪli juz ɪt fəɹ ə ɹitʃɹiɾ əɹ nɑt, əɹ aɪ wəd nɑɾ əv əɡɹid tə ðɪs, bʌɾ əl nɑt bi sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ə fju ɹæmʃækəl bɪldɪŋz ən ə dʌzən əɹ soʊ waɪldɝz. wɛl, nɑt ɹæmʃækəl - ðeɪ də sim tə hæv kɔɪn - bʌt ðə pɹɪnsəpəl ɪz ðə seɪm. noʊ, ðeɪ ɑɹ sɪmpli nɑt tʃɹʌstwɝði."

Merilille joined Elayne only moments after Reanne left, and the Gray sister made a much better pretense at simple chat than the Kinswoman had. In her manner of speaking, at least, she was poise itself. What she had to say was another matter. "I wonder how trustworthy those women are, Elayne." Her lips pursed in distaste as she brushed dust from her divided blue skirts with a gloved hand. "They say they do not take in wilders, but Reanne herself may well be a wilder, whatever she claims about failing her test for Accepted. Sumeko, as well, and certainly Kirstian." A slight frown for Kirstian, a dismissive shake of her head. "You must have noticed how she leaps at any mention of the Tower. She knows no more than she might have picked up in conversation with someone who really was put out." Merilille sighed, regretting what she had to say; she really was very good. "Have you considered that they may be lying about other things? They could be Darkfriends, for all we know, or dupes of Darkfriends. Perhaps not, but they are hardly to be trusted very far. I believe there is a farm, whether they really use it for a retreat or not, or I would not have agreed to this, but I will not be surprised to find a few ramshackle buildings and a dozen or so wilders. Well, not ramshackle - they do seem to have coin - but the principle is the same. No, they are simply not trustworthy."

ɪleɪn bɪɡæn ə sloʊ bɝn əz sun əz ʃi ɹilaɪz ðə dɝɛkʃən mɛɝɪlɪl wɑz teɪkɪŋ, ən ɪt ɡɹu hɑɾɝ. əz ðɪs slɪpɪŋ ɝaʊnd, ɔl ðɪs "meɪ" ən "kʊd" soʊ ðə wʊmən kəɾ ɪnsɪnjueɪt θɪŋz ʃi hɝsɛlf dɪd nɑt bɪliv. dɑɹkfɹɛnz? ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl hæd fɔt dɑɹkfɹɛnz. tu hæd daɪd. ən wɪθaʊt sumeɪkoʊ ən iin, nɪneɪiv maɪt bi dɛɾ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɪspæn ə pɹɪznɝ. noʊ, ðə ɹizən ðeɪ wɝ nɑt tə bi tʃɹʌstɪd wɑz nɑt kəz mɛɝɪlɪl fɪɹd ðeɪ wɝ swɔɹn tə ðə ʃædoʊ, əɹ ʃi wʊɾə sɛd soʊ. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt tə bi tʃɹʌstɪd kəz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ nɑt tʃɹʌstɪd, ðən ðeɪ kəd nɑt bi əlaʊd tə hoʊld ɪspæn.

Elayne began a slow burn as soon as she realized the direction Merilille was taking, and it grew hotter. As this slipping around, all this "may" and "could" so the woman could insinuate things she herself did not believe. Darkfriends? The Knitting Circle had fought Darkfriends. Two had died. And without Sumeko and Ieine, Nynaeve might be dead instead of Ispan a prisoner. No, the reason they were not to be trusted was not because Merilille feared they were sworn to the Shadow, or she would have said so. They were not to be trusted because if they were not trusted, then they could not be allowed to hold Ispan.

ʃi swɑɾɪd ə bɪɡ ɡɹin flaɪ ðət hæd sɛɾəld ɑn laɪoʊnəsəz nɛk, pʌŋktʃueɪɾɪŋ mɛɝɪlɪlz læst wɝd wɪð ə laʊd kɹæk, ən ðə ɡɹeɪ sɪstɝ dʒɝkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. "haʊ dɛɹ ju?" ɪleɪn bɹiðd. "ðeɪ feɪst ɪspæn ən fæljən ɪn ðə ɹæhəd, ən ðə ɡoʊləm, nɑt tə mɛnʃən tu dʌzən əɹ mɔɹ tʌfs wɪð sɔɹdz. jə wɝn ðɛɹ." ðət wɑz hɑɹdli fɛɹ. mɛɝɪlɪl ən ðə ɹɛs hæd bɪn lɛf bɪhaɪn kəz ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə ɹæhəd, ɑbviəs ɛɛs sədaɪ, maɪɾ əz wɛl bi tʃɹʌmpəts ən dʒɹʌmz fəɹ ði ətɛnʃən ðeɪ ətʃɹæktəd. ʃi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ. hɝ æŋɡɝ ɡɹu baɪ ðə moʊmənt, ən əɹ vɔɪs ɹoʊz baɪ ðə wɝd. "ju wɪl nɛvɝ sədʒɛst sətʃ ə θɪŋ tə mi əɡɛn. nɛvɝ! nɑt wɪθaʊt hɑɹɾ ɛvəɾəns! nɑt wɪθaʊt pɹuf! ɪf jə du, əl sɛt jə ə pɛnəns ðət wɪl meɪk jəɹ aɪz pɑp!" noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ haɪ ʃi stʊɾ əbʌv ði ʌðɝ wʊmən, ʃi hæd noʊ əθɔɹəɾi tə sɛɾ əɹ ɛni pɛnəns əɾ ɔl, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ əbaʊt ðæt, iðɝ. "aɪl meɪk jə wɔk ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn! iɾɪŋ nʌθɪŋ bʌt bɹɛɾ ən wɔɾɝ ði ɪntaɪɝ weɪ! əl pʊt jə ɪn ðɛɹ tʃɑɹdʒ, ən tɛl əm tə slæp jə daʊn ɪf jə seɪ bu tə ə ɡus!"

She swatted a big green fly that had settled on Lioness's neck, punctuating Merilille's last word with a loud crack, and the Gray sister jerked in surprise. "How dare you?" Elayne breathed. "They faced Ispan and Falion in the Rahad, and the gholam, not to mention two dozen or more toughs with swords. You weren't there." That was hardly fair. Merilille and the rest had been left behind because Aes Sedai in the Rahad, obvious Aes Sedai, might as well be trumpets and drums for the attention they attracted. She did not care. Her anger grew by the moment, and her voice rose by the word. "You will never suggest such a thing to me again. Never! Not without hard evidence! Not without proof! If you do, I'll set you a penance that will make your eyes pop!" No matter how high she stood above the other woman, she had no authority to set her any penance at all, but she did not care about that, either. "I'll make you walk the rest of the way to Tar Valon! Eating nothing but bread and water the entire way! I'll put you in their charge, and tell them to slap you down if you say boo to a goose!"

ɪt dɔn ɑn əɹ ðət ʃi wɑz ʃaʊɾɪŋ. səm sɔɹɾ ʌv ɡɹeɪ-ænd-waɪt bɝdz wɛn flɪɾɝɪŋ pæst oʊvɝhɛɾ ɪn ə bɹɔd bænd, ən ʃi wɑz dʒɹaʊnɪŋ aʊt ðɛɹ kɹaɪz. dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə kɑm hɝsɛlf. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv ə vɔɪs fəɹ ʃaʊɾɪŋ; ɪɾ ɔlweɪz keɪm aʊɾ əz ə ʃɹik. ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ, moʊst ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt. eɪvinhə nɑɾəd əpɹuvɪŋli. ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi wʊɾə dʌn ðə seɪm hæɾ ɪleɪn plʌnʒd ə naɪf ɪndə mɛɝɪlɪlz hɑɹt. eɪvinhə stʊd bɪsaɪɾ əɹ fɹɛnz noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt. mɛɝɪlɪlz kɛɹhinɪn pælnəs hæd bɪkʌm dɛd waɪt.

It dawned on her that she was shouting. Some sort of gray-and-white birds went flittering past overhead in a broad band, and she was drowning out their cries. Drawing a deep breath, she tried to calm herself. She did not have a voice for shouting; it always came out as a shriek. Everyone was looking at her, most in astonishment. Aviendha nodded approvingly. Of course, she would have done the same had Elayne plunged a knife into Merilille's heart. Aviendha stood beside her friends no matter what. Merilille's Cairhienin paleness had become dead white.

"aɪ min wʌɾ aɪ seɪ," ɪleɪn toʊl hɝ, ɪn ə mʌtʃ kulɝ toʊn. ɪt sim tə meɪk ivən mɔɹ blʌd liv mɛɝɪlɪlz feɪs. ʃi dɪd min ɛvɹi wɝd; ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd ðət sɔɹɾ ə ɹumɝ floʊɾɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛm. wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ ʃi wəd si ɪt dʌn, ðoʊ ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl vɛɹi laɪkli wəd feɪnt.

"I mean what I say," Elayne told her, in a much cooler tone. It seemed to make even more blood leave Merilille's face. She did mean every word; they could not afford that sort of rumor floating among them. One way or another she would see it done, though the Knitting Circle very likely would faint.

ʃi hoʊp ðət wɑz ði ɛn ʌv ɪt. ɪt ʃəɾ əv bɪn. bʌt wən tʃɪlɛɹz lɛft, sɝaɪðə ɹipleɪs hɝ, ən ʃi tu hæɾ ə ɹizən ðə kɪnswɪmən wɝ nɑt tə bi tʃɹʌstɪd. ðɛɹ eɪdʒəz. ivən kɝstʃən kleɪm tə bi oʊldɝ ðən ɛni lɪvɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ, waɪl ɹin wɑz oʊvɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz mɔɹ ðən ðəɾ ən nɑɾ ivən ði oʊldəst ə ðə kɪn. hɝ taɪɾəl ʌv ɛldəst wɛn tə ði oʊldəst ə ðɛm ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ən ðə ɹɪdʒəd skɛdʒʊl ðeɪ fɑloʊd tə əvɔɪd noʊɾəs hæɾ ə nʌmbɝ ə stɪl oʊldɝ wɪmən ɔf ɪn ʌðɝ pleɪsəz. ɪt wɑz ɑbviəsli ɪmpɑsəbəl, sɝaɪðə meɪnteɪnd.

She hoped that was the end of it. It should have been. But when Chilares left, Sareitha replaced her, and she too had a reason the Kinswomen were not to be trusted. Their ages. Even Kirstian claimed to be older than any living Aes Sedai, while Reanne was over a hundred years more than that and not even the oldest of the Kin. Her title of Eldest went to the oldest of them in Ebou Dar, and the rigid schedule they followed to avoid notice had a number of still older women off in other places. It was obviously impossible, Sareitha maintained.

ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt ʃaʊt; ʃi vɛɹi kɛɹfəli dɪd nɑt ʃaʊt. "wi wɪl lɝn ðə tʃɹuθ ɪvɛntʃəwəli," ʃi toʊl sɝaɪðə. ʃi dɪd nɑt daʊt ðə kɪnswɪmənz wɝd, bʌt ðəɹ hæd tə bi ə ɹizən waɪ ðə kɪnswɪmən lʊk niðɝ eɪdʒləs nɔɹ ɛniθɪŋ nɪɹ ði eɪdʒəz ðeɪ kleɪmd. ɪf ʃi kəɾ oʊnli pʌzəl ɪɾ aʊt. sʌmθɪŋ toʊld əɹ ɪt wɑz ɑbviəs, bʌt nʌθɪŋ lɛpt ʌp ðət sɛd wʌt. "ɪvɛntʃəwəli," ʃi æɾəd fɝmli wən ðə bɹaʊn oʊpən əɹ maʊθ əɡɛn. "ðæt wɪl bi ɪnʌf, sɝaɪðə." sɝaɪðə nɑɾəd ənsɝteɪnli ən fɛl bæk. nɑt tɛn mɪnəts leɪɾɝ, sɪbɛlə ɹipleɪs hɝ.

Elayne did not shout; she very carefully did not shout. "We will learn the truth eventually," she told Sareitha. She did not doubt the Kinswomen's word, but there had to be a reason why the Kinswomen looked neither ageless nor anything near the ages they claimed. If she could only puzzle it out. Something told her it was obvious, but nothing leaped up that said what. "Eventually," she added firmly when the Brown opened her mouth again. "That will be enough, Sareitha." Sareitha nodded uncertainly and fell back. Not ten minutes later, Sibella replaced her.

ɛvɹi taɪm wʌn ə ðə kɪnswɪmən keɪm tə meɪk əɹ ɹaʊndəbaʊt pli tə bi ɹɪlivd ʌv ɪspæn, wʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz keɪm sun æftɝ tə ɔfɝ ðə seɪm pli. ɔl seɪv mɛɝɪlɪl, hu stɪl blɪŋkt wɛnɛvɝ ɪleɪn lʊkt ət hɝ. pɝhæps ʃaʊɾɪŋ dɪɾ əv ɪts juzɪz. sɝɾənli noʊ wʌn ɛls tʃɹaɪd tə bi soʊ stʃɹeɪtfɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ətækɪŋ ðə kɪn.

Every time one of the Kinswomen came to make her roundabout plea to be relieved of Ispan, one of the sisters came soon after to offer the same plea. All save Merilille, who still blinked whenever Elayne looked at her. Perhaps shouting did have its uses. Certainly no one else tried to be so straightforward in attacking the Kin.

fəɹ ɪnstəns, vændin bɪɡæn wɪð dɪskʌsɪŋ ðə si foʊk ən haʊ tə kaʊntɝ ði ɪfɛks ə ðə bɑɹɡən meɪd wɪð ðɛm, waɪ ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi tə kaʊntɝ əm əz mʌtʃ əz pɑsəbəl. ʃi wɑz kwaɪt mæɾɝ-ʌv-fækt, wɪð nɛvɝ ə wɝɾ əɹ dʒɛstʃɝ tə leɪ ɛni bleɪm. nɑt ðət ʃi niɾəd ɛni; ðə sʌbʒɪkt dɪd ðæt, haʊɛvɝ dɛləkətli hændəld. ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ʃi sɛd, meɪnteɪn ɪts ɪnfluəns ɪn ðə wɝl nɑt baɪ fɔɹs ʌv ɑɹmz, əɹ pɝsweɪʒən, əɹ ivən baɪ plɑɾɪŋ əɹ mənɪpjəleɪʃən, ðoʊ ðoʊz tu ʃi bɹʌʃt pæs laɪtli. ɹæðɝ ðə waɪt taʊɝ kəntʃɹoʊld əɹ ɪnfluənst ɪvɛns tə wʌtɛvɝ ɪkstɛn ðeɪ dɪd kəz ɛvɹiwʌn sɔ ðə taʊɝ əz stændɪŋ əpɑɹɾ ən əbʌv, mɔɹ ivən ðən kɪŋz əɹ kwinz. ðəɾ ɪn tɝn dɪpɛndəɾ ɑn ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ biɪŋ sin ðət weɪ, əz mɪstɪɹiəs ən əpɑɹt, dɪfɹən fɹəm ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls. ə dɪfɹən flɛʃ. hɪstɔɹɪkəli, ɛɛs sədaɪ hu kəd nɑt mænədʒ ðət - ən ðəɹ wɝ ə fju - wɝ kɛpt aʊɾ ə pʌblɪk vju əz mʌtʃ əz pɑsəbəl.

For instance, Vandene began with discussing the Sea Folk and how to counter the effects of the bargain made with them, why it was necessary to counter them as much as possible. She was quite matter-of-fact, with never a word or gesture to lay any blame. Not that she needed any; the subject did that, however delicately handled. The White Tower, she said, maintained its influence in the world not by force of arms, or persuasion, or even by plotting or manipulation, though those two she brushed past lightly. Rather the White Tower controlled or influenced events to whatever extent they did because everyone saw the Tower as standing apart and above, more even than kings or queens. That in turn depended on every Aes Sedai being seen that way, as mysterious and apart, different from everyone else. A different flesh. Historically, Aes Sedai who could not manage that - and there were a few - were kept out of public view as much as possible.

ɪt tʊk ɪleɪn ə lɪɾəl waɪl tə ɹilaɪz ðət ðə θɹʌst ə ðə kɑnvɝseɪʃən hæd ʃɪftəɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə si foʊk, ən tə si wɛɹ ɪt wɑz hɛɾəd. ə dɪfɹən flɛʃ, mɪstɪɹiəs ən əpɑɹt, kəd nɑɾ əv ə sæk θɹʌst oʊvɝ ɪts hɛɾ ən bi taɪɾ əkɹɔs ə sæɾəl. nɑt wɛɹ ɛniwʌn u wɑz nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd si, ɛniweɪ. ɪn tʃɹuθ, ðə sɪstɝz wəd bi ɹʌfɝ ɑn ɪspæn ðən ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl kəd pɑsəbli meɪk ðɛmsɛlvz bi, dʒʌs nɑɾ ɪn pʌblɪk. ði ɑɹɡjəmən maɪɾ əv bɔɹn mɔɹ weɪt hæɾ ɪt kʌm fɝst, bʌɾ əz ɪt wɑz, ɪleɪn sɛn vændin pækɪŋ əz kwɪkli əz ʃi dɪɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls. ən sɔ hɝ ɹipleɪs baɪ æɾɪliz, ɹaɪɾ æftɝ sɪbɛlə wɑz toʊl ðəɾ ɪf nʌn ə ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl kəɾ ʌndɝstænd wʌɾ ɪspæn wɑz mʌmbəlɪŋ, ðən nʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz wɑz laɪkli tə iðɝ. mʌmbəlɪŋ! laɪt! ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tʊk ðɛɹ ɹɪpiɾɪd tɝnz, ən ivən noʊɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ ʌp tə, səmtaɪmz ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə si ðə kənɛkʃən ət fɝst. baɪ ðə taɪm kɛɝin bɪɡæn baɪ tɛlɪŋ əɹ ðət ðoʊz boʊldɝz ɹɪli hæd bɪn toʊz wʌns, səpoʊzədli ɑn ə stætʃu ʌv səm wɔɹiɝ kwin nɪɹli tu hʌnʒɹəd fit haɪ. . . .

It took Elayne a little while to realize that the thrust of the conversation had shifted away from the Sea Folk, and to see where it was headed. A different flesh, mysterious and apart, could not have a sack thrust over its head and be tied across a saddle. Not where anyone who was not Aes Sedai could see, anyway. In truth, the sisters would be rougher on Ispan than the Knitting Circle could possibly make themselves be, just not in public. The argument might have borne more weight had it come first, but as it was, Elayne sent Vandene packing as quickly as she did anyone else. And saw her replaced by Adeleas, right after Sibella was told that if none of the Knitting Circle could understand what Ispan was mumbling, then none of the sisters was likely to either. Mumbling! Light! The Aes Sedai took their repeated turns, and even knowing what they were up to, sometimes it was hard to see the connection at first. By the time Careane began by telling her that those boulders really had been toes once, supposedly on a statue of some warrior queen nearly two hundred feet high. . . .

"ɪspæn steɪz wɛɹ ʃi ɪz," ʃi toʊl kɛɝin kuli wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ mɔɹ. "naʊ, ənlɛs jə ɹɪli wɑnə tɛl mi waɪ ðə ʃiəɾənz θɔɾ ə pʊɾɪŋ ʌp ə stætʃu laɪk ðæt. . . ." ðə ɡɹin sɛɾ eɪntʃən ɹɛkɝdz kleɪmd ɪt hæd wɔɹn lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ɑɹmɝ, ən nɑɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə ðæt! ə kwin! "noʊ? ðɛn, ɪf jə doʊn maɪnd, aɪd laɪk tə tɔk wɪð eɪvinhə əloʊn. θæŋk jə soʊ mʌtʃ." ivən biɪŋ kɝt dɪd nɑt stɑp ðɛm, ʌv kɔɹs. ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz ðeɪ dɪd nɑt sɛn mɛɝɪlɪlz meɪd tə teɪk ə tɝn.

"Ispan stays where she is," she told Careane coolly without waiting for more. "Now, unless you really want to tell me why the Shiotans thought of putting up a statue like that. . . ." The Green said ancient records claimed it had worn little more than armor, and not a great deal of that! A queen! "No? Then, if you don't mind, I'd like to talk with Aviendha alone. Thank you so much." Even being curt did not stop them, of course. She was surprised they did not send Merilille's maid to take a turn.

nʌn ə ðɪs wʊɾə hæpən hæd nɪneɪiv bɪn wɛɹ ʃi wɑz mɛn tə bi. ət list, ɪleɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ ðət nɪneɪiv cʊɾə kwɛl ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl ən ðə sɪstɝz boʊθ, ɪn ʃɔɹɾ ɔɹɾɝ. ʃi wɑz ə ɡɹeɪt wʌn fəɹ kwɛlɪŋ. ðə pɹɑbləm wɑz ðət nɪneɪiv hæd ɡlud hɝsɛlf taɪt tə lænz saɪd bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ lɛf ðə fɝs klɪɹɪŋ. ðə wɔɹɾɝz skaʊɾəd əhɛɾ ən tə boʊθ saɪdz ə ðɛɹ pæθ, ən səmtaɪmz tə ðə ɹɪɹ, oʊnli ɹaɪɾɪŋ bæk tə ðə kɑləm lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɹipɔɹt wʌt ðeɪ hæd sin əɹ ɡɪv dɝɛkʃənz ɑn haʊ tə əvɔɪɾ ə fɑɹm əɹ ə ʃɛpɝd. bɝdʒɪt ɹeɪnʒd fɑɹ, nɛvɝ spɛndɪŋ mɔɹ ðən moʊməns wɪð ɪleɪn. læn ɹeɪnʒd fɑɹðɝ. ən wɛɹ læn wɛnt, nɪneɪiv wɛnt.

None of this would have happened had Nynaeve been where she was meant to be. At least, Elayne was sure that Nynaeve could have quelled the Knitting Circle and the sisters both, in short order. She was a great one for quelling. The problem was that Nynaeve had glued herself tight to Lan's side before they left the first clearing. The Warders scouted ahead and to both sides of their path, and sometimes to the rear, only riding back to the column long enough to report what they had seen or give directions on how to avoid a farm or a shepherd. Birgitte ranged far, never spending more than moments with Elayne. Lan ranged farther. And where Lan went, Nynaeve went.

"noʊ wʌnz meɪkɪŋ ɛni tʃɹʌbəl, ɑɹ ðeɪ?" ʃi dɪmændəd wɪð ə dɑɹk stɛɹ fəɹ ðə si foʊk, ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi fɑloʊd læn bæk. "wɛl, ðæts ɔl ɹaɪt, ðɛn," ʃi sɛd bɪfɔɹ ɪleɪn hæɾ ə tʃæns tə oʊpən əɹ maʊθ. spɪnɪŋ əɹ ɹaʊnd-bɛlid mɛɹ laɪk ə ɹeɪsɝ, ʃi flɪk ðə ɹeɪnz ən ɡæləpt æftɝ læn hoʊldɪŋ əɹ hæɾ ɑn wɪð wʌn hænd, kætʃɪŋ ʌp tə hɪm dʒʌst əz i vænɪʃt ɝaʊn ðə flæŋk ə ðə hɪl əhɛd. ʌv kɔɹs, ðən ðəɹ ɹɪli wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə kəmpleɪn əbaʊt. ɹin hæd meɪɾ əɹ vɪzət, ən mɛɝɪlɪl hɝz, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ sim sɛɾəld.

"No one's making any trouble, are they?" she demanded with a dark stare for the Sea Folk, the first time she followed Lan back. "Well, that's all right, then," she said before Elayne had a chance to open her mouth. Spinning her round-bellied mare like a racer, she flicked the reins and galloped after Lan holding her hat on with one hand, catching up to him just as he vanished around the flank of the hill ahead. Of course, then there really was nothing to complain about. Reanne had made her visit, and Merilille hers, and everything seemed settled.

baɪ ðə nɛks taɪm nɪneɪiv əpɪɹd, ɪleɪn hæd sʌfɝd θɹu ə nʌmbɝ ə dɪsɡaɪzd ətɛmps tə hæv ɪspæn tɝn oʊvɝ tə ðə sɪstɝz, eɪvinhə hæd spoʊkən tə kɹɪn, ən ðə wɪndfɪndɝz wɝ ɑn ə sloʊ bɔɪl, bʌt wən ɪleɪn ɪkspleɪnd, nɪneɪiv sɪmpli lʊkt ɝaʊnd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. ʌv kɔɹs, ɹaɪɾ ət ðət moʊmən ɛvɹiwʌn hæd tə bi wɛɹ ðeɪ bɪlɔŋd. ði æθɑn maɪɹ wɔɹ ɡlɛɹz, tʃɹu, bʌt ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl wɝ ɔl bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ən əz fəɹ ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz, noʊ ɡɹup ə nɑvəsɪz cʊɾə əpɪɹd mɔɹ wɛl-bɪheɪvd ən ɪnəsənt. ɪleɪn wɑntəd tə ʃɹik!

By the next time Nynaeve appeared, Elayne had suffered through a number of disguised attempts to have Ispan turned over to the sisters, Aviendha had spoken to Kurin, and the Windfinders were on a slow boil, but when Elayne explained, Nynaeve simply looked around, frowning. Of course, right at that moment everyone had to be where they belonged. The Atha'an Miere wore glares, true, but the Knitting Circle were all behind them, and as for the other sisters, no group of novices could have appeared more well-behaved and innocent. Elayne wanted to shriek!

"aɪm ʃʊɹ jə kən hændəl ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ɪleɪn," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ju hæv hæɾ ɔl ðət tʃɹeɪnɪŋ tə bi ə kwin. ðɪs kæn bi ɛniwɛɹ nɪɹ soʊ - dʒɹæt ðə mæn! hiz ɡoʊɪŋ əɡɛn! jə kən hændəl ɪt." ən ɔf ʃi wɛnt, ɡæləpɪŋ ðət pʊɹ mɛɹ əz ðoʊ ɪt wɝ ə wɔɹhɔɹs.

"I'm sure you can handle everything, Elayne," Nynaeve said. "You have had all that training to be a queen. This can't be anywhere near so - Drat the man! He's going again! You can handle it." And off she went, galloping that poor mare as though it were a warhorse.

ðət wɑz wən eɪvinhə tʃoʊz tə dɪskʌs haʊ ɹænd sim tə laɪk kɪsɪŋ ðə saɪdz ə hɝ nɛk. ən ɪnsɪdɛntəli haʊ mʌtʃ ʃi hæd laɪkt ɪt. ɪleɪn hæd laɪk ðət wən i dɪɾ ɪt tə hɝ, tu, bʌt haʊɛvɝ juz tə dɪskʌsɪŋ ðɪs sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ ʃi hæd bɪkʌm - ənkʌmftəbli juz tə ɪt - ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt ɹaɪt ðɛn. ʃi wɑz æŋɡɹi wɪð ɹænd. ɪt wɑz ənfɛɹ, bʌɾ ɪf nɑt fəɹ hɪm, ʃi cʊɾə toʊl nɪneɪiv tə stɑp tʃɹiɾɪŋ læn laɪk ə tʃaɪld u maɪt tʃɹɪp oʊvɝ ɪz oʊn fiɾ ən ətɛn tə hɝ oʊn duɾiz. ʃi ɔlmoʊst wɑntəd tə bleɪm ɪm fəɹ ðə weɪ ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl wɑz bɪheɪvɪŋ, tu, ən ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz, ən ðə wɪndfɪndɝz. ɪts wʌn ə ðə θɪŋz mɛn ɑɹ fɔɹ, teɪkɪŋ ðə bleɪm, ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd lini seɪɪŋ wʌns, ən læfɪŋ waɪl ʃi dɪd. ðeɪ juʒəwəli dɪzɝv ɪt, ivən ɪf jə doʊnt noʊ ɪɡzækli haʊ. nɑt fɛɹ, jɛt ʃi wɪʃt i wɝ ðəɹ lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ əɹ tə bɑks ɪz ɪɹz, dʒʌst wʌns. lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə kɪs hɪm, tə hæv ɪm kɪs ðə saɪdz ə hɝ nɛk sɔfli. lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə. . . .

That was when Aviendha chose to discuss how Rand seemed to like kissing the sides of her neck. And incidentally how much she had liked it. Elayne had liked that when he did it to her, too, but however used to discussing this sort of thing she had become - uncomfortably used to it - she did not want to talk about it right then. She was angry with Rand. It was unfair, but if not for him, she could have told Nynaeve to stop treating Lan like a child who might trip over his own feet and attend to her own duties. She almost wanted to blame him for the way the Knitting Circle was behaving, too, and the other sisters, and the Windfinders. It's one of the things men are for, taking the blame, she remembered Lini saying once, and laughing while she did. They usually deserve it, even if you don't know exactly how. Not fair, yet she wished he were there long enough for her to box his ears, just once. Long enough to kiss him, to have him kiss the sides of her neck softly. Long enough to. . . .

"hi wɪl lɪsən tə ædvaɪs, ivən wən i dʌzn laɪk hɪɹɪŋ ɪt," ʃi sɛɾ əbɹʌpli, hɝ feɪs ɹɛɾənɪŋ. laɪt, fəɹ ɔl əɹ tɔk əbaʊt ʃeɪm, ɪn səm ɛɹiəz eɪvinhə hæd nʌn. ən ɪt sim ðət ʃi hɝsɛlf noʊ lɔŋɡɝ hæɾ ɛni, iðɝ! "bʌɾ ɪf aɪ tʃɹaɪd tə pʊʃ hɪm, hi dʌɡ ɪn ɪz hilz ivən wən ɪt wɑz pleɪn ðəɾ aɪ wɑz ɹaɪt. wɑz i ðət weɪ wɪð ju?"

"He will listen to advice, even when he doesn't like hearing it," she said abruptly, her face reddening. Light, for all her talk about shame, in some areas Aviendha had none. And it seemed that she herself no longer had any, either! "But if I tried to push him, he dug in his heels even when it was plain that I was right. Was he that way with you?"

eɪvinhə ɡlænst əɾ əɹ ən əpɪɹd tə ʌndɝstænd. ɪleɪn wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɛðɝ ʃi laɪk ðəɾ əɹ nɑt. ət lis ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɔɹ tɔk ə ɹænd ən kɪsɪŋ. fəɹ ə waɪl, ɛniweɪ. eɪvinhə hæd səm nɑlədʒ ə mɛn - ʃi hæd tʃɹævəld wɪð əm əz ə meɪɾən ə ðə spɪɹ, fɔt bɪsaɪɾ əm - bʌt ʃi hæd nɛvɝ wɑntəd tə bi ɛniθɪŋ bʌt fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ, ən ðəɹ wɝ . . . ɡæps. ivən wɪð əɹ dɑlz əz ə tʃaɪld ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz pleɪɾ ət ðə spɪɹz ən ɹeɪɾɪŋ. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ flɝɾɪd, dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ɪt, ən ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ ʃi fɛl ðə weɪ ʃi dɪd wən ɹændz aɪz fɛl ɑn hɝ, əɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd ʌðɝ θɪŋz ɪleɪn hæd bɪɡʌn lɝnɪŋ ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi noʊɾəst ə bɔɪ lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ dɪfɹənli ðən i dɪɾ ət ði ʌðɝ bɔɪz. ʃi ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪleɪn tə titʃ əɹ ɔl ʌv ɪt, ən ɪleɪn tʃɹaɪd. ʃi ɹɪli kəd tɔk tə eɪvinhə əbaʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ. ɪf oʊnli ɹænd hæd nɑt bɪn ði ɪɡzæmpəl juz kwaɪt soʊ ɔfən. ɪf i hæd bɪn ðɛɹ, ʃi wʊɾə bɑkst ɪz ɪɹz. ən kɪs hɪm. ðən bɑkst ɪz ɪɹz əɡɛn.

Aviendha glanced at her and appeared to understand. Elayne was not sure whether she liked that or not. At least there was no more talk of Rand and kissing. For a while, anyway. Aviendha had some knowledge of men - she had traveled with them as a Maiden of the Spear, fought beside them - but she had never wanted to be anything but Far Dareis Mai, and there were . . . gaps. Even with her dolls as a child she had always played at the spears and raiding. She had never flirted, did not understand it, and she did not understand why she felt the way she did when Rand's eyes fell on her, or a hundred other things Elayne had begun learning the first time she noticed a boy looking at her differently than he did at the other boys. She expected Elayne to teach her all of it, and Elayne tried. She really could talk to Aviendha about anything. If only Rand had not been the example used quite so often. If he had been there, she would have boxed his ears. And kissed him. Then boxed his ears again.

nɑɾ ə plɛzən ɹaɪɾ əɾ ɔl. ə mɪzɝəbəl ɹaɪd.

Not a pleasant ride at all. A miserable ride.

nɪneɪiv meɪd sɛvɹəl mɔɹ bɹif vɪzəts, bɪfɔɹ faɪnəli kʌmɪŋ tə ənaʊns ðət ðə kɪnz fɑɹm leɪ dʒʌst əhɛd, aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ɝaʊn ə loʊ ɹaʊndəd hɪl ðəɾ əpɪɹd ɹɛɾi tə fɔl ɑn ɪts saɪd. ɹin hæd bɪn pɛsəmɪstɪk ɪn əɹ ɛstəmeɪt; ðə sʌn hæd nɑt fɔlən nɪɹli tu aʊɝz' wɝθ.

Nynaeve made several more brief visits, before finally coming to announce that the Kin's farm lay just ahead, out of sight around a low rounded hill that appeared ready to fall on its side. Reanne had been pessimistic in her estimate; the sun had not fallen nearly two hours' worth.

"wil bi ðəɹ vɛɹi kwɪkli, naʊ," nɪneɪiv toʊld ɪleɪn, nɑt simɪŋ tə noʊɾəs ðə sʌlən stɛɹ ɪleɪn ɡeɪv ɪn ɹɪtɝn. "læn, fɛtʃ ɹin ʌp hɪɹ, pliz. bɛst ɪf ðeɪ si ə fəmɪljɝ feɪs ɹaɪɾ ɔf." hi wɝld ɪz hɔɹs əweɪ, ən nɪneɪiv tɝn ɪn əɹ sæɾəl bɹifli tə fɪks ðə sɪstɝz wɪð ə fɝm aɪ. "aɪ doʊnt wɑn jə fɹaɪɾənɪŋ ðɛm, naʊ. jə hoʊl jəɹ tʌŋz əntɪl wɪv ə tʃæns tə ɪkspleɪn wʌts wʌt. ən haɪd jəɹ feɪsəz. pʊl ʌp ðə hʊdz ə jəɹ kloʊks." stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɛni ɹɪplaɪ, ʃi ɡeɪv ə sæɾəsfaɪd nɑd. "ðɛɹ. ɔl sɛɾəld, ən ɔl ɹaɪt. aɪ vaʊ, ɪleɪn, aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt jə wɝ moʊnɪŋ soʊ əbaʊt. ɛvɹiwʌnz duɪŋ ɪɡzækli əz ðeɪ ʃʊd, soʊ fɑɹ əz aɪ kən si."

"We'll be there very quickly, now," Nynaeve told Elayne, not seeming to notice the sullen stare Elayne gave in return. "Lan, fetch Reanne up here, please. Best if they see a familiar face right off." He whirled his horse away, and Nynaeve turned in her saddle briefly to fix the sisters with a firm eye. "I don't want you frightening them, now. You hold your tongues until we have a chance to explain what's what. And hide your faces. Pull up the hoods of your cloaks." Straightening without waiting for any reply, she gave a satisfied nod. "There. All settled, and all right. I vow, Elayne, I don't know what you were moaning so about. Everyone's doing exactly as they should, so far as I can see."

ɪleɪn ɡɹaʊn əɹ tiθ. ʃi wɪʃt ðeɪ wɝ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn ɔlɹɛɾi. ðət wɑz wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ hɛɾɪŋ wʌns ðɪs wɑz dʌn. ʃi hæd duɾiz lɔŋ oʊvɝdu ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. ɔl ʃi hæd tə dil wɪð ðəɹ wɑz kənvɪnsɪŋ ðə stʃɹɔŋɝ haʊsəz ðət ðə laɪən θɹoʊn wɑz hɝz dɪspaɪɾ əɹ lɔŋ æbsəns, ðəɾ ən hænlɪŋ ə ɹaɪvəl kleɪmən əɹ tu. ðəɹ maɪt nɑɾ əv bɪn ɛni hæd ʃi bɪn ðəɹ wən əɹ mʌðɝ vænɪʃt, wən ʃi daɪd, bʌt ðə hɪstɝi ʌv ændɝ sɛd ðəɹ wəd bi baɪ naʊ. sʌmhaʊ, ɪt simd ɛvɝ soʊ mʌtʃ iziɝ ðən ðɪs.

Elayne ground her teeth. She wished they were in Caemlyn already. That was where they were heading once this was done. She had duties long overdue in Caemlyn. All she had to deal with there was convincing the stronger Houses that the Lion Throne was hers despite her long absence, that and handling a rival claimant or two. There might not have been any had she been there when her mother vanished, when she died, but the history of Andor said there would be by now. Somehow, it seemed ever so much easier than this.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹ


CHAPTER 4

eɪ kwaɪət pleɪs


A Quiet Place

ðə kɪnz fɑɹm leɪ ɪn ə bɹɔd hɑloʊ sɝaʊndəd baɪ θɹi loʊ hɪlz, ə spɹɔlɪŋ əfɛɹ ə mɔɹ ðən ə dʌzən lɑɹdʒ, waɪt-plæstɝd bɪldɪŋz wɪð flæt ɹufs, ɡlimɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌn. fɔɹ ɡɹeɪt bɑɹnz wɝ bɪlt ɹaɪɾ ɪndə ðə sloʊp ə ðə haɪəs hɪl, ə flæt-tɑp θɪŋ wɪð wʌn saɪd ðət fɛl əweɪ ɪn stip klɪfs bɪɑn ðə bɑɹnz. ə fju tɔl tʃɹiz ðət hæd nɑt lɔst ɔl ə ðɛɹ livz pɹəvaɪɾəd ə mɑɾɪkəm ə ʃeɪɾ ɪn ðə fɑɹmjɑɹd. tə ðə nɔɹθ ən ist, ɑləv ɡɹoʊvz mɑɹtʃt əweɪ ən ivən ʌp ðə saɪdz ə ðə hɪlz. ə sɔɹɾ ə sloʊ bʌsəl ɛnvɛləp ðə fɑɹm, wɪð izəli oʊvɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd pipəl ɪn ɛvəɾəns dɪspaɪt ði æftɝnun hit, kæɹiɪŋ ɑn ɔl ði ɛvɹideɪ tæsks bʌt nʌn kwɪkli.

The Kin's farm lay in a broad hollow surrounded by three low hills, a sprawling affair of more than a dozen large, white-plastered buildings with flat roofs, gleaming in the sun. Four great barns were built right into the slope of the highest hill, a flat-topped thing with one side that fell away in steep cliffs beyond the barns. A few tall trees that had not lost all of their leaves provided a modicum of shade in the farmyard. To the north and east, olive groves marched away and even up the sides of the hills. A sort of slow bustle enveloped the farm, with easily over a hundred people in evidence despite the afternoon heat, carrying on all the everyday tasks but none quickly.

ɪt maɪɾ ɔlmoʊst əv pæs fəɹ ə smɔl vɪlədʒ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə fɑɹm, ɪksɛp ðət ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ə mæn əɹ ə tʃaɪl tə bi sin. ɪleɪn dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛkt ɛni. ðɪs wɑz ə weɪpɔɪn fəɹ kɪnswɪmən pæsɪŋ θɹu ɛbu dɑɹ tə ɛlswɛɹ, soʊ ðəɹ wəd nɑt bi tu mɛni ɪn ðə sɪɾi ɪtsɛlf ət wʌn taɪm, bʌt ðət wɑz ə sikɹət mæɾɝ, əz sikɹəɾ əz ðə kɪn ðɛmsɛlvz. pʌblɪkli ðɪs fɑɹm wɑz noʊn fəɹ tu hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz əɹ mɔɹ əz ə ɹitʃɹit fəɹ wɪmən, ə pleɪs fəɹ kɑntəmpleɪʃən ən ɪskeɪp fɹəm ðə kɛɹz ə ðə wɝl fəɹ ə taɪm, ə fju deɪz, ə wik, səmtaɪmz lɔŋɡɝ. ɪleɪn kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fil sɝɛnəɾi ɪn ði ɛɹ. ʃi maɪɾ əv ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd bɹɪŋɪŋ ðə wɝld ɪndə ðɪs kwaɪət pleɪs, ɪksɛp ðət ʃi ɔlsoʊ bɹɔt nu hoʊp.

It might almost have passed for a small village instead of a farm, except that there was not a man or a child to be seen. Elayne did not expect any. This was a waypoint for Kinswomen passing through Ebou Dar to elsewhere, so there would not be too many in the city itself at one time, but that was a secret matter, as secret as the Kin themselves. Publicly this farm was known for two hundred miles or more as a retreat for women, a place for contemplation and escape from the cares of the world for a time, a few days, a week, sometimes longer. Elayne could almost feel serenity in the air. She might have regretted bringing the world into this quiet place, except that she also brought new hope.

ðə fɝst əpɪɹəns ə ðə hɔɹsəz kʌmɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə linɪŋ hɪl pɹədus fɑɹ lɛs stɝ ðən ʃi ɪkspɛktəd. ə nʌmbɝ ə ðə wɪmən stɑp tə wɑtʃ, bʌt noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðæt. ðɛɹ kloʊðɪŋ vɛɹid waɪdli - ɪleɪn ivən sɔ ə ʃin ə sɪlk hɪɹ ən ðəɹ - bʌt səm kæɹid bæskəts ən ʌðɝz bʌkəts, əɹ ɡɹeɪt waɪt bʌndəlz ʌv wʌt hæd tə bi wɑʃ. wʌn hɛld ə pɛɹ ə baʊn dʌks baɪ ðə fiɾ ɪn iðɝ hænd. noʊbəlwʊmən ən kɹæftswʊmən, fɑɹmɝ ən bɛɡɝ, ɔl wɝ ikwəli wɛlkəm hɪɹ, bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn dɪɾ ə ʃɛɹ ə ðə wɝk dʊɹɪŋ əɹ steɪ. eɪvinhə tʌtʃt ɪleɪnz ɑɹm, ðən pɔɪntəd tə ðə tɑp ʌv wʌn ə ðə hɪlz, ə θɪŋ laɪk ən ɪnvɝɾɪd fʌnəl skjud tə wʌn saɪd. ɪleɪn æɾəd ə hæn tə ðə ʃeɪɾ ə hɝ hæɾ ən æftɝ ə moʊmən sɔ muvmənt. smɔl wʌndɝ noʊ wʌn wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd. lʊkaʊts ʌp ðəɹ kəd si ɛniwʌn kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ə lɔŋ weɪ.

The first appearance of the horses coming around the leaning hill produced far less stir than she expected. A number of the women stopped to watch, but no more than that. Their clothing varied widely - Elayne even saw a sheen of silk here and there - but some carried baskets and others buckets, or great white bundles of what had to be wash. One held a pair of bound ducks by the feet in either hand. Noblewoman and craftswoman, farmer and beggar, all were equally welcome here, but everyone did a share of the work during her stay. Aviendha touched Elayne's arm, then pointed to the top of one of the hills, a thing like an inverted funnel skewed to one side. Elayne added a hand to the shade of her hat and after a moment saw movement. Small wonder no one was surprised. Lookouts up there could see anyone coming from a long way.

ə mɪɾəlɪŋ wʊmən wɔkt aʊt tə miɾ əm ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə fɑɹm bɪldɪŋz. hɝ dʒɹɛs wɑz ɪn ði ɛbu dɑɹi staɪl, wɪð ə dip nɛɹoʊ nɛklaɪn, bʌɾ əɹ dɑɹk skɝts ən bɹaɪtli kʌlɝd pɛɾikoʊts wɝ ʃɔɹɾ ɪnʌf ðət ʃi dɪd nɑt nid tə hoʊld əm ʌp aʊɾ ə ðə dʌst. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɛɹ ə mɛɹɪdʒ naɪf; ðə kɪnz ɹulz pɹoʊhɪbəɾəd mɛɹɪdʒ. ðə kɪn hæd tu mɛni sikɹəts tə kip.

A middling woman walked out to meet them short of the farm buildings. Her dress was in the Ebou Dari style, with a deep narrow neckline, but her dark skirts and brightly colored petticoats were short enough that she did not need to hold them up out of the dust. She did not wear a marriage knife; the Kin's rules prohibited marriage. The Kin had too many secrets to keep.

"ðæts æləz," ɹin mɝmɝd, ɹeɪnɪŋ ɪn bɪtwin nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn. "ʃi ɹʌnz ðə fɑɹm ðɪs tɝn. ʃiz vɛɹi ɪntɛlədʒənt." ɔlmoʊs laɪk ən æftɝθɑt, ʃi æɾəd, ivən mɔɹ kwaɪətli, "æləz dʌz nɑt sʌfɝ fulz ɡlædli." əz æləz əpɹoʊtʃt, ɹin dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp ɪn əɹ sæɾəl, skwɛɹɪŋ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz əz ðoʊ fəɹ ən ɔɹdil.

"That's Alise," Reanne murmured, reining in between Nynaeve and Elayne. "She runs the farm this turn. She's very intelligent." Almost like an afterthought, she added, even more quietly, "Alise does not suffer fools gladly." As Alise approached, Reanne drew herself up in her saddle, squaring her shoulders as though for an ordeal.

mɪɾəlɪŋ wɑz ɪɡzækli haʊ ɪleɪn θɔɾ ʌv æləz, nɑt sʌmwʌn tə ɡɪv ɹin pɔz, sɝɾənli, ivən hæd ʃi nɑt bɪn ði ɛldəst ə ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl. stʃɹeɪt-bækt, æləz əpɪɹd tə bi sʌmwɛɹ ɪn əɹ mɪɾəl jɪɹz, niðɝ slɛndɝ nɔɹ staʊt, tɔl nɔɹ ʃɔɹt, ə lɪɾəl ɡɹeɪ flɛkɪŋ dɑɹk bɹaʊn hɛɹ ðət wɑz taɪd bæk wɪð ə pis ə ɹɪbən, bʌɾ ɪn ə vɛɹi pɹæktəkəl mænɝ. hɝ feɪs wɑz ənɹɪmɑɹkəbəl, ðoʊ plɛzən ɪnʌf, ə maɪl feɪs, pɝhæps ə lɪɾəl lɔŋ ɪn ðə dʒɔ. wən ʃi sɔ ɹin, ʃi ɡeɪv ə fliɾɪŋ lʊk ə sɝpɹaɪz, ðən smaɪld. ðət smaɪl tʃɹænsfɔɹmd ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ɪt dɪd nɑt meɪk əɹ bjuɾəfəl əɹ ivən pɹɪɾi, bʌɾ ɪleɪn fɛlt wɔɹm baɪ ɪt, kʌmfɝɾɪd.

Middling was exactly how Elayne thought of Alise, not someone to give Reanne pause, certainly, even had she not been the Eldest of the Knitting Circle. Straight-backed, Alise appeared to be somewhere in her middle years, neither slender nor stout, tall nor short, a little gray flecking dark brown hair that was tied back with a piece of ribbon, but in a very practical manner. Her face was unremarkable, though pleasant enough, a mild face, perhaps a little long in the jaw. When she saw Reanne, she gave a fleeting look of surprise, then smiled. That smile transformed everything. It did not make her beautiful or even pretty, but Elayne felt warmed by it, comforted.

"aɪ hɑɹdli ɪkspɛktəd tə si jə . . . ɹin," æləz sɛd, bɛɹli hɛzəteɪɾɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə neɪm. ɑbviəsli ʃi wɑz ənʃʊɹ wɛðɝ tə juz ɹinz ɹaɪtfəl taɪɾəl ɪn fɹʌn ə nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn ən eɪvinhə. ʃi stʌɾid əm wɪð kwɪk ɡlænsɪz əz ʃi spoʊk. ðəɹ sim tə bi ə bɪɾ ə tæɹɑbən ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. "bɛɹaʊɪn bɹɔt wɝɾ ə tʃɹʌbəl ɪn ðə sɪɾi, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ aɪ dɪdn θɪŋk ɪt wɑz soʊ bæd jə wəɾ əv tə liv. hu ɑɹ ɔl ðiz. . . ." hɝ wɝdz tʃɹeɪld ɔf, ən əɹ aɪz waɪɾənd, stɛɹɪŋ bɪɑn ðɛm.

"I hardly expected to see you . . . Reanne," Alise said, barely hesitating over the name. Obviously she was unsure whether to use Reanne's rightful title in front of Nynaeve and Elayne and Aviendha. She studied them with quick glances as she spoke. There seemed to be a bit of Tarabon in her voice. "Berowin brought word of trouble in the city, of course, but I didn't think it was so bad you would have to leave. Who are all these. . . ." Her words trailed off, and her eyes widened, staring beyond them.

ɪleɪn ɡlæns bæk, nɪɹli lusɪŋ ə fju ʌv ðə tʃɔɪs fɹeɪzəz ʃi hæd pɪkt ʌp ɪn vɛɹiəs pleɪsəz, moʊst ɹisənli fɹəm mæt kɔθən. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ɔl ə ðɛm, nɑt moʊst ə ðɛm ɹɪli - noʊbɑdi ɛvɝ wɑntəd tə ɪkspleɪn wʌt ðeɪ mɛn ɪɡzækli - bʌt ðeɪ dɪɾ əv ə weɪ ʌv ɹɪlivɪŋ ɪmoʊʃən. ðə wɔɹɾɝz hæd dɑf ðɛɹ kʌlɝ-ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊks, ən ðə sɪstɝz hæd dʒɹɔn ʌp ðə hʊdz ə ðɛɹ dʌst-kloʊks əz ɪnstʃɹʌktəd, ivən sɝaɪðə, hu hæd noʊ nid tə haɪɾ əɹ juθfəl feɪs, bʌt kɛɝin hæd nɑt pʊl hɝz fɔɹwɝd fɑɹ ɪnʌf. ɪt sɪmpli fɹeɪmd əɹ eɪdʒləs fitʃɝz. nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn wəd noʊ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ siɪŋ, jɛɾ ɛniwʌn u hæd bɪn ɪn ðə taʊɝ ʃʊɹli wʊd. kɛɝin dʒɝk ðə hʊd fɔɹwɝɾ əɾ ɪleɪnz ɡlɛɹ, bʌt ðə dæmədʒ wɑz dʌn.

Elayne glanced back, nearly loosing a few of the choice phrases she had picked up in various places, most recently from Mat Cauthon. She did not understand all of them, not most of them really - nobody ever wanted to explain what they meant exactly - but they did have a way of relieving emotion. The Warders had doffed their color-shifting cloaks, and the sisters had drawn up the hoods of their dust-cloaks as instructed, even Sareitha, who had no need to hide her youthful face, but Careane had not pulled hers forward far enough. It simply framed her ageless features. Not everyone would know what they were seeing, yet anyone who had been in the Tower surely would. Careane jerked the hood forward at Elayne's glare, but the damage was done.

ʌðɝz ət ðə fɑɹm bɪsaɪɾ æləz pəzɛst ʃɑɹp aɪz. "ɛɛs sədaɪ!" ə wʊmən haʊld ɪn toʊnz suɾəbəl fəɹ ənaʊnsɪŋ ði ɛn ə ðə wɝld. pɝhæps ʃi wɑz, fəɹ əɹ wɝld. ʃɹiks spɹɛd laɪk dʌs bloʊn ɑn ðə wɪnd, ən ðət kwɪkli, ðə fɑɹm bɪkeɪm ə kɪkt æntɪl. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ ə wʊmən sɪmpli feɪntɪd dɛɾ əweɪ, bʌt moʊst ɹæn waɪldli, skɹimɪŋ, dʒɹɑpɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ kæɹid, bʌmpɪŋ ɪndə wʌn ənʌðɝ, fɔlɪŋ daʊn ən skɹæmbəlɪŋ ʌp tə ɹʌn ɑn. flæpɪŋ dʌks ən tʃɪkənz ən ʃɔɹt-hɔɹn blæk ɡoʊts dɑɹɾɪd waɪldli tə əvɔɪd biɪŋ tʃɹæmpəld. ɪn ðə mɪdst ʌv ɪɾ ɔl, səm wɪmən stʊd ɡeɪpɪŋ, pleɪnli ðoʊz u hæd kʌm tə ðə ɹitʃɹit wɪð noʊ nɑlədʒ ə ðə kɪn, ðoʊ ə fju ʌv əm bɪɡæn tə muv hɝidli, tu, kɑɾ ʌp ɪn ðə fɹɛnzi.

Others at the farm beside Alise possessed sharp eyes. "Aes Sedai!" a woman howled in tones suitable for announcing the end of the world. Perhaps she was, for her world. Shrieks spread like dust blown on the wind, and that quickly, the farm became a kicked anthill. Here and there a woman simply fainted dead away, but most ran wildly, screaming, dropping what they carried, bumping into one another, falling down and scrambling up to run on. Flapping ducks and chickens and short-horned black goats darted wildly to avoid being trampled. In the midst of it all, some women stood gaping, plainly those who had come to the retreat with no knowledge of the Kin, though a few of them began to move hurriedly, too, caught up in the frenzy.

"laɪt!" nɪneɪiv bɑɹkt, jæŋkɪŋ əɹ bɹeɪd. "sʌm ə ðɛm ɑɹ ɹʌnɪŋ ɪndə ði ɑləv ɡɹoʊvz! stɑp ðɛm! ðə læs θɪŋ wi wɑn ɪz ə pænɪk! sɛn ðə wɔɹɾɝz! kwɪk, kwɪk!" læn ɹeɪzd ə kwɛstʃənɪŋ aɪbɹaʊ, bʌt ʃi weɪvd ə pɝɛmptɝi hæn ət hɪm. "kwɪk! bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɔl ɹʌn əweɪ!" wɪð ə nɑd ðət sim tə bɪɡɪn əz ə ʃeɪk ə hɪz hɛd, hi sɛn mændɑɹb ɡæləpɪŋ æftɝ ði ʌðɝ mɛn, kɝvɪŋ tə əvɔɪd ðə spɹɛɾɪŋ pændɪmoʊniəm əmʌŋ ðə bɪldɪŋz.

"Light!" Nynaeve barked, yanking her braid. "Some of them are running into the olive groves! Stop them! The last thing we want is a panic! Send the Warders! Quick, quick!" Lan raised a questioning eyebrow, but she waved a peremptory hand at him. "Quick! Before they all run away!" With a nod that seemed to begin as a shake of his head, he sent Mandarb galloping after the other men, curving to avoid the spreading pandemonium among the buildings.

ɪleɪn ʃɹʌɡd ət bɝdʒɪt, ðən moʊʃən əɹ tə fɑloʊ. ʃi əɡɹid wɪð læn. ɪt simd ə bɪt leɪt tə tʃɹaɪ stɑpɪŋ ə pænɪk, ən wɔɹɾɝz ɑn hɔɹsbæk ətɛmptɪŋ tə hɝd fɹaɪɾənd wɪmən pɹɑbli wɑz nɑt ðə bɛst weɪ. bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt si haʊ tə tʃeɪnʒ mæɾɝz naʊ, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn lɛɾɪŋ əm ɹʌn ɔf ɪndə ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd. ðeɪ wəɾ ɔl wɑnə hɪɹ ðə nuz ʃi ən nɪneɪiv bɹɔt.

Elayne shrugged at Birgitte, then motioned her to follow. She agreed with Lan. It seemed a bit late to try stopping a panic, and Warders on horseback attempting to herd frightened women probably was not the best way. But she could not see how to change matters now, and there was no point letting them run off into the countryside. They would all want to hear the news she and Nynaeve brought.

æləz ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ə ɹʌnɪŋ, əɹ ivən fɪdʒəɾɪŋ. hɝ feɪs peɪl slaɪtli, bʌt ʃi stɛɹɾ ʌp ət ɹin wɪð ə stɛɾi ɡeɪz. ə fɝm ɡeɪz. "waɪ?" ʃi bɹiðd. "waɪ, ɹin? aɪ kəd nɑɾ əv ɪmædʒən jə duɪŋ ðɪs! dɪd ðeɪ ɡɪv jə bɹaɪbz? ɔfɝ ɪmjunəɾi? wɪl ðeɪ lɛt jə wɔk fɹi waɪl wi peɪ ðə pɹaɪs? ðeɪ pɹɑbli woʊn əlaʊ ɪt, bʌɾ aɪ vaʊ əl æsk əm tə lemi kɔl jə daʊn. jɛs, ju! ðə ɹulz əplaɪ ivən tə ju, ɛldəst! ɪf aɪ kən faɪn ə weɪ tə mænədʒ ɪt, aɪ vaʊ jə woʊnt wɔk əweɪ fɹəm ðɪs smaɪlɪŋ!" ə vɛɹi fɝm ɡeɪz. stili, ɪn fækt.

Alise gave no sign of running, or even fidgeting. Her face paled slightly, but she stared up at Reanne with a steady gaze. A firm gaze. "Why?" she breathed. "Why, Reanne? I could not have imagined you doing this! Did they give you bribes? Offer immunity? Will they let you walk free while we pay the price? They probably won't allow it, but I vow I'll ask them to let me call you down. Yes, you! The rules apply even to you, Eldest! If I can find a way to manage it, I vow you won't walk away from this smiling!" A very firm gaze. Steely, in fact.

"ɪɾ ɪzənt wʌt jə θɪŋk," ɹin sɛd hɝidli, dɪsmaʊntɪŋ ən dʒɹɑpɪŋ əɹ ɹeɪnz. ʃi kɑt boʊθ ʌv æləzəz hænz ɪn hɝz dɪspaɪt ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz ɛfɝts tə fɹi ðɛm. "oʊ, aɪ dɪd nɑt wɑn ɪt tə bi laɪk ðɪs. ðeɪ noʊ, æləz. əbaʊt ðə kɪn. ðə taʊɝ əz ɔlweɪz noʊn. ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiθɪŋ. bʌt ðəɾ ɪzənt wʌɾ ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt." æləzəz aɪbɹaʊz tʃɹaɪd tə klaɪm ɑntu hɝ skælp ət ðæt, bʌt ɹin ɹʌʃt ɑn, bimɪŋ iɡɝli fɹəm ʌndɝ əɹ lɑɹdʒ stʃɹɔ hæt. "wi kən ɡoʊ bæk, æləz. wi kən tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn. ðeɪ sɛd wi kæn." ðə fɑɹm bɪldɪŋz sim tə bi ɛmptiɪŋ əz wɛl, wɪmən ɹʌʃɪŋ aʊt tə lɝn wʌt ðə kəmoʊʃən wɑz, ðən dʒɔɪnɪŋ ðə flaɪt wɪθaʊɾ ə pɔz fəɹ mɔɹ ðən haɪkɪŋ skɝts. ʃaʊts fɹəm ði ɑləv ɡɹoʊvz sɛd ðə wɔɹɾɝz wɝ ət wɝk, bʌt nɑt haʊ mʌtʃ ðeɪ wɝ ətʃivɪŋ. pɝhæps nɑɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil. ɪleɪn sɛnst ɡɹoʊɪŋ fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən fɹəm bɝdʒɪt, ən ɪɹɪteɪʃən. ɹin aɪd ðə tɝmɔɪl ən saɪd. "wi mʌst ɡæðɝ əm ɪn, æləz. wi kən ɡoʊ bæk."

"It isn't what you think," Reanne said hurriedly, dismounting and dropping her reins. She caught both of Alise's hands in hers despite the other woman's efforts to free them. "Oh, I did not want it to be like this. They know, Alise. About the Kin. The Tower has always known. Everything. Almost everything. But that isn't what is important." Alise's eyebrows tried to climb onto her scalp at that, but Reanne rushed on, beaming eagerly from under her large straw hat. "We can go back, Alise. We can try again. They said we can." The farm buildings seemed to be emptying as well, women rushing out to learn what the commotion was, then joining the flight without a pause for more than hiking skirts. Shouts from the olive groves said the Warders were at work, but not how much they were achieving. Perhaps not a great deal. Elayne sensed growing frustration from Birgitte, and irritation. Reanne eyed the turmoil and sighed. "We must gather them in, Alise. We can go back."

"ðæts ɔl vɛɹi wɛl fəɹ jə ən səm ə ði ʌðɝz," æləz sɛd daʊtfəli. "ɪf ɪts tʃɹu. wʌɾ əbaʊt ðə ɹɛst ʌv ʌs? ðə taʊɝ wəd nɑɾ əv lemi steɪ əz lɔŋ əz aɪ dɪd hæɾ aɪ bɪn kwɪkɝ tə lɝn." ʃi dɑɹɾɪd ə fɹaʊn ət ðə naʊ wɛl-hʊɾɪd sɪstɝz, ən ðə stɛɹ ʃi ɹɪtɝn tə ɹin hɛl noʊ lɪɾəl æŋɡɝ. "wʌt wəd wi ɡoʊ bæk fɔɹ? tə bi toʊld əɡɛn wi ɑɹən stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf ən bi sɛn ɑn əɹ weɪ? əɹ wɪl ðeɪ dʒʌs kip əs əz nɑvəsɪz ðə ɹɛst ʌv əɹ lɪvz? səm maɪɾ æksɛp ðæt, bʌɾ aɪ woʊnt. wʌt fɔɹ, ɹin? wʌt fɔɹ?"

"That's all very well for you and some of the others," Alise said doubtfully. "If it's true. What about the rest of us? The Tower would not have let me stay as long as I did had I been quicker to learn." She darted a frown at the now well-hooded sisters, and the stare she returned to Reanne held no little anger. "What would we go back for? To be told again we aren't strong enough and be sent on our way? Or will they just keep us as novices the rest of our lives? Some might accept that, but I won't. What for, Reanne? What for?"

nɪneɪiv klaɪm daʊn, tʌɡɪŋ əɹ mɛɹ fɔɹwɝɾ ət ði ɛn ə hɝ ɹeɪnz, ən ɪleɪn ɪməteɪɾɪd hɝ, ðoʊ liɾɪŋ laɪoʊnəs mɔɹ izəli. "tə bi pɑɹɾ ə ðə taʊɝ, ɪf ðæts wʌt jə wɪʃ," nɪneɪiv sɛɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli bɪfɔɹ ivən ɹitʃɪŋ ðə tu kɪnswɪmən. "meɪbi tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ. maɪsɛlf, aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ juv tə bi ə sɝɾən stʃɹɛŋkθ, ɪf jə kən pæs ðə ful tɛsts. əɹ doʊnt ɡoʊ bæk; ɹʌn əweɪ, fəɹ ɔl aɪ kɛɹ. wʌns aɪm dʌn hɪɹ, ɛniweɪ." plæntɪŋ əɹ fit, ʃi pʊld ɔf əɹ hæɾ ən plæntəɾ əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps. "ðɪs ɪz weɪstɪŋ taɪm, ɹin, ən wɪv wɝk tə du. ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ ðɛɹz ɛnibəɾi hɪɹ wi kən juz? spik ʌp. ɪf jəɹ nɑt ʃʊɹ, ðən wi maɪɾ əz wɛl ɡɛɾ ɑn wɪð ɪt. ðə hɝi maɪt bi aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ, bʌt naʊ wɪv ðə θɪŋ, aɪɾ əz sun ɪt wɑz oʊvɝ ən dʌn wɪð."

Nynaeve climbed down, tugging her mare forward at the end of her reins, and Elayne imitated her, though leading Lioness more easily. "To be part of the Tower, if that's what you wish," Nynaeve said impatiently before even reaching the two Kinswomen. "Maybe to be Aes Sedai. Myself, I don't know why you have to be a certain strength, if you can pass the fool tests. Or don't go back; run away, for all I care. Once I'm done here, anyway." Planting her feet, she pulled off her hat and planted her fists on her hips. "This is wasting time, Reanne, and we have work to do. Are you sure there's anybody here we can use? Speak up. If you're not sure, then we might as well get on with it. The hurry might be out of the way, but now we have the thing, I'd as soon it was over and done with."

wən ʃi ən ɪleɪn wɝ ɪntʃɹədust əz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæd ɡɪvən ðə pɹɑməsəz, æləz meɪɾ ə tʃoʊk saʊn ən bɪɡæn smuðɪŋ əɹ wʊlən skɝts əz ðoʊ hɝ hænz wɑntəd tə lætʃ ɑn tə ɹinz θɹoʊt. hɝ maʊθ oʊpən æŋɡɹəli - ðən snæpt ʃʌt wɪθaʊɾ ə saʊnd wən mɛɝɪlɪl dʒɔɪn ðɛm. ðət stɝn ɡeɪz dɪd nɑt feɪd kəmplitli, bʌɾ ɪt bɪkeɪm mɪkst wɪð ə tʌtʃ ʌv wʌndɝ. ən mɔɹ ðən ə tʌtʃ ʌv wɛɹinɪs.

When she and Elayne were introduced as Aes Sedai, the Aes Sedai who had given the promises, Alise made a choked sound and began smoothing her woolen skirts as though her hands wanted to latch on to Reanne's throat. Her mouth opened angrily - then snapped shut without a sound when Merilille joined them. That stern gaze did not fade completely, but it became mixed with a touch of wonder. And more than a touch of wariness.

"nɪneɪiv sədaɪ," mɛɝɪlɪl sɛd kɑmli, "ði æθɑn maɪɹ ɑɹ . . . ɪmpeɪʃənt . . . tə bi ɔf ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz. aɪ θɪŋk səm meɪ æsk fəɹ hilɪŋ." ə bɹif smaɪl flɪkɝɾ əkɹɔs əɹ lɪps.

"Nynaeve Sedai," Merilille said calmly, "the Atha'an Miere are . . . impatient . . . to be off their horses. I think some may ask for Healing." A brief smile flickered across her lips.

ðət sɛɾəld ðət kwɛstʃən, ðoʊ nɪneɪiv ɡɹʌmbəld ɛkstʃɹævəɡənli əbaʊt wʌt ʃi wɑz gɑnə də tə ðə nɛks pɝsən u daʊɾɪd hɝ. ɪleɪn maɪɾ əv sɛɾ ə fju tʃɔɪs wɝdz hɝsɛlf, bʌt ðə tʃɹuθ wɑz, nɪneɪiv lʊk mɔɹ ðən ə lɪɾəl sɪli kæɹiɪŋ ɑn ðət weɪ wɪð mɛɝɪlɪl ən ɹin boʊθ weɪɾɪŋ ətɛntɪvli fəɹ əɹ tə fɪnɪʃ ən æləz stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɔl θɹi. ðət sɛɾəld ɪt, əɹ pɝhæps ɪt wɑz ðə wɪndfɪndɝz, əfʊɾ ən pʊlɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ɛvɹi ʃɹɛɾ ʌv ɡɹeɪs hæd vænɪʃt dʊɹɪŋ ðə ɹaɪd, wɔɹn əweɪ baɪ hɑɹd sæɾəlz - ðɛɹ lɛɡz simd əz stɪf əz ðɛɹ feɪsəz - jɛt noʊ wʌn kəd mɪsteɪk əm fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ u ðeɪ wɝ.

That settled that question, though Nynaeve grumbled extravagantly about what she was going to do to the next person who doubted her. Elayne might have said a few choice words herself, but the truth was, Nynaeve looked more than a little silly carrying on that way with Merilille and Reanne both waiting attentively for her to finish and Alise staring at all three. That settled it, or perhaps it was the Windfinders, afoot and pulling their horses behind them. Every shred of grace had vanished during the ride, worn away by hard saddles - their legs seemed as stiff as their faces - yet no one could mistake them for anything but who they were.

"ɪf ðəɹ ɑɹ twɛnti si foʊk ðɪs fɑɹ fɹəm ðə si," æləz mʌɾɝd, "aɪl bɪliv ɛniθɪŋ." nɪneɪiv snɔɹɾɪd bʌt sɛd nʌθɪŋ, fəɹ wɪtʃ ɪleɪn wɑz ɡɹeɪtfəl. ðə wʊmən sim tə bi hævɪŋ ə hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf taɪm æksɛptɪŋ ivən wɪð mɛɝɪlɪl neɪmɪŋ əm ɛɛs sədaɪ. niðɝ taɪɹeɪd nɔɹ tæntʃɹəm wəd hɛlp.

"If there are twenty Sea Folk this far from the sea," Alise muttered, "I'll believe anything." Nynaeve snorted but said nothing, for which Elayne was grateful. The woman seemed to be having a hard enough time accepting even with Merilille naming them Aes Sedai. Neither tirade nor tantrum would help.

"ðɛn hil ðɛm," nɪneɪiv toʊl mɛɝɪlɪl. ðɛɹ aɪz wɛn tə ðə hɑbəlɪŋ wɪmən təɡɛðɝ, ən nɪneɪiv æɾəd, "ɪf ðeɪ æsk. pəlaɪtli." mɛɝɪlɪl smaɪld əɡɛn, bʌt nɪneɪiv hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi əbændən ðə si foʊk ən ɡɔn bæk tə fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə naʊ ɔl bʌɾ ɛmpti fɑɹm. ə fju ɡoʊts stɪl tʃɹɑɾəd ɝaʊn ə fɑɹmjɑɹd lɪɾɝd wɪð dʒɹɑpt wɑʃ ən ɹeɪks ən bɹumz, spɪl bʌkəts ən bæskəts, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə kɹʌmpəl fɔɹmz ə kɪnswɪmən u hæd feɪntɪd, ən ə hændfʊl ə tʃɪkənz hæd ɡɔn bæk tə skɹætʃɪŋ ən pɛkɪŋ, bʌt ði oʊnli kɑnʃəs wɪmən stɪl ɪn saɪɾ əmʌŋ ðə fɑɹm bɪldɪŋz wɝ pleɪnli nɑɾ ə ðə kɪn. səm wɔɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd lɪnən əɹ sɪlk ən səm ɹʌf kʌntʃɹi wʊlənz, jɛt ðə fæk ðət ðeɪ hæd nɑt ɹʌn spoʊk ðət mʌtʃ ə ðɛm. ɹin sɛd ðəɾ əɾ ɛni ɡɪvən taɪm əz mɛni əz hæf ðoʊz ət ðə fɑɹm maɪt fɔl ɪndə ðət ɡɹup. moʊst əpɪɹd stʌnd.

"Then Heal them," Nynaeve told Merilille. Their eyes went to the hobbling women together, and Nynaeve added, "If they ask. Politely." Merilille smiled again, but Nynaeve had already abandoned the Sea Folk and gone back to frowning at the now all but empty farm. A few goats still trotted around a farmyard littered with dropped wash and rakes and brooms, spilled buckets and baskets, not to mention the crumpled forms of Kinswomen who had fainted, and a handful of chickens had gone back to scratching and pecking, but the only conscious women still in sight among the farm buildings were plainly not of the Kin. Some wore embroidered linen or silk and some rough country woolens, yet the fact that they had not run spoke that much of them. Reanne said that at any given time as many as half those at the farm might fall into that group. Most appeared stunned.

dɪspaɪɾ əɹ ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ, nɪneɪiv weɪstəd noʊ taɪm teɪkɪŋ tʃɑɹdʒ ʌv æləz. əɹ pɝhæps æləz tʊk tʃɑɹdʒ ə nɪneɪiv. ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl tə tɛl, sɪns ðə kɪnswʊmən ʃoʊd lɪɾəl ə ðə dɛfɝəns təwɔɹɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ðət ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl dɪd. pɝhæps ʃi wɑz stɪl dʒʌs tu nʌm baɪ ðə sʌɾən tɝn ʌv ɪvɛns. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðeɪ muvd ɔf təɡɛðɝ, nɪneɪiv liɾɪŋ əɹ mɛɹ ən dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ wɪð ðə hæɾ ɪn əɹ ʌðɝ hænd, ɪnstʃɹʌktɪŋ æləz ɑn haʊ tə bɹɪŋ ɪn ðə skæɾɝd wɪmən ən wʌt tə də wɪð əm wʌns ðeɪ wɝ kəlɛktəd. ɹin hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ət list wʌn wʊmən stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə dʒɔɪn ðə sɝkəl wɑz ðɛɹ, ɡæɹiniə ɹoʊsɔɪnd, ən pɑsəbli tu mɔɹ. ɪn tʃɹuθ, ɪleɪn wɑz hoʊpɪŋ ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl ɡɔn. æləz ɔltɝneɪɾəd bɪtwin nɑɾɪŋ ən ɡɪvɪŋ nɪneɪiv vɛɹi lɛvəl lʊks ðət nɪneɪiv sim nɑt tə noʊɾəs.

Despite her grumbling, Nynaeve wasted no time taking charge of Alise. Or perhaps Alise took charge of Nynaeve. It was difficult to tell, since the Kinswoman showed little of the deference toward Aes Sedai that the Knitting Circle did. Perhaps she was still just too numbed by the sudden turn of events. In any case, they moved off together, Nynaeve leading her mare and gesturing with the hat in her other hand, instructing Alise on how to bring in the scattered women and what to do with them once they were collected. Reanne had been sure that at least one woman strong enough to join the circle was there, Garenia Rosoinde, and possibly two more. In truth, Elayne was hoping they had all gone. Alise alternated between nodding and giving Nynaeve very level looks that Nynaeve seemed not to notice.

naʊ, ɪn ðə weɪt waɪl ðə ɡæðɝɪŋ wɑz dʌn, simd ə ɡʊd taɪm tə də ə bɪt mɔɹ sɝtʃɪŋ θɹu ðə pænɪɝz, bʌt wən ɪleɪn tɝn təwɔɹd ðə pækhɔɹsɪz, wɪtʃ wɝ dʒʌs bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə bi lɛd təwɔɹd ðə fɑɹm bɪldɪŋz, ʃi noʊɾəst ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl, ɹin ən ðə hoʊl lɑɾ ə ðɛm, meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊn weɪ ɪndə ðə fɑɹm ɑn fʊt, səm hɝiɪŋ təwɔɹd wɪmən laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ʌðɝz təwɔɹd ðoʊz stændɪŋ əbaʊt ɡeɪpɪŋ. ðə hoʊl lɑɾ ə ðɛm, ən noʊ saɪn ʌv ɪspæn. ɪt tʊk oʊnli ə ɡlæns tə faɪn hɝ, ðoʊ. bɪtwin æɾɪliz ən vændin, itʃ hoʊldɪŋ ən ɑɹm əz ðeɪ hæf-dʒɹæɡd əɹ əlɔŋ, ðɛɹ dʌst-kloʊks stʃɹimɪŋ bɪhaɪnd.

Now, in the wait while the gathering was done, seemed a good time to do a bit more searching through the panniers, but when Elayne turned toward the packhorses, which were just beginning to be led toward the farm buildings, she noticed the Knitting Circle, Reanne and the whole lot of them, making their own way into the farm on foot, some hurrying toward women lying on the ground, others toward those standing about gaping. The whole lot of them, and no sign of Ispan. It took only a glance to find her, though. Between Adeleas and Vandene, each holding an arm as they half-dragged her along, their dust-cloaks streaming behind.

ðə waɪt-hɛɹd sɪstɝz wɝ lɪŋkt, ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ sʌmhaʊ ɛnkʌmpəsɪŋ əm boʊθ wɪθaʊɾ ɪnkluɾɪŋ ɪspæn. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə tɛl wɪtʃ lɛd ðə smɔl sɝkəl ən hɛl ðə ʃild ɑn ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, bʌt nɑɾ ivən wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən cʊɾə bɹoʊkən ɪt. ðeɪ stɑp tə spik tə ə staʊt wʊmən ɪn pleɪn bɹaʊn wʊl, hu ɡeɪpt ət ðə lɛðɝ sæk kʌvɝɪŋ ɪspænz hɛd bʌt stɪl kɝtsiɾ ən pɔɪntəd təwɔɹd wʌn ə ðə waɪt-plæstɝd bɪldɪŋz.

The white-haired sisters were linked, the glow of saidar somehow encompassing them both without including Ispan. There was no way to tell which led the small circle and held the shield on the Darkfriend, but not even one of the Forsaken could have broken it. They stopped to speak to a stout woman in plain brown wool, who gaped at the leather sack covering Ispan's head but still curtsied and pointed toward one of the white-plastered buildings.

ɪleɪn ɪkstʃeɪnʒd æŋɡɹi ɡlænsɪz wɪð eɪvinhə. wɛl, hɝz wɑz æŋɡɹi, ɛniweɪ. səmtaɪmz eɪvinhə ɡeɪv əweɪ noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə stoʊn. hændɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz oʊvɝ tə tu ʌv ðə pæləs steɪbəlmən, ðeɪ hɝiɾ æftɝ ðə θɹi. səm ə ðə wɪmən u wɝ nɑɾ ə ðə kɪn tʃɹaɪd tə kwɛstʃən əm əbaʊt wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ, ə fju ɪn ɹæðɝ oʊvɝbɛɹɪŋ fæʃən, bʌɾ ɪleɪn ɡeɪv əm ʃɔɹt ʃɹɪft, livɪŋ bɪhaɪn ə weɪk ʌv ɪndɪɡnən snɪfs ən snɔɹts. oʊ, wʌt ʃi wəd nɑt ɡɪv tə hæv ði eɪdʒləs feɪs ɔlɹɛɾi! ðət twikt ə θɹɛɾ ɪn ðə bæk ə hɝ θɔts, bʌɾ ɪt vænɪʃt əz sun əz ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə ɪɡzæmɪn ɪt.

Elayne exchanged angry glances with Aviendha. Well, hers was angry, anyway. Sometimes Aviendha gave away no more than a stone. Handing their horses over to two of the palace stablemen, they hurried after the three. Some of the women who were not of the Kin tried to question them about what was happening, a few in rather overbearing fashion, but Elayne gave them short shrift, leaving behind a wake of indignant sniffs and snorts. Oh, what she would not give to have the ageless face already! That tweaked a thread in the back of her thoughts, but it vanished as soon as she tried to examine it.

wən ʃi pʊʃt oʊpən ðə pleɪn wʊɾən dɔɹ wɛɹ ðə tʃɹioʊ hæd vænɪʃt, æɾɪliz ən vændin hæɾ ɪspæn siɾəd ɪn ə læɾɝ-bæk tʃɛɹ wɪð əɹ hɛd bɛɹ, ðə sæk laɪɪŋ ətɑp ə nɛɹoʊ tʃɹɛsəl teɪbəl wɪð ðɛɹ lɪnən kloʊks. ðə ɹum pəzɛst oʊnli wʌn wɪndoʊ, sɛɾ ɪn ðə silɪŋ, bʌt wɪð ðə sʌn stɪl haɪ ɪt lɛɾ ɪn ə ɡʊd laɪt. ʃɛlvz laɪn ðə wɔlz, stækt wɪð lɑɹdʒ kɑpɝ pɑts ən bɪɡ waɪt boʊlz. baɪ ðə smɛl ə bɹɛd beɪkɪŋ, ði oʊnli ʌðɝ dɔɹ lɛɾ ɪndə ə kɪtʃən.

When she pushed open the plain wooden door where the trio had vanished, Adeleas and Vandene had Ispan seated in a ladder-back chair with her head bare, the sack lying atop a narrow trestle table with their linen cloaks. The room possessed only one window, set in the ceiling, but with the sun still high it let in a good light. Shelves lined the walls, stacked with large copper pots and big white bowls. By the smell of bread baking, the only other door led into a kitchen.

vændin lʊkt ɝaʊnd ʃɑɹpli ət ðə saʊn ə ðə dɔɹ, bʌt siɪŋ ðɛm, ʃi smuðd əɹ feɪs tə ə toʊɾəl læk ʌv ɪkspɹɛʃən. "sumeɪkoʊ sɛd ði ɝbz nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv əɹ wɝ wɛɹɪŋ ɔf," ʃi sɛd, "æn ɪt sim bɛs tə kwɛstʃən əɹ ə lɪɾəl bɪfɔɹ fʌzɪŋ əɹ bɹeɪn əɡɛn. wi də sim tə hæv taɪm, naʊ. ɪt wəd bi ɡʊd tə noʊ wʌt ðə . . . ðə blæk ədʒɑ," hɝ maʊθ twɪstəɾ ɪn dɪsteɪst, "wɑz ʌp tə ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ. ən wʌt ðeɪ noʊ."

Vandene looked around sharply at the sound of the door, but seeing them, she smoothed her face to a total lack of expression. "Sumeko said the herbs Nynaeve gave her were wearing off," she said, "and it seemed best to question her a little before fuzzing her brain again. We do seem to have time, now. It would be good to know what the . . . the Black Ajah," her mouth twisted in distaste, "was up to in Ebou Dar. And what they know."

"aɪ daʊt ðeɪ ɑɹ əwɛɹ ə ðɪs fɑɹm, sɪns wi wɝ nɑt," æɾɪliz sɛd, tæpɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝ θɔtfəli ɑn əɹ lɪps əz ʃi stʌɾid ðə wʊmən ɪn ðə tʃɛɹ, "bʌɾ ɪts bɛɾɝ tə bi ʃʊɹ ðən tə wip leɪɾɝ, əz əɹ fɑðɝ juz tə seɪ." ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ən ænəməl ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin bɪfɔɹ, ə kɹitʃɝ ʃi kəd nɑt fæðəm ɪɡzɪstɪŋ.

"I doubt they are aware of this farm, since we were not," Adeleas said, tapping a finger thoughtfully on her lips as she studied the woman in the chair, "but it is better to be sure than to weep later, as our father used to say." She might have been examining an animal she had never seen before, a creature she could not fathom existing.

ɪspænz lɪp kɝld. swɛt ɹoʊl daʊn əɹ bɹuz feɪs, ən əɹ dɑɹk, biɾɪd bɹeɪdz wɝ dɪʃɛvəld ən əɹ kloʊðɪŋ ɔl dɪsɹeɪd, bʌt dɪspaɪt blɪɹi aɪz, ʃi wɑz nɑt nɪɹli soʊ wuzi əz ʃi hæd bɪn. "ðə blæk ədʒɑ, ɪts ə feɪbəl, ən ə fɪlθi wʌn," ʃi snɪɹd, ə tʃɹaɪfəl hɔɹsli. ɪt mʌst əv bɪn vɛɹi hɑɾ ɪnsaɪd ðət lɛðɝ sæk, ən ʃi hæd hæd noʊ wɔɾɝ sɪns livɪŋ ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs. "mi, aɪm sɝpɹaɪz ðət jəl ɡɪv ɪt vɔɪs. ən tə kæs ðə tʃɑɹdʒ ɑn mi! wʌɾ aɪ hæv dʌn, aɪ hæv dʌn ɑn ði ɔɹɾɝz ə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit."

Ispan's lip curled. Sweat rolled down her bruised face, and her dark, beaded braids were disheveled and her clothing all disarrayed, but despite bleary eyes, she was not nearly so woozy as she had been. "The Black Ajah, it is a fable, and a filthy one," she sneered, a trifle hoarsely. It must have been very hot inside that leather sack, and she had had no water since leaving the Tarasin Palace. "Me, I am surprised that you will give it voice. And to cast the charge on me! What I have done, I have done on the orders of the Amyrlin Seat."

"ɪleɪɾə?" ɪleɪn spæɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. "ju hæv ðə nɝv tə kleɪm ðəɾ ɪleɪɾə ɔɹɾɝd jə tə mɝɾɝ sɪstɝz ən stil fɹəm ðə taʊɝ? ɪleɪɾə ɔɹɾɝd wʌt jə dɪɾ ɪn tiɹ ən tæntʃəkoʊ? əɹ dʒju min sɪuən? jəɹ laɪz ɑɹ pəθɛɾɪk! juv fɔɹseɪkən ðə θɹi oʊðz, sʌmhaʊ, ən ðət neɪmz jə blæk ədʒɑ."

"Elaida?" Elayne spat incredulously. "You have the nerve to claim that Elaida ordered you to murder sisters and steal from the Tower? Elaida ordered what you did in Tear and Tanchico? Or do you mean Siuan? Your lies are pathetic! You've forsaken the Three Oaths, somehow, and that names you Black Ajah."

"aɪ də nɑɾ əv tə ænsɝ ðə kwɛstʃənz fɹəm ju," ɪspæn sɛd sʌlənli, hʌntʃɪŋ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. "ju ɑɹ ɹɛbəlz əɡɛns ðə lɔfəl æmɪɝlɪn sit. jəl bi pʌnɪʃt, pɝhæps stɪld. ɪspɛʃli ɪf jə hɑɹm mi. aɪ sɝv ðə tʃɹu æmɪɝlɪn sit, ən jəl bi pʌnɪʃt səvɪɹli ɪf jə hɑɹm mi."

"I do not have to answer the questions from you," Ispan said sullenly, hunching her shoulders. "You are rebels against the lawful Amyrlin Seat. You will be punished, perhaps stilled. Especially if you harm me. I serve the true Amyrlin Seat, and you will be punished severely if you harm me."

"ju wɪl ænsɝ ɛni kwɛstʃənz maɪ nɪɹ-sɪstɝ æsks." eɪvinhə tɛstəɾ əɹ bɛl naɪf ɑn ə θʌmneɪl, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz wɝ ɑn ɪspænz. "wɛtləndɝz fɪɹ peɪn. ðeɪ də nɑt noʊ haʊ tə ɛmbɹeɪs ɪt, æksɛpt ɪt. jəl ænsɝ əz jə ɑɹ æskt." ʃi dɪd nɑt ɡlɛɹ əɹ snɑɹl, ʃi dʒʌst spoʊk, bʌɾ ɪspæn ʃɹæŋk bæk ɪn ðə tʃɛɹ.

"You will answer any questions my near-sister asks." Aviendha tested her belt knife on a thumbnail, but her eyes were on Ispan's. "Wetlanders fear pain. They do not know how to embrace it, accept it. You will answer as you are asked." She did not glare or snarl, she just spoke, but Ispan shrank back in the chair.

"aɪ fɪɹ ðəɾ ɪz pɹoʊskɹaɪbd, ivən wɝ ʃi nɑɾ ən ɪnɪʃiəɾ ə ðə taʊɝ," æɾɪliz sɛd. "wi ɑɹ fɔɹbɪɾən tə ʃɛd blʌɾ ɪn kwɛstʃənɪŋ, əɹ tə əlaʊ ʌðɝz tə də soʊ ɪn əɹ neɪm." ʃi saʊndəd ɹɪlʌktənt, ðoʊ wɛðɝ oʊvɝ ðə pɹoʊəbɪʃən əɹ oʊvɝ ædmɪɾɪŋ ðəɾ ɪspæn wɑz ən ɪnɪʃiət, ɪleɪn kəd nɑt seɪ. ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd nɑt ɹɪli kənsɪɾɝd ðəɾ ɪspæn maɪt stɪl bi kənsɪɾɝd wʌn. ðəɹ wɑz ə seɪɪŋ ðət noʊ wʊmən wɑz fɪnɪʃt wɪð ðə taʊɝ əntɪl ɪt wɑz fɪnɪʃt wɪð hɝ, bʌt tʃɹuθfəli, wʌns ðə waɪt taʊɝ tʌtʃt ju, ɪt nɛvɝ wɑz fɪnɪʃt.

"I fear that is proscribed, even were she not an initiate of the Tower," Adeleas said. "We are forbidden to shed blood in questioning, or to allow others to do so in our name." She sounded reluctant, though whether over the prohibition or over admitting that Ispan was an initiate, Elayne could not say. She herself had not really considered that Ispan might still be considered one. There was a saying that no woman was finished with the Tower until it was finished with her, but truthfully, once the White Tower touched you, it never was finished.

hɝ bɹaʊ fɝoʊɾ əz ʃi stʌɾid ðə blæk sɪstɝ, soʊ bɪdʒɹæɡəld, ən stɪl soʊ ʃʊɹ ə hɝsɛlf. ɪspæn sæɾ ʌp ə lɪɾəl stʃɹeɪɾɝ, ən dɑɹɾɪd ɡlænsɪz fʊl ʌv əmjuz kəntɛmpt əɾ eɪvinhə - ən ɪleɪn. ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn soʊ pɔɪzd ɝliɝ, wən ʃi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn əloʊn u hæd hɝ; ɹiɡeɪn kəmpoʊʒɝ hæd kʌm wɪð ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðət ðəɹ wɝ oʊldɝ sɪstɝz pɹɛzənt. sɪstɝz u wəd hoʊld waɪt taʊɝ lɔ əz pɑɹɾ ə ðɛmsɛlvz. ðət lɔ fɝbeɪd nɑɾ oʊnli ʃɛɾɪŋ blʌd, bʌt bɹeɪkɪŋ boʊnz ən ə nʌmbɝ ʌv ʌðɝ θɪŋz ðəɾ ɛni waɪtkloʊk kwɛstʃənɝ wəd bi mɔɹ ðən ɹɛɾi tə du. bɪfɔɹ ɛni sɛʃən bɪɡæn, hilɪŋ hæd tə bi ɡɪvən, ən ɪf ðə kwɛstʃənɪŋ stɑɹɾəd æftɝ sʌnɹaɪz, ɪt hæd tə ɛn bɪfɔɹ sʌndaʊn; ɪf æftɝ sʌnsɛt, ðən bɪfɔɹ sʌnɹaɪz. ðə lɔ wɑz ivən mɔɹ ɹistʃɹɪktɪv wən ɪt keɪm tə ɪnɪʃieɪts ə ðə taʊɝ, ðə sɪstɝz ən æksɛptɪɾ ən nɑvəsɪz, bænɪŋ ðə jus ə seɪaɪdɑɹ ɪn kwɛstʃənɪŋ, pʌnɪʃmənt, əɹ pɛnəns. oʊ, ə sɪstɝ maɪt flɪk ə nɑvəsəz ɪɹ wɪð ðə paʊɝ ɪf ʃi wɑz ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd, əɹ ivən ɡɪv əɹ ə swɑɾ ɑn ðə bɑɾəm, bʌt nɑt vɛɹi mʌtʃ mɔɹ. ɪspæn smaɪld ət hɝ. smaɪld! ɪleɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ.

Her brow furrowed as she studied the Black sister, so bedraggled, and still so sure of herself. Ispan sat up a little straighter, and darted glances full of amused contempt at Aviendha - and Elayne. She had not been so poised earlier, when she thought it was Nynaeve and Elayne alone who had her; regained composure had come with remembering that there were older sisters present. Sisters who would hold White Tower law as part of themselves. That law forbade not only shedding blood, but breaking bones and a number of other things that any Whitecloak Questioner would be more than ready to do. Before any session began, Healing had to be given, and if the questioning started after sunrise, it had to end before sundown; if after sunset, then before sunrise. The law was even more restrictive when it came to initiates of the Tower, the sisters and Accepted and novices, banning the use of saidar in questioning, punishment, or penance. Oh, a sister might flick a novice's ear with the Power if she was exasperated, or even give her a swat on the bottom, but not very much more. Ispan smiled at her. Smiled! Elayne took a deep breath.

"æɾɪliz, vændin, aɪ wɑn jə tə liv eɪvinhə ən mi əloʊn wɪð ɪspæn." hɝ stʌmək tʃɹaɪd tə taɪ ɪtsɛlf ɪndə ə nɑt. ðəɹ hæd tə bi ə weɪ tə pɹɛs ðə wʊmən səfɪʃənli tə lɝn wʌt wɑz niɾəd wɪθaʊt bɹeɪkɪŋ taʊɝ lɔ. bʌt haʊ? pipəl u wɝ tə bi kwɛstʃən baɪ ðə taʊɝ juʒəwəli bɪɡæn tɔkɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ə fɪŋɡɝ wɑz leɪɾ ɑn əm - ɛvɹiwʌn nu ðət noʊ wʌn hɛld aʊɾ əɡɛns ðə taʊɝ; noʊ wʌn! - bʌt ðeɪ wɝ vɛɹi sɛldəm ɪnɪʃiəts. ʃi kəd hɪɹ ənʌðɝ vɔɪs, nɑt liniz ðɪs taɪm, bʌɾ əɹ mʌðɝz. wʌt jə ɔɹɾɝ dʌn, jə mʌs bi wɪlɪŋ tə də wɪð jəɹ oʊn hænd. əz ə kwin, wʌt jə ɔɹɾɝ dʌn, juv dʌn. ɪf ʃi dɪd bɹeɪk ðə lɔ. . . . hɝ mʌðɝz vɔɪs əɡɛn. ivən ə kwin kænɑt bi əbʌv ðə lɔ, əɹ ðəɹ ɪz noʊ lɔ. ən liniz. jə kən də wʌtɛvɝ jə wɪʃ, tʃaɪld. soʊ lɔŋ əz jəɹ wɪlɪŋ tə peɪ ðə pɹaɪs. ʃi dʒɹæɡd əɹ hæɾ ɔf wɪθaʊɾ əntiɪŋ ðə ɹɪbənz. kipɪŋ əɹ vɔɪs stɛɾi tʊk ən ɛfɝt. "wɛn wəɹ - wən wəɹ dʌn tɔkɪŋ wɪð hɝ, jə kən teɪk əɹ bæk tə ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl." æftɝwɝd, ʃi wəd səbmɪt hɝsɛlf tə mɛɝɪlɪl. ɛni faɪv sɪstɝz kəd sɪɾ ɪn dʒʌdʒmən tə sɛɾ ə pɛnəns, ɪf ðeɪ wɝ æskt.

"Adeleas, Vandene, I want you to leave Aviendha and me alone with Ispan." Her stomach tried to tie itself into a knot. There had to be a way to press the woman sufficiently to learn what was needed without breaking Tower law. But how? People who were to be questioned by the Tower usually began talking before a finger was laid on them - everyone knew that no one held out against the Tower; no one! - but they were very seldom initiates. She could hear another voice, not Lini's this time, but her mother's. What you order done, you must be willing to do with your own hand. As a queen, what you order done, you have done. If she did break the law. . . . Her mother's voice again. Even a queen cannot be above the law, or there is no law. And Lini's. You can do whatever you wish, child. So long as you're willing to pay the price. She dragged her hat off without untying the ribbons. Keeping her voice steady took an effort. "When we are - when we are done talking with her, you can take her back to the Knitting Circle." Afterward, she would submit herself to Merilille. Any five sisters could sit in judgment to set a penance, if they were asked.

ɪspænz hɛd swʌŋ, swoʊlən aɪz ɡoʊɪŋ fɹəm ɪleɪn tə eɪvinhə ən bæk, sloʊli waɪɾənɪŋ əntɪl ðə waɪts ʃoʊɾ ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊnd. ʃi wɑz nɑt soʊ ʃʊɹ ə hɝsɛlf naʊ.

Ispan's head swung, swollen eyes going from Elayne to Aviendha and back, slowly widening until the whites showed all the way around. She was not so sure of herself now.

saɪlənt ɡlænsɪz pæs bɪtwin vændin ən æɾɪliz, ɪn ðə mænɝ ə pipəl u hæd spɛn soʊ mʌtʃ taɪm təɡɛðɝ ðeɪ hɑɹdli niɾəd tə spik əlaʊɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ; ðən vændin tʊk ɪleɪn ən eɪvinhə itʃ baɪ ən ɑɹm. "ɪf aɪ meɪ spik wɪð jə aʊtsaɪɾ ə moʊmənt," ʃi mɝmɝd. ɪt saʊndəɾ ə sədʒɛstʃən, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɝdʒɪŋ əm tə ðə dɔɹ.

Silent glances passed between Vandene and Adeleas, in the manner of people who had spent so much time together they hardly needed to speak aloud any longer; then Vandene took Elayne and Aviendha each by an arm. "If I may speak with you outside a moment," she murmured. It sounded a suggestion, but she was already urging them to the door.

aʊtsaɪɾ ɪn ðə fɑɹmjɑɹd, pɝhæps tu dʌzən əɹ soʊ kɪnswɪmən wɝ hʌɾəld təɡɛðɝ laɪk ʃip. nɑɾ ɔl wɔɹ ɛbu dɑɹi kloʊðz, bʌt tu hæd ðə ɹɛd bɛls ʌv waɪz wɪmən, ən ɪleɪn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz bɛɹaʊɪn, ə staʊt lɪɾəl wʊmən u nɔɹməli ʃoʊɾ ə pɹaɪd fɑɹ ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ðə paʊɝ. nɑt naʊ. laɪk ðə ɹɛst, hɝ feɪs wɑz fɹaɪɾənd, hɝ aɪz dɑɹɾɪŋ, dɪspaɪt ði ɪntaɪɝ nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl sɝaʊndɪŋ əm ən tɔkɪŋ ɝdʒənli. daʊn ðə weɪ, nɪneɪiv ən æləz wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hɝd pɝhæps twaɪs əz mɛni wɪmən ɪnsaɪd wʌn ə ðə lɑɹdʒɝ bɪldɪŋz. "tʃɹaɪɪŋ" dɪd sim tə bi ðə wɝd.

Outside in the farmyard, perhaps two dozen or so Kinswomen were huddled together like sheep. Not all wore Ebou Dari clothes, but two had the red belts of Wise Women, and Elayne recognized Berowin, a stout little woman who normally showed a pride far greater than her strength in the Power. Not now. Like the rest, her face was frightened, her eyes darting, despite the entire Knitting Circle surrounding them and talking urgently. Down the way, Nynaeve and Alise were trying to herd perhaps twice as many women inside one of the larger buildings. "Trying" did seem to be the word.

". . . doʊn kɛɹ wʌɾ ɪsteɪts jə hoʊld," nɪneɪiv wɑz ʃaʊɾɪŋ əɾ ə pɹaʊd-nɛkt wʊmən ɪn peɪl ɡɹin sɪlk. "ju ɡɛɾ ɪn ðəɹ ən steɪ ɪn ðɛɹ, aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ, əɹ əl kɪk jə ɪnsaɪd!"

". . . don't care what estates you hold," Nynaeve was shouting at a proud-necked woman in pale green silk. "You get in there and stay in there, out of the way, or I'll kick you inside!"

æləz sɪmpli siz ðə ɡɹin-klæd wʊmən baɪ ðə skɹʌf ə ðə nɛk ən ɹæn əɹ θɹu ðə dɔɹweɪ dɪspaɪt vɑljəbəl ən hiɾəd pɹoʊɾɛsts. ðəɹ wɑz ə laʊd skwɔk laɪk ə hjudʒ ɡus biɪŋ stɛpt ɑn, ðən æləz ɹiəpɪɹd, dʌstɪŋ əɹ hænz. ði ʌðɝz sim tə ɡɪv noʊ tʃɹʌbəl æftɝ ðæt.

Alise simply seized the green-clad woman by the scruff of the neck and ran her through the doorway despite voluble and heated protests. There was a loud squawk like a huge goose being stepped on, then Alise reappeared, dusting her hands. The others seemed to give no trouble after that.

vændin ɹilis ðɛm, stʌɾiɪŋ ðɛɹ aɪz. ðə ɡloʊ stɪl ɛnvɛləp hɝ, jɛɾ æɾɪliz mʌst əv bɪn foʊkəsɪŋ ðɛɹ kəmbaɪn floʊz. vændin cʊɾə meɪnteɪn ðə ʃild, wʌns woʊvən, wɪθaʊt biɪŋ eɪbəl tə si ɪt, bʌt hæd ʃi bɪn ðə wʌn, ɪt wɑz mʌtʃ laɪkliɝ ðəɾ æɾɪliz wʊɾə bɹɔɾ əm aʊt. vændin cʊɾə ɡɔn sɛvɹəl hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz bɪfɔɹ ðə lɪŋk bɪɡæn tə ətɛnjueɪt - ɪt wəd nɑt bɹeɪk ɪf ʃi ən æɾɪliz wɛn tə ɑpəzət kɔɹnɝz ə ði ɝθ, ðoʊ ɪt wʊɾə bɪn jusləs lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ðət - bʌt ʃi ɹɪmeɪn kloʊs tə ðə dɔɹ. ʃi sim tə sɔɹt wɝdz ɪn əɹ hɛd.

Vandene released them, studying their eyes. The glow still enveloped her, yet Adeleas must have been focusing their combined flows. Vandene could have maintained the shield, once woven, without being able to see it, but had she been the one, it was much likelier that Adeleas would have brought them out. Vandene could have gone several hundred paces before the link began to attenuate - it would not break if she and Adeleas went to opposite corners of the earth, though it would have been useless long before that - but she remained close to the door. She seemed to sort words in her head.

"aɪv ɔlweɪz θɔɾ ɪt bɛst ɪf wɪmən wɪð ɪkspɪɹiəns hændəl ðɪs sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. "ðə jʌŋ kən izəli bi kɑɾ ʌp ɪn hɑt blʌd. ðən ðeɪ də tu mʌtʃ. əɹ səmtaɪmz, ðeɪ ɹilaɪz ðeɪ kæn bɹɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz tə də ɪnʌf. kəz ðeɪ hævən ɹɪli sin ɪnʌf, jɛt. əɹ wɝst ʌv ɔl, ðeɪ faɪn ə . . . teɪs fəɹ ɪt. nɑt ðəɾ aɪ bɪliv iðɝ ə jə hæz ðət flɔ." ʃi ɡeɪv eɪvinhə ə weɪɪŋ ɡlæns wɪθaʊt pɔzɪŋ; eɪvinhə heɪstəli ʃiðd əɹ bɛl naɪf. "æɾɪliz ən aɪ hæv sin ɪnʌf tə noʊ waɪ wi mʌs də wʌt mʌs bi dʌn, ən wi lɛf hɑt blʌd bɪhaɪn lɔŋ əɡoʊ. pɝhæps jəl liv ðɪs tə ʌs. mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ðət weɪ, ɔl ɝaʊnd." vændin sim tə teɪk ðə ɹɛkəməndeɪʃən əz æksɛptɪd. ʃi nɑɾəd ən tɝn bæk təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ.

"I've always thought it best if women with experience handle this sort of thing," she said finally. "The young can easily be caught up in hot blood. Then they do too much. Or sometimes, they realize they can't bring themselves to do enough. Because they haven't really seen enough, yet. Or worst of all, they find a . . . taste for it. Not that I believe either of you has that flaw." She gave Aviendha a weighing glance without pausing; Aviendha hastily sheathed her belt knife. "Adeleas and I have seen enough to know why we must do what must be done, and we left hot blood behind long ago. Perhaps you will leave this to us. Much better that way, all around." Vandene seemed to take the recommendation as accepted. She nodded and turned back toward the door.

noʊ sunɝ hæd ʃi dɪsəpɪɹd bɪhaɪn ɪt, ðən ɪleɪn fɛl ðə jus ə ðə paʊɝ wɪðɪn, ə wiv ðət mʌst əv blæŋkəɾɪd ðə ɹum ɪnsaɪd. ə wɔɹɾ əɡɛnst ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ, sɝɾənli. ðeɪ wəd nɑt wɑn stʃɹeɪ ɪɹz tə kætʃ wʌtɛvɝ ɪspæn sɛd. ðən ənʌðɝ jus hɪt hɝ, ən sʌɾənli ðə saɪləns fɹəm wɪðɪn wɑz mɔɹ ɑmənəs ðən ɛni ʃɹiks ðət wɔɹd wəd kənteɪn.

No sooner had she disappeared behind it, than Elayne felt the use of the Power within, a weave that must have blanketed the room inside. A ward against eavesdropping, certainly. They would not want stray ears to catch whatever Ispan said. Then another use hit her, and suddenly the silence from within was more ominous than any shrieks that ward would contain.

ʃi kɹʌʃt əɹ hæt bæk ɑntu hɝ hɛd. ðə hit ʃi kəd nɑt fil, bʌt ðə sʌnz ɡlɛɹ sʌɾənli meɪɾ əɹ kwizi. "meɪbi jəl hɛlp mi lʊk oʊvɝ wʌt ðə pækhɔɹsɪz ɑɹ kæɹiɪŋ," ʃi sɛd bɹɛθəli. ʃi hæd nɑɾ ɔɹɾɝd ɪt dʌn - wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz - bʌt ðət dɪd nɑt sim tə tʃeɪnʒ ɛniθɪŋ. eɪvinhə nɑɾəd wɪð sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ kwɪknəs; ʃi sim tə wɑnə bi əweɪ fɹəm ðət saɪləns, tu.

She crushed her hat back onto her head. The heat she could not feel, but the sun's glare suddenly made her queasy. "Maybe you'll help me look over what the packhorses are carrying," she said breathily. She had not ordered it done - whatever it was - but that did not seem to change anything. Aviendha nodded with surprising quickness; she seemed to want to be away from that silence, too.

ðə wɪndfɪndɝz wɝ weɪɾɪŋ nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm wɛɹ ðə sɝvəns hæd ðə pæk ænəməlz, weɪɾɪŋ ɪmpeɪʃənli ən stɛɹɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪmpɪɹiəsli, ɑɹmz foʊldəd bɪniθ ðɛɹ bɹɛsts, kɑpiɪŋ ɹɪneɪl. æləz mɑɹtʃt ʌp tə ðɛm, mɑɹkɪŋ ɹɪneɪl aʊɾ əz ðə liɾɝ æftɝ wʌn swipɪŋ ɡlæns. ɪleɪn ən eɪvinhə ʃi ɪɡnɔɹd.

The Windfinders were waiting not far from where the servants had the pack animals, waiting impatiently and staring about imperiously, arms folded beneath their breasts, copying Renaile. Alise marched up to them, marking Renaile out as the leader after one sweeping glance. Elayne and Aviendha she ignored.

"kʌm wɪð mi," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn bɹɪsk toʊnz ðət bɹʊk noʊ ɑɹɡjəmənt. "ði ɛɛs sədaɪ seɪ jəl wɑnə bi aʊɾ ə ðə sʌn əntɪl mæɾɝz ɑɹ mɔɹ sɛɾəld." ðə wɝdz "ɛɛs sədaɪ" hɛld əz mʌtʃ bɪɾɝnəs əz ðeɪ dɪd ði ɑ ɪleɪn wɑz juz tə fɹəm kɪnswɪmən. meɪbi mɔɹ. ɹɪneɪl stɪfənd, hɝ dɑɹk feɪs ɡɹoʊɪŋ dɑɹkɝ, bʌɾ æləz plaʊɾ ɑn. "ju waɪldɝz kən sɪɾ aʊt hɪɹ ən swɛɾ ɪf ðæts wʌt jə wɑnt, fəɹ ɔl ə mi. ɪf jə kən sɪt." ɪt wɑz ɑbviəs nʌn ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ hæd ɹəsiv hilɪŋ fəɹ ðɛɹ sæɾəl sɔɹnəs; ðeɪ stʊd laɪk wɪmən u wɑntəd tə fɝɡɛt ðeɪ ɪɡzɪstəd bɪloʊ ðə weɪst. "wʌt jəl nɑt də ɪz kip mi weɪɾɪŋ."

"Come with me," she said in brisk tones that brooked no argument. "The Aes Sedai say you will want to be out of the sun until matters are more settled." The words "Aes Sedai" held as much bitterness as they did the awe Elayne was used to from Kinswomen. Maybe more. Renaile stiffened, her dark face growing darker, but Alise plowed on. "You wilders can sit out here and sweat if that's what you want, for all of me. If you can sit." It was obvious none of the Atha'an Miere had received Healing for their saddle soreness; they stood like women who wanted to forget they existed below the waist. "What you will not do is keep me waiting."

"du jə noʊ hu aɪ æm?" ɹɪneɪl dɪmændəɾ ɪn ə taɪt fjʊɹi, bʌɾ æləz wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi wɔkɪŋ əweɪ ən nɑt lʊkɪŋ bæk. stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ wɪð hɝsɛlf vɪzəbli, ɹɪneɪl dæʃt swɛt fɹəm əɹ fɔɹhɛd wɪð ðə bæk ə hɝ hænd, ðən æŋɡɹəli ɔɹɾɝd ði ʌðɝ wɪndfɪndɝz tə liv ðə "ʃɔɹ-kɝst" hɔɹsəz ən fɑloʊ hɝ. ðeɪ meɪɾ ə spɹæəl-lɛɡəd laɪn wɑbəlɪŋ əlɔŋ æftɝ æləz, ɛvɹiwʌn bʌt ðə tu əpɹɛntəsɪz mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf - æləz ɪnkluɾəd.

"Do you know who I am?" Renaile demanded in a tight fury, but Alise was already walking away and not looking back. Struggling with herself visibly, Renaile dashed sweat from her forehead with the back of her hand, then angrily ordered the other Windfinders to leave the "shore-cursed" horses and follow her. They made a spraddle-legged line wobbling along after Alise, everyone but the two apprentices muttering to herself - Alise included.

ɪnstɪŋktɪvli, ɪleɪn bɪɡæn tə plæn haʊ tə smuð mæɾɝz oʊvɝ, haʊ tə ɡɛt ði æθɑn maɪɹz peɪnz hild wɪθaʊɾ əm hævɪŋ tə æsk. əɹ ə sɪstɝ hævɪŋ tə ɔfɝ tu stʃɹɛnjuəsli; nɪneɪiv hæd tə bi əpizd, tu, ən ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz. tə hɝ sɝpɹaɪz, ʃi sʌɾənli ɹilaɪz ðət fəɹ wʌns ɪn əɹ laɪf ʃi hæd noʊ ɹil dɪzaɪɝ tə smuð ɛniθɪŋ. wɑtʃɪŋ ðə wɪndfɪndɝz lɪmp təwɔɹd wʌn ə ðə fɑɹm bɪldɪŋz, ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd ðət mæɾɝz wɝ faɪn dʒʌst əz ðeɪ wɝ. eɪvinhə wɔɹ ə lɑɹdʒ, oʊpən ɡɹɪn əz ʃi wɑtʃt ði æθɑn maɪɹ. ɪleɪn snætʃt ðə mʌtʃ smɔlɝ smaɪl fɹəm əɹ oʊn feɪs ən tɝn tə ðə pækhɔɹsɪz. ðeɪ dɪd dɪzɝv ɪt, ðoʊ. nɑt ɡɹɪnɪŋ wɑz vɛɹi hɑɹd.

Instinctively, Elayne began to plan how to smooth matters over, how to get the Atha'an Miere's pains Healed without them having to ask. Or a sister having to offer too strenuously; Nynaeve had to be appeased, too, and the other sisters. To her surprise, she suddenly realized that for once in her life she had no real desire to smooth anything. Watching the Windfinders limp toward one of the farm buildings, she decided that matters were fine just as they were. Aviendha wore a large, open grin as she watched the Atha'an Miere. Elayne snatched the much smaller smile from her own face and turned to the packhorses. They did deserve it, though. Not grinning was very hard.

wɪð eɪvinhəz hɛlp, ðə sɝtʃɪŋ wɛn mɔɹ kwɪkli ðən bɪfɔɹ, ðoʊ eɪvinhə dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz wʌt ðeɪ wɝ æftɝ əz kwɪkli əz ʃi dɪd. nɑɾ ə ɡɹeɪt sɝpɹaɪz. ə fju ʌv ðə sɪstɝz ɪleɪn hæd tʃɹeɪnd ʃoʊɾ ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ skɪl ɪn ðɪs ðən ʃi dɪd hɝsɛlf, bʌt moʊs keɪm noʊwɛɹ nɪɹ. stɪl, tu sɛts ə hænz faʊn mɔɹ ðən wʌn, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡɹeɪt dil tə bi faʊnd. lɪvɹid steɪbəlmən ən wɪmən kæɹiɾ əweɪ ðə ɹʌbɪʃ, waɪl ə kəlɛkʃən ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɡɹu ɑn ðə bɹɔd stoʊn lɪɾ ʌv ə skwɛɹ sɪstɝn.

With Aviendha's help, the searching went more quickly than before, though Aviendha did not recognize what they were after as quickly as she did. Not a great surprise. A few of the sisters Elayne had trained showed a greater skill in this than she did herself, but most came nowhere near. Still, two sets of hands found more than one, and there was a great deal to be found. Liveried stablemen and women carried away the rubbish, while a collection of ter'angreal grew on the broad stone lid of a square cistern.

fɔɹ mɔɹ hɔɹsəz wɝ ənloʊɾəd kwɪkli, ən ðeɪ əkjumjəleɪɾəd ə səlɛkʃən ðət wʊɾə kɑzd ə sɛləbɹeɪʃən, bɹɔɾ ɪndə ðə taʊɝ. ivən wɪð noʊ wʌn stʌɾiɪŋ tɛɹæŋɡɹil. ðeɪ tʊk ɛvɹi fɔɹm ɪmædʒənəbəl. kʌps ən boʊlz ən veɪsəz, noʊ tu ðə seɪm saɪz əɹ dɪzaɪn əɹ ɪn ðə seɪm mətɪɹiəl. ə flæt, wɝm-iɾən bɑks, hæf-fɔlɪŋ əpɑɹɾ ən wʌtɛvɝ hæd laɪn ɪt lɔŋ sɪns ɡɔn tə dʌst, hɛl pisəz ə dʒuəlɹi - ə nɛkləs ən bɹeɪslɪts sɛt wɪð kʌlɝd stoʊnz, ə slɪm dʒɛm-stʌɾɪd bɛlt, sɛvɹəl fɪŋɡɝ ɹɪŋz - ən ðəɹ wɝ speɪsəz fəɹ mɔɹ. ɛvɹi sɪŋɡəl wʌn wɑz ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ən ðeɪ ɔl mætʃt, mɛn tə bi wɔɹn təɡɛðɝ, ðoʊ ɪleɪn kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən waɪ ɛni wʊmən wəd wɑnə kæɹi soʊ mɛni əbaʊɾ əɹ ət wʌn taɪm. eɪvinhə faʊn ə dæɡɝ wɪð ɡoʊld waɪɝ ɹæpt ɝaʊn ə hɪlt ə ɹʌf dɪɹ-hɔɹn; ðə bleɪd wɑz dʌl, ən baɪ ɔl ɛvəɾəns, ɔlweɪz hæd bɪn. ʃi kɛp tɝnɪŋ ðəɾ oʊvɝ ən oʊvɝ ɪn əɹ fɪŋɡɝz - hɝ hænz æktʃəli  bɪɡæn tə tʃɹɛmbəl - əntɪl ɪleɪn tʊk ɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm əɹ ən pʊɾ ɪt wɪð ði ʌðɝz ɑn ðə sɪstɝnz lɪd. ivən ðən eɪvinhə stʊd fəɹ ə taɪm, lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪɾ ən lɪkɪŋ əɹ lɪps əz ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd ɡɔn dʒɹaɪ. ðəɹ wɝ fɪŋɡɝ ɹɪŋz, ɪɹɪŋz, nɛkləsɪz, bɹeɪslɪts ən bʌkəlz, mɛni ʌv vɛɹi pəkjuljɝ pæɾɝn ɪndid. ðəɹ wɝ stætʃuɛts ən fɪɡjɝz ə bɝdz ən ænəməlz ən pipəl, sɛvɹəl naɪvz ðət dɪɾ əv ɛdʒəz, hæf ə dʌzən lɑɹdʒ mədæljənz ɪn bɹɑnz əɹ stil, moʊst wɝkt wɪð stʃɹeɪnʒ pæɾɝnz ən nɑt wʌn kæɹiɪŋ ən ɪmədʒ ɪleɪn kəd ɹɪli ʌndɝstænd, ə pɛɹ ə pəkjuljɝ hæts simɪŋli meɪɾ ə mɛɾəl, tu ɔɹneɪɾ ən tu θɪn tə bi hɛlməts, ən ɛni nʌmbɝ ʌv aɪɾəmz ʃi kəd nɑt θɪŋk wʌt tə kɔl. ə ɹɑd, əz θɪk əz əɹ ɹɪst, bɹaɪt ɹɛɾ ən smuð ən ɹaʊndəd, fɝm ɹæðɝ ðən hɑɹd fəɹ ɔl ðəɾ ɪt sim tə bi stoʊn; ɪt dɪd nɑt wɔɹm slaɪtli ɪn əɹ hænd, ɪɾ ɔlmoʊs fɛl hɑt! nɑt ɹil hiɾ ɛni mɔɹ ðən ðə wɔɹmθ wɑz ɹil, bʌt stɪl! wʌɾ əbaʊɾ ə sɛɾ ə mɛɾəl bæskətwɝk bɔlz, wʌn ɪnsaɪd ði ʌðɝ? ɛni muvmən pɹədust ə feɪn mjuzɪkəl tʃaɪm, ə dɪfɹən toʊn ɛvɹi taɪm, ən ʃi hæd ðə filɪŋ ðət noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ hɑɹd ʃi lʊkt ɪndə ɪt, ðəɹ wəɾ ɔlweɪz bi ə stɪl smɔlɝ bɔl weɪɾɪŋ tə bi dɪskʌvɝd. ə θɪŋ ðət lʊk laɪk ə blæksmɪθs pʌzəl meɪɾ ʌv ɡlæs? ɪt wɑz hɛvi ɪnʌf ðət ʃi dʒɹɑpt ɪt, ən ɪt bɹoʊk ə tʃɪp ɔf ði ɛdʒ ə ðə sɪstɝn kʌvɝ. ə kəlɛkʃən tə stɝ əmeɪzmən ɪn ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ. mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt, ðeɪ faʊn tu mɔɹ æŋɡɹil. ðoʊz ɪleɪn sɛt vɛɹi kɛɹfəli əsaɪd, wɪðɪn ɑɹmz ɹitʃ.

Four more horses were unloaded quickly, and they accumulated a selection that would have caused a celebration, brought into the Tower. Even with no one studying ter'angreal. They took every form imaginable. Cups and bowls and vases, no two the same size or design or in the same material. A flat, worm-eaten box, half-falling apart and whatever had lined it long since gone to dust, held pieces of jewelry - a necklace and bracelets set with colored stones, a slim gem-studded belt, several finger rings - and there were spaces for more. Every single one was a ter'angreal, and they all matched, meant to be worn together, though Elayne could not imagine why any woman would want to carry so many about her at one time. Aviendha found a dagger with gold wire wrapped around a hilt of rough deer-horn; the blade was dull, and by all evidence, always had been. She kept turning that over and over in her fingers - her hands actually began to tremble - until Elayne took it away from her and put it with the others on the cistern's lid. Even then Aviendha stood for a time, looking at it and licking her lips as though they had gone dry. There were finger rings, earrings, necklaces, bracelets and buckles, many of very peculiar pattern indeed. There were statuettes and figures of birds and animals and people, several knives that did have edges, half a dozen large medallions in bronze or steel, most worked with strange patterns and not one carrying an image Elayne could really understand, a pair of peculiar hats seemingly made of metal, too ornate and too thin to be helmets, and any number of items she could not think what to call. A rod, as thick as her wrist, bright red and smooth and rounded, firm rather than hard for all that it seemed to be stone; it did not warm slightly in her hand, it almost felt hot! Not real heat any more than the warmth was real, but still! What about a set of metal basketwork balls, one inside the other? Any movement produced a faint musical chime, a different tone every time, and she had the feeling that no matter how hard she looked into it, there would always be a still smaller ball waiting to be discovered. A thing that looked like a blacksmith's puzzle made of glass? It was heavy enough that she dropped it, and it broke a chip off the edge of the cistern cover. A collection to stir amazement in any Aes Sedai. More important, they found two more angreal. Those Elayne set very carefully aside, within arm's reach.

wʌn wɑz ən ɑd pis ə dʒuəlɹi, ə ɡoʊldən bɹeɪsləɾ ətætʃt baɪ fɔɹ flæt tʃeɪnz tə fɪŋɡɝ ɹɪŋz, ɛvɹi bɪɾ ʌv ɪɾ ɪnɡɹeɪvd ɪn ən ɪntʃɹəkət məzəlaɪk pæɾɝn. ðət wɑz ðə stʃɹɔŋɝ ə ðə tu, stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ðə tɝɾəl stɪl ɪn əɹ paʊtʃ. ɪt wɑz meɪd fəɹ ə smɔlɝ hæn ðən hɝz əɹ eɪvinhəz. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ðə bɹeɪslət hæɾ ə taɪni lɑk, kəmplit wɪð ə mɪnəskjul, tubjəlɝ ki dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm ə faɪn tʃeɪn ðət wɑz ɑbviəsli meɪd tə bi ɹimuvd. əlɔŋ wɪð ðə ki! ði ʌðɝ wɑz ə siɾəd wʊmən ɪn eɪdʒ-dɑɹkən aɪvɝi, hɝ lɛɡz foʊldəɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, hɝ ɪkspoʊz niz bɛɹ, bʌt wɪð hɛɹ soʊ lɔŋ ən ləɡʒɝiənt ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn mɔɹ mʌfəld ɪn ðə hɛviəs kloʊk. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ivən əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ðə tɝɾəl, bʌt ʃi faʊn ɪt vɛɹi əpilɪŋ. wʌn hæn ɹɛstəɾ ɑn ə ni, pɑm ʌp ən fɪŋɡɝz ɝeɪnʒd soʊ ðə θʌm tʌtʃt ðə tɪps ə ðə mɪɾəl tu fɪŋɡɝz, waɪl ði ʌðɝ hænd wɑz lɪftəd, ðə fɝs tu fɪŋɡɝz ɹeɪzd ən ði ʌðɝz foʊldəd. ðə hoʊl fɪɡjɝ kæɹiɾ ən ɛɹ ə səpɹim dɪɡnəɾi, jɛt ðə dɛləkətli wɝk feɪs ʃoʊɾ əmjuzmən ən dɪlaɪt. meɪbi ɪt hæd bɪn meɪd fəɹ ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ wʊmən? ɪt sim pɝsənəl, sʌmhaʊ. pɝhæps ðeɪ hæd dʌn ðæt, ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. səm tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɝ ɪmɛns, niɾɪŋ mɛn ən hɔɹsəz, əɹ ivən ðə paʊɝ, tə muv, bʌt moʊst æŋɡɹil wɝ smɔl ɪnʌf tə kæɹi əbaʊt jəɹ pɝsən; nɑɾ ɔl, bʌt moʊst.

One was an odd piece of jewelry, a golden bracelet attached by four flat chains to finger rings, every bit of it engraved in an intricate mazelike pattern. That was the stronger of the two, stronger than the turtle still in her pouch. It was made for a smaller hand than hers or Aviendha's. Strangely, the bracelet had a tiny lock, complete with a minuscule, tubular key dangling from a fine chain that was obviously made to be removed. Along with the key! The other was a seated woman in age-darkened ivory, her legs folded in front of her, her exposed knees bare, but with hair so long and luxuriant she could not have been more muffled in the heaviest cloak. It was not even as strong as the turtle, but she found it very appealing. One hand rested on a knee, palm up and fingers arranged so the thumb touched the tips of the middle two fingers, while the other hand was lifted, the first two fingers raised and the others folded. The whole figure carried an air of supreme dignity, yet the delicately worked face showed amusement and delight. Maybe it had been made for a particular woman? It seemed personal, somehow. Perhaps they had done that, in the Age of Legends. Some ter'angreal were immense, needing men and horses, or even the Power, to move, but most angreal were small enough to carry about your person; not all, but most.

ðeɪ wɝ tɔsɪŋ bæk ðə kænvəs kʌvɝz ɑn ənʌðɝ sɛɾ ʌv wɪkɝ pænɪɝz wən nɪneɪiv keɪm stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ ʌp. ði æθɑn maɪɹ bɪɡæn faɪlɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv wʌn ə ðə fɑɹm bɪldɪŋz, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ lɪmpɪŋ. mɛɝɪlɪl wɑz tɔkɪŋ wɪð ɹɪneɪl, əɹ ɹæðɝ, ðə wɪndfɪndɝ wɑz tɔkɪŋ ən mɛɝɪlɪl lɪsnɪŋ. ɪleɪn wʌndɝd wʌt hæd hæpən ɪn ðɛɹ. ðə slɪm ɡɹeɪ dɪd nɑt lʊk soʊ sæɾəsfaɪd ɛnimɔɹ. ðə hʌɾəl ə kɪnswɪmən hæd ɡɹoʊn lɑɹdʒɝ, bʌɾ ivən əz ɪleɪn lʊkt ʌp, θɹi mɔɹ keɪm hɛzɪɾəntli ɪndə ðə fɑɹmjɑɹd, ən ənʌðɝ tu stʊɾ ət ði ɛdʒ ə ði ɑləv tʃɹiz, piɹɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪndɪsaɪsɪvli. ʃi kəd sɛns bɝdʒɪt, sʌmwɛɹ aʊɾ əmʌŋ ðə ɡɹoʊvz ən oʊnli ə lɪɾəl lɛs ɪɹəteɪɾəd ðən ɝliɝ.

They were tossing back the canvas covers on another set of wicker panniers when Nynaeve came striding up. The Atha'an Miere began filing out of one of the farm buildings, no longer limping. Merilille was talking with Renaile, or rather, the Windfinder was talking and Merilille listening. Elayne wondered what had happened in there. The slim Gray did not look so satisfied anymore. The huddle of Kinswomen had grown larger, but even as Elayne looked up, three more came hesitantly into the farmyard, and another two stood at the edge of the olive trees, peering about indecisively. She could sense Birgitte, somewhere out among the groves and only a little less irritated than earlier.

nɪneɪiv ɡlænst ət ðə dɪspleɪ ʌv tɛɹæŋɡɹil ən ɡeɪv əɹ bɹeɪɾ ə tʌɡ. hɝ hæt hæd ɡɔn mɪsɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ. "ðæt kən weɪt," ʃi sɛd, saʊndɪŋ dɪsɡʌstəd. "ɪts taɪm."

Nynaeve glanced at the display of ter'angreal and gave her braid a tug. Her hat had gone missing somewhere. "That can wait," she said, sounding disgusted. "It's time."


tʃæptɝ faɪv


CHAPTER 5

ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ stɔɹm


The Breaking Storm

ðə sʌn stʊd lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən hæfweɪ daʊn təwɔɹd ðə hɝaɪzən baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ klæmbɝɾ ʌp ðə wɛl-wɔɹn, sneɪkɪŋ pæθ tə ðə tɑp ə ðə stip-saɪɾəd hɪl əbʌv ðə bɑɹnz. ðət wɑz ðə spɑt ɹɪneɪl hæd tʃoʊzən. ɪt dɪd meɪk sɛns fɹəm wʌɾ ɪleɪn nu ʌv wɝkɪŋ wɛðɝ, ɔl lɝn fɹəm ə si foʊk wɪndfɪndɝ, tə bi ʃʊɹ. tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ bɪɑn jəɹ ɪmiɾiət vəsɪnəɾi ɹikwaɪɝd wɝkɪŋ oʊvɝ lɔŋ dɪstənsəz, wɪtʃ mɛn biɪŋ eɪbəl tə si ə lɔŋ dɪstəns, mʌtʃ iziɝ ɑn ði oʊʃən ðən ɑn lænd. ɪksɛp fɹəm ə maʊntən əɹ hɪltɑp. ɪɾ ɔlsoʊ niɾəd ə dɛf hæn tə əvɔɪd kɑzɪŋ tɔɹɛntʃəl ɹeɪnz əɹ wɝlwaɪnz əɹ ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu wʌɾ ɛlswɛɹ. wʌtɛvɝ jə dɪd, ði ɪfɛks spɹɛd laɪk ɹɪpəlz fɹəm ə stoʊn tɔst ɪndə ə pɑnd. ʃi hæd noʊ dɪzaɪɝ wʌtsoʊɛvɝ tə lid ðə sɝkəl ðət wəd juz ðə boʊl.

The sun stood little more than halfway down toward the horizon by the time they clambered up the well-worn, snaking path to the top of the steep-sided hill above the barns. That was the spot Renaile had chosen. It did make sense from what Elayne knew of working weather, all learned from a Sea Folk Windfinder, to be sure. Changing anything beyond your immediate vicinity required working over long distances, which meant being able to see a long distance, much easier on the ocean than on land. Except from a mountain or hilltop. It also needed a deft hand to avoid causing torrential rains or whirlwinds or the Light alone knew what elsewhere. Whatever you did, the effects spread like ripples from a stone tossed into a pond. She had no desire whatsoever to lead the circle that would use the Bowl.

ðə tɑp ə ðə hɪl wɑz klɪɹ ə bɹʌʃ ən flæt, ɪf fɑɹ fɹəm lɛvəl, ə ɹʌf stoʊn teɪbəl, fɪfti peɪsɪz lɔŋ ən bɹɔd, wɪð plɛnti ʌv ɹum fəɹ ɛvɹibɑɾi hu niɾəd tə bi ðɛɹ, ən səm u dɪd nɑt, stʃɹɪkli spikɪŋ. fɹəm ət lis fɪfti peɪsɪz əbʌv ðə fɑɹm, ðə spɛktækjəlɝ vju stʃɹɛtʃt fəɹ maɪlz oʊvɝ ə pætʃwɝk kwɪlt ə fɑɹmz ən pæstʃɝz, fɔɹəsts ən ɑləv ɡɹoʊvz. fɑɹ tu mɛni bɹaʊnz ən sɪɹ jɛloʊz wɝ mɪkst ɪn wɪð ə hʌnʒɹəd ʃeɪdz ʌv ɡɹin, kɹaɪɪŋ ðə nid fəɹ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ tə du, jɛɾ ivən soʊ, ðə bjuɾi ʌv ɪt stʃɹʌk ɪleɪn. dɪspaɪt dʌst ɪn ði ɛɹ laɪk ə feɪn mɪst, ʃi kəd si soʊ fɑɹ! ðə læn ɹɪli wɑz kwaɪt flæt hɪɹ ɪksɛp fəɹ ðoʊz fju hɪlz. ɛbu dɑɹ leɪ dʒʌst aʊɾ ə saɪt tə ðə saʊθ ivən ɪf ʃi ɛmbɹeɪs ðə paʊɝ, jɛɾ ɪt simd ʃi ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə si ɪt, baɪ stʃɹeɪnɪŋ dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl. ʃʊɹli wɪð ə lɪɾəl ɛfɝt ʃi kəd si ðə ɹɪvɝ ɪldɑɹ. ə mɑɹvələs vju. nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz ɪntʃɹəstəd.

The top of the hill was clear of brush and flat, if far from level, a rough stone table, fifty paces long and broad, with plenty of room for everybody who needed to be there, and some who did not, strictly speaking. From at least fifty paces above the farm, the spectacular view stretched for miles over a patchwork quilt of farms and pastures, forests and olive groves. Far too many browns and sere yellows were mixed in with a hundred shades of green, crying the need for what they were to do, yet even so, the beauty of it struck Elayne. Despite dust in the air like a faint mist, she could see so far! The land really was quite flat here except for those few hills. Ebou Dar lay just out of sight to the south even if she embraced the Power, yet it seemed she should be able to see it, by straining just a little. Surely with a little effort she could see the River Eldar. A marvelous view. Not everyone was interested.

"æn aʊɝ weɪstəd," nɪneɪiv ɡɹʌmbəld, ɡlɛɹɪŋ saɪdweɪz ət ɹin. ən ət dʒʌst əbaʊɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls. wɪð læn nɑt ðɛɹ, ɪt simd ʃi maɪt teɪk ði ɑpɝtunəɾi tə ənliʃ əɹ tɛmpɝ. "ɔlmoʊst ən aʊɝ. meɪbi mɔɹ. kəmplitli weɪstəd. æləz ɪz keɪpəbəl ɪnʌf, aɪ səpoʊz, bʌt jud θɪŋk ɹin wəd noʊ hu wɑz ðɛɹ! laɪt! ɪf ðət ful wʊmən feɪns ɑn mi əɡɛn . . . !" ɪleɪn hoʊpt ʃi hɛld ɑn ə lɪɾəl lɔŋɡɝ. ɪt lʊk tə bi kwaɪɾ ə stɔɹm wʌns ʃi lɛɾ ɪt bɹeɪk.

"An hour wasted," Nynaeve grumbled, glaring sideways at Reanne. And at just about everyone else. With Lan not there, it seemed she might take the opportunity to unleash her temper. "Almost an hour. Maybe more. Completely wasted. Alise is capable enough, I suppose, but you'd think Reanne would know who was there! Light! If that fool woman faints on me again . . . !" Elayne hoped she held on a little longer. It looked to be quite a storm once she let it break.

ɹin tʃɹaɪd tə kip ə tʃɪɹfəl, iɡɝ feɪs, jɛɾ əɹ hænz wɝ nɛvɝ stɪl ɑn əɹ skɝts, kɑnstənli plʌkɪŋ ən smuðɪŋ. kɝstʃən sɪmpli klʌtʃt hɝz ən swɛɾɪd, əpɪɹɪŋ ɹɛɾi tə ɛmpti hɝ stʌmək ɛni mɪnət; wən ɛniwʌn lʊkt ət hɝ, ɛniwʌn əɾ ɔl, ʃi ʃɪvɝd. ðə θɝd kɪnswʊmən, ɡæɹiniə, wɑz ə sɑldəiən mɝtʃənt wɪð ə stʃɹɔŋ noʊz ən ə waɪd maʊð, ə ʃɔɹt slɪm-hɪpt wʊmən, stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ði ʌðɝ tu, hu lʊk nɑt ðət mʌtʃ oʊldɝ ðən nɪneɪiv. ə ɡɹisi dæmpnəs ɡlɪsən ɑn əɹ peɪl feɪs, ən əɹ dɑɹk aɪz ɡɹu waɪɾɝ wɛnɛvɝ ðeɪ fɛl ɑn ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪleɪn θɔt ʃi maɪt sun dɪskʌvɝ wɛðɝ sʌmwʌnz aɪz æktʃəli  kəd pɑp aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛd. ət list ɡæɹiniə hæd stɑp moʊnɪŋ, wɪtʃ ʃi hæd dʌn ɔl ðə weɪ ʌp ðə hɪl.

Reanne tried to keep a cheerful, eager face, yet her hands were never still on her skirts, constantly plucking and smoothing. Kirstian simply clutched hers and sweated, appearing ready to empty her stomach any minute; when anyone looked at her, anyone at all, she shivered. The third Kinswoman, Garenia, was a Saldaean merchant with a strong nose and a wide mouth, a short slim-hipped woman, stronger than the other two, who looked not that much older than Nynaeve. A greasy dampness glistened on her pale face, and her dark eyes grew wider whenever they fell on an Aes Sedai. Elayne thought she might soon discover whether someone's eyes actually could pop out of her head. At least Garenia had stopped moaning, which she had done all the way up the hill.

ðəɹ ɹɪli hæd bɪn ənʌðɝ pɛɹ u maɪɾ əv bɪn stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf - pɑsəbli; ðə kɪn dɪd nɑt peɪ mʌtʃ ətɛnʃən tə ðət - bʌt ðə læs hæd ɡɔn ɑn əɹ weɪ θɹi deɪz pæst. noʊ wʌn ɛls ət ðə fɑɹm ivən keɪm kloʊs. wɪtʃ wɑz waɪ nɪneɪiv wɑz stɪl dɪsɡʌstəd. wʌn ɹizən. ði ʌðɝ wɑz ðət ɡæɹiniə hæd bɪn wʌn ə ðə vɛɹi fɝs faʊnd, pæst aʊɾ ɪn ðə fɑɹmjɑɹd. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ʃi feɪntɪɾ əɡɛn ðə fɝs tu taɪmz ʃi wɑz ɹaʊzd, əz sun əz əɹ aɪz fɛl ɑn wʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz. ʌv kɔɹs, nɪneɪiv biɪŋ nɪneɪiv, ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə ədmɪt ðət ʃi ʃʊɾə dʌn ɛniθɪŋ soʊ sɪmpəl əz æsk æləz u wɑz stɪl ət ðə fɑɹm. əɹ ivən tɛl æləz wʌt ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ fəɹ bɪfɔɹ ðə wʊmən ɪnkwaɪɝd. nɪneɪiv nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəɾ ɛniwʌn tə hæv sɛns tə noʊ ʌp fɹəm daʊn. ɪksɛp hɝsɛlf.

There really had been another pair who might have been strong enough - possibly; the Kin did not pay much attention to that - but the last had gone on her way three days past. No one else at the farm even came close. Which was why Nynaeve was still disgusted. One reason. The other was that Garenia had been one of the very first found, passed out in the farmyard. For that matter, she fainted again the first two times she was roused, as soon as her eyes fell on one of the sisters. Of course, Nynaeve being Nynaeve, she was not about to admit that she should have done anything so simple as ask Alise who was still at the farm. Or even tell Alise what she was looking for before the woman inquired. Nynaeve never expected anyone to have sense to know up from down. Except herself.

"wi kəd bi dʌn baɪ naʊ!" nɪneɪiv ɡɹaʊld. "wi kəd bi ʃʌɾ ʌv - !" ʃi ɔlmoʊs kwɪvɝd wɪð ði ɛfɝɾ ə nɑt skaʊlɪŋ ət ðə si foʊk əz ðeɪ ɡæðɝd nɪɹ ði ist ɛn ə ðə stoʊn teɪbəl. ɹɪneɪl, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ ɛmfæɾɪkli, əpɪɹd tə bi ɡɪvɪŋ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz. ɪleɪn wʊɾə ɡɪvən ə pɹɪɾi tə hɪɹ ðoʊz.

"We could be done by now!" Nynaeve growled. "We could be shut of - !" She almost quivered with the effort of not scowling at the Sea Folk as they gathered near the east end of the stone table. Renaile, gesturing emphatically, appeared to be giving instructions. Elayne would have given a pretty to hear those.

nɪneɪivz ɡlɛɹz sɝɾənli tʊk ɪn mɛɝɪlɪl ən kɛɝin ən sɝaɪðə, hu stɪl klʌtʃt ðə sɪlk-ɹæp boʊl taɪtli. æɾɪliz ən vændin hæd ɹɪmeɪn bɪloʊ, sɪkwɛstɝd wɪð ɪspæn. ðə θɹi sɪstɝz stʊd tʃæɾɪŋ təɡɛðɝ, nɑt peɪɪŋ ɛni maɪn tə nɪneɪiv ənlɛs ʃi spoʊk tə ðɛm dɝɛkli, bʌt mɛɝɪlɪlz ɡeɪz səmtaɪmz slɪp tə ðə wɪndfɪndɝz, ðən dʒɝkt əweɪ; hɝ mæsk ə sɝɛnəɾi fɔltɝd slaɪtli, ən ʃi lɪkt əɹ lɪps wɪð ðə tɪp ə hɝ tʌŋ.

Nynaeve's glares certainly took in Merilille and Careane and Sareitha, who still clutched the silk-wrapped Bowl tightly. Adeleas and Vandene had remained below, sequestered with Ispan. The three sisters stood chatting together, not paying any mind to Nynaeve unless she spoke to them directly, but Merilille's gaze sometimes slipped to the Windfinders, then jerked away; her mask of serenity faltered slightly, and she licked her lips with the tip of her tongue.

hæd ʃi meɪd səm mɪsteɪk daʊn bɪloʊ waɪl hilɪŋ ðɛm? mɛɝɪlɪl hæd nəɡoʊʃieɪɾəd tʃɹiɾiz ən miɾieɪtɪd dɪspjuts bɪtwin neɪʃənz; fju ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɝ bɛɾɝ ðən ʃi. bʌɾ ɪleɪn ɹɪmɛmbɝd hɪɹɪŋ ə stɔɹi wʌns, ə dʒoʊk ə sɔɹts, əbaʊɾ ə dəmɑni mɝtʃənt, ə si foʊk kɑɹɡəmæstɝ ən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. nɑt mɛni pipəl toʊl dʒoʊks ɪnvɑlvɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ; tɛlɪŋ wʌn maɪt nɑt bi ɪntaɪɝli seɪf. ðə mɝtʃən ən ðə kɑɹɡəmæstɝ faʊn ən ɔɹɾənɛɹi ɹɑk ɑn ðə ʃɔɹ ən pɹəsiɾəd tə sɛl ɪt bæk ən fɔɹθ bɪtwin ðɛm, sʌmhaʊ meɪkɪŋ ə pɹɑfəɾ itʃ taɪm. ðən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ keɪm əlɔŋ. ðə dəmɑni kənvɪns ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə baɪ ðə sɪmpəl stoʊn fəɹ twaɪs wʌt ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd læs peɪd. æftɝ wɪtʃ ði æθɑn maɪɹ kənvɪns ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə baɪ ðə seɪm ɹɑk fɹəm ɪm fəɹ twaɪs ðəɾ əɡɛn. oʊnli ə dʒoʊk, bʌɾ ɪt ʃoʊd wʌt pipəl bɪlivd. meɪbi ði oʊldɝ sɪstɝz wəd nɑɾ əv dʌn ɛni bɛɾɝ bɑɹɡɪnɪŋ wɪð ðə si foʊk.

Had she made some mistake down below while Healing them? Merilille had negotiated treaties and mediated disputes between nations; few in the White Tower were better than she. But Elayne remembered hearing a story once, a joke of sorts, about a Domani merchant, a Sea Folk Cargomaster and an Aes Sedai. Not many people told jokes involving Aes Sedai; telling one might not be entirely safe. The merchant and the Cargomaster found an ordinary rock on the shore and proceeded to sell it back and forth between them, somehow making a profit each time. Then an Aes Sedai came along. The Domani convinced the Aes Sedai to buy the simple stone for twice what she herself had last paid. After which the Atha'an Miere convinced the Aes Sedai to buy the same rock from him for twice that again. Only a joke, but it showed what people believed. Maybe the older sisters would not have done any better bargaining with the Sea Folk.

eɪvinhə stʃɹoʊd stʃɹeɪt tə ði ɛdʒ ə ðə klɪfs əz sun əz ʃi ɹitʃt ðə hɪltɑp, ən stʊd stɛɹɪŋ nɔɹθ, moʊʃənləs əz ə stætʃu. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ɪleɪn ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ædmaɪɹɪŋ ðə vju; eɪvinhə wɑz sɪmpli stɛɹɪŋ. ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ skɝts ə bɪɾ ɔkwɝdli wɪð ðə θɹi æŋɡɹil ɪn hænd, ʃi dʒɔɪn əɹ fɹɛnd.

Aviendha strode straight to the edge of the cliffs as soon as she reached the hilltop, and stood staring north, motionless as a statue. After a moment, Elayne realized that she was not admiring the view; Aviendha was simply staring. Gathering her skirts a bit awkwardly with the three angreal in hand, she joined her friend.

ðə klɪf fɛl ɪn fɪfti-fʊt stɛps tə ɑləv ɡɹoʊvz, stip swɑðz ə ɹɪdʒd ɡɹeɪ stoʊn, bɛɹ ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju smɔl, daɪɪŋ bʊʃəz. ðə dʒɹɑp wɑz nɑt ɹɪli bɑðɝsəm, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz hɑɹdli ðə seɪm əz lʊkɪŋ ət ðə ɡɹaʊn fɹəm ðə tɑp ʌv ə tʃɹi, iðɝ. stʃɹeɪnʒli, lʊkɪŋ daʊn meɪɾ ɪleɪn fil ə tʃɹaɪfəl dɪzi. eɪvinhə dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs ðət ði ɛdʒ wɑz ɹaɪɾ əɾ əɹ toʊz.

The cliff fell in fifty-foot steps to olive groves, steep swathes of ridged gray stone, bare except for a few small, dying bushes. The drop was not really bothersome, but it was hardly the same as looking at the ground from the top of a tree, either. Strangely, looking down made Elayne feel a trifle dizzy. Aviendha did not seem to notice that the edge was right at her toes.

"ɪz sʌmθɪŋ tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ ju?" ɪleɪn æskt kwaɪətli.

"Is something troubling you?" Elayne asked quietly.

eɪvinhə kɛpt əɹ ɡeɪz ɑn ðə dɪstəns. "aɪ hæv feɪl ju," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. hɝ vɔɪs wɑz flæt, ɛmpti. "aɪ kænɑt fɔɹm ðə ɡeɪtweɪ pɹɑpɝli, ən ɔl sɔ mi ʃeɪm ju. aɪ θɔɾ ə sɝvənt wɑz wʌn ə ðə ʃæɾoʊɹaʊt, ən bɪheɪvd wɝs ðən fulɪʃli. ði æθɑn maɪɹ ɪɡnɔɹ mi ən ɡlɛɹ ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, əz ɪf aɪm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ dɔɡ jæpɪŋ ət ðɛɹ kəmænd. aɪ pɹitɛndəɾ aɪ kəd meɪk ðə ʃæɾoʊɹʌnɝ tɔk fəɹ ju, bʌt noʊ fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ ɪz əlaʊd tə kwɛstʃən pɹɪznɝz əntɪl ʃiz bɪn wɛd tə ðə spɪɹ fəɹ twɛnti jɪɹz, əɹ ivən tə wɑtʃ əntɪl ʃiz kæɹiɾ ɪt tɛn. aɪm wik ən sɑft, ɪleɪn. aɪ kænɑt bɛɹ tə ʃeɪm jə fɝðɝ. ɪf aɪ feɪl jə əɡɛn, əl daɪ."

Aviendha kept her gaze on the distance. "I have failed you," she said finally. Her voice was flat, empty. "I cannot form the gateway properly, and all saw me shame you. I thought a servant was one of the Shadowwrought, and behaved worse than foolishly. The Atha'an Miere ignore me and glare at the Aes Sedai, as if I am an Aes Sedai dog yapping at their command. I pretended I could make the Shadowrunner talk for you, but no Far Dareis Mai is allowed to question prisoners until she has been wed to the spear for twenty years, or even to watch until she has carried it ten. I am weak and soft, Elayne. I cannot bear to shame you further. If I fail you again, I will die."

ɪleɪnz maʊθ wɛn dʒɹaɪ. ðət saʊndəd tu kloʊs tə ə pɹɑməs. ɡɹɪpɪŋ eɪvinhəz ɑɹm fɝmli, ʃi dʒɹu hɝ bæk fɹəm ði ɛdʒ. il kəd bi ɔlmoʊst əz pəkjuljɝ əz ðə si foʊk θɔt ðeɪ wɝ. ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹɪli θɪŋk eɪvinhə wəd dʒʌmp ɔf - nɑt ɹɪli - bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə teɪk ɛni tʃænsəz. ət lis ði ʌðɝ wʊmən dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə ɹɪzɪst.

Elayne's mouth went dry. That sounded too close to a promise. Gripping Aviendha's arm firmly, she drew her back from the edge. Aiel could be almost as peculiar as the Sea Folk thought they were. She did not really think Aviendha would jump off - not really - but she was not about to take any chances. At least the other woman did not try to resist.

ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls sim tə bi ɪnɡɹoʊst ɪn ðɛmsɛlvz, əɹ ɪn itʃ ʌðɝ. nɪneɪiv hæd bɪɡʌn spikɪŋ tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ, boʊθ hænz taɪɾ ɑn əɹ bɹeɪɾ ən əɹ feɪs ɔlmoʊst əz dɑɹk əz ðɛɹz fɹəm ðə stʃɹeɪn ə nɑt ʃaʊɾɪŋ, waɪl ðeɪ lɪsənd wɪð kəntɛmptʃuəs ɛɹəɡəns. mɛɝɪlɪl ən sɝaɪðə stɪl ɡɑɹɾəd ðə boʊl, bʌt kɛɝin wɑz ətɛmptɪŋ tə tɔk wɪð ðə kɪnswɪmən, wɪθaʊt mʌtʃ səksɛs. ɹin ænsɝd, ɪf blɪŋkɪŋ ənizəli ən lɪkɪŋ əɹ lɪps, bʌt kɝstʃən stʊd tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ ən saɪlənt, waɪl ɡæɹiniəz aɪz wɝ skwizd ʃʌt. ɪleɪn kɛpt əɹ vɔɪs loʊ ɛniweɪ; ðɪs wɑz nʌn ə ðɛɹ bɪznəs.

Everyone else seemed to be engrossed in themselves, or in each other. Nynaeve had begun speaking to the Atha'an Miere, both hands tight on her braid and her face almost as dark as theirs from the strain of not shouting, while they listened with contemptuous arrogance. Merilille and Sareitha still guarded the Bowl, but Careane was attempting to talk with the Kinswomen, without much success. Reanne answered, if blinking uneasily and licking her lips, but Kirstian stood trembling and silent, while Garenia's eyes were squeezed shut. Elayne kept her voice low anyway; this was none of their business.

"ju hævən feɪld ɛniwʌn, list ʌv ɔl mi, eɪvinhə. nʌθɪŋ juv dʌn əz ɛvɝ ʃeɪmd mi, ən nʌθɪŋ jə də ɛvɝ kʊd." eɪvinhə blɪŋkt əɾ əɹ daʊtfəli. "æn jəɹ əbaʊɾ əz wik ən sɑft əz ə stoʊn." ðət hæd tə bi ði ɑɾəst kɑmpləmənt ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ peɪɾ ɛniwʌn, jɛɾ eɪvinhə æktʃəli  lʊkt ɡɹæɾəfaɪd. "aɪl bɛt ðə si foʊk ɑɹ skɛɹd sɪli ʌv ju, tu." ənʌðɝ stʃɹeɪnʒ wʌn; ɪt meɪɾ eɪvinhə smaɪl, ɪf oʊnli feɪnli. ɪleɪn dʒɹu ə bɹɛθ. "æz fəɹ ɪspæn. . . ." ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk ivən θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ðɪs. "aɪ θɔɾ aɪ kəd də wʌt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi, tu, bʌt dʒʌs lɛɾɪŋ maɪ maɪn dwɛl ɑn ɪt meɪks maɪ hænz swɛɾ ən maɪ stʌmək ɹɔɪl. aɪd θɹoʊ ʌp ɪf aɪ ivən tʃɹaɪd. soʊ wi ʃɛɹ ðæt."

"You haven't failed anyone, least of all me, Aviendha. Nothing you've done has ever shamed me, and nothing you do ever could." Aviendha blinked at her doubtfully. "And you're about as weak and soft as a stone." That had to be the oddest compliment she had ever paid anyone, yet Aviendha actually looked gratified. "I'll bet the Sea Folk are scared silly of you, too." Another strange one; it made Aviendha smile, if only faintly. Elayne drew a breath. "As for Ispan. . . ." She did not like even thinking about this. "I thought I could do what was necessary, too, but just letting my mind dwell on it makes my hands sweat and my stomach roil. I'd throw up if I even tried. So we share that."

eɪvinhə meɪd ðə meɪɾən hæntɔk saɪn fəɹ "ju stɑɹɾəl mi"; ʃi hæd stɑɹɾəd titʃɪŋ səm ə ðɛm tə ɪleɪn, ðoʊ ʃi sɛɾ ɪt wɑz fɔɹbɪɾən. əpɛɹənli, biɪŋ nɪɹ-sɪstɝz u wɝ lɝnɪŋ tə bi mɔɹ tʃeɪnʒd ðæt. ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt, ɹɪli. eɪvinhə sim tə θɪŋk əɹ ɛkspləneɪʃən hæd bɪn pɝfəkli klɪɹ. "aɪ dɪd nɑt min aɪ kəd nɑt," ʃi sɛɾ əlaʊd, "oʊnli ðəɾ aɪ də nɑt noʊ haʊ. laɪkli aɪ wʊɾə kɪl hɝ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ." sʌɾənli ʃi smaɪld, mʌtʃ waɪɾɝ ən wɔɹmɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ, ən laɪtli tʌtʃt ɪleɪnz tʃik. "wi boʊθ əv wiknəs ɪn ʌs," ʃi wɪspɝd, "bʌɾ ɪt bɹɪŋz noʊ ʃeɪm soʊ lɔŋ əz oʊnli wi tu noʊ."

Aviendha made the Maiden handtalk sign for "You startle me"; she had started teaching some of them to Elayne, though she said it was forbidden. Apparently, being near-sisters who were learning to be more changed that. Except that it did not, really. Aviendha seemed to think her explanation had been perfectly clear. "I did not mean I could not," she said aloud, "only that I do not know how. Likely I would have killed her, trying." Suddenly she smiled, much wider and warmer than before, and lightly touched Elayne's cheek. "We both have weakness in us," she whispered, "but it brings no shame so long as only we two know."

"jɛs," ɪleɪn sɛd wikli. ʃi dʒʌs dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ! "ʌv kɔɹs ɪt dʌznt." ðɪs wʊmən kənteɪn mɔɹ sɝpɹaɪzəz ðən ɛni ɡlimən. "hɪɹ," ʃi sɛd, pɹɛsɪŋ ðə wʊmən-ɹæpt-ɪn-hɝ-hɛɹ ɪndə eɪvinhəz hænd. "juz ðɪs ɪn ðə sɝkəl." lɛɾɪŋ ði æŋɡɹil ɡoʊ wɑz nɑɾ izi. ʃi hæɾ ɪntɛndəd tə juz ɪt hɝsɛlf, bʌt smaɪlz əɹ noʊ smaɪlz, hɝ fɹɛnz spɪɹəts - hɝ nɪɹ-sɪstɝz spɪɹəts - niɾəd ɹeɪzɪŋ. eɪvinhə tɝn ðə smɔl aɪvɝi fɪɡjɝ oʊvɝ ɪn əɹ hænz; ɪleɪn kəɾ ɔlmoʊst si hɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪsaɪd haʊ tə ɡɪv ɪt bæk. "eɪvinhə, jə noʊ haʊ ɪt filz wən jə hoʊld əz mʌtʃ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ əz jə kæn? θɪŋk ə hoʊldɪŋ ɔlmoʊs twaɪs əz mʌtʃ. ɹɪli θɪŋk ʌv ɪt. aɪ wɑn jə tə juz ɪt. pliz?"

"Yes," Elayne said weakly. She just did not know how! "Of course it doesn't." This woman contained more surprises than any gleeman. "Here," she said, pressing the woman-wrapped-in-her-hair into Aviendha's hand. "Use this in the circle." Letting the angreal go was not easy. She had intended to use it herself, but smiles or no smiles, her friend's spirits - her near-sister's spirits - needed raising. Aviendha turned the small ivory figure over in her hands; Elayne could almost see her trying to decide how to give it back. "Aviendha, you know how it feels when you hold as much of saidar as you can? Think of holding almost twice as much. Really think of it. I want you to use it. Please?"

pɝhæps il dɪd nɑt ʃoʊ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz, bʌɾ eɪvinhəz ɡɹin aɪz waɪɾənd. ðeɪ hæd dɪskʌst æŋɡɹil, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðɛɹ sɝtʃ, bʌt ʃi pɹɑbli nɛvɝ hæd θɔt wʌɾ ɪt wəd bi laɪk tə juz wʌn bɪfɔɹ ðɪs. "twaɪs əz mʌtʃ," ʃi mɝmɝd. "tə hoʊld ɔl ðæt. aɪ kən bɛɹli meɪk maɪsɛlf ɪmædʒən. ðɪs ɪz ə vɛɹi ɡɹeɪt ɡɪft, ɪleɪn." ʃi tʌtʃt ɪleɪnz tʃik əɡɛn, pɹɛsɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝtɪps; ðət wɑz ði il ɪkwɪvələn ʌv ə kɪs ən ə hʌɡ.

Perhaps Aiel did not show a great deal on their faces, but Aviendha's green eyes widened. They had discussed angreal, considering their search, but she probably never had thought what it would be like to use one before this. "Twice as much," she murmured. "To hold all that. I can barely make myself imagine. This is a very great gift, Elayne." She touched Elayne's cheek again, pressing her fingertips; that was the Aiel equivalent of a kiss and a hug.

wʌtɛvɝ nɪneɪiv hæd tə seɪ tə ðə si foʊk, ɪt dɪd nɑt teɪk lɔŋ. ʃi stɔkt əweɪ fɹəm əm twɪtʃɪŋ əɾ əɹ skɝts fjʊɹiəsli. əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ɪleɪn, ʃi fɹaʊn ikwəli əɾ eɪvinhə ən ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə klɪf. juʒəwəli ʃi dɪnaɪɾ əɹ pʊɹ hɛd fəɹ haɪts, bʌt ʃi kɛpt əm bɪtwin hɝsɛlf ən ðə dʒɹɑp. "aɪ hæv tə tɔk tə ju," ʃi mʌɾɝd, ɡaɪɾɪŋ ɪleɪn ə lɪɾəl dɪstəns əlɔŋ ðə hɪltɑp. ən fɑɹðɝ fɹəm ði ɛdʒ. ə lɪɾəl weɪ, bʌt fɑɹ ɪnʌf fɹəm ɛniwʌn tə əvɔɪd biɪŋ oʊvɝhɝd. ʃi dʒɹu sɛvɹəl dip bɹɛθs bɪfɔɹ bɪɡɪnɪŋ, ɪn ə loʊ vɔɪs, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk əɾ ɪleɪn.

Whatever Nynaeve had to say to the Sea Folk, it did not take long. She stalked away from them twitching at her skirts furiously. Approaching Elayne, she frowned equally at Aviendha and at the edge of the cliff. Usually she denied her poor head for heights, but she kept them between herself and the drop. "I have to talk to you," she muttered, guiding Elayne a little distance along the hilltop. And farther from the edge. A little way, but far enough from anyone to avoid being overheard. She drew several deep breaths before beginning, in a low voice, and she did not look at Elayne.

"aɪ. . . . aɪv bɪn bɪheɪvɪŋ laɪk ə ful. ɪts ðət blʌɾi mænz fɔlt! wən hiz nɑt ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə mi, aɪ kən hɑɹdli θɪŋk ʌv ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, ən wən i ɪz, aɪ kən hɑɹdli θɪŋk əɾ ɔl! jə . . . juv tə tɛl mi wən aɪ . . . wən aɪm æktɪŋ ðə ful. aɪ dɪpɛn ɑn ju, ɪleɪn." hɝ vɔɪs steɪd loʊ, bʌɾ əɹ toʊn bɪkeɪm ɔlmoʊst ə weɪl. "aɪ kæn əfɔɹd tə luz maɪ wɪts ɪn ə mæn, nɑt naʊ."

"I. . . . I've been behaving like a fool. It's that bloody man's fault! When he's not right in front of me, I can hardly think of anything else, and when he is, I can hardly think at all! You . . . you have to tell me when I . . . when I'm acting the fool. I depend on you, Elayne." Her voice stayed low, but her tone became almost a wail. "I can't afford to lose my wits in a man, not now."

ɪleɪn wɑz soʊ ʃɑkt, ʃi kəd nɑt spik fəɹ ə moʊmənt. nɪneɪiv, ædmɪɾɪŋ ʃi hæd bɪn ə ful? ʃi ɔlmoʊs lʊk tə si wɛðɝ ðə sʌn hæd tɝnd ɡɹin! "ɪɾ ɪzən lænz fɔlt, ən jə noʊ ɪt, nɪneɪiv," ʃi sɛɾ ət læst. ʃi pʊʃt əweɪ mɛmɹiz ə hɝ oʊn ɹisən θɔts əbaʊt ɹænd. ðɪs wɑz nɑt ðə seɪm. ən ði ɑpɝtunəɾi wɑz ə ɡɪft ə ðə laɪt. təmɑɹoʊ, nɪneɪiv wəd laɪkli tʃɹaɪ tə bɑks əɹ ɪɹz ɪf ʃi sɛd nɪneɪiv wɑz biɪŋ fulɪʃ. "teɪk hoʊld ə jɝsɛlf, nɪneɪiv. stɑp bɪheɪvɪŋ laɪk ə ɡɪɾi ɡɝl." dɛfənətli nɑt θɔts ə ɹænd! ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn munɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪm ðət bædli! "jɔɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən jə ɑɹ səpoʊz tə bi liɾɪŋ ʌs. lɛd! ən θɪŋk!"

Elayne was so shocked, she could not speak for a moment. Nynaeve, admitting she had been a fool? She almost looked to see whether the sun had turned green! "It isn't Lan's fault, and you know it, Nynaeve," she said at last. She pushed away memories of her own recent thoughts about Rand. This was not the same. And the opportunity was a gift of the Light. Tomorrow, Nynaeve would likely try to box her ears if she said Nynaeve was being foolish. "Take hold of yourself, Nynaeve. Stop behaving like a giddy girl." Definitely not thoughts of Rand! She had not been mooning over him that badly! "You're an Aes Sedai, and you are supposed to be leading us. Lead! And think!"

foʊldɪŋ əɹ hænz əɾ əɹ weɪst, nɪneɪiv æktʃəli  hʌŋ əɹ hɛd. "aɪl tʃɹaɪ," ʃi mʌmbəld. "aɪ wɪl, tʃɹuli. jə doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ ɪts laɪk, ðoʊ. aɪ. . . . aɪm sɑɹi."

Folding her hands at her waist, Nynaeve actually hung her head. "I'll try," she mumbled. "I will, truly. You don't know what it's like, though. I. . . . I'm sorry."

ɪleɪn nɪɹli swɑloʊɾ əɹ tʌŋ. nɪneɪiv, əpɑlədʒaɪzɪŋ ɑn tɑp ə ði ʌðɝ? nɪneɪiv, əbæʃt? meɪbi ʃi wɑz ɪl.

Elayne nearly swallowed her tongue. Nynaeve, apologizing on top of the other? Nynaeve, abashed? Maybe she was ill.

ɪt dɪd nɑt læst, ʌv kɔɹs. əbɹʌpli fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ði æŋɡɹil, nɪneɪiv klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊt. "ju ɡeɪv wʌn tə eɪvinhə, dɪd ju?" ʃi sɛd bɹɪskli. "wɛl, aɪ səpoʊz ʃiz ɔl ɹaɪt. ə pɪɾi wɪv tə lɛt ðə si foʊk juz wʌn. əl weɪdʒɝ ðeɪ tʃɹaɪ tə hæŋ ɑn tə ɪt! wɛl, dʒʌs lɛɾ əm tʃɹaɪ! wɪtʃ wʌn ɪz maɪn?"

It did not last, of course. Abruptly frowning at the angreal, Nynaeve cleared her throat. "You gave one to Aviendha, did you?" she said briskly. "Well, I suppose she's all right. A pity we have to let the Sea Folk use one. I'll wager they try to hang on to it! Well, just let them try! Which one is mine?"

wɪð ə saɪ, ɪleɪn hændəɾ əɹ ðə bɹeɪslət-ænd-ɹɪŋz, ən ʃi stɔkt əweɪ, fʌmbəlɪŋ ðə pis ə dʒuəlɹi ɑntu hɝ lɛf hæn ən kɔlɪŋ laʊdli fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn tə teɪk ðɛɹ pleɪsəz. səmtaɪmz, ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl tə tɛl nɪneɪiv liɾɪŋ fɹəm nɪneɪiv bʊliɪŋ. əz lɔŋ əz ʃi dɪd lɛd, ðoʊ.

With a sigh, Elayne handed her the bracelet-and-rings, and she stalked away, fumbling the piece of jewelry onto her left hand and calling loudly for everyone to take their places. Sometimes, it was difficult to tell Nynaeve leading from Nynaeve bullying. As long as she did lead, though.

ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz sæɾ ətɑp ɪts ənfoʊldəd waɪt ɹæpɪŋz ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə hɪltɑp, ə ʃæloʊ, hɛvi dɪsk ə klɪɹ kɹɪstəl tu fiɾ əkɹɔs, wɝkt ɪnsaɪd wɪð θɪk swɝlɪŋ klaʊdz. ən ɔɹneɪt pis, jɛt sɪmpəl wən jə θɔɾ ʌv wʌɾ ɪt kəd du. wʌt ðeɪ hoʊpt ɪt kəd du. nɪneɪiv tʊk ʌp əɹ pleɪs nɪɹbaɪ, ði æŋɡɹil faɪnəli klɪkɪŋ ʃʌɾ ɑn əɹ ɹɪst. ʃi wɝkt əɹ hænd, lʊkɪŋ sɝpɹaɪz ðət ðə tʃeɪnz dɪd nɑt sim tə ɪnkənvinjəns hɝ; ɪt fɪɾ əz ɪf meɪd fəɹ əɹ hænd. ðə θɹi kɪnswɪmən wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ðɛɹ, kɝstʃən ən ɡæɹiniə hʌɾəlɪŋ ət ɹinz bæk ən əpɪɹɪŋ mɔɹ fɹaɪɾənd ðən ɛvɝ, ɪf ðət wɑz pɑsəbəl. ðə wɪndfɪndɝz stɪl stʊɾ ɝeɪd bɪhaɪn ɹɪneɪl, ɔlmoʊs twɛnti peɪsɪz əweɪ.

The Bowl of the Winds sat atop its unfolded white wrappings in the center of the hilltop, a shallow, heavy disc of clear crystal two feet across, worked inside with thick swirling clouds. An ornate piece, yet simple when you thought of what it could do. What they hoped it could do. Nynaeve took up her place nearby, the angreal finally clicking shut on her wrist. She worked her hand, looking surprised that the chains did not seem to inconvenience her; it fit as if made for her hand. The three Kinswomen were already there, Kirstian and Garenia huddling at Reanne's back and appearing more frightened than ever, if that was possible. The Windfinders still stood arrayed behind Renaile, almost twenty paces away.

lɪftɪŋ əɹ dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts, ɪleɪn mɛɾ eɪvinhə ət ðə boʊl ən aɪd ðə si foʊk səspɪʃəsli. dɪd ðeɪ ɪntɛn tə kɹieɪɾ ə fʌs? ʃi hæd bɪn əfɹeɪɾ ʌv ɪɡzækli ðət fɹəm ðə fɝs mɛnʃən ʌv wɪmən ət ðə fɑɹm u maɪt bi stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə dʒɔɪn ðə lɪŋk. ði æθɑn maɪɹ wɝ stɪklɝz fəɹ ɹæŋk ɪnʌf tə ʃeɪm ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən ɡæɹiniəz pɹɛzəns mɛn ðət ɹɪneɪl dɪn kəlɑn blu stɑɹ, wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ, wəd nɑt bi pɑɹɾ ə ðə sɝkəl. ʃəd nɑt bi.

Lifting her divided skirts, Elayne met Aviendha at the Bowl and eyed the Sea Folk suspiciously. Did they intend to create a fuss? She had been afraid of exactly that from the first mention of women at the farm who might be strong enough to join the link. The Atha'an Miere were sticklers for rank enough to shame the White Tower, and Garenia's presence meant that Renaile din Calon Blue Star, Windfinder to the Mistress of the Ships to the Atha'an Miere, would not be part of the circle. Should not be.

ɹɪneɪl fɹaʊn sɝtʃəŋli ət ðə wɪmən ɝaʊn ðə boʊl. ʃi sim tə bi weɪɪŋ ðɛm, dʒʌdʒɪŋ ðɛɹ keɪpəbɪləɾiz. "tɑlɑn dɪn ɡɛlɪn," ʃi bɑɹk sʌɾənli, "teɪk jəɹ steɪʃən!" ɪt wɑz laɪk ə wɪp-kɹæk! ivən nɪneɪiv dʒʌmpt.

Renaile frowned searchingly at the women around the Bowl. She seemed to be weighing them, judging their capabilities. "Talaan din Gelyn," she barked suddenly, "take your station!" It was like a whip-crack! Even Nynaeve jumped.

tɑlɑn baʊd loʊ, tʌtʃɪŋ əɹ hɑɹt, ðən ɹæn tə ðə boʊl. əz sun əz ʃi muvd, ɹɪneɪl bɑɹkt əɡɛn. "mɛtʃɹə dɪn dʒunæl, teɪk jəɹ steɪʃən!" mɛtʃɹə, plʌmp jɛt sɑləd, spɛɾ ɑn tɑlɑnz hilz. niðɝ əpɹɛntəs wɑz oʊld ɪnʌf tə hæv ɝnd wʌt ðə si foʊk kɔld ə "sɔl neɪm."

Talaan bowed low, touching her heart, then ran to the Bowl. As soon as she moved, Renaile barked again. "Metarra din Junalle, take your station!" Metarra, plump yet solid, sped on Talaan's heels. Neither apprentice was old enough to have earned what the Sea Folk called a "salt name."

wʌns bɪɡʌn, ɹɪneɪl ɹæɾəld ɔf neɪmz kwɪkli, sɛndɪŋ ɹeɪnɪn ən tu ʌðɝ wɪndfɪndɝz, ɔl ə hum muv kwɪkli, jɛt nɑt soʊ fæst əz ði əpɹɛntəsɪz. baɪ ðə nʌmbɝ ə ðɛɹ mədæljənz, nɑm ən ɹaɪsl wɝ haɪɝ ɪn ɹæŋk ðən ɹeɪnɪn, dɪɡnəfaɪd wɪmən wɪð ə kwaɪəɾ ɛɹ ə kəmænd, bʌt mɑɹkədli wikɝ. ðən ɹɪneɪl pɔzd, oʊnli fəɹ ə hɑɹtbit, jɛɾ ɪn ðət ɹæpəd lɪstɪŋ ɪt stʊɾ aʊt. "tɛbɹl dɪn ɡɛlɪn saʊθ wɪnd, teɪk jəɹ steɪʃən! kɛɹ dɪn ɡɛlɪn ɹʌnɪŋ weɪv, əsum ðə kəmænd!"

Once begun, Renaile rattled off names quickly, sending Rainyn and two other Windfinders, all of whom moved quickly, yet not so fast as the apprentices. By the number of their medallions, Naime and Rysael were higher in rank than Rainyn, dignified women with a quiet air of command, but markedly weaker. Then Renaile paused, only for a heartbeat, yet in that rapid listing it stood out. "Tebreille din Gelyn South Wind, take your station! Caire din Gelyn Running Wave, assume the command!"

ɪleɪn fɛlt ə moʊmən ə ɹɪlif ðət ɹɪneɪl hæd nɑt neɪm hɝsɛlf, bʌɾ ɪt læstəɾ əbaʊɾ əz lɔŋ əz ɹɪneɪlz pɔz hæd. tɛbɹl ən kɛɹ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd wʌn lʊk, tɛbɹl ɡɹɪm ən kɛɹ smʌɡ, bɪfɔɹ muvɪŋ tə ðə boʊl. eɪɾ ɪɹɪŋz ən ə mʌltətuɾ ʌv oʊvɝlæpɪŋ mədæljənz mɑɹkt itʃ wɪndfɪndɝ tə ə klæn weɪvməstʃɹəs. oʊnli ɹɪneɪl stʊɾ əbʌv ðɛm; oʊnli dɔɹəl əmʌŋ ðə si foʊk ɑn ðə hɪltɑp wɑz ðɛɹ ikwəl. ɪn bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd jɛloʊ sɪlks, kɛɹ wɑz slaɪtli ðə tɔlɝ, tɛbɹl ɪn bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd ɡɹin sʌmwʌt stɝnɝ ə feɪs, boʊθ mɔɹ ðən hænsəm wɪmən, ən ɪt dɪd nɑt teɪk ðɛɹ neɪmz tə noʊ ðɛm blʌd sɪstɝz. ðeɪ hæd ðə seɪm bɪɡ, ɔlmoʊs blæk aɪz, ðə seɪm stʃɹeɪt noʊz, ðə seɪm stʃɹɔŋ tʃɪn. kɛɹ saɪlənli pɔɪntəd tə ə spɑɾ əɾ əɹ ɹaɪt saɪd; tɛbɹl dɪd nɑt spik iðɝ, nɔɹ dɪd ʃi hɛzəteɪɾ ɪn stændɪŋ wɛɹ əɹ sɪstɝ pɔɪntəd, bʌɾ əɹ feɪs wɑz stoʊn. wɪð hɝ, ə sɝkəl ə θɝtin wɪmən sɝaʊndəd ðə boʊl nɪɹli ʃoʊldɝ-tə-ʃoʊldɝ. kɛɹz aɪz ɔlmoʊst spɑɹkəld. tɛbɹlz wɝ lɛɾən. ɪleɪn wɑz ɹimaɪndəɾ ʌv ənʌðɝ ə liniz seɪɪŋz. noʊ naɪf ɪz ʃɑɹpɝ ðən ə sɪstɝz heɪt.

Elayne felt a moment of relief that Renaile had not named herself, but it lasted about as long as Renaile's pause had. Tebreille and Caire exchanged one look, Tebreille grim and Caire smug, before moving to the Bowl. Eight earrings and a multitude of overlapping medallions marked each Windfinder to a Clan Wavemistress. Only Renaile stood above them; only Dorile among the Sea Folk on the hilltop was their equal. In brocaded yellow silks, Caire was slightly the taller, Tebreille in brocaded green somewhat sterner of face, both more than handsome women, and it did not take their names to know them blood sisters. They had the same big, almost black eyes, the same straight nose, the same strong chin. Caire silently pointed to a spot at her right side; Tebreille did not speak either, nor did she hesitate in standing where her sister pointed, but her face was stone. With her, a circle of thirteen women surrounded the Bowl nearly shoulder-to-shoulder. Caire's eyes almost sparkled. Tebreille's were leaden. Elayne was reminded of another of Lini's sayings. No knife is sharper than a sister's hate.

kɛɹ ɡlɛɹɾ ɝaʊn ðə sɝkəl ʌv wɪmən sɝaʊndɪŋ ðə boʊl, nɑt jɛt tʃɹuli ə sɝkəl, əz ðoʊ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɪks itʃ feɪs ɪn əɹ maɪnd. əɹ meɪbi tə fɪks əɹ skaʊl ɪn ðɛɹz. ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ hɝsɛlf, ɪleɪn hɝidli pæs ðə læst æŋɡɹil, ðə smɔl æmbɝ tɝɾəl, tə tɑlɑn ən stɑɹɾəd tə ɪkspleɪn haʊ ɪt wɑz juzd. ði ɛkspləneɪʃən wɑz sɪmpəl, jɛɾ ɛniwʌn u tʃɹaɪd wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ haʊ kəd fʌmbəl fəɹ aʊɝz. ʃi wɑz nɑt ɡɪvən ðə tʃæns fəɹ faɪv wɝdz.

Caire glared around the circle of women surrounding the Bowl, not yet truly a circle, as though trying to fix each face in her mind. Or maybe to fix her scowl in theirs. Remembering herself, Elayne hurriedly passed the last angreal, the small amber turtle, to Talaan and started to explain how it was used. The explanation was simple, yet anyone who tried without knowing how could fumble for hours. She was not given the chance for five words.

"saɪləns!" kɛɹ ɹɔɹd. tætud fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps ən bɛɹ fiɾ əpɑɹt, ʃi bɪlɔŋd ɑn ðə dɛk ʌv ə ʃɪp ɡoʊɪŋ ɪndə bæɾəl. "ðɛɹ wɪl bi noʊ tɔkɪŋ ɑn steɪʃən wɪθaʊt maɪ pɝmɪʃən. tɑlɑn, ɹipɔɹt jɝsɛlf ɪmiɾiətli ɑn ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə jəɹ ʃɪp." nʌθɪŋ ɪn kɛɹz toʊn sədʒɛstəd ðət ʃi wɑz spikɪŋ tə hɝ oʊn dɔɾɝ. tɑlɑn baʊd dipli, tʌtʃɪŋ əɹ hɑɹt, ən mɝmɝd sʌmθɪŋ ɪnɔɾəbəl. kɛɹ snɔɹɾɪd kəntɛmptʃwəsli - ən ɡeɪv ɪleɪn ə ɡlɛɹ ðət sədʒɛstəɾ ə wɪʃ ðət ʃi kəɾ ɔɹɾɝ əɹ tə ɹipɔɹt hɝsɛlf tə sʌmwʌn əz wɛl - bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn ɪn ə vɔɪs ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn hɝɾ ət ðə beɪs ə ðə hɪl. "tədeɪ, wi ʃæl də wʌɾ əz nɑt bɪn dʌn sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, wən əɹ ænsɛstɝz fɔt wɪn ən weɪv ɡɔn mæd. baɪ ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz ən ðə mɝsi ʌv ðə laɪt, ðeɪ sɝvaɪvd. tədeɪ, wɪl juz ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz, lɔs tə əs fəɹ mɔɹ ðən tu θaʊzən jɪɹz, ən naʊ ɹɪtɝnd. aɪ hæv stʌɾid ði eɪntʃən lɔɹ, stʌɾid ðə ɹɛkɝdz ə ðə deɪz wən əɹ fɔɹməðɝz fɝs lɝn ðə si ən ðə wivɪŋ ə ðə wɪnz, ən ðə sɔlt ɛntɝɾ əɹ blʌd. wʌɾ ɪz noʊn ə ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz, aɪ noʊ, mɔɹ ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls." hɝ aɪz kʌt təwɔɹɾ əɹ sɪstɝ, ə sæɾəsfaɪd ɡlæns ðət tɛbɹl dɪd nɑɾ æknɑlɪdʒ. wɪtʃ sim tə sæɾəsfaɪ kɛɹ ivən mɔɹ. "wʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kænɑt du, əl də tədeɪ, ɪf ɪt plizɪz ðə laɪt. aɪ ɪkspɛkt ɛvɹi wʊmən tə stæn əɹ steɪʃən tə ðə læst. əl nɑɾ æksɛp feɪljɝ."

"Silence!" Caire roared. Tattooed fists on her hips and bare feet apart, she belonged on the deck of a ship going into battle. "There will be no talking on station without my permission. Talaan, report yourself immediately on returning to your ship." Nothing in Caire's tone suggested that she was speaking to her own daughter. Talaan bowed deeply, touching her heart, and murmured something inaudible. Caire snorted contemptuously - and gave Elayne a glare that suggested a wish that she could order her to report herself to someone as well - before going on in a voice that might have been heard at the base of the hill. "Today, we shall do what has not been done since the Breaking of the World, when our ancestors fought wind and wave gone mad. By the Bowl of the Winds and the mercy of the Light, they survived. Today, we will use the Bowl of the Winds, lost to us for more than two thousand years, and now returned. I have studied the ancient lore, studied the records of the days when our foremothers first learned the sea and the Weaving of the Winds, and the salt entered our blood. What is known of the Bowl of the Winds, I know, more than anyone else." Her eyes cut toward her sister, a satisfied glance that Tebreille did not acknowledge. Which seemed to satisfy Caire even more. "What the Aes Sedai cannot do, I will do today, if it pleases the Light. I expect every woman to stand her station to the last. I will not accept failure."

ðə ɹɛst ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ sim tə æksɛp ðət spitʃ əz ɪkspɛktəɾ ən pɹɑpɝ, bʌt ðə kɪnswɪmən ɡeɪpt ət kɛɹ ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt. ɪn ɪleɪnz əpɪnjən, ɡɹændioʊs dɪd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə dɪskɹaɪb ɪt; pleɪnli kɛɹ fʊli ɪkspɛktəd ðət ðə laɪt wəd bi plizd, ən ʃi wəd bi moʊs dɪsplizd ɪf ɪt wɑz nɑt! nɪneɪiv ɹoʊld əɹ aɪz tə ðə hɛvənz ən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ. kɛɹ fɔɹstɑl hɝ.

The rest of the Atha'an Miere seemed to accept that speech as expected and proper, but the Kinswomen gaped at Caire in astonishment. In Elayne's opinion, grandiose did not begin to describe it; plainly Caire fully expected that the Light would be pleased, and she would be most displeased if it was not! Nynaeve rolled her eyes to the heavens and opened her mouth. Caire forestalled her.

"nɪneɪiv," ðə wɪndfɪndɝ ənaʊns laʊdli, "ju wɪl naʊ dɛmənstʃɹeɪt jəɹ skɪl ət lɪŋkɪŋ. bi əbaʊɾ ɪt, wʊmən, ən kwɪkli!"

"Nynaeve," the Windfinder announced loudly, "you will now demonstrate your skill at linking. Be about it, woman, and quickly!"

ɪn ɹɪspɑns, nɪneɪiv ʃʌɾ əɹ aɪz taɪt. hɝ lɪps . . . ɹɪθd. ʃi lʊkt əbaʊt tə bɝst ə blʌd vɛsəl. "aɪ əsum ðət minz aɪ hæv pɝmɪʃən tə spik!" ʃi mɝmɝd. fɔɹtʃənətli tu loʊ tə bi hɝd baɪ kɛɹ, ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ðə sɝkəl. oʊpənɪŋ əɹ aɪz, ʃi pʊɾ ɑn ə smaɪl ðət wɑz kwaɪt hɔɹəbəl wən æɾəd tə ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən. ʃi wɑz ə saʊɝ stʌmək ən sɛvɹəl ʌðɝ kəmpleɪns ɹoʊld ɪndə wʌn.

In response, Nynaeve shut her eyes tight. Her lips . . . writhed. She looked about to burst a blood vessel. "I assume that means I have permission to speak!" she murmured. Fortunately too low to be heard by Caire, on the far side of the circle. Opening her eyes, she put on a smile that was quite horrible when added to the rest of her expression. She was a sour stomach and several other complaints rolled into one.

"ðə fɝs θɪŋ ɪz tə ɛmbɹeɪs ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, kɛɹ." ðə laɪɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ sʌɾənli ʃoʊn bɹaɪɾ ɝaʊnd nɪneɪiv; ʃi wɑz juzɪŋ ði æŋɡɹil ɑn əɹ hæn ɔlɹɛɾi, baɪ wʌɾ ɪleɪn kəd fil. "aɪ əsum jə noʊ haʊ tə də ðæt, ʌv kɔɹs." ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ði əbɹʌp taɪɾənɪŋ ə kɛɹz maʊθ, nɪneɪiv wɛn ɑn. "ɪleɪn wɪl naʊ əsɪs mi ɪn ðə dɛmənstʃɹeɪʃən. ɪf wɪv jəɹ pɝmɪʃən?"

"The first thing is to embrace the True Source, Caire." The light of saidar suddenly shone bright around Nynaeve; she was using the angreal on her hand already, by what Elayne could feel. "I assume you know how to do that, of course." Ignoring the abrupt tightening of Caire's mouth, Nynaeve went on. "Elayne will now assist me in the demonstration. If we have your permission?"

"aɪ pɹipɛɹ maɪsɛlf tə ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs," ɪleɪn pʊɾ ɪn kwɪkli, bɪfɔɹ kɛɹ kəɾ ɪɹʌpt, "bʌɾ aɪ doʊn æktʃəli  ɛmbɹeɪs ɪt." ʃi oʊpən hɝsɛlf, ən ðə wɪndfɪndɝz lin fɔɹwɝd, piɹɪŋ ət hɝ, ðoʊ ðəɹ ɹɪli wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə si jɛt. ivən kɝstʃən ən ɡæɹiniə fɝɡɑt ðɛɹ fɪɹ ɪnʌf tə ʃoʊ ɪntʃɹəst. "waɪl aɪm ət ðɪs pɔɪnt, ðə ɹɛst ɪz ʌp tə nɪneɪiv."

"I prepare myself to embrace the Source," Elayne put in quickly, before Caire could erupt, "but I don't actually embrace it." She opened herself, and the Windfinders leaned forward, peering at her, though there really was nothing to see yet. Even Kirstian and Garenia forgot their fear enough to show interest. "While I'm at this point, the rest is up to Nynaeve."

"naʊ əl ɹitʃ aʊt tə hɝ. . . ." nɪneɪiv pɔzd, lʊkɪŋ ət tɑlɑn. ɪleɪn hæd nɑt hæɾ ə tʃæns tə tɛl əɹ ɛniθɪŋ, ɹɪli. "ɪts mʌtʃ ðə seɪm əz wɪð ən æŋɡɹil," nɪneɪiv sɛd, ədʒɹɛsɪŋ ðə slɛndɝ əpɹɛntəs. kɛɹ ɡɹaʊld, ən tɑlɑn tʃɹaɪd tə wɑtʃ nɪneɪiv wɪð əɹ hɛd daʊn. "ju oʊpən jɝsɛlf tə ðə sɔɹs θɹu ən æŋɡɹil, dʒʌst əz əl θɹu ɪleɪn. əz ðoʊ jə min tə ɛmbɹeɪs ði æŋɡɹil ən ðə sɔɹs ət ðə seɪm taɪm. ɪɾ ɪzən vɛɹi dɪfəkəlt, ɹɪli. wɑtʃ, ən jəl si. wən ɪts taɪm tə bɹɪŋ jə ɪndə ðə sɝkəl, dʒʌs pʊt jɝsɛlf ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk. ðət weɪ, wən aɪ ɛmbɹeɪs θɹu ju, əl ɛmbɹeɪs θɹu ði æŋɡɹil əz wɛl."

"Now I will reach out to her. . . ." Nynaeve paused, looking at Talaan. Elayne had not had a chance to tell her anything, really. "It's much the same as with an angreal," Nynaeve said, addressing the slender apprentice. Caire growled, and Talaan tried to watch Nynaeve with her head down. "You open yourself to the Source through an angreal, just as I will through Elayne. As though you mean to embrace the angreal and the Source at the same time. It isn't very difficult, really. Watch, and you'll see. When it's time to bring you into the circle, just put yourself on the brink. That way, when I embrace through you, I'll embrace through the angreal as well."

kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən əɹ noʊ kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən, swɛt bɪɡæn tə biɾ ɑn ɪleɪnz fɔɹhɛd. bʌt ðɛn, ðə hit hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɪt. ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs bɛkənd; ɪt θɹɑbd, ən ʃi θɹɑbd wɪð ɪt. ɪt dɪmændəd. ðə lɔŋɡɝ ʃi hʌŋ dʒʌst ə hɛɹzbɹɛdθ fɹəm tʌtʃɪŋ ðə paʊɝ, ðə wɝs ðə dɪzaɪɝ, ðə nid, wəd ɡɹoʊ. hæŋɪŋ, ʃi bɪɡæn tə tʃɹɛmbəl slaɪtli. vændin hæd toʊld əɹ ðət ðə lɔŋɡɝ jə tʃænəld, ðə wɝs ðəɾ æntɪsəpeɪʃən ɡɹu.

Concentration or no concentration, sweat began to bead on Elayne's forehead. But then, the heat had nothing to do with it. The True Source beckoned; it throbbed, and she throbbed with it. It demanded. The longer she hung just a hairsbreadth from touching the Power, the worse the desire, the need, would grow. Hanging, she began to tremble slightly. Vandene had told her that the longer you channeled, the worse that anticipation grew.

"wɑtʃ wɪð eɪvinhə," nɪneɪiv toʊl tɑlɑn. "ʃi noʊz haʊ tə - " ʃi kɑt saɪɾ ʌv ɪleɪnz feɪs ən fɪnɪʃt hɝidli. "wɑtʃ!"

"Watch with Aviendha," Nynaeve told Talaan. "She knows how to - " She caught sight of Elayne's face and finished hurriedly. "Watch!"

ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪɡzækli ðə seɪm əz juzɪŋ ən æŋɡɹil, ðoʊ vɛɹi kloʊs. ɪt wɑz nɑt mɛn tə bi dʌn hɝidli, iðɝ; nɪneɪiv dɪd nɑɾ əv ə sɑf tʌtʃ, ət bɛst. ɪleɪn fɛlt əz ðoʊ ʃi wɝ biɪŋ ʃeɪkən; nʌθɪŋ hæpən fɪzɪkəli, bʌɾ ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ hɛd ʃi sim tə bi baʊnsɪŋ ɝaʊnd, tʌmbəlɪŋ waɪldli daʊnhɪl. wɝs, ʃi wɑz dʒɑsəl təwɔɹɾ ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ wɪð ɪkskɹuʃieɪɾɪŋ sloʊnəs. ɪt tʊk lɛs ðən ə hɑɹtbit, ən sim tə teɪk aʊɝz, deɪz. ʃi wɑntəd tə haʊl, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt bɹið. əbɹʌpli, laɪk ə dæm bɝstɪŋ, ðə wʌn paʊɝ floʊd θɹu hɝ, ə ɹʌʃ ə laɪf ən dʒɔɪ, ʌv blɪs, ən bɹɛθ lɛft əɹ ɪn ə lɔŋ ɡæsp ə plɛʒɝ ən ɹɪlif soʊ oʊvɝwɛlmɪŋ ðəɾ əɹ lɛɡz wɑbəld. ɪt wɑz ɔl ʃi kəd də tə kip fɹəm pæntɪŋ. tɑɾɝɪŋ, pʊlɪŋ hɝsɛlf ʌp, ʃi ɡeɪv nɪneɪiv ə stɝn lʊk, ən nɪneɪiv ʃɹʌɡd əpɑlədʒɛɾɪkli. twaɪs ɪn wʌn deɪ! ðə sʌn hæd tə bi tɝnɪŋ ɡɹin.

It was not exactly the same as using an angreal, though very close. It was not meant to be done hurriedly, either; Nynaeve did not have a soft touch, at best. Elayne felt as though she were being shaken; nothing happened physically, but inside her head she seemed to be bouncing around, tumbling wildly downhill. Worse, she was jostled toward embracing saidar with excruciating slowness. It took less than a heartbeat, and seemed to take hours, days. She wanted to howl, but she could not breathe. Abruptly, like a dam bursting, the One Power flowed through her, a rush of life and joy, of bliss, and breath left her in a long gasp of pleasure and relief so overwhelming that her legs wobbled. It was all she could do to keep from panting. Tottering, pulling herself up, she gave Nynaeve a stern look, and Nynaeve shrugged apologetically. Twice in one day! The sun had to be turning green.

"aɪ naʊ kəntʃɹoʊl ðə floʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ fɹəm əɹ əz wɛl əz maɪ oʊn," nɪneɪiv wɛn ɑn, nɑt kwaɪt miɾɪŋ ɪleɪnz aɪz, "ænd wɪl əntɪl aɪ lɛɾ əɹ ɡoʊ. naʊ, doʊn fɪɹ ðət huɛvɝ lidz ðə sɝkəl," ʃi ʃɑɾ ə fɹaʊn ət kɛɹ ən snɪft, "kæn meɪk jə dʒɹɔ tu mʌtʃ. ðɪs ɹɪli ɪz ə ɡɹeɪt dil laɪk ən æŋɡɹil. ði æŋɡɹil bʌfɝz jə əɡɛns ði ɛkstʃɹə paʊɝ, ən ɪn sʌmwʌt ðə seɪm weɪ, ɪn ə sɝkəl jə kæn bi meɪd tə dʒɹɔ tu mʌtʃ. ɪn fækt, ɪn ə sɝkəl jə kæn dʒɹɔ kwaɪɾ əz mʌtʃ əz jə kən ʌðɹwi - "

"I now control the flow of saidar from her as well as my own," Nynaeve went on, not quite meeting Elayne's eyes, "and will until I let her go. Now, don't fear that whoever leads the circle," she shot a frown at Caire and sniffed, "can make you draw too much. This really is a great deal like an angreal. The angreal buffers you against the extra Power, and in somewhat the same way, in a circle you can't be made to draw too much. In fact, in a circle you can't draw quite as much as you can otherwi - "

"ðɪs ɪz deɪnʒɝəs!" ɹɪneɪl bɹoʊk ɪn, ʃoʊldɝɪŋ ɹʌfli bɪtwin kɛɹ ən tɛbɹl. hɝ skaʊl tʊk ɪn nɪneɪiv, ɪleɪn, ən ðə sɪstɝz stændɪŋ ɔf fɹəm ðə sɝkəl əz wɛl. "ju seɪ ðət wʌn wʊmən kən sɪmpli siz ənʌðɝ, hoʊld əɹ kæptɪv, juz hɝ? haʊ lɔŋ əv jə ɛɛs sədaɪ noʊn ðɪs? aɪ wɔɹn ju, ɪf jə tʃɹaɪ tə juz ɪɾ ɑn wʌn ʌv əs - " ɪt wɑz əɹ tɝn tə bi kʌɾ ɔf.

"This is dangerous!" Renaile broke in, shouldering roughly between Caire and Tebreille. Her scowl took in Nynaeve, Elayne, and the sisters standing off from the circle as well. "You say that one woman can simply seize another, hold her captive, use her? How long have you Aes Sedai known this? I warn you, if you try to use it on one of us - " It was her turn to be cut off.

"ɪt dʌznt wɝk ðət weɪ, ɹɪneɪl." sɝaɪðə tʌtʃt ɡæɹiniə, ən ʃi ən kɝstʃən lɛpt əpɑɹt tə meɪk ɹum. ðə jʌŋ bɹaʊn aɪd nɪneɪiv ənsɝteɪnli, ðən foʊldəɾ əɹ hænz ən tʊk ɑn ə lɛktʃɝɪŋ toʊn, əz ɪf ədʒɹɛsɪŋ ə klæs. wɪð ɪt keɪm kəmpoʊʒɝ; pɝhæps ʃi dɪd si ɹɪneɪl əz ə pjupəl ɹaɪt ðɛn. "ðə taʊɝ stʌɾid ðɪs fəɹ mɛni jɪɹz, lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz. aɪ hæv ɹɛɾ ɛvɹi peɪdʒ ðət sɝvaɪvz ɪn ðə taʊɝ laɪbɹɛɹi ʌv ðoʊz stʌɾiz. ɪt wɑz pɹuvən kənklusɪvli ðət wʌn wʊmən kænɑt fɔɹm ə lɪŋk wɪð ənʌðɝ əɡɛnst əɹ wɪl. ɪt sɪmpli kænɑt bi dʌn; nʌθɪŋ hæpənz. ə wɪlɪŋ sɝɛndɝ ɪz nɛsəsɛɹi, dʒʌst əz ɪn ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ tə seɪaɪdɑɹ ɪtsɛlf." ʃi saʊndəɾ æbsəlutli dɛfənət, bʌt ɹɪneɪl stɪl fɹaʊnd; tu mɛni pipəl nu haʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd saɪdstɛp ði oʊθ əɡɛns laɪɪŋ.

"It doesn't work that way, Renaile." Sareitha touched Garenia, and she and Kirstian leaped apart to make room. The young Brown eyed Nynaeve uncertainly, then folded her hands and took on a lecturing tone, as if addressing a class. With it came composure; perhaps she did see Renaile as a pupil right then. "The Tower studied this for many years, long before the Trolloc Wars. I have read every page that survives in the Tower Library of those studies. It was proven conclusively that one woman cannot form a link with another against her will. It simply cannot be done; nothing happens. A willing surrender is necessary, just as in embracing to saidar itself." She sounded absolutely definite, but Renaile still frowned; too many people knew how Aes Sedai could sidestep the Oath against lying.

"ænd waɪ dɪd ðeɪ stʌɾi ɪt?" ɹɪneɪl dɪmændəd. "waɪ wɑz ðə waɪt taʊɝ soʊ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn sətʃ ə θɪŋ? pɝhæps jə ɛɛs sədaɪ stɪl stʌɾi?"

"And why did they study it?" Renaile demanded. "Why was the White Tower so interested in such a thing? Perhaps you Aes Sedai still study?"

"ðæɾ ɪz ɹɪdɪkjələs." ɛksæspɝeɪʃən dʒɹɪp fɹəm sɝaɪðəz vɔɪs. "ɪf jə mʌs noʊ, ɪt wɑz ðə pɹɑbləm ə mɛn u kən tʃænəl ðət dʒɹu ðɛm tə ɪt. ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld wɑz ə lɪvɪŋ mɛmɹi tə sʌm, ðɛn. aɪ doʊn səpoʊz ivən vɛɹi mɛni sɪstɝz ɹɪmɛmbɝ - ɪt hæzən bɪn pɑɹɾ ə ðə ɹikwaɪɝɾ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃən sɪns bɪfɔɹ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz - bʌt mɛn kən bi bɹɔɾ ɪndə ə sɝkəl, tu, ən əz ðə sɝkəl dʌzn bɹeɪk ivən ɪf jə ɡoʊ tə slip. . . . wɛl, jə kən si ði ædvæntɪdʒɪz. ðət wɑz ən ʌɾɝ feɪljɝ, ənfɔɹtʃənətli. mɔɹ tə ðə pɔɪn hɪɹ, aɪ seɪ əɡɛn ðəɾ ɪts ɪmpɑsəbəl tə fɔɹs ə wʊmən ɪndə ə sɝkəl. ɪf jə daʊt, tʃɹaɪ ɪt jɝsɛlf. jəl si."

"That is ridiculous." Exasperation dripped from Sareitha's voice. "If you must know, it was the problem of men who can channel that drew them to it. The Breaking of the World was a living memory to some, then. I don't suppose even very many sisters remember - it hasn't been part of the required instruction since before the Trolloc Wars - but men can be brought into a circle, too, and as the circle doesn't break even if you go to sleep. . . . Well, you can see the advantages. That was an utter failure, unfortunately. More to the point here, I say again that it is impossible to force a woman into a circle. If you doubt, try it yourself. You will see."

ɹɪneɪl nɑɾəd, æksɛptɪŋ ət læst; ðəɹ wɑz vɛɹi lɪɾəl ɛls tə də wən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪɾ ə sɪmpəl steɪtmən ə fækt. jɛɾ ɪleɪn wʌndɝd. wʌt wɑz ɪn ðə peɪdʒəz ðət hæd nɑt sɝvaɪvd? ʃi hæd noʊɾəst ə slaɪt tʃeɪnʒ ɪn sɝaɪðəz ɪnflɛkʃən ət wʌn pɔɪnt. ʃi hæd kwɛstʃənz. fəɹ leɪɾɝ, wən ðəɹ wɝ fjuɝ ɪɹz ɝaʊnd.

Renaile nodded, accepting at last; there was very little else to do when an Aes Sedai made a simple statement of fact. Yet Elayne wondered. What was in the pages that had not survived? She had noticed a slight change in Sareitha's inflection at one point. She had questions. For later, when there were fewer ears around.

wən ɹɪneɪl ən sɝaɪðə wɪθdʒɹu, nɪneɪiv twɪtʃt əɹ dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts stʃɹeɪt, pleɪnli ɪɹəteɪɾəd ət ði ɪntɝʌpʃən, ən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ əɡɛn.

When Renaile and Sareitha withdrew, Nynaeve twitched her divided skirts straight, plainly irritated at the interruption, and opened her mouth again.

"kəntɪnju jəɹ dɛmənstʃɹeɪʃən, nɪneɪiv," kɛɹ kəmændəd hɑɹʃli. hɝ dɑɹk feɪs maɪɾ əv bɪn smuð əz ə fɹoʊzən pɑnd, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑt vɛɹi plizd, iðɝ.

"Continue your demonstration, Nynaeve," Caire commanded harshly. Her dark face might have been smooth as a frozen pond, but she was not very pleased, either.

nɪneɪivz maʊθ wɝk bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd meɪk ɛni saʊn kʌm aʊt, ən wən ɪt dɪd, ʃi wɛn ɑn ɪn ə ɹʌʃ, əz ðoʊ əfɹeɪd sʌmwʌn ɛls maɪt bɹeɪk ɪn.

Nynaeve's mouth worked before she could make any sound come out, and when it did, she went on in a rush, as though afraid someone else might break in.

ðə nɛks pɑɹɾ ə ðə lɛsən wɑz pæsɪŋ kəntʃɹoʊl ə ðə sɝkəl. ðət hæd tə bi dʌn vɑləntɛɹəli, tu, ən ivən əz ʃi ɹitʃt aʊt təwɔɹd nɪneɪiv, ɪleɪn hɛld əɹ bɹɛθ əntɪl ʃi fɛl ðə sʌɾəl ʃɪf ðət mɛnt ʃi naʊ kəntʃɹoʊl ðə paʊɝ floʊɪŋ ɪndə hɝ. ən ðət floʊɪŋ θɹu nɪneɪiv, ʌv kɔɹs. ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn ʃʊɹ ɪt wəd wɝk. nɪneɪiv kəd fɔɹm ə sɝkəl izəli, ɪf nɑt wɪð ɛni fɪnɛs, bʌt pæsɪŋ ɡaɪɾəns ɔlsoʊ ɪnvɑlvd ə fɔɹm ə sɝɛndɝ; nɪneɪiv hæd kənsɪɾɝəbəl dɪfəkəltiz ɹilɪŋkwɪʃɪŋ kəntʃɹoʊl əɹ biɪŋ bɹɔɾ ɪndə ə sɝkəl, dʒʌst əz ʃi hæd wʌns hæd dɪfəkəlti sɝɛndɝɪŋ tə seɪaɪdɑɹ. wɪtʃ wɑz waɪ ɪleɪn kɛp ðə ɡaɪɾəns fəɹ naʊ. ɪt wəɾ əv tə bi pæs tə kɛɹ, ən nɪneɪiv maɪt nɑt bi eɪbəl tə mænədʒ lɛɾɪŋ ɡoʊ twaɪs. ðoʊz əpɑlədʒiz mʌst əv bɪn mʌtʃ iziɝ fəɹ hɝ.

The next part of the lesson was passing control of the circle. That had to be done voluntarily, too, and even as she reached out toward Nynaeve, Elayne held her breath until she felt the subtle shift that meant she now controlled the Power flowing into her. And that flowing through Nynaeve, of course. She had not been sure it would work. Nynaeve could form a circle easily, if not with any finesse, but passing guidance also involved a form of surrender; Nynaeve had considerable difficulties relinquishing control or being brought into a circle, just as she had once had difficulty surrendering to saidar. Which was why Elayne kept the guidance for now. It would have to be passed to Caire, and Nynaeve might not be able to manage letting go twice. Those apologies must have been much easier for her.

ɪleɪn lɪŋk nɛkst wɪð eɪvinhə, soʊ tɑlɑn kəɾ æktʃəli  si haʊ ɪt wɑz dʌn wɪð ən æŋɡɹil, əz mʌtʃ əz ðəɹ wɑz tə si, ən ɪt wɛn pɝfəkli; eɪvinhə wɑz ə vɛɹi kwɪk stʌɾi, blɛndɪŋ ɪn izəli. tɑlɑn wɑz kwɪk əz wɛl, ɪt tɝn aʊt, æɾɪŋ əɹ stɪl ɡɹeɪɾɝ æŋɡɹil eɪɾəd floʊ wɪθaʊɾ ə hɪtʃ. wʌn baɪ wʌn, ɪleɪn bɹɔɾ əm ɪn, ən ʃi hɝsɛlf ɔlmoʊst ʃɪvɝɾ ət ðə ɹɪvɝ ə ðə paʊɝ ðət stʃɹimd ɪndə hɝ. noʊ wʌn jɛt wɑz dʒɹɔɪŋ nɪɹli əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi kʊd, bʌɾ ɪɾ æɾəd ʌp, ɪspɛʃli wɪð æŋɡɹil ɪnvɑlvd. ɪleɪnz əwɛɹnəs klaɪm haɪɝ wɪð itʃ ədɪʃən ə seɪaɪdɑɹ. ʃi kəd smɛl ðə hɛvi sɛns ɪn ðə leɪswɝk ɡoʊl bɑksəz ðət ðə wɪndfɪndɝz wɔɹ ɝaʊn ðɛɹ nɛks, ən sɛpɹət wʌn fɹəm ənʌðɝ. ʃi kəd meɪk aʊɾ itʃ foʊld ən kɹis ɪn ɛvɹiwʌnz kloʊðz əz ʃɑɹpli əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ əɹ noʊz pɹɛs tə ðə klɔθ, mɔɹ ʃɑɹpli. ʃi wɑz əwɛɹ ə ðə feɪntəs muvmən ə ði ɛɹ əɡɛnst əɹ hɛɹ ən skɪn, kɝɛsəz ʃi wʊɾə əv noʊɾəst wɪθaʊt ðə paʊɝ.

Elayne linked next with Aviendha, so Talaan could actually see how it was done with an angreal, as much as there was to see, and it went perfectly; Aviendha was a very quick study, blending in easily. Talaan was quick as well, it turned out, adding her still greater angreal aided flow without a hitch. One by one, Elayne brought them in, and she herself almost shivered at the river of the Power that streamed into her. No one yet was drawing nearly as much as she could, but it added up, especially with angreal involved. Elayne's awareness climbed higher with each addition of saidar. She could smell the heavy scents in the lacework gold boxes that the Windfinders wore around their necks, and separate one from another. She could make out each fold and crease in everyone's clothes as sharply as if she had her nose pressed to the cloth, more sharply. She was aware of the faintest movement of the air against her hair and skin, caresses she never would have noticed without the Power.

ðət wɑz nɑt ðə hoʊl ə hɝ əwɛɹnəs, ʌv kɔɹs. ðə lɪŋk hæɾ ə sɝɾən kɪnʃɪp tə ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑnd, dʒʌst əz ɪntɛns ən sʌmhaʊ ivən mɔɹ ɪntəmət. ʃi nu ðəɾ ə taɪni blɪstɝ fɹəm klaɪmɪŋ ðə hɪl meɪɾ ə spɑɾ ə peɪn ɑn nɪneɪivz ɹaɪt hil; nɪneɪiv ɔlweɪz tɔkt əbaʊt ɡʊd staʊt ʃuz, bʌt ʃi hæɾ ə wiknəs fəɹ slɪpɝz wɪð ə ɡɹeɪt dil ʌv ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi. nɪneɪiv wɔɹ ə fɪks fɹaʊn, dɝɛktəɾ ət kɛɹ, hɝ ɑɹmz wɝ kɹɔst, hɝ fɪŋɡɝz wɛɹɪŋ ði æŋɡɹil pleɪɾ ɑn ðə bɹeɪd pʊld oʊvɝ əɹ ɹaɪt ʃoʊldɝ, ɛvɹi laɪn ə hɝ ʌv ə pis, jɛɾ ɪnsaɪd ʃi wɑz ə meɪlstʃɹəm ʌv ɪmoʊʃənz. fɪɹ, wɝi, æntɪsəpeɪʃən, ɪɹɪteɪʃən, wɛɹinɪs ən ɪmpeɪʃəns baʊnst oʊvɝ itʃ ʌðɝ, ən wɑʃɪŋ θɹu ɪɾ ɔl, səmtaɪmz səbmɝdʒɪŋ ðə ɹɛst, ɹɪpəlz ʌv wɔɹmθ ən weɪvz ə hit ðət θɹɛɾənd tə bɝst ɪndə fleɪm. ðoʊz læs nɪneɪiv səpɹɛs kwɪkli, ɪspɛʃli ðə hit, bʌt ðeɪ ɔlweɪz ɹɪtɝnd. ɪleɪn ɔlmoʊs θɔt ʃi kəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðɛm, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz laɪk sʌmθɪŋ ɡlɪmps fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə jəɹ aɪ ðət wɑz ɡɔn wən jə tɝn jəɹ hɛd.

That was not the whole of her awareness, of course. The link had a certain kinship to the Warder bond, just as intense and somehow even more intimate. She knew that a tiny blister from climbing the hill made a spot of pain on Nynaeve's right heel; Nynaeve always talked about good stout shoes, but she had a weakness for slippers with a great deal of embroidery. Nynaeve wore a fixed frown, directed at Caire, her arms were crossed, her fingers wearing the angreal played on the braid pulled over her right shoulder, every line of her of a piece, yet inside she was a maelstrom of emotions. Fear, worry, anticipation, irritation, wariness and impatience bounced over each other, and washing through it all, sometimes submerging the rest, ripples of warmth and waves of heat that threatened to burst into flame. Those last Nynaeve suppressed quickly, especially the heat, but they always returned. Elayne almost thought she could recognize them, but it was like something glimpsed from the corner of your eye that was gone when you turned your head.

sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, eɪvinhə fɛl fɪɹ, tu, bʌt smɔl ən taɪtli kənteɪnd, ən ɔl bʌt swɑloʊd baɪ dɪtɝməneɪʃən. ɡæɹiniə ən kɝstʃən, ʃeɪkɪŋ vɪzəbli, wɝ nɪɹli pjʊɹ tɛɹɝ, soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ɪt wɑz əmeɪzɪŋ ðət ðeɪ kəɾ ivən əv bɪɡʌn tə ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs. wʌt fɪld ɹin tə oʊvɝfloʊɪŋ wɑz iɡɝnəs, ən noʊ mæɾɝ əɹ skɝt smuðɪŋ. əz fəɹ ði æθɑn maɪɹ. . . . ivən tɛbɹl ɪɡzuɾɪd ə wɛɹi əlɝtnəs, ən ɪt dɪd nɑt teɪk ðə kwɪk dɑɹɾɪŋ ə mɛtʃɹəz aɪz, ən ɹeɪnɪnz, tə noʊ ðə foʊkəs wɑz kɛɹ, wɑtʃɪŋ əm ɔl, ɪmpeɪʃən ən kəmændɪŋ.

Surprisingly, Aviendha felt fear, too, but small and tightly contained, and all but swallowed by determination. Garenia and Kirstian, shaking visibly, were nearly pure terror, so strong it was amazing that they could even have begun to embrace the Source. What filled Reanne to overflowing was eagerness, and no matter her skirt smoothing. As for the Atha'an Miere. . . . Even Tebreille exuded a wary alertness, and it did not take the quick darting of Metarra's eyes, and Rainyn's, to know the focus was Caire, watching them all, impatient and commanding.

hɝ, ɪleɪn lɛf tə læst, ən ɪt wɑz noʊ ɹil sɝpɹaɪz ðət ʃi hæd tə meɪk fɔɹ tʃɹaɪz - fɔɹ! - tə bɹɪŋ ðə wʊmən ɪndə ðə sɝkəl. kɛɹ wɑz noʊ bɛɾɝ ət jildɪŋ ðən nɪneɪiv. ɪleɪn dɛspɝətli hoʊp ðə wʊmən hæd bɪn tʃoʊzən fəɹ əbɪləɾi, nɑt ɹæŋk.

Her, Elayne left to last, and it was no real surprise that she had to make four tries - four! - to bring the woman into the circle. Caire was no better at yielding than Nynaeve. Elayne desperately hoped the woman had been chosen for ability, not rank.

"aɪ wɪl naʊ pæs ðə sɝkəl tə ju," ʃi toʊl ðə wɪndfɪndɝ wən ɪt faɪnəli wɑz dʌn. "ɪf jə ɹikɔl wʌɾ aɪ dɪd wɪð naɪ - " wɝdz fɹoʊz moʊməntɛɹəli ɪn əɹ θɹoʊɾ əz ɡaɪɾəns ə ðə sɝkəl wɑz tɔɹn fɹəm əɹ sɝɛndɝ, ə sɛnseɪʃən laɪk hævɪŋ ə sʌɾən bɝst ʌv wɪn ɹɪp ɔl ə hɝ kloʊðz ɔf əɹ jæŋk ðə boʊnz aʊɾ ə hɝ. ʃi ɛksheɪl fɪɹsli, ən ɪf ɪt saʊndəd kloʊs tə spɪɾɪŋ, wɛl, soʊ bi ɪt.

"I will now pass the circle to you," she told the Windfinder when it finally was done. "If you recall what I did with Ny - " Words froze momentarily in her throat as guidance of the circle was torn from her surrender, a sensation like having a sudden burst of wind rip all of her clothes off or yank the bones out of her. She exhaled fiercely, and if it sounded close to spitting, well, so be it.

"ɡʊd," kɛɹ sɛd, ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ hænz təɡɛðɝ. "ɡʊd." hɝ ətɛnʃən foʊkəst ɑn ðə boʊl, hɝ hɛd twɪstɪŋ ðɪs weɪ ən ðəɾ əz ʃi stʌɾid ɪt. wɛl, pɝhæps nɑɾ ɔl əɹ ətɛnʃən. ɹin stɑɹɾəd tə sɪt daʊn, ən wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ ʌp, kɛɹ snæpt, "hoʊl jəɹ steɪʃən, wʊmən! ðɪs ɪzən ə fɪʃ lɑli! stæn tɪl jəɹ toʊl tə muv!"

"Good," Caire said, rubbing her hands together. "Good." Her attention focused on the Bowl, her head twisting this way and that as she studied it. Well, perhaps not all her attention. Reanne started to sit down, and without looking up, Caire snapped, "Hold your station, woman! This isn't a fish lolly! Stand till you're told to move!"

stɑɹɾəld, ɹin dʒɝk bæk tə hɝ fit, mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, bʌt ʃi maɪɾ əz wɛl əv sis tə ɪɡzɪst əz fɑɹ əz kɛɹ wɑz kənsɝnd. ðə wɪndfɪndɝz aɪz ɹɪmeɪn ɑn ðə flæɾənd kɹɪstəl ʃeɪp. ɪleɪn fɛlt ɹizɑlv ɪn əɹ ɡɹeɪɾ ɪnʌf tə muv ə maʊntən. ən sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, taɪni ən kwɪkli stæmpt aʊt. ənsɝɾənti. ənsɝɾənti? ɪf æftɝ ɔl ə ðɪs, ðə wʊmən ɹɪli dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt tə də -  ət ðət moʊmənt, kɛɹ dʒɹu dipli. seɪaɪdɑɹ flʌɾəd θɹu ɪleɪn, ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi kəd hoʊld; ən ənbɹoʊkən ɹɪŋ ə laɪt bleɪzd ɪndə biɪŋ, dʒɔɪnɪŋ ðə wɪmən ɪn ðə sɝkəl, bɹaɪɾɝ wɛɹɛvɝ wʌn juzd ən æŋɡɹil, bʌt noʊwɛɹ feɪnt. ʃi wɑtʃt kloʊsli əz kɛɹ tʃænəld, fɔɹmɪŋ ə kɑmplɛks wiv ʌv ɔl faɪv paʊɝz, ə fɔɹ-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ ðət ʃi leɪɾ ətɑp ðə boʊl wɪð wʌɾ ɪleɪn sʌmhaʊ wɑz ʃʊɹ wɑz ɛkskwəzət pɹisɪʒən. ðə stɑɹ tʌtʃt, ən ɪleɪn ɡæspt. wʌns, ʃi hæd tʃænəld ə tʃɹɪkəl ɪndə ðə boʊl - ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, tə bi ʃʊɹ, ən oʊnli ə ɹəflɛkʃən ə ðə boʊl, ðoʊ stɪl ə deɪnʒɝəs θɪŋ tə də - ən ðət klɪɹ kɹɪstəl hæd tɝn ə peɪl blu, ən ðə kɑɹv klaʊdz muvd. naʊ, ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz wɑz blu, ðə bɹaɪt blu ʌv ə sʌmɝ skaɪ, ən flisi waɪt klaʊdz bɪloʊɾ əkɹɔs ɪt.

Startled, Reanne jerked back to her feet, muttering under her breath, but she might as well have ceased to exist as far as Caire was concerned. The Windfinder's eyes remained on the flattened crystal shape. Elayne felt resolve in her great enough to move a mountain. And something else, tiny and quickly stamped out. Uncertainty. Uncertainty? If after all of this, the woman really did not know what to do -  At that moment, Caire drew deeply. Saidar flooded through Elayne, almost as much as she could hold; an unbroken ring of light blazed into being, joining the women in the circle, brighter wherever one used an angreal, but nowhere faint. She watched closely as Caire channeled, forming a complex weave of all Five Powers, a four-pointed star that she laid atop the Bowl with what Elayne somehow was sure was exquisite precision. The star touched, and Elayne gasped. Once, she had channeled a trickle into the Bowl - in Tel'aran'rhiod, to be sure, and only a reflection of the Bowl, though still a dangerous thing to do - and that clear crystal had turned a pale blue, and the carved clouds moved. Now, the Bowl of the Winds was blue, the bright blue of a summer sky, and fleecy white clouds billowed across it.

ðə fɔɹ-pɔɪn stɑɹ bɪkeɪm faɪv-pɔɪntəd, ðə kɑmpəzɪʃən ə ðə wiv ɔltɝd slaɪtli, ən ðə boʊl wɑz ə ɡɹin si wɪð ɡɹeɪt hivɪŋ weɪvz. faɪv pɔɪns bɪkeɪm sɪks, ən ɪt wɑz ənʌðɝ skaɪ, ə dɪfɹən blu, dɑɹkɝ, wɪntɝ pɝhæps, wɪð pɝpəl klaʊdz hɛvi wɪð ɹeɪn əɹ snoʊ. sɛvən pɔɪns, ən ə ɡɹeɪ-ɡɹin si ɹeɪdʒd ɪn stɔɹm. eɪt pɔɪns ən skaɪ. naɪn ən si, ən sʌɾənli, ɪleɪn fɛl ðə boʊl ɪtsɛlf dʒɹɔɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ, ə waɪl tɔɹən fɑɹ ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən ɔl ðə sɝkəl təɡɛðɝ kəd mænədʒ.

The four-point star became five-pointed, the composition of the weave altered slightly, and the Bowl was a green sea with great heaving waves. Five points became six, and it was another sky, a different blue, darker, winter perhaps, with purple clouds heavy with rain or snow. Seven points, and a gray-green sea raged in storm. Eight points and sky. Nine and sea, and suddenly, Elayne felt the Bowl itself drawing saidar, a wild torrent far greater than all the circle together could manage.

ðə tʃeɪnʒəz kəntɪnjuɾ ʌnəbeɪɾɪd ɪnsaɪd ðə boʊl, si tə skaɪ, weɪvz tə klaʊdz, bʌɾ ə ɹaɪðɪŋ, bɹeɪɾɪd kɑləm ə seɪaɪdɑɹ ʃɑɾ ʌp fɹəm ðət flæɾɪʃ kɹɪstəl dɪsk, faɪɝ ən ɛɹ, wɔɾɝ ən ɝθ ən spɪɹət, ə kɑləm ʌv ɪntʃɹəkət leɪs əz waɪɾ əz ðə boʊl, klaɪmɪŋ ʌp ən ʌp ɪndə ðə skaɪ, əntɪl ɪts tɑp ɹoʊz aʊɾ ə saɪt. kɛɹ kəntɪnjuɾ əɹ wivɪŋ, swɛt stʃɹimɪŋ daʊn əɹ feɪs; ʃi pɔz simɪŋli oʊnli tə blɪŋk sɔlti dʒɹɑps əweɪ fɹəm əɹ aɪz əz ʃi ɪɡzæmən ði ɪmədʒəz ɪn ðə boʊl, ðən leɪɾ ə nu wiv. ðə pæɾɝn ə ðə bɹeɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə θɪk kɑləm ɔltɝd wɪð ɛvɹi wiv, sʌɾəli ɛkoʊɪŋ wʌt kɛɹ woʊv.

The changes continued unabated inside the Bowl, sea to sky, waves to clouds, but a writhing, braided column of saidar shot up from that flattish crystal disc, Fire and Air, Water and Earth and Spirit, a column of intricate lace as wide as the Bowl, climbing up and up into the sky, until its top rose out of sight. Caire continued her weaving, sweat streaming down her face; she paused seemingly only to blink salty drops away from her eyes as she examined the images in the Bowl, then laid a new weave. The pattern of the braiding in the thick column altered with every weave, subtly echoing what Caire wove.

ɪt wɑz ə vɛɹi ɡʊd θɪŋ ʃi hæd nɑt wɑntəd tə foʊkəs ðə floʊz fəɹ ðɪs sɝkəl, ɪleɪn ɹilaɪzd; wʌt ðə wʊmən wɑz duɪŋ ɹikwaɪɝd jɪɹz mɔɹ stʌɾi ðən ʃi hæd. mɛni jɪɹz mɔɹ. sʌɾənli, ʃi ɹilaɪz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. ðəɾ ɛvɝ-tʃeɪnʒɪŋ leɪswɝk ə seɪaɪdɑɹ bɛn ɪtsɛlf ɝaʊn sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, sʌmθɪŋ ənsin ðət meɪd ðə kɑləm sɑləd. ʃi swɑloʊd, hɑɹd. ðə boʊl wɑz dʒɹɔɪŋ seɪɾɪn əz wɛl əz seɪaɪdɑɹ.

It was a very good thing she had not wanted to focus the flows for this circle, Elayne realized; what the woman was doing required years more study than she had. Many years more. Suddenly, she realized something else. That ever-changing lacework of saidar bent itself around something else, something unseen that made the column solid. She swallowed, hard. The Bowl was drawing saidin as well as saidar.

hɝ hoʊp ðət noʊ wʌn ɛls hæd pʌzəl ðəɾ aʊt vænɪʃt wɪð wʌn ɡlæns ət ði ʌðɝ wɪmən. hæf stɛɹɾ ət ðə twɪstɪŋ kɑləm wɪð ə ɹɪvʌlʃən ðət ʃʊɾə bɪn ɹɪzɝv fəɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn. fɪɹ ɡɹu stʃɹɔŋɝ əmʌŋ ði ɪmoʊʃənz ʃɛɹɾ ɪn əɹ hɛd. səm wɝ əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ðə lɛvəl ʌv ɡæɹiniə ən kɝstʃən, ən ɪt wɑz ə wʌndɝ ðoʊz tu hæd nɑt feɪntɪd. nɪneɪiv wɑz ə hɛɹ fɹəm sɪkɪŋ ʌp, fəɹ ɔl əɹ sʌɾənli tu smuð feɪs. eɪvinhə əpɪɹd dʒʌst əz kɑm aʊtwɝdli, bʌɾ ɪnsaɪd, ðət taɪni fɪɹ kwɪvɝɾ ən pʌlsd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɹoʊ.

Her hope that no one else had puzzled that out vanished with one glance at the other women. Half stared at the twisting column with a revulsion that should have been reserved for the Dark One. Fear grew stronger among the emotions shared in her head. Some were approaching the level of Garenia and Kirstian, and it was a wonder those two had not fainted. Nynaeve was a hair from sicking up, for all her suddenly too smooth face. Aviendha appeared just as calm outwardly, but inside, that tiny fear quivered and pulsed, trying to grow.

fɹəm kɛɹ keɪm oʊnli dɪtɝməneɪʃən, əz stili hɑɹɾ əz əɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən. nʌθɪŋ wɑz gɑnə stæn ɪn kɛɹz weɪ, sɝɾənli nɑt ðə mɪɹ pɹɛzəns ə ʃædoʊ-teɪntɪd seɪɾɪn mɪkst ɪndə hɝ wivɪŋ. nʌθɪŋ wɑz gɑnə stɑp hɝ. ʃi wɝk ðə floʊz, ən əbɹʌpli spaɪɾɝwɛbz ə seɪaɪdɑɹ blɑsəm fɹəm ði ənsin tɑp ə ðə kɑləm, laɪk ənivən spoʊks ʌv ə wil, ɔlmoʊst ə sɑləd fæn tə ðə saʊθ, spɑɹsɝ fænz ɹitʃɪŋ nɔɹθ ən nɔɹθwɛst, sɪŋɡəl leɪsi spoʊks stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ ɪn ʌðɝ dɝɛkʃənz. ðeɪ tʃeɪnʒd əz ðeɪ ɡɹu, nɛvɝ ðə seɪm fɹəm wʌn moʊmən tə ðə nɛkst, spɹɛɾɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə skaɪ, fɑɹðɝ ən fɑɹðɝ, əntɪl ði ɛnz ə ðə pæɾɝn ɔlsoʊ pæst aʊɾ ə saɪt. nɑt dʒʌst seɪaɪdɑɹ ðəɹ iðɝ, ɪleɪn wɑz sɝɾən; ɪn pleɪsəz ðət spaɪɾɝwɛb kɑɾ ən kɝvd ɝaʊn sʌmθɪŋ ʃi kəd nɑt si. stɪl kɛɹ woʊv, ən ðə kɑləm dæns tə hɝ bɪɾɪŋ, seɪaɪdɑɹ ən seɪɾɪn təɡɛðɝ, ən ðə spaɪɾɝwɛb ɔltɝɾ ən floʊd laɪk ə lɑpsaɪɾɪd kəlaɪɾəskoʊp spɪnɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə hɛvənz, vænɪʃɪŋ ɪndə ðə dɪstəns, ɑn ən ɑn ən ɑn.

From Caire came only determination, as steely hard as her expression. Nothing was going to stand in Caire's way, certainly not the mere presence of Shadow-tainted saidin mixed into her weaving. Nothing was going to stop her. She worked the flows, and abruptly spiderwebs of saidar blossomed from the unseen top of the column, like uneven spokes of a wheel, almost a solid fan to the south, sparser fans reaching north and northwest, single lacy spokes stretching in other directions. They changed as they grew, never the same from one moment to the next, spreading across the sky, farther and farther, until the ends of the pattern also passed out of sight. Not just saidar there either, Elayne was certain; in places that spiderweb caught and curved around something she could not see. Still Caire wove, and the column danced to her bidding, saidar and saidin together, and the spiderweb altered and flowed like a lopsided kaleidoscope spinning across the heavens, vanishing into the distance, on and on and on.

wɪθaʊt wɔɹnɪŋ, kɛɹ stʃɹeɪɾənd, nʌklɪŋ əɹ bæk, ən ɹilis ðə sɔɹs kəmplitli. kɑləm ən spaɪɾɝwɛb ɪvæpɝeɪɾəd, ən ʃi kəlæpst əz mʌtʃ əz sæt daʊn, bɹiðɪŋ hɑɹd. ðə boʊl tɝn klɪɹ əɡɛn, bʌt smɔl pætʃəz ə seɪaɪdɑɹ flæʃt ən kɹækəld ɝaʊn ɪts ɛdʒəz. "ɪɾ ɪz dʌn, ðə laɪt wɪlɪŋ," ʃi sɛd taɪɹədli.

Without warning, Caire straightened, knuckling her back, and released the Source completely. Column and spiderweb evaporated, and she collapsed as much as sat down, breathing hard. The Bowl turned clear again, but small patches of saidar flashed and crackled around its edges. "It is done, the Light willing," she said tiredly.

ɪleɪn hɑɹdli hɝd. ðət wɑz nɑt ðə weɪ tə ɛn ə sɝkəl. wən kɛɹ lɛt ɡoʊ ɪn ðət weɪ, ðə paʊɝ dɪsəpɪɹd fɹəm ɛvɹi wʊmən saɪməlteɪniəsli. ɪleɪnz aɪz pɑpt. fəɹ wʌn ɪnstənt, ɪt wɑz əz ðoʊ ʃi stʊɾ ətɑp ðə haɪəs taʊɝ ɪn ðə wɝld, ən sʌɾənli ðə taʊɝ wɑz nɑt ðəɹ ɛnimɔɹ! dʒʌst ən ɪnstənt, jɛt hɑɹdli plɛzənt. ʃi fɛl taɪɝd, ɪf nɑɾ ɛniwɛɹ nɪɹ wʌt ʃi wʊɾə hæd ʃi æktʃəli  dʌn ɛniθɪŋ bɪɑn sɝv əz ə kɑnduɪt, bʌt wʌt ʃi fɛl moʊst wɑz lɔs. lɛɾɪŋ ɡoʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ wɑz bæɾ ɪnʌf; hævɪŋ ɪt sɪmpli vænɪʃ aʊɾ ə jə wɛn bɪɑn θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt.

Elayne hardly heard. That was not the way to end a circle. When Caire let go in that way, the Power disappeared from every woman simultaneously. Elayne's eyes popped. For one instant, it was as though she stood atop the highest tower in the world, and suddenly the tower was not there anymore! Just an instant, yet hardly pleasant. She felt tired, if not anywhere near what she would have had she actually done anything beyond serve as a conduit, but what she felt most was loss. Letting go of saidar was bad enough; having it simply vanish out of you went beyond thinking about.

ʌðɝz hæd sʌfɝd fɑɹ wɝs ðən ʃi. əz ðə ɡloʊ dʒɔɪnɪŋ ðə sɝkəl wɪŋkt aʊt, nɪneɪiv sæt daʊn ɹaɪt wɛɹ ʃi stʊɾ əz ðoʊ hɝ lɛɡz hæd mɛltəd, sæt stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ðə bɹeɪslət-ænd-ɹɪŋz, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪɾ ən pæntɪŋ. swɛt ɹoʊl daʊn əɹ feɪs. "aɪ fil laɪk ə kɪtʃən sɪv ðət dʒʌs hæd ðə hoʊl mɪl pɔɹd θɹu ɪt," ʃi mɝmɝd. kæɹiɪŋ ðət mʌtʃ ə ðə paʊɝ hæɾ ɪts kɑst ivən ɪf jə dɪd nʌθɪŋ, ivən wɪð ən æŋɡɹil.

Others had suffered far worse than she. As the glow joining the circle winked out, Nynaeve sat down right where she stood as though her legs had melted, sat stroking the bracelet-and-rings, staring at it and panting. Sweat rolled down her face. "I feel like a kitchen sieve that just had the whole mill poured through it," she murmured. Carrying that much of the Power had its cost even if you did nothing, even with an angreal.

tɑlɑn weɪvɝd, ə ɹiɾ ɪn ðə wɪnd, kæstɪŋ sɝəptɪʃəs ɡlænsɪz əɾ əɹ mʌðɝ, pleɪnli əfɹeɪd tə sɪt. eɪvinhə stʊd stʃɹeɪt, hɝ fɪkst ɪkspɹɛʃən seɪɪŋ ðət wɪlpaʊɝ hæɾ əz mʌtʃ tə də wɪð ðəɾ əz ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. ʃi ɡeɪv ə slaɪt smaɪl, ðoʊ, ən meɪɾ ə dʒɛstʃɝ ɪn meɪɾən hæntɔk - wɝθ ðə pɹaɪs - ən ðən ənʌðɝ - mɔɹ - ɹaɪt bɪhaɪnd. mɔɹ ðən wɝθ ðə pɹaɪs. ɛvɹiwʌn lʊkt wɪɹi, ɪf nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ðoʊz u hæd juzd æŋɡɹil. ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz wɛn kwaɪəɾ ət læst, dʒʌst ə waɪd boʊl ə klɪɹ kɹɪstəl, bʌt dɛkɝeɪɾəd naʊ wɪð taʊɝɪŋ weɪvz. seɪaɪdɑɹ stɪl sim tə bi ðɛɹ, ðoʊ, nɑt biɪŋ wildɪd baɪ ɛniwʌn, nɑt vɪzəbəl, bʌɾ ɪn dɪmli fɛl flæʃɪz laɪk ðoʊz ðət hæd pleɪɾ ɝaʊn ðə boʊl ət ði ɛnd.

Talaan wavered, a reed in the wind, casting surreptitious glances at her mother, plainly afraid to sit. Aviendha stood straight, her fixed expression saying that willpower had as much to do with that as anything else. She gave a slight smile, though, and made a gesture in Maiden handtalk - worth the price - and then another - more - right behind. More than worth the price. Everyone looked weary, if not so much as those who had used angreal. The Bowl of the Winds went quiet at last, just a wide bowl of clear crystal, but decorated now with towering waves. Saidar still seemed to be there, though, not being wielded by anyone, not visible, but in dimly felt flashes like those that had played around the Bowl at the end.

nɪneɪiv ɹeɪzd əɹ hɛd tə ɡlaʊɝ ət ðə klaʊdləs skaɪ, ðən loʊɝɾ əɹ ɡeɪz tə kɛɹ. "ɔl ðæt, fəɹ wʌt? dɪd wi də ɛniθɪŋ, əɹ nɑt?" ə bɹɛθ ʌv ɛɹ stɝɾ əkɹɔs ðə hɪltɑp, wɔɹm əz ði ɛɹ ɪn ə kɪtʃən.

Nynaeve raised her head to glower at the cloudless sky, then lowered her gaze to Caire. "All that, for what? Did we do anything, or not?" A breath of air stirred across the hilltop, warm as the air in a kitchen.

ðə wɪndfɪndɝ stʃɹʌɡəl tə hɝ fit. "du jə θɪŋk wivɪŋ ðə wɪnz ɪz laɪk θɹoʊɪŋ ðə hɛlm oʊvɝ ɑn ə dɑɹɾɝ?" ʃi dɪmændəd kəntɛmptʃwəsli. "aɪ dʒʌs muv ðə ɹʌɾɝ ɑn ə skɪmɝ wɪð ə bim əz bɹɔɾ əz ðə wɝld! hɪl teɪk taɪm tə tɝn, taɪm tə noʊ hiz səpoʊz tə tɝn. ðəɾ i mʌs tɝn. bʌt wən i dʌz, nɑt ðə fɑðɝ ə stɔɹmz hɪmsɛlf wɪl bi eɪbəl tə stæn ɪn ɪz weɪ. aɪ hæv dʌn ɪt, ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz ɪz aʊɝz!"

The Windfinder struggled to her feet. "Do you think Weaving the Winds is like throwing the helm over on a darter?" she demanded contemptuously. "I just moved the rudder on a skimmer with a beam as broad as the world! He will take time to turn, time to know he is supposed to turn. That he must turn. But when he does, not the Father of Storms himself will be able to stand in his way. I have done it, Aes Sedai, and the Bowl of the Winds is ours!"

ɹɪneɪl muvd ɪndə ðə sɝkəl, nilɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə boʊl. kɛɹfəli ʃi bɪɡæn foʊldɪŋ ðə waɪt sɪlk ɝaʊn ɪt. "aɪ wɪl teɪk ðɪs tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps," ʃi sɛd tə nɪneɪiv. "wi hæv fʊlfɪld əɹ pɑɹɾ ə ðə bɑɹɡən. naʊ, jə ɛɛs sədaɪ mʌs fʊlfɪl ðə ɹɛst ə jʊɹz." mɛɝɪlɪl meɪɾ ə saʊn ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt, bʌt wən ɪleɪn ɡlænst ət hɝ, ðə ɡɹeɪ əpɪɹɾ ə stʌɾi ɪn kəmpoʊʒɝ.

Renaile moved into the circle, kneeling beside the Bowl. Carefully she began folding the white silk around it. "I will take this to the Mistress of the Ships," she said to Nynaeve. "We have fulfilled our part of the bargain. Now, you Aes Sedai must fulfill the rest of yours." Merilille made a sound in her throat, but when Elayne glanced at her, the Gray appeared a study in composure.

"meɪbi juv dʌn jəɹ pɑɹt," nɪneɪiv sɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ ənstɛɾəli. "meɪbi. wɪl si wən ðɪs . . . ðɪs skɪmɝ ə jʊɹz tɝnz. ɪf ɪt tɝnz!" ɹɪneɪl stɛɹd hɑɹɾ əɾ əɹ əkɹɔs ðə boʊl, bʌt nɪneɪiv ɪɡnɔɹd hɝ. "stʃɹeɪnʒ," ʃi mʌɾɝd, ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ tɛmpəl. ðə bɹeɪslət-ænd-ɹɪŋz kɑɾ ɪn əɹ hɛɹ, ən ʃi ɡɹɪməst. "aɪ kən ɔlmoʊs fil ən ɛkoʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ. ɪt mʌs bi ðɪs θɪŋ!"

"Maybe you've done your part," Nynaeve said, rising unsteadily. "Maybe. We'll see when this . . . this skimmer of yours turns. If it turns!" Renaile stared hard at her across the Bowl, but Nynaeve ignored her. "Strange," she muttered, rubbing her temple. The bracelet-and-rings caught in her hair, and she grimaced. "I can almost feel an echo of saidar. It must be this thing!"

"noʊ," ɪleɪn sɛd sloʊli. "aɪ kən fil ɪt, tu." nɑt dʒʌs ðə dɪmli pɝsiv kɹæklɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, ən nɑɾ ən ɛkoʊ, ɪɡzækli. mɔɹ ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv ən ɛkoʊ, soʊ feɪn ðəɾ ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ʃi wɝ filɪŋ sʌmwʌn juz seɪaɪdɑɹ əɾ eɪ. . . . ʃi tɝnd. ɑn ðə hɝaɪzən tə ðə saʊθ, laɪtnɪŋ flæʃt, dʌzənz ə boʊls vɪvəd sɪlvɝ-blu əɡɛns ði æftɝnun skaɪ. vɛɹi nɪɹ tə ɛbu dɑɹ.

"No," Elayne said slowly. "I can feel it, too." Not just the dimly perceived crackling in the air, and not an echo, exactly. More the shadow of an echo, so faint that it was as if she were feeling someone use saidar at a. . . . She turned. On the horizon to the south, lightning flashed, dozens of bolts vivid silver-blue against the afternoon sky. Very near to Ebou Dar.

"ə ɹeɪnstɔɹm?" sɝaɪðə sɛɾ iɡɝli. "ðə wɛðɝ mʌs bi ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪtsɛlf ɔlɹɛɾi." bʌt ðəɹ wɝ noʊ klaʊdz ɪn ðə skaɪ ivən wɛɹ ðə laɪtnɪŋ fɔɹkt ən fɛl. sɝaɪðə wɑz nɑt stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə sɛns seɪaɪdɑɹ biɪŋ wildɪɾ ət ðət dɪstəns.

"A rainstorm?" Sareitha said eagerly. "The weather must be righting itself already." But there were no clouds in the sky even where the lightning forked and fell. Sareitha was not strong enough to sense saidar being wielded at that distance.

ɪleɪn ʃɪvɝd. ʃi wɑz nɑt stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf. ənlɛs sʌmwʌn wɑz juzɪŋ əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ hæɾ ɑn ðɪs hɪltɑp. fɪfti əɹ ivən ə hʌnʒɹəd ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɔl tʃænəlɪŋ ət wʌns. ɔɹ. . . . "nɑt wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən," ʃi mɝmɝd. sʌmwʌn bɪhaɪn əɹ moʊnd.

Elayne shivered. She was not strong enough. Unless someone was using as much as they had on this hilltop. Fifty or even a hundred Aes Sedai, all channeling at once. Or. . . . "Not one of the Forsaken," she murmured. Someone behind her moaned.

"wʌn kʊdn də ðæt," nɪneɪiv əɡɹid kwaɪətli. "meɪbi ðeɪ dɪdn fil əs ðə weɪ wi də ðɛm, meɪbi, bʌt ðəl əv sin, ənlɛs ðəɹ ɔl blaɪnd. ðə laɪt bɝn əɹ lʌk!" kwaɪəɾ əɹ nɑt, ʃi wɑz ædʒəteɪɾəd; ʃi ɔfən kɔld ɪleɪn daʊn fəɹ juzɪŋ læŋɡwədʒ laɪk ðæt. "teɪk ɛvɹiwʌn u wɪl ɡoʊ tə ændɝ wɪð ju, ɪleɪn. aɪl. . . . əl mit jə ðɛɹ. mæts ɪn ðə sɪɾi. aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ bæk fəɹ hɪm. bɝn ðə bɔɪ; hi keɪm fəɹ mi, ən aɪ hæv tə."

"One couldn't do that," Nynaeve agreed quietly. "Maybe they didn't feel us the way we do them, maybe, but they'll have seen, unless they're all blind. The Light burn our luck!" Quiet or not, she was agitated; she often called Elayne down for using language like that. "Take everyone who will go to Andor with you, Elayne. I'll. . . . I'll meet you there. Mat's in the city. I have to go back for him. Burn the boy; he came for me, and I have to."

ɪleɪn ɹæpt əɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɝsɛlf ən dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. kwin taɪlɪn ʃi lɛf tə ðə mɝsiz ə ðə laɪt; taɪlɪn wəd sɝvaɪv ɪf ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl. bʌt mæt kɔθən, hɝ vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ, vɛɹi ɪnstʃɹʌktɪv səbdʒɛkt; hɝ moʊst ənlaɪkli ɹɛskjuɝ. hi hæd kʌm fəɹ hɝ, tu, ən ɔfɝd mɔɹ. ən tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn; dɪɹ tɑm, hu ʃi səmtaɪmz stɪl wɪʃt wəd tɝn aʊt tə bi hɝ ɹil fɑðɝ, ən ðə laɪt bɝn wʌt ðət wəd meɪk ə hɝ mʌðɝ. ən ðə bɔɪ, oʊlvɝ, ən tʃəl veɪnɪn, ænd. . . . ʃi hæd tə θɪŋk laɪk ə kwin. ðə ɹoʊz kɹaʊn ɪz hɛviɝ ðən ə maʊntən, hɝ mʌðɝ hæd toʊl hɝ, ən duɾi wɪl meɪk jə wip, bʌt jə mʌs bɛɹ ən də wʌt mʌs bi dʌn.

Elayne wrapped her arms around herself and drew a deep breath. Queen Tylin she left to the mercies of the Light; Tylin would survive if it was possible. But Mat Cauthon, her very strange, very instructive subject; her most unlikely rescuer. He had come for her, too, and offered more. And Thom Merrilin; dear Thom, who she sometimes still wished would turn out to be her real father, and the Light burn what that would make of her mother. And the boy, Olver, and Chel Vanin, and. . . . She had to think like a queen. The Rose Crown is heavier than a mountain, her mother had told her, and duty will make you weep, but you must bear and do what must be done.

"noʊ," ʃi sɛd, ðən mɔɹ fɝmli, "noʊ. lʊk ət ju, nɪneɪiv; jə kən hɑɹdli stænd. ivən ɪf wi ɔl wɛnt, wʌt kəd wi du? haʊ mɛni ʌv ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑɹ ðɛɹ? wid daɪ, əɹ wɝs, fəɹ noʊ ɡeɪn. ðə fɔɹseɪkən əv noʊ ɹizən tə lʊk fəɹ mæt əɹ ði ʌðɝz. ɪts əs ðəl bi æftɝ."

"No," she said, then more firmly, "No. Look at you, Nynaeve; you can hardly stand. Even if we all went, what could we do? How many of the Forsaken are there? We'd die, or worse, for no gain. The Forsaken have no reason to look for Mat or the others. It's us they will be after."

nɪneɪiv ɡeɪpt ət hɝ, stʌbɝn nɪneɪiv wɪð swɛt ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn əɹ feɪs ən əɹ lɛɡz ənstɛɾi. wʌndɝfəl, ɡælənt, fulɪʃ nɪneɪiv. "jɔɹ seɪɪŋ liv hɪm, ɪleɪn? eɪvinhə, tɔk tə hɝ. tɛl əɹ əbaʊt ðəɾ ɑnɝ jəɹ ɔlweɪz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn əbaʊt!"

Nynaeve gaped at her, stubborn Nynaeve with sweat running down her face and her legs unsteady. Wonderful, gallant, foolish Nynaeve. "You're saying leave him, Elayne? Aviendha, talk to her. Tell her about that honor you're always going on about!"

eɪvinhə hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. ʃi wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz swɛɾi əz nɪneɪiv, ən fɹəm ðə weɪ ʃi muvd, dʒʌst əz taɪɝd. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ taɪmz tə faɪt wɪθaʊt hoʊp, nɪneɪiv, bʌɾ ɪleɪn ɪz ɹaɪt. ðə ʃæɾoʊsuld wɪl nɑt bi lʊkɪŋ fəɹ mæt kɔθən; ðəl bi æftɝ ʌs, ən ðə boʊl. hi meɪ hæv lɛf ðə sɪɾi ɔlɹɛɾi. ɪf wi ɡoʊ, wi ɹɪsk ɡɪvɪŋ əm wʌt kən əndu wʌt wɪv dʌn. wɛɹɛvɝ wi sɛn ðə boʊl, ðəl bi eɪbəl tə meɪk əs tɛl əm u wi sɛn ɪt wɪð ən wɛɹ."

Aviendha hesitated, then shook her head. She was almost as sweaty as Nynaeve, and from the way she moved, just as tired. "There are times to fight without hope, Nynaeve, but Elayne is right. The Shadowsouled will not be looking for Mat Cauthon; they will be after us, and the Bowl. He may have left the city already. If we go, we risk giving them what can undo what we have done. Wherever we send the Bowl, they will be able to make us tell them who we sent it with and where."

nɪneɪivz feɪs kɹʌmpəld ɪn peɪn. ɪleɪn ɹitʃt tə pʊɾ əɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɝ.

Nynaeve's face crumpled in pain. Elayne reached to put her arms around her.

"ʃæɾoʊzpɔn!" sʌmwʌn skɹimd, ən sʌɾənli wɪmən wɝ ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ ɔl oʊvɝ ðə hɪltɑp. bɔlz ə faɪɝ ʃɑɾ ʌp fɹəm mɛɝɪlɪlz hænz, fɹəm kɛɝinz ən sɝaɪðəz, əz fæst əz ðeɪ kəd θɹoʊ. ə hjudʒ wɪŋd ʃeɪp ɛnvɛləpt ɪn fleɪm tʌmbəld aʊɾ ə ðə skaɪ tʃɹeɪlɪŋ ɔɪli blæk smoʊk, fɔlɪŋ dʒʌs bɪɑn ðə klɪf.

"Shadowspawn!" someone screamed, and suddenly women were embracing saidar all over the hilltop. Balls of fire shot up from Merilille's hands, from Careane's and Sareitha's, as fast as they could throw. A huge winged shape enveloped in flame tumbled out of the sky trailing oily black smoke, falling just beyond the cliff.

"ðɛɹz ənʌðɝ wʌn!" kɝstʃən ʃaʊɾəd, pɔɪntɪŋ. ə sɛkənd wɪŋ kɹitʃɝ dʌv əweɪ fɹəm ðə hɪl, bɑɾi əz bɪɡ əz ə hɔɹs, ɹɪbd wɪŋz spænɪŋ θɝɾi peɪsɪz əɹ mɔɹ, lɔŋ nɛk stʃɹɛtʃt aʊt bɪfɔɹ ən lɔŋɡɝ teɪl stʃɹimɪŋ bɪhaɪnd. tu fɪɡjɝz kɹaʊtʃt loʊ ɑn ɪts bæk. ə stɔɹm ə faɪɝ ɹeɪn æftɝ ɪt, kwɪkɪst ʌv ɔl fɹəm eɪvinhə ən ðə si foʊk, hu meɪd noʊ θɹoʊɪŋ dʒɛstʃɝ əz pɑɹɾ ə ðɛɹ wivɪŋ. ə heɪl ə faɪɝ soʊ θɪk ɪt sim ðət faɪɝ mʌs bi fɔɹmɪŋ ɪtsɛlf aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ, ən ðə θɪŋ dɑdʒ bɪhaɪn ðə hɪl ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə fɑɹm ən əpɪɹd tə vænɪʃ.

"There's another one!" Kirstian shouted, pointing. A second winged creature dove away from the hill, body as big as a horse, ribbed wings spanning thirty paces or more, long neck stretched out before and longer tail streaming behind. Two figures crouched low on its back. A storm of fire rained after it, quickest of all from Aviendha and the Sea Folk, who made no throwing gesture as part of their weaving. A hail of fire so thick it seemed that Fire must be forming itself out of the air, and the thing dodged behind the hill on the other side of the farm and appeared to vanish.

"dɪd wi kɪl ɪt?" sɝaɪðə æskt. hɝ aɪz ʃoʊn bɹaɪt, ən ʃi bɹið hɑɹɾ ɪn ædʒəteɪʃən.

"Did we kill it?" Sareitha asked. Her eyes shone bright, and she breathed hard in agitation.

"dɪd wi ivən hɪɾ ɪt?" wʌn ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ ɡɹaʊl dɪsɡʌstɪdli.

"Did we even hit it?" one of the Atha'an Miere growled disgustedly.

"ʃæɾoʊzpɔn," mɛɝɪlɪl mɝmɝɾ ɪn əmeɪzmənt. "hɪɹ! ət lis ðət pɹuvz ɪts ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ."

"Shadowspawn," Merilille murmured in amazement. "Here! At least that proves it's the Forsaken in Ebou Dar."

"nɑt ʃæɾoʊzpɔn," ɪleɪn sɛd hɑloʊli. nɪneɪivz feɪs wɑz ə pɪktʃɝ ʌv æŋɡwɪʃ; ʃi nu, tu. "ðeɪ kɔl ɪɾ ə ɹeɪkən. ɪts ðə sintʃæn. wi mʌst ɡoʊ, nɪneɪiv, ən teɪk ɛvɹi wʊmən ət ðə fɑɹm wɪð ʌs. wɛðɝ wi kɪl ðət θɪŋ əɹ nɑt, mɔɹ wɪl kʌm. ɛniwʌn wi liv bɪhaɪnd wɪl bi wɛɹɪŋ ə deɪmeɪn liʃ baɪ təmɑɹoʊ mɔɹnɪŋ." nɪneɪiv nɑɾəd, sloʊli, peɪnfəli; ɪleɪn θɔt ʃi mɝmɝd, "oʊ, mæt."

"Not Shadowspawn," Elayne said hollowly. Nynaeve's face was a picture of anguish; she knew, too. "They call it a raken. It's the Seanchan. We must go, Nynaeve, and take every woman at the farm with us. Whether we killed that thing or not, more will come. Anyone we leave behind will be wearing a damane leash by tomorrow morning." Nynaeve nodded, slowly, painfully; Elayne thought she murmured, "Oh, Mat."

ɹɪneɪl stʃɹoʊɾ ʌp wɪð ðə boʊl ɪn əɹ ɑɹmz, wʌns mɔɹ swɑðd ɪn ɪts waɪt kʌvɝɪŋ. "sʌm ʌv əɹ ʃɪps əv ɪnkaʊntɝd ðiz sintʃæn. ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ðən ðə ʃɪps bit tə si. maɪ ʃɪp faɪts fəɹ ɪz laɪf, ən aɪm nɑɾ ɑn ɪz dɛk! wi ɡoʊ naʊ!" ən ʃi fɔɹm ðə wiv fəɹ ə ɡeɪtweɪ, ɹaɪt ðɛɹ.

Renaile strode up with the Bowl in her arms, once more swathed in its white covering. "Some of our ships have encountered these Seanchan. If they are in Ebou Dar, then the ships beat to sea. My ship fights for his life, and I am not on his deck! We go now!" And she formed the weave for a gateway, right there.

ɪt tæŋɡəl jusləsli, ʌv kɔɹs, flɛɹd bɹaɪt fəɹ ən ɪnstən ðən kəlæpst ɪndə nʌθɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪleɪn skwikt ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf. ɹaɪt ðəɹ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðɛm! "ju ɑɹənt ɡoʊɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ fɹəm hɪɹ ənlɛs jə min tə steɪ lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə lɝn ðɪs hɪltɑp!" ʃi snæpt. ʃi hoʊp nʌn ə ðə wɪmən u hæd bɪn ɪn ðə sɝkəl tʃɹaɪd ðə wiv; hoʊldɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ wɑz ðə fæstəst weɪ tə lɝn ə pleɪs. ʃi cʊɾə meɪɾ ɪt wɝk hɪɹ, ən vɛɹi laɪkli soʊ kəd ðeɪ. "ju ɑɹənt ɡoʊɪŋ tə ə muvɪŋ ʃɪp fɹəm ɛniwɛɹ; aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ɪts ivən pɑsəbəl!" mɛɝɪlɪl nɑɾəd, ðoʊ ðət mɛn lɪɾəl; ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪlivd ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni θɪŋz tə bi tʃɹu, ən səm ə ðɛm æktʃəli  wɝ. əz wɛl ɪf ðə si foʊk bɪlivd ɪt pɹuvən, ɪn ɛni keɪs. nɪneɪiv, hæɡɝɾ ən stɛɹɪŋ, wɑz ɪn noʊ kəndɪʃən tə də ɛni liɾɪŋ ət ðə moʊmənt, soʊ ɪleɪn wɛn ɑn. ʃi hoʊpt ʃi mænədʒ tə də hɝ mʌðɝz mɛmɹi pɹaʊd. "bʌt moʊst ʌv ɔl, jə ɑɹənt ɡoʊɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ ɪksɛpt wɪð ʌs, kəz əɹ bɑɹɡən ɪzən kəmplit; ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz ɪz nɑt jʊɹz əntɪl ðə wɛðɝ ɪz ɹaɪt." nɑt pɹɪsaɪsli tʃɹu ənlɛs jə twɪstəd ðə wɝdz ə ðə bɑɹɡən ə lɪɾəl, ən ɹɪneɪl oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, bʌɾ ɪleɪn plaʊɾ ɑn. "æn kəz jə meɪɾ ə bɑɹɡən wɪð meɪtʃɹim kɔθən, maɪ sʌbʒɪkt. jə ɡoʊ vɑləntɛɹəli wɛɹ aɪ wɑn jə tə, əɹ jə ɡoʊ taɪd tə ə pæksæɾəl. ðoʊz wɝ ðə tʃɔɪsəz jə æksɛptɪd. soʊ, ɡɛt daʊn ðɪs hɪl naʊ, ɹɪneɪl dɪn kəlɑn blu stɑɹ, bɪfɔɹ ðə sintʃæn swip daʊn ɑn əs wɪð ən ɑɹmi ən ə fju hʌnʒɹəd wɪmən u kən tʃænəl ən wəd laɪk nʌθɪŋ bɛɾɝ ðən tə si əs kɑlɝɾ əlɔŋsaɪd ðɛm. naʊ! ɹʌn!"

It tangled uselessly, of course, flared bright for an instant then collapsed into nothing, but Elayne squeaked in spite of herself. Right there in the middle of them! "You aren't going anywhere from here unless you mean to stay long enough to learn this hilltop!" she snapped. She hoped none of the women who had been in the circle tried the weave; holding saidar was the fastest way to learn a place. She could have made it work here, and very likely so could they. "You aren't going to a moving ship from anywhere; I don't think it's even possible!" Merilille nodded, though that meant little; Aes Sedai believed a great many things to be true, and some of them actually were. As well if the Sea Folk believed it proven, in any case. Nynaeve, haggard and staring, was in no condition to do any leading at the moment, so Elayne went on. She hoped she managed to do her mother's memory proud. "But most of all, you aren't going anywhere except with us, because our bargain isn't complete; the Bowl of the Winds is not yours until the weather is right." Not precisely true unless you twisted the words of the bargain a little, and Renaile opened her mouth, but Elayne plowed on. "And because you made a bargain with Matrim Cauthon, my subject. You go voluntarily where I want you to, or you go tied to a packsaddle. Those were the choices you accepted. So, get down this hill now, Renaile din Calon Blue Star, before the Seanchan sweep down on us with an army and a few hundred women who can channel and would like nothing better than to see us collared alongside them. Now! Run!"

tə hɝ əstɑnɪʃmənt, ðeɪ ɹæn.

To her astonishment, they ran.


tʃæptɝ sɪks


CHAPTER 6

θɹɛdz


Threads

ɪleɪn ɹæn, tu, ʌv kɔɹs, hoʊldɪŋ əɹ skɝts ʌp, ən kwɪkli tʊk ðə lɛɾ ɑn ðə wɛl-wɔɹn dɝt pæθ. oʊnli eɪvinhə steɪd kloʊs, ðoʊ ʃi sim tə hæv noʊ aɪdiə haʊ tə ɹʌn ɪn ə dʒɹɛs, dɪvaɪɾəd əɹ nɑt; taɪɝɾ əz ʃi wɑz, ʃi sɝɾənli wʊɾə pæst ɪleɪn ʌðɝwaɪz. ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls stʃɹʌŋ aʊt bɪhaɪn əm əlɔŋ ðə nɛɹoʊ, waɪndɪŋ tʃɹæk. nʌn ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ wəd pʊʃ baɪ ɹɪneɪl, ən dɪspaɪɾ əɹ sɪlk tʃɹaʊzɝz ʃi kəd nɑt muv vɛɹi fæs kæɹiɪŋ ðə boʊl hʌɡd tə hɝ tʃɛst. nɪneɪiv hæd noʊ sətʃ kəmpjuŋkʃənz, ɛlboʊɪŋ pæst ən ɹʌnɪŋ hɑɹd, ʃaʊɾɪŋ fəɹ pipəl tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ weɪ wən ʃi stʌmbəld ɪndə ðɛm wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɝ wɪndfɪndɝz, kɪnswɪmən, əɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Elayne ran, too, of course, holding her skirts up, and quickly took the lead on the well-worn dirt path. Only Aviendha stayed close, though she seemed to have no idea how to run in a dress, divided or not; tired as she was, she certainly would have passed Elayne otherwise. Everyone else strung out behind them along the narrow, winding track. None of the Atha'an Miere would push by Renaile, and despite her silk trousers she could not move very fast carrying the Bowl hugged to her chest. Nynaeve had no such compunctions, elbowing past and running hard, shouting for people to get out of her way when she stumbled into them whether they were Windfinders, Kinswomen, or Aes Sedai.

baʊndɪŋ daʊn ðə hɪlsaɪd, tʃɹɪpɪŋ ən kætʃɪŋ hɝsɛlf, ɪleɪn wɑntəd tə læf dɪspaɪt ði ɝdʒənsi. dɪspaɪt ðə deɪnʒɝ. lini ən əɹ mʌðɝ hæd bɪn dɛθ ɑn ɹʌnɪŋ ən klaɪmɪŋ tʃɹiz fɹəm ðə taɪm ʃi wɑz twɛlv, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt dʒʌs ðə ʃɪɹ plɛʒɝ ə ɹʌnɪŋ əɡɛn ðət meɪd dɪlaɪt bʌbəl ʌp ɪn əɹ mɪɾəl. ʃi hæd bɪheɪvd əz ə kwin wɑz səpoʊz tə bɪheɪv, ən ɪt hæd wɝkt ɪɡzækli əz ɪt wɑz səpoʊz tə! ʃi hæd teɪkən tʃɑɹdʒ, tə lid pipəl aʊɾ ə deɪnʒɝ, ən ðeɪ fɑloʊd! hɝ hoʊl laɪf hæd bɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ fəɹ ðɪs. ɪt wɑz sæɾəsfækʃən ðət meɪɾ əɹ læf, ən ðə hɑt ɡloʊ ʌv pɹaɪd simd əbaʊt tə bɝs θɹu hɝ skɪn laɪk ðə ɹeɪdʒjəns ə seɪaɪdɑɹ.

Bounding down the hillside, tripping and catching herself, Elayne wanted to laugh despite the urgency. Despite the danger. Lini and her mother had been death on running and climbing trees from the time she was twelve, but it was not just the sheer pleasure of running again that made delight bubble up in her middle. She had behaved as a queen was supposed to behave, and it had worked exactly as it was supposed to! She had taken charge, to lead people out of danger, and they followed! Her whole life had been training for this. It was satisfaction that made her laugh, and the hot glow of pride seemed about to burst through her skin like the radiance of saidar.

ɹaʊndɪŋ ðə læs kɝv, ʃi paʊndɪd daʊn ðə faɪnəl stʃɹeɪt bɪsaɪd wʌn ə ðə tɔl waɪt-plæstɝd bɑɹnz. ən əɹ toʊ kɑɾ ən ɔlmoʊs bɛɹid stoʊn. ʃi pɪtʃt fɔɹwɝd hɛvəli, wɪndmɪlɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz, ən sʌɾənli ʃi wɑz sʌmɝsɔltɪŋ hɛd-oʊvɝ-hilz θɹu ði ɛɹ. noʊ taɪm ivən tə jɛl. wɪð ə θʌmp ðət dʒɑɹɾ əɹ tiθ ən tʊk ɔl ðə wɪn aʊɾ ə hɝ, ʃi lændəd hɑɹɾ ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə pæθ, sɪɾɪŋ ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə bɝdʒɪt. fəɹ ən ɪnstənt ʃi kəd nɑɾ ivən θɪŋk, ən wən ʃi kʊd, lɪɾəl sæɾəsfækʃən ɹɪmeɪnd. soʊ mʌtʃ fəɹ kwinli dɪɡnəɾi. bɹʌʃɪŋ əɹ hɛɹ aʊɾ ə hɝ feɪs, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə kætʃ əɹ bɹɛθ əz ʃi weɪɾəd fəɹ bɝdʒɪts kʌɾɪŋ kɑmɛnt. ðɪs wɑz ə tʃæns fəɹ ði ʌðɝ wʊmən tə pleɪ ði oʊldɝ ən waɪzɝ sɪstɝ wɪð ə vɛnʒəns, ən ʃi sɛldəm lɛɾ ən ɑpɝtunəɾi pæs.

Rounding the last curve, she pounded down the final straight beside one of the tall white-plastered barns. And her toe caught an almost buried stone. She pitched forward heavily, windmilling her arms, and suddenly she was somersaulting head-over-heels through the air. No time even to yell. With a thump that jarred her teeth and took all the wind out of her, she landed hard at the foot of the path, sitting right in front of Birgitte. For an instant she could not even think, and when she could, little satisfaction remained. So much for queenly dignity. Brushing her hair out of her face, she tried to catch her breath as she waited for Birgitte's cutting comment. This was a chance for the other woman to play the older and wiser sister with a vengeance, and she seldom let an opportunity pass.

tə ɪleɪnz sɝpɹaɪz, bɝdʒɪt hivd əɹ tə hɝ fiɾ ivən bɪfɔɹ eɪvinhə kəd ɹitʃ hɝ, ən wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ðə feɪnt ɡɹɪn ɑn eɪvinhəz feɪs. ɔl ɪleɪn kəd fil fɹəm əɹ wɔɹɾɝ wɑz ə sɛns ʌv . . . foʊkəs; ʃi θɔɾ ən æɹoʊ nɑkt ɑn ə dʒɹɔn bɑstʃɹɪŋ maɪt fil ðət weɪ. "du wi ɹʌn əɹ faɪt?" bɝdʒɪɾ æskt. "aɪ ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðoʊz sintʃæn flaɪɝz fɹəm fɑlm, ən tʃɹuθ fəɹ tʃɹu, aɪ sədʒɛst ɹʌnɪŋ. maɪ baʊ ɪz ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi sɔɹt, tədeɪ." eɪvinhə ɡeɪv əɹ ə slaɪt fɹaʊn, ən ɪleɪn saɪd; bɝdʒɪt hæd tə lɝn tə ɡɑɹɾ əɹ tʌŋ ɪf ʃi ɹɪli ɪntɛndəd tə haɪɾ u ʃi wɑz.

To Elayne's surprise, Birgitte heaved her to her feet even before Aviendha could reach her, and without so much as the faint grin on Aviendha's face. All Elayne could feel from her Warder was a sense of . . . focus; she thought an arrow nocked on a drawn bowstring might feel that way. "Do we run or fight?" Birgitte asked. "I recognized those Seanchan fliers from Falme, and truth for true, I suggest running. My bow is the ordinary sort, today." Aviendha gave her a slight frown, and Elayne sighed; Birgitte had to learn to guard her tongue if she really intended to hide who she was.

"ʌv kɔɹs wi ɹʌn," nɪneɪiv pæntɪd, leɪbɝɪŋ daʊn ðə faɪnəl stʃɹɛtʃ ə pæθ. "faɪɾ əɹ ɹʌn! ful kwɛstʃən! dʒju θɪŋk wɝ ʌɾɝ - ? laɪt! wʌɾ ɑɹ ðeɪ duɪŋ?" hɝ vɔɪs stɑɹɾəd klaɪmɪŋ ən kɛpt ɹaɪɾ ɑn. "æləz! æləz, wɛɹ ɑɹ ju? æləz! æləz!"

"Of course we run," Nynaeve panted, laboring down the final stretch of path. "Fight or run! Fool question! Do you think we're utter - ? Light! What are they doing?" Her voice started climbing and kept right on. "Alise! Alise, where are you? Alise! Alise!"

wɪð ə stɑɹt, ɪleɪn ɹilaɪz ðə fɑɹm wɑz bɔɪlɪŋ əz bædli əz ɪt hæd wən kɛɝinz feɪs wɑz ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd. meɪbi wɝs. ə hʌnʒɹəd ən fɔɹɾi-sɛvən kɪnswɪmən ɪnhæbəɾəd ðə pleɪs ət pɹɛzənt, æləz hæd ɹipɔɹɾəd, ɪnkluɾɪŋ fɪfti-fɔɹ ɹɛd-bɛltəd waɪz wɪmən sɛn aʊt deɪz əɡoʊ ən ə nʌmbɝ ʌv ʌðɝz u hæd bɪn pæsɪŋ θɹu ðə sɪɾi; naʊ ɪt lʊkt əz ðoʊ ɛvɹi læst wʌn wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ, ən ə ɡʊd mɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝ wɪmən, tu. moʊst ə ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs sɝvəns ɪn ðɛɹ ɡɹin-ænd-waɪt lɪvɝi dæʃt ðɪs weɪ ən ðət kæɹiɪŋ bɝɾənz. dʌks ən tʃɪkənz dɑɹɾɪd θɹu ðə tuməlt, flæpɪŋ ən skwɔkɪŋ, æɾɪŋ tə ði əpɛɹən kənfjuʒən. ɪleɪn ivən sɔ ə wɔɹɾɝ, vændinz ɡɹɪzəl jeɪɛm, tʃɹɑt baɪ wɪð ɪz wɪɹi ɑɹmz ɹæpt ɝaʊn ə bɪɡ dʒut sæk!

With a start, Elayne realized the farm was boiling as badly as it had when Careane's face was recognized. Maybe worse. A hundred and forty-seven Kinswomen inhabited the place at present, Alise had reported, including fifty-four red-belted Wise Women sent out days ago and a number of others who had been passing through the city; now it looked as though every last one was running somewhere, and a good many of the other women, too. Most of the Tarasin Palace servants in their green-and-white livery dashed this way and that carrying burdens. Ducks and chickens darted through the tumult, flapping and squawking, adding to the apparent confusion. Elayne even saw a Warder, Vandene's grizzled Jaem, trot by with his wiry arms wrapped around a big jute sack!

æləz əpɪɹɾ əz ðoʊ fɹəm ði ɛɹ, pɔɪzd ən kəlɛktəd dɪspaɪt ðə pɝspɝeɪʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs. ɛvɹi stʃɹæn ə hɝ hɛɹ wɑz ɪn pleɪs, ən əɹ dʒɹɛs lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi wɝ mɪɹli aʊt fəɹ ə stʃɹoʊl. "ðɛɹz noʊ nid tə skɹitʃ," ʃi sɛd kɑmli, plæntɪŋ hænz ɑn hɪps. "bɝdʒɪt toʊl mi wʌt ðoʊz bɪɡ bɝdz ɑɹ, ən aɪ θɔt wi maɪt bi livɪŋ sunɝ ɹæðɝ ðən leɪɾɝ, ɪspɛʃli wɪð ɔl ə jə ɡæləpɪŋ daʊn ðə hɪl laɪk ðə dɑɹk wʌn hɪmsɛlf wɑz æftɝ ju. aɪ toʊld ɛvɹibɑɾi tə kəlɛkt wʌn klin dʒɹɛs əpis, θɹi tʃeɪnʒəz ə ʃɪft ən stɑkɪŋz, soʊp, mɛndɪŋ bæskəts, ən ɔl ðə kɔɪn ðeɪ hæv. ðæt, ən noʊ mɔɹ. ðə læs tɛn tə fɪnɪʃ wɪl də ðə wɑʃɪŋ-ʌp tɪl wi ɡɛt wɛɹ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ; ðət wɪl spid ðɛɹ fit. aɪ toʊl ðoʊz sɝvəns tə ɡæðɝ ɔl ðə fud ðeɪ kʊd, tu, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs. ən jəɹ wɔɹɾɝz. sɛnsəbəl fɛloʊz, moʊst ə ðɛm. sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli sɛnsəbəl, fəɹ mɛn. dʌz biɪŋ ə wɔɹɾɝ də sʌmθɪŋ tə ðɛm?"

Alise appeared as though from the air, poised and collected despite the perspiration on her face. Every strand of her hair was in place, and her dress looked as if she were merely out for a stroll. "There's no need to screech," she said calmly, planting hands on hips. "Birgitte told me what those big birds are, and I thought we might be leaving sooner rather than later, especially with all of you galloping down the hill like the Dark One himself was after you. I told everybody to collect one clean dress apiece, three changes of shift and stockings, soap, mending baskets, and all the coin they have. That, and no more. The last ten to finish will do the washing-up till we get where we're going; that will speed their feet. I told those servants to gather all the food they could, too, just in case. And your Warders. Sensible fellows, most of them. Surprisingly sensible, for men. Does being a Warder do something to them?"

nɪneɪiv stʊd ðəɹ wɪð əɹ dʒɔ hæŋɪŋ, ɹɛɾi tə ɪʃu ɔɹɾɝz ən nʌn lɛf tə ɡɪv. ɪmoʊʃənz pleɪɾ əkɹɔs əɹ feɪs tu fæs tə kætʃ. "vɛɹi ɡʊd," ʃi mʌmbəl faɪnəli. ən saʊɝli. sʌɾənli ʃi bɹaɪɾənd. "ðə wɪmən u ɑɹən kɪn. jɛs! ðeɪv tə bi - "

Nynaeve stood there with her jaw hanging, ready to issue orders and none left to give. Emotions played across her face too fast to catch. "Very good," she mumbled finally. And sourly. Suddenly she brightened. "The women who aren't Kin. Yes! They have to be - "

"kɑm jɝsɛlf," æləz bɹoʊk ɪn, meɪkɪŋ ə suðɪŋ dʒɛstʃɝ. "ðeɪ ɑɹ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɔn, fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt. meɪnli ðoʊz wɪð hʌzbənz əɹ fæmliz ðəɹ wɝiɾ əbaʊt. aɪ kʊdn əv hɛl ðoʊz bæk hæɾ aɪ wɑntəd. bʌɾ ə ɡʊd θɝɾi θɪŋk ðoʊz bɝdz ɹɪli ɑɹ ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, ən wɑnə steɪ əz kloʊs tə ɛɛs sədaɪ əz ðeɪ kən ɡɛt." ə ʃɑɹp snɪf sɛd wʌt ʃi θɔɾ ə ðæt. "naʊ, jə dʒʌst ɡæðɝ jɝsɛlf. dʒɹɪŋk səm kul wɔɾɝ; nɑt tu fæst. pʊɾ ə lɪɾəl ɑn jəɹ feɪs. aɪ hæv tə kip ən aɪ ɑn θɪŋz." kæstɪŋ əɹ aɪ oʊvɝ ðə bʌsəl, ɛvɹibɑɾi ɹʌnɪŋ ɪn baʊnz, æləz ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "sʌm wəd slæk ɔf ɪf tʃɹɑləks wɝ kʌmɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə hɪl, ən moʊst ə ðə noʊbəlwɪmən nɛvɝ ɹɪli də ɡɛt juz tə əɹ ɹulz. fəɹ ʃʊɹ, əl nid tə ɹimaɪn tu əɹ θɹi bɪfɔɹ wi ɡoʊ." wɪð ðæt, ʃi weɪɾɪd sɝinəli bæk ɪndə ðə tɝmɔɪl ə ðə fɑɹmjɑɹɾ ən lɛf nɪneɪiv ɡeɪpɪŋ.

"Calm yourself," Alise broke in, making a soothing gesture. "They are already gone, for the most part. Mainly those with husbands or families they're worried about. I couldn't have held those back had I wanted. But a good thirty think those birds really are Shadowspawn, and want to stay as close to Aes Sedai as they can get." A sharp sniff said what she thought of that. "Now, you just gather yourself. Drink some cool water; not too fast. Put a little on your face. I have to keep an eye on things." Casting her eye over the bustle, everybody running in bounds, Alise shook her head. "Some would slack off if Trollocs were coming over the hill, and most of the noblewomen never really do get used to our rules. For sure, I'll need to remind two or three before we go." With that, she waded serenely back into the turmoil of the farmyard and left Nynaeve gaping.

"wɛl," ɪleɪn sɛd, bɹʌʃɪŋ əɹ skɝt, "ju dɪd seɪ ʃi wɑz ə vɛɹi keɪpəbəl wʊmən."

"Well," Elayne said, brushing her skirt, "you did say she was a very capable woman."

"aɪ nɛvɝ sɛd ðæt," nɪneɪiv snæpt. "aɪ nɛvɝ sɛd 'vɛɹi' mf! wɛɹ dɪd maɪ hæt ɡɛt tə? θɪŋks ʃi noʊz ɛvɹiθɪŋ. əl weɪdʒɝ ʃi dʌznt noʊ ðæt!" ʃi flaʊnst ɔf ɪn ə dɪfɹən dɝɛkʃən ðən æləz.

"I never said that," Nynaeve snapped. "I never said 'very' Hmmph! Where did my hat get to? Thinks she knows everything. I'll wager she doesn't know that!" She flounced off in a different direction than Alise.

ɪleɪn stɛɹɾ æftɝ hɝ. hɝ hæt? ʃi wʊɾə laɪk tə noʊ wɛɹ əɹ oʊn hæt hæd ɡɔn tə - ɪt wɑz ə bjuɾəfəl θɪŋ - bʌt ɹɪli! meɪbi biɪŋ ɪn ə sɝkəl wɝkɪŋ ðət mʌtʃ ə ðə paʊɝ, juzɪŋ ən æŋɡɹil duɪŋ ɪt, hæɾ ənsɛɾəld nɪneɪivz wɪts tɛmpɝɛɹəli. ʃi stɪl fɛlt ə tʃɹaɪfəl ɑd, hɝsɛlf, əz ðoʊ ʃi kəd plʌk lɪɾəl bɪts ə seɪaɪdɑɹ aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ ɝaʊn hɝ. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ʃi hæɾ ʌðɝ mæɾɝz tə wɝi əbaʊt ɹaɪt ðɛn. laɪk biɪŋ ɹɛɾi tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ bɪfɔɹ ðə sintʃæn dɪsɛndəd. fɹəm wʌt ʃi hæd sin ɪn fɑlm, ðeɪ ɹɪli maɪt bɹɪŋ ə hʌnʒɹəd deɪmeɪn, əɹ mɔɹ, ən beɪst ɑn ðə lɪɾəl ɛɡwin wəd lɛt hɝsɛlf seɪ ʌv əɹ kæptɪvəɾi, moʊst ə ðoʊz wɪmən ɹɪli wəd bi iɡɝ tə hɛlp kɑlɝ ʌðɝz. ʃi sɛd ðət wʌt hæd tɝn əɹ stʌmək moʊs hæd bɪn ðə saɪɾ ə deɪmeɪn fɹəm sintʃæn læfɪŋ wɪð ðɛɹ sʌldəm, fɔnɪŋ ən pleɪɪŋ wɪð ðɛm, wɛl-tʃɹeɪn haʊnz wɪð ðɛɹ əfɛkʃənət hænlɝz. ɛɡwin sɛd səm ə ðə wɪmən kɑlɝɾ ɪn fɑlm hæd bɪn ðət weɪ, tu. ɪt meɪɾ ɪleɪnz blʌd ɹʌn koʊld. ʃi wəd daɪ bɪfɔɹ lɛɾɪŋ əm pʊt ðət liʃ ɑn hɝ! ən ʃi wəɾ əz sun lɛt ðə fɔɹseɪkən əv wʌt ʃi hæd faʊn əz ðə sintʃæn. ʃi wɛn ɹʌnɪŋ tə ðə sɪstɝn, eɪvinhə əɾ əɹ saɪd bɹiðɪŋ ɔlmoʊst əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi wɑz hɝsɛlf.

Elayne stared after her. Her hat? She would have liked to know where her own hat had gone to - it was a beautiful thing - but really! Maybe being in a circle working that much of the Power, using an angreal doing it, had unsettled Nynaeve's wits temporarily. She still felt a trifle odd, herself, as though she could pluck little bits of saidar out of the air around her. In any case, she had other matters to worry about right then. Like being ready to get away before the Seanchan descended. From what she had seen in Falme, they really might bring a hundred damane, or more, and based on the little Egwene would let herself say of her captivity, most of those women really would be eager to help collar others. She said that what had turned her stomach most had been the sight of damane from Seanchan laughing with their sul'dam, fawning and playing with them, well-trained hounds with their affectionate handlers. Egwene said some of the women collared in Falme had been that way, too. It made Elayne's blood run cold. She would die before letting them put that leash on her! And she would as soon let the Forsaken have what she had found as the Seanchan. She went running to the cistern, Aviendha at her side breathing almost as hard as she was herself.

ɪt simd æləz ɹɪli hæd θɔɾ ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ðoʊ. ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi stoʊɾ əweɪ ɑn ðə pækhɔɹsɪz. ði ənsɝtʃt pænɪɝz ɹɪmeɪn fʊl ə dʒʌmbəld ɑdz ən ɛnz ən ðə laɪt nu wʌt, bʌt ðoʊz ʃi ən eɪvinhə hæɾ ɛmptid naʊ bʌlʒd wɪð kɔɹs sæks ə flaʊɝ ən sɔlt, binz ən lɛntəlz. ə hændfʊl ə steɪbəlfoʊk maɪndəd ðə pækænəməlz ɪnstɛɾ ə ɹʌnɪŋ əbaʊt wɪð ðɛɹ ɑɹmz fʊl. duɪŋ æləzəz bɪɾɪŋ, noʊ daʊt. ivən bɝdʒɪt wɛn tʃɹɑɾɪŋ ɔf ət ðə wʊmənz kɔl wɪð noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə ɹufəl ɡɹɪn!

It seemed Alise really had thought of everything, though. The ter'angreal were already stowed away on the packhorses. The unsearched panniers remained full of jumbled odds and ends and the Light knew what, but those she and Aviendha had emptied now bulged with coarse sacks of flour and salt, beans and lentils. A handful of stablefolk minded the packanimals instead of running about with their arms full. Doing Alise's bidding, no doubt. Even Birgitte went trotting off at the woman's call with no more than a rueful grin!

ɪleɪn lɪftəd kænvəs kʌvɝz tə ɪɡzæmɪn ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil əz wɛl əz ʃi kəd wɪθaʊɾ ənloʊɾɪŋ əm əɡɛn. ɛvɹiθɪŋ əpɪɹd tə bi ðɛɹ, ə bɪt tʌmbəl təɡɛðɝ ɪn tu pænɪɝz, nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə fɪl ðɛm, bʌt nʌθɪŋ bɹoʊkən. nɑt ðəɾ ɛniθɪŋ ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪtsɛlf kəd bɹeɪk moʊs tɛɹæŋɡɹil, jɛɾ ivən soʊ. . . .

Elayne lifted canvas covers to examine the ter'angreal as well as she could without unloading them again. Everything appeared to be there, a bit tumbled together in two panniers, not enough to fill them, but nothing broken. Not that anything short of the One Power itself could break most ter'angreal, yet even so. . . .

eɪvinhə tʊk ə sit kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, blɑɾɪŋ swɛt fɹəm əɹ feɪs wɪð ə lɑɹdʒ, pleɪn lɪnən hæŋkɝtʃɪf ðət sim vɛɹi mʌtʃ əɾ ɑdz wɪð əɹ pɹɪɾi sɪlk ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs. ivən ʃi wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ʃoʊ wɪɹinəs. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə mʌɾɝɪŋ əbaʊt, ɪleɪn? jə saʊn laɪk nɪneɪiv. ðɪs æləz əz oʊnli seɪvd əs ðə tʃɹʌbəl ə pækɪŋ ðoʊz θɪŋz aʊɝsɛlvz."

Aviendha took a seat cross-legged on the ground, blotting sweat from her face with a large, plain linen handkerchief that seemed very much at odds with her pretty silk riding dress. Even she was beginning to show weariness. "What are you muttering about, Elayne? You sound like Nynaeve. This Alise has only saved us the trouble of packing those things ourselves."

ɪleɪn kʌlɝd feɪnli. ʃi hæd nɑt mɛn tə spik əlaʊd. "aɪ dʒʌs doʊnt wɑn ɛniwʌn hænlɪŋ əm u dʌznt noʊ wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ duɪŋ, eɪvinhə." səm tɛɹæŋɡɹil kəd tʃɹɪɡɝ ivən fəɹ pipəl əneɪbəl tə tʃænəl, ɪf ðeɪ dɪd ðə ɹɔŋ θɪŋ, bʌt ðə tʃɹuθ wɑz, ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑn ɛniwʌn hænlɪŋ ðɛm. ðeɪ wɝ hɝz! ðə hɔl wɑz nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ tə hæn ðiz oʊvɝ tə səm ʌðɝ sɪstɝ dʒʌs kəz ʃi wɑz oʊldɝ ən mɔɹ ɪkspɪɹiənst, əɹ haɪɾ əm əweɪ kəz stʌɾiɪŋ tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɑz tu deɪnʒɝəs. wɪð ðɪs mɛni ɪɡzæmpəlz tə stʌɾi, meɪbi ʃi kəd faɪnəli fɪɡjɝ aʊt haʊ tə meɪk tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðət wɝkt ɛvɹi taɪm; ðəɹ hæd bɪn fɑɹ tu mɛni feɪljɝz ən hæf-səksɛsəz. "ðeɪ nid sʌmwʌn u noʊz wʌt ʃiz duɪŋ," ʃi sɛd, læʃɪŋ ðə stɪf kænvəs bæk ɪn pleɪs.

Elayne colored faintly. She had not meant to speak aloud. "I just don't want anyone handling them who doesn't know what they are doing, Aviendha." Some ter'angreal could trigger even for people unable to channel, if they did the wrong thing, but the truth was, she did not want anyone handling them. They were hers! The Hall was not going to hand these over to some other sister just because she was older and more experienced, or hide them away because studying ter'angreal was too dangerous. With this many examples to study, maybe she could finally figure out how to make ter'angreal that worked every time; there had been far too many failures and half-successes. "They need someone who knows what she's doing," she said, lashing the stiff canvas back in place.

ɔɹɾɝ bɪɡæn tə əpɪɹ aʊɾ ə pændɪmoʊniəm mɔɹ ɹæpədli ðən ɪleɪn ɪkspɛktəd, ðoʊ nɑɾ əz fæst əz ʃi kəɾ əv wɪʃt. ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi ədmɪɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli, nʌθɪŋ sloʊɝ ðən ɪnstəntæniəs cʊɾə mætʃt əɹ wɪʃɪz. əneɪbəl tə kip əɹ aɪz ɔf ðə skaɪ, ʃi sɛn kɛɝin ɹʌnɪŋ bæk tə ðə tɑp ə ðə hɪl tə wɑtʃ təwɔɹɾ ɛbu dɑɹ. ðə stɑki ɡɹin ɡɹʌmbəld ə bɪɾ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ bɪfɔɹ kɝtsiɪŋ, ən ivən fɹaʊn ət ðə kɪnswɪmən dæʃɪŋ əbaʊɾ əz ɪf ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə sədʒɛstɪŋ wʌn ə ðɛm ɪnstɛd, bʌɾ ɪleɪn wɑntəd sʌmwʌn u wəd nɑt feɪn ət ðə saɪɾ ʌv "ʃæɾoʊzpɔn" əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ, ən kɛɝin stʊd loʊəst əmʌŋ ðə sɪstɝz. æɾɪliz ən vændin bɹɔɾ aʊɾ ɪspæn bɪtwin ðɛm, fɝmli ʃildɪɾ ən ðə lɛðɝ sæk bæk oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd. ʃi wɔkt kwaɪɾ izəli, ən nʌθɪŋ vɪzəbəl sɛd ðəɾ ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl hæd bɪn dʌn tə hɝ, ɪksɛpt. . . . ɪspæn kɛpt əɹ hænz foʊldəɾ əɾ əɹ weɪst, nɛvɝ soʊ mʌtʃ əz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹeɪz ðə sæk fəɹ ə pik, ən wən ʃi wɑz bustɪɾ ɪndə ə sæɾəl, ʃi hɛld aʊɾ əɹ ɹɪsts tə bi kɔɹɾəd tə ðə pɑməl wɪθaʊt biɪŋ toʊld. ɪf ʃi wɑz ðəɾ əmɛnəbəl, pɝhæps ðeɪ hæd lɝn sʌmθɪŋ fɹəm hɝ. ɪleɪn dʒʌs dɪd nɑt wɑnə kɑntəmpleɪt haʊ ðə lɝnɪŋ maɪɾ əv bɪn ətʃivd.

Order began to appear out of pandemonium more rapidly than Elayne expected, though not as fast as she could have wished. Of course, she admitted reluctantly, nothing slower than instantaneous could have matched her wishes. Unable to keep her eyes off the sky, she sent Careane running back to the top of the hill to watch toward Ebou Dar. The stocky Green grumbled a bit under her breath before curtsying, and even frowned at the Kinswomen dashing about as if on the point of suggesting one of them instead, but Elayne wanted someone who would not faint at the sight of "Shadowspawn" approaching, and Careane stood lowest among the sisters. Adeleas and Vandene brought out Ispan between them, firmly shielded and the leather sack back over her head. She walked quite easily, and nothing visible said that anything at all had been done to her, except. . . . Ispan kept her hands folded at her waist, never so much as trying to raise the sack for a peek, and when she was boosted into a saddle, she held out her wrists to be corded to the pommel without being told. If she was that amenable, perhaps they had learned something from her. Elayne just did not want to contemplate how the learning might have been achieved.

ðəɹ wɝ . . . bʌmps, ʌv kɔɹs, ʌv sɔɹts, ivən wɪð wʌt maɪt bi ɹʌʃɪŋ təwɔɹd ðɛm. wʌt ʃʊɹli wɑz ɹʌʃɪŋ təwɔɹd ðɛm. nɪneɪiv ɡɛɾɪŋ əɹ blu-plum hæt bæk wɑz nɑt ɹɪli ə bʌmp, ðoʊ ɪɾ ɔlmoʊs tɝn ɪndə wʌn; æləz hæd faʊn ɪt, ən hændəɾ ɪt bæk tɛlɪŋ nɪneɪiv ʃi niɾəd tə ʃild əɹ feɪs fɹəm ðə sʌn ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə kip ðət smuð pɹɪɾi skɪn. ən oʊpənməð nɪneɪiv wɑtʃt ðə ɡɹeɪɪŋ wʊmən hɝi ɔf tə dil wɪð wʌn ə ðə numɝəs smɔl pɹɑbləmz, ðən ɑstənteɪʃəsli ʃʌv ðə hæɾ ʌndɝ ə stʃɹæp ə hɝ sæɾəlbæɡz.

There were . . . bumps, of course, of sorts, even with what might be rushing toward them. What surely was rushing toward them. Nynaeve getting her blue-plumed hat back was not really a bump, though it almost turned into one; Alise had found it, and handed it back telling Nynaeve she needed to shield her face from the sun if she wanted to keep that smooth pretty skin. An openmouthed Nynaeve watched the graying woman hurry off to deal with one of the numerous small problems, then ostentatiously shoved the hat under a strap of her saddlebags.

fɹəm ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ nɪneɪiv sɛɾ əbaʊt flæɾənɪŋ ðə ɹil bʌmps, bʌɾ æləz wɑz nɪɹli ɔlweɪz ðəɹ fɝst, ən wɛɹ æləz mɛɾ ə bʌmp, ðə bʌmp flæɾənd ɪtsɛlf. sɛvɹəl noʊbəlwɪmən dɪmændəd hɛlp pækɪŋ ðɛɹ bɪlɔŋɪŋz, oʊnli tə bi ɪnfɔɹmd ɪn noʊ ənsɝɾən tɝmz ðət ʃi hæd mɛnt wʌt ʃi sɛɾ ən ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt hɑp tə ɪt, ðeɪ kəd lɪv ɪn wʌt ðeɪ stʊɾ ɪn. ðeɪ hɑpt. sʌm, ən nɑɾ oʊnli noʊbəlz, tʃeɪnʒd ðɛɹ maɪnz əbaʊt ɡoʊɪŋ wən ðeɪ lɝn ðə dɛstəneɪʃən wɑz ændɝ, ən wɝ lɪɾɝəli tʃeɪst əweɪ. əfʊt, ən toʊl tə kip ɹʌnɪŋ əz lɔŋ əz ðeɪ kʊd. ɛvɹi hɔɹs wɑz niɾəd, bʌt ðeɪ hæd tə bi wɛl əweɪ bɪfɔɹ ðə sintʃæn əpɪɹd; ət ðə vɛɹi lis ðeɪ kəd bi ɪkspɛktəd tə pʊɾ ɛniwʌn nɪɹ ðə fɑɹm tə ðə kwɛstʃən. əz ʃʊɾə bɪn ɪkspɛktəd, nɪneɪiv ɡɑɾ ɪndə ə ʃaʊɾɪŋ mætʃ wɪð ɹɪneɪl oʊvɝ ðə boʊl, ən ðə tɝɾəl tɑlɑn hæd juzd, wɪtʃ ɹɪneɪl əpɛɹənli hæd tʌk bɪhaɪn əɹ sæʃ. hɑɹdli hæd ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə steɪdʒ ʌv weɪvɪŋ ɑɹmz, haʊɛvɝ, ðən æləz wɑz ɹaɪt ðɛɹ, ən ɪn ʃɔɹɾ ɔɹɾɝ ðə boʊl wɑz bæk ɪn sɝaɪðəz kɛɹ ən ðə tɝɾəl ɪn mɛɝɪlɪlz. fɑloʊɪŋ wɪtʃ, ɪleɪn wɑz tʃɹiɾəd tə ðə saɪɾ ʌv æləz ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝ ʌndɝ ði əstɑnɪʃt noʊz ə ðə wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ, dɪlɪvɝɪŋ ə tʌŋ-læʃɪŋ ɑn ðə sʌbʒɪkt ə θɛf ðət lɛft ɹɪneɪl spləɾɝɪŋ ɪndɪɡnənli. nɪneɪiv dɪɾ ə lɪɾəl spləɾɝɪŋ, tu, stɔkɪŋ əweɪ ɛmpti-hændəd, jɛɾ ɪleɪn θɔt ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin ɛniwʌn lʊk soʊ fɝlɔɹn.

From the beginning Nynaeve set about flattening the real bumps, but Alise was nearly always there first, and where Alise met a bump, the bump flattened itself. Several noblewomen demanded help packing their belongings, only to be informed in no uncertain terms that she had meant what she said and if they did not hop to it, they could live in what they stood in. They hopped. Some, and not only nobles, changed their minds about going when they learned the destination was Andor, and were literally chased away. Afoot, and told to keep running as long as they could. Every horse was needed, but they had to be well away before the Seanchan appeared; at the very least they could be expected to put anyone near the farm to the question. As should have been expected, Nynaeve got into a shouting match with Renaile over the Bowl, and the turtle Talaan had used, which Renaile apparently had tucked behind her sash. Hardly had they reached the stage of waving arms, however, than Alise was right there, and in short order the Bowl was back in Sareitha's care and the turtle in Merilille's. Following which, Elayne was treated to the sight of Alise shaking her finger under the astonished nose of the Windfinder to the Mistress of the Ships to the Atha'an Miere, delivering a tongue-lashing on the subject of theft that left Renaile spluttering indignantly. Nynaeve did a little spluttering, too, stalking away empty-handed, yet Elayne thought she had never seen anyone look so forlorn.

ɔl ɪn ɔl, ɪt dɪd nɑt teɪk vɛɹi lɔŋ, ðoʊ. ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ wɪmən u hæd bɪn ət ðə fɑɹm ɡæðɝɾ ʌndɝ ðə wɑtʃfəl aɪz ə ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl - ən ʌv æləz, hu kɛɹfəli noʊɾəd ðə læs tɛn tə ɝaɪv, ɔl bʌt tu ɪn faɪn ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd sɪlks, nɑt mʌtʃ dɪfɹən fɹəm ɪleɪnz. dɛfənətli nɑt kɪnswɪmən. ɪleɪn fɛlt ʃʊɹ ðeɪ ɹɪli wəd də ðə wɑʃɪŋ-ʌp ɛniweɪ; æləz wəd nɑt lɛɾ ə lɪɾəl θɪŋ laɪk noʊbəl bɝθ stæn ɪn əɹ weɪ. ðə wɪndfɪndɝz laɪn ʌp wɪð ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli saɪlən ɪksɛp fəɹ ɹɪneɪl, hu mʌɾɝd ɪmpɹəkeɪʃənz wɛnɛvɝ ʃi sɔ æləz. kɛɝin wɑz sʌmən bæk fɹəm ðə hɪltɑp. ðə wɔɹɾɝz bɹɔt ðə sɪstɝz ðɛɹ maʊns. ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiwʌn kɛpt ən aɪ ɑn ðə skaɪ, ən seɪaɪdɑɹ meɪd heɪloʊz ɝaʊn ɔl ə ði oʊldɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən moʊst ə ðə wɪndfɪndɝz. ɝaʊn ə fju ʌv ðə kɪn, əz wɛl.

All in all, it did not take very long, though. The remaining women who had been at the farm gathered under the watchful eyes of the Knitting Circle - and of Alise, who carefully noted the last ten to arrive, all but two in fine embroidered silks, not much different from Elayne's. Definitely not Kinswomen. Elayne felt sure they really would do the washing-up anyway; Alise would not let a little thing like noble birth stand in her way. The Windfinders lined up with their horses, surprisingly silent except for Renaile, who muttered imprecations whenever she saw Alise. Careane was summoned back from the hilltop. The Warders brought the sisters their mounts. Almost everyone kept an eye on the sky, and saidar made halos around all of the older Aes Sedai and most of the Windfinders. Around a few of the Kin, as well.

liɾɪŋ əɹ mɛɹ tə ðə hɛɾ ə ðə laɪn, ət ðə sɪstɝn, nɪneɪiv fɪŋɡɝd ði æŋɡɹil stɪl ɑn əɹ hæn əz ɪf ʃi wɝ gɑnə bi ðə wʌn tə meɪk ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, ɹɪdɪkjələs əz ðə vɛɹi aɪdiə maɪt bi. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, ðoʊ ʃi hæd wɑʃt əɹ feɪs - ən dɑn əɹ hæt; stʃɹeɪnʒli, ɔl θɪŋz kənsɪɾɝd - ʃi stɪl tɑɾɝd wɛnɛvɝ əɹ sɛlf-kəntʃɹoʊl slɪpt. læn steɪd pɹæktəkli əɾ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, stoʊn-feɪst əz ɔlweɪz, bʌɾ ɪf ɛvɝ ðəɹ wɑz ə mæn ɹɛɾi tə kætʃ ə wʊmən wən ʃi fɛl, ɪt wɑz hi. ivən wɪð ðə bɹeɪslət-ænd-ɹɪŋz, nɪneɪiv maɪt nɑt bi eɪbəl tə mænədʒ ɪnʌf tə wiv ə ɡeɪtweɪ. mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt, ʃi hæd bɪn dæʃɪŋ əbaʊt ðə fɑɹm ɛvɝ sɪns ðeɪ fɝst ɝaɪvd; ɪleɪn hæd spɛn ə kənsɪɾɝəbəl taɪm hoʊldɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ ɹaɪt wɛɹ ðeɪ naʊ stʊd. ʃi nu ðət spɑt. nɪneɪiv skaʊl sʌlkəli wən ɪleɪn ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs, bʌɾ ət list ʃi hæd sɛns ɪnʌf tə seɪ nʌθɪŋ.

Leading her mare to the head of the line, at the cistern, Nynaeve fingered the angreal still on her hand as if she were going to be the one to make the gateway, ridiculous as the very idea might be. For one thing, though she had washed her face - and donned her hat; strangely, all things considered - she still tottered whenever her self-control slipped. Lan stayed practically at her shoulder, stone-faced as always, but if ever there was a man ready to catch a woman when she fell, it was he. Even with the bracelet-and-rings, Nynaeve might not be able to manage enough to weave a gateway. More important, she had been dashing about the farm ever since they first arrived; Elayne had spent a considerable time holding saidar right where they now stood. She knew that spot. Nynaeve scowled sulkily when Elayne embraced the Source, but at least she had sense enough to say nothing.

ɹaɪt fɹəm ðə fɝst ɪleɪn wɪʃt ðət ʃi hæɾ æskt eɪvinhə fəɹ ðə wʊmən-kloʊkt-ɪn-hɝ-oʊn-hɛɹ; ʃi wɑz wɪɹi, tu, ən ɔl ðə seɪaɪdɑɹ ʃi kəd dʒɹɔ wɑz bɛɹli ɪnʌf tə fɔɹm ðə wiv soʊ ɪt wəd wɝk. ðə floʊz weɪvɝɾ ɪn əɹ ɡɹæsp ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə twɪs fɹi, ðən snæpt ɪndə pleɪs soʊ sʌɾənli ðət ʃi dʒʌmpt; tʃænəlɪŋ wən jə wɝ taɪɝd wɑz nɑɾ əɾ ɔl laɪk ʌðɝ taɪmz, bʌt ðɪs wɑz ðə wɝst ɛvɝ. ət lis ðə fəmɪljɝ vɝɾɪkəl slæʃ ə sɪlvɝ əpɪɹɾ əz ɪt ʃʊd, ən waɪɾənd ɪndə ən oʊpənɪŋ ɹaɪɾ əlɔŋsaɪd ðə sɪstɝn. ən oʊpənɪŋ noʊ bɪɡɝ ðən ðə wʌn eɪvinhə hæd meɪd, ən ət ðæt, ɪleɪn wɑz ɡɹeɪtfəl ɪt wɑz lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə fɪɾ ə hɔɹs θɹu. ət ðə læst, ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn sɝɾən ɪt wəd bi. ɡæsps ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə kɪnswɪmən, siɪŋ ə vju ʌv ən ʌplən mɛdoʊ sʌɾənli stændɪŋ bɪtwin əm ən ðə fəmɪljɝ ɡɹeɪ bʌlk ə ðə sɪstɝn.

Right from the first Elayne wished that she had asked Aviendha for the woman-cloaked-in-her-own-hair; she was weary, too, and all the saidar she could draw was barely enough to form the weave so it would work. The flows wavered in her grasp almost as if trying to twist free, then snapped into place so suddenly that she jumped; channeling when you were tired was not at all like other times, but this was the worst ever. At least the familiar vertical slash of silver appeared as it should, and widened into an opening right alongside the cistern. An opening no bigger than the one Aviendha had made, and at that, Elayne was grateful it was large enough to fit a horse through. At the last, she had not been certain it would be. Gasps rose from the Kinswomen, seeing a view of an upland meadow suddenly standing between them and the familiar gray bulk of the cistern.

"ju ʃʊɾə lemi tʃɹaɪ," nɪneɪiv sɛd sɔfli. sɔfli, bʌt wɪð ə ʃɑɹp pɔɪn ivən soʊ. "ju nɪɹli fʌbd ɪɾ ɔltəɡɛðɝ."

"You should have let me try," Nynaeve said softly. Softly, but with a sharp point even so. "You nearly fubbed it altogether."

eɪvinhə ɡeɪv nɪneɪiv ə flæt lʊk ðəɾ ɔlmoʊs meɪɾ ɪleɪn ɡɹæb əɹ ɑɹm. ðə lɔŋɡɝ ðeɪ ɹɪmeɪnd nɪɹ-sɪstɝz, ðə mɔɹ ʃi sim tə θɪŋk ʃi hæd tə dɪfɛn ɪleɪnz ɑnɝ; ɪf ðeɪ dɪd bɪkʌm fɝst-sɪstɝz, ɪleɪn kəd si hævɪŋ tə kip əɹ əweɪ fɹəm nɪneɪiv, ən bɝdʒɪt, kəmplitli!

Aviendha gave Nynaeve a flat look that almost made Elayne grab her arm. The longer they remained near-sisters, the more she seemed to think she had to defend Elayne's honor; if they did become first-sisters, Elayne could see having to keep her away from Nynaeve, and Birgitte, completely!

"ɪts dʌn, nɪneɪiv," ʃi sɛd kwɪkli. "ðæts ɔl ðət kaʊns." nɪneɪiv dɝɛktəɾ ə flæt lʊk əɾ əɹ ən mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə deɪ biɪŋ pɹɪkli, əz ɪf ɪleɪn wɝ ðə wʌn ʃoʊɪŋ əɹ snæpɪʃ saɪd.

"It's done, Nynaeve," she said quickly. "That's all that counts." Nynaeve directed a flat look at her and muttered something about the day being prickly, as if Elayne were the one showing her snappish side.

bɝdʒɪt wɑz ðə fɝs θɹu, ɡɹɪnɪŋ ɪmpuɾəntli ət læn, liɾɪŋ əɹ hɔɹs wɪð əɹ baʊ ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn əɹ ʌðɝ hænd. ɪleɪn kəd sɛns iɡɝnəs ɪn hɝ, ə tʌtʃ ə sæɾəsfækʃən, pɝhæps ðət ðɪs taɪm ʃi hæd ðə lɛɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə læn - ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ə bɪɾ ə ɹaɪvəlɹi bɪtwin wɔɹɾɝz - ən ə smɔl mɛʒɝ ʌv wɛɹinɪs. vɛɹi smɔl. ɪleɪn nu ðət mɛdoʊ wɛl; ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn hæd tɔɾ əɹ tə ɹaɪd nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ðɛɹ. əbaʊt faɪv maɪlz oʊvɝ ðoʊz fɝst spɑɹsli tʃɹid hɪlz leɪ ðə mænɝ haʊs ʌv wʌn ə hɝ mʌðɝz ɪsteɪts. wʌn ə hɝ ɪsteɪts; ʃi hæd tə ɡɛt juz tə ðæt. ðə sɛvən fæmliz u tɛndəd ðə haʊs ən ɪts ɡɹaʊnz wəd bi ði oʊnli pipəl fəɹ hæf ə deɪz dʒɝni ɪn ɛni dɝɛkʃən.

Birgitte was the first through, grinning impudently at Lan, leading her horse with her bow already in her other hand. Elayne could sense eagerness in her, a touch of satisfaction, perhaps that this time she had the lead instead of Lan - there was always a bit of rivalry between Warders - and a small measure of wariness. Very small. Elayne knew that meadow well; Gareth Bryne had taught her to ride not far from there. About five miles over those first sparsely treed hills lay the manor house of one of her mother's estates. One of her estates; she had to get used to that. The seven families who tended the house and its grounds would be the only people for half a day's journey in any direction.

ɪleɪn hæd tʃoʊzən ðət dɛstəneɪʃən kəz ðeɪ kəd ɹitʃ keɪɛmlɪn ɪn tu wiks fɹəm ðɛɹ. ən kəz ði ɪsteɪt wɑz soʊ aɪsəleɪɾəd, ʃi maɪt bi ɛntɝɪŋ keɪɛmlɪn bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn nu ʃi wɑz ɪn ændɝ. ðət kəd bi ə vɛɹi nɛsəsɛɹi pɹikɔʃən; ət vɛɹiəs taɪmz ɪn ændɝz hɪstɝi, ɹaɪvəlz fəɹ ðə ɹoʊz kɹaʊn hæd bɪn kɛpt əz "ɡɛsts" əntɪl ðeɪ ɹɪlɪŋkwɪʃt ðɛɹ kleɪmz. hɝ mʌðɝ hæd kɛp tu, əntɪl ʃi tʊk ðə θɹoʊn. wɪð lʌk, ʃi kəɾ əv ə sɑləd beɪs ɪstæblɪʃt baɪ ðə taɪm ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz ɝaɪvd.

Elayne had chosen that destination because they could reach Caemlyn in two weeks from there. And because the estate was so isolated, she might be entering Caemlyn before anyone knew she was in Andor. That could be a very necessary precaution; at various times in Andor's history, rivals for the Rose Crown had been kept as "guests" until they relinquished their claims. Her mother had kept two, until she took the throne. With luck, she could have a solid base established by the time Egwene and the others arrived.

læn tʊk mændɑɹb ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn bɝdʒɪts bɹaʊn ɡɛldɪŋ, ən nɪneɪiv lɝtʃt əz ɪf tə ɹʌʃ æftɝ ðə blæk wɔɹhɔɹs, ðən pʊl hɝsɛlf ʌp ʃɔɹt wɪð ə lɛvəl stɛɹ ðət dɛɹɾ ɪleɪn tə seɪ ə wɝd. fɪdlɪŋ fjʊɹiəsli wɪð əɹ ɹeɪnz, ʃi meɪɾ ə vɪzəbəl ɛfɝt tə lʊk ɛniwɛɹ ɪksɛp θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ æftɝ læn. hɝ lɪps muvd. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ɪleɪn ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi wɑz kaʊntɪŋ.

Lan took Mandarb right behind Birgitte's brown gelding, and Nynaeve lurched as if to rush after the black warhorse, then pulled herself up short with a level stare that dared Elayne to say a word. Fiddling furiously with her reins, she made a visible effort to look anywhere except through the gateway after Lan. Her lips moved. After a moment, Elayne realized that she was counting.

"nɪneɪiv," ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli, "wi ɹɪli doʊn əv taɪm fəɹ - "

"Nynaeve," she said quietly, "we really don't have time for - "

"muv əlɔŋ," æləz kɔl fɹəm ðə ɹɪɹ, ðə saʊn ə hɝ hænz klæpɪŋ ə ʃɑɹp pʌŋktʃueɪɾɪŋ kɹæk. "noʊ pʊʃɪŋ əɹ ʃʌvɪŋ, naʊ, bʌɾ əl əv noʊ læɡɝdz iðɝ! muv əlɔŋ."

"Move along," Alise called from the rear, the sound of her hands clapping a sharp punctuating crack. "No pushing or shoving, now, but I'll have no laggards either! Move along."

nɪneɪivz hɛd swʌŋ waɪldli, peɪn ɪndɪsɪʒən peɪntɪŋ əɹ feɪs. fəɹ səm ɹizən ʃi tʌtʃt əɹ waɪd hæt, ə fju ʌv ɪts blu plumz bɹoʊkən ən dʒɹupɪŋ, bɪfɔɹ pʊlɪŋ əɹ hæn əweɪ. "oʊ, ðət ɡoʊt-kɪsɪŋ oʊld . . . !" ʃi ɡɹaʊld, ðə ɹɛs lɔst əz ʃi dʒɹæɡd əɹ mɛɹ θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ. ɪleɪn snɪft. ən nɪneɪiv hæd ðə nɝv tə spik tə ɛnibəɾi əbaʊt ðɛɹ læŋɡwədʒ! ʃi wɪʃt ʃi cʊɾə hɝd ðə ɹɛst, ðoʊ; ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi nu ðə fɝs bɪt.

Nynaeve's head swung wildly, pained indecision painting her face. For some reason she touched her wide hat, a few of its blue plumes broken and drooping, before pulling her hand away. "Oh, that goat-kissing old . . . !" she growled, the rest lost as she dragged her mare through the gateway. Elayne sniffed. And Nynaeve had the nerve to speak to anybody about their language! She wished she could have heard the rest, though; she already knew the first bit.

æləz kəntɪnjuɾ əɹ ɝdʒɪŋ, bʌt ðəɹ ɹɪli dɪd nɑt sim tə bi mʌtʃ niɾ æftɝ ðə fɝst. ivən ðə wɪndfɪndɝz hɝid, ɡlænsɪŋ wɝidli oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz ət ðə skaɪ. ivən ɹɪneɪl, hu mʌmbəl sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊɾ æləz ðəɾ ɪleɪn noʊɾəd ɪn ðə bæk ə hɝ hɛd. ðoʊ kɔlɪŋ sʌmwʌn "ə fɪʃ-lʌvɪŋ skævənʒɝ" dɪd sim ɹæðɝ maɪld. ʃi wʊɾə ɪkspɛktəd ðə si foʊk tə it fɪʃ ɔl ðə taɪm.

Alise continued her urging, but there really did not seem to be much need after the first. Even the Windfinders hurried, glancing worriedly over their shoulders at the sky. Even Renaile, who mumbled something about Alise that Elayne noted in the back of her head. Though calling someone "a fish-loving scavenger" did seem rather mild. She would have expected the Sea Folk to eat fish all the time.

æləz hɝsɛlf bɹɔɾ ʌp ðə vɛɹi ɹɪɹ, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ wɔɹɾɝz, əz ɪf tə hɝɾ ivən ðə pækhɔɹsɪz əlɔŋ. ʃi pɔz lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə hæn ɪleɪn əɹ ɡɹin-plum hæt. "jul wɑnə kip ðə sʌn ɔf ðət swit feɪs ə jʊɹz," ʃi sɛd wɪð ə smaɪl. "sʌtʃ ə pɹɪɾi ɡɝl. noʊ nid tə tɝn tə lɛðɝ bɪfɔɹ jəɹ taɪm."

Alise herself brought up the very rear, except for the remaining Warders, as if to herd even the packhorses along. She paused long enough to hand Elayne her green-plumed hat. "You'll want to keep the sun off that sweet face of yours," she said with a smile. "Such a pretty girl. No need to turn to leather before your time."

eɪvinhə, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd nɪɹbaɪ, fɛl oʊvɝ bækwɝɾ ən kɪkt əɹ hilz læfɪŋ.

Aviendha, sitting on the ground nearby, fell over backward and kicked her heels laughing.

"aɪ θɪŋk əl æsk əɹ tə faɪn jə ə hæt. wɪð lɑts ə plumz, ən bɪɡ baʊz," ɪleɪn sɛɾ ɪn dʌlsət toʊnz bɪfɔɹ kwɪkli fɑloʊɪŋ ðə kɪnswʊmən. ðət sɝɾənli kʌɾ ɔf eɪvinhəz læftɝ.

"I think I'll ask her to find you a hat. With lots of plumes, and big bows," Elayne said in dulcet tones before quickly following the Kinswoman. That certainly cut off Aviendha's laughter.

ðə dʒɛnli ɹoʊlɪŋ mɛdoʊ wɑz bɹɔɾ ən nɪɹli ə maɪl lɔŋ, sɝaʊndəd baɪ hɪlz tɔlɝ ðən ðoʊz ʃi hæd lɛf bɪhaɪnd, ən baɪ tʃɹiz ʃi nu, oʊk ən paɪn ən blækwʊd, saʊɝɡəm ən lɛðɝlif ən fɝ, θɪk fɔɹəst wɪð ɡʊd, tɔl tɪmbɝ tə saʊθ ən wɛst ən ist, ðoʊ ðəɹ maɪt nɑt bi ɛni kʌɾɪŋ ðɪs jɪɹ. moʊst ə ðə mɔɹ skæɾɝd tʃɹiz tə ðə nɔɹθ, təwɔɹd ðə mænɝ, wɝ bɛɾɝ suɾəd fəɹ faɪɝwʊd. smɔl ɡɹeɪ boʊldɝz dɑɾəd ðə θɪk bɹaʊn ɡɹæs hɪɹ ən ðɛɹ, ən nɑɾ ivən ə wɪðɝd stɔk mɑɹk ðə dɛθ ʌv ə waɪldflaʊɝ. ðət wɑz nɑt soʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ðə saʊθ.

The gently rolling meadow was broad and nearly a mile long, surrounded by hills taller than those she had left behind, and by trees she knew, oak and pine and blackwood, sourgum and leatherleaf and fir, thick forest with good, tall timber to south and west and east, though there might not be any cutting this year. Most of the more scattered trees to the north, toward the manor, were better suited for firewood. Small gray boulders dotted the thick brown grass here and there, and not even a withered stalk marked the death of a wildflower. That was not so different from the south.

fəɹ wʌns nɪneɪiv wɑz nɑt piɹɪŋ ət ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ kʌntʃɹisaɪd tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn læn. hi ən bɝdʒɪt wəd nɑt bi ɡɔn lɔŋ ɛniweɪ, nɑt hɪɹ. ɪnstɛd ʃi stʃɹoʊd bɹɪskli əmʌŋ ðə hɔɹsəz, ɔɹɾɝɪŋ pipəl tə maʊn ɪn ə laʊd, kəmændɪŋ vɔɪs, tʃɪviɪŋ ðə sɝvəns wɪð ðə pæk ænəməlz, kɝtli tɛlɪŋ səm ə ðə kɪnswɪmən u hæd noʊ hɔɹsəz ðəɾ ɛni tʃaɪl kəd wɔk faɪv maɪlz, ʃaʊɾɪŋ əɾ ə slɛndɝ ɔltɑɹən noʊbəlwʊmən wɪð ə skɑɹ ɑn əɹ tʃik ən kæɹiɪŋ ə bʌndəl nɪɹli əz bɪɡ əz hɝsɛlf ðəɾ ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn ful ɪnʌf tə bɹɪŋ ɔl ə hɝ dʒɹɛsəz ðən ʃi kəd kæɹi ðɛm. æləz hæd ɡæðɝd ði æθɑn maɪɹ ɝaʊn əɹ ən wɑz ɪnstʃɹʌktɪŋ əm ɑn haʊ tə maʊn ə hɔɹs. fəɹ ə wʌndɝ, ðeɪ æktʃəli  əpɪɹd tə bi peɪɪŋ ətɛnʃən. nɪneɪiv ɡlænst əɹ weɪ ən sim pliz tə si æləz stændɪŋ ɪn wʌn spɑt. əntɪl æləz smaɪld ɛnkɝɪdʒɪŋli ən moʊʃən əɹ tə ɡoʊ ɑn wɪð wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ.

For once Nynaeve was not peering at the surrounding countryside trying to find Lan. He and Birgitte would not be gone long anyway, not here. Instead she strode briskly among the horses, ordering people to mount in a loud, commanding voice, chivvying the servants with the pack animals, curtly telling some of the Kinswomen who had no horses that any child could walk five miles, shouting at a slender Altaran noblewoman with a scar on her cheek and carrying a bundle nearly as big as herself that if she had been fool enough to bring all of her dresses then she could carry them. Alise had gathered the Atha'an Miere around her and was instructing them on how to mount a horse. For a wonder, they actually appeared to be paying attention. Nynaeve glanced her way and seemed pleased to see Alise standing in one spot. Until Alise smiled encouragingly and motioned her to go on with what she was doing.

fəɹ ən ɪnstənt nɪneɪiv stʊd stɑk-stɪl, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə wʊmən. ðən ʃi keɪm stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ θɹu ðə ɡɹæs tə ɪleɪn. ɹitʃɪŋ ʌp tə hɝ hæt wɪð boʊθ hænz, ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ɡlaʊɝɪŋ ʌp əɾ ɪt θɹu hɝ læʃɪz bɪfɔɹ ɡɪvɪŋ ɪɾ ə twɪtʃ stʃɹeɪt. "aɪl dʒʌs lɛɾ əɹ teɪk kɛɹ ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðɪs taɪm," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə səspɪʃəsli ɹizənəbəl toʊn. "wil dʒʌst si haʊ wɛl ʃi dʌz wɪð ðoʊz . . . si foʊk. jɛs, wi wɪl." tu ɹizənəbəl ə toʊn baɪ hæf. əbɹʌpli ʃi fɹaʊn ət ðə stɪl-oʊpən ɡeɪtweɪ. "waɪ ɑɹ jə hoʊldɪŋ ɪt? lɛt ɡoʊ." eɪvinhə wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ, tu.

For an instant Nynaeve stood stock-still, staring at the woman. Then she came striding through the grass to Elayne. Reaching up to her hat with both hands, she hesitated, glowering up at it through her lashes before giving it a twitch straight. "I'll just let her take care of everything this time," she said in a suspiciously reasonable tone. "We'll just see how well she does with those . . . Sea Folk. Yes, we will." Too reasonable a tone by half. Abruptly she frowned at the still-open gateway. "Why are you holding it? Let go." Aviendha was frowning, too.

ɪleɪn dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. ʃi hæd θɔɾ əbaʊt ðɪs, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ʌðɝ weɪ, bʌt nɪneɪiv wəd tʃɹaɪ tə ɑɹɡju hɝ aʊɾ ʌv ɪt, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ. θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, ðə fɑɹmjɑɹd stʊɾ ɛmpti, ivən ðə tʃɪkənz faɪnəli fɹaɪɾənd əweɪ baɪ ðə hʌbəb, jɛt haʊ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ɪt fɪld ʌp əɡɛn? ʃi stʌɾid əɹ wiv, mɛldəd təɡɛðɝ soʊ snʌɡli ðəɾ oʊnli ə fju θɹɛdz ɹɪmeɪn dɪstɪŋkt. ʃi kəd si ɛvɹi floʊ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ ðoʊz fju, ðeɪ əpɪɹɾ ɪnsəpɝəbli kəmbaɪnd. "teɪk ɛvɹiwʌn tə ðə mænɝ haʊs, nɪneɪiv," ʃi sɛd. ðə sʌn dɪd nɑɾ əv vɛɹi mʌtʃ fɑɹðɝ tə fɔl; pɝhæps tu aʊɝz ə laɪt ɹɪmeɪnd. "mæstɝ hɔɹnwɛl wɪl bi sɝpɹaɪzd ət soʊ mɛni vɪzəɾɝz ɝaɪvɪŋ ət dɑɹk, bʌt tɛl ɪm jəɹ ɡɛsts ə ðə ɡɝl u kɹaɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə ɹɛdbɝd wɪð ðə bɹoʊkən wɪŋ; hɪl ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt. əl bi əlɔŋ əz sun əz aɪ kæn."

Elayne drew a deep breath. She had thought about this, and there was no other way, but Nynaeve would try to argue her out of it, and there was no time for arguing. Through the gateway, the farmyard stood empty, even the chickens finally frightened away by the hubbub, yet how long before it filled up again? She studied her weave, melded together so snugly that only a few threads remained distinct. She could see every flow, of course, but except for those few, they appeared inseparably combined. "Take everyone to the manor house, Nynaeve," she said. The sun did not have very much farther to fall; perhaps two hours of light remained. "Master Hornwell will be surprised at so many visitors arriving at dark, but tell him you're guests of the girl who cried over the redbird with the broken wing; he'll remember that. I will be along as soon as I can."

"ɪleɪn," eɪvinhə bɪɡæn ɪn ə sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli æŋkʃəs vɔɪs, ən ət ðə seɪm taɪm, nɪneɪiv sɛd ʃɑɹpli, "dʒʌst wʌt dʒju θɪŋk jəɹ - "

"Elayne," Aviendha began in a surprisingly anxious voice, and at the same time, Nynaeve said sharply, "Just what do you think you're - "

ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn weɪ tə stɑp ɪt. ɪleɪn plʌkt wʌn ə ðə dɪsɝnəbəl θɹɛdz fɹi ʌv ðə wiv; ɪt weɪvɝɾ ən fleɪld laɪk ə lɪvɪŋ tɛntəkəl; ɪt fʌzd ən spləɾɝd, taɪni flʌfs ə seɪaɪdɑɹ bɹeɪkɪŋ ɔf ən feɪɾɪŋ əweɪ. ʃi hæd nɑt noʊɾəst ðət wən eɪvinhə ənmeɪɾ əɹ wiv, bʌt ʃi hæɾ oʊnli sin ðə teɪl ə ðæt, ɹɪli. "ɡoʊ ɑn," ʃi toʊl nɪneɪiv. "aɪl weɪt fəɹ ðə ɹɛst əntɪl jə ɑɹ ɔl aʊɾ ə saɪt." nɪneɪiv stɛɹɾ aʊt, hɝ dʒɔ hæŋɪŋ. "ɪɾ əz tə bi dʌn," ɪleɪn saɪd. "ðə sintʃæn wɪl bi ət ðə fɑɹm ɪn aʊɝz, fəɹ ʃʊɹ. ivən ɪf ðeɪ weɪɾ əntɪl təmɑɹoʊ, wʌɾ ɪf wʌn ə ðə deɪmeɪn əz ðə tælən tə ɹid ɹɛzəduz? nɪneɪiv, aɪ woʊnt ɡɪv tʃɹævlɪŋ tə ðə sintʃæn. aɪ woʊnt!"

There was only one way to stop it. Elayne plucked one of the discernible threads free of the weave; it wavered and flailed like a living tentacle; it fuzzed and spluttered, tiny fluffs of saidar breaking off and fading away. She had not noticed that when Aviendha unmade her weave, but she had only seen the tail of that, really. "Go on," she told Nynaeve. "I'll wait for the rest until you are all out of sight." Nynaeve stared out, her jaw hanging. "It has to be done," Elayne sighed. "The Seanchan will be at the farm in hours, for sure. Even if they wait until tomorrow, what if one of the damane has the Talent to read residues? Nynaeve, I won't give Traveling to the Seanchan. I won't!"

nɪneɪiv ɡɹaʊl sʌmθɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ əbaʊt ðə sintʃæn ðət mʌst əv bɪn pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli pɪθi, dʒʌdʒɪŋ baɪ hɝ toʊn. "wɛl, aɪ woʊn lɛt jə bɝn jɝsɛlf aʊt!" ʃi sɛɾ əlaʊd. "naʊ, pʊt ðət bæk! bɪfɔɹ ðə hoʊl θɪŋ ɪksploʊdz ðə weɪ vændin sɛd. jə kəd kɪl ɔl ʌv ʌs!"

Nynaeve growled something under her breath about the Seanchan that must have been particularly pithy, judging by her tone. "Well, I won't let you burn yourself out!" she said aloud. "Now, put that back! Before the whole thing explodes the way Vandene said. You could kill all of us!"

"ɪt kænɑt bi pʊt bæk," eɪvinhə sɛd, leɪɪŋ ə hæn ɑn nɪneɪivz ɑɹm. "ʃi hæz bɪɡʌn, ən naʊ ʃi mʌs fɪnɪʃ. jə mʌs də əz ʃi sɛz, nɪneɪiv."

"It cannot be put back," Aviendha said, laying a hand on Nynaeve's arm. "She has begun, and now she must finish. You must do as she says, Nynaeve."

nɪneɪivz bɹaʊz dʒɹu daʊn. "mʌst" wɑz ə wɝd ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk hɪɹɪŋ wʌn bɪt, nɑɾ əplaɪd tə hɝ. ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ə ful, ðoʊ, soʊ æftɝ ə bɪɾ ʌv ɡlɛɹɪŋ - əɾ ɪleɪn, ət ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, əɾ eɪvinhə, ət ðə wɝld ɪn dʒɛnɝəl - ʃi flʌŋ əɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn ɪleɪn ɪn ə hʌɡ ðət meɪɾ əɹ ɹɪbz kɹik.

Nynaeve's brows drew down. "Must" was a word she did not like hearing one bit, not applied to her. She was not a fool, though, so after a bit of glaring - at Elayne, at the gateway, at Aviendha, at the world in general - she flung her arms around Elayne in a hug that made her ribs creak.

"ju bi kɛɹfəl, jə hɪɹ mi," ʃi wɪspɝd. "ɪf jə ɡɛt jɝsɛlf kɪld, aɪ swɛɹ əl skɪn jə əlaɪv!" ɪn spaɪɾ ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ɪleɪn bɝst aʊt læfɪŋ. nɪneɪiv snɔɹɾɪd, pʊʃɪŋ əɹ aʊt tə ɑɹmz lɛŋθ baɪ hɝ ʃoʊldɝz. "ju noʊ wʌɾ aɪ min," ʃi ɡɹʌmbəld. "æn doʊn θɪŋk aɪ doʊn min ɪt, kəz aɪ du! aɪ du," ʃi æɾəd ɪn ə sɑftɝ vɔɪs. "ju teɪk kɛɹ."

"You be careful, you hear me," she whispered. "If you get yourself killed, I swear I'll skin you alive!" In spite of everything, Elayne burst out laughing. Nynaeve snorted, pushing her out to arm's length by her shoulders. "You know what I mean," she grumbled. "And don't think I don't mean it, because I do! I do," she added in a softer voice. "You take care."

ɪt tʊk nɪneɪiv ə moʊmən tə ɡæðɝ hɝsɛlf, blɪŋkɪŋ ən pʊlɪŋ əɹ blu ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɡlʌvz taɪt. ðəɹ sim tə bi ə hɪn ə mɔɪstʃɝ ɪn əɹ aɪz, ðoʊ ðət kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn; nɪneɪiv meɪɾ ʌðɝ pipəl kɹaɪ, ʃi dɪd nɑt kɹaɪ hɝsɛlf. "wɛl, ðɛn," ʃi sɛd laʊdli. "æləz, ɪf jə doʊn əv ɛvɹiwʌn ɹɛɾi jɛt - " tɝnɪŋ, ʃi kʌɾ ɔf wɪð ə stʃɹæŋɡəl kɹoʊk.

It took Nynaeve a moment to gather herself, blinking and pulling her blue riding gloves tight. There seemed to be a hint of moisture in her eyes, though that could not have been; Nynaeve made other people cry, she did not cry herself. "Well, then," she said loudly. "Alise, if you don't have everyone ready yet - " Turning, she cut off with a strangled croak.

ðoʊz u wɝ səpoʊz tə bi maʊntəd wɝ, ivən ði æθɑn maɪɹ. ðə wɔɹɾɝz wɝ ɔl ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz; læn ən bɝdʒɪt hæd ɹɪtɝnd, ən bɝdʒɪt wɑtʃt ɪleɪn wɝidli. ðə sɝvəns hæd ðə pæk ænəməlz ɪn ə laɪn, ən ðə kɪnswɪmən wɝ weɪɾɪŋ peɪʃənli, moʊst əfʊɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl. ə nʌmbɝ ə hɔɹsəz ðət cʊɾə bɪn juz fəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ wɝ loʊɾəd wɪð sæks ə fuɾ ən bʌndəlz ə bɪlɔŋɪŋz. wɪmən u hæd bɹɔt mɔɹ ðən æləz əlaʊd - nʌn ə ðɛm kɪn - kæɹid ðɛɹ bʌndəlz ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn bæks. ðə slɛndɝ noʊbəl wɪð ðə skɑɹ wɑz bɛn əɾ ən ɑkwɝɾ æŋɡəl bɪniθ hɝz, ən ɡlɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɛniwʌn bʌɾ æləz. ɛvɹi wʊmən u kəd tʃænəl wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ɡeɪtweɪ. ən ɛvɹi wʊmən u hæd bɪn ðəɹ tə hɪɹ vændin tɛl ə ðə deɪnʒɝz wɑtʃt ðət wʌn wɪpɪŋ fɪləmən əz ʃi wəɾ əv ə ɹɛɾ æɾɝ.

Those who were supposed to be mounted were, even the Atha'an Miere. The Warders were all gathered around the other sisters; Lan and Birgitte had returned, and Birgitte watched Elayne worriedly. The servants had the pack animals in a line, and the Kinswomen were waiting patiently, most afoot except for the Knitting Circle. A number of horses that could have been used for riding were loaded with sacks of food and bundles of belongings. Women who had brought more than Alise allowed - none of them Kin - carried their bundles on their own backs. The slender noble with the scar was bent at an awkward angle beneath hers, and glaring at anyone but Alise. Every woman who could channel was staring at the gateway. And every woman who had been there to hear Vandene tell of the dangers watched that one whipping filament as she would have a red adder.

ɪt wɑz æləz hɝsɛlf u bɹɔt nɪneɪiv əɹ hɔɹs. ən stʃɹeɪɾənd ðə blu-plum hæɾ əz nɪneɪiv pʊɾ ə fʊɾ ɪn ðə stɝəp. nɪneɪiv tɝn ðə plʌmp mɛɹ nɔɹθ wɪð læn ɹaɪɾɪŋ mændɑɹb əɾ əɹ saɪɾ ən ə lʊk ʌv ʌɾɝ mɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs. waɪ ʃi dɪd nɑt dʒʌst sɛɾ æləz daʊn, ɪleɪn dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. tə hɪɹ nɪneɪiv tɛl ɪt, ʃi hæd bɪn pʊɾɪŋ wɪmən oʊldɝ ðən hɝsɛlf ɪn ðɛɹ pleɪs sɪns ʃi wɑz lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ə ɡɝl. ən ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, naʊ, æftɝ ɔl; ðət ʃəd kæɹi maʊntənz ʌv weɪt wɪð ɛni kɪnswʊmən.

It was Alise herself who brought Nynaeve her horse. And straightened the blue-plumed hat as Nynaeve put a foot in the stirrup. Nynaeve turned the plump mare north with Lan riding Mandarb at her side and a look of utter mortification on her face. Why she did not just set Alise down, Elayne did not understand. To hear Nynaeve tell it, she had been putting women older than herself in their place since she was little more than a girl. And she was Aes Sedai, now, after all; that should carry mountains of weight with any Kinswoman.

əz ðə kɑləm bɪɡæn tə wɛn ɪts weɪ təwɔɹd ðə hɪlz, ɪleɪn lʊkt əɾ eɪvinhə ən bɝdʒɪt. eɪvinhə sɪmpli stʊd ðəɹ wɪð əɹ ɑɹmz foʊldəd bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts; ʃi hæd ðə wʊmən-ɹæpt-ɪn-hɝ-oʊn-hɛɹ æŋɡɹil klʌtʃt ɪn wʌn hænd. bɝdʒɪt tʊk laɪoʊnəsəz ɹeɪnz fɹəm ɪleɪn, æɾɪŋ əm tə ðoʊz ə hɝ oʊn hɔɹs ən eɪvinhəz, ðən wɔkt oʊvɝ tə ə smɔl boʊldɝ twɛnti peɪsɪz əweɪ ən sæt daʊn.

As the column began to wend its way toward the hills, Elayne looked at Aviendha and Birgitte. Aviendha simply stood there with her arms folded beneath her breasts; she had the woman-wrapped-in-her-own-hair angreal clutched in one hand. Birgitte took Lioness's reins from Elayne, adding them to those of her own horse and Aviendha's, then walked over to a small boulder twenty paces away and sat down.

"ju tu mʌst," ɪleɪn bɪɡæn, ðən kɔft wən eɪvinhəz aɪbɹaʊz ʃɑɾ ʌp ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. sɛndɪŋ eɪvinhə aʊɾ ə deɪnʒɝ wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl wɪθaʊt ʃeɪmɪŋ hɝ. pɝhæps ɪmpɑsəbəl ɔltəɡɛðɝ. "aɪ wɑn jə tə ɡoʊ wɪð ði ʌðɝz," ʃi toʊl bɝdʒɪt. "æn teɪk laɪoʊnəs. eɪvinhə ən aɪ kən teɪk tɝnz ɹaɪɾɪŋ əɹ ɡɛldɪŋ. aɪd laɪk ə wɔk bɪfɔɹ bɛdtaɪm."

"You two must," Elayne began, then coughed when Aviendha's eyebrows shot up in surprise. Sending Aviendha out of danger was impossible without shaming her. Perhaps impossible altogether. "I want you to go with the others," she told Birgitte. "And take Lioness. Aviendha and I can take turns riding her gelding. I'd like a walk before bedtime."

"ɪf jə ɛvɝ tʃɹiɾ ə mæn hæf əz wɛl əz jə də ðət hɔɹs," bɝdʒɪt sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "hil bi jʊɹz fəɹ laɪf. aɪ θɪŋk əl dʒʌst sɪɾ əwaɪl; aɪv ɹɪɾən lɔŋ ɪnʌf tədeɪ. aɪm nɑɾ ət jəɹ bɛk ən kɔl ɔl ðə taɪm. wi kən pleɪ ðət ɡeɪm ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz ən ði ʌðɝ wɔɹɾɝz, tə spɛɹ jəɹ blʌʃəz, bʌt jə ən aɪ noʊ bɛɾɝ." dɪspaɪt ðə mɑkɪŋ wɝdz, wʌɾ ɪleɪn fɛl fɹəm əɹ wɑz əfɛkʃən. noʊ; stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən əfɛkʃən. hɝ oʊn aɪz stʌŋ sʌɾənli. hɝ dɛθ wəd hɝt bɝdʒɪt tə ðə boʊn - ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑn meɪd ðət sɝɾən - bʌɾ ɪt wɑz fɹɛndʃɪp ðət meɪɾ əɹ steɪ naʊ.

"If you ever treat a man half as well as you do that horse," Birgitte said dryly, "he'll be yours for life. I think I'll just sit awhile; I've ridden long enough today. I'm not at your beck and call all the time. We can play that game in front of the sisters and the other Warders, to spare your blushes, but you and I know better." Despite the mocking words, what Elayne felt from her was affection. No; stronger than affection. Her own eyes stung suddenly. Her death would hurt Birgitte to the bone - the Warder bond made that certain - but it was friendship that made her stay now.

"aɪ æm θæŋkfəl tə hæv tu fɹɛnz sətʃ əz ju," ʃi sɛd sɪmpli. bɝdʒɪt ɡɹɪn əɾ əɹ əz ɪf ʃi hæd sɛd sʌmθɪŋ sɪli.

"I am thankful to have two friends such as you," she said simply. Birgitte grinned at her as if she had said something silly.

eɪvinhə, haʊɛvɝ, blʌʃt fjʊɹiəsli ən stɛɹɾ ət bɝdʒɪt, waɪd-aɪɾ ən flʌstɝd, əz ðoʊ ðə wɔɹɾɝz pɹɛzəns wɝ tə bleɪm fəɹ əɹ faɪɝi tʃiks. hɝidli ʃi ʃɪftəɾ əɹ ɡeɪz tə ðə pipəl stɪl ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə fɝs hɪl, pɝhæps hæf ə maɪl dɪstənt. "bɛs tə weɪɾ əntɪl ðeɪ ɑɹ aʊɾ ə saɪt," ʃi sɛd, "bʌt jə kænɑt weɪt tu lɔŋ. wʌns juv stɑɹɾəd ði ənwivɪŋ, ðə floʊz bɪɡɪn tə ɡɹoʊ . . . slɪk . . . æftɝ ə taɪm. lɛɾɪŋ wʌn slɪp fɹi bɪfɔɹ ɪts aʊɾ ə ðə wiv ɪz ðə seɪm əz lɛɾɪŋ ɡoʊ ʌv ðə wiv; ɪɾəl fɔl ɪndə wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɪʃɪz, ðɛn. bʌt jə mʌs nɑt hɝi, iðɝ. itʃ θɹɛd mʌs bi pʊl fɹi əz fɑɹ əz ɪɾəl ɡoʊ. ðə mɔɹ ðət kʌm lus, ði iziɝ ʌðɝz wɪl bi tə si, bʌt jə mʌst ɔlweɪz pɪk ðə θɹɛd ðəɾ ɪz iziəs tə si." smaɪlɪŋ wɔɹmli, ʃi pɹɛst əɹ fɪŋɡɝz fɝmli əɡɛnst ɪleɪnz tʃik. "ju wɪl də wɛl, ɪf jə ɑɹ kɛɹfəl."

Aviendha, however, blushed furiously and stared at Birgitte, wide-eyed and flustered, as though the Warder's presence were to blame for her fiery cheeks. Hurriedly she shifted her gaze to the people still short of the first hill, perhaps half a mile distant. "Best to wait until they are out of sight," she said, "but you cannot wait too long. Once you have started the unweaving, the flows begin to grow . . . slick . . . after a time. Letting one slip free before it is out of the weave is the same as letting go of the weave; it will fall into whatever it wishes, then. But you must not hurry, either. Each thread must be pulled free as far as it will go. The more that come loose, the easier others will be to see, but you must always pick the thread that is easiest to see." Smiling warmly, she pressed her fingers firmly against Elayne's cheek. "You will do well, if you are careful."

ɪt dɪd nɑt saʊn ðət dɪfəkəlt. ʃi dʒʌs hæd tə bi kɛɹfəl. ɪt sim tə teɪk ə lɔŋ taɪm fəɹ ðə læst wʊmən tə vænɪʃ oʊvɝ ðə hɪl, ðə slɛndɝ noʊbəl bɛn ʌndɝ ðə bʌlk ə hɝ dʒɹɛsəz. ðə sʌn bɛɹli əpɪɹd tə sɛɾəl ɛni əɾ ɔl, bʌɾ ɪt sim laɪk aʊɝz. wʌɾ eɪvinhə min pɹɪsaɪsli baɪ "slɪk"? ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɪkspleɪn bɪɑn vɛɹieɪʃənz ɑn ðə wɝd; ðeɪ bɪkeɪm dɪfəkəl tə hoʊld, ðət wɑz ɔl.

It did not sound that difficult. She just had to be careful. It seemed to take a long time for the last woman to vanish over the hill, the slender noble bent under the bulk of her dresses. The sun barely appeared to settle any at all, but it seemed like hours. What did Aviendha mean precisely by "slick"? She could not explain beyond variations on the word; they became difficult to hold, that was all.

ɪleɪn faʊn aʊɾ əz sun əz ʃi bɪɡæn əɡɛn. "slɪk" wɑz wʌt jə wəd ɡɛɾ ɪf jə koʊɾəd ə laɪv il wɪð ɡɹis. ʃi ɡɹɪɾɪd əɹ tiθ dʒʌs hoʊldɪŋ ɑn tə ðət fɝs θɹɛd, ən ðət wɑz ɑn tɑp ə tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊl ɪt fɹi. ɔl ðət stɑpt əɹ fɹəm ɡæspɪŋ ɪn ɹɪlif wən ðə θɹɛɾ ʌv ɛɹ bɪɡæn wɪpɪŋ əbaʊt, faɪnəli lus, wɑz ðət ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ tə ɡoʊ. ɪf ðeɪ bɪkeɪm mʌtʃ mɔɹ "slɪk," ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ʃi kəd mænədʒ ɪt. eɪvinhə wɑtʃt kloʊsli, bʌt dɪd nɑt seɪ ənʌðɝ wɝd, ðoʊ ʃi ɔlweɪz hæɾ ən ɛnkɝɪdʒɪŋ smaɪl wən ɪleɪn niɾəd wʌn. ɪleɪn kəd nɑt si bɝdʒɪt - ʃi dɪd nɑt dɛɹ lʊk əweɪ fɹəm əɹ wɝk - jɛt ʃi kəd fil hɝ, ə smɔl nɑɾ ə ɹɑk-sɑləd kɑnfəɾəns ɪn əɹ oʊn hɛd, ɪnʌf kɑnfəɾəns tə fɪl hɝ.

Elayne found out as soon as she began again. "Slick" was what you would get if you coated a live eel with grease. She gritted her teeth just holding on to that first thread, and that was on top of trying to pull it free. All that stopped her from gasping in relief when the thread of Air began whipping about, finally loose, was that there were more to go. If they became much more "slick," she was not sure she could manage it. Aviendha watched closely, but did not say another word, though she always had an encouraging smile when Elayne needed one. Elayne could not see Birgitte - she did not dare look away from her work - yet she could feel her, a small knot of rock-solid confidence in her own head, enough confidence to fill her.

swɛt slɪd daʊn əɹ feɪs, daʊn əɹ bæk ən bɛli, əntɪl ʃi bɪɡæn tə fil "slɪk" hɝsɛlf. ə bæθ tənaɪt wəd bi moʊst wɛlkəm. noʊ, ʃi kəd nɑt θɪŋk ə ðæt. ɔl ətɛnʃən ɑn ðə wivz. ðeɪ wɝ ɡɛɾɪŋ hɑɹɾɝ tə hændəl, kwɪvɝɪŋ ɪn əɹ ɡɹɪp əz sun əz ʃi tʌtʃt wʌn, bʌt ðeɪ stɪl keɪm fɹi, ən ɛvɹi taɪm wʌn θɹɛd bɪɡæn tə læʃ əbaʊt, ənʌðɝ sim tə lip aʊɾ ə ðə mæs, tə sʌɾənli bi klɪɹli pɝsɛptəbəl wɛɹ ðəɹ hæɾ oʊnli bɪn sɑləd seɪaɪdɑɹ bɪfɔɹ. tə hɝ aɪ ðə ɡeɪtweɪ ɹɪzɛmbəl səm mɑnstʃɹəs, dɪstɔɹɾəd hʌnʒɹəd-hɛdz ɑn ðə bɑɾəm ʌv ə pɑnd, sɝaʊndəd baɪ fleɪlɪŋ tɛnʒɹəlz, ɛvɹi wʌn θɪkli hɛɹd wɪð θɹɛdz ə ðə paʊɝ ðət ɡɹu ən ɹɪθd ən vænɪʃt oʊnli tə bi ɹipleɪs baɪ nu. ði oʊpənɪŋ vɪzəbəl tə ɛniwʌn flɛkst əlɔŋ ɪts ɛdʒəz, tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ʃeɪp ən ivən saɪz kəntɪnjuəsli. hɝ lɛɡz bɪɡæn tə tʃɹɛmbəl; stʃɹeɪn stʌŋ əɹ aɪz əz mʌtʃ əz swɛt dɪd. ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ ʃi kəd ɡoʊ ɑn. ɡɹɪɾɪŋ əɹ tiθ, ʃi fɔt. wʌn θɹɛɾ əɾ ə taɪm. wʌn θɹɛɾ əɾ ə taɪm.

Sweat slid down her face, down her back and belly, until she began to feel "slick" herself. A bath tonight would be most welcome. No, she could not think of that. All attention on the weaves. They were getting harder to handle, quivering in her grip as soon as she touched one, but they still came free, and every time one thread began to lash about, another seemed to leap out of the mass, to suddenly be clearly perceptible where there had only been solid saidar before. To her eye the gateway resembled some monstrous, distorted hundred-heads on the bottom of a pond, surrounded by flailing tendrils, every one thickly haired with threads of the Power that grew and writhed and vanished only to be replaced by new. The opening visible to anyone flexed along its edges, changing shape and even size continuously. Her legs began to tremble; strain stung her eyes as much as sweat did. She did not know how much longer she could go on. Gritting her teeth, she fought. One thread at a time. One thread at a time.

ə θaʊzən maɪlz əweɪ, lɛs ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əweɪ θɹu ðə ʃʌɾɝɪŋ ɡeɪtweɪ, dʌzənz ə soʊlʒɝz swɛpt ɝaʊn ðə waɪt fɑɹm bɪldɪŋz, ʃɔɹt mɛn kæɹiɪŋ kɹɔsboʊz, ɪn bɹaʊn bɹɛstpleɪts ən peɪntəd hɛlməts ðət lʊk laɪk ðə hɛdz ə hjudʒ ɪnsɛks. bɪhaɪn əm keɪm ə wʊmən wɪð ɹɛd pænəlz bɛɹɪŋ sɪlvɝ laɪtnɪŋ ɑn əɹ skɝts, ə bɹeɪsləɾ ɑn əɹ ɹɪs lɪŋk baɪ ə sɪlvɝi liʃ tə ðə kɑlɝ ɝaʊn ðə nɛk ʌv ə wʊmən ɪn ɡɹeɪ, ən ðən ənʌðɝ sʌldəm ən əɹ deɪmeɪn, ðən ənʌðɝ pɛɹ. wʌn ə ðə sʌldəm pɔɪntəɾ ət ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, ən ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ əbɹʌpli ɛnvɛləpt əɹ deɪmeɪn.

A thousand miles away, less than a hundred paces away through the shuddering gateway, dozens of soldiers swept around the white farm buildings, short men carrying crossbows, in brown breastplates and painted helmets that looked like the heads of huge insects. Behind them came a woman with red panels bearing silver lightning on her skirts, a bracelet on her wrist linked by a silvery leash to the collar around the neck of a woman in gray, and then another sul'dam and her damane, then another pair. One of the sul'dam pointed at the gateway, and the glow of saidar abruptly enveloped her damane.

"ɡɛt daʊn!" ɪleɪn skɹimd, fɔlɪŋ bækwɝd, aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ə ðə fɑɹmjɑɹd, ən sɪlvɝ-blu laɪtnɪŋ ʃɑt θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ wɪð ə ɹɔɹ ðət fɪld əɹ ɪɹz, fɔɹkɪŋ sævɪdʒli ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən. hɝ hɛɹ lɪftəd, ɛvɹi stʃɹæn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stæn ɑn ɪts oʊn, ən θʌndɝəs faʊntənz ə ɝθ ɪɹʌptəd wɛɹɛvɝ wʌn ə ðə fɔɹks stʃɹʌk. dɝɾ ən pɛbəlz ɹeɪn daʊn ɑn hɝ.

"Get down!" Elayne screamed, falling backward, out of sight of the farmyard, and silver-blue lightning shot through the gateway with a roar that filled her ears, forking savagely in every direction. Her hair lifted, every strand trying to stand on its own, and thunderous fountains of earth erupted wherever one of the forks struck. Dirt and pebbles rained down on her.

hɪɹɪŋ ɹɪtɝn sʌɾənli, ən ə mænz vɔɪs fɹəm ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ði oʊpənɪŋ, ə slɝd, dʒɹɔlɪŋ æksɛn ðət meɪɾ əɹ skɪn kɹɔl əz mʌtʃ əz ðə wɝdz. ". . . mʌs teɪk əm əlaɪv, jə fulz!"

Hearing returned suddenly, and a man's voice from the other side of the opening, a slurred, drawling accent that made her skin crawl as much as the words. ". . . must take them alive, you fools!"

əbɹʌpli wʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz wɑz lipɪŋ ɪndə ðə mɛdoʊ ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. bɝdʒɪts æɹoʊ pʌntʃt θɹu ðə klɛntʃt fɪst ɪmbɔst ɑn ɪz lɛðɝ bɹɛstpleɪt. ə sɛkən sintʃæn soʊlʒɝ stʌmbəld oʊvɝ ðə fɝst əz i fɛl, ən eɪvinhəz bɛl naɪf stæbd ɪndə hɪz θɹoʊt bɪfɔɹ i kəd ɹɪkʌvɝ. æɹoʊz flu fɹəm bɝdʒɪts baʊ laɪk heɪl; wɪð wʌn buɾ ɑn ðə hɔɹsəz' ɹeɪnz, ʃi ɡɹɪnd ɡɹɪmli əz ʃi ʃɑt. ðə tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ hɔɹsəz tɔs ðɛɹ hɛdz ən dænst əz ɪf ðeɪ wəd dʒɝk fɹi ən ɹʌn, bʌt bɝdʒɪt sɪmpli stʊɾ ən ʃɑɾ əz fæst əz ʃi kəd dʒɹɔ. ʃaʊts fɹəm bɪɑn ðə ɡeɪtweɪ sɛd bɝdʒɪt sɪlvɝboʊ stɪl stʃɹʌk hoʊm wɪð ɛvɹi ʃæft ʃi lust. ænsɝ keɪm, kwɪk əz bæd θɔt, blæk stʃɹiks, kɹɔsboʊ boʊls. soʊ kwɪk, ɔl hæpənɪŋ soʊ fæst. eɪvinhə fɛl, blʌd ɹʌnɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə fɪŋɡɝz klʌtʃɪŋ əɹ ɹaɪɾ ɑɹm, bʌt ʃi lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv əɹ waʊn ɪmiɾiətli, kɹɔlɪŋ klɪɹ, skɹæbəlɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn fəɹ ði æŋɡɹil, hɝ feɪs sɛt. bɝdʒɪt kɹaɪɾ aʊt; dʒɹɑpɪŋ əɹ baʊ, ʃi ɡɹæbd əɹ θaɪ wɛɹ ə kwɔɹəl stʌk aʊt. ɪleɪn fɛl ðə stæb ʌv æɡəni əz ʃɑɹpli əz ɪf ɪt wɝ əɹ oʊn.

Abruptly one of the soldiers was leaping into the meadow right in front of her. Birgitte's arrow punched through the clenched fist embossed on his leather breastplate. A second Seanchan soldier stumbled over the first as he fell, and Aviendha's belt knife stabbed into his throat before he could recover. Arrows flew from Birgitte's bow like hail; with one boot on the horses' reins, she grinned grimly as she shot. The trembling horses tossed their heads and danced as if they would jerk free and run, but Birgitte simply stood and shot as fast as she could draw. Shouts from beyond the gateway said Birgitte Silverbow still struck home with every shaft she loosed. Answer came, quick as bad thought, black streaks, crossbow bolts. So quick, all happening so fast. Aviendha fell, blood running over the fingers clutching her right arm, but she let go of her wound immediately, crawling clear, scrabbling on the ground for the angreal, her face set. Birgitte cried out; dropping her bow, she grabbed her thigh where a quarrel stuck out. Elayne felt the stab of agony as sharply as if it were her own.

dɛspɝətli, ʃi sizd ənʌðɝ θɹɛd fɹəm wɛɹ ʃi leɪ hæf ɑn əɹ bæk. ən ɹilaɪz tə hɝ hɔɹɝ æftɝ wʌn tʌɡ ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ɔl ʃi kəd də tə hoʊld ɑn. hæd ðə θɹɛd muvd? hæɾ ɪt slɪp fɹi ɛni əɾ ɔl? ɪf ɪt hæd, ʃi dɪd nɑt dɛɹ lɛt ɡoʊ. ðə θɹɛd tʃɹɛmbəld ɡɹisəli ɪn əɹ ɡɹæsp.

Desperately, she seized another thread from where she lay half on her back. And realized to her horror after one tug that it was all she could do to hold on. Had the thread moved? Had it slipped free any at all? If it had, she did not dare let go. The thread trembled greasily in her grasp.

"əlaɪv, aɪ sɛd!" ðət sintʃæn vɔɪs ɹɔɹd. "ɛniwʌn u kɪlz ə wʊmən ɡɛts noʊ ʃɛɹ ə ðə teɪkɪŋ ɡoʊld!" ðə flɝi ʌv kɹɔsboʊ boʊls sist.

"Alive, I said!" that Seanchan voice roared. "Anyone who kills a woman gets no share of the taking gold!" The flurry of crossbow bolts ceased.

"ju wɪʃ tə teɪk mi?" eɪvinhə ʃaʊɾəd. "ðɛn kʌm ən dæns wɪð mi!" seɪaɪdɑɹz ɡloʊ əbɹʌpli sɝaʊndəd hɝ, dɪm ivən wɪð ði æŋɡɹil, ən bɔlz ə faɪɝ spɹæŋ ɪndə biɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə ɡeɪtweɪ ən spɹeɪd θɹu əɡɛn ən əɡɛn. nɑt vɛɹi lɑɹdʒ bɔlz, bʌt ðə blæsts əz ðeɪ bɝs bæk ɪn ɔltɑɹə saʊndəɾ ɪn ə stɛɾi stʃɹim. eɪvinhə pæntɪd wɪð ɛfɝt, ðoʊ; hɝ feɪs ɡlɪsənd wɪð swɛt. bɝdʒɪt hæd ɹəkʌvɝɾ əɹ baʊ; ʃi lʊkt ɛvɹi ɪntʃ ðə hɪɹoʊ ʌv lɛdʒənd, blʌd stʃɹimɪŋ daʊn əɹ lɛɡ, bɛɹli eɪbəl tə stænd, bʌɾ ən æɹoʊ hæf dʒɹɔn, sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ə tɑɹɡət.

"You wish to take me?" Aviendha shouted. "Then come and dance with me!" Saidar's glow abruptly surrounded her, dim even with the angreal, and balls of fire sprang into being in front of the gateway and sprayed through again and again. Not very large balls, but the blasts as they burst back in Altara sounded in a steady stream. Aviendha panted with effort, though; her face glistened with sweat. Birgitte had recovered her bow; she looked every inch the hero of legend, blood streaming down her leg, barely able to stand, but an arrow half drawn, searching for a target.

ɪleɪn tʃɹaɪd tə kəntʃɹoʊl əɹ bɹiðɪŋ. ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɛmbɹeɪs wʌn ʃɹɛd mɔɹ ə ðə paʊɝ, nʌθɪŋ tə hɛlp. "ðə tu ʌv jə mʌst ɡɛɾ əweɪ," ʃi sɛd. ʃi kəd nɑt bɪliv haʊ ʃi saʊndəd, kɑm əz aɪs; ʃi nu ʃi ʃʊɾə bɪn weɪlɪŋ. hɝ hɑɹt wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə paʊn θɹu hɝ ɹɪbz. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ aɪ kən hoʊl ðɪs." ðət hɛl tʃɹu fəɹ ði ɪntaɪɝ wiv əz mʌtʃ əz fəɹ ðət sɪŋɡəl θɹɛd. wɑz ɪt slaɪɾɪŋ? wɑz ɪt? "ɡoʊ, əz fæst əz jə kæn. ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə hɪlz ʃəd bi seɪf, bʌɾ ɛvɹi spæn jə kən kʌvɝ ɡeɪnz sʌmθɪŋ. ɡoʊ!"

Elayne tried to control her breathing. She could not embrace one shred more of the Power, nothing to help. "The two of you must get away," she said. She could not believe how she sounded, calm as ice; she knew she should have been wailing. Her heart was trying to pound through her ribs. "I don't know how much longer I can hold this." That held true for the entire weave as much as for that single thread. Was it sliding? Was it? "Go, as fast as you can. The other side of the hills should be safe, but every span you can cover gains something. Go!"

bɝdʒɪt ɡɹaʊld ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, bʌt nʌθɪŋ ðəɾ ɪleɪn nu. ɪt saʊndəd laɪk fɹeɪzəz ʃi wəd laɪk tə lɝn. ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ɛvɝ ə tʃæns. bɝdʒɪt wɛn ɑn ɪn wɝdz ɪleɪn kəɾ ʌndɝstænd. "ju lɛt ðət blʌɾi θɪŋ ɡoʊ bɪfɔɹ aɪ tɛl ju, ən jə woʊn əv tə wɝi əbaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ nɪneɪiv tə skɪn ju; əl də ɪt maɪsɛlf. ən ðən lɛɾ əɹ əv ə tɝn. dʒʌs bi kwaɪəɾ ən hæŋ ɑn! eɪvinhə, ɡɛɾ ɝaʊn hɪɹ - bɪhaɪn ðət θɪŋ! - kən jə kip ðəɾ ʌp fɹəm bɪhaɪn ɪt? - ɡɛɾ ɝaʊn hɪɹ ən ɑn wʌn ə ðiz blʌɾi hɔɹsəz."

Birgitte growled in the Old Tongue, but nothing that Elayne knew. It sounded like phrases she would like to learn. If there was ever a chance. Birgitte went on in words Elayne could understand. "You let that bloody thing go before I tell you, and you won't have to worry about waiting for Nynaeve to skin you; I'll do it myself. And then let her have a turn. Just be quiet and hang on! Aviendha, get around here - behind that thing! - can you keep that up from behind it? - get around here and on one of these bloody horses."

"æz lɔŋ əz aɪ kən si wɛɹ tə wiv," eɪvinhə ɹɪplaɪd, stæɡɝɪŋ tə hɝ fit. ʃi wɑbəl saɪdweɪz ən bɛɹli kɑt hɝsɛlf ʃɔɹɾ ə fɔlɪŋ. blʌd floʊd daʊn əɹ sliv fɹəm ə wɪkəd ɡæʃ. "aɪ θɪŋk aɪ kæn." ʃi vænɪʃt bɪhaɪn ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, ən ðə faɪɝbɔlz kəntɪnjud. jə kəd si θɹu ə ɡeɪtweɪ fɹəm ði ʌðɝ saɪd, ðoʊ ɪɾ əpɪɹd tə bi ə hit heɪz hæŋɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ. jə kəd nɑt wɔk θɹu fɹəm ðət saɪd, ðoʊ - ði ətɛmpt wəd bi ɪkstʃɹimli peɪnfəl - ən wən eɪvinhə ɹiəpɪɹd, ʃi wɑz stʌmbəlɪŋ wɛl waɪd. bɝdʒɪt hɛlpt əɹ maʊn əɹ ɡɛldɪŋ, bʌt bækwɝd, ʌv ɔl θɪŋz!

"As long as I can see where to weave," Aviendha replied, staggering to her feet. She wobbled sideways and barely caught herself short of falling. Blood flowed down her sleeve from a wicked gash. "I think I can." She vanished behind the gateway, and the fireballs continued. You could see through a gateway from the other side, though it appeared to be a heat haze hanging in the air. You could not walk through from that side, though - the attempt would be extremely painful - and when Aviendha reappeared, she was stumbling well wide. Birgitte helped her mount her gelding, but backward, of all things!

wən bɝdʒɪt moʊʃən fɪɹsli tə hɝ, ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ wɪð ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, ʃi fɪɹd wʌt maɪt hæpən ɪf ʃi dɪd. "aɪm nɑt sɝɾən aɪ kən hoʊld ɑn ɪf aɪ tʃɹaɪ tə ɡɛɾ ʌp." ɪn tʃɹuθ, ʃi wɑz nɑt sɝɾən ʃi kəd ɡɛɾ ʌp; taɪɝd wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪn ɪt; hɝ mʌsəlz wɝ wɔɾɝ. "ɹaɪɾ əz fæst əz jə kæn. əl hoʊld ɑn əz lɔŋ əz aɪm eɪbəl. pliz, ɡoʊ!"

When Birgitte motioned fiercely to her, Elayne did not bother with shaking her head. For one thing, she feared what might happen if she did. "I'm not certain I can hold on if I try to get up." In truth, she was not certain she could get up; tired was no longer in it; her muscles were water. "Ride as fast as you can. I'll hold on as long as I'm able. Please, go!"

mʌɾɝɪŋ kɝsɪz ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ - ðeɪ hæd tə bi; nʌθɪŋ ɛls ɛvɝ hæd ðə saʊnd! - bɝdʒɪt ʃʌv ðə hɔɹsəz' ɹeɪnz ɪndə eɪvinhəz hænz. nɪɹli fɔlɪŋ twaɪs, ʃi hɑbəl tə ɪleɪn ən bɛn tə teɪk əɹ baɪ ðə ʃoʊldɝz. "ju kən hæŋ ɑn," ʃi sɛd, hɝ vɔɪs fɪld wɪð ðə seɪm kənvɪkʃən ɪleɪn fɛl fɹəm hɝ. "aɪ nɛvɝ mɛɾ ə kwin ʌv ændɝ bɪfɔɹ ju, bʌɾ aɪv noʊn kwinz laɪk ju. ə bækboʊn ə stil ən ə laɪənz hɑɹt. jə kən də ɪt!"

Muttering curses in the Old Tongue - they had to be; nothing else ever had the sound! - Birgitte shoved the horses' reins into Aviendha's hands. Nearly falling twice, she hobbled to Elayne and bent to take her by the shoulders. "You can hang on," she said, her voice filled with the same conviction Elayne felt from her. "I never met a Queen of Andor before you, but I've known queens like you. A backbone of steel and a lion's heart. You can do it!"

sloʊli ʃi pʊld ɪleɪn ʌp, nɑt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ən ænsɝ, hɝ feɪs taɪt, ɛvɹi stæb ɪn əɹ lɛɡ ɛkoʊɪŋ ɪn ɪleɪnz hɛd. ɪleɪn kwɪvɝd wɪð ði ɛfɝɾ ə hoʊldɪŋ ðə wiv, hoʊldɪŋ ðət wʌn θɹɛd; ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn hɝsɛlf ɪɹɛkt. ən əlaɪv. bɝdʒɪts lɛɡ θɹɑb mædli ɪn əɹ hɛd. ʃi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə lin ɑn bɝdʒɪt, bʌɾ əɹ oʊn tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ lɪmz wəd nɑt səpɔɹɾ əɹ kəmplitli. əz ðeɪ lɝtʃt təwɔɹd ðə hɔɹsəz, itʃ hæf linɪŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ, ʃi kɛp lʊkɪŋ bæk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. ʃi kəd hoʊld ə wiv wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪt - ʃi kəd nɔɹməli - bʌt ʃi niɾəd tə ɹiəʃʊɹ hɝsɛlf ðət ʃi ɹɪli dɪd stɪl əv ə ɡɹɪp ɑn ðət wʌn θɹɛd, ðəɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt slɪpɪŋ. ðə ɡeɪtweɪ naʊ əpɪɹd laɪk noʊ wiv ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ sin, twɪstɪŋ waɪldli, ɹɛðd wɪð fʌz tɛntəkəlz.

Slowly she pulled Elayne up, not waiting for an answer, her face tight, every stab in her leg echoing in Elayne's head. Elayne quivered with the effort of holding the weave, holding that one thread; she was surprised to find herself erect. And alive. Birgitte's leg throbbed madly in her head. She tried not to lean on Birgitte, but her own trembling limbs would not support her completely. As they lurched toward the horses, each half leaning on the other, she kept looking back over her shoulder. She could hold a weave without looking at it - she could normally - but she needed to reassure herself that she really did still have a grip on that one thread, that it was not slipping. The gateway now appeared like no weave she had ever seen, twisting wildly, wreathed with fuzzed tentacles.

wɪð ə ɡɹoʊn, bɝdʒɪt hivd əɹ ɪndə hɝ sæɾəl mɔɹ ðən hɛlp hɝ. bækwɝd, dʒʌs laɪk eɪvinhə! "ju hæv tə si," ʃi ɪkspleɪnd, lɪmpɪŋ tə hɝ ɡɛldɪŋ; hoʊldɪŋ ðə ɹeɪnz ʌv ɔl θɹi hɔɹsəz, ʃi pʊl hɝsɛlf ʌp peɪnfəli. wɪθaʊɾ ə saʊnd, bʌɾ ɪleɪn fɛl ði æɡəni. "ju də wʌt nidz duɪŋ ən liv wɛɹ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə mi." ðə hɔɹsəz lɛpt əweɪ, pɝhæps əz mʌtʃ fɹəm iɡɝnəs tə bi ɡɔn əz fɹəm bɝdʒɪts hil ɪn əɹ oʊn maʊns flæŋk.

With a groan, Birgitte heaved her into her saddle more than helped her. Backward, just like Aviendha! "You have to see," she explained, limping to her gelding; holding the reins of all three horses, she pulled herself up painfully. Without a sound, but Elayne felt the agony. "You do what needs doing and leave where we're going to me." The horses leaped away, perhaps as much from eagerness to be gone as from Birgitte's heel in her own mount's flank.

ɪleɪn hʌŋ ɑn tə ðə haɪ kæntəl ə hɝ sæɾəl əz ɡɹɪmli əz ʃi dɪd tə ðə wiv, tə seɪaɪdɑɹ ɪtsɛlf. ðə ɡæləpɪŋ hɔɹs flʌŋ əɹ əbaʊt, ən ɪt wɑz ɔl ʃi kəd də tə ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə sæɾəl. eɪvinhə juzd əɹ sæɾəlz kæntəl əz ə pɹɑp tə kip hɝsɛlf əpɹaɪt; hɝ maʊθ hʌŋ oʊpən, sʌkɪŋ ɛɹ, ən əɹ aɪz sim fɪkst. ðə ɡloʊ sɝaʊndəd hɝ, ðoʊ, ən ðət stʃɹim ə faɪɝbɔlz kəntɪnjud. nɑɾ əz fæst əz bɪfɔɹ, tʃɹu, ən səm ʃɑt waɪɾ ə ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, stʃɹikɪŋ tʃɹeɪlz ə fleɪm θɹu ðə ɡɹæs əɹ ɪksploʊɾɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪɑnd, bʌt ðeɪ stɪl fɔɹmd ən flu. ɪleɪn tʊk stʃɹɛŋkθ, meɪd hɝsɛlf teɪk stʃɹɛŋkθ; ɪf eɪvinhə kəd kip ɑn wən ʃi lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə fɔl ɑn əɹ feɪs, ʃi kʊd, tu.

Elayne hung on to the high cantle of her saddle as grimly as she did to the weave, to saidar itself. The galloping horse flung her about, and it was all she could do to remain in the saddle. Aviendha used her saddle's cantle as a prop to keep herself upright; her mouth hung open, sucking air, and her eyes seemed fixed. The glow surrounded her, though, and that stream of fireballs continued. Not as fast as before, true, and some shot wide of the gateway, streaking trails of flame through the grass or exploding on the ground beyond, but they still formed and flew. Elayne took strength, made herself take strength; if Aviendha could keep on when she looked ready to fall on her face, she could, too.

əɾ ə ɡæləp, ðə ɡeɪtweɪ bɪɡæn tə dwɪndəl, bɹaʊn ɡɹæs stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ aʊt bɪtwin əm ən ði oʊpənɪŋ, ən ðən ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɑz slæntɪŋ ʌpwɝd. ðeɪ wɝ klaɪmɪŋ ðə hɪl! bɝdʒɪt wɑz əɡɛn ði æɹoʊ ɪn ðə baʊ, ɔl foʊkəs, faɪɾɪŋ daʊn ði æɡəni ɪn əɹ lɛɡz, ɝdʒɪŋ əɹ hɔɹsəz fəɹ mɔɹ spid. ɔl ðeɪ hæd tə də wɑz ɹitʃ ðə kɹɛst, ɹitʃ ði ʌðɝ saɪd.

At a gallop, the gateway began to dwindle, brown grass stretching out between them and the opening, and then the ground was slanting upward. They were climbing the hill! Birgitte was again the arrow in the bow, all focus, fighting down the agony in her legs, urging her horses for more speed. All they had to do was reach the crest, reach the other side.

wɪð ə ɡæsp, eɪvinhə sæɡd ɑntu hɝ ɛlboʊz, baʊnsɪŋ ɑn əɹ sæɾəl laɪk ə lus sæk; ðə laɪɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ flɪkɝɾ ɝaʊn əɹ ən wɑz ɡɔn. "aɪ kænɑt," ʃi pæntɪd. "aɪ kænɑt." ðət wɑz ɔl ʃi kəd ɡɛɾ aʊt. sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz bɪɡæn lipɪŋ ɪndə ðə mɛdoʊ ɔlmoʊst əz sun əz ðə heɪl ə faɪɝ sist.

With a gasp, Aviendha sagged onto her elbows, bouncing on her saddle like a loose sack; the light of saidar flickered around her and was gone. "I cannot," she panted. "I cannot." That was all she could get out. Seanchan soldiers began leaping into the meadow almost as soon as the hail of fire ceased.

"ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt," ɪleɪn mænədʒd. hɝ θɹoʊt wɑz sænd; ɔl ðə mɔɪstʃɝ ðət hæd bɪn ɪn əɹ naʊ koʊɾəd əɹ skɪn ən soʊkt əɹ kloʊðz. "juzɪŋ ən æŋɡɹil ɪz taɪɹɪŋ. jə dɪd wɛl, ən ðeɪ kæn kætʃ əs naʊ."

"It's all right," Elayne managed. Her throat was sand; all the moisture that had been in her now coated her skin and soaked her clothes. "Using an angreal is tiring. You did well, and they can't catch us now."

əz ɪf tə mɑk hɝ, ə sʌldəm əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə mɛdoʊ bɪloʊ; ivən ət hæf ə maɪl ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɪsteɪkɪŋ ðə tu wɪmən. ðə sʌn, loʊ ɪn ðə wɛst, stɪl flæʃt ɡlɪns ɔf ði æɾəm lɪŋkɪŋ ðɛm. ənʌðɝ pɛɹ dʒɔɪn ðɛm, ðən ə θɝd, ən ə fɔɹθ. ə fɪfθ.

As if to mock her, a sul'dam appeared in the meadow below; even at half a mile there was no mistaking the two women. The sun, low in the west, still flashed glints off the a'dam linking them. Another pair joined them, then a third, and a fourth. A fifth.

"ðə kɹɛst!" bɝdʒɪt ʃaʊɾəd dʒɔɪfəli. "wi meɪɾ ɪt! ɪts ɡʊd waɪn ən ə wɛl sɛt-ʌp mæn tənaɪt!"

"The crest!" Birgitte shouted joyfully. "We made it! It's good wine and a well set-up man tonight!"

ɪn ðə mɛdoʊ, ə sʌldəm pɔɪntəd, ən taɪm sim tə sloʊ fəɹ ɪleɪn. ðə ɡloʊ ʌv ðə wʌn paʊɝ spɹæŋ ʌp ɝaʊn ðə wʊmənz deɪmeɪn. ɪleɪn kəd si ðə wiv fɔɹmɪŋ. ʃi nu wʌɾ ɪt wɑz. ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə stɑp ɪt. "fæstɝ!" ʃi ʃaʊɾəd. ðə ʃil stʃɹʌk hɝ. ʃi ʃʊɾə bɪn tu stʃɹɔŋ fəɹ ɪt - ʃi ʃəɾ əv bɪn! - bʌɾ ɪɡzɔstəɾ əz ʃi wɑz, bɛɹli klɪŋɪŋ tə seɪaɪdɑɹ əz ʃi wɑz, ɪt slaɪs bɪtwin əɹ ən ðə sɔɹs. daʊn ɪn ðə mɛdoʊ, ðə wiv ðət hæd bɪn ə ɡeɪtweɪ fɛl ɪn ɑn ɪtsɛlf. hæɡɝd, lʊkɪŋ əz ðoʊ ʃi kəd nɑt pɑsəbli muv, eɪvinhə hɝl hɝsɛlf fɹəm əɹ sæɾəl əɾ ɪleɪn, kæɹiɪŋ əm boʊθ ɔf. ɪleɪn hæd dʒʌs taɪm tə si ðə fɑɹ sloʊp ə ðə hɪl bɪloʊ hɝ əz ʃi fɛl.

In the meadow, a sul'dam pointed, and time seemed to slow for Elayne. The glow of the One Power sprang up around the woman's damane. Elayne could see the weave forming. She knew what it was. And there was no way to stop it. "Faster!" she shouted. The shield struck her. She should have been too strong for it - she should have been! - but exhausted as she was, barely clinging to saidar as she was, it sliced between her and the Source. Down in the meadow, the weave that had been a gateway fell in on itself. Haggard, looking as though she could not possibly move, Aviendha hurled herself from her saddle at Elayne, carrying them both off. Elayne had just time to see the far slope of the hill below her as she fell.

ði ɛɹ tɝnd waɪt, blæŋkɪŋ əɹ saɪt. ðəɹ wɑz saʊnd - ʃi nu ðəɹ wɑz saʊnd, ə ɡɹeɪt ɹɔɹ - bʌɾ ɪt leɪ bɪɑn hɪɹɪŋ. sʌmθɪŋ stʃɹʌk hɝ, əz ɪf ʃi hæd fɔlən fɹəm ə ɹuftɑp ɑntu hɑɹd peɪvmənt, fɹəm ə taʊɝ tɑp.

The air turned white, blanking her sight. There was sound - she knew there was sound, a great roar - but it lay beyond hearing. Something struck her, as if she had fallen from a rooftop onto hard pavement, from a tower top.

hɝ aɪz oʊpənd, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə skaɪ. ðə skaɪ lʊkt, stʃɹeɪnʒ sʌmhaʊ, blɝi. fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi kəd nɑt muv, ən wən ʃi dɪd, ʃi ɡæspt. ʃi hɝɾ ɛvɹiwɛɹ. oʊ, laɪt, ʃi hɝt! sloʊli ʃi ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə hɝ feɪs; hɝ fɪŋɡɝz keɪm əweɪ ɹɛd. blʌd. ði ʌðɝz. ʃi hæd tə hɛlp ði ʌðɝz. ʃi kəd fil bɝdʒɪt, fil peɪn əz bæɾ əz wʌt ɡɹɪp hɝ, bʌɾ ət lis bɝdʒɪt wɑz əlaɪv. ən dɪtɝmənd, ən æŋɡɹi əpɛɹənli; ʃi kəd nɑt bi ɪnʒɝd tu bædli. eɪvinhə.

Her eyes opened, staring at the sky. The sky looked, strange somehow, blurry. For a moment she could not move, and when she did, she gasped. She hurt everywhere. Oh, Light, she hurt! Slowly she raised a hand to her face; her fingers came away red. Blood. The others. She had to help the others. She could feel Birgitte, feel pain as bad as what gripped her, but at least Birgitte was alive. And determined, and angry apparently; she could not be injured too badly. Aviendha.

wɪð ə sɑb, ɪleɪn ɹoʊld oʊvɝ, ðən pʊʃt ʌp tə hænz ən niz, hɝ hɛd spɪnɪŋ, æɡəni stæbɪŋ əɹ saɪd. veɪɡli ʃi ɹɪkɔl ðət muvɪŋ wɪð ivən wʌn bɹoʊkən ɹɪb kəd bi deɪnʒɝəs, bʌt ðə θɔt wɑz əz heɪzi əz ðə hɪlsaɪd. θɪŋkɪŋ simd . . . dɪfəkəlt. blɪŋkɪŋ əpɪɹd tə hɛlp əɹ saɪt, ðoʊ. sʌm. ʃi wɑz ɔlmoʊs tə ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə hɪl! haɪ əbʌv, ə heɪz ə smoʊk ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə mɛdoʊ bɪɑnd. ənɪmpɔɹɾənt, naʊ. nɑɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt əɾ ɔl.

With a sob, Elayne rolled over, then pushed up to hands and knees, her head spinning, agony stabbing her side. Vaguely she recalled that moving with even one broken rib could be dangerous, but the thought was as hazy as the hillside. Thinking seemed . . . difficult. Blinking appeared to help her sight, though. Some. She was almost to the bottom of the hill! High above, a haze of smoke rose from the meadow beyond. Unimportant, now. Not important at all.

θɝɾi peɪsɪz ʌp ðə sloʊp, eɪvinhə wɑz ɑn əɹ hænz ən niz, tu, ɔlmoʊs fɔlɪŋ oʊvɝ wən ʃi ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə waɪp əweɪ blʌd ðət pɔɹd daʊn əɹ feɪs, bʌt sɝtʃɪŋ æŋkʃəsli. hɝ ɡeɪz fɛl ɑn ɪleɪn, ən ʃi fɹoʊz, stɛɹɪŋ. ɪleɪn wʌndɝd haʊ bæd ʃi lʊkt. ʃʊɹli noʊ wɝs ðən eɪvinhə hɝsɛlf; hæf ə ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz skɝt wɑz ɡɔn, hɝ bɑɾəs tɔɹn nɪɹli ɔf, ən ɛvɹiwɛɹ skɪn ʃoʊd, ðəɹ sim tə bi blʌd.

Thirty paces up the slope, Aviendha was on her hands and knees, too, almost falling over when she raised a hand to wipe away blood that poured down her face, but searching anxiously. Her gaze fell on Elayne, and she froze, staring. Elayne wondered how bad she looked. Surely no worse than Aviendha herself; half of the other woman's skirt was gone, her bodice torn nearly off, and everywhere skin showed, there seemed to be blood.

ɪleɪn kɹɔl tə hɝ. wɪð əɹ hɛd, ɪt simd mʌtʃ iziɝ ðən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stæn ən wɔk. əz ʃi keɪm kloʊs, eɪvinhə ɡeɪv ə ɹɪlivd ɡæsp.

Elayne crawled to her. With her head, it seemed much easier than trying to stand and walk. As she came close, Aviendha gave a relieved gasp.

"ju ɑɹ ɔl ɹaɪt," ʃi sɛd, tʌtʃɪŋ blʌɾi fɪŋɡɝz tə ɪleɪnz tʃik. "aɪ wɑz soʊ əfɹeɪd. soʊ əfɹeɪd."

"You are all right," she said, touching bloody fingers to Elayne's cheek. "I was so afraid. So afraid."

ɪleɪn blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. wʌt ʃi kəd si ʌv hɝsɛlf əpɪɹɾ ɪn ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz bæd ʃeɪp əz eɪvinhə. hɝ oʊn skɝts ɹɪmeɪn ɪntækt, bʌt hæf ə hɝ bɑɾəs wɑz ɹɪpt əweɪ ɪntaɪɝli, ən ʃi sim tə bi bliɾɪŋ fɹəm tu dʌzən ɡæʃəz. ðən ɪt stʃɹʌk hɝ. ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn bɝn aʊt. ʃi ʃɪvɝɾ ət ðə θɔt. "wi ɑɹ boʊθ ɔl ɹaɪt," ʃi sɛd sɔfli.

Elayne blinked in surprise. What she could see of herself appeared in every bit as bad shape as Aviendha. Her own skirts remained intact, but half of her bodice was ripped away entirely, and she seemed to be bleeding from two dozen gashes. Then it struck her. She had not been burned out. She shivered at the thought. "We are both all right," she said softly.

wɛl ɔf tə wʌn saɪd, bɝdʒɪt waɪpt əɹ bɛl naɪf ɑn ðə meɪn ʌv eɪvinhəz ɡɛldɪŋ ən stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm ðə stɪl hɔɹs. hɝ ɹaɪɾ ɑɹm dæŋɡəld, hɝ koʊt wɑz ɡɔn, əlɔŋ wɪð wʌn but, ən ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ ɡɑɹməns tɔɹn; əz mʌtʃ blʌd steɪn əɹ skɪn ən kloʊðz əz iðɝ ə ðɛɹz. ðə kɹɔsboʊ boʊl stændɪŋ aʊt fɹəm əɹ θaɪ sim tə bi ðə wɝst ə hɝ ɪnʒɝiz, bʌt ðə ɹɛst sɝɾənli æɾəd ʌp tə əz mʌtʃ əɡɛn. "hɪz bæk wɑz bɹoʊkən," ʃi sɛd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ tə ðə hɔɹs əɾ əɹ fit. "maɪnz wɛl, aɪ θɪŋk, bʌt ðə læst aɪ sɔ ʌv hɪm, hi wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ fɪt tə wɪn ðə ɹiθ ə məɡɛɹəl. aɪ ɔlweɪz θɔɾ i hæɾ ə tɝn ə spid. laɪoʊnəs." ʃi ʃɹʌɡd, ən wɪnst. "ɪleɪn, laɪoʊnəs wɑz dɛd wən aɪ faʊn hɝ. aɪm sɑɹi."

Well off to one side, Birgitte wiped her belt knife on the mane of Aviendha's gelding and straightened from the still horse. Her right arm dangled, her coat was gone, along with one boot, and the rest of her garments torn; as much blood stained her skin and clothes as either of theirs. The crossbow bolt standing out from her thigh seemed to be the worst of her injuries, but the rest certainly added up to as much again. "His back was broken," she said, gesturing to the horse at her feet. "Mine's well, I think, but the last I saw of him, he was running fit to win the Wreath of Megairil. I always thought he had a turn of speed. Lioness." She shrugged, and winced. "Elayne, Lioness was dead when I found her. I'm sorry."

"wi ɑɹ əlaɪv," ɪleɪn sɛd fɝmli, "æn ðəɾ ɪz wʌt kaʊns." ʃi wəd wip fəɹ laɪoʊnəs leɪɾɝ. ðə smoʊk əbʌv ðə hɪltɑp wɑz nɑt θɪk, bʌɾ ɪt ɹoʊz oʊvɝ ə waɪɾ ɛɹiə. "aɪ wɑnə si ɪɡzækli wʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðəɾ aɪ dɪd."

"We are alive," Elayne said firmly, "and that is what counts." She would weep for Lioness later. The smoke above the hilltop was not thick, but it rose over a wide area. "I want to see exactly what it was that I did."

ɪt tʊk klɪŋɪŋ tə wʌn ənʌðɝ fəɹ ɔl θɹi ʌv əm tə stænd, ən leɪbɝɪŋ ʌp ðə hɪlsaɪd wɑz ən ɛfɝɾ ə pæntɪŋ ən ɡɹoʊnz, ivən fɹəm eɪvinhə. ðeɪ saʊndəɾ əz ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd bɪn θɹæʃt wɪðɪn ən ɪntʃ ə ðɛɹ lɪvz - wɪtʃ ɪleɪn səpoʊz ðeɪ hæd bɪn - ən lʊkt əz ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd wɑloʊɾ ɪn ə bʊtʃɝz ʃæmbəlz. eɪvinhə stɪl kæɹid ði æŋɡɹil taɪɾ ɪn əɹ fɪst, bʌɾ ivən ɪf ʃi əɹ ɪleɪn hæd pəzɛs mɔɹ ðən ðɛɹ smɔl tælənt wɪð hilɪŋ, niðɝ cʊɾə mænədʒ tə ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs, mʌtʃ lɛs tʃænəl. ət ðə tɑp ə ðə hɪl, ðeɪ stʊd linɪŋ ɑn itʃ ʌðɝ ən stɛɹɾ ət dɛvəsteɪʃən.

It took clinging to one another for all three of them to stand, and laboring up the hillside was an effort of panting and groans, even from Aviendha. They sounded as though they had been thrashed within an inch of their lives - which Elayne supposed they had been - and looked as though they had wallowed in a butcher's shambles. Aviendha still carried the angreal tight in her fist, but even if she or Elayne had possessed more than their small Talent with Healing, neither could have managed to embrace the Source, much less channel. At the top of the hill, they stood leaning on each other and stared at devastation.

faɪɝ ɹɪŋ ðə mɛdoʊ, bʌt ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt wɑz blækənd, smoʊldɝɪŋ ən swɛp klɪɹ ivən ə boʊldɝz. hæf ðə tʃɹiz ɑn ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ sloʊps wɝ bɹoʊkən əɹ linɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə mɛdoʊ. hɔks bɪɡæn tə əpɪɹ, ɹaɪɾɪŋ ðə hɑɾ ɛɹ ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ðə faɪɝ; hɔks ɔfən hʌntəd soʊ, lʊkɪŋ fəɹ smɔl ænəməlz tʃeɪst ɪndə ði oʊpən baɪ ðə fleɪmz. ʌv ðə sintʃæn ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn. ɪleɪn wɪʃt ðəɹ wɝ bɑɾiz, soʊ ʃi kəd bi sɝɾən ðeɪ wɝ ɔl dɛd. ɪspɛʃli ɔl ə ðə sʌldəm. ɡeɪzɪŋ daʊn ət ðə bɝnd, smoʊkɪŋ ɡɹaʊnd, ðoʊ, ʃi wɑz sʌɾənli ɡlæd ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɛvəɾəns. ɪt hæd bɪn ə tɛɹəbəl weɪ tə daɪ. ðə laɪɾ əv mɝsi ɑn ðɛɹ soʊlz, ʃi θɔt. ɑn ɔl ə ðɛɹ soʊlz.

Fire ringed the meadow, but the heart of it was blackened, smoldering and swept clear even of boulders. Half the trees on the surrounding slopes were broken or leaning away from the meadow. Hawks began to appear, riding the hot air rising from the fire; hawks often hunted so, looking for small animals chased into the open by the flames. Of the Seanchan there was no sign. Elayne wished there were bodies, so she could be certain they were all dead. Especially all of the sul'dam. Gazing down at the burned, smoking ground, though, she was suddenly glad there was no evidence. It had been a terrible way to die. The Light have mercy on their souls, she thought. On all of their souls.

"wɛl," ʃi sɛɾ əlaʊd, "aɪ dɪd nɑt də əz wɛl əz ju, eɪvinhə, bʌɾ aɪ səpoʊz ɪt wɝkt aʊt fəɹ ðə bɛst, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ. əl tʃɹaɪ tə də bɛɾɝ nɛks taɪm."

"Well," she said aloud, "I did not do as well as you, Aviendha, but I suppose it worked out for the best, considering. I will try to do better next time."

eɪvinhə ɡlænst əɾ əɹ saɪdweɪz. ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡæʃ ɑn əɹ tʃik, ən ənʌðɝ əkɹɔs əɹ fɔɹhɛd, əz wɛl əz ə lɔŋ wʌn leɪɪŋ oʊpən əɹ skælp. "ju dɪd mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ðən aɪ, fəɹ ə fɝs tʃɹaɪ. aɪ wɑz ɡɪvən ə sɪmpəl nɑt taɪɾ ɪn ə floʊ ʌv waɪn ðə fɝs taɪm. ɪt tʊk mi fɪfti tʃɹaɪz tə ənwiv ivən ðət wɪθaʊt hævɪŋ ə klæp ə θʌndɝ ɪn maɪ feɪs, əɹ ə bloʊ ðət meɪd maɪ ɪɹz ɹɪŋ."

Aviendha glanced at her sideways. There was a gash on her cheek, and another across her forehead, as well as a long one laying open her scalp. "You did much better than I, for a first try. I was given a simple knot tied in a flow of Wind the first time. It took me fifty tries to unweave even that without having a clap of thunder in my face, or a blow that made my ears ring."

"aɪ səpoʊz aɪ ʃʊɾə stɑɹɾəd wɪð sʌmθɪŋ sɪmpəlɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd. "aɪ hæv ə hæbəɾ ə lipɪŋ ɪn oʊvɝ maɪ hɛd." oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd? ʃi hæd lɛp bɪfɔɹ lʊkɪŋ tə si wɛðɝ ðəɹ wɑz wɔɾɝ! ʃi staɪfəld ə tʃʌkəl, bʌt nɑt bɪfɔɹ ɪt sɛn ə stæb θɹu hɝ saɪd. soʊ ɪnstɛɾ ə tʃʌklɪŋ, ʃi moʊn θɹu hɝ tiθ. ʃi θɔt səm ə ðɛm maɪt bi lus. "æt list wiv faʊn ə nu wɛpən. pɝhæps aɪ ʃəd nɑt bi hæpi əbaʊt ðæt, bʌt wɪð ðə sintʃæn bæk əɡɛn, aɪ æm."

"I suppose I should have started with something simpler," Elayne said. "I have a habit of leaping in over my head." Over her head? She had leaped before looking to see whether there was water! She stifled a chuckle, but not before it sent a stab through her side. So instead of chuckling, she moaned through her teeth. She thought some of them might be loose. "At least we've found a new weapon. Perhaps I should not be happy about that, but with the Seanchan back again, I am."

"ju də nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd, ɪleɪn." eɪvinhə dʒɛstʃɝd təwɔɹd ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə mɛdoʊ, wɛɹ ðə ɡeɪtweɪ hæd bɪn. "ðæt cʊɾə bɪn noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə flæʃ ə laɪt, əɹ ivən lɛs. jə kænɑt tɛl əntɪl ɪt hæpənz. ɪz ə flæʃ ə laɪt wɝθ ðə ɹɪsk ə bɝnɪŋ aʊt jɝsɛlf ən ɛvɹi wʊmən kloʊsɝ tə jə ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əɹ mɔɹ?"

"You do not understand, Elayne." Aviendha gestured toward the center of the meadow, where the gateway had been. "That could have been no more than a flash of light, or even less. You cannot tell until it happens. Is a flash of light worth the risk of burning out yourself and every woman closer to you than a hundred paces or more?"

ɪleɪn stɛɹɾ ət hɝ. ʃi hæd steɪd, noʊɪŋ ðæt? tə ɹɪsk jəɹ laɪf wɑz wʌn θɪŋ, bʌt tə ɹɪsk luzɪŋ ði əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl. . . . "aɪ wɑn əs tə ədɑpt itʃ ʌðɝ əz fɝst-sɪstɝz, eɪvinhə. əz sun əz wi kən faɪnd waɪz wʌnz." wʌt ðeɪ wɝ tə də əbaʊt ɹænd, ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən. ðə vɛɹi aɪdiə ðət ðeɪ wəd boʊθ mɛɹi hɪm - ən mɪn, tu! - wɑz wɝs ðən ɹɪdɪkjələs. bʌɾ ə ðɪs, ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ. "aɪ doʊnt nid tə noʊ ɛni mɔɹ əbaʊt ju. aɪ wɑnə bi jəɹ sɪstɝ." dʒɛnli, ʃi kɪst eɪvinhəz blʌd-steɪn tʃik.

Elayne stared at her. She had stayed, knowing that? To risk your life was one thing, but to risk losing the ability to channel. . . . "I want us to adopt each other as first-sisters, Aviendha. As soon as we can find Wise Ones." What they were to do about Rand, she could not imagine. The very idea that they would both marry him - and Min, too! - was worse than ridiculous. But of this, she was sure. "I don't need to know any more about you. I want to be your sister." Gently, she kissed Aviendha's blood-stained cheek.

ʃi hæɾ oʊnli θɔɾ eɪvinhə blʌʃt fɪɹsli bɪfɔɹ. ivən il lʌvɝz dɪd nɑt kɪs wɛɹ ɛniwʌn kəd si. faɪɝi sʌnsɛts peɪl bɪsaɪɾ eɪvinhəz feɪs. "aɪ wɑn jə fəɹ maɪ sɪstɝ, tu," ʃi mʌmbəld. swɑloʊɪŋ hɑɹd - ən aɪɪŋ bɝdʒɪt, hu wɑz pɹitɛndɪŋ tə ɪɡnɔɹ əm - ʃi lin oʊvɝ ən kwɪkli pɹɛst əɹ lɪps tə ɪleɪnz tʃik. ɪleɪn lʌvd əɹ əz mʌtʃ fəɹ ðət dʒɛstʃɝ əz fəɹ ðə ɹɛst.

She had only thought Aviendha blushed fiercely before. Even Aiel lovers did not kiss where anyone could see. Fiery sunsets paled beside Aviendha's face. "I want you for my sister, too," she mumbled. Swallowing hard - and eyeing Birgitte, who was pretending to ignore them - she leaned over and quickly pressed her lips to Elayne's cheek. Elayne loved her as much for that gesture as for the rest.

bɝdʒɪt hæd bɪn ɡeɪzɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðɛm, oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ən pɝhæps ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn pɹitɛndɪŋ æftɝ ɔl, kəz ʃi sʌɾənli sɛd, "sʌmwʌnz kʌmɪŋ. læn ən nɪneɪiv, ənlɛs aɪ mɪs maɪ ɡɛs."

Birgitte had been gazing behind them, over her shoulder, and perhaps she had not been pretending after all, because she suddenly said, "Someone's coming. Lan and Nynaeve, unless I miss my guess."

ɔkwɝdli, ðeɪ tɝnd, hɑbəlɪŋ ən stʌmbəlɪŋ ən ɡɹoʊnɪŋ. ɪt sim kwaɪt luɾəkɹəs; hɪɹoʊz ɪn stɔɹiz nɛvɝ ɡɑt hɝt soʊ ðeɪ kəd bɛɹli stænd. ɪn ðə dɪstəns tə ðə nɔɹθ, tu ɹaɪɾɝz əpɪɹd bɹifli θɹu ðə tʃɹiz. bɹifli, bʌt lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə meɪk aʊɾ ə tɔl mæn ɑn ə tɔl hɔɹs, ɡæləpɪŋ hɑɹd, ən ə wʊmən ɑn ə ʃɔɹɾɝ ænəməl ɹʌnɪŋ dʒʌst əz hɑɹɾ əɾ ɪz saɪd. dʒɪnʒɝli, ðə θɹi ʌv əm sæt daʊn tə weɪt. ðət wɑz ənʌðɝ θɪŋ hɪɹoʊz ɪn stɔɹiz nɛvɝ dɪd, ɪleɪn θɔt wɪð ə saɪ. ʃi hoʊpt ʃi kəd bi ə kwin tə meɪk əɹ mʌðɝ pɹaʊd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz klɪɹ ðət ʃi wəd nɛvɝ meɪk ə hɪɹoʊ.

Awkwardly, they turned, hobbling and stumbling and groaning. It seemed quite ludicrous; heroes in stories never got hurt so they could barely stand. In the distance to the north, two riders appeared briefly through the trees. Briefly, but long enough to make out a tall man on a tall horse, galloping hard, and a woman on a shorter animal running just as hard at his side. Gingerly, the three of them sat down to wait. That was another thing heroes in stories never did, Elayne thought with a sigh. She hoped she could be a queen to make her mother proud, but it was clear that she would never make a hero.

tʃulaɪn muv ðə ɹeɪnz slaɪtli, ən sɛɡɑni bæŋk smuðli, tɝnɪŋ ɑn ə ɹɪbd wɪŋ. hi wɑz ə wɛl-tʃɹeɪn ɹeɪkən, swɪft ən ædʒəl, hɝ feɪvɹɪt, ðoʊ ʃi hæd tə ʃɛɹ flaɪɪŋ hɪm. ðəɹ wɝ ɔlweɪz mɔɹ mɔɹətʃɹeɪkən ðən ɹeɪkən; ə fækt ə laɪf. daʊn ɪn ðə fɑɹm bɪloʊ, bɔlz ə faɪɝ wɝ lipɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ əpɛɹənli, skæɾɝɪŋ ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə peɪ noʊ ətɛnʃən; hɝ dʒɑb wɑz tə wɑtʃ fəɹ tʃɹʌbəl əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ fɹəm ði ɛɹiə ɝaʊn ðə fɑɹm. ət lis ðə smoʊk hæd stɑpt ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm wɛɹ tɔɑn ən məkju hæd daɪɾ ɪn ði ɑləv ɡɹoʊv.

Chulein moved the reins slightly, and Segani banked smoothly, turning on a ribbed wing. He was a well-trained raken, swift and agile, her favorite, though she had to share flying him. There were always more morat'raken than raken; a fact of life. Down in the farm below, balls of fire were leaping out of the air apparently, scattering in every direction. She tried to pay no attention; her job was to watch for trouble approaching from the area around the farm. At least the smoke had stopped rising from where Tauan and Macu had died in the olive grove.

ə θaʊzən peɪsɪz əbʌv ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ʃi hæɾ ə vɛɹi lɔŋ vju. ɔl ði ʌðɝ ɹeɪkən wɝ ɔf skaʊɾɪŋ ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd; ɛni wʊmən u ɹæn wəd bi mɑɹk fəɹ tʃɛkɪŋ, tə si wɛðɝ ʃi wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz u hæd kɑzd ɔl ði ɪksaɪtmənt, ðoʊ tʃɹuθ fəɹ ʃʊɹ, ɛniwʌn ɪn ðiz lænz u sɔ ə ɹeɪkən ɪn ði ɛɹ laɪkli wəd ɹʌn. ɔl tʃulaɪn hæd tə də wɑz wɑtʃ fəɹ əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ tʃɹʌbəl hɪɹ. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi dɪd nɑt fil ən ɪtʃ bɪtwin əɹ ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz; ɪɾ ɔlweɪz mɛn tʃɹʌbəl wɑz ɑn ðə weɪ. ðə wɪn ə sɛɡɑniz flaɪt wɑz nɑt bæɾ ət ðɪs spid, bʌt ʃi dʒɹu ðə dʒɹɔstʃɹɪŋ ə hɝ wæks lɪnən hʊd taɪɾɝ ʌndɝ əɹ tʃɪn, tɛstəd ðə lɛðɝ seɪfti stʃɹæps ðət hɛld əɹ ɪn ðə sæɾəl, ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ kɹɪstəl ɡɑɡəlz, snʌɡd əɹ ɡɔnləts.

A thousand paces above the ground, she had a very long view. All the other raken were off scouting the countryside; any woman who ran would be marked for checking, to see whether she was one of those who had caused all the excitement, though truth for sure, anyone in these lands who saw a raken in the air likely would run. All Chulein had to do was watch for approaching trouble here. She wished she did not feel an itch between her shoulder blades; it always meant trouble was on the way. The wind of Segani's flight was not bad at this speed, but she drew the drawstring of her waxed linen hood tighter under her chin, tested the leather safety straps that held her in the saddle, adjusted her crystal goggles, snugged her gauntlets.

oʊvɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd fɪsts ə hɛvən wɝ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ɔlɹɛɾi, ən mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt, sɪks sʌldəm wɪð deɪmeɪn ən ənʌðɝ dʌzən kæɹiɪŋ ʃoʊldɝ bæɡz fʊl ə spɛɹ æɾəm. ðə sɛkən flaɪt wəd bi lɪftɪŋ fɹəm ðə hɪlz tə ðə saʊθ wɪð ɹiɪnfɔɹsməns. bɛɾɝ ɪf mɔɹ hæd kʌm ɪn ðə fɝst stʃɹaɪk, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ fju ɪnʌf tɔɹeɪkən wɪð ðə heɪlin, ən stʃɹɔŋ ɹumɝ hæɾ ɪt ðət mɛni ʌv ðoʊz hæd bɪn ɡɪvən ðə tæsk ə fɛɹiɪŋ ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ ən əɹ ɪntaɪɝ ɑntʊɹɑʒ daʊn fɹəm ɑmɑdɪʃiə. bæd tə θɪŋk ɪl ə ðə blʌd, jɛt ʃi wɪʃt mɔɹ tɔɹeɪkən hæd bɪn sɛn tə ɛbu dɑɹ. noʊ mɔɹətʃɹeɪkən kəd θɪŋk wɛl ə ðə hjudʒ, ənɡeɪnli tɔɹeɪkən, fɪɾ oʊnli tə kæɹi bɝɾənz, bʌt ðeɪ cʊɾə pʊt mɔɹ fɪsts ə hɛvən ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn fæstɝ, mɔɹ sʌldəm.

Over a hundred Fists of Heaven were on the ground already, and more important, six sul'dam with damane and another dozen carrying shoulder bags full of spare a'dam. The second flight would be lifting from the hills to the south with reinforcements. Better if more had come in the first strike, but there were few enough to'raken with the Hailene, and strong rumor had it that many of those had been given the task of ferrying the High Lady Suroth and her entire entourage down from Amadicia. Bad to think ill of the Blood, yet she wished more to'raken had been sent to Ebou Dar. No morat'raken could think well of the huge, ungainly to'raken, fit only to carry burdens, but they could have put more Fists of Heaven on the ground faster, more sul'dam.

"ɹumɝ sɛz ðəɹ ɑɹ hʌnʒɹədz ə mɛɹəθdəmeɪn daʊn ðɛɹ," ɛlaɪjə sɛd laʊdli əɡɛnst əɹ bæk. ɪn ðə skaɪ, jə hæd tə spik laʊdli, oʊvɝ ðə ɹʌʃ ʌv wɪnd. "du jə noʊ wʌɾ aɪm gɑnə də wɪð maɪ ʃɛɹ ə ðə teɪkɪŋ ɡoʊld? baɪ ən ɪn. ðɪs ɛbu dɑɹ lʊks ə laɪkli pleɪs, wʌɾ aɪ sɔ ʌv ɪt. meɪbi əl ivən faɪn ə hʌzbənd. hæv tʃɪlʒɹən. wʌt dʒju θɪŋk ə ðæt?"

"Rumor says there are hundreds of marath'damane down there," Eliya said loudly against her back. In the sky, you had to speak loudly, over the rush of wind. "Do you know what I'm going to do with my share of the taking gold? Buy an inn. This Ebou Dar looks a likely place, what I saw of it. Maybe I'll even find a husband. Have children. What do you think of that?"

tʃulaɪn ɡɹɪn bɪhaɪn əɹ wɪnd-skɑɹf. ɛvɹi flaɪɝ tɔkt ə baɪɪŋ ən ɪn - əɹ ə tævɝn, səmtaɪmz ə fɑɹm - jɛɾ u kəd liv ðə skaɪ? ʃi pæɾəd ðə beɪs ə sɛɡɑniz lɔŋ, lɛðɝi nɛk. ɛvɹi wʊmən flaɪɝ - θɹi ɪn fɔɹ wɝ wɪmən - tɔkt ʌv ə hʌzbən ən tʃɪlʒɹən, bʌt tʃɪlʒɹən mɛn ən ɛn tə flaɪɪŋ, tu. mɔɹ wɪmən lɛf ðə fɪsts ə hɛvən ɪn ə mʌnθ ðən lɛf ðə skaɪ ɪn hæf ə jɪɹ.

Chulein grinned behind her wind-scarf. Every flier talked of buying an inn - or a tavern, sometimes a farm - yet who could leave the sky? She patted the base of Segani's long, leathery neck. Every woman flier - three in four were women - talked of a husband and children, but children meant an end to flying, too. More women left the Fists of Heaven in a month than left the sky in half a year.

"aɪ θɪŋk jə ʃəd kip jəɹ aɪz oʊpən," ʃi sɛd. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ hɑɹm ɪn ə lɪɾəl tɔk. ʃi cʊɾə sin ə tʃaɪl muv ɪn ði ɑləv ɡɹoʊvz bɪloʊ, mʌtʃ mɔɹ ɛniθɪŋ ðət maɪt θɹɛɾən fɪsts ə hɛvən. ðə moʊs laɪtli ɑɹmɝɾ ə soʊlʒɝz, ðeɪ wɝ əbaʊɾ əz hɑɹɾ əz ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹd; səm sɛd hɑɹɾɝ. "aɪl juz maɪ ʃɛɹ tə baɪ ə deɪmeɪn ən haɪɝ ə sʌldəm." ɪf ðəɹ wɝ hæf əz mɛni mɛɹəθdəmeɪn daʊn ðəɹ əz ɹumɝ kleɪmd, hɝ ʃɛɹ wəd baɪ tu deɪmeɪn. θɹi! "ə deɪmeɪn tʃɹeɪn tə meɪk skaɪ laɪts. wən aɪ liv ðə skaɪ, əl bi əz ɹɪtʃ əz wʌn ə ðə blʌd." ðeɪ hæd sʌmθɪŋ kɔld "faɪɹwɝks" hɪɹ - ʃi hæd sin səm fɛloʊz veɪnli tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪntʃɹəs ðə blʌɾ ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ - bʌɾ u wəd wɑtʃ sətʃ ə pɪɾəfəl θɪŋ kəmpɛɹd tə ðə skaɪ laɪts? ðoʊz fɛloʊz hæd bɪn bʌndəld aʊɾ ən dʌmpt ɪn ðə ɹoʊɾ aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi.

"I think you should keep your eyes open," she said. But there was no harm in a little talk. She could have seen a child move in the olive groves below, much more anything that might threaten Fists of Heaven. The most lightly armored of soldiers, they were about as hard as the Deathwatch Guard; some said harder. "I'll use my share to buy a damane and hire a sul'dam." If there were half as many marath'damane down there as rumor claimed, her share would buy two damane. Three! "A damane trained to make Sky Lights. When I leave the sky, I'll be as rich as one of the Blood." They had something called "fireworks" here - she had seen some fellows vainly trying to interest the Blood in Tanchico - but who would watch such a pitiful thing compared to the Sky Lights? Those fellows had been bundled out and dumped in the road outside the city.

"ðə fɑɹm!" ɛlaɪjə ʃaʊɾəd, ən sʌɾənli sʌmθɪŋ hɪt sɛɡɑni hɑɹd, hɑɹɾɝ ðən ðə wɝst stɔɹm ɡʌs tʃulaɪn hæɾ ɛvɝ fɛlt, tʌmbəlɪŋ ɪm wɪŋ oʊvɝ wɪŋ.

"The farm!" Eliya shouted, and suddenly something hit Segani hard, harder than the worst storm gust Chulein had ever felt, tumbling him wing over wing.

daʊn ðə ɹeɪkən plʌnʒd, skɹimɪŋ ɪz ɹɔkəs kɹaɪ, spɪnɪŋ soʊ fæs ðət tʃulaɪn wɑz pʊl taɪɾ əɡɛnst əɹ seɪfti stʃɹæps. ʃi lɛft əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ θaɪz, tɛnst ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz bʌt stɪl. sɛɡɑni hæd tə pʊl aʊɾ ə ðɪs hɪmsɛlf; ɛni twɪtʃ ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz wəɾ oʊnli hɪndɝ hɪm. ɹoʊlɪŋ laɪk ə ɡæmbəlɪŋ wil, ðeɪ fɛl. mɔɹətʃɹeɪkən wɝ tɔt nɑt tə wɑtʃ ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪf ə ɹeɪkən fɛl, wʌtɛvɝ ðə ɹizən, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt hɛlp ɛstəmeɪɾɪŋ əɹ haɪɾ ɛvɹi taɪm ə wɪplaɪk tʌmbəl bɹɔt ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪndə saɪt. eɪt hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz. sɪks hʌnʒɹəd. fɔɹ. tu. ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin əɹ soʊl, ən ði ɪnfənət mɝsi ʌv ðə kɹieɪɾɝ pɹətɛkt əɹ fɹəm -  wɪð ə snæp ə hɪz bɹɔd wɪŋz ðət dʒɝkt əɹ saɪdweɪz ən ɹæɾəld əɹ tiθ, sɛɡɑni lɛvəld aʊt, ðə tɪps ə hɪz pɪnjənz bɹʌʃɪŋ tʃɹitɑps əz ðeɪ swɛp daʊn. wɪð ə kɑmnəs bɔɹn ə hɑɹd tʃɹeɪnɪŋ, ʃi tʃɛk ðə moʊʃən ə hɪz wɪŋz fəɹ stʃɹeɪn. nʌθɪŋ, bʌt ʃi wəɾ əv ə dɝmɝətʃɹeɪkən ɪɡzæmɪn ɪm θɝoʊli ɛniweɪ. ə taɪni θɪŋ ðət maɪt slɪp baɪ hɝ aɪz wəd nɑɾ ɪskeɪp ə mæstɝ.

Down the raken plunged, screaming his raucous cry, spinning so fast that Chulein was pulled tight against her safety straps. She left her hands on her thighs, tensed on the reins but still. Segani had to pull out of this himself; any twitch on the reins would only hinder him. Rolling like a gambling wheel, they fell. Morat'raken were taught not to watch the ground if a raken fell, whatever the reason, but she could not help estimating her height every time a whiplike tumble brought the ground into sight. Eight hundred paces. Six hundred. Four. Two. The Light illumine her soul, and the infinite mercy of the Creator protect her from -  With a snap of his broad wings that jerked her sideways and rattled her teeth, Segani leveled out, the tips of his pinions brushing treetops as they swept down. With a calmness born of hard training, she checked the motion of his wings for strain. Nothing, but she would have a der'morat'raken examine him thoroughly anyway. A tiny thing that might slip by her eyes would not escape a master.

"ɪt simz wiv ɪskeɪp ðə leɪɾi ʌv ðə ʃædoʊz wʌn mɔɹ taɪm, ɛlaɪjə." tɝnɪŋ tə lʊk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ʃi lɛɾ əɹ wɝdz tʃɹeɪl ɔf. ə lɛŋθ ə bɹoʊkən seɪfti stʃɹæp tʃɹeɪl bæk fɹəm ði ɛmpti sit bɪhaɪn hɝ. ɛvɹi flaɪɝ nu ðət ðə leɪɾi weɪɾəd ət ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə lɔŋ fɔl, bʌt noʊɪŋ nɛvɝ meɪd siɪŋ iziɝ.

"It seems we've escaped the Lady of the Shadows one more time, Eliya." Turning to look over her shoulder, she let her words trail off. A length of broken safety strap trailed back from the empty seat behind her. Every flier knew that the Lady waited at the bottom of the long fall, but knowing never made seeing easier.

ɔfɝɪŋ ə kwɪk pɹɛɹ fəɹ ðə dɛd, ʃi fɝmli pʊʃt hɝsɛlf bæk tə duɾi ən ɝdʒ sɛɡɑni tə klaɪm. ə sloʊ, spaɪɹəlɪŋ klaɪm, ɪn keɪs ə səm hɪɾən stʃɹeɪn, bʌɾ əz kwɪk əz ʃi θɔt seɪf. meɪbi ə lɪɾəl kwɪkɝ ðən seɪf. smoʊk ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm bɪɑn ðə nɑbi hɪl əhɛd meɪɾ əɹ fɹaʊn, bʌt wʌt ʃi sɔ əz ʃi klɪɹd ðə kɹɛs dʒɹaɪɾ əɹ maʊð. hɝ hænz stɪld ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz, ən sɛɡɑni kəntɪnjud tə klaɪm ɑn paʊɝfəl swips ə hɪz wɪŋz.

Offering a quick prayer for the dead, she firmly pushed herself back to duty and urged Segani to climb. A slow, spiraling climb, in case of some hidden strain, but as quick as she thought safe. Maybe a little quicker than safe. Smoke rising from beyond the knobby hill ahead made her frown, but what she saw as she cleared the crest dried her mouth. Her hands stilled on the reins, and Segani continued to climb on powerful sweeps of his wings.

ðə fɑɹm wɑz . . . ɡɔn. faʊndeɪʃənz skaʊɝd klin ə ðə waɪt bɪldɪŋz ðət hæd stʊɾ ɑn ðɛm, ðə bɪɡ stʃɹʌktʃɝz bɪlt ɪndə ə hɪlsaɪd smæʃt hips ə ɹʌbəl. ɡɔn. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz blækən ən bɝnd. faɪɝ ɹeɪdʒ θɹu ði ʌndɝɡɹoʊθ ɑn ðə sloʊps ən meɪd fænz ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz lɔŋ ɪndə ði ɑləv ɡɹoʊvz ən ðə fɔɹəst, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ fɹəm ðə speɪsəz bɪtwin ðə hɪlz. bɪɑn leɪ bɹoʊkən tʃɹiz fəɹ ənʌðɝ hʌnʒɹəd əɹ mɔɹ, ɔl linɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə fɑɹm. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ɪt. nʌθɪŋ kəd bi əlaɪv daʊn ðɛɹ. nʌθɪŋ cʊɾə lɪv θɹu ðæt. wʌtɛvɝ ɪt hæd bɪn.

The farm was . . . gone. Foundations scoured clean of the white buildings that had stood on them, the big structures built into a hillside smashed heaps of rubble. Gone. Everything was blackened and burned. Fire raged through the undergrowth on the slopes and made fans a hundred paces long into the olive groves and the forest, stretching from the spaces between the hills. Beyond lay broken trees for another hundred or more, all leaning away from the farm. She had never seen anything like it. Nothing could be alive down there. Nothing could have lived through that. Whatever it had been.

kwɪkli ʃi keɪm tə hɝsɛlf ən tɝn sɛɡɑni saʊθ. ɪn ðə dɪstəns ʃi kəd meɪk aʊt tɔɹeɪkən, itʃ wʌn kɹaʊɾəd wɪð ə dʌzən fɪsts ə hɛvən oʊvɝ ðɪs ʃɔɹt dɪstəns, fɪsts ə hɛvən ən sʌldəm, kʌmɪŋ tu leɪt. ʃi bɪɡæn kəmpoʊzɪŋ əɹ ɹipɔɹɾ ɪn əɹ hɛd; ðəɹ wɑz sɝɾənli noʊ wʌn ɛls tə meɪk wʌn. ɛvɹiwʌn sɛd ðɪs wɑz ə læn fʊl ə mɛɹəθdəmeɪn weɪɾɪŋ tə bi kɑlɝd, bʌt wɪð ðɪs nu wɛpən, ðiz wɪmən u kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ə tʃɹu deɪnʒɝ. sʌmθɪŋ hæd tə bi dʌn əbaʊt ðɛm, sʌmθɪŋ dɪsaɪsɪv. pɝhæps, ɪf ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ wɑz ɑn əɹ weɪ tə ɛbu dɑɹ, ʃi wəd si ðə nid, tu.

Quickly she came to herself and turned Segani south. In the distance she could make out to'raken, each one crowded with a dozen Fists of Heaven over this short distance, Fists of Heaven and sul'dam, coming too late. She began composing her report in her head; there was certainly no one else to make one. Everyone said this was a land full of marath'damane waiting to be collared, but with this new weapon, these women who called themselves Aes Sedai were a true danger. Something had to be done about them, something decisive. Perhaps, if the High Lady Suroth was on her way to Ebou Dar, she would see the need, too.


tʃæptɝ sɛvən


CHAPTER 7

eɪ ɡoʊtpən


A Goatpen

ðə ɡildænɪn skaɪ wɑz klaʊdləs, ðə fɔɹəstəd hɪlz hæmɝd baɪ ə fɪɹs mɔɹnɪŋ sʌn. ivən ʃɔɹɾ ə mɪddeɪ, ðə læn swɛltɝd. paɪnz ən lɛðɝlif wɝ jɛloʊɪŋ ɪn ðə dʒɹaʊt, ən ʌðɝz pɛɹɪn səspɛktəɾ ɔlsoʊ wɝ ɛvɝɡɹinz. nɑɾ ə wɪspɝ ʌv ɛɹ stɝd. swɛt dʒɹɪp daʊn ɪz feɪs, ɹæn ɪndə hɪz ʃɔɹt bɪɹd. hɪz kɝli hɛɹ wɑz mæɾɪŋ ɑn ɪz hɛd. hi θɔɾ i hɝd θʌndɝ sʌmwɛɹ tə ðə wɛst, bʌɾ i hæɾ ɔlmoʊst stɑp bɪlivɪŋ ɪt wəɾ ɛvɝ ɹeɪn əɡɛn. jə hæmɝd ði aɪɝn ðət leɪ ɑn jəɹ ænvəl ɪnstɛɾ ə deɪdʒɹimɪŋ əbaʊt wɝkɪŋ sɪlvɝ.

The Ghealdanin sky was cloudless, the forested hills hammered by a fierce morning sun. Even short of midday, the land sweltered. Pines and leatherleaf were yellowing in the drought, and others Perrin suspected also were evergreens. Not a whisper of air stirred. Sweat dripped down his face, ran into his short beard. His curly hair was matting on his head. He thought he heard thunder somewhere to the west, but he had almost stopped believing it would ever rain again. You hammered the iron that lay on your anvil instead of daydreaming about working silver.

fɹəm ðə væntədʒ ə hɪz spɑɹsli tʃɹid ɹɪdʒ, hi stʌɾid ðə wɔl taʊn ə bɛθɔl θɹu ə bɹæs-baʊn lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs. ivən ɪz aɪz kəd juz hɛlp oʊvɝ ðɪs dɪstəns. ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊd-saɪz taʊn ə sleɪt-ɹuf bɪldɪŋz, wɪð hæf ə dʌzən tɔl stoʊn stʃɹʌktʃɝz ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn maɪnɝ noʊbəlz' pæləsəz əɹ ðə hoʊmz ʌv wɛl-tə-du mɝtʃəns. hi kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt ðə skɑɹlət bænɝ hæŋɪŋ lɪmpli ətɑp ðə tɔlɪs taʊɝ ə ðə lɑɹdʒəs pæləs, ði oʊnli flæɡ ɪn saɪt, bʌɾ i nu hu ɪt bɪlɔŋ tə. æliændɝ mɛɹɪðə kɪɡɑɝɪn, kwin ʌv ɡildən, fɑɹ fɹəm əɹ kæpəɾəl ɪn dʒəhænə.

From the vantage of his sparsely treed ridge, he studied the walled town of Bethal through a brass-bound looking glass. Even his eyes could use help over this distance. It was a good-sized town of slate-roofed buildings, with half a dozen tall stone structures that might have been minor nobles' palaces or the homes of well-to-do merchants. He could not make out the scarlet banner hanging limply atop the tallest tower of the largest palace, the only flag in sight, but he knew who it belonged to. Alliandre Maritha Kigarin, Queen of Ghealdan, far from her capital in Jehannah.

ðə taʊn ɡeɪts stʊɾ oʊpən, wɪð ə ɡʊd twɛnti ɡɑɹdz əɾ itʃ, jɛt noʊ wʌn keɪm aʊt, ən ðə ɹoʊdz i kəd si wɝ ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ ə loʊn ɹaɪɾɝ ɡæləpɪŋ hɑɹd təwɔɹd bɛθɔl fɹəm ðə nɔɹθ. ðə soʊlʒɝz wɝ ɑn ɛdʒ, səm ʃɪftɪŋ paɪks əɹ baʊz ət saɪɾ ə ðə hɔɹsmən əz ðoʊ hi weɪvd ə blʌd-dʒɹɪpɪŋ sɔɹd. mɔɹ soʊlʒɝz ɑn wɑtʃ kɹaʊɾəd ðə wɔl taʊɝz əɹ mɑɹtʃt ðə wɔlz bɪtwin. plɛnti ʌv nɑkt æɹoʊz ʌp ðɛɹ, tu, ən ɹeɪz kɹɔsboʊz. plɛnti ʌv fɪɹ.

The town gates stood open, with a good twenty guards at each, yet no one came out, and the roads he could see were empty except for a lone rider galloping hard toward Bethal from the north. The soldiers were on edge, some shifting pikes or bows at sight of the horseman as though he waved a blood-dripping sword. More soldiers on watch crowded the wall towers or marched the walls between. Plenty of nocked arrows up there, too, and raised crossbows. Plenty of fear.

ə stɔɹm hæd swɛpt oʊvɝ ðɪs pɑɹɾ ʌv ɡildən. ɪt stɪl dɪd. ðə pɹɑfəts bænz kɹieɪɾəd keɪɑs, bændəts tʊk ædvæntɪdʒ, ən waɪtkloʊks ɹeɪɾɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə bɔɹɾɝ fɹəm ɑmɑdɪʃiə maɪɾ izəli stʃɹaɪk ðɪs fɑɹ. ə fju skæɾɝd kɑləmz ə smoʊk fɑɹðɝ saʊθ pɹɑbli mɑɹk bɝnɪŋ fɑɹmz, waɪtkloʊk wɝk əɹ ðə pɹɑfəts. bændəts sɛldəm bɑðɝd wɪð bɝnɪŋ, ən ði ʌðɝ tu lɛf lɪɾəl fəɹ əm ɪn ɛni keɪs. æɾɪŋ tə ðə dʒʌmbəl, ɹumɝ ɪn ɛvɹi vɪlədʒ i hæd pæs ðə læs fju deɪz sɛd ðəɾ æmədɔɹ hæd fɔlən, tə ðə pɹɑfəɾ əɹ tæɹɑbənɝz əɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, dɪpɛndɪŋ ɑn u toʊl ðə teɪl. səm kleɪm peɪdʒɹən naɪl hɪmsɛlf wɑz dɛɾ ɪn ðə faɪɾɪŋ tə dɪfɛn ðə sɪɾi. ɔl ɪn ɔl, ɹizən ɪnʌf fəɹ ə kwin tə bi kənsɝn fəɹ əɹ oʊn seɪfti. əɹ ðə soʊlʒɝz kəd bi daʊn ðəɹ kəz ə hɪm. dɪspaɪɾ ɪz bɛst ɛfɝts, hɪz pæsədʒ saʊθ hæd hɑɹdli ɡɔn ənnoʊɾɪst.

A storm had swept over this part of Ghealdan. It still did. The Prophet's bands created chaos, bandits took advantage, and Whitecloaks raiding across the border from Amadicia might easily strike this far. A few scattered columns of smoke farther south probably marked burning farms, Whitecloak work or the Prophet's. Bandits seldom bothered with burning, and the other two left little for them in any case. Adding to the jumble, rumor in every village he had passed the last few days said that Amador had fallen, to the Prophet or Taraboners or Aes Sedai, depending on who told the tale. Some claimed Pedron Niall himself was dead in the fighting to defend the city. All in all, reason enough for a queen to be concerned for her own safety. Or the soldiers could be down there because of him. Despite his best efforts, his passage south had hardly gone unnoticed.

hi skɹætʃt ɪz bɪɹd, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ. ə pɪɾi ðə wʊlvz ɪn ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ hɪlz kəd nɑt tɛl ɪm ɛniθɪŋ, bʌt ðeɪ sɛldəm peɪd hid tə mɛnz duɪŋz ɪksɛp tə steɪ klɪɹ ə ðɛm. ən sɪns dəməaɪz wɛlz i hæd nɑt fɛlt ɹaɪɾ ɪn æskɪŋ ɛni mɔɹ ə ðɛm ðən i æbsəlutli hæd tə. ɪt maɪt bi bɛst æftɝ ɔl ɪf i ɹoʊɾ ɪn əloʊn, wɪð dʒʌst ə fju ʌv ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn.

He scratched his beard, considering. A pity the wolves in the surrounding hills could not tell him anything, but they seldom paid heed to men's doings except to stay clear of them. And since Dumai's Wells he had not felt right in asking any more of them than he absolutely had to. It might be best after all if he rode in alone, with just a few of the Two Rivers men.

hi ɔfən θɔt feɪl kəd ɹiɾ ɪz maɪnd, juʒəwəli wən i list wɑntəɾ əɹ tə, ən ʃi pɹuvd ɪt naʊ, hilɪŋ əɹ naɪt-blæk mɛɹ swɑloʊ kloʊs tə hɪz dʌn. hɝ nɛɹoʊ-skɝɾɪd ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs wɑz nɪɹli əz dɑɹk əz ðə mɛɹ, jɛt ʃi sim tə bi teɪkɪŋ ðə hit bɛɾɝ ðən hi. ʃi smɛl feɪnli ʌv ɝbəl soʊp ən klin pɝspɝeɪʃən, ʌv hɝsɛlf. ʌv dɪtɝməneɪʃən. hɝ tɪltəɾ aɪz wɝ vɛɹi dɪtɝmənd, ən wɪð əɹ boʊl noʊz, ʃi wɑz vɛɹi mʌtʃ əɹ neɪmseɪk fælkən.

He often thought Faile could read his mind, usually when he least wanted her to, and she proved it now, heeling her night-black mare Swallow close to his dun. Her narrow-skirted riding dress was nearly as dark as the mare, yet she seemed to be taking the heat better than he. She smelled faintly of herbal soap and clean perspiration, of herself. Of determination. Her tilted eyes were very determined, and with her bold nose, she was very much her namesake falcon.

"aɪ wəd nɑt laɪk tə si hoʊlz ɪn ðət faɪn blu koʊt, hʌzbənd," ʃi sɛd sɔfli, fəɹ ɪz ɪɹz əloʊn, "æn ðoʊz fɛloʊz lʊk əz ɪf ðeɪ maɪt dʒʌst ʃuɾ əɾ ə ɡɹup ə stʃɹeɪnʒ mɛn bɪfɔɹ æskɪŋ u ðeɪ ɑɹ. bɪsaɪdz, haʊ wɪl jə ɹitʃ æliændɝ wɪθaʊɾ ənaʊnsɪŋ jəɹ neɪm tə ðə wɝld? ðɪs mʌs bi dʌn kwaɪətli, ɹɪmɛmbɝ." ʃi dɪd nɑt seɪ ðət ʃi ʃəd bi ðə wʌn tə ɡoʊ, ðət ðə ɡeɪt ɡɑɹdz wəd teɪk ə wʊmən əloʊn fəɹ ə ɹɛfjʊdʒi fɹəm ðə tʃɹʌbəlz, ðət ʃi kəd ɹitʃ ðə kwin juzɪŋ əɹ mʌðɝz neɪm wɪθaʊɾ ɪksaɪɾɪŋ tu mʌtʃ kɑmɛnt, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt nid tə. hi hæd hæɾ ɔl ðəɾ ən mɔɹ fɹəm əɹ ɛvɹi naɪt sɪns ɛntɝɪŋ ɡildən. hi wɑz hɪɹ ɪn pɑɹt kəz ʌv æliændɝz kɔʃəs lɛɾɝ tə ɹænd, ɔfɝɪŋ. . . . səpɔɹt? əlidʒəns? hɝ dɪzaɪɝ fəɹ sikɹəsi hæd bɪn pɛɹəmaʊnt, ɪn ɛni keɪs.

"I would not like to see holes in that fine blue coat, husband," she said softly, for his ears alone, "and those fellows look as if they might just shoot at a group of strange men before asking who they are. Besides, how will you reach Alliandre without announcing your name to the world? This must be done quietly, remember." She did not say that she should be the one to go, that the gate guards would take a woman alone for a refugee from the troubles, that she could reach the Queen using her mother's name without exciting too much comment, but she did not need to. He had had all that and more from her every night since entering Ghealdan. He was here in part because of Alliandre's cautious letter to Rand, offering. . . . Support? Allegiance? Her desire for secrecy had been paramount, in any case.

pɛɹɪn daʊɾɪd ðəɾ ivən ɛɹæm, sɪɾɪŋ ɪz lɛɡi ɡɹeɪ ə fju peɪsɪz bɪhaɪn ðɛm, cʊɾə hɝɾ ə wɝd feɪl sɛd, jɛt bɪfɔɹ ʃi fɪnɪʃt spikɪŋ, bɹəleɪn bɹɔɾ əɹ waɪt mɛɹ ʌp ɑn ɪz ʌðɝ saɪd, swɛt ɡlɪsnɪŋ ɑn əɹ tʃiks. ʃi ɔlsoʊ smɛl dɪtɝmənd, θɹu ə klaʊɾ ə ɹoʊz pɝfjum. tə hɪm, ɪt simd ə klaʊd. fəɹ ə wʌndɝ, hɝ ɡɹin ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs ʃoʊd noʊ mɔɹ flɛʃ ðən ɪt hæd tə.

Perrin doubted that even Aram, sitting his leggy gray a few paces behind them, could have heard a word Faile said, yet before she finished speaking, Berelain brought her white mare up on his other side, sweat glistening on her cheeks. She also smelled determined, through a cloud of rose perfume. To him, it seemed a cloud. For a wonder, her green riding dress showed no more flesh than it had to.

bɹəleɪnz tu kəmpænjənz steɪd bæk, ðoʊ ənʊɹə, hɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ædvaɪzɝ, stʌɾid ɪm wɪð ən ənɹiɾəbəl ɪkspɹɛʃən fɹəm bɪniθ əɹ kæp ə θɪn ʃoʊldɝ-lɔŋ biɾɪd bɹeɪdz. nɑɾ ɪm ən ðə tu wɪmən əɾ ɪz saɪdz; hɪm ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ. noʊ swɛt ðɛɹ. hi wɪʃt i wɝ kloʊs ɪnʌf tə smɛl ðə bik-noʊzd ɡɹeɪ sɪstɝ; ənlaɪk ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʃi hæd meɪd noʊ pɹɑməsəz tə ɛniwʌn. fəɹ wʌtɛvɝ ðoʊz pɹɑməsəz wɝ wɝθ. lɔɹd ɡælɛn, kəmændɝ ə bɹəleɪnz wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz, wɑz simɪŋli bɪzi ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ bɛθɔl θɹu ə lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs ɹeɪz tə hɪz wʌn aɪ, ən fɪdlɪŋ wɪð ɪz ɹeɪnz ɪn ə weɪ pɛɹɪn hæd kʌm tə noʊ mɛn ðəɾ i wɑz dip ɪn kælkjəleɪʃənz. pɹɑbli haʊ tə teɪk bɛθɔl baɪ fɔɹs; ɡælɛn ɔlweɪz sɔ ðə wɝs pɑsəbɪləɾi fɝst.

Berelain's two companions stayed back, though Annoura, her Aes Sedai advisor, studied him with an unreadable expression from beneath her cap of thin shoulder-long beaded braids. Not him and the two women at his sides; him in particular. No sweat there. He wished he were close enough to smell the beak-nosed Gray sister; unlike the other Aes Sedai, she had made no promises to anyone. For whatever those promises were worth. Lord Gallenne, commander of Berelain's Winged Guards, was seemingly busy examining Bethal through a looking glass raised to his one eye, and fiddling with his reins in a way Perrin had come to know meant that he was deep in calculations. Probably how to take Bethal by force; Gallenne always saw the worst possibility first.

"aɪ stɪl θɪŋk aɪ ʃəd bi ðə wʌn tə əpɹoʊtʃ æliændɝ," bɹəleɪn sɛd. ðɪs, tu, pɛɹɪn hæd hɝɾ ɛvɹi deɪ. "ɪɾ ɪz waɪ aɪ keɪm, æftɝ ɔl." ðət wɑz wʌn ə ðə ɹizənz. "ənʊɹə wɪl bi ɡɹæntəɾ ən ɑɾiəns ət wʌns, ən teɪk mi ɪn wɪð nʌn ðə waɪzɝ seɪv æliændɝ." ə sɛkənd wʌndɝ. ðəɹ hæd nɑt bɪn ə hɪn ə flɝteɪʃən ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. ʃi sim tə bi peɪɪŋ əz mʌtʃ ətɛnʃən tə smuðɪŋ əɹ ɹɛd lɛðɝ ɡlʌvz əz tə hɪm.

"I still think I should be the one to approach Alliandre," Berelain said. This, too, Perrin had heard every day. "It is why I came, after all." That was one of the reasons. "Annoura will be granted an audience at once, and take me in with none the wiser save Alliandre." A second wonder. There had not been a hint of flirtation in her voice. She seemed to be paying as much attention to smoothing her red leather gloves as to him.

wɪtʃ wʌn? ðə tʃɹʌbəl wɑz, hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə tʃuz iðɝ.

Which one? The trouble was, he did not want to choose either.

siɑnɪd, ðə sɛkən ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæd kʌm tə ðə ɹɪdʒəlaɪn, stʊd bɪsaɪɾ əɹ beɪ ɡɛldɪŋ ə lɪɾəl weɪ ɔf, nɪɹ ə tɔl dʒɹaʊt-wɪðɝd blækwʊd, lʊkɪŋ nɑɾ ət bɛθɔl bʌt ðə skaɪ. ðə tu peɪl-aɪd waɪz wʌnz wɪð əɹ meɪɾ ə ʃɑɹp kɑntʃɹæst, feɪsəz sʌn-dɑɹk tə hɝ peɪl kəmplɛkʃən, fɛɹ-hɛɹd tə hɝ dɑɹk, tɔl tə hɝ ʃɔɹt, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðɛɹ dɑɹk skɝts ən waɪt blaʊsəz kəntʃɹæstɪŋ tə hɝ faɪn blu wʊl. nɛkləsɪz ən bɹeɪslɪts ʌv ɡoʊld ən sɪlvɝ ən aɪvɝi dʒɹeɪpt ɛdʒɹə ən nəvɛɝɪn, waɪl siɑnɪd wɔɹ oʊnli hɝ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ. ðeɪ wɝ jʌŋ tə hɝ eɪdʒləs. ðə waɪz wʌnz mætʃt ðə ɡɹin sɪstɝ fəɹ sɛlf-pəzɛʃən, ðoʊ, ən ðeɪ wɝ stʌɾiɪŋ ðə skaɪ, tu.

Seonid, the second Aes Sedai who had come to the ridgeline, stood beside her bay gelding a little way off, near a tall drought-withered blackwood, looking not at Bethal but the sky. The two pale-eyed Wise Ones with her made a sharp contrast, faces sun-dark to her pale complexion, fair-haired to her dark, tall to her short, not to mention their dark skirts and white blouses contrasting to her fine blue wool. Necklaces and bracelets of gold and silver and ivory draped Edarra and Nevarin, while Seonid wore only her Great Serpent ring. They were young to her ageless. The Wise Ones matched the Green sister for self-possession, though, and they were studying the sky, too.

"du jə si sʌmθɪŋ?" pɛɹɪn æskt, pʊɾɪŋ ɔf ðə dɪsɪʒən.

"Do you see something?" Perrin asked, putting off the decision.

"wi si ðə skaɪ, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," ɛdʒɹə sɛd kɑmli, hɝ dʒuəlɹi meɪkɪŋ ə sɑf klæɾɝ əz ʃi ədʒʌstəd ðə dɑɹk ʃɔl lupt oʊvɝ əɹ ɛlboʊz. ðə hit sim tə tʌtʃ ði il əz lɪɾəl əz ɪt dɪd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. "ɪf wi sɔ mɔɹ, wi wəd tɛl ju." hi hoʊp ðeɪ wʊd. hi θɔt ðeɪ wʊd. ət list, ɪf ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ðeɪ bɪlivd ɡɹeɪɾi ən nil maɪt si, tu. ðə tu æʃəmən wəd nɑt kip ɪt sikɹət. hi wɪʃt ðeɪ wɝ ðəɹ ɪnstɛɾ ə bæk ɪn ðə kæmp.

"We see the sky, Perrin Aybara," Edarra said calmly, her jewelry making a soft clatter as she adjusted the dark shawl looped over her elbows. The heat seemed to touch the Aiel as little as it did the Aes Sedai. "If we saw more, we would tell you." He hoped they would. He thought they would. At least, if it was something they believed Grady and Neald might see, too. The two Asha'man would not keep it secret. He wished they were there instead of back in the camp.

mɔɹ ðən hæf ə wik əɡoʊ, naʊ, ə leɪs ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ stʃɹikɪŋ haɪ əkɹɔs ðə skaɪ hæd kɹieɪɾəd kwaɪɾ ə stɝ əmʌŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən waɪz wʌnz. ən wɪð ɡɹeɪɾi ən nild. wɪtʃ fæk hæd meɪɾ ə bɪɡɝ stɝ stɪl, əz kloʊs tə pænɪk əz ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz laɪkli tə kʌm. æʃəmən, ɛɛs sədaɪ ən waɪz wʌnz ɔl kleɪm ðeɪ kəd stɪl fil ðə paʊɝ feɪnli ɪn ði ɛɹ lɔŋ æftɝ ðət bɑɹ ə leɪs vænɪʃt, bʌt noʊbɑdi nu wʌɾ ɪt mɛnt. nil sɛɾ ɪt meɪɾ ɪm θɪŋk ʌv wɪnd, ðoʊ hi kəd nɑt tɛl waɪ. noʊ wʌn wəd vɔɪs mɔɹ ʌv ən əpɪnjən ðən ðæt, jɛɾ ɪf boʊθ ðə meɪl ən fimeɪl hævz ə ðə paʊɝ wɝ vɪzəbəl, ɪt hæd tə bi ðə fɔɹseɪkən ət wɝk, ən ɑn ə hjudʒ skeɪl. wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ ʌp tə hæd kɛpt pɛɹɪn əweɪk leɪt moʊs naɪts sɪns.

More than half a week ago, now, a lace of the One Power streaking high across the sky had created quite a stir among the Aes Sedai and Wise Ones. And with Grady and Neald. Which fact had made a bigger stir still, as close to panic as any Aes Sedai was likely to come. Asha'man, Aes Sedai and Wise Ones all claimed they could still feel the Power faintly in the air long after that bar of lace vanished, but nobody knew what it meant. Neald said it made him think of wind, though he could not tell why. No one would voice more of an opinion than that, yet if both the male and female halves of the Power were visible, it had to be the Forsaken at work, and on a huge scale. Wondering what they were up to had kept Perrin awake late most nights since.

ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf, hi ɡlæns tə ðə skaɪ. ən sɔ nʌθɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs, ɪksɛpt ə pɛɹ ə pɪdʒənz. əbɹʌpli ə hɔk plʌməɾɪd ɪndə hɪz saɪt, ən wʌn ə ðə pɪdʒənz wɑz ɡɔn ɪn ə spɹeɪ ʌv fɛðɝz. ði ʌðɝ wɪŋd ɑn fɹæntəkəli təwɔɹd bɛθɔl.

In spite of himself, he glanced to the sky. And saw nothing, of course, except a pair of pigeons. Abruptly a hawk plummeted into his sight, and one of the pigeons was gone in a spray of feathers. The other winged on frantically toward Bethal.

"hæv jə ɹitʃt ə dɪsɪʒən, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə?" nəvɛɝɪn æskt, ə tʌtʃ ʃɑɹpli. ðə ɡɹin-aɪd waɪz wʌn əpɪɹɾ ivən jʌŋɡɝ ðən ɛdʒɹə, pɝhæps noʊ oʊldɝ ðən i wɑz, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt kwaɪɾ əv ðə blu-aɪd wʊmənz sɝɛnəɾi. hɝ ʃɔl slɪd daʊn əɹ ɑɹmz əz ʃi plæntəd hænz ɑn hɪps, ən i hæf ɪkspɛktəɾ əɹ tə ʃeɪk ə fɪŋɡɝ ət hɪm. əɹ ə fɪst. ʃi ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm ə nɪneɪiv, ðoʊ ðeɪ ʃʊɹli lʊk nʌθɪŋ əlaɪk. nəvɛɝɪn wʊɾə meɪd nɪneɪiv lʊk plʌmp. "wʌt juz əɹ ædvaɪs ɪf jəl nɑt lɪsən?" ʃi dɪmændəd. "wʌt jus?"

"Have you reached a decision, Perrin Aybara?" Nevarin asked, a touch sharply. The green-eyed Wise One appeared even younger than Edarra, perhaps no older than he was, and she did not quite have the blue-eyed woman's serenity. Her shawl slid down her arms as she planted hands on hips, and he half expected her to shake a finger at him. Or a fist. She reminded him of Nynaeve, though they surely looked nothing alike. Nevarin would have made Nynaeve look plump. "What use our advice if you will not listen?" she demanded. "What use?"

feɪl ən bɹəleɪn sæt stʃɹeɪɾ ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz, boʊθ əz pɹaʊɾ əz ðeɪ kəd bi, boʊθ smɛlɪŋ ɪkspɛktən ən ənsɝɾən ət ðə seɪm taɪm. ən ɪɹəteɪɾəd ət biɪŋ ənsɝɾən; niðɝ laɪk ðət wʌn spɛk. siɑnɪd wɑz tu fɑɹ tə sɛn əɹ sɛnt, bʌt kəmpɹɛs lɪps ɡeɪv əɹ mud wɛl ɪnʌf. ɛdʒɹəz kəmænd nɑt tə spik ənlɛs spoʊkən tə ɪnfjʊɹieɪɾəd hɝ. stɪl, ʃi sɝɾənli wɑntəɾ ɪm tə teɪk ðə waɪz wʌnz' kaʊnsəl; ʃi stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm ɪntɛnli, əz ðoʊ ðə pɹɛʃɝ ə hɝ aɪz kəd pʊʃ ɪm ðə weɪ ðeɪ wɑntəɾ ɪm tə ɡoʊ. ɪn tʃɹuθ, hi wɑntəd tə tʃuz hɝ, jɛɾ i hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. haʊ fɑɹ dɪɾ əɹ oʊθ ə fiəlti tə ɹænd tʃɹuli hoʊld? fɝðɝ ðən i wəɾ əv bɪlivd, baɪ ði ɛvəɾəns sin soʊ fɑɹ, bʌt stɪl, haʊ fɑɹ kəɾ i tʃɹʌst ən ɛɛs sədaɪ? ði ɝaɪvəl ə siɑnɪdz tu wɔɹɾɝz spɛɹɾ ɪm fəɹ ənʌðɝ fju mɪnəts.

Faile and Berelain sat straight in their saddles, both as proud as they could be, both smelling expectant and uncertain at the same time. And irritated at being uncertain; neither liked that one speck. Seonid was too far to send her scent, but compressed lips gave her mood well enough. Edarra's command not to speak unless spoken to infuriated her. Still, she certainly wanted him to take the Wise Ones' counsel; she stared at him intently, as though the pressure of her eyes could push him the way they wanted him to go. In truth, he wanted to choose her, yet he hesitated. How far did her oath of fealty to Rand truly hold? Further than he would have believed, by the evidence seen so far, but still, how far could he trust an Aes Sedai? The arrival of Seonid's two Warders spared him for another few minutes.

ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ʌp təɡɛðɝ, ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd ɡɔn aʊt sɛpɝətli, kipɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz wɛl bæk ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪdʒəlaɪn soʊ ðeɪ wəd nɑt bi sin fɹəm ðə taʊn. fʊɹən wɑz ə tɛɹən, nɪɹli əz dɑɹk əz ɡʊd sɔɪl, wɪð ɡɹeɪ stʃɹikɪŋ ɪz kɝli blæk hɛɹ, waɪl tɛɹəl, ə mʊɹændiən, wɑz twɛnti jɪɹz jʌŋɡɝ, wɪð dɑɹk ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ, kɝl mʌstæʃɪz, ən aɪz blɝ ðən ɛdʒɹəz, jɛt ðeɪ wɝ stæmp fɹəm ðə seɪm moʊld, tɔl ən lin ən hɑɹd. ðeɪ dɪsmaʊntɪd smuðli, kloʊks ʃɪftɪŋ kʌlɝz ən vænɪʃɪŋ ɪn ə kwizi-meɪkɪŋ weɪ, ən meɪd ðɛɹ ɹɪpɔɹts tə siɑnɪd, dɪlɪbɝətli ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz. ən pɛɹɪn.

They rode up together, though they had gone out separately, keeping their horses well back into the trees along the ridgeline so they would not be seen from the town. Furen was a Tairen, nearly as dark as good soil, with gray streaking his curly black hair, while Teryl, a Murandian, was twenty years younger, with dark reddish hair, curled mustaches, and eyes bluer than Edarra's, yet they were stamped from the same mold, tall and lean and hard. They dismounted smoothly, cloaks shifting colors and vanishing in a queasy-making way, and made their reports to Seonid, deliberately ignoring the Wise Ones. And Perrin.

"ɪts wɝs ðən bæk nɔɹθ," fʊɹən sɛd dɪsɡʌstɪdli. ə fju dʒɹɑps ə swɛt biɾɪd ɑn ɪz fɔɹhɛd, bʌt niðɝ mæn əpɪɹd mʌtʃ əfɛktəd baɪ ðə hit. "ðə loʊkəl noʊbəlz ɑɹ ʃʌɾ ʌp ɪn ðɛɹ mænɝz əɹ ðə taʊn, ən ðə kwinz soʊlʒɝz kip ɪnsaɪd ðə taʊn wɔlz. ðeɪv əbændən ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd tə ðə pɹɑfəts mɛn. ən ðə bændəts, ðoʊ ðoʊz sim skɛɹs ɝaʊn hɪɹ. ðə pɹɑfəts pipəl ɑɹ ɔl oʊvɝ. aɪ θɪŋk æliændɝ wɪl bi hæpi tə si ju."

"It's worse than back north," Furen said disgustedly. A few drops of sweat beaded on his forehead, but neither man appeared much affected by the heat. "The local nobles are shut up in their manors or the town, and the Queen's soldiers keep inside the town walls. They've abandoned the countryside to the Prophet's men. And the bandits, though those seem scarce around here. The Prophet's people are all over. I think Alliandre will be happy to see you."

"ɹæbəl," tɛɹəl snɔɹɾɪd, slæpɪŋ ɪz ɹeɪnz ɑn ɪz pɑm. "aɪ nɛvɝ sɔ mɔɹ ðən fɪftin əɹ twɛnti ɪn wʌn pleɪs, ɑɹmd wɪð pɪtʃfɔɹks ən bɔɹ spɪɹz meɪnli. ɹæɡəɾ əz bɛɡɝz, ðeɪ wɝ. fɪt fəɹ skɛɹɪŋ fɑɹmɝz, tə bi ʃʊɹ, bʌt jud θɪŋk ðə lɔɹdz wəd bi ɹuɾɪŋ əm aʊɾ ən hæŋɪŋ əm ɪn bʌntʃəz. ðə kwin wɪl kɪs jəɹ hæn tə si ə sɪstɝ."

"Rabble," Teryl snorted, slapping his reins on his palm. "I never saw more than fifteen or twenty in one place, armed with pitchforks and boar spears mainly. Ragged as beggars, they were. Fit for scaring farmers, to be sure, but you'd think the lords would be rooting them out and hanging them in bunches. The Queen will kiss your hand to see a sister."

siɑnɪɾ oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, ðən ɡlænst ʌp əɾ ɛdʒɹə, hu nɑɾəd. ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, ɡeɪnɪŋ pɝmɪʃən tə spik taɪɾənd ðə ɡɹinz maʊθ mɔɹ. hɝ toʊn wɑz maɪld əz bʌɾɝ, ðoʊ. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ mɔɹ ɹizən tə pʊɾ ɔf jəɹ dɪsɪʒən, lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹə." ʃi ɛmfəsaɪz ðət taɪɾəl ə bɪt, noʊɪŋ ɪɡzækli haʊ mʌtʃ ɹaɪɾ i hæd tə ɪt. "jɔɹ waɪf kən kleɪm ə ɡɹeɪt haʊs, ən bɹəleɪn ɪz ə ɹulɝ, jɛt sɑldəiən haʊzɪz kaʊn lɪɾəl hɪɹ, ən min ɪz ðə smɔləst ə neɪʃənz. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ ən ɛməsɛɹi wɪl pʊt ðə weɪɾ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ bɪhaɪn jə ɪn æliændɝz aɪz." pɝhæps ɹɪkɔlɪŋ ðəɾ ənʊɹə wəd də fəɹ ðəɾ əz wɛl əz ʃi, ʃi hɝiɾ ɑn. "bɪsaɪdz, aɪ hæv bɪn ɪn ɡildən bɪfɔɹ, ən maɪ neɪm ɪz wɛl noʊn. æliændɝ wɪl nɑɾ oʊnli ɹəsiv mi ɪmiɾiətli, ʃɪl lɪsən tə wʌɾ aɪ seɪ."

Seonid opened her mouth, then glanced up at Edarra, who nodded. If anything, gaining permission to speak tightened the Green's mouth more. Her tone was mild as butter, though. "There is no more reason to put off your decision, Lord Aybara." She emphasized that title a bit, knowing exactly how much right he had to it. "Your wife can claim a great House, and Berelain is a ruler, yet Saldaean Houses count little here, and Mayene is the smallest of nations. An Aes Sedai for an emissary will put the weight of the White Tower behind you in Alliandre's eyes." Perhaps recalling that Annoura would do for that as well as she, she hurried on. "Besides, I have been in Ghealdan before, and my name is well known. Alliandre will not only receive me immediately, she will listen to what I say."

"nəvɛɝɪn ən əl ɡoʊ wɪð hɝ," ɛdʒɹə sɛd, ən nəvɛɝɪn æɾəd, "wi wɪl meɪk ʃʊɹ ʃi sɛz nʌθɪŋ ʃi ʃəd nɑt." siɑnɪd ɡɹaʊn əɹ tiθ ɑɾəbli, tə pɛɹɪnz ɪɹz, ən bɪzid hɝsɛlf smuðɪŋ əɹ dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts, aɪz kɛɹfəli daʊn. ənʊɹə meɪɾ ə saʊnd, vɛɹi nɪɹli ə ɡɹʌnt, ən tɝn əɹ hɛd fɹəm ðə saɪt; ʃi hɝsɛlf steɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə waɪz wʌnz, ən dɪd nɑt laɪk siɪŋ ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz wɪð ðɛm.

"Nevarin and I will go with her," Edarra said, and Nevarin added, "We will make sure she says nothing she should not." Seonid ground her teeth audibly, to Perrin's ears, and busied herself smoothing her divided skirts, eyes carefully down. Annoura made a sound, very nearly a grunt, and turned her head from the sight; she herself stayed away from the Wise Ones, and did not like seeing the other sisters with them.

pɛɹɪn wɑntəd tə ɡɹoʊn. sɛndɪŋ ðə ɡɹin wəd lɪft ɪm ɔf ə spaɪk, jɛt ðə waɪz wʌnz tʃɹʌstɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ lɛs ðən i dɪɾ ən kɛp siɑnɪɾ ən mɑsʊɝi ɑn ʃɔɹt liʃɪz. ðəɹ hæd bɪn teɪlz əbaʊɾ il ɪn ðə vɪlədʒəz ɹisənli, tu. nʌn ə ðoʊz foʊk hæɾ ɛvɝ sin ən il, bʌt ɹumɝz əbaʊt ði il fɑloʊɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn dʒɹɪftəɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ, hæf ʌv ɡildən wɑz ʃʊɹ ðəɹ wɝ il dʒʌst ə deɪ əɹ tu əweɪ, ən itʃ stɔɹi wɑz stʃɹeɪnʒɝ ən mɔɹ hɔɹəbəl ðən ðə læst. æliændɝ maɪt bi tu fɹaɪɾənd tə lɛɾ ɪm nɪɹ əɹ wʌns ʃi sɔ ə pɛɹ ʌv il wɪmən tɛlɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wən tə hɑp. ən siɑnɪd wɑz hɑpɪŋ, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ʃi ɡɹaʊn əɹ tiθ! wɛl, hi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə ɹɪsk feɪl wɪθaʊt mɔɹ əʃʊɹəns ə hɝ ɡɹiɾɪŋ ðən ə veɪɡli wɝɾɪd lɛɾɝ ɹəsiv mʌnθs əɡoʊ. ðət spaɪk dʌɡ dipɝ, ɹaɪt bɪtwin ɪz ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz, jɛɾ i hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs əɾ ɔl.

Perrin wanted to groan. Sending the Green would lift him off a spike, yet the Wise Ones trusted Aes Sedai less than he did and kept Seonid and Masuri on short leashes. There had been tales about Aiel in the villages recently, too. None of those folk had ever seen an Aiel, but rumors about the Aiel following the Dragon Reborn drifted in the air, half of Ghealdan was sure there were Aiel just a day or two away, and each story was stranger and more horrible than the last. Alliandre might be too frightened to let him near her once she saw a pair of Aiel women telling an Aes Sedai when to hop. And Seonid was hopping, however much she ground her teeth! Well, he was not about to risk Faile without more assurance of her greeting than a vaguely worded letter received months ago. That spike dug deeper, right between his shoulder blades, yet he had no choice at all.

"ə smɔl pɑɹɾi wɪl ɡɛt θɹu ðoʊz ɡeɪts iziɝ ðən ə lɑɹdʒ," hi sɛd faɪnəli, stʌfɪŋ ðə lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs ɪndə hɪz sæɾəlbæɡz. ɪt wəd sɛt fjuɝ tʌŋz wæɡɪŋ, əz wɛl. "ðæt minz dʒʌs jə ən ənʊɹə, bɹəleɪn. ən meɪbi lɔɹd ɡælɛn. laɪkli ðəl teɪk ɪm fəɹ ənʊɹəz wɔɹɾɝ."

"A small party will get through those gates easier than a large," he said finally, stuffing the looking glass into his saddlebags. It would set fewer tongues wagging, as well. "That means just you and Annoura, Berelain. And maybe Lord Gallenne. Likely they'll take him for Annoura's Warder."

bɹəleɪn tʃɔɹɾəld ɪn dɪlaɪt, linɪŋ tə klæsp ɪz ɑɹm wɪð boʊθ hænz. ʃi dɪd nɑt liv ɪɾ ət ðæt, ʌv kɔɹs. hɝ fɪŋɡɝz skwiz kɝɛsɪŋli, ən ʃi flæʃt ə hiɾəd smaɪl ə pɹɑməs, ðən stʃɹeɪɾənd bɪfɔɹ i kəd muv, hɝ feɪs sʌɾənli ɪnəsən əz ə beɪbz. ɪkspɹɛʃənləs, feɪl foʊkəst ɑn pʊlɪŋ əɹ ɡɹeɪ ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɡlʌvz snʌɡ. baɪ hɝ sɛnt, ʃi hæd nɑt noʊɾəst bɹəleɪnz smaɪl. ʃi hɪɾ əɹ dɪsəpɔɪnmənt wɛl.

Berelain chortled in delight, leaning to clasp his arm with both hands. She did not leave it at that, of course. Her fingers squeezed caressingly, and she flashed a heated smile of promise, then straightened before he could move, her face suddenly innocent as a babe's. Expressionless, Faile focused on pulling her gray riding gloves snug. By her scent, she had not noticed Berelain's smile. She hid her disappointment well.

"aɪm sɑɹi, feɪl," hi sɛd, "bʌt - "

"I'm sorry, Faile," he said, "but - "

aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ flɛɹɾ ɪn ðə smɛl ə hɝ laɪk θɔɹnz. "aɪ æm sɝɾən juv mæɾɝz tə dɪskʌs wɪð ðə fɝs bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɡoʊz, hʌzbənd," ʃi sɛd kɑmli. hɝ tɪltəɾ aɪz wɝ pjʊɹ sɝɛnəɾi, hɝ sɛn sæn bɝz. "bɛs jə si tə hɝ naʊ." pʊlɪŋ swɑloʊ ɝaʊnd, feɪl wɔk ðə mɛɹ oʊvɝ tə ə pleɪnli fjumɪŋ siɑnɪɾ ən ðə taɪt-feɪst waɪz wʌnz, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt dɪsmaʊn əɹ spik tə ðɛm. ɪnstɛd ʃi fɹaʊn daʊn ət bɛθɔl, ə fælkən stɛɹɪŋ fɹəm əɹ ɛɹi.

Outrage flared in the smell of her like thorns. "I am certain you have matters to discuss with the First before she goes, husband," she said calmly. Her tilted eyes were pure serenity, her scent sand burrs. "Best you see to her now." Pulling Swallow around, Faile walked the mare over to a plainly fuming Seonid and the tight-faced Wise Ones, but she did not dismount or speak to them. Instead she frowned down at Bethal, a falcon staring from her eyrie.

pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪzd i wɑz filɪŋ əɾ ɪz noʊz ən pʊld ɪz hæn daʊn. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ blʌd, ʌv kɔɹs; hɪz noʊz oʊnli fɛlt əz ɪf ðəɹ ʃəd bi.

Perrin realized he was feeling at his nose and pulled his hand down. There was no blood, of course; his nose only felt as if there should be.

bɹəleɪn niɾəd noʊ læst-mɪnəɾ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz - ðə fɝst ə min ən əɹ ɡɹeɪ ædvaɪzɝ wɝ ɔl ɪmpeɪʃəns tə bi ɔf, ɔl sɝɾənti ðeɪ nu wʌt tə seɪ ən də - jɛt pɛɹɪn stʃɹɛs kɑʃən ɛniweɪ, ən ɛmfəsaɪz ðət bɹəleɪn ən oʊnli bɹəleɪn wɑz tə spik wɪð æliændɝ. ənʊɹə ɡeɪv ɪm wʌn ə ðoʊz kul ɛɛs sədaɪ lʊks ən nɑɾəd. wɪtʃ maɪɾ əv bɪn əɡɹimən əɹ maɪt nɑt; hi daʊɾɪd i kəd ɡɛt mɔɹ aʊɾ ə hɝ wɪð ə pɹaɪbɑɹ. bɹəleɪnz lɪps kɝld ɪn əmjuzmənt, ðoʊ ʃi əɡɹid wɪð ɛvɹiθɪŋ i sɛd. əɹ sɛd ʃi dɪd. hi səspɛktəd ʃi wəd seɪ ɛniθɪŋ tə ɡɛt wʌt ʃi wɑntəd, ən ðoʊz smaɪlz ɪn ɔl ðə ɹɔŋ pleɪsəz bɑðɝd hɪm. ɡælɛn hæd pʊɾ ɪz lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs əweɪ, bʌɾ i wɑz stɪl pleɪɪŋ wɪð ɪz ɹeɪnz, noʊ daʊt kælkjəleɪɾɪŋ haʊ tə kɑɹv ə weɪ aʊɾ ə bɛθɔl fəɹ ðə tu wɪmən. pɛɹɪn wɑntəd tə ɡɹaʊl.

Berelain needed no last-minute instructions - the First of Mayene and her Gray advisor were all impatience to be off, all certainty they knew what to say and do - yet Perrin stressed caution anyway, and emphasized that Berelain and only Berelain was to speak with Alliandre. Annoura gave him one of those cool Aes Sedai looks and nodded. Which might have been agreement or might not; he doubted he could get more out of her with a prybar. Berelain's lips curled in amusement, though she agreed with everything he said. Or said she did. He suspected she would say anything to get what she wanted, and those smiles in all the wrong places bothered him. Gallenne had put his looking glass away, but he was still playing with his reins, no doubt calculating how to carve a way out of Bethal for the two women. Perrin wanted to growl.

hi wɑtʃt əm ɹaɪd daʊn tə ðə ɹoʊd wɪð wɝi. ðə mɛsədʒ bɹəleɪn kæɹid wɑz sɪmpəl. ɹænd ʌndɝstʊɾ æliændɝz kɑʃən, bʌɾ ɪf ʃi wɑntəɾ ɪz pɹətɛkʃən ʃi mʌs bi wɪlɪŋ tə ənaʊns səpɔɹt fəɹ ɪm oʊpənli. ðət pɹətɛkʃən wəd kʌm, soʊlʒɝz ən æʃəmən tə meɪk ɪt pleɪn tə ɛvɹiwʌn, ən ivən ɹænd hɪmsɛlf ɪf nid bi, wʌns ʃi əɡɹid tə meɪk ði ənaʊnsmənt. bɹəleɪn hæd noʊ ɹizən tə tʃeɪnʒ ðə mɛsədʒ ə hɛɹ, dɪspaɪɾ əɹ smaɪlz - hi θɔt ðeɪ maɪt bi ənʌðɝ weɪ ʌv flɝɾɪŋ - bʌɾ ənʊɹə. . . . ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd wʌt ðeɪ dɪd, ən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu waɪ hæf ðə taɪm. hi wɪʃt i nu səm weɪ tə ɹitʃ æliændɝ wɪθaʊt juzɪŋ ə sɪstɝ əɹ ɹaʊzɪŋ tɔk. əɹ ɹɪskɪŋ feɪl.

He watched them ride down to the road with worry. The message Berelain carried was simple. Rand understood Alliandre's caution, but if she wanted his protection she must be willing to announce support for him openly. That protection would come, soldiers and Asha'man to make it plain to everyone, and even Rand himself if need be, once she agreed to make the announcement. Berelain had no reason to change the message a hair, despite her smiles - he thought they might be another way of flirting - but Annoura. . . . Aes Sedai did what they did, and the Light alone knew why half the time. He wished he knew some way to reach Alliandre without using a sister or rousing talk. Or risking Faile.

ðə θɹi ɹaɪɾɝz ɹitʃt ðə ɡeɪts wɪð ənʊɹə ɪn ðə lɛd, ən ɡɑɹdz kwɪkli ɹeɪz paɪks, loʊɝd baʊz ən kɹɔsboʊz, noʊ daʊɾ əz sun əz ʃi neɪm hɝsɛlf ɛɛs sədaɪ. nɑt mɛni pipəl hæd ðə nɝv tə tʃælənʒ ðət pɝtɪkjəlɝ kleɪm. ðəɹ wɑz bɛɹli ə pɔz bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɑz liɾɪŋ ðə weɪ ɪndə ðə taʊn. ɪn fækt, ðə soʊlʒɝz simd iɡɝ tə hɝi ðɛm θɹu, aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ʌv ɛniwʌn wɑtʃɪŋ fɹəm ðə hɪlz. səm pɪɹɾ ət ðə dɪstən haɪts, ən pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt nid tə smɛl əm tə sɛns ðɛɹ əniz oʊvɝ u maɪt bi hɪɾən ʌp ðɛɹ, hu maɪt, ɪmpɹɑbli, hæv ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ə sɪstɝ.

The three riders reached the gates with Annoura in the lead, and guards quickly raised pikes, lowered bows and crossbows, no doubt as soon as she named herself Aes Sedai. Not many people had the nerve to challenge that particular claim. There was barely a pause before she was leading the way into the town. In fact, the soldiers seemed eager to hurry them through, out of sight of anyone watching from the hills. Some peered at the distant heights, and Perrin did not need to smell them to sense their unease over who might be hidden up there, who might, improbably, have recognized a sister.

tɝnɪŋ nɔɹθ, təwɔɹd ðɛɹ kæmp, pɛɹɪn lɛd ðə weɪ əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪdʒ əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ aʊɾ ə saɪt fɹəm bɛθɔlz taʊɝz, ðən slæntəd daʊn tə ðə hɑɹd-pækt ɹoʊd. skæɾɝd fɑɹmz laɪn ðə ɹoʊd, θætʃ-ɹuf haʊsəz ən lɔŋ nɛɹoʊ bɑɹnz, wɪðɝd pæstʃɝz ən stʌbəl filz ən haɪ-wɔl stoʊn ɡoʊtpənz, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl laɪvstɑk tə bi sin ən fjuɝ pipəl. ðoʊz fju wɑtʃt ðə ɹaɪɾɝz wɛɹəli, ɡis wɑtʃɪŋ fɑksəz, stɑpɪŋ tʃɔɹz wɛɹ ðeɪ stʊɾ əntɪl ðə hɔɹsəz pæst ɑn. ɛɹæm kɛpt əz kloʊz ən aɪ ɑn əm ɪn ɹɪtɝn, səmtaɪmz fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə sɔɹd hɪlt ɹaɪzɪŋ əbʌv ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, pɝhæps wɪʃɪŋ tə faɪn mɔɹ ðən fɑɹmfoʊk. dɪspaɪɾ ɪz ɡɹin-stʃɹaɪp koʊt, lɪɾəl tɪŋkɝ ɹɪmeɪn ɪn hɪm.

Turning north, toward their camp, Perrin led the way along the ridge until they were out of sight from Bethal's towers, then slanted down to the hard-packed road. Scattered farms lined the road, thatch-roofed houses and long narrow barns, withered pastures and stubbled fields and high-walled stone goatpens, but there was little livestock to be seen and fewer people. Those few watched the riders warily, geese watching foxes, stopping chores where they stood until the horses passed on. Aram kept as close an eye on them in return, sometimes fingering the sword hilt rising above his shoulder, perhaps wishing to find more than farmfolk. Despite his green-striped coat, little Tinker remained in him.

ɛdʒɹə ən nəvɛɝɪn wɔk bɪsaɪd stɛpɝ, simɪŋli aʊt fəɹ ə stʃɹoʊl jɛt kipɪŋ peɪs izəli dɪspaɪt ðɛɹ bʌlki skɝts. siɑnɪd hild əm ɑn əɹ ɡɛldɪŋ, fʊɹən ən tɛɹəl əɾ əɹ oʊn bæk. ðə peɪl-tʃikt ɡɹin pɹitɛndəd ðət ʃi sɪmpli wɑntəd tə ɹaɪɾ ə kɛɹfəl tu peɪsɪz bɪhaɪn ðə waɪz wʌnz, bʌt ðə mɛn skaʊld oʊpənli. wɔɹɾɝz ɔfən hæɾ ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ kɛɹ fəɹ ðɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪz dɪɡnəɾi ðən ðə sɪstɝ dɪd hɝsɛlf, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hæɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ kwinz.

Edarra and Nevarin walked beside Stepper, seemingly out for a stroll yet keeping pace easily despite their bulky skirts. Seonid heeled them on her gelding, Furen and Teryl at her own back. The pale-cheeked Green pretended that she simply wanted to ride a careful two paces behind the Wise Ones, but the men scowled openly. Warders often had a greater care for their Aes Sedai's dignity than the sister did herself, and Aes Sedai had enough for queens.

feɪl kɛp swɑloʊ ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ði il wɪmən, ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn saɪləns, əpɛɹənli stʌɾiɪŋ ðə dʒɹaʊt-skɑɹd lændskeɪp. slɪm ən ɡɹeɪsfəl, ʃi meɪd pɛɹɪn fil ə lɪɾəl klʌmzi ət ðə bɛst ə taɪmz. ʃi wɑz kwɪksɪlvɝ, ən i lʌvd ɪɾ ɪn hɝ, juʒəwəli, bʌt. . . . ə slaɪt bɹɛθ ʌv ɛɹ hæd bɪɡʌn tə stɝ, ɪnʌf tə kip əɹ sɛn mɪŋɡəld wɪð ðə ɹɛst. hi nu hi ʃəd bi θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊɾ æliændɝ ən wʌɾ əɹ ænsɝ wəd bi, əɹ bɛɾɝ stɪl, ðə pɹɑfəɾ ən haʊ tə faɪn ɪm wʌns æliændɝ ɹɪplaɪd, haʊɛvɝ ʃi dɪd, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt faɪn ɹum ɪn ɪz hɛd.

Faile kept Swallow on the far side of the Aiel women, riding in silence, apparently studying the drought-scarred landscape. Slim and graceful, she made Perrin feel a little clumsy at the best of times. She was quicksilver, and he loved it in her, usually, but. . . . A slight breath of air had begun to stir, enough to keep her scent mingled with the rest. He knew he should be thinking about Alliandre and what her answer would be, or better still, the Prophet and how to find him once Alliandre replied, however she did, but he could not find room in his head.

hi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd feɪl tə bi æŋɡɹi wən i tʃoʊz bɹəleɪn, fəɹ ɔl ðət ɹænd səpoʊzədli hæd sɛn əɹ fəɹ ðə pɝpəs. feɪl nu hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə sɛn əɹ ɪndə deɪnʒɝ, ɪndə ɛni ɹɪsk ə deɪnʒɝ, ə fækt ʃi dɪslaɪk mɔɹ ðən ʃi dɪd bɹəleɪn. jɛɾ əɹ sɛn hæd bɪn sɑft əz ə sʌmɝ mɔɹnɪŋ - əntɪl i tʃɹaɪd tə əpɑlədʒaɪz! wɛl, əpɑlədʒiz juʒəwəli stoʊkt əɹ æŋɡɝ ɪf ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi wɑz æŋɡɹi - ɪksɛpt wən ðeɪ mɛltəɾ əɹ tɛmpɝ, ɛniweɪ - bʌt ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn æŋɡɹi! wɪθaʊt bɹəleɪn, ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɹæn smuð əz sɪlk sæɾən bɪtwin ðɛm. moʊst ə ðə taɪm. bʌɾ ɛkspləneɪʃənz ðəɾ i dɪd nʌθɪŋ tə ɛnkɝɪdʒ ðə wʊmən - fɑɹ fɹəm ɪt! - ɝn oʊnli ə kɝt "ʌv kɔɹs jə doʊnt!" ɪn toʊnz ðət kɔld ɪm ə ful fəɹ bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp. bʌt ʃi stɪl ɡɹu æŋɡɹi - wɪð hɪm! - ɛvɹi taɪm bɹəleɪn smaɪld əɾ ɪm əɹ faʊn ən ɪkskjus tə tʌtʃ hɪm, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ bɹʌskli hi pʊɾ əɹ ɔf, ən ðə laɪt nu hi dɪd ðæt. ʃɔɹɾ ə taɪɪŋ əɹ ʌp, hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt mɔɹ i kəd də tə dɪskɝɪdʒ hɝ. dʒɪnʒɝ ətɛmps tə faɪn aʊt fɹəm feɪl wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ ɹɔŋ ɹəsivd ə laɪt "waɪ dʒju θɪŋk juv dʌn ɛniθɪŋ?" əɹ ə nɑt-soʊ-laɪt "wʌt dʒju θɪŋk juv dʌn?" əɹ ə flæt "aɪ də nɑt wɑnə tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt." hi wɑz duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt pʌzəl aʊt wʌt! hi hæd tə, ðoʊ. nʌθɪŋ wɑz mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən feɪl. nʌθɪŋ!

He had expected Faile to be angry when he chose Berelain, for all that Rand supposedly had sent her for the purpose. Faile knew he did not want to send her into danger, into any risk of danger, a fact she disliked more than she did Berelain. Yet her scent had been soft as a summer morning - until he tried to apologize! Well, apologies usually stoked her anger if she already was angry - except when they melted her temper, anyway - but she had not been angry! Without Berelain, everything ran smooth as silk satin between them. Most of the time. But explanations that he did nothing to encourage the woman - far from it! - earned only a curt "Of course you don't!" in tones that called him a fool for bringing it up. But she still grew angry - with him! - every time Berelain smiled at him or found an excuse to touch him, no matter how brusquely he put her off, and the Light knew he did that. Short of tying her up, he did not know what more he could do to discourage her. Ginger attempts to find out from Faile what he was doing wrong received a light "Why do you think you've done anything?" or a not-so-light "What do you think you've done?" or a flat "I do not want to talk about it." He was doing something wrong, but he could not puzzle out what! He had to, though. Nothing was more important than Faile. Nothing!

"lɔɹd pɛɹɪn?"

"Lord Perrin?"

ɛɹæmz ɪksaɪɾəd vɔɪs kʌɾ ɪndə hɪz bɹaʊn stʌɾi. "doʊn kɔl mi ðæt," hi mʌɾɝd, fɑloʊɪŋ ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðə mænz pɔɪntɪŋ fɪŋɡɝ, tə jɛɾ ənʌðɝ əbændən fɑɹm səm dɪstəns əhɛd, wɛɹ faɪɝ hæd teɪkən ðə ɹuf fɹəm haʊs ən bɑɹn. oʊnli ɹʌf stoʊn wɔlz stʊd. ən əbændən fɑɹm, bʌt nɑt dɪzɝɾɪd. æŋɡɹi ʃaʊts ɹoʊz ʌp ðɛɹ.

Aram's excited voice cut into his brown study. "Don't call me that," he muttered, following the direction of the man's pointing finger, to yet another abandoned farm some distance ahead, where fire had taken the roof from house and barn. Only rough stone walls stood. An abandoned farm, but not deserted. Angry shouts rose up there.

ə dʌzən əɹ mɔɹ ɹʌf-klæd fɛloʊz kæɹiɪŋ spɪɹz ən pɪtʃfɔɹks wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɔɹs ðɛɹ weɪ oʊvɝ ðə tʃɛst-haɪ stoʊn wɔl ʌv ə ɡoʊtpən, waɪl ə hændfʊl ə mɛn wɪðɪn tʃɹaɪd tə kip əm aʊt. sɛvɹəl hɔɹsəz ɹæn lus ɪnsaɪd, fɹaɪɾənd ət ðə nɔɪz ən dɑdʒɪŋ əbaʊt, ən ðəɹ wɝ θɹi wɪmən maʊntəd. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt sɪmpli weɪɾɪŋ tə si haʊ ɪt wəɾ ɔl tɝn aʊt, ðoʊ; wʌn ə ðə wɪmən əpɪɹd tə bi hɝlɪŋ ɹɑks, ən ivən əz i lʊkt, ənʌðɝ dæʃt kloʊs tə ðə wɔl tə læʃ aʊt wɪð ə lɔŋ kʌdʒəl waɪl ðə θɝd ɹɪɹɾ əɹ hɔɹs, ən ə tɔl fɛloʊ tɑpəl bæk ɔf ðə wɔl tə ɡɛt klɪɹ ə flæʃɪŋ hʊvz. bʌt ðəɹ wɝ tu mɛni ətækɝz, tu mʌtʃ wɔl tə dɪfɛnd.

A dozen or more rough-clad fellows carrying spears and pitchforks were trying to force their way over the chest-high stone wall of a goatpen, while a handful of men within tried to keep them out. Several horses ran loose inside, frightened at the noise and dodging about, and there were three women mounted. They were not simply waiting to see how it would all turn out, though; one of the women appeared to be hurling rocks, and even as he looked, another dashed close to the wall to lash out with a long cudgel while the third reared her horse, and a tall fellow toppled back off the wall to get clear of flashing hooves. But there were too many attackers, too much wall to defend.

"aɪ ædvaɪz jə tə ɹaɪd waɪd," siɑnɪd sɛd. ɛdʒɹə ən nəvɛɝɪn tɝnd ɡɹɪm stɛɹz ɑn hɝ, bʌt ʃi plaʊɾ ɑn, hɝi oʊvɝwɛlmɪŋ əɹ mæɾɝ-ʌv-fækt toʊn. "ðoʊz ɑɹ ʃʊɹli ðə pɹɑfəts mɛn, ən kɪlɪŋ ɪz pipəl ɪz ə bæd weɪ tə bɪɡɪn. tɛnz ə θaʊzənz, hʌnʒɹədz ə θaʊzənz, meɪ daɪ ɪf jə feɪl wɪð hɪm. ɪz ɪt wɝθ ɹɪskɪŋ ðət tə seɪv ə hændfʊl?"

"I advise you to ride wide," Seonid said. Edarra and Nevarin turned grim stares on her, but she plowed on, hurry overwhelming her matter-of-fact tone. "Those are surely the Prophet's men, and killing his people is a bad way to begin. Tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands, may die if you fail with him. Is it worth risking that to save a handful?"

pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə kɪl ɛniwʌn ɪf i kəd hɛlp ɪt, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə lʊk ði ʌðɝ weɪ iðɝ. hi weɪstəd noʊ taɪm ɪn ɛkspləneɪʃənz, ðoʊ. "kæn jə fɹaɪɾən ðɛm?" hi æskt ɛdʒɹə. "dʒʌs fɹaɪɾən?" hi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɔl tu wɛl wʌt ðə waɪz wʌnz hæd dʌn ət dəməaɪz wɛlz. ən ði æʃəmən. meɪbi əz wɛl ɡɹeɪɾi ən nild wɝ nɑt ðɛɹ.

Perrin did not intend to kill anyone if he could help it, but he did not intend to look the other way either. He wasted no time in explanations, though. "Can you frighten them?" he asked Edarra. "Just frighten?" He remembered all too well what the Wise Ones had done at Dumai's Wells. And the Asha'man. Maybe as well Grady and Neald were not there.

"pɝhæps," ɛdʒɹə ɹɪplaɪd, stʌɾiɪŋ ðə kɹaʊɾ ɝaʊn ðə pɛn. ʃi hæf-ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, ʃɹʌɡd ə fɹækʃən. "pɝhæps." ðət wəɾ əv tə bi ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf.

"Perhaps," Edarra replied, studying the crowd around the pen. She half-shook her head, shrugged a fraction. "Perhaps." That would have to be good enough.

"ɛɹæm, fʊɹən, tɛɹəl," hi snæpt, "wɪð mi!" hi dʌɡ ɪn ɪz hilz, ən əz stɛpɝ lɛp fɔɹwɝd, hi wɑz ɹɪliv tə si ðə wɔɹɾɝz fɑloʊɪŋ kloʊsli. fɔɹ mɛn tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ meɪɾ ə bɛɾɝ ʃoʊ ðən tu. hi kɛpt ɪz hænz ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz, əweɪ fɹəm ɪz æks.

"Aram, Furen, Teryl," he snapped, "with me!" He dug in his heels, and as Stepper leaped forward, he was relieved to see the Warders following closely. Four men charging made a better show than two. He kept his hands on the reins, away from his axe.

hi wɑz nɑt soʊ plizd wən feɪl ɡæləp swɑloʊ ʌp əlɔŋsaɪd hɪm. hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, ən ʃi ɑɹtʃt ən aɪbɹaʊ ət hɪm. hɝ blæk hɛɹ wɑz bjuɾəfəl, stʃɹimɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪn ə ðɛɹ ɹʌʃ. ʃi wɑz bjuɾəfəl. ən ɑɹtʃt aɪbɹaʊ; noʊ mɔɹ. hi tʃeɪnʒd wʌɾ i hæd bɪn əbaʊt tə seɪ. "ɡɑɹd maɪ bæk," hi toʊl hɝ. smaɪlɪŋ, ʃi pɹədust ə dæɡɝ fɹəm sʌmwɛɹ. wɪð ɔl ðə bleɪdz ʃi kæɹid hɪɾən əweɪ, səmtaɪmz i wʌndɝd haʊ hi mɪs biɪŋ stæb dʒʌs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hʌɡ hɝ.

He was not so pleased when Faile galloped Swallow up alongside him. He opened his mouth, and she arched an eyebrow at him. Her black hair was beautiful, streaming in the wind of their rush. She was beautiful. An arched eyebrow; no more. He changed what he had been about to say. "Guard my back," he told her. Smiling, she produced a dagger from somewhere. With all the blades she carried hidden away, sometimes he wondered how he missed being stabbed just trying to hug her.

əz sun əz ʃi lʊkt əhɛɾ əɡɛn, hi dʒɛstʃɝd fɹæntəkəli tə ɛɹæm, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ðə moʊʃən wɛɹ ʃi kəd nɑt si. ɛɹæm nɑɾəd, bʌɾ i wɑz linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, sɔɹd bɛɹd, ɹɛɾi tə skjuɝ ðə fɝst ə ðə pɹɑfəts foʊk i ɹitʃt. pɛɹɪn hoʊp ðə mæn ʌndɝstʊɾ i wɑz tə ɡɑɹd feɪlz bæk, ən ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ, ɪf ðeɪ æktʃəli  keɪm tə ɡɹɪps wɪð ðoʊz fɛloʊz.

As soon as she looked ahead again, he gestured frantically to Aram, trying to keep the motion where she could not see. Aram nodded, but he was leaning forward, sword bared, ready to skewer the first of the Prophet's folk he reached. Perrin hoped the man understood he was to guard Faile's back, and the rest of her, if they actually came to grips with those fellows.

nʌn ə ðə ɹʌfaɪənz hæd noʊɾəst əm jɛt. pɛɹɪn ʃaʊɾəd, bʌt ðeɪ sim nɑt tə hɪɹ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ oʊn jɛlɪŋ. ə mæn ɪn ə koʊt tu bɪɡ fəɹ ɪm mænədʒ tə skɹæmbəl ətɑp ðə wɔl, ən tu ʌðɝz əpɪɹɾ əbaʊt tə ɡɛɾ oʊvɝ. ɪf ðə waɪz wʌnz wɝ gɑnə də ɛniθɪŋ, ɪt wɑz pæst -  ə θʌndɝklæp nɪɹli oʊvɝ ðɛɹ hɛdz ɔlmoʊs dɛfən pɛɹɪn, ə maʊntənəs kɹæk ðət meɪd stɛpɝ stʌmbəl bɪfɔɹ ɹɪɡeɪnɪŋ ɪz peɪs. ði ətækɝz sɝɾənli noʊɾəst ðæt, stæɡɝɪŋ ən lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊnd waɪldli, səm klæpɪŋ hænz oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ɪɹz. ðə mæn ɑn ðə wɔl oʊvɝbælənst ən fɛl ɔf aʊtsaɪd. hi lɛpt ʌp ɪmiɾiətli, ðoʊ, æŋɡɹəli dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ tə ði ɛnkloʊʒɝ, ən səm ə hɪz kəmpænjənz lɛp bæk əɾ ɪt. ʌðɝz sɔ pɛɹɪn ðən ən pɔɪntəd, ðɛɹ maʊðz wɝkɪŋ, bʌt stɪl noʊ wʌn ɹæn. ə fju hɛftəd wɛpənz.

None of the ruffians had noticed them yet. Perrin shouted, but they seemed not to hear over their own yelling. A man in a coat too big for him managed to scramble atop the wall, and two others appeared about to get over. If the Wise Ones were going to do anything, it was past -  A thunderclap nearly over their heads almost deafened Perrin, a mountainous crack that made Stepper stumble before regaining his pace. The attackers certainly noticed that, staggering and looking around wildly, some clapping hands over their ears. The man on the wall overbalanced and fell off outside. He leaped up immediately, though, angrily gesturing to the enclosure, and some of his companions leaped back at it. Others saw Perrin then and pointed, their mouths working, but still no one ran. A few hefted weapons.

sʌɾənli ə hɔɹəzɑntəl wil ə faɪɝ əpɪɹɾ əbʌv ðə ɡoʊtpən, əz waɪɾ əz ə mæn wɑz tɔl, flɪŋɪŋ ɔf spʌɾɝɪŋ tʌfs ə fleɪm əz ɪt spʌn wɪð ə moʊn ðət ɹoʊz ən fɛl, mɔɹnfəl ɡɹoʊn tə kinɪŋ weɪl ən bæk.

Suddenly a horizontal wheel of fire appeared above the goatpen, as wide as a man was tall, flinging off sputtering tufts of flame as it spun with a moan that rose and fell, mournful groan to keening wail and back.

ðə ɹʌf-klæd mɛn bɹoʊk ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən laɪk skæɾɝɪŋ kweɪl. fəɹ ə moʊmən lɔŋɡɝ ðə mæn ɪn ə tu-bɪɡ koʊt weɪvd ɪz ɑɹmz ən ʃaʊɾəd ət ðɛm, ðən wɪð wʌn læst ɡlæns ət ðə faɪɝi wil, hi tu dɑɹɾɪd əweɪ.

The rough-clad men broke in every direction like scattering quail. For a moment longer the man in a too-big coat waved his arms and shouted at them, then with one last glance at the fiery wheel, he too darted away.

pɛɹɪn ɔlmoʊs læft. hi wəd nɑɾ əv tə kɪl ɛniwʌn. ən i wəd nɑɾ əv tə wɝi əbaʊt feɪl ɡɛɾɪŋ ə pɪtʃfɔɹk θɹu hɝ ɹɪbz.

Perrin almost laughed. He would not have to kill anyone. And he would not have to worry about Faile getting a pitchfork through her ribs.

əpɛɹənli ðə pipəl ɪn ðə pɛn wɝ əz fɹaɪɾənd əz ðoʊz aʊtsaɪd, wʌn ə ðɛm ət list. ðə wʊmən u hæd ɹɪɹɾ əɹ hɔɹs ət ði ətækɝz slɪpt oʊpən ðə ɡeɪɾ ən kɪkt əɹ maʊn tə ən ɑkwɝd ɡæləp. ʌp ðə ɹoʊd, əweɪ fɹəm pɛɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz.

Apparently the people in the pen were as frightened as those outside, one of them at least. The woman who had reared her horse at the attackers slipped open the gate and kicked her mount to an awkward gallop. Up the road, away from Perrin and the others.

"weɪt!" pɛɹɪn ʃaʊɾəd. "wi woʊn hɑɹm ju!" wɛðɝ ʃi hɝɾ əɹ nɑt, ʃi kɛpt wɪpɪŋ əɹ ɹeɪnz. ə bʌndəl taɪd bɪhaɪn əɹ sæɾəl baʊnst waɪldli. ðoʊz mɛn maɪt bi ɹʌnɪŋ əz hɑɹɾ əz ðeɪ kəd naʊ, bʌɾ ɪf ʃi wɛn ɔf baɪ hɝsɛlf, ivən tu əɹ θɹi kəd də hɝ ɪnʒɝi. laɪɪŋ flæɾ ɑn stɛpɝz nɛk, pɛɹɪn dʌɡ ɪn ɪz hilz, ən ðə dʌn ʃɑt fɔɹwɝd laɪk ən æɹoʊ.

"Wait!" Perrin shouted. "We won't harm you!" Whether she heard or not, she kept whipping her reins. A bundle tied behind her saddle bounced wildly. Those men might be running as hard as they could now, but if she went off by herself, even two or three could do her injury. Lying flat on Stepper's neck, Perrin dug in his heels, and the dun shot forward like an arrow.

hi wɑz ə bɪɡ mæn, jɛt stɛpɝ hæɾ ɝn ɪz neɪm fəɹ mɔɹ ðən pɹænsɪŋ fit. bɪsaɪdz, baɪ ɪts lʌmbɝɪŋ ɹʌn, ðə wʊmənz maʊnt wɑz hɑɹdli fɪt fəɹ ə sæɾəl. wɪð ɛvɹi stʃɹaɪd stɛpɝ kloʊz ðə ɡæp, nɪɹɝ, nɪɹɝ, əntɪl pɛɹɪn wɑz eɪbəl tə ɹitʃ aʊɾ ən siz ði ʌðɝ hɔɹsəz bɹaɪɾəl. ʌp kloʊs, hɝ hæmɝ-noʊz beɪ wɑz lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ ðən kɹoʊbeɪt, læðɝɾ ən wɔɹn aʊt mɔɹ ðən ðə ʃɔɹt ɹʌn kəɾ əkaʊn fɔɹ. sloʊli hi dʒɹu boʊθ hɔɹsəz tə ə hɔlt.

He was a big man, yet Stepper had earned his name for more than prancing feet. Besides, by its lumbering run, the woman's mount was hardly fit for a saddle. With every stride Stepper closed the gap, nearer, nearer, until Perrin was able to reach out and seize the other horse's bridle. Up close, her hammer-nosed bay was little better than crowbait, lathered and worn out more than the short run could account for. Slowly he drew both horses to a halt.

"fɝɡɪv mi ɪf aɪ fɹaɪɾənd ju, mɪstʃɹəs," hi sɛd. "tʃɹuli, aɪ min jə noʊ hɑɹm."

"Forgive me if I frightened you, Mistress," he said. "Truly, I mean you no harm."

fəɹ ðə sɛkən taɪm ðət deɪ ən əpɑlədʒi dɪd nɑt ɡɛt ðə ɹɪspɑns i ɪkspɛktəd. æŋɡɹi blu aɪz ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm fɹəm ə feɪs sɝaʊndəd baɪ lɔŋ ɹɛd-ɡoʊl kɝlz, ə feɪs əz ɹiɡəl əz ɛni kwinz fəɹ ɔl ðəɾ ɪt wɑz plæstɝd wɪð swɛɾ ən dʌst. hɝ dʒɹɛs wɑz pleɪn wʊl, tʃɹævəl-steɪn ən əz dʌsti əz əɹ tʃiks, bʌɾ əɹ feɪs wɑz fjʊɹiəs əz wɛl əz kwinli. "aɪ də nɑt nid," ʃi bɪɡæn ɪn tʃɪl toʊnz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dʒɝk əɹ hɔɹs fɹi, ðən kʌɾ ɔf əz ənʌðɝ ə ðə wɪmən, waɪt-hɛɹɾ ən boʊni, ɡæləpt ʌp ɑn ə slæb-saɪɾəd bɹaʊn mɛɹ ɪn wɝs kəndɪʃən ðən ðə beɪ. ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɹaɪɾɪŋ hɑɹd fəɹ səm taɪm, ðiz foʊk. ði oʊldɝ wʊmən wɑz dʒʌst əz wɔɹn ən dʌst-kʌvɝɾ əz ðə jʌŋɡɝ.

For the second time that day an apology did not get the response he expected. Angry blue eyes glared at him from a face surrounded by long red-gold curls, a face as regal as any queen's for all that it was plastered with sweat and dust. Her dress was plain wool, travel-stained and as dusty as her cheeks, but her face was furious as well as queenly. "I do not need," she began in chill tones, trying to jerk her horse free, then cut off as another of the women, white-haired and bony, galloped up on a slab-sided brown mare in worse condition than the bay. They had been riding hard for some time, these folk. The older woman was just as worn and dust-covered as the younger.

ʃi ɔltɝneɪɾəd bɪtwin bimɪŋ ət pɛɹɪn ən skaʊlɪŋ ət ðə wʊmən huz bɹaɪɾəl i stɪl hɛld. "θæŋk ju, maɪ lɔɹd." hɝ vɔɪs, θɪn bʌt stʃɹɔŋ, ɡeɪv ə hɪtʃ əz ʃi noʊɾəst ɪz aɪz, bʌt ɡoʊldən-jɛloʊ aɪz ɑn ə mæn sloʊɾ əɹ oʊnli ən ɪnstənt. nɑɾ ə wʊmən feɪz baɪ mʌtʃ. ʃi stɪl kæɹid ðə staʊt stɪk ʃi hæd bɪn juzɪŋ fəɹ ə wɛpən. "ə moʊs taɪmli ɹɛskju. meɪaɪɡdɪn, wʌtɛvɝ wɝ jə θɪŋkɪŋ? jə cʊɾə ɡɑɾən jɝsɛlf kɪld! ən ðə ɹɛst ʌv ʌs, tu! ʃiz ə hɛdstʃɹɔŋ ɡɝl, maɪ lɔɹd, ɔlweɪz lipɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ʃi lʊks. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, tʃaɪld, ə ful əbændənz fɹɛnz, ən ɡɪvz ʌp sɪlvɝ fəɹ ʃaɪni bɹæs. wi də θæŋk ju, maɪ lɔɹd, ən meɪaɪɡdɪn wɪl, tu, wən ʃi kʌmz tə hɝ sɛnsɪz."

She alternated between beaming at Perrin and scowling at the woman whose bridle he still held. "Thank you, my Lord." Her voice, thin but strong, gave a hitch as she noticed his eyes, but golden-yellow eyes on a man slowed her only an instant. Not a woman fazed by much. She still carried the stout stick she had been using for a weapon. "A most timely rescue. Maighdin, whatever were you thinking? You could have gotten yourself killed! And the rest of us, too! She's a headstrong girl, my Lord, always leaping before she looks. Remember, child, a fool abandons friends, and gives up silver for shiny brass. We do thank you, my Lord, and Maighdin will, too, when she comes to her senses."

meɪaɪɡdɪn, ə ɡʊd tɛn jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən pɛɹɪn, kəɾ oʊnli bi kɔld ə ɡɝl ɪn kəmpɛɹəsən tə ði oʊldɝ wʊmən, bʌt dɪspaɪt wɪɹi ɡɹɪməsɪz ðət mætʃt əɹ sɛnt, fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən tɪŋd wɪð æŋɡɝ, ʃi æksɛptɪd ðə taɪɹeɪd, oʊnli pʊlɪŋ wʌns mɔɹ ɪn ə hæfhɑɹɾɪd ətɛmp tə fɹi hɝ hɔɹs, ðən ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp. lɛɾɪŋ əɹ hænz ɹɛst ɑn əɹ kæntəl, ʃi fɹaʊn ət pɛɹɪn əkjuzɪŋli, ðən blɪŋkt. ðə jɛloʊ aɪz əɡɛn. jɛt dɪspaɪt ðət stʃɹeɪnʒnəs, ʃi stɪl dɪd nɑt smɛl əfɹeɪd. ði oʊld wʊmən dɪd, bʌt pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt wɑz ə hɪm.

Maighdin, a good ten years older than Perrin, could only be called a girl in comparison to the older woman, but despite weary grimaces that matched her scent, frustration tinged with anger, she accepted the tirade, only pulling once more in a halfhearted attempt to free her horse, then giving up. Letting her hands rest on her cantle, she frowned at Perrin accusingly, then blinked. The yellow eyes again. Yet despite that strangeness, she still did not smell afraid. The old woman did, but Perrin did not think it was of him.

ənʌðɝ ə meɪaɪɡdɪnz kəmpænjənz, ən ənʃeɪvən mæn maʊntəɾ ɑn jɛɾ ənʌðɝ bɪdʒɹæɡəl hɔɹs, ðɪs ə nɑb-nid ɡɹeɪ, əpɹoʊtʃt waɪl ði oʊld wʊmən wɑz tɔkɪŋ, bʌt kɛp bæk. hi wɑz tɔl, əz tɔl əz pɛɹɪn ɪf nɑt nɪɹli soʊ waɪd, ɪn ə tʃɹævəl-wɔɹn dɑɹk koʊt wɪð ə sɔɹd bɛltəɾ oʊvɝ. laɪk ðə wɪmən, hi hæɾ ə bʌndəl taɪɾ ɑn bɪhaɪn ɪz sæɾəl. ðət taɪni bɹiz swɝl tə bɹɪŋ pɛɹɪn ɪz sɛnt. hi wɑz nɑɾ əfɹeɪd; hi wɑz wɛɹi. ən ɪf ðə weɪ hi lʊkt ət meɪaɪɡdɪn wɑz ɛni ɡaɪd, ɪt wɑz ʃi hi wɑz wɛɹi ʌv. meɪbi ðɪs wɑz nɑt soʊ sɪmpəl əz ɹɛskjuɪŋ tʃɹævəlɝz fɹəm ə ɡæŋ ə ɹʌfaɪənz æftɝ ɔl.

Another of Maighdin's companions, an unshaven man mounted on yet another bedraggled horse, this a knob-kneed gray, approached while the old woman was talking, but kept back. He was tall, as tall as Perrin if not nearly so wide, in a travel-worn dark coat with a sword belted over. Like the women, he had a bundle tied on behind his saddle. That tiny breeze swirled to bring Perrin his scent. He was not afraid; he was wary. And if the way he looked at Maighdin was any guide, it was she he was wary of. Maybe this was not so simple as rescuing travelers from a gang of ruffians after all.

"pɝhæps jə ʃəɾ ɔl kʌm tə maɪ kæmp," pɛɹɪn sɛd, faɪnəli ɹilisɪŋ ðə bɹaɪɾəl. "jul bi seɪf fɹəm . . . bɹɪɡænz . . . ðɛɹ." hi hæf ɪkspɛktəd meɪaɪɡdɪn tə meɪk ə bɹeɪk fəɹ ðə nɪɹəs tʃɹi laɪn, bʌt ʃi tɝn əɹ hɔɹs wɪð hɪz, bæk təwɔɹd ðə ɡoʊtpən. ʃi smɛld . . . ɹɪzaɪnd.

"Perhaps you should all come to my camp," Perrin said, finally releasing the bridle. "You'll be safe from . . . brigands . . . there." He half expected Maighdin to make a break for the nearest tree line, but she turned her horse with his, back toward the goatpen. She smelled . . . resigned.

ivən soʊ, ʃi sɛd, "aɪ θæŋk jə fəɹ ði ɔfɝ, bʌɾ aɪ . . . wi . . . mʌs kəntɪnju əɹ dʒɝni. wɪl ɡoʊ ɑn, lini," ʃi æɾəd fɝmli, ən ði oʊldɝ wʊmən fɹaʊn əɾ əɹ soʊ stɝnli ðəɾ i wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɝ mʌðɝ ən dɔɾɝ dɪspaɪɾ əɹ jus ə ðə wʊmənz neɪm. ðeɪ sɝɾənli lʊk nʌθɪŋ əlaɪk. lini wɑz nɛɹoʊ-feɪst ən pɑɹtʃmənt-skɪnd, ɔl sɪnu, waɪl meɪaɪɡdɪn maɪt bi bjuɾəfəl ʌndɝ ðət dʌst. ɪf ə mæn laɪk fɛɹ hɛɹ.

Even so, she said, "I thank you for the offer, but I . . . we . . . must continue our journey. We will go on, Lini," she added firmly, and the older woman frowned at her so sternly that he wondered whether they were mother and daughter despite her use of the woman's name. They certainly looked nothing alike. Lini was narrow-faced and parchment-skinned, all sinew, while Maighdin might be beautiful under that dust. If a man liked fair hair.

pɛɹɪn ɡlænst oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ət ðə mæn tʃɹeɪlɪŋ æftɝ. ə hɑɹd-lʊkɪŋ fɛloʊ, ɪn niɾ ʌv ə ɹeɪzɝ. pɝhæps i laɪk fɛɹ hɛɹ. pɝhæps i laɪkt ɪt tu mʌtʃ. mɛn hæd meɪd tʃɹʌbəl fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz əz wɛl əz ʌðɝz fəɹ ðət ɹizən bɪfɔɹ ðɪs.

Perrin glanced over his shoulder at the man trailing after. A hard-looking fellow, in need of a razor. Perhaps he liked fair hair. Perhaps he liked it too much. Men had made trouble for themselves as well as others for that reason before this.

əhɛd, feɪl wɑz sɪɾɪŋ swɑloʊ ən piɹɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə wɔl ə ðə pɛn ət ðə pipəl ɪnsaɪd. pɝhæps wʌn ə ðɛm hæd bɪn hɝt. siɑnɪɾ ən ðə waɪz wʌnz wɝ noʊwɛɹ ɪn saɪt. ɛɹæm hæɾ ʌndɝstʊd, əpɛɹənli; hi wɑz kloʊs tə feɪl, ðoʊ lʊkɪŋ ɪmpeɪʃənli təwɔɹd pɛɹɪn. ðə deɪnʒɝ wɑz klɪɹli pæst, ðoʊ.

Ahead, Faile was sitting Swallow and peering over the wall of the pen at the people inside. Perhaps one of them had been hurt. Seonid and the Wise Ones were nowhere in sight. Aram had understood, apparently; he was close to Faile, though looking impatiently toward Perrin. The danger was clearly past, though.

bɪfɔɹ pɛɹɪn wɑz hæfweɪ tə ðə ɡoʊtpən, tɛɹəl əpɪɹd wɪð ə nɛɹoʊ-aɪd, stʌbəl-tʃik mæn stʌmbəlɪŋ əlɔŋ bɪsaɪɾ ɪz ɹoʊn, ðə kɑlɝ ə hɪz koʊt ɡɹɪpt ɪn ðə wɔɹɾɝz fɪst. "aɪ θɔt wi ʃəd kætʃ wʌn ə ðɛm," tɛɹəl sɛd wɪð ə hɑɹd ɡɹɪn. "ɔlweɪz bɛs tə hɪɹ boʊθ saɪdz, wʌtɛvɝ jə θɔt jə sɔ, maɪ oʊl dɑ ɔlweɪz sɛd." pɛɹɪn wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd; hi hæd θɔt tɛɹəl kəd nɑt θɪŋk bɪɑn ði ɛn ə hɪz sɔɹd.

Before Perrin was halfway to the goatpen, Teryl appeared with a narrow-eyed, stubble-cheeked man stumbling along beside his roan, the collar of his coat gripped in the Warder's fist. "I thought we should catch one of them," Teryl said with a hard grin. "Always best to hear both sides, whatever you thought you saw, my old da always said." Perrin was surprised; he had thought Teryl could not think beyond the end of his sword.

ivən haɪkt ʌp əz ɪt wɑz, ðə stʌbəl-tʃik fɛloʊz fɹeɪd koʊt wɑz pleɪnli tu bɪɡ fəɹ hɪm. pɛɹɪn daʊɾɪd ɛniwʌn ɛls hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə si wɛl ɪnʌf ət ðə dɪstəns, bʌɾ i ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðət θɹʌstɪŋ noʊz, tu. ðɪs mæn hæd bɪn ðə læs tə ɹʌn, ən i wɑz nɑt kaʊd naʊ, iðɝ. hɪz snɪɹ tʊk əm ɔl ɪn. "jɔɹ ɔl ɪn dip mʌk, fəɹ ðɪs," hi ɹæspt. "wi wɑz duɪŋ ðə pɹɑfəts bɪɾɪŋ, wi wɑz. ðə pɹɑfət sɛz ɪf ə mæn bɑðɝz ə wʊmən əz dʌznt wɑn hɪm, hi daɪz. ðɪs lɑt wɑz tʃeɪsɪŋ æftɝ hɝ" - hi dʒɝkt ɪz tʃɪn ət meɪaɪɡdɪn - "ænd ʃi wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ hɑɹd. ðə pɹɑfəɾəl əv jəɹ ɪɹz fəɹ ðɪs!" hi spæt fəɹ ɛmfəsəs.

Even hiked up as it was, the stubble-cheeked fellow's frayed coat was plainly too big for him. Perrin doubted anyone else had been able to see well enough at the distance, but he recognized that thrusting nose, too. This man had been the last to run, and he was not cowed now, either. His sneer took them all in. "You're all in deep muck, for this," he rasped. "We was doing the Prophet's bidding, we was. The Prophet says if a man bothers a woman as doesn't want him, he dies. This lot was chasing after her" - he jerked his chin at Maighdin - "and she was running hard. The Prophet'll have your ears for this!" He spat for emphasis.

"ðæɾ ɪz ɹɪdɪkjələs," meɪaɪɡdɪn ənaʊnst ɪn ə klɪɹ vɔɪs. "ðiz pipəl ɑɹ maɪ fɹɛnz. ðɪs mæn kəmplitli mɪsəndɝstʊd wʌɾ i sɔ."

"That is ridiculous," Maighdin announced in a clear voice. "These people are my friends. This man completely misunderstood what he saw."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd, ən ɪf ʃi θɔɾ i wɑz əɡɹiɪŋ wɪð hɝ, ɔl wɛl ən ɡʊd. bʌt pʊɾɪŋ wʌt ðɪs fɛloʊ sɛɾ əlɔŋsaɪd wʌt lini hæd. . . . nɑt sɪmpəl əɾ ɔl.

Perrin nodded, and if she thought he was agreeing with her, all well and good. But putting what this fellow said alongside what Lini had. . . . Not simple at all.

feɪl ən ði ʌðɝz dʒɔɪn ðɛm, fɑloʊd baɪ ðə ɹɛst ə meɪaɪɡdɪnz tʃɹævlɪŋ kəmpænjənz, θɹi mɔɹ mɛn ən ənʌðɝ wʊmən, ɔl liɾɪŋ wɔɹn-daʊn hɔɹsəz wɪð fju maɪlz lɛft ɪn ðɛm. nɑt ðət ðeɪ hæd bɪn pɹaɪm hɔɹsflɛʃ ɪn səm jɪɹz, ɪf ɛvɝ. ə faɪnɝ kəlɛkʃən ə bʌk niz, baʊ hɑks, speɪvɪnz, ən sweɪbæks, pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt ɹikɔl. əz ɔlweɪz, hɪz ɡeɪz wɛn fɝs tə feɪl - hɪz nɑstʃɹəlz stʃɹeɪn fəɹ əɹ sɛnt - bʌt siɑnɪd snæɡd ɪz aɪz. slʌmpt ɪn əɹ sæɾəl, flʌʃɪŋ skɑɹlət, ʃi wɔɹ ə sʌlən ɡlaʊɝ, ən əɹ feɪs lʊkt ɑd, hɝ tʃiks pʌft aʊɾ ən əɹ maʊθ nɑt kwaɪt kloʊzd. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ, ə bɪɾ ə ɹɛd-ænd-blu. . . . pɛɹɪn blɪŋkt. ənlɛs i wɑz siɪŋ θɪŋz, ʃi hæɾ ə wɑɾəd-ʌp skɑɹf stʌft ɪndə hɝ maʊθ! əpɛɹənli wən waɪz wʌnz toʊld ən əpɹɛntəs tə bi kwaɪət, ivən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ əpɹɛntəs, ðeɪ mɛn ɪt.

Faile and the others joined them, followed by the rest of Maighdin's traveling companions, three more men and another woman, all leading worn-down horses with few miles left in them. Not that they had been prime horseflesh in some years, if ever. A finer collection of buck knees, bow hocks, spavins, and swaybacks, Perrin could not recall. As always, his gaze went first to Faile - his nostrils strained for her scent - but Seonid snagged his eyes. Slumped in her saddle, flushing scarlet, she wore a sullen glower, and her face looked odd, her cheeks puffed out and her mouth not quite closed. There was something, a bit of red-and-blue. . . . Perrin blinked. Unless he was seeing things, she had a wadded-up scarf stuffed into her mouth! Apparently when Wise Ones told an apprentice to be quiet, even an Aes Sedai apprentice, they meant it.

hi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn wɪð ʃɑɹp aɪz; meɪaɪɡdɪnz maʊθ fɛl oʊpən wən ʃi sɔ siɑnɪd, ən ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə lɔŋ, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ lʊk əz ɪf i wɝ ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ ðə skɑɹf. soʊ ʃi nu ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑn saɪt, dɪd ʃi? ənkɑmən, fəɹ ðə kʌntʃɹi wʊmən ʃi əpɪɹd. ʃi dɪd nɑt saʊn laɪk wʌn, ðoʊ.

He was not the only one with sharp eyes; Maighdin's mouth fell open when she saw Seonid, and she gave him a long, considering look as if he were responsible for the scarf. So she knew an Aes Sedai on sight, did she? Uncommon, for the country woman she appeared. She did not sound like one, though.

fʊɹən, ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn siɑnɪd, wɔɹ ə θʌndɝhɛd fəɹ ə feɪs, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz tɛɹəl u meɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ivən lɛs sɪmpəl baɪ tɔsɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. "aɪ faʊn ðɪs bɪhaɪn hɪm," hi sɛd, "wɛɹ i maɪɾ əv dʒɹɑpt ɪt, ɹʌnɪŋ."

Furen, riding behind Seonid, wore a thunderhead for a face, but it was Teryl who made everything even less simple by tossing something to the ground. "I found this behind him," he said, "where he might have dropped it, running."

ət fɝst, pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌɾ i wɑz lʊkɪŋ æt, ə lɔŋ lup ə ɹɔhaɪd θɪkli stʃɹʌŋ wɪð wʌɾ əpɪɹd tə bi tæɡz ə ʃɹɪvəld lɛðɝ. ðən i dɪd noʊ, ən ɪz tiθ bɛɹɾ ɪn ə snɑɹl. "ðə pɹɑfət wəɾ əv əɹ ɪɹz, jə sɛd."

At first, Perrin did not know what he was looking at, a long loop of rawhide thickly strung with what appeared to be tags of shriveled leather. Then he did know, and his teeth bared in a snarl. "The Prophet would have our ears, you said."

ðə stʌbəl-tʃik mæn stɑpt ɡeɪpɪŋ ət siɑnɪɾ ən lɪkt ɪz lɪps. "ðæt . . . ðæts hɑɹiz wɝk!" hi pɹətɛstəd. "hɑɹiz ə min wʌn. hi laɪks tə kip kaʊnt, teɪk tʃɹoʊfiz, ən i . . . ʌ. . . ." ʃɹʌɡɪŋ ɪn ɪz kæptɪv koʊt, hi sæŋk ɪn ɑn hɪmsɛlf laɪk ə kɔɹnɝd dɔɡ. "ju kæn taɪ ðət tə mi! ðə pɹɑfəɾəl hæŋ jə ɪf jə tʌtʃ mi! hiz hæŋ noʊbəlz bɪfɔɹ, faɪn lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz. aɪ wɔk ɪn ðə laɪɾ ə ðə blɛsɪd lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən!"

The stubble-cheeked man stopped gaping at Seonid and licked his lips. "That . . . that's Hari's work!" he protested. "Hari's a mean one. He likes to keep count, take trophies, and he . . . uh. . . ." Shrugging in his captive coat, he sank in on himself like a cornered dog. "You can't tie that to me! The Prophet'll hang you if you touch me! He's hanged nobles before, fine lords and ladies. I walk in the Light of the blessed Lord Dragon!"

pɛɹɪn wɔk stɛpɝ tə ðə mæn, kɛɹfəl tə kip ðə dʌnz hʊvz klɪɹ ə ðə . . . θɪŋ . . . ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hi wɑntəd nʌθɪŋ lɛs ðən tə hæv ðə fɛloʊz sɛn ɪn ɪz noʊz, bʌɾ i bɛn daʊn, pʊɾɪŋ ɪz feɪs kloʊsɝ. saʊɝ swɛt wɔɹd wɪð fɪɹ, pænɪk, ə tɪnʒ ʌv æŋɡɝ. ə pɪɾi hi kəd nɑt snɪf aʊt ɡɪlt. "maɪɾ əv dʒɹɑpt" wɑz nɑt "hæd dʒɹɑpt." kloʊs-sɛɾ aɪz waɪɾənd, ən ðə mæn pɹɛs bæk əɡɛns tɛɹəlz ɡɛldɪŋ. jɛloʊ aɪz hæd ðɛɹ jusəz.

Perrin walked Stepper to the man, careful to keep the dun's hooves clear of the . . . thing . . . on the ground. He wanted nothing less than to have the fellow's scent in his nose, but he bent down, putting his face closer. Sour sweat warred with fear, panic, a tinge of anger. A pity he could not sniff out guilt. "Might have dropped" was not "had dropped." Close-set eyes widened, and the man pressed back against Teryl's gelding. Yellow eyes had their uses.

"ɪf aɪ kəd taɪ ðət tə ju, jud hæŋ fɹəm ðə nɪɹəs tʃɹi," hi ɡɹaʊld. ðə fɛloʊ blɪŋkt, bɪɡæn tə bɹaɪɾən əz i ʌndɝstʊd wʌt ðət mɛnt, bʌt pɛɹɪn ɡeɪv ɪm noʊ taɪm tə ɹɪɡeɪn ɪz blʌstɝ. "aɪm pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə, ən jəɹ pɹɛʃəs lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən sɛn mi hɪɹ. jə spɹɛd ðə wɝd. hi sɛn mi, ən ɪf aɪ faɪn ə mæn wɪð . . . tʃɹoʊfiz . . . hi hæŋz! ɪf aɪ faɪn ə mæn bɝnɪŋ ə fɑɹm, hi hæŋz! ɪf wʌn ə jə lʊks ət mi kɹɔs-aɪd, hi hæŋz! ən jə kən tɛl mæsimə aɪ sɛd soʊ, tu!" dɪsɡʌstəd, pɛɹɪn stʃɹeɪɾənd. "lɛɾ ɪm ɡoʊ, tɛɹəl. ɪf i ɪzən aʊɾ ə maɪ saɪɾ ɪn tu ʃeɪks . . . !"

"If I could tie that to you, you'd hang from the nearest tree," he growled. The fellow blinked, began to brighten as he understood what that meant, but Perrin gave him no time to regain his bluster. "I'm Perrin Aybara, and your precious Lord Dragon sent me here. You spread the word. He sent me, and if I find a man with . . . trophies . . . he hangs! If I find a man burning a farm, he hangs! If one of you looks at me cross-eyed, he hangs! And you can tell Masema I said so, too!" Disgusted, Perrin straightened. "Let him go, Teryl. If he isn't out of my sight in two shakes . . . !"

tɛɹəlz hæn oʊpənd, ən ðə fɛloʊ dæʃt ɔf əɾ ə dɛd ɹʌn fəɹ ðə nɪɹəs tʃɹiz, nɛvɝ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlænsɪŋ bæk. pɑɹɾ ə pɛɹɪnz dɪsɡʌst wɑz fəɹ hɪmsɛlf. θɹɛɾənɪŋ! ɪf wʌn ə ðɛm lʊkt əɾ ɪm kɹɔs-aɪd? bʌɾ ɪf ðə neɪmləs mæn hæd nɑt kʌɾ ɔf ɪɹz hɪmsɛlf, hi hæd wɑtʃt ɪɾ ən dʌn nʌθɪŋ.

Teryl's hand opened, and the fellow dashed off at a dead run for the nearest trees, never so much as glancing back. Part of Perrin's disgust was for himself. Threatening! If one of them looked at him cross-eyed? But if the nameless man had not cut off ears himself, he had watched it and done nothing.

feɪl wɑz smaɪlɪŋ, pɹaɪd ʃaɪnɪŋ θɹu ðə swɛɾ ɑn əɹ feɪs. hɝ lʊk wɑʃt əweɪ səm ə pɛɹɪnz ɹɪvʌlʃən. hi wəd wɔk bɛɹfʊt θɹu faɪɝ fəɹ ðət lʊk.

Faile was smiling, pride shining through the sweat on her face. Her look washed away some of Perrin's revulsion. He would walk barefoot through fire for that look.

nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn əpɹuvd, ʌv kɔɹs. siɑnɪdz aɪz wɝ skwizd ʃʌt, ən əɹ ɡlʌv fɪsts kwɪvɝɾ ɑn əɹ ɹeɪnz əz ðoʊ ʃi dɛspɝətli wɑntəd tə jæŋk ðət skɑɹf fɹəm əɹ maʊθ ən tɛl ɪm wʌt ʃi θɔt. hi kəd ɡɛs ɛniweɪ. ɛdʒɹə ən nəvɛɝɪn hæd ɡæðɝd ðɛɹ ʃɔlz ɝaʊn əm ən wɝ aɪɪŋ ɪm dɑɹkli. oʊ, jɛs; hi kəd ɡɛs.

Not everyone approved, of course. Seonid's eyes were squeezed shut, and her gloved fists quivered on her reins as though she desperately wanted to yank that scarf from her mouth and tell him what she thought. He could guess anyway. Edarra and Nevarin had gathered their shawls around them and were eyeing him darkly. Oh, yes; he could guess.

"aɪ θɔɾ ɪt wɑz tə bi ɔl sikɹəsi," tɛɹəl sɛd kæʒəwəli, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə stʌbəl-tʃik mæn ɹʌn. "aɪ θɔt mæsimə wɑzn tə noʊ jə wɝ hɪɹ tɪl jə spoʊk ɪn ɪz pɪŋk ɪɹ."

"I thought it was to be all secrecy," Teryl said casually, watching the stubble-cheeked man run. "I thought Masema wasn't to know you were here till you spoke in his pink ear."

ðət hæd bɪn ðə plæn. ɹænd hæd sədʒɛstəɾ ɪɾ əz ə pɹikɔʃən, siɑnɪɾ ən mɑsʊɝi hæɾ ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn ɪɾ ɛvɹi tʃæns ðeɪ ɡɑt. æftɝ ɔl, pɹɑfəɾ ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən əɹ noʊ, mæsimə maɪt nɑt wɑnə kʌm feɪs-tə-feɪs wɪð sʌmwʌn ɹænd sɛnt, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðə θɪŋz i wɑz sɛd tə hæv əlaʊd. ðoʊz ɪɹz wɝ nɑt ðə wɝst, ɪf ðə tɛnθ pɑɹɾ ə ɹumɝ wɑz tə bi bɪlivd. ɛdʒɹə ən ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz sɔ mæsimə əz ə pɑsəbəl ɛnəmi, tə bi æmbʊʃt bɪfɔɹ i kəd sɛɾ ɪz oʊn tʃɹæp.

That had been the plan. Rand had suggested it as a precaution, Seonid and Masuri had insisted on it every chance they got. After all, Prophet of the Lord Dragon or no, Masema might not want to come face-to-face with someone Rand sent, considering the things he was said to have allowed. Those ears were not the worst, if the tenth part of rumor was to be believed. Edarra and the other Wise Ones saw Masema as a possible enemy, to be ambushed before he could set his own trap.

"aɪm səpoʊz tə stɑp . . . ðæt," pɛɹɪn sɛd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ æŋɡɹəli tə ðə ɹɔhaɪd stʃɹɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hi hæd hɝd ðə ɹumɝz, ən dʌn nʌθɪŋ. naʊ hi hæd sin. "aɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl stɑɹt naʊ." ən ɪf mæsimə dɪsaɪɾɪd i wɑz ən ɛnəmi? haʊ mɛni θaʊzənz fɑloʊd ðə pɹɑfət, aʊɾ ə bɪlif əɹ fɪɹ? ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ. "ɪt stɑps, tɛɹəl. ɪt stɑps!"

"I'm supposed to stop . . . that," Perrin said, gesturing angrily to the rawhide string on the ground. He had heard the rumors, and done nothing. Now he had seen. "I might as well start now." And if Masema decided he was an enemy? How many thousands followed the Prophet, out of belief or fear? It did not matter. "It stops, Teryl. It stops!"

ðə mʊɹændiən nɑɾəd sloʊli, aɪɪŋ pɛɹɪn əz ðoʊ siɪŋ ɪm fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm.

The Murandian nodded slowly, eyeing Perrin as though seeing him for the first time.

"maɪ lɔɹd pɛɹɪn?" meɪaɪɡdɪn sɛd. hi hæd fɝɡɑɾən ɔl əbaʊɾ əɹ ən əɹ fɹɛnz. ði ʌðɝz hæd ɡæðɝd wɪð əɹ ə lɪɾəl weɪ ɔf, moʊst stɪl əfʊt. ðəɹ wɝ θɹi mɛn əsaɪd fɹəm ðə fɛloʊ hu hæd fɑloʊd meɪaɪɡdɪn, ən tu ʌv ðoʊz wɝ haɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz. lini əpɪɹd ðə wɛɹiəst ʌv ɔl, aɪz foʊkəst ɑn ɪm wɝidli; ʃi hæɾ əɹ hɔɹs kloʊs tə meɪaɪɡdɪnz ən simd ɹɛɾi tə siz ðə bɹaɪɾəl hɝsɛlf. nɑt tə stɑp ðə jʌŋɡɝ wʊmən boʊltɪŋ, bʌt tə boʊl hɝsɛlf ən teɪk meɪaɪɡdɪn wɪð hɝ. meɪaɪɡdɪn hɝsɛlf əpɪɹd kəmplitli əɾ iz, bʌt ʃi ɔlsoʊ stʌɾid pɛɹɪn. lɪɾəl wʌndɝ, æftɝ ɔl ðət tɔk ə ðə pɹɑfəɾ ən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ɑn tɑp ə hɪz aɪz. nɑt tə mɛnʃən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡæɡd. hi ɪkspɛktəɾ əɹ tə seɪ ðət ðeɪ wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ naʊ, ɪmiɾiətli, bʌt wʌt ʃi sɛɾ ɪnstɛd wɑz "wi wɪl æksɛp jəɹ kaɪn ɔfɝ. ə deɪ əɹ tu ɹɛstɪŋ ɪn jəɹ kæmp maɪt bi dʒʌs ðə θɪŋ."

"My Lord Perrin?" Maighdin said. He had forgotten all about her and her friends. The others had gathered with her a little way off, most still afoot. There were three men aside from the fellow who had followed Maighdin, and two of those were hiding behind their horses. Lini appeared the wariest of all, eyes focused on him worriedly; she had her horse close to Maighdin's and seemed ready to seize the bridle herself. Not to stop the younger woman bolting, but to bolt herself and take Maighdin with her. Maighdin herself appeared completely at ease, but she also studied Perrin. Little wonder, after all that talk of the Prophet and the Dragon Reborn, on top of his eyes. Not to mention an Aes Sedai gagged. He expected her to say that they wanted to go now, immediately, but what she said instead was "We will accept your kind offer. A day or two resting in your camp might be just the thing."

"æz jə seɪ, mɪstʃɹəs meɪaɪɡdɪn," hi sɛd sloʊli. mæskɪŋ ɪz sɝpɹaɪz wɑz dɪfəkəlt. ɪspɛʃli sɪns i hæd dʒʌst ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə tu mɛn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz bɪtwin əm ən hɪm. tɑvɝən wɝk, tə bɹɪŋ əm hɪɹ? ə stʃɹeɪnʒ twɪst ɪn ɛni keɪs. "ɪt maɪt bi dʒʌs ðə θɪŋ ət ðæt."

"As you say, Mistress Maighdin," he said slowly. Masking his surprise was difficult. Especially since he had just recognized the two men trying to keep their horses between them and him. Ta'veren work, to bring them here? A strange twist in any case. "It might be just the thing at that."


tʃæptɝ eɪt


CHAPTER 8

eɪ sɪmpəl kʌntʃɹi wʊmən


A Simple Country Woman

ðə kæmp leɪ əbaʊɾ ə liɡ fɑɹðɝ ɑn, wɛl bæk fɹəm ðə ɹoʊɾ əmʌŋ loʊ, wʊɾɪd hɪlz, dʒʌs bɪɑn ə stʃɹim ðət wɑz tɛn peɪsɪz' wɪdθ ə stoʊnz ən oʊnli faɪv ʌv wɔɾɝ nɛvɝ dipɝ ðən ə mænz niz. taɪni ɡɹin ən sɪlvɝ fɪʃ dɑɹɾɪd əweɪ fɹəm ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz. kæʒəwəl pæsɝzbi wɝ ənlaɪkli tə kʌm ɑn əm hɪɹ. ðə nɪɹəst ɪnhæbəɾəd fɑɹm wɑz oʊvɝ ə maɪl əweɪ, ən pɛɹɪn hæd tʃɛk pɝsənəli tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðoʊz foʊk tʊk ðɛɹ ænəməlz tə wɔɾɝ ɛlswɛɹ.

The camp lay about a league farther on, well back from the road among low, wooded hills, just beyond a stream that was ten paces' width of stones and only five of water never deeper than a man's knees. Tiny green and silver fish darted away from the horses' hooves. Casual passersby were unlikely to come on them here. The nearest inhabited farm was over a mile away, and Perrin had checked personally to make sure those folk took their animals to water elsewhere.

hi tʃɹuli hæd bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əvɔɪd noʊɾəs əz mʌtʃ əz pɑsəbəl, tʃɹævlɪŋ baɪ bæk ɹoʊdz ən ðə smɔləs kʌntʃɹi pæðz wən ðeɪ kəd nɑt kip tə ðə fɔɹəsts. ə fjuɾəl ɛfɝt, ɹɪli. ðə hɔɹsəz kəd bi pæstʃɝd wɛɹɛvɝ ðəɹ wɑz ɡɹæs, bʌt ðeɪ ɹikwaɪɝɾ ət list səm ɡɹeɪn, ən ivən ə smɔl ɑɹmi hæd tə baɪ fud, ən ə lɑɾ ʌv ɪt. ɛvɹi mæn niɾəd fɔɹ paʊnz ə deɪ, ɪn flaʊɝ ən binz ən mit. ɹumɝz mʌst əv bɪn floʊɾɪŋ ɔl oʊvɝ ɡildən, ðoʊ wɪð lʌk, noʊ wʌn səspɛktəɾ u ðeɪ wɝ. pɛɹɪn ɡɹɪməst. pɝhæps ðeɪ hæd nɑt, əntɪl i wɛn ən oʊpən ɪz maʊθ. stɪl, hi wʊɾə dʌn nʌθɪŋ dɪfɹənli.

He truly had been trying to avoid notice as much as possible, traveling by back roads and the smallest country paths when they could not keep to the forests. A futile effort, really. The horses could be pastured wherever there was grass, but they required at least some grain, and even a small army had to buy food, and a lot of it. Every man needed four pounds a day, in flour and beans and meat. Rumors must have been floating all over Ghealdan, though with luck, no one suspected who they were. Perrin grimaced. Perhaps they had not, until he went and opened his mouth. Still, he would have done nothing differently.

ɪt wɑz θɹi kæmps ɹɪli, kloʊs tə wʌn ənʌðɝ ən nʌn fɑɹ fɹəm ðə stʃɹim. ðeɪ tʃɹævəl təɡɛðɝ, ɔl fɑloʊɪŋ hɪm, oʊbeɪɪŋ ɪm səpoʊzədli, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ tu mɛni pɝsənælɪɾiz ɪnvɑlvd, ən noʊ wʌn wɑz ɪntaɪɝli ʃʊɹ ði ʌðɝz eɪmd ət ðə seɪm ɡoʊl. səm naɪn hʌnʒɹəd əɹ soʊ wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz hæd ðɛɹ kʊk faɪɝz kɹaʊɾəd bɪtwin ɹoʊz ə pɪkəɾɪd hɔɹsəz ɪn ə bɹɔd mɛdoʊ ʌv tʃɹæmpəl bɹaʊn ɡɹæs. hi tʃɹaɪd tə kloʊz ɪz noʊz tə ðə mɪŋɡəl smɛlz ə hɔɹsəz, swɛt, dʌŋ ən bɔɪlɪŋ ɡoʊt mit, ən ənplɛzən kɑmbəneɪʃən ɑn ə hɑt deɪ. ə dʌzən maʊntəd sɛntʃɹiz ɹoʊɾ ə sloʊ sɝkəɾ ɪn pɛɹz, ðɛɹ lɔŋ, ɹɛd-stʃɹimɝd lænsɪz ɔl ət pɹɪsaɪsli ðə seɪm æŋɡəl, bʌt ðə ɹɛst ə ðə minɝz hæd ʃɛd bɹɛstpleɪts ən hɛlməts. koʊtləs ən ɔfən ʃɝtləs ɪn ðə sʌn, ðeɪ leɪ spɹɔld ɑn ðɛɹ blæŋkəts əɹ daɪst əz ðeɪ weɪɾəd ɑn ðə fud. səm lʊkt ʌp əz pɛɹɪn pæst, ə nʌmbɝ stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ tə stʌɾi ði ədɪʃənz tə hɪz pɑɹɾi, bʌt nʌn keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ, soʊ ðə pətʃɹoʊlz wɝ stɪl aʊt. smɔl pətʃɹoʊlz, wɪθaʊt lænsɪz, hu kəd si wɪθaʊt biɪŋ sin. wɛl, ðət wɑz ðə hoʊp. ɪt hæd bɪn.

It was three camps really, close to one another and none far from the stream. They traveled together, all following him, obeying him supposedly, but there were too many personalities involved, and no one was entirely sure the others aimed at the same goal. Some nine hundred or so Winged Guards had their cook fires crowded between rows of picketed horses in a broad meadow of trampled brown grass. He tried to close his nose to the mingled smells of horses, sweat, dung and boiling goat meat, an unpleasant combination on a hot day. A dozen mounted sentries rode a slow circuit in pairs, their long, red-streamered lances all at precisely the same angle, but the rest of the Mayeners had shed breastplates and helmets. Coatless and often shirtless in the sun, they lay sprawled on their blankets or diced as they waited on the food. Some looked up as Perrin passed, a number straightened from what they were doing to study the additions to his party, but none came running, so the patrols were still out. Small patrols, without lances, who could see without being seen. Well, that was the hope. It had been.

ə hændfʊl ʌv ɡeɪʃeɪn muvd ət vɛɹiəs tʃɔɹz əmʌŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz' loʊ ɡɹeɪ-bɹaʊn tɛns ɑn ðə spɑɹsli wʊɾɪd kɹɛst ə ðə hɪl əbʌv ðə minɝz. ət ðɪs dɪstəns, ðə waɪt-ɹoʊb fɪɡjɝz əpɪɹd hɑɹmləs, aɪz daʊnkæst ən mik. ʌp kloʊs, ðeɪ wəd lʊk ðə seɪm, bʌt moʊst wɝ ʃeɪɾoʊ. ðə waɪz wʌnz kleɪmd ɡeɪʃeɪn wɝ ɡeɪʃeɪn; pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt tʃɹʌst ɛni ʃeɪɾoʊ aʊɾ ə hɪz saɪt. ɔf tə wʌn saɪɾ ɑn ðə sloʊp, bɪniθ ə bɪdʒɹæɡəl saʊɝɡəm, pɝhæps ə dʌzən meɪɾənz ɪn keɪɾɪnsɝ nɛlt ɪn ə sɝkəl ɝaʊn səlɪn, ðə tʌfəst ə ðɛm dɪspaɪɾ əɹ waɪt hɛɹ. ʃi hæd sɛn aʊt skaʊts, tu, wɪmən u kəd muv əz fæst əfʊɾ əz ðə minɝz ɑn ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ən wɝ mʌtʃ mɔɹ laɪkli tə ɪskeɪp ənwɔntɪɾ ətɛnʃən. nʌn ə ðə waɪz wʌnz ʌp ðəɹ wɝ ɪn ði oʊpən, bʌɾ ə slɛndɝ wʊmən stɝɪŋ ə lɑɹdʒ stu kɛɾəl stʃɹeɪɾənd, nʌklɪŋ əɹ bæk əz ʃi wɑtʃt pɛɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz pæs. ə wʊmən ɪn ə ɡɹin sɪlk ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs.

A handful of gai'shain moved at various chores among the Wise Ones' low gray-brown tents on the sparsely wooded crest of the hill above the Mayeners. At this distance, the white-robed figures appeared harmless, eyes downcast and meek. Up close, they would look the same, but most were Shaido. The Wise Ones claimed gai'shain were gai'shain; Perrin did not trust any Shaido out of his sight. Off to one side on the slope, beneath a bedraggled sourgum, perhaps a dozen Maidens in cadin'sor knelt in a circle around Sulin, the toughest of them despite her white hair. She had sent out scouts, too, women who could move as fast afoot as the Mayeners on their horses and were much more likely to escape unwanted attention. None of the Wise Ones up there were in the open, but a slender woman stirring a large stew kettle straightened, knuckling her back as she watched Perrin and the others pass. A woman in a green silk riding dress.

hi kəd si ðə ɡlɛɹ ɑn mɑsʊɝiz feɪs. ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd nɑt stɝ kɛɾəlz, nɔɹ pɝfɔɹm twɛnti ʌðɝ tæsks ðə waɪz wʌnz hæɾ əɹ ən siɑnɪd duɪŋ. mɑsʊɝi leɪɾ ɪɾ ət ɹændz fit, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt hɪɹ, ən pɛɹɪn wɑz. ɡɪvən hæf ə tʃæns, ʃi wəd pil ɪz haɪd fəɹ hɪm.

He could see the glare on Masuri's face. Aes Sedai did not stir kettles, nor perform twenty other tasks the Wise Ones had her and Seonid doing. Masuri laid it at Rand's feet, but he was not here, and Perrin was. Given half a chance, she would peel his hide for him.

ɛdʒɹə ən nəvɛɝɪn tɝn ʌp ðət weɪ, ivən ɪn ðoʊz bʌlki skɝts bɛɹli dɪstɝbɪŋ ðə leɪɝz ə dɛd livz ðət kɑɹpəɾɪd ðə ɡɹaʊnd. siɑnɪd fɑloʊd, hɝ tʃiks stɪl bʌlʒɪŋ ɝaʊn ðət skɑɹf. ʃi twɪstəɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl, piɹɪŋ bæk ət pɛɹɪn. ɪf i cʊɾə bɪlivd ən ɛɛs sədaɪ lʊkɪŋ æŋkʃəs, ðət wɑz wʌɾ i wʊɾə kɔl hɝ. ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ, fʊɹən ən tɛɹəl wɔɹ skaʊlz.

Edarra and Nevarin turned up that way, even in those bulky skirts barely disturbing the layers of dead leaves that carpeted the ground. Seonid followed, her cheeks still bulging around that scarf. She twisted in her saddle, peering back at Perrin. If he could have believed an Aes Sedai looking anxious, that was what he would have called her. Riding behind her, Furen and Teryl wore scowls.

mɑsʊɝi sɔ ðɛm kʌmɪŋ ən heɪstəli bɛn bæk tə ðə blæk kɛɾəl, stɝɪŋ wɪð ɹɪnud vɪɡɝ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk aʊt ðət ʃi hæd nɛvɝ stɑpt. soʊ lɔŋ əz mɑsʊɝi steɪɾ ɪn ðə waɪz wʌnz' tʃɑɹdʒ, pɛɹɪn θɔɾ i dɪd nɑɾ əv tə wɝi əbaʊɾ ɪz haɪd. ðə waɪz wʌnz sim tə kip ə vɛɹi ʃɔɹt liʃ.

Masuri saw them coming and hastily bent back to the black kettle, stirring with renewed vigor, trying to make out that she had never stopped. So long as Masuri stayed in the Wise Ones' charge, Perrin thought he did not have to worry about his hide. The Wise Ones seemed to keep a very short leash.

nəvɛɝɪn lʊk bæk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ət hɪm, ənʌðɝ ə ðoʊz dɑɹk stɛɹz i hæd bɪn ɡɛɾɪŋ fɹəm əɹ ən ɛdʒɹə sɪns sɛndɪŋ ɪz wɔɹnɪŋ, hɪz θɹɛt, baɪ ðə stʌbəl-tʃik fɛloʊ. pɛɹɪn ɛksheɪld ɪn ɛksæspɝeɪʃən. hi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə wɝi əbaʊɾ ɪz pɛlt ənlɛs ðə waɪz wʌnz dɪsaɪɾɪd ðeɪ wɑntəɾ ɪt. tu mɛni pɝsənælɪɾiz. tu mɛni ɡoʊlz.

Nevarin looked back over her shoulder at him, another of those dark stares he had been getting from her and Edarra since sending his warning, his threat, by the stubble-cheeked fellow. Perrin exhaled in exasperation. He did not have to worry about his pelt unless the Wise Ones decided they wanted it. Too many personalities. Too many goals.

meɪaɪɡdɪn ɹoʊɾ ət feɪlz saɪd, simɪŋli peɪɪŋ noʊ ətɛnʃən tə wʌt ðeɪ pæst, bʌɾ i wəd nɑɾ əv weɪdʒɝɾ ə splɪt kɑpɝ ɑn ɪt. hɝ aɪz hæd waɪɾənd ə hɛɹ ət saɪɾ ə ðə minɝ sɛntʃɹiz. ʃi nu wʌt ɹɛd bɹɛstpleɪts ən hɛlməts laɪk ɹɪm pɑts mɛnt, əz ʃʊɹli əz ʃi hæd ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ən ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪs. moʊs pipəl wəd nɑɾ əv noʊn iðɝ, ɪspɛʃli nɑt foʊk dʒɹɛst əz ʃi wɑz. ʃi wɑz ə mɪstɝi, ðɪs meɪaɪɡdɪn. fəɹ səm ɹizən, ʃi sim veɪɡli fəmɪljɝ.

Maighdin rode at Faile's side, seemingly paying no attention to what they passed, but he would not have wagered a split copper on it. Her eyes had widened a hair at sight of the Mayener sentries. She knew what red breastplates and helmets like rimmed pots meant, as surely as she had recognized an Aes Sedai face. Most people would not have known either, especially not folk dressed as she was. She was a mystery, this Maighdin. For some reason, she seemed vaguely familiar.

lini ən tɑlænvɝ - ðət wɑz wʌɾ i hæd hɝd meɪaɪɡdɪn kɔl ðə fɛloʊ hu hæd ɹɪɾən æftɝ hɝ; "jʌŋ" tɑlænvɝ, ðoʊ ðəɹ kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn mɔɹ ðən fɔɹ əɹ faɪv jɪɹz bɪtwin əm ɪf ðət - steɪɾ əz kloʊs bɪhaɪn meɪaɪɡdɪn əz pɑsəbəl, wɪð ɛɹæm ɪn ðə weɪ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hil pɛɹɪn. soʊ dɪɾ ə lɪɾəl stɪk ʌv ə fɛloʊ wɪð ə pɝs maʊθ, kɔl beɪlwɝ, hu sim tə peɪ lɛs hid tə ðɛɹ sɝaʊndɪŋz ðən meɪaɪɡdɪn pɹitɛndəd. ivən soʊ, pɛɹɪn θɔt beɪlwɝ sɔ mɔɹ ðən ʃi dɪd. hi kəd nɑt seɪ waɪ, pɹɪsaɪsli, bʌt ðə fju taɪmz i hæd kɑt ðə boʊni lɪɾəl mænz sɛnt, hi hæd bɪn maɪndəɾ ʌv ə wʊlf tɛstɪŋ ði ɛɹ. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ fɪɹ ɪn beɪlwɝ, oʊnli kwɪkli səpɹɛst ɹɪdʒəz ʌv ɪɹɪteɪʃən ʃɑt θɹu wɪð ðə kwɪvɝi smɛl ʌv ɪmpeɪʃəns. ðə ɹɪmeɪndɝ ə meɪaɪɡdɪnz kəmpænjənz tʃɹeɪld əlɔŋ wɛl bæk. ðə θɝd wʊmən, bɹin, wɑz wɪspɝɪŋ fɪɹsli tə ə hʌlkɪŋ fɛloʊ hu kɛpt ɪz aɪz daʊn ən səmtaɪmz nɑɾəd saɪlənli, səmtaɪmz ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. ə ʃoʊldɝstʃɹaɪkɝ ən stʃɹit tʌf ɪf ɛvɝ ðəɹ wɑz wʌn, bʌt ðə ʃɔɹt wʊmən hæɾ ən ɛdʒ ə tʌfnəs əbaʊt hɝ, tu. ðə læs mæn ʃɛltɝd bɪhaɪn ðoʊz tu, ə staʊt mæn wɪð ə bæɾɝd stʃɹɔ hæt pʊld loʊ tə haɪɾ ɪz feɪs. ɑn hɪm, ðə sɔɹd ðə mɛn ɔl wɔɹ lʊkt əz stʃɹeɪnʒ əz ɪt dɪɾ ɑn beɪlwɝ.

Lini and Tallanvor - that was what he had heard Maighdin call the fellow who had ridden after her; "young" Tallanvor, though there could not have been more than four or five years between them if that - stayed as close behind Maighdin as possible, with Aram in the way trying to heel Perrin. So did a little stick of a fellow with a pursed mouth, called Balwer, who seemed to pay less heed to their surroundings than Maighdin pretended. Even so, Perrin thought Balwer saw more than she did. He could not say why, precisely, but the few times he had caught the bony little man's scent, he had been minded of a wolf testing the air. Strangely, there was no fear in Balwer, only quickly suppressed ridges of irritation shot through with the quivery smell of impatience. The remainder of Maighdin's companions trailed along well back. The third woman, Breane, was whispering fiercely to a hulking fellow who kept his eyes down and sometimes nodded silently, sometimes shook his head. A shoulderstriker and street tough if ever there was one, but the short woman had an edge of toughness about her, too. The last man sheltered behind those two, a stout man with a battered straw hat pulled low to hide his face. On him, the sword the men all wore looked as strange as it did on Balwer.

ðə θɝd pɑɹɾ ə ðə kæmp, spɹɛɾ aʊɾ əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz dʒʌst ɝaʊn ðə kɝv ə ðə hɪl fɹəm ðə minɝz, kʌvɝɾ əz mʌtʃ ɡɹaʊn əz ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz' ðoʊ ɪt hɛl fɑɹ fjuɝ pipəl. hɪɹ, ðə hɔɹsəz wɝ pɪkəɾɪd wɛl əweɪ fɹəm ðə kʊk faɪɝz, soʊ ði ənblɛmɪʃt smɛl ə dɪnɝ fɪl ði ɛɹ. ɹoʊstɪŋ ɡoʊt, ðɪs taɪm, ən hɑɹd tɝnəps ðə fɑɹmɝz pɹɑbli hæɾ ɪntɛndəd tə fid tə ðɛɹ pɪɡz ivən wɪð taɪmz əz hɑɹɾ əz ðeɪ wɝ. kloʊs ɑn tə θɹi hʌnʒɹəd tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn u hæd fɑloʊd pɛɹɪn əweɪ fɹəm hoʊm wɝ tɛndɪŋ miɾ ɑn spɪts, mɛndɪŋ kloʊðz, tʃɛkɪŋ oʊvɝ æɹoʊz ən baʊz, ɔl skæɾɝd ɪn hæphæzɝd klʌmps ə faɪv əɹ sɪks fɹɛnz ɝaʊn ə faɪɝ. nɪɹli ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm weɪvd ən ʃaʊɾəd ɡɹiɾɪŋz, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz tu mʌtʃ ʌv "lɔɹd pɛɹɪn" ən "pɛɹɪn ɡoʊldeɪniz" tə sut hɪm. feɪl hæɾ ə ɹaɪt tə ðə taɪɾəlz ðeɪ ɡeɪv hɝ.

The third part of the camp, spread out among the trees just around the curve of the hill from the Mayeners, covered as much ground as the Winged Guards' though it held far fewer people. Here, the horses were picketed well away from the cook fires, so the unblemished smell of dinner filled the air. Roasting goat, this time, and hard turnips the farmers probably had intended to feed to their pigs even with times as hard as they were. Close on to three hundred Two Rivers men who had followed Perrin away from home were tending meat on spits, mending clothes, checking over arrows and bows, all scattered in haphazard clumps of five or six friends around a fire. Nearly every one of them waved and shouted greetings, though there was too much of "Lord Perrin" and "Perrin Goldeneyes" to suit him. Faile had a right to the titles they gave her.

ɡɹeɪɾi ən nild, ənswiɾɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ naɪt-blæk koʊts, dɪd nɑt tʃɪɹ; stændɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə kʊk faɪɝ ðeɪ hæd bɪlt ə lɪɾəl əweɪ fɹəm ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls, ðeɪ mɪɹli lʊkt ət hɪm. ɪkspɛktən lʊks, hi θɔt. ɪkspɛktɪŋ wʌt? ðət wɑz ðə kwɛstʃən i ɔlweɪz æsk hɪmsɛlf əbaʊt ðɛm. ði æʃəmən meɪɾ ɪm ənizi, mɔɹ ðən ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ waɪz wʌnz. wɪmən tʃænəlɪŋ ðə paʊɝ wɑz nætʃɹəl, ɪf nɑɾ ɪɡzækli ɛniθɪŋ ə mæn kəd bi kʌmftəɹbəl ɝaʊnd. pleɪn-feɪst ɡɹeɪɾi əpɪɹɾ ə fɑɹmɝ dɪspaɪɾ ɪz koʊɾ ən sɔɹd, ən nild ə poʊpənʒ wɪð ɪz kɝl mʌstæʃɪz, jɛt pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt fɝɡɛt wʌt ðeɪ wɝ, wʌt ðeɪ hæd dʌn ət dəməaɪz wɛlz. bʌt ðɛn, hi hæd bɪn ðɛɹ, tu. ðə laɪt hɛlp hɪm, hi hæd. pʊlɪŋ ɪz hæn fɹəm ði æks əɾ ɪz bɛlt, hi dɪsmaʊntɪd.

Grady and Neald, unsweating in their night-black coats, did not cheer; standing beside the cook fire they had built a little away from everyone else, they merely looked at him. Expectant looks, he thought. Expecting what? That was the question he always asked himself about them. The Asha'man made him uneasy, more than Aes Sedai or Wise Ones. Women channeling the Power was natural, if not exactly anything a man could be comfortable around. Plain-faced Grady appeared a farmer despite his coat and sword, and Neald a popinjay with his curled mustaches, yet Perrin could not forget what they were, what they had done at Dumai's Wells. But then, he had been there, too. The Light help him, he had. Pulling his hand from the axe at his belt, he dismounted.

sɝvəns, mɛn ən wɪmən fɹəm lɔɹd dɑbɹeɪnz ɪsteɪts ɪn kɛɹhin, keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm ðə laɪnz wɛɹ ðə hɔɹsəz wɝ pɪkəɾɪd, tə teɪk ðɛɹ maʊns. nʌn stʊd tɔlɝ ðən pɛɹɪnz ʃoʊldɝ, kʌntʃɹi-klæd foʊk, fɝɛvɝ boʊɪŋ ən kɝtsiɪŋ əbsɪkwiəsli. feɪl sɛɾ i dʒʌst ʌpsɛɾ əm wən i tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk əm stɑp, əɹ ət lis nɑt tə bɑb ɝaʊn ɪm soʊ ɔfən; ɪn tʃɹuθ, ðət wɑz haʊ ðeɪ smɛld wən i dɪd, ən ðeɪ ɔlweɪz wɛn bæk tə bɑbɪŋ ɪn ən aʊɝ əɹ tu. ʌðɝz, nɪɹli əz mɛni əz ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn, wɝ wɝkɪŋ wɪð ðə hɔɹsəz əɹ ɝaʊn ðə lɔŋ ɹoʊz ə haɪ-wil kɑɹts ðət hɔld ɔl ðɛɹ səplaɪz. ə fju wɝ dɑɹɾɪŋ ɪn ən aʊɾ ʌv ə lɑɹdʒ ɹɛd-ænd-waɪt tɛnt.

Servants, men and women from Lord Dobraine's estates in Cairhien, came running from the lines where the horses were picketed, to take their mounts. None stood taller than Perrin's shoulder, country-clad folk, forever bowing and curtsying obsequiously. Faile said he just upset them when he tried to make them stop, or at least not to bob around him so often; in truth, that was how they smelled when he did, and they always went back to bobbing in an hour or two. Others, nearly as many as the Two Rivers men, were working with the horses or around the long rows of high-wheeled carts that hauled all their supplies. A few were darting in and out of a large red-and-white tent.

əz juʒəwəl, ðət tɛn meɪd pɛɹɪn ɡɹʌnt ɡluməli. bɹəleɪn hæɾ ə lɑɹdʒɝ wʌn bæk ɪn ðə minɝ pɑɹɾ ə ðə kæmp, plʌs wʌn fəɹ əɹ tu meɪdz ən ənʌðɝ fəɹ ðə pɛɹ ə θif-kætʃɝz ʃi hæɾ ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn bɹɪŋɪŋ. ənʊɹə hæɾ ə tɛn ə hɝ oʊn, ən ɡælɛn əz wɛl, bʌɾ oʊnli hi ən feɪl pəzɛst wʌn hɪɹ. fəɹ hɪmsɛlf, hi wʊɾə slɛpt ʌndɝ ðə skaɪ laɪk ði ʌðɝ mɛn fɹəm hoʊm. ðeɪ hæd nʌθɪŋ oʊvɝ əm ət naɪt bʌɾ ə blæŋkət. ðəɹ wɑz sɝɾənli noʊ fɪɹ ə ɹeɪn. ðə kɛɹhinɪn sɝvəns bɛɾəd daʊn bɪniθ ðə kɑɹts. hi kəd nɑɾ æsk feɪl tə də ðæt, ðoʊ, nɑt wən bɹəleɪn hæɾ ə tɛnt. ɪf oʊnli hi cʊɾə lɛf bɹəleɪn ɪn kɛɹhin. bʌt ðən i wʊɾə hæd tə sɛn feɪl ɪndə bɛθɔl.

As usual, that tent made Perrin grunt gloomily. Berelain had a larger one back in the Mayener part of the camp, plus one for her two maids and another for the pair of thief-catchers she had insisted on bringing. Annoura had a tent of her own, and Gallenne as well, but only he and Faile possessed one here. For himself, he would have slept under the sky like the other men from home. They had nothing over them at night but a blanket. There was certainly no fear of rain. The Cairhienin servants bedded down beneath the carts. He could not ask Faile to do that, though, not when Berelain had a tent. If only he could have left Berelain in Cairhien. But then he would have had to send Faile into Bethal.

ə pɛɹ ə bænɝz ɑn tɔl, fɹɛʃ-kʌt poʊlz ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə klɪɹ speɪs nɪɹ ðə tɛn saʊɝɾ ɪz mud fɝðɝ. ðə bɹiz hæd pɪkt ʌp ə tʃɹaɪfəl, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz stɪl tu wɔɹm; hi θɔɾ i hɝd ðət θʌndɝ əɡɛn, feɪn ɪn ðə wɛst. ðə flæɡz ənfoʊldəɾ ɪn sloʊ weɪvz, kəlæpst ə ðɛɹ oʊn weɪt, ɹɪpəld oʊpən əɡɛn. hɪz kɹɪmzən-bɔɹɾɝd ɹɛd wʊlfhɛɾ ən ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl ə lɔŋ-dɛd meɪnɛðɝən, aʊɾ ɪn ði oʊpən əɡɛn dɪspaɪɾ ɪz ɔɹɾɝz. pɝhæps i hæd stɑp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə haɪd, æftɝ ə fæʃən, bʌt wʌt wɑz naʊ ɡildən hæd bɪn pɑɹɾ ə meɪnɛðɝən; æliændɝ wəd nɑt bi suð baɪ hɪɹɪŋ ə ðət bænɝ! hi mænədʒd ə plɛzən feɪs ən ə smaɪl fəɹ ðə stɑki lɪɾəl wʊmən u kɝtsid dipli ən tʊk stɛpɝ əweɪ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə nɪɹ θɪŋ. lɔɹdz wɝ səpoʊz tə bi oʊbeɪd, ən ɪf i wɑz səpoʊz tə bi ə lɔɹd, wɛl, hi sim tə bi meɪkɪŋ ə pʊɹ dʒɑb ʌv ɪt.

A pair of banners on tall, fresh-cut poles in the middle of a clear space near the tent soured his mood further. The breeze had picked up a trifle, though it was still too warm; he thought he heard that thunder again, faint in the west. The flags unfolded in slow waves, collapsed of their own weight, rippled open again. His crimson-bordered Red Wolfhead and the Red Eagle of long-dead Manetheren, out in the open again despite his orders. Perhaps he had stopped trying to hide, after a fashion, but what was now Ghealdan had been part of Manetheren; Alliandre would not be soothed by hearing of that banner! He managed a pleasant face and a smile for the stocky little woman who curtsied deeply and took Stepper away, but it was a near thing. Lords were supposed to be obeyed, and if he was supposed to be a lord, well, he seemed to be making a poor job of it.

fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps, meɪaɪɡdɪn stʊd stʌɾiɪŋ ðoʊz ɹɪpəlɪŋ flæɡz əz əɹ hɔɹs wɑz teɪkən ɔf wɪð ðə ɹɛst. sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, bɹin hæd boʊθ ðɛɹ bʌndəlz, hɛld ɔkwɝdli; ʃi wɔɹ ə pɛtʃələn skaʊl, dɝɛktəɾ ət ði ʌðɝ wʊmən. "aɪ hæv hɝɾ əbaʊt bænɝz laɪk ðoʊz," meɪaɪɡdɪn sɛd sʌɾənli. ən æŋɡɹəli; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ æŋɡɝ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs, ən əɹ feɪs wɑz smuð əz aɪs, bʌɾ əɹ fjʊɹi fɪl pɛɹɪnz noʊz. "ðeɪ wɝ ɹeɪz baɪ mɛn ɪn ændɝ, ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, hu ɹɪbɛld əɡɛns ðɛɹ lɔfəl ɹulɝ. eɪbɑɹə ɪz ə tu ɹɪvɝz neɪm, aɪ θɪŋk."

Fists on her hips, Maighdin stood studying those rippling flags as her horse was taken off with the rest. Surprisingly, Breane had both their bundles, held awkwardly; she wore a petulant scowl, directed at the other woman. "I have heard about banners like those," Maighdin said suddenly. And angrily; there was no anger in her voice, and her face was smooth as ice, but her fury filled Perrin's nose. "They were raised by men in Andor, in the Two Rivers, who rebelled against their lawful ruler. Aybara is a Two Rivers name, I think."

"wi doʊnt noʊ mʌtʃ əbaʊt lɔfəl ɹulɝz ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, mɪstʃɹəs meɪaɪɡdɪn," hi ɡɹaʊld. hi wɑz gɑnə skɪn huɛvɝ hæd pʊɾ əm ʌp ðɪs taɪm. ɪf stɔɹiz əbaʊt ɹɪbɛljən hæd spɹɛd ðɪs fɑɹ. . . . hi feɪs tu mɛni kɑmpləkeɪʃənz ɔlɹɛɾi wɪθaʊɾ æɾɪŋ mɔɹ. "aɪ səpoʊz mɔɹɡeɪs wɑz ə ɡʊd kwin, bʌt wi hæd tə fɛn fəɹ aʊɝsɛlvz, ən wi dɪd." əbɹʌpli hi nu hu ʃi ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm ʌv. ɪleɪn. nɑt ðəɾ ɪt mɛn ɛniθɪŋ; hi hæd sin mɛn ə θaʊzən maɪlz fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz u cʊɾə bɪlɔŋ tə fæmliz i nu bæk hoʊm. stɪl, ʃi hæd tə hæv səm ɹizən fəɹ æŋɡɝ. hɝ æksɛn kəd bi ændɔɝən. "θɪŋz ɑɹən əz bæɾ ɪn ændɝ əz jə maɪɾ əv hɝd," hi toʊl hɝ. "keɪɛmlɪn wɑz kwaɪət, læst aɪ wɑz ðɛɹ, ən ɹænd - ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn - minz tə pʊt mɔɹɡeɪsəz dɔɾɝ ɪleɪn ɑn ðə laɪən θɹoʊn."

"We don't know much about lawful rulers in the Two Rivers, Mistress Maighdin," he growled. He was going to skin whoever had put them up this time. If stories about rebellion had spread this far. . . . He faced too many complications already without adding more. "I suppose Morgase was a good queen, but we had to fend for ourselves, and we did." Abruptly he knew who she reminded him of. Elayne. Not that it meant anything; he had seen men a thousand miles from the Two Rivers who could have belonged to families he knew back home. Still, she had to have some reason for anger. Her accent could be Andoran. "Things aren't as bad in Andor as you might have heard," he told her. "Caemlyn was quiet, last I was there, and Rand - the Dragon Reborn - means to put Morgase's daughter Elayne on the Lion Throne."

fɑɹ fɹəm biɪŋ mɑləfaɪd, meɪaɪɡdɪn ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn hɪm, blu aɪz bleɪzɪŋ. "hi ɪntɛnz tə pʊɾ əɹ ɑn ðə θɹoʊn? noʊ mæn pʊts ə kwin ɑn ðə laɪən θɹoʊn! ɪleɪn wɪl kleɪm ðə θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ baɪ hɝ ɹaɪt!"

Far from being mollified, Maighdin rounded on him, blue eyes blazing. "He intends to put her on the throne? No man puts a queen on the Lion Throne! Elayne will claim the throne of Andor by her right!"

skɹætʃɪŋ ɪz hɛd, pɛɹɪn wɪʃt feɪl wəd stɑp wɑtʃɪŋ ðə wʊmən soʊ kɑmli ən seɪ sʌmθɪŋ. bʌɾ ɔl ʃi dɪd wɑz tʌk əɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɡlʌvz bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛlt. bɪfɔɹ i kəd θɪŋk ʌv wʌt tə seɪ, lini dɑɹɾɪd ɪn, sizɪŋ meɪaɪɡdɪnz ɑɹm ən ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ ə ʃeɪk fɪt tə ɹæɾəl əɹ tiθ.

Scratching his head, Perrin wished Faile would stop watching the woman so calmly and say something. But all she did was tuck her riding gloves behind her belt. Before he could think of what to say, Lini darted in, seizing Maighdin's arm and giving her a shake fit to rattle her teeth.

"ju əpɑlədʒaɪz!" ði oʊld wʊmən bɑɹkt. "ðɪs mæn seɪv jəɹ laɪf, meɪaɪɡdɪn, ən jə fɝɡɛt jɝsɛlf, ə sɪmpəl kʌntʃɹi wʊmən spikɪŋ soʊ tə ə lɔɹd! ɹɪmɛmbɝ u jə ɑɹ, ən doʊn lɛt jəɹ tʌŋ læn jə ɪn hɑɾɝ wɔɾɝ! ɪf ðɪs jʌŋ lɔɹd wɑz əɾ ɑdz wɪð mɔɹɡeɪs, wɛl, ɛvɹiwʌn noʊz ʃiz dɛd, ən ɪts nʌn ə jəɹ əfɛɹ ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt! naʊ əpɑlədʒaɪz bɪfɔɹ i ɡɹoʊz æŋɡɹi!"

"You apologize!" the old woman barked. "This man saved your life, Maighdin, and you forget yourself, a simple country woman speaking so to a lord! Remember who you are, and don't let your tongue land you in hotter water! If this young lord was at odds with Morgase, well, everyone knows she's dead, and it's none of your affair in any event! Now apologize before he grows angry!"

meɪaɪɡdɪn stɛɹɾ ət lini, hɝ maʊθ wɝkɪŋ, ivən mɔɹ stɑɹɾəld ðən pɛɹɪn. əɡɛn ʃi sɝpɹaɪz hɪm, ðoʊ. ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɪɹʌptɪŋ ət ðə waɪt-hɛɹd wʊmən, ʃi sloʊli dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp, ʃoʊldɝz skwɛɹd, ən lʊkt ɪm ɪn ði aɪ. "lini ɪz ɪntaɪɝli ɹaɪt. aɪ hæv noʊ ɹaɪt tə spik tə jə soʊ, lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹə. aɪ əpɑlədʒaɪz. hʌmbli. ən aɪ æsk jəɹ pɑɹɾən." hʌmbəl? hɝ dʒɔ wɑz stʌbɝn, hɝ toʊn pɹaʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən əɹ sɛn sɛd ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə tʃu ə hoʊl ɪn sʌmθɪŋ.

Maighdin stared at Lini, her mouth working, even more startled than Perrin. Again she surprised him, though. Instead of erupting at the white-haired woman, she slowly drew herself up, shoulders squared, and looked him in the eye. "Lini is entirely right. I have no right to speak to you so, Lord Aybara. I apologize. Humbly. And I ask your pardon." Humble? Her jaw was stubborn, her tone proud enough for an Aes Sedai, and her scent said she was ready to chew a hole in something.

"ju hæv ɪt," pɛɹɪn sɛd heɪstəli. wɪtʃ dɪd nɑt sim tə pleɪkeɪɾ əɹ wʌn bɪt. ʃi smaɪld, ən meɪbi ʃi ɪntɛndəd ɡɹæɾətud, bʌɾ i kəd hɪɹ əɹ tiθ ɡɹaɪndɪŋ. wɝ wɪmən ɔl kɹeɪzi?

"You have it," Perrin said hastily. Which did not seem to placate her one bit. She smiled, and maybe she intended gratitude, but he could hear her teeth grinding. Were women all crazy?

"ðeɪ ɑɹ hɑɾ ən dɝɾi, hʌzbənd," feɪl sɛd, pʊɾɪŋ ə hæn ɪn ət læst, "æn ðə læs fju aʊɝz əv bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ fəɹ ðɛm, aɪ noʊ. ɛɹæm kən ʃoʊ ðə mɛn wɛɹ tə klin ðɛmsɛlvz. əl teɪk ðə wɪmən wɪð mi. əl əv dæmp klɔθs bɹɔt tə wɑʃ jəɹ hænz ən feɪsəz," ʃi toʊl meɪaɪɡdɪn ən lini. ɡæðɝɪŋ ʌp bɹin wɪð ə dʒɛstʃɝ, ʃi bɪɡæn hɝɾɪŋ əm təwɔɹd ðə tɛnt. əɾ ə nɑd fɹəm pɛɹɪn, ɛɹæm moʊʃən ðə mɛn tə fɑloʊ hɪm.

"They are hot and dirty, husband," Faile said, putting a hand in at last, "and the last few hours have been trying for them, I know. Aram can show the men where to clean themselves. I will take the women with me. I'll have damp cloths brought to wash your hands and faces," she told Maighdin and Lini. Gathering up Breane with a gesture, she began herding them toward the tent. At a nod from Perrin, Aram motioned the men to follow him.

"æz sun əz jə fɪnɪʃ jəɹ wɑʃ, mæstɝ ɡɪl, aɪd laɪk tə tɔk wɪð ju," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"As soon as you finish your wash, Master Gill, I'd like to talk with you," Perrin said.

hi maɪɾ əz wɛl əv meɪd ðət spɪnɪŋ wil ə faɪɝ. meɪaɪɡdɪn wɪpt ɝaʊn tə ɡeɪp ət hɪm, ən ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən fɹoʊz ɪn ðɛɹ tʃɹæks. tɑlænvɝ wɑz sʌɾənli ɡɹɪpɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt əɡɛn, ən beɪlwɝ ɹoʊz ɑn ɪz toʊz, piɹɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz bʌndəl, hɛd tɪltɪŋ ðɪs weɪ ðən ðæt. nɑɾ ə wʊlf, pɝhæps; səm sɔɹɾ ə bɝd, wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ kæts. ðə staʊt mæn, bɑzəl ɡɪl, dʒɹɑpt ɪz bɪlɔŋɪŋz ən lɛpt ə fʊɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ.

He might as well have made that spinning wheel of fire. Maighdin whipped around to gape at him, and the other two women froze in their tracks. Tallanvor was suddenly gripping his sword hilt again, and Balwer rose on his toes, peering over his bundle, head tilting this way then that. Not a wolf, perhaps; some sort of bird, watching for cats. The stout man, Basel Gill, dropped his belongings and leaped a foot in the air.

"waɪ, pɛɹɪn," hi stæmɝd, snætʃɪŋ ɔf ðə stʃɹɔ hæt. swɛt meɪd tʃɹæks ɪn ðə dʌst ɑn ɪz tʃiks. hi bɛn tə pɪk ʌp ɪz bʌndəl, tʃeɪnʒd ɪz maɪn ən stʃɹeɪɾənd əɡɛn heɪstəli. "aɪ min, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn. aɪ . . . ɑ . . . aɪ θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ju, bʌt . . . bʌt wɪð əm kɔlɪŋ jə lɔɹd, aɪ wɑznt ʃʊɹ jud wɑnə noʊ ən oʊld ɪnkipɝ." skɹʌbɪŋ ə hæŋkɝtʃɪf əkɹɔs ɪz nɪɹli bɔl hɛd, hi læf nɝvəsli. "ʌv kɔɹs, əl tɔk tə ju. wɑʃɪŋ kən weɪɾ ə lɪɾəl lɔŋɡɝ."

"Why, Perrin," he stammered, snatching off the straw hat. Sweat made tracks in the dust on his cheeks. He bent to pick up his bundle, changed his mind and straightened again hastily. "I mean, Lord Perrin. I . . . ah . . . I thought it was you, but . . . but with them calling you lord, I wasn't sure you'd want to know an old innkeeper." Scrubbing a handkerchief across his nearly bald head, he laughed nervously. "Of course, I'll talk to you. Washing can wait a little longer."

"həloʊ, pɛɹɪn," ðə hʌlkɪŋ mæn sɛd. wɪð ɪz hɛvi-lɪɾɪd aɪz, læmɡwɪn dɔɹn əpɪɹd leɪzi dɪspaɪɾ ɪz mʌsəlz ən ðə skɑɹz ɑn ɪz feɪs ən hænz. "wi hɝɾ əbaʊt jʌŋ ɹænd biɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, mæstɝ ɡɪl ən mi. ʃʊɾə fɪɡjɝd juɾ əv kʌm ʌp ɪn ðə wɝld, tu. pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹəz ə ɡʊd mæn, mɪstʃɹəs meɪaɪɡdɪn. aɪ θɪŋk jə kəd tʃɹʌst ɪm wɪð ɛniθɪŋ juv ə maɪn tə." hi wɑz nɑt leɪzi, ən i wɑz nɑt stupəd, iðɝ.

"Hello, Perrin," the hulking man said. With his heavy-lidded eyes, Lamgwin Dorn appeared lazy despite his muscles and the scars on his face and hands. "We heard about young Rand being the Dragon Reborn, Master Gill and me. Should have figured you'd have come up in the world, too. Perrin Aybara's a good man, Mistress Maighdin. I think you could trust him with anything you've a mind to." He was not lazy, and he was not stupid, either.

ɛɹæm dʒɝkt ɪz hɛɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli, ən læmɡwɪn ən ði ʌðɝ tu fɑloʊd, bʌt tɑlænvɝ ən beɪlwɝ dʒɹæɡd ðɛɹ fit, kæstɪŋ wʌndɝɪŋ ɡlænsɪz bæk ət pɛɹɪn ən mæstɝ ɡɪl. kənsɝnd ɡlænsɪz. ən ət ðə wɪmən. feɪl hæɾ əm muvɪŋ əɡɛn, əz wɛl, ðoʊ wɪð plɛnti ʌv dɑɹɾɪd lʊks ət pɛɹɪn ən mæstɝ ɡɪl, ət ðə mɛn tʃɹeɪlɪŋ ɛɹæm. sʌɾənli ðeɪ wɝ nɑt soʊ plizd ət biɪŋ sɛpɝeɪɾəd.

Aram jerked his head impatiently, and Lamgwin and the other two followed, but Tallanvor and Balwer dragged their feet, casting wondering glances back at Perrin and Master Gill. Concerned glances. And at the women. Faile had them moving again, as well, though with plenty of darted looks at Perrin and Master Gill, at the men trailing Aram. Suddenly they were not so pleased at being separated.

mæstɝ ɡɪl mɑpt ɪz fɔɹhɛɾ ən smaɪld ənizəli. laɪt, waɪ dɪɾ i smɛl əfɹeɪd? pɛɹɪn wʌndɝd. ʌv hɪm? ʌv ə mæn taɪd tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, kɔlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf lɔɹɾ ən liɾɪŋ ən ɑɹmi, haʊɛvɝ smɔl, θɹɛɾənɪŋ ðə pɹɑfət. maɪɾ əz wɛl θɹoʊ ɡæɡɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪndə ɪt, tu; hi wəd teɪk ðə bleɪm fəɹ ðæt, wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ. noʊ, pɛɹɪn θɔt ɹaɪli; nʌθɪŋ ɪn ðət tə fɹaɪɾən ɛnibəɾi. ðə hoʊl lɑɾ ə ðɛm wɝ pɹɑbli əfɹeɪɾ i maɪt mɝɾɝ əm ɔl.

Master Gill mopped his forehead and smiled uneasily. Light, why did he smell afraid? Perrin wondered. Of him? Of a man tied to the Dragon Reborn, calling himself lord and leading an army, however small, threatening the Prophet. Might as well throw gagging Aes Sedai into it, too; he would take the blame for that, one way or another. No, Perrin thought wryly; nothing in that to frighten anybody. The whole lot of them were probably afraid he might murder them all.

tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊt mæstɝ ɡɪl əɾ iz, hi lɛd ðə mæn tə ə lɑɹdʒ oʊk ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz fɹəm ðə ɹɛd-ænd-waɪt tɛnt. moʊst ə ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹiz livz wɝ ɡɔn ən hæf ðoʊz lɛft wɝ bɹaʊn, bʌt mæsɪv lɪmz spɹɛɾɪŋ loʊ pɹəvaɪɾəd ə lɪɾəl ʃeɪd, ən səm ə ðə nɑɹld ɹuts stʊd haɪ ɪnʌf tə sɝv əz bɛntʃɪz. pɛɹɪn hæd juzd wʌn fəɹ dʒʌs ðæt, twɪɾəlɪŋ ɪz θʌmz waɪl kæmp wɑz biɪŋ sɛt. wɛnɛvɝ i tʃɹaɪd tə də ɛniθɪŋ jusfəl, ðəɹ wɝ ɔlweɪz tɛn hænz snætʃɪŋ ɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm hɪm.

Trying to put Master Gill at ease, he led the man to a large oak a hundred paces from the red-and-white tent. Most of the great tree's leaves were gone and half those left were brown, but massive limbs spreading low provided a little shade, and some of the gnarled roots stood high enough to serve as benches. Perrin had used one for just that, twiddling his thumbs while camp was being set. Whenever he tried to do anything useful, there were always ten hands snatching it away from him.

bɑzəl ɡɪl wɑz nɑɾ izd, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ pɛɹɪn æskt æftɝ ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ, hɪz ɪn ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, əɹ ɹɪkɔld ɪz oʊn vɪzət ðɛɹ. bʌt ðɛn, pɝhæps ɡɪl wɑz ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðət ðət vɪzət wɑz nɑt ðə θɪŋ tə kɑm ə mæn, wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ ən tɔk ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn ən ə flaɪɾ ɪn ðə naɪt. hi peɪst æŋkʃəsli ən hʌɡd ɪz bʌndəl tə hɪz tʃɛst, ʃɪftəɾ ɪt fɹəm wʌn ɑɹm tə ði ʌðɝ ən ænsɝɾ ɪn ə bɛɹ hændfʊl ʌv wɝdz, lɪkɪŋ ɪz lɪps bɪtwin.

Basel Gill was not eased, however much Perrin asked after the Queen's Blessing, his inn in Caemlyn, or recalled his own visit there. But then, perhaps Gill was remembering that that visit was not the thing to calm a man, with Aes Sedai and talk of the Dark One and a flight in the night. He paced anxiously and hugged his bundle to his chest, shifted it from one arm to the other and answered in a bare handful of words, licking his lips between.

"mæstɝ ɡɪl," pɛɹɪn toʊld ɪm faɪnəli, "stɑp kɔlɪŋ mi lɔɹd pɛɹɪn. aɪm nɑt. ɪts kɑmpləkeɪɾəd, bʌɾ aɪm nɑɾ ə lɔɹd. jə noʊ ðæt."

"Master Gill," Perrin told him finally, "stop calling me Lord Perrin. I'm not. It's complicated, but I'm not a lord. You know that."

"ʌv kɔɹs," ðə ɹaʊn mæn ɹɪplaɪd, ət læst siɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɑn wʌn ə ði oʊk ɹuts. hi əpɪɹd ɹɪlʌktən tə sɛɾ ɪz bʌndəl θɪŋz daʊn, dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪz hænz fɹəm əm sloʊli. "æz jə seɪ, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn. ɑ, ɹænd . . . ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən . . . hi ɹɪli minz ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪn tə hæv ðə θɹoʊn? nɑt ðəɾ aɪ daʊt jəɹ wɝd, ʌv kɔɹs," hi æɾəd hɝidli. pʊlɪŋ ɔf ɪz hæt, hi bɪɡæn mɑpɪŋ ɪz fɔɹhɛɾ əɡɛn. ivən fəɹ sətʃ ə ɹaʊn mæn, hi sim tə bi swɛɾɪŋ twaɪs əz mʌtʃ əz ðə hit kɔl fɔɹ. "aɪm ʃʊɹ ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən wɪl də dʒʌst əz jə seɪ." hɪz læf wɑz ʃeɪki. "ju wɑntəd tə tɔk tə mi. ən nɑɾ əbaʊt maɪ oʊld ɪn, aɪm ʃʊɹ."

"Of course," the round man replied, at last seating himself on one of the oak roots. He appeared reluctant to set his bundled things down, drawing his hands from them slowly. "As you say, Lord Perrin. Ah, Rand . . . the Lord Dragon . . . he really means the Lady Elayne to have the throne? Not that I doubt your word, of course," he added hurriedly. Pulling off his hat, he began mopping his forehead again. Even for such a round man, he seemed to be sweating twice as much as the heat called for. "I'm sure the Lord Dragon will do just as you say." His laugh was shaky. "You wanted to talk to me. And not about my old inn, I'm sure."

pɛɹɪn ɛksheɪld wɛɹəli. hi hæd θɔt nʌθɪŋ kəd bi wɝs ðən oʊl fɹɛnz ən neɪbɝz boʊɪŋ ən skɹeɪpɪŋ, bʌɾ ət lis ðeɪ fɝɡɑt səmtaɪmz ən spoʊk ðɛɹ maɪnz. ən nʌn ə ðɛm wɑz əfɹeɪɾ ə hɪm. "jɔɹ ə lɔŋ weɪ fɹəm hoʊm," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə dʒɛntəl vɔɪs. noʊ nid tə ɡoʊ tu fæst, nɑt wɪð ə mæn ɹɛɾi tə dʒʌmp aʊɾ ə hɪz skɪn. "aɪ wʌndɝd wʌt bɹɔt jə hɪɹ. nɑt tʃɹʌbəlz ʌv ɛni kaɪnd, aɪ hoʊp."

Perrin exhaled wearily. He had thought nothing could be worse than old friends and neighbors bowing and scraping, but at least they forgot sometimes and spoke their minds. And none of them was afraid of him. "You're a long way from home," he said in a gentle voice. No need to go too fast, not with a man ready to jump out of his skin. "I wondered what brought you here. Not troubles of any kind, I hope."

"ju tɛl ɪm ɹaɪt, bɑzəl ɡɪl," lini sɛd ʃɑɹpli, mɑɹtʃɪŋ ʌp tə ði oʊk. "noʊ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi, maɪnd." ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn ɡɔn vɛɹi lɔŋ, jɛt sʌmhaʊ ʃi hæd faʊn taɪm tə wɑʃ əɹ feɪs ən hænz ən wɝk əɹ hɛɹ ɪndə ə nit waɪt bʌn ɑn ðə bæk ə hɝ hɛd. ən tə bit moʊst ə ðə dʌs fɹəm əɹ pleɪn wʊlən dʒɹɛs. bɑbɪŋ ə pɝfʌŋktɝi kɝtsi ɪn pɛɹɪnz dɝɛkʃən, ʃi tɝn tə ʃeɪk ə nɑɹl fɪŋɡɝ ət ɡɪl. " 'θɹi θɪŋz ənɔɪ tə dɪstʃɹækʃən: ə tuθ ðəɾ eɪks, ə ʃu ðət pɪntʃɪz, ən ə mæn ðət tʃæɾɝz.' soʊ jə hoʊl tə ðə pɔɪn ən doʊnt ɡoʊ tɛlɪŋ ðə jʌŋ lɔɹd mɔɹ ðən i wɑns tə hɪɹ." fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi hɛl ðə ɡeɪpɪŋ ɪnkipɝ wɪð ən ædmənətɔɹi stɛɹ, ðən əbɹʌpli ɡeɪv pɛɹɪn ənʌðɝ kwɪk kɝtsi. "hi dʌz lʌv ðə saʊn ə hɪz oʊn vɔɪs - moʊs mɛn də - bʌt hɪl tɛl ɪt tə jə pɹɑpɝli, naʊ, maɪ lɔɹd."

"You tell him right, Basel Gill," Lini said sharply, marching up to the oak. "No embroidery, mind." She had not been gone very long, yet somehow she had found time to wash her face and hands and work her hair into a neat white bun on the back of her head. And to beat most of the dust from her plain woolen dress. Bobbing a perfunctory curtsy in Perrin's direction, she turned to shake a gnarled finger at Gill. " 'Three things annoy to distraction: a tooth that aches, a shoe that pinches, and a man that chatters.' So you hold to the point and don't go telling the young lord more than he wants to hear." For a moment she held the gaping innkeeper with an admonitory stare, then abruptly gave Perrin another quick curtsy. "He does love the sound of his own voice - most men do - but he'll tell it to you properly, now, my Lord."

mæstɝ ɡɪl ɡlaʊɝɾ ət hɝ, ən mʌɾɝd ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ wən ʃi weɪvd ʃɑɹpli fəɹ ɪm tə spik. "boʊni oʊld . . ." wɑz wʌt pɛɹɪn hɝd. "wʌt hæpənd - ðə sɪmpəl ən stʃɹeɪɾ ʌv ɪt - " ðə ɹaʊn mæn ɡlɛɹɾ ət lini əɡɛn, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə noʊɾəs, "wɑz ðəɾ aɪ hæd səm bɪznəs daʊn tə luɡɹd. ə tʃæns tə ɪmpɔɹt waɪn. bʌt jəɹ nɑɾ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ðæt. aɪ tʊk læmɡwɪn əlɔŋ, ʌv kɔɹs, ən bɹin, kəz ʃi woʊn lɛɾ ɪm aʊɾ ə hɝ saɪɾ ən aʊɝ ʃi dʌzn əv tə. əlɔŋ ðə weɪ, wi mɛt mɪstʃɹəs dɔɹleɪn, mɪstʃɹəs meɪaɪɡdɪn əz wi kɔl hɝ, ən lini, ən tɑlænvɝ. ən beɪlwɝ, ʌv kɔɹs. ɑn ðə ɹoʊd. nɪɹ tə luɡɹd."

Master Gill glowered at her, and muttered under his breath when she waved sharply for him to speak. "Bony old . . ." was what Perrin heard. "What happened - the simple and straight of it - " The round man glared at Lini again, but she did not appear to notice, "was that I had some business down to Lugard. A chance to import wine. But you're not interested in that. I took Lamgwin along, of course, and Breane, because she won't let him out of her sight an hour she doesn't have to. Along the way, we met Mistress Dorlain, Mistress Maighdin as we call her, and Lini, and Tallanvor. And Balwer, of course. On the road. Near to Lugard."

"meɪaɪɡdɪn ən aɪ wɝ ɪn sɝvəs ɪn mʊɹændi," lini pʊɾ ɪn ɪmpeɪʃənli. "əntɪl ðə tʃɹʌbəlz. tɑlænvɝ wɑz ən ɑɹmsmən tə ðə haʊs, ən beɪlwɝ ðə sɛkɹətɛɹi. bændəts bɝn ðə mænɝ, ən əɹ leɪɾi kʊdn əfɔɹd tə kip ʌs, soʊ wi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə tʃɹævəl təɡɛðɝ fəɹ pɹətɛkʃən."

"Maighdin and I were in service in Murandy," Lini put in impatiently. "Until the troubles. Tallanvor was an armsman to the House, and Balwer the secretary. Bandits burned the manor, and our lady couldn't afford to keep us, so we decided to travel together for protection."

"aɪ wɑz tɛlɪŋ ɪt, lini," mæstɝ ɡɪl ɡɹʌmbəld, skɹætʃɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪz ɪɹ. "ðə waɪn mɝtʃən hæd lɛf luɡɹd fəɹ ðə kʌntʃɹi, fəɹ səm ɹizən, ən . . ." hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ɪts ɔl tu mʌtʃ tə ɡoʊ ɪntu, pɛɹɪn. lɔɹd pɛɹɪn, aɪ min. fɝɡɪv mi. jə noʊ ðɛɹz tʃɹʌbəl ɛvɹiwɛɹ naʊədeɪz, wʌn kaɪn əɹ ənʌðɝ. simz laɪk ɛvɹi taɪm wi ɹæn fɹəm wʌn kaɪnd, wi faʊn ənʌðɝ, ən ɔlweɪz ɡɛɾɪŋ fɑɹðɝ fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn. tɪl hɪɹ wi ɑɹ, taɪɝɾ ən ɡɹeɪtfəl fəɹ ə ɹɛst. ən ðæts ðə ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ɪt."

"I was telling it, Lini," Master Gill grumbled, scratching behind his ear. "The wine merchant had left Lugard for the country, for some reason, and . . ." He shook his head. "It's all too much to go into, Perrin. Lord Perrin, I mean. Forgive me. You know there's trouble everywhere nowadays, one kind or another. Seems like every time we ran from one kind, we found another, and always getting farther from Caemlyn. Till here we are, tired and grateful for a rest. And that's the short of it."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd sloʊli. ðət kəd bi sɪmpəl tʃɹuθ, ðoʊ hi hæd lɝn ðət pipəl hæɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd ɹizənz fəɹ laɪɪŋ, əɹ dʒʌst ʃeɪɾɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ. ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ, hi ɹeɪk fɪŋɡɝz θɹu hɪz hɛɹ. laɪt! hi wɑz bɪkʌmɪŋ səspɪʃəs əz ə kɛɹhinɪn, ən ðə dipɝ ɹænd tæŋɡəl hɪm, ðə wɝs ɪt ɡɑt. waɪ ɑn ɝθ wəd bɑzəl ɡɪl, ʌv ɔl pipəl, laɪ tə hɪm? ə leɪɾiz meɪd, əkʌstəm tə pɹɪvlədʒ ən fɔlən ɑn hɑɹd taɪmz; ðəɾ ɪkspleɪn meɪaɪɡdɪn. səm θɪŋz wɝ sɪmpəl.

Perrin nodded slowly. That could be simple truth, though he had learned that people had a hundred reasons for lying, or just shading the truth. Grimacing, he raked fingers through his hair. Light! He was becoming suspicious as a Cairhienin, and the deeper Rand tangled him, the worse it got. Why on earth would Basel Gill, of all people, lie to him? A lady's maid, accustomed to privilege and fallen on hard times; that explained Maighdin. Some things were simple.

liniz hænz wɝ foʊldəɾ əɾ əɹ weɪst, bʌt ʃi wɑtʃt wɪð ə kin aɪ, noʊ lɪɾəl laɪk ə fælkən hɝsɛlf, ən mæstɝ ɡɪl bɪɡæn fɪdʒəɾɪŋ əz sun əz i stɑp tɔkɪŋ. hi sim tə teɪk pɛɹɪnz ɡɹɪmɑs əz ə dɪmæn fəɹ mɔɹ. hi læft, mɔɹ ɑn ɛdʒ ðən əmjuzd. "aɪ hævən sin soʊ mʌtʃ ə ðə wɝl sɪns ði il wɔɹ, ən aɪ wɑz kənsɪɾɝəbli skɪniɝ, ðɛn. waɪ, wiv bɪn əz fɑɹ əz æmədɔɹ. ʌv kɔɹs, wi lɛft æftɝ ðoʊz sintʃæn tʊk ðə sɪɾi, bʌt tʃɹuθ, ðeɪ ɑɹən ɛni wɝs ðən ðə waɪtkloʊks, ðəɾ aɪ kəd - " hi kʌɾ ɔf əz pɛɹɪn lin fɔɹwɝɾ əbɹʌpli ən sizd ɪz ləpɛl.

Lini's hands were folded at her waist, but she watched with a keen eye, no little like a falcon herself, and Master Gill began fidgeting as soon as he stopped talking. He seemed to take Perrin's grimace as a demand for more. He laughed, more on edge than amused. "I haven't seen so much of the world since the Aiel War, and I was considerably skinnier, then. Why, we've been as far as Amador. Of course, we left after those Seanchan took the city, but truth, they aren't any worse than the Whitecloaks, that I could - " He cut off as Perrin leaned forward abruptly and seized his lapel.

"sintʃæn, mæstɝ ɡɪl? ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ ə ðæt? əɹ ɪz ɪt wʌn ə ðoʊz ɹumɝz, laɪk ði il, əɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

"Seanchan, Master Gill? Are you sure of that? Or is it one of those rumors, like the Aiel, or Aes Sedai?"

"aɪ sɔ ðɛm," ɡɪl ɹɪplaɪd, ɪkstʃeɪnʒɪŋ ənsɝɾən lʊks wɪð lini. "æn ðæts wʌt ðeɪ kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz. aɪm sɝpɹaɪz jə doʊnt noʊ. wɝdz bɪn ɹʌnɪŋ əhɛɾ ʌv əs ɔl ðə weɪ fɹəm æmədɔɹ. ðiz sintʃæn wɑn pipəl tə noʊ wʌt ðəɹ əbaʊt. stʃɹeɪnʒ pipəl, wɪð stʃɹeɪnʒ kɹitʃɝz." hɪz vɔɪs pɪkt ʌp ɪntɛnsəɾi. "laɪk ʃæɾoʊzpɔn. bɪɡ lɛðɝi θɪŋz ðət flaɪ, ən kæɹi mɛn, ən ðiz θɪŋz laɪk lɪzɝdz, oʊnli ðəɹ bɪɡ əz hɔɹsəz, ən ðeɪv θɹi aɪz. aɪ sɔ ðɛm! aɪ dɪd!"

"I saw them," Gill replied, exchanging uncertain looks with Lini. "And that's what they call themselves. I'm surprised you don't know. Word's been running ahead of us all the way from Amador. These Seanchan want people to know what they're about. Strange people, with strange creatures." His voice picked up intensity. "Like Shadowspawn. Big leathery things that fly, and carry men, and these things like lizards, only they're big as horses, and they have three eyes. I saw them! I did!"

"aɪ bɪliv ju," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ɹilisɪŋ ðə mænz koʊt. "aɪv sin ðɛm, tu." ət fɑlm, wɛɹ ə θaʊzənd waɪtkloʊks daɪɾ ɪn mɪnəts ən ɪt hæd teɪkən dɛd hɪɹoʊz ə lɛdʒənd, kɔl baɪ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, tə θɹoʊ ðə sintʃæn bæk. ɹænd hæd sɛd ðeɪ wəd ɹɪtɝn, bʌt haʊ kəd ðeɪv soʊ sun? laɪt! ɪf ðeɪ hɛld æmədɔɹ, ðeɪ hæd tə hæv tæɹɑbən əz wɛl, əɹ moʊst ʌv ɪt. oʊnli ə ful kɪld ə dɪɹ wən i nu ðəɹ wɑz ə wundəd bɛɹ bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk. haʊ mʌtʃ hæd ðeɪ teɪkən? "aɪ kæn sɛn jə tə keɪɛmlɪn ɹaɪɾ əweɪ, mæstɝ ɡɪl, bʌɾ ɪf jə steɪ wɪð mi ə waɪl lɔŋɡɝ, əl si jə ðəɹ seɪfli." ɪf steɪɪŋ wɪð ɪm ɛni lɛŋθ ə taɪm wɑz seɪf. ðə pɹɑfət, waɪtkloʊks, ən naʊ meɪbi sintʃæn æɾəd ɪn.

"I believe you," Perrin said, releasing the man's coat. "I've seen them, too." At Falme, where a thousand Whitecloaks died in minutes and it had taken dead heroes of legend, called by the Horn of Valere, to throw the Seanchan back. Rand had said they would return, but how could they have so soon? Light! If they held Amador, they had to have Tarabon as well, or most of it. Only a fool killed a deer when he knew there was a wounded bear behind his back. How much had they taken? "I can't send you to Caemlyn right away, Master Gill, but if you stay with me a while longer, I'll see you there safely." If staying with him any length of time was safe. The Prophet, Whitecloaks, and now maybe Seanchan added in.

"aɪ θɪŋk jəɹ ə ɡʊd mæn," lini sɛd sʌɾənli. "aɪm əfɹeɪd wi dɪdn tɛl jə ðə hoʊl tʃɹuθ, ən meɪbi wi ʃʊd."

"I think you're a good man," Lini said suddenly. "I'm afraid we didn't tell you the whole truth, and maybe we should."

"lini, wʌɾ ɑɹ jə seɪɪŋ?" mæstɝ ɡɪl ɪkskleɪmd, baʊndɪŋ tə hɪz fit. "aɪ θɪŋk ðə hits ɡɛɾɪŋ tə hɝ," hi toʊl pɛɹɪn. "æn ɔl ðə tʃɹævəl. ʃiz stʃɹeɪnʒ fænsiz, səmtaɪmz. jə noʊ haʊ oʊl foʊks kən ɡɛt. hʌʃ, naʊ, lini!"

"Lini, what are you saying?" Master Gill exclaimed, bounding to his feet. "I think the heat's getting to her," he told Perrin. "And all the travel. She has strange fancies, sometimes. You know how old folks can get. Hush, now, Lini!"

lini slæpt əweɪ ðə hæn i wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊɾ oʊvɝ əɹ maʊθ. "ju maɪn jɝsɛlf, bɑzəl ɡɪl! əl 'oʊld' ju! meɪaɪɡdɪn wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm tɑlænvɝ, ɪn ə mænɝ ə spikɪŋ, ən i wɑz tʃeɪsɪŋ hɝ. wi ɔl wɝ, fɔɹ deɪz naʊ, ən nɪɹ kɪlɪŋ əs ən ðə hɔɹsəz boʊθ. wɛl, ɪts noʊ wʌndɝ ʃi dʌznt noʊ hɝ oʊn maɪn hæf ðə taɪm; jə mɛn snɑɹl ʌp ə wʊmənz wɪts soʊ ʃi kən hɑɹdli θɪŋk, ðən jə pɹitɛn juv dʌn nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl. ðə lɑɾ ə jə ɔt tə hæv jəɹ ɪɹz bɑkst ɑn dʒɛnɝəl pɹɪnsəpəl. ðə ɡɝlz əfɹeɪɾ ə hɝ oʊn hɑɹt! ðoʊz tu ʃəd bi mɛɹid, ən ðə kwɪkɝ ðə bɛɾɝ."

Lini slapped away the hand he was trying to put over her mouth. "You mind yourself, Basel Gill! I'll 'old' you! Maighdin was running from Tallanvor, in a manner of speaking, and he was chasing her. We all were, four days now, and near killing us and the horses both. Well, it's no wonder she doesn't know her own mind half the time; you men snarl up a woman's wits so she can hardly think, then you pretend you've done nothing at all. The lot of you ought to have your ears boxed on general principle. The girl's afraid of her own heart! Those two should be married, and the quicker the better."

mæstɝ ɡɪl ɡeɪpt ət hɝ, ən pɛɹɪn wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪz oʊn maʊθ maɪt nɑt bi hæŋɪŋ oʊpən. "aɪm nɑt sɝɾən aɪ ʌndɝstænd wʌɾ ɪts jə wɑn ə mi," hi sɛd sloʊli, ən ðə waɪt-hɛɹd wʊmən lɛpt ɪn bɪfɔɹ i wɑz wɛl fɪnɪʃt.

Master Gill gaped at her, and Perrin was not sure his own mouth might not be hanging open. "I'm not certain I understand what it is you want of me," he said slowly, and the white-haired woman leaped in before he was well finished.

"doʊn pɹitɛn tə bi dɛns. aɪ woʊn bɪliv ɪɾ ɪn jə fəɹ ə moʊmənt. aɪ kən si juv mɔɹ wɪts ðən moʊs mɛn. ðæts ðə wɝs hæbət jə mɛn hæv, meɪkɪŋ bɪliv jə doʊn si wʌts pleɪn ʌndɝ jəɹ noʊzɪz." wʌt hæd hæpən tə ɔl ðoʊz kɝtsiz? foʊldɪŋ θɪn ɑɹmz əkɹɔs əɹ tʃɛst, ʃi aɪɾ ɪm stɝnli. "wɛl, ɪf jə mʌs pɹitɛnd, əl sɛɾ ɪɾ aʊt fəɹ ju. ðɪs lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ə jʊɹz dʌz wʌtɛvɝ i wɑns, ðə weɪ aɪ hɪɹ. jəɹ pɹɑfət pɪks aʊt pipəl ən mɛɹiz əm ɑn ðə spɑt. vɛɹi wɛl; jə snætʃ ʌp meɪaɪɡdɪn ən tɑlænvɝ ən mɛɹi ðɛm. hɪl θæŋk ju, ən soʊ wɪl ʃi. wən əɹ maɪn sɛɾəlz."

"Don't pretend to be dense. I won't believe it in you for a moment. I can see you have more wits than most men. That's the worst habit you men have, making believe you don't see what's plain under your noses." What had happened to all those curtsies? Folding thin arms across her chest, she eyed him sternly. "Well, if you must pretend, I'll set it out for you. This Lord Dragon of yours does whatever he wants, the way I hear. Your Prophet picks out people and marries them on the spot. Very well; you snatch up Maighdin and Tallanvor and marry them. He'll thank you, and so will she. When her mind settles."

stʌnd, pɛɹɪn ɡlænst ət mæstɝ ɡɪl, hu ʃɹʌɡd ən meɪɾ ə sɪkli ɡɹɪn. "ɪf jəl fɝɡɪv mi," pɛɹɪn toʊl ðə fɹaʊnɪŋ wʊmən, "aɪ hæv səm mæɾɝz aɪ mʌst si tə." hi hɝiɾ əweɪ, oʊnli lʊkɪŋ bæk wʌns. lini wɑz ʃeɪkɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝ ət mæstɝ ɡɪl, bɪɹeɪɾɪŋ ɪm dɪspaɪɾ ɪz pɹoʊtɛsts. ðə bɹiz wɑz ɹɔŋ fəɹ pɛɹɪn tə hɪɹ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ seɪɪŋ. ɪn tʃɹuθ, hi dɪd nɑt wɑn tə. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl kɹeɪzi!

Stunned, Perrin glanced at Master Gill, who shrugged and made a sickly grin. "If you will forgive me," Perrin told the frowning woman, "I have some matters I must see to." He hurried away, only looking back once. Lini was shaking a finger at Master Gill, berating him despite his protests. The breeze was wrong for Perrin to hear what they were saying. In truth, he did not want to. They were all crazy!

bɹəleɪn maɪɾ əv əɹ tu meɪdz ən əɹ θif-kætʃɝz, bʌt feɪl hæɾ əɹ oʊn ətɛndəns, ʌv ə sɔɹt. kloʊs ɑn twɛnti jʌŋ tɛɹənz ən kɛɹhinɪn wɝ sɪɾɪŋ kɹɔs-lɛɡəd nɪɹ ðə tɛnt, ðə wɪmən ɪn koʊts ən bɹitʃɪz wɪð sɔɹdz bɛltəɾ ɑn dʒʌs laɪk ðə mɛn. nʌn wɔɹ ðɛɹ hɛɹ lɔŋɡɝ ðən ðə ʃoʊldɝ, ən mɛn ən wɪmən boʊθ hæɾ ɪt taɪd bæk wɪð ə ɹɪbən, ɪməteɪɾɪŋ ði il teɪl. pɛɹɪn wʌndɝd wɛɹ ðə ɹɛst wɝ; ðeɪ sɛldəm stʃɹeɪd fɑɹ fɹəm ðə saʊn ə feɪlz vɔɪs. nɑt kɑzɪŋ tʃɹʌbəl, hi hoʊpt. ʃi hæd teɪkən əm ʌndɝ əɹ wɪŋ tə kip əm aʊɾ ə tʃɹʌbəl, ʃi sɛd, ən ðə laɪt nu ðeɪ wʊɾə ɡɑɾən ɪndə ɪt, lɛf bæk ɪn kɛɹhin wɪð ə ɡɹeɪt lɑɾ ə jʌŋ fulz dʒʌs laɪk ðɛm. ɪn pɛɹɪnz əpɪnjən, ðə hoʊl læʃɪŋ ə ðɛm niɾəd ə swɪf kɪk ɪn ðə bɑɾəm tə nɑk səm sɛns ɪndə ðɛm. dulɪŋ, pleɪɪŋ ət dʒiɾoʊ, pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi səm sɔɹɾ ʌv il. ɪɾiəsi!

Berelain might have her two maids and her thief-catchers, but Faile had her own attendants, of a sort. Close on twenty young Tairens and Cairhienin were sitting cross-legged near the tent, the women in coats and breeches with swords belted on just like the men. None wore their hair longer than the shoulder, and men and women both had it tied back with a ribbon, imitating the Aiel tail. Perrin wondered where the rest were; they seldom strayed far from the sound of Faile's voice. Not causing trouble, he hoped. She had taken them under her wing to keep them out of trouble, she said, and the Light knew they would have gotten into it, left back in Cairhien with a great lot of young fools just like them. In Perrin's opinion, the whole lashing of them needed a swift kick in the bottom to knock some sense into them. Dueling, playing at ji'e'toh, pretending to be some sort of Aiel. Idiocy!

lətʃəl ɹoʊz tə hɝ fiɾ əz pɛɹɪn keɪm kloʊsɝ, ə peɪl lɪɾəl wʊmən wɪð ɹɛd ɹɪbənz pɪn tə hɝ ləpɛlz, smɔl ɡoʊl hups ɪn əɹ ɪɹz, ən ə tʃælənʒɪŋ stɛɹ ðət səmtaɪmz meɪd ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn θɪŋk ʃi maɪt laɪk ə kɪs dɪspaɪɾ əɹ sɔɹd. ɹaɪt ðɛn, ðə tʃælənʒ wɑz stoʊni hɑɹd. ə moʊmən bɪhaɪn hɝ, ɹɛlə stʊd tu, tɔl ən dɑɹk, wɪð əɹ hɛɹ kʌt ʃɔɹɾ əz ə meɪɾənz ən əɹ kloʊðz pleɪnɝ ðən moʊst ə ðə mɛnz. ənlaɪk lətʃəl, ɹɛlə meɪɾ ɪt klɪɹ ʃi wəɾ əz sun kɪs ə dɔɡ əz ɛni mæn. ðə pɛɹ meɪɾ əz ɪf tə muv ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə tɛnt, tə blɑk pɛɹɪnz weɪ, bʌɾ ə skwɛɹ-tʃɪn fɛloʊ ɪn ə pʌfi-sliv koʊt bɑɹkt ən ɔɹɾɝ ən ðeɪ sæɾ əɡɛn. ɹɪlʌktənli. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, pɛɹɪlin θʌm ðət blɑk ʌv ə tʃɪn əz ðoʊ hi maɪt bi ɹikənsɪɾɝɪŋ. hi hæd wɔɹn ə bɪɹd ðə fɝs taɪm pɛɹɪn sɔ hɪm - sɛvɹəl ə ðə tɛɹən mɛn hæd hæɾ əm - bʌɾ il dɪd nɑt wɛɹ bɪɹdz.

Lacile rose to her feet as Perrin came closer, a pale little woman with red ribbons pinned to her lapels, small gold hoops in her ears, and a challenging stare that sometimes made the Two Rivers men think she might like a kiss despite her sword. Right then, the challenge was stony hard. A moment behind her, Arrela stood too, tall and dark, with her hair cut short as a Maiden's and her clothes plainer than most of the men's. Unlike Lacile, Arrela made it clear she would as soon kiss a dog as any man. The pair made as if to move in front of the tent, to block Perrin's way, but a square-chinned fellow in a puffy-sleeved coat barked an order and they sat again. Reluctantly. For that matter, Parelean thumbed that block of a chin as though he might be reconsidering. He had worn a beard the first time Perrin saw him - several of the Tairen men had had them - but Aiel did not wear beards.

pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd əbaʊt fulɪʃnəs ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. ðeɪ wɝ feɪlz tə ðə boʊn, ən ðə fæk ðəɾ i wɑz əɹ hʌzbən mɛn lɪɾəl. ɛɹæm maɪt bi dʒɛləs ə hɪz ətɛnʃənz, jɛɾ ɛɹæm ət list ʃɛɹɾ ɪz əfɛkʃənz wɪð feɪl. hi kəd fil ðə jʌŋ ɪɾiəts' aɪz ɑn ɪm əz i stʃɹoʊɾ ɪnsaɪd. feɪl wəd skɪn ɪm ɪf ʃi ɛvɝ lɝn ðəɾ i hoʊp ðeɪ wəd kip əɹ fɹəm tʃɹʌbəl.

Perrin muttered about foolishness under his breath. They were Faile's to the bone, and the fact that he was her husband meant little. Aram might be jealous of his attentions, yet Aram at least shared his affections with Faile. He could feel the young idiots' eyes on him as he strode inside. Faile would skin him if she ever learned that he hoped they would keep her from trouble.

ðə tɛnt wɑz tɔl ən speɪʃəs, wɪð ə flaʊɝd kɑɹpət fəɹ ə flɔɹ ən spɑɹs fɝnɪʃɪŋz ðət foʊldəd fəɹ stɔɹədʒ ɑn ə kɑɹt, moʊst ə ðɛm. ðə hɛvi stænd-mɪɹɝ sɝɾənli kəd nɑt. ɪksɛp fəɹ bɹæs-baʊn tʃɛsts dʒɹeɪpt wɪð ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd klɔθs ən dʌbəlɪŋ əz ɛkstʃɹə teɪbəlz, stʃɹeɪt laɪnz ə bɹaɪt ɡɪl dɛkɝeɪɾəd ɛvɹiθɪŋ daʊn tə ðə wɑʃstæn ən ɪts mɪɹɝ. ə dʌzən mɪɹɝd læmps meɪd ði ɪntɪɹiɝ nɪɹli əz bɹaɪɾ əz aʊtsaɪd, ɪf kənsɪɾɝəbli kulɝ, ən ðəɹ wɝ ivən ə pɛɹ ə sɪlk hæŋʒɪŋz dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm ðə ɹuf poʊlz, tu ɔɹneɪt fəɹ pɛɹɪnz teɪst. tu ɹɪdʒəd, wɪð ðə bɝdz ən flaʊɝz mɑɹtʃɪŋ ɪn laɪnz ən æŋɡəlz. dɑbɹeɪn hæd sɛɾ əm ʌp tə tʃɹævəl laɪk kɛɹhinɪn noʊbəlz, ðoʊ pɛɹɪn hæd mænədʒ tə "luz" ðə wɝst ʌv ɪt. ðə hjudʒ bɛd, fəɹ wʌn, ə ɹɪdɪkjələs θɪŋ tə tʃɹævəl wɪð. ɪt hæd teɪkən ʌp ɔlmoʊst ə hoʊl kɑɹt tə ɪtsɛlf.

The tent was tall and spacious, with a flowered carpet for a floor and sparse furnishings that folded for storage on a cart, most of them. The heavy stand-mirror certainly could not. Except for brass-bound chests draped with embroidered cloths and doubling as extra tables, straight lines of bright gilt decorated everything down to the washstand and its mirror. A dozen mirrored lamps made the interior nearly as bright as outside, if considerably cooler, and there were even a pair of silk hangings dangling from the roof poles, too ornate for Perrin's taste. Too rigid, with the birds and flowers marching in lines and angles. Dobraine had set them up to travel like Cairhienin nobles, though Perrin had managed to "lose" the worst of it. The huge bed, for one, a ridiculous thing to travel with. It had taken up almost a whole cart to itself.

feɪl ən meɪaɪɡdɪn wɝ sɪɾɪŋ əloʊn təɡɛðɝ, wɝk sɪlvɝ kʌps ɪn hænd. ðeɪ hæd ði ɛɹ ʌv wɪmən filɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ aʊt, ɔl smaɪlz ɑn ði aʊtsaɪd jɛt wɪð ə hɪn ə ʃɑɹpnəs tə ði aɪz, ə hɪn ə lɪsnɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðə wɝdz, ən nɑɾ ə klu əz tə wɛðɝ ðeɪ wəd hʌɡ ɪn ðə nɛkst ɪnstən əɹ dʒɹɔ naɪvz. wɛl, hi θɔt moʊst wɪmən wəd nɑɾ æktʃəli  ɡoʊ əz fɑɹ əz naɪvz, bʌt feɪl kʊd. meɪaɪɡdɪn əpɪɹd mʌtʃ lɛs tʃɹævəl-wɔɹn ðən ʃi hæd, wɑʃt ən koʊmd, ðə dʌs bɹʌʃt fɹəm əɹ dʒɹɛs. ə smɔl moʊzeɪɪk-tɑp teɪbəl bɪtwin əm hɛl mɔɹ kʌps ən ə tɔl swɛɾɪŋ sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝ ðət ɡeɪv ɔf ðə mɪnti sɛn ə ɝb ti. boʊθ wɪmən lʊkt ɝaʊn əɾ ɪz ɛntʃɹəns, ən fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ðeɪ hæɾ ɔlmoʊst ɪɡzækli ðə seɪm ɪkspɹɛʃən, kuli wʌndɝɪŋ u wɑz bɑɹdʒɪŋ ɪn ən nɑɾ əɾ ɔl plizd wɪð ði ɪntɝʌpʃən. ət lis feɪl sɔfən hɝz ɪmiɾiətli wɪð ə smaɪl.

Faile and Maighdin were sitting alone together, worked silver cups in hand. They had the air of women feeling one another out, all smiles on the outside yet with a hint of sharpness to the eyes, a hint of listening for something behind the words, and not a clue as to whether they would hug in the next instant or draw knives. Well, he thought most women would not actually go as far as knives, but Faile could. Maighdin appeared much less travel-worn than she had, washed and combed, the dust brushed from her dress. A small mosaic-topped table between them held more cups and a tall sweating silver pitcher that gave off the minty scent of herb tea. Both women looked around at his entrance, and for an instant, they had almost exactly the same expression, coolly wondering who was barging in and not at all pleased with the interruption. At least Faile softened hers immediately with a smile.

"mæstɝ ɡɪl toʊl mi jəɹ stɔɹi, mɪstʃɹəs dɔɹleɪn," hi sɛd. "juv feɪs hɑɹd deɪz, bʌt jə kən bi ʃʊɹ jəɹ seɪf hɪɹ tɪl jə dɪsaɪd tə liv." ðə wʊmən mɝmɝd θæŋks oʊvɝ ðə ɹɪm ə hɝ kʌp, bʌt ʃi smɛld wɛɹi, ən əɹ aɪz tʃɹaɪd tə ɹiɾ ɪm laɪk ə bʊk.

"Master Gill told me your story, Mistress Dorlain," he said. "You've faced hard days, but you can be sure you're safe here till you decide to leave." The woman murmured thanks over the rim of her cup, but she smelled wary, and her eyes tried to read him like a book.

"meɪaɪɡdɪn ɔlsoʊ toʊl mi ðɛɹ stɔɹi, pɛɹɪn," feɪl sɛd, "æn aɪ hæv ən ɔfɝ tə meɪk hɝ. meɪaɪɡdɪn, jə ən jəɹ fɹɛnz əv hæd tʃɹaɪɪŋ mʌnθs bɪhaɪnd, ən jə tɛl mi ʌv noʊ pɹɑspɛks əhɛd. ɛntɝ maɪ sɝvəs, ɔl ə ju. jəl stɪl əv tə dʒɝni, bʌt ðə sɝkəmstænsəz wɪl bi mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ. aɪ peɪ wɛl, ən aɪm nɑɾ ə hɑɹʃ mɪstʃɹəs." pɛɹɪn vɔɪst ɪz əpɹuvəl ɪmiɾiətli. ɪf feɪl wɑntəd tə ɪndʌlʒ əɹ fænsi fəɹ teɪkɪŋ ɪn stʃɹeɪz, ət list i wɑntəd tə hɛlp ðɪs lɑt, tu. meɪbi ðeɪ wəd bi seɪfɝ wɪð ɪm ðən wɑndɝɪŋ ɝaʊn əloʊn ət ðæt.

"Maighdin also told me their story, Perrin," Faile said, "and I have an offer to make her. Maighdin, you and your friends have had trying months behind, and you tell me of no prospects ahead. Enter my service, all of you. You will still have to journey, but the circumstances will be much better. I pay well, and I am not a harsh mistress." Perrin voiced his approval immediately. If Faile wanted to indulge her fancy for taking in strays, at least he wanted to help this lot, too. Maybe they would be safer with him than wandering around alone at that.

tʃoʊkɪŋ ɑn əɹ ti, meɪaɪɡdɪn nɪɹli dʒɹɑpt əɹ kʌp. ʃi blɪŋkt ət feɪl, dæbɪŋ ət ðə dæmp ɑn əɹ tʃɪn wɪð ə leɪs-ɛdʒ lɪnən hæŋkɝtʃɪf, ən əɹ tʃɛɹ kɹik feɪnli əz ʃi tɝnd, stʃɹeɪnʒli, tə stʌɾi pɛɹɪn. "aɪ . . . θæŋk ju," ʃi sɛɾ ət læst, sloʊli. "aɪ θɪŋk. . . ." ənʌðɝ moʊməns pɝuzəl ə pɛɹɪn, ən əɹ vɔɪs pɪkt ʌp. "jɛs, aɪ θæŋk ju, ən aɪ æksɛp jəɹ kaɪn ɔfɝ ɡɹeɪtfəli. aɪ mʌs tɛl maɪ kəmpænjənz." ɹaɪzɪŋ, ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ɪn sɛɾɪŋ əɹ kʌp ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪ, ðən stʃɹeɪɾənd oʊnli tə spɹɛɾ əɹ skɝts ɪn ə kɝtsi suɾəbəl fəɹ ɛni pæləs. "aɪ wɪl tʃɹaɪ tə ɡɪv ɡʊd sɝvəs, maɪ leɪɾi," ʃi sɛd lɛvəli. "meɪ aɪ wɪðdʒɹɔ?" ət feɪlz əsɛnt, ʃi kɝtsiɾ əɡɛn ən bækt əweɪ tu stɛps bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ tə ɡoʊ! pɛɹɪn skɹætʃt ɪz bɪɹd. sʌmbɑɾi ɛls u wəd bi bɑbɪŋ əɾ ɪm ɛvɹi taɪm ʃi tɝn ɝaʊnd.

Choking on her tea, Maighdin nearly dropped her cup. She blinked at Faile, dabbing at the damp on her chin with a lace-edged linen handkerchief, and her chair creaked faintly as she turned, strangely, to study Perrin. "I . . . thank you," she said at last, slowly. "I think. . . ." Another moment's perusal of Perrin, and her voice picked up. "Yes, I thank you, and I accept your kind offer gratefully. I must tell my companions." Rising, she hesitated in setting her cup on the tray, then straightened only to spread her skirts in a curtsy suitable for any palace. "I will try to give good service, my Lady," she said levelly. "May I withdraw?" At Faile's assent, she curtsied again and backed away two steps before turning to go! Perrin scratched his beard. Somebody else who would be bobbing at him every time she turned around.

noʊ sunɝ hæd ðə tɛntflæp dʒɹɑp bɪhaɪn meɪaɪɡdɪn ðən feɪl pʊɾ əɹ kʌp daʊn ən læft, dʒɹʌmɪŋ əɹ hilz ɑn ðə kɑɹpət. "oʊ, aɪ laɪk hɝ, pɛɹɪn. ʃiz spɪɹət! əl weɪdʒɝ ʃi wʊɾə sɪŋʒd jəɹ bɪɹɾ oʊvɝ ðoʊz bænɝz ɪf aɪ hædn seɪv ju. oʊ, jɛs. spɪɹət!"

No sooner had the tentflap dropped behind Maighdin than Faile put her cup down and laughed, drumming her heels on the carpet. "Oh, I like her, Perrin. She has spirit! I'll wager she would have singed your beard over those banners if I hadn't saved you. Oh, yes. Spirit!"

pɛɹɪn ɡɹʌntɪd. dʒʌst wʌɾ i niɾəd; ənʌðɝ wʊmən tə sɪnʒ ɪz bɪɹd. "aɪ pɹɑməs mæstɝ ɡɪl tə lʊk æftɝ ðɛm, feɪl, bʌt. . . . kən jə ɡɛs wʌt ðət lini æskt? ʃi wɑntəd mi tə mɛɹi meɪaɪɡdɪn tə ðət fɛloʊ tɑlænvɝ. dʒʌst stæn əm ʌp ən mɛɹi ðɛm wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ sɛd! ʃi kleɪm ðeɪ wɑn ɪt." hi fɪld ə sɪlvɝ kʌp wɪð ti ən dʒɹɑpt ɪndə ðə tʃɛɹ meɪaɪɡdɪn hæd veɪkeɪɾəd, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ɪts əlɑɹmɪŋ ɡɹoʊnz ʌndɝ ɪz sʌɾən weɪt. "ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðət nɑnsɛns ɪz ðə list ə maɪ wɝiz. mæstɝ ɡɪl sɛz ɪt wɑz ðə sintʃæn tʊk æmədɔɹ, ən aɪ bɪliv hɪm. laɪt! ðə sintʃæn!"

Perrin grunted. Just what he needed; another woman to singe his beard. "I promised Master Gill to look after them, Faile, but. . . . Can you guess what that Lini asked? She wanted me to marry Maighdin to that fellow Tallanvor. Just stand them up and marry them whatever they said! She claimed they want it." He filled a silver cup with tea and dropped into the chair Maighdin had vacated, ignoring its alarming groans under his sudden weight. "In any case, that nonsense is the least of my worries. Master Gill says it was the Seanchan took Amador, and I believe him. Light! The Seanchan!"

feɪl tæpt əɹ fɪŋɡɝtɪps təɡɛðɝ, stɛɹɪŋ əkɹɔs əm ət nʌθɪŋ. "ðæt maɪt bi dʒʌs ðə θɪŋ," ʃi mjuzd. "moʊst sɝvəns də bɛɾɝ mɛɹid ðən nɑt. pɝhæps aɪ ʃəɾ ɝeɪnʒ ɪt. ən fəɹ bɹin, tu. ðə weɪ ʃi wɛn ɹʌnɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ tə tʃɛk ɑn ðət bɪɡ fɛloʊ əz sun əz əɹ feɪs wɑz klin, aɪ səspɛk ðeɪ ʃəd bi ɔlɹɛɾi. ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡlim ɪn əɹ aɪ. aɪ woʊn əv ðət kaɪndə bɪheɪvjɝ ɪn maɪ sɝvəns, pɛɹɪn. ɪt dʒʌs lidz tə tɛɹz ən ɹɪkɹɪmɪneɪʃənz ən sʌlkɪŋ. ən bɹin wɪl bi wɝs ðən i ɪz."

Faile tapped her fingertips together, staring across them at nothing. "That might be just the thing," she mused. "Most servants do better married than not. Perhaps I should arrange it. And for Breane, too. The way she went running out of here to check on that big fellow as soon as her face was clean, I suspect they should be already. There was a gleam in her eye. I won't have that kind of behavior in my servants, Perrin. It just leads to tears and recriminations and sulking. And Breane will be worse than he is."

pɛɹɪn stɛɹɾ ət hɝ. "dɪd jə hɪɹ mi?" hi sɛd sloʊli. "ðə sintʃæn əv kæptʃɝɾ æmədɔɹ! ðə sintʃæn, feɪl!"

Perrin stared at her. "Did you hear me?" he said slowly. "The Seanchan have captured Amador! The Seanchan, Faile!"

ʃi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt - ʃi ɹɪli hæd bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt mɛɹiɪŋ ɔf ðoʊz wɪmən! - ðən smaɪld ət hɪm, əmjuzd. "æmədɔɹ ɪz ə lɔŋ weɪ, jɛt, ən ɪf wi də mit wɪð ðiz sintʃæn, aɪm ʃʊɹ jəl dil wɪð ðɛm. æftɝ ɔl, jə tɔt mi tə pɝtʃ ɑn jəɹ ɹɪst, dɪdn ju?" ðət wɑz wʌt ʃi kleɪmd, ðoʊ hi hæd nɛvɝ sin ɛni saɪn ʌv ɪt.

She gave a start - she really had been thinking about marrying off those women! - then smiled at him, amused. "Amador is a long way, yet, and if we do meet with these Seanchan, I'm sure you will deal with them. After all, you taught me to perch on your wrist, didn't you?" That was what she claimed, though he had never seen any sign of it.

"ðeɪ maɪt bi ə tʌtʃ mɔɹ dɪfəkəl ðən jə wɝ," hi sɛd dʒɹaɪli, ən ʃi smaɪld əɡɛn. ʃi smɛld ɪkstʃɹimli plizd, fəɹ səm ɹizən. "aɪm θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt sɛndɪŋ ɡɹeɪɾi əɹ nil tə wɔɹn ɹænd, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ i sɛd." ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd fɪɹsli, smaɪlz ɪvæpɝeɪɾɪŋ, bʌɾ i pʊʃt ɑn. "ɪf aɪ nu haʊ tə faɪn hɪm, aɪ wʊd. ðəɹ əz tə bi səm weɪ tə ɡɛt wɝd tə hɪm wɪθaʊɾ ɛniwʌn lɝnɪŋ ʌv ɪt." ɹænd hæɾ ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn ðət mɔɹ ðən i hæɾ ɑn sikɹəsi əbaʊt mæsimə. pɛɹɪn hæd bɪn ɛɡzaɪl fɹəm ɹændz pɹɛzəns, ən noʊ wʌn wɑz tə noʊ ɛniθɪŋ ɹɪmeɪn bɪtwin əm ɪksɛpt ɛnməɾi.

"They might be a touch more difficult than you were," he said dryly, and she smiled again. She smelled extremely pleased, for some reason. "I'm thinking about sending Grady or Neald to warn Rand, no matter what he said." She shook her head fiercely, smiles evaporating, but he pushed on. "If I knew how to find him, I would. There has to be some way to get word to him without anyone learning of it." Rand had insisted on that more than he had on secrecy about Masema. Perrin had been exiled from Rand's presence, and no one was to know anything remained between them except enmity.

"hi noʊz, pɛɹɪn. aɪm ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt. meɪaɪɡdɪn sɔ pɪdʒɑnkoʊts ɛvɹiwɛɹ ɪn æmədɔɹ, ən əpɛɹənli ðə sintʃæn dɪdn lʊk əɾ əm twaɪs. baɪ ðɪs taɪm, ɛni mɝtʃən u hæz bɪznəs wɪð æmədɔɹ əz hɝd, ən soʊ hæz ðə waɪt taʊɝ. bɪliv mi, ɹænd mʌs hæv, tu. juv tə tʃɹʌs ðəɾ i noʊz bɛst. ɪn ðɪs, hi dʌz." ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ɔlweɪz soʊ sɝɾən ə ðæt.

"He knows, Perrin. I'm sure of it. Maighdin saw pigeoncotes everywhere in Amador, and apparently the Seanchan didn't look at them twice. By this time, any merchant who has business with Amador has heard, and so has the White Tower. Believe me, Rand must have, too. You have to trust that he knows best. In this, he does." She was not always so certain of that.

"meɪbi," pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd ɪɹɪɾəbli. hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə wɝi əbaʊt ɹændz sænəɾi, bʌt ɹænd meɪd pɛɹɪn əɾ ɪz moʊst səspɪʃəs lʊk laɪk ə tʃaɪl skɪpɪŋ ɪn ə mɛdoʊ. haʊ mʌtʃ dɪd ɹænd tʃɹʌst ivən hɪm? ɹænd kɛp θɪŋz bæk, hæd plænz i nɛvɝ lɛɾ ɑn.

"Maybe," Perrin muttered irritably. He tried not to worry about Rand's sanity, but Rand made Perrin at his most suspicious look like a child skipping in a meadow. How much did Rand trust even him? Rand kept things back, had plans he never let on.

ɪkshəlɪŋ, pɛɹɪn sɛɾəld bæk ɪn ðə tʃɛɹ, ɡʌlpt ə swɑloʊ ʌv ti. ðə tʃɹuθ ʌv ɪt wɑz, mæɾ əɹ seɪn, ɹænd wɑz ɹaɪt. ɪf ðə fɔɹseɪkən kɑɾ ə səspɪʃən ʌv wʌɾ i wɑz ʌp tə, əɹ ðə waɪt taʊɝ dɪd, ðeɪ wəd faɪn səm weɪ tə oʊvɝtɝn ði ænvəl ɑn ɪz fit. "æt list aɪ kən ɡɪv ðə taʊɝz aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz lɛs tə tɔk əbaʊt. ðɪs taɪm, aɪm bɝnɪŋ ðət blʌɾi bænɝ." ən ðə wʊlfhɛd, tu. hi maɪɾ əv tə pleɪ ət biɪŋ ə lɔɹd, bʌɾ i kəd də ɪt wɪθaʊɾ ə blʌɾi flæɡ!

Exhaling, Perrin settled back in the chair, gulped a swallow of tea. The truth of it was, mad or sane, Rand was right. If the Forsaken caught a suspicion of what he was up to, or the White Tower did, they would find some way to overturn the anvil on his feet. "At least I can give the Tower's eyes-and-ears less to talk about. This time, I'm burning that bloody banner." And the Wolfhead, too. He might have to play at being a lord, but he could do it without a bloody flag!

feɪlz fʊl lɪps pɝs dʒudɪʃɪsli, ən ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd slaɪtli. slɪpɪŋ fɹəm əɹ tʃɛɹ, ʃi nɛl bɪsaɪd hɪm, tʊk ɪz ɹɪst ɪn əɹ hænz. pɛɹɪn mɛɾ əɹ lɛvəl ɡeɪz wɛɹəli. wən ʃi lʊkt əɾ ɪm soʊ ɪntɛnli, soʊ sɪɹiəsli, ʃi wɑz əbaʊt tə tɛl ɪm sʌmθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt. ðæt, əɹ pʊl ðə wʊl oʊvɝ ɪz aɪz ən spɪn ɪm ɝaʊn tɪl i dɪd nɑt noʊ fɹʌn fɹəm bæk. hɝ sɛn toʊld ɪm nʌθɪŋ. hi tʃɹaɪd tə stɑp smɛlɪŋ hɝ; ɪt wɑz ɔl tu izi tə luz hɪmsɛlf ɪn ðæt, ən ðən ʃi wəd pʊl ðə wʊl oʊvɝ ɪz aɪz. wʌn θɪŋ i hæd lɝn sɪns mɛɹiɪŋ: ə mæn niɾəd ɔl ə hɪz wɪts dilɪŋ wɪð ə wʊmən. tu ɔfən ivən ðət wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf; wɪmən dɪd wʌt ðeɪ wɑntəɾ əz ʃʊɹli əz ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Faile's full lips pursed judiciously, and she shook her head slightly. Slipping from her chair, she knelt beside him, took his wrist in her hands. Perrin met her level gaze warily. When she looked at him so intently, so seriously, she was about to tell him something important. That, or pull the wool over his eyes and spin him around till he did not know front from back. Her scent told him nothing. He tried to stop smelling her; it was all too easy to lose himself in that, and then she would pull the wool over his eyes. One thing he had learned since marrying: a man needed all of his wits dealing with a woman. Too often even that was not enough; women did what they wanted as surely as Aes Sedai.

"ju maɪt wɑnə ɹikənsɪɾɝ, hʌzbənd," ʃi mɝmɝd. ə taɪni smaɪl kwɝkt əɹ maʊθ əz ɪf ʃi wʌns əɡɛn nu wʌɾ i wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ. "aɪ daʊɾ ɛniwʌn huz sin əs sɪns wi ɛntɝd ɡildən nu wʌt ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl ɪz. ɝaʊn ə taʊn ðə saɪz ə bɛθɔl, səm wɪl, ðoʊ. ən ðə lɔŋɡɝ wɪv tə hʌn fəɹ mæsimə, ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðə tʃæns."

"You might want to reconsider, husband," she murmured. A tiny smile quirked her mouth as if she once again knew what he was thinking. "I doubt anyone who's seen us since we entered Ghealdan knew what the Red Eagle is. Around a town the size of Bethal, some will, though. And the longer we have to hunt for Masema, the greater the chance."

hi dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ wɪð seɪɪŋ ðət wɑz ɔl ðə mɔɹ ɹizən tə ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ə ðə bænɝ. feɪl wɑz noʊ ful, ən ʃi θɔt mʌtʃ fæstɝ ðən hi. "ðɛn waɪ kip ɪt," hi æsk sloʊli, "wɛn ɔl ɪɾəl də ɪz dʒɹɔ aɪz tə ði ɪɾiət ɛvɹibɑɾi wɪl θɪŋk ɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊl meɪnɛðɝən aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪv?" mɛn hæd tʃɹaɪd ðəɾ ɪn ðə pæst, ən wɪmən, tu; ðə neɪm ə meɪnɛðɝən kæɹid paʊɝfəl mɛmɹiz, ən ɪt wɑz kənvinjən fəɹ ɛniwʌn u wɑntəd tə stɑɹɾ ə ɹɪbɛljən.

He did not bother with saying that was all the more reason to get rid of the banner. Faile was no fool, and she thought much faster than he. "Then why keep it," he asked slowly, "when all it'll do is draw eyes to the idiot everybody will think is trying to pull Manetheren out of the grave?" Men had tried that in the past, and women, too; the name of Manetheren carried powerful memories, and it was convenient for anyone who wanted to start a rebellion.

"bɪkɔz ɪɾəl dʒɹɔ aɪz." ʃi lin təwɔɹɾ ɪm ɪntɛnli. "tə ə mæn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹeɪz ʌp meɪnɛðɝən əɡɛn. lɛsɝ foʊk wɪl smaɪl tə jəɹ feɪs, hoʊp jə ɹaɪɾ ɑn sun, ən tʃɹaɪ tə fɝɡɛt jə əz sun əz jə du. əz fəɹ ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ, ðeɪv tu mʌtʃ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛɹ feɪsəz ɹaɪt naʊ tə lʊk twaɪs ənlɛs jə pɪntʃ ðɛɹ noʊzɪz. kəmpɛɹd tə ðə sintʃæn, əɹ ðə pɹɑfət, əɹ ðə waɪtkloʊks, ə mæn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹeɪz meɪnɛðɝən ɪz smɔl tɝnəps. ən aɪ θɪŋk ɪts seɪf tə seɪ ðə taʊɝ woʊn lʊk twaɪs iðɝ, nɑt naʊ." hɝ smaɪl waɪɾənd, ən ðə laɪɾ ɪn əɹ aɪz sɛd ʃi wɑz əbaʊt tə meɪk əɹ moʊs tɛlɪŋ pɔɪnt. "bʌt moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt, noʊ wʌn wɪl θɪŋk ðət mæn ɪz duɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls." əbɹʌpli hɝ smaɪl vænɪʃt; ʃi stʌk ə fɪŋɡɝ əɡɛnst ɪz noʊz, hɑɹd. "æn doʊn kɔl jɝsɛlf ən ɪɾiət, pɛɹɪn tæʃɪɹ eɪbɑɹə. nɑɾ ivən saɪdweɪz, laɪk ðæt. jə ɑɹənt, ən aɪ də nɑt laɪk ɪt." hɝ sɛnt wɑz taɪni spaɪks, nɑt tʃɹu æŋɡɝ bʌt dɛfənətli dɪsplizd.

"Because it will draw eyes." She leaned toward him intently. "To a man trying to raise up Manetheren again. Lesser folk will smile to your face, hope you ride on soon, and try to forget you as soon as you do. As for the greater, they've too much in front of their faces right now to look twice unless you pinch their noses. Compared to the Seanchan, or the Prophet, or the Whitecloaks, a man trying to raise Manetheren is small turnips. And I think it's safe to say the Tower won't look twice either, not now." Her smile widened, and the light in her eyes said she was about to make her most telling point. "But most important, no one will think that man is doing anything else." Abruptly her smile vanished; she stuck a finger against his nose, hard. "And don't call yourself an idiot, Perrin t'Bashere Aybara. Not even sideways, like that. You aren't, and I do not like it." Her scent was tiny spikes, not true anger but definitely displeased.

kwɪksɪlvɝ. ə kɪŋfɪʃɝ flæʃɪŋ baɪ fæstɝ ðən θɔt. sɝɾənli fæstɝ ðən ɪz θɔts. ɪt wəd nɛvɝ əv əkɝd tə hɪm tə haɪd soʊ . . . fleɪɡɹənli. bʌɾ i kəd si ðə sɛns. ɪt wɑz laɪk kənsilɪŋ ðə fæk ðət jə wɝ ə mɝɾɝɝ baɪ kleɪmɪŋ tə bi ə θif. jɛɾ ɪt maɪt wɝk.

Quicksilver. A kingfisher flashing by faster than thought. Certainly faster than his thoughts. It would never have occurred to him to hide so . . . flagrantly. But he could see the sense. It was like concealing the fact that you were a murderer by claiming to be a thief. Yet it might work.

tʃʌklɪŋ, hi kɪst əɹ fɪŋɡɝɾɪp. "ðə bænɝ steɪz," hi sɛd. hi səpoʊz ðət mɛn ðə wʊlfhɛd dɪd, tu. blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz! "æliændɝ əz tə noʊ ðə tʃɹuθ, ðoʊ. ɪf ʃi θɪŋks ɹænd minz tə sɛt mi ʌp əz kɪŋ ə meɪnɛðɝən ən teɪk əɹ lænz. . . ."

Chuckling, he kissed her fingertip. "The banner stays," he said. He supposed that meant the Wolfhead did, too. Blood and bloody ashes! "Alliandre has to know the truth, though. If she thinks Rand means to set me up as King of Manetheren and take her lands. . . ."

feɪl ɹoʊz soʊ sʌɾənli, tɝnɪŋ əweɪ, ðəɾ i wɑz əfɹeɪɾ i hæd meɪɾ ə mɪsteɪk bɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp ðə kwin. æliændɝ kəd lid tə bɹəleɪn ɔl tu izəli, ən feɪl smɛld . . . pɹɪkli. wɛɹi. bʌt wʌt ʃi sɛd, oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, wɑz "æliændɝ woʊn bi ə bɪɾ ə tʃɹʌbəl fəɹ pɛɹɪn ɡoʊldeɪniz. ðət bɝdz əz ɡʊɾ əz nɛɾɪd, hʌzbənd, soʊ ɪts taɪm tə pʊɾ əɹ maɪnz ɑn haʊ tə faɪn mæsimə." nilɪŋ ɡɹeɪsfəli bɪsaɪɾ ə smɔl tʃɛst əɡɛns ðə tɛnt wɔl, ði oʊnli tʃɛst wɪθaʊt dʒɹeɪpɝiz, ʃi lɪftəd ðə lɪɾ ən bɪɡæn ɹimuvɪŋ ɹoʊl mæps.

Faile rose so suddenly, turning away, that he was afraid he had made a mistake bringing up the Queen. Alliandre could lead to Berelain all too easily, and Faile smelled . . . prickly. Wary. But what she said, over her shoulder, was "Alliandre won't be a bit of trouble for Perrin Goldeneyes. That bird's as good as netted, husband, so it's time to put our minds on how to find Masema." Kneeling gracefully beside a small chest against the tent wall, the only chest without draperies, she lifted the lid and began removing rolled maps.

pɛɹɪn hoʊpt ʃi wɑz ɹaɪɾ əbaʊɾ æliændɝ, kəz i dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt tə də ɪf ʃi wɑz ɹɔŋ. ɪf oʊnli hi wɝ hæf wʌt ʃi θɔt hɪm. æliændɝ wɑz ə nɛɾɪd bɝd, ðə sintʃæn wəd fɔl oʊvɝ laɪk dɑlz fəɹ pɛɹɪn ɡoʊldeɪniz, ən i wəd snætʃ ʌp ðə pɹɑfəɾ ən teɪk ɪm tə ɹænd ɪf mæsimə hæd tɛn θaʊzən mɛn ɝaʊn hɪm. nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm i ɹilaɪz ðət haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ əɹ æŋɡɝ hɝɾ ən kənfjuz hɪm, ɪt wɑz əɹ dɪsəpɔɪnmənt i fɪɹd. ɪf i ɛvɝ sɔ ðəɾ ɪn əɹ aɪz, ɪt wəd ɹɪp ðə hɑɹɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz tʃɛst.

Perrin hoped she was right about Alliandre, because he did not know what to do if she was wrong. If only he were half what she thought him. Alliandre was a netted bird, the Seanchan would fall over like dolls for Perrin Goldeneyes, and he would snatch up the Prophet and take him to Rand if Masema had ten thousand men around him. Not for the first time he realized that however much her anger hurt and confused him, it was her disappointment he feared. If he ever saw that in her eyes, it would rip the heart out of his chest.

hi nɛl bɪsaɪɾ əɹ ən hɛlpt əɹ spɹɛɾ aʊt ðə lɑɹdʒəs mæp, kʌvɝɪŋ ðə saʊθ ʌv ɡildən ən ðə nɔɹθ ʌv ɑmɑdɪʃiə, ən stʌɾid ɪɾ əz ðoʊ mæsiməz neɪm wəd lip ɔf ðə pɑɹtʃmən ət hɪm. hi hæd mɔɹ ɹizən ðən ɹænd tə wɑnə səksid. wʌtɛvɝ ɛls, hi kəd nɑt feɪl feɪl.

He knelt beside her and helped her spread out the largest map, covering the south of Ghealdan and the north of Amadicia, and studied it as though Masema's name would leap off the parchment at him. He had more reason than Rand to want to succeed. Whatever else, he could not fail Faile.

feɪl leɪ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs, lɪsnɪŋ əntɪl ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðət pɛɹɪnz bɹɛθ hæd ðə dip ɹɪðəm ə slip, ðən slɪpt aʊt fɹəm ðə blæŋkəts ðeɪ ʃɛɹd. ɹufəl əmjuzmən tʌtʃt əɹ əz ʃi pʊld əɹ lɪnən naɪtdʒɹɛs ʌp oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd. dɪɾ i ɹɪli θɪŋk ʃi wəd nɑt faɪn aʊt ðəɾ i hæd hɪɾən ðə bɛd dip ɪn ə kɑps wʌn mɔɹnɪŋ waɪl ðə kɑɹts wɝ biɪŋ loʊɾəd? nɑt ðət ʃi maɪndəd; nɑɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil, ət list. ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi hæd slɛpt ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn əz ɔfən əz hi. ʃi hæd pɹitɛndəd sɝpɹaɪz, ʌv kɔɹs, ən meɪd laɪɾ ʌv ɪt. ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, ən i wəɾ əv əpɑlədʒaɪzd, pɝhæps ivən ɡɔn bæk tə fɛtʃ ðə bɛd. mænɪdʒɪŋ ə hʌzbənd wɑz ən ɑɹt, soʊ hɝ mʌðɝ sɛd. hæd dʒɹə ni ɡeɪlin ɛvɝ faʊn ɪt soʊ dɪfəkəlt?

Faile lay in the darkness, listening until she was sure that Perrin's breath had the deep rhythm of sleep, then slipped out from the blankets they shared. Rueful amusement touched her as she pulled her linen nightdress up over her head. Did he really think she would not find out that he had hidden the bed deep in a copse one morning while the carts were being loaded? Not that she minded; not a great deal, at least. She was sure she had slept on the ground as often as he. She had pretended surprise, of course, and made light of it. Anything else, and he would have apologized, perhaps even gone back to fetch the bed. Managing a husband was an art, so her mother said. Had Deira ni Ghaline ever found it so difficult?

skʌfɪŋ əɹ bɛɹ fiɾ ɪndə slɪpɝz, ʃi ʃɹʌɡd ɪndə ə sɪlk ɹoʊb, ðən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, lʊkɪŋ daʊn ət pɛɹɪn. hi wəd bi eɪbəl tə si hɝ klɪɹli, ɪf i woʊk, bʌt tə hɝ, hi wɑz dʒʌst ə ʃæɾoʊd maʊnd. ʃi wɪʃt əɹ mʌðɝ wɝ ðɛɹ, naʊ, tə ædvaɪz hɝ. ʃi lʌv pɛɹɪn wɪð ɛvɹi faɪbɝ ə hɝ biɪŋ, ən i kənfjuzd ɛvɹi faɪbɝ. æktʃəli  ʌndɝstændɪŋ mɛn wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ i wɑz soʊ ənlaɪk ɛniwʌn ʃi hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp wɪð. hi nɛvɝ swæɡɝd, ən ɪnstɛɾ ə læfɪŋ ət hɪmsɛlf, hi wɑz . . . mɑɾəst. ʃi hæd nɑt bɪlivd ə mæn kəd bi mɑɾəst! hi ɪnsɪstəd ðəɾ oʊnli tʃæns hæd meɪɾ ɪm ə liɾɝ, kleɪmd i dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ tə lid, wən mɛn u mɛɾ ɪm wɝ ɹɛɾi tə fɑloʊ æftɝ ən aʊɝ. hi dɪsmɪst ɪz oʊn θɪŋkɪŋ əz sloʊ, wən ðoʊz sloʊ, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ θɔts sɔ soʊ dipli ðət ʃi hæd tə dæns ə mɛɹi dʒɪɡ tə kip ɛni sikɹəts əɾ ɔl. hi wɑz ə wʌndɝfəl mæn, hɝ kɝli-hɛɹd wʊlf. soʊ stʃɹɔŋ. ən soʊ dʒɛntəl. saɪɪŋ, ʃi tɪptoʊd fɹəm ðə tɛnt. hɪz ɪɹz hæd kɑzd əɹ dɪfəkəltiz bɪfɔɹ.

Scuffing her bare feet into slippers, she shrugged into a silk robe, then hesitated, looking down at Perrin. He would be able to see her clearly, if he woke, but to her, he was just a shadowed mound. She wished her mother were there, now, to advise her. She loved Perrin with every fiber of her being, and he confused every fiber. Actually understanding men was impossible, of course, but he was so unlike anyone she had grown up with. He never swaggered, and instead of laughing at himself, he was . . . modest. She had not believed a man could be modest! He insisted that only chance had made him a leader, claimed he did not know how to lead, when men who met him were ready to follow after an hour. He dismissed his own thinking as slow, when those slow, considering thoughts saw so deeply that she had to dance a merry jig to keep any secrets at all. He was a wonderful man, her curly-haired wolf. So strong. And so gentle. Sighing, she tiptoed from the tent. His ears had caused her difficulties before.

ðə kæmp leɪ kwaɪət bɪniθ ə ɡɪbəs mun ðət ɡeɪv əz mʌtʃ laɪɾ ɪn ə klaʊdləs skaɪ əz ɪt nɔɹməli wəɾ əv fʊl, ə bɹaɪtnəs ðət wɑʃt aʊt ðə stɑɹz. səm sɔɹɾ ə naɪt-bɝd kɹaɪd ʃɹɪli, ðən fɛl saɪlən əɾ ən aʊlz dip hut. ðəɹ wɑz ə smɔl bɹiz, ən fəɹ ə wʌndɝ, ɪɾ æktʃəli  simd ə lɪɾəl kul. pɹɑbli hɝ ɪmædʒəneɪʃən. ðə naɪts wɝ kul oʊnli ɪn kəmpɛɹəsən tə ðə deɪz.

The camp lay quiet beneath a gibbous moon that gave as much light in a cloudless sky as it normally would have full, a brightness that washed out the stars. Some sort of night-bird cried shrilly, then fell silent at an owl's deep hoot. There was a small breeze, and for a wonder, it actually seemed a little cool. Probably her imagination. The nights were cool only in comparison to the days.

moʊst ə ðə mɛn wɝ əslip, dɑɹk hʌmps əmʌŋ ðə ʃædoʊz bɪniθ ðə tʃɹiz. ə fju ɹɪmeɪn əweɪk, tɔkɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə hændfʊl ə faɪɝz stɪl bɝnɪŋ. ʃi meɪd noʊ ɛfɝt tə haɪd, bʌt nʌn noʊɾəst hɝ. səm əpɪɹd hæf əslip wɛɹ ðeɪ sæt, hɛdz nɑɾɪŋ. ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt noʊn haʊ wɛl ðə mɛn ɑn sɛntʃɹi duɾi wəd bi kipɪŋ wɑtʃ, ʃi maɪɾ əv θɔt ðə kæmp kəd bi sɝpɹaɪz baɪ ə hɝɾ ʌv waɪl kæɾəl. ʌv kɔɹs, ðə meɪɾənz wəd bi ɑn ɡɑɹɾ ɪn ðə naɪt, tu. bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ ɪf ðeɪ sɔ hɝ, iðɝ.

Most of the men were asleep, dark humps among the shadows beneath the trees. A few remained awake, talking around the handful of fires still burning. She made no effort to hide, but none noticed her. Some appeared half asleep where they sat, heads nodding. If she had not known how well the men on sentry duty would be keeping watch, she might have thought the camp could be surprised by a herd of wild cattle. Of course, the Maidens would be on guard in the night, too. But it did not matter if they saw her, either.

ðə haɪ-wil kɑɹts meɪd lɔŋ, ʃæɾoʊd ɹoʊz, ðə sɝvəns ɔlɹɛɾi snʌɡ ən snɔɹɪŋ bɪniθ. moʊst ə ðə sɝvəns. wʌn faɪɝ stɪl kɹækəl ðɛɹ. meɪaɪɡdɪn ən əɹ fɹɛnz sæɾ ɝaʊn ɪt. tɑlænvɝ wɑz tɔkɪŋ, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ fɪɹsli, bʌɾ oʊnli ði ʌðɝ mɛn sim tə bi peɪɪŋ ɪm ɛni maɪnd, ðoʊ hi əpɪɹd tə bi ədʒɹɛsɪŋ hɪmsɛlf tə meɪaɪɡdɪn. ðət ðeɪ hæd hæd bɛɾɝ ɡɑɹb ɪn ðɛɹ bʌndəlz ðən ðoʊz nɪɹ ɹæɡz wɑz nɑt sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ, bʌt ðɛɹ fɔɹmɝ mɪstʃɹəs mʌst əv hæɾ ə vɛɹi fɹi hæn tə ɡɪv aʊt sɪlk tə hɝ pipəl, ən meɪaɪɡdɪn wɔɹ faɪnli kʌt sɪlk ɪndid, ɪn ə mjuɾɪd blu. nʌn ə ði ʌðɝz wɑz dʒɹɛst soʊ wɛl, soʊ pɝhæps meɪaɪɡdɪn hæd bɪn ðɛɹ leɪɾiz feɪvɹɪt.

The high-wheeled carts made long, shadowed rows, the servants already snug and snoring beneath. Most of the servants. One fire still crackled there. Maighdin and her friends sat around it. Tallanvor was talking, gesturing fiercely, but only the other men seemed to be paying him any mind, though he appeared to be addressing himself to Maighdin. That they had had better garb in their bundles than those near rags was not surprising, but their former mistress must have had a very free hand to give out silk to her people, and Maighdin wore finely cut silk indeed, in a muted blue. None of the others was dressed so well, so perhaps Maighdin had been their lady's favorite.

ə twɪɡ snæpt ʌndɝ feɪlz fʊt, ən hɛdz wɪpt ɝaʊnd, tɑlænvɝ stɑɹɾɪŋ tə hɪz fit, hæf dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd bɪfɔɹ i sɔ hɝ ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ ɹoʊb ɪn ðə munlaɪt. ðeɪ wɝ mɔɹ əlɝt ðən ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn bɪhaɪn hɝ. fəɹ ən ɪnstən ðə lɑɾ ə ðɛm dʒʌst stɛɹɾ ət hɝ; ðən meɪaɪɡdɪn ɹoʊz ɡɹeɪsfəli ən meɪɾ ə dip kɝtsi, ən ði ʌðɝz heɪstəli fɑloʊɾ əɹ ɪɡzæmpəl wɪð vɛɹiɪŋ dɪɡɹiz ə skɪl. oʊnli meɪaɪɡdɪn ən beɪlwɝ əpɪɹɾ əɾ ɔl əɾ iz. ə nɝvəs smaɪl splɪt ɡɪlz ɹaʊn feɪs.

A twig snapped under Faile's foot, and heads whipped around, Tallanvor starting to his feet, half drawing his sword before he saw her gathering her robe in the moonlight. They were more alert than the Two Rivers men behind her. For an instant the lot of them just stared at her; then Maighdin rose gracefully and made a deep curtsy, and the others hastily followed her example with varying degrees of skill. Only Maighdin and Balwer appeared at all at ease. A nervous smile split Gill's round face.

"ɡoʊ ɑn wɪð wʌt jə wɝ duɪŋ," feɪl toʊld əm kaɪnli. "bʌt doʊn steɪ ʌp tu leɪt; təmɑɹoʊ wɪl bi fʊl." ʃi wɔkt ɑn, bʌt wən ʃi ɡlæns bæk, ðeɪ wɝ stɪl stændɪŋ, stɪl piɹɪŋ æftɝ hɝ. ðɛɹ tʃɹævəlz mʌst əv meɪɾ əm wɛɹi əz ɹæbəts, ɔlweɪz wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ ə fɑks. ʃi wʌndɝd haʊ wɛl ðeɪ wəd fɪɾ ɪn. oʊvɝ ðə nɛks fju wiks, ʃi wəd bi bɪzi tʃɹeɪnɪŋ əm tə hɝ weɪz, lɝnɪŋ ðɛɹz. wʌn wɑz əz ɪmpɔɹɾənt əz ði ʌðɝ fəɹ ə wɛl-ɹʌn haʊshoʊld. ðə taɪm wəɾ əv tə bi faʊnd.

"Go on with what you were doing," Faile told them kindly. "But don't stay up too late; tomorrow will be full." She walked on, but when she glanced back, they were still standing, still peering after her. Their travels must have made them wary as rabbits, always watching for a fox. She wondered how well they would fit in. Over the next few weeks, she would be busy training them to her ways, learning theirs. One was as important as the other for a well-run household. The time would have to be found.

ðeɪ dɪd nɑt steɪ lɔŋ ɪn əɹ θɔts tənaɪt. sun ʃi wɑz bɪɑn ðə kɑɹts, nɑt kwaɪɾ aʊt tə wɛɹ tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn wəd bi kipɪŋ ʃɑɹp wɑtʃ fɹəm ʌp ɪn ðə tʃɹiz. nʌθɪŋ lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ə maʊs wəd ɡɛt baɪ ðɛm ənsin - ivən səm ə ðə meɪɾənz hæd bɪn spɑɾəd əpɑn əkeɪʒən - bʌt ðeɪ wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ ɛniwʌn ətɛmptɪŋ tə snik ɪn. nɑt fəɹ ðoʊz u hæɾ ə ɹaɪt tə bi ðɛɹ. ɪn ə smɔl munlɪt klɪɹɪŋ, hɝ pipəl wɝ weɪɾɪŋ.

They did not stay long in her thoughts tonight. Soon she was beyond the carts, not quite out to where Two Rivers men would be keeping sharp watch from up in the trees. Nothing larger than a mouse would get by them unseen - even some of the Maidens had been spotted upon occasion - but they were watching for anyone attempting to sneak in. Not for those who had a right to be there. In a small moonlit clearing, her people were waiting.

səm ə ðə mɛn baʊd, ən pɛɹɪlin nɪɹli wɛn tə wʌn ni bɪfɔɹ stɑpɪŋ hɪmsɛlf. sɛvɹəl wɪmən ɪnstɪŋktɪvli meɪd kɝtsiz ðət lʊkt kwaɪt pəkjuljɝ ɪn mɛnz ɡɑɹb, ðən dʒɹɑp ðɛɹ aɪz əɹ ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ɪmbɛɹəsmən ət ɹilaɪzɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ hæd dʌn. ðə mænɝz ə ðə kɔɹt hæd bɪn bɹɛɾ ɪndə ðɛm, ðoʊ ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd vɛɹi hɑɹd tə ədɑpt il kʌstəmz. wʌt ðeɪ bɪlivd wɝ il kʌstəmz, ət list. səmtaɪmz ðeɪ hɔɹəfaɪd ðə meɪɾənz wɪð wʌt ðeɪ bɪlivd. pɛɹɪn kɔld əm fulz, ən ðeɪ wɝ ɪn səm weɪz, bʌt ðeɪ hæd swɔɹn fiəlti tə hɝ, ðiz kɛɹhinɪn ən tɛɹənz - wɔɾɝ oʊθ, ðeɪ neɪmd ɪt, kɑpiɪŋ ði il, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə - ən ðət meɪɾ əm hɝz. əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ðeɪ hæd teɪkən tə kɔlɪŋ ðɛɹ "səsaɪəɾi" tʃɑ feɪl, ðə fælkənz tælən, ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd sin ðə nəsɛsəɾi ʌv kipɪŋ ðət kwaɪət. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt fulz ɪn ɔl weɪz. ɪn fækt, ɝaʊn ði ɛdʒəz ɛniweɪ, ðeɪ wɝ nɑt tu ənlaɪk ðə jʌŋ mɛn ən wɪmən ʃi hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp wɪð.

Some of the men bowed, and Parelean nearly went to one knee before stopping himself. Several women instinctively made curtsies that looked quite peculiar in men's garb, then dropped their eyes or shifted in embarrassment at realizing what they had done. The manners of the court had been bred into them, though they tried very hard to adopt Aiel customs. What they believed were Aiel customs, at least. Sometimes they horrified the Maidens with what they believed. Perrin called them fools, and they were in some ways, but they had sworn fealty to her, these Cairhienin and Tairens - water oath, they named it, copying the Aiel, trying to - and that made them hers. Among themselves they had taken to calling their "society" Cha Faile, the Falcon's Talon, though they had seen the necessity of keeping that quiet. They were not fools in all ways. In fact, around the edges anyway, they were not too unlike the young men and women she had grown up with.

ðoʊz ʃi hæd sɛn ɔf ɝli ðət mɔɹnɪŋ hæd dʒʌst ɹɪtɝnd, fəɹ ðə wɪmən əmʌŋ əm wɝ stɪl tʃeɪnʒɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə dʒɹɛsəz ðeɪ hæd wɔɹn ə nəsɛsəɾi. ivən wʌn wʊmən dʒɹɛst əz ə mæn wʊɾə ɹaʊz noʊɾəs ɪn bɛθɔl, nɑt tə mɛnʃən faɪv. ðə klɪɹɪŋ wɑz ə ɡɹeɪt flɝi ʌv skɝts ən ʃɪfs, koʊts ən ʃɝts ən bɹitʃɪz. ðə wɪmən meɪd bɪliv ðeɪ dɪd nɑt maɪn biɪŋ ənkloʊðd ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ʌðɝz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ mɛn, sɪns ði il əpɛɹənli dɪd nɑt, bʌt heɪst ən leɪbɝd bɹiðɪŋ ɡeɪv əm ðə laɪ. ðə mɛn wɝ ɔl ʃɪftɪŋ fiɾ ən tɝnɪŋ hɛdz, tɔɹn bɪtwin lʊkɪŋ əweɪ disənli ən wɑtʃɪŋ, əz ðeɪ θɔt ði il dɪd, waɪl pɹitɛndɪŋ ðeɪ wɝ nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət hæf-dʒɹɛst wɪmən. feɪl hɛld əɹ ɹoʊb kloʊs oʊvɝ əɹ naɪtdʒɹɛs; ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv dʒɹɛs fɝðɝ wɪθaʊt weɪkɪŋ pɛɹɪn fəɹ ʃʊɹ, bʌt ʃi meɪd noʊ pɹitɛns ət kʌmfɝt. ʃi wɑz noʊ dəmɑni, tə ɹəsiv əɹ ɹɪteɪnɝz ɪn əɹ bæθ.

Those she had sent off early that morning had just returned, for the women among them were still changing out of the dresses they had worn of necessity. Even one woman dressed as a man would have roused notice in Bethal, not to mention five. The clearing was a great flurry of skirts and shifts, coats and shirts and breeches. The women made believe they did not mind being unclothed in front of others, including men, since the Aiel apparently did not, but haste and labored breathing gave them the lie. The men were all shifting feet and turning heads, torn between looking away decently and watching, as they thought the Aiel did, while pretending they were not looking at half-dressed women. Faile held her robe close over her nightdress; she could not have dressed further without waking Perrin for sure, but she made no pretense at comfort. She was no Domani, to receive her retainers in her bath.

"fɝɡɪv əs fəɹ biɪŋ leɪt, maɪ leɪɾi feɪl," sɛlən pæntɪd, tʌɡɪŋ əɹ koʊɾ ɑn. ði æksɛns ə kɛɹhin wɝ ʃɑɹp ɪn ðə ʃɔɹt wʊmənz vɔɪs. ivən fəɹ ə kɛɹhinɪn, ʃi wɑz nɑt tɔl. ʃi mænədʒd ə kɹɛɾəbəl swæɡɝ, ðoʊ, ə suɾəbəl boʊlnəs ɪn ðə tɪlt ə hɝ hɛɾ ən ðə sɛɾ ə hɝ ʃoʊldɝz. "wi wʊɾə ɹɪtɝn sunɝ, bʌt ðə ɡeɪt ɡɑɹdz meɪɾ ə bɑðɝ lɛɾɪŋ əs aʊt."

"Forgive us for being late, my Lady Faile," Selande panted, tugging her coat on. The accents of Cairhien were sharp in the short woman's voice. Even for a Cairhienin, she was not tall. She managed a credible swagger, though, a suitable boldness in the tilt of her head and the set of her shoulders. "We would have returned sooner, but the gate guards made a bother letting us out."

"ə bɑðɝ?" feɪl sɛd ʃɑɹpli. ɪf oʊnli ʃi cʊɾə sin wɪð əɹ oʊn aɪz, ɑn tɑp ə ðɛɹz; ɪf oʊnli pɛɹɪn hæd lɛɾ əɹ ɡoʊ ɪnstɛɾ ə ðət tʃɹɑləp. noʊ, ʃi wəd nɑt θɪŋk əbaʊt bɹəleɪn. ɪt wɑz nɑt pɛɹɪnz fɔlt. ʃi ɹɪpiɾɪd ðət tə hɝsɛlf twɛnti taɪmz ə deɪ, laɪk ə pɹɛɹ. bʌt waɪ wɑz ðə mæn soʊ blaɪnd? "wʌt kaɪndə bɑðɝ?" ʃi dʒɹu ə ʃəɡɹɪn bɹɛθ. tʃɹʌbəlz wɪð jəɹ hʌzbənd ʃəd nɛvɝ əfɛk jəɹ toʊn wɪð jəɹ væsəlz.

"A bother?" Faile said sharply. If only she could have seen with her own eyes, on top of theirs; if only Perrin had let her go instead of that trollop. No, she would not think about Berelain. It was not Perrin's fault. She repeated that to herself twenty times a day, like a prayer. But why was the man so blind? "What kind of bother?" She drew a chagrined breath. Troubles with your husband should never affect your tone with your vassals.

"nʌθɪŋ ə noʊt, maɪ leɪɾi." sɛlən bʌkəld əɹ sɔɹd bɛlt ən sɛɾəld ɪɾ ɑn əɹ hɪps. "ðeɪ lɛt səm fɛloʊz əhɛɾ ʌv əs dʒɹaɪv ðɛɹ wæɡənz θɹu wɪθaʊɾ ə sɛkən lʊk, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ wɝiɾ əbaʊt lɛɾɪŋ wɪmən ɡoʊ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə naɪt." səm ə ði ʌðɝ wɪmən læft. ðə faɪv mɛn u hæd ɡɔn ɪndə bɛθɔl stɝɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli, noʊ daʊt kəz ðeɪ hæd nɑt bɪn θɔɾ ɪnʌf pɹətɛkʃən. ðə ɹɛst ə tʃɑ feɪl meɪɾ ə θɪk sɛmɪsɝkəl bɪhaɪn ðoʊz tɛn, wɑtʃɪŋ feɪl kloʊsli, lɪsnɪŋ kloʊsli. munlaɪt ʃæɾoʊd ðɛɹ feɪsəz.

"Nothing of note, my Lady." Selande buckled her sword belt and settled it on her hips. "They let some fellows ahead of us drive their wagons through without a second look, but they were worried about letting women go out into the night." Some of the other women laughed. The five men who had gone into Bethal stirred irritably, no doubt because they had not been thought enough protection. The rest of Cha Faile made a thick semicircle behind those ten, watching Faile closely, listening closely. Moonlight shadowed their faces.

"tɛl mi wʌt jə sɔ," feɪl kəmændəɾ ɪn ə kɑmɝ toʊn. mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ.

"Tell me what you saw," Faile commanded in a calmer tone. Much better.

sɛlən meɪɾ əɹ ɹipɔɹt kənsaɪsli, ən fəɹ ɔl feɪlz wɪʃɪz ðət ʃi hæd ɡɔn hɝsɛlf, ʃi hæd tə ədmɪt ðeɪ hæd sin ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi kəɾ əv wɪʃt. ðə stʃɹits ə bɛθɔl wɝ nɪɹli ɛmpti ivən ət ðə bɪziəst aʊɝz ə ðə deɪ. pipəl steɪd tə ðɛɹ oʊn hoʊmz əz mʌtʃ əz pɑsəbəl. ə lɪɾəl kɑmɝs tʃɹɪkəld ɪn ən aʊt, bʌt fju mɝtʃəns vɛntʃɝɾ ɪndə ðɪs pɑɹɾ ʌv ɡildən, ən bɛɹli ɪnʌf fud keɪm ɪn fɹəm ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd tə kip ɛvɹiwʌn fɛd. moʊst ə ðə taʊnzpipəl sim stʌnd, əfɹeɪɾ ʌv wʌt leɪ aʊtsaɪd ðə wɔlz, sɪŋkɪŋ dipɝ ən dipɝ ɪndə æpəθi ən dɪspɛɹ. ɛvɹiwʌn kɛp ðɛɹ maʊðz kloʊz fəɹ fɪɹ ə ðə pɹɑfəts spaɪz, ən ðɛɹ aɪz əz wɛl, fəɹ fɪɹ ə biɪŋ teɪkən fəɹ spaɪz. ðə pɹɑfət hæɾ ə dip ɪfɛkt. fəɹ ɪnstəns, haʊɛvɝ mɛni bændəts ɹoʊm ðə hɪlz, kʌtpɝsɪz ən fʊtpædz hæd vænɪʃt fɹəm bɛθɔl. ɪt wɑz sɛd ðə pɹɑfəts pɛnəlti fəɹ ə θif wɑz tə kʌɾ ɔf ðə mænz hænz. ðoʊ ðət dɪd nɑt sim tə əplaɪ tə hɪz oʊn pipəl.

Selande made her report concisely, and for all Faile's wishes that she had gone herself, she had to admit they had seen almost as much as she could have wished. The streets of Bethal were nearly empty even at the busiest hours of the day. People stayed to their own homes as much as possible. A little commerce trickled in and out, but few merchants ventured into this part of Ghealdan, and barely enough food came in from the countryside to keep everyone fed. Most of the townspeople seemed stunned, afraid of what lay outside the walls, sinking deeper and deeper into apathy and despair. Everyone kept their mouths closed for fear of the Prophet's spies, and their eyes as well, for fear of being taken for spies. The Prophet had a deep effect. For instance, however many bandits roamed the hills, cutpurses and footpads had vanished from Bethal. It was said the Prophet's penalty for a thief was to cut off the man's hands. Though that did not seem to apply to his own people.

"ðə kwin tʊɹz ðə sɪɾi ɛvɹi deɪ, ʃoʊɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə kip spɪɹəts ʌp," sɛlən sɛd, "bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ɪt hɛlps mʌtʃ. ʃiz meɪkɪŋ ə pɹɑɡɹɛs hɪɹ ɪn ðə saʊθ tə ɹimaɪn pipəl ðeɪv ə kwin; meɪbi ʃiz hæd mɔɹ səksɛs ɛlswɛɹ. ðə wɑtʃ əz bɪn æɾəd tə ðə wɔl ɡɑɹdz, ən ɔl bʌɾ ə hændfʊl ə hɝ soʊlʒɝz, tu. pɝhæps ɪt meɪks ðə taʊnzfoʊk fil seɪfɝ. əntɪl ʃi muvz ɑn. ənlaɪk ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls, æliændɝ hɝsɛlf əpɛɹənli filz noʊ fɪɹ ðə pɹɑfət wɪl kʌm stɔɹmɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə wɔlz. ʃi wɔks əloʊn ɪn ðə ɡɑɹɾənz ə lɔɹd tɛləbɪnz pæləs, mɔɹnɪŋ ən ivnɪŋ, ən kips oʊnli ə fju soʊlʒɝz, hu spɛn moʊst ə ðɛɹ taɪm ɪn ðə kɪtʃənz. ɛvɹibɑɾi ɪn ðə sɪɾi simz əz kənsɝnd wɪð fud, wɪð haʊ lɔŋ ðəɹ wɪl bi ɪnʌf, əz ðeɪ ɑɹ wɪð ðə pɹɑfət. ɪn tʃɹuθ, maɪ leɪɾi, fəɹ ɔl ðə ɡɑɹdz ɑn ðə wɔlz, aɪ θɪŋk ɪf mæsimə əpɪɹɾ ət ðə ɡeɪts əloʊn, ðeɪ maɪt ɡɪv ɪm ðə taʊn."

"The Queen tours the city every day, showing herself to keep spirits up," Selande said, "but I do not think it helps much. She is making a progress here in the south to remind people they have a Queen; maybe she has had more success elsewhere. The Watch has been added to the wall guards, and all but a handful of her soldiers, too. Perhaps it makes the townsfolk feel safer. Until she moves on. Unlike everyone else, Alliandre herself apparently feels no fear the Prophet will come storming over the walls. She walks alone in the gardens of Lord Telabin's palace, morning and evening, and keeps only a few soldiers, who spend most of their time in the kitchens. Everybody in the city seems as concerned with food, with how long there will be enough, as they are with the Prophet. In truth, my Lady, for all the guards on the walls, I think if Masema appeared at the gates alone, they might give him the town."

"ðeɪ wʊd," mɛɹɑldə pʊɾ ɪn kəntɛmptʃwəsli, bʌklɪŋ əɹ oʊn sɔɹd ɹaʊn əɹ weɪst, "æn bɛɡ fəɹ mɝsi." dɑɹk ən stɑki, mɛɹɑldə wɑz əz tɔl əz feɪl, bʌt ðə tɛɹən wʊmən dʌkt əɹ hɛɾ əɾ ə fɹaʊn fɹəm sɛlən ən mɝmɝɾ ən əpɑlədʒi. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ daʊts u lɛd tʃɑ feɪl, æftɝ feɪl hɝsɛlf.

"They would," Meralda put in contemptuously, buckling her own sword round her waist, "and beg for mercy." Dark and stocky, Meralda was as tall as Faile, but the Tairen woman ducked her head at a frown from Selande and murmured an apology. There were no doubts who led Cha Faile, after Faile herself.

ʃi hæd bɪn pliz ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə tʃeɪnʒ ðə pɹɛsəɾəns ðeɪ hæɾ ɪstæblɪʃt. sɛlənd wɑz ðə bɹaɪɾəst ə ðɛm ɪksɛpt pɝhæps fəɹ pɛɹɪlin, ən oʊnli ɹɛlə ən kɑmɛl wɝ kwɪkɝ. ən sɛlən hæd sʌmθɪŋ ɛkstʃɹə, ə stɛɾinɪs, əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi feɪs ðə wɝs fɪɹ ɪn əɹ laɪf ən nʌθɪŋ kəɾ ɛvɝ bi ðət bæɾ əɡɛn. ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi wɑntəɾ ə skɑɹ laɪk ðoʊz səm ə ðə meɪɾənz hæd. feɪl pəzɛst sɛvɹəl smɔl skɑɹz, bædʒɪz ʌv ɑnɝ moʊst ə ðɛm, bʌɾ æktʃəli  sikɪŋ wʌn wɑz ɪɾiəsi. ət lis ðə wʊmən wɑz nɑt tu vɛɹi iɡɝ ɪn ðə mæɾɝ.

She had been pleased there was no need to change the precedence they had established. Selande was the brightest of them except perhaps for Parelean, and only Arrela and Camaille were quicker. And Selande had something extra, a steadiness, as if she had already faced the worst fear in her life and nothing could ever be that bad again. Of course, she wanted a scar like those some of the Maidens had. Faile possessed several small scars, badges of honor most of them, but actually seeking one was idiocy. At least the woman was not too very eager in the matter.

"wi meɪɾ ə mæp, əz jə ɹikwaɪɝd, maɪ leɪɾi," ðə dɪmɪnjəɾɪv wʊmən fɪnɪʃt wɪð ə læst, wɔɹnɪŋ ɡlæns ət mɛɹɑldə. "wi mɑɹkt aʊt lɔɹd tɛləbɪnz pæləs ɑn ðə bæk əz mʌtʃ əz wi kʊd, bʌɾ aɪ fɪɹ ðəɾ ɪz nɑt mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən ðə ɡɑɹɾənz ən steɪbəlz."

"We made a map, as you required, my Lady," the diminutive woman finished with a last, warning glance at Meralda. "We marked out Lord Telabin's palace on the back as much as we could, but I fear that is not much more than the gardens and stables."

feɪl dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə meɪk aʊt ðə laɪnz ɑn ðə peɪpɝ ʃi ənfoʊldəɾ ɪn ðə munlaɪt. ə pɪɾi ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn eɪbəl tə ɡoʊ hɝsɛlf; ʃi cʊɾə mæp ði ɪntɪɹiɝ, tu. noʊ. dʌn wɑz dʌn, əz pɛɹɪn laɪk tə seɪ. ən ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf. "ju ɑɹ sɝɾən noʊ wʌn sɝtʃɪz wæɡənz livɪŋ ðə sɪɾi?" ivən ɪn ðə peɪl laɪt, ʃi kəd si kənfjuʒən ɑn mɛni ʌv ðə feɪsəz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. nʌn nu waɪ ʃi hæd sɛn səm ə ðɛm ɪndə bɛθɔl.

Faile did not try to make out the lines on the paper she unfolded in the moonlight. A pity she had not been able to go herself; she could have mapped the interior, too. No. Done was done, as Perrin liked to say. And it was enough. "You are certain no one searches wagons leaving the city?" Even in the pale light, she could see confusion on many of the faces in front of her. None knew why she had sent some of them into Bethal.

sɛlən dɪd nɑt lʊk kənfjuzd. "jɛs, maɪ leɪɾi," ʃi sɛd kɑmli. kwaɪt bɹaɪt, ən mɔɹ ðən kwɪk ɪnʌf.

Selande did not look confused. "Yes, my Lady," she said calmly. Quite bright, and more than quick enough.

ðə wɪnd ɡʌstɪd fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ɹʌslɪŋ livz ɑn ðə tʃɹiz, ɹʌslɪŋ dɛd livz ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ən feɪl wɪʃt ʃi hæd pɛɹɪnz ɪɹz. hɪz noʊz ən aɪz, tu. ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ ɪf ɛniwʌn sɔ hɝ hɪɹ wɪð əɹ ɹɪteɪnɝz, bʌɾ ivzdʒɹɑpɝz wəd bi sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. "juv dʌn vɛɹi wɛl, sɛlənd. ɔl ə jə hæv." pɛɹɪn nu ðə deɪnʒɝz hɪɹ, əz ɹil əz ɛni fɑɹðɝ saʊθ; hi nu, bʌt laɪk moʊs mɛn, hi θɔt wɪð ɪz hɑɹɾ əz ɔfən əz ɪz hɛd. ə waɪf hæd tə bi pɹæktəkəl, tə kip əɹ hʌzbən aʊɾ ə tʃɹʌbəl. ðət hæd bɪn əɹ mʌðɝz vɛɹi fɝs pis ʌv ædvaɪs ɑn mɛɹid laɪf. "æt fɝs laɪt, jəl ɹɪtɝn tə bɛθɔl, ən ɪf jə ɹəsiv wɝd fɹəm mi, ðɪs ɪz wʌt jəl du. . . ."

The wind gusted for a moment, rustling leaves on the trees, rustling dead leaves on the ground, and Faile wished she had Perrin's ears. His nose and eyes, too. It did not matter if anyone saw her here with her retainers, but eavesdroppers would be something else. "You've done very well, Selande. All of you have." Perrin knew the dangers here, as real as any farther south; he knew, but like most men, he thought with his heart as often as his head. A wife had to be practical, to keep her husband out of trouble. That had been her mother's very first piece of advice on married life. "At first light, you will return to Bethal, and if you receive word from me, this is what you will do. . . ."

ivən sɛlənz aɪz waɪɾənd ɪn ʃɑk əz ʃi wɛn ɑn, bʌt noʊ wʌn mɝmɝd ðə slaɪɾəst pɹoʊɾɛst. feɪl wʊɾə bɪn sɝpɹaɪzd ɪf ɛniwʌn hæd. hɝ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz wɝ tə ðə pɔɪnt. ðəɹ wəd bi səm deɪnʒɝ, bʌɾ ʌndɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz, nɑt nɪɹli wʌt maɪɾ əv bɪn.

Even Selande's eyes widened in shock as she went on, but no one murmured the slightest protest. Faile would have been surprised if anyone had. Her instructions were to the point. There would be some danger, but under the circumstances, not nearly what might have been.

"ɑɹ ðəɹ ɛni kwɛstʃənz?" ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. "dʌz ɛvɹiwʌn ʌndɝstænd?"

"Are there any questions?" she said finally. "Does everyone understand?"

wɪð wʌn vɔɪs, tʃɑ feɪl ænsɝd. "wi lɪv tə sɝv əɹ leɪɾi feɪl." ən ðət mɛn ðeɪ wəd sɝv əɹ bɪlʌvd wʊlf, wɛðɝ i wɑntəɾ əm tə əɹ nɑt.

With one voice, Cha Faile answered. "We live to serve our Lady Faile." And that meant they would serve her beloved wolf, whether he wanted them to or not.

meɪaɪɡdɪn ʃɪftəɾ ɪn əɹ blæŋkəts ɑn ðə hɑɹd ɡɹaʊnd, slip ɪluɾɪŋ hɝ. ðət wɑz əɹ neɪm, naʊ; ə nu neɪm fəɹ ə nu laɪf. meɪaɪɡdɪn, fəɹ əɹ mʌðɝ, ən dɔɹleɪn, fəɹ ə fæmli ɑn ən ɪsteɪt ðət hæd bɪn hɝz. ə nu laɪf fəɹ ən oʊld laɪf ɡɔn, bʌt taɪz ə ðə hɑɹt kəd nɑt bi kʌt. ən naʊ. . . . naʊ. . . .

Maighdin shifted in her blankets on the hard ground, sleep eluding her. That was her name, now; a new name for a new life. Maighdin, for her mother, and Dorlain, for a family on an estate that had been hers. A new life for an old life gone, but ties of the heart could not be cut. And now. . . . Now. . . .

ə feɪn kɹækəl ə dɛd livz bɹɔɾ əɹ hɛɾ ʌp, ən ʃi wɑtʃt ə dɪm ʃeɪp pæs θɹu ðə tʃɹiz. ðə leɪɾi feɪl, ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə hɝ tɛn fɹəm wɛɹɛvɝ ʃi hæd ɡɔn. ə plɛzən jʌŋ wʊmən, kaɪndhɑɹɾɪd ən wɛl spoʊkən. wʌtɛvɝ əɹ hʌzbənz stɑk, ʃi ɔlmoʊst sɝɾənli wɑz nɑbli bɔɹn. bʌt jʌŋ. ɪnɪkspɪɹiənst. ðət maɪt bi ə hɛlp.

A faint crackle of dead leaves brought her head up, and she watched a dim shape pass through the trees. The Lady Faile, returning to her tent from wherever she had gone. A pleasant young woman, kindhearted and well spoken. Whatever her husband's stock, she almost certainly was nobly born. But young. Inexperienced. That might be a help.

meɪaɪɡdɪn lɛɾ əɹ hɛd fɔl bæk ɑn ðə kloʊk ʃi hæd wɑɾəd ʌp fəɹ ə pɪloʊ. laɪt, wʌt wɑz ʃi duɪŋ hɪɹ? teɪkɪŋ sɝvəs əz ə leɪɾiz meɪd! noʊ. ʃi wəd hoʊld ɑn tə hɝ kɑnfəɾəns ɪn hɝsɛlf, ət list. ʃi kəd stɪl faɪn ðæt. ʃi kʊd. ɪf ʃi dʌɡ dipli. hɝ bɹɛθ kɑɾ ət ðə saʊn ə fʊtstɛps kloʊs baɪ.

Maighdin let her head fall back on the cloak she had wadded up for a pillow. Light, what was she doing here? Taking service as a lady's maid! No. She would hold on to her confidence in herself, at least. She could still find that. She could. If she dug deeply. Her breath caught at the sound of footsteps close by.

tɑlænvɝ nɛlt ɡɹeɪsfəli əɾ əɹ saɪd. hi wɑz ʃɝtləs, munlaɪt ɡlimɪŋ ɑn ðə smuð mʌsəlz ə hɪz tʃɛst ən ʃoʊldɝz, hɪz feɪs ɪn ʃædoʊz. ə slaɪt bɹiz ɹʌfəld ɪz hɛɹ. "wʌt mædnəs ɪz ðɪs?" hi æsk sɔfli. "ɛntɝɪŋ sɝvəs? wʌɾ ɑɹ jə ʌp tə? ən doʊn tɛl mi ðət nɑnsɛns əbaʊt meɪkɪŋ ə nu laɪf; aɪ doʊn bɪliv ɪt. noʊ wʌn dʌz."

Tallanvor knelt gracefully at her side. He was shirtless, moonlight gleaming on the smooth muscles of his chest and shoulders, his face in shadows. A slight breeze ruffled his hair. "What madness is this?" he asked softly. "Entering service? What are you up to? And don't tell me that nonsense about making a new life; I don't believe it. No one does."

ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə tɝn əweɪ, bʌɾ i leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. hi ɪɡzɝɾɪd noʊ pɹɛʃɝ, jɛɾ ɪt stɑpt əɹ əz ʃʊɹli əz ə hɔltɝ. laɪt, pliz lɛɾ əɹ nɑt tʃɹɛmbəl. ðə laɪt dɪd nɑt lɪsən, bʌɾ ət list ʃi mænədʒ tə kip əɹ vɔɪs stɛɾi. "ɪf jə hævənt noʊɾəst, aɪ mʌs meɪk maɪ weɪ ɪn ðə wɝld, naʊ. bɛɾɝ əz ə leɪɾiz meɪd ðən ə tævɝn meɪd. jə meɪ fil fɹi tə ɡoʊ ɑn əloʊn ɪf sɝvəs hɪɹ dʌzn sut."

She tried to turn away, but he laid a hand on her shoulder. He exerted no pressure, yet it stopped her as surely as a halter. Light, please let her not tremble. The Light did not listen, but at least she managed to keep her voice steady. "If you haven't noticed, I must make my way in the world, now. Better as a lady's maid than a tavern maid. You may feel free to go on alone if service here doesn't suit."

"ju dɪdn æbdəkeɪt jəɹ wɪts əɹ jəɹ pɹaɪd wən jə ɡeɪv ʌp ðə θɹoʊn," hi mʌɾɝd. bɝn lini fəɹ ɹɪvilɪŋ ðæt! "ɪf jə min tə pɹitɛn ðət jə dɪd, aɪ sədʒɛs jə əvɔɪd lɛɾɪŋ lini ɡɛt jə əloʊn." ðə mæn tʃʌkəld ət hɝ! hi tʃʌkəld, oʊ, soʊ ɹɪtʃli! "ʃi wɑns ə wɝd wɪð meɪaɪɡdɪn, ən aɪ səspɛkt ʃi woʊn bi əz dʒɛntəl wɪð meɪaɪɡdɪn əz ʃi wɑz wɪð mɔɹɡeɪs."

"You didn't abdicate your wits or your pride when you gave up the throne," he muttered. Burn Lini for revealing that! "If you mean to pretend that you did, I suggest you avoid letting Lini get you alone." The man chuckled at her! He chuckled, oh, so richly! "She wants a word with Maighdin, and I suspect she won't be as gentle with Maighdin as she was with Morgase."

æŋɡɹəli ʃi sæɾ ʌp, bɹʌʃɪŋ ɪz hæn əweɪ. "ɑɹ jə blaɪnd, ən dɛf əz wɛl? ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əz plænz fəɹ ɪleɪn! laɪt, aɪ wʊdn laɪk ɪɾ ɪf i sɪmpli nu hɝ neɪm! ɪt mʌs bi mɔɹ ðən tʃæns ðət bɹɔt mi tə wʌn ə hɪz hɛntʃmən, tɑlænvɝ. ɪts tə bi!"

Angrily she sat up, brushing his hand away. "Are you blind, and deaf as well? The Dragon Reborn has plans for Elayne! Light, I wouldn't like it if he simply knew her name! It must be more than chance that brought me to one of his henchmen, Tallanvor. It has to be!"

"bɝn mi, aɪ nu ɪt mʌs bi ðæt. aɪ hoʊpt aɪ wɑz ɹɔŋ, bʌt. . . ." hi saʊndəɾ əz æŋɡɹi əz ʃi. hi hæd noʊ ɹaɪt tə bi æŋɡɹi! "ɪleɪn ɪz seɪf ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ði æmɪɝlɪn sit woʊn lɛɾ əɹ ɛniwɛɹ nɪɹ ə mæn u kən tʃænəl, ivən ɪf hiz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn - ɪspɛʃli ɪf i ɪz! - ən meɪaɪɡdɪn dɔɹleɪn kən də nʌθɪŋ əbaʊt ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, əɹ ðə laɪən θɹoʊn. ɔl ʃi kən də ɪz ɡɛɾ əɹ nɛk snæpt, əɹ əɹ θɹoʊt kʌt, əɹ - !"

"Burn me, I knew it must be that. I hoped I was wrong, but. . . ." He sounded as angry as she. He had no right to be angry! "Elayne is safe in the White Tower, the Amyrlin Seat won't let her anywhere near a man who can channel, even if he is the Dragon Reborn - especially if he is! - and Maighdin Dorlain can do nothing about the Amyrlin Seat, the Dragon Reborn, or the Lion Throne. All she can do is get her neck snapped, or her throat cut, or - !"

"meɪaɪɡdɪn dɔɹleɪn kən wɑtʃ!" ʃi bɹoʊk ɪn, ət lis pɑɹtli tə stɑp ðəɾ ɑfəl lɪɾəni. "ʃi kən lɪsən! ʃi kən . . . !" ɪɹɪɾəbli, ʃi tʃɹeɪld ɔf. wʌt kəd ʃi du? sʌɾənli ʃi ɹilaɪzd ʃi wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ ɪn ə θɪn ʃɪft ən hɝidli foʊldəɾ əɹ blæŋkəts ɝaʊn hɝ. ðə naɪɾ æktʃəli  simd ə lɪɾəl kul. əɹ meɪbi ðə ɡus bʌmps ɑn əɹ skɪn wɝ fɹəm tɑlænvɝz ənsin aɪz ɑn hɝ. ðə θɔt ɹaʊzd ə flʌʃ ɪn əɹ tʃiks ʃi hoʊpt i kəd nɑt si. lʌkəli, ɪt pʊɾ ə hiɾ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs, tu. ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ə ɡɝl, tə ɡoʊ blʌʃɪŋ kəz ə mæn lʊkt ət hɝ! "aɪ wɪl də wʌɾ aɪ kæn, wʌtɛvɝ ðəɾ ɪz. ðə tʃæns wɪl kʌm tə lɝn sʌmθɪŋ əɹ də sʌmθɪŋ ðət wɪl hɛlp ɪleɪn, əl wɪl teɪk ɪt!"

"Maighdin Dorlain can watch!" she broke in, at least partly to stop that awful litany. "She can listen! She can . . . !" Irritably, she trailed off. What could she do? Suddenly she realized she was sitting there in a thin shift and hurriedly folded her blankets around her. The night actually seemed a little cool. Or maybe the goose bumps on her skin were from Tallanvor's unseen eyes on her. The thought roused a flush in her cheeks she hoped he could not see. Luckily, it put a heat in her voice, too. She was not a girl, to go blushing because a man looked at her! "I will do what I can, whatever that is. The chance will come to learn something or do something that will help Elayne, and I will take it!"

"ə deɪnʒɝəs dɪsɪʒən," hi toʊld əɹ kɑmli. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi kəd meɪk aʊɾ ɪz feɪs ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. oʊnli tə ɹiɾ ɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən, ʌv kɔɹs. "ju hɝɾ ɪm θɹɛɾən tə hæŋ ɛniwʌn u lʊkt əɾ ɪm ðə ɹɔŋ weɪ. aɪ kən bɪliv ɪt, ɪn ə mæn wɪð ðoʊz aɪz. laɪk ə bist. aɪ wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd i lɛt ðət fɛloʊ ɡoʊ; aɪ θɔt hid ɹɪp ɪz θɹoʊɾ aʊt! ɪf i dɪskʌvɝz u jə ɑɹ, hu jə juz tə bi. . . . beɪlwɝ maɪt bɪtʃɹeɪ ju. hi nɛvɝ ɹɪli ɪkspleɪnd waɪ hi hɛlpt əs ɪskeɪp æmədɔɹ. meɪbi hi θɔt kwin mɔɹɡeɪs wəd ɡɪv ɪm ə nu pəzɪʃən. naʊ hi noʊz ðɛɹz noʊ tʃæns ə ðæt, ən i maɪt wɑnə kʌɹi feɪvɝ wɪð ɪz nu mæstɝ ən mɪstʃɹəs."

"A dangerous decision," he told her calmly. She wished she could make out his face in the darkness. Only to read his expression, of course. "You heard him threaten to hang anyone who looked at him the wrong way. I can believe it, in a man with those eyes. Like a beast. I was surprised he let that fellow go; I thought he'd rip his throat out! If he discovers who you are, who you used to be. . . . Balwer might betray you. He never really explained why he helped us escape Amador. Maybe he thought Queen Morgase would give him a new position. Now he knows there's no chance of that, and he might want to curry favor with his new master and mistress."

"ɑɹ jə əfɹeɪɾ ə lɔɹd pɛɹɪn ɡoʊldeɪniz?" ʃi dɪmændəd kəntɛmptʃwəsli. laɪt, ðə mæn fɹaɪɾənd hɝ! ðoʊz aɪz bɪlɔŋd ɑn ə wʊlf. "beɪlwɝ noʊz ɪnʌf tə hoʊld ɪz tʌŋ. ɛniθɪŋ i sɛz wɪl ɹəflɛkt ɑn hɪm; hi keɪm wɪð mi, æftɝ ɔl. ɪf jəɹ əfɹeɪd, ðən ɹaɪɾ ɑn!"

"Are you afraid of Lord Perrin Goldeneyes?" she demanded contemptuously. Light, the man frightened her! Those eyes belonged on a wolf. "Balwer knows enough to hold his tongue. Anything he says will reflect on him; he came with me, after all. If you're afraid, then ride on!"

"ju ɔlweɪz flɪŋ ðəɾ ɪn maɪ feɪs," hi saɪd, sɛɾəlɪŋ bæk ɑn ɪz hilz. ʃi kəd nɑt si hɪz aɪz, bʌt ʃi kəd fil ðɛm. "ɹaɪɾ ɑn ɪf jə wɪʃ, jə seɪ. wʌns, ðəɹ wɑz ə soʊlʒɝ lʌvd ə kwin fɹəm əfɑɹ, noʊɪŋ ɪt wɑz hoʊpləs, noʊɪŋ i kəd nɛvɝ dɛɹ spik. naʊ ðə kwin ɪz ɡɔn, ən oʊnli ə wʊmən ɹɪmeɪnz, ən aɪ hoʊp. aɪ bɝn wɪð hoʊp! ɪf jə wɑn mi tə liv, meɪaɪɡdɪn, seɪ ɪt. wʌn wɝd. 'ɡoʊ!' ə sɪmpəl wɝd."

"You always fling that in my face," he sighed, settling back on his heels. She could not see his eyes, but she could feel them. "Ride on if you wish, you say. Once, there was a soldier loved a queen from afar, knowing it was hopeless, knowing he could never dare speak. Now the queen is gone, and only a woman remains, and I hope. I burn with hope! If you want me to leave, Maighdin, say it. One word. 'Go!' A simple word."

ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊð. ə sɪmpəl wɝd, ʃi θɔt. laɪt, ɪts oʊnli wʌn wɝd! waɪ kæn aɪ seɪ ɪt! laɪt, pliz! fəɹ ðə sɛkən taɪm ðət naɪt, ðə laɪt feɪl tə hɪɹ. ʃi sæt ðəɹ hʌɾəld ɪn əɹ blæŋkəts laɪk ə ful, hɝ maʊθ oʊpən, hɝ feɪs ɡɹoʊɪŋ hɑɾɝ ən hɑɾɝ.

She opened her mouth. A simple word, she thought. Light, it's only one word! Why can't I say it! Light, please! For the second time that night, the Light failed to hear. She sat there huddled in her blankets like a fool, her mouth open, her face growing hotter and hotter.

ɪf i hæd tʃʌkəld əɡɛn, ʃi wʊɾə pʊɾ əɹ bɛl naɪf ɪn hɪm. ɪf i hæd læft, əɹ ɡɪvən ɛni saɪn ə tʃɹaɪəmf. . . . ɪnstɛd, hi lin fɔɹwɝɾ ən dʒɛnli kɪst əɹ aɪz. ʃi meɪɾ ə saʊn dip ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt; ʃi kəd nɑt sim tə muv. waɪd-aɪd, ʃi wɑtʃt ɪm stænd. hi lumd ɪn ðə munlaɪt. ʃi wɑz ə kwin - ʃi hæd bɪn ə kwin - juz tə kəmænd, juz tə hɑɹd dɪsɪʒənz ɪn hɑɹd taɪmz, bʌt ɹaɪt ðən ðə paʊndɪŋ ə hɝ hɑɹt dʒɹʌm θɔt fɹəm əɹ hɛd.

If he had chuckled again, she would have put her belt knife in him. If he had laughed, or given any sign of triumph. . . . Instead, he leaned forward and gently kissed her eyes. She made a sound deep in her throat; she could not seem to move. Wide-eyed, she watched him stand. He loomed in the moonlight. She was a queen - she had been a queen - used to command, used to hard decisions in hard times, but right then the pounding of her heart drummed thought from her head.

"hæd jə sɛd 'ɡoʊ,' " hi toʊl hɝ, "aɪɾ əv bɛɹid hoʊp, bʌɾ aɪ kəd nɛvɝ liv ju."

"Had you said 'go,' " he told her, "I'd have buried hope, but I could never leave you."

nɑɾ əntɪl i wɑz bæk ɪn ɪz oʊn blæŋkəts kəd ʃi meɪk hɝsɛlf laɪ daʊn ən dʒɹɔ hɝz ɝaʊn hɝ. ʃi bɹiðd əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn ɹʌnɪŋ. ðə naɪt wɑz kul; ʃi wɑz ʃɪvɝɪŋ, nɑt tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ. tɑlænvɝ wɑz tu jʌŋ. tu jʌŋ! wɝs, hi wɑz ɹaɪt. bɝn ɪm fəɹ ðæt! ə leɪɾiz meɪd kəd də nʌθɪŋ tə əfɛkt ɪvɛns, ən ɪf ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹnz wʊlf-aɪd kɪlɝ lɝn ðəɾ i hæd mɔɹɡeɪs ʌv ændɝ ɪn ɪz hænz, ʃi kəd bi juzd əɡɛnst ɪleɪn ɪnstɛɾ ə hɛlpɪŋ hɝ. hi hæd noʊ ɹaɪt tə bi ɹaɪt wən ʃi wɑntəɾ ɪm tə bi ɹɔŋ! ði ɪlɑdʒɪk ə ðət θɔɾ ɪnfjʊɹieɪɾəd hɝ. ðəɹ wɑz ə tʃæns ʃi maɪt də səm ɡʊd! ðəɹ hæd tə bi!

Not until he was back in his own blankets could she make herself lie down and draw hers around her. She breathed as if she had been running. The night was cool; she was shivering, not trembling. Tallanvor was too young. Too young! Worse, he was right. Burn him for that! A lady's maid could do nothing to affect events, and if the Dragon Reborn's wolf-eyed killer learned that he had Morgase of Andor in his hands, she could be used against Elayne instead of helping her. He had no right to be right when she wanted him to be wrong! The illogic of that thought infuriated her. There was a chance she might do some good! There had to be!

ɪn ðə bæk ə hɝ hɛd, ə smɔl vɔɪs læft. jə kæn fɝɡɛt ðət jəɹ mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkənd, ɪt toʊld əɹ skɔɹnfəli, ən ivən æftɝ ʃiz æbdəkeɪɾəd əɹ θɹoʊn, kwin mɔɹɡeɪs kæn stɑp tʃɹaɪɪŋ əɹ hæn ɪn ði əfɛɹz ə ðə maɪɾi, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ mʌtʃ ɹuən ʃiz meɪɾ ʌv ɪt soʊ fɑɹ. ən ʃi kæn tɛl ə mæn tə ɡoʊ əweɪ, iðɝ, kəz ʃi kæn stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ haʊ stʃɹɔŋ ɪz hænz ɑɹ, ən haʊ hɪz lɪps kɝv wən i smaɪlz, ən -  fjʊɹiəs, ʃi pʊl ðə blæŋkəɾ oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ʃʌɾ aʊt ðə vɔɪs. ʃi wɑz nɑt steɪɪŋ kəz ʃi kəd nɑt wɔk əweɪ fɹəm paʊɝ. əz fəɹ tɑlænvɝ. . . . ʃi wəd sɛɾ ɪm fɝmli ɪn ɪz pleɪs. ðɪs taɪm ʃi wʊd! bʌt. . . . wʌt wɑz ɪz pleɪs, wɪð ə wʊmən u wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ə kwin? ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə pʊɾ ɪm aʊɾ ə hɝ maɪn ən tʃɹaɪd tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðət mɑkɪŋ vɔɪs ðət wəd nɑt bi kwaɪət, jɛt wən slip faɪnəli keɪm, ʃi kəd stɪl fil ðə pɹɛʃɝ ə hɪz lɪps ɑn əɹ aɪlɪdz.

In the back of her head, a small voice laughed. You can't forget that you're Morgase Trakand, it told her scornfully, and even after she's abdicated her throne, Queen Morgase can't stop trying her hand in the affairs of the mighty, no matter how much ruin she's made of it so far. And she can't tell a man to go away, either, because she can't stop thinking how strong his hands are, and how his lips curve when he smiles, and -  Furious, she pulled the blanket over her head, trying to shut out the voice. She was not staying because she could not walk away from power. As for Tallanvor. . . . She would set him firmly in his place. This time she would! But. . . . What was his place, with a woman who was no longer a queen? She tried to put him out of her mind and tried to ignore that mocking voice that would not be quiet, yet when sleep finally came, she could still feel the pressure of his lips on her eyelids.


tʃæptɝ naɪn


CHAPTER 9

tæŋɡəlz


Tangles

pɛɹɪn woʊk bɪfɔɹ fɝs laɪɾ əz juʒəwəl, ən əz juʒəwəl, feɪl wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ʌp ən əbaʊt. ʃi kəd meɪk ə maʊs sim nɔɪzi wən ʃi wɑntəd tə, ən i səspɛktəd ðəɾ ɪf i woʊk ən aʊɝ æftɝ laɪɪŋ daʊn, ʃi wəd stɪl mænədʒ tə bi ʌp fɝst. ðə dɔɹ-flæps wɝ taɪd bæk, ðə saɪd pænəlz ɹeɪzd ə lɪɾəl ət ðə bɑɾəm, ən ə stɝ ʌv ɛɹ ɹoʊz θɹu ðə vɛnθhoʊl ɪn ðə pik, ɪnʌf tə kɹieɪɾ ən ɪluʒən ə kulnəs. pɛɹɪn æktʃəli  ʃɪvɝd waɪl sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ɪz ʃɝɾ ən bɹitʃɪz. wɛl, ɪt wɑz səpoʊz tə bi wɪntɝ, ivən ɪf ðə wɛðɝ dɪd nɑt noʊ ɪt.

perrin woke before first light as usual, and as usual, Faile was already up and about. She could make a mouse seem noisy when she wanted to, and he suspected that if he woke an hour after lying down, she would still manage to be up first. The door-flaps were tied back, the side panels raised a little at the bottom, and a stir of air rose through the venthole in the peak, enough to create an illusion of coolness. Perrin actually shivered while searching for his shirt and breeches. Well, it was supposed to be winter, even if the weather did not know it.

hi dʒɹɛst ɪn ðə dɑɹk ən skɹʌbd ɪz tiθ wɪð sɔlt, niɾɪŋ noʊ læmps, ən wən i lɛf ðə tɛnt, stæmpɪŋ ɪz fiɾ ɪndə hɪz buts, feɪl hæɾ əɹ nu sɝvəns ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn əɹ ɪn ðə dip ɡɹeɪnəs ə ɝli mɔɹnɪŋ, səm hoʊldɪŋ laɪɾəd læntɝnz. ə lɔɹdz dɔɾɝ niɾəd sɝvəns; hi ʃʊɾə ɝeɪnʒd fəɹ ɪt bɪfɔɹ ðɪs. ðəɹ wɝ tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk ɪn keɪɛmlɪn ðət feɪl hæd tʃɹeɪn hɝsɛlf, bʌt wɪð ðə nid fəɹ sikɹəsi ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ weɪ tə fɛtʃ əm əlɔŋ. mæstɝ ɡɪl wəd wɑnə ɡoʊ hoʊm əz sun əz pɑsəbəl, ən læmɡwɪn ən bɹin wɪð hɪm, bʌt meɪbi meɪaɪɡdɪn ən lini wəd steɪ.

He dressed in the dark and scrubbed his teeth with salt, needing no lamps, and when he left the tent, stamping his feet into his boots, Faile had her new servants gathered around her in the deep grayness of early morning, some holding lighted lanterns. A lord's daughter needed servants; he should have arranged for it before this. There were Two Rivers folk in Caemlyn that Faile had trained herself, but with the need for secrecy there had been no way to fetch them along. Master Gill would want to go home as soon as possible, and Lamgwin and Breane with him, but maybe Maighdin and Lini would stay.

ɛɹæm stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm wɛɹ i hæd bɪn sɪɾɪŋ kɹɔs-lɛɡəd bɪsaɪd ðə tɛnt, ən weɪɾəd saɪlənli ɑn pɛɹɪn. ɪf pɛɹɪn hæd nɑt stɑp hɪm, ɛɹæm wʊɾə slɛpt əkɹɔs ði ɛntʃɹəns. ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ ɪz koʊt wɑz stʃɹaɪpt ɹɛd-ænd-waɪt, ðoʊ ðə waɪt wɑz ə tʃɹaɪfəl dɪnʒi, ən ivən hɪɹ ðət wʊlfhɛd-pɑməl sɔɹd hɪlt ɹoʊz oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. pɛɹɪn hæd lɛft ɪz æks ɪn ðə tɛnt, ən ɡɹeɪtfəl tə bi ɹɪɾ ʌv ɪt. tɑlænvɝ stɪl wɔɹ ɪz sɔɹd bɛltəɾ oʊvɝ ɪz koʊt, bʌt nɑt mæstɝ ɡɪl əɹ ði ʌðɝ tu.

Aram straightened from where he had been sitting cross-legged beside the tent, and waited silently on Perrin. If Perrin had not stopped him, Aram would have slept across the entrance. This morning his coat was striped red-and-white, though the white was a trifle dingy, and even here that wolfhead-pommeled sword hilt rose over his shoulder. Perrin had left his axe in the tent, and grateful to be rid of it. Tallanvor still wore his sword belted over his coat, but not Master Gill or the other two.

feɪl mʌst əv bɪn wɑtʃɪŋ, kəz noʊ sunɝ dɪd pɛɹɪn kʌm aʊt ðən ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd təwɔɹd ðə tɛnt, klɪɹli ɪʃuɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz. meɪaɪɡdɪn ən bɹin keɪm bʌsəlɪŋ pæst ɪm ən ɛɹæm wɪð læntɝnz, ðɛɹ dʒɔz sɛt, smɛlɪŋ ə dɪtɝməneɪʃən fəɹ səm ɹizən. niðɝ kɝtsid, ə plɛzən sɝpɹaɪz. lini dɪd, ə kwɪk bɛn ə ðə ni bɪfɔɹ ʃi dɑɹɾɪd æftɝ ði ʌðɝ tu mʌɾɝɪŋ əbaʊt "noʊɪŋ ðɛɹ pleɪs." pɛɹɪn səspɛktəd lini wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz wɪmən u sɔ hɝ "pleɪs" əz biɪŋ ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ. kʌm tə θɪŋk ʌv ɪt, moʊst wɪmən dɪd. ðət wɑz ðə weɪ ʌv ðə wɝld, ɪt simd, nɑt dʒʌs ðə tu ɹɪvɝz.

Faile must have been watching, because no sooner did Perrin come out than she gestured toward the tent, clearly issuing orders. Maighdin and Breane came bustling past him and Aram with lanterns, their jaws set, smelling of determination for some reason. Neither curtsied, a pleasant surprise. Lini did, a quick bend of the knee before she darted after the other two muttering about "knowing their place." Perrin suspected Lini was one of those women who saw her "place" as being in charge. Come to think of it, most women did. That was the way of the world, it seemed, not just the Two Rivers.

tɑlænvɝ ən læmɡwɪn fɑloʊd kloʊs bɪhaɪn ðə wɪmən, ən læmɡwɪn wɑz əz sɪɹiəs əbaʊt boʊɪŋ əz tɑlænvɝ, hu wɑz ɔlmoʊst ɡɹɪm. pɛɹɪn saɪɾ ən baʊd bæk, ən ðeɪ boʊθ ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, ɡeɪpɪŋ ət hɪm. ə kɝt ʃaʊt fɹəm lini dʒɝkt əm ɪndə ðə tɛnt.

Tallanvor and Lamgwin followed close behind the women, and Lamgwin was as serious about bowing as Tallanvor, who was almost grim. Perrin sighed and bowed back, and they both gave a start, gaping at him. A curt shout from Lini jerked them into the tent.

wɪð oʊnli ə kwɪkli flæʃt smaɪl fəɹ hɪm, feɪl stʃɹoʊɾ ɔf təwɔɹd ðə kɑɹts, tɔkɪŋ ɔltɝnətli tə bɑzəl ɡɪl ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ə hɝ ən sɛbæn beɪlwɝ ɑn ði ʌðɝ. ðə mɛn itʃ hɛld ə læntɝn aʊt tə laɪɾ əɹ weɪ. ʌv kɔɹs, ə dʌbəl hændfʊl ə ðoʊz ɪɾiəts kɛpt peɪs wɛɹ ðeɪ kəd hɪɹ ɪf ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ vɔɪs, stʃɹʌɾɪŋ ən stʃɹoʊkɪŋ sɔɹd hɪls ən stɛɹɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪn ðə dɪmnəs əz ðoʊ ðeɪ ɪkspɛktəɾ ən ətæk əɹ hoʊp fəɹ wʌn. pɛɹɪn tʌɡd əɾ ɪz ʃɔɹt bɪɹd. ʃi ɔlweɪz faʊn plɛnti ʌv wɝk tə fɪl əɹ aʊɝz, ən noʊbɑdi tʊk ɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ hænz. noʊbɑdi wəd dɛɹ.

With only a quickly flashed smile for him, Faile strode off toward the carts, talking alternately to Basel Gill on one side of her and Sebban Balwer on the other. The men each held a lantern out to light her way. Of course, a double handful of those idiots kept pace where they could hear if she raised her voice, strutting and stroking sword hilts and staring about in the dimness as though they expected an attack or hoped for one. Perrin tugged at his short beard. She always found plenty of work to fill her hours, and nobody took it out of her hands. Nobody would dare.

nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ðə fɝs fɪŋɡɝz ə dɔn ʃoʊɾ ɑn ðə hɝaɪzən jɛt, bʌt ðə kɛɹhinɪn wɝ bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə stɝ ɝaʊn ðə kɑɹts, ən muvɪŋ mɔɹ kwɪkli ðə kloʊsɝ feɪl keɪm. baɪ ðə taɪm ʃi ɹitʃt ðɛm, ðeɪ əpɪɹd tə bi tʃɹɑɾɪŋ, ðɛɹ læntɝnz bɑbɪŋ ən swɪŋɪŋ ɪn ðə dɪmnəs. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn, juz tə fɑɹmɝz' deɪz, wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi meɪkɪŋ bɹɛkfəst, səm læfɪŋ ən ɹʌhaʊzɪŋ ɝaʊn ðɛɹ kʊk faɪɝz, səm ɡɹʌmpɪŋ, bʌt moʊst ɡɛɾɪŋ ðə wɝk dʌn. ə fju tʃɹaɪd tə steɪ ɪn ðɛɹ blæŋkəts ən wɝ ʌnsɛɹəmoʊniəsli tʌmbəld aʊt. ɡɹeɪɾi ən nild wɝ ʌp, tu, əz ɔlweɪz ɔf baɪ ðɛmsɛlvz, ʃædoʊz ɪn blæk koʊts əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz. pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt ɹikɔl siɪŋ əm wɪθaʊt ðoʊz koʊts, ɔlweɪz bʌɾənd tə ðə nɛk, ɔlweɪz klin ən ənɹɪŋkəl kʌm sʌnɹaɪz, wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ hæd lʊk laɪk ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ. stɛpɪŋ θɹu ðə fɔɹmz ɪn junəsən, ðə pɛɹ wɝ pɹæktəsɪŋ ðə sɔɹɾ əz ðeɪ dɪɾ ɛvɹi mɔɹnɪŋ. ðət wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən ðɛɹ ivnɪŋ pɹæktəs, wən ðeɪ wəd sɪt kɹɔs-lɛɡəd, hænz ɑn niz, stɛɹɪŋ ət səm dɪstənt nʌθɪŋ. ðeɪ nɛvɝ dɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ ðən ðəɾ ɛniwʌn kəd si, jɛt nɑɾ ə mæn ɪn ðə kæmp bʌt nu wʌt ðeɪ wɝ əbaʊɾ ən kɛpt əz fɑɹ ɔf əz pɑsəbəl. nɑɾ ivən ðə meɪɾənz wəd stɛp ɪndə ðɛɹ laɪn ə saɪt ðɛn.

Not so much as the first fingers of dawn showed on the horizon yet, but the Cairhienin were beginning to stir around the carts, and moving more quickly the closer Faile came. By the time she reached them, they appeared to be trotting, their lanterns bobbing and swinging in the dimness. The Two Rivers men, used to farmers' days, were already making breakfast, some laughing and roughhousing around their cook fires, some grumping, but most getting the work done. A few tried to stay in their blankets and were unceremoniously tumbled out. Grady and Neald were up, too, as always off by themselves, shadows in black coats among the trees. Perrin could not recall seeing them without those coats, always buttoned to the neck, always clean and unwrinkled come sunrise, whatever they had looked like the night before. Stepping through the forms in unison, the pair were practicing the sword as they did every morning. That was better than their evening practice, when they would sit cross-legged, hands on knees, staring at some distant nothing. They never did anything then that anyone could see, yet not a man in the camp but knew what they were about and kept as far off as possible. Not even the Maidens would step into their line of sight then.

sʌmθɪŋ wɑz mɪsɪŋ, pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪzd wɪð ə stɑɹt. feɪl ɔlweɪz hæd wʌn ə ðə mɛn miɾ ɪm fɝs θɪŋ wɪð ə boʊl ə ðə θɪk pɔɹədʒ ðeɪ bɹɛkfæstəɾ ɑn, bʌɾ ɪt simd ʃi hæd bɪn tu bɪzi ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. bɹaɪɾənɪŋ, hi hɝid təwɔɹd ðə kʊk faɪɝz, hoʊpɪŋ ət lis tə bi eɪbəl tə dɪp ʌp ɪz oʊn pɔɹədʒ fəɹ wʌns. ə smɔl hoʊp.

Something was missing, Perrin realized with a start. Faile always had one of the men meet him first thing with a bowl of the thick porridge they breakfasted on, but it seemed she had been too busy this morning. Brightening, he hurried toward the cook fires, hoping at least to be able to dip up his own porridge for once. A small hope.

flæn bɑɹstɪɹ, ə læŋki fɛloʊ wɪð ə dɛn ɪn ɪz tʃɪn, mɛɾ ɪm hæfweɪ ən ʃʌvd ə kɑɹv boʊl ɪndə hɪz hænz. flæn wɑz fɹəm ʌp təwɔɹd wɑtʃ hɪl, ən pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt noʊ hɪm wɛl, bʌt ðeɪ hæd bɪn hʌntɪŋ təɡɛðɝ ə taɪm əɹ tu, ən wʌns pɛɹɪn hæd hɛlpt ɪm dɪɡ wʌn ə hɪz fɑðɝz kaʊz aʊɾ ʌv ə bɑɡhoʊl ɪn ðə wɔɾɝwʊd. "ðə leɪɾi feɪl toʊl mi tə bɹɪŋ ðɪs tə ju, pɛɹɪn," flæn sɛɾ æŋkʃəsli. "ju woʊn tɛl əɹ aɪ fɝɡɑt, wɪl ju? jə woʊn tɛl? aɪ faʊn səm hʌni, ən aɪ pʊɾ ɪn ə ɡʊd dɑləp." pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə saɪ. ət lis flæn hæd ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪz neɪm.

Flann Barstere, a lanky fellow with a dent in his chin, met him halfway and shoved a carved bowl into his hands. Flann was from up toward Watch Hill, and Perrin did not know him well, but they had been hunting together a time or two, and once Perrin had helped him dig one of his father's cows out of a boghole in the Waterwood. "The Lady Faile told me to bring this to you, Perrin," Flann said anxiously. "You won't tell her I forgot, will you? You won't tell? I found some honey, and I put in a good dollop." Perrin tried not to sigh. At least Flann had remembered his name.

wɛl, meɪbi hi kəd nɑt ɡɛɾ əweɪ wɪð duɪŋ ðə sɪmpləs tʃɔɹz fəɹ hɪmsɛlf, bʌɾ i wɑz stɪl ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ ðə mɛn iɾɪŋ bɪniθ ðə tʃɹiz. wɪθaʊt hɪm, ðeɪ wəd bi wɪð ðɛɹ fæmliz, ɡɛɾɪŋ ɹɛɾi fəɹ ðə deɪz tʃɔɹz ɝaʊn ðə fɑɹm, mɪlkɪŋ kaʊz ən kʌɾɪŋ faɪɝwʊɾ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ ðeɪ maɪɾ əv tə kɪl əɹ bi kɪl bɪfɔɹ sʌnsɛt. ɡʌlpɪŋ daʊn ðə hʌnid pɔɹədʒ kwɪkli, hi toʊld ɛɹæm tə teɪk ɪz iz oʊvɝ bɹɛkfəst, bʌt ðə mæn lʊk soʊ mɪzɝəbəl ðəɾ i ɹɪlɛntɪd, soʊ ɛɹæm fɑloʊɾ əz i meɪɾ ɪz weɪ ɝaʊn ðə kæmp. ðə dʒɝni wɑz nɑt wʌn pɛɹɪn ɛndʒɔɪd.

Well, maybe he could not get away with doing the simplest chores for himself, but he was still responsible for the men eating beneath the trees. Without him, they would be with their families, getting ready for the day's chores around the farm, milking cows and cutting firewood instead of wondering whether they might have to kill or be killed before sunset. Gulping down the honeyed porridge quickly, he told Aram to take his ease over breakfast, but the man looked so miserable that he relented, so Aram followed as he made his way around the camp. The journey was not one Perrin enjoyed.

mɛn pʊt daʊn ðɛɹ boʊlz wən i əpɹoʊtʃt, əɹ ivən stʊɾ əntɪl i pæst. hi ɡɹɪɾɪd ɪz tiθ wɛnɛvɝ sʌmbɑɾi hi hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp wɪð, əɹ wɝs, ə mæn u hæd sɛn ɪm ɑn ɛɹənz əz ə bɔɪ, kɔld ɪm lɔɹd pɛɹɪn. nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn dɪd, bʌt tu mɛni. fɑɹ tu mɛni. æftɝ ə taɪm, hi ɡeɪv ʌp tɛlɪŋ əm tə stɑp aʊɾ ə ʃɪɹ wɪɹinəs; ɔl tu ɔfən ðə ɹɪplaɪ wɑz "oʊ! wʌtɛvɝ jə seɪ, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn." ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf tə meɪk ə mæn haʊl!

Men put down their bowls when he approached, or even stood until he passed. He gritted his teeth whenever somebody he had grown up with, or worse, a man who had sent him on errands as a boy, called him Lord Perrin. Not everyone did, but too many. Far too many. After a time, he gave up telling them to stop out of sheer weariness; all too often the reply was "Oh! Whatever you say, Lord Perrin." It was enough to make a man howl!

dɪspaɪt ðæt, hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf pɔz tə spik ə wɝɾ əɹ tu tə ɛvɹi mæn. meɪnli, ðoʊ, hi kɛpt ɪz aɪz oʊpən. ən ɪz noʊz. ðeɪ ɔl nu ɪnʌf tə kip ðɛɹ baʊz ɪn ɡʊd ɹɪpɛɹ ən tɛn ðə flɛtʃɪŋ ən pɔɪns ɑn ðɛɹ æɹoʊz, bʌt səm wəd wɛɹ ðə soʊlz aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ buts əɹ ðə bɑɾəm aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ bɹitʃɪz wɪθaʊt noʊɾɪsɪŋ, əɹ lɛt blɪstɝz fɛstɝ kəz ðeɪ kəd nɑt bi bɑðɝd tə də ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊɾ əm dʒʌs jɛt. sɛvɹəl hæd ðə hæbəɾ ə pɪkɪŋ ʌp bɹændi wən ðeɪ kʊd, ən tu əɹ θɹi ʌv ðoʊz hæd noʊ hɛd fəɹ ɪɾ əɾ ɔl. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə smɔl vɪlədʒ ðə deɪ bɪfɔɹ ɹitʃɪŋ bɛθɔl ðət hɛl noʊ fjuɝ ðən θɹi ɪnz.

Despite that, he made himself pause to speak a word or two to every man. Mainly, though, he kept his eyes open. And his nose. They all knew enough to keep their bows in good repair and tend the fletching and points on their arrows, but some would wear the soles out of their boots or the bottom out of their breeches without noticing, or let blisters fester because they could not be bothered to do anything about them just yet. Several had the habit of picking up brandy when they could, and two or three of those had no head for it at all. There had been a small village the day before reaching Bethal that held no fewer than three inns.

ɪt wɑz vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ. hævɪŋ mɪstʃɹəs luhən əɹ ɪz mʌðɝ tɛl ɪm i niɾəd nu buts əɹ ɪz bɹitʃɪz mɛndɪd hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ, ən i wɑz ʃʊɹ i wʊɾə bɪn ɪɹəteɪɾəd ət ðə seɪm fɹəm ɛnibəɾi ɛls, bʌt fɹəm ɡɹɪzəld oʊl dʒɑndɪn bæɹən ɑn daʊn, ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn dʒʌst sɛd "waɪ, ɹaɪt jə ɑɹ, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn; əl si tə ɪt stʃɹeɪɾəweɪ" əɹ səm sʌtʃ. hi kɑɾ ə nʌmbɝ ə ðɛm ɡɹɪnɪŋ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ wən i muvd ɑn. ən ðeɪ smɛl plizd! wən i ɹuɾəd ə kleɪ dʒɑɹ ə pɛɹ bɹændi aʊɾ ə dʒɔɹi kɔŋɡɝz sæɾəlbæɡz - ə skɪni fɛloʊ hu eɪt twaɪs əz mʌtʃ əz ɛniwʌn ɛls ən ɔlweɪz lʊkt əz ɪf i hæd nɑt hæɾ ə baɪɾ ɪn ə wik, dʒɔɹi wɑz ə ɡʊd ʃɑt wɪð ə baʊ, bʌt ɡɪvən ə tʃæns i wəd dʒɹɪŋk əntɪl i kəd nɑt stænd, ən i hæd laɪt fɪŋɡɝz bɪsaɪdz - dʒɔɹi ɡeɪv ɪm ə waɪd-aɪd lʊk ən spɹɛɾ ɪz hænz əz ɪf i dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛɹ ðə dʒɑɹ hæd kʌm fɹʌm. bʌɾ əz pɛɹɪn wɔkt ɑn, ɛmptiɪŋ ðə bɹændi ɑntu ðə ɡɹaʊnd, dʒɔɹi læft, "ju kæn pʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ oʊvɝ ɑn lɔɹd pɛɹɪn!" hi saʊndəd pɹaʊd! səmtaɪmz, pɛɹɪn θɔɾ i wɑz ði oʊnli seɪn pɝsən lɛft.

It was very strange. Having Mistress Luhhan or his mother tell him he needed new boots or his breeches mended had always been embarrassing, and he was sure he would have been irritated at the same from anybody else, but from grizzled old Jondyn Barran on down, the Two Rivers men just said "Why, right you are, Lord Perrin; I'll see to it straightaway" or some such. He caught a number of them grinning at one another when he moved on. And they smelled pleased! When he rooted a clay jar of pear brandy out of Jori Congar's saddlebags - a skinny fellow who ate twice as much as anyone else and always looked as if he had not had a bite in a week, Jori was a good shot with a bow, but given a chance he would drink until he could not stand, and he had light fingers besides - Jori gave him a wide-eyed look and spread his hands as if he did not know where the jar had come from. But as Perrin walked on, emptying the brandy onto the ground, Jori laughed, "You can't put anything over on Lord Perrin!" He sounded proud! Sometimes, Perrin thought he was the only sane person left.

ənʌðɝ θɪŋ, hi noʊɾəst. wʌn ən ɔl, ðeɪ wɝ vɛɹi ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn wʌɾ i dɪd nɑt seɪ. mæn æftɝ mæn kæst ən aɪ təwɔɹd ðə tu bænɝz ðəɾ əkeɪʒənəli flæpt ətɑp ðɛɹ poʊlz ɪn ə bɹif ɡʌst, ɹɛd wʊlfhɛɾ ən ɹɛɾ iɡəl. ðeɪ aɪd ðə bænɝz ən wɑtʃt hɪm, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ði ɔɹɾɝ i hæd ɡɪvən ɛvɹi taɪm ðə θɪŋz hæd kʌm aʊt sɪns ɹitʃɪŋ ɡildən. ən ɔfən ɪnʌf bɪfɔɹ ðæt. ɪksɛp ðəɾ i hæd sɛd nʌθɪŋ jɛstɝdeɪ, ən i sɛd nʌθɪŋ tədeɪ, ən i sɔ spɛkjəleɪʃən blumɪŋ ɑn mɛnz feɪsəz. hi lɛf bɪhaɪn klʌstɝz ə mɛn piɹɪŋ ət ðə bænɝz ən ət hɪm, mɝmɝɪŋ ɪksaɪɾədli əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz. hi dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə lɪsən. wʌt wəd ðeɪ seɪ ɪf i wɑz ɹɔŋ, ɪf ðə waɪtkloʊks əɹ kɪŋ eɪlɹən dɪsaɪɾɪd ðeɪ kəd lʊk əweɪ fɹəm ðə pɹɑfəɾ ən ðə sintʃæn lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə snʌf aʊɾ ə səpoʊzd ɹɪbɛljən? ðeɪ wɝ ɪz ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi, ən i hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɑɾən tu mɛni ʌv əm kɪld.

Another thing, he noticed. One and all, they were very interested in what he did not say. Man after man cast an eye toward the two banners that occasionally flapped atop their poles in a brief gust, Red Wolfhead and Red Eagle. They eyed the banners and watched him, waiting for the order he had given every time the things had come out since reaching Ghealdan. And often enough before that. Except that he had said nothing yesterday, and he said nothing today, and he saw speculation blooming on men's faces. He left behind clusters of men peering at the banners and at him, murmuring excitedly among themselves. He did not try to listen. What would they say if he was wrong, if the Whitecloaks or King Ailron decided they could look away from the Prophet and the Seanchan long enough to snuff out a supposed rebellion? They were his responsibility, and he had already gotten too many of them killed.

ðə sʌn wɑz mɔɹ ðən pikɪŋ əbʌv ðə hɝaɪzən, spɹɛɾɪŋ ə ʃɑɹp mɔɹnɪŋ laɪt, baɪ ðə taɪm i fɪnɪʃt, ən oʊvɝ ət ðə tɛnt, tɑlænvɝ ən læmɡwɪn wɝ lʌɡɪŋ aʊt tʃɛsts ʌndɝ liniz dɝɛkʃən, waɪl meɪaɪɡdɪn ən bɹin əpɪɹd tə bi sɔɹɾɪŋ ðə kɑntɛns aʊɾ ɑn ə bɹɔd pætʃ ə dɛd ɡɹæs, blæŋkəts ən lɪnənz meɪnli, ən lɔŋ bɹaɪt swɑθs ə sɪlk sæɾən ðət hæd bɪn ɪntɛndəd tə dʒɹeɪp ðə bɛɾ i hæd mɪspleɪst. feɪl mʌst əv bɪn ɪnsaɪd, kəz ðət ɡæɡəl ʌv ɪɾiəts wɝ kulɪŋ ðɛɹ hilz nɑt fɑɹ ɔf. noʊ kæɹiɪŋ ən hɔlɪŋ fəɹ ðɛm. jusfəl əz ɹæts ɪn ðə bɑɹn.

The sun was more than peeking above the horizon, spreading a sharp morning light, by the time he finished, and over at the tent, Tallanvor and Lamgwin were lugging out chests under Lini's direction, while Maighdin and Breane appeared to be sorting the contents out on a broad patch of dead grass, blankets and linens mainly, and long bright swaths of silk satin that had been intended to drape the bed he had misplaced. Faile must have been inside, because that gaggle of idiots were cooling their heels not far off. No carrying and hauling for them. Useful as rats in the barn.

pɛɹɪn θɔɾ əbaʊt teɪkɪŋ ə lʊk ət steɪɝ ən stɛpɝ, bʌt wən i ɡlæns θɹu ðə tʃɹiz ət ðə hɔɹslaɪnz, hi wɑz sin. noʊ fjuɝ ðən θɹi ʌv ðə fɛɹiɝz stɛpt aʊɾ æŋkʃəsli, wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm. ðeɪ wɝ blɑki mɛn ɪn lɛðɝ eɪpɹənz, əlaɪk əz ɛɡz ɪn ə bæskət, ðoʊ fɑltən hæɾ oʊnli ə fɹɪnʒ ʌv waɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪz hɛd, æɛmɪn wɑz ɡɹeɪɪŋ, ən dʒɛɝæsɪd hæd nɑt jɛt kʌm ɪndə hɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz. pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðɛm. ðeɪ wəd hʌvɝ ɪf i leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn iðɝ hɔɹs, ən ɡɑɡəl ɪf i lɪftəɾ ə huf. ðə wʌn taɪm i hæd tʃɹaɪd tə tʃeɪnʒ ə wɔɹn ʃu, ɑn steɪɝ, ɔl sɪks fɛɹiɝz hæd dɑɹɾɪd əbaʊt ɡɹæbɪŋ ʌp tulz bɪfɔɹ i kəd tʌtʃ ðɛm, nɪɹli nɑkɪŋ ðə beɪ oʊvɝ ɪn ðɛɹ ɹʌʃ tə də ðə wɝk ðɛmsɛlvz.

Perrin thought about taking a look at Stayer and Stepper, but when he glanced through the trees at the horselines, he was seen. No fewer than three of the farriers stepped out anxiously, watching him. They were blocky men in leather aprons, alike as eggs in a basket, though Falton had only a fringe of white around his head, Aemin was graying, and Jerasid had not yet come into his middle years. Perrin growled at the sight of them. They would hover if he laid a hand on either horse, and goggle if he lifted a hoof. The one time he had tried to change a worn shoe, on Stayer, all six farriers had darted about grabbing up tools before he could touch them, nearly knocking the bay over in their rush to do the work themselves.

"ðeɪɹ əfɹeɪd jə doʊn tʃɹʌs ðɛm," ɛɹæm sɛd sʌɾənli. pɛɹɪn lʊkt əɾ ɪm ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, ən ɛɹæm ʃɪftəɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ɪn ɪz koʊt. "aɪv tɔk tə ðɛm, sʌm. ðeɪ θɪŋk ɪf ə lɔɹd tɛnz ɪz oʊn hɔɹsəz, ɪt mʌs bi kəz i dʌzn tʃɹʌs ðɛm. jə maɪt sɛn əm ɔf, wɪð noʊ weɪ tə ɡɛt hoʊm." hɪz toʊn sɛd ðeɪ wɝ fulz tə θɪŋk ðæt, bʌɾ i ɡeɪv pɛɹɪn ə saɪdweɪz ɡlæns ən ʃɹʌɡd əɡɛn, ənkʌmftəbli. "aɪ θɪŋk ðəɹ ɪmbɛɹəst, tu. ɪf jə doʊn bɪheɪv ðə weɪ ðeɪ θɪŋk ə lɔɹd ʃʊd, ɪt ɹɪflɛks ɑn ðɛm, əz ðeɪ si ɪt."

"They're afraid you don't trust them," Aram said suddenly. Perrin looked at him in surprise, and Aram shifted his shoulders in his coat. "I've talked to them, some. They think if a lord tends his own horses, it must be because he doesn't trust them. You might send them off, with no way to get home." His tone said they were fools to think that, but he gave Perrin a sideways glance and shrugged again, uncomfortably. "I think they're embarrassed, too. If you don't behave the way they think a lord should, it reflects on them, as they see it."

"laɪt!" pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd. feɪl hæd sɛd ðə seɪm - əbaʊɾ əm biɪŋ ɪmbɛɹəst, ɛniweɪ - bʌɾ i hæd bɪlivd ɪt dʒʌst ə lɔɹdz dɔɾɝ tɔkɪŋ. feɪl hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp sɝaʊndəd baɪ sɝvəns, jɛt haʊ kəɾ ə leɪɾi noʊ ðə θɔts ʌv ə mæn u hæd tə wɝk fəɹ ɪz bɹɛd? hi fɹaʊn təwɔɹd ðə hɔɹslaɪnz. faɪv ə ðə fɛɹiɝz stʊd təɡɛðɝ wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, naʊ. ɪmbɛɹəs ðəɾ i wɑntəd tə lʊk æftɝ ɪz oʊn hɔɹsəz, ən əpsɛt ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt wɑn əm pʊlɪŋ wʊl ən skɹætʃɪŋ ɡɹævəl ɔl oʊvɝ ðə pleɪs. "du jə θɪŋk aɪ ɔt tə æk laɪk ə ful ɪn sɪlk smɔlkloʊðz?" hi æskt. ɛɹæm blɪŋkt, ən bɪɡæn stʌɾiɪŋ ɪz buts. "laɪt!" pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld.

"Light!" Perrin muttered. Faile had said the same - about them being embarrassed, anyway - but he had believed it just a lord's daughter talking. Faile had grown up surrounded by servants, yet how could a lady know the thoughts of a man who had to work for his bread? He frowned toward the horselines. Five of the farriers stood together watching him, now. Embarrassed that he wanted to look after his own horses, and upset that he did not want them pulling wool and scratching gravel all over the place. "Do you think I ought to act like a fool in silk smallclothes?" he asked. Aram blinked, and began studying his boots. "Light!" Perrin growled.

spɑɾɪŋ bɑzəl ɡɪl hɝiɪŋ fɹəm ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðə kɑɹts, pɛɹɪn muv tə mit hɪm. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i hæd dʌn vɛɹi wɛl ət meɪkɪŋ ɡɪl fil əɾ iz jɛstɝdeɪ. ðə staʊt mæn wɑz tɔkɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf ən wʌns mɔɹ mɑpɪŋ ɪz hɛd wɪð ə kɝtʃəf, swɛɾɪŋ əweɪ ɪn ə ɹʌmpəl dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ koʊt. ðə deɪz hit wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə teɪk hoʊld ɔlɹɛɾi. hi dɪd nɑt si pɛɹɪn əntɪl pɛɹɪn wɑz nɪɹli ɑn hɪm, ən ðən i ɡeɪv ə dʒʌmp, stʌfɪŋ ðə kɝtʃəf ɪndə ə koʊt pɑkəɾ ən meɪkɪŋ ə baʊ. hi lʊkt kɝiɾ ən bɹʌʃt fɪt fəɹ ə fistdeɪ.

Spotting Basel Gill hurrying from the direction of the carts, Perrin moved to meet him. He did not think he had done very well at making Gill feel at ease yesterday. The stout man was talking to himself and once more mopping his head with a kerchief, sweating away in a rumpled dark gray coat. The day's heat was beginning to take hold already. He did not see Perrin until Perrin was nearly on him, and then he gave a jump, stuffing the kerchief into a coat pocket and making a bow. He looked curried and brushed fit for a feastday.

"ɑ. maɪ lɔɹd pɛɹɪn. jəɹ leɪɾi toʊl mi tə teɪk ə kɑɹɾ ɪndə bɛθɔl. ʃi sɛz aɪm tə faɪn jə səm tu ɹɪvɝz təbæk, ɪf aɪ kæn, bʌɾ aɪ doʊnt noʊ ðæts pɑsəbəl. tu ɹɪvɝz lif əz ɔlweɪz bɪn dɪɹ, ən tʃɹeɪɾ ɪzənt wʌɾ ɪt wɑz."

"Ah. My Lord Perrin. Your Lady told me to take a cart into Bethal. She says I'm to find you some Two Rivers tabac, if I can, but I don't know that's possible. Two Rivers leaf has always been dear, and trade isn't what it was."

"ʃiz sɛndɪŋ jə fəɹ təbæk?" pɛɹɪn sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. hi səpoʊz sikɹəsi hæd ɡɔn daʊn ðə wɛl, bʌt stɪl. "aɪ bɑt θɹi kæsks, tu vɪlədʒəz bæk. ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛvɹibɑɾi."

"She's sending you for tabac?" Perrin said, frowning. He supposed secrecy had gone down the well, but still. "I bought three casks, two villages back. Enough for everybody."

ɡɪl ʃʊk ɪz hɛd fɝmli. "nɑt tu ɹɪvɝz lif, ən jəɹ leɪɾi sɛz jə laɪk ðəɾ əbʌv ɛni ʌðɝ. ðə ɡildænɪn lif wɪl də fəɹ jəɹ mɛn. aɪm tə bi jəɹ ʃæmbaɪən, ʃi kɔld ɪt, ən kip jə ən əɹ səplaɪd wɪð wʌt jə nid. nɑt mʌtʃ dɪfɹən fɹəm wʌɾ aɪ dɪd ɹʌnɪŋ ðə blɛsɪŋ, ɹɪli." ðə sɪməlɛɹəɾi sim tə əmjuz hɪm; hɪz bɛli ʃʊk wɪð kwaɪət tʃʌkəlz. "aɪ hæv kwaɪɾ ə lɪst, ðoʊ aɪ kæn seɪ haʊ mʌtʃ ʌv ɪɾ əl faɪnd. ɡʊd waɪn, ɝbz, fɹut, kændəlz ən læmp ɔɪl, oʊlklɔθ ən wæks, peɪpɝ ən ɪŋk, niɾəlz, pɪnz, oʊ, ɔl sɔɹts ə θɪŋz. tɑlænvɝ ən læmɡwɪn ən aɪ ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ, wɪð səm ə jəɹ leɪɾiz ʌðɝ ɹɪteɪnɝz."

Gill shook his head firmly. "Not Two Rivers leaf, and your Lady says you like that above any other. The Ghealdanin leaf will do for your men. I'm to be your shambayan, she called it, and keep you and her supplied with what you need. Not much different from what I did running the Blessing, really." The similarity seemed to amuse him; his belly shook with quiet chuckles. "I have quite a list, though I can't say how much of it I'll find. Good wine, herbs, fruit, candles and lamp oil, oilcloth and wax, paper and ink, needles, pins, oh, all sorts of things. Tallanvor and Lamgwin and I are going, with some of your Lady's other retainers."

hɪz leɪɾiz ʌðɝ ɹɪteɪnɝz. tɑlænvɝ ən læmɡwɪn wɝ bɹɪŋɪŋ aʊt jɛɾ ənʌðɝ tʃɛs fəɹ ðə wɪmən tə sɔɹt θɹu. ðeɪ hæd tə pæs baɪ ðə skwɑɾɪŋ klʌmp ə jʌŋ fulz, hu nɛvɝ ɔfɝd tə lɛn ə hænd. ɪn fækt, ðə laɪəbaʊts ɪɡnɔɹɾ əm kəmplitli.

His Lady's other retainers. Tallanvor and Lamgwin were bringing out yet another chest for the women to sort through. They had to pass by the squatting clump of young fools, who never offered to lend a hand. In fact, the layabouts ignored them completely.

"ju kip ən aɪ ɑn ðət lɑt," pɛɹɪn kɑʃənd. "ɪf wʌn ə ðɛm stɑɹts ɛni tʃɹʌbəl - ɪf i ivən lʊks əz ɪf hɪl - juv læmɡwɪn kɹæk ɪz hɛd." ən ɪf ɪt wɑz wʌn ə ðə wɪmən? ðeɪ wɝ dʒʌst əz laɪkli, meɪbi mɔɹ soʊ. pɛɹɪn ɡɹʌntɪd. feɪlz "ɹɪteɪnɝz" wɝ gɑnə taɪ hɪz bɛli ɪndə pɝmənənt nɑts jɛt. tu bæd ʃi kəd nɑt bi sæɾəsfaɪd wɪð ðə laɪks ə mæstɝ ɡɪl ən meɪaɪɡdɪn. "ju dɪdn mɛnʃən beɪlwɝ. hæz i dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ɡoʊ ɑn əloʊn?" dʒʌs ðɛn, ə ʃɪft ɪn ðə bɹiz bɹɔɾ ɪm beɪlwɝz sɛnt, ən əlɝt smɛl vɛɹi mʌtʃ əɾ ɑdz wɪð ðə fɛloʊz ɔlmoʊs dɪsɪkeɪɾɪd ɪkstɪɹiɝ.

"You keep an eye on that lot," Perrin cautioned. "If one of them starts any trouble - if he even looks as if he will - you have Lamgwin crack his head." And if it was one of the women? They were just as likely, maybe more so. Perrin grunted. Faile's "retainers" were going to tie his belly into permanent knots yet. Too bad she could not be satisfied with the likes of Master Gill and Maighdin. "You didn't mention Balwer. Has he decided to go on alone?" Just then, a shift in the breeze brought him Balwer's scent, an alert smell very much at odds with the fellow's almost desiccated exterior.

ivən fəɹ soʊ ɹiɾi ə mæn, beɪlwɝ meɪd sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli lɪɾəl nɔɪz ɑn ðə dʒɹaɪd livz ʌndɝfʊt. ɪn ə spɛɹoʊ-bɹaʊn koʊt, hi ɔfɝɾ ə kwɪk baʊ, ən ɪz tɪltəd hɛɾ æɾəd tə ði ɪmədʒ ʌv ə bɝd. "aɪ æm steɪɪŋ, maɪ lɔɹd," hi sɛd kɔʃəsli. əɹ meɪbi ðət wɑz dʒʌst ɪz mænɝ. "æz jəɹ ɡɹeɪʃəs leɪɾiz sɛkɹətɛɹi. ən jʊɹz, ɪf ɪt plizɪz ju." hi stɛp kloʊsɝ, vɛɹi nɪɹli ə hɑp. "aɪ æm wɛl vɝst, maɪ lɔɹd. aɪ pəzɛs ə ɡʊd mɛmɹi ən ɹaɪɾ ə ɡʊd hænd, ən maɪ lɔɹd kən bi əʃʊɹd ðət wʌtɛvɝ i kənfaɪdz ɪn mi wɪl nɛvɝ pæs maɪ lɪps tə ənʌðɝ. ði əbɪləɾi tə kip sikɹəts ɪz ə pɹaɪmɛɹi skɪl ʌv ə sɛkɹətɛɹi. doʊn juv pɹɛsɪŋ duɾiz fəɹ əɹ nu mɪstʃɹəs, mæstɝ ɡɪl?"

Even for so reedy a man, Balwer made surprisingly little noise on the dried leaves underfoot. In a sparrow-brown coat, he offered a quick bow, and his tilted head added to the image of a bird. "I am staying, my Lord," he said cautiously. Or maybe that was just his manner. "As your gracious Lady's secretary. And yours, if it pleases you." He stepped closer, very nearly a hop. "I am well versed, my Lord. I possess a good memory and write a good hand, and my Lord can be assured that whatever he confides in me will never pass my lips to another. The ability to keep secrets is a primary skill of a secretary. Don't you have pressing duties for our new mistress, Master Gill?"

ɡɪl fɹaʊn ət beɪlwɝ, oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, ðən kloʊzd ɪt wɪð ə snæp. spɪnɪŋ ɑn ɪz hil, hi tʃɹɑɾəd əweɪ təwɔɹd ðə tɛnt.

Gill frowned at Balwer, opened his mouth, then closed it with a snap. Spinning on his heel, he trotted away toward the tent.

fəɹ ə moʊmən beɪlwɝ wɑtʃt ɪm ɡoʊ, hɛd tə wʌn saɪd, lɪps pɝs θɔtfəli. "aɪ kən ɔfɝ ʌðɝ sɝvəsəz, əz wɛl, maɪ lɔɹd," hi sɛd faɪnəli. "nɑlədʒ. aɪ oʊvɝhɝd səm ə maɪ lɔɹdz mɛn spikɪŋ, ən aɪ ʌndɝstæn ðət maɪ lɔɹd meɪ hæv hæd səm . . . dɪfəkəltiz . . . wɪð ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. ə sɛkɹətɛɹi lɝnz mɛni θɪŋz. aɪ noʊ ə sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ əmaʊn əbaʊt ðə tʃɪlʒɹən."

For a moment Balwer watched him go, head to one side, lips pursed thoughtfully. "I can offer other services, as well, my Lord," he said finally. "Knowledge. I overheard some of my Lord's men speaking, and I understand that my Lord may have had some . . . difficulties . . . with the Children of the Light. A secretary learns many things. I know a surprising amount about the Children."

"wɪð ɛni lʌk aɪ kən əvɔɪd waɪtkloʊks," pɛɹɪn toʊl hɪm. "bɛɾɝ ɪf jə nu wɛɹ ðə pɹɑfəɾ ɪz. əɹ ðə sintʃæn." hi dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛkt ɛni ʌv ðæt, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt beɪlwɝ sɝpɹaɪz hɪm.

"With any luck I can avoid Whitecloaks," Perrin told him. "Better if you knew where the Prophet is. Or the Seanchan." He did not expect any of that, of course, but Balwer surprised him.

"aɪ kænɑt bi sɝɾən, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ðə sintʃæn əv nɑt spɹɛd fɑɹ bɪɑn æmədɔɹ əz jɛt. fækt ɪz dɪfəkəl tə sɪft fɹəm ɹumɝ, maɪ lɔɹd, bʌɾ aɪ kip maɪ ɪɹz oʊpən. ʌv kɔɹs, ðeɪ də sim tə muv wɪð ʌnɪkspɛktɪd sʌɾənnəs. ə deɪnʒɝəs pipəl, wɪð lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝz ə tæɹɑbənɝ soʊlʒɝz. aɪ bɪliv fɹəm mæstɝ ɡɪl ðət maɪ lɔɹd noʊz ə ðɛm, bʌɾ aɪ əbzɝvd əm kloʊsli ɪn æmədɔɹ, ən wʌɾ aɪ sɔ ɪz ət maɪ lɔɹdz dɪspoʊzəl. əz tə ðə pɹɑfət, ðəɹ ɑɹ əz mɛni ɹumɝz kənsɝnɪŋ ɪm əz ðə sintʃæn, bʌɾ aɪ bɪliv aɪ kən seɪ ɹɪlaɪəbli ðəɾ i wɑz ɹisənli əɾ ɑbilə, ə lɑɹdʒɪʃ taʊn səm fɔɹɾi liɡz saʊθ ə hɪɹ." beɪlwɝ smaɪl θɪnli, ə bɹif sɛlf-sæɾəsfaɪd smaɪl.

"I cannot be certain, of course, but I think the Seanchan have not spread far beyond Amador as yet. Fact is difficult to sift from rumor, my Lord, but I keep my ears open. Of course, they do seem to move with unexpected suddenness. A dangerous people, with large numbers of Taraboner soldiers. I believe from Master Gill that my Lord knows of them, but I observed them closely in Amador, and what I saw is at my Lord's disposal. As to the Prophet, there are as many rumors concerning him as the Seanchan, but I believe I can say reliably that he was recently at Abila, a largish town some forty leagues south of here." Balwer smiled thinly, a brief self-satisfied smile.

"haʊ kən jə bi soʊ ʃʊɹ?" pɛɹɪn sɛd sloʊli.

"How can you be so sure?" Perrin said slowly.

"æz aɪ sɛd, maɪ lɔɹd, aɪ kip maɪ ɪɹz oʊpən. ðə pɹɑfət ɹɪpɔɹɾədli kloʊzd ə nʌmbɝ ʌv ɪnz ən tævɝnz, ən tɔɹ daʊn ðoʊz i kənsɪɾɝd tu dɪsɹɛpjəɾəbəl. sɛvɹəl wɝ mɛnʃənd, ən baɪ tʃæns, aɪ hæpən tə noʊ ðəɹ ɑɹ ɪnz ə ðoʊz neɪmz ɪn ɑbilə. aɪ θɪŋk ðəɹ ɪz lɪɾəl tʃæns ənʌðɝ taʊn wəɾ əv ɪnz wɪð ðə seɪm neɪmz." hi flæʃt ənʌðɝ nɛɹoʊ smaɪl. hi sɝɾənli, smɛl plizd wɪð hɪmsɛlf.

"As I said, my Lord, I keep my ears open. The Prophet reportedly closed a number of inns and taverns, and tore down those he considered too disreputable. Several were mentioned, and by chance, I happen to know there are inns of those names in Abila. I think there is little chance another town would have inns with the same names." He flashed another narrow smile. He certainly, smelled pleased with himself.

pɛɹɪn skɹætʃt ɪz bɪɹd θɔtfəli. ðə mæn dʒʌs hæpən tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ wɛɹ səm ɪnz ðət mæsimə səpoʊzədli hæd tɔɹn daʊn wɝ loʊkeɪɾəd. ən ɪf mæsimə tɝn aʊt nɑt tə bi ðəɹ æftɝ ɔl, wɛl, ðiz deɪz ɹumɝz spɹaʊɾəd laɪk mʌʃɹumz æftɝ ɹeɪn. beɪlwɝ saʊndəɾ ə mæn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɪld ʌp ɪz oʊn ɪmpɔɹɾəns. "θæŋk ju, mæstɝ beɪlwɝ. əl kip ðət tə maɪnd. ɪf jə hɪɹ ɛni mɔɹ, bi ʃʊɹ tə tɛl mi." əz i tɝn tə ɡoʊ, ðə mæn kɑɾ ɪz sliv.

Perrin scratched his beard thoughtfully. The man just happened to remember where some inns that Masema supposedly had torn down were located. And if Masema turned out not to be there after all, well, these days rumors sprouted like mushrooms after rain. Balwer sounded a man trying to build up his own importance. "Thank you, Master Balwer. I'll keep that to mind. If you hear any more, be sure to tell me." As he turned to go, the man caught his sleeve.

beɪlwɝz skɪni fɪŋɡɝz lɛpt əweɪ ɪmiɾiətli, əz ðoʊ bɝnd, ən i meɪd wʌn ə ðoʊz bɝdlaɪk baʊz, dʒɹaɪ-wɑʃɪŋ ɪz hænz. "fɝɡɪv mi, maɪ lɔɹd. aɪ hɛzəteɪt tə pɹɛs, bʌt də nɑt teɪk ðə waɪtkloʊks tu laɪtli. əvɔɪɾɪŋ əm ɪz waɪz, bʌɾ ɪt meɪ nɑt bi pɑsəbəl. ðeɪ ɑɹ mʌtʃ kloʊsɝ ðən ðə sintʃæn. imən vɑldə, ðə nu lɔɹd kæptən kəmændɝ, lɛd moʊst ə ðɛɹ nʌmbɝz təwɔɹd nɔɹðɝn ɑmɑdɪʃiə bɪfɔɹ æmədɔɹ fɛl. hi wɑz hʌntɪŋ ðə pɹɑfət, ɔlsoʊ, maɪ lɔɹd. vɑldə ɪz ə deɪnʒɝəs mæn, ən ɹɑɾəm əsunɑwə, ðə ɡɹæn ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ, meɪks vɑldə sim plɛzənt. ən aɪ fɪɹ niðɝ əz ɛni lʌv fəɹ jəɹ oʊn lɔɹd. fɝɡɪv mi." hi baʊɾ əɡɛn, hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən wɛn ɑn smuðli. "ɪf aɪ meɪ seɪ soʊ, maɪ lɔɹdz dɪspleɪ ʌv meɪnɛðɝənz bænɝ ɪz ɪnspaɪɝd. maɪ lɔɹd wɪl bi mɔɹ ðən ə mætʃ fəɹ vɑldə ən əsunɑwə, ɪf i teɪks kɛɹ."

Balwer's skinny fingers leaped away immediately, as though burned, and he made one of those birdlike bows, dry-washing his hands. "Forgive me, my Lord. I hesitate to press, but do not take the Whitecloaks too lightly. Avoiding them is wise, but it may not be possible. They are much closer than the Seanchan. Eamon Valda, the new Lord Captain Commander, led most of their numbers toward northern Amadicia before Amador fell. He was hunting the Prophet, also, my Lord. Valda is a dangerous man, and Rhadam Asunawa, the Grand Inquisitor, makes Valda seem pleasant. And I fear neither has any love for your own Lord. Forgive me." He bowed again, hesitated, then went on smoothly. "If I may say so, my Lord's display of Manetheren's banner is inspired. My Lord will be more than a match for Valda and Asunawa, if he takes care."

wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm baʊ hɪmsɛlf əweɪ, pɛɹɪn θɔɾ i nu pɑɹɾ ə beɪlwɝz stɔɹi naʊ. klɪɹli, hi ɔlsoʊ hæd ɹʌn əfaʊl ə ðə waɪtkloʊks. ðət kəd teɪk noʊ mɔɹ ðən biɪŋ ɑn ðə seɪm stʃɹit wɪð ðɛm, ə fɹaʊn ət ðə ɹɔŋ taɪm, bʌɾ ɪt sim beɪlwɝ hæɾ ə ɡɹʌdʒ. ə ʃɑɹp maɪnd, tu, siɪŋ ɹaɪɾ əweɪ əbaʊt ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl. ən ə ʃɑɹp tʌŋ wɪð mæstɝ ɡɪl.

Watching him bow himself away, Perrin thought he knew part of Balwer's story now. Clearly, he also had run afoul of the Whitecloaks. That could take no more than being on the same street with them, a frown at the wrong time, but it seemed Balwer had a grudge. A sharp mind, too, seeing right away about the Red Eagle. And a sharp tongue with Master Gill.

ɡɪl wɑz ɑn ɪz niz bɪsaɪd meɪaɪɡdɪn, tɔkɪŋ ɹæpədli dɪspaɪt liniz ɛfɝt tə hʌʃ hɪm. meɪaɪɡdɪn hæd tɝn tə stɛɹ æftɝ beɪlwɝ əz ðə fɛloʊ hɝid θɹu ðə tʃɹiz təwɔɹd ðə kɑɹts, bʌt naʊ ən ðən əɹ ɡeɪz swʌŋ tə pɛɹɪn. ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm klʌstɝd kloʊs tə hɝ, piɹɪŋ naʊ ət beɪlwɝ, naʊ ət pɛɹɪn. ɪf i hæɾ ɛvɝ sin ə ɡɹup ə pipəl wɝiɾ əbaʊt wʌt sʌmbɑɾi ɛls hæd sɛd, ɪt wɑz ðeɪ. bʌt wʌt wɝ ðeɪ wɝiɾ i maɪɾ əv hɝd? bækbaɪɾɪŋ, pɹɑbli. teɪlz ə ɹɪzɛnmənts ən mɪsdidz, ɹil əɹ ɪmædʒənd. pipəl kupt ʌp təɡɛðɝ tɛndəd tə stɑɹt pɛkɪŋ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ. ɪf ðət wɑz ɪt, meɪbi hi kəd pʊɾ ə stɑp bɪfɔɹ sʌmbɑɾi dʒɹu blʌd. tɑlænvɝ wɑz fɑndəlɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt əɡɛn! wʌd feɪl ɪntɛn tə də wɪð ðə fɛloʊ?

Gill was on his knees beside Maighdin, talking rapidly despite Lini's effort to hush him. Maighdin had turned to stare after Balwer as the fellow hurried through the trees toward the carts, but now and then her gaze swung to Perrin. The rest of them clustered close to her, peering now at Balwer, now at Perrin. If he had ever seen a group of people worried about what somebody else had said, it was they. But what were they worried he might have heard? Backbiting, probably. Tales of resentments and misdeeds, real or imagined. People cooped up together tended to start pecking at one another. If that was it, maybe he could put a stop before somebody drew blood. Tallanvor was fondling his sword hilt again! What did Faile intend to do with the fellow?

"ɛɹæm, aɪ wɑn jə tə ɡoʊ tɔk tə tɑlænvɝ ən ðət lɑt. tɛl əm wʌt beɪlwɝ sɛd tə mi. dʒʌst slaɪɾ ɪɾ ɪndə ðə tɔk, bʌt tɛl ɛvɹiθɪŋ." ðət ʃəd suð fɪɹz ə teɪl-bɛɹɪŋ. feɪl sɛd sɝvəns niɾəd tə bi meɪd tə fil ət hoʊm. "meɪk fɹɛnz wɪð əm ɪf jə kæn, ɛɹæm. bʌɾ ɪf jə dɪsaɪd tə mun oʊvɝ wʌn ə ðə wɪmən, bi ʃʊɹ ɪts lini. ði ʌðɝ tu ɑɹ teɪkən."

"Aram, I want you to go talk to Tallanvor and that lot. Tell them what Balwer said to me. Just slide it into the talk, but tell everything." That should soothe fears of tale-bearing. Faile said servants needed to be made to feel at home. "Make friends with them if you can, Aram. But if you decide to moon over one of the women, be sure it's Lini. The other two are taken."

ðə mæn hæɾ ə smuð tʌŋ fəɹ ɛni pɹɪɾi wʊmən, bʌɾ i mænədʒ tə lʊk sɝpɹaɪzd ən əfɛndəd, boʊθ. "æz jə wɪʃ, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn," hi mʌɾɝd sʌlkəli. "aɪl kætʃ jə ʌp kwɪkli."

The man had a smooth tongue for any pretty woman, but he managed to look surprised and offended, both. "As you wish, Lord Perrin," he muttered sulkily. "I'll catch you up quickly."

"aɪ wɪl bi oʊvɝ wɪð ði il."

"I will be over with the Aiel."

ɛɹæm blɪŋkt. "ɑ. jɛs. wɛl, ɪt maɪt teɪk ə waɪl, ət ðæt, ɪf aɪm tə meɪk fɹɛnz wɪð ðɛm. ðeɪ doʊn lʊk laɪk ðeɪ mʌtʃ wɑn fɹɛnz, tə mi." ðɪs fɹəm ə fɛloʊ hu stɛɹd səspɪʃəsli əɾ ɛniwʌn ɪksɛp feɪl u keɪm nɪɹ pɛɹɪn ən nɛvɝ smaɪl fəɹ ɛniwʌn nɑt wɛɹɪŋ ə skɝt.

Aram blinked. "Ah. Yes. Well, it might take a while, at that, if I'm to make friends with them. They don't look like they much want friends, to me." This from a fellow who stared suspiciously at anyone except Faile who came near Perrin and never smiled for anyone not wearing a skirt.

nɛvɝðəlɛs, hi wɛn oʊvɝ ən skwɑɾɪd ɑn ɪz hilz wɛɹ i kəd spik tə ɡɪl ən ði ʌðɝz. ivən fɹəm ə dɪstəns ðɛɹ stændɔfɪʃnəs wɑz pleɪn. ðeɪ kəntɪnjud wɪð ðɛɹ wɝk, oʊnli naʊ ən ðən seɪɪŋ ə wɝd tə ɛɹæm, ən ðeɪ lʊkt əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ əz ɔfən əz ət hɪm. skɪɾɪʃ əz ɡɹin kweɪl ɪn sʌmɝ, wən ðə fɑksəz wɝ titʃɪŋ ðə kʌbz tə hʌnt. bʌɾ ət lis ðeɪ wɝ tɔkɪŋ.

Nevertheless, he went over and squatted on his heels where he could speak to Gill and the others. Even from a distance their standoffishness was plain. They continued with their work, only now and then saying a word to Aram, and they looked at each other as often as at him. Skittish as green quail in summer, when the foxes were teaching the cubs to hunt. But at least they were talking.

pɛɹɪn wʌndɝd wʌt mɪstʃəf ɛɹæm hæd ɡɑɾən ʌp tə wɪð ði il - ðəɹ dɪd nɑt sim tə hæv bɪn ɛni taɪm fəɹ ɪt! - bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt wʌndɝ lɔŋ. ɛni sɪɹiəs tʃɹʌbəl wɪð il juʒəwəli mɛn sʌmwʌn dɛd, ən nɑt ði il. ɪn tʃɹuθ, hi wɑz nɑt soʊ iɡɝ tə mit ðə waɪz wʌnz hɪmsɛlf. hi wɔkt ɝaʊn ðə kɝv ə ðə hɪl, bʌɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə klaɪmɪŋ ðə sloʊp, hɪz fit kæɹiɾ ɪm ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə minɝz. hi hæd steɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðɛɹ kæmp əz mʌtʃ əz pɑsəbəl, tu, ən nɑt sɪmpli kəz ə bɹəleɪn. ðəɹ wɝ dɪsədvæntɪdʒɪz tə hævɪŋ tu kin ə noʊz.

Perrin wondered what mischief Aram had gotten up to with the Aiel - there did not seem to have been any time for it! - but he did not wonder long. Any serious trouble with Aiel usually meant someone dead, and not the Aiel. In truth, he was not so eager to meet the Wise Ones himself. He walked around the curve of the hill, but instead of climbing the slope, his feet carried him all the way to the Mayeners. He had stayed away from their camp as much as possible, too, and not simply because of Berelain. There were disadvantages to having too keen a nose.

fɔɹtʃənətli, ə fɹɛʃənɪŋ bɹiz wɑz kæɹiɪŋ moʊst ə ðə stɪŋk əweɪ, ðoʊ ɪt dɪd lɪɾəl fəɹ ðə hit. swɛt ɹoʊl daʊn ðə feɪsəz ə ðə maʊntəd sɛntʃɹiz ɪn ðɛɹ ɹɛɾ ɑɹmɝ. ət ðə saɪɾ ə hɪm, ðeɪ sæɾ ʌp ivən mɔɹ ɹɪdʒɪdli ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz, wɪtʃ wɑz seɪɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ. wɛɹ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn ɹoʊd laɪk fɛloʊz hɛɾɪŋ aʊt tə ðə filz, ðə minɝz juʒəwəli wɝ stætʃuz ɑn hɔɹsbæk. ðeɪ kəd faɪt, ðoʊ. ðə laɪt sɛn ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid.

Fortunately, a freshening breeze was carrying most of the stink away, though it did little for the heat. Sweat rolled down the faces of the mounted sentries in their red armor. At the sight of him, they sat up even more rigidly in their saddles, which was saying something. Where the Two Rivers men rode like fellows heading out to the fields, the Mayeners usually were statues on horseback. They could fight, though. The Light send there was no need.

heɪvin nɹɛl keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ, bʌtoʊnɪŋ ʌp ɪz koʊt, bɪfɔɹ pɛɹɪn wɑz wɛl pæs ðə sɛntʃɹiz. ðə dʌzən əɹ soʊ ʌðɝ ɔfəsɝz fɑloʊɾ ət nɹɛlz hilz, ɔl koʊɾəd ən səm fæsənɪŋ ðə stʃɹæps ə ðɛɹ ɹɛd bɹɛstpleɪts. tu əɹ θɹi kæɹid hɛlməts wɪð θɪn ɹɛd plumz tʌkt ʌndɝ ðɛɹ ɑɹmz. moʊst wɝ jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən nɹɛl, səm twaɪs ɪz eɪdʒ, ɡɹeɪɪŋ mɛn wɪð hɑɹd, skɑɹd feɪsəz, bʌt nɹɛlz ɹɪwɔɹd fəɹ hɛlpɪŋ tə ɹɛskju ɹænd hæd bɪn tə bi neɪmd ɡælɛnz sɛkənd, hɪz fɝs lutɛnənt, ðeɪ kɔld ɪt.

Havien Nurelle came running, buttoning up his coat, before Perrin was well past the sentries. The dozen or so other officers followed at Nurelle's heels, all coated and some fastening the straps of their red breastplates. Two or three carried helmets with thin red plumes tucked under their arms. Most were years older than Nurelle, some twice his age, graying men with hard, scarred faces, but Nurelle's reward for helping to rescue Rand had been to be named Gallenne's second, his First Lieutenant, they called it.

"ðə fɝs hæzən ɹɪtɝnd, jɛt, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn," nɹɛl sɛd, meɪkɪŋ ə baʊ mɪɹɝd baɪ ði ʌðɝz. ə tɔl slɛndɝ mæn, hi dɪd nɑt lʊk əz jʌŋ əz i hæd bɪfɔɹ dəməaɪz wɛlz. ðəɹ wɑz ən ɛdʒ tə hɪz aɪz, wɪtʃ hæd sin mɔɹ blʌd ðən moʊs vɛɾɝənz ə twɛnti bæɾəlz. bʌɾ ɪf ɪz feɪs wɑz hɑɹɾɝ, ðəɹ wɑz stɪl ən iɡɝnəs tə pliz ɪn ɪz sɛnt. tə heɪvin nɹɛl, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə wɑz ə mæn u kəd flaɪ əɹ wɔk ɑn wɔɾɝ əz i tʃoʊz. "ðə mɔɹnɪŋ pətʃɹoʊlz sɔ nʌθɪŋ, ðoʊz ðəɾ ɑɹ bæk. aɪ wəɾ əv ɹipɔɹɾəd, ʌðɝwaɪz."

"The First hasn't returned, yet, Lord Perrin," Nurelle said, making a bow mirrored by the others. A tall slender man, he did not look as young as he had before Dumai's Wells. There was an edge to his eyes, which had seen more blood than most veterans of twenty battles. But if his face was harder, there was still an eagerness to please in his scent. To Havien Nurelle, Perrin Aybara was a man who could fly or walk on water as he chose. "The morning patrols saw nothing, those that are back. I would have reported, otherwise."

"ʌv kɔɹs," pɛɹɪn toʊl hɪm. "aɪ . . . dʒʌst wɑntəd tə lʊk əbaʊɾ ə bɪt."

"Of course," Perrin told him. "I . . . just wanted to look about a bit."

hi sɪmpli mɛn tə wɔk ɝaʊn əntɪl i kəd wɝk ʌp ɪz nɝv tə feɪs ðə waɪz wʌnz, bʌt ðə jʌŋ minɝ fɑloʊɾ ɪm wɪð ðə ɹɛst ə ði ɔfəsɝz, æŋkʃəsli wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ lɔɹd pɛɹɪn tə faɪn səm flɔ ɪn ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz, wɪnsɪŋ wɛnɛvɝ ðeɪ keɪm ɑn bɛɹ-tʃɛstəd mɛn tɔsɪŋ daɪs ɑn ə blæŋkəɾ əɹ səm fɛloʊ snɔɹɪŋ əweɪ wɪð ðə sʌn ɑn ðə klaɪm. hi nid nɑɾ əv bɑðɝd; tə pɛɹɪn, ðə kæmp lʊk leɪɾ aʊt wɪð ə plʌm laɪn ən lɛvəl. itʃ mæn hæɾ ɪz blæŋkəts, ən ɪz sæɾəl fəɹ ə pɪloʊ, nɑt mɔɹ ðən tu peɪsɪz fɹəm wɛɹ ɪz hɔɹs wɑz taɪd tə wʌn ə ðə lɔŋ ɹoʊps dʒɹupɪŋ bɪtwin tʃɛst-haɪ poʊlz sɛɾ əpɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ə kʊk faɪɝ stʊɾ ɛvɹi twɛnti peɪsɪz, wɪð lænsɪz stækt ɪn stil-tɪp koʊnz bɪtwin. ðə hoʊl meɪɾ ə sɔɹɾ ə bɑks ɝaʊn faɪv pik tɛns, wʌn stʃɹaɪpt ɡoʊld-ænd-blu ən lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ði ʌðɝ fɔɹ kəmbaɪnd. ɔl vɛɹi dɪfɹən fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛnz ɛvɹi-wɪtʃ-weɪ ɝeɪnʒmənt.

He simply meant to walk around until he could work up his nerve to face the Wise Ones, but the young Mayener followed him with the rest of the officers, anxiously watching for Lord Perrin to find some flaw in the Winged Guards, wincing whenever they came on bare-chested men tossing dice on a blanket or some fellow snoring away with the sun on the climb. He need not have bothered; to Perrin, the camp looked laid out with a plumb line and level. Each man had his blankets, and his saddle for a pillow, not more than two paces from where his horse was tied to one of the long ropes drooping between chest-high poles set upright in the ground. A cook fire stood every twenty paces, with lances stacked in steel-tipped cones between. The whole made a sort of box around five peaked tents, one striped gold-and-blue and larger than the other four combined. All very different from the Two Rivers men's every-which-way arrangement.

pɛɹɪn wɔkt əlɔŋ bɹɪskli, tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə lʊk tu mʌtʃ ə ful. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ mʌtʃ səksɛs i wɑz hævɪŋ. hi ɪtʃt tə stɑp ən lʊk oʊvɝ ə hɔɹs əɹ tu - dʒʌs tə bi eɪbəl tə pɪk ʌp ə huf wɪθaʊt sʌmbɑɾi pɹæktəkli feɪntɪŋ - bʌt maɪnfəl ʌv wʌɾ ɛɹæm hæd sɛd, hi kɛpt ɪz hænz tə hɪmsɛlf. ɛvɹiwʌn simd əz stɑɹɾəld əz nɹɛl əɾ ɪz peɪs. tʌf-aɪd bænɝmɪn tʃɪid mɛn tə ðɛɹ fiɾ oʊnli tə hæv pɛɹɪn stʃɹaɪd baɪ wɪð ə nɑd bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɔl əpɹaɪt. ə pʌzəl mɝmɝ tʃɹeɪld ɪn ði ɛɹ bɪhaɪn hɪm, ən ɪz ɪɹz kɑɾ ə fju kɑmɛns əbaʊɾ ɔfəsɝz, lɔɹdz ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ, ðəɾ i wɑz dʒʌst əz ɡlæd nɹɛl ən ði ʌðɝz mɪst. faɪnəli, hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɑn ðə vɝdʒ ə ðə kæmp, stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ðə bɹʌʃi sloʊp təwɔɹd ðə waɪz wʌnz' tɛns. oʊnli ə fju ʌv ðə meɪɾənz wɝ vɪzəbəl əmʌŋ ðə skæɾɝd tʃɹiz ʌp ðɛɹ, ən səm ə ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn.

Perrin walked along briskly, trying not to look too much a fool. He was not sure how much success he was having. He itched to stop and look over a horse or two - just to be able to pick up a hoof without somebody practically fainting - but mindful of what Aram had said, he kept his hands to himself. Everyone seemed as startled as Nurelle at his pace. Tough-eyed bannermen chivvied men to their feet only to have Perrin stride by with a nod before they were all upright. A puzzled murmur trailed in the air behind him, and his ears caught a few comments about officers, lords in particular, that he was just as glad Nurelle and the others missed. Finally, he found himself on the verge of the camp, staring up the brushy slope toward the Wise Ones' tents. Only a few of the Maidens were visible among the scattered trees up there, and some of the gai'shain.

"lɔɹd pɛɹɪn," nɹɛl sɛd hɛzɪɾəntli. "ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. . . . hi stɛp kloʊsɝ ən loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs tə ə hɔɹs wɪspɝ. "aɪ noʊ ðeɪ swɔɹ tə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, ænd. . . . aɪv sin θɪŋz, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn. ðeɪ də kæmp tʃɔɹz! ɛɛs sədaɪ! ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, mɑsʊɝi ən siɑnɪd keɪm daʊn tə fɛtʃ wɔɾɝ! ən jɛstɝdeɪ, æftɝ jə ɹɪtɝnd. . . . jɛstɝdeɪ, aɪ θɔɾ aɪ hɝd sʌmwʌn ʌp ðəɹ . . . kɹaɪɪŋ aʊt. ɪt kʊdn əv bɪn wʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz, ʌv kɔɹs," hi æɾəd hɝidli, ən læf tə ʃoʊ haʊ ɹɪdɪkjələs ði aɪdiə wɑz, ə vɛɹi ʃeɪki læf. "ju. . . . jəl si ðəɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪz . . . ɔl ɹaɪt . . . wɪð ðɛm?" hi hæd ɹɪɾən ɪndə fɔɹɾi θaʊzənd ʃeɪɾoʊ liɾɪŋ tu hʌnʒɹəd lænsɝz, bʌt tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ðɪs hæɾ ɪm hʌntʃɪŋ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ən ʃɪftɪŋ ɪz fit. ʌv kɔɹs, hi hæd ɹɪɾən ɪndə fɔɹɾi θaʊzənd ʃeɪɾoʊ kəz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑntəɾ ɪm tə.

"Lord Perrin," Nurelle said hesitantly. "The Aes Sedai. . . . He stepped closer and lowered his voice to a hoarse whisper. "I know they swore to the Lord Dragon, and. . . . I've seen things, Lord Perrin. They do camp chores! Aes Sedai! This morning, Masuri and Seonid came down to fetch water! And yesterday, after you returned. . . . Yesterday, I thought I heard someone up there . . . crying out. It couldn't have been one of the sisters, of course," he added hurriedly, and laughed to show how ridiculous the idea was, a very shaky laugh. "You. . . . You will see that everything is . . . all right . . . with them?" He had ridden into forty thousand Shaido leading two hundred lancers, but talking about this had him hunching his shoulders and shifting his feet. Of course, he had ridden into forty thousand Shaido because an Aes Sedai wanted him to.

"aɪl də wʌɾ aɪ kæn," pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd. meɪbi mæɾɝz wɝ wɝs ðən i hæd θɔt. naʊ hi hæd tə stɑp əm ɡɛɾɪŋ wɝs stɪl. ɪf i kʊd. hi wəd ɹæðɝ əv feɪs ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ əɡɛn.

"I'll do what I can," Perrin muttered. Maybe matters were worse than he had thought. Now he had to stop them getting worse still. If he could. He would rather have faced the Shaido again.

nɹɛl nɑɾəd əz ðoʊ pɛɹɪn hæd pɹɑməst ɔl i æskt ən mɔɹ. "ðæɾ ɪz wɛl, ðɛn," hi sɛd, saʊndɪŋ ɹɪlivd. kæstɪŋ saɪdweɪz ɡlænsɪz ət pɛɹɪn, hi wɝk hɪmsɛlf ʌp tə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, bʌɾ əpɛɹənli ðɪs wɑz nɑt soʊ tʌtʃi əz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. "aɪ hɝd ðət jə lɛt ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl steɪ.".

Nurelle nodded as though Perrin had promised all he asked and more. "That is well, then," he said, sounding relieved. Casting sideways glances at Perrin, he worked himself up to say something else, but apparently this was not so touchy as the Aes Sedai. "I heard that you let the Red Eagle stay.".

pɛɹɪn vɛɹi nɪɹli dʒʌmpt. ivən fəɹ dʒʌst ɝaʊn ðə hɪl, nuz hæd tʃɹævəl fæst. "ɪt sim ðə θɪŋ tə du," hi sɛd sloʊli. bɹəleɪn wəɾ əv tə noʊ ðə tʃɹuθ, jɛɾ ɪf tu mɛni nu, ðət tʃɹuθ wəd spɹɛd fɹəm ðə nɛks vɪlədʒ ðeɪ pæst, ðə nɛks fɑɹm. "ðɪs juz tə bi pɑɹɾ ə meɪnɛðɝən," hi æɾəd, əz ɪf nɹɛl dɪd nɑt noʊ ðət pɝfəkli wɛl. tʃɹuθ! hi hæd ɡɑɾən soʊ hi kəd bɛn tʃɹuθ laɪk ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən tə mɛn ɑn ɪz saɪd. "nɑt ðə fɝs taɪm ðət flæɡz bɪn ɹeɪzd ɝaʊn hɪɹ, əl wɔɹənt, bʌt nʌn ə ðoʊz fɛloʊz hæd ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn bɪhaɪn hɪm." ən ɪf ðət dɪd nɑt sɛt ðə nɛsəsɛɹi sidz, hi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ tə plaʊ ə fɝoʊ.

Perrin very nearly jumped. Even for just around the hill, news had traveled fast. "It seemed the thing to do," he said slowly. Berelain would have to know the truth, yet if too many knew, that truth would spread from the next village they passed, the next farm. "This used to be part of Manetheren," he added, as if Nurelle did not know that perfectly well. Truth! He had gotten so he could bend truth like an Aes Sedai, and to men on his side. "Not the first time that flag's been raised around here, I'll warrant, but none of those fellows had the Dragon Reborn behind him." And if that did not set the necessary seeds, he did not know how to plow a furrow.

əbɹʌpli hi ɹilaɪz ðət wʌt simd ɛvɹi læst wʌn ə ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm wɪð ðɛɹ ɔfəsɝz. noʊ daʊt wʌndɝɪŋ wʌɾ i wɑz seɪɪŋ, æftɝ ɔl bʌt ɹʌnɪŋ θɹu ðət weɪ. ivən ðə lin bɔldɪŋ oʊl soʊlʒɝ ɡælɛn kɔld ɪz dɔɡɹɑbɝ hæd kʌm aʊt tə stɛɹ, ən bɹəleɪnz meɪdz, ə pɛɹ ə plʌmp pleɪn-feɪst wɪmən ɡɑɹb tə mætʃ ðɛɹ mɪstʃɹəsəz tɛnt. pɛɹɪn hæd hɑɹdli sin ə θɪŋ, bʌɾ i nu hi hæd tə ɡɪv səm sɔɹɾ ə pɹeɪz.

Abruptly he realized that what seemed every last one of the Winged Guards was watching him with their officers. No doubt wondering what he was saying, after all but running through that way. Even the lean balding old soldier Gallenne called his dogrobber had come out to stare, and Berelain's maids, a pair of plump plain-faced women garbed to match their mistress's tent. Perrin had hardly seen a thing, but he knew he had to give some sort of praise.

ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz vɔɪs ɪnʌf tə kæɹi, hi sɛd, "ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz wɪl də min pɹaʊɾ ɪf wi ɛvɝ feɪs ənʌðɝ dəməaɪz wɛlz." ðoʊz wɝ ðə fɝst wɝdz ðət keɪm tə maɪnd, bʌɾ i wɪnst ət seɪɪŋ ðɛm.

Raising his voice enough to carry, he said, "The Winged Guards will do Mayene proud if we ever face another Dumai's Wells." Those were the first words that came to mind, but he winced at saying them.

tə hɪz ʃɑk, ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɹoʊz stʃɹeɪɾəweɪ əmʌŋ ðə soʊlʒɝz, tʃɪɹɪŋ, "pɛɹɪn ɡoʊldeɪniz!" ən "min fəɹ ɡoʊldeɪniz!" ən "ɡoʊldeɪniz ən meɪnɛðɝən!" mɛn dænst ən keɪpɝd, ən səm snætʃt lænsɪz fɹəm ðə stæks tə ʃeɪk əm soʊ ðə ɹɛd stʃɹimɝz weɪvd ɪn ðə bɹiz. ɡɹɪzəl bænɝmɪn wɑtʃt əm wɪð ɑɹmz foʊldəd, nɑɾɪŋ əpɹuvəl. nɹɛl bimd, ən nɑɾ oʊnli hɪm. ɔfəsɝz wɪð ɡɹeɪ ɪn ðɛɹ hɛɹ ən skɑɹz ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz ɡɹɪn laɪk bɔɪz pɹeɪzd ət ðɛɹ lɛsənz. laɪt, hi wɑz ði oʊnli seɪn mæn lɛft! hi pɹeɪd nɛvɝ tə si ənʌðɝ bæɾəl!

To his shock, shouting rose straightaway among the soldiers, cheering, "Perrin Goldeneyes!" and "Mayene for Goldeneyes!" and "Goldeneyes and Manetheren!" Men danced and capered, and some snatched lances from the stacks to shake them so the red streamers waved in the breeze. Grizzled bannermen watched them with arms folded, nodding approval. Nurelle beamed, and not only him. Officers with gray in their hair and scars on their faces grinned like boys praised at their lessons. Light, he was the only sane man left! He prayed never to see another battle!

wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ ðɪs wɑz gɑnə kɑz tʃɹʌbəl wɪð bɹəleɪn, hi meɪɾ ɪz ɡʊdbaɪz wɪð nɹɛl ən ði ʌðɝz ən tʃɹæmpt ʌp ðə sloʊp θɹu dɛɾ əɹ daɪɪŋ bɹʌʃ, nʌn ʌv ɪt weɪst-haɪ. bɹaʊn widz kɹækəl bɪniθ ɪz buts. ʃaʊɾɪŋ stɪl fɪl ðə minɝ kæmp. ivən æftɝ ʃi lɝn ðə tʃɹuθ, ðə fɝs maɪt nɑt bi pliz tə hæv əɹ soʊlʒɝz tʃɪɹɪŋ ɪm ðɪs weɪ. ʌv kɔɹs, ðət kəɾ əv ɡʊd pɔɪns. meɪbi ʃi wəd bi æŋɡɹi ɪnʌf tə stɑp pɛstɝɪŋ hɪm.

Wondering whether this was going to cause trouble with Berelain, he made his goodbyes with Nurelle and the others and tramped up the slope through dead or dying brush, none of it waist-high. Brown weeds crackled beneath his boots. Shouting still filled the Mayener camp. Even after she learned the truth, the First might not be pleased to have her soldiers cheering him this way. Of course, that could have good points. Maybe she would be angry enough to stop pestering him.

ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə kɹɛst, hi pɔzd, lɪsnɪŋ tə ðə tʃɪɹz faɪnəli feɪɾ əweɪ. noʊ wʌn wɑz gɑnə tʃɪɹ ɪm hɪɹ. ɔl ə ðə saɪd flæps wɝ daʊn ɑn ðə waɪz wʌnz' loʊ ɡɹeɪ-bɹaʊn tɛns, kloʊzɪŋ əm ɪn. oʊnli ə fju ʌv ðə meɪɾənz wɝ ɪn saɪt, naʊ. skwɑɾɪŋ izəli ɑn ðɛɹ hilz bɪniθ ə lɛðɝlif ðət stɪl ʃoʊd səm ɡɹin, ðeɪ aɪɾ ɪm kjʊɹiəsli. ðɛɹ hænz muv kwɪkli ɪn ðət weɪ ðeɪ hæɾ ə tɔkɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz wɪð saɪnz. æftɝ ə moʊmən səlɪn ɹoʊz, ʃɪftɪŋ əɹ hɛvi bɛl naɪf, ən stʃɹoʊɾ ɪn ɪz dɝɛkʃən, ə tɔl, wɪɹi wʊmən wɪð ə pɪŋk skɑɹ əkɹɔs əɹ sʌn-dɑɹk tʃik. ʃi ɡlæns bæk daʊn ðə weɪ hi hæd kʌm ən simd ɹɪliv ðəɾ i wɑz əloʊn, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz ɔfən hɑɹd tə tɛl wɪð il.

Short of the crest, he paused, listening to the cheers finally fade away. No one was going to cheer him here. All of the side flaps were down on the Wise Ones' low gray-brown tents, closing them in. Only a few of the Maidens were in sight, now. Squatting easily on their heels beneath a leatherleaf that still showed some green, they eyed him curiously. Their hands moved quickly in that way they had of talking among themselves with signs. After a moment Sulin rose, shifting her heavy belt knife, and strode in his direction, a tall, wiry woman with a pink scar across her sun-dark cheek. She glanced back down the way he had come and seemed relieved that he was alone, though it was often hard to tell with Aiel.

"ðɪs ɪz ɡʊd, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli. "ðə waɪz wʌnz əv nɑt bɪn pliz ðət jə meɪk əm kʌm tə ju. oʊnli ə ful dɪsplisɪz waɪz wʌnz, ən aɪ hæv nɑt teɪkən jə fəɹ ə ful."

"This is good, Perrin Aybara," she said quietly. "The Wise Ones have not been pleased that you make them come to you. Only a fool displeases Wise Ones, and I have not taken you for a fool."

pɛɹɪn skɹʌbd əɾ ɪz bɪɹd. hi hæd bɪn kipɪŋ klɪɹ ə ðə waɪz wʌnz - ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ - əz mʌtʃ əz pɑsəbəl, bʌɾ i hæd hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə fɔɹsɪŋ əm tə kʌm tə hɪm. hi dʒʌs faʊn ðɛɹ kʌmpəni ənkʌmftəɹbəl. tə pʊɾ ɪt maɪldli. "wɛl, aɪ nid tə si ɛdʒɹə naʊ," hi toʊl hɝ. "əbaʊt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ."

Perrin scrubbed at his beard. He had been keeping clear of the Wise Ones - and the Aes Sedai - as much as possible, but he had had no intention of forcing them to come to him. He just found their company uncomfortable. To put it mildly. "Well, I need to see Edarra now," he told her. "About the Aes Sedai."

"pɝhæps aɪ wɑz mɪsteɪkən æftɝ ɔl," səlɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "bʌɾ əl tɛl hɝ." tɝnɪŋ, ʃi pɔzd. "tɛl mi sʌmθɪŋ. tɛɹəl wɪntɝ ən fʊɹən ælhæɹə ɑɹ kloʊs tə siɑnɪd tʃɹeɪɡən - laɪk fɝst-bɹʌðɝz wɪð ə fɝst-sɪstɝ; ʃi dʌz nɑt laɪk mɛn əz mɛn - jɛt ðeɪ ɔfɝd tə teɪk əɹ pʌnɪʃmən fəɹ hɝ. haʊ kəd ðeɪ ʃeɪm əɹ soʊ?"

"Perhaps I was mistaken after all," Sulin said dryly. "But I will tell her." Turning, she paused. "Tell me something. Teryl Wynter and Furen Alharra are close to Seonid Traighan - like first-brothers with a first-sister; she does not like men as men - yet they offered to take her punishment for her. How could they shame her so?"

hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, bʌt nʌθɪŋ keɪm aʊt. ə pɛɹ ʌv ɡeɪʃeɪn əpɪɹd fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝs sloʊp, itʃ liɾɪŋ tu ʌv ði ilz pæk mjulz; ðə waɪt-ɹoʊb mɛn pæst wɪðɪn ə fju peɪsɪz, hɛɾɪŋ daʊn təwɔɹd ðə stʃɹim. hi kəd nɑt bi ʃʊɹ, bʌɾ i θɔt boʊθ wɝ ʃeɪɾoʊ. ðə pɛɹ kɛp ðɛɹ aɪz mikli daʊn, bɛɹli lʊkɪŋ ʌp ɪnʌf tə si wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ. ðeɪ hæd hæɾ ɛvɹi ɑpɝtunəɾi tə ɹʌn əweɪ, duɪŋ tʃɔɹz laɪk ðət wɪθaʊɾ ɛniwʌn tə wɑtʃ. ə pəkjuljɝ pipəl.

He opened his mouth, but nothing came out. A pair of gai'shain appeared from the reverse slope, each leading two of the Aiel's pack mules; the white-robed men passed within a few paces, heading down toward the stream. He could not be sure, but he thought both were Shaido. The pair kept their eyes meekly down, barely looking up enough to see where they were going. They had had every opportunity to run away, doing chores like that without anyone to watch. A peculiar people.

"aɪ si jə ɑɹ ʃɑkt, tu," səlɪn sɛd. "aɪ hæd hoʊp jə kəɾ ɪkspleɪn. əl tɛl ɛdʒɹə." əz ʃi stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə tɛns, ʃi æɾəd oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, "ju wɛtləndɝz ɑɹ vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə."

"I see you are shocked, too," Sulin said. "I had hoped you could explain. I will tell Edarra." As she started for the tents, she added over her shoulder, "You wetlanders are very strange, Perrin Aybara."

pɛɹɪn fɹaʊn æftɝ hɝ, ən wən ʃi vænɪʃt ɪndə wʌn ə ðə tɛns, hi tɝn tə fɹaʊn ət ðə tu ɡeɪʃeɪn liɾɪŋ ðə hɔɹsəz tə wɔɾɝ. wɛtləndɝz wɝ stʃɹeɪnʒ? laɪt! soʊ nɹɛl hæd bɪn ɹaɪɾ ɪn wʌɾ i hɝd. ɪt wɑz bɪɑn taɪm tə stɪk ɪz noʊz ɪndə wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn bɪtwin ðə waɪz wʌnz ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. hi ʃəɾ əv bɪfɔɹ ðɪs. hi wɪʃt i dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt wəd bi ðə seɪm əz stɪkɪŋ ɪz noʊz ɪndə ə hɔɹnɪts nɛst.

Perrin frowned after her, and when she vanished into one of the tents, he turned to frown at the two gai'shain leading the horses to water. Wetlanders were strange? Light! So Nurelle had been right in what he heard. It was beyond time to stick his nose into what was going on between the Wise Ones and the Aes Sedai. He should have before this. He wished he did not think it would be the same as sticking his nose into a hornet's nest.

ɪt sim tə teɪk ə lɔŋ taɪm fəɹ səlɪn tə ɹiəpɪɹ, ən ʃi dɪd lɪɾəl tə hɛlp ɪz mud wən ʃi dɪd. hoʊldɪŋ ðə tɛntflæp fəɹ hɪm, ʃi flɪkt ɪz bɛl naɪf kəntɛmptʃwəsli wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ əz i dʌk θɹu. "ju ʃəd bi bɛɾɝ ɑɹm fəɹ ðɪs dæns, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," ʃi sɛd.

It seemed to take a long time for Sulin to reappear, and she did little to help his mood when she did. Holding the tentflap for him, she flicked his belt knife contemptuously with a finger as he ducked through. "You should be better armed for this dance, Perrin Aybara," she said.

ɪnsaɪd, hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ɔl sɪks waɪz wʌnz sɪɾɪŋ kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn kʌlɝfəl tæsɛl kʊʃənz, ðɛɹ ʃɔlz taɪɾ ɝaʊn ðɛɹ weɪsts ən ðɛɹ skɝts meɪkɪŋ kɛɹfəli ɝeɪnʒd fænz əkɹɔs ðə leɪɝd ɹʌɡz. hi hæd hoʊp fəɹ dʒʌst ɛdʒɹə. nʌn lʊk tə bi mɔɹ ðən fɔɹ əɹ faɪv jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən hi, səm noʊ oʊldɝ əɾ ɔl, jɛt sʌmhaʊ ðeɪ ɔlweɪz meɪɾ ɪm fil əz ɪf i wɝ feɪsɪŋ ði oʊldəs mɛmbɝz ə ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl, ðə wʌnz u hæd spɛn jɪɹz lɝnɪŋ tə snɪf aʊt wʌtɛvɝ jə wɑntəd tə haɪd. sɛpɝeɪɾɪŋ wʌn wʊmənz sɛn fɹəm ənʌðɝz wɑz ɔl bʌɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl, bʌɾ i hɑɹdli niɾəd tə. sɪks sɛts ʌv aɪz lætʃt ɑn tə hɪm, fɹəm dʒəninəz peɪl skaɪ blu tə mɑɹlaɪnz pɝpəl twaɪlaɪt, nɑt tə mɛnʃən nəvɛɝɪnz ʃɑɹp ɡɹin. ɛvɹi aɪ cʊɾə bɪn ə skjuɝ.

Inside, he was surprised to find all six Wise Ones sitting cross-legged on colorful tasseled cushions, their shawls tied around their waists and their skirts making carefully arranged fans across the layered rugs. He had hoped for just Edarra. None looked to be more than four or five years older than he, some no older at all, yet somehow they always made him feel as if he were facing the oldest members of the Women's Circle, the ones who had spent years learning to sniff out whatever you wanted to hide. Separating one woman's scent from another's was all but impossible, but he hardly needed to. Six sets of eyes latched on to him, from Janina's pale sky blue to Marline's purple twilight, not to mention Nevarin's sharp green. Every eye could have been a skewer.

ɛdʒɹə bɹʌskli moʊʃən ɪm tə teɪk ə kʊʃən hɪmsɛlf, wɪtʃ i dɪd wɪð ɡɹæɾətud, ðoʊ ɪt pʊɾ ɪm feɪsɪŋ əm ɔl ɪn ə sɛmɪsɝkəl. meɪbi waɪz wʌnz hæd dɪzaɪn ðiz tɛns, tə meɪk mɛn bɛn ðɛɹ nɛks ɪf ðeɪ wɑntəd tə stæn əpɹaɪt. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ɪt wɑz kulɝ ɪn ðə dɪm ɪntɪɹiɝ, bʌɾ i stɪl fɛlt laɪk swɛɾɪŋ. meɪbi hi kəd nɑt pɪk wʌn fɹəm ənʌðɝ, jɛt ðiz wɪmən smɛld laɪk wʊlvz stʌɾiɪŋ ə tɛðɝd ɡoʊt. ə skwɛɹ-feɪst ɡeɪʃeɪn u wɑz hæf əɡɛn əz bɪɡ əz i wɑz nɛl tə ɔfɝ ə ɡoʊldən kʌp ə dɑɹk waɪn-pʌntʃ ɑn ən ɪlæbɹət sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ. ðə waɪz wʌnz ɔlɹɛɾi hɛl mɪsmætʃt sɪlvɝ kʌps ən ɡoʊbləts. ənʃʊɹ wʌɾ ɪt mɛn ðəɾ i wɑz biɪŋ ɔfɝd ɡoʊld - meɪbi nʌθɪŋ, jɛɾ u kəd seɪ, wɪð il? - pɛɹɪn tʊk ɪt kɔʃəsli. ɪt ɡeɪv ɔf ðə sɛn ə plʌmz. ðə fɛloʊ baʊd mikli ɪnʌf wən ɛdʒɹə klæpt əɹ hænz, ən bɛn hɪmsɛlf aʊɾ ə ðə tɛn bækwɝd, bʌt ðə hæf-hil slæʃ daʊn ɪz hɑɹd feɪs hæd tə deɪt fɹəm dəməaɪz wɛlz.

Edarra brusquely motioned him to take a cushion himself, which he did with gratitude, though it put him facing them all in a semicircle. Maybe Wise Ones had designed these tents, to make men bend their necks if they wanted to stand upright. Strangely, it was cooler in the dim interior, but he still felt like sweating. Maybe he could not pick one from another, yet these women smelled like wolves studying a tethered goat. A square-faced gai'shain who was half again as big as he was knelt to offer a golden cup of dark wine-punch on an elaborate silver tray. The Wise Ones already held mismatched silver cups and goblets. Unsure what it meant that he was being offered gold - maybe nothing, yet who could say, with Aiel? - Perrin took it cautiously. It gave off the scent of plums. The fellow bowed meekly enough when Edarra clapped her hands, and bent himself out of the tent backward, but the half-healed slash down his hard face had to date from Dumai's Wells.

"naʊ ðət jə ɑɹ hɪɹ," ɛdʒɹə sɛɾ əz sun əz ðə tɛntflæp dʒɹɑp bɪhaɪn ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn, "wi wɪl ɪkspleɪn əɡɛn waɪ jə mʌs kɪl ðə mæn kɔl mæsimə dɑɡɝ."

"Now that you are here," Edarra said as soon as the tentflap dropped behind the gai'shain, "we will explain again why you must kill the man called Masema Dagar."

"wi ʃəd nɑɾ əv tə ɪkspleɪn əɡɛn," dɛlɔɹə pʊɾ ɪn. hɝ hɛɹ ən aɪz wɝ nɪɹli ðə seɪm ʃeɪɾ əz meɪaɪɡdɪnz, bʌt noʊ wʌn wəd kɔl əɹ pɪntʃt feɪs pɹɪɾi. hɝ mænɝ wɑz pjʊɹ aɪs. "ðɪs mæsimə dɑɡɝ ɪz ə deɪnʒɝ tə ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn. hi mʌs daɪ."

"We should not have to explain again," Delora put in. Her hair and eyes were nearly the same shade as Maighdin's, but no one would call her pinched face pretty. Her manner was pure ice. "This Masema Dagar is a danger to the Car'a'carn. He must die."

"ðə dʒɹimwɔkɝz əv toʊld ʌs, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə." kɛɹɛl sɝɾənli wɑz pɹɪɾi, ən ðoʊ hɝ faɪɝi hɛɹ ən pɪɹsɪŋ aɪz meɪɾ əɹ lʊk əz ðoʊ ʃi hæɾ ə tɛmpɝ, ʃi wɑz ɔlweɪz maɪld. fəɹ ə waɪz wʌn. ən sɝɾənli nɑt sɑft. "ðeɪ hæv ɹɛd ðə dʒɹim. ðə mæn mʌs daɪ."

"The dreamwalkers have told us, Perrin Aybara." Carelle certainly was pretty, and though her fiery hair and piercing eyes made her look as though she had a temper, she was always mild. For a Wise One. And certainly not soft. "They have read the dream. The man must die."

pɛɹɪn tʊk ə swɑloʊ ʌv plʌm pʌntʃ tə ɡeɪn ə moʊmənt. sʌmhaʊ, ðə pʌntʃ wɑz kul. ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz ðə seɪm wɪð ðɛm. ɹænd hæd nɑt mɛnʃən ɛni wɔɹnɪŋ fɹəm ðə dʒɹimwɔkɝz. ðə fɝs taɪm, pɛɹɪn hæd mɛnʃən ðæt. oʊnli ðə wʌns; ðeɪ hæd θɔɾ i wɑz kæstɪŋ daʊɾ ɑn ðɛɹ wɝd, ən ivən kɛɹɛl hæd ɡɔn hɑt-aɪd. nɑt ðət pɛɹɪn θɔt ðeɪ wəd laɪ. nɑɾ ɪɡzækli. hi hæd nɑt kɑɾ əm ɪn wʌn, ɛniweɪ. bʌt wʌt ðeɪ wɑntəd fəɹ ðə fjutʃɝ ən wʌt ɹænd wɑntəd - wʌɾ i hɪmsɛlf wɑntəd, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ - maɪt bi vɛɹi dɪfɹən θɪŋz. meɪbi ɪt wɑz ɹænd u wɑz kipɪŋ sikɹəts. "ɪf jə kəd dʒʌst ɡɪmi səm aɪdiə wʌt ðɪs deɪnʒɝ ɪz," hi sɛd, faɪnəli. "ðə laɪt noʊz, mæsiməz ə mædmæn, bʌɾ i səpɔɹts ɹænd. ə faɪn θɪŋ, ɪf aɪ ɡoʊ ɝaʊn kɪlɪŋ pipəl ɑn əɹ saɪd. ðət wɪl sɝɾənli kənvɪns pipəl tə dʒɔɪn ɹænd."

Perrin took a swallow of plum punch to gain a moment. Somehow, the punch was cool. It was always the same with them. Rand had not mentioned any warning from the dreamwalkers. The first time, Perrin had mentioned that. Only the once; they had thought he was casting doubt on their word, and even Carelle had gone hot-eyed. Not that Perrin thought they would lie. Not exactly. He had not caught them in one, anyway. But what they wanted for the future and what Rand wanted - what he himself wanted, for that matter - might be very different things. Maybe it was Rand who was keeping secrets. "If you could just give me some idea what this danger is," he said, finally. "The Light knows, Masema's a madman, but he supports Rand. A fine thing, if I go around killing people on our side. That will certainly convince people to join Rand."

sɑɹkæzəm wɑz lɔst ɑn ðɛm. ðeɪ lʊkt ət hɪm, ənblɪŋkɪŋ. "ðə mæn mʌs daɪ," ɛdʒɹə sɛɾ ət læst. "ɪɾ ɪz ɪnʌf ðət θɹi dʒɹimwɔkɝz əv sɛd soʊ, ən sɪks waɪz wʌnz tɛl ju." ðə seɪm əz ɔlweɪz. meɪbi ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ ɛni mɔɹ ðən ðæt. ən meɪbi hi ʃəd ɡɛɾ ɑn wɪð waɪ hi hæd kʌm.

Sarcasm was lost on them. They looked at him, unblinking. "The man must die," Edarra said at last. "It is enough that three dreamwalkers have said so, and six Wise Ones tell you." The same as always. Maybe they did not know any more than that. And maybe he should get on with why he had come.

"aɪ wɑnə tɔk əbaʊt siɑnɪɾ ən mɑsʊɝi," hi sɛd, ən sɪks feɪsəz tɝn tə fɹɔst. laɪt, ðiz wɪmən kəd stɛɹ daʊn ə stoʊn! sɛɾɪŋ ðə waɪnkʌp bɪsaɪd hɪm, hi lin təwɔɹɾ əm stʌbɝnli. "aɪm səpoʊz tə ʃoʊ pipəl ɛɛs sədaɪ swɔɹn tə ɹænd." hi wɑz səpoʊz tə ʃoʊ mæsimə, æktʃəli , bʌt ðɪs dɪd sim ə ɡʊd taɪm tə mɛnʃən ðæt. "ðeɪ gɑnə tə bi vɛɹi koʊɑpɝeɪɾɪv ɪf jə lɑt bit ðɛm! laɪt! ðəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ! ɪnstɛɾ ə meɪkɪŋ əm hɔl wɔɾɝ, waɪ doʊn jə lɝn fɹəm ðɛm? ðeɪ mʌs noʊ ɔl sɔɹts ə θɪŋz jə doʊnt." tu leɪt, hi bɪɾ ɪz tʌŋ. ði il wɪmən dɪd nɑt teɪk əfɛns, ðoʊ; nɑt ðəɾ ɪt ʃoʊd, ɛniweɪ.

"I want to talk about Seonid and Masuri," he said, and six faces turned to frost. Light, these women could stare down a stone! Setting the winecup beside him, he leaned toward them stubbornly. "I'm supposed to show people Aes Sedai sworn to Rand." He was supposed to show Masema, actually, but this did seem a good time to mention that. "They aren't going to be very cooperative if you lot beat them! Light! They're Aes Sedai! Instead of making them haul water, why don't you learn from them? They must know all sorts of things you don't." Too late, he bit his tongue. The Aiel women did not take offense, though; not that it showed, anyway.

"ðeɪ noʊ səm θɪŋz wi də nɑt," dɛlɔɹə toʊld ɪm fɝmli, "ænd wi noʊ səm ðeɪ də nɑt." əz fɝmli əz ə spɪɹpɔɪn ɪn ðə ɹɪbz.

"They know some things we do not," Delora told him firmly, "and we know some they do not." As firmly as a spearpoint in the ribs.

"wi lɝn wʌt ðəɹ ɪz tə lɝn, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," mɑɹlaɪn sɛd kɑmli, koʊmɪŋ nɪɹli blæk hɛɹ wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. ʃi wɑz wʌn ə ðə fju il i hæd sin wɪð sətʃ dɑɹk hɛɹ, ən ʃi ɔfən tɔɪd wɪð ɪt. "ænd wi titʃ wʌt ðəɹ ɪz tə titʃ."

"We learn what there is to learn, Perrin Aybara," Marline said calmly, combing nearly black hair with her fingers. She was one of the few Aiel he had seen with such dark hair, and she often toyed with it. "And we teach what there is to teach."

"ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt," dʒəninə sɛd, "ɪɾ ɪz nʌn ə jəɹ əfɛɹ. mɛn də nɑɾ ɪntɝfɪɹ bɪtwin waɪz wʌnz ən əpɹɛntəsɪz." ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ oʊvɝ ɪz fulɪʃnəs.

"In any event," Janina said, "it is none of your affair. Men do not interfere between Wise Ones and apprentices." She shook her head over his foolishness.

"ju meɪ stɑp lɪsnɪŋ aʊtsaɪɾ ən kʌm ɪn, siɑnɪd tʃɹeɪɡən," ɛdʒɹə sɛd sʌɾənli. pɛɹɪn blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, bʌt nʌn ə ðə wɪmən bæɾɪd ən aɪ.

"You may stop listening outside and come in, Seonid Traighan," Edarra said suddenly. Perrin blinked in surprise, but none of the women batted an eye.

ðəɹ wɑz ə moʊmən ə saɪləns, ðən ðə tɛntflæp twɪtʃt əsaɪd, ən siɑnɪd dʌkt ɪnsaɪd, nilɪŋ kwɪkli ɑn ðə ɹʌɡz. ðət vɔntɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝɛnəɾi wɑz ʃæɾɝd ɪn hɝ. hɝ maʊθ wɑz ə θɪn laɪn, hɝ aɪz taɪt, hɝ feɪs ɹɛd. ʃi smɛld ʌv æŋɡɝ, fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən, ən ə dʌzən mɔɹ ɪmoʊʃənz ɔl wɝlɪŋ əbaʊt soʊ kwɪkli ðət pɛɹɪn kəd bɛɹli sɛpɝeɪɾ ɛni aʊt. "meɪ aɪ spik tə hɪm?" ʃi æskt ɪn ə stɪf vɔɪs.

There was a moment of silence, then the tentflap twitched aside, and Seonid ducked inside, kneeling quickly on the rugs. That vaunted Aes Sedai serenity was shattered in her. Her mouth was a thin line, her eyes tight, her face red. She smelled of anger, frustration, and a dozen more emotions all whirling about so quickly that Perrin could barely separate any out. "May I speak to him?" she asked in a stiff voice.

"ɪf jə teɪk kɛɹ wʌt jə seɪ," ɛdʒɹə toʊl hɝ. sɪpɪŋ əɹ waɪn, ðə waɪz wʌn wɑtʃt oʊvɝ ðə ɹɪm ə hɝ kʌp. ə titʃɝ wɑtʃɪŋ ə pjupəl? ə hɔk wɑtʃɪŋ ə maʊs? pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt bi ʃʊɹ. ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɛdʒɹə wɑz vɛɹi ʃʊɹ ə hɝ pleɪs, wʌtɛvɝ ðə pɛɹɪŋ. soʊ wɑz siɑnɪd. bʌt ðət dɪd nɑt kæɹi oʊvɝ tə hɪm.

"If you take care what you say," Edarra told her. Sipping her wine, the Wise One watched over the rim of her cup. A teacher watching a pupil? A hawk watching a mouse? Perrin could not be sure. Except that Edarra was very sure of her place, whatever the pairing. So was Seonid. But that did not carry over to him.

ʃi twɪstəɾ ɝaʊn tə feɪs ɪm ɑn əɹ niz, bæk ɡoʊɪŋ stʃɹeɪt, aɪz hiɾəd. æŋɡɝ ɹeɪdʒd ɪn ðə smɛl ə hɝ. "wʌtɛvɝ jə noʊ," ʃi sɛɾ æŋɡɹəli, "wʌtɛvɝ jə θɪŋk jə noʊ, jəl fɝɡɛt!" noʊ, ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ə ʃɹɛɾ ə sɝɛnəɾi lɛft ɪn hɝ. "wʌtɛvɝ ɪz bɪtwin ðə waɪz wʌnz ən əs ɪz fəɹ əs əloʊn! jəl stæn əsaɪd, əvɝt jəɹ aɪz, ən kip jəɹ maʊθ kloʊzd!"

She twisted around to face him on her knees, back going straight, eyes heated. Anger raged in the smell of her. "Whatever you know," she said angrily, "whatever you think you know, you will forget!" No, there was not a shred of serenity left in her. "Whatever is between the Wise Ones and us is for us alone! You will stand aside, avert your eyes, and keep your mouth closed!"

əmeɪzd, pɛɹɪn ɹeɪkt ɪz fɪŋɡɝz θɹu hɪz hɛɹ. "laɪt, jəɹ əpsɛt kəz aɪ noʊ jə ɡɑɾ ə swɪtʃɪŋ?" hi sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. wɛl, hi wəɾ əv bɪn, tu, bʌt nɑɾ əlɔŋsaɪd ðə ɹɛst. "doʊn jə noʊ ðiz wɪmən wəɾ əz sun kʌt jəɹ θɹoʊɾ əz lʊk ət ju? slɪt jəɹ θɹoʊɾ ən liv jə baɪ ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ɹoʊd! wɛl, aɪ pɹɑməs maɪsɛlf aɪ wʊdn lɛt ðət hæpən! aɪ doʊn laɪk ju, bʌɾ aɪ pɹɑməs tə pɹətɛk jə fɹəm ðə waɪz wʌnz, əɹ ði æʃəmən, əɹ ɹænd hɪmsɛlf, soʊ kʌm daʊn ɔf ðət haɪ hɔɹs!" ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðəɾ i wɑz ʃaʊɾɪŋ, hi dʒɹu ə dip, ɪmbɛɹəs bɹɛθ ən sɛɾəld bæk ɑn ɪz kʊʃən, snætʃt ʌp ɪz waɪnkʌp ən tʊk ə lɔŋ dʒɹɪŋk.

Amazed, Perrin raked his fingers through his hair. "Light, you're upset because I know you got a switching?" he said incredulously. Well, he would have been, too, but not alongside the rest. "Don't you know these women would as soon cut your throat as look at you? Slit your throat and leave you by the side of the road! Well, I promised myself I wouldn't let that happen! I don't like you, but I promised to protect you from the Wise Ones, or the Asha'man, or Rand himself, so come down off that high horse!" Realizing that he was shouting, he drew a deep, embarrassed breath and settled back on his cushion, snatched up his winecup and took a long drink.

siɑnɪd wɛn stɪfɝ baɪ ðə wɝd wɪð ɪndɪɡneɪʃən, ən əɹ lɪp kɝld wɛl bɪfɔɹ i fɪnɪʃt. "ju pɹɑməst?" ʃi snɪɹd. "ju θɪŋk ɛɛs sədaɪ nid jəɹ pɹətɛkʃən? jə - ?"

Seonid went stiffer by the word with indignation, and her lip curled well before he finished. "You promised?" she sneered. "You think Aes Sedai need your protection? You - ?"

"ɪnʌf," ɛdʒɹə sɛd kwaɪətli, ən siɑnɪdz dʒɔ snæpt ʃʌt, ðoʊ hɝ hænz meɪd waɪt-nʌkəl fɪsts klʌtʃɪŋ əɹ skɝts.

"Enough," Edarra said quietly, and Seonid's jaw snapped shut, though her hands made white-knuckled fists clutching her skirts.

"wʌt meɪks jə θɪŋk wi wəd kɪl hɝ, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə?" dʒəninə æskt kjʊɹiəsli. il sɛldəm ʃoʊd mʌtʃ ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz, bʌt ði ʌðɝz fɹaʊn əɾ ɪm əɹ lʊkt wɪð oʊpən ɪnkɹədulɪɾi.

"What makes you think we would kill her, Perrin Aybara?" Janina asked curiously. Aiel seldom showed much on their faces, but the others frowned at him or looked with open incredulity.

"aɪ noʊ haʊ jə fil," hi ɹɪplaɪd sloʊli. "aɪv noʊn sɪns aɪ sɔ jə wɪð ðə sɪstɝz æftɝ dəməaɪz wɛlz." hi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə ɪkspleɪn ðəɾ i hæd smɛl ðɛɹ heɪtʃɹəd, ðɛɹ kəntɛmpt, ɛvɹi taɪm ə waɪz wʌn lʊkt əɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ bæk ðɛn. hi dɪd nɑt smɛl ɪt naʊ, bʌt noʊ wʌn kəd meɪnteɪn ðət lɛvəl ə fjʊɹi fəɹ lɔŋ wɪθaʊt bɝstɪŋ. ðət dɪd nɑt min ɪt wɑz ɡɔn, oʊnli ðəɾ ɪt hæd sʌŋk dip, meɪbi ɪndə ðə boʊn.

"I know how you feel," he replied slowly. "I've known since I saw you with the sisters after Dumai's Wells." He was not about to explain that he had smelled their hatred, their contempt, every time a Wise One looked at an Aes Sedai back then. He did not smell it now, but no one could maintain that level of fury for long without bursting. That did not mean it was gone, only that it had sunk deep, maybe into the bone.

dɛlɔɹə snɔɹɾɪd, ə saʊn laɪk lɪnən ɹɪpɪŋ. "fɝs jə seɪ ðeɪ mʌs bi kɑɾəld kəz jə nid ðɛm, ən naʊ kəz ðeɪ ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən juv pɹɑməs tə pɹətɛk ðɛm. wɪtʃ ɪz tʃɹuθ, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə?"

Delora snorted, a sound like linen ripping. "First you say they must be coddled because you need them, and now because they are Aes Sedai and you have promised to protect them. Which is truth, Perrin Aybara?"

"boʊθ." pɛɹɪn mɛt dɛlɔɹəz hɑɹd ɡeɪz fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmənt, ðən aɪɾ itʃ ə ði ʌðɝz ɪn tɝn. "boʊθ ɑɹ tʃɹu, ən aɪ min boʊθ."

"Both." Perrin met Delora's hard gaze for a long moment, then eyed each of the others in turn. "Both are true, and I mean both."

ðə waɪz wʌnz ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz, ðə sɔɹt wɛɹ ɛvɹi flɪkɝ ʌv ən aɪləd hɛld ə hʌnʒɹəd wɝdz ən noʊ mæn kəd meɪk aʊɾ ə wʌn. faɪnəli, ɪn ə ʃɪftɪŋ ə nɛkləsɪz ən ɹiədʒʌstɪŋ ə taɪd ʃɔlz, ðeɪ əpɪɹd tə ɹitʃ əɡɹimənt.

The Wise Ones exchanged glances, the sort where every flicker of an eyelid held a hundred words and no man could make out a one. Finally, in a shifting of necklaces and readjusting of tied shawls, they appeared to reach agreement.

"wi də nɑt kɪl əpɹɛntəsɪz, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," nəvɛɝɪn sɛd. ʃi saʊndəd ʃɑkt ət ði aɪdiə. "wɛn ɹænd ælθɹ æskt əs tə əpɹɛntəs ðɛm, pɝhæps i θɔɾ ɪt wɑz dʒʌs tə meɪk əm oʊbeɪ ʌs, bʌt wi də nɑt spik ɛmpti wɝdz. ðeɪ ɑɹ əpɹɛntəsɪz, naʊ."

"We do not kill apprentices, Perrin Aybara," Nevarin said. She sounded shocked at the idea. "When Rand al'Thor asked us to apprentice them, perhaps he thought it was just to make them obey us, but we do not speak empty words. They are apprentices, now."

"ðeɪ wɪl ɹɪmeɪn soʊ əntɪl faɪv waɪz wʌnz əɡɹi ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹɛɾi tə bi mɔɹ," mɑɹlaɪn æɾəd, swipɪŋ əɹ lɔŋ hɛɹ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. "æn ðeɪ ɑɹ tʃɹiɾəd noʊ dɪfɹənli ðən ɛni ʌðɝz."

"They will remain so until five Wise Ones agree they are ready to be more," Marline added, sweeping her long hair over her shoulder. "And they are treated no differently than any others."

ɛdʒɹə nɑɾəd oʊvɝ əɹ waɪnkʌp. "tɛl ɪm ði ædvaɪs jə wəd ɡɪv ɪm kənsɝnɪŋ mæsimə dɑɡɝ, siɑnɪd tʃɹeɪɡən," ʃi sɛd.

Edarra nodded over her winecup. "Tell him the advice you would give him concerning Masema Dagar, Seonid Traighan," she said.

ðə nilɪŋ wʊmən hæd pɹæktəkli ɹɪθ dʊɹɪŋ nəvɛɝɪn ən mɑɹlaɪnz ʃɔɹt spitʃəz, ɡɹɪpɪŋ əɹ skɝɾ əntɪl pɛɹɪn θɔt ðə sɪlk maɪt ɹɪp, bʌt ʃi weɪstəd noʊ taɪm kəmplaɪɪŋ wɪð ɛdʒɹəz ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz. "ðə waɪz wʌnz ɑɹ ɹaɪt, wʌtɛvɝ ðɛɹ ɹizənz. aɪ də nɑt seɪ ðɪs kəz ðeɪ wɪʃ ɪt." ʃi dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp əɡɛn, smuðɪŋ əɹ fitʃɝz wɪð ə vɪzəbəl ɛfɝt. ə tʌtʃ ə hit stɪl flɛɹɾ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs, ðoʊ. "aɪ sɔ ðə wɝk ə soʊ-kɔl dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn bɪfɔɹ aɪ ɛvɝ mɛt ɹænd ælθɹ. dɛθ ən dɪstʃɹʌkʃən, tə noʊ pɝpəs. ivən ə feɪθfəl dɔɡ mʌs bi pʊt daʊn ɪf ɪt bɪɡɪnz tə foʊm ət ðə maʊθ."

The kneeling woman had practically writhed during Nevarin and Marline's short speeches, gripping her skirt until Perrin thought the silk might rip, but she wasted no time complying with Edarra's instructions. "The Wise Ones are right, whatever their reasons. I do not say this because they wish it." She drew herself up again, smoothing her features with a visible effort. A touch of heat still flared in her voice, though. "I saw the work of so-called Dragonsworn before I ever met Rand al'Thor. Death and destruction, to no purpose. Even a faithful dog must be put down if it begins to foam at the mouth."

"blʌɾ ən æʃəz!" pɛɹɪn ɡɹʌmbəld. "haʊ kən aɪ ivən lɛt jə ɪn saɪɾ ə ðə mæn æftɝ ðæt? jə swɔɹ fiəlti tə ɹænd; jə noʊ ðəɾ ɪzənt wʌɾ i wɑns! wʌɾ əbaʊt ðət 'θaʊzənz wɪl daɪ ɪf jə feɪl'?" laɪt, ɪf mɑsʊɝi fɛl ðə seɪm, ðən i hæd tə pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ ən waɪz wʌnz fəɹ nʌθɪŋ! noʊ, wɝs. hi wəɾ əv tə ɡɑɹd mæsimə fɹəm ðɛm!

"Blood and ashes!" Perrin grumbled. "How can I even let you in sight of the man after that? You swore fealty to Rand; you know that isn't what he wants! What about that 'thousands will die if you fail'?" Light, if Masuri felt the same, then he had to put up with Aes Sedai and Wise Ones for nothing! No, worse. He would have to guard Masema from them!

"mɑsʊɝi noʊz mæsimə fəɹ ɹæbɪɾ əz wɛl əz aɪ," siɑnɪd ɹɪplaɪd wən i pʊt ðə kwɛstʃən tə hɝ. ɔl ə hɝ sɝɛnəɾi hæd ɹɪtɝnd. ʃi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ɪm wɪð ə kul, ənɹiɾəbəl feɪs. hɝ sɛnt wɑz ʃɑɹpli əlɝt. ɪntɛnt. əz ɪf i niɾəd ɪz noʊz, wɪð əɹ aɪz fɪkst ɑn hɪz, bɪɡ ən dɑɹk ən bɑɾəmləs. "aɪ swɔɹ tə sɝv ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən ðə bɛst sɝvəs aɪ kən ɡɪv ɪm naʊ ɪz tə kip ðɪs ænəməl fɹəm hɪm. bæɾ ɪnʌf ðət ɹulɝz noʊ mæsimə səpɔɹts hɪm; wɝs ɪf ðeɪ si hɪm ɛmbɹeɪs ðə mæn. ən θaʊzənz wɪl daɪ ɪf jə feɪl - tə ɡɛt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə mæsimə tə kɪl hɪm."

"Masuri knows Masema for rabid as well as I," Seonid replied when he put the question to her. All of her serenity had returned. She regarded him with a cool, unreadable face. Her scent was sharply alert. Intent. As if he needed his nose, with her eyes fixed on his, big and dark and bottomless. "I swore to serve the Dragon Reborn, and the best service I can give him now is to keep this animal from him. Bad enough that rulers know Masema supports him; worse if they see him embrace the man. And thousands will die if you fail - to get close enough to Masema to kill him."

pɛɹɪn θɔɾ ɪz hɛd wəd spɪn. əɡɛn ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝld wɝdz əbaʊt laɪk ə tɑp, meɪɾ ɪt sim ʃi hæd sɛd blæk wən ʃi mɛnt waɪt. ðən ðə waɪz wʌnz æɾəd ðɛɹ bɪt.

Perrin thought his head would spin. Again an Aes Sedai whirled words about like a top, made it seem she had said black when she meant white. Then the Wise Ones added their bit.

"mɑsʊɝi soʊkɑwə," nəvɛɝɪn sɛd kɑmli, "bɪlivz ðə ɹæbɪd dɔɡ kən bi liʃt ən baʊn soʊ hi meɪ bi juz seɪfli." fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, siɑnɪd lʊkt əz sɝpɹaɪzd əz pɛɹɪn fɛlt, bʌt ʃi ɹəkʌvɝd kwɪkli. aʊtsaɪd, ʃi dɪd; hɝ sɛnt wɑz sʌɾənli wɛɹi, əz ɪf ʃi sɛnst ə tʃɹæp wɛɹ ʃi hæd nɑɾ ɪkspɛktəd wʌn.

"Masuri Sokawa," Nevarin said calmly, "believes the rabid dog can be leashed and bound so he may be used safely." For an instant, Seonid looked as surprised as Perrin felt, but she recovered quickly. Outside, she did; her scent was suddenly wary, as if she sensed a trap where she had not expected one.

"ʃi ɔlsoʊ wɪʃɪz tə fɪt jə fəɹ ə hɔltɝ, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," kɛɹɛl æɾəd, ivən mɔɹ kæʒəwəli. "ʃi θɪŋks jə mʌs bi baʊn ɔlsoʊ, tə meɪk jə seɪf." nʌθɪŋ ɑn əɹ fɹɛkəl feɪs toʊld wɛðɝ ʃi əɡɹid.

"She also wishes to fit you for a halter, Perrin Aybara," Carelle added, even more casually. "She thinks you must be bound also, to make you safe." Nothing on her freckled face told whether she agreed.

ɛdʒɹə ɹeɪzd ə hæn təwɔɹd siɑnɪd. "ju meɪ ɡoʊ, naʊ. jəl nɑt lɪsən fɝðɝ, bʌt jə meɪ æsk ɡɝɑɾɪn əɡɛn tə lɛt jə hil ðə waʊn ɑn ɪz feɪs. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ɪf i stɪl ɹəfjuzəz, jə mʌst æksɛpt ɪt. hiz ɡeɪʃeɪn, nɑt wʌn ə jəɹ wɛtləndɝ sɝvəns." ʃi ɪnvɛstəd ðət læst wɝd wɪð dɛpθs ə skɔɹn.

Edarra raised a hand toward Seonid. "You may go, now. You will not listen further, but you may ask Gharadin again to let you Heal the wound on his face. Remember, if he still refuses, you must accept it. He is gai'shain, not one of your wetlander servants." She invested that last word with depths of scorn.

siɑnɪd stɛɹɾ aɪsi ɔɡɝz ət pɛɹɪn. ʃi lʊkt ət ðə waɪz wʌnz, hɝ lɪps tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk ə spitʃ. ɪn ði ɛnd, ðoʊ, ɔl ʃi kəd də wɑz ɡoʊ wɪð əz ɡʊɾ ə ɡɹeɪs əz ʃi kəd mʌstɝ. aʊtwɝdli, ðət wɑz kənsɪɾɝəbəl, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ biɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ fɪt tə ʃeɪm ə kwin. bʌt ðə sɛnt ʃi tʃɹeɪl bɪhaɪn əɹ wɑz fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən ʃɑɹp ɪnʌf tə kʌt.

Seonid stared icy augers at Perrin. She looked at the Wise Ones, her lips trembling on the brink of speech. In the end, though, all she could do was go with as good a grace as she could muster. Outwardly, that was considerable, an Aes Sedai being Aes Sedai fit to shame a queen. But the scent she trailed behind her was frustration sharp enough to cut.

əz sun əz ʃi wɑz ɡɔn, ðə sɪks waɪz wʌnz foʊkəst ɑn pɛɹɪn əɡɛn.

As soon as she was gone, the six Wise Ones focused on Perrin again.

"naʊ," ɛdʒɹə sɛd, "ju kən ɪkspleɪn tə əs waɪ jə wəd pʊɾ ə ɹæbɪɾ ænəməl nɛks tə ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn."

"Now," Edarra said, "you can explain to us why you would put a rabid animal next to the Car'a'carn."

"oʊnli ə ful oʊbeɪz ənʌðɝz kəmæn tə pʊʃ ɪm oʊvɝ ə klɪf," nəvɛɝɪn sɛd.

"Only a fool obeys another's command to push him over a cliff," Nevarin said.

"ju wɪl nɑt lɪsən tə ʌs," dʒəninə sɛd, "soʊ wɪl lɪsən tə ju. spik, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə."

"You will not listen to us," Janina said, "so we will listen to you. Speak, Perrin Aybara."

pɛɹɪn kənsɪɾɝd meɪkɪŋ ə bɹeɪk fəɹ ðə dɔɹflæps. bʌɾ ɪf i dɪd, hi wəd liv bɪhaɪnd wʌn ɛɛs sədaɪ hu maɪt pɑsəbli bi ʌv səm daʊtfəl hɛlp, ən ənʌðɝ, əlɔŋ wɪð sɪks waɪz wʌnz, hu wɝ ɔl sɛt tə ɹuən ɛvɹiθɪŋ i hæd kʌm tə du. hi pʊɾ ɪz waɪnkʌp daʊn əɡɛn, ən sɛɾəld ɪz hænz ɑn ɪz niz. hi niɾəd ə klɪɹ hɛɾ ɪf i wɑz tə ʃoʊ ðiz wɪmən i wɑz noʊ tɛðɝd ɡoʊt.

Perrin considered making a break for the doorflaps. But if he did, he would leave behind one Aes Sedai who might possibly be of some doubtful help, and another, along with six Wise Ones, who were all set to ruin everything he had come to do. He put his winecup down again, and settled his hands on his knees. He needed a clear head if he was to show these women he was no tethered goat.


tʃæptɝ tɛn


CHAPTER 10

tʃeɪnʒəz


Changes

wən pɛɹɪn lɛf ðə waɪz wʌnz' tɛnt, hi kənsɪɾɝd ɹimuvɪŋ ɪz koʊt tə si wɛðɝ ɪz haɪd wɑz stɪl ətætʃt ən hoʊl. nɑɾ ə tɛðɝd ɡoʊt, meɪbi, bʌɾ ə stæɡ wɪð sɪks ʃi-wʊlvz ɑn ɪz hilz, ən i wɑz ənʃʊɹ wʌt fæs fit hæd ɡeɪn hɪm. fəɹ sɝɾən, nʌn ə ðə waɪz wʌnz hæd tʃeɪnʒd əɹ maɪnd, ən ðɛɹ pɹɑməsəz nɑt tə teɪk ɛni ækʃən ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn hæd bɪn veɪɡ ət bɛst. əbaʊt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ pɹɑməsəz, ivən fɑɡi wʌnz.

When Perrin left the Wise Ones' tent, he considered removing his coat to see whether his hide was still attached and whole. Not a tethered goat, maybe, but a stag with six she-wolves on his heels, and he was unsure what fast feet had gained him. For certain, none of the Wise Ones had changed her mind, and their promises not to take any action on their own had been vague at best. About the Aes Sedai, there had been no promises, even foggy ones.

hi lʊk fəɹ iðɝ ə ðə sɪstɝz, ən faʊn mɑsʊɝi. ə nɛɹoʊ ɹoʊp hæd bɪn taɪd bɪtwin tu tʃɹiz ən ə fɹɪn ɹɛd-ænd-ɡɹin ɹʌɡ dʒɹeɪpt oʊvɝ ɪt. ðə slɛndɝ bɹaʊn wɑz fleɪlɪŋ əweɪ wɪð ə bɛnt-wʊd biɾɝ, ɹeɪzɪŋ θɪn klaʊdz ə dʌs moʊts ðət floʊɾəd ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪdmɔɹnɪŋ sʌn. hɝ wɔɹɾɝ, ə kɑmpæk mæn wɪð dɑɹk ɹɪsiɾɪŋ hɛɹ, sæɾ ɑn ə fɔlən tʃɹi tʃɹʌŋk nɪɹbaɪ, wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ ɡlʌmli. ɹoʊvɛɹ kɝklɪn nɔɹməli hæɾ ə ɹɛɾi ɡɹɪn, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz bɛɹid dip tədeɪ. mɑsʊɝi kɑt saɪɾ ə pɛɹɪn, ən wɪð bɛɹli ə pɔz ɪn əɹ ɹʌɡ-biɾɪŋ ʃɑɾ ɪm ə lʊk ə sətʃ fɹoʊzən mælɛvələns ðəɾ i saɪd. ən ʃi wɑz ðə wʌn u θɔɾ əz i dɪd. əz kloʊs tə ɪɾ əz i wɑz laɪkli tə faɪnd, ɛniweɪ. ə ɹɛd-teɪl hɔk pæst oʊvɝhɛd, ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɹaɪzɪŋ kɝəns ə hɑɾ ɛɹ fɹəm hɪl tə hɪl wɪθaʊt flæpɪŋ ɪts aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt wɪŋz. ɪt wəd bi vɛɹi naɪs tə sɔɹ əweɪ fɹəm ɔl ðɪs. ði aɪɝn ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, nɑt dʒɹimz ə sɪlvɝ.

He looked for either of the sisters, and found Masuri. A narrow rope had been tied between two trees and a fringed red-and-green rug draped over it. The slender Brown was flailing away with a bent-wood beater, raising thin clouds of dust motes that floated glittering in the midmorning sun. Her Warder, a compact man with dark receding hair, sat on a fallen tree trunk nearby, watching her glumly. Rovair Kirklin normally had a ready grin, but it was buried deep today. Masuri caught sight of Perrin, and with barely a pause in her rug-beating shot him a look of such frozen malevolence that he sighed. And she was the one who thought as he did. As close to it as he was likely to find, anyway. A red-tailed hawk passed overhead, riding rising currents of hot air from hill to hill without flapping its outstretched wings. It would be very nice to soar away from all this. The iron in front of him, not dreams of silver.

nɑɾɪŋ tə səlɪn ən ðə meɪɾənz, hu maɪɾ əv teɪkən ɹuɾ ʌndɝ ðət lɛðɝlif, pɛɹɪn tɝn tə ɡoʊ, ən stɑpt. tu mɛn wɝ klaɪmɪŋ ðə hɪl, wʌn ən il ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪz ən bɹaʊnz ən ɡɹinz ə ðə keɪɾɪnsɝ, hɪz keɪs baʊ ɑn ɪz bæk, ə bɹɪsəlɪŋ kwɪvɝ əɾ ɪz bɛlt, ən ɪz spɪɹz ən ɹaʊn haɪd bʌkəlɝ ɪn hænd. ɡɔl wɑz ə fɹɛnd, ən ði oʊnli mæn əmʌŋ ði il u dɪd nɑt wɛɹ waɪt. hɪz kəmpænjən, ə hɛd ʃɔɹɾɝ ɪn ə bɹɔd-bɹɪm hæɾ ən koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz ʌv ə pleɪn dʌl ɡɹin, wɑz noʊ il. hi hæɾ ə fʊl kwɪvɝ əɾ ɪz bɛlt, tu, ən ə naɪf ivən lɔŋɡɝ ən hɛviɝ ðən ði ilmənz, bʌɾ i kæɹiɾ ɪz baʊ, mʌtʃ ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ə tu ɹɪvɝz lɔŋboʊ ðoʊ lɔŋɡɝ ðən ðə hɔɹn baʊz ə ði il. dɪspaɪɾ ɪz kloʊðz, hi dɪd nɑɾ əv ðə lʊk ʌv ə fɑɹmɝ, əɹ ə sɪɾi mæn iðɝ. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz ðə ɡɹeɪɪŋ hɛɹ taɪɾ ət ðə neɪp ə hɪz nɛk ən hæŋɪŋ tə hɪz weɪst, ðə bɪɹd fænɪŋ əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst, əɹ pɝhæps dʒʌs ðə weɪ hi muvd, mʌtʃ laɪk ðə mæn əɾ ɪz saɪd, slɪpɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə bɹʌʃ ɑn ðə hɪl soʊ ðət jə wɝ ʃʊɹ noʊ twɪɡ snæpt ɪn ɪz pæsɪŋ, noʊ widz bɹoʊk ʌndɝ ɪz fʊt. pɛɹɪn hæd nɑt sin ɪm ɪn wʌt simd ə vɛɹi lɔŋ taɪm.

Nodding to Sulin and the Maidens, who might have taken root under that leatherleaf, Perrin turned to go, and stopped. Two men were climbing the hill, one an Aiel in the grays and browns and greens of the cadin'sor, his cased bow on his back, a bristling quiver at his belt, and his spears and round hide buckler in hand. Gaul was a friend, and the only man among the Aiel who did not wear white. His companion, a head shorter in a broad-brimmed hat and coat and breeches of a plain dull green, was no Aiel. He had a full quiver at his belt, too, and a knife even longer and heavier than the Aielman's, but he carried his bow, much shorter than a Two Rivers longbow though longer than the horn bows of the Aiel. Despite his clothes, he did not have the look of a farmer, or a city man either. Perhaps it was the graying hair tied at the nape of his neck and hanging to his waist, the beard fanning across his chest, or perhaps just the way he moved, much like the man at his side, slipping around the brush on the hill so that you were sure no twig snapped in his passing, no weeds broke under his foot. Perrin had not seen him in what seemed a very long time.

ɹitʃɪŋ ðə hɪltɑp, ɛlaɪəs mækɛɹə ɹəɡɑɹɾəd pɛɹɪn, ɡoʊldən aɪz ʃaɪnɪŋ feɪnli ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv ɪz hæt bɹɪm. hɪz aɪz hæd bɪn ðət weɪ jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ pɛɹɪnz; ɛlaɪəs hæɾ ɪntʃɹədus pɛɹɪn tə ðə wʊlvz. hi hæd bɪn dʒɹɛst ɪn haɪdz, ðɛn. "ɡʊd tə si jə əɡɛn, bɔɪ," hi sɛd kwaɪətli. swɛt ɡlɪsən ɑn ɪz feɪs, bʌt lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ɑn ɡɔlz. "ju ɡɪv əweɪ ðəɾ æks, faɪnəli? aɪ dɪdn θɪŋk juɾ ɛvɝ stɑp heɪɾɪŋ ɪt."

Reaching the hilltop, Elyas Machera regarded Perrin, golden eyes shining faintly in the shadow of his hat brim. His eyes had been that way years before Perrin's; Elyas had introduced Perrin to the wolves. He had been dressed in hides, then. "Good to see you again, boy," he said quietly. Sweat glistened on his face, but little more than on Gaul's. "You give away that axe, finally? I didn't think you'd ever stop hating it."

"aɪ stɪl du," pɛɹɪn sɛd dʒʌst əz kwaɪətli. ə lɔŋ taɪm əɡoʊ ðə wʌntaɪm wɔɹɾɝ hæd toʊld ɪm tə kip ði æks əntɪl i stɑp heɪɾɪŋ tə juz ɪt. laɪt, bʌɾ i stɪl heɪɾəd ɪt! ən i hæɾ æɾəd nu ɹizənz, naʊ. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ ɪn ðɪs pɑɹɾ ə ðə wɝld, ɛlaɪəs? wɛɹ dɪd ɡɔl faɪn ju?"

"I still do," Perrin said just as quietly. A long time ago the onetime Warder had told him to keep the axe until he stopped hating to use it. Light, but he still hated it! And he had added new reasons, now. "What are you doing in this part of the world, Elyas? Where did Gaul find you?"

"hi faʊn mi," ɡɔl sɛd. "aɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ hi wɑz bɪhaɪn mi əntɪl i kɔft." hi spoʊk laʊdli ɪnʌf tə bi hɝd baɪ ðə meɪɾənz, ən ðə sʌɾən stɪlnəs əmʌŋ əm wɑz sɑləɾ əz ə tʌtʃ.

"He found me," Gaul said. "I did not know he was behind me until he coughed." He spoke loudly enough to be heard by the Maidens, and the sudden stillness among them was solid as a touch.

pɛɹɪn ɪkspɛktəɾ ət list ə fju kʌɾɪŋ kɑmɛns - il hjumɝ kəd nɪɹ dʒɹɔ blʌd, ən ðə meɪɾənz sizd ɛni tʃæns tə dɪɡ ət ðə ɡɹin-aɪd mæn - bʌɾ ɪnstɛd, səm ə ðə wɪmən tʊk ʌp spɪɹz ən bʌklɝz tə ɹæɾəl əm təɡɛðɝ ɪn æpɹəbeɪʃən. ɡɔl nɑɾəd əpɹuvəl.

Perrin expected at least a few cutting comments - Aiel humor could near draw blood, and the Maidens seized any chance to dig at the green-eyed man - but instead, some of the women took up spears and bucklers to rattle them together in approbation. Gaul nodded approval.

ɛlaɪəs ɡɹʌntɪɾ æmbɪɡjuəsli ən tʌɡd ɪz hæt daʊn, jɛɾ i smɛl plizd. ði il dɪd nɑɾ əpɹuv ə mʌtʃ ðɪs saɪɾ ə ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl. "aɪ laɪk tə kip muvɪŋ," hi toʊl pɛɹɪn, "æn aɪ dʒʌs hæpən tə bi ɪn ɡildən wən səm mjutʃəwəl fɹɛnz toʊl mi jə wɝ tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð ðɪs pɝeɪd." hi dɪd nɑt neɪm ðə mjutʃəwəl fɹɛnz; ɪt wɑz ənwaɪz tə spik oʊpənli əbaʊt tɔkɪŋ tə wʊlvz. "toʊl mi ə lɑɾ ə θɪŋz. toʊl mi ðeɪ smɛl ə tʃeɪnʒ kʌmɪŋ. ðeɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt. meɪbi jə du. aɪ hɪɹ juv bɪn ɹʌnɪŋ wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn."

Elyas grunted ambiguously and tugged his hat down, yet he smelled pleased. The Aiel did not approve of much this side of the Dragonwall. "I like to keep moving," he told Perrin, "and I just happened to be in Ghealdan when some mutual friends told me you were traveling with this parade." He did not name the mutual friends; it was unwise to speak openly about talking to wolves. "Told me a lot of things. Told me they smell a change coming. They don't know what. Maybe you do. I hear you've been running with the Dragon Reborn."

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd sloʊli. ə tʃeɪnʒ? hi hæd nɑt θɔt tə æsk ðə wʊlvz ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən wɛɹ lɑɹdʒ ɡɹups ə mɛn wɝ, soʊ hi kəd ɡoʊ ɝaʊn ðɛm. ivən hɪɹ ɪn ɡildən, səmtaɪmz i fɛl bleɪm əmʌŋ əm fəɹ ðə wʊlvz dɛɾ ət dəməaɪz wɛlz. wʌt kaɪndə tʃeɪnʒ? "ɹæn ɪz ʃʊɹli tʃeɪnʒɪŋ θɪŋz, bʌɾ aɪ kʊdn seɪ wʌt ðeɪ min. laɪt, ðə hoʊl wɝld ɪz tɝnɪŋ sʌmɝsɔls, ən nɛvɝ maɪn hɪm."

"I don't know," Perrin said slowly. A change? He had not thought to ask the wolves anything more than where large groups of men were, so he could go around them. Even here in Ghealdan, sometimes he felt blame among them for the wolves dead at Dumai's Wells. What kind of change? "Rand is surely changing things, but I couldn't say what they mean. Light, the whole world is turning somersaults, and never mind him."

"ɔl θɪŋz tʃeɪnʒ," ɡɔl sɛd dɪsmɪsɪvli. "əntɪl wi weɪk, ðə dʒɹim dʒɹɪfs ɑn ðə wɪnd." fəɹ ə moʊmən i stʌɾid pɛɹɪn ən ɛlaɪəs, kəmpɛɹɪŋ ðɛɹ aɪz, pɛɹɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ. hi sɛd nʌθɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛm, ðoʊ; ði il sim tə teɪk ɡoʊldən aɪz əz dʒʌst wʌn mɔɹ pɪkjuliɛɹəɾi əmʌŋ wɛtləndɝz. "aɪ wɪl liv jə tu tə tɔk əloʊn. fɹɛnz lɔŋ sɛpɝeɪɾəd nid tə tɔk baɪ ðɛmsɛlvz. səlɪn, ɑɹ kiæɾ ən beɪn əbaʊt? aɪ sɔ ðɛm hʌntɪŋ jɛstɝdeɪ, ən θɔɾ aɪ maɪt ʃoʊ ðɛm haʊ tə dʒɹɔ ə baʊ bɪfɔɹ wʌn ə ðɛm ʃuts hɝsɛlf."

"All things change," Gaul said dismissively. "Until we wake, the dream drifts on the wind." For a moment he studied Perrin and Elyas, comparing their eyes, Perrin was sure. He said nothing about them, though; the Aiel seemed to take golden eyes as just one more peculiarity among wetlanders. "I will leave you two to talk alone. Friends long separated need to talk by themselves. Sulin, are Chiad and Bain about? I saw them hunting yesterday, and thought I might show them how to draw a bow before one of them shoots herself."

"aɪ wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə si jə kʌm bæk tədeɪ," ðə waɪt-hɛɹd wʊmən ɹɪplaɪd. "ðeɪ wɛn aʊt tə sɛt snɛɹz fəɹ ɹæbəts." læftɝ ɹɪpəl θɹu ðə meɪɾənz, ən fɪŋɡɝz flɪkɝd ɹæpədli ɪn hæntɔk.

"I was surprised to see you come back today," the white-haired woman replied. "They went out to set snares for rabbits." Laughter rippled through the Maidens, and fingers flickered rapidly in handtalk.

saɪɪŋ, ɡɔl ɹoʊld ɪz aɪz ɑstənteɪʃəsli. "ɪn ðət keɪs, aɪ θɪŋk aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ kʌɾ əm lus." ɔlmoʊst əz mɛni meɪɾənz læft ət ðæt, ɪnkluɾɪŋ səlɪn. "meɪ jə faɪnd ʃeɪd ðɪs deɪ," hi toʊl pɛɹɪn, ə kæʒəwəl fɛɹwɛl bɪtwin fɹɛnz, bʌɾ i klæsp fɹɑɹmz fɔɹməli wɪð ɛlaɪəs ən sɛd, "maɪ ɑnɝ ɪz jʊɹz, ɛlaɪəs mækɛɹə."

Sighing, Gaul rolled his eyes ostentatiously. "In that case, I think I must go cut them loose." Almost as many Maidens laughed at that, including Sulin. "May you find shade this day," he told Perrin, a casual farewell between friends, but he clasped forearms formally with Elyas and said, "My honor is yours, Elyas Machera."

"ɑd fɛloʊ," ɛlaɪəs mɝmɝd, wɑtʃɪŋ ɡɔl loʊp bæk daʊn ðə hɪl. "wɛn aɪ kɔft, hi tɝn ɝaʊn ɹɛɾi tə kɪl mi, aɪ θɪŋk, ðən i dʒʌst stɑɹɾəd læfɪŋ ɪnstɛd. juv ɛni əbdʒɛkʃənz tə ɡoʊɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ ɛls? aɪ doʊnt noʊ ðə sɪstɝ huz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə mɝɾɝ ðət ɹʌɡ, bʌɾ aɪ doʊn laɪk teɪkɪŋ tʃænsəz wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ." hɪz aɪz nɛɹoʊd. "ɡɔl sɛz ðəɹ ɑɹ θɹi wɪð ju. jə doʊn ɪkspɛk tə bi miɾɪŋ ʌp wɪð ɛni mɔɹ, də ju?"

"Odd fellow," Elyas murmured, watching Gaul lope back down the hill. "When I coughed, he turned around ready to kill me, I think, then he just started laughing instead. You have any objections to going somewhere else? I don't know the sister who's trying to murder that rug, but I don't like taking chances with Aes Sedai." His eyes narrowed. "Gaul says there are three with you. You don't expect to be meeting up with any more, do you?"

"aɪ hoʊp nɑt," pɛɹɪn ɹɪplaɪd. mɑsʊɝi wɑz ɡlænsɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ bɪtwin slæʃɪz wɪð ðə biɾɝ; ʃi wəd lɝn əbaʊɾ ɛlaɪəs' aɪz sun ɪnʌf ən stɑɹt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɛɹəɾ aʊt wʌɾ ɛls lɪŋkt ɪm tə pɛɹɪn. "kʌm ɑn; ɪts taɪm aɪ wɑz bæk ɪn maɪ oʊn kæmp ɛniweɪ. ɑɹ jə wɝiɾ əbaʊt miɾɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hu noʊz ju?" ɛlaɪəs' deɪz əz ə wɔɹɾɝ hæɾ ɛndəd wən ɪt wɑz lɝn i kəd tɔk tə wʊlvz. səm sɪstɝz θɔɾ ɪɾ ə mɑɹk ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ən i hæd hæd tə kɪl ʌðɝ wɔɹɾɝz tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ.

"I hope not," Perrin replied. Masuri was glancing their way between slashes with the beater; she would learn about Elyas' eyes soon enough and start trying to ferret out what else linked him to Perrin. "Come on; it's time I was back in my own camp anyway. Are you worried about meeting an Aes Sedai who knows you?" Elyas' days as a Warder had ended when it was learned he could talk to wolves. Some sisters thought it a mark of the Dark One, and he had had to kill other Warders to get away.

ði oʊldɝ mæn weɪɾəd əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ ə dʌzən peɪsɪz fɹəm ðə tɛns bɪfɔɹ i ɹɪplaɪd, ən ivən ðɛn, hi spoʊk kwaɪətli, əz ðoʊ hi səspɛktəd sʌmwʌn bɪhaɪn əm maɪɾ əv ɪɹz əz ɡʊɾ əz ðɛɹz. "wʌn u noʊz maɪ neɪm wɪl bi bæɾ ɪnʌf. wɔɹɾɝz doʊn ɹʌn ɔf ɔfən, bɔɪ. moʊst ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪl fɹi ə mæn u ɹɪli wɑns tə ɡoʊ - moʊst wɪl - ən ɛniweɪ, ʃi kən tʃɹæk jə daʊn haʊɛvɝ fɑɹ jə ɹʌn ɪf ʃi dɪsaɪdz tə hʌnt. bʌɾ ɛni sɪstɝ u faɪnz ə ɹɛnəɡeɪd wɪl spɛn əɹ aɪɾəl moʊməns meɪkɪŋ ɪm wɪʃ hid nɛvɝ bɪn bɔɹn." hi ʃɪvɝd slaɪtli. hɪz smɛl wɑz nɑt fɪɹ, bʌɾ æntɪsəpeɪʃən ə peɪn. "ðɛn ʃɪl tɝn ɪm oʊvɝ tə hɪz oʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ tə dʒɹaɪv ðə lɛsən hoʊm. ə mænz nɛvɝ kwaɪt ðə seɪm æftɝ ðæt." ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə sloʊp, hi lʊk bæk. mɑsʊɝi dɪd sim tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɪl ðə kɑɹpət, foʊkəsɪŋ ɔl əɹ ɹeɪdʒ ɑn ətɛmptɪŋ tə biɾ ə hoʊl θɹu ɪt. ɛlaɪəs ʃɪvɝɾ əɡɛn, ðoʊ. "wɝs θɪŋ wəd bi tə ɹʌn ɪndə ɹinə. aɪd ɹæðɝ bi kɑɾ ɪn ə fɔɹəs faɪɝ wɪð boʊθ lɛɡz bɹoʊkən."

The older man waited until they were a dozen paces from the tents before he replied, and even then, he spoke quietly, as though he suspected someone behind them might have ears as good as theirs. "One who knows my name will be bad enough. Warders don't run off often, boy. Most Aes Sedai will free a man who really wants to go - most will - and anyway, she can track you down however far you run if she decides to hunt. But any sister who finds a renegade will spend her idle moments making him wish he'd never been born." He shivered slightly. His smell was not fear, but anticipation of pain. "Then she'll turn him over to his own Aes Sedai to drive the lesson home. A man's never quite the same after that." At the edge of the slope, he looked back. Masuri did seem to be trying to kill the carpet, focusing all her rage on attempting to beat a hole through it. Elyas shivered again, though. "Worse thing would be to run into Rina. I'd rather be caught in a forest fire with both legs broken."

"ɹinəz jəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ? bʌt haʊ kəd jə ɹʌn ɪndə hɝ? ðə bɑn lɛts jə noʊ wɛɹ ʃi ɪz." ðət nʌdʒ sʌmθɪŋ ɪn pɛɹɪnz mɛmɹi, bʌt wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz mɛltəɾ əweɪ əɾ ɛlaɪəs' ɹɪplaɪ.

"Rina's your Aes Sedai? But how could you run into her? The bond lets you know where she is." That nudged something in Perrin's memory, but whatever it was melted away at Elyas' reply.

"ə fɛɹ nʌmbɝ kən fʌz ðə bɑnd, ɪn ə mænɝ ə spikɪŋ. meɪbi ðeɪ ɔl kæn. jə doʊnt noʊ mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən ʃiz stɪl əlaɪv, ən aɪ noʊ ðəɾ ɛniweɪ, kəz aɪ hævənt ɡɔn kɹeɪzi." ɛlaɪəs sɔ ðə kwɛstʃən ɑn ɪz feɪs ən bɑɹkt ə læf. "laɪt, mæn, ə sɪstɝz flɛʃ-ænd-blʌd, tu. moʊst ɑɹ. θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪt. wəd jə wɑn sʌmbɑɾi ɪnsaɪd jəɹ hɛd waɪl jə kʌɾəld ʌp wɪð ə laɪkli wɛnk? sɑɹi; aɪ fɝɡɑt jə wɝ mɛɹid, naʊ. noʊ əfɛns mɛnt. aɪ wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə hɪɹ jud mɛɹiɾ ə sɑldəiən, ðoʊ."

"A fair number can fuzz the bond, in a manner of speaking. Maybe they all can. You don't know much more than she's still alive, and I know that anyway, because I haven't gone crazy." Elyas saw the question on his face and barked a laugh. "Light, man, a sister's flesh-and-blood, too. Most are. Think about it. Would you want somebody inside your head while you cuddled up with a likely wench? Sorry; I forgot you were married, now. No offense meant. I was surprised to hear you'd married a Saldaean, though."

"sɝpɹaɪzd?" pɛɹɪn hæd nɛvɝ kənsɪɾɝd ðəɾ əbaʊt ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑnd. laɪt! fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, hi hæd nɛvɝ ɹɪli θɔɾ əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ðət weɪ. ɪt simd əbaʊɾ əz pɑsəbəl əz . . . əz ə mæn tɔkɪŋ tə wʊlvz. "waɪ sɝpɹaɪzd?" ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd daʊn θɹu ðə tʃɹiz ɑn ðɪs saɪɾ ə ðə hɪl, nɑt hɝiɪŋ ən meɪkɪŋ lɪɾəl nɔɪz. pɛɹɪn hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ə ɡʊd hʌntɝ, əkʌstəm tə ðə fɔɹəsts, ən ɛlaɪəs hɑɹdli dɪstɝb ðə livz ʌndɝfʊt, ɡlaɪɾɪŋ smuðli θɹu ði ʌndɝɡɹoʊθ wɪθaʊt ʃɪftɪŋ ə bɹæntʃ. hi maɪɾ əv slʌŋ ɪz baʊ ɑn ɪz bæk naʊ, bʌɾ i stɪl kæɹiɾ ɪt ɹɛɾi. ɛlaɪəs wɑz ə wɛɹi mæn, ɪspɛʃli ɝaʊn pipəl.

"Surprised?" Perrin had never considered that about the Warder bond. Light! For that matter, he had never really thought about Aes Sedai that way. It seemed about as possible as . . . as a man talking to wolves. "Why surprised?" They started down through the trees on this side of the hill, not hurrying and making little noise. Perrin had always been a good hunter, accustomed to the forests, and Elyas hardly disturbed the leaves underfoot, gliding smoothly through the undergrowth without shifting a branch. He might have slung his bow on his back now, but he still carried it ready. Elyas was a wary man, especially around people.

"waɪ, kəz jəɹ ə kwaɪət sɔɹt, ən aɪ θɔt jud mɛɹi sʌmbɑɾi kwaɪət, tu. wɛl, jə noʊ baɪ naʊ sɑldəiənz ɑɹən kwaɪət. ɪksɛpt wɪð stʃɹeɪnʒɝz ən aʊtsaɪɾɝz. sɛt ðə sʌn ɑn faɪɝ wʌn mɪnət, ən ðə nɛkst, ɪts ɔl bloʊn əweɪ ən fɝɡɑɾən. meɪk ɝæfɛlɪn lʊk stɑləɾ ən dəmɑni daʊnɹaɪt dʌl." ɛlaɪəs ɡɹɪn sʌɾənli. "aɪ lɪvd ə jɪɹ wɪð ə sɑldəiən, wʌns, ən mɛɹiə ʃaʊɾəd maɪ ɪɹz ɔf faɪv deɪz ɪn ðə wik, ən meɪbi hiv ðə dɪʃəz ət maɪ hɛd, tu. ɛvɹi taɪm aɪ θɔɾ əbaʊt livɪŋ, ðoʊ, ʃid wɑnə meɪk ʌp, ən aɪ nɛvɝ sim tə ɡɛt tə ðə dɔɹ. ɪn ði ɛnd, ʃi lɛf mi. sɛɾ aɪ wɑz tu ɹistʃɹeɪn fəɹ əɹ teɪst." hɪz ɹæspɪŋ læf wɑz ɹɛmənɪsənt, bʌɾ i ɹʌbd əɾ ə feɪnt, eɪdʒ-feɪɾəd skɑɹ əlɔŋ ɪz dʒɔ ɹɛmənɪsənli, tu. ɪt lʊk tə hæv bɪn meɪd baɪ ə naɪf.

"Why, because you're a quiet sort, and I thought you'd marry somebody quiet, too. Well, you know by now Saldaeans aren't quiet. Except with strangers and outsiders. Set the sun on fire one minute, and the next, it's all blown away and forgotten. Make Arafellin look stolid and Domani downright dull." Elyas grinned suddenly. "I lived a year with a Saldaean, once, and Merya shouted my ears off five days in the week, and maybe heaved the dishes at my head, too. Every time I thought about leaving, though, she'd want to make up, and I never seemed to get to the door. In the end, she left me. Said I was too restrained for her taste." His rasping laugh was reminiscent, but he rubbed at a faint, age-faded scar along his jaw reminiscently, too. It looked to have been made by a knife.

"feɪlz nɑt laɪk ðæt." ɪt saʊndəd laɪk biɪŋ mɛɹid tə nɪneɪiv! nɪneɪiv wɪð sɔɹ tiθ! "aɪ doʊn min ʃi dʌznt ɡɛɾ æŋɡɹi naʊ ən ðɛn," hi ədmɪɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli, "bʌt ʃi dʌznt ʃaʊɾ ən θɹoʊ θɪŋz." wɛl, ʃi dɪd nɑt ʃaʊt vɛɹi ɔfən, ən ɪnstɛɾ ə flɛɹɪŋ hɑɾ ən vænɪʃɪŋ, hɝ æŋɡɝ stɑɹɾəd hɑɾ ən dʒɹæɡd ɑn tɪl ɪt tɝn koʊld.

"Faile's not like that." It sounded like being married to Nynaeve! Nynaeve with sore teeth! "I don't mean she doesn't get angry now and then," he admitted reluctantly, "but she doesn't shout and throw things." Well, she did not shout very often, and instead of flaring hot and vanishing, her anger started hot and dragged on till it turned cold.

ɛlaɪəs ɡlænst əɾ ɪm saɪdweɪz. "ɪf aɪ ɛvɝ smɛld ə mæn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɑdʒ heɪl. . . . juv bɪn ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ sɑft wɝdz ɔl ðə taɪm, hævən ju? maɪld əz mɪlk-wɔɾɝ ən nɛvɝ leɪ jəɹ ɪɹz bæk? nɛvɝ ɹeɪz jəɹ vɔɪs tə hɝ?"

Elyas glanced at him sideways. "If I ever smelled a man trying to dodge hail. . . . You've been giving her soft words all the time, haven't you? Mild as milk-water and never lay your ears back? Never raise your voice to her?"

"ʌv kɔɹs nɑt!" pɛɹɪn pɹətɛstəd. "aɪ lʌv hɝ! waɪ wəɾ aɪ ʃaʊɾ ət hɝ?"

"Of course not!" Perrin protested. "I love her! Why would I shout at her?"

ɛlaɪəs bɪɡæn mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, ðoʊ pɛɹɪn kəd hɪɹ ɛvɹi wɝd, ʌv kɔɹs. "bɝn mi, ə mæn wɑns tə sɪɾ ɑn ə ɹɛɾ æɾɝ, ɪts ɪz əfɛɹ. nɑt maɪ bɪznəs ɪf ə mæn wɑns tə wɔɹm ɪz hænz wən ðə ɹufs ɑn faɪɝ. ɪts ɪz laɪf. wɪl i θæŋk mi? noʊ, hi blʌɾi wɛl woʊnt!"

Elyas began muttering under his breath, though Perrin could hear every word, of course. "Burn me, a man wants to sit on a red adder, it's his affair. Not my business if a man wants to warm his hands when the roof's on fire. It's his life. Will he thank me? No, he bloody well won't!"

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn əbaʊt?" pɛɹɪn dɪmændəd. kætʃɪŋ ɛlaɪəs' ɑɹm, hi pʊld ɪm tə ə stɑp bɪniθ ə wɪntɝbɛɹi tʃɹi, ɪts pɹɪkli livz stɪl moʊsli ɡɹin. lɪɾəl ɛls nɪɹbaɪ wɑz, ɪksɛp fəɹ səm stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ kɹipɝz. ðeɪ hæd kʌm lɛs ðən hæfweɪ daʊn ðə hɪl. "feɪl ɪzən ə ɹɛɾ æɾɝ əɹ ə ɹuf ɑn faɪɝ! weɪɾ əntɪl jə miɾ əɹ bɪfɔɹ jə stɑɹt tɔkɪŋ laɪk jə noʊ hɝ."

"What are you going on about?" Perrin demanded. Catching Elyas' arm, he pulled him to a stop beneath a winterberry tree, its prickly leaves still mostly green. Little else nearby was, except for some struggling creepers. They had come less than halfway down the hill. "Faile isn't a red adder or a roof on fire! Wait until you meet her before you start talking like you know her."

ɪɹɪɾəbli, ɛlaɪəs ɹeɪk fɪŋɡɝz θɹu hɪz lɔŋ bɪɹd. "aɪ noʊ sɑldəiənz, bɔɪ. ðət jɪɹ wɑzn ði oʊnli taɪm aɪv bɪn ðɛɹ. aɪv oʊnli ɛvɝ mɛɾ əbaʊt faɪv sɑldəiən wɪmən aɪd kɔl mik, əɹ ivən maɪld-mænɝd. noʊ, ʃi ɪzən ən æɾɝ; wʌt ʃiz ɪz ə lɛpɝd, əl weɪdʒɝ. doʊnt ɡɹaʊl, bɝn ju! əl bɛt maɪ buts ʃid smaɪl tə hɪɹ mi seɪ ɪt!"

Irritably, Elyas raked fingers through his long beard. "I know Saldaeans, boy. That year wasn't the only time I've been there. I've only ever met about five Saldaean women I'd call meek, or even mild-mannered. No, she isn't an adder; what she is is a leopard, I'll wager. Don't growl, burn you! I'll bet my boots she'd smile to hear me say it!"

pɛɹɪn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ æŋɡɹəli, ðən kloʊzd ɪɾ əɡɛn. hi hæd nɑt ɹilaɪzd i wɑz ɡɹoʊlɪŋ dip ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt. feɪl wəd smaɪl ət biɪŋ kɔld ə lɛpɝd. "ju kæn bi seɪɪŋ ʃi wɑns mi tə ʃaʊɾ ət hɝ, ɛlaɪəs."

Perrin opened his mouth angrily, then closed it again. He had not realized he was growling deep in his throat. Faile would smile at being called a leopard. "You can't be saying she wants me to shout at her, Elyas."

"jɛs, aɪ æm. moʊs laɪkli, ɛniweɪ. meɪbi ʃiz ðə sɪksθ. meɪbi. dʒʌs hɪɹ mi aʊt. moʊst wɪmən, jə ɹeɪz jəɹ vɔɪs, ən ðeɪ ɡoʊ bʌlʒ-aɪd əɹ aɪs, ən nɛks θɪŋ jə noʊ, jəɹ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ əbaʊt jə biɪŋ æŋɡɹi, nɛvɝ maɪnd wʌt pʊt ði ɪmbɝ daʊn jəɹ bæk ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs. swɑloʊ jəɹ tʌŋ wɪð ə sɑldəiən, ðoʊ, ən tə hɝ, jəɹ seɪɪŋ ʃi ɪzən stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə stæn ʌp tə ju. ɪnsʌlt əɹ laɪk ðæt, ən jəɹ lʌki ʃi dʌzn fid jə jəɹ oʊn ɡɪzɝd fəɹ bɹɛkfəst. ʃiz noʊ fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ wɛnk, tə ɪkspɛkt ə mæn tə sɪt wɛɹ ʃi pɔɪns ən dʒʌmp wən ʃi snæps əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. ʃiz ə lɛpɝd, ən ʃi ɪkspɛks əɹ hʌzbən tə bi ə lɛpɝd, tu. laɪt! aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ aɪm duɪŋ. ɡɪvɪŋ ə mæn ædvaɪs əbaʊɾ ɪz waɪf ɪz ə ɡʊd weɪ tə ɡɛt jəɹ ɪnɝdz spɪld."

"Yes, I am. Most likely, anyway. Maybe she's the sixth. Maybe. Just hear me out. Most women, you raise your voice, and they go bulge-eyed or ice, and next thing you know, you're arguing about you being angry, never mind what put the ember down your back in the first place. Swallow your tongue with a Saldaean, though, and to her, you're saying she isn't strong enough to stand up to you. Insult her like that, and you're lucky she doesn't feed you your own gizzard for breakfast. She's no Far Madding wench, to expect a man to sit where she points and jump when she snaps her fingers. She's a leopard, and she expects her husband to be a leopard, too. Light! I don't know what I'm doing. Giving a man advice about his wife is a good way to get your innards spilled."

ɪt wɑz ɛlaɪəs' tɝn tə ɡɹaʊl. hi dʒɝkt ɪz hæt stʃɹeɪɾ ənnɛsəsɛɹəli ən lʊkt ɝaʊn ðə sloʊp fɹaʊnɪŋ, əz ðoʊ kənsɪɾɝɪŋ wɛðɝ tə vænɪʃ bæk ɪndə ðə fɔɹəsts, ðən poʊkt ə fɪŋɡɝ ət pɛɹɪn. "lʊk hɪɹ. aɪ ɔlweɪz nu jə wɝ mɔɹ ðən ə stʃɹeɪ, ən pʊɾɪŋ wʌt ðə wʊlvz toʊl mi təɡɛðɝ wɪð jə dʒʌs hæpənɪŋ tə bi hɛɾɪŋ təwɔɹd ðɪs pɹɑfət fɛloʊ, aɪ θɔt meɪbi jə kəd juz ə fɹɛn tə wɑtʃ jəɹ bæk. ʌv kɔɹs, ðə wʊlvz dɪdn mɛnʃən jə wɝ liɾɪŋ ðoʊz pɹɪɾi minɝ lænsɝz. niðɝ dɪd ɡɔl, tɪl wi sɔ ðɛm. ɪf jud laɪk mi tə steɪ, aɪ wɪl. ɪf nɑt, ðɛɹz plɛnti ʌv ðə wɝld aɪ hævən sin jɛt."

It was Elyas' turn to growl. He jerked his hat straight unnecessarily and looked around the slope frowning, as though considering whether to vanish back into the forests, then poked a finger at Perrin. "Look here. I always knew you were more than a stray, and putting what the wolves told me together with you just happening to be heading toward this Prophet fellow, I thought maybe you could use a friend to watch your back. Of course, the wolves didn't mention you were leading those pretty Mayener lancers. Neither did Gaul, till we saw them. If you'd like me to stay, I will. If not, there's plenty of the world I haven't seen yet."

"aɪ kən ɔlweɪz juz ənʌðɝ fɹɛnd, ɛlaɪəs." kəd feɪl ɹɪli wɑn ɪm tə ʃaʊt? hi hæɾ ɔlweɪz noʊn i maɪt hɝt sʌmbɑɾi ɪf i wɑz nɑt kɛɹfəl, ən i ɔlweɪz tʃɹaɪd tə kip ə taɪt ɹeɪn ɑn ɪz tɛmpɝ. wɝdz kəd hɝɾ əz hɑɹɾ əz fɪsts, ðə ɹɔŋ wɝdz, wɝdz jə nɛvɝ mɛnt, lɛt lus ɪn ə tɛmpɝ. ɪt hæd tə bi ɪmpɑsəbəl. ɪt dʒʌst stʊd tə ɹizən. noʊ wʊmən wəd stæn fəɹ ðæt, fɹəm əɹ hʌzbən əɹ ɛni mæn.

"I can always use another friend, Elyas." Could Faile really want him to shout? He had always known he might hurt somebody if he was not careful, and he always tried to keep a tight rein on his temper. Words could hurt as hard as fists, the wrong words, words you never meant, let loose in a temper. It had to be impossible. It just stood to reason. No woman would stand for that, from her husband or any man.

ə blufɪntʃəz kɔl bɹɔt pɛɹɪnz hɛɾ ʌp, ɪɹz pɹɪkɪŋ. ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ət ði ɛdʒ ə hɪɹɪŋ ivən fəɹ hɪm, bʌɾ ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ ðə tʃɹɪl wɑz ɹɪpiɾɪd kloʊsɝ, ðən əɡɛn, nɪɹɝ stɪl. ɛlaɪəs kɑkt ən aɪbɹaʊ ət hɪm; hi wəd noʊ ðə kɔl ʌv ə bɔɹɾɝlənd bɝd. pɛɹɪn hæd lɝn ɪt fɹəm səm ʃaɪnɝənz, mæsimə əmʌŋ ðɛm, ən tɔt ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn.

A bluefinch's call brought Perrin's head up, ears pricking. It was just at the edge of hearing even for him, but a moment later the trill was repeated closer, then again, nearer still. Elyas cocked an eyebrow at him; he would know the call of a Borderland bird. Perrin had learned it from some Shienarans, Masema among them, and taught the Two Rivers men.

"wi hæv vɪzəɾɝz kʌmɪŋ," hi toʊld ɛlaɪəs.

"We have visitors coming," he told Elyas.

ðeɪ keɪm kwɪkli, fɔɹ ɹaɪɾɝz əɾ ə fæs kæntɝ, ɝaɪvɪŋ bɪfɔɹ i ən ɛlaɪəs ɹitʃt ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə hɪl. bɹəleɪn lɛd ðə weɪ, splæʃɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹim wɪð ənʊɹə ən ɡælɛn kloʊs bɪhaɪn ən ə wʊmən ɪn ə peɪl, hʊɾɪd dʌst-kloʊk əɾ əɹ saɪd. ðeɪ swɛpt ɹaɪt baɪ ðə minɝ kæmp wɪθaʊɾ ə ɡlæns, nɑt dʒɹɔɪŋ ɹeɪn əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə ɹɛd-ænd-waɪt stʃɹaɪp tɛnt. səm ə ðə kɛɹhinɪn sɝvəns ɹʌʃt tə teɪk bɹaɪɾəlz ən hoʊl stɝəps, ən bɹəleɪn ən əɹ kəmpænjənz wɝ ɪnsaɪd bɪfɔɹ ðə dʌst ə ðɛɹ ɝaɪvəl sɛɾəld.

They came quickly, four riders at a fast canter, arriving before he and Elyas reached the bottom of the hill. Berelain led the way, splashing across the stream with Annoura and Gallenne close behind and a woman in a pale, hooded dust-cloak at her side. They swept right by the Mayener camp without a glance, not drawing rein until they were in front of the red-and-white striped tent. Some of the Cairhienin servants rushed to take bridles and hold stirrups, and Berelain and her companions were inside before the dust of their arrival settled.

ɔl ɪn ɔl, ði ɝaɪvəl kɹieɪɾəd kwaɪɾ ə stɝ. ə bʌz ɹoʊz əmʌŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn ðət pɛɹɪn kəɾ oʊnli kɔl æntɪsəpətɔɹi. ði ɪnɛvəɾəbəl ɡæðɝɪŋ ə feɪlz jʌŋ fulz skɹætʃt ðɛɹ hɛdz ən stɛɹɾ ət ðə tɛnt, tʃæɾɝɪŋ ɪksaɪɾədli əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz. ɡɹeɪɾi ən nild wɑtʃt ðə tɛn θɹu ðə tʃɹiz, tu, naʊ ən ðən linɪŋ təɡɛðɝ tə tɔk ðoʊ noʊbɑdi wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ ɛniθɪŋ ðeɪ sɛd.

All in all, the arrival created quite a stir. A buzz rose among the Two Rivers men that Perrin could only call anticipatory. The inevitable gathering of Faile's young fools scratched their heads and stared at the tent, chattering excitedly among themselves. Grady and Neald watched the tent through the trees, too, now and then leaning together to talk though nobody was close enough to hear anything they said.

"lʊks laɪk jəɹ vɪzəɾɝz ɑɹ mɔɹ ðən kæʒəwəl," ɛlaɪəs sɛd kwaɪətli. "wɑtʃ ɡælɛn; hi kəd bi tʃɹʌbəl."

"Looks like your visitors are more than casual," Elyas said quietly. "Watch Gallenne; he could be trouble."

"ju noʊ hɪm, ɛlaɪəs? aɪd laɪk jə tə steɪ, bʌɾ ɪf jə θɪŋk i maɪt tɛl wʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz u jə ɑɹ. . . ." pɛɹɪn ʃɹʌɡd ɪn ɹɛzəɡneɪʃən. "aɪ maɪt bi eɪbəl tə stɑp siɑnɪɾ ən mɑsʊɝi" - hi θɔɾ i kəd - "bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ənʊɹə wɪl də wʌtɛvɝ ʃi wɑns." ən wʌd ʃi ɹɪli θɪŋk əbaʊt mæsimə?

"You know him, Elyas? I'd like you to stay, but if you think he might tell one of the sisters who you are. . . ." Perrin shrugged in resignation. "I might be able to stop Seonid and Masuri" - he thought he could - "but I think Annoura will do whatever she wants." And what did she really think about Masema?

"oʊ, bɝteɪn ɡælɛn dʌznt noʊ ðə laɪks ʌv ɛlaɪəs mækɛɹə," ɛlaɪəs ɹɪplaɪd wɪð ə ɹaɪ ɡɹɪn. " 'mɔɹ fulz noʊ dʒæk ful ðən dʒæk ful noʊz.' aɪ noʊ hɪm, ðoʊ. hi woʊnt ɡoʊ əɡɛns jə əɹ bɪhaɪn jəɹ bæk, bʌt bɹəleɪn əz ðə bɹeɪnz bɪtwin ðɛm. ʃiz kɛp tɛɹ aʊɾ ə min baɪ pleɪɪŋ ðə tɛɹənz əɡɛns ði ɪliɑnɝz sɪns ʃi wɑz sɪkstin. bɹəleɪn noʊz haʊ tə mənuvɝ; ɔl ɡælɛn noʊz ɪz ətæk. hiz ɡʊɾ əɾ ɪt, bʌɾ i nɛvɝ siz ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, ən səmtaɪmz i dʌzn stɑp tə θɪŋk."

"Oh, Bertain Gallenne doesn't know the likes of Elyas Machera," Elyas replied with a wry grin. " 'More fools know Jak Fool than Jak Fool knows.' I know him, though. He won't go against you or behind your back, but Berelain has the brains between them. She's kept Tear out of Mayene by playing the Tairens against the Illianers since she was sixteen. Berelain knows how to maneuver; all Gallenne knows is attack. He's good at it, but he never sees anything else, and sometimes he doesn't stop to think."

"aɪd fɪɡjɝd ðəɾ aʊɾ əbaʊt boʊθ ə ðɛm," pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd. ət lis bɹəleɪn hæd bɹɔɾ ə mɛsənʒɝ fɹəm æliændɝ. ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv kʌm ɹʌʃɪŋ ɪn ðət weɪ wɪð ə nu meɪd. ði oʊnli kwɛstʃən wɑz waɪ æliændɝz ɹɪplaɪ niɾəd ə mɛsənʒɝ. "aɪ hæd bɛs faɪn aʊt wɛðɝ ðə nuz ɪz ɡʊd, ɛlaɪəs. leɪɾɝ, wɪl tɔk əbaʊt wʌt laɪz saʊθ. ən jə kən mit feɪl," hi æɾəd bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ əweɪ.

"I'd figured that out about both of them," Perrin muttered. At least Berelain had brought a messenger from Alliandre. She would not have come rushing in that way with a new maid. The only question was why Alliandre's reply needed a messenger. "I had best find out whether the news is good, Elyas. Later, we'll talk about what lies south. And you can meet Faile," he added before turning away.

"ðə pɪɾ ə dum laɪz saʊθ," ði ʌðɝ mæn kɔld æftɝ hɪm, "ɔɹ əz kloʊs tə ɪɾ əz aɪ ɪkspɛktəd tə si bɪloʊ ðə blaɪt." pɛɹɪn ɪmædʒən i hɝd ðət feɪn θʌndɝ ɪn ðə wɛst əɡɛn. naʊ, ðət wəd bi ə plɛzən tʃeɪnʒ.

"The Pit of Doom lies south," the other man called after him, "or as close to it as I expected to see below the Blight." Perrin imagined he heard that faint thunder in the west again. Now, that would be a pleasant change.

ɪn ðə tɛnt, bɹin wɑz kæɹiɪŋ ə sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ əbaʊt wɪð ə boʊl ə ɹoʊz-sɛntɪd wɔɾɝ ən klɔθs fəɹ wɑʃɪŋ feɪsəz ən hænz, kɝtsiɪŋ stɪfli əz ʃi pɹizɛntəɾ ɪt. wɪð ivən stɪfɝ kɝtsiz, meɪaɪɡdɪn wɑz ɔfɝɪŋ ə tʃɹeɪ hoʊldɪŋ kʌps ʌv waɪn-pʌntʃ - meɪd wɪð ðə læst ə ðə dʒɹaɪd blubɛɹiz, baɪ ðə smɛl - waɪl lini foʊldəd ðə nukʌmɝz dʌst-kloʊk. ðəɹ sim sʌmθɪŋ ɑɾ ɪn ðə weɪ feɪl ən bɹəleɪn stʊd tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə nu wʊmən, ən ənʊɹə hʌvɝd bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ɔl foʊkəst ɑn hɝ. sʌmwɛɹ ɪn əɹ mɪɾəl jɪɹz, wɪð ə kæp ʌv ɡɹin nɛt ɡæðɝɪŋ dɑɹk hɛɹ ðət fɛl ɔlmoʊs tə hɝ weɪst, ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn pɹɪɾi ɪf əɹ noʊz hæd nɑt bɪn soʊ lɔŋ. ən ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt kæɹiɾ ɪt soʊ haɪ. ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən feɪl əɹ bɹəleɪn iðɝ wʌn, ʃi stɪl mænədʒ tə lʊk daʊn ðət noʊz ət pɛɹɪn, kuli ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ɪm fɹəm hɛɹ tə buts. ʃi dɪd nɑt blɪŋk ət saɪɾ ə hɪz aɪz, ɔlðoʊ nɪɹli ɛvɹiwʌn dɪd.

In the tent, Breane was carrying a silver tray about with a bowl of rose-scented water and cloths for washing faces and hands, curtsying stiffly as she presented it. With even stiffer curtsies, Maighdin was offering a tray holding cups of wine-punch - made with the last of the dried blueberries, by the smell - while Lini folded the newcomer's dust-cloak. There seemed something odd in the way Faile and Berelain stood to either side of the new woman, and Annoura hovered behind them, all focused on her. Somewhere in her middle years, with a cap of green net gathering dark hair that fell almost to her waist, she might have been pretty if her nose had not been so long. And if she had not carried it so high. Shorter than Faile or Berelain either one, she still managed to look down that nose at Perrin, coolly examining him from hair to boots. She did not blink at sight of his eyes, although nearly everyone did.

"mædʒəsti," bɹəleɪn pɹənaʊnst ɪn ə fɔɹməl vɔɪs əz sun əz pɛɹɪn ɛntɝd, "meɪ aɪ pɹɛzən lɔɹd pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə ʌv ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ɪn ændɝ, ðə pɝsənəl fɹɛn ən ɛməsɛɹi ʌv ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn." ðə lɔŋ-noʊzd wʊmən nɑɾəd kɛɹfəli, kuli, ən bɹəleɪn wɛn ɑn wɪð skɛɹsli ə pɔz. "lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹə, ɡɪv ɡɹiɾɪŋz ən wɛlkəm tə æliændɝ mɛɹɪðə kɪɡɑɝɪn, kwin ʌv ɡildən, blɛsɪɾ ə ðə laɪt, dɪfɛndɝ ʌv ɡæɹənz wɔl, hu ɪz pliz tə ɹəsiv jə ɪn pɝsən." ɡælɛn, stændɪŋ nɪɹ ðə tɛnt wɔl, ədʒʌstəɾ ɪz aɪpætʃ ən ɹeɪzd ɪz waɪnkʌp tə pɛɹɪn wɪð ə smaɪl ə tʃɹaɪəmf.

"Majesty," Berelain pronounced in a formal voice as soon as Perrin entered, "may I present Lord Perrin Aybara of the Two Rivers, in Andor, the personal friend and emissary of the Dragon Reborn." The long-nosed woman nodded carefully, coolly, and Berelain went on with scarcely a pause. "Lord Aybara, give greetings and welcome to Alliandre Maritha Kigarin, Queen of Ghealdan, Blessed of the Light, Defender of Garen's Wall, who is pleased to receive you in person." Gallenne, standing near the tent wall, adjusted his eyepatch and raised his winecup to Perrin with a smile of triumph.

fəɹ səm ɹizən feɪl ʃɑt bɹəleɪn ə hɑɹd lʊk. pɛɹɪnz maʊθ nɪɹli dʒɹɑpt oʊpən. æliændɝ hɝsɛlf? hi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ i ʃəd nil, ðən sɛɾəld fəɹ ə baʊ æftɝ tu lɔŋ ə pɔz. laɪt! hi hæd noʊ noʊʃən haʊ tə dil wɪð ə kwin. ɪspɛʃli wʌn u tɝn ʌp aʊɾ ə ðə blu wɪð noʊ ɛskɔɹt, wɪθaʊɾ ə dʒuəl ɪn saɪt. hɝ dɑɹk ɡɹin ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs wɑz pleɪn wʊl, lækɪŋ ə sɪŋɡəl stɪtʃ ʌv ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi.

For some reason Faile shot Berelain a hard look. Perrin's mouth nearly dropped open. Alliandre herself? He wondered whether he should kneel, then settled for a bow after too long a pause. Light! He had no notion how to deal with a queen. Especially one who turned up out of the blue with no escort, without a jewel in sight. Her dark green riding dress was plain wool, lacking a single stitch of embroidery.

"æftɝ ðə ɹisənt nuz," æliændɝ sɛd, "aɪ θɔɾ aɪ ʃəd kʌm tə ju, lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹə." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz kɑm, hɝ feɪs smuð, hɝ aɪz əluf. ən əbzɝvənt, əɹ i wɑz ə tɛɹən fɛɹi mæn. bɛs tə stɛp wɛɹəli tɪl i nu haʊ ðə pæθ leɪ. "ju meɪ nɑɾ əv hɝd," ʃi kəntɪnjud, "bʌt fɔɹ deɪz əɡoʊ ɪljən fɛl tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, blɛsɪd bi hɪz neɪm ɪn ðə laɪt. hiz teɪkən ðə lɔɹəl kɹaʊn, ðoʊ aɪ ʌndɝstæn ɪts naʊ kɔl ðə kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz."

"After the recent news," Alliandre said, "I thought I should come to you, Lord Aybara." Her voice was calm, her face smooth, her eyes aloof. And observant, or he was a Taren Ferry man. Best to step warily till he knew how the path lay. "You may not have heard," she continued, "but four days ago Illian fell to the Dragon Reborn, blessed be his name in the Light. He has taken the Laurel Crown, though I understand it is now called the Crown of Swords."

feɪl, teɪkɪŋ ə kʌp fɹəm meɪaɪɡdɪnz tʃɹeɪ, wɪspɝɾ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, "æn sɛvən deɪz ɡɔn, ðə sintʃæn tʊk ɛbu dɑɹ." ivən meɪaɪɡdɪn dɪd nɑt noʊɾəs.

Faile, taking a cup from Maighdin's tray, whispered under her breath, "And seven days gone, the Seanchan took Ebou Dar." Even Maighdin did not notice.

ɪf pɛɹɪn hæd nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi teɪkən hoʊld ə hɪmsɛlf, hi tʃɹuli wəɾ əv ɡeɪpt. waɪ dɪd feɪl tɛl ɪm ðɪs weɪ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪt tə kʌm fɹəm ðə wʊmən u mʌst əv toʊl hɝ? ɪn ə vɔɪs ðəɾ ɛvɹiwʌn kəd hɪɹ, hi ɹɪpiɾɪd əɹ wɝdz. ə hɑɹd vɔɪs, bʌt ðət wɑz ði oʊnli weɪ tə kip ɪt fɹəm ʃeɪkɪŋ. ɛbu dɑɹ, tu? laɪt! ən sɛvən deɪz əɡoʊ? ðə deɪ ɡɹeɪɾi ən ði ʌðɝz hæd sin ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪn ðə skaɪ. koʊɪnsɪɾəns, meɪbi. bʌt wəɾ i ɹæðɝ ɪt hæd bɪn ðə fɔɹseɪkən?

If Perrin had not already taken hold of himself, he truly would have gaped. Why did Faile tell him this way instead of waiting for it to come from the woman who must have told her? In a voice that everyone could hear, he repeated her words. A hard voice, but that was the only way to keep it from shaking. Ebou Dar, too? Light! And seven days ago? The day Grady and the others had seen the One Power in the sky. Coincidence, maybe. But would he rather it had been the Forsaken?

ənʊɹə fɹaʊn oʊvɝ əɹ kʌp, pɝsɪŋ əɹ lɪps, bɪfɔɹ i fɪnɪʃt spikɪŋ, ən bɹəleɪn ɡeɪv ɪm ə stɑɹɾəld lʊk ðət vænɪʃt kwɪkli. ðeɪ nu hi hæd nɑt noʊn əbaʊɾ ɛbu dɑɹ wən ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ɪndə bɛθɔl.

Annoura frowned over her cup, pursing her lips, before he finished speaking, and Berelain gave him a startled look that vanished quickly. They knew he had not known about Ebou Dar when they rode into Bethal.

æliændɝ mɪɹli nɑɾəd, ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz sɛlf-pəzɛst əz ðə ɡɹeɪ. "ju sim ɹɪmɑɹkəbli wɛl ɪnfɔɹmd," ʃi sɛd, kʌmɪŋ kloʊsɝ tə hɪm. "aɪ daʊt ðə fɝst ɹumɝz ɑɹ ɹitʃɪŋ dʒəhænə wɪð ðə ɹɪvɝ tʃɹeɪd, jɛt. aɪ maɪsɛlf lɝn ʌv ɪɾ oʊnli ə fju deɪz əɡoʊ. sɛvɹəl ə ðə mɝtʃəns kip mi əbɹɛst ʌv ɪvɛns. aɪ bɪliv," ʃi æɾəd dʒɹaɪli, "ðæt ðeɪ hoʊp aɪ kən ɪntɝsid fəɹ əm wɪð ðə pɹɑfəɾ ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, ɪf sətʃ bɪkʌmz nɛsəsɛɹi."

Alliandre merely nodded, every bit as self-possessed as the Gray. "You seem remarkably well informed," she said, coming closer to him. "I doubt the first rumors are reaching Jehannah with the river trade, yet. I myself learned of it only a few days ago. Several of the merchants keep me abreast of events. I believe," she added dryly, "that they hope I can intercede for them with the Prophet of the Lord Dragon, if such becomes necessary."

ət læst i kəd pɪk aʊɾ əɹ sɛnt, ən ɪz əpɪnjən ə hɝ tʃeɪnʒd, ðoʊ nɑt fəɹ ðə wɝs. aʊtwɝdli, ðə kwin wɑz ɔl kul ɹɪzɝv, bʌɾ ənsɝɾənti ʃɑt θɹu wɪð fɪɹ fɪl ðə smɛl ə hɝ. hi dɪd nɑt bɪliv i cʊɾə hɛld ɪz feɪs soʊ kɑm hæɾ i fɛl ðæt.

At last he could pick out her scent, and his opinion of her changed, though not for the worse. Outwardly, the Queen was all cool reserve, but uncertainty shot through with fear filled the smell of her. He did not believe he could have held his face so calm had he felt that.

"ɔlweɪz bɛs tə noʊ əz mʌtʃ əz jə kæn," hi toʊl hɝ, hæf dɪstʃɹæktəd. bɝn mi, hi θɔt, aɪ hæv tə lɛt ɹænd noʊ əbaʊt ðɪs!

"Always best to know as much as you can," he told her, half distracted. Burn me, he thought, I have to let Rand know about this!

"ɪn sɑldɑiə wi faɪn mɝtʃəns jusfəl fəɹ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən, tu," feɪl sɛd. ɪmplaɪɪŋ ðət wɑz haʊ pɛɹɪn nu əbaʊɾ ɛbu dɑɹ. "ðeɪ sim tə lɝn wʌt hæpən ə θaʊzən maɪlz ɔf wiks bɪfɔɹ ðə ɹumɝz bɪɡɪn."

"In Saldaea we find merchants useful for information, too," Faile said. Implying that was how Perrin knew about Ebou Dar. "They seem to learn what happened a thousand miles off weeks before the rumors begin."

ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk ət pɛɹɪn, bʌɾ i nu ʃi spoʊk tə hɪm əz mʌtʃ əz æliændɝ. ɹænd nu, ʃi wɑz seɪɪŋ. ən ɛniweɪ, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə ɡɛt wɝd tə hɪm ɪn sikɹət. kəd feɪl ɹɪli wɑn ɪm tə . . . ? noʊ, ɪt wɑz ənθɪŋkəbəl. blɪŋkɪŋ, hi ɹilaɪzd i hæd mɪst sʌmθɪŋ æliændɝ hæd sɛd. "jɔɹ pɑɹɾən, æliændɝ," hi sɛd pəlaɪtli. "aɪ wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ɹænd - ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn." ʌv kɔɹs ɪt wɑz ənθɪŋkəbəl!

She did not look at Perrin, but he knew she spoke to him as much as Alliandre. Rand knew, she was saying. And anyway, there was no way to get word to him in secret. Could Faile really want him to . . . ? No, it was unthinkable. Blinking, he realized he had missed something Alliandre had said. "Your pardon, Alliandre," he said politely. "I was thinking about Rand - the Dragon Reborn." Of course it was unthinkable!

ɛvɹiwʌn stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, ivən lini ən meɪaɪɡdɪn ən bɹin. ənʊɹəz aɪz hæd ɡɔn waɪd, ən ɡælɛnz maʊθ hʌŋ oʊpən. ðən ɪt hɪt hɪm. hi hæd dʒʌs kɔl ðə kwin baɪ neɪm. hi tʊk ə kʌp fɹəm meɪaɪɡdɪnz tʃɹeɪ, ən ʃi ɹoʊz fɹəm əɹ kɝtsi soʊ kwɪkli ðət ʃi nɪɹli nɑkt ɪt fɹəm ɪz hænd. weɪvɪŋ əɹ əweɪ æbsənli, hi waɪpt ɪz dæmp hæn ɑn ɪz koʊt. hi hæd tə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪt hɪɹ, nɑt lɛɾ ɪz maɪnd wɑndɝ ɪn naɪn dɝɛkʃənz. noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ ɛlaɪəs θɔɾ i nu, feɪl wəd nɛvɝ. . . . noʊ! kɑnsəntʃɹeɪt!

Everyone stared at him, even Lini and Maighdin and Breane. Annoura's eyes had gone wide, and Gallenne's mouth hung open. Then it hit him. He had just called the Queen by name. He took a cup from Maighdin's tray, and she rose from her curtsy so quickly that she nearly knocked it from his hand. Waving her away absently, he wiped his damp hand on his coat. He had to concentrate here, not let his mind wander in nine directions. No matter what Elyas thought he knew, Faile would never. . . . No! Concentrate!

æliændɝ ɹəkʌvɝɾ əɹ ikwəlɪbɹiəm kwɪkli. ɪn tʃɹuθ, ʃi hæɾ əpɪɹd ðə list sɝpɹaɪzd ʌv ɛniwʌn, ən əɹ sɛnt nɛvɝ weɪvɝd. "aɪ wɑz seɪɪŋ ðət kʌmɪŋ tə jə ɪn sikɹət sim ðə waɪzəs kɔɹs, lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹə," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ðət kul vɔɪs. "lɔɹd tɛləbɪn bɪlivz aɪm kipɪŋ pɹaɪvəɾ ɪn ɪz ɡɑɹɾənz, wɪtʃ aɪ lɛf baɪ ə sɛldəm-juzd ɡeɪt. pæsɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi, aɪ wɑz ənʊɹə sədaɪz meɪd." bɹʌʃɪŋ fɪŋɡɝtɪps əkɹɔs wʌn skɝɾ ə hɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs, ʃi ɡeɪv ə smɔl læf. ivən ðəɾ əbaʊɾ əɹ wɑz kul, soʊ əɾ ɑdz wɪð wʌɾ ɪz noʊz toʊl hɪm. "ə nʌmbɝ ə maɪ oʊn soʊlʒɝz sɔ mi, bʌt wɪð ðə hʊɾ ə maɪ kloʊk pʊld ʌp, nʌn nu mi."

Alliandre recovered her equilibrium quickly. In truth, she had appeared the least surprised of anyone, and her scent never wavered. "I was saying that coming to you in secret seemed the wisest course, Lord Aybara," she said in that cool voice. "Lord Telabin believes I am keeping private in his gardens, which I left by a seldom-used gate. Passing out of the city, I was Annoura Sedai's maid." Brushing fingertips across one skirt of her riding dress, she gave a small laugh. Even that about her was cool, so at odds with what his nose told him. "A number of my own soldiers saw me, but with the hood of my cloak pulled up, none knew me."

"taɪmz biɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ, ðət pɹɑbli wɑz waɪzəst," pɛɹɪn sɛd kɛɹfəli. "bʌt jəl əv tə kʌm ɪndə ði oʊpən sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ. wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ." pəlaɪɾ ən tə ðə pɔɪnt, ðət wɑz ðə θɪŋ. ə kwin wəd nɑt wɑnə weɪs taɪm wɪð ə mæn u blæðɝd. ən i dɪd nɑt wɑnə dɪsəpɔɪn feɪl baɪ æktɪŋ ðə heɪfʊɾ əɡɛn. "waɪ kʌm əɾ ɔl? ɔl jə hæd tə də wɑz sɛn ə lɛɾɝ, əɹ dʒʌs tɛl bɹəleɪn jəɹ ænsɝ. wɪl jə dɪklɛɹ fəɹ ɹænd əɹ nɑt? iðɝ weɪ, hæv noʊ fɪɹ əbaʊt ɡɛɾɪŋ bæk tə bɛθɔl seɪfli." ə ɡʊd pɔɪnt, ðæt. wʌtɛvɝ ɛls fɹaɪɾənd hɝ, biɪŋ hɪɹ əloʊn mʌst.

"Times being what they are, that probably was wisest," Perrin said carefully. "But you will have to come into the open sooner or later. One way or another." Polite and to the point, that was the thing. A queen would not want to waste time with a man who blathered. And he did not want to disappoint Faile by acting the hayfoot again. "Why come at all? All you had to do was send a letter, or just tell Berelain your answer. Will you declare for Rand or not? Either way, have no fear about getting back to Bethal safely." A good point, that. Whatever else frightened her, being here alone must.

feɪl wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, pɹitɛndɪŋ nɑt tə, sɪpɪŋ əɹ pʌntʃ ən dɝɛktɪŋ əɹ smaɪlz əɾ æliændɝ, bʌɾ i kɑt ðə kwɪk flɪkɝz ə hɝ aɪz ɪn ɪz dɝɛkʃən. bɹəleɪn meɪd noʊ pɹitɛns, wɑtʃɪŋ kwaɪɾ oʊpənli, aɪz slaɪtli nɛɹoʊɾ ən nɛvɝ livɪŋ ɪz feɪs. ənʊɹə wɑz dʒʌst əz ɪntɛnt, dʒʌst əz θɔtfəl. dɪd ðeɪ ɔl bɪliv i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə tʃɹɪp oʊvɝ ɪz oʊn tʌŋ əɡɛn?

Faile was watching him, pretending not to, sipping her punch and directing her smiles at Alliandre, but he caught the quick flickers of her eyes in his direction. Berelain made no pretense, watching quite openly, eyes slightly narrowed and never leaving his face. Annoura was just as intent, just as thoughtful. Did they all believe he was going to trip over his own tongue again?

ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ænsɝɪŋ ði ɪmpɔɹɾənt kwɛstʃən, æliændɝ sɛd, "ðə fɝs toʊl mi ə ɡɹeɪt dil əbaʊt ju, lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹə, ən əbaʊt ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, blɛsɪd bi hɪz neɪm ɪn ðə laɪt." ðət læst saʊndəd baɪ ɹoʊt, ən ədɪʃən ʃi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ hæd tə θɪŋk əbaʊt. "aɪ kænɑt si hɪm bɪfɔɹ aɪ meɪk maɪ dɪsɪʒən, soʊ aɪ wɪʃt tə si ju, tə teɪk ə mɛʒɝ ə ju. ɪts pɑsəbəl tə tɛl mʌtʃ əbaʊɾ ə mæn baɪ ðoʊz i tʃuzəz tə spik fəɹ hɪm." tɪltɪŋ əɹ feɪs daʊn təwɔɹd ðə kʌp ɪn əɹ hænz, ʃi pɪɹɾ əɾ ɪm θɹu hɝ læʃɪz. fɹəm bɹəleɪn, ðət wʊɾə bɪn flɝteɪʃəs, bʌɾ æliændɝ wɑz kɔʃəsli wɑtʃɪŋ ə wʊlf ʃʊɹ əz i wɑz stændɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. "aɪ ɔlsoʊ sɔ jəɹ bænɝz," ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli. "ðə fɝs dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən ðɛm."

Instead of answering the important question, Alliandre said, "The First told me a great deal about you, Lord Aybara, and about the Lord Dragon Reborn, blessed be his name in the Light." That last sounded by rote, an addition she no longer had to think about. "I cannot see him before I make my decision, so I wished to see you, to take a measure of you. It's possible to tell much about a man by those he chooses to speak for him." Tilting her face down toward the cup in her hands, she peered at him through her lashes. From Berelain, that would have been flirtatious, but Alliandre was cautiously watching a wolf sure as he was standing in front of her. "I also saw your banners," she said quietly. "The First did not mention them."

pɛɹɪn skaʊl bɪfɔɹ i kəd stɑp hɪmsɛlf. bɹəleɪn hæd toʊld əɹ ə ɡɹeɪt dil əbaʊt hɪm? wʌt hæd ʃi sɛd? "ðə bænɝz ɑɹ mɛn tə bi sin." æŋɡɝ pʊɾ ə ɹʌnəs ɪn ɪz vɔɪs ðət ɹikwaɪɝd səm ɛfɝt tə fɔɹs daʊn. naʊ, bɹəleɪn wɑz ə wʊmən u niɾəd ʃaʊɾɪŋ æt. "bɪliv mi, ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ plænz tə sɛɾ ʌp meɪnɛðɝən əɡɛn." ðɛɹ; hɪz toʊn wɑz əz kul əz æliændɝz. "wʌɾ ɪz jəɹ dɪsɪʒən? ɹænd kən əv tɛn θaʊzən soʊlʒɝz, ə hʌnʒɹəd θaʊzənd, hɪɹ ɪn ðə blɪŋk ʌv ən aɪ, əɹ nɪɹ ɪnʌf." ən i maɪɾ əv tə. ðə sintʃæn ɪn æmədɔɹ ən ɛbu dɑɹ? laɪt, haʊ mɛni wɝ ðeɪ?

Perrin scowled before he could stop himself. Berelain had told her a great deal about him? What had she said? "The banners are meant to be seen." Anger put a roughness in his voice that required some effort to force down. Now, Berelain was a woman who needed shouting at. "Believe me, there are no plans to set up Manetheren again." There; his tone was as cool as Alliandre's. "What is your decision? Rand can have ten thousand soldiers, a hundred thousand, here in the blink of an eye, or near enough." And he might have to. The Seanchan in Amador and Ebou Dar? Light, how many were they?

æliændɝ sɪp dɛləkətli əɾ əɹ waɪn-pʌntʃ bɪfɔɹ spikɪŋ, ən əɡɛn ʃi dɑdʒ ðə kwɛstʃən. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ə θaʊzən ɹumɝz, əz jə mʌs noʊ, ən ivən ðə waɪldɪst ɪz bəlivəbəl wən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪz ɹibɔɹn, stʃɹeɪnʒɝz əpɪɹ kleɪmɪŋ tə bi ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɑɹmiz ɹɪtɝnd, ən ðə taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf ɪz bɹoʊkən baɪ ɹɪbɛljən."

Alliandre sipped delicately at her wine-punch before speaking, and again she dodged the question. "There are a thousand rumors, as you must know, and even the wildest is believable when the Dragon is Reborn, strangers appear claiming to be Artur Hawkwing's armies returned, and the Tower itself is broken by rebellion."

"ə mæɾɝ fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ," ənʊɹə sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "ɪt kənsɝnz noʊ wʌn ɛls." bɹəleɪn flæʃt ən ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd lʊk ət hɝ, wɪtʃ ʃi əfɛktəd nɑt tə noʊɾəs.

"A matter for Aes Sedai," Annoura said sharply. "It concerns no one else." Berelain flashed an exasperated look at her, which she affected not to notice.

æliændɝ flɪntʃt ən tɝn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ tə ðə sɪstɝ. kwin əɹ nɑt, noʊ wʌn wɑntəd tə hɪɹ ðət toʊn fɹəm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. "ðə wɝld ɪz tɝn ʌpsaɪd daʊn, lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹə. waɪ, aɪv ivən hæd ɹɪpɔɹts ʌv il sækɪŋ ə vɪlədʒ ɹaɪt hɪɹ ɪn ɡildən." əbɹʌpli pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪz ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ hɪɹ ðən æŋzaɪəɾi oʊvɝ əfɛndɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. æliændɝ wɑtʃt hɪm, weɪɾɪŋ. bʌt fəɹ wʌt? ɹiəʃʊɹəns?

Alliandre flinched and turned her shoulder to the sister. Queen or not, no one wanted to hear that tone from an Aes Sedai. "The world is turned upside down, Lord Aybara. Why, I've even had reports of Aiel sacking a village right here in Ghealdan." Abruptly Perrin realized there was more here than anxiety over offending Aes Sedai. Alliandre watched him, waiting. But for what? Reassurance?

"ði oʊnli il ɪn ɡildən ɑɹ wɪð mi," hi toʊl hɝ. "ðə sintʃæn meɪ bi dɪsɛndəns ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɑɹmi, bʌt hɔkwɪŋ ɪz ə θaʊzən jɪɹz dɛd. ɹænd dɛlt wɪð əm wʌns ɔlɹɛɾi, ən hɪl əɡɛn." hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd fɑlm əz klɪɹli əz dəməaɪz wɛlz, ðoʊ hi hæd tʃɹaɪd fɝɡɛɾɪŋ. ʃʊɹli ðəɹ hæd nɑt bɪn ɪnʌf ə ðɛm ðəɹ tə teɪk æmədɔɹ ən ɛbu dɑɹ, ivən wɪð ðɛɹ deɪmeɪn. beɪlwɝ kleɪm ðeɪ hæd tæɹɑbənɝ soʊlʒɝz, tu. "æn ɪt maɪt tʃɪɹ jə tə hɪɹ ðət ðoʊz ɹɛbəl ɛɛs sədaɪ səpɔɹt ɹænd. ðeɪ wɪl, sun, ət list." ðət wɑz wʌt ɹænd sɛd, ə hændfʊl ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð noʊwɛɹ tə ɡoʊ ɪksɛp tə hɪm. pɛɹɪn wɑz nɑt soʊ ʃʊɹ. ɹumɝ ɪn ɡildən pʊɾ ən ɑɹmi wɪð ðoʊz sɪstɝz. ʌv kɔɹs, ðə seɪm ɹumɝz kaʊntəd mɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðət hændfʊl ðən ðəɹ wɝ ɪn ðə wɝld, bʌt stɪl. . . . laɪt, hi wɪʃt sʌmwʌn wəd ɹiəʃʊɹ hɪm! "waɪ doʊnt wi sɪt," hi sɛd. "aɪl ænsɝ ɛni kwɛstʃənz jə hæv, tə hɛlp jə meɪk jəɹ dɪsɪʒən, bʌt wi maɪɾ əz wɛl bi kʌmftəɹbəl." dʒɹɔɪŋ wʌn ə ðə foʊldɪŋ tʃɛɹz tə hɪm, hi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ət ðə læst ɪnstənt nɑt tə dʒʌs dʒɹɑp ɪndə ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt kɹikt ʌndɝ ɪm dʒʌs ðə seɪm.

"The only Aiel in Ghealdan are with me," he told her. "The Seanchan may be descendants of Artur Hawkwing's army, but Hawkwing is a thousand years dead. Rand dealt with them once already, and he will again." He remembered Falme as clearly as Dumai's Wells, though he had tried forgetting. Surely there had not been enough of them there to take Amador and Ebou Dar, even with their damane. Balwer claimed they had Taraboner soldiers, too. "And it might cheer you to hear that those rebel Aes Sedai support Rand. They will, soon, at least." That was what Rand said, a handful of Aes Sedai with nowhere to go except to him. Perrin was not so sure. Rumor in Ghealdan put an army with those sisters. Of course, the same rumors counted more Aes Sedai in that handful than there were in the world, but still. . . . Light, he wished someone would reassure him! "Why don't we sit," he said. "I'll answer any questions you have, to help you make your decision, but we might as well be comfortable." Drawing one of the folding chairs to him, he remembered at the last instant not to just drop into it, but it creaked under him just the same.

lini ən ði ʌðɝ tu sɝvəns ɹʌʃt əbaʊt, pʊlɪŋ tʃɛɹz ɪndə ə sɝkəl wɪð hɪz, bʌt nʌn ə ði ʌðɝ wɪmən muv təwɔɹd ðɛm. æliændɝ stʊd lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, ən ðə ɹɛs lʊkt ət hɝ. ɪksɛp fəɹ ɡælɛn, hu mɪɹli pɔɹd hɪmsɛlf ənʌðɝ kʌp ə pʌntʃ fɹəm ðə sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝ.

Lini and the other two servants rushed about, pulling chairs into a circle with his, but none of the other women moved toward them. Alliandre stood looking at him, and the rest looked at her. Except for Gallenne, who merely poured himself another cup of punch from the silver pitcher.

ɪt keɪm tə pɛɹɪn ðət feɪl hæd nɑɾ oʊpən əɹ maʊθ sɪns spikɪŋ ə ðə mɝtʃəns. hi wɑz əz ɡɹeɪtfəl fəɹ bɹəleɪnz saɪləns əz i wɑz ðət ʃi hæd nɑt dɪsaɪɾɪd tə flʌɾɝ əɹ læʃɪz əɾ ɪm ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə kwin, bʌɾ i cʊɾə juz səm hɛlp fɹəm feɪl ɹaɪt ðɛn. ə lɪɾəl ædvaɪs. laɪt, ʃi nu tɛn taɪmz wʌɾ i dɪɾ əbaʊt wʌɾ i ʃəd seɪ ən də hɪɹ.

It came to Perrin that Faile had not opened her mouth since speaking of the merchants. He was as grateful for Berelain's silence as he was that she had not decided to flutter her lashes at him in front of the Queen, but he could have used some help from Faile right then. A little advice. Light, she knew ten times what he did about what he should say and do here.

wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ i ʃəd stænd wɪð ði ʌðɝz, hi sɛɾ ɪz waɪn-pʌntʃ ɑn wʌn ə ðə smɔl teɪbəlz ən æskt əɹ tə spik tə æliændɝ. "ɪf ɛniwʌn kən meɪk əɹ si ðə ɹaɪt weɪ tə ɡoʊ, jə kæn," hi sɛd. feɪl ɡeɪv ɪm ə pliz smaɪl, bʌt hɛld əɹ tʌŋ.

Wondering whether he should stand with the others, he set his wine-punch on one of the small tables and asked her to speak to Alliandre. "If anyone can make her see the right way to go, you can," he said. Faile gave him a pleased smile, but held her tongue.

əbɹʌpli æliændɝ pʊɾ aʊɾ əɹ kʌp tə wʌn saɪd wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ, əz ɪf ɪkspɛktɪŋ ə tʃɹeɪ tə bi ðɛɹ. wʌn wɑz, bɛɹli ɪn taɪm tə kætʃ ðə kʌp, ən meɪaɪɡdɪn, hu hɛld ɪt, mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ pɛɹɪn hoʊp feɪl hæd nɑt hɝd. feɪl wɑz dɛθ ɑn sɝvəns juzɪŋ ðət sɔɹɾ ə læŋɡwədʒ. hi stɑɹɾəd tə ɹaɪz əz æliændɝ əpɹoʊtʃt hɪm, bʌt tə hɪz ʃɑk, ʃi nɛlt ɡɹeɪsfəli ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, kætʃɪŋ ɪz hænz wɪð hɝz. bɪfɔɹ i nu wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ, ʃi twɪstəd soʊ hɝ hænz wɝ bæk-tə-bæk bɪtwin ɪz pɑmz. ʃi klʌŋ soʊ hɑɹɾ əɹ hænz mʌst əv hɝt; fəɹ ʃʊɹ, hi wɑz nɑt sɝɾən i kəd lus hɪmsɛlf wɪθaʊt hɝɾɪŋ hɝ.

Abruptly Alliandre put out her cup to one side without looking, as if expecting a tray to be there. One was, barely in time to catch the cup, and Maighdin, who held it, muttered something Perrin hoped Faile had not heard. Faile was death on servants using that sort of language. He started to rise as Alliandre approached him, but to his shock, she knelt gracefully in front of him, catching his hands with hers. Before he knew what she was doing, she twisted so her hands were back-to-back between his palms. She clung so hard her hands must have hurt; for sure, he was not certain he could loose himself without hurting her.

"ʌndɝ ðə laɪt," ʃi sɛd fɝmli, lʊkɪŋ ʌp ət hɪm, "aɪ, æliændɝ mɛɹɪðə kɪɡɑɝɪn, plɛdʒ maɪ fiəlti ən sɝvəs tə lɔɹd pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə ʌv ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, naʊ ən fəɹ ɔl taɪm, seɪv ðəɾ i tʃuzəz tə ɹilis mi ʌv ɪz oʊn wɪl. maɪ lænz ən θɹoʊn ɑɹ hɪz, ən aɪ jild əm tə hɪz hænd. soʊ aɪ də swɛɹ."

"Under the Light," she said firmly, looking up at him, "I, Alliandre Maritha Kigarin, pledge my fealty and service to Lord Perrin Aybara of the Two Rivers, now and for all time, save that he chooses to release me of his own will. My lands and throne are his, and I yield them to his hand. So I do swear."

fəɹ ən ɪnstən ðəɹ wɑz ə saɪləns bɹoʊkən oʊnli baɪ ɡælɛnz ɡæsp ən ðə mjuɾɪd θʌɾ ə hɪz waɪnkʌp hɪɾɪŋ ðə ɹʌɡ.

For an instant there was a silence broken only by Gallenne's gasp and the muted thud of his winecup hitting the rug.

ðən pɛɹɪn hɝd feɪl, wʌns mɔɹ wɪspɝɪŋ soʊ sɔfli noʊ wʌn nɛks tə hɝ cʊɾə meɪɾ aʊɾ əɹ wɝdz. "ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, aɪ də æksɛp jəɹ plɛdʒ ən wɪl dɪfɛn ən pɹətɛk jə ən jʊɹz θɹu bæɾəlz ɹæk ən wɪntɝz blæst ən ɔl ðət taɪm meɪ bɹɪŋ. ðə lænz ən θɹoʊn ʌv ɡildən, aɪ ɡɪv tə jə əz maɪ feɪθfəl væsəl. ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, aɪ də æksɛpt. . . ." ðət mʌst əv bɪn ðə sɑldəiən mænɝ ʌv æksɛptɪŋ. θæŋk ðə laɪt ʃi wɑz tu bɪzi kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ɑn ɪm tə si bɹəleɪn nɑɾɪŋ əɾ ɪm fjʊɹiəsli, ɝdʒɪŋ ðə seɪm. ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm lʊkt ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf ðeɪ hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd ðɪs! ənʊɹə, ðoʊ, wɪð əɹ maʊθ hæŋɪŋ oʊpən, əpɪɹɾ əz stʌn əz hi, laɪk ə fɪʃ u hæd dʒʌst sin ðə wɔɾɝ vænɪʃ.

Then Perrin heard Faile, once more whispering so softly no one next to her could have made out her words. "Under the Light, I do accept your pledge and will defend and protect you and yours through battle's wrack and winter's blast and all that time may bring. The lands and throne of Ghealdan, I give to you as my faithful vassal. Under the Light, I do accept. . . ." That must have been the Saldaean manner of accepting. Thank the Light she was too busy concentrating on him to see Berelain nodding at him furiously, urging the same. The pair of them looked almost as if they had expected this! Annoura, though, with her mouth hanging open, appeared as stunned as he, like a fish who had just seen the water vanish.

"waɪ?" hi æsk dʒɛnli, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ feɪlz fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd hɪs ən bɹəleɪnz ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd ɡɹʌn əlaɪk. bɝn mi, hi θɔt, ɪm ə blʌɾi blæksmɪθ! noʊbɑdi swɔɹ fiəlti tə blæksmɪθs. kwinz dɪd nɑt swɛɹ fiəlti tə ɛniwʌn! "aɪv bɪn toʊld aɪm tɑvɝən; jə maɪt wɑnə ɹikənsɪɾɝ ðɪs ɪn ən aʊɝ."

"Why?" he asked gently, ignoring Faile's frustrated hiss and Berelain's exasperated grunt alike. Burn me, he thought, I'm a bloody blacksmith! Nobody swore fealty to blacksmiths. Queens did not swear fealty to anyone! "I've been told I'm ta'veren; you might want to reconsider this in an hour."

"aɪ hoʊp jə ɑɹ tɑvɝən, maɪ lɔɹd." æliændɝ læft, bʌt nɑɾ ɪn əmjuzmənt, ən ɡɹɪpt ɪz hænz ivən mɔɹ taɪtli, əz ðoʊ fɪɹfəl i maɪt pʊl əweɪ. "wɪð ɔl maɪ hɑɹt, aɪ hoʊp ɪt. aɪ fɪɹ nʌθɪŋ lɛs wɪl seɪv ɡildən. aɪ ɔl bʌt ɹitʃt ðɪs dɪsɪʒən əz sun əz ðə fɝs toʊl mi waɪ jə ɑɹ hɪɹ, ən miɾɪŋ jə oʊnli kənfɝmd mi ɪn ɪt. ɡildən nidz pɹətɛkʃən aɪ kænɑt ɡɪv, soʊ duɾi dɪmænz aɪ faɪn ɪt. jə kən ɡɪv ɪt, maɪ lɔɹd, jə ən ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, blɛsɪd bi hɪz neɪm ɪn ðə laɪt. ɪn tʃɹuθ, aɪ wəd swɛɹ dɝɛkli tə hɪm ɪf i wɝ hɪɹ, bʌt jə ɑɹ ɪz mæn. swɛɹɪŋ tə ju, aɪ ɔlsoʊ swɛɹ tə hɪm." dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ʃi fɔɹst aʊɾ ənʌðɝ wɝd. "pliz." ʃi smɛl dɛspɹɪt, naʊ, ən əɹ aɪz ʃoʊn wɪð fɪɹ.

"I hope you are ta'veren, my Lord." Alliandre laughed, but not in amusement, and gripped his hands even more tightly, as though fearful he might pull away. "With all my heart, I hope it. I fear nothing less will save Ghealdan. I all but reached this decision as soon as the First told me why you are here, and meeting you only confirmed me in it. Ghealdan needs protection I cannot give, so duty demands I find it. You can give it, my Lord, you and the Lord Dragon Reborn, blessed be his name in the Light. In truth, I would swear directly to him if he were here, but you are his man. Swearing to you, I also swear to him." Drawing a deep breath, she forced out another word. "Please." She smelled desperate, now, and her eyes shone with fear.

stɪl, hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ðɪs wɑz ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɹænd kəd wɑn ən mɔɹ, bʌt pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə wɑz dʒʌst ə blæksmɪθ. hi wɑz! kəɾ i stɪl tɛl hɪmsɛlf ðəɾ ɪf i dɪd ðɪs θɪŋ? æliændɝ stɛɹɾ ʌp əɾ ɪm pliɾɪŋli. dɪd tɑvɝən wɝk ɑn ðɛmsɛlvz, hi wʌndɝd. "ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, aɪ, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə, æksɛp jəɹ plɛdʒ. . . ." hɪz θɹoʊt wɑz dʒɹaɪ baɪ ðə taɪm i fɪnɪʃt ðə wɝdz feɪl hæd wɪspɝd. tu leɪt tə stɑp ən θɪŋk naʊ.

Still, he hesitated. This was everything Rand could want and more, but Perrin Aybara was just a blacksmith. He was! Could he still tell himself that if he did this thing? Alliandre stared up at him pleadingly. Did ta'veren work on themselves, he wondered. "Under the Light, I, Perrin Aybara, accept your pledge. . . ." His throat was dry by the time he finished the words Faile had whispered. Too late to stop and think now.

wɪð ə ɡæsp ə ɹɪlif, æliændɝ kɪst ɪz hænz. pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn soʊ ɪmbɛɹəst ɪn ɪz laɪf. stændɪŋ hɝidli, hi dʒɹu hɝ tə hɝ fit. ən ɹilaɪzd i dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt tə də nɛkst. ə pɹaʊdli bimɪŋ feɪl wɪspɝd noʊ fɝðɝ hɪns. bɹəleɪn smaɪld, tu, ɹɪlif soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ɑn əɹ feɪs ʃi maɪɾ əv dʒʌs bɪn pʊl fɹəm ə faɪɝ.

With a gasp of relief, Alliandre kissed his hands. Perrin did not think he had ever been so embarrassed in his life. Standing hurriedly, he drew her to her feet. And realized he did not know what to do next. A proudly beaming Faile whispered no further hints. Berelain smiled, too, relief so strong on her face she might have just been pulled from a fire.

hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ənʊɹə wəd spik - ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔlweɪz hæd plɛnti tə seɪ, ɪspɛʃli wən ɪt ɡeɪv ən ɑpɝtunəɾi tə teɪk tʃɑɹdʒ - bʌt ðə ɡɹeɪ sɪstɝ wɑz hoʊldɪŋ aʊɾ ə waɪnkʌp fəɹ meɪaɪɡdɪn tə ɹifɪl. ənʊɹə wɑtʃt ɪm wɪð ən ənɹiɾəbəl ɪkspɹɛʃən, ən fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, soʊ dɪd meɪaɪɡdɪn, soʊ mʌtʃ soʊ ðət ʃi kəntɪnjud tɪltɪŋ əɹ pɪtʃɝ əntɪl pʌntʃ slɑpt oʊvɝ ɑntu ði ɛɛs sədaɪz ɹɪst. ət wɪtʃ ənʊɹə ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə kʌp ɪn əɹ hæn əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd fɝɡɑɾən ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ. feɪl fɹaʊnd, ən lini fɹaʊn ivən hɑɹɾɝ, ən meɪaɪɡdɪn skɝid fəɹ ə klɔθ tə dʒɹaɪ ðə sɪstɝz hænd, ɔl ðə waɪl mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ əɡɛn. feɪl wɑz gɑnə hæv fɪts ɪf ʃi ɛvɝ hɝd ðoʊz mʌɾɝz.

He was sure Annoura would speak - Aes Sedai always had plenty to say, especially when it gave an opportunity to take charge - but the Gray sister was holding out a winecup for Maighdin to refill. Annoura watched him with an unreadable expression, and for that matter, so did Maighdin, so much so that she continued tilting her pitcher until punch slopped over onto the Aes Sedai's wrist. At which Annoura gave a start, staring at the cup in her hand as though she had forgotten it was there. Faile frowned, and Lini frowned even harder, and Maighdin scurried for a cloth to dry the sister's hand, all the while muttering under her breath again. Faile was going to have fits if she ever heard those mutters.

pɛɹɪn nu hi wɑz teɪkɪŋ tu lɔŋ. æliændɝ lɪkt əɹ lɪps æŋkʃəsli; ʃi ɪkspɛktəd mɔɹ, bʌt wʌt? "naʊ ðət wɝ dʌn hɪɹ, aɪ hæv tə faɪn ðə pɹɑfət nɛkst," hi sɛd, ən wɪnst. tu əbɹʌpt. hi hæd noʊ fil fəɹ dilɪŋ wɪð noʊbəlz, mʌtʃ lɛs kwinz. "aɪ səpoʊz jəl wɑnə ɡɛt bæk tə bɛθɔl bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn lɝnz jəɹ ɡɔn."

Perrin knew he was taking too long. Alliandre licked her lips anxiously; she expected more, but what? "Now that we're done here, I have to find the Prophet next," he said, and winced. Too abrupt. He had no feel for dealing with nobles, much less queens. "I suppose you'll want to get back to Bethal before anyone learns you're gone."

"ðə læst aɪ hɝd," æliændɝ toʊl hɪm, "ðə pɹɑfəɾ ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən wɑz ɪn ɑbilə. ðæts ə lɑɹdʒɪʃ taʊn ɪn ɑmɑdɪʃiə, pɝhæps fɔɹɾi liɡz saʊθ ə hɪɹ."

"The last I heard," Alliandre told him, "the Prophet of the Lord Dragon was in Abila. That's a largish town in Amadicia, perhaps forty leagues south of here."

ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf, pɛɹɪn fɹaʊnd, ðoʊ hi smuðd ɪz bɹaʊ kwɪkli. soʊ beɪlwɝ hæd bɪn ɹaɪt. ɹaɪɾ ɪn wʌn θɪŋ dɪd nɑt min ɹaɪɾ ɪn ɔl, bʌɾ ɪt maɪt bi wɝθwaɪl hɪɹɪŋ wʌt ðə mæn hæd tə seɪ əbaʊt ðə waɪtkloʊks. ən ðə sintʃæn. haʊ mɛni tæɹɑbənɝz?

In spite of himself, Perrin frowned, though he smoothed his brow quickly. So Balwer had been right. Right in one thing did not mean right in all, but it might be worthwhile hearing what the man had to say about the Whitecloaks. And the Seanchan. How many Taraboners?

feɪl ɡlaɪɾɪd tə hɪz saɪd, leɪɪŋ ə hæn ɑn ɪz ɑɹm ən dɝɛktɪŋ ə wɔɹm smaɪl əɾ æliændɝ. "ju kænɑt min tə sɛn əɹ əweɪ naʊ, maɪ hɑɹt. nɑt wən ʃiz dʒʌst ɝaɪvd. liv əs tə tɔk hɪɹ aʊɾ ə ðə sʌn bɪfɔɹ ʃi mʌs feɪs ðə ɹaɪd bæk. aɪ noʊ juv ɪmpɔɹɾənt mæɾɝz tə si tə."

Faile glided to his side, laying a hand on his arm and directing a warm smile at Alliandre. "You cannot mean to send her away now, my heart. Not when she has just arrived. Leave us to talk here out of the sun before she must face the ride back. I know you have important matters to see to."

hi mænədʒ nɑt tə stɛɹ, wɪð ə lɪɾəl ɛfɝt. wʌt kəd bi mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən ðə kwin ʌv ɡildən? sɝɾən ʃʊɹ, nʌθɪŋ ɛniwʌn wəd lɛɾ ɪm leɪ hæn tə. klɪɹli ʃi wɑntəd tə tɔk wɪð æliændɝ wɪθaʊt hɪm. wɪð lʌk, ʃi wəd tɛl ɪm waɪ leɪɾɝ. wɪð lʌk, ʃi wəd tɛl ɪm ɔl ʌv ɪt. ɛlaɪəs maɪt θɪŋk i nu sɑldəiənz, bʌt pɛɹɪn hæd lɝn ɑn ɪz oʊn ðəɾ oʊnli ə ful tʃɹaɪd tə ɹuɾ aʊɾ ɔl ə hɪz waɪfs sikɹəts. əɹ lɛɾ əɹ noʊ əbaʊt ðoʊz i hæɾ ənɝθt ɔlɹɛɾi.

He managed not to stare, with a little effort. What could be more important than the Queen of Ghealdan? Certain sure, nothing anyone would let him lay hand to. Clearly she wanted to talk with Alliandre without him. With luck, she would tell him why later. With luck, she would tell him all of it. Elyas might think he knew Saldaeans, but Perrin had learned on his own that only a fool tried to root out all of his wife's secrets. Or let her know about those he had unearthed already.

livɪŋ æliændɝ ʃəd noʊ daʊɾ ɪnvɑlv əz mʌtʃ sɛɹəmoʊni əz miɾɪŋ hɝ, bʌɾ i mænədʒd ə kɹɛɾəbəl lɛɡ ən meɪɾ ɪz baʊ, æskɪŋ əɹ pɑɹɾən fəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ɔf, ən ʃi kɝtsid dipli, mɝmɝɪŋ ðəɾ i ɑnɝɾ əɹ tu mʌtʃ, ən ðət wɑz ðæt. ɪksɛp fəɹ dʒɝkɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ət ɡælɛn tə fɑloʊ hɪm. hi daʊɾɪd ðət feɪl wəd sɛn ɪm ɔf ən wɑn ðət wʌn tə steɪ. wʌd ʃi wɑnə tɔk əbaʊɾ əloʊn?

Leaving Alliandre should no doubt involve as much ceremony as meeting her, but he managed a credible leg and made his bow, asking her pardon for going off, and she curtsied deeply, murmuring that he honored her too much, and that was that. Except for jerking his head at Gallenne to follow him. He doubted that Faile would send him off and want that one to stay. What did she want to talk about alone?

aʊtsaɪd, ðə wʌn-aɪd mæn ɡeɪv pɛɹɪn ə klæp ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ ðət wʊɾə stæɡɝɾ ə smɔlɝ mæn. "bɝn mi, aɪv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə ðə laɪk! naʊ aɪ kən seɪ aɪv sin ə tɑvɝən ət wɝk fəɹ tʃɹu. wʌd jə wɑnt wɪð mi?" ən wʌt wɑz i tə seɪ tə ðæt?

Outside, the one-eyed man gave Perrin a clap on the shoulder that would have staggered a smaller man. "Burn me, I've never heard of the like! Now I can say I've seen a ta'veren at work for true. What did you want with me?" And what was he to say to that?

dʒʌs ðɛn, hi hɝd ʃaʊɾɪŋ fɹəm ðə minɝ kæmp, ðə saʊn ʌv ɑɹɡjuɪŋ, laʊɾ ɪnʌf ðət tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn stʊd tə pɪɹ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz, ðoʊ ðə saɪɾ ə ðə hɪl hɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ.

Just then, he heard shouting from the Mayener camp, the sound of arguing, loud enough that Two Rivers men stood to peer through the trees, though the side of the hill hid everything.

"fɝs lɛts si wʌɾ ɔl ðəɾ ɪz əbaʊt," pɛɹɪn ɹɪplaɪd. ðət wəd ɡɪv ɪm taɪm tə θɪŋk. əbaʊt wʌt tə seɪ tə ɡælɛn, ən ʌðɝ θɪŋz.

"First let's see what all that is about," Perrin replied. That would give him time to think. About what to say to Gallenne, and other things.

feɪl weɪɾəd ə fju moʊməns æftɝ pɛɹɪn lɛf bɪfɔɹ tɛlɪŋ ðə sɝvəns ðət ʃi ən ði ʌðɝz wəd si tə ðɛmsɛlvz. meɪaɪɡdɪn wɑz soʊ bɪzi stɛɹɪŋ əɾ æliændɝ ðət lini hæd tə plʌk əɾ əɹ sliv bɪfɔɹ ʃi muvd. ðət wəɾ əv tə bi hændəld leɪɾɝ. sɛɾɪŋ əɹ kʌp daʊn, feɪl fɑloʊd ðə θɹi wɪmən tə ðə dɔɹ ə ðə tɛn əz ɪf hɝiɪŋ ðɛm, bʌt ʃi pɔz ðɛɹ.

Faile waited a few moments after Perrin left before telling the servants that she and the others would see to themselves. Maighdin was so busy staring at Alliandre that Lini had to pluck at her sleeve before she moved. That would have to be handled later. Setting her cup down, Faile followed the three women to the door of the tent as if hurrying them, but she paused there.

pɛɹɪn ən ɡælɛn wɝ stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ ɔf θɹu ðə tʃɹiz təwɔɹd ðə minɝ kæmp. ɡʊd. moʊst ə tʃɑ feɪl wɑz skwɑɾɪŋ nɑt fɑɹ ɔf. kætʃɪŋ pɛɹɪlinz aɪ, ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd loʊ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ weɪst, wɛɹ noʊ wʌn bɪhaɪn əɹ kəd si. ə kwɪk sɝkjəlɝ moʊʃən fɑloʊd baɪ ə klɛntʃt fɪst. ɪmiɾiətli ðə tɛɹənz ən kɛɹhin bɹoʊk əpɑɹɾ ɪn ɡɹups ə tu əɹ θɹi ən spɹɛɾ aʊt. fɑɹ lɛs ɪlæbɹət ðən meɪɾən hæntɔk, tʃɑ feɪlz sɪɡnəlz səfaɪst. ɪn moʊməns ə skæɾɝd ɹɪŋ ə hɝ pipəl hæd sɝaʊndəd ðə tɛnt, əpɛɹənli ət ɹændəm, tɔkɪŋ aɪdli əɹ pleɪɪŋ ət kæts kɹeɪɾəl. bʌt noʊ wʌn wəd kʌm nɪɹɝ ðən twɛnti peɪsɪz wɪθaʊɾ əɹ ɹəsivɪŋ wɔɹnɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə θɹɛʃoʊld.

Perrin and Gallenne were striding off through the trees toward the Mayener camp. Good. Most of Cha Faile was squatting not far off. Catching Parelean's eye, she gestured low in front of her waist, where no one behind her could see. A quick circular motion followed by a clenched fist. Immediately the Tairens and Cairhien broke apart in groups of two or three and spread out. Far less elaborate than Maiden handtalk, Cha Faile's signals sufficed. In moments a scattered ring of her people had surrounded the tent, apparently at random, talking idly or playing at cat's cradle. But no one would come nearer than twenty paces without her receiving warning before they reached the threshold.

ɪt wɑz pɛɹɪn u wɝiɾ əɹ moʊst. ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd sʌmθɪŋ moʊmɛntəs əz sun əz æliændɝ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə flɛʃ, ɪf nɑt wʌt keɪm, bʌɾ i hæd bɪn stʌn baɪ hɝ vaʊ. ɪf i tʊk ɪɾ ɪndə hɪz hɛd tə ɹɪtɝn, tə teɪk ənʌðɝ stæb ət meɪkɪŋ æliændɝ fil kʌmftəɹbəl ɪn əɹ dɪsɪʒən. . . . oʊ, hi dɪd θɪŋk wɪð ɪz hɑɹt wən i ʃəd juz ɪz hɛd. ən wɪð ɪz hɛd wən i ʃəd juz ɪz hɑɹt! ɡɪl pɹɪkt əɹ ət ðə θɔt.

It was Perrin who worried her most. She had expected something momentous as soon as Alliandre appeared in the flesh, if not what came, but he had been stunned by her vow. If he took it into his head to return, to take another stab at making Alliandre feel comfortable in her decision. . . . Oh, he did think with his heart when he should use his head. And with his head when he should use his heart! Guilt pricked her at the thought.

"pəkjuljɝ sɝvəns jə faʊn baɪ ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ɹoʊd," bɹəleɪn sɛɾ ɪn toʊnz ə mɑk sɪmpəθi əɾ əɹ saɪd, ən feɪl ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. ʃi hæd nɑt hɝd ðə wʊmən kʌm ʌp bɪhaɪn hɝ. lini ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ wɔkɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə kɑɹts, lini ʃeɪkɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝ ət meɪaɪɡdɪn, ən bɹəleɪn ʃɪftəɾ əɹ ɡeɪz fɹəm feɪl tə ðɛm. ʃi kɛpt əɹ vɔɪs loʊ, bʌt ðə mɑkɪŋ toʊn ɹɪmeɪnd. "ði oʊldəst ət list simz tə noʊ hɝ duɾiz ɪnstɛɾ ə sɪmpli hævɪŋ hɝɾ əbaʊt ðɛm, bʌɾ ənʊɹə tɛlz mi ðə jʌŋɡəst ɪz ə waɪldɝ. vɛɹi wik, ənʊɹə sɛz, nɛɡlədʒəbəl, bʌt waɪldɝz ɔlweɪz kɑz pɹɑbləmz. ði ʌðɝz wɪl kæɹi teɪlz əbaʊt hɝ, ɪf ðeɪ noʊ, ən sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ʃɪl ɹʌn əweɪ. waɪldɝz ɔlweɪz du, aɪ hɪɹ. ðæts wʌt kʌmz ə pɪkɪŋ ʌp jəɹ meɪdz laɪk stʃɹeɪ dɑɡz."

"Peculiar servants you found by the side of the road," Berelain said in tones of mock sympathy at her side, and Faile gave a start. She had not heard the woman come up behind her. Lini and the others were walking toward the carts, Lini shaking a finger at Maighdin, and Berelain shifted her gaze from Faile to them. She kept her voice low, but the mocking tone remained. "The oldest at least seems to know her duties instead of simply having heard about them, but Annoura tells me the youngest is a wilder. Very weak, Annoura says, negligible, but wilders always cause problems. The others will carry tales about her, if they know, and sooner or later, she will run away. Wilders always do, I hear. That's what comes of picking up your maids like stray dogs."

"ðeɪ sut mi wɛl ɪnʌf," feɪl ɹɪplaɪd kuli. stɪl, ə lɔŋ kɑnvɝseɪʃən wɪð lini wɑz dɛfənətli niɾəd. ə waɪldɝ? ivən ɪf wik, ðət maɪt pɹuv jusfəl. "aɪ ɔlweɪz θɔt jə wɝ fɪt fəɹ haɪɹɪŋ sɝvəns." bɹəleɪn blɪŋkt, ənsɝɾən wʌt ðət mɛnt, ən feɪl kɛɹfəli dɪd nɑt lɛɾ əɹ sæɾəsfækʃən ʃoʊ. tɝnɪŋ əweɪ, ʃi sɛd, "ənʊɹə, wɪl jə meɪk əs pɹaɪvət wɪð ə wɔɹɾ əɡɛns lɪsənɝz?"

"They suit me well enough," Faile replied coolly. Still, a long conversation with Lini was definitely needed. A wilder? Even if weak, that might prove useful. "I always thought you were fit for hiring servants." Berelain blinked, uncertain what that meant, and Faile carefully did not let her satisfaction show. Turning away, she said, "Annoura, will you make us private with a ward against listeners?"

ðəɹ sim lɪɾəl tʃæns ðət siɑnɪɾ əɹ mɑsʊɝi wəd faɪn ɛni ɑpɝtunəɾi tə ivzdʒɹɑp juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ - ʃi wɑz weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ði ɪksploʊʒən wən pɛɹɪn faʊn aʊt dʒʌs haʊ taɪtli ðə waɪz wʌnz hæd ðət pɛɹ hɔltɝd - jɛt ðə waɪz wʌnz ðɛmsɛlvz maɪɾ əv lɝnd. feɪl wɑz ʃʊɹ ɛdʒɹə ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ ɹɪŋɪŋ siɑnɪɾ ən mɑsʊɝi dʒɹaɪ.

There seemed little chance that Seonid or Masuri would find any opportunity to eavesdrop using the Power - she was waiting for the explosion when Perrin found out just how tightly the Wise Ones had that pair haltered - yet the Wise Ones themselves might have learned. Faile was sure Edarra and the others were wringing Seonid and Masuri dry.

ðə ɡɹeɪ sɪstɝz biɾɪd bɹeɪdz klɪk sɔfli əz ʃi nɑɾəd. "ɪɾ ɪz dʌn, leɪɾi feɪl," ʃi sɛd, ən bɹəleɪnz lɪps kəmpɹɛs bɹifli. kwaɪt sæɾɪsfaɪɪŋ. ðə təmɛɹəɾi ʌv meɪkɪŋ ðə pɹɛzənteɪʃənz hɪɹ ɪn feɪlz oʊn tɛnt! ʃi dɪzɝv mɔɹ ðən hævɪŋ sʌmwʌn stɛp bɪtwin əɹ ən əɹ ædvaɪzɝ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz sæɾɪsfaɪɪŋ.

The Gray sister's beaded braids clicked softly as she nodded. "It is done, Lady Faile," she said, and Berelain's lips compressed briefly. Quite satisfying. The temerity of making the presentations here in Faile's own tent! She deserved more than having someone step between her and her advisor, but it was satisfying.

tʃaɪldiʃli sæɾɪsfaɪɪŋ, feɪl ədmɪɾəd, wən ʃi ʃəd bi foʊkəst ɑn ðə mæɾɝ ət hænd. ʃi ɔlmoʊs bɪɾ əɹ lɪp ɪn æɡɹəveɪʃən. ʃi dɪd nɑt daʊɾ əɹ hʌzbənz lʌv, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt tʃɹit bɹəleɪn əz ðə wʊmən dɪzɝvd, ən ðət fɔɹs hɝ, əɡɛnst əɹ wɪl, tə pleɪ ə ɡeɪm wɪð pɛɹɪn tu ɔfən əz ðə ɡeɪmɪŋ bɔɹd. ən ðə pɹaɪz, soʊ bɹəleɪn bɪlivd. ɪf oʊnli pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt səmtaɪmz bɪheɪv əz ɪf i maɪt bi. fɝmli ʃi pʊɾ ɔl ðəɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛd. ðəɹ wɑz ə waɪfs wɝk tə bi dʌn hɪɹ. ðə pɹæktəkəl saɪd.

Childishly satisfying, Faile admitted, when she should be focused on the matter at hand. She almost bit her lip in aggravation. She did not doubt her husband's love, but she could not treat Berelain as the woman deserved, and that forced her, against her will, to play a game with Perrin too often as the gaming board. And the prize, so Berelain believed. If only Perrin did not sometimes behave as if he might be. Firmly she put all that out of her head. There was a wife's work to be done here. The practical side.

æliændɝ ɡlæns θɔtfəli əɾ ənʊɹə wən ə wɔɹd wɑz mɛnʃənd - ʃi hæd tə ɹilaɪz ɪt mɛn sɪɹiəs tɔk - bʌt wʌt ʃi sɛd wɑz "jɔɹ hʌzbən ɪz ə fɔɹməɾəbəl mæn, leɪɾi feɪl. aɪ min noʊ əfɛns wən aɪ seɪ hɪz blʌf ɪkstɪɹiɝ bɪlaɪz ə ʃɹud maɪnd. wɪð ɑmɑdɪʃiə ɑn əɹ dɔɹstɛp, wi ɪn ɡildən pleɪ deɪz deɪmɑɹ ə nəsɛsəɾi, bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk aɪ hæv ɛvɝ bɪn dænst soʊ swɪfli əɹ soʊ dɛfli tə ə dɪsɪʒən əz jəɹ lɔɹd dɪd. ðə hɪn ʌv ə θɹɛt hɪɹ, ə fɹaʊn ðɛɹ. ə vɛɹi fɔɹməɾəbəl mæn."

Alliandre glanced thoughtfully at Annoura when a ward was mentioned - she had to realize it meant serious talk - but what she said was "Your husband is a formidable man, Lady Faile. I mean no offense when I say his bluff exterior belies a shrewd mind. With Amadicia on our doorstep, we in Ghealdan play Daes Dae'mar of necessity, but I do not think I have ever been danced so swiftly or so deftly to a decision as your Lord did. The hint of a threat here, a frown there. A very formidable man."

ðɪs taɪm haɪɾɪŋ əɹ smaɪl tʊk səm ɛfɝɾ ɑn feɪlz pɑɹt. ðiz saʊθlændɝz sɛɾ ə ɡɹeɪt stɔɹ baɪ ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk æliændɝ wəɾ əpɹiʃieɪt lɝnɪŋ ðət pɛɹɪn sɪmpli sɛd wʌɾ i bɪlivd - tu fɹili baɪ hæf, ət taɪmz - ən pipəl wɪð diviəs maɪnz sɔ kælkjəleɪʃən ɪn ɪz ɑnəsti. "hi spɛn səm taɪm ɪn kɛɹhin," ʃi sɛd. lɛɾ æliændɝ meɪk ə ðət wʌt ʃi wʊd. "wi kən spik fɹili hɪɹ, seɪf bɪhaɪn ənʊɹə sədaɪz wɔɹɾɪŋ. ɪts pleɪn jə də nɑt wɑnə ɹɪtɝn tə bɛθɔl jɛt. ɪz jəɹ oʊθ tə pɛɹɪn, ən ɪz tə ju, nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə taɪ hɪm tə ju?" səm hɪɹ ɪn ðə saʊθ hæd pəkjuljɝ aɪdiəz ʌv wʌt fiəlti ɪnteɪld.

This time hiding her smile took some effort on Faile's part. These southlanders set a great store by the Game of Houses, and she did not think Alliandre would appreciate learning that Perrin simply said what he believed - too freely by half, at times - and people with devious minds saw calculation in his honesty. "He spent some time in Cairhien," she said. Let Alliandre make of that what she would. "We can speak freely here, safe behind Annoura Sedai's warding. It is plain you do not want to return to Bethal yet. Is your oath to Perrin, and his to you, not enough to tie him to you?" Some here in the south had peculiar ideas of what fealty entailed.

bɹəleɪn saɪlənli tʊk ə pəzɪʃən tə feɪlz ɹaɪt, ən ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ ənʊɹə dɪd ðə seɪm ɑn əɹ lɛft, soʊ ðəɾ æliændɝ faʊn hɝsɛlf kənfɹʌntəd baɪ ɔl θɹi. ɪt sɝpɹaɪz feɪl ðət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ fɛl ɪn wɪð əɹ plæn wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz - wɪθaʊt daʊɾ ənʊɹə hæɾ əɹ oʊn ɹizənz, ən feɪl wʊɾə ɡɪvən ə pɹɪɾi tə noʊ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ - bʌt ʃi fɛl noʊ sɝpɹaɪz ðət bɹəleɪn dɪd soʊ. wʌn kæʒəwəl mɑkɪŋ sɛntəns kəd spɔɪl ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ɪspɛʃli əbaʊt pɛɹɪnz skɪl ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪt ɡeɪm, jɛt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wəd nɑt kʌm. ɪn ə weɪ, ðəɾ ɪɹəteɪɾəd hɝ. wʌns ʃi hæd dɪspaɪz bɹəleɪn; ʃi stɪl heɪɾəd hɝ, dip ən hɑt, bʌt ɡɹʌdʒɪŋ ɹɪspɛk hæd ɹipleɪs kəntɛmpt. ðə wʊmən nu wən ðɛɹ "ɡeɪm" hæd tə bi pʊɾ əsaɪd. ɪf nɑt fəɹ pɛɹɪn, feɪl θɔt ʃi maɪɾ æktʃəli  hæv laɪk hɝ! bɹifli, tə ɪkstɪŋɡwɪʃ ðət heɪtfəl θɔt, ʃi pɪktʃɝd hɝsɛlf ʃeɪvɪŋ bɹəleɪn bɔld. ʃi wɑz ə dʒeɪɾ ən ə tʃɹʌl! ən nɑt sʌmθɪŋ feɪl kəɾ əlaʊ tə daɪvɝɾ əɹ naʊ.

Berelain silently took a position to Faile's right, and a moment later Annoura did the same on her left, so that Alliandre found herself confronted by all three. It surprised Faile that the Aes Sedai fell in with her plan without knowing what it was - without doubt Annoura had her own reasons, and Faile would have given a pretty to know what they were - but she felt no surprise that Berelain did so. One casual mocking sentence could spoil everything, especially about Perrin's skill in the Great Game, yet she was sure it would not come. In a way, that irritated her. Once she had despised Berelain; she still hated her, deep and hot, but grudging respect had replaced contempt. The woman knew when their "game" had to be put aside. If not for Perrin, Faile thought she might actually have liked her! Briefly, to extinguish that hateful thought, she pictured herself shaving Berelain bald. She was a jade and a trull! And not something Faile could allow to divert her now.

æliændɝ stʌɾid itʃ ə ðə wɪmən ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ ɪn tɝn, bʌt ʃi ɡeɪv noʊ ɛvəɾəns ə nɝvəsnəs. teɪkɪŋ ʌp əɹ waɪnkʌp əɡɛn, ʃi sɪp kæʒəwəli ən spoʊk wɪð saɪz ən ɹufəl smaɪlz əz ɪf əɹ wɝdz wɝ nɑt ɹɪli əz ɪmpɔɹɾənt əz ðeɪ saʊndəd. "aɪ min tə kip maɪ oʊθ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt jə mʌst ʌndɝstæn ðəɾ aɪ hoʊp fəɹ mɔɹ. wʌns jəɹ hʌzbənd ɡoʊz, aɪm lɛft əz aɪ wɑz. wɝs, pɝhæps, əntɪl səm tænʒəbəl eɪd kʌmz fɹəm ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, blɛsɪd bi hɪz neɪm ɪn ðə laɪt. ðə pɹɑfət kəd ɹuən bɛθɔl əɹ ivən dʒəhænə ɪtsɛlf əz i dɪd sæmɝə, ən aɪ kænɑt stɑp hɪm. ən ɪf i sʌmhaʊ lɝnz ə maɪ oʊθ. . . . hi sɛz hiz kʌm tə ʃoʊ əs haʊ tə sɝv ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɪn ðə laɪt, bʌt hiz ðə wʌn u ʃoʊz ðət weɪ, ən aɪ kænɑt θɪŋk hɪl bi plizd wɪð ɛniwʌn u faɪnz ənʌðɝ."

Alliandre studied each of the women in front of her in turn, but she gave no evidence of nervousness. Taking up her winecup again, she sipped casually and spoke with sighs and rueful smiles as if her words were not really as important as they sounded. "I mean to keep my oath, of course, but you must understand that I hoped for more. Once your husband goes, I am left as I was. Worse, perhaps, until some tangible aid comes from the Lord Dragon, blessed be his name in the Light. The Prophet could ruin Bethal or even Jehannah itself as he did Samara, and I cannot stop him. And if he somehow learns of my oath. . . . He says he has come to show us how to serve the Lord Dragon in the Light, but he is the one who shows that way, and I cannot think he will be pleased with anyone who finds another."

"ɪɾ ɪz ɡʊd ðət jəl kip jəɹ oʊθ," feɪl toʊld əɹ dʒɹaɪli. "ɪf jə wɑn mɔɹ ə maɪ hʌzbənd, pɝhæps jə ʃəd də mɔɹ. pɝhæps jə ʃəɾ əkʌmpəni hɪm wən i ɡoʊz saʊθ tə mit ðə pɹɑfət. ʌv kɔɹs, jəl wɑn jəɹ oʊn soʊlʒɝz wɪð ju, bʌɾ aɪ sədʒɛs noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðə fɝst əz wɪð hɝ. ʃæl wi sɪt?" teɪkɪŋ ðə tʃɛɹ pɛɹɪn hæd veɪkeɪɾəd, ʃi moʊʃən bɹəleɪn ən ənʊɹə tə ðoʊz ɑn iðɝ saɪd, ən oʊnli ðən dʒɛstʃɝd təwɔɹɾ ənʌðɝ fəɹ æliændɝ.

"It is good that you will keep your oath," Faile told her dryly. "If you want more of my husband, perhaps you should do more. Perhaps you should accompany him when he goes south to meet the Prophet. Of course, you will want your own soldiers with you, but I suggest no more than the First has with her. Shall we sit?" Taking the chair Perrin had vacated, she motioned Berelain and Annoura to those on either side, and only then gestured toward another for Alliandre.

ðə kwin sæt sloʊli, stɛɹɪŋ waɪd-aɪɾ ət feɪl, nɑt nɝvəs bʌɾ əstaʊndɪd. "waɪ ɪn ðə laɪt wəɾ aɪ də ðæt?" ʃi ɪkskleɪmd. "leɪɾi feɪl, ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt wɪl teɪk ɛni ɪkskjus tə ɪnkɹis ðɛɹ dɛpɹədeɪʃənz ɪn ɡildən, ən kɪŋ eɪlɹən maɪt dɪsaɪd tə sɛn ən ɑɹmi nɔɹθ əz wɛl. ɪts ɪmpɑsəbəl!"

The Queen sat slowly, staring wide-eyed at Faile, not nervous but astounded. "Why in the Light would I do that?" she exclaimed. "Lady Faile, the Children of the Light will take any excuse to increase their depredations in Ghealdan, and King Ailron might decide to send an army north as well. It's impossible!"

"ðə waɪf ə jəɹ lidʒ lɔɹɾ æsks ɪɾ ə ju, æliændɝ," feɪl sɛd fɝmli.

"The wife of your liege lord asks it of you, Alliandre," Faile said firmly.

ɪt dɪdn sim pɑsəbəl ðəɾ æliændɝz aɪz kəd waɪɾən fɑɹðɝ, jɛt ðeɪ dɪd. ʃi lʊk tə ənʊɹə ən faʊn oʊnli ɪmpɝɾɝbəbəl ɛɛs sədaɪ kɑm lʊkɪŋ bæk. "ʌv kɔɹs," ʃi sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt. hɝ vɔɪs wɑz hɑloʊ. swɑloʊɪŋ, ʃi æɾəd, "ʌv kɔɹs, əl də əz jə . . . æsk . . . maɪ leɪɾi."

It didn't seem possible that Alliandre's eyes could widen farther, yet they did. She looked to Annoura and found only imperturbable Aes Sedai calm looking back. "Of course," she said after a moment. Her voice was hollow. Swallowing, she added, "Of course, I will do as you . . . ask . . . my Lady."

feɪl hɪɾ əɹ ɹɪlif bɪhaɪn ə ɡɹeɪʃəs nɑɾ ʌv æksɛptəns. ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ æliændɝ tə bɔk. ðəɾ æliændɝ kəd swɛɹ fiəlti wɪθaʊt ɹilaɪzɪŋ wʌt ðət mɛnt - ðət ʃi fɛlt ɪt nɛsəsɛɹi tə seɪ ðət ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə kip əɹ oʊθ! - hæɾ oʊnli kənfɝm feɪlz bɪlif ðət ðə wʊmən kəd nɑt bi lɛf bɪhaɪnd. baɪ ɔl əkaʊns, æliændɝ hæd dɛlt wɪð mæsimə baɪ jildɪŋ tə hɪm. sloʊli, tə bi ʃʊɹ, wɪð lɪɾəl ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs ən oʊnli wən ʃi hæd tə, jɛt səbmɪʃən kəd bɪkʌm ə hæbət. bæk ɪn bɛθɔl, wɪð nʌθɪŋ vɪzəbəl tʃeɪnʒd, haʊ sun bɪfɔɹ ʃi wəd dɪsaɪd tə hɛdʒ wɪð ə wɔɹnɪŋ tə mæsimə? ʃi hæd fɛl ðə weɪɾ ə hɝ oʊθ; naʊ feɪl kəd laɪɾən əɹ bɝɾən.

Faile hid her relief behind a gracious nod of acceptance. She had expected Alliandre to balk. That Alliandre could swear fealty without realizing what that meant - that she felt it necessary to say that she intended to keep her oath! - had only confirmed Faile's belief that the woman could not be left behind. By all accounts, Alliandre had dealt with Masema by yielding to him. Slowly, to be sure, with little other choice and only when she had to, yet submission could become a habit. Back in Bethal, with nothing visible changed, how soon before she would decide to hedge with a warning to Masema? She had felt the weight of her oath; now Faile could lighten her burden.

"aɪ æm hæpi ðət jəl bi əkʌmpəniɪŋ ʌs," ʃi sɛd wɔɹmli. ən tʃɹuli, ʃi wɑz. "maɪ hʌzbən dʌz nɑt fɝɡɛt ðoʊz u ɹɛndɝ ɪm sɝvəs. wʌn sətʃ sɝvəs wəd bi tə ɹaɪt tə jəɹ noʊbəlz, tɛlɪŋ əm ðəɾ ə mæn ɪn ðə saʊθ əz ɹeɪz ðə bænɝ ə meɪnɛðɝən." bɹəleɪnz hɛd hæf dʒɝkt ɝaʊn ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, ən ənʊɹə wɛn soʊ fɑɹ əz tə blɪŋk.

"I am happy that you will be accompanying us," she said warmly. And truly, she was. "My husband does not forget those who render him service. One such service would be to write to your nobles, telling them that a man in the south has raised the banner of Manetheren." Berelain's head half jerked around in surprise, and Annoura went so far as to blink.

"maɪ leɪɾi," æliændɝ sɛɾ ɝdʒənli, "hæf ə ðɛm wɪl sɛnd wɝd tə ðə pɹɑfəɾ əz sun əz ðeɪ ɹəsiv maɪ lɛɾɝ. ðeɪ ɑɹ tɛɹəfaɪɾ ə hɪm, ən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn noʊz wʌɾ i maɪt du." dʒʌs ðə ɹɪspɑns feɪl hæd hoʊp fɔɹ.

"My Lady," Alliandre said urgently, "half of them will send word to the Prophet as soon as they receive my letter. They are terrified of him, and the Light alone knows what he might do." Just the response Faile had hoped for.

"wɪtʃ ɪz waɪ jəl ɹaɪɾ ɪm ɔlsoʊ, seɪɪŋ ðət juv ɡæðɝɾ ə fju soʊlʒɝz tə dil wɪð ðɪs mæn pɝsənəli. æftɝ ɔl, ðə pɹɑfəɾ ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɪz tu ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə hæv tə tɝn ɪz ətɛnʃən tə sətʃ ə maɪnɝ mæɾɝ."

"Which is why you will write him also, saying that you have gathered a few soldiers to deal with this man personally. After all, the Prophet of the Lord Dragon is too important to have to turn his attention to such a minor matter."

"vɛɹi ɡʊd," ənʊɹə mɝmɝd. "noʊ wʌn wɪl noʊ hu ɪz hu."

"Very good," Annoura murmured. "No one will know who is who."

bɹəleɪn læft ɪn dɪlaɪɾəd əpɹuvəl, bɝn hɝ!

Berelain laughed in delighted approval, burn her!

"maɪ leɪɾi," æliændɝ bɹiðd, "aɪ sɛd ðət maɪ lɔɹd pɛɹɪn ɪz fɔɹməɾəbəl. meɪ aɪ æd ðəɾ ɪz waɪf ɪz ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz fɔɹməɾəbəl?"

"My Lady," Alliandre breathed, "I said that my Lord Perrin is formidable. May I add that his wife is every bit as formidable?"

feɪl tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə bæsk tu vɪzəbli. naʊ ʃi hæd tə sɛnd wɝd tə hɝ pipəl ɪn bɛθɔl. ɪn ə weɪ, ʃi ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd ðæt. ɪkspleɪnɪŋ tə pɛɹɪn wʊɾə bɪn mɔɹ ðən dɪfəkəlt, bʌɾ ivən i kəd nɑɾ əv kɛpt ɪz tɛmpɝ ɪf ʃi hæd kɪdnæp ðə kwin ʌv ɡildən.

Faile tried not to bask too visibly. Now she had to send word to her people in Bethal. In a way, she regretted that. Explaining to Perrin would have been more than difficult, but even he could not have kept his temper if she had kidnapped the Queen of Ghealdan.

moʊst ə ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz əpɪɹd tə bi ɡæðɝɾ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðɛɹ kæmp, sɝaʊndɪŋ tɛn ə ðɛɹ nʌmbɝ ɑn hɔɹsbæk. ði æbsəns ə lænsɪz sɛd ðə ɹaɪɾɝz wɝ skaʊts. ðə mɛn əfʊt mɪld ən pʊʃt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛt kloʊsɝ. pɛɹɪn θɔɾ i hɝd θʌndɝ əɡɛn, nɑt soʊ dɪstənt, bʌɾ ɪɾ oʊnli tʌtʃt ði ɛdʒ ʌv əwɛɹnəs.

Most of the Winged Guards appeared to be gathered on the edge of their camp, surrounding ten of their number on horseback. The absence of lances said the riders were scouts. The men afoot milled and pushed, trying to get closer. Perrin thought he heard thunder again, not so distant, but it only touched the edge of awareness.

əz i pɹipɛɹd tə pʊʃ ɪz weɪ θɹu, ɡælɛn ɹɔɹd, "meɪk weɪ, jə meɪnʒi haʊnz!" hɛdz wɪpt ɝaʊnd, ən mɛn ɹɪəl saɪdweɪz ɪn ðə mæs, oʊpənɪŋ ə nɛɹoʊ pæθ. pɛɹɪn wʌndɝd wʌt wəd hæpən ɪf i kɔl ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn meɪnʒi haʊnz. pɹɑbli ɝn ɪm ə pʌntʃ ɪn ðə noʊz. ɪt maɪt bi wɝθ ə tʃɹaɪ.

As he prepared to push his way through, Gallenne roared, "Make way, you mangy hounds!" Heads whipped around, and men wriggled sideways in the mass, opening a narrow path. Perrin wondered what would happen if he called the Two Rivers men mangy hounds. Probably earn him a punch in the nose. It might be worth a try.

nɹɛl ən ði ʌðɝ ɔfəsɝz wɝ wɪð ðə skaʊts. soʊ wɝ sɛvən mɛn əfʊt wɪð ðɛɹ hænz taɪd bɪhaɪn əm ən lɛd ɹoʊps ɝaʊn ðɛɹ nɛks, ɔl ʃʌflɪŋ ðɛɹ fiɾ ən hʌntʃɪŋ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz ən skaʊlɪŋ dɪfaɪəns əɹ fɪɹ əɹ boʊθ. ðɛɹ kloʊðz wɝ stɪf wɪð oʊl fɪlθ, ðoʊ səm hæd bɪn faɪn wʌns. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ðeɪ smɛl hɛvəli ʌv wʊdzmoʊk. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, səm ə ðə maʊntəd soʊlʒɝz hæd sʊɾ ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz, ən wʌn əɹ tu sim tə bi nɝsɪŋ bɝnz. ɛɹæm stʊd stʌɾiɪŋ ðə pɹɪznɝz, fɹaʊnɪŋ slaɪtli.

Nurelle and the other officers were with the scouts. So were seven men afoot with their hands tied behind them and lead ropes around their necks, all shuffling their feet and hunching their shoulders and scowling defiance or fear or both. Their clothes were stiff with old filth, though some had been fine once. Strangely, they smelled heavily of woodsmoke. For that matter, some of the mounted soldiers had soot on their faces, and one or two seemed to be nursing burns. Aram stood studying the prisoners, frowning slightly.

ɡælɛn tʊk ə stæns wɪð ɪz fiɾ əpɑɹɾ ən fɪsts ɑn ɪz hɪps, hɪz wʌn aɪ duɪŋ əz ɡʊɾ ə dʒɑb ʌv ɡlɛɹɪŋ əz moʊs mɛnz tu. "wʌt hæpənd?" hi dɪmændəd. "maɪ skaʊts ɑɹ səpoʊz tə bɹɪŋ bæk ɪnfɝmeɪʃən, nɑt ɹæɡ-pɪkɝz!"

Gallenne took a stance with his feet apart and fists on his hips, his one eye doing as good a job of glaring as most men's two. "What happened?" he demanded. "My scouts are supposed to bring back information, not rag-pickers!"

"aɪ wɪl lɛɾ ɔɹɾɪs ɹipɔɹt, maɪ lɔɹd," nɹɛl sɛd. "hi wɑz ðɛɹ. skwɑd-mæn ɔɹɾɪs!"

"I will let Ortis report, my Lord," Nurelle said. "He was there. Squad-man Ortis!"

ə soʊlʒɝ ɪn ɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz skɹæmbəl daʊn fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl tə baʊ, ɡɔntələɾəd hæn pɹɛs tə hɑɹt. hɪz hɛlmət wɑz pleɪn, wɪθaʊt ðə θɪn plumz ən wɪŋz ðət wɝ wɝkt ɪn ðə saɪdz ʌv ɔfəsɝz' hɛlməts. bɪniθ ðə ɹɪm, ə lɪvɪd bɝn stʊɾ aʊt pleɪnli ɑn ɪz feɪs. ði ʌðɝ tʃik hæɾ ə skɑɹ ðət pʊld ʌp ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz maʊθ. "maɪ lɔɹd ɡælɛn, maɪ lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹə," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə ɡɹævəli vɔɪs. "wi keɪm ɑn ðiz tɝnəp-iɾɝz əbaʊt tu liɡz tə ðə wɛst, maɪ lɔɹdz. bɝnɪŋ ə fɑɹm, wɪð ðə fɑɹm foʊk ɪnsaɪd. ə wʊmən tʃɹaɪd tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə wɪndoʊ, ən wʌn ə ðiz skʌm bæʃt əɹ hɛɾ ɪn. noʊɪŋ haʊ lɔɹɾ eɪbɑɹə filz, wi pʊɾ ə stɑp tə ɪt. wi wɝ tu leɪt tə seɪv ɛnibəɾi, bʌt wi kɑt ðiz sɛvən. ðə ɹɛst ɡɑɾ əweɪ."

A soldier in his middle years scrambled down from his saddle to bow, gauntleted hand pressed to heart. His helmet was plain, without the thin plumes and wings that were worked in the sides of officers' helmets. Beneath the rim, a livid burn stood out plainly on his face. The other cheek had a scar that pulled up the corner of his mouth. "My Lord Gallenne, my Lord Aybara," he said in a gravelly voice. "We came on these turnip-eaters about two leagues to the west, my Lords. Burning a farm, with the farm folk inside. A woman tried to get out a window, and one of these scum bashed her head in. Knowing how Lord Aybara feels, we put a stop to it. We were too late to save anybody, but we caught these seven. The rest got away."

"pipəl ɑɹ ɔfən tɛmptəd tə slaɪd bæk ɪndə ðə ʃædoʊ," wʌn ə ðə pɹɪznɝz sɛd sʌɾənli. "ðeɪ mʌs bi ɹimaɪndəɾ ə ðə kɑst." ə tɔl, lin mæn wɪð ə steɪtli ɛɹ, hɪz vɔɪs wɑz smuð ən ɛdʒəkeɪɾəd, bʌɾ ɪz koʊt wɑz əz dɝɾi əz ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz, ən i hæd nɑt ʃeɪvd ɪn tu əɹ θɹi deɪz. ðə pɹɑfət dɪd nɑt sim tə əpɹuv ʌv weɪstɪŋ taɪm ɑn θɪŋz laɪk ɹeɪzɝz. əɹ wɑʃɪŋ. wɪð ɪz hænz baʊn ən ə ɹoʊp ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk, hi ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ ɪz kæptɝz wɪθaʊt ðə lis bɪɾ ə fɪɹ. hi wɑz ɔl supɝsɪliəs dɪfaɪəns. "jɔɹ soʊlʒɝz də nɑɾ ɪmpɹɛs mi," hi sɛd. "ðə pɹɑfəɾ ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, blɛsɪd bi hɪz neɪm ɪn ðə laɪt, hæz dɪstʃɹɔɪd ɡɹeɪɾɝ ɑɹmiz baɪ fɑɹ ðən jəɹ tæɡ ɛnd. jə meɪ kɪl ʌs, bʌt wɪl bi əvɛnʒd wən ðə pɹɑfət spɪlz jəɹ blʌɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. nʌn ə jəl sɝvaɪv əs lɔŋ. hɪl tʃɹaɪəmf ɪn faɪɝ ən ɪn blʌd." hi fɪnɪʃt ɑn ə ɹɪŋɪŋ toʊn, hɪz bæk stʃɹeɪɾ əz ən aɪɝn ɹɑd. mɝmɝz ɹæn θɹu ðə lɪsnɪŋ soʊlʒɝz. ðeɪ nu vɛɹi wɛl ðət mæsimə hæd dɪstʃɹɔɪd lɑɹdʒɝ ɑɹmiz ðən ðɛɹz.

"People are often tempted to slide back into the Shadow," one of the prisoners said suddenly. "They must be reminded of the cost." A tall, lean man with a stately air, his voice was smooth and educated, but his coat was as dirty as any of the others, and he had not shaved in two or three days. The Prophet did not seem to approve of wasting time on things like razors. Or washing. With his hands bound and a rope around his neck, he glared at his captors without the least bit of fear. He was all supercilious defiance. "Your soldiers do not impress me," he said. "The Prophet of the Lord Dragon, blessed be his name in the Light, has destroyed greater armies by far than your tag end. You may kill us, but we will be avenged when the Prophet spills your blood on the ground. None of you will survive us long. He will triumph in fire and in blood." He finished on a ringing tone, his back straight as an iron rod. Murmurs ran through the listening soldiers. They knew very well that Masema had destroyed larger armies than theirs.

"hæŋ ðɛm," pɛɹɪn sɛd. əɡɛn, hi hɝd ðət θʌndɝ.

"Hang them," Perrin said. Again, he heard that thunder.

hævɪŋ ɡɪvən ði ɔɹɾɝ, hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf wɑtʃ. dɪspaɪt ðə mɝmɝz, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ læk ə ɹɛɾi hænz. səm ə ðə pɹɪznɝz bɪɡæn tə wip əz ðɛɹ lɛd ɹoʊps wɝ θɹoʊn oʊvɝ tʃɹi lɪmz. ə wʌns-fæt mæn huz wɑɾəlz hʌŋ ɪn foʊlz ʃaʊɾəd ðəɾ i ɹɪpɛntɪd, ðəɾ i wəd sɝv ɛni mæstɝ ðeɪ neɪmd. ə bɔld-hɛɾəd fɛloʊ hu lʊkt əz tʌf əz læmɡwɪn θɹæʃt ən skɹimd əntɪl ðə ɹoʊp kʌɾ ɔf ɪz haʊlz. oʊnli ðə smuð-vɔɪs mæn dɪd nɑt kɪk əɹ faɪt, ivən wən ðə nus dʒɹu taɪɾ ɑn ɪz nɛk. tə ði ɛn i ɡlɛɹd dɪfaɪəns.

Having given the order, he made himself watch. Despite the murmurs, there was no lack of ready hands. Some of the prisoners began to weep as their lead ropes were thrown over tree limbs. A once-fat man whose wattles hung in folds shouted that he repented, that he would serve any master they named. A bald-headed fellow who looked as tough as Lamgwin thrashed and screamed until the rope cut off his howls. Only the smooth-voiced man did not kick or fight, even when the noose drew tight on his neck. To the end he glared defiance.

"æt list wʌn ə ðɛm nu haʊ tə daɪ," ɡælɛn ɡɹaʊld əz ðə læs bɑɾi wɛn lɪmp. hi fɹaʊn ət ðə mɛn dɛkɝeɪɾɪŋ ðə tʃɹiz əz ɪf ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ ðeɪ hæd nɑt pʊɾ ʌp mɔɹ faɪt.

"At least one of them knew how to die," Gallenne growled as the last body went limp. He frowned at the men decorating the trees as if regretting they had not put up more fight.

"ɪf ðoʊz pipəl wɝ sɝvɪŋ ðə ʃædoʊ," ɛɹæm bɪɡæn, ðən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "fɝɡɪv mi, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn, bʌt wɪl ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən əpɹuv ə ðɪs?"

"If those people were serving the Shadow," Aram began, then hesitated. "Forgive me, Lord Perrin, but will the Lord Dragon approve of this?"

pɛɹɪn ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, əɡæst. "laɪt, ɛɹæm, jə hɝd wʌt ðeɪ dɪd! ɹænd wʊɾəv pʊt ðə ɹoʊps ɑn ðɛɹ nɛks hɪmsɛlf!" hi θɔt ɹænd wəd hæv, hoʊpt i wəd hæv. ɹænd wɑz fɪkst ɑn wɛldɪŋ ðə neɪʃənz təɡɛðɝ bɪfɔɹ ðə læs bæɾəl, ən i hæd dʌn lɪɾəl kaʊntɪŋ ə kɑs tə də soʊ.

Perrin gave a start and stared at him, aghast. "Light, Aram, you heard what they did! Rand would've put the ropes on their necks himself!" He thought Rand would have, hoped he would have. Rand was fixed on welding the nations together before the Last Battle, and he had done little counting of cost to do so.

mɛnz hɛdz dʒɝkt ʌp əz θʌndɝ pild laʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɔl tə hɪɹ, ðən kloʊsɝ, ən əɡɛn kloʊsɝ stɪl. ə wɪnd ɡʌstɪd, fɛl, ɹoʊz əɡɛn, tʌɡɪŋ pɛɹɪnz koʊɾ əz ɪt slæʃt ðɪs weɪ ən ðæt. laɪtnɪŋ fɔɹkt ɪn ə klaʊdləs skaɪ. ɪn ðə minɝ kæmp, hɔɹsəz wɪniɾ ən ɹɪɹɾ ət ðɛɹ taɪz. θʌndɝ tɑld ɹɪpiɾɪdli, ən laɪtnɪŋ ɹɪθd ɪn sɪlvɝ-blu sneɪks, ən bɪniθ ə bɝnɪŋ sʌn, ɹeɪn fɛl, fæt skæɾɝd dʒɹɑps ðət splæʃt faʊntənz ə dʌst wɛɹ ðeɪ hɪt bɛɹ ɡɹaʊnd. pɛɹɪn waɪpt wʌn fɹəm ɪz tʃik ən pɪɹɾ ət dæmp fɪŋɡɝz ɪn əmeɪzmənt.

Men's heads jerked up as thunder pealed loud enough for all to hear, then closer, and again closer still. A wind gusted, fell, rose again, tugging Perrin's coat as it slashed this way and that. Lightning forked in a cloudless sky. In the Mayener camp, horses whinnied and reared at their ties. Thunder tolled repeatedly, and lightning writhed in silver-blue snakes, and beneath a burning sun, rain fell, fat scattered drops that splashed fountains of dust where they hit bare ground. Perrin wiped one from his cheek and peered at damp fingers in amazement.

ɪn moʊməns ðə stɔɹm wɑz ɡɔn, θʌndɝ ən laɪtnɪŋ ɹoʊlɪŋ ɑn istwɝd. θɝsti ɡɹaʊn əbzɔɹb ðə ɹeɪndʒɹɑps ðət hæd fɔlən, ðə sʌn beɪkt əz fɪɹsli əz ɛvɝ, ən oʊnli flɪkɝɪŋ laɪts ɪn ðə skaɪ ən feɪɾɪŋ bumz sɛd ðəɾ ɛniθɪŋ hæd hæpənd. soʊlʒɝz stɛɹɾ əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ ənsɝteɪnli. ɡælɛn pɹaɪɾ ɪz fɪŋɡɝz fɹəm ðə hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹd wɪð ən ɑbviəs ɛfɝt.

In moments the storm was gone, thunder and lightning rolling on eastward. Thirsty ground absorbed the raindrops that had fallen, the sun baked as fiercely as ever, and only flickering lights in the sky and fading booms said that anything had happened. Soldiers stared at each other uncertainly. Gallenne pried his fingers from the hilt of his sword with an obvious effort.

"ðɪs . . . ðɪs kæn bi ðə dɑɹk wʌnz wɝk," ɛɹæm sɛd, ən flɪntʃt. noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ sin ə nætʃɹəl stɔɹm laɪk ðæt. "ɪt minz ðə wɛðɝ ɪz tʃeɪnʒɪŋ, dʌzn ɪt, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn? ðə wɛðɝ ɪz gɑnə bi ɹaɪɾ əɡɛn?"

"This . . . this can't be the Dark One's work," Aram said, and flinched. No one had ever seen a natural storm like that. "It means the weather is changing, doesn't it, Lord Perrin? The weather is going to be right again?"

pɛɹɪn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə tɛl ðə mæn nɑt tə kɔl ɪm ðæt, bʌɾ i kloʊzd ɪɾ əɡɛn wɪð ə saɪ. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ," hi sɛd. wʌt wɑz ɪt ɡɔl hæd sɛd? "ɛvɹiθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒəz, ɛɹæm." hi hæd dʒʌs nɛvɝ θɔt ðəɾ i wəɾ əv tə tʃeɪnʒ, tu.

Perrin opened his mouth to tell the man not to call him that, but he closed it again with a sigh. "I don't know," he said. What was it Gaul had said? "Everything changes, Aram." He had just never thought that he would have to change, too.


tʃæptɝ ɪlɛvən


CHAPTER 11

kwɛstʃənz ən ən oʊθ


Questions and an Oath

ði ɛɹ ɪn ðə hjudʒ steɪbəl smɛld ʌv oʊl heɪ ən hɔɹs dʌŋ. ən blʌd, ən bɝn flɛʃ. wɪð ɔl ðə dɔɹz kloʊzd, ði ɛɹ fɛl θɪk. tu læntɝnz ɡeɪv lɪɾəl laɪt, ən ʃædoʊz fɪl moʊst ə ði ɪntɪɹiɝ. ɪn ðə lɔŋ ɹoʊz ə stɔlz, hɔɹsəz wɪkɝd nɝvəsli. ðə mæn hæŋɪŋ baɪ hɪz ɹɪsts fɹəm ə ɹuf bim ɡeɪv ə loʊ moʊn, ðən ə ɹæɡəd kɑf. hɪz hɛd fɛl daʊn ɑn ɪz tʃɛst. hi wɑz ə tɔl mæn, wɛl-mʌsəld, ɪf ɹæðɝ ðə wɝs fəɹ wɛɹ.

The air in the huge stable smelled of old hay and horse dung. And blood, and burned flesh. With all the doors closed, the air felt thick. Two lanterns gave little light, and shadows filled most of the interior. In the long rows of stalls, horses whickered nervously. The man hanging by his wrists from a roof beam gave a low moan, then a ragged cough. His head fell down on his chest. He was a tall man, well-muscled, if rather the worse for wear.

əbɹʌpli sɪvænə ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɪz tʃɛs noʊ lɔŋɡɝ muvd. ðə dʒɛm-stʌɾɪd ɹɪŋz ɑn əɹ fɪŋɡɝz ɡlɪɾɝd ɹɛɾ ən ɡɹin əz ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd kɝtli tə ɹiɑli.

Abruptly Sevanna realized that his chest no longer moved. The gem-studded rings on her fingers glittered red and green as she gestured curtly to Rhiale.

ðə fleɪm-hɛɹd wʊmən pʊʃt ðə mænz hɛɾ ʌp ən θʌm bæk wʌn aɪləd, ðən pɹɛst ən ɪɹ tə hɪz tʃɛst, kɛɹləs ə ðə stɪl-smoʊldɝɪŋ splɪntɝz ðət pɛpɝd hɪm. wɪð ə saʊn ə dɪsɡʌst, ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd. "hi ɪz dɛd. wi ʃʊɾə lɛf ðɪs tə ðə meɪɾənz, sɪvænə, əɹ ðə blæk aɪz. aɪ də nɑt daʊt wi kɪld ɪm baɪ ɪɡnɝəns."

The flame-haired woman pushed the man's head up and thumbed back one eyelid, then pressed an ear to his chest, careless of the still-smoldering splinters that peppered him. With a sound of disgust, she straightened. "He is dead. We should have left this to the Maidens, Sevanna, or the Black Eyes. I do not doubt we killed him by ignorance."

sɪvænəz maʊθ taɪɾənd, ən ʃi ʃɪftəɾ əɹ ʃɔl ɪn ə klæɾɝ ə bɹeɪslɪts. ðeɪ ɹæn nɪɹli tə hɝ ɛlboʊz, ə noʊɾəsəbəl weɪɾ ɪn ɡoʊld ən aɪvɝi ən dʒɛmz, jɛt ʃi wʊɾə wɔɹn ɛvɹi wʌn ʃi oʊn ɪf ʃi kʊd. nʌn ə ði ʌðɝ wɪmən sɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ. pʊɾɪŋ pɹɪznɝz tə ðə kwɛstʃən wɑz nɑt ðə wɝk ʌv waɪz wʌnz, bʌt ɹiɑli nu waɪ ðeɪ hæd tə də ðɪs ðɛmsɛlvz. ðə loʊn sɝvaɪvɝ ə tɛn maʊntəd mɛn u θɔt ðeɪ kəd dɪfit twɛnti meɪɾənz kəz ðeɪ ɹoʊd hɔɹsəz, ðə mæn hæɾ ɔlsoʊ bɪn ðə fɝst sintʃæn kæptʃɝɾ ɪn ðə tɛn deɪz sɪns ðɛɹ ɝaɪvəl ɪn ðɪs lænd.

Sevanna's mouth tightened, and she shifted her shawl in a clatter of bracelets. They ran nearly to her elbows, a noticeable weight in gold and ivory and gems, yet she would have worn every one she owned if she could. None of the other women said anything. Putting prisoners to the question was not the work of Wise Ones, but Rhiale knew why they had to do this themselves. The lone survivor of ten mounted men who thought they could defeat twenty Maidens because they rode horses, the man had also been the first Seanchan captured in the ten days since their arrival in this land.

"hi wʊɾə lɪvd ɪf i hæd nɑt fɔt ðə peɪn soʊ hɑɹd, ɹiɑli," sʌmɛɝɪn sɛd faɪnəli, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd. "ə stʃɹɔŋ mæn fəɹ ə wɛtləndɝ, bʌɾ i kəd nɑɾ æksɛpt peɪn. stɪl, hi toʊld əs mʌtʃ."

"He would have lived if he had not fought the pain so hard, Rhiale," Someryn said finally, shaking her head. "A strong man for a wetlander, but he could not accept pain. Still, he told us much."

sɪvænə aɪɾ əɹ saɪdweɪz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə si wɛðɝ ʃi hɪd sɑɹkæzəm. əz tɔl əz moʊs mɛn, sʌmɛɝɪn wɔɹ mɔɹ bɹeɪslɪts ən nɛkləsɪz ðən ɛni wʊmən ðəɹ ɪksɛp sɪvænə hɝsɛlf, leɪɝz ə faɪɝdʒɹɑps ən ɛmɹəlz, ɹubiz ən sæfaɪɝz, ɔlmoʊs kənsilɪŋ ə tu-fʊl bʊzəm ðəɾ ʌðɝwaɪz wʊɾə bɪn hæf bɛɹd wɪð əɹ blaʊs əndʌn ɔlmoʊs tə hɝ skɝt. hɝ ʃɔl, taɪɾ ɝaʊn əɹ weɪst, hɪd nʌθɪŋ. ət taɪmz ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl fəɹ sɪvænə tə tɛl wɛðɝ sʌmɛɝɪn wɑz kɑpiɪŋ əɹ əɹ kəmpiɾɪŋ wɪð hɝ.

Sevanna eyed her sideways, trying to see whether she hid sarcasm. As tall as most men, Someryn wore more bracelets and necklaces than any woman there except Sevanna herself, layers of firedrops and emeralds, rubies and sapphires, almost concealing a too-full bosom that otherwise would have been half bared with her blouse undone almost to her skirt. Her shawl, tied around her waist, hid nothing. At times it was difficult for Sevanna to tell whether Someryn was copying her or competing with her.

"mʌtʃ!" mɹə ɪkskleɪmd. ɪn ðə laɪɾ ə ðə læntɝn ʃi hɛld, hɝ lɔŋ feɪs wɑz ɡɹɪmɝ ðən juʒəwəl, ðoʊ ðət hɑɹdli sim pɑsəbəl. mɹə kəd faɪn ðə dɑɹk saɪɾ ə ðə nundeɪ sʌn. "ðæɾ ɪz pipəl laɪ tu deɪz wɛst ɪn ðə sɪɾi kɔld æmədɔɹ? wi nu ðæt. ɔl hiz toʊld əs ɑɹ waɪl teɪlz. ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ! bɑ! ðə meɪɾənz ʃʊɾə kɛpt ɪm ən dʌn wʌt wɑz niɾəd."

"Much!" Meira exclaimed. In the light of the lantern she held, her long face was grimmer than usual, though that hardly seemed possible. Meira could find the dark side of the noonday sun. "That his people lie two days west in the city called Amador? We knew that. All he has told us are wild tales. Artur Hawkwing! Bah! The Maidens should have kept him and done what was needed."

"wʊd jə . . . ɹɪsk lɛɾɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn lɝn tu mʌtʃ tu sun?" sɪvænə bɪɾ əɹ lɪp ɪn vɛkseɪʃən. ʃi hæɾ ɔlmoʊs kɔld əm "ju fulz." tu mɛni ɔlɹɛɾi nu tu mʌtʃ, ɪn əɹ əpɪnjən, waɪz wʌnz əmʌŋ ðɛm, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt ɹɪsk əfɛndɪŋ ðiz wɪmən. ðət nɑlədʒ ɡɹeɪɾɪd ɑn hɝ! "ðə pipəl ɑɹ fɹaɪɾənd." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə haɪɾ əɹ kəntɛmp fəɹ ðæt, ət list. wʌt ʃɑk hɝ, aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ hɝ, wɑz nɑt ðət ðeɪ wɝ əfɹeɪd, bʌt haʊ fju meɪɾ ɛni ɛfɝt tə haɪd ðə fækt. "blæk aɪz, əɹ stoʊn dɑɡz, əɹ ivən meɪɾənz, wʊɾə tɔkt ʌv wʌɾ i sɛd. jə noʊ ðeɪ wʊd! hɪz laɪz wəɾ oʊnli hæv spɹɛd mɔɹ fɪɹ." ðeɪ hæd tə bi laɪz. ɪn sɪvænəz maɪn ə si wɑz laɪk ðə leɪks ʃi hæd sin ɪn ðə wɛtlænz, bʌt wɪð ɪts fɑɹ saɪd bɪɑn saɪt. ɪf hʌnʒɹədz ə θaʊzənz mɔɹ ə hɪz pipəl wɝ kʌmɪŋ, ivən fɹəm ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə soʊ lɑɹdʒ ə bɑɾi ʌv wɔɾɝ, ði ʌðɝ pɹɪznɝz ʃi hæd kwɛstʃənd wʊɾə noʊn ə ðɛm. ən noʊ pɹɪznɝ wɑz kwɛstʃənd wɪθaʊɾ əɹ pɹɛzənt.

"Would you . . . risk letting everyone learn too much too soon?" Sevanna bit her lip in vexation. She had almost called them "you fools." Too many already knew too much, in her opinion, Wise Ones among them, but she could not risk offending these women. That knowledge grated on her! "The people are frightened." There was no need to hide her contempt for that, at least. What shocked her, outraged her, was not that they were afraid, but how few made any effort to hide the fact. "Black Eyes, or Stone Dogs, or even Maidens, would have talked of what he said. You know they would! His lies would only have spread more fear." They had to be lies. In Sevanna's mind a sea was like the lakes she had seen in the wetlands, but with its far side beyond sight. If hundreds of thousands more of his people were coming, even from the other side of so large a body of water, the other prisoners she had questioned would have known of them. And no prisoner was questioned without her present.

ʃən ɹeɪz ðə sɛkən læntɝn ən ɹəɡɑɹɾəd əɹ wɪð ənblɪŋkɪŋ ɡɹeɪ aɪz. nɪɹli ə hɛd ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən sʌmɛɝɪn, ʃən wɑz stɪl tɔlɝ ðən sɪvænə. ən twaɪs əz waɪd. hɝ ɹaʊn feɪs ɔfən əpɪɹd plæsəd, bʌt θɪŋkɪŋ əɹ soʊ wɑz ə mɪsteɪk. "ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹaɪt tə fɪɹ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə stoʊni vɔɪs. "aɪ æm əfɹeɪd, ən teɪk noʊ ʃeɪm ɪn ɪt. ðə sintʃæn ɑɹ mɛni ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ noʊ mɔɹ ðən tʊk æmədɔɹ, ən wəɹ fju. juv jəɹ sɛpt ɝaʊn ju, sɪvænə, bʌt wɛɹ ɪz maɪ sɛpt? jəɹ wɛtləndɝ fɹɛn kædɑɝ ən ɪz teɪm ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛn əs θɹu hɪz hoʊlz ɪn ði ɛɹ tə daɪ. wɛɹ ɑɹ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ?"

Tion raised the second lantern and regarded her with unblinking gray eyes. Nearly a head shorter than Someryn, Tion was still taller than Sevanna. And twice as wide. Her round face often appeared placid, but thinking her so was a mistake. "They are right to fear," she said in a stony voice. "I am afraid, and take no shame in it. The Seanchan are many if they are no more than took Amador, and we are few. You have your sept around you, Sevanna, but where is my sept? Your wetlander friend Caddar and his tame Aes Sedai sent us through his holes in the air to die. Where are the rest of the Shaido?"

ɹiɑli muv tə stæn dɪfaɪənli bɪsaɪd ʃən, ən ðeɪ wɝ kwɪkli dʒɔɪn baɪ əlɹiz, ivən naʊ tɔɪɪŋ wɪð əɹ blæk hɛɹ tə dʒɹɔ ətɛnʃən tə ɪt. əɹ pɝhæps ɪt wɑz tə əvɔɪd miɾɪŋ sɪvænəz aɪz. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ə skaʊlɪŋ mɹə æɾəd hɝsɛlf tə ðə klʌstɝ, ən ðən moʊdʒɹə. moʊdʒɹə maɪɾ əv bɪn kɔl slɪm ɪf ʃi wɝ nɑɾ ivən tɔlɝ ðən sʌmɛɝɪn; əz ɪt wɑz, lin wɑz ðə bɛs ðət kəd bi sɛɾ ə hɝ. sɪvænə hæd θɔt moʊdʒɹə əz fɝmli ɪn əɹ ɡɹæsp əz ɛni ʌv ðə ɹɪŋz ɑn əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. əz fɝmli ɪn əɹ ɡɹæsp æz. . . . sʌmɛɝɪn lʊkt əɾ əɹ ən saɪd, lʊkt ət ði ʌðɝz. sloʊli ʃi wɔkt oʊvɝ tə stæn bɪsaɪd ðɛm.

Rhiale moved to stand defiantly beside Tion, and they were quickly joined by Alarys, even now toying with her black hair to draw attention to it. Or perhaps it was to avoid meeting Sevanna's eyes. After a moment, a scowling Meira added herself to the cluster, and then Modarra. Modarra might have been called slim if she were not even taller than Someryn; as it was, lean was the best that could be said of her. Sevanna had thought Modarra as firmly in her grasp as any of the rings on her fingers. As firmly in her grasp as. . . . Someryn looked at her and sighed, looked at the others. Slowly she walked over to stand beside them.

sɪvænə wɑz lɛf stændɪŋ ɑn ðə vɛɹi ɛdʒ ə ðə læntɝnz laɪt. ʌv ɔl ðə wɪmən taɪd tə hɝ baɪ ðə kɪlɪŋ ə deɪseɪn, ʃi tʃɹʌstɪd ðiz moʊst. nɑt ðət ʃi tʃɹʌstɪɾ ɛniwʌn vɛɹi fɑɹ, ʌv kɔɹs. bʌt sʌmɛɝɪn ən moʊdʒɹə ʃi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ wɝ hɝz əz taɪtli əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd swɔɹn wɔɾɝ oʊθ tə fɑloʊ wɛɹ ʃi lɛd. ən naʊ ðeɪ dɛɹd feɪs əɹ wɪð əkjuzɪŋ aɪz. ivən əlɹiz lʊkt ʌp fɹəm pleɪɪŋ wɪð əɹ hɛɹ.

Sevanna was left standing on the very edge of the lantern's light. Of all the women tied to her by the killing of Desaine, she trusted these most. Not that she trusted anyone very far, of course. But Someryn and Modarra she had been sure were hers as tightly as if they had sworn water oath to follow where she led. And now they dared face her with accusing eyes. Even Alarys looked up from playing with her hair.

sɪvænə mɛt ðɛɹ stɛɹz wɪð ə kul smaɪl dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ə snɪɹ. naʊ, ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd, wɑz nɑt ðə taɪm tə ɹimaɪn əm ə ðə kɹaɪm ðət baʊn ðɛɹ feɪts təɡɛðɝ. nɑt ðə blʌdʒən, ðɪs taɪm. "aɪ səspɛktəd kædɑɝ maɪt tʃɹaɪ tə bɪtʃɹeɪ ʌs," ʃi sɛɾ ɪnstɛd. ɹiɑliz blu aɪz waɪɾənd ət ði ædmɪʃən, ən ʃən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ. sɪvænə wɛn ɑn, nɑt livɪŋ əm ɹum tə spik. "wʊd jə ɹæðɝ əv ɹɪmeɪn ɪn kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ tə bi dɪstʃɹɔɪd? tə bi hʌntəd laɪk ænəməlz baɪ fɔɹ klænz huz waɪz wʌnz noʊ haʊ tə meɪk ðoʊz hoʊlz wɪθaʊt ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ bɑksəz? ɪnstɛd, wəɹ ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv ə ɹɪtʃ, sɑf lænd. ɹɪtʃɝ ivən ðən ðə lænz ə ðə tʃɹi-kɪlɝz. lʊk ət wʌt wɪv teɪkən ɪn oʊnli tɛn deɪz. haʊ mʌtʃ mɔɹ wɪl wi teɪk ɪn ə wɛtləndɝ sɪɾi? jə fɪɹ ðə sintʃæn kəz ðeɪv nʌmbɝz? ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðəɾ aɪ bɹɔɾ ɛvɹi ʃeɪɾoʊ waɪz wʌn u kən tʃænəl wɪð mi." ðət ʃi kəd nɑt tʃænəl hɝsɛlf sɛldəm əkɝd tə hɝ, naʊ. sun ðət læk wəd bi ɹɛməɾid. "wi ɑɹ əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ɛni fɔɹs ðiz wɛtləndɝz kən sɛn əɡɛnst ʌs. ivən ɪf ðeɪ də hæv flaɪɪŋ lɪzɝdz." ʃi snɪft fɔɹsfəli tə ʃoʊ wʌt ʃi θɔɾ ə ðoʊz! nʌn ə ðɛm hæd sin wʌn, nɔɹ ɛni ʌv ðə skaʊts, bʌt nɪɹli ɛvɹi pɹɪznɝ hæd bɪn fʊl ə ðə ɹɪdɪkjələs teɪlz. "æftɝ wi faɪn ði ʌðɝ sɛps, wɪl teɪk ðɪs læn fəɹ əɹ oʊn. ɔl ʌv ɪt! wɪl ɪkstʃɹækt ə tɛnfoʊld ɹipeɪmən fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ən wɪl faɪn kædɑɝ ən meɪk ɪm daɪ skɹimɪŋ fəɹ mɝsi."

Sevanna met their stares with a cool smile just short of a sneer. Now, she decided, was not the time to remind them of the crime that bound their fates together. Not the bludgeon, this time. "I suspected Caddar might try to betray us," she said instead. Rhiale's blue eyes widened at the admission, and Tion opened her mouth. Sevanna went on, not leaving them room to speak. "Would you rather have remained in Kinslayer's Dagger to be destroyed? To be hunted like animals by four clans whose Wise Ones know how to make those holes without the traveling boxes? Instead, we are in the heart of a rich, soft land. Richer even than the lands of the tree-killers. Look at what we have taken in only ten days. How much more will we take in a wetlander city? You fear the Seanchan because they have numbers? Remember that I brought every Shaido Wise One who can channel with me." That she could not channel herself seldom occurred to her, now. Soon that lack would be remedied. "We are as strong as any force these wetlanders can send against us. Even if they do have flying lizards." She sniffed forcefully to show what she thought of those! None of them had seen one, nor any of the scouts, but nearly every prisoner had been full of the ridiculous tales. "After we find the other septs, we will take this land for our own. All of it! We will extract a tenfold repayment from the Aes Sedai. And we will find Caddar and make him die screaming for mercy."

ðət ʃʊɾə ɹælid ðɛm, ɹɪstɔɹd ðɛɹ hɑɹts əz ʃi hæd hæd tə də bɪfɔɹ. nɑt wʌn wʊmənz feɪs tʃeɪnʒd. nɑt wʌn.

That should have rallied them, restored their hearts as she had had to do before. Not one woman's face changed. Not one.

"æn ðəɹ ɪz ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn," ʃən sɛd kɑmli. "ənlɛs juv ɡɪvən ʌp jəɹ plæn tə mɛɹi hɪm."

"And there is the Car'a'carn," Tion said calmly. "Unless you have given up your plan to marry him."

"aɪ hæv ɡɪvən ʌp nʌθɪŋ," sɪvænə ɹɪplaɪɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli. ðə mæn - ən mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt, ðə paʊɝ ðət keɪm wɪð ɪm - wəd bi hɝz sʌmdeɪ. sʌmhaʊ. wʌtɛvɝ ɪt tʊk. smuðɪŋ əɹ vɔɪs, ʃi wɛn ɑn. "ɹæn ælθɹ ɪz hɑɹdli ʌv kɑnsəkwəns naʊ." ət lis tə ðiz blaɪn sɪmpəltənz. wɪð ɪm ɪn əɹ hænz, ɛniθɪŋ wəd bi pɑsəbəl fəɹ hɝ. "aɪ də nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə stæn hɪɹ ɔl deɪ dɪskʌsɪŋ maɪ bɹaɪɾəl ɹiθ. aɪ hæv mæɾɝz tə si tə ðəɾ ɑɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt."

"I have given up nothing," Sevanna replied irritably. The man - and more important, the power that came with him - would be hers someday. Somehow. Whatever it took. Smoothing her voice, she went on. "Rand al'Thor is hardly of consequence now." At least to these blind simpletons. With him in her hands, anything would be possible for her. "I do not intend to stand here all day discussing my bridal wreath. I have matters to see to that are important."

əz ʃi stɔkt əweɪ fɹəm əm θɹu ðə ɡlum, təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹz ə ðə steɪbəl, ən ənplɛzən θɔt sʌɾənli əkɝd tə hɝ. ʃi wɑz əloʊn wɪð ðiz wɪmən. haʊ fɑɹ kəd ʃi tʃɹʌs ðɛm, naʊ? deɪseɪnz dɛθ ɹɪmeɪn ɔl tu vɪvəɾ ɪn əɹ maɪnd; ðə waɪz wʌn hæd bɪn . . . bʊtʃɝd . . . juzɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ. baɪ ðə wɪmən bɪhaɪn hɝ, əmʌŋ ʌðɝz. ðə θɔt twɪstəɾ əɹ bɛli taɪt. ʃi lɪsən fəɹ ðə feɪn ɹʌsəl ə stʃɹɔ ðət wəɾ ənaʊns fit fɑloʊɪŋ əɹ ən hɝd nʌθɪŋ. wɝ ðeɪ dʒʌst stændɪŋ ðəɹ wɑtʃɪŋ? ʃi ɹəfjuz tə lʊk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. kipɪŋ ðə seɪm sloʊ peɪs ɹikwaɪɝɾ oʊnli ə lɪɾəl ɛfɝt - ʃi wəd nɑt dɪspleɪ fɪɹ ən ʃeɪm hɝsɛlf! - jɛt wən ʃi pʊʃt wʌn ə ðə tɔl dɔɹz oʊpən ɑn ɪts wɛl-ɔɪl hɪnʒɪz ən stɛpt ɪndə bɹaɪt mɪddeɪ laɪt, ʃi kəd nɑt stɑp fɹəm dʒɹɔɪŋ ə ɹɪliv bɹɛθ.

As she stalked away from them through the gloom, toward the doors of the stable, an unpleasant thought suddenly occurred to her. She was alone with these women. How far could she trust them, now? Desaine's death remained all too vivid in her mind; the Wise One had been . . . butchered . . . using the One Power. By the women behind her, among others. The thought twisted her belly tight. She listened for the faint rustle of straw that would announce feet following her and heard nothing. Were they just standing there watching? She refused to look over her shoulder. Keeping the same slow pace required only a little effort - she would not display fear and shame herself! - yet when she pushed one of the tall doors open on its well-oiled hinges and stepped into bright midday light, she could not stop from drawing a relieved breath.

ɛfɑlɪn wɑz peɪsɪŋ aʊtsaɪd, ʃoʊufə dʒɹeɪpt ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk, baʊ keɪst ɑn əɹ bæk, spɪɹz ən bʌkəlɝ ɪn hænd. ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən tɝn əbɹʌpli, ðə wɝi ɑn əɹ feɪs feɪɾɪŋ oʊnli ə lɪɾəl ət saɪɾ ə sɪvænə. ðə liɾɝ ʌv ɔl ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ meɪɾənz, ən ʃi lɛɾ əɹ dɪstʃɹɛs ʃoʊ! ʃi wɑz nɑt dʒuməaɪ, bʌt ʃi hæd kʌm wɪð sɪvænə juzɪŋ ði ɪkskjus ðət sɪvænə spoʊk əz ðə tʃif əntɪl ə nu tʃif ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ kəd bi tʃoʊzən. sɪvænə wɑz ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ɛfɑlɪn səspɛktəd ðət wəd nɛvɝ hæpən. ɛfɑlɪn nu wɛɹ ðə paʊɝ leɪ. ən wən tə kip əɹ maʊθ kloʊzd.

Efalin was pacing outside, shoufa draped around her neck, bow cased on her back, spears and buckler in hand. The gray-haired woman turned abruptly, the worry on her face fading only a little at sight of Sevanna. The leader of all the Shaido Maidens, and she let her distress show! She was not Jumai, but she had come with Sevanna using the excuse that Sevanna spoke as the chief until a new chief of the Shaido could be chosen. Sevanna was sure that Efalin suspected that would never happen. Efalin knew where the power lay. And when to keep her mouth closed.

"bɛɹi hɪm dipli ən haɪd ðə ɡɹeɪv," sɪvænə toʊl hɝ.

"Bury him deeply and hide the grave," Sevanna told her.

ɛfɑlɪn nɑɾəd, sɪɡnəlɪŋ ðə meɪɾənz ɹɪŋɪŋ ðə steɪbəl tə ðɛɹ fit, ən ðeɪ vænɪʃt ɪnsaɪd bɪhaɪn hɝ. sɪvænə stʌɾid ðə bɪldɪŋ, wɪð ɪts ʃɑɹp-pikt ɹɛd ɹuf ən blu wɔlz, ðən tɝn tə ðə fild ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɪt. ə loʊ stoʊn fɛns wɪð ə sɪŋɡəl oʊpənɪŋ, ɹaɪt bɪfɔɹ ðə steɪbəl, ɛnkloʊzd ə sɝkəl ə hɑɹd-pæk dɝt pɝhæps ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əkɹɔs. ðə wɛtləndɝz hæd juzd ɪt fəɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ hɔɹsəz. waɪ ɪt hæd bɪn pleɪst soʊ fɑɹ fɹəm ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls, sɝaʊndəd baɪ tʃɹiz soʊ tɔl ðət sɪvænə stɪl səmtaɪmz stɛɹɾ ət ðɛm, ʃi hæd nɑt θɔt tə æsk ðə fɔɹmɝ oʊnɝz, bʌt ði aɪsəleɪʃən sɝvd əɹ pɝpəsəz. ðə meɪɾənz wɪð ɛfɑlɪn wɝ ðoʊz u hæd kæptʃɝd ðə sintʃæn. noʊ wʌn nɑt hɪɹ nu hi ɪɡzɪstəd. əɹ wəd noʊ. wɝ ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz tɔkɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ? əbaʊt hɝ? ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə meɪɾənz? wʌt wɝ ðeɪ seɪɪŋ? ʃi wəd nɑt weɪɾ ɑn əm əɹ ɛniwʌn!

Efalin nodded, signaling the Maidens ringing the stable to their feet, and they vanished inside behind her. Sevanna studied the building, with its sharp-peaked red roof and blue walls, then turned to the field in front of it. A low stone fence with a single opening, right before the stable, enclosed a circle of hard-packed dirt perhaps a hundred paces across. The wetlanders had used it for training horses. Why it had been placed so far from everything else, surrounded by trees so tall that Sevanna still sometimes stared at them, she had not thought to ask the former owners, but the isolation served her purposes. The Maidens with Efalin were those who had captured the Seanchan. No one not here knew he existed. Or would know. Were the other Wise Ones talking in there? About her? In front of the Maidens? What were they saying? She would not wait on them or anyone!

ðeɪ keɪm aʊɾ ə ðə steɪbəl dʒʌst əz ʃi stɑɹɾəd ɔf təwɔɹd ðə fɔɹəst, sʌmɛɝɪn ən ði ʌðɝz, ən fɑloʊɾ əɹ ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz ɑɹɡjuɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz əbaʊt ðə sintʃæn, ən kædɑɝ, ən wɛɹ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ hæd bɪn sɛnt. nɑɾ əbaʊt hɝ, bʌt ðɛn, ðeɪ wəd nɑt wɛɹ ʃi kəd lɪsən. wʌt ʃi dɪd hɪɹ meɪɾ əɹ ɡɹɪmɑs. ðəɹ wɝ oʊvɝ θɹi hʌnʒɹəd waɪz wʌnz wɪð ðə dʒuməaɪ, ən ɪt wɑz ðə seɪm wɛnɛvɝ θɹi əɹ fɔɹ stɑɹɾəd tɔkɪŋ. wɛɹ wɝ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə sɛps, ən hæd kædɑɝ bɪn ə spɪɹ hɝl baɪ ɹænd ælθɹ, ən haʊ mɛni sintʃæn wɝ ðɛɹ, ən ivən dɪd ðeɪ ɹɪli ɹaɪd lɪzɝdz? lɪzɝdz! ðiz wɪmən hæd bɪn wɪð əɹ fɹəm ðə fɝst. ʃi hæd ɡaɪɾəd ðɛɹ fit stɛp baɪ stɛp, bʌt ðeɪ bɪliv ðeɪ hæd hɛlpt plæn ɛvɹi muv, bɪliv ðeɪ nu ðə dɛstəneɪʃən. ɪf ʃi wɑz luzɪŋ əm naʊ. . . .

They came out of the stable just as she started off toward the forest, Someryn and the others, and followed her into the trees arguing among themselves about the Seanchan, and Caddar, and where the rest of the Shaido had been sent. Not about her, but then, they would not where she could listen. What she did hear made her grimace. There were over three hundred Wise Ones with the Jumai, and it was the same whenever three or four started talking. Where were the rest of the septs, and had Caddar been a spear hurled by Rand al'Thor, and how many Seanchan were there, and even did they really ride lizards? Lizards! These women had been with her from the first. She had guided their feet step by step, but they believed they had helped plan every move, believed they knew the destination. If she was losing them now. . . .

ðə fɔɹəst ɡeɪv weɪ tə ə hjudʒ klɪɹɪŋ ðət cʊɾə swɑloʊd ðə sɝkəl bæk ət ðə steɪbəl fɪfti taɪmz oʊvɝ, ən sɪvænə fɛlt ɪl tɛmpɝ slɪpɪŋ əweɪ əz ʃi stɑp tə lʊk. loʊ hɪlz ɹoʊz tə ðə nɔɹθ, ən maʊntənz ə fju liɡz bɪɑn əm wɝ kæpt wɪð klaʊdz, ɡɹeɪt mæsəz ʌv waɪt stʃɹikt wɪð dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin soʊ mɛni klaʊdz ɪn əɹ laɪf. kloʊsɝ ət hænd, θaʊzənz ə dʒuməaɪ wɛn əbaʊt ðə deɪz wɝk. ðə ɹɪŋ ə hæmɝ ɑn ænvəl ɹoʊz fɹəm blæksmɪθs, ən ʃip ən ɡoʊts wɝ biɪŋ slɔɾɝd fəɹ ði ivnɪŋ mil, ðɛɹ bliɾɪŋ mɪkst wɪð ðə læftɝ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən əz ðeɪ ɹæn ət pleɪ. ɡɪvən mɔɹ taɪm tə pɹipɛɹ fəɹ ðɛɹ flaɪt fɹəm kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ ðən ði ʌðɝ sɛps, ðə dʒuməaɪ hæd bɹɔt ðə flɑks ɡæðɝɾ ɪn kɛɹhin, ən æɾəd tə ðɛm hɪɹ.

The forest gave way to a huge clearing that could have swallowed the circle back at the stable fifty times over, and Sevanna felt ill temper slipping away as she stopped to look. Low hills rose to the north, and mountains a few leagues beyond them were capped with clouds, great masses of white streaked with dark gray. She had never seen so many clouds in her life. Closer at hand, thousands of Jumai went about the day's work. The ring of hammer on anvil rose from blacksmiths, and sheep and goats were being slaughtered for the evening meal, their bleating mixed with the laughter of the children as they ran at play. Given more time to prepare for their flight from Kinslayer's Dagger than the other septs, the Jumai had brought the flocks gathered in Cairhien, and added to them here.

mɛni pipəl hæd sɛɾ ʌp ðɛɹ tɛns, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid. kʌlɝfəl stʃɹʌktʃɝz nɪɹli fɪl ðə klɪɹɪŋ laɪk ə lɑɹdʒ wɛtləndɝ vɪlədʒ, tɔl bɑɹnz ən steɪbəlz, ə lɑɹdʒ fɔɹdʒ ən ðə skwɑt ɹufs ðət hæd ʃɛltɝd sɝvəns, ɔl peɪntəd ɹɛɾ ən blu, sɝaʊndɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪt ɹuf ɪtsɛlf. ðə mænɝ haʊs ðət wɑz kɔld, θɹi flɔɹz haɪ bɪniθ ə dɑɹk ɡɹin taɪl ɹuf, ɔl ʌv ɪɾ ə pəlɝ ɡɹin tʃɹɪmd wɪð jɛloʊ, ətɑp ə bɹɔd mæn-meɪd stoʊn hɪl tɛn peɪsɪz tɔl. dʒuməaɪ ən ɡeɪʃeɪn klaɪm ðə lɔŋ ɹæmp ðət lɛd tə ðə ɡɹeɪt bɪldɪŋz dɔɹ ən wɔk ði ɔɹnətli kɑɹv bælkəniz ðət ɹɪŋd ɪt.

Many people had set up their tents, but there was no need. Colorful structures nearly filled the clearing like a large wetlander village, tall barns and stables, a large forge and the squat roofs that had sheltered servants, all painted red and blue, surrounding the great roof itself. The manor house that was called, three floors high beneath a dark green tile roof, all of it a paler green trimmed with yellow, atop a broad man-made stone hill ten paces tall. Jumai and gai'shain climbed the long ramp that led to the great building's door and walked the ornately carved balconies that ringed it.

ðə stoʊn wɔlz ən pæləsəz ʃi hæd sin ɪn kɛɹhin hæd nɑɾ ɪmpɹɛst əɹ hæf soʊ mʌtʃ. ðɪs wʌn wɑz peɪntəd laɪk ə wæɡən ə ðə lɔst wʌnz, bʌɾ ivən soʊ, mɑɹvələs. ʃi ʃʊɾə ɹilaɪz ðət wɪð soʊ mɛni tʃɹiz, ðiz pipəl kəɾ əfɔɹd tə bɪld ɛniθɪŋ ʌv wʊd. kəd noʊ wʌn bʌt ʃi si haʊ fæt ðɪs lænd wɑz? mɔɹ waɪt-klæd ɡeɪʃeɪn skɝiɾ əbaʊt ðɛɹ tæsks ðən ɛni twɛnti sɛps hæɾ ɛvɝ hæd bɪfɔɹ, nɪɹli hæf əz mɛni əz ðəɹ wɝ dʒuməaɪ! noʊ wʌn kəmpleɪn əbaʊt meɪkɪŋ wɛtləndɝz ɡeɪʃeɪn ɛnimɔɹ. ðeɪ wɝ soʊ dɑsəl! ə waɪd-aɪd jʌŋ mæn ɪn ɹʌf-soʊn waɪt hɝid pæs klʌtʃɪŋ ə bæskət, ɡeɪpɪŋ ət ðə pipəl ɝaʊn ɪm ən stʌmbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə hɛm ə hɪz ɹoʊb. sɪvænə smaɪld. ðət wʌnz fɑðɝ hæd kɔl hɪmsɛlf ðə lɔɹɾ ə ðɪs pleɪs ən blʌstɝd ðət ʃi ən əɹ pipəl wəd bi hʌntəd daʊn - baɪ tʃɪlʒɹən, ʌv ɔl θɪŋz! - fəɹ ðɪs aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ, jɛt naʊ hi wɔɹ waɪɾ ən wɝkt əz hɑɹɾ əz ɪz sʌn, əz dɪɾ ɪz waɪf ən ɪz dɔɾɝz ən ɪz ʌðɝ sʌnz. ðə wɪmən hæd pəzɛs mɛni faɪn dʒɛmz ən bjuɾəfəl sɪlks, ən sɪvænə hæɾ oʊnli teɪkən ðə fɝs pɪk fəɹ hɝsɛlf. ə fæt lænd, soʊ sɑft ɪɾ uzd ɹɪtʃ ɔɪlz.

The stone walls and palaces she had seen in Cairhien had not impressed her half so much. This one was painted like a wagon of the Lost Ones, but even so, marvelous. She should have realized that with so many trees, these people could afford to build anything of wood. Could no one but she see how fat this land was? More white-clad gai'shain scurried about their tasks than any twenty septs had ever had before, nearly half as many as there were Jumai! No one complained about making wetlanders gai'shain anymore. They were so docile! A wide-eyed young man in rough-sewn white hurried past clutching a basket, gaping at the people around him and stumbling over the hem of his robe. Sevanna smiled. That one's father had called himself the lord of this place and blustered that she and her people would be hunted down - by children, of all things! - for this outrage, yet now he wore white and worked as hard as his son, as did his wife and his daughters and his other sons. The women had possessed many fine gems and beautiful silks, and Sevanna had only taken the first pick for herself. A fat land, so soft it oozed rich oils.

ðə wɪmən bɪhaɪn əɹ hæd stɑpt ʃɔɹt tə tɔk əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə tʃɹiz. ʃi kɑt wʌt ðeɪ wɝ seɪɪŋ, ən ɪt tɝn əɹ muɾ əɡɛn.

The women behind her had stopped short to talk among themselves at the edge of the trees. She caught what they were saying, and it turned her mood again.

". . . haʊ mɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ faɪt fəɹ ðiz sintʃæn," ʃən wɑz seɪɪŋ. "wi mʌs lɝn ðæt." sʌmɛɝɪn ən moʊdʒɹə mɝmɝɾ əɡɹimənt.

". . . how many Aes Sedai fight for these Seanchan," Tion was saying. "We must learn that." Someryn and Modarra murmured agreement.

"aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ɪt mæɾɝz," ɹiɑli pʊɾ ɪn. ət list əɹ kɑntʃɹɛɹinəs ɪkstɛndəd tə ði ʌðɝz, tu. "aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ðəl faɪɾ ənlɛs wi ətæk ðɛm. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ðeɪ dɪd nʌθɪŋ əntɪl wi muvd əɡɛns ðɛm, nɑɾ ivən tə dɪfɛn ðɛmsɛlvz."

"I do not think it matters," Rhiale put in. At least her contrariness extended to the others, too. "I do not think they will fight unless we attack them. Remember, they did nothing until we moved against them, not even to defend themselves."

"ænd wən ðeɪ dɪd," mɹə sɛd saʊɝli, "twɛnti-θɹi ʌv əs daɪd. ən mɔɹ ðən tɛn θaʊzən æl-ɡeɪdsɪswaɪ dɪd nɑt ɹɪtɝn iðɝ. hɪɹ, wɪv lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ə θɝɾ ə ðət nʌmbɝ ivən kaʊntɪŋ ðə bɹʌðɝləs." ʃi soʊk ðə læst wɝɾ ɪn skɔɹn.

"And when they did," Meira said sourly, "twenty-three of us died. And more than ten thousand al-gai'd'siswai did not return either. Here, we have little more than a third of that number even counting the Brotherless." She soaked the last word in scorn.

"ðæt wɑz ɹænd ælθɹz wɝk!" sɪvænə toʊld əm ʃɑɹpli. "ɪnstɛɾ ə θɪŋkɪŋ wʌɾ i dɪɾ əɡɛnst ʌs, θɪŋk wʌt wi kən də wən hiz aʊɝz!" wən hiz maɪn, ʃi θɔt. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə teɪk ən hoʊld ɪm əz lɔŋ əz ðeɪ hæd, ən ʃi hæd sʌmθɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd nɑt, ɛls ðeɪ wʊɾə juzd ɪt. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪnstɛd ðət wi hæd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ biɾən əntɪl i tʊk ðɛɹ saɪd. ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ nʌθɪŋ!"

"That was Rand al'Thor's work!" Sevanna told them sharply. "Instead of thinking what he did against us, think what we can do when he is ours!" When he is mine, she thought. The Aes Sedai had been able to take and hold him as long as they had, and she had something the Aes Sedai had not, else they would have used it. "Remember instead that we had the Aes Sedai beaten until he took their side. Aes Sedai are nothing!"

wʌns əɡɛn əɹ ɛfɝt tə stʃɹɛŋθən ðɛɹ hɑɹts pɹədus noʊ vɪzəbəl ɪfɛkt. ɔl ðeɪ kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ wɑz ðət ðə spɪɹz hæd bɪn bɹoʊkən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kæptʃɝ ɹænd ælθɹ, ən ðeɪ wɪð ðɛm. moʊdʒɹə maɪɾ əv bɪn stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɡɹeɪv ʌv ɔl əɹ sɛpt, ən ivən ʃən fɹaʊn ənizəli, daʊtləs ɹɪkɔlɪŋ ðət ʃi, tu, hæd ɹʌn laɪk ə fɹaɪɾənd ɡoʊt.

Once again her effort to strengthen their hearts produced no visible effect. All they could remember was that the spears had been broken trying to capture Rand al'Thor, and they with them. Modarra might have been staring into the grave of all her sept, and even Tion frowned uneasily, doubtless recalling that she, too, had run like a frightened goat.

"waɪz wʌnz," ə mænz vɔɪs sɛd bɪhaɪn sɪvænə, "aɪ hæv bɪn sɛn tə æsk fəɹ jəɹ dʒʌdʒmənt."

"Wise Ones," a man's voice said behind Sevanna, "I have been sent to ask for your judgment."

ɪnstənli ɛvɹi wʊmənz feɪs ɹiɡeɪn ɪts ikwənɪmɪɾi. wʌt ʃi kəd nɑt du, hi hæd dʌn wɪð ɪz vɛɹi pɹɛzəns. noʊ waɪz wʌn wəɾ əlaʊ ɛni bʌɾ ənʌðɝ waɪz wʌn tə si hɝ aʊɾ ə kaʊntənəns. əlɹiz stɑp stʃɹoʊkɪŋ əɹ hɛɹ, wɪtʃ ʃi hæd pʊld oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. pleɪnli nʌn ə ðɛm ɹɛkəɡnaɪz hɪm. sɪvænə θɔt ʃi dɪd.

Instantly every woman's face regained its equanimity. What she could not do, he had done with his very presence. No Wise One would allow any but another Wise One to see her out of countenance. Alarys stopped stroking her hair, which she had pulled over her shoulder. Plainly none of them recognized him. Sevanna thought she did.

hi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd əm ɡɹeɪvli, wɪð ɡɹin aɪz mʌtʃ oʊldɝ ðən ɪz smuð feɪs. hi hæd fʊl lɪps, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə sɛt tə hɪz maʊθ, əz ɪf i hæd fɝɡɑɾən haʊ tə smaɪl. "aɪ æm kɪnhuən, ʌv ðə mɛɝeɪɾɪn, waɪz wʌnz. ðə dʒuməaɪ seɪ wi meɪ nɑt teɪk əɹ fʊl ʃɛɹ fɹəm ðɪs pleɪs kəz wəɹ nɑt dʒuməaɪ, bʌɾ ɪts kəz ðəl əv lɛs sɪns wəɹ tu fəɹ ɛvɹi dʒuməaɪ æl-ɡeɪdsɪswaɪ. ðə bɹʌðɝləs æsk jəɹ dʒʌdʒmənt, waɪz wʌnz."

He regarded them gravely, with green eyes much older than his smooth face. He had full lips, but there was a set to his mouth, as if he had forgotten how to smile. "I am Kinhuin, of the Mera'din, Wise Ones. The Jumai say we may not take our full share from this place because we are not Jumai, but it is because they will have less since we are two for every Jumai al-gai'd'siswai. The Brotherless ask your judgment, Wise Ones."

naʊ ðət ðeɪ nu hu hi wɑz, səm kəd nɑt haɪd ðɛɹ dɪslaɪk ə ðə mɛn u hæɾ əbændən klæn ən sɛp tə kʌm tə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ ɹæðɝ ðən fɑloʊ ɹænd ælθɹ, ə wɛtləndɝ ən noʊ tʃɹu kɑɹəkɑɹn, əz ðeɪ θɔt. ʃənz feɪs mɪɹli wɛn flæt, bʌt ɹiɑliz aɪz flæʃt, ən mɹə tiɾɝd ɑn ði ɛdʒ ʌv ə skaʊl. oʊnli moʊdʒɹə ʃoʊd kənsɝn, bʌt ðɛn, ʃi wʊɾə tʃɹaɪd tə sɛɾəl ə dɪspjut bɪtwin tʃɹikɪlɝz.

Now that they knew who he was, some could not hide their dislike of the men who had abandoned clan and sept to come to the Shaido rather than follow Rand al'Thor, a wetlander and no true Car'a'carn, as they thought. Tion's face merely went flat, but Rhiale's eyes flashed, and Meira teetered on the edge of a scowl. Only Modarra showed concern, but then, she would have tried to settle a dispute between treekillers.

"ðiz sɪks waɪz wʌnz wɪl ɡɪv dʒʌdʒmən æftɝ hɪɹɪŋ boʊθ saɪdz," sɪvænə toʊl kɪnhuən wɪð ə ɡɹeɪvinəs tə mætʃ hɪz.

"These six Wise Ones will give judgment after hearing both sides," Sevanna told Kinhuin with a graveness to match his.

ði ʌðɝ wɪmən lʊkt ət hɝ, bɛɹli kənsilɪŋ ðɛɹ sɝpɹaɪz ðət ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə stæn əsaɪd. ɪt hæd bɪn ʃi hu ɝeɪnʒd fəɹ tɛn taɪmz ðə nʌmbɝ ə mɛɝeɪɾɪn tə əkʌmpəni ðə dʒuməaɪ əz wɛnt wɪð ɛni ʌðɝ sɛpt. ʃi ɹɪli hæd səspɛktəd kædɑɝ, ɪf nɑɾ ʌv wʌɾ i hæd dʌn, ən ʃi hæd wɑntəɾ əz mɛni spɪɹz ɝaʊn əɹ əz pɑsəbəl. bɪsaɪdz, ðeɪ kəɾ ɔlweɪz daɪ ɪn pleɪs ə dʒuməaɪ.

The other women looked at her, barely concealing their surprise that she intended to stand aside. It had been she who arranged for ten times the number of Mera'din to accompany the Jumai as went with any other sept. She really had suspected Caddar, if not of what he had done, and she had wanted as many spears around her as possible. Besides, they could always die in place of Jumai.

ʃi əfɛktəd sɝpɹaɪz ət ði ʌðɝz' sɝpɹaɪz. "ɪt wəd nɑt bi fɛɹ fəɹ mi tə teɪk pɑɹt sɪns maɪ oʊn sɛpt ɪz ɪnvɑlvd," ʃi toʊld əm bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ bæk tə ðə ɡɹin-aɪd mæn. "ðeɪ wɪl ɡɪv fɛɹ dʒʌdʒmənt, kɪnhuən. ən aɪm sɝɾən ðəl spik ɪn feɪvɝ ə ðə mɛɝeɪɾɪn."

She affected surprise at the others' surprise. "It would not be fair for me to take part since my own sept is involved," she told them before turning back to the green-eyed man. "They will give fair judgment, Kinhuin. And I am certain they will speak in favor of the Mera'din."

ði ʌðɝ wɪmən ɡeɪv əɹ hɑɹd lʊks bɪfɔɹ ʃən moʊʃən əbɹʌpli fəɹ kɪnhuən tə lid ðə weɪ. hi hæd tə tɛɹ ɪz aɪz əweɪ fɹəm sɪvænə tə kəmplaɪ. wɛɹɪŋ ə feɪn smaɪl - hi hæd bɪn stɛɹɪŋ ət hɝ, nɑt sʌmɛɝɪn - ʃi wɑtʃt əm vænɪʃ ɪndə ðə mæs ə pipəl muvɪŋ əbaʊt ðə mænɝ ɡɹaʊnz. fəɹ ɔl ðɛɹ mɪsləkɪŋ ðə bɹʌðɝləs - ən əɹ meɪkɪŋ pɹidɪkʃənz tə ðə mæn əbaʊt ðɛɹ dɪsɪʒən - ðə tʃænsəz wɝ ðeɪ wəd dɪsaɪd ðət weɪ. iðɝ weɪ, kɪnhuən wəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ən tɛl ði ʌðɝz ə hɪz soʊ-kɔl səsaɪəɾi. ðə dʒuməaɪ wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn əɹ bɛl paʊtʃ, bʌɾ ɛniθɪŋ ðət taɪd ðə mɛɝeɪɾɪn tə hɝ wɑz wɛlkəm.

The other women gave her hard looks before Tion motioned abruptly for Kinhuin to lead the way. He had to tear his eyes away from Sevanna to comply. Wearing a faint smile - he had been staring at her, not Someryn - she watched them vanish into the mass of people moving about the manor grounds. For all their misliking the Brotherless - and her making predictions to the man about their decision - the chances were they would decide that way. Either Way, Kinhuin would remember and tell the others of his so-called society. The Jumai were already in her belt pouch, but anything that tied the Mera'din to her was welcome.

tɝnɪŋ, sɪvænə stʃɹoʊd bæk ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz, ðoʊ nɑt təwɔɹd ðə steɪbəl. naʊ ðət ʃi wɑz əloʊn, ʃi kəd si tə sʌmθɪŋ mʌtʃ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən ðə bɹʌðɝləs. ʃi tʃɛkt wʌt ʃi hæd tʌkt ɪndə hɝ skɝɾ ət ðə smɔl ə hɝ bæk, wɛɹ əɹ ʃɔl hɪɾ ɪt. ʃi wʊɾə fɛlt ɪf ɪt slɪpt ə hɛɹ, bʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə tʌtʃ ɪts smuð lɛŋθ wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. noʊ waɪz wʌn wəd dɛɹ θɪŋk əɹ lɛs ðən ðeɪ, wʌns ʃi juz ðæt, pɝhæps tədeɪ. ən wʌn deɪ, ɪt wəd ɡɪv əɹ ɹænd ælθɹ. æftɝ ɔl, ɪf kædɑɝ hæd laɪɾ ɪn wʌn θɪŋ, meɪbi hi hæd laɪɾ ɪn ʌðɝz.

Turning, Sevanna strode back into the trees, though not toward the stable. Now that she was alone, she could see to something much more important than the Brotherless. She checked what she had tucked into her skirt at the small of her back, where her shawl hid it. She would have felt if it slipped a hair, but she wanted to touch its smooth length with her fingers. No Wise One would dare think her less than they, once she used that, perhaps today. And one day, it would give her Rand al'Thor. After all, if Caddar had lied in one thing, maybe he had lied in others.

θɹu ə blɝ ə tɪɹz ɡəlinə kæsbən ɡlɛɹɾ ət ðə waɪz wʌn ʃildɪŋ hɝ. əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ ɛni nid fəɹ ðə slɛndɝ wʊmənz ʃild. ɹaɪt ðən ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs. sɪɾɪŋ kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪtwin tu skwɑɾɪŋ meɪɾənz, bəlɪn ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ ʃɔl ən ɡeɪv ə θɪn smaɪl, əz ɪf ʃi nu ɡəlinəz θɔts. hɝ feɪs wɑz nɛɹoʊ ən fɑkslaɪk, ən əɹ hɛɹ ən aɪbɹaʊz hæd bɪn blitʃt nɪɹli waɪt baɪ ðə sʌn. ɡəlinə wɪʃt ʃi hæd kɹʌʃt əɹ skʌl ɪnstɛɾ ə mɪɹli slæpɪŋ hɝ.

Through a blur of tears Galina Casban glared at the Wise One shielding her. As if there were any need for the slender woman's shield. Right then she could not have so much as embraced the Source. Sitting cross-legged on the ground between two squatting Maidens, Belinde adjusted her shawl and gave a thin smile, as if she knew Galina's thoughts. Her face was narrow and foxlike, and her hair and eyebrows had been bleached nearly white by the sun. Galina wished she had crushed her skull instead of merely slapping her.

ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn ən ətɛmpt əɾ ɪskeɪp, mɪɹli mɔɹ fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən ðən ʃi kəd bɛɹ. hɝ deɪz bɪɡæn ən ɛndəd wɪð ɪɡzɔstʃən, ɛvɹi deɪ mɔɹ ðən ðə læst. ʃi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ haʊ lɔŋ sɪns ðeɪ hæd stʌft əɹ ɪndə ðət kɔɹs blæk ɹoʊb; ðə deɪz ɹæn təɡɛðɝ laɪk ən ɛvɝlæstɪŋ stʃɹim. ə wik? ə mʌnθ? meɪbi nɑt ðət lɔŋ. ʃʊɹli nɑt mɔɹ. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi hæd nɛvɝ tʌtʃt bəlɪnd. ɪf ðə wʊmən hæd nɑt stʌft ɹæɡz ɪndə hɝ maʊθ tə saɪləns əɹ sɑbɪŋ, ʃi wʊɾə bɛɡd tə bi əlaʊd tə kæɹi ɹɑks əɡɛn, əɹ muv ə paɪl ə pɛbəlz stoʊn baɪ stoʊn, əɹ ɛni ʌv ðə tɔɹtʃɝz ðeɪ fɪld əɹ aʊɝz wɪð. ɛniθɪŋ ɹæðɝ ðən ðɪs.

It had not been an attempt at escape, merely more frustration than she could bear. Her days began and ended with exhaustion, every day more than the last. She could not remember how long since they had stuffed her into that coarse black robe; the days ran together like an everlasting stream. A week? A month? Maybe not that long. Surely not more. She wished she had never touched Belinde. If the woman had not stuffed rags into her mouth to silence her sobbing, she would have begged to be allowed to carry rocks again, or move a pile of pebbles stone by stone, or any of the tortures they filled her hours with. Anything rather than this.

oʊnli ɡəlinəz hɛd stʌk aʊɾ ə ðə lɛðɝ sæk ðət hʌŋ səspɛndəd fɹəm ðə staʊt lɪm ʌv ən oʊk. dɝɛkli bɪniθ ðə sæk, koʊlz ɡloʊɾ ɪn ə bɹɑnz bɹeɪziɝ, ə sloʊ bɝn, hiɾɪŋ ði ɛɹ ɪnsaɪd ðə sæk. ʃi hʌɾəld ɪn ðət swɛltɝɪŋ hit wɪð əɹ θʌmz taɪd tə hɝ toʊz, swɛt slɪkɪŋ əɹ neɪkədnəs. hɝ hɛɹ klʌŋ dæmpli tə hɝ feɪs, ən ʃi pæntɪd, nɑstʃɹəlz flɛɹɪŋ fəɹ ɛɹ, wən ʃi wɑz nɑt sɑbɪŋ. ivən soʊ, ðɪs wʊɾə bɪn bɛɾɝ ðən ði ɛnləs, sɛnsləs, bækbɹeɪkɪŋ leɪbɝ ðeɪ səbdʒɛktɪɾ əɹ tə ɪksɛp fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ. bɪfɔɹ snʌɡɪŋ ðə nɛk ə ðə sæk bɪniθ əɹ tʃɪn, bəlɪn hæɾ ɛmptiɾ ə paʊtʃ ə səm faɪn paʊɾɝ oʊvɝ hɝ, ən əz ʃi hæd bɪɡʌn tə swɛt, ɪt hæd bɪɡʌn tə bɝn laɪk pɛpɝ flʌŋ ɪn ði aɪz. ɪt sim tə koʊɾ əɹ fɹəm ðə ʃoʊldɝz daʊn, ænd, oʊ, laɪt, ɪt bɝnd!

Only Galina's head stuck out of the leather sack that hung suspended from the stout limb of an oak. Directly beneath the sack, coals glowed in a bronze brazier, a slow burn, heating the air inside the sack. She huddled in that sweltering heat with her thumbs tied to her toes, sweat slicking her nakedness. Her hair clung damply to her face, and she panted, nostrils flaring for air, when she was not sobbing. Even so, this would have been better than the endless, senseless, backbreaking labor they subjected her to except for one thing. Before snugging the neck of the sack beneath her chin, Belinde had emptied a pouch of some fine powder over her, and as she had begun to sweat, it had begun to burn like pepper flung in the eyes. It seemed to coat her from the shoulders down, and, oh, Light, it burned!

ðət ʃi kɔld ɑn ðə laɪt mɛʒɝɾ əɹ dɛspɝeɪʃən, bʌt ðeɪ hæd nɑt bɹoʊkən əɹ fəɹ ɔl ðɛɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ. ʃi wəd ɡɛt fɹi - ʃi wʊd! - ən wʌns ʃi dɪd, ʃi wəd meɪk ðiz sævədʒəz peɪ ɪn blʌd! ɹɪvɝz ə blʌd! oʊʃənz! ʃi wəɾ əv əm ɔl skɪn əlaɪv! ʃi wəd . . . ! flɪŋɪŋ bæk əɹ hɛd, ʃi haʊld; ðə wɑɾəd ɹæɡz ɪn əɹ maʊθ mʌfəl ðə saʊnd, bʌt ʃi haʊld, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz ə ʃɹik ə ɹeɪdʒ əɹ ə skɹim fəɹ mɝsi.

That she called on the Light measured her desperation, but they had not broken her for all their trying. She would get free - she would! - and once she did, she would make these savages pay in blood! Rivers of blood! Oceans! She would have them all skinned alive! She would . . . ! Flinging back her head, she howled; the wadded rags in her mouth muffled the sound, but she howled, and she did not know whether it was a shriek of rage or a scream for mercy.

wən əɹ haʊlz daɪɾ ən əɹ hɛd fɛl fɔɹwɝd, bəlɪn ən ðə meɪɾənz wɝ ɑn ðɛɹ fit, ən sɪvænə wɑz wɪð ðɛm. ɡəlinə ətɛmptəd tə staɪfəl əɹ sɑbɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd wʊmən, bʌt ʃi kəɾ əz sun əv plʌk ðə sʌn fɹəm ðə skaɪ wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝz.

When her howls died and her head fell forward, Belinde and the Maidens were on their feet, and Sevanna was with them. Galina attempted to stifle her sobbing in front of the golden-haired woman, but she could as soon have plucked the sun from the sky with her fingers.

"lɪsən tə hɝ waɪn ən snaɪvəl," sɪvænə snɪɹd, kʌmɪŋ tə lʊk ʌp ət hɝ. ɡəlinə tʃɹaɪd tə pʊɾ ən ikwəl kəntɛmpt ɪn əɹ oʊn stɛɹ. sɪvænə dɛk hɝsɛlf wɪð ɪnʌf dʒuəlɹi fəɹ tɛn wɪmən! ʃi wɔɹ əɹ blaʊs ənleɪs tə nɪɹli bɛɹ əɹ bʊzəm, ɪksɛp fəɹ ɔl ðoʊz mɪsmætʃt nɛkləsɪz, ən bɹið dip wən mɛn lʊkt ət hɝ! ɡəlinə tʃɹaɪd, bʌt kəntɛmpt wɑz hɑɹd tə mænədʒ wɪð tɪɹz ɹoʊlɪŋ daʊn əɹ tʃiks əlɔŋ wɪð əɹ swɛt. ʃi ʃʊk wɪð wipɪŋ, meɪkɪŋ ðə sæk sweɪ.

"Listen to her whine and snivel," Sevanna sneered, coming to look up at her. Galina tried to put an equal contempt in her own stare. Sevanna decked herself with enough jewelry for ten women! She wore her blouse unlaced to nearly bare her bosom, except for all those mismatched necklaces, and breathed deep when men looked at her! Galina tried, but contempt was hard to manage with tears rolling down her cheeks along with her sweat. She shook with weeping, making the sack sway.

"ðɪs dætsæŋ ɪz tʌf əz ən oʊld u," bəlɪn kækəld, "bʌɾ aɪ ɔlweɪz faʊn ivən ðə tʌfəst oʊld u wɑz meɪd tɛndɝ ɪf kʊk sloʊli, wɪð ðə ɹaɪɾ ɝbz. wən aɪ wɑz ə meɪɾən, aɪ sɔfən stoʊn dɑɡz wɪð ɪnʌf kʊkɪŋ." ɡəlinə kloʊzd əɹ aɪz. oʊʃənz ə blʌd, tə peɪ fəɹ . . . !

"This da'tsang is tough as an old ewe," Belinde cackled, "but I always found even the toughest old ewe was made tender if cooked slowly, with the right herbs. When I was a Maiden, I softened Stone Dogs with enough cooking." Galina closed her eyes. Oceans of blood, to pay for . . . !

ðə sæk lɝtʃt, ən ɡəlinəz aɪz pɑpt oʊpən əz ɪt bɪɡæn tə sɛɾəl. ðə meɪɾənz hæɾ əndʌn ðə ɹoʊp ɹʌnɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə lɪm, ən ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm wɝ loʊɝɪŋ əɹ sloʊli. fɹæntəkəli ʃi θɹæʃt əbaʊt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lʊk daʊn, ən ɔlmoʊs bɪɡæn sɑbɪŋ ənu, wɪð ɹɪlif, wən ʃi sɔ ðət ðə bɹeɪziɝ hæd bɪn muvd əsaɪd. wɪð bəlɪnz tɔk ə kʊkɪŋ. . . . ðət wəd bi bəlɪnz feɪt, ɡəlinə dɪsaɪɾɪd. taɪd tə ə spɪɾ ən tɝn oʊvɝ ə faɪɝ əntɪl əɹ dʒusəz dʒɹɪpt! ðət tə bɪɡɪn!

The sack lurched, and Galina's eyes popped open as it began to settle. The Maidens had undone the rope running over the limb, and the pair of them were lowering her slowly. Frantically she thrashed about, trying to look down, and almost began sobbing anew, with relief, when she saw that the brazier had been moved aside. With Belinde's talk of cooking. . . . That would be Belinde's fate, Galina decided. Tied to a spit and turned over a fire until her juices dripped! That to begin!

wɪð ə θʌd ðət meɪd ɡəlinə ɡɹʌnt, ðə lɛðɝ bæɡ hɪt ðə ɡɹaʊn ən tɑpəld oʊvɝ. əz ʌnkənsɝn əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ hænlɪŋ ə sæk ə pəteɪɾoʊz, ðə meɪɾənz tʌmbəld əɹ aʊɾ ɑntu ðə bɹaʊn widz, slaɪs ðə kɔɹdz ðət hɛld əɹ θʌmz ən toʊz, plʌk ðə ɡæɡ fɹəm bɪtwin əɹ tiθ. dɝɾ ən dɛd livz stʌk tə ðə swɛt koʊɾɪŋ hɝ.

With a thud that made Galina grunt, the leather bag hit the ground and toppled over. As unconcerned as if they were handling a sack of potatoes, the Maidens tumbled her out onto the brown weeds, sliced the cords that held her thumbs and toes, plucked the gag from between her teeth. Dirt and dead leaves stuck to the sweat coating her.

ʃi vɛɹi mʌtʃ wɑntəd tə stænd, tə miɾ əm ɔl aɪ-tə-aɪ ən ɡlɛɹ-fɔɹ-ɡlɛɹ. ɪnstɛd, ʃi ɹoʊz oʊnli əz fɑɹ əz hænz ən niz, ðən dʌɡ hɝ fɪŋɡɝz ɪndə ðə mʌltʃ ə ðə fɔɹəs flɔɹ, dʌɡ hɝ toʊz ɪn. ɛni fɑɹðɝ, ən ʃi wəd nɑt bi eɪbəl tə stɑp əɹ hænz fɹəm flaɪɪŋ tə suð əɹ ɹɛd, fleɪmɪŋ skɪn. hɝ swɛt fɛlt laɪk ðə dʒus ʌv aɪs pɛpɝz. ɔl ʃi kəd də wɑz kɹaʊtʃ ðəɹ ən kwɪvɝ, tʃɹaɪ tə wɝk səm mɔɪstʃɝ bæk ɪndə hɝ maʊθ ən deɪdʒɹim ʌv wʌt ʃi wəd də tə ðiz sævədʒəz.

She very much wanted to stand, to meet them all eye-to-eye and glare-for-glare. Instead, she rose only as far as hands and knees, then dug her fingers into the mulch of the forest floor, dug her toes in. Any farther, and she would not be able to stop her hands from flying to soothe her red, flaming skin. Her sweat felt like the juice of ice peppers. All she could do was crouch there and quiver, try to work some moisture back into her mouth and daydream of what she would do to these savages.

"aɪ bɪliv jə wɝ stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ðɪs," sɪvænə sɛɾ əbʌv əɹ ɪn θɔtfəl toʊnz, "bʌt pɝhæps bəlɪn ɪz ɹaɪt. pɝhæps jə ɑɹ sɑft ɪnʌf, naʊ. ɪf jə swɛɹ tə oʊbeɪ mi, jə kən stɑp biɪŋ dætsæŋ. pɝhæps jəl nɑɾ ivən əv tə bi ɡeɪʃeɪn. wɪl jə swɛɹ tə oʊbeɪ mi ɪn ɔl θɪŋz?"

"I believed you were stronger than this," Sevanna said above her in thoughtful tones, "but perhaps Belinde is right. Perhaps you are soft enough, now. If you swear to obey me, you can stop being da'tsang. Perhaps you will not even have to be gai'shain. Will you swear to obey me in all things?"

"jɛs!" ðə hɔɹs wɝd flu fɹəm ɡəlinəz tʌŋ wɪθaʊt hɛzəteɪʃən, ðoʊ ʃi hæd tə swɑloʊ bɪfɔɹ spikɪŋ mɔɹ. "aɪ wɪl oʊbeɪ ju! aɪ swɛɹ ɪt!" ən soʊ ʃi wəɾ oʊbeɪ. əntɪl ðeɪ ɡeɪv ði oʊpənɪŋ ʃi niɾəd. wɑz ðɪs ɔl ðət hæd bɪn nɛsəsɛɹi? ən oʊθ ʃi wʊɾə meɪd ðə fɝs deɪ? sɪvænə wəd lɝn wʌɾ ɪt wɑz laɪk tə hæŋ oʊvɝ hɑt koʊlz. oʊ, jɛs, ʃi. . . .

"Yes!" The hoarse word flew from Galina's tongue without hesitation, though she had to swallow before speaking more. "I will obey you! I swear it!" And so she would obey. Until they gave the opening she needed. Was this all that had been necessary? An oath she would have made the first day? Sevanna would learn what it was like to hang over hot coals. Oh, yes, she. . . .

"ðɛn jəl nɑɾ əbdʒɛk tə swɛɹɪŋ jəɹ oʊθ ɑn ðɪs," sɪvænə sɛd, tɔsɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ daʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ.

"Then you will not object to swearing your oath on this," Sevanna said, tossing something down in front of her.

ɡəlinəz skælp kɹɔld əz ʃi stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪt. ə waɪt ɹɑd laɪk pɑlɪʃt aɪvɝi, ə fʊt lɔŋ ən noʊ θɪkɝ ðən əɹ ɹɪst. ðən ʃi sɔ ðə floʊɪŋ mɑɹks kɑɹvd ɪndə ði ɛn təwɔɹd hɝ, numɝəlz juzd ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. wʌn hʌnʒɹəd ɪlɛvən. ʃi hæd θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ði oʊθ ɹɑd, sʌmhaʊ stoʊlən fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ðəɾ ɔlsoʊ wɑz mɑɹkt, bʌt wɪð ðə numɝəl θɹi, wɪtʃ səm θɔt stʊd fəɹ ðə θɹi oʊðz. meɪbi ðɪs wɑz nɑt wʌɾ ɪt simd. meɪbi. jɛt noʊ hʊɾɪd vaɪpɝ fɹəm ðə dʒɹaʊn lænz kɔɪl ðəɹ cʊɾə fɹoʊzən əɹ soʊ stɪl.

Galina's scalp crawled as she stared at it. A white rod like polished ivory, a foot long and no thicker than her wrist. Then she saw the flowing marks carved into the end toward her, numerals used in the Age of Legends. One hundred eleven. She had thought it was the Oath Rod, somehow stolen from the White Tower. That also was marked, but with the numeral three, which some thought stood for the Three Oaths. Maybe this was not what it seemed. Maybe. Yet no hooded viper from the Drowned Lands coiled there could have frozen her so still.

"ə faɪn oʊθ, sɪvænə. wən dɪd jə ɪntɛn tə tɛl ðə ɹɛst ʌv ʌs?"

"A fine oath, Sevanna. When did you intend to tell the rest of us?"

ðət vɔɪs dʒɝkt ɡəlinəz hɛɾ ʌp. ɪt cʊɾə pʊld əɹ aɪz əweɪ fɹəm ə hʊɾɪd vaɪpɝ, tu.

That voice jerked Galina's head up. It could have pulled her eyes away from a hooded viper, too.

θɛɝɑvə əpɪɹɾ əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz liɾɪŋ ə dʌzən koʊld-feɪst waɪz wʌnz. wən ðeɪ stɑp bɪhaɪn hɝ, kənfɹʌntɪŋ sɪvænə, ɛvɹi wʊmən pɹɛzən ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə meɪɾənz hæd bɪn ðəɹ wən ɡəlinə wɑz sɛntəns tə wɛɹ ðə blæk ɹoʊb. ə wɝd fɹəm θɛɝɑvə, ə ʃɔɹt nɑd fɹəm sɪvænə, ən ðə meɪɾənz dɪpɑɹɾəd swɪfli. swɛt stɪl uz fɹəm ɡəlinə, bʌt sʌɾənli ði ɛɹ sim koʊld.

Therava appeared among the trees leading a dozen cold-faced Wise Ones. When they stopped behind her, confronting Sevanna, every woman present except for the Maidens had been there when Galina was sentenced to wear the black robe. A word from Therava, a short nod from Sevanna, and the Maidens departed swiftly. Sweat still oozed from Galina, but suddenly the air seemed cold.

sɪvænə ɡlænst ət bəlɪnd, hu əvɔɪɾəd əɹ aɪ. sɪvænəz lɪp kɝld, hæf snɪɹ, hæf snɑɹl, ən ʃi plæntəd fɪsts ɑn hɪps. ɡəlinə dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd wɛɹ ʃi faʊn ðə nɝv, ə wʊmən u kəd nɑt tʃænəl əɾ ɔl. səm ə ðiz wɪmən pəzɛs nɑɾ ɪnkɑnsɪɾɝəbəl stʃɹɛŋkθ. noʊ, ʃi kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə θɪŋk ə ðɛm oʊnli əz waɪldɝz ɪf ʃi wɑz tə ɪskeɪp ən əv əɹ ɹivɛnʒ. θɛɝɑvə ən sʌmɛɝɪn wɝ stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ɛni wʊmən ɪn ðə taʊɝ, ən ɛni ʌv əm cʊɾə bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ izəli.

Sevanna glanced at Belinde, who avoided her eye. Sevanna's lip curled, half sneer, half snarl, and she planted fists on hips. Galina did not understand where she found the nerve, a woman who could not channel at all. Some of these women possessed not inconsiderable strength. No, she could not afford to think of them only as wilders if she was to escape and have her revenge. Therava and Someryn were stronger than any woman in the Tower, and any of them could have been Aes Sedai easily.

bʌt sɪvænə feɪst əm dɪfaɪənli. "ɪt simz jə ɹɛndɝd dʒʌstəs kwɪkli," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə vɔɪs dʒɹaɪ əz dʌst.

But Sevanna faced them defiantly. "It seems you rendered justice quickly," she said in a voice dry as dust.

"ðə mæɾɝ wɑz sɪmpəl," ʃən ɹɪplaɪd kɑmli. "ðə mɛɝeɪɾɪn ɹəsiv ðə dʒʌstəs ðeɪ dɪzɝvd."

"The matter was simple," Tion replied calmly. "The Mera'din received the justice they deserved."

"æn ðeɪ wɝ toʊl ðeɪ ɹəsivd ɪɾ ɪn spaɪɾ ə jəɹ ətɛmp tə sweɪ ʌs," ɹiɑli æɾəd wɪð səm hit. sɪvænə nɪɹli dɪd snɑɹl ət ðæt.

"And they were told they received it in spite of your attempt to sway us," Rhiale added with some heat. Sevanna nearly did snarl at that.

θɛɝɑvə wəd nɑt bi daɪvɝɾɪd fɹəm əɹ pɝpəs, ðoʊ. ɪn wʌn swɪf stɛp ʃi ɹitʃt ɡəlinə, ɡɹɪpt ə hændfʊl ə hɝ hɛɹ ən dʒɝkt əɹ ʌp tə hɝ niz, bɛn əɹ hɛd bæk. θɛɝɑvə wɑz nɑt ðə tɔlɪst ə ðiz wɪmən baɪ ət list ə hɛd, jɛt ʃi lum tɔlɝ ðən moʊs mɛn, stɛɹɪŋ daʊn wɪð ə hɔks aɪz, dʒɹaɪvɪŋ əweɪ ɛvɹi θɔɾ ə ɹivɛnʒ əɹ dɪfaɪəns. ðə waɪt stʃɹiks tʌtʃɪŋ əɹ dɑɹk ɹɛd hɛɹ oʊnli meɪɾ əɹ feɪs mɔɹ kəmændɪŋ. ɡəlinəz hænz klɛntʃt ɪndə fɪsts ɑn əɹ θaɪz, neɪlz dɪɡɪŋ ɪndə hɝ pɑmz. ivən ðə bɝnɪŋ ə hɝ skɪn peɪld ʌndɝ ðət stɛɹ. ʃi hæd deɪdʒɹimd əbaʊt bɹeɪkɪŋ ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðiz wɪmən, meɪkɪŋ əm plid fəɹ dɛθ, læfɪŋ əz ʃi dɪnaɪd ðɛɹ bɛɡɪŋ. əbaʊɾ ɛvɹi wʌn ɪksɛp θɛɝɑvə. ət naɪt, θɛɝɑvə fɪld əɹ dʒɹimz ən ɔl ɡəlinə kəd də wɑz tʃɹaɪ tə fli; ði oʊnli ɪskeɪp wɑz tə weɪk skɹimɪŋ. ɡəlinə hæd bɹoʊkən stʃɹɔŋ mɛn ən stʃɹɔŋ wɪmən, bʌt ʃi stɛɹɾ ʌp ət θɛɝɑvə waɪd-aɪɾ ən waɪnd.

Therava would not be diverted from her purpose, though. In one swift step she reached Galina, gripped a handful of her hair and jerked her up to her knees, bent her head back. Therava was not the tallest of these women by at least a head, yet she loomed taller than most men, staring down with a hawk's eyes, driving away every thought of revenge or defiance. The white streaks touching her dark red hair only made her face more commanding. Galina's hands clenched into fists on her thighs, nails digging into her palms. Even the burning of her skin paled under that stare. She had daydreamed about breaking every one of these women, making them plead for death, laughing as she denied their begging. About every one except Therava. At night, Therava filled her dreams and all Galina could do was try to flee; the only escape was to wake screaming. Galina had broken strong men and strong women, but she stared up at Therava wide-eyed and whined.

"ðɪs wʌn əz noʊ ɑnɝ tə ʃeɪm." θɛɝɑvə ɔlmoʊst spæt ðə wɝdz. "ɪf jə wɑn əɹ bɹoʊkən, sɪvænə, lemi hæv hɝ. wən aɪm dʌn, ʃɪl oʊbeɪ wɪθaʊt ðə nid fəɹ jəɹ fɹɛn kædɑɝz tɔɪ."

"This one has no honor to shame." Therava almost spat the words. "If you want her broken, Sevanna, let me have her. When I am done, she will obey without the need for your friend Caddar's toy."

sɪvænə spoʊk ʌp hiɾɪdli, dɪnaɪɪŋ fɹɛndʃɪp wɪð ðɪs kædɑɝ, huɛvɝ i wɑz, ən ɹiɑli bɑɹk ðət sɪvænə hæd bɹɔɾ ɪm tə ði ʌðɝz, ən ʌðɝz bɪɡæn ɑɹɡjuɪŋ əbaʊt wɛðɝ ðə "baɪndɝ" wəd wɝk ɛni bɛɾɝ ðən ðə "tʃɹævlɪŋ bɑks."

Sevanna spoke up heatedly, denying friendship with this Caddar, whoever he was, and Rhiale barked that Sevanna had brought him to the others, and others began arguing about whether the "binder" would work any better than the "traveling box."

ə smɔl pɑɹɾ ʌv ɡəlinəz maɪn sizd ɑn mɛnʃən ə ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ bɑks. ʃi hæd hɝɾ ɪt spoʊkən ə bɪfɔɹ, lɔŋ tə leɪ hænz ɑn ɪɾ ɪf oʊnli fəɹ ə moʊmənt. wɪð ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðəɾ ɛneɪbəld əɹ tə tʃɹævəl, haʊɛvɝ ɪmpɝfɪkli ɪt sim tə wɝk, ʃi wəd bi eɪbəl tə. . . . ivən hoʊp ʌv ɪskeɪp kəd nɑt stæn əɡɛns θɔts ʌv wʌt θɛɝɑvə wəd də tə hɝ ɪf ði ʌðɝz dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ɡɪv ɪn tə ðə wʊmənz ɹɪkwɛst. wən ðə hɔk-aɪd waɪz wʌn lust əɹ hɛɹ tə dʒɔɪn ði ɑɹɡjəmənt, ɡəlinə hɝl hɝsɛlf ət ðə ɹɑd, lændɪŋ flæɾ ɑn əɹ bɛli. ɛniθɪŋ, ivən hævɪŋ tə oʊbeɪ sɪvænə, wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən biɪŋ hændəɾ oʊvɝ tə θɛɝɑvə. ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn ʃildɪd, ʃi wʊɾə tʃænəl tə ɑpɝeɪt ðə ɹɑd hɝsɛlf.

A small part of Galina's mind seized on mention of the traveling box. She had heard it spoken of before, longed to lay hands on it if only for a moment. With a ter'angreal that enabled her to Travel, however imperfectly it seemed to work, she would be able to. . . . Even hope of escape could not stand against thoughts of what Therava would do to her if the others decided to give in to the woman's request. When the hawk-eyed Wise One loosed her hair to join the argument, Galina hurled herself at the rod, landing flat on her belly. Anything, even having to obey Sevanna, was better than being handed over to Therava. If she had not been shielded, she would have channeled to operate the rod herself.

noʊ sunɝ dɪɾ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz kloʊs ɑn ðə smuð ɹɑd ðən θɛɝɑvəz fʊt keɪm daʊn ɑn ɪt hɑɹd, tʃɹæpɪŋ əɹ hænz peɪnfəli əɡɛns ðə ɡɹaʊnd. nʌn ə ðə waɪz wʌnz soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlænst əɾ əɹ wɛɹ ʃi leɪ ɹaɪðɪŋ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ fjuɾɪlli tə pʊl fɹi. ʃi kəd nɑt meɪk hɝsɛlf pʊl tu hɑɹd; dɪmli ʃi kəd ɹikɔl meɪkɪŋ ɹulɝz peɪl wɪð fɪɹ, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt dɛɹ dɪstɝb ðɪs wʊmənz fʊt.

No sooner did her fingers close on the smooth rod than Therava's foot came down on it hard, trapping her hands painfully against the ground. None of the Wise Ones so much as glanced at her where she lay writhing, trying futilely to pull free. She could not make herself pull too hard; dimly she could recall making rulers pale with fear, but she did not dare disturb this woman's foot.

"ɪf ʃiz tə swɛɹ," θɛɝɑvə sɛd, stɛɹɪŋ hɑɹɾ ət sɪvænə, "ɪt ʃəd bi tə oʊbeɪ ɔl ʌv əs hɪɹ." ði ʌðɝz nɑɾəd, səm vɔɪsɪŋ əɡɹimənt, ɔl bʌt bəlɪnd, ən ʃi pɝst əɹ lɪps θɔtfəli.

"If she is to swear," Therava said, staring hard at Sevanna, "it should be to obey all of us here." The others nodded, some voicing agreement, all but Belinde, and she pursed her lips thoughtfully.

sɪvænə stɛɹd bæk dʒʌst əz hɑɹd. "vɛɹi wɛl," ʃi æksiɾɪd faɪnəli. "bʌt mi fɝst əmʌŋ ʌs. aɪm nɑɾ oʊnli ə waɪz wʌn; aɪ spik əz ðə klæn tʃif."

Sevanna stared back just as hard. "Very well," she acceded finally. "But me first among us. I am not only a Wise One; I speak as the clan chief."

θɛɝɑvə smaɪl θɪnli. "soʊ jə du. tu əmʌŋ əs fɝst, sɪvænə. jə ən aɪ." nɑɾ ə wɪspɝ ə dɪfaɪəns feɪɾəd fɹəm sɪvænəz feɪs, bʌt ʃi nɑɾəd. ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli. oʊnli ðən dɪd θɛɝɑvə muv əɹ fʊt. ðə laɪɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ sɝaʊndəd hɝ, ən ə floʊ ʌv spɪɹət tʌtʃt ðə numɝəlz ət ði ɛn ə ðə ɹɑɾ ɪn ɡəlinəz hænz. dʒʌst əz wɑz dʌn wɪð ði oʊθ ɹɑd.

Therava smiled thinly. "So you do. Two among us first, Sevanna. You and I." Not a whisper of defiance faded from Sevanna's face, but she nodded. Grudgingly. Only then did Therava move her foot. The light of saidar surrounded her, and a flow of Spirit touched the numerals at the end of the rod in Galina's hands. Just as was done with the Oath Rod.

fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ɡəlinə hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, flɛksɪŋ mæʃt fɪŋɡɝz. ɪt fɛl ðə seɪm əz ði oʊθ ɹɑd, tu; nɑt kwaɪt laɪk aɪvɝi, nɑt kwaɪt laɪk ɡlæs, dɪstɪŋkli kul ɑn əɹ pɑmz. ɪf ɪt wɑz ə sɛkən oʊθ ɹɑd, ɪt kəd bi juz tə ɹimuv ɛni oʊθ ʃi swɔɹ naʊ. ɪf ʃi wɝ ɡɪvən ði ɑpɝtunəɾi. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə teɪk ðə tʃæns, dɪd nɑt wɑnə swɛɹ tə θɛɝɑvə ɪn ɛni keɪs. ɔlweɪz bɪfɔɹ ðɪs ɪn əɹ laɪf, ʃi hæd kəmændəd; laɪf sɪns əɹ kæptʃɝ hæd bɪn mɪzɝi, bʌt θɛɝɑvə wəd meɪk əɹ ə læpdɔɡ! jɛɾ ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt, wəd ðeɪ lɛt θɛɝɑvə bɹeɪk hɝ? ʃi kəd nɑt faɪn ðə smɔləs pɑɹɾəkəl ə daʊt ðət ðə wʊmən wəd də dʒʌs ðæt. ʌɾɝli.

For an instant, Galina hesitated, flexing mashed fingers. It felt the same as the Oath Rod, too; not quite like ivory, not quite like glass, distinctly cool on her palms. If it was a second Oath Rod, it could be used to remove any oath she swore now. If she were given the opportunity. She did not want to take the chance, did not want to swear to Therava in any case. Always before this in her life, she had commanded; life since her capture had been misery, but Therava would make her a lapdog! Yet if she did not, would they let Therava break her? She could not find the smallest particle of doubt that the woman would do just that. Utterly.

"ʌndɝ ðə laɪɾ ən baɪ maɪ hoʊp ə sælveɪʃən ən ɹibɝθ" - ʃi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bɪlivd ɪn ðə laɪɾ əɹ ə hoʊp ə sælveɪʃən, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə spik mɔɹ ðən ə sɪmpəl pɹɑməs, bʌt ðeɪ ɪkspɛktəɾ ə stʃɹɔŋ oʊθ - "aɪ swɛɹ tə oʊbeɪ ɛvɹi waɪz wʌn pɹɛzən hɪɹ ɪn ɔl θɪŋz, ən fɝst əmʌŋ ðɛm, θɛɝɑvə ən sɪvænə." ðə læs hoʊp ðət ðɪs "baɪndɝ" wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls vænɪʃt əz ɡəlinə fɛl ði oʊθ sɛɾəl ɑn hɝ, əz ɪf ʃi sʌɾənli wɔɹ ə ɡɑɹmən ðət kʌvɝɾ əɹ fɑɹ tu taɪtli fɹəm əɹ skælp tə ðə soʊlz ə hɝ fit. θɹoʊɪŋ bæk əɹ hɛd, ʃi skɹimd. ɪn pɑɹt ðət wɑz kəz ɪt sʌɾənli simd əz ɪf ðə bɝnɪŋ ə hɝ skɪn wɑz biɪŋ pɹɛs dip ɪndə hɝ flɛʃ, bʌt meɪnli, ɪt wɑz pjʊɹ dɪspɛɹ.

"Under the Light and by my hope of salvation and rebirth" - she no longer believed in the Light or a hope of salvation, and there was no need to speak more than a simple promise, but they expected a strong oath - "I swear to obey every Wise One present here in all things, and first among them, Therava and Sevanna." The last hope that this "binder" was something else vanished as Galina felt the oath settle on her, as if she suddenly wore a garment that covered her far too tightly from her scalp to the soles of her feet. Throwing back her head, she screamed. In part that was because it suddenly seemed as if the burning of her skin was being pressed deep into her flesh, but mainly, it was pure despair.

"bi kwaɪət!" θɛɝɑvə sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "aɪ də nɑt wɑnə lɪsən tə jə weɪlɪŋ!" ɡəlinəz tiθ klɪkt ʃʌt, nɪɹli baɪɾɪŋ əɹ tʌŋ, ən ʃi stʃɹʌɡəl tə swɑloʊ hɝ sɑbz. nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ oʊbiɾiəns wɑz pɑsəbəl, naʊ. θɛɝɑvə fɹaʊn ət hɝ. "lɛɾ əs si ɪf ðɪs tʃɹuli wɝks," ʃi mʌɾɝd, bɛndɪŋ kloʊsɝ. "hæv jə plæn vaɪələns əɡɛnst ɛni waɪz wʌn hɪɹ? ænsɝ tʃɹuθfəli, ən æsk tə bi pʌnɪʃt ɪf jə hæv. ðə pɛnəlti fəɹ vaɪələns əɡɛnst ə waɪz wʌn," ʃi æɾəd laɪk ən æftɝθɑt, "kæn bi tə bi kɪld laɪk ən ænəməl." ʃi dʒɹu ə fɪŋɡɝ ɪkspɹɛsɪvli əkɹɔs əɹ θɹoʊt ðən ɡɹɪpt əɹ bɛl naɪf wɪð ðə seɪm hænd.

"Be quiet!" Therava said sharply. "I do not want to listen to you wailing!" Galina's teeth clicked shut, nearly biting her tongue, and she struggled to swallow her sobs. Nothing but obedience was possible, now. Therava frowned at her. "Let us see if this truly works," she muttered, bending closer. "Have you planned violence against any Wise One here? Answer truthfully, and ask to be punished if you have. The penalty for violence against a Wise One," she added like an afterthought, "can be to be killed like an animal." She drew a finger expressively across her throat then gripped her belt knife with the same hand.

ɡʌlpɪŋ ɛɹ ɪn hɔɹəfaɪd pænɪk, ɡəlinə ʃaɪd bæk fɹəm ðə wʊmən. ʃi kəd nɑt teɪk əɹ aɪz əweɪ fɹəm θɛɝɑvəz, ðoʊ, ən ʃi kəd nɑt stɑp ðə wɝdz ðət tʃæɾɝd θɹu hɝ tiθ. "aɪ di-dɪd, æɡ-dʒi-ɡeɪnst ɔl ə ju! pi-pliz pi-pʌnɪʃ mi ɛf-fɔɹ ɪt!" wəd ðeɪ kɪl hɝ, naʊ? æftɝ ɔl ə ðɪs, wɑz ʃi tə daɪ hɪɹ?

Gulping air in horrified panic, Galina shied back from the woman. She could not take her eyes away from Therava's, though, and she could not stop the words that chattered through her teeth. "I d-did, ag-g-gainst all of you! P-please p-punish me f-for it!" Would they kill her, now? After all of this, was she to die here?

"ɪt simz ðɪs baɪndɝ dʌz əz jəɹ fɹɛn kleɪmd æftɝ ɔl, sɪvænə." plʌkɪŋ ðə ɹɑd fɹəm ɡəlinəz lɪmp hænz, θɛɝɑvə tʌkt ɪt bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛlt əz ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd. "ɪɾ ɔlsoʊ simz ðət jəl wɛɹ waɪɾ æftɝ ɔl, ɡəlinə kæsbən." fəɹ səm ɹizən, ʃi ɡeɪv ə pliz smaɪl ət ðæt. bʌt ʃi ɪʃuɾ ʌðɝ kəmænz, tu. "ju wɪl bɪheɪv mikli, əz ə ɡeɪʃeɪn ʃʊd. ɪf ə tʃaɪl tɛlz jə tə dʒʌmp, jəl dʒʌmp ənlɛs wʌn ʌv əs əz sɛɾ ʌðɝwaɪz. ən jəl nɑt tʌtʃ seɪaɪdɑɹ əɹ tʃænəl ənlɛs wʌn ʌv əs tɛlz ju. ɹilis ðə ʃild ɑn hɝ, bəlɪnd."

"It seems this binder does as your friend claimed after all, Sevanna." Plucking the rod from Galina's limp hands, Therava tucked it behind her belt as she straightened. "It also seems that you will wear white after all, Galina Casban." For some reason, she gave a pleased smile at that. But she issued other commands, too. "You will behave meekly, as a gai'shain should. If a child tells you to jump, you will jump unless one of us has said otherwise. And you will not touch saidar or channel unless one of us tells you. Release the shield on her, Belinde."

ðə ʃil vænɪʃt, ən ɡəlinə nɛl ðɛɹ, stɛɹɪŋ hɑloʊli. ðə sɔɹs ʃoʊn dʒʌst aʊɾ ə saɪt, tæntəlaɪzɪŋ. ən ʃi cʊɾə spɹaʊɾəd wɪŋz əz izəli əz ʃi kəd stʃɹɛtʃ aʊt fəɹ ɪt.

The shield vanished, and Galina knelt there, staring hollowly. The Source shone just out of sight, tantalizing. And she could have sprouted wings as easily as she could stretch out for it.

bɹeɪslɪts klæɾɝd əz sɪvænə ʃɪftəɾ əɹ ʃɔl ɪn æŋɡɝ. "ju teɪk tu mʌtʃ ɑn jɝsɛlf, θɛɝɑvə. ðəɾ ɪz maɪn; ɡɪv ɪt tə mi!" ʃi hɛld aʊɾ əɹ hænd, bʌt θɛɝɑvə mɪɹli foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts.

Bracelets clattered as Sevanna shifted her shawl in anger. "You take too much on yourself, Therava. That is mine; give it to me!" She held out her hand, but Therava merely folded her arms beneath her breasts.

"ðɛɹ əv bɪn miɾɪŋz əmʌŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz," ðə stɝn-aɪd wʊmən toʊl sɪvænə. "wi hæv ɹitʃt sɝɾən dɪsɪʒənz." ðə wɪmən u hæd kʌm wɪð əɹ ɡæðɝd bɪhaɪn hɝ, ɔl ə ðɛm feɪsɪŋ sɪvænə, ən bəlɪn hɝid tə dʒɔɪn ðɛm.

"There have been meetings among the Wise Ones," the stern-eyed woman told Sevanna. "We have reached certain decisions." The women who had come with her gathered behind her, all of them facing Sevanna, and Belinde hurried to join them.

"wɪθaʊt mi?" sɪvænə snæpt. "du ɛni ʌv jə dɛɹ ɹitʃ ə dɪsɪʒən wɪθaʊt mi?" hɝ toʊn ɹɪmeɪn əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ɛvɝ, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz flɪkɝd tə ðə ɹɑɾ ɪn θɛɝɑvəz bɛlt, ən ɡəlinə θɔt ðəɹ wɑz ə tʌtʃ ʌv ʌnizinəs ðɛɹ. ənʌðɝ taɪm, ʃi wʊɾə bɪn dɪlaɪɾəd tə si ɪt.

"Without me?" Sevanna snapped. "Do any of you dare reach a decision without me?" Her tone remained as strong as ever, but her eyes flickered to the rod in Therava's belt, and Galina thought there was a touch of uneasiness there. Another time, she would have been delighted to see it.

"wʌn dɪsɪʒən hæd tə bi ɹitʃt wɪθaʊt ju," ʃən sɛɾ ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs.

"One decision had to be reached without you," Tion said in a flat voice.

"æz jə soʊ ɔfən pɔɪn aʊt, jə spik əz ðə klæn tʃif," ɪmɝiz æɾəd, ə mɑkɪŋ laɪɾ ɪn əɹ bɪɡ ɡɹeɪ aɪz. "səmtaɪmz, waɪz wʌnz mʌs tɔk wɪθaʊɾ ə klæn tʃif lɪsnɪŋ. əɹ sʌmwʌn u spiks əz ə tʃif."

"As you so often point out, you speak as the clan chief," Emerys added, a mocking light in her big gray eyes. "Sometimes, Wise Ones must talk without a clan chief listening. Or someone who speaks as a chief."

"wi dɪsaɪɾɪd," θɛɝɑvə sɛd, "ðæt dʒʌst əz ə klæn tʃif mʌst əv ə waɪz wʌn tə ædvaɪz hɪm, soʊ mʌs juv ə waɪz wʌnz ædvaɪs. əl ædvaɪz ju."

"We decided," Therava said, "that just as a clan chief must have a Wise One to advise him, so must you have a Wise One's advice. I will advise you."

ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl ɝaʊn hɝ, sɪvænə stʌɾid ðə wɪmən kənfɹʌntɪŋ hɝ. hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən wɑz ənɹiɾəbəl. haʊ dɪd ʃi də ɪt? ðeɪ kəd kɹʌʃ əɹ laɪk ən ɛɡ bɪniθ ə hæmɝ. "ænd wʌɾ ædvaɪs dʒju ɔfɝ mi, θɛɝɑvə?" ʃi sɛɾ ət læst ɪn ən aɪsi vɔɪs.

Gathering her shawl around her, Sevanna studied the women confronting her. Her expression was unreadable. How did she do it? They could crush her like an egg beneath a hammer. "And what advice do you offer me, Therava?" she said at last in an icy voice.

"maɪ stʃɹɔŋ ædvaɪs ɪz ðət wi muv wɪθaʊt dɪleɪ," θɛɝɑvə ɹɪplaɪd, əz kul əz sɪvænə. "ðiz sintʃæn ɑɹ tu kloʊz ən tu mɛni. wi ʃəd muv nɔɹθ ɪndə ðiz maʊntənz ə mɪst ən ɪstæblɪʃ ə hoʊld. fɹəm ðɛɹ, wi kən sɛn pɑɹɾiz tə faɪn ði ʌðɝ sɛps. ɪt meɪ teɪk lɔŋ tə ɹiunaɪt ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, sɪvænə. jəɹ wɛtləndɝ fɹɛn meɪ hæv skæɾɝd əs tə ðə naɪn kɔɹnɝz ə ðə wɝld. əntɪl wi də ðæt, wəɹ vʌlnɝəbəl."

"My strong advice is that we move without delay," Therava replied, as cool as Sevanna. "These Seanchan are too close and too many. We should move north into these Mountains of Mist and establish a hold. From there, we can send parties to find the other septs. It may take long to reunite the Shaido, Sevanna. Your wetlander friend may have scattered us to the nine corners of the world. Until we do that, we are vulnerable."

"wi wɪl muv təmɑɹoʊ." ɪf ɡəlinə hæd nɑt bɪn ʃʊɹ ʃi nu sɪvænə ɪnsaɪɾ ən aʊt, ʃi wʊɾə θɔt ðə wʊmən saʊndəd pɛtʃələn əz wɛl əz æŋɡɹi. ðoʊz ɡɹin aɪz flæʃt. "bʌɾ ist. ðəɾ ɔlsoʊ ɪz əweɪ fɹəm ðə sintʃæn, ən ðə lænz tə ði ist ɑɹ ɪn tɝmɔɪl, ɹaɪp fəɹ plʌkɪŋ."

"We will move tomorrow." If Galina had not been sure she knew Sevanna inside and out, she would have thought the woman sounded petulant as well as angry. Those green eyes flashed. "But east. That also is away from the Seanchan, and the lands to the east are in turmoil, ripe for plucking."

ðəɹ wɑz ə lɔŋ saɪləns, ðən θɛɝɑvə nɑɾəd. "ist." ʃi sɛd ðə wɝd sɔfli, ðə sɔfnəs ə sɪlk leɪɾ oʊvɝ stil. "bʌt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət klæn tʃifs əv lɪv tə ɹəɡɹɛt ɹɪdʒɛktɪŋ ə waɪz wʌnz ædvaɪs tu ɔfən. jə meɪ, əz wɛl." ðə θɹɛɾ ɑn əɹ feɪs wɑz pleɪn əz ðəɾ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs, jɛt sɪvænə læft!

There was a long silence, then Therava nodded. "East." She said the word softly, the softness of silk laid over steel. "But remember that clan chiefs have lived to regret rejecting a Wise One's advice too often. You may, as well." The threat on her face was plain as that in her voice, yet Sevanna laughed!

"ju ɹɪmɛmbɝ, θɛɝɑvə! ɔl ə jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ! ɪf aɪm lɛft fəɹ ðə vʌltʃɝz, soʊ wɪl jə bi! aɪ hæv meɪɾ əʃʊɹəns ə ðæt."

"You remember, Therava! All of you remember! If I am left for the vultures, so will you be! I have made assurance of that."

ði ʌðɝ wɪmən ɪkstʃeɪnʒd wɝid ɡlænsɪz, ɔl bʌt θɛɝɑvə, ən moʊdʒɹə ən nɔɹliə fɹaʊnd.

The other women exchanged worried glances, all but Therava, and Modarra and Norlea frowned.

slʌmpt ɑn əɹ niz, wɪmpɝɪŋ ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ ɪn veɪn tə suð əɹ skɪn wɪð əɹ hænz, ɡəlinə faʊn hɝsɛlf wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt ðiz θɹɛts mɛnt. ɪt wɑz ə smɔl θɔt, wɝmɪŋ ɪts weɪ θɹu bɪɾɝnəs ən sɛlf-pɪɾi. ɛniθɪŋ ʃi kəd juz əɡɛns ðiz wɪmən wəd bi wɛlkəm. ɪf ʃi dɛɹd juz ɪt. ə bɪɾɝ θɔt.

Slumped on her knees, whimpering and trying in vain to soothe her skin with her hands, Galina found herself wondering what these threats meant. It was a small thought, worming its way through bitterness and self-pity. Anything she could use against these women would be welcome. If she dared use it. A bitter thought.

əbɹʌpli ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət ðə skaɪ wɑz tɝnɪŋ dɑɹk. bɪloʊɪŋ klaʊdz wɝ ɹoʊlɪŋ daʊn fɹəm ðə nɔɹθ, stʃɹikt ɡɹeɪ ən blæk, əbskjʊɹɪŋ ðə sʌn. ən bɪniθ ðə klaʊdz fɛl flɝiz ə snoʊ, swɝlɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ. nʌn ɹitʃt ðə ɡɹaʊnd - fju fɛl əz fɑɹ əz ðə tʃɹitɑps - bʌt ɡəlinə ɡeɪpt. snoʊ! hæd ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd lusən ɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn ðə wɝl fəɹ səm ɹizən?

Abruptly she realized that the sky was turning dark. Billowing clouds were rolling down from the north, streaked gray and black, obscuring the sun. And beneath the clouds fell flurries of snow, swirling in the air. None reached the ground - few fell as far as the treetops - but Galina gaped. Snow! Had the Great Lord loosened his grip on the world for some reason?

ðə waɪz wʌnz stɛɹɾ ət ðə skaɪ, tu, maʊðz hæŋɪŋ oʊpən əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ sin klaʊdz, mʌtʃ lɛs snoʊ.

The Wise Ones stared at the sky, too, mouths hanging open as if they had never seen clouds, much less snow.

"wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs, ɡəlinə kæsbən?" θɛɝɑvə dɪmændəd. "spik ɪf jə noʊ!" ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk əweɪ fɹəm ðə skaɪ əntɪl ɡəlinə toʊld əɹ ɪt wɑz snoʊ, ən wən ʃi dɪɾ ɪt wɑz tə læf. "aɪ ɔlweɪz θɔt ðə mɛn u ɹæn daʊn leɪmən tʃɹikɪlɝ laɪɾ əbaʊt snoʊ. ðɪs kəd nɑt hæmpɝ ə maʊs!"

"What is this, Galina Casban?" Therava demanded. "Speak if you know!" She did not look away from the sky until Galina told her it was snow, and when she did it was to laugh. "I always thought the men who ran down Laman Treekiller lied about snow. This could not hamper a mouse!"

ɡəlinə klæmpt əɹ dʒɔz ʃʌɾ ɑn ɪkspleɪnɪŋ əbaʊt snoʊfɔlz, əɡæs ðəɾ əɹ ɪnstɪŋk hæd bɪn tə kʌɹi feɪvɝ. əɡæst əz wɛl ət ðə smɔl pæŋ ə plɛʒɝ ðət kipɪŋ ði ɪnfɝmeɪʃən bæk ɡeɪv. aɪm ðə haɪəst ə ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ! ʃi ɹimaɪndəd hɝsɛlf. aɪ sɪɾ ɑn ðə səpɹim kaʊnsəl ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ! ðeɪ saʊndəd laɪk laɪz. ðɪs wɑz nɑt fɛɹ!

Galina clamped her jaws shut on explaining about snowfalls, aghast that her instinct had been to curry favor. Aghast as well at the small pang of pleasure that keeping the information back gave. I am the Highest of the Red Ajah! she reminded herself. I sit on the Supreme Council of the Black Ajah! They sounded like lies. This was not fair!

"ɪf wəɹ dʌn hɪɹ," sɪvænə sɛd, "aɪ wɪl teɪk ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn bæk tə ðə ɡɹeɪt ɹuf ən si hɝ pʊɾ ɪn waɪt. jə kən ɹɪmeɪn ən stɛɹ ət ðə snoʊ ɪf jə wɪʃ." hɝ toʊn wɑz soʊ smuð, laɪk bʌɾɝ ɪn ðə tʌb, ðət noʊ wʌn wʊɾə θɔɾ əɹ ət dæɡɝz' pɔɪns oʊnli moʊməns ɝliɝ. ʃi lupt əɹ ʃɔl oʊvɝ əɹ ɛlboʊz ən ədʒʌstəd səm ə hɝ nɛkləsɪz; nʌθɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝl kənsɝn əɹ mɔɹ.

"If we are done here," Sevanna said, "I will take the gai'shain back to the great roof and see her put in white. You can remain and stare at the snow if you wish." Her tone was so smooth, like butter in the tub, that no one would have thought her at daggers' points only moments earlier. She looped her shawl over her elbows and adjusted some of her necklaces; nothing in the world concerned her more.

"wi wɪl teɪk kɛɹ ə ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn," θɛɝɑvə toʊld əɹ dʒʌst əz smuðli. "sɪns jə spik əz ðə tʃif, juv ə lɔŋ deɪ ən moʊst ə ðə naɪɾ əhɛɾ ə jə ɪf wəɹ tə muv təmɑɹoʊ." fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, sɪvænəz aɪz flæʃt əɡɛn, bʌt θɛɝɑvə mɪɹli snæpt əɹ fɪŋɡɝz ən dʒɛstʃɝd ʃɑɹpli ət ɡəlinə bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ tə ɡoʊ. "kʌm wɪð mi," ʃi sɛd. "æn stɑp paʊɾɪŋ."

"We will take care of the gai'shain," Therava told her just as smoothly. "Since you speak as the chief, you have a long day and most of the night ahead of you if we are to move tomorrow." For an instant, Sevanna's eyes flashed again, but Therava merely snapped her fingers and gestured sharply at Galina before turning to go. "Come with me," she said. "And stop pouting."

hɛd daʊn, ɡəlinə skɹæmbəl tə hɝ fiɾ ən skɝiɾ æftɝ θɛɝɑvə ən ði ʌðɝ wɪmən u kəd tʃænəl. paʊɾɪŋ? ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn skaʊlɪŋ, bʌt nɛvɝ paʊɾɪŋ! hɝ θɔts skɹæbəld laɪk ɹæts ɪn ə keɪdʒ, faɪndɪŋ noʊ hoʊp ʌv ɪskeɪp. ðəɹ hæd tə bi wʌn! ðəɹ hæd tə bi! wʌn θɔt ðət sɝfɪst ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðət tɝmɔɪl ɔlmoʊs meɪɾ əɹ bɪɡɪn wipɪŋ əɡɛn. wɝ ɡeɪʃeɪn ɹoʊbz sɑftɝ ðən ðə skɹætʃi blæk wʊl ʃi hæd bɪn fɔɹs tə wɛɹ soʊ fɑɹ? ðəɹ hæd tə bi ə weɪ aʊt! ə heɪsti ɡlæns bæk θɹu ðə tʃɹiz ʃoʊd sɪvænə stɪl stændɪŋ ðɛɹ, ɡlɛɹɪŋ æftɝ ðɛm. oʊvɝhɛd, ðə klaʊdz swɝld, ən ðə fɔlɪŋ snoʊ mɛltəd laɪk ɡəlinəz hoʊps.

Head down, Galina scrambled to her feet and scurried after Therava and the other women who could channel. Pouting? She might have been scowling, but never pouting! Her thoughts scrabbled like rats in a cage, finding no hope of escape. There had to be one! There had to be! One thought that surfaced in the middle of that turmoil almost made her begin weeping again. Were gai'shain robes softer than the scratchy black wool she had been forced to wear so far? There had to be a way out! A hasty glance back through the trees showed Sevanna still standing there, glaring after them. Overhead, the clouds swirled, and the falling snow melted like Galina's hopes.


tʃæptɝ twɛlv


CHAPTER 12

nu əlaɪənsəz


New Alliances

ɡɹeɪndəl wɪʃt ðəɹ hæd bɪn ivən ə sɪmpəl tʃɹænskɹaɪbɝ əmʌŋ ðə θɪŋz ʃi hæd ɹimuv fɹəm ɪljən æftɝ sɑmaɪlz dɛθ. ðɪs eɪdʒ wɑz fɹaɪtfəl juʒəwəli, pɹɪməɾɪv ən ənkʌmftəɹbəl. stɪl, səm ʌv ɪt suɾəd hɝ. ɪn ə lɑɹdʒ bæmbu keɪdʒ ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə ɹum ə hʌnʒɹəd bɹaɪtli pluməɡd bɝdz sæŋ mɛloʊɾiəsli, ɔlmoʊst əz bjuɾəfəl ɪn ðɛɹ mʌltikʌlɝd flɪɾɪŋ əz əɹ tu pɛts ɪn tʃɹænspɛɹən ɹoʊbz u weɪɾəd ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə dɔɹ, ðɛɹ ɡeɪzəz lɑkt ɑn hɝ, iɡɝ tə sɝv əɹ plɛʒɝ. ɪf ɔɪl læmps dɪd nɑt ɡɪv ðə seɪm laɪɾ əz ɡloʊbəlbz, eɪɾəd baɪ lɑɹdʒ mɪɹɝz ɑn ðə wɔlz ðeɪ pɹədust ə sɝɾən bɑɹbæɹɪk splɛndɝ wɪð ðə ɡɪldɪd fɪʃ-skeɪl silɪŋ. ɪt wʊɾə bɪn naɪs tə niɾ oʊnli spik ðə wɝdz, bʌɾ æktʃəli  pʊɾɪŋ əm ɑn peɪpɝ wɪð əɹ oʊn hæn pɹədust ə plɛʒɝ əkɪn tə ðət ʃi fɛlt ɪn skɛtʃɪŋ. ðə skɹɪpt ə ðɪs eɪdʒ wɑz kwaɪt sɪmpəl, ən lɝnɪŋ tə dupləkeɪɾ ənʌðɝz staɪl hæd bɪn noʊ mɔɹ dɪfəkəlt.

Graendal wished there had been even a simple transcriber among the things she had removed from Illian after Sammael's death. This Age was frightful usually, primitive and uncomfortable. Still, some of it suited her. In a large bamboo cage at the far end of the room a hundred brightly plumaged birds sang melodiously, almost as beautiful in their multicolored flitting as her two pets in transparent robes who waited on either side of the door, their gazes locked on her, eager to serve her pleasure. If oil lamps did not give the same light as glowbulbs, aided by large mirrors on the walls they produced a certain barbaric splendor with the gilded fish-scale ceiling. It would have been nice to need only speak the words, but actually putting them on paper with her own hand produced a pleasure akin to that she felt in sketching. The script of this Age was quite simple, and learning to duplicate another's style had been no more difficult.

saɪnɪŋ wɪð ə flɝɪʃ - nɑɾ əɹ oʊn neɪm, ʌv kɔɹs - ʃi sændɪd ðə θɪk peɪdʒ, ðən foʊldəɾ ɪɾ ən sild ɪt wɪð wʌn ə ðə sɪɡnɪt ɹɪŋz ə vɛɹiəs saɪzəz ðət meɪɾ ə dɛkɹəɾɪv laɪn əkɹɔs ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl. ðə hæn ən sɔɹɾ ʌv ɑɹæd dumən ɪmpɹɛst ɑn ən ɪɹɛɡjəlɝ sɝkəl ə blu-ænd-ɡɹin wæks.

Signing with a flourish - not her own name, of course - she sanded the thick page, then folded it and sealed it with one of the signet rings of various sizes that made a decorative line across the writing table. The Hand and Sword of Arad Doman impressed on an irregular circle of blue-and-green wax.

"teɪk ðɪs tə lɔɹɾ ɪɾɝɑldi wɪð ɔl spid," ʃi sɛd, "æn seɪ oʊnli wʌɾ aɪ toʊl ju."

"Take this to Lord Ituralde with all speed," she said, "and say only what I told you."

"æz fæst əz hɔɹsəz kən kæɹi mi, maɪ leɪɾi." næzɹən baʊɾ əz i tʊk ðə lɛɾɝ, wʌn fɪŋɡɝ stʃɹoʊkɪŋ θɪn blæk mʌstæʃɪz əbʌv ə wɪnɪŋ smaɪl. skwɛɹ ən dipli bɹaʊn ɪn ə wɛl-fɪɾɪŋ blu koʊt, hi wɑz hænsəm; dʒʌs nɑt səfɪʃənli hænsəm. "aɪ ɹəsiv ðɪs fɹəm ðə leɪɾi tuvə, hu daɪɾ ə hɝ wunz æftɝ tɛlɪŋ mi ðət ʃi wɑz ə kɝiɝ fɹəm ælsələm ən hæd bɪn ətæk baɪ ə ɡɹeɪ mæn."

"As fast as horses can carry me, my Lady." Nazran bowed as he took the letter, one finger stroking thin black mustaches above a winning smile. Square and deeply brown in a well-fitting blue coat, he was handsome; just not sufficiently handsome. "I received this from the Lady Tuva, who died of her wounds after telling me that she was a courier from Alsalam and had been attacked by a Gray Man."

"meɪk ʃʊɹ ðəɹ ɪz hjumən blʌɾ ɑn ɪt," ʃi ədmɑnɪʃt. ʃi daʊɾɪd ɛniwʌn ɪn ðɪs taɪm kəd tɛl hjumən blʌd fɹəm ɛni ʌðɝ, bʌt ʃi hæd faʊn tu mɛni sɝpɹaɪzəz tə teɪk ən ənnɛsəsɛɹi tʃæns. "ɪnʌf fəɹ ɹilɪzəm; nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə spɔɪl wʌɾ aɪ ɹoʊt."

"Make sure there is human blood on it," she admonished. She doubted anyone in this time could tell human blood from any other, but she had found too many surprises to take an unnecessary chance. "Enough for realism; not enough to spoil what I wrote."

hɪz blæk aɪz lɪŋɡɝd wɔɹmli ɑn əɹ əz i baʊɾ əɡɛn, bʌɾ əz sun əz i stʃɹeɪɾənd i hɝid tə ðə dɔɹ, buts θəɾɪŋ ɑn ðə peɪl jɛloʊ mɑɹbəl flɔɹ. hi dɪd nɑt noʊɾəs ðə sɝvəns wɪð ðɛɹ aɪz fɪkst ɑɹɾəntli ɑn hɝ, əɹ əfɛktəd nɑt tə noʊɾəs, ðoʊ hi hæd wʌns bɪn ə fɹɛn ə ðə jʌŋ mæn. oʊnli ə tʌtʃ ə kəmpʌlʃən hæd bɪn niɾəd tə meɪk næzɹən nɪɹli əz ævəd tə oʊbeɪ əz ðeɪ, nɑt tə mɛnʃən sɝɾən ðəɾ i maɪt jɛt teɪst əɹ tʃɑɹmz əɡɛn. ʃi læf sɔfli. wɛl, hi bɪlivd i hæd teɪstəd ðɛm; dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl pɹɪɾiɝ, ən i maɪt hæv. ʌv kɔɹs, hi wʊɾə bɪn jusləs fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ðɛn. hi wəd ɹaɪd hɔɹsəz tə dɛθ ɹitʃɪŋ ɪɾɝɑldi, ən ɪf ðət mɛsədʒ, dɪlɪvɝd baɪ ælsələmz kloʊs kʌzən, səpoʊzədli kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðə kɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ən wɪð ɡɹeɪ mɛn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stɑp ɪt, dɪd nɑt sæɾəsfaɪ ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz kəmæn tə ɪnkɹis keɪɑs, nʌθɪŋ wʊd, ʃɔɹɾ ə bɑlfaɪɝ. ən ɪt wəd sɝv əɹ oʊn ɛnz vɛɹi naɪsli əz wɛl. hɝ oʊn ɛnz.

His black eyes lingered warmly on her as he bowed again, but as soon as he straightened he hurried to the door, boots thudding on the pale yellow marble floor. He did not notice the servants with their eyes fixed ardently on her, or affected not to notice, though he had once been a friend of the young man. Only a touch of Compulsion had been needed to make Nazran nearly as avid to obey as they, not to mention certain that he might yet taste her charms again. She laughed softly. Well, he believed he had tasted them; just a little prettier, and he might have. Of course, he would have been useless for anything else then. He would ride horses to death reaching Ituralde, and if that message, delivered by Alsalam's close cousin, supposedly coming from the King himself and with Gray Men trying to stop it, did not satisfy the Great Lord's command to increase chaos, nothing would, short of balefire. And it would serve her own ends very nicely as well. Her own ends.

ɡɹeɪndəlz hænd wɛn tə ði oʊnli ɹɪŋ ɑn ðə teɪbəl ðət wɑz nɑɾ ə sɪɡnɪt, ə pleɪn ɡoʊldən bæn tu smɔl fəɹ ɛni bʌɾ əɹ lɪɾəl fɪŋɡɝ. ɪt hæd bɪn ə plɛzən sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ən æŋɡɹil ətun tə wɪmən əmʌŋ sɑmaɪlz pəzɛʃənz. ə plɛzən sɝpɹaɪz tə hæv taɪm tə faɪn mʌtʃ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ jusfəl wɪð ælθɹ ən ðoʊz pʌpiz u kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz æʃəmən kɑnstənli ɪn ən aʊɾ ə sɑmaɪlz tʃeɪmbɝz ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪt hɔl ə ðə kaʊnsəl. ðeɪ hæd stʃɹɪpt ɪt bɛɹ ʌv wʌt ʃi hæd nɑt teɪkən. deɪnʒɝəs pʌpiz, ɔl ə ðɛm, ɪspɛʃli ælθɹ. ən ʃi hæd nɑt wɑntəd tə ɹɪsk ɛniwʌn biɪŋ eɪbəl tə dʒɹɔ ə laɪn fɹəm sɑmaɪl tə hɝ. jɛs, ʃi mʌst ɪnkɹis ðə peɪs ə hɝ oʊn plænz, ən dɪstəns hɝsɛlf fɹəm sɑmaɪlz dɪzæstɝ.

Graendal's hand went to the only ring on the table that was not a signet, a plain golden band too small for any but her little finger. It had been a pleasant surprise to find an angreal attuned to women among Sammael's possessions. A pleasant surprise to have time to find much of anything useful with al'Thor and those puppies who called themselves Asha'man constantly in and out of Sammael's chambers in the Great Hall of the Council. They had stripped it bare of what she had not taken. Dangerous puppies, all of them, especially al'Thor. And she had not wanted to risk anyone being able to draw a line from Sammael to her. Yes, she must increase the pace of her own plans, and distance herself from Sammael's disaster.

əbɹʌpli ə vɝɾɪkəl slæʃ ə sɪlvɝ əpɪɹɾ ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə ɹum, bɹaɪɾ əɡɛns ðə tæpəstʃɹiz hæŋɪŋ bɪtwin ðə hɛvi ɡɪldɪd mɪɹɝz, ən ə kɹɪstəlaɪn tʃaɪm ɹæŋ laʊd. hɝ aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. sʌmwʌn ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə kɝɾəsiz ʌv ə mɔɹ sɪvəlaɪzd eɪdʒ, ɪt simd. stændɪŋ, ʃi fɔɹs ðə pleɪn bæn ʌv ɡoʊl daʊn əɡɛns ðə ɹubi ɹɪŋ ɑn əɹ smɔləs fɪŋɡɝ ən ɛmbɹeɪst seɪaɪdɑɹ θɹu ɪt bɪfɔɹ tʃænəlɪŋ ðə wɛb ðət wəd saʊn ən ænsɝɪŋ tʃaɪm fəɹ huɛvɝ wɑntəd tə oʊpən ə ɡeɪtweɪ. ði æŋɡɹil dɪd nɑɾ ɔfɝ mʌtʃ, jɛɾ ɛniwʌn u θɔt ðeɪ nu hɝ stʃɹɛŋkθ wəd faɪn ə ʃɑk.

Abruptly a vertical slash of silver appeared at the far end of the room, bright against the tapestries hanging between the heavy gilded mirrors, and a crystalline chime rang loud. Her eyebrows rose in surprise. Someone remembered the courtesies of a more civilized Age, it seemed. Standing, she forced the plain band of gold down against the ruby ring on her smallest finger and embraced saidar through it before channeling the web that would sound an answering chime for whoever wanted to open a gateway. The angreal did not offer much, yet anyone who thought they knew her strength would find a shock.

ðə ɡeɪtweɪ oʊpənd, ən tu wɪmən ɪn nɪɹli aɪdɛntɪkəl ɹɛd-ænd-blæk sɪlk dʒɹɛsəz stɛp θɹu wɛɹəli. ət list, mɑɡiɾin muv kɔʃəsli, dɑɹk aɪz flɪkɝɪŋ ɪn sɝtʃ ə tʃɹæps, hænz smuðɪŋ əɹ waɪd skɝts; ðə ɡeɪtweɪ wɪŋkt aʊɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt, bʌt ʃi hɛld ɑn tə seɪaɪdɑɹ. ə sɛnsəbəl pɹikɔʃən, ðoʊ mɑɡiɾin hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ə ɡɹeɪt wʌn fəɹ pɹikɔʃənz. ɡɹeɪndəl dɪd nɑt lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv ðə sɔɹs, iðɝ. mɑɡiɾinz kəmpænjən, ə ʃɔɹt jʌŋ wʊmən wɪð lɔŋ sɪlvɝ hɛɹ ən vɪvəd blu aɪz, stɛɹɾ əbaʊɾ əɹ koʊldli, hɑɹdli mɔɹ ðən ɡlænsɪŋ ɪn ɡɹeɪndəlz dɝɛkʃən. baɪ hɝ dɪminɝ, ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn ə pɹaɪm kaʊnsəlɝ fɔɹs tə ɛndʒjʊɹ ðə kʌmpəni ʌv kɑmən leɪbɝɝz ən ɪntɛn ɑn ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðɛɹ ɛɡzɪstəns. ə fulɪʃ ɡɝl, tə ɪməteɪt ðə spaɪɾɝ. ɹɛɾ ən blæk dɪd nɑt suɾ əɹ kʌlɝɪŋ, ən ʃi ʃʊɾə meɪd bɛɾɝ jus ə sətʃ ən ɪmpɹɛsɪv bʊzəm.

The gateway opened, and two women in nearly identical red-and-black silk dresses stepped through warily. At least, Moghedien moved cautiously, dark eyes flickering in search of traps, hands smoothing her wide skirts; the gateway winked out after a moment, but she held on to saidar. A sensible precaution, though Moghedien had always been a great one for precautions. Graendal did not let go of the Source, either. Moghedien's companion, a short young woman with long silver hair and vivid blue eyes, stared about her coldly, hardly more than glancing in Graendal's direction. By her demeanor, she might have been a Prime Counselor forced to endure the company of common laborers and intent on ignoring their existence. A foolish girl, to imitate the Spider. Red and black did not suit her coloring, and she should have made better use of such an impressive bosom.

"ðɪs ɪz sɪndeɪn, ɡɹeɪndəl," mɑɡiɾin sɛd. "wi ɑɹ . . . wɝkɪŋ təɡɛðɝ." ʃi dɪd nɑt smaɪl wən ʃi neɪm ðə hɔɾi jʌŋ wʊmən, bʌt ɡɹeɪndəl dɪd. ə pɹɪɾi neɪm fəɹ ə mɔɹ ðən pɹɪɾi ɡɝl, bʌt wʌt twɪst ə feɪt hæd lɛd səm mʌðɝ ə ðɪs taɪm tə ɡɪv əɹ dɔɾɝ ə neɪm ðət mɛnt "læs tʃæns"? sɪndeɪnz feɪs ɹɪmeɪn koʊld ən smuð, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz flɛɹd. ə bjuɾəfəl dɑl kɑɹv fɹəm aɪs, wɪð hɪɾən faɪɝz. ɪt simd ʃi nu ðə minɪŋ ən dɪd nɑt laɪk ɪt.

"This is Cyndane, Graendal," Moghedien said. "We are . . . working together." She did not smile when she named the haughty young woman, but Graendal did. A pretty name for a more than pretty girl, but what twist of fate had led some mother of this time to give her daughter a name that meant "Last Chance"? Cyndane's face remained cold and smooth, but her eyes flared. A beautiful doll carved from ice, with hidden fires. It seemed she knew the meaning and did not like it.

"wʌt bɹɪŋz jə ən jəɹ fɹɛnd, mɑɡiɾin?" ɡɹeɪndəl æskt. ðə spaɪɾɝ wɑz ðə vɛɹi læst ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd tə kʌm aʊt fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz. "hæv noʊ fɪɹ ə spikɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə maɪ sɝvəns." ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd, ən ðə pɛɹ baɪ ðə dɔɹ sæŋk tə ðɛɹ niz, pɹɛs ðɛɹ feɪsəz tə ðə flɔɹ. ðeɪ wəd nɑt kwaɪt fɔl dɛd baɪ hɝ sɪmpəl kəmænd, bʌt kloʊs.

"What brings you and your friend, Moghedien?" Graendal asked. The Spider was the very last she had expected to come out from the shadows. "Have no fear of speaking in front of my servants." She gestured, and the pair by the door sank to their knees, pressed their faces to the floor. They would not quite fall dead by her simple command, but close.

"wʌɾ ɪntʃɹəs kən jə faɪn ɪn əm wən jə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ɛniθɪŋ ðət maɪt meɪk əm ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ?" sɪndeɪn dɪmændəd, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ ɛɹəɡənli əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ. ʃi hɛl hɝsɛlf vɛɹi stʃɹeɪt, stʃɹaɪvɪŋ fəɹ ɛvɹi hɛɹ ə haɪt. "du jə noʊ ðət sɑmaɪl ɪz dɛd?"

"What interest can you find in them when you destroy anything that might make them interesting?" Cyndane demanded, striding arrogantly across the floor. She held herself very straight, striving for every hair of height. "Do you know that Sammael is dead?"

ɡɹeɪndəl kɛpt əɹ oʊn feɪs smuð, wɪð ə lɪɾəl ɛfɝt. ʃi hæd səpoʊz ðɪs ɡɝl səm fɹɛn ə ðə dɑɹk hum mɑɡiɾin hæd pɪkt ʌp tə ɹʌn ɛɹənz, pɝhæps ə noʊbəl u θɔɾ əɹ taɪɾəl kaʊntəd, bʌt naʊ ðət ʃi wɑz kloʊz. . . . ðə ɡɝl wɑz stʃɹɔŋɝ ɪn ðə wʌn paʊɝ ðən ʃi hɝsɛlf! ivən ɪn əɹ oʊn eɪdʒ, ðət hæd bɪn ənkɑmən əmʌŋ mɛn, ən vɛɹi ɹɛɹ ɪndiɾ əmʌŋ wɪmən. ɑn ði ɪnstənt, ɑn ɪnstɪŋkt, ʃi tʃeɪnʒd əɹ ɪntɛntʃən tə dɪnaɪ ɛni kɑntækt wɪð sɑmaɪl.

Graendal kept her own face smooth, with a little effort. She had supposed this girl some Friend of the Dark whom Moghedien had picked up to run errands, perhaps a noble who thought her title counted, but now that she was close. . . . The girl was stronger in the One Power than she herself! Even in her own Age, that had been uncommon among men, and very rare indeed among women. On the instant, on instinct, she changed her intention to deny any contact with Sammael.

"aɪ səspɛktəd," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd, dɝɛktɪŋ ə fɔls smaɪl oʊvɝ ðə jʌŋ wʊmənz hɛɾ ət mɑɡiɾin. haʊ mʌtʃ dɪd ʃi noʊ? wɛɹ hæd ðə spaɪɾɝ faʊn ə ɡɝl soʊ mʌtʃ stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ʃi, ən waɪ wɑz ʃi tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð hɝ? mɑɡiɾin hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn dʒɛləs ʌv ɛniwʌn wɪð mɔɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ. əɹ mɔɹ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ. "hi juz tə vɪzət mi, ɪmpɹtunɪŋ maɪ hɛlp ɪn wʌn mæd plæn əɹ ənʌðɝ. aɪ nɛvɝ ɹɪdʒɛktɪɾ ɪm aʊtʃɹaɪt; jə noʊ sɑmaɪl ɪz - wɑz ə deɪnʒɝəs mæn tə ɹɪdʒɛkt. hi əpɪɹɾ ɛvɹi fju deɪz wɪθaʊt feɪl, ən wən i stɑpt, aɪ əsum sʌmθɪŋ daɪɹ hæd hæpən tə hɪm. hu ɪz ðɪs ɡɝl, mɑɡiɾin? ə ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl faɪnd."

"I suspected," she replied, directing a false smile over the young woman's head at Moghedien. How much did she know? Where had the Spider found a girl so much stronger than she, and why was she traveling with her? Moghedien had always been jealous of anyone with more strength. Or more of anything. "He used to visit me, importuning my help in one mad plan or another. I never rejected him outright; you know Sammael is - was a dangerous man to reject. He appeared every few days without fail, and when he stopped, I assumed something dire had happened to him. Who is this girl, Moghedien? A remarkable find."

ðə jʌŋ wʊmən stɛp kloʊsɝ, stɛɹɪŋ ʌp əɾ əɹ wɪð aɪz laɪk blu faɪɝ. "ʃi toʊl jə maɪ neɪm. ðəɾ ɪz ɔl jə nid noʊ." ðə ɡɝl nu ʃi spoʊk tə wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən, ən jɛɾ əɹ toʊn ɹɪmeɪn fɹɔst. ivən ɡɪvən əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ, ðɪs wɑz noʊ sɪmpəl fɹɛn ə ðə dɑɹk. ənlɛs ʃi wɑz ɪnseɪn. "hæv jə peɪɾ ətɛnʃən tə ðə wɛðɝ, ɡɹeɪndəl?"

The young woman stepped closer, staring up at her with eyes like blue fire. "She told you my name. That is all you need know." The girl knew she spoke to one of the Chosen, and yet her tone remained frost. Even given her strength, this was no simple Friend of the Dark. Unless she was insane. "Have you paid attention to the weather, Graendal?"

əbɹʌpli, ɡɹeɪndəl ɹilaɪz ðət mɑɡiɾin wɑz lɛɾɪŋ ðə ɡɝl də ɔl ðə tɔkɪŋ. hæŋɪŋ bæk əntɪl ə wiknəs bɪkeɪm əpɛɹənt. ən ɡɹeɪndəl hæd bɪn lɛɾɪŋ hɝ! "aɪ də nɑt səpoʊz jə keɪm tə tɛl mi ʌv sɑmaɪlz dɛθ, mɑɡiɾin," ʃi sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "ɔɹ tə tɔk əbaʊt wɛðɝ. jə noʊ aɪ sɛldəm ɡoʊ aʊtsaɪd." neɪtʃɝ wɑz ənɹuli, lækɪŋ ɔɹɾɝ. ðəɹ wɝ nɑɾ ivən wɪndoʊz ɪn ðɪs ɹum, nɔɹ ɪn moʊs ðət ʃi juzd. "wʌt dʒju wɑnt?" ðə dɑɹk-hɛɹd wʊmən wɑz ɛdʒɪŋ saɪdweɪz əlɔŋ ðə wɔl; ðə ɡloʊ ʌv ðə wʌn paʊɝ stɪl sɝaʊndəd hɝ. ɡɹeɪndəl stɛp kæʒəwəli soʊ ðət boʊθ ɹɪmeɪn ɪn əɹ saɪt.

Abruptly, Graendal realized that Moghedien was letting the girl do all the talking. Hanging back until a weakness became apparent. And Graendal had been letting her! "I do not suppose you came to tell me of Sammael's death, Moghedien," she said sharply. "Or to talk about weather. You know I seldom go outside." Nature was unruly, lacking order. There were not even windows in this room, nor in most that she used. "What do you want?" The dark-haired woman was edging sideways along the wall; the glow of the One Power still surrounded her. Graendal stepped casually so that both remained in her sight.

"ju meɪk ə mɪsteɪk, ɡɹeɪndəl." ə tʃɪli smaɪl bɛɹli kɝv sɪndeɪnz fʊl lɪps; ʃi wɑz ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ ðɪs. "aɪ lɛd bɪtwin ʌs. mɑɡiɾin ɪz ɪn ə bæɾ oʊɾɝ wɪð mɔɹaɪɾɪn fəɹ əɹ ɹisən mɪsteɪks."

"You make a mistake, Graendal." A chilly smile barely curved Cyndane's full lips; she was enjoying this. "I lead between us. Moghedien is in a bad odor with Moridin for her recent mistakes."

ɹæpɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɝsɛlf, mɑɡiɾin ʃɑt ðə sɪlvɝ-hɛɹd lɪɾəl wʊmən ə skaʊl əz ɡʊɾ əz ɛni spoʊkən kɑnfɝmeɪʃən. sʌɾənli sɪndeɪnz bɪɡ aɪz oʊpən ivən waɪɾɝ, ən ʃi ɡæspt, ʃʌɾɝɪŋ.

Wrapping her arms around herself, Moghedien shot the silver-haired little woman a scowl as good as any spoken confirmation. Suddenly Cyndane's big eyes opened even wider, and she gasped, shuddering.

mɑɡiɾinz ɡlɛɹ tɝn məlɪʃəs. "ju lɛd fəɹ ðə moʊmənt," ʃi snɪɹd. "jɔɹ pleɪs ɪn ɪz aɪz ɪz nɑt fɑɹ bɛɾɝ ðən maɪn." ən ðən ʃi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən ʃɪvɝd, baɪɾɪŋ əɹ lɪp.

Moghedien's glare turned malicious. "You lead for the moment," she sneered. "Your place in his eyes is not far better than mine." And then she gave a start and shivered, biting her lip.

wɑz ʃi biɪŋ tɔɪd wɪð, ɡɹeɪndəl wʌndɝd. ðə pjʊɹ heɪtʃɹəd fəɹ itʃ ʌðɝ ɑn ðə tu wɪmənz feɪsəz simd ənfeɪənd. iðɝ weɪ, ʃi wəd si haʊ ðeɪ ɛndʒɔɪd biɪŋ pleɪd. ʌnkɑnʃəsli ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ hænz təɡɛðɝ, ɹʌbɪŋ ði æŋɡɹil ɑn əɹ fɪŋɡɝ, ʃi muv tə ə tʃɛɹ wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ əɹ aɪz fɹəm ðə pɛɹ. ðə switnəs ə seɪaɪdɑɹ floʊɪŋ ɪndə hɝ wɑz ə kʌmfɝt. nɑt ðət ʃi niɾəd kʌmfɝt, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɑd hɪɹ. ðə haɪ stʃɹeɪt bæk, θɪkli kɑɹvd ən ɡɪldɪd, meɪd ðə tʃɛɹ sim ə θɹoʊn, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ɛni ʌðɝ ɪn ðə ɹum. sətʃ θɪŋz əfɛktəɾ ivən ðə moʊst səfɪstəkeɪɾɪd ɑn lɛvəlz ðeɪ nɛvɝ nu kɑnʃəsli.

Was she being toyed with, Graendal wondered. The pure hatred for each other on the two women's faces seemed unfeigned. Either way, she would see how they enjoyed being played. Unconsciously rubbing her hands together, rubbing the angreal on her finger, she moved to a chair without taking her eyes from the pair. The sweetness of saidar flowing into her was a comfort. Not that she needed comfort, but there was something odd here. The high straight back, thickly carved and gilded, made the chair seem a throne, though it was no different from any other in the room. Such things affected even the most sophisticated on levels they never knew consciously.

ʃi sæt linɪŋ bæk wɪð əɹ lɛɡz kɹɔst, wʌn fʊt kɪkɪŋ aɪdli, ðə pɪktʃɝ ʌv ə wʊmən əɾ əɹ iz, ən meɪɾ əɹ vɔɪs bɔɹd. "sɪns jə lɛd, tʃaɪld, tɛl mi, wən ðɪs mæn u kɔlz hɪmsɛlf dɛθ ɪz ɪn ɪz skɪn, hu ɪz hi? wʌɾ ɪz hi?"

She sat leaning back with her legs crossed, one foot kicking idly, the picture of a woman at her ease, and made her voice bored. "Since you lead, child, tell me, when this man who calls himself Death is in his skin, who is he? What is he?"

"mɔɹaɪɾɪn ɪz nɛbli." ðə ɡɝlz vɔɪs wɑz kɑm ən koʊld ən ɛɹəɡənt. "ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ əz dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪts taɪm fəɹ jə tə sɝv ðə nɛbli, tu."

"Moridin is Nae'blis." The girl's voice was calm and cold and arrogant. "The Great Lord has decided it is time for you to serve the Nae'blis, too."

ɡɹeɪndəl dʒɝkt əpɹaɪt. "ðɪs ɪz pɹɪpɑstɝəs." ʃi kəd nɑt kip ði æŋɡɝ fɹəm əɹ vɔɪs. "ə mæn aɪv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə hæz bɪn neɪm ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz ɹidʒən ɑn ɝθ?" ʃi dɪd nɑt maɪnd wən ʌðɝz tʃɹaɪd tə mənɪpjəleɪɾ əɹ - ʃi ɔlweɪz faʊn ə weɪ tə tɝn ðɛɹ skimz əɡɛnst əm - bʌt mɑɡiɾin mʌs teɪk əɹ fəɹ ə hæf-wɪt! ʃi hæd noʊ daʊt ðət mɑɡiɾin wɑz dɝɛktɪŋ ðɪs ɑbnɑkʃəs ɡɝl, wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ kleɪmd, wʌtɛvɝ lʊks ðeɪ stæbd əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ. "aɪ sɝv ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ən maɪsɛlf, noʊ ʌðɝ! aɪ θɪŋk ðə tu ʌv jə ʃəd ɡoʊ, naʊ, ən pleɪ jəɹ lɪɾəl ɡeɪm ɛlswɛɹ. dɪmɑndɝd maɪt bi daɪvɝɾɪd baɪ ɪt. əɹ sɛmɝhɪdʒ? bi kɛɹfəl haʊ jə tʃænəl ɪn livɪŋ; aɪ hæv sɛɾ ə fju ɪnvɝɾɪd wɛbz, ən jə wəd nɑt wɑnə tʃɹɪɡɝ wʌn."

Graendal jerked upright. "This is preposterous." She could not keep the anger from her voice. "A man I've never heard of has been named the Great Lord's Regent on Earth?" She did not mind when others tried to manipulate her - she always found a way to turn their schemes against them - but Moghedien must take her for a half-wit! She had no doubt that Moghedien was directing this obnoxious girl, whatever they claimed, whatever looks they stabbed at each other. "I serve the Great Lord and myself, no other! I think the two of you should go, now, and play your little game elsewhere. Demandred might be diverted by it. Or Semirhage? Be careful how you channel in leaving; I have set a few inverted webs, and you would not want to trigger one."

ðət wɑz ə laɪ, bʌɾ ə vɛɹi bəlivəbəl wʌn, soʊ ɪt keɪm əz ə ʃɑk wən mɑɡiɾin sʌɾənli tʃænəld ən ɛvɹi læmp ɪn ðə ɹum wɛn aʊt, plʌnʒɪŋ əm ɪndə dɑɹknəs. ɪnstənli ɡɹeɪndəl flʌŋ hɝsɛlf fɹəm ðə tʃɛɹ soʊ əz nɑt tə bi wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd læst sin hɝ, ən ʃi ɔlsoʊ tʃænəld ivən əz ʃi muvd, wivɪŋ ə wɛb ə laɪt ðət hʌŋ tə wʌn saɪd, ə sfɪɹ ə pjʊɹ waɪt ðət kæs lʊɹəd ʃædoʊz əbaʊt ðə ɹum. ən ɹɪvil ðə pɛɹ klɪɹli. wɪθaʊt hɛzəteɪʃən, ʃi tʃænəld əɡɛn, dʒɹɔɪŋ ðə fʊl stʃɹɛŋkθ ə ðə lɪɾəl ɹɪŋ. ʃi dɪd nɑt niɾ ɪɾ ɔl, əɹ ivən moʊst, bʌt ʃi wɑntəɾ ɛvɹi ædvæntɪdʒ ʃi kəd faɪnd. ətæk hɝ, wəd ðeɪ! ə nɛɾ ə kəmpʌlʃən taɪɾənd ɑn itʃ ə ðɛm bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd twɪtʃ.

That was a lie, but a very believable one, so it came as a shock when Moghedien suddenly channeled and every lamp in the room went out, plunging them into darkness. Instantly Graendal flung herself from the chair so as not to be where they had last seen her, and she also channeled even as she moved, weaving a web of light that hung to one side, a sphere of pure white that cast lurid shadows about the room. And revealed the pair clearly. Without hesitation, she channeled again, drawing the full strength of the little ring. She did not need it all, or even most, but she wanted every advantage she could find. Attack her, would they! A net of Compulsion tightened on each of them before they could twitch.

ʃi hæd spʌn ðə nɛts stʃɹɔŋ, fəɹ æŋɡɝz seɪk, nɪɹli stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə də hɑɹm, ən ðə wɪmən stʊd stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ ədɔɝɪŋli, aɪz waɪɾ ən maʊðz hæŋɪŋ oʊpən ɪn ædʒəleɪʃən, ɪntɑksəkeɪɾəd wɪð wɝʃəp. ðeɪ wɝ hɝz tə kəmænd, naʊ. ɪf ʃi toʊld əm tə kʌt ðɛɹ oʊn θɹoʊts, ðeɪ wʊd. sʌɾənli ɡɹeɪndəl ɹilaɪz ðət mɑɡiɾin wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ ðə sɔɹs. ðɪs mʌtʃ kəmpʌlʃən maɪɾ əv ʃɑkt əɹ ɪndə lɛɾɪŋ ɡoʊ. ðə sɝvəns baɪ ðə dɔɹ hæd nɑt muvd, ʌv kɔɹs.

She had spun the nets strong, for anger's sake, nearly strong enough to do harm, and the women stood staring at her adoringly, eyes wide and mouths hanging open in adulation, intoxicated with worship. They were hers to command, now. If she told them to cut their own throats, they would. Suddenly Graendal realized that Moghedien was no longer embracing the Source. This much Compulsion might have shocked her into letting go. The servants by the door had not moved, of course.

"naʊ," ʃi sɛɾ ə tʌtʃ bɹɛθləsli, "ju wɪl ænsɝ maɪ kwɛstʃənz." ʃi hæɾ ə nʌmbɝ, ɪnkluɾɪŋ u wɑz ðɪs mɔɹaɪɾɪn fɛloʊ, ɪf ðəɹ wɑz sətʃ ə mæn, ən wɛɹ hæd sɪndeɪn kʌm fɹʌm, bʌt wʌn pikt əɹ mɔɹ ðən ðə ɹɛst. "wʌt dɪd jə hoʊp tə ɡeɪn baɪ ðɪs, mɑɡiɾin? aɪ meɪ dɪsaɪd tə nɑt ðoʊz wɛbz ɑn ju. jə kən peɪ fəɹ jəɹ ɡeɪm baɪ sɝvɪŋ mi."

"Now," she said a touch breathlessly, "you will answer my questions." She had a number, including who was this Moridin fellow, if there was such a man, and where had Cyndane come from, but one piqued her more than the rest. "What did you hope to gain by this, Moghedien? I may decide to knot those webs on you. You can pay for your game by serving me."

"noʊ, pliz," mɑɡiɾin ɡɹoʊnd, ɹɪŋɪŋ əɹ hænz. ʃi æktʃəli  bɪɡæn tə wip! "ju wɪl kɪl əs ɔl! pliz, jə mʌst sɝv ðə nɛbli! ðəɾ ɪz wʌt wi keɪm fɔɹ. tə bɹɪŋ jə tə mɔɹaɪɾɪnz sɝvəs!" ðə sɪlvɝ-hɛɹd lɪɾəl wʊmənz feɪs wɑz ə ʃæɾoʊd mæsk ə tɛɹɝ ɪn ðə peɪl laɪt, hɝ bʊzəm hivɪŋ əz ʃi ɡʌlp bɹɛθ.

"No, please," Moghedien groaned, wringing her hands. She actually began to weep! "You will kill us all! Please, you must serve the Nae'blis! That is what we came for. To bring you to Moridin's service!" The silver-haired little woman's face was a shadowed mask of terror in the pale light, her bosom heaving as she gulped breath.

sʌɾənli ənizi, ɡɹeɪndəl oʊpən əɹ maʊð. ðɪs meɪd lɛs ən lɛs sɛns baɪ ðə moʊmənt. ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, ən ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs vænɪʃt. ðə wʌn paʊɝ vænɪʃt fɹəm hɝ, ən blæknəs swɑloʊd ðə ɹum əɡɛn. əbɹʌpli ðə keɪdʒ bɝdz bɹoʊk ɪndə ə fɹɛnzi ʌv tʃɪɹupɪŋ; ðɛɹ wɪŋz flʌɾɝd fɹæntəkəli əɡɛns ðə bæmbu bɑɹz.

Suddenly uneasy, Graendal opened her mouth. This made less and less sense by the moment. She opened her mouth, and the True Source vanished. The One Power vanished from her, and blackness swallowed the room again. Abruptly the caged birds broke into a frenzy of chirruping; their wings fluttered frantically against the bamboo bars.

bɪhaɪn hɝ, ə vɔɪs ɹæsp laɪk ɹɑk biɪŋ ɡɹaʊn tə dʌst. "ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd θɔt jə maɪt nɑt teɪk ðɛɹ wɝd, ɡɹeɪndəl. ðə taɪm wən jə kəd ɡoʊ jəɹ oʊn weɪ hæz pæst." ə bɔl ʌv . . . sʌmθɪŋ . . . əpɪɹɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ, ə dɛd blæk ɡloʊb, bʌɾ ə sɪlvɝ laɪt fɪl ðə ɹum. ðə mɪɹɝz dɪd nɑt ʃaɪn; ðeɪ sim tə dʌl ɪn ðət laɪt. ðə bɝdz wɛn stɪl, saɪlənt; sʌmhaʊ, ɡɹeɪndəl nu ðeɪ hæd fɹoʊzən ɪn tɛɹɝ.

Behind her, a voice rasped like rock being ground to dust. "The Great Lord thought you might not take their word, Graendal. The time when you could go your own way has passed." A ball of . . . something . . . appeared in the air, a dead black globe, but a silver light filled the room. The mirrors did not shine; they seemed to dull in that light. The birds went still, silent; somehow, Graendal knew they had frozen in terror.

ʃi ɡeɪpt ət ðə mɹdʒɹɑl stændɪŋ ðɛɹ, peɪl ən aɪləs ən kloʊðd ɪn blæk dipɝ ðən ðə bɔl, bʌt lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ɛni ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ sin. ɪt hæd tə bi ðə ɹizən ʃi kəd nɑt sɛns ðə sɔɹs, bʌt ðət wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl! ɪksɛpt. . . . wɛɹ hæd ðət stʃɹeɪnʒ sfɪɹ ə blæk laɪt kʌm fɹəm ɪf nɑt fɹəm ɪt? ʃi hæd nɛvɝ fɛl ðə seɪm fɪɹ ʌðɝz dɪɾ əɾ ə mɹdʒɹɑlz ɡeɪz, nɑt tə ðə seɪm dɪɡɹi, jɛɾ əɹ hænz ɹoʊz ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn, ən ʃi hæd tə snætʃ əm daʊn tə kip fɹəm kʌvɝɪŋ əɹ feɪs. ɡlænsɪŋ təwɔɹd mɑɡiɾin ən sɪndeɪn, ʃi flɪntʃt. ðeɪ hæɾ ədɑptəd ðə seɪm poʊz əz əɹ sɝvəns, kɹaʊtʃɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ niz, hɛdz tə ðə flɔɹ təwɔɹd ðə mɹdʒɹɑl.

She gaped at the Myrddraal standing there, pale and eyeless and clothed in black deeper than the ball, but larger than any she had ever seen. It had to be the reason she could not sense the Source, but that was impossible! Except. . . . Where had that strange sphere of black light come from if not from it? She had never felt the same fear others did at a Myrddraal's gaze, not to the same degree, yet her hands rose on their own, and she had to snatch them down to keep from covering her face. Glancing toward Moghedien and Cyndane, she flinched. They had adopted the same pose as her servants, crouching on their knees, heads to the floor toward the Myrddraal.

ʃi hæd tə wɝk mɔɪstʃɝ ɪndə hɝ maʊθ. "ju ɑɹ ə mɛsənʒɝ fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd?" hɝ vɔɪs wɑz stɛɾi, bʌt wik. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə sətʃ ə θɪŋ, ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd sɛndɪŋ ə mɛsədʒ baɪ mɹdʒɹɑl, ən jɛt. . . . mɑɡiɾin wɑz ə fɪzɪkəl kaʊɝd, bʌt stɪl wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən, ən ʃi ɡɹoʊvəld əz əsɪdwəsli əz ðə ɡɝl. ən ðəɹ wɑz ðə laɪt. ɡɹeɪndəl faʊn hɝsɛlf wɪʃɪŋ əɹ dʒɹɛs wɝ nɑt kʌt soʊ loʊ. ɹɪdɪkjələs, ʌv kɔɹs; mɹdʒɹɑlz æpətaɪts fəɹ wɪmən wɝ wɛl noʊn, bʌt ʃi wɑz wʌn ə ðə. . . . hɝ aɪz dʒɹɪftəd tə mɑɡiɾin wʌns mɔɹ.

She had to work moisture into her mouth. "You are a messenger from the Great Lord?" Her voice was steady, but weak. She had never heard of such a thing, the Great Lord sending a message by Myrddraal, and yet. . . . Moghedien was a physical coward, but still one of the Chosen, and she groveled as assiduously as the girl. And there was the light. Graendal found herself wishing her dress were not cut so low. Ridiculous, of course; Myrddraal's appetites for women were well known, but she was one of the. . . . Her eyes drifted to Moghedien once more.

ðə mɹdʒɹɑl stʃɹoʊd baɪ hɝ sɪnjuəsli, simɪŋ nɑt tə peɪ hɝ ɛni hid. ɪts lɔŋ blæk kloʊk hʌŋ ʌndɪstɝbd baɪ ɪts muvməns. eɪdʒɪnɝ hæd θɔt ðə kɹitʃɝz wɝ nɑt kwaɪɾ ɪn ðə wɝld ɪn ðə seɪm weɪ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls wɑz; "slaɪtli aʊɾ ə feɪz wɪð taɪm ən ɹiæləɾi," hi hæd kɔld ɪt, wʌtɛvɝ ðət mɛnt.

The Myrddraal strode by her sinuously, seeming not to pay her any heed. Its long black cloak hung undisturbed by its movements. Aginor had thought the creatures were not quite in the world in the same way everything else was; "slightly out of phase with time and reality," he had called it, whatever that meant.

"aɪ æm ʃeɪaɪdɑɹ hæɹən." stɑpɪŋ baɪ hɝ sɝvəns, ðə mɹdʒɹɑl bɛn tə ɡɹɪp əm baɪ ðə bæks ə ðɛɹ nɛks, wʌn hæn tə itʃ. "wɛn aɪ spik, jə meɪ kənsɪɾɝ ðət jə hɪɹ ðə vɔɪs ə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk." ðoʊz hænz taɪɾənd tə ðə sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli laʊd saʊn ə kɹækɪŋ boʊn. ðə jʌŋ mæn spæzmd əz i daɪd, kɪkɪŋ aʊt; ðə jʌŋ wʊmən mɪɹli wɛn lɪmp. ðeɪ hæd bɪn tu ʌv əɹ pɹɪɾiəst. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm ðə kɔɹpsəz. "aɪ æm ɪz hæn ɪn ðɪs wɝld, ɡɹeɪndəl. wən jə stæn bɪfɔɹ mi, jə stæn bɪfɔɹ hɪm."

"I am Shaidar Haran." Stopping by her servants, the Myrddraal bent to grip them by the backs of their necks, one hand to each. "When I speak, you may consider that you hear the voice of the Great Lord of the Dark." Those hands tightened to the surprisingly loud sound of cracking bone. The young man spasmed as he died, kicking out; the young woman merely went limp. They had been two of her prettiest. The Myrddraal straightened from the corpses. "I am his hand in this world, Graendal. When you stand before me, you stand before him."

ɡɹeɪndəl kənsɪɾɝd kɛɹfəli, ɪf kwɪkli. ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪd, ən ɪmoʊʃən ʃi wɑz fɑɹ mɔɹ juz tə ɪnspaɪɹɪŋ ɪn ʌðɝz, bʌt ʃi nu haʊ tə kəntʃɹoʊl əɹ fɪɹ. waɪl ʃi hæd nɛvɝ kəmændəɾ ɑɹmiz əz səm ə ði ʌðɝz hæd, ʃi wɑz niðɝ ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ tə hæzɝd nɔɹ ə kaʊɝd, jɛt ðɪs wɑz mɔɹ ðən ə mɪɹ θɹɛt. mɑɡiɾin ən sɪndeɪn stɪl nɛlt wɪð ðɛɹ hɛdz tə ðə mɑɹbəl flɔɹ, mɑɡiɾin æktʃəli  tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ vɪzəbli. ɡɹeɪndəl bɪliv ðɪs mɹdʒɹɑl. əɹ wʌtɛvɝ ɪt tʃɹuli wɑz. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd wɑz teɪkɪŋ ə mɔɹ dɝɛk hæn ɪn ɪvɛns, əz ʃi hæd fɪɹd. ən ɪf i lɝn ə hɝ skimɪŋ wɪð sɑmaɪl. . . . ɪf i tʃoʊz tə teɪk ækʃən, ðət wɑz; bɛɾɪŋ ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt noʊ wɑz ə fulɪʃ weɪdʒɝ ət ðɪs pɔɪnt.

Graendal considered carefully, if quickly. She was afraid, an emotion she was far more used to inspiring in others, but she knew how to control her fear. While she had never commanded armies as some of the others had, she was neither a stranger to hazard nor a coward, yet this was more than a mere threat. Moghedien and Cyndane still knelt with their heads to the marble floor, Moghedien actually trembling visibly. Graendal believed this Myrddraal. Or whatever it truly was. The Great Lord was taking a more direct hand in events, as she had feared. And if he learned of her scheming with Sammael. . . . If he chose to take action, that was; betting that he did not know was a foolish wager at this point.

ʃi nɛl smuðli bɪfɔɹ ðə mɹdʒɹɑl. "wʌt wəd juv mi du?" hɝ vɔɪs hæd ɹiɡeɪn ɪts stʃɹɛŋkθ. ə nɛsəsɛɹi flɛksəbɪləɾi wɑz nɑt kaʊɝɾəs; ðoʊz u dɪd nɑt bɛn fəɹ ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd wɝ bɛnt. əɹ snæpt ɪn tu. "ʃʊɾ aɪ kɔl jə ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ, əɹ wəd jə pɹəfɝ ənʌðɝ taɪɾəl? aɪ wəd nɑt fil kʌmftəɹbəl ədʒɹɛsɪŋ ivən ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz hæn əz aɪ wəd hɪm."

She knelt smoothly before the Myrddraal. "What would you have me do?" Her voice had regained its strength. A necessary flexibility was not cowardice; those who did not bend for the Great Lord were bent. Or snapped in two. "Should I call you Great Master, or would you prefer another title? I would not feel comfortable addressing even the Great Lord's hand as I would him."

ʃɑkɪŋli, ðə mɹdʒɹɑl læft. ɪt saʊndəd laɪk aɪs kɹʌmbəlɪŋ. mɹdʒɹɑl nɛvɝ læft. "ju ɑɹ bɹeɪvɝ ðən moʊst. ən waɪzɝ. ʃeɪaɪdɑɹ hæɹən wɪl də fəɹ ju. soʊ lɔŋ əz jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ u aɪ æm. soʊ lɔŋ əz jə də nɑt lɛt bɹeɪvɝi oʊvɝkʌm jəɹ fɪɹ tu fɑɹ."

Shockingly, the Myrddraal laughed. It sounded like ice crumbling. Myrddraal never laughed. "You are braver than most. And wiser. Shaidar Haran will do for you. So long as you remember who I am. So long as you do not let bravery overcome your fear too far."

əz ɪɾ ɪʃuɾ ɪts kəmænz - ə vɪzət tə ðɪs mɔɹaɪɾɪn wɑz fɝst, ɪt simd; ʃi wəd nid tə bi ɑn əɹ ɡɑɹɾ əɡɛns mɑɡiɾin, ən pɝhæps sɪndeɪn ɔlsoʊ, teɪkɪŋ ɹivɛnʒ fəɹ əɹ bɹif jus ə kəmpʌlʃən; ʃi daʊɾɪd ðə ɡɝl wɑz ɛni mɔɹ fɝɡɪvɪŋ ðən ðə spaɪɾɝ - ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə kip tə hɝsɛlf ðə lɛɾɝ ʃi hæd sɛn tə ɹoʊɾəl ɪɾɝɑldi. nʌθɪŋ ʃi wɑz toʊld ɪndəkeɪɾəd ðəɾ əɹ ækʃənz wəd bi dɪsplisɪŋ tə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, ən ʃi stɪl hæd tə kənsɪɾɝ əɹ oʊn pəzɪʃən. mɔɹaɪɾɪn, huɛvɝ i wɑz, maɪt bi nɛbli tədeɪ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz təmɑɹoʊ.

As it issued its commands - a visit to this Moridin was first, it seemed; she would need to be on her guard against Moghedien, and perhaps Cyndane also, taking revenge for her brief use of Compulsion; she doubted the girl was any more forgiving than the Spider - she decided to keep to herself the letter she had sent to Rodel Ituralde. Nothing she was told indicated that her actions would be displeasing to the Great Lord, and she still had to consider her own position. Moridin, whoever he was, might be Nae'blis today, but there was always tomorrow.

bɹeɪsɪŋ hɝsɛlf əɡɛns ðə ɹɑkɪŋ ʌv ɑɹɪlɪnz koʊtʃ, kædzueɪn muvd wʌn ə ðə lɛðɝ wɪndoʊ kɝɾənz fɑɹ ɪnʌf tə si aʊt. ə laɪt ɹeɪn fɛl ɑn kɛɹhin fɹəm ə ɡɹeɪ skaɪ fʊl ə blʌstɝɪŋ klaʊdz ən ɹʌf, swɝlɪŋ wɪnz. nɑɾ oʊnli ðə skaɪ wɑz fʊl ʌv wɪnd. haʊlɪŋ ɡʌsts ɹɑk ðə koʊtʃ mɔɹ ðən dɪɾ ɪts fɔɹwɝd moʊʃən. taɪni dʒɹɑpləts stʌŋ əɹ hænd, koʊld əz aɪs. ɪf ði ɛɹ kuld ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ, ðəɹ wəd bi snoʊ. ʃi dʒɹu hɝ wʊlən kloʊk kloʊsɝ; ʃi hæd bɪn pliz tə faɪn ɪt, ʃʌv tə ðə bɑɾəm ə hɝ sæɾəlbæɡz. ði ɛɹ wəd kul.

Bracing herself against the rocking of Arilyn's coach, Cadsuane moved one of the leather window curtains far enough to see out. A light rain fell on Cairhien from a gray sky full of blustering clouds and rough, swirling winds. Not only the sky was full of wind. Howling gusts rocked the coach more than did its forward motion. Tiny droplets stung her hand, cold as ice. If the air cooled a little more, there would be snow. She drew her woolen cloak closer; she had been pleased to find it, shoved to the bottom of her saddlebags. The air would cool.

ðə sɪɾiz stip sleɪt ɹufs ən stoʊn-peɪv stʃɹits ɡlɪsənd wɛtli, ən ðoʊ ðə ɹeɪn wɑz nɑt hɑɹd, fju wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə bɹeɪv ðə stʃɹɔŋ wɪnz. ə wʊmən ɡaɪɾɪŋ ən ɑks-kɑɹt wɪð tæps ʌv ə lɔŋ ɡoʊd muvd əz peɪʃənli əz əɹ ɑks, bʌt moʊs pipəl əfʊt klʌtʃt kloʊks taɪtli, hʊdz pʊl daʊn, ən stɛp kwɪkli əz ðə bɛɹɝz ʌv ə sɪdæn tʃɛɹ ɹʌʃt baɪ, ɪts stɪf kɑn flʌɾɝɪŋ. ʌðɝz bɪsaɪd ðə wʊmən ən əɹ ɑks sɔ noʊ ɹizən fəɹ heɪst, ðoʊ. ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə stʃɹiɾ ə taʊɝɪŋ ilmən stʊd ɡeɪpɪŋ ət ðə skaɪ ɪn dɪsbɪlif waɪl ðə dʒɹɪzəl soʊk hɪm, soʊ əbzɔɹb ðəɾ ə dɛɹɪŋ kʌtpɝs slaɪst əweɪ hɪz bɛl paʊtʃ ən dɑɹɾɪd ɔf ənnoʊɾɪst baɪ hɪz vɪktəm. ə wʊmən huz ɪlæbɹətli kɝld, haɪ-paɪl hɛɹ mɑɹkt əɹ əz noʊbəl wɔkt əlɔŋ sloʊli, hɝ kloʊk flæpɪŋ waɪldli, ən ɪts lɔŋ hʊɾ əz wɛl. ðɪs maɪɾ əv bɪn ðə fɝs taɪm ɛvɝ ðət ʃi hæɾ æktʃəli  wɔkt ɪn ðə stʃɹits, bʌt ʃi wɑz læfɪŋ əz ðə ɹeɪn slɪkt əɹ tʃiks. fɹəm ðə dɔɹweɪ ʌv ə pɝfumɝz ʃɑp, ðə ʃɑpkipɝ stɛɹɾ aʊt dɪskənsəlɑtli; ʃi wəd də lɪɾəl bɪznəs tədeɪ. moʊst ə ðə hɔkɝz hæd vænɪʃt fəɹ ðə seɪm ɹizən, bʌɾ ə hændfʊl stɪl hoʊpfəli kɹaɪd hɑt ti ən mit paɪz fɹəm bæɹoʊz bɪniθ meɪkʃɪft ɔnɪŋz. ðoʊ ɛniwʌn u bɑɾ ə mit paɪ ɪn ðə stʃɹit ðiz deɪz dɪzɝv ðə bɛlieɪk ʃi wəd ɡɛt.

The city's steep slate roofs and stone-paved streets glistened wetly, and though the rain was not hard, few were willing to brave the strong winds. A woman guiding an ox-cart with taps of a long goad moved as patiently as her ox, but most people afoot clutched cloaks tightly, hoods pulled down, and stepped quickly as the bearers of a sedan chair rushed by, its stiff con fluttering. Others beside the woman and her ox saw no reason for haste, though. In the middle of the street a towering Aielman stood gaping at the sky in disbelief while the drizzle soaked him, so absorbed that a daring cutpurse sliced away his belt pouch and darted off unnoticed by his victim. A woman whose elaborately curled, high-piled hair marked her as noble walked along slowly, her cloak flapping wildly, and its long hood as well. This might have been the first time ever that she had actually walked in the streets, but she was laughing as the rain slicked her cheeks. From the doorway of a perfumer's shop, the shopkeeper stared out disconsolately; she would do little business today. Most of the hawkers had vanished for the same reason, but a handful still hopefully cried hot tea and meat pies from barrows beneath makeshift awnings. Though anyone who bought a meat pie in the street these days deserved the bellyache she would get.

ə pɛɹ ə stɑɹvɪŋ dɑɡz ɹæn aʊt fɹəm ən æli, stɪf-lɛɡəɾ ən hækəlz ʌp, bɑɹkɪŋ ən snɑɹlɪŋ ət ðə koʊtʃ. kædzueɪn lɛt ðə kɝɾən fɔl. dɑɡz sim tə noʊ wɪmən u kəd tʃænəl əz izəli əz kæts dɪd, bʌt dɑɡz əpɪɹd tə θɪŋk ðə wɪmən wɝ kæts, ɪf ənnətʃɝəli lɑɹdʒ wʌnz. ðə pɛɹ ʌv wɪmən siɾəd əkɹɔs fɹəm əɹ wɝ stɪl ɪn kɑnvɝseɪʃən.

A pair of starving dogs ran out from an alley, stiff-legged and hackles up, barking and snarling at the coach. Cadsuane let the curtain fall. Dogs seemed to know women who could channel as easily as cats did, but dogs appeared to think the women were cats, if unnaturally large ones. The pair of women seated across from her were still in conversation.

"fɝɡɪv mi," deɪdʒiən wɑz seɪɪŋ, "bʌt ðə lɑdʒɪk ɪz ɪnɪskeɪpəbəl." ʃi dʌkt əɹ hɛɾ əpɑlədʒɛɾɪkli, meɪkɪŋ ðə munstoʊn dæŋɡəlɪŋ ɑn ə faɪn sɪlvɝ tʃeɪn fɹəm əɹ lɔŋ blæk hɛɹ sweɪ əkɹɔs əɹ fɔɹhɛd. hɝ fɪŋɡɝz plʌk ðə waɪt slæʃɪz ɪn əɹ dɑɹk skɝts, ən ʃi spoʊk ɹæpədli, əz ðoʊ əfɹeɪɾ ə biɪŋ ɪntɝʌptɪd. "ɪf jə æksɛp ðət ðə lɪŋɡɝɪŋ hit wɑz ðə dɑɹk wʌnz wɝk, ðə tʃeɪnʒ mʌs bi baɪ səm ʌðɝ eɪdʒənsi. hi wəd nɑɾ əv ɹɪlɛntɪd. jə maɪt seɪ ðət hiz dɪsaɪɾɪd tə fɹiz əɹ dʒɹaʊn ðə wɝld ɪnstɛɾ ə beɪkɪŋ ɪt, bʌt waɪ? hæd ðə hit kəntɪnjud θɹu spɹɪŋ, ðə dɛd maɪt wɛl əv aʊtnʌmbɝd ðə lɪvɪŋ, noʊ dɪfɹən ðən ɪf snoʊ fɔlz ɪndə ðə sʌmɝ. ðɛɹfɔɹ, lɑdʒɪkli, səm ʌðɝ hæn ɪz ət wɝk." ðə plʌmp wʊmənz dɪfəɾəns wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ ət taɪmz, bʌɾ əz ɔlweɪz, kædzueɪn faʊn əɹ lɑdʒɪk ɪmpɛkəbəl. ʃi dʒʌst wɪʃt ʃi nu huz hæn ən tə wʌɾ ɛnd.

"Forgive me," Daigian was saying, "but the logic is inescapable." She ducked her head apologetically, making the moonstone dangling on a fine silver chain from her long black hair sway across her forehead. Her fingers plucked the white slashes in her dark skirts, and she spoke rapidly, as though afraid of being interrupted. "If you accept that the lingering heat was the Dark One's work, the change must be by some other agency. He would not have relented. You might say that he has decided to freeze or drown the world instead of baking it, but why? Had the heat continued through spring, the dead might well have outnumbered the living, no different than if snow falls into the summer. Therefore, logically, some other hand is at work." The plump woman's diffidence was trying at times, but as always, Cadsuane found her logic impeccable. She just wished she knew whose hand and to what end.

"pis!" kʌmaɪɹə mʌɾɝd. "aɪ wəd ɹæðɝ ən aʊns ə hɑɹd pɹuf ðən ə hʌnʒɹədweɪt ə jəɹ waɪɾ ədʒɑ lɑdʒɪk." ʃi wɑz bɹaʊn, hɝsɛlf, ðoʊ lɪɾəl ɡɪvən tə ðɛɹ juʒəwəl feɪlɪŋz. ə hænsəm wʊmən wɪð ʃɔɹtkʌt hɛɹ, ʃi wɑz hɑɹdhɛɾɪd ən pɹæktəkəl, ə kin əbzɝvɝ, ən nɛvɝ lɔs hɝsɛlf soʊ dipli ɪn θɔt ðət ʃi lɔst saɪɾ ə ðə wɝld ɝaʊn əɹ əz wɛl. noʊ sunɝ hæd kʌmaɪɹə spoʊkən ðən ʃi pæɾəd deɪdʒiənz ni wɪð ə ɡɹeɪsfəl hænd, ən ɡeɪv ə smaɪl ðət tʃeɪnʒd əɹ blu aɪz fɹəm ʃɑɹp tə wɔɹm. ʃaɪnɝənz wɝ ə pəlaɪt pipəl, baɪ ən lɑɹdʒ, ən kʌmaɪɹə tʊk kɛɹ nɑt tə əfɛnd. baɪ æksəɾənt, ət list. "pʊt jəɹ maɪn tə wʌt wi kən də əbaʊt ðə sɪstɝz hɛl baɪ ði il. aɪ noʊ jəl ɹizən aʊt sʌmθɪŋ ɪf ɛniwʌn kæn."

"Peace!" Kumira muttered. "I would rather an ounce of hard proof than a hundredweight of your White Ajah logic." She was Brown, herself, though little given to their usual failings. A handsome woman with shortcut hair, she was hardheaded and practical, a keen observer, and never lost herself so deeply in thought that she lost sight of the world around her as well. No sooner had Kumira spoken than she patted Daigian's knee with a graceful hand, and gave a smile that changed her blue eyes from sharp to warm. Shienarans were a polite people, by and large, and Kumira took care not to offend. By accident, at least. "Put your mind to what we can do about the sisters held by the Aiel. I know you'll reason out something if anyone can."

kædzueɪn snɔɹɾɪd. "ðeɪ dɪzɝv wʌtɛvɝ hæpənz tə ðɛm." ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn əlaʊd nɪɹ ði il tɛns hɝsɛlf, nɔɹ hæɾ ɛni ʌv əɹ kəmpænjənz, bʌt səm ə ðə fulz u hæd swɔɹn fiəlti tə ði ælθɹ bɔɪ hæd vɛntʃɝɾ aʊt tə ðə spɹɔlɪŋ ɛnkæmpmən ən kʌm bæk waɪt-feɪst ən tɔɹn bɪtwin aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ ən sɪkɪŋ ʌp. nɔɹməli, ʃi ɔlsoʊ wʊɾə bɪn fjʊɹiəs oʊvɝ ði əfɹʌn tə ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪɡnəɾi, wʌtɛvɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz; nɑt naʊ. tə ətʃiv əɹ ɡoʊl, ʃi wʊɾə ɹʌn ði ɪntaɪɝ waɪt taʊɝ θɹu ðə stʃɹits neɪkəd. haʊ kəd ʃi kənsɝn hɝsɛlf wɪð ðə dɪskʌmfɝɾ ʌv wɪmən u maɪɾ əv ɹuən ɛvɹiθɪŋ?

Cadsuane snorted. "They deserve whatever happens to them." She had not been allowed near the Aiel tents herself, nor had any of her companions, but some of the fools who had sworn fealty to the al'Thor boy had ventured out to the sprawling encampment and come back white-faced and torn between outrage and sicking up. Normally, she also would have been furious over the affront to Aes Sedai dignity, whatever the circumstances; not now. To achieve her goal, she would have run the entire White Tower through the streets naked. How could she concern herself with the discomfort of women who might have ruined everything?

kʌmaɪɹə oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə pɹoʊtɛs dɪspaɪt noʊɪŋ əɹ filɪŋz, bʌt kædzueɪn wɛn ɑn, kɑm jɛt ɹɪlɛnlɪs. "pɝhæps ðəl wip ɪnʌf tə ətoʊn fəɹ ðə dɔɡz dɪnɝ ðeɪ meɪɾ ə mæɾɝz, bʌɾ aɪ daʊɾ ɪt. ðeɪ ɑɹ aʊɾ ʌv əɹ hænz, ən ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɪn maɪn, aɪ maɪt dʒʌst ɡɪv əm tə ði il. fɝɡɛt ðɛm, deɪdʒiən, ən pʊt ðət faɪn maɪn ə jʊɹz ɑn ðə tʃɹæk aɪ sɛt ju."

Kumira opened her mouth to protest despite knowing her feelings, but Cadsuane went on, calm yet relentless. "Perhaps they'll weep enough to atone for the dog's dinner they made of matters, but I doubt it. They are out of our hands, and if they were in mine, I might just give them to the Aiel. Forget them, Daigian, and put that fine mind of yours on the track I set you."

ðə kɛɹhinɪn wʊmənz peɪl tʃiks flʌʃt ɹɛɾ ət ðə kɑmpləmənt. θæŋk ðə laɪt ʃi wɑz nɑt ðɪs weɪ ɪksɛpt wɪð ʌðɝ sɪstɝz. kʌmaɪɹə sæt saɪlənli, vɛɹi smuð-feɪst, hɝ hænz ɪn əɹ læp. ʃi maɪt bi səbdud naʊ, bʌt lɪɾəl kəd səbdu kʌmaɪɹə fəɹ lɔŋ. ðeɪ wɝ ɪɡzækli ðə pɛɹ kædzueɪn wɑntəd wɪð əɹ tədeɪ.

The Cairhienin woman's pale cheeks flushed red at the compliment. Thank the Light she was not this way except with other sisters. Kumira sat silently, very smooth-faced, her hands in her lap. She might be subdued now, but little could subdue Kumira for long. They were exactly the pair Cadsuane wanted with her today.

ðə koʊtʃ tɪltəɾ əz ðə tim stɑɹɾəd ʌp ðə lɔŋ ɹæmp liɾɪŋ tə ðə sʌn pæləs. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌɾ aɪ toʊl ju," ʃi toʊl ði ʌðɝ tu fɝmli. "æn əv ə kɛɹ!"

The coach tilted as the team started up the long ramp leading to the Sun Palace. "Remember what I told you," she told the other two firmly. "And have a care!"

ðeɪ mɝmɝd ðət ðeɪ wʊd, əz wɛl ðeɪ maɪt, ən ʃi nɑɾəd. ɪf nid dɪmændəd, ʃi wəd juz əm boʊθ fəɹ mʌltʃ, ən ʌðɝz tu, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə luz iðɝ kəz ðeɪ ɡɹu kɛɹləs.

They murmured that they would, as well they might, and she nodded. If need demanded, she would use them both for mulch, and others too, but she did not intend to lose either because they grew careless.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ bɑðɝ əɹ dɪleɪ ɪn lɛɾɪŋ ðə koʊtʃ θɹu ðə pæləs ɡeɪts. ðə ɡɑɹdz ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ɑɹɪlɪnz sɪdʒəl ɑn ðə dɔɹz, ən ðeɪ nu hu wəd bi ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪnsaɪd. ðət koʊtʃ hæd bɪn tə ðə pæləs ɔfən ɪnʌf ɪn ðə pæst wik. ðə moʊmən ðə hɔɹsəz hɔltəd, ən æŋkʃəs-aɪd fʊtmən ɪn ʌnədɔɹn blæk oʊpən ðə koʊtʃ dɔɹ, hoʊldɪŋ aʊɾ ə bɹɔd flæt pɛɹɑsɑl ə dɑɹk ɔɪl klɔθ. ɹeɪn dʒɹɪp fɹəm ði ɛdʒ ɑntu hɪz bɛɹ hɛd, bʌt ðɛn, ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪntɛndəd fəɹ ɪz ʃɛltɝ.

There was no bother or delay in letting the coach through the Palace gates. The guards recognized Arilyn's sigil on the doors, and they knew who would be riding inside. That coach had been to the Palace often enough in the past week. The moment the horses halted, an anxious-eyed footman in unadorned black opened the coach door, holding out a broad flat parasol of dark oiled cloth. Rain dripped from the edge onto his bare head, but then, it was not intended for his shelter.

kwɪkli tʌtʃɪŋ ði ɔɹnəməns dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm ðə bʌn ətɑp əɹ hɛd tə bi ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ðəɹ - ʃi hæd nɛvɝ lɔst wʌn, bʌt ðət wɑz kəz ʃi wɑz kɛɹfəl ə ðɛm - kædzueɪn ɡæðɝd ðə hændəlz ə hɝ skwɛɹ wɪkɝ soʊɪŋ bæskət fɹəm bɪniθ əɹ siɾ ən stɛp daʊn. hæf ə dʌzən fʊtmən stʊd weɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðə fɝst, pɛɹɑsəlz ət ðə ɹɛɾi. soʊ mɛni pæsənʒɝz wʊɾə kɹaʊɾəd ðə koʊtʃ bɪɑn kʌmfɝt, bʌt ðə fʊtmən wɝ nɑɾ əbaʊt tə bi kɑt ʃɔɹt, ən ði ɛkstʃɹə dɪd nɑt hɝi əweɪ əntɪl ɪt wɑz pleɪn ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli ðə θɹi ʌv ðɛm.

Quickly touching the ornaments dangling from the bun atop her head to be sure they were all there - she had never lost one, but that was because she was careful of them - Cadsuane gathered the handles of her square wicker sewing basket from beneath her seat and stepped down. Half a dozen footmen stood waiting behind the first, parasols at the ready. So many passengers would have crowded the coach beyond comfort, but the footmen were not about to be caught short, and the extra did not hurry away until it was plain there were only the three of them.

ɑbviəsli ðə koʊtʃ hæd bɪn sin kʌmɪŋ. dɑɹk-ɡɑɹb sɝvɪŋ mɛn ən wɪmən meɪɾ ə niɾ ɝeɪ ɑn ðə dip blu ən ɡoʊl taɪlz ə ðə ɡɹeɪɾ ɛntʃɹi hɔl wɪð ɪts skwɛɹ-vɔltəd silɪŋ faɪv spænz haɪ. ðeɪ lɛp fɔɹwɝd, teɪkɪŋ kloʊks, ɔfɝɪŋ smɔl, wɔɹm lɪnən taʊəlz ɪn keɪs ɛniwʌn niɾəd tə dʒɹaɪ feɪs əɹ hænz, pɹɑfɝɪŋ si foʊk pɔɹsələn ɡoʊbləts ə mʌld waɪn ðət ɡeɪv ɔf ə hɛɾi sɛn ə spaɪsəz. ə wɪntɝ dʒɹɪŋk, jɛt ðə sʌɾən dʒɹɑp ɪn tɛmpɹətʃɝ meɪɾ ɪt suɾəbəl. ən æftɝ ɔl, ɪt wɑz wɪntɝ. faɪnəli.

Obviously the coach had been seen coming. Dark-garbed serving men and women made a neat array on the deep blue and gold tiles of the great entry hall with its square-vaulted ceiling five spans high. They leaped forward, taking cloaks, offering small, warm linen towels in case anyone needed to dry face or hands, proffering Sea Folk porcelain goblets of mulled wine that gave off a heady scent of spices. A winter drink, yet the sudden drop in temperature made it suitable. And after all, it was winter. Finally.

θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ stʊd weɪɾɪŋ tə wʌn saɪɾ əmʌŋ ðə mæsɪv skwɛɹ kɑləmz ə dɑɹk mɑɹbəl, ɪn fɹʌn ə tɔl, peɪl fɹizɪz dɪpɪktɪŋ bæɾəlz noʊ daʊɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə kɛɹhin, bʌt kædzueɪn ɪɡnɔɹd ðə wɪmən fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ. wʌn ə ðə jʌŋ sɝvɪŋ mɛn hæɾ ə smɔl ɹɛd-ænd-ɡoʊl fɪɡjɝ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɑn ðə lɛf bɹɛst ə hɪz koʊt, wʌt pipəl wɝ kɔlɪŋ ə dʒɹæɡən. kɔɹɡeɪd, ðə ɡɹeɪv-feɪst, ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən u ɔɹɾɝd ðə sɝvəns ɪn ðə sʌn pæləs, wɔɹ noʊ ɔɹnəmən seɪv fəɹ ðə lɑɹdʒ ɹɪŋ ə hɛvi kiz əɾ əɹ weɪst. nɔɹ dɪɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls əv ɛni dɛkɝeɪʃən ɑn ðɛɹ kloʊðz, ən dɪspaɪt ðə jʌŋ mænz əpɛɹən ɪnθuziæzəm, ɪt wɑz kɔɹɡeɪd, ðə hoʊldɝ ə ðə kiz, hu wəd sɛt ðə muɾ əmʌŋ ðə sɝvəns. stɪl, ʃi hæɾ əlaʊd ðə jʌŋ fɛloʊ hɪz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi; ə pɔɪn tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ. kædzueɪn spoʊk tə hɝ kwaɪətli, æskɪŋ æftɝ ə ɹum wɛɹ ʃi maɪt wɝk əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi hup ʌndɪstɝbd, ən ðə wʊmən dɪd nɑt blɪŋk ət ðə ɹɪkwɛst. bʌt ðɛn, daʊtləs ʃi hæd hɝd stʃɹeɪnʒɝ, sɝvɪŋ ɪn ðɪs pleɪs.

Three Aes Sedai stood waiting to one side among the massive square columns of dark marble, in front of tall, pale friezes depicting battles no doubt important to Cairhien, but Cadsuane ignored the women for the time being. One of the young serving men had a small red-and-gold figure embroidered on the left breast of his coat, what people were calling a Dragon. Corgaide, the grave-faced, gray-haired woman who ordered the servants in the Sun Palace, wore no ornament save for the large ring of heavy keys at her waist. Nor did anyone else have any decoration on their clothes, and despite the young man's apparent enthusiasm, it was Corgaide, the Holder of the Keys, who would set the mood among the servants. Still, she had allowed the young fellow his embroidery; a point to remember. Cadsuane spoke to her quietly, asking after a room where she might work her embroidery hoop undisturbed, and the woman did not blink at the request. But then, doubtless she had heard stranger, serving in this place.

əz ðə sɝvəns wɪð ðə kloʊks ən tʃɹeɪz baʊɾ ən kɝtsid ðɛmsɛlvz ɔf, kædzueɪn faɪnəli tɝn tə ðə θɹi sɪstɝz əmʌŋ ðə kɑləmz. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ kʌmaɪɹə ən deɪdʒiən. kɔɹɡeɪd ɹɪmeɪnd, bʌt ʃi steɪd wɛl bæk, ɡɪvɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pɹaɪvəsi. "aɪ hɑɹdli ɪkspɛktəd tə faɪn jə stʃɹoʊlɪŋ əbaʊɾ ət jəɹ iz," kædzueɪn sɛd. "aɪ θɔt ði il wɝk ðɛɹ əpɹɛntəsɪz hɑɹd."

As the servants with the cloaks and trays bowed and curtsied themselves off, Cadsuane finally turned to the three sisters among the columns. They were all looking at her, ignoring Kumira and Daigian. Corgaide remained, but she stayed well back, giving the Aes Sedai privacy. "I hardly expected to find you strolling about at your ease," Cadsuane said. "I thought the Aiel worked their apprentices hard."

feɪlʒɹɪn bɛɹli ɹiæktəd, mɪɹli ə slaɪt dʒɝk ə hɝ hɛd ðət sɔfli ɹæɾəld ðə kʌlɝd bidz ɪn əɹ θɪn bɹeɪdz, bʌt mɛɹænə kʌlɝd wɪð ɪmbɛɹəsmənt, ən əɹ hænz klɛntʃt ɪn əɹ skɝts. ɪvɛns hæd ʃeɪkən mɛɹænə soʊ dipli ðət kædzueɪn wɑz ənʃʊɹ ʃi wəɾ ɛvɝ ɹɪkʌvɝ. bɛɹə, ʌv kɔɹs, wɑz vɛɹi nɪɹli ənflæpəbəl.

Faeldrin barely reacted, merely a slight jerk of her head that softly rattled the colored beads in her thin braids, but Merana colored with embarrassment, and her hands clenched in her skirts. Events had shaken Merana so deeply that Cadsuane was unsure she would ever recover. Bera, of course, was very nearly unflappable.

"moʊst ʌv əs wɝ ɡɪvən ə fɹideɪ kəz ə ðə ɹeɪn," bɛɹə ɹɪplaɪd kɑmli. ə stɝɾi wʊmən ɪn pleɪn wʊl - faɪn ən wɛl-kʌt, bʌt dɪsaɪɾədli pleɪn - jə maɪɾ əv θɔɾ əɹ mɔɹ ət hoʊm ɑn ə fɑɹm ðən ɪn ə pæləs. jə maɪɾ ɪf jə wɝ ə ful; bɛɹə hæɾ ə kin maɪnd, ə stʃɹɔŋ wɪl, ən kædzueɪn dɪd nɑt bɪliv ʃi ɛvɝ meɪd ðə seɪm mɪsteɪk twaɪs. laɪk moʊst sɪstɝz, ʃi hæd nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli ɡɑɾən oʊvɝ miɾɪŋ kædzueɪn məleɪdʒɹɪn, əlaɪv ən ɪn ðə flɛʃ, jɛt ʃi dɪd nɑt lɛɾ ɑ ɹul hɝ. æftɝ oʊnli ðə slaɪɾəst ə dip bɹɛθs, ʃi wɛn ɑn. "aɪ kænɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ jə kip kʌmɪŋ bæk, kædzueɪn. klɪɹli, jə wɑn sʌmθɪŋ fɹəm ʌs, bʌɾ ənlɛs jə tɛl əs wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz, wi kænɑt hɛlp ju. wi noʊ wʌt jə dɪd fəɹ ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən" - ʃi stʌmbəld ə lɪɾəl oʊvɝ ðə taɪɾəl; ðeɪ stɪl wɝ nɑt kwaɪt ʃʊɹ wʌt tə kɔl ðə bɔɪ - "bʌɾ ɪts ɑbviəs jə keɪm tə kɛɹhin kəz ə hɪm, ən əntɪl jə tɛl əs waɪ ən wʌt jə ɪntɛnd, jə mʌst ʌndɝstæn ðət jəl faɪnd noʊ eɪd fɹəm ʌs." feɪlʒɹɪn, ənʌðɝ ɡɹin, ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ət bɛɹəz boʊl toʊn, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑɾɪŋ əɡɹimən bɪfɔɹ bɛɹə fɪnɪʃt.

"Most of us were given a freeday because of the rain," Bera replied calmly. A sturdy woman in plain wool - fine and well-cut, but decidedly plain - you might have thought her more at home on a farm than in a palace. You might if you were a fool; Bera had a keen mind, a strong will, and Cadsuane did not believe she ever made the same mistake twice. Like most sisters, she had not entirely gotten over meeting Cadsuane Melaidhrin, alive and in the flesh, yet she did not let awe rule her. After only the slightest of deep breaths, she went on. "I cannot understand why you keep coming back, Cadsuane. Clearly, you want something from us, but unless you tell us what it is, we cannot help you. We know what you did for the Lord Dragon" - she stumbled a little over the title; they still were not quite sure what to call the boy - "but it's obvious you came to Cairhien because of him, and until you tell us why and what you intend, you must understand that you'll find no aid from us." Faeldrin, another Green, gave a start at Bera's bold tone, but she was nodding agreement before Bera finished.

"ju mʌst ʌndɝstæn ðɪs, tu," mɛɹænə æɾəd, hɝ sɝɛnəɾi ɹiɡeɪnd. "ɪf wi dɪsaɪd wi mʌst əpoʊz ju, wi wɪl." bɛɹəz feɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, bʌt feɪlʒɹɪnz maʊθ taɪɾənd bɹifli. pɝhæps ʃi dɪsəɡɹid, ən pɝhæps ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɹɪvil tu mʌtʃ.

"You must understand this, too," Merana added, her serenity regained. "If we decide we must oppose you, we will." Bera's face did not change, but Faeldrin's mouth tightened briefly. Perhaps she disagreed, and perhaps she did not want to reveal too much.

kædzueɪn feɪvɝɾ əm wɪð ə θɪn smaɪl. tɛl əm waɪ ən wʌt? ɪf ðeɪ dɪsaɪɾɪd? soʊ fɑɹ ðeɪ hæd mænədʒ tə stʌf ðɛmsɛlvz ɪndə jʌŋ ælθɹz sæɾəlbæɡz taɪd hæn ən fʊt, ivən bɛɹə. smɔl ɹɛkəməndeɪʃən fəɹ lɛɾɪŋ əm dɪsaɪd soʊ mʌtʃ əz wʌt tə wɛɹ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ! "aɪ dɪd nɑt kʌm tə si ju," ʃi sɛd. "ðoʊ aɪ səpoʊz kʌmaɪɹə ən deɪdʒiən wəɾ ɛndʒɔɪ ə vɪzət, sɪns juv ə fɹideɪ. jəl ɪkskjuz mi."

Cadsuane favored them with a thin smile. Tell them why and what? If they decided? So far they had managed to stuff themselves into young al'Thor's saddlebags tied hand and foot, even Bera. Small recommendation for letting them decide so much as what to wear in the morning! "I did not come to see you," she said. "Though I suppose Kumira and Daigian would enjoy a visit, since you have a freeday. You will excuse me."

moʊʃənɪŋ kɔɹɡeɪd tə liɾ ɑn, ʃi fɑloʊd ðə wʊmən əkɹɔs ði ɛntʃɹi hɔl. ʃi oʊnli ɡlæns bæk wʌns. bɛɹə ən ði ʌðɝz hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡæðɝɾ ʌp kʌmaɪɹə ən deɪdʒiən ən wɝ hʌsəlɪŋ əm əweɪ, bʌt hɑɹdli laɪk wɛlkəm ɡɛsts. mɔɹ laɪk hɝɾɪd ɡis. kædzueɪn smaɪld. moʊst sɪstɝz kənsɪɾɝd deɪdʒiən lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ ðən ə waɪldɝ ən tʃɹiɾəd əɹ lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ ðən ə sɝvənt. ɪn ðət kʌmpəni, kʌmaɪɹə hɑɹdli stʊd mʌtʃ haɪɝ. ðə moʊst səspɪʃəs kəd nɑt θɪŋk ðeɪ wɝ ðəɹ tə tʃɹaɪ tə kənvɪns ɛniwʌn ʌv ɛniθɪŋ. soʊ deɪdʒiən wəd pɔɹ ðə ti ən sɪt kwaɪətli ɪksɛpt wən ədʒɹɛst - ən əplaɪ hɝ ɛksələn maɪn tə ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi hɝd. kʌmaɪɹə wəd lɛɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪksɛp deɪdʒiən spik bɪfɔɹ əɹ - ən sɔɹɾ ən faɪl əweɪ ɛvɹi wɝd, ɛvɹi dʒɛstʃɝ ən ɡɹɪmɑs. bɛɹə ən ðə ɹɛst wəd kip ðɛɹ oʊðz tə ðə bɔɪ, ʌv kɔɹs - ðət wɛnt wɪθaʊt seɪɪŋ - bʌt haʊ əsɪdwəsli wɑz ənʌðɝ kwɛstʃən. ivən mɛɹænə maɪt bi ənwɪlɪŋ tə ɡoʊ tu fɑɹ bɪɑn bɛɹ oʊbiɾiəns. ðət wɑz bæɾ ɪnʌf, jɛɾ ɪt lɛf kənsɪɾɝəbəl ɹum fəɹ əm tə mənuvɝ. əɹ bi mənuvɝd.

Motioning Corgaide to lead on, she followed the woman across the entry hall. She only glanced back once. Bera and the others had already gathered up Kumira and Daigian and were hustling them away, but hardly like welcome guests. More like herded geese. Cadsuane smiled. Most sisters considered Daigian little better than a wilder and treated her little better than a servant. In that company, Kumira hardly stood much higher. The most suspicious could not think they were there to try to convince anyone of anything. So Daigian would pour the tea and sit quietly except when addressed - and apply her excellent mind to everything she heard. Kumira would let everyone except Daigian speak before her - and sort and file away every word, every gesture and grimace. Bera and the rest would keep their oaths to the boy, of course - that went without saying - but how assiduously was another question. Even Merana might be unwilling to go too far beyond bare obedience. That was bad enough, yet it left considerable room for them to maneuver. Or be maneuvered.

dɑɹk-lɪvɹid sɝvəns hɝiɪŋ ət ðɛɹ tæsks əlɔŋ ðə bɹɔd, tæpəstʃɹi-hʌŋ hɔlweɪz dɑɹɾɪd əsaɪd fəɹ kædzueɪn ən kɔɹɡeɪd, ən ðə tu ʌv əm pɹəɡɹɛs tə ə flɝi ʌv dip baʊz ən kɝtsiz meɪɾ oʊvɝ bæskəts ən tʃɹeɪz ən ɑɹmloʊdz ə taʊəlz. fɹəm ðə weɪ aɪz wɑtʃt kɔɹɡeɪd, kædzueɪn səspɛktəd ðə dɛfɝəns wɑz əz mʌtʃ fəɹ ðə hoʊldɝ ə ðə kiz əz fəɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðəɹ wɝ ə fju il əbaʊt, tu, hjudʒ mɛn laɪk koʊld-aɪd laɪənz ən wɪmən laɪk koʊldɝ-aɪd lɛpɝdz. səm ə ðoʊz ɡeɪzəz fɑloʊɾ əɹ aɪsɪli ɪnʌf tə bɹɪŋ ɑn ðə snoʊ θɹɛɾənd baɪ ðə ɹeɪn aʊtsaɪd, bʌɾ ʌðɝ il nɑɾəd tə hɝ ɡɹeɪvli, ən hɪɹ ən ðəɹ wʌn ə ðə fɪɹs-aɪd wɪmən wɛn soʊ fɑɹ əz tə smaɪl. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ kleɪm tə bi ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ seɪvɪŋ ðɛɹ kɑɹəkɑɹn, bʌt teɪlz bɪkeɪm twɪstəɾ ɪn ɹitɛlɪŋ, ən ðə bɪlif ɡɹæntəɾ əɹ mɔɹ ɹɪspɛk ðən ɛni ʌðɝ sɪstɝ, ən sɝɾənli mɔɹ fɹiɾəm ə muvmən ɝaʊn ðə pæləs. ʃi wʌndɝd haʊ ðeɪ wəd fil ɪf ðeɪ nu ðət hæd ʃi hæd ðə bɔɪ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ ɹaɪt ðɛn, ʃi wʊɾə bɪn hɑɹd-pɹɛs tə stɑp hɝsɛlf fɹəm blɪstɝɪŋ ɪz haɪd fəɹ hɪm! bɛɹli mɔɹ ðən ə wik sɪns i nɪɹli, ɡɑt hɪmsɛlf kɪld, ən nɑɾ oʊnli hæɾ i mænədʒ tə ɪluɾ əɹ kəmplitli, hi hæd meɪɾ əɹ tæsk ivən mɔɹ dɪfəkəlt, ɪf hæf wʌt ʃi hɝd wɑz tʃɹu. ə pɪɾi hi hæd nɑt bɪn ɹeɪzd ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ. bʌt ðɛn, ðət maɪɾ əv lɛd tə ɪts oʊn kətæstʃɹəfi.

Dark-liveried servants hurrying at their tasks along the broad, tapestry-hung hallways darted aside for Cadsuane and Corgaide, and the two of them progressed to a flurry of deep bows and curtsies made over baskets and trays and armloads of towels. From the way eyes watched Corgaide, Cadsuane suspected the deference was as much for the Holder of the Keys as for an Aes Sedai. There were a few Aiel about, too, huge men like cold-eyed lions and women like colder-eyed leopards. Some of those gazes followed her icily enough to bring on the snow threatened by the rain outside, but other Aiel nodded to her gravely, and here and there one of the fierce-eyed women went so far as to smile. She had never claimed to be responsible for saving their Car'a'carn, but tales became twisted in retelling, and the belief granted her more respect than any other sister, and certainly more freedom of movement around the Palace. She wondered how they would feel if they knew that had she had the boy in front of her right then, she would have been hard-pressed to stop herself from blistering his hide for him! Barely more than a week since he nearly, got himself killed, and not only had he managed to elude her completely, he had made her task even more difficult, if half what she heard was true. A pity he had not been raised in Far Madding. But then, that might have led to its own catastrophe.

ðə ɹum kɔɹɡeɪd tʊk əɹ tə wɑz kʌmfɝɾəbli wɔɹm, wɪð faɪɝz bleɪzɪŋ ɪn mɑɹbəl faɪɝpleɪsəz əɾ iðɝ ɛn ə ðə tʃeɪmbɝ ən læmps lɪt, mɪɹɝd fleɪmz ɪn ɡlæs taʊɝz ðət tʃeɪs ðə deɪz ɡlum. pleɪnli kɔɹɡeɪd hæd sɛn ɔɹɾɝz əhɛd tə pɹipɛɹ waɪl ʃi wɑz weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ði ɛntʃɹi hɔl. ə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən əpɪɹɾ ɔlmoʊst əz sun əz ðeɪ, wɪð boʊθ hɑt ti ən spaɪst waɪn ɑn ə tʃɹeɪ, ən smɔl keɪks ɡleɪzd wɪð hʌni.

The room Corgaide took her to was comfortably warm, with fires blazing in marble fireplaces at either end of the chamber and lamps lit, mirrored flames in glass towers that chased the day's gloom. Plainly Corgaide had sent orders ahead to prepare while she was waiting in the entry hall. A serving woman appeared almost as soon as they, with both hot tea and spiced wine on a tray, and small cakes glazed with honey.

"wɪl ðəɹ bi ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, ɛɛs sədaɪ?" kɔɹɡeɪɾ æskt əz kædzueɪn sɛɾ əɹ soʊɪŋ bæskət bɪsaɪd ðə tʃɹeɪ ɑn ə teɪbəl wɪð ɛdʒ ən lɛɡz θɪkli ɡɪldɪd. ɹɪdʒɪdli kɑɹvd, tu, əz wɑz ðə waɪd kɔɹnəs, ɔlsoʊ kʌvɝd wɪð ɡɪlt. kædzueɪn ɔlweɪz fɛlt ʃi wɑz ɪn ə ɡoʊldən fɪʃ wiɹ wən ʃi vɪzəɾəd kɛɹhin. dɪspaɪt ðə laɪɾ ən wɔɹmθ ɪnsaɪd, ɹeɪn dʒɹɪpɪŋ aʊtsaɪd ðə tɔl nɛɹoʊ wɪndoʊz ən ðə ɡɹeɪ skaɪ aʊtsaɪd haɪɾənd ðə sɛnseɪʃən.

"Will there be anything else, Aes Sedai?" Corgaide asked as Cadsuane set her sewing basket beside the tray on a table with edge and legs thickly gilded. Rigidly carved, too, as was the wide cornice, also covered with gilt. Cadsuane always felt she was in a golden fish weir when she visited Cairhien. Despite the light and warmth inside, rain dripping outside the tall narrow windows and the gray sky outside heightened the sensation.

"ðə ti wɪl də naɪsli," ʃi sɛd. "ɪf jə wɪl, tɛl ɑlɑnə mɑsvɑni ðəɾ aɪ wɑnə si hɝ. tɛl hɝ, wɪθaʊt dɪleɪ."

"The tea will do nicely," she said. "If you will, tell Alanna Mosvani that I want to see her. Tell her, without delay."

kɔɹɡeɪdz kiz dʒɪŋɡəld əz ʃi kɝtsid, mɝmɝɪŋ ɹɪspɛkfəli ðət ʃi wəd faɪnd "ɑlɑnə ɛɛs sədaɪ" hɝsɛlf. hɝ ɡɹeɪv ɪkspɹɛʃən nɛvɝ ɔltɝɾ əz ʃi lɛft. vɛɹi laɪkli ʃi wɑz ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ðə ɹɪkwɛs fəɹ sʌɾəltiz. kædzueɪn pɹəfɝd tə bi dɝɛkt, wən pɑsəbəl. ʃi hæd tʃɹɪpt ʌp ɛni nʌmbɝ ə klɛvɝ pipəl u hæd nɑt bɪlivd ʃi mɛn ɪɡzækli wʌt ʃi sɛd.

Corgaide's keys jingled as she curtsied, murmuring respectfully that she would find "Alanna Aes Sedai" herself. Her grave expression never altered as she left. Very likely she was examining the request for subtleties. Cadsuane preferred to be direct, when possible. She had tripped up any number of clever people who had not believed she meant exactly what she said.

oʊpənɪŋ ðə lɪɾ ə hɝ soʊɪŋ bæskət, ʃi tʊk aʊɾ əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi hup wɪð ə lɛs ðən hæf-dʌn pis ʌv wɝk ɹæpt ɝaʊn ɪt. ðə bæskət hæd pɑkəts woʊvən ɪnsaɪd tə hoʊld aɪɾəmz ðət hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð soʊɪŋ. hɝ aɪvɝi hæn mɪɹɝ ən hɛɹbɹʌʃ ən koʊm, ə pɛn keɪs ən taɪtli stɑpɝɾ ɪŋk bɑɾəl, ə nʌmbɝ ə θɪŋz ðət ʃi hæd faʊn jusfəl tə hæv ət hæn oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ səm ðət wʊɾə sɝpɹaɪzd ɛniwʌn wɪð nɝv ɪnʌf tə sɝtʃ ðə bæskət. nɑt ðət ʃi ɔfən lɛft ɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ saɪt. sɛɾɪŋ ðə pɑlɪʃt sɪlvɝ θɹɛd bɑks kɛɹfəli ɑn ðə teɪbəl, ʃi səlɛktəd ðə sknz ʃi niɾəd ən sæt wɪð əɹ bæk tə ðə dɔɹ. ðə meɪdʒɝ ɪmədʒ ɑn əɹ pis ʌv ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi wɑz fɪnɪʃt, ə mænz hæn klʌtʃɪŋ ði eɪntʃən sɪmbəl ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. kɹæks ɹæn əkɹɔs ðə blæk-ænd-waɪt dɪsk, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tɛlɪŋ wɛðɝ ðə hænd wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hoʊld ɪt təɡɛðɝ əɹ kɹʌʃ ɪt. ʃi nu wʌt ʃi ɪntɛndəd, bʌt taɪm wəd tɛl wʌt wɑz tʃɹuθ.

Opening the lid of her sewing basket, she took out her embroidery hoop with a less than half-done piece of work wrapped around it. The basket had pockets woven inside to hold items that had nothing to do with sewing. Her ivory hand mirror and hairbrush and comb, a pen case and tightly stoppered ink bottle, a number of things that she had found useful to have at hand over the years, including some that would have surprised anyone with nerve enough to search the basket. Not that she often left it out of her sight. Setting the polished silver thread box carefully on the table, she selected the skeins she needed and sat with her back to the door. The major image on her piece of embroidery was finished, a man's hand clutching the ancient symbol of the Aes Sedai. Cracks ran across the black-and-white disc, and there was no telling whether the hand was trying to hold it together or crush it. She knew what she intended, but time would tell what was truth.

θɹɛɾɪŋ ə niɾəl, ʃi sɛt tə wɝk ɑn wʌn ə ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ ɪmədʒəz, ə bɹaɪt ɹɛd ɹoʊz. ɹoʊzɪz ən stɑɹ-bleɪz ən sʌnbɝst ɔltɝneɪɾəd wɪð deɪziz ən hɑɹts-blʌʃ ən snoʊkæp, ɔl sɛpɝeɪɾəd baɪ bænz ə stɑɹk nɛɾəlz ən lɔŋ-θɔɹn bɹaɪɹz. ɪt wəd bi ə dɪstɝbɪŋ pis, wən kəmpliɾəd.

Threading a needle, she set to work on one of the surrounding images, a bright red rose. Roses and star-blaze and sunburst alternated with daisies and hearts-blush and snowcap, all separated by bands of stark nettles and long-thorned briars. It would be a disturbing piece, when completed.

bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæd fɪnɪʃt hæf ə pɛɾəl ɑn ðə ɹoʊz, ə flæʃ ə moʊʃən ɹəflɛktəɾ ɑn ðə flæt lɪɾ ə ðə θɹɛd bɑks kɑɾ əɹ aɪ. ɪt hæd bɪn kɛɹfəli pleɪs tə ɹəflɛk ðə dɔɹweɪ. ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹeɪz əɹ hɛd fɹəm ðə hup. ɑlɑnə stʊd ðəɹ ɡlɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ bæk. kædzueɪn kəntɪnjud ðə sloʊ wɝk ə hɝ niɾəl, bʌt ʃi wɑtʃt ðət ɹəflɛkʃən fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ. twaɪs ɑlɑnə hæf tɝn əz ɪf tə ɡoʊ, ðən faɪnəli dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp, vɪzəbli stilɪŋ hɝsɛlf.

Before she had finished half a petal on the rose, a flash of motion reflected on the flat lid of the thread box caught her eye. It had been carefully placed to reflect the doorway. She did not raise her head from the hoop. Alanna stood there glaring at her back. Cadsuane continued the slow work of her needle, but she watched that reflection from the corner of her eye. Twice Alanna half turned as if to go, then finally drew herself up, visibly steeling herself.

"kʌm ɪn, ɑlɑnə." stɪl nɑt ɹeɪzɪŋ əɹ hɛd, kædzueɪn pɔɪntəd tə ə spɑɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. "stæn ðɛɹ." ʃi smaɪld ɹaɪli əz ɑlɑnə dʒʌmpt. ðəɹ wɝ ædvæntɪdʒɪz tə biɪŋ ə lɛdʒənd; pipəl sɛldəm noʊɾəst ði ɑbviəs wən dilɪŋ wɪð ə lɛdʒənd.

"Come in, Alanna." Still not raising her head, Cadsuane pointed to a spot in front of her. "Stand there." She smiled wryly as Alanna jumped. There were advantages to being a legend; people seldom noticed the obvious when dealing with a legend.

ɑlɑnə stɔkt ɪndə ðə ɹum ɪn ə swɪʃ ə sɪlk skɝts ən tʊk ðə pleɪs kædzueɪn hæɾ ɪndəkeɪɾəd, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə sʌlki twɪs tə hɝ maʊθ. "waɪ dʒju pɝsɪst ɪn bædʒɝɪŋ mi?" ʃi dɪmændəd. "aɪ kænɑt tɛl jə ɛni mɔɹ ðən aɪ hæv. ən ɪf aɪ kʊd, aɪ doʊnt noʊ ðəɾ aɪ wʊd! hi bɪlɔŋz tə - !" ʃi kʌɾ ɔf əbɹʌpli, baɪɾɪŋ əɹ loʊɝ lɪp, bʌt ʃi maɪɾ əz wɛl əv fɪnɪʃt. ði ælθɹ bɔɪ bɪlɔŋ tə hɝ; hɝ wɔɹɾɝ. ʃi hæd ðə ɡɔl tə θɪŋk ðæt!

Alanna stalked into the room in a swish of silk skirts and took the place Cadsuane had indicated, but there was a sulky twist to her mouth. "Why do you persist in badgering me?" she demanded. "I cannot tell you any more than I have. And if I could, I don't know that I would! He belongs to - !" She cut off abruptly, biting her lower lip, but she might as well have finished. The al'Thor boy belonged to her; her Warder. She had the gall to think that!

"aɪ hæv kɛp jəɹ kɹaɪm tə maɪsɛlf," kædzueɪn sɛd kwaɪətli, "bʌɾ oʊnli kəz aɪ sɔ noʊ ɹizən tə kɑmpləkeɪt mæɾɝz." lɪftɪŋ əɹ aɪz tə ði ʌðɝ wʊmən, ʃi kɛpt əɹ vɔɪs sɑft. "ɪf jə θɪŋk ðət minz aɪ woʊn kɔɹ jə laɪk ə kæbədʒ, θɪŋk əɡɛn."

"I have kept your crime to myself," Cadsuane said quietly, "but only because I saw no reason to complicate matters." Lifting her eyes to the other woman, she kept her voice soft. "If you think that means I won't core you like a cabbage, think again."

ɑlɑnə stɪfənd. ðə laɪɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ sʌɾənli ʃoʊn ɝaʊn hɝ.

Alanna stiffened. The light of saidar suddenly shone around her.

"ɪf jə wɪʃ tə bi tʃɹuli fulɪʃ." kædzueɪn smaɪld, ə koʊl smaɪl. ʃi meɪd noʊ muv tə ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs hɝsɛlf. wʌn ə hɝ dæŋɡəlɪŋ hɛɹ ɔɹnəməns, ɪntɝtwaɪnd ɡoʊldən kɹɛsəns, wɑz kul ɑn əɹ tɛmpəl. "ju kip ə hoʊl haɪɾ ət pɹɛzənt, bʌt maɪ sʌfɝæns ɪz nɑɾ ɪnfənət. ɪn fækt, ɪt dæŋɡəlz baɪ ə θɹɛd."

"If you wish to be truly foolish." Cadsuane smiled, a cold smile. She made no move to embrace the Source herself. One of her dangling hair ornaments, intertwined golden crescents, was cool on her temple. "You keep a whole hide at present, but my sufferance is not infinite. In fact, it dangles by a thread."

ɑlɑnə stʃɹʌɡəld wɪð hɝsɛlf, ʌnkɑnʃəsli smuðɪŋ blu sɪlk. əbɹʌpli ðə ɡloʊ ʌv ðə paʊɝ wɪŋkt aʊt, ən ʃi tɝn əɹ hɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm kædzueɪn soʊ swɪfli ðəɾ əɹ lɔŋ blæk hɛɹ swʌŋ. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɛni mɔɹ tə tɛl." ðə sʌlən wɝdz ɹʌʃt aʊɾ ə hɝ bɹɛθəli. "hi wɑz ɪnʒɝd, ən ðən nɑt, bʌɾ aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ə sɪstɝ hil hɪm. ðə wunz noʊ wʌn kəd hil ɑɹ stɪl ðɛɹ. hi lips əbaʊt, tʃɹævlɪŋ, bʌt hiz stɪl ɪn ðə saʊθ. sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ɪljən, aɪ θɪŋk, bʌɾ ət ðɪs dɪstəns, hi kəd bi ɪn tiɹ fəɹ ɔl aɪ noʊ. hiz fʊl ə ɹeɪdʒ, ən peɪn, ən səspɪʃən. ðəɹ ɪzən ɛni mɔɹ, kædzueɪn. ðəɹ ɪzənt!"

Alanna struggled with herself, unconsciously smoothing blue silk. Abruptly the glow of the Power winked out, and she turned her head away from Cadsuane so swiftly that her long black hair swung. "I don't know any more to tell." The sullen words rushed out of her breathily. "He was injured, and then not, but I don't think a sister Healed him. The wounds no one could Heal are still there. He leaps about, Traveling, but he's still in the south. Somewhere in Illian, I think, but at this distance, he could be in Tear for all I know. He's full of rage, and pain, and suspicion. There isn't any more, Cadsuane. There isn't!"

kɛɹfəl ə ðə sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝz hit, kædzueɪn pɔɹɾ ə kʌp ə ti, tɛstɪŋ ðə θɪn ɡɹin pɔɹsələn kʌp fəɹ wɔɹmθ. əz maɪɾ əv bɪn ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪn sɪlvɝ, ðə ti hæd kul kwɪkli. tʃænəlɪŋ bɹifli, ʃi hiɾəd ɪɾ əɡɛn. ðə dɑɹk ti teɪstəd tu mʌtʃ ə mɪnt; kɛɹhinɪn juz mɪn ɪntaɪɝli tu fɹili ɪn əɹ əpɪnjən. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɔfɝ ə kʌp tə ɑlɑnə. tʃɹævlɪŋ. haʊ kəd ðə bɔɪ hæv ɹiɾɪskʌvɝd wʌt hæd bɪn lɔs tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ? "ju wɪl kip mi fʊli ɪnfɔɹmd, haʊɛvɝ, woʊn ju, ɑlɑnə." ðət wɑz nɑɾ ə kwɛstʃən. "lʊk ət mi, wʊmən! ɪf jə dʒɹim ə hɪm, aɪ wɑn ɛvɹi dɪteɪl!"

Careful of the silver pitcher's heat, Cadsuane poured a cup of tea, testing the thin green porcelain cup for warmth. As might have been expected in silver, the tea had cooled quickly. Channeling briefly, she heated it again. The dark tea tasted too much of mint; Cairhienin used mint entirely too freely in her opinion. She did not offer a cup to Alanna. Traveling. How could the boy have rediscovered what had been lost to the White Tower since the Breaking? "You will keep me fully informed, however, won't you, Alanna." That was not a question. "Look at me, woman! If you dream of him, I want every detail!"

ənʃt tɪɹz ɡlɪsən ɪn ɑlɑnəz aɪz. "ɪn maɪ pleɪs, jə wʊɾə dʌn ðə seɪm!"

Unshed tears glistened in Alanna's eyes. "In my place, you would have done the same!"

kædzueɪn skaʊld oʊvɝ ðə kʌp ət hɝ. ʃi maɪt hæv. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ dɪfɝəns bɪtwin wʌɾ ɑlɑnə hæd dʌn ən ə mæn fɔɹsɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɑn ə wʊmən, bʌt, ðə laɪt hɛlp hɝ, ʃi maɪt hæv, hæd ʃi bɪlivd ɪt wəd hɛlp əɹ ɹitʃ əɹ ɡoʊl. naʊ, ʃi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ kənsɪɾɝd ivən meɪkɪŋ ɑlɑnə pæs ðə bɑn tə hɝ. ɑlɑnə hæd pɹuv haʊ jusləs ðət wɑz ɪn kəntʃɹoʊlɪŋ hɪm.

Cadsuane scowled over the cup at her. She might have. There was no difference between what Alanna had done and a man forcing himself on a woman, but, the Light help her, she might have, had she believed it would help her reach her goal. Now, she no longer considered even making Alanna pass the bond to her. Alanna had proved how useless that was in controlling him.

"du nɑt kip mi weɪɾɪŋ, ɑlɑnə," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ən aɪsi toʊn. ʃi hæd noʊ sɪmpəθi fəɹ ði ʌðɝ wʊmən. ɑlɑnə wɑz ənʌðɝ ɪn ə laɪn ə sɪstɝz, fɹəm mɔɪɹeɪn tə ɪleɪɾə, hu hæd bʌŋɡəld ən wɝsənd wʌt ðeɪ ʃʊɾə bɪn mɛndɪŋ. waɪl ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd bɪn ɔf tʃeɪsɪŋ fɝs lɑɡən əblɝ ən ðən mæzɹim teɪm. wɪtʃ dɪd nɑt suð əɹ mud.

"Do not keep me waiting, Alanna," she said in an icy tone. She had no sympathy for the other woman. Alanna was another in a line of sisters, from Moiraine to Elaida, who had bungled and worsened what they should have been mending. While she herself had been off chasing first Logain Ablar and then Mazrim Taim. Which did not soothe her mood.

"aɪ wɪl kip jə fʊli ɪnfɔɹmd," ɑlɑnə saɪd, paʊɾɪŋ laɪk ə ɡɝl. kædzueɪn ɪtʃt tə slæp hɝ. ɑlɑnə hæd wɔɹn ðə ʃɔl oʊvɝ twɛnti jɪɹz; ʃi ʃʊɾə ɡɹoʊn ʌp mɔɹ ðən ðɪs. ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi wɑz ɝæfɛlɪn. ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ, fju ɡɝlz ə twɛnti sʌlkt ən paʊɾɪd əz mʌtʃ əz ən ɝæfɛlɪn kəɾ ɑn əɹ eɪdʒ dɛθbɛd.

"I will keep you fully informed," Alanna sighed, pouting like a girl. Cadsuane itched to slap her. Alanna had worn the shawl over twenty years; she should have grown up more than this. Of course, she was Arafellin. In Far Madding, few girls of twenty sulked and pouted as much as an Arafellin could on her aged deathbed.

əbɹʌpli, ɑlɑnəz aɪz waɪɾənd ɪn əlɑɹm, ən kædzueɪn sɔ ənʌðɝ feɪs ɹəflɛktəɾ ɪn ðə lɪɾ ə hɝ θɹɛd bɑks. sɛɾɪŋ ðə kʌp bæk ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪ ən əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi hup ɑn ðə teɪbəl, kædzueɪn stʊɾ ən tɝn tə ðə dɔɹ. ʃi dɪd nɑt hɝi, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt dæli əɹ pleɪ ɡeɪmz əz ʃi hæd wɪð ɑlɑnə, iðɝ.

Abruptly, Alanna's eyes widened in alarm, and Cadsuane saw another face reflected in the lid of her thread box. Setting the cup back on the tray and her embroidery hoop on the table, Cadsuane stood and turned to the door. She did not hurry, but she did not dally or play games as she had with Alanna, either.

"ɑɹ jə dʌn wɪð hɝ, ɛɛs sədaɪ?" sɔɹɪliə æskt, stɛpɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɹum. ðə lɛðɝi, waɪt-hɛɹd waɪz wʌn spoʊk tə kædzueɪn, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz ɹɪmeɪn ɑn ɑlɑnə. aɪvɝi ən ɡoʊl klɪk sɔfli əɾ əɹ ɹɪsts əz ʃi plæntəd hænz ɑn əɹ hɪps, ən əɹ dɑɹk ʃɔl slɪd tə hɝ ɛlboʊz.

"Are you done with her, Aes Sedai?" Sorilea asked, stepping into the room. The leathery, white-haired Wise One spoke to Cadsuane, but her eyes remained on Alanna. Ivory and gold clicked softly at her wrists as she planted hands on her hips, and her dark shawl slid to her elbows.

wən kædzueɪn sɛd ðət ʃi wɑz ɪndid dʌn, sɔɹɪliə dʒɛstʃɝd kɝtli tə ɑlɑnə, hu stɔk fɹəm ðə ɹum. flaʊns maɪɾ əv bɪn ə bɛɾɝ wɝd, wɪð sʌlən ɪɹɪteɪʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs. sɔɹɪliə fɹaʊn æftɝ hɝ. kædzueɪn hæɾ ɪnkaʊntɝd ðə wʊmən bɪfɔɹ, ən ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ ɪnkaʊntɝz ðeɪ hæd bɪn, ɪf bɹif. ʃi hæd nɑt mɛt mɛni pipəl ʃi kənsɪɾɝd fɔɹməɾəbəl, bʌt sɔɹɪliə wɑz wʌn. pɝhæps ivən ə mætʃ fəɹ hɝsɛlf, ɪn səm weɪz. ʃi ɔlsoʊ səspɛktəd ðə wʊmən wɑz əz oʊld əz ʃi wɑz, meɪbi oʊldɝ, ən ðæt, ʃi hæd nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd tə faɪnd.

When Cadsuane said that she was indeed done, Sorilea gestured curtly to Alanna, who stalked from the room. Flounced might have been a better word, with sullen irritation on her face. Sorilea frowned after her. Cadsuane had encountered the woman before, and interesting encounters they had been, if brief. She had not met many people she considered formidable, but Sorilea was one. Perhaps even a match for herself, in some ways. She also suspected the woman was as old as she was, maybe older, and that, she had never expected to find.

noʊ sunɝ hæɾ ɑlɑnə vænɪʃt ðən kaɪɹunə əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ, kɪkɪŋ ɡɹeɪ sɪlk skɝts ɪn əɹ hɝi ən piɹɪŋ daʊn ðə hɔl ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ɑlɑnə hæd ɡɔn. ən kæɹiɪŋ ən ɪntʃɹəkətli wɝkt ɡoʊldən tʃɹeɪ ðət hɛld ən ivən mɔɹ ɪlæbɹət ɡoʊldən pɪtʃɝ wɪð ə haɪ nɛk, ænd, ɪŋkɔŋɹuəsli, tu smɔl, waɪt-ɡleɪz pɑɾɝi kʌps. "waɪ ɪz ɑlɑnə ɹʌnɪŋ?" ʃi sɛd. "aɪ wʊɾə bɪn fæstɝ, sɔɹɪliə, bʌt - " ʃi sɔ kædzueɪn ðɛn, ən əɹ tʃiks wɛn ðə dipəs pɑsəbəl kɹɪmzən. ɪmbɛɹəsmən lʊkt kwaɪɾ ɑɾ ɑn ðə stætʃuɛsk wʊmən.

No sooner had Alanna vanished than Kiruna appeared in the doorway, kicking gray silk skirts in her hurry and peering down the hall in the direction Alanna had gone. And carrying an intricately worked golden tray that held an even more elaborate golden pitcher with a high neck, and, incongruously, two small, white-glazed pottery cups. "Why is Alanna running?" she said. "I would have been faster, Sorilea, but - " She saw Cadsuane then, and her cheeks went the deepest possible crimson. Embarrassment looked quite odd on the statuesque woman.

"pʊt ðə tʃɹeɪ ɑn ðə teɪbəl, ɡɝl," sɔɹɪliə sɛd, "ænd ɡoʊ tə tʃeɪlɪn. ʃɪl bi weɪɾɪŋ tə ɡɪv jə jəɹ lɛsənz."

"Put the tray on the table, girl," Sorilea said, "and go to Chaelin. She will be waiting to give you your lessons."

stɪfli, kaɪɹunə sɛɾ əɹ bɝɾən daʊn, əvɔɪɾɪŋ kædzueɪnz aɪz. əz ʃi tɝn tə ɡoʊ, sɔɹɪliə kɑɾ əɹ tʃɪn ɪn sɪnjui fɪŋɡɝz. "ju hæv bɪɡʌn tə meɪk ə tʃɹu ɛfɝt, ɡɝl," ðə waɪz wʌn toʊld əɹ fɝmli. "ɪf jə kəntɪnju, jəl də vɛɹi wɛl. vɛɹi wɛl. naʊ, ɡoʊ. tʃeɪlɪn ɪz nɑɾ əz peɪʃən əz aɪ."

Stiffly, Kiruna set her burden down, avoiding Cadsuane's eyes. As she turned to go, Sorilea caught her chin in sinewy fingers. "You have begun to make a true effort, girl," the Wise One told her firmly. "If you continue, you will do very well. Very well. Now, go. Chaelin is not as patient as I."

sɔɹɪliə weɪv təwɔɹd ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, bʌt kaɪɹunə stʊd stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmənt, ə stʃɹeɪnʒ ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs. ɪf kædzueɪn hæd hæd tə meɪk ə weɪdʒɝ, ʃi wʊɾə kɔl kaɪɹunə plizd ət ðə pɹeɪz ən sɝpɹaɪzd ət biɪŋ plizd. ðə waɪt-hɛɹd wʊmən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, ən kaɪɹunə ɡeɪv hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk ən hɝid fɹəm ðə ɹum. ə ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl ʃoʊ.

Sorilea waved toward the corridor, but Kiruna stood staring at her for a long moment, a strange expression on her face. If Cadsuane had had to make a wager, she would have called Kiruna pleased at the praise and surprised at being pleased. The white-haired woman opened her mouth, and Kiruna gave herself a shake and hurried from the room. A remarkable show.

"du jə ɹɪli θɪŋk ʃɪl lɝn jəɹ weɪz ʌv wivɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ?" kædzueɪn æskt, haɪɾɪŋ əɹ ɪnkɹədulɪɾi. kaɪɹunə ən ði ʌðɝz hæd toʊld əɹ ə ðiz lɛsənz, bʌt mɛni ʌv ðə waɪz wʌnz' wivz wɝ vɛɹi dɪfɹən fɹəm ðoʊz tɔɾ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ðə fɝst weɪ jə lɝn ðə wiv fəɹ ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ θɪŋ ɪmpɹɪntɪɾ ɪtsɛlf ɑn ju; lɝnɪŋ ə sɛkənd wɑz ɔl bʌɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl, ən ivən wən jə kəd lɝn, ðə sɛkənd-lɝnd wiv ɔlmoʊs nɛvɝ wɝk nɪɹli əz wɛl. ðət wɑz wʌn ɹizən səm sɪstɝz dɪd nɑt wɛlkəm waɪldɝz tə ðə taʊɝ əɾ ɛni eɪdʒ; tu mʌtʃ maɪɾ əv bɪn lɝn ɔlɹɛɾi, ən kəd nɑt bi ənlɝnd.

"Do you really think she will learn your ways of weaving saidar?" Cadsuane asked, hiding her incredulity. Kiruna and the others had told her of these lessons, but many of the Wise Ones' weaves were very different from those taught in the White Tower. The first way you learned the weave for a particular thing imprinted itself on you; learning a second was all but impossible, and even when you could learn, the second-learned weave almost never worked nearly as well. That was one reason some sisters did not welcome wilders to the Tower at any age; too much might have been learned already, and could not be unlearned.

sɔɹɪliə ʃɹʌɡd. "pɝhæps. lɝnɪŋ ə sɛkənd weɪ ɪz hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf wɪθaʊɾ ɔl ðə hænd-weɪvɪŋ jə ɛɛs sədaɪ du. ðə meɪn θɪŋ kaɪɹunə nækɪmən mʌs lɝn ɪz ðət ʃi oʊnz əɹ pɹaɪd; ɪt dʌz nɑɾ oʊn hɝ. ʃɪl bi ə vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋ wʊmən wʌns ʃi lɝnz ðæt." pʊlɪŋ ə tʃɛɹ ɝaʊn tə feɪs ðə wʌn kædzueɪn hæd bɪn sɪɾɪŋ ɪn, ʃi aɪɾ ɪt daʊtfəli, ðən sæt daʊn. ʃi əpɪɹɾ ɔlmoʊst əz stɪf ən ənkʌmftəɹbəl əz kaɪɹunə hæd, bʌt ʃi moʊʃən ɔθɔɹəteɪɾɪvli fəɹ kædzueɪn tə sɪt, ə stʃɹɔŋ-wɪld wʊmən juz tə kəmænd.

Sorilea shrugged. "Perhaps. Learning a second way is hard enough without all the hand-waving you Aes Sedai do. The main thing Kiruna Nachiman must learn is that she owns her pride; it does not own her. She will be a very strong woman once she learns that." Pulling a chair around to face the one Cadsuane had been sitting in, she eyed it doubtfully, then sat down. She appeared almost as stiff and uncomfortable as Kiruna had, but she motioned authoritatively for Cadsuane to sit, a strong-willed woman used to command.

kædzueɪn swɑloʊɾ ə ɹufəl tʃʌkəl əz ʃi tʊk əɹ tʃɛɹ. ɪt wɑz wɛl tə bi ɹimaɪndəd ðæt, waɪldɝz əɹ nɑt, ðə waɪz wʌnz wɝ fɑɹ fɹəm ɪɡnɝən sævədʒəz. ʌv kɔɹs ðeɪ wəd noʊ ðə dɪfəkəltiz. əz fəɹ hænd-weɪvɪŋ. . . . fju hæd tʃænəld wɛɹ ʃi kəd si, bʌt ʃi hæd noʊɾəst ðət ðeɪ kɹieɪɾəd səm wivz wɪθaʊt ðə dʒɛstʃɝz ðət sɪstɝz juzd. ðə hæn muvməns wɝ nɑt tʃɹuli pɑɹɾ ə ðə wiv, bʌɾ ɪn ə weɪ ðeɪ wɝ, kəz ðeɪ hæd bɪn pɑɹɾ ə lɝnɪŋ ðə wiv. pɝhæps, wʌns, ðəɹ hæd bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ hu kʊd, seɪ, hɝl ə bɔl ə faɪɝ wɪθaʊt səm sɔɹɾ ə θɹoʊɪŋ moʊʃən, bʌɾ ɪf soʊ, ðeɪ wɝ lɔŋ dɛd, ən ðɛɹ titʃɪŋz wɪð ðɛm. tədeɪ, səm θɪŋz dʒʌs kəd nɑt bi dʌn wɪθaʊt ði əpɹoʊpɹiət dʒɛstʃɝz. ðəɹ wɝ sɪstɝz u kleɪm ðeɪ kəd tɛl u hæd tɔɾ ənʌðɝ sɪstɝ baɪ wɪtʃ moʊʃənz ʃi juz fəɹ wɪtʃ wivz.

Cadsuane swallowed a rueful chuckle as she took her chair. It was well to be reminded that, wilders or not, the Wise Ones were far from ignorant savages. Of course they would know the difficulties. As for hand-waving. . . . Few had channeled where she could see, but she had noticed that they created some weaves without the gestures that sisters used. The hand movements were not truly part of the weave, but in a way they were, because they had been part of learning the weave. Perhaps, once, there had been Aes Sedai who could, say, hurl a ball of fire without some sort of throwing motion, but if so, they were long dead, and their teachings with them. Today, some things just could not be done without the appropriate gestures. There were sisters who claimed they could tell who had taught another sister by which motions she used for which weaves.

"titʃɪŋ ɛni ʌv əɹ nu əpɹɛntəsɪz ɛniθɪŋ əz bɪn dɪfəkəlt ət bɛst," sɔɹɪliə wɛn ɑn. "aɪ də nɑt spik tə əfɛnd, bʌt jə ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡɪv oʊθ, ɪt simz, ən ɪmiɾiətli tʃɹaɪ tə faɪn ə weɪ ɝaʊn ɪt. ɑlɑnə mɑsvɑni ɪz pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli dɪfəkəlt." sʌɾənli hɝ klɪɹ ɡɹin aɪz wɝ vɛɹi ʃɑɹp ɑn kædzueɪnz feɪs. "haʊ kən wi pʌnɪʃ əɹ wɪlfəl feɪlɪŋz ɪf ɪt minz hɑɹmɪŋ ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn?"

"Teaching any of our new apprentices anything has been difficult at best," Sorilea went on. "I do not speak to offend, but you Aes Sedai give oath, it seems, and immediately try to find a way around it. Alanna Mosvani is particularly difficult." Suddenly her clear green eyes were very sharp on Cadsuane's face. "How can we punish her willful failings if it means harming the Car'a'carn?"

kædzueɪn foʊldəɾ əɹ hænz ɪn əɹ læp. mæskɪŋ sɝpɹaɪz wɑz nɑɾ izi. soʊ mʌtʃ fəɹ ðə sikɹəɾ ʌv ɑlɑnəz kɹaɪm. bʌt waɪ hæd ðə wʊmən lɛɾ əɹ noʊ ðət ʃi nu? pɝhæps wʌn ɹɛvəleɪʃən kɔl fəɹ ənʌðɝ. "ðə bɑn dʌz nɑt wɝk ɪn ðət fæʃən," ʃi sɛd. "ɪf jə kɪl hɝ, hɪl daɪ, ðən əɹ sun æftɝ. ʃɔɹɾ ə ðæt, hɪl bi əwɛɹ ʌv wʌt hæpənz tə hɝ, bʌt hɪl nɑt ɹɪli fil ɪt. əz fɑɹ əweɪ əz hiz naʊ, hɪl oʊnli bi veɪɡli əwɛɹ, ət ðæt."

Cadsuane folded her hands in her lap. Masking surprise was not easy. So much for the secret of Alanna's crime. But why had the woman let her know that she knew? Perhaps one revelation called for another. "The bond does not work in that fashion," she said. "If you kill her, he will die, then or soon after. Short of that, he will be aware of what happens to her, but he will not really feel it. As far away as he is now, he will only be vaguely aware, at that."

sɔɹɪliə nɑɾəd sloʊli. hɝ fɪŋɡɝz tʌtʃt ðə ɡoʊldən tʃɹeɪ ɑn ðə teɪbəl, ðən keɪm əweɪ. hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən wɑz əz hɑɹd tə ɹiɾ əz ðə feɪs ʌv ə stætʃu, bʌt kædzueɪn səspɛktəd ðəɾ ɑlɑnə wəd faɪn ən ənplɛzən sɝpɹaɪz ðə nɛks taɪm ʃi lɛɾ əɹ tɛmpɝ flɛɹ, əɹ θɹu wʌn ə hɝ ɝæfɛlɪn sʌlks. ðət wɑz ənɪmpɔɹɾənt, ðoʊ. oʊnli ðə bɔɪ wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt.

Sorilea nodded slowly. Her fingers touched the golden tray on the table, then came away. Her expression was as hard to read as the face of a statue, but Cadsuane suspected that Alanna would find an unpleasant surprise the next time she let her temper flare, or threw one of her Arafellin sulks. That was unimportant, though. Only the boy was important.

"moʊs mɛn wɪl teɪk wʌɾ ɪz ɔfɝd, ɪf ɪt simz ətʃɹæktɪv ən plɛzənt," sɔɹɪliə sɛd. "wʌns, wi θɔɾ ə ɹænd ælθɹ soʊ. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ɪts tu leɪt tə tʃeɪnʒ ðə pæθ wi wɔk. naʊ, hi sʌspɛks wʌtɛvɝ ɪz ɔfɝd fɹili. naʊ, ɪf aɪ wɑntəɾ ɪm tə æksɛp sʌmθɪŋ, aɪ wəd pɹitɛn aɪ dɪd nɑt wɑn ɪm tə hæv ɪt. ɪf aɪ wɑntəd tə steɪ kloʊs tə hɪm, aɪ wəd pɹitɛn ɪndɪfɝəns tə wɛðɝ aɪ ɛvɝ sɔ hɪm əɡɛn." wʌns mɔɹ, ðoʊz aɪz foʊkəst ɑn kædzueɪn, ɡɹin ɔɡɝz. nɑt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə si wʌt leɪ ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ hɛd. ðə wʊmən nu. sʌm, ət list. ɪnʌf, əɹ tu mʌtʃ.

"Most men will take what is offered, if it seems attractive and pleasant," Sorilea said. "Once, we thought of Rand al'Thor so. Unfortunately, it is too late to change the path we walk. Now, he suspects whatever is offered freely. Now, if I wanted him to accept something, I would pretend I did not want him to have it. If I wanted to stay close to him, I would pretend indifference to whether I ever saw him again." Once more, those eyes focused on Cadsuane, green augers. Not trying to see what lay inside her head. The woman knew. Some, at least. Enough, or too much.

stɪl, kædzueɪn fɛlt ə ɹaɪzɪŋ θɹɪl ə pɑsəbɪləɾi. ɪf ʃi hæd hæɾ ɛni daʊts ðət sɔɹɪliə wɑntəd tə fil əɹ aʊt, ðeɪ wɝ ɡɔn. ən jə dɪd nɑt fil aʊt sʌmwʌn ɪn ðɪs mænɝ ənlɛs jə hoʊp fəɹ səm əɡɹimənt. "du jə bɪliv ə mæn mʌs bi hɑɹd?" ʃi æskt. ʃi wɑz teɪkɪŋ ə tʃæns. "ɔɹ stʃɹɔŋ?" baɪ hɝ toʊn, ʃi lɛf noʊ daʊt ʃi sɔ ə dɪfɝəns.

Still, Cadsuane felt a rising thrill of possibility. If she had had any doubts that Sorilea wanted to feel her out, they were gone. And you did not feel out someone in this manner unless you hoped for some agreement. "Do you believe a man must be hard?" she asked. She was taking a chance. "Or strong?" By her tone, she left no doubt she saw a difference.

əɡɛn sɔɹɪliə tʌtʃt ðə tʃɹeɪ; ðə smɔləst ə smaɪlz maɪɾ əv kwɝkt əɹ lɪps fəɹ ən ɪnstənt. əɹ nɑt. "moʊs mɛn si ðə tu əz wʌn ən ðə seɪm, kædzueɪn məleɪdʒɹɪn. stʃɹɔŋ ɛndʒjʊɹz; hɑɹd ʃæɾɝz."

Again Sorilea touched the tray; the smallest of smiles might have quirked her lips for an instant. Or not. "Most men see the two as one and the same, Cadsuane Melaidhrin. Strong endures; hard shatters."

kædzueɪn dʒɹu bɹɛθ. ə tʃæns ʃi wʊɾə skaʊɝɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls fəɹ teɪkɪŋ. bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls, ən səmtaɪmz tʃænsəz hæd tə bi teɪkən. "ðə bɔɪ kənfjuzɪz ðɛm," ʃi sɛd. "hi nidz tə bi stʃɹɔŋ, ən meɪks hɪmsɛlf hɑɹɾɝ. tu hɑɹd, ɔlɹɛɾi, ən hɪl nɑt stɑp əntɪl hiz stɑpt. hiz fɝɡɑɾən haʊ tə læf ɪksɛpt ɪn bɪɾɝnəs; ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ tɪɹz lɛft ɪn hɪm. ənlɛs i faɪnz læftɝ ən tɪɹz əɡɛn, ðə wɝl feɪsəz dɪzæstɝ. hi mʌs lɝn ðəɾ ivən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪz flɛʃ. ɪf i ɡoʊz tə tɑɹmən ɡdən əz i ɪz, ivən ɪz vɪktɝi meɪ bi əz dɑɹk əz ɪz dɪfit."

Cadsuane drew breath. A chance she would have scoured anyone else for taking. But she was not anyone else, and sometimes chances had to be taken. "The boy confuses them," she said. "He needs to be strong, and makes himself harder. Too hard, already, and he will not stop until he is stopped. He has forgotten how to laugh except in bitterness; there are no tears left in him. Unless he finds laughter and tears again, the world faces disaster. He must learn that even the Dragon Reborn is flesh. If he goes to Tarmon Gai'don as he is, even his victory may be as dark as his defeat."

sɔɹɪliə lɪsən ɪntɛnli, ən kɛp saɪlən ivən æftɝ kædzueɪn fɪnɪʃt. ðoʊz ɡɹin aɪz stʌɾid hɝ. "jɔɹ dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ən jəɹ læs bæɾəl ɑɹ nɑɾ ɪn əɹ pɹɑfəsiz," sɔɹɪliə sɛɾ ət læst. "wi hæv tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk ɹænd ælθɹ noʊ hɪz blʌd, bʌɾ aɪ fɪɹ i siz əs əz oʊnli ənʌðɝ spɪɹ. ɪf wʌn spɪɹ bɹeɪks ɪn jəɹ hænd, jə də nɑt pɔz tə mɔɹn bɪfɔɹ teɪkɪŋ ʌp ənʌðɝ. pɝhæps jə ən aɪ eɪm ət tɑɹɡəts nɑt tu fɑɹ əpɑɹt."

Sorilea listened intently, and kept silent even after Cadsuane finished. Those green eyes studied her. "Your Dragon Reborn and your Last Battle are not in our prophecies," Sorilea said at last. "We have tried to make Rand al'Thor know his blood, but I fear he sees us as only another spear. If one spear breaks in your hand, you do not pause to mourn before taking up another. Perhaps you and I aim at targets not too far apart."

"pɝhæps wi du," kædzueɪn sɛd kɔʃəsli. tɑɹɡəts ivən ə hæn əpɑɹt maɪt bi nɑɾ əɾ ɔl əlaɪk.

"Perhaps we do," Cadsuane said cautiously. Targets even a hand apart might be not at all alike.

əbɹʌpli, ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ sɝaʊndəd ðə lɛðɝ-feɪst wʊmən. ʃi wɑz wik ɪnʌf tə meɪk deɪdʒiən lʊk ət lis mɑɾɝətli stʃɹɔŋ. bʌt ðɛn, sɔɹɪliəz stʃɹɛŋkθ dɪd nɑt laɪ ɪn ðə paʊɝ. "ðɛɹ ɪz ə θɪŋ jə meɪ faɪn jusfəl," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ kænɑt meɪk ɪt wɝk, bʌɾ aɪ kən wiv ðə floʊz tə ʃoʊ ju." ʃi dɪd dʒʌs ðæt, leɪɪŋ fibəl sknz ðət fɛl ɪndə pleɪs ən mɛltəd, tu pʊɹ tə də wʌt ðeɪ wɝ ɪntɛndəd fɔɹ. "ɪɾ ɪz kɔl tʃɹævlɪŋ," sɔɹɪliə sɛd.

Abruptly, the glow of saidar surrounded the leather-faced woman. She was weak enough to make Daigian look at least moderately strong. But then, Sorilea's strength did not lie in the Power. "There is a thing you may find useful," she said. "I cannot make it work, but I can weave the flows to show you." She did just that, laying feeble skeins that fell into place and melted, too poor to do what they were intended for. "It is called Traveling," Sorilea said.

ðɪs taɪm, kædzueɪnz dʒɔ dʒɹɑpt. ɑlɑnə ən kaɪɹunə ən ðə ɹɛs dɪnaɪd titʃɪŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz haʊ tə lɪŋk, əɹ ə nʌmbɝ ʌv ʌðɝ skɪlz ðeɪ sʌɾənli sim tə hæv, ən kædzueɪn hæɾ əsum ði il hæd mænədʒ tə ɹɪŋ əm aʊɾ ə ðə sɪstɝz hɛld ɪn ðə tɛns. bʌt ðɪs wɑz. . . .

This time, Cadsuane's jaw dropped. Alanna and Kiruna and the rest denied teaching the Wise Ones how to link, or a number of other skills they suddenly seemed to have, and Cadsuane had assumed the Aiel had managed to wring them out of the sisters held in the tents. But this was. . . .

ɪmpɑsəbəl, ʃi wəɾ əv sɛd, jɛt ʃi dɪd nɑt bɪliv sɔɹɪliə wɑz laɪɪŋ. ʃi kəd hɑɹdli weɪt tə tʃɹaɪ ðə wiv hɝsɛlf. nɑt ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ə mʌtʃ jus ɪmiɾiətli. ivən ɪf ʃi nu ɪɡzækli wɛɹ ðə ɹɛtʃɪd bɔɪ wɑz, ʃi hæd tə meɪk ɪm kʌm tə hɝ. sɔɹɪliə wɑz ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt ðæt. "ə vɛɹi ɡɹeɪt ɡɪft," ʃi sɛd sloʊli. "aɪ hæv nʌθɪŋ aɪ kən ɡɪv jə tə kəmpɛɹ."

Impossible, she would have said, yet she did not believe Sorilea was lying. She could hardly wait to try the weave herself. Not that it was of much use immediately. Even if she knew exactly where the wretched boy was, she had to make him come to her. Sorilea was right about that. "A very great gift," she said slowly. "I have nothing I can give you to compare."

ðɪs taɪm, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ daʊɾ ə ðə bɹif smaɪl ðət flæʃt əkɹɔs sɔɹɪliəz lɪps. ʃi nu vɛɹi wɛl ðət kædzueɪn wɑz ɪn əɹ dɛt. teɪkɪŋ ʌp ðə hɛvi ɡoʊldən pɪtʃɝ wɪð boʊθ hænz, ʃi kɛɹfəli fɪl ðə smɔl waɪt kʌps. wɪð pleɪn wɔɾɝ. ʃi dɪd nɑt spɪl ə dʒɹɑp.

This time, there was no doubt of the brief smile that flashed across Sorilea's lips. She knew very well that Cadsuane was in her debt. Taking up the heavy golden pitcher with both hands, she carefully filled the small white cups. With plain water. She did not spill a drop.

"aɪ ɔfɝ jə wɔɾɝ oʊθ," ʃi sɛd sɔləmli, pɪkɪŋ ʌp wʌn ə ðə kʌps. "baɪ ðɪs, wəɹ baʊn əz wʌn, tə titʃ ɹænd ælθɹ læftɝ ən tɪɹz." ʃi sɪpt, ən kædzueɪn ɪməteɪɾɪd hɝ.

"I offer you water oath," she said solemnly, picking up one of the cups. "By this, we are bound as one, to teach Rand al'Thor laughter and tears." She sipped, and Cadsuane imitated her.

"wi ɑɹ baʊn əz wʌn." ən ɪf ðɛɹ tɑɹɡəts tɝn aʊt nɑt tə bi ðə seɪm əɾ ɔl? ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝɛstəmeɪt sɔɹɪliə əz ælaɪ əɹ əpoʊnənt, bʌt kædzueɪn nu wɪtʃ tɑɹɡət hæd tə bi stʃɹʌk, əɾ ɛni kɑst.

"We are bound as one." And if their targets turned out not to be the same at all? She did not underestimate Sorilea as ally or opponent, but Cadsuane knew which target had to be struck, at any cost.


tʃæptɝ θɝtin


CHAPTER 13

floʊɾɪŋ laɪk snoʊ


Floating Like Snow

ðə nɔɹðɝn hɝaɪzən wɑz pɝpəl wɪð ðə fɪɹs ɹeɪn ðət hæd hæmɝd ði ist ʌv ɪljən θɹu ðə naɪt. oʊvɝhɛd, ə mɔɹnɪŋ skaɪ ʌv dɑɹk bɔɪlɪŋ klaʊdz θɹɛɾənd, ən stʃɹɔŋ wɪnz flʌŋ kloʊks əbaʊt, meɪd bænɝz snæp ən kɹæk laɪk wɪps ɑn ðə kɹɛst ə ðə ɹɪdʒ, ðə waɪt dʒɹæɡən bænɝ ən ðə kɹɪmzən bænɝ ə laɪt, ən ðə bɹaɪt stændɝdz ə noʊbɪləɾi fɹəm ɪljən ən kɛɹhin ən tɛɹ. ðə noʊbəlz kɛp tə ðɛɹ oʊn kaɪnd, θɹi waɪdli speɪs nɑts əwɑʃ ɪn ɡɪlt ən sɪlvɝ-pleɪɾəd stil, sɪlks ən vɛlvəts ən leɪsəz, bʌɾ ɪn kɑmən ðeɪ lʊkt ɝaʊn ənizəli. ivən ðə bɛst-tʃɹeɪn ə ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz tɔs hɛdz ən stæmp hʊvz ɑn ðə mʌɾi ɡɹaʊnd. ðə wɪnd wɑz koʊld, ən koʊldɝ simɪŋ fəɹ ðə hiɾ ɪt hæd ɹipleɪst soʊ əbɹʌpli, dʒʌst əz ðə ɹeɪn hæd bɪn ə ʃɑk æftɝ soʊ lɔŋ wɪθaʊt. fɹəm wʌtɛvɝ neɪʃən, ðeɪ hæd pɹeɪd fəɹ ðə beɪkɪŋ dʒɹaʊt tə bɹeɪk, bʌt nʌn nu wʌt tə meɪk ʌv ʌnɹilɛntɪŋ stɔɹmz ɪn ænsɝ tə ðɛɹ pɹɛɹz. səm ɡlænst ət ɹænd wən ðeɪ θɔɾ i wəd nɑt noʊɾəs. pɝhæps wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf i hæɾ ænsɝɾ əm soʊ. ðə θɔt meɪɾ ɪm læf sɔfli, bɪɾɝli.

The northern horizon was purple with the fierce rain that had hammered the east of Illian through the night. Overhead, a morning sky of dark boiling clouds threatened, and strong winds flung cloaks about, made banners snap and crack like whips on the crest of the ridge, the white Dragon Banner and the crimson Banner of Light, and the bright standards of nobility from Illian and Cairhien and Tear. The nobles kept to their own kind, three widely spaced knots awash in gilt and silver-plated steel, silks and velvets and laces, but in common they looked around uneasily. Even the best-trained of their horses tossed heads and stamped hooves on the muddy ground. The wind was cold, and colder seeming for the heat it had replaced so abruptly, just as the rain had been a shock after so long without. From whatever nation, they had prayed for the baking drought to break, but none knew what to make of unrelenting storms in answer to their prayers. Some glanced at Rand when they thought he would not notice. Perhaps wondering if he had answered them so. The thought made him laugh softly, bitterly.

hi pæɾəd ɪz blæk ɡɛldɪŋz nɛk wɪð ə lɛðɝ-ɡɔntələɾəd hænd, ɡlæd ðət teɪdeɪʃɝ dɪd nɑt ʃoʊ nɝvz. ðə mæsɪv ænəməl maɪɾ əv bɪn ə stætʃu, əweɪɾɪŋ ðə pɹɛʃɝ ə ɹeɪnz əɹ niz tə muv. ɪt wɑz ɡʊd ðət ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹnz hɔɹs simd əz koʊld əz i dɪd, əz ðoʊ ðeɪ floʊɾəd ɪn ðə vɔɪd təɡɛðɝ. ivən wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɹeɪdʒɪŋ θɹu hɪm, faɪɝ ən aɪs ən dɛθ, hi wɑz bɛɹli əwɛɹ ə ðə wɪnd, ðoʊ ɪt fleɪld ɪz ɡoʊld-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd kloʊk əbaʊɾ ən kʌt θɹu hɪz koʊt, ɡɹin sɪlk θɪkli wɝkt wɪð ɡoʊld ən nɑɾ ɪntɛndəd fəɹ wɛɹ ɪn sətʃ wɛðɝ. ðə wunz ɪn ɪz saɪɾ ætʃt ən θɹɑbd, ði oʊld ən ðə nu kʌɾɪŋ əkɹɔs ɪt, ðə wunz ðət wəd nɛvɝ hil, bʌt ðət wɑz dɪstənt, tu, ənʌðɝ mænz flɛʃ. ðə kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz maɪɾ əv bɪn pɹɪkɪŋ sʌmwʌn ɛlsəz tɛmpəlz wɪð ðə ʃɑɹp pɔɪns ə ðə taɪni bleɪdz əmʌŋ ɪts ɡoʊldən lɔɹəl livz. ivən ðə fɪlθ woʊvən θɹu seɪɾɪn sim lɛs əbtʃɹusɪv ðən ɪt wʌns hæd; stɪl vaɪl, stɪl loʊðsəm, bʌt noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wɝθ noʊɾəs. ðə noʊbəlz' aɪz ɑn ɪz bæk wɝ pælpəbəl, ðoʊ.

He patted his black gelding's neck with a leather-gauntleted hand, glad that Tai'daishar did not show nerves. The massive animal might have been a statue, awaiting the pressure of reins or knees to move. It was good that the Dragon Reborn's horse seemed as cold as he did, as though they floated in the Void together. Even with the One Power raging through him, fire and ice and death, he was barely aware of the wind, though it flailed his gold-embroidered cloak about and cut through his coat, green silk thickly worked with gold and not intended for wear in such weather. The wounds in his side ached and throbbed, the old and the new cutting across it, the wounds that would never heal, but that was distant, too, another man's flesh. The Crown of Swords might have been pricking someone else's temples with the sharp points of the tiny blades among its golden laurel leaves. Even the filth woven through saidin seemed less obtrusive than it once had; still vile, still loathsome, but no longer worth notice. The nobles' eyes on his back were palpable, though.

ʃɪftɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt, hi lin fɔɹwɝd. hi kəd si ðə taɪt klʌstɝ ə loʊ, wʊɾɪd hɪlz hæf ə maɪl tə ði ist əz klɪɹli əz ɪf i wɝ juzɪŋ ə lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs. ðə lænd wɑz flæt, hɪɹ, ði oʊnli pɹɑmənənsəz ðoʊz fɔɹəstəd hɪlz ən ðɪs lɔŋ ɹɪdʒ, θɹʌstɪŋ ʌp fɹəm ðə hiθ. ðə nɛks θɪkɪt dɛns ɪnʌf tə tʃɹuli dɪzɝv ðə neɪm leɪ kloʊs tə tɛn maɪlz ɔf. oʊnli stɔɹm-bæɾɝd hæf-lifləs tʃɹiz ən tæŋɡəlz ʌv ʌndɝɡɹoʊθ wɝ vɪzəbəl ɑn ðə hɪlz, bʌɾ i nu wʌt ðeɪ hɪd. tu, pɝhæps θɹi θaʊzən ə ðə mɛn sɑmaɪl hæd ɡæðɝd tə tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp ɪm fɹəm teɪkɪŋ ɪljən.

Shifting his sword hilt, he leaned forward. He could see the tight cluster of low, wooded hills half a mile to the east as clearly as if he were using a looking glass. The land was flat, here, the only prominences those forested hills and this long ridge, thrusting up from the heath. The next thicket dense enough to truly deserve the name lay close to ten miles off. Only storm-battered half-leafless trees and tangles of undergrowth were visible on the hills, but he knew what they hid. Two, perhaps three thousand of the men Sammael had gathered to try to stop him from taking Illian.

ðəɾ ɑɹmi hæd dɪsɪntəɡɹeɪɾɪd wʌns ðeɪ lɝn ðət ðə mæn u hæd sʌmən əm wɑz dɛd, ðət mæɾɪn stɛpeɪnəoʊz hæd vænɪʃt, pɝhæps ɪndə ðə ɡɹeɪv əz wɛl, ən ðət ðəɹ wɑz ə nu kɪŋ ɪn ɪljən. mɛni hæd skæɾɝd bæk tə ðɛɹ hoʊmz, jɛt dʒʌst əz mɛni klʌŋ təɡɛðɝ. juʒəwəli noʊ mɔɹ ðən twɛnti hɪɹ, θɝɾi ðɛɹ, bʌɾ ə ɡɹeɪɾ ɑɹmi ɪf ðeɪ keɪm təɡɛðɝ əɡɛn, ən kaʊnləs ɑɹm bænz ʌðɝwaɪz. iðɝ weɪ, ðeɪ kəd nɑt bi əlaʊd tə ɹoʊm ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd. taɪm weɪd daʊn ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz laɪk lɛd. ðəɹ wɑz nɛvɝ ɪnʌf taɪm, bʌt meɪbi ðɪs wʌns. . . . faɪɝ ən aɪs ən dɛθ.

That army had disintegrated once they learned that the man who had summoned them was dead, that Mattin Stepaneos had vanished, perhaps into the grave as well, and that there was a new king in Illian. Many had scattered back to their homes, yet just as many clung together. Usually no more than twenty here, thirty there, but a great army if they came together again, and countless armed bands otherwise. Either way, they could not be allowed to roam the countryside. Time weighed down on his shoulders like lead. There was never enough time, but maybe this once. . . . Fire and ice and death.

wʌt wəd jə du? hi θɔt. ɑɹ jə ðɛɹ? ən ðɛn, daʊtfəli, heɪɾɪŋ ðə daʊt, wɝ jə ɛvɝ ðɛɹ? saɪləns ænsɝd, dip ən dɛɾ ɪn ði ɛmptinəs ðət sɝaʊndəd hɪm. əɹ wɑz ðəɹ mæd læftɝ sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə ɹisɛsəz ə hɪz maɪnd? dɪɾ i ɪmædʒən ɪt, laɪk ðə fil ə sʌmwʌn lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, sʌmwʌn dʒʌst ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk ə tʌtʃɪŋ ɪz bæk? əɹ ðə kʌlɝz ðət swɝl dʒʌst aʊɾ ə saɪt, mɔɹ ðən kʌlɝz, ən wɝ ɡɔn? ə θɪŋ ə mædmən. hɪz ɡlʌv θʌm slɪɾ əlɔŋ ðə kɑɹvɪŋz ðət sɝpɛntən ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ. ðə lɔŋ ɡɹin-ænd-waɪt tæsəlz bɪloʊ ðə pɑlɪʃt spɪɹ-pɔɪn flʌɾɝd ɪn ðə wɪnd. faɪɝ ən aɪs, ən dɛθ wəd kʌm.

What would you do? he thought. Are you there? And then, doubtfully, hating the doubt, Were you ever there? Silence answered, deep and dead in the emptiness that surrounded him. Or was there mad laughter somewhere in the recesses of his mind? Did he imagine it, like the feel of someone looking over his shoulder, someone just on the brink of touching his back? Or the colors that swirled just out of sight, more than colors, and were gone? A thing of madmen. His gloved thumb slid along the carvings that serpentined the Dragon Scepter. The long green-and-white tassels below the polished spear-point fluttered in the wind. Fire and ice, and death would come.

"aɪ wɪl ɡoʊ tɔk tə ðɛm maɪsɛlf," hi ənaʊnst. wɪtʃ pɹədust ə fjʊɹɔɹ.

"I will go talk to them myself," he announced. Which produced a furor.

lɔɹd ɡɹɛɡɹɪn, ðə ɡɹin sæʃ ə ðə kaʊnsəl ə naɪn slæntəɾ əkɹɔs ɪz ɔɹnətli ɡɪldɪd bɹɛstpleɪt, hɝiɾ ɪz faɪn-æŋkəld waɪt ɡɛldɪŋ fɔɹwɝd fɹəm ði ɪliɑnɝz, fɑloʊd kloʊsli baɪ dɛmiɾɝ mɑɹkəlɪn, fɝs kæptən ə ðə kəmpænjənz, ɑn ə sɑləd beɪ. mɑɹkəlɪn wɑz ði oʊnli mæn əmʌŋ əm wɪθaʊt sɪlk əɹ ə spɛk ə leɪs, ði oʊnli mæn ɪn pleɪn ɪf bɹaɪtli bɝnɪʃt ɑɹmɝ, ðoʊ ðə kɑnɪkəl hɛlmət ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn ɪz sæɾəlz haɪ pɑməl dɪd bɛɹ θɹi θɪn ɡoʊldən plumz. lɔɹd mɑɹæk lɪftəɾ ɪz ɹeɪnz, ðən lɛɾ əm fɔl ənsɝteɪnli wən i sɔ noʊ ʌðɝz ə ðə naɪn muv. ə waɪd mæn wɪð ə stɑləd mænɝ, ən nu tə ðə kaʊnsəl, hi ɔfən simd mɔɹ kɹæfsmən ðən lɔɹd dɪspaɪt ðə ɹɪtʃ sɪlks bɪniθ ɪz lævɪʃ ɑɹmɝ ən ðə fɔlz ə leɪs spɪlɪŋ oʊvɝ. haɪ lɔɹdz wɪɹɑmɑn ən toʊlmɝæn spɝd təɡɛðɝ fɹəm ðə tɛɹənz, əz kɹʌstɪd wɪð ɡoʊld ən sɪlvɝ əz ɛni ʌv ðə naɪn, ən ɹoʊzænə, nuli ɹeɪz tə haɪ leɪɾi ən wɛɹɪŋ ə bɹɛstpleɪt wɝkt wɪð ðə hɔk-ænd-stɑɹz ə hɝ haʊs. ðɛɹ, tu, ʌðɝz hæf meɪɾ əz ɪf tə fɑloʊ ðən hʌŋ bæk, lʊkɪŋ wɝid. bleɪd-slɛndɝ ɑɹəkʌm ən blu-aɪd mɑɹəkən ən bɔld-hɛɾəd ɡəm wɝ dɛd mɛn; ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ ðæt, bʌt haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ðeɪ wɑntəd tə bi ət ðə sɛntɝ ə paʊɝ, ðeɪ fɪɹd ɹænd wəd kɪl ðɛm. oʊnli lɔɹd səmɝædʒɹɪd keɪm fɹəm ðə kɛɹhinɪn, ɑn ə ɡɹeɪ ðət hæd sin bɛɾɝ deɪz, hɪz ɑɹmɝ bæɾɝd, ɪts ɡɪldɪŋ tʃɪpt. hɪz feɪs wɑz ɡɔn ən hɑɹd, ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz hɛd ʃeɪvd ən paʊɾɝd laɪk ə kɑmən soʊlʒɝ, ən ɪz dɑɹk aɪz ʃoʊn wɪð kəntɛmp fəɹ ðə tɔlɝ tɛɹənz.

Lord Gregorin, the green sash of the Council of Nine slanted across his ornately gilded breastplate, hurried his fine-ankled white gelding forward from the Illianers, followed closely by Demetre Marcolin, First Captain of the Companions, on a solid bay. Marcolin was the only man among them without silk or a speck of lace, the only man in plain if brightly burnished armor, though the conical helmet resting on his saddle's high pommel did bear three thin golden plumes. Lord Marac lifted his reins, then let them fall uncertainly when he saw no others of the Nine move. A wide man with a stolid manner, and new to the Council, he often seemed more craftsman than lord despite the rich silks beneath his lavish armor and the falls of lace spilling over. High Lords Weiramon and Tolmeran spurred together from the Tairens, as crusted with gold and silver as any of the Nine, and Rosana, newly raised to High Lady and wearing a breastplate worked with the Hawk-and-Stars of her House. There, too, others half made as if to follow then hung back, looking worried. Blade-slender Aracome and blue-eyed Maraconn and bald-headed Gueyam were dead men; they did not know that, but however much they wanted to be at the center of power, they feared Rand would kill them. Only Lord Semaradrid came from the Cairhienin, on a gray that had seen better days, his armor battered, its gilding chipped. His face was gaunt and hard, the front of his head shaved and powdered like a common soldier, and his dark eyes shone with contempt for the taller Tairens.

ðəɹ wɑz plɛnti ʌv kəntɛmp tə ɡoʊ ɝaʊnd. tɛɹənz ən kɛɹhinɪn heɪɾəd wʌn ənʌðɝ. ɪliɑnɝz ən tɛɹənz dɪspaɪzd itʃ ʌðɝ. oʊnli kɛɹhinɪn ən ɪliɑnɝz ɡɑɾ əlɔŋ tə ɛni dɪɡɹi, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə sɝɾən əmaʊn ə pɹɪkəl ivən ðɛɹ. ðɛɹ tu neɪʃənz maɪt nɑɾ əv nɪɹ ðə lɔŋ hɪstɝi ʌv bæd blʌd ʃɛɹd baɪ tiɹ ən ɪljən, jɛt ðə kɛɹhinɪn stɪl wɝ fɔɹənɝz, ɑɹmd ən ɑɹmɝɾ ɑn ɪljənz sɔɪl, wɛlkəm hæfhɑɹɾɪdli ət bɛst ən oʊnli ðət mʌtʃ kəz ðeɪ fɑloʊd ɹænd. bʌt dɪspaɪɾ ɔl ðə fɹaʊnɪŋ ən bɹɪsəlɪŋ ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tɔk ət wʌns əz ðeɪ mɪld əbaʊt ɹænd ɪn ə flɝi ʌv wɪnbloʊn kloʊks, ðeɪ hæɾ ə kɑmən ɡoʊl naʊ. æftɝ ə fæʃən.

There was plenty of contempt to go around. Tairens and Cairhienin hated one another. Illianers and Tairens despised each other. Only Cairhienin and Illianers got along to any degree, and there was a certain amount of prickle even there. Their two nations might not have near the long history of bad blood shared by Tear and Illian, yet the Cairhienin still were foreigners, armed and armored on Illian's soil, welcomed halfheartedly at best and only that much because they followed Rand. But despite all the frowning and bristling and trying to talk at once as they milled about Rand in a flurry of windblown cloaks, they had a common goal now. After a fashion.

"mædʒəsti," ɡɹɛɡɹɪn sɛd heɪstəli, boʊɪŋ ɪn ɪz ɡoʊld-tul sæɾəl, "aɪ də bɛɡ jə lemi ɡoʊ ɪn jəɹ stɛd, əɹ fɝs kæptən mɑɹkəlɪn." ðə skwɛɹ-kʌt bɪɹd ðət lɛft ɪz ʌpɝ lɪp bɛɹ fɹeɪmd ə ɹaʊn feɪs kɹist wɪð wɝi. "ðiz mɛn mʌs noʊ jə ɑɹ kɪŋ - ðə pɹɑkləmeɪʃənz də bi ɹɛɾ ɪn ɛvɹi vɪlədʒ, əɾ ɛvɹi kɹɔsɹoʊdz, əz wi də spik - jɛt ðeɪ meɪ noʊ ʃoʊ pɹɑpɝ ɹɪspɛk fəɹ jəɹ kɹaʊn." læntɝn-dʒɔd mɑɹkəlɪn, klin-ʃeɪvən, stʌɾid ɹænd wɪð dɑɹk, dip-sɛɾ aɪz, ɡɪvɪŋ noʊ hɪnt wʌt leɪ bɪhaɪn ɪz ɪmpæsɪv feɪs. ðə kəmpænjənz' lɔɪəlti wɑz tə ðə kɹaʊn ʌv ɪljən, ən mɑɹkəlɪn wɑz oʊld ɪnʌf tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ wən tɑɹn ælθɹ hæd bɪn sɛkən kæptən oʊvɝ hɪm, bʌɾ oʊnli hi nu wʌɾ i θɔɾ ə ɹænd ælθɹ əz kɪŋ.

"Majesty," Gregorin said hastily, bowing in his gold-tooled saddle, "I do beg you let me go in your stead, or First Captain Marcolin." The square-cut beard that left his upper lip bare framed a round face creased with worry. "These men must know you are King - the proclamations do be read in every village, at every crossroads, as we do speak - yet they may no show proper respect for your crown." Lantern-jawed Marcolin, clean-shaven, studied Rand with dark, deep-set eyes, giving no hint what lay behind his impassive face. The Companions' loyalty was to the crown of Illian, and Marcolin was old enough to remember when Tarn al'Thor had been Second Captain over him, but only he knew what he thought of Rand al'Thor as King.

"maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," wɪɹɑmɑn ɪntoʊn əz i meɪɾ ɪz baʊ, nɑt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɡɹɛɡɹɪn tə fɪnɪʃ. ðə mæn ɔlweɪz ɪntoʊnd, ən ivən ɑn hɔɹsbæk i sim tə stʃɹʌt. hɪz wɝk vɛlvəts ən stʃɹaɪp sɪlks ən fɔlz ə leɪs ɔlmoʊst oʊvɝwɛlmd ɪz ɑɹmɝ, ən ɪz pɔɪntəd ɡɹeɪ bɪɹd ɡeɪv ɔf ə flaʊɝi sɛn ə pɝfjumd ɔɪlz. "ðɪs ɹæbəl ɪz tu pɛɾi tə kənsɝn ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən pɝsənəli. sɛt dɑɡz tə kætʃ dɑɡz, aɪ seɪ. lɛt ði ɪliɑnɝz ɹuɾ əm aʊt. bɝn maɪ soʊl, ðeɪv dʌn nʌθɪŋ soʊ fɑɹ tə sɝv jə bʌt tɔk." tʃɹʌst ɪm tə tɝn əɡɹimənt wɪð ɡɹɛɡɹɪn ɪndə ən ɪnsəlt. toʊlmɝæn wɑz lin ɪnʌf tə meɪk wɪɹɑmɑn əpɪɹ bʌlki ən sɑmbɝ ɪnʌf tə dɪm ðə lʌstɝ ə hɪz ɡɑɹb; hi wɑz noʊ ful, ən ɹaɪvəl tə wɪɹɑmɑn bɪsaɪdz, jɛɾ i nɑɾəd sloʊli ɪn əɡɹimənt. noʊ lʌv lɔs ðəɹ fəɹ ɪliɑnɝz, əɾ ɔl.

"My Lord Dragon," Weiramon intoned as he made his bow, not waiting for Gregorin to finish. The man always intoned, and even on horseback he seemed to strut. His worked velvets and striped silks and falls of lace almost overwhelmed his armor, and his pointed gray beard gave off a flowery scent of perfumed oils. "This rabble is too petty to concern the Lord Dragon personally. Set dogs to catch dogs, I say. Let the Illianers root them out. Burn my soul, they've done nothing so far to serve you but talk." Trust him to turn agreement with Gregorin into an insult. Tolmeran was lean enough to make Weiramon appear bulky and somber enough to dim the luster of his garb; he was no fool, and rival to Weiramon besides, yet he nodded slowly in agreement. No love lost there for Illianers, at all.

səmɝædʒɹɪd kɝld ə lɪp ət ðə tɛɹənz bʌɾ ədʒɹɛs hɪmsɛlf tə ɹænd, kʌɾɪŋ ɪn hɑɹɾ ɑn wɪɹɑmɑnz hilz. "ðɪs ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪz tɛn taɪmz əz lɑɹdʒ əz ɛni ʌðɝ wɪv faʊn soʊ fɑɹ, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən." hi kɛɹd nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ðə kɪŋ ʌv ɪljən, ən lɪɾəl ɪnʌf fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ɪksɛp ðət ðə θɹoʊn ə kɛɹhin wɑz ɹændz tə ɡɪv, ən səmɝædʒɹɪd hoʊpt ɪt wəd bi ɡɪvən tə wʌn i kəd fɑloʊ ɪnstɛɾ ə faɪt. "ðɛɹ lɔɪəltiz mʌs bi tə bɹɛnd, əɹ soʊ mɛni wəd nɑɾ əv hɛl təɡɛðɝ. aɪ fɪɹ tɔkɪŋ tə ðɛm ɪz ə weɪst ə taɪm, bʌɾ ɪf jə mʌs tɔk, lemi ɹɪŋ ðɛɹ pəzɪʃən oʊpənli wɪð stil soʊ ðeɪ noʊ ðə pɹaɪs ə pʊɾɪŋ ə fʊɾ aʊɾ ə laɪn."

Semaradrid curled a lip at the Tairens but addressed himself to Rand, cutting in hard on Weiramon's heels. "This gathering is ten times as large as any other we have found so far, my Lord Dragon." He cared nothing for the King of Illian, and little enough for the Dragon Reborn, except that the throne of Cairhien was Rand's to give, and Semaradrid hoped it would be given to one he could follow instead of fight. "Their loyalties must be to Brend, or so many would not have held together. I fear talking to them is a waste of time, but if you must talk, let me ring their position openly with steel so they know the price of putting a foot out of line."

ɹoʊzænə ɡlɛɹd ɹaɪt bæk ət səmɝædʒɹɪd, ə lin wʊmən, nɑt tɔl jɛt nɪɹli əz tɔl əz hi, wɪð aɪz laɪk blu aɪs. ʃi dɪd nɑt weɪt fəɹ ɪm tə fɪnɪʃ, iðɝ, ən ʃi, tu, spoʊk tə ɹænd. "aɪv kʌm tu fɑɹ ən ɪnvɛstəd tu mʌtʃ ɪn jə tə si jə daɪ naʊ, fəɹ nʌθɪŋ," ʃi sɛd blʌnli. noʊ mɔɹ ə ful ðən toʊlmɝæn, ɹoʊzænə hæd kleɪmd ə pleɪs ɪn ðə kaʊnsəlz ə ðə haɪ lɔɹdz, ðoʊ tɛɹən haɪ leɪɾiz sɛldəm dɪd, ən blʌnt wɑz ðə wɝd fəɹ hɝ. dɪspaɪt ði ɑɹmɝ moʊst ə ðə noʊbəlwɪmən wɔɹ, nʌn æktʃəli  lɛd ðɛɹ ɑɹmmɪn ɪndə bæɾəl, jɛt ɹoʊzænə kæɹiɾ ə flæŋʒd meɪs ɑn əɹ sæɾəl, ən səmtaɪmz ɹænd θɔt ʃi wəd laɪk ə tʃæns tə juz ɪt. "aɪ daʊt ðoʊz ɪliɑnɝz læk fəɹ baʊz," ʃi sɛd, "æn ɪt teɪks oʊnli wʌn æɹoʊ tə kɪl ivən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn." pɝsɪŋ ɪz lɪps θɔtfəli, mɑɹkəlɪn nɑɾəd bɪfɔɹ kætʃɪŋ hɪmsɛlf, ðən ɪkstʃeɪnʒd stɑɹɾəld lʊks wɪð ɹoʊzænə, itʃ mɔɹ sɝpɹaɪz ðən ði ʌðɝ tə faɪn ðɛmsɛlvz ə laɪk maɪnd wɪð ən eɪntʃən ɛnəmi.

Rosana glared right back at Semaradrid, a lean woman, not tall yet nearly as tall as he, with eyes like blue ice. She did not wait for him to finish, either, and she, too, spoke to Rand. "I've come too far and invested too much in you to see you die now, for nothing," she said bluntly. No more a fool than Tolmeran, Rosana had claimed a place in the councils of the High Lords, though Tairen High Ladies seldom did, and blunt was the word for her. Despite the armor most of the noblewomen wore, none actually led their armsmen into battle, yet Rosana carried a flanged mace on her saddle, and sometimes Rand thought she would like a chance to use it. "I doubt those Illianers lack for bows," she said, "and it takes only one arrow to kill even the Dragon Reborn." Pursing his lips thoughtfully, Marcolin nodded before catching himself, then exchanged startled looks with Rosana, each more surprised than the other to find themselves of like mind with an ancient enemy.

"ðiz pɛzəns kəd nɛvɝ əv faʊn ðə mɛɾəl tə steɪ ʌndɝ ɑɹmz wɪθaʊɾ ɛnkɝɪdʒmənt," wɪɹɑmɑn kəntɪnjud smuðli, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ɹoʊzænə. hi wɑz skɪld əɾ ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ hu, ən wʌt, hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə si əɹ hɪɹ. hi wɑz ə ful. "meɪ aɪ sədʒɛs maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən lʊk tə ðiz soʊ-kɔl naɪn fəɹ ðə sɔɹs?"

"These peasants could never have found the mettle to stay under arms without encouragement," Weiramon continued smoothly, ignoring Rosana. He was skilled at ignoring who, and what, he did not want to see or hear. He was a fool. "May I suggest my Lord Dragon look to these so-called Nine for the source?"

"aɪ də pɹoʊtɛs ðɪs tɛɹən pɪɡz ɪnsʌls, mædʒəsti!" ɡɹɛɡɹɪn ɡɹaʊld ɹaɪɾ ətɑp hɪm, wʌn hæn dɑɹɾɪŋ tə hɪz sɔɹd. "aɪ də pɹoʊɾɛst moʊs hɑɹɾəli!"

"I do protest this Tairen pig's insults, Majesty!" Gregorin growled right atop him, one hand darting to his sword. "I do protest most heartily!"

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ tu mɛni ðɪs taɪm," səmɝædʒɹɪd sɛɾ ət ðə seɪm ɪnstənt. "moʊst wɪl tɝn əɡɛns jə əz sun əz jəɹ bæk ɪz tə ðɛm ɪn ɛni keɪs." baɪ hɪz pɔɪntəd fɹaʊn, hi maɪɾ əv bɪn spikɪŋ ə ðə tɛɹənz əz wɛl əz ðə mɛn ɑn ðə wʊɾɪd hɪlz. pɝhæps i wɑz. "bɛɾɝ tə kɪl əm ən bi dʌn!"

"There are too many this time," Semaradrid said at the same instant. "Most will turn against you as soon as your back is to them in any case." By his pointed frown, he might have been speaking of the Tairens as well as the men on the wooded hills. Perhaps he was. "Better to kill them and be done!"

"dɪɾ aɪ æsk fəɹ əpɪnjənz?" ɹænd snæp hɑɹʃli. bæbəl bɪkeɪm saɪləns, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə kɹæk ə kloʊks ən bænɝz flæpɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪnd. sʌɾənli ɪkspɹɛʃənləs feɪsəz ɹəɡɑɹɾəd hɪm, mɔɹ ðən wʌn ɡoʊɪŋ ɡɹeɪ. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ hi hɛl ðə paʊɝ, bʌt ðeɪ nu hɪm. nɑɾ ɔl ʌv wʌt ðeɪ nu wɑz tʃɹuθ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz dʒʌst əz wɛl ðeɪ bɪlivd. "ju wɪl kʌm wɪð mi, ɡɹɛɡɹɪn," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə mɔɹ nɔɹməl vɔɪs. stɪl hɑɹd, ðoʊ. stil wɑz ɔl ðeɪ ʌndɝstʊd; ɡoʊ sɑft, ən ðeɪ wəd tɝn ɑn hɪm. "æn ju, mɑɹkəlɪn. ðə ɹɛst steɪ hɪɹ. dæʃivə! hɑpwəl!"

"Did I ask for opinions?" Rand snapped harshly. Babble became silence, except for the crack of cloaks and banners flapping in the wind. Suddenly expressionless faces regarded him, more than one going gray. They did not know he held the Power, but they knew him. Not all of what they knew was truth, but it was just as well they believed. "You will come with me, Gregorin," he said in a more normal voice. Still hard, though. Steel was all they understood; go soft, and they would turn on him. "And you, Marcolin. The rest stay here. Dashiva! Hopwil!"

ɛvɹiwʌn nɑt neɪmd ɹeɪn ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz bæk hɝidli əz ðə tu æʃəmən ɹoʊd tə dʒɔɪn ɹænd, ən ði ɪliɑnɝz aɪd ðə blæk-koʊɾəd mɛn əz ðoʊ ðeɪ wʊɾə laɪk tə ɹɪmeɪn bɪhaɪnd, tu. əsaɪd fɹəm ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, kɔɹlən dæʃivə wɑz ɡlaʊɝɪŋ ən mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ əz i soʊ ɔfən dɪd. ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz əwɛɹ ðət seɪɾɪn dʒɹoʊv mɛn mæd sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ən pleɪn-feɪs dæʃivə sɝɾənli lʊk ðə pɑɹt, læŋk əntʃɹɪm hɛɹ flaɪɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪnd, lɪkɪŋ ɪz lɪps ən ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ɛbən hɑpwəl, dʒʌst sɪkstin ən stɪl wɪð ə fju skæɾɝd blɑtʃəz ɑn ɪz tʃiks, wɔɹ ə stɛɹɪŋ fɹaʊn ðət ɡeɪz bɪɑn ɛniθɪŋ ɪn saɪt. ət list ɹænd nu ðə waɪ ʌv ðæt.

Everyone not named reined their horses back hurriedly as the two Asha'man rode to join Rand, and the Illianers eyed the black-coated men as though they would have liked to remain behind, too. Aside from anything else, Corlan Dashiva was glowering and muttering under his breath as he so often did. Everyone was aware that saidin drove men mad sooner or later, and plain-faced Dashiva certainly looked the part, lank untrimmed hair flying in the wind, licking his lips and shaking his head. For that matter, Eben Hopwil, just sixteen and still with a few scattered blotches on his cheeks, wore a staring frown that gazed beyond anything in sight. At least Rand knew the why of that.

əz ði æʃəmən dʒɹu nɪɹ, ɹænd kəd nɑt hɛlp kɑkɪŋ ɪz hɛd tə lɪsən, ðoʊ wʌɾ i lɪsən fəɹ wɑz ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd. ɑlɑnə wɑz ðɛɹ, ʌv kɔɹs; niðɝ ðə vɔɪd nɔɹ ðə paʊɝ ɔltɝd ðəɾ ə wɪskɝ. dɪstəns wɔɹ ðəɾ əwɛɹnəs daʊn tə dʒʌs ðət - əwɛɹnəs ðət ʃi ɪɡzɪstəd, sʌmwɛɹ fɑɹ tə ðə nɔɹθ - jɛt ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ tədeɪ, sʌmθɪŋ i hæd fɛl sɛvɹəl taɪmz ɹisənli, dɪm ən bɛɹli ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə noʊɾəs. ə wɪspɝ ə ʃɑk, pɝhæps, əɹ aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ, ə bɹɛθ ə sʌmθɪŋ ʃɑɹp i kəd nɑt kwaɪt ɡɹæsp. ʃi mʌs fil wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋli fəɹ ɪm tə bi ivən ðət kɑnʃəs ʌv ɪɾ ət ðɪs dɪstəns. meɪbi ʃi wɑz mɪsɪŋ hɪm. ə ɹaɪ θɔt. hi dɪd nɑt mɪs hɝ. ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ɑlɑnə wɑz iziɝ ðən ɪt hæd bɪn wʌns. ʃi wɑz ðɛɹ, bʌt nɑt ðə vɔɪs ðət juz tə ʃaʊɾ ə dɛθ ən kɪlɪŋ wɛnɛvɝ ən æʃəmən keɪm ɪndə saɪt. luz θɝɪn wɑz ɡɔn. ənlɛs ðət fil ə sʌmwʌn stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd, bɹʌʃɪŋ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ, wɑz hɪm. wɑz ðəɹ ə mædmænz hɔɹs læftɝ dip ɪn ɪz θɔts? əɹ wɑz ɪɾ ɪz oʊn? ðə mæn hæd bɪn ðɛɹ! hi hæd!

As the Asha'man drew near, Rand could not help cocking his head to listen, though what he listened for was inside his head. Alanna was there, of course; neither the Void nor the Power altered that a whisker. Distance wore that awareness down to just that - awareness that she existed, somewhere far to the north - yet there was something more today, something he had felt several times recently, dim and barely on the edge of notice. A whisper of shock, perhaps, or outrage, a breath of something sharp he could not quite grasp. She must feel whatever it was very strongly for him to be even that conscious of it at this distance. Maybe she was missing him. A wry thought. He did not miss her. Ignoring Alanna was easier than it had been once. She was there, but not the voice that used to shout of death and killing whenever an Asha'man came into sight. Lews Therin was gone. Unless that feel of someone staring at the back of his head, brushing his shoulder blades with a finger, was him. Was there a madman's hoarse laughter deep in his thoughts? Or was it his own? The man had been there! He had!

hi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə mɑɹkəlɪn stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm, ən ɡɹɛɡɹɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ vɛɹi hɑɹd nɑt tə. "nɑt jɛt," hi toʊld əm ɹaɪli, ən ɔlmoʊs læft wən ðeɪ klɪɹli ʌndɝstʊd ɹaɪɾ əweɪ. ɹɪlif wɑz tu pleɪn ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. hi wɑz nɑɾ ɪnseɪn. jɛt. "kʌm," hi toʊl ðɛm, ən stɑɹɾəd teɪdeɪʃɝ daʊn ðə sloʊp əɾ ə tʃɹɑt. dɪspaɪt ðə mɛn fɑloʊɪŋ, hi fɛlt əloʊn. dɪspaɪt ðə paʊɝ, hi fɛlt ɛmpti.

He became aware of Marcolin staring at him, and Gregorin trying very hard not to. "Not yet," he told them wryly, and almost laughed when they clearly understood right away. Relief was too plain on their faces for anything else. He was not insane. Yet. "Come," he told them, and started Tai'daishar down the slope at a trot. Despite the men following, he felt alone. Despite the Power, he felt empty.

bɪtwin ðə ɹɪdʒ ən ðə hɪlz leɪ pætʃəz ə θɪk skɹʌb ən lɔŋ stʃɹɛtʃəz ə dɛd ɡɹæs, ə ɡlɪsnɪŋ mæt ə bɹaʊn ən jɛloʊ biɾən flæt baɪ ðə ɹeɪn. oʊnli ə fju deɪz əɡoʊ ðə ɡɹaʊn hæd bɪn soʊ pɑɹtʃt ðəɾ i hæd θɔɾ ɪt kəd dʒɹɪŋk ə ɹɪvɝ wɪθaʊt tʃeɪnʒɪŋ. ðən ðə tɔɹəns keɪm, sɛn baɪ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ faɪndɪŋ mɝsi ət læst, əɹ meɪbi baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪn ə fɪɾ ə blæk hjumɝ; hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɪtʃ. naʊ ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz splæʃt mʌɾ əɾ ɛvɹi sɛkən stɛp. hi hoʊp ðɪs dɪd nɑt teɪk lɔŋ. hi hæd səm taɪm, baɪ wʌt hɑpwəl hæd ɹipɔɹɾəd, bʌt nɑt fɝɛvɝ. pɝhæps wiks, ɪf i wɑz lʌki. hi niɾəd mʌnθs. laɪt, hi niɾəd jɪɹz i wəd nɛvɝ hæv!

Between the ridge and the hills lay patches of thick scrub and long stretches of dead grass, a glistening mat of brown and yellow beaten flat by the rain. Only a few days ago the ground had been so parched that he had thought it could drink a river without changing. Then the torrents came, sent by the Creator finding mercy at last, or maybe by the Dark One in a fit of black humor; he did not know which. Now the horses' hooves splashed mud at every second step. He hoped this did not take long. He had some time, by what Hopwil had reported, but not forever. Perhaps weeks, if he was lucky. He needed months. Light, he needed years he would never have!

hɪz hɪɹɪŋ haɪɾənd baɪ ðə paʊɝ, hi kəd meɪk aʊt səm ʌv wʌt ðə mɛn bɪhaɪn ɪm wɝ seɪɪŋ. ɡɹɛɡɹɪn ən mɑɹkəlɪn ɹoʊd ni-tə-ni, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hoʊl ðɛɹ kloʊks əɡɛns ðə wɪn ən spikɪŋ ɪn loʊ toʊnz əbaʊt ðə mɛn əhɛd, əbaʊt ðɛɹ fɪɹz ðə mɛn maɪt faɪt. niðɝ daʊɾɪd ðeɪ wəd bi kɹʌʃt ɪf ðeɪ ɹɪzɪstɪd, bʌt ðeɪ fɪɹd ði ɪfɛkt ɑn ɹænd, ən ɪz ɑn ɪljən, ɪf ɪliɑnɝz fɔɾ ɪm naʊ ðət bɹɛnd wɑz dɛd. ðeɪ stɪl kəd nɑt bɹɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz tə ɡɪv bɹɛn ɪz tʃɹu neɪm, sɑmaɪl. ðə vɛɹi noʊʃən ðət wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən hæd ɹuld ɪn ɪljən fɹaɪɾənd əm ivən mɔɹ ðən ðə fæk ðət ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɹul ðəɹ naʊ.

His hearing heightened by the Power, he could make out some of what the men behind him were saying. Gregorin and Marcolin rode knee-to-knee, trying to hold their cloaks against the wind and speaking in low tones about the men ahead, about their fears the men might fight. Neither doubted they would be crushed if they resisted, but they feared the effect on Rand, and his on Illian, if Illianers fought him now that Brend was dead. They still could not bring themselves to give Brend his true name, Sammael. The very notion that one of the Forsaken had ruled in Illian frightened them even more than the fact that the Dragon Reborn ruled there now.

dæʃivə, slʌmpt ɪn ɪz ɡɹeɪz sæɾəl laɪk ə mæn u hæd nɛvɝ sin ə hɔɹs bɪfɔɹ, mʌɾɝd æŋɡɹəli ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, wɪtʃ i spoʊk ən ɹɛɾ əz fluənli əz ə skɑlɝ. ɹænd nu ə lɪɾəl, ðoʊ nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə ʌndɝstænd wʌt ðə fɛloʊ wɑz mʌmbəlɪŋ. pɹɑbli kəmpleɪns əbaʊt ðə wɛðɝ; dɪspaɪt biɪŋ ə fɑɹmɝ, dæʃivə dɪslaɪk biɪŋ aʊt-ʌv-dɔɹz ənlɛs ðə skaɪz wɝ klɪɹ.

Dashiva, slumped in his gray's saddle like a man who had never seen a horse before, muttered angrily under his breath. In the Old Tongue, which he spoke and read as fluently as a scholar. Rand knew a little, though not enough to understand what the fellow was mumbling. Probably complaints about the weather; despite being a farmer, Dashiva disliked being out-of-doors unless the skies were clear.

oʊnli hɑpwəl ɹoʊɾ ɪn saɪləns, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət sʌmθɪŋ bɪɑn ðə hɝaɪzən, hɪz hɛɹ ən kloʊk wɪpɪŋ əbaʊɾ əz waɪldli əz dæʃivəz. naʊ ən ðən i klʌtʃt ðə hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹɾ ʌnkɑnʃəsli. ɹænd hæd tə spik θɹi taɪmz, ðə læst ʃɑɹpli, bɪfɔɹ hɑpwəl ɡeɪv ə sɝpɹaɪz dʒɝk ən buɾɪd ɪz læŋki dʌn ʌp bɪsaɪd teɪdeɪʃɝ.

Only Hopwil rode in silence, frowning at something beyond the horizon, his hair and cloak whipping about as wildly as Dashiva's. Now and then he clutched the hilt of his sword unconsciously. Rand had to speak three times, the last sharply, before Hopwil gave a surprised jerk and booted his lanky dun up beside Tai'daishar.

ɹænd stʌɾid hɪm. ðə jʌŋ mæn - nɑɾ ə bɔɪ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, noʊ mæɾɝ ɪz eɪdʒ - hæd fɪld aʊt sɪns ɹænd fɝst sɔ hɪm, ðoʊ hɪz noʊz ən ɪɹz stɪl simd meɪd fəɹ ə bɪɡɝ mæn. eɪ dʒɹæɡən, ɹɛd-ɪnæməld ɡoʊld, naʊ bæləns ðə sɪlvɝ sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz haɪ kɑlɝ, dʒʌs laɪk dæʃivəz. wʌns, hi hæd sɛɾ i wəd læf ə jɪɹ fəɹ dʒɔɪ wən ðə dʒɹæɡən wɑz hɪz, bʌɾ i stɛɹɾ ənblɪŋkɪŋ ət ɹænd əz ðoʊ lʊkɪŋ θɹu hɪm.

Rand studied him. The young man - not a boy any longer, no matter his age - had filled out since Rand first saw him, though his nose and ears still seemed made for a bigger man. A Dragon, red-enameled gold, now balanced the silver Sword on his high collar, just like Dashiva's. Once, he had said he would laugh a year for joy when the Dragon was his, but he stared unblinking at Rand as though looking through him.

"wʌt jə lɝnd wɑz ɡʊd nuz," ɹænd toʊl hɪm. oʊnli ən ɛfɝt kɛpt ɪm fɹəm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɹʌʃ ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ ɪn ɪz fɪst. "ju dɪd wɛl." hi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd ðə sintʃæn tə ɹɪtɝn, bʌt nɑt soʊ sun. hi hæd hoʊp nɑt soʊ sun. ən nɑt lipɪŋ aʊɾ ə noʊwɛɹ, swɑloʊɪŋ sɪɾiz əɾ ə ɡʌlp. wən i faʊn aʊt ðət mɝtʃəns ɪn ɪljən hæd noʊn fəɹ deɪz bɪfɔɹ ɛni ʌv əm θɔt tə ɪnfɔɹm ðə naɪn - ðə laɪt fɝbɪd ðeɪ ʃəd luz ə tʃæns ət pɹɑfət kəz tu mɛni nu tu mʌtʃ! - hi hæd bɪn wɪðɪn ə hɛɹ ə skaʊɝɪŋ ðə sɪɾi tə ɪts faʊndeɪʃənz. bʌt ðə nuz wɑz ɡʊd, əɹ əz ɡʊɾ əz ɪt kəd bi ɪn ðə sɝkəmstænsəz. hɑpwəl hæd tʃɹævəl tə æmədɔɹ, tə ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd nɪɹbaɪ, ən ðə sintʃæn əpɪɹd tə bi weɪɾɪŋ. pɝhæps daɪdʒɛstɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ hæd kənsumd. ðə laɪt sɛn ðeɪ tʃoʊkt ɑn ɪt! hi fɔɹst ɪz ɡɹɪp tə lusən ɑn ðə lɛŋθ ə dʒɹæɡən-kɑɹv spɪɹhɛd. "ɪf mɔɹ bɹɪŋz hæf əz ɡʊd, aɪ hæv taɪm tə sɛɾəl ɪljən bɪfɔɹ dilɪŋ wɪð ðɛm." ɛbu dɑɹ, əz wɛl! ðə laɪt bɝn ðə sintʃæn! ðeɪ wɝ ə dɪstʃɹækʃən, wʌn i dɪd nɑt niɾ ən kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə ɪɡnɔɹ.

"What you learned was good news," Rand told him. Only an effort kept him from trying to crush the Dragon Scepter in his fist. "You did well." He had expected the Seanchan to return, but not so soon. He had hoped not so soon. And not leaping out of nowhere, swallowing cities at a gulp. When he found out that merchants in Illian had known for days before any of them thought to inform the Nine - the Light forbid they should lose a chance at profit because too many knew too much! - he had been within a hair of scouring the city to its foundations. But the news was good, or as good as it could be in the circumstances. Hopwil had Traveled to Amador, to the countryside nearby, and the Seanchan appeared to be waiting. Perhaps digesting what they had consumed. The Light send they choked on it! He forced his grip to loosen on the length of Dragon-carved spearhead. "If Morr brings half as good, I have time to settle Illian before dealing with them." Ebou Dar, as well! The Light burn the Seanchan! They were a distraction, one he did not need and could not afford to ignore.

hɑpwəl sɛd nʌθɪŋ, oʊnli lʊkt.

Hopwil said nothing, only looked.

"ɑɹ jə əpsɛt kəz jə hæd tə kɪl wɪmən?" dɪsɔɹə, ʌv ðə musɑɹə ɹn, ən ləmɛl, ʌv ðə smoʊk wɔɾɝ maɪæɡoʊmə, ænd. . . . ɹænd fɔɹs daʊn ði ɪnstɪŋktɪv lɪɾəni ivən əz ɪt bɪɡæn floʊɾɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə vɔɪd. nu neɪmz hæɾ əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðət lɪst, neɪmz i dɪd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ æɾɪŋ. leɪdʒɪn ɑɹnoʊ, ə ɹɛd sɪstɝ u hæd daɪd tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə teɪk ɪm ə pɹɪznɝ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ʃʊɹli ʃi hæd noʊ ɹaɪt tə ə pleɪs, bʌt ʃi hæd kleɪmd wʌn. koʊləveɪɪɹ seɪɡən, hu hæd hæŋ hɝsɛlf ɹæðɝ ðən æksɛp dʒʌstəs. ʌðɝz. mɛn hæd daɪɾ ɪn θaʊzənz, baɪ hɪz ɔɹɾɝ əɹ baɪ hɪz hænd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə feɪsəz ə ðə wɪmən ðət hɔntəɾ ɪz dʒɹimz. itʃ naɪt, hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf kənfɹʌn ðɛɹ saɪlənli əkjuzɪŋ aɪz. meɪbi ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ aɪz i hæd fɛlt ə leɪt.

"Are you upset because you had to kill women?" Desora, of the Musara Reyn, and Lamelle, of the Smoke Water Miagoma, and. . . . Rand forced down the instinctive litany even as it began floating across the Void. New names had appeared on that list, names he did not remember adding. Laigin Arnault, a Red sister who had died trying to take him a prisoner to Tar Valon. Surely she had no right to a place, but she had claimed one. Colavaere Saighan, who had hanged herself rather than accept justice. Others. Men had died in thousands, by his order or by his hand, but it was the faces of the women that haunted his dreams. Each night, he made himself confront their silently accusing eyes. Maybe it was their eyes he had felt of late.

"aɪ toʊl jə əbaʊt deɪmeɪn ən sʌldəm," hi sɛd kɑmli, bʌɾ ɪnsaɪɾ ə hɪm, ɹeɪdʒ flɛɹd, faɪɝ spaɪɾɝwɪbɪŋ ɝaʊn ði ɛmptinəs ə ðə vɔɪd. ðə laɪt bɝn mi, aɪv kɪl mɔɹ wɪmən ðən ɔl jəɹ naɪtmɛɹz kəd hoʊld! maɪ hænz ɑɹ blæk wɪð ðə blʌɾ ʌv wɪmən! "ɪf jə hædnt waɪpt aʊt ðət sintʃæn pətʃɹoʊl, ðeɪɾ əv kɪl jə fəɹ ʃʊɹ." hi dɪd nɑt seɪ ðət hɑpwəl ʃʊɾə əvɔɪɾəd ðɛm, əvɔɪɾəd ðə nid tə kɪl ðɛm. tu leɪt fəɹ ðæt. "aɪ daʊt ðət deɪmeɪn ivən nu haʊ tə ʃild ə mæn. jə hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs." ən bɛɾɝ ðeɪ wɝ ɔl dɛd ðən səm ɪskeɪpɪŋ wɪð wɝɾ ʌv ə mæn u kəd tʃænəl, skaʊɾɪŋ ðɛm.

"I told you about damane and sul'dam," he said calmly, but inside of him, rage flared, fire spiderwebbing around the emptiness of the Void. The Light burn me, I've killed more women than all your nightmares could hold! My hands are black with the blood of women! "If you hadn't wiped out that Seanchan patrol, they'd have killed you for sure." He did not say that Hopwil should have avoided them, avoided the need to kill them. Too late for that. "I doubt that damane even knew how to shield a man. You had no choice." And better they were all dead than some escaping with word of a man who could channel, scouting them.

æbsənli, hɑpwəl tʌtʃt ɪz lɛf sliv, wɛɹ ðə blæk kʌlɝ dɪsɡaɪz faɪɝ-skɑɹd wʊl. ðə sintʃæn hæd nɑt daɪɾ izəli əɹ fæst. "aɪ paɪl ðə bɑɾiz ɪn ə hɑloʊ," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs. "ðə hɔɹsəz, ɛvɹiθɪŋ. aɪ bɝn ɪɾ ɔl tə æʃ. waɪɾ æʃ ðət floʊɾəd ɪn ðə wɪn laɪk snoʊ. ɪt dɪdn bɑðɝ mi əɾ ɔl."

Absently, Hopwil touched his left sleeve, where the black color disguised fire-scarred wool. The Seanchan had not died easily or fast. "I piled the bodies in a hollow," he said in a flat voice. "The horses, everything. I burned it all to ash. White ash that floated in the wind like snow. It didn't bother me at all."

ɹænd hɝd ðə laɪ ɑn ðə mænz tʌŋ, bʌt hɑpwəl hæd tə lɝn. æftɝ ɔl, hi hæd. ðeɪ wɝ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ, ən ðət wɑz ɔl ðəɹ wɑz tə ɪt. ɔl ðəɹ wɑz. laɪæ, ʌv ðə koʊseɪɾə tʃɑɝin, ə neɪm ɹɪɾən ɪn faɪɝ. mɔɪɹeɪn dəmədʒɹd, ənʌðɝ neɪm ðət sɪɹd tə ðə soʊl ɹæðɝ ðən mɪɹli bɝnɪŋ. ə neɪmləs dɑɹkfɹɛnd, ɹɛpɹəzɛntəɾ oʊnli baɪ ə feɪs, hu hæd daɪd baɪ hɪz sɔɹd nɪɹ. . . .

Rand heard the lie on the man's tongue, but Hopwil had to learn. After all, he had. They were what they were, and that was all there was to it. All there was. Liah, of the Cosaida Chareen, a name written in fire. Moiraine Damodred, another name that seared to the soul rather than merely burning. A nameless Darkfriend, represented only by a face, who had died by his sword near. . . .

"mædʒəsti," ɡɹɛɡɹɪn sɛd laʊdli, pɔɪntɪŋ əhɛd. ə loʊn mæn keɪm aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɹiz ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə nɪɹəs hɪl tə stænd weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ən æɾətud ə dɪfaɪəns. hi kæɹiɾ ə baʊ, ən wɔɹ ə pɔɪntəd stil kæp ən ə bɛltəd meɪl ʃɝt ðət hʌŋ nɪɹli tə hɪz niz.

"Majesty," Gregorin said loudly, pointing ahead. A lone man came out of the trees at the foot of the nearest hill to stand waiting in an attitude of defiance. He carried a bow, and wore a pointed steel cap and a belted mail shirt that hung nearly to his knees.

ɹænd spɝd teɪdeɪʃɝ tə miɾ ɪm siθɪŋ wɪð ðə paʊɝ. seɪɾɪn kəd pɹətɛkt ɪm fɹəm mɛn.

Rand spurred Tai'daishar to meet him seething with the Power. Saidin could protect him from men.

ʌp kloʊz, ðə boʊmən dɪd nɑt meɪk soʊ bɹeɪv ə saɪt. ɹʌst stʃɹikt ɪz hɛlməɾ ən meɪl, ən i lʊk sɑɾən, mʌd tə hɪz θaɪz, dæmp hɛɹ tʃɹeɪlɪŋ daʊn ə nɛɹoʊ feɪs. kɑfɪŋ hɑloʊli, hi skɹʌbd əɾ ə lɔŋ noʊz wɪð ðə bæk ə hɪz hænd. hɪz bɑstʃɹɪŋ əpɪɹd tɔt, ðoʊ; ðæt, hi hæd pɹətɛktəd fɹəm ðə ɹeɪn. ən ðə flɛtʃɪŋz ɑn ði æɹoʊz ɪn ɪz kwɪvɝ lʊk dʒɹaɪ, tu.

Up close, the bowman did not make so brave a sight. Rust streaked his helmet and mail, and he looked sodden, mud to his thighs, damp hair trailing down a narrow face. Coughing hollowly, he scrubbed at a long nose with the back of his hand. His bowstring appeared taut, though; that, he had protected from the rain. And the fletchings on the arrows in his quiver looked dry, too.

"ɑɹ jə ðə liɾɝ hɪɹ?" ɹænd dɪmændəd.

"Are you the leader here?" Rand demanded.

"ju maɪt seɪ aɪ də spik fəɹ hɪm," ðə nɛɹoʊ-feɪs mæn ɹɪplaɪd wɛɹəli. "waɪ?" əz ði ʌðɝz ɡæləpt ʌp bɪhaɪn ɹænd, hi ʃɪftəɾ ɪz fit, dɑɹk aɪz laɪk ə kɔɹnɝd bædʒɝz. bædʒɝz wɝ deɪnʒɝəs, kɔɹnɝd.

"You might say I do speak for him," the narrow-faced man replied warily. "Why?" As the others galloped up behind Rand, he shifted his feet, dark eyes like a cornered badger's. Badgers were dangerous, cornered.

"wɑtʃ jəɹ tʌŋ, mæn!" ɡɹɛɡɹɪn snæpt. "ju də spik tə ɹænd ælθɹ, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, lɔɹɾ ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ən kɪŋ ʌv ɪljən! nil tə jəɹ kɪŋ! wʌt də jəɹ neɪm bi?"

"Watch your tongue, man!" Gregorin snapped. "You do speak to Rand al'Thor, the Dragon Reborn, Lord of the Morning and King of Illian! Kneel to your King! What do your name be?"

"hi də bi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn?" ðə fɛloʊ sɛd daʊtfəli. aɪɪŋ ɹænd fɹəm ðə kɹaʊn ɑn ɪz hɛd tə hɪz buts, lɪŋɡɝɪŋ ə moʊmən ɑn ðə ɡɪldɪd dʒɹæɡən bʌklɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd bɛlt, ðə mæn ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ əz ɪf i hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd sʌmwʌn oʊldɝ, əɹ ɡɹændɝ. "æn lɔɹɾ ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, jə də seɪ? əɹ kɪŋ dɪd nɛvɝ staɪl hɪmsɛlf soʊ." hi meɪd noʊ muv təwɔɹd nilɪŋ, əɹ ɡɪvɪŋ ɪz neɪm. ɡɹɛɡɹɪnz feɪs dɑɹkən ət ðə mænz toʊn, ən meɪbi ət ðə mænz əblik dɪnaɪəl ə ɹænd əz kɪŋ. mɑɹkəlɪn ɡeɪv ə slaɪt nɑd, əz ðoʊ hi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd noʊ mɔɹ.

"He do be the Dragon Reborn?" the fellow said doubtfully. Eyeing Rand from the crown on his head to his boots, lingering a moment on the gilded Dragon buckling his sword belt, the man shook his head as if he had expected someone older, or grander. "And Lord of the Morning, you do say? Our King did never style himself so." He made no move toward kneeling, or giving his name. Gregorin's face darkened at the man's tone, and maybe at the man's oblique denial of Rand as King. Marcolin gave a slight nod, as though he had expected no more.

dæmp ɹʌsəlɪŋz stɝɾ ɪn ði ʌndɝɡɹoʊθ əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz. ɹænd hɝɾ izəli, ən əbɹʌpli hi fɛl seɪɾɪn fɪl hɑpwəl. noʊ lɔŋɡɝ stɛɹɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ, hɑpwəl stʌɾid ðə wʊdlaɪn ɪntɛnli, ə waɪld laɪɾ ɪn ɪz aɪz. dæʃivə, saɪlənt, ɹeɪkɪŋ dɑɹk hɛɹ aʊɾ ə hɪz feɪs, lʊk bɔɹd. linɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, ɡɹɛɡɹɪn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ æŋɡɹəli. faɪɝ ən aɪs, bʌt nɑt jɛt dɛθ.

Damp rustlings stirred in the undergrowth among the trees. Rand heard easily, and abruptly he felt saidin fill Hopwil. No longer staring at nothing, Hopwil studied the woodline intently, a wild light in his eyes. Dashiva, silent, raking dark hair out of his face, looked bored. Leaning forward in his saddle, Gregorin opened his mouth angrily. Fire and ice, but not yet death.

"pis, ɡɹɛɡɹɪn." ɹænd dɪd nɑt ɹeɪz ɪz vɔɪs, bʌɾ i woʊv floʊz tə kæɹi hɪz wɝdz, ɛɹ ən faɪɝ, soʊ ðeɪ bumd əɡɛns ðə wɔl ə tʃɹiz. "maɪ ɔfɝ ɪz dʒɛnɝəs." ðə lɔŋ-noʊz mæn stæɡɝɾ ət ðə saʊnd, ən ɡɹɛɡɹɪnz hɔɹs ʃaɪd. ðoʊz hɪɾən mɛn wəd hɪɹ klɪɹli. "leɪ daʊn jəɹ ɑɹmz, ən ðoʊz u wɑnə ɹɪtɝn hoʊm, kæn. ðoʊz u wɑnə fɑloʊ mi ɪnstɛd, kən də ðæt. bʌt noʊ mæn livz hɪɹ ʌndɝ ɑɹmz ənlɛs i dʌz fɑloʊ mi. aɪ noʊ moʊst ə jə ɑɹ ɡʊd mɛn, hu ænsɝd ðə kɔl ə jəɹ kɪŋ ən ðə kaʊnsəl ə naɪn tə dɪfɛn ɪljən, bʌɾ aɪm jəɹ kɪŋ, naʊ, ən əl nɑɾ əv ɛniwʌn tɛmptəd tə tɝn bændət." mɑɹkəlɪn nɑɾəd ɡɹɪmli.

"Peace, Gregorin." Rand did not raise his voice, but he wove flows to carry his words, Air and Fire, so they boomed against the wall of trees. "My offer is generous." The long-nosed man staggered at the sound, and Gregorin's horse shied. Those hidden men would hear clearly. "Lay down your arms, and those who want to return home, can. Those who want to follow me instead, can do that. But no man leaves here under arms unless he does follow me. I know most of you are good men, who answered the call of your King and the Council of Nine to defend Illian, but I am your King, now, and I'll not have anyone tempted to turn bandit." Marcolin nodded grimly.

"wʌɾ əbaʊt jəɹ dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn bɝnɪŋ fɑɹmz?" ə mænz fɹaɪɾənd vɔɪs ʃaʊɾəd fɹəm ðə tʃɹiz. "ðeɪ də bi fleɪmɪŋ bændəts!"

"What about your Dragonsworn burning farms?" a man's frightened voice shouted from the trees. "They do be flaming bandits!"

"wʌɾ əbaʊt jəɹ il?" ənʌðɝ kɔld. "aɪ də hɪɹ ðeɪ kæɹi ɔf hoʊl vɪlədʒəz!" mɔɹ vɔɪsəz fɹəm ənsin mɛn dʒɔɪn ɪn, ɔl ʃaʊɾɪŋ ðə seɪm θɪŋz, dʒɹæɡən-swɔɹn ən il, mɝɾɝəs bɹɪɡænz ən sævədʒəz. ɹænd ɡɹaʊn ɪz tiθ.

"What about your Aiel?" another called. "I do hear they carry off whole villages!" More voices from unseen men joined in, all shouting the same things, Dragon-sworn and Aiel, murderous brigands and savages. Rand ground his teeth.

wən ðə ʃaʊɾɪŋ feɪɾəd, nɛɹoʊ-feɪs sɛd, "ju də si?" hi pɔz tə kɑf, ðən hɔkt ən spæt, meɪbi fəɹ ɪz tʃɛst ən meɪbi fəɹ ɛmfəsəs. ə pɪɾəfəl saɪt, ɔl wɛɾ ən ɹʌst, bʌɾ ɪz bækboʊn wɑz əz taɪɾ əz ɪz bɑstʃɹɪŋ. hi ɪɡnɔɹd ɹændz ɡlɛɹ əz izəli əz i dɪd ɡɹɛɡɹɪnz. "ju də æsk əs tə ɡoʊ hoʊm ənɑɹmd, əneɪbəl tə dɪfɛn aʊɝsɛlvz əɹ əɹ fæmliz, waɪl jəɹ pipəl də bɝn ən stil ən kɪl. ðeɪ də seɪ ðə stɔɹm bi kʌmɪŋ," hi æɾəd, ən lʊk sɝpɹaɪz ðəɾ i hæd, sɝpɹaɪzd ən kənfjuz fəɹ ə moʊmənt.

When the shouting faded, narrow-face said, "You do see?" He paused to cough, then hawked and spat, maybe for his chest and maybe for emphasis. A pitiful sight, all wet and rust, but his backbone was as tight as his bowstring. He ignored Rand's glare as easily as he did Gregorin's. "You do ask us to go home unarmed, unable to defend ourselves or our families, while your people do burn and steal and kill. They do say the storm be coming," he added, and looked surprised that he had, surprised and confused for a moment.

"ði il juv hɝɾ əbaʊɾ ɑɹ maɪ ɛnəmiz!" nɑt spaɪɾɝwɛbz ə fleɪm ðɪs taɪm, bʌt sɑləd ʃits ə fjʊɹi ðət ɹæp taɪɾ ɝaʊn ðə vɔɪd. ɹændz vɔɪs wɑz aɪs, ðoʊ; ɪt ɹɔɹd laɪk ðə kɹæk ʌv wɪntɝ. ðə stɔɹm wɑz kʌmɪŋ? laɪt, hi wɑz ðə stɔɹm! "maɪ il ɑɹ hʌntɪŋ əm daʊn. maɪ il hʌn ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, ən ðeɪ ən dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ ən moʊst ə ðə kəmpænjənz hʌn bændəts, wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz! aɪm ðə kɪŋ ʌv ɪljən, ən əl əlaʊ noʊ wʌn tə dɪsɹʌp ðə pis ʌv ɪljən!"

"The Aiel you've heard about are my enemies!" Not spiderwebs of flame this time, but solid sheets of fury that wrapped tight around the Void. Rand's voice was ice, though; it roared like the crack of winter. The storm was coming? Light, he was the storm! "My Aiel are hunting them down. My Aiel hunt the Shaido, and they and Davram Bashere and most of the Companions hunt bandits, whatever they call themselves! I am the King of Illian, and I will allow no one to disrupt the peace of Illian!"

"ivən ɪf wʌt jə seɪ də bi tʃɹu," nɛɹoʊ-feɪs bɪɡæn.

"Even if what you say do be true," narrow-face began.

"ɪɾ ɪz!" ɹænd snæpt. "ju hæv əntɪl mɪddeɪ tə dɪsaɪd." ðə mæn fɹaʊn ənsɝteɪnli; ənlɛs ðə ɹɔɪlɪŋ klaʊdz klɪɹd, hi maɪɾ əv ə dɪfəkəl taɪm noʊɪŋ mɪddeɪ. ɹænd ɡeɪv ɪm noʊ ɹɪlif. "dɪsaɪd waɪzli!" hi sɛd. wɝlɪŋ teɪdeɪʃɝ əbaʊt, hi spɝd ðə ɡɛldɪŋ tə ə ɡæləp bæk təwɔɹd ðə ɹɪdʒ wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ði ʌðɝz.

"It is!" Rand snapped. "You have until midday to decide." The man frowned uncertainly; unless the roiling clouds cleared, he might have a difficult time knowing midday. Rand gave him no relief. "Decide wisely!" he said. Whirling Tai'daishar about, he spurred the gelding to a gallop back toward the ridge without waiting for the others.

ɹɪlʌktənli hi lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv ðə paʊɝ, fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf nɑt tə hæŋ ɑn laɪk ə mæn klʌtʃɪŋ sælveɪʃən wɪð ɪz fɪŋɡɝneɪlz əz laɪf ən fɪlθ dʒɹeɪn fɹəm ɪm təɡɛðɝ. fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, hi sɔ dʌbəl; ðə wɝl sim tə tɪl dɪtsəli. ðət wɑz ə ɹisən pɹɑbləm, ən i wɝiɾ ɪt maɪt bi pɑɹɾ ə ðə sɪknəs ðət kɪl mɛn u tʃænəld, bʌt ðə dɪzinəs nɛvɝ læstəd mɔɹ ðən moʊməns. ɪt wɑz ðə ɹɛst ə lɛɾɪŋ ɡoʊ ðəɾ i ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd. ðə wɝl sim tə dʌl. noʊ, ɪt dɪd dʌl, ən bɪkeɪm sʌmhaʊ lɛs. kʌlɝz wɝ wɑʃt-aʊt, ðə skaɪ smɔlɝ, kəmpɛɹd tə wʌt ðeɪ hæd bɪn bɪfɔɹ. hi wɑntəd dɛspɝətli tə siz ðə sɔɹs əɡɛn ən ɹɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ aʊɾ ʌv ɪt. ɔlweɪz ɪt wɑz soʊ wən ðə paʊɝ lɛf hɪm.

Reluctantly he let go of the Power, forced himself not to hang on like a man clutching salvation with his fingernails as life and filth drained from him together. For an instant, he saw double; the world seemed to tilt dizzily. That was a recent problem, and he worried it might be part of the sickness that killed men who channeled, but the dizziness never lasted more than moments. It was the rest of letting go that he regretted. The world seemed to dull. No, it did dull, and became somehow less. Colors were washed-out, the sky smaller, compared to what they had been before. He wanted desperately to seize the Source again and wring the One Power out of it. Always it was so when the Power left him.

noʊ sunɝ hæd seɪɾɪn ɡɔn, ðoʊ, ðən ɹeɪdʒ bʌbəld ɪn ɪts pleɪs, waɪt-hɑɾ ən sɪɹɪŋ, nɪɹli əz hɑɾ əz ðə paʊɝ hæd bɪn. ðə sintʃæn wɝ nɑɾ ɪnʌf, ən bɹɪɡænz haɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪz neɪm? dɛdli dɪstʃɹækʃənz i kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd. wɑz sɑmaɪl ɹitʃɪŋ aʊt fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪv? hæɾ i soʊn ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ tə spɹaʊt laɪk θɔɹnz wɛɹɛvɝ ɹænd leɪɾ ə hænd? waɪ? ðə mæn kəd nɑɾ əv bɪlivd i wəd daɪ. ən ɪf hæf ðə teɪlz ɹænd hɝd wɝ tʃɹu, ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ ɪn mʊɹændi ən ɔltɑɹə ən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu wɛɹ! mɛni əmʌŋ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ ɔlɹɛɾi teɪkən pɹɪznɝ hæd spoʊkən ʌv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. kəd ðə waɪt taʊɝ bi ɪnvɑlv sʌmhaʊ? wəd ðə waɪt taʊɝ nɛvɝ ɡɪv ɪm pis? nɛvɝ? nɛvɝ.

No sooner had saidin gone, though, than rage bubbled in its place, white-hot and searing, nearly as hot as the Power had been. The Seanchan were not enough, and brigands hiding behind his name? Deadly distractions he could not afford. Was Sammael reaching out from the grave? Had he sown the Shaido to sprout like thorns wherever Rand laid a hand? Why? The man could not have believed he would die. And if half the tales Rand heard were true, there were more in Murandy and Altara and the Light alone knew where! Many among the Shaido already taken prisoner had spoken of an Aes Sedai. Could the White Tower be involved somehow? Would the White Tower never give him peace? Never? Never.

bæɾəlɪŋ fjʊɹi, hi wɑz blaɪn tə ɡɹɛɡɹɪn ən ðə ɹɛs kætʃɪŋ ʌp. wən ðeɪ tɑp ðə ɹɪdʒ əmʌŋ ðə weɪɾɪŋ noʊbəlz, hi dʒɹu ɹeɪn soʊ əbɹʌpli ðət teɪdeɪʃɝ ɹɪɹd, pɔɪŋ ði ɛɹ ən flɪŋɪŋ mʌd fɹəm ɪz hʊvz. ðə noʊbəlz ɛdʒ ðɛɹ maʊns bæk, fɹəm ɪz ɡɛldɪŋ, fɹəm hɪm.

Battling fury, he was blind to Gregorin and the rest catching up. When they topped the ridge among the waiting nobles, he drew rein so abruptly that Tai'daishar reared, pawing the air and flinging mud from his hooves. The nobles edged their mounts back, from his gelding, from him.

"aɪ ɡeɪv əm tə mɪddeɪ," hi ənaʊnst. "wɑtʃ ðɛm. aɪ doʊnt wɑn ðɪs lɑt bɹeɪkɪŋ ɪndə fɪfti smɔlɝ bænz ən slɪpɪŋ əweɪ. əl bi ɪn maɪ tɛnt." ɪksɛp fəɹ wɪnd-tɔs kloʊks ðeɪ maɪɾ əv bɪn stoʊn, ɹuɾəd tə wʌn spɑɾ əz ɪf i mɛn ðə kəmæn tə wɑtʃ fəɹ əm pɝsənəli. ət ðət moʊmənt, hi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ ɪf ðeɪ steɪd ðəɹ tɪl ðeɪ fɹoʊz əɹ mɛltəd.

"I gave them to midday," he announced. "Watch them. I don't want this lot breaking into fifty smaller bands and slipping away. I'll be in my tent." Except for wind-tossed cloaks they might have been stone, rooted to one spot as if he meant the command to watch for them personally. At that moment, he did not care if they stayed there till they froze or melted.

wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ wɝɾ i tʃɹɑɾəd daʊn ðə bæk sloʊp ə ðə ɹɪdʒ, fɑloʊd baɪ ðə tu blæk-koʊɾəd æʃəmən ən ɪz ɪliɑnɝ bænɝ-bɛɹɝz. faɪɝ ən aɪs, ən dɛθ wɑz kʌmɪŋ. bʌɾ i wɑz stil. hi wɑz stil.

Without another word he trotted down the back slope of the ridge, followed by the two black-coated Asha'man and his Illianer banner-bearers. Fire and ice, and death was coming. But he was steel. He was steel.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹtin


CHAPTER 14

mɛsədʒ fɹəm ðə l


Message from the M'Hael

ə maɪl wɛst ə ðə ɹɪdʒ, ðə kæmps bɪɡæn, mɛn ən hɔɹsəz ən kʊk faɪɝz, wɪnd-fleɪl bænɝz ən ə fju skæɾɝd tɛns klʌmp baɪ næʃənæləɾi, baɪ haʊs, itʃ kæmp ə leɪk ə tʃɝn mʌd sɛpɝeɪɾəd fɹəm ði ʌðɝz baɪ stʃɹɛtʃəz ə bɹʌʃi hiθ. mɛn maʊntəɾ ən əfʊt wɑtʃt ɹændz stʃɹimɪŋ bænɝz pæs, ən pɪɹd təwɔɹɾ ʌðɝ kæmps tə ɡeɪdʒ ɹiækʃənz. wən ði il hæd bɪn pɹizɛnt, ðiz mɛn hæd meɪɾ ə sɪŋɡəl hjudʒ kæmp, dʒɹɪvən təɡɛðɝ baɪ wʌn ə ðə fju θɪŋz ðeɪ tʃɹuli ʃɛɹɾ ɪn kɑmən. ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ il, ən fɪɹɾ əm haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ðeɪ dɪnaɪɾ ɪt. ðə wɝld wəd daɪ ənlɛs i səksiɾəd, bʌɾ i hæd noʊ ɪluʒənz ðət ðeɪ ʃɛɹɾ ɛni lɔɪəlti tə hɪm, əɹ ivən bɪliv ðət ðə feɪɾ ə ðə wɝl kəd nɑt bi meɪd tə əkɑmədeɪt ðɛɹ oʊn kənsɝnz, ðɛɹ oʊn dɪzaɪɝz fəɹ ɡoʊld əɹ ɡlɔɹi əɹ paʊɝ. ə hændfʊl dɪd, pɝhæps, ə bɛɹ hændfʊl, bʌt fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt, ðeɪ fɑloʊd kəz ðeɪ fɪɹɾ ɪm fɑɹ mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ dɪd ði il. meɪbi mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ dɪd ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ɪn hum səm dɪd nɑt ɹɪli bɪliv, nɑɾ ɪn ðə dɛpθs ə ðɛɹ hɑɹts, nɑt ðəɾ i kəɾ ən wəd tʌtʃ ðə wɝl hɑɹɾɝ ðən i hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. ɹænd stʊd bɪfɔɹ ðɛɹ feɪsəz, ən ðeɪ bɪlivd ɪn ðæt. hi æksɛptɪɾ ɪt, naʊ. hi hæd tu mɛni bæɾəlz əhɛɾ ə hɪm tə weɪst ɛfɝɾ ɑn wʌn i kəd nɑt wɪn. soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ fɑloʊɾ ən oʊbeɪd, ɪt hæd tə bi ɪnʌf.

A mile west of the ridge, the camps began, men and horses and cook fires, wind-flailed banners and a few scattered tents clumped by nationality, by House, each camp a lake of churned mud separated from the others by stretches of brushy heath. Men mounted and afoot watched Rand's streaming banners pass, and peered toward other camps to gauge reactions. When the Aiel had been present, these men had made a single huge camp, driven together by one of the few things they truly shared in common. They were not Aiel, and feared them however much they denied it. The world would die unless he succeeded, but he had no illusions that they shared any loyalty to him, or even believed that the fate of the world could not be made to accommodate their own concerns, their own desires for gold or glory or power. A handful did, perhaps, a bare handful, but for the most part, they followed because they feared him far more than they did the Aiel. Maybe more than they did the Dark One, in whom some did not really believe, not in the depths of their hearts, not that he could and would touch the world harder than he had already. Rand stood before their faces, and they believed in that. He accepted it, now. He had too many battles ahead of him to waste effort on one he could not win. So long as they followed and obeyed, it had to be enough.

ðə lɑɹdʒəst ə ðə kæmps wɑz ɪz oʊn, ən hɪɹ ɪliɑnɝ kəmpænjənz ɪn ɡɹin koʊts wɪð jɛloʊ kʌfs ɹʌbd ʃoʊldɝz wɪð tɛɹən dɪfɛndɝz ə ðə stoʊn ɪn fæt-sliv koʊts stʃɹaɪp blæk-ænd-ɡoʊld ən ən ikwəl nʌmbɝ ə kɛɹhinɪn dʒɹɔn fɹəm fɔɹɾi-ɑd haʊsəz, ɪn dɑɹk kʌlɝz, səm wɪð kɑn stɪf əbʌv ðɛɹ hɛdz. ðeɪ kʊkt ət dɪfɹən faɪɝz, slɛpt əpɑɹt, pɪkəɾɪd ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz əpɑɹt, ən aɪd wʌn ənʌðɝ wɛɹəli, bʌt ðeɪ mɪŋɡəld. ðə seɪfti ʌv ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɑz ðɛɹ ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi, ən ðeɪ tʊk ðə dʒɑb sɪɹiəsli. ɛni ʌv əm maɪt bɪtʃɹeɪ hɪm, bʌt nɑt waɪl ði ʌðɝz wɝ ðəɹ tə wɑtʃ. oʊl heɪtʃɹədz ən nu dɪslaɪks wəd bɹɪŋ bɪtʃɹeɪəl ʌv ɛni plɑt bɪfɔɹ ðə bɪtʃɹeɪɝ stɑp tə θɪŋk.

The largest of the camps was his own, and here Illianer Companions in green coats with yellow cuffs rubbed shoulders with Tairen Defenders of the Stone in fat-sleeved coats striped black-and-gold and an equal number of Cairhienin drawn from forty-odd Houses, in dark colors, some with con stiff above their heads. They cooked at different fires, slept apart, picketed their horses apart, and eyed one another warily, but they mingled. The safety of the Dragon Reborn was their responsibility, and they took the job seriously. Any of them might betray him, but not while the others were there to watch. Old hatreds and new dislikes would bring betrayal of any plot before the betrayer stopped to think.

ə ɹɪŋ ə stil stʊd ɡɑɹɾ ɝaʊn ɹændz tɛnt, ə hjudʒ pik θɪŋ ʌv ɡɹin sɪlk ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɔl oʊvɝ wɪð biz ɪn θɹɛd-ʌv-ɡoʊld. ɪt hæd bɪlɔŋ tə hɪz pɹɛɾəsɛsɝ, mæɾɪn stɛpeɪnəoʊz, ən hæd kʌm wɪð ðə kɹaʊn, ɪn ə mænɝ ə spikɪŋ. kəmpænjənz ɪn bɝnɪʃt kɑnɪkəl hɛlməts stʊd saɪd baɪ saɪd wɪð dɪfɛndɝz ɪn hɛlməts ɹɪdʒd ən ɹɪmd, ən kɛɹhinɪn ɪn bɛl-ʃeɪp hɛlmz, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə wɪnd, bɑɹd feɪsɡɑɹdz haɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ fitʃɝz, hælbɝdz slæntəd pɹɪsaɪsli. nɑt wʌn muvd ə hɛɹ wən ɹænd dʒɹu ɹeɪn, bʌɾ ə bɛvi ʌv sɝvəns keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ tə ətɛn tə hɪm ən ði æʃəmən. ə boʊni wʊmən ɪn ðə ɡɹin-ænd-jɛloʊ vɛst ʌv ə ɡɹum fɹəm ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs ɪn ɪljən tʊk ɪz bɹaɪɾəl, waɪl ɪz stɝəp wɑz hɛl baɪ ə bʌlbəs-noʊz fɛloʊ ɪn ðə blæk-ænd-ɡoʊld lɪvɝi ʌv ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ. ðeɪ tʌɡd fɔɹlɑks tə hɪm, ən kæst oʊnli wʌn ʃɑɹp lʊk ət wʌn ənʌðɝ. bɔɹiən kɛɹɪvɪn, ə staʊt peɪl lɪɾəl wʊmən ɪn ə dɑɹk dʒɹɛs, sɛlf-ɪmpɔɹɾəntli ɔfɝɾ ɪm ə sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ ʌv dæmp klɔθs fɹəm wɪtʃ stim ɹoʊz. kɛɹhinɪn, ʃi wɑtʃt ði ʌðɝ tu, ðoʊ mɔɹ əz ɪf meɪkɪŋ ʃʊɹ ðeɪ dɪd ðɛɹ tæsks pɹɑpɝli ðən wɪð ði ænəmɑsəɾi fəɹ itʃ ʌðɝ ðeɪ bɛɹli hɪd. bʌt wɪð kɛɹ, stɪl. wʌt wɝkt wɪð ðə soʊlʒɝz wɝkt wɪð ðə sɝvəns əz wɛl.

A ring of steel stood guard around Rand's tent, a huge peaked thing of green silk embroidered all over with bees in thread-of-gold. It had belonged to his predecessor, Mattin Stepaneos, and had come with the crown, in a manner of speaking. Companions in burnished conical helmets stood side by side with Defenders in helmets ridged and rimmed, and Cairhienin in bell-shaped helms, ignoring the wind, barred faceguards hiding their features, halberds slanted precisely. Not one moved a hair when Rand drew rein, but a bevy of servants came running to attend to him and the Asha'man. A bony woman in the green-and-yellow vest of a groom from the Royal Palace in Illian took his bridle, while his stirrup was held by a bulbous-nosed fellow in the black-and-gold livery of the Stone of Tear. They tugged forelocks to him, and cast only one sharp look at one another. Boreane Carivin, a stout pale little woman in a dark dress, self-importantly offered him a silver tray of damp cloths from which steam rose. Cairhienin, she watched the other two, though more as if making sure they did their tasks properly than with the animosity for each other they barely hid. But with care, still. What worked with the soldiers worked with the servants as well.

dʒɹɔɪŋ ɔf ɪz ɡɔnləts, ɹænd weɪvd əweɪ bɔɹiənz tʃɹeɪ. deɪmɝ flɪn hæd ɹɪzən fɹəm ən ɔɹnətli kɑɹv bɛntʃ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə tɛn əz ɹænd dɪsmaʊntɪd. bɔld ɪksɛp fəɹ ə ɹæɡəd waɪt fɹɪnʒ, flɪn lʊk mɔɹ ə ɡɹændfɑðɝ ðən ən æʃəmən. ə lɛðɝ-tʌf ɡɹændfɑðɝ wɪð ə stɪf lɛɡ, hu hæd sin mɔɹ ə ðə wɝl ðən ə fɑɹm. ðə sɔɹɾ əɾ ɪz hɪp lʊkt əz ɪf ɪt bɪlɔŋd, əz wɛl ɪt ʃəɾ ɑn ə fɔɹmɝ soʊlʒɝ ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹd. ɹænd tʃɹʌstɪɾ ɪm mɔɹ ðən moʊst. flɪn hæd seɪvd ɪz laɪf, æftɝ ɔl.

Drawing off his gauntlets, Rand waved away Boreane's tray. Damer Flinn had risen from an ornately carved bench in front of the tent as Rand dismounted. Bald except for a ragged white fringe, Flinn looked more a grandfather than an Asha'man. A leather-tough grandfather with a stiff leg, who had seen more of the world than a farm. The sword at his hip looked as if it belonged, as well it should on a former soldier of the Queen's Guard. Rand trusted him more than most. Flinn had saved his life, after all.

flɪn səluɾəd, fɪs tə tʃɛst, ən wən ɹænd æknɑlɪdʒd ɪm wɪð ə nɑd, lɪmp kloʊsɝ ən weɪɾəd əntɪl ðə ɡɹumz lɛft wɪð ðə hɔɹsəz bɪfɔɹ spikɪŋ ɪn ə loʊ vɔɪs. "tɔɹvəlz hɪɹ. sɛn baɪ ðə l, hi sɛz. hi wɑntəd tə weɪɾ ɪn ðə kaʊnsəl tɛnt. aɪ toʊl nɛɹɪʃmə tə wɑtʃ hɪm." ðət hæd bɪn ɹændz kəmænd, ðoʊ hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ waɪ hi hæd ɡɪvən ɪt; noʊ wʌn u keɪm fɹəm ðə blæk taʊɝ wɑz tə bi lɛft əloʊn. hɛzəteɪɾɪŋ, flɪn fɪŋɡɝd ðə dʒɹæɡən ɑn ɪz blæk kɑlɝ. "hi wɑzn hæpi tə hɪɹ jud ɹeɪzd ɔl ʌv ʌs."

Flinn saluted, fist to chest, and when Rand acknowledged him with a nod, limped closer and waited until the grooms left with the horses before speaking in a low voice. "Torval's here. Sent by the M'Hael, he says. He wanted to wait in the council tent. I told Narishma to watch him." That had been Rand's command, though he was not sure why he had given it; no one who came from the Black Tower was to be left alone. Hesitating, Flinn fingered the Dragon on his black collar. "He wasn't happy to hear you'd raised all of us."

"wɑzn hi, naʊ," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli, tʌkɪŋ ɪz ɡlʌvz bɪhaɪn ɪz sɔɹd bɛlt. ən kəz flɪn stɪl lʊkt ənsɝɾən, hi æɾəd, "ju ɔl ɝn ɪt." hi hæd bɪn əbaʊt tə sɛnd wʌn ə ði æʃəmən tə teɪm - ðə liɾɝ, ðə l, əz ði æʃəmən ɔl kɔld ɪm - bʌt naʊ tɔɹvəl kəd kæɹi ðə mɛsədʒ. ɪn ðə kaʊnsəl tɛnt? "hæv ɹəfɹɛʃməns sɛnt," hi toʊl flɪn, ðən moʊʃən hɑpwəl ən dæʃivə tə fɑloʊ.

"Wasn't he, now," Rand said softly, tucking his gloves behind his sword belt. And because Flinn still looked uncertain, he added, "You all earned it." He had been about to send one of the Asha'man to Taim - the Leader, the M'Hael, as the Asha'man all called him - but now Torval could carry the message. In the council tent? "Have refreshments sent," he told Flinn, then motioned Hopwil and Dashiva to follow.

flɪn səluɾəd əɡɛn, bʌt ɹænd wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əweɪ, blæk mʌd skwɛltʃɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪz buts. noʊ tʃɪɹz ɹoʊz fəɹ ɪm ɪn ðə blʌstɝɪŋ wɪnd. hi kəd ɹikɔl wən ðəɹ hæd bɪn. ɪf ðət wɑz nɑt wʌn ə luz θɝɪnz mɛmɹiz. ɪf luz θɝɪn hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn ɹil. ə flæʃ ə kʌlɝ dʒʌs bɪɑn ði ɛdʒ ə saɪt, ðə fil ə sʌmwʌn əbaʊt tə tʌtʃ ɪm fɹəm bɪhaɪnd. wɪð ən ɛfɝt, hi foʊkəs hɪmsɛlf.

Flinn saluted again, but Rand was already striding away, black mud squelching around his boots. No cheers rose for him in the blustering wind. He could recall when there had been. If that was not one of Lews Therin's memories. If Lews Therin had ever been real. A flash of color just beyond the edge of sight, the feel of someone about to touch him from behind. With an effort, he focused himself.

ðə kaʊnsəl tɛnt wɑz ə lɑɹdʒ ɹɛd-stʃɹaɪpt pəvɪljən ðət hæd wʌns sæɾ ɑn ðə pleɪnz ə mɑɹeɪɾoʊ, naʊ pɪtʃt ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ɹændz ɛnkæmpmənt, sɝaʊndəd baɪ θɝɾi peɪsɪz ə bɛɹ ɡɹaʊnd. ðəɹ wɝ nɛvɝ ɡɑɹdz hɪɹ, nɑɾ ənlɛs ɹænd wɑz miɾɪŋ wɪð ðə noʊbəlz. ɛniwʌn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə slɪp ɪn wʊɾə bɪn sin ɪnstənli baɪ ə θaʊzən pɹaɪɪŋ aɪz. θɹi bænɝz ɑn tɔl poʊlz fɔɹmd ə tʃɹaɪæŋɡəl ɝaʊn ðə tɛnt, ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn ə kɛɹhin, ðə θɹi kɹɛsəns ə tiɹ, ən ðə ɡoʊldən biz ʌv ɪljən, ən əbʌv ðə kɹɪmzən ɹuf, haɪɝ ðən ðə ɹɛst, stʊd ðə dʒɹæɡən bænɝ, ən ðə bænɝ ə laɪt. ðə wɪn meɪɾ əm ɔl stæn aʊt, ɹɪpəlɪŋ ən snæpɪŋ, ən ðə tɛnt wɔlz ʃɪvɝɾ ɪn ðə ɡʌsts. ɪnsaɪd, kʌlɝfəl, fɹɪn kɑɹpəts meɪɾ ə flɔɹ, ən ði oʊnli fɝnɪtʃɝ wɑz ə hjudʒ teɪbəl, θɪkli kɑɹvd ən ɡɪldɪd, ɪnleɪd wɪð aɪvɝi ən tɝkwɔɪz. ə dʒʌmbəl ə mæps ɔlmoʊs hɪd ðə teɪbəltɑp.

The council tent was a large red-striped pavilion that had once sat on the Plains of Maredo, now pitched in the middle of Rand's encampment, surrounded by thirty paces of bare ground. There were never guards here, not unless Rand was meeting with the nobles. Anyone trying to slip in would have been seen instantly by a thousand prying eyes. Three banners on tall poles formed a triangle around the tent, the Rising Sun of Cairhien, the Three Crescents of Tear, and the Golden Bees of Illian, and above the crimson roof, higher than the rest, stood the Dragon Banner, and the Banner of Light. The wind made them all stand out, rippling and snapping, and the tent walls shivered in the gusts. Inside, colorful, fringed carpets made a floor, and the only furniture was a huge table, thickly carved and gilded, inlaid with ivory and turquoise. A jumble of maps almost hid the tabletop.

tɔɹvəl lɪftəɾ ɪz hɛd fɹəm ðə mæps, pleɪnli ɹɛɾi tə ɡɪv ðə ɹʌf saɪɾ ə hɪz tʌŋ tə huɛvɝ hæd bɑɹdʒd ɪn ɑn hɪm. kloʊs tə hɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz ən tɔl bɪsaɪɾ ɛniwʌn seɪv ɹænd əɹ ən il, hi stɛɹd koʊldli daʊn ə ʃɑɹp noʊz ðət pɹæktəkli kwɪvɝd wɪð ɪndɪɡneɪʃən. ðə dʒɹæɡən ən ðə sɔɹd ɡlɪsən ɑn ɪz koʊt kɑlɝ ɪn ðə laɪɾ ə ðə stænd-læmps. ə sɪlk koʊt, ʃaɪnɪŋ blæk, kʌt faɪn ɪnʌf fəɹ ə lɔɹd. hɪz sɔɹd hæd sɪlvɝ maʊntɪŋz wɑʃt wɪð ɡoʊld, ən ə ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ ɹɛd dʒɛm kæp ðə hɪlt. ənʌðɝ ɡlim dɑɹkli ɑn ə fɪŋɡɝ ɹɪŋ. jə kəd nɑt tʃɹeɪn mɛn tə bi wɛpənz wɪθaʊɾ ɪkspɛktɪŋ ə sɝɾən əmaʊn ʌv ɛɹəɡəns, jɛt ɹænd dɪd nɑt laɪk tɔɹvəl. bʌt ðɛn, hi hæd noʊ niɾ ə luz θɝɪnz vɔɪs tə bi səspɪʃəs ʌv ɛni mæn ɪn ə blæk koʊt. haʊ fɑɹ dɪɾ i tʃɹuli tʃɹʌst ivən flɪn? jɛɾ i hæd tə lid ðɛm. ði æʃəmən wɝ ɪz meɪkɪŋ, hɪz ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi.

Torval lifted his head from the maps, plainly ready to give the rough side of his tongue to whoever had barged in on him. Close to his middle years and tall beside anyone save Rand or an Aiel, he stared coldly down a sharp nose that practically quivered with indignation. The Dragon and the Sword glistened on his coat collar in the light of the stand-lamps. A silk coat, shining black, cut fine enough for a lord. His sword had silver mountings washed with gold, and a glittering red gem capped the hilt. Another gleamed darkly on a finger ring. You could not train men to be weapons without expecting a certain amount of arrogance, yet Rand did not like Torval. But then, he had no need of Lews Therin's voice to be suspicious of any man in a black coat. How far did he truly trust even Flinn? Yet he had to lead them. The Asha'man were his making, his responsibility.

wən tɔɹvəl sɔ ɹænd, hi stʃɹeɪɾənd kæʒəwəli ən səluɾəd, bʌɾ ɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən bɛɹli tʃeɪnʒd. hi hæd hæɾ ə snɪɹɪŋ maʊð ðə fɝs taɪm ɹænd ɛvɝ sɔ hɪm. "maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," hi sɛɾ ɪn ði æksɛns ə tæɹɑbən, ən i maɪɾ əv bɪn ɡɹiɾɪŋ ən ikwəl. əɹ biɪŋ ɡɹeɪʃəs tə ən ɪnfɪɹiɝ. hɪz swæɡɝɪŋ baʊ tʊk ɪn hɑpwəl ən dæʃivə əz wɛl. "aɪ ɡɪv kənɡɹætʃəleɪʃənz ɑn ðə kɑŋkwɛst ʌv ɪljən. ə ɡɹeɪt vɪktɝi, jɛs? ðəɹ wʊɾə bɪn waɪn tə ɡɹit ju, bʌt ðɪs jʌŋ . . . dɛɾəkeɪtəd . . . dʌz nɑt sim tə ʌndɝstæn ɔɹɾɝz."

When Torval saw Rand, he straightened casually and saluted, but his expression barely changed. He had had a sneering mouth the first time Rand ever saw him. "My Lord Dragon," he said in the accents of Tarabon, and he might have been greeting an equal. Or being gracious to an inferior. His swaggering bow took in Hopwil and Dashiva as well. "I give congratulations on the conquest of Illian. A great victory, yes? There would have been wine to greet you, but this young . . . Dedicated . . . does not seem to understand orders."

ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ, sɪlvɝ bɛlz ɑn ði ɛnz ə nɛɹɪʃməz tu lɔŋ dɑɹk bɹeɪdz meɪɾ ə feɪn saʊn əz i ʃɪftəd. hi hæd tæn dɑɹkli ɪn ðə sʌðɝn sʌn, bʌt səm θɪŋz əbaʊɾ ɪm hæd nɑt tʃeɪnʒd. oʊldɝ ðən ɹænd, hɪz feɪs meɪɾ ɪm sim jʌŋɡɝ ðən hɑpwəl, bʌt ðə ɹɛd ðət ɹoʊz ɪn ɪz tʃiks wɑz æŋɡɝ, nɑɾ ɪmbɛɹəsmənt. hɪz pɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə nu-wʌn sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz kɑlɝ wɑz kwaɪət, jɛt dip. tɔɹvəl smaɪld ət hɪm, ə sloʊ smaɪl boʊθ əmjuzd ən deɪnʒɝəs. dæʃivə læft, ə ʃɔɹt bɑɹk, ən wɑz stɪl.

In the corner, silver bells on the ends of Narishma's two long dark braids made a faint sound as he shifted. He had tanned darkly in the southern sun, but some things about him had not changed. Older than Rand, his face made him seem younger than Hopwil, but the red that rose in his cheeks was anger, not embarrassment. His pride in the new-won Sword on his collar was quiet, yet deep. Torval smiled at him, a slow smile both amused and dangerous. Dashiva laughed, a short bark, and was still.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ hɪɹ, tɔɹvəl?" ɹænd æskt ɹʌfli. hi tɔs ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ ən ɪz ɡɔnləts daʊn ətɑp ðə mæps ən fɑloʊɾ əm wɪð ɪz sɔɹd bɛlt ən skæbɑɹɾɪd sɔɹd. ðə mæps ðət tɔɹvəl hæd noʊ ɹizən tə bi stʌɾiɪŋ. noʊ niɾ ə luz θɝɪnz vɔɪs.

"What are you doing here, Torval?" Rand asked roughly. He tossed the Dragon Scepter and his gauntlets down atop the maps and followed them with his sword belt and scabbarded sword. The maps that Torval had no reason to be studying. No need of Lews Therin's voice.

wɪð ə ʃɹʌɡ, tɔɹvəl pɹədust ə lɛɾɝ fɹəm ɪz koʊt pɑkəɾ ən hændəɾ ɪt tə ɹænd. "ðə l, hi sɛn ðɪs." ðə peɪpɝ wɑz snoʊi waɪɾ ən θɪk, ðə sil ə dʒɹæɡən ɪmpɹɛst ɪn ə lɑɹdʒ oʊvəl ə blu wæks ðət ɡlɪɾɝd wɪð ɡoʊldən flɛks. ɪt maɪɾ ɔlmoʊst əv bɪn θɔt tə kʌm fɹəm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. teɪm dɪd θɪŋk wɛl ə hɪmsɛlf. "ðə l sɛd tə tɛl jə ðə teɪlz ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn mʊɹændi wɪð ən ɑɹmi, ðeɪ ɑɹ tʃɹu. ɹumɝ sɛz ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹəbɛlz əɡɛns tɑɹ vəlɑn" - tɔɹvəlz snɪɹ θɪkənd wɪð dɪsbɪlif - "bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ mɑɹtʃɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə blæk taʊɝ. sun, ðeɪ meɪ bɪkʌm ə deɪnʒɝ, jɛs?"

With a shrug, Torval produced a letter from his coat pocket and handed it to Rand. "The M'Hael, he sent this." The paper was snowy white and thick, the seal a dragon impressed in a large oval of blue wax that glittered with golden flecks. It might almost have been thought to come from the Dragon Reborn. Taim did think well of himself. "The M'Hael said to tell you the tales of Aes Sedai in Murandy with an army, they are true. Rumor says they are rebels against Tar Valon" - Torval's sneer thickened with disbelief - "but they are marching toward the Black Tower. Soon, they may become a danger, yes?"

ɹænd kɹæk ðə mæɡnɪfəsən sil tə bɪts bɪtwin ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. "ðeɪɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə keɪɛmlɪn, nɑt ðə blæk taʊɝ, ən ðəɹ noʊ θɹɛt. maɪ ɔɹɾɝz wɝ klɪɹ. liv ɛɛs sədaɪ əloʊn ənlɛs ðeɪ kʌm æftɝ ju."

Rand cracked the magnificent seal to bits between his fingers. "They're going to Caemlyn, not the Black Tower, and they're no threat. My orders were clear. Leave Aes Sedai alone unless they come after you."

"bʌt haʊ kən jə bi ʃʊɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑɾ ə θɹɛt?" tɔɹvəl pɝsɪstəd. "pɝhæps ðeɪ ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə keɪɛmlɪn, əz jə seɪ, bʌɾ ɪf jə ɑɹ ɹɔŋ, wɪl nɑt noʊ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ətæk ʌs."

"But how can you be sure they are not a threat?" Torval persisted. "Perhaps they are going to Caemlyn, as you say, but if you are wrong, we'll not know before they attack us."

"tɔɹvəl maɪt bi ɹaɪt," dæʃivə pʊɾ ɪn θɔtfəli. "aɪ kæn seɪ aɪd tʃɹʌst wɪmən u pʊt mi ɪn ə bɑks, ən ðiz hævən swɔɹn ɛni oʊðz. əɹ əv ðeɪ?"

"Torval might be right," Dashiva put in thoughtfully. "I can't say I'd trust women who put me in a box, and these haven't sworn any oaths. Or have they?"

"aɪ sɛd liv əm əloʊn!" ɹænd slæp ðə teɪbəltɑp, hɑɹd, ən hɑpwəl dʒʌmpt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. dæʃivə fɹaʊnd wɪð ɪɹɪteɪʃən bɪfɔɹ hɝidli smuðɪŋ ɪɾ oʊvɝ, bʌt ɹænd wɑz nɑɾ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn dæʃivəz mudz. baɪ tʃæns - hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz tʃæns - hɪz hæn hæd kʌm daʊn ɑn ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ. hɪz ɑɹm tʃɹɛmbəld wɪð ðə dɪzaɪɝ tə teɪk ɪɾ ʌp ən stæb tɔɹvəl θɹu ðə hɑɹt. noʊ nid fəɹ luz θɝɪn əɾ ɔl. "ði æʃəmən ɑɹ ə wɛpən tə bi eɪmd wɛɹ aɪ seɪ, nɑt tə flʌɾɝ ɝaʊn laɪk hɛnz ɛvɹi taɪm teɪm ɡɛts fɹaɪɾənd oʊvɝ ə hændfʊl ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ hævɪŋ dɪnɝ ət ðə seɪm ɪn. ɪf aɪ mʌst, aɪ kən kʌm bæk tə meɪk maɪsɛlf klɪɹɝ."

"I said leave them alone!" Rand slapped the tabletop, hard, and Hopwil jumped in surprise. Dashiva frowned with irritation before hurriedly smoothing it over, but Rand was not interested in Dashiva's moods. By chance - he was sure it was chance - his hand had come down on the Dragon Scepter. His arm trembled with the desire to take it up and stab Torval through the heart. No need for Lews Therin at all. "The Asha'man are a weapon to be aimed where I say, not to flutter around like hens every time Taim gets frightened over a handful of Aes Sedai having dinner at the same inn. If I must, I can come back to make myself clearer."

"aɪ æm ʃʊɹ ðəɹ ɪz noʊ niɾ ə ðæt," tɔɹvəl sɛd kwɪkli. ət læst sʌmθɪŋ hæd waɪp ðə ɹaɪ twɪs fɹəm ɪz maʊθ. aɪz taɪt, hi spɹɛɾ ɪz hænz, kloʊs tə dɪfəɾənt, vɛɹi nɪɹli əpɑlədʒɛɾɪk. ən pleɪnli fɹaɪɾənd. "ðə l, hi mɪɹli wɑntəd jə ɪnfɔɹmd. jəɹ ɔɹɾɝz ɑɹ ɹɛɾ əlaʊɾ ɛvɹi deɪ ət mɔɹnɪŋ daɪɹɛktɪvz, æftɝ ðə kɹid."

"I am sure there is no need of that," Torval said quickly. At last something had wiped the wry twist from his mouth. Eyes tight, he spread his hands, close to diffident, very nearly apologetic. And plainly frightened. "The M'Hael, he merely wanted you informed. Your orders are read aloud every day at Morning Directives, after the Creed."

"ðæts ɡʊd, ðɛn." ɹænd kɛpt ɪz vɔɪs kul, kɛpt ə skaʊl fɹəm ɪz feɪs baɪ meɪn ɛfɝt. ɪt wɑz ɪz pɹɛʃəs l ðə mæn fɪɹd, nɑt ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. əfɹeɪd teɪm wəd teɪk ɪɾ əmɪs ɪf sʌmθɪŋ i hæd sɛd bɹɔt ɹændz æŋɡɝ ɑn teɪmz hɛd. "bɪkɔz əl kɪl ɛni wʌn ə jə hu ɡoʊz nɪɹ ðoʊz wɪmən ɪn mʊɹændi. jə kʌt wɛɹ aɪ dɝɛkt."

"That's good, then." Rand kept his voice cool, kept a scowl from his face by main effort. It was his precious M'Hael the man feared, not the Dragon Reborn. Afraid Taim would take it amiss if something he had said brought Rand's anger on Taim's head. "Because I'll kill any one of you who goes near those women in Murandy. You cut where I direct."

tɔɹvəl baʊd ɹɪdʒɪdli, mɝmɝɪŋ, "æz jə seɪ, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən." hɪz tiθ wɝ bɛɹɾ ɪn ən ətɛmptəd smaɪl, bʌɾ ɪz noʊz wɑz pɪntʃt, ən i stʃɹʌɡəl tə əvɔɪd miɾɪŋ ɛniwʌnz aɪz waɪl simɪŋ tə əvɔɪd nʌθɪŋ. dæʃivə jɛlpt ənʌðɝ læf, ən hɑpwəl wɔɹ ə smɔl ɡɹɪn.

Torval bowed rigidly, murmuring, "As you say, my Lord Dragon." His teeth were bared in an attempted smile, but his nose was pinched, and he struggled to avoid meeting anyone's eyes while seeming to avoid nothing. Dashiva yelped another laugh, and Hopwil wore a small grin.

nɛɹɪʃmə wɑz nɑɾ ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ tɔɹvəlz dɪskʌmfɝt, ðoʊ, əɹ peɪɪŋ ɪɾ ətɛnʃən. hi lʊkt ət ɹænd wɪθaʊt blɪŋkɪŋ, əz ðoʊ hi sɛns dip kɝəns ðət ðə ɹɛs mɪst. moʊst wɪmən ən noʊ fju mɛn θɔɾ ɪm dʒʌst ə pɹɪɾi bɔɪ, bʌt ðoʊz tu-bɪɡ aɪz səmtaɪmz simd mɔɹ noʊɪŋ ðən ɛni ʌðɝz.

Narishma was not enjoying Torval's discomfort, though, or paying it attention. He looked at Rand without blinking, as though he sensed deep currents that the rest missed. Most women and no few men thought him just a pretty boy, but those too-big eyes sometimes seemed more knowing than any others.

ɹænd pʊld ɪz hæn fɹəm ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ ən smuðd oʊpən ðə lɛɾɝ. hɪz hænz dɪd nɑt kwaɪt ʃeɪk. tɔɹvəl smaɪld wikli, saʊɝli, noʊɾɪsɪŋ nʌθɪŋ. əɡɛns ðə tɛnt wɔl, nɛɹɪʃmə ʃɪftəd, ɹɪlæksɪŋ.

Rand pulled his hand from the Dragon Scepter and smoothed open the letter. His hands did not quite shake. Torval smiled weakly, sourly, noticing nothing. Against the tent wall, Narishma shifted, relaxing.

ðə ɹəfɹɛʃməns ɝaɪvd, ðɛn, bɔɹn baɪ ə steɪtli pɹəsɛʃən fɑloʊɪŋ bɔɹiən, ə laɪn ʌv ɪliɑnɝz ən kɛɹhinɪn ən tɛɹənz ɪn ðɛɹ vɛɹiəs lɪvɝiz. ðəɹ wɑz ə sɝvən bɛɹɪŋ ə sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ ən pɪtʃɝ fəɹ itʃ kaɪndə waɪn, ən tu mɔɹ wɪð tʃɹeɪz ə sɪlvɝ mʌɡz fəɹ hɑt pʌntʃ ən spaɪst waɪnz ən faɪn bloʊn ɡoʊbləts fəɹ ði ʌðɝz. ə pɪŋk-feɪs fɛloʊ ɪn ɡɹin-ænd-jɛloʊ kæɹiɾ ə tʃɹeɪ ɑn wɪtʃ tə də ðə pɔɹɪŋ, ən ə dɑɹk wʊmən ɪn blæk-ænd-ɡoʊld wɑz ðəɹ tə æktʃəli  hændəl ðə pɪtʃɝz. ðəɹ wɝ nʌts ən kændid fɹuts, tʃizɪz ən ɑlɪvz, itʃ sɔɹt ɹikwaɪɝɪŋ ə sɝvɪŋ mæn əɹ wʊmən. ʌndɝ bɔɹiənz dɝɛkʃən, ðeɪ floʊɾ ɪn ə fɔɹməl dæns, boʊɪŋ, kɝtsiɪŋ, wʌn ɡɪvɪŋ weɪ tə ənʌðɝ əz ðeɪ meɪd ðɛɹ ɔfɝɪŋz.

The refreshments arrived, then, borne by a stately procession following Boreane, a line of Illianers and Cairhienin and Tairens in their various liveries. There was a servant bearing a silver tray and pitcher for each kind of wine, and two more with trays of silver mugs for hot punch and spiced wines and fine blown goblets for the others. A pink-faced fellow in green-and-yellow carried a tray on which to do the pouring, and a dark woman in black-and-gold was there to actually handle the pitchers. There were nuts and candied fruits, cheeses and olives, each sort requiring a serving man or woman. Under Boreane's direction, they flowed in a formal dance, bowing, curtsying, one giving way to another as they made their offerings.

æksɛptɪŋ spaɪst waɪn, ɹænd hɔɪstəd hɪmsɛlf ɑntu ði ɛdʒ ə ðə teɪbəl ən sæt ðə stimɪŋ mʌɡ bɪsaɪɾ ɪm əntʌtʃt əz i bɪzid hɪmsɛlf wɪð ðə lɛɾɝ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ədʒɹɛs, noʊ pɹiæmbəl ʌv ɛni kaɪnd. teɪm heɪɾəd ɡɪvɪŋ ɹænd ɛni sɔɹɾ ə taɪɾəl, ðoʊ hi tʃɹaɪd tə haɪd ðə fækt.

Accepting spiced wine, Rand hoisted himself onto the edge of the table and sat the steaming mug beside him untouched as he busied himself with the letter. There was no address, no preamble of any kind. Taim hated giving Rand any sort of title, though he tried to hide the fact.

aɪ hæv ði ɑnɝ tə ɹipɔɹt ðət twɛnti-naɪn æʃəmən, naɪnti-sɛvən dɛɾəkeɪtəd ən θɹi hʌnʒɹəd twɛnti-tu soʊlʒɝz ɑɹ naʊ ɛnɹoʊld ət ðə blæk taʊɝ. ðəɹ əv bɪn ə hændfʊl ə dɛzɝɾɝz, ənfɔɹtʃənətli, huz neɪmz əv bɪn stʃɹɪkən, bʌt lɔsəz ɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɹɪmeɪn æksɛptəbəl.

I have the honor to report that twenty-nine Asha'man, ninety-seven Dedicated and three hundred twenty-two Soldiers are now enrolled at the Black Tower. There have been a handful of deserters, unfortunately, whose names have been stricken, but losses in training remain acceptable.

aɪ naʊ hæv əz mɛni əz fɪfti ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ pɑɹɾiz ɪn ðə fild əɾ ɛni ɡɪvən taɪm, wɪð ðə ɹɪzʌl ðət θɹi əɹ fɔɹ mɛn ɑɹ æɾəd tə ðə ɹoʊlz ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹi deɪ. ɪn ə fju mʌnθs, ðə blæk taʊɝ wɪl ikwəl ðə waɪt, əz aɪ sɛɾ ɪt wʊd. ɪn ə jɪɹ, tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪl tʃɹɛmbəl əɾ əɹ nʌmbɝz.

I now have as many as fifty recruiting parties in the field at any given time, with the result that three or four men are added to the rolls almost every day. In a few months, the Black Tower will equal the White, as I said it would. In a year, Tar Valon will tremble at our numbers.

aɪ hɑɹvəstəd ðət blækbɛɹi bʊʃ maɪsɛlf. ə smɔl bʊʃ, ən θɔɹni, bʌɾ ə sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ nʌmbɝ ə bɛɹiz fəɹ ðə saɪz.

I harvested that blackberry bush myself. A small bush, and thorny, but a surprising number of berries for the size.

mæzɹim teɪm l ɹænd ɡɹɪməst, pʊɾɪŋ ðə . . . ðə blækbɛɹi bʊʃ . . . aʊɾ ə hɪz maɪnd. wʌt hæd tə bi dʌn, hæd tə bi dʌn. ðə hoʊl wɝl peɪɾ ə pɹaɪs fəɹ ɪz ɛɡzɪstəns. hi wəd daɪ fəɹ ɪt, bʌt ðə hoʊl wɝl peɪd.

Mazrim Taim M'Hael Rand grimaced, putting the . . . the blackberry bush . . . out of his mind. What had to be done, had to be done. The whole world paid a price for his existence. He would die for it, but the whole world paid.

ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝ θɪŋz tə ɡɹɪmɑs oʊvɝ, ɛniweɪ. θɹi əɹ fɔɹ nu mɛn ə deɪ? teɪm wɑz ɑptəmɪstɪk. ɪn ə fju mʌnθs, ət ðət ɹeɪt, ðəɹ wəd bi mɔɹ mɛn u kəd tʃænəl ðən ɛɛs sədaɪ, tʃɹu, bʌt ðə nuəst sɪstɝ hæd jɪɹz ə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ. ən pɑɹɾ ə ðət spəsɪfɪkli tɔt haʊ tə dil wɪð ə mæn u kəd tʃænəl. hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə kɑntəmpleɪɾ ɛni ɪnkaʊntɝ bɪtwin æʃəmən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hu nu wʌt ðeɪ wɝ feɪsɪŋ; blʌɾ ən ɹəɡɹɛt kəd bi ði oʊnli aʊtkʌm, wʌtɛvɝ hæpənd. ði æʃəmən wɝ nɑɾ eɪmd ət ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ðoʊ, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt teɪm θɔt. ɪt wɑz ə kənvinjən bɪlif, haʊɛvɝ, ɪf ɪt meɪd tɑɹ vəlɑn stɛp wɛɹəli. ən æʃəmən oʊnli niɾəd tə noʊ haʊ tə kɪl. ɪf ðəɹ wɝ ɪnʌf tə də ðəɾ ət ðə ɹaɪt pleɪs ən taɪm, ɪf ðeɪ lɪv lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə, ðət wɑz ɔl ðeɪ hæd bɪn kɹieɪɾəd fɔɹ.

There were other things to grimace over, anyway. Three or four new men a day? Taim was optimistic. In a few months, at that rate, there would be more men who could channel than Aes Sedai, true, but the newest sister had years of training behind her. And part of that specifically taught how to deal with a man who could channel. He did not want to contemplate any encounter between Asha'man and Aes Sedai who knew what they were facing; blood and regret could be the only outcome, whatever happened. The Asha'man were not aimed at the White Tower, though, no matter what Taim thought. It was a convenient belief, however, if it made Tar Valon step warily. An Asha'man only needed to know how to kill. If there were enough to do that at the right place and time, if they lived long enough to, that was all they had been created for.

"haʊ mɛni dɛzɝɾɝz, tɔɹvəl?" hi sɛd kwaɪətli. hi pɪkt ʌp ðə waɪn mʌɡ ən tʊk ə swɑloʊ, əz ɪf ði ænsɝ wɝ ənɪmpɔɹɾənt. ðə waɪn ʃʊɾə bɪn wɔɹmɪŋ, bʌt ðə dʒɪnʒɝ ən swit sɛɹəl ən meɪs teɪstəd bɪɾɝ ɑn ɪz tʌŋ. "haʊ mɛni lɔsəz ɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ?"

"How many deserters, Torval?" he said quietly. He picked up the wine mug and took a swallow, as if the answer were unimportant. The wine should have been warming, but the ginger and sweet serrel and mace tasted bitter on his tongue. "How many losses in training?"

tɔɹvəl wɑz ɹəkʌvɝɪŋ hɪmsɛlf oʊvɝ ðə ɹəfɹɛʃməns, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz hænz ən ɑɹtʃɪŋ ən aɪbɹaʊ ət ðə tʃɔɪs ʌv waɪnz, meɪkɪŋ ə ɡɹeɪt ʃoʊ ʌv noʊɪŋ ðə bɛst, meɪkɪŋ ə ʃoʊ ʌv lɔɹɾɪŋ ɪt. dæʃivə hæɾ æksɛptɪd ðə fɝst ɔfɝd, ən stʊd ɡlaʊɝɪŋ ɪndə hɪz twɪst-stɛmd ɡɑbləɾ əz ðoʊ ɪt hɛl swɪl. pɔɪntɪŋ tə wʌn ə ðə tʃɹeɪz, tɔɹvəl kɑkt ɪz hɛd θɔtfəli, bʌɾ i hæd ðə wɝdz ɹɛɾi ɑn ɪz tʌŋ. "naɪntin dɛzɝɾɝz, soʊ fɑɹ. ðə l, hiz ɔɹɾɝd əm kɪld wɛnɛvɝ ðeɪ ɑɹ faʊnd, ən ðɛɹ hɛdz bɹɔt bæk fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəlz." plʌkɪŋ ə bɪɾ ʌv ɡleɪz pɛɹ fɹəm ðə pɹɑfɝd tʃɹeɪ, hi pɑpt ɪɾ ɪndə hɪz maʊθ ən smaɪl bɹaɪtli. "θɹi hɛdz hæŋ laɪk fɹuɾ ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪɾɝz tʃɹi ət ðɪs moʊmənt."

Torval was recovering himself over the refreshments, rubbing his hands and arching an eyebrow at the choice of wines, making a great show of knowing the best, making a show of lording it. Dashiva had accepted the first offered, and stood glowering into his twist-stemmed goblet as though it held swill. Pointing to one of the trays, Torval cocked his head thoughtfully, but he had the words ready on his tongue. "Nineteen deserters, so far. The M'Hael, he has ordered them killed whenever they are found, and their heads brought back for examples." Plucking a bit of glazed pear from the proffered tray, he popped it into his mouth and smiled brightly. "Three heads hang like fruit on the Traitor's Tree at this moment."

"ɡʊd," ɹænd sɛd lɛvəli. mɛn u ɹæn naʊ kəd nɑt bi tʃɹʌstɪd nɑt tə ɹʌn leɪɾɝ, wən lɪvz dɪpɛndəɾ ɑn əm stændɪŋ. ən ðiz mɛn kəd nɑt bi əlaʊd tə ɡoʊ ðɛɹ oʊn weɪ; ðoʊz fɛloʊz bæk ɑn ðə hɪlz, ɪf ðeɪ ɪskeɪpt ɪn ə bɑɾi, wɝ lɛs deɪnʒɝəs ðən wʌn mæn tʃɹeɪn ɪn ðə blæk taʊɝ. ðə tʃɹeɪɾɝz tʃɹi? teɪm wɑz ə ɡɹeɪt wʌn fəɹ neɪmɪŋ θɪŋz. bʌt mɛn niɾəd ðə tʃɹæpɪŋz, ðə sɪmbəlz ən ðə neɪmz, ðə blæk koʊts ən ðə pɪnz, tə hɛlp hoʊld əm təɡɛðɝ. əntɪl ɪt wɑz taɪm tə daɪ. "ðə nɛks taɪm aɪ vɪzət ðə blæk taʊɝ, aɪ wɑnə si ɛvɹi dɛzɝɾɝz hɛd."

"Good," Rand said levelly. Men who ran now could not be trusted not to run later, when lives depended on them standing. And these men could not be allowed to go their own way; those fellows back on the hills, if they escaped in a body, were less dangerous than one man trained in the Black Tower. The Traitor's Tree? Taim was a great one for naming things. But men needed the trappings, the symbols and the names, the black coats and the pins, to help hold them together. Until it was time to die. "The next time I visit the Black Tower, I want to see every deserter's head."

ə sɛkən pis ə kændid pɛɹ, hæfweɪ tə tɔɹvəlz maʊθ, dʒɹɑp fɹəm ɪz fɪŋɡɝz ən stʃɹik ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz faɪn koʊt. "ɪt maɪɾ ɪntɝfɪɹ wɪð ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ, meɪkɪŋ ðət sɔɹɾ ʌv ɛfɝt," hi sɛd sloʊli. "ðə dɛzɝɾɝz, ðeɪ də nɑɾ ənaʊns ðɛmsɛlvz."

A second piece of candied pear, halfway to Torval's mouth, dropped from his fingers and streaked the front of his fine coat. "It might interfere with recruiting, making that sort of effort," he said slowly. "The deserters, they do not announce themselves."

ɹænd hɛl ði ʌðɝ mænz ɡeɪz əntɪl ɪt fɛl. "haʊ mɛni lɔsəz ɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ?" hi dɪmændəd. ðə ʃɑɹp-noʊzd æʃəmən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "haʊ mɛni?"

Rand held the other man's gaze until it fell. "How many losses in training?" he demanded. The sharp-nosed Asha'man hesitated. "How many?"

nɛɹɪʃmə lin fɔɹwɝd, stɛɹɪŋ ɪntɛnli ət tɔɹvəl. soʊ dɪd hɑpwəl. ðə sɝvəns kəntɪnjud ðɛɹ smuð, saɪlən dæns, ɔfɝɪŋ ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪz tə mɛn u noʊ lɔŋɡɝ sɔ ðɛm. bɔɹiən tʊk ædvæntɪdʒ ə nɛɹɪʃməz pɹiɑkjəpeɪʃən tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ɪz sɪlvɝ mʌɡ hɛl mɔɹ hɑt wɔɾɝ ðən spaɪst waɪn.

Narishma leaned forward, staring intently at Torval. So did Hopwil. The servants continued their smooth, silent dance, offering their trays to men who no longer saw them. Boreane took advantage of Narishma's preoccupation to make sure his silver mug held more hot water than spiced wine.

tɔɹvəl ʃɹʌɡd, tu kæʒəwəli. "fɪfti-wʌn, ɔl toʊld. θɝtin bɝn aʊt, ən twɛnti-eɪt dɛd wɛɹ ðeɪ stʊd. ðə ɹɛst. . . . ðə l, hi ædz sʌmθɪŋ tə ðɛɹ waɪn, ən ðeɪ də nɑt weɪk." əbɹʌpli hɪz toʊn tɝn məlɪʃəs. "ɪt kən kʌm sʌɾənli, əɾ ɛni taɪm. wʌn mæn bɪɡæn skɹimɪŋ ðət spaɪɾɝz wɝ kɹɔlɪŋ bɪniθ ɪz skɪn ɑn ɪz sɛkən deɪ." hi smaɪl vɪʃəsli ət nɛɹɪʃmə ən hɑpwəl, ən nɪɹli soʊ ət ɹænd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz tə ði ʌðɝ tu hi ədʒɹɛs hɪmsɛlf, swɪŋɪŋ ɪz hɛd bɪtwin ðɛm. "ju si? nɑt tə wɝi ɪf jə slaɪɾ ɪndə mædnəs. jəl nɑt hɝt jʊɹsɛlvz əɹ ə soʊl. jə ɡoʊ tə slip . . . fɝɛvɝ. kaɪndɝ ðən dʒɛntəlɪŋ, ivən ɪf wi nu haʊ. kaɪndɝ ðən livɪŋ jə ɪnseɪn ən kʌɾ ɔf, jɛs?" nɛɹɪʃmə stɛɹd bæk, tɔɾ əz ə hɑɹpstʃɹɪŋ, hɪz mʌɡ fɝɡɑɾən ɪn ɪz hænd. hɑpwəl wɑz wʌns mɔɹ fɹaʊnɪŋ ət sʌmθɪŋ oʊnli hi kəd si.

Torval shrugged, too casually. "Fifty-one, all told. Thirteen burned out, and twenty-eight dead where they stood. The rest. . . . The M'Hael, he adds something to their wine, and they do not wake." Abruptly his tone turned malicious. "It can come suddenly, at any time. One man began screaming that spiders were crawling beneath his skin on his second day." He smiled viciously at Narishma and Hopwil, and nearly so at Rand, but it was to the other two he addressed himself, swinging his head between them. "You see? Not to worry if you slide into madness. You'll not hurt yourselves or a soul. You go to sleep . . . forever. Kinder than gentling, even if we knew how. Kinder than leaving you insane and cut off, yes?" Narishma stared back, taut as a harpstring, his mug forgotten in his hand. Hopwil was once more frowning at something only he could see.

"kaɪndɝ," ɹænd sɛɾ ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs, sɛɾɪŋ ðə mʌɡ bæk bɪsaɪɾ ɪm ɑn ðə teɪbəl. sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðə waɪn. maɪ soʊl ɪz blæk wɪð blʌd, ən dæmd. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə hɑɹd θɔt, nɑt baɪɾɪŋ əɹ ɛdʒd; ə sɪmpəl steɪtmən ə fækt. "ə mɝsi ɛni mæn maɪt wɪʃ fɔɹ, tɔɹvəl."

"Kinder," Rand said in a flat voice, setting the mug back beside him on the table. Something in the wine. My soul is black with blood, and damned. It was not a hard thought, not biting or edged; a simple statement of fact. "A mercy any man might wish for, Torval."

tɔɹvəlz kɹuəl smaɪl feɪɾəd, ən i stʊd bɹiðɪŋ hɑɹd. ðə sʌmz wɝ izi; wʌn mæn ɪn tɛn dɪstʃɹɔɪd, wʌn mæn ɪn fɪfti mæd, ən mɔɹ ʃʊɹli tə kʌm. ɝli deɪz jɛt, ən noʊ weɪ tɪl ðə deɪ jə daɪd tə noʊ jə hæd biɾən ði ɑdz. ɪksɛp ðət ði ɑdz wəd bit ju, wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ, ɪn ði ɛnd. wʌtɛvɝ ɛls, tɔɹvəl stʊɾ ʌndɝ ðət θɹɛt, tu.

Torval's cruel smile faded, and he stood breathing hard. The sums were easy; one man in ten destroyed, one man in fifty mad, and more surely to come. Early days yet, and no way till the day you died to know you had beaten the odds. Except that the odds would beat you, one way or another, in the end. Whatever else, Torval stood under that threat, too.

əbɹʌpli ɹænd bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə bɔɹiən. ɪt tʊk ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ i ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ði ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs, ən wən i dɪd, hi bɪt bæk koʊld wɝdz. haʊ dɛɹ ʃi fil pɪɾi! dɪd ʃi θɪŋk tɑɹmən ɡdən kəd bi wʌn wɪθaʊt blʌd? ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən dɪmændəd blʌd laɪk ɹeɪn!

Abruptly Rand became aware of Boreane. It took a moment before he recognized the expression on her face, and when he did, he bit back cold words. How dare she feel pity! Did she think Tarmon Gai'don could be won without blood? The Prophecies of the Dragon demanded blood like rain!

"liv ʌs," hi toʊl hɝ, ən ʃi kwaɪətli ɡæðɝd ðə sɝvəns. bʌt ʃi stɪl kæɹid kəmpæʃən ɪn əɹ aɪz əz ʃi hɝɾɪd əm aʊt.

"Leave us," he told her, and she quietly gathered the servants. But she still carried compassion in her eyes as she herded them out.

kæstɪŋ ɝaʊn fəɹ ə weɪ tə tʃeɪnʒ ðə mud, ɹænd faʊnd nʌθɪŋ. pɪɾi wikən əz ʃʊɹli əz fɪɹ, ən ðeɪ hæd tə bi stʃɹɔŋ. tə feɪs wʌt ðeɪ hæd tə feɪs, ðeɪ ɔl mʌs bi stil. hɪz meɪkɪŋ, hɪz ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi.

Casting around for a way to change the mood, Rand found nothing. Pity weakened as surely as fear, and they had to be strong. To face what they had to face, they all must be steel. His making, his responsibility.

lɔst ɪn ɪz oʊn θɔts, nɛɹɪʃmə pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə stim ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ɪz waɪn, ən hɑpwəl stɪl tʃɹaɪd tə stɛɹ θɹu ðə saɪɾ ə ðə tɛnt. tɔɹvəl kæst saɪdweɪz ɡlænsɪz ət ɹænd ən stʃɹʌɡəl tə pʊt ðə skɔɹnfəl twɪs bæk ɑn ɪz maʊθ. dæʃivə əloʊn əpɪɹɾ ʌnəfɛktɪd, wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz foʊldəd, stʌɾiɪŋ tɔɹvəl əz ə mæn maɪt stʌɾi ə hɔɹs ɔfɝd fəɹ seɪl.

Lost in his own thoughts, Narishma peered into the steam rising from his wine, and Hopwil still tried to stare through the side of the tent. Torval cast sideways glances at Rand and struggled to put the scornful twist back on his mouth. Dashiva alone appeared unaffected, with his arms folded, studying Torval as a man might study a horse offered for sale.

ɪndə ðə peɪnfəli stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ saɪləns bɝst ə hʌski, wɪnbloʊn jʌŋ mæn ɪn blæk, wɪð ðə sɔɹɾ ən dʒɹæɡən ɑn ɪz kɑlɝ. ʌv ən eɪdʒ wɪð hɑpwəl, stɪl nɑɾ oʊld ɪnʌf tə mɛɹi moʊs pleɪsəz, fɛdwɪn mɔɹ wɔɹ ɪntɛnsəɾi mɔɹ kloʊsli ðən ɪz ʃɝt; hi muvd ɑn ɪz toʊz, ən ɪz aɪz hæd ðə lʊk ʌv ə hʌntɪŋ kæt ðət nu ɪtsɛlf hʌntəɾ ɪn tɝn. hi hæd bɪn dɪfɹənt, wʌns, ən nɑt soʊ lɔŋ əɡoʊ. "ðə sintʃæn wɪl muv fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ sun," hi sɛɾ əz i səluɾəd. "ðeɪ min tə kʌm əɡɛnst ɪljən nɛkst." hɑpwəl ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən ə ɡæsp, dʒoʊltɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz dɑɹk stʌɾi. wʌns əɡɛn, dæʃivəz ɹɪspɑns wɑz tə læf, mɝθləsli ðɪs taɪm.

Into the painfully stretching silence burst a husky, windblown young man in black, with the Sword and Dragon on his collar. Of an age with Hopwil, still not old enough to marry most places, Fedwin Morr wore intensity more closely than his shirt; he moved on his toes, and his eyes had the look of a hunting cat that knew itself hunted in turn. He had been different, once, and not so long ago. "The Seanchan will move from Ebou Dar soon," he said as he saluted. "They mean to come against Illian next." Hopwil gave a start and a gasp, jolted out of his dark study. Once again, Dashiva's response was to laugh, mirthlessly this time.

nɑɾɪŋ, ɹænd tʊk ʌp ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ. æftɝ ɔl, hi kæɹiɾ ɪt fəɹ ɹimɛmbɹəns. ðə sintʃæn dæns tə ðɛɹ oʊn tun, nɑt ðə sɔŋ i wɪʃt fɔɹ.

Nodding, Rand took up the Dragon Scepter. After all, he carried it for remembrance. The Seanchan danced to their own tune, not the song he wished for.

ɪf ɹænd ɹəsiv ði ənaʊnsmən ɪn saɪləns, tɔɹvəl dɪd nɑt. faɪndɪŋ ɪz snɪɹ, hi ɹeɪzd ə kəntɛmptʃuəs aɪbɹaʊ. "dɪd ðeɪ tɛl jə ɔl ðæt, naʊ?" hi sɛd mɑkəŋli. "ɔɹ əv jə lɝn tə ɹid maɪnz? lemi tɛl jə sʌmθɪŋ, bɔɪ. aɪ hæv fɔt, əɡɛnst ɑmɑdɪʃənz ən dəmɑni boʊθ, ən noʊ ɑɹmi teɪks ə sɪɾi ðən pæks ɪtsɛlf ʌp tə mɑɹtʃ ə θaʊzən maɪlz! mɔɹ ðən ə θaʊzən maɪlz! əɹ dʒju θɪŋk ðeɪ kən tʃɹævəl?"

If Rand received the announcement in silence, Torval did not. Finding his sneer, he raised a contemptuous eyebrow. "Did they tell you all that, now?" he said mockingly. "Or have you learned to read minds? Let me tell you something, boy. I have fought, against Amadicians and Domani both, and no army takes a city then packs itself up to march a thousand miles! More than a thousand miles! Or do you think they can Travel?"

mɔɹ mɛt tɔɹvəlz dɝɪʒən kɑmli. əɹ ɪf ɪɾ ənsɛɾəld ɪm əɾ ɔl, ði oʊnli saɪn i ɡeɪv wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ ə θʌm daʊn ɪz lɔŋ sɔɹd hɪlt. "aɪ dɪd tɔk tə səm ə ðɛm. moʊst wɝ tæɹɑbənɝz, ən mɔɹ lændɪŋ baɪ ʃɪp ɛvɹi deɪ, əɹ nɪɹ ɪnʌf." ʃoʊldɝɪŋ pæs tɔɹvəl tə ðə teɪbəl, hi feɪvɝd ðə tæɹɑbənɝ wɪð ə lɛvəl lʊk. "ɔl stɛpɪŋ ɹaɪt kwɪk wɛnɛvɝ ɛnibəɾi wɪð ə slɝɪŋ weɪ ʌv spitʃ oʊpən ə maʊθ." ði oʊldɝ mæn oʊpən hɪz, æŋɡɹəli, bʌt ðə jʌŋɡɝ pɹɛst ɑn hɝidli, tə ɹænd. "ðeɪɹ pʊɾɪŋ soʊlʒɝz ɔl əlɔŋ ðə vɛnɪɹ maʊntənz. faɪv hʌnʒɹəd, səmtaɪmz ə θaʊzən təɡɛðɝ. ɔl ðə weɪ tə ɹən hɛɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. ən ðəɹ baɪɪŋ əɹ teɪkɪŋ ɛvɹi wæɡən ən kɑɹt wɪðɪn twɛnti liɡz ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ, ən ði ænəməlz tə dʒɹɔ ðɛm."

Morr met Torval's derision calmly. Or if it unsettled him at all, the only sign he gave was running a thumb down his long sword hilt. "I did talk to some of them. Most were Taraboners, and more landing by ship every day, or near enough." Shouldering past Torval to the table, he favored the Taraboner with a level look. "All stepping right quick whenever anybody with a slurring way of speech opened a mouth." The older man opened his, angrily, but the younger pressed on hurriedly, to Rand. "They're putting soldiers all along the Venir Mountains. Five hundred, sometimes a thousand together. All the way to Arran Head already. And they're buying or taking every wagon and cart within twenty leagues of Ebou Dar, and the animals to draw them."

"kɑɹts!" tɔɹvəl ɪkskleɪmd. "wæɡənz! ɪz ɪt ðət ðeɪ min tə hoʊld ə mɑɹkət fɛɹ, dʒju θɪŋk? ən wʌt ful wəd mɑɹtʃ ən ɑɹmi θɹu maʊntənz wən ðəɹ ɑɹ pɝfəkli ɡʊd ɹoʊdz?" hi noʊɾəst ɹænd wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, ən kʌɾ ɔf wɪð ə smɔl fɹaʊn, sʌɾənli ənsɝɾən.

"Carts!" Torval exclaimed. "Wagons! Is it that they mean to hold a market fair, do you think? And what fool would march an army through mountains when there are perfectly good roads?" He noticed Rand watching him, and cut off with a small frown, suddenly uncertain.

"aɪ toʊl jə tə steɪ loʊ, mɔɹ." ɹænd lɛɾ æŋɡɝ tʌtʃ ɪz vɔɪs. ðə jʌŋ æʃəmən hæd tə stɛp bæk əz i dʒʌmp daʊn fɹəm ðə teɪbəl. "nɑt tə ɡoʊ æskɪŋ ðə sintʃæn ðɛɹ plænz. tə lʊk ən steɪ loʊ."

"I told you to stay low, Morr." Rand let anger touch his voice. The young Asha'man had to step back as he jumped down from the table. "Not to go asking the Seanchan their plans. To look and stay low."

"aɪ wɑz kɛɹfəl; aɪ dɪdnt wɛɹ maɪ pɪnz." mɔɹz aɪz dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ fəɹ ɹænd, stɪl hʌntɝ ən hʌntəɾ ɪn wʌn. hi sim tə bi bɔɪlɪŋ ɪnsaɪd. hæd ɹænd nɑt noʊn bɛɾɝ, hi wʊɾə θɔt mɔɹ hɛl ðə paʊɝ, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə sɝvaɪv seɪɾɪn ivən əz ɪt ɡeɪv ɪm laɪf tɛn taɪmz oʊvɝ. hɪz feɪs sim tə wɑnə swɛt. "ɪf ɛni ʌv ðə mɛn aɪ tɔk tə nu wɛɹ ðəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ nɛkst, ðeɪ dɪdn seɪ, ən aɪ dɪdn æsk, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə kəmpleɪn oʊvɝ ə mʌɡ ʌv eɪl əbaʊt mɑɹtʃɪŋ ɔl ðə taɪm ən nɛvɝ stændɪŋ stɪl. ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ðeɪ wɝ soʊkɪŋ ʌp ɔl ði eɪl ɪn ðə sɪɾi əz fæst əz ðeɪ kʊd, kəz ðeɪ seɪ ðeɪv tə mɑɹtʃ əɡɛn. ən ðəɹ ɡæðɝɪŋ wæɡənz, dʒʌs laɪk aɪ sɛd." ðəɾ ɔl keɪm aʊɾ ɪn ə ɹʌʃ, ən i klæmpt ɪz tiθ ət ði ɛn əz ðoʊ tə tʃɹæp mɔɹ wɝdz ðət wɑntəd tə flaɪ fɹəm ɪz tʌŋ.

"I was careful; I didn't wear my pins." Morr's eyes did not change for Rand, still hunter and hunted in one. He seemed to be boiling inside. Had Rand not known better, he would have thought Morr held the Power, struggling to survive saidin even as it gave him life ten times over. His face seemed to want to sweat. "If any of the men I talked to knew where they're going next, they didn't say, and I didn't ask, but they were willing to complain over a mug of ale about marching all the time and never standing still. In Ebou Dar, they were soaking up all the ale in the city as fast as they could, because they say they have to march again. And they're gathering wagons, just like I said." That all came out in a rush, and he clamped his teeth at the end as though to trap more words that wanted to fly from his tongue.

smaɪlɪŋ sʌɾənli, ɹænd klæpt ɪm ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ. "ju dɪd wɛl. ðə wæɡənz wʊɾə bɪn ɪnʌf, bʌt jə dɪd wɛl. wæɡənz ɑɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt," hi æɾəd, tɝnɪŋ tə tɔɹvəl. "ɪf ən ɑɹmi fidz ɔf ðə kʌntʃɹi, ɪɾ its wʌɾ ɪt faɪnz. əɹ nɑt, ɪf ɪt dʌznt." tɔɹvəl hæd nɑt flɪkɝɾ ən aɪləɾ ət hɪɹɪŋ ə sintʃæn ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ. ɪf ðət teɪl hæd ɹitʃt ðə blæk taʊɝ, waɪ hæd teɪm nɑt mɛnʃən ɪt? ɹænd hoʊpt ɪz smaɪl dɪd nɑt lʊk ə snɑɹl. "ɪts hɑɹɾɝ tə ɝeɪnʒ səplaɪ tʃɹeɪnz, bʌt wən juv wʌn jə noʊ ðɛɹz fɑɾɝ fəɹ ði ænəməlz ən binz fəɹ ðə mɛn. ðə sintʃæn ɔɹɡənaɪz ɛvɹiθɪŋ."

Smiling suddenly, Rand clapped him on the shoulder. "You did well. The wagons would have been enough, but you did well. Wagons are important," he added, turning to Torval. "If an army feeds off the country, it eats what it finds. Or not, if it doesn't." Torval had not flickered an eyelid at hearing of Seanchan in Ebou Dar. If that tale had reached the Black Tower, why had Taim not mentioned it? Rand hoped his smile did not look a snarl. "It's harder to arrange supply trains, but when you have one you know there's fodder for the animals and beans for the men. The Seanchan organize everything."

sɔɹɾɪŋ θɹu ðə mæps, hi faʊn ðə wʌn i wɑntəɾ ən spɹɛɾ ɪɾ aʊt, weɪɾɪd ət wʌn saɪd wɪð ɪz sɔɹɾ ən ət ði ʌðɝ wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ. ðə koʊs bɪtwin ɪljən ən ɛbu dɑɹ stɛɹɾ ʌp ət hɪm, ɹɪm fəɹ moʊst ʌv ɪts lɛŋθ baɪ hɪlz ən maʊntənz, dɑɾəd wɪð fɪʃɪŋ vɪlədʒəz ən smɔl taʊnz. ðə sintʃæn dɪɾ ɔɹɡənaɪz. ɛbu dɑɹ hæd bɪn ðɛɹz bɛɹli mɔɹ ðən ə wik, bʌt ðə mɝtʃəns' aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz ɹoʊɾ ə ɹɪpɛɹz wɛl ʌndɝ weɪ ɑn ðə dæmədʒ dʌn tə ðə sɪɾi ɪn ɪts teɪkɪŋ, ʌv klin sɪk-haʊsəz sɛɾ ʌp fəɹ ði ɪl, ʌv fuɾ ən wɝk ɝeɪnʒd fəɹ ðə pʊɹ ən ðoʊz dʒɹɪvən fɹəm ðɛɹ hoʊmz baɪ tʃɹʌbəlz ɪnlænd. ðə stʃɹits ən ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ kʌntʃɹisaɪd wɝ pətʃɹoʊl soʊ ðət noʊ wʌn nid fɪɹ fʊtpædz əɹ bændəts, deɪ əɹ naɪt, ən waɪl mɝtʃəns wɝ wɛlkəm, smʌɡəlɪŋ hæd bɪn kʌt tə ə tʃɹɪkəl ɪf nɑt lɛs. ðoʊz ɑnəst ɪliɑnɝ mɝtʃəns hæd bɪn sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli ɡlʌm əbaʊt ðə smʌɡəlɪŋ. wʌt wɝ ðə sintʃæn ɔɹɡənaɪzɪŋ naʊ?

Sorting through the maps, he found the one he wanted and spread it out, weighted at one side with his sword and at the other with the Dragon Scepter. The coast between Illian and Ebou Dar stared up at him, rimmed for most of its length by hills and mountains, dotted with fishing villages and small towns. The Seanchan did organize. Ebou Dar had been theirs barely more than a week, but the merchants' eyes-and-ears wrote of repairs well under way on the damage done to the city in its taking, of clean sick-houses set up for the ill, of food and work arranged for the poor and those driven from their homes by troubles inland. The streets and the surrounding countryside were patrolled so that no one need fear footpads or bandits, day or night, and while merchants were welcome, smuggling had been cut to a trickle if not less. Those honest Illianer merchants had been surprisingly glum about the smuggling. What were the Seanchan organizing now?

ði ʌðɝz ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn ðə teɪbəl əz ɹænd pɝuz ðə mæp. ðəɹ wɝ ɹoʊdz hɑɹɾ əlɔŋ ðə koʊst, bʌt pʊɹ stʃɹæɡəlɪŋ θɪŋz, mɑɹkt əz lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən kɑɹt pæðz. ðə bɹɔd tʃɹeɪd ɹoʊdz leɪ ɪnlænd, əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðə wɝst ə ðə tɝeɪn ən ðə wɝst ʌv wʌt ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz hæd tə ɔfɝ. "mɛn ɹeɪɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðoʊz maʊntənz kəd meɪk pæsədʒ dɪfəkəl fəɹ ɛniwʌn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə juz ði ɪnlæn ɹoʊdz," hi sɛd faɪnəli. "baɪ kəntʃɹoʊlɪŋ ðə maʊntənz, ðeɪ meɪk ðə ɹoʊdz seɪf əz ə sɪɾi stʃɹit. jəɹ ɹaɪt, mɔɹ. ðeɪ ɑɹ kʌmɪŋ tə ɪljən."

The others gathered around the table as Rand perused the map. There were roads hard along the coast, but poor straggling things, marked as little more than cart paths. The broad trade roads lay inland, avoiding the worst of the terrain and the worst of what the Sea of Storms had to offer. "Men raiding out of those mountains could make passage difficult for anyone trying to use the inland roads," he said finally. "By controlling the mountains, they make the roads safe as a city street. You're right, Morr. They are coming to Illian."

linɪŋ ɑn ɪz fɪsts, tɔɹvəl ɡlɛɹɾ ət mɔɹ, hu hæd bɪn ɹaɪt wən i wɑz ɹɔŋ. ə ɡɹivəs sɪn, pɝhæps, ɪn tɔɹvəlz bʊk. "ivən soʊ, ɪɾəl bi mʌnθs bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kən tʃɹʌbəl jə hɪɹ," hi sɛd sʌlənli. "ə hʌnʒɹəd æʃəmən, fɪfti, pleɪst ɪn ɪljən, kəd dɪstʃɹɔɪ ɛni ɑɹmi ɪn ðə wɝl bɪfɔɹ wʌn mæn kɹɔsɪz ðə kɔzweɪz."

Leaning on his fists, Torval glared at Morr, who had been right when he was wrong. A grievous sin, perhaps, in Torval's book. "Even so, it will be months before they can trouble you here," he said sullenly. "A hundred Asha'man, fifty, placed in Illian, could destroy any army in the world before one man crosses the causeways."

"aɪ daʊɾ ən ɑɹmi wɪð deɪmeɪn ɪz dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ əz izəli əz wʌn kɪlz il kəmɪɾəd tə ən ətæk ən kɑt baɪ sɝpɹaɪz," ɹænd sɛd kwaɪətli, ən tɔɹvəl stɪfənd. "bɪsaɪdz, aɪ hæv tə dɪfɛn ɔl ʌv ɪljən, nɑt dʒʌs ðə sɪɾi."

"I doubt an army with damane is destroyed as easily as one kills Aiel committed to an attack and caught by surprise," Rand said quietly, and Torval stiffened. "Besides, I have to defend all of Illian, not just the city."

ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə mæn, ɹænd tʃɹeɪs laɪnz əkɹɔs ðə mæp wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ. bɪtwin ɹən hɛɾ ən ðə sɪɾi ʌv ɪljən leɪ ə hʌnʒɹəd liɡz ʌv oʊpən wɔɾɝ, əkɹɔs ðə maʊθ ə kɑbəl dip, wɛɹ, ʃɪp kæptənz ɪn ɪljən sɛd, ðɛɹ lɔŋɡəst saʊndɪŋ laɪnz kəd faɪnd noʊ bɑɾəm dʒʌst ə maɪl əɹ soʊ fɹəm ðə ʃɔɹ. ðə weɪvz ðəɹ kəɾ oʊvɝtɝn ʃɪps əz ðeɪ sɝdʒ nɔɹθ tə paʊn ðə koʊst wɪð bɹeɪkɝz fɪftin peɪsɪz haɪ. ɪn ðɪs wɛðɝ, ɪt wəd bi wɝs. mɑɹtʃɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə dip wɑz ə ɹuɾ ə tu hʌnʒɹəd liɡz tə ɹitʃ ðə sɪɾi, ivən kipɪŋ tə ðə ʃɔɹɾɪst weɪz, bʌɾ ɪf ðə sintʃæn pɹɛst ɑn fɹəm ɹən hɛd, ðeɪ kəd ɹitʃ ðə bɔɹɾɝ ɪn tu wiks dɪspaɪt ðə ɹeɪnstɔɹmz. meɪbi lɛs. bɛɾɝ tə faɪt wɛɹ i tʃoʊz, nɑt wɛɹ ðeɪ dɪd. hɪz fɪŋɡɝ slɪɾ əlɔŋ ðə saʊθ koʊst ʌv ɔltɑɹə, əlɔŋ ðə vɛnɪɹ ɹeɪnʒ, əntɪl ðə maʊntənz dwɪndəl tə hɪlz ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ. faɪv hʌnʒɹəd hɪɹ, ə θaʊzən ðɛɹ. ə tæntəlaɪzɪŋ stʃɹɪŋ ə bidz dʒɹɑpt əlɔŋ ðə maʊntənz. ə ʃɑɹp ɹæp maɪt ɹoʊl əm bæk tə ɛbu dɑɹ, maɪɾ ivən pɛn əm ðəɹ waɪl ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd tə fɪɡjɝ aʊt wʌɾ i wɑz ʌp tə. ɔɹ. . . .

Ignoring the man, Rand traced lines across the map with a finger. Between Arran Head and the city of Illian lay a hundred leagues of open water, across the mouth of Kabal Deep, where, ship captains in Illian said, their longest sounding lines could find no bottom just a mile or so from the shore. The waves there could overturn ships as they surged north to pound the coast with breakers fifteen paces high. In this weather, it would be worse. Marching around the Deep was a route of two hundred leagues to reach the city, even keeping to the shortest ways, but if the Seanchan pressed on from Arran Head, they could reach the border in two weeks despite the rainstorms. Maybe less. Better to fight where he chose, not where they did. His finger slid along the south coast of Altara, along the Venir range, until the mountains dwindled to hills short of Ebou Dar. Five hundred here, a thousand there. A tantalizing string of beads dropped along the mountains. A sharp rap might roll them back to Ebou Dar, might even pen them there while they tried to figure out what he was up to. Or. . . .

"ðɛɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls," mɔɹ sɛɾ əbɹʌpli, ɹʌʃɪŋ əɡɛn. "ðɛɹ wɑz tɔk əbaʊt səm sɔɹɾ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛpən. aɪ faʊnd wɛɹ ɪt wɑz juzd, ə fju maɪlz fɹəm ðə sɪɾi. ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɑz ɔl bɝn oʊvɝ, sɪɹd klin ɪn ðə mɪɾəl, ə ɡʊd θɹi hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz waɪɾ əɹ mɔɹ, ən ɹuən ɔɹtʃɝdz fɝðɝ. ðə sænd wɑz mɛltəd tə ʃits ʌv ɡlæs. seɪɾɪn wɑz wɝst, ðɛɹ."

"There was something else," Morr said abruptly, rushing again. "There was talk about some sort of Aes Sedai weapon. I found where it was used, a few miles from the city. The ground was all burned over, seared clean in the middle, a good three hundred paces wide or more, and ruined orchards further. The sand was melted to sheets of glass. Saidin was worst, there."

tɔɹvəl weɪvd ə hæn əɾ ɪm dɪsmɪsɪvli. "ðɛɹ cʊɾə bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ nɪɹ wən ðə sɪɾi fɛl, jɛs? əɹ meɪbi ðə sintʃæn ðɛmsɛlvz dɪɾ ɪt. wʌn sɪstɝ wɪð ən æŋɡɹil kəd - "

Torval waved a hand at him dismissively. "There could have been Aes Sedai near when the city fell, yes? Or maybe the Seanchan themselves did it. One sister with an angreal could - "

ɹænd kʌɾ ɪn. "wʌt dʒju min, seɪɾɪn wɑz wɝs ðɛɹ?" dæʃivə muvd, aɪɪŋ mɔɹ ɑdli, ɹitʃɪŋ əz ðoʊ tə siz ðə jʌŋ mæn. ɹænd fɛndɪɾ ɪm ɔf ɹʌfli. "wʌt dʒju min, mɔɹ?"

Rand cut in. "What do you mean, saidin was worst there?" Dashiva moved, eyeing Morr oddly, reaching as though to seize the young man. Rand fended him off roughly. "What do you mean, Morr?"

mɔɹ stɛɹd, maʊθ ʃʌt taɪt, ɹʌnɪŋ ɪz θʌm ʌp ən daʊn ðə lɛŋθ ə hɪz sɔɹd hɪlt. ðə hiɾ ɪnsaɪɾ ə hɪm simd ɹɛɾi tə bɝst aʊt. ðəɹ ɹɪli wɑz swɛt biɾɪŋ ɑn ɪz feɪs naʊ. "seɪɾɪn wɑz . . . stʃɹeɪnʒ," hi sɛd hɔɹsli. hɪz wɝdz keɪm ɪn ɹæpəd bɝsts. "wɝs ðəɹ - aɪ kəd . . . fil ɪt . . . ɪn ði ɛɹ ɔl ɝaʊn mi - bʌt stʃɹeɪnʒ ɛvɹiwɛɹ ɝaʊn ɛbu dɑɹ. ən ivən ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz əweɪ. aɪ hæd tə faɪɾ ɪt; nɑt laɪk ɔlweɪz; dɪfɹənt. laɪk ɪt wɑz əlaɪv. səmtaɪmz. . . . səmtaɪmz, ɪt dɪdn də wʌɾ aɪ wɑntəd. səmtaɪmz, ɪt . . . dɪd sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. ɪt dɪd. aɪm nɑt mæd! ɪt dɪd!" ðə wɪnd ɡʌstɪd, haʊlɪŋ fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ʃɪvɝɪŋ ən snæpɪŋ ðə tɛnt wɔlz, ən mɔɹ fɛl saɪlənt. nɛɹɪʃməz bɛlz tʃaɪmd əɾ ə dʒɝk ə hɪz hɛd, ðən wɝ stɪl.

Morr stared, mouth shut tight, running his thumb up and down the length of his sword hilt. The heat inside of him seemed ready to burst out. There really was sweat beading on his face now. "Saidin was . . . strange," he said hoarsely. His words came in rapid bursts. "Worst there - I could . . . feel it . . . in the air all around me - but strange everywhere around Ebou Dar. And even a hundred miles away. I had to fight it; not like always; different. Like it was alive. Sometimes. . . . Sometimes, it didn't do what I wanted. Sometimes, it . . . did something else. It did. I'm not mad! It did!" The wind gusted, howling for a moment, shivering and snapping the tent walls, and Morr fell silent. Narishma's bells chimed at a jerk of his head, then were still.

"ðæɾ ɪzən pɑsəbəl," dæʃivə mʌɾɝd ɪndə ðə saɪləns, bʌt nɪɹli ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. "ɪɾ ɪz nɑt pɑsəbəl."

"That isn't possible," Dashiva muttered into the silence, but nearly under his breath. "It is not possible."

"hu noʊz wʌts pɑsəbəl?" ɹænd sɛd. "aɪ doʊnt! də ju?" dæʃivəz hɛd keɪm ʌp ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, bʌt ɹænd tɝn tə mɔɹ, mɑɾɝeɪtɪŋ ɪz toʊn. "doʊnt wɝi, mæn." nɑɾ ə maɪl toʊn - hi kəd nɑt mænədʒ ðət - jɛt hɑɹɾənɪŋ, hi hoʊpt. hɪz meɪkɪŋ, hɪz ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi. "jul bi wɪð mi tə ðə læs bæɾəl. aɪ pɹɑməs ɪt."

"Who knows what's possible?" Rand said. "I don't! Do you?" Dashiva's head came up in surprise, but Rand turned to Morr, moderating his tone. "Don't worry, man." Not a mild tone - he could not manage that - yet heartening, he hoped. His making, his responsibility. "You'll be with me to the Last Battle. I promise it."

ðə jʌŋ mæn nɑɾəd, ən skɹʌbd əɾ ɪz feɪs wɪð ɪz hæn əz ðoʊ sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ɪt dæmp, bʌɾ i ɡlænst ət tɔɹvəl, hu hæd ɡɔn əz stɪl əz stoʊn. dɪd mɔɹ noʊ əbaʊt ðə waɪn? ɪt wɑz ə mɝsi, ɡɪvən ði ɔltɝnəɾɪvz. ə smɔl ən bɪɾɝ mɝsi.

The young man nodded, and scrubbed at his face with his hand as though surprised to find it damp, but he glanced at Torval, who had gone as still as stone. Did Morr know about the wine? It was a mercy, given the alternatives. A small and bitter mercy.

ɹænd pɪkt ʌp teɪmz mɪsɪv, foʊldəd ðə peɪdʒ, ən θɹʌst ɪɾ ɪndə hɪz koʊt pɑkət. wʌn ɪn fɪfti mæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi, ən mɔɹ tə kʌm. wɑz mɔɹ nɛkst? dæʃivə wɑz ʃʊɹli kloʊs. hɑpwəlz stɛɹz tʊk ɑn ə nu minɪŋ, ən ivən nɛɹɪʃməz həbɪtʃuəl kwaɪət. mædnəs dɪd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz min skɹimɪŋ əbaʊt spaɪɾɝz. hi hæɾ æskt wʌns, wɛɹəli, wɛɹ i nu ði ænsɝz wəd bi tʃɹu, haʊ tə klɛnz ðə teɪn fɹəm seɪɾɪn. ən ɡɑɾ ə ɹɪɾəl fəɹ ænsɝ. hɹɪd fɛl hæd kleɪm ðə ɹɪɾəl steɪɾəd "saʊn pɹɪnsəpəlz, ɪn boʊθ haɪ fəlɑsəfi ən nætʃɹəl fəlɑsəfi," bʌɾ i hæd nɑt sin ɛni weɪ tə əplaɪ ɪt tə ðə pɹɑbləm ət hænd. hæd fɛl bɪn kɪl kəz i maɪɾ əv pʌzəld aʊt ðə ɹɪɾəl? ɹænd hæɾ ə hɪn ət ði ænsɝ, əɹ θɔɾ i maɪt, ə ɡɛs ðət kəd bi dɪzæstʃɹəsli ɹɔŋ. hɪns ən ɹɪɾəlz wɝ nɑɾ ænsɝz, jɛɾ i hæd tə də sʌmθɪŋ. ɪf ðə teɪnt wɑz nɑt klɛnz sʌmhaʊ, tɑɹmən ɡdən maɪt faɪn ə wɝld ɔlɹɛɾi ɹuən baɪ mædmən. wʌt hæd tə bi dʌn, hæd tə bi dʌn.

Rand picked up Taim's missive, folded the page, and thrust it into his coat pocket. One in fifty mad already, and more to come. Was Morr next? Dashiva was surely close. Hopwil's stares took on a new meaning, and even Narishma's habitual quiet. Madness did not always mean screaming about spiders. He had asked once, warily, where he knew the answers would be true, how to cleanse the taint from saidin. And got a riddle for answer. Herid Fel had claimed the riddle stated "sound principles, in both high philosophy and natural philosophy," but he had not seen any way to apply it to the problem at hand. Had Fel been killed because he might have puzzled out the riddle? Rand had a hint at the answer, or thought he might, a guess that could be disastrously wrong. Hints and riddles were not answers, yet he had to do something. If the taint was not cleansed somehow, Tarmon Gai'don might find a world already ruined by madmen. What had to be done, had to be done.

"ðæt wəd bi wʌnʒɹəs," tɔɹvəl sɛɾ ɪn ə nɪɹ wɪspɝ, "bʌt haʊ kəɾ ɛniwʌn ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə kɹieɪɾɝ əɹ . . . ?" hi tʃɹeɪld ɔf ənizəli.

"That would be wondrous," Torval said in a near whisper, "but how could anyone short of the Creator or . . . ?" He trailed off uneasily.

ɹænd hæd nɑt ɹilaɪzd i hæd spoʊkən ɛni ʌv ɪz θɔts əlaʊd. nɛɹɪʃməz aɪz, ən mɔɹz, ən hɑpwəlz, bɪlɔŋd ɪn wʌn feɪs, ʃaɪnɪŋ wɪð sʌɾən hoʊp. dæʃivə lʊk pɑliækst. ɹænd hoʊpt i hæd nɑt sɛd tu mʌtʃ. səm sikɹəts hæd tə bi kɛpt. ɪnkluɾɪŋ wʌɾ i wəd də nɛkst.

Rand had not realized he had spoken any of his thoughts aloud. Narishma's eyes, and Morr's, and Hopwil's, belonged in one face, shining with sudden hope. Dashiva looked poleaxed. Rand hoped he had not said too much. Some secrets had to be kept. Including what he would do next.

ɪn ʃɔɹɾ ɔɹɾɝ, hɑpwəl wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ fəɹ ɪz hɔɹs tə ɹaɪd tə ðə ɹɪdʒ wɪð ɔɹɾɝz fəɹ ðə noʊbəlz, mɔɹ ən dæʃivə tə faɪn flɪn ən ði ʌðɝ æʃəmən, ən tɔɹvəl wɑz stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ ɔf tə tʃɹævəl bæk tə ðə blæk taʊɝ wɪð kəmænz fəɹ teɪm. nɛɹɪʃmə wɑz læst, ən θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ ən sintʃæn ən wɛpənz, ɹænd sɛn ɪm əweɪ əz wɛl, wɪð kɛɹfəl ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz ðət meɪd ðə jʌŋ mænz maʊθ taɪɾən.

In short order, Hopwil was running for his horse to ride to the ridge with orders for the nobles, Morr and Dashiva to find Flinn and the other Asha'man, and Torval was striding off to Travel back to the Black Tower with commands for Taim. Narishma was last, and thinking of Aes Sedai and Seanchan and weapons, Rand sent him away as well, with careful instructions that made the young man's mouth tighten.

"spik tə noʊ wʌn," ɹænd fɪnɪʃt sɔfli, ɡɹɪpɪŋ nɛɹɪʃməz ɑɹm hɑɹd. "æn doʊn feɪl mi. nɑt baɪ ə hɛɹ."

"Speak to no one," Rand finished softly, gripping Narishma's arm hard. "And don't fail me. Not by a hair."

"aɪ woʊn feɪl," nɛɹɪʃmə sɛd, ənblɪŋkɪŋ. wɪð ə kwɪk səlut, hi wɑz ɡɔn, tu.

"I won't fail," Narishma said, unblinking. With a quick salute, he was gone, too.

deɪnʒɝəs, ə vɔɪs wɪspɝɾ ɪn ɹændz hɛd. oʊ, jɛs, vɛɹi deɪnʒɝəs, meɪbi tu deɪnʒɝəs. bʌɾ ɪt maɪt wɝk; ɪt maɪt. ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt, jə mʌs kɪl tɔɹvəl naʊ. jə mʌst.

Dangerous, a voice whispered in Rand's head. Oh, yes, very dangerous, maybe too dangerous. But it might work; it might. In any event, you must kill Torval now. You must.

wɪɹɑmɑn ɛntɝd ðə kaʊnsəl tɛnt, ʃoʊldɝɪŋ əsaɪd ɡɹɛɡɹɪn ən toʊlmɝæn, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ʃoʊldɝ əsaɪd ɹoʊzænə ən səmɝædʒɹɪd, ðə lɑɾ ə ðɛm iɡɝ tə tɛl ɹænd ðət ðə mɛn ɪn ðə tʃɹiz hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd waɪzli æftɝ ɔl. ðeɪ faʊn ɪm læfɪŋ tɪl tɪɹz ɹoʊl daʊn ɪz feɪs. luz θɝɪn hæd kʌm bæk. əɹ ɛls i ɹɪli wɑz mæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. iðɝ weɪ, ɪt wɑz ɹizən tə læf.

Weiramon entered the council tent, shouldering aside Gregorin and Tolmeran, trying to shoulder aside Rosana and Semaradrid, the lot of them eager to tell Rand that the men in the trees had decided wisely after all. They found him laughing till tears rolled down his face. Lews Therin had come back. Or else he really was mad already. Either way, it was reason to laugh.


tʃæptɝ fɪftin


CHAPTER 15

stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ɹɪɾən lɔ


Stronger Than Written Law

ɪn ðə dɪm, koʊl dɑɹk ə dip naɪt, ɛɡwin woʊk ɡɹɑdʒəli fɹəm ɹɛsləs slip ən tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ dʒɹimz, ðə mɔɹ tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ kəz ʃi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðɛm. hɝ dʒɹimz wɝ ɔlweɪz oʊpən tə hɝ, əz klɪɹ əz pɹɪntəd wɝdz ɑn ə peɪdʒ, jɛt ðiz hæd bɪn mɝki ən fɪɹfəl. ʃi hæd hæd tu mɛni ʌv ðoʊz, leɪtli. ðeɪ lɛft əɹ wɑntɪŋ tə ɹʌn, tə ɪskeɪp, nɛvɝ eɪbəl tə ɹikɔl wʌt fɹʌm, bʌɾ ɔlweɪz kwizi ən ənsɝɾən, ivən tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ. ət list əɹ hɛd wɑz nɑt hɝɾɪŋ. ət list ʃi kəd ɹikɔl ðə dʒɹimz ʃi nu mʌs bi səɡnɪfɪkənt, ðoʊ nɑt haʊ tə ɪntɝpɹət ðɛm. ɹænd, wɛɹɪŋ dɪfɹən mæsks, əntɪl sʌɾənli wʌn ə ðoʊz fɔls feɪsəz wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ə mæsk, bʌt hɪm. pɛɹɪn ən ə tɪŋkɝ, fɹɛnzidli hækɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ θɹu bɹæmbəlz wɪð æks ən sɔɹd, ʌnəwɛɹ ə ðə klɪf ðət leɪ dʒʌst əhɛd. ən ðə bɹæmbəlz skɹimd wɪð hjumən vɔɪsəz ðeɪ dɪd nɑt hɪɹ. mæt, weɪɪŋ tu ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑn ə hjudʒ sɛɾ ə bæləns skeɪlz, ən ɑn ɪz dɪsɪʒən dɪpɛndəd. . . . ʃi kəd nɑt seɪ wʌt; sʌmθɪŋ væst; ðə wɝld, pɝhæps. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ʌðɝ dʒɹimz, moʊs tɪŋd wɪð sʌfɝɪŋ. ɹisənli, ɔl ə hɝ dʒɹimz əbaʊt mæt wɝ peɪl ən fʊl ə peɪn, laɪk ʃædoʊz kæs baɪ naɪtmɛɹz, ɔlmoʊst əz ðoʊ mæt hɪmsɛlf wɝ nɑt kwaɪt ɹil. ðət meɪɾ əɹ əfɹeɪd fəɹ hɪm, lɛf bɪhaɪn ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ən ɡeɪv əɹ æɡəniz ʌv ɡɹif fəɹ sɛndɪŋ ɪm ðɛɹ, nɑt tə mɛnʃən pʊɹ oʊl tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn. bʌt ði ənɹimɛmbɝd dʒɹimz wɝ wɝs, ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ.

In the dim, cold dark of deep night, Egwene woke groggily from restless sleep and troubling dreams, the more troubling because she could not remember them. Her dreams were always open to her, as clear as printed words on a page, yet these had been murky and fearful. She had had too many of those, lately. They left her wanting to run, to escape, never able to recall what from, but always queasy and uncertain, even trembling. At least her head was not hurting. At least she could recall the dreams she knew must be significant, though not how to interpret them. Rand, wearing different masks, until suddenly one of those false faces was no longer a mask, but him. Perrin and a Tinker, frenziedly hacking their way through brambles with axe and sword, unaware of the cliff that lay just ahead. And the brambles screamed with human voices they did not hear. Mat, weighing two Aes Sedai on a huge set of balance scales, and on his decision depended. . . . She could not say what; something vast; the world, perhaps. There had been other dreams, most tinged with suffering. Recently, all of her dreams about Mat were pale and full of pain, like shadows cast by nightmares, almost as though Mat himself were not quite real. That made her afraid for him, left behind in Ebou Dar, and gave her agonies of grief for sending him there, not to mention poor old Thom Merrilin. But the unremembered dreams were worse, she was sure.

ðə saʊn ə loʊ vɔɪsəz ɑɹɡjuɪŋ hæd wækən hɝ, ən ðə fʊl mun wɑz stɪl ʌp aʊtsaɪd, kæstɪŋ ɪnʌf laɪt fəɹ əɹ tə meɪk aʊt tu wɪmən kənfɹʌntɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ ət ðə tɛns ɛntʃɹəns.

The sound of low voices arguing had wakened her, and the full moon was still up outside, casting enough light for her to make out two women confronting one another at the tent's entrance.

"ðə pʊɹ wʊmənz hɛd peɪnz əɹ ɔl deɪ, ən ʃi ɡɛts lɪɾəl ɹɛst ət naɪt," hɑlimə wɪspɝd fɪɹsli, fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps. "lɛt ðɪs weɪt tɪl mɔɹnɪŋ."

"The poor woman's head pains her all day, and she gets little rest at night," Halima whispered fiercely, fists on her hips. "Let this wait till morning."

"aɪ doʊn pɹəpoʊz tə ɑɹɡju wɪð ju." sɪuənz vɔɪs wɑz wɪntɝ ɪtsɛlf, ən ʃi tɔs bæk əɹ kloʊk wɪð ə mɪɾənd hæn əz ðoʊ pɹipɛɹɪŋ tə faɪt. ʃi wɑz dʒɹɛs fəɹ ðə wɛðɝ, ɪn staʊt wʊl noʊ daʊt wɔɹn oʊvɝ əz mɛni ʃɪfs əz ʃi kəd fɪɾ ʌndɝniθ. "ju stæn əsaɪd, ən ɹaɪt kwɪk, əɹ əl əv jəɹ ɡʌts fəɹ beɪt! ən pʊɾ ɑn səm disən kloʊðz!"

"I don't propose to argue with you." Siuan's voice was winter itself, and she tossed back her cloak with a mittened hand as though preparing to fight. She was dressed for the weather, in stout wool no doubt worn over as many shifts as she could fit underneath. "You stand aside, and right quick, or I'll have your guts for bait! And put on some decent clothes!"

wɪð ə sɑf læf, hɑlimə dʒɹu ʌp ən ɪf ɛniθɪŋ plæntəd hɝsɛlf mɔɹ skwɛɹli ɪn sɪuənz weɪ. hɝ waɪt naɪtɡaʊn klʌŋ, bʌt wɑz disən ɪnʌf fəɹ ɪts pɝpəs. ðoʊ ɪt dɪd sim ə wʌndɝ ʃi ɪveɪɾɪd fɹizɪŋ ɪn ðət θɪn sɪlk. ðə koʊlz ɪn ðə tʃɹaɪpɑd bɹeɪʒɝz hæd daɪd daʊn lɔŋ sɪns, ən niðɝ mʌtʃ-mɛndɪd tɛn kænvəs nɔɹ leɪɝd kɑɹpəts ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn hɛld ɪn wɔɹmθ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. boʊθ wɪmənz bɹɛθ wɑz peɪl mɪst.

With a soft laugh, Halima drew up and if anything planted herself more squarely in Siuan's way. Her white nightgown clung, but was decent enough for its purpose. Though it did seem a wonder she evaded freezing in that thin silk. The coals in the tripod braziers had died down long since, and neither much-mended tent canvas nor layered carpets on the ground held in warmth any longer. Both women's breath was pale mist.

θɹoʊɪŋ ɔf ðə blæŋkəts, ɛɡwin sæɾ ʌp wɛɹəli ɑn əɹ nɛɹoʊ kɑt. hɑlimə wɑz ə kʌntʃɹi wʊmən wɪð ə skɪm ə səfɪstəkeɪʃən, ən ɔfən ʃi dɪd nɑt sim tə ɹilaɪz ðə dɛfɝəns du tə ɛɛs sədaɪ, əɹ ɪndid sim tə θɪŋk ʃi nid dɪfɝ tə ɛniwʌn. ʃi spoʊk tə sɪɾɝz əz ʃi maɪt tə ðə ɡʊd-waɪvz ɪn əɹ oʊn vɪlədʒ, wɪð ə læf ən ə lɛvəl aɪ ən ə stʃɹeɪtfɔɹwɝɾ ɝθinəs ðət səmtaɪmz ʃɑkt. sɪuən spɛn əɹ deɪz ɡɪvɪŋ weɪ tə wɪmən u hæd dʒʌmpt əɾ əɹ wɝɾ ə jɪɹ ɝliɝ, smaɪlɪŋ ən kɝtsiɪŋ fəɹ nɪɹli ɛvɹi sɪstɝ ɪn ðə kæmp. mɛni stɪl leɪd mʌtʃ ə ðə taʊɝz tʃɹʌbəlz əɾ əɹ fiɾ ən θɔt ʃi hæd hɑɹdli sʌfɝɾ ɪnʌf tə ətoʊn. səfɪʃən tə kip ɛniwʌnz pɹaɪɾ əɾ ə stɪf pɹɪkəl. təɡɛðɝ, ðə pɛɹ wɝ ə læntɝn tɔst ɪndə ðə bæk ʌv ən ɪluməneɪɾɝz wæɡən, bʌɾ ɛɡwin hoʊp tə əvɔɪɾ ən ɪksploʊʒən. bɪsaɪdz, sɪuən wəd nɑɾ əv kʌm ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə naɪɾ ənlɛs ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi.

Throwing off the blankets, Egwene sat up wearily on her narrow cot. Halima was a country woman with a skim of sophistication, and often she did not seem to realize the deference due to Aes Sedai, or indeed seem to think she need defer to anyone. She spoke to Sitters as she might to the good-wives in her own village, with a laugh and a level eye and a straightforward earthiness that sometimes shocked. Siuan spent her days giving way to women who had jumped at her word a year earlier, smiling and curtsying for nearly every sister in the camp. Many still laid much of the Tower's troubles at her feet and thought she had hardly suffered enough to atone. Sufficient to keep anyone's pride at a stiff prickle. Together, the pair were a lantern tossed into the back of an Illuminator's wagon, but Egwene hoped to avoid an explosion. Besides, Siuan would not have come in the middle of the night unless it was necessary.

"ɡoʊ bæk tə bɛd, hɑlimə." smʌðɝɪŋ ə jɔn, ɛɡwin bɛn tə fʌmbəl əɹ ʃuz ən stɑkɪŋz fɹəm bɪniθ ðə kɑt. ʃi dɪd nɑt tʃænəl ə læmp əlaɪt. bɛɾɝ ɪf noʊ wʌn noʊɾəst ðət ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑz əweɪk. "ɡoʊ ɑn; jə nid jəɹ ɹɛst."

"Go back to bed, Halima." Smothering a yawn, Egwene bent to fumble her shoes and stockings from beneath the cot. She did not channel a lamp alight. Better if no one noticed that the Amyrlin was awake. "Go on; you need your rest."

hɑlimə pɹətɛstəd, pɝhæps mɔɹ stʃɹɔŋli ðən ʃi ʃəɾ əv tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, bʌt sun ɪnʌf ʃi wɑz bæk ɑn ðə taɪni kɑt ðət hæd bɪn skwizd ɪndə ðə tɛn fəɹ hɝ. vɛɹi lɪɾəl ɹum ɹɪmeɪn tə muv ɪn, wɪð ə wɑʃstænd, ə stænd-mɪɹɝ ən ə ɹil ɑɹmtʃɛɹ, plʌs fɔɹ lɑɹdʒ tʃɛsts stækt ətɑp wʌn ənʌðɝ. ðoʊz hɛl ðə kɑnstən floʊ ʌv kloʊðz fɹəm sɪɾɝz u hæd nɑt jɛt ɹilaɪz ðət haʊɛvɝ jʌŋ ɛɡwin maɪt bi, ʃi wɑz nɑt jʌŋ ɪnʌf tə bi dæzəld əɹ daɪvɝɾɪd baɪ sɪlks ən leɪsəz. hɑlimə leɪ kɝld ʌp, wɑtʃɪŋ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs, waɪl ɛɡwin heɪstəli dʒɹæɡd ən aɪvɝi koʊm θɹu hɝ hɛɹ, dɑn staʊt mɪɾənz, ən pʊld ə fɑks-laɪn kloʊk oʊvɝ əɹ naɪtɡaʊn. ə θɪk wʊlən naɪtɡaʊn, ən ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv maɪndəd θɪkɝ ɪn ðɪs wɛðɝ. hɑliməz aɪz sim tə pɪk ʌp ðə feɪn munlaɪɾ ən ʃaɪn dɑɹkli, ənblɪŋkɪŋ.

Halima protested, perhaps more strongly than she should have to the Amyrlin Seat, but soon enough she was back on the tiny cot that had been squeezed into the tent for her. Very little room remained to move in, with a washstand, a stand-mirror and a real armchair, plus four large chests stacked atop one another. Those held the constant flow of clothes from Sitters who had not yet realized that however young Egwene might be, she was not young enough to be dazzled or diverted by silks and laces. Halima lay curled up, watching in the darkness, while Egwene hastily dragged an ivory comb through her hair, donned stout mittens, and pulled a fox-lined cloak over her nightgown. A thick woolen nightgown, and she would not have minded thicker in this weather. Halima's eyes seemed to pick up the faint moonlight and shine darkly, unblinking.

ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðə wʊmən dʒɛləs ə hɝ pleɪs nɪɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, kæʒəwəl əz ɪt wɑz, ən ðə laɪt nu ʃi dɪd nɑt kæɹi ɡɑsəp, bʌt hɑlimə hæɾ ən ɪnəsən kjʊɹiɑsəɾi əbaʊɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, wɛðɝ əɹ nɑɾ ɪt wɑz ɛni ʌv əɹ bɪznəs. ɹizən ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ sɪuən aʊɾ ɛlswɛɹ. ɛvɹiwʌn nu naʊ ðət sɪuən hæd θɹoʊn ɪn əɹ lɑt wɪð ɛɡwin, æftɝ ə fæʃən, əz ðeɪ θɔt, sʌlənli ən ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli. ə fɪɡjɝ ə səm əmjuzmən ən əkeɪʒənəl pɪɾi, sɪuən sɑntʃ, ɹədus tə ətætʃɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə ðə wʊmən u hɛl ðə taɪɾəl wʌns hɝz, ən ðət wʊmən noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə pʌpət wʌns ðə hɔl fɪnɪʃt faɪɾɪŋ oʊvɝ u wəd pʊl əɹ kɔɹdz. sɪuən wɑz hjumən ɪnʌf tə hɑɹbɝ spɑɹks ə ɹɪzɛnmənt, bʌt soʊ fɑɹ ðeɪ hæd mænədʒ tə kip sikɹət ðəɾ əɹ ædvaɪs wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm ɡɹʌdʒɪŋ. soʊ ʃi ɛndʒjʊɹd pɪɾi ən snɪkɝz əz bɛst ʃi kʊd, ən ɛvɹiwʌn bɪlivd əɹ əz tʃeɪnʒd baɪ hɝ ɪkspɪɹiənsɪz əz əɹ feɪs. ðət bɪlif hæd tə bi meɪnteɪnd, əɹ ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn ən vɛɹi laɪkli ðə ɹɛst ə ðə hɔl, tu, wəd faɪnd weɪz tə sɛpɝeɪɾ əɹ - ən əɹ ædvaɪs - fɹəm ɛɡwin.

Egwene did not think the woman jealous of her place near the Amyrlin Seat, casual as it was, and the Light knew she did not carry gossip, but Halima had an innocent curiosity about everything, whether or not it was any of her business. Reason enough to hear Siuan out elsewhere. Everyone knew now that Siuan had thrown in her lot with Egwene, after a fashion, as they thought, sullenly and grudgingly. A figure of some amusement and occasional pity, Siuan Sanche, reduced to attaching herself to the woman who held the title once hers, and that woman no more than a puppet once the Hall finished fighting over who would pull her cords. Siuan was human enough to harbor sparks of resentment, but so far they had managed to keep secret that her advice was far from grudging. So she endured pity and snickers as best she could, and everyone believed her as changed by her experiences as her face. That belief had to be maintained, or Romanda and Lelaine and very likely the rest of the Hall, too, would find ways to separate her - and her advice - from Egwene.

ðə koʊld aʊtsaɪd slæpt ɛɡwin ɪn ðə feɪs ən flʌɾəd ʌndɝ əɹ kloʊk; hɝ naɪtɡaʊn maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn hɑliməz fəɹ ɔl ðə pɹətɛkʃən ɪɾ ɔfɝd. dɪspaɪt staʊt lɛðɝ ən ɡʊd wʊl, hɝ fit fɛlt əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ bɛɹ. tɛnʒɹəlz ə fɹɔsti ɛɹ kɝld ɝaʊn əɹ ɪɹz, mɑkɪŋ ðə θɪk fɝ laɪnɪŋ əɹ hʊd. jɝnɪŋ fəɹ əɹ bɛɾ əz ʃi wɑz, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ði aɪsaɪnəs tʊk ɔl ðə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən ʃi kəd mʌstɝ. klaʊdz skʌɾɪd əkɹɔs ðə skaɪ, ən munʃæɾoʊz floʊɾəd oʊvɝ ðə ɡlimɪŋ waɪt ðət kʌvɝd ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ə smuð ʃit bɹoʊkən baɪ ðə dɑɹk maʊnz ə tɛns ən ðə tɔlɝ ʃeɪps ə kænvəs-tɑpt wæɡənz ðət naʊ hæd lɔŋ wʊɾən ɹʌnɝz ɪn pleɪs ʌv wilz. mɛni ʌv ðə wæɡənz wɝ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ pɑɹkt əpɑɹt fɹəm ðə tɛns, bʌt lɛft wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪn ənloʊɾəd; noʊ wʌn hæd ðə hɑɹt tə meɪk ðə wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝz pʊɾ aʊɾ ivən ðət mʌtʃ ɛkstʃɹə ɛfɝɾ ət ði ɛn ə ðə deɪ. nʌθɪŋ muvd ɪksɛp ðoʊz peɪl slaɪɾɪŋ ʃædoʊz. ðə waɪd ɹʌnəlz ðət hæd bɪn tʃɹæmpəl θɹu ðə kæmp fəɹ pæðz leɪ ɛmpti. ðə saɪləns wɑz kɹɪsp ən soʊ dip ðət ʃi ɔlmoʊst ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd bɹeɪkɪŋ ɪt.

The cold outside slapped Egwene in the face and flooded under her cloak; her nightgown might as well have been Halima's for all the protection it offered. Despite stout leather and good wool, her feet felt as if they were bare. Tendrils of frosty air curled around her ears, mocking the thick fur lining her hood. Yearning for her bed as she was, ignoring the iciness took all the concentration she could muster. Clouds scudded across the sky, and moonshadows floated over the gleaming white that covered the ground, a smooth sheet broken by the dark mounds of tents and the taller shapes of canvas-topped wagons that now had long wooden runners in place of wheels. Many of the wagons were no longer parked apart from the tents, but left where they had been unloaded; no one had the heart to make the wagon drivers put out even that much extra effort at the end of the day. Nothing moved except those pale sliding shadows. The wide runnels that had been trampled through the camp for paths lay empty. The silence was crisp and so deep that she almost regretted breaking it.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?" ʃi æsk sɔfli, kæstɪŋ ə wɛɹi ɡlæns ət ðə smɔl tɛnt nɪɹbaɪ ʃɛɹd baɪ hɝ meɪdz, tʃɛsə, mɛɹi, ən sɛləm. ðət wɑz əz stɪl ən dɑɹk əz ði ʌðɝz. ɪɡzɔstʃən meɪɾ əz θɪk ə blæŋkəɾ oʊvɝ ðə kæmp əz ðə snoʊ. "nɑɾ ənʌðɝ ɹɛvəleɪʃən laɪk ðə kɪn, aɪ hoʊp." ʃi klɪkt əɹ tʌŋ ɪn vɛkseɪʃən. ʃi wɑz spɛnt, tu, baɪ lɔŋ fɹizɪŋ deɪz ɪn ðə sæɾəl ən nɑɾ ɪnʌf ɹil slip, əɹ ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv sɛd ðæt. "aɪm sɑɹi, sɪuən."

"What is it?" she asked softly, casting a wary glance at the small tent nearby shared by her maids, Chesa, Meri, and Selame. That was as still and dark as the others. Exhaustion made as thick a blanket over the camp as the snow. "Not another revelation like the Kin, I hope." She clicked her tongue in vexation. She was spent, too, by long freezing days in the saddle and not enough real sleep, or she would not have said that. "I'm sorry, Siuan."

"noʊ nid tə əpɑlədʒaɪz, mʌðɝ." sɪuən kɛpt əɹ vɔɪs daʊn əz wɛl, ən ɡlænst əbaʊt tə si wɛðɝ ɛniwʌn maɪt bi wɑtʃɪŋ fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz bɪsaɪdz. niðɝ wɑntəd tə faɪn hɝsɛlf dɪskʌsɪŋ ðə kɪn wɪð ðə hɔl. "aɪ noʊ aɪ ʃʊɾə toʊl jə bɪfɔɹhænd, bʌɾ ɪt simd ə smɔl θɪŋ. aɪ nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd ðoʊz ɡɝlz tə ivən spik tə wʌn ə ðɛm. ðɛɹz soʊ mʌtʃ tə tɛl ju. aɪ hæv tə tʃɹaɪ tə pɪk ən tʃuz wʌts ɪmpɔɹɾənt."

"No need to apologize, Mother." Siuan kept her voice down as well, and glanced about to see whether anyone might be watching from the shadows besides. Neither wanted to find herself discussing the Kin with the Hall. "I know I should have told you beforehand, but it seemed a small thing. I never expected those girls to even speak to one of them. There's so much to tell you. I have to try to pick and choose what's important."

wɪð ən ɛfɝt, ɛɡwin mænədʒ nɑt tə saɪ. ðət wɑz ɔlmoʊst wɝd fəɹ wɝd ði əpɑlədʒi sɪuən hæɾ ɔfɝd bɪfɔɹ. sɛvɹəl taɪmz. wʌt ʃi mɛnt wɑz ðət ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɔɹs-fiɾ ɛɡwin oʊvɝ twɛnti jɪɹz ʌv ɪkspɪɹiəns əz ɛɛs sədaɪ, mɔɹ ðən tɛn ə ðəɾ əz æmɪɝlɪn, ən də ɪɾ ɪn mʌnθs. ət taɪmz ɛɡwin fɛlt laɪk ə ɡus biɪŋ fæɾənd fəɹ mɑɹkət. "wɛl, wʌts ɪmpɔɹɾənt tənaɪt?"

With an effort, Egwene managed not to sigh. That was almost word for word the apology Siuan had offered before. Several times. What she meant was that she was trying to force-feed Egwene over twenty years of experience as Aes Sedai, more than ten of that as Amyrlin, and do it in months. At times Egwene felt like a goose being fattened for market. "Well, what's important tonight?"

"ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪnz weɪɾɪŋ ɪn jəɹ stʌɾi." sɪuən dɪd nɑt ɹeɪz əɹ vɔɪs, bʌɾ ɪt tʊk ɑn ən ɛdʒ, əz ɔlweɪz wən ʃi spoʊk ə lɔɹd bɹaɪn. ʃi tɔst əɹ hɛɾ æŋɡɹəli ɪnsaɪd ðə dip hʊɾ ə hɝ kloʊk, ən meɪɾ ə saʊn laɪk ə kæt spɪɾɪŋ. "ðə mæn keɪm ɪn dʒɹɪpɪŋ snoʊ, skup mi aʊɾ ə maɪ bɛɾɪŋ, ən bɛɹli ɡeɪv mi taɪm tə dʒɹɛs bɪfɔɹ hɔlɪŋ mi ʌp bɪhaɪn ɪz sæɾəl. hi toʊl mi nʌθɪŋ; dʒʌs tɔs mi daʊn ət ði ɛdʒ ə kæmp ən sɛn mi tə fɛtʃ jə laɪk aɪ wɑz ə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝl!"

"Gareth Bryne's waiting in your study." Siuan did not raise her voice, but it took on an edge, as always when she spoke of Lord Bryne. She tossed her head angrily inside the deep hood of her cloak, and made a sound like a cat spitting. "The man came in dripping snow, scooped me out of my bedding, and barely gave me time to dress before hauling me up behind his saddle. He told me nothing; just tossed me down at the edge of camp and sent me to fetch you like I was a serving girl!"

fɝmli, ɛɡwin staɪfəld ə ɹaɪzɪŋ hoʊp. ðəɹ hæd bɪn tu mɛni dɪsəpɔɪnmənts, ən wʌtɛvɝ hæd bɹɔt bɹaɪn ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə naɪt wɑz mʌtʃ mɔɹ laɪkli tə bi ə pətɛnʃəl dɪzæstɝ ðən wʌt ʃi wɪʃt fɔɹ. haʊ fɑɹ jɛt tə ðə bɔɹɾɝ wɪð ændɝ? "lɛts si wʌɾ i wɑns."

Firmly, Egwene stifled a rising hope. There had been too many disappointments, and whatever had brought Bryne in the middle of the night was much more likely to be a potential disaster than what she wished for. How far yet to the border with Andor? "Let's see what he wants."

stɑɹɾɪŋ ɔf təwɔɹd ðə tɛn ɛvɹiwʌn neɪm ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi, ʃi hɛld əɹ kloʊk kloʊs. ʃi dɪd nɑt ʃɪvɝ, bʌt ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə lɛt hiɾ əɹ koʊl tʌtʃ jə dɪd nɑt meɪk əm ɡoʊ əweɪ. jə kəɾ ɪɡnɔɹ əm ɹaɪɾ ʌp tə ðə moʊmən sʌnstʃɹoʊk kʊk jəɹ bɹeɪn əɹ fɹɔstbaɪt ɹɑɾɪd jəɹ hænz ən fit. ʃi kənsɪɾɝd wʌt sɪuən hæd sɛd.

Starting off toward the tent everyone named the Amyrlin's Study, she held her cloak close. She did not shiver, but refusing to let heat or cold touch you did not make them go away. You could ignore them right up to the moment sunstroke cooked your brain or frostbite rotted your hands and feet. She considered what Siuan had said.

"ju wɝn slipɪŋ ɪn jəɹ oʊn tɛn hɪɹ?" ʃi sɛd kɛɹfəli. ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz ɹileɪʃən tə lɔɹd bɹaɪn wɑz ðəɾ ʌv ə sɝvənt, ɪn ə vɛɹi pəkjuljɝ weɪ, bʌɾ ɛɡwin hoʊp sɪuən wɑz nɑt lɛɾɪŋ əɹ stʌbɝn pɹaɪd lɛɾ əɹ ɪndə lɛɾɪŋ ɪm teɪk ædvæntɪdʒ. ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən ɪt, ʌv ɪm əɹ hɝ, jɛt nɑt soʊ lɔŋ əɡoʊ ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv ɪmædʒən sɪuən æksɛptɪŋ ɛni pɑɹɾ ə ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən. ʃi stɪl kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ.

"You weren't sleeping in your own tent here?" she said carefully. The other woman's relation to Lord Bryne was that of a servant, in a very peculiar way, but Egwene hoped Siuan was not letting her stubborn pride lead her into letting him take advantage. She could not imagine it, of him or her, yet not so long ago she could not have imagined Siuan accepting any part of the situation. She still could not understand why.

snɔɹɾɪŋ laʊdli, sɪuən kɪkt əɹ skɝts, ən nɪɹli fɛl əz əɹ ʃuz skɪɾəd. snoʊ biɾən daʊn baɪ kaʊnləs fit hæd kwɪkli bɪkʌm ə ɹʌf ʃiɾ ʌv aɪs. ɛɡwin wɑz pɪkɪŋ əɹ oʊn weɪ kɔʃəsli. ɛvɹi deɪ bɹɔt bɹoʊkən boʊnz ðət tʃɹævəl-wɪɹi sɪstɝz hæd tə hil. hæf əbændənɪŋ əɹ kloʊk, ʃi ɔfɝɾ ən ɑɹm əz mʌtʃ fəɹ ðə səpɔɹt ʃi maɪt ɹəsiv əz ɡɪv. sɪuən tʊk ɪt, mʌɾɝɪŋ.

Snorting loudly, Siuan kicked her skirts, and nearly fell as her shoes skidded. Snow beaten down by countless feet had quickly become a rough sheet of ice. Egwene was picking her own way cautiously. Every day brought broken bones that travel-weary sisters had to Heal. Half abandoning her cloak, she offered an arm as much for the support she might receive as give. Siuan took it, muttering.

"baɪ ðə taɪm aɪ fɪnɪʃt klinɪŋ ðə mænz spɛɹ buts ən sɛkən sæɾəl, ɪt wɑz tu leɪt tə tʃɹæmp bæk θɹu ðɪs. nɑt ðəɾ i ɔfɝd mɔɹ ðən blæŋkəts ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ; nɑt ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn! meɪd mi dɪɡ ðɛm aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɛs maɪsɛlf, waɪl i wɛn ɔf ðə laɪt noʊz wɛɹ! mɛn ɑɹ ə tʃɹaɪəl, ən ðət wʌn ðə wɝst!" wɪθaʊɾ ə pɔz fəɹ bɹɛθ, ʃi tʃeɪnʒd ðə sʌbʒɪkt. "ju ʃʊdn lɛt ðət hɑlimə slip ɪn jəɹ tɛnt. ʃiz ənʌðɝ pɛɹ ʌv ɪɹz juv tə bi kɛɹfəl ʌv, ən snupi wɪð ɪt. bɪsaɪdz, jəɹ lʌki jə doʊnt wɔk ɪn tə faɪn əɹ ɛntɝteɪnɪŋ səm soʊlʒɝ."

"By the time I finished cleaning the man's spare boots and second saddle, it was too late to tramp back through this. Not that he offered more than blankets in a corner; not Gareth Bryne! Made me dig them out of the chest myself, while he went off the Light knows where! Men are a trial, and that one the worst!" Without a pause for breath, she changed the subject. "You shouldn't let that Halima sleep in your tent. She's another pair of ears you have to be careful of, and snoopy with it. Besides, you're lucky you don't walk in to find her entertaining some soldier."

"aɪ æm vɛɹi ɡlæd ðət dɛlænə kən spɛɹ hɑlimə naɪts," ɛɡwin sɛd fɝmli. "aɪ nid hɝ. ənlɛs jə θɪŋk naɪsaʊz hilɪŋ maɪt də bɛɾɝ wɪð maɪ hɛdeɪks ə sɛkən taɪm ɝaʊnd." hɑliməz fɪŋɡɝz sim tə dʒɹɔ ðə peɪn aʊt θɹu hɝ skælp; wɪθaʊt ðæt, ʃi wəd nɑt bi eɪbəl tə slip əɾ ɔl. naɪsaʊz ɛfɝt hæd hæd noʊ ɪfɛkt wʌtsoʊɛvɝ, ən ʃi wɑz ði oʊnli jɛloʊ ɛɡwin dɛɹɾ əpɹoʊtʃ wɪð ðə pɹɑbləm. əz fəɹ ðə ɹɛst. . . . ʃi meɪɾ əɹ vɔɪs stɝnɝ stɪl. "aɪ æm sɝpɹaɪz jəɹ stɪl lɪsnɪŋ tə ðət ɡɑsəp, dɔɾɝ. ðə fæk ðət mɛn laɪk lʊkɪŋ əɾ ə wʊmən dʌzn min ʃi ɪnvaɪts ɪt, əz jə ʃəd noʊ wɛl. aɪv sin mɔɹ ðən ə fju lʊkɪŋ ət jə ən ɡɹɪnɪŋ." teɪkɪŋ ðət toʊn keɪm iziɝ ðən ɪt wʌns hæd.

"I am very glad that Delana can spare Halima nights," Egwene said firmly. "I need her. Unless you think Nisao's Healing might do better with my headaches a second time around." Halima's fingers seemed to draw the pain out through her scalp; without that, she would not be able to sleep at all. Nisao's effort had had no effect whatsoever, and she was the only Yellow Egwene dared approach with the problem. As for the rest. . . . She made her voice sterner still. "I am surprised you're still listening to that gossip, daughter. The fact that men like looking at a woman doesn't mean she invites it, as you should know well. I've seen more than a few looking at you and grinning." Taking that tone came easier than it once had.

sɪuən ɡeɪv əɹ ə stɑɹɾəld saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlæns ænd, æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ɡɹʌmbəld ən əpɑlədʒi. ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn sənsɪɹ. ɛɡwin æksɛptɪɾ ɪt, iðɝ weɪ. lɔɹd bɹaɪn wɑz vɛɹi bæd fəɹ sɪuənz tɛmpɝ, ən tɔsɪŋ hɑlimə ɪndə ðə bɑɹɡən, ɛɡwin θɔɾ ɪɾ ə ɡʊd dʒɑb ʃi wɑz nɑt pʊʃt ɪndə teɪkɪŋ ə stʃɹɪktɝ stæns. sɪuən hɝsɛlf hæd sɛd ðət ʃi ʃəd nɑt pʊɾ ʌp wɪð nɑnsɛns, ən ʃi ʃʊɹli kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ɪt fɹəm sɪuən, ʌv ɔl pipəl.

Siuan gave her a startled sidelong glance and, after a moment, grumbled an apology. It might have been sincere. Egwene accepted it, either way. Lord Bryne was very bad for Siuan's temper, and tossing Halima into the bargain, Egwene thought it a good job she was not pushed into taking a stricter stance. Siuan herself had said that she should not put up with nonsense, and she surely could not afford to put up with it from Siuan, of all people.

tʃɹʌdʒɪŋ ɑɹm-ɪn-ɑɹm, ðeɪ wɛn ɑn ɪn saɪləns, ðə koʊl fɑɡɡɪŋ ðɛɹ bɹɛθ ən sipɪŋ θɹu ðɛɹ flɛʃ. ðə snoʊ wɑz ə kɝs ən ə lɛsən. ʃi kəd stɪl hɪɹ sɪuən ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn əbaʊt wʌt ʃi kɔl ðə lɔ ʌv ʌnɪntɛndɪd kɑnsəkwɛnsəz, stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ɛni ɹɪɾən lɔ. wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt wʌt jə də hæz ði ɪfɛk jə wɑnt, ɪɾəl əv θɹi ət lis jə nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd, ən wʌn ə ðoʊz juʒəwəli ənplɛzənt.

Trudging arm-in-arm, they went on in silence, the cold fogging their breath and seeping through their flesh. The snow was a curse and a lesson. She could still hear Siuan going on about what she called the Law of Unintended Consequences, stronger than any written law. Whether or not what you do has the effect you want, it will have three at least you never expected, and one of those usually unpleasant.

ðə fɝst, fibəl ɹeɪnz hæd bɹɔɾ əstɑnɪʃmənt, fəɹ ɔl ɛɡwin hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɪnfɔɹm ðə hɔl ðət ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz hæd bɪn faʊn ən juzd. ðət wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi kəd ɹɪsk lɛɾɪŋ əm noʊ ʌv wʌɾ ɪleɪn hæd toʊld əɹ ɪn tɛlɝən' ɹhiəd; tu mʌtʃ ʌv wʌt hæd hæpən ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ wɑz dʒʌs ðə θɪŋ tə kʌɾ əɹ fiɾ aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ əɹ hɪɹ, ən əɹ pəzɪʃən wɑz pɹikɛɹiəs ɪnʌf əz ɪt wɑz. ən ɪksploʊʒən ə dʒɔɪ ɪɹʌptəɾ ət ðoʊz fɝst spɹɪŋkəlz. ðeɪ hæd hɔltəd ðə mɑɹtʃ ət mɪddeɪ, ən ðəɹ hæd bɪn bɑnfaɪɝz ən fistɪŋ ɪn ðə dʒɹɪzəl, pɹɛɹz ə θæŋksɡɪvɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə sɪstɝz ən dænsɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə sɝvəns ən ðə soʊlʒɝz. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, səm ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd dænst, tu.

The first, feeble rains had brought astonishment, for all Egwene had already informed the Hall that the Bowl of the Winds had been found and used. That was almost as much as she could risk letting them know of what Elayne had told her in Tel'aran' rhiod; too much of what had happened in Ebou Dar was just the thing to cut her feet out from under her here, and her position was precarious enough as it was. An explosion of joy erupted at those first sprinkles. They had halted the march at midday, and there had been bonfires and feasting in the drizzle, prayers of thanksgiving among the sisters and dancing among the servants and the soldiers. For that matter, some of the Aes Sedai had danced, too.

ə fju deɪz leɪɾɝ, ðə sɑft ɹeɪnz bɪkeɪm daʊnpɔɹz, ən ðən haʊlɪŋ tɛmpɛsts. ðə tɛmpɹətʃɝ slɪd daʊnwɝd, plʌməɾɪd, ən tɛmpɛsts bɪkeɪm blɪzɝdz. naʊ, ðə dɪstəns wʌns kʌvɝɾ ɪn ə deɪ, wɪð ɛɡwin ɡɹɪɾɪŋ əɹ tiθ oʊvɝ haʊ sloʊli ðeɪ muvd, tʊk faɪv wən ðə skaɪ hɛld oʊnli klaʊdz, ən wən ðə snoʊz fɛl, ðeɪ dɪd nɑt muv əɾ ɔl. izi ɪnʌf tə θɪŋk ə θɹi ʌnɪntɛndɪd kɑnsəkwɛnsəz, əɹ mɔɹ, ən ðə snoʊ maɪt wɛl bi ðə list ənplɛzənt.

A few days later, the soft rains became downpours, and then howling tempests. The temperature slid downward, plummeted, and tempests became blizzards. Now, the distance once covered in a day, with Egwene gritting her teeth over how slowly they moved, took five when the sky held only clouds, and when the snows fell, they did not move at all. Easy enough to think of three unintended consequences, or more, and the snow might well be the least unpleasant.

əz ðeɪ əpɹoʊtʃt ðə smɔl, pætʃt tɛn kɔl ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi, ə ʃædoʊ muv bɪsaɪd wʌn ə ðə tɔl wæɡənz, ən ɛɡwinz bɹɛθ kɑt. ðə ʃædoʊ bɪkeɪm ə fɪɡjɝ u slɪp bæk əɹ hʊɾ ɪnʌf tə ɹɪvil linz feɪs, ðən pʊl bæk ɪndə dɑɹknəs.

As they approached the small, patched tent called the Amyrlin's Study, a shadow moved beside one of the tall wagons, and Egwene's breath caught. The shadow became a figure who slipped back her hood enough to reveal Leane's face, then pulled back into darkness.

"ʃil kip ə wɑtʃ ən lɛɾ əs noʊ ɪf ɛnibəɾi kʌmz," sɪuən sɛd sɔfli.

"She'll keep a watch and let us know if anybody comes," Siuan said softly.

"ðæts ɡʊd," ɛɡwin mʌɾɝd. ðə wʊmən cʊɾə toʊld əɹ ɪn ədvæns. ʃi hæd hæf bɪn əfɹeɪɾ ɪt wɑz ɹoʊmændə əɹ ləleɪn!

"That's good," Egwene muttered. The woman could have told her in advance. She had half been afraid it was Romanda or Lelaine!

ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi wɑz dɑɹk, bʌt lɔɹd bɹaɪn stʊd weɪɾɪŋ peɪʃənli ɪnsaɪd, ɹæpt ɪn ɪz kloʊk, ə ʃædoʊ əmʌŋ ʃædoʊz. ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ ðə sɔɹs, ɛɡwin tʃænəld, nɑt tə laɪt ðə læntɝn hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ðə sɛntɝ-poʊl əɹ wʌn ə ðə kændəlz, bʌt tə meɪk ə smɔl sfɪɹ ə peɪl laɪt ðət ʃi səspɛndəɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ oʊvɝ ðə foʊldɪŋ teɪbəl ʃi juzd əz ə ɹaɪɾɪŋ dɛsk. vɛɹi smɔl, ən vɛɹi peɪl; ənlaɪkli tə bi noʊɾəst fɹəm aʊtsaɪd, ən kwɪk əz θɔt tə ɪkstɪŋɡwɪʃ. ʃi kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd dɪskʌvɝi.

The Amyrlin's Study was dark, but Lord Bryne stood waiting patiently inside, wrapped in his cloak, a shadow among shadows. Embracing the Source, Egwene channeled, not to light the lantern hanging from the center-pole or one of the candles, but to make a small sphere of pale light that she suspended in the air over the folding table she used as a writing desk. Very small, and very pale; unlikely to be noticed from outside, and quick as thought to extinguish. She could not afford discovery.

ðəɹ hæd bɪn æmɪɝlənz u ɹeɪn ɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ, æmɪɝlənz u mænədʒd ən ivən bæləns wɪð ðə hɔl, ən æmɪɝlənz u hæd hæɾ əz lɪɾəl paʊɝ əz ʃi, əɹ lɛs əpɑn ɹɛɹ əkeɪʒənz, wɛl-hɪɾən ɪn ðə sikɹət hɪstɝiz ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. sɛvɹəl hæd fɹɪɾɝd əweɪ paʊɝ ən ɪnfluəns, fɔlɪŋ fɹəm stʃɹɛŋkθ tə wiknəs, bʌɾ ɪn oʊvɝ θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz, pɹɛʃəs fju hæd mænədʒ tə muv ɪn ði ʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən. ɛɡwin vɛɹi mʌtʃ wɪʃt ʃi nu haʊ maɪɹiəm koʊpæn ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðət bɛɹ hændfʊl hæd mænədʒd. ɪf ɛniwʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ θɔt tə ɹaɪt ðət daʊn, ðə peɪdʒəz wɝ lɔŋ lɔst.

There had been Amyrlins who reigned in strength, Amyrlins who managed an even balance with the Hall, and Amyrlins who had had as little power as she, or less upon rare occasions, well-hidden in the secret histories of the White Tower. Several had frittered away power and influence, falling from strength to weakness, but in over three thousand years, precious few had managed to move in the other direction. Egwene very much wished she knew how Myriam Copan and the rest of that bare handful had managed. If anyone had ever thought to write that down, the pages were long lost.

boʊɪŋ ɹɪspɛkfəli, bɹaɪn ʃoʊd noʊ sɝpɹaɪz əɾ əɹ kɑʃən. hi nu wʌt ʃi pʊɾ ət hæzɝd, miɾɪŋ ɪm sikɹɪtli. tə ə vɛɹi lɑɹdʒ dɪɡɹi, ʃi tʃɹʌstɪd ðɪs stɝɾi, hɛvəli ɡɹeɪɪŋ mæn wɪð ðə blʌf, wɛðɝd feɪs, ən nɑɾ oʊnli kəz ʃi hæd tə. hɪz kloʊk wɑz θɪk ɹɛd wʊl, laɪnd wɪð mɑɹɾən ən bɔɹɾɝd wɪð ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ə ɡɪft fɹəm ðə hɔl, jɛɾ i hæd meɪd pleɪn ə dʌzən taɪmz ɪn ðə pæst wiks ðət wʌtɛvɝ ðə hɔl θɔt - ən i wɑz nɑt blaɪn ɪnʌf tə hæv mɪs ðæt! - ʃi wɑz ði æmɪɝlɪn, ən i fɑloʊd ði æmɪɝlɪn. oʊ, hi hæd nɛvɝ sɛd soʊ ɹaɪɾ aʊt, bʌt wɪð kɛɹfəli wɝɾɪd hɪns ðət lɛf noʊ daʊts. ɪkspɛktɪŋ mɔɹ wʊɾə bɪn ɪkspɛktɪŋ tu mʌtʃ. ðəɹ wɝ nɪɹli əz mɛni ʌndɝkɝəns ɪn ðə kæmp əz ðəɹ wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ, səm stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə pʊl ɪm daʊn. sɛvɹəl stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə maɪɹ əɹ dipɝ ðən ʃi wɑz, ɪf ðə hɔl lɝn ə ðɪs miɾɪŋ. ʃi tʃɹʌstɪɾ ɪm fɝðɝ ðən ɛniwʌn ɪksɛp sɪuən ən lin, əɹ ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv, meɪbi fɝðɝ ðən ɛni ʌv ðə sɪstɝz u hæd swɔɹn fiəlti tə hɝ ɪn sikɹət, ən ʃi wɪʃt ʃi hæd ðə kɝədʒ tə tʃɹʌst ɪm mɔɹ. ðə bɔl ʌv waɪt laɪt kæst wik, fɪtfəl ʃædoʊz.

Bowing respectfully, Bryne showed no surprise at her caution. He knew what she put at hazard, meeting him secretly. To a very large degree, she trusted this sturdy, heavily graying man with the bluff, weathered face, and not only because she had to. His cloak was thick red wool, lined with marten and bordered with the Flame of Tar Valon, a gift from the Hall, yet he had made plain a dozen times in the past weeks that whatever the Hall thought - and he was not blind enough to have missed that! - she was the Amyrlin, and he followed the Amyrlin. Oh, he had never said so right out, but with carefully worded hints that left no doubts. Expecting more would have been expecting too much. There were nearly as many undercurrents in the camp as there were Aes Sedai, some strong enough to pull him down. Several strong enough to mire her deeper than she was, if the Hall learned of this meeting. She trusted him further than anyone except Siuan and Leane, or Elayne and Nynaeve, maybe further than any of the sisters who had sworn fealty to her in secret, and she wished she had the courage to trust him more. The ball of white light cast weak, fitful shadows.

"ju hæv nuz, lɔɹd bɹaɪn?" ʃi æskt, staɪflɪŋ hoʊp. ʃi kəd θɪŋk ʌv ə dʌzən pɑsəbəl mɛsədʒəz ðət maɪt bɹɪŋ ɪm ɪn ðə naɪt, itʃ wɪð ɪts oʊn sɛɾ ə pɪtfɔlz ən snɛɹz. hæd ɹænd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə æd mɔɹ kɹaʊnz tə ðəɾ ʌv ɪljən, əɹ ðə sintʃæn sʌmhaʊ kæptʃɝd stɪl ənʌðɝ sɪɾi, əɹ ðə bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hæn sʌɾənli muvd ɑn ɪts oʊn ɪnstɛɾ ə ʃæɾoʊɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɔɹ. . . .

"You have news, Lord Bryne?" she asked, stifling hope. She could think of a dozen possible messages that might bring him in the night, each with its own set of pitfalls and snares. Had Rand decided to add more crowns to that of Illian, or the Seanchan somehow captured still another city, or the Band of the Red Hand suddenly moved on its own instead of shadowing the Aes Sedai, or. . . .

"æn ɑɹmi laɪz nɔɹθ ʌv ʌs, mʌðɝ," hi ɹɪplaɪd kɑmli. hɪz lɛðɝ-ɡɔntələɾəd hænz ɹɛstəd laɪtli ətɑp ɪz lɔŋ sɔɹd hɪlt. ən ɑɹmi tə ðə nɔɹθ, ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ snoʊ, ɔl ðə seɪm. "ændɔɹənz, meɪnli, bʌt wɪð ə ɡʊdli nʌmbɝ ə mʊɹændiənz. maɪ dip skaʊts bɹɔt ðə nuz lɛs ðən ən aʊɝ əɡoʊ. pɛlɪvɑɹ lidz, ən ɑɝəθɛl ɪz wɪð hɪm, ðə haɪ sits ə tu ʌv ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəs haʊsəz ɪn ændɝ, ən ðeɪv bɹɔt twɛnti mɔɹ ət list. ðəɹ pʊʃɪŋ saʊθ hɑɹd, ɪt simz. ɪf jə kip ɑn əz jə ɑɹ, wɪtʃ aɪ ædvaɪz əɡɛnst, wi ʃəd mit hɛd-ɑn ɪn tu deɪz, θɹi ət ði aʊtsaɪd."

"An army lies north of us, Mother," he replied calmly. His leather-gauntleted hands rested lightly atop his long sword hilt. An army to the north, a little more snow, all the same. "Andorans, mainly, but with a goodly number of Murandians. My deep scouts brought the news less than an hour ago. Pelivar leads, and Arathelle is with him, the High Seats of two of the strongest Houses in Andor, and they've brought twenty more at least. They're pushing south hard, it seems. If you keep on as you are, which I advise against, we should meet head-on in two days, three at the outside."

ɛɡwin kɛpt əɹ feɪs smuð, səpɹɛsɪŋ əɹ ɹɪlif. wʌt ʃi hæd bɪn hoʊpɪŋ fɔɹ, weɪɾɪŋ fɔɹ; wʌt ʃi hæd bɪɡʌn tə fɪɹ maɪt nɛvɝ kʌm. sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, ɪt wɑz sɪuən u ɡæspt, ən klæpt ə mɪɾənd hæn oʊvɝ əɹ maʊθ tu leɪt. bɹaɪn kɑkt ən aɪbɹaʊ ət hɝ, bʌt ʃi ɹəkʌvɝd kwɪkli, pʊɾɪŋ ɑn ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝɛnəɾi soʊ θɪk jə ɔlmoʊs fɝɡɑɾ əɹ juθfəl feɪs.

Egwene kept her face smooth, suppressing her relief. What she had been hoping for, waiting for; what she had begun to fear might never come. Surprisingly, it was Siuan who gasped, and clapped a mittened hand over her mouth too late. Bryne cocked an eyebrow at her, but she recovered quickly, putting on Aes Sedai serenity so thick you almost forgot her youthful face.

"du juv kwɑmz ət faɪɾɪŋ jəɹ fɛloʊ ændɔɹənz?" ʃi dɪmændəd. "spik ʌp, mæn. aɪm nɑt jəɹ wɑʃwʊmən hɪɹ." wɛl, ðəɹ wɑz ə smɔl kɹæk ɪn ðət sɝɛnəɾi.

"Do you have qualms at fighting your fellow Andorans?" she demanded. "Speak up, man. I'm not your washwoman here." Well, there was a small crack in that serenity.

"æz jə kəmænd, sɪuən sədaɪ." bɹaɪnz toʊn hɛl noʊ skɹæp ə mɑkɝi, jɛt sɪuənz maʊθ bɪɡæn tə taɪɾən, hɝ aʊtwɝd kulnəs ɪvæpɝeɪɾɪŋ fæst. hi meɪɾ əɹ ə smɔl baʊ, wɝkmænlaɪk bʌɾ æksɛptəbəl. "aɪ wɪl faɪt huɛvɝ ðə mʌðɝ wɪʃɪz mi tə faɪt, ʌv kɔɹs." ivən hɪɹ, hi wəd nɑt bi mɔɹ fɔɹθkʌmɪŋ. mɛn lɝn kɑʃən ɝaʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ. soʊ dɪd wɪmən. ɛɡwin θɔt kɑʃən hæd bɪkʌm ə sɛkən skɪn fəɹ hɝ.

"As you command, Siuan Sedai." Bryne's tone held no scrap of mockery, yet Siuan's mouth began to tighten, her outward coolness evaporating fast. He made her a small bow, workmanlike but acceptable. "I will fight whoever the Mother wishes me to fight, of course." Even here, he would not be more forthcoming. Men learned caution around Aes Sedai. So did women. Egwene thought caution had become a second skin for her.

"æn ɪf wi doʊn kip ɑn?" ʃi sɛd. soʊ mʌtʃ plænɪŋ, dʒʌst əɹ ən sɪuən ən səmtaɪmz lin, ən naʊ ʃi stɪl hæd tə fil aʊɾ itʃ stɛp əz kɛɹfəli əz ɑn ðoʊz aɪsi pæðz aʊtsaɪd. "ɪf wi stɑp hɪɹ?"

"And if we don't keep on?" she said. So much planning, just her and Siuan and sometimes Leane, and now she still had to feel out each step as carefully as on those icy paths outside. "If we stop here?"

hi dɪd nɑt hɛzəteɪt. "ɪf juv ə weɪ tə bɹɪŋ əm ɝaʊnd wɪθaʊt faɪɾɪŋ, ɔl wɛl ən ɡʊd, bʌt səm taɪm təmɑɹoʊ ðəl ɹitʃ ən ɛksələn pəzɪʃən tə dɪfɛnd, wʌn flæŋk hɛl baɪ ðə ɹɪvɝ ɑɹmɑn, ði ʌðɝ baɪ ə lɑɹdʒ pit bɑɡ, ən smɔl stʃɹimz ɪn fɹʌn tə bɹeɪk ʌp ətæks. pɛlɪvɑɹ wɪl sɛɾəl ɪn ðəɹ tə weɪt; hi noʊz ðə wɝk. ɑɝəθɛl wɪl əv əɹ pɑɹɾ ɪf ðɛɹz tɔkɪŋ, bʌt ʃɪl liv ðə paɪks ən sɔɹdz tə hɪm. wi kæn ɹitʃ ɪɾ əhɛɾ ə hɪm, ən ɛniweɪ, ðə tɝeɪn ɪz noʊ jus tə əs ðɛɹ, wɪð ɪm tə ðə nɔɹθ. ɪf jə min tə faɪt, aɪ ædvaɪz meɪkɪŋ fəɹ ðət ɹɪdʒ wi kɹɔs tu deɪz bæk. wi kən ɹitʃ ɪɾ ɪn ɡʊɾ ɔɹɾɝ əhɛɾ ə ðɛm ɪf wi stɑɹɾ ət dɔn, ən pɛlɪvɑɹ wəd θɪŋk twaɪs əbaʊt kʌmɪŋ əɾ əs ðəɹ ɪf i hæd θɹi taɪmz ðə nʌmbɝz i dʌz."

He did not hesitate. "If you have a way to bring them around without fighting, all well and good, but some time tomorrow they'll reach an excellent position to defend, one flank held by the River Armahn, the other by a large peat bog, and small streams in front to break up attacks. Pelivar will settle in there to wait; he knows the work. Arathelle will have her part if there's talking, but she'll leave the pikes and swords to him. We can't reach it ahead of him, and anyway, the terrain is no use to us there, with him to the north. If you mean to fight, I advise making for that ridge we crossed two days back. We can reach it in good order ahead of them if we start at dawn, and Pelivar would think twice about coming at us there if he had three times the numbers he does."

ɹɪəlɪŋ nɪɹ-fɹoʊzən toʊz ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ stɑkɪŋz, ɛɡwin lɛɾ aʊɾ ən ənɔɪd saɪ. ðəɹ wɑz ə dɪfɝəns bɪtwin nɑt lɛɾɪŋ koʊl tʌtʃ jə ən nɑt filɪŋ ɪt. pɪkɪŋ əɹ weɪ kɛɹfəli, nɑt lɛɾɪŋ hɝsɛlf bi dɪstʃɹæktəd baɪ ðə tʃɪl, ʃi æskt, "wɪl ðeɪ tɔk, ɔfɝd ðə tʃæns?"

Wriggling near-frozen toes inside her stockings, Egwene let out an annoyed sigh. There was a difference between not letting cold touch you and not feeling it. Picking her way carefully, not letting herself be distracted by the chill, she asked, "Will they talk, offered the chance?"

"pɹɑbli, mʌðɝ. ðə mʊɹændiənz hɑɹdli kaʊnt; ðəɹ dʒʌs ðəɹ fəɹ wʌtɛvɝ ædvæntɪdʒ ðeɪ kən ɹɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən, seɪm əz ðɛɹ kʌntʃɹimɪn ʌndɝ mi. ɪts pɛlɪvɑɹ ən ɑɝəθɛl u mæɾɝ. ɪf aɪ hæd tə weɪdʒɝ, aɪd seɪ ðeɪ oʊnli min tə kip jə aʊɾ ʌv ændɝ." hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd ɡɹɪmli. "bʌt ðəl faɪɾ ɪf ðeɪv tə, ɪf ðeɪ mʌst, meɪbi ivən ɪf ɪt minz feɪsɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪnstɛɾ ə dʒʌst soʊlʒɝz. aɪ ɪkspɛk ðeɪv hɝd ðə seɪm teɪlz wɪv əbaʊt ðət bæɾəl aʊɾ ist sʌmwɛɹ."

"Probably, Mother. The Murandians hardly count; they're just there for whatever advantage they can wring out of the situation, same as their countrymen under me. It's Pelivar and Arathelle who matter. If I had to wager, I'd say they only mean to keep you out of Andor." He shook his head grimly. "But they'll fight if they have to, if they must, maybe even if it means facing Aes Sedai instead of just soldiers. I expect they've heard the same tales we have about that battle out east somewhere."

"fɪʃ ɡʌts!" sɪuən ɡɹaʊld. soʊ mʌtʃ fəɹ kɑm. "hæf-beɪkt ɹumɝz ən ɹɔ ɡɑsəp ɑɹ noʊ pɹuf ðəɹ wɑz ɛni bæɾəl, jə lʌmɑks, ən ɪf ðəɹ wɑz, sɪstɝz wʊdn əv ɡɑɾən ðɛmsɛlvz mɪkst ʌp ɪn ɪt!" ðə mæn tʃɹuli wɑz ən əkeɪʒən ə sɪn fəɹ hɝ.

"Fish guts!" Siuan growled. So much for calm. "Half-baked rumors and raw gossip are no proof there was any battle, you lummox, and if there was, sisters wouldn't have gotten themselves mixed up in it!" The man truly was an occasion of sin for her.

stʃɹeɪnʒli, bɹaɪn smaɪld. hi ɔfən dɪd wən sɪuən ʃoʊɾ əɹ tɛmpɝ. ɛniwɛɹ ɛls, ɑn ɛniwʌn ɛls, ɛɡwin wʊɾə kɔl ðə smaɪl fɑnd. "bɛɾɝ fəɹ əs ɪf ðeɪ bɪliv," hi toʊl sɪuən maɪldli. hɝ feɪs dɑɹkən soʊ, jə maɪɾ əv θɔɾ i hæd snɪɹɾ ət hɝ.

Strangely, Bryne smiled. He often did when Siuan showed her temper. Anywhere else, on anyone else, Egwene would have called the smile fond. "Better for us if they believe," he told Siuan mildly. Her face darkened so, you might have thought he had sneered at her.

waɪ dɪɾ ə nɔɹməli sɛnsəbəl wʊmən lɛt bɹaɪn ɡɛɾ ʌndɝ əɹ skɪn? wʌtɛvɝ ðə ɹizən, ɛɡwin hæd noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɪt tənaɪt. "sɪuən, aɪ si sʌmwʌn fɝɡɑt tə teɪk əweɪ ðə mʌld waɪn. ɪt kæn əv saʊɝɾ ɪn ðɪs wɛðɝ. wɔɹm ɪt fəɹ ʌs, pliz." ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk sɛɾɪŋ ði ʌðɝ wʊmən daʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə bɹaɪn, bʌt ʃi hæd tə bi ɹeɪn ɪn, ən ðɪs sim ðə dʒɛntələst weɪ tə də ɪt. ɹɪli, ðeɪ ʃəd nɑɾ əv lɛf ðə sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝ ɑn əɹ teɪbəl.

Why did a normally sensible woman let Bryne get under her skin? Whatever the reason, Egwene had no time for it tonight. "Siuan, I see someone forgot to take away the mulled wine. It can't have soured in this weather. Warm it for us, please." She did not like setting the other woman down in front of Bryne, but she had to be reined in, and this seemed the gentlest way to do it. Really, they should not have left the silver pitcher on her table.

sɪuən dɪd nɑt kwaɪt flɪntʃ, bʌt fɹəm əɹ stʃɹɪkən ɪkspɹɛʃən, kwɪkli smuðd oʊvɝ, jə wəd nɛvɝ əv bɪlivd ʃi wɑʃt ðə mænz smɔl-kloʊðz. wɪθaʊt kɑmɛnt ʃi tʃænəl slaɪtli tə ɹihit ðə waɪn ɪn ðə sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝ, kwɪkli fɪl tu klin wɝkt-sɪlvɝ kʌps, ən hændəd ðə fɝs tə ɛɡwin. ʃi kɛp ðə sɛkənd, stɛɹɪŋ ət lɔɹd bɹaɪn əz ʃi sɪpt ən livɪŋ ɪm tə pɔɹ fəɹ hɪmsɛlf.

Siuan did not quite flinch, but from her stricken expression, quickly smoothed over, you would never have believed she washed the man's small-clothes. Without comment she channeled slightly to reheat the wine in the silver pitcher, quickly filled two clean worked-silver cups, and handed the first to Egwene. She kept the second, staring at Lord Bryne as she sipped and leaving him to pour for himself.

wɔɹmɪŋ əɹ mɪɾənd fɪŋɡɝz ɑn əɹ oʊn kʌp, ɛɡwin fɛlt ə flæʃ ʌv ɪɹɪteɪʃən. meɪbi ɪt wɑz pɑɹɾ ə sɪuənz lɔŋ-dɪleɪd ɹiækʃən tə ðə dɛθ ə hɝ wɔɹɾɝ. ʃi stɪl bɪkeɪm wipi fəɹ noʊ vɪzəbəl ɹizən naʊ ən ðɛn, ðoʊ ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə haɪɾ ɪt. ɛɡwin pʊt ðə mæɾɝ aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛd. tənaɪt, ðət wɑz ən æntɪl bɪsaɪd maʊntənz.

Warming her mittened fingers on her own cup, Egwene felt a flash of irritation. Maybe it was part of Siuan's long-delayed reaction to the death of her Warder. She still became weepy for no visible reason now and then, though she tried to hide it. Egwene put the matter out of her head. Tonight, that was an anthill beside mountains.

"aɪ wɑnə əvɔɪɾ ə bæɾəl ɪf aɪ kæn, lɔɹd bɹaɪn. ði ɑɹmi ɪz fəɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn, nɑt faɪɾɪŋ ə wɔɹ hɪɹ. sɛn tə ɝeɪnʒ ə miɾɪŋ əz sun əz pɑsəbəl fəɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɪð lɔɹd pɛlɪvɑɹ ən leɪɾi ɑɝəθɛl ən ɛniwʌn ɛls jə θɪŋk jə ʃəd bi pɹɛzənt. nɑt hɪɹ. əɹ ɹæɡəd kæmp woʊn ɪmpɹɛs əm vɛɹi mʌtʃ. əz sun əz pɑsəbəl, maɪnd. aɪ wʊdn əbdʒɛk tə təmɑɹoʊ, ɪf ɪt kəd bi sɛt."

"I want to avoid a battle if I can, Lord Bryne. The army is for Tar Valon, not fighting a war here. Send to arrange a meeting as soon as possible for the Amyrlin Seat with Lord Pelivar and Lady Arathelle and anyone else you think you should be present. Not here. Our ragged camp won't impress them very much. As soon as possible, mind. I wouldn't object to tomorrow, if it could be set."

"ðæts sunɝ ðən aɪ kən mænədʒ, mʌðɝ," hi sɛd maɪldli. "ɪf aɪ sɛn ɹaɪɾɝz aʊɾ əz sun əz aɪ ɹɪtɝn tə kæmp, aɪ daʊt ðeɪ kən bi bæk wɪð ən ænsɝ mʌtʃ bɪfɔɹ təmɑɹoʊ naɪt."

"That's sooner than I can manage, Mother," he said mildly. "If I send riders out as soon as I return to camp, I doubt they can be back with an answer much before tomorrow night."

"ðɛn aɪ sədʒɛs jə ɹɪtɝn kwɪkli." laɪt, bʌɾ əɹ hænz ən fit fɛl koʊld. ən ðə pɪɾ ə hɝ stʌmək, tu. bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs kɛpt ɪts kɑm. "æn aɪ wɑn jə tə kip ðət miɾɪŋ, ən ði ɛɡzɪstəns ə ðɛɹ ɑɹmi, fɹəm ðə hɔl əz lɔŋ əz pɑsəbəl."

"Then I suggest you return quickly." Light, but her hands and feet felt cold. And the pit of her stomach, too. But her voice kept its calm. "And I want you to keep that meeting, and the existence of their army, from the Hall as long as possible."

ðɪs taɪm, ʃi wɑz æskɪŋ ɪm tə teɪk əz ɡɹeɪɾ ə ɹɪsk əz ʃi dɪd. ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn wɑz wʌn ə ðə bɛs dʒɛnɝəlz lɪvɪŋ, bʌt ðə hɔl tʃeɪf ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt ɹʌn ði ɑɹmi tə sut ðɛm. ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɡɹeɪtfəl fəɹ ɪz neɪm ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, fəɹ ɪt hɛlp dʒɹɔ soʊlʒɝz tə ðɛɹ kɑz. naʊ ði ɑɹmi hæd mɔɹ ðən θɝɾi θaʊzən ɑɹmd mɛn, wɪð mɔɹ kʌmɪŋ ivən sɪns ðə snoʊz hæd stɑɹɾəd, ən ðeɪ θɔt ðət meɪbi ðeɪ dɪd nɑt nid lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. ən ə kɔɹs, ðəɹ wɝ ðoʊz u bɪliv ðeɪ nɛvɝ hæd niɾəd hɪm. ðeɪ wəd nɑt sɪmpli sɛn ɪm əweɪ fəɹ ðɪs. ɪf ðə hɔl tʃoʊz tə ækt, hi maɪt wɛl ɡoʊ tə ðə hɛdzmən fəɹ tʃɹizən.

This time, she was asking him to take as great a risk as she did. Gareth Bryne was one of the best generals living, but the Hall chafed that he did not run the army to suit them. They had been grateful for his name in the beginning, for it helped draw soldiers to their cause. Now the army had more than thirty thousand armed men, with more coming even since the snows had started, and they thought that maybe they did not need Lord Gareth Bryne any longer. And of course, there were those who believed they never had needed him. They would not simply send him away for this. If the Hall chose to act, he might well go to the headsman for treason.

hi dɪd nɑt blɪŋk, ən i dɪd nɑɾ æsk kwɛstʃənz. pɝhæps i nu ʃi wəd nɑt ɡɪv ænsɝz. əɹ meɪbi hi θɔɾ i nu ðɛm. "ðɛɹ ɪzən mʌtʃ tʃɹæfɪk bɪtwin maɪ kæmp ən jʊɹz, bʌt tu mɛni mɛn noʊ ɔlɹɛɾi tə kip ə sikɹət lɔŋ. əl də wʌɾ aɪ kæn, ðoʊ."

He did not blink, and he did not ask questions. Perhaps he knew she would not give answers. Or maybe he thought he knew them. "There isn't much traffic between my camp and yours, but too many men know already to keep a secret long. I will do what I can, though."

əz sɪmpəl əz ðæt. ðə fɝst stɛp daʊn ə ɹoʊd ðət wəd si hɝ ɑn ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, əɹ ɛls dɪlɪvɝ əɹ fɝmli ɪndə ðə ɡɹæsp ə ðə hɔl, wɪð nʌθɪŋ lɛf tə dɪsaɪɾ ɪksɛpt wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz ɹoʊmændə əɹ ləleɪn u toʊld əɹ wʌt tə du. sʌmhaʊ, sətʃ ə pɪvəɾəl moʊmənt ʃʊɾə bɪn əkʌmpənid baɪ fænfɛɹz ə tʃɹʌmpəts, əɹ ət ðə list, θʌndɝ ɪn ðə skaɪ. ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz ðət weɪ ɪn stɔɹiz.

As simple as that. The first step down a road that would see her on the Amyrlin Seat in Tar Valon, or else deliver her firmly into the grasp of the Hall, with nothing left to decide except whether it was Romanda or Lelaine who told her what to do. Somehow, such a pivotal moment should have been accompanied by fanfares of trumpets, or at the least, thunder in the sky. It was always that way in stories.

ɛɡwin lɛt ðə bɔl ə laɪt vænɪʃ, bʌɾ əz bɹaɪn tɝn tə liv, ʃi kɑɾ ɪz ɑɹm. ɪt wɑz laɪk kætʃɪŋ ə θɪk tʃɹi bɹæntʃ θɹu hɪz koʊt. "ə θɪŋ aɪ hæv bɪn minɪŋ tə æsk ju, lɔɹd bɹaɪn. jə kænt wɑnə teɪk mɛn wɔɹn daʊn baɪ mɑɹtʃɪŋ ɹaɪɾ ɪndə ə sidʒ ə tɑɹ vəlɑn. haʊ lɔŋ wəd jə wɑnə ɹɛst əm bɪfɔɹ jə bɪɡæn?"

Egwene let the ball of light vanish, but as Bryne turned to leave, she caught his arm. It was like catching a thick tree branch through his coat. "A thing I have been meaning to ask you, Lord Bryne. You can't want to take men worn down by marching right into a siege of Tar Valon. How long would you want to rest them before you began?"

fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, hi pɔzd, ən ʃi wɪʃt ʃi stɪl hæd ðə laɪt tə si hɪz feɪs. ʃi θɔɾ i fɹaʊnd. "ivən livɪŋ pipəl ɪn ðə peɪ ʌv ðə taʊɝ aʊɾ ʌv ɪt," hi sɛɾ ət læst, sloʊli, "nuz ʌv ən ɑɹmi flaɪz əz fæst əz ə fælkən. ɪleɪɾə wɪl noʊ tə ðə deɪ wən wɪl ɝaɪv, ən ʃi woʊnt ɡɪv əs ən aʊɝ. jə noʊ ʃiz ɪnkɹisɪŋ ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹd? tə fɪfti θaʊzən mɛn, əpɛɹənli. bʌɾ ə mʌnθ, ɪf aɪ kʊd, tə ɹɛst ən ɹɪkʌvɝ. tɛn deɪz wəd du, bʌɾ ə mʌnθ wəd bi bɛɾɝ."

For the first time, he paused, and she wished she still had the light to see his face. She thought he frowned. "Even leaving people in the pay of the Tower out of it," he said at last, slowly, "news of an army flies as fast as a falcon. Elaida will know to the day when we'll arrive, and she won't give us an hour. You know she's increasing the Tower Guard? To fifty thousand men, apparently. But a month, if I could, to rest and recover. Ten days would do, but a month would be better."

ʃi nɑɾəd, ɹilisɪŋ hɪm. ðət kæʒəwəl kwɛstʃən əbaʊt ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹd hɝt. hi wɑz əwɛɹ ðət ðə hɔl ən ði ədʒəz toʊld əɹ wʌt ðeɪ wɑntəɾ əɹ tə noʊ ən noʊ mɔɹ. "aɪ səpoʊz jəɹ ɹaɪt," ʃi sɛɾ ivənli. "ðɛɹəl bi noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɹɛst wʌns wi ɹitʃ tɑɹ vəlɑn. sɛn jəɹ fæstəst ɹaɪɾɝz. ðəɹ woʊn bi ɛni dɪfəkəlti, wɪl ðɛɹ? pɛlɪvɑɹ ən ɑɝəθɛl wɪl hɪɹ əm aʊt?" ʃi dɪd nɑt feɪn ðə tʌtʃ ʌv æŋzaɪəɾi. mɔɹ ðən əɹ plænz maɪt bi ɹuən ɪf ðeɪ hæd tə faɪt naʊ.

She nodded, releasing him. That casual question about the Tower Guard hurt. He was aware that the Hall and the Ajahs told her what they wanted her to know and no more. "I suppose you're right," she said evenly. "There'll be no time for rest once we reach Tar Valon. Send your fastest riders. There won't be any difficulty, will there? Pelivar and Arathelle will hear them out?" She did not feign the touch of anxiety. More than her plans might be ruined if they had to fight now.

bɹaɪnz toʊn dɪd nɑɾ ɔltɝ ə wɪt ðət ʃi kəd tɛl, bʌt sʌmhaʊ, hi saʊndəd suðɪŋ. "soʊ lɔŋ əz ðəɹ ɪz laɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ əm tə si ðə waɪt fɛðɝz, ðəl ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ə tʃɹus ən lɪsən. aɪd bɛɾɝ ɡoʊ, mʌðɝ. ɪts ə lɔŋ weɪ ən hɑɹd ɹaɪɾɪŋ, ivən fəɹ mɛn wɪð ɛkstʃɹə hɔɹsəz."

Bryne's tone did not alter a whit that she could tell, but somehow, he sounded soothing. "So long as there is light enough for them to see the white feathers, they'll recognize a truce and listen. I'd better go, Mother. It's a long way and hard riding, even for men with extra horses."

əz sun əz ðə tɛntflæp fɛl bɪhaɪn hɪm, ɛɡwin lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ. hɝ ʃoʊldɝz wɝ taɪt, ən ʃi ɪkspɛktəɾ əɹ hɛd tə stɑɹɾ eɪkɪŋ ɛni moʊmənt. bɹaɪn juʒəwəli meɪɾ əɹ fil ɹɪlækst, əbzɔɹbɪŋ ɪz ʃʊɹnəs. tənaɪt, ʃi hæd hæd tə mənɪpjəleɪt hɪm, ən ʃi θɔɾ i nu ɪt. hi wɑz vɛɹi əbzɝvən fəɹ ə mæn. bʌt tu mʌtʃ wɑz ət steɪk tə tʃɹʌst ɪm mɔɹ, əntɪl i meɪɾ ən oʊpən dɛklɝeɪʃən. meɪbi ən oʊθ laɪk ðə wʌn maɪɹɛl ən ði ʌðɝz hæd ɡɪvən. bɹaɪn fɑloʊd ði æmɪɝlɪn, ən ði ɑɹmi fɑloʊd bɹaɪn. ɪf i θɔt ʃi wɑz gɑnə θɹoʊ mɛn əweɪ jusləsli, ə fju wɝdz fɹəm ɪm kəd hæn əɹ tə ðə hɔl tʃɹʌs laɪk ə pɪɡ ɑn ə plæɾɝ. ʃi dʒɹæŋk dipli, filɪŋ ðə wɔɹmθ ə ðə spaɪst waɪn spɹɛd θɹu hɝ.

As soon as the tentflap fell behind him, Egwene let out a long breath. Her shoulders were tight, and she expected her head to start aching any moment. Bryne usually made her feel relaxed, absorbing his sureness. Tonight, she had had to manipulate him, and she thought he knew it. He was very observant for a man. But too much was at stake to trust him more, until he made an open declaration. Maybe an oath like the one Myrelle and the others had given. Bryne followed the Amyrlin, and the army followed Bryne. If he thought she was going to throw men away uselessly, a few words from him could hand her to the Hall trussed like a pig on a platter. She drank deeply, feeling the warmth of the spiced wine spread through her.

"bɛɾɝ fəɹ əs ɪf ðeɪ bɪlivd," ʃi mʌɾɝd. "aɪ wɪʃ ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ əm tə bɪliv. ɪf aɪ də nʌθɪŋ ɛls, sɪuən, aɪ hoʊp ət list aɪ kən fɹi əs fɹəm ðə θɹi oʊðz."

"Better for us if they believed," she muttered. "I wish there was something for them to believe. If I do nothing else, Siuan, I hope at least I can free us from the Three Oaths."

"noʊ!" sɪuən bɑɹkt. ʃi saʊndəd skændəlaɪzd. "ivən tʃɹaɪɪŋ kəd bi dɪzæstʃɹəs, ən ɪf jə səksiɾəd. . . . ðə laɪt hɛlp ʌs, ɪf jə səksiɾəd, jə wəd dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðə waɪt taʊɝ."

"No!" Siuan barked. She sounded scandalized. "Even trying could be disastrous, and if you succeeded. . . . The Light help us, if you succeeded, you would destroy the White Tower."

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt? aɪ tʃɹaɪ tə fɑloʊ ði oʊðz, sɪuən, sɪns wɝ stʌk wɪð əm - fəɹ naʊ - bʌt ði oʊðz woʊn hɛlp əs əɡɛns ðə sintʃæn. ɪf sɪstɝz əv tə bi ɪn deɪnʒɝ ə ðɛɹ laɪvz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kən faɪt bæk, ɪts oʊnli ə mæɾɝ ə taɪm bɪfɔɹ wəɹ ɔl dɛɾ əɹ kɑlɝd." fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi kəd fil ði æɾəm ɝaʊn əɹ θɹoʊɾ əɡɛn, tɝnɪŋ əɹ ɪndə ə dɔɡ ɑn ə liʃ. ə wɛl-tʃɹeɪn ən oʊbiɾiənt dɔɡ. ʃi wɑz ɡlæɾ ə ðə dɑɹknəs, naʊ, haɪɾɪŋ əɹ tʃɹɛmbəlz. ʃædoʊz əbskjʊɹd sɪuənz feɪs, seɪv fəɹ ə saʊnləsli wɝkɪŋ dʒɔ.

"What are you talking about? I try to follow the Oaths, Siuan, since we're stuck with them - for now - but the Oaths won't help us against the Seanchan. If sisters have to be in danger of their lives before they can fight back, it's only a matter of time before we are all dead or collared." For a moment she could feel the a'dam around her throat again, turning her into a dog on a leash. A well-trained and obedient dog. She was glad of the darkness, now, hiding her trembles. Shadows obscured Siuan's face, save for a soundlessly working jaw.

"doʊn jə lʊk ət mi laɪk ðæt, sɪuən." ɪt wɑz iziɝ tə bi æŋɡɹi ðən əfɹeɪd, izi tə mæsk fɪɹ ɪn æŋɡɝ. ʃi wəd nɛvɝ bi kɑlɝd laɪk ðəɾ əɡɛn! "juv teɪkən ɛvɹi ædvæntɪdʒ sɪns jə wɝ fɹid fɹəm ði oʊðz. ɪf jə hædn laɪɾ ɪn jəɹ tiθ, wiɾ ɔl bi ɪn sɑlədɑɹ, wɪθaʊɾ ən ɑɹmi, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn əɹ hænz ən weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ə mɪɹəkəl. wɛl, jə wəd bi. ðeɪd nɛvɝ əv sʌmən mi tə bi æmɪɝlɪn wɪθaʊt jəɹ laɪ əbaʊt lɑɡən ən ðə ɹɛdz. ɪleɪɾə wəd ɹeɪn səpɹim, ən ɪn ə jɪɹ, noʊbɑdi wəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ haʊ ʃi jusɝp ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ʃid dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðə taʊɝ, fəɹ ʃʊɹ. jə noʊ ʃid mɪshændəl ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊt ɹænd. aɪ wəd nɑt bi sɝpɹaɪzd ɪf ʃi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə kɪdnæp ɪm baɪ naʊ, ɪksɛp ðət ʃiz kənsɝnd wɪð ʌs. wɛl, meɪbi nɑt kɪdnæp, bʌt ʃiɾ əv dʌn sʌmθɪŋ. laɪkli, ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd bi faɪɾɪŋ æʃəmən tədeɪ, ən nɛvɝ maɪn tɑɹmən ɡdən weɪɾɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə hɝaɪzən."

"Don't you look at me like that, Siuan." It was easier to be angry than afraid, easy to mask fear in anger. She would never be collared like that again! "You've taken every advantage since you were freed from the Oaths. If you hadn't lied in your teeth, we'd all be in Salidar, without an army, sitting on our hands and waiting for a miracle. Well, you would be. They'd never have summoned me to be Amyrlin without your lie about Logain and the Reds. Elaida would reign supreme, and in a year, nobody would remember how she usurped the Amyrlin Seat. She'd destroy the Tower, for sure. You know she'd mishandle everything about Rand. I would not be surprised if she had tried to kidnap him by now, except that she's concerned with us. Well, maybe not kidnap, but she'd have done something. Likely, Aes Sedai would be fighting Asha'man today, and never mind Tarmon Gai'don waiting over the horizon."

"aɪ hæv laɪd wən ɪt sim nɛsəsɛɹi," sɪuən bɹiðd. "wɛn ɪt simd ɪkspiɾiənt." hɝ ʃoʊldɝz hʌntʃt, ən ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ðoʊ ʃi wɝ kənfɛsɪŋ kɹaɪmz ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə ədmɪt tə hɝsɛlf. "səmtaɪmz aɪ θɪŋk ɪts bɪkʌm tu izi fəɹ mi tə dɪsaɪd ðəɾ ɪts nɛsəsɛɹi ən ɪkspiɾiənt. aɪv laɪd tə ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiwʌn. ɪksɛp ju. bʌt doʊn θɪŋk ɪt hæzən əkɝd tə mi. tə nʌdʒ jə təwɔɹɾ ə dɪsɪʒən, əɹ əweɪ fɹəm wʌn. ɪt wɑznt wɑntɪŋ tə kip jəɹ tʃɹʌs ðət stɑp mi." sɪuənz hæn stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk, pliɾɪŋ. "ðə laɪt noʊz wʌt jəɹ tʃɹʌst ən fɹɛndʃɪp min tə mi, bʌɾ ɪt wɑzn ðæt. ɪt wɑznt noʊɪŋ ðət juɾ əv ðə haɪɾ ɔf mi ɪn stʃɹɪps, əɹ sɛn mi əweɪ, ɪf jə faʊn aʊt. aɪ ɹilaɪz ðəɾ aɪ hæd tə hoʊld ɑn tə ði oʊðz wɪð sʌmbɑɾi, əɹ aɪd luz maɪsɛlf kəmplitli. soʊ aɪ doʊn laɪ tə ju, əɹ tə ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn, wʌtɛvɝ ɪt kɑsts. ən əz sun aɪ kæn, mʌðɝ, əl swɛɹ ðə θɹi oʊðz ɑn ði oʊθ ɹɑɾ əɡɛn."

"I have lied when it seemed necessary," Siuan breathed. "When it seemed expedient." Her shoulders hunched, and she sounded as though she were confessing crimes she did not want to admit to herself. "Sometimes I think it's become too easy for me to decide that it's necessary and expedient. I've lied to almost everyone. Except you. But don't think it hasn't occurred to me. To nudge you toward a decision, or away from one. It wasn't wanting to keep your trust that stopped me." Siuan's hand stretched out in the dark, pleading. "The Light knows what your trust and friendship mean to me, but it wasn't that. It wasn't knowing that you'd have the hide off me in strips, or send me away, if you found out. I realized that I had to hold on to the Oaths with somebody, or I'd lose myself completely. So I don't lie to you, or to Gareth Bryne, whatever it costs. And as soon I can, Mother, I will swear the Three Oaths on the Oath Rod again."

"waɪ?" ɛɡwin æskt kwaɪətli. sɪuən hæd kənsɪɾɝd laɪɪŋ tə hɝ? ʃi wʊɾə hæɾ əɹ haɪd fəɹ ðæt. bʌɾ əɹ æŋɡɝ wɑz ɡɔn. "aɪ doʊn kəndoʊn laɪɪŋ, sɪuən. nɑt nɔɹməli. ɪts dʒʌs ðət səmtaɪmz, ɪt ɹɪli ɪz nɛsəsɛɹi." hɝ taɪm wɪð ði il flæʃt θɹu hɝ maɪnd. "soʊ lɔŋ əz jəɹ wɪlɪŋ tə peɪ fəɹ ɪt, ɛniweɪ. aɪv sin sɪstɝz teɪk ɑn pɛnəns fəɹ smɔlɝ θɪŋz. jə ɑɹ wʌn ə ðə fɝst ʌv ə nu sɔɹɾ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ, sɪuən, fɹi ən ənbaʊnd. aɪ bɪliv jə wən jə seɪ jə woʊn laɪ tə mi." əɹ tə lɔɹd bɹaɪn? ɑd, ðæt. "waɪ ɡɪv ʌp jəɹ fɹiɾəm?"

"Why?" Egwene asked quietly. Siuan had considered lying to her? She would have had her hide for that. But her anger was gone. "I don't condone lying, Siuan. Not normally. It's just that sometimes, it really is necessary." Her time with the Aiel flashed through her mind. "So long as you're willing to pay for it, anyway. I've seen sisters take on penance for smaller things. You are one of the first of a new sort of Aes Sedai, Siuan, free and unbound. I believe you when you say you won't lie to me." Or to Lord Bryne? Odd, that. "Why give up your freedom?"

"ɡɪv ʌp?" sɪuən læft. "aɪl bi ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp nʌθɪŋ." hɝ bæk stʃɹeɪɾənd, ən əɹ vɔɪs bɪɡæn tə ɡeɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ, ən ðən pæʃən. "ði oʊðz ɑɹ wʌt meɪk əs mɔɹ ðən sɪmpli ə ɡɹup ʌv wɪmən mɛɾəlɪŋ ɪn ði əfɛɹz ə ðə wɝld. əɹ sɛvən ɡɹups. əɹ fɪfti. ði oʊðz hoʊld əs təɡɛðɝ, ə steɪɾəd sɛɾ ə bɪlifs ðət baɪn əs ɔl, ə sɪŋɡəl θɹɛd ɹʌnɪŋ θɹu ɛvɹi sɪstɝ, lɪvɪŋ əɹ dɛd, bæk tə ðə fɝs tə leɪ hɝ hænz ɑn ði oʊθ ɹɑd. ðeɪ ɑɹ wʌt meɪk əs ɛɛs sədaɪ, nɑt seɪaɪdɑɹ. ɛni waɪldɝ kən tʃænəl. mɛn meɪ lʊk ət wʌt wi seɪ fɹəm sɪks saɪdz, bʌt wən ə sɪstɝ sɛz, 'ðɪs ɪz soʊ,' ðeɪ noʊ ɪts tʃɹu, ən ðeɪ tʃɹʌst. kəz ə ði oʊðz. kəz ə ði oʊðz, noʊ kwin fɪɹz ðət sɪstɝz wɪl leɪ weɪs tə hɝ sɪɾiz. ðə wɝs vɪlən noʊz hiz seɪf ɪn ɪz laɪf wɪð ə sɪstɝ ənlɛs i tʃɹaɪz tə hɑɹm hɝ. oʊ, ðə waɪtkloʊks kɔl əm laɪz, ən səm pipəl əv stʃɹeɪnʒ aɪdiəz əbaʊt wʌt ði oʊðz ɛnteɪl, bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ vɛɹi fju pleɪsəz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ kænɑt ɡoʊ, ən bi lɪsən tə, kəz ə ði oʊðz. ðə θɹi oʊðz ɑɹ wʌɾ ɪts tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðə hɑɹɾ ə biɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. θɹoʊ ðəɾ ɑn ðə ɹʌbɪʃ hip, ən wɪl bi sænd wɑʃɪŋ əweɪ ɪn ðə taɪd. ɡɪv ʌp? əl bi ɡeɪnɪŋ."

"Give up?" Siuan laughed. "I'll be giving up nothing." Her back straightened, and her voice began to gain strength, and then passion. "The Oaths are what make us more than simply a group of women meddling in the affairs of the world. Or seven groups. Or fifty. The Oaths hold us together, a stated set of beliefs that bind us all, a single thread running through every sister, living or dead, back to the first to lay her hands on the Oath Rod. They are what make us Aes Sedai, not saidar. Any wilder can channel. Men may look at what we say from six sides, but when a sister says, 'This is so,' they know it's true, and they trust. Because of the Oaths. Because of the Oaths, no queen fears that sisters will lay waste to her cities. The worst villain knows he's safe in his life with a sister unless he tries to harm her. Oh, the Whitecloaks call them lies, and some people have strange ideas about what the Oaths entail, but there are very few places an Aes Sedai cannot go, and be listened to, because of the Oaths. The Three Oaths are what it is to be Aes Sedai, the heart of being Aes Sedai. Throw that on the rubbish heap, and we'll be sand washing away in the tide. Give up? I will be gaining."

ɛɡwin fɹaʊnd. "æn ðə sintʃæn?" wʌɾ ɪt wɑz tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɔlmoʊs fɹəm ðə deɪ ʃi fɝst ɝaɪvd ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, ʃi hæd wɝk tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ʃi hæd nɛvɝ ɹɪli θɔɾ əbaʊt wʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðət meɪɾ ə wʊmən ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Egwene frowned. "And the Seanchan?" What it was to be Aes Sedai. Almost from the day she first arrived in Tar Valon, she had worked to be Aes Sedai, but she had never really thought about what it was that made a woman Aes Sedai.

wʌns mɔɹ sɪuən læft, ðoʊ ðɪs taɪm ɪt wɑz ə tʌtʃ ɹaɪ, ən wɪɹi. ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, ən dɑɹknəs əɹ noʊ, lʊk taɪɝd. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ, mʌðɝ. ðə laɪt hɛlp mi, aɪ doʊnt. bʌt wi sɝvaɪv ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, ən waɪtkloʊks, ən ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn bɪtwin. wi kən faɪn ə weɪ tə dil wɪð ðiz sintʃæn. wɪθaʊt dɪstʃɹɔɪɪŋ aʊɝsɛlvz."

Once more Siuan laughed, though this time it was a touch wry, and weary. She shook her head, and darkness or no, looked tired. "I don't know, Mother. The Light help me, I don't. But we survived the Trolloc Wars, and Whitecloaks, and Artur Hawkwing, and everything in between. We can find a way to deal with these Seanchan. Without destroying ourselves."

ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt soʊ ʃʊɹ. mɛni ʌv ðə sɪstɝz ɪn kæmp θɔt ðə sintʃæn wɝ sətʃ ə deɪnʒɝ ðət bɪsidʒɪŋ ɪleɪɾə ʃəd weɪt. əz ɪf weɪɾɪŋ wəd nɑt səmɛn ɪleɪɾə ɑn ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. mɛni ʌðɝz sim tə θɪŋk ðət sɪmpli junaɪɾɪŋ ðə waɪt taʊɝ əɡɛn, ət wʌtɛvɝ pɹaɪs, wəd meɪk ðə sintʃæn vænɪʃ. sɝvaɪvəl lɔst səm ʌv ɪts ətʃɹækʃən ɪf ɪt wɑz sɝvaɪvəl ɑn ə liʃ, ən ɪleɪɾəz wəd nɑt bi mʌtʃ lɛs kənfaɪnɪŋ ðən ðə sintʃænz. wʌɾ ɪt wɑz tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Egwene was not so sure. Many of the sisters in camp thought the Seanchan were such a danger that besieging Elaida should wait. As if waiting would not cement Elaida on the Amyrlin Seat. Many others seemed to think that simply uniting the White Tower again, at whatever price, would make the Seanchan vanish. Survival lost some of its attraction if it was survival on a leash, and Elaida's would not be much less confining than the Seanchan's. What it was to be Aes Sedai.

"ðɛɹz noʊ nid tə kip ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn əɾ ɑɹmz lɛŋθ," sɪuən sɛd sʌɾənli. "ðə mænz ə wɔkɪŋ tʃɹɪbjəleɪʃən, ɪts tʃɹu. ɪf i dʌzn kaʊn əz pɛnəns fəɹ maɪ laɪz, biɪŋ fleɪɾ əlaɪv wʊdn du. wʌn ə ðiz deɪz, əl bɑks ɪz ɪɹz ɛvɹi mɔɹnɪŋ ən twaɪs əɾ ivnɪŋz, ɑn dʒɛnɝəl pɹɪnsəpəl, bʌt jə kən tɛl ɪm ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ɪt wəd hɛlp, ɪf i ʌndɝstʊd. hiz teɪkɪŋ jə ɑn tʃɹʌst, ən ɪt taɪz ɪz stʌmək ɪn nɑts, wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ jə noʊ wʌt jəɹ duɪŋ. hi dʌzn lɛɾ ɑn, bʌɾ aɪ si."

"There's no need to keep Gareth Bryne at arm's length," Siuan said suddenly. "The man's a walking tribulation, it's true. If he doesn't count as penance for my lies, being flayed alive wouldn't do. One of these days, I'll box his ears every morning and twice at evenings, on general principle, but you can tell him everything. It would help, if he understood. He's taking you on trust, and it ties his stomach in knots, wondering whether you know what you're doing. He doesn't let on, but I see."

sʌɾənli, pisəz klɪkt ɪn ɛɡwinz maɪn laɪk ə blæksmɪθs pʌzəl kʌmɪŋ əndʌn. ʃɑkɪŋ pisəz. sɪuən wɑz ɪn lʌv wɪð ðə mæn! nʌθɪŋ ɛls meɪd sɛns. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi nu bɪtwin əm ɔltɝd. nɑt nɛsəsɛɹəli fəɹ ðə bɛɾɝ. ə wʊmən ɪn lʌv ɔfən pʊɾ əɹ bɹeɪnz ɑn ðə ʃɛlf wən ʃi wɑz ɝaʊn ðə mæn ɪn kwɛstʃən. əz ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz ɔl tu wɛl əwɛɹ. wɛɹ wɑz ɡɔɪn? wɑz i wɛl? wɑz i wɔɹm? ɪnʌf ə ðæt. tu mʌtʃ, ɪn laɪɾ ʌv wʌt ʃi hæd tə seɪ. ʃi pʊɾ ɑn əɹ bɛst æmɪɝlɪnz vɔɪs, ʃʊɹ ən ɪn kəmænd. "ju kən bɑks lɔɹd bɹaɪnz ɪɹz əɹ bɛd hɪm, sɪuən, bʌt jəl wɑtʃ jɝsɛlf wɪð hɪm. jəl nɑt lɛt slɪp θɪŋz i mʌsnt noʊ jɛt. dʒju ʌndɝstæn mi?"

Suddenly, pieces clicked in Egwene's mind like a blacksmith's puzzle coming undone. Shocking pieces. Siuan was in love with the man! Nothing else made sense. Everything she knew between them altered. Not necessarily for the better. A woman in love often put her brains on the shelf when she was around the man in question. As she herself was all too well aware. Where was Gawyn? Was he well? Was he warm? Enough of that. Too much, in light of what she had to say. She put on her best Amyrlin's voice, sure and in command. "You can box Lord Bryne's ears or bed him, Siuan, but you will watch yourself with him. You will not let slip things he mustn't know yet. Do you understand me?"

sɪuən dʒɝk stɪfli ɪɹɛkt. "aɪm nɑɾ ɪn ðə hæbəɾ ə lɛɾɪŋ maɪ tʌŋ flæp laɪk ə tɔɹn seɪl, mʌðɝ," ʃi sɛd hiɾɪdli.

Siuan jerked stiffly erect. "I'm not in the habit of letting my tongue flap like a torn sail, Mother," she said heatedly.

"aɪm vɛɹi ɡlæd tə hɪɹ ɪt, sɪuən." dɪspaɪt ðɛɹ lʊkɪŋ oʊnli ə fju jɪɹz əpɑɹt, sɪuən wɑz oʊld ɪnʌf tə bi hɝ mʌðɝ jɛɾ ət ðət moʊmən ɛɡwin fɛlt əz ðoʊ ðɛɹ eɪdʒəz hæd bɪn ɹɪvɝst. ðɪs maɪt bi ðə fɝs taɪm ðət sɪuən hæɾ ɛvɝ hæd tə mænədʒ wɪð ə mæn nɑɾ əz ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌɾ əz ə wʊmən. ə fju jɪɹz ə θɪŋkɪŋ aɪ lʌvd ɹænd, ɛɡwin θɔt ɹaɪli, ə fju mʌnθs ə dæŋɡəlɪŋ baɪ maɪ toʊz fəɹ ɡɔɪn, ən aɪ noʊ ɔl ðəɹ ɪz tə noʊ.

"I'm very glad to hear it, Siuan." Despite their looking only a few years apart, Siuan was old enough to be her mother yet at that moment Egwene felt as though their ages had been reversed. This might be the first time that Siuan had ever had to manage with a man not as Aes Sedai, but as a woman. A few years of thinking I loved Rand, Egwene thought wryly, a few months of dangling by my toes for Gawyn, and I know all there is to know.

"aɪ θɪŋk wɝ dʌn hɪɹ," ʃi wɛn ɑn, slɪpɪŋ ən ɑɹm θɹu sɪuənz. "ɔlmoʊst. kʌm."

"I think we're done here," she went on, slipping an arm through Siuan's. "Almost. Come."

ðə wɔlz ə ðə tɛn hæd sim lɪɾəl pɹətɛkʃən, jɛt stɛpɪŋ aʊtsaɪd bɹɔɾ ə ɹɪnuɾ əsɔl baɪ wɪntɝz tiθ. ðə munlaɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊs bɹaɪɾ ɪnʌf tə ɹid baɪ, ɹəflɛktəɾ ɔf ðə snoʊ, bʌt ðət ɡloʊ sim koʊld. bɹaɪn hæd vænɪʃt əz ɪf i hæd nɛvɝ bɪn. lin əpɪɹd lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə seɪ ʃi hæd sin noʊ wʌn, hɝ slɪmnəs swɑloʊɾ ɪn leɪɝz ʌv wʊl, ðən hɝiɾ ɔf ɪndə ðə naɪt lʊkɪŋ əbaʊt hɝ. noʊ wʌn nu ʌv ɛni kənɛkʃən bɪtwin lin ən ɛɡwin, ən ɛvɹiwʌn θɔt lin ən sɪuən wɝ pɹæktəkli ət dæɡɝz' pɔɪns.

The walls of the tent had seemed little protection, yet stepping outside brought a renewed assault by winter's teeth. The moonlight was almost bright enough to read by, reflected off the snow, but that glow seemed cold. Bryne had vanished as if he had never been. Leane appeared long enough to say she had seen no one, her slimness swallowed in layers of wool, then hurried off into the night looking about her. No one knew of any connection between Leane and Egwene, and everyone thought Leane and Siuan were practically at daggers' points.

ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ kloʊk əz bɛst ʃi kəd wʌn-hændəd, ɛɡwin foʊkəst ɑn ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ði aɪsi tʃɪl əz ʃi ən sɪuən wɔkt ɪn ði ɑpəzət dɝɛkʃən fɹəm lin. ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə tʃɪl, ən kipɪŋ ən aɪ aʊt fəɹ ɛniwʌn u hæpən tə bi aʊt. nɑt ðəɾ ɛniwʌn u wɑz aʊtsaɪd naʊ wɑz laɪkli tə bi ðəɹ baɪ hæpənstæns.

Gathering her cloak as best she could one-handed, Egwene focused on ignoring the icy chill as she and Siuan walked in the opposite direction from Leane. Ignoring the chill, and keeping an eye out for anyone who happened to be out. Not that anyone who was outside now was likely to be there by happenstance.

"lɔɹd bɹaɪn wɑz ɹaɪt," ʃi toʊl sɪuən, "əbaʊɾ ɪt biɪŋ bɛɾɝ ɪf pɛlɪvɑɹ ən ɑɝəθɛl bɪliv ðoʊz stɔɹiz. əɹ ət list ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ənsɝɾən. tu ənsɝɾən tə faɪt, əɹ də ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛp tɔk. dʒju θɪŋk ðeɪ wəd wɛlkəm ə vɪzət fɹəm ɛɛs sədaɪ? sɪuən, ɑɹ jə lɪsnɪŋ tə mi?"

"Lord Bryne was right," she told Siuan, "about it being better if Pelivar and Arathelle believed those stories. Or at least if they were uncertain. Too uncertain to fight, or do anything except talk. Do you think they would welcome a visit from Aes Sedai? Siuan, are you listening to me?"

sɪuən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, ən stɑp stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə dɪstəns əhɛɾ ə ðɛm. ʃi hæd bɪn wɔkɪŋ əhɛd wɪθaʊt mɪsɪŋ ə stɛp, bʌt naʊ ʃi slɪpt ən nɪɹli sæt daʊn ɪn ðə fɹoʊzən pæθ, bɛɹli ɹɪɡeɪnɪŋ əɹ bæləns ɪn taɪm tə kip fɹəm pʊlɪŋ ɛɡwin daʊn. "jɛs, mʌðɝ. ʌv kɔɹs aɪm lɪsnɪŋ. ðeɪ maɪt nɑt bi ɪɡzækli wɛlkəmɪŋ, bʌɾ aɪ daʊt ðəl tɝn sɪstɝz əweɪ."

Siuan gave a start, and stopped staring into the distance ahead of them. She had been walking ahead without missing a step, but now she slipped and nearly sat down in the frozen path, barely regaining her balance in time to keep from pulling Egwene down. "Yes, Mother. Of course I'm listening. They might not be exactly welcoming, but I doubt they'll turn sisters away."

"ðɛn aɪ wɑn jə tə weɪk bioʊnɪn, æneɪjə, ən maɪɹɛl. ðeɪ ɑɹ tə ɹaɪd nɔɹθ ɪnsaɪd ði aʊɝ. ɪf lɔɹd bɹaɪn ɪkspɛks ə ɹɪplaɪ əz sun əz təmɑɹoʊ ivnɪŋ, taɪm ɪz ʃɔɹt." ə pɪɾi ʃi hæd nɑt faʊn aʊɾ ɪɡzækli wɛɹ ðɪs ʌðɝ ɑɹmi wɑz loʊkeɪɾəd, bʌɾ æskɪŋ bɹaɪn maɪɾ əv ɹaʊz səspɪʃən. faɪndɪŋ ɪt ʃəd nɑt bi tu hɑɹd fəɹ wɔɹɾɝz, ən ðoʊz θɹi sɪstɝz hæd faɪv bɪtwin ðɛm.

"Then I want you to wake Beonin, Anaiya, and Myrelle. They are to ride north inside the hour. If Lord Bryne expects a reply as soon as tomorrow evening, time is short." A pity she had not found out exactly where this other army was located, but asking Bryne might have roused suspicion. Finding it should not be too hard for Warders, and those three sisters had five between them.

sɪuən lɪsən ɪn saɪləns tə hɝ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz. nɑɾ oʊnli ðoʊz θɹi wɝ tə bi ɹuɾəd aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ slip. kʌm dɔn, ʃɛɹiəm ən kɑɹlɪnjə, mɔɹvɹɪn ən naɪsaʊ wəɾ ɔl noʊ wʌt tə seɪ oʊvɝ bɹɛkfəst. sidz hæd tə bi plæntəd, sidz ðət kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn pleɪst ɝliɝ fəɹ fɪɹ ə ðɛm spɹaʊɾɪŋ tu sun, bʌt naʊ ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl tu lɪɾəl taɪm tə ɡɹoʊ.

Siuan listened in silence to her instructions. Not only those three were to be rooted out of their sleep. Come dawn, Sheriam and Carlinya, Morvrin and Nisao would all know what to say over breakfast. Seeds had to be planted, seeds that could not have been placed earlier for fear of them sprouting too soon, but now they had all too little time to grow.

"ɪt wɪl bi ə plɛʒɝ tə hɔl əm aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ blæŋkəts," sɪuən sɛd wən ʃi wɑz dʌn. "ɪf aɪ hæv tə tʃɹæmp ɝaʊn ɪn ðɪs. . . ." ɹilisɪŋ ɛɡwinz ɑɹm, ʃi stɑɹɾəd tə tɝn əweɪ, ðən stɑpt, hɝ feɪs sɪɹiəs, ivən ɡɹɪm. "aɪ noʊ jə wɑnə bi ə sɛkən dʒɛɹə kɪʃɝ - əɹ meɪbi sɛɝl beɪɡənd. juv ɪɾ ɪn jə tə mætʃ iðɝ. bʌt bi kɛɹfəl jə doʊn tɝn aʊt tə bi ənʌðɝ ʃaɪn tʃʌnlə. ɡʊd naɪt, mʌðɝ. slip wɛl."

"It will be a pleasure to haul them out of their blankets," Siuan said when she was done. "If I have to tramp around in this. . . ." Releasing Egwene's arm, she started to turn away, then stopped, her face serious, even grim. "I know you want to be a second Gerra Kishar - or maybe Sereille Bagand. You have it in you to match either. But be careful you don't turn out to be another Shein Chunla. Good night, Mother. Sleep well."

ɛɡwin stʊd wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ ɡoʊ, ə kloʊk-ʃɹaʊɾɪd fɪɡjɝ səmtaɪmz skɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə pæθ ən mʌɾɝɪŋ æŋɡɹəli ɔlmoʊs laʊɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk aʊt. dʒɛɹə ən sɛɝl wɝ ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ əz əmʌŋ ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst æmɪɝlənz. boʊθ hæd ɹeɪz ði ɪnfluəns ən pɹɛstiʒ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ tə lɛvəlz sɛldəm ikwəl sɪns bɪfɔɹ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ. boʊθ kəntʃɹoʊl ðə taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf, tu, dʒɛɹə baɪ skɪlfəli pleɪɪŋ wʌn fækʃən ɪn ðə hɔl əɡɛnst ənʌðɝ, sɛɝl baɪ ðə ʃɪɹ fɔɹs ə hɝ wɪl. ʃaɪn tʃʌnlə wɑz ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ, wʌn u hæd skwɑndɝd ðə paʊɝ ə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, eɪliəneɪɾɪŋ moʊst ə ðə sɪstɝz ɪn ðə taʊɝ. ðə wɝl bɪliv ðət ʃaɪn hæd daɪɾ ɪn ɔfəs, kloʊs ɑn fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz əɡoʊ, bʌt ðə dipli hɪɾən tʃɹuθ wɑz ðət ʃi hæd bɪn dɪpoʊzd ən sɛn ɪndə ɛɡzaɪl fəɹ laɪf. ivən ðə sikɹət hɪstɝiz tʃɹɛɾɪd laɪtli ɪn sɝɾən ɛɹiəz, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz fɛɹli ɑbviəs ðæt, æftɝ ðə fɔɹθ plɑt tə ɹɪstɔɹ əɹ tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɑz ənkʌvɝd, ðə sɪstɝz ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ʃaɪn hæd smʌðɝɾ əɹ ɪn əɹ slip wɪð ə pɪloʊ. ɛɡwin ʃɪvɝd, ən toʊl hɝsɛlf ɪt wɑz ðə koʊld.

Egwene stood watching her go, a cloak-shrouded figure sometimes skidding on the path and muttering angrily almost loud enough to make out. Gerra and Sereille were remembered as among the greatest Amyrlins. Both had raised the influence and prestige of the White Tower to levels seldom equaled since before Artur Hawkwing. Both controlled the Tower itself, too, Gerra by skillfully playing one faction in the Hall against another, Sereille by the sheer force of her will. Shein Chunla was another matter, one who had squandered the power of the Amyrlin Seat, alienating most of the sisters in the Tower. The world believed that Shein had died in office, close on four hundred years ago, but the deeply hidden truth was that she had been deposed and sent into exile for life. Even the secret histories treaded lightly in certain areas, yet it was fairly obvious that, after the fourth plot to restore her to the Amyrlin Seat was uncovered, the sisters guarding Shein had smothered her in her sleep with a pillow. Egwene shivered, and told herself it was the cold.

tɝnɪŋ, ʃi bɪɡæn meɪkɪŋ əɹ sloʊ weɪ bæk tə hɝ tɛn əloʊn. slip wɛl? ðə fæt mun hʌŋ loʊ ɪn ðə skaɪ, ən ðəɹ wɝ aʊɝz jɛt tɪl sʌnɹaɪz, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ʃi wɑz gɑnə bi eɪbəl tə slip əɾ ɔl.

Turning, she began making her slow way back to her tent alone. Sleep well? The fat moon hung low in the sky, and there were hours yet till sunrise, but she was not sure she was going to be able to sleep at all.


tʃæptɝ sɪkstin


CHAPTER 16

ʌnɪkspɛktɪɾ æbsənsəz


Unexpected Absences

bɪfɔɹ ðə sʌn meɪɾ ə ɹɪm ɑn ðə hɝaɪzən ðə nɛks mɔɹnɪŋ, ɛɡwin kənvin ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ. ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, ðət wʊɾə bɪn əkʌmpənid baɪ kənsɪɾɝəbəl sɛɹəmoʊni, ən ivən sɪns livɪŋ sɑlədɑɹ ðeɪ hæd hɛl tə səm dɪspaɪt ðə dɪfəkəltiz ə tʃɹævəl. naʊ, ʃɛɹiəm sɪmpli wɛn fɹəm sɪɾɝz tɛn tə sɪɾɝz tɛnt waɪl ɪt wɑz stɪl dɑɹk tə ənaʊns ðət ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hæd kɔl ðə hɔl tə sɪt. ɪn fækt, ðeɪ dɪd nɑt sɪɾ əɾ ɔl. ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪnəs dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ tʃɹu sʌnɹaɪz, eɪtin wɪmən stʊɾ ɪn ə sɛmɪsɝkəl ɑn ðə snoʊ tə hɪɹ ɛɡwin, ɔl bʌndəld əɡɛns ðə koʊl ðət mɪstɪd ðɛɹ bɹɛθ.

Before the sun made a rim on the horizon the next morning, Egwene convened the Hall of the Tower. In Tar Valon, that would have been accompanied by considerable ceremony, and even since leaving Salidar they had held to some despite the difficulties of travel. Now, Sheriam simply went from Sitter's tent to Sitter's tent while it was still dark to announce that the Amyrlin Seat had called the Hall to Sit. In fact, they did not sit at all. In the grayness just before true sunrise, eighteen women stood in a semicircle on the snow to hear Egwene, all bundled against the cold that misted their breath.

ʌðɝ sɪstɝz bɪɡæn əpɪɹɪŋ bɪhaɪn əm tə lɪsən, oʊnli ə fju ət ðə stɑɹt, bʌt wən noʊ wʌn toʊld əm tə liv, ðə ɡɹup θɪkən ən spɹɛɾ aʊt tə ə sɑf bʌz ə tɔk. ə vɛɹi mjuɾɪd bʌz. fju sɪstɝz wəd ɹɪsk bɑðɝɪŋ ə loʊn sɪɾɝ, mʌtʃ lɛs ði ɪntaɪɝ hɔl. ði æksɛptɪɾ ɪn bændɪd dʒɹɛsəz ən kloʊks u hæɾ əpɪɹd bɪhaɪn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ kwaɪəɾɝ, ʌv kɔɹs, ən ivən kwaɪəɾɝ ðə ɡæðɝɪŋ nɑvəsɪz u hæd noʊ tʃɔɹz, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɝ ə ɡʊd mɛni mɔɹ ə ðɛm. ðə kæmp naʊ hɛl hæf əɡɛn əz mɛni nɑvəsɪz əz sɪstɝz, soʊ mɛni ðət fju pəzɛst ə pɹɑpɝ waɪt kloʊk ən moʊs meɪd də wɪð ə sɪmpəl waɪt skɝɾ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə nɑvəs dʒɹɛs. səm sɪstɝz stɪl bɪliv ðeɪ ʃəd ɡoʊ bæk tə ði oʊld weɪz ən lɛt ɡɝlz sik əm aʊt, bʌt moʊst ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd ðə lɔs jɪɹz, wən ɛɛs sədaɪ nʌmbɝz dwɪndəld. ɛɡwin hɝsɛlf ɔlmoʊst ʃɪvɝd wɛnɛvɝ ʃi θɔɾ ʌv wʌt ðə taʊɝ kəɾ əv bɪn. ðɪs wɑz wʌn tʃeɪnʒ nɑɾ ivən sɪuən kəɾ əbdʒɛk tə.

Other sisters began appearing behind them to listen, only a few at the start, but when no one told them to leave, the group thickened and spread out to a soft buzz of talk. A very muted buzz. Few sisters would risk bothering a lone Sitter, much less the entire Hall. The Accepted in banded dresses and cloaks who had appeared behind the Aes Sedai were quieter, of course, and even quieter the gathering novices who had no chores, though there were a good many more of them. The camp now held half again as many novices as sisters, so many that few possessed a proper white cloak and most made do with a simple white skirt instead of a novice dress. Some sisters still believed they should go back to the old ways and let girls seek them out, but most regretted the lost years, when Aes Sedai numbers dwindled. Egwene herself almost shivered whenever she thought of what the Tower could have been. This was one change not even Siuan could object to.

ɪn ðə mɪdst ʌv ɔl ðə ɡæðɝɪŋ, kɑɹlɪnjə keɪm ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ ʌv ə tɛn ən stɑpt ʃɔɹɾ ət ðə saɪɾ ʌv ɛɡwin ən ðə sɪɾɝz. nɔɹməli kəmpoʊʒɝ tə hɝ toʊneɪlz, ðə waɪt sɪstɝ ɡeɪpt, ən əɹ peɪl feɪs ɹɛɾənd bɪfɔɹ ʃi hɝiɾ əweɪ, lʊkɪŋ bæk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. ɛɡwin staɪfəld ə ɡɹɪmɑs. ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz tu kənsɝnd wɪð wʌt ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz əbaʊt ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ tə hæv noʊɾəst, bʌt sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, sʌmwʌn wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə, ən wʌndɝ.

In the midst of all the gathering, Carlinya came around the corner of a tent and stopped short at the sight of Egwene and the Sitters. Normally composure to her toenails, the White sister gaped, and her pale face reddened before she hurried away, looking back over her shoulder. Egwene stifled a grimace. Everyone was too concerned with what she herself was about this morning to have noticed, but sooner or later, someone was going to, and wonder.

flɪŋɪŋ bæk əɹ dɛləkətli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd kloʊk tə ɹɪvil ðə nɛɹoʊ blu stoʊl ə ðə kipɝ, ʃɛɹiəm meɪɾ ɛɡwin əz mʌtʃ ʌv ə fɔɹməl kɝtsi əz əɹ bʌlki ɡɑɹməns əlaʊd bɪfɔɹ teɪkɪŋ ə pleɪs əɾ əɹ saɪd. ɹæpt ɪn leɪɝz ə faɪn wʊl ən sɪlk, ðə fleɪm-hɛɹd wʊmən wɑz ðə vɛɹi pɪktʃɝ ʌv ikwənɪmɪɾi. əɾ ɛɡwinz nɑd, ʃi tʊk wʌn stɛp fɔɹwɝd tə ɪntoʊn ði eɪntʃən fɔɹmjələ ɪn ə klɪɹ, haɪ vɔɪs.

Flinging back her delicately embroidered cloak to reveal the narrow blue stole of the Keeper, Sheriam made Egwene as much of a formal curtsy as her bulky garments allowed before taking a place at her side. Wrapped in layers of fine wool and silk, the flame-haired woman was the very picture of equanimity. At Egwene's nod, she took one step forward to intone the ancient formula in a clear, high voice.

"ʃi kʌmz; ʃi kʌmz! ðə wɑtʃɝ ə ðə silz, ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ətɛn jə ɔl, fəɹ ʃi kʌmz!" ɪt simd ə lɪɾəl aʊɾ ə pleɪs hɪɹ, ən bɪsaɪdz, ʃi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ðɛɹ, nɑt kʌmɪŋ. ðə sɪɾɝz stʊɾ ɪn saɪləns, weɪɾɪŋ. ə fju fɹaʊn ɪmpeɪʃənli, əɹ fɪɾəld ɹɛsləsli wɪð kloʊks əɹ skɝts.

"She comes; she comes! The Watcher of the Seals, the Flame of Tar Valon, the Amyrlin Seat. Attend you all, for she comes!" It seemed a little out of place here, and besides, she was already there, not coming. The Sitters stood in silence, waiting. A few frowned impatiently, or fiddled restlessly with cloaks or skirts.

ɛɡwin pʊʃt bæk əɹ oʊn kloʊk, ənkʌvɝɪŋ ðə sɛvən-stʃɹaɪp stoʊl dʒɹeɪpt ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk. ðiz wɪmən niɾəd ɛni ɹimaɪndɝ ʃi kəd ɡɪv ðət ʃi wɑz ɪndid ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. "ɛvɹiwʌn ɪz wɪɹi fɹəm tʃɹævəl ɪn ðɪs wɛðɝ," ʃi ənaʊnst, nɑt kwaɪt soʊ laʊdli əz ʃɛɹiəm, bʌt laʊɾ ɪnʌf ðəɾ ɛvɹiwʌn kəd hɪɹ. ʃi fɛlt ə tɪŋɡəl ʌv æntɪsəpeɪʃən, ən ɔlmoʊs laɪt-hɛɾəd θɹɪl. ɪt wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ dɪfɹən fɹəm biɪŋ kwizi. "aɪ hæv dɪsaɪɾɪd tə stɑp hɪɹ fəɹ tu deɪz, pɝhæps θɹi." ðət bɹɔt hɛdz ʌp ən spɑɹkt ɪntʃɹəst. ʃi hoʊp sɪuən wɑz ɪn ðə lɪsnɪŋ kɹaʊd. ʃi dɪd tʃɹaɪ tə hoʊl tə ði oʊðz. "ðə hɔɹsəz nid ɹɛst, tu, ən mɛni ʌv ðə wæɡənz bædli nid ɹɪpɛɹz. ðə kipɝ wɪl si tə ðə nɛsəsɛɹi ɝeɪnʒmənts." ɪt tʃɹuli wɑz bɪɡʌn, naʊ.

Egwene pushed back her own cloak, uncovering the seven-striped stole draped around her neck. These women needed any reminder she could give that she was indeed the Amyrlin Seat. "Everyone is weary from travel in this weather," she announced, not quite so loudly as Sheriam, but loud enough that everyone could hear. She felt a tingle of anticipation, an almost light-headed thrill. It was not much different from being queasy. "I have decided to stop here for two days, perhaps three." That brought heads up and sparked interest. She hoped Siuan was in the listening crowd. She did try to hold to the Oaths. "The horses need rest, too, and many of the wagons badly need repairs. The Keeper will see to the necessary arrangements." It truly was begun, now.

ʃi ɪkspɛktəd niðɝ ɑɹɡjəmənt nɔɹ dɪskʌʃən, ən ðəɹ wɑz nʌn. wʌt ʃi hæd toʊl sɪuən wɑz noʊ ɪɡzædʒɝeɪʃən. tu mɛni sɪstɝz hoʊp fəɹ ə mɪɹəkəl, soʊ ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ əv tə mɑɹtʃ ɑn tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪð ðə wɝld wɑtʃɪŋ. ivən əmʌŋ ðoʊz kənvɪnst ɪn ðɛɹ soʊlz ðəɾ ɪleɪɾə mʌs bi aʊstɪd fəɹ ðə ɡʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ, dɪspaɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðeɪ hæd dʌn, tu mɛni wəd ɡɹæsp ɛni tʃæns ə dɪleɪ, ɛni tʃæns fəɹ ðət mɪɹəkəl tə əpɪɹ.

She expected neither argument nor discussion, and there was none. What she had told Siuan was no exaggeration. Too many sisters hoped for a miracle, so they would not have to march on Tar Valon with the world watching. Even among those convinced in their souls that Elaida must be ousted for the good of the Tower, despite everything they had done, too many would grasp any chance of delay, any chance for that miracle to appear.

wʌn ə ðoʊz læst, ɹoʊmændə, dɪd nɑt weɪt fəɹ ʃɛɹiəm tə spik ðə kloʊzɪŋ laɪnz. əz sun əz ɛɡwin fɪnɪʃt spikɪŋ, ɹoʊmændə, lʊkɪŋ kwaɪt juθfəl wɪð əɹ taɪt ɡɹeɪ bʌn hɪɾən baɪ hɝ hʊd, sɪmpli stʃɹoʊɾ əweɪ. kloʊks flæpɪŋ, mæɡlə, sɛɝɔɪjə, ən vɛɹɪlɪn skɝiɾ æftɝ hɝ. əz wɛl əz ɛniwʌn kəd skɝi, wən ɛvɹi ʌðɝ stɛp sæŋk æŋkəl-dip. ðeɪ dɪɾ ə ɡʊd dʒɑb ʌv ɪɾ ɛniweɪ; sɪɾɝz əɹ noʊ, ðeɪ hɑɹdli sim tə bɹið wɪθaʊt ɹoʊmændəz pɝmɪʃən. wən ləleɪn sɔ ɹoʊmændə livɪŋ, ʃi ɡæðɝɾ ʌp feɪsɛl, tɑkimə, ən laɪɹɛl fɹəm ðə sɛmɪsɝkəl wɪð ə dʒɛstʃɝ ən wɛnt wɪθaʊɾ ə bækwɝd ɡlæns, laɪk ə swɑn wɪð θɹi æŋkʃəs ɡɑsəlɪŋz. ɪf ðeɪ wɝ nɑt soʊ fɝmli ɪn ləleɪnz ɡɹæsp əz ði ʌðɝ θɹi wɝ ɪn ɹoʊmændəz, ðeɪ dɪd nɑt fɔl fɑɹ ʃɔɹt. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ðə ɹɛst ə ðə sɪɾɝz bɛɹli weɪɾəd ɑn ðə faɪnəl "dɪpɑɹt naʊ ɪn ðə laɪt" tə liv ʃɛɹiəmz lɪps. ɛɡwin tɝn tə ɡoʊ wɪð əɹ hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ ɔlɹɛɾi skæɾɝɪŋ ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən. ðət tɪŋɡəl wɑz stʃɹɔŋɝ. ən vɛɹi laɪk biɪŋ kwizi.

One of those last, Romanda, did not wait for Sheriam to speak the closing lines. As soon as Egwene finished speaking, Romanda, looking quite youthful with her tight gray bun hidden by her hood, simply strode away. Cloaks flapping, Magla, Saroiya, and Varilin scurried after her. As well as anyone could scurry, when every other step sank ankle-deep. They did a good job of it anyway; Sitters or no, they hardly seemed to breathe without Romanda's permission. When Lelaine saw Romanda leaving, she gathered up Faiselle, Takima, and Lyrelle from the semicircle with a gesture and went without a backward glance, like a swan with three anxious goslings. If they were not so firmly in Lelaine's grasp as the other three were in Romanda's, they did not fall far short. For that matter, the rest of the Sitters barely waited on the final "Depart now in the Light" to leave Sheriam's lips. Egwene turned to go with her Hall of the Tower already scattering in every direction. That tingle was stronger. And very like being queasy.

"θɹi deɪz," ʃɛɹiəm mɝmɝd, ɔfɝɪŋ ɛɡwin ə hæn tə hɛlp əɹ daʊn ɪndə wʌn ə ðə ɹʌɾɪd pæðz. ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɝ tɪltəd ɡɹin aɪz kɹɪŋkəl kwɪtsɪkli. "aɪm sɝpɹaɪzd, mʌðɝ. fɝɡɪv mi, bʌt jə dʌɡ ɪn jəɹ hilz nɪɹli ɛvɹi taɪm aɪ wɑntəd tə stɑp fəɹ mɔɹ ðən wʌn."

"Three days," Sheriam murmured, offering Egwene a hand to help her down into one of the rutted paths. The corners of her tilted green eyes crinkled quizzically. "I'm surprised, Mother. Forgive me, but you dug in your heels nearly every time I wanted to stop for more than one."

"spik tə mi əɡɛn æftɝ juv tɔk tə ðə wilɹaɪts ən fɛɹiɝz," ɛɡwin toʊl hɝ. "wil nɑt ɡoʊ fɑɹ wɪð hɔɹsəz dʒɹɑpɪŋ dɛɾ ən wæɡənz fɔlɪŋ əpɑɹt."

"Speak to me again after you've talked to the wheelwrights and farriers," Egwene told her. "We'll not go far with horses dropping dead and wagons falling apart."

"æz jə seɪ, mʌðɝ," ði ʌðɝ wʊmən ɹɪplaɪd, nɑt pɹɪsaɪsli mikli, bʌɾ ɪn pɝfəkt æksɛptəns.

"As you say, Mother," the other woman replied, not precisely meekly, but in perfect acceptance.

ðə fʊɾɪŋ wɑz noʊ bɛɾɝ naʊ ðən ɪt hæd bɪn ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ, ən ðɛɹ stɛps səmtaɪmz slɪd. lɪŋkɪŋ ɑɹmz, ðeɪ wɔkt ɑn sloʊli. ʃɛɹiəm ɔfɝd mɔɹ səpɔɹt ðən ɛɡwin ɹikwaɪɝd, bʌt ʃi dɪd soʊ ɔlmoʊst sɝəptɪʃəsli. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit ʃəd nɑt fɔl ɑn əɹ bɑɾəm ɪn ðə fʊl vju ʌv fɪfti sɪstɝz ən ə hʌnʒɹəd sɝvəns, bʌt niðɝ ʃəd ʃi sim pɹɑpt ʌp laɪk ən ɪnvələd.

The footing was no better now than it had been the night before, and their steps sometimes slid. Linking arms, they walked on slowly. Sheriam offered more support than Egwene required, but she did so almost surreptitiously. The Amyrlin Seat should not fall on her bottom in the full view of fifty sisters and a hundred servants, but neither should she seem propped up like an invalid.

moʊst ə ðə sɪɾɝz u hæd swɔɹn tə ɛɡwin, ʃɛɹiəm ɪnkluɾəd, hæd dʌn soʊ aʊɾ ə sɪmpəl fɪɹ, ɹɪli, ən sɛlf-pɹɛzɝveɪʃən. ɪf ðə hɔl lɝn ðeɪ hæd sɛn sɪstɝz tə sweɪ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən wɝs, kɛp ðə fæk fɹəm ðə hɔl fəɹ fɪɹ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnz əmʌŋ ðə sɪɾɝz, ðeɪ ʃʊɹli ən sɝɾənli wəd spɛn ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛɹ laɪvz ɪn pɛnəns ən ɛɡzaɪl. soʊ ðə wɪmən u hæd bɪliv ðeɪ kəd sʌmhaʊ twɪtʃ ɛɡwin əbaʊt laɪk ə pʌpət, æftɝ ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ pɑɹɾ ə ðɛɹ ɪnfluəns wɪð ðə hɔl mɛltəd, ɪnstɛd faʊn ðɛmsɛlvz swɔɹn tə oʊbeɪ hɝ. ðət wɑz ɹɛɹ ivən ɪn ðə sikɹət hɪstɝiz; sɪstɝz wɝ ɪkspɛktəd tə oʊbeɪ ði æmɪɝlɪn, bʌt swɛɹɪŋ fiəlti wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls əɡɛn. moʊst stɪl simd ənsɛɾəld baɪ ɪt, ðoʊ ðeɪ dɪɾ oʊbeɪ. fju wɝ əz bæɾ əz kɑɹlɪnjə, bʌɾ ɛɡwin hæɾ æktʃəli  hɝd bioʊnɪnz tiθ tʃæɾɝ ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi sɔ ɛɡwin wɪð sɪɾɝz æftɝ swɛɹɪŋ. mɔɹvɹɪn lʊkt əstɑnɪʃt ənu wɛnɛvɝ əɹ aɪz fɛl ɑn ɛɡwin, əz ɪf ʃi stɪl dɪd nɑt kwaɪt bɪliv, ən naɪsaʊ hɑɹdli sim tə stɑp fɹaʊnɪŋ. æneɪjə klɪkt əɹ tʌŋ oʊvɝ ðə sikɹəsi, ən maɪɹɛl ɔfən flɪntʃt, ðoʊ fəɹ mɔɹ ɹizən ðən teɪkɪŋ ən oʊθ. bʌt ʃɛɹiəm sɪmpli hæd sɛɾəld ɪndə ðə ɹoʊl ʌv ɛɡwinz kipɝ ə ðə kɹɑnəkəlz ɪn tʃɹuθ, nɑt dʒʌs neɪm.

Most of the Sitters who had sworn to Egwene, Sheriam included, had done so out of simple fear, really, and self-preservation. If the Hall learned they had sent sisters to sway the Aes Sedai in Tar Valon, and worse, kept the fact from the Hall for fear of Darkfriends among the Sitters, they surely and certainly would spend the rest of their lives in penance and exile. So the women who had believed they could somehow twitch Egwene about like a puppet, after the greater part of their influence with the Hall melted, instead found themselves sworn to obey her. That was rare even in the secret histories; sisters were expected to obey the Amyrlin, but swearing fealty was something else again. Most still seemed unsettled by it, though they did obey. Few were as bad as Carlinya, but Egwene had actually heard Beonin's teeth chatter the first time she saw Egwene with Sitters after swearing. Morvrin looked astonished anew whenever her eyes fell on Egwene, as if she still did not quite believe, and Nisao hardly seemed to stop frowning. Anaiya clicked her tongue over the secrecy, and Myrelle often flinched, though for more reason than taking an oath. But Sheriam simply had settled into the role of Egwene's Keeper of the Chronicles in truth, not just name.

"meɪ aɪ sədʒɛs juzɪŋ ðɪs ɑpɝtunəɾi tə si wʌt ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ kʌntʃɹi ɔfɝz ɪn weɪ ʌv fuɾ ən fɑɾɝ, mʌðɝ? əɹ stɑks ɑɹ loʊ." ʃɛɹiəm fɹaʊn æŋkʃəsli. "ɪspɛʃli ti ən sɔlt, ðoʊ aɪ daʊt wɪl faɪn ðoʊz."

"May I suggest using this opportunity to see what the surrounding country offers in way of food and fodder, Mother? Our stocks are low." Sheriam frowned anxiously. "Especially tea and salt, though I doubt we'll find those."

"du wʌt jə kæn," ɛɡwin sɛɾ ɪn ə suðɪŋ toʊn. ɑd naʊ, tə θɪŋk ðət wʌns ʃi hæd ɡɔn ɪn ɑ ʌv ʃɛɹiəm, ən ɪn noʊ lɪɾəl fɪɹ ə hɝ dɪsplɛʒɝ. stʃɹeɪnʒ əz ɪt simd, naʊ ðət ʃi wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tʌɡ ən pʊʃ ɛɡwin tə də əz ʃi wɪʃt, ʃɛɹiəm æktʃəli  sim hæpiɝ. "aɪ hæv ɛvɹi kɑnfəɾəns ɪn ju, ʃɛɹiəm." ðə wʊmən pɑzəɾɪvli bimd ət ðə kɑmpləmənt.

"Do what you can," Egwene said in a soothing tone. Odd now, to think that once she had gone in awe of Sheriam, and in no little fear of her displeasure. Strange as it seemed, now that she was no longer Mistress of Novices, no longer trying to tug and push Egwene to do as she wished, Sheriam actually seemed happier. "I have every confidence in you, Sheriam." The woman positively beamed at the compliment.

ðə sʌn stɪl dɪd nɑt ʃoʊ əbʌv ðə tɛns ən wæɡənz tə ði ist, bʌt ðə kæmp wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi bʌsəlɪŋ. ɪn ə mænɝ ə spikɪŋ. bɹɛkfəs dʌn, ðə kʊks wɝ klinɪŋ ʌp, hɛlp baɪ ə hɔɹɾ ə nɑvəsɪz. fɹəm ðə vɪɡɝ ðeɪ pʊɾ ɪndə ɪt, ðə jʌŋ wɪmən sim tə faɪn səm wɔɹmθ ɪn skɹʌbɪŋ kɛɾəlz wɪð snoʊ, bʌt ðə kʊks muv ləbɔɹiəsli, nʌklɪŋ ðɛɹ bæks, stɑpɪŋ tə saɪ ən səmtaɪmz tə pʊl ðɛɹ kloʊks kloʊs ən stɛɹ blikli ət ðə snoʊ. ʃɪvɝɪŋ sɝvɪŋ mɛn, wɛɹɪŋ moʊst ə ðə kloʊðz ðeɪ oʊnd, hæd bɪɡʌn stʃɹaɪkɪŋ tɛns ən loʊɾɪŋ wæɡənz ɔɾəmætɪkli əz sun əz ðeɪ fɪnɪʃt ðɛɹ heɪsti mil, ən wɝ naʊ stʌmbəlɪŋ əbaʊt tə ɹeɪz ðə tɛns ən hɔl tʃɛsts aʊɾ ə ðə wæɡənz. ænəməlz ðət hæd bɪn biɪŋ hɑɹnəst wɝ naʊ biɪŋ lɛɾ əweɪ baɪ wɪɹi hɔɹshænlɝz u wɔkt wɪð hɛdz daʊn. ɛɡwin hɝɾ ə fju ɡɹʌmbəlz fɹəm mɛn u feɪl tə noʊɾəs ðəɹ wɝ sɪstɝz nɪɹbaɪ, bʌt ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ nʌmbɝ sim tu taɪɝd tə vɔɪs ə kəmpleɪnt.

The sun still did not show above the tents and wagons to the east, but the camp was already bustling. In a manner of speaking. Breakfast done, the cooks were cleaning up, helped by a horde of novices. From the vigor they put into it, the young women seemed to find some warmth in scrubbing kettles with snow, but the cooks moved laboriously, knuckling their backs, stopping to sigh and sometimes to pull their cloaks close and stare bleakly at the snow. Shivering serving men, wearing most of the clothes they owned, had begun striking tents and loading wagons automatically as soon as they finished their hasty meal, and were now stumbling about to raise the tents and haul chests out of the wagons. Animals that had been being harnessed were now being led away by weary horsehandlers who walked with heads down. Egwene heard a few grumbles from men who failed to notice there were sisters nearby, but the greater number seemed too tired to voice a complaint.

moʊst ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ huz tɛns wɝ ʌp hæd vænɪʃt ɪnsaɪd, bʌɾ ə ɡʊd mɛni stɪl dɝɛktəd wɝkɝz, ən ʌðɝz hɝiɾ əlɔŋ ðə sʌŋkən pæðz ɑn ɛɹənz ə ðɛɹ oʊn. ənlaɪk ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls, ðeɪ ʃoʊɾ əz lɪɾəl aʊtwɝd wɪɹinəs əz ðə wɔɹɾɝz, hu sʌmhaʊ mænədʒ tə əpɪɹ əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd hæɾ ɔl ðə slip ðeɪ niɾəd fəɹ ðɪs faɪn spɹɪŋ deɪ. ɛɡwin səspɛktəd ðət wɑz ə ɹil pɑɹɾ ə haʊ ə sɪstɝ dʒɹu stʃɹɛŋkθ fɹəm əɹ wɔɹɾɝ, kwaɪɾ əsaɪd fɹəm wʌt ʃi kəd də wɪð ðə bɑnd. wən jəɹ wɔɹɾɝ wəd nɑɾ ədmɪt tə hɪmsɛlf ðəɾ i wɑz koʊld əɹ taɪɝɾ əɹ hʌŋɡɹi, jə dʒʌs hæd tə bɛɹ ʌp əz wɛl.

Most of the Aes Sedai whose tents were up had vanished inside, but a good many still directed workers, and others hurried along the sunken paths on errands of their own. Unlike everyone else, they showed as little outward weariness as the Warders, who somehow managed to appear as if they had had all the sleep they needed for this fine spring day. Egwene suspected that was a real part of how a sister drew strength from her Warder, quite aside from what she could do with the bond. When your Warder would not admit to himself that he was cold or tired or hungry, you just had to bear up as well.

ɑn wʌn ə ðə kɹɔsɪŋ pæðz, mɔɹvɹɪn əpɪɹd, klʌtʃɪŋ tɑkiməz ɑɹm. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz fəɹ səpɔɹt, ðoʊ mɔɹvɹɪn wɑz waɪɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ðə ʃɔɹɾɝ wʊmən sim mɔɹ dɪmɪnjəɾɪv ðən ʃi æktʃəli  wɑz. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz tə kip tɑkimə fɹəm ɪskeɪpɪŋ; mɔɹvɹɪn wɑz dɔɡd wʌns ʃi sɛɾ ə ɡoʊl. ɛɡwin fɹaʊnd. mɔɹvɹɪn maɪt wɛl bi ɪkspɛktəd tə sik aʊɾ ə sɪɾɝ fəɹ əɹ ədʒɑ, ðə bɹaʊn, jɛt wʊɾə əv θɔt dʒɑnjə əɹ ɛskɹɑldi mɔɹ laɪkli. ðə tu pæst aʊɾ ə saɪt bɪhaɪn ə kænvəs-tɑpt wæɡən ɑn ɹʌnɝz, mɔɹvɹɪn bɛndɪŋ tə tɔk ɪn əɹ kəmpænjənz ɪɹ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə tɛl wɛðɝ tɑkimə wɑz peɪɪŋ ɛni maɪnd.

On one of the crossing paths, Morvrin appeared, clutching Takima's arm. Perhaps it was for support, though Morvrin was wide enough to make the shorter woman seem more diminutive than she actually was. Perhaps it was to keep Takima from escaping; Morvrin was dogged once she set a goal. Egwene frowned. Morvrin might well be expected to seek out a Sitter for her Ajah, the Brown, yet Egwene would have thought Janya or Escaralde more likely. The two passed out of sight behind a canvas-topped wagon on runners, Morvrin bending to talk in her companion's ear. There was no way to tell whether Takima was paying any mind.

"ɪz sʌmθɪŋ ðə mæɾɝ, mʌðɝ?"

"Is something the matter, Mother?"

ɛɡwin pʊɾ ɑn ə smaɪl ðət fɛl taɪt. "noʊ mɔɹ ðən juʒəwəl, ʃɛɹiəm. noʊ mɔɹ ðən juʒəwəl."

Egwene put on a smile that felt tight. "No more than usual, Sheriam. No more than usual."

ət ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi, ʃɛɹiəm dɪpɑɹɾəd tə si tə ðə tæsks ɛɡwin hæd ɡɪvən hɝ, ən ɛɡwin wɛn ɪn tə faɪn ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn ɹɛɾinəs. ʃi wʊɾə bɪn sɝpɹaɪzd əɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. sɛləm wɑz dʒʌst sɛɾɪŋ ə ti tʃɹeɪ ɑn ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl. bɹaɪtli kʌlɝd bidwɝk ɹæn əkɹɔs ðə ɹeɪl-θɪn wʊmənz bɑɾəs ən daʊn əɹ slivz, ən wɪð əɹ lɔŋ noʊz kæɹid haɪ, ʃi hɑɹdli simd ə sɝvən ət fɝst ɡlæns, bʌt ʃi hæd sin tə wʌt niɾəd duɪŋ. tu bɹeɪʒɝz fʊl ʌv ɡloʊɪŋ koʊlz hæd teɪkən səm ə ðə tʃɪl ɔf ði ɛɹ, ðoʊ moʊst ə ðə hit ɹʌʃt aʊt θɹu ðə smoʊk hoʊl. dʒɹaɪɾ ɝbz spɹɪŋkəld ɑn ðə koʊlz ɡeɪv ə plɛzən sɛn tə ðə smoʊk ðət dɪd nɑɾ ɪskeɪp, ðə tʃɹeɪ fɹəm ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ wɑz ɡɔn, ən ðə læntɝn ən tæloʊ kændəlz hæd bɪn tʃɹɪmd ən lɪt. noʊ wʌn wɑz əbaʊt tə liv ə tɛn oʊpən ɪnʌf tə lɛɾ ɪn laɪt fɹəm aʊtsaɪd.

At the Amyrlin's Study, Sheriam departed to see to the tasks Egwene had given her, and Egwene went in to find everything in readiness. She would have been surprised at anything else. Selame was just setting a tea tray on the writing table. Brightly colored beadwork ran across the rail-thin woman's bodice and down her sleeves, and with her long nose carried high, she hardly seemed a servant at first glance, but she had seen to what needed doing. Two braziers full of glowing coals had taken some of the chill off the air, though most of the heat rushed out through the smoke hole. Dried herbs sprinkled on the coals gave a pleasant scent to the smoke that did not escape, the tray from the night before was gone, and the lantern and tallow candles had been trimmed and lit. No one was about to leave a tent open enough to let in light from outside.

sɪuən wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ðɛɹ, tu, wɪð ə stæk ə peɪpɝz ɪn əɹ hænz, ə hɛɹiɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs, ən ə smʌdʒ ʌv ɪŋk ɑn əɹ noʊz. ðə poʊst ə sɛkɹətɛɹi pɹəvaɪɾəd ðə tu ʌv əm ənʌðɝ ɹizən tə bi sin tɔkɪŋ, ən ʃɛɹiəm hæd nɑt maɪndəɾ əɾ ɔl ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp ðə wɝk. sɪuən hɝsɛlf ɡɹʌmbəl fɹikwənli, haʊɛvɝ. fəɹ ə wʊmən u hæd sɛldəm lɛf ðə taʊɝ sɪns ɛntɝɪŋ əz ə nɑvəs, ʃi hæɾ ə ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl dɪslaɪk fəɹ steɪɪŋ ɪnsaɪd. ət ðə moʊmənt ʃi wɑz ðə pɪktʃɝ ʌv ə wʊmən biɪŋ peɪʃən ən wɑntɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn tə noʊ ɪt.

Siuan was already there, too, with a stack of papers in her hands, a harried expression on her face, and a smudge of ink on her nose. The post of secretary provided the two of them another reason to be seen talking, and Sheriam had not minded at all giving up the work. Siuan herself grumbled frequently, however. For a woman who had seldom left the Tower since entering as a novice, she had a remarkable dislike for staying inside. At the moment she was the picture of a woman being patient and wanting everyone to know it.

fəɹ ɔl əɹ haɪ noʊz, sɛləm sɪmpɝɾ ən bɑb soʊ mɛni kɝtsiz ðət teɪkɪŋ ɛɡwinz kloʊk ən mɪɾənz tɝn ɪndə ən ɪlæbɹət lɪɾəl sɛɹəmoʊni. ðə wʊmən næɾɝd ɑn əbaʊt ðə mʌðɝ pʊɾɪŋ əɹ fiɾ ʌp, ən pɝhæps ʃi ʃəd fɛtʃ ðə mʌðɝ ə læp ɹoʊb, ən meɪbi ʃi ʃəd steɪ ɪn keɪs ðə mʌðɝ wɑntəɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, əntɪl ɛɡwin pɹæktəkli tʃeɪst əɹ aʊt. ðə ti teɪstəɾ ə mɪnt. ɪn ðɪs wɛðɝ! sɛləm wɑz ə tʃɹaɪəl, ən ʃi kəd hɑɹdli bi kɔld lɔɪəl, bʌt ʃi dɪd tʃɹaɪ.

For all her high nose, Selame simpered and bobbed so many curtsies that taking Egwene's cloak and mittens turned into an elaborate little ceremony. The woman nattered on about the Mother putting her feet up, and perhaps she should fetch the Mother a lap robe, and maybe she should stay in case the Mother wanted anything else, until Egwene practically chased her out. The tea tasted of mint. In this weather! Selame was a trial, and she could hardly be called loyal, but she did try.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm fəɹ laʊnʒɪŋ ən sɪpɪŋ ti, ðoʊ. ɛɡwin stʃɹeɪɾənd əɹ stoʊl ən tʊk əɹ pleɪs bɪhaɪn ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ dɛsk, æbsəntmaɪndɪdli ɡɪvɪŋ ə jæŋk tə ðə lɛɡ ʌv əɹ tʃɛɹ soʊ ɪt wəd nɑt foʊl bɪniθ əɹ əz ɪɾ ɔfən dɪd, sɪuən pɝtʃt ətɑp ə ɹɪkəɾi stul ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə teɪbəl, ən ðə ti kuld. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt spik ə plænz, əɹ ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn, əɹ hoʊps; wʌt kəd bi dʌn ðəɹ fəɹ naʊ, hæd bɪn. ɹɪpɔɹts ən pɹɑbləmz paɪld ʌp wən ðeɪ wɝ ɑn ðə muv ən wɪɹinəs oʊvɝkeɪm ətɛmps tə dil wɪð ðɛm, ən naʊ ðət ðeɪ wɝ stɑpt, ɔl hæd tə bi ɡɔn θɹu. ən ɑɹmi əhɛd dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ ðæt.

There was no time for lounging and sipping tea, though. Egwene straightened her stole and took her place behind the writing desk, absentmindedly giving a yank to the leg of her chair so it would not fold beneath her as it often did, Siuan perched atop a rickety stool on the other side of the table, and the tea cooled. They did not speak of plans, or Gareth Bryne, or hopes; what could be done there for now, had been. Reports and problems piled up when they were on the move and weariness overcame attempts to deal with them, and now that they were stopped, all had to be gone through. An army ahead did not change that.

ət taɪmz, ɛɡwin wʌndɝd haʊ soʊ mʌtʃ peɪpɝ kəd bi faʊnd wən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls sim soʊ dɪfəkəlt. ðə ɹɪpɔɹts sɪuən hændəɾ əɹ dɪteɪld ʃɔɹɾədʒəz ən lɪɾəl ɛls. nɑt sɪmpli ðoʊz ʃɛɹiəm hæd mɛnʃənd, bʌt koʊl ən neɪlz ən aɪɝn fəɹ ðə fɛɹiɝz ən wilɹaɪts, lɛðɝ ən ɔɪl θɹɛd fəɹ ðə hɑɹnəsmeɪkɝz, læmp ɔɪl ən kændəlz ən ə hʌnʒɹəd ʌðɝ θɪŋz, ivən soʊp. ən wʌtɛvɝ wɑz nɑt ɹʌnɪŋ aʊt wɑz wɛɹɪŋ aʊt, fɹəm ʃuz tə tɛns, ɔl lɪstəɾ ɪn sɪuənz boʊl hænd, wɪtʃ ɡɹu mɔɹ əɡɹɛsɪv ðə mɔɹ ɡlɛɹɪŋ ðə nid ʃi ɹoʊɾ əbaʊt. hɝ əkaʊn ə ðə kɔɪn ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ lʊk tə hæv bɪn slæʃt ɑntu ðə peɪpɝ ɪn ə pɑzəɾɪv fjʊɹi. ən nɑɾ ə θɪŋ tə bi dʌn əbaʊɾ ɪt.

At times, Egwene wondered how so much paper could be found when everything else seemed so difficult. The reports Siuan handed her detailed shortages and little else. Not simply those Sheriam had mentioned, but coal and nails and iron for the farriers and wheelwrights, leather and oiled thread for the harnessmakers, lamp oil and candles and a hundred other things, even soap. And whatever was not running out was wearing out, from shoes to tents, all listed in Siuan's bold hand, which grew more aggressive the more glaring the need she wrote about. Her account of the coin remaining looked to have been slashed onto the paper in a positive fury. And not a thing to be done about it.

əmʌŋ sɪuənz peɪpɝz wɝ sɛvɹəl ædʒɹɛsɪz fɹəm sɪɾɝz sədʒɛstɪŋ weɪz tə sɑlv ðə pɹɑbləm ə mʌni. əɹ ɹæðɝ, ɪnfɔɹmɪŋ ɛɡwin wʌt ðeɪ ɪntɛndəd tə leɪ bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl. ðəɹ wɝ fju ædvæntɪdʒɪz tə ɛni ʌv ðə skimz, haʊɛvɝ, ən mɛni pɪtfɔlz. mɔɹiə kɛɹɛntənɪs pɹəpoʊz stɑpɪŋ ðə soʊlʒɝz' peɪ, ə noʊʃən ɛɡwin θɔt ðə hɔl hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɹilaɪzd wəd kɑz ði ɑɹmi tə mɛlt əweɪ laɪk du ʌndɝ ə mɪdsʌmɝ sʌn. mɑlɪnd nækənɪn pɹizɛntəɾ ən əpil tə nɪɹbaɪ noʊbəlz ðət saʊndəd mɔɹ ə dɪmæn ən maɪt wɛl tɝn ðə hoʊl kʌntʃɹisaɪɾ əɡɛns ðɛm, əz wəd sæliɾə tɔɹeɪnz' ɪntɛntʃən tə lɛvi ə tæks ɑn ðə taʊnz ən vɪlədʒəz ðeɪ pæst.

Among Siuan's papers were several addresses from Sitters suggesting ways to solve the problem of money. Or rather, informing Egwene what they intended to lay before the Hall. There were few advantages to any of the schemes, however, and many pitfalls. Moria Karentanis proposed stopping the soldiers' pay, a notion Egwene thought the Hall had already realized would cause the army to melt away like dew under a midsummer sun. Malind Nachenin presented an appeal to nearby nobles that sounded more a demand and might well turn the whole countryside against them, as would Salita Toranes' intention to levy a tax on the towns and villages they passed.

kɹʌmplɪŋ ðə θɹi ædʒɹɛsɪz təɡɛðɝ ɪn əɹ fɪst, ɛɡwin ʃʊk əm ət sɪuən. ʃi wɪʃt ɪt wɝ θɹi sɪɾɝz' θɹoʊts ʃi wɑz ɡɹɪpɪŋ. "du ðeɪ ɔl θɪŋk ɛvɹiθɪŋ əz tə ɡoʊ ðə weɪ ðeɪ wɪʃ, ən nɛvɝ maɪn ɹiæləɾiz? laɪt, ðəɹ ðə wʌnz bɪheɪvɪŋ laɪk tʃɪlʒɹən!"

Crumpling the three addresses together in her fist, Egwene shook them at Siuan. She wished it were three Sitters' throats she was gripping. "Do they all think everything has to go the way they wish, and never mind realities? Light, they're the ones behaving like children!"

"ðə taʊɝ əz mænədʒ tə meɪk ɪts wɪʃɪz bɪkʌm ɹiæləɾiz ɔfən ɪnʌf," sɪuən sɛd kəmpleɪsənli. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ, səm wəd seɪ jəɹ ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ɹiæləɾi, tu."

"The Tower has managed to make its wishes become realities often enough," Siuan said complacently. "Remember, some would say you're ignoring reality, too."

ɛɡwin snɪft. lʌkəli, wʌtɛvɝ ðə hɔl voʊɾəd, nʌn ə ðə pɹəpoʊzəlz kəd bi kæɹid fɔɹwɝd wɪθaʊɾ ə dɪkɹi fɹəm hɝ. ivən ɪn əɹ stʃɹeɪɾənd sɝkəmstænsəz, ʃi hæɾ ə lɪɾəl paʊɝ. vɛɹi lɪɾəl, bʌt ðət wɑz mɔɹ ðən nʌn. "ɪz ðə hɔl ɔlweɪz ðɪs bæd, sɪuən?"

Egwene sniffed. Luckily, whatever the Hall voted, none of the proposals could be carried forward without a decree from her. Even in her straitened circumstances, she had a little power. Very little, but that was more than none. "Is the Hall always this bad, Siuan?"

sɪuən nɑɾəd, ʃɪftɪŋ slaɪtli tə tʃɹaɪ tə faɪn ə bɛɾɝ bæləns. noʊ tu ʌv əɹ stulz lɛɡz wɝ ðə seɪm lɛŋθ. "bʌɾ ɪt kəd bi wɝs. ɹimaɪn mi tə tɛl jə əbaʊt ðə jɪɹ ə ðə fɔɹ æmɪɝlənz; ðət wɑz əbaʊɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd ən fɪfti jɪɹz æftɝ ðə faʊndɪŋ ə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ɪn ðoʊz deɪz, ðə nɔɹməl wɝkɪŋz ə ðə taʊɝ nɪɹli ɹaɪvəld wʌts hæpənɪŋ tədeɪ. ɛvɹi hæn tʃɹaɪd tə snætʃ ðə tɪlɝ, ɪf ðeɪ kʊd. ðəɹ wɝ æktʃəli  tu ɹaɪvəl hɔlz ə ðə taʊɝ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn fəɹ pɑɹɾ ə ðət jɪɹ. ɔlmoʊs laɪk naʊ. dʒʌst əbaʊɾ ɛvɹiwʌn keɪm tə ɡɹif ɪn ði ɛnd, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ə fju hu θɔt ðeɪ gɑnə tə seɪv ðə taʊɝ. səm ə ðɛm maɪt hæv, ɪf ðeɪ hædn stɛpt ɪn kwɪksænd. ðə taʊɝ sɝvaɪvd ɛniweɪ, ʌv kɔɹs. ɪɾ ɔlweɪz dʌz."

Siuan nodded, shifting slightly to try to find a better balance. No two of her stool's legs were the same length. "But it could be worse. Remind me to tell you about the Year of the Four Amyrlins; that was about a hundred and fifty years after the founding of Tar Valon. In those days, the normal workings of the Tower nearly rivaled what's happening today. Every hand tried to snatch the tiller, if they could. There were actually two rival Halls of the Tower in Tar Valon for part of that year. Almost like now. Just about everyone came to grief in the end, including a few who thought they were going to save the Tower. Some of them might have, if they hadn't stepped in quicksand. The Tower survived anyway, of course. It always does."

ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə hɪstɝi ɡɹu ʌp ɪn oʊvɝ θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz, mʌtʃ səpɹɛst, hɪɾən fɹəm ɔl bʌɾ ə fju aɪz, jɛt sɪuən sim tə hæv ɛvɹi dɪteɪl əɾ əɹ fɪŋɡɝtɪps. ʃi mʌst əv spɛn ə ɡʊd pɑɹɾ ə hɝ jɪɹz ɪn ðə taʊɝ bɛɹiɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɪn ðoʊz sikɹət hɪstɝiz. ʌv wʌn θɪŋ, ɛɡwin wɑz sɝɾən. ʃi wəɾ əvɔɪd ʃaɪnz feɪɾ ɪf ʃi kʊd, bʌt ʃi wəd nɑt ɹɪmeɪn əz ʃi wɑz, lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ ɔf ðən səmeɪl sɔɹɛnteɪn. lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ði ɛn ə hɝ ɹeɪn, ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt dɪsɪʒən lɛf tə səmeɪlz dɪskɹɛʃən wɑz wʌt dʒɹɛs tə wɛɹ. ʃi wɑz gɑnə hæv tə æsk sɪuən tə tɛl əɹ əbaʊt ðə jɪɹ ə ðə fɔɹ æmɪɝlənz, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə ɪt.

A great deal of history grew up in over three thousand years, much suppressed, hidden from all but a few eyes, yet Siuan seemed to have every detail at her fingertips. She must have spent a good part of her years in the Tower burying herself in those secret histories. Of one thing, Egwene was certain. She would avoid Shein's fate if she could, but she would not remain as she was, little better off than Cemaile Sorenthaine. Long before the end of her reign, the most important decision left to Cemaile's discretion was what dress to wear. She was going to have to ask Siuan to tell her about the Year of the Four Amyrlins, and she did not look forward to it.

ðə ʃɪftɪŋ bim ə laɪt fɹəm ðə smoʊk hoʊl ɪn ðə ɹuf ʃoʊd mɔɹnɪŋ təwɔɹd mɪddeɪ, bʌt sɪuənz stæk ə peɪpɝz sim hɑɹdli dɪmɪnɪʃt. ɛni ɪntɝʌpʃən əɾ ɔl wʊɾə bɪn wɛlkəm, ivən pɹimətʃʊɹ dɪskʌvɝi. wɛl, meɪbi nɑt ðæt.

The shifting beam of light from the smoke hole in the roof showed morning toward midday, but Siuan's stack of papers seemed hardly diminished. Any interruption at all would have been welcome, even premature discovery. Well, maybe not that.

"wʌts nɛkst, sɪuən?" ʃi ɡɹaʊld.

"What's next, Siuan?" she growled.

ə flɪkɝ ə muvmən kɑɾ ɝæŋɡɝz aɪ, ən ʃi pɪɹd θɹu ðə tʃɹiz təwɔɹd ði ɑɹmiz kæmp, ən əbskjʊɹɪŋ ɹɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə tɛns ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ə laɪn ʌv wæɡən-slɛdʒɪz wɑz muvɪŋ sloʊli ist, ɛskɔɹɾɪd baɪ mɛn ɑn hɔɹsbæk. ðə peɪl sʌn ɡlɪntɪd fɹəm ɑɹmɝ ən ðə pɔɪns ə lænsɪz. ʃi kəd nɑt hɛlp snɪɹɪŋ. spɪɹz ən hɔɹsəz! ə pɹɪməɾɪv ɹæbəl ðət kəd muv noʊ fæstɝ ðən ə mæn kəd wɔk, lɛd baɪ ə mæn u dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz əweɪ. ɛɛs sədaɪ? ʃi kəd dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðə lɑɾ ə ðɛm, ən ivən daɪɪŋ ðeɪ wəd nɛvɝ səspɛkt u wɑz kɪlɪŋ ðɛm. ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi wəd nɑt sɝvaɪv əm lɔŋ. ðət θɔt meɪɾ əɹ ʃɪvɝ. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd ɡeɪv vɛɹi fju ə sɛkən tʃæns ət laɪf, ən ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə θɹoʊ əweɪ hɝz.

A flicker of movement caught Aran'gar's eye, and she peered through the trees toward the army's camp, an obscuring ring around the tents of the Aes Sedai. A line of wagon-sledges was moving slowly east, escorted by men on horseback. The pale sun glinted from armor and the points of lances. She could not help sneering. Spears and horses! A primitive rabble that could move no faster than a man could walk, led by a man who did not know what was happening a hundred miles away. Aes Sedai? She could destroy the lot of them, and even dying they would never suspect who was killing them. Of course, she would not survive them long. That thought made her shiver. The Great Lord gave very few a second chance at life, and she was not about to throw away hers.

weɪɾɪŋ əntɪl ðə ɹaɪɾɝz muvd aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ɪndə ðə fɔɹəst, ʃi stɑɹɾəd bæk təwɔɹd ðə kæmp, θɪŋkɪŋ aɪdli ʌv tənaɪts dʒɹimz. bɪhaɪn hɝ, smuð snoʊ wəd haɪd wʌt ʃi hæd bɛɹiɾ əntɪl ðə spɹɪŋ θɔ, mɔɹ ðən lɔŋ ɪnʌf. əhɛd, səm ə ðə mɛn ɪn ðə kæmp faɪnəli noʊɾəst əɹ ən stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm ðɛɹ tæsks tə wɑtʃ. ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf, ʃi smaɪld ən smuðd əɹ skɝɾ oʊvɝ əɹ hɪps. ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl naʊ tə ɹɪli ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌt laɪf hæd bɪn laɪk əz ə mæn; hæd ʃi bɪn sətʃ ən izəli mənɪpjəleɪɾɪd ful, ðɛn? ɡɛɾɪŋ θɹu ðət swɔɹm wɪð ə kɔɹps ənsin hæd bɪn dɪfəkəlt, ivən fəɹ hɝ, bʌt ʃi ɛndʒɔɪd ðə wɔk bæk.

Waiting until the riders moved out of sight into the forest, she started back toward the camp, thinking idly of tonight's dreams. Behind her, smooth snow would hide what she had buried until the spring thaw, more than long enough. Ahead, some of the men in the camp finally noticed her and straightened from their tasks to watch. In spite of herself, she smiled and smoothed her skirt over her hips. It was difficult now to really remember what life had been like as a man; had she been such an easily manipulated fool, then? Getting through that swarm with a corpse unseen had been difficult, even for her, but she enjoyed the walk back.

ðə mɔɹnɪŋ wɛn ɑn ɪn ə simɪŋli ɛnləs weɪɾɪŋ θɹu peɪpɝ, əntɪl wʌɾ ɛɡwin hæd noʊn wəd hæpən, dɪd. sɝɾən deɪli ɪvɛns wɝ ʃʊɹ. ðəɹ wəd bi bɪɾɝ koʊld, ðəɹ wəd bi snoʊ, ðəɹ wəd bi klaʊdz, ən ɡɹeɪ skaɪz, ən wɪnd. ən ðəɹ wəd bi vɪzəts fɹəm ləleɪn ən ɹoʊmændə.

The morning went on in a seemingly endless wading through paper, until what Egwene had known would happen, did. Certain daily events were sure. There would be bitter cold, there would be snow, there would be clouds, and gray skies, and wind. And there would be visits from Lelaine and Romanda.

wɪɹi ʌv sɪɾɪŋ, ɛɡwin wɑz stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ əɹ lɛɡz wən ləleɪn swɛpt ɪndə ðə tɛnt wɪð fɑoʊleɪn əɾ əɹ hilz. fɹɪdʒəɾ ɛɹ ɹoʊld ɪn wɪð əm bɪfɔɹ ðə tɛntflæp fɛl ʃʌt. lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊnd wɪð ə feɪnli dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ ɛɹ, ləleɪn plʌkt ɔf blu lɛðɝ ɡlʌvz, waɪl əlaʊɪŋ fɑoʊleɪn tə ɹimuv ðə lɪŋks-laɪn kloʊk fɹəm əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. slɛndɝ ən dɪɡnəfaɪɾ ɪn dip blu sɪlk, wɪð pɛnətʃɹeɪɾɪŋ aɪz, ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn ɪn əɹ oʊn tɛnt. əɾ ə kæʒəwəl dʒɛstʃɝ, fɑoʊleɪn ɹitʃɹiɾəd dɪfɝɛntʃəli tə ə kɔɹnɝ wɪð ðə ɡɑɹmənt, mɪɹli ʃɹʌɡɪŋ əɹ oʊn kloʊk bæk. pleɪnli, ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə ɡoʊ ɑn ði ɪnstən əɾ ənʌðɝ weɪv ə ðə sɪɾɝz hænd. hɝ dɑɹk fitʃɝz wɔɹ ə kæst ə ɹɪzaɪn miknəs, nɑt vɛɹi mʌtʃ laɪk hɝ.

Weary of sitting, Egwene was stretching her legs when Lelaine swept into the tent with Faolain at her heels. Frigid air rolled in with them before the tentflap fell shut. Looking around with a faintly disapproving air, Lelaine plucked off blue leather gloves, while allowing Faolain to remove the lynx-lined cloak from her shoulders. Slender and dignified in deep blue silk, with penetrating eyes, she might have been in her own tent. At a casual gesture, Faolain retreated deferentially to a corner with the garment, merely shrugging her own cloak back. Plainly, she was ready to go on the instant at another wave of the Sitter's hand. Her dark features wore a cast of resigned meekness, not very much like her.

ləleɪnz ɹɪzɝv kɹæk fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ɪn ə sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli wɔɹm smaɪl fəɹ sɪuən. ðeɪ hæd bɪn fɹɛnz, wʌns, jɪɹz əɡoʊ, ən ʃi hæɾ ivən ɔfɝd sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðə pætʃɹənɪdʒ ðət fɑoʊleɪn hæɾ æksɛptɪd, ə sɪɾɝz pɹətɛkʃən ən ʃɛltɝɪŋ ɑɹm əɡɛns ðə snɪɹz ən ækjəzeɪʃənz ʌv ʌðɝ sɪstɝz. tʌtʃɪŋ sɪuənz tʃik, ləleɪn sɔfli mɝmɝd sʌmθɪŋ ðət saʊndəd sɪmpəθɛɾɪk. sɪuən blʌʃt, ə stɑɹtlɪŋ ənsɝɾənti flæʃɪŋ əkɹɔs əɹ feɪs. ɪt wɑz nɑt pɹitɛns, ɛɡwin wɑz ʃʊɹ. sɪuən faʊn ɪt dɪfəkəl tə dil wɪð wʌt ɹɪli hæd tʃeɪnʒd ɪn hɝ, ən mɔɹ, wɪð haʊ izəli ʃi wɑz ədæptɪŋ.

Lelaine's reserve cracked for a moment, in a surprisingly warm smile for Siuan. They had been friends, once, years ago, and she had even offered something like the patronage that Faolain had accepted, a Sitter's protection and sheltering arm against the sneers and accusations of other sisters. Touching Siuan's cheek, Lelaine softly murmured something that sounded sympathetic. Siuan blushed, a startling uncertainty flashing across her face. It was not pretense, Egwene was sure. Siuan found it difficult to deal with what really had changed in her, and more, with how easily she was adapting.

ləleɪn aɪd ðə stul ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl ænd, əz juʒəwəl, vɪzəbli ɹɪdʒɛktɪd sətʃ ən ənstɛɾi sit. oʊnli ðən dɪd ʃi æknɑlɪdʒ ɛɡwinz pɹɛzəns, wɪð ðə bɛɹəs dɪp ə hɝ hɛd. "wi nid tə spik ə ðə si foʊk, mʌðɝ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə toʊn ə bɪt fɝm tə bi dɝɛktəɾ ət ði æmɪɝlɪn sit.

Lelaine eyed the stool in front of the writing table and, as usual, visibly rejected such an unsteady seat. Only then did she acknowledge Egwene's presence, with the barest dip of her head. "We need to speak of the Sea Folk, Mother," she said in a tone a bit firm to be directed at the Amyrlin Seat.

nɑɾ əntɪl ɛɡwinz hɑɹt sæŋk daʊn fɹəm əɹ θɹoʊt dɪd ʃi ɹilaɪz ʃi hæd bɪn əfɹeɪd ðət ləleɪn ɔlɹɛɾi nu wʌt lɔɹd bɹaɪn hæd toʊl hɝ. əɹ ivən ðə miɾɪŋ i wɑz ɝeɪnʒɪŋ. ðə nɛkst ɪnstənt, hɝ hɑɹt lɛp bæk əɡɛn. ðə si foʊk? ʃʊɹli ðə hɔl kəd nɑɾ əv lɝn ə ði ɪnseɪn bɑɹɡən nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn hæd meɪd. ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən wʌt hæd lɛɾ əm ɪndə sətʃ ə dɪzæstɝ, əɹ haʊ ʃi wɑz tə dil wɪð ɪt.

Not until Egwene's heart sank down from her throat did she realize she had been afraid that Lelaine already knew what Lord Bryne had told her. Or even the meeting he was arranging. The next instant, her heart leaped back again. The Sea Folk? Surely the Hall could not have learned of the insane bargain Nynaeve and Elayne had made. She could not imagine what had led them into such a disaster, or how she was to deal with it.

hɝ stʌmək ɹɔɪlɪŋ, ʃi tʊk əɹ pleɪs bɪhaɪn ðə teɪbəl wɪθaʊt ɹɪvilɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ ʌv wʌt ʃi fɛlt. ən ðət ful tʃɛɹ lɛɡ foʊldəd, nɪɹli dʒɹɑpɪŋ əɹ ɑntu ðə kɑɹpəts bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd dʒɝk ɪt stʃɹeɪɾ əɡɛn. ʃi hoʊpt əɹ tʃiks wɝ nɑt kʌlɝɪŋ. "ðə si foʊk ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, əɹ ɪn kɛɹhin?" jɛs; ðət saʊndəd suɾəbli kɑm ən kəlɛktəd.

Her stomach roiling, she took her place behind the table without revealing anything of what she felt. And that fool chair leg folded, nearly dropping her onto the carpets before she could jerk it straight again. She hoped her cheeks were not coloring. "The Sea Folk in Caemlyn, or in Cairhien?" Yes; that sounded suitably calm and collected.

"kɛɹhin." ɹoʊmændəz haɪ vɔɪs ɹæŋ laɪk sʌɾən tʃaɪmz. "dɛfənətli kɛɹhin." hɝ ɛntʃɹi meɪd ləleɪnz sim ɔlmoʊs dɪfəɾənt, ðə fɔɹs ə hɝ pɝsənælɪɾi əbɹʌpli fɪlɪŋ ðə tɛnt. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ wɔɹm smaɪlz ɪn ɹoʊmændə; hænsəm əz əɹ feɪs wɑz, ɪt dɪd nɑt sim meɪd fəɹ ðɛm.

"Cairhien." Romanda's high voice rang like sudden chimes. "Definitely Cairhien." Her entry made Lelaine's seem almost diffident, the force of her personality abruptly filling the tent. There were no warm smiles in Romanda; handsome as her face was, it did not seem made for them.

θiədʒɹɪn fɑloʊɾ əɹ ɪn, ən ɹoʊmændə swʌŋ əɹ kloʊk ɔf wɪð ə flɝɪʃ ən tɔst ɪt tə ðə slɪm, æpəl-tʃik sɪstɝ wɪð ə pɝɛmptɝi dʒɛstʃɝ ðət sɛn θiədʒɹɪn hɝiɪŋ tə ə kɔɹnɝ ɑpəzət fɑoʊleɪn. fɑoʊleɪn wɑz dɪstɪŋkli səbdud, bʌt θiədʒɹɪnz tɪltəɾ aɪz wɝ vɛɹi waɪd, əz ðoʊ ʃi wɑz pɝmənənli stɑɹɾəld, ən əɹ lɪps simd ɹɛɾi tə ɡæsp. laɪk fɑoʊleɪn, hɝ pɹɑpɝ pleɪs ɪn ðə haɪɝɑɹki ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪmændəd bɛɾɝ ɛmplɔɪmənt, bʌt niðɝ wɑz laɪkli tə ɹəsiv ɪt sun.

Theodrin followed her in, and Romanda swung her cloak off with a flourish and tossed it to the slim, apple-cheeked sister with a peremptory gesture that sent Theodrin hurrying to a corner opposite Faolain. Faolain was distinctly subdued, but Theodrin's tilted eyes were very wide, as though she was permanently startled, and her lips seemed ready to gasp. Like Faolain, her proper place in the hierarchy of Aes Sedai demanded better employment, but neither was likely to receive it soon.

ɹoʊmændəz kəmpɛlɪŋ ɡeɪz ɹɛstəɾ ə moʊmən ɑn sɪuən, əz ɪf kənsɪɾɝɪŋ wɛðɝ tə sɛn əɹ tə ə kɔɹnɝ əz wɛl, ðən bɹʌʃt pæs ləleɪn ɔlmoʊs dɪsmɪsɪvli bɪfɔɹ sɛɾəlɪŋ ɑn ɛɡwin. "ɪt simz ðət jʌŋ mæn əz bɪn tɔkɪŋ wɪð ðə si foʊk, mʌðɝ. ðə jɛloʊ aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz ɪn kɛɹhin ɑɹ moʊst ɪksaɪɾəd əbaʊɾ ɪt. juv ɛni aɪdiə wʌt maɪɾ ɪntʃɹəst ɪm ɪn ði æθɑn maɪɹ?"

Romanda's compelling gaze rested a moment on Siuan, as if considering whether to send her to a corner as well, then brushed past Lelaine almost dismissively before settling on Egwene. "It seems that young man has been talking with the Sea Folk, Mother. The Yellow eyes-and-ears in Cairhien are most excited about it. Do you have any idea what might interest him in the Atha'an Miere?"

dɪspaɪt ðə taɪɾəl, ɹoʊmændə hɑɹdli saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ədʒɹɛsɪŋ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, bʌt ðɛn, ʃi nɛvɝ dɪd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ daʊɾ u "ðæt jʌŋ mæn" wɑz. ɛvɹi sɪstɝ ɪn ðə kæmp æksɛptɪd ðət ɹænd wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, bʌɾ ɛniwʌn u hɝɾ əm tɔk wʊɾə bɪliv ðeɪ wɝ spikɪŋ ʌv ən ənɹuli jʌŋ laʊɾ u maɪt kʌm tə dɪnɝ dʒɹʌŋk ən θɹoʊ ʌp ɑn ðə teɪbəl.

Despite the title, Romanda hardly sounded as if she were addressing the Amyrlin Seat, but then, she never did. There was no doubt who "that young man" was. Every sister in the camp accepted that Rand was the Dragon Reborn, but anyone who heard them talk would have believed they were speaking of an unruly young lout who might come to dinner drunk and throw up on the table.

"ʃi kən hɑɹdli noʊ wʌts ɪn ðə bɔɪz hɛd," ləleɪn sɛd bɪfɔɹ ɛɡwin kəɾ oʊpən əɹ maʊð. hɝ smaɪl wɑz nɑɾ əɾ ɔl wɔɹm ðɪs taɪm. "ɪf ən ænsɝ ɪz tə bi faʊnd, ɹoʊmændə, ɪɾəl bi ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. ði æθɑn maɪɹ ðəɹ ɑɹ nɑt sɪkwɛstɝɾ ɑn ə ʃɪp, ən aɪ sɪɹiəsli daʊt ðət haɪ ɹæŋkɪŋ si foʊk keɪm soʊ fɑɹ fɹəm ðə si ɑn dɪfɹən ɛɹənz. aɪv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə ðɛm duɪŋ soʊ fəɹ ɛni ɹizən. ɪt meɪ bi ðeɪv ən ɪntʃɹəst ɪn hɪm. ðeɪ mʌs noʊ hu hiz baɪ naʊ."

"She can hardly know what's in the boy's head," Lelaine said before Egwene could open her mouth. Her smile was not at all warm this time. "If an answer is to be found, Romanda, it will be in Caemlyn. The Atha'an Miere there are not sequestered on a ship, and I seriously doubt that high ranking Sea Folk came so far from the sea on different errands. I've never heard of them doing so for any reason. It may be they have an interest in him. They must know who he is by now."

ɹoʊmændə smaɪl bæk, ən fɹɔst ʃʊɾə əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðə tɛnt wɔlz. "ðɛɹz hɑɹdli nid tə steɪt ði ɑbviəs, ləleɪn. ðə fɝs kwɛstʃən ɪz haʊ tə faɪn aʊt."

Romanda smiled back, and frost should have appeared on the tent walls. "There's hardly need to state the obvious, Lelaine. The first question is how to find out."

"aɪ wɑz əbaʊt tə ɹizɑlv ðət wən jə bɑɹdʒd ɪn, ɹoʊmændə. ðə nɛks taɪm ðə mʌðɝ ɪnkaʊntɝz ɪleɪn əɹ nɪneɪiv ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, ʃi kən pæs ɑn ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz. mɛɝɪlɪl kən dɪskʌvɝ wʌt ði æθɑn maɪɹ wɑnt, əɹ meɪbi wʌt ðə bɔɪ dʌz, wən ʃi ɹitʃəz keɪɛmlɪn. ə pɪɾi ðə ɡɝlz dɪdn θɪŋk tə sɛɾ ə ɹɛɡjəlɝ skɛdʒʊl, bʌt wi mʌst wɝk ɝaʊn ðæt. mɛɝɪlɪl kən mit wɪð ə sɪɾɝ ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd wən ʃi noʊz." ləleɪn meɪɾ ə smɔl dʒɛstʃɝ; pleɪnli, ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz ði ɪntɛndəd sɪɾɝ. "aɪ θɔt sɑlədɑɹ maɪt bi ə suɾəbəl pleɪs."

"I was about to resolve that when you barged in, Romanda. The next time the Mother encounters Elayne or Nynaeve in Tel'aran'rhiod, she can pass on instructions. Merilille can discover what the Atha'an Miere want, or maybe what the boy does, when she reaches Caemlyn. A pity the girls didn't think to set a regular schedule, but we must work around that. Merilille can meet with a Sitter in Tel'aran'rhiod when she knows." Lelaine made a small gesture; plainly, she herself was the intended Sitter. "I thought Salidar might be a suitable place."

ɹoʊmændə snɔɹɾɪd wɪð əmjuzmənt. ivən ɪn ðæt, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wɔɹmθ. "iziɝ tə ɪnstʃɹʌk mɛɝɪlɪl ðən tə si ʃi oʊbeɪz, ləleɪn. aɪ ɪkspɛkt ʃi noʊz ʃi feɪsəz ʃɑɹp kwɛstʃənz. ðɪs boʊl ə ðə wɪnz ʃʊɾə bɪn bɹɔt tə əs fəɹ stʌɾi fɝst. nʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ hæd mʌtʃ əbɪləɾi ɪn klaʊd dænsɪŋ, aɪ bɪliv, ən jə kən si ðə ɹɪzʌlt, ɔl ðɪs hɝli-bɝli ən sʌɾənnəs. aɪ hæv ə θɔt tə kɔl ə kwɛstʃən bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl kənsɝnɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪnvɑlvd." əbɹʌpli ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmənz vɔɪs bɪkeɪm smuð əz bʌɾɝ. "æz aɪ ɹikɔl, jə səpɔɹɾəd ðə tʃɔɪs ə mɛɝɪlɪl."

Romanda snorted with amusement. Even in that, there was no warmth. "Easier to instruct Merilille than to see she obeys, Lelaine. I expect she knows she faces sharp questions. This Bowl of the Winds should have been brought to us for study first. None of the sisters in Ebou Dar had much ability in Cloud Dancing, I believe, and you can see the result, all this hurly-burly and suddenness. I have a thought to call a question before the Hall concerning everyone involved." Abruptly the gray-haired woman's voice became smooth as butter. "As I recall, you supported the choice of Merilille."

wɪð ə dʒɝk, ləleɪn dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp. hɝ aɪz flæʃt. "aɪ səpɔɹɾəd u ðə ɡɹeɪ pʊt fɔɹwɝd, ɹoʊmændə, ən noʊ mɔɹ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪndɪɡnənli. "haʊ kəɾ aɪ hæv ɪmædʒənd ʃi wəd dɪsaɪd tə juz ðə boʊl ðɛɹ? ən tə ɪnklud si foʊk waɪldɝz ɪn ðə sɝkəl! haʊ kəd ʃi bɪliv ðeɪ noʊ əz mʌtʃ ʌv wɝkɪŋ wɛðɝ əz ɛɛs sədaɪ?" əbɹʌpli hɝ aɪɹ slɪpt. ʃi wɑz dɪfɛndɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə hɝ fɪɹsəst ædvɝsɛɹi ɪn ðə hɔl, hɝ oʊnli ɹil ædvɝsɛɹi. ænd, noʊ daʊt wɝs ɪn əɹ vju, ʃi wɑz əɡɹiɪŋ wɪð əɹ əbaʊt ðə si foʊk. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ kwɛstʃən ðət ʃi dɪɾ əɡɹi, bʌt ɡɪvɪŋ ðə fæk vɔɪs wɑz ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ.

With a jerk, Lelaine drew herself up. Her eyes flashed. "I supported who the Gray put forward, Romanda, and no more," she said indignantly. "How could I have imagined she would decide to use the Bowl there? And to include Sea Folk wilders in the circle! How could she believe they know as much of working weather as Aes Sedai?" Abruptly her ire slipped. She was defending herself to her fiercest adversary in the Hall, her only real adversary. And, no doubt worse in her view, she was agreeing with her about the Sea Folk. There was no question that she did agree, but giving the fact voice was another matter.

ɹoʊmændə lɛɾ əɹ koʊl smaɪl dipən əz ləleɪnz feɪs peɪld wɪð fjʊɹi. ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd əɹ bɹɑnz-kʌlɝd skɝts wɪð mətɪkjələs kɛɹ əz ləleɪn sɝtʃt fəɹ ə weɪ tə tɝn mæɾɝz əbaʊt. "wi wɪl si haʊ ðə hɔl stænz, ləleɪn," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. "əntɪl ðə kwɛstʃən ɪz kɔld, aɪ θɪŋk ɪt bɛst ɪf mɛɝɪlɪl dʌz nɑt mit wɪð ɛni ʌv ðə sɪɾɝz ɪnvɑlvd ɪn əɹ səlɛkʃən. ivən ə sədʒɛstʃən ə kəluʒən wəd bi lʊkt əɾ əskæns. aɪm ʃʊɹ jəl əɡɹi aɪ ʃəd bi ðə wʌn tə spik wɪð hɝ."

Romanda let her cold smile deepen as Lelaine's face paled with fury. She straightened her bronze-colored skirts with meticulous care as Lelaine searched for a way to turn matters about. "We will see how the Hall stands, Lelaine," she said finally. "Until the question is called, I think it best if Merilille does not meet with any of the Sitters involved in her selection. Even a suggestion of collusion would be looked at askance. I'm sure you will agree I should be the one to speak with her."

ləleɪnz feɪs peɪl dɪfɹənli. ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əfɹeɪd, nɑt vɪzəbli, jɛɾ ɛɡwin kəɾ ɔlmoʊst si hɝ kaʊntɪŋ u maɪt stæn fəɹ hɝ, əɹ əɡɛnst. kəluʒən wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz sɪɹiəs əz ə tʃɑɹdʒ ə tʃɹizən, ən ɹikwaɪɝɾ oʊnli ðə lɛsɝ kənsɛnsəs. laɪkli, ʃi kəɾ əvɔɪd ðæt, bʌt ði ɑɹɡjəməns wəd bi dip ən ækɹəmoʊniəs. ɹoʊmændəz fækʃən maɪɾ ivən ɪnkɹis. ðət wəd kɑz əntoʊl pɹɑbləmz wɛðɝ əɹ nɑɾ ɛɡwinz oʊn plænz bɔɹ fɹut. ən ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ʃi kəd də tə stɑp ɪt, ʃɔɹɾ ə ɹɪvilɪŋ wʌt ɹɪli hæd hæpən ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ. əz wɛl æsk əm tə lɛɾ əɹ æksɛp ðə seɪm ɔfɝ fɑoʊleɪn ən θiədʒɹɪn hæd.

Lelaine's face paled differently. She was not afraid, not visibly, yet Egwene could almost see her counting who might stand for her, or against. Collusion was almost as serious as a charge of treason, and required only the lesser consensus. Likely, she could avoid that, but the arguments would be deep and acrimonious. Romanda's faction might even increase. That would cause untold problems whether or not Egwene's own plans bore fruit. And there was nothing she could do to stop it, short of revealing what really had happened in Ebou Dar. As well ask them to let her accept the same offer Faolain and Theodrin had.

ɛɡwin dʒɹu bɹɛθ. ət list ʃi maɪt bi eɪbəl tə pɹɪvɛn ðə jus ə sɑlədɑɹ əz ə miɾɪŋ pleɪs ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. ðət wɑz wɛɹ ʃi mɛɾ ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv, naʊ. wən ʃi dɪd, ɛniweɪ; ʃi hæd nɑɾ ɪn deɪz. wɪð sɪɾɝz pɑpɪŋ ɪn ən aʊɾ ə ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz, faɪndɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ jə kəd bi ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ əpɪɹ wɑz dɪfəkəlt. "ðə nɛks taɪm aɪ ɪnkaʊntɝ ɪleɪn əɹ nɪneɪiv, əl pæs ɑn jəɹ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ mɛɝɪlɪl. aɪ kən lɛt jə noʊ wən ʃiz ɹɛɾi tə mit ju." wɪtʃ wəd bi nɛvɝ, wʌns ʃi wɑz dʌn wɪð ðoʊz ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz.

Egwene drew breath. At least she might be able to prevent the use of Salidar as a meeting place in Tel'aran'rhiod. That was where she met Elayne and Nynaeve, now. When she did, anyway; she had not in days. With Sitters popping in and out of the World of Dreams, finding anywhere you could be sure they would not appear was difficult. "The next time I encounter Elayne or Nynaeve, I will pass on your instructions regarding Merilille. I can let you know when she's ready to meet you." Which would be never, once she was done with those instructions.

ðə sɪɾɝz' hɛdz wɪpt ɝaʊnd, ən tu sɛts ʌv aɪz stɛɹɾ ət hɝ. ðeɪ hæd fɝɡɑɾən ʃi wɑz ðɛɹ! stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə kip əɹ feɪs smuð, ʃi ɹilaɪzd əɹ fʊt wɑz tæpɪŋ ɪɹɪɾəbli, ən stɑpt ɪt. ʃi hæd tə ɡoʊ əlɔŋ wɪð wʌt ðeɪ θɔɾ ə hɝ ə waɪl lɔŋɡɝ, jɛt. ə lɪɾəl waɪl lɔŋɡɝ. ət list ʃi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ fɛl nɔzieɪɾəd. dʒʌst æŋɡɹi.

The Sitters' heads whipped around, and two sets of eyes stared at her. They had forgotten she was there! Struggling to keep her face smooth, she realized her foot was tapping irritably, and stopped it. She had to go along with what they thought of her a while longer, yet. A little while longer. At least she no longer felt nauseated. Just angry.

ɪndə ðət moʊmən ə saɪləns, tʃɛsə keɪm bʌsəlɪŋ wɪð ɛɡwinz mɪddeɪ mil ɑn ə klɔθ-kʌvɝd tʃɹeɪ. dɑɹk-hɛɹd, plʌmp ən pɹɪɾi ɪn əɹ mɪɾəl jɪɹz, tʃɛsə mænədʒ tə kənveɪ ə pɹɑpɝ ɹɪspɛkt wɪθaʊt kɹɪŋɪŋ. hɝ kɝtsi wɑz əz sɪmpəl əz əɹ dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ dʒɹɛs, wɪð dʒʌst ə tʌtʃ ə pleɪn leɪs ət ðə θɹoʊt. "fɝɡɪv mi fəɹ ɪntʃɹuɾɪŋ, mʌðɝ, ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪm sɑɹi ðɪs ɪz leɪt, mʌðɝ, bʌt mɛɹi simz tə hæv wɑndɝɾ ɔf." ʃi klɪkt əɹ tʌŋ ɪn ɛksæspɝeɪʃən əz ʃi sɛt ðə tʃɹeɪ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɛɡwin. wɑndɝɪŋ sim vɛɹi ənlaɪk ðə mɪsneɪmd mɛɹi. ðət daʊɝ wʊmən wɑz əz dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ ə fɔls ɪn hɝsɛlf əz ʃi wɑz ə ðoʊz ɪn ʌðɝz.

Into that moment of silence, Chesa came bustling with Egwene's midday meal on a cloth-covered tray. Dark-haired, plump and pretty in her middle years, Chesa managed to convey a proper respect without cringing. Her curtsy was as simple as her dark gray dress, with just a touch of plain lace at the throat. "Forgive me for intruding, Mother, Aes Sedai. I am sorry this is late, Mother, but Meri seems to have wandered off." She clicked her tongue in exasperation as she set the tray in front of Egwene. Wandering seemed very unlike the misnamed Meri. That dour woman was as disapproving of faults in herself as she was of those in others.

ɹoʊmændə fɹaʊnd, bʌt ʃi sɛd nʌθɪŋ. æftɝ ɔl, ʃi kəd hɑɹdli ʃoʊ tu mʌtʃ ɪntʃɹəst ɪn wʌn ʌv ɛɡwinz meɪdz. ɪspɛʃli wən ðə wʊmən wɑz əɹ spaɪ. dʒʌst əz sɛləm wɑz ləleɪnz. ɛɡwin əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ ət θiədʒɹɪn əɹ fɑoʊleɪn, boʊθ stɪl stændɪŋ duɾifəli ɪn ðɛɹ kɔɹnɝz laɪk æksɛptɪd, ɹæðɝ ðən ɛɛs sədaɪ ðɛmsɛlvz.

Romanda frowned, but she said nothing. After all, she could hardly show too much interest in one of Egwene's maids. Especially when the woman was her spy. Just as Selame was Lelaine's. Egwene avoided looking at Theodrin or Faolain, both still standing dutifully in their corners like Accepted, rather than Aes Sedai themselves.

tʃɛsə hæf-oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, bʌt kloʊzd ɪɾ əɡɛn, pɝhæps ɪntɪmɪdeɪɾɪd baɪ ðə sɪɾɝz. ɛɡwin wɑz ɹɪlivd wən ʃi dɪpt ənʌðɝ kɝtsi ən lɛft wɪð ə mɝmɝd "baɪ jəɹ liv, mʌðɝ." tʃɛsəz ædvaɪs wɑz ɔlweɪz ɪndɝɛkt ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛni sɪstɝ wən ɛniwʌn ɛls wɑz pɹɛzənt, bʌt ɹaɪt ðɛn, ðə læs θɪŋ ɛɡwin wɑntəd wɑz ivən ə sɝkəmspɛkt ɹimaɪndɝ tə it waɪl əɹ fud wɑz hɑt.

Chesa half-opened her mouth, but closed it again, perhaps intimidated by the Sitters. Egwene was relieved when she dipped another curtsy and left with a murmured "By your leave, Mother." Chesa's advice was always indirect enough for any sister when anyone else was present, but right then, the last thing Egwene wanted was even a circumspect reminder to eat while her food was hot.

ləleɪn tʊk ʌp əz ɪf ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ ɪntɝʌpʃən. "ði ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ," ʃi sɛd fɝmli, "ɪz tə lɝn wʌt ði æθɑn maɪɹ wɑnt. əɹ wʌt ðə bɔɪ dʌz. meɪbi hi wɑns tə bi ðɛɹ kɪŋ, tu." hoʊldɪŋ aʊɾ əɹ ɑɹmz, ʃi əlaʊd fɑoʊleɪn tə ɹɪstɔɹ əɹ kloʊk, wɪtʃ ðə dɑɹk jʌŋ wʊmən dɪd wɪð kɛɹ. "ju wɪl ɹɪmɛmbɝ tə lemi noʊ ɪf juv ɛni θɔts ɑn ɪt, mʌðɝ?" ðət wɑz dʒʌs bɛɹli ə ɹɪkwɛst.

Lelaine took up as if there had been no interruption. "The important thing," she said firmly, "is to learn what the Atha'an Miere want. Or what the boy does. Maybe he wants to be their king, too." Holding out her arms, she allowed Faolain to restore her cloak, which the dark young woman did with care. "You will remember to let me know if you have any thoughts on it, Mother?" That was just barely a request.

"aɪ wɪl θɪŋk hɑɹd," ɛɡwin toʊl hɝ. wɪtʃ wɑz nɑt tə seɪ ʃi wəd ʃɛɹ əɹ θɔts. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi hæɾ ə ɡlɪmɝ ə ði ænsɝ. ðət ði æθɑn maɪɹ bɪlivd ɹænd wɑz ðɛɹ pɹɑfəsaɪd kɔɹəmʊɹ, ʃi nu, ðoʊ ðə hɔl dɪd nɑt, bʌt wʌɾ i wɑntəd fɹəm ðɛm, əɹ əm fɹəm hɪm, ʃi kəd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə ɪmædʒən. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ɪleɪn, ðə si foʊk wɪð əm hæd noʊ klu. əɹ sɛd nɑt. ɛɡwin ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt wʌn ə ðə hændfʊl ə sɪstɝz u hæd kʌm fɹəm ði æθɑn maɪɹ wɑz ɪn ðə kæmp. ɔlmoʊst. wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ, ðoʊz wɪndfɪndɝz wɝ gɑnə kɑz tʃɹʌbəl.

"I will think hard," Egwene told her. Which was not to say she would share her thoughts. She wished she had a glimmer of the answer. That the Atha'an Miere believed Rand was their prophesied Coramoor, she knew, though the Hall did not, but what he wanted from them, or them from him, she could not begin to imagine. According to Elayne, the Sea Folk with them had no clue. Or said not. Egwene almost wished one of the handful of sisters who had come from the Atha'an Miere was in the camp. Almost. One way or another, those Windfinders were going to cause trouble.

əɾ ə weɪv ə ɹoʊmændəz hænd, θiədʒɹɪn lɛp fɔɹwɝd wɪð ðə sɪɾɝz kloʊk əz ðoʊ ɡusd. baɪ ɹoʊmændəz ɪkspɹɛʃən, ləleɪnz ɹəkʌvɝi dɪd nɑt bɛs pliz hɝ. "ju wɪl ɹɪmɛmbɝ tə tɛl mɛɝɪlɪl aɪ wɪʃ tə spik wɪð hɝ, mʌðɝ," ʃi sɛd, ən ðət wɑz nɑɾ ə ɹɪkwɛst əɾ ɔl.

At a wave of Romanda's hand, Theodrin leaped forward with the Sitter's cloak as though goosed. By Romanda's expression, Lelaine's recovery did not best please her. "You will remember to tell Merilille I wish to speak with her, Mother," she said, and that was not a request at all.

fəɹ ə bɹif moʊmən ðə tu sɪɾɝz stʊd stɛɹɪŋ əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ, ɛɡwin fɝɡɑɾən əɡɛn ɪn ðɛɹ mjutʃəwəl ænəmɑsəɾi. ðeɪ dɪpɑɹɾəd wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd tə hɝ, vɛɹi nɪɹli dʒɑsəlɪŋ fəɹ pɹɛsəɾəns bɪfɔɹ ɹoʊmændə slɪpt aʊt fɝst, dʒɹɔɪŋ θiədʒɹɪn ɪn əɹ weɪk. bɛɹɪŋ əɹ tiθ, ləleɪn pɹæktəkli pʊʃt fɑoʊleɪn fɹəm ðə tɛn əhɛɾ ə hɝ.

For a brief moment the two Sitters stood staring at each other, Egwene forgotten again in their mutual animosity. They departed without a word to her, very nearly jostling for precedence before Romanda slipped out first, drawing Theodrin in her wake. Baring her teeth, Lelaine practically pushed Faolain from the tent ahead of her.

sɪuən hivd ə hɑɹɾi saɪ, ən meɪd noʊ ətɛmp tə haɪɾ əɹ ɹɪlif.

Siuan heaved a hearty sigh, and made no attempt to hide her relief.

"baɪ jəɹ liv, mʌðɝ," ɛɡwin mʌɾɝd mɑkəŋli. "ɪf jə pliz, mʌðɝ. jə meɪ ɡoʊ, dɔɾɝz." lɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ, ʃi sɛɾəld bæk ɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ. wɪtʃ pɹɑmpli pɪtʃt əɹ ɑntu ðə kɑɹpəts ɪn ə hip. ʃi pɪk hɝsɛlf ʌp sloʊli ən dʒɝkt əɹ skɝts stʃɹeɪt, pʊɾ əɹ stoʊl tə ɹaɪts. ət list ɪt hæd nɑt hæpən ɪn fɹʌn ə ðoʊz tu. "ɡoʊ ɡɛt sʌmθɪŋ tə it, sɪuən. ən bɹɪŋ ɪt bæk. wiv ə lɔŋ deɪ, jɛt."

"By your leave, Mother," Egwene muttered mockingly. "If you please, Mother. You may go, daughters." Letting out a long breath, she settled back in her chair. Which promptly pitched her onto the carpets in a heap. She picked herself up slowly and jerked her skirts straight, put her stole to rights. At least it had not happened in front of those two. "Go get something to eat, Siuan. And bring it back. We've a long day, yet."

"sʌm fɔlz hɝt lɛs ðən ʌðɝz," sɪuən sɛɾ əz ɪf tə hɝsɛlf bɪfɔɹ dʌkɪŋ aʊtsaɪd. ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊd θɪŋ ʃi wɛn soʊ kwɪkli, əɹ ɛɡwin maɪɾ əv ɡɪvən əɹ ən ɪɹfəl.

"Some falls hurt less than others," Siuan said as if to herself before ducking outside. It was a good thing she went so quickly, or Egwene might have given her an earful.

ʃi ɹɪtɝn sun, ðoʊ, ən ðeɪ eɪt hɑɹd ɹoʊlz ən lɛntəl stu leɪst wɪð tʌf kæɹəɾ ən skɹæps ə miɾ ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt lʊk ət kloʊsli. ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli ə fju ɪntɝʌpʃənz, ɪntʃɹuʒənz wɛɹ ðeɪ fɛl saɪlən ən pɹitɛndəd tə stʌɾi ɹɪpɔɹts. tʃɛsə keɪm tə teɪk əweɪ ðə tʃɹeɪ, ən leɪɾɝ tə ɹipleɪs ðə kændəlz, ə tæsk ʃi ɡɹʌmbəld oʊvɝ, wɪtʃ wɑz nɑt laɪk hɝ.

She returned soon, though, and they ate hard rolls and lentil stew laced with tough carrot and scraps of meat Egwene did not look at closely. There were only a few interruptions, intrusions where they fell silent and pretended to study reports. Chesa came to take away the tray, and later to replace the candles, a task she grumbled over, which was not like her.

"huɾ ɪkspɛk sɛləm tə ɡoʊ mɪsɪŋ, tu?" ʃi mʌɾɝd, hæf tə hɝsɛlf. "ɔf kənudlɪŋ wɪð ðə soʊlʒɝz, aɪ ɪkspɛkt. ðət hɑliməz ə bæɾ ɪnfluəns."

"Who'd expect Selame to go missing, too?" she muttered, half to herself. "Off canoodling with the soldiers, I expect. That Halima's a bad influence."

ə skɪni jʌŋ fɛloʊ wɪð ə dʒɹɪpɪŋ noʊz ɹɪnud ði ɔlɹɛɾi dɛd koʊlz ɪn ðə bɹeɪʒɝz - ði æmɪɝlɪn ɡɑt mɔɹ wɔɹmθ ðən moʊst, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil - ən i stʌmbəld oʊvɝ ɪz oʊn buts ən ɡeɪpt əɾ ɛɡwin ɪn ə mænɝ kwaɪt ɡɹæɾəfaɪɪŋ æftɝ ðə tu sɪɾɝz. ʃɛɹiəm əpɪɹd tə æsk wɛðɝ ɛɡwin hæɾ ɛni fɝðɝ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz, ʌv ɔl θɪŋz, ən ðən sim tə wɑnə steɪ. pɝhæps ðə fju sikɹəts ʃi nu meɪɾ əɹ nɝvəs; hɝ aɪz sɝɾənli dɑɹɾɪd ənizəli.

A skinny young fellow with a dripping nose renewed the already dead coals in the braziers - the Amyrlin got more warmth than most, but that was not a great deal - and he stumbled over his own boots and gaped at Egwene in a manner quite gratifying after the two Sitters. Sheriam appeared to ask whether Egwene had any further instructions, of all things, and then seemed to want to stay. Perhaps the few secrets she knew made her nervous; her eyes certainly darted uneasily.

ðət wɑz ðə lɑt, ən ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz kəz noʊ wʌn bɑðɝd ði æmɪɝlɪn wɪθaʊt kɑz, əɹ kəz ɛvɹiwʌn nu ðə ɹil dɪsɪʒənz wɝ meɪɾ ɪn ðə hɔl.

That was the lot, and Egwene was not sure whether it was because no one bothered the Amyrlin without cause, or because everyone knew the real decisions were made in the Hall.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ əbaʊt ðɪs ɹipɔɹɾ ə soʊlʒɝz muvɪŋ saʊθ aʊɾ ə kændɝ," sɪuən sɛɾ əz sun əz ðə tɛntflæp fɛl bɪhaɪnd ʃɛɹiəm. "ðɛɹz dʒʌs ðə wʌn, ən bɔɹɾɝləndɝz sɛldəm ɡoʊ fɑɹ fɹəm ðə blaɪt, bʌɾ ɛvɹi ful noʊz ðæt, soʊ ɪts hɑɹdli ðə kaɪndə teɪl ɛniwʌn wəd meɪk ʌp." ʃi wɑz nɑt ɹiɾɪŋ fɹəm ə peɪdʒ, naʊ.

"I don't know about this report of soldiers moving south out of Kandor," Siuan said as soon as the tentflap fell behind Sheriam. "There's just the one, and Borderlanders seldom go far from the Blight, but every fool knows that, so it's hardly the kind of tale anyone would make up." She was not reading from a page, now.

sɪuən hæd mænədʒ tə kip vɛɹi tɛnjəwəs kəntʃɹoʊl ə ði æmɪɝlɪnz nɛtwɝk ʌv aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz soʊ fɑɹ, ən ɹɪpɔɹts, ɹumɝz, ən ɡɑsəp floʊd tə hɝ ɪn stɛɾi stʃɹimz, tə bi stʌɾid bɪfɔɹ ʃi ən ɛɡwin dɪsaɪɾɪd wʌt tə pæs ɑn tə ðə hɔl. lin hæɾ əɹ oʊn nɛtwɝk, tə æd tə ðə floʊ. moʊst ʌv ɪt wɑz pæst ɑn - səm θɪŋz ðə hɔl hæd tə noʊ, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɡɛɹənti ðət ði ədʒəz wəd pæs ɑn wʌt ðɛɹ oʊn eɪdʒəns lɝnd - bʌɾ ɪɾ ɔl hæd tə bi siv fəɹ wʌt maɪt bi deɪnʒɝəs, əɹ sɝv tə daɪvɝɾ ətɛnʃən fɹəm ðə ɹil ɡoʊl.

Siuan had managed to keep very tenuous control of the Amyrlin's network of eyes-and-ears so far, and reports, rumors, and gossip flowed to her in steady streams, to be studied before she and Egwene decided what to pass on to the Hall. Leane had her own network, to add to the flow. Most of it was passed on - some things the Hall had to know, and there was no guarantee that the Ajahs would pass on what their own agents learned - but it all had to be sieved for what might be dangerous, or serve to divert attention from the real goal.

fju ʌv ðoʊz stʃɹimz kæɹiɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɡʊd, ʌv leɪt. kɛɹhin hæd pɹədust ɛni nʌmbɝ ə ɹumɝz ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ əlaɪd wɪð ɹænd, ɔɹ, wɝs, sɝvɪŋ hɪm, jɛɾ ət lis ðoʊz kəd bi dɪsmɪst aʊɾ ə hænd. ðə waɪz wʌnz wəd nɑt seɪ mʌtʃ əɾ ɔl əbaʊt ɹænd əɹ ɛniwʌn kənɛktəd tə hɪm, bʌɾ əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðɛm, mɛɹænə wɑz əweɪɾɪŋ ɪz ɹɪtɝn, ən sɝɾənli sɪstɝz ɪn ðə sʌn pæləs, wɛɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn kɛpt ɪz fɝs θɹoʊn, wɝ mɔɹ ðən siɾ ɪnʌf tə ɡɹoʊ ðoʊz teɪlz. ʌðɝz wɝ nɑɾ izəli ɪɡnɔɹd, ivən wən ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə noʊ wʌt tə meɪk ə ðɛm. ə pɹɪntɝ ɪn ɪljən əsɝɾəd ðəɾ i hæd pɹuf ɹænd hæd kɪl mæɾɪn stɛpeɪnəoʊz wɪð ɪz oʊn hænz ən dɪstʃɹɔɪd ðə bɑɾi wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, waɪl ə leɪbɝɝ ɑn ðə dɑks ðəɹ kleɪmd ʃi hæd sin ðə fɔɹmɝ kɪŋ kæɹid, baʊn ən ɡæɡd ən ɹoʊld ɪn ə ɹʌɡ, əbɔɹɾ ə ʃɪp ðət hæd seɪld ɪn ðə naɪt wɪð ðə blɛsɪŋz ə ðə kæptən ə ðə pɔɹt wɑtʃ. ðə fɝst wɑz fɑɹ mɔɹ laɪkli, bʌɾ ɛɡwin hoʊp nʌn ə ði ədʒəz' eɪdʒəns hæd pɪkt ʌp ðə seɪm teɪl. ðəɹ wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi tu mɛni blæk mɑɹks əɡɛnst ɹændz neɪm ɪn ðə sɪstɝz' bʊks.

Few of those streams carried anything good, of late. Cairhien had produced any number of rumors of Aes Sedai allied with Rand, or, worse, serving him, yet at least those could be dismissed out of hand. The Wise Ones would not say much at all about Rand or anyone connected to him, but according to them, Merana was awaiting his return, and certainly sisters in the Sun Palace, where the Dragon Reborn kept his first throne, were more than seed enough to grow those tales. Others were not easily ignored, even when it was hard to know what to make of them. A printer in Illian asserted that he had proof Rand had killed Mattin Stepaneos with his own hands and destroyed the body with the One Power, while a laborer on the docks there claimed she had seen the former King carried, bound and gagged and rolled in a rug, aboard a ship that had sailed in the night with the blessings of the captain of the Port Watch. The first was far more likely, but Egwene hoped none of the Ajahs' agents had picked up the same tale. There were already too many black marks against Rand's name in the sisters' books.

ɪt wɛn ɑn laɪk ðæt. ðə sintʃæn sim tə bi teɪkɪŋ ə fɝm hoʊld ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, əɡɛns vɛɹi lɪɾəl ɹɪzɪstəns. ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪn ə lænd wɛɹ ðə kwinz tʃɹu ɹul ɛndəɾ ə fju deɪz' ɹaɪd fɹəm əɹ kæpəɾəl, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz hɑɹdli hɑɹɾənɪŋ. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ sim tə bi ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ðoʊ wɝɾ ə ðɛm ɔlweɪz keɪm fɹəm sʌmwʌn u hæd hɝd fɹəm sʌmwʌn u hæd hɝd. moʊst sɪstɝz sim tə bɪliv ðə skæɾɝd ʃeɪɾoʊ wɝ ɹændz wɝk dɪspaɪt ðə waɪz wʌnz' dɪnaɪəlz, kæɹid baɪ ʃɛɹiəm. noʊ wʌn wɑntəd tə pɹoʊb ðə waɪz wʌnz' səpoʊz laɪz tu kloʊsli, ʌv kɔɹs. ðəɹ wɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd ɪkskjusɪz, bʌt noʊ wʌn wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə miɾ əm ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəɾ ɪksɛp ðə sɪstɝz swɔɹn tə ɛɡwin, ən ðeɪ hæd tə bi ɔɹɾɝd. æneɪjə dʒɹaɪli kɔl ði ɪnkaʊntɝz "kwaɪt kɑmpæk lɛsənz ɪn hjumɪlɪɾi," ən ʃi dɪd nɑt sim əɾ ɔl əmjuzd.

It went on like that. The Seanchan seemed to be taking a firm hold in Ebou Dar, against very little resistance. That might have been expected in a land where the Queen's true rule ended a few days' ride from her capital, yet it was hardly heartening. The Shaido seemed to be everywhere, though word of them always came from someone who had heard from someone who had heard. Most sisters seemed to believe the scattered Shaido were Rand's work despite the Wise Ones' denials, carried by Sheriam. No one wanted to probe the Wise Ones' supposed lies too closely, of course. There were a hundred excuses, but no one was willing to meet them in Tel'aran'rhiod except the sisters sworn to Egwene, and they had to be ordered. Anaiya dryly called the encounters "quite compact lessons in humility," and she did not seem at all amused.

"ðɛɹ kæn bi ðət mɛni ʃeɪɾoʊ," ɛɡwin mʌɾɝd. noʊ ɝbz hæd bɪn æɾəd tə ðə sɛkən bætʃ ə tʃɑɹkoʊl, wɪtʃ wɑz daɪɪŋ daʊn ɪn feɪn ɛmbɝz, ən əɹ aɪz ætʃt fɹəm ðə smoʊk ðət hʌŋ θɪn ɪn ði ɛɹ. tʃænəlɪŋ tə ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ʌv ɪt wəd dɪspɝs ðə læst wɔɹmθ, tu. "sʌm ə ðɪs mʌs bi bændəts' wɝk." æftɝ ɔl, hu kəd tɛl ə vɪlədʒ ɛmptid baɪ pipəl fliɪŋ bɹɪɡænz fɹəm wʌn ɛmptid baɪ ʃeɪɾoʊ? ɪspɛʃli ət θɝd hænd, əɹ fɪfθ. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ sɝɾənli ɪnʌf bændəts ɝaʊn tə əkaʊn fəɹ səm ʌv ɪt." moʊs kɔlɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn, wɪtʃ wɑz noʊ hɛlp əɾ ɔl. ʃi wɝkt əɹ ʃoʊldɝz tə lusən ə fju ʌv ðə nɑts ɪn əɹ mʌsəlz.

"There can't be that many Shaido," Egwene muttered. No herbs had been added to the second batch of charcoal, which was dying down in faint embers, and her eyes ached from the smoke that hung thin in the air. Channeling to get rid of it would disperse the last warmth, too. "Some of this must be bandits' work." After all, who could tell a village emptied by people fleeing brigands from one emptied by Shaido? Especially at third hand, or fifth. "There are certainly enough bandits around to account for some of it." Most calling themselves Dragonsworn, which was no help at all. She worked her shoulders to loosen a few of the knots in her muscles.

əbɹʌpli ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət sɪuən wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ soʊ ɪntɛnli ðət ʃi əpɪɹd ɹɛɾi tə slɪp ɔf ə hɝ stul. "sɪuən, ɑɹ jə fɔlɪŋ əslip? wi meɪ hæv wɝk moʊst ə ðə deɪ, bʌɾ ɪts stɪl laɪɾ aʊt." ðəɹ wɑz laɪɾ ət ðə smoʊk hoʊl, ðoʊ ɪt dɪɾ əpɪɹ tə bi feɪɾɪŋ.

Abruptly she realized that Siuan was staring at nothing so intently that she appeared ready to slip off of her stool. "Siuan, are you falling asleep? We may have worked most of the day, but it's still light out." There was light at the smoke hole, though it did appear to be fading.

sɪuən blɪŋkt. "aɪm sɑɹi. aɪv bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ leɪtli, ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ tə ʃɛɹ ɪt wɪð ju. əbaʊt ðə hɔl."

Siuan blinked. "I'm sorry. I've been thinking about something lately, and trying to decide whether to share it with you. About the Hall."

"ðə hɔl! sɪuən, ɪf jə noʊ sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə hɔl - !"

"The Hall! Siuan, if you know something about the Hall - !"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɛniθɪŋ," sɪuən kʌɾ ɪn. "ɪts wʌɾ aɪ səspɛkt." ʃi klɪkt əɹ tʌŋ ɪn ənɔɪəns. "nɑɾ ivən səspɛkt, ɹɪli. ət list, aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt tə səspɛkt. bʌɾ aɪ si ə pæɾɝn."

"I don't know anything," Siuan cut in. "It's what I suspect." She clicked her tongue in annoyance. "Not even suspect, really. At least, I don't know what to suspect. But I see a pattern."

"ðɛn jə hæd bɛs tɛl mi əbaʊɾ ɪt," ɛɡwin sɛd. sɪuən hæd ʃoʊn hɝsɛlf vɛɹi skɪld ət dɪtɛktɪŋ pæɾɝnz wɛɹ ʌðɝz sɔ oʊnli ə dʒʌmbəl.

"Then you had best tell me about it," Egwene said. Siuan had shown herself very skilled at detecting patterns where others saw only a jumble.

ʃɪftɪŋ ɑn əɹ stul, sɪuən lin fɔɹwɝɾ ɪntɛnli. "ɪts ðɪs. əsaɪd fɹəm ɹoʊmændə ən mɔɹiə, ðə sɪɾɝz tʃoʊzən ɪn sɑlədɑɹ ɑɹ . . . ðəɹ tu jʌŋ." mʌtʃ hæd tʃeɪnʒd ɪn sɪuən, bʌt spikɪŋ ʌv ʌðɝ sɪstɝz' eɪdʒəz klɪɹli meɪɾ əɹ ənkʌmftəɹbəl. "ɛskɹɑldi ɪz ði oʊldəst, ən aɪm ʃʊɹ ʃi ɪzən mʌtʃ pæst sɛvənti. aɪ kæn bi sɝɾən wɪθaʊt ɡoʊɪŋ ɪndə ðə nɑvəs bʊk ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, əɹ əɹ tɛlɪŋ ʌs, bʌɾ aɪm əz ʃʊɹ əz aɪ kən bi. ɪɾ ɪzən ɔfən ðə hɔl əz hɛl mɔɹ ðən wʌn sɪɾɝ ʌndɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd, ən hɪɹ wɪv eɪt!"

Shifting on her stool, Siuan leaned forward intently. "It's this. Aside from Romanda and Moria, the Sitters chosen in Salidar are . . . they're too young." Much had changed in Siuan, but speaking of other sisters' ages clearly made her uncomfortable. "Escaralde is the oldest, and I'm sure she isn't much past seventy. I can't be certain without going into the novice book in Tar Valon, or her telling us, but I'm as sure as I can be. It isn't often the Hall has held more than one Sitter under a hundred, and here we have eight!"

"bʌt ɹoʊmændə ən mɔɹiə ɑɹ nu," ɛɡwin sɛd dʒɛnli, ɹɛstɪŋ əɹ ɛlboʊz ɑn ðə teɪbəl. ɪt hæd bɪn ə lɔŋ deɪ. "ænd niðɝ ɪz jʌŋ. meɪbi wi ʃəd bi ɡɹeɪtfəl ði ʌðɝz ɑɹ, əɹ ðeɪ maɪt nɑɾ əv bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə ɹeɪz mi." ʃi cʊɾə pɔɪntəɾ aʊt ðət sɪuən hɝsɛlf hæd bɪn tʃoʊzən æmɪɝlɪn ət lɛs ðən hæf ɛskɹɑldiz eɪdʒ, bʌt ðə ɹimaɪndɝ wʊɾə bɪn kɹuəl.

"But Romanda and Moria are new," Egwene said gently, resting her elbows on the table. It had been a long day. "And neither is young. Maybe we should be grateful the others are, or they might not have been willing to raise me." She could have pointed out that Siuan herself had been chosen Amyrlin at less than half Escaralde's age, but the reminder would have been cruel.

"meɪbi," sɪuən sɛd stʌbɝnli. "ɹoʊmændə wɑz sɝɾən fəɹ ðə hɔl əz sun əz ʃi ʃoʊɾ ʌp. aɪ daʊt ðɛɹz ə jɛloʊ wəd dɛɹ spik əɡɛnst əɹ fəɹ ə tʃɛɹ. ən mɔɹiə. . . . ʃi dʌzn klɪŋ tə ləleɪn, bʌt ləleɪn ən laɪɹɛl pɹɑbli θɔt ʃi wʊd. aɪ doʊnt noʊ. mɑɹk mi, ðoʊ. wən ə wʊmən ɪz ɹeɪz tu jʌŋ, ðɛɹz ə ɹizən." ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "ɪnkluɾɪŋ wən aɪ wɑz." ðə peɪn ə lɔs flæʃt əkɹɔs əɹ feɪs, ðə lɔs ə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit sɝɾənli, meɪbi ʌv ɔl ðə lɔsəz ʃi hæd sʌfɝd. ɪt wɑz ɡɔn ɔlmoʊst əz sun əz ɪt keɪm. ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ noʊn ə wʊmən əz stʃɹɔŋ əz sɪuən sɑntʃ. "ðɪs taɪm, ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf sɪstɝz ə pɹɑpɝ eɪdʒ tə tʃuz fɹʌm, ən aɪ kæn si faɪv ədʒəz dɛdlɑkɪŋ ɑn ɔl ə ðɛm. ðəɹ ɪz ə pæɾɝn, ən aɪ min tə pɪk ɪɾ aʊt."

"Maybe," Siuan said stubbornly. "Romanda was certain for the Hall as soon as she showed up. I doubt there's a Yellow would dare speak against her for a chair. And Moria. . . . She doesn't cling to Lelaine, but Lelaine and Lyrelle probably thought she would. I don't know. Mark me, though. When a woman is raised too young, there's a reason." She took a deep breath. "Including when I was." The pain of loss flashed across her face, the loss of the Amyrlin Seat certainly, maybe of all the losses she had suffered. It was gone almost as soon as it came. Egwene did not think she had ever known a woman as strong as Siuan Sanche. "This time, there were more than enough sisters of proper age to choose from, and I can't see five Ajahs deadlocking on all of them. There is a pattern, and I mean to pick it out."

ɛɡwin dɪd nɑɾ əɡɹi. tʃeɪnʒ hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ wɛðɝ sɪuən wɑntəd tə si ɪɾ əɹ nɑt. ɪleɪɾə hæd bɹoʊkən kʌstəm, kʌm vɛɹi kloʊs tə bɹeɪkɪŋ lɔ, ɪn jusɝpɪŋ sɪuənz pleɪs. sɪstɝz hæd flɛd ðə taʊɝ ən lɛt ðə wɝl noʊ ʌv ɪt, ən ðət læst sɝɾənli hæd nɛvɝ hæpən bɪfɔɹ. tʃeɪnʒ. oʊldɝ sɪstɝz wɝ mɔɹ laɪkli tə bi taɪd tə ði oʊld weɪz, bʌɾ ivən səm ə ðɛm hæd tə si ðəɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz ʃɪftɪŋ. ʃʊɹli ðət wɑz waɪ jʌŋɡɝ wɪmən, mɔɹ oʊpən tə ðə nu, hæd bɪn tʃoʊzən. ʃəd ʃi ɔɹɾɝ sɪuən tə stɑp weɪstɪŋ əɹ taɪm wɪð ðɪs? sɪuən hæɾ ɪnʌf ɛls tə du. əɹ wəɾ ɪt bi ə kaɪndnəs tə lɛɾ əɹ kəntɪnju? ʃi wɑntəd soʊ dipli tə pɹuv ðət ðə tʃeɪnʒ ʃi sɔ wɑz nɑt ɹɪli əkɝɪŋ əɾ ɔl.

Egwene did not agree. Change hung in the air whether Siuan wanted to see it or not. Elaida had broken custom, come very close to breaking law, in usurping Siuan's place. Sisters had fled the Tower and let the world know of it, and that last certainly had never happened before. Change. Older sisters were more likely to be tied to the old ways, but even some of them had to see that everything was shifting. Surely that was why younger women, more open to the new, had been chosen. Should she order Siuan to stop wasting her time with this? Siuan had enough else to do. Or would it be a kindness to let her continue? She wanted so deeply to prove that the change she saw was not really occurring at all.

bɪfɔɹ ɛɡwin kəd meɪk ə dɪsɪʒən, ɹoʊmændə dʌkt ɪndə ðə tɛn ən stʊd hoʊldɪŋ ðə tɛntflæp oʊpən. lɔŋ ʃædoʊz stʃɹɛtʃt əkɹɔs ðə snoʊ aʊtsaɪd. ivnɪŋ wɑz kʌmɪŋ fæst. ɹoʊmændəz feɪs wɑz əz dɑɹk əz ðoʊz ʃædoʊz. ʃi fɪkst sɪuən wɪð ə stɝn ɡeɪz ən snæpt wʌn wɝd. "aʊt!"

Before Egwene could make a decision, Romanda ducked into the tent and stood holding the tentflap open. Long shadows stretched across the snow outside. Evening was coming fast. Romanda's face was as dark as those shadows. She fixed Siuan with a stern gaze and snapped one word. "Out!"

ɛɡwin ɡeɪv ən ɪnfɪnɪtɛsɪməl nɑd, bʌt sɪuən wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɑn əɹ fit. ʃi mɪst ə stɛp, ðən ɔl bʌt ɹæn fɹəm ðə tɛnt. ə sɪstɝ u stʊd wɛɹ sɪuən dɪd wɑz ɪkspɛktəd tə oʊbeɪ ɛni sɪstɝ ə ɹoʊmændəz stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ðə paʊɝ, nɑt dʒʌst ə sɪɾɝ.

Egwene gave an infinitesimal nod, but Siuan was already on her feet. She missed a step, then all but ran from the tent. A sister who stood where Siuan did was expected to obey any sister of Romanda's strength in the Power, not just a Sitter.

θɹoʊɪŋ daʊn ðə tɛntflæp, ɹoʊmændə ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs. ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ sɝaʊndəd hɝ, ən ʃi woʊv ə wɔɹɾ əɡɛnst ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ ɝaʊn ði ɪnsaɪɾ ə ðə tɛnt wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə pɹitɛns ʌv æskɪŋ ɛɡwinz pɝmɪʃən. "ju ɑɹ ə ful!" ʃi ɡɹeɪɾɪd. "haʊ lɔŋ dɪd jə θɪŋk jə kəd kip ðɪs ə sikɹət? soʊlʒɝz tɔk, tʃaɪld. mɛn ɔlweɪz tɔk! bɹaɪn wɪl bi lʌki ɪf ðə hɔl dʌzn pʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɑn ə paɪk."

Throwing down the tentflap, Romanda embraced the Source. The glow of saidar surrounded her, and she wove a ward against eavesdropping around the inside of the tent without so much as a pretense of asking Egwene's permission. "You are a fool!" she grated. "How long did you think you could keep this a secret? Soldiers talk, child. Men always talk! Bryne will be lucky if the Hall doesn't put his head on a pike."

ɛɡwin stʊd sloʊli, smuðɪŋ əɹ skɝt. ʃi hæd bɪn weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðɪs, bʌt ʃi stɪl niɾəd tə bi kɛɹfəl. ðə ɡeɪm wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm pleɪɾ aʊt, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ kəd stɪl tɝn əɡɛnst əɹ ɪn ə flæʃ. ʃi hæd tə pɹitɛn ɪnəsəns, əntɪl ʃi kəɾ əfɔɹd tə stɑp pɹitɛndɪŋ. "mʌst aɪ ɹimaɪn jə ðət ɹudnəs tə ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɪz ə kɹaɪm, dɔɾɝ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪnstɛd. ʃi hæd bɪn pɹitɛndɪŋ soʊ lɔŋ, ən ʃi wɑz soʊ kloʊz.

Egwene stood slowly, smoothing her skirt. She had been waiting for this, but she still needed to be careful. The game was far from played out, and everything could still turn against her in a flash. She had to pretend innocence, until she could afford to stop pretending. "Must I remind you that rudeness to the Amyrlin Seat is a crime, daughter," she said instead. She had been pretending so long, and she was so close.

"ði æmɪɝlɪn sit." ɹoʊmændə stʃɹoʊɾ əkɹɔs ðə kɑɹpəts tə wɪðɪn ɑɹmz ɹitʃ ʌv ɛɡwin, ən baɪ hɝ ɡlɛɹ, ðə θɔɾ ə ɹitʃɪŋ mɔɹ kɹɔst əɹ maɪnd. "jɔɹ ən ɪnfənt! jəɹ bɑɾəm stɪl ɹɪmɛmbɝz ðə læst swɪtʃɪŋ ɪt hæɾ əz ə nɑvəs! æftɝ ðɪs, jəl bi lʌki ɪf ðə hɔl dʌzn pʊt jə ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ wɪð ə fju pleɪ pɹɪɾiz. ɪf jə wɑnə əvɔɪd ðæt, jəl lɪsən tə mi, ən də əz aɪ tɛl ju. naʊ, sɪt daʊn!"

"The Amyrlin Seat." Romanda strode across the carpets to within arm's reach of Egwene, and by her glare, the thought of reaching more crossed her mind. "You're an infant! Your bottom still remembers the last switching it had as a novice! After this, you'll be lucky if the Hall doesn't put you in a corner with a few play pretties. If you want to avoid that, you will listen to me, and do as I tell you. Now, sit down!"

ɛɡwin siðd ɪnsaɪd, bʌt ʃi sæt. ɪt wɑz tu sun.

Egwene seethed inside, but she sat. It was too soon.

wɪð ə ʃɑɹp, sæɾəsfaɪd nɑd, ɹoʊmændə plæntəɾ əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps. ʃi stɛɹd daʊn əɾ ɛɡwin laɪk ə stɝn æn lɛktʃɝɪŋ ə mɪsbəheɪvɪŋ nis. ə vɛɹi stɝn ænt. əɹ ə hɛdzmən wɪð ə tuθæk. "ðɪs miɾɪŋ wɪð pɛlɪvɑɹ ən ɑɝəθɛl əz tə ɡoʊ fɔɹwɝd, naʊ ɪts bɪn ɝeɪnʒd. ðeɪ ɪkspɛk ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ən ðəl si hɝ. jəl ətɛnd wɪð ɔl ðə pɑmp ən dɪɡnəɾi jəɹ taɪɾəl dɪzɝvz. ən jəl tɛl əm aɪm tə spik fəɹ ju, æftɝ wɪtʃ, jəl hoʊl jəɹ tʌŋ! ɡɛɾɪŋ əm aʊɾ ʌv əɹ weɪ wɪl ɹikwaɪɝ ə fɝm hænd, ən sʌmwʌn u noʊz wʌt ʃiz əbaʊt. noʊ daʊt ləleɪn wɪl bi hɪɹ ɛni mɪnət, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊt hɝsɛlf fɔɹwɝd, bʌt jə dʒʌst ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə tʃɹʌbəl ʃiz ɪn. aɪv spɛn ðə deɪ spikɪŋ wɪð ʌðɝ sɪɾɝz, ən ɪɾ əpɪɹz vɛɹi laɪkli ðət mɛɝɪlɪl ən mɛɹænəz feɪljɝz wɪl bi kwaɪt fɝmli ətætʃt tə ləleɪn wən ðə hɔl sɪts nɛkst. soʊ, ɪf juv ɛni hoʊp ʌv ɡeɪnɪŋ ði ɪkspɪɹiəns jəl nid tə ɡɹoʊ ɪndə ðət stoʊl, ɪt laɪz wɪð mi! dʒju ʌndɝstæn mi?"

With a sharp, satisfied nod, Romanda planted her fists on her hips. She stared down at Egwene like a stern aunt lecturing a misbehaving niece. A very stern aunt. Or a headsman with a toothache. "This meeting with Pelivar and Arathelle has to go forward, now it's been arranged. They expect the Amyrlin Seat, and they will see her. You will attend with all the pomp and dignity your title deserves. And you will tell them I am to speak for you, after which, you will hold your tongue! Getting them out of our way will require a firm hand, and someone who knows what she's about. No doubt Lelaine will be here any minute, trying to put herself forward, but you just remember the trouble she's in. I've spent the day speaking with other Sitters, and it appears very likely that Merilille and Merana's failures will be quite firmly attached to Lelaine when the Hall sits next. So, if you have any hope of gaining the experience you'll need to grow into that stole, it lies with me! Do you understand me?"

"aɪ ʌndɝstæn pɝfəkli," ɛɡwin sɛd, ɪn wʌt ʃi hoʊpt wɑz ə mik vɔɪs. ɪf ʃi lɛt ɹoʊmændə spik ɪn əɹ pleɪs, ðəɹ wəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bi ɛni daʊts. ðə hɔl ən ðə hoʊl wɝld wəd noʊ hu hɛld ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ baɪ ðə skɹʌf ə hɝ nɛk.

"I understand perfectly," Egwene said, in what she hoped was a meek voice. If she let Romanda speak in her place, there would no longer be any doubts. The Hall and the whole world would know who held Egwene al'Vere by the scruff of her neck.

ɹoʊmændəz aɪz sim tə bɔɹ ɪndə hɝ hɛd bɪfɔɹ ðə wʊmən ɡeɪv ə kɝt nɑd. "aɪ hoʊp ðət jə du. aɪ ɪntɛn tə ɹimuv ɪleɪɾə fɹəm ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ən aɪ woʊn si ðət ɹuən kəz ə tʃaɪl θɪŋks ʃi noʊz ɪnʌf tə faɪn əɹ weɪ əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹit wɪθaʊɾ əɹ hæn hɛld." wɪð ə snɔɹt, ʃi flʌŋ əɹ kloʊk ɝaʊn əɹ ən flʌŋ hɝsɛlf aʊɾ ə ðə tɛnt. ðə wɔɹd vænɪʃt əz ʃi dɪd.

Romanda's eyes seemed to bore into her head before the woman gave a curt nod. "I hope that you do. I intend to remove Elaida from the Amyrlin Seat, and I won't see that ruined because a child thinks she knows enough to find her way across the street without her hand held." With a snort, she flung her cloak around her and flung herself out of the tent. The ward vanished as she did.

ɛɡwin sæɾ ən fɹaʊn ət ðə tɛns ɛntʃɹɑns. ə tʃaɪld? bɝn ðə wʊmən, ʃi wɑz ði æmɪɝlɪn sit! wɛðɝ ðeɪ laɪkt ɪɾ əɹ nɑt, ðeɪ hæd ɹeɪz hɝ, ən ðeɪ wɝ gɑnə hæv tə lɪv wɪð ɪt! ɪvɛntʃəwəli. snætʃɪŋ ʌp ðə stoʊn ɪŋkwɛl, ʃi hɝld ɪɾ ət ðə tɛntflæp.

Egwene sat and frowned at the tent's entrance. A child? Burn the woman, she was the Amyrlin Seat! Whether they liked it or not, they had raised her, and they were going to have to live with it! Eventually. Snatching up the stone inkwell, she hurled it at the tentflap.

ləleɪn dɑdʒ bæk, bɛɹli əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðə splæʃ. "tɛmpɝ, tɛmpɝ," ʃi tʃaɪɾɪd, kʌmɪŋ ɑn ɪn.

Lelaine dodged back, barely avoiding the splash. "Temper, temper," she chided, coming on in.

noʊ mɔɹ æskɪŋ pɝmɪʃən ðən ɹoʊmændə hæd, ʃi ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs ən woʊv ə wɔɹd tə stɑp ɛniwʌn oʊvɝhɪɹɪŋ wʌt ʃi hæd tə seɪ. wɛɹ ɹoʊmændə hæd bɪn ɪn ə fjʊɹi, ləleɪn əpɪɹd plizd wɪð hɝsɛlf, ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ ɡlʌv hænz ən smaɪlɪŋ.

No more asking permission than Romanda had, she embraced the Source and wove a ward to stop anyone overhearing what she had to say. Where Romanda had been in a fury, Lelaine appeared pleased with herself, rubbing her gloved hands and smiling.

"aɪ doʊn səpoʊz aɪ nid tɛl jə jəɹ lɪɾəl sikɹəɾ ɪz aʊt. vɛɹi bæɾ ə lɔɹd bɹaɪn, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk hiz tu væljəbəl tə kɪl. ə ɡʊd θɪŋ fəɹ ɪm aɪ du. lemi si. aɪ səpoʊz ɹoʊmændə toʊl jə ðət ðəɹ wɪl bi ə miɾɪŋ wɪð pɛlɪvɑɹ ən ɑɝəθɛl, bʌt jə ɑɹ tə lɛɾ əɹ də ɔl ðə tɔkɪŋ. æm aɪ ɹaɪt?" ɛɡwin stɝd, bʌt ləleɪn weɪvd ə hæn ət hɝ. "noʊ nid tə ænsɝ. aɪ noʊ ɹoʊmændə. ənfɔɹtʃənətli fəɹ hɝ, aɪ lɝn əbaʊt ðɪs bɪfɔɹ ʃi dɪd, ən ɪnstɛɾ ə ɹʌnɪŋ tə jə stʃɹeɪɾəweɪ, aɪv bɪn poʊlɪŋ ði ʌðɝ sɪɾɝz. dʒju wɑnə noʊ wʌt ðeɪ θɪŋk?"

"I don't suppose I need tell you your little secret is out. Very bad of Lord Bryne, but I think he's too valuable to kill. A good thing for him I do. Let me see. I suppose Romanda told you that there will be a meeting with Pelivar and Arathelle, but you are to let her do all the talking. Am I right?" Egwene stirred, but Lelaine waved a hand at her. "No need to answer. I know Romanda. Unfortunately for her, I learned about this before she did, and instead of running to you straightaway, I've been polling the other Sitters. Do you want to know what they think?"

ɛɡwin bɔld əɹ fɪsts ɪn əɹ læp, wɛɹ ʃi hoʊp ðeɪ wəd nɑt bi noʊɾəst. "aɪ ɪkspɛk jəɹ gɑnə tɛl mi."

Egwene balled her fists in her lap, where she hoped they would not be noticed. "I expect you're going to tell me."

"ju ɑɹ ɪn noʊ pəzɪʃən tə teɪk ðət toʊn wɪð mi," ləleɪn sɛd ʃɑɹpli, bʌt ðə nɛkst ɪnstənt, hɝ smaɪl ɹɪtɝnd. "ðə hɔl ɪz dɪsplizd wɪð ju. vɛɹi dɪsplizd. wʌtɛvɝ ɹoʊmændə hæz θɹɛɾənd jə wɪð - ən ɪts izi ɪnʌf tə ɪmædʒən - aɪ kən dɪlɪvɝ. ɹoʊmændə, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, hæz əpsɛɾ ə nʌmbɝ ə sɪɾɝz wɪð əɹ bʊliɪŋ. soʊ, ənlɛs jə wɑnə faɪn jɝsɛlf wɪð lɛs əθɔɹəɾi ðən ðə lɪɾəl juv naʊ, ɹoʊmændə ɪz gɑnə bi sɝpɹaɪz təmɑɹoʊ wən jə neɪm mi tə spik fəɹ ju. ɪts hɑɹd tə bɪliv ɑɝəθɛl ən pɛlɪvɑɹ wɝ fulɪʃ ɪnʌf tə pʊɾ ə θɪŋ laɪk ðɪs ɪn moʊʃən, bʌt ðəl slɪŋk əweɪ wɪð ðɛɹ teɪlz bɪtwin ðɛɹ lɛɡz wʌns aɪm dʌn wɪð ðɛm."

"You are in no position to take that tone with me," Lelaine said sharply, but the next instant, her smile returned. "The Hall is displeased with you. Very displeased. Whatever Romanda has threatened you with - and it's easy enough to imagine - I can deliver. Romanda, on the other hand, has upset a number of Sitters with her bullying. So, unless you want to find yourself with less authority than the little you have now, Romanda is going to be surprised tomorrow when you name me to speak for you. It's hard to believe Arathelle and Pelivar were foolish enough to put a thing like this in motion, but they'll slink away with their tails between their legs once I'm done with them."

"haʊ də aɪ noʊ jə woʊn kæɹi aʊt ðoʊz θɹɛts ɛniweɪ?" ɛɡwin hoʊpt əɹ æŋɡɹi mʌɾɝ saʊndəd laɪk sʌlənnəs. laɪt, bʌt ʃi wɑz taɪɝɾ ə ðɪs!

"How do I know you won't carry out those threats anyway?" Egwene hoped her angry mutter sounded like sullenness. Light, but she was tired of this!

"bɪkɔz aɪ seɪ aɪ woʊnt," ləleɪn snæpt. "doʊn jə noʊ baɪ naʊ ðət jə ɑɹən ɹɪli ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ? ðə hɔl ɪz, ən ðəɾ ɪz bɪtwin ɹoʊmændə ən mi. ɪn ənʌðɝ hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, jə meɪ ɡɹoʊ ɪndə ðə stoʊl, bʌt fəɹ naʊ, sɪt kwaɪətli, foʊl jəɹ hænz, ən lɛt sʌmwʌn u noʊz wʌt ʃiz əbaʊt si tə pʊlɪŋ ɪleɪɾə daʊn."

"Because I say I won't," Lelaine snapped. "Don't you know by now that you aren't really in charge of anything? The Hall is, and that is between Romanda and me. In another hundred years, you may grow into the stole, but for now, sit quietly, fold your hands, and let someone who knows what she is about see to pulling Elaida down."

æftɝ ləleɪn lɛft, ɛɡwin wʌns mɔɹ sæt stɛɹɪŋ. ðɪs taɪm, ʃi wɑz nɑt lɛɾɪŋ æŋɡɝ bɔɪl. jə meɪ ɡɹoʊ ɪndə ðə stoʊl. ɔlmoʊs ðə seɪm θɪŋ ɹoʊmændə hæd sɛd. sʌmwʌn u noʊz wʌt ʃiz əbaʊt. wɑz ʃi dɪsivɪŋ hɝsɛlf? ə tʃaɪld, ɹuɪnɪŋ wʌɾ ə wʊmən wɪð ɪkspɪɹiəns kəd hændəl izəli?

After Lelaine left, Egwene once more sat staring. This time, she was not letting anger boil. You may grow into the stole. Almost the same thing Romanda had said. Someone who knows what she is about. Was she deceiving herself? A child, ruining what a woman with experience could handle easily?

sɪuən slɪpt ɪndə ðə tɛn ən stʊd lʊkɪŋ wɝid. "ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn dʒʌs keɪm tə tɛl mi ðə hɔl noʊz," ʃi sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "ʌndɝ kʌvɝ ʌv æskɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪz ʃɝts. hɪm ən ɪz blʌɾi ʃɝts! ðə miɾɪŋ ɪz sɛt fəɹ təmɑɹoʊ, əɾ ə leɪk əbaʊt faɪv aʊɝz tə ðə nɔɹθ. pɛlɪvɑɹ ən ɑɝəθɛl ɑɹ ɔlɹɛɾi ɑn ðə weɪ. æɛmlɪn, tu. ðæts ə θɝd stʃɹɔŋ haʊs."

Siuan slipped into the tent and stood looking worried. "Gareth Bryne just came to tell me the Hall knows," she said dryly. "Under cover of asking about his shirts. Him and his bloody shirts! The meeting is set for tomorrow, at a lake about five hours to the north. Pelivar and Arathelle are already on the way. Aemlyn, too. That's a third strong House."

"ðæts mɔɹ ðən ləleɪn əɹ ɹoʊmændə sɔ fɪt tə tɛl mi," ɛɡwin sɛd, dʒʌst əz dʒɹaɪli. noʊ. ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz ə biɪŋ lɛd baɪ ðə hænd, pʊʃt baɪ ðə skɹʌf ə hɝ nɛk, əɹ fɪfti jɪɹz, əɹ faɪv, ən ʃi wəd bi fɪt fəɹ nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ. ɪf ʃi hæd tə ɡɹoʊ, ʃi hæd tə ɡɹoʊ naʊ.

"That's more than Lelaine or Romanda saw fit to tell me," Egwene said, just as dryly. No. A hundred years of being led by the hand, pushed by the scruff of her neck, or fifty years, or five, and she would be fit for nothing more. If she had to grow, she had to grow now.

"oʊ, blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz," sɪuən ɡɹoʊnd. "aɪ kæn stæn ɪt! wʌd ðeɪ seɪ? haʊ dɪɾ ɪt ɡoʊ?"

"Oh, blood and bloody ashes," Siuan groaned. "I can't stand it! What did they say? How did it go?"

"əbaʊɾ əz wi ɪkspɛktəd." ɛɡwin smaɪld wɪð ə wʌndɝ ðət tʌtʃt əɹ vɔɪs, tu. "sɪuən, ðeɪ kʊdn əv hændəd mi ðə hɔl bɛɾɝ ɪf aɪ hæd toʊld əm wʌt tə du."

"About as we expected." Egwene smiled with a wonder that touched her voice, too. "Siuan, they couldn't have handed me the Hall better if I had told them what to do."

ðə læs laɪt wɑz feɪlɪŋ əz ʃɛɹiəm əpɹoʊtʃt əɹ taɪni tɛnt, smɔlɝ ivən ðən ɛɡwinz. ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn kipɝ, ʃi wʊɾə hæd tə ʃɛɹ. dʌkɪŋ ɪnsaɪd, ʃi hæɾ oʊnli taɪm tə ɹilaɪz ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn wən ʃi wɑz ʃildɪɾ ən flʌŋ feɪsdaʊn ɑn əɹ kɑt. stʌnd, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə kɹaɪ aʊt, bʌɾ ə kɔɹnɝ ʌv wʌn ə hɝ blæŋkəts wɑɾəd ɪtsɛlf ɪndə hɝ maʊθ. dʒɹɛs ən ʃɪf bɝst əweɪ fɹəm əɹ bɑɾi laɪk ə pɹɪk bʌbəl.

The last light was failing as Sheriam approached her tiny tent, smaller even than Egwene's. If she had not been Keeper, she would have had to share. Ducking inside, she had only time to realize she was not alone when she was shielded and flung facedown on her cot. Stunned, she tried to cry out, but a corner of one of her blankets wadded itself into her mouth. Dress and shift burst away from her body like a pricked bubble.

ə hæn stʃɹoʊkt əɹ hɛd. "ju wɝ səpoʊz tə kip mi ɪnfɔɹmd, ʃɛɹiəm. ðət ɡɝl ɪz ʌp tə sʌmθɪŋ, ən aɪ wɑnə noʊ wʌt."

A hand stroked her head. "You were supposed to keep me informed, Sheriam. That girl is up to something, and I want to know what."

ɪt tʊk ə lɔŋ taɪm tə kənvɪns əɹ kwɛstʃənɝ ðət ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi toʊld ɔl ʃi nu, ðət ʃi wəd nɛvɝ hoʊl bæk ə wɝd, nɑɾ ə wɪspɝ. wən ʃi wɑz lɛft əloʊn ət læst, ɪt wɑz tə laɪ kɝld ʌp ən wɪmpɝɪŋ fɹəm əɹ wɛls, bɪɾɝli wɪʃɪŋ ðət ʃi hæd nɛvɝ ɪn əɹ laɪf spoʊkən tə ə sɪŋɡəl sɪstɝ ɪn ðə hɔl.

It took a long time to convince her questioner that she had already told all she knew, that she would never hold back a word, not a whisper. When she was left alone at last, it was to lie curled up and whimpering from her welts, bitterly wishing that she had never in her life spoken to a single sister in the Hall.


tʃæptɝ sɛvəntin


CHAPTER 17

aʊɾ ɑn ði aɪs


Out on the Ice

ðə nɛks mɔɹnɪŋ, ə kɑləm ɹoʊd nɔɹθ fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kæmp wɛl bɪfɔɹ dɔn, nɪɹ saɪlən ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə kɹik ə sæɾəlz ən ðə kɹʌntʃ ə hʊvz bɹeɪkɪŋ θɹu ðə snoʊz kɹɪsp kɹʌst. əkeɪʒənəli ə hɔɹs snɔɹɾɪd, əɹ mɛɾəl dʒɪŋɡəld ən wɑz kwɪkli mʌfəld. ðə mun wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi daʊn, ðə skaɪ ɡlɪsnɪŋ wɪð stɑɹz, bʌt ðə peɪl blæŋkət laɪɪŋ oʊvɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ bɪloʊ laɪɾənd ðə dɑɹknəs. wən ðə fɝst ɡlɪmɝz ə deɪ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ði ist, ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ə ɡʊɾ aʊɝ əɹ mɔɹ. wɪtʃ wɑz nɑt tə seɪ ðeɪ hæd tʃɹævəl fɑɹ. oʊvɝ səm oʊpən stʃɹɛtʃəz, ɛɡwin kəd lɛt deɪʃɝ ɡoʊ əɾ ə sloʊ kæntɝ ðət spɹeɪd waɪt laɪk splæʃɪŋ wɔɾɝ, bʌt fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt, ðə hɔɹsəz wɔkt, ən nɑt kwɪkli, θɹu spɑɹs fɔɹəst wɛɹ ðə snoʊ meɪd dip dʒɹɪfs bɪloʊ ən klʌŋ tə bɹæntʃəz oʊvɝhɛd. oʊk ən paɪn, saʊɝɡəm ən lɛðɝlif ən tʃɹiz ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ɔl lʊkt ivən mɔɹ bi dʒɹæɡəl ðən ðeɪ hæɾ ɪn ðə hiɾ ən dʒɹaʊt. tədeɪ wɑz ðə fist ʌv əbɹæm, bʌt ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ pɹaɪzəz beɪkt ɪn hʌnikeɪks. ðə laɪt sɛn səm pipəl faʊn sɝpɹaɪzəz ɪn ðə deɪ, ðoʊ.

The next morning, a column rode north from the Aes Sedai camp well before dawn, near silent except for the creak of saddles and the crunch of hooves breaking through the snow's crisp crust. Occasionally a horse snorted, or metal jingled and was quickly muffled. The moon was already down, the sky glistening with stars, but the pale blanket lying over everything below lightened the darkness. When the first glimmers of day appeared in the east, they had been riding a good hour or more. Which was not to say they had traveled far. Over some open stretches, Egwene could let Daishar go at a slow canter that sprayed white like splashing water, but for the most part, the horses walked, and not quickly, through sparse forest where the snow made deep drifts below and clung to branches overhead. Oak and pine, sourgum and leatherleaf and trees she did not recognize all looked even more be draggled than they had in the heat and drought. Today was the Feast of Abram, but there would be no prizes baked in honeycakes. The Light send some people found surprises in the day, though.

ðə sʌn ɹoʊz ən klaɪmd, ə peɪl ɡoʊldən bɔl ðət ɡeɪv noʊ wɔɹmθ. ɛvɹi bɹɛθ stɪl bɪt ðə θɹoʊɾ ən pɹədust ə pʌf ə mɪst. ə ʃɑɹp wɪn blu, nɑt hɑɹd, bʌt kʌɾɪŋ, ən tə ðə wɛs dɑɹk klaʊdz ɹoʊl nɔɹθ ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ tə ændɝ. ʃi fɛlt ə tʌtʃ ə pɪɾi fəɹ huɛvɝ wəd noʊ ðə bɝɾən ə ðoʊz klaʊdz. ən ɹɪlif ðət ðeɪ wɝ hɛɾɪŋ əweɪ. weɪɾɪŋ ənʌðɝ deɪ wʊɾə bɪn mæɾənɪŋ. ʃi hæd bɪn əneɪbəl tə slip əɾ ɔl, fəɹ fɪdʒəti ɹɛsləsnəs, nɑt hɛdeɪks. ɹɛsləsnəs, ən tɛnʒɹəlz ə fɪɹ ðət hæd kɹɛpt ɪn laɪk koʊld ɛɹ ʌndɝ ði ɛdʒəz ə ðə tɛnt. ʃi wɑz nɑt taɪɝd, ðoʊ. ʃi fɛlt laɪk ə kəmpɹɛst spɹɪŋ, ə taɪt-waʊn klɑk, fʊl ʌv ɛnɝdʒi ðət wɑntəd dɛspɝətli tə faɪn ɹilis. laɪt, ɛvɹiθɪŋ kəd stɪl ɡoʊ hɔɹəbli ɹɔŋ.

The sun rose and climbed, a pale golden ball that gave no warmth. Every breath still bit the throat and produced a puff of mist. A sharp wind blew, not hard, but cutting, and to the west dark clouds rolled north on their way to Andor. She felt a touch of pity for whoever would know the burden of those clouds. And relief that they were heading away. Waiting another day would have been maddening. She had been unable to sleep at all, for fidgety restlessness, not headaches. Restlessness, and tendrils of fear that had crept in like cold air under the edges of the tent. She was not tired, though. She felt like a compressed spring, a tight-wound clock, full of energy that wanted desperately to find release. Light, everything could still go horribly wrong.

ɪt wɑz ən ɪmpɹɛsɪv kɑləm, bɪhaɪn ðə stændɝɾ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ðə waɪt fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn sɛntɝɾ ɑn ə spaɪɹəl ə sɛvən kʌlɝz, wʌn fəɹ itʃ ədʒɑ. soʊn sikɹɪtli ɪn sɑlədɑɹ, ɪt hæd leɪn ɪn ðə bɑɾəm ʌv ə tʃɛst ɛvɝ sɪns, wɪð ðə kiz ɪn ðə kipɪŋ ə ðə hɔl. ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðeɪ wʊɾə pɹədust ɪɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋz nid fəɹ pɑmp. ə θaʊzən hɛvi kævəlɹi ɪn pleɪt-ænd-meɪl pɹəvaɪɾəd ə kloʊs ɛskɔɹt, ə pænɑpli ʌv lænsɪz, sɔɹdz, meɪsəz ən æksiz sɛldəm sin saʊθ ə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. ðɛɹ kəmændɝ wɑz ə wʌn-aɪd ʃaɪnɝən wɪð ə vɪvədli peɪntəɾ aɪpætʃ, ə mæn ʃi hæd mɛt wʌns, wʌt simd ən eɪdʒ əɡoʊ. ənoʊ noʊmstə ɡlɛɹɾ ət ðə tʃɹiz θɹu ðə stil bɑɹz ə hɪz hɛlməts feɪsɡɑɹɾ əz ɪf i ɪkspɛktəɾ ɛvɹi læst wʌn tə haɪɾ ən æmbʊʃ, ən ɪz mɛn sim nɪɹli əz wɑtʃfəl, ɪɹɛkt ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz.

It was an impressive column, behind the standard of the White Tower, the white Flame of Tar Valon centered on a spiral of seven colors, one for each Ajah. Sewn secretly in Salidar, it had lain in the bottom of a chest ever since, with the keys in the keeping of the Hall. She did not think they would have produced it except for this morning's need for pomp. A thousand heavy cavalry in plate-and-mail provided a close escort, a panoply of lances, swords, maces and axes seldom seen south of the Borderlands. Their commander was a one-eyed Shienaran with a vividly painted eyepatch, a man she had met once, what seemed an Age ago. Uno Nomesta glared at the trees through the steel bars of his helmet's faceguard as if he expected every last one to hide an ambush, and his men seemed nearly as watchful, erect in their saddles.

ɔlmoʊst aʊɾ ə saɪɾ əhɛd θɹu ðə tʃɹiz ɹoʊɾ ə nɑɾ ə mɛn u wɔɹ hɛlməts, bɹɛst- ən bækpleɪts, bʌt noʊ ʌðɝ ɑɹmɝ. ðɛɹ kloʊks wɪpt əbaʊt fɹili; ə ɡɔntələɾəd hæn fəɹ ðə ɹeɪnz ən ə hæn fəɹ ðə ʃɔɹt baʊ ðeɪ itʃ kæɹid lɛf nʌθɪŋ tə ɡɹæsp ət wɔɹmθ. ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ fɑɹðɝ ɑn, ən bɪɑn saɪt tə lɛft ən ɹaɪɾ ən bɪhaɪnd, ənʌðɝ θaʊzən ɔltəɡɛðɝ, tə skaʊɾ ən skɹin. ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛk tʃɹɪkɝi fɹəm ði ændɔɹənz, bʌɾ i hæd bɪn ɹɔŋ bɪfɔɹ, soʊ hi sɛd, ən ðə mʊɹændiənz wɝ ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ. ən ðən ðəɹ wɑz ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ʌv əsæsənz ɪn ɪleɪɾəz peɪ, əɹ ivən dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu wən ə dɑɹkfɹɛn maɪt dɪsaɪd tə kɪl, əɹ waɪ. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ðoʊ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɝ səpoʊzədli fɑɹ əweɪ, noʊ wʌn ɛvɝ sim tə noʊ ðeɪ wɝ ðəɹ əntɪl ðə kɪlɪŋ bɪɡæn. ivən bændəts maɪɾ əv tʃɹaɪd ðɛɹ hænd wɪð tu smɔl ə pɑɹɾi. lɔɹd bɹaɪn wɑz nɑɾ ə mæn tə teɪk tʃænsəz ənnɛsəsɛɹəli, ən ɛɡwin wɑz vɛɹi ɡlæd. tədeɪ, ʃi wɑntəɾ əz mɛni wɪtnəsəz əz pɑsəbəl.

Almost out of sight ahead through the trees rode a knot of men who wore helmets, breast- and backplates, but no other armor. Their cloaks whipped about freely; a gauntleted hand for the reins and a hand for the short bow they each carried left nothing to grasp at warmth. There were more farther on, and beyond sight to left and right and behind, another thousand altogether, to scout and screen. Gareth Bryne did not expect trickery from the Andorans, but he had been wrong before, so he said, and the Murandians were another matter. And then there was the possibility of assassins in Elaida's pay, or even Darkfriends. The Light alone knew when a Darkfriend might decide to kill, or why. For that matter, though the Shaido were supposedly far away, no one ever seemed to know they were there until the killing began. Even bandits might have tried their hand with too small a party. Lord Bryne was not a man to take chances unnecessarily, and Egwene was very glad. Today, she wanted as many witnesses as possible.

ʃi hɝsɛlf ɹoʊɾ əhɛɾ ə ðə bænɝ, wɪð ʃɛɹiəm ən sɪuən ən bɹaɪn. ði ʌðɝz əpɪɹd kɑɾ ɪn ðɛɹ oʊn θɔts. lɔɹd bɹaɪn sæɾ ɪz sæɾəl izəli, ðə mɪst ə hɪz ivən bɹɛθ fɔɹmɪŋ ə laɪt fɹɔst ɑn ɪz feɪsɡɑɹd, jɛɾ ɛɡwin kəd si hɪm kɑmli mɑɹkɪŋ tɝeɪn ɪn ɪz maɪnd. ɪn keɪs i hæd tə faɪɾ oʊvɝ ɪt. sɪuən ɹoʊd soʊ stɪfli ðət ʃi wəd bi sɔɹ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ɹitʃɪŋ ðɛɹ dɛstəneɪʃən, bʌt ʃi stɛɹd nɔɹθ əz ðoʊ ʃi kəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi si ðə leɪk, ən səmtaɪmz ʃi nɑɾəd tə hɝsɛlf, əɹ ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv dʌn ðəɾ ənlɛs ʃi wɑz ənizi. ʃɛɹiəm nu noʊ mɔɹ ʌv wʌt wɑz tə kʌm ðən ðə sɪɾɝz dɪd, jɛt ʃi əpɪɹɾ ivən mɔɹ nɝvəs ðən sɪuən, ʃɪftɪŋ kɑnstənli ɪn əɹ sæɾəl ən ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ. æŋɡɝ ʃoʊn ɪn əɹ ɡɹin aɪz, tu, fəɹ səm ɹizən.

She herself rode ahead of the banner, with Sheriam and Siuan and Bryne. The others appeared caught in their own thoughts. Lord Bryne sat his saddle easily, the mist of his even breath forming a light frost on his faceguard, yet Egwene could see him calmly marking terrain in his mind. In case he had to fight over it. Siuan rode so stiffly that she would be sore long before reaching their destination, but she stared north as though she could already see the lake, and sometimes she nodded to herself, or shook her head. She would not have done that unless she was uneasy. Sheriam knew no more of what was to come than the Sitters did, yet she appeared even more nervous than Siuan, shifting constantly in her saddle and grimacing. Anger shone in her green eyes, too, for some reason.

kloʊs bɪhaɪn ðə bænɝ keɪm ði ɪntaɪɝ hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ ɪn dʌbəl kɑləm, wɛɹɪŋ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd sɪlks ən ɹɪtʃ vɛlvəts ən fɝz ən kloʊks wɪð ðə fleɪm lɑɹdʒ ɑn ðə bæk. wɪmən u sɛldəm wɔɹ mɔɹ ɔɹnəməns ðən ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ wɝ dɛk tədeɪ ɪn ðə faɪnəs dʒɛmz ðə kæmps dʒuəlɹi kæskəts kəd səplaɪ. ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz meɪɾ ə mɔɹ splɛndəd dɪspleɪ sɪmpli baɪ wɛɹɪŋ ðɛɹ kʌlɝ-ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊks; pɑɹts ə ðə mɛn sim tə vænɪʃ əz ðə dɪskwaɪəɾɪŋ kloʊks swɝld ɪn ðə stɪf bɹiz. sɝvəns fɑloʊd, tu əɹ θɹi fəɹ ɛvɹi sɪstɝ, ɑn ðə bɛs hɔɹsəz ðət kəd bi faʊn fəɹ ðɛm. ðeɪ maɪɾ əv pæs fəɹ lɛsɝ noʊbɪləɾi ðɛmsɛlvz ɪf ə nʌmbɝ hæd nɑt bɪn liɾɪŋ pæk ænəməlz; ɛvɹi tʃɛst ɪn ðə kæmp hæd bɪn ɹænsæk tə aʊtfɪɾ əm ɪn bɹaɪt kʌlɝz.

Close behind the banner came the entire Hall of the Tower in double column, wearing embroidered silks and rich velvets and furs and cloaks with the Flame large on the back. Women who seldom wore more ornaments than the Great Serpent ring were decked today in the finest gems the camp's jewelry caskets could supply. Their Warders made a more splendid display simply by wearing their color-shifting cloaks; parts of the men seemed to vanish as the disquieting cloaks swirled in the stiff breeze. Servants followed, two or three for every sister, on the best horses that could be found for them. They might have passed for lesser nobility themselves if a number had not been leading pack animals; every chest in the camp had been ransacked to outfit them in bright colors.

pɝhæps kəz ʃi wɑz wʌn ə ðə sɪɾɝz wɪθaʊɾ ə wɔɹɾɝ, dɛlænə hæd bɹɔt hɑlimə əlɔŋ, ɑn ə spɪɹəɾəd waɪt mɛɹ. ðə tu ɹoʊɾ ɔlmoʊs ni-tə-ni. səmtaɪmz dɛlænə wəd lin təwɔɹd hɑlimə tə spik pɹaɪvətli, ðoʊ hɑlimə əpɪɹd tu ɪksaɪɾəd tə lɪsən. səpoʊzədli, hɑlimə wɑz dɛlænəz sɛkɹətɛɹi, bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn bɪlivd ɪɾ ə keɪs ə tʃɛɹɪɾi, əɹ pɑsəbli fɹɛndʃɪp, haʊɛvɝ ənlaɪkli, bɪtwin ðə dɪɡnəfaɪd, peɪl-hɛɹd sɪstɝ ən ðə hɑt-neɪtʃɝd, ɹeɪvən-hɛɹd kʌntʃɹi wʊmən. ɛɡwin hæd sin hɑliməz hænd, ən ɪt hæd ði ənfɔɹm lʊk ʌv ə tʃaɪlz dʒʌs lɝnɪŋ əɹ lɛɾɝz. tədeɪ, ʃi wɑz ɪn ɡɑɹməns əz faɪn əz ɛni sɪstɝz, wɪð dʒɛmz ðəɾ izəli ikwəl dɛlænəz, hu mʌst əv bɪn ðɛɹ sɔɹs. wɛnɛvɝ ə ɡʌst oʊpən əɹ vɛlvət kloʊk, ʃi dɪspleɪɾ ə ʃɑkɪŋ əmaʊn ə bʊzəm, ən ʃi ɔlweɪz læft ən tʊk əɹ taɪm əbaʊt ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪɾ ɝaʊn əɹ əɡɛn, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə ədmɪt ðət ʃi fɛl ðə koʊld ɛni mɔɹ ðən ðə sɪstɝz dɪd.

Perhaps because she was one of the Sitters without a Warder, Delana had brought Halima along, on a spirited white mare. The two rode almost knee-to-knee. Sometimes Delana would lean toward Halima to speak privately, though Halima appeared too excited to listen. Supposedly, Halima was Delana's secretary, but everyone believed it a case of charity, or possibly friendship, however unlikely, between the dignified, pale-haired sister and the hot-natured, raven-haired country woman. Egwene had seen Halima's hand, and it had the unformed look of a child's just learning her letters. Today, she was in garments as fine as any sister's, with gems that easily equaled Delana's, who must have been their source. Whenever a gust opened her velvet cloak, she displayed a shocking amount of bosom, and she always laughed and took her time about gathering it around her again, refusing to admit that she felt the cold any more than the sisters did.

fəɹ wʌns, ɛɡwin wɑz ɡlæɾ ʌv ɔl ðə ɡɪfs ə kloʊðɪŋ ʃi hæd bɪn ɡɪvən, əlaʊɪŋ əɹ tə sɝpæs ðə sɪɾɝz. hɝ ɡɹin-ænd-blu sɪlk wɑz slæʃt wɪð waɪɾ ən wɝkt wɪð sid pɝlz. pɝlz ivən dɛkɝeɪɾəd ðə bæks ə hɝ ɡlʌvz. ət ðə læs mɪnuɾ ə kloʊk laɪnd wɪð ɝmən hæd bɪn pɹəvaɪɾəd baɪ ɹoʊmændə, ən ə nɛkləs ən ɪɹɪŋz ʌv ɛmɹəlz ən waɪɾ oʊpəlz baɪ ləleɪn. ðə munstoʊnz ɪn əɹ hɛɹ keɪm fɹəm dʒɑnjə. ði æmɪɝlɪn hæd tə bi ɹisplɛndən tədeɪ. ivən sɪuən əpɪɹd ɹɛɾi fəɹ ə bɔl, ɪn blu vɛlvəts ən kɹim leɪs, wɪð ə waɪd bæn ə pɝlz əɾ əɹ θɹoʊɾ ən mɔɹ leɪs θɹu hɝ hɛɹ.

For once, Egwene was glad of all the gifts of clothing she had been given, allowing her to surpass the Sitters. Her green-and-blue silk was slashed with white and worked with seed pearls. Pearls even decorated the backs of her gloves. At the last minute a cloak lined with ermine had been provided by Romanda, and a necklace and earrings of emeralds and white opals by Lelaine. The moonstones in her hair came from Janya. The Amyrlin had to be resplendent today. Even Siuan appeared ready for a ball, in blue velvets and cream lace, with a wide band of pearls at her throat and more laced through her hair.

ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn lɛd ðə sɪɾɝz, ɹaɪɾɪŋ soʊ kloʊsli bɪhaɪn ðə soʊlʒɝ bɛɹɪŋ ðə bænɝ ðəɾ i ɡlænst oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ nɝvəsli ən səmtaɪmz ɛdʒd ɪz hɔɹs nɪɹɝ ðə ɹaɪɾɝz əhɛɾ ə hɪm. ɛɡwin mænədʒ nɑt tə lʊk bæk mɔɹ ðən wʌns əɹ twaɪs, jɛt ʃi kəd fil ðɛɹ aɪz pɹɛsɪŋ bɪtwin əɹ ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz. itʃ θɔɾ əɹ taɪɾ ɪn ə nit bʌndəl, bʌɾ itʃ hæd tə bi wʌndɝɪŋ huz kɔɹdz hæd dʌn ðə baɪndɪŋ. oʊ, laɪt, ðɪs kəd nɑt ɡoʊ ɹɔŋ. nɑt naʊ.

Romanda and Lelaine led the Sitters, riding so closely behind the soldier bearing the banner that he glanced over his shoulder nervously and sometimes edged his horse nearer the riders ahead of him. Egwene managed not to look back more than once or twice, yet she could feel their eyes pressing between her shoulder blades. Each thought her tied in a neat bundle, but each had to be wondering whose cords had done the binding. Oh, Light, this could not go wrong. Not now.

ʌðɝ ðən ðə kɑləm, lɪɾəl muvd ɪn ɔl ðət snoʊ-kʌvɝd lændskeɪp. ə bɹɔd-wɪŋ hɔk wild oʊvɝhɛɾ əɡɛns ðə koʊl blu skaɪ fəɹ ə taɪm bɪfɔɹ wɪŋɪŋ istwɝd. twaɪs ɛɡwin sɔ blæk-teɪl fɑksəz tʃɹɑɾɪŋ ɪn ðə dɪstəns, stɪl ɪn ðɛɹ sʌmɝ fɝ, ən wʌns, ə lɑɹdʒ dɪɹ wɪð tɔl fɔɹkt ænlɝz ɡɑstɪɾ əweɪ ən vænɪʃt əmɪd ðə tʃɹiz. ə hɛɹ, stɑɹɾɪŋ ʌp ɹaɪɾ ʌndɝ bɛləz hʊvz ən baʊndɪŋ ɔf, meɪd ðə ʃæɡi mɛɹ tɔs əɹ hɛd, ən sɪuən jɛlpt ən ɡɹæbd ət ðə ɹeɪnz əz ɪf ʃi ɪkspɛktəd bɛlə tə boʊlt. ʌv kɔɹs, bɛlə oʊnli ɡeɪv ə ɹipɹoʊtʃfəl snɔɹɾ ən plɑɾəd ɔnwɝd. ɛɡwinz tɔl ɹoʊn ɡɛldɪŋ ʃaɪd mɔɹ, ən ðə hɛɹ hæd nɑt ɡɔn nɪɹ hɪm.

Other than the column, little moved in all that snow-covered landscape. A broad-winged hawk wheeled overhead against the cold blue sky for a time before winging eastward. Twice Egwene saw black-tailed foxes trotting in the distance, still in their summer fur, and once, a large deer with tall forked antlers ghosted away and vanished amid the trees. A hare, starting up right under Bela's hooves and bounding off, made the shaggy mare toss her head, and Siuan yelped and grabbed at the reins as if she expected Bela to bolt. Of course, Bela only gave a reproachful snort and plodded onward. Egwene's tall roan gelding shied more, and the hare had not gone near him.

sɪuən bɪɡæn ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ æftɝ ðə hɛɹ skæmpɝɾ əweɪ, ən ɪt tʊk kwaɪt səm taɪm bɪfɔɹ ʃi iz bɛləz ɹeɪnz. biɪŋ ɑn ə hɔɹs ɔlweɪz meɪɾ əɹ ɡɹʌmpi - ʃi tʃɹævəld ɪn wʌn ə ðə wæɡənz wɛnɛvɝ pɑsəbəl - bʌt ʃi wɑz sɛldəm ðɪs bæd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə lʊk fɝðɝ ðən lɔɹd bɹaɪn, əɹ əɹ fɪɹs ɡlænsɪz ət hɪm, tə noʊ waɪ.

Siuan began grumbling under her breath after the hare scampered away, and it took quite some time before she eased Bela's reins. Being on a horse always made her grumpy - she traveled in one of the wagons whenever possible - but she was seldom this bad. There was no need to look further than Lord Bryne, or her fierce glances at him, to know why.

ɪf i noʊɾəst sɪuənz lʊks, hi ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn. ði oʊnli wʌn nɑɾ ɪn faɪn ɝeɪ, hi lʊkt əz i ɔlweɪz dɪd, pleɪn ən slaɪtli bæɾɝd. ə ɹɑk ðət hæd wɛðɝd stɔɹmz ən wəɾ aʊtlæs mɔɹ tə kʌm. fəɹ səm ɹizən, ɛɡwin wɑz ɡlæɾ i hæd ɹɪzɪstɪd ðɛɹ ɛfɝts tə dʒɹɛs ɪm ɪn faɪnɝ ɡɑɹb. ðeɪ tʃɹuli dɪd nid tə meɪk ən ɪmpɹɛʃən, jɛt ʃi θɔɾ i meɪɾ ən ɛksələnt wʌn əz i wɑz.

If he noticed Siuan's looks, he gave no sign. The only one not in fine array, he looked as he always did, plain and slightly battered. A rock that had weathered storms and would outlast more to come. For some reason, Egwene was glad he had resisted their efforts to dress him in finer garb. They truly did need to make an impression, yet she thought he made an excellent one as he was.

"ɪts ə faɪn mɔɹnɪŋ tə bi ɪn ðə sæɾəl," ʃɛɹiəm sɛɾ æftɝ ə taɪm. "nʌθɪŋ laɪk ə ɡʊd ɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə snoʊ tə klɪɹ ðə hɛd." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz nɑt loʊ, ən ʃi kʌɾ əɹ aɪz ət ðə stɪl-mʌɾɝɪŋ sɪuən wɪð ə taɪni smaɪl.

"It's a fine morning to be in the saddle," Sheriam said after a time. "Nothing like a good ride in the snow to clear the head." Her voice was not low, and she cut her eyes at the still-muttering Siuan with a tiny smile.

sɪuən dɪd nɑt seɪ ɛniθɪŋ - ʃi hɑɹdli kəd də ðəɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə soʊ mɛni aɪz - bʌt ʃi dɪd ɡɪv ʃɛɹiəm ə hɑɹd lʊk ðət pɹɑməst ʃɑɹp wɝdz fəɹ leɪɾɝ. ðə faɪɝ-hɛɹd wʊmən twɪstəɾ əweɪ əbɹʌpli wɪð vɛɹi kloʊs tə ə wɪns. wɪŋ, hɝ dæpəld ɡɹeɪ mɛɹ, pɹænst ə fju stɛps, ən ʃɛɹiəm sɛɾəld əɹ daʊn wɪð ɔlmoʊs tu fɝm ə hænd. ʃi hæd ʃoʊn lɪɾəl ɡɹæɾətud tə ðə wʊmən u hæd neɪmd əɹ mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz, ən laɪk moʊst ɪn ðət pəzɪʃən, ʃi faʊn ɹizənz tə bleɪm sɪuən. ɪt wɑz ði oʊnli flɔ ɛɡwin hæd faʊn ɪn əɹ sɪns ðə swɛɹɪŋ. wɛl, ʃi hæd pɹətɛstəd ðæt, əz kipɝ, ʃi ʃəd nɑɾ əv tə teɪk ɔɹɾɝz fɹəm sɪuən ðə weɪ ði ʌðɝz u hæd swɔɹn dɪd, bʌɾ ɛɡwin hæd sin ɹaɪɾ əweɪ wɛɹ ðət wəd lɛd. ðɪs wɑz nɑt ðə fɝs taɪm ʃɛɹiəm hæd tʃɹaɪd tə plæn ə bɑɹb. sɪuən ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn hænlɪŋ ʃɛɹiəm hɝsɛlf, ən əɹ pɹaɪd wɑz tu fɹædʒəl fəɹ ɛɡwin tə dɪnaɪ ðə ɹɪkwɛst ənlɛs mæɾɝz ɡɑɾ aʊɾ ə hænd.

Siuan did not say anything - she hardly could do that in front of so many eyes - but she did give Sheriam a hard look that promised sharp words for later. The fire-haired woman twisted away abruptly with very close to a wince. Wing, her dappled gray mare, pranced a few steps, and Sheriam settled her down with almost too firm a hand. She had shown little gratitude to the woman who had named her Mistress of Novices, and like most in that position, she found reasons to blame Siuan. It was the only flaw Egwene had found in her since the swearing. Well, she had protested that, as Keeper, she should not have to take orders from Siuan the way the others who had sworn did, but Egwene had seen right away where that would lead. This was not the first time Sheriam had tried to plant a barb. Siuan insisted on handling Sheriam herself, and her pride was too fragile for Egwene to deny the request unless matters got out of hand.

ɛɡwin wɪʃt ðəɹ wɝ səm weɪ tə meɪk mɔɹ spid. sɪuən wɛn bæk tə hɝ ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ, ən ʃɛɹiəm wɑz ɑbviəsli θɪŋkɪŋ ə sʌmθɪŋ ɛls tə seɪ ðət wəd nɑt kwaɪt bɹɪŋ ə ɹibjuk. ɔl ðət mʌɾɝɪŋ ən kʌɾɪŋ ʌv aɪz bɪɡæn tə faɪn ðɛɹ weɪ ʌndɝ ɛɡwinz skɪn. æftɝ ə waɪl, ivən bɹaɪnz lɛvlhɛɾɪd pɔɪz bɪɡæn tə wɛɹ. ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf θɪŋkɪŋ ə θɪŋz ʃi maɪt seɪ ðət wəd ʃeɪk ɪz əplɑm. ənfɔɹtʃənətli - əɹ pɝhæps fɔɹtʃənətli - ʃi dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɛniθɪŋ kʊd. bʌɾ ɪf ʃi hæd tə weɪt mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ, ʃi θɔt ʃi maɪt bɝs fɹəm ʃɪɹ ɪmpeɪʃəns.

Egwene wished there were some way to make more speed. Siuan went back to her grumbling, and Sheriam was obviously thinking of something else to say that would not quite bring a rebuke. All that muttering and cutting of eyes began to find their way under Egwene's skin. After a while, even Bryne's levelheaded poise began to wear. She found herself thinking of things she might say that would shake his aplomb. Unfortunately - or perhaps fortunately - she did not believe anything could. But if she had to wait much longer, she thought she might burst from sheer impatience.

ðə sʌn klaɪm təwɔɹd mɪddeɪ, ðə peɪnfəli sloʊ maɪlz pæs bɪhaɪnd, ən ət læst wʌn ə ðə ɹaɪɾɝz əhɛd tɝn ən ɹeɪzd ɪz hænd. wɪð ə heɪsti əpɑlədʒi tə ɛɡwin, bɹaɪn ɡæləp fɔɹwɝd. ɪt wɑz ɹɪli mɔɹ ʌv ə lʌmbɝ θɹu ðə snoʊ fəɹ ɪz stɝɾi beɪ ɡɛldɪŋ, tʃɹævəlɝ, bʌɾ i kɑɾ ʌp tə ði aʊtʃɹaɪɾɝz, ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ə fju wɝdz, ðən sɛn əm ɑn θɹu ðə tʃɹiz ən weɪɾəd fəɹ ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz tə ɹitʃ hɪm.

The sun climbed toward midday, the painfully slow miles passed behind, and at last one of the riders ahead turned and raised his hand. With a hasty apology to Egwene, Bryne galloped forward. It was really more of a lumber through the snow for his sturdy bay gelding, Traveler, but he caught up to the outriders, exchanged a few words, then sent them on through the trees and waited for Egwene and the others to reach him.

əz i fɛl ɪn bɪsaɪɾ əɹ wʌns mɔɹ, ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn dʒɔɪn ðɛm. ðə tu sɪɾɝz bɛɹli æknɑlɪdʒd ɛɡwinz pɹɛzəns, fɪksɪŋ bɹaɪn wɪð ðə kul sɝɛnəɾi ðət hæd ʃeɪkən soʊ mɛni mɛn feɪsɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪksɛp ðət naʊ ən ðɛn, itʃ ɡlænst saɪdweɪz ət ði ʌðɝ ɪn ə kənsɪɾɝɪŋ weɪ. ðeɪ hɑɹdli sim tə ɹilaɪz wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ. ɛɡwin hoʊp ðeɪ wɝ hæf əz nɝvəs əz ʃi; ʃi wəd bi sæɾəsfaɪd wɪð ðæt.

As he fell in beside her once more, Romanda and Lelaine joined them. The two Sitters barely acknowledged Egwene's presence, fixing Bryne with the cool serenity that had shaken so many men facing Aes Sedai. Except that now and then, each glanced sideways at the other in a considering way. They hardly seemed to realize what they were doing. Egwene hoped they were half as nervous as she; she would be satisfied with that.

kuli sɝin stɛɹz wɑʃt oʊvɝ bɹaɪn laɪk ɹeɪn oʊvɝ ðət ɹɑk. hi meɪd slaɪt baʊz tə ðə sɪɾɝz, bʌɾ i spoʊk tə ɛɡwin. "ðeɪv ɔlɹɛɾi ɝaɪvd, mʌðɝ." ðət hæd bɪn ɪkspɛktəd. "ðeɪ bɹɔɾ ɔlmoʊst əz mɛni mɛn əz wi dɪd, bʌt ðəɹ ɔl ɑn ðə nɔɹθ saɪɾ ə ðə leɪk. aɪv pʊt skaʊts aʊt tə meɪk ʃʊɹ noʊbɑdi tʃɹaɪz sɝkəlɪŋ ɝaʊnd, bʌɾ ɪn tʃɹuθ, aɪ doʊn ɪkspɛkt ɪt."

Coolly serene stares washed over Bryne like rain over that rock. He made slight bows to the Sitters, but he spoke to Egwene. "They've already arrived, Mother." That had been expected. "They brought almost as many men as we did, but they're all on the north side of the lake. I've put scouts out to make sure nobody tries circling around, but in truth, I don't expect it."

"lɛɾ əs hoʊp jəɹ ɹaɪt," ɹoʊmændə toʊld ɪm ʃɑɹpli, ən ləleɪn æɾəd ɪn ə mʌtʃ koʊldɝ toʊn, "jɔɹ dʒʌdʒmən əz nɑt bɪn ɔl ɪt ʃəd bi, ʌv leɪt, lɔɹd bɹaɪn." ə fɹɪdʒəd, kʌɾɪŋ toʊn.

"Let us hope you're right," Romanda told him sharply, and Lelaine added in a much colder tone, "Your judgment has not been all it should be, of late, Lord Bryne." A frigid, cutting tone.

"æz jə seɪ, ɛɛs sədaɪ." hi meɪɾ ənʌðɝ slaɪt baʊ wɪθaʊt ɹɪli tɝnɪŋ fɹəm ɛɡwin. laɪk sɪuən, hi wɑz taɪd tə hɝ oʊpənli naʊ, ət list soʊ fɑɹ əz ðə hɔl wɑz kənsɝnd. ɪf oʊnli ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ taɪtli. ɪf oʊnli ʃi kəd bi ʃʊɹ haʊ taɪtli. "wʌn θɪŋ mɔɹ, mʌðɝ," hi wɛn ɑn. "tælmɑnz ɪz ðəɹ ət ðə leɪk, tu. ðəɹ ɑɹ əbaʊɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd ə ðə bæn ɑn ði ist saɪd. nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə kɑz tʃɹʌbəl ivən ɪf i wɑntəd tə, ən smɔl tʃæns i wʊd, aɪ θɪŋk."

"As you say, Aes Sedai." He made another slight bow without really turning from Egwene. Like Siuan, he was tied to her openly now, at least so far as the Hall was concerned. If only they did not know how tightly. If only she could be sure how tightly. "One thing more, Mother," he went on. "Talmanes is there at the lake, too. There are about a hundred of the Band on the east side. Not enough to cause trouble even if he wanted to, and small chance he would, I think."

ɛɡwin mɪɹli nɑɾəd. nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə kɑz tʃɹʌbəl? tælmɑnz əloʊn maɪt bi ɪnʌf! ʃi teɪstəd baɪl. ɪt - kəd - nɑt - ɡoʊ - ɹɔŋ - naʊ!

Egwene merely nodded. Not enough to cause trouble? Talmanes alone might be enough! She tasted bile. It - could - not - go - wrong - now!

"tælmɑnz!" ləleɪn ɪkskleɪmd, sɝɛnəɾi ʃæɾɝɪŋ. ʃi mʌst əv bɪn əz mʌtʃ ɑn ɛdʒ əz ɛɡwin. "haʊ dɪɾ i faɪn aʊt? ɪf juv ɪnkluɾəd dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn ɪn jəɹ skimɪŋ, lɔɹd bɹaɪn, jə tʃɹuli wɪl lɝn wʌt ɡoʊɪŋ tu fɑɹ minz!"

"Talmanes!" Lelaine exclaimed, serenity shattering. She must have been as much on edge as Egwene. "How did he find out? If you've included Dragonsworn in your scheming, Lord Bryne, you truly will learn what going too far means!"

ɹaɪɾ ɑn tɑp ə hɝ, ɹoʊmændə ɡɹaʊld, "ðɪs ɪz dɪsɡɹeɪsfəl! jə seɪ juv oʊnli lɝn ə hɪz pɹɛzəns naʊ? ɪf ðæts soʊ, jəɹ ɹɛpjəteɪʃən ɪz pʌft ʌp laɪk ə bɔɪl!" ɛɛs sədaɪ kɑm wɑz ə θɪn leɪɝ fəɹ səm tədeɪ, ɪt simd.

Right on top of her, Romanda growled, "This is disgraceful! You say you've only learned of his presence now? If that's so, your reputation is puffed up like a boil!" Aes Sedai calm was a thin layer for some today, it seemed.

ðeɪ kəntɪnjuɾ ɪn ðət veɪn, bʌt bɹaɪn ɹoʊɾ ɑn, oʊnli mɝmɝɪŋ ði əkeɪʒənəl "æz jə seɪ, ɛɛs sədaɪ," wən i hæd tə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ. hi hæd ɹəsivd wɝs ɪn ɛɡwinz hɪɹɪŋ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, ən ɹiæktəd noʊ mɔɹ. ɪt wɑz sɪuən u faɪnəli snɔɹɾɪd, ən ðən blʌʃt kɹɪmzən wən ðə sɪɾɝz lʊkt əɾ əɹ ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. ɛɡwin ɔlmoʊst ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. sɪuən wɑz vɛɹi dɛfənətli ɪn lʌv. ən ʃi vɛɹi dɛfənətli niɾəd tɔkɪŋ tə! fəɹ səm ɹizən, bɹaɪn smaɪld, bʌt ðət maɪt dʒʌst əv bɪn kəz i wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ði əbdʒɛkt ə ðə sɪɾɝz' ətɛnʃən.

They continued in that vein, but Bryne rode on, only murmuring the occasional "As you say, Aes Sedai," when he had to say something. He had received worse in Egwene's hearing this morning, and reacted no more. It was Siuan who finally snorted, and then blushed crimson when the Sitters looked at her in surprise. Egwene almost shook her head. Siuan was very definitely in love. And she very definitely needed talking to! For some reason, Bryne smiled, but that might just have been because he was no longer the object of the Sitters' attention.

tʃɹiz ɡeɪv weɪ tə ənʌðɝ oʊpən speɪs, lɑɹdʒɝ ðən moʊst, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɔɹ taɪm fəɹ fɹɪvələs θɔts.

Trees gave way to another open space, larger than most, and there was no more time for frivolous thoughts.

əsaɪd fɹəm ə waɪd ɹɪm ə tɔl bɹaʊn ɹidz ən kæteɪlz poʊkɪŋ θɹu ðə snoʊ, nʌθɪŋ neɪm ðɪs ə leɪk. ɪt cʊɾə bɪn ə bɪɡ mɛdoʊ, flæɾ ən vɛɹi ɹʌfli oʊvəl ɪn ʃeɪp. səm dɪstəns fɹəm ðə tʃɹilaɪn, ɑn ðə fɹoʊzən leɪk, stʊɾ ə lɑɹdʒ blu kænəpi ɑn tɔl poʊlz, wɪð ə smɔl kɹaʊɾ ə pipəl mɪlɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪɾ ən dʌzənz ə hɔɹsəz hɛl baɪ sɝvəns bɪhaɪnd. ðə bɹiz ɹʌfəld ə bɹaɪt θɪkɪɾ ə pɛnəns ən bænɝz, ən kæɹid mʌfəld ʃaʊts ðət kəɾ oʊnli hæv bɪn ɔɹɾɝz. mɔɹ sɝvəns dɑɹɾɪd əbaʊt heɪstəli. əpɛɹənli, ðeɪ hæd nɑt bɪn ðəɹ lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə fɪnɪʃ ðɛɹ pɹɛpɝeɪʃənz.

Aside from a wide rim of tall brown reeds and cattails poking through the snow, nothing named this a lake. It could have been a big meadow, flat and very roughly oval in shape. Some distance from the treeline, on the frozen lake, stood a large blue canopy on tall poles, with a small crowd of people milling about it and dozens of horses held by servants behind. The breeze ruffled a bright thicket of pennants and banners, and carried muffled shouts that could only have been orders. More servants darted about hastily. Apparently, they had not been there long enough to finish their preparations.

pɝhæps ə maɪl əweɪ ðə tʃɹiz bɪɡæn əɡɛn, ən ðə fibəl sʌnlaɪt ɡlɪntɪɾ ɔf mɛɾəl ðɛɹ. kwaɪɾ ə lɑɾ ə mɛɾəl, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə fɑɹ ʃɔɹ. tə ði ist, ɔlmoʊst əz kloʊs əz ðə pəvɪljən, ðə hʌnʒɹəd mɛn ə ðə bæn meɪd noʊ ɛfɝɾ ət kənsilmənt, stændɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðɛɹ maʊns dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ʌv wɛɹ ðə kæteɪlz bɪɡæn. ə fju ʌv əm pɔɪntəd wən ðə flæɡ ʌv tɑɹ vəlɑn əpɪɹd. ðə pipəl ət ðə pəvɪljən stɑp tə lʊk.

Perhaps a mile away the trees began again, and the feeble sunlight glinted off metal there. Quite a lot of metal, stretching the length of the far shore. To the east, almost as close as the pavilion, the hundred men of the Band made no effort at concealment, standing beside their mounts just short of where the cattails began. A few of them pointed when the flag of Tar Valon appeared. The people at the pavilion stopped to look.

ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt pɔz bɪfɔɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ aʊɾ ɑntu ðə snoʊ-kʌvɝɾ aɪs. ʃi dɪɾ ɪmædʒən hɝsɛlf ə ɹoʊzbʌɾ oʊpənɪŋ tə ðə sʌn, ðoʊ, ðəɾ oʊl nɑvəs ɛksɝsaɪz. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ æktʃəli  ɛmbɹeɪs seɪaɪdɑɹ, bʌt ðə kɑm ðət keɪm wɑz vɛɹi wɛlkəm.

Egwene did not pause before riding out onto the snow-covered ice. She did imagine herself a rosebud opening to the sun, though, that old novice exercise. She did not actually embrace saidar, but the calm that came was very welcome.

sɪuən ən ʃɛɹiəm fɑloʊd, ən ðə sɪɾɝz wɪð ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz, ən ðə sɝvəns. lɔɹd bɹaɪn ən ðə bænɝ-mæn wɝ ði oʊnli tu soʊlʒɝz u wɛnt. ʃaʊts ɹaɪzɪŋ bɪhaɪn əɹ toʊld ʌv ənoʊ pʊɾɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmɝd hɔɹsmən ɪndə pəzɪʃən əlɔŋ ðə ʃɔɹlaɪn. ðə mɔɹ laɪtli ɑɹmɝd mɛn wɝ ɝeɪd tə iðɝ saɪd, ðoʊz nɑɾ ɔf ɡɑɹɾɪŋ əɡɛns tʃɹɛtʃɝi. wʌn ɹizən ðə leɪk hæd bɪn tʃoʊzən wɑz ðət ði aɪs wɑz θɪk ɪnʌf tə hoʊld ə fɛɹ nʌmbɝ ə hɔɹsəz, bʌt nɑt hʌnʒɹədz, mʌtʃ lɛs θaʊzənz. ðət kʌt daʊn ɑn ðə tʃæns ə ʃɪkeɪnɝi. ʌv kɔɹs, ə pəvɪljən bɪɑn baʊʃɑt wɑz nɑt bɪɑn ðə ɹeɪnʒ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ, nɑɾ ɪf ɪt kəd bi sin. ɪksɛp ðət ðə wɝs mæn ɪn ðə wɝl nu hɪmsɛlf seɪf fɹəm ðəɾ ənlɛs i θɹɛɾənd ə sɪstɝ. ɛɡwin ɛksheɪld ʃɑɹpli, ən bɪɡæn əkwaɪɹɪŋ kɑm ɔl oʊvɝ əɡɛn.

Siuan and Sheriam followed, and the Sitters with their Warders, and the servants. Lord Bryne and the banner-man were the only two soldiers who went. Shouts rising behind her told of Uno putting his armored horsemen into position along the shoreline. The more lightly armored men were arrayed to either side, those not off guarding against treachery. One reason the lake had been chosen was that the ice was thick enough to hold a fair number of horses, but not hundreds, much less thousands. That cut down on the chance of chicanery. Of course, a pavilion beyond bowshot was not beyond the range of the One Power, not if it could be seen. Except that the worst man in the world knew himself safe from that unless he threatened a sister. Egwene exhaled sharply, and began acquiring calm all over again.

ə pɹɑpɝ ɡɹiɾɪŋ fəɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit ʃʊɾə hæd sɝvəns ɹʌʃɪŋ fɔɹwɝd wɪð wɔɹm dʒɹɪŋks ən klɔθs ɹæpt ɝaʊn hɑt bɹɪks, ən ðə lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz ðɛmsɛlvz tə teɪk ɹeɪnz ən ɔfɝ ə kɪs ɪn toʊkən ʌv əbɹæm. ɛni vɪzəɾɝ ə ɹæŋk əɾ ɔl wʊɾə hæd ðə sɝvəns, bʌt noʊ wʌn stɝd fɹəm ðə pəvɪljən. bɹaɪn hɪmsɛlf dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ən keɪm tə hoʊl deɪʃɝz bɹaɪɾəl, ən ðə seɪm læŋki jʌŋ mæn u hæd kʌm wɪð fɹɛʃ tʃɑɹkoʊl ðə deɪ bɪfɔɹ ɹæn tə hoʊld ɛɡwinz stɝəp. hɪz noʊz stɪl dʒɹɪpt, bʌɾ ɪn ə ɹɛd vɛlvət koʊɾ oʊnli ə lɪɾəl tu lɑɹdʒ fəɹ ɪm ən ə bɹaɪt blu kloʊk, hi aʊtʃoʊn ɛni ʌv ðə noʊbəlz u stʊd stɛɹɪŋ fɹəm ʌndɝ ðə kænəpi. ðeɪ əpɪɹd tə bi ɪn staʊt wʊlənz fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt, wɪð nɑt mʌtʃ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ən vɛɹi lɪɾəl sɪlk əɹ leɪs. laɪkli ðeɪ hæd hæd tə skɹæmbəl tə faɪn suɾəbəl kloʊðz wʌns ðə snoʊz bɪɡæn, ən əm ɔlɹɛɾi ɑn ðə mɑɹtʃ. ðoʊ ðə sɪmpəl tʃɹuθ wɑz ðət ðə jʌŋ mæn maɪɾ əv aʊtʃoʊn ə tɪŋkɝ.

A proper greeting for the Amyrlin Seat should have had servants rushing forward with warm drinks and cloths wrapped around hot bricks, and the lords and ladies themselves to take reins and offer a kiss in token of Abram. Any visitor of rank at all would have had the servants, but no one stirred from the pavilion. Bryne himself dismounted and came to hold Daishar's bridle, and the same lanky young man who had come with fresh charcoal the day before ran to hold Egwene's stirrup. His nose still dripped, but in a red velvet coat only a little too large for him and a bright blue cloak, he outshone any of the nobles who stood staring from under the canopy. They appeared to be in stout woolens for the most part, with not much embroidery and very little silk or lace. Likely they had had to scramble to find suitable clothes once the snows began, and them already on the march. Though the simple truth was that the young man might have outshone a Tinker.

kɑɹpəts hæd bɪn leɪd tə flɔɹ ðə pəvɪljən, ən bɹeɪʒɝz lɪt, ðoʊ ðə bɹiz kæɹiɾ əweɪ hiɾ ən smoʊk əlaɪk. tʃɛɹz stʊɾ ɪn tu feɪsɪŋ laɪnz fəɹ ðə dɛləɡeɪʃənz, eɪɾ ɪn itʃ. ðeɪ hæd nɑɾ ɪkspɛktəd soʊ mɛni sɪstɝz. səm ə ðə weɪɾɪŋ noʊbəlz ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks ə kɑnstɝneɪʃən, ən ə nʌmbɝ ə ðɛɹ sɝvəns æktʃəli  ɹʌŋ ðɛɹ hænz, wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt tə du. ðeɪ nid nɑt hæv.

Carpets had been laid to floor the pavilion, and braziers lit, though the breeze carried away heat and smoke alike. Chairs stood in two facing lines for the delegations, eight in each. They had not expected so many sisters. Some of the waiting nobles exchanged looks of consternation, and a number of their servants actually wrung their hands, wondering what to do. They need not have.

ðə tʃɛɹz wɝ ə mɪsmætʃt mɪsəleɪni, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ ɔl əlaɪk ɪn saɪz, ən nʌn wɑz noʊɾɪsəbli mɔɹ wɔɹn əɹ bæɾɝd ðən ənʌðɝ. nʌn hæd noʊɾɪsəbli mɔɹ əɹ lɛs ɡɪldɪd kɑɹvɪŋ. ðə læŋki jʌŋ mæn ən ə nʌmbɝ ʌv ʌðɝz tʃɹɑɾəd ɪn ən ʌndɝ ðə fɹaʊnz ə ðə noʊbəlz, wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə baɪ-jɔɹ-liv, kæɹid ðoʊz mɛn fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə snoʊ, ðən ɹʌʃt tə hɛlp wɪð ənloʊɾɪŋ ðə pækhɔɹsɪz. stɪl, noʊ wʌn spoʊk ə wɝd.

The chairs were a mismatched miscellany, but they were all alike in size, and none was noticeably more worn or battered than another. None had noticeably more or less gilded carving. The lanky young man and a number of others trotted in and under the frowns of the nobles, without so much as a by-your-leave, carried those meant for Aes Sedai out into the snow, then rushed to help with unloading the packhorses. Still, no one spoke a word.

kwɪkli, sits wɝ sɛɾ ʌp səfɪʃən fəɹ ði ɪntaɪɝ hɔl, ən ɛɡwin. oʊnli sɪmpəl bɛntʃɪz, ðoʊ pɑlɪʃt tɪl ðeɪ ɡlimd, bʌɾ itʃ stʊɾ ɑn ə waɪd bɑks kʌvɝd wɪð klɔθ ɪn ðə kʌlɝ ə ðə sɪɾɝz ədʒɑ, ɪn ə lɔŋ ɹoʊ əz waɪɾ əz ðə kænəpi. ðə bɑks pleɪst ɪn fɹʌnt, fəɹ ɛɡwinz bɛntʃ, wɑz stʃɹaɪp laɪk əɹ stoʊl. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə ɡɹeɪt flɝi ʌv æktɪvəɾi ɪn ðə naɪt, bɪɡɪnɪŋ wɪð faɪndɪŋ biswæks fəɹ pɑlɪʃ ən ɡʊd klɔθ ə ðə ɹaɪt kʌlɝz.

Quickly, seats were set up sufficient for the entire Hall, and Egwene. Only simple benches, though polished till they gleamed, but each stood on a wide box covered with cloth in the color of the Sitter's Ajah, in a long row as wide as the canopy. The box placed in front, for Egwene's bench, was striped like her stole. There had been a great flurry of activity in the night, beginning with finding beeswax for polish and good cloth of the right colors.

wən ɛɡwin ən ðə sɪɾɝz tʊk ðɛɹ pleɪsəz, ðeɪ sæɾ ə fʊt haɪɝ ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls. ʃi hæd hæɾ əɹ daʊts əbaʊt ðæt, bʌt ðə læk ʌv ɛni wɝɾ ʌv wɛlkəm hæd sɛɾəld ðoʊz. ðə minəs fɑɹmɝ wʊɾə ɔfɝɾ ə kʌp ən ə kɪs tə ə væɡəbɑn ɑn ðə fist ʌv əbɹæm. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt sʌpləkəns, ən ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ ikwəlz. ðeɪ wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

When Egwene and the Sitters took their places, they sat a foot higher than anyone else. She had had her doubts about that, but the lack of any word of welcome had settled those. The meanest farmer would have offered a cup and a kiss to a vagabond on the Feast of Abram. They were not supplicants, and they were not equals. They were Aes Sedai.

wɔɹɾɝz stʊd bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən sɪuən ən ʃɛɹiəm flæŋkt ɛɡwin. ðə sɪstɝz ɑstənteɪʃəsli flʌŋ bæk kloʊks ən tʌkt ɡlʌvz əweɪ tə ɛmfəsaɪz ðət ðə koʊl dɪd nɑt tʌtʃ ðɛm, ə ʃɑɹp kɑntʃɹæs tə ðə noʊbəlz klʌtʃɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊn kloʊks kloʊs. aʊtsaɪd, ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn lɪftəɾ ɪn ðə stɪfənɪŋ bɹiz. oʊnli hɑlimə, laʊnʒɪŋ bɪsaɪd dɛlænəz tʃɛɹ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə ɡɹeɪ-kʌvɝd bɑks, əɾ ɔl spɔɪl ðə ɡɹæn ɪmədʒ, ən əɹ bɪɡ ɡɹin aɪz stɛɹɾ ət ði ændɔɹənz ən mʊɹændiənz soʊ tʃælənʒɪŋli ðət ʃi dɪd nɑt spɔɪl ɪt mʌtʃ.

Warders stood behind their Aes Sedai, and Siuan and Sheriam flanked Egwene. The sisters ostentatiously flung back cloaks and tucked gloves away to emphasize that the cold did not touch them, a sharp contrast to the nobles clutching their own cloaks close. Outside, the Flame of Tar Valon lifted in the stiffening breeze. Only Halima, lounging beside Delana's chair on the edge of the gray-covered box, at all spoiled the grand image, and her big green eyes stared at the Andorans and Murandians so challengingly that she did not spoil it much.

ðəɹ wɝ ə fju stɛɹz wən ɛɡwin tʊk ðə siɾ ɪn fɹʌnt, bʌɾ oʊnli ə fju. noʊ wʌn ɹɪli lʊk sɝpɹaɪzd. aɪ səpoʊz ðeɪv hɝɾ ɔl əbaʊt ðə ɡɝl æmɪɝlɪn, ʃi θɔt dʒɹaɪli. wɛl, ðəɹ hæd bɪn kwinz jʌŋɡɝ, ɪnkluɾɪŋ kwinz ʌv ændɝ ən mʊɹændi. kɑmli, ʃi nɑɾəd, ən ʃɛɹiəm dʒɛstʃɝd tə ðə laɪn ə tʃɛɹz. noʊ mæɾɝ u hæɾ ɝaɪv fɝst əɹ pɹəvaɪɾəd ðə pəvɪljən, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ daʊɾ u hæd kɔl ðɪs miɾɪŋ. hu wɑz ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ.

There were a few stares when Egwene took the seat in front, but only a few. No one really looked surprised. I suppose they've heard all about the girl Amyrlin, she thought dryly. Well, there had been queens younger, including queens of Andor and Murandy. Calmly, she nodded, and Sheriam gestured to the line of chairs. No matter who had arrived first or provided the pavilion, there was no doubt who had called this meeting. Who was in charge.

hɝ ækʃən wɑz nɑt wɛl ɹəsivd, ʌv kɔɹs. ðəɹ wɑz ə moʊmən ə saɪlən hɛzəteɪʃən waɪl ðə noʊbəlz kæs ðɛɹ maɪnz əbaʊt fəɹ səm weɪ tə ɹɪɡeɪn ən ikwəl fʊɾɪŋ, ən noʊ fju ɡɹɪməsɪz əz ðeɪ ɹilaɪzd ɪt kəd nɑt bi dʌn. ɡɹɪm-feɪst, eɪɾ ə ðɛm sæt daʊn, fɔɹ mɛn ən fɔɹ wɪmən, wɪð mʌtʃ æŋɡɹi ɡæðɝɪŋ ə kloʊks ən ədʒʌstɪŋ ə skɝts. ðoʊz ə lɛsɝ ɹæŋk stʊd bɪhaɪn ðə tʃɛɹz, ən klɪɹli ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl lʌv lɔs bɪtwin ændɔɝən ən mʊɹændiən. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ðə mʊɹændiənz, mɛn ən wɪmən əlaɪk, mʌɾɝd ən dʒɑsəld wʌn ənʌðɝ fəɹ pɹɛsəɾəns əz fɪɹsli əz ðeɪ dɪd ðɛɹ "ælaɪz" fɹəm ðə nɔɹθ. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹəsivd ə ɡʊd mɛni dɑɹk lʊks əz wɛl, ən ə fju foʊk spɛɹd skaʊlz fəɹ bɹaɪn, hu stʊɾ ɔf tə wʌn saɪd wɪð ɪz hɛlməɾ ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹm. hi wɑz wɛl noʊn ɑn boʊθ saɪdz ə ðə bɔɹɾɝ, ən ɹɪspɛktɪɾ ivən baɪ moʊst ə ðoʊz u wʊɾə laɪk tə si hɪm dɛd. ət list, ðət hæd bɪn ðə keɪs bɪfɔɹ i tɝn ʌp liɾɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪz ɑɹmi. hi ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛɹ æsəd ɡlɛɹz əz i hæd ðə sɪɾɝz' æsəd tʌŋz.

Her action was not well received, of course. There was a moment of silent hesitation while the nobles cast their minds about for some way to regain an equal footing, and no few grimaces as they realized it could not be done. Grim-faced, eight of them sat down, four men and four women, with much angry gathering of cloaks and adjusting of skirts. Those of lesser rank stood behind the chairs, and clearly there was little love lost between Andoran and Murandian. For that matter, the Murandians, men and women alike, muttered and jostled one another for precedence as fiercely as they did their "allies" from the north. The Aes Sedai received a good many dark looks as well, and a few folk spared scowls for Bryne, who stood off to one side with his helmet under his arm. He was well known on both sides of the border, and respected even by most of those who would have liked to see him dead. At least, that had been the case before he turned up leading the Aes Sedai's army. He ignored their acid glares as he had the Sitters' acid tongues.

ənʌðɝ mæn dɪd nɑt dʒɔɪn wɪð iðɝ pɑɹɾi. ə peɪl mæn, lɛs ðən ə hæn tɔlɝ ðən ɛɡwin, ɪn ə dɑɹk koʊɾ ən bɹɛstpleɪt, hi wɔɹ ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz hɛd ʃeɪvd, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə lɔŋ ɹɛd skɑɹf taɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪz lɛft ɑɹm. hɪz dip ɡɹeɪ kloʊk hæɾ ə lɑɹdʒ ɹɛd hænd wɝkt ɑn ðə bɹɛst. tælmɑnz stʊɾ ɑpəzət bɹaɪn, linɪŋ əɡɛnst wʌn ə ðə pəvɪljənz poʊlz wɪð ən ɛɹəɡən kæʒəɑlnəs, ən wɑtʃt wɪθaʊt ɹɪvilɪŋ ə hɪn ə hɪz θɔts. ɛɡwin wɪʃt ʃi nu wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ ðɛɹ. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi nu wʌɾ i hæd sɛd bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɝaɪvd. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ʃi hæd tə spik wɪð hɪm. ɪf ɪt kəd bi mænədʒd wɪθaʊɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd ɪɹz lɪsnɪŋ.

Another man did not join with either party. A pale man, less than a hand taller than Egwene, in a dark coat and breastplate, he wore the front of his head shaved, and there was a long red scarf tied around his left arm. His deep gray cloak had a large red hand worked on the breast. Talmanes stood opposite Bryne, leaning against one of the pavilion's poles with an arrogant casualness, and watched without revealing a hint of his thoughts. Egwene wished she knew what he was doing there. She wished she knew what he had said before she arrived. In any case, she had to speak with him. If it could be managed without a hundred ears listening.

ə lin, wɛðɝd mæn ɪn ə ɹɛd kloʊk, sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɹoʊ ʌv tʃɛɹz, lin fɔɹwɝɾ ən oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, bʌt ʃɛɹiəm fɔɹstɑld ɪm ɪn ə klɪɹ, kæɹiɪŋ vɔɪs.

A lean, weathered man in a red cloak, sitting in the middle of the row of chairs, leaned forward and opened his mouth, but Sheriam forestalled him in a clear, carrying voice.

"mʌðɝ, meɪ aɪ pɹɛzən tə ju, ʌv ændɝ, ɑɝəθɛl ɹɛnʃɝ, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs ɹɛnʃɝ. pɛlɪvɑɹ koʊələn, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs koʊələn. æɛmlɪn kɑɝənd, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs kɑɝənd, ən əɹ hʌzbənd, kʌlhən kɑɝənd." ðeɪ æknɑlɪdʒ ðɛɹ neɪmz saʊɝli, wɪð bɛɹ nɑdz ən noʊ mɔɹ. pɛlɪvɑɹ wɑz ðə lin mæn; hi wɑz luzɪŋ ɪz dɑɹk hɛɹ fɹəm ðə fɹʌnt. ʃɛɹiəm wɛn ɑn wɪθaʊt pɔz; ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊd θɪŋ bɹaɪn hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə səplaɪ ðə neɪmz ə ðoʊz u hæd bɪn tʃoʊzən tə spik. "meɪ aɪ pɹɛzənt, ʌv mʊɹændi, dɑnəl də mɔɝni əlɔɹdaɪn. ʃin də mɛhɑn æmækənsə. peɪtʃɹ də fɝnə ækən. sɛɡən də əvhɑɝɪn ɹuz." ðə mʊɹændiənz sim tə fil ðə læk ə taɪɾəlz ivən mɔɹ ðən ði ændɔɹənz. dɑnəl, wɛɹɪŋ mɔɹ leɪs ðən moʊst ə ðə wɪmən, twɪstəɾ ɪz kɝl mʌstæʃɪz fɪɹsli, ən peɪtʃɹ əpɪɹd tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə jæŋk ɪz lus. sɛɡən pɝs fʊl lɪps ən əɹ dɑɹk aɪz kɑt faɪɝ, waɪl ʃin, ə stɑki, ɡɹeɪɪŋ wʊmən, snɔɹɾɪd kwaɪt laʊdli. ʃɛɹiəm tʊk noʊ noʊɾəs. "ju ɑɹ bɪniθ ði aɪz ə ðə wɑtʃɝ ə ðə silz. jə ɑɹ bɪfɔɹ ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn. jə meɪ pɹizɛn jəɹ sʌpləkeɪʃənz tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit."

"Mother, may I present to you, of Andor, Arathelle Renshar, High Seat of House Renshar. Pelivar Coelan, High Seat of House Coelan. Aemlyn Carand, High Seat of House Carand, and her husband, Culhan Carand." They acknowledged their names sourly, with bare nods and no more. Pelivar was the lean man; he was losing his dark hair from the front. Sheriam went on without pause; it was a good thing Bryne had been able to supply the names of those who had been chosen to speak. "May I present, of Murandy, Donel do Morny a'Lordeine. Cian do Mehon a'Macansa. Paitr do Fearna a'Conn. Segan do Avharin a'Roos." The Murandians seemed to feel the lack of titles even more than the Andorans. Donel, wearing more lace than most of the women, twisted his curled mustaches fiercely, and Paitr appeared to be trying to yank his loose. Segan pursed full lips and her dark eyes caught fire, while Cian, a stocky, graying woman, snorted quite loudly. Sheriam took no notice. "You are beneath the eyes of the Watcher of the Seals. You are before the Flame of Tar Valon. You may present your supplications to the Amyrlin Seat."

wɛl. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt laɪk ðæt, nɑɾ ɪn ðə list. ɛɡwin hæd θɔɾ əm saʊɝ bɪfɔɹ, bʌt naʊ ðeɪ lʊk stʌft fʊl ʌv ɡɹin pɝsimənz. pɝhæps ðeɪ hæd bɪliv ðeɪ kəd pɹitɛnd ʃi wɑz nɑt ði æmɪɝlɪn əɾ ɔl. ðeɪ wəd lɝn. ʌv kɔɹs, fɝst ʃi hæd tə titʃ ðə hɔl.

Well. They did not like that, not in the least. Egwene had thought them sour before, but now they looked stuffed full of green persimmons. Perhaps they had believed they could pretend she was not the Amyrlin at all. They would learn. Of course, first she had to teach the Hall.

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ eɪntʃən taɪz bɪtwin ændɝ ən ðə waɪt taʊɝ," ʃi sɛd, laʊdli ən fɝmli. "sɪstɝz əv ɔlweɪz ɪkspɛktəd wɛlkəm ɪn ændɝ əɹ mʊɹændi. waɪ ðən dʒju bɹɪŋ ən ɑɹmi əɡɛnst ɛɛs sədaɪ? jə mɛɾəl wɛɹ θɹoʊnz ən neɪʃənz fɪɹ tə stɛp. θɹoʊnz əv fɔlən, mɛɾəlɪŋ ɪn ði əfɛɹz ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"There are ancient ties between Andor and the White Tower," she said, loudly and firmly. "Sisters have always expected welcome in Andor or Murandy. Why then do you bring an army against Aes Sedai? You meddle where thrones and nations fear to step. Thrones have fallen, meddling in the affairs of Aes Sedai."

ðət saʊndəd suɾəbli θɹɛɾənɪŋ, wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt maɪɹɛl ən ði ʌðɝz hæd mænədʒ tə pɹipɛɹ əɹ weɪ. wɪð lʌk, ðeɪ wɝ wɛl ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ bæk tə ðə kæmp, wɪð noʊ wʌn ðə waɪzɝ. ənlɛs wʌn ə ðiz noʊbəlz spoʊk ðə ɹɔŋ neɪm. ðət wəd luz əɹ ən ædvæntɪdʒ əɡɛns ðə hɔl, bʌɾ əlɔŋsaɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls, ɪt wɑz ə stʃɹɔ bɪsaɪɾ ə heɪlɔft.

That sounded suitably threatening, whether or not Myrelle and the others had managed to prepare her way. With luck, they were well on their way back to the camp, with no one the wiser. Unless one of these nobles spoke the wrong name. That would lose her an advantage against the Hall, but alongside everything else, it was a straw beside a hayloft.

pɛlɪvɑɹ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks wɪð ðə wʊmən siɾəd bɪsaɪd hɪm, ən ʃi stʊd. kɹisɪz ɪn əɹ feɪs kəd nɑt dɪsɡaɪz ðə fæk ðəɾ ɑɝəθɛl hæd bɪn ə bjuɾəfəl, faɪn-boʊnd wʊmən wən jʌŋ; naʊ, ɡɹeɪ θɹɛɾəd θɪkli θɹu hɝ hɛɹ, ən əɹ ɡeɪz stʃɹʌk əz hɑɹɾ əz ɛni wɔɹɾɝz. hɝ ɹɛd-ɡlʌv hænz ɡɹɪp ði ɛdʒəz ə hɝ kloʊk əɾ əɹ saɪdz, bʌt pleɪnli nɑɾ ɪn wɝi. maʊθ kəmpɹɛs tə ə θɪn laɪn, ʃi skæn ðə laɪn ə sɪɾɝz, ən oʊnli ðən spoʊk. pæst ɛɡwin, tə ðə sɪstɝz bɪhaɪn hɝ. ɡɹɪɾɪŋ əɹ tiθ, ɛɡwin pʊɾ ɑn ən ətɛntɪv ɪkspɹɛʃən.

Pelivar exchanged looks with the woman seated beside him, and she stood. Creases in her face could not disguise the fact that Arathelle had been a beautiful, fine-boned woman when young; now, gray threaded thickly through her hair, and her gaze struck as hard as any Warder's. Her red-gloved hands gripped the edges of her cloak at her sides, but plainly not in worry. Mouth compressed to a thin line, she scanned the line of Sitters, and only then spoke. Past Egwene, to the sisters behind her. Gritting her teeth, Egwene put on an attentive expression.

"wi ɑɹ hɪɹ pɹɪsaɪsli kəz wi də nɑt wɑnə bɪkʌm ɛntæŋɡəld ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝz əfɛɹz." ɑɝəθɛlz vɔɪs hɛl toʊnz ʌv əθɔɹəɾi, ənsɝpɹaɪzɪŋ ɪn ðə haɪ siɾ ʌv ə paʊɝfəl haʊs. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ hɪn ə ðə dɪfəɾəns ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn ɪkspɛktəd, ivən fɹəm ə paʊɝfəl haɪ sit, feɪsɪŋ soʊ mɛni sɪstɝz, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. "ɪf ɔl wiv hɝɾ ɪz tʃɹu, ðən ət bɛst, əlaʊɪŋ jə tə pæs θɹu ændɝ ənhɪndɝd meɪ sim laɪk ɡɪvɪŋ eɪd, əɹ ivən əlaɪəns, ɪn ði aɪz ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. feɪljɝ tə əpoʊz jə maɪt min lɝnɪŋ wʌt ðə ɡɹeɪp lɝnz ɪn ðə waɪnpɹɛs." sɛvɹəl ə ðə mʊɹændiənz tɝn ðɛɹ skaʊlz ɑn hɝ. noʊ wʌn ɪn mʊɹændi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə hɪndɝ ðə sɪstɝz' pæsədʒ. vɛɹi laɪkli, noʊ wʌn hæd kənsɪɾɝd ðə pɑsəbɪləɾiz bɪɑn ðə deɪ ðeɪ pæst ɑntu ənʌðɝz lænz.

"We are here precisely because we do not want to become entangled in the White Tower's affairs." Arathelle's voice held tones of authority, unsurprising in the High Seat of a powerful House. There was no hint of the diffidence that might have been expected, even from a powerful High Seat, facing so many sisters, not to mention the Amyrlin Seat. "If all we've heard is true, then at best, allowing you to pass through Andor unhindered may seem like giving aid, or even alliance, in the eyes of the White Tower. Failure to oppose you might mean learning what the grape learns in the winepress." Several of the Murandians turned their scowls on her. No one in Murandy had tried to hinder the sisters' passage. Very likely, no one had considered the possibilities beyond the day they passed onto another's lands.

ɑɝəθɛl kəntɪnjuɾ əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt noʊɾəst, bʌɾ ɛɡwin daʊɾɪd ðæt. "æt wɝst. . . . wɪv hɝd . . . ɹɪpɔɹts . . . ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ ɪndə ændɝ ɪn sikɹət, ən taʊɝ ɡɑɹdz. ɹumɝz maɪt bi ə bɛɾɝ wɝd, bʌt ðeɪ kʌm fɹəm mɛni pleɪsəz. nʌn ʌv əs wəd laɪk tə si ə bæɾəl bɪtwin ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ændɝ."

Arathelle continued as if she had not noticed, but Egwene doubted that. "At worst. . . . We have heard . . . reports . . . of Aes Sedai making their way into Andor in secret, and Tower Guards. Rumors might be a better word, but they come from many places. None of us would like to see a battle between Aes Sedai in Andor."

"ðə laɪt pɹəzɝv ən pɹətɛkt ʌs!" dɑnəl bɝst aʊt, ɹɛd-feɪst. peɪtʃɹ nɑɾəd ɛnkɝɪdʒmənt, slaɪɾɪŋ tə ði ɛdʒ ə hɪz sit, ən ʃin lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə dʒʌmp ɪn hɝsɛlf. "noʊ wʌn wɑns tə si ɪt hɪɹ, iðɝ!" dɑnəl spæt. "nɑt bɪtwin ɛɛs sədaɪ! fəɹ ʃʊɹ, wiv hɝd wʌt hæpən aʊɾ ist! ən ðoʊz sɪstɝz - !"

"The Light preserve and protect us!" Donel burst out, red-faced. Paitr nodded encouragement, sliding to the edge of his seat, and Cian looked ready to jump in herself. "No one wants to see it here, either!" Donel spat. "Not between Aes Sedai! For sure, we've heard what happened out east! And those sisters - !"

ɛɡwin bɹiðd ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ izəli wən ɑɝəθɛl stɛpt ɑn ɪm fɝmli. "ɪf jə pliz, lɔɹd dɑnəl. jəl əv jəɹ tɝn tə spik." ʃi tɝn bæk tə ɛɡwin - tə ðə sɪɾɝz wʌns mɔɹ, ɹɪli - wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ɪz ɹɪplaɪ, livɪŋ ɪm spləɾɝɪŋ ən ði ʌðɝ θɹi mʊɹændiənz ɡlaʊɝɪŋ. ʃi hɝsɛlf lʊkt kwaɪɾ ʌndɪstɝbd, sɪmpli ə wʊmən leɪɪŋ aʊt ðə fæks. leɪɪŋ əm aʊt, ən minɪŋ ðət ðeɪ ʃəd bi sin əz ʃi sɔ ðɛm.

Egwene breathed a little more easily when Arathelle stepped on him firmly. "If you please, Lord Donel. You will have your turn to speak." She turned back to Egwene - to the Sitters once more, really - without waiting on his reply, leaving him spluttering and the other three Murandians glowering. She herself looked quite undisturbed, simply a woman laying out the facts. Laying them out, and meaning that they should be seen as she saw them.

"æz aɪ wɑz seɪɪŋ. ðəɾ ɪz ðə wɝst wi fɪɹ, ɪf ðə teɪlz ɑɹ tʃɹu. ən ɔlsoʊ ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt. ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪ bi ɡæðɝɪŋ sikɹɪtli ɪn ændɝ, wɪð taʊɝ ɡɑɹdz. ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð ən ɑɹmi ɑɹ ɹɛɾi tə ɛntɝ ændɝ. ɔfən ɪnʌf ðə waɪt taʊɝ əz sim tə eɪm ət wʌn tɑɹɡət, oʊnli fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ʌv əs tə lɝn leɪɾɝ ɪt wɑz eɪmɪŋ əɾ ənʌðɝ ɔl əlɔŋ. aɪ kən hɑɹdli ɪmædʒən ivən ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɡoʊɪŋ ðɪs fɑɹ, bʌɾ ɪf ɛvɝ ðəɹ wɑz ə tɑɹɡət jə maɪt twɪs jʊɹsɛlvz ɪndə ə nɑt fɔɹ, ɪts ðə blæk taʊɝ." ɑɝəθɛl ʃɪvɝd slaɪtli, ən ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt wɑz ðə koʊld. "ə bæɾəl bɪtwin ɛɛs sədaɪ maɪt ɹuən ðə læn fəɹ maɪlz ɝaʊnd. ðət bæɾəl maɪt ɹuən hæf ʌv ændɝ."

"As I was saying. That is the worst we fear, if the tales are true. And also if they are not. Aes Sedai may be gathering secretly in Andor, with Tower Guards. Aes Sedai with an army are ready to enter Andor. Often enough the White Tower has seemed to aim at one target, only for the rest of us to learn later it was aiming at another all along. I can hardly imagine even the White Tower going this far, but if ever there was a target you might twist yourselves into a knot for, it's the Black Tower." Arathelle shivered slightly, and Egwene did not think it was the cold. "A battle between Aes Sedai might ruin the land for miles around. That battle might ruin half of Andor."

pɛlɪvɑɹ spɹæŋ tə hɪz fit. "ðə pleɪn ʌv ɪɾ ɪz, jə mʌst ɡoʊ ənʌðɝ weɪ." hɪz vɔɪs wɑz sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli haɪ, bʌt noʊ lɛs fɝm ðən ɑɝəθɛlz. "ɪf aɪ mʌs daɪ tə dɪfɛn maɪ lænz ən maɪ pipəl, ðən bɛɾɝ hɪɹ ðən wɛɹ maɪ lænz ən pipəl daɪ, tu."

Pelivar sprang to his feet. "The plain of it is, you must go another way." His voice was surprisingly high, but no less firm than Arathelle's. "If I must die to defend my lands and my people, then better here than where my lands and people die, too."

hi səbsaɪɾɪd əɾ ɑɝəθɛlz suðɪŋ dʒɛstʃɝ, sɪŋkɪŋ bæk ɪndə hɪz tʃɛɹ. hɑɹd-aɪd, hi dɪd nɑt lʊk mɑləfaɪd. æɛmlɪn, ə plʌmp wʊmən ɹæpt ɪn dɑɹk wʊl, nɑɾəd əɡɹimənt wɪð hɪm, əz dɪɾ əɹ skwɛɹ-feɪs hʌzbənd.

He subsided at Arathelle's soothing gesture, sinking back into his chair. Hard-eyed, he did not look mollified. Aemlyn, a plump woman wrapped in dark wool, nodded agreement with him, as did her square-faced husband.

dɑnəl stɛɹɾ ət pɛlɪvɑɹ əz ðoʊ hi hæd nɛvɝ hæd ðɪs θɔɾ iðɝ, ən i wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn. səm ə ðə stændɪŋ mʊɹændiənz bɪɡæn tə ɑɹɡju aʊt laʊɾ əntɪl ʌðɝz kwaɪəɾəd ðɛm. səmtaɪmz wɪð ə ʃeɪkən fɪst. wʌtɛvɝ hæd pəzɛs ðiz pipəl tə dʒɔɪn fɔɹsɪz wɪð ði ændɔɹənz?

Donel stared at Pelivar as though he had never had this thought either, and he was not the only one. Some of the standing Murandians began to argue out loud until others quieted them. Sometimes with a shaken fist. Whatever had possessed these people to join forces with the Andorans?

ɛɡwin dʒɹu bɹɛθ. ə ɹoʊzbʌd, oʊpənɪŋ tə ðə sʌn. ðeɪ hæd nɑɾ æknɑlɪdʒd əɹ əz ði æmɪɝlɪn sit - ɑɝəθɛl hæd kʌm əz kloʊs tə ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ əɹ əz wɑz pɑsəbəl wɪθaʊt pʊʃɪŋ əɹ əsaɪd! - jɛt ðeɪ hæd ɡɪvən əɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls ʃi cʊɾə wɪʃt fɔɹ. kɑm. naʊ wɑz wən ləleɪn ən ɹoʊmændə wəd bi ɪkspɛktɪŋ əɹ tə neɪm wʌn ə ðɛm tə hændəl ðə nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz. ʃi hoʊp ðɛɹ stʌməks wɝ taɪɾ ɪn nɑts wɪð wʌndɝɪŋ wɪtʃ ə ðɛm ɪt wəd bi. ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz. ðəɹ kəd bi nʌn.

Egwene drew breath. A rosebud, opening to the sun. They had not acknowledged her as the Amyrlin Seat - Arathelle had come as close to ignoring her as was possible without pushing her aside! - yet they had given her everything else she could have wished for. Calm. Now was when Lelaine and Romanda would be expecting her to name one of them to handle the negotiations. She hoped their stomachs were tied in knots with wondering which of them it would be. There would be no negotiations. There could be none.

"ɪleɪɾə," ʃi sɛd lɛvəli, aɪɪŋ ɑɝəθɛl ən ðə siɾəd noʊbəlz ɪn tɝn, "ɪz ə jusɝpɝ u hæz vaɪəleɪɾɪd wʌt laɪz ət ðə vɛɹi hɑɹɾ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. aɪm ði æmɪɝlɪn sit." ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd ət haʊ steɪtli ʃi mænədʒ tə saʊnd, haʊ kul. bʌt nɑɾ əz sɝpɹaɪzd əz ʃi wʌns wəɾ əv bɪn. ðə laɪt hɛlp hɝ, ʃi wɑz ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. "wi ɡoʊ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn tə ɹimuv ɪleɪɾə ən tʃɹaɪ hɝ, bʌt ðəɾ ɪz ðə waɪt taʊɝz bɪznəs, ən nʌn ə jʊɹz ɪksɛp tə noʊ ðə tʃɹuθ. ðɪs soʊ-kɔl blæk taʊɝ ɔlsoʊ ɪz əɹ bɪznəs; mɛn u kən tʃænəl əv ɔlweɪz bɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝz əfɛɹ. wɪl dil wɪð əm əz wi tʃuz, wən ðə taɪm ɪz ɹaɪp, bʌɾ aɪ əʃʊɹ ju, ðət taɪm ɪz nɑt naʊ. mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt mæɾɝz mʌs teɪk pɹɛsəɾəns."

"Elaida," she said levelly, eyeing Arathelle and the seated nobles in turn, "is a usurper who has violated what lies at the very heart of the White Tower. I am the Amyrlin Seat." She was surprised at how stately she managed to sound, how cool. But not as surprised as she once would have been. The Light help her, she was the Amyrlin Seat. "We go to Tar Valon to remove Elaida and try her, but that is the White Tower's business, and none of yours except to know the truth. This so-called Black Tower also is our business; men who can channel have always been the White Tower's affair. We will deal with them as we choose, when the time is ripe, but I assure you, that time is not now. More important matters must take precedence."

ʃi hɝd muvmən əmʌŋ ðə sɪɾɝz bɪhaɪn hɝ. ən æktʃəwəl ʃɪftɪŋ ɑn bɛntʃɪz ən ðə kɹɪsp swɪʃɪŋ ə dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts biɪŋ ədʒʌstəd. ət list səm mʌs bi səvɪɹli ædʒəteɪɾəd. wɛl, sɛvɹəl hæd sədʒɛstəd ðət ðə blæk taʊɝ maɪt bi dɛlt wɪð ɪn pæsɪŋ. nɑt wʌn bɪliv ðəɹ kəd bi mɔɹ ðən ə dʌzən əɹ soʊ mɛn ðəɹ ət moʊst, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ðeɪ hɝd; æftɝ ɔl, ɪt sɪmpli wɑz nɑt pɑsəbəl ðət hʌnʒɹədz ə mɛn wəd wɑnə tʃænəl. ðən əɡɛn, ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn ðə ɹiləzeɪʃən ðəɾ ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt gɑnə neɪm iðɝ ɹoʊmændə əɹ ləleɪn.

She heard movement among the Sitters behind her. An actual shifting on benches and the crisp swishing of divided skirts being adjusted. At least some must be severely agitated. Well, several had suggested that the Black Tower might be dealt with in passing. Not one believed there could be more than a dozen or so men there at most, no matter what they heard; after all, it simply was not possible that hundreds of men would want to channel. Then again, it might have been the realization that Egwene was not going to name either Romanda or Lelaine.

ɑɝəθɛl fɹaʊnd, pɝhæps kætʃɪŋ ə hɪn ə sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ. pɛlɪvɑɹ muvd, ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə ɹaɪzɪŋ əɡɛn, ən dɑnəl dʒɹu hɪmsɛlf ʌp kwɛɹələsli. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ɪt bʌt tə pɹɛs ɑn. ðəɹ nɛvɝ hæd bɪn.

Arathelle frowned, perhaps catching a hint of something in the air. Pelivar moved, on the point of rising again, and Donel drew himself up querulously. There was nothing for it but to press on. There never had been.

"aɪ ʌndɝstæn jəɹ kənsɝnz," ʃi kəntɪnjuɾ ɪn ðə seɪm fɔɹməl toʊn, "æn əl ædʒɹɛs ðɛm." wʌt wɑz ðət stʃɹeɪnʒ kɔl tə ɑɹmz ðə bæn juzd? jɛs. ɪt wɑz taɪm tə tɔs ðə daɪs. "aɪ ɡɪv jə ðɪs əʃʊɹəns əz ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. fəɹ wʌn mʌnθ wɪl steɪ hɪɹ, ɹɛstɪŋ, ən ðən wɪl liv mʊɹændi, bʌt wɪl nɑt kɹɔs ðə bɔɹɾɝ ɪndə ændɝ. mʊɹændi wɪl bi tʃɹʌbəl baɪ əs noʊ mɔɹ æftɝ ðæt, ən ændɝ wɪl nɑt bi tʃɹʌbəld əɾ ɔl. aɪm sɝɾən," ʃi æɾəd, "ðə mʊɹændiən lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz hɪɹ wɪl bi hæpi tə səplaɪ əɹ wɑns ɪn ɪkstʃeɪnʒ fəɹ ɡʊd sɪlvɝ. wɪl peɪ fɛɹ pɹaɪsəz." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn mɑləfaɪɪŋ ði ændɔɹənz ɪf ɪt mɛn mʊɹændiənz ɹeɪɾɪŋ ðə hɔɹsəz ən səplaɪ tʃɹeɪnz.

"I understand your concerns," she continued in the same formal tone, "and I will address them." What was that strange call to arms the Band used? Yes. It was time to toss the dice. "I give you this assurance as the Amyrlin Seat. For one month we will stay here, resting, and then we will leave Murandy, but we will not cross the border into Andor. Murandy will be troubled by us no more after that, and Andor will not be troubled at all. I'm certain," she added, "the Murandian lords and ladies here will be happy to supply our wants in exchange for good silver. We will pay fair prices." There was no point mollifying the Andorans if it meant Murandians raiding the horses and supply trains.

ðə mʊɹændiənz, lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊn ənizəli, əpɪɹd dɪsaɪɾədli tɔɹn ɪn ɛni keɪs. ðəɹ wɑz kɔɪn tə bi meɪd, ən ə ɡɹeɪt dil ʌv ɪt səplaɪɪŋ ən ɑɹmi soʊ lɑɹdʒ, bʌɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, hu kəd hæɡəl səksɛsfəli wɪð wʌtɛvɝ ən ɑɹmi soʊ lɑɹdʒ ɔfɝd? dɑnəl æktʃəli  simd ɹɛɾi tə sɪk ʌp, waɪl ʃin sim tə bi duɪŋ sʌmz ɪn əɹ hɛd. mʌɾɝz ɹoʊz əmʌŋ ði ɔnlʊkɝz. mɔɹ ðən mʌɾɝz; nɪɹli laʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛɡwin.

The Murandians, looking around uneasily, appeared decidedly torn in any case. There was coin to be made, and a great deal of it supplying an army so large, but on the other hand, who could haggle successfully with whatever an army so large offered? Donel actually seemed ready to sick up, while Cian seemed to be doing sums in her head. Mutters rose among the onlookers. More than mutters; nearly loud enough for Egwene.

ʃi wɑntəd tə lʊk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. ðə saɪləns fɹəm ðə sɪɾɝz wɑz dɛfənɪŋ. sɪuən wɑz stɛɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛɾ ən ɡɹɪpɪŋ əɹ skɝts əz ɪf tə kip hɝsɛlf lʊkɪŋ fɔɹwɝd baɪ meɪn fɔɹs. ət list ʃi hæd noʊn wʌt wɑz kʌmɪŋ. ʃɛɹiəm, hu hæd nɑt, aɪd ði ændɔɹənz ən mʊɹændiənz ɹiɡəli, kɑmli, əz ðoʊ ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ ɛvɹi wɝd.

She wanted to look over her shoulder. The silence from the Sitters was deafening. Siuan was staring straight ahead and gripping her skirts as if to keep herself looking forward by main force. At least she had known what was coming. Sheriam, who had not, eyed the Andorans and Murandians regally, calmly, as though she had expected every word.

ɛɡwin niɾəd tə meɪk əm fɝɡɛt ðə ɡɝl ðeɪ sɔ bɪfɔɹ ðɛm, ən hɪɹ ə wʊmən wɪð ðə ɹeɪnz ə paʊɝ fɝmli ɪn hænd. ɪf ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ ɪn əɹ hænz naʊ, ðeɪ wəd bi! ʃi fɝmd əɹ vɔɪs. "mɑɹk mi wɛl. aɪ hæv meɪd maɪ dɪsɪʒən; ɪts fəɹ jə tə æksɛpt ɪt. əɹ feɪs wʌt ʃʊɹli wɪl kʌm fɹəm jəɹ feɪljɝ." əz ʃi fɛl saɪlənt, ðə wɪnd ɡʌstɪd tə ə bɹif haʊl, ɹætlɪŋ ðə kænəpi, tʌɡɪŋ ət ɡɑɹməns. ɛɡwin stʃɹeɪɾənd əɹ hɛɹ kɑmli. səm ə ðə wɑtʃɪŋ noʊbəlz ʃɪvɝɾ ən twɪtʃt ðɛɹ kloʊks ɝaʊn ðɛm, ən ʃi hoʊp ðɛɹ ʃɪvɝz keɪm fɹəm mɔɹ ðən ðə wɛðɝ.

Egwene needed to make them forget the girl they saw before them, and hear a woman with the reins of power firmly in hand. If they were not in her hands now, they would be! She firmed her voice. "Mark me well. I have made my decision; it is for you to accept it. Or face what surely will come from your failure." As she fell silent, the wind gusted to a brief howl, rattling the canopy, tugging at garments. Egwene straightened her hair calmly. Some of the watching nobles shivered and twitched their cloaks around them, and she hoped their shivers came from more than the weather.

ɑɝəθɛl ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks wɪð pɛlɪvɑɹ ən æɛmlɪn, ən ɔl θɹi stʌɾid ðə sɪɾɝz bɪfɔɹ sloʊli nɑɾɪŋ. ðeɪ bɪlivd ʃi wɑz mɪɹli maʊðɪŋ wɝdz ðə sɪɾɝz hæd pʊɾ ɑn əɹ tʌŋ! ivən soʊ, ɛɡwin vɛɹi nɪɹli saɪd wɪð ɹɪlif.

Arathelle exchanged looks with Pelivar and Aemlyn, and all three studied the Sitters before slowly nodding. They believed she was merely mouthing words the Sitters had put on her tongue! Even so, Egwene very nearly sighed with relief.

"ɪt wɪl bi əz jə seɪ," ðə hɑɹd-aɪd noʊbəlwʊmən sɛd. əɡɛn, tə ðə sɪɾɝz. "wi də nɑt daʊt ðə wɝɾ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt jəl ʌndɝstæn ɪf wi ɔlsoʊ ɹɪmeɪn. səmtaɪmz, wʌt jə hɪɹ ɪzənt wʌt jə θɪŋk jə hɝd. nɑt ðət ðæts ðə keɪs hɪɹ, aɪm ʃʊɹ. bʌt wɪl steɪ waɪl jə du." dɑnəl tʃɹuli lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə ɛmpti hɪmsɛlf. vɛɹi laɪkli hɪz lænz leɪ nɪɹbaɪ. ændɔɝən ɑɹmiz ɪn mʊɹændi hæd sɛldəm bɪn noʊn tə peɪ fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ.

"It will be as you say," the hard-eyed noblewoman said. Again, to the Sitters. "We do not doubt the word of Aes Sedai, of course, but you will understand if we also remain. Sometimes, what you hear isn't what you think you heard. Not that that's the case here, I'm sure. But we will stay while you do." Donel truly looked ready to empty himself. Very likely his lands lay nearby. Andoran armies in Murandy had seldom been known to pay for anything.

ɛɡwin stʊd, ən ʃi kəd hɪɹ ðə ɹʌsəl ə ðə sɪɾɝz ɹaɪzɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ. "ɪɾ ɪz əɡɹid, ðɛn. wi mʌst ɔl dɪpɑɹt sun, ɪf wəɹ tə ɹɪtɝn tə əɹ oʊn bɛdz bɪfɔɹ dɑɹk, bʌt wi ʃəd spɛɹ ə fju moʊməns. ɡɛɾɪŋ tə noʊ wʌn ənʌðɝ ə lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ naʊ maɪɾ əvɔɪd mɪsʌndɝstændɪŋz leɪɾɝ." ən tɔk maɪt ɡɪv əɹ ə tʃæns tə ɹitʃ tælmɑnz. "oʊ. wʌn ʌðɝ θɪŋ jə ʃəɾ ɔl bi əwɛɹ ʌv. ðə nɑvəs bʊk ɪz naʊ oʊpən tə ɛni wʊmən, wʌtɛvɝ əɹ eɪdʒ, ɪf ʃi tɛsts tʃɹu." ɑɝəθɛl blɪŋkt. sɪuən dɪd nɑt, jɛɾ ɛɡwin θɔt ʃi hɝɾ ə feɪnt ɡɹʌnt. ðɪs wɑz nɑt pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌt ðeɪ hæd dɪskʌst, bʌt ðəɹ wəd nɛvɝ bi ə bɛɾɝ taɪm. "kʌm. aɪm ʃʊɹ jə wəɾ ɔl laɪk tə spik wɪð ðə sɪɾɝz. lɛt fɔɹmæləɾi ɡoʊ."

Egwene stood, and she could hear the rustle of the Sitters rising behind her. "It is agreed, then. We must all depart soon, if we are to return to our own beds before dark, but we should spare a few moments. Getting to know one another a little better now might avoid misunderstandings later." And talk might give her a chance to reach Talmanes. "Oh. One other thing you should all be aware of. The novice book is now open to any woman, whatever her age, if she tests true." Arathelle blinked. Siuan did not, yet Egwene thought she heard a faint grunt. This was not part of what they had discussed, but there would never be a better time. "Come. I'm sure you would all like to speak with the Sitters. Let formality go."

wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ʃɛɹiəm tə ɔfɝ ə hænd, ʃi stɛp daʊn. ʃi ɔlmoʊs fɛlt laɪk læfɪŋ. læs naɪt ʃi hæd bɪn əfɹeɪd ʃi maɪt nɛvɝ ɹitʃ əɹ ɡoʊl, bʌt ʃi wɑz hæfweɪ ðɛɹ, ɔlmoʊs hæfweɪ, ən ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn nɪɹli əz dɪfəkəlt əz ʃi hæd fɪɹd. ʌv kɔɹs, ði ʌðɝ hæf ɹɪmeɪnd.

Without waiting for Sheriam to offer a hand, she stepped down. She almost felt like laughing. Last night she had been afraid she might never reach her goal, but she was halfway there, almost halfway, and it had not been nearly as difficult as she had feared. Of course, the other half remained.


tʃæptɝ eɪtin


CHAPTER 18

eɪ pəkjuljɝ kɔlɪŋ


A Peculiar Calling

fəɹ ə moʊmən æftɝ ɛɡwin dɪsɛndəd, noʊ wʌn ɛls muvd. ən ðən ði ændɔɹənz ən mʊɹændiənz hɛɾəd fəɹ ðə sɪɾɝz, ɔlmoʊst əz wʌn. əpɛɹənli, ə ɡɝl æmɪɝlɪn - ə ɡɝl pʌpəɾ ən fɪɡjɝhɛd! - hɛl noʊ ɪntʃɹəst, nɑt wɪð eɪdʒləs feɪsəz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm ðəɾ ət list sɛd ðeɪ æktʃəli  wɝ spikɪŋ tə ɛɛs sədaɪ. tu əɹ θɹi lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz klʌstɝɾ ɝaʊn itʃ sɪɾɝ, səm θɹʌstɪŋ ðɛɹ tʃɪnz dɪmændɪŋli, ʌðɝz dɪfəɾəntli bɛndɪŋ ðɛɹ nɛks, jɛɾ ɛvɹi wʌn ɪnsɪstən ɑn biɪŋ hɝd. ðə ʃɑɹp bɹiz wɪskt əweɪ ðə mɪst ə ðɛɹ bɹɛθ ən flʌɾɝd kloʊks fɝɡɑɾən ɪn ði ɪmpɔɹɾəns ʌv æskɪŋ ðɛɹ kwɛstʃənz. ʃɛɹiəm wɑz bʌɾənhoʊld tu, baɪ ɹɛd-feɪs lɔɹd dɑnəl, hu blʌstɝɾ ən dʒɝk baʊz baɪ tɝnz.

For a moment after Egwene descended, no one else moved. And then the Andorans and Murandians headed for the Sitters, almost as one. Apparently, a girl Amyrlin - a girl puppet and figurehead! - held no interest, not with ageless faces in front of them that at least said they actually were speaking to Aes Sedai. Two or three lords and ladies clustered around each Sitter, some thrusting their chins demandingly, others diffidently bending their necks, yet every one insistent on being heard. The sharp breeze whisked away the mist of their breath and fluttered cloaks forgotten in the importance of asking their questions. Sheriam was buttonholed too, by red-faced Lord Donel, who blustered and jerked bows by turns.

ɛɡwin pʊld ʃɛɹiəm əweɪ fɹəm ðə nɛɹoʊ-aɪd mæn. "faɪn aʊt dɪskɹitli ɔl jə kən əbaʊt ðiz sɪstɝz ən taʊɝ ɡɑɹdz ɪn ændɝ," ʃi wɪspɝd heɪstəli. əz sun əz ʃi ɹilis ðə wʊmən, dɑnəl ɹikleɪm hɝ. ʃɛɹiəm æktʃəli  lʊk pʊt-əpɑn, bʌɾ əɹ fɹaʊn dɪsəpɪɹd kwɪkli. dɑnəl blɪŋkt ənizəli əz ʃi bɪɡæn kwɛstʃənɪŋ hɪm.

Egwene pulled Sheriam away from the narrow-eyed man. "Find out discreetly all you can about these sisters and Tower Guards in Andor," she whispered hastily. As soon as she released the woman, Donel reclaimed her. Sheriam actually looked put-upon, but her frown disappeared quickly. Donel blinked uneasily as she began questioning him.

ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn ɡeɪzd əɾ ɛɡwin θɹu ðə kɹaʊd wɪð feɪsəz kɑɹv fɹəm aɪs, bʌɾ itʃ hæɾ əkwaɪɝɾ ə pɛɹ ə noʊbəlz u wɑntəd. . . . sʌmθɪŋ. ɹiəʃʊɹəns ðət ðəɹ wɑz noʊ hɪɾən tʃɹɪk ɪn ɛɡwinz wɝdz, pɝhæps. haʊ ðeɪ wəd heɪt duɪŋ ðæt, bʌt dɑdʒ ən dʌk əz ðeɪ wəd - ən ðeɪ wʊd! - ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə ɹɪli əvɔɪd ðət ɹiəʃʊɹəns wɪθaʊt ɹipjuɾieɪtɪŋ əɹ ɑn ðə spɑt. ivən ðoʊz tu wəd nɑt ɡoʊ ðət fɑɹ. nɑt hɪɹ, nɑt pʌblɪkli.

Romanda and Lelaine gazed at Egwene through the crowd with faces carved from ice, but each had acquired a pair of nobles who wanted. . . . Something. Reassurance that there was no hidden trick in Egwene's words, perhaps. How they would hate doing that, but dodge and duck as they would - and they would! - there was no way to really avoid that reassurance without repudiating her on the spot. Even those two would not go that far. Not here, not publicly.

sɪuən slɪp kloʊs tə ɛɡwin, fitʃɝz sɛɾ ɪn miknəs. ɪksɛp ðəɾ əɹ aɪz dɑɹɾɪd, meɪbi lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ɹoʊmændə əɹ ləleɪn kʌmɪŋ tə siz əm wɛɹ ðeɪ stʊd, ən fɝɡɛt lɔ, kʌstəm, pɹəpɹaɪəɾi ən u wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ. "ʃaɪn tʃʌnlə," ʃi ɔl bʌt hɪst ɪn ə wɪspɝ.

Siuan slipped close to Egwene, features set in meekness. Except that her eyes darted, maybe looking for Romanda or Lelaine coming to seize them where they stood, and forget law, custom, propriety and who was watching. "Shein Chunla," she all but hissed in a whisper.

ɛɡwin nɑɾəd, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz sɝtʃt fəɹ tælmɑnz. moʊst ə ðə mɛn ən səm ə ðə wɪmən wɝ tɔl ɪnʌf tə haɪd hɪm. wɪð ɛvɹiwʌn ʃɪftɪŋ əbaʊt. . . . ʃi wɛn ʌp ɑn əɹ toʊz. wɛɹ hæɾ i ɡɔn tə?

Egwene nodded, but her eyes searched for Talmanes. Most of the men and some of the women were tall enough to hide him. With everyone shifting about. . . . She went up on her toes. Where had he gone to?

sɛɡən plæntəd hɝsɛlf ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps, aɪɪŋ sɪuən daʊtfəli. ɛɡwin lɛɾ əɹ hilz daʊn hɝidli. ði æmɪɝlɪn kəd nɑt bɑb əbaʊt laɪk ə ɡɝl əɾ ə dæns lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ə bɔɪ. ə ɹoʊzbʌɾ ənfoʊldɪŋ. kɑm. sɝɛnəɾi. dʒɹæɾ ɔl mɛn!

Segan planted herself in front of her, fists on her hips, eyeing Siuan doubtfully. Egwene let her heels down hurriedly. The Amyrlin could not bob about like a girl at a dance looking for a boy. A rosebud unfolding. Calm. Serenity. Drat all men!

ə slɛndɝ wʊmən wɪð lɔŋ dɑɹk hɛɹ, sɛɡən sim tə hæv bɪn bɔɹn pɛtʃələnt, hɝ fʊl maʊθ fɪkst ɪn ə paʊt. hɝ dʒɹɛs wɑz ɡʊd blu wʊl ən meɪd fəɹ wɔɹmθ, bʌɾ ɪt hæd fɑɹ tu mʌtʃ vɪvəd ɡɹin ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi əkɹɔs əɹ bʊzəm, ən əɹ ɡlʌvz wɝ bɹaɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə tɪŋkɝ. ʃi lʊkt ɛɡwin ʌp ən daʊn, pɝsɪŋ əɹ lɪps, wɪð əz mʌtʃ ɪnkɹədulɪɾi ɑn əɹ feɪs əz ʃi hæd ɡɪvən sɪuən. "wʌt jə sɛɾ əbaʊt ðə nɑvəs bʊk," ʃi sɛɾ əbɹʌpli. "wɝ jə minɪŋ ɛni wʊmən ʌv ɛni eɪdʒ əɾ ɔl? ɛni kən bɪkʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðɛn?"

A slender woman with long dark hair, Segan seemed to have been born petulant, her full mouth fixed in a pout. Her dress was good blue wool and made for warmth, but it had far too much vivid green embroidery across her bosom, and her gloves were bright enough for a Tinker. She looked Egwene up and down, pursing her lips, with as much incredulity on her face as she had given Siuan. "What you said about the novice book," she said abruptly. "Were you meaning any woman of any age at all? Any can become Aes Sedai, then?"

ə kwɛstʃən kloʊs tə ɛɡwinz hɑɹt, ən ən ænsɝ ʃi dɪɹli wɑntəd tə ɡɪv - əlɔŋ wɪð ə bɑks ɑn ði ɪɹ fəɹ ðə daʊt - bʌt dʒʌs ðən ə smɔl ɡæp ɪn ðə floʊ ʌv pipəl ʃoʊɾ əɹ tælmɑnz nɪɹ ðə bæk ə ðə pəvɪljən. tɔkɪŋ wɪð pɛlɪvɑɹ! ðeɪ stʊd stɪfli, mæstəfs nɑt kwaɪt ɹɛɾi tə ʃoʊ tiθ, jɛt ðeɪ wɝ kipɪŋ ə wɑtʃ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ noʊ wʌn keɪm kloʊs ɪnʌf tə oʊvɝhɪɹ wʌt ðeɪ hæd tə seɪ. "ɛni wʊmən ʌv ɛni eɪdʒ əɾ ɔl, dɔɾɝ," ʃi əɡɹiɾ æbsənli. pɛlɪvɑɹ?

A question close to Egwene's heart, and an answer she dearly wanted to give - along with a box on the ear for the doubt - but just then a small gap in the flow of people showed her Talmanes near the back of the pavilion. Talking with Pelivar! They stood stiffly, mastiffs not quite ready to show teeth, yet they were keeping a watch to make sure no one came close enough to overhear what they had to say. "Any woman of any age at all, daughter," she agreed absently. Pelivar?

"θæŋk ju," sɛɡən sɛd, ən hɔltɪŋli æɾəd, "mʌðɝ." ʃi skɛtʃt ə kɝtsi, ðə bɛɹəs hɪn ʌv wʌn, bɪfɔɹ hɝiɪŋ ɔf. ɛɡwin stɛɹɾ æftɝ hɝ. wɛl, ɪt wɑz ə bɪɡɪnɪŋ.

"Thank you," Segan said, and haltingly added, "Mother." She sketched a curtsy, the barest hint of one, before hurrying off. Egwene stared after her. Well, it was a beginning.

sɪuən snɔɹɾɪd. "aɪ doʊn maɪn seɪlɪŋ ðə fɪŋɡɝz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪn ðə dɑɹk ɪf aɪ mʌst," ʃi mʌɾɝd hæf ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. "wi dɪskʌs ðæt; wi weɪd ðə deɪnʒɝz, ən ɛniweɪ, ðəɹ dʌzn sim tə bi ə ɡʌlz læs dɪnɝ fəɹ tʃɔɪs. bʌt juv tə sɛɾ ə faɪɝ ɑn dɛk dʒʌs tə meɪk θɪŋz ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ. nɛɾɪŋ laɪən-fɪʃ ɪzən ɪnʌf fəɹ ju. juv tə stʌf ə pɹɪkəlbæk daʊn jəɹ dʒɹɛs, tu. jə ɑɹən kɑntɛn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə weɪɾ ə skul ə sɪlvɝpaɪk - "

Siuan snorted. "I don't mind sailing the Fingers of the Dragon in the dark if I must," she muttered half under her breath. "We discussed that; we weighed the dangers, and anyway, there doesn't seem to be a gull's last dinner for choice. But you have to set a fire on deck just to make things interesting. Netting lion-fish isn't enough for you. You have to stuff a prickleback down your dress, too. You aren't content trying to wade a school of silverpike - "

ɛɡwin bɹoʊk ɪn. "sɪuən, aɪ θɪŋk aɪ ʃəd tɛl lɔɹd bɹaɪn jəɹ hɛɾ oʊvɝ hilz ɪn lʌv wɪð hɪm. ɪts oʊnli fɛɹ ðəɾ i noʊ, doʊn jə əɡɹi?" sɪuənz blu aɪz bʌlʒd, ən əɹ maʊθ wɝkt, bʌɾ ɔl ðət keɪm aʊt wɑz ə sɔɹɾ ʌv ɡɑbəlɪŋ. ɛɡwin pæɾəd əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. "jɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, sɪuən. tʃɹaɪ tə meɪnteɪn ət list ə lɪɾəl dɪɡnəɾi. ən tʃɹaɪ tə faɪn aʊɾ əbaʊt ðoʊz sɪstɝz ɪn ændɝ." ðə kɹaʊd pɑɹɾəd əɡɛn. ʃi sɔ tælmɑnz ɪn ə dɪfɹən pleɪs, bʌt stɪl ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə pəvɪljən. ən əloʊn, naʊ.

Egwene broke in. "Siuan, I think I should tell Lord Bryne you're head over heels in love with him. It's only fair that he know, don't you agree?" Siuan's blue eyes bulged, and her mouth worked, but all that came out was a sort of gobbling. Egwene patted her shoulder. "You're Aes Sedai, Siuan. Try to maintain at least a little dignity. And try to find out about those sisters in Andor." The crowd parted again. She saw Talmanes in a different place, but still on the edge of the pavilion. And alone, now.

tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə hɝi, ʃi wɔkt ɪn ɪz dɝɛkʃən, livɪŋ sɪuən stɪl ɡɑbəlɪŋ. ə pɹɪɾi, blæk-hɛɹd sɝvɪŋ mæn, huz bʌlki wʊlən bɹitʃɪz kəd nɑt kwaɪt haɪd nitli tɝn kævz, ɔfɝd sɪuən ə stimɪŋ sɪlvɝ kʌp fɹəm ə tʃɹeɪ. ʌðɝ sɝvəns wɝ muvɪŋ əbaʊt wɪð ʌðɝ sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪz. ɹəfɹɛʃmənt wɑz biɪŋ ɔfɝd, ɪf ə bɪt leɪt. ɪt wɑz mʌtʃ tu leɪt fəɹ ðə kɪs ə pis. ʃi dɪd nɑt hɪɹ wʌt sɪuən sɛɾ əz ʃi snætʃt ə kʌp, bʌt fɹəm ðə weɪ ðə fɛloʊ dʒɝkt ən stɑɹɾəd bɑbɪŋ baʊz, hi hæd ɹəsivd ʃɑɹp ʃɑɹdz ə hɝ tɛmpɝ ət ðə list. ɛɡwin saɪd.

Trying not to hurry, she walked in his direction, leaving Siuan still gobbling. A pretty, black-haired serving man, whose bulky woolen breeches could not quite hide neatly turned calves, offered Siuan a steaming silver cup from a tray. Other servants were moving about with other silver trays. Refreshment was being offered, if a bit late. It was much too late for the kiss of peace. She did not hear what Siuan said as she snatched a cup, but from the way the fellow jerked and started bobbing bows, he had received sharp shards of her temper at the least. Egwene sighed.

tælmɑnz stʊd wɪð ɑɹmz foʊldəd, əbzɝvɪŋ ðə ɡoʊɪŋz-ɑn wɪð ən əmjuz smaɪl ðət dɪd nɑt ɹitʃ ɪz aɪz. hi sim pɔɪz tə ɪksploʊɾ ɪndə moʊʃən, bʌɾ ɪz aɪz wɝ taɪɝd. əɾ əɹ əpɹoʊtʃ, hi meɪɾ ə ɹɪspɛkfəl lɛɡ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə ɹaɪ tʌtʃ tə hɪz vɔɪs wən i sɛd, "ju tʃeɪnʒd ə bɔɹɾɝ tədeɪ." hi ɡæðɝɾ ɪz kloʊk əɡɛns ði aɪsi bɹiz. "ɪɾ əz ɔlweɪz bɪn . . . fluəd . . . bɪtwin ændɝ ən mʊɹændi, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt mæps seɪ, bʌɾ ændɝ əz nɛvɝ kʌm saʊθ ɪn sətʃ nʌmbɝz bɪfɔɹ. ɪksɛp fəɹ ði il wɔɹ, ən ðə waɪtkloʊk wɔɹ, ɛniweɪ, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ oʊnli pæsɪŋ θɹu, ðɛn. wʌns ðeɪv bɪn hɪɹ ə mʌnθ, nu mæps wɪl ʃoʊ ə nu laɪn. lʊk ət ðə mʊɹændiənz skɹæmbəl, fɔnɪŋ oʊvɝ pɛlɪvɑɹ ən ɪz kəmpænjənz əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ də ðə sɪstɝz. ðeɪ ɑɹ hoʊpɪŋ tə meɪk nu fɹɛnz fəɹ ðə nu deɪ."

Talmanes stood with arms folded, observing the goings-on with an amused smile that did not reach his eyes. He seemed poised to explode into motion, but his eyes were tired. At her approach, he made a respectful leg, but there was a wry touch to his voice when he said, "You changed a border today." He gathered his cloak against the icy breeze. "It has always been . . . fluid . . . between Andor and Murandy, no matter what maps say, but Andor has never come south in such numbers before. Except for the Aiel War, and the Whitecloak War, anyway, but they were only passing through, then. Once they have been here a month, new maps will show a new line. Look at the Murandians scramble, fawning over Pelivar and his companions as much as they do the sisters. They are hoping to make new friends for the new day."

tə ɛɡwin, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənsil əɹ kɛɹfəl wɑtʃ ɑn ðoʊz u maɪt bi wɑtʃɪŋ hɝ, ɪt sim ðəɾ ɔl ə ðə noʊbəlz, mʊɹændiən ən ændɔɝən, wɝ ɪntɛn ɑn ðə sɪɾɝz, kɹaʊɾɪŋ ɝaʊn ðɛm. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ʃi hæd slaɪtli mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt mæɾɝz ɪn maɪn ðən bɔɹɾɝz. tə hɝ, ɪf nɑt tə ðə noʊbəlz. ɪksɛp fəɹ bɹif moʊməns, nʌn ə ðə sɪɾɝz wɝ vɪzəbəl bɪɑn ðə tɑps ə ðɛɹ hɛdz. oʊnli hɑlimə ən sɪuən sim tə noʊɾəs hɝ, ən ə bæbəl laɪk ðəɾ ʌv ə flɑk ʌv ɪksaɪɾəd ɡis fɪl ði ɛɹ. ʃi loʊɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs, ən tʃoʊz əɹ wɝdz kɛɹfəli.

To Egwene, trying to conceal her careful watch on those who might be watching her, it seemed that all of the nobles, Murandian and Andoran, were intent on the Sitters, crowding around them. In any case, she had slightly more important matters in mind than borders. To her, if not to the nobles. Except for brief moments, none of the Sitters were visible beyond the tops of their heads. Only Halima and Siuan seemed to notice her, and a babble like that of a flock of excited geese filled the air. She lowered her voice, and chose her words carefully.

"fɹɛnz ɑɹ ɔlweɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt, tælmɑnz. juv bɪn ə ɡʊd fɹɛn tə mæt, ən aɪ θɪŋk tə mi. aɪ hoʊp ðət hæzən tʃeɪnʒd. aɪ hoʊp juv nɑt toʊld ɛniwʌn wʌt jə ʃʊdnt." laɪt, ʃi wɑz æŋkʃəs, əɹ ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn soʊ dɝɛkt. nɛkst, ʃi wəd kʌm ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ən æsk wʌɾ i ən pɛlɪvɑɹ hæd bɪn tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt!

"Friends are always important, Talmanes. You've been a good friend to Mat, and I think to me. I hope that hasn't changed. I hope you've not told anyone what you shouldn't." Light, she was anxious, or she would not have been so direct. Next, she would come right out and ask what he and Pelivar had been talking about!

lʌkəli, hi dɪd nɑt læf əɾ əɹ fəɹ ə blʌnt-tʌŋ vɪlədʒ wʊmən. ðoʊ hi maɪɾ əv bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ ɪt. hi stʌɾid əɹ sɪɹiəsli bɪfɔɹ spikɪŋ. ɪn ə sɑf vɔɪs. hi ɔlsoʊ nu kɑʃən. "nɑɾ ɔl mɛn ɡɑsəp. tɛl mi, wən jə sɛn mæt saʊθ, dɪd jə noʊ wʌt jə wəd də hɪɹ tədeɪ?"

Luckily, he did not laugh at her for a blunt-tongued village woman. Though he might have been thinking it. He studied her seriously before speaking. In a soft voice. He also knew caution. "Not all men gossip. Tell me, when you sent Mat south, did you know what you would do here today?"

"haʊ kəɾ aɪ noʊ ðət tu mʌnθs əɡoʊ? noʊ, ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹən ɑmnɪʃənt, tælmɑnz." ʃi hæd hoʊp fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ ðət wəd pʊɾ əɹ ɪn ðə pleɪs ʃi wɑz, hæd plæn fəɹ ɪt, bʌt ʃi hæd nɑt noʊn, nɑt bæk ðɛn. ʃi ɔlsoʊ hoʊpt i dɪd nɑt ɡɑsəp. səm mɛn dɪd nɑt.

"How could I know that two months ago? No, Aes Sedai aren't omniscient, Talmanes." She had hoped for something that would put her in the place she was, had planned for it, but she had not known, not back then. She also hoped he did not gossip. Some men did not.

ɹoʊmændə stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹɾ əɹ wɪð ə fɝm stʃɹaɪɾ ən ə fɹoʊzən feɪs, bʌɾ ɑɝəθɛl ɪntɝsɛptəd hɝ, kætʃɪŋ ðə jɛloʊ sɪɾɝz ɑɹm ən ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə bi pʊɾ ɔf dɪspaɪt ɹoʊmændəz əstɑnɪʃmənt.

Romanda started toward her with a firm stride and a frozen face, but Arathelle intercepted her, catching the Yellow Sitter's arm and refusing to be put off despite Romanda's astonishment.

"wɪl jə ət lis tɛl mi wɛɹ mæt ɪz?" tælmɑnz æskt. "ɑn ɪz weɪ tə keɪɛmlɪn wɪð ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ? waɪ ɑɹ jə sɝpɹaɪzd? ə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən wɪl spik tə ə soʊlʒɝ wən fɛtʃɪŋ wɔɾɝ fɹəm ðə seɪm stʃɹim. ivən wən hiz ə hɔɹəbəl dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn," hi æɾəd dʒɹaɪli.

"Will you at least tell me where Mat is?" Talmanes asked. "On his way to Caemlyn with the Daughter-Heir? Why are you surprised? A serving woman will speak to a soldier when fetching water from the same stream. Even when he is a horrible Dragonsworn," he added dryly.

laɪt! mɛn ɹɪli wɝ . . . ɪnkənvinjənt . . . ət taɪmz. ðə bɛst ə ðɛm faʊnd weɪz tə seɪ ɪɡzækli ðə ɹɔŋ θɪŋ ət ðə ɹɔŋ moʊmənt, tə æsk ðə ɹɔŋ kwɛstʃən. nɑt tə mɛnʃən ɪnveɪiɡəlɪŋ sɝvɪŋ wɪmən ɪndə pɹæɾəl. soʊ mʌtʃ iziɝ ɪf ʃi kəd dʒʌs laɪ, bʌɾ i hæd ɡɪvən əɹ plɛnti ʌv ɹum wɪðɪn ði oʊðz. hæf ðə tʃɹuθ wəd səfaɪs, ən kip ɪm fɹəm hɛɹɪŋ ɔf tə ɛbu dɑɹ. meɪbi lɛs ðən hæf.

Light! Men really were . . . inconvenient . . . at times. The best of them found ways to say exactly the wrong thing at the wrong moment, to ask the wrong question. Not to mention inveigling serving women into prattle. So much easier if she could just lie, but he had given her plenty of room within the Oaths. Half the truth would suffice, and keep him from haring off to Ebou Dar. Maybe less than half.

oʊvɝ ɪn ðə fɑɹ kɔɹnɝ ə ðə pəvɪljən, sɪuən stʊd kənvɝsɪŋ wɪð ə tɔl jʌŋ ɹɛdhɛd wɪð kɝl mʌstæʃɪz u wɑz aɪɪŋ əɹ əz dubiəsli əz sɛɡən hæd. noʊbəlz juʒəwəli nu ðə lʊk ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ. bʌɾ i hɛld oʊnli ə pɑɹɾ ə sɪuənz ətɛnʃən. hɝ ɡeɪz kɑnstənli flɪkɝd təwɔɹɾ ɛɡwin. ɪt sim tə ʃaʊt, laʊɾ əz kɑnʃəns. iziɝ. ɪkspiɾiənt. wʌɾ ɪt wɑz tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi hæd nɑt noʊn əbaʊt tədeɪ, oʊnli hoʊpt! ɛɡwin ɪkspɛld ən ɪɹəteɪɾəd bɹɛθ. bɝn ðə wʊmən!

Over in the far corner of the pavilion, Siuan stood conversing with a tall young redhead with curled mustaches who was eyeing her as dubiously as Segan had. Nobles usually knew the look of Aes Sedai. But he held only a part of Siuan's attention. Her gaze constantly flickered toward Egwene. It seemed to shout, loud as conscience. Easier. Expedient. What it was to be Aes Sedai. She had not known about today, only hoped! Egwene expelled an irritated breath. Burn the woman!

"hi wɑz ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ðə læst aɪ hɝd," ʃi mʌɾɝd. "bʌɾ i mʌs bi hɝiɪŋ nɔɹθ əz fæst əz i kən baɪ naʊ. hi stɪl θɪŋks hiz tə seɪv mi, tælmɑnz, ən meɪtʃɹim kɔθən wʊdn mɪs ðə tʃæns tə bi ɑn ðə spɑt soʊ hi kən seɪ aɪ toʊl jə soʊ."

"He was in Ebou Dar, the last I heard," she muttered. "But he must be hurrying north as fast as he can by now. He still thinks he has to save me, Talmanes, and Matrim Cauthon wouldn't miss the chance to be on the spot so he can say I told you so."

tælmɑnz dɪd nɑt lʊk əɾ ɔl sɝpɹaɪzd. "aɪ θɔɾ ɪt maɪt bi soʊ," hi saɪd. "aɪ hæv . . . fɛlt . . . sʌmθɪŋ, fəɹ wiks naʊ. ʌðɝz ɪn ðə bæn hæv, tu. nɑɾ ɝdʒənt, bʌɾ ɔlweɪz ðɛɹ. əz ɪf i niɾəd mi. əz ɪf aɪ ʃəd lʊk saʊθ, ɛniweɪ. ɪt kən bi pəkjuljɝ, fɑloʊɪŋ ə tɑvɝən."

Talmanes did not look at all surprised. "I thought it might be so," he sighed. "I have . . . felt . . . something, for weeks now. Others in the Band have, too. Not urgent, but always there. As if he needed me. As if I should look south, anyway. It can be peculiar, following a ta'veren."

"aɪ səpoʊz ɪt kæn," ʃi əɡɹid, hoʊpɪŋ nʌn ə hɝ ɪnkɹədulɪɾi ʃoʊd. ɪt wɑz stʃɹeɪnʒ ɪnʌf tə θɪŋk ə mæt ðə weɪstʃɹəl əz liɾɝ ə ðə bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hænd, mʌtʃ lɛs əz tɑvɝən, bʌt ʃʊɹli ə tɑvɝən hæd tə bi pɹɛzənt, nɪɹbaɪ ət list, tə hæv ɛni ɪfɛkt.

"I suppose it can," she agreed, hoping none of her incredulity showed. It was strange enough to think of Mat the wastrel as leader of the Band of the Red Hand, much less as ta'veren, but surely a ta'veren had to be present, nearby at least, to have any effect.

"mæt wɑz ɹɔŋ əbaʊt jə niɾɪŋ ɹɛskju. jə nɛvɝ hæɾ ɛni ɪntɛntʃən ə kʌmɪŋ tə mi fəɹ hɛlp, dɪd ju?"

"Mat was wrong about you needing rescue. You never had any intention of coming to me for help, did you?"

hi stɪl spoʊk sɔfli, bʌt ʃi lʊkt ɝaʊn hɝidli ɛniweɪ. sɪuən wɑz stɪl wɑtʃɪŋ ðɛm. ən soʊ wɑz hɑlimə. peɪtʃɹ stʊd mʌtʃ tu kloʊs tə hɝ, pʌfɪŋ ən pɹinɪŋ ən stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ɪz mʌstæʃɪz - fɹəm ðə weɪ hi stɛɹd daʊn əɹ dʒɹɛs, hi hæd nɑt mɪsteɪkən əɹ fəɹ ə sɪstɝ, ðət wɑz sɝɾən! - bʌt ʃi wɑz ɡɪvɪŋ ɪm oʊnli hæf əɹ maɪnd, dɑɹɾɪŋ saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlænsɪz ɪn ɛɡwinz dɝɛkʃən waɪl ʃi smaɪld ʌp əɾ ɪm wɔɹmli. ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls əpɪɹɾ ɑkjəpaɪd, ən noʊ wʌn stʊd kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ.

He still spoke softly, but she looked around hurriedly anyway. Siuan was still watching them. And so was Halima. Paitr stood much too close to her, puffing and preening and stroking his mustaches - from the way he stared down her dress, he had not mistaken her for a sister, that was certain! - but she was giving him only half her mind, darting sidelong glances in Egwene's direction while she smiled up at him warmly. Everyone else appeared occupied, and no one stood close enough to hear.

"ði æmɪɝlɪn sit kəd hɑɹdli ɡoʊ ɹʌnɪŋ fəɹ sæŋktʃuɛɹi, naʊ kəd ʃi? bʌt ðəɹ əv bɪn taɪmz ɪts bɪn ə kʌmfɝt noʊɪŋ jə wɝ ðɛɹ," ʃi ədmɪɾəd. ɹɪlʌktənli. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɑz hɑɹdli səpoʊz tə niɾ ə boʊlt-hoʊl, bʌɾ ɪt kəd də noʊ hɑɹm soʊ lɔŋ əz nʌn ə ðə sɪɾɝz nu. "ju hæv bɪn ə fɹɛnd, tælmɑnz. aɪ hoʊp ðət kəntɪnjuz. aɪ tʃɹuli du."

"The Amyrlin Seat could hardly go running for sanctuary, now could she? But there have been times it's been a comfort knowing you were there," she admitted. Reluctantly. The Amyrlin Seat was hardly supposed to need a bolt-hole, but it could do no harm so long as none of the Sitters knew. "You have been a friend, Talmanes. I hope that continues. I truly do."

"ju hæv bɪn mɔɹ . . . oʊpən . . . wɪð mi ðən aɪ ɪkspɛktəd," hi sɛd sloʊli, "soʊ əl tɛl jə sʌmθɪŋ." hɪz feɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ - tə ɛni wɑtʃɝ, hi mʌst əv simd əz kæʒəwəl əz bɪfɔɹ - bʌɾ ɪz vɔɪs dʒɹɑp tə ə wɪspɝ. "aɪ hæv hæɾ əpɹoʊtʃɪz fɹəm kɪŋ ɹɔdʒɹən əbaʊt ðə bænd. ɪt simz hiz hoʊps ə biɪŋ mʊɹændiz fɝst ɹil kɪŋ. hi wɑns tə haɪɝ ʌs. aɪ wəd nɑɾ əv kənsɪɾɝd ɪt, nɔɹməli, bʌt ðəɹ ɪz nɛvɝ ɪnʌf kɔɪn, ən wɪð ðɪs . . . ðɪs fil ə mæt niɾɪŋ ʌs. . . . ɪt maɪt bi bɛɾɝ ɪf wi ɹɪmeɪn ɪn mʊɹændi. klɪɹ əz ɡʊd ɡlæs, jə ɑɹ wɛɹ jə wɑnə bi ən əv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn hænd."

"You have been more . . . open . . . with me than I expected," he said slowly, "so I will tell you something." His face did not change - to any watcher, he must have seemed as casual as before - but his voice dropped to a whisper. "I have had approaches from King Roedran about the Band. It seems he has hopes of being Murandy's first real king. He wants to hire us. I would not have considered it, normally, but there is never enough coin, and with this . . . this feel of Mat needing us. . . . It might be better if we remain in Murandy. Clear as good glass, you are where you want to be and have everything in hand."

hi fɛl saɪlən əz ə jʌŋ sɝvɪŋ wʊmən kɝtsid tə ɔfɝ mʌld waɪn. ʃi wɔɹ faɪnli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɡɹin wʊl ən ə kloʊk plʌʃ wɪð spɑɾəd ɹæbət. ʌðɝ sɝvəns fɹəm ðə kæmp wɝ hɛlpɪŋ aʊt naʊ, əz wɛl, noʊ daʊt fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ tə də bɪsaɪdz stæn ən ʃɪvɝ. ðə jʌŋ wʊmənz ɹaʊn feɪs wɑz dɪsaɪɾədli pɪntʃt fɹəm ðə koʊld.

He fell silent as a young serving woman curtsied to offer mulled wine. She wore finely embroidered green wool and a cloak plush with spotted rabbit. Other servants from the camp were helping out now, as well, no doubt for something to do besides stand and shiver. The young woman's round face was decidedly pinched from the cold.

tælmɑnz weɪvd əɹ ɔf ən pʊld ɪz kloʊk bæk ɝaʊn hɪm, bʌɾ ɛɡwin tʊk ə sɪlvɝ kʌp tə ɡeɪn ə moʊmən fəɹ θɔt. tʃɹuli ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl nid fəɹ ðə bæn ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. dɪspaɪɾ ɔl ðə mʌɾɝɪŋ, ðə sɪstɝz tʊk ðɛɹ pɹɛzəns əz ə mæɾɝ ə kɔɹs naʊ, dʒɹæɡən-swɔɹn əɹ nɑt; ðeɪ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ fɪɹɾ ən ətæk, ən ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ ɹil nid tə juz ðə bænz pɹɛzəns tə pɹɑɾ əm ɪndə muvɪŋ sɪns livɪŋ sɑlədɑɹ. ði oʊnli tʃɹu pɝpəs ʃɛn ən kɑlhɑɹ sɝv naʊ wɑz tə dʒɹɔ ɹəkɹuts ɪndə bɹaɪnz ɑɹmi, mɛn u θɔt tu ɑɹmiz mɛn ə bæɾəl ən wɑntəd tə bi ɑn ðə saɪd wɪð ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst nʌmbɝz. ʃi hæd noʊ niɾ ə ðɛm, bʌt tælmɑnz hæɾ æktəɾ əz ə fɹɛnd. ən ʃi wɑz æmɪɝlɪn. səmtaɪmz fɹɛndʃɪp ən ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi pʊʃt ɪn ðə seɪm dɝɛkʃən.

Talmanes waved her off and pulled his cloak back around him, but Egwene took a silver cup to gain a moment for thought. Truly there was little need for the Band any longer. Despite all the muttering, the sisters took their presence as a matter of course now, Dragon-sworn or not; they no longer feared an attack, and there had been no real need to use the Band's presence to prod them into moving since leaving Salidar. The only true purpose Shen an Calhar served now was to draw recruits into Bryne's army, men who thought two armies meant a battle and wanted to be on the side with the greatest numbers. She had no need of them, but Talmanes had acted as a friend. And she was Amyrlin. Sometimes friendship and responsibility pushed in the same direction.

əz ðə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən muvd ɔf, ɛɡwin leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn tælmɑnz' ɑɹm. "ju mʌs nɑt də ðæt. ivən ðə bæn kæn kɑŋkɝ ɔl ə mʊɹændi baɪ ɪtsɛlf, ən ɛvɹi hænd wɪl bi əɡɛns ju. jə noʊ vɛɹi wɛl ðə wʌn θɪŋ ðət meɪks mʊɹændiənz stæn təɡɛðɝ ɪz fɔɹənɝz ɑn ðɛɹ sɔɪl. fɑloʊ əs tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, tælmɑnz. mæt wɪl kʌm ðɛɹ; aɪ hæv noʊ daʊɾ ə ðæt." mæt wəd nɑt ɹɪli bɪliv ʃi wɑz ði æmɪɝlɪn əntɪl i sɔ hɝ wɛɹɪŋ ðə stoʊl ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ.

As the serving woman moved off, Egwene laid a hand on Talmanes' arm. "You must not do that. Even the Band can't conquer all of Murandy by itself, and every hand will be against you. You know very well the one thing that makes Murandians stand together is foreigners on their soil. Follow us to Tar Valon, Talmanes. Mat will come there; I have no doubt of that." Mat would not really believe she was the Amyrlin until he saw her wearing the stole in the White Tower.

"ɹɔdʒɹən ɪz noʊ ful," hi sɛd plɑtʃədli. "ɔl i wɑns əs tə də ɪz sɪɾ ən weɪt, ə fɔɹən ɑɹmi - wɪθaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ - ən noʊbɑdi noʊɪŋ wʌɾ ɪts ʌp tə. hi ʃəd nɑɾ əv mʌtʃ tʃɹʌbəl junaɪɾɪŋ ðə noʊbəlz əɡɛnst ʌs. ðɛn, soʊ hi sɛz, wi kwaɪətli slɪp əkɹɔs ðə bɔɹɾɝ. hi θɪŋks i kən hoʊld ɑn tə ðɛm æftɝwɝd."

"Roedran is no fool," he said placidly. "All he wants us to do is sit and wait, a foreign army - without Aes Sedai - and nobody knowing what it is up to. He should not have much trouble uniting the nobles against us. Then, so he says, we quietly slip across the border. He thinks he can hold on to them afterward."

ʃi kəd nɑt stɑp ə tʌtʃ ə hiɾ ɛntɝɪŋ əɹ vɔɪs. "ænd wʌɾ ɪz tə stɑp ɪm bɪtʃɹeɪɪŋ ju? ɪf ðə θɹɛt ɡoʊz əweɪ wɪθaʊɾ ə faɪt, hɪz dʒɹim ʌv ə junaɪɾəd mʊɹændi maɪt, tu." ðə ful mæn simd əmjuzd!

She could not stop a touch of heat entering her voice. "And what is to stop him betraying you? If the threat goes away without a fight, his dream of a united Murandy might, too." The fool man seemed amused!

"aɪ æm nɑɾ ə ful iðɝ. ɹɔdʒɹən kænɑt bi ɹɛɾi bɪfɔɹ spɹɪŋ. ðɪs lɑt wəd nɛvɝ əv stɝd fɹəm ðɛɹ mænɝz ɪf ði ændɔɹənz hæd nɑt kʌm saʊθ, ən ðeɪ wɝ ɑn ðə mɑɹtʃ bɪfɔɹ ðə snoʊz bɪɡæn. bɪfɔɹ ðɛn, mæt wɪl faɪn ʌs. ɪf hiz kʌmɪŋ nɔɹθ, hi mʌs hɪɹ ʌv ʌs. ɹɔdʒɹən wɪl əv tə bi sæɾəsfaɪd wɪð wʌtɛvɝ hiz mænədʒ baɪ ðɛn. soʊ ɪf mæt dʌz ɪntɛn tə ɡoʊ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, aɪ meɪ si jə ðəɹ jɛt."

"I am not a fool either. Roedran cannot be ready before spring. This lot would never have stirred from their manors if the Andorans had not come south, and they were on the march before the snows began. Before then, Mat will find us. If he is coming north, he must hear of us. Roedran will have to be satisfied with whatever he has managed by then. So if Mat does intend to go to Tar Valon, I may see you there yet."

ɛɡwin meɪɾ ə vɛkst saʊnd. ɪt wɑz ə ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl plæn, ðə sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ sɪuən maɪt dɪvaɪz, ən hɑɹdli ə skim ʃi θɔt ɹɔdʒɹən ælmɹɪk də ɹəloʊə ænælɔɪ kəd kæɹi ɔf. ðə fɛloʊ wɑz sɛd tə bi soʊ dɪsəluɾ i meɪd mæt lʊk hoʊlsəm. bʌt ðɛn, ɪt wɑz hɑɹdli ə skim ʃi wʊɾə bɪlivd ɹɔdʒɹən kəd θɪŋk ʌp. ði oʊnli sɝɾənti wɑz ðət tælmɑnz hæd meɪɾ ʌp ɪz maɪnd.

Egwene made a vexed sound. It was a remarkable plan, the sort of thing Siuan might devise, and hardly a scheme she thought Roedran Almaric do Arreloa a'Naloy could carry off. The fellow was said to be so dissolute he made Mat look wholesome. But then, it was hardly a scheme she would have believed Roedran could think up. The only certainty was that Talmanes had made up his mind.

"aɪ wɑn jəɹ wɝd, tælmɑnz, ðət jə woʊn lɛt ɹɔdʒɹən pʊl jə ɪndə ə wɔɹ." ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi. ðə nɛɹoʊ stoʊl ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk sim tə weɪ tɛn taɪmz mɔɹ ðən əɹ kloʊk. "ɪf i muvz sunɝ ðən jə θɪŋk, jəl liv wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt mæt əz dʒɔɪn ju."

"I want your word, Talmanes, that you won't let Roedran pull you into a war." Responsibility. The narrow stole around her neck seemed to weigh ten times more than her cloak. "If he moves sooner than you think, you will leave whether or not Mat has joined you."

"aɪ wɪʃ aɪ kəd pɹɑməs, bʌɾ ɪts nɑt pɑsəbəl," hi pɹətɛstəd. "aɪ ɪkspɛk ðə fɝst ɹeɪɾ əɡɛns maɪ fɔɹədʒɝz θɹi deɪz ət moʊst æftɝ aɪ stɑɹt muvɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm lɔɹd bɹaɪnz ɑɹmi. ɛvɹi lɔɹɾəlɪŋ ən fɑɹmɝ wɪl θɪŋk i kən pɪk ʌp ə fju hɔɹsəz ɪn ðə naɪt, ɡɪmi ə pɪnpɹɪk, ən ɹʌn ɔf tə haɪd."

"I wish I could promise, but it is not possible," he protested. "I expect the first raid against my foragers three days at most after I start moving away from Lord Bryne's army. Every lordling and farmer will think he can pick up a few horses in the night, give me a pinprick, and run off to hide."

"aɪm nɑt tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt dɪfɛndɪŋ jɝsɛlf, ən jə noʊ ɪt," ʃi sɛd fɝmli. "jɔɹ wɝd, tælmɑnz. əɹ əl nɑɾ əlaʊ jəɹ əɡɹimənt wɪð ɹɔdʒɹən." ði oʊnli weɪ tə stɑp ɪt wɑz tə bɪtʃɹeɪ ɪt, bʌt ʃi wəd nɑt liv ə wɔɹ ɪn əɹ weɪk, ə wɔɹ ʃi hæd stɑɹɾəd baɪ bɹɪŋɪŋ tælmɑnz hɪɹ.

"I'm not talking about defending yourself, and you know it," she said firmly. "Your word, Talmanes. Or I will not allow your agreement with Roedran." The only way to stop it was to betray it, but she would not leave a war in her wake, a war she had started by bringing Talmanes here.

stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ əz ɪf fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, hi faɪnəli bɛn ɪz hɛd. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ðət simd mɔɹ fɔɹməl ðən ɪz baʊ hæd. "ɪt wɪl bi əz jə seɪ, mʌðɝ. tɛl mi, ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ jə ɑɹ nɑt tɑvɝən, tu?"

Staring at her as if for the first time, he finally bent his head. Strangely, that seemed more formal than his bow had. "It will be as you say, Mother. Tell me, are you sure you are not ta'veren, too?"

"aɪ æm ði æmɪɝlɪn sit," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd. "ðæɾ ɪz kwaɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛniwʌn." ʃi tʌtʃt ɪz ɑɹm əɡɛn. "ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn ju, tælmɑnz." hɪz smaɪl nɪɹli tʌtʃt ɪz aɪz ðɪs taɪm.

"I am the Amyrlin Seat," she replied. "That is quite enough for anyone." She touched his arm again. "The Light shine on you, Talmanes." His smile nearly touched his eyes this time.

ɪnɛvəɾəbli, dɪspaɪt ðɛɹ wɪspɝz, ðɛɹ tɔk hæd bɪn noʊɾəst. meɪbi kəz ə ðɛɹ wɪspɝz. ðə ɡɝl u kleɪm tə bi æmɪɝlɪn, ə ɹɛbəl əɡɛns ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ɪn kɑnvɝseɪʃən wɪð ðə liɾɝ ə tɛn θaʊzən dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn. hæd ʃi meɪd tælmɑnz' skim wɪð ɹɔdʒɹən hɑɹɾɝ, əɹ iziɝ? wɑz wɔɹ ɪn mʊɹændi lɛs laɪkli, əɹ mɔɹ? sɪuən ən əɹ blʌɾi lɔ ʌv ʌnɪntɛndɪd kɑnsəkwɛnsəz! fɪfti ɡeɪzəz fɑloʊd hɝ, ðən dɑɹɾɪd əweɪ, əz ʃi muv θɹu ðə kɹaʊd wɔɹmɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz ɑn əɹ kʌp. wɛl, moʊs dɑɹɾɪd əweɪ. ðə sɪɾɝz' feɪsəz wɝ ɔl eɪdʒləs ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝɛnəɾi, bʌt ləleɪn maɪɾ əv bɪn ə bɹaʊn-aɪd kɹoʊ wɑtʃɪŋ ə fɪʃ stʃɹʌɡəl ɪn ðə ʃæloʊz, waɪl ɹoʊmændəz slaɪtli dɑɹkɝ aɪz cʊɾə dʒɹɪl hoʊlz θɹu aɪɝn.

Inevitably, despite their whispers, their talk had been noticed. Maybe because of their whispers. The girl who claimed to be Amyrlin, a rebel against the White Tower, in conversation with the leader of ten thousand Dragonsworn. Had she made Talmanes' scheme with Roedran harder, or easier? Was war in Murandy less likely, or more? Siuan and her bloody Law of Unintended Consequences! Fifty gazes followed her, then darted away, as she moved through the crowd warming her fingers on her cup. Well, most darted away. The Sitters' faces were all ageless Aes Sedai serenity, but Lelaine might have been a brown-eyed crow watching a fish struggle in the shallows, while Romanda's slightly darker eyes could have drilled holes through iron.

tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ə wɑtʃ ɑn ðə sʌn aʊtsaɪd, ʃi meɪɾ ə sloʊ sɝkət θɹu ðə pəvɪljən. ðə noʊbəlz wɝ stɪl ɪmpɹtunɪŋ sɪɾɝz, bʌt ðeɪ muv fɹəm wʌn tə ənʌðɝ əz ɪf sikɪŋ bɛɾɝ ænsɝz, ən ʃi bɪɡæn tə noʊɾəs smɔl θɪŋz. dɑnəl pɔzd ɑn ɪz weɪ fɹəm dʒɑnjə tə mɔɹiə, boʊɪŋ loʊ tə æɛmlɪn, hu æknɑlɪdʒd ɪm wɪð ə ɡɹeɪʃəs nɑd. ʃin, tɝnɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm tɑkimə, kɝtsid dipli tə pɛlɪvɑɹ ən ɹəsivd ə slaɪt baʊ ɪn ɹɪtɝn. ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝz, ɔlweɪz ə mʊɹændiən dɪfɝɪŋ tə ən ændɔɝən u ɹɪspɑndɪd dʒʌst əz fɔɹməli. ði ændɔɹənz tʃɹaɪd tə ɪɡnɔɹ bɹaɪn ɪksɛp fəɹ ði ɑd skaʊl, bʌɾ ɛni nʌmbɝ ə mʊɹændiənz sɔɾ ɪm aʊt, wʌn baɪ wʌn ən wɛl əweɪ fɹəm ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls, ən fɹəm ðə dɝɛkʃənz ðɛɹ aɪz wɛnt, ɪt wɑz pleɪn ðeɪ wɝ dɪskʌsɪŋ pɛlɪvɑɹ, əɹ ɑɝəθɛl, əɹ æɛmlɪn. pɝhæps tælmɑnz hæd bɪn ɹaɪt.

Trying to keep a watch on the sun outside, she made a slow circuit through the pavilion. The nobles were still importuning Sitters, but they moved from one to another as if seeking better answers, and she began to notice small things. Donel paused on his way from Janya to Moria, bowing low to Aemlyn, who acknowledged him with a gracious nod. Cian, turning away from Takima, curtsied deeply to Pelivar and received a slight bow in return. There were others, always a Murandian deferring to an Andoran who responded just as formally. The Andorans tried to ignore Bryne except for the odd scowl, but any number of Murandians sought him out, one by one and well away from everyone else, and from the directions their eyes went, it was plain they were discussing Pelivar, or Arathelle, or Aemlyn. Perhaps Talmanes had been right.

ʃi ɹəsiv baʊz ən kɝtsiz, tu, ðoʊ nʌn soʊ dip əz ðoʊz ɡɪvən ɑɝəθɛl ən pɛlɪvɑɹ ən æɛmlɪn, mʌtʃ lɛs ðə sɪɾɝz. hæf ə dʌzən wɪmən toʊld əɹ haʊ θæŋkfəl ðeɪ wɝ ðət mæɾɝz hæd bɪn ɹizɑlv pisfəli, ðoʊ ɪn tʃɹuθ, ɔlmoʊst əz mɛni meɪd nɑnkəmɪɾəl nɔɪzɪz əɹ ʃɹʌɡd ənizəli wən ʃi ɪkspɹɛs ðə seɪm sɛntəmənt, əz ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ ənsɝɾən ɪɾ ɔl wəɾ ɛn pisfəli. hɝ əʃʊɹənsɪz ðəɾ ɪt wəd wɝ mɛt wɪð ə fɝvənt "ðə laɪt sɛn ɪt soʊ!" əɹ ə ɹɪzaɪnd "ɪf ðə laɪt wɪlz." fɔɹ kɔld əɹ mʌðɝ, wʌn wɪθaʊt hɛzəteɪɾɪŋ fɝst. θɹi ʌðɝz sɛd ðət ʃi wɑz kwaɪt lʌvli, ðət ʃi hæd bjuɾəfəl aɪz, ən ðət ʃi hæɾ ə ɡɹeɪsfəl kæɹɪdʒ, ɪn ðəɾ ɔɹɾɝ; suɾəbəl kɑmpləməns pɝhæps fəɹ ɛɡwinz eɪdʒ bʌt nɑɾ əɹ steɪʃən.

She received bows and curtsies, too, though none so deep as those given Arathelle and Pelivar and Aemlyn, much less the Sitters. Half a dozen women told her how thankful they were that matters had been resolved peacefully, though in truth, almost as many made noncommittal noises or shrugged uneasily when she expressed the same sentiment, as though they were uncertain it all would end peacefully. Her assurances that it would were met with a fervent "The Light send it so!" or a resigned "If the Light wills." Four called her Mother, one without hesitating first. Three others said that she was quite lovely, that she had beautiful eyes, and that she had a graceful carriage, in that order; suitable compliments perhaps for Egwene's age but not her station.

ət list ʃi faʊnd wʌn ənælɔɪd plɛʒɝ. sɛɡən wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn ɪn biɪŋ ɪntʃɹiɡd baɪ hɝ ənaʊnsmən kənsɝnɪŋ ðə nɑvəs bʊk. pleɪnli ðət wɑz waɪ moʊst ə ðə wɪmən spoʊk tə hɝ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs. æftɝ ɔl, ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz maɪt bi ɪn ɹɪbɛljən əɡɛns ðə taʊɝ, bʌt ʃi kleɪm tə bi ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ðɛɹ ɪntʃɹəs hæd tə bi stʃɹɔŋ tə oʊvɝkʌm ðæt, ðoʊ noʊ wʌn wɑntəd tə lɛɾ ɪt ʃoʊ. ɑɝəθɛl meɪd ði ɪnkwaɪɹi wɪð ə fɹaʊn ðət pʊt mɔɹ kɹisɪz ɪn əɹ tʃiks. æɛmlɪn ʃʊk əɹ ɡɹeɪɪŋ hɛɾ ət ði ænsɝ. blɑki ʃin æskt, fɑloʊd baɪ ə ʃɑɹp-feɪst ændɔɝən leɪɾi neɪm nɛɡɑɹə, ðən ə pɹɪɾi, bɪɡ-aɪd mʊɹændiən kɔl dʒɛnət, ən ʌðɝz. nʌn wɑntəd tə noʊ fəɹ hɝsɛlf - sɛvɹəl meɪd ðət klɪɹ kwɪkli, ɪspɛʃli ðə jʌŋɡɝ wɪmən - bʌt bɪfɔɹ lɔŋ, ɛvɹi sɪŋɡəl noʊbəlwʊmən ðəɹ hæɾ æskt, ən sɛvɹəl sɝvəns əz wɛl, ʌndɝ kʌvɝ ʌv ɔfɝɪŋ mɔɹ spaɪst waɪn. wʌn, ə wɪɹi wʊmən neɪm nɪlʒɹə, hæd kʌm fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kæmp.

At least she found one unalloyed pleasure. Segan was not alone in being intrigued by her announcement concerning the novice book. Plainly that was why most of the women spoke to her in the first place. After all, the other sisters might be in rebellion against the Tower, but she claimed to be the Amyrlin Seat. Their interest had to be strong to overcome that, though no one wanted to let it show. Arathelle made the inquiry with a frown that put more creases in her cheeks. Aemlyn shook her graying head at the answer. Blocky Cian asked, followed by a sharp-faced Andoran lady named Negara, then a pretty, big-eyed Murandian called Jennet, and others. None wanted to know for herself - several made that clear quickly, especially the younger women - but before long, every single noblewoman there had asked, and several servants as well, under cover of offering more spiced wine. One, a wiry woman named Nildra, had come from the Aes Sedai camp.

ɛɡwin fɛl kwaɪt plizd wɪð ðə sid ʃi hæd plæntəd ðɛɹ. ʃi wɑz nɑt soʊ plizd wɪð ðə mɛn. ə fju spoʊk tə hɝ, bʌɾ oʊnli wən ðeɪ keɪm feɪs-tə-feɪs ən sim tə hæv noʊ ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs. ə mɝmɝd wɝɾ əbaʊt ðə wɛðɝ, iðɝ pɹeɪzɪŋ ði ɛn ə ðə dʒɹaʊɾ əɹ dɪplɔɹɪŋ ðə sʌɾən snoʊz, ə mʌɾɝd hoʊp ðət ðə bændət pɹɑbləm wəɾ ɛn sun, pɝhæps wɪð ə səɡnɪfɪkən lʊk təwɔɹd tælmɑnz, ən ðeɪ slɪpt əweɪ laɪk ɡɹis pɪɡz. ə bɛɹ ʌv ən ændɔɝən baɪ ðə neɪm ə mækɝən tʃɹɪpt oʊvɝ ɪz oʊn buts tə əvɔɪd hɝ. ɪn ə weɪ, ɪt wɑz hɑɹdli sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ. ðə wɪmən hæd ðə dʒʌstəfəkeɪʃən, ɪf oʊnli tə ðɛmsɛlvz, ʌv ðə nɑvəs bʊk, bʌt ðə mɛn hæɾ oʊnli ðə θɔt ðət biɪŋ sin kənvɝsɪŋ wɪð əɹ maɪt tɑɹ əm wɪð ðə seɪm bɹʌʃ.

Egwene felt quite pleased with the seed she had planted there. She was not so pleased with the men. A few spoke to her, but only when they came face-to-face and seemed to have no other choice. A murmured word about the weather, either praising the end of the drought or deploring the sudden snows, a muttered hope that the bandit problem would end soon, perhaps with a significant look toward Talmanes, and they slipped away like greased pigs. A bear of an Andoran by the name of Macharan tripped over his own boots to avoid her. In a way, it was hardly surprising. The women had the justification, if only to themselves, of the novice book, but the men had only the thought that being seen conversing with her might tar them with the same brush.

ɪt wɑz ɹɪli kwaɪt dɪskɝədʒɪŋ. ʃi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ wʌt ðə mɛn θɔɾ əbaʊt nɑvəsɪz, bʌt ʃi vɛɹi mʌtʃ wɑntəd tə noʊ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ əz fɪɹfəl əz ðə wɪmən ðət ðɪs wəd kʌm tə bloʊz ɪn ði ɛnd. fɪɹz laɪk ðət kəd fʊlfɪl ðɛmsɛlvz vɛɹi izəli. ət læst, ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn weɪ tə faɪn aʊt.

It was really quite discouraging. She did not care what the men thought about novices, but she very much wanted to know if they were as fearful as the women that this would come to blows in the end. Fears like that could fulfill themselves very easily. At last, she decided there was only one way to find out.

pɛlɪvɑɹ tɝn fɹəm teɪkɪŋ ə fɹɛʃ kʌp ʌv waɪn fɹəm ə tʃɹeɪ ən stɑɹɾəd bæk, wɪð ə mʌfəld oʊθ, tə kip fɹəm bʌmpɪŋ ɪndə hɝ; hæd ʃi stʊɾ ɛni kloʊsɝ, ʃi wʊɾə hæd tə stæn ɑn ɪz buts. hɑt waɪn splæʃt oʊvɝ ɪz ɡlʌv hæn ən ɹæn daʊn ʌndɝ ɪz koʊtsliv, pɹədusɪŋ ə kɝs nɑt soʊ mjuɾɪd. tɔl ɪnʌf tə lum oʊvɝ hɝ, hi meɪɾ ə ɡʊd dʒɑb ʌv ɪt. hɪz skaʊl bɪlɔŋd ɑn ə mæn wɑntɪŋ tə sɛn ən ənɔɪɪŋ jʌŋ wʊmən bɹɪskli aʊɾ ə hɪz weɪ. əɹ ɑn ə mæn u hæd nɪɹli stɛpt ɑn ə ɹɛɾ æɾɝ. ʃi hɛl hɝsɛlf ɪɹɛkt ən foʊkəst ɑn ən ɪmədʒ ə hɪm əz ə smɔl bɔɪ ʌp tə noʊ ɡʊd; ðəɾ ɔlweɪz hɛlpt; moʊs mɛn sim tə fil ɪt. hi mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ - ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn ə pəlaɪt ɡɹiɾɪŋ, əɹ ənʌðɝ oʊθ - ən dɪpt ɪz hɛd slaɪtli, ðən tʃɹaɪd tə stɛp ɝaʊn hɝ. ʃi saɪd-stɛp tə steɪ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. hi muv bæk, ən ʃi fɑloʊd. hi bɪɡæn tə lʊk hʌntəd. ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə tʃɹaɪ pʊɾɪŋ ɪm əɾ iz bɪfɔɹ pɹɛsɪŋ ði ɪmpɔɹɾənt kwɛstʃən. ʃi wɑntəɾ ænsɝz, nɑt mɔɹ mʌmbəlɪŋ.

Pelivar turned from taking a fresh cup of wine from a tray and started back, with a muffled oath, to keep from bumping into her; had she stood any closer, she would have had to stand on his boots. Hot wine splashed over his gloved hand and ran down under his coatsleeve, producing a curse not so muted. Tall enough to loom over her, he made a good job of it. His scowl belonged on a man wanting to send an annoying young woman briskly out of his way. Or on a man who had nearly stepped on a red adder. She held herself erect and focused on an image of him as a small boy up to no good; that always helped; most men seemed to feel it. He muttered something - it might have been a polite greeting, or another oath - and dipped his head slightly, then tried to step around her. She side-stepped to stay in front of him. He moved back, and she followed. He began to look hunted. She decided to try putting him at ease before pressing the important question. She wanted answers, not more mumbling.

"ju mʌs bi pliz tə hɪɹ ðət ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ɪz ɑn əɹ weɪ tə keɪɛmlɪn, lɔɹd pɛlɪvɑɹ." ʃi hæd hɝd sɛvɹəl ə ðə sɪɾɝz mɛnʃən ðæt.

"You must be pleased to hear that the Daughter-Heir is on her way to Caemlyn, Lord Pelivar." She had heard several of the Sitters mention that.

hɪz feɪs wɛn blæŋk. "ɪleɪn tʃɹəkən əz ə ɹaɪt tə pʊɾ ɪn əɹ kleɪm tə ðə laɪən θɹoʊn," hi ɹɪplaɪɾ ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs.

His face went blank. "Elayne Trakand has a right to put in her claim to the Lion Throne," he replied in a flat voice.

ɛɡwinz aɪz waɪɾənd, ən i stɛp bæk əɡɛn, ənsɝteɪnli. pɝhæps i θɔɾ əɹ æŋɡɹi oʊvɝ ði æbsəns ə hɝ taɪɾəl, bʌt ʃi bɛɹli noʊɾəst ðæt. pɛlɪvɑɹ hæd səpɔɹɾəd ɪleɪnz mʌðɝ ɪn əɹ kleɪm fəɹ ðə θɹoʊn, ən ɪleɪn hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ i wəd səpɔɹt hɝ, tu. ʃi spoʊk ə pɛlɪvɑɹ fɑnli, laɪk ə feɪvɹɪɾ ʌŋkəl.

Egwene's eyes widened, and he stepped back again, uncertainly. Perhaps he thought her angry over the absence of her title, but she barely noticed that. Pelivar had supported Elayne's mother in her claim for the throne, and Elayne had been sure he would support her, too. She spoke of Pelivar fondly, like a favorite uncle.

"mʌðɝ," sɪuən mɝmɝɾ əɾ əɹ ɛlboʊ, "wi mʌs liv ɪf jə wɑnə bi ʃʊɹ ə ɹitʃɪŋ ðə kæmp bɪfɔɹ sʌnsɛt." ʃi mænədʒ tə pʊt kənsɪɾɝəbəl ɝdʒənsi ɪndə ðoʊz kwaɪət wɝdz. ðə sʌn hæd pæst ɪts pik.

"Mother," Siuan murmured at her elbow, "we must leave if you want to be sure of reaching the camp before sunset." She managed to put considerable urgency into those quiet words. The sun had passed its peak.

"ðɪs ɪz noʊ wɛðɝ tə bi ɪn ði oʊpən ət naɪtfɔl," pɛlɪvɑɹ sɛd hɝidli. "ɪf jəl ɪkskjuz mi, aɪ mʌs meɪk ɹɛɾi tə liv." ʃʌvɪŋ ɪz kʌp ɑntu ðə tʃɹeɪ ʌv ə pæsɪŋ sɝvənt, hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd bɪfɔɹ hæfweɪ meɪkɪŋ ə lɛɡ, ən stɔkt ɔf wɪð ði ɛɹ ʌv ə mæn u hæd ɹɪəl fɹi ʌv ə tʃɹæp.

"This is no weather to be in the open at nightfall," Pelivar said hurriedly. "If you will excuse me, I must make ready to leave." Shoving his cup onto the tray of a passing servant, he hesitated before halfway making a leg, and stalked off with the air of a man who had wriggled free of a trap.

ɛɡwin wɑntəd tə ɡɹaɪn əɹ tiθ wɪð fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. wʌd ðə mɛn θɪŋk ə ðɛɹ əɡɹimənt? ɪf ɪt kəd bi kɔl ðæt, ðə weɪ ʃi hæd fɔɹst ɪɾ ɑn ðɛm. ɑɝəθɛl ən æɛmlɪn hæd mɔɹ paʊɝ ən ɪnfluəns ðən moʊst ə ðə mɛn, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz pɛlɪvɑɹ ən kʌlhən ən ðə laɪk u ɹoʊd wɪð ðə soʊlʒɝz; ðeɪ kəd stɪl meɪk ðɪs flɛɹ ʌp ɪn əɹ feɪs laɪk ə bæɹəl ə læmp ɔɪl.

Egwene wanted to grind her teeth with frustration. What did the men think of their agreement? If it could be called that, the way she had forced it on them. Arathelle and Aemlyn had more power and influence than most of the men, yet it was Pelivar and Culhan and the like who rode with the soldiers; they could still make this flare up in her face like a barrel of lamp oil.

"faɪnd ʃɛɹiəm," ʃi ɡɹaʊld, "æn tɛl əɹ tə ɡɛɾ ɛvɹiwʌn maʊntəd naʊ, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ ɪt teɪks!" ʃi kəd nɑt ɡɪv ðə sɪɾɝz ə naɪt tə θɪŋk əbaʊt wʌt hæd hæpən tədeɪ, tə plæn ən plɑt. ðeɪ hæd tə bi bæk ɪn kæmp bɪfɔɹ ðə sʌn wɛn daʊn.

"Find Sheriam," she growled, "and tell her to get everyone mounted now, no matter what it takes!" She could not give the Sitters a night to think about what had happened today, to plan and plot. They had to be back in camp before the sun went down.


tʃæptɝ naɪntin


CHAPTER 19

ðə lɔ


The Law

ɡɛɾɪŋ ðə sɪɾɝz tə ðɛɹ maʊns pɹuv noʊ bɑðɝ; ðeɪ wɝ əz iɡɝ tə bi əweɪ əz ɛɡwin, ɪspɛʃli ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn, boʊθ koʊld əz ðə wɪn ən wɪð aɪz laɪk θʌndɝklaʊdz. ðə ɹɛst wɝ ðə vɛɹi ɪmədʒ ə kul-aɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝɛnəɾi, ɡɪvɪŋ ɔf kəmpoʊʒɝ laɪk ə hɛvi sɛnt, jɛt ðeɪ ɡlaɪɾɪd tə ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz soʊ kwɪkli ðət ðə noʊbəlz wɝ lɛft ɡeɪpɪŋ ən ðə bɹaɪtli klæd sɝvəns skɹæmbəld ɪn loʊɾɪŋ ðə pækhɔɹsɪz tə kætʃ ʌp əz bɛs ðeɪ kʊd.

Getting the Sitters to their mounts proved no bother; they were as eager to be away as Egwene, especially Romanda and Lelaine, both cold as the wind and with eyes like thunderclouds. The rest were the very image of cool-eyed Aes Sedai serenity, giving off composure like a heavy scent, yet they glided to their horses so quickly that the nobles were left gaping and the brightly clad servants scrambled in loading the packhorses to catch up as best they could.

ɛɡwin hæd deɪʃɝ sɛɾ ə hɑɹd peɪs ɪn ðə snoʊ, ən wɪð noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə lʊk ən ə nɑd fɹəm əɹ lɔɹd bɹaɪn meɪd ʃʊɹ ði ɑɹmɝɾ ɛskɔɹts muvd əz fæst. sɪuən ɑn bɛlə ən ʃɛɹiəm ɑn wɪŋ ɹʌʃt tə dʒɔɪn hɝ. fəɹ lɔŋ stʃɹɛtʃəz ðeɪ tʃɝn θɹu fɛtlɑk-dip kʌvɝ, ðə hɔɹsəz stɛpɪŋ haɪ ət nɪɹ tə ə tʃɹɑt, ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ɹɪpəlɪŋ ɪn ði aɪsi bɹiz, ən ivən wən ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi tə sloʊ, wən ðə hɔɹsəz wɝ sɪŋkɪŋ ni-dip θɹu ðə snoʊ kɹʌst, ðeɪ kɛp tə ə fæst wɔk.

Egwene had Daishar set a hard pace in the snow, and with no more than a look and a nod from her Lord Bryne made sure the armored escorts moved as fast. Siuan on Bela and Sheriam on Wing rushed to join her. For long stretches they churned through fetlock-deep cover, the horses stepping high at near to a trot, the Flame of Tar Valon rippling in the icy breeze, and even when it was necessary to slow, when the horses were sinking knee-deep through the snow crust, they kept to a fast walk.

ðə sɪɾɝz hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs ɪksɛp tə kip ʌp, ən ðɛɹ spid kʌt daʊn ðɛɹ ɑpɝtunəɾi tə tɔk ɑn ðə weɪ. ət ðət taɪɹɪŋ peɪs, ə læk ʌv ətɛnʃən tə jəɹ hɔɹs kəd bɹɪŋ ə bɹoʊkən lɛɡ fəɹ ði ænəməl ən ə bɹoʊkən nɛk fəɹ ju. ivən soʊ, ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn itʃ mænədʒ tə ɡæðɝ əɹ koʊɾɝi ɝaʊn hɝ, ən ðoʊz tu nɑts flaʊndɝd θɹu ðə snoʊ sɝaʊndəd baɪ wɔɹdz əɡɛnst ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ. ðə pɛɹ sim tə bi dɪlɪvɝɪŋ taɪɹeɪdz. ɛɡwin kəɾ ɪmædʒən ðə tɑpɪk. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ʌðɝ sɪɾɝz mænədʒ tə ɹaɪd təɡɛðɝ fəɹ ə taɪm, ɪkstʃeɪnʒɪŋ ə fju wɝdz kwaɪətli ən kæstɪŋ kul ɡlænsɪz səmtaɪmz əɾ əɹ ən səmtaɪmz ət ðə sɪstɝz ɹæpt ɝaʊn baɪ seɪaɪdɑɹ. oʊnli dɛlænə nɛvɝ dʒɔɪnd wʌn ə ðoʊz bɹif kɑnvɝseɪʃənz. ʃi steɪd kloʊs bɪsaɪd hɑlimə, hu ət læst ədmɪɾəd ðət ʃi wɑz koʊld. feɪs taɪt, ðə kʌntʃɹi wʊmən hɛld əɹ kloʊk kloʊs ɝaʊn hɝ, bʌt ʃi stɪl tʃɹaɪd tə kʌmfɝt dɛlænə, wɪspɝɪŋ tə hɝ ɔlmoʊs kɑnstənli. dɛlænə sim tə nid kʌmfɝɾɪŋ; hɝ bɹaʊz wɝ dʒɹɔn daʊn, pʊɾɪŋ ə kɹis ɪn əɹ fɔɹhɛd ðəɾ æktʃəli  meɪɾ əɹ sim eɪdʒɪd.

The Sitters had no choice except to keep up, and their speed cut down their opportunity to talk on the way. At that tiring pace, a lack of attention to your horse could bring a broken leg for the animal and a broken neck for you. Even so, Romanda and Lelaine each managed to gather her coterie around her, and those two knots floundered through the snow surrounded by wards against eavesdropping. The pair seemed to be delivering tirades. Egwene could imagine the topic. For that matter, other Sitters managed to ride together for a time, exchanging a few words quietly and casting cool glances sometimes at her and sometimes at the sisters wrapped around by saidar. Only Delana never joined one of those brief conversations. She stayed close beside Halima, who at last admitted that she was cold. Face tight, the country woman held her cloak close around her, but she still tried to comfort Delana, whispering to her almost constantly. Delana seemed to need comforting; her brows were drawn down, putting a crease in her forehead that actually made her seem aged.

ʃi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn wɝid. ði ʌðɝz mæsk ðə filɪŋ ɹɪdʒɪdli, ɹeɪɾieɪtɪŋ æbsəlut pɔɪz, bʌt ðə wɔɹɾɝz ɹoʊd laɪk mɛn ɪkspɛktɪŋ ðə wɝs tə lip aʊɾ ə ðə snoʊ ət ðə nɛkst stɛp, aɪz ʃɪftɪŋ ɪn ən ənsisɪŋ wɑtʃ, dɪskwaɪəɾɪŋ kloʊks stʃɹimɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪn tə liv hænz fɹi. wən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝid, hɝ wɔɹɾɝ wɝid, ən ðə sɪɾɝz wɝ tu əbzɔɹb tə θɪŋk ə kɑmɪŋ ðə mɛn. ɛɡwin wɑz dʒʌst əz ɡlæd tə si ɪt. ɪf ðə sɪɾɝz wɝ tʃɹʌbəld, ðeɪ hæd nɑt jɛt meɪɾ ʌp ðɛɹ maɪnz.

She was not the only one worried. The others masked the feeling rigidly, radiating absolute poise, but the Warders rode like men expecting the worst to leap out of the snow at the next step, eyes shifting in an unceasing watch, disquieting cloaks streaming in the wind to leave hands free. When an Aes Sedai worried, her Warder worried, and the Sitters were too absorbed to think of calming the men. Egwene was just as glad to see it. If the Sitters were troubled, they had not yet made up their minds.

wən bɹaɪn ɹoʊɾ aʊt tə kənfɝ wɪð ənoʊ, ʃi tʊk ði ɑpɝtunəɾi tə æsk wʌt ðə tu wɪmən hæd lɝn əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən taʊɝ ɡɑɹdz ɪn ændɝ.

When Bryne rode out to confer with Uno, she took the opportunity to ask what the two women had learned about Aes Sedai and Tower Guards in Andor.

"nɑt mʌtʃ," sɪuən ɹɪplaɪɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs. ʃæɡi bɛlə dɪd nɑt sim tə bi hævɪŋ ɛni dɪfəkəlti wɪð ðə peɪs, bʌt sɪuən dɪd, ɡɹɪpɪŋ əɹ ɹeɪnz taɪtli ɪn wʌn hæn ən ðə pɑməl ə hɝ sæɾəl wɪð ði ʌðɝ. "æz nɪɹ əz aɪ kən meɪk aʊt, ðəɹ ɑɹ fɪfti ɹumɝz ən noʊ fæks. ɪts ə laɪkli sɔɹɾ ə teɪl tə spɹɪŋ ʌp, bʌɾ ɪt maɪt stɪl bi tʃɹu." bɛlə lɝtʃt, hɝ fɹʌn hʊvz sɪŋkɪŋ dip, ən sɪuən ɡæspt. "ðə laɪt bɝn ɔl hɔɹsəz!"

"Not much," Siuan replied in a tight voice. Shaggy Bela did not seem to be having any difficulty with the pace, but Siuan did, gripping her reins tightly in one hand and the pommel of her saddle with the other. "As near as I can make out, there are fifty rumors and no facts. It's a likely sort of tale to spring up, but it might still be true." Bela lurched, her front hooves sinking deep, and Siuan gasped. "The Light burn all horses!"

ʃɛɹiəm hæd lɝnd noʊ mɔɹ. ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, ən saɪɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli. "ɪt saʊnz ɔl fɛðɝz ən nɑnsɛns tə mi, mʌðɝ. ðəɹ ɑɹ ɔlweɪz ɹumɝz ə sɪstɝz snikɪŋ əbaʊt. dɪdn jə ɛvɝ lɝn tə ɹaɪd, sɪuən?" ʃi æɾəd, hɝ vɔɪs sʌɾənli dʒɹɪpɪŋ dɝɪʒən. "baɪ tənaɪt, jəl bi tu sɔɹ tə wɔk!" ʃɛɹiəmz nɝvz mʌst əv bɪn ɹæɡəd fəɹ əɹ tə bɝst aʊt soʊ oʊpənli. fɹəm ðə weɪ ʃi kɛpt ʃɪftɪŋ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl, ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ətʃivd əɹ pɹidɪkʃən fəɹ sɪuən.

Sheriam had learned no more. She shook her head, and sighed irritably. "It sounds all feathers and nonsense to me, Mother. There are always rumors of sisters sneaking about. Didn't you ever learn to ride, Siuan?" she added, her voice suddenly dripping derision. "By tonight, you'll be too sore to walk!" Sheriam's nerves must have been ragged for her to burst out so openly. From the way she kept shifting in her saddle, she had already achieved her prediction for Siuan.

sɪuənz aɪz hɑɹɾənd, ən ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ ɔlɹɛɾi hæf snɑɹlɪŋ, nɛvɝ maɪn u wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðə bænɝ.

Siuan's eyes hardened, and she opened her mouth already half snarling, never mind who was watching from behind the banner.

"bi stɪl, boʊθ ə ju!" ɛɡwin snæpt. ʃi tʊk ə dip, kɑmɪŋ bɹɛθ. ʃi wɑz ə bɪt ɹæɡəd hɝsɛlf. wʌtɛvɝ ɑɝəθɛl bɪlivd, ɛni fɔɹs ɪleɪɾə sɛn tə ɪntɝfɪɹ wɪð əm wəd bi tu lɑɹdʒ fəɹ snikɪŋ. ðət lɛf ðə blæk taʊɝ, ə dɪzæstɝ ɪn ðə meɪkɪŋ. jə ɡɑt fɝðɝ plʌkɪŋ ðə tʃɪkən ɪn fɹʌn ə jə ðən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stɑɹɾ ɑn wʌn ʌp ə tʃɹi. ɪspɛʃli wən ðə tʃɹi wɑz ɪn ənʌðɝ kʌntʃɹi ən ðəɹ maɪt nɑɾ ivən bi ənʌðɝ tʃɪkən.

"Be still, both of you!" Egwene snapped. She took a deep, calming breath. She was a bit ragged herself. Whatever Arathelle believed, any force Elaida sent to interfere with them would be too large for sneaking. That left the Black Tower, a disaster in the making. You got further plucking the chicken in front of you than trying to start on one up a tree. Especially when the tree was in another country and there might not even be another chicken.

stɪl, ʃi bɪɾ ɔf əɹ wɝdz ɪn ɡɪvɪŋ ʃɛɹiəm ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz fəɹ wʌns ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə kæmp. ʃi wɑz ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ən ðət mɛn ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ əɹ ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi, ivən ðoʊz fɑloʊɪŋ ɪleɪɾə. hɝ vɔɪs wɑz ɹɑk stɛɾi, ðoʊ. ɪt wɑz tu leɪt tə bi fɹaɪɾənd wʌns jə ɡɹæb ðə wʊlf baɪ ði ɪɹz.

Still, she bit off her words in giving Sheriam instructions for once they reached the camp. She was the Amyrlin Seat, and that meant all Aes Sedai were her responsibility, even those following Elaida. Her voice was rock steady, though. It was too late to be frightened once you grabbed the wolf by the ears.

ʃɛɹiəmz tɪltəɾ aɪz wɛnt waɪɾ ət ði ɔɹɾɝz. "mʌðɝ, ɪf aɪ meɪ æsk, waɪ . . . ?" ʃi tʃɹeɪld ɔf ʌndɝ ɛɡwinz lɛvəl ɡeɪz, ən swɑloʊd. "ɪt wɪl bi əz jə seɪ, mʌðɝ," ʃi sɛd sloʊli. "stʃɹeɪnʒ. aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə deɪ jə ən nɪneɪiv keɪm tə ðə taʊɝ, tu ɡɝlz u kʊdn dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ tə bi ɪksaɪɾəd əɹ fɹaɪɾənd. soʊ mʌtʃ əz tʃeɪnʒd sɪns ðɛn. ɛvɹiθɪŋ."

Sheriam's tilted eyes went wide at the orders. "Mother, if I may ask, why . . . ?" She trailed off under Egwene's level gaze, and swallowed. "It will be as you say, Mother," she said slowly. "Strange. I remember the day you and Nynaeve came to the Tower, two girls who couldn't decide whether to be excited or frightened. So much has changed since then. Everything."

"nʌθɪŋ steɪz ðə seɪm fɝɛvɝ," ɛɡwin toʊl hɝ. ʃi ɡeɪv sɪuən ə səɡnɪfɪkən lʊk, bʌt sɪuən ɹəfjuz tə si. ʃi əpɪɹd tə bi sʌlkɪŋ. ʃɛɹiəm lʊk sɪk.

"Nothing stays the same forever," Egwene told her. She gave Siuan a significant look, but Siuan refused to see. She appeared to be sulking. Sheriam looked sick.

lɔɹd bɹaɪn ɹɪtɝn ðɛn, ən i mʌst əv sɛns ðə muɾ əmʌŋ ðɛm. əsaɪd fɹəm seɪɪŋ ðət ðeɪ wɝ meɪkɪŋ ɡʊd taɪm, hi kɛpt ɪz maʊθ ʃʌt. ə waɪz mæn.

Lord Bryne returned then, and he must have sensed the mood among them. Aside from saying that they were making good time, he kept his mouth shut. A wise man.

meɪkɪŋ ɡʊd taɪm əɹ nɑt, ðə sʌn wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɔlmoʊst ɑn ðə tʃɹitɑps wən ðeɪ faɪnəli ɹoʊd θɹu ði ɑɹmiz spɹɔlɪŋ kæmp. wæɡənz ən tɛns kæs lɔŋ ʃædoʊz əkɹɔs ðə snoʊ, ən ə nʌmbɝ ə mɛn wɝ hɑɹɾ ət wɝk bɪldɪŋ jɛt mɔɹ loʊ ʃɛltɝz aʊɾ ə bɹʌʃ. ðəɹ wɝ nɑt nɪɹli ɪnʌf tɛns, ivən fəɹ ɔl ðə soʊlʒɝz, ən ðə kæmp hɛld ɔlmoʊst əz mɛni hɑɹnəsmeɪkɝz ən lɔnʒɹəsəz ən flɛtʃɝz ən ðə laɪk, ɔl ðoʊz u ɪnɛvəɾəbli fɑloʊɾ ɛni ɑɹmi. ðə ɹɪŋɪŋ ʌv ænvəlz spoʊk ə fɛɹiɝz ən ɑɹmɔɹɝz ən blæksmɪθs stɪl ət ðɛɹ leɪbɝz. kʊk faɪɝz wɝ bɝnɪŋ ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ən ðə kævəlɹi pild əweɪ, iɡɝ fəɹ wɔɹmθ ən hɑt fuɾ əz sun əz ðɛɹ wɛɹəli plɑɾɪŋ ænəməlz wɝ kɛɹd fɔɹ. sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, bɹaɪn ɹoʊɾ ɑn əɾ ɛɡwinz saɪɾ æftɝ ʃi dɪsmɪs hɪm.

Making good time or not, the sun was sitting almost on the treetops when they finally rode through the army's sprawling camp. Wagons and tents cast long shadows across the snow, and a number of men were hard at work building yet more low shelters out of brush. There were not nearly enough tents, even for all the soldiers, and the camp held almost as many harnessmakers and laundresses and fletchers and the like, all those who inevitably followed any army. The ringing of anvils spoke of farriers and armorers and blacksmiths still at their labors. Cook fires were burning everywhere, and the cavalry peeled away, eager for warmth and hot food as soon as their wearily plodding animals were cared for. Surprisingly, Bryne rode on at Egwene's side after she dismissed him.

"ɪf jəl əlaʊ, mʌðɝ," hi sɛd, "aɪ θɔɾ aɪ maɪɾ əkʌmpəni jə ə waɪl lɔŋɡɝ." ʃɛɹiəm æktʃəli  twɪstəɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl tə stɛɹ ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt. sɪuən stɛɹd, tu, stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, əz ɪf nɑt dɛɹɪŋ tə tɝn əɹ sʌɾənli waɪɾ aɪz təwɔɹd hɪm.

"If you will allow, Mother," he said, "I thought I might accompany you a while longer." Sheriam actually twisted in her saddle to stare in astonishment. Siuan stared, too, straight ahead, as if not daring to turn her suddenly wide eyes toward him.

wʌɾ i θɪŋk i kəd du? ækt əz əɹ bɑɾiɡɑɹd? əɡɛnst sɪstɝz? ðət fɛloʊ wɪð ðə dʒɹɪpi noʊz wəd də əz wɛl. ɹɪvil dʒʌs haʊ kəmplitli hi wɑz ɑn əɹ saɪd? təmɑɹoʊ wɑz taɪm ɪnʌf fəɹ ðæt, ɪf ɔl wɛnt wɛl tənaɪt; ðət ɹɛvəleɪʃən naʊ maɪɾ izəli stæmpid ðə hɔl ɪn dɝɛkʃənz ʃi hɑɹdli dɛɹd kɑntəmpleɪt.

What did he think he could do? Act as her bodyguard? Against sisters? That fellow with the drippy nose would do as well. Reveal just how completely he was on her side? Tomorrow was time enough for that, if all went well tonight; that revelation now might easily stampede the Hall in directions she hardly dared contemplate.

"tənaɪɾ ɪz fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪznəs," ʃi toʊld ɪm fɝmli. bʌt, sɪli əz ðə sədʒɛstʃən wɑz, hi hæɾ ɔfɝd tə pʊt hɪmsɛlf ət ɹɪsk fəɹ hɝ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tɛlɪŋ ɪz ɹizənz - hu nu waɪ ə mæn dɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ? - jɛt ʃi oʊɾ ɪm fəɹ ðæt. əmʌŋ ʌðɝ θɪŋz. "ənlɛs aɪ sɛn sɪuən tə jə tənaɪt, lɔɹd bɹaɪn, jə ʃəd liv bɪfɔɹ mɔɹnɪŋ. ɪf bleɪm fəɹ tədeɪ ətætʃɪz ɪtsɛlf tə mi, ɪt maɪt ɹəflɛkt ɑn ju, tu. steɪɪŋ kəd pɹuv deɪnʒɝəs. ivən feɪɾəl. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðeɪ wəd nid mʌtʃ ɪkskjuz." noʊ nid tə neɪm u "ðeɪ" wɝ.

"Tonight is for Aes Sedai business," she told him firmly. But, silly as the suggestion was, he had offered to put himself at risk for her. There was no telling his reasons - who knew why a man did anything? - yet she owed him for that. Among other things. "Unless I send Siuan to you tonight, Lord Bryne, you should leave before morning. If blame for today attaches itself to me, it might reflect on you, too. Staying could prove dangerous. Even fatal. I don't think they would need much excuse." No need to name who "they" were.

"aɪ ɡeɪv maɪ wɝd," hi ɹɪplaɪd kwaɪətli, pæɾɪŋ tʃɹævəlɝz nɛk. "tə tɑɹ vəlɑn." pɔzɪŋ, hi ɡlæns təwɔɹd sɪuən. ɪt wɑz lɛs ə hɛzəteɪʃən ðən ə kənsɪɾɝeɪʃən. "wʌtɛvɝ tənaɪts bɪznəs ɪz," hi sɛd faɪnəli, "ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət juv θɝɾi θaʊzən mɛn ən ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn bɪhaɪn ju. ðət ʃəd kaʊn fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ, ivən əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. əntɪl təmɑɹoʊ, mʌðɝ." ɹeɪnɪŋ ɪz bɪɡ-noʊz beɪ ɝaʊnd, hi kɔld oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, "aɪ ɪkspɛk tə si jə təmɑɹoʊ, tu, sɪuən. nʌθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒəz ðæt." sɪuən stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪz bæk əz i ɹoʊɾ əweɪ. ðəɹ wɑz æŋɡwɪʃ ɪn əɹ aɪz.

"I gave my word," he replied quietly, patting Traveler's neck. "To Tar Valon." Pausing, he glanced toward Siuan. It was less a hesitation than a consideration. "Whatever tonight's business is," he said finally, "remember that you have thirty thousand men and Gareth Bryne behind you. That should count for something, even among Aes Sedai. Until tomorrow, Mother." Reining his big-nosed bay around, he called over his shoulder, "I expect to see you tomorrow, too, Siuan. Nothing changes that." Siuan stared at his back as he rode away. There was anguish in her eyes.

ɛɡwin kəd nɑt hɛlp stɛɹɪŋ, tu. hi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn soʊ oʊpən bɪfɔɹ, nɑt nɪɹli. waɪ naʊ, ʌv ɔl taɪmz?

Egwene could not help staring, too. He had never been so open before, not nearly. Why now, of all times?

kɹɔsɪŋ ðə fɔɹɾi əɹ fɪfti peɪsɪz ðət sɛpɝeɪɾəd ði ɑɹmiz kæmp fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪz, ʃi nɑɾəd tə ʃɛɹiəm, hu dʒɹu ɹeɪn ət ðə fɝs tɛns. ʃi ən sɪuən ɹoʊɾ ɑn. bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ʃɛɹiəmz vɔɪs ɹoʊz, sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli klɪɹ ən stɛɾi. "ði æmɪɝlɪn sit kɔlz ðə hɔl tə sɪt ðɪs deɪ ɪn fɔɹməl sɛʃən. lɛt pɹɛpɝeɪʃənz bi meɪd wɪð ɔl spid." ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt lʊk bæk.

Crossing the forty or fifty paces that separated the army's camp from the Aes Sedai's, she nodded to Sheriam, who drew rein at the first tents. She and Siuan rode on. Behind them, Sheriam's voice rose, surprisingly clear and steady. "The Amyrlin Seat calls the Hall to sit this day in formal session. Let preparations be made with all speed." Egwene did not look back.

əɾ əɹ tɛnt, ə boʊni ɡɹum kɪkɪŋ əɹ leɪɝd wʊlən skɝts keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ tə teɪk deɪʃɝ ən bɛlə. hɝ feɪs wɑz pɪntʃt, ən ʃi bɛɹli dʌkt əɹ hɛd bɪfɔɹ hɝiɪŋ əweɪ wɪð ðə hɔɹsəz əz kwɪkli əz ʃi hæd kʌm. ðə wɔɹmθ ə ðə ɡloʊɪŋ bɹeɪʒɝz ɪnsaɪd wɑz laɪk ə fɪs kloʊzɪŋ daʊn. ɛɡwin hæd nɑt ɹilaɪz haʊ koʊld ɪt wɑz aʊtsaɪɾ əntɪl ðɛn. əɹ haʊ koʊld ʃi wɑz.

At her tent, a bony groom kicking her layered woolen skirts came running to take Daishar and Bela. Her face was pinched, and she barely ducked her head before hurrying away with the horses as quickly as she had come. The warmth of the glowing braziers inside was like a fist closing down. Egwene had not realized how cold it was outside until then. Or how cold she was.

tʃɛsə tʊk əɹ kloʊk, ən ɪkskleɪmd wən ʃi fɛlt əɹ hænz. "waɪ, jəɹ aɪs tə ðə boʊn, mʌðɝ." tʃæɾɝɪŋ əweɪ, ʃi bʌsəld ɝaʊn foʊldɪŋ ɛɡwinz kloʊk ən sɪuənz, smuðɪŋ ðə nitli tɝnd-daʊn blæŋkəts ɑn ɛɡwinz kɑt, tʌtʃɪŋ ə tʃɹeɪ sɛɾ ɑn wʌn ə ðə tʃɛsts ðət hæd bɪn pʊl daʊn fɹəm ðə stæk. "aɪd dʒʌmp ɹaɪɾ ɪndə bɛd, wɪð hɑt bɹɪks ɔl ɝaʊnd, ɪf aɪ wɑz ðət tʃɪld. əz sun əz aɪɾ iɾən, ɛniweɪ. wɔɹm aʊtsaɪd dʌz oʊnli soʊ mʌtʃ ɡʊd wɪθaʊt wɔɹm ɪnsaɪd. əl fɛtʃ ə fju ɛkstʃɹə bɹɪks tə tʌk ʌndɝ jəɹ fit waɪl jə sʌp. ən fəɹ sɪuən sədaɪ, ʌv kɔɹs. oʊ, ɪf aɪ wɑz əz hʌŋɡɹi əz jə mʌs bi, aɪ noʊ aɪd bi tɛmptəd tə ɡʌlp maɪ fud, bʌt ðəɾ ɔlweɪz ɡɪvz mi peɪnz ɪn ðə stʌmək." pɔzɪŋ baɪ ðə tʃɹeɪ, ʃi aɪɾ ɛɡwin, ən nɑɾəd wɪð sæɾəsfækʃən wən ʃi sɛd ðət ʃi wəd nɑɾ it tu fæst.

Chesa took her cloak, and exclaimed when she felt her hands. "Why, you're ice to the bone, Mother." Chattering away, she bustled around folding Egwene's cloak and Siuan's, smoothing the neatly turned-down blankets on Egwene's cot, touching a tray set on one of the chests that had been pulled down from the stack. "I'd jump right into bed, with hot bricks all around, if I was that chilled. As soon as I'd eaten, anyway. Warm outside does only so much good without warm inside. I'll fetch a few extra bricks to tuck under your feet while you sup. And for Siuan Sedai, of course. Oh, if I was as hungry as you must be, I know I'd be tempted to gulp my food, but that always gives me pains in the stomach." Pausing by the tray, she eyed Egwene, and nodded with satisfaction when she said that she would not eat too fast.

meɪkɪŋ ə soʊbɝ ænsɝ wɑz nɑɾ izi. tʃɛsə wɑz ɔlweɪz ɹɪfɹɛʃɪŋ, bʌɾ æftɝ tədeɪ, ɛɡwin ɔlmoʊs læft wɪð plɛʒɝ. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ kɑmpləkeɪʃənz tə tʃɛsə. tu waɪt boʊlz ə lɛntəl stu stʊɾ ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪ, əlɔŋ wɪð ə tɔl pɪtʃɝ ə spaɪst waɪn, tu sɪlvɝ kʌps, ən tu lɑɹdʒ ɹoʊlz. sʌmhaʊ, ðə wʊmən hæd noʊn sɪuən wəd bi iɾɪŋ wɪð hɝ. stim ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə boʊlz ən pɪtʃɝ. haʊ ɔfən hæd tʃɛsə hæd tə tʃeɪnʒ ðət tʃɹeɪ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ wɔɹm fud ɡɹiɾəd ɛɡwin stʃɹeɪɾəweɪ? sɪmpəl ən ənkɑmpləkeɪɾɪd. ən əz kɛɹɪŋ əz ə mʌðɝ. əɹ ə fɹɛnd.

Making a sober answer was not easy. Chesa was always refreshing, but after today, Egwene almost laughed with pleasure. There were no complications to Chesa. Two white bowls of lentil stew stood on the tray, along with a tall pitcher of spiced wine, two silver cups, and two large rolls. Somehow, the woman had known Siuan would be eating with her. Steam rose from the bowls and pitcher. How often had Chesa had to change that tray to make sure warm food greeted Egwene straightaway? Simple and uncomplicated. And as caring as a mother. Or a friend.

"aɪ mʌs fɔɹɡoʊ bɛd fəɹ naʊ, tʃɛsə. aɪv wɝk jɛt tənaɪt. wəd jə liv ʌs?"

"I must forgo bed for now, Chesa. I've work yet tonight. Would you leave us?"

sɪuən ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ əz ðə tɛntflæp fɛl bɪhaɪn ðə plʌmp wʊmən. "ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ ʃi hæzən bɪn ɪn jəɹ sɝvəs sɪns jə wɝ ə beɪb?" ʃi mʌɾɝd.

Siuan shook her head as the tentflap fell behind the plump woman. "Are you sure she hasn't been in your service since you were a babe?" she muttered.

teɪkɪŋ wʌn ə ðə boʊlz, ə ɹoʊl, ən ə spun, ɛɡwin sɛɾəld ɪndə hɝ tʃɛɹ wɪð ə saɪ. ʃi ɔlsoʊ ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs ən wɔɹɾɪd ðə tɛn əɡɛns lɪsənɝz. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, seɪaɪdɑɹ meɪɾ əɹ ɔl ðət mʌtʃ mɔɹ əwɛɹ ə hæf-fɹoʊzən hænz ən fit. ðə bɪts ɪn bɪtwin wɝ nɑt mʌtʃ wɔɹmɝ. ðə boʊl simd ɔlmoʊs tu wɔɹm tə hændəl, ən ðə ɹoʊl, əz wɛl. oʊ, haʊ ʃi wʊɾə lʌv tə hæv ðoʊz hɑt bɹɪks.

Taking one of the bowls, a roll, and a spoon, Egwene settled into her chair with a sigh. She also embraced the Source and warded the tent against listeners. Unfortunately, saidar made her all that much more aware of half-frozen hands and feet. The bits in between were not much warmer. The bowl seemed almost too warm to handle, and the roll, as well. Oh, how she would have loved to have those hot bricks.

"ɪz ðəɹ ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ wi kən du?" ʃi æskt, ən pɹɑmpli ɡʌlp daʊn ə spunfʊl ə stu. ʃi wɑz ɹævənəs, ən noʊ wʌndɝ, wɪð nʌθɪŋ sɪns bɹɛkfəst ən ðəɾ ɝli. lɛntəlz ən wʊɾi kæɹəts teɪstəd laɪk əɹ mʌðɝz faɪnəs kʊkɪŋ. "aɪ kæn θɪŋk ʌv ɛniθɪŋ, bʌt kən ju?"

"Is there anything more we can do?" she asked, and promptly gulped down a spoonful of stew. She was ravenous, and no wonder, with nothing since breakfast and that early. Lentils and woody carrots tasted like her mother's finest cooking. "I can't think of anything, but can you?"

"wʌt kən bi dʌn, hæz bɪn. ðəɹ ɪzən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə kɹieɪɾɝ pʊɾɪŋ ə hæn ɪn." sɪuən tʊk ði ʌðɝ boʊl ən dʒɹɑpt ɑntu ðə loʊ stul, bʌt ðən ʃi sæt stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə hɝ stu ən stɝɪŋ ɪt wɪð əɹ spun. "ju wʊdn ɹɪli tɛl hɪm, wəd ju?" ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. "aɪ kʊdn bɛɹ ɪf i nu."

"What can be done, has been. There isn't anything else, short of the Creator putting a hand in." Siuan took the other bowl and dropped onto the low stool, but then she sat staring into her stew and stirring it with her spoon. "You wouldn't really tell him, would you?" she said finally. "I couldn't bear if he knew."

"waɪ ɑn ɝθ nɑt?"

"Why on earth not?"

"hid teɪk ædvæntɪdʒ," sɪuən sɛd dɑɹkli. "oʊ, nɑt ðæt. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðæt." ʃi wɑz kwaɪt pɹuɾɪʃ ɪn səm ɛɹiəz. "bʌt ðə mæn wəd meɪk maɪ laɪf ðə pɪɾ ə dum!" ən wɑʃɪŋ ɪz smɔlkloʊðz ən pɑlɪʃɪŋ ɪz buts ən ɪz sæɾəl ɛvɹi deɪ wɑz nɑt?

"He'd take advantage," Siuan said darkly. "Oh, not that. I don't think that." She was quite prudish in some areas. "But the man would make my life the Pit of Doom!" And washing his smallclothes and polishing his boots and his saddle every day was not?

ɛɡwin saɪd. haʊ kəd sətʃ ə sɛnsəbəl, ɪntɛlədʒənt, keɪpəbəl wʊmən tɝn ɪndə ə skæɾɝbɹeɪn oʊvɝ ðɪs wʌn sʌbʒɪkt? laɪk ə hɪsɪŋ vaɪpɝ, ən ɪmədʒ ɹoʊz ɪn əɹ hɛd. hɝsɛlf, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ɡɔɪnz ni pleɪɪŋ kɪsɪŋ ɡeɪmz. ɪn ə tævɝn! ʃi ʃʌvd ɪɾ əweɪ, hɑɹd. "sɪuən, aɪ nid jəɹ ɪkspɪɹiəns. aɪ nid jəɹ bɹeɪn. aɪ kæn əfɔɹd tə hæv jə hæf-wɪɾɪd kəz ə lɔɹd bɹaɪn. ɪf jə kæn pʊl jɝsɛlf təɡɛðɝ, əl peɪ hɪm wʌt jə oʊ, ən fɝbɪd jə tə si hɪm. aɪ wɪl."

Egwene sighed. How could such a sensible, intelligent, capable woman turn into a scatterbrain over this one subject? Like a hissing viper, an image rose in her head. Herself, sitting on Gawyn's knee playing kissing games. In a tavern! She shoved it away, hard. "Siuan, I need your experience. I need your brain. I can't afford to have you half-witted because of Lord Bryne. If you can't pull yourself together, I'll pay him what you owe, and forbid you to see him. I will."

"aɪ sɛɾ aɪd wɝk ɔf ðə dɛt," sɪuən sɛd stʌbɝnli. "aɪ hæv əz mʌtʃ ɑnɝ əz lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ blʌɾi bɹaɪn! əz mʌtʃ ən mɔɹ! hi kips ɪz wɝd, ən aɪ kip maɪn! bɪsaɪdz, mɪn toʊl mi aɪ hæv tə steɪ kloʊs tə hɪm əɹ wɪl boʊθ daɪ. əɹ sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðæt." ə pɪŋknəs ɪn əɹ tʃiks ɡeɪv əɹ əweɪ, ðoʊ. hɝ ɑnɝ ən mɪnz vjuɪŋ nɑtwɪθstændɪŋ, ʃi wɑz sɪmpli wɪlɪŋ tə pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ɛniθɪŋ tə bi nɪɹ ðə mæn!

"I said I'd work off the debt," Siuan said stubbornly. "I have as much honor as Lord Gareth bloody Bryne! As much and more! He keeps his word, and I keep mine! Besides, Min told me I have to stay close to him or we'll both die. Or something like that." A pinkness in her cheeks gave her away, though. Her honor and Min's viewing notwithstanding, she was simply willing to put up with anything to be near the man!

"vɛɹi wɛl. jəɹ bɛsɑɾɪd, ən ɪf aɪ tɛl jə tə steɪ əweɪ fɹəm hɪm, jəl iðɝ dɪsəbeɪ əɹ moʊp ən ɹæp ðə ɹɛst ə jəɹ bɹeɪnz ɪn ə klaʊd. wʌɾ ɑɹ jə gɑnə də əbaʊt hɪm?"

"Very well. You're besotted, and if I tell you to stay away from him, you'll either disobey or mope and wrap the rest of your brains in a cloud. What are you going to do about him?"

skaʊlɪŋ ɪndɪɡnənli, sɪuən wɛn ɑn fəɹ səm lɪɾəl taɪm, ɡɹoʊlɪŋ wʌt ʃi wəd laɪk tə də əbaʊt ɡɛɹɪθ blʌɾi bɹaɪn. hi wʊɾə ɛndʒɔɪd nʌn ʌv ɪt. sʌm, hi maɪt nɑɾ əv sɝvaɪvd.

Scowling indignantly, Siuan went on for some little time, growling what she would like to do about Gareth bloody Bryne. He would have enjoyed none of it. Some, he might not have survived.

"sɪuən," ɛɡwin sɛd wɔɹnɪŋli. "ju dɪnaɪ wʌn mɔɹ taɪm wʌts pleɪn əz jəɹ noʊz, ən əl tɛl ɪm ən ɡɪv ɪm ðə mʌni."

"Siuan," Egwene said warningly. "You deny one more time what's plain as your nose, and I'll tell him and give him the money."

sɪuən paʊɾɪd sʌlənli. ʃi paʊɾɪd! sʌlənli! sɪuən! "aɪ doʊn əv taɪm tə bi ɪn lʌv. aɪ bɛɹli hæv taɪm tə θɪŋk, bɪtwin wɝkɪŋ fəɹ jə ən hɪm. ən ivən ɪf ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɡoʊz ɹaɪt tənaɪt, əl əv twaɪs əz mʌtʃ tə du. bɪsaɪdz. . . ." hɝ feɪs fɛl, ən ʃi ʃɪftəɾ ɑn ðə stul. "wʌɾ ɪf i dʌznt . . . ɹɪtɝn maɪ filɪŋz?" ʃi mʌɾɝd. "hiz nɛvɝ ivən tʃɹaɪd tə kɪs mi. ɔl i kɛɹz əbaʊɾ ɪz wɛðɝ ɪz ʃɝts ɑɹ klin."

Siuan pouted sullenly. She pouted! Sullenly! Siuan! "I don't have time to be in love. I barely have time to think, between working for you and him. And even if everything goes right tonight, I'll have twice as much to do. Besides. . . ." Her face fell, and she shifted on the stool. "What if he doesn't . . . return my feelings?" she muttered. "He's never even tried to kiss me. All he cares about is whether his shirts are clean."

ɛɡwin skɹeɪpt əɹ spun θɹu hɝ boʊl, ən wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd wən ɪt keɪm ʌp ɛmpti. nʌθɪŋ ɹɪmeɪn ə ðə ɹoʊl bʌɾ ə fju kɹʌmz ɑn əɹ dʒɹɛs. laɪt, hɝ mɪɾəl stɪl fɛl hɑloʊ. ʃi aɪd sɪuənz boʊl hoʊpfəli; ðə wʊmən sim tə hæv lɪɾəl ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ɛniθɪŋ bʌt dʒɹɔɪŋ sɝkəlz ɪn ðə lɛntəlz.

Egwene scraped her spoon through her bowl, and was surprised when it came up empty. Nothing remained of the roll but a few crumbs on her dress. Light, her middle still felt hollow. She eyed Siuan's bowl hopefully; the woman seemed to have little interest in anything but drawing circles in the lentils.

ə sʌɾən θɔɾ əkɝd tə hɝ. waɪ hæd lɔɹd bɹaɪn ɪnsɪstəd ðət sɪuən wɝk ɔf əɹ dɛɾ ivən æftɝ lɝnɪŋ u ʃi wɑz? dʒʌs kəz ʃi hæd sɛd ʃi wʊd? ɪt wɑz ə pɹɪpɑstɝəs ɝeɪnʒmənt. ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɪt dɪd kip əɹ kloʊs tə hɪm wən nʌθɪŋ ɛls wəd hæv. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ʃi hɝsɛlf hæɾ ɔfən wʌndɝd waɪ bɹaɪn hæɾ əɡɹid tə bɪl ði ɑɹmi. hi hæd tə hæv noʊn ðəɹ wɑz ə vɛɹi ɡʊd tʃæns i wɑz leɪɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ɑn ðə tʃɑpɪŋ blɑk. ən waɪ hi hæɾ ɔfɝd ðəɾ ɑɹmi tə hɝ, ə ɡɝl æmɪɝlɪn wɪð noʊ ɹil əθɔɹəɾi ən nɑɾ ə fɹɛn əmʌŋ ðə sɪstɝz ɪksɛp sɪuən, əz fɑɹ əz i nu? kəd ði ænsɝ tə ɔl ə ðoʊz kwɛstʃənz bi əz sɪmpəl əz . . . hi lʌv sɪuən? noʊ; moʊs mɛn wɝ fɹɪvələs ən flaɪɾi, bʌt ðət wɑz tʃɹuli pɹɪpɑstɝəs! stɪl, ʃi ɔfɝd ðə sədʒɛstʃən, ɪf oʊnli tə əmjuz sɪuən. ɪt maɪt tʃɪɹ əɹ ə lɪɾəl.

A sudden thought occurred to her. Why had Lord Bryne insisted that Siuan work off her debt even after learning who she was? Just because she had said she would? It was a preposterous arrangement. Except that it did keep her close to him when nothing else would have. For that matter, she herself had often wondered why Bryne had agreed to build the army. He had to have known there was a very good chance he was laying his head on the chopping block. And why he had offered that army to her, a girl Amyrlin with no real authority and not a friend among the sisters except Siuan, as far as he knew? Could the answer to all of those questions be as simple as . . . he loved Siuan? No; most men were frivolous and flighty, but that was truly preposterous! Still, she offered the suggestion, if only to amuse Siuan. It might cheer her a little.

sɪuən snɔɹɾɪd ɪn dɪsbɪlif. ɪt saʊndəɾ ɑd, kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðət pɹɪɾi feɪs, bʌt noʊ wʌn kəd pʊt kwaɪt soʊ mʌtʃ ɪkspɹɛʃən ɪndə ə snɔɹɾ əz ʃi dɪd. "hiz nɑɾ ə toʊɾəl ɪɾiət," ʃi sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "ɪn fækt, hiz ə ɡʊd hɛɾ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. hi θɪŋks laɪk ə wʊmən, moʊst ə ðə taɪm."

Siuan snorted in disbelief. It sounded odd, coming from that pretty face, but no one could put quite so much expression into a snort as she did. "He's not a total idiot," she said dryly. "In fact, he has a good head on his shoulders. He thinks like a woman, most of the time."

"aɪ stɪl hævən hɝd jə seɪ jəl stʃɹeɪɾən ʌp, sɪuən," ɛɡwin pɝsɪstəd. "ju hæv tə, wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ."

"I still haven't heard you say you'll straighten up, Siuan," Egwene persisted. "You have to, one way or another."

"wɛl, ʌv kɔɹs aɪ wɪl. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌts bɪn ðə mæɾɝ wɪð mi. ɪɾ ɪzən əz ɪf aɪ nɛvɝ kɪst ə mæn bɪfɔɹ." hɝ aɪz nɛɹoʊd sʌɾənli, əz ɪf ʃi ɪkspɛktəɾ ɛɡwin tə tʃælənʒ əɹ ɑn ðæt. "aɪ hævən spɛn maɪ hoʊl laɪf ɪn ðə taʊɝ. ðɪs ɪz ɹɪdɪkjələs! tʃæɾɝɪŋ əbaʊt mɛn, tənaɪɾ ʌv ɔl naɪts!" piɹɪŋ ɪndə hɝ boʊl, ʃi sim tə ɹilaɪz fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ðəɾ ɪt hɛl fud. ʃi fɪld əɹ spun, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ wɪð ɪɾ əɾ ɛɡwin. "ju hæv tə bi kɛɹfəl ə jəɹ taɪmɪŋ, mɔɹ naʊ ðən ɛvɝ. ɪf ɹoʊmændə əɹ ləleɪn ɡɹæbz ðə tɪlɝ, jəl nɛvɝ ɡɛt jəɹ hænz ɑn ɪt."

"Well, of course I will. I don't know what's been the matter with me. It isn't as if I never kissed a man before." Her eyes narrowed suddenly, as if she expected Egwene to challenge her on that. "I haven't spent my whole life in the Tower. This is ridiculous! Chattering about men, tonight of all nights!" Peering into her bowl, she seemed to realize for the first time that it held food. She filled her spoon, gesturing with it at Egwene. "You have to be careful of your timing, more now than ever. If Romanda or Lelaine grabs the tiller, you'll never get your hands on it."

ɹɪdɪkjələs əɹ nɑt, sʌmθɪŋ sɝɾənli hæd ɹɪstɔɹd sɪuənz æpətaɪt. ʃi wɛn θɹu hɝ stu fæstɝ ðən ɛɡwin hæd hɝz, ən nɑɾ ə kɹʌm ə ðə ɹoʊl ɪskeɪp hɝ. ɛɡwin faʊn ðət ʃi hæd dʒɹɔn əɹ fɪŋɡɝz θɹu hɝ oʊn ɛmpti boʊl. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ɪt ðən bʌt tə lɪk ɔf ðə læs fju lɛntəlz, ʌv kɔɹs.

Ridiculous or not, something certainly had restored Siuan's appetite. She went through her stew faster than Egwene had hers, and not a crumb of the roll escaped her. Egwene found that she had drawn her fingers through her own empty bowl. There was nothing for it then but to lick off the last few lentils, of course.

dɪskʌsɪŋ wʌt wɑz tə hæpən tənaɪt sɝv noʊ ɹil pɔɪnt. ðeɪ hæd hoʊn ən ɹəfaɪnd wʌɾ ɛɡwin wɑz tə seɪ, ən wɛn, soʊ mɛni taɪmz ðət ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd ʃi hæd nɑt dʒɹimd ʌv ɪt. ʃi sɝɾənli cʊɾə dʌn əɹ pɑɹɾ ɪn əɹ slip. sɪuən ɪnsɪstəɾ ɛniweɪ, skɝɾɪŋ vɛɹi nɪɹ ðə pɔɪnt wɛɹ ɛɡwin wəɾ əv tə kɔl əɹ daʊn, ɡoʊɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪɾ əɡɛn ən əɡɛn, bɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp pɑsəbɪləɾiz ðeɪ hæd dɪskʌs bɪfɔɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz. stʃɹeɪnʒli, sɪuən hæd faʊn hɝsɛlf ə vɛɹi ɡʊd mud. ʃi ivən ɛseɪɾ ə lɪɾəl hjumɝ, ənjuʒəwəl fəɹ əɹ ə leɪt, ðoʊ səm wɑz ɑn ðə ɡæloʊz saɪd.

Discussing what was to happen tonight served no real point. They had honed and refined what Egwene was to say, and when, so many times that she was surprised she had not dreamed of it. She certainly could have done her part in her sleep. Siuan insisted anyway, skirting very near the point where Egwene would have to call her down, going over it again and again, bringing up possibilities they had discussed before a hundred times. Strangely, Siuan had found herself a very good mood. She even essayed a little humor, unusual for her of late, though some was on the gallows side.

"ju noʊ ɹoʊmændə wɑntəd tə bi æmɪɝlɪn hɝsɛlf wʌns," ʃi sɛɾ ət wʌn pɔɪnt. "aɪv hɝɾ ɪt wɑz tæmɹə ɡɛɾɪŋ ðə stoʊl ən stæf ðət meɪɾ əɹ stɔk ɔf ɪndə ɹitaɪɝmən laɪk ə ɡʌl wɪð əɹ teɪl fɛðɝz klɪpt. əl leɪ ə sɪlvɝ mɑɹk aɪ doʊn əv tə ə fɪʃ skeɪl ðəɾ əɹ aɪz bʌlʒ twaɪs əz mʌtʃ əz ləleɪnz."

"You know Romanda wanted to be Amyrlin herself once," she said at one point. "I've heard it was Tamra getting the stole and staff that made her stalk off into retirement like a gull with her tail feathers clipped. I'll lay a silver mark I don't have to a fish scale that her eyes bulge twice as much as Lelaine's."

ən leɪɾɝ. "aɪ wɪʃ aɪ kəd bi ðəɹ tə hɪɹ əm haʊl. sʌmbɑɾiz gɑnə bɪfɔɹ mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ, ən aɪd ɹæðɝ ɪt wɑz əm ðən ʌs. aɪ nɛvɝ hæd ðə vɔɪs fəɹ sɪŋɪŋ." ʃi æktʃəli  sæŋ ə lɪɾəl snætʃ əbaʊt stɛɹɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ əɾ ə bɔɪ ən hævɪŋ noʊ boʊt. ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt; hɝ vɔɪs wɑz plɛzən ɪn ɪts fæʃən, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt kæɹi ə tun ɪn ə bʌkət.

And later. "I wish I could be there to hear them howl. Somebody's going to before much longer, and I'd rather it was them than us. I never had the voice for singing." She actually sang a little snatch about staring across the river at a boy and having no boat. She was right; her voice was pleasant in its fashion, but she could not carry a tune in a bucket.

ən leɪɾɝ stɪl. "ə ɡʊd θɪŋ aɪ hæv sətʃ ə swit feɪs naʊ. ɪf ðɪs ɡoʊz bædli, ðəl dʒɹɛs ðə pɛɹ ʌv əs fəɹ dɑlz ən sɪɾ əs ɑn ə ʃɛlf tə ædmaɪɹ. ʌv kɔɹs, wi maɪɾ əv 'æksəɾənts' ɪnstɛd. dɑlz də ɡɛt bɹoʊkən. ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn wɪl əv tə faɪn sʌmwʌn ɛls tə bʊli." ʃi ɹɪli læft ət ðæt.

And later still. "A good thing I have such a sweet face now. If this goes badly, they'll dress the pair of us for dolls and sit us on a shelf to admire. Of course, we might have 'accidents' instead. Dolls do get broken. Gareth Bryne will have to find someone else to bully." She really laughed at that.

ɛɡwin fɛl kənsɪɾɝəbəl ɹɪlif wən ðə tɛntflæp bʌlʒd ɪnwɝd bɹifli, ənaʊnsɪŋ sʌmwʌn u nu ɪnʌf nɑt tə ɛntɝ wɛɹ ðəɹ wɑz ə wɔɹd. ʃi ɹɪli dɪd nɑt wɑnə hɪɹ wɛɹ sɪuənz hjumɝ wɛn fɹəm ðɛɹ!

Egwene felt considerable relief when the tentflap bulged inward briefly, announcing someone who knew enough not to enter where there was a ward. She really did not want to hear where Siuan's humor went from there!

əz sun əz ʃi ɹilis ðə wɔɹd, ʃɛɹiəm stɛpt ɪnsaɪd, əkʌmpənid baɪ ə ɹʌʃ ʌv ɛɹ ðət sim tɛn taɪmz əz koʊld əz ɝliɝ. "ɪts taɪm, mʌðɝ. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪz ɹɛɾi." hɝ tɪltəɾ aɪz wɝ waɪd, ən ʃi lɪkt əɹ lɪps wɪð ðə tɪp ə hɝ tʌŋ.

As soon as she released the ward, Sheriam stepped inside, accompanied by a rush of air that seemed ten times as cold as earlier. "It's time, Mother. Everything is ready." Her tilted eyes were wide, and she licked her lips with the tip of her tongue.

sɪuən baʊndəd tə hɝ fiɾ ən sizd əɹ kloʊk fɹəm ɛɡwinz kɑt, bʌt ʃi pɔzd ɪn ði ækt ə dʒɹeɪpɪŋ ɪɾ ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. "aɪ hæv seɪl ðə fɪŋɡɝz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪn ðə dɑɹk, jə noʊ," ʃi sɛd sɪɹiəsli. "ænd nɛɾɪd ə laɪənfɪʃ wʌns, wɪð maɪ fɑðɝ. ɪt kən bi dʌn."

Siuan bounded to her feet and seized her cloak from Egwene's cot, but she paused in the act of draping it on her shoulders. "I have sailed the Fingers of the Dragon in the dark, you know," she said seriously. "And netted a lionfish once, with my father. It can be done."

ʃɛɹiəm fɹaʊn əz sɪuən dɑɹɾɪd aʊt, lɛɾɪŋ ɪn mɔɹ koʊld. "səmtaɪmz, aɪ θɪŋk," ʃi bɪɡæn, bʌt wʌtɛvɝ ʃi səmtaɪmz θɔt, ʃi dɪd nɑt ʃɛɹ. "waɪ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ ðɪs, mʌðɝ?" ʃi æskt ɪnstɛd. "ɔl ʌv ɪt, tədeɪ ət ðə leɪk, kɔlɪŋ ðə hɔl tənaɪt. waɪ dɪd juv əs spɛn ɔl deɪ jɛstɝdeɪ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt lɑɡən tə ɛvɹibɑɾi wi mɛt? aɪd θɪŋk jə maɪt ʃɛɹ ɪt wɪð mi. aɪm jəɹ kipɝ. aɪ dɪd swɛɹ fiəlti."

Sheriam frowned as Siuan darted out, letting in more cold. "Sometimes, I think," she began, but whatever she sometimes thought, she did not share. "Why are you doing this, Mother?" she asked instead. "All of it, today at the lake, calling the Hall tonight. Why did you have us spend all day yesterday talking about Logain to everybody we met? I'd think you might share it with me. I am your Keeper. I did swear fealty."

"aɪ tɛl jə wʌt jə nid tə noʊ," ɛɡwin sɛd, swɪŋɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə seɪ ðət ʃi tʃɹʌstɪɾ ə fɔɹst oʊθ oʊnli soʊ fɑɹ, ivən ə sɪstɝz. ən ʃɛɹiəm maɪt faɪn ə ɹizən tə lɛɾ ə wɝd slɪp ɪndə ðə ɹɔŋ ɪɹ dɪspaɪt ðəɾ oʊθ. æftɝ ɔl, ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ noʊɾəd fəɹ faɪndɪŋ luphoʊlz ɪn wʌt ðeɪ hæd sɛd. ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹɪli bɪliv ðət wəd hæpən, bʌt dʒʌst əz wɪð lɔɹd bɹaɪn, ʃi kəd nɑt teɪk ivən smɔl tʃænsəz ənlɛs ʃi hæd tə.

"I tell you what you need to know," Egwene said, swinging her cloak around her shoulders. There was no need to say that she trusted a forced oath only so far, even a sister's. And Sheriam might find a reason to let a word slip into the wrong ear despite that oath. After all, Aes Sedai were noted for finding loopholes in what they had said. She did not really believe that would happen, but just as with Lord Bryne, she could not take even small chances unless she had to.

"aɪ hæv tə tɛl ju," ʃɛɹiəm sɛd bɪɾɝli, "aɪ θɪŋk təmɑɹoʊ ɹoʊmændə əɹ ləleɪn wɪl bi jəɹ kipɝ ə ðə kɹɑnəkəlz, ən əl bi sɝvɪŋ ə pɛnəns fəɹ nɑt wɔɹnɪŋ ðə hɔl. ən aɪ θɪŋk jə maɪɾ ɛnvi mi."

"I have to tell you," Sheriam said bitterly, "I think tomorrow Romanda or Lelaine will be your Keeper of the Chronicles, and I'll be serving a penance for not warning the Hall. And I think you might envy me."

ɛɡwin nɑɾəd. ɔl tu pɑsəbəl. "ʃæl wi ɡoʊ?"

Egwene nodded. All too possible. "Shall we go?"

ðə sʌn meɪɾ ə ɹɛd doʊm ɑn ðə tʃɹitɑps tə ðə wɛst, ən ə lʊɹəd laɪt ʃoʊn ɔf ðə snoʊ. sɝvəns mɑɹkt ɛɡwinz pæsədʒ əlɔŋ ðə dip pæðz wɪð saɪlən baʊz ən kɝtsiz. ðɛɹ feɪsəz wɝ tʃɹʌbəld əɹ ɛls blæŋk; sɝvəns kəd pɪk ʌp ðə mudz ə ðoʊz ðeɪ sɝvd ɔlmoʊst əz kwɪkli əz wɔɹɾɝz.

The sun made a red dome on the treetops to the west, and a lurid light shone off the snow. Servants marked Egwene's passage along the deep paths with silent bows and curtsies. Their faces were troubled or else blank; servants could pick up the moods of those they served almost as quickly as Warders.

nɑɾ ə sɪstɝ wɑz tə bi sin, ət fɝst, ən ðən ðeɪ ɔl wɝ, ɪn ə ɡɹeɪt ɡæðɝɪŋ θɹi dip ɝaʊn ə pəvɪljən sɛɾ ʌp ɪn ði oʊnli oʊpən speɪs ɪn ðə kæmp lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf, ði ɛɹiə juz baɪ sɪstɝz skɪmɪŋ tə ðə dʌvəkoʊts ɪn sɑlədɑɹ ən tʃɹævlɪŋ bæk wɪð ɹɪpɔɹts fɹəm ði aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz. ə lɑɹdʒ mʌtʃ-mɛndɪd pis ə hɛvi kænvəs, nɑɾ ə pætʃ ɑn ðə splɛndɝ ə ðə kænəpi ət ðə leɪk, ɪt hæd bɪn ə ɡɹeɪt dil ʌv ɛfɝt tə sɛɾ ʌp. moʊst ɔfən ɪn ðə pæs tu mʌnθs, ðə hɔl hæd kənvin mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ hæd jɛstɝdeɪ mɔɹnɪŋ, əɹ pɝhæps skwizd ɪndə wʌn ə ðə lɑɹdʒɝ tɛns. ðə pəvɪljən hæd bɪn ɪɹɛktəɾ oʊnli twaɪs sɪns livɪŋ sɑlədɑɹ. boʊθ taɪmz fəɹ ə tʃɹaɪəl.

Not a sister was to be seen, at first, and then they all were, in a great gathering three deep around a pavilion set up in the only open space in the camp large enough, the area used by sisters Skimming to the dovecotes in Salidar and Traveling back with reports from the eyes-and-ears. A large much-mended piece of heavy canvas, not a patch on the splendor of the canopy at the lake, it had been a great deal of effort to set up. Most often in the past two months, the Hall had convened much as they had yesterday morning, or perhaps squeezed into one of the larger tents. The pavilion had been erected only twice since leaving Salidar. Both times for a trial.

noʊɾɪsɪŋ ɛɡwin ən ʃɛɹiəmz əpɹoʊtʃ, sɪstɝz ɪn ðə bæk mɝmɝd tə ðoʊz əhɛd, ən ə ɡæp oʊpən tə lɛɾ əm θɹu. ɪkspɹɛʃənləs aɪz wɑtʃt ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm, ɡɪvɪŋ nɑɾ ə klu tə wɛðɝ ðə wɑtʃɪŋ sɪstɝz nu əɹ ivən səspɛktəd wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ. nɑɾ ə klu tə wʌt ðeɪ θɔt. bʌɾɝflaɪz stɝɾ ɪn ɛɡwinz stʌmək. ə ɹoʊzbʌd. kɑm.

Noticing Egwene and Sheriam's approach, sisters in the back murmured to those ahead, and a gap opened to let them through. Expressionless eyes watched the pair of them, giving not a clue to whether the watching sisters knew or even suspected what was happening. Not a clue to what they thought. Butterflies stirred in Egwene's stomach. A rosebud. Calm.

ʃi stɛpt ɑntu ðə leɪɝd kɑɹpəts, woʊvən ɪn bɹaɪt flaʊɝz ən ə dʌzən dɪfɹən pæɾɝnz, ən muv θɹu ðə ɹɪŋ ə bɹeɪʒɝz sɛɾ ʌp ɝaʊn ðə kænəpiz ɹɪm, ən ʃɛɹiəm bɪɡæn. "ʃi kʌmz; ʃi kʌmz. . . ." ɪf ʃi saʊndəɾ ə lɪɾəl lɛs ɡɹæn ðən juʒəwəl, ə tʌtʃ nɝvəs, ɪt wɑz smɔl wʌndɝ.

She stepped onto the layered carpets, woven in bright flowers and a dozen different patterns, and moved through the ring of braziers set up around the canopy's rim, and Sheriam began. "She comes; she comes. . . ." If she sounded a little less grand than usual, a touch nervous, it was small wonder.

ðə pɑlɪʃt bɛntʃɪz ən klɔθ-kʌvɝd bɑksəz fɹəm ðə leɪk wɝ ɪn jus əɡɛn. ðeɪ meɪɾ ə mʌtʃ mɔɹ fɔɹməl saɪt ðən ðə mɪsmætʃt ɡæɡəl ə tʃɛɹz ðət hæd bɪn juz pɹiviəsli, tu slæntɪŋ laɪnz ə naɪn, ɡɹup baɪ θɹiz; ɡɹin, ɡɹeɪ ən jɛloʊ tə wʌn saɪd, waɪt, bɹaʊn ən blu tə ði ʌðɝ. ət ðə waɪɾ ɛnd, fɑɹðəs fɹəm ɛɡwin, stʊd ðə stʃɹaɪp bɑks ən bɛntʃ fəɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. sɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ, ʃi wəd bi ðə foʊkəs ʌv ɛvɹi aɪ, vɛɹi mʌtʃ əwɛɹ ðət ʃi wɑz wʌn feɪsɪŋ eɪtin. əz wɛl ʃi hæd nɑt tʃeɪnʒd əɹ kloʊðz; ɛvɹi sɪɾɝ stɪl wɔɹ əɹ faɪnɝi fɹəm ðə leɪk, oʊnli æɾɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl. ə ɹoʊzbʌd. kɑm.

The polished benches and cloth-covered boxes from the lake were in use again. They made a much more formal sight than the mismatched gaggle of chairs that had been used previously, two slanting lines of nine, grouped by threes; Green, Gray and Yellow to one side, White, Brown and Blue to the other. At the wide end, farthest from Egwene, stood the striped box and bench for the Amyrlin Seat. Sitting there, she would be the focus of every eye, very much aware that she was one facing eighteen. As well she had not changed her clothes; every Sitter still wore her finery from the lake, only adding her shawl. A rosebud. Calm.

wʌn ə ðə bɛntʃɪz wɑz ɛmpti, ðoʊ oʊnli fəɹ ə moʊmən lɔŋɡɝ. dɛlænə keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ ɪn dʒʌst əz ʃɛɹiəm fɪnɪʃt əɹ lɪɾəni. lʊkɪŋ bɹɛθləs ən flʌstɝd, ðə ɡɹeɪ sɪɾɝ skɹæmbəld ʌp tə hɝ sit, bɪtwin vɛɹɪlɪn ən kweɪmɛsə, wɪð lɪɾəl ə hɝ juʒəwəl ɡɹeɪs. ʃi wɔɹ ə sɪkli ɡɹɪn, ən tɔɪd nɝvəsli wɪð ðə faɪɝdʒɹɑps ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk. ɛniwʌn maɪɾ əv θɔt ʃi wɑz ðə wʌn ɑn tʃɹaɪəl. kɑm. noʊ wʌn wɑz ɑn tʃɹaɪəl. jɛt.

One of the benches was empty, though only for a moment longer. Delana came running in just as Sheriam finished her litany. Looking breathless and flustered, the Gray Sitter scrambled up to her seat, between Varilin and Kwamesa, with little of her usual grace. She wore a sickly grin, and toyed nervously with the firedrops around her neck. Anyone might have thought she was the one on trial. Calm. No one was on trial. Yet.

ɛɡwin stɑɹɾəd sloʊli əkɹɔs ðə kɑɹpəts, bɪtwin ðə tu ɹoʊz, wɪð ʃɛɹiəm kloʊs bɪhaɪnd, ən kweɪmɛsə stʊd. ðə laɪɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ sʌɾənli ʃoʊn ɝaʊn ðə dɑɹk slɛndɝ wʊmən, jʌŋɡəst ə ðə sɪɾɝz. tənaɪt ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ skɪmpɪŋ ə ðə fɔɹmæləɾiz. "wʌɾ ɪz bɹɔt bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ ɪz fəɹ ðə hɔl əloʊn tə kənsɪɾɝ," kweɪmɛsə ənaʊnst. "husoʊɛvɝ ɪntʃɹudz ənbɪddən, wʊmən əɹ mæn, ɪnɪʃiəɾ əɹ aʊtsaɪɾɝ, wɛðɝ ðeɪ kʌm ɪn pis əɹ ɪn æŋɡɝ, əl baɪn əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə lɔ, tə feɪs ðə lɔ. noʊ ðət wʌɾ aɪ spik ɪz tʃɹu; ɪɾəl ən ʃæl bi dʌn."

Egwene started slowly across the carpets, between the two rows, with Sheriam close behind, and Kwamesa stood. The light of saidar suddenly shone around the dark slender woman, youngest of the Sitters. Tonight there would be no skimping of the formalities. "What is brought before the Hall of the Tower is for the Hall alone to consider," Kwamesa announced. "Whosoever intrudes unbidden, woman or man, initiate or outsider, whether they come in peace or in anger, I will bind according to the law, to face the law. Know that what I speak is true; it will and shall be done."

ðət fɔɹmjələ wɑz oʊldɝ ðən ði oʊθ əɡɛnst spikɪŋ əntʃɹuθ, fɹəm ə taɪm wən ɔlmoʊst əz mɛni æmɪɝlənz daɪd baɪ əsæsəneɪʃən əz baɪ ɔl ʌðɝ kɑzəz pʊt təɡɛðɝ. ɛɡwin kəntɪnjuɾ əɹ mɛʒɝd tʃɹɛd. ɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝt nɑt tə tʌtʃ əɹ stoʊl, fəɹ ə ɹimaɪndɝ. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn ðə bɛntʃ əhɛd.

That formula was older than the oath against speaking untruth, from a time when almost as many Amyrlins died by assassination as by all other causes put together. Egwene continued her measured tread. It was an effort not to touch her stole, for a reminder. She tried to concentrate on the bench ahead.

kweɪmɛsə ɹɪzumd əɹ sit, stɪl ʃaɪnɪŋ wɪð ðə paʊɝ, ən əmʌŋ ðə waɪts, ələdʒɹɪn ɹoʊz, ðə ɡloʊ sɝaʊndɪŋ əɹ əz wɛl. wɪð əɹ dɑɹk ɡoʊldən hɛɹ ən bɪɡ peɪl bɹaʊn aɪz, ʃi wɑz kwaɪt lʌvli wən ʃi smaɪld, bʌt tənaɪɾ ə stoʊn hæd mɔɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən ðən ʃi. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ðoʊz wɪðɪn ɪɹʃɑɾ u ɑɹ nɑɾ ə ðə hɔl," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə kul vɔɪs stʃɹɔŋ wɪð ði æksɛns ə tæɹɑbən. "wʌɾ ɪz spoʊkən ɪn ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ ɪz fəɹ ðə hɔl əloʊn tə hɪɹ, əntɪl ən ənlɛs ðə hɔl dɪsaɪdz ʌðɝwaɪz. əl meɪk əs pɹaɪvət. əl sil əɹ wɝdz tə əɹ ɪɹz oʊnli." wivɪŋ ə wɔɹd ðət wɔl ði ɪntaɪɝ pəvɪljən, ʃi sæt. ðəɹ wɑz ə stɝ əmʌŋ ðə sɪstɝz aʊtsaɪd, hu naʊ mʌst wɑtʃ ðə hɔl muv ɪn ʌɾɝ saɪləns.

Kwamesa resumed her seat, still shining with the Power, and among the Whites, Aledrin rose, the glow surrounding her as well. With her dark golden hair and big pale brown eyes, she was quite lovely when she smiled, but tonight a stone had more expression than she. "There are those within earshot who are not of the Hall," she said in a cool voice strong with the accents of Tarabon. "What is spoken in the Hall of the Tower is for the Hall alone to hear, until and unless the Hall decides otherwise. I will make us private. I will seal our words to our ears only." Weaving a ward that walled the entire pavilion, she sat. There was a stir among the sisters outside, who now must watch the Hall move in utter silence.

stʃɹeɪnʒ, ðət soʊ mʌtʃ əmʌŋ sɪɾɝz dɪpɛndəɾ ɑn eɪdʒ, wən dɪstɪŋkʃən baɪ eɪdʒ wɑz nɛks tə ənæθəmə əmʌŋ ðə ɹɛst ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ. kəd sɪuən əv sin ə pæɾɝn ɪn ðə sɪɾɝz' eɪdʒəz? noʊ. foʊkəs. kɑm, ən foʊkəs.

Strange, that so much among Sitters depended on age, when distinction by age was next to anathema among the rest of Aes Sedai. Could Siuan have seen a pattern in the Sitters' ages? No. Focus. Calm, and focus.

ɡɹɪpɪŋ ði ɛdʒəz ə hɝ kloʊk, ɛɡwin stɛpt ʌp ɑntu ðə bɹaɪtli stʃɹaɪp bɑks ən tɝnd. ləleɪn wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɑn əɹ fit, blu-fɹɪnd ʃɔl lupt əkɹɔs əɹ ɑɹmz, ən ɹoʊmændə wɑz ɹaɪzɪŋ, wɪθaʊɾ ivən weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɛɡwin tə sɪt. ʃi dɛɹd nɑt lɛɾ iðɝ siz ðə tɪlɝ. "aɪ kɔl ə kwɛstʃən bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə laʊd, fɝm vɔɪs. "hu wɪl stæn tə dɪklɛɹ wɔɹ əɡɛns ðə jusɝpɝ ɪleɪɾə də əvɹaɪni ɹɔɪhən?"

Gripping the edges of her cloak, Egwene stepped up onto the brightly striped box and turned. Lelaine was already on her feet, blue-fringed shawl looped across her arms, and Romanda was rising, without even waiting for Egwene to sit. She dared not let either seize the tiller. "I call a question before the Hall," she said in a loud, firm voice. "Who will stand to declare war against the usurper Elaida do Avriny a'Roihan?"

ən ðən ʃi sæt, θɹoʊɪŋ ɔf əɹ kloʊk ən lɛɾɪŋ ɪt fɔl əkɹɔs ðə bɛntʃ. stændɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ əɹ ɑn ðə kɑɹpəts, ʃɛɹiəm əpɪɹd kwaɪt kul ən kəlɛktəd, bʌt ʃi meɪɾ ə smɔl saʊnd, ɔlmoʊst ə wɪmpɝ. ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɛniwʌn ɛls hæd hɝd. ʃi hoʊp nɑt.

And then she sat, throwing off her cloak and letting it fall across the bench. Standing beside her on the carpets, Sheriam appeared quite cool and collected, but she made a small sound, almost a whimper. Egwene did not think anyone else had heard. She hoped not.

ðəɹ wɑz ə bɹif moʊmən ə ʃɑk, wɪmən fɹoʊzən ɑn ðɛɹ sits, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ ɪn əmeɪzmənt. pɝhæps əz mʌtʃ kəz ʃi hæɾ æskt əɾ ɔl əz wʌt ʃi hæɾ æskt. noʊ wʌn pʊɾ ə kwɛstʃən bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl bɪfɔɹ saʊndɪŋ aʊt ðə sɪɾɝz; ɪt dʒʌst wɑz nɑt dʌn, fəɹ pɹæktəkəl ɹizənz əz mʌtʃ əz tʃɹədɪʃən.

There was a brief moment of shock, women frozen on their seats, staring at her in amazement. Perhaps as much because she had asked at all as what she had asked. No one put a question before the Hall before sounding out the Sitters; it just was not done, for practical reasons as much as tradition.

ət læs ləleɪn spoʊk. "wi də nɑt dɪklɛɹ wɔɹ ɑn ɪndəvɪdʒəwəlz," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə dʒɹaɪ vɔɪs. "nɑɾ ivən ɑn tʃɹeɪɾɝz laɪk ɪleɪɾə. ɪn ɛni keɪs, aɪ kɔl tə ʃɛlv jəɹ kwɛstʃən waɪl wi dil wɪð mɔɹ ɪmiɾiət mæɾɝz." ʃi hæd hæd taɪm tə ɡæðɝ hɝsɛlf sɪns ðə ɹaɪd bæk; hɝ feɪs wɑz mɪɹli hɑɹd naʊ, nɑt θʌndɝəs. bɹʌʃɪŋ blu-slæʃt skɝts əz ɪf bɹʌʃɪŋ əweɪ ɪleɪɾə - əɹ pɝhæps ɛɡwin - ʃi tɝn əɹ ətɛnʃən tə ði ʌðɝ sɪɾɝz. "wʌt bɹɪŋz əs tə sɪt tənaɪɾ ɪz. . . . aɪ wɑz əbaʊt tə seɪ sɪmpəl, bʌɾ ɪɾ ɪzənt. oʊpən ðə nɑvəs bʊk? wi wəɾ əv ɡɹændmʌðɝz klæmɝɪŋ tə bi tɛstəd. ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ ə mʌnθ? aɪ hɑɹdli nid lɪs ðə dɪfəkəltiz, bɪɡɪnɪŋ wɪð spɛndɪŋ hæf əɹ ɡoʊld wɪθaʊt kʌmɪŋ ə fʊt nɪɹɝ tɑɹ vəlɑn. ən əz fəɹ nɑt kɹɔsɪŋ ɪndə ændɝ - "

At last Lelaine spoke. "We do not declare war on individuals," she said in a dry voice. "Not even on traitors like Elaida. In any case, I call to shelve your question while we deal with more immediate matters." She had had time to gather herself since the ride back; her face was merely hard now, not thunderous. Brushing blue-slashed skirts as if brushing away Elaida - or perhaps Egwene - she turned her attention to the other Sitters. "What brings us to sit tonight is. . . . I was about to say simple, but it isn't. Open the novice book? We would have grandmothers clamoring to be tested. Remain here a month? I hardly need list the difficulties, beginning with spending half our gold without coming a foot nearer Tar Valon. And as for not crossing into Andor - "

"maɪ sɪstɝ ləleɪn, ɪn əɹ æŋzaɪəɾi, hæz fɝɡɑɾən u hæz ðə ɹaɪt tə spik fɝst," ɹoʊmændə kʌɾ ɪn smuðli. hɝ smaɪl mænədʒ tə meɪk ləleɪn əpɪɹ mɛɹi. stɪl, ʃi tʊk əɹ taɪm ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl dʒʌst əz ʃi wɑntəd, ə wʊmən wɪð ɔl ðə taɪm ɪn ðə wɝld. "aɪ hæv tu kwɛstʃənz tə kɔl bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl, ən ɪn ðə sɛkən əl ædʒɹɛs ləleɪnz kənsɝnz. ənfɔɹtʃənətli fəɹ hɝ, maɪ fɝs kwɛstʃən kənsɝnz ləleɪnz oʊn fɪtnəs tə kəntɪnju ɪn ðə hɔl." hɝ smaɪl waɪɾənd wɪθaʊt ɡɹoʊɪŋ ðə slaɪɾəst bɪt wɔɹmɝ. ləleɪn sæt sloʊli, hɝ skaʊl kwaɪɾ oʊpən.

"My sister Lelaine, in her anxiety, has forgotten who has the right to speak first," Romanda cut in smoothly. Her smile managed to make Lelaine appear merry. Still, she took her time adjusting her shawl just as she wanted, a woman with all the time in the world. "I have two questions to call before the Hall, and in the second I will address Lelaine's concerns. Unfortunately for her, my first question concerns Lelaine's own fitness to continue in the Hall." Her smile widened without growing the slightest bit warmer. Lelaine sat slowly, her scowl quite open.

ə kwɛstʃən ʌv wɔɹ kænɑt bi ʃɛlvd," ɛɡwin sɛɾ ɪn ə kæɹiɪŋ toʊn. "ɪt mʌs bi ænsɝd bɪfɔɹ ɛni kwɛstʃən kɔld æftɝ ɪt. ðəɾ ɪz ðə lɔ."

A question of war cannot be shelved," Egwene said in a carrying tone. "It must be answered before any question called after it. That is the law."

kwɪk, kwɛstʃənɪŋ ɡlænsɪz pæs bɪtwin sɪɾɝz.

Quick, questioning glances passed between Sitters.

"ɪz ðət soʊ?" dʒɑnjə sɛd faɪnəli. skwɪntɪŋ θɔtfəli, ʃi twɪstəɾ ɑn əɹ bɛntʃ tə ædʒɹɛs ðə wʊmən nɛks tə hɝ. "tɑkimə, jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ jə ɹɛd, ən aɪm ʃʊɹ aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ jə seɪɪŋ jə hæd ɹɛd ðə lɔ ʌv wɔɹ. ɪz ðət wʌɾ ɪt sɛz?"

"Is that so?" Janya said finally. Squinting thoughtfully, she twisted on her bench to address the woman next to her. "Takima, you remember everything you read, and I'm sure I remember you saying you had read the Law of War. Is that what it says?"

ɛɡwin hɛld əɹ bɹɛθ. ðə waɪt taʊɝ hæd sɛn soʊlʒɝz tə ɛni nʌmbɝ ʌv wɔɹz oʊvɝ ðə læs θaʊzən jɪɹz, bʌɾ ɔlweɪz ɪn ɹɪspɑns tə ə pli fəɹ hɛlp fɹəm ət lis tu θɹoʊnz, ən ɪɾ ɔlweɪz hæd bɪn ðɛɹ wɔɹ, nɑt ðə taʊɝz. ðə læs taɪm ðə taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf æktʃəli  dɪklɛɹd wɔɹ hæd bɪn əɡɛnst ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ. sɪuən sɛd ðət naʊ oʊnli ə fju laɪbɹɛɹiənz nu mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən ðət ðəɹ wɑz ə lɔ ʌv wɔɹ.

Egwene held her breath. The White Tower had sent soldiers to any number of wars over the last thousand years, but always in response to a plea for help from at least two thrones, and it always had been their war, not the Tower's. The last time the Tower itself actually declared war had been against Artur Hawkwing. Siuan said that now only a few librarians knew much more than that there was a Law of War.

ʃɔɹt, wɪð lɔŋ dɑɹk hɛɹ tə hɝ weɪst ən skɪn ðə kʌlɝ ʌv eɪdʒd aɪvɝi, tɑkimə ɔfən ɹimaɪndəd pipəl ʌv ə bɝd, tɪltɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ ɪn θɔt. naʊ ʃi lʊk laɪk ə bɝd ðət wɑntəd tə teɪk flaɪt, ʃɪftɪŋ ɑn əɹ sit, ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl, ənnɛsəsɛɹəli stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ əɹ kæp ə pɝlz ən sæfaɪɝz. "ɪɾ ɪz," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli, ən klæmpt əɹ maʊθ ʃʌt.

Short, with long dark hair to her waist and skin the color of aged ivory, Takima often reminded people of a bird, tilting her head in thought. Now she looked like a bird that wanted to take flight, shifting on her seat, adjusting her shawl, unnecessarily straightening her cap of pearls and sapphires. "It is," she said finally, and clamped her mouth shut.

ɛɡwin kwaɪətli stɑɹɾəd bɹiðɪŋ əɡɛn.

Egwene quietly started breathing again.

"ɪt simz," ɹoʊmændə sɛɾ ɪn ə klɪp toʊn, "ðæt sɪuən sɑntʃ əz bɪn titʃɪŋ jə wɛl. mʌðɝ. haʊ spik jə ɪn səpɔɹɾ ə dɪklɛɹɪŋ wɔɹ? ɑn ə wʊmən." ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊʃ sʌmθɪŋ dɪsəɡɹiəbəl aʊɾ ə hɝ weɪ, ən ʃi dʒɹɑpt ɑntu hɝ sit weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪt tə dɪpɑɹt.

"It seems," Romanda said in a clipped tone, "that Siuan Sanche has been teaching you well. Mother. How speak you in support of declaring war? On a woman." She sounded as if she were trying to push something disagreeable out of her way, and she dropped onto her seat waiting for it to depart.

ɛɡwin nɑɾəd ɡɹeɪʃəsli ɛniweɪ, ən ɹoʊz. ʃi mɛt ðə sɪɾɝz' ɡeɪzəz wʌn baɪ wʌn, lɛvəli, fɝmli. tɑkimə əvɔɪɾəd əɹ aɪz. laɪt, ðə wʊmən nu! bʌt ʃi hæd nɑt sɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ. wəd ʃi hoʊl saɪlən lɔŋ ɪnʌf? ɪt wɑz tu leɪt tə tʃeɪnʒ plænz.

Egwene nodded graciously anyway, and rose. She met the Sitters' gazes one by one, levelly, firmly. Takima avoided her eyes. Light, the woman knew! But she had not said anything. Would she hold silent long enough? It was too late to change plans.

"tədeɪ wi faɪn aʊɝsɛlvz kənfɹʌntəd baɪ ən ɑɹmi, lɛd baɪ pipəl u daʊɾ ʌs. ðəɾ ɑɹmi wəd nɑt bi ðəɹ ʌðɝwaɪz." ɛɡwin wɑntəd tə pʊt pæʃən ɪndə hɝ vɔɪs, tə lɛɾ ɪt bɝst aʊt, bʌt sɪuən hæɾ ædvaɪzd ʌɾɝ kulnəs, ən faɪnəli ʃi hæɾ əɡɹid. ðeɪ niɾəd tə si ə wʊmən ɪn kəntʃɹoʊl ə hɝsɛlf, nɑɾ ə ɡɝl biɪŋ ɹɪɾən baɪ hɝ hɑɹt. ðə wɝdz keɪm fɹəm əɹ hɑɹt, ðoʊ. "ju hɝɾ ɑɝəθɛl seɪ ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə bɪkʌm ɛntæŋɡəld ɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ əfɛɹz. jɛt ðeɪ wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə bɹɪŋ ən ɑɹmi ɪndə mʊɹændi ən stæn ɪn əɹ weɪ. kəz ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt sɝɾən u wi ɑɹ, əɹ wʌt wəɹ əbaʊt. dɪɾ ɛni ʌv jə fil ðət ðeɪ tʃɹuli bɪliv jə ɑɹ sɪɾɝz?" mɑlɪnd, ɹaʊnd-feɪst ən fɪɹs-aɪd, ʃɪftəɾ ɑn əɹ bɛntʃ əmʌŋ ðə ɡɹinz, ən soʊ dɪd sæliɾə, twɪtʃɪŋ əɹ jɛloʊ-fɹɪnd ʃɔl, ðoʊ hɝ dɑɹk feɪs mænədʒ tə haɪɾ ɛni ɪkspɹɛʃən. bɛɹænə, ənʌðɝ sɪɾɝ tʃoʊzən ɪn sɑlədɑɹ, fɹaʊn θɔtfəli. ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən ðə ɹiækʃən tə hɝ əz æmɪɝlɪn; ɪf ðət θɔt wɑz nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ðɛɹ hɛdz, ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə plæn ɪt.

"Today we find ourselves confronted by an army, led by people who doubt us. That army would not be there otherwise." Egwene wanted to put passion into her voice, to let it burst out, but Siuan had advised utter coolness, and finally she had agreed. They needed to see a woman in control of herself, not a girl being ridden by her heart. The words came from her heart, though. "You heard Arathelle say she did not want to become entangled in Aes Sedai affairs. Yet they were willing to bring an army into Murandy and stand in our way. Because they are not certain who we are, or what we are about. Did any of you feel that they truly believe you are Sitters?" Malind, round-faced and fierce-eyed, shifted on her bench among the Greens, and so did Salita, twitching her yellow-fringed shawl, though her dark face managed to hide any expression. Berana, another Sitter chosen in Salidar, frowned thoughtfully. Egwene did not mention the reaction to her as Amyrlin; if that thought was not already in their heads, she did not want to plant it.

"wiv lɪstəɾ ɪleɪɾəz kɹaɪmz tə kaʊnləs noʊbəlz," ʃi wɛn ɑn. "wiv toʊld əm wi ɪntɛn tə ɹimuv hɝ. bʌt ðeɪ daʊt. ðeɪ θɪŋk ðət meɪbi - meɪbi - wəɹ wʌt wi seɪ. ən meɪbi ðɛɹz ə tʃɹɪk ɪn əɹ wɝdz. pɝhæps wəɹ oʊnli ɪleɪɾəz hænd, wivɪŋ səm ɪlæbɹət skim. daʊt livz pipəl flaʊndɝɪŋ. daʊt ɡeɪv pɛlɪvɑɹ ən ɑɝəθɛl ðə nɝv tə stæn bɪfɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən seɪ, 'ju kænɑt ɡoʊ fɝðɝ.' hu ɛls wɪl stæn ɪn əɹ weɪ, əɹ ɪntɝfɪɹ, kəz ðeɪ ɑɹən sɝɾən, ən ənsɝɾənti lidz əm tə ækt ɪn ə klaʊɾ ə kənfjuʒən? ðɛɹz oʊnli wʌn weɪ fəɹ əs tə dɪspɛl ðɛɹ kənfjuʒən. wɪv ɔlɹɛɾi dʌn ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls. wʌns wi dɪklɛɹ aʊɝsɛlvz ət wɔɹ wɪð ɪleɪɾə, ðəɹ kən bi noʊ daʊts. aɪ doʊn seɪ ðəɾ ɑɝəθɛl ən pɛlɪvɑɹ ən æɛmlɪn wɪl mɑɹtʃ əweɪ əz sun əz wi də soʊ, bʌt ðeɪ ən ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls wɪl noʊ hu wi ɑɹ. noʊ wʌn wɪl dɛɹ əɡɛn tə ʃoʊ daʊt soʊ oʊpənli wən jə seɪ jə ɑɹ ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ. noʊ wʌn wɪl dɛɹ stæn ɪn əɹ weɪ, mɛɾəlɪŋ ɪn ði əfɛɹz ə ðə taʊɝ θɹu ənsɝɾənti ən ɪɡnɝəns. wɪv wɔk tə ðə dɔɹ ən pʊɾ əɹ hænz ɑn ðə lætʃ. ɪf jə ɑɹ əfɹeɪd tə wɔk θɹu, ðən jə ɔl bʌɾ æsk ðə wɝl tə bɪliv ðət jə ɑɹ nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ ɪleɪɾəz pʌpəts."

"We've listed Elaida's crimes to countless nobles," she went on. "We've told them we intend to remove her. But they doubt. They think that maybe - maybe - we are what we say. And maybe there's a trick in our words. Perhaps we are only Elaida's hand, weaving some elaborate scheme. Doubt leaves people floundering. Doubt gave Pelivar and Arathelle the nerve to stand before Aes Sedai and say, 'You cannot go further.' Who else will stand in our way, or interfere, because they aren't certain, and uncertainty leads them to act in a cloud of confusion? There's only one way for us to dispel their confusion. We have already done everything else. Once we declare ourselves at war with Elaida, there can be no doubts. I don't say that Arathelle and Pelivar and Aemlyn will march away as soon as we do so, but they and everyone else will know who we are. No one will dare again to show doubt so openly when you say you are the Hall of the Tower. No one will dare stand in our way, meddling in the affairs of the Tower through uncertainty and ignorance. We have walked to the door and put our hands on the latch. If you are afraid to walk through, then you all but ask the world to believe that you are nothing but Elaida's puppets."

ʃi sæt, sɝpɹaɪzd ət haʊ kɑm ʃi fɛlt. bɪɑn ðə tu ɹoʊz ə sɪɾɝz, sɪstɝz aʊtsaɪd stɝd, pʊɾɪŋ ðɛɹ hɛdz təɡɛðɝ. ʃi kəɾ ɪmædʒən ði ɪksaɪɾəd mɝmɝz ðəɾ ələdʒɹɪnz wɔɹd blɑkt ɔf. naʊ ɪf oʊnli tɑkimə kɛpt əɹ maʊθ ʃʌt lɔŋ ɪnʌf.

She sat, surprised at how calm she felt. Beyond the two rows of Sitters, sisters outside stirred, putting their heads together. She could imagine the excited murmurs that Aledrin's ward blocked off. Now if only Takima kept her mouth shut long enough.

ɹoʊmændə ɡɹʌntɪɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli, ən stʊɾ oʊnli lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə seɪ, "hu stænz fəɹ dɪklɛɹɪŋ wɔɹ əɡɛnst ɪleɪɾə?" hɝ ɡeɪz ɹɪtɝn tə ləleɪn, ən əɹ koʊld, smʌɡ smaɪl ɹɪtɝnd. ɪt wɑz klɪɹ wʌt ʃi kənsɪɾɝd ɪmpɔɹɾənt, wʌns ðɪs nɑnsɛns wɑz dʌn wɪð.

Romanda grunted impatiently, and stood only long enough to say, "Who stands for declaring war against Elaida?" Her gaze returned to Lelaine, and her cold, smug smile returned. It was clear what she considered important, once this nonsense was done with.

dʒɑnjə ɹoʊz ɪmiɾiətli, ðə lɔŋ bɹaʊn fɹɪnʒ ɑn əɹ ʃɔl sweɪɪŋ. "wi maɪɾ əz wɛl," ʃi sɛd. ʃi wɑz nɑt səpoʊz tə spik, bʌɾ əɹ sɛt dʒɔ ən ʃɑɹp ɡeɪz dɛɹɾ ɛniwʌn tə kɔl əɹ daʊn. ʃi wɑz nɑt nɔɹməli soʊ fɔɹsfəl, bʌɾ əz juʒəwəl, hɝ wɝdz nɪɹli tʃɹɪpt oʊvɝ wʌn ənʌðɝ. "mɛndɪŋ wʌt ðə wɝl noʊz woʊn bi ɛni hɑɹɾɝ ðən ɪts fəɹ ðɪs. wɛl? wɛl? aɪ doʊn si ðə pɔɪn ʌv weɪɾɪŋ." ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə tɑkimə, ɛskɹɑldi nɑɾəd ən stʊd.

Janya rose immediately, the long brown fringe on her shawl swaying. "We might as well," she said. She was not supposed to speak, but her set jaw and sharp gaze dared anyone to call her down. She was not normally so forceful, but as usual, her words nearly tripped over one another. "Mending what the world knows won't be any harder than it is for this. Well? Well? I don't see the point of waiting." On the other side of Takima, Escaralde nodded and stood.

mɔɹiə ɔl bʌt baʊndəd tə hɝ fit, fɹaʊnɪŋ daʊn ət laɪɹɛl, hu ɡæðɝɾ əɹ skɝts əz ɪf tə ɹaɪz, ðən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ən lʊkt ət ləleɪn kwɛstʃənɪŋli. ləleɪn wɑz tu bɪzi fɹaʊnɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə kɑɹpəts ət ɹoʊmændə tə noʊɾəs.

Moria all but bounded to her feet, frowning down at Lyrelle, who gathered her skirts as if to rise, then hesitated and looked at Lelaine questioningly. Lelaine was too busy frowning across the carpets at Romanda to notice.

əmʌŋ ðə ɡɹinz, səmeɪlɪn ən mɑlɪn stʊd təɡɛðɝ, ən feɪsɛl lʊkt ʌp wɪð ə dʒɝk. ə stɑki, kɑpɝ-skɪn dəmɑni, feɪsɛl wɑz nɑɾ ə wʊmən stɑɹɾəld baɪ mʌtʃ, bʌt ʃi lʊk stɑɹɾəld naʊ, hɝ skwɛɹ feɪs swɪŋɪŋ waɪd-aɪd fɹəm səmeɪlɪn tə mɑlɪn ən bæk.

Among the Greens, Samalin and Malind stood together, and Faiselle looked up with a jerk. A stocky, copper-skinned Domani, Faiselle was not a woman startled by much, but she looked startled now, her square face swinging wide-eyed from Samalin to Malind and back.

sæliɾə ɹoʊz, kɛɹfəli ədʒʌstɪŋ ðə jɛloʊ fɹɪnʒ ə hɝ ʃɔl ən dʒʌst əz kɛɹfəli əvɔɪɾɪŋ ɹoʊmændəz sʌɾən fɹaʊn. kweɪmɛsə stʊd, ən ðən ələdʒɹɪn, dʒɹɔɪŋ bɛɹænə ʌp baɪ hɝ sliv. dɛlænə twɪstəd kəmplitli ɝaʊn ɑn əɹ bɛntʃ, piɹɪŋ ət ðə sɪstɝz aʊtsaɪd. ivən ɪn saɪləns ðə spɛkteɪɾɝz' ɪksaɪtmən kəmjunəkeɪɾɪd ɪtsɛlf ɪn kɑnstənt ʃɪftɪŋ, hɛdz ɡoʊɪŋ təɡɛðɝ, aɪz dɑɹɾɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə sɪɾɝz. dɛlænə ɹoʊz sloʊli, boʊθ hænz pɹɛs tə hɝ mɪɾəl, lʊkɪŋ ɹɛɾi tə sɪk ʌp ɑn ðə spɑt. tɑkimə ɡɹɪməst ən stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ niz. sɛɝɔɪjə stʌɾid ði ʌðɝ tu waɪt sɪɾɝz, tʌɡɪŋ əɾ əɹ ɪɹ ðə weɪ ʃi dɪd wən dip ɪn θɔt. bʌt noʊ wʌn ɛls muv tə stænd.

Salita rose, carefully adjusting the yellow fringe of her shawl and just as carefully avoiding Romanda's sudden frown. Kwamesa stood, and then Aledrin, drawing Berana up by her sleeve. Delana twisted completely around on her bench, peering at the sisters outside. Even in silence the spectators' excitement communicated itself in constant shifting, heads going together, eyes darting toward the Sitters. Delana rose slowly, both hands pressed to her middle, looking ready to sick up on the spot. Takima grimaced and stared at her hands on her knees. Saroiya studied the other two White Sitters, tugging at her ear the way she did when deep in thought. But no one else moved to stand.

ɛɡwin fɛl baɪl ɹaɪzɪŋ ɪn əɹ oʊn θɹoʊt. tɛn. dʒʌs tɛn. ʃi hæd bɪn soʊ ʃʊɹ. sɪuən hæd bɪn soʊ ʃʊɹ. lɑɡən əloʊn ʃʊɾə bɪn ɪnʌf, ɡɪvən ðɛɹ ɪɡnɝəns ə ðə lɔ ɪnvɑlvd. pɛlɪvɑɹz ɑɹmi ən ɑɝəθɛl ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə ədmɪt ðət ðeɪ wɝ sɪɾɝz ʃʊɾə pɹaɪmd əm laɪk ə pʌmp.

Egwene felt bile rising in her own throat. Ten. Just ten. She had been so sure. Siuan had been so sure. Logain alone should have been enough, given their ignorance of the law involved. Pelivar's army and Arathelle refusing to admit that they were Sitters should have primed them like a pump.

"fɔɹ ðə lʌv ə ðə laɪt!" mɔɹiə bɝst aʊt. ɹaʊndɪŋ ɑn laɪɹɛl ən ləleɪn, ʃi plæntəɾ əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps. ɪf dʒɑnjəz spikɪŋ hæd ɡɔn əɡɛns kʌstəm, ðɪs taɪɾ ɪɾ ɪn ə nɑt. dɪspleɪz ʌv æŋɡɝ wɝ stʃɹɪkli fɔɹbɪɾən ɪn ðə hɔl, bʌt mɔɹiəz aɪz bleɪzd, ən əɹ ɪliɑnɝ æksɛnt wɑz θɪk wɪð ɪt. "waɪ dʒju weɪt? ɪleɪɾə dɪd stil ðə stoʊl ən ðə stæf! ɪleɪɾəz ədʒɑ dɪd meɪk lɑɡən ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən, ən oʊnli ðə laɪt noʊz haʊ mɛni ʌðɝ mɛn! noʊ wʊmən ɪn ðə hɪstɝi ʌv ðə taʊɝ dɪɾ ɛvɝ dɪzɝv ðɪs dɛklɝeɪʃən mɔɹ! stænd, əɹ hoʊl saɪlən fɹəm naʊ əbaʊt jəɹ ɹizɑlv tə ɹimuv hɝ!"

"For the love of the Light!" Moria burst out. Rounding on Lyrelle and Lelaine, she planted her fists on her hips. If Janya's speaking had gone against custom, this tied it in a knot. Displays of anger were strictly forbidden in the Hall, but Moria's eyes blazed, and her Illianer accent was thick with it. "Why do you wait? Elaida did steal the stole and the staff! Elaida's Ajah did make Logain a false Dragon, and only the Light knows how many other men! No woman in the history of the Tower did ever deserve this declaration more! Stand, or hold silent from now about your resolve to remove her!"

ləleɪn dɪd nɑt kwaɪt stɛɹ, bʌt baɪ hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən jə maɪɾ əv θɔt ʃi hæd faʊn hɝsɛlf ətæk baɪ ə spɛɹoʊ. "ðɪs ɪz hɑɹdli wɝθ ə voʊt, mɔɹiə," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs. "wi wɪl spik leɪɾɝ əbaʊt dɪkɔɹəm, jə ən aɪ. stɪl, ɪf jə niɾ ə dɛmənstʃɹeɪʃən ə ɹizɑlv. . . ." wɪð ə ʃɑɹp snɪf, ʃi ɹoʊz, ən ɡeɪv ə dʒɝk ə hɝ hɛd ðət pʊld laɪɹɛl tə hɝ fit laɪk stʃɹɪŋz. ləleɪn sim sɝpɹaɪz ðəɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt pʊl ʌp feɪsɛl ən tɑkimə, tu.

Lelaine did not quite stare, but by her expression you might have thought she had found herself attacked by a sparrow. "This is hardly worth a vote, Moria," she said in a tight voice. "We will speak later about decorum, you and I. Still, if you need a demonstration of resolve. . . ." With a sharp sniff, she rose, and gave a jerk of her head that pulled Lyrelle to her feet like strings. Lelaine seemed surprised that it did not pull up Faiselle and Takima, too.

fɑɹ fɹəm stændɪŋ, tɑkimə ɡɹʌntɪɾ əz ɪf stʃɹʌk. dɪsbɪlif bɹaɪɾ ɑn əɹ feɪs, ʃi ɹæn əɹ aɪz əlɔŋ ðə wɪmən ɑn ðɛɹ fit, ɑbviəsli kaʊntɪŋ. ən ðən dɪɾ ɪɾ əɡɛn. tɑkimə, hu ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðə fɝs taɪm.

Far from standing, Takima grunted as if struck. Disbelief bright on her face, she ran her eyes along the women on their feet, obviously counting. And then did it again. Takima, who remembered everything the first time.

ɛɡwin bɹið dip ɪn ɹɪlif. ɪt wɑz dʌn. ʃi kəd hɑɹdli bɪliv. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ʃi klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊt, ən ʃɛɹiəm æktʃəli  dʒʌmpt.

Egwene breathed deep in relief. It was done. She could hardly believe. After a moment, she cleared her throat, and Sheriam actually jumped.

ɡɹin aɪz əz bɪɡ əz tikəps, ðə kipɝ klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊt, tu. "ðə lɛsɝ kənsɛnsəs stændɪŋ, wɔɹ ɪz dɪklɛɹɾ əɡɛnst ɪleɪɾə də əvɹaɪni ɹɔɪhən." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz nʌn tu stɛɾi, bʌɾ ɪt səfaɪst. "ɪn ði ɪntʃɹəst ə junəɾi, aɪ æsk fəɹ ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ kənsɛnsəs tə stænd."

Green eyes as big as teacups, the Keeper cleared her throat, too. "The lesser consensus standing, war is declared against Elaida do Avriny a'Roihan." Her voice was none too steady, but it sufficed. "In the interest of unity, I ask for the greater consensus to stand."

feɪsɛl hæf-muvd, ðən klɛntʃt əɹ hænz ɪn əɹ læp. sɛɝɔɪjə oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, ðən kloʊzd ɪt wɪθaʊt spikɪŋ, hɝ feɪs tʃɹʌbəld. noʊ wʌn ɛls stɝd.

Faiselle half-moved, then clenched her hands in her lap. Saroiya opened her mouth, then closed it without speaking, her face troubled. No one else stirred.

"ju woʊnt ɡɛɾ ɪt," ɹoʊmændə sɛd flætli. ðə snɪɹ ʃi dɝɛktəɾ əkɹɔs ðə pəvɪljən ət ləleɪn wɑz əz ɡʊɾ əz ə steɪtmən ʌv waɪ ʃi, ət list, wəd nɑt stænd. "naʊ ðət lɪɾəl bɪznəs ɪz fɪnɪʃt, wi kən ɡoʊ ɑn wɪð - "

"You won't get it," Romanda said flatly. The sneer she directed across the pavilion at Lelaine was as good as a statement of why she, at least, would not stand. "Now that little business is finished, we can go on with - "

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk wi kæn," ɛɡwin kʌɾ ɪn. "tɑkimə, wʌt dʌz ðə lɔ ʌv wɔɹ seɪ əbaʊt ði æmɪɝlɪn sit?" ɹoʊmændə wɑz lɛft wɪð əɹ maʊθ hæŋɪŋ oʊpən.

"I don't think we can," Egwene cut in. "Takima, what does the Law of War say about the Amyrlin Seat?" Romanda was left with her mouth hanging open.

tɑkiməz lɪps ɹɪθd. ðə dɪmɪnjəɾɪv bɹaʊn lʊk mɔɹ ðən ɛvɝ ə bɝd wɪʃɪŋ tə teɪk flaɪt. "ðə lɔ . . . ." ʃi bɪɡæn, ðən tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪt. "ðə lɔ ʌv wɔɹ steɪts, 'æz wʌn sɛɾ ə hænz mʌst ɡaɪɾ ə sɔɹd, soʊ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit ʃæl dɝɛkt ən pɹɑsəkjut ðə wɔɹ baɪ dɪkɹi. ʃi ʃæl sik ði ædvaɪs ə ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, bʌt ðə hɔl ʃæl kæɹi aʊɾ əɹ dɪkɹiz wɪð ɔl pɑsəbəl spid, ən fəɹ ðə seɪk ə junəɾi, ðeɪ ʃæl. . . ." ʃi fɔltɝd, ən hæd tə vɪzəbli fɔɹs hɝsɛlf tə ɡoʊ ɑn. ". . . ðeɪ ʃæl ən mʌst əpɹuv ɛni dɪkɹi ʌv ði æmɪɝlɪn sit ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ pɹɑsəkjuʃən ə ðə wɔɹ wɪð ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ kənsɛnsəs."

Takima's lips writhed. The diminutive Brown looked more than ever a bird wishing to take flight. "The Law . . . ." she began, then took a deep breath and sat up straight. "The Law of War states, 'As one set of hands must guide a sword, so the Amyrlin Seat shall direct and prosecute the war by decree. She shall seek the advice of the Hall of the Tower, but the Hall shall carry out her decrees with all possible speed, and for the sake of unity, they shall. . . ." She faltered, and had to visibly force herself to go on. ". . . they shall and must approve any decree of the Amyrlin Seat regarding prosecution of the war with the greater consensus."

ə lɔŋ saɪləns stʃɹɛtʃt. ɛvɹi aɪ sim tə bi ɡɑəlɪŋ. tɝnɪŋ əbɹʌpli, dɛlænə vɑməɾəd ɑntu ðə kɑɹpəts bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛntʃ. kweɪmɛsə ən sæliɾə boʊθ klaɪm daʊn ən stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd hɝ, bʌt ʃi weɪvd əm ɔf, plʌkɪŋ ə skɑɹf fɹəm əɹ sliv tə waɪp əɹ maʊθ. mæɡlə ən sɛɝɔɪjə ən sɛvɹəl ʌðɝz stɪl siɾəd lʊkt əz ðoʊ ðeɪ maɪt fɑloʊ hɝ ɪɡzæmpəl. noʊ ʌðɝz u hæd bɪn tʃoʊzən ɪn sɑlədɑɹ, ðoʊ. ɹoʊmændə əpɪɹd ɹɛɾi tə baɪt θɹu ə neɪl.

A long silence stretched. Every eye seemed to be goggling. Turning abruptly, Delana vomited onto the carpets behind her bench. Kwamesa and Salita both climbed down and started toward her, but she waved them off, plucking a scarf from her sleeve to wipe her mouth. Magla and Saroiya and several others still seated looked as though they might follow her example. No others who had been chosen in Salidar, though. Romanda appeared ready to bite through a nail.

"vɛɹi klɛvɝ," ləleɪn sɛɾ ət læst ɪn klɪp toʊnz, ən æftɝ ə dɪlɪbɝɪt pɔz, æɾəd, "mʌðɝ. wɪl jə tɛl əs wʌt ðə ɡɹeɪt wɪzdəm ə jəɹ væst ɪkspɪɹiəns tɛlz jə tə du? əbaʊt ðə wɔɹ, aɪ min. aɪ wɑnə meɪk maɪsɛlf klɪɹ."

"Very clever," Lelaine said at last in clipped tones, and after a deliberate pause, added, "Mother. Will you tell us what the great wisdom of your vast experience tells you to do? About the war, I mean. I want to make myself clear."

"lɛt mi meɪk maɪsɛlf klɪɹ, tu," ɛɡwin sɛd koʊldli. linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, ʃi fɪks ðə blu sɪɾɝ stɝnli. "ə sɝɾən dɪɡɹi ʌv ɹɪspɛkt ɪz ɹikwaɪɝd təwɔɹd ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ən fɹəm naʊ ɑn, əl əv ɪt, dɔɾɝ. ðɪs ɪz noʊ taɪm fəɹ mi tə hæv tə əntʃɛɹ jə ən neɪm ə pɛnəns." ləleɪnz aɪz kɹɛpt waɪɾɝ ən waɪɾɝ wɪð ʃɑk. hæd ðə wʊmən ɹɪli bɪlivd ɛvɹiθɪŋ wəd kəntɪnju əz bɪfɔɹ? əɹ æftɝ soʊ lɔŋ nɑt dɛɹɪŋ tə ʃoʊ mɔɹ ðən ðə taɪniəs bækboʊn, hæd ləleɪn sɪmpli bɪlivd ʃi hæd nʌn? ɛɡwin ɹɪli dɪd nɑt wɑnə əntʃɛɹ hɝ; ðə bluz wəɾ ɔlmoʊst sɝɾənli ɹɪtɝn ðə wʊmən, ən ʃi stɪl hæd tə dil wɪð ðə hɔl ɑn mæɾɝz ðət kəd nɑt bi kənvɪnsɪŋli dɪsɡaɪzd əz pɑɹɾ ə ðə wɔɹ əɡɛnst ɪleɪɾə.

"Let me make myself clear, too," Egwene said coldly. Leaning forward, she fixed the Blue Sitter sternly. "A certain degree of respect is required toward the Amyrlin Seat, and from now on, I will have it, daughter. This is no time for me to have to unchair you and name a penance." Lelaine's eyes crept wider and wider with shock. Had the woman really believed everything would continue as before? Or after so long not daring to show more than the tiniest backbone, had Lelaine simply believed she had none? Egwene really did not want to unchair her; the Blues would almost certainly return the woman, and she still had to deal with the Hall on matters that could not be convincingly disguised as part of the war against Elaida.

fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ, ʃi sɔ ə smaɪl pæs əkɹɔs ɹoʊmændəz lɪps ət siɪŋ ləleɪn sɛt daʊn. smɔl pɹɑfəɾ ɪf ɔl ʃi dɪd wɑz ɹeɪz ɹoʊmændəz stɑk wɪð ði ʌðɝz. "ðæt hoʊlz fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn, ɹoʊmændə," ʃi sɛd. "ɪf nid bi, tiɑnə kən faɪn tu bɝtʃɪz əz izəli əz wʌn." ɹoʊmændəz smaɪl vænɪʃt əbɹʌpli.

From the corner of her eye, she saw a smile pass across Romanda's lips at seeing Lelaine set down. Small profit if all she did was raise Romanda's stock with the others. "That holds for everyone, Romanda," she said. "If need be, Tiana can find two birches as easily as one." Romanda's smile vanished abruptly.

"ɪf aɪ meɪ spik, mʌðɝ," tɑkimə sɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ sloʊli. ʃi ətɛmptəɾ ə smaɪl, bʌt ʃi stɪl lʊk dɪsaɪɾədli ɪl. "aɪ maɪsɛlf θɪŋk juv bɪɡʌn wɛl. ðəɹ meɪ bi bɛnəfɪts tə stɑpɪŋ hɪɹ ə mʌnθ. əɹ lɔŋɡɝ." ɹoʊmændəz hɛd dʒɝkt ɝaʊn tə stɛɹ ət hɝ, bʌt fəɹ wʌns, tɑkimə dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə noʊɾəs. "wɪntɝɪŋ hɪɹ, wi kən əvɔɪd wɝs wɛðɝ fɑɹðɝ nɔɹθ, ən ɔlsoʊ plæn kɛɹfəli - "

"If I may speak, Mother," Takima said, rising slowly. She attempted a smile, but she still looked decidedly ill. "I myself think you have begun well. There may be benefits to stopping here a month. Or longer." Romanda's head jerked around to stare at her, but for once, Takima did not appear to notice. "Wintering here, we can avoid worse weather farther north, and also plan carefully - "

"ðɛɹz ən ɛn tə dɪleɪz, dɔɾɝ," ɛɡwin kʌɾ ɪn. "noʊ mɔɹ dʒɹæɡɪŋ əɹ fit." wəd ʃi bi ənʌðɝ dʒɛɹə, əɹ ənʌðɝ ʃaɪn? iðɝ wɑz stɪl pɑsəbəl. "ɪn wʌn mʌnθ, wɪl tʃɹævəl fɹəm hɪɹ." noʊ; ʃi wɑz ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ, ən wʌtɛvɝ ðə sikɹət hɪstɝiz wəd seɪ ʌv əɹ fɔls ən vɝtʃuz, ðə laɪɾ oʊnli nu, bʌt ðeɪ wəd bi hɝz, nɑt kɑpiz ə səm ʌðɝ wʊmənz. "ɪn wʌn mʌnθ, wɪl bɪɡɪn ðə sidʒ ə tɑɹ vəlɑn."

"There's an end to delays, daughter," Egwene cut in. "No more dragging our feet." Would she be another Gerra, or another Shein? Either was still possible. "In one month, we will Travel from here." No; she was Egwene al'Vere, and whatever the secret histories would say of her faults and virtues, the Light only knew, but they would be hers, not copies of some other woman's. "In one month, we will begin the siege of Tar Valon."

ðɪs taɪm, ðə saɪləns wɑz bɹoʊkən oʊnli baɪ ðə saʊn ə tɑkimə wipɪŋ.

This time, the silence was broken only by the sound of Takima weeping.


tʃæptɝ twɛnti


CHAPTER 20

ɪndə ændɝ


Into Andor

ɪleɪn hoʊp ðət ðə dʒɝni tə keɪɛmlɪn wəd ɡoʊ smuðli, ən ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, ɪt sim tə də soʊ. ʃi θɔt ðəɾ ivən əz ʃi ən eɪvinhə ən bɝdʒɪt sæt boʊn-wɪɹi ən hʌɾəld ɪn ðə ɹæɡz ðət ɹɪmeɪn ə ðɛɹ kloʊðɪŋ, fɪlθi wɪð dɝɾ ən dʌst ən ðə blʌɾ ə ði ɪnʒɝiz ðeɪ hæd ɹəsivd wən ðə ɡeɪtweɪ ɪksploʊɾəd. ɪn tu wiks ət moʊst, ʃi wəd bi ɹɛɾi tə pɹizɛn əɹ kleɪmz tə ðə laɪən θɹoʊn. ðəɹ ɑn ðə hɪltɑp, nɪneɪiv hil ðɛɹ numɝəs hɝts ən spoʊk bɛɹli ə wɝd, sɝɾənli nɑt bɪɹeɪɾɪŋ ðɛm. ʃʊɹli ðət wɑz ə plɛzən saɪn, ɪf ənjuʒəwəl. ɹɪlif ət faɪndɪŋ əm əlaɪv bæɾəld wɝi ɑn əɹ feɪs.

Elayne hoped that the journey to Caemlyn would go smoothly, and in the beginning, it seemed to do so. She thought that even as she and Aviendha and Birgitte sat bone-weary and huddled in the rags that remained of their clothing, filthy with dirt and dust and the blood of the injuries they had received when the gateway exploded. In two weeks at most, she would be ready to present her claims to the Lion Throne. There on the hilltop, Nynaeve Healed their numerous hurts and spoke barely a word, certainly not berating them. Surely that was a pleasant sign, if unusual. Relief at finding them alive battled worry on her face.

lænz stʃɹɛŋkθ wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi tə ɹimuv ðə sintʃæn kɹɔsboʊ boʊl fɹəm bɝdʒɪts θaɪ bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd bi hild ə ðət waʊnd, bʌɾ ɔlðoʊ hɝ feɪs dʒɹeɪn ə blʌɾ ən ɪleɪn fɛlt ə stæb ʌv æɡəni θɹu ðə bɑnd, æɡəni ðət meɪɾ əɹ wɑnə kɹaɪ aʊt, hɝ wɔɹɾɝ bɛɹli ɡɹoʊn θɹu hɝ ɡɹɪɾɪd tiθ.

Lan's strength was necessary to remove the Seanchan crossbow bolt from Birgitte's thigh before she could be Healed of that wound, but although her face drained of blood and Elayne felt a stab of agony through the bond, agony that made her want to cry out, her Warder barely groaned through her gritted teeth.

"teɪʃɝ kændɝ," læn mɝmɝd, tɔsɪŋ ðə paɪl-hɛd kwɔɹəl, meɪd tə pʌntʃ θɹu ɑɹmɝ, əsaɪɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. tʃɹu blʌɾ ə kændɝ. bɝdʒɪt blɪŋkt, ən i pɔzd. "fɝɡɪv mi, ɪf aɪ ɛɹd. aɪ əsum fɹəm jəɹ kloʊðz jə wɝ kændɔɹi."

"Tai'shar Kandor," Lan murmured, tossing the pile-head quarrel, made to punch through armor, aside on the ground. True blood of Kandor. Birgitte blinked, and he paused. "Forgive me, if I erred. I assumed from your clothes you were Kandori."

"oʊ, jɛs," bɝdʒɪt bɹiðd. "kændɔɹi." hɝ sɪkli ɡɹɪn maɪɾ əv bɪn fɹəm əɹ ɪnʒɝiz; nɪneɪiv wɑz ɪmpeɪʃənli ʃuɪŋ læn aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ soʊ ʃi kəd leɪ hænz ɑn hɝ. ɪleɪn hoʊp ðə wʊmən nu mɔɹ ə kændɝ ðən ðə neɪm; wən bɝdʒɪt hæd læs bɪn bɔɹn, ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ kændɝ. ʃi ʃʊɾə teɪkən ɪɾ əz ən oʊmən.

"Oh, yes," Birgitte breathed. "Kandori." Her sickly grin might have been from her injuries; Nynaeve was impatiently shooing Lan out of the way so she could lay hands on her. Elayne hoped the woman knew more of Kandor than the name; when Birgitte had last been born, there had been no Kandor. She should have taken it as an omen.

fəɹ ðə faɪv maɪlz tə ðə smɔl sleɪt-ɹuf mænɝ haʊs, bɝdʒɪt ɹoʊd bɪhaɪnd nɪneɪiv ɑn ðə læɾɝz staʊt bɹaʊn mɛɹ - neɪm lʌvɝsknət, ʌv ɔl θɪŋz - ən ɪleɪn ən eɪvinhə ɹoʊd lænz tɔl blæk stæljən. ət list, ɪleɪn sæt mændɑɹbz sæɾəl wɪð eɪvinhəz ɑɹmz ɝaʊn əɹ weɪst waɪl læn lɛd ðə faɪɝi-aɪɾ ænəməl. tʃɹeɪnd wɔɹhɔɹsɪz wɝ əz mʌtʃ wɛpənz əz ə sɔɹd, ən deɪnʒɝəs maʊns fəɹ stʃɹeɪnʒ ɹaɪɾɝz. bi ʃʊɹ ə jɝsɛlf, ɡɝl, lini hæɾ ɔlweɪz toʊl hɝ, bʌt nɑt tu ʃʊɹ, ən ʃi dɪd tʃɹaɪ. ʃi ʃʊɾə ɹilaɪzd ɪvɛns wɝ noʊ mɔɹ ɪn əɹ kəntʃɹoʊl ðən mændɑɹbz ɹeɪnz.

For the five miles to the small slate-roofed manor house, Birgitte rode behind Nynaeve on the latter's stout brown mare - named Loversknot, of all things - and Elayne and Aviendha rode Lan's tall black stallion. At least, Elayne sat Mandarb's saddle with Aviendha's arms around her waist while Lan led the fiery-eyed animal. Trained warhorses were as much weapons as a sword, and dangerous mounts for strange riders. Be sure of yourself, girl, Lini had always told her, but not too sure, and she did try. She should have realized events were no more in her control than Mandarb's reins.

ət ðə θɹi-stɔɹi stoʊn haʊs, mæstɝ hɔɹnwɛl, staʊɾ ən ɡɹeɪhɛɹd, ən mɪstʃɹəs hɔɹnwɛl, slaɪtli lɛs ɹaʊn ən slaɪtli lɛs ɡɹeɪ bʌɾ ʌðɝwaɪz ɹɪzɛmbəlɪŋ əɹ hʌzbən ɹɪmɑɹkəbli, hæɾ ɛvɹi læs pɝsən u wɝk ði ɪsteɪts, ən mɛɝɪlɪlz meɪd, pɔl, ən ðə ɡɹin-ænd-waɪt lɪvɹid sɝvəns u hæd kʌm fɹəm ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs əz wɛl, ɔl bʌsəlɪŋ tə faɪn slipɪŋ əkɑmədeɪʃənz fəɹ oʊvɝ tu hʌnʒɹəd pipəl, moʊst wɪmən, hu hæɾ əpɪɹɾ aʊɾ ə noʊwɛɹ wɪð dɑɹk nɪɹ tə fɔlɪŋ. ðə wɝk wɛnt wɪð sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ swɪfnəs, ɪn spaɪɾ ə ði ɪsteɪts' pipəl stɑpɪŋ tə ɡɔk əɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪz eɪdʒləs feɪs, əɹ ə wɔɹɾɝz ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊk meɪkɪŋ pɑɹts ə hɪm vænɪʃ, əɹ wʌn ə ðə si foʊk wɪð ɔl ə hɝ bɹaɪt sɪlks, hɝ ɪɹɪŋz ən noʊsɝɪŋ ən mɛdæljən tʃeɪn. kɪnswɪmən wɝ dəsaɪɾɪŋ ðət naʊ ɪt wɑz seɪf tə bi fɹaɪɾənd ən kɹaɪ noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ɹin ən ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl sɛd tə ðɛm; wɪndfɪndɝz wɝ snɑɹlɪŋ oʊvɝ haʊ fɑɹ fɹəm ðə sɔl ðeɪ hæd kʌm, əɡɛns ðɛɹ wɪl əz ɹɪneɪl dɪn kəlɑn laʊdli kleɪmd; ən noʊbəlz ən kɹæftswɪmən u hæd bɪn ɔl tu wɪlɪŋ tə fli wʌtɛvɝ leɪ bæk ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, wɪlɪŋ tə kæɹi ðɛɹ bʌndəl pəzɛʃənz ɑn ðɛɹ bæks, wɝ naʊ bɔkɪŋ ət biɪŋ ʃoʊn ə heɪlɔft fəɹ ə bɛd.

At the three-story stone house, Master Hornwell, stout and grayhaired, and Mistress Hornwell, slightly less round and slightly less gray but otherwise resembling her husband remarkably, had every last person who worked the estates, and Merilille's maid, Pol, and the green-and-white liveried servants who had come from the Tarasin Palace as well, all bustling to find sleeping accommodations for over two hundred people, most women, who had appeared out of nowhere with dark near to falling. The work went with surprising swiftness, in spite of the estates' people stopping to gawk at an Aes Sedai's ageless face, or a Warder's shifting cloak making parts of him vanish, or one of the Sea Folk with all of her bright silks, her earrings and nosering and medallioned chain. Kinswomen were deciding that now it was safe to be frightened and cry no matter what Reanne and the Knitting Circle said to them; Windfinders were snarling over how far from the salt they had come, against their will as Renaile din Calon loudly claimed; and nobles and craftswomen who had been all too willing to flee whatever lay back in Ebou Dar, willing to carry their bundled possessions on their backs, were now balking at being shown a hayloft for a bed.

ɔl ðət wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn wən ɪleɪn ən ði ʌðɝz ɝaɪvd wɪð ðə sʌn ɹɛɾ ɑn ðə wɛstɝn hɝaɪzən, ə ɡɹeɪɾ əphivəl ən mɪlɪŋ ɔl əbaʊt ðə haʊs ən θætʃ-ɹuft aʊtbɪldɪŋz, bʌɾ æləz tɛndʒaɪl, smaɪlɪŋ plɛzənli ən ɪmplækəbəl əz ən ævəlæntʃ, sim tə hæv ɛvɹiθɪŋ mɔɹ ɪn hæn ðən ivən ðə keɪpəbəl hɔɹnwɛlz. kɪnswɪmən u wɛp hɑɹɾɝ fəɹ ɔl ə ɹinz ətɛmps ət kʌmfɝt dʒɹaɪd ðɛɹ tɪɹz əɾ ə mɝmɝ fɹəm æləz ən bɪɡæn muvɪŋ wɪð ðə pɝpəsfəl ɛɹ ʌv wɪmən u hæd bɪn kɛɹɪŋ fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn ə hɑstəl wɝl fəɹ mɛni jɪɹz. hɔɾi noʊbəlz wɪð mɛɹɪdʒ naɪvz dæŋɡəlɪŋ ɪndə ði oʊvəl kʌtaʊts ɪn ðɛɹ leɪs-tʃɹɪm bɑɾɪsɪz ən kɹæftswɪmən u dɪspleɪɾ ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ ɛɹəɡəns ən nɪɹli əz mʌtʃ bʊzəm, ɪf nɑɾ ɪn sɪlk, flɪntʃt ət ðə saɪɾ ʌv æləz əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ, ən wɛn skɝiɪŋ fəɹ ðə tɔl bɑɹnz hʌɡɪŋ ðɛɹ bʌndəlz ən ənaʊnsɪŋ laʊdli ðət ðeɪ hæɾ ɔlweɪz θɔɾ ɪt maɪt bi əmjuzɪŋ tə slip ɑn stʃɹɔ. ivən ðə wɪndfɪndɝz, mɛni ʌv əm ɪmpɔɹɾənt ən paʊɝfəl wɪmən əmʌŋ ði æθɑn maɪɹ, mʌfəl ðɛɹ kəmpleɪns wən æləz keɪm nɪɹ. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, sɝaɪðə, stɪl lækɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ eɪɡləsnəs, aɪɾ æləz əskæns ən tʌtʃt əɹ bɹaʊn-fɹɪnd ʃɔl əz ɪf tə ɹimaɪn hɝsɛlf ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ. mɛɝɪlɪl - ənflæpəbəl mɛɝɪlɪl - wɑtʃt ðə wʊmən ɡoʊ əbaʊɾ əɹ wɝk wɪð ə blɛn ʌv əpɹuvəl ən oʊpən əmeɪzmənt.

All that was going on when Elayne and the others arrived with the sun red on the western horizon, a great upheaval and milling all about the house and thatch-roofed outbuildings, but Alise Tenjile, smiling pleasantly and implacable as an avalanche, seemed to have everything more in hand than even the capable Hornwells. Kinswomen who wept harder for all of Reanne's attempts at comfort dried their tears at a murmur from Alise and began moving with the purposeful air of women who had been caring for themselves in a hostile world for many years. Haughty nobles with marriage knives dangling into the oval cutouts in their lace-trimmed bodices and craftswomen who displayed almost as much arrogance and nearly as much bosom, if not in silk, flinched at the sight of Alise approaching, and went scurrying for the tall barns hugging their bundles and announcing loudly that they had always thought it might be amusing to sleep on straw. Even the Windfinders, many of them important and powerful women among the Atha'an Miere, muffled their complaints when Alise came near. For that matter, Sareitha, still lacking the Aes Sedai agelessness, eyed Alise askance and touched her brown-fringed shawl as if to remind herself it was there. Merilille - unflappable Merilille - watched the woman go about her work with a blend of approval and open amazement.

klæmbɝɪŋ daʊn fɹəm əɹ sæɾəl ət ðə fɹʌn dɔɹ ə ðə haʊs, nɪneɪiv ɡlɛɹd təwɔɹɾ æləz, ɡeɪv əɹ dɑɹk bɹeɪd wʌn dɪlɪbɝɪt, mɛʒɝd tʌɡ ðət ði ʌðɝ wʊmən wɑz fɑɹ tu bɪzi tə noʊɾəs, ən stɔkt ɪnsaɪd, stʃɹɪpɪŋ ɔf əɹ blu ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɡlʌvz ən mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf. wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ ɡoʊ, læn tʃʌkəl sɔfli, ðən staɪfəld ɪz læftɝ ɪmiɾiətli wən ɪleɪn dɪsmaʊntɪd. laɪt, bʌɾ ɪz aɪz wɝ koʊld! fəɹ nɪneɪivz seɪk, ʃi hoʊp ðə mæn kəd bi seɪv fɹəm ɪz feɪt, jɛt lʊkɪŋ ɪndə ðoʊz aɪz, ʃi dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪt.

Clambering down from her saddle at the front door of the house, Nynaeve glared toward Alise, gave her dark braid one deliberate, measured tug that the other woman was far too busy to notice, and stalked inside, stripping off her blue riding gloves and muttering to herself. Watching her go, Lan chuckled softly, then stifled his laughter immediately when Elayne dismounted. Light, but his eyes were cold! For Nynaeve's sake, she hoped the man could be saved from his fate, yet looking into those eyes, she did not believe it.

"wɛɹ ɪz ɪspæn?" ʃi mɝmɝd, hɛlpɪŋ eɪvinhə skɹæmbəl daʊn. soʊ mɛni ʌv ðə wɪmən nu ən ɛɛs sədaɪ - ə blæk sɪstɝ - wɑz biɪŋ hɛl pɹɪznɝ ðət ðə nuz wɑz baʊn tə spɹɛd θɹu ði ɪsteɪts laɪk faɪɝ ɪn dʒɹaɪ ɡɹæs, bʌt bɛɾɝ ɪf ðə mænɝz foʊk hæɾ ə lɪɾəl pɹɛpɝeɪʃən.

"Where is Ispan?" she murmured, helping Aviendha scramble down. So many of the women knew an Aes Sedai - a Black sister - was being held prisoner that the news was bound to spread through the estates like fire in dry grass, but better if the manor's folk had a little preparation.

"æɾɪliz ən vændin tʊk əɹ tə ə smɔl wʊdkəɾɝz hʌɾ əbaʊt hæf ə maɪl əweɪ," hi ɹɪplaɪd dʒʌst əz kwaɪətli. "ɪn ɔl ðɪs, aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ɛniwʌn noʊɾəst ə wʊmən wɪð ə sæk oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd. ðə sɪstɝz sɛd ðeɪ wəd steɪ ðəɹ wɪð əɹ tənaɪt."

"Adeleas and Vandene took her to a small woodcutter's hut about half a mile away," he replied just as quietly. "In all this, I don't think anyone noticed a woman with a sack over her head. The sisters said they would stay there with her tonight."

ɪleɪn ʃɪvɝd. ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnd wɑz tə bi kwɛstʃən əɡɛn wʌns ðə sʌn wɛn daʊn, ɪt simd. ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ændɝ, naʊ, ən ðət meɪɾ əɹ fil mɔɹ dipli əz ɪf ʃi hæd ɡɪvən ði ɔɹɾɝ fəɹ ɪt.

Elayne shivered. The Darkfriend was to be questioned again once the sun went down, it seemed. They were in Andor, now, and that made her feel more deeply as if she had given the order for it.

sun ʃi wɑz ɪn ə kɑpɝ bæθtəb, lʌɡʒʊɹieɪɾɪŋ ɪn pɝfjum soʊp ən klin skɪn əɡɛn, læfɪŋ ən splæʃɪŋ wɔɾɝ ət bɝdʒɪt, hu lɑld ɪn ənʌðɝ tʌb ɪksɛpt wən ʃi wɑz splæʃɪŋ bæk, boʊθ ə ðɛm ɡɪɡəlɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə wɪnsɪŋ hɔɹɝ eɪvinhə kəd nɑt kwaɪt kənsil ət sɪɾɪŋ ʌp tə hɝ bɹɛsts ɪn wɔɾɝ. ʃi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ə vɛɹi ɡʊd dʒoʊk ɑn hɝsɛlf, ðoʊ, ən toʊld ə moʊst ɪmpɹɑpɝ stɔɹi əbaʊɾ ə mæn ɡɛɾɪŋ sɛɡeɪd spaɪnz ɪn ɪz bɑɾəm. bɝdʒɪt toʊld wʌn stɪl mɔɹ ɪmpɹɑpɝ, əbaʊɾ ə wʊmən ɡɛɾɪŋ əɹ hɛd kɑt bɪtwin ðə slæts ʌv ə fɛns, ðət meɪɾ ivən eɪvinhə blʌʃ. ðeɪ wɝ fʌni, ðoʊ. ɪleɪn wɪʃt ʃi nu wʌn tə tɛl.

Soon she was in a copper bathtub, luxuriating in perfumed soap and clean skin again, laughing and splashing water at Birgitte, who lolled in another tub except when she was splashing back, both of them giggling over the wincing horror Aviendha could not quite conceal at sitting up to her breasts in water. She thought it was a very good joke on herself, though, and told a most improper story about a man getting segade spines in his bottom. Birgitte told one still more improper, about a woman getting her head caught between the slats of a fence, that made even Aviendha blush. They were funny, though. Elayne wished she knew one to tell.

ʃi ən eɪvinhə koʊmd ən bɹʌʃt itʃ ʌðɝz hɛɹ - ə naɪtli ɹɪtʃuəl fəɹ nɪɹ-sɪstɝz - ən ðən ðeɪ snʌɡəl taɪɹədli ɪndə ðə kænəpid bɛɾ ɪn ə smɔl ɹum. ʃi ən eɪvinhə, bɝdʒɪɾ ən nɪneɪiv, ən lʌki ðəɹ wɝ noʊ mɔɹ. lɑɹdʒɝ ɹumz hæd kɑts ən pæləts kʌvɝɪŋ ðə flɔɹz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹumz, ðə kɪtʃənz, ən moʊst ə ðə hɔlz. nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd hæf ðə naɪɾ əbaʊt ði ɪndisənsi ʌv meɪkɪŋ ə wʊmən slip əpɑɹt fɹəm əɹ hʌzbənd, ən fəɹ ði ʌðɝ hæf, hɝ ɛlboʊz sim tə weɪk ɪleɪn ɛvɹi taɪm ʃi dʒɹɑpt ɔf. bɝdʒɪt flætli ɹəfjuz tə tʃeɪnʒ pleɪsəz, ən ʃi kəd nɑɾ æsk eɪvinhə tə ɛndʒjʊɹ ðə wʊmənz ʃɑɹp pɹɑɾɪŋ, soʊ ʃi dɪd nɑt ɡɛɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə slip.

She and Aviendha combed and brushed each other's hair - a nightly ritual for near-sisters - and then they snuggled tiredly into the canopied bed in a small room. She and Aviendha, Birgitte and Nynaeve, and lucky there were no more. Larger rooms had cots and pallets covering the floors, including the sitting rooms, the kitchens, and most of the halls. Nynaeve muttered half the night about the indecency of making a woman sleep apart from her husband, and for the other half, her elbows seemed to wake Elayne every time she dropped off. Birgitte flatly refused to change places, and she could not ask Aviendha to endure the woman's sharp prodding, so she did not get a great deal of sleep.

ɪleɪn wɑz stɪl ɡɹɑɡi wən ðeɪ pɹipɛɹd tə dɪpɑɹt ðə nɛks mɔɹnɪŋ, wɪð ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn ə moʊltən bɔl ʌv ɡoʊld. ðə mænɝ hæd fju ænəməlz tə spɛɹ ənlɛs ʃi stʃɹɪp ði ɪsteɪts bɛɹ, soʊ waɪl ʃi ɹoʊɾ ə blæk ɡɛldɪŋ neɪm faɪɹhɑɹt, ən eɪvinhə ən bɝdʒɪt hæd nu maʊns, ðoʊz u hæd bɪn əfʊt wən ðeɪ flɛd ðə kɪnz fɑɹm ɹɪmeɪn əfʊt. ðəɾ ɪnkluɾəd moʊst ə ðə kɪnswɪmən ðɛmsɛlvz, ðə sɝvəns liɾɪŋ ðə pæk ænəməlz, ən ðə twɛnti-ɑd wɪmən u pleɪnli wɝ bɪɑn ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ ðɛɹ vɪzət tə ðə kɪnz fɑɹm ɪn hoʊps ə pis ən kɑntəmpleɪʃən. ðə wɔɹɾɝz ɹoʊɾ əhɛd tə skaʊt ðə weɪ əkɹɔs ɹoʊlɪŋ hɪlz kʌvɝɾ ɪn dʒɹaʊt-stɑɹv fɔɹəst, ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ɪn ə moʊs pəkjuljɝ sneɪk, wɪð nɪneɪiv ən hɝsɛlf ən ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz ət ðə hɛd. ən eɪvinhə, ʌv kɔɹs.

Elayne was still groggy when they prepared to depart the next morning, with the rising sun a molten ball of gold. The manor had few animals to spare unless she stripped the estates bare, so while she rode a black gelding named Fireheart, and Aviendha and Birgitte had new mounts, those who had been afoot when they fled the Kin's farm remained afoot. That included most of the Kinswomen themselves, the servants leading the pack animals, and the twenty-odd women who plainly were beyond regretting their visit to the Kin's farm in hopes of peace and contemplation. The Warders rode ahead to scout the way across rolling hills covered in drought-starved forest, and the rest of them stretched out in a most peculiar snake, with Nynaeve and herself and the other sisters at the head. And Aviendha, of course.

ɪt wɑz hɑɹdli ə ɡɹup ðət kəɾ ɪskeɪp noʊɾəs, soʊ mɛni wɪmən tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð soʊ fju mɛn fəɹ ɡɑɹdz, nɑt tə mɛnʃən twɛnti dɑɹk wɪndfɪndɝz, ɑkwɝɾ ɑn ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ən əz bɹaɪɾ əz ɛɡzɑɾɪkli pluməɡd bɝdz, ən eɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, faɪv ə ðɛm ɹɛkəɡnaɪzəbli soʊ tə ɛniwʌn u nu wʌt tə lʊk fɔɹ. ðoʊ wʌn dɪd ɹaɪd wɪð ə lɛðɝ sæk oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd, ʌv kɔɹs. əz ɪf ðət wəd nɑɾ ətʃɹækt aɪz baɪ ɪtsɛlf. ɪleɪn hæd hoʊp tə ɹitʃ keɪɛmlɪn ənnoʊɾɪst, bʌt ðət noʊ lɔŋɡɝ sim pɑsəbəl. stɪl, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹizən ðəɾ ɛniwʌn wəd səspɛk ðət ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ, ɪleɪn tʃɹəkən hɝsɛlf, wɑz wʌn ə ðɪs ɡɹup. ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, ʃi θɔt ðət ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst dɪfəkəlti ðeɪ maɪt feɪs wəd bi sʌmwʌn u əpoʊzd əɹ kleɪmz lɝnɪŋ ə hɝ pɹɛzəns, sɛndɪŋ ɑɹmd mɛn tə tʃɹaɪ teɪkɪŋ əɹ ɪndə kʌstəɾi əntɪl ðə səksɛʃən wɑz sɛɾəld.

It was hardly a group that could escape notice, so many women traveling with so few men for guards, not to mention twenty dark Windfinders, awkward on their horses and as bright as exotically plumaged birds, and eight Aes Sedai, five of them recognizably so to anyone who knew what to look for. Though one did ride with a leather sack over her head, of course. As if that would not attract eyes by itself. Elayne had hoped to reach Caemlyn unnoticed, but that no longer seemed possible. Still, there was no reason that anyone would suspect that the Daughter-Heir, Elayne Trakand herself, was one of this group. In the beginning, she thought that the greatest difficulty they might face would be someone who opposed her claims learning of her presence, sending armed men to try taking her into custody until the succession was settled.

ɪn tʃɹuθ, ʃi ɪkspɛktəd ðə fɝs tʃɹʌbəl tə kʌm fɹəm ðə fʊtsɔɹ kɹæftswɪmən ən noʊbəlz, pɹaʊd wɪmən ɔl, ən nʌn juz tə tʃɹæmpɪŋ dʌsti hɪlz. ɪspɛʃli sɪns mɛɝɪlɪlz meɪd hæɾ əɹ oʊn plʌmp mɛɹ tə ɹaɪd. ðə fju fɑɹmwaɪvz əmʌŋ əm dɪd nɑt sim tə maɪn tu mʌtʃ, bʌt nɪɹli hæf ðɛɹ nʌmbɝ wɝ wɪmən u pəzɛs lænz ən mænɝz ən pæləsəz, ən moʊst ə ðə ɹɛst cʊɾə əfɔɹɾəd tə baɪ ən ɪsteɪɾ ɪf nɑt tu əɹ θɹi. ðeɪ ɪnkluɾəd tu ɡoʊlsmɪθs, θɹi wivɝz u oʊn oʊvɝ fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd lumz bɪtwin ðɛm, ə wʊmən huz mænjəfæktɝiz pɹədust ə tɛnθ ʌv ɔl ðə lækɹwɛɹ ɛbu dɑɹ pɹədust, ən ə bæŋkɝ. ðeɪ wɔkt, ðɛɹ pəzɛʃənz stʃɹæp tə ðɛɹ bæks, waɪl ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz bɔɹ pæksæɾəlz leɪɾən wɪð fud. ðəɹ wɑz ɹil nid. ɛvɹi læs kɔɪn ɪn ɛvɹiwʌnz pɝs hæd bɪn pul təɡɛðɝ ən ɡɪvən ɪndə nɪneɪivz taɪtfɪstɪd kipɪŋ, bʌɾ ɔl maɪt nɑt bi səfɪʃən tə baɪ fud, fɑɾɝ ən lɑdʒɪŋz fəɹ soʊ lɑɹdʒ ə pɑɹɾi ɔl ðə weɪ tə keɪɛmlɪn. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt sim tə ʌndɝstænd. ðeɪ kəmpleɪn laʊdli ən ɪnsɛsənli θɹu ðə fɝs deɪz mɑɹtʃ. laʊɾəst ʌv ɔl wɑz ə slɪm leɪɾi wɪð ə θɪn skɑɹ ɑn wʌn tʃik, ə stɝn-feɪst wʊmən neɪmd mɑliən, hu wɑz nɪɹli bɛn dʌbəl ʌndɝ ðə weɪɾ ʌv ə hjudʒ bʌndəl kənteɪnɪŋ ə dʌzən əɹ mɔɹ dʒɹɛsəz ən ɔl ðə tʃeɪnʒəz ðət wɛnt wɪð ðɛm.

In truth, she expected the first trouble to come from the footsore craftswomen and nobles, proud women all, and none used to tramping dusty hills. Especially since Merilille's maid had her own plump mare to ride. The few farmwives among them did not seem to mind too much, but nearly half their number were women who possessed lands and manors and palaces, and most of the rest could have afforded to buy an estate if not two or three. They included two goldsmiths, three weavers who owned over four hundred looms between them, a woman whose manufactories produced a tenth of all the lacquerware Ebou Dar produced, and a banker. They walked, their possessions strapped to their backs, while their horses bore packsaddles laden with food. There was real need. Every last coin in everyone's purse had been pooled together and given into Nynaeve's tightfisted keeping, but all might not be sufficient to buy food, fodder and lodgings for so large a party all the way to Caemlyn. They did not seem to understand. They complained loudly and incessantly through the first day's march. Loudest of all was a slim lady with a thin scar on one cheek, a stern-faced woman named Malien, who was nearly bent double under the weight of a huge bundle containing a dozen or more dresses and all the changes that went with them.

wən ðeɪ meɪd kæmp ðət fɝs naɪt, wɪð ðɛɹ kʊk faɪɝz ɡloʊɪŋ ɪn ðə twaɪlaɪɾ ən ɛvɹiwʌn fʊl ə binz ən bɹɛɾ ɪf nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli sæɾəsfaɪd wɪð ðɛm, mɑliən ɡæðɝd ðə noʊbəlwɪmən ɝaʊn hɝ, ðɛɹ sɪlks mɔɹ ðən tʃɹævəl-steɪnd. ðə kɹæftswɪmən dʒɔɪn ɪn, tu, ən ðə bæŋkɝ, ən ðə fɑɹmɝz stʊd kloʊs. bɪfɔɹ mɑliən kəd seɪ ə wɝd, ɹin stʃɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɡɹup. hɝ feɪs fʊl ə smaɪl laɪnz, ɪn pleɪn bɹaʊn wʊlənz wɪð əɹ skɝts soʊn ʌp ɑn ðə lɛf tə ɪkspoʊz bɹaɪt leɪɝd pɛɾikoʊts, ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn wʌn ə ðə fɑɹm wɪmən.

When they made camp that first night, with their cook fires glowing in the twilight and everyone full of beans and bread if not entirely satisfied with them, Malien gathered the noblewomen around her, their silks more than travel-stained. The craftswomen joined in, too, and the banker, and the farmers stood close. Before Malien could say a word, Reanne strode into the group. Her face full of smile lines, in plain brown woolens with her skirts sewn up on the left to expose bright layered petticoats, she might have been one of the farm women.

"ɪf jə wɪʃ tə ɡoʊ hoʊm," ʃi ənaʊnst ɪn ðət sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli haɪ vɔɪs, "ju meɪ də soʊ əɾ ɛni taɪm. aɪ ɹəɡɹɛt ðət wi mʌs kip jəɹ hɔɹsəz, ðoʊ. jəl bi peɪd fəɹ əm əz sun əz kən bi ɝeɪnʒd. ɪf jə tʃuz tə ɹɪmeɪn, pliz ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət ðə ɹulz ə ðə fɑɹm stɪl əplaɪ." ə nʌmbɝ ə ðə wɪmən ɝaʊn əɹ ɡeɪpt. mɑliən wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn ɪn oʊpənɪŋ əɹ maʊθ æŋɡɹəli.

"If you wish to go home," she announced in that surprisingly high voice, "you may do so at any time. I regret that we must keep your horses, though. You will be paid for them as soon as can be arranged. If you choose to remain, please remember that the rules of the farm still apply." A number of the women around her gaped. Malien was not alone in opening her mouth angrily.

æləz dʒʌst sim tə əpɪɹ ət ɹinz saɪd, fɪsts plæntəɾ ɑn əɹ hɪps. ʃi wɑz nɑt smaɪlɪŋ naʊ. "aɪ sɛd ðə læs tɛn tə bi ɹɛɾi wəd də ðə wɑʃɪŋ ʌp," ʃi toʊld əm fɝmli. ən ʃi neɪmd əm ɔf; dʒɪliən, ə plʌmp ɡoʊldsmɪθ; neɪsɛl, ðə kul-aɪd bæŋkɝ; ən ɔl eɪɾ ə ðə noʊbəlz. ðeɪ stʊd stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ əntɪl ʃi klæpt əɹ hænz ən sɛd, "doʊn meɪk mi ɪnvoʊk ðə ɹul ɑn feɪljɝ tə də jəɹ ʃɛɹ ə ðə tʃɔɹz."

Alise just seemed to appear at Reanne's side, fists planted on her hips. She was not smiling now. "I said the last ten to be ready would do the washing up," she told them firmly. And she named them off; Jillien, a plump goldsmith; Naiselle, the cool-eyed banker; and all eight of the nobles. They stood staring at her until she clapped her hands and said, "Don't make me invoke the rule on failure to do your share of the chores."

mɑliən, waɪd-aɪɾ ən mʌɾɝɪŋ ɪn dɪsbɪlif, wɑz ðə læs tə dɑɹɾ ɔf ən bɪɡɪn ɡæðɝɪŋ dɝɾi boʊlz, bʌt ðə nɛks mɔɹnɪŋ ʃi pɛɹɾ əɹ bʌndəl daʊn, livɪŋ leɪs-tʃɹɪm sɪlk dʒɹɛsəz ən ʃɪfs tə bi tʃɹæmpəld ɑn ðə hɪlsaɪɾ əz ðeɪ dɪpɑɹɾəd. ɪleɪn kəntɪnjud tə ɪkspɛkt ən ɪksploʊʒən, bʌt ɹin kɛpt ə fɝm hæn ɑn ðɛm, æləz kɛpt ə fɝmɝ, ən ɪf mɑliən ən ði ʌðɝz ɡlɛɹɾ ən mʌɾɝd oʊvɝ ðə ɡɹis steɪnz ðət ɡɹu ɑn ðɛɹ kloʊðz deɪ baɪ deɪ, ɹin hæɾ oʊnli tə spik ə fju wɝdz tə sɛn əm tə ðɛɹ wɝk. æləz oʊnli hæd tə klæp əɹ hænz.

Malien, wide-eyed and muttering in disbelief, was the last to dart off and begin gathering dirty bowls, but the next morning she pared her bundle down, leaving lace-trimmed silk dresses and shifts to be trampled on the hillside as they departed. Elayne continued to expect an explosion, but Reanne kept a firm hand on them, Alise kept a firmer, and if Malien and the others glared and muttered over the grease stains that grew on their clothes day by day, Reanne had only to speak a few words to send them to their work. Alise only had to clap her hands.

ɪf ðə ɹɛst ə ðə dʒɝni cʊɾə ɡɔn əz smuðli, ɪleɪn wʊɾə bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə dʒɔɪn ðoʊz wɪmən ɪn ðɛɹ ɡɹisi leɪbɝz. lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ɹitʃɪŋ keɪɛmlɪn, ʃi nu ðət fəɹ ə fækt.

If the rest of the journey could have gone as smoothly, Elayne would have been willing to join those women in their greasy labors. Long before reaching Caemlyn, she knew that for a fact.

wʌns ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə fɝs nɛɹoʊ dʌsti ɹoʊd, lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən kɑɹt tʃɹæk, fɑɹmz bɪɡæn tə əpɪɹ, θætʃt stoʊn haʊsəz ən bɑɹnz klɪŋɪŋ tə ðə hɪlsaɪdz əɹ nɛsəld ɪn hɑloʊz. fɹəm ðən ɑn, wɛðɝ ðə lænd wɑz hɪli əɹ flæt, fɔɹəstəɾ əɹ klɪɹd, ðeɪ ɹɛɹli spɛn mɛni aʊɝz bɪɑn saɪɾ ʌv ə fɑɹm əɹ ə vɪlədʒ. əɾ itʃ ə ðoʊz, waɪl ðə loʊkəl foʊk ɡɑɡəld ət ðə vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, ɪleɪn tʃɹaɪd tə lɝn haʊ mʌtʃ səpɔɹt haʊs tʃɹəkən hæd, ən wʌt kənsɝn ðə pipəl moʊst. ədʒɹɛsɪŋ ðoʊz kənsɝnz wəd bi ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪn meɪkɪŋ əɹ kleɪm tə ðə θɹoʊn stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə stænd, əz ɪmpɔɹɾənt əz ðə bækɪŋ ʌv ʌðɝ haʊsəz. ʃi hɝɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil, ɪf nɑɾ ɔlweɪz wʌt ʃi wɪʃt tə hɪɹ. ændɔɹənz kleɪm ðə ɹaɪt tə spik ðɛɹ maɪnz tə ðə kwin hɝsɛlf; ðeɪ wɝ hɑɹdli ʃaɪ wɪð ə jʌŋ noʊbəlwʊmən, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ pəkjuljɝ əɹ tʃɹævlɪŋ kəmpænjənz.

Once they reached the first narrow dusty road, little more than cart track, farms began to appear, thatched stone houses and barns clinging to the hillsides or nestled in hollows. From then on, whether the land was hilly or flat, forested or cleared, they rarely spent many hours beyond sight of a farm or a village. At each of those, while the local folk goggled at the very strange strangers, Elayne tried to learn how much support House Trakand had, and what concerned the people most. Addressing those concerns would be important in making her claim to the throne strong enough to stand, as important as the backing of other Houses. She heard a great deal, if not always what she wished to hear. Andorans claimed the right to speak their minds to the Queen herself; they were hardly shy with a young noblewoman, no matter how peculiar her traveling companions.

ɪn ə vɪlədʒ kɔl deɪməliən, wɛɹ θɹi mɪlz sæt bɪsaɪɾ ə smɔl ɹɪvɝ ʃɹʌŋkən tə liv ðɛɹ tɔl wɔɾɝ-wilz dʒɹaɪ, ðə skwɛɹ-dʒɔɾ ɪnkipɝ ət ðə ɡoʊldən ʃivz əlaʊɾ əz haʊ hi θɔt mɔɹɡeɪs hæd bɪn ə ɡʊd kwin, ðə bɛs ðət kəd bi, ðə bɛs ðəɾ ɛvɝ wɑz. "hɝ dɔɾɝ maɪɾəv bɪn ə ɡʊd ɹulɝ, tu, aɪ səpoʊz," hi mʌɾɝd, θʌmɪŋ ɪz tʃɪn. "pɪɾi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn kɪl ðɛm. aɪ səpoʊz i hæd tə - ðə pɹɑfəsiz əɹ səm sətʃ - bʌɾ i hæd noʊ kɔl tə dʒɹaɪ ʌp ðə ɹɪvɝz, naʊ dɪd hi? haʊ mʌtʃ ɡɹeɪn dɪd jə seɪ jəɹ hɔɹsəz nid, maɪ leɪɾi? ɪts dʒɹɛdfəl dɪɹ, maɪnd."

In a village called Damelien, where three mills sat beside a small river shrunken to leave their tall water-wheels dry, the square-jawed innkeeper at The Golden Sheaves allowed as how he thought Morgase had been a good queen, the best that could be, the best that ever was. "Her daughter might've been a good ruler, too, I suppose," he muttered, thumbing his chin. "Pity the Dragon Reborn killed them. I suppose he had to - the Prophecies or some such - but he had no call to dry up the rivers, now did he? How much grain did you say your horses need, my lady? It's dreadful dear, mind."

ə hɑɹd-feɪst wʊmən, ɪn ə wɔɹn bɹaʊn dʒɹɛs ðət hʌŋ ɑn əɹ əz ɪf ʃi hæd lɔst weɪt, sɝveɪɾ ə fil sɝaʊndəd baɪ ə loʊ stoʊn wɔl, wɛɹ ðə hɑt wɪn sɛnt ʃits ə dʌs mɑɹtʃɪŋ ɪndə ðə wʊdz. ði ʌðɝ fɑɹmz ɝaʊn bɛɹihɪl lʊkt əz bæɾ əɹ wɝs. "ðæt dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹnz ɡɑt noʊ ɹaɪt tə də ðɪs tə ʌs, naʊ hæz hi? aɪ æsk ju!" ʃi spæɾ ən fɹaʊn ʌp əɾ ɪleɪn ɪn əɹ sæɾəl. "ðə θɹoʊn? oʊ, daɪɛlɪnz əz ɡʊɾ əz ɛni, naʊ mɔɹɡeɪs ən əɹ ɡɝl ɑɹ dɛd. səm ɝaʊn hɪɹ stɪl spik ʌp fəɹ nɑiən əɹ ɛləniə, bʌɾ aɪm fəɹ daɪɛlɪn. ɛni lʊkaʊt, keɪɛmlɪnz ə lɔŋ weɪ ɔf. aɪv ɡɑt kɹɑps tə wɝi əbaʊt. ɪf aɪ ɛvɝ meɪk ənʌðɝ kɹɑp."

A hard-faced woman, in a worn brown dress that hung on her as if she had lost weight, surveyed a field surrounded by a low stone wall, where the hot wind sent sheets of dust marching into the woods. The other farms around Buryhill looked as bad or worse. "That Dragon Reborn's got no right to do this to us, now has he? I ask you!" She spat and frowned up at Elayne in her saddle. "The throne? Oh, Dyelin's as good as any, now Morgase and her girl are dead. Some around here still speak up for Naean or Elenia, but I'm for Dyelin. Any lookout, Caemlyn's a long way off. I've got crops to worry about. If I ever make another crop."

"oʊ, ɪts tʃɹu, maɪ leɪɾi, soʊ ɪɾ ɪz; ɪleɪnz əlaɪv," ə nɑɹld oʊl kɑɹpəntɝ toʊld əɹ ɪn fɔɹəl mɑɹkət. hi wɑz bɔld əz ə lɛðɝ ɛɡ, hɪz fɪŋɡɝz twɪstəd wɪð eɪdʒ, bʌt ðə wɝk stændɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə ʃeɪvɪŋz ən sɔdʌs ðət lɪɾɝd ɪz ʃɑp lʊkt əz faɪn əz ɛni ɪleɪn hæd sin. ʃi wɑz ði oʊnli pɝsən ɪn ðə ʃɑp bɪsaɪdz hɪm. fɹəm ðə lʊk ə ðə vɪlədʒ, hæf ðə ɹɛzəɾənts hæd lɛft. "ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪz hævɪŋ əɹ bɹɔt tə keɪɛmlɪn soʊ hi kən pʊt ðə ɹoʊz kɹaʊn ɑn əɹ hɛd hɪmsɛlf," hi əlaʊd. "ðə nuz ɪz ɔl oʊvɝ. 'tɪsn ɹaɪt, ɪf jə æsk mi. hiz wʌn ə ðɛm blæk-aɪɾ ilmɛn, aɪ hɪɹ. wi ɔt tə mɑɹtʃ ɑn keɪɛmlɪn ən dʒɹaɪv ɪm ən ɔl əm il bæk wɛɹ ðeɪ kʌm fɹʌm. ðən ɪleɪn kən kleɪm ðə θɹoʊn əɹ oʊn sɛlf. ɪf daɪɛlɪn lɛts əɹ kip ɪt, ɛniweɪ."

"Oh, it's true, my lady, so it is; Elayne's alive," a gnarled old carpenter told her in Forel Market. He was bald as a leather egg, his fingers twisted with age, but the work standing among the shavings and sawdust that littered his shop looked as fine as any Elayne had seen. She was the only person in the shop besides him. From the look of the village, half the residents had left. "The Dragon Reborn is having her brought to Caemlyn so he can put the Rose Crown on her head himself," he allowed. "The news is all over. 'Tisn't right, if you ask me. He's one of them black-eyed Aielmen, I hear. We ought to march on Caemlyn and drive him and all them Aiel back where they come from. Then Elayne can claim the throne her own self. If Dyelin lets her keep it, anyway."

ɪleɪn hɝɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil əbaʊt ɹænd, ɹumɝz ɹeɪnʒɪŋ fɹəm ɪm swɛɹɪŋ fiəlti tə ɪleɪɾə tə hɪm biɪŋ ðə kɪŋ ʌv ɪljən, ʌv ɔl θɪŋz. ɪn ændɝ, hi wɑz bleɪm fəɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ bæd ðət hæpən fəɹ ðə læs tu əɹ θɹi jɪɹz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ stɪlbɝθs ən bɹoʊkən lɛɡz, ɪnfɛsteɪʃənz ʌv ɡɹæshɑpɝz, tu-hɛɾəd kævz, ən θɹi-lɛɡəd tʃɪkənz. ən ivən pipəl u θɔɾ əɹ mʌðɝ hæd ɹuən ðə kʌntʃɹi ən ən ɛn tə ðə ɹeɪn ə haʊs tʃɹəkənd wɑz ɡʊd ɹɪɾəns stɪl bɪlivd ɹænd ælθɹ ən ɪnveɪɾɝ. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɑz səpoʊz tə faɪt ðə dɑɹk wʌn ət ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, ən i ʃəd bi dʒɹɪvən aʊɾ ʌv ændɝ. nɑt wʌt ʃi hæd hoʊp tə hɪɹ, nɑɾ ə bɪɾ ʌv ɪt. bʌt ʃi hɝɾ ɪɾ ɔl əɡɛn ən əɡɛn. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə plɛzən dʒɝni əɾ ɔl. ɪt wɑz wʌn lɔŋ lɛsən ɪn wʌn ə liniz feɪvɹɪt seɪɪŋz. ɪɾ ɪzən ðə stoʊn jə si ðət tʃɹɪps jə ɑn jəɹ noʊz.

Elayne heard a great deal about Rand, rumors ranging from him swearing fealty to Elaida to him being the King of Illian, of all things. In Andor, he was blamed for everything bad that happened for the last two or three years, including stillbirths and broken legs, infestations of grasshoppers, two-headed calves, and three-legged chickens. And even people who thought her mother had ruined the country and an end to the reign of House Trakand was good riddance still believed Rand al'Thor an invader. The Dragon Reborn was supposed to fight the Dark One at Shayol Ghul, and he should be driven out of Andor. Not what she had hoped to hear, not a bit of it. But she heard it all again and again. It was not a pleasant journey at all. It was one long lesson in one of Lini's favorite sayings. It isn't the stone you see that trips you on your nose.

ʃi θɔɾ ə nʌmbɝ ə θɪŋz bɪsaɪd ðə noʊbəlz maɪt kɑz tʃɹʌbəl, səm ʃʊɹ tə bi ɪksploʊʒənz əz ɡɹeɪɾ əz ðə ɡeɪtweɪ. ðə wɪndfɪndɝz, smʌɡ ɪn ðə bɑɹɡən meɪd wɪð nɪneɪiv ən hɝsɛlf, bɪheɪvd ɪn ən ɪɹɪteɪɾɪŋli supɪɹiɝ mænɝ təwɔɹd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪspɛʃli æftɝ ɪt keɪm aʊt ðət mɛɝɪlɪl hæd lɛt hɝsɛlf əɡɹi tə bi wʌn ə ðə fɝst sɪstɝz tə ɡoʊ ɑn ðə ʃɪps. jɛɾ ɪf ðə sɪzəlɪŋ ðəɹ kəntɪnjud laɪk ðə bɝnɪŋ ʌv ən ɪluməneɪɾɝz fjuz-kɔɹd, ði ɪksploʊʒən nɛvɝ kwaɪt keɪm. ðə wɪndfɪndɝz ən ðə kɪnswɪmən, ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl, simd əz sɝɾən tə bloʊ ʌp. ðeɪ kʌt wʌn ənʌðɝ dɛd wən nɑt snɪɹɪŋ oʊpənli, ðə kɪn ət "si foʊk waɪldɝz ɡɛɾɪŋ əbʌv ðɛmsɛlvz," ðə wɪndfɪndɝz ət "kɹɪŋɪŋ sændlæpɝz kɪsɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ fit." bʌɾ ɪt nɛvɝ wɛn bɪɑn lɪps kɝld əɹ dæɡɝz kɝɛst.

She thought a number of things beside the nobles might cause trouble, some sure to be explosions as great as the gateway. The Windfinders, smug in the bargain made with Nynaeve and herself, behaved in an irritatingly superior manner toward the Aes Sedai, especially after it came out that Merilille had let herself agree to be one of the first sisters to go on the ships. Yet if the sizzling there continued like the burning of an Illuminator's fuse-cord, the explosion never quite came. The Windfinders and the Kinswomen, in particular the Knitting Circle, seemed as certain to blow up. They cut one another dead when not sneering openly, the Kin at "Sea Folk wilders getting above themselves," the Windfinders at "cringing sandlappers kissing Aes Sedai feet." But it never went beyond lips curled or daggers caressed.

ɪspæn sɝɾənli pɹizɛntəd pɹɑbləmz ðəɾ ɪleɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ wəd ɡɹoʊ, jɛɾ æftɝ ə fju deɪz, vændin ən æɾɪliz lɛɾ əɹ ɹaɪɾ ənhʊɾɪd ɪf nɑɾ ənʃildɪd, ə saɪlən fɪɡjɝ wɪð kʌlɝd bidz ɪn əɹ θɪn bɹeɪdz, eɪdʒləs feɪs tɝn daʊn ən hænz stɪl ɑn əɹ ɹeɪnz. ɹɪneɪl toʊld ɛvɹiwʌn u wəd lɪsən ðəɾ əmʌŋ ði æθɑn maɪɹ, ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd wɑz stʃɹɪpt ə hɪz əɹ əɹ neɪmz əz sun əz pɹuvən ɡɪlti, ðən θɹoʊn oʊvɝ ðə saɪd taɪd tə bæləst stoʊnz. əmʌŋ ðə kɪnswɪmən, ivən ɹin ən æləz peɪld ɛvɹi taɪm ðeɪ sɔ ðə tæɹɑbənɝ wʊmən. bʌɾ ɪspæn ɡɹu mikɝ ən mikɝ, iɡɝ tə pliz ən fʊl ʌv ɪnɡɹeɪʃieɪɾɪŋ smaɪlz fəɹ ðə tu waɪt-hɛɹd sɪstɝz noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðeɪ dɪd tə hɝ wən ðeɪ kæɹiɾ əɹ əweɪ fɹəm ði ʌðɝz ət naɪt. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, æɾɪliz ən vændin ɡɹu mɔɹ ən mɔɹ fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd. æɾɪliz toʊl nɪneɪiv ɪn ɪleɪnz hɪɹɪŋ ðət ðə wʊmən spɪld aʊt vɑljumz əbaʊɾ oʊl plɑts ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ, ðoʊz ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn ɪnvɑlvd ɪn mʌtʃ mɔɹ ɪnθuziæstɪkli ðən ðoʊz ʃi wɑz, jɛɾ ivən wən ðeɪ pɹɛst əɹ hɑɹd - ɪleɪn kəd nɑt kwaɪt meɪk hɝsɛlf æsk haʊ ðeɪ pɹɛst - ən ʃi lɛt slɪp ðə neɪmz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnz, moʊst wɝ sɝɾənli dɛɾ ən nʌn wɑz ə sɪstɝ. vændin sɛd ðeɪ wɝ bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə fɪɹ ʃi hæd teɪkən ən oʊθ - ðə kæpəɾəl wɑz ɑɾəbəl - əɡɛns bɪtʃɹeɪɪŋ əɹ koʊhɔɹts. ðeɪ kəntɪnjud tə aɪsəleɪɾ ɪspæn əz mʌtʃ əz pɑsəbəl ən kəntɪnjud wɪð ðɛɹ kwɛstʃənz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz pleɪn ðeɪ wɝ filɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ blaɪnli, naʊ, ən kɛɹfəli.

Ispan certainly presented problems that Elayne was sure would grow, yet after a few days, Vandene and Adeleas let her ride unhooded if not unshielded, a silent figure with colored beads in her thin braids, ageless face turned down and hands still on her reins. Renaile told everyone who would listen that among the Atha'an Miere, a Darkfriend was stripped of his or her names as soon as proven guilty, then thrown over the side tied to ballast stones. Among the Kinswomen, even Reanne and Alise paled every time they saw the Taraboner woman. But Ispan grew meeker and meeker, eager to please and full of ingratiating smiles for the two white-haired sisters no matter what it was they did to her when they carried her away from the others at night. On the other hand, Adeleas and Vandene grew more and more frustrated. Adeleas told Nynaeve in Elayne's hearing that the woman spilled out volumes about old plots of the Black Ajah, those she had not been involved in much more enthusiastically than those she was, yet even when they pressed her hard - Elayne could not quite make herself ask how they pressed - and she let slip the names of Darkfriends, most were certainly dead and none was a sister. Vandene said they were beginning to fear she had taken an Oath - the capital was audible - against betraying her cohorts. They continued to isolate Ispan as much as possible and continued with their questions, but it was plain they were feeling their way blindly, now, and carefully.

ən ðəɹ wɑz nɪneɪiv, ən læn. moʊs dɛfənətli nɪneɪiv ən læn, wɪð əɹ nɪɹ tə bɝstɪŋ ət ði ɛfɝɾ ə hoʊldɪŋ əɹ tɛmpɝ ɝaʊn hɪm, munɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪm wən ðeɪ hæd tə slip əpɑɹt - wɪtʃ wɑz nɪɹli ɔlweɪz, ðə weɪ əkɑmədeɪʃənz dɪvaɪɾəd ʌp - ən tɔɹn bɪtwin iɡɝ ən əfɹeɪd wən ʃi kəd snik ɪm ɔf tə ə heɪlɔft. ɪt wɑz əɹ oʊn fɔl fəɹ tʃuzɪŋ ə si foʊk wɛɾɪŋ, ɪn ɪleɪnz ɛstəmeɪʃən. ðə si foʊk bɪlivd ɪn haɪɝɑɹki əz ðeɪ dɪɾ ɪn ðə si, ən ðeɪ nu ə wʊmən ən əɹ hʌzbən maɪt bi pɹəmoʊɾəd wʌn pæs ði ʌðɝ mɛni taɪmz ɪn ðɛɹ lɪvz. ðɛɹ mɛɹɪdʒ ɹaɪts tʊk ðəɾ ɪndə əkaʊnt. huɛvɝ hæd ðə ɹaɪt tə kəmæn ɪn pʌblɪk, mʌst oʊbeɪ ɪn pɹaɪvət. læn nɛvɝ tʊk ædvæntɪdʒ, soʊ nɪneɪiv sɛd - "nɑt ɹɪli," wʌtɛvɝ ðət wɑz səpoʊz tə min! ʃi ɔlweɪz blʌʃt wən ʃi sɛɾ ɪt - bʌt ʃi kɛpt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪm tə də soʊ, ən i dʒʌst sim tə ɡɹoʊ mɔɹ ən mɔɹ əmjuzd. ðɪs əmjuzmənt, ʌv kɔɹs, skɹud nɪneɪivz tɛmpɝ tə ə fivɝ pɪtʃ. nɪneɪiv dɪɾ ɪɹʌpt, aʊɾ ʌv ɔl ði ɪksploʊʒənz ɪleɪn hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd. ʃi snæpt əɾ ɛniwʌn ən ɛvɹiwʌn u ɡɑɾ ɪn əɹ weɪ. ɪksɛpt ət læn; wɪð hɪm, ʃi wɑz ɔl hʌni ən kɹim. ən nɑɾ əɾ æləz. ʃi keɪm kloʊs wʌns əɹ twaɪs, bʌɾ ivən nɪneɪiv kəd nɑt sim tə meɪk hɝsɛlf snæp əɾ æləz.

And there was Nynaeve, and Lan. Most definitely Nynaeve and Lan, with her near to bursting at the effort of holding her temper around him, mooning over him when they had to sleep apart - which was nearly always, the way accommodations divided up - and torn between eager and afraid when she could sneak him off to a hayloft. It was her own fault for choosing a Sea Folk wedding, in Elayne's estimation. The Sea Folk believed in hierarchy as they did in the sea, and they knew a woman and her husband might be promoted one past the other many times in their lives. Their marriage rites took that into account. Whoever had the right to command in public, must obey in private. Lan never took advantage, so Nynaeve said - "not really," whatever that was supposed to mean! She always blushed when she said it - but she kept waiting for him to do so, and he just seemed to grow more and more amused. This amusement, of course, screwed Nynaeve's temper to a fever pitch. Nynaeve did erupt, out of all the explosions Elayne had expected. She snapped at anyone and everyone who got in her way. Except at Lan; with him, she was all honey and cream. And not at Alise. She came close once or twice, but even Nynaeve could not seem to make herself snap at Alise.

ɪleɪn hæd hoʊps, nɑt wɝiz, əbaʊt ðə θɪŋz bɹɔɾ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹæhəɾ əlɔŋ wɪð ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz. eɪvinhə hɛlpt əɹ sɝtʃ, ən soʊ dɪd nɪneɪiv wʌns əɹ twaɪs, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɪntaɪɝli tu sloʊ ən dʒɪnʒɝ əbaʊɾ ɪɾ ən ʃoʊd lɪɾəl skɪl ət faɪndɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ sɝtʃɪŋ fɔɹ. ðeɪ faʊnd noʊ mɔɹ æŋɡɹil, jɛt ðə kəlɛkʃən ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɡɹu; wʌns ɔl ðə ɹʌbɪʃ hæd bɪn θɹoʊn əweɪ, ɑbʒɛkts ðət juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ fɪl faɪv ɪntaɪɝ pænɪɝz ɑn ðə pækhɔɹsɪz.

Elayne had hopes, not worries, about the things brought out of the Rahad along with the Bowl of the Winds. Aviendha helped her search, and so did Nynaeve once or twice, but she was entirely too slow and ginger about it and showed little skill at finding what they were searching for. They found no more angreal, yet the collection of ter'angreal grew; once all the rubbish had been thrown away, objects that used the One Power filled five entire panniers on the packhorses.

kɛɹfəl əz ɪleɪn wɑz, ðoʊ, hɝ ətɛmps tə stʌɾi ðɛm dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ soʊ wɛl. spɪɹət wɑz ðə seɪfəst ə ðə faɪv paʊɝz tə juz ɪn ðɪs - ənlɛs, ʌv kɔɹs, spɪɹət hæpən tə bi wʌt tʃɹɪɡɝd ðə θɪŋ! - jɛɾ ət taɪmz ʃi hæd tə juz ʌðɝ floʊz, əz faɪn əz ʃi kəd wiv. səmtaɪmz əɹ dɛləkət pɹoʊbɪŋ dɪd nʌθɪŋ, bʌɾ əɹ fɝs tʌtʃ ət ðə θɪŋ ðət lʊk laɪk ə blæksmɪθs pʌzəl meɪɾ ʌv ɡlæs lɛft əɹ dɪzi ən əneɪbəl tə slip fəɹ hæf ðə naɪt, ən ə θɹɛɾ ə faɪɝ tʌtʃɪŋ wʌt lʊk laɪk ə hɛlmət meɪɾ ə flʌfi mɛɾəl fɛðɝz ɡeɪv ɛvɹiwʌn wɪðɪn twɛnti peɪsɪz ə blaɪndɪŋ hɛdeɪk. ɪksɛp fəɹ hɝsɛlf. ən ðən ðəɹ wɑz ðə kɹɪmzən ɹɑd ðət fɛl hɑt; hɑt, ɪn ə weɪ.

Careful as Elayne was, though, her attempts to study them did not go so well. Spirit was the safest of the Five Powers to use in this - unless, of course, Spirit happened to be what triggered the thing! - yet at times she had to use other flows, as fine as she could weave. Sometimes her delicate probing did nothing, but her first touch at the thing that looked like a blacksmith's puzzle made of glass left her dizzy and unable to sleep for half the night, and a thread of Fire touching what looked like a helmet made of fluffy metal feathers gave everyone within twenty paces a blinding headache. Except for herself. And then there was the crimson rod that felt hot; hot, in a way.

sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə hɝ bɛɾ əɾ ən ɪn kɔl ðə waɪl bɔɹ, ʃi ɪɡzæmən ðə smuð ɹɑd baɪ ðə laɪɾ ə tu pɑlɪʃt bɹæs læmps. ɹɪst-θɪk ən ə fʊt lɔŋ, ɪt lʊk laɪk stoʊn, bʌt fɛl fɝm ɹæðɝ ðən hɑɹd. ʃi wɑz əloʊn; sɪns ðə hɛlmət, ʃi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə də hɝ stʌɾiɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ði ʌðɝz. ðə hiɾ ə ðə ɹɑd meɪɾ əɹ θɪŋk ə faɪɝ. . . .

Sitting on the edge of her bed at an inn called The Wild Boar, she examined the smooth rod by the light of two polished brass lamps. Wrist-thick and a foot long, it looked like stone, but felt firm rather than hard. She was alone; since the helmet, she had tried to do her studying away from the others. The heat of the rod made her think of Fire. . . .

blɪŋkɪŋ, ʃi oʊpən əɹ aɪz ən sæɾ ʌp ɪn ðə bɛd. sʌnlaɪt stʃɹimd ɪn ət ðə wɪndoʊ. ʃi wɑz ɪn əɹ ʃɪft, ən nɪneɪiv, fʊli dʒɹɛst, stʊd fɹaʊnɪŋ daʊn ət hɝ. eɪvinhə ən bɝdʒɪt wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ fɹəm bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ.

Blinking, she opened her eyes and sat up in the bed. Sunlight streamed in at the window. She was in her shift, and Nynaeve, fully dressed, stood frowning down at her. Aviendha and Birgitte were watching from beside the door.

"wʌt hæpənd?" ɪleɪn dɪmændəd, ən nɪneɪiv ʃʊk əɹ hɛd ɡɹɪmli.

"What happened?" Elayne demanded, and Nynaeve shook her head grimly.

"ju doʊnt wɑnə noʊ." hɝ lɪps twɪtʃt.

"You don't want to know." Her lips twitched.

eɪvinhəz feɪs ɡeɪv əweɪ nʌθɪŋ. bɝdʒɪts maʊθ maɪɾ əv bɪn ə lɪɾəl taɪt, bʌt ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst ɪmoʊʃən ɪleɪn fɛl fɹəm əɹ wɑz ə kɑmbəneɪʃən ə ɹɪlif ən - hɪlɛɹəɾi! ðə wʊmən wɑz duɪŋ əɹ ʌtmoʊs nɑt tə ɹoʊl ɑn ðə flɔɹ læfɪŋ!

Aviendha's face gave away nothing. Birgitte's mouth might have been a little tight, but the strongest emotion Elayne felt from her was a combination of relief and - hilarity! The woman was doing her utmost not to roll on the floor laughing!

ðə wɝst ʌv ɪt wɑz, noʊ wʌn wəd tɛl wʌt hæd hæpənd. wʌt ʃi hæd sɛd, əɹ dʌn; ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz ðæt, baɪ ðə kwɪkli hɪɾən ɡɹɪnz ʃi sɔ, fɹəm kɪnswɪmən ən wɪndfɪndɝz əz wɛl əz sɪstɝz. bʌt noʊ wʌn wəd tɛl hɝ! æftɝ ðæt, ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə liv stʌɾiɪŋ ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil tə sʌmwɛɹ mɔɹ kʌmftəɹbəl ðən ə ɪn. sʌmwɛɹ dɛfənətli mɔɹ pɹaɪvət!

The worst of it was, no one would tell what had happened. What she had said, or done; she was sure it was that, by the quickly hidden grins she saw, from Kinswomen and Windfinders as well as sisters. But no one would tell her! After that, she decided to leave studying the ter'angreal to somewhere more comfortable than a inn. Somewhere definitely more private!

naɪn deɪz æftɝ ðɛɹ flaɪt fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ, skæɾɝd klaʊdz əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə skaɪ ən ə spɹɪŋklɪŋ ə fæt ɹeɪndʒɹɑps splæʃt dʌst ɪn ðə ɹoʊd. ən ɪntɝmɪɾənt dʒɹɪzəl fɛl ðə nɛks deɪ, ən ðə deɪ æftɝ, ə dɛljudʒ kɛpt əm hʌɾəld ɪn ðə haʊsəz ən steɪbəlz ə fɔɹəl mɑɹkət. ðət naɪt, ðə ɹeɪn tɝn tə slit, ən baɪ mɔɹnɪŋ, θɪk flɝiz ə snoʊ dʒɹɪftəd fɹəm ə klaʊd-dɑɹk skaɪ. mɔɹ ðən hæfweɪ tə keɪɛmlɪn, ɪleɪn bɪɡæn tə wʌndɝ wɛðɝ ðeɪ kəd meɪk ɪɾ ɪn tu wiks fɹəm wɛɹ ðeɪ stʊd.

Nine days after their flight from Ebou Dar, scattered clouds appeared in the sky and a sprinkling of fat raindrops splashed dust in the road. An intermittent drizzle fell the next day, and the day after, a deluge kept them huddled in the houses and stables of Forel Market. That night, the rain turned to sleet, and by morning, thick flurries of snow drifted from a cloud-dark sky. More than halfway to Caemlyn, Elayne began to wonder whether they could make it in two weeks from where they stood.

wɪð ðə snoʊ, kloʊðz bɪkeɪm ə wɝi. ɪleɪn bleɪm hɝsɛlf fəɹ nɑt θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðə fæk ðəɾ ɛvɹiwʌn maɪt nid wɔɹm kloʊðz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðɛɹ dɛstəneɪʃən. nɪneɪiv bleɪm hɝsɛlf fəɹ nɑt θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɪt. mɛɝɪlɪl θɔt ʃi wɑz ət fɔlt, ən ɹin θɔt ʃi wɑz. ðeɪ æktʃəli  stʊɾ ɪn ðə meɪn stʃɹiɾ ə fɔɹəl mɑɹkət ðət mɔɹnɪŋ wɪð snoʊ-fleɪks dʒɹɪftɪŋ daʊn ɑn ðɛɹ hɛdz, ɑɹɡjuɪŋ oʊvɝ u kəd kleɪm ðə bleɪm. ɪleɪn wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɪtʃ ə ðɛm sɔ ði əbsɝɾəti fɝst, hu wɑz ðə fɝs tə læf, bʌɾ ɔl wɝ læfɪŋ əz ðeɪ sɛɾəld ɝaʊn ə teɪbəl ɪn ðə waɪt swɑn tə dɪsaɪd wʌt tə du. ə səluʃən tɝn aʊt tə bi noʊ læfɪŋ mæɾɝ. pɹəvaɪɾɪŋ wʌn wɔɹm koʊɾ əɹ kloʊk fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn wəd teɪk ə lɑɹdʒ baɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ kɔɪn, ɪf soʊ mɛni kəd bi faʊnd. dʒuəlɹi kəd bi soʊld əɹ tʃɹeɪɾɪd, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt noʊ wʌn ɪn fɔɹəl mɑɹkət sim tə bi ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn nɛkləsɪz əɹ bɹeɪslɪts, haʊɛvɝ faɪn.

With the snow, clothes became a worry. Elayne blamed herself for not thinking of the fact that everyone might need warm clothes before they reached their destination. Nynaeve blamed herself for not thinking of it. Merilille thought she was at fault, and Reanne thought she was. They actually stood in the main street of Forel Market that morning with snow-flakes drifting down on their heads, arguing over who could claim the blame. Elayne was not sure which of them saw the absurdity first, who was the first to laugh, but all were laughing as they settled around a table in The White Swan to decide what to do. A solution turned out to be no laughing matter. Providing one warm coat or cloak for everyone would take a large bite out of their coin, if so many could be found. Jewelry could be sold or traded, of course, but no one in Forel Market seemed to be interested in necklaces or bracelets, however fine.

eɪvinhə sɑlv ðət dɪfəkəlti baɪ pɹədusɪŋ ə smɔl sæk ðət bʌlʒd wɪð klɪɹ, pɝfək dʒɛmstoʊnz, səm kwaɪt lɑɹdʒ. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ðə seɪm foʊk u hæd sɛd wɪð bɛɹ pəlaɪtnəs ðət ðeɪ hæd noʊ jus fəɹ bi-ɡɛm nɛkləsɪz wɛn ɹaʊnd-aɪɾ ət ði ənsɛt stoʊnz ɹoʊlɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪn eɪvinhəz pɑm. ɹin sɛd ðeɪ sɔ wʌn əz fɹɪpɝi, ði ʌðɝ əz wɛlθ, bʌt wʌtɛvɝ ðɛɹ ɹizənz, ɪn ɹɪtɝn fəɹ tu ɹubiz ə mɑɾɝət saɪz, wʌn lɑɹdʒ munstoʊn, ən ə smɔl faɪɝdʒɹɑp, ðə pipəl ə fɔɹəl mɑɹkət wɝ mɔɹ ðən wɪlɪŋ tə pɹəvaɪɾ əz mɛni θɪk wʊlənz əz ðɛɹ vɪzəɾɝz dɪzaɪɝd, səm ə ðɛm hɑɹdli wɔɹn.

Aviendha solved that difficulty by producing a small sack that bulged with clear, perfect gemstones, some quite large. Strangely, the same folk who had said with bare politeness that they had no use for be-gemmed necklaces went round-eyed at the unset stones rolling about in Aviendha's palm. Reanne said they saw one as frippery, the other as wealth, but whatever their reasons, in return for two rubies of moderate size, one large moonstone, and a small firedrop, the people of Forel Market were more than willing to provide as many thick woolens as their visitors desired, some of them hardly worn.

"vɛɹi dʒɛnɝəs ə ðɛm," nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd saʊɝli əz pipəl bɪɡæn ɹuɾɪŋ kloʊðz aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ tʃɛsts ən æɾɪks. ə stɛɾi stʃɹim mɑɹtʃt ɪndə ði ɪn wɪð ðɛɹ ɑɹmz fʊl. "ðoʊz stoʊnz kəd baɪ ðə hoʊl vɪlədʒ!" eɪvinhə ʃɹʌɡd slaɪtli; ʃi wʊɾə sɝɛndɝɾ ə hændfʊl ə ðə dʒɛmz ɪf ɹin hæd nɑɾ ɪntɝvind.

"Very generous of them," Nynaeve muttered sourly as people began rooting clothes out of their chests and attics. A steady stream marched into the inn with their arms full. "Those stones could buy the whole village!" Aviendha shrugged slightly; she would have surrendered a handful of the gems if Reanne had not intervened.

mɛɝɪlɪl ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "wi hæv wʌt ðeɪ wɑnt, bʌt ðeɪv wʌt wi nid. aɪm əfɹeɪd ðət minz ðeɪ sɛt ðə pɹaɪs." wɪtʃ wɑz ɪntaɪɝli tu mʌtʃ laɪk ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən wɪð ðə si foʊk. nɪneɪiv lʊk pɑzəɾɪvli ɪl.

Merilille shook her head. "We have what they want, but they have what we need. I'm afraid that means they set the price." Which was entirely too much like the situation with the Sea Folk. Nynaeve looked positively ill.

wən ðeɪ wɝ əloʊn, ɪn ə hɔlweɪ ʌv ði ɪn, ɪleɪn æskt eɪvinhə wɛɹ ʃi hæd ɡɑɾən sətʃ ə fɔɹtʃən ɪn dʒuəlz, ən wʌn ʃi simd iɡɝ tə bi ɹɪɾ ʌv. ʃi ɪkspɛktəɾ əɹ nɪɹ-sɪstɝ tə seɪ ðeɪ wɝ əɹ teɪkɪŋz fɹəm ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ, əɹ pɝhæps kɛɹhin.

When they were alone, in a hallway of the inn, Elayne asked Aviendha where she had gotten such a fortune in jewels, and one she seemed eager to be rid of. She expected her near-sister to say they were her takings from the Stone of Tear, or perhaps Cairhien.

"ɹæn ælθɹ tʃɹɪk mi," eɪvinhə mʌɾɝd sʌlənli. "aɪ tʃɹaɪd tə baɪ maɪ toʊ fɹəm hɪm. aɪ noʊ ðəɾ ɪz ðə list ɑnɝəbəl weɪ," ʃi pɹətɛstəd, "bʌɾ aɪ kəd si noʊ ʌðɝ. ən i stʊd mi ɑn maɪ hɛd! waɪ ɪz ɪt, wən jə ɹizən θɪŋz aʊt lɑdʒɪkli, ə mæn ɔlweɪz dʌz sʌmθɪŋ kəmplitli ɪlɑdʒɪkəl ən ɡeɪnz ði ʌpɝ hænd?"

"Rand al'Thor tricked me," Aviendha muttered sullenly. "I tried to buy my toh from him. I know that is the least honorable way," she protested, "but I could see no other. And he stood me on my head! Why is it, when you reason things out logically, a man always does something completely illogical and gains the upper hand?"

"ðɛɹ pɹɪɾi hɛdz ɑɹ soʊ fʌzi, ə wʊmən kæn ɪkspɛk tə fɑloʊ haʊ ðeɪ skɪɾɝ," ɪleɪn toʊl hɝ. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɪnkwaɪɹ wʌt toʊ eɪvinhə hæd tʃɹaɪd tə baɪ, əɹ haʊ ði ətɛmp hæɾ ɛndəd wɪð əɹ nɪɹ-sɪstɝ pəzɛsɪŋ ə sæk fʊl ə ɹɪtʃ dʒɛmz. tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ɹænd wɑz hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf wɪθaʊt wɛɹ ðət maɪt lɛd.

"Their pretty heads are so fuzzy, a woman can't expect to follow how they skitter," Elayne told her. She did not inquire what toh Aviendha had tried to buy, or how the attempt had ended with her near-sister possessing a sack full of rich gems. Talking about Rand was hard enough without where that might lead.

snoʊ bɹɔt mɔɹ ðən ə nid fəɹ wɔɹm kloʊðɪŋ. ət mɪddeɪ, wɪð ðə snoʊ flɝiz fɔlɪŋ θɪkɝ baɪ ðə mɪnət, ɹɪneɪl stʃɹoʊd daʊn ðə stɛɹz ɪndə ðə kɑmən ɹum, pɹoʊkleɪm ðəɾ əɹ pɑɹɾ ə ðə bɑɹɡən hæd bɪn mɛt, ən dɪmændəd nɑɾ oʊnli ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz, bʌt mɛɝɪlɪl. ðə ɡɹeɪ sɪstɝ stɛɹɾ ɪn kɑnstɝneɪʃən, ən soʊ dɪɾ ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni ʌðɝz. ðə bɛntʃɪz wɝ fɪld wɪð kɪnswɪmən teɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ tɝn ət ðə mɪddeɪ mil, ən sɝvɪŋ mɛn ən wɪmən ɹæn tə sɝv ðɪs θɝd lɑɾ ə milz. ɹɪneɪl dɪd nɑt kip əɹ vɔɪs daʊn, ən ɛvɹi hɛɾ ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum swɪvəl təwɔɹd hɝ.

Snow brought more than a need for warm clothing. At midday, with the snow flurries falling thicker by the minute, Renaile strode down the stairs into the common room, proclaimed that her part of the bargain had been met, and demanded not only the Bowl of the Winds, but Merilille. The Gray sister stared in consternation, and so did a great many others. The benches were filled with Kinswomen taking their turn at the midday meal, and serving men and women ran to serve this third lot of meals. Renaile did not keep her voice down, and every head in the common room swiveled toward her.

"ju kən bɪɡɪn jəɹ titʃɪŋ, naʊ," ɹɪneɪl toʊl ðə waɪd-aɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ. "ʌp ðə læɾɝ wɪð jə tə maɪ kɔɹɾɝz." mɛɝɪlɪl stɑɹɾəd tə pɹoʊtɛst, bʌt feɪs sʌɾənli koʊld, ðə wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps plæntəd fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps. "wɛn aɪ ɡɪv ə kəmænd, mɛɝɪlɪl ʃiændɪvɪn," ʃi sɛɾ aɪsɪli, "aɪ ɪkspɛkt ɛvɹi hæn ɑn dɛk tə dʒʌmp. naʊ dʒʌmp!"

"You can begin your teaching, now," Renaile told the wide-eyed Aes Sedai. "Up the ladder with you to my quarters." Merilille started to protest, but face suddenly cold, the Windfinder to the Mistress of the Ships planted fists on her hips. "When I give a command, Merilille Ceandevin," she said icily, "I expect every hand on deck to jump. Now jump!"

mɛɝɪlɪl dɪd nɑt pɹɪsaɪsli dʒʌmp, bʌt ʃi dɪd ɡæðɝ hɝsɛlf ən ɡoʊ, wɪð ɹɪneɪl pɹæktəkli tʃɪviɪŋ əɹ ʌp ðə stɛɹz fɹəm bɪhaɪnd. ɡɪvən əɹ pɹɑməs, ʃi hæd noʊ ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs. ɹinz feɪs wɑz əɡæst. æləz ən staʊt sumeɪkoʊ, stɪl wɛɹɪŋ əɹ ɹɛd bɛlt, wɑtʃt θɔtfəli.

Merilille did not precisely jump, but she did gather herself and go, with Renaile practically chivvying her up the stairs from behind. Given her promise, she had no other choice. Reanne's face was aghast. Alise and stout Sumeko, still wearing her red belt, watched thoughtfully.

ɪn ðə deɪz ðət fɑloʊd, wɛðɝ leɪbɝɪŋ əlɔŋ ə snoʊ-kʌvɝd ɹoʊɾ ɑn ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, wɔkɪŋ ðə stʃɹits ʌv ə vɪlədʒ, əɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn ɹum fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn əɾ ə fɑɹm, ɹɪneɪl kɛp mɛɝɪlɪl əɾ əɹ hilz ɪksɛpt wən ʃi toʊld əɹ ɔf tə fɑloʊ ənʌðɝ wɪndfɪndɝ. ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ sɝaʊndəd ðə ɡɹeɪ sɪstɝ ən əɹ ɛskɔɹɾ ɔlmoʊs kɑnstənli, ən mɛɝɪlɪl dɛmənstʃɹeɪɾəd wivz ənsizɪŋli. ðə peɪl kɛɹhinɪn wɑz mɑɹkədli ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ɛni ʌv ðə dɑɹk si foʊk wɪmən, bʌɾ ət fɝs mɛɝɪlɪl mænədʒ tə stæn tɔlɝ baɪ ðə ʃɪɹ fɔɹs ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪɡnəɾi. sun, ðoʊ, ʃi bɪɡæn tə wɛɹ ə pɝmənənli stɑɹɾəld ɪkspɹɛʃən. ɪleɪn lɝn ðət wən ðeɪ ɔl hæd bɛdz tə slip ɪn, wɪtʃ ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz, mɛɝɪlɪl wɑz ʃɛɹɪŋ wɪð pɔl, hɝ meɪd, ən ðə tu əpɹɛntəs wɪndfɪndɝz, tɑlɑn ən mɛtʃɹə. wʌt ðət sɛɾ ə mɛɝɪlɪlz stæɾəs, ɪleɪn wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ. klɪɹli, ðə wɪndfɪndɝz dɪd nɑt pʊɾ əɹ ɑn ə lɛvəl wɪð ði əpɹɛntəsɪz. ðeɪ dʒʌst ɪkspɛktəɾ əɹ tə də əz ʃi wɑz toʊld, wən ʃi wɑz toʊld, wɪð noʊ dɪleɪz əɹ ɛkwɪvəkeɪʃənz.

In the days that followed, whether laboring along a snow-covered road on their horses, walking the streets of a village, or trying to find room for everyone at a farm, Renaile kept Merilille at her heels except when she told her off to follow another Windfinder. The glow of saidar surrounded the Gray sister and her escort almost constantly, and Merilille demonstrated weaves unceasingly. The pale Cairhienin was markedly shorter than any of the dark Sea Folk women, but at first Merilille managed to stand taller by the sheer force of Aes Sedai dignity. Soon, though, she began to wear a permanently startled expression. Elayne learned that when they all had beds to sleep in, which they did not always, Merilille was sharing with Pol, her maid, and the two apprentice Windfinders, Talaan and Metarra. What that said of Merilille's status, Elayne was not sure. Clearly, the Windfinders did not put her on a level with the apprentices. They just expected her to do as she was told, when she was told, with no delays or equivocations.

ɹin ɹɪmeɪn əpɔld ət ðə tɝn ʌv ɪvɛns, bʌɾ æləz ən sumeɪkoʊ wɝ nɑt ði oʊnli wʌnz əmʌŋ ðə kɪn tə wɑtʃ kloʊsli, nɑt ði oʊnli wʌnz tə nɑd θɔtfəli. ən sʌɾənli, ənʌðɝ pɹɑbləm keɪm tə ɪleɪnz noʊɾəs. ðə kɪnswɪmən sɔ ɪspæn meɪd mɔɹ ən mɔɹ mæliəbəl ɪn əɹ kæptɪvəɾi, bʌt ʃi wɑz ðə pɹɪznɝ ʌv ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə si foʊk wɝ nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən mɛɝɪlɪl nɑɾ ə pɹɪznɝ, jɛt ʃi wɑz stɑɹɾɪŋ tə dʒʌmp wən ɹɪneɪl ɪʃuɾ ə kəmænd, ɔɹ, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, wən dɔɹəl, əɹ kɛɹ, əɹ kɛɹz blʌd-sɪstɝ tɛbɹl dɪd. itʃ ə ðoʊz wɑz wɪndfɪndɝ tə ə klæn weɪvməstʃɹəs, ən nʌn ə ði ʌðɝz meɪɾ əɹ hɑp wɪð sətʃ əlækɹəɾi, bʌt ðət wɑz ɪnʌf. mɔɹ ən mɔɹ ə ðə kɪn slɪd fɹəm hɔɹəfaɪd ɡeɪpɪŋ tə θɔtfəl ɑbzɝveɪʃən. pɝhæps ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ nɑɾ ə dɪfɹən flɛʃ æftɝ ɔl. ɪf ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ dʒʌst wɪmən laɪk ðɛmsɛlvz, waɪ ʃəd ðeɪ sʌbʒɪkt ðɛmsɛlvz wʌns mɔɹ tə ðə ɹɪɡɝz ə ðə taʊɝ, tə ɛɛs sədaɪ əθɔɹəɾi ən ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪsəplən? hæd ðeɪ nɑt sɝvaɪvd vɛɹi wɛl ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn, səm fəɹ mɔɹ jɪɹz ðən ɛni ʌv ði oʊldɝ sɪstɝz wɝ kwaɪt ɹɛɾi tə bɪliv? ɪleɪn kəd pɹæktəkli si ði aɪdiə fɔɹmɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ hɛdz.

Reanne remained appalled at the turn of events, but Alise and Sumeko were not the only ones among the Kin to watch closely, not the only ones to nod thoughtfully. And suddenly, another problem came to Elayne's notice. The Kinswomen saw Ispan made more and more malleable in her captivity, but she was the prisoner of other Aes Sedai. The Sea Folk were not Aes Sedai, and Merilille not a prisoner, yet she was starting to jump when Renaile issued a command, or, for that matter, when Dorile, or Caire, or Caire's blood-sister Tebreille did. Each of those was Windfinder to a clan Wavemistress, and none of the others made her hop with such alacrity, but that was enough. More and more of the Kin slid from horrified gaping to thoughtful observation. Perhaps Aes Sedai were not a different flesh after all. If Aes Sedai were just women like themselves, why should they subject themselves once more to the rigors of the Tower, to Aes Sedai authority and Aes Sedai discipline? Had they not survived very well on their own, some for more years than any of the older sisters were quite ready to believe? Elayne could practically see the idea forming in their heads.

wən ʃi mɛnʃən ɪt tə nɪneɪiv, ðoʊ, nɪneɪiv dʒʌs mʌɾɝd, "əbaʊt taɪm səm ə ðə sɪstɝz lɝnd wʌɾ ɪts laɪk tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə titʃ ə wʊmən u θɪŋks ʃi noʊz mɔɹ ðən əɹ titʃɝ. ðoʊz u hæv ə tʃæns əɾ ə ʃɔl wɪl stɪl wɑn ɪt, ən fəɹ ðə ɹɛst, aɪ doʊn si waɪ ðeɪ ʃʊdnt ɡɹoʊ səm bækboʊn." ɪleɪn ɹɪfɹeɪn fɹəm mɛnʃənɪŋ nɪneɪivz kəmpleɪns əbaʊt sumeɪkoʊ, hu hæd sɝɾənli ɡɹoʊn bækboʊn; sumeɪkoʊ hæd kɹɪɾəsaɪzd sɛvɹəl ə nɪneɪivz hilɪŋ wivz əz "klʌmzi," ən ɪleɪn hæd θɔt nɪneɪiv wɑz gɑnə hæv æpəplɛksi ɑn ðə spɑt. "ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðɛɹz noʊ nid tə tɛl ɛɡwin əbaʊt ðɪs. ɪf ʃiz ðɛɹ. ɛni ʌv ɪt. ʃiz ɪnʌf ɑn əɹ pleɪt." wɪθaʊt daʊt, "ɛni ʌv ɪt" ɹəfɝd tə mɛɝɪlɪl ən ðə wɪndfɪndɝz.

When she mentioned it to Nynaeve, though, Nynaeve just muttered, "About time some of the sisters learned what it's like trying to teach a woman who thinks she knows more than her teacher. Those who have a chance at a shawl will still want it, and for the rest, I don't see why they shouldn't grow some backbone." Elayne refrained from mentioning Nynaeve's complaints about Sumeko, who had certainly grown backbone; Sumeko had criticized several of Nynaeve's Healing weaves as "clumsy," and Elayne had thought Nynaeve was going to have apoplexy on the spot. "In any case, there's no need to tell Egwene about this. If she's there. Any of it. She has enough on her plate." Without doubt, "any of it" referred to Merilille and the Windfinders.

ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ðɛɹ ʃɪfs, siɾəd ɑn ðɛɹ bɛɾ ɑn ðə sɛkən flɔɹ ə ðə nu plaʊ, wɪð ðə twɪstəd-ɹɪŋ dʒɹim tɛɹæŋɡɹil hæŋɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛɹ nɛks, ɪleɪnz ɑn ə sɪmpəl lɛðɝ kɔɹd, nɪneɪivz əlɔŋsaɪd lænz hɛvi sɪɡnɪt ɹɪŋ ɑn ə nɛɹoʊ ɡoʊldən tʃeɪn. eɪvinhə ən bɝdʒɪt, stɪl fʊli dʒɹɛst, sæɾ ɑn tu ʌv ðɛɹ kloʊðɪŋ tʃɛsts. stændɪŋ ɡɑɹd, ðeɪ kɔld ɪt, əntɪl ʃi ən nɪneɪiv ɹɪtɝn fɹəm ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz. boʊθ wɔɹ ðɛɹ kloʊks əntɪl ðeɪ kəd klaɪm ʌndɝ ðə blæŋkəts. ðə nu plaʊ wɑz dɛfənətli nɑt nu; kɹæks spaɪɾɝd əkɹɔs ðə plæstɝd wɔlz, ən ənfɔɹtʃənət dʒɹæfs kɹɛpt ɪn ɛvɹiwɛɹ.

They were in their shifts, seated on their bed on the second floor of The New Plow, with the twisted-ring dream ter'angreal hanging about their necks, Elayne's on a simple leather cord, Nynaeve's alongside Lan's heavy signet ring on a narrow golden chain. Aviendha and Birgitte, still fully dressed, sat on two of their clothing chests. Standing guard, they called it, until she and Nynaeve returned from the World of Dreams. Both wore their cloaks until they could climb under the blankets. The New Plow was definitely not new; cracks spidered across the plastered walls, and unfortunate drafts crept in everywhere.

ðə ɹum ɪtsɛlf wɑz smɔl, ən ðə tʃɛsts ən stæk bʌndəlz lɛft ɹum fəɹ lɪɾəl bɪɑn ðə bɛɾ ən wɑʃstænd. ɪleɪn nu ʃi hæd tə pɹizɛn hɝsɛlf pɹɑpɝli ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, bʌt səmtaɪmz ʃi fɛlt ɡɪlti, wɪð əɹ bɪlɔŋɪŋz ɑn pæk ænəməlz wən moʊst ʌðɝz hæd tə meɪk də wɪð wʌt ðeɪ kəd kæɹi ɑn ðɛɹ bæks. nɪneɪiv sɝɾənli nɛvɝ ʃoʊɾ ɛni ɹɪɡɹɛts oʊvɝ əɹ tʃɛsts. ðeɪ hæd bɪn sɪkstin deɪz ɑn ðə ɹoʊd, ðə fʊl mun aʊtsaɪd ðə nɛɹoʊ wɪndoʊ ʃoʊn ɑn ə waɪt blæŋkəɾ ə snoʊ ðət wəd meɪk tʃɹævlɪŋ təmɑɹoʊ sloʊ ivən ɪf ðə skaɪ ɹɪmeɪn klɪɹ, ən ɪleɪn θɔɾ ənʌðɝ wik tə keɪɛmlɪn wɑz ən ɑptəmɪstɪk ɛstəmət.

The room itself was small, and the chests and stacked bundles left room for little beyond the bed and washstand. Elayne knew she had to present herself properly in Caemlyn, but sometimes she felt guilty, with her belongings on pack animals when most others had to make do with what they could carry on their backs. Nynaeve certainly never showed any regrets over her chests. They had been sixteen days on the road, the full moon outside the narrow window shone on a white blanket of snow that would make traveling tomorrow slow even if the sky remained clear, and Elayne thought another week to Caemlyn was an optimistic estimate.

"aɪ hæv ɪnʌf sɛns nɑt tə ɹimaɪn hɝ," ʃi toʊl nɪneɪiv. "aɪ doʊnt wɑn maɪ noʊz snæpt ɔf əɡɛn."

"I have enough sense not to remind her," she told Nynaeve. "I don't want my nose snapped off again."

ðət wɑz ə maɪld weɪ ʌv pʊɾɪŋ ɪt. ðeɪ hæd nɑt bɪn ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd sɪns ɪnfɔɹmɪŋ ɛɡwin, ðə naɪɾ æftɝ livɪŋ ði ɪsteɪt, ðət ðə boʊl hæd bɪn juzd. ɹɪlʌktənli, ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ hæd toʊld əɹ ə ðə bɑɹɡən ðeɪ hæd bɪn fɔɹst ɪndə wɪð ðə si foʊk, ən faʊn ðɛmsɛlvz feɪsɪŋ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɪð ðə stʃɹaɪp stoʊl ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ɪleɪn nu ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi ən ɹaɪt - ə kwinz kloʊsəs fɹɛn əmʌŋ əɹ sʌbʒɪkts nu ʃi wɑz ðə kwin əz wɛl əz ə fɹɛnd, hæd tə noʊ - bʌt ʃi hæd nɑɾ ɛndʒɔɪɾ əɹ fɹɛn tɛlɪŋ əm ɪn ə hiɾəd vɔɪs ðət ðeɪ hæd bɪheɪv laɪk wɪtləs lubiz u maɪɾ əv bɹɔt ɹuən daʊn ɑn ɔl ðɛɹ hɛdz. ɪspɛʃli wən ʃi hɝsɛlf əɡɹid. ʃi hæd nɑt laɪk hɪɹɪŋ ðət ði oʊnli ɹizən ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt sɛɾ əm boʊθ ə pɛnəns ðət wəd kɝl ðɛɹ hɛɹ wɑz ðət ʃi kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə hæv əm weɪs ðə taɪm. nɛsəsɛɹi ən ɹaɪt, ðoʊ; wən ʃi sæɾ ɑn ðə laɪən θɹoʊn, ʃi wəd stɪl bi ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən sʌbʒɪkt tə ðə lɔz ən ɹulz ən kʌstəmz ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ. nɑt fəɹ ændɝ - ʃi wəd nɑt ɡɪv əɹ læn tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ - bʌt fəɹ hɝsɛlf. soʊ, ənplɛzən əz ɪt hæd bɪn, ʃi æksɛptɪɾ əɹ kæstəɡeɪʃən kɑmli. nɪneɪiv hæd ɹɪθd ən stæmɝd wɪð ɪmbɛɹəsmənt, pɹətɛstəɾ ən ɔl bʌt paʊɾɪd, ðən əpɑlədʒaɪz soʊ pɹəfjusli ðəɾ ɪleɪn hɑɹdli bɪlivd ɪt wɑz ðə seɪm wʊmən ʃi nu. kwaɪt ɹaɪtli, ɛɡwin hæd ɹɪmeɪn ði æmɪɝlɪn, kul ɪn əɹ dɪsplɛʒɝ ivən waɪl ɡɪvɪŋ pɑɹɾən fəɹ ðɛɹ mɪsteɪks. ət bɛst, tənaɪt kəd nɑt bi plɛzən əɹ kʌmftəɹbəl ɪf ʃi wɑz ðɛɹ.

That was a mild way of putting it. They had not been in Tel'aran'rhiod since informing Egwene, the night after leaving the estate, that the Bowl had been used. Reluctantly, they also had told her of the bargain they had been forced into with the Sea Folk, and found themselves facing the Amyrlin Seat with the striped stole on her shoulders. Elayne knew it was necessary and right - a Queen's closest friend among her subjects knew she was the Queen as well as a friend, had to know - but she had not enjoyed her friend telling them in a heated voice that they had behaved like witless loobies who might have brought ruin down on all their heads. Especially when she herself agreed. She had not liked hearing that the only reason Egwene did not set them both a penance that would curl their hair was that she could not afford to have them waste the time. Necessary and right, though; when she sat on the Lion Throne, she would still be Aes Sedai, and subject to the laws and rules and customs of Aes Sedai. Not for Andor - she would not give her land to the White Tower - but for herself. So, unpleasant as it had been, she accepted her castigation calmly. Nynaeve had writhed and stammered with embarrassment, protested and all but pouted, then apologized so profusely that Elayne hardly believed it was the same woman she knew. Quite rightly, Egwene had remained the Amyrlin, cool in her displeasure even while giving pardon for their mistakes. At best, tonight could not be pleasant or comfortable if she was there.

bʌt wən ðeɪ dʒɹim ðɛmsɛlvz ɪndə ðə sɑlədɑɹ ə tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, ɪndə ðə ɹum ɪn ðə lɪɾəl taʊɝ ðət hæd bɪn kɔl ði æmɪɝlɪnz stʌɾi, ʃi wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ, ən ði oʊnli saɪn ʃi hæd vɪzəɾəd sɪns ðɛɹ miɾɪŋ wɑz səm bɛɹli vɪzəbəl wɝdz ɹʌfli skɹætʃt ɑn ə biɾəl-ɹɪdəld wɔl pænəl, əz ɪf baɪ ən aɪɾəl hæn ðət dɪd nɑt wɑnə spɛn ði ɛfɝt tə kɑɹv dipli.

But when they dreamed themselves into the Salidar of Tel'aran'rhiod, into the room in the Little Tower that had been called the Amyrlin's Study, she was not there, and the only sign she had visited since their meeting was some barely visible words roughly scratched on a beetle-riddled wall panel, as if by an idle hand that did not want to spend the effort to carve deeply.

steɪ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn ən ə fju fiɾ əweɪ:

STAY IN CAEMLYN And a few feet away:

kip saɪlən ən bi kɛɹfəl ðoʊz hæd bɪn ɛɡwinz faɪnəl ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz tə ðɛm. ɡoʊ tə keɪɛmlɪn, ən steɪ ðəɹ əntɪl ʃi kəd pʌzəl aʊt haʊ tə kip ðə hɔl fɹəm sɔltɪŋ ɔl ə ðɛm daʊn ən neɪlɪŋ əm ɪndə ə bæɹəl. ə ɹimaɪndɝ ðeɪ hæd noʊ weɪ tə ɪɹeɪs.

KEEP SILENT AND BE CAREFUL Those had been Egwene's final instructions to them. Go to Caemlyn, and stay there until she could puzzle out how to keep the Hall from salting all of them down and nailing them into a barrel. A reminder they had no way to erase.

ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ, ɪleɪn tʃænəl tə liv əɹ oʊn mɛsədʒ, ðə nʌmbɝ fɪftin simɪŋli skɹætʃt ɑn ðə hɛvi teɪbəl ðət hæd bɪn ɛɡwinz ɹaɪɾɪŋ dɛsk. ɪnvɝɾɪŋ ðə wiv ən taɪɪŋ ɪɾ ɔf mɛn ðəɾ oʊnli sʌmwʌn u ɹæn əɹ fɪŋɡɝz əkɹɔs ðə numɝəlz wəd ɹilaɪz ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ɹɪli ðɛɹ. pɝhæps ɪt wəd nɑt teɪk fɪftin deɪz tə ɹitʃ keɪɛmlɪn, bʌt mɔɹ ðən ə wik, ʃi wɑz sɝɾən.

Embracing saidar, Elayne channeled to leave her own message, the number fifteen seemingly scratched on the heavy table that had been Egwene's writing desk. Inverting the weave and tying it off meant that only someone who ran her fingers across the numerals would realize they were not really there. Perhaps it would not take fifteen days to reach Caemlyn, but more than a week, she was certain.

nɪneɪiv stʃɹoʊd tə ðə wɪndoʊ ən pɪɹɾ aʊt boʊθ weɪz, kɛɹfəl nɑt tə pʊɾ əɹ hɛɾ aʊt θɹu ði oʊpən keɪsmənt. ɪt wɑz naɪɾ aʊt ðəɹ əz ɪn ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld, ə fʊl mun ɡlimɪŋ ɑn bɹaɪt snoʊ, ðoʊ ði ɛɹ dɪd nɑt fil koʊld. noʊ wʌn ɛls ʃəd bi ðəɹ ɪksɛp ðɛm, ən ɪf ɛniwʌn wɑz, ɪt wɑz sʌmwʌn tə əvɔɪd. "aɪ hoʊp ʃi ɪzən hævɪŋ tʃɹʌbəl wɪð əɹ plænz," ʃi mʌɾɝd.

Nynaeve strode to the window and peered out both ways, careful not to put her head out through the open casement. It was night out there as in the waking world, a full moon gleaming on bright snow, though the air did not feel cold. No one else should be there except them, and if anyone was, it was someone to avoid. "I hope she isn't having trouble with her plans," she muttered.

"ʃi toʊld əs nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðoʊz ivən tə itʃ ʌðɝ, nɪneɪiv. 'ə sikɹət spoʊkən faɪnz wɪŋz.' " ðət hæd bɪn ənʌðɝ ə liniz mɛni feɪvɹɪts.

"She told us not to mention those even to each other, Nynaeve. 'A secret spoken finds wings.' " That had been another of Lini's many favorites.

nɪneɪiv ɡɹɪməst oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ðən ɹɪtɝn tə piɹɪŋ daʊn ðə nɛɹoʊ æli. "ɪts dɪfɹən fəɹ ju. aɪ tɛndəɾ əɹ əz ə tʃaɪld, tʃeɪnʒd əɹ swɑɾəlɪŋ, smækt əɹ bɑɾəm ə taɪm əɹ tu. ən naʊ aɪ hæv tə lip wən ʃi snæps əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. ɪts hɑɹd."

Nynaeve grimaced over her shoulder, then returned to peering down the narrow alley. "It's different for you. I tended her as a child, changed her swaddling, smacked her bottom a time or two. And now I have to leap when she snaps her fingers. It's hard."

ɪleɪn kəd nɑt hɛlp hɝsɛlf. ʃi snæpt əɹ fɪŋɡɝz.

Elayne could not help herself. She snapped her fingers.

nɪneɪiv spʌn soʊ fæs ðət ʃi blɝd, hɝ feɪs pɑpeɪd wɪð hɔɹɝ. hɝ dʒɹɛs blɝd, tu, fɹəm blu ɹaɪɾɪŋ sɪlks tə ən æksɛptɪdz bændɪd waɪt tə wʌt ʃi ɹəfɝd tə əz ɡʊd, staʊt tu ɹɪvɝz wʊl, dɑɹk ən θɪk. wən ʃi ɹilaɪzd ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ, hæd nɑt bɪn lɪsnɪŋ, ʃi ɔlmoʊs feɪntɪd wɪð ɹɪlif.

Nynaeve spun so fast that she blurred, her face popeyed with horror. Her dress blurred, too, from blue riding silks to an Accepted's banded white to what she referred to as good, stout Two Rivers wool, dark and thick. When she realized Egwene was not there, had not been listening, she almost fainted with relief.

wən ðeɪ stɛp bæk tə ðɛɹ bɑɾiz ən woʊk lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə tɛl ði ʌðɝz ðeɪ kəd kʌm tə bɛd, eɪvinhə sɝɾənli θɔɾ ɪɾ ə ɡʊd dʒoʊk, ən bɝdʒɪt læft əz wɛl. nɪneɪiv hæɾ əɹ ɹivɛnʒ, ðoʊ. ðə nɛks mɔɹnɪŋ, ʃi woʊk ɪleɪn wɪð ən aɪsɪkəl. ɪleɪnz ʃɹiks woʊk ɛvɹibɑɾi ɛls ɪn ðə hoʊl vɪlədʒ.

When they stepped back to their bodies and woke long enough to tell the others they could come to bed, Aviendha certainly thought it a good joke, and Birgitte laughed as well. Nynaeve had her revenge, though. The next morning, she woke Elayne with an icicle. Elayne's shrieks woke everybody else in the whole village.

θɹi deɪz leɪɾɝ, ðə fɝst ɪksploʊʒən keɪm.

Three days later, the first explosion came.


tʃæptɝ twɛntiwʌn


CHAPTER 21

ænsɝɪŋ ðə sʌmənz


Answering the Summons

ðə ɡɹeɪt wɪntɝ tɛmpɛsts kɔl ðə sɛmɑɹoʊz kəntɪnjud tə ɹoʊl ʌp aʊɾ ə ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, hɑɹʃɝ ðən ɛni ɪn mɛmɹi. səm sɛd ðɪs jɪɹ ðə sɛmɑɹoʊz wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk ʌp fəɹ ðə mʌnθs ə dɪleɪ. laɪtnɪŋ kɹækəld əkɹɔs ðə skaɪz, ɪnʌf tə meɪk ðə dɑɹknəs pætʃi ət naɪt. wɪn læʃt ðə læn ən ɹeɪn fleɪld ɪt, tɝnɪŋ ɔl bʌt ðə hɑɹɾəst ɹoʊdz tə ɹɪvɝz ə mʌd. səmtaɪmz ðə mʌd fɹoʊz æftɝ naɪtfɔl, bʌt sʌnɹaɪz ɔlweɪz bɹɔɾ ə θɔ, ivən ʌndɝ ə ɡɹeɪ skaɪ, ən ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪkeɪm bɑɡz wʌns mɔɹ. ɹænd wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd ət haʊ mʌtʃ ɔl ðət hæmpɝɾ ɪz plænz.

The great winter tempests called the cemaros continued to roll up out of the Sea of Storms, harsher than any in memory. Some said this year the cemaros was trying to make up for the months of delay. Lightning crackled across the skies, enough to make the darkness patchy at night. Wind lashed the land and rain flailed it, turning all but the hardest roads to rivers of mud. Sometimes the mud froze after nightfall, but sunrise always brought a thaw, even under a gray sky, and the ground became bogs once more. Rand was surprised at how much all that hampered his plans.

ði æʃəmən i hæd sɛn fəɹ keɪm kwɪkli, ət mɪdmɔɹnɪŋ ðə nɛks deɪ, ɹaɪɾɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə ɡeɪtweɪ ɪndə ə dʒɹaɪvɪŋ daʊnpɔɹ ðəɾ əbskjʊɹd ðə sʌn soʊ, ɪt maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn twaɪlaɪt. θɹu ðə hoʊl ɪn ði ɛɹ, snoʊ fɛl bæk ɪn ændɝ, fæt waɪt fleɪks swɝlɪŋ əbaʊt θɪkli ən haɪɾɪŋ wʌt leɪ bɪhaɪn ðɛm. moʊst ə ðə mɛn ɪn ðə ʃɔɹt kɑləm wɝ bʌndəld ɪn hɛvi blæk kloʊks, bʌt ðə ɹeɪn sim tə slɪp ɝaʊn əm ən ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɑbviəs, jɛɾ ɛniwʌn u noʊɾəst wəd lʊk twaɪs, ɪf nɑt θɹi taɪmz. kipɪŋ dʒɹaɪ ɹikwaɪɝɾ oʊnli ə sɪmpəl wiv, soʊ lɔŋ əz jə dɪd nɑt maɪn flɔntɪŋ wʌt jə wɝ. bʌt ðɛn, ðə blæk-ænd-waɪt dɪsk wɝkt ɑn ə kɹɪmzən sɝkəl ɑn ðə bɹɛst ə ðɛɹ kloʊks dɪd ðæt. ivən hæf-hɪɾən baɪ ðə ɹeɪn, ðəɹ wɑz ə pɹaɪɾ əbaʊt ðɛm, ən ɛɹəɡəns ɪn ðə weɪ ðeɪ sæt ðɛɹ sæɾəlz. ə dɪfaɪəns. ðeɪ ɡlɔɹaɪɾ ɪn wʌt ðeɪ wɝ.

The Asha'man he had sent for came quickly, at midmorning the next day, riding out of a gateway into a driving downpour that obscured the sun so, it might as well have been twilight. Through the hole in the air, snow fell back in Andor, fat white flakes swirling about thickly and hiding what lay behind them. Most of the men in the short column were bundled in heavy black cloaks, but the rain seemed to slip around them and their horses. It was not obvious, yet anyone who noticed would look twice, if not three times. Keeping dry required only a simple weave, so long as you did not mind flaunting what you were. But then, the black-and-white disc worked on a crimson circle on the breast of their cloaks did that. Even half-hidden by the rain, there was a pride about them, an arrogance in the way they sat their saddles. A defiance. They gloried in what they were.

ðɛɹ kəmændɝ, tʃɑɹl dʒɛdwɪn, wɑz ə fju jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən ɹænd, ʌv mɪɾəlɪŋ haɪɾ ən wɛɹɪŋ ðə sɔɹɾ ən dʒɹæɡən, laɪk tɔɹvəl, ɑn ə vɛɹi wɛl kʌt, haɪ-kɑlɝd koʊɾ ə ðə bɛs blæk sɪlk. hɪz sɔɹd wɑz maʊntəd lʌʃli wɪð sɪlvɝ, hɪz sɪlvɝ-wɝk sɔɹd bɛl fæsənd wɪð ə sɪlvɝ bʌkəl ʃeɪpt ɪn ə klɛntʃt fɪst. dʒɛdwɪn tɝm hɪmsɛlf tsɹoʊvænmhl; ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, stɔɹm liɾɝ, wʌtɛvɝ ðət wɑz səpoʊz tə min. ɪt simd əpɹoʊpɹiət tə ðə wɛðɝ, ət list.

Their commander, Charl Gedwyn, was a few years older than Rand, of middling height and wearing the Sword and Dragon, like Torval, on a very well cut, high-collared coat of the best black silk. His sword was mounted lushly with silver, his silver-worked sword belt fastened with a silver buckle shaped in a clenched fist. Gedwyn termed himself Tsorovan'm'hael; in the Old Tongue, Storm Leader, whatever that was supposed to mean. It seemed appropriate to the weather, at least.

ivən soʊ, hi stʊd dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ði ɛntʃɹəns tə ɹændz ɔɹneɪt ɡɹin tɛn ən skaʊld aʊɾ ət ðə kæskeɪɾɪŋ ɹeɪn. ə ɡɑɹɾ ə maʊntəd kəmpænjənz ɪnsɝkəl ðə tɛnt, noʊ mɔɹ ðən θɝɾi peɪsɪz əweɪ, jɛt ðeɪ wɝ bɛɹli vɪzəbəl. ðeɪ maɪɾ əv bɪn stætʃuz, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə tɔɹənt.

Even so, he stood just inside the entrance to Rand's ornate green tent and scowled out at the cascading rain. A guard of mounted Companions encircled the tent, no more than thirty paces away, yet they were barely visible. They might have been statues, ignoring the torrent.

"haʊ dʒju ɪkspɛk mi tə faɪn ɛniwʌn ɪn ðɪs?" dʒɛdwɪn mʌɾɝd, ɡlænsɪŋ bæk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ət ɹænd. ə tɪk leɪt, hi æɾəd, "maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən." hɪz aɪz wɝ hɑɹɾ ən tʃælənʒɪŋ, bʌt ðeɪ ɔlweɪz wɝ, wɛðɝ lʊkɪŋ əɾ ə mæn əɹ ə fɛnspoʊst. "ɹɑtʃeɪɾ ən aɪ bɹɔɾ eɪt dɛɾəkeɪtəd ən fɔɹɾi soʊlʒɝz, ɪnʌf tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ən ɑɹmi əɹ kaʊ tɛn kɪŋz. wi maɪɾ ivən meɪk ən ɛɛs sədaɪ blɪŋk," hi sɛd ɹaɪli. "bɝn mi, ðə pɛɹ ʌv əs kəd də ə fɛɹ dʒɑb əloʊn. əɹ jə kʊd. waɪ dʒju niɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls?"

"How do you expect me to find anyone in this?" Gedwyn muttered, glancing back over his shoulder at Rand. A tick late, he added, "My Lord Dragon." His eyes were hard and challenging, but they always were, whether looking at a man or a fencepost. "Rochaid and I brought eight Dedicated and forty Soldiers, enough to destroy an army or cow ten kings. We might even make an Aes Sedai blink," he said wryly. "Burn me, the pair of us could do a fair job alone. Or you could. Why do you need anyone else?"

"aɪ ɪkspɛk jə tə oʊbeɪ, dʒɛdwɪn," ɹænd sɛd koʊldli. stɔɹm liɾɝ? ən mənəl ɹɑtʃeɪd, dʒɛdwɪnz sɛkənd, kɔl hɪmsɛlf beɪaɪjænmhl, ətæk liɾɝ. wʌt wɑz teɪm ʌp tə, kɹieɪɾɪŋ nu ɹæŋks? ði ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ wɑz ðət ðə mæn meɪd wɛpənz. ði ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ wɑz ðət ðə wɛpənz steɪd seɪn lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə bi juzd. "æn aɪ doʊn ɪkspɛk jə tə weɪs taɪm kwɛstʃənɪŋ maɪ ɔɹɾɝz."

"I expect you to obey, Gedwyn," Rand said coldly. Storm Leader? And Manel Rochaid, Gedwyn's second, called himself Baijan'm'hael, Attack Leader. What was Taim up to, creating new ranks? The important thing was that the man made weapons. The important thing was that the weapons stayed sane long enough to be used. "And I don't expect you to waste time questioning my orders."

"æz jə kəmænd, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," dʒɛdwɪn mʌɾɝd. "aɪl sɛn mɛn aʊɾ ɪmiɾiətli." wɪð ə kɝt səlut, fɪs tə tʃɛst, hi stʃɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə stɔɹm. ðə dɛljudʒ bɛn əweɪ fɹəm hɪm, ʃiɾɪŋ daʊn ðə smɔl ʃild i woʊv ɝaʊn hɪmsɛlf. ɹænd wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðə mæn səspɛktəd haʊ kloʊs i hæd kʌm tə daɪɪŋ wən i siz seɪɾɪn wɪθaʊt wɔɹnɪŋ.

"As you command, my Lord Dragon," Gedwyn muttered. "I'll send men out immediately." With a curt salute, fist to chest, he strode out into the storm. The deluge bent away from him, sheeting down the small shield he wove around himself. Rand wondered whether the man suspected how close he had come to dying when he seized saidin without warning.

jə mʌs kɪl ɪm bɪfɔɹ i kɪlz ju, luz θɝɪn ɡɪɡəld. ðeɪ wɪl, jə noʊ. dɛd mɛn kæn bɪtʃɹeɪ ɛniwʌn. ðə vɔɪs ɪn ɹændz hɛd tɝnd wʌndɝɪŋ. bʌt səmtaɪmz ðeɪ doʊn daɪ. æm aɪ dɛd? ɑɹ ju?

You must kill him before he kills you, Lews Therin giggled. They will, you know. Dead men can't betray anyone. The voice in Rand's head turned wondering. But sometimes they don't die. Am I dead? Are you?

ɹænd pʊʃt ðə wɝdz daʊn tə ə flaɪz bʌzɪŋ, dʒʌst ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə noʊɾəs. sɪns ɪz ɹiəpɪɹəns ɪnsaɪd ɹændz hɛd, luz θɝɪn sɛldəm wɛn saɪlən ənlɛs fɔɹst. ðə mæn simd mæɾɝ ðən ɛvɝ moʊst ə ðə taɪm, ən juʒəwəli æŋɡɹiɝ əz wɛl. stʃɹɔŋɝ səmtaɪmz, tu. ðət vɔɪs ɪnveɪɾəd ɹændz dʒɹimz, ən wən i sɔ hɪmsɛlf ɪn ə dʒɹim, ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɔlweɪz hɪmsɛlf əɾ ɔl ðəɾ i sɔ. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɔlweɪz luz θɝɪn, iðɝ, ðə feɪs i hæd kʌm tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz əz luz θɝɪnz. səmtaɪmz ɪt wɑz blɝd, jɛt veɪɡli fəmɪljɝ, ən luz θɝɪn sim stɑɹɾəld baɪ ɪt, tu. ðət wɑz ən ɪndəkeɪʃən haʊ fɑɹ ðə mænz mædnəs wɛnt. əɹ meɪbi hɪz oʊn.

Rand pushed the words down to a fly's buzzing, just on the edge of notice. Since his reappearance inside Rand's head, Lews Therin seldom went silent unless forced. The man seemed madder than ever most of the time, and usually angrier as well. Stronger sometimes, too. That voice invaded Rand's dreams, and when he saw himself in a dream, it was not always himself at all that he saw. It was not always Lews Therin, either, the face he had come to recognize as Lews Therin's. Sometimes it was blurred, yet vaguely familiar, and Lews Therin seemed startled by it, too. That was an indication how far the man's madness went. Or maybe his own.

nɑt jɛt, ɹænd θɔt. aɪ kæn əfɔɹd tə ɡoʊ mæd jɛt.

Not yet, Rand thought. I can't afford to go mad yet.

wɛn, ðɛn? luz θɝɪn wɪspɝd bɪfɔɹ ɹænd kəd mjuɾ ɪm əɡɛn.

When, then? Lews Therin whispered before Rand could mute him again.

wɪð ði ɝaɪvəl ə dʒɛdwɪn ən ði æʃəmən, hɪz plæn tə swip ðə sintʃæn wɛstwɝd ɡɑɾ ʌndɝ weɪ. ɡɑɾ ʌndɝ weɪ, ən kɹɛp fɔɹwɝɾ əz sloʊli əz ə mæn leɪbɝɪŋ əlɔŋ wʌn ə ðoʊz maɪɹd ɹoʊdz. hi ʃɪftəɾ ɪz oʊn kæmp ət wʌns, meɪkɪŋ noʊ ɛfɝt tə haɪɾ ɪz muvməns. ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl pɔɪn tə stʃɹeɪnɪŋ fəɹ sikɹəsi. wɝd tʃɹævəl sloʊli baɪ pɪdʒən, ən fɑɹ sloʊɝ baɪ kɝiɝ, wʌns ðə sɛmɑɹoʊz keɪm, jɛɾ i hæd noʊ daʊts i wɑz wɑtʃt, baɪ ðə waɪt taʊɝ, baɪ ðə fɔɹseɪkən, baɪ ɛniwʌn u sɔ ɡeɪn əɹ lɔs ɪn wɛɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɛn ən kəɾ əfɔɹd tə slɪp kɔɪn tə ə soʊlʒɝ. meɪbi ivən baɪ ðə sintʃæn. ɪf i kəd skaʊt ðɛm, waɪ nɑt ðeɪ hɪm? bʌt nɑɾ ivən ði æʃəmən nu waɪ hi wɑz muvɪŋ.

With the arrival of Gedwyn and the Asha'man, his plan to sweep the Seanchan westward got under way. Got under way, and crept forward as slowly as a man laboring along one of those mired roads. He shifted his own camp at once, making no effort to hide his movements. There was little point to straining for secrecy. Word traveled slowly by pigeon, and far slower by courier, once the cemaros came, yet he had no doubts he was watched, by the White Tower, by the Forsaken, by anyone who saw gain or loss in where the Dragon Reborn went and could afford to slip coin to a soldier. Maybe even by the Seanchan. If he could scout them, why not they him? But not even the Asha'man knew why he was moving.

waɪl ɹænd wɑz aɪdli wɑtʃɪŋ mɛn foʊld ɪz tɛn ɑntu ə haɪ-wil kɑɹt, wɪɹɑmɑn əpɪɹɾ ɑn wʌn ə hɪz mɛni hɔɹsəz, ə pɹænsɪŋ waɪt ɡɛldɪŋ ə ðə faɪnəs tɛɹən blʌdstɑk. ðə ɹeɪn hæd klɪɹd, ðoʊ ɡɹeɪ klaʊdz stɪl veɪl ðə nundeɪ sʌn ən ði ɛɹ fɛlt əz ɪf jə kəd skwiz wɔɾɝ aʊɾ ʌv ɪt wɪð jəɹ hænz. ðə dʒɹæɡən bænɝ ən ðə bænɝ ə laɪt hʌŋ lɪmp ən sɑɾən ɑn ðɛɹ tɔl stæfs.

While Rand was idly watching men fold his tent onto a high-wheeled cart, Weiramon appeared on one of his many horses, a prancing white gelding of the finest Tairen bloodstock. The rain had cleared, though gray clouds still veiled the noonday sun and the air felt as if you could squeeze water out of it with your hands. The Dragon Banner and the Banner of Light hung limp and sodden on their tall staffs.

tɛɹən dɪfɛndɝz hæd ɹipleɪs ðə kəmpænjənz, ən əz wɪɹɑmɑn ɹoʊd θɹu ðɛɹ maʊntəd ɹɪŋ, hi fɹaʊn ət ɹɑdʒɹəvɑɹ taɪhɛɹə, ə lin fɛloʊ, dɑɹk ivən fəɹ ə tɛɹən, wɪð ə ʃɔɹt bɪɹd tʃɹɪm tə ə vɛɹi ʃɑɹp pɔɪnt. ə vɛɹi maɪnɝ noʊbəl u hæd hæd tə ɹaɪz θɹu hɪz əbɪləɾiz, taɪhɛɹə wɑz pəŋktɪliəs ɪn ði ɪkstʃɹim. ðə fæt waɪt plumz bɑbɪŋ ɑn ɪz ɹɪm hɛlməɾ æɾəd ɛmbɛlɪʃmən tə ði ɪlæbɹət baʊ hi ɡeɪv wɪɹɑmɑn. ðə haɪ lɔɹdz fɹaʊn dipənd.

Tairen Defenders had replaced the Companions, and as Weiramon rode through their mounted ring, he frowned at Rodrivar Tihera, a lean fellow, dark even for a Tairen, with a short beard trimmed to a very sharp point. A very minor noble who had had to rise through his abilities, Tihera was punctilious in the extreme. The fat white plumes bobbing on his rimmed helmet added embellishment to the elaborate bow he gave Weiramon. The High Lord's frown deepened.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid fəɹ ðə kæptən ə ðə stoʊn tə bi pɝsənəli ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ ə ɹændz bɑɾiɡɑɹd, bʌɾ i fɹikwənli wɑz, dʒʌst əz mɑɹkəlɪn ɔfən kəmændəd ðə kəmpænjənz hɪmsɛlf. ən ɔfən bɪɾɝ ɹaɪvəlɹi hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp bɪtwin dɪfɛndɝz ən kəmpænjənz, sɛntɝɪŋ ɑn u ʃəd ɡɑɹd ɹænd. ðə tɛɹənz kleɪm ðə ɹaɪt kəz i hæd ɹuld lɔŋɡɝ ɪn tɛɹ, ði ɪliɑnɝz kəz i wɑz, æftɝ ɔl, kɪŋ ʌv ɪljən. pɝhæps wɪɹɑmɑn hæd hɝd səm ə ðə mʌɾɝz əmʌŋ ðə dɪfɛndɝz ðəɾ ɪt wɑz taɪm tiɹ hæɾ ə kɪŋ ʌv ɪts oʊn, ən u bɛɾɝ ðən ðə mæn u hæd teɪkən ðə stoʊn? wɪɹɑmɑn mɔɹ ðən əɡɹid wɪð ðə nid, bʌt nɑt wɪð ðə tʃɔɪs ə hu ʃəd wɛɹ ðə kɹaʊn. hi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn.

There was no need for the Captain of the Stone to be personally in charge of Rand's bodyguard, but he frequently was, just as Marcolin often commanded the Companions himself. An often bitter rivalry had grown up between Defenders and Companions, centering on who should guard Rand. The Tairens claimed the right because he had ruled longer in Tear, the Illianers because he was, after all, King of Illian. Perhaps Weiramon had heard some of the mutters among the Defenders that it was time Tear had a king of its own, and who better than the man who had taken the Stone? Weiramon more than agreed with the need, but not with the choice of who should wear the crown. He was not the only one.

ðə mæn smuðd ɪz fitʃɝz əz sun əz i sɔ ɹænd lʊkɪŋ, ən swʌŋ daʊn fɹəm ɪz ɡoʊld-tul sæɾəl tə ɔfɝ ə baʊ ðət meɪd taɪhɛɹəz sim sɪmpəl. aɪɝn-spaɪn əz i wɑz, hi kəd pʌf ʌp ən stʃɹʌɾ ɪn ɪz slip. ðoʊ hi dɪd ɡɹɪmɑs slaɪtli ət pʊɾɪŋ ɪz pɑlɪʃt buɾ ɪndə ðə mʌd. hi wɔɹ ə ɹeɪn keɪp, tə kip ðə mɪst ɔf ɪz faɪn kloʊðz, bʌɾ ivən ðət wɑz ɛnkɹʌstɪd wɪð ɡoʊld ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ən hæɾ ə kɑlɝ ə sæfaɪɝz. fəɹ ɔl ə ɹændz koʊɾ ə dip ɡɹin sɪlk, wɪð ɡoʊldən biz klaɪmɪŋ ðə slivz ən ləpɛlz, ɛniwʌn maɪɾ əv bɪn fɝɡɪvən fəɹ θɪŋkɪŋ ðə kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz bɪlɔŋd ɑn ði ʌðɝz hɛd, nɑt hɪz.

The man smoothed his features as soon as he saw Rand looking, and swung down from his gold-tooled saddle to offer a bow that made Tihera's seem simple. Iron-spined as he was, he could puff up and strut in his sleep. Though he did grimace slightly at putting his polished boot into the mud. He wore a rain cape, to keep the mist off his fine clothes, but even that was encrusted with gold embroidery and had a collar of sapphires. For all of Rand's coat of deep green silk, with golden bees climbing the sleeves and lapels, anyone might have been forgiven for thinking the Crown of Swords belonged on the other's head, not his.

"maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," wɪɹɑmɑn ɪntoʊnd. "aɪ kænɑɾ ɪkspɹɛs haʊ hæpi aɪm tə si jə ɡɑɹɾəd baɪ tɛɹənz, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. ʃʊɹli ðə wɝld wəd wip ɪf ɛniθɪŋ əntuɔɹd hæpənd." hi wɑz tu ɪntɛlədʒən tə kʌm aʊɾ ən kɔl ðə kəmpænjənz əntʃɹʌstwɝði. baɪ ə hɛɹ, hi wɑz.

"My Lord Dragon," Weiramon intoned. "I cannot express how happy I am to see you guarded by Tairens, my Lord Dragon. Surely the world would weep if anything untoward happened." He was too intelligent to come out and call the Companions untrustworthy. By a hair, he was.

"sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ɪt wʊd," ɹænd sɛd dʒɹaɪli. æftɝ ə ɡʊd pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt fɪnɪʃt sɛləbɹeɪɾɪŋ. "aɪ noʊ haʊ hɑɹd jud kɹaɪ, wɪɹɑmɑn."

"Sooner or later it would," Rand said dryly. After a good part of it finished celebrating. "I know how hard you'd cry, Weiramon."

ðə fɛloʊ æktʃəli  pɹind, stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ðə pɔɪn ə hɪz ɡɹeɪ-stʃɹik bɪɹd. hi hɝd wʌɾ i wɑntəd tə hɪɹ. "jɛs, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, jə kən bi əʃʊɹɾ ə maɪ kɑnstənsi. wɪtʃ ɪz waɪ aɪm kənsɝn baɪ ði ɔɹɾɝz jəɹ mæn bɹɔt mi ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ." ðət wɑz ædli; mɛni ʌv ðə noʊbəlz θɔt pɹitɛndɪŋ ði æʃəmən wɝ mɪɹli ɹændz sɝvəns wəd sʌmhaʊ meɪk əm lɛs deɪnʒɝəs. "waɪz ə jə tə sɛn əweɪ moʊst ə ðə kɛɹhinɪn. ən ði ɪliɑnɝz, ʌv kɔɹs; ðət ɡoʊz wɪθaʊt seɪɪŋ. aɪ kən ivən ʌndɝstænd waɪ jə lɪmət ɡəm ən ði ʌðɝz." wɪɹɑmɑnz buts skwɛltʃt ɪn ðə mʌɾ əz i stɛp nɪɹɝ, ən ɪz vɔɪs tʊk ɑn ə kənfaɪɾɪŋ toʊn. "aɪ də bɪliv səm ə ðɛm - aɪ wʊdn seɪ plɑɾəd əɡɛns ju, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk pɝhæps ðɛɹ lɔɪəlti hæz nɑɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn wɪθaʊt kwɛstʃən. əz maɪn ɪz. wɪθaʊt kwɛstʃən." hɪz vɔɪs ʃɪftəɾ əɡɛn, tə stʃɹɔŋ ən kɑnfəɾənt, ə mæn kənsɝn oʊnli wɪð ðə nidz ə ðə wʌn i sɝvd. ðə wʌn u ʃʊɹli wəd meɪk ɪm ðə fɝs kɪŋ ə tɛɹ. "əlaʊ mi tə bɹɪŋ ɔl ə maɪ ɑɹmmɪn, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. wɪð ðɛm, ən ðə dɪfɛndɝz, aɪ kən əʃʊɹ ði ɑnɝ ə ðə lɔɹɾ ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, ən ɪz seɪfti."

The fellow actually preened, stroking the point of his gray-streaked beard. He heard what he wanted to hear. "Yes, my Lord Dragon, you can be assured of my constancy. Which is why I'm concerned by the orders your man brought me this morning." That was Adley; many of the nobles thought pretending the Asha'man were merely Rand's servants would somehow make them less dangerous. "Wise of you to send away most of the Cairhienin. And the Illianers, of course; that goes without saying. I can even understand why you limit Gueyam and the others." Weiramon's boots squelched in the mud as he stepped nearer, and his voice took on a confiding tone. "I do believe some of them - I wouldn't say plotted against you, but I think perhaps their loyalty has not always been without question. As mine is. Without question." His voice shifted again, to strong and confident, a man concerned only with the needs of the one he served. The one who surely would make him the first King of Tear. "Allow me to bring all of my armsmen, my Lord Dragon. With them, and the Defenders, I can assure the honor of the Lord of the Morning, and his safety."

ɪn ɔl ə ði ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl kæmps əkɹɔs ðə hiθ, wæɡənz ən kɑɹts wɝ biɪŋ loʊɾəd, hɔɹsəz sæɾəld. moʊs tɛns wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi daʊn. ðə haɪ leɪɾi ɹoʊzænə wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ nɔɹθ, hɝ bænɝ hɛɾɪŋ ə kɑləm lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə ɹeɪz hævək əmʌŋ ðə bændəts ən ət list ɡɪv ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ pɔz. bʌt nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə plænt noʊʃənz ɪn əɹ hɛd, ɪspɛʃli nɑt wən hæf wɝ ɡəmz ən mɑɹəkənz ɹɪteɪnɝz mɪkst wɪð dɪfɛndɝz ə ðə stoʊn. mʌtʃ ðə seɪm əplaɪd tə spɪɝən nɛɹɛɾɪn, ɹaɪɾɪŋ istwɝɾ oʊvɝ ðə tɔl ɹɪdʒ wɪð əz mɛni kəmpænjənz ən mɛn swɔɹn tə ʌðɝz ə ðə kaʊnsəl ə naɪn əz ɪz oʊn lidʒmən, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ə hʌnʒɹəd mɔɹ teɪlɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɑn fʊt, səm ə ðə fɛloʊz u hæd sɝɛndɝɾ ɪn ðə wʊdz bɪɑn ðət ɹɪdʒ ðə deɪ bɪfɔɹ. ə sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ nʌmbɝ hæd tʃoʊzən tə fɑloʊ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, bʌt ɹænd dɪd nɑt tʃɹʌst əm ɪnʌf tə liv əm təɡɛðɝ. toʊlmɝæn wɑz dʒʌst stɑɹɾɪŋ saʊθ wɪð ðə seɪm kaɪndə blɛnd, ən ʌðɝz wəd bi mɑɹtʃɪŋ ɔf əz sun əz ðeɪ hæd ðɛɹ kɑɹts ən wæɡənz loʊɾəd. itʃ ɪn ə dɪfɹən dɝɛkʃən, ən nʌn eɪbəl tə tʃɹʌs ðə mɛn ət ðɛɹ bæks fɑɹ ɪnʌf fəɹ əm tə də mɔɹ ðən fɑloʊ ði ɔɹɾɝz ɹænd hæd ɡɪvən. bɹɪŋɪŋ pis tə ɪljən wɑz ən ɪmpɔɹɾənt tæsk, jɛɾ ɛvɹi læs lɔɹɾ ən leɪɾi ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd biɪŋ sɛn əweɪ fɹəm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, pleɪnli wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ ɪt mɛn ðeɪ hæd slɪpt ɪn ɪz tʃɹʌst. ðoʊ ə fju maɪɾ əv kənsɪɾɝd waɪ hi tʃoʊz tə kip ðoʊz i dɪɾ ʌndɝ ɪz aɪ. ɹoʊzænə hæd sɝɾənli lʊk θɔtfəl.

In all of the individual camps across the heath, wagons and carts were being loaded, horses saddled. Most tents were already down. The High Lady Rosana was riding north, her banner heading a column large enough to raise havoc among the bandits and at least give the Shaido pause. But not enough to plant notions in her head, especially not when half were Gueyam's and Maraconn's retainers mixed with Defenders of the Stone. Much the same applied to Spiron Narettin, riding eastward over the tall ridge with as many Companions and men sworn to others of the Council of Nine as his own liegemen, not to mention a hundred more tailing behind on foot, some of the fellows who had surrendered in the woods beyond that ridge the day before. A surprising number had chosen to follow the Dragon Reborn, but Rand did not trust them enough to leave them together. Tolmeran was just starting south with the same kind of blend, and others would be marching off as soon as they had their carts and wagons loaded. Each in a different direction, and none able to trust the men at their backs far enough for them to do more than follow the orders Rand had given. Bringing peace to Illian was an important task, yet every last lord and lady regretted being sent away from the Dragon Reborn, plainly wondering whether it meant they had slipped in his trust. Though a few might have considered why he chose to keep those he did under his eye. Rosana had certainly looked thoughtful.

"jɔɹ kənsɝn tʌtʃəz mi," ɹænd toʊld wɪɹɑmɑn, "bʌt haʊ mɛni bɑɾiɡɑɹdz dʌz wʌn mæn nid? aɪm nɑɾ ɔf tə stɑɹɾ ə wɔɹ." ə faɪn pɔɪnt, pɝhæps, jɛt ðɪs wɔɹ wɑz wɛl ʌndɝ weɪ. ɪt hæd bɪɡʌn ət fɑlm, ɪf nɑt bɪfɔɹ. "ɡɛt jəɹ pipəl ɹɛɾi."

"Your concern touches me," Rand told Weiramon, "but how many bodyguards does one man need? I'm not off to start a war." A fine point, perhaps, yet this war was well under way. It had begun at Falme, if not before. "Get your people ready."

haʊ mɛni hæv daɪd fəɹ maɪ pɹaɪd? luz θɝɪn moʊnd. haʊ mɛni hæv daɪd fəɹ maɪ mɪsteɪks?

How many have died for my pride? Lews Therin moaned. How many have died for my mistakes?

"meɪ aɪ ət list æsk wɛɹ wəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ?" wɪɹɑmɑnz kwɛstʃən, nɑt kwaɪɾ ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd, keɪm ɹaɪɾ ətɑp ðə vɔɪs ɪn ɹændz hɛd.

"May I at least ask where we are going?" Weiramon's question, not quite exasperated, came right atop the voice in Rand's head.

"ðə sɪɾi," ɹænd snæpt. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ mɛni hæd daɪd fəɹ ɪz mɪsteɪks, bʌt nʌn fəɹ ɪz pɹaɪd. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ə ðæt.

"The City," Rand snapped. He did not know how many had died for his mistakes, but none for his pride. He was sure of that.

wɪɹɑmɑn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, pleɪnli kənfjuzd əz tə wɛðɝ i mɛn tiɹ əɹ ɪljən, əɹ meɪbi ivən kɛɹhin, bʌt ɹænd dʒɛstʃɝɾ ɪm əweɪ wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ, ə ʃɑɹp stæbɪŋ moʊʃən ðət meɪd ðə ɡɹin-ænd-waɪt tæsəl swɪŋ. hi hæf wɪʃt i kəd stæb luz θɝɪn wɪð ɪt. "aɪ doʊn ɪntɛn tə sɪt hɪɹ ɔl deɪ, wɪɹɑmɑn! ɡoʊ tə jəɹ mɛn!"

Weiramon opened his mouth, plainly confused as to whether he meant Tear or Illian, or maybe even Cairhien, but Rand gestured him away with the Dragon Scepter, a sharp stabbing motion that made the green-and-white tassel swing. He half wished he could stab Lews Therin with it. "I don't intend to sit here all day, Weiramon! Go to your men!"

lɛs ðən ən aʊɝ leɪɾɝ i tʊk hoʊld ə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs ən pɹipɛɹd tə meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ fəɹ tʃɹævlɪŋ. hi hæd tə faɪt ðə dɪzinəs ðət ɡɹɪpt ɪm leɪtli wɛnɛvɝ i sizd əɹ lus ðə paʊɝ; hi dɪd nɑt kwaɪt sweɪ ɪn teɪdeɪʃɝz sæɾəl. wʌt wɪð ðə moʊltən fɪlθ floʊɾɪŋ ɑn seɪɾɪn, ðə fɹoʊzən slaɪm, tʌtʃɪŋ ðə sɔɹs keɪm kloʊs tə ɛmptiɪŋ ɪz stʌmək. siɪŋ dʌbəl, ivən fəɹ oʊnli ə fju moʊməns, meɪd wivɪŋ floʊz dɪfəkəlt ɪf nɑɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl, ən i cʊɾə toʊl dæʃivə əɹ flɪn əɹ wʌn ə ði ʌðɝz tə də ɪt, bʌt dʒɛdwɪn ən ɹɑtʃeɪd wɝ hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz' ɹeɪnz ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə dʌzən əɹ soʊ blæk-koʊɾəd soʊlʒɝz, ɔl u hæd nɑt bɪn aʊt tə sɝtʃ. dʒʌst stændɪŋ ðəɹ peɪʃənli. ən wɑtʃɪŋ ɹænd. ɹɑtʃeɪd, noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə hænd ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ɹænd ən meɪbi tu jɪɹz jʌŋɡɝ, wɑz ɔlsoʊ fʊl æʃəmən, ən ɪz koʊt, tu, wɑz sɪlk. ə smɔl smaɪl pleɪɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs, əz ɪf i nu θɪŋz ʌðɝz dɪd nɑɾ ən wɑz əmjuzd. wʌɾ i noʊ? əbaʊt ðə sintʃæn, ʃʊɹli, ɪf nɑt ɹændz plænz fəɹ ðɛm. wʌɾ ɛls? meɪbi nʌθɪŋ, bʌt ɹænd wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə ʃoʊ ɛni wiknəs ɪn fɹʌn ə ðət pɛɹ. ðə dɪzinəs feɪɾəd kwɪkli, ðə twɪn saɪɾ ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ sloʊli, əz ɪɾ ɔlweɪz dɪd, ðiz læs fju wiks, ən i kəmpliɾəd ðə wiv, ðɛn, wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ, dʌɡ ɪn ɪz hilz ən ɹoʊd θɹu ði oʊpənɪŋ ðəɾ ənfoʊldəd bɪfɔɹ hɪm.

Less than an hour later he took hold of the True Source and prepared to make a gateway for Traveling. He had to fight the dizziness that gripped him lately whenever he seized or loosed the Power; he did not quite sway in Tai'daishar's saddle. What with the molten filth floating on saidin, the frozen slime, touching the Source came close to emptying his stomach. Seeing double, even for only a few moments, made weaving flows difficult if not impossible, and he could have told Dashiva or Flinn or one of the others to do it, but Gedwyn and Rochaid were holding their horses' reins in front of a dozen or so black-coated Soldiers, all who had not been out to search. Just standing there patiently. And watching Rand. Rochaid, no more than a hand shorter than Rand and maybe two years younger, was also full Asha'man, and his coat, too, was silk. A small smile played on his face, as if he knew things others did not and was amused. What did he know? About the Seanchan, surely, if not Rand's plans for them. What else? Maybe nothing, but Rand was not about to show any weakness in front of that pair. The dizziness faded quickly, the twinned sight a little more slowly, as it always did, these last few weeks, and he completed the weave, then, without waiting, dug in his heels and rode through the opening that unfolded before him.

ðə sɪɾi hi hæd mɛnt wɑz ɪljən, ðoʊ ðə ɡeɪtweɪ oʊpən tə ðə nɔɹθ ə ðət sɪɾi. dɪspaɪt wɪɹɑmɑnz səpoʊz kənsɝnz, hi hɑɹdli wɛn ʌnpɹətɛktɪɾ ən əloʊn. nɪɹli θɹi θaʊzən mɛn ɹoʊd θɹu ðət tɔl skwɛɹ hoʊl ɪn ði ɛɹ, ɪndə ɹoʊlɪŋ mɛɾoʊlənd nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ðə bɹɔd mʌɾi ɹoʊd ðət lɛd daʊn tə ðə kɑzweɪ ʌv ðə nɔɹðɝn stɑɹ. ivən wən ɛvɹi lɔɹd hæɾ oʊnli bɪn əlaʊɾ ə hændfʊl ʌv ɑɹmmɪn - tə mɛn əkʌstəm tə liɾɪŋ ə θaʊzən ɪf nɑt θaʊzənz, ə hʌnʒɹəd əɹ soʊ wɝ ə hændfʊl - ðeɪ æɾəd ʌp. tɛɹənz ən kɛɹhinɪn ən ɪliɑnɝz, dɪfɛndɝz ə ðə stoʊn ʌndɝ taɪhɛɹə ən kəmpænjənz ʌndɝ mɑɹkəlɪn, æʃəmən hilɪŋ dʒɛdwɪn. ði æʃəmən u hæd kʌm wɪð hɪm, ɛniweɪ. dæʃivə ən flɪn ən ðə ɹɛs kɛp ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz kloʊs bɪhaɪn ɹænd. ɔl bʌt nɛɹɪʃmə. nɛɹɪʃmə hæd nɑt kʌm bæk jɛt. ðə mæn nu wɛɹ tə faɪn hɪm, bʌt ɹænd dɪd nɑt laɪk ɪt.

The City he had meant was Illian, though the gateway opened to the north of that city. Despite Weiramon's supposed concerns, he hardly went unprotected and alone. Nearly three thousand men rode through that tall square hole in the air, into rolling meadowland not far from the broad muddy road that led down to the Causeway of the Northern Star. Even when every lord had only been allowed a handful of armsmen - to men accustomed to leading a thousand if not thousands, a hundred or so were a handful - they added up. Tairens and Cairhienin and Illianers, Defenders of the Stone under Tihera and Companions under Marcolin, Asha'man heeling Gedwyn. The Asha'man who had come with him, anyway. Dashiva and Flinn and the rest kept their horses close behind Rand. All but Narishma. Narishma had not come back yet. The man knew where to find him, but Rand did not like it.

itʃ kaɪn kɛp tə ðɛmsɛlvz əz mʌtʃ əz pɑsəbəl. ɡəm ən mɑɹəkən ən ɑɹəkʌm ɹoʊd wɪð wɪɹɑmɑn, ɔl aɪɪŋ ɹænd mɔɹ ðən wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ, ən ɡɹɛɡɹɪn pɑnɝ wɪð θɹi ʌðɝz ə ðə kaʊnsəl ə naɪn, linɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz tə spik sɔfli ən ənizəli əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz. səmɝædʒɹɪd, wɪð ə nɑɾ ə taɪt-feɪs kɛɹhinɪn lɔɹdz bɪhaɪn hɪm, wɑtʃt ɹænd ɔlmoʊst əz kloʊsli əz ðə tɛɹənz dɪd. ɹænd hæd tʃoʊzən ðoʊz u keɪm wɪð ɪm əz kɛɹfəli əz ðoʊz i sɛn əweɪ, nɑɾ ɔlweɪz fəɹ ðə ɹizənz ʌðɝz maɪɾ əv juzd.

Each kind kept to themselves as much as possible. Gueyam and Maraconn and Aracome rode with Weiramon, all eyeing Rand more than where they were going, and Gregorin Panar with three others of the Council of Nine, leaning in their saddles to speak softly and uneasily among themselves. Semaradrid, with a knot of tight-faced Cairhienin lords behind him, watched Rand almost as closely as the Tairens did. Rand had chosen those who came with him as carefully as those he sent away, not always for the reasons others might have used.

hæd ðəɹ bɪn ɛni ɔnlʊkɝz, ɪt wʊɾə bɪn ə bɹeɪv dɪspleɪ, wɪð ɔl ðɛɹ bɹaɪt bænɝz ən pɛnəns, ən smɔl kɑn ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm səm ə ðə kɛɹhinɪnz bæks. bɹaɪɾ ən bɹeɪv ən vɛɹi deɪnʒɝəs. səm hæd plɑɾəd əɡɛns hɪm, ən i hæd lɝn ðət səmɝædʒɹɪdz haʊs mɛɹɑvɪn hæɾ oʊld əlaɪənsəz wɪð haʊs ɹieɪɾən, wɪtʃ stʊɾ ɪn oʊpən ɹɪbɛljən əɡɛnst ɪm ɪn kɛɹhin. səmɝædʒɹɪd dɪd nɑt dɪnaɪ ðə kənɛkʃən, bʌɾ i hæd nɑt mɛnʃən ɪt bɪfɔɹ ɹænd hɝd, iðɝ. ðə kaʊnsəl ə naɪn wɝ dʒʌs tu nu tə hɪm tə ɹɪsk livɪŋ əm ɔl bɪhaɪnd. ən wɪɹɑmɑn wɑz ə ful. lɛf tə hɪz oʊn dɪvaɪsəz, hi maɪt wɛl tʃɹaɪ tə ɡeɪn ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡənz feɪvɝ baɪ mɑɹtʃɪŋ ən ɑɹmi əɡɛns ðə sintʃæn, əɹ mʊɹændi, əɹ ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu hu əɹ wɛɹ. tu stupəd tə liv bɪhaɪnd, tu paʊɝfəl tə ʃʌv əsaɪd, soʊ hi ɹoʊd wɪð ɹænd ən θɔt hɪmsɛlf ɑnɝd. ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊst ə pɪɾi hi wɑz nɑt stupəɾ ɪnʌf tə də sʌmθɪŋ ðət wəd ɡɛɾ ɪm ɛksəkjuɾəd.

Had there been any onlookers, it would have been a brave display, with all their bright banners and pennants, and small con rising from some of the Cairhienin's backs. Bright and brave and very dangerous. Some had plotted against him, and he had learned that Semaradrid's House Maravin had old alliances with House Riatin, which stood in open rebellion against him in Cairhien. Semaradrid did not deny the connection, but he had not mentioned it before Rand heard, either. The Council of Nine were just too new to him to risk leaving them all behind. And Weiramon was a fool. Left to his own devices, he might well try to gain the Lord Dragon's favor by marching an army against the Seanchan, or Murandy, or the Light alone knew who or where. Too stupid to leave behind, too powerful to shove aside, so he rode with Rand and thought himself honored. It was almost a pity he was not stupid enough to do something that would get him executed.

bɪhaɪn keɪm ðə sɝvəns ən kɑɹts - noʊ wʌn ʌndɝstʊd waɪ ɹænd hæd sɛn ɔl ə ðə wæɡənz wɪð ði ʌðɝz, ən i wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə ɪkspleɪn; hu oʊn ðə nɛks pɛɹ ʌv ɪɹz ðət wəd hɪɹ? - ən ðən ðə lɔŋ stʃɹɪŋz ə spɛɹ maʊns lɛd baɪ hɔɹs hænlɝz, ən stʃɹæɡəlɪŋ faɪlz ə mɛn ɪn bæɾɝd bɹɛstpleɪts ðət dɪd nɑt kwaɪt fɪɾ əɹ lɛðɝ dʒɝkɪnz soʊn wɪð ɹʌsti stil dɪsks, kæɹiɪŋ baʊz əɹ kɹɔsboʊz əɹ spɪɹz, ən ivən ə fju paɪks; mɔɹ ə ðə fɛloʊz u hæɾ oʊbeɪd "lɔɹd bɹɛnz" sʌmənz ən dɪsaɪɾɪd əɡɛnst ɡoʊɪŋ hoʊm ənɑɹmd. ðɛɹ liɾɝ wɑz ðə ɹʌni-noʊz mæn ɹænd hæd spoʊkən tə ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə wʊdz, iɡən pædʒɹoʊs baɪ neɪm ən mʌtʃ bɹaɪɾɝ ðən i lʊkt. ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl fəɹ ə kɑmənɝ tə ɹaɪz vɛɹi fɑɹ, moʊs pleɪsəz, bʌt ɹænd hæd mɑɹk pædʒɹoʊs aʊt. ðə fɛloʊ ɡæðɝɾ ɪz mɛn ɔf tə wʌn saɪd, bʌt ðə hoʊl lɑɾ ə ðɛm mɪld əbaʊt, ɛlboʊɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ əsaɪd fəɹ ə bɛɾɝ vju saʊθwɝd.

Behind came the servants and carts - no one understood why Rand had sent all of the wagons with the others, and he was not about to explain; who owned the next pair of ears that would hear? - and then the long strings of spare mounts led by horse handlers, and straggling files of men in battered breastplates that did not quite fit or leather jerkins sewn with rusty steel discs, carrying bows or crossbows or spears, and even a few pikes; more of the fellows who had obeyed "Lord Brend's" summons and decided against going home unarmed. Their leader was the runny-nosed man Rand had spoken to on the edge of the woods, Eagan Padros by name and much brighter than he looked. It was difficult for a commoner to rise very far, most places, but Rand had marked Padros out. The fellow gathered his men off to one side, but the whole lot of them milled about, elbowing one another aside for a better view southward.

ðə kɑzweɪ ʌv ðə nɔɹðɝn stɑɹ stʃɹɛtʃt æɹoʊ-stʃɹeɪt θɹu ðə maɪlz ə bɹaʊn mɑɹʃ ðət sɝaʊndəɾ ɪljən, ə waɪd ɹoʊɾ ə hɑɹd-pæk dɝt bɹoʊkən baɪ flæt stoʊn bɹɪdʒəz. ə wɪn fɹəm ðə saʊθ kæɹid si sɔlt ən ə hɪn ə tænɝiz. ɪljən wɑz ə spɹɔlɪŋ sɪɾi, izəli əz lɑɹdʒ əz keɪɛmlɪn əɹ kɛɹhin. bɹaɪtli kʌlɝd ɹuf taɪlz ən hʌnʒɹədz ə θɹʌstɪŋ taʊɝz, ɡlimɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌn, wɝ dʒʌs vɪzəbəl əkɹɔs ðət si ʌv ɡɹæs wɛɹ lɔŋ-lɛɡəd kɹeɪnz weɪɾɪd ən flɑks ʌv waɪt bɝdz flu loʊ ʌɾɝɪŋ ʃɹɪl kɹaɪz. ɪljən hæd nɛvɝ niɾəd wɔlz. nɑt ðət wɔlz wʊɾə dʌn ðə sɪɾi ɛni ɡʊɾ əɡɛns hɪm.

The Causeway of the Northern Star stretched arrow-straight through the miles of brown marsh that surrounded Illian, a wide road of hard-packed dirt broken by flat stone bridges. A wind from the south carried sea salt and a hint of tanneries. Illian was a sprawling city, easily as large as Caemlyn or Cairhien. Brightly colored roof tiles and hundreds of thrusting towers, gleaming in the sun, were just visible across that sea of grass where long-legged cranes waded and flocks of white birds flew low uttering shrill cries. Illian had never needed walls. Not that walls would have done the City any good against him.

ðəɹ wɑz kənsɪɾɝəbəl dɪsəpɔɪnmənt ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt min tə ɛntɝ ɪljən, ðoʊ noʊ wʌn spoʊk ə kəmpleɪnt, ət lis nɑt wɛɹ i kəd hɪɹ. stɪl, ðəɹ wɝ plɛnti ʌv ɡlʌm feɪsəz ən saʊɝ mʌɾɝz əz heɪsti kæmps bɪɡæn ɡoʊɪŋ ʌp. laɪk moʊst ə ðə ɡɹeɪt sɪɾiz, ɪljən hæɾ ə neɪm fəɹ ɪɡzɑɾɪk mɪstɝi, fɹi-hændəd tæpstɝz, ən wɪlɪŋ wɪmən. ət list əmʌŋ mɛn u hæd nɛvɝ bɪn ðɛɹ, ivən wən ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ oʊn kæpəɾəl. ɪɡnɝəns ɔlweɪz ɪnfleɪɾəd ə sɪɾiz ɹɛpjəteɪʃən fəɹ sətʃ θɪŋz. əz ɪt wɑz, oʊnli mɔɹ ɡæləpt ɔf əkɹɔs ðə kɑzweɪ. mɛn stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm hæmɝɪŋ tɛn pɛɡz əɹ sɛɾɪŋ pɪkət laɪnz fəɹ ðə hɔɹsəz, ən fɑloʊɾ ɪm wɪð dʒɛləs aɪz. noʊbəlz wɑtʃt kjʊɹiəsli, waɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɹitɛn ðeɪ wɝ nɑt.

There was considerable disappointment that he did not mean to enter Illian, though no one spoke a complaint, at least not where he could hear. Still, there were plenty of glum faces and sour mutters as hasty camps began going up. Like most of the great cities, Illian had a name for exotic mystery, free-handed tapsters, and willing women. At least among men who had never been there, even when it was their own capital. Ignorance always inflated a city's reputation for such things. As it was, only Morr galloped off across the causeway. Men straightened from hammering tent pegs or setting picket lines for the horses, and followed him with jealous eyes. Nobles watched curiously, while trying to pretend they were not.

ði æʃəmən wɪð dʒɛdwɪn peɪd mɔɹ noʊ maɪn əz ðeɪ meɪd ðɛɹ oʊn kæmp, wɪtʃ kənsɪstəɾ ʌv ə pɪtʃ-blæk tɛn fəɹ dʒɛdwɪn ən ɹɑtʃeɪɾ ən ə speɪs wɛɹ dæmp bɹaʊn ɡɹæs ən mʌd wɝ skwiz flæɾ ən dʒɹaɪ, fəɹ ðə ɹɛs tə slip ɹæpt ɪn ðɛɹ kloʊks. ðət wɑz dʌn wɪð ðə paʊɝ, ʌv kɔɹs; ðeɪ dɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɪð ðə paʊɝ, nɑɾ ivən bɑðɝɪŋ tə bɪl kʊk faɪɝz. ə fju ɪn ði ʌðɝ kæmps stɛɹɾ ət ðɛm, waɪd-aɪd, əz ðə tɛn sim tə spɹɪŋ ʌp ʌv ɪts oʊn əkɔɹɾ ən hæmpɝz floʊɾəd əweɪ fɹəm pæksæɾəlz, bʌt moʊs lʊkt ɛniwɛɹ ɛls əɾ ɔl wʌns ðeɪ ɹilaɪzd wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. tu əɹ θɹi ʌv ðə blæk-koʊɾəd soʊlʒɝz əpɪɹd tə bi tɔkɪŋ tə ðɛmsɛlvz.

The Asha'man with Gedwyn paid Morr no mind as they made their own camp, which consisted of a pitch-black tent for Gedwyn and Rochaid and a space where damp brown grass and mud were squeezed flat and dry, for the rest to sleep wrapped in their cloaks. That was done with the Power, of course; they did everything with the Power, not even bothering to build cook fires. A few in the other camps stared at them, wide-eyed, as the tent seemed to spring up of its own accord and hampers floated away from packsaddles, but most looked anywhere else at all once they realized what was going on. Two or three of the black-coated Soldiers appeared to be talking to themselves.

flɪn ən ði ʌðɝz dɪd nɑt dʒɔɪn dʒɛdwɪnz lɑt - ðeɪ hæɾ ə pɛɹ ə tɛns ðət wɛn ʌp nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ɹændz - bʌt dæʃivə wɑndɝɾ oʊvɝ tə wɛɹ ðə "stɔɹm liɾɝ" ən ði "ətæk liɾɝ" wɝ stændɪŋ ət ðɛɹ iz, ən əkeɪʒənəli ɪʃuɪŋ ə ʃɑɹp ɔɹɾɝ. ə fju wɝdz, ən i wɑndɝd bæk ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ən mʌɾɝɪŋ æŋɡɹəli ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. dʒɛdwɪn ən ɹɑtʃeɪd wɝ nɑɾ ə fɹɛnli pɛɹ. əz wɛl ðeɪ wɝ nɑt.

Flinn and the others did not join Gedwyn's lot - they had a pair of tents that went up not far from Rand's - but Dashiva wandered over to where the "Storm Leader" and the "Attack Leader" were standing at their ease, and occasionally issuing a sharp order. A few words, and he wandered back shaking his head and muttering angrily under his breath. Gedwyn and Rochaid were not a friendly pair. As well they were not.

ɹænd tʊk tə hɪz tɛn əz sun əz ɪt wɑz pɪtʃt, ən spɹɔl fʊli kloʊðd ɑn ɪz kɑt, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə sləp silɪŋ. ðəɹ wɝ biz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɑn ði ɪnsaɪɾ əz wɛl, ɑn ə fɔls ɹuf meɪɾ ə sɪlk. hɑpwəl bɹɔɾ ə stimɪŋ pjuɾɝ mʌɡ ʌv mʌld waɪn - ɹænd hæd lɛft ɪz sɝvəns bɪhaɪnd - bʌt ðə waɪn ɡɹu koʊld ɑn ɪz ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl. hɪz maɪnd wɝk fɛvɝɪʃli. tu əɹ θɹi mɔɹ deɪz, ən ðə sintʃæn wʊɾə bɪn dɛlt ə bloʊ ðət nɑkt əm ɑn ðɛɹ hilz. ðən ɪt wɑz bæk tə kɛɹhin tə si haʊ nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz wɪð ðə si foʊk hæd ɡɔn, tə lɝn wʌt kædzueɪn wɑz æftɝ - hi oʊɾ əɹ ə dɛt, bʌt ʃi wɑz æftɝ sʌmθɪŋ! - meɪbi tə pʊɾ ə faɪnəl ɛn tə wʌt ɹɪmeɪn ə ðə ɹɪbɛljən ðɛɹ. hæd kæɹɑlin dəmədʒɹɾ ən dɑɹlɪn sɪsnɛɹə slɪpt əweɪ ɪn ðə kənfjuʒən? ðə haɪ lɔɹd dɑɹlɪn ɪn ɪz hænz maɪt fɪnɪʃ ðə ɹɪbɛljən ɪn tiɹ, əz wɛl. ændɝ. ɪf mæt ən ɪleɪn wɝ ɪn mʊɹændi, ðə weɪ ɪɾ əpɪɹd, ɪt wəd bi wiks mɔɹ ət bɛs bɪfɔɹ ɪleɪn kəd kleɪm ðə laɪən θɹoʊn. wʌns ðət hæpənd, hi wəɾ əv tə steɪ klɪɹ ə keɪɛmlɪn. bʌɾ i hæd tə tɔk tə nɪneɪiv. kəɾ i klɛnz seɪɾɪn? ɪt maɪt wɝk. ɪt maɪt dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðə wɝld, tu. luz θɝɪn ɡɪbɝɾ əɾ ɪm ɪn stɑɹk tɛɹɝ. laɪt, wɛɹ wɑz nɛɹɪʃmə?

Rand took to his tent as soon as it was pitched, and sprawled fully clothed on his cot, staring at the sloped ceiling. There were bees embroidered on the inside as well, on a false roof made of silk. Hopwil brought a steaming pewter mug of mulled wine - Rand had left his servants behind - but the wine grew cold on his writing table. His mind worked feverishly. Two or three more days, and the Seanchan would have been dealt a blow that knocked them on their heels. Then it was back to Cairhien to see how negotiations with the Sea Folk had gone, to learn what Cadsuane was after - he owed her a debt, but she was after something! - maybe to put a final end to what remained of the rebellion there. Had Caraline Damodred and Darlin Sisnera slipped away in the confusion? The High Lord Darlin in his hands might finish the rebellion in Tear, as well. Andor. If Mat and Elayne were in Murandy, the way it appeared, it would be weeks more at best before Elayne could claim the Lion Throne. Once that happened, he would have to stay clear of Caemlyn. But he had to talk to Nynaeve. Could he cleanse saidin? It might work. It might destroy the world, too. Lews Therin gibbered at him in stark terror. Light, where was Narishma?

ə sɛmɑɹoʊz stɔɹm swɛpt ɪn, ɔl ðə fɪɹsɝ ðɪs nɪɹ ðə si. ɹeɪn biɾ ɪz tɛn laɪk ə dʒɹʌm. laɪtnɪŋ flæʃɪz fɪl ði ɛntʃɹəns wɪð blu-waɪt laɪt, ən θʌndɝ ɹʌmbəld, ðə saʊn laɪk maʊntənz tʌmbəlɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə lænd.

A cemaros storm swept in, all the fiercer this near the sea. Rain beat his tent like a drum. Lightning flashes filled the entrance with blue-white light, and thunder rumbled, the sound like mountains tumbling across the land.

aʊɾ ə ðæt, nɛɹɪʃmə stɛpt ɪndə ðə tɛnt, dʒɹɪpɪŋ wɛt, dɑɹk hɛɹ plæstɝd tə hɪz hɛd. hɪz ɔɹɾɝz hæd bɪn tə əvɔɪd noʊɾəs əɾ ɔl kɑst. noʊ flɔntɪŋ fəɹ hɪm. hɪz sɑɾən koʊt wɑz pleɪn bɹaʊn, ən ɪz dɑɹk hɛɹ wɑz taɪd bæk, nɑt bɹeɪɾɪd. ivən wɪθaʊt bɛlz, nɪɹ weɪst-lɛŋθ hɛɹ ɑn ə mæn ətʃɹæktəɾ aɪz. hi wɔɹ ə skaʊl, tu, ən ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹm i kæɹiɾ ə səlɪnʒɹɪkəl bʌndəl taɪd wɪð kɔɹd, fæɾɝ ðən ə mænz lɛɡ, laɪk ə smɔl kɑɹpət.

Out of that, Narishma stepped into the tent, dripping wet, dark hair plastered to his head. His orders had been to avoid notice at all cost. No flaunting for him. His sodden coat was plain brown, and his dark hair was tied back, not braided. Even without bells, near waist-length hair on a man attracted eyes. He wore a scowl, too, and under his arm he carried a cylindrical bundle tied with cord, fatter than a man's leg, like a small carpet.

spɹɪŋɪŋ fɹəm ðə kɑt, ɹænd snætʃt ðə bʌndəl bɪfɔɹ nɛɹɪʃmə kəd pɹɑfɝ ɪt. "dɪɾ ɛniwʌn si ju?" hi dɪmændəd. "wʌt tʊk jə soʊ lɔŋ? aɪ ɪkspɛktəd jə læs naɪt!"

Springing from the cot, Rand snatched the bundle before Narishma could proffer it. "Did anyone see you?" he demanded. "What took you so long? I expected you last night!"

"ɪt tʊk ə waɪl tə fɪɡjɝ aʊt wʌɾ aɪ hæd tə du," nɛɹɪʃmə ɹɪplaɪɾ ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs. "ju dɪdn tɛl mi ɛvɹiθɪŋ. jə nɪɹli kɪl mi."

"It took a while to figure out what I had to do," Narishma replied in a flat voice. "You didn't tell me everything. You nearly killed me."

ðət wɑz ɹɪdɪkjələs. ɹænd hæd toʊld ɪm ɛvɹiθɪŋ i niɾəd tə noʊ. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn tə tʃɹʌstɪŋ ðə mæn əz fɑɹ əz i hæd, oʊnli tə hæv ɪm daɪ ən ɹuən ɛvɹiθɪŋ. kɛɹfəli hi tʌk ðə bʌndəl bɪniθ ɪz kɑt. hɪz hænz tʃɹɛmbəld wɪð ði ɝdʒ tə stʃɹɪp ðə ɹæpɪŋz əweɪ, tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðeɪ hɛld wʌt nɛɹɪʃmə hæd bɪn sɛn fɔɹ. ðə mæn wəd nɑɾ əv dɛɹd ɹɪtɝn ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt. "ɡɛt jɝsɛlf ɪndə ə pɹɑpɝ koʊt bɪfɔɹ jə dʒɔɪn ði ʌðɝz," hi sɛd. "ænd nɛɹɪʃmə. . . . ɹænd stʃɹeɪɾənd, fɪksɪŋ ði ʌðɝ mæn wɪð ə stɛɾi ɡeɪz. "ju tɛl ɛniwʌn əbaʊt ðɪs, ən əl kɪl ju."

That was ridiculous. Rand had told him everything he needed to know. He was sure of it. There was no point to trusting the man as far as he had, only to have him die and ruin everything. Carefully he tucked the bundle beneath his cot. His hands trembled with the urge to strip the wrappings away, to make sure they held what Narishma had been sent for. The man would not have dared return if they did not. "Get yourself into a proper coat before you join the others," he said. "And Narishma. . . . Rand straightened, fixing the other man with a steady gaze. "You tell anyone about this, and I will kill you."

kɪl ðə hoʊl wɝld, luz θɝɪn læft, ə moʊn ə dɝɪʒən. ʌv dɪspɛɹ. aɪ kɪl ðə wɝld, ən jə kæn, tu, ɪf jə tʃɹaɪ hɑɹd.

Kill the whole world, Lews Therin laughed, a moan of derision. Of despair. I killed the world, and you can, too, if you try hard.

nɛɹɪʃmə stʃɹʌk hɪmsɛlf hɑɹɾ ɑn ðə tʃɛst wɪð ɪz fɪst. "æz jə kəmænd, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," hi sɛd saʊɝli.

Narishma struck himself hard on the chest with his fist. "As you command, my Lord Dragon," he said sourly.

bɹaɪɾ ən ɝli ðə nɛks mɔɹnɪŋ, ə θaʊzən mɛn ə ðə lidʒən ə ðə dʒɹæɡən mɑɹtʃt aʊɾ ʌv ɪljən, əkɹɔs ðə kɑzweɪ ʌv ðə nɔɹðɝn stɑɹ, stɛpɪŋ tə ðə stɛɾi biɾ ə dʒɹʌmz. wɛl, ɪt wɑz ɝli, ɛniweɪ. θɪk ɡɹeɪ klaʊdz ɹɔɪld əkɹɔs ðə skaɪ, ən ə stɪf si bɹiz ʃɑɹp wɪð sɔlt wɪp kloʊks ən bænɝz, mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌv ənʌðɝ stɔɹm ɑn ðə weɪ. ðə lidʒən ətʃɹæktəɾ ə ɡʊd bɪɾ ʌv ətɛnʃən fɹəm ði ɑɹmmɪn ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ðə kæmp, wɪð ðɛɹ blu-peɪntəɾ ændɔɝən hɛlməts ən ðɛɹ lɔŋ blu koʊts wɝkt ɑn ðə tʃɛst wɪð ə ɹɛd-ænd-ɡoʊl dʒɹæɡən. ə blu pɛnən bɛɹɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ən ə nʌmbɝ mɑɹkt itʃ ə ðə faɪv kʌmpəniz. ðə lidʒənmɛn wɝ dɪfɹən ɪn mɛni weɪz. fəɹ ɪnstəns, ðeɪ wɔɹ bɹɛstpleɪts, bʌt bɪniθ ðɛɹ koʊts, soʊ əz nɑt tə haɪd ðə dʒɹæɡənz - ðə seɪm ɹizən ðə koʊts bʌɾənd ʌp wʌn saɪd - ən ɛvɹi mæn kæɹiɾ ə ʃɔɹt-sɔɹɾ əɾ ɪz hɪp ən ə stil-ɑɹm kɹɔsboʊ, ɛvɹi wʌn ʃoʊldɝɾ ɪɡzækli ðə seɪm əz ɛvɹi ʌðɝ. ði ɔfəsɝz wɔkt, itʃ wɪð ə tɔl ɹɛd plum ɑn ɪz hɛlmət, dʒʌst əhɛɾ ə dʒɹʌm ən pɛnənt. ði oʊnli hɔɹsəz wɝ mɔɹz maʊs-kʌlɝd ɡɛldɪŋ, ət ðɛɹ hɛd, ən pæk ænəməlz ət ðə ɹɪɹ.

Bright and early the next morning, a thousand men of the Legion of the Dragon marched out of Illian, across the Causeway of the Northern Star, stepping to the steady beat of drums. Well, it was early, anyway. Thick gray clouds roiled across the sky, and a stiff sea breeze sharp with salt whipped cloaks and banners, muttering of another storm on the way. The Legion attracted a good bit of attention from the armsmen already in the camp, with their blue-painted Andoran helmets and their long blue coats worked on the chest with a red-and-gold Dragon. A blue pennant bearing the Dragon and a number marked each of the five companies. The Legionmen were different in many ways. For instance, they wore breastplates, but beneath their coats, so as not to hide the Dragons - the same reason the coats buttoned up one side - and every man carried a short-sword at his hip and a steel-armed crossbow, every one shouldered exactly the same as every other. The officers walked, each with a tall red plume on his helmet, just ahead of drum and pennant. The only horses were Morr's mouse-colored gelding, at their head, and pack animals at the rear.

"fʊt," wɪɹɑmɑn mʌɾɝd, slæpɪŋ ɪz ɹeɪnz ɑn ə ɡɔntələɾəd hænd. "bɝn maɪ soʊl, ðəɹ noʊ ɡʊd, fʊt. ðəl skæɾɝ ət ðə fɝs tʃɑɹdʒ. bɪfɔɹ." ðə fɝst ə ðə kɑləm stʃɹoʊɾ ɔf ðə kɑzweɪ. ðeɪ hæd hɛlp teɪk ɪljən, ən ðeɪ hæd nɑt skæɾɝd.

"Foot," Weiramon muttered, slapping his reins on a gauntleted hand. "Burn my soul, they're no good, foot. They'll scatter at the first charge. Before." The first of the column strode off the causeway. They had helped take Illian, and they had not scattered.

səmɝædʒɹɪd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "noʊ paɪks," hi mʌɾɝd. "aɪ hæv sin wɛl-lɛd fʊt hoʊld, wɪð paɪks, bʌt wɪθaʊt. . . ." hi meɪɾ ə saʊn ə dɪsɡʌst ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt.

Semaradrid shook his head. "No pikes," he muttered. "I have seen well-led foot hold, with pikes, but without. . . ." He made a sound of disgust in his throat.

ɡɹɛɡɹɪn pɑnɝ, ðə θɝd mæn sɪɾɪŋ ɪz sæɾəl nɪɹ ɹænd tə wɑtʃ ðə nu ɝaɪvəlz, sɛd nʌθɪŋ. pɝhæps i hæd noʊ pɹɛdʒəɾɪs əɡɛnst ɪnfəntʃɹi - ðoʊ ɪf i dɪd nɑt, hi wəd bi wʌn ʌv oʊnli ə hændfʊl ə noʊbəlmən ɹænd hæd mɛt wɪθaʊɾ ɪt - bʌɾ i tʃɹaɪd hɑɹd nɑt tə fɹaʊn ən ɔlmoʊst səksiɾəd. ɛvɹiwʌn nu baɪ naʊ ðət ðə mɛn wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən ɑn ðɛɹ tʃɛsts bɔɹ ɑɹmz kəz ðeɪ hæd tʃoʊzən tə fɑloʊ ɹænd, tʃoʊzən tə fɑloʊ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, fəɹ noʊ ʌðɝ ɹizən ðən ðət ðeɪ wɑntəd tə. ði ɪliɑnɝ hæd tə bi wʌndɝɪŋ wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ ðət ɹænd wɑntəd ðə lidʒən ən ðə kaʊnsəl ə naɪn wɑz nɑt tʃɹʌstɪd tə noʊ. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, səmɝædʒɹɪɾ aɪd ɹænd saɪdweɪz. oʊnli wɪɹɑmɑn wɑz tu stupəd tə θɪŋk.

Gregorin Panar, the third man sitting his saddle near Rand to watch the new arrivals, said nothing. Perhaps he had no prejudice against infantry - though if he did not, he would be one of only a handful of noblemen Rand had met without it - but he tried hard not to frown and almost succeeded. Everyone knew by now that the men with the Dragon on their chests bore arms because they had chosen to follow Rand, chosen to follow the Dragon Reborn, for no other reason than that they wanted to. The Illianer had to be wondering where they were going that Rand wanted the Legion and the Council of Nine was not trusted to know. For that matter, Semaradrid eyed Rand sideways. Only Weiramon was too stupid to think.

ɹænd tɝn teɪdeɪʃɝ əweɪ. nɛɹɪʃməz pækədʒ hæd bɪn ɹiɹæpt, ɪndə ə θɪnɝ bʌndəl, ən taɪd bɪniθ ɪz lɛf stɝəp lɛðɝ. "stʃɹaɪk ðə kæmp; wɝ muvɪŋ," hi toʊl ðə θɹi noʊbəlz.

Rand turned Tai'daishar away. Narishma's package had been rewrapped, into a thinner bundle, and tied beneath his left stirrup leather. "Strike the camp; we're moving," he told the three nobles.

ðɪs taɪm, hi lɛt dæʃivə wiv ðə ɡeɪtweɪ tə teɪk əm ɔl əweɪ. ðə pleɪn-feɪs fɛloʊ fɹaʊn əɾ ɪm ən mʌmbəl tə hɪmsɛlf - dæʃivə æktʃəli  simd əfɹʌntɪd, fəɹ səm ɹizən! - ən dʒɛdwɪn ən ɹɑtʃeɪd, ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ʃoʊldɝ-baɪ-ʃoʊldɝ, wɑtʃt wɪð sɑɹdɑnɪk smaɪlz əz ðə sɪlvɝi slæʃ ə laɪt ɹoʊteɪɾɪd ɪndə ə hoʊl ɪn nʌθɪŋ. wɑtʃt ɹænd mɔɹ ðən dæʃivə. wɛl, lɛɾ əm wɑtʃ. haʊ ɔfən kəɾ i siz seɪɾɪn ən ɹɪsk fɔlɪŋ dɪtsəli ɑn ɪz feɪs bɪfɔɹ i ɹɪli dɪd fɔl? ɪt kəd nɑt bi wɛɹ ðeɪ kəd si.

This time, he let Dashiva weave the gateway to take them all away. The plain-faced fellow frowned at him and mumbled to himself - Dashiva actually seemed affronted, for some reason! - and Gedwyn and Rochaid, their horses shoulder-by-shoulder, watched with sardonic smiles as the silvery slash of light rotated into a hole in nothing. Watched Rand more than Dashiva. Well, let them watch. How often could he seize saidin and risk falling dizzily on his face before he really did fall? It could not be where they could see.

ðɪs taɪm, ðə ɡeɪtweɪ tʊk əm tə ə waɪd ɹoʊd kɑɹv θɹu ðə loʊ, bɹʌʃi fʊthɪlz ə maʊntənz tə ðə wɛst. ðə nəmɑɝɛlɪn maʊntənz. nɑt ði ikwəlz ə ðə maʊntən ə mɪst, ən nɑɾ ə pætʃ ɑn ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld, bʌt ðeɪ ɹoʊz dɑɹk ən səvɪɹ əɡɛns ðə skaɪ, ʃɑɹp piks ðət wɔl ðə wɛs koʊst ʌv ɪljən. bɪɑn əm leɪ kɑbəl dip, ən bɪɑn ðæt. . . .

This time, the gateway took them to a wide road carved through the low, brushy foothills of mountains to the west. The Nemarellin Mountains. Not the equals of the Mountain of Mist, and not a patch on the Spine of the World, but they rose dark and severe against the sky, sharp peaks that walled the west coast of Illian. Beyond them lay Kabal Deep, and beyond that. . . .

mɛn bɪɡæn tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə piks sun ɪnʌf. ɡɹɛɡɹɪn pɑnɝ tʊk wʌn lʊk ɝaʊn ən nɑɾəd ɪn sʌɾən sæɾəsfækʃən. ði ʌðɝ θɹi kaʊnsəlɝz ən mɑɹkəlɪn ɹeɪn kloʊs tə hɪm tə tɔk waɪl hɔɹsmən wɝ stɪl pɔɹɪŋ θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ. səmɝædʒɹɪd ɹikwaɪɝɾ oʊnli ə bɪt lɔŋɡɝ tə pʌzəl ɪɾ aʊt, ən taɪhɛɹə, ən ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ ʌndɝstʊd naʊ.

Men began to recognize the peaks soon enough. Gregorin Panar took one look around and nodded in sudden satisfaction. The other three Councilors and Marcolin reined close to him to talk while horsemen were still pouring through the gateway. Semaradrid required only a bit longer to puzzle it out, and Tihera, and they also looked as if they understood now.

ðə sɪlvɝ ɹoʊd ɹæn fɹəm ðə sɪɾi tə luɡɹd, ən kæɹiɾ ɔl ə ði ɪnlæn tʃɹeɪd fəɹ ðə wɛst. ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡoʊld ɹoʊd, tu, ðət lɛd tə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ. ɹoʊdz ən neɪmz əlaɪk deɪɾɪd fɹəm bɪfɔɹ ðəɹ hæd bɪn ən ɪljən. sɛntʃɝiz ʌv wæɡən wilz, hʊvz ən buts hæd biɾən əm hɑɹd, ən ðə sɛmɑɹoʊz kəɾ oʊnli skɪm əm wɪð mʌd. ðeɪ wɝ əmʌŋ ðə fju ɹɪlaɪəbəl haɪweɪz ɪn ɪljən fəɹ muvɪŋ lɑɹdʒ ɡɹups ə mɛn ɪn wɪntɝ. ɛvɹiwʌn nu əbaʊt ðə sintʃæn ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ baɪ ðɪs taɪm, ðoʊ ə ɡʊd mɛni ʌv ðə teɪlz ɹænd hæd hɝɾ əmʌŋ ði ɑɹmmɪn meɪd ði ɪnveɪɾɝz sim tʃɹɑləks' minɝ kʌzənz. ɪf ðə sintʃæn ɪntɛndəd tə stʃɹaɪk ɪndə ɪljən, ðə sɪlvɝ ɹoʊd wɑz ə ɡʊd pleɪs tə ɡæðɝ fəɹ dɪfɛns.

The Silver Road ran from the City to Lugard, and carried all of the inland trade for the west. There was a Gold Road, too, that led to Far Madding. Roads and names alike dated from before there had been an Illian. Centuries of wagon wheels, hooves and boots had beaten them hard, and the cemaros could only skim them with mud. They were among the few reliable highways in Illian for moving large groups of men in winter. Everyone knew about the Seanchan in Ebou Dar by this time, though a good many of the tales Rand had heard among the armsmen made the invaders seem Trollocs' meaner cousins. If the Seanchan intended to strike into Illian, the Silver Road was a good place to gather for defense.

səmɝædʒɹɪɾ ən ði ʌðɝz θɔt ðeɪ nu wʌɾ i plænd: hi mʌst əv lɝn ðət ðə sintʃæn wɝ kʌmɪŋ, ən ði æʃəmən wɝ ðəɹ tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðɛm wən ðeɪ dɪd. ɡɪvən ðə stɔɹiz əbaʊt ðə sintʃæn, noʊ wʌn sim tu əpsɛt ðət ðət lɛf lɪɾəl fəɹ əm tə du. ʌv kɔɹs, wɪɹɑmɑn hæd tə hæv ɪɾ ɪkspleɪn tə hɪm faɪnəli, baɪ taɪhɛɹə, ən i wɑz ʌpsɛt, ðoʊ hi tʃɹaɪd tə mæsk ɪt bɪhaɪn ə ɡɹæn spitʃ əbaʊt ðə wɪzdəm ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ən ðə mɪlətɛɹi dʒinjəs ə ðə lɔɹɾ ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, əlɔŋ wɪð haʊ hi, pɝsənəli, wəd lɛd ðə fɝs tʃɑɹdʒ əɡɛns ðiz sintʃæn. ə pjʊɹ bʊl-ɡus ful. wɪð lʌk, ɛniwʌn ɛls u lɝn ʌv ə ɡæðɝɪŋ ɑn ðə sɪlvɝ ɹoʊd wəɾ ət lis nɑt bi tu mʌtʃ bɹaɪɾɝ ðən səmɝædʒɹɪɾ əɹ ɡɹɛɡɹɪn. wɪð lʌk, noʊ wʌn u mæɾɝd wəd lɝn bɪfɔɹ ɪt wɑz tu leɪt.

Semaradrid and the others thought they knew what he planned: he must have learned that the Seanchan were coming, and the Asha'man were there to destroy them when they did. Given the stories about the Seanchan, no one seemed too upset that that left little for them to do. Of course, Weiramon had to have it explained to him finally, by Tihera, and he was upset, though he tried to mask it behind a grand speech about the wisdom of the Lord Dragon and the military genius of the Lord of the Morning, along with how he, personally, would lead the first charge against these Seanchan. A pure bull-goose fool. With luck, anyone else who learned of a gathering on the Silver Road would at least not be too much brighter than Semaradrid or Gregorin. With luck, no one who mattered would learn before it was too late.

sɛɾəlɪŋ ɪn tə weɪt, ɹænd θɔɾ ɪt wəɾ oʊnli bi ənʌðɝ deɪ əɹ soʊ, bʌɾ əz ðə deɪz stʃɹɛtʃt aʊt, hi bɪɡæn tə wʌndɝ wɛðɝ i maɪt bi nɪɹli əz bɪɡ ə ful əz wɪɹɑmɑn.

Settling in to wait, Rand thought it would only be another day or so, but as the days stretched out, he began to wonder whether he might be nearly as big a fool as Weiramon.

moʊst ə ði æʃəmən wɝ aʊt sɝtʃɪŋ əkɹɔs ɪljən ən tiɹ ən ðə pleɪnz ə mɑɹeɪɾoʊ fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ə ðoʊz ɹænd wɑntəd. sɝtʃɪŋ θɹu ðə sɛmɑɹoʊz. ɡeɪtweɪz ən tʃɹævlɪŋ wɝ ɔl vɛɹi wɛl, bʌɾ ivən æʃəmən tʊk taɪm tə faɪn u ðeɪ sɔt wən daʊnpɔɹz hɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ fɪfti peɪsɪz əweɪ ən kwæɡmaɪɹz dʒɹæɡd ɹumɝ tə ə nɪɹ hɔlt. sɝtʃɪŋ æʃəmən pæst wɪðɪn ə maɪl ə ðɛɹ kwɔɹi ɪn ɪɡnɝəns, ən tɝn oʊnli tə lɝn ðə mɛn hæd muvd ɑn əɡɛn. səm hæd fɑɹðɝ tə ɡoʊ, sikɪŋ pipəl nɑt nɛsəsɛɹəli iɡɝ tə bi faʊnd. deɪz pæs bɪfɔɹ ðə fɝs bɹɔt nuz.

Most of the Asha'man were out searching across Illian and Tear and the Plains of Maredo for the rest of those Rand wanted. Searching through the cemaros. Gateways and Traveling were all very well, but even Asha'man took time to find who they sought when downpours hid anything fifty paces away and quagmires dragged rumor to a near halt. Searching Asha'man passed within a mile of their quarry in ignorance, and turned only to learn the men had moved on again. Some had farther to go, seeking people not necessarily eager to be found. Days passed before the first brought news.

ðə haɪ lɔɹd sunəmən dʒɔɪnd wɪɹɑmɑn, ə fæt mæn wɪð ən ʌŋtʃwəs mænɝ - təwɔɹd ɹænd, ət list. smuð ɪn ɪz faɪn sɪlk koʊt, ɔlweɪz smaɪlɪŋ, hi wɑz vɑljəbəl ɪn ɪz dɛklɝeɪʃənz ə lɔɪəlti, bʌɾ i hæd plɑɾəd əɡɛnst ɹænd soʊ lɔŋ ðəɾ i pɹɑbli dɪd soʊ ɪn ɪz slip. ðə haɪ lɔɹd tʃɹiən keɪm, wɪð ɪz lʌmpi fɑɹmɝz feɪs ən ɪz væst wɛlθ, stæmɝɪŋ əbaʊt ði ɑnɝ ə ɹaɪɾɪŋ wʌns mɔɹ ət ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡənz saɪd. ɡoʊl kənsɝn tʃɹiən mɔɹ ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, ɪksɛpt pɑsəbli ðə pɹɪvlədʒəz ɹænd hæd teɪkən əweɪ fɹəm ðə noʊbəlz ɪn tɛɹ. hi sim pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli dɪsmeɪd tə lɝn ðəɹ wɝ noʊ sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz ɪn ðə kæmp, ən nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə vɪlədʒ nɪɹbaɪ wɛɹ kəmplaɪən fɑɹmɡɝlz maɪt bi faʊnd. tʃɹiən hæd skimd əɡɛnst ɹænd ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz ɔfən əz sunəmən. meɪbi ivən mɔɹ ðən ɡəm, əɹ mɑɹəkən, əɹ ɑɹəkʌm.

The High Lord Sunamon joined Weiramon, a fat man with an unctuous manner - toward Rand, at least. Smooth in his fine silk coat, always smiling, he was voluble in his declarations of loyalty, but he had plotted against Rand so long that he probably did so in his sleep. The High Lord Torean came, with his lumpy farmer's face and his vast wealth, stammering about the honor of riding once more at the Lord Dragon's side. Gold concerned Torean more than anything else, except possibly the privileges Rand had taken away from the nobles in Tear. He seemed particularly dismayed to learn there were no serving girls in the camp, and not so much as a village nearby where compliant farmgirls might be found. Torean had schemed against Rand every bit as often as Sunamon. Maybe even more than Gueyam, or Maraconn, or Aracome.

ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝz. ðəɹ wɑz bɝtoʊm seɪɡən, ə ʃɔɹt, ɹʌɡədli hænsəm mæn wɪð ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz hɛd ʃeɪvd. hi səpoʊzədli dɪd nɑt mɔɹn ðə dɛθ ə hɪz kʌzən koʊləveɪɪɹ tu ɡɹeɪtli, boʊθ kəz ðət meɪɾ ɪm ðə nu haɪ siɾ ə haʊs seɪɡən ən kəz ɹumɝ sɛd ɹænd hæɾ ɛksəkjuɾəd hɝ. əɹ mɝɾɝd hɝ. bɝtoʊm baʊɾ ən smaɪld, ən ɪz smaɪl nɛvɝ ɹitʃt ɪz dɑɹk aɪz. səm sɛɾ i hæd bɪn vɛɹi fɑn ə hɪz kʌzən. eɪlɪl ɹieɪɾən keɪm, ə slɪm dɪɡnəfaɪd wʊmən wɪð bɪɡ dɑɹk aɪz, nɑt jʌŋ bʌt kwaɪt pɹɪɾi, pɹətɛstɪŋ ðət ʃi hæɾ ə læns-kæptən tə liɾ əɹ ɑɹmmɪn ən noʊ dɪzaɪɝ tə teɪk ðə fild ɪn pɝsən. pɹətɛstɪŋ əɹ lɔɪəlti fəɹ ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, tu. bʌɾ əɹ bɹʌðɝ tɔɹæm kleɪm ðə θɹoʊn ɹænd mɛn fəɹ ɪleɪn, ən ɪt wɑz wɪspɝd ðət ʃi wəd də ɛniθɪŋ fəɹ tɔɹæm, ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl. ivən dʒɔɪn wɪð ɪz ɛnəmiz; tə hæmpɝ əɹ tə spaɪ əɹ boʊθ, ʌv kɔɹs. dælθeɪnz ænælɪn keɪm, ən əmənʒɹɪd əsiɛlɪn, ən dɔɹɛsɪn tʃuliəndɝd, lɔɹdz u hæd səpɔɹɾəd koʊləveɪɪɹz siʒɝ ə ðə sʌn θɹoʊn wən ðeɪ θɔt ɹænd wəd nɛvɝ ɹɪtɝn tə kɛɹhin.

There were others. There was Bertome Saighan, a short, ruggedly handsome man with the front of his head shaved. He supposedly did not mourn the death of his cousin Colavaere too greatly, both because that made him the new High Seat of House Saighan and because rumor said Rand had executed her. Or murdered her. Bertome bowed and smiled, and his smile never reached his dark eyes. Some said he had been very fond of his cousin. Ailil Riatin came, a slim dignified woman with big dark eyes, not young but quite pretty, protesting that she had a Lance-captain to lead her armsmen and no desire to take the field in person. Protesting her loyalty for the Lord Dragon, too. But her brother Toram claimed the throne Rand meant for Elayne, and it was whispered that she would do anything for Toram, anything at all. Even join with his enemies; to hamper or to spy or both, of course. Dalthanes Annallin came, and Amondrid Osiellin, and Doressin Chuliandred, lords who had supported Colavaere's seizure of the Sun Throne when they thought Rand would never return to Cairhien.

kɛɹhinɪn ən tɛɹən, ðeɪ wɝ bɹɔɾ ɪn wʌn baɪ wʌn, wɪð fɪfti ɹɪteɪnɝz, əɹ ət moʊst ə hʌnʒɹəd. mɛn ən wɪmən i tʃɹʌstɪɾ ivən lɛs ðən i dɪd ɡɹɛɡɹɪn əɹ səmɝædʒɹɪd. moʊst wɝ mɛn, nɑt kəz i θɔt ðə wɪmən ɛni lɛs deɪnʒɝəs - hi wɑz nɑt ðət bɪɡ ə ful; ə wʊmən wəd kɪl jə twaɪs əz fæst əz ə mæn, ən juʒəwəli fəɹ hæf ðə ɹizən! - bʌt kəz i kəd nɑt bɹɪŋ hɪmsɛlf tə teɪk ɛni wʊmən ɪksɛp ðə moʊs deɪnʒɝəs, wɛɹ i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ. eɪlɪl kəd smaɪl wɔɹmli waɪl ʃi kælkjəleɪɾəd wɛɹ tə plæn ðə naɪf ɪn jəɹ ɹɪbz. ænɑiɛlə, ə wɪləwi sɪmpɝɪŋ haɪ leɪɾi hu ɡeɪv ə fɛɹ ɪməteɪʃən ʌv ə bjuɾəfəl ɡusbɹeɪn, hæd ɹɪtɝn tə tɛɹ fɹəm kɛɹhin ən oʊpənli bɪɡʌn tɔkɪŋ ə hɝsɛlf fəɹ ði æz-jɛt-nɑnəɡzɪstən θɹoʊn ə tɛɹ. pɝhæps ʃi wɑz ə ful, bʌt ʃi hæd mænədʒ tə ɡeɪn ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə səpɔɹt, boʊθ əmʌŋ noʊbəlz ən ɪn ðə stʃɹits.

Cairhienin and Tairen, they were brought in one by one, with fifty retainers, or at most a hundred. Men and women he trusted even less than he did Gregorin or Semaradrid. Most were men, not because he thought the women any less dangerous - he was not that big a fool; a woman would kill you twice as fast as a man, and usually for half the reason! - but because he could not bring himself to take any woman except the most dangerous, where he was going. Ailil could smile warmly while she calculated where to plant the knife in your ribs. Anaiyella, a willowy simpering High Lady who gave a fair imitation of a beautiful goosebrain, had returned to Tear from Cairhien and openly begun talking of herself for the as-yet-nonexistent throne of Tear. Perhaps she was a fool, but she had managed to gain a great deal of support, both among nobles and in the streets.

soʊ hi ɡæðɝɾ əm ɪn, ɔl ðə foʊk u hæd bɪn tu lɔŋ aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪz aɪ. hi kəd nɑt wɑtʃ ɔl ə ðɛm ɔl ðə taɪm, bʌɾ i kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə lɛɾ əm fɝɡɛt ðəɾ i dɪd wɑtʃ səmtaɪmz. hi ɡæðɝd ðɛm, ən i weɪɾəd. fəɹ tu deɪz. næʃɪŋ ɪz tiθ, hi weɪɾəd. faɪv deɪz. eɪt.

So he gathered them in, all the folk who had been too long out from under his eye. He could not watch all of them all the time, but he could not afford to let them forget that he did watch sometimes. He gathered them, and he waited. For two days. Gnashing his teeth, he waited. Five days. Eight.

ɹeɪn wɑz biɾɪŋ ə dɪmɪnɪʃɪŋ dʒɹʌm ɑn ɪz tɛnt wən ðə læs mæn i wɑz weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ faɪnəli ɝaɪvd.

Rain was beating a diminishing drum on his tent when the last man he was waiting for finally arrived.

ʃeɪkɪŋ ə smɔl tɔɹən fɹəm ɪz ɔɪld-klɔθ keɪp, dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ blu aʊɾ ɪz θɪk, ɡɹeɪ-stʃɹik mʌstæʃɪz ɪn dɪsɡʌst ən tɔs ðə keɪp oʊvɝ ə bæɹəl tʃɛɹ. ə ʃɔɹt mæn wɪð ə ɡɹeɪt hʊk bik ʌv ə noʊz, hi sim lɑɹdʒɝ ðən i wɑz. nɑt kəz i stʃɹʌɾɪd, bʌt kəz i əsum ðəɾ i wɑz əz tɔl əz ɛni mæn pɹɛzənt, ən ʌðɝ mɛn tʊk ɪm soʊ. waɪz mɛn dɪd. ðə wʊlf-hɛɾəd aɪvɝi bətɑn ə ðə mɑɹʃəl-dʒɛnɝəl ə sɑldɑiə, tʌkt kɛɹləsli bɪhaɪn ɪz sɔɹd bɛlt, hæd bɪn ɝn ɑn skɔɹz ə bæɾəlfildz ən əɾ əz mɛni kaʊnsəl teɪbəlz. hi wɑz wʌn ə ðə vɛɹi fju mɛn ɹænd wəd tʃɹʌst wɪð ɪz laɪf.

Shaking a small torrent from his oiled-cloth cape, Davram Bashere blew out his thick, gray-streaked mustaches in disgust and tossed the cape over a barrel chair. A short man with a great hooked beak of a nose, he seemed larger than he was. Not because he strutted, but because he assumed that he was as tall as any man present, and other men took him so. Wise men did. The wolf-headed ivory baton of the Marshal-General of Saldaea, tucked carelessly behind his sword belt, had been earned on scores of battlefields and at as many council tables. He was one of the very few men Rand would trust with his life.

"aɪ noʊ jə doʊn laɪk ɪkspleɪnɪŋ," bæʃɪɹ mʌɾɝd, "bʌɾ aɪ kəd juz ə lɪɾəl ɪluməneɪʃən." ədʒʌstɪŋ ɪz sɝpəntaɪn sɔɹd, hi spɹɔld ɪn ənʌðɝ tʃɛɹ ən flʌŋ ə lɛɡ oʊvɝ ði ɑɹm ʌv ɪt. hi ɔlweɪz simd əɾ ɪz iz, bʌɾ i kəɾ ʌnkɔɪl fæstɝ ðən ə wɪp. "ðæɾ æʃəmən fɛloʊ wʊdn seɪ mɔɹ ðən jə niɾəd mi jɛstɝdeɪ, jɛɾ i sɛd nɑt tə bɹɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ə θaʊzən mɛn. aɪ oʊnli hæd hæf ðət wɪð mi, bʌɾ aɪ bɹɔt ðɛm. ɪt kæn bi ə bæɾəl. hæf ðə sɪɡəlz aɪ sɔ aʊt ðəɹ bɪlɔŋ tə mɛn hud baɪt ðɛɹ tʌŋz ɪf ðeɪ sɔ ə fɛloʊ bɪhaɪn jə wɪð ə naɪf, ən moʊst ə ðə ɹɛs tə mɛn hud tʃɹaɪ tə hoʊl jəɹ ətɛnʃən. ɪf ðeɪ hædn peɪd ðə naɪf mæn ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs."

"I know you don't like explaining," Bashere muttered, "but I could use a little illumination." Adjusting his serpentine sword, he sprawled in another chair and flung a leg over the arm of it. He always seemed at his ease, but he could uncoil faster than a whip. "That Asha'man fellow wouldn't say more than you needed me yesterday, yet he said not to bring more than a thousand men. I only had half that with me, but I brought them. It can't be a battle. Half the sigils I saw out there belong to men who'd bite their tongues if they saw a fellow behind you with a knife, and most of the rest to men who'd try to hold your attention. If they hadn't paid the knife man in the first place."

siɾəd bɪhaɪn ɪz ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl ɪn ɪz ʃɝtslivz, ɹænd wɛɹəli pɹɛs ðə hilz ə hɪz pɑmz əɡɛnst ɪz aɪz. wɪð bɔɹiən kɛɹɪvɪn lɛf bɪhaɪnd, ðə læmp wɪks niɾəd pɹɑpɝ tʃɹɪmɪŋ, ən ə feɪn heɪz ə smoʊk hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ. bɪsaɪdz, hi hæd bɪn əweɪk moʊst ə ðə naɪt pɔɹɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə mæps skæɾɝd əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəl. mæps ə sʌðɝn ɔltɑɹə. noʊ tu əɡɹiɾ ɑn vɛɹi mʌtʃ.

Seated behind his writing table in his shirtsleeves, Rand wearily pressed the heels of his palms against his eyes. With Boreane Carivin left behind, the lamp wicks needed proper trimming, and a faint haze of smoke hung in the air. Besides, he had been awake most of the night poring over the maps scattered across the table. Maps of southern Altara. No two agreed on very much.

"ɪf jəɹ gɑnə faɪɾ ə bæɾəl," hi toʊl bæʃɪɹ, "hu bɛɾɝ tə peɪ ðə bʊtʃɝz bɪl ðən mɛn u wɑn jə dɛd? ɛniweɪ, ɪɾ ɪzən soʊlʒɝz hul wɪn ðɪs bæɾəl. ɔl ðeɪv tə də ɪz kip ɛnibəɾi fɹəm snikɪŋ ʌp ɑn ði æʃəmən. wʌt dʒju θɪŋk ə ðæt?"

"If you're going to fight a battle," he told Bashere, "who better to pay the butcher's bill than men who want you dead? Anyway, it isn't soldiers who'll win this battle. All they have to do is keep anybody from sneaking up on the Asha'man. What do you think of that?"

bæʃɪɹ snɔɹɾɪd soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ ɪz hɛvi mʌstæʃɪz stɝd. "aɪ θɪŋk ɪts ə dɛdli stu, ɪz wʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk. sʌmbɑɾiz gɑnə tʃoʊk tə dɛθ ɑn ɪt. ðə laɪt sɛn ɪɾ ɪzən ʌs." ən ðən i læft əz ɪf ðət wɝ ə faɪn dʒoʊk.

Bashere snorted so hard that his heavy mustaches stirred. "I think it's a deadly stew, is what I think. Somebody's going to choke to death on it. The Light send it isn't us." And then he laughed as if that were a fine joke.

luz θɝɪn læft, tu.

Lews Therin laughed, too.


tʃæptɝ twɛntiɾu


CHAPTER 22

ɡæðɝɪŋ klaʊdz


Gathering Clouds

ʌndɝ ə stɛɾi dʒɹɪzəl ɹændz smɔl ɑɹmi fɔɹm kɑləmz əkɹɔs ðə loʊ foʊldəd hɪlz feɪsɪŋ ðə nəmɑɝɛlɪn piks, dɑɹk ən ʃɑɹp əɡɛns ðə wɛstɝn skaɪ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹil nid tə feɪs ðə dɝɛkʃən jə ɪntɛndəd tə tʃɹævəl, bʌɾ ɪɾ ɔlweɪz fɛlt əskju tə ɹænd ʌðɝwaɪz. dɪspaɪt ðə ɹeɪn, ɹæpədli θɪnɪŋ ɡɹeɪ klaʊdz lɛt θɹu stɑɹtlɪŋli bɹaɪt sʌnʃaɪn. əɹ meɪbi ðə deɪ oʊnli sim bɹaɪt, æftɝ ɔl ðə ɹisənt ɡlum.

Under a steady drizzle Rand's small army formed columns across the low folded hills facing the Nemarellin peaks, dark and sharp against the western sky. There was no real need to face the direction you intended to Travel, but it always felt askew to Rand otherwise. Despite the rain, rapidly thinning gray clouds let through startlingly bright sunshine. Or maybe the day only seemed bright, after all the recent gloom.

fɔɹ ə ðə kɑləmz wɝ hɛɾəd baɪ bæʃɪɹz sɑldəiənz, bændi-lɛɡəɾ ənɑɹmɝd mɛn ɪn ʃɔɹt koʊts stændɪŋ peɪʃənli bɪsaɪd ðɛɹ maʊns bɪniθ ə smɔl fɔɹəst ə ʃaɪnɪŋ læns hɛdz, ði ʌðɝ faɪv baɪ blu-koʊɾəd mɛn wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən ɑn ðɛɹ tʃɛsts, kəmændəd baɪ ə ʃɔɹt stɑki fɛloʊ neɪm dʒæk meɪsɑnd. wən meɪsɑn muvd, ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz wɪð sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ kwɪknəs, bʌɾ i wɑz ʌɾɝli stɪl naʊ, fit plæntəɾ əstʃɹaɪɾ ən hænz foʊldəd bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk. hɪz mɛn wɝ ɪn pleɪs, ən soʊ wɝ ðə dɪfɛndɝz ən kəmpænjənz, ɡɹʌmpi əbaʊt biɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪnfəntʃɹi. ɪt wɑz ðə noʊbəlz ən ðɛɹ foʊk, meɪnli, hu mɪld əbaʊɾ əz ɪf ənʃʊɹ wɛɹ tə ɡoʊ. θɪk mʌd sʌkt ət hʊvz ən buts, ən maɪɹd kɑɹt wilz; ʃaʊɾəd kɝsɪz ɹoʊz. ɪt tʊk taɪm tə laɪn ʌp nɪɹli sɪks θaʊzən soʊk mɛn, ɡɛɾɪŋ wɛɾɝ baɪ ðə mɪnət. ən ðət wɑz nɑt kaʊntɪŋ ðə səplaɪ kɑɹts, ən ðə ɹimaʊns.

Four of the columns were headed by Bashere's Saldaeans, bandy-legged unarmored men in short coats standing patiently beside their mounts beneath a small forest of shining lance heads, the other five by blue-coated men with the Dragon on their chests, commanded by a short stocky fellow named Jak Masond. When Masond moved, it was always with surprising quickness, but he was utterly still now, feet planted astride and hands folded behind his back. His men were in place, and so were the Defenders and Companions, grumpy about being behind infantry. It was the nobles and their folk, mainly, who milled about as if unsure where to go. Thick mud sucked at hooves and boots, and mired cart wheels; shouted curses rose. It took time to line up nearly six thousand soaked men, getting wetter by the minute. And that was not counting the supply carts, and the remounts.

ɹænd hæd dɑn ɪz faɪnəst, soʊ hi wəd stæn aʊɾ əɾ ə ɡlæns. ə lɪk wɪð ðə paʊɝ hæd pɑlɪʃt ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝz spɪɹhɛd tə mɪɹɝ bɹaɪtnəs, ən ənʌðɝ hæd bɝnɪʃt ðə kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz soʊ ðə ɡoʊld ɡlimd. ðə ɡɪldɪd dʒɹæɡən bʌkəl ə hɪz sɔɹd bɛl kɑt ðə laɪt, ən soʊ dɪd ðə θɹɛd-ʌv-ɡoʊld ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ðət kʌvɝɾ ɪz blu sɪlk koʊt. fəɹ ə moʊmənt, hi ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd ɡɪvɪŋ əweɪ ðə dʒɛmz ðət wʌns hæd dɛkt ɪz sɔɹdz hɪlt ən skæbɝd. ðə dɑɹk bɔɹhaɪd wɑz sɝvəsəbəl, bʌɾ ɛni ɑɹmsmən cʊɾə wɔɹn ðæt. lɛt mɛn noʊ hu hi wɑz. lɛt ðə sintʃæn noʊ hu hæd kʌm tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðɛm.

Rand had donned his finest, so he would stand out at a glance. A lick with the Power had polished the Dragon Scepter's spearhead to mirror brightness, and another had burnished the Crown of Swords so the gold gleamed. The gilded Dragon buckle of his sword belt caught the light, and so did the thread-of-gold embroidery that covered his blue silk coat. For a moment, he regretted giving away the gems that once had decked his sword's hilt and scabbard. The dark boarhide was serviceable, but any armsman could have worn that. Let men know who he was. Let the Seanchan know who had come to destroy them.

sɪɾɪŋ teɪdeɪʃɝ ɑn ə bɹɔd flæt, hi ɪmpeɪʃənli wɑtʃt ðə noʊbəlz ɹɔɪl əbaʊɾ ɑn ðə hɪlz. ə lɪɾəl weɪ ɔf ɑn ðə flæt, dʒɛdwɪn ən ɹɑtʃeɪd sæt ðɛɹ sæɾəlz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛɹ mɛn, ɔl fɔɹmd ɪndə ə pɹɪsaɪs bɑks, dɛɾəkeɪtəd ɪn ðə fɹʌn ɹæŋk, soʊlʒɝz laɪn ʌp bɪhaɪnd. ðeɪ lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə pɝeɪd. əz mɛni hæd ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ əɹ nɪɹli nʌn əz wɝ jʌŋ - sɛvɹəl wɝ əz jʌŋ əz hɑpwəl əɹ mɔɹ - bʌɾ ɛvɹi wʌn wɑz stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ. ðət hæd bɪn ə ɹɪkwaɪɹmənt. flɪn ən dæʃivə weɪɾəd bɪhaɪn ɹænd ɪn ə kæʒəwəl klʌstɝ wɪð ædli ən mɔɹ, hɑpwəl ən nɛɹɪʃmə. ən ə ɹɪdʒəd pɛɹ ə maʊntəd bænɝmɪn, wʌn tɛɹən ən wʌn kɛɹhinɪn, ðɛɹ bɹɛstpleɪts ən hɛlməts ən ivən ðɛɹ stil-bækt ɡɔnləts bʌft ən pɑlɪʃt tɪl ðeɪ ʃoʊn. ðə kɹɪmzən bænɝ ə laɪɾ ən ðə lɔŋ waɪt dʒɹæɡən bænɝ hʌŋ lɪmp ən dʒɹɪpɪŋ. ɹænd hæɾ əsum ðə paʊɝ ɪn ɪz tɛnt, wɛɹ ɪz moʊməntɛɹi stæɡɝ wəd nɑt bi sin, ən ðə spɑɹs ɹeɪn feɪl baɪ ən ɪntʃ tə tʌtʃ ɪm əɹ ɪz hɔɹs.

Sitting Tai'daishar on a broad flat, he impatiently watched the nobles roil about on the hills. A little way off on the flat, Gedwyn and Rochaid sat their saddles in front of their men, all formed into a precise box, Dedicated in the front rank, Soldiers lined up behind. They looked ready to parade. As many had gray hair or nearly none as were young - several were as young as Hopwil or Morr - but every one was strong enough to make a gateway. That had been a requirement. Flinn and Dashiva waited behind Rand in a casual cluster with Adley and Morr, Hopwil and Narishma. And a rigid pair of mounted bannermen, one Tairen and one Cairhienin, their breastplates and helmets and even their steel-backed gauntlets buffed and polished till they shone. The crimson Banner of Light and the long white Dragon Banner hung limp and dripping. Rand had assumed the Power in his tent, where his momentary stagger would not be seen, and the sparse rain failed by an inch to touch him or his horse.

ðə teɪn ɑn seɪɾɪn fɛlt ɪspɛʃli hɛvi tədeɪ, ə θɪk faʊl ɔɪl ðəɾ uzd ɪndə hɪz pɔɹz ən steɪn ɪz boʊnz dip. steɪn ɪz soʊl. hi hæd θɔt hɪmsɛlf əkʌstəm tə ðə vɪlnəs, æftɝ ə fæʃən, jɛt tədeɪ ɪt wɑz nɔʒieɪɾɪŋ, stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ðə fɹoʊzən faɪɝ ən moʊltən koʊld ə seɪɾɪn ɪtsɛlf. hi hɛld ɑn tə ðə sɔɹs əz ɔfən əz pɑsəbəl naʊ, æksɛptɪŋ ðə vɪlnəs tə əvɔɪd ðə nu sɪknəs ə sizɪŋ ɪt. ɪt kəd bi dɛdli, ɪf i lɛt sɪknəs dɪstʃɹækt ɪm fɹəm ðət stʃɹʌɡəl. meɪbi ɪt wɑz kənɛktəd tə ðə dɪzi spɛlz, sʌmhaʊ. laɪt, hi kəd nɑt ɡoʊ mæd jɛt, ən i kəd nɑt daɪ. nɑt jɛt. ðəɹ wɑz tu mʌtʃ stɪl tə bi dʌn.

The taint on saidin felt especially heavy today, a thick foul oil that oozed into his pores and stained his bones deep. Stained his soul. He had thought himself accustomed to the vileness, after a fashion, yet today it was nauseating, stronger than the frozen fire and molten cold of saidin itself. He held on to the Source as often as possible now, accepting the vileness to avoid the new sickness of seizing it. It could be deadly, if he let sickness distract him from that struggle. Maybe it was connected to the dizzy spells, somehow. Light, he could not go mad yet, and he could not die. Not yet. There was too much still to be done.

hi pɹɛst ɪz lɛf lɛɡ əɡɛns teɪdeɪʃɝz flæŋk dʒʌs tə fil ðə lɔŋ bʌndəl stʃɹæp bɪtwin stɝəp lɛðɝ ən skɑɹlət sæɾəl klɔθ. ɛvɹi taɪm i dɪd ðæt, sʌmθɪŋ ɹɪəld əkɹɔs ði aʊtsaɪɾ ə ðə vɔɪd. æntɪsəpeɪʃən, ən meɪbi ə tʌtʃ ə fɪɹ. wɛl tʃɹeɪnd, ðə ɡɛldɪŋ stɑɹɾəd tə tɝn lɛft, ən ɹænd hæd tə ɹeɪn ɪm bæk. wən wəd ðə noʊbəlz sɔɹt ðɛmsɛlvz aʊt? hi ɡɹaʊn ɪz tiθ ɪn ɪmpeɪʃəns.

He pressed his left leg against Tai'daishar's flank just to feel the long bundle strapped between stirrup leather and scarlet saddle cloth. Every time he did that, something wriggled across the outside of the Void. Anticipation, and maybe a touch of fear. Well trained, the gelding started to turn left, and Rand had to rein him back. When would the nobles sort themselves out? He ground his teeth in impatience.

hi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ əz ə bɔɪ hɪɹɪŋ mɛn læf ðət wən ɹeɪn fɛl ɪn sʌnʃaɪn ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɑz biɾɪŋ sɛmɝhɪdʒ. səm ə ðət læftɝ hæd bɪn ənizi, ðoʊ, ən skɹɔni oʊl sɛn bui wəɾ ɔlweɪz snɑɹl ðət sɛmɝhɪdʒ wəd bi smɑɹɾɪŋ ən æŋɡɹi æftɝ ðæt, ən kʌm fəɹ smɔl bɔɪz u dɪd nɑt kip aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ ɛldɝz' weɪ. ðət hæd bɪn ɪnʌf tə sɛn ɹænd ɹʌnɪŋ, wən i wɑz lɪɾəl. hi wɪʃt sɛmɝhɪdʒ wəd kʌm fəɹ ɪm naʊ, ɹaɪt ðəɾ ɪnstənt. hi wəd meɪk əɹ wip.

He could remember as a boy hearing men laugh that when rain fell in sunshine the Dark One was beating Semirhage. Some of that laughter had been uneasy, though, and scrawny old Cenn Buie would always snarl that Semirhage would be smarting and angry after that, and come for small boys who did not keep out of their elders' way. That had been enough to send Rand running, when he was little. He wished Semirhage would come for him now, right that instant. He would make her weep.

nʌθɪŋ meɪks sɛmɝhɪdʒ wip, luz θɝɪn mʌɾɝd. ʃi ɡɪvz tɪɹz tə ʌðɝz, bʌt ʃiz nʌn hɝsɛlf.

Nothing makes Semirhage weep, Lews Therin muttered. She gives tears to others, but she has none herself.

ɹænd læf sɔfli. ɪf ʃi keɪm tədeɪ, hi wəd meɪk əɹ wip. hɝ ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən təɡɛðɝ, ɪf ðeɪ keɪm tədeɪ. moʊst əʃʊɹədli hi wəd meɪk ðə sintʃæn wip.

Rand laughed softly. If she came today, he would make her weep. Her and the rest of the Forsaken together, if they came today. Most assuredly he would make the Seanchan weep.

nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz plizd wɪð ði ɔɹɾɝz i hæd ɡɪvən. sunəmənz ɔɪli smaɪl vænɪʃt wən i θɔt ɹænd dɪd nɑt si. tʃɹiən hæɾ ə flæsk ɪn ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz, noʊ daʊt bɹændi, əɹ meɪbi sɛvɹəl flæsks, kəz i dʒɹæŋk stɛɾəli ən nɛvɝ əpɪɹd tə ɹʌn dʒɹaɪ. səmɝædʒɹɪɾ ən mɑɹkəlɪn ən taɪhɛɹə itʃ əpɪɹɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ɹænd tə pɹoʊtɛs ðə nʌmbɝz wɪð sɑmbɝ feɪsəz. ə fju jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ, kloʊs ɑn sɪks θaʊzən mɛn wʊɾə bɪn ɑɹmi ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛni wɔɹ, bʌt ðeɪ hæd sin ɑɹmiz ɪn ðə tɛnz ə θaʊzənz, naʊ, hʌnʒɹədz ə θaʊzənz, əz ɪn ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz deɪ, ən tə ɡoʊ əɡɛns ðə sintʃæn, ðeɪ wɑntəd fɑɹ mɔɹ. hi sɛn əm əweɪ dɪsɡɹʌntəld. ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðət fɪfti-ɑɾ æʃəmən wɝ əz bɪɡ ə hæmɝ əz ɛniwʌn kəd wɪʃ fɔɹ. ɹænd wʌndɝd wʌt ðeɪ wʊɾə sɛd hæɾ i toʊld əm i wɑz hæmɝ ɪnʌf baɪ hɪmsɛlf. hi hæd kənsɪɾɝd duɪŋ ðɪs baɪ hɪmsɛlf. ɪt maɪt kʌm tə ðət jɛt.

Not everyone was pleased with the orders he had given. Sunamon's oily smile vanished when he thought Rand did not see. Torean had a flask in his saddlebags, no doubt brandy, or maybe several flasks, because he drank steadily and never appeared to run dry. Semaradrid and Marcolin and Tihera each appeared in front of Rand to protest the numbers with somber faces. A few years before, close on six thousand men would have been army enough for any war, but they had seen armies in the tens of thousands, now, hundreds of thousands, as in Artur Hawkwing's day, and to go against the Seanchan, they wanted far more. He sent them away disgruntled. They did not understand that fifty-odd Asha'man were as big a hammer as anyone could wish for. Rand wondered what they would have said had he told them he was hammer enough by himself. He had considered doing this by himself. It might come to that yet.

wɪɹɑmɑn keɪm; hi dɪd nɑt laɪk hævɪŋ tə teɪk ɔɹɾɝz fɹəm bæʃɪɹ, əɹ ðə fæk ðət ðeɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ ɪndə maʊntənz - vɛɹi hɑɹd tə maʊn ə disən tʃɑɹdʒ ɪn maʊntənz - əɹ sɛvɹəl ʌðɝ θɪŋz - ɹænd wɑz sɝɾən ðəɹ wɝ ət list sɛvɹəl mɔɹ - ðət ɹænd dɪd nɑt lɛɾ ɪm ʌɾɝ.

Weiramon came; he did not like having to take orders from Bashere, or the fact that they were going into mountains - very hard to mount a decent charge in mountains - or several other things - Rand was certain there were at least several more - that Rand did not let him utter.

"ðə sɑldəiən simz tə bɪliv aɪ ʃəd ɹaɪɾ ɑn ðə ɹaɪt flæŋk," wɪɹɑmɑn mʌɾɝd dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋli. hi twɪstəɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz əz ðoʊ ðə ɹaɪt flæŋk wɝ ə ɡɹeɪɾ ɪnsəlt, fəɹ səm ɹizən. "æn ðə fʊt, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. ɹɪli, aɪ θɪŋk - "

"The Saldaean seems to believe I should ride on the right flank," Weiramon muttered disparagingly. He twisted his shoulders as though the right flank were a great insult, for some reason. "And the foot, my Lord Dragon. Really, I think - "

"aɪ θɪŋk jə ʃəd ɡɛt jəɹ mɛn ɹɛɾi," ɹænd sɛd koʊldli. pɑɹɾ ə ðə tʃɪl wɑz ði ɪfɛkt ə floʊɾɪŋ ɪn ɪmoʊʃənləs ɛmptinəs. "ɔɹ jə woʊn bi ɑn ɛni flæŋk." hi mɛn ðəɾ i wəd liv ðə mæn bɪhaɪn ɪf i wɑz nɑt ɹɛɾi ɪn taɪm. ʃʊɹli sətʃ ə ful kəd nɑt meɪk mʌtʃ tʃɹʌbəl lɛft ɪn ðɪs ɹɪmoʊt spɑt wɪð oʊnli ə fju ɑɹmmɪn. ɹænd wəd bi bæk bɪfɔɹ i kəd ɹaɪd tə ɛniθɪŋ lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ə vɪlədʒ.

"I think you should get your men ready," Rand said coldly. Part of the chill was the effect of floating in emotionless emptiness. "Or you won't be on any flank." He meant that he would leave the man behind if he was not ready in time. Surely such a fool could not make much trouble left in this remote spot with only a few armsmen. Rand would be back before he could ride to anything larger than a village.

blʌd dʒɹeɪn fɹəm wɪɹɑmɑnz feɪs, ðoʊ. "æz maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən kəmænz," hi sɛd, bɹɪskli fəɹ hɪm, ən wɑz wɝlɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs əweɪ bɪfɔɹ ðə wɝdz wɝ wɛl aʊɾ ə hɪz maʊð. hɪz maʊnt wɑz ə tɔl dip-tʃɛstəd beɪ, tədeɪ.

Blood drained from Weiramon's face, though. "As my Lord Dragon commands," he said, briskly for him, and was whirling his horse away before the words were well out of his mouth. His mount was a tall deep-chested bay, today.

ðə peɪl leɪɾi eɪlɪl ɹeɪn tə ə stɑp ɪn fɹʌn ə ɹænd, əkʌmpənid baɪ ðə haɪ leɪɾi ænɑiɛlə, ə stʃɹeɪnʒ pɛɹ tə bi ɪn kʌmpəni, ən nɑt dʒʌs kəz ðɛɹ neɪʃənz heɪɾəd wʌn ənʌðɝ. eɪlɪl wɑz tɔl fəɹ ə kɛɹhinɪn wʊmən, ɪf oʊnli fəɹ ə kɛɹhinɪn, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊɾ əɹ wɑz dɪɡnəɾi ən pɹisɪʒən, fɹəm ði ɑɹtʃ ə hɝ aɪbɹaʊ tə ðə tɝn ə hɝ ɹɛd-ɡlʌvd ɹɪs tə ðə weɪ hɝ pɝl-kɑlɝd ɹeɪn keɪp leɪ spɹɛɾ əkɹɔs ðə ɹʌmp ə hɝ smoʊk-ɡɹeɪ mɛɹ. ənlaɪk səmɝædʒɹɪɾ əɹ mɑɹkəlɪn, wɪɹɑmɑn əɹ taɪhɛɹə, ʃi dɪd nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz blɪŋk ət ðə saɪɾ ə ɹeɪndʒɹɑps slaɪɾɪŋ daʊn nʌθɪŋ ɝaʊn hɪm. ænɑiɛlə dɪd blɪŋk. ən ɡæsp. ən tɪɾɝ bɪhaɪn əɹ hænd. ænɑiɛlə wɑz wɪləwi ən dɑɹkli bjuɾəfəl, hɝ ɹeɪn keɪp kɑlɝd wɪð ɹubiz ən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð ɡoʊl bɪsaɪdz, bʌt ðəɹ ɛni ɹɪzɛmbləns tə eɪlɪl ɛndəd. ænɑiɛlə wɑz ɔl mɪnsɪŋ ɛləɡəns ən sɪmpɝz. wən ʃi baʊd, hɝ waɪt ɡɛldɪŋ dɪd, tu, bɛndɪŋ ɪts fɔɹɛlɛɡz. ðə pɹænsɪŋ ænəməl wɑz ʃoʊi, bʌt ɹænd səspɛktəɾ ɪt hæd noʊ bɑɾəm. laɪk ɪts mɪstʃɹəs.

The pale Lady Ailil reined to a stop in front of Rand, accompanied by the High Lady Anaiyella, a strange pair to be in company, and not just because their nations hated one another. Ailil was tall for a Cairhienin woman, if only for a Cairhienin, and everything about her was dignity and precision, from the arch of her eyebrow to the turn of her red-gloved wrist to the way her pearl-collared rain cape lay spread across the rump of her smoke-gray mare. Unlike Semaradrid or Marcolin, Weiramon or Tihera, she did not so much as blink at the sight of raindrops sliding down nothing around him. Anaiyella did blink. And gasp. And titter behind her hand. Anaiyella was willowy and darkly beautiful, her rain cape collared with rubies and embroidered with gold besides, but there any resemblance to Ailil ended. Anaiyella was all mincing elegance and simpers. When she bowed, her white gelding did, too, bending its forelegs. The prancing animal was showy, but Rand suspected it had no bottom. Like its mistress.

"maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," eɪlɪl sɛd, "aɪ mʌs meɪk wʌn mɔɹ pɹoʊɾɛst əɡɛns maɪ ɪnkluʒən ɪn ðɪs . . . ɛkspədɪʃən." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz kuli nutʃɹəl, ɪf nɑɾ ɪɡzækli ənfɹɛnli. "aɪ wɪl sɛn maɪ ɹɪteɪnɝz wɛɹ jə kəmæn ən wɛn, bʌɾ aɪ hæv noʊ dɪzaɪɝ əɾ ɔl tə bi ɪn ðə θɪk ʌv ə bæɾəl."

"My Lord Dragon," Ailil said, "I must make one more protest against my inclusion in this . . . expedition." Her voice was coolly neutral, if not exactly unfriendly. "I will send my retainers where you command and when, but I have no desire at all to be in the thick of a battle."

"oʊ, noʊ," ænɑiɛlə æɾəd, wɪð ə dɛləkət ʃʌɾɝ. ivən əɹ toʊn sɪmpɝd! "næsti θɪŋz, bæɾəlz. soʊ maɪ mæstɝ ə ðə hɔɹs sɛz. ʃʊɹli jə woʊn ɹɪli meɪk əs ɡoʊ, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən? wiv hɝd juv ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ kɛɹ fəɹ wɪmən. hævənt wi, eɪlɪl?"

"Oh, no," Anaiyella added, with a delicate shudder. Even her tone simpered! "Nasty things, battles. So my Master of the Horse says. Surely you won't really make us go, my Lord Dragon? We've heard you have a particular care for women. Haven't we, Ailil?"

ɹænd wɑz soʊ əstɑnɪʃt ðət ðə vɔɪd kəlæpst, ən seɪɾɪn vænɪʃt. ɹeɪndʒɹɑps bɪɡæn tə tʃɹɪkəl θɹu hɪz hɛɹ ən sip θɹu hɪz koʊt, bʌt fəɹ ə moʊmənt, klʌtʃɪŋ ɪz sæɾəlz haɪ pɑməl tə hoʊl hɪmsɛlf əpɹaɪt, siɪŋ fɔɹ wɪmən ɪnstɛɾ ə tu, hi wɑz tu stʌn tə noʊɾəs. haʊ mʌtʃ dɪd ðeɪ noʊ? ðeɪ hæd hɝd? haʊ mɛni pipəl nu? haʊ dɪɾ ɛniwʌn noʊ? laɪt, ɹumɝ hæɾ ɪm kɪlɪŋ mɔɹɡeɪs, ɪleɪn, koʊləveɪɪɹ, ə hʌnʒɹəd wɪmən pɹɑbli, ən itʃ ɪn ə wɝs weɪ ðən ðə læst! hi swɑloʊɾ əɡɛns ði ɝdʒ tə sɪk ʌp. ðət wɑz oʊnli pɑɹtli seɪɾɪnz fɔlt. bɝn mi, haʊ mɛni spaɪz ɑɹ ðəɹ wɑtʃɪŋ mi? ðə θɔt wɑz ə ɡɹaʊl.

Rand was so astonished that the Void collapsed, and saidin vanished. Raindrops began to trickle through his hair and seep through his coat, but for a moment, clutching his saddle's high pommel to hold himself upright, seeing four women instead of two, he was too stunned to notice. How much did they know? They had heard? How many people knew? How did anyone know? Light, rumor had him killing Morgase, Elayne, Colavaere, a hundred women probably, and each in a worse way than the last! He swallowed against the urge to sick up. That was only partly saidin's fault. Burn me, how many spies are there watching me? The thought was a growl.

ðə dɛd wɑtʃ, luz θɝɪn wɪspɝd. ðə dɛd nɛvɝ kloʊs ðɛɹ aɪz. ɹænd ʃɪvɝd.

The dead watch, Lews Therin whispered. The dead never close their eyes. Rand shivered.

"aɪ də tʃɹaɪ tə bi kɛɹfəl ʌv wɪmən," hi toʊld əm wən i kəd spik. fæstɝ ðən ə mæn, ən fəɹ hæf ðə ɹizən. "ðæts waɪ aɪ wɑnə kip jə kloʊz ðə nɛks fju deɪz. bʌɾ ɪf jə ɹɪli dɪslaɪk ði aɪdiə soʊ mʌtʃ, aɪ kəd tɛl ɔf wʌn ə ði æʃəmən. jud bi seɪf ət ðə blæk taʊɝ." ænɑiɛlə skwik pɹɪɾəli, bʌɾ əɹ feɪs wɛnt ɡɹeɪ.

"I do try to be careful of women," he told them when he could speak. Faster than a man, and for half the reason. "That's why I want to keep you close the next few days. But if you really dislike the idea so much, I could tell off one of the Asha'man. You'd be safe at the Black Tower." Anaiyella squeaked prettily, but her face went gray.

"θæŋk ju, noʊ," eɪlɪl sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt, æbsəlutli kɑm. "aɪ səpoʊz aɪ hæd bɛs kənfɝ wɪð maɪ læns-kæptən əbaʊt wʌt tə ɪkspɛkt." bʌt ʃi pɔzd ɪn tɝnɪŋ əɹ mɛɹ əweɪ, ən ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ɹænd wɪð ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊk. "maɪ bɹʌðɝ tɔɹæm ɪz . . . ɪmpɛtʃwəs, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. ivən ɹæʃ. aɪm nɑt."

"Thank you, no," Ailil said after a moment, absolutely calm. "I suppose I had best confer with my lance-captain about what to expect." But she paused in turning her mare away, and regarded Rand with a sidelong look. "My brother Toram is . . . impetuous, my Lord Dragon. Even rash. I am not."

ænɑiɛlə smaɪl mʌtʃ tu switli ət ɹænd, ən æktʃəli  ɹɪəl slaɪtli bɪfɔɹ fɑloʊɪŋ, bʌt wʌns ʃi feɪst əweɪ fɹəm hɪm, ʃi dʌɡ ɪn əɹ hilz ən wɝkt əɹ dʒuəl-hændəl kwɝt, kwɪkli pæsɪŋ ði ʌðɝ wʊmən. ðət waɪt ɡɛldɪŋ ʃoʊɾ ə sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ tɝn ə spid.

Anaiyella smiled much too sweetly at Rand, and actually wriggled slightly before following, but once she faced away from him, she dug in her heels and worked her jewel-handled quirt, quickly passing the other woman. That white gelding showed a surprising turn of speed.

ət læst ɔl wɑz ɹɛɾi, ðə kɑləmz fɔɹmd, sneɪkɪŋ bæk oʊvɝ ðə loʊ hɪlz.

At last all was ready, the columns formed, snaking back over the low hills.

"bɪɡɪn," ɹænd toʊl dʒɛdwɪn, hu wild ɪz hɔɹs ən bɪɡæn bɑɹkɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz tə hɪz mɛn. ði eɪt dɛɾəkeɪtəd ɹoʊd fɔɹwɝɾ ən dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ðeɪ hæd mɛmɝaɪzd, feɪsɪŋ ðə maʊntənz. wʌn ə ðɛm lʊk fəmɪljɝ, ə ɡɹɪzəl fɛloʊ huz pɔɪntəd tɛɹən bɪɹɾ əpɪɹɾ ɑɾ ɑn ɪz ɹɪŋkəl kʌntʃɹimənz feɪs. eɪt vɝɾɪkəl laɪnz ə ʃɑɹp blu laɪt tɝn ən bɪkeɪm oʊpənɪŋz ðət ʃoʊd slaɪtli dɪfɹən vjuz ʌv ə lɔŋ, spɑɹsli wʊɾɪd maʊntən væli ɹaɪzɪŋ tə ə stip pæs. ɪn ɔltɑɹə. ɪn ðə vɛnɪɹ maʊntənz.

"Begin," Rand told Gedwyn, who wheeled his horse and began barking orders to his men. The eight Dedicated rode forward and dismounted on the ground they had memorized, facing the mountains. One of them looked familiar, a grizzled fellow whose pointed Tairen beard appeared odd on his wrinkled countryman's face. Eight vertical lines of sharp blue light turned and became openings that showed slightly different views of a long, sparsely wooded mountain valley rising to a steep pass. In Altara. In the Venir Mountains.

kɪl ðɛm, luz θɝɪn wɛpt pliɾɪŋli. ðəɹ tu deɪnʒɝəs tə lɪv! wɪθaʊt θɔt, ɹænd səpɹɛs ðə vɔɪs. ənʌðɝ mæn tʃænəlɪŋ ɔfən bɹɔt ðət ɹiækʃən fɹəm luz θɝɪn, əɹ ivən ə mæn u kʊd. hi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wʌndɝd waɪ.

Kill them, Lews Therin wept pleadingly. They're too dangerous to live! Without thought, Rand suppressed the voice. Another man channeling often brought that reaction from Lews Therin, or even a man who could. He no longer wondered why.

ɹænd mʌɾɝd ə kəmænd, ən flɪn blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz bɪfɔɹ hɝiɪŋ tə dʒɔɪn ðə laɪn ən wiv ə naɪnθ ɡeɪtweɪ. nʌn wɑz əz lɑɹdʒ əz ɹænd kəd meɪk, bʌɾ ɛni wəd pæs ə kɑɹt, ɪf kloʊsli. hi hæɾ ɪntɛndəd tə də ðət hɪmsɛlf, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt wɑnə tʃæns sizɪŋ seɪɾɪn əɡɛn ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɛvɹiwʌn. hi noʊɾəst dʒɛdwɪn ən ɹɑtʃeɪd wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, wɛɹɪŋ aɪdɛntɪkəl noʊɪŋ smaɪlz. ən dæʃivə əz wɛl, fɹaʊnɪŋ, lɪps muvɪŋ əz i tɔk tə hɪmsɛlf. wɑz ɪɾ ɪz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən, əɹ wɑz nɛɹɪʃmə aɪɪŋ ɪm əskæns tu? ən ædli? mɔɹ?

Rand muttered a command, and Flinn blinked in surprise before hurrying to join the line and weave a ninth gateway. None was as large as Rand could make, but any would pass a cart, if closely. He had intended to do that himself, but he did not want to chance seizing saidin again in front of everyone. He noticed Gedwyn and Rochaid watching him, wearing identical knowing smiles. And Dashiva as well, frowning, lips moving as he talked to himself. Was it his imagination, or was Narishma eyeing him askance too? And Adley? Morr?

ɹænd ʃɪvɝd bɪfɔɹ i kəd stɑp hɪmsɛlf. mɪstʃɹʌst ə dʒɛdwɪn ən ɹɑtʃeɪd wɑz sɪmpəl sɛns, bʌt wɑz i kʌmɪŋ daʊn wɪð wʌt nɪneɪiv hæd kɔl ðə dʒɹɛdz? ə kaɪndə mædnəs, ə kɹɪpəlɪŋ dɑɹk səspɪʃən ʌv ɛvɹiwʌn ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ? ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə kɑplɪn, bɛnli, hu θɔɾ ɛvɹibɑɾi wɑz skimɪŋ əɡɛns hɪm. hi hæd stɑɹv tə dɛθ wən ɹænd wɑz ə bɔɪ, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə it fəɹ fɪɹ ə pɔɪzən.

Rand shivered before he could stop himself. Mistrust of Gedwyn and Rochaid was simple sense, but was he coming down with what Nynaeve had called the dreads? A kind of madness, a crippling dark suspicion of everyone and everything? There had been a Coplin, Benly, who thought everybody was scheming against him. He had starved to death when Rand was a boy, refusing to eat for fear of poison.

dʌkɪŋ loʊ ɑn teɪdeɪʃɝz nɛk, ɹænd hil ðə ɡɛldɪŋ θɹu ðə lɑɹdʒəst ɡeɪtweɪ. flɪnz, əz ɪt hæpənd, bʌɾ i wʊɾə ɹɪɾən θɹu wʌn meɪd baɪ dʒɛdwɪn ɹaɪt ðɛn. hi wɑz ðə fɝst ɑntu ɔltɑɹən sɔɪl.

Ducking low on Tai'daishar's neck, Rand heeled the gelding through the largest gateway. Flinn's, as it happened, but he would have ridden through one made by Gedwyn right then. He was the first onto Altaran soil.

ði ʌðɝz fɑloʊd kwɪkli, ði æʃəmən fɝst ʌv ɔl. dæʃivə stɛɹɾ ɪn ɹændz dɝɛkʃən, fɹaʊnɪŋ, ən nɛɹɪʃmə, tu, bʌt dʒɛdwɪn ɪmiɾiətli bɪɡæn dɝɛktɪŋ ɪz soʊlʒɝz. wʌn baɪ wʌn, ðeɪ ɹʌʃt fɔɹwɝd, oʊpən ə ɡeɪtweɪ ən dɑɹɾɪd θɹu, dʒɹæɡɪŋ ðɛɹ maʊns bɪhaɪn ðɛm. əhɛɾ ʌp ðə væli, bɹaɪt flæʃɪz ə laɪt toʊld ʌv ɡeɪtweɪz oʊpənɪŋ ən kloʊzɪŋ. ði æʃəmən kəd tʃɹævəl ʃɔɹt dɪstənsəz wɪθaʊt fɝs mɛmɝaɪzɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊn ðeɪ lɛft fɹʌm, ən kʌvɝ ɡɹaʊn fɑɹ fæstɝ ðən ɹaɪɾɪŋ. ɪn ʃɔɹɾ ɔɹɾɝ, oʊnli dʒɛdwɪn ən ɹɑtʃeɪd ɹɪmeɪnd, əsaɪd fɹəm ðə dɛɾəkeɪtəd hoʊldɪŋ ðə ɡeɪtweɪz. ði ʌðɝz wəd bi fænɪŋ aʊt wɛstwɝd, sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ sintʃæn. ðə sɑldəiənz wɝ θɹu fɹəm ɪljən, ən maʊntɪŋ. lidʒənmɛn spɹɛɾ ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz əɾ ə tʃɹɑt, kɹɔsboʊz hɛld ɹɛɾi. ɪn ðɪs kʌntʃɹi, ðeɪ kəd muv əz fæst əfʊɾ əz mɛn ɑn hɔɹsbæk.

The others followed quickly, the Asha'man first of all. Dashiva stared in Rand's direction, frowning, and Narishma, too, but Gedwyn immediately began directing his Soldiers. One by one, they rushed forward, opened a gateway and darted through, dragging their mounts behind them. Ahead up the valley, bright flashes of light told of gateways opening and closing. The Asha'man could Travel short distances without first memorizing the ground they left from, and cover ground far faster than riding. In short order, only Gedwyn and Rochaid remained, aside from the Dedicated holding the gateways. The others would be fanning out westward, searching for Seanchan. The Saldaeans were through from Illian, and mounting. Legionmen spread into the trees at a trot, crossbows held ready. In this country, they could move as fast afoot as men on horseback.

əz ðə ɹɛst ə ði ɑɹmi bɪɡæn ɪmɝdʒɪŋ, ɹænd ɹoʊɾ ʌp ðə væli ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ði æʃəmən hæd ɡɔn. maʊntənz ɹoʊz haɪ bɪhaɪn hɪm, ə wɔl fɹʌntɪŋ ðə dip, bʌt wɛs ðə piks ɹæn ɔlmoʊs tə ɛbu dɑɹ. hi kwɪkən ðə ɡɛldɪŋz peɪs tə ə kæntɝ.

As the rest of the army began emerging, Rand rode up the valley in the direction the Asha'man had gone. Mountains rose high behind him, a wall fronting the Deep, but west the peaks ran almost to Ebou Dar. He quickened the gelding's pace to a canter.

bæʃɪɹ kɑɾ ɪm bɪfɔɹ i ɹitʃt ðə pæs. ðə mænz beɪ wɑz smɔl - moʊst ə ðə sɑldəiənz ɹoʊd smɔl hɔɹsəz - bʌt kwɪk. "noʊ sintʃæn hɪɹ, ɪt simz," hi sɛɾ ɔlmoʊst aɪdli, stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ɪz mʌstæʃɪz wɪð ə nʌkəl. "bʌt ðəɹ kəɾ əv bɪn. tɛnoʊbiəz laɪkli tə hæv maɪ hɛɾ ɑn ə paɪk sun ɪnʌf fəɹ fɑloʊɪŋ ə laɪv dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, mʌtʃ mɔɹ ə dɛd wʌn."

Bashere caught him before he reached the pass. The man's bay was small - most of the Saldaeans rode small horses - but quick. "No Seanchan here, it seems," he said almost idly, stroking his mustaches with a knuckle. "But there could have been. Tenobia's likely to have my head on a pike soon enough for following a live Dragon Reborn, much more a dead one."

ɹænd skaʊld. meɪbi hi kəd teɪk flɪn, tə wɑtʃ ɪz bæk, ən nɛɹɪʃmə, ænd. . . . flɪn hæd seɪvd ɪz laɪf; ðə mæn hæd tə bi tʃɹu. mɛn kəd tʃeɪnʒ, ðoʊ. ən nɛɹɪʃmə? ivən æftɝ . . . ? hi fɛl koʊld ət ðə ɹɪsk i hæd teɪkən. nɑt ðə dʒɹɛdz. nɛɹɪʃmə hæd pɹuv tʃɹu, bʌɾ ɪt stɪl hæd bɪn ə mæd ɹɪsk. əz mæɾ əz ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm stɛɹz i wɑz nɑɾ ivən ʃʊɹ wɝ ɹil, ɹʌnɪŋ tə wɛɹ i hæd noʊ noʊʃən wʌt wɑz weɪɾɪŋ. bæʃɪɹ wɑz ɹaɪt, bʌt ɹænd dɪd nɑt wɑnə tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt fɝðɝ.

Rand scowled. Maybe he could take Flinn, to watch his back, and Narishma, and. . . . Flinn had saved his life; the man had to be true. Men could change, though. And Narishma? Even after . . . ? He felt cold at the risk he had taken. Not the dreads. Narishma had proved true, but it still had been a mad risk. As mad as running from stares he was not even sure were real, running to where he had no notion what was waiting. Bashere was right, but Rand did not want to talk about it further.

ðə sloʊps liɾɪŋ ʌp ɪndə ðə pæs wɝ bɛɹ stoʊn ən boʊldɝz ʌv ɔl saɪzəz, bʌɾ əmʌŋ ðə nætʃɹəl stoʊn leɪ wɛðɝd pisəz ʌv wʌt mʌst əv wʌns bɪn ə hjudʒ stætʃu. səm wɝ dʒʌst ɹɛkəɡnaɪzəbəl əz wɝk stoʊn, ʌðɝz mɔɹ soʊ. ə bɛɹɪn hænd nɪɹli bɪɡ əz ɪz tʃɛst, ɡɹɪpɪŋ ə sɔɹd hɪlt wɪð ə bɹoʊkən stʌb ə bleɪd waɪɾɝ ðən ɪz hænd. ə ɡɹeɪt hɛd, ə wʊmən wɪð kɹæks əkɹɔs əɹ feɪs ən ə kɹaʊn ðət sim tə bi meɪɾ ʌv ʌp-θɹʌstɪŋ dæɡɝz, səm stɪl hoʊl.

The slopes leading up into the pass were bare stone and boulders of all sizes, but among the natural stone lay weathered pieces of what must have once been a huge statue. Some were just recognizable as worked stone, others more so. A beringed hand nearly big as his chest, gripping a sword hilt with a broken stub of blade wider than his hand. A great head, a woman with cracks across her face and a crown that seemed to be made of up-thrusting daggers, some still whole.

"hu dʒju θɪŋk ʃi wɑz?" hi æskt. ə kwin, ʌv kɔɹs. ivən ɪf mɝtʃəns əɹ skɑlɝz hæd wɔɹn kɹaʊnz ɪn səm dɪstən taɪm, oʊnli ɹulɝz ən dʒɛnɝəlz ɝn stætʃuz.

"Who do you think she was?" he asked. A queen, of course. Even if merchants or scholars had worn crowns in some distant time, only rulers and generals earned statues.

bæʃɪɹ twɪstəɾ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl tə stʌɾi ðə hɛd bɪfɔɹ spikɪŋ. "eɪ kwin ə ʃioʊɾə, əl weɪdʒɝ," hi sɛd faɪnəli. "nɑɾ oʊldɝ. aɪ sɔ ə stætʃu meɪɾ ɪn ɛɹən wʌns, ən ɪt wɑz soʊ wɔɹn jə kʊdn seɪ wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz mæn əɹ wʊmən. ə kɑŋkɝɝ, əɹ ðeɪ wʊdn əv ʃoʊn əɹ wɪð ə sɔɹd. ən aɪ sim tə ɹikɔl ʃioʊɾə ɡeɪv ə kɹaʊn laɪk ðət tə ɹulɝz u ɪkspændəd ðə bɔɹɾɝz. meɪbi ðeɪ kɔld ɪt ðə kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz, ɛ? eɪ bɹaʊn sɪstɝ maɪt bi eɪbəl tə tɛl jə mɔɹ."

Bashere twisted in his saddle to study the head before speaking. "A Queen of Shiota, I'll wager," he said finally. "Not older. I saw a statue made in Eharon once, and it was so worn you couldn't say whether it was man or woman. A conqueror, or they wouldn't have shown her with a sword. And I seem to recall Shiota gave a crown like that to rulers who expanded the borders. Maybe they called it the Crown of Swords, eh? A Brown sister might be able to tell you more."

"ɪɾ ɪzən ɪmpɔɹɾənt," ɹænd toʊld ɪm ɪɹɪɾəbli. ðeɪ dɪd lʊk laɪk sɔɹdz.

"It isn't important," Rand told him irritably. They did look like swords.

bæʃɪɹ wɛn ɑn ɛniweɪ, ɡɹeɪɪŋ aɪbɹaʊz loʊɝd, ɡɹeɪvli sɪɹiəs. "aɪ ɪkspɛk θaʊzənz tʃɪɹd hɝ, kɔld əɹ ðə hoʊp ə ʃioʊɾə, meɪbi ivən bɪlivd ʃi wɑz. ɪn əɹ taɪm, ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn əz fɪɹɾ ən ɹɪspɛktɪɾ əz ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ wɑz leɪɾɝ, bʌt naʊ ivən ðə bɹaʊn sɪstɝz meɪ nɑt noʊ hɝ neɪm. wən jə daɪ, pipəl bɪɡɪn tə fɝɡɛt, hu jə wɝ ən wʌt jə dɪd, əɹ tʃɹaɪd tə du. ɛvɹibɑɾi daɪz ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ən ɛvɹibɑɾi ɪz fɝɡɑɾən, ɪvɛntʃəwəli, bʌt ðɛɹz noʊ blʌɾi pɔɪn daɪɪŋ bɪfɔɹ jəɹ taɪm kʌmz."

Bashere went on anyway, graying eyebrows lowered, gravely serious. "I expect thousands cheered her, called her the hope of Shiota, maybe even believed she was. In her time, she might have been as feared and respected as Artur Hawkwing was later, but now even the Brown sisters may not know her name. When you die, people begin to forget, who you were and what you did, or tried to do. Everybody dies eventually, and everybody is forgotten, eventually, but there's no bloody point dying before your time comes."

"aɪ doʊn ɪntɛn tə," ɹænd sɛd ʃɑɹpli. hi nu wɛɹ i wɑz mɛn tə daɪ, ɪf nɑt wɛn. hi θɔɾ i dɪd.

"I don't intend to," Rand said sharply. He knew where he was meant to die, if not when. He thought he did.

ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ kɑt moʊʃən, bæk daʊn wɛɹ bɛɹ stoʊn ɡeɪv weɪ tə bɹʌʃ ən ə fju smɔl tʃɹiz. fɪfti peɪsɪz əweɪ, ə mæn stɛpt ɪndə ði oʊpən ən ɹeɪzd ə baʊ, smuðli dʒɹɔɪŋ flɛtʃɪŋz tə tʃik. ɛvɹiθɪŋ sim tə hæpən ət wʌns.

The corner of his eye caught motion, back down where bare stone gave way to brush and a few small trees. Fifty paces away, a man stepped into the open and raised a bow, smoothly drawing fletchings to cheek. Everything seemed to happen at once.

snɑɹlɪŋ, ɹænd hɔl teɪdeɪʃɝ ɝaʊnd, wɑtʃɪŋ ði ɑɹtʃɝ ədʒʌs tə fɑloʊ. hi siz seɪɾɪn ən swit laɪf ən fɪlθ pɔɹɾ ɪndə hɪm təɡɛðɝ. hɪz hɛd spʌn. ðəɹ wɝ tu ɑɹtʃɝz. baɪl ɹoʊz ɪn ɪz θɹoʊɾ əz i fɔt waɪld, ʌnkəntʃɹoʊl sɝdʒəz ə ðə paʊɝ ðət tʃɹaɪd tə sɪɹ ɪm tə ðə boʊn ən fɹiz ɪz flɛʃ sɑləd. hi kəd nɑt kəntʃɹoʊl ðɛm; ɪt wɑz ɔl i kəd də tə steɪ əlaɪv. dɛspɝətli, hi fɔt tə klɪɹ ɪz saɪt, tə bi eɪbəl tə si wɛl ɪnʌf tə wiv ðə floʊz i kəd bɛɹli fɔɹm, wɪð nɔziə flʌɾɪŋ ɪm əz stʃɹɔŋli əz ðə paʊɝ. hi θɔɾ i hɝd bæʃɪɹ ʃaʊt. tu ɑɹtʃɝz lust.

Snarling, Rand hauled Tai'daishar around, watching the archer adjust to follow. He seized saidin and sweet life and filth poured into him together. His head spun. There were two archers. Bile rose in his throat as he fought wild, uncontrolled surges of the Power that tried to sear him to the bone and freeze his flesh solid. He could not control them; it was all he could do to stay alive. Desperately, he fought to clear his sight, to be able to see well enough to weave the flows he could barely form, with nausea flooding him as strongly as the Power. He thought he heard Bashere shout. Two archers loosed.

ɹænd ʃəɾ əv daɪd. ət ðət ɹeɪnʒ, ə bɔɪ cʊɾə hɪɾ ɪz tɑɹɡət. meɪbi biɪŋ tɑvɝən seɪv hɪm. əz ði ɑɹtʃɝ lɛt flaɪ, ə kʌvi ʌv ɡɹeɪ-wɪŋ kweɪl bɝst ʌp ɔlmoʊst əɾ ɪz fiɾ ʌɾɝɪŋ pɪɹsɪŋ wɪsəlz. nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə θɹoʊ ɔf ən ɪkspɪɹiəns mæn, ən ɪndid, ðə fɛloʊ oʊnli flɪntʃt ə hɛɹ. ɹænd fɛl ðə wɪn ə ði æɹoʊz pæsədʒ əɡɛnst ɪz tʃik.

Rand should have died. At that range, a boy could have hit his target. Maybe being ta'veren saved him. As the archer let fly, a covey of gray-winged quail burst up almost at his feet uttering piercing whistles. Not enough to throw off an experienced man, and indeed, the fellow only flinched a hair. Rand felt the wind of the arrow's passage against his cheek.

faɪɝbɔlz ðə saɪz ə fɪsts sʌɾənli stʃɹʌk ði ɑɹtʃɝ. hi skɹimd əz ɪz ɑɹm spʌn əweɪ, hæn stɪl ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə baʊ. ənʌðɝ tʊk ɪz lɛf lɛɡ ət ðə ni, ən i fɛl ʃɹikɪŋ.

Fireballs the size of fists suddenly struck the archer. He screamed as his arm spun away, hand still gripping the bow. Another took his left leg at the knee, and he fell shrieking.

linɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪz sæɾəl, ɹænd vɑməɾəd ɑntu ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hɪz stʌmək tʃɹaɪd tə hiv ʌp ɛvɹi mil i hæɾ ɛvɝ iɾən. ðə vɔɪɾ ən seɪɾɪn lɛft wɪð ə sɪkənɪŋ ɹɛntʃ. ɪt wɑz nɪɹli mɔɹ ðən i kəd mænədʒ nɑt tə fɔl.

Leaning out of his saddle, Rand vomited onto the ground. His stomach tried to heave up every meal he had ever eaten. The Void and saidin left with a sickening wrench. It was nearly more than he could manage not to fall.

wən i kəd sɪɾ əpɹaɪɾ əɡɛn, hi tʊk ðə waɪt lɪnən hæŋkɝtʃɪf bæʃɪɹ saɪlənli ɔfɝd, ən waɪpt ɪz maʊð. ðə sɑldəiən fɹaʊnd wɪð kənsɝn, əz wɛl i maɪt. ɹændz stʌmək wɑntəd tə faɪn mɔɹ tə spju aʊt. hi θɔɾ ɪz feɪs mʌs bi peɪl. hi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. luzɪŋ seɪɾɪn ðət weɪ kəd kɪl ju. bʌɾ i kəd stɪl sɛns ðə sɔɹs; ət list seɪɾɪn hæd nɑt bɝn ɪm aʊt. ət list i kəd si pɹɑpɝli; ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ. bʌt ði ɪlnəs simd ə lɪɾəl wɝs itʃ taɪm i siz seɪɾɪn.

When he could sit upright again, he took the white linen handkerchief Bashere silently offered, and wiped his mouth. The Saldaean frowned with concern, as well he might. Rand's stomach wanted to find more to spew out. He thought his face must be pale. He drew a deep breath. Losing saidin that way could kill you. But he could still sense the Source; at least saidin had not burned him out. At least he could see properly; there was only one Davram Bashere. But the illness seemed a little worse each time he seized saidin.

"lɛts si ɪf ðɛɹz ɪnʌf lɛft ə ðɪs fɛloʊ tə tɔk," hi toʊl bæʃɪɹ. ðəɹ wɑz nɑt.

"Let's see if there's enough left of this fellow to talk," he told Bashere. There was not.

ɹɑtʃeɪd wɑz ɑn ɪz niz, kɑmli sɝtʃɪŋ θɹu ðə kɔɹpsəz tɔɹn, blʌdsteɪn koʊt. bɪsaɪdz ɪz mɪsɪŋ ɑɹm ən lɛɡ, ðə dɛd mæn hæɾ ə blækən hoʊl əz bɪɡ əz ɪz hɛɾ ɔl ðə weɪ θɹu hɪz tʃɛst. ɪt wɑz iɡən pædʒɹoʊs; hɪz saɪtləs aɪz stɛɹɾ ət ðə skaɪ ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. dʒɛdwɪn ɪɡnɔɹd ðə bɑɾi əɾ ɪz fit, stʌɾiɪŋ ɹænd ɪnstɛd, əz koʊld əz ɹɑtʃeɪd. boʊθ mɛn hɛl seɪɾɪn. sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, luz θɝɪn oʊnli moʊnd.

Rochaid was on his knees, calmly searching through the corpse's torn, bloodstained coat. Besides his missing arm and leg, the dead man had a blackened hole as big as his head all the way through his chest. It was Eagan Padros; his sightless eyes stared at the sky in surprise. Gedwyn ignored the body at his feet, studying Rand instead, as cold as Rochaid. Both men held saidin. Surprisingly, Lews Therin only moaned.

ɪn ə klæɾɝ ə hʊvz ɑn stoʊn, flɪn ən nɛɹɪʃmə keɪm ɡæləpɪŋ ʌp ðə ɹaɪz, fɑloʊd baɪ nɪɹli ə hʌnʒɹəd sɑldəiənz. əz ðeɪ keɪm kloʊs, ɹænd kəd fil ðə paʊɝ ɪn ðə ɡɹɪzəld oʊl mæn ən ðə jʌŋɡɝ, meɪbi əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ kəd hoʊld. ðeɪ hæd boʊθ lɛpt ʌp ɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ sɪns dəməaɪz wɛlz. ðət wɑz ðə weɪ ʌv ɪt wɪð mɛn; wɪmən sim tə ɡeɪn smuðli, bʌt mɛn sʌɾənli dʒʌmpt. flɪn wɑz stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən dʒɛdwɪn əɹ ɹɑtʃeɪɾ iðɝ wʌn, ən nɛɹɪʃmə nɑt fɑɹ bɪhaɪnd. fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə noʊ haʊ ɪt wəɾ ɛnd. nʌn keɪm kloʊs tə mætʃɪŋ ɹænd, ðoʊ. nɑt jɛt, ɛniweɪ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə tɛl wʌt taɪm wəd bɹɪŋ. nɑt ðə dʒɹɛdz.

In a clatter of hooves on stone, Flinn and Narishma came galloping up the rise, followed by nearly a hundred Saldaeans. As they came close, Rand could feel the Power in the grizzled old man and the younger, maybe as much as they could hold. They had both leaped up in strength since Dumai's Wells. That was the way of it with men; women seemed to gain smoothly, but men suddenly jumped. Flinn was stronger than Gedwyn or Rochaid either one, and Narishma not far behind. For the time being; there was no way to know how it would end. None came close to matching Rand, though. Not yet, anyway. There was no way to tell what time would bring. Not the dreads.

"ɪt simz ɪts wɛl wi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə fɑloʊ ju, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən." dʒɛdwɪnz vɔɪs əsum kənsɝn, dʒʌst ʃaɪ ʌv mɑkɪŋ. "ɑɹ jə sʌfɝɪŋ fɹəm ə tɛndɝ stʌmək ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ?"

"It seems it's well we decided to follow you, my Lord Dragon." Gedwyn's voice assumed concern, just shy of mocking. "Are you suffering from a tender stomach this morning?"

ɹænd dʒʌst ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hi kəd nɑt teɪk ɪz aɪz fɹəm pædʒɹoʊs' feɪs. waɪ? kəz i hæd kɑŋkɝɾ ɪljən? kəz ðə mæn hæd bɪn lɔɪəl tə "lɔɹd bɹɛnd"?

Rand just shook his head. He could not take his eyes from Padros' face. Why? Because he had conquered Illian? Because the man had been loyal to "Lord Brend"?

wɪð ə laʊɾ ɛkskləmeɪʃən, ɹɑtʃeɪd ɹɪpt ə wɑʃ-lɛðɝ paʊtʃ fɹəm pædʒɹoʊs' koʊt pɑkəɾ ən ʌpɛndəɾ ɪt. bɹaɪt ɡoʊldən kɔɪnz spɪld ɑntu ðə stoʊni ɡɹaʊnd, baʊnsɪŋ ən klɪŋkɪŋ. "θɝɾi kɹaʊnz," hi ɡɹaʊld. "tɑɹ vəlɑn kɹaʊnz. noʊ daʊɾ u peɪd hɪm." hi snætʃt ə kɔɪn ən tɔst ɪɾ ʌp fəɹ ɹænd, bʌt ɹænd meɪd noʊ ɛfɝt tə kætʃ ɪt, ən ɪt ɡlænst ɔf ɪz ɑɹm.

With a loud exclamation, Rochaid ripped a wash-leather pouch from Padros' coat pocket and upended it. Bright golden coins spilled onto the stony ground, bouncing and clinking. "Thirty crowns," he growled. "Tar Valon crowns. No doubt who paid him." He snatched a coin and tossed it up for Rand, but Rand made no effort to catch it, and it glanced off his arm.

"ðɛɹz plɛnti ʌv tɑɹ vəlɑn kɔɪn tə bi faʊnd," bæʃɪɹ sɛd kɑmli. "hæf ðə mɛn ɪn ðɪs væli hæv ə fju ɪn ðɛɹ pɑkəts. aɪ du, maɪsɛlf" dʒɛdwɪn ən ɹɑtʃeɪd swɪvəl tə lʊk ət hɪm. bæʃɪɹ smaɪl bɪhaɪn ɪz θɪk mʌstæʃɪz, əɹ ət list ʃoʊd tiθ, bʌt səm ə ðə sɑldəiənz ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz ən fɪŋɡɝd bɛl paʊtʃəz.

"There's plenty of Tar Valon coin to be found," Bashere said calmly. "Half the men in this valley have a few in their pockets. I do, myself" Gedwyn and Rochaid swiveled to look at him. Bashere smiled behind his thick mustaches, or at least showed teeth, but some of the Saldaeans shifted uneasily in their saddles and fingered belt pouches.

ʌp wɛɹ ðə pæs lɛvəld ɔf fəɹ ə bɪt bɪtwin stip maʊntən sloʊps, ə slæʃ ə laɪt ɹoʊteɪɾɪd ɪndə ə ɡeɪtweɪ, ən ə tɑp-nɑɾɪd ʃaɪnɝən ɪn ə pleɪn blæk koʊt tʃɹɑɾəd θɹu, pʊlɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs bɪhaɪn hɪm. ɪɾ əpɪɹd ðə fɝst sintʃæn hæd bɪn faʊnd, ən nɑt tu fɑɹ əweɪ ɪf ðə mæn wɑz bæk soʊ kwɪkli.

Up where the pass leveled off for a bit between steep mountain slopes, a slash of light rotated into a gateway, and a top-knotted Shienaran in a plain black coat trotted through, pulling his horse behind him. It appeared the first Seanchan had been found, and not too far away if the man was back so quickly.

"taɪm tə muv," ɹænd toʊl bæʃɪɹ. ðə mæn nɑɾəd, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt stɝ. ɪnstɛd, hi stʌɾid ðə tu æʃəmən stændɪŋ nɪɹ pædʒɹoʊs. ðeɪ ɪɡnɔɹd hɪm.

"Time to move," Rand told Bashere. The man nodded, but he did not stir. Instead, he studied the two Asha'man standing near Padros. They ignored him.

"wʌt də wi də wɪð hɪm?" dʒɛdwɪn dɪmændəd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ tə ðə kɔɹps. "wi ɔt tə sɛn ɪm bæk tə ðə wɪtʃəz, ət list."

"What do we do with him?" Gedwyn demanded, gesturing to the corpse. "We ought to send him back to the witches, at least."

"liv hɪm," ɹænd ɹɪplaɪd.

"Leave him," Rand replied.

ɑɹ jə ɹɛɾi tə kɪl naʊ? luz θɝɪn æskt. hi dɪd nɑt saʊn ɪnseɪn əɾ ɔl.

Are you ready to kill now? Lews Therin asked. He did not sound insane at all.

nɑt jɛt, ɹænd θɔt. sun.

Not yet, Rand thought. Soon.

dɪɡɪŋ ɪz hilz ɪndə teɪdeɪʃɝz flæŋks, hi ɡæləp bæk daʊn təwɔɹɾ ɪz ɑɹmi. dæʃivə ən flɪn fɑloʊd kloʊsli, ən bæʃɪɹ ən ðə hʌnʒɹəd sɑldəiənz. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊn əz ɪf ðeɪ ɪkspɛktəɾ ənʌðɝ ətɛmpt ɑn ɪz laɪf. tə ði ist, blæk klaʊdz wɝ bɪldɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə piks, ənʌðɝ sɛmɑɹoʊz stɔɹm. sun.

Digging his heels into Tai'daishar's flanks, he galloped back down toward his army. Dashiva and Flinn followed closely, and Bashere and the hundred Saldaeans. They were all looking around as if they expected another attempt on his life. To the east, black clouds were building among the peaks, another cemaros storm. Soon.

ðə hɪltɑp kæmp wɑz wɛl leɪɾ aʊt, wɪð ə miændɝɪŋ stʃɹim kloʊs baɪ fəɹ wɔɾɝ ən ɡʊd laɪnz ə saɪt tə ðə laɪkliəst weɪz ɪndə ðə lɔŋ maʊntən mɛdoʊ. əsɪd bɑkən dɪd nɑt fil pɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə kæmp. dʊɹɪŋ θɝɾi jɪɹz ɪn ði ɛvɝ vɪktɔɹiəs ɑɹmi, hi hæd meɪd hʌnʒɹədz ə kæmps; hi wəɾ əz sun əv fɛl pɹaɪɾ ɪn wɔkɪŋ əkɹɔs ə ɹum wɪθaʊt fɔlɪŋ daʊn. nɔɹ dɪɾ i fil pɹaɪɾ ɪn wɛɹ i wɑz. θɝɾi jɪɹz sɝvɪŋ ði ɛmpɹɛs, maɪt ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ, ən waɪl ðəɹ hæd bɪn ði əkeɪʒənəl ɹɪbɛljən baɪ səm mæɾ ʌpstɑɹt wɪð aɪz ɑn ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn, ðə bʌlk ə ðoʊz jɪɹz hæd bɪn spɛn pɹipɛɹɪŋ fəɹ ðɪs. fəɹ tu dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz, waɪl ðə ɡɹeɪt ʃɪps wɝ bɪl tə kæɹi ðə ɹɪtɝn, ði ɛvɝ vɪktɔɹiəs ɑɹmi hæd tʃɹeɪn ən pɹipɛɹd. bɑkən sɝɾənli hæd bɪn pɹaʊd wən i lɝn i wɑz tə bi wʌn ə ðə fɔɹʌnɝz. ʃʊɹli hi kəd bi fɝɡɪvən dʒɹimz ə ɹəteɪkɪŋ ðə lænz stoʊlən fɹəm ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɹaɪtfəl ɛɹz, ivən waɪl dʒɹimz tə kəmpliɾɪŋ ðɪs nu kənsɑlədeɪʃən bɪfɔɹ ðə kɔɝɪn keɪm. nɑt sətʃ ə waɪl dʒɹim æftɝ ɔl, əz ɪt tɝn aʊt, bʌt nɑɾ əɾ ɔl ðə weɪ hi hæɾ ɪmædʒənd.

The hilltop camp was well laid out, with a meandering stream close by for water and good lines of sight to the likeliest ways into the long mountain meadow. Assid Bakuun did not feel pride in the camp. During thirty years in the Ever Victorious Army, he had made hundreds of camps; he would as soon have felt pride in walking across a room without falling down. Nor did he feel pride in where he was. Thirty years serving the Empress, might she live forever, and while there had been the occasional rebellion by some mad upstart with eyes on the Crystal Throne, the bulk of those years had been spent preparing for this. For two generations, while the great ships were built to carry the Return, the Ever Victorious Army had trained and prepared. Bakuun certainly had been proud when he learned he was to be one of the Forerunners. Surely he could be forgiven dreams of retaking the lands stolen from Artur Hawkwing's rightful heirs, even wild dreams to completing this new Consolidation before the Corenne came. Not such a wild dream after all, as it turned out, but not at all the way he had imagined.

ə ɹɪtɝnɪŋ pətʃɹoʊl ə fɪfti tæɹɑbənɝ lænsɝz ɹoʊɾ ʌp ðə hɪlsaɪd, ɹɛɾ ən ɡɹin stʃɹaɪps peɪntəɾ əkɹɔs ðɛɹ sɑləd bɹɛstpleɪts, veɪlz ə meɪl haɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ θɪk mʌstæʃɪz. ðeɪ ɹoʊd wɛl, ən ivən fɔt wɛl, wən ðeɪ hæd disən liɾɝz. mɔɹ ðən tɛn taɪmz əz mɛni wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi əmʌŋ ðə kʊk faɪɝz, əɹ daʊn ət ðə pɪkət laɪnz tɛndɪŋ ðɛɹ maʊns, ən θɹi pətʃɹoʊlz wɝ stɪl aʊt. bɑkən hæd nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd tə faɪn hɪmsɛlf wɪð wɛl oʊvɝ hæf ɪz kəmæn dɪsɛndəns ə θivz. ən ʌnəʃeɪmd ʌv ɪt; ðeɪ wəd lʊk jə stʃɹeɪɾ ɪn ði aɪz. ðə pətʃɹoʊlz kəmændɝ baʊd loʊ tə hɪm əz ðɛɹ mʌɾi-lɛɡəd hɔɹsəz pæst, bʌt mɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz wɛn ɑn tɔkɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ pəkjuljɝ æksɛns, spikɪŋ tu fæs fəɹ bɑkən tə ʌndɝstænd wɪθaʊt lɪsnɪŋ hɑɹd. ðeɪ hæd pəkjuljɝ noʊʃənz ə dɪsəplən, tu.

A returning patrol of fifty Taraboner lancers rode up the hillside, red and green stripes painted across their solid breastplates, veils of mail hiding their thick mustaches. They rode well, and even fought well, when they had decent leaders. More than ten times as many were already among the cook fires, or down at the picket lines tending their mounts, and three patrols were still out. Bakuun had never expected to find himself with well over half his command descendants of thieves. And unashamed of it; they would look you straight in the eyes. The patrol's commander bowed low to him as their muddy-legged horses passed, but many of the others went on talking in their peculiar accents, speaking too fast for Bakuun to understand without listening hard. They had peculiar notions of discipline, too.

ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd, bɑkən stʃɹoʊɾ əkɹɔs tə ðə sʌldəmz lɑɹdʒ tɛnt. lɑɹdʒɝ ðən hɪz, ʌv nəsɛsəɾi. fɔɹ ə ðɛm wɝ sɪɾɪŋ ɑn stulz aʊtsaɪɾ ɪn ðɛɹ dɑɹk blu dʒɹɛsəz wɪð ðə fɔɹk laɪtnɪŋ ɑn ðə skɝts, ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ ðə sʌn dʊɹɪŋ ðɪs bɹeɪk ɪn ðə stɔɹmz. ðoʊz wɝ ɹɛɹ ɪnʌf, naʊ. ðə ɡɹeɪ-klæd deɪmeɪn sæɾ ət ðɛɹ fit, wɪð nɛɹɪθ bɹeɪɾɪŋ əɹ peɪl hɛɹ. tɔkɪŋ tə hɝ, əz wɛl, ɔl ə ðɛm dʒɔɪnɪŋ ɪn ən læfɪŋ sɔfli. ðə bɹeɪsləɾ ɑn ði ɛn ə ðə sɪlvɝi æɾəmz liʃ leɪ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. bɑkən ɡɹʌntɪd saʊɝli. hi hæɾ ə feɪvɹɪt wʊlfhnd, bæk hoʊm, ən ivən tɔk tə hɪm səmtaɪmz, bʌɾ i nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd nɪp tə kæɹi ɑn ə kɑnvɝseɪʃən!

Shaking his head, Bakuun strode across to the sul'dam's large tent. Larger than his, of necessity. Four of them were sitting on stools outside in their dark blue dresses with the forked lightning on the skirts, enjoying the sun during this break in the storms. Those were rare enough, now. The gray-clad damane sat at their feet, with Nerith braiding her pale hair. Talking to her, as well, all of them joining in and laughing softly. The bracelet on the end of the silvery a'dam's leash lay on the ground. Bakuun grunted sourly. He had a favorite wolfhound, back home, and even talked to him sometimes, but he never expected Nip to carry on a conversation!

"ɪz ʃi wɛl?" hi æsk nɛɹɪθ, nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. əɹ ðə tɛnθ. "ɪz ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɛl wɪð hɝ?" ðə deɪmeɪn dʒɹɑpt əɹ aɪz ən wɛn saɪlənt.

"Is she well?" he asked Nerith, not for the first time. Or the tenth. "Is everything well with her?" The damane dropped her eyes and went silent.

"ʃi ɪz kwaɪt wɛl, kæptən bɑkən." ə skwɛɹ-feɪst wʊmən, nɛɹɪθ pʊt ðə pɹɑpɝ dɪɡɹi ʌv ɹɪspɛkt ɪndə hɝ vɔɪs ən nɑɾ ə wɪskɝ bɪɑnd. bʌt ʃi stʃɹoʊk ðə deɪmeɪnz hɛd suðɪŋli waɪl ʃi tɔkt. "wʌtɛvɝ ði ɪndɪspəzɪʃən, ɪts ɡɔn, naʊ. ə smɔl θɪŋ, ɪn ɛni keɪs. nʌθɪŋ tə wɝi əbaʊt." ðə deɪmeɪn wɑz tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ.

"She is quite well, Captain Bakuun." A square-faced woman, Nerith put the proper degree of respect into her voice and not a whisker beyond. But she stroked the damane's head soothingly while she talked. "Whatever the indisposition, it is gone, now. A small thing, in any case. Nothing to worry about." The damane was trembling.

bɑkən ɡɹʌntɪɾ əɡɛn. nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ði ænsɝ i hæd ɹəsiv bɪfɔɹ. sʌmθɪŋ hæd bɪn ɹɔŋ, ðoʊ, bæk ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ən nɑt dʒʌst wɪð ðɪs deɪmeɪn. ðə sʌldəm hæɾ ɔl bɪn əz taɪt-lɪpt əz klæmz - ən ðə blʌd wəd nɑt seɪ ɛniθɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs, nɑt tə ðə laɪks ə hɪm! - bʌɾ i hæd hɝd tu mɛni wɪspɝz. ðeɪ sɛd ðə deɪmeɪn wɝ ɔl sɪk, əɹ ɪnseɪn. laɪt, hi hæd nɑt sin ə sɪŋɡəl wʌn juzd ɝaʊn ɛbu dɑɹ wʌns ðə sɪɾi wɑz sɪkjʊɹd, nɑɾ ivən fəɹ ə vɪktɝi dɪspleɪ ʌv skaɪ laɪts, ən u hæɾ ɛvɝ hɝd ðə laɪk ə ðæt!

Bakuun grunted again. Not far from the answer he had received before. Something had been wrong, though, back in Ebou Dar, and not just with this damane. The sul'dam had all been as tight-lipped as clams - and the Blood would not say anything, of course, not to the likes of him! - but he had heard too many whispers. They said the damane were all sick, or insane. Light, he had not seen a single one used around Ebou Dar once the city was secured, not even for a victory display of Sky Lights, and who had ever heard the like of that!

"wɛl, aɪ hoʊp ʃi . . . " hi bɪɡæn, ən kʌɾ ɔf əz ə ɹeɪkən əpɪɹd, swipɪŋ θɹu ði istɝn pæs. ɪts ɡɹeɪt lɛðɝi wɪŋz bit paʊɝfli fəɹ haɪt, ən ɹaɪɾ əbʌv ðə hɪl ɪt sʌɾənli tɪltəɾ ən kʌɾ ə taɪt sɝkəl, wʌn wɪŋtɪp pɔɪntəɾ ɔlmoʊst stʃɹeɪt daʊn. ə θɪn ɹɛd stʃɹimɝ fɛl əweɪ ʌndɝ ðə weɪɾ ʌv ə lɛd bɔl.

"Well, I hope she . . . " he began, and cut off as a raken appeared, sweeping through the eastern pass. Its great leathery wings beat powerfully for height, and right above the hill it suddenly tilted and cut a tight circle, one wingtip pointed almost straight down. A thin red streamer fell away under the weight of a lead ball.

bɑkən swɑloʊɾ ə kɝs. flaɪɝz wɝ ɔlweɪz ʃoʊɪŋ ɔf, bʌɾ ɪf ðɪs pɛɹ ɪnʒɝd wʌn ə hɪz mɛn dɪlɪvɝɪŋ ðɛɹ skaʊɾɪŋ ɹipɔɹt, hi wəɾ əv ðɛɹ haɪdz noʊ mæɾɝ u hi hæd tə feɪs tə ɡɛt ðɛm. hi wəd nɑɾ əv wɑntəd tə faɪt wɪθaʊt flaɪɝz tə skaʊt, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ kɑɾəld laɪk səm blʌdz feɪvɹɪt pɛt.

Bakuun swallowed a curse. Fliers were always showing off, but if this pair injured one of his men delivering their scouting report, he would have their hides no matter who he had to face to get them. He would not have wanted to fight without fliers to scout, but they were coddled like some Blood's favorite pet.

æɹoʊ-stʃɹeɪt ðə stʃɹimɝ plʌməɾɪd. ðə lɛd weɪt stʃɹʌk ðə ɡɹaʊn ən baʊnst ɑn ðə kɹɛst, ɔlmoʊs bɪsaɪd ðə tɔl θɪn mɛsədʒ poʊl, wɪtʃ wɑz tu lɔŋ tə loʊɝ ənlɛs ðəɹ wɑz ə mɛsədʒ tə sɛnd. bɪsaɪdz, wən ɪt wɑz lɛf daʊn sʌmbɑɾi wɑz ɔlweɪz stɛpɪŋ ə hɔɹs ɑn ðə θɪŋ ən bɹeɪkɪŋ ðə dʒɔɪnz.

Arrow-straight the streamer plummeted. The lead weight struck the ground and bounced on the crest, almost beside the tall thin message pole, which was too long to lower unless there was a message to send. Besides, when it was left down somebody was always stepping a horse on the thing and breaking the joins.

bɑkən stʃɹoʊd stʃɹeɪt tə hɪz tɛnt, bʌɾ ɪz fɝs lutɛnənt wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi weɪɾɪŋ wɪð ðə mʌd-steɪn stʃɹimɝ ən ðə mɛsədʒ tub. tʃɹəs wɑz ə boʊni mæn ə hɛd tɔlɝ ðən hɪm, wɪð ən ənfɔɹtʃənət skɹæp ə bɪɹd klɪŋɪŋ tə ðə pɔɪn ə hɪz tʃɪn.

Bakuun strode straight to his tent, but his First Lieutenant was already waiting with the mud-stained streamer and the message tube. Tiras was a bony man a head taller than him, with an unfortunate scrap of beard clinging to the point of his chin.

ðə ɹipɔɹt ɹoʊld ʌp ɪn ðə θɪn mɛɾəl tub, ɑn ə slɪp ə peɪpɝ bɑkən kəɾ ɔlmoʊst si θɹu, wɑz ɹɪɾən sɪmpli. hi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn fɔɹs tə ɹaɪɾ ɑn ɹeɪkən əɹ tɔɹeɪkən - ðə laɪt bi θæŋkt, ən ði ɛmpɹɛs, maɪt ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ, bi pɹeɪzd! - bʌɾ i daʊɾɪd ɪt wɑz izi tə hændəl ə pɛn ɪn ə sæɾəl stʃɹæp tə ðə bæk ʌv ə flaɪɪŋ lɪzɝd. wʌɾ ɪt sɛd meɪɾ ɪm flɪp oʊpən ðə lɪɾ ə hɪz smɔl kæmp dɛsk ən ɹaɪt hɝidli.

The report rolled up in the thin metal tube, on a slip of paper Bakuun could almost see through, was written simply. He had never been forced to ride on raken or to'raken - the Light be thanked, and the Empress, might she live forever, be praised! - but he doubted it was easy to handle a pen in a saddle strapped to the back of a flying lizard. What it said made him flip open the lid of his small camp desk and write hurriedly.

"ðɛɹz ə fɔɹs nɑt tɛn maɪlz ist ə hɪɹ," hi toʊl tʃɹəs. "faɪv əɹ sɪks taɪmz əɹ nʌmbɝ." flaɪɝz ɪɡzædʒɝeɪɾəd səmtaɪmz, bʌt nɑɾ ɔfən baɪ mʌtʃ. haʊ hæd ðət mɛni pɛnətʃɹeɪɾəd ðiz maʊntənz soʊ fɑɹ wɪθaʊt biɪŋ spɑɾəd bɪfɔɹ? hi hæd sin ðə koʊs tə ði ist, ən i wɑntəɾ ɪz bɛɹiəl pɹɛɹz peɪd fəɹ bɪfɔɹ i tʃɹaɪɾ ə lændɪŋ ðɛɹ. bɝn ɪz aɪz, ðə flaɪɝz boʊstəd ðeɪ wəd si ə fli muv ɛniwɛɹ ɪn ðə ɹeɪnʒ. "noʊ ɹizən tə θɪŋk ðeɪ noʊ wɝ hɪɹ, bʌɾ aɪd nɑt maɪn ə fju ɹiɪnfɔɹsməns."

"There's a force not ten miles east of here," he told Tiras. "Five or six times our number." Fliers exaggerated sometimes, but not often by much. How had that many penetrated these mountains so far without being spotted before? He had seen the coast to the east, and he wanted his burial prayers paid for before he tried a landing there. Burn his eyes, the fliers boasted they would see a flea move anywhere in the range. "No reason to think they know we're here, but I'd not mind a few reinforcements."

tʃɹəs læft. "wil ɡɪv əm ə bɹʌʃ ə ðə deɪmeɪn, ən ðət wɪl bi ðəɾ ɪf ðeɪ aʊtnʌmbɝ əs baɪ twɛnti taɪmz." hɪz oʊnli ɹil fɔlt wɑz ə tʌtʃ ʌv oʊvɝkɑnfɪɾəns. ə ɡʊd soʊlʒɝ, ðoʊ.

Tiras laughed. "We'll give them a brush of the damane, and that will be that if they outnumber us by twenty times." His only real fault was a touch of overconfidence. A good soldier, though.

"æn ɪf ðeɪv ə fju . . . ɛɛs sədaɪ?" bɑkən sɛd kwaɪətli, hɑɹdli stʌmbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə neɪm, əz i stʌf ðə flaɪɝz ɹipɔɹt bæk ɪndə ðə tub wɪð ɪz oʊn bɹif mɛsədʒ. hi hæd nɑt ɹɪli bɪlivd ɛniwʌn kəd lɛt ðoʊz . . . wɪmən ɹʌn fɹi.

"And if they have a few . . . Aes Sedai?" Bakuun said quietly, hardly stumbling over the name, as he stuffed the flier's report back into the tube with his own brief message. He had not really believed anyone could let those . . . women run free.

tʃɹəs' feɪs ʃoʊd ðəɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə teɪlz əbaʊɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛpən. ðə ɹɛd stʃɹimɝ floʊɾəd bɪhaɪn ɪm əz i ɹæn wɪð ðə mɛsədʒ tub.

Tiras' face showed that he remembered the tales about an Aes Sedai weapon. The red streamer floated behind him as he ran with the message tube.

sun ɪnʌf tub ən stʃɹimɝ wɝ ətætʃt tə ðə tɪp ə ðə mɛsədʒ poʊl, ə taɪni bɹiz stɝɪŋ ðə lɔŋ ɹɛd stʃɹɪp fɪftin peɪsɪz əbʌv ðə hɪl kɹɛst. ðə ɹeɪkən sɔɹd təwɔɹɾ ɪɾ əlɔŋ ðə væli, aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt wɪŋz stɪl əz dɛθ. əbɹʌpli wʌn ə ðə flaɪɝz swʌŋ daʊn fɹəm ðə sæɾəl ən hʌŋ - ʌpsaɪd daʊn! - bɪloʊ ðə ɹeɪkənz tʃɹeɪlɪŋ klɔz. ɪt meɪd bɑkənz stʌmək hɝt tə wɑtʃ. bʌɾ əɹ hæn kloʊzd ɑn ðə stʃɹimɝ, ðə poʊl flɛkst, ðən vaɪbɹeɪɾɪd bæk əpɹaɪɾ əz ðə mɛsədʒ tub pʊl fɹi ʌv ðə klɪp, ən ʃi skɹæmbəl bæk ʌp əz ðə kɹitʃɝ klaɪmd ɪn sloʊ sɝkəlz.

Soon enough tube and streamer were attached to the tip of the message pole, a tiny breeze stirring the long red strip fifteen paces above the hill crest. The raken soared toward it along the valley, outstretched wings still as death. Abruptly one of the fliers swung down from the saddle and hung - upside down! - below the raken's trailing claws. It made Bakuun's stomach hurt to watch. But her hand closed on the streamer, the pole flexed, then vibrated back upright as the message tube pulled free of the clip, and she scrambled back up as the creature climbed in slow circles.

bɑkən θæŋkfəli pʊt ɹeɪkən ən flaɪɝz aʊɾ ə hɪz maɪn əz i sɝveɪd ðə væli. bɹɔɾ ən lɔŋ, nɪɹli flæɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ ðɪs hɪl, ən sɝaʊndəd baɪ stip wʊɾɪd sloʊps; oʊnli ə ɡoʊt kəɾ ɛntɝ, ɪksɛp baɪ ðə pæsəz ɪn ɪz saɪt. wɪð ðə deɪmeɪn, hi kəd kʌɾ ɛnibəɾi tə pisəz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ mænədʒ tə tʃɹaɪ ətækɪŋ əkɹɔs ðət mʌɾi mɛdoʊ. hi hæd pæst wɝɾ əlɔŋ, ðoʊ; ɪf ði ɛnəmi keɪm stʃɹeɪɾ ɑn, ðeɪ wəɾ ɝaɪv bɪfɔɹ ɛni pɑsəbəl ɹiɪnfɔɹsməns baɪ θɹi deɪz ət bɛst. haʊ hæd ðeɪ kʌm ðɪs fɑɹ ənsin?

Bakuun thankfully put raken and fliers out of his mind as he surveyed the valley. Broad and long, nearly flat except for this hill, and surrounded by steep wooded slopes; only a goat could enter, except by the passes in his sight. With the damane, he could cut anybody to pieces before they managed to try attacking across that muddy meadow. He had passed word along, though; if the enemy came straight on, they would arrive before any possible reinforcements by three days at best. How had they come this far unseen?

hi hæd mɪs ðə læs bæɾəlz ə ðə kənsɑlədeɪʃən baɪ tu hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, bʌt səm ə ðoʊz ɹɪbɛljənz hæd nɑt bɪn smɔl. tu jɪɹz faɪɾɪŋ ɑn mɑɹɛndəlɝ, θɝɾi θaʊzən dɛd, ən fɪfti taɪmz ðət ʃɪp bæk tə ðə meɪnlæn əz pɹɑpɝɾi. teɪkɪŋ noʊɾəs ə ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ kɛpt ə soʊlʒɝ əlaɪv. ɔɹɾɝɪŋ ðə kæmp stʃɹʌk ən ɔl saɪnz ʌv ɪt klɪɹd, hi bɪɡæn muvɪŋ ɪz kəmæn tə ðə fɔɹəstəd sloʊps. dɑɹk klaʊdz wɝ mæsɪŋ ɪn ði ist, ənʌðɝ ə ðoʊz kɝst stɔɹmz kʌmɪŋ.

He had missed the last battles of the Consolidation by two hundred years, but some of those rebellions had not been small. Two years fighting on Marendalar, thirty thousand dead, and fifty times that shipped back to the mainland as property. Taking notice of the strange kept a soldier alive. Ordering the camp struck and all signs of it cleared, he began moving his command to the forested slopes. Dark clouds were massing in the east, another of those cursed storms coming.


tʃæptɝ twɛntiθɹi


CHAPTER 23

fɑɡ ʌv wɔɹ, stɔɹm ə bæɾəl


Fog of War, Storm of Battle

noʊ ɹeɪn fɛl, fəɹ ðə moʊmənt. ɹænd ɡaɪɾəd teɪdeɪʃɝ ɝaʊn ən əpɹuɾɪd tʃɹi laɪɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə sloʊp ən fɹaʊn daʊn əɾ ə dɛd mæn spɹɔld ɑn ɪz bæk bɪhaɪn ðə tʃɹi tʃɹʌŋk. ðə fɛloʊ wɑz ʃɔɹɾ ən blɑki, hɪz feɪs kɹist, ən ɪz ɑɹmɝ ɔl oʊvɝlæpɪŋ pleɪts lækɝd blu ən ɡɹin, bʌt stɛɹɪŋ saɪtləsli ət ðə blæk klaʊdz oʊvɝhɛd, hi lʊkt ə dil laɪk iɡən pædʒɹoʊs, ivən tə ðə mɪsɪŋ lɛɡ. ən ɔfəsɝ, pleɪnli; ðə sɔɹd bɪsaɪɾ ɪz aʊtfləŋ hæn hæɾ ən aɪvɝi hɪl kɑɹvd ɪn ðə laɪknəs ʌv ə wʊmən, ən ɪz lækɝd hɛlmət, ʃeɪp laɪk səm hjudʒ ɪnsɛks hɛd, bɔɹ tu lɔŋ θɪn blu plumz.

No rain fell, for the moment. Rand guided Tai'daishar around an uprooted tree lying across the slope and frowned down at a dead man sprawled on his back behind the tree trunk. The fellow was short and blocky, his face creased, and his armor all overlapping plates lacquered blue and green, but staring sightlessly at the black clouds overhead, he looked a deal like Eagan Padros, even to the missing leg. An officer, plainly; the sword beside his outflung hand had an ivory hilt carved in the likeness of a woman, and his lacquered helmet, shaped like some huge insect's head, bore two long thin blue plumes.

əpɹuɾɪd tʃɹiz ən ʃæɾɝd wʌnz, ə fɛɹ nʌmbɝ bɝnɪŋ fɹəm ɛn tə ɛnd, lɪɾɝd ðə sloʊp ə ðə maʊntən fəɹ ə ɡʊd faɪv hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz. bɑɾiz, tu, mɛn bɹoʊkən əɹ ɹɪpt əpɑɹt wən seɪɾɪn hɛɹɹoʊd ðə maʊntənsaɪd. moʊst wɔɹ stil veɪlz əkɹɔs ðɛɹ feɪsəz, ən bɹɛstpleɪts peɪntəɾ ɪn hɔɹəzɑntəl stʃɹaɪps. noʊ wɪmən, θæŋk ðə laɪt. ði ɪnʒɝd hɔɹsəz hæd bɪn pʊt daʊn, ənʌðɝ θɪŋ tə bi θæŋkfəl fɔɹ. ɪt wɑz ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl haʊ laʊdli ə hɔɹs kəd skɹim.

Uprooted trees and shattered ones, a fair number burning from end to end, littered the slope of the mountain for a good five hundred paces. Bodies, too, men broken or ripped apart when saidin harrowed the mountainside. Most wore steel veils across their faces, and breastplates painted in horizontal stripes. No women, thank the Light. The injured horses had been put down, another thing to be thankful for. It was incredible how loudly a horse could scream.

dʒju θɪŋk ðə dɛɾ ɑɹ saɪlənt? luz θɝɪnz læf wɑz ɹæspɪŋ. də ju? hɪz vɔɪs tɝn tə peɪn ɹeɪdʒ. ðə dɛd haʊl ət mi!

Do you think the dead are silent? Lews Therin's laugh was rasping. Do you? His voice turned to pained rage. The dead howl at me!

ət mi, tu, ɹænd θɔt sædli. aɪ kæn əfɔɹd tə lɪsən, bʌt haʊ dʒju ʃʌɾ əm ʌp? luz θɝɪn bɪɡæn wipɪŋ fəɹ ɪz lɔst aɪlaɪɛnə.

At me, too, Rand thought sadly. I can't afford to listen, but how do you shut them up? Lews Therin began weeping for his lost Ilyena.

"ə ɡɹeɪt vɪktɝi," wɪɹɑmɑn ɪntoʊn bɪhaɪn ɹænd, ðən mʌɾɝd, "bʌt smɔl ɑnɝ ɪn ɪt. ði oʊld weɪz ɑɹ bɛst." mʌd lɪbɝəli dɛkɝeɪɾəd ɹændz koʊt, jɛt sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, wɪɹɑmɑn əpɪɹɾ əz pɹɪstin əz i hæd bæk ɑn ðə sɪlvɝ ɹoʊd. hɪz hɛlməɾ ən ɑɹmɝ ʃoʊn. haʊ hæɾ i mænədʒd? ðə tæɹɑbənɝz tʃɑɹdʒd, ət ði ɛnd, lænsɪz ən kɝədʒ əɡɛns ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ən wɪɹɑmɑn hæd lɛɾ ɪz oʊn tʃɑɹdʒ tə bɹeɪk ðɛm. wɪθaʊɾ ɔɹɾɝz, ən fɑloʊd baɪ ɛvɹi tɛɹən seɪv ðə dɪfɛndɝz, ivən ə hæf-dʒɹʌŋk tʃɹiən, sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli. baɪ səmɝædʒɹɪɾ ən ɡɹɛɡɹɪn pɑnɝ, tu, wɪð moʊst ə ðə kɛɹhinɪn ən ɪliɑnɝz. stændɪŋ stɪl hæd bɪn hɑɹd baɪ ðət taɪm, ən ɛvɹi mæn wɑntəd tə kʌm tə ɡɹɪps wɪð sʌmθɪŋ i æktʃəli  kəd kʌm tə ɡɹɪps wɪð. ði cʊɾə əv dʌn ɪt fæstɝ. ɪf sʌmwʌt mɔɹ mɛsəli.

"A great victory," Weiramon intoned behind Rand, then muttered, "But small honor in it. The old ways are best." Mud liberally decorated Rand's coat, yet surprisingly, Weiramon appeared as pristine as he had back on the Silver Road. His helmet and armor shone. How had he managed? The Taraboners charged, at the end, lances and courage against the One Power, and Weiramon had led his own charge to break them. Without orders, and followed by every Tairen save the Defenders, even a half-drunk Torean, surprisingly. By Semaradrid and Gregorin Panar, too, with most of the Cairhienin and Illianers. Standing still had been hard by that time, and every man wanted to come to grips with something he actually could come to grips with. The Asha'man could have done it faster. If somewhat more messily.

ɹænd hæd teɪkən noʊ pɑɹɾ ɪn ðə faɪɾɪŋ, ɪksɛp tə sɪɾ ɪz sæɾəl wɛɹ mɛn kəd si hɪm. hi hæd bɪn əfɹeɪd tə siz ðə paʊɝ. hi dɪd nɑt dɛɹ dɪspleɪ wiknəs fəɹ əm tə kætʃ. nɑɾ ə skɹæp. luz θɝɪn ɡɪbɝd wɪð hɔɹɝ ət ðə vɛɹi aɪdiə.

Rand had taken no part in the fighting, except to sit his saddle where men could see him. He had been afraid to seize the Power. He did not dare display weakness for them to catch. Not a scrap. Lews Therin gibbered with horror at the very idea.

ikwəli sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ əz wɪɹɑmɑnz ənsʌlid koʊt, ænɑiɛlə ɹoʊd wɪð hɪm, ən fəɹ wʌns nɑt sɪmpɝɪŋ. hɝ feɪs wɑz pɪntʃt ən dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ɪt dɪd nɑt spɔɪl əɹ lʊks nɪɹli soʊ mʌtʃ əz əɹ ʌŋtʃwəs smaɪlz dɪd. ʃi hæd nɑt dʒɔɪn ðə tʃɑɹdʒ hɝsɛlf, ʌv kɔɹs, ɛni mɔɹ ðən eɪlɪl, bʌɾ ænɑiɛləz mæstɝ ə ðə hɔɹs hæd, ən ðə mæn wɑz moʊs dɛfənətli dɛd, wɪð ə tæɹɑbənɝ læns θɹu hɪz tʃɛst. ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk ðət wʌn bɪt. bʌt waɪ dɪd ʃi əkʌmpəni wɪɹɑmɑn? dʒʌs tɛɹənz flɑkɪŋ təɡɛðɝ? meɪbi. ʃi hæd bɪn wɪð sunəmən, ðə læst ɹænd hæd sin.

Equally surprising as Weiramon's unsullied coat, Anaiyella rode with him, and for once not simpering. Her face was pinched and disapproving. Strangely, it did not spoil her looks nearly so much as her unctuous smiles did. She had not joined the charge herself, of course, any more than Ailil, but Anaiyella's Master of the Horse had, and the man was most definitely dead, with a Taraboner lance through his chest. She did not like that one bit. But why did she accompany Weiramon? Just Tairens flocking together? Maybe. She had been with Sunamon, the last Rand had seen.

bæʃɪɹ wɔkt ɪz beɪ ʌp ðə sloʊp, pɪkɪŋ ɪz weɪ ɝaʊn ðə dɛd waɪl simɪŋ tə peɪ ðɛm noʊ mɔɹ maɪn ðən i dɪɾ ə splɪntɝd tʃɹi tʃɹʌŋk əɹ ə bɝnɪŋ stʌmp. hɪz hɛlmət hʌŋ fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl, ən ɪz ɡɔnləts wɝ stʌf bɪhaɪn ɪz sɔɹd bɛlt. hi wɑz mʌɾ ɔl daʊn ɪz ɹaɪt saɪd, ən ɪz hɔɹs əz wɛl.

Bashere walked his bay up the slope, picking his way around the dead while seeming to pay them no more mind than he did a splintered tree trunk or a burning stump. His helmet hung from his saddle, and his gauntlets were stuffed behind his sword belt. He was mud all down his right side, and his horse as well.

"ɑɹəkʌmz ɡɔn," hi sɛd. "flɪn tʃɹaɪd hilɪŋ hɪm, bʌɾ aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ɑɹəkʌm wɑntəd tə lɪv laɪk ðæt. ðɛɹz nɪɹ fɪfti dɛd soʊ fɑɹ, ən səm ə ðə ɹɛs maɪt nɑt sɝvaɪv." ænɑiɛlə peɪld. ɹænd hæd sin əɹ nɪɹ ɑɹəkʌm, ɛmptiɪŋ hɝsɛlf. dɛd kɑmənɝz dɪd nɑɾ əfɛkt əɹ soʊ mʌtʃ.

"Aracome's gone," he said. "Flinn tried Healing him, but I don't think Aracome wanted to live like that. There's near fifty dead so far, and some of the rest might not survive." Anaiyella paled. Rand had seen her near Aracome, emptying herself. Dead commoners did not affect her so much.

ɹænd fɛlt ə moʊmən ə pɪɾi. nɑt fəɹ hɝ, ən nɑt vɛɹi mʌtʃ fəɹ ɑɹəkʌm. fəɹ mɪn, ðoʊ ʃi wɑz seɪfli bæk ɪn kɛɹhin. mɪn hæd fɔɹtoʊld ɑɹəkʌmz dɛθ fɹəm wʌn ə hɝ vjuɪŋz, ən ɡəm ən mɑɹəkənz, tu. wʌtɛvɝ ʃi hæd sin, ɹænd hoʊpt ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn ɛniwɛɹ nɪɹ ðə ɹiæləɾi.

Rand felt a moment of pity. Not for her, and not very much for Aracome. For Min, though she was safely back in Cairhien. Min had foretold Aracome's death from one of her viewings, and Gueyam and Maraconn's, too. Whatever she had seen, Rand hoped it had not been anywhere near the reality.

moʊst ə ðə soʊlʒɝz wɝ ɔf skaʊɾɪŋ əɡɛn, bʌt daʊn ɪn ðə bɹɔd mɛdoʊ, ɡeɪtweɪz woʊvən baɪ dʒɛdwɪnz dɛɾəkeɪtəd wɝ spɪlɪŋ aʊt ðə səplaɪ kɑɹts ən ðə ɹimaʊns. ðə mɛn kʌmɪŋ wɪð əm ɡeɪpt əz sun əz ðeɪ wɝ klɪɹ ɪnʌf tə si. ðə mʌɾi ɡɹaʊnd wɑz nɑt soʊ wɛl plaʊɾ əz ðə maʊntənsaɪd, jɛt blækən fɝoʊz, tu peɪsɪz waɪɾ ən fɪfti lɔŋ, kɑɹv θɹu ðə bɹaʊn ɡɹæs, ən ɡeɪpɪŋ hoʊlz ə hɔɹs maɪt nɑt bi eɪbəl tə lip. ðeɪ hæd nɑt faʊn ðə deɪmeɪn soʊ fɑɹ. ɹænd θɔt ðəɹ hæd tə bi oʊnli wʌn; mɔɹ wʊɾə dʌn kənsɪɾɝəbli ɡɹeɪɾɝ dæmədʒ ʌndɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz.

Most of the Soldiers were off scouting again, but down in the broad meadow, gateways woven by Gedwyn's Dedicated were spilling out the supply carts and the remounts. The men coming with them gaped as soon as they were clear enough to see. The muddy ground was not so well plowed as the mountainside, yet blackened furrows, two paces wide and fifty long, carved through the brown grass, and gaping holes a horse might not be able to leap. They had not found the damane so far. Rand thought there had to be only one; more would have done considerably greater damage under the circumstances.

mɛn muvd ɝaʊn ə nʌmbɝ ə smɔl faɪɝz wɛɹ wɔɾɝ bɔɪl fəɹ ti, əmʌŋ ʌðɝ θɪŋz. fəɹ wʌns, tɛɹənz, kɛɹhinɪn ən ɪliɑnɝz mɪŋɡəld. nɑt dʒʌs ðə kɑmənɝz. səmɝædʒɹɪd wɑz ʃɛɹɪŋ ɪz sæɾəl-flæsk wɪð ɡəm, hu wɛɹəli ɹʌbd ə hæn oʊvɝ ɪz bɔl hɛd. mɑɹəkən ən kɹəl dʒɹeɪpeɪnəoʊz, ə stɔɹk ʌv ə mæn huz skwɛɹ-kʌt bɪɹd lʊkt ɑɾ ɑn ɪz nɛɹoʊ feɪs, wɝ skwɑɾɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ hilz nɪɹ wʌn ə ðə faɪɝz. pleɪɪŋ kɑɹdz, baɪ ðə lʊk ʌv ɪt! tʃɹiən hæɾ ə hoʊl sɝkəl ə læfɪŋ kɛɹhinɪn lɔɹɾəlɪŋz ɝaʊn hɪm, ðoʊ ðeɪ maɪɾ əv bɪn lɛs əmjuz baɪ hɪz dʒoʊks ðən baɪ ðə weɪ hi sweɪɾ ən ɹʌbd əɾ ɪz pəteɪtoʊ noʊz. ðə lidʒənmɛn kɛpt əpɑɹt, bʌt ðeɪ hæd teɪkən ɪn ðə "vɑləntɪɹz" hu hæd fɑloʊd pædʒɹoʊs tə ðə bænɝ ə laɪt. ðət lɑt simd mɔɹ iɡɝ ðən ɛniwʌn sɪns lɝnɪŋ haʊ pædʒɹoʊs daɪd. blu-koʊɾəd lidʒənmɛn wɝ ʃoʊɪŋ əm haʊ tə tʃeɪnʒ dɝɛkʃən wɪθaʊt fɔlɪŋ əpɑɹt laɪk ə ɡæɡəl ʌv ɡis.

Men moved around a number of small fires where water boiled for tea, among other things. For once, Tairens, Cairhienin and Illianers mingled. Not just the commoners. Semaradrid was sharing his saddle-flask with Gueyam, who wearily rubbed a hand over his bald head. Maraconn and Kiril Drapaneos, a stork of a man whose square-cut beard looked odd on his narrow face, were squatting on their heels near one of the fires. Playing cards, by the look of it! Torean had a whole circle of laughing Cairhienin lordlings around him, though they might have been less amused by his jokes than by the way he swayed and rubbed at his potato nose. The Legionmen kept apart, but they had taken in the "volunteers" who had followed Padros to the Banner of Light. That lot seemed more eager than anyone since learning how Padros died. Blue-coated Legionmen were showing them how to change direction without falling apart like a gaggle of geese.

flɪn wɑz əmʌŋ ðə wundəd wɪð ædli ən mɔɹ ən hɑpwəl. nɛɹɪʃmə kəd hil lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən maɪnɝ kʌts, noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən ɹænd, ən dæʃivə nɑɾ ivən ðæt. dʒɛdwɪn ən ɹɑtʃeɪd stʊd tɔkɪŋ wɛl əpɑɹt fɹəm ɛniwʌn ɛls, hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz baɪ ðə ɹeɪnz ətɑp ðə hɪl ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə væli. ðə hɪl wɛɹ ðeɪ hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd tə kætʃ ðə sintʃæn baɪ sɝpɹaɪz wən ðeɪ ɹʌʃt aʊɾ ʌv ɡeɪtweɪz sɝaʊndɪŋ ɪt. nɪɹ fɪfti dɛd, ən mɔɹ tə kʌm, bʌɾ ɪt wʊɾə bɪn əbʌv tu hʌnʒɹəd wɪθaʊt flɪn ən ðə ɹɛst u kəd mænədʒ hilɪŋ tə wʌn dɪɡɹi əɹ ənʌðɝ. dʒɛdwɪn ən ɹɑtʃeɪd hæd nɑt wɑntəd tə dɝɾi ðɛɹ hænz ən ɡɹɪməst wən ɹænd dʒɹoʊv əm tə ɪt. wʌn ə ðə dɛd wɑz ə soʊlʒɝ, ən ənʌðɝ soʊlʒɝ, ə ɹaʊnd-feɪs kɛɹhinɪn, sæt slʌmp bɪsaɪɾ ə faɪɝ wɪð ə deɪz lʊk ðət ɹænd hoʊp keɪm fɹəm biɪŋ tɔs θɹu ði ɛɹ baɪ ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪɹʌptɪŋ ɔlmoʊst ʌndɝ ɪz fit.

Flinn was among the wounded with Adley and Morr and Hopwil. Narishma could Heal little more than minor cuts, no better than Rand, and Dashiva not even that. Gedwyn and Rochaid stood talking well apart from anyone else, holding their horses by the reins atop the hill in the middle of the valley. The hill where they had expected to catch the Seanchan by surprise when they rushed out of gateways surrounding it. Near fifty dead, and more to come, but it would have been above two hundred without Flinn and the rest who could manage Healing to one degree or another. Gedwyn and Rochaid had not wanted to dirty their hands and grimaced when Rand drove them to it. One of the dead was a Soldier, and another Soldier, a round-faced Cairhienin, sat slumped beside a fire with a dazed look that Rand hoped came from being tossed through the air by the ground erupting almost under his feet.

daʊn ðəɹ ɑn ðə fɝoʊd flæts, eɪlɪl wɑz kənfɝɪŋ wɪð əɹ læns-kæptən, ə peɪl lɪɾəl mæn kɔl dɛnhɝəd. ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz stʊd nɪɹli tʌtʃɪŋ, ən əkeɪʒənəli ðeɪ lʊkt ʌp ðə maʊntən təwɔɹd ɹænd. wʌt wɝ ðeɪ skimɪŋ?

Down there on the furrowed flats, Ailil was conferring with her Lance-captain, a pale little man called Denharad. Their horses stood nearly touching, and occasionally they looked up the mountain toward Rand. What were they scheming?

"wil də bɛɾɝ nɛks taɪm," bæʃɪɹ mɝmɝd. hi ɹæn ɪz ɡeɪz ɝaʊn ðə væli, ðən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ðə wɝs mɪsteɪk ɪz tə meɪk ðə seɪm wʌn twaɪs, ən wi woʊnt."

"We'll do better next time," Bashere murmured. He ran his gaze around the valley, then shook his head. "The worst mistake is to make the same one twice, and we won't."

wɪɹɑmɑn hɝɾ ɪm ən ɹɪpiɾɪd ðə seɪm θɪŋ, bʌt juzɪŋ twɛnti taɪmz ðə wɝdz, ən flaʊɝi ɪnʌf fəɹ ə ɡɑɹɾən ɪn spɹɪŋ. wɪθaʊɾ ædmɪɾɪŋ ðət ðəɹ hæd bɪn ɛni mɪsteɪks, sɝɾənli nɑɾ ɑn ɪz pɑɹt. hi əvɔɪɾəd ɹændz mɪsteɪks wɪð ikwəl ædʒɹɔɪɑtnəs.

Weiramon heard him and repeated the same thing, but using twenty times the words, and flowery enough for a garden in spring. Without admitting that there had been any mistakes, certainly not on his part. He avoided Rand's mistakes with equal adroitness.

ɹænd nɑɾəd, hɪz maʊθ taɪt. nɛks taɪm ðeɪ wəd də bɛɾɝ. ðeɪ hæd tə, ənlɛs i wɑntəd tə liv hæf ɪz mɛn bɛɹiɾ ɪn ðiz maʊntənz. ɹaɪt ðɛn, hi wɑz wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt tə də wɪð ðə pɹɪznɝz.

Rand nodded, his mouth tight. Next time they would do better. They had to, unless he wanted to leave half his men buried in these mountains. Right then, he was wondering what to do with the prisoners.

moʊst ə ðoʊz u ɪskeɪp dɛθ ɑn ðə maʊntənsaɪd hæd mænədʒ tə wɪðdʒɹɔ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz ðət ɹɪmeɪn stændɪŋ. wɪð əmeɪzɪŋli ɡʊɾ ɔɹɾɝ kənsɪɾɝɪŋ, bæʃɪɹ kleɪmd, jɛt ðeɪ wɝ ənlaɪkli tə bi mʌtʃ θɹɛt naʊ. nɑɾ ənlɛs ðeɪ hæd ðə deɪmeɪn wɪð ðɛm. bʌɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd əɹ soʊ mɛn sæt hʌɾəld ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, stʃɹɪpt ʌv wɛpənz ən ɑɹmɝ, ʌndɝ ðə wɑtʃfəl aɪz ə tu dʌzən maʊntəd kəmpænjənz ən dɪfɛndɝz. tæɹɑbənɝz, fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt, ðeɪ hæd nɑt fɔt laɪk mɛn dʒɹɪvən tə ɪt baɪ kɑŋkɝɝz. ə fɛɹ nʌmbɝ hɛl ðɛɹ hɛdz ʌp, ən dʒɪɹɾ ət ðɛɹ ɡɑɹdz. dʒɛdwɪn hæd wɑntəd tə kɪl ðɛm, æftɝ pʊɾɪŋ əm tə ðə kwɛstʃən. wɪɹɑmɑn dɪd nɑt kɛɹ wɛðɝ ðeɪ hæd ðɛɹ θɹoʊts slɪt, bʌɾ i kənsɪɾɝd tɔɹtʃɝ ə weɪst ə taɪm. nʌn wəd noʊ ɛniθɪŋ jusfəl, hi meɪnteɪnd; ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ə wʌn nɑbli bɔɹn.

Most of those who escaped death on the mountainside had managed to withdraw through the trees that remained standing. With amazingly good order considering, Bashere claimed, yet they were unlikely to be much threat now. Not unless they had the damane with them. But a hundred or so men sat huddled on the ground, stripped of weapons and armor, under the watchful eyes of two dozen mounted Companions and Defenders. Taraboners, for the most part, they had not fought like men driven to it by conquerors. A fair number held their heads up, and jeered at their guards. Gedwyn had wanted to kill them, after putting them to the question. Weiramon did not care whether they had their throats slit, but he considered torture a waste of time. None would know anything useful, he maintained; there was not a one nobly born.

ɹænd ɡlænst ət bæʃɪɹ. wɪɹɑmɑn wɑz stɪl ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn sənɝəsli. ". . . swip ðiz maʊntənz klin fəɹ ju, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. wɪl tʃɹæmpəl əm bɪniθ əɹ hʊvz, ænd. . . ." ænɑiɛlə wɑz nɑɾɪŋ ɡɹɪm əpɹuvəl.

Rand glanced at Bashere. Weiramon was still going on sonorously. ". . . sweep these mountains clean for you, my Lord Dragon. We'll trample them beneath our hooves, and. . . ." Anaiyella was nodding grim approval.

"sɪks ʌp, ən hæf ə dʌzən daʊn," bæʃɪɹ sɛd sɔfli. hi skɹeɪp mʌd fɹəm wʌn ə hɪz θɪk mʌstæʃɪz wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝneɪl. "ɔɹ əz səm ə maɪ tɛnəns seɪ, wʌt jə ɡeɪn ɑn ðə swɪŋz, jə luz ɑn ðə ɹaʊndəbaʊts." wʌɾ ɪn ðə laɪt wɑz ə ɹaʊndəbaʊt? ə ɡɹeɪt hɛlp ðət wɑz!

"Six up, and half a dozen down," Bashere said softly. He scraped mud from one of his thick mustaches with a fingernail. "Or as some of my tenants say, what you gain on the swings, you lose on the roundabouts." What in the Light was a roundabout? A great help that was!

ən ðən wʌn ə bæʃɪɹz pətʃɹoʊlz meɪd mæɾɝz wɝs.

And then one of Bashere's patrols made matters worse.

ðə sɪks mɛn keɪm pɹɑɾɪŋ ə pɹɪznɝ əlɔŋ ðə sloʊp əhɛɾ ə ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz wɪð ðə bʌts ə ðɛɹ lænsɪz. ʃi wɑz ə blæk-hɛɹd wʊmən ɪn ə tɔɹn ən dɝɾi dɑɹk blu dʒɹɛs, wɪð ɹɛd pænəlz ɑn ðə bɹɛst ən skɝts bɛɹɪŋ fɔɹk laɪtnɪŋ. hɝ feɪs wɑz dɝɾi, tu, ən tɛɹ-stʃɹikt. ʃi stʌmbəld ən hæf-fɛl, bʌt ðə pɹɑɾɪŋ wɑz mɔɹ dʒɛstʃɝ ðən æktʃəwəl tʌtʃɪŋ. ʃi ɡlɛɹd skɔɹnfəli əɾ əɹ kæptɝz, ivən spɪɾɪŋ wʌns. ʃi snɪɹɾ ət ɹænd, tu.

The six men came prodding a prisoner along the slope ahead of their horses with the butts of their lances. She was a black-haired woman in a torn and dirty dark blue dress, with red panels on the breast and skirts bearing forked lightning. Her face was dirty, too, and tear-streaked. She stumbled and half-fell, but the prodding was more gesture than actual touching. She glared scornfully at her captors, even spitting once. She sneered at Rand, too.

"dɪd jə hɝt hɝ?" hi dɪmændəd. ə stʃɹeɪnʒ kwɛstʃən, pɝhæps, əbaʊɾ ən ɛnəmi æftɝ wʌt hæd hæpən ɪn ðɪs væli. əbaʊɾ ə sʌldəm. bʌɾ ɪt pɑpt aʊt.

"Did you hurt her?" he demanded. A strange question, perhaps, about an enemy after what had happened in this valley. About a sul'dam. But it popped out.

"nɑɾ ʌs, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," ðə ɡɹʌf-feɪs pətʃɹoʊl liɾɝ sɛd. "wi faʊn əɹ laɪk ðɪs." skɹætʃɪŋ ɪz tʃɪn θɹu ə blæk floʊɪŋ bɪɹd, hi aɪd bæʃɪɹ əz ɪf fəɹ səpɔɹt. "ʃi kleɪmz wi kɪld əɹ ɡaɪl. ə pɛt dɔɡ, əɹ kæt, əɹ səm sʌtʃ, ðə weɪ ʃi kæɹiz ɑn. hɝ neɪmz nɛɹɪθ. wi ɡɑt ðət mʌtʃ aʊɾ ə hɝ." ðə wʊmən tɝn ən snɑɹəld əɾ ɪm əɡɛn.

"Not us, my Lord Dragon," the gruff-faced patrol leader said. "We found her like this." Scratching his chin through a black flowing beard, he eyed Bashere as if for support. "She claims we killed her Gille. A pet dog, or cat, or some such, the way she carries on. Her name's Nerith. We got that much out of her." The woman turned and snarled at him again.

ɹænd saɪd. nɑɾ ə pɛt dɔɡ. noʊ! ðət neɪm dɪd nɑt bɪlɔŋ ɑn ðə lɪst! bʌɾ i kəd hɪɹ ðə lɪɾəni ʌv neɪmz ɹisaɪɾɪŋ ɪtsɛlf ɪn ɪz hɛd, ən "ɡaɪl ðə deɪmeɪn" wɑz ðɛɹ. luz θɝɪn moʊn fəɹ ɪz aɪlaɪɛnə. hɝ neɪm ɔlsoʊ wɑz ɑn ðə lɪst. ɹænd θɔɾ ɪt hæɾ ə ɹaɪt.

Rand sighed. Not a pet dog. No! That name did not belong on the list! But he could hear the litany of names reciting itself in his head, and "Gille the damane" was there. Lews Therin moaned for his Ilyena. Her name also was on the list. Rand thought it had a right.

"ðɪs ɪz ə sintʃæn ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ænɑiɛlə æsk sʌɾənli, linɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə pɑməl ə hɝ sæɾəl tə pɪɹ hɑɹɾ ət nɛɹɪθ. nɛɹɪθ spæɾ ət hɝ, əz wɛl, aɪz waɪɾənɪŋ ɪn aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ. ɹænd ɪkspleɪn ðə lɪɾəl i nu ʌv sʌldəm, ðət ðeɪ kəntʃɹoʊld wɪmən u kəd tʃænəl wɪð ði eɪɾ ʌv ə liʃ-ænd-kɑlɝ tɛɹæŋɡɹil bʌt kəd nɑt ðɛmsɛlvz tʃænəl, ən tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, ðə deɪnti sɪmpɝɪŋ haɪ leɪɾi sɛd koʊldli, "ɪf maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən filz kənstʃɹeɪnd, əl hæŋ əɹ fəɹ hɪm." nɛɹɪθ spæɾ əɾ əɹ əɡɛn! kəntɛmptʃwəsli, ðɪs taɪm. noʊ ʃɔɹtfɔl ə kɝədʒ ðɛɹ.

"This is a Seanchan Aes Sedai?" Anaiyella asked suddenly, leaning over the pommel of her saddle to peer hard at Nerith. Nerith spat at her, as well, eyes widening in outrage. Rand explained the little he knew of sul'dam, that they controlled women who could channel with the aide of a leash-and-collar ter'angreal but could not themselves channel, and to his surprise, the dainty simpering High Lady said coldly, "If my Lord Dragon feels constrained, I'll hang her for him." Nerith spat at her again! Contemptuously, this time. No shortfall of courage there.

"noʊ!" ɹænd ɡɹaʊld. laɪt, ðə θɪŋz pipəl wəd də tə ɡɛɾ ɑn ɪz ɡʊd saɪd! əɹ meɪbi ænɑiɛlə hæd bɪn kloʊsɝ tə hɝ mæstɝ ə ðə hɔɹs ðən wɑz kənsɪɾɝd pɹɑpɝ. ðə mæn hæd bɪn staʊɾ ən bɔldɪŋ - ən ə kɑmənɝ; ðət kaʊntəd hɛvəli wɪð tɛɹənz - bʌt wɪmən dɪɾ əv stʃɹeɪnʒ teɪsts ɪn mɛn. hi nu ðət fəɹ ə pjʊɹ fækt.

"No!" Rand growled. Light, the things people would do to get on his good side! Or maybe Anaiyella had been closer to her Master of the Horse than was considered proper. The man had been stout and balding - and a commoner; that counted heavily with Tairens - but women did have strange tastes in men. He knew that for a pure fact.

"æz sun əz wɝ ɹɛɾi tə muv əɡɛn," hi toʊl bæʃɪɹ, "tɝn ðə mɛn daʊn ðəɹ lus." teɪkɪŋ pɹɪznɝz əlɔŋ wən i lɔntʃt ɪz nɛkst ətæk wɑz aʊɾ ə ðə kwɛstʃən, ən livɪŋ ə hʌnʒɹəd mɛn - ə hʌnʒɹəd naʊ; mɔɹ leɪɾɝ, fəɹ ʃʊɹ - livɪŋ əm tə fɑloʊ wɪð ðə səplaɪ kɑɹts ɹɪsk fɪfti kaɪnz ə mɪstʃəf. ðeɪ kəd kɑz noʊ tʃɹʌbəl lɛf bɪhaɪnd. ivən ðə fɛloʊz u hæd ɡɑɾən əweɪ ɑn hɔɹsbæk kəd nɑt kæɹi ə wɔɹnɪŋ fæstɝ ðən i kəd tʃɹævəl.

"As soon as we're ready to move again," he told Bashere, "turn the men down there loose." Taking prisoners along when he launched his next attack was out of the question, and leaving a hundred men - a hundred now; more later, for sure - leaving them to follow with the supply carts risked fifty kinds of mischief. They could cause no trouble left behind. Even the fellows who had gotten away on horseback could not carry a warning faster than he could Travel.

bæʃɪɹ ʃɹʌɡd feɪnli; hi θɔɾ ɪt maɪt bi soʊ, bʌt ðən əɡɛn ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ði ɑd tʃæns. stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz hæpən ivən wɪθaʊɾ ə tɑvɝən ɝaʊnd.

Bashere shrugged faintly; he thought it might be so, but then again there was always the odd chance. Strange things happened even without a ta'veren around.

wɪɹɑmɑn ən ænɑiɛlə oʊpən ðɛɹ maʊðz ɔlmoʊs təɡɛðɝ, feɪsəz sɛɾ ɪn pɹoʊɾɛst, bʌt ɹænd pɹɛst ɑn. "aɪv spoʊkən, ən ɪts dʌn! wɪl kip ðə wʊmən, ðoʊ. ən ɛni mɔɹ wɪmən wi kæptʃɝ."

Weiramon and Anaiyella opened their mouths almost together, faces set in protest, but Rand pressed on. "I've spoken, and it's done! We'll keep the woman, though. And any more women we capture."

"bɝn maɪ soʊl," wɪɹɑmɑn ɪkskleɪmd. "waɪ?" ðə mæn əpɪɹd dʌmfaʊndɪd, ən fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, bæʃɪɹ ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾəld dʒɝk ə hɪz hɛd. ænɑiɛləz maʊθ twɪstəɾ ɪn kəntɛmp bɪfɔɹ ʃi mænədʒ tə tɝn ɪt tə ə sɪmpɝɪŋ smaɪl fəɹ ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. pleɪnli, ʃi θɔɾ ɪm tu sɑf tə sɛn ə wʊmən ɔf wɪð ði ʌðɝz. ðeɪ wəɾ əv hɑɹd wɔkɪŋ ɪn ðɪs tɝeɪn, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ʃɔɹt ɹæʃənz. ən ðə wɛðɝ wɑz nɑt wɛðɝ tə tɝn ə wʊmən aʊɾ ɪn.

"Burn my soul," Weiramon exclaimed. "Why?" The man appeared dumbfounded, and for that matter, Bashere gave a startled jerk of his head. Anaiyella's mouth twisted in contempt before she managed to turn it to a simpering smile for the Lord Dragon. Plainly, she thought him too soft to send a woman off with the others. They would have hard walking in this terrain, not to mention short rations. And the weather was not weather to turn a woman out in.

"aɪ hæv ɪnʌf ɛɛs sədaɪ əɡɛns mi wɪθaʊt sɛndɪŋ sʌldəm bæk tə ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪd," hi toʊl ðɛm. ðə laɪt nu ðət wɑz tʃɹu! ðeɪ nɑɾəd, ɪf wɪɹɑmɑn wɑz sloʊ əbaʊɾ ɪt; bæʃɪɹ lʊkt ɹɪlivd, ænɑiɛlə dɪsəpɔɪntɪd. bʌt wʌt tə də wɪð ðə wʊmən, ən ɛni mɔɹ i kæptʃɝd? hi dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə tɝn ðə blæk taʊɝ ɪndə ə pɹɪzən. ði il kəd hoʊl ðɛm. ɪksɛp ðət ðə waɪz wʌnz maɪt slɪt ðɛɹ θɹoʊts ðə moʊmən ɪz bæk wɑz tɝnd. wʌɾ əbaʊt ðə sɪstɝz ðət mæt wɑz teɪkɪŋ tə keɪɛmlɪn wɪð ɪleɪn, ðoʊ? "wɛn ðɪs ɪz dʌn, əl hæn əɹ oʊvɝ tə səm ɛɛs sədaɪ aɪ tʃuz." ðeɪ maɪt si ɪɾ əz ə dʒɛstʃɝ ʌv ɡʊdwɪl, ə lɪɾəl hʌni tə swiɾən ðɛɹ hævɪŋ tə æksɛpt ɪz pɹətɛkʃən.

"I have enough Aes Sedai against me without sending sul'dam back to their trade," he told them. The Light knew that was true! They nodded, if Weiramon was slow about it; Bashere looked relieved, Anaiyella disappointed. But what to do with the woman, and any more he captured? He did not intend to turn the Black Tower into a prison. The Aiel could hold them. Except that the Wise Ones might slit their throats the moment his back was turned. What about the sisters that Mat was taking to Caemlyn with Elayne, though? "When this is done, I'll hand her over to some Aes Sedai I choose." They might see it as a gesture of goodwill, a little honey to sweeten their having to accept his protection.

noʊ sunɝ wɝ ðə wɝdz aʊɾ ə hɪz maʊθ ðən nɛɹɪθs feɪs wɛn dɛd waɪɾ ən ʃi skɹimd ət ðə tɑp ə hɝ lʌŋz. haʊlɪŋ wɪθaʊt sis, ʃi flʌŋ hɝsɛlf daʊn ðə sloʊp, skɹæbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ daʊn tʃɹiz, fɔlɪŋ ən skɹæmbəlɪŋ bæk ʌp.

No sooner were the words out of his mouth than Nerith's face went dead white and she screamed at the top of her lungs. Howling without cease, she flung herself down the slope, scrabbling over downed trees, falling and scrambling back up.

"blʌɾi - ! kætʃ hɝ!" ɹænd snæpt, ən ðə sɑldəiən pətʃɹoʊl lɛpt æftɝ ðə wʊmən, dʒʌmpɪŋ ðɛɹ maʊns əkɹɔs ðə tʃɹi-lɪɾɝd sloʊp kɛɹləs ə bɹoʊkən lɛɡz ən nɛks. stɪl weɪlɪŋ, ʃi dɑdʒd ən dɑɹɾɪd əmʌŋ ðə hɔɹsəz wɪð ivən lɛs kɛɹ.

"Bloody - ! Catch her!" Rand snapped, and the Saldaean patrol leaped after the woman, jumping their mounts across the tree-littered slope careless of broken legs and necks. Still wailing, she dodged and darted among the horses with even less care.

ɪn ðə maʊθ ə ði istɝnmoʊs pæs, ə ɡeɪtweɪ oʊpən ɪn ə flæʃ ə sɪlvɝ laɪt. ə blæk-koʊɾəd soʊlʒɝ pʊld ɪz hɔɹs θɹu, dʒʌmp tə ðə sæɾəl əz ðə ɡeɪtweɪ wɪŋkt aʊɾ ən pʊɾ ɪz maʊn tə ə ɡæləp, təwɔɹd ðə hɪltɑp wɛɹ dʒɛdwɪn ən ɹɑtʃeɪd weɪɾəd. ɹænd wɑtʃt ɪmpæsɪvli. ɪn ɪz hɛd, luz θɝɪn snɑɹəld ə kɪlɪŋ, kɪlɪŋ ɔl ði æʃəmən bɪfɔɹ ɪt wɑz tu leɪt.

In the mouth of the easternmost pass, a gateway opened in a flash of silver light. A black-coated Soldier pulled his horse through, jumped to the saddle as the gateway winked out and put his mount to a gallop, toward the hilltop where Gedwyn and Rochaid waited. Rand watched impassively. In his head, Lews Therin snarled of killing, killing all the Asha'man before it was too late.

baɪ ðə taɪm ðə θɹi ʌv əm stɑɹɾəd ʌp ðə sloʊp təwɔɹd ɹænd, fɔɹ ə ðə sɑldəiənz hæd nɛɹɪθ daʊn ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, baɪndɪŋ əɹ hæn ən fʊt. ɪt tʊk fɔɹ, ðə weɪ ʃi θɹæʃt ən bɪɾ ət ðɛm, ən ən əmjuz bæʃɪɹ wɑz ɔfɝɪŋ ɑdz ɑn wɛðɝ ʃi maɪt nɑɾ oʊvɝkʌm əm ɪnstɛd. ænɑiɛlə mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt kɹækɪŋ ðə wʊmənz hɛd. dɪd ʃi min kɹækɪŋ ɪɾ oʊpən? ɹænd fɹaʊn ət hɝ.

By the time the three of them started up the slope toward Rand, four of the Saldaeans had Nerith down on the ground, binding her hand and foot. It took four, the way she thrashed and bit at them, and an amused Bashere was offering odds on whether she might not overcome them instead. Anaiyella muttered something about cracking the woman's head. Did she mean cracking it open? Rand frowned at her.

ðə soʊlʒɝ bɪtwin dʒɛdwɪn ən ɹɑtʃeɪd ɡlænst ət nɛɹɪθ ənizəli əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd pæst. ɹænd veɪɡli ɹɪmɛmbɝd siɪŋ ɪm ət ðə blæk taʊɝ, ðə deɪ hi fɝs hændəɾ aʊt ðə sɪlvɝ sɔɹdz, ən ɡeɪv teɪm ðə vɛɹi fɝs dʒɹæɡən pɪn. hi wɑz ə jʌŋ mæn, vɛɹəl nɛnsən baɪ neɪm, stɪl wɛɹɪŋ ə tʃɹænspɛɹən veɪl tə kʌvɝ ɪz θɪk mʌstæʃɪz. hi hæd nɑt hɛzɪteɪɾɪd wən i faʊn hɪmsɛlf feɪsɪŋ ɪz kʌntʃɹimɪn, ðoʊ. əlidʒəns wɑz tə ðə blæk taʊɝ ən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, naʊ, soʊ teɪm ɔlweɪz sɛd. ðə sɛkən pɑɹɾ ə ðəɾ ɔlweɪz saʊndəɾ ən æftɝθɑt.

The Soldier between Gedwyn and Rochaid glanced at Nerith uneasily as they rode past. Rand vaguely remembered seeing him at the Black Tower, the day he first handed out the silver Swords, and gave Taim the very first Dragon pin. He was a young man, Varil Nensen by name, still wearing a transparent veil to cover his thick mustaches. He had not hesitated when he found himself facing his countrymen, though. Allegiance was to the Black Tower and the Dragon Reborn, now, so Taim always said. The second part of that always sounded an afterthought.

"ju meɪ hæv ði ɑnɝ ə meɪkɪŋ jəɹ ɹipɔɹt tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, soʊlʒɝ nɛnsən," dʒɛdwɪn sɛd. ɹaɪli.

"You may have the honor of making your report to the Dragon Reborn, Soldier Nensen," Gedwyn said. Wryly.

nɛnsən sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪɾ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl. "maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən!" hi bɑɹkt, slæpɪŋ fɪs tə tʃɛst. "ðɛɹz mɔɹ ə ðɛm əbaʊt θɝɾi maɪlz wɛst, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən." θɝɾi maɪlz wɑz əz fɑɹ əz ɹænd hæd toʊl ðə skaʊts tə ɡoʊ bɪfɔɹ ɹɪtɝnɪŋ. wʌt ɡʊɾ ɪf wʌn soʊlʒɝ faʊn sintʃæn waɪl ðə ɹɛs kɛp muvɪŋ ɛvɝ fɑɹðɝ wɛst? "meɪbi hæf wʌt wɝ hɪɹ," nɛnsən wɛn ɑn. ænd. . . ." hɪz dɑɹk aɪz flɪkɝd təwɔɹd nɛɹɪθ əɡɛn. ʃi wɑz taɪd, naʊ, ðə sɑldəiənz stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ əɹ oʊvɝ ə hɔɹs. "æn aɪ sɔ noʊ saɪn ʌv wɪmən, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən."

Nensen sat up straight in his saddle. "My Lord Dragon!" he barked, slapping fist to chest. "There's more of them about thirty miles west, my Lord Dragon." Thirty miles was as far as Rand had told the scouts to go before returning. What good if one Soldier found Seanchan while the rest kept moving ever farther west? "Maybe half what were here," Nensen went on. And. . . ." His dark eyes flickered toward Nerith again. She was tied, now, the Saldaeans struggling to get her over a horse. "And I saw no sign of women, my Lord Dragon."

bæʃɪɹ skwɪntɪɾ ət ðə skaɪ. dɑɹk klaʊdz leɪ ɪn ə blæŋkət fɹəm maʊntən pik tə maʊntən pik, bʌt ðə sʌn ʃəd stɪl bi haɪ. "taɪm tə fid ðə mɛn bɪfɔɹ ðə ɹɛst ɹɪtɝn," hi sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ ɪn sæɾəsfækʃən. nɛɹɪθ hæd mænədʒ tə sɪŋk əɹ tiθ ɪndə ə sɑldəiənz ɹɪst ən wɑz hæŋɪŋ ɑn laɪk ə bædʒɝ.

Bashere squinted at the sky. Dark clouds lay in a blanket from mountain peak to mountain peak, but the sun should still be high. "Time to feed the men before the rest return," he said, nodding in satisfaction. Nerith had managed to sink her teeth into a Saldaean's wrist and was hanging on like a badger.

"fiɾ əm kwɪk," ɹænd sɛɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli. wəɾ ɛvɹi sʌldəm i kæptʃɝd bi əz dɪfəkəlt? vɛɹi laɪkli. laɪt, wʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ tʊk ə deɪmeɪn? "aɪ doʊnt wɑnə spɛn ɔl wɪntɝ ɪn ðiz maʊntənz." ɡaɪl ðə deɪmeɪn. hi kəd nɑɾ ɪɹeɪs ə neɪm wʌns ɪt wɛn ɑntu ðət lɪst.

"Feed them quick," Rand said irritably. Would every sul'dam he captured be as difficult? Very likely. Light, what if they took a damane? "I don't want to spend all winter in these mountains." Gille the damane. He could not erase a name once it went onto that list.

ðə dɛɾ ɑɹ nɛvɝ saɪlənt, luz θɝɪn wɪspɝd. ðə dɛd nɛvɝ slip.

The dead are never silent, Lews Therin whispered. The dead never sleep.

ɹænd ɹoʊd daʊn təwɔɹd ðə faɪɝz. hi dɪd nɑt fil laɪk iɾɪŋ.

Rand rode down toward the fires. He did not feel like eating.

fɹəm ðə pɔɪn ʌv ə θɹʌstɪŋ ʃoʊldɝ ə stoʊn, fɹɪk kɛɹid kɛɹfəli stʌɾid ðə fɔɹəstəd maʊntənz ɹaɪzɪŋ ɔl ɝaʊn hɪm, ʃɑɹp piks laɪk dɑɹk fæŋz. hɪz hɔɹs, ə tɔl dæpəld ɡɛldɪŋ, stɪfən ɪz ɪɹz əz ðoʊ kætʃɪŋ ə saʊn i hæd mɪst, bʌɾ ʌðɝwaɪz ði ænəməl wɑz stɪl. ɛvɹi soʊ ɔfən, kɛɹid hæd tə stɑp ən waɪp ðə lɛnz ə hɪz lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs. ə laɪt ɹeɪn fɛl fɹəm ə ɡɹeɪ mɔɹnɪŋ skaɪ. hɪz hɛlməts tu blæk plumz wɝ bɛn oʊvɝ ɪnstɛɾ ə stændɪŋ stʃɹeɪt, ən wɔɾɝ ɹæn daʊn ɪz bæk. ə laɪt ɹeɪn kəmpɛɹd tə jɛstɝdeɪ, ɛniweɪ, ən pɹɑbli kəmpɛɹd tə təmɑɹoʊ. əɹ ðɪs æftɝnun, pɝhæps. θʌndɝ ɹʌmbəld ɑmənəsli ɪn ðə saʊθ. kɛɹidz kənsɝn hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð wɛðɝ, ðoʊ.

From the point of a thrusting shoulder of stone, Furyk Karede carefully studied the forested mountains rising all around him, sharp peaks like dark fangs. His horse, a tall dappled gelding, stiffened his ears as though catching a sound he had missed, but otherwise the animal was still. Every so often, Karede had to stop and wipe the lens of his looking glass. A light rain fell from a gray morning sky. His helmet's two black plumes were bent over instead of standing straight, and water ran down his back. A light rain compared to yesterday, anyway, and probably compared to tomorrow. Or this afternoon, perhaps. Thunder rumbled ominously in the south. Karede's concern had nothing to do with weather, though.

bɪloʊ hɪm, ðə læst ə twɛnti-θɹi hʌnʒɹəd mɛn sneɪk θɹu ðə waɪndɪŋ pæsəz, mɛn ɡæðɝd fɹəm fɔɹ aʊtpoʊsts. wɛl-maʊntəd, ɹizənəbli wɛl-lɛd, jɛɾ ə bɛɹ tu hʌnʒɹəd wɝ sintʃæn, ən dʒʌs tu bɪsaɪdz hɪmsɛlf wɔɹ ðə ɹɛd-ænd-ɡɹin ə ðə ɡɑɹd. moʊst ə ðə ɹɪmeɪndɝ wɝ tæɹɑbənɝz - hi nu ðɛɹ mɛɾəl - bʌɾ ə ɡʊd θɝd wɝ ɑmɑdɪʃənz ən ɔltɑɹənz, tu nu tə ðɛɹ oʊðz fəɹ ɛni tə bi ʃʊɹ haʊ ðeɪ wəd stæn ʌp. səm ɔltɑɹənz ən ɑmɑdɪʃənz hæd swɪtʃt əlidʒəns tu əɹ θɹi taɪmz ɔlɹɛɾi. tʃɹaɪd tə, ɛniweɪ. pipəl ðɪs saɪɾ ə ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən hæd noʊ ʃeɪm. ə dʌzən sʌldəm ɹoʊd nɪɹ ðə fɹʌn ə ðə kɑləm, ən i wɪʃt ɔl twɛlv hæd liʃt deɪmənz wɔkɪŋ baɪ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ɪnstɛɾ ʌv oʊnli tu.

Below him, the last of twenty-three hundred men snaked through the winding passes, men gathered from four outposts. Well-mounted, reasonably well-led, yet a bare two hundred were Seanchan, and just two besides himself wore the red-and-green of the Guard. Most of the remainder were Taraboners - he knew their mettle - but a good third were Amadicians and Altarans, too new to their oaths for any to be sure how they would stand up. Some Altarans and Amadicians had switched allegiance two or three times already. Tried to, anyway. People this side of the Aryth Ocean had no shame. A dozen sul'dam rode near the front of the column, and he wished all twelve had leashed damanes walking by their horses instead of only two.

fɪfti peɪsɪz fɑɹðɝ ɑn, ðə tɛn mɛn ə ðə spɪɹhɛd wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ ðə sloʊps əbʌv ðɛm, ðoʊ nɑɾ əz kɛɹfəli əz ðeɪ ʃəd hæv. tu mɛni mɛn u ɹoʊd spɪɹhɛd ɹɪlaɪɾ ɑn ðə fɔɹwɝd skaʊts tə faɪn ɛni deɪnʒɝz. kɛɹid meɪɾ ə noʊt tə spik tə ðɛm pɝsənəli. ðeɪ wəd də ðɛɹ duɾiz pɹɑpɝli æftɝ ðæt, əɹ i wəd sɛn əm tə ðə leɪbɝ lɛviz.

Fifty paces farther on, the ten men of the spearhead were watching the slopes above them, though not as carefully as they should have. Too many men who rode spearhead relied on the forward scouts to find any dangers. Karede made a note to speak to them personally. They would do their duties properly after that, or he would send them to the labor levies.

ə ɹeɪkən əpɪɹɾ ɪn ði ist əhɛd, skɪmɪŋ loʊ oʊvɝ ðə tʃɹitɑps, twɪstɪŋ ən tɝnɪŋ tə fɑloʊ ðə kɝvz ə ðə læn laɪk ə mæn ɹʌnɪŋ ɪz hæn daʊn ə wʊmənz bæk. pəkjuljɝ. mɔɹətʃɹeɪkən, flaɪɝz, ɔlweɪz laɪk tə sɔɹ haɪ ənlɛs ðə skaɪ wɑz æktʃəli  fʊl ə laɪtnɪŋ. kɛɹid loʊɝd ðə lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs tə wɑtʃ.

A raken appeared in the east ahead, skimming low over the treetops, twisting and turning to follow the curves of the land like a man running his hand down a woman's back. Peculiar. Morat'raken, fliers, always liked to soar high unless the sky was actually full of lightning. Karede lowered the looking glass to watch.

"meɪbi wɪl faɪnəli ɡɛɾ ənʌðɝ skaʊɾɪŋ ɹipɔɹt," dʒædʒɹæŋkə sɛd. tə ði ʌðɝ ɔfəsɝz weɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn kɛɹid, nɑt tə hɪm. θɹi ʌv ðə tɛn mætʃt kɛɹidz ɹæŋk, jɛt fju ɪksɛp ðə blʌd dɪstɝbd ə mæn ɪn ðə blʌd-ɹɛɾ ən nɪɹli blæk ɡɹin ə ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹd. nɑt ðət mɛni əmʌŋ ðə blʌd dɪd.

"Maybe we'll finally get another scouting report," Jadranka said. To the other officers waiting behind Karede, not to him. Three of the ten matched Karede's rank, yet few except the Blood disturbed a man in the blood-red and nearly black green of the Deathwatch Guard. Not that many among the Blood did.

əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə teɪlz i hæd hɝɾ əz ə tʃaɪld, wʌn ə hɪz ænsɛstɝz, ə noʊbəl, hæd fɑloʊd luthɛɹ pɛndʒɹæɡ tə sintʃæn əɾ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz kəmænd, bʌt tu hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz leɪɾɝ, wɪð oʊnli ðə nɔɹθ sɪkjʊɹ, ənʌðɝ ænsɛstɝ tʃɹaɪd tə kɑɹv aʊɾ ə kɪŋdəm ə hɪz oʊn ən ɛndəd soʊl fɹəm ðə blɑk ɪnstɛd. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz soʊ; mɛni dækoʊvæl kleɪm noʊbəl ænsɛstɝz. əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, ət list; fju ʌv ðə blʌd faʊn sətʃ tʃæɾɝ əmjuzɪŋ. ɪn ɛni keɪs, kɛɹid hæd fɛlt lʌki wən ðə tʃuzɝz pɪkt ɪm aʊt, ə stɝɾi bɔɪ nɑt jɛɾ oʊld ɪnʌf tə bi əsaɪn duɾiz, ən i stɪl fɛl pɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə ɹeɪvənz tætuɾ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. mɛni dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz wɛnt wɪθaʊt koʊɾ əɹ ʃɝt wɛnɛvɝ pɑsəbəl, tə dɪspleɪ ðoʊz. ðə hjumənz, ɛniweɪ. oʊɡiɝ ɡɑɹɾənɝz wɝ nɑt mɑɹkt əɹ oʊnd, bʌt ðət wɑz bɪtwin əm ən ði ɛmpɹɛs.

According to the tales he had heard as a child, one of his ancestors, a noble, had followed Luthair Paendrag to Seanchan at Artur Hawkwing's command, but two hundred years later, with only the north secure, another ancestor tried to carve out a kingdom of his own and ended sold from the block instead. Perhaps it was so; many da'covale claimed noble ancestors. Among themselves, at least; few of the Blood found such chatter amusing. In any case, Karede had felt lucky when the Choosers picked him out, a sturdy boy not yet old enough to be assigned duties, and he still felt pride in the ravens tattooed on his shoulders. Many Deathwatch Guards went without coat or shirt whenever possible, to display those. The humans, anyway. Ogier Gardeners were not marked or owned, but that was between them and the Empress.

kɛɹid wɑz dækoʊvæl ən pɹaʊɾ ʌv ɪt, laɪk ɛvɹi mæn ə ðə ɡɑɹd, ðə pɹɑpɝɾi ʌv ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn, bɑɾi ən soʊl. hi fɔt wɛɹ ði ɛmpɹɛs pɔɪntəd, ən wəd daɪ ðə deɪ ʃi sɛd daɪ. tə ði ɛmpɹɛs əloʊn dɪd ðə ɡɑɹɾ ænsɝ, ən wɛɹ ðeɪ əpɪɹd, ðeɪ əpɪɹɾ əz əɹ hænd, ə vɪzəbəl ɹimaɪndɝ ə hɝ. noʊ wʌndɝ ðət səm əmʌŋ ðə blʌd kəd bɪkʌm ənizi wɑtʃɪŋ ə dɪtætʃmən ʌv ɡɑɹdzmɪn pæs. ə fɑɹ bɛɾɝ laɪf ðən mʌkɪŋ aʊɾ ə lɔɹdz steɪbəlz əɹ sɝvɪŋ kæf tə ə leɪɾi. bʌɾ i kɝs ðə lʌk ðət hæd sɛn ɪm ɪndə ðiz maʊntənz tə ɪnspɛk ði aʊtpoʊsts.

Karede was da'covale and proud of it, like every man of the Guard, the property of the Crystal Throne, body and soul. He fought where the Empress pointed, and would die the day she said die. To the Empress alone did the Guard answer, and where they appeared, they appeared as her hand, a visible reminder of her. No wonder that some among the Blood could become uneasy watching a detachment of Guardsmen pass. A far better life than mucking out a Lord's stables or serving kaf to a Lady. But he cursed the luck that had sent him into these mountains to inspect the outposts.

ðə ɹeɪkən dɑɹɾɪd ɑn wɛstwɝd, ðə tu flaɪɝz kɹaʊtʃt loʊ ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəl. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ skaʊɾɪŋ ɹipɔɹt, noʊ mɛsədʒ fəɹ hɪm. fɹɪk nu ɪt wɑz ɪz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən, bʌt ðə kɹitʃɝz lɔŋ, aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt nɛk sʌmhaʊ lʊkt . . . æŋkʃəs. hæɾ i bɪn ɛniwʌn ɛls, hi maɪɾ əv bɪn æŋkʃəs, tu. ðəɹ hæd bɪn fju mɛsədʒəz fəɹ ɪm sɪns ɪz ɔɹɾɝz θɹi deɪz əɡoʊ tə əsum kəmæn ən muv ist. itʃ mɛsədʒ hæd θɪkən ðə fɑɡ mɔɹ ðən klɪɹɾ ɪt.

The raken darted on westward, the two fliers crouched low in their saddle. There was no scouting report, no message for him. Furyk knew it was his imagination, but the creature's long, outstretched neck somehow looked . . . anxious. Had he been anyone else, he might have been anxious, too. There had been few messages for him since his orders three days ago to assume command and move east. Each message had thickened the fog more than cleared it.

ðə loʊkəlz, ðiz ɔltɑɹənz, hæd muvd ɪndə ðə maʊntənz ɪn fɔɹs, ɪt simd, bʌt haʊ? ðə ɹoʊdz əlɔŋ ðə nɔɹðɝn bɔɹɾɝ ə ðɪs ɹeɪnʒ wɝ pətʃɹoʊld ən wɑtʃt nɪɹli tə ðə bɔɹɾɝ ʌv ɪljən, baɪ flaɪɝz ən mɔɹɑtʃɹm əz wɛl əz hɔɹs-maʊntəd pɑɹɾiz. wʌt cʊɾə meɪd ði ɔltɑɹənz dɪsaɪd tə ʃoʊ soʊ mɛni tiθ? tə stæn təɡɛðɝ? ə mæn maɪt faɪn hɪmsɛlf ɪn ə duəl fəɹ ə lʊk - ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd bɪɡʌn tə lɝn tʃælənʒɪŋ ə ɡɑɹdzmæn wɑz dʒʌst ə sloʊɝ weɪ ʌv kʌɾɪŋ jəɹ oʊn θɹoʊt - bʌɾ i hæd sin noʊbəlz ə ðɪs soʊ-kɔl neɪʃən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə sɛl itʃ ʌðɝ ən ðɛɹ kwin fəɹ ðə mɪɹ sədʒɛstʃən ðət ðɛɹ oʊn lænz maɪt bi pɹətɛktəɾ ən pɝhæps ðoʊz ə ðɛɹ neɪbɝ æɾəd tə ðɛm.

The locals, these Altarans, had moved into the mountains in force, it seemed, but how? The roads along the northern border of this range were patrolled and watched nearly to the border of Illian, by fliers and morat'torm as well as horse-mounted parties. What could have made the Altarans decide to show so many teeth? To stand together? A man might find himself in a duel for a look - though they had begun to learn challenging a Guardsman was just a slower way of cutting your own throat - but he had seen nobles of this so-called nation trying to sell each other and their Queen for the mere suggestion that their own lands might be protected and perhaps those of their neighbor added to them.

nəɾək, ə bɪɡ mæn wɪð ə dɪsɛptɪvli maɪl feɪs, twɪstəɾ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl tə wɑtʃ ðə ɹeɪkən. "aɪ doʊn laɪk mɑɹtʃɪŋ blaɪnd," hi mʌɾɝd. "nɑt wən ði ɔltɑɹənz əv mænədʒ tə pʊt fɔɹɾi θaʊzən mɛn ʌp hɪɹ. fɔɹɾi, ət list."

Nadoc, a big man with a deceptively mild face, twisted in his saddle to watch the raken. "I don't like marching blind," he muttered. "Not when the Altarans have managed to put forty thousand men up here. Forty, at least."

dʒædʒɹæŋkə snɔɹɾɪd soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ ɪz tɔl waɪt ɡɛldɪŋ ʃɪftəd. dʒædʒɹæŋkə wɑz ðə sinjɝ ə ðə θɹi kæptənz bɪhaɪn kɛɹid, hævɪŋ sɝvd əz lɔŋ əz kɛɹid hɪmsɛlf. ə ʃɔɹt θɪn mæn wɪð ə pɹɑmənənt noʊz ən sətʃ ɛɹz jə maɪɾ əv θɔɾ ɪm ə ðə blʌd. ðət hɔɹs wəd stæn aʊɾ əɾ ə maɪl. "fɔɹɾi θaʊzən əɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd, nəɾək, ðəɹ skæɾɝd fɹəm hɪɹ tə ði ɛn ə ðə ɹeɪnʒ, tu fɑɹ əpɑɹt tə səpɔɹt wʌn ənʌðɝ. stæb maɪ aɪz, laɪkli hæf ɑɹ dɛɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. ðeɪ mʌs bi tæŋəlɪŋ wɪð aʊtpoʊsts ɛvɹiwɛɹ. ðæts waɪ wi ɑɹənt ɡɛɾɪŋ ɹɪpɔɹts. wɝ dʒʌst ɪkspɛktəd tə swip ʌp ðə ɹɛmnəns."

Jadranka snorted so hard that his tall white gelding shifted. Jadranka was the senior of the three captains behind Karede, having served as long as Karede himself. A short thin man with a prominent nose and such airs you might have thought him of the Blood. That horse would stand out at a mile. "Forty thousand or a hundred, Nadoc, they're scattered from here to the end of the range, too far apart to support one another. Stab my eyes, likely half are dead already. They must be tangling with outposts everywhere. That's why we aren't getting reports. We're just expected to sweep up the remnants."

kɛɹid swɑloʊɾ ə saɪ. hi hæd hoʊp dʒædʒɹæŋkə wɑz nɑɾ ə ful ətɑp ɪz ɛɹz. pɹeɪz ə vɪktɝz spɹɛd kwɪkli, wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɝ ən ɑɹmi əɹ hæf ə bænɝ. ɪt wɑz ðə ɹɛɹ dɪfits ðət wɝ swɑloʊɾ ɪn saɪləns ən fɝɡɑɾən. soʊ mʌtʃ saɪləns wɑz . . . ɑmənəs.

Karede swallowed a sigh. He had hoped Jadranka was not a fool atop his airs. Praise of victors spread quickly, whether they were an army or half a Banner. It was the rare defeats that were swallowed in silence and forgotten. So much silence was . . . ominous.

"ðæt læst ɹipɔɹt dɪdn saʊn laɪk ɹɛmnəns tə mi," nəɾək pɝsɪstəd. hi wɑz noʊ ful. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ faɪv θaʊzən mɛn nɑt fɪfti maɪlz əhɛɾ ʌv ʌs, ən aɪ daʊt wɪl teɪk əm wɪð bɹumz."

"That last report didn't sound like remnants to me," Nadoc persisted. He was no fool. "There are five thousand men not fifty miles ahead of us, and I doubt we'll take them with brooms."

dʒædʒɹæŋkə snɔɹɾɪd əɡɛn. "wil kɹʌʃ ðɛm, wɪð sɔɹdz əɹ bɹumz. ðə laɪt bɝn maɪ aɪz, aɪ kən hɑɹdli weɪt fəɹ ə disən ɛnɡeɪdʒmənt. aɪ toʊl ðə skaʊts tə pɹɛs ɑn əntɪl ðeɪ faʊn ðɛm. aɪ woʊn əv əm slɪpɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ʌs."

Jadranka snorted again. "We'll crush them, with swords or brooms. The Light burn my eyes, I can hardly wait for a decent engagement. I told the scouts to press on until they found them. I won't have them slipping away from us."

"ju dɪd wʌt?" kɛɹid sɛd sɔfli.

"You did what?" Karede said softly.

sɑft əɹ nɑt, hɪz wɝdz dʒɝkt ɛvɹi aɪ təwɔɹd hɪm. ðoʊ nəɾək ən ə fju ʌv ði ʌðɝz hæd tə stʃɹʌɡəl tə stɑp ɡeɪpɪŋ ət dʒædʒɹæŋkə. skaʊts toʊl tə pɹɛs əhɛd, skaʊts toʊld wʌt tə lʊk fɔɹ. wʌt hæd ɡɔn ənsin fəɹ ðoʊz ɔɹɾɝz?

Soft or not, his words jerked every eye toward him. Though Nadoc and a few of the others had to struggle to stop gaping at Jadranka. Scouts told to press ahead, scouts told what to look for. What had gone unseen for those orders?

bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn kəɾ oʊpən ɪz maʊθ ʃaʊts ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə mɛn ɪn ðə pæs, skɹimz ən ðə ʃɹiks ə hɔɹsəz.

Before anyone could open his mouth shouts rose from the men in the pass, screams and the shrieks of horses.

kɛɹid pɹɛs ðə lɛðɝ tub ə ðə lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs tə hɪz aɪ. əlɔŋ ðə pæs əhɛɾ ə hɪm, mɛn ən hɔɹsəz wɝ daɪɪŋ ʌndɝ ə heɪl ʌv wʌɾ i θɔt mʌs bi kɹɔsboʊ boʊls, ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæmɝd θɹu stil bɹɛstpleɪts, ɪksploʊɾəd θɹu tʃɛsts pɹətɛktəd baɪ meɪl. hʌnʒɹədz wɝ daʊn ɔlɹɛɾi, hʌnʒɹədz mɔɹ sæɡɪŋ wundəɾ ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz əɹ əfʊɾ ən ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm hɔɹsəz θɹæʃɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. tu mɛni wɝ ɹʌnɪŋ. ivən əz i lʊkt, mɛn stɪl maʊntəd wɝl ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz tə tʃɹaɪ fliɪŋ bæk ʌp ðə pæs. wɛɹ ɪn ðə laɪt wɝ ðə sʌldəm? hi kəd nɑt faɪn ðɛm. hi hæd feɪst ɹɛbəlz u hæd sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn, ən ðeɪ ɔlweɪz hæd tə bi kɪld əz fæst əz pɑsəbəl. meɪbi ðə loʊkəlz hæd lɝn ðæt.

Karede pressed the leather tube of the looking glass to his eye. Along the pass ahead of him, men and horses were dying under a hail of what he thought must be crossbow bolts, the way they hammered through steel breastplates, exploded through chests protected by mail. Hundreds were down already, hundreds more sagging wounded in their saddles or afoot and running from horses thrashing on the ground. Too many were running. Even as he looked, men still mounted whirled their horses to try fleeing back up the pass. Where in the Light were the sul'dam? He could not find them. He had faced rebels who had sul'dam and damane, and they always had to be killed as fast as possible. Maybe the locals had learned that.

sʌɾənli, ʃɑkɪŋli, ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪɡæn tə ɪɹʌpt ɪn ɹɔɹɪŋ faʊntənz ɔl əlɔŋ ðə ɹaɪðɪŋ sneɪk ə hɪz kəmænd, faʊntənz ðət flʌŋ mɛn ən hɔɹsəz ɪndə ði ɛɹ əz izəli əz dɝɾ ən stoʊnz. laɪtnɪŋ flæʃt aʊɾ ə ðə skaɪ, blu-waɪt boʊls ʃæɾɝɪŋ ɝθ ən mɛn əlaɪk. ʌðɝ mɛn sɪmpli ɪksploʊɾəd, ɹɪp tə ʃɹɛdz baɪ nʌθɪŋ i kəd si. dɪd ðə loʊkəlz əv deɪmeɪn ə ðɛɹ oʊn? noʊ, ɪt wəd bi ðoʊz ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Suddenly, shockingly, the ground began to erupt in roaring fountains all along the writhing snake of his command, fountains that flung men and horses into the air as easily as dirt and stones. Lightning flashed out of the sky, blue-white bolts shattering earth and men alike. Other men simply exploded, ripped to shreds by nothing he could see. Did the locals have damane of their own? No, it would be those Aes Sedai.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ wi ɡoʊɪŋ tə du?" nəɾək sɛd. hi saʊndəd ʃeɪkən. əz wɛl i maɪt.

"What are we going to do?" Nadoc said. He sounded shaken. As well he might.

"du jə θɪŋk tə əbændən jəɹ mɛn?" dʒædʒɹæŋkə snɑɹəld. "wi ɹæli ðɛm ən ətæk, jə - !" hi kʌɾ ɔf, ɡɝɡəlɪŋ, əz kɛɹidz sɔɹdpɔɪnt wɛnt nitli ɪndə hɪz θɹoʊt. ðəɹ wɝ taɪmz fulz kəd bi tɑlɝeɪɾəd, ən taɪmz nɑt. əz ðə mæn tɑpəl fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl, kɛɹid dɛfli waɪpt ɪz bleɪɾ ɑn ðə ɡɛldɪŋz waɪt meɪn bɪfɔɹ ði ænəməl boʊltəd. ðəɹ wɝ taɪmz fəɹ ə lɪɾəl ʃoʊ, tu.

"Do you think to abandon your men?" Jadranka snarled. "We rally them and attack, you - !" He cut off, gurgling, as Karede's swordpoint went neatly into his throat. There were times fools could be tolerated, and times not. As the man toppled from his saddle, Karede deftly wiped his blade on the gelding's white mane before the animal bolted. There were times for a little show, too.

"wi ɹæli wʌt kən bi ɹælid, nəɾək," hi sɛɾ əz ɪf dʒædʒɹæŋkə hæd nɛvɝ spoʊkən. əz ɪf i hæd nɛvɝ bɪn. "wi seɪv wʌt kən bi seɪvd, ən fɔl bæk."

"We rally what can be rallied, Nadoc," he said as if Jadranka had never spoken. As if he had never been. "We save what can be saved, and fall back."

tɝnɪŋ tə ɹaɪd daʊn ɪndə ðə pæs wɛɹ laɪtnɪŋz flæʃt ən θʌndɝz ɹɔɹd, hi ɔɹɾɝd æŋhɑɹ, ə stɛɾi-aɪd jʌŋ mæn wɪð ə fæs hɔɹs, tə ɹaɪɾ ist ən ɹipɔɹt wʌt hæd tʃɹænspaɪɝd hɪɹ. pɝhæps ə flaɪɝ wəd si ən pɝhæps nɑt, ðoʊ kɛɹid səspɛktəɾ i nu waɪ ðeɪ flu loʊ, naʊ. hi səspɛktəd ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ ən ðə dʒɛnɝəlz ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ ɔlɹɛɾi nu wʌt wɑz əkɝɪŋ ʌp hɪɹ, tu. wɑz tədeɪ ðə deɪ hi daɪd fəɹ ði ɛmpɹɛs? hi dʌɡ hɪz hilz ɪndə hɪz hɔɹsəz flæŋks.

Turning to ride down into the pass where lightnings flashed and thunders roared, he ordered Anghar, a steady-eyed young man with a fast horse, to ride east and report what had transpired here. Perhaps a flier would see and perhaps not, though Karede suspected he knew why they flew low, now. He suspected the High Lady Suroth and the generals in Ebou Dar already knew what was occurring up here, too. Was today the day he died for the Empress? He dug his heels into his horse's flanks.

fɹəm ðə flæt, θɪnli tʃɹid ɹɪdʒ, ɹænd pɪɹd wɛstwɝɾ oʊvɝ ðə fɔɹəs bɪfɔɹ hɪm. wɪð ðə paʊɝ ɪn ɪm - laɪf, soʊ swit; vɪlnəs, oʊ, soʊ vaɪl - hi kəd si ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl livz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf. teɪdeɪʃɝ stæmpt ə huf. ðə dʒæɡd piks bɪhaɪnd, tə iðɝ saɪd, ən ɔl ɝaʊn oʊvɝtɑp ðə ɹɪdʒ baɪ ə maɪl əɹ mɔɹ, bʌt ðə ɹɪdʒ stʊd wɛl əbʌv ðə tʃɹitɑps bɪloʊ, ə ɹoʊlɪŋ wʊɾɪd væli oʊvɝ ə liɡ ɪn lɛŋθ ən nɪɹli əz waɪd. ɔl wɑz stɪl daʊn ðɛɹ. əz kwaɪəɾ əz ðə vɔɪɾ i floʊɾəd ɪn. kwaɪət fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, ɛniweɪ. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ plumz ə smoʊk ɹoʊz fɹəm wɛɹ tu əɹ θɹi tʃɹiz ɪn ə klʌmp bɝn laɪk tɔɹtʃɪz. oʊnli ðə dʒɛnɝəl wɛt stɑpt əm tɝnɪŋ ðə væli ɪndə ə kɑnfləɡɹeɪʃən.

From the flat, thinly treed ridge, Rand peered westward over the forest before him. With the Power in him - life, so sweet; vileness, oh, so vile - he could see individual leaves, but it was not enough. Tai'daishar stamped a hoof. The jagged peaks behind, to either side, and all around overtopped the ridge by a mile or more, but the ridge stood well above the treetops below, a rolling wooded valley over a league in length and nearly as wide. All was still down there. As quiet as the Void he floated in. Quiet for the moment, anyway. Here and there plumes of smoke rose from where two or three trees in a clump burned like torches. Only the general wet stopped them turning the valley into a conflagration.

flɪn ən dæʃivə wɝ ði oʊnli æʃəmən stɪl wɪð hɪm. ɔl ðə ɹɛst wɝ daʊn ɪn ðə væli. ðə pɛɹ stʊɾ ə lɪɾəl weɪ fɹəm ɪm ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə tʃɹiz, hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz baɪ ðə ɹeɪnz ən stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə fɔɹəs bɪloʊ. wɛl, flɪn stɛɹd, əz ɪntɛnli əz ɹænd hɪmsɛlf. dæʃivə ɡlænst əkeɪʒənəli, twɪstɪŋ ɪz maʊθ, səmtaɪmz mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf ɪn ə weɪ ðət meɪd flɪn ʃɪft ɪz fiɾ ən aɪ hɪm saɪdweɪz. ðə paʊɝ fɪl boʊθ mɛn, nɪɹli tə oʊvɝfloʊɪŋ, bʌt fəɹ ə tʃeɪnʒ, luz θɝɪn sɛd nʌθɪŋ. ðə mæn simd ɪnkɹisɪŋli tə hæv ɡɔn bæk ɪndə haɪɾɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə læs fju deɪz.

Flinn and Dashiva were the only Asha'man still with him. All the rest were down in the valley. The pair stood a little way from him at the edge of the trees, holding their horses by the reins and staring at the forest below. Well, Flinn stared, as intently as Rand himself. Dashiva glanced occasionally, twisting his mouth, sometimes muttering to himself in a way that made Flinn shift his feet and eye him sideways. The Power filled both men, nearly to overflowing, but for a change, Lews Therin said nothing. The man seemed increasingly to have gone back into hiding over the last few days.

ɪn ðə skaɪ ðəɹ wɑz æktʃəli  sʌnlaɪt, ən ðə skæɾɝd klaʊdz wɝ ɡɹeɪ. ɪt wɑz faɪv deɪz sɪns ɹænd hæd bɹɔɾ ɪz smɔl ɑɹmi tə ɔltɑɹə, faɪv deɪz sɪns i hæd sin ɪz fɝst sintʃæn dɛd. hi hæd sin kwaɪɾ ə fju sɪns. θɔt slɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə sɝfəs ə ðə vɔɪd. hi kəd fil ðə hɛɹən bɹændɪɾ ɪndə hɪz pɑm pɹɛsɪŋ əɡɛns ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ θɹu hɪz ɡlʌv. saɪlənt. ðəɹ wɝ nʌn ə ðə flaɪɪŋ kɹitʃɝz tə bi sin. θɹi ʌv ðoʊz hæd daɪd, slæʃt fɹəm ðə skaɪ baɪ laɪtnɪŋ, bɪfɔɹ ðɛɹ ɹaɪɾɝz lɝn tə steɪ klɪɹ. bæʃɪɹ wɑz fæsəneɪɾəd baɪ ðə kɹitʃɝz. kwaɪət.

In the sky there was actually sunlight, and the scattered clouds were gray. It was five days since Rand had brought his small army to Altara, five days since he had seen his first Seanchan dead. He had seen quite a few since. Thought slid across the surface of the Void. He could feel the heron branded into his palm pressing against the Dragon Scepter through his glove. Silent. There were none of the flying creatures to be seen. Three of those had died, slashed from the sky by lightning, before their riders learned to stay clear. Bashere was fascinated by the creatures. Quiet.

"pɝhæps ɪts fɪnɪʃt, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən." eɪlɪlz vɔɪs wɑz kɑm ən kul, bʌt ʃi pæɾəd əɹ mɛɹz nɛk, ðoʊ ði ænəməl dɪd nɑt nid suðɪŋ. ʃi aɪd flɪn ən dæʃivə saɪdweɪz ən stʃɹeɪɾənd, ənwɪlɪŋ tə ɹɪvil ə ʃɹɛɾ ʌv əniz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm.

"Perhaps it is finished, my Lord Dragon." Ailil's voice was calm and cool, but she patted her mare's neck, though the animal did not need soothing. She eyed Flinn and Dashiva sideways and straightened, unwilling to reveal a shred of unease in front of them.

ɹænd faʊn hɪmsɛlf hʌmɪŋ ən stɑpt əbɹʌpli. ðət wɑz luz θɝɪnz hæbət, lʊkɪŋ əɾ ə pɹɪɾi wʊmən, nɑt hɪz. nɑt hɪz! laɪt, ɪf i stɑɹɾəd teɪkɪŋ ɑn ðə fɛloʊz mænɝɪzəmz, ən wən i wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ, ət ðət . . . !

Rand found himself humming and stopped abruptly. That was Lews Therin's habit, looking at a pretty woman, not his. Not his! Light, if he started taking on the fellow's mannerisms, and when he was not there, at that . . . !

əbɹʌpli, hɑloʊ θʌndɝ bumd ʌp ðə væli. faɪɝ faʊnteɪn aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɹiz ə ɡʊd tu maɪlz əweɪ əɹ mɔɹ, ðən əɡɛn, ən əɡɛn, əɡɛn. laɪtnɪŋ stʃɹik daʊn ɪndə ðə fɔɹəs nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm wɛɹ ðə tɔl fleɪmz hæd blumd, sɪŋɡəl slæʃɪz laɪk dʒæɡd blu-waɪt lænsɪz. ə flɝi ʌv laɪtnɪŋ boʊls ən faɪɝ, ən ɔl wɑz stɪl əɡɛn. noʊ tʃɹiz hæd kɑt faɪɝ, ðɪs taɪm.

Abruptly, hollow thunder boomed up the valley. Fire fountained out of the trees a good two miles away or more, then again, and again, again. Lightning streaked down into the forest not far from where the tall flames had bloomed, single slashes like jagged blue-white lances. A flurry of lightning bolts and fire, and all was still again. No trees had caught fire, this time.

səm ə ðət hæd bɪn seɪɾɪn. səm ʌv ɪt.

Some of that had been saidin. Some of it.

ʃaʊts ɹoʊz, dɪm ən dɪstənt, fɹəm ənʌðɝ pɑɹɾ ə ðə væli, hi θɔt. tu fɑɹ fəɹ ivən ɪz seɪɾɪn-ɛnhænst ɪɹz tə hɪɹ ðə kɹæʃ ə stil. dɪspaɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, nɑɾ ɔl ə ðə faɪɾɪŋ wɑz biɪŋ dʌn baɪ æʃəmən ən dɛɾəkeɪtəd ən soʊlʒɝz.

Shouts rose, dim and distant, from another part of the valley, he thought. Too far for even his saidin-enhanced ears to hear the crash of steel. Despite everything, not all of the fighting was being done by Asha'man and Dedicated and Soldiers.

ænɑiɛlə lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ ʃi mʌst əv bɪn hoʊldɪŋ sɪns ði ɪkstʃeɪnʒ wɪð ðə paʊɝ bɪɡæn. mɛn faɪɾɪŋ wɪð stil dɪd nɑt dɪstɝb hɝ. ðən ʃi pæɾəd əɹ maʊns nɛk. ðə ɡɛldɪŋ hæɾ oʊnli flɪkɝɾ ən ɪɹ. ɹænd hæd noʊɾəst ðəɾ əbaʊt wɪmən. kwaɪɾ ɔfən, wən ə wʊmən wɑz ædʒəteɪɾəd, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə suð ʌðɝz wɛðɝ ðeɪ ɹikwaɪɝd suðɪŋ əɹ nɑt. ə hɔɹs wəd du. wɛɹ wɑz luz θɝɪn?

Anaiyella let out a long breath she must have been holding since the exchange with the Power began. Men fighting with steel did not disturb her. Then she patted her mount's neck. The gelding had only flickered an ear. Rand had noticed that about women. Quite often, when a woman was agitated, she tried to soothe others whether they required soothing or not. A horse would do. Where was Lews Therin?

ɪɹɪɾəbli hi lin fɔɹwɝd tə stʌɾi ðə fɔɹəs kænəpi əɡɛn. ə ɡʊd mɛni ʌv ðoʊz tʃɹiz wɝ ɛvɝɡɹinz - oʊk ən paɪn ən lɛðɝlif - ən dɪspaɪt ðə leɪt dʒɹaʊt, ðeɪ meɪɾ ən ɪfɛktɪv skɹin, ivən tə hɪz ɪntɛnsəfaɪd vɪʒən. əz ɪf aɪdli, hi tʌtʃt ðə nɛɹoʊ bʌndəl ʌndɝ ɪz stɝəp lɛðɝ. hi kəd teɪk ə hænd. ən stʃɹaɪk blaɪnli. hi kəd ɹaɪd daʊn ɪndə ðə wʊdz. ən bi eɪbəl tə si tɛn peɪsɪz ət moʊst. daʊn ðɛɹ, hi wəd bi lɪɾəl mɔɹ ɪfɛktɪv ðən wʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz.

Irritably he leaned forward to study the forest canopy again. A good many of those trees were evergreens - oak and pine and leatherleaf - and despite the late drought, they made an effective screen, even to his intensified vision. As if idly, he touched the narrow bundle under his stirrup leather. He could take a hand. And strike blindly. He could ride down into the woods. And be able to see ten paces at most. Down there, he would be little more effective than one of the Soldiers.

ə ɡeɪtweɪ oʊpən əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz ə lɪɾəl weɪ əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪdʒ, sɪlvɝi slæʃ waɪɾənɪŋ ɪndə ə hoʊl ðət ʃoʊd dɪfɹən tʃɹiz ən θɪk wɪntɝ bɹaʊn ʌndɝbɹʌʃ. ə kɑpɝ-skɪn soʊlʒɝ wɪð ə θɪn mʌstæʃ ɑn ɪz ʌpɝ lɪp ən ə smɔl pɝl ɪn ɪz ɪɹ ɛɡzəɾɪd əfʊɾ ən lɛt ðə ɡeɪtweɪ vænɪʃ. hi wɑz ʃʌvɪŋ ə sʌldəm əhɛɾ ə hɪm wɪð əɹ ɹɪsts taɪd bɪhaɪn hɝ, ə hænsəm wʊmən ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə pɝpəl nɑɾ ɑn ðə saɪɾ ə hɝ hɛd. ðət sim tə ɡoʊ əlɔŋ wɪð əɹ skaʊl, ðoʊ, əz wɛl əz ɪt dɪd wɪð əɹ ɹʌmpəld, lif-steɪn dʒɹɛs. ʃi snɪɹɾ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ət ðə soʊlʒɝ waɪl i pʊʃt əɹ əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪdʒtɑp tə ɹænd, ən ðən ʃi snɪɹɾ ʌp ət ɹænd.

A gateway opened among the trees a little way along the ridge, silvery slash widening into a hole that showed different trees and thick winter brown underbrush. A copper-skinned Soldier with a thin mustache on his upper lip and a small pearl in his ear exited afoot and let the gateway vanish. He was shoving a sul'dam ahead of him with her wrists tied behind her, a handsome woman except for the purple knot on the side of her head. That seemed to go along with her scowl, though, as well as it did with her rumpled, leaf-stained dress. She sneered over her shoulder at the Soldier while he pushed her along the ridgetop to Rand, and then she sneered up at Rand.

ðə soʊlʒɝ stɪfənd, səluɾɪŋ smɑɹtli. "soʊlʒɝ ɑɹlən næləm, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," hi bɑɹkt, stɛɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ ət ɹændz sæɾəl. "maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡənz ɔɹɾɝz wɝ tə bɹɪŋ ɛni wɪmən kæptʃɝd tə hɪm."

The Soldier stiffened, saluting smartly. "Soldier Arlen Nalaam, my Lord Dragon," he barked, staring straight at Rand's saddle. "My Lord Dragon's orders were to bring any women captured to him."

ɹænd nɑɾəd. ɪt wɑz oʊnli tə ɡɪv ɪm ði əpɪɹəns ə duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ, ɪnspɛktɪŋ pɹɪznɝz tə bi ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wɝ wʌɾ ɛni ɪɾiət kəd si ðeɪ wɝ. "teɪk əɹ bæk tə ðə kɑɹts, soʊlʒɝ næləm, ðən ɹɪtɝn tə ðə faɪɾɪŋ." hi ɔlmoʊst ɡɹaʊn ɪz tiθ seɪɪŋ ðæt. ɹɪtɝn tə ðə faɪɾɪŋ. waɪl ɹænd ælθɹ, dʒɹæɡən. ɹibɔɹn ən kɪŋ ʌv ɪljən, sæɾ ɪz hɔɹs ən wɑtʃt tʃɹitɑps!

Rand nodded. It was only to give him the appearance of doing something, inspecting prisoners to be sure they were what any idiot could see they were. "Take her back to the carts, Soldier Nalaam, then return to the fighting." He almost ground his teeth saying that. Return to the fighting. While Rand al'Thor, Dragon. Reborn and King of Illian, sat his horse and watched treetops!

næləm səluɾəd əɡɛn bɪfɔɹ pʊʃɪŋ əweɪ ðə wʊmən əhɛɾ ə hɪm, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt sloʊ əbaʊɾ ɪt. ʃi kɛpt piɹɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ əɡɛn, jɛt nɑɾ ət ðə soʊlʒɝ ðɪs taɪm. ət ɹænd. wɪð waɪd-aɪd, oʊpənməðd əstɑnɪʃmənt. fəɹ səm ɹizən, næləm dɪd nɑt pʊl əɹ tə ə hɔlt əntɪl i ɹitʃt ðə spɑt wɛɹ i hæd kʌm aʊt. ɔl ðət wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi wɑz tə ɡoʊ fɑɹ ɪnʌf tə əvɔɪɾ ɪnʒɝɪŋ ðə hɔɹsəz.

Nalaam saluted again before pushing away the woman ahead of him, but he was not slow about it. She kept peering over her shoulder again, yet not at the Soldier this time. At Rand. With wide-eyed, openmouthed astonishment. For some reason, Nalaam did not pull her to a halt until he reached the spot where he had come out. All that was necessary was to go far enough to avoid injuring the horses.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ?" ɹænd dɪmændəɾ əz seɪɾɪn fɪl ðə mæn.

"What are you doing?" Rand demanded as saidin filled the man.

næləm hæf tɝn bæk tə hɪm, hɛzəteɪɾɪŋ bɹifli. "ɪt simz iziɝ, hɪɹ, ɪf aɪ juz ə pleɪs aɪv ɔlɹɛɾi meɪɾ ə ɡeɪtweɪ, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. seɪɾɪn . . . seɪɾɪn filz . . . stʃɹeɪnʒ . . . tə mi hɪɹ." hɪz pɹɪznɝ tɝn tə fɹaʊn ət hɪm.

Nalaam half turned back to him, hesitating briefly. "It seems easier, here, if I use a place I've already made a gateway, my Lord Dragon. Saidin . . . Saidin feels . . . strange . . . to me here." His prisoner turned to frown at him.

æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ɹænd dʒɛstʃɝɾ ɪm tə ɡoʊ əhɛd. flɪn pɹitɛndəd tə bi ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ɪz hɔɹsəz sæɾəl ɡɝθ, bʌt ðə bɔldɪŋ oʊl mæn smaɪl feɪnli. smʌɡli. dæʃivə . . . ɡɪɡəld. flɪn hæd bɪn ðə fɝs tə mɛnʃən ən ɑd fil tə seɪɾɪn ɪn ðɪs væli. ʌv kɔɹs, nɛɹɪʃmə ən hɑpwəl hæd hɝd hɪm, ən mɔɹ æɾəd ɪz teɪlz ə ðə "stʃɹeɪnʒnəs" ɝaʊn ɛbu dɑɹ. smɔl wʌndɝ ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz kleɪmɪŋ tə fil sʌmθɪŋ naʊ, ðoʊ nɑɾ ə wʌn kəd seɪ wʌt. seɪɾɪn dʒʌs fɛlt . . . pəkjuljɝ. laɪt, wɪð ðə teɪn θɪk ɑn ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə sɔɹs, wʌɾ ɛls wəɾ ɪt fil? ɹænd hoʊp ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ ɔl kʌmɪŋ daʊn wɪð ɪz nu sɪknəs.

After a moment, Rand gestured him to go ahead. Flinn pretended to be interested in his horse's saddle girth, but the balding old man smiled faintly. Smugly. Dashiva . . . giggled. Flinn had been the first to mention an odd feel to saidin in this valley. Of course, Narishma and Hopwil had heard him, and Morr added his tales of the "strangeness" around Ebou Dar. Small wonder everyone was claiming to feel something now, though not a one could say what. Saidin just felt . . . peculiar. Light, with the taint thick on the male half of the Source, what else would it feel? Rand hoped they were not all coming down with his new sickness.

næləmz ɡeɪtweɪ oʊpənd, ən vænɪʃt bɪhaɪn ɪm ən ɪz pɹɪznɝ. ɹænd lɛt hɪmsɛlf ɹɪli fil seɪɾɪn. laɪf ən kɝʌpʃən kɑmɪŋɡəld; aɪs tə meɪk wɪntɝz hɑɹt sim wɔɹm, ən faɪɝ tə meɪk ə fɔɹdʒəz fleɪmz koʊld; dɛθ, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪm tə slɪp. wɑntɪŋ ɪm tə slɪp. ɪt dɪd nɑt fil ɛni dɪfɹənt. dɪɾ ɪt? hi skaʊld ət wɛɹ næləm hæd dɪsəpɪɹd. næləm ən ðə wʊmən.

Nalaam's gateway opened, and vanished behind him and his prisoner. Rand let himself really feel saidin. Life and corruption commingled; ice to make winter's heart seem warm, and fire to make a forge's flames cold; death, waiting for him to slip. Wanting him to slip. It did not feel any different. Did it? He scowled at where Nalaam had disappeared. Nalaam and the woman.

ʃi wɑz ðə fɔɹθ sʌldəm teɪkən ðɪs æftɝnun. ðət meɪd twɛnti-θɹi sʌldəm pɹɪznɝz wɪð ðə kɑɹts. ən tu deɪmeɪn, itʃ stɪl ɪn əɹ sɪlvɝi liʃ ən kɑlɝ, kæɹiɾ ɑn sɛpɹət kɑɹts; ɪn ðoʊz kɑlɝz, ðeɪ kəd nɑt wɔk θɹi stɛps bɪfɔɹ bɪkʌmɪŋ mɔɹ vaɪələnli sɪk ðən ɹænd dɪd sizɪŋ ðə sɔɹs. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ðə sɪstɝz wɪð mæt wəd bi pliz tə ɹəsiv əm æftɝ ɔl. ðə fɝs deɪmeɪn, θɹi deɪz bɪfɔɹ, hi hæd nɑt θɔɾ ʌv əz ə pɹɪznɝ. ə slɛndɝ wʊmən wɪð peɪl jɛloʊ hɛɹ ən bɪɡ blu aɪz, ʃi wɑz ə sintʃæn kæptɪv tə bi fɹid. hi θɔt. bʌt wən i fɔɹst ə sʌldəm tə ɹimuv ðə wʊmənz kɑlɝ, hɝ æɾəm, ʃi skɹim fəɹ ðə sʌldəm tə hɛlp əɹ ən ɪmiɾiətli bɪɡæn læʃɪŋ aʊt wɪð ðə paʊɝ. ʃi hæɾ ivən ɔfɝɾ əɹ nɛk fəɹ ðə sʌldəm tə ɹipleɪs ðə θɪŋ! naɪn dɪfɛndɝz ən ə soʊlʒɝ daɪd bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd bi ʃildɪd. dʒɛdwɪn wʊɾə kɪld əɹ ɑn ðə spɑt hæd ɹænd nɑt stɑpt ɪt. ðə dɪfɛndɝz, nɪɹli əz ənkʌmftəɹbəl ɝaʊnd wɪmən u kəd tʃænəl əz ʌðɝz wɝ ɝaʊn mɛn u kəd - ðə dɪfɛndɝz stɪl wɑntəɾ əɹ dɛd. ðeɪ hæd teɪkən kæʒəwəltiz ɪn ðə faɪɾɪŋ ðiz pæs deɪz, bʌt hævɪŋ mɛn kɪl baɪ ə pɹɪznɝ sim tə əfɛn ðɛm.

She was the fourth sul'dam taken this afternoon. That made twenty-three sul'dam prisoners with the carts. And two damane, each still in her silvery leash and collar, carried on separate carts; in those collars, they could not walk three steps before becoming more violently sick than Rand did seizing the Source. He was not sure the sisters with Mat would be pleased to receive them after all. The first damane, three days before, he had not thought of as a prisoner. A slender woman with pale yellow hair and big blue eyes, she was a Seanchan captive to be freed. He thought. But when he forced a sul'dam to remove the woman's collar, her a'dam, she screamed for the sul'dam to help her and immediately began lashing out with the Power. She had even offered her neck for the sul'dam to replace the thing! Nine Defenders and a Soldier died before she could be shielded. Gedwyn would have killed her on the spot had Rand not stopped it. The Defenders, nearly as uncomfortable around women who could channel as others were around men who could - the Defenders still wanted her dead. They had taken casualties in the fighting these past days, but having men killed by a prisoner seemed to offend them.

ðəɹ hæd bɪn mɔɹ kæʒəwəltiz ðən ɹænd hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd. θɝɾi-wʌn dɪfɛndɝz dɛd, ən fɔɹɾi-sɪks kəmpænjənz. mɔɹ ðən tu hʌnʒɹəd əmʌŋ ðə lidʒənmɛn ən ðə noʊbəlz ɑɹmmɪn. sɛvən soʊlʒɝz ən ə dɛɾəkeɪtəd, mɛn ɹænd hæd nɛvɝ mɛt bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ænsɝɾ ɪz sʌmənz tə ɪljən. tu mɛni, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðəɾ ɔl ɪksɛp ðə ɡɹævəst ɪnʒɝi kəd bi hild, ɪf ə mæn kəɾ oʊnli hæŋ ɑn əntɪl ðəɹ wɑz taɪm. bʌɾ i wɑz dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ðə sintʃæn wɛst. dʒɹaɪvɪŋ əm hɑɹd.

There had been more casualties than Rand had expected. Thirty-one Defenders dead, and forty-six Companions. More than two hundred among the Legionmen and the noble's armsmen. Seven Soldiers and a Dedicated, men Rand had never met before they answered his summons to Illian. Too many, considering that all except the gravest injury could be Healed, if a man could only hang on until there was time. But he was driving the Seanchan west. Driving them hard.

mɔɹ ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɹoʊz sʌmwɛɹ fɑɹ ɔf daʊn ɪn ðə væli. faɪɝ blɑsəmd ə ɡʊd θɹi maɪlz tə ðə wɛst, ən laɪtnɪŋ stʃɹʌk, tɑpəlɪŋ tʃɹiz. tʃɹiz ən stoʊn ɪɹʌptəd fɹəm ə maʊntənsaɪd fɑɹðɝ ɑn, stʃɹeɪnʒ faʊntənz mɑɹtʃɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə sloʊp. ðə ɹɔɹɪŋ bumz swɑloʊd ʃaʊts. ðə sintʃæn wɝ ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ.

More shouting rose somewhere far off down in the valley. Fire blossomed a good three miles to the west, and lightning struck, toppling trees. Trees and stone erupted from a mountainside farther on, strange fountains marching along the slope. The roaring booms swallowed shouts. The Seanchan were retreating.

"ɡɛt daʊn ðɛɹ," ɹænd toʊl flɪn ən dæʃivə. "boʊθ ə ju. faɪn dʒɛdwɪn ən tɛl ɪm aɪ sɛd pʊʃ! pʊʃ!"

"Get down there," Rand told Flinn and Dashiva. "Both of you. Find Gedwyn and tell him I said push! Push!"

dæʃivə ɡɹɪməst ət ðə fɔɹəs bɪloʊ, ðən bɪɡæn ɔkwɝdli tʌɡɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪdʒ. ðə mæn wɑz ənɡeɪnli wɪð hɔɹsəz, ɹaɪɾɪŋ əɹ liɾɪŋ. hi nɪɹli tʃɹɪpt oʊvɝ ɪz sɔɹd!

Dashiva grimaced at the forest below, then began awkwardly tugging his horse along the ridge. The man was ungainly with horses, riding or leading. He nearly tripped over his sword!

flɪn lʊkt ʌp ət ɹænd wɝidli. "ju min tə steɪ hɪɹ əloʊn, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən?"

Flinn looked up at Rand worriedly. "You mean to stay here alone, my Lord Dragon?"

"aɪm hɑɹdli əloʊn," ɹænd sɛd dʒɹaɪli, ɡlænsɪŋ əɾ eɪlɪl ən ænɑiɛlə. ðeɪ hæd ɹɪɾən bæk tə ðɛɹ ɑɹmmɪn, ɔlmoʊs tu hʌnʒɹəd lænsɝz weɪɾɪŋ dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ʌv wɛɹ ðə ɹɪdʒ bɪɡæn tə sloʊp daʊn tə ði ist. ət ðɛɹ hɛd, dɛnhɝəd fɹaʊn θɹu ðə feɪs-bɑɹz ə hɪz hɛlmət. hi hæd kəmæn ə boʊθ lɑts, naʊ, ən ɪf ɪz kənsɝn wɑz fəɹ eɪlɪl ən ænɑiɛlə, hɪz fɛloʊz stɪl meɪɾ ə ʃoʊ fɪt tə kip əweɪ moʊst ətækɝz. bɪsaɪdz, wɪɹɑmɑn hæd ðə nɔɹðɝn ɛn ə ðɪs ɹɪdʒ sɪkjʊɹd soʊ ə flaɪ kəd nɑt pæs, hi kleɪmd, ən bæʃɪɹ hɛl ðə saʊθ. wɪθaʊt boʊstɪŋ; bæʃɪɹ dʒʌst ɪɹɛktəɾ ə wɔl ə lænsɪz wɪθaʊt tɔkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt. ən ðə sintʃæn wɝ ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ. "æn aɪm hɑɹdli hɛlpləs, ɛniweɪ, flɪn."

"I'm hardly alone," Rand said dryly, glancing at Ailil and Anaiyella. They had ridden back to their armsmen, almost two hundred lancers waiting just short of where the ridge began to slope down to the east. At their head, Denharad frowned through the face-bars of his helmet. He had command of both lots, now, and if his concern was for Ailil and Anaiyella, his fellows still made a show fit to keep away most attackers. Besides, Weiramon had the northern end of this ridge secured so a fly could not pass, he claimed, and Bashere held the south. Without boasting; Bashere just erected a wall of lances without talking about it. And the Seanchan were retreating. "And I'm hardly helpless, anyway, Flinn."

flɪn æktʃəli  lʊk daʊtfəl ən skɹætʃt ɪz fɹɪnʒ ʌv waɪt hɛɹ bɪfɔɹ səluɾɪŋ ən liɾɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs təwɔɹd wɛɹ dæʃivəz ɡeɪtweɪ wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi wɪŋkɪŋ aʊt. lɪmpɪŋ əlɔŋ, flɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf fɪt fəɹ dæʃivə. ɹænd wɑntəd tə snɑɹl. hi kəd nɑt ɡoʊ mæd, ən niðɝ kəd ðeɪ.

Flinn actually looked doubtful and scratched his fringe of white hair before saluting and leading his horse toward where Dashiva's gateway was already winking out. Limping along, Flinn shook his head, muttering to himself fit for Dashiva. Rand wanted to snarl. He could not go mad, and neither could they.

flɪnz ɡeɪtweɪ vænɪʃt, ən ɹænd ɹɪtɝn tə hɪz stʌɾi ʌv ðə tʃɹitɑps. ɪt wɑz kwaɪəɾ əɡɛn. taɪm stʃɹɛtʃt ɪn stɪlnəs. ðɪs noʊʃən ə teɪkɪŋ ði aʊtpoʊsts ɪn ðə maʊntənz hæd bɪn ə bæd wʌn; hi wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə ədmɪt ðæt, naʊ. ɪn ðɪs tɝeɪn, jə kəd bi hæf ə maɪl fɹəm ən ɑɹmi wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ. ɪn ðoʊz tæŋɡəld wʊdz daʊn ðɛɹ, jə kəd bi tɛn fit fɹəm əm wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ! hi niɾəd tə feɪs ðə sintʃæn ɑn bɛɾɝ ɡɹaʊnd. hi niɾəd. . . .

Flinn's gateway vanished, and Rand returned to his study of the treetops. It was quiet again. Time stretched in stillness. This notion of taking the outposts in the mountains had been a bad one; he was willing to admit that, now. In this terrain, you could be half a mile from an army without knowing. In those tangled woods down there, you could be ten feet from them without knowing! He needed to face the Seanchan on better ground. He needed. . . .

əbɹʌpli hi wɑz faɪɾɪŋ seɪɾɪn, faɪɾɪŋ waɪl sɝdʒəz ðət tʃɹaɪd tə ɹim aʊɾ ɪz skʌl. ðə vɔɪd wɑz vænɪʃɪŋ, mɛltɪŋ bɪniθ ði ɔnslɔt. fɹæntɪk, deɪzd, hi ɹilis ðə sɔɹs bɪfɔɹ ɪt kəd kɪl hɪm. nɔziə twɪstəɾ ɪz mɪɾəl. dʌbəl vɪʒən ʃoʊɾ ɪm tu kɹaʊnz ə sɔɹdz. laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə θɪk mʌltʃ ə dɛd livz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz feɪs! hi wɑz ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd! hi kəd nɑt sim tə bɹið pɹɑpɝli, ən stʃɹʌɡəl tə sʌk ɪn ɛɹ. ðəɹ wɑz ə tʃɪp bɹoʊkən ɔf wʌn ə ðə kɹaʊnz ɡoʊldən lɔɹəl livz, ən blʌd steɪn sɛvɹəl ə ðə taɪni ɡoʊldən sɔɹdpɔɪns. ə nɑɾ ə hɑt peɪn ɪn ɪz saɪd toʊld ɪm ðoʊz nɛvɝ-hilɪŋ wunz hæd bɹoʊkən oʊpən. hi tʃɹaɪd tə pʊʃ hɪmsɛlf ʌp, ən kɹaɪɾ aʊt. ɪn stʌn əmeɪzmən i stɛɹɾ ət ðə dɑɹk flɛtʃɪŋz ʌv ən æɹoʊ stʌk θɹu hɪz ɹaɪɾ ɑɹm. wɪð ə ɡɹoʊn i kəlæpst. sʌmθɪŋ ɹæn daʊn ɪz feɪs. sʌmθɪŋ dʒɹɪpt ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz aɪ. blʌd.

Abruptly he was fighting saidin, fighting wild surges that tried to ream out his skull. The Void was vanishing, melting beneath the onslaught. Frantic, dazed, he released the Source before it could kill him. Nausea twisted his middle. Double vision showed him two Crowns of Swords. Lying on the thick mulch of dead leaves in front of his face! He was on the ground! He could not seem to breathe properly, and struggled to suck in air. There was a chip broken off one of the crown's golden laurel leaves, and blood stained several of the tiny golden swordpoints. A knot of hot pain in his side told him those never-healing wounds had broken open. He tried to push himself up, and cried out. In stunned amazement he stared at the dark fletchings of an arrow stuck through his right arm. With a groan he collapsed. Something ran down his face. Something dripped in front of his eye. Blood.

veɪɡli hi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə juləleɪɾɪŋ kɹaɪz. hɔɹsmən əpɪɹɾ əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz tə ðə nɔɹθ, ɡæləpɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪdʒ, səm wɪð loʊɝd lænsɪz, səm wɝkɪŋ ʃɔɹt baʊz əz fæst əz ðeɪ kəd nɑk ən dʒɹɔ. hɔɹsmən ɪn blu-ænd-jɛloʊ ɑɹmɝ ʌv oʊvɝlæpɪŋ pleɪts, ən hɛlməts laɪk hjudʒ ɪnsɛks' hɛdz. sintʃæn, sɛvɹəl hʌnʒɹəd ə ðɛm ɪt simd. fɹəm ðə nɔɹθ. soʊ mʌtʃ fəɹ wɪɹɑmɑnz flaɪ.

Vaguely he became aware of ululating cries. Horsemen appeared among the trees to the north, galloping along the ridge, some with lowered lances, some working short bows as fast as they could nock and draw. Horsemen in blue-and-yellow armor of overlapping plates, and helmets like huge insects' heads. Seanchan, several hundred of them it seemed. From the north. So much for Weiramon's fly.

ɹænd stʃɹʌɡəl tə ɹitʃ ðə sɔɹs. tu leɪt tə wɝi əbaʊt sɪkɪŋ ʌp, əɹ fɔlɪŋ ɑn ɪz feɪs. ənʌðɝ taɪm, hi maɪɾ əv læft ət ðæt. hi stʃɹʌɡəld. . . . ɪt wɑz laɪk fʌmbəlɪŋ fəɹ ə pɪn ɪn ðə dɑɹk wɪð nʌm fɪŋɡɝz.

Rand struggled to reach the Source. Too late to worry about sicking up, or falling on his face. Another time, he might have laughed at that. He struggled. . . . It was like fumbling for a pin in the dark with numbed fingers.

taɪm tə daɪ, luz θɝɪn wɪspɝd. ɹænd hæɾ ɔlweɪz noʊn luz θɝɪn wəd bi ðəɹ ət ði ɛnd.

Time to die, Lews Therin whispered. Rand had always known Lews Therin would be there at the end.

nɑt fɪfti peɪsɪz fɹəm ɹænd, skɹimɪŋ tɛɹənz ən kɛɹhin plaʊɾ ɪndə ðə sintʃæn.

Not fifty paces from Rand, screaming Tairens and Cairhien plowed into the Seanchan.

"faɪt, jə dɑɡz!" ænɑiɛlə ʃɹikt, swɪŋɪŋ daʊn fɹəm əɹ sæɾəl bɪsaɪd hɪm. "faɪt!" ðə wɪloʊ leɪɾi ɪn əɹ sɪlks ən leɪsəz hɝld ə stʃɹɪŋ ə kɝsɪz ðət wʊɾə meɪɾ ə wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝz tʌŋ ɡoʊ dʒɹaɪ.

"Fight, you dogs!" Anaiyella shrieked, swinging down from her saddle beside him. "Fight!" The willow lady in her silks and laces hurled a string of curses that would have made a wagon driver's tongue go dry.

ænɑiɛlə stʊd hoʊldɪŋ əɹ maʊns ɹeɪnz, ɡlɛɹɪŋ fɹəm ðə mɪl ə mɛn ən stil tə ɹænd. ɪt wɑz eɪlɪl u tɝn ɪm ɑntu hɪz bæk. nilɪŋ ðɛɹ, ʃi lʊk daʊn əɾ ɪm wɪð ən ənɹiɾəbəl ɪkspɹɛʃən ɪn əɹ bɪɡ dɑɹk aɪz. hi kəd nɑt sim tə muv. hi fɛl dʒɹeɪnd. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i kəd blɪŋk. skɹimz ən ðə klæʃ ə stil ɹæŋ ɪn ɪz ɪɹz.

Anaiyella stood holding her mount's reins, glaring from the mill of men and steel to Rand. It was Ailil who turned him onto his back. Kneeling there, she looked down at him with an unreadable expression in her big dark eyes. He could not seem to move. He felt drained. He was not sure he could blink. Screams and the clash of steel rang in his ears.

"ɪf i daɪz ɑn əɹ hænz, bæʃɪɹ wɪl hæŋ boʊθ ʌv ʌs!" ænɑiɛlə sɝɾənli wɑz nɑt sɪmpɝɪŋ naʊ. "ɪf ðoʊz blæk-koʊɾəd mɑnstɝz ɡɛt hoʊld ʌv əs . . . !" ʃi ʃʌɾɝəd, ən bɛn kloʊsɝ tə eɪlɪl, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ wɪð ə bɛl naɪf i hæd nɑt noʊɾəst ɪn əɹ hæn bɪfɔɹ. ə ɹubi spɑɹkəl blʌd-ɹɛɾ ɑn ðə hɪlt. "jɔɹ læns-kæptən kəd bɹeɪk ɔf ɪnʌf mɛn tə ɡɛɾ əs əweɪ. wi kəd bi maɪlz əweɪ bɪfɔɹ hiz faʊnd, ən bæk tə əɹ ɪsteɪts baɪ ðə taɪm - "

"If he dies on our hands, Bashere will hang both of us!" Anaiyella certainly was not simpering now. "If those black-coated monsters get hold of us . . . !" She shuddered, and bent closer to Ailil, gesturing with a belt knife he had not noticed in her hand before. A ruby sparkled blood-red on the hilt. "Your Lance-captain could break off enough men to get us away. We could be miles away before he's found, and back to our estates by the time - "

"aɪ θɪŋk i kən hɪɹ ʌs," eɪlɪl bɹoʊk ɪn kɑmli. hɝ ɹɛd-ɡlʌv hænz muvd əɾ əɹ weɪst. ʃiðɪŋ ə bɛl naɪf? əɹ dʒɹɔɪŋ wʌn? "ɪf i daɪz hɪɹ - " ʃi kʌɾ ɔf əz ʃɑɹpli əz ði ʌðɝ wʊmən hæd, ən əɹ hɛd dʒɝkt ɝaʊnd.

"I think he can hear us," Ailil broke in calmly. Her red-gloved hands moved at her waist. Sheathing a belt knife? Or drawing one? "If he dies here - " She cut off as sharply as the other woman had, and her head jerked around.

hʊvz θʌndɝd pæst ɹænd ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ɪn θɪk stʃɹimz. ɡæləpɪŋ nɔɹθ, təwɔɹd ðə sintʃæn. sɔɹɾ ɪn hænd, bæʃɪɹ bɛɹli ɹeɪn ɪn bɪfɔɹ lipɪŋ fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl. ɡɹɛɡɹɪn pɑnɝ dɪsmaʊntɪd mɔɹ sloʊli, bʌɾ i weɪvd ɪz sɔɹɾ ət ðə mɛn flʌɾɪŋ baɪ. "stʃɹaɪk hoʊm fəɹ kɪŋ ən ɪljən!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. "stʃɹaɪk hoʊm! ðə lɔɹɾ ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ! ðə lɔɹɾ ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ!" ðə kɹæʃ ə stil ɹoʊz haɪɝ. ən ðə skɹimɪŋ.

Hooves thundered past Rand on either side in thick streams. Galloping north, toward the Seanchan. Sword in hand, Bashere barely reined in before leaping from his saddle. Gregorin Panar dismounted more slowly, but he waved his sword at the men flooding by. "Strike home for King and Illian!" he shouted. "Strike home! The Lord of the Morning! The Lord of the Morning!" The crash of steel rose higher. And the screaming.

"ɪt wəd bi laɪk ðɪs ət ðə læst ʌv ɪt," bæʃɪɹ ɡɹaʊld, feɪvɝɪŋ ðə tu wɪmən wɪð səspɪʃəs ɡlɛɹz. hi weɪstəɾ oʊnli ən ɪnstənt, ðoʊ, bɪfɔɹ ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz vɔɪs əbʌv ðə dɪn ə bæɾəl. "mɔɹ! bɝn jəɹ æʃəmən haɪd! hɪɹ, naʊ!" hi dɪd nɑt ʃaʊt ðət ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən wɑz daʊn, θæŋk ðə laɪt.

"It would be like this at the last of it," Bashere growled, favoring the two women with suspicious glares. He wasted only an instant, though, before raising his voice above the din of battle. "Morr! Burn your Asha'man hide! Here, now!" He did not shout that the Lord Dragon was down, thank the Light.

wɪð ən ɛfɝt, ɹænd tɝn ɪz hɛd pɝhæps ə hænd. ɪnʌf tə si ɪliɑnɝz ən sɑldəiənz dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ɑn nɔɹθ. ðə sintʃæn mʌst əv ɡɪvən weɪ.

With an effort, Rand turned his head perhaps a hand. Enough to see Illianers and Saldaeans driving on north. The Seanchan must have given way.

"mɔɹ!" ðə neɪm ɹɔɹd θɹu bæʃɪɹz mʌstæʃɪz, ən mɔɹ hɪmsɛlf dʒɹɑp fɹəm ə ɡæləpɪŋ hɔɹs nɪɹli ɑn tɑp ʌv ænɑiɛlə. ʃi lʊk dɪsɡɹʌntəld ət ðə læk ʌv ən əpɑlədʒi əz ðə mæn nɛl bɪsaɪd ɹænd, skɹʌbɪŋ dɑɹk hɛɹ aʊɾ ə hɪz feɪs. ʃi muv bæk kwɪkli ɪnʌf wən ʃi ɹilaɪzd i ɪntɛndəd tə tʃænəl, ðoʊ, pɹæktəkli baʊndɪŋ əweɪ. eɪlɪl wɑz mʌtʃ smuðɝ əbaʊt ɹaɪzɪŋ, bʌt nɑt noʊɾɪsəbli sloʊɝ ɪn stɛpɪŋ klɪɹ. ən ʃi slɪpt ə sɪlvɝ-hændəl bɛl naɪf bæk ɪndə ɪts ʃiθ əɾ əɹ weɪst.

"Morr!" The name roared through Bashere's mustaches, and Morr himself dropped from a galloping horse nearly on top of Anaiyella. She looked disgruntled at the lack of an apology as the man knelt beside Rand, scrubbing dark hair out of his face. She moved back quickly enough when she realized he intended to channel, though, practically bounding away. Ailil was much smoother about rising, but not noticeably slower in stepping clear. And she slipped a silver-handled belt knife back into its sheath at her waist.

hilɪŋ wɑz ə sɪmpəl mæɾɝ, ɪf nɑɾ ɪɡzækli kʌmftəɹbəl. ðə flɛtʃɪŋz wɝ bɹoʊkən ɔf ən ði æɹoʊ dʒɹɔn ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ θɹu wɪð ə ʃɑɹp dʒɝk ðət bɹɔɾ ə ɡæsp tə ɹændz lɪps, bʌt ðət wɑz dʒʌs tə klɪɹ ðə weɪ. dɝɾ ən laɪtli ɛmbɛɾɪd fɹæɡməns wəd fɔl əweɪ əz flɛʃ nɪɾ ɪtsɛlf ʌp, bʌɾ oʊnli flɪn ən ə fju ʌðɝz kəd juz ðə paʊɝ tə ɹimuv wʌt wɑz dʒɹɪvən dip. ɹɛstɪŋ tu fɪŋɡɝz ɑn ɹændz tʃɛst, mɔɹ kɑɾ ɪz tʌŋ bɪtwin ɪz tiθ wɪð ə fɪkst ɪkspɹɛʃən ən woʊv hilɪŋ. ðət wɑz haʊ hi ɔlweɪz dɪɾ ɪt; ɪt dɪd nɑt wɝk fəɹ hɪm, ʌðɝwaɪz. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə kɑmplɛks wivz ðət flɪn juzd. fju kəd mænədʒ ðæt, ən nʌn əz wɛl əz flɪn, soʊ fɑɹ. ðɪs wɑz sɪmpəlɝ. ɹʌfɝ. weɪvz ə hit ɹʌʃt θɹu ɹænd, stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪm ɡɹʌn ən sɛn swɛt ɡʌʃɪŋ fɹəm ɛvɹi pɔɹ. hi kwɪvɝd vaɪələnli fɹəm hɛd tə fʊt. ə ɹoʊst ɪn ði ʌvən mʌst əv fɛl ðət weɪ.

Healing was a simple matter, if not exactly comfortable. The fletchings were broken off and the arrow drawn the rest of the way through with a sharp jerk that brought a gasp to Rand's lips, but that was just to clear the way. Dirt and lightly embedded fragments would fall away as flesh knit itself up, but only Flinn and a few others could use the Power to remove what was driven deep. Resting two fingers on Rand's chest, Morr caught his tongue between his teeth with a fixed expression and wove Healing. That was how he always did it; it did not work for him, otherwise. It was not the complex weaves that Flinn used. Few could manage that, and none as well as Flinn, so far. This was simpler. Rougher. Waves of heat rushed through Rand, strong enough to make him grunt and send sweat gushing from every pore. He quivered violently from head to foot. A roast in the oven must have felt that way.

ðə sʌɾən flʌɾ ə hiɾ ɛb sloʊli, ən ɹænd leɪ pæntɪŋ. ɪn ɪz hɛd, luz θɝɪn pæntɪd, tu. kɪl hɪm! kɪl hɪm! oʊvɝ ən oʊvɝ.

The sudden flood of heat ebbed slowly, and Rand lay panting. In his head, Lews Therin panted, too. Kill him! Kill him! Over and over.

mjuɾɪŋ ðə vɔɪs tə ə feɪn bʌz, ɹænd θæŋk mɔɹ - ðə jʌŋ mæn blɪŋkt əz ɪf sɝpɹaɪzd! - ðən ɡɹæb ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊn ən fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə hɪz fit. ɪɹɛkt, hi sweɪd slaɪtli. bæʃɪɹ stɑɹɾəd tə ɔfɝ ən ɑɹm, ðən bækt əweɪ əɾ ə dʒɛstʃɝ. ɹænd kəd stæn əneɪɾɪd. bɛɹli. hi kəɾ əz sun əv floʊn baɪ weɪvɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmz əz tʃænəld, ðoʊ. wən i tʌtʃt ɪz saɪd, hɪz ʃɝt slɪpt ɑn blʌd, jɛt ði oʊld ɹaʊn skɑɹ ən ðə nuɝ slæʃ əkɹɔs ɪt mɪɹli fɛl tɛndɝ. hæf-hild oʊnli, bʌt ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ bɪn bɛɾɝ ðən ðət sɪns i ɡɑt ðɛm.

Muting the voice to a faint buzz, Rand thanked Morr - the young man blinked as if surprised! - then grabbed the Dragon Scepter from the ground and forced himself to his feet. Erect, he swayed slightly. Bashere started to offer an arm, then backed away at a gesture. Rand could stand unaided. Barely. He could as soon have flown by waving his arms as channeled, though. When he touched his side, his shirt slipped on blood, yet the old round scar and the newer slash across it merely felt tender. Half-healed only, but they had never been better than that since he got them.

fəɹ ə moʊmənt, hi stʌɾid ðə tu wɪmən. ænɑiɛlə mɝmɝd sʌmθɪŋ veɪɡli kənɡɹætʃələtɔɹi ən ɔfɝɾ ɪm ə smaɪl ðət meɪɾ ɪm wʌndɝ wɛðɝ ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə lɪk ɪz ɹɪst. eɪlɪl stʊd vɛɹi stʃɹeɪt, vɛɹi kul, əz ɪf nʌθɪŋ hæd hæpənd. hæd ðeɪ mɛn tə liv ɪm tə daɪ? əɹ tə kɪl hɪm? bʌɾ ɪf soʊ, waɪ sɛn ðɛɹ ɑɹmmɪn tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ ɪn ən ɹʌʃ tə tʃɛk ɑn hɪm? ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, eɪlɪl hæd dʒɹɔn əɹ naɪf wʌns ðə tɔk ə hɪm daɪɪŋ bɪɡæn.

For a moment, he studied the two women. Anaiyella murmured something vaguely congratulatory and offered him a smile that made him wonder whether she intended to lick his wrist. Ailil stood very straight, very cool, as if nothing had happened. Had they meant to leave him to die? Or to kill him? But if so, why send their armsmen charging in and rush to check on him? On the other hand, Ailil had drawn her knife once the talk of him dying began.

moʊst ə ðə sɑldəiənz ən ɪliɑnɝz wɝ ɡæləpɪŋ nɔɹθ əɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ daʊn ðə sloʊp ə ðə ɹɪdʒ, pɝsuɪŋ ðə læst ə ðə sintʃæn. ən ðən wɪɹɑmɑn əpɪɹd fɹəm ðə nɔɹθ, ɹaɪɾɪŋ ə tɔl, ɡlɔsi blæk əɾ ə sloʊ kæntɝ ðət pɪkt ʌp wən i sɔ ɹænd. hɪz ɑɹmmɪn ɹoʊɾ ɪn dʌbəl faɪl əɾ ɪz bæk.

Most of the Saldaeans and Illianers were galloping north or riding down the slope of the ridge, pursuing the last of the Seanchan. And then Weiramon appeared from the north, riding a tall, glossy black at a slow canter that picked up when he saw Rand. His armsmen rode in double file at his back.

"maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," ðə haɪ lɔɹɾ ɪntoʊn əz i dɪsmaʊntɪd. hi stɪl simd əz klin əz i hæɾ ɪn ɪljən. bæʃɪɹ sɪmpli lʊkt ɹʌmpəld ən ə bɪt ɡɹaɪmi hɪɹ ən ðɛɹ, bʌt ɡɹɛɡɹɪnz faɪnɝi wɑz dɪsaɪɾədli dɝt-steɪnd, ən slæʃt daʊn wʌn sliv bɪsaɪdz. wɪɹɑmɑn flɝɪʃt ə baʊ tə ʃeɪm ə kɪŋz kɔɹt. "fɝɡɪv mi, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. aɪ θɔɾ aɪ sɔ sintʃæn ədvænsɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə ɹɪdʒ ən wɛn tə mit ðɛm. aɪ nɛvɝ səspɛktəd ðɪs ʌðɝ kʌmpəni. jə kænt noʊ haʊ ɪt wəd peɪn mi ɪf jə wɝ ɪnʒɝd."

"My Lord Dragon," the High Lord intoned as he dismounted. He still seemed as clean as he had in Illian. Bashere simply looked rumpled and a bit grimy here and there, but Gregorin's finery was decidedly dirt-stained, and slashed down one sleeve besides. Weiramon flourished a bow to shame a king's court. "Forgive me, my Lord Dragon. I thought I saw Seanchan advancing in front of the ridge and went to meet them. I never suspected this other company. You can't know how it would pain me if you were injured."

"aɪ θɪŋk aɪ noʊ," ɹænd sɛd dʒɹaɪli, ən wɪɹɑmɑn blɪŋkt. sintʃæn ədvænsɪŋ? pɝhæps. wɪɹɑmɑn wəɾ ɔlweɪz snætʃ əɾ ə tʃæns fəɹ ɡlɔɹi ɪn ðə tʃɑɹdʒ. "wʌt dɪd jə min, 'æt ðə læst,' bæʃɪɹ?"

"I think I know," Rand said dryly, and Weiramon blinked. Seanchan advancing? Perhaps. Weiramon would always snatch at a chance for glory in the charge. "What did you mean, 'at the last,' Bashere?"

"ðeɪɹ pʊlɪŋ bæk," bæʃɪɹ ɹɪplaɪd. ɪn ðə væli, faɪɝ ən laɪtnɪŋ ɪɹʌptəd fəɹ ə moʊmən əz ɪf tə ɡɪv ɪm ðə laɪ, bʌt nɪɹli tə ðə fɑɹ ɛnd.

"They're pulling back," Bashere replied. In the valley, fire and lightning erupted for a moment as if to give him the lie, but nearly to the far end.

"jɔɹ . . . skaʊts də seɪ ðeɪ ɔl də bi ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ," ɡɹɛɡɹɪn sɛd, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz bɪɹd, ən ɡeɪv mɔɹ ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ, ənkʌmftəɹbəl ɡlæns. mɔɹ ɡɹɪn əɾ ɪm tuthəli. ɹænd hæd sin ði ɪliɑnɝ ɪn ðə θɪk ə faɪɾɪŋ hɛɾɪŋ ɪz mɛn, ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɛnkɝɪdʒmən ən leɪɪŋ ɪz sɔɹɾ əbaʊt wɪð waɪld əbændən, bʌɾ i flɪntʃt ət mɔɹz ɡɹɪn.

"Your . . . scouts do say they all do be retreating," Gregorin said, rubbing his beard, and gave Morr a sidelong, uncomfortable glance. Morr grinned at him toothily. Rand had seen the Illianer in the thick of fighting heading his men, shouting encouragement and laying his sword about with wild abandon, but he flinched at Morr's grin.

dʒɛdwɪn stʃɹoʊɾ ʌp ðɛn, liɾɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs kɛɹləsli, ɪnsələnli. hi ɔlmoʊst snɪɹɾ ət bæʃɪɹ ən ɡɹɛɡɹɪn, fɹaʊn ət wɪɹɑmɑn əz ɪf ɔlɹɛɾi noʊɪŋ ðə mænz blʌndɝ, ən aɪɾ eɪlɪl ən ænɑiɛlə əz ðoʊ hi maɪt pɪntʃ ðɛm. ðə tu wɪmən dʒɹu bæk fɹəm ɪm heɪstəli, bʌt ðɛn, soʊ dɪd ðə mɛn ɪksɛp fəɹ bæʃɪɹ. ivən mɔɹ. dʒɛdwɪnz səlut tə ɹænd wɑz ə kæʒəwəl tæp ə fɪs tə tʃɛst. "aɪ sɛn skaʊts aʊɾ əz sun əz aɪ sɔ ðɪs lɑt wɑz dʌn. ðəɹ ɑɹ θɹi mɔɹ kɑləmz ɪnsaɪd tɛn maɪlz."

Gedwyn strode up then, leading his horse carelessly, insolently. He almost sneered at Bashere and Gregorin, frowned at Weiramon as if already knowing the man's blunder, and eyed Ailil and Anaiyella as though he might pinch them. The two women drew back from him hastily, but then, so did the men except for Bashere. Even Morr. Gedwyn's salute to Rand was a casual tap of fist to chest. "I sent scouts out as soon as I saw this lot was done. There are three more columns inside ten miles."

"ɔl hɛɾəd wɛst," bæʃɪɹ pʊɾ ɪn kwaɪətli, bʌɾ i lʊkt ət dʒɛdwɪn ʃɑɹp ɪnʌf tə slaɪs stoʊn. "juv dʌn ɪt," hi toʊld ɹænd. "ðeɪɹ ɔl fɔlɪŋ bæk. aɪ daʊt ðəl stɑp ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ. kæmpeɪnz doʊn ɔlweɪz ɛnd wɪð ə ɡɹæn mɑɹtʃ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi, ən ðɪs wʌn ɪz fɪnɪʃt."

"All headed west," Bashere put in quietly, but he looked at Gedwyn sharp enough to slice stone. "You've done it," he told Rand. "They're all falling back. I doubt they'll stop short of Ebou Dar. Campaigns don't always end with a grand march into the city, and this one is finished."

sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli - əɹ pɝhæps nɑt - wɪɹɑmɑn bɪɡæn ɑɹɡjuɪŋ fəɹ ən ədvæns, tə "teɪk ɛbu dɑɹ fəɹ ðə ɡlɔɹi ʌv ðə lɔɹɾ ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ," əz i pʊɾ ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz sɝɾənli ə ʃɑk tə hɪɹ dʒɛdwɪn seɪ hi wəd nɑt maɪn teɪkɪŋ ə fju mɔɹ swaɪps ət ðiz sintʃæn ən i sɝɾənli wəd nɑt maɪn siɪŋ ɛbu dɑɹ. ivən eɪlɪl ən ænɑiɛlə æɾəd ðɛɹ vɔɪsəz ɪn feɪvɝ ʌv "pʊɾɪŋ ən ɛn tə ðə sintʃæn wʌns ən fəɹ ɔl," ðoʊ eɪlɪl dɪɾ æd ðət ʃi wəɾ əz sun laɪk tə əvɔɪd hævɪŋ tə ɹɪtɝn tə fɪnɪʃ. ʃi wɑz kwaɪt ʃʊɹ ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən wəɾ ɪnsɪst ɑn əɹ kʌmpəni fəɹ ɪt. ðəɾ ɪn ə toʊn əz kul ən dʒɹaɪ əz naɪɾ ɪn ði il weɪst.

Surprisingly - or perhaps not - Weiramon began arguing for an advance, to "take Ebou Dar for the glory of the Lord of the Morning," as he put it, but it was certainly a shock to hear Gedwyn say he would not mind taking a few more swipes at these Seanchan and he certainly would not mind seeing Ebou Dar. Even Ailil and Anaiyella added their voices in favor of "putting an end to the Seanchan once and for all," though Ailil did add that she would as soon like to avoid having to return to finish. She was quite sure the Lord Dragon would insist on her company for it. That in a tone as cool and dry as night in the Aiel Waste.

oʊnli bæʃɪɹ ən ɡɹɛɡɹɪn spoʊk fəɹ tɝnɪŋ bæk, ən ɹeɪz ðɛɹ vɔɪsəz ðeɪ dɪɾ ɪnkɹisɪŋli əz ɹænd stʊd saɪlənt. saɪlən ən stɛɹɪŋ wɛst. təwɔɹɾ ɛbu dɑɹ.

Only Bashere and Gregorin spoke for turning back, and raise their voices they did increasingly as Rand stood silent. Silent and staring west. Toward Ebou Dar.

"wi dɪd də wʌt wi keɪm fɔɹ," ɡɹɛɡɹɪn ɪnsɪstəd. "laɪts mɝsi, dʒju θɪŋk tə teɪk ɛbu dɑɹ ɪtsɛlf?"

"We did do what we came for," Gregorin insisted. "Light's mercy, do you think to take Ebou Dar itself?"

teɪk ɛbu dɑɹ, ɹænd θɔt. waɪ nɑt? noʊ wʌn wəɾ ɪkspɛk ðæt. ə toʊɾəl sɝpɹaɪz, fəɹ ðə sintʃæn ən ɛvɹibɑɾi ɛls.

Take Ebou Dar, Rand thought. Why not? No one would expect that. A total surprise, for the Seanchan and everybody else.

"taɪmz ɑɹ, jə siz ði ædvæntɪdʒ ən ɹaɪɾ ɑn," bæʃɪɹ ɡɹaʊld. "ʌðɝ taɪmz, jə teɪk jəɹ wɪnɪŋz ən ɡoʊ hoʊm. aɪ seɪ ɪts taɪm tə ɡoʊ hoʊm."

"Times are, you seize the advantage and ride on," Bashere growled. "Other times, you take your winnings and go home. I say it's time to go home."

aɪ wəd nɑt maɪn jə ɪn maɪ hɛd, luz θɝɪn sɛd, saʊndɪŋ ɔlmoʊst seɪn, ɪf jə wɝ nɑt soʊ klɪɹli mæd.

I would not mind you in my head, Lews Therin said, sounding almost sane, if you were not so clearly mad.

ɛbu dɑɹ. ɹænd taɪɾənd ɪz hæn ɑn ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ, ən luz θɝɪn kækəld.

Ebou Dar. Rand tightened his hand on the Dragon Scepter, and Lews Therin cackled.


tʃæptɝ twɛntifɔɹ


CHAPTER 24

eɪ taɪm fəɹ aɪɝn


A Time for Iron

əɾəzən liɡz ist ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ, ɹeɪkən ɡlaɪɾɪd ɪn aʊɾ ə ðə klaʊd-stʃɹik sʌnɹaɪz tə læn ɪn ə lɔŋ pæstʃɝ mɑɹkt əz ðə flaɪɝz' fil baɪ kʌlɝd stʃɹimɝz ɑn tɔl poʊlz. ðə bɹaʊn ɡɹæsəz hæd bɪn tʃɹæmpəld ən skɔɹd deɪz sɪns. ɔl ə ðə kɹitʃɝz' ɡɹeɪs ɪn ði ɛɹ wɑz lɔst əz sun əz ðɛɹ klɔz tʌtʃt ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪn ə lʌmbɝɪŋ ɹʌn, lɛðɝi pɪnjənz θɝɾi peɪsɪz əɹ mɔɹ waɪd hɛl haɪ əz ɪf ði ænəməl wɑntəd tə swip ɪtsɛlf bæk ʌpwɝd. ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl bjuɾi, iðɝ, ɪn ðə ɹeɪkən ðət ɹæn ɔkwɝdli daʊn ðə fil biɾɪŋ ɹɪbd wɪŋz, flaɪɝz kɹaʊtʃɪŋ ɪn ðə sæɾəl əz ɪf tə pʊl ðə bist ʌp baɪ meɪn fɔɹs, ɹæn ɑn əntɪl ət læs ðeɪ stʌmbəld ɪndə ði ɛɹ, wɪŋtəps bɛɹli klɪɹɪŋ ðə tɑps ə ði ɑləv tʃɹiz ət ði ɛn ə ðə fild. oʊnli əz ðeɪ ɡeɪn haɪɾ ən tɝn təwɔɹd ðə sʌn, sɔɹd təwɔɹd ðə klaʊdz, dɪd ðə ɹeɪkən ɹɪɡeɪn dɪɡnəfaɪd ɡɹænduɹ. flaɪɝz u lændəd dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ tə dɪsmaʊnt. waɪl ə ɡɹaʊnlɪŋ hɛld ə bæskəɾ ʌp fəɹ ðə ɹeɪkən tə ɡʌlp hoʊl ʃɹɪvəl fɹuts baɪ ðə dʌbəl-hændfʊl əɾ ə taɪm, wʌn ə ðə flaɪɝz wəd hæn daʊn ðɛɹ skaʊɾɪŋ ɹipɔɹt tə ə stɪl mɔɹ sinjɝ ɡɹaʊnlɪŋ, ən ði ʌðɝ bɛn ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd tə ɹəsiv nu ɔɹɾɝz fɹəm ə flaɪɝ tu sinjɝ tə hændəl ɹeɪnz pɝsənəli vɛɹi ɔfən. ɔlmoʊs ðət kwɪkli æftɝ kʌmɪŋ tə ə hɔlt, ðə kɹitʃɝ wɑz ɹeɪn ɝaʊn tə wɑɾəl oʊvɝ tə wɛɹ fɔɹ əɹ faɪv ʌðɝz weɪɾəd ðɛɹ tɝn tə meɪk ðət lɔŋ, ənɡeɪnli ɹʌn tə ðə skaɪ.

Adozen leagues east of Ebou Dar, raken glided in out of the cloud-streaked sunrise to land in a long pasture marked as the fliers' field by colored streamers on tall poles. The brown grasses had been trampled and scored days since. All of the creatures' grace in the air was lost as soon as their claws touched the ground in a lumbering run, leathery pinions thirty paces or more wide held high as if the animal wanted to sweep itself back upward. There was little beauty, either, in the raken that ran awkwardly down the field beating ribbed wings, fliers crouching in the saddle as if to pull the beast up by main force, ran on until at last they stumbled into the air, wingtips barely clearing the tops of the olive trees at the end of the field. Only as they gained height and turned toward the sun, soared toward the clouds, did the raken regain dignified grandeur. Fliers who landed did not bother to dismount. While a groundling held a basket up for the raken to gulp whole shriveled fruits by the double-handful at a time, one of the fliers would hand down their scouting report to a still more senior groundling, and the other bent on the other side to receive new orders from a flier too senior to handle reins personally very often. Almost that quickly after coming to a halt, the creature was reined around to waddle over to where four or five others waited their turn to make that long, ungainly run to the sky.

əɾ ə dɛd ɹʌn, dɑdʒɪŋ bɪtwin muvɪŋ fɔɹmeɪʃənz ə kævəlɹi ən ɪnfəntʃɹi, mɛsənʒɝz kæɹid ðə skaʊɾɪŋ ɹɪpɔɹts tə ðə hjudʒ ɹɛd-bænɝd kəmæn tɛnt. ðəɹ wɝ hɔɾi tæɹɑbənɝ lænsɝz ən stɑləɾ ɑmɑdɪʃən pɪkmɛn ɪn wɛl-ɔɹɾɝd skwɛɹz, bɹɛstpleɪts stʃɹaɪp hɔɹɪzɑntəli ɪn ðə kʌlɝz ə ðə ɹɛdʒəməns ðeɪ wɝ ətætʃt tə. ɔltɑɹən laɪt hɔɹs ɪn dɪsɔɹɾɝd bʌntʃəz meɪd ðɛɹ maʊns pɹæns, veɪn ə ðə ɹɛd slæʃɪz kɹɪskɹɔsɪŋ ðɛɹ tʃɛsts, soʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ðə mɑɹkɪŋz ɛniwʌn ɛls wɔɹ. ði ɔltɑɹənz dɪd nɑt noʊ ðoʊz ɪndəkeɪɾəd ɪɹɛɡjəlɝz ə daʊtfəl ɹilaɪəbɪləɾi. əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz, neɪmd ɹɛdʒəməns wɪð pɹaʊɾ ɑnɝz wɝ ɹɛpɹəzɛntəd, fɹəm ɛvɹi kɔɹnɝ ə ði ɛmpaɪɝ, peɪl-aɪd mɛn fɹəm ælkəm, hʌni-bɹaʊn mɛn fɹəm ɑn, mɛn blæk əz koʊl fɹəm kaʊil ən dælənʃɝ. ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹɑtʃɹm ɑn ðɛɹ sɪnwəs bɹɑnz-skeɪl maʊns ðət meɪd hɔɹsəz wɪkɝ ən dæns ɪn fɹaɪt, ən ivən ə fju mɔɹɑtɡɹoʊm wɪð ðɛɹ skwɑt, bik-maʊð tʃɑɹdʒəz, bʌt wʌn θɪŋ ðəɾ ɔlweɪz əkʌmpəniɾ ə sintʃæn ɑɹmi wɑz kənspɪkjuəs baɪ ɪɾ æbsəns. ðə sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn wɝ stɪl ɪn ðɛɹ tɛns. kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl kɛnɝ mɪɹaɪ θɔɾ ə sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn ə ɡɹeɪt dil.

At a dead run, dodging between moving formations of cavalry and infantry, messengers carried the scouting reports to the huge red-bannered command tent. There were haughty Taraboner lancers and stolid Amadician pikemen in well-ordered squares, breastplates striped horizontally in the colors of the regiments they were attached to. Altaran light horse in disordered bunches made their mounts prance, vain of the red slashes crisscrossing their chests, so different from the markings anyone else wore. The Altarans did not know those indicated irregulars of doubtful reliability. Among the Seanchan soldiers, named regiments with proud honors were represented, from every corner of the Empire, pale-eyed men from Alqam, honey-brown men from N'Kon, men black as coal from Khoweal and Dalenshar. There were morat'torm on their sinuous bronze-scaled mounts that made horses whicker and dance in fright, and even a few morat'grolm with their squat, beak-mouthed charges, but one thing that always accompanied a Seanchan army was conspicuous by it absence. The sul'dam and damane were still in their tents. Captain-General Kennar Miraj thought of sul'dam and damane a great deal.

fɹəm ɪz siɾ ɑn ðə deɪz i kəd si ðə mæp teɪbəl klɪɹli, wɛɹ hɛlmɔɪtləs ʌndɝ-lutɛnəns tʃɛk ðə ɹɪpɔɹts ən pleɪs mɑɹkɝz tə ɹɛpɹəzɛn ðə fɔɹsɪz ɪn ðə fild. ə smɔl peɪpɝ bænɝ stʊɾ əbʌv itʃ mɑɹkɝ, ɪŋk sɪmbəlz ɡɪvɪŋ ðə saɪz ən kɑmpəzɪʃən ə ðə fɔɹs. faɪndɪŋ disən mæps ɪn ðiz lænz wɑz nɛks tə ɪmpɑsəbəl, bʌt ðə mæp kɑpiɾ ətɑp ðə lɑɹdʒ teɪbəl wɑz səfɪʃənt. ən wɝiɪŋ, ɪn wʌɾ ɪt toʊl hɪm. blæk dɪsks fəɹ aʊtpoʊsts oʊvɝɹʌn əɹ dɪspɝst. fɑɹ tu mɛni ʌv ðoʊz, dɑɾɪŋ ðə hoʊl istɝn hæf ə ðə vɛnɪɹ ɹeɪnʒ. ɹɛd wɛdʒəz, fəɹ kəmænz ɑn ðə muv, mɑɹk ðə wɛstɝn ɛn əz θɪkli, ɔl pɔɪntəd bæk təwɔɹɾ ɛbu dɑɹ. ən skæɾɝd əmʌŋ ðə blæk dɪsks, sɛvəntin stɑɹk waɪt. əz i wɑtʃt, ə jʌŋ ɔfəsɝ ɪn ðə bɹaʊn-ænd-blæk ʌv ə mɔɹɑtʃɹm kɛɹfəli pleɪst ən eɪtinθ. ɛnəmi fɔɹsɪz. ə fju maɪt bi ðə seɪm ɡɹup sin twaɪs, bʌt fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt ðeɪ wɝ mʌtʃ tu fɑɹ əpɑɹt, ðə taɪmɪŋ ə ðə saɪɾɪŋz ɹɔŋ.

From his seat on the dais he could see the map table clearly, where helmetless under-lieutenants checked the reports and placed markers to represent the forces in the field. A small paper banner stood above each marker, inked symbols giving the size and composition of the force. Finding decent maps in these lands was next to impossible, but the map copied atop the large table was sufficient. And worrying, in what it told him. Black discs for outposts overrun or dispersed. Far too many of those, dotting the whole eastern half of the Venir range. Red wedges, for commands on the move, marked the western end as thickly, all pointed back toward Ebou Dar. And scattered among the black discs, seventeen stark white. As he watched, a young officer in the brown-and-black of a morat'torm carefully placed an eighteenth. Enemy forces. A few might be the same group seen twice, but for the most part they were much too far apart, the timing of the sightings wrong.

əlɔŋ ðə wɔlz ə ðə tɛnt, klɝks ɪn pleɪn bɹaʊn koʊts, mɑɹkt oʊnli wɪð ɪnsɪɡniə ʌv ɹæŋk əmʌŋ klɝks ɑn ðə waɪd kɑlɝz, weɪɾəd ət ðɛɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəlz, pɛnz ɪn hænd, fəɹ mɪɹaɪ tə ɪʃu ɔɹɾɝz ðət ðeɪ wəd kɑpi aʊt fəɹ dɪstʃɹəbjuʃən. hi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɪvən wʌɾ ɔɹɾɝz i kʊd. ðəɹ wɝ əz mɛni əz naɪnti θaʊzən ɛnəmi soʊlʒɝz ɪn ðə maʊntənz, nɪɹli twaɪs wʌɾ i kəd mʌstɝ hɪɹ ivən wɪð ðə neɪɾɪv lɛviz. tu mɛni fəɹ bɪlif, ɪksɛp ðət skaʊts dɪd nɑt laɪ; laɪɝz hæd ðɛɹ θɹoʊts slɪt baɪ ðɛɹ fɛloʊz. tu mɛni, spɹɪŋɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɹaʊn laɪk tʃɹæp-wɝmz ɪn ðə sɛn tʃjɔɹ. ət lis ðeɪ hæɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz ə maʊntən jɛt tə kʌvɝ ɪf ðeɪ ɪntɛndəd tə θɹɛɾən ɛbu dɑɹ. ɔlmoʊs tu hʌnʒɹəd, fəɹ ðə waɪt dɪsks fɑɹðəst ist. ən hɪl kʌntʃɹi æftɝ ðət fəɹ ənʌðɝ hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz. ʃʊɹli ði ɛnəmi dʒɛnɝəl kəd nɑt min tə lɛɾ ɪz dɪspɝs fɔɹsɪz bi kənfɹʌntəd wʌn baɪ wʌn. ɡæðɝɪŋ əm təɡɛðɝ wəd teɪk mɔɹ taɪm. taɪm əloʊn wɑz ɑn ɪz saɪd, ɹaɪt ðɛn.

Along the walls of the tent, clerks in plain brown coats, marked only with insignia of rank among clerks on the wide collars, waited at their writing tables, pens in hand, for Miraj to issue orders that they would copy out for distribution. He had already given what orders he could. There were as many as ninety thousand enemy soldiers in the mountains, nearly twice what he could muster here even with the native levies. Too many for belief, except that scouts did not lie; liars had their throats slit by their fellows. Too many, springing out of the ground like trap-worms in the Sen T'jore. At least they had a hundred miles of mountain yet to cover if they intended to threaten Ebou Dar. Almost two hundred, for the white discs farthest east. And hill country after that for another hundred miles. Surely the enemy general could not mean to let his dispersed forces be confronted one by one. Gathering them together would take more time. Time alone was on his side, right then.

ði ɛntʃɹi flæps ə ðə tɛn swɛpt oʊpən, ən ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ ɡlaɪɾɪd ɪn, blæk hɛɹ ə pɹaʊd kɹɛst spɪlɪŋ daʊn əɹ bæk, pliɾɪd snoʊ-waɪt ɡaʊn ən ɹɪtʃli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd oʊvɝ-ɹoʊb sʌmhaʊ əntʌtʃt baɪ ðə mʌɾ aʊtsaɪd. hi hæd θɔɾ əɹ stɪl ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ; ʃi mʌst əv floʊn aʊt baɪ tɔɹeɪkən. ʃi wɑz əkʌmpənid baɪ ə smɔl ɑntʊɹɑʒ, fəɹ hɝ. ə pɛɹ ə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz wɪð blæk tæsəlz ɑn ðɛɹ sɔɹd hɪls hɛl ðə tɛntflæps, ən mɔɹ wɝ vɪzəbəl aʊtsaɪd, stoʊn-feɪs mɛn ɪn ɹɛd-ænd-ɡɹin. ði ɛmbɑɾimənt ə ði ɛmpɹɛs, maɪt ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ. ivən ðə blʌd tʊk noʊɾ ə ðɛm. sjuɹɔθ seɪl pæst əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ əz mʌtʃ sɝvəns əz ðə lʌʃli bɑɾid dækoʊvæl ɪn slɪpɝz ən ə nɪɹli tʃɹænspɛɹənt waɪt ɹoʊb, hɝ hʌni-jɛloʊ hɛɹ ɪn ə mʌltətuɾ ə θɪn bɹeɪdz, hu kæɹid ðə haɪ leɪɾiz ɡɪldɪd ɹaɪɾɪŋ dɛsk ə mik tu peɪsɪz bɪhaɪnd. sjuɹɔθs vɔɪs ə ðə blʌd, ælwɪn, ə ɡlaʊɝɪŋ wʊmən ɪn ɡɹin ɹoʊbz wɪð ðə lɛf saɪɾ ə hɝ hɛd ʃeɪvd ən ðə ɹɪmeɪndɝ ə hɝ peɪl bɹaʊn hɛɹ ɪn ə səvɪɹ bɹeɪd, fɑloʊd kloʊs ɑn əɹ mɪstʃɹəsəz hilz. əz mɪɹaɪ stɛp daʊn fɹəm ðə deɪz, hi ɹilaɪzd wɪð ʃɑk ðət ðə sɛkən dækoʊvæl bɪhaɪn sjuɹɔθ, ʃɔɹɾ ən dɑɹk-hɛɹɾ ən slɪm ɪn əɹ daɪəfənəs ɹoʊb, wɑz deɪmeɪn! ə deɪmeɪn ɡɑɹbd əz pɹɑpɝɾi wɑz ənhɝɾ ʌv, bʌɾ ɑɾɝ stɪl, ɪt wɑz ælwɪn u lɛɾ əɹ baɪ ði æɾəm!

The entry flaps of the tent swept open, and the High Lady Suroth glided in, black hair a proud crest spilling down her back, pleated snow-white gown and richly embroidered over-robe somehow untouched by the mud outside. He had thought her still in Ebou Dar; she must have flown out by to'raken. She was accompanied by a small entourage, for her. A pair of Deathwatch Guards with black tassels on their sword hilts held the tentflaps, and more were visible outside, stone-faced men in red-and-green. The embodiment of the Empress, might she live forever. Even the Blood took note of them. Suroth sailed past as if they were as much servants as the lushly bodied da'covale in slippers and a nearly transparent white robe, her honey-yellow hair in a multitude of thin braids, who carried the High Lady's gilded writing desk a meek two paces behind. Suroth's Voice of the Blood, Alwhin, a glowering woman in green robes with the left side of her head shaved and the remainder of her pale brown hair in a severe braid, followed close on her mistress's heels. As Miraj stepped down from the dais, he realized with shock that the second da'covale behind Suroth, short and dark-haired and slim in her diaphanous robe, was damane! A damane garbed as property was unheard of, but odder still, it was Alwhin who led her by the a'dam!

hi lɛt nʌn ə hɪz əmeɪzmənt ʃoʊ əz i wɛn tə wʌn ni, mɝmɝɪŋ, "ðə laɪt bi əpɑn ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ. ɔl ɑnɝ tə ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ." ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls pɹɑstʃɹeɪɾɪd ðɛmsɛlvz ɑn ðə kænvəs ɡɹaʊndklɔθ, aɪz daʊn. mɪɹaɪ wɑz ə ðə blʌd, ɪf tu loʊ tə ʃeɪv ðə saɪdz ə hɪz skælp laɪk sjuɹɔθ. oʊnli ðə neɪlz ə hɪz lɪɾəl fɪŋɡɝz wɝ lækɝd. mʌtʃ tu loʊ tə ɹɛdʒɪstɝ sɝpɹaɪz ɪf ə haɪ leɪɾi əlaʊɾ əɹ vɔɪs tə kəntɪnju æktɪŋ əz sʌldəm æftɝ biɪŋ ɹeɪz tə ðə sɔɪhɪn. stʃɹeɪnʒ taɪmz ɪn ə stʃɹeɪnʒ lænd, wɛɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɔkt ən mɛɹəθdəmeɪn ɹæn waɪl tə kɪl ən ɛnslɑv wɛɹ ðeɪ wʊd.

He let none of his amazement show as he went to one knee, murmuring, "The Light be upon the High Lady Suroth. All honor to the High Lady Suroth." Everyone else prostrated themselves on the canvas groundcloth, eyes down. Miraj was of the Blood, if too low to shave the sides of his scalp like Suroth. Only the nails of his little fingers were lacquered. Much too low to register surprise if a High Lady allowed her Voice to continue acting as sul'dam after being raised to the so'jhin. Strange times in a strange land, where the Dragon Reborn walked and marath'damane ran wild to kill and enslave where they would.

sjuɹɔθ bɛɹli ɡlænst əɾ ɪm bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ tə stʌɾi ðə mæp teɪbəl, ən ɪf əɹ blæk aɪz taɪɾənd ət wʌt ʃi sɔ, ʃi hæd kɑz. ʌndɝ hɝ, ðə heɪlin hæd dʌn fɑɹ mɔɹ ðən hæd bɪn dʒɹimd, ɹikleɪmɪŋ ɡɹeɪt stʃɹɛtʃəz ə ðə stoʊlən lænz. ɔl ðeɪ hæd bɪn sɛn fəɹ wɑz tə skaʊt ðə weɪ, ən æftɝ fɑlm, səm hæd θɔɾ ivən ðəɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl. ʃi dʒɹʌm fɪŋɡɝz ɑn ðə teɪbəl ɪɹɪɾəbli, ðə lɔŋ blu-lækɝd fɪŋɡɝneɪlz ɑn ðə fɝs tu klɪkɪŋ. kəntɪnjud səksɛs, ən ʃi maɪt bi eɪbəl tə ʃeɪv əɹ hɛɾ ɪntaɪɝli ən peɪn ə θɝd neɪl ɑn itʃ hænd. ədɑpʃən ɪndə ði ɪmpɪɹiəl fæmli wɑz nɑɾ ənhɝɾ ə fəɹ ətʃivməns soʊ ɡɹeɪt. ən ɪf ʃi stɛp tu fɑɹ, oʊvɝstɛpt, ʃi maɪt faɪn əɹ fɪŋɡɝneɪlz klɪpt ən hɝsɛlf stʌft ɪndə ə fɪlmi ɹoʊb tə sɝv wʌn ə ðə blʌd, ɪf nɑt soʊl tə ə fɑɹmɝ tə hɛlp tɪl ɪz filz, əɹ swɛɾ ɪn ə wɛɹhaʊs. ət wɝst, mɪɹaɪ wəɾ oʊnli hæv tə oʊpən ɪz oʊn veɪnz.

Suroth barely glanced at him before turning to study the map table, and if her black eyes tightened at what she saw, she had cause. Under her, the Hailene had done far more than had been dreamed, reclaiming great stretches of the stolen lands. All they had been sent for was to scout the way, and after Falme, some had thought even that impossible. She drummed fingers on the table irritably, the long blue-lacquered fingernails on the first two clicking. Continued success, and she might be able to shave her head entirely and paint a third nail on each hand. Adoption into the Imperial family was not unheard of for achievements so great. And if she stepped too far, overstepped, she might find her fingernails clipped and herself stuffed into a filmy robe to serve one of the Blood, if not sold to a farmer to help till his fields, or sweat in a warehouse. At worst, Miraj would only have to open his own veins.

hi kəntɪnjud tə wɑtʃ sjuɹɔθ ɪn peɪʃən saɪləns, bʌɾ i hæd bɪn ə skaʊt lutɛnənt, mɔɹətʃɹeɪkən, bɪfɔɹ biɪŋ ɹeɪz tə ðə blʌd, ən i kəd nɑt hɛlp biɪŋ əwɛɹ ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɝaʊn hɪm. ə skaʊt lɪvd əɹ daɪd baɪ wʌɾ i sɔ əɹ dɪd nɑt, ən soʊ dɪɾ ʌðɝz. ðə mɛn laɪɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz ɝaʊn ðə tɛnt; səm hɑɹdli sim tə bɹið. sjuɹɔθ ʃʊɾə teɪkən ɪm əsaɪɾ ən lɛɾ əm kəntɪnju wɪð ðɛɹ wɝk. ə mɛsənʒɝ wɑz biɪŋ tɝn bæk baɪ ðə soʊlʒɝz ət ði ɛntʃɹəns. haʊ daɪɹ wɑz ðə mɛsədʒ ðət ðə wʊmən tʃɹaɪd tə pʊʃ pæs dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz?

He continued to watch Suroth in patient silence, but he had been a scout lieutenant, morat'raken, before being raised to the Blood, and he could not help being aware of everything around him. A scout lived or died by what he saw or did not, and so did others. The men lying on their faces around the tent; some hardly seemed to breathe. Suroth should have taken him aside and let them continue with their work. A messenger was being turned back by the soldiers at the entrance. How dire was the message that the woman tried to push past Deathwatch Guards?

ðə dækoʊvæl wɪð ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ dɛsk ɪn əɹ ɑɹmz kɑɾ ɪz aɪ. skaʊlz flæʃt əkɹɔs əɹ pɹɪɾi dɑlz feɪs, nɛvɝ pʊʃt daʊn fəɹ mɔɹ ðən moʊməns. pɹɑpɝɾi ʃoʊɪŋ æŋɡɝ? ən ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. hɪz ɡeɪz flɪkɝd tə ðə deɪmeɪn, hu stʊd wɪð əɹ hɛd daʊn bʌt stɪl lʊkt ɝaʊnd wɪð kjʊɹiɑsəɾi. bɹaʊn-aɪd dækoʊvæl ən peɪl-aɪd deɪmeɪn lʊkt əbaʊɾ əz dɪfɹən əz tu wɪmən kʊd, jɛt ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛm. sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ feɪsəz. stʃɹeɪnʒ. hi kəd nɑɾ əv sɛd haʊ oʊld iðɝ wɑz.

The da'covale with the writing desk in her arms caught his eye. Scowls flashed across her pretty doll's face, never pushed down for more than moments. Property showing anger? And there was something else. His gaze flickered to the damane, who stood with her head down but still looked around with curiosity. Brown-eyed da'covale and pale-eyed damane looked about as different as two women could, yet there was something about them. Something in their faces. Strange. He could not have said how old either was.

kwɪk əz ɪz ɡlæns wɑz, ælwɪn noʊɾəst. wɪð ə twɪtʃ ə ði æɾəmz sɪlvɝi liʃ ʃi pʊt ðə deɪmeɪn feɪsdaʊn ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊndklɔθ. snæpɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz, ʃi pɔɪntəd tə ðə kænvəs wɪð ðə hænd nɑɾ ɛnkʌmbɝd baɪ ði æɾəmz bɹeɪslət, ðən ɡɹɪməst wən ðə hʌni-hɛɹd dækoʊvæl dɪd nɑt muv. "daʊn, liɑnʒɹɪn!" ʃi hɪst ɔlmoʊst ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. wɪð ə ɡlɛɹ fəɹ ælwɪn - ə ɡlɛɹ! - ðə dækoʊvæl sæŋk tə hɝ niz, fitʃɝz peɪntəd wɪð sʌlkənəs.

Quick as his glance was, Alwhin noticed. With a twitch of the a'dam's silvery leash she put the damane facedown on the groundcloth. Snapping her fingers, she pointed to the canvas with the hand not encumbered by the a'dam's bracelet, then grimaced when the honey-haired da'covale did not move. "Down, Liandrin!" she hissed almost under her breath. With a glare for Alwhin - a glare! - the da'covale sank to her knees, features painted with sulkiness.

moʊst stʃɹeɪnʒ. bʌt hɑɹdli ɪmpɔɹɾənt. feɪs ɪmpæsɪv, ən ʌðɝwaɪz bɝstɪŋ wɪð ɪmpeɪʃəns, hi weɪɾəd. ɪmpeɪʃəns ən noʊ lɪɾəl dɪskʌmfɝt. hi hæd bɪn ɹeɪz tə ðə blʌɾ æftɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ fɪfti maɪlz ɪn ə sɪŋɡəl naɪt wɪð θɹi æɹoʊz ɪn ɪm tə bɹɪŋ wɝɾ ʌv ə ɹɛbəl ɑɹmi mɑɹtʃɪŋ ɑn sindɑɹ ɪtsɛlf, ən ɪz bæk stɪl peɪn hɪm.

Most strange. But hardly important. Face impassive, and otherwise bursting with impatience, he waited. Impatience and no little discomfort. He had been raised to the Blood after riding fifty miles in a single night with three arrows in him to bring word of a rebel army marching on Seandar itself, and his back still pained him.

faɪnəli, sjuɹɔθ tɝn fɹəm ðə mæp teɪbəl. ʃi dɪd nɑt ɡɪv ɪm liv tə ɹaɪz, mʌtʃ lɛs ɛmbɹeɪs ɪm əz wʌn ə ðə blʌd. nɑt ðəɾ i hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd ðæt. hi wɑz fɑɹ bɪniθ hɝ. "ju ɑɹ ɹɛɾi tə mɑɹtʃ?" ʃi dɪmændəd kɝtli. ət list ʃi dɪd nɑt spik tə hɪm θɹu hɝ vɔɪs. bɪfɔɹ soʊ mɛni ʌv ɪz ɔfəsɝz, ðə ʃeɪm wʊɾə pʊɾ ɪz aɪz ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn fəɹ mʌnθs ɪf nɑt jɪɹz.

Finally, Suroth turned from the map table. She did not give him leave to rise, much less embrace him as one of the Blood. Not that he had expected that. He was far beneath her. "You are ready to march?" she demanded curtly. At least she did not speak to him through her Voice. Before so many of his officers, the shame would have put his eyes on the ground for months if not years.

"aɪ wɪl bi, sjuɹɔθ," hi ɹɪplaɪd kɑmli, miɾɪŋ əɹ ɡeɪz. hi wɑz ə ðə blʌd, haʊɛvɝ loʊ. "ðeɪ kænɑt kɑmbaɪn ɪn fjuɝ ðən tɛn deɪz, wɪð ət list ənʌðɝ tɛn bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kən ɛɡzɪt ðə maʊntənz. wɛl bɪfɔɹ ðɛn, aɪ - "

"I will be, Suroth," he replied calmly, meeting her gaze. He was of the Blood, however low. "They cannot combine in fewer than ten days, with at least another ten before they can exit the mountains. Well before then, I - "

"ðeɪ kəd bi hɪɹ təmɑɹoʊ," ʃi snæpt. "tədeɪ! ɪf ðeɪ kʌm, mɪɹaɪ, ðəl kʌm baɪ ði eɪntʃən ɑɹɾ ə tʃɹævlɪŋ, ən ɪt simz vɛɹi pɑsəbəl ðət ðəl kʌm."

"They could be here tomorrow," she snapped. "Today! If they come, Miraj, they will come by the ancient art of Traveling, and it seems very possible that they will come."

hi hɝd mɛn ʃɪftɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ bɛliz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd ɹistʃɹeɪn ðɛmsɛlvz. sjuɹɔθ lɔs kəntʃɹoʊl ə hɝ ɪmoʊʃənz ən bæbəld ə lɛdʒənz? "ɑɹ jə sɝɾən?" ðə wɝdz pɑpt aʊɾ ə hɪz maʊθ bɪfɔɹ i kəd stɑp ðɛm.

He heard men shifting on their bellies before they could restrain themselves. Suroth lost control of her emotions and babbled of legends? "Are you certain?" The words popped out of his mouth before he could stop them.

hi hæɾ oʊnli θɔt ʃi hæd lɔs kəntʃɹoʊl bɪfɔɹ. hɝ aɪz bleɪzd. ʃi ɡɹɪp ði ɛdʒəz ə hɝ flaʊɝ-wɝkt ɹoʊb, waɪt-nʌkəld, ən əɹ hænz ʃʊk. "du jə kwɛstʃən mi?" ʃi snɑɹəld ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. "səfaɪs ɪt ðəɾ aɪ hæv maɪ sɔɹsəz ʌv ɪnfɝmeɪʃən." ən wɑz fjʊɹiəs wɪð əm əz mʌtʃ əz wɪð hɪm, hi ɹilaɪzd. "ɪf ðeɪ kʌm, ðəɹ wɪl bi pɝhæps əz mɛni əz fɪfti ʌv ðiz ɡɹænli neɪmd æʃəmən, bʌt noʊ mɔɹ ðən faɪv əɹ sɪks θaʊzən soʊlʒɝz. ɪt simz ðəɹ əv bɪn noʊ mɔɹ sɪns ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, wʌtɛvɝ ðə flaɪɝz seɪ."

He had only thought she had lost control before. Her eyes blazed. She gripped the edges of her flower-worked robe, white-knuckled, and her hands shook. "Do you question me?" she snarled incredulously. "Suffice it that I have my sources of information." And was furious with them as much as with him, he realized. "If they come, there will be perhaps as many as fifty of these grandly named Asha'man, but no more than five or six thousand soldiers. It seems there have been no more since the beginning, whatever the fliers say."

mɪɹaɪ nɑɾəd sloʊli. faɪv θaʊzən mɛn, muvd əbaʊɾ ɪn səm weɪ wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, wəɾ ɪkspleɪn ə ɡɹeɪt dil. wʌt wɝ əɹ sɔɹsəz, ðət ʃi nu nʌmbɝz soʊ pɹɪsaɪsli? hi wɑz nɑt ful ɪnʌf tə æsk. ʃi sɝɾənli hæd lɪsənɝz ən sikɝz ɪn əɹ sɝvəs. wɑtʃɪŋ hɝ, tu. fɪfti æʃəmən. ðə vɛɹi aɪdiə ʌv ə mæn tʃænəlɪŋ meɪɾ ɪm wɑnə spɪɾ ɪn dɪsɡʌst. ɹumɝ kleɪm ðeɪ wɝ biɪŋ ɡæðɝd fɹəm ɛvɹi neɪʃən baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ðɪs ɹænd ælθɹ, bʌɾ i hæd nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd ðəɹ kəd bi soʊ mɛni. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn kəd tʃænəl, ɪt wɑz sɛd. ðət maɪt bi tʃɹu, bʌɾ i wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

Miraj nodded slowly. Five thousand men, moved about in some way with the One Power, would explain a great deal. What were her sources, that she knew numbers so precisely? He was not fool enough to ask. She certainly had Listeners and Seekers in her service. Watching her, too. Fifty Asha'man. The very idea of a man channeling made him want to spit in disgust. Rumor claimed they were being gathered from every nation by the Dragon Reborn, this Rand al'Thor, but he had never expected there could be so many. The Dragon Reborn could channel, it was said. That might be true, but he was the Dragon Reborn.

ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən hæd bɪn noʊn ɪn sintʃæn ivən bɪfɔɹ luthɛɹ pɛndʒɹæɡ bɪɡæn ðə kənsɑlədeɪʃən. ɪn kɝʌptɪd fɔɹm, ɪt wɑz sɛd, mʌtʃ dɪfɹən fɹəm ðə pjʊɹ vɝʒən luthɛɹ pɛndʒɹæɡ bɹɔt. mɪɹaɪ hæd sin sɛvɹəl vɑljumz ə ðə kæɹæəθən saɪkəl pɹɪntəɾ ɪn ðiz lænz, ən ðeɪ wɝ kɝʌptɪd tu - nɑt wʌn mɛnʃən ɪm sɝvɪŋ ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn! - bʌt ðə pɹɑfəsiz hɛl mɛnz maɪnz ən hɑɹts stɪl. mɔɹ ðən ə fju hoʊp ðə ɹɪtɝn keɪm sun, ðət ðiz lænz kəd bi ɹikleɪm bɪfɔɹ tɑɹmən ɡdən soʊ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn kəd wɪn ðə læs bæɾəl fəɹ ðə ɡlɔɹi ʌv ði ɛmpɹɛs, maɪt ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ. ði ɛmpɹɛs ʃʊɹli wəd wɑn ælθɹ sɛn tə hɝ, soʊ ʃi kəd si wʌt sɔɹɾ ə mæn sɝv hɝ. ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ dɪfəkəlti wɪð ælθɹ wʌns i hæd nɛl tə hɝ. fju izəli ʃʊk ɔf ði ɑ ðeɪ fɛlt, nilɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn, wɪð ðə θɝs tə oʊbeɪ dʒɹaɪɪŋ ðɛɹ tʌŋz. bʌɾ ɪt simd ɑbviəs ðət bʌndəlɪŋ ðə fɛloʊ ɑntu ə ʃɪp wəd bi iziɝ ɪf dɪspoʊzɪŋ ə ði æʃəmən - ðeɪ hæd tə bi dɪspoʊzd ʌv, sɝɾənli - weɪɾəd əntɪl ælθɹ wɑz wɛl ɑn ɪz weɪ əkɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən tə sindɑɹ.

The Prophecies of the Dragon had been known in Seanchan even before Luthair Paendrag began the Consolidation. In corrupted form, it was said, much different from the pure version Luthair Paendrag brought. Miraj had seen several volumes of The Karaethon Cycle printed in these lands, and they were corrupted too - not one mentioned him serving the Crystal Throne! - but the Prophecies held men's minds and hearts still. More than a few hoped the Return came soon, that these lands could be reclaimed before Tarmon Gai'don so the Dragon Reborn could win the Last Battle for the glory of the Empress, might she live forever. The Empress surely would want al'Thor sent to her, so she could see what sort of man served her. There would be no difficulty with al'Thor once he had knelt to her. Few easily shook off the awe they felt, kneeling before the Crystal Throne, with the thirst to obey drying their tongues. But it seemed obvious that bundling the fellow onto a ship would be easier if disposing of the Asha'man - they had to be disposed of, certainly - waited until al'Thor was well on his way across the Aryth Ocean to Seandar.

wɪtʃ bɹɔɾ ɪm bæk tə ðə pɹɑbləm i hæd bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əvɔɪd, hi ɹilaɪzd wɪð ən ɪnwɝd stɑɹt. hi wɑz nɑɾ ə mæn tə ʃaɪ fɹəm dɪfəkəltiz, mʌtʃ lɛs ɪɡnɔɹ əm blaɪnli, bʌt ðɪs wɑz dɪfɹən fɹəm ɛni hi hæd feɪs bɪfɔɹ. hi hæd fɔɾ ɪn tu dʌzən bæɾəlz wɪð deɪmeɪn juzd ɑn boʊθ saɪdz; hi nu ðə weɪ ʌv ðɛm. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ oʊnli ə mæɾɝ ə stʃɹaɪkɪŋ aʊt wɪð ðə paʊɝ. ɪkspɪɹiənst sʌldəm kəd sʌmhaʊ si wʌt deɪmeɪn əɹ mɛɹəθdəmeɪn dɪɾ ən deɪmeɪn wəd tɛl ði ʌðɝz, soʊ ðeɪ kəd dɪfɛn əz wɛl. kəd sʌldəm si wʌɾ ə mæn dɪd, tu? wɝs. . . .

Which brought him back to the problem he had been trying to avoid, he realized with an inward start. He was not a man to shy from difficulties, much less ignore them blindly, but this was different from any he had faced before. He had fought in two dozen battles with damane used on both sides; he knew the way of them. It was not only a matter of striking out with the Power. Experienced sul'dam could somehow see what damane or marath'damane did and damane would tell the others, so they could defend as well. Could sul'dam see what a man did, too? Worse. . . .

"ju wɪl ɹilis ðə sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn tə mi?" hi sɛd. teɪkɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf, hi æɾəd, "ɪf ðəɹ stɪl sɪk, ɪɾəl bi ə ʃɔɹt faɪɾ ən blʌɾi. ɑn əɹ saɪd."

"You will release the sul'dam and damane to me?" he said. Taking a deep breath in spite of himself, he added, "If they're still sick, it will be a short fight and bloody. On our side."

wɪtʃ pɹədust ənʌðɝ stɝ əmʌŋ ðə mɛn weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz. ɛvɹi sɛkən ɹumɝ ɪn ðə kæmp wɑz əbaʊt wʌɾ ɪlnəs hæd kənfaɪn ðə sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn tə ðɛɹ tɛns. ælwɪn ɹiæktəd kwaɪɾ oʊpənli, moʊst ɪmpɹɑpɝ ɪn ə sɔɪhɪn, wɪð ə fjʊɹiəs ɡlɛɹ. ðə deɪmeɪn flɪntʃt əɡɛn, ən bɪɡæn tə ʃɪvɝ wɛɹ ʃi leɪ. ɑdli, ðə hʌni-hɛɹd dækoʊvæl flɪntʃt, əz wɛl.

Which produced another stir among the men waiting on their faces. Every second rumor in the camp was about what illness had confined the sul'dam and damane to their tents. Alwhin reacted quite openly, most improper in a so'jhin, with a furious glare. The damane flinched again, and began to shiver where she lay. Oddly, the honey-haired da'covale flinched, as well.

smaɪlɪŋ, sjuɹɔθ ɡlaɪɾɪd tə wɛɹ ðə dækoʊvæl nɛlt. waɪ wəd ʃi smaɪl əɾ ə pʊɹli tʃɹeɪn sɝvɪŋ ɡɝl? ʃi bɪɡæn stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ðə nilɪŋ wʊmənz θɪn bɹeɪdz, ən ə sʌlən paʊɾ əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðət ɹoʊzbʌd maʊð. ə fɔɹmɝ noʊbəlwʊmən ə ðiz lænz? sjuɹɔθs fɝst wɝdz səpɔɹɾəd ðæt, ðoʊ ɑbviəsli mɛn fəɹ hɪm. "smɔl feɪljɝz bɹɪŋ smɔl kɑsts; ɡɹeɪt feɪljɝz bɹɪŋ peɪnfəli ɡɹeɪt kɑsts. jəl əv ðə deɪmeɪn jə ɹikwaɪɝ, mɪɹaɪ. ən jəl titʃ ðiz æʃəmən ðeɪ ʃʊɾə ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə nɔɹθ. jəl waɪp əm fɹəm ðə feɪs ə ði ɝθ, ði æʃəmən, ðə soʊlʒɝz, ɔl ə ðɛm. tə ðə mæn. mɪɹaɪ. aɪ hæv spoʊkən."

Smiling, Suroth glided to where the da'covale knelt. Why would she smile at a poorly trained serving girl? She began stroking the kneeling woman's thin braids, and a sullen pout appeared on that rosebud mouth. A former noblewoman of these lands? Suroth's first words supported that, though obviously meant for him. "Small failures bring small costs; great failures bring painfully great costs. You will have the damane you require, Miraj. And you will teach these Asha'man they should have remained in the north. You will wipe them from the face of the earth, the Asha'man, the soldiers, all of them. To the man. Miraj. I have spoken."

"ɪt wɪl bi əz jə seɪ, sjuɹɔθ," hi ɹɪplaɪd. "ðeɪ wɪl bi dɪstʃɹɔɪd. tə ðə mæn." ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɛls i kəd seɪ, naʊ. hi wɪʃt, ðoʊ, ðət ʃi hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ən ænsɝ əbaʊt wɛðɝ ðə sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn wɝ stɪl sɪk.

"It will be as you say, Suroth," he replied. "They will be destroyed. To the man." There was nothing else he could say, now. He wished, though, that she had given him an answer about whether the sul'dam and damane were still sick.

ɹænd ɹeɪn teɪdeɪʃɝ ɝaʊnd nɪɹ ðə kɹɛst ə ðə bɛɹ, stoʊni hɪl tə wɑtʃ moʊst ə hɪz smɔl ɑɹmi spɪlɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ʌðɝ hoʊlz ɪn ði ɛɹ. hi hɛl hɑɹd tə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, soʊ hɑɹɾ ɪt sim tə tʃɹɛmbəl ɪn ɪz ɡɹæsp. wɪð ðə paʊɝ ɪn hɪm, ðə ʃɑɹp pɔɪns ə ðə kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz pɹɪkɪŋ ɪz tɛmpəlz fɛlt ət wʌns kinɝ ðən ɛvɝ ən ʌɾɝli ɹimuvd, ðə mɪdmɔɹnɪŋ tʃɪl boʊθ koʊldɝ ən bɪniθ noʊɾəs. ðə nɛvɝ-hilɪŋ wunz ɪn ɪz saɪd wɝ ə dʌl ən dɪstən eɪk. luz θɝɪn sim tə bi pæntɪŋ ɪn ənsɝɾənti. əɹ pɝhæps fɪɹ. meɪbi æftɝ kʌmɪŋ soʊ kloʊs tə dɛθ ðə deɪ bɪfɔɹ, hi dɪd nɑt wɑn soʊ mʌtʃ tə daɪ ɛnimɔɹ. bʌt ðɛn, hi dɪd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz wɑnə daɪ. ði oʊnli kɑnstən ɪn ðə mæn wɑz ðə dɪzaɪɝ tə kɪl. wɪtʃ dʒʌs hæpən tə ɪnklud kɪlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf, ɔfən ɪnʌf.

Rand reined Tai'daishar around near the crest of the bare, stony hill to watch most of his small army spilling out of other holes in the air. He held hard to the True Source, so hard it seemed to tremble in his grasp. With the Power in him, the sharp points of the Crown of Swords pricking his temples felt at once keener than ever and utterly removed, the midmorning chill both colder and beneath notice. The never-healing wounds in his side were a dull and distant ache. Lews Therin seemed to be panting in uncertainty. Or perhaps fear. Maybe after coming so close to death the day before, he did not want so much to die anymore. But then, he did not always want to die. The only constant in the man was the desire to kill. Which just happened to include killing himself, often enough.

ðɛɹəl bi kɪlɪŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛnibəɾi, sun, ɹænd θɔt. laɪt, ðə læst sɪks deɪz wɝ ɪnʌf tə sɪkən ə vʌltʃɝ. hæɾ ɪɾ oʊnli bɪn sɪks deɪz? ðə dɪsɡʌs dɪd nɑt tʌtʃ hɪm, ðoʊ. hi wəd nɑt lɛɾ ɪt. luz θɝɪn dɪd nɑɾ ænsɝ. jɛs. ɪt wɑz ə taɪm fəɹ aɪɝn hɑɹts. ən aɪɝn stʌməks, tu. hi bɛn ə moʊmən tə tʌtʃ ðə lɔŋ klɔθ-ɹæpt pækədʒ ʌndɝ ɪz stɝəp lɛðɝ. noʊ. nɑt taɪm, jɛt. meɪbi nɑɾ əɾ ɔl. ənsɝɾənti ʃɪmɝɾ əkɹɔs ðə vɔɪd, ən meɪbi sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. nɑɾ əɾ ɔl, hi hoʊpt. ənsɝɾənti, jɛs, bʌt ði ʌðɝ hæd nɑt bɪn fɪɹ. ɪt hæd nɑt!

There'll be killing enough for anybody, soon, Rand thought. Light, the last six days were enough to sicken a vulture. Had it only been six days? The disgust did not touch him, though. He would not let it. Lews Therin did not answer. Yes. It was a time for iron hearts. And iron stomachs, too. He bent a moment to touch the long cloth-wrapped package under his stirrup leather. No. Not time, yet. Maybe not at all. Uncertainty shimmered across the Void, and maybe something else. Not at all, he hoped. Uncertainty, yes, but the other had not been fear. It had not!

hæf ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ loʊ hɪlz wɝ kʌvɝd wɪð skwɑt, nɑɹld ɑləv tʃɹiz, dæpəl baɪ ðə sʌnlaɪt, wɛɹ lænsɝz ɔlɹɛɾi ɹoʊɾ əlɔŋ ðə ɹoʊz tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wɝ klɪɹ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn ʌv wɝkɝz ɪn ðoʊz ɔɹtʃɝdz, noʊ fɑɹmhaʊs, noʊ stʃɹʌktʃɝ ʌv ɛni kaɪn ɪn saɪt. ə fju maɪlz tə ðə wɛst, ðə hɪlz wɝ dɑɹkɝ, fɔɹəstəd. lidʒənmɛn, ɪmɝdʒɪŋ ɪn tʃɹɑɾɪŋ faɪlz bɪloʊ ɹænd, fɔɹmd ʌp, tʃɹeɪl baɪ ə ɹæɡəd skwɛɹ ʌv ɪliɑnɝ vɑləntɪɹz, naʊ ɛnlɪstɪɾ ɪndə ðə lidʒən. əz sun əz ðɛɹ ɹæŋks wɝ əlaɪnd, ðeɪ mɑɹtʃt aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ tə meɪk ɹum fəɹ dɪfɛndɝz ən kəmpænjənz. ðə ɡɹaʊn simd moʊsli kleɪ, ən buts ən hʊvz əlaɪk skɪɾəd ɪn ðə θɪn skɪm ə mʌd. fəɹ ə wʌndɝ, ðoʊ, oʊnli ə fju klaʊdz hʌŋ ɪn ðə skaɪ, waɪɾ ən klin. ðə sʌn wɑz ə peɪl jɛloʊ bɔl. ən nʌθɪŋ flu ʌp ðəɹ lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ə spɛɹoʊ.

Half the surrounding low hills were covered with squat, gnarled olive trees, dappled by the sunlight, where lancers already rode along the rows to make sure they were clear. There was no sign of workers in those orchards, no farmhouse, no structure of any kind in sight. A few miles to the west, the hills were darker, forested. Legionmen, emerging in trotting files below Rand, formed up, trailed by a ragged square of Illianer volunteers, now enlisted into the Legion. As soon as their ranks were aligned, they marched out of the way to make room for Defenders and Companions. The ground seemed mostly clay, and boots and hooves alike skidded in the thin skim of mud. For a wonder, though, only a few clouds hung in the sky, white and clean. The sun was a pale yellow ball. And nothing flew up there larger than a sparrow.

dæʃivə ən flɪn wɝ əmʌŋ ðə mɛn hoʊldɪŋ ɡeɪtweɪz, əz wɝ ædli ən hɑpwəl, mɔɹ ən nɛɹɪʃmə. səm ə ðə ɡeɪtweɪz leɪ aʊɾ ə ɹændz saɪt bɪhaɪn ðə foʊldəd hɪlz. hi wɑntəɾ ɛvɹiwʌn θɹu əz kwɪkli əz pɑsəbəl, ən ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju soʊlʒɝz skænɪŋ ðə skaɪ, ɛvɹi mæn ɪn ə blæk koʊɾ u wɑz nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi aʊt skaʊɾɪŋ hɛld ə wiv. ivən dʒɛdwɪn ən ɹɑtʃeɪd, ðoʊ boʊθ ɡɹɪməst oʊvɝ ɪt, əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ ən ɪn ɪz dɝɛkʃən. ɹænd θɔɾ əm noʊ lɔŋɡɝ juz tə duɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ soʊ kɑmən əz hoʊldɪŋ ə ɡeɪtweɪ fəɹ ʌðɝz tə juz.

Dashiva and Flinn were among the men holding gateways, as were Adley and Hopwil, Morr and Narishma. Some of the gateways lay out of Rand's sight behind the folded hills. He wanted everyone through as quickly as possible, and except for a few Soldiers scanning the sky, every man in a black coat who was not already out scouting held a weave. Even Gedwyn and Rochaid, though both grimaced over it, at each other and in his direction. Rand thought them no longer used to doing anything so common as holding a gateway for others to use.

bæʃɪɹ kæntɝɾ ʌp ðə sloʊp, vɛɹi mʌtʃ əɾ iz wɪð hɪmsɛlf, ən wɪð ɪz ʃɔɹt beɪ. hɪz kloʊk wɑz flʌŋ bæk dɪspaɪt ðə mɔɹnɪŋz kulnəs, nɑt soʊ koʊld əz ðə maʊntənz, bʌt stɪl wɪntɝi. hi nɑɾəd kæʒəwəli tə ænɑiɛlə ən eɪlɪl, hu ɡeɪv blik stɛɹz ɪn ɹɪtɝn. bæʃɪɹ smaɪl θɹu ðoʊz θɪk mʌstæʃɪz, laɪk daʊn-kɝvɪŋ hɔɹnz, ə nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli plɛzən smaɪl. hi hæɾ əz mɛni daʊts ə ðə wɪmən əz ɹænd dɪd. ðə wɪmən nu, əbaʊt bæʃɪɹz ɹɛzɝveɪʃənz ət list. tɝnɪŋ əɹ hɛd kwɪkli fɹəm ðə sɑldəiən, ænɑiɛlə ɹɪtɝn tə stʃɹoʊkɪŋ əɹ ɡɛldɪŋz meɪn; eɪlɪl hɛld əɹ ɹeɪnz tu ɹɪdʒɪdli.

Bashere cantered up the slope, very much at ease with himself, and with his short bay. His cloak was flung back despite the morning's coolness, not so cold as the mountains, but still wintery. He nodded casually to Anaiyella and Ailil, who gave bleak stares in return. Bashere smiled through those thick mustaches, like down-curving horns, a not entirely pleasant smile. He had as many doubts of the women as Rand did. The women knew, about Bashere's reservations at least. Turning her head quickly from the Saldaean, Anaiyella returned to stroking her gelding's mane; Ailil held her reins too rigidly.

ðət pɛɹ hæd nɑt stʃɹeɪd fɑɹ fɹəm ɹænd sɪns ði ɪnsəɾənt ɑn ðə ɹɪdʒ, ivən hævɪŋ ðɛɹ tɛns pɪtʃt ɪn ɪɹʃɑɾ ə hɪz ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ. ɑn ə bɹaʊn-ɡɹæs hɪlsaɪɾ ɑpəzət, dɛnhɝəd ʃɪftəd tə stʌɾi ðə tu noʊbəlwɪmənz ɹɪteɪnɝz, ɝeɪd təɡɛðɝ bɪhaɪn hɪm, ðən kwɪkli ɹɪtɝn tə wɑtʃɪŋ ɹænd. vɛɹi laɪkli hi wɑtʃt eɪlɪl, ən meɪbi ænɑiɛlə əz wɛl, bʌɾ i wɑtʃt ɹænd wɪθaʊt daʊt. ɹænd wɑz ənʃʊɹ wɛðɝ ðeɪ stɪl fɪɹd tə teɪk ðə bleɪm ɪf i wɑz kɪld əɹ sɪmpli wɑntəd tə si ɪt hæpən. ðə wʌn θɪŋ i wɑz sɝɾən ʌv wɑz ðəɾ ɪf ðeɪ dɪd wɑn ɪm dɛd, hi wəd ɡɪv əm noʊ ɑpɝtunəɾi.

That pair had not strayed far from Rand since the incident on the ridge, even having their tents pitched in earshot of his the night before. On a brown-grass hillside opposite, Denharad shifted to study the two noblewomen's retainers, arrayed together behind him, then quickly returned to watching Rand. Very likely he watched Ailil, and maybe Anaiyella as well, but he watched Rand without doubt. Rand was unsure whether they still feared to take the blame if he was killed or simply wanted to see it happen. The one thing he was certain of was that if they did want him dead, he would give them no opportunity.

hu noʊz ə wʊmənz hɑɹt? luz θɝɪn tʃʌkəld ɹaɪli. hi saʊndəɾ ɪn wʌn ə hɪz seɪnɝ mudz. moʊst wɪmən wɪl ʃɹʌɡ ɔf wʌɾ ə mæn wəd kɪl jə fɔɹ, ən kɪl jə fəɹ wʌɾ ə mæn wəd ʃɹʌɡ ɔf.

Who knows a woman's heart? Lews Therin chuckled wryly. He sounded in one of his saner moods. Most women will shrug off what a man would kill you for, and kill you for what a man would shrug off.

ɹænd ɪɡnɔɹd hɪm. ðə læst ɡeɪtweɪ ɪn ɹændz saɪt wɪŋkt aʊt. ði æʃəmən maʊntɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz wɝ tu fɑɹ fəɹ ɪm tə seɪ fəɹ ʃʊɹ wɛðɝ ɛni stɪl hɛld ɑn tə seɪɾɪn, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ soʊ lɔŋ əz i dɪd. klʌmzi dæʃivə tʃɹaɪd tə maʊn kwɪkli ən nɪɹli fɛl ɔf twaɪs bɪfɔɹ səksɛsfəli ɹitʃɪŋ ɪz sæɾəl. moʊst ə ðə blæk-koʊɾəd mɛn ɪn vju bɪɡæn ɹaɪɾɪŋ nɔɹθ əɹ saʊθ.

Rand ignored him. The last gateway in Rand's sight winked out. The Asha'man mounting their horses were too far for him to say for sure whether any still held on to saidin, but it did not matter so long as he did. Clumsy Dashiva tried to mount quickly and nearly fell off twice before successfully reaching his saddle. Most of the black-coated men in view began riding north or south.

ðə ɹɛst ə ðə noʊbəlz ɡæðɝd kwɪkli wɪð bæʃɪɹ ɑn ðə sloʊp dʒʌs bɪloʊ ɹænd, ðə haɪəst ɹæŋkɪŋ ən ðoʊz wɪð ðə moʊs paʊɝ ɪn fɹʌn æftɝ ə lɪɾəl dʒɑsəlɪŋ hɪɹ ən ðɛɹ, wɛɹ pɹɛsəɾəns ɹɪmeɪn ənsɝɾən. taɪhɛɹə ən mɑɹkəlɪn kɛp ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ɑn ðə fɹɪnʒɪz, ɑn ɑpəzət saɪdz ə ðə mæs ə noʊbəlz, feɪsəz kɛɹfəli blæŋk; ðeɪ maɪt bi æsk fəɹ ædvaɪs, bʌt boʊθ nu ðə faɪnəl dɪsɪʒənz ɹɛstəd wɪð ʌðɝz. wɪɹɑmɑn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ wɪð ə ɡɹæn dʒɛstʃɝ, daʊtləs tə bɪɡɪn ənʌðɝ splɛndəd pɝɝeɪʃən ɑn ðə ɡlɔɹiz ə fɑloʊɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. sunəmən ən tʃɹiən, əkʌstəm tə hɪz spitʃəz ən paʊɝfəl ɪnʌf tə teɪk noʊ kɛɹ ɝaʊn hɪm, ɹeɪn ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz təɡɛðɝ ən bɪɡæn tɔkɪŋ kwaɪətli. sunəmənz feɪs wɔɹ ən ʌnəkʌstəm hɑɹdnəs, ən tʃɹiən simd ɹɛɾi tə skwɑbəl oʊvɝ ə baʊndɝi laɪn dɪspaɪt ðə ɹɛd sæɾən stʃɹaɪps ɑn ɪz koʊtslivz. skwɛɹ-dʒɔd bɝtoʊm ən səm ə ði ʌðɝ kɛɹhinɪn wɝ nɑt kwaɪəɾ əɾ ɔl, læfɪŋ əɾ itʃ ʌðɝz dʒoʊks. ɛvɹiwʌn hæd hæɾ ə bɛlɪfəl ʌv wɪɹɑmɑnz ɡɹæn dɪkləmeɪʃənz. ðoʊ səmɝædʒɹɪdz skaʊl dipən ɛvɹi taɪm i lʊkt əɾ eɪlɪl ən ænɑiɛlə - hi dɪd nɑt laɪk əm ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ kloʊs tə ɹænd, ɪspɛʃli hɪz kaʊʌntʃɹiwʊmən - soʊ pɝhæps ɪz saʊɝnəs hæd mɔɹ ɹut ðən wɪɹɑmɑnz wɪndinəs.

The rest of the nobles gathered quickly with Bashere on the slope just below Rand, the highest ranking and those with the most power in front after a little jostling here and there, where precedence remained uncertain. Tihera and Marcolin kept their horses on the fringes, on opposite sides of the mass of nobles, faces carefully blank; they might be asked for advice, but both knew the final decisions rested with others. Weiramon opened his mouth with a grand gesture, doubtless to begin another splendid peroration on the glories of following the Dragon Reborn. Sunamon and Torean, accustomed to his speeches and powerful enough to take no care around him, reined their horses together and began talking quietly. Sunamon's face wore an unaccustomed hardness, and Torean seemed ready to squabble over a boundary line despite the red satin stripes on his coatsleeves. Square-jawed Bertome and some of the other Cairhienin were not quiet at all, laughing at each other's jokes. Everyone had had a bellyful of Weiramon's grand declamations. Though Semaradrid's scowl deepened every time he looked at Ailil and Anaiyella - he did not like them remaining close to Rand, especially his countrywoman - so perhaps his sourness had more root than Weiramon's windiness.

"əbaʊt tɛn maɪlz fɹəm ʌs," ɹænd sɛd laʊdli, "ə ɡʊd fɪfti θaʊzən mɛn ɑɹ pɹipɛɹɪŋ tə mɑɹtʃ." ðeɪ wɝ əwɛɹ ə ðæt, bʌɾ ɪt pʊld ɛvɹi aɪ tə hɪm ən saɪlənst ɛvɹi tʌŋ. wɪɹɑmɑnz maʊθ snæpt ʃʌt saʊɝli; ðə fɛloʊ dɪd lʌv tə hɪɹ hɪmsɛlf tɔk. ɡəm ən mɑɹəkən, tʌɡɪŋ ət ʃɑɹp ɔɪl bɪɹdz, smaɪld ɪn æntɪsəpeɪʃən, ðə fulz. səmɝædʒɹɪd lʊk laɪk ə mæn u hæɾ iɾən ən ɪntaɪɝ boʊl ə bæd plʌmz; ɡɹɛɡɹɪn ən ðə θɹi lɔɹdz ə ðə naɪn wɪð ɪm mɪɹli wɔɹ ɡɹɪm dɪtɝməneɪʃən ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz. nɑt fulz. "ðə skaʊts sɔ noʊ saɪnz ə sʌldəm əɹ deɪmeɪn," ɹænd wɛn ɑn, "bʌɾ ivən wɪθaʊt ðɛm, ivən wɪð æʃəmən, ðæts ɪnʌf tə kɪl ə lɑɾ ʌv əs ɪf ɛnibəɾi fɝɡɛts ðə plæn. noʊ wʌn wɪl fɝɡɛt, ðoʊ, aɪm ʃʊɹ." noʊ tʃɑɹdʒəz wɪθaʊɾ ɔɹɾɝz, ðɪs taɪm. hi hæd meɪd ðət klɪɹ əz ɡlæs, ən hɑɹɾ əz stoʊn. noʊ hɛɹɪŋ ɔf kəz jə θɔt meɪbi jə dʒʌs maɪɾ əv sin sʌmθɪŋ, iðɝ.

"About ten miles from us," Rand said loudly, "a good fifty thousand men are preparing to march." They were aware of that, but it pulled every eye to him and silenced every tongue. Weiramon's mouth snapped shut sourly; the fellow did love to hear himself talk. Gueyam and Maraconn, tugging at sharp oiled beards, smiled in anticipation, the fools. Semaradrid looked like a man who had eaten an entire bowl of bad plums; Gregorin and the three lords of the Nine with him merely wore grim determination on their faces. Not fools. "The scouts saw no signs of sul'dam or damane," Rand went on, "but even without them, even with Asha'man, that's enough to kill a lot of us if anybody forgets the plan. No one will forget, though, I'm sure." No charges without orders, this time. He had made that clear as glass, and hard as stone. No haring off because you thought maybe you just might have seen something, either.

wɪɹɑmɑn smaɪld, mænɪdʒɪŋ tə pʊɾ əz mʌtʃ ɔɪl ɪndə ɪɾ əz sunəmən ɛvɝ kʊd.

Weiramon smiled, managing to put as much oil into it as Sunamon ever could.

ɪt wɑz ə sɪmpəl plæn, ɪn ɪts weɪ. ðeɪ wəɾ ədvæns wɛst ɪn faɪv kɑləmz, itʃ wɪð æʃəmən, ən ətɛmp tə fɔl ɑn ðə sintʃæn fɹəm ɛvɹi saɪɾ ət wʌns. əɹ əz kloʊs tə ɔl saɪdz əz kəd bi mænədʒd. sɪmpəl plænz wɝ bɛst, bæʃɪɹ ɪnsɪstəd. ɪf jə woʊn bi sæɾəsfaɪd wɪð ə hoʊl lɪɾɝ ə fæt paɪɡələts, hi hæd mʌɾɝd, ɪf juv tə ɹʌʃ ɪndə ðə wʊdz tə faɪn ði oʊl saʊ, ðən doʊnt ɡɛt tu fænsi, əɹ ʃɪl ɡʌt ju.

It was a simple plan, in its way. They would advance west in five columns, each with Asha'man, and attempt to fall on the Seanchan from every side at once. Or as close to all sides as could be managed. Simple plans were best, Bashere insisted. If you won't be satisfied with a whole litter of fat piglets, he had muttered, if you have to rush into the woods to find the old sow, then don't get too fancy, or she'll gut you.

noʊ plæn ə bæɾəl sɝvaɪvz fɝs kɑntækt, luz θɝɪn sɛɾ ɪn ɹændz hɛd. fəɹ ə moʊmənt, hi stɪl sim lusəd. fəɹ ə moʊmənt. sʌmθɪŋ ɪz ɹɔŋ, hi ɡɹaʊl sʌɾənli. hɪz vɔɪs bɪɡæn tə ɡeɪn ɪntɛnsəɾi, ən dʒɹɪft ɪndə waɪl dɪsbɪlivɪŋ læftɝ. ɪt kæn bi ɹɔŋ, bʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz. sʌmθɪŋ stʃɹeɪnʒ, sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ, skɪɾɝɪŋ, dʒʌmpɪŋ, twɪtʃɪŋ. hɪz kækəlz tɝn tə wipɪŋ. ɪt kæn bi! aɪ mʌs bi mæd! ən i vænɪʃt bɪfɔɹ ɹænd kəd mjut hɪm. bɝn hɪm, ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɹɔŋ wɪð ðə plæn, əɹ bæʃɪɹ wʊɾə bɪn ɑn ɪt laɪk ə dʌk ɑn ə biɾəl.

No plan of battle survives first contact, Lews Therin said in Rand's head. For a moment, he still seemed lucid. For a moment. Something is wrong, he growled suddenly. His voice began to gain intensity, and drift into wild disbelieving laughter. It can't be wrong, but it is. Something strange, something wrong, skittering, jumping, twitching. His cackles turned to weeping. It can't be! I must be mad! And he vanished before Rand could mute him. Burn him, there was nothing wrong with the plan, or Bashere would have been on it like a duck on a beetle.

luz θɝɪn wɑz mæd, noʊ daʊɾ ʌv ɪt. bʌt soʊ lɔŋ əz ɹænd ælθɹ ɹɪmeɪn seɪn. . . . ə bɪɾɝ dʒoʊk ɑn ðə wɝld, ɪf ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɛn mæd bɪfɔɹ ðə læs bæɾəl ivən bɪɡæn. "teɪk jəɹ pleɪsəz," hi kəmændəd wɪð ə weɪv ə ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ. hi hæd tə faɪt daʊn ði ɝdʒ tə læf ət ðət dʒoʊk.

Lews Therin was mad, no doubt of it. But so long as Rand al'Thor remained sane. . . . A bitter joke on the world, if the Dragon Reborn went mad before the Last Battle even began. "Take your places," he commanded with a wave of the Dragon Scepter. He had to fight down the urge to laugh at that joke.

ðə lɑɹdʒ klʌmp ə noʊbəlz bɹoʊk əpɑɹɾ əɾ ɪz ɔɹɾɝ, mɪlɪŋ ən mʌɾɝɪŋ əz ðeɪ sɔɹɾɪd ðɛmsɛlvz aʊt. fju laɪk ðə weɪ ɹænd hæd dɪvaɪɾəd əm ʌp. wʌtɛvɝ bɹeɪkɪŋ daʊn ə bæɹiɝz hæɾ əkɝɾ ɪn ðə ʃɑk ə ðə fɝs faɪɾ ɪn ðə maʊntənz, ðeɪ hæd spɹʌŋ ʌp əɡɛn ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli.

The large clump of nobles broke apart at his order, milling and muttering as they sorted themselves out. Few liked the way Rand had divided them up. Whatever breaking down of barriers had occurred in the shock of the first fight in the mountains, they had sprung up again almost immediately.

wɪɹɑmɑn fɹaʊn oʊvɝ ɪz ʌndɪlɪvɝd spitʃ, bʌɾ æftɝ ən ɪlæbɹət baʊ ðət θɹʌst ɪz bɪɹɾ ət ɹænd laɪk ə spɪɹ i ɹoʊd nɔɹθ oʊvɝ ðə hɪlz fɑloʊd baɪ kɹəl dʒɹeɪpeɪnəoʊz, bɝtoʊm, dɔɹɛsɪn, ən sɛvɹəl maɪnɝ kɛɹhinɪn lɔɹdz, ɛvɹi læst wʌn ə ðɛm stoʊni-feɪst əɾ ə tɛɹən biɪŋ pleɪst oʊvɝ ðɛm. dʒɛdwɪn ɹoʊd baɪ wɪɹɑmɑnz saɪɾ ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf i wɝ ðə wʌn liɾɪŋ, ən ɡɑt dɑɹk skaʊlz fəɹ ɪt ðəɾ i əfɛktəd nɑt tə noʊɾəs. ði ʌðɝ ɡɹupɪŋz wɝ əz mɪkst. ɡɹɛɡɹɪn ɔlsoʊ hɛɾəd nɔɹθ, wɪð ə sʌlən sunəmən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɹitɛn i wɑz hɛɾɪŋ ɪn ðə seɪm dɝɛkʃən baɪ hæpənstæns, ən dælθeɪnz liɾɪŋ lɛsɝ kɛɹhinɪn bɪhaɪnd. dʒɛɹdwɪn səmɛɝɪs, ənʌðɝ ə ðə naɪn, fɑloʊd bæʃɪɹ saʊθ wɪð əmənʒɹɪd ən ɡəm. ðoʊz θɹi hæɾ æksɛptɪd ðə sɑldəiən ɔlmoʊst iɡɝli fəɹ ðə sɪmpəl ɹizən ðəɾ i wɑz nɑt tɛɹən, əɹ kɛɹhinɪn, əɹ ɪliɑnɝ, dɪpɛndɪŋ ɑn ðə mæn. ɹɑtʃeɪd sim tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ ðə seɪm wɪð bæʃɪɹ ðət dʒɛdwɪn wɑz wɪð wɪɹɑmɑn, bʌt bæʃɪɹ əpɪɹd tə ɪɡnɔɹ ɪt. ə lɪɾəl weɪ fɹəm bæʃɪɹz pɑɹɾi, tʃɹiən ən mɑɹəkən ɹoʊd wɪð ðɛɹ hɛdz təɡɛðɝ, laɪkli vɛntɪŋ splin ət hævɪŋ səmɝædʒɹɪd pleɪst oʊvɝ ðɛm. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ɝʃɪn nɛtɑɹi kɛpt ɡlænsɪŋ təwɔɹd dʒɛɹdwɪn, ən stændɪŋ ɪn ɪz stɝəps tə lʊk bæk təwɔɹd ɡɹɛɡɹɪn ən kɹəl, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz ɪmpɹɑbəbəl i kəd si ðɛm ɛni lɔŋɡɝ pæs ðə hɪlz. səmɝædʒɹɪd, hɪz bæk aɪɝn-ɹɑd stʃɹeɪt, lʊkt əz ənflæpəbəl əz bæʃɪɹ.

Weiramon frowned over his undelivered speech, but after an elaborate bow that thrust his beard at Rand like a spear he rode north over the hills followed by Kiril Drapaneos, Bertome, Doressin, and several minor Cairhienin lords, every last one of them stony-faced at a Tairen being placed over them. Gedwyn rode by Weiramon's side almost as if he were the one leading, and got dark scowls for it that he affected not to notice. The other groupings were as mixed. Gregorin also headed north, with a sullen Sunamon trying to pretend he was heading in the same direction by happenstance, and Dalthanes leading lesser Cairhienin behind. Jeordwyn Semaris, another of the Nine, followed Bashere south with Amondrid and Gueyam. Those three had accepted the Saldaean almost eagerly for the simple reason that he was not Tairen, or Cairhienin, or Illianer, depending on the man. Rochaid seemed to be trying the same with Bashere that Gedwyn was with Weiramon, but Bashere appeared to ignore it. A little way from Bashere's party, Torean and Maraconn rode with their heads together, likely venting spleen at having Semaradrid placed over them. For that matter, Ershin Netari kept glancing toward Jeordwyn, and standing in his stirrups to look back toward Gregorin and Kiril, though it was improbable he could see them any longer past the hills. Semaradrid, his back iron-rod straight, looked as unflappable as Bashere.

ɪt wɑz ðə seɪm pɹɪnsəpəl ɹænd hæd juzd ɔl əlɔŋ. hi tʃɹʌstɪd bæʃɪɹ, ən i θɔɾ i maɪt bi eɪbəl tə tʃɹʌst ɡɹɛɡɹɪn, ən nʌn ə ði ʌðɝz kəd dɛɹ θɪŋk ə tɝnɪŋ əɡɛnst ɪm wɪð soʊ mɛni aʊtləndɝz ɝaʊn hɪm, soʊ mɛni oʊld ɛnəmiz ən soʊ fju fɹɛnz. ɹænd læf sɔfli, wɑtʃɪŋ əm ɔl ɹaɪɾ ɔf fɹəm ɪz hɪlsaɪd. ðeɪ wəd faɪt fəɹ hɪm, ən faɪt wɛl, kəz ðeɪ hæd noʊ ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs. ɛni mɔɹ ðən i hæd.

It was the same principle Rand had used all along. He trusted Bashere, and he thought he might be able to trust Gregorin, and none of the others could dare think of turning against him with so many outlanders around him, so many old enemies and so few friends. Rand laughed softly, watching them all ride off from his hillside. They would fight for him, and fight well, because they had no other choice. Any more than he had.

mædnəs, luz θɝɪn hɪst. ɹænd ʃʌv ðə vɔɪs əweɪ æŋɡɹəli.

Madness, Lews Therin hissed. Rand shoved the voice away angrily.

hi wɑz hɑɹdli əloʊn, ʌv kɔɹs. taɪhɛɹə ən mɑɹkəlɪn hæd moʊst ə ðə dɪfɛndɝz ən kəmpænjənz maʊntəɾ ɪn ɹæŋks əmʌŋ ði ɑləv tʃɹiz ɑn hɪlz flæŋkɪŋ ðə wʌn wɛɹ i sæɾ ɪz hɔɹs. ðə ɹɛst wɝ aʊɾ əz ə skɹin əɡɛnst sɝpɹaɪz. ə kʌmpəni ʌv blu-koʊɾəd lidʒənmɛn weɪɾəd peɪʃənli ɪn ðə hɑloʊ bɪloʊ ʌndɝ meɪsɑnz aɪ, ən ət ðɛɹ ɹɪɹ, əz mɛni mɛn ɪn wʌt ðeɪ hæd wɔɹn sɝɛndɝɪŋ ɑn ðə hiθ bæk ɪn ɪljən. ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɛmjəleɪt ðə lidʒənmɛnz kɑm - ði ʌðɝ lidʒənmɛn, naʊ - tʃɹaɪɪŋ wɪθaʊɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə səksɛs.

He was hardly alone, of course. Tihera and Marcolin had most of the Defenders and Companions mounted in ranks among the olive trees on hills flanking the one where he sat his horse. The rest were out as a screen against surprise. A company of blue-coated Legionmen waited patiently in the hollow below under Masond's eye, and at their rear, as many men in what they had worn surrendering on the heath back in Illian. They were trying to emulate the Legionmen's calm - the other Legionmen, now - trying without a great deal of success.

ɹænd ɡlænst əɾ eɪlɪl ən ænɑiɛlə. ðə tɛɹən wʊmən ɡeɪv ɪm ə sɪmpɝɪŋ smaɪl, bʌɾ ɪt fɔltɝd wikli. ðə kɛɹhinɪn wʊmənz feɪs wɑz fɹɔst. hi kəd nɑt fɝɡɛt ðɛm, əɹ dɛnhɝəɾ ən ðɛɹ ɑɹmmɪn. hɪz kɑləm, ɪn ðə sɛntɝ, wəd bi ðə lɑɹdʒəst, ən ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəs baɪ ə fɛɹ mɑɹdʒən. ə vɛɹi fɛɹ mɑɹdʒən.

Rand glanced at Ailil and Anaiyella. The Tairen woman gave him a simpering smile, but it faltered weakly. The Cairhienin woman's face was frost. He could not forget them, or Denharad and their armsmen. His column, in the center, would be the largest, and the strongest by a fair margin. A very fair margin.

flɪn ən ðə mɛn ɹænd hæd tʃoʊzən aʊɾ æftɝ dəməaɪz wɛlz ɹoʊɾ ʌp ðə hɪl təwɔɹd hɪm. ðə bɔldɪŋ oʊl mæn ɔlweɪz lɛd, ðoʊ ɔl seɪv ædli ən nɛɹɪʃmə naʊ wɔɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən əz wɛl əz ðə sɔɹd, ən dæʃivə hæd wɔɹn ɪt fɝst. ɪn pɑɹɾ ɪt wɑz kəz ðə jʌŋɡɝ mɛn dɪfɝd tə flɪn, wɪð ɪz lɔŋ ɪkspɪɹiəns əz ə bænɝ-mæn ɪn ði ændɔɝən kwinz ɡɑɹdz. ɪn pɑɹɾ ɪt wɑz kəz dæʃivə dɪd nɑt sim tə kɛɹ. hi oʊnli əpɪɹɾ əmjuz baɪ ði ʌðɝz. wən i kəd spɛɹ taɪm fɹəm tɔkɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf, ðət wɑz. moʊst ɔfən, hi hɑɹdli simd əwɛɹ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ pæst ɪz oʊn noʊz.

Flinn and the men Rand had chosen out after Dumai's Wells rode up the hill toward him. The balding old man always led, though all save Adley and Narishma now wore the Dragon as well as the Sword, and Dashiva had worn it first. In part it was because the younger men deferred to Flinn, with his long experience as a banner-man in the Andoran Queen's Guards. In part it was because Dashiva did not seem to care. He only appeared amused by the others. When he could spare time from talking to himself, that was. Most often, he hardly seemed aware of anything past his own nose.

fəɹ ðət ɹizən, ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ə ʃɑk wən dæʃivə ɔkwɝdli buɾɪd ɪz slæb-saɪɾəd maʊn əhɛɾ ə ðə ɹɛst. ðət pleɪn feɪs, soʊ ɔfən veɪɡ əɹ bɪmjuzd wɪð ðə fɛloʊz oʊn θɔts, wɑz fɪkst ɪn ə wɝid fɹaʊn. ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ðən sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ə ʃɑk wən i siz seɪɾɪn əz sun əz i ɹitʃt ɹænd ən woʊv ə bæɹiɝ ɝaʊn əm əɡɛnst ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ. luz θɝɪn dɪd nɑt weɪs bɹɛθ - ɪf ə dɪsɪbɑɾid vɔɪs hæd bɹɛθ - ɑn mʌɾɝz əbaʊt kɪlɪŋ; hi lɝtʃt fəɹ ðə sɔɹs snɑɹlɪŋ wɝdləsli, tʃɹaɪd tə klɔ ðə paʊɝ əweɪ fɹəm ɹænd. ən dʒʌst əz əbɹʌpli fɛl saɪlən ən vænɪʃt.

For that reason, it was something of a shock when Dashiva awkwardly booted his slab-sided mount ahead of the rest. That plain face, so often vague or bemused with the fellow's own thoughts, was fixed in a worried frown. It was more than something of a shock when he seized saidin as soon as he reached Rand and wove a barrier around them against eavesdropping. Lews Therin did not waste breath - if a disembodied voice had breath - on mutters about killing; he lurched for the Source snarling wordlessly, tried to claw the Power away from Rand. And just as abruptly fell silent and vanished.

"ðɛɹz sʌmθɪŋ əskju wɪð seɪɾɪn hɪɹ, sʌmθɪŋ əmɪs," dæʃivə sɛd, saʊndɪŋ nɑɾ əɾ ɔl veɪɡ. ɪn fækt, hi saʊndəd . . . pɹɪsaɪs. ən tɛsti. ə titʃɝ lɛktʃɝɪŋ ə pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli dɛns pjupəl. hi ivən stæbd ə fɪŋɡɝ ət ɹænd. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz. nʌθɪŋ kən twɪst seɪɾɪn, ən ɪf ɪt kəd bi twɪstəd, wiɾ əv fɛlt ɪt bæk ɪn ðə maʊntənz. wɛl, ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ðɛɹ, jɛstɝdeɪ, bʌt soʊ smɔl. . . . aɪ fil ɪt klɪɹli hɪɹ, ðoʊ. seɪɾɪn ɪz . . . iɡɝ. aɪ noʊ; aɪ noʊ. seɪɾɪn ɪz nɑɾ əlaɪv. bʌɾ ɪt . . . pʌlsɪz, hɪɹ. ɪts dɪfəkəl tə kəntʃɹoʊl."

"There's something askew with saidin here, something amiss," Dashiva said, sounding not at all vague. In fact, he sounded . . . precise. And testy. A teacher lecturing a particularly dense pupil. He even stabbed a finger at Rand. "I don't know what it is. Nothing can twist saidin, and if it could be twisted, we'd have felt it back in the mountains. Well, there was something there, yesterday, but so small. . . . I feel it clearly here, though. Saidin is . . . eager. I know; I know. Saidin is not alive. But it . . . pulses, here. It is difficult to control."

ɹænd fɔɹst ɪz hæn tə lusən ɪts ɡɹɪp ɑn ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ. hi hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ʃʊɹ dæʃivə wɑz nɪɹli əz mæɾ əz luz θɝɪn hɪmsɛlf. juʒəwəli ðə mæn meɪnteɪn ə bɛɾɝ hoʊld ɑn hɪmsɛlf, ðoʊ, haʊɛvɝ pɹɪkɛɹiəsli. "aɪv bɪn tʃænəlɪŋ lɔŋɡɝ ðən ju, dæʃivə. jəɹ dʒʌs filɪŋ ðə teɪn mɔɹ." hi kəd nɑt sɑfən ɪz toʊn. laɪt, hi kəd nɑt ɡoʊ mæd jɛt, ən niðɝ kəd ðeɪ! "ɡɛt tə jəɹ pleɪs. wɪl bi muvɪŋ sun." ðə skaʊts hæd tə ɹɪtɝn sun. ivən ɪn ðɪs flæɾɝ kʌntʃɹi, ivən lɪməɾəd tə noʊ fɑɹðɝ ðən ðeɪ kəd si, tɛn maɪlz wəd nɑt teɪk lɔŋ tə kʌvɝ, tʃɹævlɪŋ.

Rand forced his hand to loosen its grip on the Dragon Scepter. He had always been sure Dashiva was nearly as mad as Lews Therin himself. Usually the man maintained a better hold on himself, though, however precariously. "I've been channeling longer than you, Dashiva. You're just feeling the taint more." He could not soften his tone. Light, he could not go mad yet, and neither could they! "Get to your place. We'll be moving soon." The scouts had to return soon. Even in this flatter country, even limited to no farther than they could see, ten miles would not take long to cover, Traveling.

dæʃivə meɪd noʊ muv tə oʊbeɪ. ɪnstɛd, hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ æŋɡɹəli, ðən snæpt ɪt ʃʌt. ʃeɪkɪŋ vɪzəbli, hi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. "aɪ æm wɛl əwɛɹ haʊ lɔŋ juv tʃænəld," hi sɛɾ ɪn ən aɪsi, ɔlmoʊs kəntɛmptʃuəs vɔɪs, "bʌt ʃʊɹli ivən jə kən fil ɪt. fil, mæn! aɪ doʊn laɪk 'stʃɹeɪnʒ' əplaɪd tə seɪɾɪn, ən aɪ doʊnt wɑnə daɪ əɹ . . . əɹ bi bɝn aʊt kəz jəɹ blaɪnd! lʊk ət maɪ wɔɹd! lʊk əɾ ɪt!"

Dashiva made no move to obey. Instead, he opened his mouth angrily, then snapped it shut. Shaking visibly, he drew a deep breath. "I am well aware how long you have channeled," he said in an icy, almost contemptuous voice, "but surely even you can feel it. Feel, man! I don't like 'strange' applied to saidin, and I don't want to die or . . . or be burned out because you're blind! Look at my ward! Look at it!"

ɹænd stɛɹd. dæʃivə pʊʃɪŋ hɪmsɛlf fɔɹwɝd wɑz pəkjuljɝ ɪnʌf, bʌt dæʃivə ɪn ə tɛmpɝ? ən ðən i dɪd lʊk ət ðə wɔɹd. ɹɪli lʊk. ðə floʊz ʃʊɾə bɪn əz stɛɾi əz ðə θɹɛdz ɪn taɪt-woʊvən kænvəs. ðeɪ vaɪbɹeɪɾɪd. ðə wɔɹd stʊd sɑləɾ əz ɪt ʃəd bi, bʌt ði ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl θɹɛdz ə ðə paʊɝ ʃɪmɝd wɪð feɪn muvmənt. mɔɹ hæd sɛd seɪɾɪn wɑz stʃɹeɪnʒ nɪɹ ɛbu dɑɹ, ən fəɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz ɝaʊnd. ðeɪ wɝ kloʊsɝ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz, naʊ.

Rand stared. Dashiva pushing himself forward was peculiar enough, but Dashiva in a temper? And then he did look at the ward. Really look. The flows should have been as steady as the threads in tight-woven canvas. They vibrated. The ward stood solid as it should be, but the individual threads of the Power shimmered with faint movement. Morr had said saidin was strange near Ebou Dar, and for a hundred miles around. They were closer than a hundred miles, now.

ɹænd meɪd hɪmsɛlf fil seɪɾɪn. hi wɑz ɔlweɪz əwɛɹ ə ðə paʊɝ - ɛniθɪŋ ɛls mɛn dɛθ əɹ wɝs - jɛɾ i hæd bɪkʌm juz tə ðə stʃɹʌɡəl. hi fɔt fəɹ laɪf, bʌt ðə faɪt hæd bɪkʌm əz nætʃɹəl əz laɪf. ðə stʃɹʌɡəl wɑz laɪf. hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf fil ðət bæɾəl, hɪz laɪf. koʊl tə meɪk stoʊn ʃæɾɝ ɪndə dʌst. faɪɝ tə meɪk stoʊn flæʃ tə veɪpɝ. fɪlθ tə meɪk ə ɹɑɾən sɛspɪt smɛl ə ɡɑɹɾən ɪn fʊl flaʊɝ. ən . . . ə pʌlsɪŋ, laɪk sʌmθɪŋ kwɪvɝɪŋ ɪn ɪz fɪst. ðɪs wɑz nɑt ðə sɔɹɾ ə θɹɑbɪŋ i hæd fɛlt ɪn ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, wən ðə teɪn ɑn seɪɾɪn hæd ɹɛzəneɪɾɪd wɪð ði ivəl ə ðət pleɪs, ən seɪɾɪn hæd pʌlsd wɪð ɪt. ðə vɪlnəs wɑz stʃɹɔŋ, bʌt stɛɾi hɪɹ. ɪt wɑz seɪɾɪn ɪtsɛlf ðət sim fʊl ə kɝəns ən sɝdʒəz. iɡɝ, dæʃivə kɔld ɪt, ən ɹænd kəd si waɪ.

Rand made himself feel saidin. He was always aware of the Power - anything else meant death or worse - yet he had become used to the struggle. He fought for life, but the fight had become as natural as life. The struggle was life. He made himself feel that battle, his life. Cold to make stone shatter into dust. Fire to make stone flash to vapor. Filth to make a rotten cesspit smell a garden in full flower. And . . . a pulsing, like something quivering in his fist. This was not the sort of throbbing he had felt in Shadar Logoth, when the taint on saidin had resonated with the evil of that place, and saidin had pulsed with it. The vileness was strong, but steady here. It was saidin itself that seemed full of currents and surges. Eager, Dashiva called it, and Rand could see why.

daʊn ðə sloʊp, bɪhaɪn flɪn, mɔɹ skɹʌbd ə hæn θɹu hɪz hɛɹ ən lʊkt ɝaʊn ənizəli. flɪn ɔltɝneɪɾəd ʃɪftɪŋ ɑn ɪz sæɾəl ən izɪŋ ɪz sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪts skæbɝd. nɛɹɪʃmə, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə skaɪ fəɹ flaɪɪŋ kɹitʃɝz, blɪŋk tu ɔfən. ə mʌsəl twɪtʃt ɪn ædliz tʃik. ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm dɪspleɪd səm saɪn ə nɝvəsnəs, ən lɪɾəl wʌndɝ. ɹɪlif wɛld ʌp ɪn ɹænd. nɑt mædnəs æftɝ ɔl.

Down the slope, behind Flinn, Morr scrubbed a hand through his hair and looked around uneasily. Flinn alternated shifting on his saddle and easing his sword in its scabbard. Narishma, watching the sky for flying creatures, blinked too often. A muscle twitched in Adley's cheek. Every one of them displayed some sign of nervousness, and little wonder. Relief welled up in Rand. Not madness after all.

dæʃivə smaɪld, ə twɪstəd sɛlf-sæɾəsfaɪd smaɪl. "aɪ kænɑt bɪliv jə dɪdnt noʊɾəs bɪfɔɹ." ðəɹ wɑz vɛɹi kloʊz tə ə snɪɹ ɪn ɪz vɔɪs. "juv bɪn hoʊldɪŋ seɪɾɪn pɹæktəkli deɪ ən naɪt sɪns wi bɪɡæn ðɪs mæɾ ɛkspədɪʃən. ðɪs ɪz ə sɪmpəl wɔɹd, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt wɑnə fɔɹm, ðən ɪt snæp təɡɛðɝ laɪk pʊlɪŋ aʊɾ ə maɪ hænz."

Dashiva smiled, a twisted self-satisfied smile. "I cannot believe you didn't notice before." There was very close to a sneer in his voice. "You've been holding saidin practically day and night since we began this mad expedition. This is a simple ward, but it did not want to form, then it snapped together like pulling out of my hands."

ðə sɪlvɝ-blu slæʃ ʌv ə ɡeɪtweɪ ɹoʊteɪɾɪd oʊpən ətɑp wʌn ə ðə bɛɹ hɪlz, hæf ə maɪl tə ðə wɛst, ən ə soʊlʒɝ pʊld ɪz hɔɹs θɹu ən maʊntəd hɝidli, ɹɪtɝnɪŋ fɹəm ðə skaʊt. ivən əɾ ə dɪstəns, ɹænd kəd meɪk aʊt ðə feɪnt ʃɪmɝ ə ðə wivz sɝaʊndɪŋ ðə ɡeɪtweɪ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ vænɪʃt. ðə ɹaɪɾɝ hæd nɑt ɹitʃt ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə hɪl bɪfɔɹ ənʌðɝ ɡeɪtweɪ oʊpən ɑn ðə kɹɛst, ən ðən ə θɝd, ə fɔɹθ, mɔɹ, wʌn æftɝ ənʌðɝ, ɔlmoʊst əz fæst əz ðə pɹisiɾɪŋ mæn kəd ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ.

The silver-blue slash of a gateway rotated open atop one of the bare hills, half a mile to the west, and a Soldier pulled his horse through and mounted hurriedly, returning from the scout. Even at a distance, Rand could make out the faint shimmer of the weaves surrounding the gateway before they vanished. The rider had not reached the bottom of the hill before another gateway opened on the crest, and then a third, a fourth, more, one after another, almost as fast as the preceding man could get out of the way.

"bʌɾ ɪt dɪd fɔɹm," ɹænd sɛd. soʊ hæd ðə skaʊts' ɡeɪtweɪz. "ɪf seɪɾɪn ɪz hɑɹd tə kəntʃɹoʊl, ɪts ɔlweɪz hɑɹd, ən ɪt stɪl dʌz wʌt jə wɑnt." bʌt waɪ mɔɹ dɪfəkəl hɪɹ? ə kwɛstʃən fəɹ ənʌðɝ taɪm. laɪt, hi wɪʃt hɹɪd fɛl wɝ stɪl əlaɪv; ði oʊl fəlɑsəfɝ maɪɾ əv hæɾ ən ænsɝ. "ɡɛt bæk wɪð ði ʌðɝz, dæʃivə," hi ɔɹɾɝd, bʌt ðə mæn stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt, ən i hæd tə ɹɪpit hɪmsɛlf bɪfɔɹ ðə fɛloʊ lɛt ðə wɔɹd vænɪʃ, dʒɝkt ɪz hɔɹs ɝaʊnd wɪθaʊɾ ə səluɾ ən θʌmp ði ænəməl bæk daʊn ðə sloʊp wɪð ɪz hilz.

"But it did form," Rand said. So had the scouts' gateways. "If saidin is hard to control, it's always hard, and it still does what you want." But why more difficult here? A question for another time. Light, he wished Herid Fel were still alive; the old philosopher might have had an answer. "Get back with the others, Dashiva," he ordered, but the man stared at him in astonishment, and he had to repeat himself before the fellow let the ward vanish, jerked his horse around without a salute and thumped the animal back down the slope with his heels.

"sʌm tʃɹʌbəl, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən?" ænɑiɛlə sɪmpɝd. eɪlɪl mɪɹli lʊkt ət ɹænd wɪð flæɾ aɪz.

"Some trouble, my Lord Dragon?" Anaiyella simpered. Ailil merely looked at Rand with flat eyes.

siɪŋ ðə fɝst skaʊɾ ɑn ðə weɪ təwɔɹd ɹænd, ði ʌðɝz fæn ɔf tə nɔɹθ ən saʊθ, wɛɹ ðeɪ wəd dʒɔɪn wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ kɑləmz. faɪndɪŋ əm ði oʊld-fæʃənd weɪ wəd bi fæstɝ ðən kæstɪŋ əbaʊt wɪð ɡeɪtweɪz. dʒɹɔɪŋ ɹeɪn ɪn fɹʌn ə ɹænd, næləm slæp fɪs tə tʃɛst - dɪɾ i lʊk ə bɪt waɪld-aɪd? noʊ mæɾɝ. seɪɾɪn stɪl dɪd wʌt ðə mæn wildɪŋ ɪt meɪɾ ɪt du. næləm səluɾəd ən ɡeɪv ɪz ɹipɔɹt. ðə sintʃæn wɝ nɑɾ ɪnkæmp tɛn maɪlz əweɪ, ðeɪ wɝ noʊ mɔɹ ðən faɪv əɹ sɪks dɪstənt, mɑɹtʃɪŋ ist. ən ðeɪ hæd sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn baɪ ðə skɔɹ.

Seeing the first scout on the way toward Rand, the others fanned off to north and south, where they would join one of the other columns. Finding them the old-fashioned way would be faster than casting about with gateways. Drawing rein in front of Rand, Nalaam slapped fist to chest - did he look a bit wild-eyed? No matter. Saidin still did what the man wielding it made it do. Nalaam saluted and gave his report. The Seanchan were not encamped ten miles away, they were no more than five or six distant, marching east. And they had sul'dam and damane by the score.

ɹænd ɪʃuɾ ɪz ɔɹɾɝz əz næləm ɡæləpt əweɪ, ən ɪz kɑləm bɪɡæn muvɪŋ wɛst. ðə dɪfɛndɝz ən ðə kəmpænjənz ɹoʊɾ ɑn iðɝ flæŋk. ðə lidʒənmɛn mɑɹtʃt ət ðə ɹɪɹ, dʒʌs bɪhaɪn dɛnhɝəd. ə ɹimaɪndɝ tə ðə noʊbəlwɪmən, ən ðɛɹ ɑɹmmɪn, ɪf ðeɪ niɾəd wʌn. ænɑiɛlə sɝɾənli lʊkt oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ɔfən ɪnʌf, ən eɪlɪlz ɹəfjuzəl tə wɑz pɔɪntəd. ɹænd fɔɹm ðə meɪn θɹʌst ə ðə kɑləm, ɹænd ən flɪn ən ði ʌðɝz, dʒʌst əz ɪt wəd bi wɪð ði ʌðɝ kɑləmz. æʃəmən tə stʃɹaɪk, ən mɛn wɪð stil tə ɡɑɹd ðɛɹ bæks waɪl ðeɪ kɪld. ðə sʌn stɪl hæɾ ə lɔŋ weɪ tə klaɪm bɪfɔɹ mɪddeɪ. nʌθɪŋ hæd tʃeɪnʒd tə ɔltɝ ðə plæn.

Rand issued his orders as Nalaam galloped away, and his column began moving west. The Defenders and the Companions rode on either flank. The Legionmen marched at the rear, just behind Denharad. A reminder to the noblewomen, and their armsmen, if they needed one. Anaiyella certainly looked over her shoulder often enough, and Ailil's refusal to was pointed. Rand formed the main thrust of the column, Rand and Flinn and the others, just as it would be with the other columns. Asha'man to strike, and men with steel to guard their backs while they killed. The sun still had a long way to climb before midday. Nothing had changed to alter the plan.

mædnəs weɪts fəɹ sʌm, luz θɝɪn wɪspɝd. ɪt kɹips ʌp ɑn ʌðɝz.

Madness waits for some, Lews Therin whispered. It creeps up on others.

mɪɹaɪ ɹoʊd nɪɹ ðə hɛɾ ə hɪz ɑɹmi mɑɹtʃɪŋ ist əlɔŋ ə mʌɾi ɹoʊd ðət waʊn θɹu hɪli ɑləv ɡɹoʊvz ən pætʃi fɔɹəst. nɑɾ ət ðə hɛd. ə fʊl ɹɛdʒəmənt, moʊst sintʃæn, ɹoʊd bɪtwin ɪm ən ðə fɔɹwɝd skaʊts. hi hæd noʊn dʒɛnɝəlz u wɑntəd tə bi ət ðə vɛɹi fɹʌnt. moʊst wɝ dɛd. moʊs hæd lɔs ðə bæɾəlz ðeɪ daɪɾ ɪn. mʌd kɛp daʊn dʌst, jɛt wɝɾ ʌv ən ɑɹmi ɑn ðə muv ɹæn laɪk waɪldfaɪɝ ɑn ðə sɑlɑz pleɪnz, wʌtɛvɝ ðə lænd. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ əmʌŋ ði ɑləv tʃɹiz i spɑɾəd ən oʊvɝtɝnd wilbɛɹoʊ əɹ ən əbændən pɹunɪŋ hʊk, bʌt ðə wɝkɝz hæd vænɪʃt lɔŋ sɪns. lʌkəli, ðeɪ wəɾ əvɔɪɾ ɪz əpoʊnəns əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ dɪd hɪm. wɪð lʌk, lækɪŋ ɹeɪkən, hɪz əpoʊnəns wəd nɑt noʊ hi wɑz ɑn əm əntɪl ɪt wɑz tu leɪt. kɛnɝ mɪɹaɪ dɪd nɑt laɪk tʃɹʌstɪŋ tə lʌk.

Miraj rode near the head of his army marching east along a muddy road that wound through hilly olive groves and patchy forest. Not at the head. A full regiment, most Seanchan, rode between him and the forward scouts. He had known generals who wanted to be at the very front. Most were dead. Most had lost the battles they died in. Mud kept down dust, yet word of an army on the move ran like wildfire on the Sa'las Plains, whatever the land. Here and there among the olive trees he spotted an overturned wheelbarrow or an abandoned pruning hook, but the workers had vanished long since. Luckily, they would avoid his opponents as much as they did him. With luck, lacking raken, his opponents would not know he was on them until it was too late. Kennar Miraj did not like trusting to luck.

əsaɪd fɹəm ʌndɝ-ɔfəsɝz ɹɛɾi tə pɹədus mæps əɹ kɑpi ɔɹɾɝz ən mɛsənʒɝz ɹɛɾi tə kæɹi ðɛm, hi ɹoʊɾ əkʌmpəniɾ oʊnli baɪ ɑbɑldɑɹ julən, smɔl ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪz kwaɪɾ ɔɹɾənɛɹi bɹaʊn ɡɛldɪŋ sim ɪmɛns, ə faɪɝi mæn wɪð ðə neɪlz ə hɪz lɪɾəl fɪŋɡɝz peɪntəd ɡɹin u wɔɹ ə blæk wɪɡ tə kənsil ɪz bɔlnəs, ən lɪseɪn dʒɑɹəθ, ə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən fɹəm sindɑɹ ɪtsɛlf, huz peɪl plʌmp feɪs ən blu aɪz wɝ ə stʌɾi ɪn sɝɛnəɾi. julən wɑz nɑt kɑm; mɪɹaɪz koʊl-dɑɹk kæptən ə ði ɛɹ ɔfən wɔɹ ə skaʊl fəɹ ðə ɹulz ðət sɛldəm lɛɾ ɪm tʌtʃ ðə ɹeɪnz ʌv ə ɹeɪkən ɛnimɔɹ, bʌt tədeɪ hɪz fɹaʊn wɛn boʊn dip. ðə skaɪ wɑz klɪɹ, pɝfəkt wɛðɝ fəɹ ɹeɪkən, bʌt baɪ sjuɹɔθs kəmænd, nʌn ə hɪz flaɪɝz wəd bi ɪn ðə sæɾəl tədeɪ, nɑt hɪɹ. ðəɹ wɝ tu fju ɹeɪkən wɪð ðə heɪlin tə ɹɪsk əm ənnɛsəsɛɹəli. lɪseɪnz kɑm tʃɹʌbəl mɪɹaɪ mɔɹ. mɔɹ ðən ðə sinjɝ dɝsʌldəm ʌndɝ ɪz kəmænd, ʃi wɑz ə fɹɛnd wɪð hum i hæd ʃɛɹd mɛni ə kʌp ə kæf ən mɛni ə ɡeɪm ə stoʊnz. ən ænəmeɪɾəd wʊmən, ɔlweɪz bʌbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ wɪð ɪnθuziæzəmz ən əmjuzmənt. ən ʃi wɑz aɪsi kɑm, əz saɪlən əz ɛni sʌldəm i hæd tʃɹaɪd tə kwɛstʃən.

Aside from under-officers ready to produce maps or copy orders and messengers ready to carry them, he rode accompanied only by Abaldar Yulan, small enough to make his quite ordinary brown gelding seem immense, a fiery man with the nails of his little fingers painted green who wore a black wig to conceal his baldness, and Lisaine Jarath, a gray-haired woman from Seandar itself, whose pale plump face and blue eyes were a study in serenity. Yulan was not calm; Miraj's coal-dark Captain of the Air often wore a scowl for the rules that seldom let him touch the reins of a raken anymore, but today his frown went bone deep. The sky was clear, perfect weather for raken, but by Suroth's command, none of his fliers would be in the saddle today, not here. There were too few raken with the Hailene to risk them unnecessarily. Lisaine's calm troubled Miraj more. More than the senior der'sul'dam under his command, she was a friend with whom he had shared many a cup of kaf and many a game of stones. An animated woman, always bubbling over with enthusiasms and amusement. And she was icy calm, as silent as any sul'dam he had tried to question.

wɪðɪn ɪz saɪt wɝ twɛnti deɪmeɪn flæŋkɪŋ ðə hɔɹsmən, itʃ wɔkɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ əɹ sʌldəmz maʊnt. ðə sʌldəm bɑbd ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz, bɛndɪŋ tə pæɾ ə deɪmeɪnz hɛd, stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ oʊnli tə bɛn əɡɛn tə stʃɹoʊk əɹ hɛɹ. ðə deɪmeɪn lʊk stɛɾi ɪnʌf tə hɪz aɪ, bʌt pleɪnli ðə sʌldəm wɝ ɑn ɹeɪzɝz ɛdʒ. ən ɪbʌljən lɪseɪn ɹoʊd saɪlən əz ə stoʊn.

Within his sight were twenty damane flanking the horsemen, each walking beside her sul'dam's mount. The sul'dam bobbed in their saddles, bending to pat a damane's head, straightening only to bend again to stroke her hair. The damane looked steady enough to his eye, but plainly the sul'dam were on razor's edge. And ebullient Lisaine rode silent as a stone.

ə tɔɹm əpɪɹɾ əhɛd, ɹeɪsɪŋ daʊn ðə kɑləm. wɛl ɔf tə ðə saɪd, ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə ɡɹoʊvz, jɛt hɔɹsəz wɪkɝɾ ən ʃaɪɾ əz ðə bɹɑnz-skeɪl kɹitʃɝ floʊd pæst. ə tʃɹeɪn tɔɹm wəd nɑɾ ətæk hɔɹsəz - ət lis nɑɾ ənlɛs ðə kɪlɪŋ fɹɛnzi oʊvɝtʊk ɪt, ðə ɹizən tɔɹm wɝ noʊ ɡʊɾ ɪn bæɾəl - bʌt hɔɹsəz tʃɹeɪn tə bi kɑm ɝaʊn tɔɹm wɝ ɪn əz ʃɔɹt səplaɪ əz tɔɹm ðɛmsɛlvz.

A torm appeared ahead, racing down the column. Well off to the side, on the edge of the groves, yet horses whickered and shied as the bronze-scaled creature flowed past. A trained torm would not attack horses - at least not unless the killing frenzy overtook it, the reason torm were no good in battle - but horses trained to be calm around torm were in as short supply as torm themselves.

mɪɹaɪ sɛn ə skɪni ʌndɝ-lutɛnənt neɪm vɑɹɛk tə fɛtʃ ðə mɔɹɑtʃɹmz skaʊɾɪŋ ɹipɔɹt. əfʊt, ən ðə laɪt kənsum wɛðɝ vɑɹɛk lɔst seɪaɪtɑɹ. hi wəd nɑt weɪs taɪm ɑn vɑɹɛk tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kəntʃɹoʊl ə maʊn əkwaɪɝd loʊkəli. ðə mæn ɹɪtɝn fæstɝ ðən i wɛn ən meɪɾ ə kɹɪsp baʊ, bɪɡɪnɪŋ ɪz ɹipɔɹt bɪfɔɹ ɪz bæk wɑz stʃɹeɪɾ əɡɛn.

Miraj sent a skinny under-lieutenant named Varek to fetch the morat'torm's scouting report. Afoot, and the Light consume whether Varek lost sei'taer. He would not waste time on Varek trying to control a mount acquired locally. The man returned faster than he went and made a crisp bow, beginning his report before his back was straight again.

"ði ɛnəmi ɪz lɛs ðən faɪv maɪlz du ist, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl, mɑɹtʃɪŋ ɪn əɹ dɝɛkʃən. ðeɪ ɑɹ dɪplɔɪɾ ɪn faɪv kɑləmz speɪst əpɹɑksəmətli wʌn maɪl əpɑɹt."

"The enemy is less than five miles due east, my Lord Captain-General, marching in our direction. They are deployed in five columns spaced approximately one mile apart."

soʊ mʌtʃ fəɹ lʌk. bʌt mɪɹaɪ hæd kənsɪɾɝd haʊ hi wəɾ ətæk fɔɹɾi θaʊzənd wɪð oʊnli faɪv hɪmsɛlf, ən fɪfti deɪmeɪn. kwɪkli mɛn wɝ ɡæləpɪŋ wɪð ɔɹɾɝz tə dɪplɔɪ tə miɾ ən ətɛmptəɾ ɛnvɛləpmənt, ən ðə ɹɛdʒəməns bɪhaɪn ɪm bɪɡæn tɝnɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɡɹoʊvz, sʌldəm ɹaɪɾɪŋ əmʌŋ əm wɪð ðɛɹ deɪmeɪn.

So much for luck. But Miraj had considered how he would attack forty thousand with only five himself, and fifty damane. Quickly men were galloping with orders to deploy to meet an attempted envelopment, and the regiments behind him began turning into the groves, sul'dam riding among them with their damane.

ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪz kloʊk əɡɛnst ə sʌɾən koʊld wɪnd, mɪɹaɪ noʊɾəst sʌmθɪŋ ðət meɪɾ ɪm fil koʊldɝ stɪl. lɪseɪn wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ðə sʌldəm vænɪʃ ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz, tu. ən ʃi hæd bɪɡʌn tə swɛt.

Gathering his cloak against a sudden cold wind, Miraj noticed something that made him feel colder still. Lisaine was watching the sul'dam vanish into the trees, too. And she had begun to sweat.

bɝtoʊm ɹoʊɾ izəli, lɛɾɪŋ ðə wɪn stʃɹim ɪz kloʊk tə wʌn saɪd, bʌɾ i stʌɾid ðə fɔɹəstəd kʌntʃɹi əhɛd wɪð ə wɛɹinɪs i bɛɹli ətɛmptəd tə kənsil. ʌv ɪz fɔɹ kʌntʃɹimɪn əɾ ɪz bæk, oʊnli dɔɹɛsɪn wɑz tʃɹuli skɪld ɪn ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz. ðət ful tɛɹən dɔɡ wɪɹɑmɑn wɑz blaɪnd, ʌv kɔɹs. bɝtoʊm ɡlɛɹɾ ət ðə pʌft-ʌp bəfunz bæk. wɪɹɑmɑn ɹoʊd wɛl əhɛɾ ə ðə ɹɛst ɪn dip kɑnvɝseɪʃən wɪð dʒɛdwɪn, ən ɪf bɝtoʊm niɾəd ɛni fɝðɝ pɹuf ðət ðə tɛɹən wəd smaɪl ət wʌt ɡæɡd ə ɡoʊt, ɪt wɑz haʊ hi tɑlɝeɪɾəd ðət hɑt-aɪd jʌŋ mɑnstɝ. hi noʊɾəst kɹəl ɡlænsɪŋ saɪdweɪz ət hɪm, ən ɹeɪn ɪz ɡɹeɪ fɑɹðɝ fɹəm ðə taʊɝɪŋ mæn. hi hæd noʊ pɝtɪkjəlɝ ɛnməɾi təwɔɹd ði ɪliɑnɝ, bʌɾ i dɪd heɪt pipəl lumɪŋ oʊvɝ hɪm. hi kəd nɑt weɪt tə ɹɪtɝn tə kɛɹhin, wɛɹ i dɪd nɑɾ əv tə bi sɝaʊndəd baɪ ənɡeɪnli dʒaɪəns. kɹəl dʒɹeɪpnəoʊz wɑz nɑt blaɪnd, ðoʊ, haʊɛvɝ oʊvɝ-tɔl. hi hæd sɛn ə dʌzən skaʊts fɔɹwɝd, tu. wɪɹɑmɑn hæd sɛnt wʌn.

Bertome rode easily, letting the wind stream his cloak to one side, but he studied the forested country ahead with a wariness he barely attempted to conceal. Of his four countrymen at his back, only Doressin was truly skilled in the Game of Houses. That fool Tairen dog Weiramon was blind, of course. Bertome glared at the puffed-up buffoon's back. Weiramon rode well ahead of the rest in deep conversation with Gedwyn, and if Bertome needed any further proof that the Tairen would smile at what gagged a goat, it was how he tolerated that hot-eyed young monster. He noticed Kiril glancing sideways at him, and reined his gray farther from the towering man. He had no particular enmity toward the Illianer, but he did hate people looming over him. He could not wait to return to Cairhien, where he did not have to be surrounded by ungainly giants. Kiril Drapeneos was not blind, though, however over-tall. He had sent a dozen scouts forward, too. Weiramon had sent one.

"dɔɹɛsɪn," bɝtoʊm sɛd sɔfli, ðɛn, ə lɪɾəl laʊɾɝ, "dɔɹɛsɪn, jə lʌmp!"

"Doressin," Bertome said softly, then, a little louder, "Doressin, you lump!"

ðə boʊni mæn ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl. laɪk bɝtoʊm, laɪk ði ʌðɝ θɹi, hi hæd ʃeɪvd ən paʊɾɝd ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz hɛd; ðə staɪl ə mɑɹkɪŋ jɝsɛlf laɪk ə soʊlʒɝ hæd bɪkʌm kwaɪt fæʃənəbəl. dɔɹɛsɪn ʃʊɾə kɔld ɪm ə toʊɾ ɪn ɹɪtɝn, ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæd sɪns bɔɪhʊd, bʌɾ ɪnstɛɾ i hild ɪz ɡɛldɪŋ ʌp bɪsaɪd bɝtoʊmz ən lin kloʊs. hi wɑz wɝid, ən lɛɾɪŋ ɪt ʃoʊ, hɪz fɔɹhɛd fɝoʊd dipli. "ju ɹilaɪz ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən minz əs tə daɪ?" hi wɪspɝd, ɡlænsɪŋ ət ðə kɑləm tʃɹeɪlɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðɛm. "blʌɾ ən faɪɝ, aɪ oʊnli lɪsən tə koʊləveɪɪɹ, bʌɾ aɪ hæv noʊn aɪ wɑz ə dɛd mæn sɪns i kɪl hɝ."

The bony man gave a start in his saddle. Like Bertome, like the other three, he had shaved and powdered the front of his head; the style of marking yourself like a soldier had become quite fashionable. Doressin should have called him a toad in return, the way they had since boyhood, but instead he heeled his gelding up beside Bertome's and leaned close. He was worried, and letting it show, his forehead furrowed deeply. "You realize the Lord Dragon means us to die?" he whispered, glancing at the column trailing behind them. "Blood and fire, I only listened to Colavaere, but I have known I was a dead man since he killed her."

fəɹ ə moʊmənt, bɝtoʊm aɪd ðə kɑləm ʌv ɑɹmmɪn, sneɪkɪŋ bæk θɹu ðə ɹoʊlɪŋ hɪlz. ðə tʃɹiz wɝ mɔɹ skæɾɝd hɪɹ ðən əhɛd, bʌt stɪl ɪnʌf tə ʃild ən ətæk əntɪl ɪt wɑz ɹaɪɾ ɑn tɑp ə ju. ðə læst ɑləv ɡɹoʊv leɪ nɪɹli ə maɪl bɪhaɪnd. wɪɹɑmɑnz mɛn ɹoʊɾ ət ðə fɔɹ, ʌv kɔɹs, ɪn ðoʊz ɹɪdɪkjələs koʊts wɪð ðɛɹ fæt waɪt-stʃɹaɪp slivz, ən ðən kɹəlz ɪliɑnɝz ɪn ɪnʌf ɡɹin ən ɹɛd tə ʃeɪm tɪŋkɝz. hɪz oʊn pipəl, disənli klæɾ ɪn dɑɹk blu bɪniθ ðɛɹ bɹɛstpleɪts, wɝ stɪl bɪɑn ɪz saɪt wɪð dɔɹɛsɪnz ən ði ʌðɝz', əhɛɾ oʊnli ʌv ðə kʌmpəni ʌv lidʒənmɛn. wɪɹɑmɑn hæd sim sɝpɹaɪz ðət ðə fʊt kɛpt ʌp, ðoʊ hi hæd hɑɹdli sɛɾ ə dɪfəkəl peɪs.

For a moment, Bertome eyed the column of armsmen, snaking back through the rolling hills. The trees were more scattered here than ahead, but still enough to shield an attack until it was right on top of you. The last olive grove lay nearly a mile behind. Weiramon's men rode at the fore, of course, in those ridiculous coats with their fat white-striped sleeves, and then Kiril's Illianers in enough green and red to shame Tinkers. His own people, decently clad in dark blue beneath their breastplates, were still beyond his sight with Doressin's and the others', ahead only of the company of Legionmen. Weiramon had seemed surprised that the foot kept up, though he had hardly set a difficult pace.

ɪt wɑz nɑt ɹɪli ði ɑɹmmɪn bɝtoʊm ɡlænst æt, ðoʊ. sɛvən mɛn ɹoʊd bɪfɔɹ ivən wɪɹɑmɑnz, sɛvən mɛn wɪð hɑɹd feɪsəz ən dɛθ-koʊld aɪz, ɪn blæk koʊts. wʌn wɔɹ ə pɪn ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə sɪlvɝ sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz tɔl kɑlɝ.

It was not really the armsmen Bertome glanced at, though. Seven men rode before even Weiramon's, seven men with hard faces and death-cold eyes, in black coats. One wore a pin in the shape of a silver sword on his tall collar.

"æn ɪlæbɹət weɪ tə ɡoʊ əbaʊɾ ɪt," hi toʊl dɔɹɛsɪn dʒɹaɪli. "æn aɪ daʊɾ ælθɹ wʊɾə sɛn ðoʊz fɛloʊz wɪð ʌs, ɪf wi wɝ dʒʌs biɪŋ fɛɾ ɪndə ə sɔsədʒ ɡɹaɪndɝ." fɔɹhɛd stɪl kɹist, dɔɹɛsɪn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ əɡɛn, bʌt bɝtoʊm sɛd, "aɪ nid tə tɔk tə ðə tɛɹən." hi dɪslaɪk siɪŋ ɪz tʃaɪldhʊd fɹɛn ðɪs weɪ. ælθɹ hæɾ ənhɪnʒd hɪm.

"An elaborate way to go about it," he told Doressin dryly. "And I doubt al'Thor would have sent those fellows with us, if we were just being fed into a sausage grinder." Forehead still creased, Doressin opened his mouth again, but Bertome said, "I need to talk to the Tairen." He disliked seeing his childhood friend this way. Al'Thor had unhinged him.

əbzɔɹbd ɪn wʌn ənʌðɝ, wɪɹɑmɑn ən dʒɛdwɪn dɪd nɑt hɪɹ ɪm ɹaɪɾɪŋ ʌp ɑn ðɛm. dʒɛdwɪn wɑz aɪdli pleɪɪŋ wɪð ɪz ɹeɪnz, hɪz fitʃɝz koʊld wɪð kəntɛmpt. ðə tɛɹən wɑz ɹɛd-feɪst. "aɪ doʊn kɛɹ u jə ɑɹ," hi wɑz seɪɪŋ tə ðə blæk-koʊɾəd mæn ɪn ə loʊ, hɑɹd vɔɪs, spɪɾəl flaɪɪŋ, "aɪ woʊn teɪk mɔɹ ɹɪsk wɪθaʊɾ ə kəmæn dɝɛk fɹəm ðə lɪps ʌv - "

Absorbed in one another, Weiramon and Gedwyn did not hear him riding up on them. Gedwyn was idly playing with his reins, his features cold with contempt. The Tairen was red-faced. "I don't care who you are," he was saying to the black-coated man in a low, hard voice, spittle flying, "I won't take more risk without a command direct from the lips of - "

əbɹʌpli ðə pɛɹ bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə bɝtoʊm, ən wɪɹɑmɑnz maʊθ snæpt ʃʌt. hi ɡlɛɹɾ əz ɪf i wɑntəd tə kɪl bɝtoʊm. ði æʃəmənz ɛvɝ-pɹɛzən smaɪl mɛltəɾ əweɪ. ðə wɪnd ɡʌstɪd, koʊld ən ʃɑɹp əz klaʊdz dʒɹɪftəɾ əkɹɔs ðə sʌn, bʌt noʊ koʊldɝ ðən dʒɛdwɪnz sʌɾən stɛɹ. wɪð ə smɔl ʃɑk bɝtoʊm ɹilaɪz ðə mæn ɔlsoʊ wɑntəd tə stʃɹaɪk ɪm dɛɾ ɑn ðə spɑt.

Abruptly the pair became aware of Bertome, and Weiramon's mouth snapped shut. He glared as if he wanted to kill Bertome. The Asha'man's ever-present smile melted away. The wind gusted, cold and sharp as clouds drifted across the sun, but no colder than Gedwyn's sudden stare. With a small shock Bertome realized the man also wanted to strike him dead on the spot.

dʒɛdwɪnz aɪsɪli mɝɾɝəs ɡeɪz dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, bʌt wɪɹɑmɑnz feɪs ʌndɝwɛn ə ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl tʃɹænsfɝmeɪʃən. ðə ɹɛd feɪɾəd sloʊli əz i pɹədust ə smaɪl ɪn ən ɪnstənt, ən ɔɪli smaɪl wɪð oʊnli ə tʃɹeɪs ə mɑkɪŋ kɑndəsɛnʃən. "aɪv bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ju, bɝtoʊm," hi sɛd hɑɹɾəli. "ə pɪɾi ælθɹ stʃɹæŋɡəl jəɹ kʌzən. wɪð ɪz oʊn hænz, aɪ hɪɹ. fɹæŋkli, aɪ wɑz sɝpɹaɪz jə keɪm wən i kɔld. aɪv sin ɪm wɑtʃɪŋ ju. aɪ fɪɹ i plænz sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ . . . ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ . . . fəɹ jə ðən θɹæʃɪŋ jəɹ hilz ɑn ðə flɔɹ waɪl ɪz fɪŋɡɝz taɪɾən ɑn jəɹ θɹoʊt."

Gedwyn's icily murderous gaze did not change, but Weiramon's face underwent a remarkable transformation. The red faded slowly as he produced a smile in an instant, an oily smile with only a trace of mocking condescension. "I've been thinking about you, Bertome," he said heartily. "A pity al'Thor strangled your cousin. With his own hands, I hear. Frankly, I was surprised you came when he called. I've seen him watching you. I fear he plans something more . . . interesting . . . for you than thrashing your heels on the floor while his fingers tighten on your throat."

bɝtoʊm səpɹɛst ə saɪ, ən nɑɾ oʊnli ət ðə fulz klʌmzinəs. ə ɡʊd mɛni θɔt tə mənɪpjəleɪɾ ɪm wɪð koʊləveɪɪɹz dɛθ. ʃi hæd bɪn ɪz feɪvɹɪt kʌzən, bʌɾ æmbɪʃəs bɪɑn ɹizən. seɪɡən hæd ɡʊd kleɪmz tə ðə sʌn θɹoʊn, jɛt ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv hɛld ɪɾ əɡɛns ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ə ɹieɪɾən əɹ dəmədʒɹɾ iðɝ wʌn, lɛɾ əloʊn boʊθ təɡɛðɝ, nɑt wɪθaʊt ði oʊpən blɛsɪŋz ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ əɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. stɪl, ʃi hæd bɪn ɪz feɪvɹɪt. wʌd wɪɹɑmɑn wɑnt? sɝɾənli nɑt wʌɾ ɪt simd ɑn ðə sɝfəs. ivən ðɪs tɛɹən ɑf wɑz nɑt ðət sɪmpəl.

Bertome suppressed a sigh, and not only at the fool's clumsiness. A good many thought to manipulate him with Colavaere's death. She had been his favorite cousin, but ambitious beyond reason. Saighan had good claims to the Sun Throne, yet she could not have held it against the strength of Riatin or Damodred either one, let alone both together, not without the open blessings of the White Tower or the Dragon Reborn. Still, she had been his favorite. What did Weiramon want? Certainly not what it seemed on the surface. Even this Tairen oaf was not that simple.

bɪfɔɹ i kəd fɹeɪm ɛni ɹɪspɑns, ə hɔɹsmən keɪm ɡæləpɪŋ təwɔɹɾ əm θɹu ðə tʃɹiz əhɛd. eɪ kɛɹhinɪn, ən əz i ɹeɪn tə ə sʌɾən hɔlt ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm, ðət meɪɾ ɪz hɔɹs sɪt bæk ɑn ɪts hɔntʃɪz, bɝtoʊm ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd wʌn ə hɪz oʊn ɑɹmmɪn, ə ɡæp-tuθ fɛloʊ wɪð sim skɑɹz ɑn boʊθ tʃiks. dɔɪl, hi θɔt. fɹəm ðə koʊltʃeɪn ɪsteɪts.

Before he could frame any response, a horseman came galloping toward them through the trees ahead. A Cairhienin, and as he reined to a sudden halt in front of them, that made his horse sit back on its haunches, Bertome recognized one of his own armsmen, a gap-toothed fellow with seamed scars on both cheeks. Doile, he thought. From the Colchaine estates.

"maɪ lɔɹd bɝtoʊm," ðə fɛloʊ pæntɪd, boʊɪŋ heɪstəli. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ tu θaʊzən tæɹɑbənɝz hɑɹɾ ɑn maɪ hilz. ən wɪmən wɪð ðɛm! wɪð laɪtnɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ dʒɹɛsəz!"

"My Lord Bertome," the fellow panted, bowing hastily. "There are two thousand Taraboners hard on my heels. And women with them! With lightning on their dresses!"

"hɑɹɾ ɑn ɪz hilz," wɪɹɑmɑn mɝmɝd dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋli. "wil si wʌt maɪ mæn əz tə seɪ wən i ɡɛts bæk. aɪ sɝɾənli doʊn si ɛni - !"

"Hard on his heels," Weiramon murmured disparagingly. "We'll see what my man has to say when he gets back. I certainly don't see any - !"

sʌɾən wups ɪn ðə nɪɹ dɪstəns əhɛd kʌɾ ɪm ɔf, ən ðə θʌndɝ ə hʊvz, ən ðən kwɪkli ɡæləpɪŋ lænsɝz əpɪɹd, ə floʊɪŋ taɪd spɹɛɾɪŋ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz. stʃɹeɪt təwɔɹd bɝtoʊm ən ði ʌðɝz.

Sudden whoops in the near distance ahead cut him off, and the thunder of hooves, and then quickly galloping lancers appeared, a flowing tide spreading through the trees. Straight toward Bertome and the others.

wɪɹɑmɑn læft. "kɪl huɛvɝ jə wɪʃ, wɛɹɛvɝ jə wɪʃ, dʒɛdwɪn," hi sɛd, dʒɹɔɪŋ sɔɹd wɪð ə flɝɪʃ. "aɪ juz ðə mɛθədz aɪ jus, ən ðæts ðæt!" ɹeɪsɪŋ bæk təwɔɹɾ ɪz ɑɹmmɪn, hi weɪv ðə bleɪɾ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd ʃaʊɾɪŋ, "sɑniəɡoʊ! sɑniəɡoʊ ən ɡlɔɹi!" ɪt wɑz noʊ sɝpɹaɪz i dɪd nɑɾ æɾ ə ʃaʊt fəɹ ɪz kʌntʃɹi tə ðoʊz fəɹ ɪz haʊs ən ɪz ɡɹeɪɾəst lʌv.

Weiramon laughed. "Kill whoever you wish, wherever you wish, Gedwyn," he said, drawing sword with a flourish. "I use the methods I use, and that's that!" Racing back toward his armsmen, he waved the blade over his head shouting, "Saniago! Saniago and glory!" It was no surprise he did not add a shout for his country to those for his House and his greatest love.

spɝɪŋ ɪn ðə seɪm dɝɛkʃən, bɝtoʊm ɹeɪzd ɪz oʊn vɔɪs. "seɪɡən ən kɛɹhin!" noʊ nid fəɹ sɔɹd weɪvɪŋ jɛt. "seɪɡən ən kɛɹhin!" wʌt hæd ðə mæn bɪn æftɝ?

Spurring in the same direction, Bertome raised his own voice. "Saighan and Cairhien!" No need for sword waving yet. "Saighan and Cairhien!" What had the man been after?

θʌndɝ ɹʌmbəld, ən bɝtoʊm lʊk tə ðə skaɪ, pɝplɛkst. ðəɹ wɝ fju mɔɹ klaʊdz ðən ɝliɝ. noʊ; dɔɪl - dælɪn? - hæd mɛnʃən ðoʊz wɪmən. ən ðən i fɝɡɑɾ ɔl əbaʊt wʌtɛvɝ ðə ful tɛɹən wɑntəɾ əz stil-veɪl tæɹɑbənɝz pɔɹɾ oʊvɝ ðə wʊɾɪd hɪlz təwɔɹd hɪm, ði ɝθ blumɪŋ faɪɝ ən ðə skaɪ ɹeɪnɪŋ laɪtnɪŋ əhɛɾ ə ðɛm.

Thunder rumbled, and Bertome looked to the sky, perplexed. There were few more clouds than earlier. No; Doile - Dalyn? - had mentioned those women. And then he forgot all about whatever the fool Tairen wanted as steel-veiled Taraboners poured over the wooded hills toward him, the earth blooming fire and the sky raining lightning ahead of them.

"seɪɡən ən kɛɹhin!" hi ʃaʊɾəd.

"Saighan and Cairhien!" he shouted.

ðə wɪn ɹoʊz.

The wind rose.

hɔɹsmən klæʃt əmɪd θɪk tʃɹiz ən hɛvi ʌndɝbɹʌʃ, wɛɹ ʃædoʊz hʌŋ hɛvəli. ðə laɪt sim tə bi feɪlɪŋ, ðə klaʊdz θɪkənɪŋ oʊvɝhɛd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə seɪ wɪð ðə dɛns fɔɹəs kænəpi fəɹ ə ɹuf. bumɪŋ ɹɔɹz hæf-dʒɹaʊn ðə ɹɪŋ ə stil ɑn stil, ðə ʃaʊts ə mɛn, ðə skɹimz ə hɔɹsəz. səmtaɪmz ðə ɡɹaʊnd ʃʊk. səmtaɪmz ði ɛnəmi ɹeɪzd ʃaʊts.

Horsemen clashed amid thick trees and heavy underbrush, where shadows hung heavily. The light seemed to be failing, the clouds thickening overhead, but it was hard to say with the dense forest canopy for a roof. Booming roars half-drowned the ring of steel on steel, the shouts of men, the screams of horses. Sometimes the ground shook. Sometimes the enemy raised shouts.

"dɛn lʌʃɪnoʊz! dɛn lʌʃɪnoʊz ən ðə biz!"

"Den Lushenos! Den Lushenos and the Bees!"

ænælɪn! ɹæli tə ænælɪn!"

Annallin! Rally to Annallin!"

"hɛlɪn! hɛlɪn! fəɹ ðə haɪ lɔɹd sunəmən!"

"Haellin! Haellin! For the High Lord Sunamon!"

ðə læst wɑz ði oʊnli kɹaɪ vɑɹɛk ʌndɝstʊɾ ɪn ðə list, ðoʊ hi səspɛktəɾ ɛni ʌv ðə loʊkəlz u neɪm ðɛmsɛlvz haɪ lɔɹdz əɹ leɪɾiz maɪt nɑt bi ɔfɝd ðə tʃæns tə swɛɹ ði oʊθ.

The last was the only cry Varek understood in the least, though he suspected any of the locals who named themselves High Lords or Ladies might not be offered the chance to swear the Oath.

hi dʒɝkt ɪz sɔɹd fɹi fɹəm wɛɹ i hæd dʒæmd ɪɾ ɪndə hɪz əpoʊnəns ɑɹmpɪt, dʒʌst əbʌv ðə bɹɛstpleɪt, ən lɛt ðə peɪl lɪɾəl mæn tɑpəl. ə deɪnʒɝəs faɪɾɝ, əntɪl i meɪd ðə mɪsteɪk ə ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz bleɪd tu haɪ. ðə mænz beɪ kɹæʃt ɔf θɹu ði ʌndɝɡɹoʊθ, ən vɑɹɛk spɛɹɾ ə moʊmən fəɹ ɹəɡɹɛt. ði ænəməl lʊk bɛɾɝ ðən ðə waɪt-fʊɾɪd dʌn i wɑz fɔɹs tə ɹaɪd. ə moʊmən oʊnli, ən ðən i wɑz piɹɪŋ θɹu ðə kloʊs-sɛt tʃɹiz, wɛɹ ɪt sim vaɪnz dæŋɡəl fɹəm hæf ðə bɹæntʃəz ən bʌntʃəz ə səm ɡɹeɪ, fɛðɝi plæn fɹəm nɪɹli ɔl.

He jerked his sword free from where he had jammed it into his opponent's armpit, just above the breastplate, and let the pale little man topple. A dangerous fighter, until he made the mistake of raising his blade too high. The man's bay crashed off through the undergrowth, and Varek spared a moment for regret. The animal looked better than the white-footed dun he was forced to ride. A moment only, and then he was peering through the close-set trees, where it seemed vines dangled from half the branches and bunches of some gray, feathery plant from nearly all.

saʊnz ə bæɾəl ɹoʊz fɹəm ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən, bʌɾ ət fɝst i kəd si nʌθɪŋ ðət muvd. ðən ə dʌzən ɔltɑɹən lænsɝz əpɪɹɾ ət fɪfti peɪsɪz, wɔkɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ən piɹɪŋ əbaʊt kɛɹfəli, ðoʊ ðə weɪ ðeɪ tɔk laʊdli əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz mɔɹ ðən dʒʌstəfaɪd ðə ɹɛd slæʃɪz kɹɪskɹɔsɪŋ ðɛɹ bɹɛstpleɪts. vɑɹɛk ɡæðɝɾ ɪz ɹeɪnz, minɪŋ tə teɪk əm ɪn. ən ɛskɔɹt, ivən ðɪs əndɪsɪplɪn ɹæbəl, maɪt bi ðə dɪfɝəns bɪtwin ði ɝdʒən mɛsədʒ i kæɹid ɹitʃɪŋ bænɝ-dʒɛnɝəl kiænməaɪ ən nɑt.

Sounds of battle rose from every direction, but at first he could see nothing that moved. Then a dozen Altaran lancers appeared at fifty paces, walking their horses and peering about carefully, though the way they talked loudly among themselves more than justified the red slashes crisscrossing their breastplates. Varek gathered his reins, meaning to take them in. An escort, even this undisciplined rabble, might be the difference between the urgent message he carried reaching Banner-General Chianmai and not.

blæk stʃɹiks flæʃt fɹəm əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz, ɛmptiɪŋ ɔltɑɹən sæɾəlz. ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz dæʃt ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən əz ðə ɹaɪɾɝz fɛl, ən ðən ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli ə dʌzən kɔɹpsəz spɹɔld ɑn ðə dæmp kɑɹpəɾ ə dɛd livz, ət list wʌn kɹɔsboʊ boʊl dʒʌɾɪŋ fɹəm ɛvɹi mæn. nʌθɪŋ muvd. vɑɹɛk ʃɪvɝɾ ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf. ðoʊz fʊɾ ɪn blu koʊts hæd simd izi ət fɝst, wɪð noʊ paɪks tə stæn bɪhaɪnd, bʌt ðeɪ nɛvɝ keɪm ɪndə ði oʊpən, haɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn tʃɹiz, ɪn dɪps ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ðə wɝst. hi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ æftɝ ðə fɹæntɪk ɹitʃɹit tə ðə ʃɪps ət fɑlm ðəɾ i hæd sin ðə wɝs i ɛvɝ kəd si, ði ɛvɝ vɪktɔɹiəs ɑɹmi ɪn ə ɹaʊt. nɑt hæf ən aʊɝ ɡɔn, ðoʊ, hi hæd sin ə hʌnʒɹəd tæɹɑbənɝz feɪs wʌn loʊn mæn ɪn ə blæk koʊt. ə hʌnʒɹəd lænsɝz əɡɛnst wʌn, ən ðə tæɹɑbənɝz hæd bɪn ɹɪp tə ʃɹɛdz. lɪɾɝəli ɹɪp tə ʃɹɛdz, mɛn ən hɔɹsəz sɪmpli ɪksploʊɾɪŋ əz fæst i kəd kaʊnt; ðə slɔɾɝ hæd kəntɪnjuɾ æftɝ ðə tæɹɑbənɝz tɝn tə fli, wɛn ɑn soʊ lɔŋ əz wʌn ə ðɛm ɹɪmeɪn ɪn saɪt. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz ɹɪli noʊ wɝs ðən hævɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪɹʌp bɪniθ jəɹ fit, bʌɾ ət lis deɪmeɪn juʒəwəli lɛft ɪnʌf ə jə tə bi bɛɹid.

Black streaks flashed from among the trees, emptying Altaran saddles. Their horses dashed in every direction as the riders fell, and then there were only a dozen corpses sprawled on the damp carpet of dead leaves, at least one crossbow bolt jutting from every man. Nothing moved. Varek shivered in spite of himself. Those foot in blue coats had seemed easy at first, with no pikes to stand behind, but they never came into the open, hiding behind trees, in dips in the ground. They were not the worst. He had been sure after the frantic retreat to the ships at Falme that he had seen the worse he ever could see, the Ever Victorious Army in a rout. Not half an hour gone, though, he had seen a hundred Taraboners face one lone man in a black coat. A hundred lancers against one, and the Taraboners had been ripped to shreds. Literally ripped to shreds, men and horses simply exploding as fast he could count; the slaughter had continued after the Taraboners turned to flee, went on so long as one of them remained in sight. Perhaps it was really no worse than having the ground erupt beneath your feet, but at least damane usually left enough of you to be buried.

hi hæd bɪn toʊl baɪ ðə læs mæn i mænədʒ tə spik tə ɪn ðiz wʊdz, ə ɡɹɪzəl vɛɾɝən fɹəm hoʊm liɾɪŋ ə hʌnʒɹəd ɑmɑdɪʃən paɪks, ðət kiænməaɪ wɑz ɪn ðɪs dɝɛkʃən. əhɛd, hi spɑɾəd ɹaɪɾɝləs hɔɹsəz taɪd tə tʃɹiz, ən mɛn əfʊt. meɪbi ðeɪ kəd ɡɪv ɪm fɝðɝ dɝɛkʃən. ən i wəd ɡɪv əm ðə læʃ ə hɪz tʌŋ fəɹ stændɪŋ əbaʊt waɪl ə bæɾəl ɹeɪdʒd.

He had been told by the last man he managed to speak to in these woods, a grizzled veteran from home leading a hundred Amadician pikes, that Chianmai was in this direction. Ahead, he spotted riderless horses tied to trees, and men afoot. Maybe they could give him further direction. And he would give them the lash of his tongue for standing about while a battle raged.

wən i ɹoʊɾ ɪn əmʌŋ ðɛm, hi fɝɡɑt tʌŋ-læʃɪŋz. hi hæd faʊnd wʌɾ i wɑz lʊkɪŋ fɔɹ, bʌt nɑɾ əɾ ɔl wʌɾ i wɑntəd tə faɪnd. ə dʌzən bædli bɝn kɔɹpsəz leɪ ɪn ə ɹoʊ. wʌn, hɪz hʌni-bɹaʊn feɪs əntʌtʃt, wɑz ɹɛkəɡnaɪzəbli kiænməaɪ. ðə mɛn ɑn ðɛɹ fit wɝ ɔl tæɹɑbənɝz, ɑmɑdɪʃənz, ɔltɑɹənz. səm ə ðɛm wɝ ɪnʒɝd, tu. ði oʊnli sintʃæn wɑz ə taɪt-feɪst sʌldəm suðɪŋ ə wipɪŋ deɪmeɪn.

When he rode in among them, he forgot tongue-lashings. He had found what he was looking for, but not at all what he wanted to find. A dozen badly burned corpses lay in a row. One, his honey-brown face untouched, was recognizably Chianmai. The men on their feet were all Taraboners, Amadicians, Altarans. Some of them were injured, too. The only Seanchan was a tight-faced sul'dam soothing a weeping damane.

"wʌt hæpən hɪɹ?" vɑɹɛk dɪmændəd. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt wɑz laɪk ðiz æʃəmən tə liv sɝvaɪvɝz. meɪbi ðə sʌldəm hæd fɔɾ ɪm ɔf.

"What happened here?" Varek demanded. He did not think it was like these Asha'man to leave survivors. Maybe the sul'dam had fought him off.

"mædnəs, maɪ lɔɹd." ə hʌlkɪŋ tæɹɑbənɝ ʃɹʌɡd əweɪ ðə mæn u wɑz spɹɛɾɪŋ ɔɪnmənt daʊn ɪz sɪɹd lɛft ɑɹm. ðə sliv əpɪɹd tə hæv bɪn bɝn əweɪ klɪɹ tə ðə fɛloʊz bɹɛstpleɪt, jɛt dɪspaɪɾ ɪz bɝnz, hi dɪd nɑt ɡɹɪmɑs. hɪz veɪl ə stil meɪl hʌŋ baɪ ə kɔɹnɝ fɹəm ɪz ɹɛd-plum kɑnɪkəl hɛlmət, bɛɹɪŋ ə hɑɹd feɪs wɪð θɪk ɡɹeɪ mʌstæʃɪz ðət nɪɹli hɪɾ ɪz maʊθ, ən ɪz aɪz wɝ ɪnsʌltɪŋli dɝɛkt. "ə ɡɹup ʌv ɪliɑnɝz, ðeɪ fɛl ɑn əs wɪθaʊt wɔɹnɪŋ. ət fɝst, ɔl wɛnt wɛl. ðeɪ hæd nʌn ə ðə blækoʊts wɪð ðɛm. lɔɹd kiænməaɪ, hi lɛɾ əs bɹeɪvli, ən ðə . . . ðə wʊmən . . . tʃænəld laɪtnɪŋz. ðɛn, dʒʌst əz ði ɪliɑnɝz bɹoʊk, ðə laɪtnɪŋz, ðeɪ fɛl əmʌŋ ʌs, tu." hi kʌɾ ɔf wɪð ə səɡnɪfɪkən lʊk ət ðə sʌldəm.

"Madness, my lord." A hulking Taraboner shrugged away the man who was spreading ointment down his seared left arm. The sleeve appeared to have been burned away clear to the fellow's breastplate, yet despite his burns, he did not grimace. His veil of steel mail hung by a corner from his red-plumed conical helmet, baring a hard face with thick gray mustaches that nearly hid his mouth, and his eyes were insultingly direct. "A group of Illianers, they fell on us without warning. At first, all went well. They had none of the blackcoats with them. Lord Chianmai, he led us bravely, and the . . . the woman . . . channeled lightnings. Then, just as the Illianers broke, the lightnings, they fell among us, too." He cut off with a significant look at the sul'dam.

ʃi wɑz ɑn əɹ fiɾ ɪn ən ɪnstənt, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ fɹi fɪst ən stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əz fɑɹ təwɔɹd ðə tæɹɑbənɝ əz ðə liʃ ətætʃt tə hɝ ʌðɝ ɹɪst wəɾ əlaʊ. hɝ deɪmeɪn leɪ ɪn ə wipɪŋ hip. "aɪ wɪl nɑt hɪɹ ðɪs dɔɡz wɝdz əɡɛns maɪ zækɑi! ʃiz ə ɡʊd deɪmeɪn! ə ɡʊd deɪmeɪn!"

She was on her feet in an instant, shaking her free fist and striding as far toward the Taraboner as the leash attached to her other wrist would allow. Her damane lay in a weeping heap. "I will not hear this dog's words against my Zakai! She is a good damane! A good damane!"

vɑɹɛk meɪd suðɪŋ dʒɛstʃɝz tə ðə wʊmən. hi hæd sin sʌldəm meɪk ðɛɹ tʃɑɹdʒəz haʊl fəɹ mɪsdidz, ən ə fju hu kɹɪpəl ðə ɹɪkælsɪtʃɹənt, bʌt moʊst wəd bɹɪsəl ivən ət wʌn ə ðə blʌɾ u kæst əspɝʒənz ɑn ə feɪvɹɪt. ðɪs tæɹɑbənɝ wɑz nɑɾ ə ðə blʌd, ən baɪ ðə lʊk ə ðə kwɪvɝɪŋ sʌldəm, ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə də mɝɾɝ. hæd ðə mæn vɔɪst ɪz ɹɪdɪkjələs, ənspoʊkən tʃɑɹdʒ, vɑɹɛk θɔt ʃi maɪɾ əv kɪld ɪm ɑn ðə spɑt.

Varek made soothing gestures to the woman. He had seen sul'dam make their charges howl for misdeeds, and a few who crippled the recalcitrant, but most would bristle even at one of the Blood who cast aspersions on a favorite. This Taraboner was not of the Blood, and by the look of the quivering sul'dam, she was ready to do murder. Had the man voiced his ridiculous, unspoken charge, Varek thought she might have killed him on the spot.

"pɹɛɹz fəɹ ðə dɛd mʌst weɪt," vɑɹɛk sɛd blʌnli. wʌɾ i wɑz əbaʊt tə də wəɾ ɛnd wɪð ɪm ɪn ðə hænz ə ðə sikɝz, ɪf i feɪld, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ə sintʃæn lɛf stændɪŋ hɪɹ ɪksɛp ðə sʌldəm. "aɪ æm əsumɪŋ kəmænd. wɪl dɪsɪnɡeɪdʒ ən tɝn saʊθ."

"Prayers for the dead must wait," Varek said bluntly. What he was about to do would end with him in the hands of the Seekers, if he failed, but there was not a Seanchan left standing here except the sul'dam. "I am assuming command. We will disengage and turn south."

"dɪsɪnɡeɪdʒ!" ðə hɛvi-ʃoʊldɝd tæɹɑbənɝ bɑɹkt. "ɪt wɪl teɪk əs deɪz tə dɪsɪnɡeɪdʒ! ði ɪliɑnɝz, ðeɪ faɪt laɪk bædʒɝz bækt ɪndə ə kɔɹnɝ, ðə kɛɹhinɪn laɪk fɛɹəts ɪn ə bɑks. ðə tɛɹənz, ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt soʊ hɑɹɾ əz aɪ hæv hɝd, bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ meɪbi ə dʌzən ə ðiz æʃəmən, jɛs? aɪ də nɑɾ ivən noʊ wɛɹ θɹi-kɔɹɾɝz ə maɪ mɛn ɑɹ, ɪn ðɪs dʒɑli-bæɡ!" ɛmboʊldən baɪ hɪz ɪɡzæmpəl, ði ʌðɝz bɪɡæn ɡɪvɪŋ pɹoʊɾɛst, tu.

"Disengage!" the heavy-shouldered Taraboner barked. "It will take us days to disengage! The Illianers, they fight like badgers backed into a corner, the Cairhienin like ferrets in a box. The Tairens, they are not so hard as I have heard, but there are maybe a dozen of these Asha'man, yes? I do not even know where three-quarters of my men are, in this jolly-bag!" Emboldened by his example, the others began giving protest, too.

vɑɹɛk ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛm. ən fɔɹbɹ æskɪŋ wʌɾ ə "dʒɑli-bæɡ" wɑz; lʊkɪŋ ət ðə tæŋɡəl fɔɹəst ɔl ɝaʊnd, lɪsnɪŋ tə ðə klæʃ ə bæɾəl, ðə bumz ʌv ɪksploʊʒənz ən laɪtnɪŋz, hi kəɾ ɪmædʒən. "ju wɪl ɡæðɝ jəɹ mɛn ən bɪɡɪn pʊlɪŋ bæk," hi sɛd laʊdli, kʌɾɪŋ θɹu ðɛɹ tʃæɾɝ. "nɑt tu fæst; jəl ækt ɪn junəsən." mɪɹaɪz ɔɹɾɝz tə kiænməaɪ sɛd "wɪð ɔl pɑsəbəl spid" - hi hæd mɛmɝaɪz ðɛm, ɪn keɪs sʌmθɪŋ hæpən tə ðə kɑpi ɪn ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz - "ɔl pɑsəbəl spid," bʌt tu mʌtʃ spiɾ ɪn ðɪs, ən hæf ðə mɛn wəd bi lɛf bɪhaɪnd, tʃɑp tə flɪndɝz ət ði ɛnəmiz lɛʒɝ. "naʊ, muv! jə faɪt fəɹ ði ɛmpɹɛs, meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ!"

Varek ignored them. And forbore asking what a "jolly-bag" was; looking at the tangled forest all around, listening to the clash of battle, the booms of explosions and lightnings, he could imagine. "You will gather your men and begin pulling back," he said loudly, cutting through their chatter. "Not too fast; you will act in unison." Miraj's orders to Chianmai said "with all possible speed" - he had memorized them, in case something happened to the copy in his saddlebags - "all possible speed," but too much speed in this, and half the men would be left behind, chopped to flinders at the enemy's leisure. "Now, move! You fight for the Empress, may she live forever!"

ðət læst wɑz ðə sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ jə toʊl fɹɛʃ ɹəkɹuts, bʌt fəɹ səm ɹizən, ðə lɪsnɪŋ mɛn dʒɝkt əz ɪf i hæd stʃɹʌk əm ɔl wɪð ɪz kwɝt. boʊɪŋ kwɪkli ən dipli, hænz ɑn niz, ðeɪ ɔl bʌt flu tə ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz. stʃɹeɪnʒ. naʊ ɪt wɑz ʌp tə hɪm tə faɪn ðə sintʃæn junəts. wʌn ə ðoʊz wəd bi kəmændəd baɪ sʌmwʌn əbʌv hɪm, ən i kəd pæs ɪz ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi.

That last was the sort of thing you told fresh recruits, but for some reason, the listening men jerked as if he had struck them all with his quirt. Bowing quickly and deeply, hands on knees, they all but flew to their horses. Strange. Now it was up to him to find the Seanchan units. One of those would be commanded by someone above him, and he could pass his responsibility.

ðə sʌldəm wɑz ɑn əɹ niz, stʃɹoʊkɪŋ əɹ stɪl wipɪŋ deɪmeɪnz hɛɹ ən kɹunɪŋ sɔfli. "ɡɛɾ əɹ suð daʊn," hi toʊl hɝ. wɪð ɔl pɑsəbəl spid. ən i θɔɾ i hæd sin ə tʌtʃ ʌv æŋzaɪəɾi ɪn mɪɹaɪz aɪz. wʌt kəd meɪk kɛnɝ mɪɹaɪ æŋkʃəs? "aɪ θɪŋk wɪl bi dɪpɛndɪŋ ɑn jə sʌldəm tə ðə saʊθ." naʊ, waɪ wəd ðət meɪk ðə blʌd dʒɹeɪn fɹəm əɹ feɪs?

The sul'dam was on her knees, stroking her still weeping damane's hair and crooning softly. "Get her soothed down," he told her. With all possible speed. And he thought he had seen a touch of anxiety in Miraj's eyes. What could make Kennar Miraj anxious? "I think we will be depending on you sul'dam to the south." Now, why would that make the blood drain from her face?

bæʃɪɹ stʊd dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ði ɛdʒ ə ðə tʃɹiz, fɹaʊnɪŋ θɹu hɪz hɛlməts feɪs-bɑɹz ət wʌɾ i sɔ. hɪz beɪ nʌzəld ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. hi hɛld ɪz kloʊk kloʊs əɡɛns ðə wɪnd. mɔɹ tə əvɔɪɾ ɛni moʊʃən ðət wəd dʒɹɔ aɪz ðən fəɹ ðə koʊld, ðoʊ ðət tʃɪld ɪz flɛʃ. ɪt wʊɾə bɪn ə spɹɪŋ bɹiz bæk ɪn sɑldɑiə, bʌt mʌnθs ɪn ðə saʊθlənz hæd sɔfən hɪm. ʃaɪnɪŋ bɹaɪt bɪtwin ɡɹeɪ klaʊdz ðət seɪld əlɔŋ kwɪkli, ðə sʌn stɪl leɪ ə lɪɾəl ʃɔɹɾ ə mɪddeɪ. ən əhɛɾ ə hɪm. dʒʌs kəz jə bɪɡæn ə bæɾəl feɪsɪŋ wɛs dɪd nɑt min jə ɛndəɾ ɪt ðət weɪ. bɪfɔɹ ɪm leɪ ə bɹɔd pæstʃɝ wɛɹ flɑks ə blæk-ænd-waɪt ɡoʊts kɹɑpt ət ðə bɹaʊn ɡɹæs ɪn dɛsəltɔɹi fæʃən dʒʌst əz ɪf ðəɹ wɑz noʊ bæɾəl ɹeɪdʒɪŋ ɔl ɝaʊn ðɛm. nɑt ðət ðəɹ wɑz ɛni saɪn ʌv ɪt hɪɹ. fəɹ ðə moʊmənt. ə mæn kəd ɡɛt hɪmsɛlf kʌt tə dɑl ɹæɡz kɹɔsɪŋ ðət mɛdoʊ. ən ɪn ðə tʃɹiz, wɛðɝ fɔɹəst əɹ ɑləv ɡɹoʊvz əɹ θɪkəts, jə dɪd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz si ði ɛnəmi bɪfɔɹ jə wɝ ɑn tɑp ə hɪm, skaʊts əɹ noʊ skaʊts.

Bashere stood just inside the edge of the trees, frowning through his helmet's face-bars at what he saw. His bay nuzzled his shoulder. He held his cloak close against the wind. More to avoid any motion that would draw eyes than for the cold, though that chilled his flesh. It would have been a spring breeze back in Saldaea, but months in the southlands had softened him. Shining bright between gray clouds that sailed along quickly, the sun still lay a little short of midday. And ahead of him. Just because you began a battle facing west did not mean you ended it that way. Before him lay a broad pasture where flocks of black-and-white goats cropped at the brown grass in desultory fashion just as if there was no battle raging all around them. Not that there was any sign of it here. For the moment. A man could get himself cut to doll rags crossing that meadow. And in the trees, whether forest or olive groves or thickets, you did not always see the enemy before you were on top of him, scouts or no scouts.

"ɪf wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə kɹɔs," ɡəm mʌɾɝd, ɹʌbɪŋ ə waɪd hæn oʊvɝ ɪz bɔl hɛd, "wi ʃəd kɹɔs. laɪts tʃɹuθ, wɝ weɪstɪŋ taɪm." əmənʒɹɪd snæpt ɪz maʊθ ʃʌt; laɪkli, ðə mun-feɪs kɛɹhinɪn hæd bɪn əbaʊt tə seɪ mʌtʃ ðə seɪm θɪŋ. hi wəɾ əɡɹi wɪð ə tɛɹən wən hɔɹsəz klaɪm tʃɹiz.

"If we're going to cross," Gueyam muttered, rubbing a wide hand over his bald head, "we should cross. Light's truth, we're wasting time." Amondrid snapped his mouth shut; likely, the moon-faced Cairhienin had been about to say much the same thing. He would agree with a Tairen when horses climbed trees.

dʒɛɹdwɪn səmɛɝɪs snɔɹɾɪd. ðə mæn ʃʊɾə ɡɹoʊn ə bɪɹd tə haɪd ðət nɛɹoʊ dʒɔ. ɪt meɪɾ ɪz hɛd lʊk laɪk ə fɔɹəstɝz splɪɾɪŋ wɛdʒ. "aɪ də seɪ ɡoʊ ɝaʊnd," hi mʌɾɝd. "aɪv lɔst ɪnʌf mɛn tə ðoʊz laɪt-kɝs deɪmeɪn, ən . . ." hi tʃɹeɪld ɔf wɪð ən ənizi ɡlæns təwɔɹd ɹɑtʃeɪd.

Jeordwyn Semaris snorted. The man should have grown a beard to hide that narrow jaw. It made his head look like a forester's splitting wedge. "I do say go around," he muttered. "I've lost enough men to those Light-cursed damane, and . . ." He trailed off with an uneasy glance toward Rochaid.

ðə jʌŋ æʃəmən stʊd baɪ hɪmsɛlf, maʊθ taɪt, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðət dʒɹæɡən pɪn ɑn ɪz kɑlɝ. meɪbi wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz wɝθ ɪt, baɪ ðə lʊk ə hɪm. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ noʊɪŋ ɛɹ əbaʊt ðə bɔɪ naʊ, oʊnli fɹaʊnɪŋ wɝi.

The young Asha'man stood by himself, mouth tight, fingering that Dragon pin on his collar. Maybe wondering whether it was worth it, by the look of him. There was no knowing air about the boy now, only frowning worry.

liɾɪŋ kwɪk baɪ ðə ɹeɪnz, bæʃɪɹ stʃɹoʊd tə ði æʃəmən ən dʒɹu hɪm fɑɹðɝ əsaɪɾ ɪn ðə tʃɹiz. pʊʃt ɪm fɑɹðɝ əsaɪd. ɹɑtʃeɪd skaʊld, ɡoʊɪŋ ɹɪlʌktənli. ðə mæn wɑz tɔl ɪnʌf tə lum oʊvɝ bæʃɪɹ, bʌt bæʃɪɹ wɑz hævɪŋ nʌn ʌv ɪt.

Leading Quick by the reins, Bashere strode to the Asha'man and drew him farther aside in the trees. Pushed him farther aside. Rochaid scowled, going reluctantly. The man was tall enough to loom over Bashere, but Bashere was having none of it.

"kæn aɪ kaʊn ɑn jəɹ pipəl nɛks taɪm?" bæʃɪɹ dɪmændəd, dʒɝkɪŋ ə mʌstæʃ ɪn ɪɹɪteɪʃən. "noʊ dɪleɪz?" ɹɑtʃeɪɾ ən ɪz fɛloʊz sim tə hæv ɡɹoʊn sloʊɝ ən sloʊɝ ɹɪspɑndɪŋ wən ðeɪ faʊn ðɛmsɛlvz ɑpəzət deɪmeɪn.

"Can I count on your people next time?" Bashere demanded, jerking a mustache in irritation. "No delays?" Rochaid and his fellows seemed to have grown slower and slower responding when they found themselves opposite damane.

"aɪ noʊ wʌɾ aɪm əbaʊt, bæʃɪɹ," ɹɑtʃeɪd snɑɹəld. "ɑɹənt wi kɪlɪŋ ɪnʌf ə ðɛm fəɹ ju? əz fɑɹ əz aɪ kən si, wɝ əbaʊt dʌn!"

"I know what I'm about, Bashere," Rochaid snarled. "Aren't we killing enough of them for you? As far as I can see, we're about done!"

bæʃɪɹ nɑɾəd sloʊli. nɑɾ ɪn əɡɹimənt wɪð ðə læst. ðəɹ wɝ plɛnti ʌv ɛnəmi soʊlʒɝz lɛft, ɔlmoʊst ɛniwɛɹ jə lʊk hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf. bʌɾ ə ɡʊd mɛni wɝ dɛd. hi hæd pæɾɝnd ɪz muvməns ɑn wʌɾ i hæd stʌɾid ə ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, wən ðə fɔɹsɪz ə ðə laɪt sɛldəm keɪm ɛniwɛɹ nɪɹ ðə nʌmbɝz ðeɪ hæd tə feɪs. slæʃ ət ðə flæŋks, ən ɹʌn. slæʃ ət ðə ɹɪɹ, ən ɹʌn. slæʃ, ən ɹʌn, ən wən ði ɛnəmi tʃeɪst æftɝ, tɝn ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn jə hæd tʃoʊzən bɪfɔɹhænd, wɛɹ ðə lidʒənmɛn leɪ weɪɾɪŋ wɪð ðɛɹ kɹɔsboʊz, tɝn ən kʌɾ əɾ ɪm əntɪl ɪt wɑz taɪm tə ɹʌn əɡɛn. əɹ əntɪl i bɹoʊk. ɔlɹɛɾi tədeɪ hi hæd bɹoʊkən tæɹɑbənɝz, ɑmɑdɪʃənz, ɔltɑɹənz ən ðiz sintʃæn ɪn ðɛɹ stʃɹeɪnʒ ɑɹmɝ. hi hæd sin mɔɹ ɛnəmi dɛd ðən ɪn ɛni faɪt sɪns ðə blʌd snoʊ. bʌɾ ɪf i hæɾ æʃəmən, ði ʌðɝ saɪd hæd ðoʊz deɪmeɪn. ə ɡʊd θɝɾ ə hɪz sɑldəiənz leɪ dɛɾ əlɔŋ ðə maɪlz bɪhaɪnd. nɪɹli hæf ɪz fɔɹs wɑz dɛd, ɔl toʊld, ən ðəɹ wɝ stɪl mɔɹ sintʃæn aʊt ðəɹ wɪð ðɛɹ kɝst wɪmən, ən tæɹɑbənɝz, ən ɑmɑdɪʃənz ən ɔltɑɹənz. ðeɪ dʒʌs kɛp kʌmɪŋ, mɔɹ əpɪɹɪŋ əz sun əz i fɪnɪʃt ðə læst. ən ði æʃəmən wɝ ɡɹoʊɪŋ . . . hɛzɪɾənt.

Bashere nodded slowly. Not in agreement with the last. There were plenty of enemy soldiers left, almost anywhere you looked hard enough. But a good many were dead. He had patterned his movements on what he had studied of the Trolloc Wars, when the forces of the Light seldom came anywhere near the numbers they had to face. Slash at the flanks, and run. Slash at the rear, and run. Slash, and run, and when the enemy chased after, turn on the ground you had chosen beforehand, where the legionmen lay waiting with their crossbows, turn and cut at him until it was time to run again. Or until he broke. Already today he had broken Taraboners, Amadicians, Altarans and these Seanchan in their strange armor. He had seen more enemy dead than in any fight since the Blood Snow. But if he had Asha'man, the other side had those damane. A good third of his Saldaeans lay dead along the miles behind. Nearly half his force was dead, all told, and there were still more Seanchan out there with their cursed women, and Taraboners, and Amadicians and Altarans. They just kept coming, more appearing as soon as he finished the last. And the Asha'man were growing . . . hesitant.

swɪŋɪŋ ɪndə kwɪks sæɾəl, hi ɹoʊd bæk tə dʒɛɹdwɪn ən ði ʌðɝz. "wi ɡoʊ ɝaʊnd," hi ɔɹɾɝd, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ dʒɛɹdwɪnz nɑdz əz mʌtʃ əz i dɪd ɡəm ən əmənʒɹɪdz skaʊlz. "tʃɹɪpəl skaʊts aʊt. aɪ min tə pʊʃ hɑɹd, bʌɾ aɪ doʊnt wɑnə tʃɹɪp oʊvɝ ə deɪmeɪn." noʊ wʌn læft.

Swinging into Quick's saddle, he rode back to Jeordwyn and the others. "We go around," he ordered, ignoring Jeordwyn's nods as much as he did Gueyam and Amondrid's scowls. "Triple scouts out. I mean to push hard, but I don't want to trip over a damane." No one laughed.

ɹɑtʃeɪd hæd ɡæðɝd ði ʌðɝ faɪv æʃəmən ɝaʊn hɪm, wʌn wɪð ə sɪlvɝ sɔɹd pɪn tə hɪz kɑlɝ, ði ʌðɝz wɪθaʊt. ðəɹ hæd bɪn tu mɔɹ wɪð bɛɹ kɑlɝz wən ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd aʊt ðət mɔɹnɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪf æʃəmən nu haʊ tə kɪl, soʊ dɪd deɪmeɪn. weɪvɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmz æŋɡɹəli, ɹɑtʃeɪɾ əpɪɹd tə bi ɑɹɡjuɪŋ wɪð ðɛm. hɪz feɪs wɑz ɹɛd, ðɛɹz blæŋk ən stʌbɝn. bæʃɪɹ dʒʌs hoʊpt ɹɑtʃeɪd kəd kip ɔl ə ðɛm fɹəm dɛzɝɾɪŋ. tədeɪ hæd bɪn kɑsli ɪnʌf wɪθaʊɾ æɾɪŋ ðət sɔɹɾ ə mæn wɑndɝɪŋ əbaʊt lus.

Rochaid had gathered the other five Asha'man around him, one with a silver sword pinned to his collar, the others without. There had been two more with bare collars when they started out that morning, but if Asha'man knew how to kill, so did damane. Waving his arms angrily, Rochaid appeared to be arguing with them. His face was red, theirs blank and stubborn. Bashere just hoped Rochaid could keep all of them from deserting. Today had been costly enough without adding that sort of man wandering about loose.

ə laɪt ɹeɪn fɛl. ɹænd skaʊld ət ðə θɪk blæk klaʊdz ɡæðɝɪŋ ðə skaɪ, ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə əbskjʊɹ ə peɪl sʌn hæfweɪ daʊn tə ðə fɑɹ hɝaɪzən. laɪt ɹeɪn naʊ, bʌɾ ɪt wəd θɪkən laɪk ðoʊz klaʊdz! ɪɹɪɾəbli hi ɹɪtɝn tə stʌɾiɪŋ ðə læn əhɛɾ ə hɪm. ðə kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz pɹɪkt ɪz tɛmpəlz. wɪð ðə paʊɝ ɪn hɪm, ðə lænd wɑz klɪɹ əz ə mæp dɪspaɪt ðə wɛðɝ. klɪɹ ɪnʌf, ɛniweɪ. hɪlz sɪŋkɪŋ əweɪ, səm kʌvɝd wɪð θɪkəts əɹ ɑləv tʃɹiz, ʌðɝz bɛɹ ɡɹæs əɹ dʒʌst stoʊn ən widz. hi θɔɾ i sɔ muvmən ət ði ɛdʒ ʌv ə kɑps, ðən əɡɛn əmʌŋ ðə ɹoʊz ʌv ən ɑləv ɔɹtʃɝɾ ɑn ənʌðɝ hɪl ə maɪl fɹəm ðə kɑps. θɪŋkɪŋ wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf. dɛd mɛn leɪ əkɹɔs ðə maɪlz bɪhaɪnd, dɛɾ ɛnəmiz. dɛd wɪmən, tu, hi nu, bʌɾ i hæd steɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm ɛniwɛɹ sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn hæd daɪd, ɹəfjuz tə si ðɛɹ feɪsəz. moʊs θɔɾ ɪt wɑz heɪtʃɹəd fəɹ ðoʊz u kɪl soʊ mɛni ʌv ɪz fɑloʊɝz.

A light rain fell. Rand scowled at the thick black clouds gathering the sky, already beginning to obscure a pale sun halfway down to the far horizon. Light rain now, but it would thicken like those clouds! Irritably he returned to studying the land ahead of him. The Crown of Swords pricked his temples. With the Power in him, the land was clear as a map despite the weather. Clear enough, anyway. Hills sinking away, some covered with thickets or olive trees, others bare grass or just stone and weeds. He thought he saw movement at the edge of a copse, then again among the rows of an olive orchard on another hill a mile from the copse. Thinking was not enough. Dead men lay across the miles behind, dead enemies. Dead women, too, he knew, but he had stayed away from anywhere sul'dam and damane had died, refused to see their faces. Most thought it was hatred for those who killed so many of his followers.

teɪdeɪʃɝ fɹɪskt ə fju stɛps ɑn ðə hɪltɑp bɪfɔɹ ɹænd sɛɾəld ɪm wɪð ə fɝm hæn ən ðə pɹɛʃɝ ə hɪz niz. ə faɪn θɪŋ ɪf ə sʌldəm spɑɾəd ɪz muvmənt. ðə fju tʃɹiz ɝaʊn ɪm wɝ nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə haɪd mʌtʃ. veɪɡli, hi ɹilaɪzd i dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ə wʌn ə ðɛm. teɪdeɪʃɝ tɔst ɪz hɛd. ɹænd tʌk ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ ɪndə hɪz sæɾəlbæɡz, dʒʌs ðə kɑɹv bʌɾ ɛn stɪkɪŋ aʊt, tə fɹi boʊθ hænz ɪn keɪs ðə ɡɛldɪŋ wɑz nɑt sæɾəsfaɪd. hi cʊɾə teɪkən wɪɹinəs fɹəm ðə hɔɹs wɪð seɪɾɪn, bʌɾ i nu noʊ weɪ tə meɪk ɪɾ oʊbeɪ wɪð ðə paʊɝ.

Tai'daishar frisked a few steps on the hilltop before Rand settled him with a firm hand and the pressure of his knees. A fine thing if a sul'dam spotted his movement. The few trees around him were not enough to hide much. Vaguely, he realized he did not recognize a one of them. Tai'daishar tossed his head. Rand tucked the Dragon Scepter into his saddlebags, just the carved butt end sticking out, to free both hands in case the gelding was not satisfied. He could have taken weariness from the horse with saidin, but he knew no way to make it obey with the Power.

hi kəd nɑt si haʊ ðə ɡɛldɪŋ ɹɪteɪn ɪnʌf ɛnɝdʒi. seɪɾɪn fɪl hɪm, bʌbəld ɪn hɪm, bʌɾ ɪz dɪstənli fɛl bɑɾi wɑntəd tə sæɡ wɪð wɪɹinəs. pɑɹɾ ə ðət wɑz ðə ʃɪɹ əmaʊn ə ðə paʊɝ i hæd hændəl tədeɪ. pɑɹt wɑz ðə stʃɹeɪn ə faɪɾɪŋ seɪɾɪn tə meɪk ɪt də wʌɾ i wɑntəd. ɔlweɪz, seɪɾɪn hæd tə bi kɑŋkɝd, fɔɹst, bʌt nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ laɪk tədeɪ. ðə hæf-hild, nɛvɝ-hilɪŋ wunz ɪn ɪz lɛf saɪd wɝ æɡəni, ði oʊldɝ ən ɔɡɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dʒɹɪl θɹu ðə vɔɪd, ðə nuɝ ə bleɪz ə ɹɔ fleɪm.

He could not see how the gelding retained enough energy. Saidin filled him, bubbled in him, but his distantly felt body wanted to sag with weariness. Part of that was the sheer amount of the Power he had handled today. Part was the strain of fighting saidin to make it do what he wanted. Always, saidin had to be conquered, forced, but never before like today. The half-healed, never-healing wounds in his left side were agony, the older an auger trying to drill through the Void, the newer a blaze of raw flame.

"ɪt wɑz ən æksəɾənt, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," ædli sɛd sʌɾənli. "aɪ swɛɹ ɪt wɑz!"

"It was an accident, my Lord Dragon," Adley said suddenly. "I swear it was!"

"ʃʌɾ ʌp ən wɑtʃ!" ɹænd toʊld ɪm hɑɹʃli. ædliz aɪz sæŋk tə hɪz hænz ɑn ɪz oʊn ɹeɪnz fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən i ɹeɪk dæmp hɛɹ aʊɾ ə hɪz feɪs ən dʒɝkt ɪz hɛɾ ʌp oʊbiɾiəntli.

"Shut up and watch!" Rand told him harshly. Adley's eyes sank to his hands on his own reins for a moment, then he raked damp hair out of his face and jerked his head up obediently.

tədeɪ, hɪɹ, kəntʃɹoʊlɪŋ seɪɾɪn wɑz hɑɹɾɝ ðən ɛvɝ, bʌt lɛɾɪŋ ɪt slɪp ɛnitaɪm, ɛniwɛɹ, kəd kɪl ju. ædli hæd lɛɾ ɪt slɪp, ən mɛn hæd daɪɾ ɪn ʌnkəntʃɹoʊl bɝsts ə faɪɝ, nɑt dʒʌs ði ɑmɑdɪʃənz i hæd bɪn eɪmɪŋ æt, bʌt nɪɹ θɝɾi ʌv eɪlɪlz ɑɹmmɪn ən ɔlmoʊst əz mɛni ʌv ænɑiɛləz.

Today, here, controlling saidin was harder than ever, but letting it slip anytime, anywhere, could kill you. Adley had let it slip, and men had died in uncontrolled bursts of fire, not just the Amadicians he had been aiming at, but near thirty of Ailil's armsmen and almost as many of Anaiyella's.

ɪksɛp fəɹ ɪz slɪp, ædli wʊɾə bɪn wɪð mɔɹ, wɪð ðə kəmpænjənz ɪn ðə wʊdz hæf ə maɪl tə ðə saʊθ. nɛɹɪʃmə ən hɑpwəl wɝ wɪð ðə dɪfɛndɝz, tə ðə nɔɹθ. ɹænd wɑntəɾ ædli ʌndɝ ɪz aɪ. hæɾ ɛni ʌðɝ "æksəɾənts" hæpənd, aʊɾ ə hɪz saɪt? hi kəd nɑt wɑtʃ ɛvɹiwʌn, ɔl ðə taɪm. flɪnz feɪs wɑz ɡɹɪm əz deɪ-oʊl dɛθ, ən dæʃivə, fɑɹ fɹəm lʊkɪŋ veɪɡ, simd ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə swɛɾɪŋ wɪð kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən. hi stɪl mʌɾɝd tə hɪmsɛlf ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, soʊ loʊ ɹænd kəd nɑt hɪɹ ivən wɪð ðə paʊɝ ɪn hɪm, bʌt ðə mæn mɑpt ɹeɪn fɹəm ɪz feɪs kəntɪnjuəli wɪð ə sɑɾən leɪs-ɛdʒ lɪnən hæŋkɝtʃɪf ðət hæd ɡɹoʊn mɔɹ ðən ɡɹaɪmi əz ðə deɪ wɔɹ ɑn. ɹænd dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðeɪ hæd slɪpt. ɪn ɛni keɪs, niðɝ ðeɪ nɔɹ ædli hɛl ðə paʊɝ naʊ. nɔɹ wəɾ əntɪl i ɪnstʃɹʌktəɾ əm tə siz ɪt.

Except for his slip, Adley would have been with Morr, with the Companions in the woods half a mile to the south. Narishma and Hopwil were with the Defenders, to the north. Rand wanted Adley under his eye. Had any other "accidents" happened, out of his sight? He could not watch everyone, all the time. Flinn's face was grim as day-old death, and Dashiva, far from looking vague, seemed on the point of sweating with concentration. He still muttered to himself under his breath, so low Rand could not hear even with the Power in him, but the man mopped rain from his face continually with a sodden lace-edged linen handkerchief that had grown more than grimy as the day wore on. Rand did not think they had slipped. In any case, neither they nor Adley held the Power now. Nor would until he instructed them to seize it.

"ɪz ɪt dʌn?" ænɑiɛlə æsk bɪhaɪn hɪm.

"Is it done?" Anaiyella asked behind him.

hidləs ə hu maɪt bi wɑtʃɪŋ aʊt ðɛɹ, ɹænd wil teɪdeɪʃɝ ɝaʊn tə feɪs hɝ. ðə tɛɹən wʊmən stɑɹɾəd bæk ɪn əɹ sæɾəl, ðə hʊɾ ə hɝ ɹɪtʃli ɪlæbɹət ɹeɪn keɪp fɔlɪŋ tə hɝ ʃoʊldɝz. hɝ tʃik ɡeɪv ə twɪtʃ. hɝ aɪz maɪɾ əv bɪn fʊl ə fɪɹ, əɹ heɪt. əɾ əɹ saɪd, eɪlɪl fɪŋɡɝɾ əɹ ɹeɪnz kɑmli wɪð ɹɛd-ɡlʌv hænz.

Heedless of who might be watching out there, Rand wheeled Tai'daishar around to face her. The Tairen woman started back in her saddle, the hood of her richly elaborate rain cape falling to her shoulders. Her cheek gave a twitch. Her eyes might have been full of fear, or hate. At her side, Ailil fingered her reins calmly with red-gloved hands.

"wʌt mɔɹ kən jə wɑnt?" ðə smɔlɝ wʊmən æskt ɪn ə kul vɔɪs. ə leɪɾi biɪŋ pəlaɪt tə ə miniəl. bɛɹli. "ɪf ðə saɪz ʌv ə vɪktɝi ɪz əkaʊntəd baɪ dɛɾ ɛnəmiz, aɪ θɪŋk tədeɪ əloʊn wɪl pʊt jəɹ neɪm ɪn ðə hɪstɝiz."

"What more can you want?" the smaller woman asked in a cool voice. A lady being polite to a menial. Barely. "If the size of a victory is accounted by dead enemies, I think today alone will put your name in the histories."

"aɪ min tə dʒɹaɪv ðə sintʃæn ɪndə ðə si!" ɹænd snæpt. laɪt, hi hæd tə fɪnɪʃ əm naʊ, wən i hæd ðə tʃæns! hi kəd nɑt faɪt ðə sintʃæn ən ðə fɔɹseɪkən ən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu hu əɹ wʌɾ ɛls, ɔl ət ðə seɪm taɪm! "aɪ dɪɾ ɪt bɪfɔɹ, ən əl əɡɛn!"

"I mean to drive the Seanchan into the sea!" Rand snapped. Light, he had to finish them now, when he had the chance! He could not fight the Seanchan and the Forsaken and the Light alone knew who or what else, all at the same time! "I did it before, and I will again!"

juv ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ hɪɾən ɪn jəɹ pɑkət ðɪs taɪm? luz θɝɪn æsk slaɪli. ɹænd snɑɹəld əɾ ɪm saɪlənli.

Do you have the Horn of Valere hidden in your pocket this time? Lews Therin asked slyly. Rand snarled at him silently.

"ðɛɹz sʌmwʌn bɪloʊ," flɪn sɛd sʌɾənli. "ɹaɪɾɪŋ ʌp ðɪs weɪ. fɹəm ðə wɛst."

"There's someone below," Flinn said suddenly. "Riding up this way. From the west."

ɹænd pʊld ɪz maʊn bæk ɝaʊnd. lidʒənmɛn ɹɪŋ ðə sloʊps ə ðə hɪl, ðoʊ ðeɪ hɪd wɛl ɪnʌf ðəɾ i sɛldəm kɑt saɪɾ ʌv ə blu koʊt. nʌn ə ðɛm hæɾ ə hɔɹs. hu wəd bi ɹaɪɾɪŋ . . .

Rand pulled his mount back around. Legionmen ringed the slopes of the hill, though they hid well enough that he seldom caught sight of a blue coat. None of them had a horse. Who would be riding . . .

bæʃɪɹz beɪ tʃɹɑɾəd ʌp ðə sloʊp ɔlmoʊst əz ðoʊ ɪt wɝ lɛvəl ɡɹaʊnd. bæʃɪɹz hɛlmət hʌŋ fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl, ən ðə mæn hɪmsɛlf lʊk taɪɝd. wɪθaʊt pɹiæmbəl, hi spoʊk ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs. "wɝ fɪnɪʃt, hɪɹ. pɑɹɾ ə faɪɾɪŋ ɪz noʊɪŋ wən tə ɡoʊ, ən ɪts taɪm. aɪv lɛft faɪv hʌnʒɹəd dɛd bɪhaɪnd, nɪɹ ɪnʌf, ən tu ʌv jəɹ soʊlʒɝz fəɹ sɔlt. aɪ sɛn θɹi mɔɹ tə faɪn səmɝædʒɹɪd, ɡɹɛɡɹɪn ən wɪɹɑmɑn ən tɛl əm tə ɹæli ɑn ju. aɪ daʊt ðəɹ ɪn ɛni bɛɾɝ kəndɪʃən ðən aɪ æm. haʊ dʌz jəɹ bʊtʃɝz bɪl ɹʌn?"

Bashere's bay trotted up the slope almost as though it were level ground. Bashere's helmet hung from his saddle, and the man himself looked tired. Without preamble, he spoke in a flat voice. "We're finished, here. Part of fighting is knowing when to go, and it's time. I've left five hundred dead behind, near enough, and two of your Soldiers for salt. I sent three more to find Semaradrid, Gregorin and Weiramon and tell them to rally on you. I doubt they're in any better condition than I am. How does your butcher's bill run?"

ɹænd ɪɡnɔɹd ðə kwɛstʃən. hɪz oʊn dɛd tɑp bæʃɪɹz baɪ kloʊs tə tu hʌnʒɹəd. "ju hæd noʊ ɹaɪt sɛndɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz tə ði ʌðɝz. soʊ lɔŋ əz ðəɹ ɑɹ hæf ə dʌzən æʃəmən lɛft - soʊ lɔŋ əz ðɛɹz mi! - aɪ hæv ɪnʌf! aɪ min tə faɪn ðə ɹɛst ə ðə sintʃæn ɑɹmi ən dɪstʃɹɔɪ ɪt, bæʃɪɹ. aɪ woʊn lɛɾ əm æɾ ɔltɑɹə tə tæɹɑbən ən ɑmɑdɪʃiə."

Rand ignored the question. His own dead topped Bashere's by close to two hundred. "You had no right sending orders to the others. So long as there are half a dozen Asha'man left - so long as there's me! - I have enough! I mean to find the rest of the Seanchan army and destroy it, Bashere. I won't let them add Altara to Tarabon and Amadicia."

bæʃɪɹ nʌkəld ɪz θɪk mʌstæʃɪz wɪð ə ɹaɪ læf. "ju wɑnə faɪn ðɛm. lʊk aʊt ðɛɹ." hi swɛpt ə ɡɔntələɾəd hæn əkɹɔs ðə hɪlz tə ðə wɛst. "aɪ kæn pɔɪn tə ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ spɑt, bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ tɛn, meɪbi fɪftin θaʊzən kloʊs ɪnʌf tə si fɹəm hɪɹ, ɪf ðoʊz tʃɹiz wɝn ɪn ðə weɪ. aɪ dænst wɪð ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɡɛɾɪŋ θɹu ðɛm ənsin tə ɹitʃ ju. meɪbi ə hʌnʒɹəd deɪmeɪn daʊn ðɛɹ. meɪbi mɔɹ. mɔɹ kʌmɪŋ, fəɹ ʃʊɹ, ən mɔɹ mɛn. simz ðɛɹ dʒɛnɝəl əz dɪsaɪɾɪd tə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn ju. aɪ səpoʊz ɪɾ ɪzən ɔlweɪz tʃiz ən eɪl biɪŋ tɑvɝən."

Bashere knuckled his thick mustaches with a wry laugh. "You want to find them. Look out there." He swept a gauntleted hand across the hills to the west. "I can't point to a particular spot, but there are ten, maybe fifteen thousand close enough to see from here, if those trees weren't in the way. I danced with the Dark One getting through them unseen to reach you. Maybe a hundred damane down there. Maybe more. More coming, for sure, and more men. Seems their general has decided to concentrate on you. I suppose it isn't always cheese and ale being ta'veren."

"ɪf ðəɹ aʊt ðəɹ . . ." ɹænd skæn ðə hɪlz. ðə ɹeɪn fɛl mɔɹ hɛvəli. wɛɹ hæɾ i sin muvmənt? laɪt, hi wɑz taɪɝd. seɪɾɪn hæmɝɾ ət hɪm. ʌnkɑnʃəsli hi tʌtʃt ðə ɹæp bʌndəl bɪniθ ɪz stɝəp lɛðɝ. hɪz hæn dʒɝkt əweɪ ʌv ɪts oʊn əkɔɹd. tɛn θaʊzənd, ivən fɪftin . . . wʌns səmɝædʒɹɪd ɹitʃt hɪm, ən ɡɹɛɡɹɪn, ən wɪɹɑmɑn . . . mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt, wʌns ðə ɹɛst ə ði æʃəmən dɪd . . . "ɪf ðəɹ aʊt ðɛɹ, ðæts wɛɹ əl dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðɛm, bæʃɪɹ. əl hɪɾ əm fɹəm ɔl saɪdz, ðə weɪ wi ɪntɛndəɾ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs."

"If they're out there . . ." Rand scanned the hills. The rain fell more heavily. Where had he seen movement? Light, he was tired. Saidin hammered at him. Unconsciously he touched the wrapped bundled beneath his stirrup leather. His hand jerked away of its own accord. Ten thousand, even fifteen . . . Once Semaradrid reached him, and Gregorin, and Weiramon . . . More important, once the rest of the Asha'man did . . . "If they're out there, that's where I'll destroy them, Bashere. I'll hit them from all sides, the way we intended in the first place."

fɹaʊnɪŋ, bæʃɪɹ ɹeɪn ɪz hɔɹs kloʊsɝ, əntɪl ɪz ni ɔlmoʊs tʌtʃt ɹænz. flɪn muvd ɪz maʊn əweɪ, bʌɾ ædli wɑz tu foʊkəst ɑn stɛɹɪŋ θɹu ðə ɹeɪn tə noʊɾəs ɛniθɪŋ soʊ nɪɹ, ən dæʃivə, stɪl waɪpɪŋ ɪz feɪs ɪnsɛsənli, stɛɹd wɪð oʊpən ɪntʃɹəst. bæʃɪɹ loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs tə ə mɝmɝ. "ju ɑɹən θɪŋkɪŋ stʃɹeɪt. ðət wɑz ə ɡʊd plæn, ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, bʌt ðɛɹ dʒɛnɝəl θɪŋks fæst. hi spɹɛɾ aʊt tə blʌn əɹ ətæks bɪfɔɹ wi kəd fɔl ɑn ɪm spɹɛɾ aʊt mɑɹtʃɪŋ. wiv kɑst ɪm ivən soʊ, ɪt simz, ən i naʊ hiz pʊlɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ təɡɛðɝ. jə woʊn kætʃ ɪm baɪ sɝpɹaɪz. hi wɑns əs tə kʌm ət hɪm. hiz aʊt ðəɹ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪt. æʃəmən əɹ noʊ æʃəmən, ɪf wi stænd noʊz-tə-noʊz wɪð ðɪs fɛloʊ, aɪ θɪŋk meɪbi ðə vʌltʃɝz ɡɹoʊ fæɾ ən noʊbɑdi ɹaɪdz əweɪ."

Frowning, Bashere reined his horse closer, until his knee almost touched Rand's. Flinn moved his mount away, but Adley was too focused on staring through the rain to notice anything so near, and Dashiva, still wiping his face incessantly, stared with open interest. Bashere lowered his voice to a murmur. "You aren't thinking straight. That was a good plan, in the beginning, but their general thinks fast. He spread out to blunt our attacks before we could fall on him spread out marching. We've cost him even so, it seems, and he now he's pulling everything together. You won't catch him by surprise. He wants us to come at him. He's out there waiting for it. Asha'man or no Asha'man, if we stand nose-to-nose with this fellow, I think maybe the vultures grow fat and nobody rides away."

"noʊbɑdi stænz noʊz-tə-noʊz wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," ɹænd ɡɹaʊld. "ðə fɔɹseɪkən kəd tɛl ɪm ðæt, huɛvɝ i ɪz. ɹaɪt, flɪn? dæʃivə?" flɪn nɑɾəd ənsɝteɪnli. dæʃivə flɪntʃt. "ju θɪŋk aɪ kæn sɝpɹaɪz hɪm, bæʃɪɹ? wɑtʃ!" pʊlɪŋ ðə lɔŋ bʌndəl lus, hi stʃɹɪpt əweɪ ðə klɔθ kʌvɝɪŋ, ən ɹænd hɝd ɡæsps əz ɹeɪndʒɹɑps ɡlɪsən ɑn ə sɔɹd simɪŋli meɪɾ ə kɹɪstəl. ðə sɔɹd ðəɾ ɪz nɑɾ ə sɔɹd. "lɛts si ɪf hiz sɝpɹaɪz baɪ kælændɝ ɪn ðə hænz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, bæʃɪɹ."

"Nobody stands nose-to-nose with the Dragon Reborn," Rand growled. "The Forsaken could tell him that, whoever he is. Right, Flinn? Dashiva?" Flinn nodded uncertainly. Dashiva flinched. "You think I can't surprise him, Bashere? Watch!" Pulling the long bundle loose, he stripped away the cloth covering, and Rand heard gasps as raindrops glistened on a sword seemingly made of crystal. The Sword That Is Not a Sword. "Let's see if he's surprised by Callandor in the hands of the Dragon Reborn, Bashere."

kɹeɪɾəlɪŋ ðə tʃɹænslusən bleɪɾ ɪn ðə kɹʊk ə hɪz ɛlboʊ, ɹænd ɹoʊd teɪdeɪʃɝ fɔɹwɝɾ ə fju stɛps. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹizən tə. hi hæd noʊ klɪɹɝ vju fɹəm ðɛɹ. ɪksɛpt . . . sʌmθɪŋ spaɪɾɝd əkɹɔs ði aʊɾɝ sɝfəs ə ðə vɔɪd, ə ɹɪəlɪŋ blæk wɛb. hi wɑz əfɹeɪd. ðə læs taɪm i hæd juz kælændɝ, ɹɪli juzd ɪt, hi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə bɹɪŋ ðə dɛd bæk tə laɪf. hi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ i kəd də ɛniθɪŋ, ðɛn, ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl. laɪk ə mædmæn θɪŋkɪŋ i kəd flaɪ. bʌɾ i wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. hi kəd də ɛniθɪŋ. hæɾ i nɑt pɹuvd ɪt taɪm ən əɡɛn? hi ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə sɔɹs θɹu ðə sɔɹd ðəɾ ɪz nɑɾ ə sɔɹd.

Cradling the translucent blade in the crook of his elbow, Rand rode Tai'daishar forward a few steps. There was no reason to. He had no clearer view from there. Except . . . Something spidered across the outer surface of the Void, a wriggling black web. He was afraid. The last time he had used Callandor, really used it, he had tried to bring the dead back to life. He had been sure he could do anything, then, anything at all. Like a madman thinking he could fly. But he was the Dragon Reborn. He could do anything. Had he not proved it time and again? He reached for the Source through the Sword That Is Not a Sword.

seɪɾɪn sim tə lip ɪndə kælændɝ bɪfɔɹ i tʌtʃt ðə sɔɹs θɹu ɪt. fɹəm pɑməl tə pɔɪnt, ðə kɹɪstəl sɔɹd ʃoʊn wɪð ə waɪt laɪt. hi hæɾ oʊnli θɔt ðə paʊɝ fɪld ɪm bɪfɔɹ. naʊ hi hɛl mɔɹ ðən tɛn mɛn kəɾ əv əneɪɾɪd, ə hʌnʒɹəd, hi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ mɛni. ðə faɪɝz ə ðə sʌn, sɪɹɪŋ θɹu hɪz hɛd. ðə koʊld ʌv ɔl ə ðə wɪntɝz ʌv ɔl ði eɪdʒəz, iɾɪŋ ɪndə hɪz hɑɹt. ɪn ðət tɔɹənt, ðə teɪnt wɑz ɔl ðə mɪɾən hips ɪn ðə wɝld ɛmptiɪŋ ɪndə hɪz soʊl. seɪɾɪn stɪl tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl hɪm, tʃɹaɪd tə skaʊɝ əweɪ, bɝn əweɪ, fɹiz əweɪ, ɛvɹi skɹæp ə hɪm, bʌɾ i fɔt, ən i lɪv fəɹ ə moʊmən mɔɹ, ən ənʌðɝ moʊmənt, ənʌðɝ. hi wɑntəd tə læf. hi kəd də ɛniθɪŋ!

Saidin seemed to leap into Callandor before he touched the Source through it. From pommel to point, the crystal sword shone with a white light. He had only thought the Power filled him before. Now he held more than ten men could have unaided, a hundred, he did not know how many. The fires of the sun, searing through his head. The cold of all of the winters of all the Ages, eating into his heart. In that torrent, the taint was all the midden heaps in the world emptying into his soul. Saidin still tried to kill him, tried to scour away, burn away, freeze away, every scrap of him, but he fought, and he lived for a moment more, and another moment, another. He wanted to laugh. He could do anything!

wʌns, hoʊldɪŋ kælændɝ, hi hæd meɪɾ ə wɛpən ðət sɝtʃt aʊt ʃæɾoʊzpɔn θɹu ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ, stʃɹʌk əm dɛd wɪð hʌntɪŋ laɪtnɪŋ wɛɹɛvɝ ðeɪ stʊɾ əɹ ɹæn əɹ hɪd. ʃʊɹli ðəɹ mʌs bi sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðæt, tə juz əɡɛnst ɪz ɛnəmiz hɪɹ. bʌt wən i kɔl tə luz θɝɪn, oʊnli æŋɡwɪʃt wɪmpɝz ænsɝd, əz ɪf ðət dɪsɪbɑɾid vɔɪs fɪɹd ðə peɪn ə seɪɾɪn.

Once, holding Callandor, he had made a weapon that searched out Shadowspawn through the Stone of Tear, struck them dead with hunting lightning wherever they stood or ran or hid. Surely there must be something like that, to use against his enemies here. But when he called to Lews Therin, only anguished whimpers answered, as if that disembodied voice feared the pain of saidin.

wɪð kælændɝ bleɪzɪŋ ɪn ɪz hænd - hi dɪd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɹeɪzɪŋ ðə bleɪɾ oʊvɝhɛd - hi stɛɹɾ ət ðə hɪlz wɛɹ ɪz ɛnəmiz hɪd. ðeɪ wɝ ɡɹeɪ naʊ, wɪð θɪkənɪŋ ɹeɪn, ən dɛns blæk klaʊdz blɑkɪŋ ðə sʌn. wʌt wɑz ɪɾ i hæd toʊld iɡən pædʒɹoʊs?

With Callandor blazing in his hand - he did not remember raising the blade overhead - he stared at the hills where his enemies hid. They were gray now, with thickening rain, and dense black clouds blocking the sun. What was it he had told Eagan Padros?

"aɪ æm ðə stɔɹm," hi wɪspɝd - ə ʃaʊɾ ɪn ɪz ɪɹz, ə ɹɔɹ - ən i tʃænəld.

"I am the storm," he whispered - a shout in his ears, a roar - and he channeled.

oʊvɝhɛd, ðə klaʊdz bɔɪld. wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪn ðə blæk ə sʊt, ðeɪ bɪkeɪm mɪdnaɪt, ðə hɑɹɾ ə mɪdnaɪt. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌɾ i wɑz tʃænəlɪŋ. soʊ ɔfən, hi dɪd nɑt, ɪn spaɪɾ ʌv æzmɑɾiənz titʃɪŋ. meɪbi luz θɝɪn wɑz ɡaɪɾɪŋ hɪm, ɪn spaɪɾ ə ðə mænz wipɪŋ. floʊz ə seɪɾɪn spʌn əkɹɔs ðə skaɪ, wɪn ən wɔɾɝ ən faɪɝ. faɪɝ. ðə skaɪ tʃɹuli dɪd ɹeɪn laɪtnɪŋ. ə hʌnʒɹəd boʊls ət wʌns, hʌnʒɹədz, fɔɹk blu-waɪt ʃæfs stæbɪŋ daʊn əz fɑɹ əz i kəd si. ðə hɪlz bɪfɔɹ ɪm ɪɹʌptəd. səm flu əpɑɹɾ ʌndɝ ðə tɔɹən ə laɪtnɪŋ laɪk kɪkt ænthɪlz. fleɪmz spɹæŋ ʌp ɪn θɪkəts, tʃɹiz tɝnɪŋ tə tɔɹtʃɪz ɪn ðə ɹeɪn, fleɪmz ɹeɪsɪŋ θɹu ɑləv ɔɹtʃɝdz.

Overhead, the clouds boiled. Where they had been the black of soot, they became midnight, the heart of midnight. He did not know what he was channeling. So often, he did not, in spite of Asmodean's teaching. Maybe Lews Therin was guiding him, in spite of the man's weeping. Flows of saidin spun across the sky, Wind and Water and Fire. Fire. The sky truly did rain lightning. A hundred bolts at once, hundreds, forked blue-white shafts stabbing down as far as he could see. The hills before him erupted. Some flew apart under the torrent of lightning like kicked anthills. Flames sprang up in thickets, trees turning to torches in the rain, flames racing through olive orchards.

sʌmθɪŋ stʃɹʌk ɪm hɑɹd, ən i ɹilaɪzd i wɑz pɪkɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ʌp fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ðə kɹaʊn hæd fɔlən fɹəm ɪz hɛd. kælændɝ stɪl bleɪzd ɪn ɪz hænd, ðoʊ. veɪɡli, hi wɑz əwɛɹ ə teɪdeɪʃɝ skɹæmbəlɪŋ tə hɪz fit, tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ. soʊ ðeɪ θɔt tə stʃɹaɪk bæk ət hɪm, dɪd ðeɪ.

Something struck him hard, and he realized he was picking himself up from the ground. The crown had fallen from his head. Callandor still blazed in his hand, though. Vaguely, he was aware of Tai'daishar scrambling to his feet, trembling. So they thought to strike back at him, did they.

ʃʌvɪŋ kælændɝ haɪ, hi skɹimd ət ðɛm. "kʌm əɡɛns mi, ɪf jə dɛɹ! aɪm ðə stɔɹm! kʌm ɪf jə dɛɹ, ʃeɪtɑn! aɪm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn!" ə θaʊzən sɪzəlɪŋ laɪtnɪŋ boʊls heɪl daʊn fɹəm ðə klaʊdz.

Shoving Callandor high, he screamed at them. "Come against me, if you dare! I am the storm! Come if you dare, Shai'tan! I am the Dragon Reborn!" A thousand sizzling lightning bolts hailed down from the clouds.

əɡɛn sʌmθɪŋ stʃɹʌk ɪm daʊn. hi tʃɹaɪd tə faɪɾ ʌp əɡɛn. kælændɝ, stɪl ʃaɪnɪŋ, leɪ ə peɪs fɹəm ɪz aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt hænd. ðə skaɪ ʃæɾɝd wɪð laɪtnɪŋz. sʌɾənli, hi ɹilaɪz ðət ðə weɪɾ ətɑp ɪm wɑz bæʃɪɹ, ðət ðə mæn wɑz ʃeɪkɪŋ hɪm. ɪt mʌst əv bɪn bæʃɪɹ u hæd flʌŋ ɪm daʊn!

Again something struck him down. He tried to fight up again. Callandor, still shining, lay a pace from his outstretched hand. The sky shattered with lightnings. Suddenly, he realized that the weight atop him was Bashere, that the man was shaking him. It must have been Bashere who had flung him down!

"stɑp ɪt!" ðə sɑldəiən ʃaʊɾəd. blʌd fæn daʊn ɪz feɪs fɹəm ə splɪɾ əkɹɔs ɪz skælp. "jɔɹ kɪlɪŋ ʌs, mæn! stɑp!"

"Stop it!" the Saldaean shouted. Blood fanned down his face from a split across his scalp. "You're killing us, man! Stop!"

ɹænd tɝn ɪz hɛd, ən wʌn stʌn lʊk wɑz ɪnʌf. laɪtnɪŋz flæʃt ɔl ɝaʊn hɪm, ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən. ə boʊl stæb daʊn ɑntu ðə ɹɪvɝs sloʊp, wɛɹ dɛnhɝəɾ ən ði ɑɹmmɪn wɝ; ðə skɹimz ə mɛn ən hɔɹsəz ɹoʊz. ænɑiɛlə ən eɪlɪl wɝ boʊθ əfʊt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ veɪnli tə kwaɪət maʊns ðət ɹɪɹd, aɪz ɹoʊlɪŋ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹɪp ɹeɪnz fɹi. flɪn wɑz bɛndɪŋ oʊvɝ sʌmwʌn, nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ə dɛd hɔɹs wɪð lɛɡz ɔlɹɛɾi stɪf.

Rand turned his head, and one stunned look was enough. Lightnings flashed all around him, in every direction. A bolt stabbed down onto the reverse slope, where Denharad and the armsmen were; the screams of men and horses rose. Anaiyella and Ailil were both afoot, trying vainly to quiet mounts that reared, eyes rolling, trying to rip reins free. Flinn was bending over someone, not far from a dead horse with legs already stiff.

ɹænd lɛt seɪɾɪn ɡoʊ. hi lɛɾ ɪt ɡoʊ, bʌt fəɹ moʊməns ɪt stɪl floʊɾ ɪndə hɪm, ən laɪtnɪŋ ɹeɪdʒd. ðə floʊ ɪndə hɪm dwɪndəld, teɪld ɔf ən vænɪʃt. dɪzinəs swɛp θɹu hɪm ɪn ɪts pleɪs. fəɹ θɹi mɔɹ hɑɹtbits, tu ʌv kælændɝ ʃoʊn wɛɹ ðeɪ leɪ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ən laɪtnɪŋ fɛl. ðɛn, saɪləns ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ dʒɹʌm ə ðə ɹeɪn. ən ðə skɹimz fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðə hɪl.

Rand let saidin go. He let it go, but for moments it still flowed into him, and lightning raged. The flow into him dwindled, tailed off and vanished. Dizziness swept through him in its place. For three more heartbeats, two of Callandor shone where they lay on the ground, and lightning fell. Then, silence except for the rising drum of the rain. And the screams from behind the hill.

sloʊli bæʃɪɹ klaɪmd ɔf ə hɪm, ən ɹænd ɹoʊz əneɪɾɪd ɑn tɑɾɝɪŋ lɛɡz, blɪŋkɪŋ əz ɪz saɪt ɹɪtɝn tə nɔɹməl. ðə sɑldəiən wɑtʃt ɪm əz i maɪɾ əv ə ɹæbɪd laɪən, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt. ænɑiɛlə tʊk wʌn lʊk ət ɹænd ɑn ɪz fiɾ ən kəlæpst ɪn ə feɪnt; hɝ hɔɹs dæʃt əweɪ, ɹeɪnz dæŋɡəlɪŋ. eɪlɪl, stɪl faɪɾɪŋ əɹ ɹɪɹɪŋ ænəməl, spɛɹd fju ɡlænsɪz fəɹ ɹænd. ɹænd lɛt kælændɝ laɪ wɛɹ ɪt wɑz fəɹ ðə moʊmənt. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i dɛɹd pɪk ɪɾ ʌp. nɑt jɛt.

Slowly Bashere climbed off of him, and Rand rose unaided on tottering legs, blinking as his sight returned to normal. The Saldaean watched him as he might have a rabid lion, fingering his sword hilt. Anaiyella took one look at Rand on his feet and collapsed in a faint; her horse dashed away, reins dangling. Ailil, still fighting her rearing animal, spared few glances for Rand. Rand let Callandor lie where it was for the moment. He was not sure he dared pick it up. Not yet.

flɪn stʃɹeɪɾənd, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd, ðən stʊd saɪlənli əz ɹænd wɛn ənstɛɾəli tə stæn bɪsaɪd hɪm. ðə ɹeɪn fɛl ɑn dʒoʊnən ædliz saɪtləs aɪz, bʌlʒɪŋ əz ɪf ɪn hɔɹɝ. dʒoʊnən hæd bɪn wʌn ə ðə fɝst. ðoʊz skɹimz fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðə hɪl sim tə slaɪs θɹu ðə ɹeɪn. haʊ mɛni mɔɹ, ɹænd wʌndɝd. əmʌŋ ðə dɪfɛndɝz? ðə kəmpænjənz? əmʌŋ . . . ?

Flinn straightened, shaking his head, then stood silently as Rand went unsteadily to stand beside him. The rain fell on Jonan Adley's sightless eyes, bulging as if in horror. Jonan had been one of the first. Those screams from behind the hill seemed to slice through the rain. How many more, Rand wondered. Among the Defenders? The Companions? Among . . . ?

ɹeɪn θɪk əz ə blæŋkət hɪd ðə hɪlz wɛɹ ðə sintʃæn ɑɹmi leɪ. hæɾ i hɝɾ əm əɾ ɔl, stʃɹaɪkɪŋ aʊt blaɪnli? əɹ wɝ ðeɪ stɪl weɪɾɪŋ aʊt ðəɹ wɪð ɔl ðɛɹ deɪmeɪn? weɪɾɪŋ tə si haʊ mɛni mɔɹ ə hɪz oʊn i kəd kɪl fəɹ ðɛm.

Rain thick as a blanket hid the hills where the Seanchan army lay. Had he hurt them at all, striking out blindly? Or were they still waiting out there with all their damane? Waiting to see how many more of his own he could kill for them.

"sɛt wʌtɛvɝ ɡɑɹd jə θɪŋk wi nid," ɹænd toʊl bæʃɪɹ. hɪz vɔɪs wɑz aɪɝn. wʌn ə ðə fɝst. hɪz hɑɹt wɑz aɪɝn. "wɛn ɡɹɛɡɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz ɹitʃ ʌs, wɪl tʃɹævəl tə wɛɹ ðə kɑɹts ɑɹ weɪɾɪŋ əz fæst əz wi kæn." bæʃɪɹ nɑɾəd wɪθaʊt spikɪŋ, ən tɝn əweɪ ɪn ðə ɹeɪn.

"Set whatever guard you think we need," Rand told Bashere. His voice was iron. One of the first. His heart was iron. "When Gregorin and the others reach us, we'll Travel to where the carts are waiting as fast as we can." Bashere nodded without speaking, and turned away in the rain.

aɪv lɔst, ɹænd θɔt dʌli. ɪm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, bʌt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, aɪv lɔst.

I've lost, Rand thought dully. I'm the Dragon Reborn, but for the first time, I've lost.

sʌɾənli, luz θɝɪn ɹeɪdʒd ʌp ɪnsaɪd hɪm, slaɪ dɪɡz fɝɡɑɾən. aɪv nɛvɝ bɪn dɪfiɾəd, hi snɑɹəld. aɪm ðə lɔɹɾ ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ! noʊ wʌn kən dɪfit mi!

Suddenly, Lews Therin raged up inside him, sly digs forgotten. I've never been defeated, he snarled. I am the Lord of the Morning! No one can defeat me!

ɹænd sæɾ ɪn ðə ɹeɪn, tɝnɪŋ ðə kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz ɪn ɪz hænz, lʊkɪŋ ət kælændɝ laɪɪŋ ɪn ðə mʌd. hi lɛt luz θɝɪn ɹeɪdʒ.

Rand sat in the rain, turning the Crown of Swords in his hands, looking at Callandor lying in the mud. He let Lews Therin rage.

ɑbɑldɑɹ julən wɛpt, ɡɹeɪtfəl fəɹ ðə daʊnpɔɹ ðət hɪd ðə tɪɹz ɑn ɪz tʃiks. sʌmwʌn wəɾ əv tə ɡɪv ði ɔɹɾɝ. ɪvɛntʃəwəli sʌmwʌn wəɾ əv tə əpɑlədʒaɪz tə ði ɛmpɹɛs, maɪt ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ, ən meɪbi tə sjuɹɔθ sunɝ. ðoʊz wɝ nɑt waɪ hi wɛpt, ðoʊ, nɔɹ ivən fəɹ ə dɛd kɑmɹæd. ɹʌfli ɹɪpɪŋ ə sliv fɹəm ɪz koʊt, hi leɪɾ ɪɾ əkɹɔs mɪɹaɪz stɛɹɪŋ aɪz soʊ ðə ɹeɪn wəd nɑt fɔl ɪn ðɛm.

Abaldar Yulan wept, grateful for the downpour that hid the tears on his cheeks. Someone would have to give the order. Eventually someone would have to apologize to the Empress, might she live forever, and maybe to Suroth sooner. Those were not why he wept, though, nor even for a dead comrade. Roughly ripping a sleeve from his coat, he laid it across Miraj's staring eyes so the rain would not fall in them.

"sɛn aʊɾ ɔɹɾɝz fəɹ ɹitʃɹit," julən ɔɹɾɝd, ən sɔ ðə mɛn stændɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪm dʒɝk. fəɹ ðə sɛkən taɪm ɑn ðiz ʃɔɹz, ði ɛvɝ vɪktɔɹiəs ɑɹmi hæd sʌfɝɾ ə dɛvəsteɪɾɪŋ dɪfit, ən julən dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn u wɛpt.

"Send out orders for retreat," Yulan ordered, and saw the men standing around him jerk. For the second time on these shores, the Ever Victorious Army had suffered a devastating defeat, and Yulan did not think he was the only one who wept.


tʃæptɝ twɛntifaɪv


CHAPTER 25

ən ənwɛlkəm ɹɪtɝn


An Unwelcome Return

siɾəd bɪhaɪn əɹ ɡɪldɪd ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl, ɪleɪɾə fɪŋɡɝɾ ən eɪdʒ-dɑɹk aɪvɝi kɑɹvɪŋ ʌv ə stʃɹeɪnʒ bɝd wɪð ə bik əz lɔŋ əz ɪts bɑɾi ən lɪsənd wɪð səm əmjuzmən tə ðə sɪks wɪmən stændɪŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl. itʃ ə sɪɾɝ fəɹ əɹ ədʒɑ, ðeɪ fɹaʊn saɪdweɪz ət wʌn ənʌðɝ, ʃɪftəd vɛlvət slɪpɝz ɑn ðə bɹaɪtli pæɾɝnd kɑɹpət ðət kʌvɝd moʊst ə ðə ɹʌsət flɔɹ taɪlz, twɪtʃt ət vaɪn-wɝkt ʃɔlz soʊ ðə kʌlɝd fɹɪnʒɪz dænst, ən dʒɛnɝəli lʊkt ən saʊndəd laɪk ə ɡæɡəl ə pivɪʃ sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz wɪʃɪŋ ðeɪ hæd ðə nɝv tə ɡoʊ fəɹ itʃ ʌðɝz' θɹoʊts ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛɹ mɪstʃɹəs. fɹɔs koʊɾəd ðə ɡlæs keɪsməns fɪɾəd ɪndə ðə wɪndoʊz soʊ ðəɾ ɪt wɑz hɑɹdli pɑsəbəl tə si ðə snoʊ swɝlɪŋ aʊtsaɪd, ðoʊ səmtaɪmz ðə wɪnz haʊld wɪð ən aɪsi ɹeɪdʒ. ɪleɪɾə fɛl kwaɪt wɔɹm, ən nɑt dʒʌs fəɹ ðə θɪk lɔɡz bleɪzɪŋ ɪn ðə waɪt mɑɹbəl faɪɝpleɪs. wɛðɝ ðiz wɪmən nu ɪɾ əɹ nɑt - wɛl, dʌɑɹə nu, sɝɾənli, ən pɝhæps ði ʌðɝz dɪd - ʃi wɑz ðɛɹ mɪstʃɹəs. ði ɪlæbɹət ɡoʊld-kʌvɝd keɪs klɑk ðət səmeɪl hæd kəmɪʃən tɪkt əweɪ. səmeɪlz vænɪʃt dʒɹim wəd kʌm tʃɹu; ðə taʊɝ ɹɪtɝn tə ɪts ɡlɔɹi. ən fɝmli ɪn ðə keɪpəbəl hænz ʌv ɪleɪɾə də əvɹaɪni ɹɔɪhən.

Seated behind her gilded writing table, Elaida fingered an age-dark ivory carving of a strange bird with a beak as long as its body and listened with some amusement to the six women standing on the other side on the table. Each a Sitter for her Ajah, they frowned sideways at one another, shifted velvet slippers on the brightly patterned carpet that covered most of the russet floor tiles, twitched at vine-worked shawls so the colored fringes danced, and generally looked and sounded like a gaggle of peevish serving girls wishing they had the nerve to go for each others' throats in front of their mistress. Frost coated the glassed casements fitted into the windows so that it was hardly possible to see the snow swirling outside, though sometimes the winds howled with an icy rage. Elaida felt quite warm, and not just for the thick logs blazing in the white marble fireplace. Whether these women knew it or not - well, Duhara knew, certainly, and perhaps the others did - she was their mistress. The elaborate gold-covered case clock that Cemaile had commissioned ticked away. Cemaile's vanished dream would come true; The Tower returned to its glory. And firmly in the capable hands of Elaida do Avriny a'Roihan.

"noʊ tɛɹæŋɡɹil əz ɛvɝ bɪn faʊn ðət kən 'kəntʃɹoʊl' ə wʊmənz tʃænəlɪŋ," vɛlinə wɑz seɪɪŋ ɪn ə vɔɪs kul ən pɹɪsaɪs bʌɾ ɔlmoʊst ɡɝlɪʃli haɪ-pɪtʃt, ə vɔɪs ət stʃɹɔŋ ɑdz wɪð əɹ iɡəlz bik ʌv ə noʊz ən əɹ ʃɑɹp, tɪltəɾ aɪz. ʃi sæt fəɹ ðə waɪt, ən wɑz ðə vɛɹi mɑɾəl ʌv ə waɪt sɪstɝ, ɪn ɔl bʌɾ əɹ fɪɹs əpɪɹəns. hɝ pleɪn, snoʊi dʒɹɛs sim stɑɹk ən koʊld. "vɛɹi fju hæv ɛvɝ bɪn faʊn ðət pɝfɔɹm ðə seɪm fʌŋkʃən. ðɛɹfɔɹ, lɑdʒɪkli, ɪf sətʃ ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil wɝ faʊnd, əɹ mɔɹ ðən wʌn, ɪmpɹɑbəbəl əz ðət mʌs bi, ðəɹ kəd nɑt bi səfɪʃən ə ðɛm tə kəntʃɹoʊl mɔɹ ðən tu əɹ θɹi wɪmən ət moʊst. ɪt fɑloʊz ðət ðə ɹɪpɔɹts ə ðiz soʊ-kɔl sintʃæn ɑɹ ɪɡzædʒɝeɪɾəd waɪldli. ɪf wɪmən ɑn 'liʃɪz' ɪɡzɪst, ðeɪ kænɑt tʃænəl. pleɪnli nɑt. aɪ də nɑt dɪnaɪ ðiz pipəl hoʊld ɛbu dɑɹ, ən æmədɔɹ, ən pɝhæps mɔɹ, bʌt klɪɹli ðeɪ ɑɹ bʌɾ ə kɹieɪʃən ə ɹænd ælθɹ, pɝhæps tə fɹaɪɾən pipəl ɪndə flɑkɪŋ tə hɪm. laɪk ðɪs pɹɑfəɾ ə hɪz. ɪts sɪmpəl lɑdʒɪk."

"No ter'angreal has ever been found that can 'control' a woman's channeling," Velina was saying in a voice cool and precise but almost girlishly high-pitched, a voice at strong odds with her eagle's beak of a nose and her sharp, tilted eyes. She sat for the White, and was the very model of a White sister, in all but her fierce appearance. Her plain, snowy dress seemed stark and cold. "Very few have ever been found that perform the same function. Therefore, logically, if such a ter'angreal were found, or more than one, improbable as that must be, there could not be sufficient of them to control more than two or three women at most. It follows that the reports of these so-called Seanchan are exaggerated wildly. If women on 'leashes' exist, they cannot channel. Plainly not. I do not deny these people hold Ebou Dar, and Amador, and perhaps more, but clearly they are but a creation of Rand al'Thor, perhaps to frighten people into flocking to him. Like this Prophet of his. It is simple logic."

"aɪ æm vɛɹi ɡlæd jə doʊn dɪnaɪ æmədɔɹ ən ɛbu dɑɹ ət list, vɛlinə," ʃɛvən sɛd dʒɹɪli. ən ʃi kəd bi vɛɹi dʒɹaɪ ɪndid. əz tɔl əz moʊs mɛn, ən boʊnəli θɪn wɪð ɪt, ðə bɹaʊn sɪɾɝ hæɾ ən æŋɡjəlɝ feɪs ən ə lɔŋ tʃɪn, nɑɾ ɪmpɹuv baɪ ə kæp ə kɝlz. wɪð spaɪɾɝi fɪŋɡɝz ʃi ɹiɝeɪnʒd əɹ ʃɔl ən smuð skɝts ə dɑɹk ɡoʊldən sɪlk, ən əɹ vɔɪs tʊk ɑn pɔɪntəɾ əmjuzmənt. "aɪm ənkʌmftəɹbəl seɪɪŋ wʌt kən ən kæn bi. fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl, nɑt lɔŋ ɡɔn, ɛvɹiwʌn 'nu' oʊnli ə ʃild woʊvən baɪ ə sɪstɝ kəd stɑp ə wʊmən tʃænəlɪŋ. ðən kʌmz ə sɪmpəl ɝb, fɔkɹut, ən ɛniwʌn əɾ ɔl kən fid jə ə ti ðət livz jə əneɪbəl əz ə stoʊn tə tʃænəl fəɹ aʊɝz. jusfəl wɪð ənɹuli waɪldɝz əɹ ðə laɪk, aɪ səpoʊz, bʌɾ ə næsti lɪɾəl sɝpɹaɪz fəɹ ðoʊz u θɪŋk ðeɪ nu ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ɛ? meɪbi nɛkst, sʌmwʌn wɪl lɝn tə meɪk tɛɹæŋɡɹil əɡɛn."

"I am very glad you don't deny Amador and Ebou Dar at least, Velina," Shevan said drily. And she could be very dry indeed. As tall as most men, and bonily thin with it, the Brown Sitter had an angular face and a long chin, not improved by a cap of curls. With spidery fingers she rearranged her shawl and smoothed skirts of dark golden silk, and her voice took on pointed amusement. "I'm uncomfortable saying what can and can't be. For example, not long gone, everyone 'knew' only a shield woven by a sister could stop a woman channeling. Then comes a simple herb, forkroot, and anyone at all can feed you a tea that leaves you unable as a stone to channel for hours. Useful with unruly wilders or the like, I suppose, but a nasty little surprise for those who think they knew everything, eh? Maybe next, someone will learn to make ter'angreal again."

ɪleɪɾəz maʊθ taɪɾənd. ʃi dɪd nɑt kənsɝn hɝsɛlf wɪð ɪmpɑsəbɪləɾiz, ən ɪf noʊ sɪstɝ hæd mænədʒ tə ɹiɾɪskʌvɝ ðə meɪkɪŋ ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɪn θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz, wʌn nɛvɝ wəɾ ən ðət wɑz ðæt. ɪt wɑz nɑlədʒ slɪpɪŋ θɹu hɝ fɪŋɡɝz wən ʃi wɑntəɾ ɪt hɛl kloʊs ðət kɝld ɪleɪɾəz tʌŋ. ɪn spaɪɾ ʌv ɔl əɹ ɛfɝts, ɛvɹi læst ɪnɪʃiəɾ ɪn ðə taʊɝ hæd lɝn ə fɔkɹut, naʊ. noʊ wʌn laɪk noʊɪŋ ɪn ðə list. noʊ wʌn laɪk sʌɾənli biɪŋ vʌlnɝəbəl tə ɛniwʌn wɪð ə nɑlədʒ ə ɝbz ən ə lɪɾəl hɑt wɔɾɝ. ðət nɑlədʒ wɑz wɝs ðən pɔɪzən, əz ðə sɪɾɝz hɪɹ meɪd klɪɹ.

Elaida's mouth tightened. She did not concern herself with impossibilities, and if no sister had managed to rediscover the making of ter'angreal in three thousand years, one never would and that was that. It was knowledge slipping through her fingers when she wanted it held close that curled Elaida's tongue. In spite of all her efforts, every last initiate in the Tower had learned of forkroot, now. No one liked knowing in the least. No one liked suddenly being vulnerable to anyone with a knowledge of herbs and a little hot water. That knowledge was worse than poison, as the Sitters here made clear.

ət mɛnʃən ə ði ɝb, dʌɑɹəz bɪɡ, dɑɹk aɪz ɡɹu ənizi ɪn əɹ kɑpɝi feɪs, ən ʃi hɛl hɝsɛlf mɔɹ stɪfli ðən juʒəwəl, hænz klʌtʃɪŋ skɝts soʊ ɹɛd ðeɪ sim nɪɹli blæk. sɛdɔɹi æktʃəli  swɑloʊd, ən əɹ fɪŋɡɝz taɪɾənd ɑn ðə wɝk lɛðɝ foʊldɝ ɪleɪɾə hæd hændəd hɝ, ðoʊ ðə ɹaʊnd-feɪs jɛloʊ juʒəwəli kæɹid hɝsɛlf wɪð ə fɹɔsti ɛləɡəns. ændaɪə ʃɪvɝd! ʃi æktʃəli  ɹæpt əɹ ɡɹeɪ-fɹɪnd ʃɔl ɝaʊn əɹ kənvʌlsɪvli.

At mention of the herb, Duhara's big, dark eyes grew uneasy in her coppery face, and she held herself more stiffly than usual, hands clutching skirts so red they seemed nearly black. Sedore actually swallowed, and her fingers tightened on the worked leather folder Elaida had handed her, though the round-faced Yellow usually carried herself with a frosty elegance. Andaya shivered! She actually wrapped her gray-fringed shawl around her convulsively.

ɪleɪɾə wʌndɝd wʌt ðeɪ wəd də ɪf ðeɪ lɝn ði æʃəmən hæd ɹiɾɪskʌvɝd tʃɹævlɪŋ. əz ɪt wɑz, ðeɪ wɝ bɛɹli eɪbəl tə meɪk ðɛmsɛlvz spik ə ðɛm. ət list ʃi hæd mænədʒ tə hoʊl ðət nɑlədʒ tə ə hændfʊl.

Elaida wondered what they would do if they learned the Asha'man had rediscovered Traveling. As it was, they were barely able to make themselves speak of them. At least she had managed to hold that knowledge to a handful.

"aɪ θɪŋk wi maɪt bɛɾɝ kənsɝn aʊɝsɛlvz wɪð wʌt wi noʊ tə bi tʃɹu, jɛs?" ændaɪə sɛd fɝmli, bæk ɪn kəntʃɹoʊl ə hɝsɛlf. hɝ laɪt bɹaʊn hɛɹ, bɹʌʃt tɪl ɪt ɡlimd, hʌŋ floʊɪŋ daʊn əɹ bæk, ən əɹ sɪlvɝ-slæʃt blu dʒɹɛs wɑz kʌɾ ɪn ðə staɪl ʌv ændɝ, bʌt tæɹɑbən stɪl ɹɛstəd stʃɹɔŋli ɑn əɹ tʌŋ. ðoʊ niðɝ pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli smɔl nɔɹ pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli slɪm, ʃi sʌmhaʊ ɔlweɪz ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪleɪɾə ʌv ə spɛɹoʊ əbaʊt tə hɑp ɑn ə bɹæntʃ. ə moʊst ənlaɪkli-əpɪɹɪŋ nəɡoʊʃieɪɾɝ, ðoʊ hɝ ɹɛpjəteɪʃən hæd bɪn ɝnd. ʃi smaɪld ət ði ʌðɝz, nɑt vɛɹi plɛzənli, ən ðət sim spɛɹoʊlaɪk, tu. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz haʊ ʃi hɛld əɹ hɛd. "aɪɾəl spɛkjəleɪʃən, ɪt weɪsts pɹɛʃəs taɪm. ðə wɝl hæŋz baɪ ə θɹɛd, ən maɪsɛlf, aɪ də nɑt wɪʃ tə fɹɪɾɝ əweɪ væljəbəl aʊɝz pɹæɾəlɪŋ əbaʊt səpoʊz lɑdʒɪk əɹ tʃæɾɝɪŋ oʊvɝ wʌɾ ɛvɹi ful ən nɑvəs noʊz. dʌz ɛniwʌn əv ɛniθɪŋ jusfəl tə seɪ?" fəɹ ə spɛɹoʊ, ʃi kəd pʊɾ æsəɾ ɑn əɹ wɝdz. vɛlinəz feɪs wɛn ɹɛd, ən ʃɛvənz dɑɹkənd.

"I think we might better concern ourselves with what we know to be true, yes?" Andaya said firmly, back in control of herself. Her light brown hair, brushed till it gleamed, hung flowing down her back, and her silver-slashed blue dress was cut in the style of Andor, but Tarabon still rested strongly on her tongue. Though neither particularly small nor particularly slim, she somehow always reminded Elaida of a sparrow about to hop on a branch. A most unlikely-appearing negotiator, though her reputation had been earned. She smiled at the others, not very pleasantly, and that seemed sparrowlike, too. Perhaps it was how she held her head. "Idle speculation, it wastes precious time. The world hangs by a thread, and myself, I do not wish to fritter away valuable hours prattling about supposed logic or chattering over what every fool and novice knows. Does anyone have anything useful to say?" For a sparrow, she could put acid on her words. Velina's face went red, and Shevan's darkened.

ɹubɪn twɪstəɾ əɹ lɪps ət ðə ɡɹeɪ. pɝhæps ðeɪ wɝ mɛn tə meɪk ə smaɪl, bʌt ðeɪ mɪɹli sim tə ɹɪð. wɪð ɹeɪvən-blæk hɛɹ ən aɪz laɪk sæfaɪɝz, ðə minɝ juʒəwəli lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə wɔk θɹu ə stoʊn wɔl, ən plæntɪŋ əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps naʊ, ʃi simd ɹɛɾi tə wɔk θɹu tu. "wiv dɛlt wɪð wʌt wi kən fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ, ændaɪə. moʊst ʌv ɪt, ɛniweɪ. ðə ɹɛbəlz ɑɹ kɑt baɪ ðə snoʊz ɪn mʊɹændi, ən wɪl meɪk wɪntɝ hɑɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ əm ðəɾ ɪn ðə spɹɪŋ ðəl kʌm kɹɔlɪŋ bæk tə əpɑlədʒaɪz ən bɛɡ pɛnəns. tiɹ wɪl bi teɪkən kɛɹ ʌv əz sun əz wi faɪnd wɛɹ ðə haɪ lɔɹd dɑɹlɪn əz vænɪʃt tə, ən kɛɹhin wʌns wi ɹut kæɹɑlin dəmədʒɹɾ ən tɔɹæm ɹieɪɾən aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ haɪɾɪŋ pleɪsəz. ælθɹ əz ðə kɹaʊn ʌv ɪljən fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, bʌt ðæts ɪn wɝk. soʊ, ənlɛs juv ə skim fəɹ snæfəlɪŋ ðə mæn ɪndə ðə taʊɝ əɹ meɪkɪŋ ðiz soʊ-kɔld æʃəmən' vænɪʃ, aɪ hæv ðə bɪznəs ə maɪ ədʒɑ tə bi əbaʊt."

Rubinde twisted her lips at the Gray. Perhaps they were meant to make a smile, but they merely seemed to writhe. With raven-black hair and eyes like sapphires, the Mayener usually looked as if she intended to walk through a stone wall, and planting her fists on her hips now, she seemed ready to walk through two. "We've dealt with what we can for the time being, Andaya. Most of it, anyway. The rebels are caught by the snows in Murandy, and we'll make winter hot enough for them that in the spring they'll come crawling back to apologize and beg penance. Tear will be taken care of as soon as we find where the High Lord Darlin has vanished to, and Cairhien once we root Caraline Damodred and Toram Riatin out of their hiding places. Al'Thor has the crown of Illian for the moment, but that's in work. So, unless you have a scheme for snaffling the man into the Tower or making these so-called Asha'man' vanish, I have the business of my Ajah to be about."

ændaɪə dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp, hɝ fɛðɝz wɛl ən tʃɹuli ɹʌfəld. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, dʌɑɹəz aɪz nɛɹoʊd; mɛnʃən ə mɛn u kəd tʃænəl ɔlweɪz lɪt faɪɝz ɪn əɹ hɛd. ʃɛvən klɪkt əɹ tʌŋ əz ɪf ət tʃɪlʒɹən skwɑbəlɪŋ - ðoʊ ʃi lʊk pliz tə si ɪt - ən vɛlinə fɹaʊnd, fəɹ səm ɹizən ʃʊɹ ʃɛvən hæɾ eɪmd ət hɝ. ðɪs wɑz əmjuzɪŋ, bʌt ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə hænd.

Andaya drew herself up, her feathers well and truly ruffled. For that matter, Duhara's eyes narrowed; mention of men who could channel always lit fires in her head. Shevan clicked her tongue as if at children squabbling - though she looked pleased to see it - and Velina frowned, for some reason sure Shevan had aimed at her. This was amusing, but getting out of hand.

"ðə bɪznəs ə ði ədʒəz ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt, dɔɾɝz." ɪleɪɾə dɪd nɑt ɹeɪz əɹ vɔɪs, bʌɾ ɛvɹi hɛd swɪvəl təwɔɹd hɝ. ʃi ɹipleɪs ði aɪvɝi kɑɹvɪŋ wɪð ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ kəlɛkʃən ɪn ðə lɑɹdʒ bɑks kʌvɝd wɪð ɹoʊzɪz ən ɡoʊldən skɹoʊlz, kɛɹfəli ədʒʌstəd ðə pəzɪʃənz ə hɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ keɪs ən kɔɹəspɑndəns bɑks soʊ ðə θɹi lækɝd bɑksəz laɪn ʌp dʒʌst soʊ ɑn ðə teɪbəl, ən wʌns ðɛɹ saɪləns wɑz pɝfəkt ʃi wɛn ɑn. "ðə bɪznəs ə ðə taʊɝ ɪz mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt, ðoʊ. aɪ tʃɹʌs jəl ɪfɛk maɪ dɪkɹiz pɹɑmpli. aɪ si tu mʌtʃ sloʊθ ɪn ðə taʊɝ. aɪ fɪɹ sɪlviænə meɪ faɪn hɝsɛlf vɛɹi bɪzi ɪf mæɾɝz də nɑt kʌm ɹaɪt sun." ʃi dɪd nɑt vɔɪs ɛni fɝðɝ θɹɛt. ʃi mɪɹli smaɪld.

"The business of the Ajahs is important, daughters." Elaida did not raise her voice, but every head swiveled toward her. She replaced the ivory carving with the rest of her collection in the large box covered with roses and golden scrolls, carefully adjusted the positions of her writing case and correspondence box so the three lacquered boxes lined up just so on the table, and once their silence was perfect she went on. "The business of the Tower is more important, though. I trust you will effect my decrees promptly. I see too much sloth in the Tower. I fear Silviana may find herself very busy if matters do not come right soon." She did not voice any further threat. She merely smiled.

"æz jə kəmænd, mʌðɝ," mɝmɝd sɪks vɔɪsəz nɑt soʊ stɛɾi əz ðɛɹ oʊnɝz maɪɾ əv wɪʃt. ivən dʌɑɹəz feɪs wɑz peɪsti peɪl əz ðeɪ meɪd ðɛɹ kɝtsiz. tu sɪɾɝz hæd bɪn stʃɹɪpt ə ðɛɹ tʃɛɹz, ən hæf ə dʌzən hæd sɝv deɪz ə leɪbɝ fəɹ pɛnəns - wɪtʃ wɑz hjumɪlieɪɾɪŋ ɪnʌf ɪn ðɛɹ pəzɪʃən tə bi mɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃən ə ðə spɪɹət bɪsaɪdz; ʃɛvən ən sɛdɔɹi sɝɾənli wɔɹ taɪt maʊðz əz ðeɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɔl tu wɛl skɹʌbɪŋ flɔɹz ən wɝkɪŋ ɪn ðə lɔnʒɹiz - bʌt nʌn hæd bɪn sɛn tə sɪlviænə fəɹ mɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃən ə ðə flɛʃ. noʊ wʌn wɑntəd tə bi. ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz hæd tu əɹ θɹi vɪzəts itʃ wik fɹəm sɪstɝz u bɪn ɡɪvən pɛnəns baɪ ðɛɹ ədʒəz əɹ sɛt wʌn fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz - ə doʊs ə ðə stʃɹæp, haʊɛvɝ peɪnfəl, wɑz dʌn wɪð mʌtʃ mɔɹ kwɪkli ðən ɹeɪkɪŋ ɡɑɹɾən pæðz fəɹ ə mʌnθ - bʌt sɪlviænə pəzɛs kənsɪɾɝəbli lɛs mɝsi wɪð sɪstɝz ðən wɪð ðə nɑvəsɪz ən æksɛptɪɾ ɪn əɹ tʃɑɹdʒ. mɔɹ ðən wʌn sɪstɝ mʌst əv spɛn ðə nɛks fju deɪz wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ ə mʌnθ pʊlɪŋ ə ɹeɪk maɪt nɑɾ əv bɪn pɹɛfɝəbəl æftɝ ɔl.

"As you command, Mother," murmured six voices not so steady as their owners might have wished. Even Duhara's face was pasty pale as they made their curtsies. Two Sitters had been stripped of their chairs, and half a dozen had served days of Labor for penance - which was humiliating enough in their position to be Mortification of the Spirit besides; Shevan and Sedore certainly wore tight mouths as they remembered all too well scrubbing floors and working in the laundries - but none had been sent to Silviana for Mortification of the Flesh. No one wanted to be. The Mistress of Novices had two or three visits each week from sisters who been given penance by their Ajahs or set one for themselves - a dose of the strap, however painful, was done with much more quickly than raking garden paths for a month - but Silviana possessed considerably less mercy with sisters than with the novices and Accepted in her charge. More than one sister must have spent the next few days wondering whether a month pulling a rake might not have been preferable after all.

ðeɪ skɝid təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹz, iɡɝ tə bi əweɪ. sɪɾɝz əɹ noʊ, nɑt wʌn wʊɾə sɛt fʊt ðɪs haɪ ɪn ðə taʊɝ wɪθaʊɾ ɪleɪɾəz dɝɛk sʌmənz. fɪŋɡɝɪŋ əɹ stʃɹaɪp stoʊl, ɪleɪɾə lɛɾ əɹ smaɪl bɪkʌm wʌn ə plɛʒɝ. jɛs, ʃi wɑz ðə mɪstʃɹəs ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. əz wɑz oʊnli pɹɑpɝ fəɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit.

They scurried toward the doors, eager to be away. Sitters or no, not one would have set foot this high in the Tower without Elaida's direct summons. Fingering her striped stole, Elaida let her smile become one of pleasure. Yes, she was the mistress in the White Tower. As was only proper for the Amyrlin Seat.

bɪfɔɹ ðət fæst-stɛpɪŋ nɑɾ ə sɪɾɝz ɹitʃ ðə dɔɹweɪ, ðə lɛft-hæn dɔɹ oʊpənd, ən ɑlviɛɝɪn stɛpt ɪn, ðə nɛɹoʊ waɪt stoʊl ə ðə kipɝ ɔlmoʊs vænɪʃɪŋ əɡɛnst ə sɪlk dʒɹɛs ðət meɪd vɛlinəz sim dɪnʒi.

Before that fast-stepping knot of Sitters reach the doorway, the left-hand door opened, and Alviarin stepped in, the narrow white stole of the Keeper almost vanishing against a silk dress that made Velina's seem dingy.

ɪleɪɾə fɛlt əɹ smaɪl ɡoʊ kɹʊkəɾ ən bɪɡɪn slaɪɾɪŋ fɹəm əɹ feɪs. ɑlviɛɝɪn hæɾ ə sɪŋɡəl ʃiɾ ə pɑɹtʃmən ɪn wʌn slɪm hænd. ɑd, wʌt wʌn noʊɾəst əɾ ə taɪm laɪk ðɪs. ðə wʊmən hæd bɪn ɡɔn ɔlmoʊs tu wiks, vænɪʃt fɹəm ðə taʊɝ wɪθaʊt wɝɾ əɹ noʊt, wɪθaʊɾ ɛniwʌn soʊ mʌtʃ əz siɪŋ əɹ ɡoʊ, ən ɪleɪɾə hæd bɪɡʌn tə θɪŋk fɑn θɔts ʌv ɑlviɛɝɪn laɪɪŋ ɪn ə snoʊbæŋk, əɹ swɛpt əweɪ ɪn ə ɹɪvɝ, slaɪɾɪŋ bɪniθ ði aɪs.

Elaida felt her smile go crooked and begin sliding from her face. Alviarin had a single sheet of parchment in one slim hand. Odd, what one noticed at a time like this. The woman had been gone almost two weeks, vanished from the Tower without word or note, without anyone so much as seeing her go, and Elaida had begun to think fond thoughts of Alviarin lying in a snowbank, or swept away in a river, sliding beneath the ice.

ðə sɪks sɪɾɝz skɪɾəd tə ə hɔlt ənsɝteɪnli wən ɑlviɛɝɪn dɪd nɑt muv aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ weɪ. ivən ə kipɝ wɪð ɑlviɛɝɪnz ɪnfluəns dɪd nɑɾ ɪmpid sɪɾɝz. ðoʊ vɛlinə, nɔɹməli ðə moʊst sɛlf-pəzɛst wʊmən ɪn ðə taʊɝ, flɪntʃt fəɹ səm ɹizən. ɑlviɛɝɪn ɡlænst wʌns əɾ ɪleɪɾə, kuli, stʌɾid ðə sɪɾɝz fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ən ʌndɝstʊɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ.

The six Sitters skidded to a halt uncertainly when Alviarin did not move out of their way. Even a Keeper with Alviarin's influence did not impede Sitters. Though Velina, normally the most self-possessed woman in the Tower, flinched for some reason. Alviarin glanced once at Elaida, coolly, studied the Sitters for a moment, and understood everything.

"aɪ θɪŋk jə ʃəd liv ðət wɪð mi," ʃi sɛd tə sɛdɔɹi ɪn toʊnz oʊnli ə fɹækʃən wɔɹmɝ ðən ðə snoʊ aʊtsaɪd. "ðə mʌðɝ laɪks tə kənsɪɾɝ əɹ dɪkɹiz kɛɹfəli, əz jə noʊ. ðɪs wəd nɑt bi ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi tʃeɪnʒd əɹ maɪn æftɝ saɪnɪŋ." ʃi hɛld aʊɾ ə slɪm hænd.

"I think you should leave that with me," she said to Sedore in tones only a fraction warmer than the snow outside. "The Mother likes to consider her decrees carefully, as you know. This would not be the first time she changed her mind after signing." She held out a slim hand.

sɛdɔɹi, huz ɛɹəɡəns wɑz noʊɾəbəl ivən əmʌŋ jɛloʊz, bɛɹli hɛzɪteɪɾɪd bɪfɔɹ ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ ðə lɛðɝ foʊldɝ.

Sedore, whose arrogance was notable even among Yellows, barely hesitated before giving her the leather folder.

ɪleɪɾə ɡɹaʊn əɹ tiθ ɪn fjʊɹi. sɛdɔɹi hæd heɪɾəd əɹ faɪv deɪz ʌp tə hɝ ɛlboʊz ɪn hɑt wɔɾɝ ən skɹʌb bɔɹdz. ɪleɪɾə wəd faɪn sʌmθɪŋ lɛs kʌmftəɹbəl fəɹ əɹ nɛks taɪm. meɪbi sɪlviænə æftɝ ɔl. meɪbi klinɪŋ ðə sɛspɪts!

Elaida ground her teeth in fury. Sedore had hated her five days up to her elbows in hot water and scrub boards. Elaida would find something less comfortable for her next time. Maybe Silviana after all. Maybe cleaning the cesspits!

ɑlviɛɝɪn stɛpt əsaɪd wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd, ən ðə sɪɾɝz wɛnt, ədʒʌstɪŋ ʃɔlz, mʌɾɝɪŋ tə ðɛmsɛlvz, ɹiəsumɪŋ ðə dɪɡnəɾi ʌv ðə hɔl. bɹɪskli, ɑlviɛɝɪn kloʊz ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn əm ən wɔk təwɔɹɾ ɪleɪɾə θʌmɪŋ θɹu ðə peɪpɝz ɪn ðə foʊldɝ. ðə dɪkɹiz ʃi hæd saɪn hoʊpɪŋ ɑlviɛɝɪn wɑz dɛd. ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi hæd nɑt ɹɛstəɾ ɑn hoʊp. ʃi hæd nɑt spoʊkən tə sin, ɪn keɪs sʌmwʌn maɪt si ən tɛl ɑlviɛɝɪn wən ʃi ɹɪtɝnd, bʌt sin wɑz sɝɾənli wɝkɪŋ əweɪ əz ɪnstʃɹʌktəd, fɑloʊɪŋ ðə pæθ ə tʃɹizən ðət ʃʊɹli wəd lɛd tə ɑlviɛɝɪn fɹaɪɾən. bʌɾ ɪleɪɾə hæd hoʊpt. oʊ, haʊ ʃi hæd hoʊpt.

Alviarin stepped aside without a word, and the Sitters went, adjusting shawls, muttering to themselves, reassuming the dignity of the Hall. Briskly, Alviarin closed the door behind them and walked toward Elaida thumbing through the papers in the folder. The decrees she had signed hoping Alviarin was dead. Of course, she had not rested on hope. She had not spoken to Seaine, in case someone might see and tell Alviarin when she returned, but Seaine was certainly working away as instructed, following the path of treason that surely would lead to Alviarin Freidhen. But Elaida had hoped. Oh, how she had hoped.

ɑlviɛɝɪn mɝmɝd tə hɝsɛlf əz ʃi ɹaɪfəl ðə foʊldɝ. "ðɪs kən ɡoʊ θɹu, aɪ səpoʊz. bʌt nɑt ðɪs. əɹ ðɪs. ən sɝɾənli nɑt ðɪs!" ʃi kɹʌmpəld ə dɪkɹi, saɪn ən sil baɪ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ən tɔst ɪt tə ðə flɔɹ kəntɛmptʃwəsli. stɑpɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ɪleɪɾəz ɡɪldɪd tʃɛɹ, wɪð ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ɪn munstoʊnz ətɑp ɪts haɪ bæk, ʃi slæp ðə foʊldɝ ən əɹ oʊn pɑɹtʃmən daʊn ɑn ðə teɪbəl. ən ðən slæpt ɪleɪɾəz feɪs soʊ hɑɹd ʃi sɔ blæk flɛks.

Alviarin murmured to herself as she rifled the folder. "This can go through, I suppose. But not this. Or this. And certainly not this!" She crumpled a decree, signed and sealed by the Amyrlin Seat, and tossed it to the floor contemptuously. Stopping beside Elaida's gilded chair, with the Flame of Tar Valon in moonstones atop its high back, she slapped the folder and her own parchment down on the table. And then slapped Elaida's face so hard she saw black flecks.

"aɪ θɔt wi hæd sɛɾəld ðɪs, ɪleɪɾə." ðə mɑnstʃɹəs wʊmənz vɔɪs meɪd ðə snoʊstɔɹm aʊtsaɪd sim wɔɹm. "aɪ noʊ haʊ tə seɪv ðə taʊɝ fɹəm jəɹ blʌndɝz, ən aɪ woʊn əv jə meɪkɪŋ nu wʌnz bɪhaɪn maɪ bæk. ɪf jə pɝsɪst, bi əʃʊɹd ðəɾ əl si jə dɪpoʊzd, stɪld, ən haʊlɪŋ ʌndɝ ðə bɝtʃ bɪfɔɹ ɛvɹi ɪnɪʃiəɾ ən ivən ðə sɝvəns!"

"I thought we had settled this, Elaida." The monstrous woman's voice made the snowstorm outside seem warm. "I know how to save the Tower from your blunders, and I won't have you making new ones behind my back. If you persist, be assured that I will see you deposed, stilled, and howling under the birch before every initiate and even the servants!"

wɪð ən ɛfɝt, ɪleɪɾə kɛpt əɹ hæn əweɪ fɹəm əɹ tʃik. ʃi dɪd nɑt niɾ ə mɪɹɝ tə tɛl əɹ ɪt wɑz ɹɛd. ʃi hæd tə bi kɛɹfəl. sin hæd faʊnd nʌθɪŋ jɛt, əɹ ʃi wəɾ əv kʌm. ɑlviɛɝɪn kəɾ oʊpən əɹ maʊθ bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl ən ɹɪvil ðə hoʊl dɪzæstʃɹəs kɪdnæpɪŋ ə ði ælθɹ bɔɪ. ʃi maɪt si hɝ dɪpoʊzd, ən stɪld ən bɝtʃt wɪð ðəɾ əloʊn, bʌɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn hæɾ ənʌðɝ stʃɹɪŋ tə hɝ baʊ. tʌvaɪn ɡæzəl wɑz liɾɪŋ fɪfti sɪstɝz ən tu hʌnʒɹəd ə ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹɾ əɡɛnst ə blæk taʊɝ ɪleɪɾə hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ, wən ʃi ɡeɪv ði ɔɹɾɝz, hɛl pɝhæps tu əɹ θɹi mɛn u kəd tʃænəl. jɛɾ ivən wɪð ðə hʌnʒɹədz - hʌnʒɹədz! wɪð ɑlviɛɝɪn stɛɹɪŋ koʊldli daʊn ət hɝ, ðət θɔt stɪl kɝɾəld ɪleɪɾəz stʌmək! - ivən wɪð hʌnʒɹədz ə ðiz æʃəmən, ʃi hæd hoʊp fəɹ tʌvaɪn. ðə blæk taʊɝ wəd bi ɹɛn ɪn faɪɝ ən blʌd, ʃi hæd fɔɹtoʊld, ən sɪstɝz wəd wɔk ɪts ɡɹaʊnz. ʃʊɹli ðət mɛn ðət sʌmhaʊ, tʌvaɪn wəd tʃɹaɪəmf. mɔɹ, ðə ɹɛst ə ðə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ hæd toʊld əɹ ðət ðə taʊɝ wəd ɹɪɡeɪn ɔl ɪts oʊld ɡlɔɹiz ʌndɝ hɝ, ðəɾ ælθɹ hɪmsɛlf wəd kweɪl əɾ əɹ æŋɡɝ. ɑlviɛɝɪn hæd hɝd ðə wɝdz kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ɪleɪɾəz maʊθ wən ðə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ tʊk hɝ. ən ʃi hæd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝd leɪɾɝ, wən ʃi bɪɡæn əɹ blækmeɪl, hæd nɑɾ ʌndɝstʊɾ əɹ oʊn dum. ɪleɪɾə weɪɾəd ɪn peɪʃəns. ʃi wəd ɹipeɪ ðə wʊmən θɹi-foʊld! bʌt ʃi kəd bi peɪʃənt. fəɹ naʊ.

With an effort, Elaida kept her hand away from her cheek. She did not need a mirror to tell her it was red. She had to be careful. Seaine had found nothing yet, or she would have come. Alviarin could open her mouth before the Hall and reveal the whole disastrous kidnapping of the al'Thor boy. She might see her deposed, and stilled and birched with that alone, but Alviarin had another string to her bow. Toveine Gazal was leading fifty sisters and two hundred of the Tower Guard against a Black Tower Elaida had been sure, when she gave the orders, held perhaps two or three men who could channel. Yet even with the hundreds - hundreds! with Alviarin staring coldly down at her, that thought still curdled Elaida's stomach! - even with hundreds of these Asha'man, she had hope for Toveine. The Black Tower would be rent in fire and blood, she had Foretold, and sisters would walk its grounds. Surely that meant that somehow, Toveine would triumph. More, the rest of the Foretelling had told her that the Tower would regain all its old glories under her, that al'Thor himself would quail at her anger. Alviarin had heard the words coming out of Elaida's mouth when the Foretelling took her. And she had not remembered later, when she began her blackmail, had not understood her own doom. Elaida waited in patience. She would repay the woman three-fold! But she could be patient. For now.

meɪkɪŋ noʊ ətɛmp tə haɪɾ əɹ snɪɹ, ɑlviɛɝɪn pʊʃt ðə foʊldɝ əsaɪɾ ən muv ðə sɪŋɡəl pɑɹtʃmən ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɪleɪɾə. ʃi flɪpt oʊpən ðə ɡɹin-ænd-ɡoʊld ɹaɪɾɪŋ keɪs, dɪpt ɪleɪɾəz pɛn ɪn ði ɪŋkwɛl ən θɹʌst ɪɾ ət hɝ. "saɪn."

Making no attempt to hide her sneer, Alviarin pushed the folder aside and moved the single parchment in front of Elaida. She flipped open the green-and-gold writing case, dipped Elaida's pen in the inkwell and thrust it at her. "Sign."

ɪleɪɾə tʊk ðə pɛn wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt mædnəs ʃi wəd bi pʊɾɪŋ əɹ neɪm tə ðɪs taɪm. jɛɾ ənʌðɝ ɪnkɹis ɪn ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹd, wən ðə ɹɛbəlz wəd bi dʌn bɪfɔɹ ðəɹ wɑz ɛni jus fəɹ soʊlʒɝz? ənʌðɝ ətɛmp tə meɪk ði ədʒəz ɹɪvil pʌblɪkli wɪtʃ sɪstɝz hɛɾəd ðɛm? ðət hæd sɝɾənli fɔlən ɑn ɪts noʊz! ɹɛɾɪŋ kwɪkli, ʃi fɛlt ə nɑɾ ʌv aɪs ɡɹoʊ ɪn əɹ bɛli ən kip ɡɹoʊɪŋ. ɡɪvɪŋ itʃ ədʒɑ faɪnəl əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ ɛni sɪstɝ ɪn ɪts kɔɹɾɝ noʊ mæɾɝ əɹ oʊn ədʒɑ hæd bɪn ðə wɝst ɪnsænəɾi soʊ fɑɹ - haʊ kəd pɪkɪŋ əpɑɹt ðə vɛɹi fæbɹɪk ə ðə taʊɝ seɪv ɪt? - bʌt ðɪs - !

Elaida took the pen wondering what madness she would be putting her name to this time. Yet another increase in the Tower Guard, when the rebels would be done before there was any use for soldiers? Another attempt to make the Ajahs reveal publicly which sisters headed them? That had certainly fallen on its nose! Reading quickly, she felt a knot of ice grow in her belly and keep growing. Giving each Ajah final authority over any sister in its quarter no matter her own Ajah had been the worst insanity so far - how could picking apart the very fabric of the Tower save it? - but this - !

ðə wɝl naʊ noʊz ðət ɹænd ælθɹ ɪz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ðə wɝl noʊz ðət hiz ə mæn u kən tʌtʃ ðə wʌn paʊɝ. sətʃ mɛn əv leɪn wɪðɪn ði əθɔɹəɾi ʌv ðə waɪt taʊɝ sɪns taɪm ɪməmɔɹiəl. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪz ɡɹæntəd ðə pɹətɛkʃən ə ðə taʊɝ, bʌt husoʊɛvɝ ətɛmps tə əpɹoʊtʃ ɪm seɪv θɹu ðə waɪt taʊɝ laɪz əɾəntɪd ə tʃɹizən əɡɛns ðə laɪt, ən ənæθəmə ɪz pɹənaʊnst əɡɛnst əm naʊ ən fɝɛvɝ. ðə wɝl meɪ ɹɛst izəli noʊɪŋ ðət ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɪl seɪfli ɡaɪd ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn tə ðə læs bæɾəl ən ði ɪnɛvəɾəbəl tʃɹaɪəmf.

The world now knows that Rand al'Thor is the Dragon Reborn. The world knows that he is a man who can touch the One Power. Such men have lain within the authority of the White Tower since time immemorial. The Dragon Reborn is granted the protection of the Tower, but whosoever attempts to approach him save through the White Tower lies attainted of treason against the Light, and anathema is pronounced against them now and forever. The world may rest easily knowing that the White Tower will safely guide the Dragon Reborn to the Last Battle and the inevitable triumph.

ɔɾəmætɪkli, nʌmbli, ʃi æɾəd "ʌv ðə laɪt" æftɝ "tʃɹaɪəmf," bʌt ðən əɹ hæn fɹoʊz. pʌblɪkli æknɑlɪdʒɪŋ ælθɹ əz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn kəd bi bɔɹn, sɪns i wɑz, ən ðɪs maɪt lɛd mɛni tə æksɛp ðə ɹumɝz ðəɾ i hæd nɛl tə hɝ ɔlɹɛɾi, wɪtʃ wəd pɹuv jusfəl, bʌt fəɹ ðə ɹɛst, ʃi kəd nɑt bɪliv soʊ mʌtʃ dæmədʒ kəd bi kənteɪn ɪn soʊ fju wɝdz.

Automatically, numbly, she added "of the Light" after "triumph," but then her hand froze. Publicly acknowledging al'Thor as the Dragon Reborn could be borne, since he was, and this might lead many to accept the rumors that he had knelt to her already, which would prove useful, but for the rest, she could not believe so much damage could be contained in so few words.

"ðə laɪɾ əv mɝsi," ʃi bɹið fɝvənli. "ɪf ðɪs ɪz pɹoʊkleɪmd, ɪɾəl bi ɪmpɑsəbəl tə kənvɪns ælθɹ ðəɾ ɪz æbdʌkʃən wɑz ənsæŋkʃənd." ɪt wəd bi hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf wɪθaʊt, bʌt ʃi hæd sin pipəl kənvɪns bɪfɔɹ ðət wʌt hæd hæpənd, hæd nɑt, ən əm ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ɪt hæpənɪŋ. "æn hɪl bi tɛn taɪmz ɑn ɪz ɡɑɹɾ əɡɛnst ənʌðɝ ətɛmpt. ɑlviɛɝɪn, ət bɛst, ðɪs wɪl fɹaɪɾən əweɪ ə fju ʌv ɪz fɑloʊɝz. ət bɛst!" mɛni laɪkli hæd weɪɾɪd soʊ dip wɪð ɪm ðeɪ dɪd nɑt dɛɹ tʃɹaɪ tə weɪd bæk. sɝɾənli nɑɾ ɪf ðeɪ θɔɾ ənæθəmə ɔlɹɛɾi hʌŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ hɛdz! "aɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl sɛt faɪɝ tə ðə taʊɝ wɪð maɪ oʊn hæn əz saɪn ðɪs!"

"The Light have mercy," she breathed fervently. "If this is proclaimed, it will be impossible to convince al'Thor that his abduction was unsanctioned." It would be hard enough without, but she had seen people convinced before that what had happened, had not, and them in the middle of it happening. "And he will be ten times on his guard against another attempt. Alviarin, at best, this will frighten away a few of his followers. At best!" Many likely had waded so deep with him they did not dare try to wade back. Certainly not if they thought anathema already hung over their heads! "I might as well set fire to the Tower with my own hand as sign this!"

ɑlviɛɝɪn saɪɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli. "ju hævən fɝɡɑɾən jəɹ kæɾəkɪzəm, hæv ju? seɪ ɪt fəɹ mi, əz aɪ tɔt ju."

Alviarin sighed impatiently. "You haven't forgotten your catechism, have you? Say it for me, as I taught you."

ɪleɪɾəz lɪps kəmpɹɛst ə ðɛɹ oʊn əkɔɹd. wʌn plɛʒɝ ɪn ðə wʊmənz æbsəns - nɑt ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst, bʌɾ ə vɛɹi ɹil plɛʒɝ - hæd bɪn nɑt biɪŋ fɔɹs tə ɹɪpit ðət vaɪl lɪɾəni ɛvɹi deɪ. "aɪ wɪl də əz aɪm toʊld," ʃi sɛɾ ət læst, ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs. ʃi wɑz ði æmɪɝlɪn sit! "aɪ wɪl spik ðə wɝdz jə tɛl mi tə spik, ən noʊ mɔɹ." hɝ fɔɹtɛlɪŋ ɔɹdeɪn əɹ tʃɹaɪəmf, bʌt, oʊ, laɪt, lɛɾ ɪt kʌm sun! "aɪ wɪl saɪn wʌt jə tɛl mi tə saɪn, ən nʌθɪŋ ɛls. aɪm . . ." ʃi tʃoʊkt oʊvɝ ðə læst. "aɪ æm oʊbiɾiənt tə jəɹ wɪl."

Elaida's lips compressed of their own accord. One pleasure in the woman's absence - not the greatest, but a very real pleasure - had been not being forced to repeat that vile litany every day. "I will do as I am told," she said at last, in a flat voice. She was the Amyrlin Seat! "I will speak the words you tell me to speak, and no more." Her Foretelling ordained her triumph, but, oh, Light, let it come soon! "I will sign what you tell me to sign, and nothing else. I am . . ." She choked over the last. "I am obedient to your will."

"ju saʊn əz ɪf jə nid tə bi ɹimaɪndəɾ ə ðə tʃɹuθ ə ðæt," ɑlviɛɝɪn sɛd wɪð ənʌðɝ saɪ. "aɪ səpoʊz aɪv lɛf jə əloʊn tu lɔŋ." ʃi tæp ðə pɑɹtʃmənt wɪð ə pɝɛmptɝi fɪŋɡɝ. "saɪn."

"You sound as if you need to be reminded of the truth of that," Alviarin said with another sigh. "I suppose I've left you alone too long." She tapped the parchment with a peremptory finger. "Sign."

ɪleɪɾə saɪnd, dʒɹæɡɪŋ ðə pɛn əkɹɔs ðə pɑɹtʃmənt. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɛls ʃi kəd du.

Elaida signed, dragging the pen across the parchment. There was nothing else she could do.

ɑlviɛɝɪn bɛɹli weɪɾəd fəɹ ðə pɛnz nɪb tə lɪf bɪfɔɹ snætʃɪŋ ʌp ðə dɪkɹi. "aɪ wɪl sil ðɪs maɪsɛlf," ʃi sɛd, hɛɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə dɔɹ. "aɪ ʃʊdn əv lɛf ði æmɪɝlɪnz sil wɛɹ jə kəd faɪn ɪt. aɪ wɑnə tɔk tə jə leɪɾɝ. aɪ hæv lɛf jə tə jɝsɛlf tu lɔŋ. bi hɪɹ wən aɪ ɹɪtɝn."

Alviarin barely waited for the pen's nib to lift before snatching up the decree. "I will seal this myself," she said, heading for the door. "I shouldn't have left the Amyrlin's seal where you could find it. I want to talk to you later. I have left you to yourself too long. Be here when I return."

"leɪɾɝ?" ɪleɪɾə sɛd. "wɛn? ɑlviɛɝɪn? ɑlviɛɝɪn?"

"Later?" Elaida said. "When? Alviarin? Alviarin?"

ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn ðə wʊmən, livɪŋ ɪleɪɾə tə fjum. bi ðəɹ wən ɑlviɛɝɪn ɹɪtɝnd! kənfaɪn tə hɝ kɔɹɾɝz laɪk ə nɑvəs ɪn ðə pʌnɪʃmən sɛlz!

The door closed behind the woman, leaving Elaida to fume. Be there when Alviarin returned! Confined to her quarters like a novice in the punishment cells!

fəɹ ə taɪm ʃi fɪŋɡɝɾ əɹ kɔɹəspɑndəns bɑks, wɪð ɪts ɡoʊldən hɔks faɪɾɪŋ əmʌŋ waɪt klaʊdz ɪn ə blu skaɪ, jɛt ʃi kəd nɑt meɪk hɝsɛlf oʊpən ɪt. wɪð ɑlviɛɝɪn ɡɔn, ðət bɑks hæd bɪɡʌn wʌns mɔɹ tə hoʊld lɛɾɝz ən ɹɪpɔɹts ʌv ɪmpɔɹɾəns, nɑt dʒʌs ðə teɪbəl skɹæps ɑlviɛɝɪn lɛt fɔl tə hɝ, jɛt wɪð ðə wʊmənz ɹɪtɝn, ɪt maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn ɛmpti. ɹaɪzɪŋ, ʃi bɪɡæn ɹiɝeɪnʒɪŋ ðə ɹoʊzɪz ɪn ðɛɹ waɪt veɪsəz, itʃ ətɑp ə waɪt mɑɹbəl plɪnθ ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə ɹum. blu ɹoʊzɪz; ðə moʊst ɹɛɹ.

For a time she fingered her correspondence box, with its golden hawks fighting among white clouds in a blue sky, yet she could not make herself open it. With Alviarin gone, that box had begun once more to hold letters and reports of importance, not just the table scraps Alviarin let fall to her, yet with the woman's return, it might as well have been empty. Rising, she began rearranging the roses in their white vases, each atop a white marble plinth in a corner of the room. Blue roses; the most rare.

əbɹʌpli ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ə bɹoʊkən ɹoʊz stɛm ɪn əɹ hænz, snæpt ɪn tu. hæf ə dʌzən mɔɹ lɪɾɝd ðə flɔɹ taɪlz. ʃi meɪɾ ə vɛkst saʊn ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt. ʃi hæd bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ ə hɝ hænz ɝaʊn ɑlviɛɝɪnz θɹoʊt. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi hæd kənsɪɾɝd kɪlɪŋ ðə wʊmən. bʌɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn wʊɾə teɪkən pɹikɔʃənz. sil dɑkjəməns, tə bi oʊpənd ʃəɾ ɛniθɪŋ əntuɔɹd hæpən, hæd noʊ daʊt bɪn lɛft wɪð ðə læst sɪstɝz ɪleɪɾə wəd səspɛkt. ðət hæd bɪn əɹ wʌn ɹil wɝi dʊɹɪŋ ɑlviɛɝɪnz æbsəns, ðət sʌmwʌn ɛls maɪt θɪŋk ðə wʊmən dɛd, ən kʌm fɔɹwɝd wɪð ði ɛvəɾəns ðət wəd dʒɹæɡ ðə stoʊl fɹəm əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ðoʊ, wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ, ɑlviɛɝɪn wɑz fɪnɪʃt, əz ʃʊɹli əz ðoʊz ɹoʊzɪz wɝ -  "ju dɪdn ænsɝ maɪ nɑk, mʌðɝ, soʊ aɪ keɪm ɑn ɪn," ə wʊmən sɛd ɡɹʌflaɪ bɪhaɪn hɝ.

Abruptly she realized that she was staring at a broken rose stem in her hands, snapped in two. Half a dozen more littered the floor tiles. She made a vexed sound in her throat. She had been thinking of her hands around Alviarin's throat. It was not the first time she had considered killing the woman. But Alviarin would have taken precautions. Sealed documents, to be opened should anything untoward happen, had no doubt been left with the last sisters Elaida would suspect. That had been her one real worry during Alviarin's absence, that someone else might think the woman dead, and come forward with the evidence that would drag the stole from her shoulders. Sooner or later, though, one way or another, Alviarin was finished, as surely as those roses were -  "You didn't answer my knock, Mother, so I came on in," a woman said gruffly behind her.

ɪleɪɾə tɝnd, ɹɛɾi tə fleɪ wɪð əɹ tʌŋ, bʌɾ ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə stɑki, skwɛɹ-feɪst wʊmən ɪn ə ɹɛd-fɹɪnd ʃɔl stændɪŋ dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə ɹum, ðə blʌd dʒɹeɪn fɹəm əɹ oʊn tʃiks.

Elaida turned, ready to flay with her tongue, but at the sight of the stocky, square-faced woman in a red-fringed shawl standing just inside the room, the blood drained from her own cheeks.

"ðə kipɝ sɛd jə wɑntəd tə spik mi," sɪlviænə sɛɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli. "əbaʊɾ ə pɹaɪvət pɛnəns." ivən tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ʃi meɪd noʊ ɛfɝt tə haɪɾ əɹ dɪsɡʌst. sɪlviænə bɪliv pɹaɪvət pɛnəns ə ɹɪdɪkjələs æfɛkteɪʃən. pɛnəns wɑz pʌblɪk; oʊnli pʌnɪʃmən tʊk pleɪs ɪn pɹaɪvət. "ʃi ɔlsoʊ æsk mi tə ɹimaɪn jə ʌv sʌmθɪŋ, bʌt ʃi ɹʌʃt ɔf bɪfɔɹ seɪɪŋ wʌt." ʃi fɪnɪʃt wɪð ə snɔɹt. sɪlviænə sɔ ɛniθɪŋ ðət tʊk taɪm əweɪ fɹəm əɹ nɑvəsɪz ən æksɛptɪɾ əz nidləs ɪntɝʌpʃən.

"The Keeper said you wanted to speak me," Silviana said irritably. "About a private penance." Even to the Amyrlin Seat, she made no effort to hide her disgust. Silviana believed private penance a ridiculous affectation. Penance was public; only punishment took place in private. "She also asked me to remind you of something, but she rushed off before saying what." She finished with a snort. Silviana saw anything that took time away from her novices and Accepted as needless interruption.

"aɪ θɪŋk aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ," ɪleɪɾə toʊld əɹ dʌli.

"I think I remember," Elaida told her dully.

wən sɪlviænə faɪnəli lɛft - æftɝ oʊnli hæf ən aʊɝ baɪ ðə tʃaɪmz ə səmeɪlz klɑk, jɛɾ ən ɛnləs ɪtɝnəɾi - ɔl ðət kɛpt ɪleɪɾə fɹəm kɔlɪŋ ðə hɔl tə sɪɾ ɪmiɾiətli soʊ ʃi kəd dɪmæn ɑlviɛɝɪn bi stʃɹɪpt ə ðə kipɝz stoʊl wɝ ðə sɝɾənti ʌv əɹ fɔɹtɛlɪŋ ən ðə sɝɾənti ðət sin wəd tʃɹeɪs ðət tʃɹeɪl ə tʃɹizən bæk tə ɑlviɛɝɪn. ðæt, ən ðə ʃʊɹ fæk ðət wɛðɝ əɹ nɑɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn fɛl ɪn ðə kɑnfɹənteɪʃən, ʃi hɝsɛlf dɛfənətli wʊd. soʊ, ɪleɪɾə də əvɹaɪni ɹɔɪhən, wɑtʃɝ ə ðə silz, ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ʃʊɹli ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ɹulɝ ɪn ðə wɝld, leɪ feɪsdaʊn ɑn əɹ bɛɾ ən blʌbɝɾ ɪndə hɝ pɪloʊz, tu tɛndɝ tə dɑn ðə ʃɪf ðət leɪ dɪskɑɹɾɪd ɑn ðə flɔɹ, sɝɾən ðət wən ɑlviɛɝɪn ɹɪtɝnd, ðə wʊmən wəɾ ɪnsɪst ɑn əɹ sɪɾɪŋ θɹu ði ɪntaɪɝ ɪntɝvju. ʃi blʌbɝd, ən θɹu hɝ tɪɹz ʃi pɹeɪd fəɹ ɑlviɛɝɪnz daʊnfɔl tə kʌm sun.

When Silviana finally left - after only half an hour by the chimes of Cemaile's clock, yet an endless eternity - all that kept Elaida from calling the Hall to sit immediately so she could demand Alviarin be stripped of the Keeper's stole were the certainty of her Foretelling and the certainty that Seaine would trace that trail of treason back to Alviarin. That, and the sure fact that whether or not Alviarin fell in the confrontation, she herself definitely would. So, Elaida do Avriny a'Roihan, Watcher of the Seals, the Flame of Tar Valon, the Amyrlin Seat, surely the most powerful ruler in the world, lay facedown on her bed and blubbered into her pillows, too tender to don the shift that lay discarded on the floor, certain that when Alviarin returned, the woman would insist on her sitting through the entire interview. She blubbered, and through her tears she prayed for Alviarin's downfall to come soon.

"aɪ dɪd nɑt tɛl jə tə hæv ɪleɪɾə . . . biɾən," ðət vɔɪs ə kɹɪstəl tʃaɪmz sɛd. "du jə ɹaɪz əbʌv jɝsɛlf?"

"I did not tell you to have Elaida . . . beaten," that voice of crystal chimes said. "Do you rise above yourself?"

ɑlviɛɝɪn flʌŋ hɝsɛlf fɹəm əɹ niz ɑntu hɝ bɛli bɪfɔɹ ðə wʊmən u simd meɪɾ ə dɑɹk ʃædoʊz ən sɪlvɝi laɪt. sizɪŋ ðə hɛm ə mɛsænəz dʒɹɛs, ʃi ɹeɪn kɪsəz ɑn ɪt. ðə wiv ʌv ɪluʒən - ɪt mʌs bi ðæt, ðoʊ ʃi kəd nɑt si ə sɪŋɡəl θɹɛɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ ɛni mɔɹ ðən ʃi kəd sɛns ði əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl ɪn ðə wʊmən u stʊɾ oʊvɝ əɹ - dɪd nɑt hoʊl kəmplitli, wɪð əɹ fɹæntəkəli ʃɪftɪŋ ðə skɝts ɛdʒ. flɪkɝz ə bɹɑnz sɪlk wɪð ə θɪn bɔɹɾɝ ʌv ɪntʃɹəkətli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd blæk skɹɑlwɝk ʃoʊd θɹu.

Alviarin flung herself from her knees onto her belly before the woman who seemed made of dark shadows and silvery light. Seizing the hem of Mesaana's dress, she rained kisses on it. The weave of Illusion - it must be that, though she could not see a single thread of saidar any more than she could sense the ability to channel in the woman who stood over her - did not hold completely, with her frantically shifting the skirt's edge. Flickers of bronze silk with a thin border of intricately embroidered black scrollwork showed through.

"aɪ lɪv tə sɝv ən oʊbeɪ ju, ɡɹeɪt mɪstʃɹəs," ɑlviɛɝɪn pæntɪd bɪtwin kɪsəz. "aɪ noʊ ðəɾ aɪm əmʌŋ ðə loʊəst ə ðə loʊ, ə wɝm ɪn jəɹ pɹɛzəns, ən aɪ pɹeɪ oʊnli fəɹ jəɹ smaɪl." ʃi hæd bɪn pʌnɪʃt wʌns fəɹ "ɹaɪzɪŋ əbʌv hɝsɛlf" - nɑt fəɹ dɪsəbiɾiəns, θæŋks bi tə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk! - ən ʃi nu ðət wʌtɛvɝ haʊlz ɪleɪɾə maɪt bi ɹeɪzɪŋ ɹaɪt ðɛn, ðeɪ kəd nɑt bi hæf soʊ laʊɾ əz əɹ oʊn hæd bɪn.

"I live to serve and obey you, Great Mistress," Alviarin panted between kisses. "I know that I am among the lowest of the low, a worm in your presence, and I pray only for your smile." She had been punished once for "rising above herself" - not for disobedience, thanks be to the Great Lord of the Dark! - and she knew that whatever howls Elaida might be raising right then, they could not be half so loud as her own had been.

mɛsænə lɛt ðə kɪsɪŋ ɡoʊ ɑn fəɹ səm taɪm, ən faɪnəli sɪɡnəld ən ɛn baɪ tɪpɪŋ ɑlviɛɝɪnz feɪs ʌp wɪð ðə toʊ ʌv ə slɪpɝ bɪniθ ðə tʃɪn. "ðə dɪkɹi hæz ɡɔn aʊt." ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə kwɛstʃən, bʌɾ ɑlviɛɝɪn ænsɝd heɪstəli.

Mesaana let the kissing go on for some time, and finally signaled an end by tipping Alviarin's face up with the toe of a slipper beneath the chin. "The decree has gone out." It was not a question, but Alviarin answered hastily.

"jɛs, ɡɹeɪt mɪstʃɹəs. kɑpiz wɛn tə nɔɹθhɑɹbɝ ən saʊθhɑɹbɝ ivən bɪfɔɹ aɪ hæɾ ɪleɪɾə saɪn. ðə fɝs kɝiɝz əv ɡɔn, ən noʊ mɝtʃənt wɪl liv ðə sɪɾi wɪθaʊt kɑpiz tə dɪstʃɹɪbjut." mɛsænə nu ɔl ðæt, ʌv kɔɹs. ʃi nu ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ə kɹæmp taɪɾənd ðə bæk ʌv ɑlviɛɝɪnz ɔkwɝdli kɹeɪnd nɛk, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt muv. mɛsænə wəd tɛl əɹ wən tə muv. "ɡɹeɪt mɪstʃɹəs, ɪleɪɾə ɪz ən ɛmpti hʌsk. wɪð ɔl hjumɪlɪɾi, wəɾ ɪt nɑt bi bɛɾɝ wɪθaʊt ðə nid tə juz hɝ?" ʃi hɛld əɹ bɹɛθ. kwɛstʃənz kəd bi deɪnʒɝəs, wɪð ðə tʃoʊzən.

"Yes, Great Mistress. Copies went to Northharbor and Southharbor even before I had Elaida sign. The first couriers have gone, and no merchant will leave the city without copies to distribute." Mesaana knew all that, of course. She knew everything. A cramp tightened the back of Alviarin's awkwardly craned neck, but she did not move. Mesaana would tell her when to move. "Great Mistress, Elaida is an empty husk. With all humility, would it not be better without the need to use her?" She held her breath. Questions could be dangerous, with the Chosen.

ə ʃædoʊ-neɪl sɪlvɝi fɪŋɡɝ tæp sɪlvɝ lɪps pɝst ɪn ən əmjuz smaɪl. "bɛɾɝ ɪf jə wɔɹ ði æmɪɝlɪnz stoʊl, tʃaɪld?" mɛsænə sɛɾ ət læst. "æn æmbɪʃən smɔl ɪnʌf tə fɪt ju, bʌɾ ɔl ɪn ɪts taɪm. fəɹ naʊ, aɪ hæv ə taɪni tæsk fəɹ ju. ɪn spaɪɾ ʌv ɔl ðə wɔlz ðəɾ əv ɡɔn ʌp bɪtwin ði ədʒəz, ðə hɛdz ə ði ədʒəz sim tə ɪnkaʊntɝ wʌn ənʌðɝ wɪð sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ fɹikwənsi. baɪ tʃæns, ðeɪ meɪk ɪt sim. ɔl bʌt ðə ɹɛd, ət list; ə pɪɾi ɡəlinə ɡɑt hɝsɛlf kɪld, əɹ ʃi kəd tɛl jə wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ əbaʊt. vɛɹi pɹɑbli ɪts tʃɹɪviəl, bʌt jəl lɝn waɪ ðeɪ bɛɹ tiθ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn pʌblɪk, ðən wɪspɝ təɡɛðɝ ɪn pɹaɪvət."

A shadow-nailed silvery finger tapped silver lips pursed in an amused smile. "Better if you wore the Amyrlin's stole, child?" Mesaana said at last. "An ambition small enough to fit you, but all in its time. For now, I have a tiny task for you. In spite of all the walls that have gone up between the Ajahs, the heads of the Ajahs seem to encounter one another with surprising frequency. By chance, they make it seem. All but the Red, at least; a pity Galina got herself killed, or she could tell you what they are about. Very probably it is trivial, but you will learn why they bare teeth at one another in public, then whisper together in private."

"aɪ hɪɹ ən oʊbeɪ, ɡɹeɪt mɪstʃɹəs," ɑlviɛɝɪn ɹɪplaɪd pɹɑmpli, ɡɹeɪtfəl ðət mɛsænə kənsɪɾɝd ɪɾ ənɪmpɔɹɾənt. ðə ɡɹeɪt "sikɹət" ʌv u hɛɾəd ði ədʒəz wɑz nʌn tə hɝ - ɛvɹi blæk sɪstɝ wɑz ɹikwaɪɝd tə ɹileɪ tə ðə səpɹim kaʊnsəl ɛvɹi wɪspɝ ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ səpoʊzd ədʒɑ - bʌɾ oʊnli ɡəlinə əmʌŋ əm hæd bɪn blæk. ðət mɛn kwɛɝaɪɪŋ ðə blæk sɪstɝz əmʌŋ ðə sɪɾɝz, wɪtʃ mɛnt ɡoʊɪŋ θɹu ɔl ðə leɪɝz bɪtwin əm ən hɝ. ðət wəd teɪk taɪm, ən wɪθaʊɾ ɛni sɝɾənti ʌv səksɛs. ɪksɛp fəɹ fɛɹən nhɝən ən swænə dʒɹeɪɡənd, hu wɝ ðə hɛdz ə ðə ðɛɹ ədʒəz, sɪɾɝz ɹɛɹli sim tə noʊ wʌt ðɛɹ ədʒɑz hɛd wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ toʊld. "aɪ wɪl tɛl jə əz sun əz aɪ lɝn, ɡɹeɪt mɪstʃɹəs."

"I hear and obey, Great Mistress," Alviarin replied promptly, grateful that Mesaana considered it unimportant. The great "secret" of who headed the Ajahs was none to her - every Black sister was required to relay to the Supreme Council every whisper inside her supposed Ajah - but only Galina among them had been Black. That meant querying the Black sisters among the Sitters, which meant going through all the layers between them and her. That would take time, and without any certainty of success. Except for Ferane Neheran and Suana Dragand, who were the heads of the their Ajahs, Sitters rarely seemed to know what their Ajah's head was thinking until they were told. "I will tell you as soon as I learn, Great Mistress."

bʌt ʃi dɪd faɪl əweɪ ə tɪdbɪt fəɹ hɝsɛlf. tʃɹɪviəl mæɾɝ əɹ nɑt, mɛsænə dɪd nɑt noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət hæpən ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ən ɑlviɛɝɪn wəd kip əɹ aɪz oʊpən fəɹ ə sɪstɝ ɪn bɹɑnz skɝts bɔɹɾɝd ɑn ðə hɛm ɪn blæk skɹɑlwɝk. mɛsænə wɑz haɪɾɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɪn ðə taʊɝ, ən nɑlədʒ wɑz paʊɝ.

But she did file away a tidbit for herself. Trivial matter or not, Mesaana did not know everything that happened in the White Tower. And Alviarin would keep her eyes open for a sister in bronze skirts bordered on the hem in black scrollwork. Mesaana was hiding herself in the Tower, and knowledge was power.


tʃæptɝ twɛntisɪks


CHAPTER 26

ði ɛkstʃɹə bɪt


The Extra Bit

sin stʃɹoʊd ðə hɔlweɪz ə ðə taʊɝ wɪð ə ɡɹoʊɪŋ sɛns ə biɪŋ kənfaʊndɪɾ əɾ ɛvɹi tɝn. ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɑz kwaɪt lɑɹdʒ, tʃɹu, bʌt ʃi hæd bɪn ət ðɪs fəɹ aʊɝz. ʃi vɛɹi mʌtʃ wɑntəd tə bi snʌɡ ɪn əɹ oʊn ɹumz. dɪspaɪt keɪsməns ɪn pleɪs ɪn ɛvɹi wɪndoʊ, dʒɹæfs dʒɹɪftəɾ əlɔŋ ðə bɹɔd, tæpəstʃɹi-hʌŋ kɔɹɪɾɝz ən meɪd ðə stænd-læmps flɪkɝ. koʊl dʒɹæfs, ən dɪfəkəl tə ɪɡnɔɹ wən ðeɪ slɪpt ʌndɝ əɹ skɝts. hɝ ɹumz wɝ wɔɹm ən kʌmftəɹbəl, ən seɪf.

Seaine strode the hallways of the Tower with a growing sense of being confounded at every turn. The White Tower was quite large, true, but she had been at this for hours. She very much wanted to be snug in her own rooms. Despite casements in place in every window, drafts drifted along the broad, tapestry-hung corridors and made the stand-lamps flicker. Cold drafts, and difficult to ignore when they slipped under her skirts. Her rooms were warm and comfortable, and safe.

meɪdz bɑb kɝtsiz ən mænsɝvəns baʊɾ ɪn əɹ weɪk, hæf-sin ən kəmplitli ɪɡnɔɹd. moʊst sɪstɝz wɝ ɪn ðɛɹ oʊn ədʒəz' kɔɹɾɝz, ən ðoʊz fju aʊɾ ən əbaʊt muvd wɪð wɛɹi pɹaɪd, ɔfən ɪn pɛɹz, ɔlweɪz ə ðə seɪm ədʒɑ, ʃɔlz spɹɛɾ əlɔŋ ðɛɹ ɑɹmz ən dɪspleɪd laɪk bænɝz. ʃi smaɪld ən nɑɾəd plɛzənli tə tælin, bʌt ðə stætʃuɛsk, ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd sɪɾɝ ɹɪtɝn ə hɑɹd stɛɹ, bjuɾi kɑɹv fɹəm aɪs, ðən stɔkt əweɪ twɪtʃɪŋ əɹ ɡɹin-fɹɪnd ʃɔl.

Maids bobbed curtsies and manservants bowed in her wake, half-seen and completely ignored. Most sisters were in their own Ajahs' quarters, and those few out and about moved with wary pride, often in pairs, always of the same Ajah, shawls spread along their arms and displayed like banners. She smiled and nodded pleasantly to Talene, but the statuesque, golden-haired Sitter returned a hard stare, beauty carved from ice, then stalked away twitching her green-fringed shawl.

tu leɪt naʊ tə əpɹoʊtʃ tælin əbaʊt biɪŋ pɑɹɾ ə ðə sɝtʃ, ivən hæd pɛvɑɹə bɪn əɡɹiəbəl. pɛvɑɹə kaʊnsəl kɑʃən, ðən mɔɹ kɑʃən, ən tʃɹuθ tə tɛl, sin wɑz mɔɹ ðən wɪlɪŋ tə lɪsən ʌndɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz. ɪt wɑz dʒʌs ðət tælin wɑz ə fɹɛnd. hæd bɪn ə fɹɛnd.

Too late now to approach Talene about being part of the search, even had Pevara been agreeable. Pevara counseled caution, then more caution, and truth to tell, Seaine was more than willing to listen under the circumstances. It was just that Talene was a friend. Had been a friend.

tælin wɑz nɑt ðə wɝst. sɛvɹəl ɔɹɾənɛɹi sɪstɝz snɪft əɾ əɹ oʊpənli. əɾ ə sɪɾɝ! nʌn waɪt, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ðət ʃʊɾə meɪd noʊ dɪfɝəns. noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn ɪn ðə taʊɝ, pɹəpɹaɪəɾiz ʃəd bi əbzɝvd. dʒuleɪn mədoʊm, ə tɔl, ətʃɹæktɪv wʊmən wɪð ʃɔɹt-kʌt blæk hɛɹ u hæd hɛld ə tʃɛɹ fəɹ ðə bɹaʊn lɛs ðən ə jɪɹ, bɹʌʃt pæst əɹ wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə mɝmɝ ʌv əpɑlədʒi ən wɛn ɔf wɪð ðoʊz mænɪʃ stʃɹaɪdz ə hɝz. sɹɪn æsnoʊbɑɹ, ənʌðɝ bɹaʊn sɪɾɝ, ɡeɪv sin ə fɪɹs skaʊl ən fɪŋɡɝd ðət kɝv naɪf ʃi ɔlweɪz kæɹid bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛl bɪfɔɹ dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ daʊn ə saɪd kɔɹəɾɝ. sɹɪn wɑz ɔltɑɹən, slaɪt tʌtʃəz ʌv waɪɾ əɾ əɹ dɑɹk tɛmpəlz ɛmfəsaɪzɪŋ ə θɪn eɪdʒ-feɪɾəd waɪt skɑɹ əkɹɔs wʌn ɑləv tʃik, ən oʊnli ə wɔɹɾɝ kəd mætʃ əɹ fəɹ skaʊlɪŋ.

Talene was not the worst. Several ordinary sisters sniffed at her openly. At a Sitter! None White, of course, but that should have made no difference. No matter what was going on in the Tower, proprieties should be observed. Juilaine Madome, a tall, attractive woman with short-cut black hair who had held a chair for the Brown less than a year, brushed past her without so much as a murmur of apology and went off with those mannish strides of hers. Saerin Asnobar, another Brown Sitter, gave Seaine a fierce scowl and fingered that curved knife she always carried behind her belt before disappearing down a side corridor. Saerin was Altaran, slight touches of white at her dark temples emphasizing a thin age-faded white scar across one olive cheek, and only a Warder could match her for scowling.

pɝhæps ðiz θɪŋz wɝ ɔl tə bi ɪkspɛktəd. ðəɹ hæd bɪn sɛvɹəl ənfɔɹtʃənəɾ ɪnsəɾənts ɹisənli, ən noʊ sɪstɝ wəd fɝɡɛt biɪŋ bʌndəld ʌnsɛɹəmoʊniəsli fɹəm ðə hɔlweɪz ɝaʊn ənʌðɝ ədʒɑz kɔɹɾɝz, mʌtʃ lɛs wʌt hæd səmtaɪmz ɡɔn wɪð ɪt. ɹumɝ sɛɾ ə sɪɾɝ - ə sɪɾɝ! - hæd hæd mɔɹ ðən əɹ dɪɡnəɾi ɹʌfəl baɪ ðə ɹɛdz, ðoʊ nɑt hu. ə ɡɹeɪt pɪɾi ðə hɔl kəd nɑɾ əbstʃɹʌkt ɪleɪɾəz mæd dɪkɹi, bʌt fɝst wʌn ədʒɑ, ðən ənʌðɝ, hæd lɛpt ɑn ðə nu pɹɪɹɑɡəɾɪvz, fju sɪɾɝz wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə θɪŋk ʌv ɡɪvɪŋ əm ʌp naʊ ðət ðeɪ wɝ ɪn pleɪs, ən ðə ɹɪzʌlt wɑz ə taʊɝ dɪvaɪɾəd vɛɹi nɪɹli ɪndə ɑɹm kæmps. wʌns sin hæd θɔt ði ɛɹ ɪn ðə taʊɝ fɛlt laɪk ə kwɪvɝɪŋ hɑt dʒɛli ʌv səspɪʃən ən bækbaɪɾɪŋ; naʊ ɪt wɑz kwɪvɝɪŋ hɑt dʒɛli wɪð ən æsəd baɪt.

Perhaps these things were all to be expected. There had been several unfortunate incidents recently, and no sister would forget being bundled unceremoniously from the hallways around another Ajah's quarters, much less what had sometimes gone with it. Rumor said a Sitter - a Sitter! - had had more than her dignity ruffled by the Reds, though not who. A great pity the Hall could not obstruct Elaida's mad decree, but first one Ajah, then another, had leaped on the new prerogatives, few Sitters were willing to think of giving them up now that they were in place, and the result was a Tower divided very nearly into armed camps. Once Seaine had thought the air in the Tower felt like a quivering hot jelly of suspicion and backbiting; now it was quivering hot jelly with an acid bite.

klɪkɪŋ əɹ tʌŋ ɪn vɛkseɪʃən, ʃi ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ oʊn waɪt-fɹɪnd ʃɔl əz sɹɪn vænɪʃt. ɪt wɑz ɪlɑdʒɪkəl tə flɪntʃ kəz ən ɔltɑɹən skaʊld - ivən sɹɪn wəd ɡoʊ noʊ fɑɹðɝ; ʃʊɹli nɑt - ən mɔɹ ðən ɪlɑdʒɪkəl tə wɝi oʊvɝ wʌt ʃi kəd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ wən ʃi hæɾ ə tæsk.

Clicking her tongue in vexation, she adjusted her own white-fringed shawl as Saerin vanished. It was illogical to flinch because an Altaran scowled - even Saerin would go no farther; surely not - and more than illogical to worry over what she could not change when she had a task.

ən ðɛn, æftɝ ɔl ə hɝ sɝtʃ ðət mɔɹnɪŋ, ʃi tʊk ə sɪŋɡəl stɛp ən sɔ hɝ lɔŋ-sɔt kwɔɹi wɔkɪŋ təwɔɹd hɝ. zɛɹə dɑkən wɑz ə slɪm, blæk-hɛɹd ɡɝl wɪð ə pɹaɪdfəl ɛɹ, pɹɑpɝli sɛlf-pəzɛst, ən baɪ ɔl aʊtwɝɾ ɛvəɾəns əntʌtʃt baɪ ðə hiɾəd kɝəns floʊɪŋ θɹu ðə taʊɝ ðiz deɪz. wɛl, nɑɾ ə ɡɝl pɹɪsaɪsli, bʌt sin wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi hæd nɑt wɔɹn ðət waɪt-fɹɪnd ʃɔl fɪfti jɪɹz jɛt. ʃi wɑz ɪnɪkspɪɹiənst. ɹɛləɾɪvli ɪnɪkspɪɹiənst. ðət maɪt hɛlp.

And then, after all of her search that morning, she took a single step and saw her long-sought quarry walking toward her. Zerah Dacan was a slim, black-haired girl with a prideful air, properly self-possessed, and by all outward evidence untouched by the heated currents flowing through the Tower these days. Well, not a girl precisely, but Seaine was sure she had not worn that white-fringed shawl fifty years yet. She was inexperienced. Relatively inexperienced. That might help.

zɛɹə meɪd noʊ muv tə əvɔɪɾ ə sɪɾɝ ə hɝ oʊn ədʒɑ, boʊɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ ɪn ɹɪspɛkt əz sin fɛl ɪn bɪsaɪd hɝ. kwaɪɾ ə lɑɾ ʌv ɪntʃɹəkət ɡoʊldən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi klaɪm ðə slivz ə hɝ snoʊi dʒɹɛs ən meɪɾ ə waɪd bæn ət ðə bɑɾəm ə hɝ skɝt. ɪt wɑz ən ənjuʒəwəl dɪɡɹi ʌv ʃoʊ fəɹ ðə waɪɾ ədʒɑ. "sɪɾɝ," ʃi mɝmɝd. dɪɾ əɹ blu aɪz hoʊld ə tʌtʃ ʌv wɝi?

Zerah made no move to avoid a Sitter of her own Ajah, bowing her head in respect as Seaine fell in beside her. Quite a lot of intricate golden embroidery climbed the sleeves of her snowy dress and made a wide band at the bottom of her skirt. It was an unusual degree of show for the White Ajah. "Sitter," she murmured. Did her blue eyes hold a touch of worry?

"aɪ nid jə fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ," sin sɛd mɔɹ kɑmli ðən ʃi fɛlt. vɛɹi laɪkli ʃi wɑz tʃɹænsplæntɪŋ əɹ oʊn filɪŋz ɪndə zɛɹəz bɪɡ aɪz. "kʌm wɪð mi." ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə fɪɹ, nɑɾ ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, bʌt kipɪŋ əɹ hænz foʊldəɾ əɾ əɹ weɪst, ənklɛntʃt, ɹikwaɪɝd sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ ɛfɝt.

"I need you for something," Seaine said more calmly than she felt. Very likely she was transplanting her own feelings into Zerah's big eyes. "Come with me." There was nothing to fear, not in the heart of the White Tower, but keeping her hands folded at her waist, unclenched, required surprising effort.

əz ɪkspɛktəd - əz hoʊpt - zɛɹə wɛn əlɔŋ wɪð oʊnli ənʌðɝ mɝmɝ, ðɪs ʌv ækwiɛsəns. ʃi ɡlaɪɾɪd ət sinz saɪd kwaɪt ɡɹeɪsfəli əz ðeɪ dɪsɛndəd bɹɔd mɑɹbəl stɛɹkeɪsɪz ən waɪd kɝvɪŋ ɹæmps, ən ɡeɪv oʊnli ðə slaɪɾəst fɹaʊn wən sin oʊpən ə dɔɹ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn flɔɹ, ɑntu nɛɹoʊ stɛɹz ðət spaɪɹəl daʊn ɪndə dɑɹknəs.

As expected - as hoped - Zerah went along with only another murmur, this of acquiescence. She glided at Seaine's side quite gracefully as they descended broad marble staircases and wide curving ramps, and gave only the slightest frown when Seaine opened a door on the ground floor, onto narrow stairs that spiraled down into darkness.

"æftɝ ju, sɪstɝ," sin sɛd, tʃænəlɪŋ ə smɔl bɔl ə laɪt. baɪ pɹoʊɾəkɑl, ʃi ʃʊɾə pɹɪsiɾɪd ði ʌðɝ wʊmən, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt bɹɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə də ðæt.

"After you, sister," Seaine said, channeling a small ball of light. By protocol, she should have preceded the other woman, but she could not bring herself to do that.

zɛɹə dɪd nɑt hɛzəteɪɾ ɪn ɡoʊɪŋ daʊn. lɑdʒɪkli, ʃi hæd nʌθɪŋ tə fɪɹ fɹəm ə sɪɾɝ, ə waɪt sɪɾɝ. lɑdʒɪkli, sin wəd tɛl əɹ wʌt ʃi wɑntəd wən ðə taɪm wɑz ɹaɪp, ən ɪt wəd bi nʌθɪŋ ʃi kəd nɑt du. ɪlɑdʒɪkli, sinz stʌmək flʌɾɝd laɪk ə hjudʒ mɔθ. laɪt, ʃi hɛl seɪaɪdɑɹ ən ði ʌðɝ wʊmən dɪd nɑt. zɛɹə wɑz wikɝ ɪn ɛni keɪs. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə fɪɹ. wɪtʃ dɪd nʌθɪŋ tə kwaɪət ðoʊz flʌɾɝɪŋ wɪŋz ɪn əɹ mɪɾəl.

Zerah did not hesitate in going down. Logically, she had nothing to fear from a Sitter, a White Sitter. Logically, Seaine would tell her what she wanted when the time was ripe, and it would be nothing she could not do. Illogically, Seaine's stomach fluttered like a huge moth. Light, she held saidar and the other woman did not. Zerah was weaker in any case. There was nothing to fear. Which did nothing to quiet those fluttering wings in her middle.

daʊn ðeɪ klaɪmd ən daʊn, pæs dɔɹz lɛɾɪŋ ɑntu beɪsməns ən sʌbəsməns, əntɪl ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə vɛɹi loʊəs lɛvəl, bɪloʊ ivən wɛɹ ði æksɛptɪd wɝ tɛstəd. ðə dɑɹk hɔlweɪ wɑz lɪɾ oʊnli baɪ sinz smɔl laɪt. ðeɪ hɛl ðɛɹ skɝts haɪ, bʌt ðɛɹ slɪpɝz kɪkt ʌp smɔl klaʊdz ə dʌs haʊɛvɝ kɛɹfəli ðeɪ stɛpt. pleɪn wʊɾən dɔɹz laɪn ðə smuð stoʊn wɔlz, mɛni wɪð ɡɹeɪt lʌmps ə ɹʌs fəɹ hɪnʒɪz ən lɑks.

Down they climbed and down, past doors letting onto basements and subbasements, until they reached the very lowest level, below even where the Accepted were tested. The dark hallway was lit only by Seaine's small light. They held their skirts high, but their slippers kicked up small clouds of dust however carefully they stepped. Plain wooden doors lined the smooth stone walls, many with great lumps of rust for hinges and locks.

"sɪɾɝ," zɛɹə æskt, faɪnəli ʃoʊɪŋ daʊt, "wʌtɛvɝ kən wi bi æftɝ daʊn hɪɹ? aɪ doʊn bɪliv ɛniwʌn əz bɪn ðɪs dip fəɹ jɪɹz."

"Sitter," Zerah asked, finally showing doubt, "whatever can we be after down here? I don't believe anyone has been this deep for years."

sin wɑz ʃʊɹ əɹ oʊn vɪzət, ə fju deɪz ɝliɝ, hæd bɪn ðə fɝs tə ðɪs lɛvəl ɪn ət list ə sɛntʃɝi. ðət wɑz wʌn ə ðə ɹizənz ʃi ən pɛvɑɹə hæd tʃoʊzən ɪt. "dʒʌst ɪn hɪɹ," ʃi sɛd, swɪŋɪŋ oʊpən ə dɔɹ ðət muvd wɪð oʊnli ə lɪɾəl skwilɪŋ. noʊ əmaʊn ʌv ɔɪl kəd lusən ɔl ðə ɹʌst, ən ɛfɝts tə juz ðə paʊɝ hæd bɪn jusləs. hɝ əbɪləɾiz wɪð ɝθ wɝ bɛɾɝ ðən pɛvɑɹəz, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt seɪɪŋ vɛɹi mʌtʃ.

Seaine was sure her own visit, a few days earlier, had been the first to this level in at least a century. That was one of the reasons she and Pevara had chosen it. "Just in here," she said, swinging open a door that moved with only a little squealing. No amount of oil could loosen all the rust, and efforts to use the Power had been useless. Her abilities with Earth were better than Pevara's, but that was not saying very much.

zɛɹə stɛpt ɪn, ən blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. ɪn ən ʌðɝwaɪz ɛmpti ɹum, pɛvɑɹə sæt bɪhaɪn ə stɝɾi ɪf ɹæðɝ wɔɹn teɪbəl wɪð θɹi smɔl bɛntʃɪz ɝaʊn ɪt. ɡɛɾɪŋ ðoʊz fju pisəz daʊn ənsin hæd bɪn dɪfəkəlt - ɪspɛʃli wən sɝvəns kəd nɑt bi tʃɹʌstɪd. klɪɹɪŋ aʊt ðə dʌs hæd bɪn mʌtʃ sɪmpəlɝ ɪf noʊ mɔɹ plɛzənt, ən smuðɪŋ ðə dʌst ɪn ðə hɔl aʊtsaɪd, nɛsəsɛɹi æftɝ ɛvɹi vɪzət, hæd bɪn sɪmpli oʊnɝəs.

Zerah stepped in, and blinked in surprise. In an otherwise empty room, Pevara sat behind a sturdy if rather worn table with three small benches around it. Getting those few pieces down unseen had been difficult - especially when servants could not be trusted. Clearing out the dust had been much simpler if no more pleasant, and smoothing the dust in the hall outside, necessary after every visit, had been simply onerous.

"aɪ wɑz əbaʊt tə ɡɪv ʌp sɪɾɪŋ hɪɹ ɪn ðə dɑɹk," pɛvɑɹə ɡɹaʊld. ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ sɝaʊndəɾ əɹ əz ʃi lɪftəɾ ə læntɝn fɹəm bɪniθ ðə teɪbəl ən tʃænəld ɪɾ əlaɪt, kæstɪŋ əz mʌtʃ ɪluməneɪʃən əz ðə ɹʌf-wɔl fɔɹmɝ stɔɹɹum dɪzɝvd. sʌmwʌt plʌmp ən nɔɹməli pɹɪɾi, ðə ɹɛd sɪɾɝ lʊkt ə bɛɹ wɪð tu sɔɹ tiθ. "wi wɑnə æsk jə ə fju kwɛstʃənz, zɛɹə." ən ʃi ʃildɪd ðə wʊmən əz sin ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ.

"I was about to give up sitting here in the dark," Pevara growled. The glow of saidar surrounded her as she lifted a lantern from beneath the table and channeled it alight, casting as much illumination as the rough-walled former storeroom deserved. Somewhat plump and normally pretty, the Red Sitter looked a bear with two sore teeth. "We want to ask you a few questions, Zerah." And she shielded the woman as Seaine shut the door.

zɛɹəz ʃæɾoʊd feɪs ɹɪmeɪn ʌɾɝli kɑm, bʌt ʃi swɑloʊɾ ɑɾəbli. "əbaʊt wʌt, sɪɾɝz?" ðəɹ wɑz ðə feɪntəs tʃɹɛmɝ ɪn ðə jʌŋɡɝ wʊmənz vɔɪs, əz wɛl. ɪt kəd bi sɪmpli ðə muɾ ə ðə taʊɝ, ðoʊ.

Zerah's shadowed face remained utterly calm, but she swallowed audibly. "About what, Sitters?" There was the faintest tremor in the younger woman's voice, as well. It could be simply the mood of the Tower, though.

"ðə blæk ədʒɑ," pɛvɑɹə ɹɪplaɪd kɝtli. "wi wɑnə noʊ wɛðɝ jəɹ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd."

"The Black Ajah," Pevara replied curtly. "We want to know whether you're a Darkfriend."

əmeɪzmən ən aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ ʃæɾɝd zɛɹəz kɑm. moʊst wʊɾə teɪkən ðət fəɹ səfɪʃən dɪnaɪəl wɪθaʊɾ əɹ snæpt "aɪ doʊn əv tə teɪk ðət fɹəm ju! jə ɹɛdz əv bɪn sɛɾɪŋ ʌp fɔls dʒɹæɡənz fəɹ jɪɹz! ɪf jə æsk mi, ðɛɹz noʊ nid tə lʊk fɝðɝ ðən ðə ɹɛd kɔɹɾɝz tə faɪn blæk sɪstɝz!"

Amazement and outrage shattered Zerah's calm. Most would have taken that for sufficient denial without her snapped "I don't have to take that from you! You Reds have been setting up false Dragons for years! If you ask me, there's no need to look further than the Red quarters to find Black sisters!"

pɛvɑɹəz feɪs dɑɹkənd wɪð fjʊɹi. hɝ lɔɪəlti tə hɝ ədʒɑ wɑz stʃɹɔŋ, wɪtʃ wɛnt wɪθaʊt seɪɪŋ, bʌt wɝs, ʃi hæd lɔst əɹ ɪntaɪɝ fæmli tə dɑɹkfɹɛnz. sin dɪsaɪɾɪd tə stɛp ɪn bɪfɔɹ pɛvɑɹə ɹɪzɔɹɾɪd tə bɹut fɔɹs. ðeɪ hæd noʊ pɹuf. nɑt jɛt.

Pevara's face darkened with fury. Her loyalty to her Ajah was strong, which went without saying, but worse, she had lost her entire family to Darkfriends. Seaine decided to step in before Pevara resorted to brute force. They had no proof. Not yet.

"sɪt, zɛɹə," ʃi sɛd wɪð əz mʌtʃ wɔɹmθ əz ʃi kəd mʌstɝ. "sɪt daʊn, sɪstɝ."

"Sit, Zerah," she said with as much warmth as she could muster. "Sit down, sister."

zɛɹə tɝn təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ əz ðoʊ ʃi maɪt dɪsəbeɪ ən ɔɹɾɝ fɹəm ə sɪɾɝ - ən ə hɝ oʊn ədʒɑ! - bʌɾ ət læst ʃi sɛɾəld ɑntu wʌn ə ðə bɛntʃɪz, stɪfli, sɪɾɪŋ ɹaɪɾ ət ði ɛdʒ.

Zerah turned toward the door as though she might disobey an order from a Sitter - and of her own Ajah! - but at last she settled onto one of the benches, stiffly, sitting right at the edge.

bɪfɔɹ sin hæd fɪnɪʃt teɪkɪŋ ə sit ðət pleɪs zɛɹə bɪtwin ðɛm, pɛvɑɹə leɪd ði aɪvɝi-waɪɾ oʊθ ɹɑɾ ɑn ðə bæɾɝd teɪbəltɑp. sin saɪd. ðeɪ wɝ sɪɾɝz, wɪð ə pɝfəkt ɹaɪt tə juz ɛni tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðeɪ wɪʃt, bʌt ʃi hæd bɪn ðə wʌn tə fɪltʃ ɪt - ʃi kəd nɑt hɛlp θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɪɾ əz fɪlkɪŋ wən ʃi hæɾ əbzɝv nʌn ə ðə pɹɑpɝ pɹəsidʒɝz - ən ðə hoʊl taɪm, ɪn ðə bæk ə hɝ hɛd, ʃi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ʃi wəd tɝn tə faɪn lɔŋ-dɛd sɛɝl beɪɡən stændɪŋ hɪɹ, ɹɛɾi tə hɔl əɹ ɔf tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz' stʌɾi baɪ hɝ ɪɹ. ɪɹæʃənəl, bʌt noʊ lɛs ɹil.

Before Seaine had finished taking a seat that placed Zerah between them, Pevara laid the ivory-white Oath Rod on the battered tabletop. Seaine sighed. They were Sitters, with a perfect right to use any ter'angreal they wished, but she had been the one to filch it - she could not help thinking of it as filching when she had observed none of the proper procedures - and the whole time, in the back of her head, she had been sure she would turn to find long-dead Sereille Bagand standing here, ready to haul her off to the Mistress of Novices' study by her ear. Irrational, but no less real.

"wi wɑnə meɪk ʃʊɹ jə tɛl ðə tʃɹuθ," pɛvɑɹə sɛd, stɪl saʊndɪŋ laɪk ən æŋɡɹi bɛɹ, "soʊ jəl swɛɹ ən oʊθ ɑn ðɪs, ən ðən əl æsk əɡɛn."

"We want to make sure you tell the truth," Pevara said, still sounding like an angry bear, "so you will swear an oath on this, and then I'll ask again."

"aɪ ʃəd nɑt bi səbdʒɛktɪd tə ðɪs," zɛɹə sɛd wɪð ən əkjuzɪŋ lʊk ət sin, "bʌɾ əl ɹeɪ-swɛɹ ɔl ə ði oʊðz, ɪf ðæts wʌɾ ɪt nidz tə sæɾəsfaɪ ju. ən əl dɪmæn ən əpɑlədʒi fɹəm jə boʊθ, æftɝwɝd." ʃi hɑɹdli saʊndəd laɪk ə wʊmən ʃildɪɾ ən æsk sətʃ ə kwɛstʃən. ɔlmoʊs kəntɛmptʃwəsli, ʃi ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə slɪm, fʊt-lɔŋ ɹɑd. ɪt ʃoʊn ɪn ðə dɪm laɪɾ ə ðə læntɝn.

"I should not be subjected to this," Zerah said with an accusing look at Seaine, "but I will re-swear all of the Oaths, if that's what it needs to satisfy you. And I will demand an apology from you both, afterward." She hardly sounded like a woman shielded and asked such a question. Almost contemptuously, she reached for the slim, foot-long rod. It shone in the dim light of the lantern.

"jul swɛɹ tə oʊbeɪ ðə tu ʌv əs æbsəlutli," pɛvɑɹə toʊl hɝ, ən ðət hæn snætʃt bæk əz ɪf fɹəm ə kɔɪl vaɪpɝ. pɛvɑɹə wɛn ɹaɪɾ ɑn, ivən slaɪɾɪŋ ðə ɹɑd kloʊsɝ tə ðə wʊmən wɪð tu fɪŋɡɝz. "ðæt weɪ, wi kən tɛl jə tə ænsɝ tʃɹuθfəli ən noʊ jə wɪl, ən ɪf jə ɡɪv ðə ɹɔŋ ænsɝ, wi kən noʊ jəl bi oʊbiɾiənt ən hɛlpfəl ɪn hɛlpɪŋ əs hʌn daʊn jəɹ blæk sɪstɝz. ðə ɹɑd kən bi juz tə fɹi jə ʌv ði oʊθ, ɪf jə ɡɪv ðə ɹaɪɾ ænsɝ."

"You'll swear to obey the two of us absolutely," Pevara told her, and that hand snatched back as if from a coiled viper. Pevara went right on, even sliding the Rod closer to the woman with two fingers. "That way, we can tell you to answer truthfully and know you will, and if you give the wrong answer, we can know you'll be obedient and helpful in helping us hunt down your Black sisters. The Rod can be used to free you of the oath, if you give the right answer."

"tə fɹi - ?" zɛɹə ɪkskleɪmd. "aɪv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ɛniwʌn biɪŋ lus fɹəm ən oʊθ ɑn ði oʊθ ɹɑd."

"To free - ?" Zerah exclaimed. "I've never heard of anyone being loosed from an oath on the Oath Rod."

"ðæɾ ɪz waɪ wəɹ teɪkɪŋ ɔl ðiz pɹikɔʃənz," sin toʊl hɝ. "lɑdʒɪkli, ə blæk sɪstɝ mʌs bi eɪbəl tə laɪ, wɪtʃ minz ʃi mʌst əv bɪn fɹiɾ ʌv ət lis ðəɾ oʊθ ən laɪkli ɔl θɹi. pɛvɑɹə ən aɪ tɛstəd, ən faʊn ðə pɹəsidʒɝ mʌtʃ ðə seɪm əz teɪkɪŋ ən oʊθ." ʃi dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən haʊ peɪnfəl ɪt hæd bɪn, ðoʊ, livɪŋ ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm wipɪŋ. ʃi ɔlsoʊ dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən ðət zɛɹə wəd nɑt bi fɹiɾ ə hɝ oʊθ wʌtɛvɝ əɹ ænsɝ, nɑɾ əntɪl ðə sɝtʃ fəɹ ðə blæk ədʒɑ keɪm tə ə kənkluʒən. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, ʃi kəd nɑt bi əlaʊd tə ɹʌn ɔf ən kəmpleɪn əbaʊt ðɪs kwɛstʃənɪŋ, wɪtʃ ʃi moʊst sɝɾənli wʊd, wɪð ɛvɹi ɹaɪt, ɪf ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ə ðə blæk. ɪf.

"That is why we are taking all these precautions," Seaine told her. "Logically, a Black sister must be able to lie, which means she must have been freed of at least that Oath and likely all three. Pevara and I tested, and found the procedure much the same as taking an oath." She did not mention how painful it had been, though, leaving the pair of them weeping. She also did not mention that Zerah would not be freed of her oath whatever her answer, not until the search for the Black Ajah came to a conclusion. For one thing, she could not be allowed to run off and complain about this questioning, which she most certainly would, with every right, if she was not of the Black. If.

laɪt, bʌt sin wɪʃt ðeɪ hæd faʊn ə sɪstɝ fɹəm ənʌðɝ ədʒɑ hu fɪt ðə kɹaɪtɪɹiə ðeɪ hæd sɛt. eɪ ɡɹin əɹ ə jɛloʊ wʊɾə dʌn kwaɪt naɪsli. ðət lɑt wɝ oʊvɝwinɪŋ ət ðə bɛst ə taɪmz, ən ə leɪt . . . ! noʊ. ʃi wɑz nɑt gɑnə fɔl pɹeɪ tə ðə sɪknəs spɹɛɾɪŋ θɹu ðə taʊɝ. jɛt ʃi kəd nɑt hɛlp ðə neɪmz ðət flæʃt θɹu hɝ hɛd, ə dʌzən ɡɹinz, twaɪs əz mɛni jɛloʊz, ən ɛvɹi wʌn lɔŋ pæs du teɪkɪŋ daʊn ə fju ɹʌŋz. snɪf əɾ ə sɪɾɝ?

Light, but Seaine wished they had found a sister from another Ajah who fit the criteria they had set. A Green or a Yellow would have done quite nicely. That lot were overweening at the best of times, and of late . . . ! No. She was not going to fall prey to the sickness spreading through the Tower. Yet she could not help the names that flashed through her head, a dozen Greens, twice as many Yellows, and every one long past due taking down a few rungs. Sniff at a Sitter?

"ju fɹid jʊɹsɛlvz fɹəm wʌn ə ði oʊðz?" zɛɹə saʊndəd stɑɹɾəld, dɪsɡʌstəd, ənizi, ɔl ət ðə seɪm taɪm. pɝfəkli ɹizənəbəl ɹɪspɑnsɪz.

"You freed yourselves from one of the Oaths?" Zerah sounded startled, disgusted, uneasy, all at the same time. Perfectly reasonable responses.

"æn tʊk ɪɾ əɡɛn," pɛvɑɹə mʌɾɝd ɪmpeɪʃənli. snætʃɪŋ ʌp ðə slɪm ɹɑd, ʃi tʃænəld ə lɪɾəl spɪɹəɾ ɪndə wʌn ɛnd waɪl meɪnteɪnɪŋ zɛɹəz ʃild. "ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, aɪ vaʊ tə spik noʊ wɝd ðəɾ ɪz nɑt tʃɹu. ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, aɪ vaʊ tə meɪk noʊ wɛpən fəɹ wʌn mæn tə kɪl ənʌðɝ. ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, aɪ vaʊ nɑt tə juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən ɪksɛpt əɡɛns dɑɹk-fɹɛnz əɹ ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, əɹ ɪn ðə læs dɪfɛns ə maɪ laɪf, ðə laɪf ə maɪ wɔɹɾɝ, əɹ ðəɾ ʌv ənʌðɝ sɪstɝ." ʃi dɪd nɑt ɡɹɪmɑs oʊvɝ ðə pɑɹɾ əbaʊt wɔɹɾɝz; nu sɪstɝz baʊn fəɹ ðə ɹɛɾ ɔfən dɪd. "aɪ æm nɑɾ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd. aɪ hoʊp ðət sæɾɪsfaɪz ju." ʃi ʃoʊd zɛɹə hɝ tiθ, bʌt wɛðɝ ɪn smaɪl əɹ snɑɹl wɑz hɑɹd tə seɪ.

"And took it again," Pevara muttered impatiently. Snatching up the slim rod, she channeled a little Spirit into one end while maintaining Zerah's shield. "Under the Light, I vow to speak no word that is not true. Under the Light, I vow to make no weapon for one man to kill another. Under the Light, I vow not to use the One Power as a weapon except against Dark-friends or Shadowspawn, or in the last defense of my life, the life of my Warder, or that of another sister." She did not grimace over the part about Warders; new sisters bound for the Red often did. "I am not a Darkfriend. I hope that satisfies you." She showed Zerah her teeth, but whether in smile or snarl was hard to say.

sin ɹitʊk ði oʊðz ɪn tɝn, itʃ pɹədusɪŋ ə slaɪt moʊməntɛɹi pɹɛʃɝ ɛvɹiwɛɹ fɹəm əɹ skælp tə ðə soʊlz ə hɝ fit. ɪn tʃɹuθ, ðə pɹɛʃɝ wɑz dɪfəkəl tə dɪtɛkt əɾ ɔl, wɪð əɹ skɪn stɪl filɪŋ tu taɪt fɹəm ɹəteɪkɪŋ ði oʊθ əɡɛnst spikɪŋ ə laɪ. kleɪmɪŋ ðət pɛvɑɹə hæɾ ə bɪɹɾ əɹ ðət ðə stʃɹits ə tɑɹ vəlɑn wɝ peɪvd wɪð tʃiz hæd bɪn stʃɹeɪnʒli ɪɡzɪlɝeɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ə taɪm - ivən pɛvɑɹə hæd ɡɪɡəld - bʌt hɑɹdli wɝθ ðə dɪskʌmfɝt naʊ. tɛstɪŋ hæd nɑt ɹɪli sim nɛsəsɛɹi, tə hɝ. lɑdʒɪkli, ɪt mʌs bi soʊ. seɪɪŋ ðət ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ə ðə blæk twɪstəɾ əɹ tʌŋ - ə vaɪl θɪŋ tə bi fɔɹs tə dɪnaɪ - bʌt ʃi hændəd zɛɹə ði oʊθ ɹɑd wɪð ə dɪsaɪsɪv nɑd.

Seaine retook the Oaths in turn, each producing a slight momentary pressure everywhere from her scalp to the soles of her feet. In truth, the pressure was difficult to detect at all, with her skin still feeling too tight from retaking the Oath against speaking a lie. Claiming that Pevara had a beard or that the streets of Tar Valon were paved with cheese had been strangely exhilarating for a time - even Pevara had giggled - but hardly worth the discomfort now. Testing had not really seemed necessary, to her. Logically, it must be so. Saying that she was not of the Black twisted her tongue - a vile thing to be forced to deny - but she handed Zerah the Oath Rod with a decisive nod.

ʃɪftɪŋ ɑn əɹ bɛntʃ, ðə slɛndɝ wʊmən tɝn ðə smuð waɪt ɹɑɾ ɪn əɹ fɪŋɡɝz, swɑloʊɪŋ kənvʌlsɪvli. ðə peɪl læntɝn laɪt meɪɾ əɹ əpɪɹ ɪl. ʃi lʊk fɹəm wʌn ə ðɛm tə ði ʌðɝ, waɪd-aɪd, ðən əɹ hænz taɪɾənd ɑn ðə ɹɑd, ən ʃi nɑɾəd.

Shifting on her bench, the slender woman turned the smooth white rod in her fingers, swallowing convulsively. The pale lantern light made her appear ill. She looked from one of them to the other, wide-eyed, then her hands tightened on the Rod, and she nodded.

"ɪɡzækli əz aɪ sɛd," pɛvɑɹə ɡɹaʊld, tʃænəlɪŋ spɪɹət tə ðə ɹɑɾ əɡɛn, "ɔɹ jəl bi swɛɹɪŋ əntɪl juv ɪt ɹaɪt."

"Exactly as I said," Pevara growled, channeling Spirit to the Rod again, "or you'll be swearing until you have it right."

"aɪ vaʊ tə oʊbeɪ ðə tu ʌv jə æbsəlutli," zɛɹə sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs, ðən ʃʌɾɝəd əz ði oʊθ tʊk hoʊld. ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz taɪɾɝ ət ðə fɝst. "æsk mi əbaʊt ðə blæk ədʒɑ," ʃi dɪmændəd. hɝ hænz ʃʊk hoʊldɪŋ ðə ɹɑd. "æsk mi əbaʊt ðə blæk ədʒɑ!" hɝ ɪntɛnsəɾi toʊl sin ði ænsɝ ivən bɪfɔɹ pɛvɑɹə ɹilis ðə floʊ ʌv spɪɹəɾ ən æsk ðə kwɛstʃən, kəmændɪŋ ʌɾɝ tʃɹuθ. "noʊ!" zɛɹə pɹæktəkli ʃaʊɾəd. "noʊ, aɪm nɑt blæk ədʒɑ! naʊ teɪk ðɪs oʊθ fɹəm mi! fɹi mi!"

"I vow to obey the two of you absolutely," Zerah said in a tight voice, then shuddered as the oath took hold. It was always tighter at the first. "Ask me about the Black Ajah," she demanded. Her hands shook holding the Rod. "Ask me about the Black Ajah!" Her intensity told Seaine the answer even before Pevara released the flow of Spirit and asked the question, commanding utter truth. "No!" Zerah practically shouted. "No, I am not Black Ajah! Now take this oath from me! Free me!"

sin slʌmp dɪdʒɛktɪdli, ɹɛstɪŋ əɹ ɛlboʊz ɑn ðə teɪbəl. ʃi sɝɾənli hæd nɑt wɑntəd zɛɹə tə ænsɝ jɛs, bʌt ʃi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ðeɪ hæd faʊn ði ʌðɝ wʊmən aʊɾ ɪn ə laɪ. wʌn laɪ faʊnd, əɹ soʊ ɪt hæd simd, æftɝ wiks ə sɝtʃɪŋ. haʊ mɛni mɔɹ wiks ə sɝtʃɪŋ leɪ əhɛd? ən ə lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ fɹəm weɪkɪŋ tə slipɪŋ? wən ʃi mænədʒ tə slip.

Seaine slumped dejectedly, resting her elbows on the table. She certainly had not wanted Zerah to answer yes, but she had been sure they had found the other woman out in a lie. One lie found, or so it had seemed, after weeks of searching. How many more weeks of searching lay ahead? And of looking over her shoulder from waking to sleeping? When she managed to sleep.

pɛvɑɹə stæbd ən əkjuzɪŋ fɪŋɡɝ ət ðə wʊmən. "ju toʊl pipəl ðət jə keɪm fɹəm ðə nɔɹθ."

Pevara stabbed an accusing finger at the woman. "You told people that you came from the north."

zɛɹəz aɪz wɛnt waɪɾ əɡɛn. "aɪ dɪd," ʃi sɛd sloʊli. "aɪ ɹoʊd daʊn ðə bæŋk ə ði ɛɹɪnɪn tə wɑlh. naʊ fɹi mi ʌv ðɪs oʊθ!" ʃi lɪkt əɹ lɪps.

Zerah's eyes went wide again. "I did," she said slowly. "I rode down the bank of the Erinin to Jualdhe. Now free me of this oath!" She licked her lips.

sin fɹaʊn ət hɝ. "ɡoʊldɪnθɝn sidz ən ə ɹɛd kɑkəlbɝ wɝ faʊn ɑn jəɹ sæɾələklɔθ, zɛɹə. ɡoʊldɪnθɝn ən ɹɛd kɑkəlbɝ kæn bi faʊn fəɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz saʊθ ə tɑɹ vəlɑn."

Seaine frowned at her. "Goldenthorn seeds and a red cockleburr were found on your saddlecloth, Zerah. Goldenthorn and red cockleburr can't be found for a hundred miles south of Tar Valon."

zɛɹə lɛp tə hɝ fit, ən pɛvɑɹə snæpt, "sɪt daʊn!"

Zerah leaped to her feet, and Pevara snapped, "Sit down!"

ðə wʊmən dʒɹɑpt ɑntu ðə bɛntʃ wɪð ə laʊd smæk, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən wɪns. ʃi wɑz tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ. noʊ, ʃeɪkɪŋ. hɝ maʊθ wɑz klæmpt ʃʌt, ʌðɝwaɪz sin wɑz ʃʊɹ əɹ tiθ wʊɾə bɪn tʃæɾɝɪŋ. laɪt, ðə kwɛstʃən ə nɔɹθ əɹ saʊθ fɹaɪɾənd əɹ mɔɹ ðən ən ækjəzeɪʃən ə biɪŋ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd.

The woman dropped onto the bench with a loud smack, but she did not even wince. She was trembling. No, shaking. Her mouth was clamped shut, otherwise Seaine was sure her teeth would have been chattering. Light, the question of north or south frightened her more than an accusation of being a Darkfriend.

"fɹʌm wɛɹ dɪd jə stɑɹɾ aʊt," sin æsk sloʊli, "ænd waɪ - ?" ʃi mɛn tə æsk waɪ ðə wʊmən hæd ɡɔn ɹaʊndəbaʊt - wɪtʃ pleɪnli ʃi hæd - dʒʌs tə haɪd wɪtʃ dɝɛkʃən ʃi keɪm fɹʌm, bʌɾ ænsɝz bɝs fɹəm zɛɹəz maʊθ.

"From where did you start out," Seaine asked slowly, "and why - ?" She meant to ask why the woman had gone roundabout - which plainly she had - just to hide which direction she came from, but answers burst from Zerah's mouth.

"fɹʌm sɑlədɑɹ," ʃi skwild. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ʌðɝ wɝd fəɹ ɪt. stɪl klʌtʃɪŋ ði oʊθ ɹɑd, ʃi ɹɪθd ɑn əɹ bɛntʃ. tɪɹz spɪl fɹəm əɹ aɪz, aɪz əz waɪɾ əz ðeɪ wəd ɡoʊ ən fɪkst ɑn pɛvɑɹə. wɝdz pɔɹɾ aʊt, ðoʊ hɝ tiθ tʃɹuli dɪd tʃæɾɝ naʊ. "aɪ si-keɪm tə ɛm-meɪk ʃʊɹ ɔl ðə sɪstɝz hɪɹ noʊ əbaʊt ði ɑɹ-ɹɛdz ən lɑɡən, soʊ ðəl di-dɪpoʊz ɪleɪɾə ən ðə ti-taʊɝ kən bi hoʊl əɡɛn." wɪð ə weɪl ʃi kəlæpst ɪndə oʊpənməð bɔlɪŋ əz ʃi stɛɹɾ ət ðə ɹɛd sɪɾɝ.

"From Salidar," she squealed. There was no other word for it. Still clutching the Oath Rod, she writhed on her bench. Tears spilled from her eyes, eyes as wide as they would go and fixed on Pevara. Words poured out, though her teeth truly did chatter now. "I c-came to m-make sure all the sisters here know about the R-Reds and Logain, so they'll d-depose Elaida and the T-Tower can be whole again." With a wail she collapsed into openmouthed bawling as she stared at the Red Sitter.

"wɛl," pɛvɑɹə sɛd. ðən əɡɛn, mɔɹ ɡɹɪmli, "wɛl!" hɝ feɪs wɑz ɔl kəmpoʊʒɝ, bʌt ðə ɡlɪɾɝ ɪn əɹ dɑɹk aɪz wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm ðə mɪstʃəf sin ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ əz nɑvəs ən æksɛptɪd. "soʊ jə ɑɹ ðə sɔɹs ə ðət . . . ɹumɝ. jə ɑɹ gɑnə stæn bɪfɔɹ ðə hɔl ən ɹɪvil ɪt fəɹ ðə laɪ ɪɾ ɪz! ədmɪt ðə laɪ, ɡɝl!"

"Well," Pevara said. Then again, more grimly, "Well!" Her face was all composure, but the glitter in her dark eyes was far from the mischief Seaine remembered as novice and Accepted. "So you are the source of that . . . rumor. You are going to stand before the Hall and reveal it for the lie it is! Admit the lie, girl!"

ɪf zɛɹəz aɪz hæd bɪn waɪd bɪfɔɹ, ðeɪ bʌlʒd naʊ. ðə ɹɑd dʒɹɑp fɹəm əɹ hænz tə ɹoʊl əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəltɑp, ən ʃi klʌtʃt əɹ θɹoʊt. ə tʃoʊkɪŋ saʊn keɪm fɹəm əɹ sʌɾənli ɡeɪpɪŋ maʊθ. pɛvɑɹə stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ ɪn ʃɑk, bʌt sʌɾənli sin ʌndɝstʊd.

If Zerah's eyes had been wide before, they bulged now. The Rod dropped from her hands to roll across the tabletop, and she clutched her throat. A choking sound came from her suddenly gaping mouth. Pevara stared at her in shock, but suddenly Seaine understood.

"laɪts mɝsi," ʃi bɹiðd. "ju də nɑɾ əv tə laɪ, zɛɹə." zɛɹəz lɛɡz θɹæʃt bɪniθ ðə teɪbəl əz ɪf ʃi wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹaɪz ən kəd nɑt ɡɛɾ əɹ fiɾ ʌndɝ hɝ. "tɛl hɝ, pɛvɑɹə. ʃi bɪlivz ɪts tʃɹu! juv kəmændəɾ əɹ tə spik ðə tʃɹuθ ən tə laɪ. doʊn lʊk ət mi ðət weɪ! ʃi bɪlivz!" ə bluɪʃ tɪnʒ əpɪɹɾ ɑn zɛɹəz lɪps. hɝ aɪlɪdz flʌɾɝd. sin ɡæðɝd kɑm wɪð boʊθ hænz. "pɛvɑɹə, jə ɡeɪv ði ɔɹɾɝ soʊ əpɛɹənli jə mʌst ɹilis hɝ, əɹ ʃɪl sʌfəkeɪt ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ʌs."

"Light's mercy," she breathed. "You do not have to lie, Zerah." Zerah's legs thrashed beneath the table as if she were trying to rise and could not get her feet under her. "Tell her, Pevara. She believes it's true! You've commanded her to speak the truth and to lie. Don't look at me that way! She believes!" A bluish tinge appeared on Zerah's lips. Her eyelids fluttered. Seaine gathered calm with both hands. "Pevara, you gave the order so apparently you must release her, or she will suffocate right in front of us."

"ʃiz ə ɹɛbəl." pɛvɑɹəz mʌɾɝ ɪnvɛstəd ðət wɝd wɪð ɔl ðə skɔɹn ɪt kəd hoʊld. bʌt ðən ʃi saɪd. "ʃi hæzən bɪn tʃɹaɪd, jɛt. jə doʊn əv tə . . . laɪ . . . ɡɝl." zɛɹə tɑpəl fɔɹwɝɾ ən leɪ wɪð əɹ tʃik pɹɛst əɡɛns ðə teɪbəltɑp, ɡʌlpɪŋ ɛɹ bɪtwin wɪmpɝz.

"She's a rebel." Pevara's mutter invested that word with all the scorn it could hold. But then she sighed. "She hasn't been tried, yet. You don't have to . . . lie . . . girl." Zerah toppled forward and lay with her cheek pressed against the tabletop, gulping air between whimpers.

sin ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɪn wʌndɝ. ðeɪ hæd nɑt kənsɪɾɝd ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ʌv kənflɪktɪŋ oʊðz. wʌɾ ɪf ðə blæk ədʒɑ dɪd nɑt mɪɹli ɹimuv ði oʊθ əɡɛns laɪɪŋ, bʌt ɹipleɪst ɪt wɪð wʌn ə ðɛɹ oʊn? wʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ ɹipleɪst ɔl θɹi wɪð ðɛɹ oʊn oʊðz? ʃi ən pɛvɑɹə wəd nid tə ɡoʊ vɛɹi kɛɹfəli ɪf ðeɪ dɪd faɪn ə blæk sɪstɝ, əɹ ðeɪ maɪɾ əv əɹ fɔl dɛd bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ nu wʌt ðə kɑnflɪkt wɑz. pɝhæps fɝst ə ɹɪnʌnsieɪʃən ʌv ɔl oʊðz - noʊ weɪ tə ɡoʊ əbaʊɾ ɪt mɔɹ kɛɹfəli wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ wʌt blæk sɪstɝz swɔɹ - fɑloʊd baɪ ɹəteɪkɪŋ ðə θɹi? laɪt, ðə peɪn ə biɪŋ lus fɹəm ɛvɹiθɪŋ ət wʌns wəd bi lɪɾəl ʃɔɹɾ ə biɪŋ pʊt tə ðə kwɛstʃən. meɪbi nɑt ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ɪɾ əɾ ɔl. bʌt sɝɾənli ə dɑɹkfɹɛn dɪzɝv ðəɾ ən mɔɹ. ɪf ðeɪ ɛvɝ faʊnd wʌn.

Seaine shook her head in wonder. They had not considered the possibility of conflicting oaths. What if the Black Ajah did not merely remove the Oath against lying, but replaced it with one of their own? What if they replaced all Three with their own oaths? She and Pevara would need to go very carefully if they did find a Black sister, or they might have her fall dead before they knew what the conflict was. Perhaps first a renunciation of all oaths - no way to go about it more carefully without knowing what Black sisters swore - followed by retaking the Three? Light, the pain of being loosed from everything at once would be little short of being put to the question. Maybe not short of it at all. But certainly a Darkfriend deserved that and more. If they ever found one.

pɛvɑɹə ɡlɛɹd daʊn ət ðə ɡæspɪŋ wʊmən wɪθaʊt ðə slaɪɾəst tʌtʃ ə pɪɾi ɑn əɹ feɪs. "wɛn ʃi stænz tʃɹaɪəl fəɹ ɹɪbɛljən, aɪ ɪntɛn tə sɪɾ ɑn əɹ kɔɹt."

Pevara glared down at the gasping woman without the slightest touch of pity on her face. "When she stands trial for rebellion, I intend to sit on her court."

"wɛn ʃiz tʃɹaɪd, pɛvɑɹə," sin sɛd θɔtfəli. "ə pɪɾi tə luz ði əsɪstəns ʌv wʌn wi noʊ ɪzən ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd. ən sɪns ʃiz ə ɹɛbəl, wi nid nɑt bi oʊvɝli kənsɝn əbaʊt juzɪŋ hɝ." ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə nʌmbɝ ə dɪskʌʃənz, nʌn tə ə kənkluʒən, əbaʊt ðə sɛkən ɹizən fəɹ livɪŋ ðə nu oʊθ ɪn pleɪs. ə sɪstɝ swɔɹn tə oʊbeɪ kəd bi kəmpɛld - sin ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli; ðət saʊndəɾ ɪntaɪɝli tu kloʊs tə ðə fɔɹbɪɾən vɪlnəs ə kəmpʌlʃən - ʃi kəd bi ɪndus tə hɛlp ɪn ðə hʌnt, soʊ lɔŋ əz jə dɪd nɑt maɪn fɔɹsɪŋ əɹ tə æksɛp ðə deɪnʒɝ, wɛðɝ ʃi wɪʃt tə əɹ nɑt. "aɪ kænɑt θɪŋk ðeɪ wəd sɛn oʊnli wʌn," ʃi wɛn ɑn. "zɛɹə, haʊ mɛni ʌv jə keɪm tə spɹɛd ðɪs teɪl?"

"When she is tried, Pevara," Seaine said thoughtfully. "A pity to lose the assistance of one we know isn't a Darkfriend. And since she is a rebel, we need not be overly concerned about using her." There had been a number of discussions, none to a conclusion, about the second reason for leaving the new oath in place. A sister sworn to obey could be compelled - Seaine shifted uneasily; that sounded entirely too close to the forbidden vileness of Compulsion - she could be induced to help in the hunt, so long as you did not mind forcing her to accept the danger, whether she wished to or not. "I cannot think they would send only one," she went on. "Zerah, how many of you came to spread this tale?"

"tɛn," ðə wʊmən mʌmbəld əɡɛns ðə teɪbəltɑp, ðən dʒɝkt ɪɹɛkt, ɡlɛɹɪŋ ɪn dɪfaɪəns. "aɪ wɪl nɑt bɪtʃɹeɪ maɪ sɪstɝz! aɪ woʊnt - !" əbɹʌpli ʃi kʌɾ ɔf, lɪps twɪstɪŋ bɪɾɝli əz ʃi ɹilaɪzd ʃi hæd dʌn dʒʌs ðæt.

"Ten," the woman mumbled against the tabletop, then jerked erect, glaring in defiance. "I will not betray my sisters! I won't - !" Abruptly she cut off, lips twisting bitterly as she realized she had done just that.

"neɪmz!" pɛvɑɹə bɑɹkt. "ɡɪv mi ðɛɹ neɪmz, əɹ əl əv jəɹ haɪd hɪɹ ən naʊ!"

"Names!" Pevara barked. "Give me their names, or I will have your hide here and now!"

neɪmz spɪl fɹəm zɛɹəz ənwɪlɪŋ lɪps. ət ðə kəmænd, sɝɾənli, mɔɹ ðən ðə θɹɛt. lʊkɪŋ ət pɛvɑɹəz ɡɹɪm feɪs, ðoʊ, sin wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi niɾəd lɪɾəl pɹɑvəkeɪʃən tə stʃɹaɪp zɛɹə laɪk ə nɑvəs kɑt stilɪŋ. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ʃi hɝsɛlf dɪd nɑt fil ðə seɪm ænəmɑsəɾi. ɹɪvʌlʃən, jɛs, bʌt klɪɹli nɑɾ əz stʃɹɔŋ. ðə wʊmən wɑz ə ɹɛbəl u hæd hɛlp bɹeɪk ðə waɪt taʊɝ wən ə sɪstɝ mʌst æksɛpt ɛniθɪŋ tə kip ðə taʊɝ hoʊl, ən jɛt. . . . vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ.

Names spilled from Zerah's unwilling lips. At the command, certainly, more than the threat. Looking at Pevara's grim face, though, Seaine was sure she needed little provocation to stripe Zerah like a novice caught stealing. Strangely, she herself did not feel the same animosity. Revulsion, yes, but clearly not as strong. The woman was a rebel who had helped break the White Tower when a sister must accept anything to keep the Tower whole, and yet. . . . Very strange.

"ju əɡɹi, pɛvɑɹə?" ʃi sɛd wən ðə lɪs kənkluɾəd. ðə stʌbɝn wʊmən ɡeɪv əɹ oʊnli ə fɪɹs nɑd fəɹ əɡɹimənt. "vɛɹi wɛl. zɛɹə, jəl bɹɪŋ bɝneɪl tə maɪ ɹumz ðɪs æftɝnun." ðəɹ wɝ tu fɹəm itʃ ədʒɑ ɛksɛptɪŋ ðə blu ən ðə ɹɛd, ɪt simd, bʌt bɛs tə bɪɡɪn wɪð ði ʌðɝ waɪt. "ju wɪl seɪ oʊnli ðəɾ aɪ wɪʃ tə spik tə hɝ ɑn ə pɹaɪvət mæɾɝ. jəl ɡɪv əɹ noʊ wɔɹnɪŋ baɪ wɝd, did, əɹ oʊmɪʃən. ðən jəl stæn kwaɪətli ən lɛt pɛvɑɹə ən mi də wʌɾ ɪz nɛsəsɛɹi. jə ɑɹ biɪŋ ɹɪkɹuɾɪd ɪndə ə wɝðiɝ kɑz ðən jəɹ mɪsɡaɪɾɪd ɹɪbɛljən, zɛɹə." ʌv kɔɹs ɪt wɑz mɪsɡaɪɾɪd. noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ mæd wɪð paʊɝ ɪleɪɾə hæd bɪkʌm. "ju ɑɹ gɑnə hɛlp əs hʌn daʊn ðə blæk ədʒɑ."

"You agree, Pevara?" she said when the list concluded. The stubborn woman gave her only a fierce nod for agreement. "Very well. Zerah, you will bring Bernaile to my rooms this afternoon." There were two from each Ajah excepting the Blue and the Red, it seemed, but best to begin with the other White. "You will say only that I wish to speak to her on a private matter. You will give her no warning by word, deed, or omission. Then you will stand quietly and let Pevara and me do what is necessary. You are being recruited into a worthier cause than your misguided rebellion, Zerah." Of course it was misguided. No matter how mad with power Elaida had become. "You are going to help us hunt down the Black Ajah."

zɛɹəz hɛd dʒɝkt ənwɪlɪŋ nɑdz əɾ itʃ ɪndʒʌŋkʃən, hɝ feɪs peɪnd, bʌɾ ət mɛnʃən ʌv ə hʌn fəɹ ðə blæk ədʒɑ, ʃi ɡæspt. laɪt, hɝ wɪts mʌst əv bɪn toʊɾəli ənhɪnʒd baɪ hɝ ɪkspɪɹiənsɪz nɑt tə si ðæt!

Zerah's head jerked unwilling nods at each injunction, her face pained, but at mention of a hunt for the Black Ajah, she gasped. Light, her wits must have been totally unhinged by her experiences not to see that!

"æn jəl stɑp spɹɛɾɪŋ ðiz . . . stɔɹiz," pɛvɑɹə pʊɾ ɪn stɝnli. "fɹʌm ðɪs moʊmənt, jəl nɑt mɛnʃən ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ ən fɔls dʒɹæɡənz təɡɛðɝ. æm aɪ ʌndɝstʊd?"

"And you will stop spreading these . . . stories," Pevara put in sternly. "From this moment, you'll not mention the Red Ajah and false Dragons together. Am I understood?"

zɛɹəz feɪs dɑn ə mæsk ə sʌlən stʌbɝnnəs. zɛɹəz maʊθ sɛd, "aɪ ʌndɝstænd, sɪɾɝ." ʃi lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə bɪɡɪn wipɪŋ əɡɛn fɹəm ʃɪɹ fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən.

Zerah's face donned a mask of sullen stubbornness. Zerah's mouth said, "I understand, Sitter." She looked ready to begin weeping again from sheer frustration.

"ðɛn ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə maɪ saɪt," pɛvɑɹə toʊl hɝ, ɹilisɪŋ ðə ʃild ən seɪaɪdɑɹ təɡɛðɝ. "æn kəmpoʊz jɝsɛlf! wɑʃ jəɹ feɪs ən stʃɹeɪɾən jəɹ hɛɹ!" ðət læst wɑz dɝɛktəɾ ət ðə bæk ə ðə wʊmən ɔlɹɛɾi dɑɹɾɪŋ fɹəm ðə teɪbəl. zɛɹə hæd tə pʊl əɹ hænz əweɪ fɹəm əɹ hɛɹ tə oʊpən ðə dɔɹ. əz ðə dɔɹ skwikt ʃʌt bɪhaɪn hɝ, pɛvɑɹə snɔɹɾɪd. "aɪ wʊdn pʊɾ ɪt pæst əɹ tə hæv ɡɔn tə ðɪs bɝneɪl laɪk ə sloʊvən, hoʊpɪŋ tə wɔɹn əɹ ðət weɪ."

"Then get out of my sight," Pevara told her, releasing the shield and saidar together. "And compose yourself! Wash your face and straighten your hair!" That last was directed at the back of the woman already darting from the table. Zerah had to pull her hands away from her hair to open the door. As the door squeaked shut behind her, Pevara snorted. "I wouldn't put it past her to have gone to this Bernaile like a sloven, hoping to warn her that way."

"ə væləd pɔɪnt," sin ədmɪɾəd. "bʌɾ u wɪl wi wɔɹn ɪf wi skaʊl ɹaɪɾ ən lɛft ət ðiz wɪmən? ət ðə vɛɹi list, wɪl ətʃɹæk noʊɾəs."

"A valid point," Seaine admitted. "But who will we warn if we scowl right and left at these women? At the very least, we will attract notice."

"ðə weɪ mæɾɝz ɑɹ, sin, wi wʊdn ətʃɹæk noʊɾəs kɪkɪŋ əm əkɹɔs ðə taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz." pɛvɑɹə saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ðət wɝ ən ətʃɹæktɪv noʊʃən. "ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹəbɛlz, ən aɪ ɪntɛn tə hoʊld əm soʊ hɑɹd ðeɪ skwik ɪf wʌn ə ðɛm soʊ mʌtʃ əz əz ə ɹɔŋ θɔt!"

"The way matters are, Seaine, we wouldn't attract notice kicking them across the Tower grounds." Pevara sounded as if that were an attractive notion. "They are rebels, and I intend to hold them so hard they squeak if one of them so much as has a wrong thought!"

ðeɪ wɛn ɹaʊn ən ɹaʊn əbaʊt ðæt. sin ɪnsɪstəd ðət kɛɹ ɪn ði ɔɹɾɝz ðeɪ ɡeɪv, livɪŋ noʊ luphoʊlz, wəd bi səfɪʃənt. pɛvɑɹə pɔɪntəɾ aʊt ðət ðeɪ wɝ lɛɾɪŋ tɛn ɹɛbəlz - tɛn! - wɔk ðə taʊɝz hɔlz ənpʌnɪʃt. sin sɛd ðeɪ wəd feɪs pʌnɪʃmən ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ən pɛvɑɹə ɡɹaʊl ðəɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli wɑz nɑt sun ɪnʌf. sin hæɾ ɔlweɪz ədmaɪɝd ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz stʃɹɛŋkθ ʌv wɪl, bʌt ɹɪli, səmtaɪmz ɪt wɑz pjʊɹ stʌbɝnnəs.

They went round and round about that. Seaine insisted that care in the orders they gave, leaving no loopholes, would be sufficient. Pevara pointed out that they were letting ten rebels - ten! - walk the Tower's halls unpunished. Seaine said they would face punishment eventually, and Pevara growled that eventually was not soon enough. Seaine had always admired the other woman's strength of will, but really, sometimes it was pure stubbornness.

ə feɪn kɹik fɹəm ə hɪnʒ wɑz ɔl ðə wɔɹnɪŋ sin hæd tə snætʃ ði oʊθ ɹɑɾ ɪndə hɝ læp, haɪɾɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn foʊlz ə hɝ skɝɾ əz ðə dɔɹ oʊpənd waɪd. ʃi ən pɛvɑɹə ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs ɔlmoʊst əz wʌn.

A faint creak from a hinge was all the warning Seaine had to snatch the Oath Rod into her lap, hiding it in folds of her skirt as the door opened wide. She and Pevara embraced the Source almost as one.

sɹɪn wɔkt ɪndə ðə ɹum kɑmli, hoʊldɪŋ ə læntɝn, ən stʊɾ əsaɪd fəɹ tælin, hu wɑz fɑloʊd baɪ taɪni jukɪɝi, wɪð ə sɛkən laɪt, ən bɔɪɪʃli slɪm dʌsin, tɔl fəɹ ə kɛɹhinɪn, hu kloʊz ðə dɔɹ kwaɪt fɝmli ən sɛɾəld əɹ bæk əɡɛnst ɪɾ əz ɪf tə kip ɛniwʌn fɹəm livɪŋ. fɔɹ sɪɾɝz, ɹɛpɹɪzɛntɪŋ ɔl ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ ədʒəz ɪn ðə taʊɝ. ðeɪ sim tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðə fæk ðət sin ən pɛvɑɹə hɛl seɪaɪdɑɹ. sʌɾənli, tə sin, ðə ɹum fɛlt ɹæðɝ kɹaʊɾəd. ɪmædʒəneɪʃən, ən ɪɹæʃənəl, bʌt . . .

Saerin walked into the room calmly, holding a lantern, and stood aside for Talene, who was followed by tiny Yukiri, with a second light, and boyishly slim Doesine, tall for a Cairhienin, who closed the door quite firmly and settled her back against it as if to keep anyone from leaving. Four Sitters, representing all the remaining Ajahs in the Tower. They seemed to ignore the fact that Seaine and Pevara held saidar. Suddenly, to Seaine, the room felt rather crowded. Imagination, and irrational, but . . .

"stʃɹeɪnʒ tə si ðə pɛɹ ə jə təɡɛðɝ," sɹɪn sɛd. hɝ feɪs maɪt bi sɝin, bʌt ʃi slɪd fɪŋɡɝz əlɔŋ ðə hɪlt ə ðət kɝv naɪf bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛlt. ʃi hæd hɛld əɹ tʃɛɹ fɔɹɾi jɪɹz, lɔŋɡɝ ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls ɪn ðə hɔl, ən ɛvɹiwʌn hæd lɝn tə bi kɛɹfəl ə hɝ tɛmpɝ.

"Strange to see the pair of you together," Saerin said. Her face might be serene, but she slid fingers along the hilt of that curved knife behind her belt. She had held her chair forty years, longer than anyone else in the Hall, and everyone had learned to be careful of her temper.

"wi maɪt seɪ ðə seɪm ə ju," pɛvɑɹə ɹɪplaɪd dʒɹaɪli. sɹɪnz tɛmpɝ nɛvɝ əpsɛt hɝ. "ɔɹ dɪd jə kʌm daʊn hɪɹ tə hɛlp dʌsin tʃɹaɪ tə ɡɛt səm ə hɝ oʊn bæk?" ə sʌɾən flʌʃ meɪd ðə jɛloʊz feɪs lʊk ivən mɔɹ ðəɾ ʌv ə pɹɪɾi bɔɪ dɪspaɪɾ əɹ ɛləɡən bɛɹɪŋ, ən toʊl sin wɪtʃ sɪɾɝ hæd stʃɹeɪd tu nɪɹ ðə ɹɛd kɔɹɾɝz wɪð ənfɔɹtʃənət ɹɪzʌls. "aɪ wʊdn əv θɔt ðət wəd bɹɪŋ jə təɡɛðɝ, ðoʊ. ɡɹinz ət jɛloʊz' θɹoʊts, bɹaʊnz ət ɡɹeɪz'. əɹ dɪd jə dʒʌs bɹɪŋ əm daʊn fəɹ ə kwaɪət duəl, sɹɪn?"

"We might say the same of you," Pevara replied dryly. Saerin's temper never upset her. "Or did you come down here to help Doesine try to get some of her own back?" A sudden flush made the Yellow's face look even more that of a pretty boy despite her elegant bearing, and told Seaine which Sitter had strayed too near the Red quarters with unfortunate results. "I wouldn't have thought that would bring you together, though. Greens at Yellows' throats, Browns at Grays'. Or did you just bring them down for a quiet duel, Saerin?"

fɹæntəkəli, sin kæst ɝaʊn fəɹ wʌt ɹizən wəɾ əv ðiz fɔɹ ðɪs dip ɪndə ðə bɛdʒɹɑk ə tɑɹ vəlɑn. wʌt kəd taɪ ðɛm təɡɛðɝ? ðɛɹ ədʒəz - ɔl ə ði ədʒəz - tʃɹuli wɝ ət wʌn ənʌðɝz θɹoʊts. ɔl fɔɹ hæd bɪn hændəd pɛnənsɪz baɪ ɪleɪɾə. noʊ sɪɾɝ kəɾ ɛndʒɔɪ leɪbɝ, ɪspɛʃli wən ɛvɹiwʌn nu ɪɡzækli waɪ ʃi wɑz skɹʌbɪŋ flɔɹz əɹ pɑts, jɛt ðət wɑz hɑɹdli ə bɑnd. wʌɾ ɛls? nʌn wɝ nɑbli bɔɹn. sɹɪn ən jukɪɝi wɝ ðə dɔɾɝz ʌv ɪnkipɝz, tælin ə fɑɹmɝz, waɪl dʌsinz fɑðɝ hæd bɪn ə kʌtlɝ. sɹɪn hæd bɪn tʃɹeɪn fɝs baɪ ðə dɔɾɝz ə saɪləns, ði oʊnli wʌn ə ðət lɑt tə ɹitʃ ðə ʃɔl. æbsəlutli jusləs dʒɹɪvəl. sʌɾənli, sʌmθɪŋ dɪd stʃɹaɪk hɝ, ən dʒɹaɪɾ əɹ θɹoʊt. sɹɪn wɪð əɹ tɛmpɝ ɔfən bɛɹli ɪn ɹeɪn. dʌsin, hu hæɾ æktʃəli  ɹʌn əweɪ θɹi taɪmz əz ə nɑvəs, ðoʊ ʃi hæɾ oʊnli wʌns meɪɾ ɪɾ əz fɑɹ əz ðə bɹɪdʒəz. tælin, hu maɪɾ əv ɝn mɔɹ pʌnɪʃməns ðən ɛni ʌðɝ nɑvəs ɪn ðə hɪstɝi ʌv ðə taʊɝ. jukɪɝi, ɔlweɪz ðə læst ɡɹeɪ tə dʒɔɪn əɹ sɪstɝz' kənsɛnsəs wən ʃi wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ ənʌðɝ weɪ, ðə læs tə dʒɔɪn ðə hɔlz, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. ɔl fɔɹ wɝ kənsɪɾɝd ɹɛbəlz, ɪn ə weɪ, ən ɪleɪɾə hæd hjumɪlieɪɾɪd ɛvɹi wʌn. kəd ðeɪ bi θɪŋkɪŋ ðeɪ hæd meɪɾ ə mɪsteɪk, stændɪŋ tə dɪpoʊz sɪuən ən ɹeɪz ɪleɪɾə? ðeɪv hæv faʊn aʊɾ əbaʊt zɛɹə ən ði ʌðɝz? ən ɪf wʌd dɪd ðeɪ ɪntɛn tə du?

Frantically, Seaine cast around for what reason would have these four this deep into the bedrock of Tar Valon. What could tie them together? Their Ajahs - all of the Ajahs - truly were at one another's throats. All four had been handed penances by Elaida. No Sitter could enjoy Labor, especially when everyone knew exactly why she was scrubbing floors or pots, yet that was hardly a bond. What else? None were nobly born. Saerin and Yukiri were the daughters of innkeepers, Talene of farmers, while Doesine's father had been a cutler. Saerin had been trained first by the Daughters of Silence, the only one of that lot to reach the shawl. Absolutely useless drivel. Suddenly, something did strike her, and dried her throat. Saerin with her temper often barely in rein. Doesine, who had actually run away three times as a novice, though she had only once made it as far as the bridges. Talene, who might have earned more punishments than any other novice in the history of the Tower. Yukiri, always the last Gray to join her sisters' consensus when she wanted to go another way, the last to join the Hall's, for that matter. All four were considered rebels, in a way, and Elaida had humiliated every one. Could they be thinking they had made a mistake, standing to depose Siuan and raise Elaida? Could they have found out about Zerah and the others? And if so, what did they intend to do?

mɛntəli, sin pɹipɛɹd hɝsɛlf tə wiv seɪaɪdɑɹ, ðoʊ wɪθaʊt mʌtʃ hoʊp ðət ʃi kəɾ ɪskeɪp. pɛvɑɹə mætʃt sɹɪn ən jukɪɝi ɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ, bʌt ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz wikɝ ðən ɛni hɪɹ seɪv dʌsin. ʃi pɹipɛɹd hɝsɛlf, ən tælin stɛp fɔɹwɝɾ ən bɝst ɔl ə hɝ lɑdʒɪkəl dɪdʌkʃənz tə flɪndɝz.

Mentally, Seaine prepared herself to weave saidar, though without much hope that she could escape. Pevara matched Saerin and Yukiri in strength, but she herself was weaker than any here save Doesine. She prepared herself, and Talene stepped forward and burst all of her logical deductions to flinders.

"jukɪɝi noʊɾəst jə tu snikɪŋ əbaʊt təɡɛðɝ, ən wi wɑnə noʊ waɪ." hɝ sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli dip vɔɪs hɛl hit dɪspaɪt ði aɪs ðət sim tə koʊɾ əɹ feɪs. "dɪd ðə hɛdz ə jəɹ ədʒəz sɛt jə ə sikɹət tæsk? ɪn pʌblɪk, ði ədʒəz' hɛdz snɑɹl ət wʌn ənʌðɝ wɝs ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls, bʌt ðeɪv bɪn snikɪŋ ɔf ɪndə kɔɹnɝz tə tɔk, ɪt simz. wʌtɛvɝ ðəɹ skimɪŋ, ðə hɔl əz ə ɹaɪt tə noʊ."

"Yukiri noticed you two sneaking about together, and we want to know why." Her surprisingly deep voice held heat despite the ice that seemed to coat her face. "Did the heads of your Ajahs set you a secret task? In public, the Ajahs' heads snarl at one another worse than anyone else, but they've been sneaking off into corners to talk, it seems. Whatever they're scheming, the Hall has a right to know."

"oʊ, də ɡɪv oʊvɝ, tælin." jukɪɝiz vɔɪs wɑz ɔlweɪz ən ivən bɪɡɝ sɝpɹaɪz ðən tælinz. ðə wʊmən lʊkt ə mɪniətʃʊɹ kwin, ɪn dɑɹk sɪlvɝ sɪlk wɪð aɪvɝi leɪs, bʌt ʃi saʊndəɾ ə kʌmftəɹbəl kʌntʃɹi wʊmən. ʃi kleɪm ðə kɑntʃɹæs hɛlpt ɪn nəɡoʊʃieɪʃənz. ʃi smaɪld ət sin ən pɛvɑɹə, ə mɑnɑɹk pɝhæps ənʃʊɹ haʊ ɡɹeɪʃəs ʃi ʃəd bi. "aɪ sɔ ðə pɛɹ ə jə snɪfɪŋ əbaʊt laɪk fɛɹəts ət ðə hɛnkup," ʃi sɛd, "bʌɾ aɪ hɛl maɪ tʌŋ - jə maɪt bi pɪloʊ fɹɛnz, fəɹ ɔl aɪ noʊ, ən huz bɪznəs ɪz ðət bʌt jʊɹz? - aɪ hɛl maɪ tʌŋ tɪl tælin hɪɹ stɑɹɾəd jɛlpɪŋ əbaʊt huz bɪn hʌɾəlɪŋ ɪn kɔɹnɝz. aɪv sin ə bɪɾ ə hʌɾəlɪŋ ɪn kɔɹnɝz maɪsɛlf, ən aɪ səspɛk səm ə ðoʊz wɪmən maɪt hɛd ðɛɹ ədʒəz əz wɛl, soʊ. . . . səmtaɪmz sɪks ən sɪks meɪk ə dʌzən, ən səmtaɪmz ðeɪ meɪk ə mɛs. tɛl əs ɪf jə kæn, naʊ. ðə hɔl dʌz əv ə ɹaɪt."

"Oh, do give over, Talene." Yukiri's voice was always an even bigger surprise than Talene's. The woman looked a miniature queen, in dark silver silk with ivory lace, but she sounded a comfortable country woman. She claimed the contrast helped in negotiations. She smiled at Seaine and Pevara, a monarch perhaps unsure how gracious she should be. "I saw the pair of you sniffing about like ferrets at the hencoop," she said, "but I held my tongue - you might be pillow friends, for all I know, and whose business is that but yours? - I held my tongue till Talene here started yelping about who's been huddling in corners. I've seen a bit of huddling in corners myself, and I suspect some of those women might head their Ajahs as well, so. . . . Sometimes six and six make a dozen, and sometimes they make a mess. Tell us if you can, now. The Hall does have a right."

"wi ɑɹ nɑt livɪŋ əntɪl jə də tɛl," tælin pʊɾ ɪn ivən mɔɹ hiɾɪdli ðən bɪfɔɹ.

"We are not leaving until you do tell," Talene put in even more heatedly than before.

pɛvɑɹə snɔɹɾɪd ən foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz. "ɪf ðə hɛɾ ə maɪ ədʒɑ spoʊk tu wɝdz tə mi, aɪd si noʊ ɹizən tə tɛl jə wʌt ðeɪ wɝ. əz ɪt hæpənz, wʌt sin ən aɪ wɝ dɪskʌsɪŋ əz nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə ɹɛɾ əɹ ðə waɪt. snup ɛlswɛɹ." bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹilis seɪaɪdɑɹ. niðɝ dɪd sin.

Pevara snorted and folded her arms. "If the head of my Ajah spoke two words to me, I'd see no reason to tell you what they were. As it happens, what Seaine and I were discussing has nothing to do with the Red or the White. Snoop elsewhere." But she did not release saidar. Neither did Seaine.

"blʌɾi jusləs ən aɪ blʌɾi nu ɪt," dʌsin mʌɾɝd fɹəm əɹ pleɪs baɪ ðə dɔɹ. "waɪ aɪ ɛvɝ fleɪmɪŋ lɛt jə tɔk mi ɪndə ðɪs. . . . dʒʌst əz blʌɾi wɛl noʊbɑdi ɛls noʊz, əɹ wiɾ əv ʃipswæləp ɔl oʊvɝ feɪsəz fəɹ ðə hoʊl blʌɾi taʊɝ tə si." ət taɪmz ʃi hæɾ ə tʌŋ laɪk ə bɔɪ, tu, ə bɔɪ hu niɾəd ɪz maʊθ wɑʃt aʊt.

"Bloody useless and I bloody knew it," Doesine muttered from her place by the door. "Why I ever flaming let you talk me into this. . . . Just as bloody well nobody else knows, or we'd have sheepswallop all over faces for the whole bloody Tower to see." At times she had a tongue like a boy, too, a boy who needed his mouth washed out.

sin wʊɾə stʊd tə liv ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt fɪɹɾ əɹ niz wəd bɪtʃɹeɪ hɝ. pɛvɑɹə dɪd stænd, ən ɹeɪzd ən ɪmpeɪʃən aɪbɹaʊ ət ðə wɪmən bɪtwin əɹ ən ðə dɔɹ.

Seaine would have stood to leave if she had not feared her knees would betray her. Pevara did stand, and raised an impatient eyebrow at the women between her and the door.

sɹɪn fɪŋɡɝɾ əɹ naɪf hɪlt ən aɪɾ əm kwɪtsɪkli, nɑt ʃɪftɪŋ ə stɛp. "ə pʌzəl," ʃi mɝmɝd. sʌɾənli ʃi ɡlaɪɾɪd fɔɹwɝd, hɝ fɹi hæn dɪpɪŋ ɪndə sinz læp soʊ kwɪkli ðət sin ɡæspt. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə kip ði oʊθ ɹɑd hɪɾən, bʌt ði oʊnli ɹɪzʌlt wɑz ðət ʃi ɛndəd wɪð sɹɪn hoʊldɪŋ ðə ɹɑd weɪs haɪ wɪð wʌn hænd waɪl ʃi hɛl ði ʌðɝ ɛn ən ə fɪsfəl ə hɝ skɝts. "aɪ ɛndʒɔɪ pʌzəlz," sɹɪn sɛd.

Saerin fingered her knife hilt and eyed them quizzically, not shifting a step. "A puzzle," she murmured. Suddenly she glided forward, her free hand dipping into Seaine's lap so quickly that Seaine gasped. She tried to keep the Oath Rod hidden, but the only result was that she ended with Saerin holding the Rod waist high with one hand while she held the other end and a fistful of her skirts. "I enjoy puzzles," Saerin said.

sin lɛt ɡoʊ ən ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ dʒɹɛs; ðəɹ sim nʌθɪŋ ɛls tə du.

Seaine let go and adjusted her dress; there seemed nothing else to do.

ði əpɪɹəns ə ðə ɹɑd pɹədust ə moʊməntɛɹi bæbəl əz nɪɹli ɛvɹiwʌn spoʊk ət wʌns.

The appearance of the Rod produced a momentary babble as nearly everyone spoke at once.

"blʌɾ ən faɪɝ," dʌsin ɡɹaʊld. "ɑɹ jə daʊn hɪɹ ɹeɪzɪŋ nu blʌɾi sɪstɝz?"

"Blood and fire," Doesine growled. "Are you down here raising new bloody sisters?"

"oʊ, liv ɪt wɪð ðɛm, sɹɪn," jukɪɝi læft ɹaɪɾ ɑn tɑp ə hɝ. "wʌtɛvɝ ðəɹ ʌp tə, ɪts ðɛɹ oʊn bɪznəs."

"Oh, leave it with them, Saerin," Yukiri laughed right on top of her. "Whatever they're up to, it's their own business."

ətɑp boʊθ, tælin bɑɹkt, "waɪ ɛls ɑɹ ðeɪ snikɪŋ əbaʊt - təɡɛðɝ! - ɪf ɪɾ ɪzən tə də wɪð ði ədʒɑ hɛdz?"

Atop both, Talene barked, "Why else are they sneaking about - together! - if it isn't to do with the Ajah heads?"

sɹɪn weɪvd ə hænd, ən æftɝ ə moʊmənt ɡeɪn kwaɪət. ɔl pɹɛzənt wɝ sɪɾɝz, bʌt ʃi hæd ðə ɹaɪt tə spik fɝst ɪn ðə hɔl, ən əɹ fɔɹɾi jɪɹz kaʊntəd fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ, tu. "ðɪs ɪz ðə ki tə ðə pʌzəl, aɪ θɪŋk," ʃi sɛd, stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ðə ɹɑd wɪð əɹ θʌm. "waɪ ðɪs, æftɝ ɔl?" əbɹʌpli ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ sɝaʊndəd hɝ, tu, ən ʃi tʃænəl spɪɹət tə ðə ɹɑd. "ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, əl spik noʊ wɝd ðəɾ ɪz nɑt tʃɹu. aɪm nɑɾ ə dɑɹk-fɹɛnd."

Saerin waved a hand, and after a moment gained quiet. All present were Sitters, but she had the right to speak first in the Hall, and her forty years counted for something, too. "This is the key to the puzzle, I think," she said, stroking the Rod with her thumb. "Why this, after all?" Abruptly the glow of saidar surrounded her, too, and she channeled Spirit to the Rod. "Under the Light, I will speak no word that is not true. I am not a Dark-friend."

ɪn ðə saɪləns ðət fɑloʊd, ə maʊs snizɪŋ wʊɾə saʊndəd laʊd.

In the silence that followed, a mouse sneezing would have sounded loud.

"æm aɪ ɹaɪt?" sɹɪn sɛd, ɹilisɪŋ ðə paʊɝ. ʃi hɛl ðə ɹɑɾ aʊt təwɔɹd sin.

"Am I right?" Saerin said, releasing the Power. She held the Rod out toward Seaine.

fəɹ ðə θɝd taɪm, sin ɹitʊk ði oʊθ əɡɛns laɪɪŋ, ən fəɹ ðə sɛkən taɪm ɹɪpiɾɪd ðət ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ə ðə blæk. pɛvɑɹə dɪd ðə seɪm wɪð fɹoʊzən dɪɡnəɾi. ən aɪz ʃɑɹp əz ən iɡəlz.

For the third time, Seaine retook the Oath against lying, and for the second time repeated that she was not of the Black. Pevara did the same with frozen dignity. And eyes sharp as an eagle's.

"ðɪs ɪz ɹɪdɪkjələs," tælin sɛd. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ blæk ədʒɑ."

"This is ridiculous," Talene said. "There is no Black Ajah."

jukɪɝi tʊk ðə ɹɑd fɹəm pɛvɑɹə ən tʃænəld. "ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, əl spik noʊ wɝd ðəɾ ɪz nɑt tʃɹu. aɪm nɑt blæk ədʒɑ." ðə laɪɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ ɝaʊn əɹ wɪŋkt aʊt, ən ʃi hændəd ðə ɹɑd tə dʌsin.

Yukiri took the Rod from Pevara and channeled. "Under the Light, I will speak no word that is not true. I am not Black Ajah." The light of saidar around her winked out, and she handed the Rod to Doesine.

tælin fɹaʊn ɪn dɪsɡʌst. "stæn əsaɪd, dʌsin. aɪ fəɹ wʌn wɪl nɑt pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ðɪs fɪlθi sədʒɛstʃən."

Talene frowned in disgust. "Stand aside, Doesine. I for one will not put up with this filthy suggestion."

"ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, əl spik noʊ wɝd ðəɾ ɪz nɑt tʃɹu," dʌsin sɛɾ ɔlmoʊst ɹɛvɝənli, ðə ɡloʊ ɝaʊn əɹ laɪk ə heɪloʊ. "aɪ æm nɑɾ ə ðə blæk ədʒɑ." wən mæɾɝz wɝ sɪɹiəs, hɝ tʌŋ wɑz əz klin əz ɛni mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz kəɾ əv wɪʃt. ʃi ɪkstɛndəd ðə ɹɑd tə tælin.

"Under the Light, I will speak no word that is not true," Doesine said almost reverently, the glow around her like a halo. "I am not of the Black Ajah." When matters were serious, her tongue was as clean as any Mistress of Novices could have wished. She extended the Rod to Talene.

ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd wʊmən stɑɹɾəd bæk əz fɹəm ə pɔɪzənəs sneɪk. "ivən tə æsk ðɪs ɪz ə slændɝ. wɝs ðən slændɝ!" sʌmθɪŋ fɛɹəl muvd ɪn əɹ aɪz. ən ɪɹæʃənəl θɔt, pɝhæps, bʌt ðət wɑz wʌt sin sɔ. "naʊ muv aʊɾ ə maɪ weɪ," tælin dɪmændəd wɪð ɔl ði əθɔɹəɾi ʌv ə sɪɾɝ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. "aɪ æm livɪŋ!"

The golden-haired woman started back as from a poisonous snake. "Even to ask this is a slander. Worse than slander!" Something feral moved in her eyes. An irrational thought, perhaps, but that was what Seaine saw. "Now move out of my way," Talene demanded with all the authority of a Sitter in her voice. "I am leaving!"

"aɪ θɪŋk nɑt," pɛvɑɹə sɛd kwaɪətli, ən jukɪɝi nɑɾəd sloʊli ɪn əɡɹimənt. sɹɪn dɪd nɑt stʃɹoʊk əɹ naɪf hɪlt; ʃi ɡɹɪpt ɪt tɪl əɹ nʌkəlz wɛnt waɪt.

"I think not," Pevara said quietly, and Yukiri nodded slowly in agreement. Saerin did not stroke her knife hilt; she gripped it till her knuckles went white.

ɹaɪɾɪŋ θɹu ðə dip snoʊz ʌv ændɝ, flaʊndɝɪŋ θɹu ðɛm, tʌvaɪn ɡæzəl kɝs ðə deɪ ʃi wɑz bɔɹn. ʃɔɹɾ ən slaɪtli plʌmp, wɪð smuð kɑpɝ skɪn ən lɔŋ ɡlɔsi dɑɹk hɛɹ, ʃi hæd sim pɹɪɾi tə mɛni oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz, bʌt nʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ kɔld əɹ bjuɾəfəl. sɝɾənli nʌn wəd naʊ. ðə dɑɹk aɪz ðət hæd wʌns bɪn dɝɛk naʊ bɔɹɾ ɪndə wʌtɛvɝ ʃi lʊkt æt. ðət wɑz wən ʃi wɑz nɑɾ æŋɡɹi. ʃi wɑz æŋɡɹi tədeɪ. wən tʌvaɪn wɑz æŋɡɹi, sɝpəns flɛd.

Riding through the deep snows of Andor, floundering through them, Toveine Gazal cursed the day she was born. Short and slightly plump, with smooth copper skin and long glossy dark hair, she had seemed pretty to many over the years, but none had ever called her beautiful. Certainly none would now. The dark eyes that had once been direct now bored into whatever she looked at. That was when she was not angry. She was angry today. When Toveine was angry, serpents fled.

fɔɹ ʌðɝ ɹɛdz ɹoʊd - flaʊndɝd - əɾ əɹ bæk, ən bɪhaɪn əm twɛnti ʌv ðə taʊɝ ɡɑɹɾ ɪn dɑɹk koʊts ən kloʊks. nʌn ə ðə mɛn laɪkt ɪt ðət ðɛɹ ɑɹmɝ wɑz stoʊɾ əweɪ ɑn ðə pækhɔɹsɪz, ən ðeɪ wɑtʃt ðə fɔɹəs laɪnɪŋ boʊθ saɪdz ə ðə ɹoʊɾ əz ðoʊ ɪkspɛktɪŋ ətæk ɛni moʊmənt. haʊ ðeɪ θɔt tə kɹɔs θɹi hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz ʌv ændɝ ənnoʊɾɪst, wɛɹɪŋ koʊts ən kloʊks wɪð ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ʃaɪnɪŋ bɹaɪɾ ɑn ðɛm, tʌvaɪn kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən. ðə dʒɝni wɑz ɔlmoʊs dʌn, ðoʊ. ɪn ənʌðɝ deɪ, pɝhæps tu wɪð ɹoʊdz ni-dip ɪn snoʊ ɑn ðə hɔɹsəz, ʃi wəd dʒɔɪn wɪð naɪn ʌðɝ pɑɹɾiz ɪɡzækli laɪk hɝz. nɑɾ ɔl ə ðə sɪstɝz ɪn əm wɝ ɹɛd, ənfɔɹtʃənətli, bʌt ðət dɪd nɑt tʃɹʌbəl əɹ oʊvɝmək. tʌvaɪn ɡæzəl, wʌns ə sɪɾɝ fəɹ ðə ɹɛd, wəd ɡoʊ ɪndə ðə hɪstɝiz əz ðə wʊmən u dɪstʃɹɔɪd ðɪs blæk taʊɝ.

Four other Reds rode - floundered - at her back, and behind them twenty of the Tower Guard in dark coats and cloaks. None of the men liked it that their armor was stowed away on the packhorses, and they watched the forest lining both sides of the road as though expecting attack any moment. How they thought to cross three hundred miles of Andor unnoticed, wearing coats and cloaks with the Flame of Tar Valon shining bright on them, Toveine could not imagine. The journey was almost done, though. In another day, perhaps two with roads knee-deep in snow on the horses, she would join with nine other parties exactly like hers. Not all of the sisters in them were Red, unfortunately, but that did not trouble her overmuch. Toveine Gazal, once a Sitter for the Red, would go into the histories as the woman who destroyed this Black Tower.

ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪleɪɾə θɔɾ əɹ ɡɹeɪtfəl fəɹ ðə tʃæns, kɔl bæk fɹəm ɛɡzaɪl ən dɪsɡɹeɪs, ɡɪvən ði ɑpɝtunəɾi fəɹ ɹɪdɛmpʃən. ʃi snɪɹd, ən ɪf ə wʊlf hæd bɪn lʊkɪŋ ɪndə ðə dip hʊɾ ə hɝ kloʊk, ɪt maɪɾ əv kweɪld. wʌt hæd bɪn dʌn twɛnti jɪɹz əɡoʊ wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi, ən ðə laɪt bɝn ɔl ðoʊz u mʌɾɝd ðət ðə blæk ədʒɑ mʌst əv bɪn ɪnvɑlvd. ɪt hæd bɪn nɛsəsɛɹi ən ɹaɪt, bʌt tʌvaɪn ɡæzəl hæd bɪn dʒɹɪvən fɹəm əɹ tʃɛɹ ɪn ðə hɔl, ən fɔɹs tə haʊl fəɹ mɝsi ʌndɝ ðə bɝtʃ, wɪð ði əsɛmbəl sɪstɝz wɑtʃɪŋ, ən ivən nɑvəsɪz ən æksɛptɪd wɪtnəsɪŋ ðət sɪɾɝz, tu, leɪ bɪniθ ðə lɔ, ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ nɑt toʊld wʌt lɔ. ən ðən ʃi hæd bɪn sɛn tə wɝk ðiz læs twɛnti jɪɹz ɑn ði aɪsəleɪɾəd blæk hɪlz fɑɹm ə mɪstʃɹəs dʒɑɹə daʊil, ə wʊmən u kənsɪɾɝd ən ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝvɪŋ pɛnəns ɪn ɛɡzaɪl noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ɛni ʌðɝ hæn leɪbɝɪŋ ɪn sʌn ən snoʊ. tʌvaɪnz hænz ʃɪftəɾ ɑn əɹ ɹeɪnz; ʃi kəd fil ðə kælʌsɪz. mɪstʃɹəs daʊil - ivən naʊ, ʃi kəd nɑt θɪŋk ə ðə wʊmən wɪθaʊt ði ɑnɝɪfɪk ʃi hæd dɪmændəd - mɪstʃɹəs daʊil bɪlivd ɪn hɑɹd wɝk. ən dɪsəplən əz taɪɾ əz ɛni nɑvəs feɪst! ʃi hæd noʊ mɝsi ɑn ɛniwʌn u tʃɹaɪd tə ʃɝk ðə bækbɹeɪkɪŋ leɪbɝ ðət ʃi hɝsɛlf ʃɛɹd, ən lɛs ðən nʌn fəɹ ə wʊmən u snikt əweɪ tə kʌmfɝt hɝsɛlf wɪð ə pɹɪɾi bɔɪ. ðət hæd bɪn tʌvaɪnz laɪf fəɹ fɪftin jɪɹz. ən ɪleɪɾə hæd slɪp θɹu ðə kɹæks ənkɔt, dænst əɹ weɪ tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit ðət tʌvaɪn hæd wʌns dʒɹimd ə fəɹ hɝsɛlf. noʊ, ʃi wɑz nɑt ɡɹeɪtfəl. bʌt ʃi hæd lɝn tə weɪɾ əɹ tʃæns.

She was sure Elaida thought her grateful for the chance, called back from exile and disgrace, given the opportunity for redemption. She sneered, and if a wolf had been looking into the deep hood of her cloak, it might have quailed. What had been done twenty years ago was necessary, and the Light burn all those who muttered that the Black Ajah must have been involved. It had been necessary and right, but Toveine Gazal had been driven from her chair in the Hall, and forced to howl for mercy under the birch, with the assembled sisters watching, and even novices and Accepted witnessing that Sitters, too, lay beneath the law, though they were not told what law. And then she had been sent to work these last twenty years on the isolated Black Hills farm of Mistress Jara Doweel, a woman who considered an Aes Sedai serving penance in exile no different from any other hand laboring in sun and snow. Toveine's hands shifted on her reins; she could feel the calluses. Mistress Doweel - even now, she could not think of the woman without the honorific she had demanded - Mistress Doweel believed in hard work. And discipline as tight as any novice faced! She had no mercy on anyone who tried to shirk the backbreaking labor that she herself shared, and less than none for a woman who sneaked away to comfort herself with a pretty boy. That had been Toveine's life for fifteen years. And Elaida had slipped through the cracks uncaught, danced her way to the Amyrlin Seat that Toveine had once dreamed of for herself. No, she was not grateful. But she had learned to wait her chance.

əbɹʌpli, ə tɔl mæn ɪn ə blæk koʊt, dɑɹk hɛɹ fɔlɪŋ tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝz, spɝɾ ɪz hɔɹs aʊɾ ə ðə fɔɹəst ɪndə ðə ɹoʊɾ əhɛɾ ə hɝ, spɹeɪɪŋ snoʊ. "ðɛɹz noʊ pɔɪn stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ," hi ənaʊns fɝmli, ɹeɪzɪŋ ə ɡlʌv hænd. "sɝɛndɝ pisfəli, ən noʊ wʌn wɪl bi hɝt."

Abruptly, a tall man in a black coat, dark hair falling to his shoulders, spurred his horse out of the forest into the road ahead of her, spraying snow. "There's no point struggling," he announced firmly, raising a gloved hand. "Surrender peacefully, and no one will be hurt."

ɪt wɑz niðɝ ɪz əpɪɹəns nɔɹ ɪz wɝdz ðət meɪd tʌvaɪn ɹeɪn ʌp ʃɔɹt, lɛɾɪŋ ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz ɡæðɝ bɪsaɪd hɝ. "teɪk hɪm," ʃi sɛd kɑmli. "ju hæd bɛɾɝ lɪŋk. hiz mi ʃildɪd." ɪt simd wʌn ə ðiz æʃəmən hæd kʌm tə hɝ. haʊ kənvinjən ə hɪm.

It was neither his appearance nor his words that made Toveine rein up short, letting the other sisters gather beside her. "Take him," she said calmly. "You had better link. He has me shielded." It seemed one of these Asha'man had come to her. How convenient of him.

əbɹʌpli ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət nʌθɪŋ wɑz hæpənɪŋ ən tʊk əɹ aɪz fɹəm ðə fɛloʊ tə fɹaʊn ət dʒɛnɛɹ. ðə wʊmənz peɪl, skwɛɹ feɪs simd æbsəlutli blʌdləs. "tʌvaɪn," ʃi sɛɾ ənstɛɾəli, "aɪ ɔlsoʊ æm ʃildɪd."

Abruptly she realized that nothing was happening and took her eyes from the fellow to frown at Jenare. The woman's pale, square face seemed absolutely bloodless. "Toveine," she said unsteadily, "I also am shielded."

"aɪ æm ʃildɪd, tu," ləməaɪ bɹiðd ɪn dɪsbɪlif, ən ði ʌðɝz tʃaɪmd ɪn, ɪnkɹisɪŋli fɹæntɪk. ɔl ʃildɪd.

"I am shielded, too," Lemai breathed in disbelief, and the others chimed in, increasingly frantic. All shielded.

mɔɹ mɛn ɪn blæk koʊts əpɪɹd fɹəm əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz, ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz stɛpɪŋ sloʊli, ɔl ɝaʊnd. tʌvaɪn stɑp kaʊntɪŋ ət fɪftin. ðə ɡɑɹdz mʌɾɝd æŋɡɹəli, weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ə sɪstɝz kəmænd. ðeɪ nu nʌθɪŋ jɛɾ ɪksɛp ðəɾ ə bæn ə ɹoʊɡz hæd weɪleɪd ðɛm. tʌvaɪn klɪkt əɹ tʌŋ ɪn ɪɹɪteɪʃən. ðiz mɛn kəd nɑɾ ɔl tʃænəl, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ əpɛɹənli ɛvɹi æʃəmən u kəd də soʊ hæd kʌm əɡɛns hɝ. ʃi dɪd nɑt pænɪk. ənlaɪk səm ə ðə sɪstɝz wɪð hɝ, ðiz wɝ nɑt ðə fɝs mɛn u tʃænəl ðət ʃi hæd kənfɹʌntəd. ðə tɔl mæn bɪɡæn ɹaɪɾɪŋ təwɔɹd hɝ, smaɪlɪŋ, əpɛɹənli θɪŋkɪŋ ðeɪ hæɾ oʊbeɪɾ ɪz ɹɪdɪkjələs ɔɹɾɝ.

More men in black coats appeared from among the trees, their horses stepping slowly, all around. Toveine stopped counting at fifteen. The Guards muttered angrily, waiting on a sister's command. They knew nothing yet except that a band of rogues had waylaid them. Toveine clicked her tongue in irritation. These men could not all channel, of course, but apparently every Asha'man who could do so had come against her. She did not panic. Unlike some of the sisters with her, these were not the first men who channeled that she had confronted. The tall man began riding toward her, smiling, apparently thinking they had obeyed his ridiculous order.

"æt maɪ kəmænd," ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli, "wi wɪl bɹeɪk ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən. əz sun əz jə ɑɹ fɑɹ ɪnʌf əweɪ ðət ðə mæn luzəz ðə ʃild," mɛn ɔlweɪz θɔt ðeɪ hæd tə bi eɪbəl tə si tə hoʊl ðɛɹ wivz, wɪtʃ mɛn ðət ðeɪ dɪɾ əv tə, "tɝn bæk ən hɛlp ðə ɡɑɹdz. ɹɛɾi jʊɹsɛlvz." ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ vɔɪs tə ə ʃaʊt. "ɡɑɹdzmɪn, faɪt ðɛm!"

"At my command," she said quietly, "we will break in every direction. As soon as you are far enough away that the man loses the shield," men always thought they had to be able to see to hold their weaves, which meant that they did have to, "turn back and help the Guards. Ready yourselves." She raised her voice to a shout. "Guardsmen, fight them!"

ɹɔɹɪŋ, ðə ɡɑɹdzmɪn sɝdʒ fɔɹwɝd, weɪvɪŋ ðɛɹ sɔɹdz ən noʊ daʊt θɪŋkɪŋ tə sɝaʊn ən pɹətɛk ðə sɪstɝz. pʊlɪŋ əɹ mɛɹ ɝaʊn tə ðə ɹaɪt, tʌvaɪn dʌɡ ɪn əɹ hilz ən kɹaʊtʃt loʊ oʊvɝ spɛɹoʊz nɛk, dɑdʒɪŋ bɪtwin stɑɹɾəld ɡɑɹdzmɪn, ðən bɪtwin tu vɛɹi jʌŋ mɛn ɪn blæk koʊts u ɡeɪpt əɾ əɹ ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt. ðən ʃi wɑz ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz, ɝdʒɪŋ mɔɹ spid, snoʊ spɹeɪɪŋ waɪldli, kɛɹləs ʌv wɛðɝ ðə mɛɹ bɹoʊk ə lɛɡ. ʃi laɪk ði ænəməl, bʌt mɔɹ ðən ə hɔɹs wəd daɪ tədeɪ. bɪhaɪn hɝ, ʃaʊts. ən wʌn vɔɪs, ɹɔɹɪŋ θɹu ɔl ðə kækɑfəni. ðə tɔl mænz vɔɪs.

Roaring, the Guardsmen surged forward, waving their swords and no doubt thinking to surround and protect the sisters. Pulling her mare around to the right, Toveine dug in her heels and crouched low over Sparrow's neck, dodging between startled Guardsmen, then between two very young men in black coats who gaped at her in astonishment. Then she was into the trees, urging more speed, snow spraying wildly, careless of whether the mare broke a leg. She liked the animal, but more than a horse would die today. Behind her, shouts. And one voice, roaring through all the cacophony. The tall man's voice.

"teɪk əm əlaɪv, baɪ ɔɹɾɝ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn! hɑɹm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən jəl ænsɝ tə mi!"

"Take them alive, by order of the Dragon Reborn! Harm an Aes Sedai, and you'll answer to me!"

baɪ ɔɹɾɝ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, tʌvaɪn fɛl fɪɹ, ən aɪsɪkəl wɝmɪŋ ɪndə hɝ mɪɾəl. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ʃi θɹæʃt spɛɹoʊz nɛk wɪð ðə ɹeɪnz. ðə ʃild wɑz stɪl ɑn hɝ! ʃʊɹli ðəɹ wɝ ɪnʌf tʃɹiz bɪtwin əm ɔlɹɛɾi tə blɑk ðə kɝs mɛnz saɪɾ ə hɝ! oʊ, laɪt, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn!

By order of the Dragon Reborn. For the first time, Toveine felt fear, an icicle worming into her middle. The Dragon Reborn. She thrashed Sparrow's neck with the reins. The shield was still on her! Surely there were enough trees between them already to block the cursed men's sight of her! Oh, Light, the Dragon Reborn!

ʃi ɡɹʌntɪɾ əz sʌmθɪŋ stʃɹʌk əɹ əkɹɔs ðə mɪɾəl, ə bɹæntʃ wɛɹ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ bɹæntʃ, snætʃɪŋ əɹ aʊɾ ə ðə sæɾəl. ʃi hʌŋ ðəɹ wɑtʃɪŋ spɛɹoʊ plaʊ ɔf əɾ əz mʌtʃ ʌv ə ɡæləp əz ðə snoʊ əlaʊd. ʃi hʌŋ ðɛɹ. ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ði ɛɹ, ɑɹmz tʃɹæpt əɾ əɹ saɪdz, fit dæŋɡəlɪŋ ə peɪs əɹ mɔɹ əbʌv ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ʃi swɑloʊd. hɑɹd. ɪt hæd tə bi ðə meɪl pɑɹɾ ə ðə paʊɝ hoʊldɪŋ əɹ ʌp. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn tʌtʃt baɪ seɪɾɪn bɪfɔɹ. ʃi kəd fil ðə θɪk bæn ə nʌθɪŋ snʌɡ ɝaʊn əɹ mɪɾəl. ʃi θɔt ʃi kəd fil ðə dɑɹk wʌnz teɪnt. ʃi kwɪvɝd, faɪɾɪŋ daʊn skɹimz.

She grunted as something struck her across the middle, a branch where there was no branch, snatching her out of the saddle. She hung there watching Sparrow plow off at as much of a gallop as the snow allowed. She hung there. In the middle of the air, arms trapped at her sides, feet dangling a pace or more above the ground. She swallowed. Hard. It had to be the male part of the Power holding her up. She had never been touched by saidin before. She could feel the thick band of nothing snug around her middle. She thought she could feel the Dark One's taint. She quivered, fighting down screams.

ðə tɔl mæn ɹeɪn ɪz hɔɹs tə ə hɔlt ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, ən ʃi floʊɾəd daʊn tə sɪt saɪdweɪz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz sæɾəl. hi dɪd nɑt sim pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hi hæd kæptʃɝd, ðoʊ. "hɑɹdlɪn!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. "nɔɹli! kɑdʒimə! wʌn ə jə blʌɾi jʌŋ laʊts kʌm hɪɹ naʊ!"

The tall man reined his horse to a halt in front of her, and she floated down to sit sideways in front of his saddle. He did not seem particularly interested in the Aes Sedai he had captured, though. "Hardlin!" he shouted. "Norley! Kajima! One of you bloody young louts come here now!"

hi wɑz vɛɹi tɔl, wɪð ʃoʊldɝz ən æks-hændəl waɪd. ðət wɑz haʊ mɪstʃɹəs daʊil wʊɾə pʊɾ ɪt. dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ə hɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz, hænsəm ɪn ə bɹuɾɪŋ, ɹʌɡəd fæʃən. nɑɾ əɾ ɔl laɪk ðə pɹɪɾi bɔɪz tʌvaɪn laɪkt, iɡɝ ən ɡɹeɪtfəl ən soʊ izəli kəntʃɹoʊld. ə sɪlvɝ sɔɹd dɛkɝeɪɾəd ðə tɔl kɑlɝ ə hɪz blæk wʊl koʊɾ ɑn wʌn saɪd, wɪð ə pəkjuljɝ kɹitʃɝ ɪn ɡoʊld ən ɹɛɾ ɪnæməl ɑn ði ʌðɝ. hi wɑz ə mæn u kəd tʃænəl. ən i hæɾ əɹ ʃildɪɾ ən ə pɹɪznɝ.

He was very tall, with shoulders an axe-handle wide. That was how Mistress Doweel would have put it. Just short of his middle years, handsome in a brooding, rugged fashion. Not at all like the pretty boys Toveine liked, eager and grateful and so easily controlled. A silver sword decorated the tall collar of his black wool coat on one side, with a peculiar creature in gold and red enamel on the other. He was a man who could channel. And he had her shielded and a prisoner.

ðə ʃɹik ðət bɝs fɹəm əɹ θɹoʊt stɑɹɾəld ivən hɝ. ʃi wʊɾə hɛld ɪt bæk ɪf ʃi kʊd, bʌɾ ənʌðɝ lɛpt aʊt bɪhaɪn ɪt, haɪɝ stɪl, ən ənʌðɝ ivən haɪɝ, ənʌðɝ ən ənʌðɝ. kɪkɪŋ waɪldli, ʃi flʌŋ hɝsɛlf fɹəm saɪd tə saɪd. jusləs əɡɛns ðə paʊɝ. ʃi nu ðæt, bʌɾ oʊnli ɪn ə taɪni kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ maɪnd. ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ haʊld ət ðə tɑp ə hɝ lʌŋz, haʊld wɝdləs pliz fəɹ ɹɛskju fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊ. skɹimɪŋ, ʃi stʃɹʌɡəld laɪk ə mæd bist.

The shriek that burst from her throat startled even her. She would have held it back if she could, but another leaped out behind it, higher still, and another even higher, another and another. Kicking wildly, she flung herself from side to side. Useless against the Power. She knew that, but only in a tiny corner of her mind. The rest of her howled at the top of her lungs, howled wordless pleas for rescue from the Shadow. Screaming, she struggled like a mad beast.

dɪmli ʃi wɑz əwɛɹ ə hɪz hɔɹs plʌnʒɪŋ ən dænsɪŋ əz əɹ hilz dʒɹʌmd ɪts ʃoʊldɝ. dɪmli ʃi hɝd ðə mæn tɔkɪŋ. "izi, jə lʌmp-ɪɹd sæk ə koʊl! kɑm daʊn, sɪstɝ. aɪm nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ tə - izi, jə speɪvən mjul! laɪt! maɪ əpɑlədʒiz, sɪstɝ, bʌt ðɪs ɪz haʊ wi lɝn tə də ɪt." ən ðən i kɪs hɝ.

Dimly she was aware of his horse plunging and dancing as her heels drummed its shoulder. Dimly she heard the man talking. "Easy, you lump-eared sack of coal! Calm down, sister. I'm not going to - Easy, you spavined mule! Light! My apologies, sister, but this is how we learn to do it." And then he kissed her.

ʃi hæɾ oʊnli ə hɑɹtbit tə ɹilaɪz ɪz lɪps wɝ tʌtʃɪŋ hɝz, ðən saɪt vænɪʃt, ən wɔɹmθ flʌɾəd θɹu hɝ. mɔɹ ðən wɔɹmθ. ʃi wɑz mɛltəd hʌni ɪnsaɪd, bʌbəlɪŋ hʌni, ɹʌʃɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə bɔɪl. ʃi wɑz ə hɑɹpstʃɹɪŋ, vaɪbɹeɪɾɪŋ fæstɝ ən fæstɝ, vaɪbɹeɪɾɪŋ tə ɪnvɪzəbɪləɾi ən fæstɝ stɪl. ʃi wɑz ə θɪn kɹɪstəl veɪs, kwɪvɝɪŋ ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk ə ʃæɾɝɪŋ. ðə hɑɹpstʃɹɪŋ bɹoʊk; ðə veɪs ʃæɾɝd.

She had only a heartbeat to realize his lips were touching hers, then sight vanished, and warmth flooded through her. More than warmth. She was melted honey inside, bubbling honey, rushing toward the boil. She was a harpstring, vibrating faster and faster, vibrating to invisibility and faster still. She was a thin crystal vase, quivering on the brink of shattering. The harpstring broke; the vase shattered.

"ɑəəəəəəəəəəəəə!"

"Aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaah!"

ət fɝst, ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹilaɪz ðət saʊn hæd kʌm fɹəm əɹ ɡeɪpɪŋ maʊθ. fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ʃi kəd nɑt θɪŋk koʊhiɹənli. pæntɪŋ, ʃi stɛɹɾ ʌp ət ðə meɪl feɪs əbʌv hɝ, wʌndɝɪŋ u ɪt bɪlɔŋ tə. jɛs. ðə tɔl mæn. ðə mæn u kəd -  "aɪ cʊɾə dʌn wɪθaʊt ði ɛkstʃɹə bɪt," hi saɪd, pæɾɪŋ ðə hɔɹsəz nɛk; ði ænəməl snɔɹɾɪd, bʌɾ ɪt noʊ lɔŋɡɝ lɛpt əbaʊt, "jɛɾ aɪ səpoʊz ɪts nɛsəsɛɹi. jəɹ hɑɹdli ə waɪf. bi kɑm. doʊn tʃɹaɪ tə ɪskeɪp, doʊn ətæk ɛniwʌn ɪn ə blæk koʊt, ən doʊn tʌtʃ ðə sɔɹs ənlɛs aɪ ɡɪv jə pɝmɪʃən. naʊ, wʌts jəɹ neɪm?"

At first, she did not realize that sound had come from her gaping mouth. For a moment, she could not think coherently. Panting, she stared up at the male face above her, wondering who it belonged to. Yes. The tall man. The man who could -  "I could have done without the extra bit," he sighed, patting the horse's neck; the animal snorted, but it no longer leaped about, "yet I suppose it is necessary. You're hardly a wife. Be calm. Don't try to escape, don't attack anyone in a black coat, and don't touch the Source unless I give you permission. Now, what's your name?"

ənlɛs i ɡeɪv pɝmɪʃən? ði ɪfɹʌntɝi ʌv ðə mæn!

Unless he gave permission? The effrontery of the man!

"tʌvaɪn ɡæzəl," ʃi sɛd, ən blɪŋkt. naʊ, waɪ hæd ʃi ænsɝd hɪm?

"Toveine Gazal," she said, and blinked. Now, why had she answered him?

"ðɛɹ jə ɑɹ," ənʌðɝ blæk-koʊɾəd mæn sɛd, splæʃɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs θɹu ðə snoʊ tə ðɛm. ðɪs wʌn wəd bi mʌtʃ mɔɹ tə hɝ laɪkɪŋ - ɪf i kəd nɑɾ æktʃəli  tʃænəl, ət list. ʃi daʊɾɪd ðɪs pɪŋk-tʃik læd ʃeɪv mɔɹ ðən twaɪs ɪn ðə wik. "laɪt, lɑɡən!" ðə pɹɪɾi bɔɪ ɪkskleɪmd. "dɪd jə teɪk ə sɛkənd wʌn? ðə l woʊn laɪk ðæt! aɪ doʊn θɪŋk i laɪks əs teɪkɪŋ ɛni! meɪbi ɪt woʊn mæɾɝ, ðoʊ, jə tu biɪŋ soʊ kloʊs ən ɔl."

"There you are," another black-coated man said, splashing his horse through the snow to them. This one would be much more to her liking - if he could not actually channel, at least. She doubted this pink-cheeked lad shaved more than twice in the week. "Light, Logain!" the pretty boy exclaimed. "Did you take a second one? The M'Hael won't like that! I don't think he likes us taking any! Maybe it won't matter, though, you two being so close and all."

"kloʊs, vɪntʃhoʊvə?" lɑɡən sɛd ɹaɪli. "ɪf ðə l hæɾ ɪz weɪ, aɪd bi hoʊɪŋ tɝnəps wɪð ðə nu bɔɪz. əɹ bɛɹiɾ ʌndɝ ðə fild," hi æɾəd ɪn ə mʌɾɝ ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i mɛn tə bi hɝd.

"Close, Vinchova?" Logain said wryly. "If the M'Hael had his way, I'd be hoeing turnips with the new boys. Or buried under the field," he added in a mutter she did not think he meant to be heard.

haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ i hɝd, ðə pɹɪɾi bɔɪ læft wɪð ɪnkɹɛdʒələs dɪsbɪlif. tʌvaɪn bɛɹli hɝd hɪm. ʃi wɑz ɡeɪzɪŋ ʌp ət ðə mæn lumɪŋ oʊvɝ hɝ. lɑɡən. ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən. bʌɾ i wɑz dɛd! stɪld ən dɛd! ən hoʊldɪŋ əɹ bɪfɔɹ ɪz sæɾəl wɪð ə kæʒəwəl hænd. waɪ wɑz ʃi nɑt skɹimɪŋ, əɹ stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ət hɪm? ivən əɹ bɛl naɪf wəd du, ðɪs nɪɹ. jɛt ʃi hæd noʊ dɪzaɪɝ əɾ ɔl tə ɹitʃ fəɹ ði aɪvɝi hæft. ʃi kʊd, ʃi ɹilaɪzd. ðət bæn ɝaʊn əɹ mɪɾəl wɑz ɡɔn. ʃi kəɾ ət list slɪp daʊn ɔf ðə hɔɹs ən tʃɹaɪ tə - ʃi hæd noʊ dɪzaɪɝ tə də ðæt, iðɝ.

However much he heard, the pretty boy laughed with incredulous disbelief. Toveine barely heard him. She was gazing up at the man looming over her. Logain. The false Dragon. But he was dead! Stilled and dead! And holding her before his saddle with a casual hand. Why was she not screaming, or striking at him? Even her belt knife would do, this near. Yet she had no desire at all to reach for the ivory haft. She could, she realized. That band around her middle was gone. She could at least slip down off the horse and try to - She had no desire to do that, either.

"wʌt dɪd jə də tə mi?" ʃi dɪmændəd. kɑmli. ət list ʃi hæd mænədʒ tə hoʊld ɑn tə ðæt!

"What did you do to me?" she demanded. Calmly. At least she had managed to hold on to that!

tɝnɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs tə ɹaɪd bæk tə ðə ɹoʊd, lɑɡən toʊld əɹ wʌɾ i hæd dʌn, ən ʃi pʊɾ əɹ hɛɾ əɡɛns ðət waɪd tʃɛst, nɑt kɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɔl haʊ bɪɡ hi wɑz, ən wɛpt. ʃi wɑz gɑnə meɪk ɪleɪɾə peɪ fəɹ ðɪs, ʃi vaʊd. ɪf lɑɡən ɛvɝ lɛt hɝ, ʃi wʊd. ðət læst wɑz ən ɪspɛʃli bɪɾɝ θɔt.

Turning his horse to ride back to the road, Logain told her what he had done, and she put her head against that wide chest, not caring at all how big he was, and wept. She was going to make Elaida pay for this, she vowed. If Logain ever let her, she would. That last was an especially bitter thought.


tʃæptɝ twɛntisɛvən


CHAPTER 27

ðə bɑɹɡən


The Bargain

siɾəd kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɪn ə hɛvəli ɡɪldɪd, haɪ-bæk tʃɛɹ, mɪn tʃɹaɪd tə luz hɝsɛlf ɪn ðə lɛðɝ-baʊn kɑpi ʌv hɹɪd fɛlz ɹizən ən ənɹisən laɪɪŋ oʊpən ɑn əɹ niz. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ izi. oʊ, ðə bʊk ɪtsɛlf wɑz mɛzmɝaɪzɪŋ; mæstɝ fɛlz ɹaɪɾɪŋz ɔlweɪz swɛpt əɹ ɪndə wɝlz ə θɔt ʃi hæd nɑt dʒɹimd ʌv waɪl wɝkɪŋ ɪn steɪbəlz. ʃi vɛɹi mʌtʃ ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd ðə swiɾ oʊl mænz dɛθ. ʃi hoʊp tə faɪn ə klu ɪn ɪz bʊks tə waɪ hi hæd bɪn kɪld. hɝ dɑɹk ɹɪŋləts swʌŋ əz ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ən tʃɹaɪd tə əplaɪ hɝsɛlf.

Seated cross-legged in a heavily gilded, high-backed chair, Min tried to lose herself in the leather-bound copy of Herid Fel's Reason and Unreason lying open on her knees. It was not easy. Oh, the book itself was mesmerizing; Master Fel's writings always swept her into worlds of thought she had not dreamed of while working in stables. She very much regretted the sweet old man's death. She hoped to find a clue in his books to why he had been killed. Her dark ringlets swung as she shook her head and tried to apply herself.

ðə bʊk wɑz fæsəneɪɾɪŋ, bʌt ðə ɹum wɑz əpɹɛsɪv. ɹændz smɔl θɹoʊn ɹum ɪn ðə sʌn pæləs wɑz θɪk wɪð ɡɪl fɹəm ðə waɪd kɔɹnɪsəz tə ðə tɔl mɪɹɝz ɑn ðə wɔlz ɹɪpleɪsɪŋ ðoʊz ɹænd hæd smæʃt, fɹəm ðə tu ɹoʊz ə tʃɛɹz laɪk ðə wʌn ʃi sæɾ ɪn tə ðə deɪz ət ðə hɛɾ ə ðə ɹoʊz ən ðə dʒɹæɡən θɹoʊn ətɑp ðə deɪz. ðət wɑz ə mɑnstʃɹɑsəɾi, ɪn ðə staɪl ə tiɹ əz ɪmædʒən baɪ kɛɹhinɪn kɹæfsmən, ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn ðə bæks ʌv ə pɛɹ ə dʒɹæɡənz wɪð tu mɔɹ dʒɹæɡənz fəɹ ði ɑɹmz ən ʌðɝz klaɪmɪŋ ðə bæk, ɔl wɪð lɑɹdʒ sʌnstoʊnz fəɹ aɪz, ðə hoʊl ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ wɪð ɡɪlt ən ɹɛɾ ɪnæməl. ə hjudʒ ɡoʊldən, weɪvi-ɹeɪd ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn sɛɾ ɪn ðə pɑlɪʃt stoʊn flɔɹ oʊnli æɾəd tə ðə sɛns ə hɛvinəs. ət lis ðə faɪɝz bleɪzɪŋ ɪn tu ɡɹeɪt faɪɝpleɪsəz, tɔl ɪnʌf fəɹ əɹ tə wɔk ɪntu, ɡeɪv ə plizɪŋ wɔɹmθ, ɪspɛʃli wɪð snoʊ spɪlɪŋ daʊn aʊtsaɪd. ən ðiz wɝ ɹændz ɹumz; ðə kʌmfɝɾ ə ðəɾ əloʊn aʊtweɪɾ ɛni əmaʊn ʌv əpɹɛʃən. ən ɪɹəteɪɾɪŋ θɔt. ðɪs wɑz ɹændz ɹum ɪf i ɛvɝ dn tə ɹɪtɝn. ə vɛɹi ɪɹəteɪɾɪŋ θɔt. biɪŋ ɪn lʌv wɪð ə mæn sim tə kənsɪs lɑɹdʒli ʌv ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni ɪɹəteɪɾɪŋ ædmɪʃənz tə jɝsɛlf!

The book was fascinating, but the room was oppressive. Rand's small throne room in the Sun Palace was thick with gilt from the wide cornices to the tall mirrors on the walls replacing those Rand had smashed, from the two rows of chairs like the one she sat in to the dais at the head of the rows and the Dragon Throne atop the dais. That was a monstrosity, in the style of Tear as imagined by Cairhienin craftsmen, resting on the backs of a pair of Dragons with two more Dragons for the arms and others climbing the back, all with large sunstones for eyes, the whole glittering with gilt and red enamel. A huge golden, wavy-rayed Rising Sun set in the polished stone floor only added to the sense of heaviness. At least the fires blazing in two great fireplaces, tall enough for her to walk into, gave a pleasing warmth, especially with snow spilling down outside. And these were Rand's rooms; the comfort of that alone outweighed any amount of oppression. An irritating thought. This was Rand's room if he ever deigned to return. A very irritating thought. Being in love with a man seemed to consist largely of a great many irritating admissions to yourself!

ʃɪftɪŋ ɪn ə veɪn ətɛmp tə meɪk ðə hɑɹd tʃɛɹ kʌmftəɹbəl, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə ɹid, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz kɛp swɪŋɪŋ tə ðə tɔl dɔɹz, itʃ klaɪm baɪ ɪts oʊn laɪn ʌv ɡɪldɪd ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌnz. ʃi hoʊp tə si ɹænd wɔk ɪn; ʃi fɪɹd tə si sɔɹɪliə, əɹ kædzueɪn. ʌnkɑnʃəsli, ʃi ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ peɪl blu koʊt, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə taɪni snoʊflaʊɝz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɑn ðə ləpɛlz. mɔɹ twaɪn ɝaʊn ðə slivz, ən ðə lɛɡz ə bɹitʃɪz meɪɾ əz snʌɡ əz ʃi kəd mænədʒ tə ɹɪɡəl hɝsɛlf ɪntu. nɑt ðət ɡɹeɪɾ ə tʃeɪnʒ fɹəm wʌt ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz wɔɹn. nɑt ɹɪli. soʊ fɑɹ, ʃi hæɾ əvɔɪɾəd dʒɹɛsəz, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ʃi wɔɹ, bʌt ʃi vɛɹi mʌtʃ fɪɹd ðət sɔɹɪliə mɛn tə stʌf əɹ ɪndə ə dʒɹɛs ɪf ðə waɪz wʌn hæd tə pil əɹ aʊɾ ʌv wʌt ʃi wɑz wɛɹɪŋ wɪð əɹ oʊn hænz.

Shifting in a vain attempt to make the hard chair comfortable, she tried to read, but her eyes kept swinging to the tall doors, each climbed by its own line of gilded Rising Suns. She hoped to see Rand walk in; she feared to see Sorilea, or Cadsuane. Unconsciously, she adjusted her pale blue coat, fingering the tiny snowflowers embroidered on the lapels. More twined around the sleeves, and the legs of breeches made as snug as she could manage to wriggle herself into. Not that great a change from what she had always worn. Not really. So far, she had avoided dresses, however much embroidery she wore, but she very much feared that Sorilea meant to stuff her into a dress if the Wise One had to peel her out of what she was wearing with her own hands.

ðə wʊmən nu ɔl əbaʊɾ əɹ ən ɹænd. ɔl əbaʊt. ʃi fɛlt əɹ tʃiks hiɾɪŋ. sɔɹɪliə sim tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ mɪn fɑɹʃɔ wɑz ə suɾəbəl . . . lʌvɝ . . . fəɹ ɹænd ælθɹ. ðət wɝd meɪɾ əɹ fil fulɪʃli ɡɪɾi; ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ə flʌf-bɹeɪnd ɡɝl! ðət wɝd meɪɾ əɹ wɑnə lʊk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ɡɪltəli fəɹ ði æns u hæd ɹeɪz hɝ. noʊ, ʃi θɔt ɹaɪli, jəɹ nɑt flʌf-bɹeɪnd. flʌf əz ɪts wɪts əbaʊɾ ɪt kəmpɛɹd tə ju!

The woman knew all about her and Rand. All about. She felt her cheeks heating. Sorilea seemed to be trying to decide whether Min Farshaw was a suitable . . . lover . . . for Rand al'Thor. That word made her feel foolishly giddy; she was not a fluff-brained girl! That word made her want to look over her shoulder guiltily for the aunts who had raised her. No, she thought wryly, you're not fluff-brained. Fluff has its wits about it compared to you!

əɹ meɪbi sɔɹɪliə wɑntəd tə noʊ wɛðɝ ɹænd wɑz suɾəbəl fəɹ mɪn; ɪt sim ðət weɪ, ət taɪmz. ðə waɪz wʌnz æksɛptɪd mɪn əz wʌn ə ðɛm, əɹ vɛɹi nɪɹli, bʌt ðiz pæst wiks, sɔɹɪliə hæd ɹʌŋ əɹ aʊt laɪk ə lɔnʒɹɪsəz mæŋɡəl. ðə lɛðɝ-feɪst, waɪt-hɛɹd waɪz wʌn wɑntəd tə noʊ ɛvɹi skɹæp əbaʊt mɪn, ən ɛvɹi ʃɹɛɾ əbaʊt ɹænd. ʃi wɑntəd ðə dʌs fɹəm ðə bɑɾəmz ə hɪz pɑkəts! twaɪs mɪn hæd tʃɹaɪd bɔkɪŋ ət ði ɪnsɛsən ɪntɛɹəɡeɪʃən, ən twaɪs sɔɹɪliə hæd pɹədust ə swɪtʃ! ðət tɛɹəbəl oʊld wʊmən sɪmpli bʌndəld əɹ oʊvɝ ðə saɪɾ ə ðə nɪɹəs teɪbəl, ən æftɝwɝd toʊld əɹ ðət meɪbi ðət wəd lusən ənʌðɝ skɹæp ɪn əɹ hɛd. nʌn ə ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz ɡeɪv ðə slaɪɾəst kəməzɝeɪʃən, iðɝ! laɪt, ðə θɪŋz jə hæd tə pʊɾ ʌp wɪð fəɹ ə mæn! ən ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv ɪm fəɹ hɝsɛlf əloʊn, ət ðæt!

Or maybe Sorilea wanted to know whether Rand was suitable for Min; it seemed that way, at times. The Wise Ones accepted Min as one of them, or very nearly, but these past weeks, Sorilea had wrung her out like a laundress's mangle. The leather-faced, white-haired Wise One wanted to know every scrap about Min, and every shred about Rand. She wanted the dust from the bottoms of his pockets! Twice Min had tried balking at the incessant interrogation, and twice Sorilea had produced a switch! That terrible old woman simply bundled her over the side of the nearest table, and afterward told her that maybe that would loosen another scrap in her head. None of the other Wise Ones gave the slightest commiseration, either! Light, the things you had to put up with for a man! And she could not have him for herself alone, at that!

kædzueɪn wɑz ə dɪfɹən pɹɑpəzɪʃən ɔltəɡɛðɝ. ði ɪmɛnsli dɪɡnəfaɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, əz ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹɾ əz sɔɹɪliə wɑz waɪt, dɪd nɑt sim tə kɛɹ tu fɪɡz fəɹ mɪn əɹ ɹænd iðɝ wʌn, bʌt ʃi spɛn ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə taɪm ɪn ðə sʌn pæləs. əvɔɪɾɪŋ əɹ ɪntaɪɝli wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl; ʃi sim tə wɑndɝ wɛɹɛvɝ ʃi wɑntəd. ən wən kædzueɪn lʊkt ət mɪn, haʊɛvɝ bɹifli, mɪn kəd nɑt hɛlp siɪŋ ə wʊmən u kəd titʃ bʊlz tə dæns ən bɛɹz tə sɪŋ. ʃi kɛpt ɪkspɛktɪŋ ðə wʊmən tə pɔɪn əɾ əɹ ən ənaʊns ðəɾ ɪt wɑz taɪm mɪn fɑɹʃɔ lɝn tə bæləns ə bɔl ɑn əɹ noʊz. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ɹænd hæd tə feɪs kædzueɪn əɡɛn, ən ðə θɔt taɪd mɪnz stʌmək ɪn nɑts.

Cadsuane was a different proposition altogether. The immensely dignified Aes Sedai, as gray-haired as Sorilea was white, did not seem to care two figs for Min or Rand either one, but she spent a great deal of time in the Sun Palace. Avoiding her entirely was impossible; she seemed to wander wherever she wanted. And when Cadsuane looked at Min, however briefly, Min could not help seeing a woman who could teach bulls to dance and bears to sing. She kept expecting the woman to point at her and announce that it was time Min Farshaw learned to balance a ball on her nose. Sooner or later, Rand had to face Cadsuane again, and the thought tied Min's stomach in knots.

ʃi meɪd hɝsɛlf bɛn bæk oʊvɝ əɹ bʊk. wʌn ə ðə dɔɹz swʌŋ oʊpən, ən ɹænd stʃɹoʊld ɪn wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ nɛsəld ɪn ðə kɹʊk ə hɪz ɑɹm. hi wɔɹ ə ɡoʊldən kɹaʊn, ə bɹɔd sɝkləɾ ə lɔɹəl livz - ðət mʌs bi ðɪs kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt - snʌɡ bɹitʃɪz ðət ʃoʊɾ ɪz lɛɡz tə ædvæntɪdʒ, ən ə ɡoʊld-wɝkt ɡɹin sɪlk koʊt ðət fɪɾ ɪm bjuɾəfli. hi wɑz bjuɾəfəl.

She made herself bend back over her book. One of the doors swung open, and Rand strolled in with the Dragon Scepter nestled in the crook of his arm. He wore a golden crown, a broad circlet of laurel leaves - that must be this Crown of Swords everyone was talking about - snug breeches that showed his legs to advantage, and a gold-worked green silk coat that fit him beautifully. He was beautiful.

mɑɹkɪŋ əɹ pleɪs wɪð ðə noʊt mæstɝ fɛl hæd ɹɪɾən seɪɪŋ ʃi wɑz "tu pɹɪɾi," ʃi kɛɹfəli kloʊz ðə bʊk ən kɛɹfəli sɛɾ ɪɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ bɪsaɪɾ əɹ tʃɛɹ. ðən ʃi foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz ən weɪɾəd. hæd ʃi bɪn stændɪŋ, ʃi wʊɾə tæpt əɹ fʊt, bʌt ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv ðə mæn θɪŋkɪŋ ʃi wɑz spɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp dʒʌs kəz i faɪnəli əpɪɹd.

Marking her place with the note Master Fel had written saying she was "too pretty," she carefully closed the book and carefully set it on the floor beside her chair. Then she folded her arms and waited. Had she been standing, she would have tapped her foot, but she would not have the man thinking she was springing up just because he finally appeared.

fəɹ ə moʊmən i stʊd smaɪlɪŋ ət hɝ, ən tʌɡɪŋ ɪz ɝloʊb fəɹ səm ɹizən - hi sim tə bi hʌmɪŋ! - ðən əbɹʌpli hi swʌŋ ɹaʊn tə fɹaʊn ət ðə dɔɹz. "ðə meɪɾənz aʊt ðəɹ dɪdn tɛl mi jə wɝ ɪn hɪɹ. ðeɪ hɑɹdli sɛɾ ə wɝɾ əɾ ɔl. laɪt, ðeɪ lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə veɪl ət ðə saɪɾ ə mi."

For a moment he stood smiling at her, and tugging his earlobe for some reason - he seemed to be humming! - then abruptly he swung round to frown at the doors. "The Maidens out there didn't tell me you were in here. They hardly said a word at all. Light, they looked ready to veil at the sight of me."

"meɪbi ðeɪ ɑɹ ʌpsɛt," ʃi sɛd kɑmli. "meɪbi ðeɪ wʌndɝd wɛɹ jə wɝ. ðə weɪ aɪ dɪd. meɪbi ðeɪ wʌndɝd wɛðɝ jə wɝ hɝt, əɹ sɪk, əɹ koʊld." ðə weɪ aɪ dɪd, ʃi θɔt bɪɾɝli. ðə mæn lʊkt kənfjuzd!

"Maybe they are upset," she said calmly. "Maybe they wondered where you were. The way I did. Maybe they wondered whether you were hurt, or sick, or cold." The way I did, she thought bitterly. The man looked confused!

"aɪ ɹoʊt tə ju," hi sɛd sloʊli, ən ʃi snɪft.

"I wrote to you," he said slowly, and she sniffed.

"twaɪs! wɪð æʃəmən tə dɪlɪvɝ jəɹ lɛɾɝz, jə ɹoʊt twaɪs, ɹænd ælθɹ. ɪf jə kɔl ɪt ɹaɪɾɪŋ!"

"Twice! With Asha'man to deliver your letters, you wrote twice, Rand al'Thor. If you call it writing!"

hi stæɡɝɾ əz ɪf ʃi hæd slæpt ɪm - noʊ; əz ɪf ʃi hæd kɪkt ɪm ɪn ðə bɛli! - ən blɪŋkt. ʃi tʊk ə fɝm hoʊld ɑn hɝsɛlf ən sɛɾəld əɡɛns ðə tʃɛɹbæk. ɡɪv ə mæn sɪmpəθi ət ðə ɹɔŋ moʊmənt, ən jə nɛvɝ ɹiɡeɪn ðə ɡɹaʊn lɔst. ə pɑɹɾ ə hɝ wɑntəd tə θɹoʊ hɝ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɪm, kʌmfɝt hɪm, dʒɹɔ aʊɾ ɔl ɪz peɪnz, suð ɔl ɪz hɝts. hi hæd soʊ mɛni, ən ɹəfjuz tə ədmɪɾ ə wʌn. ʃi wɑz nɑt gɑnə spɹɪŋ ʌp ən ɹʌʃ tə hɪm, ɡʌʃɪŋ tə noʊ wʌt wɑz ɹɔŋ əɹ . . . laɪt, hi hæd tə bi ɔl ɹaɪt.

He staggered as if she had slapped him - no; as if she had kicked him in the belly! - and blinked. She took a firm hold on herself and settled against the chairback. Give a man sympathy at the wrong moment, and you never regained the ground lost. A part of her wanted to throw her arms around him, comfort him, draw out all his pains, soothe all his hurts. He had so many, and refused to admit a one. She was not going to spring up and rush to him, gushing to know what was wrong or . . . Light, he had to be all right.

sʌmθɪŋ tʊk əɹ dʒɛnli bɪniθ ði ɛlboʊz ən lɪftəɾ əɹ aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɛɹ. blu buts dæŋɡəlɪŋ, ʃi floʊɾəd təwɔɹɾ ɪm θɹu ði ɛɹ. ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ floʊɾəd əweɪ fɹəm hɪm. soʊ, hi θɔɾ i kəd smaɪl, dɪd hi? hi θɔɾ ə pɹɪɾi smaɪl kəd tɝn əɹ ɝaʊnd? ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə ɡɪv ɪm ə pis ə hɝ maɪnd. ə vɛɹi ʃɑɹp pis! foʊldɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɝ, hi kɪs hɝ.

Something took her gently beneath the elbows and lifted her out of the chair. Blue boots dangling, she floated toward him through the air. The Dragon Scepter floated away from him. So, he thought he could smile, did he? He thought a pretty smile could turn her around? She opened her mouth to give him a piece of her mind. A very sharp piece! Folding his arms around her, he kissed her.

wən ʃi kəd bɹið əɡɛn, ʃi pɪɹɾ ʌp əɾ ɪm θɹu hɝ læʃɪz. "ðə fɝs taɪm . . ." ʃi swɑloʊd tə klɪɹ əɹ vɔɪs. "fɝst, dʒɑhɹ nɛɹɪʃmə stɔkt ɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stɛɹ ɪnsaɪɾ ɛvɹibɑɾiz skʌl ðə weɪ hi dʌz, ən vænɪʃt æftɝ hændɪŋ mi ə skɹæp ə pɑɹtʃmənt. lemi si. ɪt sɛd, 'aɪ hæv kleɪm ðə kɹaʊn ʌv ɪljən. tʃɹʌs noʊ wʌn əntɪl aɪ ɹɪtɝn. ɹænd.' ə lɪɾəl ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ə pɹɑpɝ lʌv lɛɾɝ, aɪd seɪ."

When she could breathe again, she peered up at him through her lashes. "The first time . . ." She swallowed to clear her voice. "First, Jahar Narishma stalked in trying to stare inside everybody's skull the way he does, and vanished after handing me a scrap of parchment. Let me see. It said, 'I have claimed the crown of Illian. Trust no one until I return. Rand.' A little short of a proper love letter, I'd say."

hi kɪst əɹ əɡɛn.

He kissed her again.

ðɪs taɪm, ɡɛɾɪŋ əɹ bɹɛθ bæk tʊk lɔŋɡɝ. ðɪs wɑz nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ əz ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ əɾ ɔl. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, ɪt wɑz nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ vɛɹi bædli. "ðə sɛkən taɪm, dʒoʊnən ædli dɪlɪvɝɾ ə bɪɾ ə peɪpɝ ðət sɛd, 'aɪ wɪl ɹɪtɝn wən aɪ fɪnɪʃ hɪɹ. tʃɹʌs noʊ wʌn. ɹænd.' ædli wɔkt ɪn ɑn mi ɪn maɪ bæθ," ʃi æɾəd, "æn i wɑznt ʃaɪ əbaʊt ɡɛɾɪŋ ən aɪfəl." ɹænd ɔlweɪz tʃɹaɪd tə pɹitɛn i wɑz nɑt dʒɛləs - əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ ə mæn ɪn ðə wɝld u wɑz nɑt - bʌt ʃi hæd noʊɾəst ɪz skaʊlz ət mɛn u lʊkt ət hɝ. ən ɪz vɛɹi kənsɪɾɝəbəl ɑɹɾɝ wɑz mɔɹ hiɾəd æftɝwɝd, tu. ʃi wʌndɝd wʌt ðɪs kɪs wəd bi laɪk. meɪbi ʃi ʃəd sədʒɛst ɹɪtaɪɹɪŋ tə ðə bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ? noʊ, ʃi wəd nɑt bi ðət fɔɹwɝd noʊ mæɾɝ -  ɹænd sɛɾ əɹ daʊn, hɪz feɪs sʌɾənli blik. "ædliz dɛd," hi sɛd. sʌɾənli ðə kɹaʊn flu fɹəm ɪz hɛd, spɪnɪŋ ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə ɹum əz ðoʊ hɝld. dʒʌst wən ʃi θɔɾ ɪt wəd kɹæʃ ɪndə ðə bæk ə ðə dʒɹæɡən θɹoʊn, pɝhæps smæʃ θɹu ɪt, ðə waɪd ɹɪŋ ʌv ɡoʊl stɑpt ʃɔɹɾ ən sɛɾəld sloʊli ɑntu ðə θɹoʊnz sit.

This time, getting her breath back took longer. This was not going as she had expected at all. On the other hand, it was not going very badly. "The second time, Jonan Adley delivered a bit of paper that said, 'I will return when I finish here. Trust no one. Rand.' Adley walked in on me in my bath," she added, "and he wasn't shy about getting an eyeful." Rand always tried to pretend he was not jealous - as if there were a man in the world who was not - but she had noticed his scowls at men who looked at her. And his very considerable ardor was more heated afterward, too. She wondered what this kiss would be like. Maybe she should suggest retiring to the bedchamber? No, she would not be that forward no matter -  Rand set her down, his face suddenly bleak. "Adley's dead," he said. Suddenly the crown flew from his head, spinning the length of the room as though hurled. Just when she thought it would crash into the back of the Dragon Throne, perhaps smash through it, the wide ring of gold stopped short and settled slowly onto the throne's seat.

mɪnz bɹɛθ kɑɾ əz ʃi lʊkt ʌp ət hɪm. blʌd ɡlɪsən ɪn ðə dɑɹk ɹɛd kɝlz əbʌv ɪz lɛft ɪɹ. pʊlɪŋ ə leɪs-ɛdʒ hæŋkɝtʃɪf fɹəm əɹ sliv, ʃi ɹitʃt fəɹ ɪz tɛmpəl, bʌɾ i kɑɾ əɹ ɹɪst.

Min's breath caught as she looked up at him. Blood glistened in the dark red curls above his left ear. Pulling a lace-edged handkerchief from her sleeve, she reached for his temple, but he caught her wrist.

"aɪ kɪl hɪm," hi sɛd kwaɪətli.

"I killed him," he said quietly.

ʃi ʃɪvɝɾ ət ðə saʊn ə hɪz vɔɪs. kwaɪət, ðə weɪ ðə ɡɹeɪv wɑz kwaɪət. pɝhæps ðə bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ wɑz ə vɛɹi ɡʊɾ aɪdiə. noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ fɔɹwɝɾ ɪt wɑz. meɪkɪŋ hɝsɛlf smaɪl - ən blʌʃɪŋ wən ʃi ɹilaɪz haʊ izi ɪt wɑz tə smaɪl, θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðət hjudʒ bɛd - ʃi ɡɹɪp ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz ʃɝt, pɹipɛɹɪŋ tə ɹɪp ʃɝɾ ən koʊt fɹəm ɪz bæk ɹaɪt ðən ən ðɛɹ.

She shivered at the sound of his voice. Quiet, the way the grave was quiet. Perhaps the bedchamber was a very good idea. No matter how forward it was. Making herself smile - and blushing when she realized how easy it was to smile, thinking of that huge bed - she gripped the front of his shirt, preparing to rip shirt and coat from his back right then and there.

sʌmwʌn nɑkt ət ðə dɔɹz.

Someone knocked at the doors.

mɪnz hænz spɹæŋ əweɪ fɹəm ɹændz ʃɝt. ʃi spɹæŋ əweɪ, tu. hu kəɾ ɪt bi, ʃi wʌndɝɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli. ðə meɪɾənz iðɝ ənaʊns vɪzəɾɝz wən ɹænd wɑz ðɛɹ, əɹ sɪmpli sɛn əm ɪn.

Min's hands sprang away from Rand's shirt. She sprang away, too. Who could it be, she wondered irritably. The Maidens either announced visitors when Rand was there, or simply sent them in.

"kʌm," hi sɛd laʊdli, ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ ə ɹufəl smaɪl. ən ʃi blʌʃt əɡɛn ət ðæt.

"Come," he said loudly, giving her a rueful smile. And she blushed again at that.

dɑbɹeɪn pʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪn ət ðə dɔɹ, ðən ɛntɝɾ ən ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn ɪm wən i sɔ ðɛm stændɪŋ təɡɛðɝ. ðə kɛɹhinɪn lɔɹd wɑz ə smɔl mæn, lɪɾəl tɔlɝ ðən ʃi, wɪð ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz hɛd ʃeɪvd ən ðə ɹɛst ə hɪz moʊsli ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ fɔlɪŋ tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝz. stʃɹaɪps ə blu ən waɪt dɛkɝeɪɾəd ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz nɪɹli blæk koʊt tə bɪloʊ hɪz weɪst. ivən bɪfɔɹ ɡeɪnɪŋ ɹændz feɪvɝ i hæd bɪn ə paʊɝ ɪn ðə lænd. naʊ, hi ɹul hɪɹ, ət list əntɪl ɪleɪn kəd kleɪm ðə sʌn θɹoʊn. "maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," hi mɝmɝd, boʊɪŋ. "maɪ leɪɾi tɑvɝən."

Dobraine put his head in at the door, then entered and shut the door behind him when he saw them standing together. The Cairhienin lord was a small man, little taller than she, with the front of his head shaved and the rest of his mostly gray hair falling to his shoulders. Stripes of blue and white decorated the front of his nearly black coat to below his waist. Even before gaining Rand's favor he had been a power in the land. Now, he ruled here, at least until Elayne could claim the Sun Throne. "My Lord Dragon," he murmured, bowing. "My Lady Ta'veren."

"ə dʒoʊk," mɪn mʌɾɝd, wən ɹænd kwɝkt ən aɪbɹaʊ ət hɝ.

"A joke," Min muttered, when Rand quirked an eyebrow at her.

"pɝhæps," dɑbɹeɪn sɛd, ʃɹʌɡɪŋ slaɪtli, "jɛt hæf ðə noʊbəlwɪmən ɪn ðə sɪɾi naʊ wɛɹ bɹaɪt kʌlɝz ɪn ɪməteɪʃən ə ðə leɪɾi mɪn. bɹitʃɪz ðət dɪspleɪ ðɛɹ lɛɡz, ən mɛni ɪn koʊts ðət də nɑɾ ivən kʌvɝ ðɛɹ . . ." hi kɔf dɪskɹitli, ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðət mɪnz koʊt dɪd nɑt kʌvɝ əɹ hɪps kəmplitli.

"Perhaps," Dobraine said, shrugging slightly, "yet half the noblewomen in the city now wear bright colors in imitation of the Lady Min. Breeches that display their legs, and many in coats that do not even cover their . . ." He coughed discreetly, realizing that Min's coat did not cover her hips completely.

ʃi θɔɾ əbaʊt tɛlɪŋ ɪm i hæd vɛɹi pɹɪɾi lɛɡz, ivən ɪf ðeɪ wɝ dɪsaɪɾədli nɑbi, ðən kwɪkli θɔt bɛɾɝ. ɹændz dʒɛləsi maɪt bi ə wʌndɝfəl fleɪm ɪf ðeɪ wɝ əloʊn, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑn ɪm stʃɹaɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ət dɑbɹeɪn. hi wɑz keɪpəbəl ə ðæt, ʃi fɪɹd. bɪsaɪdz, ʃi θɔɾ ɪt ɹɪli wɑz ə slɪp; lɔɹd dɑbɹeɪn tæbɔɹwɪn wɑz nɑt ðə sɔɹt tə meɪk ivən slaɪtli ɹʌf dʒoʊks.

She thought about telling him he had very pretty legs, even if they were decidedly knobby, then quickly thought better. Rand's jealousy might be a wonderful flame if they were alone, but she did not want him striking out at Dobraine. He was capable of that, she feared. Besides, she thought it really was a slip; Lord Dobraine Taborwin was not the sort to make even slightly rough jokes.

"soʊ jəɹ tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ðə wɝld, tu, mɪn." ɡɹɪnɪŋ, ɹænd tæp ðə tɪp ə hɝ noʊz wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ. hi tæpt əɹ noʊz! laɪk ə tʃaɪld i wɑz əmjuzd wɪð! wɝs, ʃi fɛl hɝsɛlf ɡɹɪnɪŋ bæk əɾ ɪm laɪk ə ful. "ɪn bɛɾɝ weɪz ðən aɪ æm, ɪɾ əpɪɹz," hi wɛn ɑn, ən ðət moʊməntɛɹi bɔɪɪʃ ɡɹɪn feɪɾəd laɪk mɪst.

"So you're changing the world, too, Min." Grinning, Rand tapped the tip of her nose with a finger. He tapped her nose! Like a child he was amused with! Worse, she felt herself grinning back at him like a fool. "In better ways than I am, it appears," he went on, and that momentary boyish grin faded like mist.

"ɪz ɔl wɛl ɪn tiɹ ən ɪljən, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən?" dɑbɹeɪn ɛnkwaɪɝd.

"Is all well in Tear and Illian, my Lord Dragon?" Dobraine enquired.

"ɪn tiɹ ən ɪljən, ɔl ɪz wɛl," ɹænd ɹɪplaɪd ɡɹɪmli. "wʌt juv fəɹ mi, dɑbɹeɪn? sɪt, mæn. sɪt." hi moʊʃən təwɔɹd ðə ɹoʊz ə tʃɛɹz, ən tʊk wʌn fəɹ hɪmsɛlf.

"In Tear and Illian, all is well," Rand replied grimly. "What do you have for me, Dobraine? Sit, man. Sit." He motioned toward the rows of chairs, and took one for himself.

"aɪ hæv æktəɾ ɑn ɔl ə jəɹ lɛɾɝz," dɑbɹeɪn sɛd, siɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf əkɹɔs fɹəm ɹænd, "bʌt ðəɹ ɪz lɪɾəl ɡʊd tə ɹipɔɹt, aɪ fɪɹ."

"I have acted on all of your letters," Dobraine said, seating himself across from Rand, "but there is little good to report, I fear."

"aɪl ɡɛɾ əs sʌmθɪŋ tə dʒɹɪŋk," mɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs. lɛɾɝz? ɪt wɑz nɑɾ izi tə stɔk ɪn hil buts - ʃi hæd ɡɹoʊn əkʌstəm tə ðɛm, bʌt ðə θɪŋz meɪd jə sweɪ wʌtɛvɝ jə dɪd - nɑɾ izi, jɛɾ ɪnʌf æŋɡɝ meɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ pɑsəbəl. ʃi stɔk tə ðə smɔl ɡɪldɪd teɪbəl bɪniθ wʌn ə ðə hjudʒ mɪɹɝz wɛɹ ə sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝ ən ɡoʊbləts sæt. ʃi bɪzid hɝsɛlf wɪð pɔɹɪŋ spaɪst waɪn, splæʃɪŋ ɪɾ aʊt fjʊɹiəsli. ðə sɝvəns ɔlweɪz bɹɔɾ ɛkstʃɹə ɡoʊbləts, ɪn keɪs ʃi hæd vɪzəɾɝz, ðoʊ ʃi sɛldəm dɪɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ sɔɹɪliə əɹ ə ful lɑɾ ə noʊbəlwɪmən. ðə waɪn wɑz bɛɹli wɔɹm, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ðən hɑɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ðə laɪks ə ðət pɛɹ. ʃi hæd ɹəsiv tu lɛɾɝz, bʌt ʃi wəd bɛt dɑbɹeɪn hæd hæd tɛn! twɛnti! bæŋɪŋ pɪtʃɝ ən ɡoʊbləts əbaʊt, ʃi lɪsən kɛɹfəli. wʌt hæd ðeɪ bɪn ʌp tə bɪhaɪn əɹ bæk wɪð ðɛɹ dʌzənz ə lɛɾɝz?

"I'll get us something to drink," Min said in a tight voice. Letters? It was not easy to stalk in heeled boots - she had grown accustomed to them, but the things made you sway whatever you did - not easy, yet enough anger made anything possible. She stalked to the small gilded table beneath one of the huge mirrors where a silver pitcher and goblets sat. She busied herself with pouring spiced wine, splashing it out furiously. The servants always brought extra goblets, in case she had visitors, though she seldom did except for Sorilea or a fool lot of noblewomen. The wine was barely warm, but it was more than hot enough for the likes of that pair. She had received two letters, but she would bet Dobraine had had ten! Twenty! Banging pitcher and goblets about, she listened carefully. What had they been up to behind her back with their dozens of letters?

"tɔɹæm ɹieɪɾən əpɪɹz tə hæv vænɪʃt," dɑbɹeɪn sɛd, "ðoʊ ɹumɝ, ət list, sɛz i stɪl laɪvz, wɝs lʌk. ɹumɝz ɔlsoʊ seɪ ðət dɑv hænlən ən dʒɛɹɑl mɔɹɾɪθ - pdən feɪn, əz jə kɔl ðə mæn - hæv dɪzɝɾɪd hɪm. baɪ ðə weɪ, aɪ hæv sɛɾəld tɔɹæmz sɪstɝ, ðə leɪɾi eɪlɪl, ɪn dʒɛnɝəs əpɑɹtməns, wɪð sɝvəns u ɑɹ . . . tʃɹʌstwɝði." baɪ hɪz toʊn, hi klɪɹli mɛn tʃɹʌstwɝði təwɔɹd hɪmsɛlf. ðə wʊmən wəd nɑt bi eɪbəl tə tʃeɪnʒ əɹ dʒɹɛs wɪθaʊɾ ɪm noʊɪŋ. "aɪ kən ʌndɝstæn bɹɪŋɪŋ əɹ hɪɹ, ən lɔɹd bɝtoʊm ən ði ʌðɝz, bʌt waɪ haɪ lɔɹd wɪɹɑmɑn, əɹ haɪ leɪɾi ænɑiɛlə? ɪt ɡoʊz wɪθaʊt seɪɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs, ðət ðɛɹ sɝvəns ɔlsoʊ ɑɹ tʃɹʌstwɝði."

"Toram Riatin appears to have vanished," Dobraine said, "though rumor, at least, says he still lives, worse luck. Rumors also say that Daved Hanlon and Jeraal Mordeth - Padan Fain, as you call the man - have deserted him. By the way, I have settled Toram's sister, the Lady Ailil, in generous apartments, with servants who are . . . trustworthy." By his tone, he clearly meant trustworthy toward himself. The woman would not be able to change her dress without him knowing. "I can understand bringing her here, and Lord Bertome and the others, but why High Lord Weiramon, or High Lady Anaiyella? It goes without saying, of course, that their servants also are trustworthy."

"haʊ dʒju noʊ wən ə wʊmən wɑns tə kɪl ju?" ɹænd mjuzd.

"How do you know when a woman wants to kill you?" Rand mused.

"wɛn ʃi noʊz jəɹ neɪm?" dɑbɹeɪn dɪd nɑt saʊn əz ɪf i wɝ dʒoʊkɪŋ. ɹænd tɪltəɾ ɪz hɛd θɔtfəli, ðən nɑɾəd. nɑɾəd! ʃi hoʊpt i wɑz nɑt stɪl hɪɹɪŋ vɔɪsəz.

"When she knows your name?" Dobraine did not sound as if he were joking. Rand tilted his head thoughtfully, then nodded. Nodded! She hoped he was not still hearing voices.

ɹænd dʒɛstʃɝɾ əz ɪf bɹʌʃɪŋ əweɪ ðə wɪmən u wɑntəd tə kɪl hɪm. ə deɪnʒɝəs θɪŋ, wɪð əɹ əbaʊt. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə kɪl hɪm, sɝɾənli, bʌt ʃi wəd nɑt maɪn siɪŋ sɔɹɪliə ɡoʊ əɾ ɪm wɪð ðət swɪtʃ! bɹitʃɪz dɪd nɑt ɡɪv mʌtʃ pɹətɛkʃən.

Rand gestured as if brushing away the women who wanted to kill him. A dangerous thing, with her about. She did not want to kill him, certainly, but she would not mind seeing Sorilea go at him with that switch! Breeches did not give much protection.

"wɪɹɑmɑn ɪz ə ful u meɪks tu mɛni mɪsteɪks," ɹænd toʊl dɑbɹeɪn, hu nɑɾəd soʊbɝ əɡɹimənt. "maɪ mɪsteɪk fəɹ θɪŋkɪŋ aɪ kəd juz hɪm. hi simz hæpi ɪnʌf tə steɪ nɪɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪn ɛni keɪs. wʌɾ ɛls?" mɪn hændəɾ ɪm ə ɡɑblət, ən i smaɪld əɾ əɹ dɪspaɪt ðə waɪn ðət slɑpt oʊvɝ ɪz ɹɪst. meɪbi hi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ən æksəɾənt.

"Weiramon is a fool who makes too many mistakes," Rand told Dobraine, who nodded sober agreement. "My mistake for thinking I could use him. He seems happy enough to stay near the Dragon Reborn in any case. What else?" Min handed him a goblet, and he smiled at her despite the wine that slopped over his wrist. Maybe he thought it was an accident.

"lɪɾəl ɛls ən tu mʌtʃ," dɑbɹeɪn bɪɡæn, ðən dʒɝk bæk ɪn ɪz tʃɛɹ tə əvɔɪd spɪlɪŋ waɪn əz mɪn ʃʌv ðə sɛkən sɪlvɝ ɡɑbləɾ ət hɪm. ʃi hæd nɑt laɪkt əɹ bɹif stɪn əz ə tɑvɝmeɪd. "maɪ θæŋks, maɪ leɪɾi mɪn," hi mɝmɝd ɡɹeɪʃəsli, bʌɾ i aɪɾ əɹ əskæns əz i tʊk ðə ɡɑblət. ʃi wɔkt kɑmli bæk tə fɛtʃ əɹ oʊn waɪn. kɑmli.

"Little else and too much," Dobraine began, then jerked back in his chair to avoid spilling wine as Min shoved the second silver goblet at him. She had not liked her brief stint as a tavernmaid. "My thanks, my Lady Min," he murmured graciously, but he eyed her askance as he took the goblet. She walked calmly back to fetch her own wine. Calmly.

"aɪ fɪɹ ðət leɪɾi kæɹɑlin ən ðə haɪ lɔɹd dɑɹlɪn ɑɹ ɪn leɪɾi ɑɹɪlɪnz pæləs hɪɹ ɪn ðə sɪɾi," ðə kɛɹhinɪn lɔɹd wɛn ɑn, "ʌndɝ ðə pɹətɛkʃən ə kædzueɪn sədaɪ. pɝhæps pɹətɛkʃən ɪz nɑt ðə kɝɛkt wɝd. aɪ hæv bɪn ɹəfjuzd ɛntʃɹi tə si ðɛm, bʌɾ aɪ hɪɹ ðət ðeɪv ətɛmptəd tə liv ðə sɪɾi ən bɪn bɹɔt bæk laɪk sæks. ɪn ə sæk, wʌn stɔɹi kleɪmz. hævɪŋ mɛt kædzueɪn, aɪ kən ɔlmoʊs bɪliv ɪt."

"I fear that Lady Caraline and the High Lord Darlin are in Lady Arilyn's palace here in the City," the Cairhienin lord went on, "under the protection of Cadsuane Sedai. Perhaps protection is not the correct word. I have been refused entry to see them, but I hear that they have attempted to leave the City and been brought back like sacks. In a sack, one story claims. Having met Cadsuane, I can almost believe it."

"kædzueɪn," ɹænd mɝmɝd, ən mɪn fɛlt ə tʃɪl. hi dɪd nɑt saʊn əfɹeɪd, pɹɪsaɪsli, jɛɾ i dɪd saʊn mɔɹ ðən ənizi. "wʌt dʒju θɪŋk aɪ ʃəd də əbaʊt kæɹɑlin ən dɑɹlɪn, mɪn?"

"Cadsuane," Rand murmured, and Min felt a chill. He did not sound afraid, precisely, yet he did sound more than uneasy. "What do you think I should do about Caraline and Darlin, Min?"

sɛɾəlɪŋ ɪndə ə tʃɛɹ tu əweɪ fɹəm hɪm, mɪn dʒɝkt ət sʌɾənli biɪŋ ɪnkluɾəd. ɹufəli, ʃi stɛɹd daʊn ət ðə waɪn soʊkɪŋ θɹu hɝ bɛs kɹim sɪlk blaʊs, ən əɹ bɹitʃɪz, tu. "kæɹɑlin wɪl səpɔɹɾ ɪleɪn fəɹ ðə sʌn θɹoʊn," ʃi sɛd ɡlʌmli. fəɹ wɔɹm waɪn, ɪt sim vɛɹi koʊld, ən ʃi daʊɾɪd ðə steɪn wəɾ ɛvɝ kʌm aʊɾ ə ðə blaʊs. "nɑɾ ə vjuɪŋ, bʌɾ aɪ bɪliv hɝ." ʃi dɪd nɑt ɡlæns təwɔɹd dɑbɹeɪn, ðoʊ hi nɑɾəd sədʒli. ɛvɹiwʌn nu əbaʊɾ əɹ vjuɪŋz, naʊ. ði oʊnli ɹɪzʌl hæd bɪn ə stʃɹim ə noʊbəlwɪmən u wɑntəd tə noʊ ðɛɹ fjutʃɝz, ən ɹaɪt sʌlki, tu, wən ʃi sɛd ʃi kəd nɑt tɛl ðɛm. moʊst wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn plizd wɪð ðə lɪɾəl ʃi hæd sin; nʌθɪŋ daɪɹ, bʌt nɑɾ əɾ ɔl ðə bɹaɪt wʌndɝz ðət fɔɹtʃən-tɛlɝz ət ðə fɛɹ fɔɹkæst. "æz fəɹ dɑɹlɪn, əsaɪd fɹəm ðə fæk ðət hɪl mɛɹi kæɹɑlin, æftɝ ʃiz ɹʌŋ ɪm aʊɾ ən hʌŋ ɪm ʌp tə dʒɹaɪ, ɔl aɪ kən seɪ ɪz ðət wʌn deɪ hɪl bi ə kɪŋ. aɪ sɔ ðə kɹaʊn ɑn ɪz hɛd, ə θɪŋ wɪð ə sɔɹɾ ɑn ðə fɹʌn ʌv ɪt, bʌɾ aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt kʌntʃɹi ɪt bɪlɔŋz tə. ænd, oʊ, jɛs. hɪl daɪ ɪn bɛd, ən ʃɪl sɝvaɪv hɪm."

Settling into a chair two away from him, Min jerked at suddenly being included. Ruefully, she stared down at the wine soaking through her best cream silk blouse, and her breeches, too. "Caraline will support Elayne for the Sun Throne," she said glumly. For warm wine, it seemed very cold, and she doubted the stain would ever come out of the blouse. "Not a viewing, but I believe her." She did not glance toward Dobraine, though he nodded sagely. Everyone knew about her viewings, now. The only result had been a stream of noblewomen who wanted to know their futures, and right sulky, too, when she said she could not tell them. Most would not have been pleased with the little she had seen; nothing dire, but not at all the bright wonders that fortune-tellers at the fair forecast. "As for Darlin, aside from the fact that he'll marry Caraline, after she's wrung him out and hung him up to dry, all I can say is that one day he'll be a king. I saw the crown on his head, a thing with a sword on the front of it, but I don't know what country it belongs to. And, oh, yes. He'll die in bed, and she will survive him."

dɑbɹeɪn tʃoʊkt ɑn ɪz waɪn, spləɾɝɪŋ ən dæbɪŋ əɾ ɪz lɪps wɪð ə pleɪn lɪnən hæŋkɝtʃɪf. moʊst ə ðoʊz u nu dɪd nɑt bɪliv. kwaɪt sæɾəsfaɪd wɪð hɝsɛlf, mɪn dʒɹæŋk ðə lɪɾəl ðət ɹɪmeɪn ɪn əɹ ɡɑblət. ən ðən ʃi wɑz tʃoʊkɪŋ ən ɡæspɪŋ, dʒɝkɪŋ əɹ hæŋkɝtʃɪf fɹəm əɹ sliv tə waɪp əɾ əɹ maʊθ. laɪt, ʃi wəɾ əv tə ɡɪv hɝsɛlf ðə dʒɹɛɡz!

Dobraine choked on his wine, spluttering and dabbing at his lips with a plain linen handkerchief. Most of those who knew did not believe. Quite satisfied with herself, Min drank the little that remained in her goblet. And then she was choking and gasping, jerking her handkerchief from her sleeve to wipe at her mouth. Light, she would have to give herself the dregs!

ɹænd sɪmpli nɑɾəd, piɹɪŋ ɪndə hɪz ɡɑblət. "soʊ ðəl lɪv tə tʃɹʌbəl mi," hi mɝmɝd. ə vɛɹi sɑf saʊnd, fəɹ wɝdz laɪk stoʊn. hi wɑz hɑɹɾ əz ə bleɪd, hɝ ʃifɝɾɝ. "ænd wʌt də aɪ də əbaʊt - "

Rand simply nodded, peering into his goblet. "So they will live to trouble me," he murmured. A very soft sound, for words like stone. He was hard as a blade, her sheepherder. "And what do I do about - "

əbɹʌpli hi twɪstəɾ ɪn ɪz tʃɛɹ, təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹz. wʌn wɑz oʊpənɪŋ. hi hæd vɛɹi ʃɑɹp ɪɹz. mɪn hæd hɝd nʌθɪŋ.

Abruptly he twisted in his chair, toward the doors. One was opening. He had very sharp ears. Min had heard nothing.

niðɝ ə ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ hu ɛntɝd wɑz kædzueɪn, ən mɪn fɛlt əɹ ʃoʊldɝz lusən əz ʃi tʌkt əɹ hæŋkɝtʃɪf əweɪ. waɪl ɹæfɛlə ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ, mɛɹænə kɝtsid dipli tə ɹænd, ðoʊ ðə ɡɹeɪ sɪstɝz heɪzəl aɪz tʊk ɪn mɪn ən dɑbɹeɪn ən faɪld əm əweɪ, ən ðən ðə ɹaʊnd-feɪst ɹæfɛlə wɑz spɹɛɾɪŋ əɹ dip blu skɝts waɪd, tu. niðɝ ɹoʊz əntɪl ɹænd dʒɛstʃɝd. ðeɪ ɡlaɪɾɪd tə hɪm wɛɹɪŋ kul sɝɛnəɾi əz ðeɪ dɪd ðɛɹ dʒɹɛsəz. ɪksɛp ðət ðə plʌmp blu sɪstɝ fɪŋɡɝɾ əɹ ʃɔl bɹifli əz ðoʊ tə ɹimaɪn hɝsɛlf ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ. mɪn hæd sin ðət dʒɛstʃɝ bɪfɔɹ, fɹəm ʌðɝ sɪstɝz u hæd swɔɹn fiəlti tə ɹænd. ɪt kəd nɑt bi izi fəɹ ðɛm. oʊnli ðə waɪt taʊɝ kəmændəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ɹænd kɹʊkəɾ ə fɪŋɡɝ ən ðeɪ keɪm, pɔɪntəɾ ən ðeɪ wɛnt. ɛɛs sədaɪ spoʊk wɪð kɪŋz ən kwinz əz ikwəlz, pɝhæps slaɪtli əz ðɛɹ bɛɾɝz, jɛt ðə waɪz wʌnz kɔld əm əpɹɛntəsɪz ən ɪkspɛktəɾ əm tə oʊbeɪ twaɪs əz fæst əz ɹænd dɪd.

Neither of the two Aes Sedai who entered was Cadsuane, and Min felt her shoulders loosen as she tucked her handkerchief away. While Rafela shut the door, Merana curtsied deeply to Rand, though the Gray sister's hazel eyes took in Min and Dobraine and filed them away, and then the round-faced Rafela was spreading her deep blue skirts wide, too. Neither rose until Rand gestured. They glided to him wearing cool serenity as they did their dresses. Except that the plump Blue sister fingered her shawl briefly as though to remind herself it was there. Min had seen that gesture before, from other sisters who had sworn fealty to Rand. It could not be easy for them. Only the White Tower commanded Aes Sedai, but Rand crooked a finger and they came, pointed and they went. Aes Sedai spoke with kings and queens as equals, perhaps slightly as their betters, yet the Wise Ones called them apprentices and expected them to obey twice as fast as Rand did.

nʌn ə ðət ʃoʊɾ ɑn mɛɹænəz smuð feɪs. "maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," ʃi sɛd ɹɪspɛkfəli. "wi oʊnli dʒʌs lɝn ðət jə hæd ɹɪtɝnd, ən wi θɔt jə maɪt bi iɡɝ tə lɝn haʊ mæɾɝz wɛnt wɪð ði æθɑn maɪɹ." ʃi mɪɹli ɡlænst ət dɑbɹeɪn, bʌɾ i ɹoʊz ɪmiɾiətli. kɛɹhinɪn wɝ juz tə pipəl wɑntɪŋ tə spik ɪn pɹaɪvət.

None of that showed on Merana's smooth face. "My Lord Dragon," she said respectfully. "We only just learned that you had returned, and we thought you might be eager to learn how matters went with the Atha'an Miere." She merely glanced at Dobraine, but he rose immediately. Cairhienin were used to people wanting to speak in private.

"dɑbɹeɪn kən steɪ," ɹænd sɛd kɝtli. hæɾ i hɛzɪteɪɾɪd? hi dɪd nɑt stænd. hɪz aɪz laɪk blu aɪs, hi wɑz biɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn fəɹ ɔl i wɑz wɝθ. mɪn hæd toʊld ɪm ðiz wɪmən wɝ ɪz ɪn tʃɹuθ, ðəɾ ɔl faɪv u hæɾ əkʌmpəniɾ ɪm tə ðə si foʊk ʃɪp wɝ hɪz, ʌɾɝli lɔɪəl tə ðɛɹ oʊθ ən ðɛɹfɔɹ oʊbiɾiənt tə hɪz wɪl, jɛɾ i sim tə faɪn tʃɹʌstɪŋ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪfəkəlt. ʃi ʌndɝstʊd, bʌɾ i wɑz gɑnə hæv tə lɝn haʊ.

"Dobraine can stay," Rand said curtly. Had he hesitated? He did not stand. His eyes like blue ice, he was being the Dragon Reborn for all he was worth. Min had told him these women were his in truth, that all five who had accompanied him to the Sea Folk ship were his, utterly loyal to their oath and therefore obedient to his will, yet he seemed to find trusting any Aes Sedai difficult. She understood, but he was going to have to learn how.

"æz jə wɪʃ," mɛɹænə ɹɪplaɪd, ɪnklaɪnɪŋ əɹ hɛd bɹifli. "ɹæfɛlə ən aɪ hæv ɹitʃt ə bɑɹɡən wɪð ðə si foʊk. ðə bɑɹɡən, ðeɪ kɔl ɪt." ðə dɪfɝəns wɑz klɪɹ tə ði ɪɹ. hænz laɪɪŋ stɪl ɑn ɡɹeɪ-slæʃt ɡɹin skɝts, ʃi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. ʃi niɾəd ɪt. "hɑɹɪn dɪn toʊɡɑɹə tu wɪnz, weɪvməstʃɹəs ə klæn ʃoʊdaɪn, spikɪŋ fəɹ nɛstə dɪn ɹiz tu munz, mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ, ən ðʌs baɪndɪŋ ɔl ði æθɑn maɪɹ, hæz pɹɑməst sətʃ ʃɪps əz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn nidz, tə seɪl wən ən wɛɹ i nidz ðɛm, fəɹ wʌtɛvɝ pɝpəsəz i ɹikwaɪɝz." mɛɹænə dɪd sim tə ɡɹoʊ ə tʌtʃ pɑntɪfəkəl wən ðəɹ wɝ noʊ waɪz wʌnz ɝaʊnd; ðə waɪz wʌnz dɪd nɑɾ əlaʊ ɪt. "ɪn ɹɪtɝn, ɹæfɛlə ən aɪ, spikɪŋ fəɹ ju, pɹɑməs ðət ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɪl nɑt tʃeɪnʒ ɛni lɔz ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ, əz hiz dʌn əmʌŋ ðə . . ." fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ʃi fɔltɝd. "fɝɡɪv mi. aɪm juz tə dɪlɪvɝɪŋ əɡɹiməns ɪɡzækli əz meɪd. ðə wɝd ðeɪ juzd wɑz 'ʃɔɹbaʊnd,' bʌt wʌt ðeɪ min ɪz wʌt juv dʌn ɪn tiɹ ən kɛɹhin." ə kwɛstʃən əpɪɹɾ ɪn əɹ aɪz, ən wɑz ɡɔn. pɝhæps ʃi wɑz wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ i hæd dʌn ðə seɪm ɪn ɪljən. ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɹɛst ɹɪlif ðəɾ i hæd tʃeɪnʒd nʌθɪŋ ɪn əɹ neɪɾɪv ændɝ.

"As you wish," Merana replied, inclining her head briefly. "Rafela and I have reached a bargain with the Sea Folk. The Bargain, they call it." The difference was clear to the ear. Hands lying still on gray-slashed green skirts, she drew a deep breath. She needed it. "Harine din Togara Two Winds, Wavemistress of Clan Shodein, speaking for Nesta din Reas Two Moons, Mistress of the Ships to the Atha'an Miere, and thus binding all the Atha'an Miere, has promised such ships as the Dragon Reborn needs, to sail when and where he needs them, for whatever purposes he requires." Merana did seem to grow a touch pontifical when there were no Wise Ones around; the Wise Ones did not allow it. "In return, Rafela and I, speaking for you, promised that the Dragon Reborn will not change any laws of the Atha'an Miere, as he has done among the . . ." For a moment, she faltered. "Forgive me. I am used to delivering agreements exactly as made. The word they used was 'shorebound,' but what they mean is what you have done in Tear and Cairhien." A question appeared in her eyes, and was gone. Perhaps she was wondering whether he had done the same in Illian. She had expressed relief that he had changed nothing in her native Andor.

"aɪ səpoʊz aɪ kən lɪv wɪð ðæt," hi mʌɾɝd.

"I suppose I can live with that," he muttered.

"sɛkənli," ɹæfɛlə tʊk ʌp, foʊldɪŋ plʌmp hænz əɾ əɹ weɪst, "ju mʌst ɡɪv ði æθɑn maɪɹ lænd, ə skwɛɹ wʌn maɪl ɑn ə saɪd, əɾ ɛvɹi sɪɾi ɑn nævəɡəbəl wɔɾɝ ðət jə kəntʃɹoʊl naʊ əɹ kʌm tə kəntʃɹoʊl." ʃi saʊndəd lɛs pɑmpəs ðən əɹ kəmpænjən, bʌɾ oʊnli dʒʌst. nɔɹ dɪd ʃi saʊn ɪntaɪɝli plizd wɪð wʌt ʃi wɑz seɪɪŋ. ʃi wɑz tɛɹən, æftɝ ɔl, ən fju pɔɹts hɛld ə taɪɾɝ kəntʃɹoʊl ɑn ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪd ðən tɛɹ. "wɪðɪn ðəɾ ɛɹiə, ðə lɔz ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ ɑɹ tə hoʊl sweɪ əbʌv ɛni ʌðɝz. ðɪs əɡɹimən mʌst ɔlsoʊ bi meɪd baɪ ðə ɹulɝz ə ðoʊz pɔɹts soʊ ðət . . ." ɪt wɑz əɹ tɝn tə fɔltɝ, ən əɹ dɑɹk tʃiks tɝn ə tʃɹaɪfəl ɡɹeɪ.

"Secondly," Rafela took up, folding plump hands at her waist, "you must give the Atha'an Miere land, a square one mile on a side, at every city on navigable water that you control now or come to control." She sounded less pompous than her companion, but only just. Nor did she sound entirely pleased with what she was saying. She was Tairen, after all, and few ports held a tighter control on their trade than Tear. "Within that area, the laws of the Atha'an Miere are to hold sway above any others. This agreement must also be made by the rulers of those ports so that . . ." It was her turn to falter, and her dark cheeks turned a trifle gray.

"soʊ ði əɡɹimənt wɪl sɝvaɪv mi?" ɹænd sɛd dʒɹaɪli. hi bɑɹkt ə læf. "aɪ kən lɪv wɪð ðæt, tu."

"So the agreement will survive me?" Rand said dryly. He barked a laugh. "I can live with that, too."

"ɛvɹi sɪɾi ɑn wɔɾɝ?" dɑbɹeɪn ɪkskleɪmd. "du ðeɪ min hɪɹ, tu?" hi lɛp tə hɪz fiɾ ən bɪɡæn peɪsɪŋ, spɪlɪŋ mɔɹ ə hɪz waɪn ðən mɪn hæd. hi dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs. "ə maɪl skwɛɹ? ʌndɝ ðə laɪɾ əloʊn noʊz wʌt pəkjuljɝ lɔz? aɪv tʃɹævəld ɑn ə si foʊk ʃɪp, ən ɪts pəkjuljɝ! bɛɹ lɛɡz ɑɹ nɑɾ ɪn ɪt! ən wʌɾ ə ðə kʌstəmz duɾiz, ən dɑkɪŋ fiz, ən . . ." sʌɾənli hi ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn ɹænd. hi skaʊld ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, hu peɪɾ ɪm noʊ maɪnd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz tə ɹænd i spoʊk, ɪn ə toʊn bɔɹɾɝɪŋ ɑn ɹʌnəs. "ðeɪ wɪl ɹuən kɛɹhin ɪn ə jɪɹ, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. ðəl ɹuən ɛni pɔɹt wɛɹ jə əlaʊ ðɛm tə də ðɪs."

"Every city on water?" Dobraine exclaimed. "Do they mean here, too?" He leaped to his feet and began pacing, spilling more of his wine than Min had. He did not seem to notice. "A mile square? Under the Light alone knows what peculiar laws? I've traveled on a Sea Folk ship, and it is peculiar! Bare legs are not in it! And what of the customs duties, and docking fees, and . . ." Suddenly he rounded on Rand. He scowled at the Aes Sedai, who paid him no mind, but it was to Rand he spoke, in a tone bordering on roughness. "They will ruin Cairhien in a year, my Lord Dragon. They will ruin any port where you allow them to do this."

mɪn əɡɹid, saɪlənli, bʌt ɹænd mɪɹli weɪvd ə hæn ən læft əɡɛn. "ðeɪ meɪ θɪŋk soʊ, bʌɾ aɪ noʊ sʌmθɪŋ ə ðɪs, dɑbɹeɪn. ðeɪ dɪdn seɪ hu tʃuzəz ðə lænd, soʊ ɪt dʌzn əv tə bi ɑn ðə wɔɾɝ əɾ ɔl. ðəl əv tə baɪ ðɛɹ fud fɹəm ju, ən lɪv wɪð jəɹ lɔz wən ðeɪ liv, soʊ ðeɪ kæn bi tu ɛɹəɡənt. ət wɝst, jə kən kəlɛk jəɹ kʌstəmz wən ðə ɡʊdz kʌm aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ . . . sæŋktʃuɛɹi. fəɹ ðə ɹɛst . . . ɪf aɪ kən æksɛpt ɪt, jə kæn, tu." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ læftɝ ɪn ɪz vɔɪs naʊ, ən dɑbɹeɪn baʊɾ ɪz hɛd.

Min agreed, silently, but Rand merely waved a hand and laughed again. "They may think so, but I know something of this, Dobraine. They didn't say who chooses the land, so it doesn't have to be on the water at all. They'll have to buy their food from you, and live with your laws when they leave, so they can't be too arrogant. At worst, you can collect your customs when the goods come out of their . . . sanctuary. For the rest . . . If I can accept it, you can, too." There was no laughter in his voice now, and Dobraine bowed his head.

mɪn wʌndɝd wɛɹ i hæd lɝn ɔl ðæt. hi saʊndəɾ ə kɪŋ, ən wʌn u nu wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ. meɪbi ɪleɪn hæd tɔt hɪm.

Min wondered where he had learned all that. He sounded a king, and one who knew what he was doing. Maybe Elayne had taught him.

" 'sɛkənli' ɪmplaɪz mɔɹ," ɹænd sɛd tə ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ.

" 'Secondly' implies more," Rand said to the two Aes Sedai.

mɛɹænə ən ɹæfɛlə ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz, ʌnkɑnʃəsli tʌtʃt skɝts ən ʃɔlz, ən ðən mɛɹænə spoʊk, hɝ vɔɪs nɑɾ əɾ ɔl pɑmpəs. ɪn fækt, ɪt wɑz mʌtʃ tu laɪt. "θɝdli, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əɡɹiz tə kip ən æmbæsəɾɝ tʃoʊzən baɪ ði æθɑn maɪɹ wɪð ɪm əɾ ɔl taɪmz. hɑɹɪn dɪn toʊɡɑɹə hæz neɪm hɝsɛlf. ʃɪl bi əkʌmpənid baɪ hɝ wɪndfɪndɝ, hɝ sɔɹdmæstɝ ən ə ɹɛɾənu."

Merana and Rafela exchanged glances, unconsciously touched skirts and shawls, and then Merana spoke, her voice not at all pompous. In fact, it was much too light. "Thirdly, the Dragon Reborn agrees to keep an ambassador chosen by the Atha'an Miere with him at all times. Harine din Togara has named herself. She will be accompanied by her Windfinder, her Swordmaster and a retinue."

"wʌt?" ɹænd ɹɔɹd, spɹɪŋɪŋ fɹəm ðə tʃɛɹ.

"What?" Rand roared, springing from the chair.

ɹæfɛlə ɹʌʃt ɪn, ɹʌʃt əhɛd, əz ðoʊ əfɹeɪɾ i maɪt kʌɾ əɹ ɔf. "æn fɔɹθli, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əɡɹiz tə ɡoʊ pɹɑmpli tə ə sʌmənz fɹəm ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps, bʌt nɑt mɔɹ ðən twaɪs ɪn ɛni θɹi kənsɛkjəɾɪv jɪɹz." ʃi fɪnɪʃt pæntɪŋ ə lɪɾəl, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk ðə læst saʊn laɪk ɪkstɛnjueɪʃən.

Rafela rushed in, rushed ahead, as though afraid he might cut her off. "And fourthly, the Dragon Reborn agrees to go promptly to a summons from the Mistress of the Ships, but not more than twice in any three consecutive years." She finished panting a little, trying to make the last sound like extenuation.

ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ flu fɹəm ðə flɔɹ bɪhaɪn ɹænd, ən i snæɡd ɪɾ aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ. hɪz aɪz wɝ nɑɾ aɪs ɛni mɔɹ. ðeɪ wɝ blu faɪɝ. "eɪ si foʊk æmbæsəɾɝ klɪŋɪŋ tə maɪ hilz?" hi ʃaʊɾəd. "oʊbeɪ sʌmənzɪz?" hi ʃʊk ðə kɑɹv spɪɹhɛɾ ət ðɛm, ðə ɡɹin-ænd-waɪt tæsəl fleɪlɪŋ. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ə pipəl aʊt ðəɹ u wɑnə kɑŋkɝ ɔl ʌv ʌs, ən maɪt bi eɪbəl tə də ɪt! ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑɹ aʊt ðɛɹ! ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪz weɪɾɪŋ! waɪ dɪdn jə əɡɹi aɪd kɑk ðɛɹ hʌlz waɪl jə wɝ əbaʊɾ ɪt!"

The Dragon Scepter flew from the floor behind Rand, and he snagged it out of the air without looking. His eyes were not ice any more. They were blue fire. "A Sea Folk ambassador clinging to my heels?" he shouted. "Obey summonses?" He shook the carved spearhead at them, the green-and-white tassel flailing. "There are a people out there who want to conquer all of us, and might be able to do it! The Forsaken are out there! The Dark One is waiting! Why didn't you agree I'd caulk their hulls while you were about it!"

nɔɹməli, mɪn tʃɹaɪd tə suð ɪz tɛmpɝ wən ɪt flɛɹd, bʌt ðɪs taɪm ʃi sæt fɔɹwɝɾ ən ɡlɛɹɾ ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi əɡɹid wɪð ɪm fʊli. ðeɪ hæd ɡɪvən əweɪ ðə bɑɹn tə sɛl ə hɔɹs!

Normally, Min tried to soothe his temper when it flared, but this time she sat forward and glared at the Aes Sedai. She agreed with him fully. They had given away the barn to sell a horse!

ɹæfɛlə æktʃəli  sweɪd bɪfɔɹ ðət blæst, bʌt mɛɹænə dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp, hɝ oʊn aɪz mænɪdʒɪŋ ə ɡʊɾ ɪməteɪʃən ə bɹaʊn faɪɝ flɛkt wɪð ɡoʊld. "ju kæstəɡeɪɾ ʌs?" ʃi snæpt ɪn toʊnz əz fɹɔsti əz əɹ aɪz wɝ hɑt. ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ əz ðə tʃaɪl mɪn hæd sin ðɛm, ɹiɡəl əbʌv kwinz, paʊɝfəl əbʌv paʊɝz. "ju wɝ pɹɛzən ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, tɑvɝən, ən jə twɪstəɾ əm əz jə wɑntəd ðɛm. cʊɾə əv hæɾ əm ɔl nilɪŋ tə ju! bʌt jə lɛft! ðeɪ wɝ nɑt pliz tə noʊ ðeɪ hæd bɪn dænsɪŋ fəɹ ə tɑvɝən. sʌmwɛɹ, ðeɪ lɝn tə wiv ʃilz, ən bɪfɔɹ jə wɝ wɛl ɔf ðɛɹ ʃɪp, ɹæfɛlə ən aɪ wɝ ʃildɪd. soʊ wi kəd nɑt teɪk ædvæntɪdʒ wɪð ðə paʊɝ, ðeɪ sɛd. mɔɹ ðən wʌns, hɑɹɪn θɹɛɾənd tə hæŋ əs ɪn ðə ɹɪɡɪŋ baɪ əɹ toʊz əntɪl wi keɪm tə əɹ sɛnsɪz, ən aɪ fəɹ wʌn bɪliv ʃi mɛn ɪt! fil lʌki juv hæv ðə ʃɪps jə wɑnt, ɹænd ælθɹ. wʊɾə əv ɡɪvən jə ə hændfʊl! fil lʌki ʃi dɪdnt wɑn jəɹ nu buts ən ðət ɡæsli θɹoʊn ə jʊɹz əz wɛl! oʊ, baɪ ðə baɪ, ʃi fɔɹməli æknɑlɪdʒ jə əz ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ, meɪ jə ɡɛɾ ə bɛlieɪk fɹəm ɪt!"

Rafela actually swayed before that blast, but Merana drew herself up, her own eyes managing a good imitation of brown fire flecked with gold. "You castigate us?" she snapped in tones as frosty as her eyes were hot. She was Aes Sedai as the child Min had seen them, regal above queens, powerful above powers. "You were present in the beginning, ta'veren, and you twisted them as you wanted them. You could have had them all kneeling to you! But you left! They were not pleased to know they had been dancing for a ta'veren. Somewhere, they learned to weave shields, and before you were well off their ship, Rafela and I were shielded. So we could not take advantage with the Power, they said. More than once, Harine threatened to hang us in the rigging by our toes until we came to our senses, and I for one believe she meant it! Feel lucky that you have the ships you want, Rand al'Thor. Harine would have given you a handful! Feel lucky she didn't want your new boots and that ghastly throne of yours as well! Oh, by the by, she formally acknowledged you as the Coramoor, may you get a bellyache from it!"

mɪn stɛɹɾ ət hɝ. ɹænd ən dɑbɹeɪn stɛɹɾ ət hɝ, ən ðə kɛɹhinɪnz dʒɔ hʌŋ oʊpən. ɹæfɛlə stɛɹd, hɝ maʊθ wɝkɪŋ saʊnləsli. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ðə faɪɝ feɪɾəd fɹəm mɛɹænəz aɪz, ən ðeɪ sloʊli ɡɹu waɪɾɝ ən waɪɾɝ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ dʒʌs hɪɹɪŋ wʌt ʃi hæd sɛd.

Min stared at her. Rand and Dobraine stared at her, and the Cairhienin's jaw hung open. Rafela stared, her mouth working soundlessly. For that matter, the fire faded from Merana's eyes, and they slowly grew wider and wider as if she were just hearing what she had said.

ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛptɝ tʃɹɛmbəld ɪn ɹændz fɪst. mɪn hæd sin ɪz fjʊɹi swɛl nɪɹ tə bɝstɪŋ fəɹ fɑɹ lɛs. ʃi pɹeɪd fəɹ ə weɪ tə əvɔɪd ði ɪksploʊʒən, ən kəd nɑt si wʌn.

The Dragon Scepter trembled in Rand's fist. Min had seen his fury swell near to bursting for far less. She prayed for a way to avoid the explosion, and could not see one.

"ɪt simz," hi sɛd faɪnəli, "ðæt ðə wɝdz ə tɑvɝən dʒɹæɡz aʊɾ ɑɹən ɔlweɪz ðə wɝdz i wɑns tə hɪɹ." hi saʊndəd . . . kɑm; mɪn wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə θɪŋk, seɪn. "juv dʌn wɛl, mɛɹænə. aɪ hændəd jə ə dɔɡz dɪnɝ, bʌt jə ən ɹæfɛlə hæv dʌn wɛl."

"It seems," he said finally, "that the words a ta'veren drags out aren't always the words he wants to hear." He sounded . . . calm; Min was not about to think, sane. "You've done well, Merana. I handed you a dog's dinner, but you and Rafela have done well."

ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ sweɪd, ən fəɹ ə moʊmənt, mɪn θɔt ðeɪ maɪt kəlæps ɪn pʌɾəlz ɑn ðə flɔɹ fɹəm ʃɪɹ ɹɪlif.

The two Aes Sedai swayed, and for a moment, Min thought they might collapse in puddles on the floor from sheer relief.

"æt list wi mænədʒ tə kip ðə dɪteɪlz fɹəm kædzueɪn," ɹæfɛlə sɛd, smuðɪŋ əɹ skɝts ənstɛɾəli. "ðɛɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə stɑp ɛvɹiwʌn lɝnɪŋ wi hæd meɪd səm sɔɹɾ ʌv əɡɹimənt, bʌt wi kɛp ðət mʌtʃ fɹəm hɝ."

"At least we managed to keep the details from Cadsuane," Rafela said, smoothing her skirts unsteadily. "There was no way to stop everyone learning we had made some sort of agreement, but we kept that much from her."

"jɛs," mɛɹænə sɛd bɹɛθləsli. "ʃi ivən weɪleɪɾ əs ɑn ðə weɪ hɪɹ. ɪts dɪfəkəl kipɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ fɹəm hɝ, bʌt wi dɪd. wi dɪdn θɪŋk jud wɑn əɹ tə . . ." ʃi tʃɹeɪld ɔf ət ðə stoʊni lʊk ɑn ɹændz feɪs.

"Yes," Merana said breathlessly. "She even waylaid us on the way here. It's difficult keeping anything from her, but we did. We didn't think you'd want her to . . ." She trailed off at the stony look on Rand's face.

"kædzueɪn əɡɛn," hi sɛd flætli. hi fɹaʊn ət ðə kɑɹv lɛŋθ ə spɪɹhɛɾ ɪn ɪz hænd, ðən tɔst ɪɾ ɑntu ə tʃɛɹ əz ɪf i dɪd nɑt tʃɹʌs hɪmsɛlf wɪð ɪt. "ʃiz ɪn ðə sʌn pæləs, ɪz ʃi? mɪn, tɛl ðə meɪɾənz aʊtsaɪd tə kæɹi ə mɛsədʒ tə kædzueɪn. ʃiz tə ətɛn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪn ɔl heɪst."

"Cadsuane again," he said flatly. He frowned at the carved length of spearhead in his hand, then tossed it onto a chair as if he did not trust himself with it. "She's in the Sun Palace, is she? Min, tell the Maidens outside to carry a message to Cadsuane. She is to attend the Dragon Reborn in all haste."

"ɹænd, aɪ doʊn θɪŋk," mɪn bɪɡæn ənizəli, bʌt ɹænd kʌɾ ɪn. nɑt hɑɹʃli, bʌt kwaɪt fɝmli.

"Rand, I don't think," Min began uneasily, but Rand cut in. Not harshly, but quite firmly.

"du ɪt, pliz, mɪn. ðɪs wʊmən ɪz laɪk ə wʊlf aɪɪŋ ðə ʃipfoʊld. aɪ ɪntɛn tə faɪn aʊt wʌt ʃi wɑns."

"Do it, please, Min. This woman is like a wolf eyeing the sheepfold. I intend to find out what she wants."

mɪn tʊk əɹ taɪm ɡɛɾɪŋ ʌp, ən dʒɹæɡd əɹ fit tə ðə dɔɹz. ʃi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn tə θɪŋk ðɪs ə bæɾ aɪdiə. əɹ ət lis tə wɑnə bi ɛlswɛɹ wən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn feɪs kædzueɪn məleɪdʒɹɪn. dɑbɹeɪn pæst əɹ ɑn ðə weɪ tə ðə dɔɹ, meɪkɪŋ ə heɪsti baʊ wɪð bɛɹli ə pɔz, ən ivən mɛɹænə ən ɹæfɛlə wɝ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum bɪfɔɹ hɝ, ðoʊ ðeɪ meɪɾ ɪɾ əpɪɹ ðeɪ wɝ nɑt hɝiɪŋ. ɪnsaɪd ðə ɹum, ðeɪ dɪd, ɛniweɪ. wən mɪn pʊɾ əɹ hɛɾ ɪndə ðə hɔlweɪ, ðə tu sɪstɝz hæd kɑt dɑbɹeɪn ən wɝ skɝiɪŋ əlɔŋ ət lɪɾəl ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ə tʃɹɑt.

Min took her time getting up, and dragged her feet to the doors. She was not the only one to think this a bad idea. Or at least to want to be elsewhere when the Dragon Reborn faced Cadsuane Melaidhrin. Dobraine passed her on the way to the door, making a hasty bow with barely a pause, and even Merana and Rafela were out of the room before her, though they made it appear they were not hurrying. Inside the room, they did, anyway. When Min put her head into the hallway, the two sisters had caught Dobraine and were scurrying along at little short of a trot.

stʃɹeɪnʒli, ðə hæf-dʌzən meɪɾənz u hæd bɪn aʊtsaɪd wən mɪn ɛntɝɾ ɝliɝ hæd naʊ ɡɹoʊn ɪn nʌmbɝ əntɪl ðeɪ laɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ əz fɑɹ əz ʃi kəd si ɪn boʊθ dɝɛkʃənz, tɔl hɑɹd-feɪst wɪmən ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪz ən bɹaʊnz ən ɡɹeɪz ə ðə keɪɾɪnsɝ, ʃoʊufə ɹæpt ɝaʊn ðɛɹ hɛdz wɪð ðə lɔŋ blæk veɪl hæŋɪŋ daʊn. ə ɡʊd mɛni kæɹid ðɛɹ spɪɹz ən bʊl-haɪd bʌklɝz əz ɪf ðeɪ ɪkspɛktəɾ ə bæɾəl. səm wɝ pleɪɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝ-ɡeɪm kɔld "naɪf, peɪpɝ, stoʊn," ən ðə ɹɛst wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ ɪntɛnli.

Strangely, the half-dozen Maidens who had been outside when Min entered earlier had now grown in number until they lined the corridor as far as she could see in both directions, tall hard-faced women in the grays and browns and grays of the cadin'sor, shoufa wrapped around their heads with the long black veil hanging down. A good many carried their spears and bull-hide bucklers as if they expected a battle. Some were playing a finger-game called "knife, paper, stone," and the rest were watching intently.

nɑt soʊ ɪntɛnli ðət ðeɪ dɪd nɑt si hɝ, ðoʊ. wən ʃi pæst ɹændz mɛsədʒ, hæntɔk flæʃt ʌp ən daʊn ðə ɹoʊz, ðən tu læŋki meɪɾənz wɛn tʃɹɑɾɪŋ ɔf. ði ʌðɝz pɹɑmpli ɹɪtɝn tə ðə ɡeɪm, pleɪɪŋ əɹ wɑtʃɪŋ.

Not so intently that they did not see her, though. When she passed Rand's message, handtalk flashed up and down the rows, then two lanky Maidens went trotting off. The others promptly returned to the game, playing or watching.

skɹætʃɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ ɪn pʌzəlmənt, mɪn wɛn bæk ɪn. ðə meɪɾənz ɔfən meɪɾ əɹ nɝvəs, jɛt ðeɪ ɔlweɪz hæɾ ə wɝd fəɹ hɝ, səmtaɪmz ɹɪspɛkfəl, əz tə ə waɪz wʌn, səmtaɪmz dʒoʊkɪŋ, ðoʊ ðɛɹ hjumɝ wɑz ɑd, tə seɪ ðə list. nɛvɝ hæd ðeɪ ɪɡnɔɹɾ əɹ laɪk ðɪs.

Scratching her head in puzzlement, Min went back in. The Maidens often made her nervous, yet they always had a word for her, sometimes respectful, as to a Wise One, sometimes joking, though their humor was odd, to say the least. Never had they ignored her like this.

ɹænd wɑz ɪn ðə bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ. ðət sɪmpəl fæk sɛɾ əɹ hɑɹt ɹeɪsɪŋ. hi hæɾ ɪz koʊɾ ɔf, hɪz snoʊi ʃɝɾ ənleɪst ət nɛk ən kʌfs ən pʊld aʊɾ ə hɪz bɹitʃɪz. sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə fʊɾ ə ðə bɛd, ʃi lin bæk əɡɛnst wʌn ə ðə hɛvi blækwʊd bɪdpoʊsts ən swʌŋ əɹ fiɾ ʌp, kɹɔsɪŋ əɹ æŋkəlz. ʃi hæd nɑt hæɾ ə tʃæns tə wɑtʃ ɹænd əndʒɹɛs hɪmsɛlf, ən ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə ɛndʒɔɪ ɪt.

Rand was in the bedchamber. That simple fact set her heart racing. He had his coat off, his snowy shirt unlaced at neck and cuffs and pulled out of his breeches. Sitting on the foot of the bed, she leaned back against one of the heavy blackwood bedposts and swung her feet up, crossing her ankles. She had not had a chance to watch Rand undress himself, and she intended to enjoy it.

ɪnstɛɾ ə kəntɪnjuɪŋ, ðoʊ, hi stʊd ðəɹ lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ. "wʌt kən kædzueɪn pɑsəbli titʃ mi?" hi æsk sʌɾənli.

Instead of continuing, though, he stood there looking at her. "What can Cadsuane possibly teach me?" he asked suddenly.

"ju, ən ɔl ði æʃəmən," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd. ðət hæd bɪn əɹ vjuɪŋ. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt, ɹænd. aɪ oʊnli noʊ juv tə lɝn ɪt. ɔl ə jə du." ɪt dɪd nɑt sim i ɪntɛndəd tə pɹəɡɹɛs bɪɑn lɛɾɪŋ ɪz ʃɝt hæŋ daʊn. saɪɪŋ, ʃi wɛn ɑn. "ju nid hɝ, ɹænd. jə kæn əfɔɹd tə meɪk əɹ æŋɡɹi. jə kæn əfɔɹd tə tʃeɪs əɹ əweɪ." æktʃəli , ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk fɪfti mɹdʒɹɑl ən ə θaʊzən tʃɹɑləks kəd tʃeɪs kædzueɪn ɛniwɛɹ, bʌt ðə pɔɪnt wɑz ðə seɪm.

"You, and all the Asha'man," she replied. That had been her viewing. "I don't know what, Rand. I only know you have to learn it. All of you do." It did not seem he intended to progress beyond letting his shirt hang down. Sighing, she went on. "You need her, Rand. You can't afford to make her angry. You can't afford to chase her away." Actually, she did not think fifty Myrddraal and a thousand Trollocs could chase Cadsuane anywhere, but the point was the same.

ə fɑɹ-ɔf lʊk keɪm ɪndə ɹændz aɪz, ən æftɝ ə moʊmənt, hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "waɪ ʃəɾ aɪ lɪsən tə ə mædmæn?" hi mʌɾɝd ɔlmoʊst ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. laɪt, dɪɾ i ɹɪli bɪliv luz θɝɪn tɛləmən spoʊk ɪn ɪz hɛd? "lɛt sʌmwʌn noʊ jə nid ðɛm, mɪn, ən ðeɪv ə hoʊld ɑn ju. ə liʃ, tə pʊl jə wɛɹ ðeɪ wɑnt. aɪ woʊn pʊɾ ə hɔltɝ ɑn maɪ oʊn nɛk fəɹ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ. nɑt fəɹ ɛniwʌn!" sloʊli hɪz fɪsts ənklɛntʃt. "ju, aɪ nid, mɪn," hi sɛd sɪmpli. "nɑt fəɹ jəɹ vjuɪŋz. aɪ dʒʌs nid ju."

A far-off look came into Rand's eyes, and after a moment, he shook his head. "Why should I listen to a madman?" he muttered almost under his breath. Light, did he really believe Lews Therin Telamon spoke in his head? "Let someone know you need them, Min, and they have a hold on you. A leash, to pull you where they want. I won't put a halter on my own neck for any Aes Sedai. Not for anyone!" Slowly his fists unclenched. "You, I need, Min," he said simply. "Not for your viewings. I just need you."

bɝn hɝ, bʌt ðə mæn kəd swip əɹ fiɾ aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ əɹ wɪð ə fju wɝdz!

Burn her, but the man could sweep her feet out from under her with a few words!

wɪð ə smaɪl əz iɡɝ əz hɝz, hi ɡɹæsp ðə bɑɾəm ə hɪz ʃɝt wɪð boʊθ hænz ən bɛn tə bɪɡɪn hɔlɪŋ ɪɾ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd. lɑsɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz oʊvɝ əɹ stʌmək, ʃi sɛɾəld bæk tə wɑtʃ.

With a smile as eager as hers, he grasped the bottom of his shirt with both hands and bent to begin hauling it over his head. Lacing her fingers over her stomach, she settled back to watch.

ðə θɹi meɪɾənz u mɑɹtʃt ɪndə ðə ɹum noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wɔɹ ðə ʃoʊufə ðət hæd kənsil ðɛɹ ʃɔɹt hɛɹ ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ. ðeɪ wɝ ɛmpti-hændəd, ən noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wɔɹ ðoʊz hɛvi-bleɪd bɛl naɪvz, iðɝ. ðət wɑz ɔl mɪn hæd taɪm tə noʊɾəs.

The three Maidens who marched into the room no longer wore the shoufa that had concealed their short hair in the corridor. They were empty-handed, and no longer wore those heavy-blade belt knives, either. That was all Min had time to notice.

ɹændz hɛɾ ən ɑɹmz wɝ stɪl ɪnsaɪd ðə ʃɝt, ən soʊmɑɹə, fleɪksən-hɛɹɾ ən tɔl ivən fəɹ ən il wʊmən, siz ðə waɪt lɪnən ən tæŋɡəld ɪt, tʃɹæpɪŋ hɪm. ɔlmoʊst ɪn ðə seɪm muvmənt, ʃi kɪkt ɪm bɪtwin ðə lɛɡz. wɪð ə stʃɹæŋɡəld ɡɹoʊn, hi bɛn fɑɹðɝ, stæɡɝɪŋ.

Rand's head and arms were still inside the shirt, and Somara, flaxen-haired and tall even for an Aiel woman, seized the white linen and tangled it, trapping him. Almost in the same movement, she kicked him between the legs. With a strangled groan, he bent farther, staggering.

nəsɹ, faɪɝi-hɛɹɾ ən bjuɾəfəl dɪspaɪt waɪt skɑɹz ɑn boʊθ sʌn-dɑɹk tʃiks, plæntəɾ ə fɪst ɪn ɪz ɹaɪt saɪd hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪm stʌmbəl saɪdweɪz.

Nesair, fiery-haired and beautiful despite white scars on both sun-dark cheeks, planted a fist in his right side hard enough to make him stumble sideways.

wɪð ə kɹaɪ, mɪn lɔntʃt hɝsɛlf fɹəm ðə bɛd. ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt mædnəs wɑz hæpənɪŋ hɪɹ, kəd nɑɾ ivən bɪɡɪn tə ɡɛs. wʌn ə hɝ naɪvz keɪm smuðli fɹəm itʃ sliv, ən ʃi θɹu hɝsɛlf ət ðə meɪɾənz, ʃaʊɾɪŋ, "hɛlp! oʊ, ɹænd! sʌmbɑɾi, hɛlp!" ət list, ðət wɑz wʌt ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə ʃaʊt.

With a cry, Min launched herself from the bed. She did not know what madness was happening here, could not even begin to guess. One of her knives came smoothly from each sleeve, and she threw herself at the Maidens, shouting, "Help! Oh, Rand! Somebody, help!" At least, that was what she tried to shout.

ðə θɝd meɪɾən, nændɛɹə, tɝn laɪk ə sneɪk, ən mɪn faʊn ə fʊt plæntəɾ ɪn əɹ stʌmək. bɹɛθ ɹʌʃt aʊɾ ə hɝ ɪn ə wiz. hɝ naɪvz flu fɹəm nʌm hænz, ən ʃi tɝn ə sʌmɝsɔl oʊvɝ ðə ɡɹeɪɪŋ meɪɾənz fʊt, lændɪŋ ɑn əɹ bæk wɪð ə kɹæʃ ðət dʒɹoʊv aʊt wʌt lɪɾəl ɛɹ ɹɪmeɪn ɪn hɝ. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə muv, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɹið - tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ʌndɝstænd! - ɔl ʃi kəd də wɑz laɪ ðəɹ ən wɑtʃ.

The third Maiden, Nandera, turned like a snake, and Min found a foot planted in her stomach. Breath rushed out of her in a wheeze. Her knives flew from numb hands, and she turned a somersault over the graying Maiden's foot, landing on her back with a crash that drove out what little air remained in her. Trying to move, trying to breathe - trying to understand! - all she could do was lie there and watch.

ðə θɹi wɪmən wɝ kwaɪt θɝoʊ. nəsɹ ən nændɛɹə paʊndɪd ɹænd wɪð ðɛɹ fɪsts waɪl soʊmɑɹə hɛld ɪm bɛn oʊvɝ ən kɑɾ ɪn ɪz oʊn ʃɝt. əɡɛn ən əɡɛn ən əɡɛn ðeɪ dʒɹoʊv stʌɾid bloʊz ɪndə ɹændz hɑɹd bɛli, ɪndə hɪz ɹaɪt saɪd. mɪn wʊɾə læf hɪstɛɹɪkli, hæd ʃi hæɾ ɛni bɹɛθ. ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə biɾ ɪm tə dɛθ, ən ðeɪ vɛɹi kɛɹfəli əvɔɪd hɪɾɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ nɪɹ ðə tɛndɝ ɹaʊn skɑɹ ɪn ɪz lɛf saɪd wɪð ðə hæf-hil slæʃ ɹʌnɪŋ θɹu ɪt.

The three women were quite thorough. Nesair and Nandera pounded Rand with their fists while Somara held him bent over and caught in his own shirt. Again and again and again they drove studied blows into Rand's hard belly, into his right side. Min would have laughed hysterically, had she had any breath. They were trying to beat him to death, and they very carefully avoid hitting anywhere near the tender round scar in his left side with the half-healed slash running through it.

ʃi nu vɛɹi wɛl haʊ hɑɹd ɹændz bɑɾi wɑz, haʊ stʃɹɔŋ, bʌt noʊ wʌn kəd stæn ʌp tə ðæt. sloʊli, hɪz niz foʊldəd, ən wən ðeɪ θʌmp tə ðə flɔɹ taɪlz, nændɛɹə ən nəsɹ stʊd bæk. itʃ nɑɾəd, ən soʊmɑɹə ɹilist əɹ hoʊld ɑn ɹændz ʃɝt. hi fɛl fɔɹwɝɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs. ʃi kəd hɪɹ ɪm ɡæspɪŋ, faɪɾɪŋ ɡɹoʊnz ðət bʌbəld ʌp dɪspaɪɾ ɪz ɛfɝts. nilɪŋ, soʊmɑɹə pʊld ɪz ʃɝt daʊn ɔlmoʊs tɛndɝli. hi leɪ ðəɹ wɪð ɪz tʃik ɑn ðə flɔɹ, aɪz bʌlʒɪŋ, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ fəɹ bɹɛθ.

She knew very well how hard Rand's body was, how strong, but no one could stand up to that. Slowly, his knees folded, and when they thumped to the floor tiles, Nandera and Nesair stood back. Each nodded, and Somara released her hold on Rand's shirt. He fell forward on his face. She could hear him gasping, fighting groans that bubbled up despite his efforts. Kneeling, Somara pulled his shirt down almost tenderly. He lay there with his cheek on the floor, eyes bulging, struggling for breath.

nəsɹ bɛn tə kætʃ ə fɪsfəl ə hɪz hɛɹ ən dʒɝk ɪz hɛɾ ʌp. "wi wʌn ðə ɹaɪt fəɹ ðɪs," ʃi ɡɹaʊld, "bʌɾ ɛvɹi meɪɾən wɑntəd tə leɪ hɝ hænz ɑn ju. aɪ lɛf maɪ klæn fəɹ ju, ɹænd ælθɹ. əl nɑɾ əv jə spɪɾ ɑn mi!"

Nesair bent to catch a fistful of his hair and jerk his head up. "We won the right for this," she growled, "but every Maiden wanted to lay her hands on you. I left my clan for you, Rand al'Thor. I will not have you spit on me!"

soʊmɑɹə muvd ə hæn əz ɪf tə smuð hɛɹ aʊɾ ə hɪz feɪs, ðən snætʃt ɪt bæk. "ðɪs ɪz haʊ wi tʃɹiɾ ə fɝst-bɹʌðɝ u dɪsɑnɝz ʌs, ɹænd ælθɹ," ʃi sɛd fɝmli. "ðə fɝs taɪm. ðə nɛkst, wɪl juz stʃɹæps."

Somara moved a hand as if to smooth hair out of his face, then snatched it back. "This is how we treat a first-brother who dishonors us, Rand al'Thor," she said firmly. "The first time. The next, we will use straps."

nændɛɹə stʊɾ oʊvɝ ɹænd wɪð fɪs plæntəɾ ɑn əɹ hɪps ən ə feɪs ə stoʊn. "ju kæɹi ði ɑnɝ ə fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ, sʌn ʌv ə meɪɾən," ʃi sɛd ɡɹɪmli. "ju pɹɑməs tə kɔl əs tə dæns ðə spɪɹz fəɹ ju, ən ðən jə ɹæn tə bæɾəl ən lɛft əs bɪhaɪnd. jəl nɑt də ðɪs əɡɛn."

Nandera stood over Rand with fist planted on her hips and a face of stone. "You carry the honor of Far Dareis Mai, son of a Maiden," she said grimly. "You promised to call us to dance the spears for you, and then you ran to battle and left us behind. You will not do this again."

ʃi stɛpt oʊvɝ ɪm tə stʃɹaɪɾ aʊt, ən ði ʌðɝ tu fɑloʊd. oʊnli soʊmɑɹə ɡlæns bæk, ən ɪf sɪmpəθi tʌtʃt əɹ blu aɪz, ðəɹ wɑz nʌn ɪn əɹ vɔɪs wən ʃi sɛd, "du nɑt meɪk ðɪs nɛsəsɛɹi əɡɛn, sʌn ʌv ə meɪɾən."

She stepped over him to stride out, and the other two followed. Only Somara glanced back, and if sympathy touched her blue eyes, there was none in her voice when she said, "Do not make this necessary again, son of a Maiden."

ɹænd hæd pʊʃt hɪmsɛlf ʌp tə hænz ən niz baɪ ðə taɪm mɪn mænədʒ tə kɹɔl tə hɪm. "ðeɪ mʌs bi mæd," ʃi kɹoʊkt. laɪt, bʌɾ əɹ mɪɾəl hɝt! "ɹəɑɹk wɪl - !" ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt ɹəɑɹk wəd du. nɑɾ ɪnʌf, wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz. "sɔɹɪliə." sɔɹɪliə wəd steɪk əm aʊɾ ɪn ðə sʌn! tə stɑɹt! "wɛn wi tɛl əɹ - "

Rand had pushed himself up to hands and knees by the time Min managed to crawl to him. "They must be mad," she croaked. Light, but her middle hurt! "Rhuarc will - !" She did not know what Rhuarc would do. Not enough, whatever it was. "Sorilea." Sorilea would stake them out in the sun! To start! "When we tell her - "

"wi tɛl noʊ wʌn," hi sɛd. hi ɔlmoʊst saʊndəɾ əz ɪf i hæɾ ɪz bɹɛθ bæk, ɔlðoʊ hi wɑz stɪl slaɪtli pɑp-aɪd. haʊ kəɾ i də ðæt? "ðeɪ hæv ðə ɹaɪt. ðeɪv ɝn ðə ɹaɪt."

"We tell no one," he said. He almost sounded as if he had his breath back, although he was still slightly pop-eyed. How could he do that? "They have the right. They've earned the right."

mɪn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðət toʊn mʌtʃ tə wɛl. wən ə mæn dɪsaɪɾɪd tə bi stʌbɝn, hi wəd sɪt bɛɹ ɪn ə nɛɾəl pætʃ ən dɪnaɪ tə jəɹ feɪs ðət ðeɪ meɪɾ ɪz bɑɾəm stɪŋ! ʃi wɑz ɔlmoʊs pliz tə hɪɹ ɪm ɡɹoʊn əz ʃi hɛlpt ɪm tə hɪz fit. wɛl, əz ðeɪ hɛlpt itʃ ʌðɝ. ɪf i wɑz gɑnə bi ə pjʊɹ wʊl-hɛɾəd ɪɾiət, hi dɪzɝvd ə fju bɹuzəz!

Min recognized that tone much to well. When a man decided to be stubborn, he would sit bare in a nettle patch and deny to your face that they made his bottom sting! She was almost pleased to hear him groan as she helped him to his feet. Well, as they helped each other. If he was going to be a pure wool-headed idiot, he deserved a few bruises!

hi iz hɪmsɛlf ɑntu ðə bɛd, laɪɪŋ bæk ɑn ðə hipt pɪloʊz, ən ʃi snʌɡəld ɪn bɪsaɪd hɪm. nɑt wʌt ʃi hæd bɪn hoʊpɪŋ fɔɹ, bʌɾ əz mʌtʃ əz wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə hæpən, ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ.

He eased himself onto the bed, lying back on the heaped pillows, and she snuggled in beside him. Not what she had been hoping for, but as much as was going to happen, she was sure.

"nɑt wʌɾ aɪ wɑz hoʊpɪŋ tə juz ðɪs bɛd fɔɹ," hi mʌɾɝd. ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ʃi hæd bɪn səpoʊz tə hɪɹ.

"Not what I was hoping to use this bed for," he muttered. She was not sure she had been supposed to hear.

ʃi læft. "aɪ ɛndʒɔɪ jə hoʊldɪŋ mi dʒʌst əz mʌtʃ əz . . . əz ði ʌðɝ." stʃɹeɪnʒli, hi smaɪld əɾ əɹ əz ɪf i nu ʃi wɑz laɪɪŋ. hɝ æn mɹən kleɪm ðət wɑz wʌn ə ðə θɹi laɪz ɛni mæn wəd bɪliv fɹəm ə wʊmən.

She laughed. "I enjoy you holding me just as much as . . . as the other." Strangely, he smiled at her as if he knew she was lying. Her Aunt Miren claimed that was one of the three lies any man would believe from a woman.

"ɪf aɪm ɪntɝʌptɪŋ," ə wʊmənz kul vɔɪs sɛd fɹəm ðə dɔɹweɪ, "aɪ səpoʊz aɪ kəd ɹɪtɝn wən ɪts mɔɹ kənvinjənt."

"If I am interrupting," a woman's cool voice said from the doorway, "I suppose I could return when it is more convenient."

mɪn dʒɝkt əweɪ fɹəm ɹænd əz ðoʊ bɝnd, bʌt wən i pʊld əɹ bæk, ʃi sɛɾəld əɡɛnst ɪm əɡɛn. ʃi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ stændɪŋ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ, ə plʌmp lɪɾəl kɛɹhinɪn wɪð fɔɹ θɪn stʃɹaɪps ə kʌlɝ əkɹɔs əɹ fʊl bʊzəm ən waɪt slæʃɪz ɪn əɹ dɑɹk skɝts. deɪdʒiən moʊsənilɪn wɑz wʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz u hæd kʌm wɪð kædzueɪn. ən ʃi wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz oʊvɝbɛɹɪŋ əz kædzueɪn hɝsɛlf, ɪn mɪnz əpɪnjən.

Min jerked away from Rand as though burned, but when he pulled her back, she settled against him again. She recognized the Aes Sedai standing in the doorway, a plump little Cairhienin with four thin stripes of color across her full bosom and white slashes in her dark skirts. Daigian Moseneillin was one of the sisters who had come with Cadsuane. And she was almost as overbearing as Cadsuane herself, in Min's opinion.

"hu maɪt jə bi wən jəɹ ət hoʊm?" ɹænd sɛd læzəli. "huɛvɝ jə ɑɹ, dɪdn ɛniwʌn ɛvɝ titʃ jə tə nɑk?" mɪn ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɛvɹi mʌsəl ɪn ði ɑɹm hoʊldɪŋ əɹ wɑz hɑɹɾ əz ə ɹɑk, ðoʊ.

"Who might you be when you're at home?" Rand said lazily. "Whoever you are, didn't anyone ever teach you to knock?" Min realized that every muscle in the arm holding her was hard as a rock, though.

ðə munstoʊn dæŋɡəlɪŋ ɑntu deɪdʒiənz fɔɹhɛɾ ɑn ə θɪn sɪlvɝ tʃeɪn swʌŋ əz ʃi sloʊli ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. pleɪnli, ʃi wɑz nɑt plizd. "kædzueɪn sədaɪ ɹəsiv jəɹ ɹɪkwɛst," ʃi sɛd, ivən mɔɹ kuli ðən bɪfɔɹ, "æn æsk mi tə kənveɪ hɝ ɹɪɡɹɛts. ʃi vɛɹi mʌtʃ wɪʃɪz tə fɪnɪʃ ðə pis ə niɾəlpɔɪnt ʃiz wɝkɪŋ ɑn. pɝhæps ʃi maɪt bi eɪbəl tə si jə ənʌðɝ deɪ. ɪf ʃi kən faɪn taɪm."

The moonstone dangling onto Daigian's forehead on a thin silver chain swung as she slowly shook her head. Plainly, she was not pleased. "Cadsuane Sedai received your request," she said, even more coolly than before, "and asked me to convey her regrets. She very much wishes to finish the piece of needlepoint she is working on. Perhaps she might be able to see you another day. If she can find time."

"ɪz ðət wʌt ʃi sɛd?" ɹænd æsk deɪnʒɝəsli.

"Is that what she said?" Rand asked dangerously.

deɪdʒiən snɪf dɪsdeɪnfəli. "aɪ wɪl liv jə tə ɹɪzum . . . wʌtɛvɝ jə wɝ duɪŋ." mɪn wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ʃi kəd ɡɛɾ əweɪ wɪð slæpɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. deɪdʒiən aɪɾ əɹ fɹɔstəli, əz ɪf hɪɹɪŋ ðə θɔt, ən tɝn tə ɡlaɪd fɹəm ðə ɹum.

Daigian sniffed disdainfully. "I will leave you to resume . . . whatever you were doing." Min wondered whether she could get away with slapping an Aes Sedai. Daigian eyed her frostily, as if hearing the thought, and turned to glide from the room.

ɹænd sæɾ ʌp wɪð ə mʌfəld oʊθ. "ju tɛl kædzueɪn ʃi kən ɡoʊ tə ðə pɪɾ ə dum!" hi ʃaʊɾəd æftɝ ðə ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ sɪstɝ. "tɛl əɹ ʃi kən ɹɑt!"

Rand sat up with a muffled oath. "You tell Cadsuane she can go to the Pit of Doom!" he shouted after the retreating sister. "Tell her she can rot!"

"ɪt woʊn du, ɹænd," mɪn saɪd. ðɪs wɑz gɑnə bi hɑɹɾɝ ðən ʃi hæd θɔt. "ju nid kædzueɪn. ʃi dʌznt nid ju."

"It won't do, Rand," Min sighed. This was going to be harder than she had thought. "You need Cadsuane. She doesn't need you."

"dʌznt ʃi?" hi sɛd sɔfli, ən ʃi ʃɪvɝd. ʃi hæɾ oʊnli θɔɾ ɪz vɔɪs wɑz deɪnʒɝəs bɪfɔɹ.

"Doesn't she?" he said softly, and she shivered. She had only thought his voice was dangerous before.

ɹænd pɹipɛɹd kɛɹfəli, dʒɹɛsɪŋ ɪn ðə ɡɹin koʊɾ əɡɛn, sɛndɪŋ mɪn wɪð mɛsədʒəz fəɹ ðə meɪɾənz tə kæɹi. ət lis ðeɪ wəd stɪl də ðæt. hɪz ɹɪbz ætʃt ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ ɑn ɪz ɹaɪt saɪɾ əz ðə wunz dɪɾ ɑn ɪz lɛft, ən ɪz bɛli fɛlt əz i hæd bɪn biɾən wɪð ə bɔɹd. hi hæd pɹɑməs ðɛm. hi siz hoʊld ə seɪɾɪn əloʊn ɪn ɪz bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ, ənwɪlɪŋ tə lɛɾ ivən mɪn si hɪm fɔltɝ əɡɛn. hi kəd kip əɹ seɪf, ət list, sʌmhaʊ, bʌt haʊ kəd ʃi fil seɪf ɪf ʃi sɔ hɪm əbaʊt tə fɔl oʊvɝ? hi hæd tə bi stʃɹɔŋ, fəɹ əɹ seɪk. hi hæd tə bi stʃɹɔŋ, fəɹ ðə wɝld. ðət bʌndəl ʌv ɪmoʊʃənz ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd ðət wɑz ɑlɑnə ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm ə ðə kɑst ə kɛɹləsnəs. ɹaɪt ðɛn, ɑlɑnə wɑz sʌlkɪŋ. ʃi mʌst əv pʊʃt ə waɪz wʌn tu fɑɹ, kəz ɪf ʃi wɑz sɪɾɪŋ, ʃi wɑz sɪɾɪŋ dʒɪnʒɝli.

Rand prepared carefully, dressing in the green coat again, sending Min with messages for the Maidens to carry. At least they would still do that. His ribs ached almost as much on his right side as the wounds did on his left, and his belly felt as he had been beaten with a board. He had promised them. He seized hold of saidin alone in his bedchamber, unwilling to let even Min see him falter again. He could keep her safe, at least, somehow, but how could she feel safe if she saw him about to fall over? He had to be strong, for her sake. He had to be strong, for the world. That bundle of emotions in the back of his head that was Alanna reminded him of the cost of carelessness. Right then, Alanna was sulking. She must have pushed a Wise One too far, because if she was sitting, she was sitting gingerly.

"aɪ stɪl θɪŋk ðɪs ɪz lunəsi, ɹænd ælθɹ," mɪn sɛɾ əz i pleɪs ðə kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz kɛɹfəli ɑn ɪz hɛd. hi dɪd nɑt wɑn ðoʊz taɪni bleɪdz tə dʒɹɔ blʌɾ əɡɛn naʊ. "ɑɹ jə lɪsnɪŋ tə mi? wɛl, ɪf jə ɪntɛn tə ɡoʊ θɹu wɪð ɪt, aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ wɪð ju. jə ədmɪɾəd jə nid mi, ən jəl nid mi mɔɹ ðən ɛvɝ fəɹ ðɪs!" ʃi wɑz ɪn fʊl fɪɡ, fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps, fʊt tæpɪŋ, aɪz ɔl bʌt ɡloʊɪŋ.

"I still think this is lunacy, Rand al'Thor," Min said as he placed the Crown of Swords carefully on his head. He did not want those tiny blades to draw blood again now. "Are you listening to me? Well, if you intend to go through with it, I'm going with you. You admitted you need me, and you'll need me more than ever for this!" She was in full fig, fists on her hips, foot tapping, eyes all but glowing.

"jɔɹ steɪɪŋ hɪɹ," hi toʊld əɹ fɝmli. hi wɑz stɪl nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌɾ i ɪntɛndəd tə du, nɑt fʊli, ən i dɪd nɑt wɑn əɹ tə si hɪm stʌmbəl. hi wɑz vɛɹi əfɹeɪɾ i maɪt stʌmbəl. hi ɪkspɛktəɾ ən ɑɹɡjəmənt, ðoʊ.

"You're staying here," he told her firmly. He was still not sure what he intended to do, not fully, and he did not want her to see him stumble. He was very afraid he might stumble. He expected an argument, though.

ʃi fɹaʊn ət hɪm, ən əɹ fʊt stɑp tæpɪŋ. ði æŋɡɹi laɪɾ ɪn əɹ aɪz feɪɾəd ɪndə wɝi ðət vænɪʃt ɪn ə twɪŋkəlɪŋ. "wɛl, aɪ səpoʊz jəɹ oʊld ɪnʌf tə kɹɔs ðə steɪbliɑɹd wɪθaʊt jəɹ hæn hɛld, ʃifɝɾɝ. bɪsaɪdz, aɪm fɔlɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪn maɪ ɹɛɾɪŋ."

She frowned at him, and her foot stopped tapping. The angry light in her eyes faded into worry that vanished in a twinkling. "Well, I suppose you're old enough to cross the stableyard without your hand held, sheepherder. Besides, I am falling behind in my reading."

dʒɹɑpɪŋ ɪndə wʌn ə ðə tɔl ɡɪldɪd tʃɛɹz, ʃi foʊldəɾ əɹ lɛɡz bɪniθ əɹ ən pɪkt ʌp ðə bʊk ʃi hæd bɪn ɹɛɾɪŋ wən i keɪm ɪn. ɪn moʊməns, ʃi sim toʊɾəli ɪnɡɹoʊst ɪn ðə peɪdʒ bɪfɔɹ hɝ.

Dropping into one of the tall gilded chairs, she folded her legs beneath her and picked up the book she had been reading when he came in. In moments, she seemed totally engrossed in the page before her.

ɹænd nɑɾəd. ðət wɑz wʌɾ i wɑntəd; hɝ hɪɹ, ən seɪf. stɪl, ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə fɝɡɛɾ ɪm soʊ kəmplitli.

Rand nodded. That was what he wanted; her here, and safe. Still, she did not have to forget him so completely.

ðəɹ wɝ sɪks meɪɾənz skwɑɾɪŋ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ aʊtsaɪɾ ɪz dɔɹ. ðeɪ stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm flæt-aɪd, nɑt spikɪŋ, nændɛɹəz ɡeɪz ðə flæɾəst ʌv ɔl. ðoʊ soʊmɑɹə ən nəsɹ keɪm kloʊs. hi θɔt nəsɹ wɑz ʃeɪɾoʊ; hi wəɾ əv tə kip ə hɑɹɾ aɪ ɑn hɝ.

There were six Maidens squatting in the hallway outside his door. They stared at him flat-eyed, not speaking, Nandera's gaze the flattest of all. Though Somara and Nesair came close. He thought Nesair was Shaido; he would have to keep a hard eye on her.

ði æʃəmən wɝ weɪɾɪŋ, tu - luz θɝɪn mʌɾɝd dɑɹkli ʌv kɪlɪŋ ɪn ɹændz hɛd - ɔl bʌt nɛɹɪʃmə wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən ɑn ðɛɹ kɑlɝz əz wɛl əz ðə sɔɹd. kɝtli, hi ɔɹɾɝd nɛɹɪʃmə tə stænd ɡɑɹɾ ɑn ɪz əpɑɹtməns, ən ðə mæn səluɾəd ʃɑɹpli, ðoʊz dɑɹk tu-bɪɡ aɪz siɪŋ tu mʌtʃ, feɪnli əkjuzɪŋ. ɹænd dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðə meɪɾənz wəd teɪk aʊt ðɛɹ dɪsplɛʒɝ ɑn mɪn, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt teɪkɪŋ ɛni tʃænsəz. laɪt, hi hæd toʊl nɛɹɪʃmə ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə tʃɹæps i hæd woʊvən ɪn ðə stoʊn wən i sɛn ðə mæn tə fɛtʃ kælændɝ. ðə mæn wɑz ɪmædʒənɪŋ θɪŋz. bɝn hɪm, bʌt ðət hæd bɪn ə mæd ɹɪsk tə teɪk.

The Asha'man were waiting, too - Lews Therin muttered darkly of killing in Rand's head - all but Narishma with the Dragon on their collars as well as the Sword. Curtly, he ordered Narishma to stand guard on his apartments, and the man saluted sharply, those dark too-big eyes seeing too much, faintly accusing. Rand did not think the Maidens would take out their displeasure on Min, but he was not taking any chances. Light, he had told Narishma everything about the traps he had woven in the Stone when he sent the man to fetch Callandor. The man was imagining things. Burn him, but that had been a mad risk to take.

oʊnli mædmən nɛvɝ tʃɹʌst. luz θɝɪn saʊndəɾ əmjuzd. ən kwaɪt mæd. ðə wunz ɪn ɹændz saɪd θɹɑbd; ðeɪ sim tə ɹɛzəneɪt wɪð itʃ ʌðɝ ɪn dɪstən peɪn.

Only madmen never trust. Lews Therin sounded amused. And quite mad. The wounds in Rand's side throbbed; they seemed to resonate with each other in distant pain.

"ʃoʊ mi wɛɹ tə faɪn kædzueɪn," hi kəmændəd. nændɛɹə ɹoʊz smuðli tə hɝ fiɾ ən stɑɹɾəd ɔf wɪθaʊɾ ə bækwɝd ɡlæns. hi fɑloʊd, ən ði ʌðɝz fɛl ɪn bɪhaɪn hɪm, dæʃivə ən flɪn, mɔɹ ən hɑpwəl. hi ɡeɪv əm heɪsti ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz əz ðeɪ wɔkt. flɪn, ʌv ɔl pipəl, tʃɹaɪd tə pɹoʊtɛst, bʌt ɹænd bɔɹ ɪm daʊn; ðɪs wɑz noʊ taɪm fəɹ kweɪlɪŋ. ðə ɡɹɪzəld wʌntaɪm ɡɑɹdzmæn wɑz ðə læst ɹænd hæɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪɾ ʌv. mɔɹ əɹ hɑpwəl, pɝhæps. ɪf noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪɡzækli dui-aɪd, ðeɪ wɝ stɪl jʌŋ ɪnʌf tə liv ðɛɹ ɹeɪzɝz dʒɹaɪ əz mɛni deɪz əz wɛt. bʌt nɑt flɪn. nændɛɹəz sɑf buts meɪd noʊ saʊnd; ðɛɹ fʊtstɛps ɹɪvɝbɝeɪɾɪd fɹəm ðə haɪ skwɛɹ-vɔltəd silɪŋ, tʃeɪsɪŋ əweɪ ɛvɹiwʌn wɪð ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv ə ɹizən fəɹ fɪɹ. hɪz wunz pʌlsd.

"Show me where to find Cadsuane," he commanded. Nandera rose smoothly to her feet and started off without a backward glance. He followed, and the others fell in behind him, Dashiva and Flinn, Morr and Hopwil. He gave them hasty instructions as they walked. Flinn, of all people, tried to protest, but Rand bore him down; this was no time for quailing. The grizzled onetime Guardsman was the last Rand had expected it of. Morr or Hopwil, perhaps. If no longer exactly dewy-eyed, they were still young enough to leave their razors dry as many days as wet. But not Flinn. Nandera's soft boots made no sound; their footsteps reverberated from the high square-vaulted ceiling, chasing away everyone with the shadow of a reason for fear. His wounds pulsed.

ɛvɹi læs pɝsən ɪn ðə sʌn pæləs nu ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɑn saɪt baɪ naʊ, ən ðeɪ nu hu ðə blæk-koʊɾəd mɛn wɝ, tu. blæk-lɪvɹid sɝvəns meɪd dip baʊz əɹ kɝtsiz, ən hɝid tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz saɪt. moʊs noʊbəlz wɝ ɔlmoʊst əz kwɪk tə pʊt dɪstəns bɪtwin ðɛmsɛlvz ən faɪv mɛn u kəd tʃænəl, ɡoʊɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ wɪð pɝpəs ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz. eɪlɪl wɑtʃt əm pæs wɪð ən ənɹiɾəbəl ɪkspɹɛʃən. ænɑiɛlə sɪmpɝd, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt wən ɹænd ɡlæns bæk, ʃi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ æftɝ ɪm wɪð ə feɪs tə mætʃ nændɛɹəz. bɝtoʊm smaɪld əz i meɪɾ ɪz lɛɡ, ə dɑɹk smaɪl wɪð niðɝ mɝθ nɔɹ plɛʒɝ ɪn ɪt.

Every last person in the Sun Palace knew the Dragon Reborn on sight by now, and they knew who the black-coated men were, too. Black-liveried servants made deep bows or curtsies, and hurried to get out of his sight. Most nobles were almost as quick to put distance between themselves and five men who could channel, going somewhere with purpose on their faces. Ailil watched them pass with an unreadable expression. Anaiyella simpered, of course, but when Rand glanced back, she was staring after him with a face to match Nandera's. Bertome smiled as he made his leg, a dark smile with neither mirth nor pleasure in it.

nændɛɹə dɪd nɑt spik ivən wən ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðɛɹ dɛstəneɪʃən, mɪɹli pɔɪntəd tə ə kloʊz dɔɹ wɪð wʌn ə hɝ spɪɹz, tɝn ɑn əɹ hil, ən stʃɹoʊd bæk ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæd kʌm. ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn wɪθaʊɾ ə sɪŋɡəl meɪɾən tə ɡɑɹd hɪm. dɪd ðeɪ θɪŋk fɔɹ æʃəmən ɪnʌf tə kip ɪm seɪf? əɹ wɑz əɹ dɪpɑɹtʃɝ ənʌðɝ saɪn ə dɪsplɛʒɝ?

Nandera did not speak even when they reached their destination, merely pointed to a closed door with one of her spears, turned on her heel, and strode back the way they had come. The Car'a'carn without a single Maiden to guard him. Did they think four Asha'man enough to keep him safe? Or was her departure another sign of displeasure?

"du wʌɾ aɪ toʊl ju," ɹænd sɛd.

"Do what I told you," Rand said.

dæʃivə ɡeɪv ə dʒɝk əz ɪf kʌmɪŋ bæk tə hɪmsɛlf, ðən siz ðə sɔɹs. ðə waɪd dɔɹ, kɑɹvd ɪn vɝɾɪkəl laɪnz, swʌŋ oʊpən wɪð ə bæŋ ɑn ə floʊ ʌv ɛɹ. ði ʌðɝ θɹi tʊk hoʊld ə seɪɾɪn ən fɑloʊd dæʃivə ɪn, feɪsəz ɡɹɪm.

Dashiva gave a jerk as if coming back to himself, then seized the Source. The wide door, carved in vertical lines, swung open with a bang on a flow of Air. The other three took hold of saidin and followed Dashiva in, faces grim.

"ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," dæʃivəz vɔɪs saʊndəd laʊd, mæɡnəfaɪd slaɪtli baɪ ðə paʊɝ, "ðə kɪŋ ʌv ɪljən, ðə lɔɹɾ ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, kʌmz tə si ðə wʊmən, kædzueɪn məleɪdʒɹɪn."

"The Dragon Reborn," Dashiva's voice sounded loud, magnified slightly by the Power, "the King of Illian, the Lord of the Morning, comes to see the woman, Cadsuane Melaidhrin."

ɹænd stɛpt ɪn, stændɪŋ tɔl. hi dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ði ʌðɝ wiv dæʃivə hæd kɹieɪɾəd, bʌt ði ɛɹ sim tə hʌm wɪð mɛnəs, ə sɛns ə sʌmθɪŋ ɪnɛksɝəbəl əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ, dʒɹɔɪŋ ɛvɝ nɪɹɝ.

Rand stepped in, standing tall. He did not recognize the other weave Dashiva had created, but the air seemed to hum with menace, a sense of something inexorable approaching, drawing ever nearer.

"aɪ sɛn fəɹ ju, kædzueɪn," ɹænd sɛd. hi dɪd nɑt juz wivz. hɪz vɔɪs wɑz hɑɹɾ ən flæɾ ɪnʌf wɪθaʊɾ eɪd.

"I sent for you, Cadsuane," Rand said. He did not use weaves. His voice was hard and flat enough without aid.

ðə ɡɹin sɪstɝ i ɹɪmɛmbɝd sæt bɪsaɪɾ ə smɔl teɪbəl wɪð ən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi hup ɪn əɹ hænz, ən oʊpən bæskəɾ ɑn ðə pɑlɪʃt teɪbəltɑp spɪlɪŋ aʊt sknz ə bɹaɪt θɹɛd fɹəm səm ʌv ɪts mɛni kəmpɑɹtməns. ʃi wɑz ɪɡzækli əz i ɹɪmɛmbɝd. ðət stʃɹɔŋ feɪs tɑp baɪ ən aɪɝn-ɡɹeɪ bʌn dɛkɝeɪɾəd wɪð smɔl dæŋɡəlɪŋ ɡoʊldən fɪʃ ən bɝdz, stɑɹz ən munz. ðoʊz dɑɹk aɪz, simɪŋ ɔlmoʊs blæk ɪn əɹ fɛɹ feɪs. kul, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ aɪz. luz θɝɪn ɡeɪv ə weɪl ən flɛɾ ət ðə saɪɾ ə hɝ.

The Green sister he remembered sat beside a small table with an embroidery hoop in her hands, an opened basket on the polished tabletop spilling out skeins of bright thread from some of its many compartments. She was exactly as he remembered. That strong face topped by an iron-gray bun decorated with small dangling golden fish and birds, stars and moons. Those dark eyes, seeming almost black in her fair face. Cool, considering eyes. Lews Therin gave a wail and fled at the sight of her.

"wɛl," ʃi sɛd, sɛɾɪŋ ði ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi hup ɑn ðə teɪbəl, "aɪ mʌst seɪ aɪv sin bɛɾɝ wɪθaʊt peɪɪŋ. wɪð ɔl aɪv bɪn hɪɹɪŋ əbaʊt ju, bɔɪ, ðə list aɪ ɪkspɛktəd wɑz pilz ə θʌndɝ, tʃɹʌmpəts ɪn ðə hɛvənz, flæʃɪŋ laɪts ɪn ðə skaɪ." kɑmli, ʃi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ðə faɪv stoʊn-feɪs mɛn u kəd tʃænəl, wɪtʃ ʃʊɾə bɪn ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ flɪntʃ. kɑmli, ʃi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. "aɪ hoʊp wʌn ə jə ɪz ət list ɡoʊɪŋ tə dʒʌɡəl," ʃi sɛd. "ɔɹ it faɪɝ? aɪv ɔlweɪz ɛndʒɔɪd wɑtʃɪŋ ɡlimən it faɪɝ."

"Well," she said, setting the embroidery hoop on the table, "I must say I've seen better without paying. With all I've been hearing about you, boy, the least I expected was peals of thunder, trumpets in the heavens, flashing lights in the sky." Calmly, she regarded the five stone-faced men who could channel, which should have been enough to make any Aes Sedai flinch. Calmly, she regarded the Dragon Reborn. "I hope one of you is at least going to juggle," she said. "Or eat fire? I've always enjoyed watching gleemen eat fire."

flɪn bɑɹkt ə læf bɪfɔɹ kætʃɪŋ hɪmsɛlf, ən ivən ðən ɹeɪkt ə hæn θɹu hɪz fɹɪnʒ ə hɛɹ ən sim tə bi stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ wɪð əmjuzmənt. mɔɹ ən hɑpwəl ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks boʊθ pʌzəld ən mɔɹ ðən ə lɪɾəl aʊtʃɹeɪdʒd. dæʃivə smaɪld ənplɛzənli, ən ðə wiv i wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ɡɹu stʃɹɔŋɝ, əntɪl ɹænd fɛlt əz ɪf i wɑntəd tə lʊk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ tə si wʌt wɑz ɹʌʃɪŋ təwɔɹd hɪm.

Flinn barked a laugh before catching himself, and even then raked a hand through his fringe of hair and seemed to be struggling with amusement. Morr and Hopwil exchanged looks both puzzled and more than a little outraged. Dashiva smiled unpleasantly, and the weave he was holding grew stronger, until Rand felt as if he wanted to look over his shoulder to see what was rushing toward him.

"ɪɾ ɪz ɪnʌf ðət jə noʊ aɪm u aɪ æm," ɹænd toʊl hɝ. "dæʃivə, ɔl ə ju, weɪɾ aʊtsaɪd."

"It is enough that you know I am who I am," Rand told her. "Dashiva, all of you, wait outside."

dæʃivə oʊpən ɪz maʊθ əz ɪf tə pɹoʊtɛst. ðət hæd nɑt bɪn pɑɹɾ ə ɹændz ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ nɑt gɑnə oʊvɝeɪ ðə wʊmən, nɑt ðɪs weɪ. ðə mæn wɛnt, ðoʊ, mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf. hɑpwəl ən mɔɹ æktʃəli  stɛpt aʊɾ iɡɝli, wɪð saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlænsɪz ət kædzueɪn. flɪn wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn tə meɪk ə dɪɡnəfaɪd wɪðdʒɹɔəl, ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪz lɪmp. ən i stɪl simd əmjuzd!

Dashiva opened his mouth as if to protest. That had not been part of Rand's instructions, but they were not going to overawe the woman, not this way. The man went, though, muttering to himself. Hopwil and Morr actually stepped out eagerly, with sidelong glances at Cadsuane. Flinn was the only one to make a dignified withdrawal, in spite of his limp. And he still seemed amused!

ɹænd tʃænəld, ən ə hɛvi, lɛpɝd-kɑɹv tʃɛɹ floʊɾəd ɪndə ði ɛɹ fɹəm ɪts pleɪs baɪ ðə wɔl, spɪnɪŋ ɛn oʊvɝ ɛn ɪn sʌmɝsɔls bɪfɔɹ sɛɾəlɪŋ laɪk ə fɛðɝ ɪn fɹʌn ə kædzueɪn. ət ðə seɪm taɪm, ə hɛvi sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝ dʒɹɪftəɾ ʌp fɹəm ə lɔŋ, dʒɹeɪp teɪbəl əkɹɔs ðə ɹum, meɪkɪŋ ə laʊd pɪŋ əz ɪt wɑz sʌɾənli hiɾəd; stim ɡʌʃt fɹəm ðə tɑp, ən ɪt tɪpt oʊvɝ, wɝlɪŋ ɹaʊn ən ɹaʊn laɪk ə sloʊ tɑp, əz ə sɪlvɝ kʌp dɑɹɾɪd ʌp tə nitli kætʃ ðə dɑɹk pɔɹɪŋ.

Rand channeled, and a heavy, leopard-carved chair floated into the air from its place by the wall, spinning end over end in somersaults before settling like a feather in front of Cadsuane. At the same time, a heavy silver pitcher drifted up from a long, draped table across the room, making a loud ping as it was suddenly heated; steam gushed from the top, and it tipped over, whirling round and round like a slow top, as a silver cup darted up to neatly catch the dark pouring.

"tu hɑt, aɪ θɪŋk," ɹænd sɛd, ən ðə ɡlæs keɪsməns lɛp fɹəm ðə tɔl, nɛɹoʊ wɪndoʊz. snoʊfleɪks bɪloʊɾ ɪn ɑn ən aɪsi blæst, ən ðə kʌp sɔɹɾ aʊt θɹu wʌn ə ðə wɪndoʊz, sɔɹd bæk əɡɛn, stʃɹeɪt tə hɪz hæn əz i sæt hɪmsɛlf. lɛɾ əɹ si haʊ kɑm ʃi kəd steɪ wɪð ə mædmæn stɛɹɪŋ ət hɝ. ðə dɑɹk lɪkwəd wɑz ti, tu stʃɹɔŋ æftɝ ɪz bɔɪlɪŋ, ən bɪɾɝ ɪnʌf tə sɛɾ ɪz tiθ ɑn ɛdʒ. bʌt ðə wɔɹmθ wɑz dʒʌst ɹaɪt. hɪz skɪn pɛbəld ɪn ðə ɡʌsts haʊlɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɹum ən flæpɪŋ tæpəstʃɹiz əɡɛns ðə wɔlz, bʌɾ ɪn ðə vɔɪd, ðət wɑz fɑɹ əweɪ, sʌmwʌn ɛlsəz skɪn.

"Too hot, I think," Rand said, and the glassed casements leaped from the tall, narrow windows. Snowflakes billowed in on an icy blast, and the cup soared out through one of the windows, soared back again, straight to his hand as he sat himself. Let her see how calm she could stay with a madman staring at her. The dark liquid was tea, too strong after his boiling, and bitter enough to set his teeth on edge. But the warmth was just right. His skin pebbled in the gusts howling into the room and flapping tapestries against the walls, but in the Void, that was far away, someone else's skin.

"ðə lɔɹəl kɹaʊn ɪz pɹɪɾiɝ ðən sʌm," kædzueɪn sɛd wɪð ə feɪn smaɪl. hɝ hɛɹ ɔɹnəməns sweɪd wɛnɛvɝ ðə wɪn ɹoʊz, ən smɔl wɪsps fleɪld əbaʊɾ əɹ bʌn, bʌt ði oʊnli noʊɾəs ʃi tʊk wɑz tə kætʃ əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi hup dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ɪt wɑz bloʊn fɹəm ðə teɪbəl. "aɪ pɹəfɝ ðət neɪm. bʌt jə kæn ɪkspɛk mi tə bi ɪmpɹɛs baɪ kɹaʊnz. aɪv pæɾəld ðə bɑɾəmz ə tu ɹeɪnɪŋ kɪŋz ən θɹi kwinz. nɑt sɪɾɪŋ ɹulɝz, jə ʌndɝstænd, wʌns aɪ wɑz dʌn wɪð ðɛm, nɑt fəɹ ə deɪ əɹ soʊ, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd ɡɛt ðɛɹ ətɛnʃən. jə kən si waɪ kɹaʊnz doʊn ɪmpɹɛs mi, ðoʊ."

"The Laurel Crown is prettier than some," Cadsuane said with a faint smile. Her hair ornaments swayed whenever the wind rose, and small wisps flailed about her bun, but the only notice she took was to catch her embroidery hoop just before it was blown from the table. "I prefer that name. But you can't expect me to be impressed by crowns. I've paddled the bottoms of two reigning kings and three queens. Not sitting rulers, you understand, once I was done with them, not for a day or so, but it did get their attention. You can see why crowns don't impress me, though."

ɹænd izd ɪz dʒɔ. ɡɹaɪndɪŋ ɪz tiθ wəd nɑt hɛlp. hi waɪɾənd ɪz aɪz, hoʊpɪŋ i lʊkt ɪnseɪn ɪnstɛɾ ə sɪmpli fjʊɹiəs. "moʊst ɛɛs sədaɪ əvɔɪd ðə sʌn pæləs," hi toʊl hɝ. "ɪksɛp fəɹ ðoʊz u hæv swɔɹn fiəlti tə mi. ən ðoʊz aɪ hoʊl pɹɪznɝ." laɪt, wʌt wɑz i tə də wɪð ðoʊz? əz lɔŋ əz ðə waɪz wʌnz kɛpt əm aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛɹ, ɔl wɑz wɛl ɪnʌf.

Rand eased his jaw. Grinding his teeth would not help. He widened his eyes, hoping he looked insane instead of simply furious. "Most Aes Sedai avoid the Sun Palace," he told her. "Except for those who have sworn fealty to me. And those I hold prisoner." Light, what was he to do with those? As long as the Wise Ones kept them out of his hair, all was well enough.

"ði il sim tə θɪŋk aɪ ʃəd kʌm ən ɡoʊ əz aɪ pliz," ʃi sɛɾ æbsənli, aɪɪŋ ðə hup ɪn əɹ hæn əz ɪf θɪŋkɪŋ ə teɪkɪŋ ʌp əɹ niɾəl əɡɛn. "ə mæɾɝ ə səm tʃɹaɪflɪŋ hɛlp aɪ ɡeɪv səm bɔɪ əɹ ʌðɝ. ðoʊ waɪ ɛniwʌn bʌɾ ɪz mʌðɝ ʃəd θɪŋk ɪm wɝθ ɪt, aɪ kən hɑɹdli seɪ."

"The Aiel seem to think I should come and go as I please," she said absently, eyeing the hoop in her hand as if thinking of taking up her needle again. "A matter of some trifling help I gave some boy or other. Though why anyone but his mother should think him worth it, I can hardly say."

ɹænd meɪɾ ənʌðɝ ɛfɝt nɑt tə ɡɹaɪn ɪz tiθ. ðə wʊmən hæd seɪvd ɪz laɪf. hɝ ən dɑɹnɝ flɪn bɪtwin ðɛm, ən plɛnti ʌv ʌðɝz ɪn ðə bɑɹɡən, mɪn əmʌŋ ðɛm. bʌɾ i stɪl oʊd kædzueɪn sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ ðæt. bɝn hɝ. "aɪ wɑn jə tə bi maɪ ædvaɪzɝ. aɪm kɪŋ ʌv ɪljən naʊ, ən kɪŋz əv ɛɛs sədaɪ ædvaɪzɝz."

Rand made another effort not to grind his teeth. The woman had saved his life. Her and Darner Flinn between them, and plenty of others in the bargain, Min among them. But he still owed Cadsuane something for that. Burn her. "I want you to be my advisor. I'm King of Illian now, and kings have Aes Sedai advisors."

ʃi ɡeɪv ɪz kɹaʊn ə dɪsmɪsɪv ɡlæns. "sɝɾənli nɑt. ən ædvaɪzɝ əz tə stæn ən wɑtʃ əɹ tʃɑɹdʒ meɪk ə mʌɾəl mʌtʃ tu ɔfən tə sut mi. ʃi ɔlsoʊ hæz tə teɪk ɔɹɾɝz, sʌmθɪŋ aɪm pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli bæɾ æt. woʊn sʌmwʌn ɛls du? ɑlɑnə, pɝhæps?"

She gave his crown a dismissive glance. "Certainly not. An advisor has to stand and watch her charge make a muddle much too often to suit me. She also has to take orders, something I am particularly bad at. Won't someone else do? Alanna, perhaps?"

dɪspaɪt hɪmsɛlf, ɹænd sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪt. dɪd ʃi noʊ əbaʊt ðə bɑnd? mɛɹænə hæd sɛɾ ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə kip ɛniθɪŋ fɹəm hɝ. noʊ; hi kəd wɝi leɪɾɝ əbaʊt haʊ mʌtʃ ɪz "feɪθfəl" ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ tɛlɪŋ kædzueɪn. laɪt, hi wɪʃt mɪn kəd bi ɹɔŋ fəɹ wʌns. bʌɾ i wəd bɪliv hɪmsɛlf bɹiðɪŋ wɔɾɝ, fɝst. "aɪ . . ." hi kəd nɑt meɪk hɪmsɛlf tɛl əɹ ðəɾ i niɾəd hɝ. noʊ hɔltɝ! "wʌɾ ɪf jə dɪdn əv tə swɛɹ ɛni oʊðz?"

Despite himself, Rand sat up straight. Did she know about the bond? Merana had said it was hard to keep anything from her. No; he could worry later about how much his "faithful" Aes Sedai were telling Cadsuane. Light, he wished Min could be wrong for once. But he would believe himself breathing water, first. "I . . ." He could not make himself tell her that he needed her. No halter! "What if you didn't have to swear any oaths?"

"aɪ səpoʊz ðət maɪt wɝk," ʃi sɛd daʊtfəli, piɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ kɝst stɪtʃɝi. hɝ aɪz ɹoʊz tə hɪz. kənsɪɾɝɪŋ. "ju saʊnd . . . ənizi. aɪ doʊn laɪk tə tɛl ə mæn hiz əfɹeɪɾ ivən wən hiz ɹizən tə bi. ənizi oʊvɝ ə sɪstɝ jə hævən tɝn ɪndə ə teɪm læpdɔɡ snɛɹɪŋ jə ɪn səm fæʃən? lemi si. aɪ kən meɪk jə ə fju pɹɑməsəz; pɝhæps ðəl sɛt jəɹ maɪn ət ɹɛst. aɪ ɪkspɛk jə tə lɪsən, ʌv kɔɹs - meɪk mi weɪs maɪ bɹɛθ, ən jəl jɛlp fəɹ ɪt - bʌɾ aɪ woʊn meɪk jə də wʌɾ aɪ wɑnt. aɪ woʊn tɑlɝeɪɾ ɛniwʌn laɪɪŋ tə mi, sɝɾənli - ðæts ənʌðɝ θɪŋ jəl faɪn dɪsaɪɾədli ənkʌmftəɹbəl - bʌɾ aɪ doʊn ɪkspɛk jə tə tɛl mi ðə dipəs jɝnɪŋz ə jəɹ hɑɹt, iðɝ. oʊ, jɛs. wʌtɛvɝ aɪ du, ɪɾəl bi fəɹ jəɹ oʊn ɡʊd; nɑt maɪn, nɑt ðə ɡʊɾ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, jʊɹz. naʊ, dʌz ðəɾ iz jəɹ fɪɹz? pɑɹɾən mi. jəɹ əniz."

"I suppose that might work," she said doubtfully, peering at her cursed stitchery. Her eyes rose to his. Considering. "You sound . . . uneasy. I don't like to tell a man he's afraid even when he has reason to be. Uneasy over a sister you haven't turned into a tame lapdog snaring you in some fashion? Let me see. I can make you a few promises; perhaps they will set your mind at rest. I expect you to listen, of course - make me waste my breath, and you'll yelp for it - but I won't make you do what I want. I won't tolerate anyone lying to me, certainly - that's another thing you'll find decidedly uncomfortable - but I don't expect you to tell me the deepest yearnings of your heart, either. Oh, yes. Whatever I do, it will be for your own good; not mine, not the good of the White Tower, yours. Now, does that ease your fears? Pardon me. Your unease."

wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ i wɑz səpoʊz tə læf, ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət hɝ. "du ðeɪ titʃ jə haʊ tə də ðæt?" hi dɪmændəd. "meɪk ə pɹɑməs saʊn ə θɹɛt, aɪ min."

Wondering whether he was supposed to laugh, Rand stared at her. "Do they teach you how to do that?" he demanded. "Make a promise sound a threat, I mean."

"oʊ, aɪ si. jə wɑn ɹulz. moʊs bɔɪz du, wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ seɪ. vɛɹi wɛl. lemi si. aɪ kænɑɾ əbaɪɾ ɪnsɪvɪləɾi. soʊ jəl bi pɹɑpɝli sɪvəl tə mi, tə maɪ fɹɛnz, ən maɪ ɡɛsts. ðəɾ ɪnkludz nɑt tʃænəlɪŋ ət ðɛm, ɪn keɪs jə hævənt ɡɛst, ən hoʊldɪŋ jəɹ tɛmpɝ, wɪtʃ aɪ ʌndɝstæn ɪz mɛmɝəbəl. ɪɾ ɔlsoʊ teɪks ɪn jəɹ . . . kəmpænjənz ɪn ðoʊz blæk koʊts. ə pɪɾi ɪf aɪ hæd tə spæŋk jə fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ wʌn ə ðɛm dɪd. dʌz ðət səfaɪs? aɪ kən meɪk mɔɹ, ɪf jə nid ðɛm."

"Oh, I see. You want rules. Most boys do, whatever they say. Very well. Let me see. I cannot abide incivility. So you will be properly civil to me, to my friends, and my guests. That includes not channeling at them, in case you haven't guessed, and holding your temper, which I understand is memorable. It also takes in your . . . companions in those black coats. A pity if I had to spank you for something one of them did. Does that suffice? I can make more, if you need them."

ɹænd sɛɾ ɪz kʌp daʊn bɪsaɪd ðə tʃɛɹ. ðə ti hæd ɡɔn koʊld əz wɛl əz bɪɾɝ. snoʊ wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə paɪl ʌp ɪn dʒɹɪfs bɪniθ ðə wɪndoʊz. "ɪm ðə wʌn huz səpoʊz tə ɡoʊ mæd, ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt jə ɔlɹɛɾi ɑɹ." ɹaɪzɪŋ, hi stʃɹoʊd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ.

Rand set his cup down beside the chair. The tea had gone cold as well as bitter. Snow was beginning to pile up in drifts beneath the windows. "I'm the one who's supposed to go mad, Aes Sedai, but you already are." Rising, he strode for the door.

"aɪ də hoʊp jə hævən tʃɹaɪd tə juz kælændɝ," ʃi sɛd kəmpleɪsənli bɪhaɪn hɪm. "aɪ hæv hɝɾ ɪts vænɪʃt fɹəm ðə stoʊn. jə mænədʒ tə ɪskeɪp wʌns, bʌt jə maɪt nɑt twaɪs."

"I do hope you haven't tried to use Callandor," she said complacently behind him. "I have heard it's vanished from the Stone. You managed to escape once, but you might not twice."

hi stɑpt ʃɔɹt, lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ðə wʊmən wɑz pʊʃɪŋ ðət blʌɾi niɾəl θɹu ðə klɔθ stʃɹɛtʃt ɑn əɹ hup! ðə wɪnd ɡʌstɪd, swɝlɪŋ snoʊ ɝaʊn hɝ, ən ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən lɪft əɹ hɛd. "wʌt dʒju min, ɪskeɪp?"

He stopped short, looking over his shoulder. The woman was pushing that bloody needle through the cloth stretched on her hoop! The wind gusted, swirling snow around her, and she did not even lift her head. "What do you mean, escape?"

"wʌt?" ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk ʌp. "oʊ. vɛɹi fju ivən ɪn ðə taʊɝ nu wʌt kælændɝ ɪz bɪfɔɹ jə dʒɹu ɪt, bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ θɪŋz hɪɾən ɪn mʌsti kɔɹnɝz ə ðə taʊɝ laɪbɹɛɹi. aɪ wɛn ɹʌmɪdʒɪŋ səm jɪɹz əɡoʊ, wən aɪ fɝs hæd ðə səspɪʃən jə maɪt bi sʌklɪŋ ət jəɹ mʌðɝz bɹɛst. dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ aɪ dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ɡoʊ bæk ɪndə ɹitaɪɝmənt. beɪbz ɑɹ mɛsi θɪŋz, ən aɪ kəd nɑt si haʊ tə faɪn jə bɪfɔɹ jə stɑp dʒɹɪpɪŋ ət wʌn ɛn əɹ ði ʌðɝ."

"What?" She did not look up. "Oh. Very few even in the Tower knew what Callandor is before you drew it, but there are surprising things hidden in musty corners of the Tower Library. I went rummaging some years ago, when I first had the suspicion you might be suckling at your mother's breast. Just before I decided to go back into retirement. Babes are messy things, and I could not see how to find you before you stopped dripping at one end or the other."

"wʌt dʒju min?" hi dɪmændəd ɹʌfli.

"What do you mean?" he demanded roughly.

kædzueɪn lʊkt ʌp ðɛn, ən wɪð əɹ hɛɹ flʌŋ əbaʊɾ ən snoʊ sɛɾəlɪŋ ɑn əɹ dʒɹɛs, ʃi lʊkt ə kwin. "aɪ toʊl jə aɪ kænɑɾ əbaɪɾ ɪnsɪvɪləɾi. ɪf jə æsk fəɹ maɪ hɛlp əɡɛn, aɪ ɪkspɛk jə tə æsk pəlaɪtli. ən əl ɪkspɛkt ən əpɑlədʒi fəɹ jəɹ bɪheɪvjɝ tədeɪ!"

Cadsuane looked up then, and with her hair flung about and snow settling on her dress, she looked a queen. "I told you I cannot abide incivility. If you ask for my help again, I expect you to ask politely. And I will expect an apology for your behavior today!"

"wʌt dʒju min əbaʊt kælændɝ?"

"What do you mean about Callandor?"

"ɪɾ ɪz flɔd," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd kɝtli, "lækɪŋ ðə bʌfɝ ðət meɪks ʌðɝ sɑŋɡɹil seɪf tə juz. ən ɪɾ əpɛɹənli mæɡnəfaɪz ðə teɪnt, ɪndusɪŋ waɪlnəs ə ðə maɪnd. soʊ lɔŋ əz ə mæn ɪz juzɪŋ ɪt, ɛniweɪ. ði oʊnli seɪf weɪ fəɹ jə tə juz ðə sɔɹd ðəɾ ɪz nɑɾ ə sɔɹd, ði oʊnli weɪ tə juz ɪt wɪθaʊt ðə ɹɪsk ə kɪlɪŋ jɝsɛlf, əɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə də ðə laɪɾ əloʊn noʊz wʌɾ ɪnsænəɾi, ɪz lɪŋkt wɪð tu wɪmən, ən wʌn ə ðɛm ɡaɪɾɪŋ ðə floʊz."

"It is flawed," she replied curtly, "lacking the buffer that makes other sa'angreal safe to use. And it apparently magnifies the taint, inducing wildness of the mind. So long as a man is using it, anyway. The only safe way for you to use The Sword That Is Not a Sword, the only way to use it without the risk of killing yourself, or trying to do the Light alone knows what insanity, is linked with two women, and one of them guiding the flows."

tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə hʌntʃ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, hi stʃɹoʊɾ əweɪ fɹəm hɝ. soʊ ɪt hæd bɪn nɑt dʒʌs ðə waɪlnəs ə seɪɾɪn ɝaʊn ɛbu dɑɹ ðət hæd kɪld ædli. hi hæd mɝɾɝd ðə mæn ðə moʊmən i sɛnt nɛɹɪʃmə fəɹ ðə θɪŋ.

Trying not to hunch his shoulders, he strode away from her. So it had been not just the wildness of saidin around Ebou Dar that had killed Adley. He had murdered the man the moment he sent Narishma for the thing.

kædzueɪnz vɔɪs pɝsud hɪm. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ, bɔɪ. jə mʌst æsk vɛɹi naɪsli, ən əpɑlədʒaɪz. aɪ maɪɾ ivən əɡɹi, ɪf jəɹ əpɑlədʒi saʊnz tʃɹuli sənsɪɹ."

Cadsuane's voice pursued him. "Remember, boy. You must ask very nicely, and apologize. I might even agree, if your apology sounds truly sincere."

ɹænd bɛɹli hɝd hɝ. hi hæd hoʊp tə juz kælændɝ əɡɛn, hoʊpt ɪt wəd bi stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf. naʊ oʊnli wʌn tʃæns ɹɪmeɪnd, ən ɪt tɛɹəfaɪd hɪm. hi sim tə hɪɹ ənʌðɝ wʊmənz vɔɪs, ə dɛd wʊmənz vɔɪs. jə kəd tʃælənʒ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ.

Rand barely heard her. He had hoped to use Callandor again, hoped it would be strong enough. Now only one chance remained, and it terrified him. He seemed to hear another woman's voice, a dead woman's voice. You could challenge the Creator.


tʃæptɝ twɛntieɪt


CHAPTER 28

kɹɪmsɑnθɝn


Crimsonthorn

ɪt hɑɹdli sim ðə sɛɾɪŋ fəɹ ði ɪksploʊʒən ɪleɪn fɪɹd. hɑɹlən bɹɪdʒ wɑz ə vɪlədʒ ə mɑɾɝət saɪz, wɪð θɹi ɪnz ən ɪnʌf haʊsəz ðət noʊ wʌn hæd tə slip ɪn ə heɪlɔft. wən ɪleɪn ən bɝdʒɪt wɛn daʊnstɛɹz tə ðə kɑmən ɹum ðət mɔɹnɪŋ, mɪstʃɹəs dɪl, ðə ɹaʊn ɪnkipɝ, smaɪld wɔɹmli ən ɔfɝɾ əz mʌtʃ ʌv ə kɝtsi əz əɹ saɪz əlaʊd. ɪt wɑz nɑt dʒʌs ðəɾ ɪleɪn wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ. mɪstʃɹəs dɪl wɑz soʊ pliz ðəɾ əɹ ɪn wɑz fʊl, wʌt wɪð ðə ɹoʊdz snoʊ-pækt, ðət ʃi bɑbd ət nɪɹli ɛvɹiwʌn. ət ðɛɹ ɛntʃɹəns, eɪvinhə heɪstəli ɡʌlp ðə læst ə hɝ bɹɛkfəs bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz, bɹʌʃt ə fju kɹʌmz fɹəm əɹ ɡɹin dʒɹɛs, ən snætʃt ʌp əɹ dɑɹk kloʊk tə dʒɔɪn ðɛm.

It hardly seemed the setting for the explosion Elayne feared. Harlon Bridge was a village of moderate size, with three inns and enough houses that no one had to sleep in a hayloft. When Elayne and Birgitte went downstairs to the common room that morning, Mistress Dill, the round innkeeper, smiled warmly and offered as much of a curtsy as her size allowed. It was not just that Elayne was Aes Sedai. Mistress Dill was so pleased that her inn was full, what with the roads snow-packed, that she bobbed at nearly everyone. At their entrance, Aviendha hastily gulped the last of her breakfast bread and cheese, brushed a few crumbs from her green dress, and snatched up her dark cloak to join them.

aʊtsaɪd, ðə sʌn wɑz dʒʌs pikɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə hɝaɪzən, ə loʊ doʊm ə peɪl jɛloʊ. oʊnli ə fju klaʊdz mɑɹɾ ə bjuɾəfəl blu skaɪ, ən ðeɪ wɝ waɪɾ ən flʌfi, nɑt ðə sɔɹt tə kæɹi snoʊ. ɪt simd ə wʌndɝfəl deɪ fəɹ tʃɹævlɪŋ.

Outside, the sun was just peeking over the horizon, a low dome of pale yellow. Only a few clouds marred a beautiful blue sky, and they were white and fluffy, not the sort to carry snow. It seemed a wonderful day for traveling.

ɪksɛp ðəɾ æɾɪliz wɑz tʃɹæmplɪŋ ə pæθ ʌp ðə snoʊi stʃɹit, ən ðə waɪt-hɛɹd sɪstɝ wɑz dʒɹæɡɪŋ wʌn ə ðə kɪn, ɡæɹiniə ɹoʊsɔɪnd, baɪ hɝ ɑɹm. ɡæɹiniə wɑz ə slɪm-hɪp sɑldəiən u hæd spɛn ðə læs twɛnti jɪɹz əz ə mɝtʃən ɔlðoʊ ʃi lʊkt oʊnli ə fju jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən nɪneɪiv dɪd. nɔɹməli, hɝ stʃɹɔŋli hʊk noʊz ɡeɪv əɹ ə fɔɹsfəl əpɪɹəns, ə wʊmən u wəd meɪk hɑɹd tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ən nɑt bæk əweɪ. naʊ hɝ dɑɹk tɪltəɾ aɪz wɝ lɑɹdʒ ɪn əɹ feɪs ən əɹ waɪd maʊθ hʌŋ oʊpən, ɪmɪɾɪŋ ə wɝdləs weɪl. ə ɡɹoʊɪŋ nɑɾ ə kɪnswɪmən fɑloʊd bɪhaɪnd, skɝts hɛl haɪ aʊɾ ə ðə snoʊ, wɪspɝɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, wɪð mɔɹ ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən tə dʒɔɪn. ɹin ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl wɝ ɪn ðə fɹʌnt, ɔl ɡɹɪm-feɪst ɪksɛp fəɹ kɝstʃən, hu simd ivən pəlɝ ðən juʒəwəl. æləz wɑz ðɛɹ, tu, wɛɹɪŋ ən ʌɾɝli blæŋk ɪkspɹɛʃən.

Except that Adeleas was trampling a path up the snowy street, and the white-haired sister was dragging one of the Kin, Garenia Rosoinde, by her arm. Garenia was a slim-hipped Saldaean who had spent the last twenty years as a merchant although she looked only a few years older than Nynaeve did. Normally, her strongly hooked nose gave her a forceful appearance, a woman who would make hard trading and not back away. Now her dark tilted eyes were large in her face and her wide mouth hung open, emitting a wordless wail. A growing knot of Kinswomen followed behind, skirts held high out of the snow, whispering among themselves, with more running from every direction to join. Reanne and the rest of the Knitting Circle were in the front, all grim-faced except for Kirstian, who seemed even paler than usual. Alise was there, too, wearing an utterly blank expression.

æɾɪliz stɑpt ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɪleɪn ən ʃʌvd ɡæɹiniə soʊ hɑɹd ðə wʊmən fɛl tə hænz ən niz ɪn ðə snoʊ. wɛɹ ʃi steɪd, stɪl weɪlɪŋ. ðə kɪnswɪmən ɡæðɝd bɪhaɪn hɝ, mɔɹ ə ðɛɹ nʌmbɝ flɑkɪŋ ɪn.

Adeleas stopped in front of Elayne and shoved Garenia so hard the woman fell to hands and knees in the snow. Where she stayed, still wailing. The Kinswomen gathered behind her, more of their number flocking in.

"aɪm bɹɪŋɪŋ ðɪs tə jə kəz nɪneɪiv ɪz bɪzi," ðə bɹaʊn sɪstɝ toʊld ɪleɪn. ʃi mɛn ðət nɪneɪiv wɑz ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ ə lɪɾəl taɪm əloʊn wɪð læn sʌmwɛɹ, bʌt fəɹ wʌns, nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə hɪn ʌv ə smaɪl kɹɔst əɹ lɪps. "bi kwaɪət, tʃaɪld!" ʃi snæpt ət ɡæɹiniə. hu pɹɑmpli wɛn saɪlənt. æɾɪliz ɡeɪv ə sæɾəsfaɪd nɑd. "ðɪs ɪz nɑt ɡæɹiniə ɹoʊsɔɪnd," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ faɪnəli ɹɛkəɡnaɪz hɝ. zɛɹjə ælkeɪis, ə nɑvəs u ɹæn əweɪ dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ vændin ən aɪ dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ɹɪtaɪɹ ən ɹaɪɾ əɹ hɪstɝi ʌv ðə wɝld. ʃi ədmɪɾəd ɪt, wən aɪ kənfɹʌntəd hɝ. aɪm sɝpɹaɪz kɛɝin dɪdn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz əɹ bɪfɔɹ ðɪs; ðeɪ wɝ nɑvəsɪz təɡɛðɝ fəɹ tu jɪɹz. ðə lɔ ɪz klɪɹ, ɪleɪn. ə ɹʌnəweɪ mʌs bi pʊt bæk ɪn waɪɾ əz sun əz pɑsəbəl ən kɛpt ʌndɝ stʃɹɪk dɪsəplən əntɪl ʃi kən bi ɹɪtɝn tə ðə taʊɝ fəɹ pɹɑpɝ pʌnɪʃmənt. ʃi woʊn θɪŋk ə ɹʌnɪŋ əɡɛn æftɝ ðæt!"

"I'm bringing this to you because Nynaeve is busy," the Brown sister told Elayne. She meant that Nynaeve was enjoying a little time alone with Lan somewhere, but for once, not so much as a hint of a smile crossed her lips. "Be quiet, child!" she snapped at Garenia. Who promptly went silent. Adeleas gave a satisfied nod. "This is not Garenia Rosoinde," she said. "I finally recognized her. Zarya Alkaese, a novice who ran away just before Vandene and I decided to retire and write our history of the world. She admitted it, when I confronted her. I'm surprised Careane didn't recognize her before this; they were novices together for two years. The law is clear, Elayne. A runaway must be put back in white as soon as possible and kept under strict discipline until she can be returned to the Tower for proper punishment. She won't think of running again after that!"

ɪleɪn nɑɾəd sloʊli, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə θɪŋk ʌv wʌt tə seɪ. wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ɡæɹiniə - zɛɹjə - θɔɾ ə ɹʌnɪŋ əɡɛn, ʃi wəd nɑt bi əlaʊd ði ɑpɝtunəɾi. ʃi wɑz vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ðə paʊɝ; ðə taʊɝ wəd nɑt lɛɾ əɹ ɡoʊ ɪf ɪt tʊk ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ laɪf tə ɝn ðə ʃɔl. bʌɾ ɪleɪn wɑz ɹɪkɔlɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ʃi hæd hɝd ðɪs wʊmən seɪ ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi mɛt hɝ. ðə minɪŋ hæd nɑt ɹɛdʒəstɝd ðɛn, bʌt naʊ ɪt dɪd. haʊ wəd zɛɹjə feɪs nɑvəs waɪɾ əɡɛn æftɝ lɪvɪŋ əz əɹ oʊn wʊmən fəɹ sɛvənti jɪɹz? wɝs, ðoʊz wɪspɝz əmʌŋ ðə kɪnswɪmən hæd bɪɡʌn tə saʊn laɪk ɹʌmbəlz.

Elayne nodded slowly, trying to think of what to say. Whether or not Garenia - Zarya - thought of running again, she would not be allowed the opportunity. She was very strong in the Power; the Tower would not let her go if it took the rest of her life to earn the shawl. But Elayne was recalling something she had heard this woman say the first time she met her. The meaning had not registered then, but now it did. How would Zarya face novice white again after living as her own woman for seventy years? Worse, those whispers among the Kinswomen had begun to sound like rumbles.

ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv lɔŋ tə θɪŋk. sʌɾənli kɝstʃən fɛl tə hɝ niz, klʌtʃɪŋ əɾ æɾɪliz' skɝts wɪð wʌn hænd. "aɪ səbmɪt maɪsɛlf," ʃi sɛd kɑmli, hɝ toʊn ə wʌndɝ kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðət blʌdləs feɪs. "aɪ wɑz ɛnɹoʊld ɪn ðə nɑvəs bʊk ɔlmoʊs θɹi hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz əɡoʊ, ən ɹæn əweɪ lɛs ðən ə jɪɹ leɪɾɝ. aɪ səbmɪt maɪsɛlf, ən . . . ən bɛɡ mɝsi."

She did not have long to think. Suddenly Kirstian fell to her knees, clutching at Adeleas' skirts with one hand. "I submit myself," she said calmly, her tone a wonder coming from that bloodless face. "I was enrolled in the novice book almost three hundred years ago, and ran away less than a year later. I submit myself, and . . . and beg mercy."

ɪt wɑz waɪt-hɛɹɾ æɾɪliz' tɝn tə ɡoʊ waɪd-aɪd. kɝstʃən wɑz kleɪmɪŋ tə hæv ɹʌn əweɪ fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ wən ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz ən ɪnfənt, ɪf nɑt bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɑz bɔɹn! moʊst ə ðə sɪstɝz stɪl dɪd nɑt ɹɪli bɪliv ði eɪdʒəz kleɪm baɪ ðə kɪn. ɪndid, kɝstʃən əpɪɹd dʒʌst ɪndə hɝ mɪɾəl jɪɹz.

It was white-haired Adeleas' turn to go wide-eyed. Kirstian was claiming to have run away from the White Tower when she herself was an infant, if not before she was born! Most of the sisters still did not really believe the ages claimed by the Kin. Indeed, Kirstian appeared just into her middle years.

ivən soʊ, æɾɪliz ɹəkʌvɝd hɝsɛlf kwɪkli. haʊɛvɝ oʊl ði ʌðɝ wʊmən wɑz, æɾɪliz hæd bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ əbaʊɾ əz lɔŋ əz ɛniwʌn lɪvɪŋ. ʃi kæɹiɾ ən ɔɹə ʌv eɪdʒ, ən əθɔɹəɾi. "ɪf ðəɾ ɪz soʊ, tʃaɪld," hɝ vɔɪs dɪd fɔltɝ dʒʌst ə bɪɾ ət ðæt, "aɪ fɪɹ wi mʌs pʊt jə ɪn waɪt, tu. jəl stɪl bi pʌnɪʃt, bʌt sɝɛndɝɪŋ əz juv wɪl ɡeɪn jə səm mɪɾɪɡeɪʃən."

Even so, Adeleas recovered herself quickly. However old the other woman was, Adeleas had been Aes Sedai about as long as anyone living. She carried an aura of age, and authority. "If that is so, child," her voice did falter just a bit at that, "I fear we must put you in white, too. You will still be punished, but surrendering as you have will gain you some mitigation."

"ðæɾ ɪz waɪ aɪ dɪɾ ɪt." kɝstʃənz stɛɾi toʊn wɑz spɔɪl sʌmwʌt baɪ ə hɑɹd swɑloʊ. ʃi wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz stʃɹɔŋ əz zɛɹjə - nʌn ə ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl wɝ wik - ən ʃi wəd bi hɛl vɛɹi kloʊsli. "aɪ nu jə wəd faɪn mi aʊt sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ."

"That is why I did it." Kirstian's steady tone was spoiled somewhat by a hard swallow. She was almost as strong as Zarya - none of the Knitting Circle were weak - and she would be held very closely. "I knew you would find me out sooner or later."

æɾɪliz nɑɾəd əz ðoʊ ðət wɝ klɪɹli ɑbviəs, ðoʊ haʊ ðə wʊmən wʊɾə bɪn faʊn aʊt, ɪleɪn kəd nɑt ɡɛs. ʃi vɛɹi mʌtʃ daʊɾɪd ðət kɝstʃən tʃælwɪn wɑz ðə neɪm ðə wʊmən hæd bɪn bɔɹn wɪð. moʊst ə ðə kɪn bɪlivd ɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑmnɪsəəns, ðoʊ. ðeɪ hæd, ət list.

Adeleas nodded as though that were clearly obvious, though how the woman would have been found out, Elayne could not guess. She very much doubted that Kirstian Chalwin was the name the woman had been born with. Most of the Kin believed in Aes Sedai omniscience, though. They had, at least.

"ɹʌbɪʃ!" sɹeɪnjə vɔstoʊvənz hʌski vɔɪs kʌt θɹu ðə mɝmɝd bæbəl ə ðə kɪn. niðɝ stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə bɪkʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ nɔɹ nɪɹli oʊld ɪnʌf tə stæn vɛɹi haɪ əmʌŋ ðə kɪn, ʃi stɪl stɛp fɹəm ðə pæk dɪfaɪənli. "waɪ ʃəd wi ɡɪv əm ʌp tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ? wɪv hɛlpt wɪmən ɹʌn əweɪ, ən ɹaɪtli soʊ! ɪts nɑt pɑɹɾ ə ðə ɹulz tə ɡɪv əm bæk!"

"Rubbish!" Sarainya Vostovan's husky voice cut through the murmured babble of the Kin. Neither strong enough to become Aes Sedai nor nearly old enough to stand very high among the Kin, she still stepped from the pack defiantly. "Why should we give them up to the White Tower? We have helped women run away, and rightly so! It is not part of the rules to give them back!"

"kəntʃɹoʊl jɝsɛlf!" ɹin sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "æləz, teɪk sɹeɪnjə ɪn hænd, pliz. ɪt simz ʃi fɝɡɛts tu mɛni ʌv ðə ɹulz ʃi kleɪmz tə noʊ."

"Control yourself!" Reanne said sharply. "Alise, take Sarainya in hand, please. It seems she forgets too many of the rules she claims to know."

æləz lʊkt ət ɹin, hɝ feɪs stɪl ənɹiɾəbəl. æləz, hu ɛnfɔɹs ðə kɪnz ɹulz wɪð ə fɝm hænd. "ɪɾ ɪz nɑt pɑɹɾ ʌv əɹ ɹulz tə hæn ɹʌnəweɪz bæk, ɹin," ʃi sɛd.

Alise looked at Reanne, her face still unreadable. Alise, who enforced the Kin's rules with a firm hand. "It is not part of our rules to hand runaways back, Reanne," she said.

ɹin dʒɝkt əz ðoʊ stʃɹʌk. "æn haʊ dʒju sədʒɛs kipɪŋ ðɛm?" ʃi dɪmændəd faɪnəli. "wi hæv ɔlweɪz hɛld ɹʌnəweɪz əpɑɹɾ əntɪl wi wɝ ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wɝ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ hʌntəd, ən ɪf ðeɪ wɝ faʊn bɪfɔɹ, wi lɛt ðə sɪstɝz teɪk ðɛm. ðəɾ ɪz ðə ɹul, æləz. wʌɾ ʌðɝ ɹul dʒju pɹəpoʊz vaɪəleɪɾɪŋ? dʒju sədʒɛs ðət wi æktʃəli  sɛɾ aʊɝsɛlvz əɡɛnst ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ɹɪɾəkjul ə sətʃ ə noʊʃən lɑɹɾɪd əɹ vɔɪs, jɛɾ æləz stʊd lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ, saɪlənt.

Reanne jerked as though struck. "And how do you suggest keeping them?" she demanded finally. "We have always held runaways apart until we were sure they were no longer hunted, and if they were found before, we let the sisters take them. That is the rule, Alise. What other rule do you propose violating? Do you suggest that we actually set ourselves against Aes Sedai?" Ridicule of such a notion larded her voice, yet Alise stood looking at her, silent.

"jɛs!" ə vɔɪs ʃaʊɾəd fɹəm ðə kɹaʊɾ ə kɪnswɪmən. "wi ɑɹ mɛni, ən ðeɪ ɑɹ fju!" æɾɪliz stɛɹɾ ət ðə kɹaʊɾ ɪn dɪsbɪlif. ɪleɪn ɛmbɹeɪst seɪaɪdɑɹ, ðoʊ ʃi nu ðə vɔɪs wɑz ɹaɪt - ðə kɪn wɝ tu mɛni. ʃi fɛlt eɪvinhə ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ ðə paʊɝ, ən bɝdʒɪt sɛɾɪŋ hɝsɛlf.

"Yes!" a voice shouted from the crowd of Kinswomen. "We are many, and they are few!" Adeleas stared at the crowd in disbelief. Elayne embraced saidar, though she knew the voice was right - the Kin were too many. She felt Aviendha embracing the Power, and Birgitte setting herself.

ɡɪvɪŋ hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk əz ɪf kʌmɪŋ tə, æləz dɪd sʌmθɪŋ fɑɹ mɔɹ pɹæktəkəl, sɝɾənli fɑɹ mɔɹ ɪfɛktɪv. "sɹeɪnjə," ʃi sɛd laʊdli, "ju wɪl ɹipɔɹt tə mi wən wi stɑp tənaɪt, wɪð ə swɪtʃ jə kʌt jɝsɛlf bɪfɔɹ wi liv ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. ju, tu, eɪsɹə; aɪ ɹɛkəɡnaɪz jəɹ vɔɪs!" ən ðɛn, dʒʌst əz laʊdli, ʃi sɛd tə ɹin, "aɪ wɪl ɹipɔɹt maɪsɛlf fəɹ jəɹ dʒʌdʒmənt wən wi stɑp tənaɪt. aɪ doʊn si ɛniwʌn ɡɛɾɪŋ ɹɛɾi!"

Giving herself a shake as if coming to, Alise did something far more practical, certainly far more effective. "Sarainya," she said loudly, "you will report to me when we stop tonight, with a switch you cut yourself before we leave this morning. You, too, Asra; I recognize your voice!" And then, just as loudly, she said to Reanne, "I will report myself for your judgment when we stop tonight. I don't see anyone getting ready!"

ðə kɪnswɪmən bɹoʊk ʌp kwɪkli ðɛn, hɛɾɪŋ ɔf tə ɡæðɝ ðɛɹ θɪŋz, jɛɾ ɪleɪn sɔ səm ə ðɛm tɔkɪŋ kwaɪətli əz ðeɪ wɛnt. wən ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə bɹɪdʒ əkɹɔs ðə fɹoʊzən stʃɹim ðət waʊn daʊn bɪsaɪd ðə vɪlədʒ, wɪð nɪneɪiv ɪnkɹɛdʒələs oʊvɝ wʌt ʃi hæd mɪst ən ɡlɛɹɪŋ əbaʊt fəɹ sʌmwʌn tə kɔl daʊn, sɹeɪnjə ən eɪsɹə kæɹid swɪtʃəz - əz dɪɾ æləz - ən zɛɹjə ən kɝstʃən wɔɹ heɪstəli faʊnd waɪt dʒɹɛsəz bɪniθ ðɛɹ dɑɹk kloʊks. ðə wɪndfɪndɝz pɔɪntəɾ əɾ əm ən læft əpɹɔɑɹiəsli. bʌt mɛni ʌv ðə kɪnswɪmən stɪl tɔkt ɪn klʌstɝz, fɔlɪŋ saɪlənt wɛnɛvɝ ə sɪstɝ əɹ wʌn ə ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl lʊkt ət ðɛm. ən ðəɹ wɑz ə dɑɹknəs tə ðɛɹ aɪz wən ðeɪ lʊkt əɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

The Kinswomen broke up quickly then, heading off to gather their things, yet Elayne saw some of them talking quietly as they went. When they rode over the bridge across the frozen stream that wound down beside the village, with Nynaeve incredulous over what she had missed and glaring about for someone to call down, Sarainya and Asra carried switches - as did Alise - and Zarya and Kirstian wore hastily found white dresses beneath their dark cloaks. The Windfinders pointed at them and laughed uproariously. But many of the Kinswomen still talked in clusters, falling silent whenever a sister or one of the Knitting Circle looked at them. And there was a darkness to their eyes when they looked at Aes Sedai.

eɪt mɔɹ deɪz ə flaʊndɝɪŋ θɹu ðə snoʊ wən ɪt wɑz nɑt fɔlɪŋ, ən ɡɹaɪndɪŋ əɹ tiθ ɪn ən ɪn wən ɪt wɑz. eɪt mɔɹ deɪz ə bɹuɾɪŋ baɪ ðə kɪn, ʌv stɛɹɪŋ blikli ət ðə sɪstɝz, deɪz ə stʃɹʌɾɪŋ baɪ ðə wɪndfɪndɝz ɝaʊn kɪn ən ɛɛs sədaɪ əlaɪk. ɑn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ə ðə naɪnθ deɪ, ɪleɪn bɪɡæn tə wɪʃ ɛvɹiwʌn hæd sɪmpli ɡɔn fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛlsəz θɹoʊt.

Eight more days of floundering through the snow when it was not falling, and grinding her teeth in an inn when it was. Eight more days of brooding by the Kin, of staring bleakly at the sisters, days of strutting by the Windfinders around Kin and Aes Sedai alike. On the morning of the ninth day, Elayne began to wish everyone had simply gone for everyone else's throat.

ʃi wɑz dʒʌst wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ ðeɪ kəd kʌvɝ ðə læs tɛn maɪlz tə keɪɛmlɪn wɪθaʊɾ ə mɝɾɝ, wən kɝstʃən ɹæpt əɾ əɹ dɔɹ ən dɑɹɾɪd ɪn wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ən ænsɝ. ðə wʊmənz pleɪn wʊlən dʒɹɛs wɑz nɑt ðə ʃeɪɾ ʌv waɪt pɹɑpɝ fəɹ ə nɑvəs, ən ʃi hæd ɹiɡeɪn mʌtʃ ə hɝ dɪɡnəɾi sʌmhaʊ, əz ɪf noʊɪŋ əɹ fjutʃɝ hæd smuðd əɹ pɹɛzənt, bʌt naʊ ʃi meɪɾ ə heɪsti kɝtsi, ɔlmoʊs tʃɹɪpɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ kloʊk, ən əɹ nɪɹli blæk aɪz wɝ æŋkʃəs. "nɪneɪiv sədaɪ, ɪleɪn sədaɪ, lɔɹd læn sɛz jə ɑɹ tə kʌm ət wʌns," ʃi sɛd bɹɛθləsli. "hi toʊl mi tə spik tə noʊ wʌn, ən jə ɑɹən tə, iðɝ."

She was just wondering whether they could cover the last ten miles to Caemlyn without a murder, when Kirstian rapped at her door and darted in without waiting for an answer. The woman's plain woolen dress was not the shade of white proper for a novice, and she had regained much of her dignity somehow, as if knowing her future had smoothed her present, but now she made a hasty curtsy, almost tripping over her cloak, and her nearly black eyes were anxious. "Nynaeve Sedai, Elayne Sedai, Lord Lan says you are to come at once," she said breathlessly. "He told me to speak to no one, and you aren't to, either."

ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks wɪð eɪvinhə ən bɝdʒɪt. nɪneɪiv ɡɹaʊl sʌmθɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ əbaʊt ðə mæn nɑt noʊɪŋ pɹaɪvət fɹəm pʌblɪk, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz klɪɹ bɪfɔɹ ʃi blʌʃt ðət ʃi dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪt. ɪleɪn fɛl bɝdʒɪt foʊkəs, ðə dʒɹɔn æɹoʊ hʌntɪŋ ə tɑɹɡət.

Elayne and Nynaeve exchanged looks with Aviendha and Birgitte. Nynaeve growled something under her breath about the man not knowing private from public, but it was clear before she blushed that she did not believe it. Elayne felt Birgitte focus, the drawn arrow hunting a target.

kɝstʃən dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt læn wɑntəd, oʊnli wɛɹ ʃi wɑz tə lid ðɛm. ðə smɔl hʌɾ aʊtsaɪɾ ə kʌlənz kɹɔsɪŋ wɛɹ æɾɪliz hæd teɪkən ɪspæn ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ. læn stʊɾ aʊtsaɪd, hɪz aɪz əz koʊld əz ði ɛɹ, ən wəd nɑt lɛt kɝstʃən ɛntɝ. wən ɪleɪn wɛn ɪnsaɪd, ʃi sɔ waɪ.

Kirstian did not know what Lan wanted, only where she was to lead them. The small hut outside of Cullen's Crossing where Adeleas had taken Ispan the night before. Lan stood outside, his eyes as cold as the air, and would not let Kirstian enter. When Elayne went inside, she saw why.

æɾɪliz leɪ ɑn əɹ saɪd bɪsaɪɾ ən oʊvɝtɝn stul, ə kʌp ɑn ðə ɹʌf wʊɾən flɔɹ nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm wʌn aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt hænd. hɝ aɪz stɛɹd, ən ə pul ə kəndʒil blʌd spɹɛɾ aʊt fɹəm ðə dip slæʃ əkɹɔs əɹ θɹoʊt. ɪspæn leɪ ɑn ə smɔl kɑt, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə silɪŋ. lɪps dʒɹɔn bæk ɪn ə ɹɪktəs bɛɹɾ əɹ tiθ, ən əɹ bʌlʒɪŋ aɪz sim fʊl ə hɔɹɝ. əz wɛl ðeɪ maɪt hæv, sɪns ə ɹɪst-θɪk wʊɾən steɪk stʊɾ aʊt fɹəm bɪtwin əɹ bɹɛsts. ðə hæmɝ ðət hæd pleɪnli bɪn juz tə dʒɹaɪv ɪɾ ɪn leɪ bɪsaɪd ðə kɑt, ɑn ði ɛdʒ ʌv ə dɑɹk steɪn ðət ɹæn bæk ʌndɝ ðə kɑt.

Adeleas lay on her side beside an overturned stool, a cup on the rough wooden floor not far from one outstretched hand. Her eyes stared, and a pool of congealed blood spread out from the deep slash across her throat. Ispan lay on a small cot, staring at the ceiling. Lips drawn back in a rictus bared her teeth, and her bulging eyes seemed full of horror. As well they might have, since a wrist-thick wooden stake stood out from between her breasts. The hammer that had plainly been used to drive it in lay beside the cot, on the edge of a dark stain that ran back under the cot.

ɪleɪn fɔɹs hɝsɛlf tə stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɛmptiɪŋ əɹ stʌmək ɑn ðə spɑt. "laɪt," ʃi bɹiðd. "laɪt! hu kəd də ðɪs? haʊ kəɾ ɛniwʌn də ðɪs?" eɪvinhə ʃʊk əɹ hɛd wʌndɝɪŋli, ən læn dɪd nɑɾ ivən bɑðɝ wɪð ðæt. hi dʒʌst wɑtʃt naɪn dɝɛkʃənz ət wʌns, əz ðoʊ hi ɪkspɛktəd huɛvɝ, əɹ wʌtɛvɝ, hæd kəmɪɾəd ðɪs mɝɾɝ tə kʌm θɹu wʌn ə ðə tu taɪni wɪndoʊz ɪf nɑt θɹu ðə wɔlz. bɝdʒɪt dʒɹu hɝ bɛl naɪf, ən baɪ hɝ feɪs, ʃi dɪɹli wɪʃt ʃi hæɾ əɹ baʊ. ðət dʒɹɔn æɹoʊ wɑz stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ɛvɝ ɪn ɪleɪnz hɛd.

Elayne forced herself to stop thinking about emptying her stomach on the spot. "Light," she breathed. "Light! Who could do this? How could anyone do this?" Aviendha shook her head wonderingly, and Lan did not even bother with that. He just watched nine directions at once, as though he expected whoever, or whatever, had committed this murder to come through one of the two tiny windows if not through the walls. Birgitte drew her belt knife, and by her face, she dearly wished she had her bow. That drawn arrow was stronger than ever in Elayne's head.

ət fɝst, nɪneɪiv sɪmpli stʊɾ ɪn wʌn spɑt, stʌɾiɪŋ ðə hʌts ɪntɪɹiɝ. ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl tə si, əsaɪd fɹəm ði ɑbviəs. ə sɛkən θɹi-lɛɡəd stul, ə ɹʌf teɪbəl hoʊldɪŋ ə flɪkɝɪŋ læmp, ə ɡɹin tipɑɾ ən ə sɛkən kʌp, ə ɹud stoʊn faɪɝpleɪs wɪð koʊld æʃ ɑn ðə hɑɹθstoʊn. ðət wɑz ɔl. ðə hʌt wɑz soʊ smɔl ɪɾ oʊnli tʊk nɪneɪiv ə stɛp tə ɹitʃ ðə teɪbəl. dɪpɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝ ɪndə ðə tipɑt, ʃi tʌtʃt ɪt tə ðə tɪp ə hɝ tʌŋ, ðən spæt vɪɡɝəsli ən ɛmptid ðə hoʊl tipɑɾ ɪndə ðə teɪbəl ɪn ə wɑʃ ə ti ən ti livz. ɪleɪn blɪŋkt wʌndɝɪŋli.

At first, Nynaeve simply stood in one spot, studying the hut's interior. There was little to see, aside from the obvious. A second three-legged stool, a rough table holding a flickering lamp, a green teapot and a second cup, a rude stone fireplace with cold ash on the hearthstone. That was all. The hut was so small it only took Nynaeve a step to reach the table. Dipping her finger into the teapot, she touched it to the tip of her tongue, then spat vigorously and emptied the whole teapot into the table in a wash of tea and tea leaves. Elayne blinked wonderingly.

"wʌt hæpənd?" vændin æskt kuli fɹəm ðə dɔɹ. læn muv tə bɑɹ əɹ weɪ, bʌt ʃi stɑpt ɪm wɪð ə smɔl dʒɛstʃɝ. ɪleɪn stɑɹɾəd tə pʊɾ ən ɑɹm ɝaʊn hɝ, ən ɹəsivd ənʌðɝ ɹeɪz hæn tə kip əɹ bæk. vændinz aɪz ɹɪmeɪn ɑn əɹ sɪstɝ, kɑm ɪn ə feɪs ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝɛnəɾi. ðə dɛd wʊmən ɑn ðə kɑt maɪɾ əz wɛl nɑɾ əv ɪɡzɪstəd. "wɛn aɪ sɔ ɔl ə jə hɛɾɪŋ ðɪs weɪ, aɪ θɔt . . . wi nu wi dɪdn əv mɛni jɪɹz ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ, bʌt . . ." hɝ vɔɪs saʊndəd sɝɛnəɾi ɪtsɛlf, bʌt smɔl wʌndɝ ɪf ðət wɑz ə mæsk. "wʌɾ əv jə faʊnd, nɪneɪiv?"

"What happened?" Vandene asked coolly from the door. Lan moved to bar her way, but she stopped him with a small gesture. Elayne started to put an arm around her, and received another raised hand to keep her back. Vandene's eyes remained on her sister, calm in a face of Aes Sedai serenity. The dead woman on the cot might as well not have existed. "When I saw all of you heading this way, I thought . . . We knew we didn't have many years remaining, but . . ." Her voice sounded serenity itself, but small wonder if that was a mask. "What have you found, Nynaeve?"

sɪmpəθi lʊkt ɑɾ ɑn nɪneɪivz feɪs. klɪɹɪŋ əɹ θɹoʊt, ʃi pɔɪntəd tə ðə ti livz wɪθaʊt tʌtʃɪŋ ðɛm. tə waɪt ʃeɪvɪŋz əmʌŋ ðə mæɾɪd blæk livz. "ðɪs ɪz kɹɪmsɑnθɝn ɹut," ʃi sɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə saʊn mæɾɝ-ʌv-fækt ən feɪlɪŋ. "ɪts swit, soʊ jə maɪt mɪs ɪɾ ɪn ti ənlɛs jə noʊ wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz, ɪspɛʃli ɪf jə teɪk ə lɑɾ ə hʌni."

Sympathy looked odd on Nynaeve's face. Clearing her throat, she pointed to the tea leaves without touching them. To white shavings among the matted black leaves. "This is crimsonthorn root," she said, trying to sound matter-of-fact and failing. "It's sweet, so you might miss it in tea unless you know what it is, especially if you take a lot of honey."

vændin nɑɾəd, nɛvɝ teɪkɪŋ əɹ aɪz fɹəm əɹ sɪstɝ. "æɾɪliz dɪvɛləpt ə teɪs fəɹ swit ti ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ."

Vandene nodded, never taking her eyes from her sister. "Adeleas developed a taste for sweet tea in Ebou Dar."

"ə lɪɾəl kɪlz peɪn," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ðɪs mʌtʃ . . . ðɪs mʌtʃ kɪlz, bʌt sloʊli. ivən ə fju sɪps wəd bi ɪnʌf." teɪkɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ʃi æɾəd, "ðeɪ maɪɾ əv ɹɪmeɪn kɑnʃəs fəɹ aʊɝz. nɑɾ eɪbəl tə muv, bʌɾ əwɛɹ. iðɝ huɛvɝ dɪd ðɪs dɪdnt wɑnə ɹɪsk sʌmwʌn kʌmɪŋ tu sun wɪð ən æntɪdoʊt - nɑt ðəɾ aɪ noʊ wʌn, fəɹ ə bɹu ðɪs stʃɹɔŋ - əɹ ɛls ðeɪ wɑntəd wʌn əɹ ði ʌðɝ tə noʊ hu wɑz kɪlɪŋ ðɛm." ɪleɪn ɡæspt ət ðə bɹutæləɾi, bʌt vændin sɪmpli nɑɾəd.

"A little kills pain," Nynaeve said. "This much . . . This much kills, but slowly. Even a few sips would be enough." Taking a deep breath, she added, "They might have remained conscious for hours. Not able to move, but aware. Either whoever did this didn't want to risk someone coming too soon with an antidote - not that I know one, for a brew this strong - or else they wanted one or the other to know who was killing them." Elayne gasped at the brutality, but Vandene simply nodded.

"ɪspæn, aɪ θɪŋk, sɪns ðeɪ əpɪɹ tə hæv teɪkən ðə moʊs taɪm wɪð hɝ." ðə waɪt-hɛɹd ɡɹin ɔlmoʊst sim tə bi θɪŋkɪŋ əlaʊd, wɝkɪŋ aʊɾ ə pʌzəl. kʌɾɪŋ ə θɹoʊt tʊk lɛs taɪm ðən dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ə steɪk θɹu sʌmwʌnz hɑɹt. ðə kɑm ə hɝ meɪɾ ɪleɪnz skɪn kɹɔl. "æɾɪliz wəd nɛvɝ əv æksɛptɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ tə dʒɹɪŋk fɹəm sʌmwʌn ʃi dɪdnt noʊ, nɑɾ aʊt hɪɹ wɪð ɪspæn. ðoʊz tu fæks neɪm əɹ kɪlɝ, ɪn ə weɪ. eɪ dɑɹk-fɹɛnd, ən wʌn ʌv əɹ pɑɹɾi. wʌn ʌv ʌs." ɪleɪn fɛl tu tʃɪlz, hɝ oʊn, ən bɝdʒɪts.

"Ispan, I think, since they appear to have taken the most time with her." The white-haired Green almost seemed to be thinking aloud, working out a puzzle. Cutting a throat took less time than driving a stake through someone's heart. The calm of her made Elayne's skin crawl. "Adeleas would never have accepted anything to drink from someone she didn't know, not out here with Ispan. Those two facts name her killer, in a way. A Dark-friend, and one of our party. One of us." Elayne felt two chills, her own, and Birgitte's.

"wʌn ʌv ʌs," nɪneɪiv əɡɹid sædli. eɪvinhə bɪɡæn tɛstɪŋ ði ɛdʒ ə hɝ bɛl naɪf ɑn əɹ θʌm, ən fəɹ wʌns, ɪleɪn fɛl noʊ əbdʒɛkʃən.

"One of us," Nynaeve agreed sadly. Aviendha began testing the edge of her belt knife on her thumb, and for once, Elayne felt no objection.

vændin æsk tə bi lɛft əloʊn wɪð əɹ sɪstɝ fəɹ ə fju moʊməns, ən sæɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ tə kɹeɪɾəl æɾɪliz ɪn əɹ ɑɹmz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ aʊɾ ə ðə dɔɹ. jeɪɛm, vændinz nɑɹld oʊld wɔɹɾɝ, wɑz weɪɾɪŋ aʊtsaɪd wɪð ə ʃɪvɝɪŋ kɝstʃən.

Vandene asked to be left alone with her sister for a few moments, and sat on the floor to cradle Adeleas in her arms before they were out of the door. Jaem, Vandene's gnarled old Warder, was waiting outside with a shivering Kirstian.

sʌɾənli ə weɪl bɝst aʊɾ ɪnsaɪd ðə hʌt, ðə fʊl-θɹoʊɾɪd kɹaɪ ʌv ə wʊmən mɔɹnɪŋ ðə lɔs ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ. nɪneɪiv, ʌv ɔl pipəl, tɝn tə ɡoʊ bæk, bʌt læn leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn əɹ ɑɹm, ən jeɪɛm plæntəd hɪmsɛlf bɪfɔɹ ðə dɔɹ wɪð aɪz nɑt mʌtʃ wɔɹmɝ ðən lænz. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə də bʌt liv ðɛm, vændin tə ʃɹik əɹ peɪn, ən jeɪɛm tə ɡɑɹɾ əɹ ɪn ɪt. ən ʃɛɹ ɪt, ɪleɪn ɹilaɪzd, filɪŋ ðət nɑɾ ʌv ɪmoʊʃənz ɪn əɹ hɛd ðət wɑz bɝdʒɪt. ʃi ʃɪvɝd, ən bɝdʒɪt pʊɾ ən ɑɹm ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. eɪvinhə dɪd ðə seɪm fɹəm ði ʌðɝ saɪd, ən moʊʃən fəɹ nɪneɪiv tə dʒɔɪn ðɛm, wɪtʃ ʃi dɪd, æftɝ ə moʊmənt. ðə mɝɾɝ ɪleɪn hæd θɔɾ ə soʊ laɪtli hæd kʌm, wʌn ə ðɛɹ kəmpænjənz wɑz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, ən ðə deɪ sʌɾənli fɛl koʊld ɪnʌf tə ʃæɾɝ boʊnz, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə wɔɹmθ ɪn ðə kloʊsnɪs ə hɝ fɹɛnz.

Suddenly a wail burst out inside the hut, the full-throated cry of a woman mourning the loss of everything. Nynaeve, of all people, turned to go back, but Lan laid a hand on her arm, and Jaem planted himself before the door with eyes not much warmer than Lan's. There was nothing to do but leave them, Vandene to shriek her pain, and Jaem to guard her in it. And share it, Elayne realized, feeling that knot of emotions in her head that was Birgitte. She shivered, and Birgitte put an arm around her shoulders. Aviendha did the same from the other side, and motioned for Nynaeve to join them, which she did, after a moment. The murder Elayne had thought of so lightly had come, one of their companions was a Darkfriend, and the day suddenly felt cold enough to shatter bones, but there was a warmth in the closeness of her friends.

ðə læs tɛn fjunɝiəl maɪlz tə keɪɛmlɪn tʊk tu deɪz ɪn ðə snoʊ, wɪð ivən ðə wɪndfɪndɝz disənli səbdud. nɑt ðət ðeɪ pʊʃt mɛɝɪlɪl ɛni lɛs hɑɹd. nɑt ðət kɪn stɑp tɔkɪŋ, ən fɔlɪŋ saɪlənt wɛnɛvɝ ə sɪstɝ əɹ wʌn ə ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl keɪm nɪɹ. vændin, wɪð əɹ sɪstɝz sɪlvɝ-maʊntəd sæɾəl ɑn əɹ hɔɹs, əpɪɹɾ əz sɝin əz ʃi hæɾ əɾ æɾɪliz' ɡɹeɪvsaɪd, bʌt jeɪɛmz aɪz kæɹiɾ ə saɪlən pɹɑməs ə dɛθ ðət ʃʊɹli ɹoʊɾ ɪn vændinz hɑɹt, tu. ɪleɪn kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn hæpiɝ tə si ðə wɔlz ən taʊɝz ə keɪɛmlɪn ɪf ðə vɛɹi saɪt hæd ɡɪvən əɹ ðə ɹoʊz kɹaʊn ən bɹɔt bæk æɾɪliz.

The last ten funereal miles to Caemlyn took two days in the snow, with even the Windfinders decently subdued. Not that they pushed Merilille any less hard. Not that Kin stopped talking, and falling silent whenever a sister or one of the Knitting Circle came near. Vandene, with her sister's silver-mounted saddle on her horse, appeared as serene as she had at Adeleas' graveside, but Jaem's eyes carried a silent promise of death that surely rode in Vandene's heart, too. Elayne could not have been happier to see the walls and towers of Caemlyn if the very sight had given her the Rose Crown and brought back Adeleas.

ivən keɪɛmlɪn, wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪt sɪɾiz ə ðə wɝld, hæd nɛvɝ sin ðə laɪks ə ðɛɹ pɑɹɾi bɪfɔɹ, ən wʌns ɪnsaɪd ðə fɪfti-fʊt wɔlz ʌv ɡɹeɪ stoʊn ðeɪ ətʃɹæktəd noʊɾəs əz ðeɪ kɹɔs ðə nu sɪɾi əlɔŋ waɪd, slʌʃ-fɪl stʃɹits bʌsəlɪŋ wɪð pipəl ən kɑɹts ən wæɡənz. ʃɑpkipɝz stʊɾ ɪn ðɛɹ dɔɹweɪz ən ɡeɪpt. wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝz ɹeɪn ɪn ðɛɹ timz tə stɛɹ. taʊɝɪŋ ilmɛn ən tɔl meɪɾənz aɪɾ əm fɹəm ɛvɹi kɔɹnɝ, ɪt simd. ðə pipəl sim tə teɪk noʊ noʊɾəs ə ði il, bʌɾ ɪleɪn dɪd. ʃi lʌvd eɪvinhə əz ʃi dɪd hɝsɛlf, mɔɹ, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt lʌv ən ɑɹmi ʌv ɑɹmd il wɔkɪŋ keɪɛmlɪnz stʃɹits.

Even Caemlyn, one of the great cities of the world, had never seen the likes of their party before, and once inside the fifty-foot walls of gray stone they attracted notice as they crossed the New City along wide, slush-filled streets bustling with people and carts and wagons. Shopkeepers stood in their doorways and gaped. Wagon drivers reined in their teams to stare. Towering Aielmen and tall Maidens eyed them from every corner, it seemed. The people seemed to take no notice of the Aiel, but Elayne did. She loved Aviendha as she did herself, more, but she could not love an army of armed Aiel walking Caemlyn's streets.

ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi, ɹɪŋ baɪ taʊɝd wɔlz ə sɪlvɝ-stʃɹikt waɪt, wɑz ə ɹɪmɛmbɝd dɪlaɪt, ən ɪleɪn faɪnəli bɪɡæn tə fil ðət ʃi wɑz kʌmɪŋ hoʊm. ðə stʃɹits fɑloʊd ðə kɝvz ə ðə hɪlz, ən ɛvɹi ɹaɪz pɹizɛntəɾ ə nu vɪstə ʌv snoʊ-kʌvɝd pɑɹks ən mɑnjəməns leɪɾ aʊt tə bi sin fɹəm əbʌv əz wɛl əz ʌp kloʊs, ʌv bɹaɪtli taɪl taʊɝz ʃaɪnɪŋ wɪð ə hʌnʒɹəd kʌlɝz ɪn ði æftɝnun sʌn. ən ðən ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs ɪtsɛlf wɑz bɪfɔɹ ðɛm, ə kənfɛkʃən ə peɪl spaɪɹz ən ɡoʊldən doʊmz ən ɪntʃɹəkət stoʊnwɝk tʃɹeɪsɝiz. ðə bænɝ ʌv ændɝ weɪv fɹəm nɪɹli ɛvɹi pɹɑmənəns, ðə waɪt laɪən ɑn ɹɛd. ən fɹəm ði ʌðɝz, ðə dʒɹæɡən bænɝ əɹ ðə bænɝ ə laɪt.

The Inner City, ringed by towered walls of silver-streaked white, was a remembered delight, and Elayne finally began to feel that she was coming home. The streets followed the curves of the hills, and every rise presented a new vista of snow-covered parks and monuments laid out to be seen from above as well as up close, of brightly tiled towers shining with a hundred colors in the afternoon sun. And then the Royal Palace itself was before them, a confection of pale spires and golden domes and intricate stonework traceries. The banner of Andor waved from nearly every prominence, the White Lion on red. And from the others, the Dragon Banner or the Banner of Light.

ət ðə tɔl ɡɪldɪd ɡeɪts ə ðə pæləs, ɪleɪn ɹoʊd fɔɹwɝɾ əloʊn ɪn əɹ tʃɹævəl-steɪnd ɡɹeɪ ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs. tʃɹədɪʃən ən lɛdʒən sɛd wɪmən u fɝst əpɹoʊtʃt ðə pæləs ɪn splɛndɝ ɔlweɪz feɪld. ʃi hæd meɪd klɪɹ ðət ʃi hæd tə də ɪɾ əloʊn, jɛt ʃi ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt eɪvinhə ən bɝdʒɪt hæd səksiɾəd ɪn oʊvɝɹulɪŋ hɝ. hæf ðə tu dʌzən ɡɑɹdz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə ɡeɪts wɝ il meɪɾənz, ði ʌðɝz mɛn ɪn blu hɛlməts ən blu koʊts wɪð ə ɹɛd-ænd-ɡoʊl dʒɹæɡən mɑɹtʃɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə tʃɛst.

At the tall gilded gates of the Palace, Elayne rode forward alone in her travel-stained gray riding dress. Tradition and legend said women who first approached the Palace in splendor always failed. She had made clear that she had to do it alone, yet she almost wished Aviendha and Birgitte had succeeded in overruling her. Half the two dozen guards in front of the gates were Aiel Maidens, the others men in blue helmets and blue coats with a red-and-gold Dragon marching across the chest.

"aɪ æm ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd," ʃi ənaʊns laʊdli, sɝpɹaɪzd ət haʊ kɑm ʃi saʊndəd. hɝ vɔɪs kæɹid, ən əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹeɪt plɑzə pipəl tɝn fɹəm stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ kəmpænjənz tə stɛɹ ət hɝ. ði eɪntʃən fɔɹmjələ ɹoʊl fɹəm əɹ tʌŋ. "ɪn ðə neɪm ə haʊs tʃɹəkənd, baɪ ɹaɪɾ ə dɪsɛn fɹəm ɪʃɑɹə, aɪ hæv kʌm tə kleɪm ðə laɪən θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ, ɪf ðə laɪt wɪlz ɪt soʊ."

"I am Elayne Trakand," she announced loudly, surprised at how calm she sounded. Her voice carried, and across the great plaza people turned from staring at her companions to stare at her. The ancient formula rolled from her tongue. "In the name of House Trakand, by right of descent from Ishara, I have come to claim the Lion Throne of Andor, if the Light wills it so."

ðə ɡeɪts oʊpənd waɪd.

The gates opened wide.

ɪt wəd nɑt bi ðəɾ izi, ʌv kɔɹs. ivən pəzɛʃən ə ðə pæləs wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə hoʊl ðə θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ baɪ ɪtsɛlf. pæsɪŋ əɹ kəmpænjənz ɪndə ðə kɛɹ ʌv ən əstɑnɪʃt ɹɪn hɑɹfɝ - ən vɛɹi pliz tə si ðət ðə ɡɹeɪɪŋ fɝs meɪd, ɹaʊn ən əz ɹiɡəl əz ɛni kwin, stɪl hæd ðə pæləs ɪn əɹ keɪpəbəl hænz - ən ə koʊɾɝi ʌv sɝvəns ɪn ɹɛd-ænd-waɪt lɪvɝi, ɪleɪn hɝid tə ðə ɡɹæn hɔl, ðə θɹoʊn ɹum ʌv ændɝ. əloʊn, əɡɛn. ðɪs wɑz nɑt pɑɹɾ ə ðə ɹɪtʃuəl, nɑt jɛt. ʃi ʃʊɾə bɪn gɑnə tʃeɪnʒ ɪndə ðə ɹɛd sɪlk wɪð ðə pɝl-wɝk bɑɾəs ən waɪt laɪənz klaɪmɪŋ ðə slivz, bʌt ʃi fɛl kəmpɛld. ðɪs taɪm, nɑɾ ivən nɪneɪiv tʃɹaɪd tə əbdʒɛkt.

It would not be that easy, of course. Even possession of the Palace was not enough to hold the throne of Andor by itself. Passing her companions into the care of an astonished Reene Harfor - and very pleased to see that the graying First Maid, round and as regal as any queen, still had the Palace in her capable hands - and a coterie of servants in red-and-white livery, Elayne hurried to the Grand Hall, the throne room of Andor. Alone, again. This was not part of the ritual, not yet. She should have been going to change into the red silk with the pearl-worked bodice and white lions climbing the sleeves, but she felt compelled. This time, not even Nynaeve tried to object.

waɪt kɑləmz twɛnti peɪsɪz haɪ mɑɹtʃt daʊn ðə saɪdz ə ðə ɡɹæn hɔl. ðə θɹoʊn ɹum wɑz ɛmpti, stɪl. ðət wəd nɑt læs lɔŋ. klɪɹ æftɝnun laɪt θɹu ðə ɡlæs keɪsməns ɪn tɔl wɪndoʊz əlɔŋ ðə wɔlz mɪŋɡəld wɪð ðə kʌlɝd laɪt θɹu ðə ɡɹeɪt wɪndoʊz sɛɾ ɪn ðə silɪŋ, wɛɹ ðə waɪt laɪən ʌv ændɝ ɔltɝneɪɾəd wɪð sinz ʌv ændɔɝən vɪktɝiz ən ðə feɪsəz ə ðə lænz ɝliəs kwinz, bɪɡɪnɪŋ wɪð ɪʃɑɹə hɝsɛlf, əz dɑɹk əz ɛni ʌv ði æθɑn maɪɹ, əz fʊl ʌv əθɔɹəɾi əz ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ. noʊ ɹulɝ ʌv ændɝ kəd fɝɡɛt hɝsɛlf wɪð ðə pɹɛɾəsɛsɝz u hæd fɔɹdʒ ðɪs neɪʃən stɛɹɪŋ daʊn ət hɝ.

White columns twenty paces high marched down the sides of the Grand Hall. The throne room was empty, still. That would not last long. Clear afternoon light through the glassed casements in tall windows along the walls mingled with the colored light through the great windows set in the ceiling, where the White Lion of Andor alternated with scenes of Andoran victories and the faces of the land's earliest queens, beginning with Ishara herself, as dark as any of the Atha'an Miere, as full of authority as any Aes Sedai. No ruler of Andor could forget herself with the predecessors who had forged this nation staring down at her.

wʌn θɪŋ ʃi fɪɹd tə si - ðə hjudʒ mɑnstʃɹɑsəɾi ʌv ə θɹoʊn, ɔl ɡɪldɪd dʒɹæɡənz, ðət ʃi hæd sin stændɪŋ ɑn ðə deɪz ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə hɔl ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ, θæŋk ðə laɪt. ðə laɪən θɹoʊn noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɹɛstəɾ ɑn ə tɔl plɪnθ laɪk səm tʃɹoʊfi, iðɝ, bʌt kɛpt ɪts pɹɑpɝ pleɪs əpɑn ðə deɪz, ə mæsɪv tʃɛɹ, kɑɹvd ən ɡɪldɪd, bʌt saɪz fəɹ ə wʊmən. ðə waɪt laɪən, pɪkt aʊɾ ɪn munstoʊnz ɑn ə fild ə ɹubiz, wəd stæn əbʌv ðə hɛɾ ʌv ɛni wʊmən u sæt ðɛɹ. noʊ mæn kəd fil əɾ ɪz iz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðət θɹoʊn, bɪkɔz, soʊ lɛdʒən sɛd, hi wəd noʊ hi hæd sild ɪz dum. ɪleɪn θɔɾ ɪt mɔɹ laɪkli ðə bɪldɝz hæd sɪmpli meɪd ʃʊɹ ə mæn wəd nɑt fɪɾ ɑn ɪɾ izəli.

One thing she feared to see - the huge monstrosity of a throne, all gilded Dragons, that she had seen standing on the dais at the far end of the Hall in Tel'aran'rhiod. It was not there, thank the Light. The Lion Throne no longer rested on a tall plinth like some trophy, either, but kept its proper place upon the dais, a massive chair, carved and gilded, but sized for a woman. The White Lion, picked out in moonstones on a field of rubies, would stand above the head of any woman who sat there. No man could feel at his ease sitting on that throne, because, so legend said, he would know he had sealed his doom. Elayne thought it more likely the builders had simply made sure a man would not fit on it easily.

klaɪmɪŋ ðə waɪt mɑɹbəl stɛps ə ðə deɪz, ʃi leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn wʌn ɑɹm ə ðə θɹoʊn. ʃi hæd noʊ ɹaɪt tə sɪɾ ɑn ɪt hɝsɛlf, nɑt jɛt. nɑɾ əntɪl ʃi wɑz æknɑlɪdʒ kwin. bʌt teɪkɪŋ oʊðz ɑn ðə laɪən θɹoʊn wɑz ə kʌstəm əz oʊld əz ændɝ. ʃi hæd tə ɹɪzɪs ðə dɪzaɪɝ tə sɪmpli fɔl ɑn əɹ niz ən wip ɪndə ðə θɹoʊnz sit. ɹɛkənsaɪl tə hɝ mʌðɝz dɛθ ʃi maɪt bi, bʌt ðɪs bɹɔt bæk ɔl ðə peɪn. ʃi kəd nɑt bɹeɪk daʊn naʊ.

Climbing the white marble steps of the dais, she laid a hand on one arm of the throne. She had no right to sit on it herself, not yet. Not until she was acknowledged Queen. But taking oaths on the Lion Throne was a custom as old as Andor. She had to resist the desire to simply fall on her knees and weep into the throne's seat. Reconciled to her mother's death she might be, but this brought back all the pain. She could not break down now.

"ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, əl ɑnɝ jəɹ mɛmɹi, mʌðɝ," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "aɪ wɪl ɑnɝ ðə neɪm ə mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkənd, ən tʃɹaɪ tə bɹɪŋ oʊnli ɑnɝ tə haʊs tʃɹəkənd."

"Under the Light, I will honor your memory, Mother," she said softly. "I will honor the name of Morgase Trakand, and try to bring only honor to House Trakand."

"aɪ ɔɹɾɝd ðə ɡɑɹdz tə kip ðə kjʊɹiəs ən ðə feɪvɝ-sikɝz əweɪ. aɪ səspɛktəd jə maɪt wɑnə bi əloʊn hɪɹ fəɹ ə taɪm."

"I ordered the guards to keep the curious and the favor-seekers away. I suspected you might want to be alone here for a time."

ɪleɪn tɝn sloʊli tə feɪs daɪɛlɪn tæɹɑvɪn, əz ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd wʊmən wɔk ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə ɡɹæn hɔl. daɪɛlɪn hæd bɪn wʌn ə hɝ mʌðɝz ɝliəst səpɔɹɾɝz ɪn əɹ oʊn kwɛs fəɹ ðə θɹoʊn. ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ ɡɹeɪ ɪn əɹ hɛɹ ðən ɪleɪn ɹɪmɛmbɝd, mɔɹ laɪnz ət ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɝ aɪz. ʃi wɑz stɪl kwaɪt bjuɾəfəl. ə stʃɹɔŋ wʊmən. ən paʊɝfəl əz fɹɛn əɹ foʊ.

Elayne turned slowly to face Dyelin Taravin, as the golden-haired woman walked the length of the Grand Hall. Dyelin had been one of her mother's earliest supporters in her own quest for the throne. There was more gray in her hair than Elayne remembered, more lines at the corners of her eyes. She was still quite beautiful. A strong woman. And powerful as friend or foe.

ʃi stɑpt ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə deɪz, lʊkɪŋ ʌp. "aɪv bɪn hɪɹɪŋ fəɹ tu deɪz ðət jə wɝ əlaɪv, bʌɾ aɪ dɪdn ɹɪli bɪliv ɪɾ əntɪl naʊ. juv kʌm tə æksɛp ðə θɹoʊn fɹəm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ðɛn?"

She stopped at the foot of the dais, looking up. "I've been hearing for two days that you were alive, but I didn't really believe it until now. You've come to accept the throne from the Dragon Reborn, then?"

"aɪ kleɪm ðə θɹoʊn baɪ maɪ oʊn ɹaɪt, daɪɛlɪn, wɪð maɪ oʊn hænd. ðə laɪən θɹoʊn ɪz noʊ bɔbəl tə bi æksɛptɪd fɹəm ə mæn." daɪɛlɪn nɑɾəd, əz ət sɛlf-ɛvəɾənt tʃɹuθ. wɪtʃ ɪt wɑz, tə ɛni ændɔɝən. "haʊ dʒju stænd, daɪɛlɪn? wɪð tʃɹəkənd, əɹ əɡɛnst? aɪ hæv hɝd jəɹ neɪm ɔfən ɑn maɪ weɪ hɪɹ."

"I claim the throne by my own right, Dyelin, with my own hand. The Lion Throne is no bauble to be accepted from a man." Dyelin nodded, as at self-evident truth. Which it was, to any Andoran. "How do you stand, Dyelin? With Trakand, or against? I have heard your name often on my way here."

"sɪns jə kleɪm ðə θɹoʊn baɪ jəɹ oʊn ɹaɪt, wɪð." fju pipəl kəd saʊn əz dʒɹaɪ əz ʃi. ɪleɪn sæt daʊn ɑn ðə tɑp stɛp, ən moʊʃən ði oʊldɝ wʊmən tə dʒɔɪn hɝ. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ə fju ɑbstəkəlz, ʌv kɔɹs," daɪɛlɪn wɛn ɑn əz ʃi ɡæðɝɾ əɹ blu skɝts tə sɪt. "ðɛɹ əv bɪn sɛvɹəl kleɪməns ɔlɹɛɾi, əz jə meɪ noʊ. nɑiən ən ɛləniə, aɪ hæv sɪkjʊɹli lɑkt ʌp. ɑn ə tʃɑɹdʒ ə tʃɹizən ðət moʊs pipəl sim wɪlɪŋ tə æksɛpt. fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ. ɛləniəz hʌzbən ɪz stɪl æktɪv fəɹ hɝ, ðoʊ kwaɪətli, ən ɛɹəmɪlə hæz ənaʊnst ə kleɪm, ðə sɪli ɡus. ʃiz ɡɛɾɪŋ səpɔɹɾ ʌv ə kaɪnd, bʌt nʌθɪŋ ðət nid wɝi ju. jəɹ ɹil wɝiz - əsaɪd fɹəm il ɔl oʊvɝ ðə sɪɾi weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn tə kʌm bæk - ɑɹ æɛmlɪn, ɑɝəθɛl, ən pɛlɪvɑɹ. fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, lwɑn ən ɛlɹin wɪl bi bɪhaɪn ju, bʌt ðeɪ maɪt ɡoʊ oʊvɝ tə ðoʊz θɹi."

"Since you claim the throne by your own right, with." Few people could sound as dry as she. Elayne sat down on the top step, and motioned the older woman to join her. "There are a few obstacles, of course," Dyelin went on as she gathered her blue skirts to sit. "There have been several claimants already, as you may know. Naean and Elenia, I have securely locked up. On a charge of treason that most people seem willing to accept. For the time being. Elenia's husband is still active for her, though quietly, and Arymilla has announced a claim, the silly goose. She's getting support of a kind, but nothing that need worry you. Your real worries - aside from Aiel all over the city waiting for the Dragon Reborn to come back - are Aemlyn, Arathelle, and Pelivar. For the moment, Luan and Ellorien will be behind you, but they might go over to those three."

ə vɛɹi səksɪŋk lɪst, dɪlɪvɝɾ ɪn ə toʊn suɾəbəl fəɹ dɪskʌsɪŋ ə pɑsəbəl hɔɹs tʃɹeɪd. nɑiən ən ɛləniə ʃi nu əbaʊt, ɪf nɑt ðət dʒɑɝɪd stɪl θɔɾ ɪz waɪf hæɾ ə tʃæns ət ðə θɹoʊn. ɛɹəmɪlə wɑz ə ɡus tə bɪliv ʃi wəd bi æksɛptɪd, wʌtɛvɝ əɹ səpɔɹt. ðə læs faɪv neɪmz wɝ wɝiɪŋ, ðoʊ. itʃ hæd bɪn əz stʃɹɔŋ ə səpɔɹɾɝ ə hɝ mʌðɝ, əz hæd daɪɛlɪn, ən itʃ lɛɾ ə stʃɹɔŋ haʊs.

A very succinct list, delivered in a tone suitable for discussing a possible horse trade. Naean and Elenia she knew about, if not that Jarid still thought his wife had a chance at the throne. Arymilla was a goose to believe she would be accepted, whatever her support. The last five names were worrying, though. Each had been as strong a supporter of her mother, as had Dyelin, and each led a strong House.

"soʊ ɑɝəθɛl ən æɛmlɪn wɑn ðə θɹoʊn," ɪleɪn mɝmɝd. "aɪ kæn bɪliv ɪɾ ʌv ɛlɹin, nɑt fəɹ hɝsɛlf." pɛlɪvɑɹ maɪt bi æktɪŋ fəɹ wʌn ə hɪz dɔɾɝz, bʌt lwɑn hæɾ oʊnli ɡɹændɔɾɝz, nʌn nɪɹ oʊld ɪnʌf. "ju spoʊk əz ɪf ðeɪ maɪt junaɪt, ɔl faɪv haʊsəz. bɪhaɪn hum?" ðət wəd bi ə daɪɹ θɹɛt.

"So Arathelle and Aemlyn want the throne," Elayne murmured. "I can't believe it of Ellorien, not for herself." Pelivar might be acting for one of his daughters, but Luan had only granddaughters, none near old enough. "You spoke as if they might unite, all five Houses. Behind whom?" That would be a dire threat.

smaɪlɪŋ, daɪɛlɪn pɹɑpt əɹ tʃɪn ɪn əɹ hænd. "ðeɪ sim tə θɪŋk aɪ ʃəɾ əv ðə θɹoʊn. naʊ, wʌt dʒju ɪntɛn əbaʊt ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn? hi hæzən bɪn bæk hɪɹ ɪn səm taɪm, bʌɾ i kən pɑp aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ, ɪt simz."

Smiling, Dyelin propped her chin in her hand. "They seem to think I should have the throne. Now, what do you intend about the Dragon Reborn? He hasn't been back here in some time, but he can pop out of the air, it seems."

ɪleɪn skwizd əɹ aɪz ʃʌt fəɹ ə moʊmənt, bʌt wən ʃi oʊpən ðɛm, ʃi wɑz stɪl sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə stɛps ə ðə deɪz ɪn ðə ɡɹæn hɔl, ən daɪɛlɪn wɑz stɪl smaɪlɪŋ ət hɝ. hɝ bɹʌðɝ fɔt fəɹ ɪleɪɾə, ən əɹ hæf-bɹʌðɝ wɑz ə waɪtkloʊk. ʃi hæd fɪl ðə pæləs wɪð wɪmən u maɪt tɝn ɑn wʌn ənʌðɝ əɾ ɛni moʊmənt, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə fæk ðət wʌn wɑz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, meɪbi ivən blæk ədʒɑ. ən ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəs θɹɛt ʃi feɪst ɪn kleɪmɪŋ ðə θɹoʊn, ə vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋ wʌn, stʊd bɪhaɪn ə wʊmən u sɛd ʃi səpɔɹɾəd ɪleɪn. ðə wɝld wɑz kwaɪt mæd. ʃi maɪɾ əz wɛl æɾ əɹ bɪt.

Elayne squeezed her eyes shut for a moment, but when she opened them, she was still sitting on the steps of the dais in the Grand Hall, and Dyelin was still smiling at her. Her brother fought for Elaida, and her half-brother was a Whitecloak. She had filled the Palace with women who might turn on one another at any moment, not to mention the fact that one was a Darkfriend, maybe even Black Ajah. And the strongest threat she faced in claiming the throne, a very strong one, stood behind a woman who said she supported Elayne. The world was quite mad. She might as well add her bit.

"aɪ min tə bɑn ɪm maɪ wɔɹɾɝ," ʃi sɛd, ən wɛn ɑn bɪfɔɹ ði ʌðɝ wʊmən kəd mɔɹ ðən blɪŋk ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt. "aɪ ɔlsoʊ hoʊp tə mɛɹi hɪm. ðoʊz θɪŋz əv nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə laɪən θɹoʊn, haʊɛvɝ. ðə vɛɹi fɝs θɪŋ aɪ ɪntɛnd . . ."

"I mean to bond him my Warder," she said, and went on before the other woman could more than blink in astonishment. "I also hope to marry him. Those things have nothing to do with the Lion Throne, however. The very first thing I intend . . ."

əz ʃi wɛn ɑn, daɪɛlɪn bɪɡæn tə læf. ɪleɪn wɪʃt ʃi nu wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz fɹəm dɪlaɪɾ oʊvɝ əɹ plænz əɹ kəz daɪɛlɪn sɔ hɝ oʊn pæθ tə ðə laɪən θɹoʊn biɪŋ meɪd smuð. ət list ʃi nu wʌt ʃi feɪst, naʊ.

As she went on, Dyelin began to laugh. Elayne wished she knew whether it was from delight over her plans or because Dyelin saw her own path to the Lion Throne being made smooth. At least she knew what she faced, now.

ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪndə keɪɛmlɪn, dɑv hænlən kəd nɑt hɛlp θɪŋkɪŋ wʌɾ ə sɪɾi fəɹ ðə luɾɪŋ ɪt wɑz. ɪn ɪz jɪɹz soʊlʒɝɪŋ, hi hæd sin mɛni vɪlədʒəz ən taʊnz luɾəd, ən wʌns, twɛnti jɪɹz əɡoʊ, ə ɡɹeɪt sɪɾi, kɛɹhin, æftɝ ði il lɛft. stʃɹeɪnʒ ðəɾ ɔl ðiz il hæd lɛf keɪɛmlɪn soʊ əpɛɹənli əntʌtʃt, bʌt ðɛn, ɪf ðə tɔlɪs taʊɝz ɪn kɛɹhin hæd nɑt bɪn bɝnɪŋ, ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn hɑɹd tə noʊ ðeɪ hæd bɪn ðɛɹ; plɛnti ʌv ɡoʊld, əmʌŋ ʌðɝ θɪŋz, laɪɪŋ əbaʊt fəɹ ðə pɪkɪŋ ʌp, ən plɛnti ʌv mɛn tə də ðə pɪkɪŋ. hi kəd si ðiz bɹɔd stʃɹits fʊl ə hɔɹsmən ən fliɪŋ pipəl, fæt mɝtʃəns u wəd ɡɪv ʌp ðɛɹ ɡoʊl bɪfɔɹ ðə naɪf tʌtʃt əm ɪn ðə hoʊp ðɛɹ laɪvz wəd bi spɛɹd, slɪm ɡɝlz ən plʌmp wɪmən soʊ tɛɹəfaɪd wən ðeɪ wɝ dʒɹæɡd ɪndə ə kɔɹnɝ ðət ðeɪ kəd hɑɹdli mænədʒ tə skwil, mʌtʃ lɛs stʃɹʌɡəl. hi hæd sin ðoʊz θɪŋz ən dʌn ðɛm, ən i hoʊp tə əɡɛn. nɑɾ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, ðoʊ, hi ədmɪɾəd wɪð ə saɪ. ɪf ði ɔɹɾɝz ðət sɛn ɪm hɪɹ hæd bɪn ðə sɔɹɾ i kəd dɪsəbeɪ, hi wʊɾə ɡɔn wɛɹ ðə pɪkɪŋz maɪt nɑt bi soʊ ɹɪtʃ, bʌt dɛfənətli iziɝ tə plʌk.

Riding into Caemlyn, Daved Hanlon could not help thinking what a city for the looting it was. In his years soldiering, he had seen many villages and towns looted, and once, twenty years ago, a great city, Cairhien, after the Aiel left. Strange that all these Aiel had left Caemlyn so apparently untouched, but then, if the tallest towers in Cairhien had not been burning, it might have been hard to know they had been there; plenty of gold, among other things, lying about for the picking up, and plenty of men to do the picking. He could see these broad streets full of horsemen and fleeing people, fat merchants who would give up their gold before the knife touched them in the hope their lives would be spared, slim girls and plump women so terrified when they were dragged into a corner that they could hardly manage to squeal, much less struggle. He had seen those things and done them, and he hoped to again. Not in Caemlyn, though, he admitted with a sigh. If the orders that sent him here had been the sort he could disobey, he would have gone where the pickings might not be so rich, but definitely easier to pluck.

hɪz ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz hæd bɪn klɪɹ. stɑbəlɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs ət ðə ɹɛd bʊl, ɪn ðə nu sɪɾi, hi wɔkt ə maɪl tə ə tɔl stoʊn haʊs ɑn ə saɪd stʃɹit, ðə haʊs ʌv ə wɛlθi mɝtʃən dɪskɹiɾ əbaʊɾ əɹ ɡoʊld, mɑɹkt wɪð ə taɪni peɪntəd sɪdʒəl ɑn ðə dɔɹz, ə ɹɛd hɑɹɾ ɑn ə ɡoʊldən hænd. ðə hʌlkɪŋ fɛloʊ hu lɛɾ ɪm ɪn wɑz noʊ mɝtʃəns sɝvənt, wɪð ɪz sʌŋkən nʌkəlz ən sʌlən aɪz. wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd, ðə hjudʒ mæn lɛɾ ɪm dipɝ ɪndə ðə haʊs, ðən daʊn, təwɔɹd ðə beɪsməns. hænlən izd ɪz sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪts skæbɝd. əmʌŋ ðə θɪŋz i hæd sin wɝ mɛn ən wɪmən, feɪljɝz, lɛd tə ðɛɹ oʊn vɛɹi ɪlæbɹəɾ ɛksəkjuʃənz. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i hæd feɪld, bʌt ðən əɡɛn, hi hæd hɑɹdli səksiɾəd. hi hæd fɑloʊɾ ɔɹɾɝz, ðoʊ. wɪtʃ wɑz nɑɾ ɔlweɪz ɪnʌf.

His instructions had been clear. Stabling his horse at The Red Bull, in the New City, he walked a mile to a tall stone house on a side street, the house of a wealthy merchant discreet about her gold, marked with a tiny painted sigil on the doors, a red heart on a golden hand. The hulking fellow who let him in was no merchant's servant, with his sunken knuckles and sullen eyes. Without a word, the huge man led him deeper into the house, then down, toward the basements. Hanlon eased his sword in its scabbard. Among the things he had seen were men and women, failures, led to their own very elaborate executions. He did not think he had failed, but then again, he had hardly succeeded. He had followed orders, though. Which was not always enough.

ɪn ðə ɹʌf stoʊn beɪsmənt, lɪt baɪ ɡɪldɪd læmps sɛɾ ɔl ɝaʊnd, hɪz aɪz wɛn fɝs tə ə pɹɪɾi wʊmən ɪn ə leɪs-tʃɹɪm dʒɹɛs ə skɑɹlət sɪlk, wɪð əɹ hɛɹ kɑɾ ɪn fɹɔθi leɪs nɛt. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ hu ðɪs leɪɾi ʃieɪn wɑz, bʌɾ ɪz ɔɹɾɝz hæd bɪn tə oʊbeɪ hɝ. hi meɪɾ ɪz bɛs lɛɡ, smaɪlɪŋ. ʃi sɪmpli lʊkt ət hɪm, əz ɪf weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪm tə noʊɾəs wʌɾ ɛls ðə beɪsmən hɛld.

In the rough stone basement, lit by gilded lamps set all around, his eyes went first to a pretty woman in a lace-trimmed dress of scarlet silk, with her hair caught in frothy lace net. He did not know who this Lady Shiaine was, but his orders had been to obey her. He made his best leg, smiling. She simply looked at him, as if waiting for him to notice what else the basement held.

hi kəd hɑɹdli hæv mɪst ɪt, sɪns ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju kæsks ðə ɹum hɛld oʊnli ə lɑɹdʒ hɛvi teɪbəl, dɛkɝeɪɾəd ɪn ə vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ fæʃən. tu oʊvəlz hæd bɪn kʌɾ ɪn ðə teɪbəltɑp, ən fɹəm wʌn stʌk ðə hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz ʌv ə mæn, hɪz hɛd ɹɛntʃt bæk əɡɛns ðə wʊɾən sɝfəs ən hɛl ðəɹ baɪ minz ə lɛðɝ stʃɹæps neɪl tə ðə teɪbəltɑp ən fæsən tə ə blɑk ʌv wʊd dʒæm bɪtwin ɪz tiθ. ə wʊmən, pɹipɛɹd ðə seɪm, pɹəvaɪɾəd ði ʌðɝ dɛkɝeɪʃən. bɪniθ ðə teɪbəl, ðeɪ nɛlt wɪð ɹɪsts taɪd tə æŋkəlz. kwaɪt sɪkjʊɹli hɛl fəɹ ɛni sɔɹɾ ə plɛʒɝ. ðə mæn hæɾ ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪ ɪn ɪz hɛɹ ən ðə feɪs ʌv ə lɔɹd, bʌɾ ʌnsɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, hɪz dip-sɛɾ aɪz ɹoʊld waɪldli. ðə wʊmənz hɛɹ, spɹɛɾ aʊɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl, wɑz dɑɹk ən ɡlɔsi, bʌɾ əɹ feɪs wɑz ə lɪɾəl lɔŋ fəɹ hænlənz teɪst.

He could hardly have missed it, since except for a few casks the room held only a large heavy table, decorated in a very strange fashion. Two ovals had been cut in the tabletop, and from one stuck the head and shoulders of a man, his head wrenched back against the wooden surface and held there by means of leather straps nailed to the tabletop and fastened to a block of wood jammed between his teeth. A woman, prepared the same, provided the other decoration. Beneath the table, they knelt with wrists tied to ankles. Quite securely held for any sort of pleasure. The man had a touch of gray in his hair and the face of a lord, but unsurprisingly, his deep-set eyes rolled wildly. The woman's hair, spread out on the table, was dark and glossy, but her face was a little long for Hanlon's taste.

sʌɾənli hi ɹɪli sɔ hɝ feɪs, ən ɪz hæn lɛp tə hɪz sɔɹd bɪfɔɹ i kəd stɑp ɪt. ɹilisɪŋ ðə hɪl tʊk səm ɛfɝt, wɪtʃ i meɪd peɪnz tə haɪd. ən ɛɛs sədaɪz feɪs, bʌɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hu lɛt hɝsɛlf bi fæsən laɪk ðət wɑz noʊ θɹɛt.

Suddenly he really saw her face, and his hand leaped to his sword before he could stop it. Releasing the hilt took some effort, which he made pains to hide. An Aes Sedai's face, but an Aes Sedai who let herself be fastened like that was no threat.

"soʊ juv səm bɹeɪnz," ʃieɪn sɛd. baɪ hɝ æksɛns, ʃi wɑz ə noʊbəl, ən ʃi sɝɾənli hæd ðə kəmændɪŋ ɛɹ, swipɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə teɪbəl tə pɪɹ daʊn ɪndə ðə baʊn mænz feɪs. "aɪ æsk ðə ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ mɔɹaɪɾɪn tə sɛn mi ə mæn wɪð bɹeɪnz. pʊɹ dʒeɪitʃɪm hɪɹ əz vɛɹi fju."

"So you have some brains," Shiaine said. By her accents, she was a noble, and she certainly had the commanding air, sweeping around the table to peer down into the bound man's face. "I asked the Great Master Moridin to send me a man with brains. Poor Jaichim here has very few."

hænlən fɹaʊnd, ən smuðd ɪɾ əweɪ ɪmiɾiətli. hɪz ɔɹɾɝz hæd kʌm fɹəm mɑɡiɾin hɝsɛlf. hu ɪn ðə pɪɾ ə dum wɑz mɔɹaɪɾɪn? ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ. hɪz ɔɹɾɝz hæd kʌm fɹəm mɑɡiɾin; ðət wɑz ɪnʌf.

Hanlon frowned, and smoothed it away immediately. His orders had come from Moghedien herself. Who in the Pit of Doom was Moridin? It did not matter. His orders had come from Moghedien; that was enough.

ðə hʌlkɪŋ fɛloʊ hændəd ʃieɪn ə fʌnəl, wɪtʃ ʃi fɪɾəd ɪndə ə hoʊl bɔɹd θɹu ðə blɑk ʌv wʊd bɪtwin ðɪs dʒeɪitʃɪmz tiθ. ðə mænz aɪz simd ɹɛɾi tə lip fɹəm ɪz hɛd. "pʊɹ dʒeɪitʃɪm hɪɹ feɪl vɛɹi bædli," ʃieɪn sɛd, smaɪlɪŋ laɪk ə fɑks lʊkɪŋ əɾ ə tʃɪkən. "mɔɹaɪɾɪn wɪʃɪz ɪm pʌnɪʃt. pʊɹ dʒeɪitʃɪm dʌz laɪk ɪz bɹændi."

The hulking fellow handed Shiaine a funnel, which she fitted into a hole bored through the block of wood between this Jaichim's teeth. The man's eyes seemed ready to leap from his head. "Poor Jaichim here failed very badly," Shiaine said, smiling like a fox looking at a chicken. "Moridin wishes him punished. Poor Jaichim does like his brandy."

ʃi stɛp bæk, nɑt soʊ fɑɹ ðət ʃi kəd nɑt si klɪɹli, ən hænlən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ əz ðə hʌlkɪŋ mæn keɪm tə ðə teɪbəl wɪð wʌn ə ðə kæsks. hænlən dɪd θɪŋk i cʊɾə lɪftəd ðə θɪŋ əneɪɾɪd, bʌt ðə bɪɡ mæn tɪpt ɪɾ izəli. ðə baʊn mæn ʃɹikt wʌns, ən ðən ə stʃɹim ə dɑɹk lɪkwəd wɑz pɔɹɪŋ fɹəm ðə kæsk ɪndə ðə fʌnəl, tɝnɪŋ ɪz kɹaɪ tə ɡɝɡəlɪŋ. ðə ɹʌf smɛl ə kɹud bɹændi fɪl ði ɛɹ. sɪkjʊɹɾ əz i wɑz, ðə mæn fɔt, θɹæʃɪŋ əbaʊt, ivən mænɪdʒɪŋ tə hiv ðə teɪbəl saɪdweɪz, bʌt ðə bɹændi kɛpt pɔɹɪŋ. bʌbəlz ɹoʊz ɪn ðə fʌnəl əz i tʃɹaɪd tə ʃaʊɾ əɹ skɹim, bʌt ðə stɛɾi stʃɹim nɛvɝ fɔltɝd. ən ðən ɪz θɹæʃɪŋ sloʊɾ ən stɑpt. waɪd, ɡleɪzɪŋ aɪz stɛɹɾ ʌp ðə silɪŋ, ən bɹændi tʃɹɪkəl fɹəm ɪz nɑstʃɹəlz. ðə bɪɡ fɛloʊ stɪl dɪd nɑt stɑp əntɪl ðə læs dʒɹɑps fɛl fɹəm ən ɛmpti kæsk.

She stepped back, not so far that she could not see clearly, and Hanlon gave a start as the hulking man came to the table with one of the casks. Hanlon did think he could have lifted the thing unaided, but the big man tipped it easily. The bound man shrieked once, and then a stream of dark liquid was pouring from the cask into the funnel, turning his cry to gurgling. The rough smell of crude brandy filled the air. Secured as he was, the man fought, thrashing about, even managing to heave the table sideways, but the brandy kept pouring. Bubbles rose in the funnel as he tried to shout or scream, but the steady stream never faltered. And then his thrashing slowed and stopped. Wide, glazing eyes stared up the ceiling, and brandy trickled from his nostrils. The big fellow still did not stop until the last drops fell from an empty cask.

"aɪ θɪŋk pʊɹ dʒeɪitʃɪm əz faɪnəli hæɾ ɪnʌf bɹændi," ʃieɪn sɛd, ən læft ɪn dɪlaɪt.

"I think poor Jaichim has finally had enough brandy," Shiaine said, and laughed in delight.

hænlən nɑɾəd. hi səpoʊz ðə mæn hæd, ət ðæt. hi wʌndɝɾ u hi hæd bɪn.

Hanlon nodded. He supposed the man had, at that. He wondered who he had been.

ʃieɪn wɑz nɑt kwaɪt fɪnɪʃt. əɾ ə dʒɛstʃɝ fɹəm hɝ, ðə hʌlkɪŋ mæn ɹɪpt wʌn ə ðə stʃɹæps hoʊldɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪz ɡæɡ ɔf ʌv ɪts neɪl. hænlən θɔt ðə wʊɾən blɑk maɪɾ əv lusən ə fju ʌv əɹ tiθ kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɝ maʊθ, bʌɾ ɪf soʊ, ʃi dɪd nɑt weɪs taɪm ɑn ðɛm. ʃi bɪɡæn bæbəlɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə fɛloʊ lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv ðə stʃɹæp.

Shiaine was not quite finished. At a gesture from her, the hulking man ripped one of the straps holding the Aes Sedai's gag off of its nail. Hanlon thought the wooden block might have loosened a few of her teeth coming out of her mouth, but if so, she did not waste time on them. She began babbling before the fellow let go of the strap.

"aɪ wɪl oʊbeɪ ju!" ʃi haʊld. "aɪ wɪl oʊbeɪ, əz ðə ɡɹeɪt mæstɝ kəmændəd! hi sɛt ðə ʃild ɑn mi tə dɪzɑlv soʊ aɪ kəɾ oʊbeɪ! hi toʊl mi soʊ! lemi pɹuv maɪsɛlf! əl kɹɔl! aɪm ə wɝm, ən jə ɑɹ ðə sʌn! oʊ, pliz! pliz! pliz!"

"I will obey you!" she howled. "I will obey, as the Great Master commanded! He set the shield on me to dissolve so I could obey! He told me so! Let me prove myself! I will crawl! I am a worm, and you are the sun! Oh, please! Please! Please!"

ʃieɪn staɪfəld wɝdz ɪf nɑt wɪmpɝz baɪ pʊɾɪŋ ə hæn oʊvɝ ði ɛɛs sədaɪz maʊθ. "haʊ də aɪ noʊ jə woʊn feɪl əɡɛn, fæljən? juv feɪl bɪfɔɹ, ən mɔɹaɪɾɪn lɛf jəɹ pʌnɪʃmən tə mi. hi ɡeɪv mi ənʌðɝ; də aɪ nid tu ʌv ju? aɪ meɪ ɡɪv jə ə sɛkən tʃæns tə plid jəɹ keɪs, fæljən - pɝhæps - bʌɾ ɪf aɪ du, jəl əv tə kənvɪns mi. əl ɪkspɛk tʃɹu ɪnθuziæzəm."

Shiaine stifled words if not whimpers by putting a hand over the Aes Sedai's mouth. "How do I know you won't fail again, Falion? You have failed before, and Moridin left your punishment to me. He gave me another; do I need two of you? I may give you a second chance to plead your case, Falion - perhaps - but if I do, you will have to convince me. I will expect true enthusiasm."

fæljən bɪɡæn skɹimɪŋ pliz əɡɛn, meɪkɪŋ ɪkstʃɹævəɡən pɹɑməsəz, ðə moʊmənt ʃieɪnz hæn muvd, bʌt sun ɪnʌf ʃi wɑz ɹədus tə wɝdləs ʃɹiks ən tɪɹz əz ðə ɡæɡ wɑz ɹipleɪst, ðə neɪl dʒɹɪvən θɹu ðə stʃɹæp əɡɛn, ən dʒeɪitʃɪmz fʌnəl pleɪst əbʌv əɹ ɡeɪpɪŋ θɹoʊt. ðə hʌlkɪŋ mæn stʊɾ ənʌðɝ kæsk ɑn ðə teɪbəl bɪsaɪɾ əɹ hɛd. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sim tə ɡoʊ mæd, bʌlʒɪŋ aɪz ɹoʊlɪŋ, flɪŋɪŋ hɝsɛlf əbaʊt bɪloʊ ðə teɪbəl tɪl ɪt tʃɹɛmbəld.

Falion began screaming pleas again, making extravagant promises, the moment Shiaine's hand moved, but soon enough she was reduced to wordless shrieks and tears as the gag was replaced, the nail driven through the strap again, and Jaichim's funnel placed above her gaping throat. The hulking man stood another cask on the table beside her head. The Aes Sedai seemed to go mad, bulging eyes rolling, flinging herself about below the table till it trembled.

hænlən wɑz ɪmpɹɛst. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ mʌs bi hɑɹɾɝ tə bɹeɪk ðən ə plʌmp mɝtʃən əɹ ɪz ɹaʊnd-tʃik dɔɾɝ. stɪl, ʃi hæd hæd ðə hɛlp ʌv wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən, ɪt simd. ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðət ʃieɪn wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, hi stɑp smaɪlɪŋ daʊn ət fæljən. hɪz fɝst ɹul ɪn laɪf wɑz nɛvɝ tə əfɛn ðoʊz ðə tʃoʊzən sɛɾ əbʌv hɪm.

Hanlon was impressed. An Aes Sedai must be harder to break than a plump merchant or his round-cheeked daughter. Still, she had had the help of one of the Chosen, it seemed. Realizing that Shiaine was looking at him, he stopped smiling down at Falion. His first rule in life was never to offend those the Chosen set above him.

"tɛl mi, hænlən," ʃieɪn sɛd, "haʊ wəd jə laɪk tə pʊt jəɹ hænz ɑn ə kwin?"

"Tell me, Hanlon," Shiaine said, "how would you like to put your hands on a queen?"

hi lɪkt ɪz lɪps ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf. ə kwin? ðæt, hi hæd nɛvɝ dʌn.

He licked his lips in spite of himself. A queen? That, he had never done.


tʃæptɝ twɛntinaɪn


CHAPTER 29

eɪ kʌp ə slip


A Cup of Sleep

"doʊn bi ən ʌɾɝ wʊlhɛd, ɹænd," mɪn sɛd. meɪkɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɹɪmeɪn siɾəd, ʃi kɹɔst əɹ lɛɡz ən kɪkt əɹ fʊɾ aɪdli, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt kip ɛksæspɝeɪʃən aʊɾ ə hɝ vɔɪs. "ɡoʊ tə hɝ! spik tə hɝ!"

"Don't be an utter woolhead, Rand," Min said. Making herself remain seated, she crossed her legs and kicked her foot idly, but she could not keep exasperation out of her voice. "Go to her! Speak to her!"

"waɪ?" hi snæpt. "aɪ noʊ wɪtʃ lɛɾɝ tə bɪliv, naʊ. ɪts bɛɾɝ ðɪs weɪ. ʃiz seɪf, naʊ. fɹəm ɛniwʌn u wɑns tə stʃɹaɪk ət mi. seɪf fɹəm mi! ɪts bɛɾɝ!" bʌɾ i stɔkt ʌp ən daʊn ɪn ɪz ʃɝtslivz bɪtwin ðə tu ɹoʊz ə tʃɛɹz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə dʒɹæɡən θɹoʊn, hɪz fɪsts waɪt-nʌkəl hɑɹd, ɡlɛɹɪŋ tə bit ðə blæk klaʊdz bɪɑn ðə keɪsməns ðət wɝ leɪɪŋ ə nu blæŋkəɾ ə snoʊ ɑn kɛɹhin.

"Why?" he snapped. "I know which letter to believe, now. It's better this way. She's safe, now. From anyone who wants to strike at me. Safe from me! It's better!" But he stalked up and down in his shirtsleeves between the two rows of chairs in front of the Dragon Throne, his fists white-knuckle hard, glaring to beat the black clouds beyond the casements that were laying a new blanket of snow on Cairhien.

mɪn ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks wɪð fɛdwɪn mɔɹ, hu stʊd baɪ ðə sʌn-kɑɹv dɔɹz. ðə meɪɾənz naʊ lɛɾ ɛniwʌn u wɑz nɑɾ ən ɑbviəs θɹɛt wɔk ɪn ʌnənaʊnst, bʌt ðoʊz ɹænd dɪd nɑt wɑnə si ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ wəd bi tɝn əweɪ baɪ ðə hʌski bɔɪ. hi wɔɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ən sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz blæk kɑlɝ, ən mɪn nu hi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi sin mɔɹ bæɾəlz - mɔɹ hɔɹɝ - ðən moʊs mɛn θɹi taɪmz ɪz eɪdʒ, jɛɾ i wɑz ə bɔɪ. tədeɪ, kæstɪŋ ənizi ɡlænsɪz ət ɹænd, hi sim jʌŋɡɝ ðən ɛvɝ. ðə sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz hɪp stɪl lʊkt aʊɾ ə pleɪs, tə hɝ.

Min exchanged looks with Fedwin Morr, who stood by the sun-carved doors. The Maidens now let anyone who was not an obvious threat walk in unannounced, but those Rand did not want to see this morning would be turned away by the husky boy. He wore the Dragon and Sword on his black collar, and Min knew he had already seen more battles - more horror - than most men three times his age, yet he was a boy. Today, casting uneasy glances at Rand, he seemed younger than ever. The sword on his hip still looked out of place, to her.

"ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪz ə mæn, fɛdwɪn," ʃi sɛd. "æn laɪk ɛni mæn, hiz sʌlkɪŋ kəz i θɪŋks ə wʊmən dʌznt wɑnə si hɪm əɡɛn."

"The Dragon Reborn is a man, Fedwin," she said. "And like any man, he's sulking because he thinks a woman doesn't want to see him again."

ɡɑəlɪŋ, ðə bɔɪ dʒɝkt əz ɪf ʃi hæd ɡus hɪm. ɹænd stɑp tə skaʊl əɾ əɹ sʌlənli. ɔl ðət kɛpt əɹ fɹəm læfɪŋ wɑz noʊɪŋ ðəɾ i wɑz haɪɾɪŋ peɪn əz ɹil əz ɛni stæb waʊnd. ðæt, ən ðə ʃʊɹ nɑlədʒ ðəɾ i wəd bi əz hɝɾ ɪf ʃi hæd dʌn wʌt hæd bɪn dʌn. nɑt ðət ʃi wəɾ ɛvɝ əv ðə tʃæns tə ɹɪp daʊn ɪz bænɝz, bʌt ðə pɔɪn əplaɪd. ɹænd hæd bɪn stʌn ət fɝs baɪ ðə nuz teɪm bɹɔt fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn ət dɔn, bʌɾ əz sun əz ðə mæn lɛft, hi hæd stɑp lʊkɪŋ laɪk ə pɑliæks bʊl ən stɑɹɾəd . . . ðɪs!

Goggling, the boy jerked as if she had goosed him. Rand stopped to scowl at her sullenly. All that kept her from laughing was knowing that he was hiding pain as real as any stab wound. That, and the sure knowledge that he would be as hurt if she had done what had been done. Not that she would ever have the chance to rip down his banners, but the point applied. Rand had been stunned at first by the news Taim brought from Caemlyn at dawn, but as soon as the man left, he had stopped looking like a poleaxed bull and started . . . This!

stændɪŋ, ʃi ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ peɪl ɡɹin koʊt, foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts, ən kənfɹʌntəɾ ɪm dɝɛkli. "wʌɾ ɛls kən ɪt bi?" ʃi æskt kɑmli. wɛl, ʃi tʃɹaɪd fəɹ kɑm, ən ɔlmoʊs meɪɾ ɪt. ʃi lʌv ðə mæn, bʌɾ æftɝ ə mɔɹnɪŋ ə ðɪs, ʃi wɑntəd tə bɑks ɪz ɪɹz saʊnli. "ju hævən mɛnʃən mæt twaɪs, ən jə doʊnt noʊ wɛðɝ hiz ivən əlaɪv."

Standing, she adjusted her pale green coat, folded her arms beneath her breasts, and confronted him directly. "What else can it be?" she asked calmly. Well, she tried for calm, and almost made it. She loved the man, but after a morning of this, she wanted to box his ears soundly. "You haven't mentioned Mat twice, and you don't know whether he's even alive."

"mæts əlaɪv," ɹænd snɑɹəld. "aɪd noʊ ɪf i wɑz dɛd. wʌt dʒju min ɪm - !" hɪz dʒɔ klɛntʃt əz ɪf i kəd nɑt meɪk hɪmsɛlf seɪ ðə wɝd.

"Mat's alive," Rand snarled. "I'd know if he was dead. What do you mean I'm - !" His jaw clenched as if he could not make himself say the word.

"sʌlkɪŋ," ʃi pɹəvaɪɾəd. "sun, jəl bi paʊɾɪŋ. səm wɪmən θɪŋk mɛn ɑɹ pɹɪɾiɝ wən ðeɪ paʊt. aɪm nɑt wʌn ə ðɛm." wɛl, ɪnʌf ə ðæt. hɪz feɪs hæd dɑɹkənd, ən i wɑz nɑt blʌʃɪŋ. "hævən jə twɪstəd jɝsɛlf ɪndə nɑts tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ʃi ɡɑt ðə θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ? wɪtʃ ɪz hɝz baɪ ɹaɪt, maɪɾ aɪ æd. dɪdn jə seɪ jə wɑntəɾ əɹ tə hæv ændɝ hoʊl, nɑt ɹɪpt əpɑɹt laɪk kɛɹhin əɹ tiɹ?"

"Sulking," she provided. "Soon, you'll be pouting. Some women think men are prettier when they pout. I'm not one of them." Well, enough of that. His face had darkened, and he was not blushing. "Haven't you twisted yourself into knots to make sure she got the throne of Andor? Which is hers by right, might I add. Didn't you say you wanted her to have Andor whole, not ripped apart like Cairhien or Tear?"

"aɪ dɪd!" hi ɹɔɹd. "ænd naʊ ɪts hɝz, ən ʃi wɑns mi aʊɾ ʌv ɪt! ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf, aɪ seɪ! ən doʊn tɛl mi əɡɛn tə stɑp ʃaʊɾɪŋ! aɪm nɑt - !" hi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i wɑz, ən klæmpt ɪz tiθ ʃʌt. ə loʊ ɡɹaʊl keɪm fɹəm ɪz θɹoʊt. mɔɹ sɛt tə stʌɾiɪŋ wʌn ə hɪz bʌɾənz, twɪstɪŋ ɪt bæk ən fɔɹθ. hi hæd bɪn duɪŋ ə lɑɾ ə ðət ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ.

"I did!" he roared. "And now it's hers, and she wants me out of it! Good enough, I say! And don't tell me again to stop shouting! I'm not - !" He realized that he was, and clamped his teeth shut. A low growl came from his throat. Morr set to studying one of his buttons, twisting it back and forth. He had been doing a lot of that this morning.

mɪn kɛpt əɹ feɪs smuð. ʃi wɑz nɑt gɑnə slæp hɪm, ən i wɑz tu bɪɡ fəɹ əɹ tə spæŋk. "ændɝ ɪz hɝz, dʒʌst əz jə wɑntəd," ʃi sɛd. kɑmli. ɔlmoʊst. "nʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ æftɝ əɹ naʊ ʃiz tɔɹn jəɹ bænɝz daʊn." ə deɪnʒɝəs laɪɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðoʊz blu-ɡɹeɪ aɪz, bʌt ʃi pɹɛst ɑn. "dʒʌst əz jə wɑntəd. ən jə kæn bɪliv ʃiz saɪɾɪŋ wɪð jəɹ ɛnəmiz. ændɝ wɪl fɑloʊ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən jə noʊ ɪt. soʊ ði oʊnli ɹizən fəɹ jə tə bi ɪn ə snɪɾ ɪz kəz jə θɪŋk ʃi dʌznt wɑnə si ju. ɡoʊ tə hɝ, jə ful!" ðə nɛks pɑɹt wɑz ðə hɑɹɾəst tə seɪ. "bɪfɔɹ jə kən seɪ tu wɝdz, ʃɪl bi kɪsɪŋ ju." laɪt, ʃi lʌvd ɪleɪn ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi dɪd ɹænd - meɪbi əz mʌtʃ, ɪn ə vɛɹi dɪfɹənt weɪ - bʌt haʊ wɑz ə wʊmən tə kəmpit wɪð ə bjuɾəfəl ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd kwin u hæɾ ə paʊɝfəl neɪʃən əɾ əɹ bɛk ən kɔl?

Min kept her face smooth. She was not going to slap him, and he was too big for her to spank. "Andor is hers, just as you wanted," she said. Calmly. Almost. "None of the Forsaken are going after her now she's torn your banners down." A dangerous light appeared in those blue-gray eyes, but she pressed on. "Just as you wanted. And you can't believe she's siding with your enemies. Andor will follow the Dragon Reborn, and you know it. So the only reason for you to be in a snit is because you think she doesn't want to see you. Go to her, you fool!" The next part was the hardest to say. "Before you can say two words, she'll be kissing you." Light, she loved Elayne almost as much as she did Rand - maybe as much, in a very different way - but how was a woman to compete with a beautiful golden-haired queen who had a powerful nation at her beck and call?

"aɪ æm nɑt . . . æŋɡɹi," ɹænd sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs. ən stɑɹɾəd peɪsɪŋ əɡɛn. mɪn kənsɪɾɝd kɪkɪŋ ɪm skwɛɹ ɪn ðə bɑɾəm. hɑɹd.

"I am not . . . angry," Rand said in a tight voice. And started pacing again. Min considered kicking him square in the bottom. Hard.

wʌn ə ðə dɔɹz oʊpən tə ədmɪt lɛðɝi waɪt-hɛɹd sɔɹɪliə, hu bɹʌʃt mɔɹ əsaɪɾ ivən əz i wɑz lʊkɪŋ tə si wɛðɝ ɹænd wɑntəɾ əɹ əlaʊɾ ɛntʃɹi. ɹænd oʊpən ɪz maʊθ - æŋɡɹəli, wʌtɛvɝ i tʃoʊz tə kleɪm - ən faɪv wɪmən ɪn θɪk blæk ɹoʊbz dæmp wɪð mɛltəd snoʊ fɑloʊd ðə waɪz wʌn ɪndə ðə ɹum, hænz foʊldəd, aɪz daʊn, ən dip hʊdz nɑt kwaɪt haɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ feɪsəz. ðɛɹ fit wɝ ɹæpt ɪn ɹæɡz.

One of the doors opened to admit leathery white-haired Sorilea, who brushed Morr aside even as he was looking to see whether Rand wanted her allowed entry. Rand opened his mouth - angrily, whatever he chose to claim - and five women in thick black robes damp with melted snow followed the Wise One into the room, hands folded, eyes down, and deep hoods not quite hiding their faces. Their feet were wrapped in rags.

mɪnz skælp pɹɪkəld. tə hɝ aɪz, ɪmədʒəz ən ɔʊɹəz dænst ən vænɪʃt ən wɝ ɹipleɪst ɝaʊn ɔl sɪks wɪmən, dʒʌst əz ɝaʊn ɹænd. ʃi hæd bɪn hoʊpɪŋ i hæd fɝɡɑɾən ðoʊz faɪv wɝ əlaɪv. wʌɾ ɪn ðə neɪm ə ðə laɪt wɑz ðət wɪkəɾ oʊld wʊmən duɪŋ?

Min's scalp prickled. To her eyes, images and auras danced and vanished and were replaced around all six women, just as around Rand. She had been hoping he had forgotten those five were alive. What in the name of the Light was that wicked old woman doing?

sɔɹɪliə dʒɛstʃɝd wʌns ɪn ə klæɾɝ ʌv ɡoʊld ən aɪvɝi bɹeɪslɪts, ən ðə faɪv heɪstəli ɝeɪnʒd ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn ə laɪn ətɑp ðə ɡoʊldən ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn sɛɾ ɪn ðə stoʊn flɔɹ. ɹænd stʃɹoʊɾ əlɔŋ ðət ɹoʊ, stʃɹɪpɪŋ bæk hʊdz, bɛɹɪŋ feɪsəz ðəɾ i stɛɹɾ ɪndə koʊld-aɪd.

Sorilea gestured once in a clatter of gold and ivory bracelets, and the five hastily arranged themselves in a line atop the golden Rising Sun set in the stone floor. Rand strode along that row, stripping back hoods, baring faces that he stared into cold-eyed.

ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðə blæk-ɹoʊbd wɪmən wɑz ənwɑʃt, hɝ hɛɹ læŋk ən dɝɾi wɪð swɛt. ɛlzə pɛnfəl, ə ɡɹin sɪstɝ, mɛɾ ɪz ɡeɪz iɡɝli, ə stʃɹeɪnʒli fɝvən lʊk ɑn əɹ feɪs. nɛsun bihɑɹə, ə slɛndɝ bɹaʊn, stʌɾid ɪm əz ɪntɛnli əz i dɪd hɝ. sɝin nɛmdɑl, soʊ bjuɾəfəl ivən ɪn əɹ dɝt ðət jə θɔɾ əɹ eɪɡləsnəs mʌs bi nætʃɹəl, əpɪɹd tə bi hoʊldɪŋ tə hɝ waɪɾ ədʒɑ kulnəs baɪ ə fɪŋɡɝneɪl. bɛldaɪn nɪɹæm, tu nu tə ðə ʃɔl tə hæv ði eɪdʒləs fitʃɝz, ɛseɪɾ ən ənsɝɾən smaɪl ðət mɛltəɾ ʌndɝ ɪz stɛɹ. ɛɹiən bɹoʊlɛoʊz, peɪl ən ɔlmoʊst əz lʌvli əz sɝin, flɪntʃt, ðən vɪzəbli fɔɹs hɝsɛlf tə lʊk ɪndə ðət fɹɪdʒəd ɡeɪz. ðoʊz læs tu ɔlsoʊ wɝ ɡɹin, ən ɔl faɪv hæd bɪn əmʌŋ ðə sɪstɝz u kɪdnæpt ɪm ɑn ɪleɪɾəz ɔɹɾɝz. səm hæd bɪn əmʌŋ ðoʊz u tɔɹtʃɝɾ ɪm waɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kæɹi hɪm tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. səmtaɪmz ɹænd stɪl woʊk, swɛɾɪŋ ən pæntɪŋ, mʌmbəlɪŋ əbaʊt biɪŋ kənfaɪnd, biɪŋ biɾən. mɪn hoʊpt ʃi dɪd nɑt si mɝɾɝ ɪn ɪz stɛɹ.

Every one of the black-robed women was unwashed, her hair lank and dirty with sweat. Elza Penfell, a Green sister, met his gaze eagerly, a strangely fervent look on her face. Nesune Bihara, a slender Brown, studied him as intently as he did her. Sarene Nemdahl, so beautiful even in her dirt that you thought her agelessness must be natural, appeared to be holding to her White Ajah coolness by a fingernail. Beldeine Nyram, too new to the shawl to have the ageless features, essayed an uncertain smile that melted under his stare. Erian Boroleos, pale and almost as lovely as Sarene, flinched, then visibly forced herself to look into that frigid gaze. Those last two also were Green, and all five had been among the sisters who kidnapped him on Elaida's orders. Some had been among those who tortured him while trying to carry him to Tar Valon. Sometimes Rand still woke, sweating and panting, mumbling about being confined, being beaten. Min hoped she did not see murder in his stare.

"ðiz wɝ neɪm dætsæŋ, ɹænd ælθɹ," sɔɹɪliə sɛd. "aɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ fil ðɛɹ ʃeɪm ɪn ðə boʊn, naʊ. ɛɹiən bɹoʊlɛoʊz wɑz ðə fɝs tə æsk tə bi biɾən əz jə wɝ, sʌnɹaɪz ən sʌnsɛt, bʌt naʊ itʃ əz dʌn soʊ. ðət pli hæz bɪn ɡɹæntəd. itʃ əz æsk tə sɝv jə haʊɛvɝ ʃi meɪ. ðə toʊ fəɹ ðɛɹ bɪtʃɹeɪəl kænɑt bi mɛt," hɝ vɔɪs dɑɹkən fəɹ ə moʊmənt; tə ði il, ðə bɪtʃɹeɪəl ə ðə kɪdnæpɪŋ wɑz fɑɹ wɝs ðən wʌt ðeɪ hæd dʌn æftɝ, "jɛt ðeɪ noʊ ðɛɹ ʃeɪm, ən ðeɪ wɪʃ tə tʃɹaɪ. wɪv dɪsaɪɾɪd tə liv ðə tʃɔɪs tə ju."

"These were named da'tsang, Rand al'Thor," Sorilea said. "I think they feel their shame in the bone, now. Erian Boroleos was the first to ask to be beaten as you were, sunrise and sunset, but now each has done so. That plea has been granted. Each has asked to serve you however she may. The toh for their betrayal cannot be met," her voice darkened for a moment; to the Aiel, the betrayal of the kidnapping was far worse than what they had done after, "yet they know their shame, and they wish to try. We have decided to leave the choice to you."

mɪn fɹaʊnd. liv ðə tʃɔɪs tə hɪm? waɪz wʌnz ɹɛɹli lɛft ɛni tʃɔɪs ðeɪ kəd meɪk tə ɛniwʌn ɛls. sɔɹɪliə nɛvɝ dɪd. ðə sɪnjui waɪz wʌn kæʒəwəli ʃɪftəɾ əɹ dɑɹk ʃɔl ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz ən wɑtʃt ɹænd əz ɪf ðɪs wɑz ə noʊ ɪmpɔɹɾəns əɾ ɔl. bʌt ʃi ʃɑt wʌn blu aɪs ɡlæns ət mɪn, ən sʌɾənli mɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ɪf ʃi sɛd ðə ɹɔŋ θɪŋ hɪɹ, ðət boʊni oʊld wʊmən wəɾ əv əɹ haɪd. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə vjuɪŋ. ʃi dʒʌs nu sɔɹɪliə bɛɾɝ ðən ʃi wɑntəd tə, baɪ naʊ.

Min frowned. Leave the choice to him? Wise Ones rarely left any choice they could make to anyone else. Sorilea never did. The sinewy Wise One casually shifted her dark shawl on her shoulders and watched Rand as if this was of no importance at all. But she shot one blue ice glance at Min, and suddenly Min was sure that if she said the wrong thing here, that bony old woman would have her hide. It was not a viewing. She just knew Sorilea better than she wanted to, by now.

dətɝmənədli ʃi sɛt tə stʌɾiɪŋ wʌt wɑz əpɪɹɪŋ ən vænɪʃɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə wɪmən. noʊ izi tæsk wən ðeɪ stʊd soʊ kloʊs təɡɛðɝ ʃi kəd nɑt bi sɝɾən wɛðɝ ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ ɪmədʒ bɪlɔŋ tə wʌn wʊmən əɹ ðə wʊmən nɛks tə hɝ. ət lis ði ɔʊɹəz wɝ ɔlweɪz sɝɾən. laɪt, lɛɾ əɹ bi eɪbəl tə ʌndɝstæn ət list səm ʌv wʌt ʃi sɔ!

Determinedly she set to studying what was appearing and vanishing around the women. No easy task when they stood so close together she could not be certain whether a particular image belonged to one woman or the woman next to her. At least the auras were always certain. Light, let her be able to understand at least some of what she saw!

ɹænd tʊk sɔɹɪliəz ənaʊnsmən kuli, ɑn ðə sɝfəs. hi ɹʌbd ɪz hænz təɡɛðɝ sloʊli, ðən θɔtfəli ɪɡzæmən ðə hɛɹənz bɹændɪɾ ɑn ɪz pɑmz. hi ɪɡzæmən itʃ ə ðoʊz ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪsəz ɪn tɝn. faɪnəli, hi foʊkəst ɑn ɛɹiən.

Rand took Sorilea's announcement coolly, on the surface. He rubbed his hands together slowly, then thoughtfully examined the herons branded on his palms. He examined each of those Aes Sedai faces in turn. Finally, he focused on Erian.

"waɪ?" hi æskt əɹ ɪn ə maɪl vɔɪs. "aɪ kɪl tu ʌv jəɹ wɔɹɾɝz. waɪ?" mɪn wɪnst. ɹænd wɑz mɛni θɪŋz, bʌt sɛldəm maɪld. ən ɛɹiən wɑz wʌn ə ðə fju hu hæd biɾən ɪm mɔɹ ðən wʌns.

"Why?" he asked her in a mild voice. "I killed two of your Warders. Why?" Min winced. Rand was many things, but seldom mild. And Erian was one of the few who had beaten him more than once.

ðə peɪl ɪliɑnɝ sɪstɝ stʃɹeɪɾənd. ɪmədʒəz dænst, ən ɔʊɹəz flæʃt ən wɝ ɡɔn. nʌθɪŋ mɪn kəd ɹid. dɝɾi-feɪst ən əɹ lɔŋ blæk hɛɹ mæɾɪd, ɛɹiən ɡæðɝɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ əθɔɹəɾi ɝaʊn əɹ ən mɛɾ ɪz ɡeɪz lɛvəli. bʌɾ əɹ ænsɝ keɪm sɪmpli ən dɝɛkli. "wi dɪd bi ɹɔŋ ɪn teɪkɪŋ ju. aɪ hæv kənsɪɾɝd lɔŋ ɑn ɪt. jə mʌs faɪt ðə læs bæɾəl, ən wi mʌs hɛlp ju. ɪf jəl noʊ æksɛp mi, aɪ də ʌndɝstænd, bʌɾ əl hɛlp əz jə də ɹikwaɪɝ ɪf jəl əlaʊ."

The pale Illianer sister straightened. Images danced, and auras flashed and were gone. Nothing Min could read. Dirty-faced and her long black hair matted, Erian gathered Aes Sedai authority around her and met his gaze levelly. But her answer came simply and directly. "We did be wrong in taking you. I have considered long on it. You must fight the Last Battle, and we must help you. If you will no accept me, I do understand, but I will help as you do require if you will allow."

ɹænd stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ wɪθaʊɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən.

Rand stared at her without expression.

hi pʊt ðət seɪm wʌn-wɝd kwɛstʃən tə itʃ, ən ðɛɹ ænsɝz wɝ əz dɪfɹən əz ðə wɪmən.

He put that same one-word question to each, and their answers were as different as the women.

"ðə ɡɹin ɪz ðə bæɾəl ədʒɑ," bɛldaɪn toʊld ɪm pɹaʊdli, ən dɪspaɪt smʌdʒɪz ɑn əɹ tʃiks ən dɑɹk sɝkəlz bɪniθ əɹ aɪz, ʃi dɪd lʊk ə kwin ə bæɾəlz. bʌt ðɛn, sɑldəiən wɪmən sim tə faɪn ðət sɛkənd neɪtʃɝ. "wɛn jə ɡoʊ tə tɑɹmən ɡdən, ðə ɡɹin mʌs bi ðɛɹ. əl fɑloʊ, ɪf jəl æksɛp mi." laɪt, ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə bɑn ən æʃəmən əz ə wɔɹɾɝ! haʊ . . . ? noʊ; ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt naʊ.

"The Green is the Battle Ajah," Beldeine told him proudly, and despite smudges on her cheeks and dark circles beneath her eyes, she did look a Queen of Battles. But then, Saldaean women seemed to find that second nature. "When you go to Tarmon Gai'don, the Green must be there. I will follow, if you will accept me." Light, she was going to bond an Asha'man as a Warder! How . . . ? No; it was not important now.

"wʌt wi dɪd wɑz lɑdʒɪkəl ət ðə taɪm." sɝinz taɪtli hɛl kul sɝɛnəɾi slɪpt ɪndə klɪɹ wɝi, ən ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "aɪ seɪ ðət tə ɪkspleɪn, nɑt tə ɪkskəlpeɪt. sɝkəmstænsəz əv tʃeɪnʒd. fəɹ ju, ðə lɑdʒɪkəl kɔɹs maɪt sim tə . . ." ʃi dʒɹu ə dɪsaɪɾədli ənstɛɾi bɹɛθ. ɪmədʒəz ən ɔʊɹəz; ə tɛmpɛstʃuəs lʌv əfɛɹ, ʌv ɔl θɪŋz! ðə wʊmən wɑz aɪs, haʊɛvɝ bjuɾəfəl. ən ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ jusfəl ɪn noʊɪŋ səm mæn wəd mɛl hɝ! "tə sɛn əs bæk tə kæptɪvəɾi," ʃi wɛn ɑn, "ɔɹ ivən ɛksəkjuɾ ʌs. fəɹ mi, lɑdʒɪk sɛz aɪ mʌst sɝv ju."

"What we did was logical at the time." Sarene's tightly held cool serenity slipped into clear worry, and she shook her head. "I say that to explain, not to exculpate. Circumstances have changed. For you, the logical course might seem to . . ." She drew a decidedly unsteady breath. Images and auras; a tempestuous love affair, of all things! The woman was ice, however beautiful. And there was nothing useful in knowing some man would melt her! "To send us back to captivity," she went on, "or even execute us. For me, logic says I must serve you."

nɛsun tɪltəɾ əɹ hɛd, ən əɹ nɪɹli blæk aɪz sim tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stɔɹ əweɪ ɛvɹi skɹæp ə hɪm. wʌn ɹɛd-ænd-ɡɹin ɔɹə spoʊk ʌv ɑnɝz, ən feɪm. ə hjudʒ bɪldɪŋ əpɪɹɾ əbʌv əɹ hɛɾ ən vænɪʃt. ə laɪbɹɛɹi ʃi wəd faʊnd. "aɪ wɑnə stʌɾi ju," ʃi sɛd sɪmpli. "aɪ kən hɑɹdli də ðət kæɹiɪŋ stoʊnz əɹ dɪɡɪŋ hoʊlz. ðeɪ də liv plɛnti ʌv taɪm fəɹ θɔt, bʌt sɝvɪŋ jə simz ə fɛɹ ɪkstʃeɪnʒ fəɹ wʌɾ aɪ maɪt lɝn." ɹænd blɪŋkt ət ðə dɝɛknəs ə ðæt, bʌɾ ʌðɝwaɪz, hɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən dɪd nɑɾ ɔltɝ.

Nesune tilted her head, and her nearly black eyes seemed to be trying to store away every scrap of him. One red-and-green aura spoke of honors, and fame. A huge building appeared above her head and vanished. A library she would found. "I want to study you," she said simply. "I can hardly do that carrying stones or digging holes. They do leave plenty of time for thought, but serving you seems a fair exchange for what I might learn." Rand blinked at the directness of that, but otherwise, his expression did not alter.

ðə moʊst sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ ænsɝ keɪm fɹəm ɛlzə, ɪn əɹ mænɝ ə dɪlɪvɝi mɔɹ ðən ðə wɝdz. sɪŋkɪŋ tə hɝ niz, ʃi ɡeɪzd ʌp ət ɹænd wɪð fivɝɪʃ aɪz. hɝ hoʊl feɪs sim tə ʃaɪn wɪð fɝvɝ. ɔʊɹəz flɛɹɾ ən ɪmədʒəz kæskeɪɾɪd ɝaʊn hɝ, tɛlɪŋ nʌθɪŋ. "ju ɑɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," ʃi sɛd bɹɛθləsli. "ju mʌs bi ðəɹ fəɹ ðə læs bæɾəl. aɪ mʌs hɛlp jə bi ðɛɹ! wʌtɛvɝ ɪz nɛsəsɛɹi, əl du!" ən ʃi flʌŋ hɝsɛlf feɪsdaʊn, pɹɛsɪŋ əɹ lɪps tə ðə pɑlɪʃt stoʊn flɔɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz buts. ivən sɔɹɪliə lʊk teɪkən əbæk, ən sɝinz maʊθ dʒɹɑpt oʊpən. mɔɹ ɡeɪpt əɾ əɹ ən heɪstəli ɹɪtɝn tə twɪstɪŋ ɪz bʌɾən. mɪn θɔɾ i ɡɪɡəl nɝvəsli, ɔlmoʊst ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ.

The most surprising answer came from Elza, in her manner of delivery more than the words. Sinking to her knees, she gazed up at Rand with feverish eyes. Her whole face seemed to shine with fervor. Auras flared and images cascaded around her, telling nothing. "You are the Dragon Reborn," she said breathlessly. "You must be there for the Last Battle. I must help you be there! Whatever is necessary, I will do!" And she flung herself facedown, pressing her lips to the polished stone floor in front of his boots. Even Sorilea looked taken aback, and Sarene's mouth dropped open. Morr gaped at her and hastily returned to twisting his button. Min thought he giggled nervously, almost under his breath.

tɝnɪŋ ɑn ɪz hil, ɹænd stɔk hæfweɪ tə ðə dʒɹæɡən θɹoʊn, wɛɹ ɪz sɛptɝ ən ðə kɹaʊn ʌv ɪljən ɹɛstəɾ ətɑp ɪz ɡoʊld-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɹɛd koʊt. hɪz feɪs wɑz soʊ blik ðət mɪn wɑntəd tə ɹʌʃ tə hɪm noʊ mæɾɝ u wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ, bʌt ʃi kəntɪnjud tə stʌɾi ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ən sɔɹɪliə. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin ɛniθɪŋ ɹɪli jusfəl ɝaʊn ðət waɪt-hɛɹd hɛɹɹəɾən.

Turning on his heel, Rand stalked halfway to the Dragon Throne, where his scepter and the crown of Illian rested atop his gold-embroidered red coat. His face was so bleak that Min wanted to rush to him no matter who was watching, but she continued to study the Aes Sedai. And Sorilea. She had never seen anything really useful around that white-haired harridan.

əbɹʌpli, ɹænd tɝn bæk, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə laɪn ʌv wɪmən soʊ kwɪkli ðət bɛldaɪn ən sɝin stɛp bæk. ə ʃɑɹp dʒɛstʃɝ fɹəm sɔɹɪliə dʒɝkt əm ɪndə pleɪs əɡɛn.

Abruptly, Rand turned back, striding toward the line of women so quickly that Beldeine and Sarene stepped back. A sharp gesture from Sorilea jerked them into place again.

"wʊd jə æksɛp biɪŋ kənfaɪn ɪn ə bɑks?" hɪz vɔɪs ɡɹeɪɾɪd, stoʊn ɡɹaɪndɪŋ ɑn fɹoʊzən stoʊn. "lɑkt ɪn ə tʃɛst ɔl deɪ, ən biɾən bɪfɔɹ jə ɡoʊ ɪn ən wən jə kʌm aʊt?" ðət wɑz wʌt ðeɪ hæd dʌn tə hɪm.

"Would you accept being confined in a box?" His voice grated, stone grinding on frozen stone. "Locked in a chest all day, and beaten before you go in and when you come out?" That was what they had done to him.

"jɛs!" ɛlzə moʊn əɡɛns ðə flɔɹ. "wʌtɛvɝ aɪ mʌs du, aɪ wɪl!"

"Yes!" Elza moaned against the floor. "Whatever I must do, I will!"

"ɪf jə də ɹikwaɪɝ ɪt," ɛɹiən mænədʒd ʃɑkəli, ænd, feɪsəz əɡæst, ði ʌðɝz nɑɾəd sloʊli.

"If you do require it," Erian managed shakily, and, faces aghast, the others nodded slowly.

mɪn stɛɹɾ ɪn əmeɪzmənt, nɑɾɪŋ əɹ fɪsts ɪn əɹ koʊt pɑkəts. ðəɾ i maɪt θɪŋk ʌv ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪz oʊn bæk ɪn ðə seɪm mænɝ simd ɔlmoʊs nætʃɹəl, bʌt ʃi hæd tə stɑp ɪt, sʌmhaʊ. ʃi nu hɪm bɛɾɝ ðən i dɪd hɪmsɛlf; ʃi nu wɛɹ i wɑz hɑɹɾ əz ə naɪf bleɪd, ən wɛɹ i wɑz vʌlnɝəbəl noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ hi dɪnaɪɾ ɪt. hi wəd nɛvɝ fɝɡɪv hɪmsɛlf ðɪs. bʌt haʊ? fjʊɹi kəntɔɹɾəd ɪz feɪs, ən i ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ əz i dɪd wən ɑɹɡjuɪŋ wɪð ðət vɔɪs i hɝd. hi mʌɾɝd wʌn wɝɾ əlaʊd ðət ʃi ʌndɝstʊd. tɑvɝən. sɔɹɪliə stʊd ðəɹ kɑmli ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ɪm əz kloʊsli əz nɛsun dɪd. nɑɾ ivən ðə θɹɛɾ ə ðə tʃɛst ʃʊk ðə bɹaʊn. ɪksɛp fəɹ ɛlzə, stɪl moʊnɪŋ ən kɪsɪŋ ðə flɔɹ, ði ʌðɝz wɝ hɑloʊ-aɪd, əz ɪf siɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz dʌbəld ʌp ən baʊn əz i hæd bɪn.

Min stared in amazement, knotting her fists in her coat pockets. That he might think of getting his own back in the same manner seemed almost natural, but she had to stop it, somehow. She knew him better than he did himself; she knew where he was hard as a knife blade, and where he was vulnerable no matter how he denied it. He would never forgive himself this. But how? Fury contorted his face, and he shook his head as he did when arguing with that voice he heard. He muttered one word aloud that she understood. Ta'veren. Sorilea stood there calmly examining him as closely as Nesune did. Not even the threat of the chest shook the Brown. Except for Elza, still moaning and kissing the floor, the others were hollow-eyed, as if seeing themselves doubled up and bound as he had been.

əmʌŋ ɔl ə ðoʊz ɪmədʒəz spɪlɪŋ ɝaʊn ɹænd ən ðə wɪmən, sʌɾənli ən ɔɹə flæʃt, blu ən jɛloʊ tɪŋd wɪð ɡɹin, ɛnkʌmpəsɪŋ əm ɔl. ən mɪn nu ɪts minɪŋ. ʃi ɡæspt, hæf ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, hæf ɪn ɹɪlif.

Among all of those images spilling around Rand and the women, suddenly an aura flashed, blue and yellow tinged with green, encompassing them all. And Min knew its meaning. She gasped, half in surprise, half in relief.

"ðeɪ wɪl sɝv ju, itʃ ɪn əɹ fæʃən, ɹænd," ʃi sɛd hɝidli. "aɪ sɔ ɪt." sɔɹɪliə wəd sɝv hɪm? sʌɾənli mɪn wʌndɝɾ ɪɡzækli wʌt "ɪn əɹ fæʃən" mɛnt. ðə wɝdz keɪm wɪð ðə noʊɪŋ, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz noʊ wʌt ðə wɝdz ðɛmsɛlvz mɛnt. bʌt ðeɪ wəd sɝv; ðət mʌtʃ wɑz pleɪn.

"They will serve you, each in her fashion, Rand," she said hurriedly. "I saw it." Sorilea would serve him? Suddenly Min wondered exactly what "in her fashion" meant. The words came with the knowing, but she did not always know what the words themselves meant. But they would serve; that much was plain.

ðə fjʊɹi dʒɹeɪn fɹəm ɹændz feɪs əz i saɪlənli stʌɾid ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. səm ə ðɛm ɡlænst ət mɪn wɪð ɹeɪzd aɪbɹaʊz, ɑbviəsli mɑɹvəlɪŋ ðəɾ ə fju wɝdz fɹəm əɹ kæɹid soʊ mʌtʃ weɪt, bʌt fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt, ðeɪ wɑtʃt ɹænd ən hɑɹdli sim tə bɹið. ivən ɛlzə lɪftəɾ əɹ hɛd tə ɡeɪz ʌp ət hɪm. sɔɹɪliə ɡeɪv mɪn wʌn kwɪk lʊk, ən ðə feɪntəs nɑd. əpɹuvɪŋ, mɪn θɔt. soʊ ði oʊld wʊmən pɹitɛndəd nɑt tə kɛɹ wʌn weɪ əɹ ði ʌðɝ, dɪd ʃi?

The fury drained from Rand's face as he silently studied the Aes Sedai. Some of them glanced at Min with raised eyebrows, obviously marveling that a few words from her carried so much weight, but for the most part, they watched Rand and hardly seemed to breathe. Even Elza lifted her head to gaze up at him. Sorilea gave Min one quick look, and the faintest nod. Approving, Min thought. So the old woman pretended not to care one way or the other, did she?

ət læst, ɹænd spoʊk. "ju kən swɛɹ tə mi əz kaɪɹunə ən ði ʌðɝz dɪd. ðæt, əɹ ɡoʊ bæk tə wɛɹɛvɝ ðə waɪz wʌnz əv bɪn kipɪŋ ju. əl æksɛp nʌθɪŋ lɛs." dɪspaɪɾ ə hɪn ə dɪmæn ɪn ɪz vɔɪs, hi lʊkt əz ɪf hi, tu, dɪd nɑt kɛɹ, ɑɹmz foʊldəd, aɪz ɪmpeɪʃənt. ði oʊθ i dɪmændəɾ ə ðɛm keɪm aʊɾ ɪn ə ɹʌʃ.

At last, Rand spoke. "You can swear to me as Kiruna and the others did. That, or go back to wherever the Wise Ones have been keeping you. I'll accept nothing less." Despite a hint of demand in his voice, he looked as if he, too, did not care, arms folded, eyes impatient. The oath he demanded of them came out in a rush.

mɪn dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛkt kwɪbəlz, nɑɾ æftɝ əɹ vjuɪŋ, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl ə sɝpɹaɪz wən ɛlzə skɹæmbəld ʌp tə hɝ niz, ən ði ʌðɝz loʊɝd ðɛmsɛlvz tə ðɛɹz. ɪn ɹæɡəd junəsən, faɪv mɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ swɔɹ ʌndɝ ðə laɪɾ ən baɪ ðɛɹ hoʊp ə sælveɪʃən tə sɝv ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn feɪθfəli əntɪl ðə læs bæɾəl hæd kʌm ən ɡɔn. nɛsun dɪlɪvɝd ðə wɝdz əz ðoʊ ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ itʃ wʌn, sɝin əz ɪf steɪɾɪŋ ə pɹɪnsəpəl ə lɑdʒɪk, ɛlzə wɛɹɪŋ ə waɪd, vɪktɔɹiəs smaɪl, bʌt ðeɪ ɔl swɔɹ. haʊ mɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ wəɾ i ɡæðɝ ɝaʊn hɪm?

Min did not expect quibbles, not after her viewing, yet it was still a surprise when Elza scrambled up to her knees, and the others lowered themselves to theirs. In ragged unison, five more Aes Sedai swore under the Light and by their hope of salvation to serve the Dragon Reborn faithfully until the Last Battle had come and gone. Nesune delivered the words as though examining each one, Sarene as if stating a principle of logic, Elza wearing a wide, victorious smile, but they all swore. How many Aes Sedai would he gather around him?

wɪð ði oʊθ, ɹænd sim tə luz ɪntʃɹəst. "faɪn əm kloʊðz ən pʊɾ əm wɪð jəɹ ʌðɝ 'əpɹɛntəsɪz,' " hi toʊl sɔɹɪliə æbsənli. hi wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ, bʌt nɑɾ əɾ əɹ əɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. "haʊ mɛni dʒju θɪŋk jəl ɛn ʌp wɪð?" mɪn ɔlmoʊs dʒʌmpt ət ði ɛkoʊ ʌv əɹ oʊn θɔt.

With the oath, Rand seemed to lose interest. "Find them clothes and put them with your other 'apprentices,' " he told Sorilea absently. He was frowning, but not at her or the Aes Sedai. "How many do you think you'll end up with?" Min almost jumped at the echo of her own thought.

"haʊɛvɝ mɛni ɑɹ nɛsəsɛɹi," sɔɹɪliə sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "aɪ θɪŋk mɔɹ wɪl kʌm." ʃi klæpt əɹ hænz wʌns ən dʒɛstʃɝd, ən ðə faɪv sɪstɝz spɹæŋ tə ðɛɹ fit. oʊnli nɛsun lʊk sɝpɹaɪzd ət ði əlækɹəɾi wɪð wɪtʃ ðeɪ hæɾ oʊbeɪd. sɔɹɪliə smaɪld, ə vɛɹi sæɾəsfaɪd smaɪl fəɹ ən il, ən mɪn dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt wɑz kɑz baɪ ði ʌðɝ wɪmənz oʊbiɾiəns.

"However many are necessary," Sorilea said dryly. "I think more will come." She clapped her hands once and gestured, and the five sisters sprang to their feet. Only Nesune looked surprised at the alacrity with which they had obeyed. Sorilea smiled, a very satisfied smile for an Aiel, and Min did not think it was caused by the other women's obedience.

nɑɾɪŋ, ɹænd tɝn əweɪ. hi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə peɪs əɡɛn, ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə skaʊl oʊvɝ ɪleɪn. mɪn sɛɾəld ɪndə hɝ tʃɛɹ wʌns mɔɹ, wɪʃɪŋ ʃi hæd wʌn ə mæstɝ fɛlz bʊks tə ɹid. əɹ tə θɹoʊ ət ɹænd. wɛl, wʌn ə mæstɝ fɛlz tə ɹid, ən sʌmwʌn ɛlsəz tə θɹoʊ.

Nodding, Rand turned away. He was already beginning to pace again, already beginning to scowl over Elayne. Min settled into her chair once more, wishing she had one of Master Fel's books to read. Or to throw at Rand. Well, one of Master Fel's to read, and someone else's to throw.

sɔɹɪliə hɝɾɪd ðə blæk-klæd sɪstɝz aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum, bʌɾ ət ðə læst, ʃi pɔzd wɪð wʌn hæn hoʊldɪŋ ə dɔɹ ən lʊk bæk ət ɹænd stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm əɹ təwɔɹd ðə ɡɪldɪd θɹoʊn. hɝ lɪps pɝs θɔtfəli. "ðæt wʊmən, kædzueɪn məleɪdʒɹɪn, ɪz bɪniθ ðɪs ɹuf əɡɛn tədeɪ," ʃi sɛɾ ət læst, tə hɪz bæk. "aɪ θɪŋk ʃi bɪlivz jə ɑɹ əfɹeɪɾ ə hɝ, ɹænd ælθɹ, ðə weɪ jə əvɔɪɾ əɹ wɛɹəbaʊts." wɪð ðæt, ʃi lɛft.

Sorilea herded the black-clad sisters out of the room, but at the last, she paused with one hand holding a door and looked back at Rand striding away from her toward the gilded throne. Her lips pursed thoughtfully. "That woman, Cadsuane Melaidhrin, is beneath this roof again today," she said at last, to his back. "I think she believes you are afraid of her, Rand al'Thor, the way you avoid her whereabouts." With that, she left.

fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmənt, ɹænd stʊd stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə θɹoʊn. əɹ meɪbi ət sʌmθɪŋ bɪɑn ɪt. əbɹʌpli, hi ɡeɪv hɪmsɛlf ə ʃeɪk ən stʃɹoʊd ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ dɪstəns tə pɪk ʌp ðə kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz. ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə sɛɾɪŋ ɪɾ ɑn ɪz hɛd, ðoʊ, hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən pʊɾ ɪt bæk. dɑnɪŋ ðə koʊt, hi lɛf kɹaʊn ən sɛptɝ wɛɹ ðeɪ leɪ.

For a long moment, Rand stood staring at the throne. Or maybe at something beyond it. Abruptly, he gave himself a shake and strode the remaining distance to pick up the Crown of Swords. On the point of setting it on his head, though, he hesitated, then put it back. Donning the coat, he left crown and scepter where they lay.

"aɪ min tə faɪn aʊt wʌt kædzueɪn wɑns," hi ənaʊnst. "ʃi dʌzn kʌm tə ðə pæləs ɛvɹi deɪ kəz ʃi laɪks ə tʃɹɪp θɹu ðə snoʊ. wɪl jə kʌm wɪð mi, mɪn? meɪbi jəl əv ə vjuɪŋ."

"I mean to find out what Cadsuane wants," he announced. "She doesn't come to the palace every day because she likes a trip through the snow. Will you come with me, Min? Maybe you'll have a viewing."

ʃi wɑz ɑn əɹ fit fæstɝ ðən ɛni ʌv ðoʊz ɛɛs sədaɪ. ə vɪzət wɪð kædzueɪn wəd laɪkli bi əz plɛʒɝəbəl əz ə vɪzət wɪð sɔɹɪliə, jɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən sɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ əloʊn. bɪsaɪdz, meɪbi ʃi wəɾ əv ə vjuɪŋ. fɛdwɪn fɛl ɪn bɪhaɪn əɹ ən ɹænd wɪð ən əlɝt lʊk ɪn ɪz aɪz.

She was on her feet faster than any of those Aes Sedai. A visit with Cadsuane would likely be as pleasurable as a visit with Sorilea, yet anything was better than sitting there alone. Besides, maybe she would have a viewing. Fedwin fell in behind her and Rand with an alert look in his eyes.

ðə sɪks meɪɾənz aʊtsaɪɾ ɪn ðə tɔl vɔltəd hɔlweɪ ɹoʊz, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt fɑloʊ. soʊmɑɹə wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn mɪn nu; ʃi ɡeɪv mɪn ə bɹif smaɪl, ən ɹænd ə flæt, dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ stɛɹ. ði ʌðɝz ɡlaʊɝd. ðə meɪɾənz hæɾ æksɛptɪɾ ɪz ɛkspləneɪʃən əbaʊt waɪ hi hæd ɡɔn wɪθaʊɾ əm ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs, soʊ ɛni wɑtʃɝz wəd bɪliv fəɹ əz lɔŋ əz pɑsəbəl ðəɾ i wɑz stɪl ɪn kɛɹhin, bʌt ðeɪ stɪl dɪmændəd tə noʊ waɪ hi hæd nɑt sɛn fəɹ əm æftɝwɝd, ən ɹænd hæd hæd noʊ ænsɝz. hi mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, ən kwɪkən ɪz peɪs soʊ mɪn hæd tə stʃɹɛtʃ əɹ lɛɡz tə kip ʌp.

The six Maidens outside in the tall vaulted hallway rose, but they did not follow. Somara was the only one Min knew; she gave Min a brief smile, and Rand a flat, disapproving stare. The others glowered. The Maidens had accepted his explanation about why he had gone without them in the first place, so any watchers would believe for as long as possible that he was still in Cairhien, but they still demanded to know why he had not sent for them afterward, and Rand had had no answers. He muttered something under his breath, and quickened his pace so Min had to stretch her legs to keep up.

"wɑtʃ kædzueɪn kɛɹfəli, mɪn," hi sɛd. "æn ju, tu, mɔɹ. ʃiz ʌp tə səm ɛɛs sədaɪ skim, bʌt bɝn mi ɪf aɪ kən si wʌt. aɪ doʊnt noʊ. ðɛɹz - "

"Watch Cadsuane carefully, Min," he said. "And you, too, Morr. She's up to some Aes Sedai scheme, but burn me if I can see what. I don't know. There's - "

ə stoʊn wɔl sim tə stʃɹaɪk mɪn fɹəm bɪhaɪnd; ʃi θɔt ʃi hɝd ɹɔɹɪŋ, kɹæʃɪŋ. ən ðən ɹænd wɑz tɝnɪŋ əɹ oʊvɝ - ʃi wɑz laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ? - lʊkɪŋ daʊn əɾ əɹ wɪð ðə fɝs fɪɹ ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd siɪŋ ɪn ðoʊz mɔɹnɪŋ-blu aɪz. ɪɾ oʊnli feɪɾəd wən ʃi sæɾ ʌp, kɑfɪŋ. ði ɛɹ wɑz fʊl ə dʌst! ən ðən ʃi sɔ ðə kɔɹəɾɝ.

A stone wall seemed to strike Min from behind; she thought she heard roaring, crashing. And then Rand was turning her over - she was lying on the floor? - looking down at her with the first fear she remembered seeing in those morning-blue eyes. It only faded when she sat up, coughing. The air was full of dust! And then she saw the corridor.

ðə meɪɾənz wɝ ɡɔn fɹəm ɪn fɹʌn ə ɹændz dɔɹz. ðə dɔɹz ðɛmsɛlvz wɝ ɡɔn, əlɔŋ wɪð moʊst ə ðə wɔl, ən ə dʒæɡd hoʊl nɪɹli əz bɪɡ ɡeɪpt ɪn ðə wɔl ɑpəzət. ʃi kəd si ɪndə hɪz əpɑɹtməns klɪɹli dɪspaɪt ðə dʌst, ɪndə dɛvəsteɪʃən. mæsɪv paɪlz ə ɹʌbəl leɪ ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ən əbʌv, ðə silɪŋ jɔn oʊpən tə ðə skaɪ. snoʊ swɝl daʊn ɑntu fleɪmz dænsɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə ɹʌbəl. wʌn ə ðə mæsɪv blækwʊd poʊsts ə hɪz bɛd stʌk bɝnɪŋ aʊɾ ə ʃæɾɝd stoʊn, ən ʃi ɹilaɪzd ʃi kəd si ɔl ðə weɪ aʊtsaɪd tə ðə stɛp taʊɝz veɪl baɪ ðə snoʊfɔl. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ə hjudʒ hæmɝ hæd smæʃt ɪndə ðə sʌn pæləs. ən hæd ðeɪ bɪn ɪn ðɛɹ, ɪnstɛɾ ʌv gɑnə si kædzueɪn . . . mɪn ʃɪvɝd.

The Maidens were gone from in front of Rand's doors. The doors themselves were gone, along with most of the wall, and a jagged hole nearly as big gaped in the wall opposite. She could see into his apartments clearly despite the dust, into devastation. Massive piles of rubble lay everywhere, and above, the ceiling yawned open to the sky. Snow swirled down onto flames dancing among the rubble. One of the massive blackwood posts of his bed stuck burning out of shattered stone, and she realized she could see all the way outside to the stepped towers veiled by the snowfall. It was as if a huge hammer had smashed into the Sun Palace. And had they been in there, instead of going to see Cadsuane . . . Min shivered.

"wʌt . . . ?" ʃi bɪɡæn ənstɛɾəli, ðən əbændən ðə jusləs kwɛstʃən. ɛni ful wəd si wʌt hæd hæpənd. "hu?" ʃi æskt ɪnstɛd.

"What . . . ?" she began unsteadily, then abandoned the useless question. Any fool would see what had happened. "Who?" she asked instead.

kʌvɝɾ ɪn dʌst, hɛɹ ɛvɹi wɪtʃ weɪ, ən wɪð tɪɹz ɪn ðɛɹ koʊts, ðə tu mɛn lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɹoʊld əlɔŋ ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, ən pɝhæps ðeɪ hæd. ʃi θɔt ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ə ɡʊd tɛn peɪsɪz fɑɹðɝ fɹəm ðə dɔɹz ðən ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd. fɹəm wɛɹ ðə dɔɹz hæd bɪn. ɪn ðə dɪstəns, æŋkʃəs ʃaʊts ɹoʊz, ɛkoʊɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə hɔlz. niðɝ mæn ænsɝd hɝ.

Covered in dust, hair every which way, and with tears in their coats, the two men looked as if they had been rolled along the corridor, and perhaps they had. She thought they were all a good ten paces farther from the doors than she remembered. From where the doors had been. In the distance, anxious shouts rose, echoing along the halls. Neither man answered her.

"kæn aɪ tʃɹʌs ju, mɔɹ?" ɹænd æskt.

"Can I trust you, Morr?" Rand asked.

fɛdwɪn mɛɾ ɪz ɡeɪz oʊpənli. "wɪð jəɹ laɪf, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," hi sɛd sɪmpli.

Fedwin met his gaze openly. "With your life, my Lord Dragon," he said simply.

"ðæts wʌɾ aɪm tʃɹʌstɪŋ jə wɪð," ɹænd sɛd. hɪz fɪŋɡɝz bɹʌʃt əɹ tʃik, ən ðən i stʊɾ əbɹʌpli. "ɡɑɹɾ əɹ wɪð jəɹ laɪf, mɔɹ." hɑɹɾ əz stil, hɪz vɔɪs. ɡɹɪm əz dɛθ. "ɪf ðəɹ stɪl ɪn ðə pæləs, ðəl fil jə tʃɹaɪ tə meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ, ən stʃɹaɪk bɪfɔɹ jə kən fɪnɪʃ. doʊn tʃænəl əɾ ɔl ənlɛs jə mʌst, bʌt bi ɹɛɾi. teɪk əɹ daʊn tə ðə sɝvəns' kɔɹɾɝz, ən kɪl ɛniwʌn əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ðət tʃɹaɪz tə ɡɛt tə hɝ. ɛniwʌn!"

"That's what I am trusting you with," Rand said. His fingers brushed her cheek, and then he stood abruptly. "Guard her with your life, Morr." Hard as steel, his voice. Grim as death. "If they're still in the Palace, they'll feel you try to make a gateway, and strike before you can finish. Don't channel at all unless you must, but be ready. Take her down to the servants' quarters, and kill anyone or anything that tries to get to her. Anyone!"

wɪð ə læs lʊk daʊn əɾ əɹ - oʊ, laɪt, ɛni ʌðɝ taɪm, ʃi wʊɾə θɔt ʃi kəd daɪ hæpəli, siɪŋ ðət lʊk ɪn ɪz aɪz! - hi wɛn ɹʌnɪŋ, əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɹuəneɪʃən. əweɪ fɹəm hɝ. huɛvɝ hæd tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl ɪm wəd bi hʌntɪŋ fəɹ hɪm.

With a last look down at her - oh, Light, any other time, she would have thought she could die happily, seeing that look in his eyes! - he went running, away from the ruination. Away from her. Whoever had tried to kill him would be hunting for him.

mɔɹ pæɾəd əɹ ɑn ði ɑɹm wɪð ə dʌsti hæn ən ɡeɪv əɹ ə bɔɪɪʃ ɡɹɪn. "doʊnt wɝi, mɪn. əl teɪk kɛɹ ə ju."

Morr patted her on the arm with a dusty hand and gave her a boyish grin. "Don't worry, Min. I'll take care of you."

bʌɾ u wɑz gɑnə teɪk kɛɹ ə ɹænd? kən aɪ tʃɹʌs ju, hi hæɾ æsk ðɪs bɔɪ hu hæd bɪn wʌn ə ðə fɝs tə kʌm æskɪŋ tə lɝn. laɪt, hu wəd meɪk ɪm seɪf?

But who was going to take care of Rand? Can I trust you, he had asked this boy who had been one of the first to come asking to learn. Light, who would make him safe?

ɹaʊndɪŋ ə kɔɹnɝ, ɹænd stɑpt wɪð ə hæn əɡɛnst wʌn wɔl tə siz ðə sɔɹs. ə ful θɪŋ, nɑt wɑntɪŋ mɪn tə si hɪm stæɡɝ wən sʌmwʌn tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl hɪm, bʌt ðəɹ ɪt wɑz. nɑt dʒʌst ɛni sʌmwʌn. ə mæn, dɪmɑndɝd, əɹ pɝhæps æzmɑɾiən kʌm bæk ət læst. meɪbi boʊθ; ðəɹ hæd bɪn ən ɑɾəti, əz ɪf ðə wivɪŋ keɪm fɹəm dɪfɹən dɝɛkʃənz. hi hæd fɛl ðə tʃænəlɪŋ tu leɪt tə də ɛniθɪŋ. hi wəɾ əv daɪd, ɪn ɪz ɹumz. hi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə daɪ. bʌt nɑt mɪn, noʊ, nɑt mɪn. ɪleɪn wɑz bɛɾɝ ɔf, tɝnɪŋ əɡɛns hɪm. oʊ, laɪt, ʃi wɑz!

Rounding a corner, Rand stopped with a hand against one wall to seize the Source. A fool thing, not wanting Min to see him stagger when someone tried to kill him, but there it was. Not just any someone. A man, Demandred, or perhaps Asmodean come back at last. Maybe both; there had been an oddity, as if the weaving came from different directions. He had felt the channeling too late to do anything. He would have died, in his rooms. He was ready to die. But not Min, no, not Min. Elayne was better off, turning against him. Oh, Light, she was!

hi siz ðə sɔɹs, ən seɪɾɪn flʌɾəd ɪm wɪð moʊltən koʊld ən fɹizɪŋ hit, wɪð laɪf ən switnəs, fɪlθ ən dɛθ. hɪz stʌmək twɪstəd, ən ðə hɔlweɪ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm dʌbəld ɪtsɛlf. fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, hi θɔɾ i sɔ ə feɪs. nɑt wɪð ɪz aɪz; ɪn ɪz hɛd. ə mæn, ʃɪmɝɪŋ ən ənɹɛkəɡnaɪzəbəl, ɡɔn. hi floʊɾəd ɪn ðə vɔɪd, ɛmpti, ən fʊl ə ðə paʊɝ.

He seized the Source, and saidin flooded him with molten cold and freezing heat, with life and sweetness, filth and death. His stomach twisted, and the hallway in front of him doubled itself. For an instant, he thought he saw a face. Not with his eyes; in his head. A man, shimmering and unrecognizable, gone. He floated in the Void, empty, and full of the Power.

jə woʊnt wɪn, hi toʊld luz θɝɪn. ɪf aɪ daɪ, əl daɪ mi!

You won't win, he told Lews Therin. If I die, I'll die me!

aɪ ʃʊɾə sɛn aɪlaɪɛnə əweɪ, luz θɝɪn wɪspɝd bæk. ʃi wəɾ əv lɪvd.

I should have sent Ilyena away, Lews Therin whispered back. She would have lived.

pʊʃɪŋ ðə vɔɪs əweɪ əz i pʊʃt hɪmsɛlf fɹəm ðə wɔl, ɹænd slɪpt əlɔŋ ðə pæləs kɔɹɪɾɝz wɪð ɔl ðə stɛlθ i kəd mʌstɝ, stɛpɪŋ laɪtli, ɡlaɪɾɪŋ kloʊs tə tæpəstʃɹi-hʌŋ wɔlz, ɝaʊnd ɡoʊld-wɝk tʃɛsts ən ɡɪldɪd kæbənəts bɛɹɪŋ fɹædʒəl ɡoʊldən pɔɹsələnz ən aɪvɝi stætʃuɛts. hɪz aɪz sɝtʃt fəɹ ɪz ətækɝz. ðeɪ wəd nɑt bi sæɾəsfaɪd ʃɔɹɾ ə faɪndɪŋ ɪz bɑɾi, bʌt ðeɪ wəd bi vɛɹi kɛɹfəl ɪn əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ɪz ɹumz ɪn keɪs i hæd sɝvaɪv baɪ səm tɑvɝən swɝl ə feɪt. ðeɪ wəd weɪt, tə si wɛðɝ i stɝd. ɪn ðə vɔɪd, hi wɑz əz nɪɹ wʌn wɪð ðə paʊɝ əz ɛni mæn kəd lɪv θɹu. ɪn ðə vɔɪd, əz wɪð ə sɔɹd, hi wɑz wʌn wɪð ɪz sɝaʊndɪŋz.

Pushing the voice away as he pushed himself from the wall, Rand slipped along the Palace corridors with all the stealth he could muster, stepping lightly, gliding close to tapestry-hung walls, around gold-worked chests and gilded cabinets bearing fragile golden porcelains and ivory statuettes. His eyes searched for his attackers. They would not be satisfied short of finding his body, but they would be very careful in approaching his rooms in case he had survived by some ta'veren swirl of fate. They would wait, to see whether he stirred. In the Void, he was as near one with the Power as any man could live through. In the Void, as with a sword, he was one with his surroundings.

fɹæntɪk ʃaʊts ən klæmɝ ɹoʊz ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən, səm skɹimɪŋ tə noʊ wʌt hæd hæpənd, ʌðɝz kɹaɪɪŋ ðət ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn hæd ɡɔn mæd. ðə bʌndəl ə fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən ɪn ɪz hɛd ðət wɑz ɑlɑnə pɹəvaɪɾəd wʌn smɔl kʌmfɝt. ʃi wɑz aʊɾ ə ðə pæləs, əz ʃi hæd bɪn ɔl mɔɹnɪŋ, meɪbi ivən aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi wɔlz. hi wɪʃt mɪn wɑz, tu. səmtaɪmz i sɔ mɛn ən wɪmən daʊn wʌn hɔlweɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ, blæk-lɪvɹid sɝvəns meɪnli, ɹʌnɪŋ, fɔlɪŋ daʊn ən skɹæmbəlɪŋ ʌp tə ɹʌn əɡɛn. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt si hɪm. wɪð ðə paʊɝ ɪn hɪm, hi kəd hɪɹ ɛvɹi wɪspɝ. ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðə wɪspɝ ə sɑf buts ɹʌnɪŋ, laɪt-fʊɾɪd.

Frantic shouts and clamor rose in every direction, some screaming to know what had happened, others crying that the Dragon Reborn had gone mad. The bundle of frustration in his head that was Alanna provided one small comfort. She was out of the Palace, as she had been all morning, maybe even outside the city walls. He wished Min was, too. Sometimes he saw men and women down one hallway or another, black-liveried servants mainly, running, falling down and scrambling up to run again. They did not see him. With the Power in him, he could hear every whisper. Including the whisper of soft boots running, light-footed.

bækɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔl bɪsaɪɾ ə lɔŋ teɪbəl tɑpt wɪð pɔɹsələn, hi kwɪkli woʊv faɪɝ ən ɛɹ ɝaʊn hɪmsɛlf ən hɛl vɛɹi stɪl ɹæpt ɪn foʊldəd laɪt.

Backing against the wall beside a long table topped with porcelain, he quickly wove Fire and Air around himself and held very still wrapped in Folded Light.

meɪɾənz əpɪɹd, ə stʃɹim ə ðɛm, veɪld, ən ɹæn baɪ wɪθaʊt siɪŋ hɪm. təwɔɹɾ ɪz əpɑɹtməns. hi kəd nɑt lɛɾ əm əkʌmpəni hɪm; hi hæd pɹɑməst, bʌt tə lɛɾ əm faɪt, nɑt tə liɾ əm tə slɔɾɝ. wən i faʊn dɪmɑndɝɾ ən æzmɑɾiən, ɔl ðə meɪɾənz kəd də wɑz daɪ, ən i ɔlɹɛɾi hæd faɪv neɪmz tə lɝn ən æd tə hɪz lɪst. soʊmɑɹə ʌv ðə bɛn pik dɛɹn wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ðɛɹ. ə pɹɑməs i hæd hæd tə meɪk, ə pɹɑməs i hæd tə kip. fəɹ ðət pɹɑməs əloʊn, hi dɪzɝv tə daɪ!

Maidens appeared, a stream of them, veiled, and ran by without seeing him. Toward his apartments. He could not let them accompany him; he had promised, but to let them fight, not to lead them to slaughter. When he found Demandred and Asmodean, all the Maidens could do was die, and he already had five names to learn and add to his list. Somara of the Bent Peak Daryne was already there. A promise he had had to make, a promise he had to keep. For that promise alone, he deserved to die!

iɡəlz ən wɪmən kən oʊnli bi kɛp seɪf ɪn keɪdʒɪz, luz θɝɪn sɛɾ əz ðoʊ kwoʊɾɪŋ, ðən əbɹʌpli bɪɡæn wipɪŋ əz ðə læst ə ðə meɪɾənz vænɪʃt.

Eagles and women can only be kept safe in cages, Lews Therin said as though quoting, then abruptly began weeping as the last of the Maidens vanished.

ɹænd muvd ɑn, swipɪŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ θɹu ðə pæləs ɪn ɑɹks ðət sloʊli muvd əweɪ fɹəm ɪz əpɑɹtməns. foʊldəd laɪt juz vɛɹi lɪɾəl ə ðə paʊɝ - soʊ lɪɾəl noʊ mæn cʊɾə fɛl ðə jus ə seɪɾɪn ənlɛs ɹaɪɾ ɑn tɑp ʌv ɪt - ən i juzd ɪt wɛnɛvɝ ɛniwʌn simd əbaʊt tə si hɪm. hɪz ətækɝz hæd nɑt stʃɹʌk əɾ ɪz ɹumz ɑn ðə tʃæns i wəd bi ðɛɹ. ðeɪ hæɾ aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz ɪn ðə pæləs. meɪbi ɪt hæd bɪn tɑvɝən wɝk ðət pʊld ɪm aʊɾ ə ði əpɑɹtməns, ɪf ə tɑvɝən kəd wɝk ɑn hɪmsɛlf, ən meɪbi dʒʌs hæpənstæns, bʌt pɝhæps ɪz tʌɡɪŋ ət ðə pæɾɝn kəd bɹɪŋ ɪz ətækɝz wɪðɪn ɪz ɡɹæsp waɪl ðeɪ θɔɾ ɪm dɛɾ əɹ ɪnʒɝd. luz θɝɪn tʃʌkəld ət ðə θɔt. ɹænd kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fil ðə mæn ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz hænz ɪn æntɪsəpeɪʃən.

Rand moved on, sweeping back and forth through the palace in arcs that slowly moved away from his apartments. Folded Light used very little of the Power - so little no man could have felt the use of saidin unless right on top of it - and he used it whenever anyone seemed about to see him. His attackers had not struck at his rooms on the chance he would be there. They had eyes-and-ears in the Palace. Maybe it had been ta'veren work that pulled him out of the apartments, if a ta'veren could work on himself, and maybe just happenstance, but perhaps his tugging at the Pattern could bring his attackers within his grasp while they thought him dead or injured. Lews Therin chuckled at the thought. Rand could almost feel the man rubbing his hands in anticipation.

θɹi mɔɹ taɪmz i hæd tə haɪd bɪhaɪn ðə paʊɝ əz veɪl meɪɾənz ɹʌʃt baɪ, ən wʌns wən i sɔ kædzueɪn swipɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə kɔɹəɾɝ əhɛd wɪð noʊ fjuɝ ðən sɪks ɛɛs sədaɪ əɾ əɹ hilz, ən nɑt wʌn ʌðɝ ðəɾ i ɹɛkəɡnaɪz bɪsaɪdz hɝ. ðeɪ sim tə bi hʌntɪŋ. hi wɑz nɑɾ əfɹeɪɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd sɪstɝ, pɹɪsaɪsli. noʊ, ʌv kɔɹs nɑɾ əfɹeɪd! bʌɾ i weɪɾəd əntɪl ʃi ən əɹ fɹɛnz wɝ wɛl aʊɾ ə saɪt bɪfɔɹ lɛɾɪŋ ɪz kənsilɪŋ wiv ɡoʊ. luz θɝɪn dɪd nɑt tʃʌkəl oʊvɝ kædzueɪn. hi wɑz dɛθli saɪlən əntɪl ʃi wɑz ɡɔn.

Three more times he had to hide behind the Power as veiled Maidens rushed by, and once when he saw Cadsuane sweeping along the corridor ahead with no fewer than six Aes Sedai at her heels, and not one other that he recognized besides her. They seemed to be hunting. He was not afraid of the gray-haired sister, precisely. No, of course not afraid! But he waited until she and her friends were well out of sight before letting his concealing weave go. Lews Therin did not chuckle over Cadsuane. He was deathly silent until she was gone.

ɹænd stɛpt əweɪ fɹəm ðə wɔl, ə dɔɹ oʊpən ɹaɪt bɪsaɪd hɪm, ən eɪlɪl pikt aʊt. hi hæd nɑt noʊn i wɑz nɪɹ əɹ ɹumz. bɪhaɪn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ stʊɾ ə dɑɹk wʊmən wɪð fæt ɡoʊldən ɹɪŋz ɪn əɹ ɪɹz ən ə mədæljən-fɪld ɡoʊldən tʃeɪn ɹʌnɪŋ əkɹɔs əɹ lɛf tʃik tə hɝ noʊz ɹɪŋ. ʃələn, wɪndfɪndɝ tə hɑɹɪn dɪn toʊɡɑɹə, ði æθɑn maɪɹ æmbæsəɾɝ u hæd muvd ɪndə ðə pæləs wɪð əɹ ɹɛɾənu ɔlmoʊst əz mɛɹænə ɪnfɔɹmd ɪm ə ði əɡɹimənt. ən miɾɪŋ wɪð ə wʊmən u maɪt wɑn ɪm dɛd. ðɛɹ aɪz pɑpt ət ðə saɪɾ ə hɪm.

Rand stepped away from the wall, a door opened right beside him, and Ailil peeked out. He had not known he was near her rooms. Behind her shoulder stood a dark woman with fat golden rings in her ears and a medallion-filled golden chain running across her left cheek to her nose ring. Shalon, Windfinder to Harine din Togara, the Atha'an Miere ambassador who had moved into the Palace with her retinue almost as Merana informed him of the agreement. And meeting with a woman who might want him dead. Their eyes popped at the sight of him.

hi wɑz əz dʒɛntəl əz i kəd bi, bʌɾ i hæd tə bi kwɪk. ə fju moʊməns æftɝ ðə dɔɹ oʊpənd, hi wɑz tʌkɪŋ ə sʌmwʌt ɹʌmpəld eɪlɪl bɪniθ əɹ bɛɾ əlɔŋsaɪd ʃələn. pɝhæps ðeɪ wɝ nɑt pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ. pɝhæps. seɪf wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən sɑɹi. ɡlɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm əbʌv maʊðz wɑɾəd fʊl ʌv eɪlɪlz skɑɹvz, ðə tu wɪmən ɹɪθd əɡɛns ðə tɔɹn stʃɹɪps ə bɛdʃiɾ i hæd juz tə baɪn ðɛɹ ɹɪsts ən æŋkəlz. ðə ʃild i hæd taɪɾ ɔf ɑn ʃələn wəd hoʊld əɹ fəɹ ə deɪ əɹ tu bɪfɔɹ ðə nɑɾ ənɹævəld, bʌt sʌmwʌn wəd faɪn əm ən kʌt ðɛɹ ʌðɝ bɑnz bɪfɔɹ tu mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ.

He was as gentle as he could be, but he had to be quick. A few moments after the door opened, he was tucking a somewhat rumpled Ailil beneath her bed alongside Shalon. Perhaps they were not part of what was happening. Perhaps. Safe was better than sorry. Glaring at him above mouths wadded full of Ailil's scarves, the two women writhed against the torn strips of bedsheet he had used to bind their wrists and ankles. The shield he had tied off on Shalon would hold her for a day or two before the knot unraveled, but someone would find them and cut their other bonds before too much longer.

wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt ðət ʃild, hi oʊpən ðə dɔɹ ɪnʌf tə tʃɛk ðə hɔlweɪ, ən hɝiɾ aʊt, əlɔŋ ði ɛmpti kɔɹəɾɝ. hi kəd nɑɾ əv lɛf ðə wɪndfɪndɝ fɹi tə tʃænəl, bʌt ʃildɪŋ ə wʊmən wɑz nɑɾ ə mæɾɝ ə dʒɹɪbəlz ə ðə paʊɝ. ɪf wʌn ə hɪz ətækɝz hæd bɪn kloʊs ɪnʌf . . . bʌɾ i sɔ noʊ wʌn daʊn ɛni ʌv ðə kɹɔsɪŋ kɔɹɪɾɝz, iðɝ.

Worrying about that shield, he opened the door enough to check the hallway, and hurried out, along the empty corridor. He could not have left the Windfinder free to channel, but shielding a woman was not a matter of dribbles of the Power. If one of his attackers had been close enough . . . But he saw no one down any of the crossing corridors, either.

fɪfti peɪsɪz bɪɑn eɪlɪlz ɹumz, ðə kɔɹəɾɝ oʊpən ɪndə ə skwɛɹ-ɹeɪl bælkəni ʌv blu mɑɹbəl wɪð bɹɔd stɛɹz əɾ iðɝ ɛnd, fɹʌntɪŋ ə skwɛɹ tʃeɪmbɝ wɪð ə haɪ, vɔltəd silɪŋ ən ðə seɪm sɔɹɾ ə bælkəni ət ði ʌðɝ saɪd. tæpəstʃɹiz tɛn peɪsɪz lɔŋ hʌŋ əlɔŋ ðə wɔlz, bɝdz sɔɹɪŋ tə ðə skaɪz ɪn ɹɪdʒəd pæɾɝnz. bɪloʊ, dæʃivə stʊd lʊkɪŋ əbaʊt, lɪkɪŋ ɪz lɪps ənsɝteɪnli. dʒɛdwɪn ən ɹɑtʃeɪd wɝ wɪð hɪm! luz θɝɪn tʃɪɾɝd ə kɪlɪŋ.

Fifty paces beyond Ailil's rooms, the corridor opened into a square-railed balcony of blue marble with broad stairs at either end, fronting a square chamber with a high, vaulted ceiling and the same sort of balcony at the other side. Tapestries ten paces long hung along the walls, birds soaring to the skies in rigid patterns. Below, Dashiva stood looking about, licking his lips uncertainly. Gedwyn and Rochaid were with him! Lews Therin chittered of killing.

". . . tɛlɪŋ jə aɪ fɛl nʌθɪŋ," dʒɛdwɪn wɑz seɪɪŋ. "hiz dɛd!"

". . . telling you I felt nothing," Gedwyn was saying. "He's dead!"

ən dæʃivə sɔ ɹænd, ət ðə hɛɾ ə ðə stɛɹz.

And Dashiva saw Rand, at the head of the stairs.

ði oʊnli wɔɹnɪŋ i hæd wɑz ðə sʌɾən snɑɹl ðət kəntɔɹɾəd dæʃivəz feɪs. dæʃivə tʃænəld, ən wɪð noʊ taɪm tə θɪŋk, ɹænd woʊv - əz soʊ ɔfən, hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt; sʌmθɪŋ dʒɹɛdʒ fɹəm luz θɝɪnz mɛmɹiz; hi wɑz nɑɾ ivən ʃʊɹ i kɹieɪɾəd ðə wiv ɪntaɪɝli hɪmsɛlf, əɹ wɛðɝ luz θɝɪn snætʃt ət seɪɾɪn - ɛɹ ən faɪɝ ən ɝθ woʊvən ɝaʊn hɪmsɛlf dʒʌst soʊ. ðə faɪɝ ðət lɛp fɹəm dæʃivə ɪɹʌptəd, ʃæɾɝɪŋ mɑɹbəl, flɪŋɪŋ ɹænd bæk daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ, baʊndɪŋ ən ɹoʊlɪŋ ɪn ɪz kəkun.

The only warning he had was the sudden snarl that contorted Dashiva's face. Dashiva channeled, and with no time to think, Rand wove - as so often, he did not know what; something dredged from Lews Therin's memories; he was not even sure he created the weave entirely himself, or whether Lews Therin snatched at saidin - Air and Fire and Earth woven around himself just so. The fire that leaped from Dashiva erupted, shattering marble, flinging Rand back down the hallway, bounding and rolling in his cocoon.

ðət bæɹiɝ wəd kip aʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ ʃɔɹɾ ə bɑlfaɪɝ. ɪnkluɾɪŋ ɛɹ tə bɹið. ɹænd ɹilist ɪt pæntɪŋ, skɹeɪpɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə flɔɹ, wɪð ðə kɹæʃ ə ði ɪksploʊʒənz stɪl ɹɪŋɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, dʌst stɪl hæŋɪŋ ən bɪts ə bɹoʊkən mɑɹbəl tʌmbəlɪŋ. əz mʌtʃ əz fəɹ bɹɛθ, ðoʊ, hi lɛɾ ɪt ɡoʊ kəz wʌt kəd kip ðə paʊɝ aʊt, kɛpt ɪɾ ɪn. bɪfɔɹ i stɑp slaɪɾɪŋ, hi tʃænəl faɪɝ ən ɛɹ, bʌt woʊvən mʌtʃ dɪfɹənli ðən fəɹ foʊldəd laɪt. θɪn ɹɛd waɪɝz lɛp fɹəm ɪz lɛf hænd, fænɪŋ aʊɾ əz ðeɪ slaɪs θɹu ði ɪntɝvinɪŋ stoʊn təwɔɹd wɛɹ dæʃivə ən ði ʌðɝz hæd bɪn stændɪŋ. fɹəm ɪz lɛf spɛd bɔlz ə fleɪm, faɪɝ woʊvən wɪð ɛɹ, fæstɝ ðən i kəd kaʊnt, ən ðeɪ bɝn θɹu ðə stoʊn bɪfɔɹ ɪksploʊɾɪŋ ɪn ðət tʃeɪmbɝ. wʌn kəntɪnjuəs dɛfənɪŋ ɹɔɹ meɪd ðə pæləs tʃɹɛmbəl. dʌs ðət hæd fɔlən ɹoʊz ʌp əɡɛn, ən pisəz ə stoʊn baʊnst.

That barrier would keep out anything short of balefire. Including air to breathe. Rand released it panting, scraping along the floor, with the crash of the explosions still ringing in the air, dust still hanging and bits of broken marble tumbling. As much as for breath, though, he let it go because what could keep the Power out, kept it in. Before he stopped sliding, he channeled Fire and Air, but woven much differently than for Folded Light. Thin red wires leaped from his left hand, fanning out as they sliced through the intervening stone toward where Dashiva and the others had been standing. From his left sped balls of flame, Fire woven with Air, faster than he could count, and they burned through the stone before exploding in that chamber. One continuous deafening roar made the Palace tremble. Dust that had fallen rose up again, and pieces of stone bounced.

ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli, ðoʊ, hi wɑz ʌp ən ɹʌnɪŋ, bæk pæst eɪlɪlz əpɑɹtməns. ðə mæn u stʃɹʌk ən steɪɾ ɪn wʌn spɑt wɑz æskɪŋ tə daɪ. hi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə daɪ, bʌt nɑt jɛt. snɑɹlɪŋ saʊnləsli, hi spɛd daʊn ənʌðɝ hɔl, dɪsɛndəd nɛɹoʊ sɝvəns' stɛɹz, ən keɪm aʊɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ bɪloʊ.

Almost immediately, though, he was up and running, back past Ailil's apartments. The man who struck and stayed in one spot was asking to die. He was ready to die, but not yet. Snarling soundlessly, he sped down another hall, descended narrow servants' stairs, and came out on the floor below.

hi tʊk kɛɹ meɪkɪŋ ɪz weɪ bæk tə wɛɹ i hæd sin dæʃivə, dɛdli wivz ɹɛɾi tə flɪŋ ət soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə ɡlɪmps.

He took care making his way back to where he had seen Dashiva, deadly weaves ready to fling at so much as a glimpse.

aɪ ʃʊɾə kɪld əm ɔl ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, luz θɝɪn pæntɪd. aɪ ʃʊɾə kɪld əm ɔl!

I should have killed them all in the beginning, Lews Therin panted. I should have killed them all!

ɹænd lɛɾ ɪm ɹeɪdʒ.

Rand let him rage.

ðə lɑɹdʒ tʃeɪmbɝ sim tə hæv bɪn wɑʃt ɪn faɪɝ. oʊnli tʃɑɹd fɹæɡməns lɪk baɪ fleɪmz ɹɪmeɪn ə ðə tæpəstʃɹiz, ən ɡɹeɪt ɡaʊudʒɪz ə peɪs əkɹɔs hæd bɪn bɝn ɪndə flɔɹ ən wɔlz. ðə stɛɹz ɹænd hæd bɪn əbaʊt tə dɪsɛn ɛndəɾ ɪn ə tɛn-fʊt ɡæp hæfweɪ daʊn. ʌv ðə θɹi mɛn, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn. ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn kənsum kəmplitli. sʌmθɪŋ wəɾ əv ɹɪmeɪnd.

The large chamber seemed to have been washed in fire. Only charred fragments licked by flames remained of the tapestries, and great gouges a pace across had been burned into floor and walls. The stairs Rand had been about to descend ended in a ten-foot gap halfway down. Of the three men, there was no sign. They would not have been consumed completely. Something would have remained.

ə sɝvən ɪn ə blæk koʊt kɔʃəsli poʊkt ɪz hɛd fɹəm ə taɪni dɔɹ bɪsaɪd ðə stɛɹz ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə tʃeɪmbɝ. hɪz aɪz fɛl ɑn ɹænd, ɹoʊld ʌp ɪn ɪz hɛd, ən i fɛl fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ə hip. ənʌðɝ sɝvən pipt aʊɾ ʌv ə kɔɹəɾɝ, ðən ɡæðɝɾ əɹ skɝts ən ɹeɪs bæk ðə weɪ ʃi hæd kʌm, ʃɹikɪŋ ət ðə tɑp ə hɝ lʌŋz ðət ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɑz kɪlɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə pæləs.

A servant in a black coat cautiously poked his head from a tiny door beside the stairs on the other side of the chamber. His eyes fell on Rand, rolled up in his head, and he fell forward in a heap. Another servant peeped out of a corridor, then gathered her skirts and raced back the way she had come, shrieking at the top of her lungs that the Dragon Reborn was killing everyone in the Palace.

ɹænd slɪpt aʊɾ ə ðə tʃeɪmbɝ ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ. hi wɑz vɛɹi ɡʊɾ ət fɹaɪɾənɪŋ pipəl u kəd nɑt hɑɹm hɪm. vɛɹi ɡʊɾ ət dɪstʃɹɔɪɪŋ.

Rand slipped out of the chamber grimacing. He was very good at frightening people who could not harm him. Very good at destroying.

tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ, əɹ bi dɪstʃɹɔɪd, luz θɝɪn læft. wən ðæts jəɹ tʃɔɪs, ɪz ðəɹ ə dɪfɝəns?

To destroy, or be destroyed, Lews Therin laughed. When that's your choice, is there a difference?

sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə pæləs, ə mæn tʃænəld ɪnʌf ə ðə paʊɝ tə meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ. dæʃivə ən ði ʌðɝz fliɪŋ? əɹ wɑntɪŋ ɪm tə θɪŋk ðæt?

Somewhere in the Palace, a man channeled enough of the Power to make a gateway. Dashiva and the others fleeing? Or wanting him to think that?

hi wɔk ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz ə ðə pæləs, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bɑðɝɪŋ tə haɪd. ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls sim tə bi. ðə fju sɝvəns i sɔ, flɛd skɹimɪŋ. kɔɹəɾɝ æftɝ kɔɹəɾɝ, hi hʌntəd, fɪl nɪɹ tə bɝstɪŋ wɪð seɪɾɪn, fʊl ə faɪɝ ən aɪs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ənaɪəleɪɾ ɪm əz ʃʊɹli əz dæʃivə hæd, fʊl ə ðə teɪnt wɝmɪŋ ɪts weɪ ɪndə hɪz soʊl. hi hæd noʊ niɾ ə luz θɝɪnz ɹæɡəd læftɝ ən ɹeɪvəŋz tə bi fɪld wɪð ə dɪzaɪɝ tə kɪl.

He walked the corridors of the Palace, no longer bothering to hide. Everyone else seemed to be. The few servants he saw, fled screaming. Corridor after corridor, he hunted, filled near to bursting with saidin, full of fire and ice trying to annihilate him as surely as Dashiva had, full of the taint worming its way into his soul. He had no need of Lews Therin's ragged laughter and ravings to be filled with a desire to kill.

ə ɡlɪmps ʌv ə blæk koʊɾ əhɛd, ən ɪz hænd ʃɑɾ ʌp, faɪɝ stʃɹikɪŋ, ɪksploʊɾɪŋ, tɛɹɪŋ əweɪ ðə kɔɹnɝ wɛɹ ðə tu hɔlweɪz mɛt. ɹænd lɛt ðə wiv səbsaɪd, bʌt dɪd nɑt lɛɾ ɪt ɡoʊ. hæɾ i kɪl hɪm?

A glimpse of a black coat ahead, and his hand shot up, fire streaking, exploding, tearing away the corner where the two hallways met. Rand let the weave subside, but did not let it go. Had he killed him?

"maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," ə vɔɪs ʃaʊɾəd fɹəm bɪɑn ðə tɔɹn stoʊnwɝk, "ɪts mi, nɛɹɪʃmə! ən flɪn!"

"My Lord Dragon," a voice shouted from beyond the torn stonework, "it's me, Narishma! And Flinn!"

"aɪ dɪdn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ju," ɹænd laɪd. "kʌm hɪɹ."

"I didn't recognize you," Rand lied. "Come here."

"aɪ θɪŋk meɪbi jəɹ blʌdz hɑt," flɪnz vɔɪs kɔld. "aɪ θɪŋk meɪbi wi ʃəd weɪt fəɹ ɛvɹibɑɾi tə kul daʊn."

"I think maybe your blood's hot," Flinn's voice called. "I think maybe we should wait for everybody to cool down."

"jɛs," ɹænd sɛd sloʊli. hæɾ i ɹɪli tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl nɛɹɪʃmə? hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i kəd kleɪm ði ɪkskjus ə luz θɝɪn. "jɛs, ðət maɪt bi bɛst. fəɹ ə lɪɾəl waɪl lɔŋɡɝ." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ænsɝ. dɪɾ i hɪɹ buts ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ? hi fɔɹst ɪz hænz daʊn ən tɝn ənʌðɝ weɪ.

"Yes," Rand said slowly. Had he really tried to kill Narishma? He did not think he could claim the excuse of Lews Therin. "Yes, that might be best. For a little while longer." There was no answer. Did he hear boots retreating? He forced his hands down and turned another way.

hi sɝtʃt θɹu ðə pæləs fəɹ aʊɝz wɪθaʊt faɪndɪŋ ə saɪn ə dæʃivə əɹ ði ʌðɝz. ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz ən ɡɹeɪt hɔlz, ivən ðə kɪtʃənz, wɝ ɛmpti ʌv pipəl. hi faʊnd nʌθɪŋ, ən lɝnd nʌθɪŋ. noʊ. hi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i hæd lɝnd wʌn θɪŋ. tʃɹʌst wɑz ə naɪf, ən ðə hɪlt wɑz əz ʃɑɹp əz ðə bleɪd.

He searched through the Palace for hours without finding a sign of Dashiva or the others. The corridors and great halls, even the kitchens, were empty of people. He found nothing, and learned nothing. No. He realized that he had learned one thing. Trust was a knife, and the hilt was as sharp as the blade.

ðən i faʊn peɪn.

Then he found pain.

ðə smɔl stoʊn-wɔld ɹum wɑz dip bɪloʊ ðə sʌn pæləs ən wɔɹm dɪspaɪt ðə læk ʌv ə faɪɝpleɪs, bʌt mɪn fɛl koʊld. θɹi ɡɪldɪd læmps ɑn ðə taɪni wʊɾən teɪbəl ɡeɪv mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf laɪt. ɹænd hæd sɛd ðət fɹəm ðɛɹ, hi kəd ɡɛɾ əɹ əweɪ ivən ɪf sʌmwʌn tʃɹaɪd tə ɹut ðə pæləs aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hi hæd nɑt saʊndəɾ əz ɪf i wɝ dʒoʊkɪŋ.

The small stone-walled room was deep below the Sun Palace and warm despite the lack of a fireplace, but Min felt cold. Three gilded lamps on the tiny wooden table gave more than enough light. Rand had said that from there, he could get her away even if someone tried to root the Palace out of the ground. He had not sounded as if he were joking.

hoʊldɪŋ ðə kɹaʊn ʌv ɪljən ɑn əɹ læp, ʃi wɑtʃt ɹænd. wɑtʃt ɹænd wɑtʃɪŋ fɛdwɪn. hɝ hænz taɪɾənd ɑn ðə kɹaʊn, ən lusən ɪmiɾiətli ət ðə stæbz ə ðoʊz smɔl sɔɹdz hɪɾən əmʌŋ ðə lɔɹəl livz. stʃɹeɪnʒ, ðət ðə kɹaʊn ən sɛptɝ ʃʊɾə sɝvaɪvd wən ðə dʒɹæɡən θɹoʊn ɪtsɛlf wɑz ə paɪl ʌv ɡɪldɪd splɪntɝz bɛɹiɾ ɪn ɹʌbəl. ə lɑɹdʒ lɛðɝ skɹɪp bɪsaɪɾ əɹ tʃɛɹ, wɪð ɹændz sɔɹd bɛlt ən skæbɑɹɾɪd sɔɹd ɹɛstɪŋ əɡɛnst ɪt, hɛld wʌɾ ɛls i hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə sælvədʒ. stʃɹeɪnʒ tʃɔɪsəz fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt, ɪn əɹ ɛstəmeɪʃən.

Holding the crown of Illian on her lap, she watched Rand. Watched Rand watching Fedwin. Her hands tightened on the crown, and loosened immediately at the stabs of those small swords hidden among the laurel leaves. Strange, that the crown and scepter should have survived when the Dragon Throne itself was a pile of gilded splinters buried in rubble. A large leather scrip beside her chair, with Rand's sword belt and scabbarded sword resting against it, held what else he had been able to salvage. Strange choices for the most part, in her estimation.

jə bɹeɪnləs lubi, ʃi θɔt. nɑt θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt wʌts ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə jə woʊn meɪk ɪt ɡoʊ əweɪ.

You brainless loobie, she thought. Not thinking about what's right in front of you won't make it go away.

ɹænd sæt kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ðə bɛɹ stoʊn flɔɹ, stɪl kʌvɝɾ ɪn dʌst ən skɹætʃəz, hɪz koʊt tɔɹn. hɪz feɪs maɪɾ əv bɪn kɑɹvd. hi sim tə wɑtʃ fɛdwɪn wɪθaʊt blɪŋkɪŋ. ðə bɔɪ wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ, tu, hɪz lɛɡz spɹɔld aʊt. tʌŋ kɑt bɪtwin ɪz tiθ, fɛdwɪn wɑz kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ɑn meɪkɪŋ ə taʊɝ aʊɾ ə blɑks ʌv wʊd. mɪn swɑloʊd hɑɹd.

Rand sat cross-legged on the bare stone floor, still covered in dust and scratches, his coat torn. His face might have been carved. He seemed to watch Fedwin without blinking. The boy was sitting on the floor, too, his legs sprawled out. Tongue caught between his teeth, Fedwin was concentrating on making a tower out of blocks of wood. Min swallowed hard.

ʃi kəd stɪl ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə hɔɹɝ wən ʃi ɹilaɪz ðə bɔɪ "ɡɑɹɾɪŋ" hɝ naʊ hæd ðə maɪn ʌv ə smɔl tʃaɪld. ðə sædnəs ɹɪmeɪnd, tu - laɪt, hi wɑz oʊnli ə bɔɪ! ɪt wɑz nɑt ɹaɪt! - bʌt ʃi hoʊpt ɹænd stɪl hæɾ ɪm ʃildɪd. ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn izi, tɔkɪŋ fɛdwɪn ɪndə pleɪɪŋ wɪð ðoʊz wʊɾən blɑks ɪnstɛɾ ə pʊlɪŋ stoʊnz aʊɾ ə ðə wɔlz wɪð ðə paʊɝ tə meɪk ə "bɪɡ taʊɝ tə kip jə seɪf ɪn." ən ðən ʃi hæd sæt ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ɪm əntɪl ɹænd keɪm. oʊ, laɪt, ʃi wɑntəd tə kɹaɪ. fəɹ ɹænd ivən mɔɹ ðən fɛdwɪn.

She could still remember the horror when she realized the boy "guarding" her now had the mind of a small child. The sadness remained, too - Light, he was only a boy! it was not right! - but she hoped Rand still had him shielded. It had not been easy, talking Fedwin into playing with those wooden blocks instead of pulling stones out of the walls with the Power to make a "big tower to keep you safe in." And then she had sat guarding him until Rand came. Oh, Light, she wanted to cry. For Rand even more than Fedwin.

"ju haɪd jɝsɛlf ɪn ðə dɛpθs, ɪɾ əpɪɹz."

"You hide yourself in the depths, it appears."

ðə dip vɔɪs wɑz nɑt fɪnɪʃt spikɪŋ fɹəm ðə dɔɹweɪ bɪfɔɹ ɹænd wɑz ɑn ɪz fit, feɪsɪŋ mæzɹim teɪm. əz juʒəwəl, ðə hʊk-noʊz mæn wɔɹ ə blæk koʊt wɪð blu-ænd-ɡoʊl dʒɹæɡənz spaɪɹəlɪŋ ʌp ði ɑɹmz. ənlaɪk ði ʌðɝ æʃəmən, hi hæd niðɝ sɔɹd nɔɹ dʒɹæɡən ɑn ɪz haɪ kɑlɝ. hɪz dɑɹk feɪs wɔɹ nɪɹli əz lɪɾəl ɪkspɹɛʃən əz ɹænz. naʊ, stɛɹɪŋ ət teɪm, ɹænd sim tə bi ɡɹɪɾɪŋ ɪz tiθ. mɪn sɝəptɪʃəsli izd ə naɪf ɪn əɹ koʊtsliv. əz mɛni ɪmədʒəz ən ɔʊɹəz dænst ɝaʊnd wʌn əz ði ʌðɝ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə vjuɪŋ ðət meɪɾ əɹ sʌɾənli wɛɹi. ʃi hæd sin ə mæn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ tə kɪl ənʌðɝ bɪfɔɹ, ən ʃi wɑz siɪŋ ɪɾ əɡɛn.

The deep voice was not finished speaking from the doorway before Rand was on his feet, facing Mazrim Taim. As usual, the hook-nosed man wore a black coat with blue-and-gold Dragons spiraling up the arms. Unlike the other Asha'man, he had neither Sword nor Dragon on his high collar. His dark face wore nearly as little expression as Rand's. Now, staring at Taim, Rand seemed to be gritting his teeth. Min surreptitiously eased a knife in her coatsleeve. As many images and auras danced around one as the other, but it was not a viewing that made her suddenly wary. She had seen a man trying to decide whether to kill another before, and she was seeing it again.

"ju kʌm hɪɹ hoʊldɪŋ seɪɾɪn, teɪm?" ɹænd sɛd, mʌtʃ tu sɔfli. teɪm spɹɛɾ ɪz hænz, ən ɹænd sɛd, "ðæts bɛɾɝ." bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt ɹɪlæks.

"You come here holding saidin, Taim?" Rand said, much too softly. Taim spread his hands, and Rand said, "That's better." But he did not relax.

"ɪt wɑz dʒʌs ðəɾ aɪ θɔɾ aɪ maɪt bi stæbd baɪ æksəɾənt," teɪm sɛd, "meɪkɪŋ maɪ weɪ hɪɹ θɹu kɔɹɪɾɝz pækt wɪð ðoʊz il wɪmən. ðeɪ sim ædʒəteɪɾəd." hɪz aɪz nɛvɝ lɛft ɹænd, bʌt mɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ i hæd noʊɾəst əɹ tʌtʃɪŋ əɹ naɪf. "ʌndɝstændəbli, ʌv kɔɹs," hi wɛn ɑn smuðli. "aɪ kænɑɾ ɪkspɹɛs maɪ dʒɔɪ ət faɪndɪŋ jə əlaɪv æftɝ siɪŋ wʌɾ aɪ dɪɾ əbʌv. aɪ keɪm tə ɹipɔɹt dɛzɝɾɝz. nɔɹməli, aɪ wʊdn əv bɑðɝd, bʌt ðiz ɑɹ dʒɛdwɪn, ɹɑtʃeɪd, tɔɹvəl, ən kɪsmən. ɪt simz ðeɪ wɝ mælkəntɛntɪɾ oʊvɝ ɪvɛns ɪn ɔltɑɹə, bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ θɔt ðeɪ wəd ɡoʊ ðɪs fɑɹ. aɪ hævən sin ɛni ʌv ðə mɛn aɪ lɛft wɪð ju." fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, hɪz ɡeɪz flɪkɝd tə fɛdwɪn. fəɹ noʊ mɔɹ ðən ən ɪnstənt. "ðɛɹ wɝ . . . ʌðɝ . . . kæʒəwəltiz? əl teɪk ðɪs wʌn wɪð mi, ɪf jə wɪʃ."

"It was just that I thought I might be stabbed by accident," Taim said, "making my way here through corridors packed with those Aiel women. They seem agitated." His eyes never left Rand, but Min was sure he had noticed her touching her knife. "Understandably, of course," he went on smoothly. "I cannot express my joy at finding you alive after seeing what I did above. I came to report deserters. Normally, I wouldn't have bothered, but these are Gedwyn, Rochaid, Torval, and Kisman. It seems they were malcontented over events in Altara, but I never thought they would go this far. I haven't seen any of the men I left with you." For an instant, his gaze flickered to Fedwin. For no more than an instant. "There were . . . other . . . casualties? I will take this one with me, if you wish."

"aɪ toʊld əm tə steɪ aʊɾ ə saɪt," ɹænd sɛɾ ɪn ə hɑɹʃ vɔɪs. "æn əl teɪk kɛɹ ə fɛdwɪn. fɛdwɪn mɔɹ, teɪm; nɑt 'ðɪs wʌn.' " hi æktʃəli  bæk tə ðə smɔl teɪbəl tə pɪk ʌp ðə sɪlvɝ kʌp sɪɾɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə læmps. mɪnz bɹɛθ kɑt.

"I told them to stay out of sight," Rand said in a harsh voice. "And I'll take care of Fedwin. Fedwin Morr, Taim; not 'this one.' " He actually backed to the small table to pick up the silver cup sitting among the lamps. Min's breath caught.

"ðə wɪzdəm ɪn maɪ vɪlədʒ kəd kjʊɹ ɛniθɪŋ," ɹænd sɛɾ əz i nɛl bɪsaɪd fɛdwɪn. sʌmhaʊ, hi mænədʒ tə smaɪl ət ðə bɔɪ wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ ɪz aɪz fɹəm teɪm. fɛdwɪn smaɪl bæk hæpəli ən tʃɹaɪd tə teɪk ðə kʌp, bʌt ɹænd hɛld ɪt fəɹ ɪm tə dʒɹɪŋk. "ʃi noʊz mɔɹ əbaʊɾ ɝbz ðən ɛnibəɾi aɪv ɛvɝ mɛt. aɪ lɝn ə lɪɾəl fɹəm hɝ, wɪtʃ ɑɹ seɪf, wɪtʃ nɑt." fɛdwɪn saɪɾ əz ɹænd tʊk ðə kʌp əweɪ ən hɛl ðə bɔɪ tə hɪz tʃɛst. "slip, fɛdwɪn," ɹænd mɝmɝd.

"The Wisdom in my village could cure anything," Rand said as he knelt beside Fedwin. Somehow, he managed to smile at the boy without taking his eyes from Taim. Fedwin smiled back happily and tried to take the cup, but Rand held it for him to drink. "She knows more about herbs than anybody I've ever met. I learned a little from her, which are safe, which not." Fedwin sighed as Rand took the cup away and held the boy to his chest. "Sleep, Fedwin," Rand murmured.

ɪt dɪd sim ðət ðə bɔɪ wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə slip. hɪz aɪz kloʊzd. hɪz tʃɛst ɹoʊz ən fɛl mɔɹ sloʊli. sloʊɝ. əntɪl ɪt stɑpt. ðə smaɪl nɛvɝ lɛft ɪz lɪps.

It did seem that the boy was going to sleep. His eyes closed. His chest rose and fell more slowly. Slower. Until it stopped. The smile never left his lips.

"ə lɪɾəl sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðə waɪn," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli əz i leɪd fɛdwɪn daʊn. mɪnz aɪz bɝnd, bʌt ʃi wəd nɑt kɹaɪ. ʃi wəd nɑt!

"A little something in the wine," Rand said softly as he laid Fedwin down. Min's eyes burned, but she would not cry. She would not!

"ju ɑɹ hɑɹɾɝ ðən aɪ θɔt," teɪm mʌɾɝd.

"You are harder than I thought," Taim muttered.

ɹænd smaɪld ət hɪm, ə hɑɹd fɛɹəl smaɪl. "æd kɔɹlən dæʃivə tə jəɹ lɪst ə dɛzɝɾɝz, teɪm. nɛks taɪm aɪ vɪzət ðə blæk taʊɝ, aɪ ɪkspɛk tə si hɪz hɛɾ ɑn jəɹ tʃɹeɪɾɝz tʃɹi."

Rand smiled at him, a hard feral smile. "Add Corlan Dashiva to your list of deserters, Taim. Next time I visit the Black Tower, I expect to see his head on your Traitor's Tree."

"dæʃivə?" teɪm snɑɹəld, hɪz aɪz waɪɾənɪŋ ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. "ɪt wɪl bi əz jə seɪ. wən nɛks jə vɪzət ðə blæk taʊɝ." ðət kwɪkli, hi ɹəkʌvɝd hɪmsɛlf, ɔl pɑlɪʃt stoʊn ən pɔɪz wʌns mɔɹ. haʊ ʃi wɪʃt ʃi kəd ɹiɾ əɹ vjuɪŋz ə hɪm.

"Dashiva?" Taim snarled, his eyes widening in surprise. "It will be as you say. When next you visit the Black Tower." That quickly, he recovered himself, all polished stone and poise once more. How she wished she could read her viewings of him.

"ɹɪtɝn tə ðə blæk taʊɝ, ən doʊn kʌm hɪɹ əɡɛn." stændɪŋ, ɹænd feɪs ði ʌðɝ mæn oʊvɝ fɛdwɪnz bɑɾi. "aɪ meɪ bi muvɪŋ əbaʊt fəɹ ə waɪl."

"Return to the Black Tower, and don't come here again." Standing, Rand faced the other man over Fedwin's body. "I may be moving about for a while."

teɪmz baʊ wɑz mɪnəskjul. "æz jə kəmænd."

Taim's bow was minuscule. "As you command."

əz ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn hɪm, mɪn lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ.

As the door closed behind him, Min let out a long breath.

"noʊ pɔɪnt weɪstɪŋ taɪm, ən noʊ taɪm tə weɪst," ɹænd mʌɾɝd. nilɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, hi tʊk ðə kɹaʊn ən slɪpt ɪɾ ɪndə ðə skɹɪp wɪð ði ʌðɝ θɪŋz. "mɪn, aɪ θɔɾ aɪ wɑz ðə hoʊl pæk ə haʊnz, tʃeɪsɪŋ daʊn wʌn wʊlf æftɝ ənʌðɝ, bʌɾ ɪt simz ɪm ðə wʊlf."

"No point wasting time, and no time to waste," Rand muttered. Kneeling in front of her, he took the crown and slipped it into the scrip with the other things. "Min, I thought I was the whole pack of hounds, chasing down one wolf after another, but it seems I'm the wolf."

"bɝn ju," ʃi bɹiðd. tæŋəlɪŋ boʊθ hænz ɪn ɪz hɛɹ, ʃi stɛɹɾ ɪn ɪz aɪz. naʊ blu, naʊ ɡɹeɪ, ə mɔɹnɪŋ skaɪ dʒʌst ət sʌnɹaɪz. ən dʒɹaɪ. "ju kən kɹaɪ, ɹænd ælθɹ. jə woʊn mɛlt ɪf jə kɹaɪ!"

"Burn you," she breathed. Tangling both hands in his hair, she stared in his eyes. Now blue, now gray, a morning sky just at sunrise. And dry. "You can cry, Rand al'Thor. You won't melt if you cry!"

"aɪ doʊn əv taɪm fəɹ tɪɹz, iðɝ, mɪn," hi sɛd dʒɛnli. "səmtaɪmz, ðə haʊnz kætʃ ðə wʊlf ən wɪʃ ðeɪ hædnt. səmtaɪmz, hi tɝnz ɑn ðɛm, əɹ weɪts ɪn æmbʊʃ. bʌt fɝst, ðə wʊlf əz tə ɹʌn."

"I don't have time for tears, either, Min," he said gently. "Sometimes, the hounds catch the wolf and wish they hadn't. Sometimes, he turns on them, or waits in ambush. But first, the wolf has to run."

"wɛn də wi ɡoʊ?" ʃi æskt. ʃi dɪd nɑt lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv ɪz hɛɹ. ʃi wɑz nɛvɝ gɑnə lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv hɪm. nɛvɝ.

"When do we go?" she asked. She did not let go of his hair. She was never going to let go of him. Never.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾi


CHAPTER 30

bɪɡɪnɪŋz


Beginnings

hoʊldɪŋ ɪz fɝ-laɪn kloʊk kloʊs wɪð wʌn hænd, pɛɹɪn lɛt steɪɝ wɔk ət ðə beɪz oʊn peɪs. ðə mɪdmɔɹnɪŋ sʌn ɡeɪv noʊ wɔɹmθ, ən ðə ɹʌɾɪd snoʊ ɑn ðə ɹoʊd liɾɪŋ ɪndə ɑbilə meɪd pʊɹ fʊɾɪŋ. hi ən ɪz dʌzən kəmpænjənz ʃɛɹd ðə weɪ wɪð oʊnli tu lʌmbɝɪŋ ɑks-kɑɹts ən ə hændfʊl ə fɑɹm-foʊk ɪn pleɪn dɑɹk wʊlənz. ðeɪ ɔl tʃɹʌdʒd əlɔŋ wɪð hɛdz daʊn, klʌtʃɪŋ ət hæɾ əɹ kæp wɛnɛvɝ ə ɡʌst ɹoʊz bʌɾ ʌðɝwaɪz kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪniθ ðɛɹ ʃuz.

Holding his fur-lined cloak close with one hand, Perrin let Stayer walk at the bay's own pace. The midmorning sun gave no warmth, and the rutted snow on the road leading into Abila made poor footing. He and his dozen companions shared the way with only two lumbering ox-carts and a handful of farm-folk in plain dark woolens. They all trudged along with heads down, clutching at hat or cap whenever a gust rose but otherwise concentrating on the ground beneath their shoes.

bɪhaɪn hɪm, hi hɝd nil meɪk ə ɹibɔl dʒoʊk ɪn ə loʊ vɔɪs; ɡɹeɪɾi ɡɹʌntɪɾ ɪn ɹɪplaɪ, ən beɪlwɝ snɪf pɹɪsəli. nʌn ə ðə θɹi simd əɾ ɔl əfɛktəd baɪ wʌt ðeɪ hæd sin ən hɝd ðɪs pæs mʌnθ sɪns kɹɔsɪŋ ðə bɔɹɾɝ ɪndə ɑmɑdɪʃiə, əɹ baɪ wʌt leɪ əhɛd. ɛdʒɹə wɑz ʃɑɹpli bɪɹeɪɾɪŋ mɑsʊɝi fəɹ lɛɾɪŋ əɹ hʊd slɪp. ɛdʒɹə ən kɛɹɛl boʊθ wɔɹ ðɛɹ ʃɔlz ɹæpt ɝaʊn ðɛɹ hɛdz ən ʃoʊldɝz ɪn ədɪʃən tə kloʊks, bʌɾ ivən æftɝ ædmɪɾɪŋ ðə nəsɛsəɾi tə ɹaɪd, ðeɪ hæd ɹəfjuz tə tʃeɪnʒ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ bʌlki skɝts, soʊ ðɛɹ dɑɹk-stɑkɪnɡd lɛɡz wɝ bɛɹɾ əbʌv ðə ni. ðə koʊl dɪd nɑt sim tə bɑðɝ əm ɪn ðə list; dʒʌs ðə stʃɹeɪnʒnəs ə snoʊ. kɛɹɛl bɪɡæn kwaɪətli ædvaɪzɪŋ siɑnɪɾ əz tə wʌt wəd hæpən ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt kip əɹ feɪs hɪɾən.

Behind him, he heard Neald make a ribald joke in a low voice; Grady grunted in reply, and Balwer sniffed prissily. None of the three seemed at all affected by what they had seen and heard this past month since crossing the border into Amadicia, or by what lay ahead. Edarra was sharply berating Masuri for letting her hood slip. Edarra and Carelle both wore their shawls wrapped around their heads and shoulders in addition to cloaks, but even after admitting the necessity to ride, they had refused to change out of their bulky skirts, so their dark-stockinged legs were bared above the knee. The cold did not seem to bother them in the least; just the strangeness of snow. Carelle began quietly advising Seonid as to what would happen if she did not keep her face hidden.

ʌv kɔɹs, ɪf ʃi lɛɾ əɹ feɪs bi sin tu sun, ə doʊs ə ðə stʃɹæp wəd bi ðə list ʃi hæd tə fɪɹ, əz ʃi ən ðə waɪz wʌn nu wɛl. pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑɾ əv tə lʊk bæk tə noʊ ðə sɪstɝz' θɹi wɔɹɾɝz, bɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp ðə ɹɪɹ ɪn ɔɹɾənɛɹi kloʊks, wɝ mɛn ɪkspɛktɪŋ ðə niɾ əɾ ɛni moʊmən tə aʊt sɔɹɾ ən kɑɹv ə weɪ klɪɹ. ðeɪ hæd bɪn ðət weɪ sɪns livɪŋ ðə kæmp ət dɔn. hi ɹæn ə ɡlʌv θʌm əlɔŋ ði æks hæŋɪŋ əɾ ɪz bɛlt, ðən ɹiɡɑðɝɾ ɪz oʊn kloʊk dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ə sʌɾən ɡʌs kəd meɪk ɪt bɪloʊ. ɪf ðɪs wɛn bædli, ðə wɔɹɾɝz maɪt bi ɹaɪt.

Of course, if she let her face be seen too soon, a dose of the strap would be the least she had to fear, as she and the Wise One knew well. Perrin did not have to look back to know the sisters' three Warders, bringing up the rear in ordinary cloaks, were men expecting the need at any moment to out sword and carve a way clear. They had been that way since leaving the camp at dawn. He ran a gloved thumb along the axe hanging at his belt, then regathered his own cloak just before a sudden gust could make it billow. If this went badly, the Warders might be right.

ɔf tə ðə lɛft, ʃɔɹɾ ʌv wɛɹ ðə ɹoʊd kɹɔst ə wʊɾən bɹɪdʒ oʊvɝ ə fɹoʊzən stʃɹim ðət twɪstəɾ əlɔŋ ðə taʊnz ɛdʒ, tʃɑɹd tɪmbɝz θɹʌst aʊɾ ə ðə snoʊ ətɑp ə lɑɹdʒ skwɛɹ stoʊn plætfɔɹm wɪð dʒɹɪfs paɪld ɝaʊn ðə bɑɾəm. sloʊ tə pɹoʊkleɪm əlidʒəns tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ðə loʊkəl lɔɹd hæd bɪn lʌki mɪɹli tə bi flɑɡd ən faɪn ɔl ðəɾ i pəzɛst. ə nɑɾ ə mɛn stændɪŋ ət ðə bɹɪdʒ wɑtʃt ðə maʊntəd pɑɹɾi əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ. pɛɹɪn sɔ noʊ saɪn ə hɛlməts əɹ ɑɹmɝ, bʌɾ ɛvɹi mæn klʌtʃt spɪɹ əɹ kɹɔsboʊ ɔlmoʊst əz hɑɹɾ əz i dɪɾ ɪz kloʊk. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt tɔk tə wʌn ənʌðɝ. ðeɪ dʒʌst wɑtʃt, ðə mɪst ə ðɛɹ bɹɛθ kɝlɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðɛɹ feɪsəz. ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝ ɡɑɹdz bʌntʃt ɔl ɝaʊn ðə taʊn, əɾ ɛvɹi ɹoʊd liɾɪŋ aʊt, əɾ ɛvɹi speɪs bɪtwin tu bɪldɪŋz. ðɪs wɑz ðə pɹɑfəts kʌntʃɹi, bʌt ðə waɪtkloʊks ən kɪŋ eɪlɹənz ɑɹmi stɪl hɛld lɑɹdʒ pɑɹts ʌv ɪt.

Off to the left, short of where the road crossed a wooden bridge over a frozen stream that twisted along the town's edge, charred timbers thrust out of the snow atop a large square stone platform with drifts piled around the bottom. Slow to proclaim allegiance to the Dragon Reborn, the local lord had been lucky merely to be flogged and fined all that he possessed. A knot of men standing at the bridge watched the mounted party approaching. Perrin saw no sign of helmets or armor, but every man clutched spear or crossbow almost as hard as he did his cloak. They did not talk to one another. They just watched, the mist of their breath curling before their faces. There were other guards bunched all around the town, at every road leading out, at every space between two buildings. This was the Prophet's country, but the Whitecloaks and King Ailron's army still held large parts of it.

"aɪ wɑz ɹaɪt nɑt tə bɹɪŋ hɝ," hi mʌɾɝd, "bʌɾ əl peɪ fəɹ ɪɾ ɛniweɪ."

"I was right not to bring her," he muttered, "but I'll pay for it anyway."

"ʌv kɔɹs jəl peɪ," ɛlaɪəs snɔɹɾɪd. fəɹ ə mæn u hæd spɛn moʊst ə ðə læs fɪftin jɪɹz əfʊt, hi hændəld ɪz maʊs-kʌlɝd ɡɛldɪŋ wɛl. hi hæɾ əkwaɪɝɾ ə kloʊk laɪnd wɪð blæk fɑks, dɪsɪŋ wɪð ɡælɛn. ɛɹæm, ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɑn pɛɹɪnz ʌðɝ saɪd, aɪɾ ɛlaɪəs dɑɹkli, bʌt ðə bɪɹɾəd mæn ɪɡnɔɹd hɪm. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt ɡɛɾ ɑn wɛl. "ə mæn ɔlweɪz peɪz sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, wɪð ɛni wʊmən, wɛðɝ i oʊz əɹ nɑt. bʌɾ aɪ wɑz ɹaɪt, wɑzn aɪ?"

"Of course you'll pay," Elyas snorted. For a man who had spent most of the last fifteen years afoot, he handled his mouse-colored gelding well. He had acquired a cloak lined with black fox, dicing with Gallenne. Aram, riding on Perrin's other side, eyed Elyas darkly, but the bearded man ignored him. They did not get on well. "A man always pays sooner or later, with any woman, whether he owes or not. But I was right, wasn't I?"

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli. ɪt stɪl dɪd nɑt sim ɹaɪt teɪkɪŋ ædvaɪs əbaʊɾ ɪz waɪf fɹəm ənʌðɝ mæn, ivən sɝkəmspɛkli, oʊblikli, jɛɾ ɪt dɪd sim tə bi wɝkɪŋ. ʌv kɔɹs, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz vɔɪs tə feɪl wɑz əz hɑɹɾ əz nɑt ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪt tə bɹəleɪn, bʌɾ i hæd mænədʒ ðə læs kwaɪɾ ɔfən ən ðə fɝst sɛvɹəl taɪmz. hi hæd fɑloʊɾ ɛlaɪəs' ædvaɪs tə ðə lɛɾɝ. wɛl, moʊst ʌv ɪt. əz wɛl əz i kʊd. ðət spaɪki sɛn ə dʒɛləsi stɪl flɛɹɾ ət ðə saɪɾ ə bɹəleɪn, jɛɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, ðə hɝt smɛl hæd vænɪʃt əz ðeɪ meɪd ðɛɹ sloʊ weɪ saʊθ. stɪl, hi wɑz ənizi. wən i fɝmli toʊld əɹ ʃi wɑz nɑt kʌmɪŋ wɪð ɪm ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, ʃi hæd nɑt ɹeɪzd ə sɪŋɡəl wɝɾ ə pɹoʊɾɛst! ʃi ivən smɛld . . . plizd! əmʌŋ ʌðɝ θɪŋz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ stɑɹɾəld. ən haʊ kəd ʃi bi plizd ən æŋɡɹi ət ðə seɪm taɪm? nɑɾ ə skɹæp ʌv ɪt hæd ʃoʊɾ ɑn əɹ feɪs, bʌɾ ɪz noʊz nɛvɝ laɪd. sʌmhaʊ, ɪt sim ðət ðə mɔɹ i lɝn əbaʊt wɪmən, ðə lɛs i nu!

Perrin nodded. Grudgingly. It still did not seem right taking advice about his wife from another man, even circumspectly, obliquely, yet it did seem to be working. Of course, raising his voice to Faile was as hard as not raising it to Berelain, but he had managed the last quite often and the first several times. He had followed Elyas' advice to the letter. Well, most of it. As well as he could. That spiky scent of jealousy still flared at the sight of Berelain, yet on the other hand, the hurt smell had vanished as they made their slow way south. Still, he was uneasy. When he firmly told her she was not coming with him this morning, she had not raised a single word of protest! She even smelled . . . pleased! Among other things, including startled. And how could she be pleased and angry at the same time? Not a scrap of it had showed on her face, but his nose never lied. Somehow, it seemed that the more he learned about women, the less he knew!

ðə bɹɪdʒ ɡɑɹdz fɹaʊn ən fɪŋɡɝd ðɛɹ wɛpənz əz steɪɝz hʊvz θʌddɪd hɑloʊli ɑntu ðə wʊɾən plæŋkɪŋ. ðeɪ wɝ ðə juʒəwəl ɑd mɪks ðət fɑloʊd ðə pɹɑfət, dɝɾi-feɪst fɛloʊz ɪn sɪlk koʊts tu bɪɡ fəɹ ðɛm, skɑɹ-feɪst stʃɹit tʌfs ən pɪŋk-tʃikt əpɹɛntəsɪz, fɔɹmɝ mɝtʃəns ən kɹæfsmən u lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd slɛpt ɪn ðɛɹ wʌns faɪn wʊlənz fəɹ mʌnθs. ðɛɹ wɛpənz əpɪɹd wɛl kɛɹd fɔɹ, ðoʊ. səm ə ðə mɛn hæɾ ə fivɝ ɪn ðɛɹ aɪz; ðə ɹɛst wɔɹ ɡɑɹɾəd, wʊɾən feɪsəz. əlɔŋ wɪð ənwɑʃt, ðeɪ smɛld iɡɝ, æŋkʃəs, fɝvənt, əfɹeɪd, ɔl dʒʌmbəl təɡɛðɝ.

The bridge guards frowned and fingered their weapons as Stayer's hooves thudded hollowly onto the wooden planking. They were the usual odd mix that followed the Prophet, dirty-faced fellows in silk coats too big for them, scar-faced street toughs and pink-cheeked apprentices, former merchants and craftsmen who looked as if they had slept in their once fine woolens for months. Their weapons appeared well cared for, though. Some of the men had a fever in their eyes; the rest wore guarded, wooden faces. Along with unwashed, they smelled eager, anxious, fervent, afraid, all jumbled together.

ðeɪ meɪd noʊ muv tə bɑɹ pæsədʒ, dʒʌst wɑtʃt, hɑɹdli blɪŋkɪŋ. baɪ wʌt pɛɹɪn hæd hɝd, ɔl sɔɹts fɹəm leɪɾiz ɪn sɪlks tə bɛɡɝz ɪn ɹæɡz keɪm tə ðə pɹɑfət hoʊpɪŋ ðət səbmɪɾɪŋ tə hɪm ɪn pɝsən maɪt ɡeɪn æɾəd blɛsɪŋz. əɹ meɪbi æɾəd pɹətɛkʃən. ðət wɑz waɪ hi hæd kʌm ðɪs weɪ, wɪð oʊnli ə hændfʊl ə kəmpænjənz. hi wəd fɹaɪɾən mæsimə ɪf i hæd tə, ɪf mæsimə kəd bi fɹaɪɾənd, bʌɾ ɪt hæd sim bɛɾɝ tə tʃɹaɪ ɹitʃɪŋ ðə mæn wɪθaʊt faɪɾɪŋ ə bæɾəl. hi kəd fil ðə ɡɑɹdz aɪz ɑn ɪz bæk əntɪl i ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ ɔl əkɹɔs ðə ʃɔɹt bɹɪdʒ ən ɑntu ðə peɪv stʃɹits ʌv ɑbilə. wən ðət pɹɛʃɝ lɛft, ðoʊ, ɪt bɹɔt noʊ sɛns ə ɹɪlif.

They made no move to bar passage, just watched, hardly blinking. By what Perrin had heard, all sorts from ladies in silks to beggars in rags came to the Prophet hoping that submitting to him in person might gain added blessings. Or maybe added protection. That was why he had come this way, with only a handful of companions. He would frighten Masema if he had to, if Masema could be frightened, but it had seemed better to try reaching the man without fighting a battle. He could feel the guard's eyes on his back until he and the others were all across the short bridge and onto the paved streets of Abila. When that pressure left, though, it brought no sense of relief.

ɑbilə wɑz ə ɡʊdli saɪz taʊn, wɪð sɛvɹəl tɔl wɑtʃtaʊɝz ən mɛni bɪldɪŋz ɹaɪzɪŋ fɔɹ stɔɹiz, ɛvɹi læst wʌn ɹuft ɪn sleɪt. hɪɹ ən ðɛɹ, maʊndɪd stoʊn ən tɪmbɝz fɪld ə ɡæp bɪtwin tu stʃɹʌktʃɝz wɛɹ ən ɪn əɹ səm mɝtʃəns haʊs hæd bɪn pʊl daʊn. ðə pɹɑfət dɪsəpɹuvd ʌv wɛlθ ɡeɪn baɪ tʃɹeɪɾ əz mʌtʃ əz i dɪd kəɹaʊzəŋ əɹ wʌɾ ɪz fɑloʊɝz kɔld lud bɪheɪvjɝ. hi dɪsəpɹuvd ʌv ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni θɪŋz, ən meɪɾ ɪz filɪŋz noʊn wɪð ʃɑɹp ɪɡzæmpəlz.

Abila was a goodly sized town, with several tall watchtowers and many buildings rising four stories, every last one roofed in slate. Here and there, mounded stone and timbers filled a gap between two structures where an inn or some merchant's house had been pulled down. The Prophet disapproved of wealth gained by trade as much as he did carousing or what his followers called lewd behavior. He disapproved of a great many things, and made his feelings known with sharp examples.

ðə stʃɹits wɝ dʒæmd wɪð pipəl, bʌt pɛɹɪn ən ɪz kəmpænjənz wɝ ði oʊnli wʌnz ɑn hɔɹsbæk. ðə snoʊ hæd lɔŋ sɪns bɪn tʃɹæmpəl tə hæf-fɹoʊzən æŋkəl-dip mʌʃ. plɛnti ʌv ɑks-kɑɹts meɪd ðɛɹ sloʊ weɪ θɹu ðə θɹɔŋ, bʌt vɛɹi fju wæɡənz, ən nɑɾ ə sɪŋɡəl kæɹɪdʒ. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðoʊz wɛɹɪŋ wɔɹn kæstɔfs əɹ pɑsəbli stoʊlən kloʊðz, ɛvɹiwʌn wɔɹ dʒɹæb wʊlənz. moʊs pipəl hɝid, bʌt laɪk ðə foʊk ɑn ðə ɹoʊd, wɪð hɛdz daʊn. ðoʊz u dɪd nɑt hɝi wɝ stʃɹæɡəlɪŋ ɡɹups ə mɛn kæɹiɪŋ wɛpənz. ɪn ðə stʃɹits, ðə smɛl wɑz meɪnli dɝɾ ən fɪɹ. ɪt meɪd pɛɹɪnz hækəlz ɹaɪz. ət list, ɪf ɪt keɪm tə ðæt, ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə taʊn wɪð noʊ wɔl wəd nɑt pɹuv hɑɹɾɝ ðən ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪn.

The streets were jammed with people, but Perrin and his companions were the only ones on horseback. The snow had long since been trampled to half-frozen ankle-deep mush. Plenty of ox-carts made their slow way through the throng, but very few wagons, and not a single carriage. Except for those wearing worn castoffs or possibly stolen clothes, everyone wore drab woolens. Most people hurried, but like the folk on the road, with heads down. Those who did not hurry were straggling groups of men carrying weapons. In the streets, the smell was mainly dirt and fear. It made Perrin's hackles rise. At least, if it came to that, getting out of a town with no wall would not prove harder than getting in.

"maɪ lɔɹd," beɪlwɝ mɝmɝɾ əz ðeɪ keɪm əbɹɛst ʌv wʌn ə ðoʊz hips ə ɹʌbəl. hi bɛɹli weɪɾəd fəɹ pɛɹɪnz nɑd bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ ɪz hæmɝ-noʊz maʊn əsaɪɾ ən meɪkɪŋ ɪz weɪ ɪn ənʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən, hʌntʃt ɪn ɪz sæɾəl wɪð ɪz bɹaʊn kloʊk hɛl taɪɾ ɝaʊn hɪm. pɛɹɪn hæd noʊ wɝiz əbaʊt ðə dʒɹaɪd-ʌp lɪɾəl mæn ɡoʊɪŋ ɔf əloʊn, ivən hɪɹ. fəɹ ə sɛkɹətɛɹi, hi mænədʒ tə lɝn ə sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ əmaʊn ɑn ðiz fɔɹeɪz ə hɪz. hi sim tə noʊ wʌɾ i wɑz əbaʊt.

"My Lord," Balwer murmured as they came abreast of one of those heaps of rubble. He barely waited for Perrin's nod before turning his hammer-nosed mount aside and making his way in another direction, hunched in his saddle with his brown cloak held tight around him. Perrin had no worries about the dried-up little man going off alone, even here. For a secretary, he managed to learn a surprising amount on these forays of his. He seemed to know what he was about.

dɪsmɪsɪŋ beɪlwɝ fɹəm ɪz θɔts, pɛɹɪn sɛt tə wʌɾ i wɑz ðəɹ əbaʊt.

Dismissing Balwer from his thoughts, Perrin set to what he was there about.

ɪt tʊk oʊnli wʌn kwɛstʃən, pʊt tə ə læŋki jʌŋ mæn wɪð ən ɛkstæɾɪk laɪɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs, tə lɝn wɛɹ ðə pɹɑfət wɑz steɪɪŋ, ən θɹi mɔɹ tə ʌðɝ foʊk ɪn ðə stʃɹits tə faɪn ðə mɝtʃəns haʊs, fɔɹ stɔɹiz ʌv ɡɹeɪ stoʊn wɪð waɪt mɑɹbəl moʊldɪŋz ən wɪndoʊ fɹeɪmz. mæsimə dɪsəpɹuvd ʌv ɡɹʌbɪŋ fəɹ mʌni, bʌɾ i wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə æksɛpt əkɑmədeɪʃənz fɹəm ðoʊz u dɪd. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, beɪlwɝ sɛɾ i hæd slɛpt ɪn ə liki fɑɹmhaʊs əz ɔfən ən bɪn əz sæɾəsfaɪd. mæsimə dʒɹæŋk oʊnli wɔɾɝ, ən wɛɹɛvɝ i wɛnt, hi haɪɝɾ ə pʊɹ wɪɾoʊ ən eɪt ðə fud ʃi pɹipɛɹd, fɛɹ əɹ faʊl, wɪθaʊt kəmpleɪnt. ðə mæn hæd meɪd tu mɛni wɪɾoʊz fəɹ ðət tʃɛɹɪɾi tə kaʊn fɑɹ wɪð pɛɹɪn.

It took only one question, put to a lanky young man with an ecstatic light on his face, to learn where the Prophet was staying, and three more to other folk in the streets to find the merchant's house, four stories of gray stone with white marble moldings and window frames. Masema disapproved of grubbing for money, but he was willing to accept accommodations from those who did. On the other hand, Balwer said he had slept in a leaky farmhouse as often and been as satisfied. Masema drank only water, and wherever he went, he hired a poor widow and ate the food she prepared, fair or foul, without complaint. The man had made too many widows for that charity to count far with Perrin.

ðə θɹɔŋ ðət pæk ðə stʃɹits ɛlswɛɹ wɑz əbsɛn ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə tɔl haʊs, jɛt ðə nʌmbɝ ʌv ɑɹmd ɡɑɹdz laɪk ðoʊz ət ðə bɹɪdʒ ɔlmoʊs meɪɾ ʌp fəɹ ɪt. ðeɪ stɛɹɾ ət pɛɹɪn sʌlənli, ðoʊz u dɪd nɑt snɪɹ ɪnsələnli. ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ kɛp ðɛɹ feɪsəz hɪɾən ɪn ðɛɹ dip hʊdz ən ðɛɹ hɛdz daʊn, waɪt bɹɛθ ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ðə kaʊlz laɪk stim. fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ, pɛɹɪn sɔ ɛlaɪəs θʌmɪŋ ðə hɪlt ə hɪz lɔŋ naɪf. ɪt wɑz hɑɹd nɑt tə stʃɹoʊk ɪz æks.

The throng that packed the streets elsewhere was absent in front of the tall house, yet the number of armed guards like those at the bridge almost made up for it. They stared at Perrin sullenly, those who did not sneer insolently. The two Aes Sedai kept their faces hidden in their deep hoods and their heads down, white breath rising from the cowls like steam. From the corner of his eye, Perrin saw Elyas thumbing the hilt of his long knife. It was hard not to stroke his axe.

"aɪv kʌm wɪð ə mɛsədʒ fəɹ ðə pɹɑfət fɹəm ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," hi ənaʊnst. wən nʌn ə ðə mɛn muvd, hi æɾəd, "maɪ neɪm ɪz pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. ðə pɹɑfət noʊz mi." beɪlwɝ hæd kɑʃən ɪm əbaʊt ðə deɪnʒɝz ə juzɪŋ mæsiməz neɪm, əɹ kɔlɪŋ ɹænd ɛniθɪŋ bʌt ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. hi wɑz nɑt ðəɹ tə stɑɹɾ ə ɹaɪət.

"I've come with a message for the Prophet from the Dragon Reborn," he announced. When none of the men moved, he added, "My name is Perrin Aybara. The Prophet knows me." Balwer had cautioned him about the dangers of using Masema's name, or calling Rand anything but the Lord Dragon Reborn. He was not there to start a riot.

ðə kleɪm ə noʊɪŋ mæsimə sim tə pʊɾ ə spɑɹk ɪndə ðə ɡɑɹdz. sɛvɹəl ɪkstʃeɪnʒd waɪd-aɪd lʊks, ən wʌn wɛn ɹʌnɪŋ ɪnsaɪd. ðə ɹɛst stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm əz ɪf i wɝ ə ɡlimən. ɪn ə fju moʊməns, ə wʊmən keɪm tə ðə dɔɹ. hænsəm, wɪð waɪɾ əɾ əɹ tɛmpəlz, ɪn ə haɪ-nɛk dʒɹɛs ə blu wʊl ðət wɑz faɪn ɪf ʌnədɔɹnd, ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn ðə mɝtʃən hɝsɛlf. mæsimə dɪd nɑt θɹoʊ ðoʊz u ɔfɝɾ ɪm hɑspətæləɾi ɪndə ðə stʃɹits, bʌt ðɛɹ sɝvəns əɹ fɑɹmhænz juʒəwəli ɛndəɾ ʌp wɪð wʌn ə ðə bænz "spɹɛɾɪŋ ðə ɡlɔɹiz ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən."

The claim of knowing Masema seemed to put a spark into the guards. Several exchanged wide-eyed looks, and one went running inside. The rest stared at him as if he were a gleeman. In a few moments, a woman came to the door. Handsome, with white at her temples, in a high-necked dress of blue wool that was fine if unadorned, she might have been the merchant herself. Masema did not throw those who offered him hospitality into the streets, but their servants or farmhands usually ended up with one of the bands "spreading the glories of the Lord Dragon."

"ɪf jəl kʌm wɪð mi, mæstɝ eɪbɑɹə," ðə wʊmən sɛd kɑmli, "ju ən jəɹ fɹɛnz, əl teɪk jə tə ðə pɹɑfəɾ ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, meɪ ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ɪz neɪm." kɑm ʃi maɪt saʊnd, bʌt tɛɹɝ fɪld əɹ sɛnt.

"If you will come with me, Master Aybara," the woman said calmly, "you and your friends, I will take you to the Prophet of the Lord Dragon, may the Light illumine his name." Calm she might sound, but terror filled her scent.

tɛlɪŋ nild ən ðə wɔɹɾɝz tə wɑtʃ ðə hɔɹsəz əntɪl ðeɪ ɹɪtɝnd, pɛɹɪn fɑloʊɾ əɹ ɪnsaɪd wɪð ði ʌðɝz. ði ɪntɪɹiɝ wɑz dɑɹk, wɪð fju læmps lɪt, ən nɑt mʌtʃ wɔɹmɝ ðən aʊtsaɪd. ivən ðə waɪz wʌnz sim səbdud. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt smɛl əfɹeɪd, bʌɾ ɔlmoʊst əz kloʊs tə ɪɾ əz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ɡɹeɪɾi ən ɛlaɪəs smɛld ʌv wɛɹinɪs, ʌv ɹeɪz hækəlz ən ɪɹz leɪd bæk. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ɛɹæmz sɛnt wɑz iɡɝ. pɛɹɪn hoʊp ðə mæn dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə dʒɹɔ ðət sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz bæk.

Telling Neald and the Warders to watch the horses until they returned, Perrin followed her inside with the others. The interior was dark, with few lamps lit, and not much warmer than outside. Even the Wise Ones seemed subdued. They did not smell afraid, but almost as close to it as the Aes Sedai, and Grady and Elyas smelled of wariness, of raised hackles and ears laid back. Strangely, Aram's scent was eager. Perrin hoped the man did not try to draw that sword on his back.

ðə lɑɹdʒ, kɑɹpəɾɪd ɹum ðə wʊmən lɛɾ əm tə, wɪð faɪɝz bleɪzɪŋ ɑn hɑɹθs əɾ iðɝ ɛnd, maɪɾ əv bɪn ə dʒɛnɝəlz stʌɾi, ɛvɹi teɪbəl ən hæf ðə tʃɛɹz kʌvɝd wɪð mæps ən peɪpɝz, ən wɔɹm ɪnʌf ðət pɛɹɪn tɔst ɪz kloʊk bæk ən ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd wɛɹɪŋ tu ʃɝts ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz mæsimə stændɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɹum u dʒɹu hɪz aɪz ɪmiɾiətli, laɪk aɪɝn faɪlɪŋz tə ə loʊdstoʊn, ə dɑɹk, skaʊlɪŋ mæn wɪð ə ʃeɪvən hɛɾ ən ə peɪl tʃɹaɪæŋɡjəlɝ skɑɹ ɑn wʌn tʃik, ɪn ə ɹɪŋkəld ɡɹeɪ koʊɾ ən skʌf buts. hɪz dip-sɛɾ aɪz bɝnd wɪð ə blæk faɪɝ, ən ɪz sɛnt . . . ði oʊnli neɪm pɛɹɪn kəd ɡɪv ðət smɛl, stil-hɑɹɾ ən bleɪd-ʃɑɹp ən kwɪvɝɪŋ wɪð waɪld ɪntɛnsəɾi, wɑz mædnəs. ən ɹænd θɔɾ i kəd pʊɾ ə liʃ ɑn ðɪs?

The large, carpeted room the woman led them to, with fires blazing on hearths at either end, might have been a general's study, every table and half the chairs covered with maps and papers, and warm enough that Perrin tossed his cloak back and regretted wearing two shirts under his coat. But it was Masema standing in the middle of the room who drew his eyes immediately, like iron filings to a lodestone, a dark, scowling man with a shaven head and a pale triangular scar on one cheek, in a wrinkled gray coat and scuffed boots. His deep-set eyes burned with a black fire, and his scent . . . The only name Perrin could give that smell, steel-hard and blade-sharp and quivering with wild intensity, was madness. And Rand thought he could put a leash on this?

"soʊ, ɪts ju," mæsimə ɡɹaʊld. "aɪ dɪd nɑt θɪŋk jə wəd dɛɹ ʃoʊ jəɹ feɪs. aɪ noʊ wʌt juv bɪn ʌp tə! hɑɹi toʊl mi mɔɹ ðən ə wik əɡoʊ, ən aɪ hæv kɛp maɪsɛlf ɪnfɔɹmd." ə mæn ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə ɹum, ə nɛɹoʊ-aɪd fɛloʊ wɪð ə θɹʌstɪŋ noʊz, ən pɛɹɪn əpbɹeɪɾɪd hɪmsɛlf fəɹ nɑt noʊɾɪsɪŋ ɪm bɪfɔɹ. hɑɹiz ɡɹin sɪlk koʊt wɑz mʌtʃ faɪnɝ ðən wʌɾ i hæd wɔɹn wən i dɪnaɪd kəlɛktɪŋ ɪɹz. ðə fɛloʊ ɹʌbd ɪz hænz təɡɛðɝ ən ɡɹɪn ət pɛɹɪn vɪʃəsli, bʌɾ i kɛp saɪlən əz mæsimə wɛn ɑn. ðə pɹɑfəts vɔɪs ɡɹu hɑɾɝ baɪ ðə wɝd, nɑt wɪð æŋɡɝ, bʌɾ əz ðoʊ hi mɛn tə bɝn ɛvɹi sɪləbəl dip ɪndə pɛɹɪnz flɛʃ. "aɪ noʊ əbaʊt jə mɝɾɝɪŋ mɛn u hæv kʌm tə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. aɪ noʊ əbaʊt jə tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɑɹv aʊt jəɹ oʊn kɪŋdəm! jɛs, aɪ noʊ əbaʊt meɪnɛðɝən! əbaʊt jəɹ æmbɪʃən! jəɹ ɡɹid fəɹ ɡlɔɹi! juv tɝn jəɹ bæk ɑn - !"

"So, it is you," Masema growled. "I did not think you would dare show your face. I know what you've been up to! Hari told me more than a week ago, and I have kept myself informed." A man shifted in a corner of the room, a narrow-eyed fellow with a thrusting nose, and Perrin upbraided himself for not noticing him before. Hari's green silk coat was much finer than what he had worn when he denied collecting ears. The fellow rubbed his hands together and grinned at Perrin viciously, but he kept silent as Masema went on. The Prophet's voice grew hotter by the word, not with anger, but as though he meant to burn every syllable deep into Perrin's flesh. "I know about you murdering men who have come to the Lord Dragon. I know about you trying to carve out your own kingdom! Yes, I know about Manetheren! About your ambition! Your greed for glory! You have turned your back on - !"

sʌɾənli mæsiməz aɪz bʌlʒd, ən fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, æŋɡɝ fleɪmd ɪn ɪz sɛnt. hɑɹi meɪɾ ə stʃɹæŋɡəl saʊn ən tʃɹaɪd tə bæk θɹu ðə wɔl. siɑnɪɾ ən mɑsʊɝi hæd loʊɝd ðɛɹ hʊdz ən stʊd wɪð bɛɹ feɪsəz, kɑm ən kul, ən pleɪnli ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ɛniwʌn u nu ðə lʊk. pɛɹɪn wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðeɪ hɛl ðə paʊɝ. hi wʊɾə weɪdʒɝd ðət ðə waɪz wʌnz dɪd. ɛdʒɹə ən kɛɹɛl wɝ kwaɪətli wɑtʃɪŋ ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən ət wʌns, ən smuð feɪsəz əɹ noʊ, ɪf i hæɾ ɛvɝ sin ɛniwʌn ɹɛɾi tə faɪt, ɪt wɑz ðɛm. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ɡɹeɪɾi wɔɹ ɹɛɾinəs laɪk ɪz blæk koʊt; meɪbi hi hɛl ðə paʊɝ, tu. ɛlaɪəs wɑz linɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔl bɪsaɪd ði oʊpən dɔɹz, aʊtwɝdli əz kəmpoʊzd əz ðə sɪstɝz, bʌɾ i smɛld ɹɛɾi tə baɪt. ən ɛɹæm stʊd ɡeɪzɪŋ ət mæsimə wɪð ɪz maʊθ hæŋɪŋ oʊpən! laɪt!

Suddenly Masema's eyes bulged, and for the first time, anger flamed in his scent. Hari made a strangled sound and tried to back through the wall. Seonid and Masuri had lowered their hoods and stood with bare faces, calm and cool, and plainly Aes Sedai to anyone who knew the look. Perrin wondered whether they held the Power. He would have wagered that the Wise Ones did. Edarra and Carelle were quietly watching every direction at once, and smooth faces or no, if he had ever seen anyone ready to fight, it was them. For that matter, Grady wore readiness like his black coat; maybe he held the Power, too. Elyas was leaning against the wall beside the open doors, outwardly as composed as the sisters, but he smelled ready to bite. And Aram stood gazing at Masema with his mouth hanging open! Light!

"soʊ ðəɾ ɪz tʃɹu, tu!" mæsimə snæpt, spɪɾəl flaɪɪŋ fɹəm ɪz lɪps. "wɪð fɪlθi ɹumɝz spɹɛɾɪŋ əɡɛns ðə hoʊli neɪm ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, jə dɛɹ tə ɹaɪd wɪð ðiz . . . ðiz . . . !"

"So that is true, too!" Masema snapped, spittle flying from his lips. "With filthy rumors spreading against the holy name of the Lord Dragon, you dare to ride with these . . . these . . . !"

"ðeɪv swɔɹn fiəlti tə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, mæsimə," pɛɹɪn kʌɾ ɪn. "ðeɪ sɝv hɪm! də ju? hi sɛn mi tə stɑp ðə kɪlɪŋ. ən tə bɹɪŋ jə tə hɪm." noʊ wʌn wɑz ɔfɝɪŋ ɪm ə tʃɛɹ, soʊ hi pʊʃt ə stæk ə peɪpɝz fɹəm wʌn ən sæt. hi wɪʃt ðə ɹɛst wəd sɪt, tu; ʃaʊɾɪŋ sim hɑɹɾɝ wən jə wɝ sɪɾɪŋ daʊn.

"They've sworn fealty to the Lord Dragon, Masema," Perrin cut in. "They serve him! Do you? He sent me to stop the killing. And to bring you to him." No one was offering him a chair, so he pushed a stack of papers from one and sat. He wished the rest would sit, too; shouting seemed harder when you were sitting down.

hɑɹi ɡɑɡəld ət hɪm, ən mæsimə wɑz pɹæktəkli ʃeɪkɪŋ. kəz i hæd teɪkən ə tʃɛɹ wɪθaʊt biɪŋ æskt? oʊ. jɛs.

Hari goggled at him, and Masema was practically shaking. Because he had taken a chair without being asked? Oh. Yes.

"aɪ hæv ɡɪvən ʌp ðə neɪmz ə mɛn," mæsimə sɛd koʊldli. "aɪ æm sɪmpli ðə pɹɑfəɾ ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, meɪ ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ɪm ən ðə wɝl kʌm tə nil bɪfɔɹ hɪm." baɪ hɪz toʊn, ðə wɝld ən ðə laɪt wəd ɹəɡɹɛt feɪljɝ ikwəli. "ðɛɹ ɪz mʌtʃ tə də hɪɹ, jɛt ɡɹeɪt wɝks. ɔl mʌst oʊbeɪ wən ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən kɔlz, bʌɾ ɪn wɪntɝ, tʃɹævəl ɪz ɔlweɪz sloʊ. ə dɪleɪ ʌv ə fju wiks wɪl meɪk lɪɾəl dɪfɝəns."

"I have given up the names of men," Masema said coldly. "I am simply the Prophet of the Lord Dragon, may the Light illumine him and the world come to kneel before him." By his tone, the world and the Light would regret failure equally. "There is much to do here, yet Great works. All must obey when the Lord Dragon calls, but in winter, travel is always slow. A delay of a few weeks will make little difference."

"aɪ kən əv jə ɪn kɛɹhin tədeɪ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "wʌns ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən əz spoʊkən tə ju, jə kən ɹɪtɝn ðə seɪm weɪ ən bi bæk hɪɹ ɪn ə fju deɪz." ɪf ɹænd lɛɾ ɪm ɹɪtɝn.

"I can have you in Cairhien today," Perrin said. "Once the Lord Dragon has spoken to you, you can return the same way and be back here in a few days." If Rand let him return.

mæsimə æktʃəli  ɹikɔɪld. bɛɹɪŋ ɪz tiθ, hi ɡlɛɹɾ ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. "sʌm kəntʃɹaɪvəns ə ðə əl wɪl nɑt bi tʌtʃt wɪð ðə ɪts ɪz blæsfəmi fəɹ mɔɹɾəlz tə tʌtʃ ɪt!"

Masema actually recoiled. Baring his teeth, he glared at the Aes Sedai. "Some contrivance of the Power? I will not be touched with the Power! It is blasphemy for mortals to touch it!"

pɛɹɪn keɪm kloʊs tə ɡeɪpɪŋ. "ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn tʃænəlz, mæn!"

Perrin came close to gaping. "The Dragon Reborn channels, man!"

"ðə blɛsɪd lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɪz nɑɾ əz ʌðɝ mɛn, eɪbɑɹə!" mæsimə snɑɹəld. "hi ɪz ðə laɪt meɪd flɛʃ! əl oʊbeɪ hɪz sʌmənz, bʌɾ əl nɑt bi tʌtʃt baɪ ðə fɪlθ ðiz wɪmən du!"

"The blessed Lord Dragon is not as other men, Aybara!" Masema snarled. "He is the Light made flesh! I will obey his summons, but I will not be touched by the filth these women do!"

slʌmpɪŋ bæk ɪn ðə tʃɛɹ, pɛɹɪn saɪd. ɪf ðə mæn wɑz ðɪs bæɾ oʊvɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ, haʊ wəɾ i bi wən i lɝn ðət ɡɹeɪɾi ən nil kəd tʃænəl? fəɹ ə moʊmənt, hi kənsɪɾɝd sɪmpli nɑkɪŋ mæsimə oʊvɝ ðə hɛd, ən . . . mɛn wɝ pæsɪŋ baɪ ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, pɔzɪŋ tə ɡlæns ɪn bɪfɔɹ hɝiɪŋ ɑn. ɔl ɪt tʊk wɑz wʌn ə ðɛm ɹeɪzɪŋ ə ʃaʊt, ən ɑbilə kəd bɪkʌm ə slɔɾɝhaʊs. "ðɛn wi ɹaɪd, pɹɑfət," hi sɛd saʊɝli. laɪt, ɹænd hæd sɛd tə kip ðɪs sikɹəɾ əntɪl mæsimə stʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm! haʊ tə mænədʒ ðət ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɔl ðə weɪ tə kɛɹhin? "bʌt noʊ dɪleɪz. ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɪz vɛɹi æŋkʃəs tə tɔk wɪð ju."

Slumping back in the chair, Perrin sighed. If the man was this bad over Aes Sedai, how would he be when he learned that Grady and Neald could channel? For a moment, he considered simply knocking Masema over the head, and . . . Men were passing by in the corridor, pausing to glance in before hurrying on. All it took was one of them raising a shout, and Abila could become a slaughterhouse. "Then we ride, Prophet," he said sourly. Light, Rand had said to keep this secret until Masema stood in front of him! How to manage that riding all the way to Cairhien? "But no delays. The Lord Dragon is very anxious to talk with you."

"aɪ æm æŋkʃəs tə spik wɪð ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, meɪ hɪz neɪm bi blɛsɪd baɪ ðə laɪt." hɪz aɪz flɪkɝd təwɔɹd ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ. hi tʃɹaɪd tə haɪɾ ɪt, æktʃəli  smaɪlɪŋ ət pɛɹɪn. bʌɾ i smɛld . . . ɡɹɪm. "aɪ æm vɛɹi æŋkʃəs ɪndid."

"I am anxious to speak with the Lord Dragon, may his name be blessed by the Light." His eyes flickered toward the two Aes Sedai. He tried to hide it, actually smiling at Perrin. But he smelled . . . grim. "I am very anxious indeed."

"wʊd maɪ leɪɾi laɪk mi tə æsk wʌn ə ðə hænlɝz tə bɹɪŋ əɹ ə hɔk?" meɪaɪɡdɪn æskt. wʌn ʌv æliændɝz fɔɹ hɔk hænlɝz, ɔl mɛn əz lin əz ðɛɹ bɝdz, ɝdʒd ə slik dʌkhɔk wɛɹɪŋ ə fɛðɝd hʊɾ ɑntu hɪz hɛvi ɡɔnlət fɹəm ðə wʊɾən stæn ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz sæɾəl ən lɪftəd ðə ɡɹeɪ bɝd təwɔɹd hɝ. ðə fælkən, wɪð ɪts blu-tɪpt wɪŋz, wɑz ɑn æliændɝz ɡɹin-ɡlʌvd ɹɪst. ðət bɝd wɑz ɹɪzɝv tə hɝ, ənfɔɹtʃənətli. æliændɝ nu hɝ pleɪs əz ə væsəl, bʌt feɪl ʌndɝstʊd nɑt wɑntɪŋ tə ɹɪlɪŋkwɪʃ ə feɪvɹɪt bɝd.

"Would my Lady like me to ask one of the handlers to bring her a hawk?" Maighdin asked. One of Alliandre's four hawk handlers, all men as lean as their birds, urged a sleek duckhawk wearing a feathered hood onto his heavy gauntlet from the wooden stand in front of his saddle and lifted the gray bird toward her. The falcon, with its blue-tipped wings, was on Alliandre's green-gloved wrist. That bird was reserved to her, unfortunately. Alliandre knew her place as a vassal, but Faile understood not wanting to relinquish a favorite bird.

ʃi mɪɹli ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, ən meɪaɪɡdɪn baʊɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl ən muvd əɹ ɹoʊn mɛɹ əweɪ fɹəm swɑloʊ, fɑɹ ɪnʌf nɑt tə ɪntʃɹud bʌt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə bi ət hænd wɪθaʊt feɪl ɹeɪzɪŋ əɹ vɔɪs. ðə dɪɡnəfaɪd ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd wʊmən hæd pɹuv tə bi ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz ɡʊɾ ə leɪɾiz meɪɾ əz feɪl hæd hoʊpt, nɑlədʒəbəl, keɪpəbəl. ət list, ʃi hæd wʌns ʃi lɝn ðət wʌtɛvɝ ðɛɹ ɹɛləɾɪv pəzɪʃənz wɪð ðɛɹ fɔɹmɝ mɪstʃɹəs, lini wɑz fɝst əmʌŋ feɪlz sɝvɪŋ wɪmən, ən wɪlɪŋ tə juz əɹ əθɔɹəɾi. sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, ðət hæɾ æktʃəli  teɪkən ən ɛpəsoʊd wɪð ə swɪtʃ, bʌt feɪl pɹitɛndəd nɑt tə noʊ. oʊnli ən ʌɾɝ ful ɪmbɛɹəst əɹ sɝvəns. ðəɹ wɑz stɪl ðə mæɾɝ ə meɪaɪɡdɪn ən tɑlænvɝ, ʌv kɔɹs. ʃi wɑz sɝɾən meɪaɪɡdɪn hæd bɪɡʌn ʃɛɹɪŋ ɪz bɛd, ən ɪf ʃi faʊn pɹuf, ðeɪ wəd mɛɹi ɪf ʃi hæd tə tɝn lini lus ɑn boʊθ ə ðɛm. stɪl, ðət wɑz ə smɔl mæɾɝ, ən kəd nɑt spɔɪl əɹ mɔɹnɪŋ.

She merely shook her head, and Maighdin bowed in her saddle and moved her roan mare away from Swallow, far enough not to intrude but close enough to be at hand without Faile raising her voice. The dignified golden-haired woman had proved to be every bit as good a lady's maid as Faile had hoped, knowledgeable, capable. At least, she had once she learned that whatever their relative positions with their former mistress, Lini was first among Faile's serving women, and willing to use her authority. Surprisingly, that had actually taken an episode with a switch, but Faile pretended not to know. Only an utter fool embarrassed her servants. There was still the matter of Maighdin and Tallanvor, of course. She was certain Maighdin had begun sharing his bed, and if she found proof, they would marry if she had to turn Lini loose on both of them. Still, that was a small matter, and could not spoil her morning.

hɔkɪŋ hæd bɪn æliændɝz aɪdiə, bʌt feɪl hæd nɑɾ əbdʒɛktəd tə ə ɹaɪd θɹu ðɪs spɑɹs fɔɹəst, wɛɹ snoʊ meɪɾ ə ɹoʊlɪŋ blæŋkəɾ oʊvɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ən leɪ θɪk ən waɪɾ ɑn bɛɹ bɹæntʃəz. ðə ɡɹin ə ðə tʃɹiz ðət stɪl hɛl ðɛɹ livz simd ʃɑɹpɝ. ði ɛɹ wɑz kɹɪsp, ən ɪt smɛl nu ən fɹɛʃ.

Hawking had been Alliandre's idea, but Faile had not objected to a ride through this sparse forest, where snow made a rolling blanket over everything and lay thick and white on bare branches. The green of the trees that still held their leaves seemed sharper. The air was crisp, and it smelled new and fresh.

beɪn ən kiæd hæɾ ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn əkʌmpəniɪŋ hɝ, bʌt ðeɪ skwɑɾɪd nɪɹbaɪ, ʃoʊufə ɹæpt ɝaʊn ðɛɹ hɛdz, wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ wɪð dɪsɡɹʌntəld ɪkspɹɛʃənz. səlɪn hæd wɑntəd tə kʌm wɪð ɔl ə ðə meɪɾənz, bʌt wɪð ə hʌnʒɹəd stɔɹiz ʌv il dɛpɹədeɪʃənz floʊɾɪŋ ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ðə saɪɾ ʌv ən il wɑz ɪnʌf tə sɛn moʊs pipəl ɪn ɑmɑdɪʃiə ɹʌnɪŋ əɹ ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ ə sɔɹd. ðəɹ mʌs bi səm tʃɹuθ ɪn ðoʊz teɪlz, əɹ soʊ mɛni wəd nɑt noʊ ən il, ðoʊ ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu hu ðeɪ wɝ əɹ wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd kʌm fɹʌm, jɛɾ ivən səlɪn əɡɹid ðət huɛvɝ ðeɪ wɝ, ðeɪ hæd muvd ɑn ist, pɝhæps ɪndə ɔltɑɹə.

Bain and Chiad had insisted on accompanying her, but they squatted nearby, shoufa wrapped around their heads, watching her with disgruntled expressions. Sulin had wanted to come with all of the Maidens, but with a hundred stories of Aiel depredations floating everywhere, the sight of an Aiel was enough to send most people in Amadicia running or reaching for a sword. There must be some truth in those tales, or so many would not know an Aiel, though the Light alone knew who they were or where they had come from, yet even Sulin agreed that whoever they were, they had moved on east, perhaps into Altara.

ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðɪs kloʊs tə ɑbilə, twɛnti ʌv æliændɝz soʊlʒɝz ən əz mɛni minɝ wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz pɹəvaɪɾəd səfɪʃən ɛskɔɹt. ðə stʃɹimɝz ɑn ðɛɹ lænsɪz, ɹɛɾ əɹ ɡɹin, lɪftəd laɪk ɹɪbənz wən ðə bɹiz stɝd. bɹəleɪnz pɹɛzəns wɑz ði oʊnli blaɪt. ðoʊ wɑtʃɪŋ ðə wʊmən ʃɪvɝ ɪn əɹ fɝ-tʃɹɪmd ɹɛd kloʊk, θɪk ɪnʌf fəɹ tu blæŋkəts, wɑz sɝɾənli əmjuzɪŋ. min dɪd nɑɾ əv ə ɹil wɪntɝ. ðɪs wɑz laɪk ðə læs deɪz ʌv ɔɾəm. ɪn sɑldɑiə, ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv wɪntɝ kəd fɹiz ɪkspoʊz flɛʃ hɑɹɾ əz wʊd. feɪl tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. ʃi fɛlt laɪk læfɪŋ.

In any case, this close to Abila, twenty of Alliandre's soldiers and as many Mayener Winged Guards provided sufficient escort. The streamers on their lances, red or green, lifted like ribbons when the breeze stirred. Berelain's presence was the only blight. Though watching the woman shiver in her fur-trimmed red cloak, thick enough for two blankets, was certainly amusing. Mayene did not have a real winter. This was like the last days of autumn. In Saldaea, the heart of winter could freeze exposed flesh hard as wood. Faile took a deep breath. She felt like laughing.

baɪ səm mɪɹəkəl, hɝ hʌzbənd, hɝ bɪlʌvd wʊlf, hæd bɪɡʌn bɪheɪvɪŋ əz i ʃʊd. ɪnstɛɾ ə ʃaʊɾɪŋ ət bɹəleɪn əɹ ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm hɝ, pɛɹɪn naʊ tɑlɝeɪɾəd ðə dʒeɪdz blændɪʃməns, pleɪnli tɑlɝeɪɾəd əm ðə weɪ hi wəɾ ə tʃaɪl pleɪɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪz niz. ən bɛst ʌv ɔl, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɛni nid tə tæmp daʊn əɹ æŋɡɝ wən ʃi wɑntəd tə lɛɾ ɪt lus. wən ʃi ʃaʊɾəd, hi ʃaʊɾəd bæk. ʃi nu hi wɑz nɑt sɑldəiən, bʌɾ ɪt hæd bɪn soʊ hɑɹd, θɪŋkɪŋ ɪn əɹ hɑɹɾ ə hɑɹts ðəɾ i bɪlivd əɹ tu wik tə stæn ʌp tə hɪm. ə fju naɪts əɡoʊ ət sʌpɝ, ʃi hæɾ ɔlmoʊs pɔɪntəɾ aʊt tə hɪm ðət bɹəleɪn wɑz gɑnə fɔl aʊɾ ə hɝ dʒɹɛs ɪf ʃi lin oʊvɝ ðə teɪbəl ɛni fɑɹðɝ. wɛl, ʃi wɑz nɑt gɑnə ɡoʊ ðət fɑɹ, nɑt wɪð bɹəleɪn; ðə tʃɹʌl stɪl θɔt ʃi kəd wɪn hɪm. ən ðət vɛɹi mɔɹnɪŋ, hi hæd bɪn kəmændɪŋ, kwaɪətli bɹʊkɪŋ noʊ ɑɹɡjəmənt, ðə sɔɹɾ ə mæn ə wʊmən nu ʃi hæd tə bi stʃɹɔŋ tə dɪzɝv, tə ikwəl. ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi wəɾ əv tə nɪp ɪm oʊvɝ ðæt. ə kəmændɪŋ mæn wɑz wʌndɝfəl, soʊ lɔŋ əz i dɪd nɑt kʌm tə bɪliv i kəɾ ɔlweɪz kəmænd. læf? ʃi kəɾ əv sʌŋ!

By some miracle, her husband, her beloved wolf, had begun behaving as he should. Instead of shouting at Berelain or running from her, Perrin now tolerated the jade's blandishments, plainly tolerated them the way he would a child playing around his knees. And best of all, there was no longer any need to tamp down her anger when she wanted to let it loose. When she shouted, he shouted back. She knew he was not Saldaean, but it had been so hard, thinking in her heart of hearts that he believed her too weak to stand up to him. A few nights ago at supper, she had almost pointed out to him that Berelain was going to fall out of her dress if she leaned over the table any farther. Well, she was not going to go that far, not with Berelain; the trull still thought she could win him. And that very morning, he had been commanding, quietly brooking no argument, the sort of man a woman knew she had to be strong to deserve, to equal. Of course, she would have to nip him over that. A commanding man was wonderful, so long as he did not come to believe he could always command. Laugh? She could have sung!

"meɪaɪɡdɪn, aɪ θɪŋk æftɝ ɔl əl . . ." meɪaɪɡdɪn wɑz ðəɹ ɪmiɾiətli wɪð ən ɛnkwaɪɝɪŋ smaɪl, bʌt feɪl tʃɹeɪld ɔf ət ðə saɪɾ ə θɹi ɹaɪɾɝz əhɛɾ ə hɝ, plaʊɪŋ θɹu ðə snoʊ əz fæst əz ðeɪ kəd pʊʃ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz.

"Maighdin, I think after all I will . . ." Maighdin was there immediately with an enquiring smile, but Faile trailed off at the sight of three riders ahead of her, plowing through the snow as fast as they could push their horses.

"æt lis ðəɹ ɑɹ plɛnti ʌv hɛɹz, maɪ leɪɾi," æliændɝ sɛd, wɔkɪŋ əɹ tɔl waɪt ɡɛldɪŋ ʌp bɪsaɪd swɑloʊ, "bʌɾ aɪ hæd hoʊpt . . . hu ɑɹ ðeɪ?" hɝ fælkən ʃɪftəɾ ɑn əɹ θɪk ɡlʌv, ðə bɛlz ɑn ɪts dʒɛsəz dʒɪŋɡəlɪŋ. "waɪ, ɪt lʊks laɪk səm ə jəɹ pipəl, maɪ leɪɾi."

"At least there are plenty of hares, my Lady," Alliandre said, walking her tall white gelding up beside Swallow, "but I had hoped . . . Who are they?" Her falcon shifted on her thick glove, the bells on its jesses jingling. "Why, it looks like some of your people, my Lady."

feɪl nɑɾəd ɡɹɪmli. ʃi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðɛm, tu. pɛɹɪlin, ɹɛlə ən lətʃəl. bʌt wʌt wɝ ðeɪ duɪŋ hɪɹ?

Faile nodded grimly. She recognized them, too. Parelean, Arrela and Lacile. But what were they doing here?

ðə θɹi dʒɹu ɹeɪn bɪfɔɹ hɝ, ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz pæntɪŋ stim. pɛɹɪlin lʊkt əz waɪd-aɪɾ əz ɪz dæpəl. lətʃəl, hɝ peɪl feɪs nɪɹli hɪɾən ɪn ðə dip kaʊl ə hɝ kloʊk, wɑz swɑloʊɪŋ æŋkʃəsli, ən ɹɛləz dɑɹk feɪs simd ɡɹeɪ. "maɪ leɪɾi," pɛɹɪlin sɛɾ ɝdʒənli, "daɪɹ nuz! ðə pɹɑfət mæsimə hæz bɪn miɾɪŋ wɪð ðə sintʃæn!"

The three drew rein before her, their horses panting steam. Parelean looked as wide-eyed as his dapple. Lacile, her pale face nearly hidden in the deep cowl of her cloak, was swallowing anxiously, and Arrela's dark face seemed gray. "My Lady," Parelean said urgently, "dire news! The Prophet Masema has been meeting with the Seanchan!"

"ðə sintʃæn!" æliændɝ ɪkskleɪmd. "ʃʊɹli hi kænɑt bɪliv ðəl kʌm tə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən!"

"The Seanchan!" Alliandre exclaimed. "Surely he cannot believe they will come to the Lord Dragon!"

"ɪt maɪt bi sɪmpəlɝ," bɹəleɪn sɛd, hilɪŋ əɹ tu-ʃoʊi waɪt mɛɹ ʌp ɑn æliændɝz ʌðɝ saɪd. wɪθaʊt pɛɹɪn əbaʊt fəɹ əɹ tə tʃɹaɪ tə ɪmpɹɛs, hɝ dɑɹk blu ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs wɑz kʌt kwaɪt mɑɾəstli, wɪð ə nɛk ʌp ʌndɝ əɹ tʃɪn. ʃi stɪl ʃɪvɝd. "mæsimə dɪslaɪks ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ðə sintʃæn kip wɪmən u kən tʃænəl əz pɹɪznɝz."

"It might be simpler," Berelain said, heeling her too-showy white mare up on Alliandre's other side. Without Perrin about for her to try to impress, her dark blue riding dress was cut quite modestly, with a neck up under her chin. She still shivered. "Masema dislikes Aes Sedai, and the Seanchan keep women who can channel as prisoners."

feɪl klɪkt əɹ tʌŋ ɪn vɛkseɪʃən. daɪɹ nuz ɪndid, ɪf tʃɹu. ən ʃi kəɾ oʊnli hoʊp pɛɹɪlin ən ði ʌðɝz ɹɪteɪn ɪnʌf ə ðɛɹ wɪts tə ət lis pɹitɛn ðeɪ hæd sɪmpli oʊvɝhɝd tɔk baɪ tʃæns. ivən soʊ, ʃi hæd tə bi ʃʊɹ, ən kwɪkli. pɛɹɪn maɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hæv ɹitʃt mæsimə. "wʌt pɹuf dʒju hæv, pɛɹɪlin?"

Faile clicked her tongue in vexation. Dire news indeed, if true. And she could only hope Parelean and the others retained enough of their wits to at least pretend they had simply overheard talk by chance. Even so, she had to be sure, and quickly. Perrin might already have reached Masema. "What proof do you have, Parelean?"

"wi tɔk tə θɹi fɑɹmɝz u sɔ ə lɑɹdʒ flaɪɪŋ kɹitʃɝ læn fɔɹ naɪts əɡoʊ, maɪ leɪɾi. ɪt bɹɔɾ ə wʊmən u wɑz teɪkən tə mæsimə ən ɹɪmeɪnd wɪð ɪm fəɹ θɹi aʊɝz."

"We talked to three farmers who saw a large flying creature land four nights ago, my Lady. It brought a woman who was taken to Masema and remained with him for three hours."

"wi wɝ eɪbəl tə tʃɹeɪs əɹ ɔl ðə weɪ tə wɛɹ mæsimə steɪz ɪn ɑbilə," lətʃəl æɾəd.

"We were able to trace her all the way to where Masema stays in Abila," Lacile added.

"ðə θɹi mɛn ɔl θɔt ðə kɹitʃɝ wɑz ʃæɾoʊzpɔn," ɹɛlə pʊɾ ɪn, "bʌt ðeɪ sim fɛɹli ɹɪlaɪəbəl." fəɹ əɹ tə seɪ ɛni mæn nɑɾ ə tʃɑ feɪl wɑz fɛɹli ɹɪlaɪəbəl wɑz ðə seɪm əz ɛniwʌn ɛls seɪɪŋ ðeɪ θɔɾ i wɑz ɑnəst əz ə bɛl.

"The three men all thought the creature was Shadowspawn," Arrela put in, "but they seemed fairly reliable." For her to say any man not of Cha Faile was fairly reliable was the same as anyone else saying they thought he was honest as a bell.

"aɪ θɪŋk aɪ mʌst ɹaɪɾ ɪndə ɑbilə," feɪl sɛd, ɡæðɝɪŋ swɑloʊz ɹeɪnz. "æliændɝ, teɪk meɪaɪɡdɪn ən bɹəleɪn wɪð ju." ɛni ʌðɝ taɪm, ðə taɪɾənɪŋ ə bɹəleɪnz lɪps oʊvɝ ðət wʊɾə bɪn əmjuzɪŋ. "pɛɹɪlin, ɹɛlə ən lətʃəl wɪl əkʌmpəni mi - " ə mæn skɹimd, ən ɛvɹiwʌn dʒɝkt.

"I think I must ride into Abila," Faile said, gathering Swallow's reins. "Alliandre, take Maighdin and Berelain with you." Any other time, the tightening of Berelain's lips over that would have been amusing. "Parelean, Arrela and Lacile will accompany me - " A man screamed, and everyone jerked.

fɪfti peɪsɪz əweɪ, wʌn ʌv æliændɝz ɡɹin-koʊɾəd soʊlʒɝz wɑz tɑpəlɪŋ fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl, ən ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ, ə wɪŋd ɡɑɹd fɛl wɪð ən æɹoʊ stændɪŋ aʊt fɹəm ɪz θɹoʊt. il əpɪɹɾ əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz, veɪld ən wildɪŋ baʊz əz ðeɪ ɹæn. mɔɹ soʊlʒɝz fɛl. beɪn ən kiæd wɝ ɑn ðɛɹ fit, dɑɹk veɪlz haɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ feɪsəz tə ði aɪz; ðɛɹ spɪɹz wɝ θɹʌs θɹu ðə stʃɹæps ə ðə baʊ keɪsəz ɑn ðɛɹ bæk, ən ðeɪ wɝk ðɛɹ baʊz smuðli, bʌt ðeɪ kæst ɡlænsɪz təwɔɹd feɪl, tu. ðəɹ wɝ il ɔl ɝaʊnd, hʌnʒɹədz ɪt simd, ə ɡɹeɪt nus kloʊzɪŋ ɪn. maʊntəd soʊlʒɝz loʊɝd lænsɪz, pʊlɪŋ bæk ɪn ðɛɹ oʊn sɝkəl ɝaʊn feɪl ən ði ʌðɝz, bʌt ɡæps əpɪɹɾ ɪmiɾiətli əz il æɹoʊz stʃɹʌk hoʊm.

Fifty paces away, one of Alliandre's green-coated soldiers was toppling from his saddle, and a moment later, a Winged Guard fell with an arrow standing out from his throat. Aiel appeared among the trees, veiled and wielding bows as they ran. More soldiers fell. Bain and Chiad were on their feet, dark veils hiding their faces to the eyes; their spears were thrust through the straps of the bow cases on their back, and they worked their bows smoothly, but they cast glances toward Faile, too. There were Aiel all around, hundreds it seemed, a great noose closing in. Mounted soldiers lowered lances, pulling back in their own circle around Faile and the others, but gaps appeared immediately as Aiel arrows struck home.

"sʌmwʌn mʌst ɡɛt ðɪs nuz ə mæsimə tə lɔɹd pɛɹɪn," feɪl toʊl pɛɹɪlin ən ðə tu wɪmən. "wʌn ə jə mʌst ɹitʃ hɪm! ɹaɪd laɪk faɪɝ!" hɝ swipɪŋ ɡeɪz tʊk ɪn æliændɝ ən meɪaɪɡdɪn. ən bɹəleɪn, tu. "ɔl ə ju, ɹaɪd laɪk faɪɝ, əɹ daɪ hɪɹ!" bɛɹli weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðɛɹ nɑdz, ʃi suɾəd ækʃənz tə wɝdz, ən dʌɡ hɝ hilz ɪndə swɑloʊz flæŋks, bɝstɪŋ θɹu ðə jusləs ɹɪŋ ə soʊlʒɝz. "ɹaɪd!" ʃi ʃaʊɾəd. sʌmwʌn hæd tə ɡɛt ðə nuz tə pɛɹɪn. "ɹaɪd!"

"Someone must get this news of Masema to Lord Perrin," Faile told Parelean and the two women. "One of you must reach him! Ride like fire!" Her sweeping gaze took in Alliandre and Maighdin. And Berelain, too. "All of you, ride like fire, or die here!" Barely waiting for their nods, she suited actions to words, and dug her heels into Swallow's flanks, bursting through the useless ring of soldiers. "Ride!" she shouted. Someone had to get the news to Perrin. "Ride!"

linɪŋ loʊ ɑn swɑloʊz nɛk, ʃi ɝdʒ ðə blæk mɛɹ fəɹ spid. flit hʊvz splæʃt snoʊ əz swɑloʊ ɹæn, laɪɾ əz əɹ neɪmseɪk. fəɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd stʃɹaɪdz, feɪl θɔt ʃi maɪt bɹeɪk fɹi. ən ðən swɑloʊ skɹimd ən stʌmbəld, pɪtʃɪŋ fɔɹwɝd wɪð ðə ʃɑɹp snæp ʌv ə bɹeɪkɪŋ lɛɡ. feɪl flu θɹu ɛɹ ən stʃɹʌk hɑɹd, moʊst ə ðə bɹɛθ dʒɹɪvən aʊɾ ə hɝ əz ʃi plʌnʒd feɪsdaʊn ɪndə ðə snoʊ. faɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɛɹ, ʃi stʃɹʌɡəl tə hɝ fiɾ ən snætʃt ə naɪf fɹəm əɹ bɛlt. swɑloʊ hæd skɹim bɪfɔɹ ʃi stʌmbəld, bɪfɔɹ ðəɾ ɑfəl kɹæk.

Leaning low on Swallow's neck, she urged the black mare for speed. Fleet hooves splashed snow as Swallow ran, light as her namesake. For a hundred strides, Faile thought she might break free. And then Swallow screamed and stumbled, pitching forward with the sharp snap of a breaking leg. Faile flew through air and struck hard, most of the breath driven out of her as she plunged facedown into the snow. Fighting for air, she struggled to her feet and snatched a knife from her belt. Swallow had screamed before she stumbled, before that awful crack.

ə veɪld ilmən lumd ʌp bɪfɔɹ əɹ əz ɪf aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ, tʃɑpɪŋ əɾ əɹ ɹɪst wɪð ə stɪfən hænd. hɝ naɪf dʒɹɑp fɹəm sʌɾənli nʌm fɪŋɡɝz, ən bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd tʃɹaɪ tə dʒɹɔ ənʌðɝ wɪð əɹ lɛf hænd, ðə mæn wɑz ɑn hɝ.

A veiled Aielman loomed up before her as if out of the air, chopping at her wrist with a stiffened hand. Her knife dropped from suddenly numb fingers, and before she could try to draw another with her left hand, the man was on her.

ʃi fɔt, kɪkɪŋ, pʌntʃɪŋ, ivən baɪɾɪŋ, bʌt ðə fɛloʊ wɑz əz waɪɾ əz pɛɹɪn ən ə hɛd tɔlɝ. hi simd əz hɑɹɾ əz pɛɹɪn, tu, fəɹ ɔl ði ɪmpɹɛʃən ʃi meɪɾ ɑn hɪm. ʃi cʊɾə wɛpt wɪð fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən ət ðə hjumɪlieɪɾɪŋ iz wɪð wɪtʃ i hændəl hɝ, fɝst ɹuɾɪŋ aʊɾ ɔl ə hɝ naɪvz ən tʌkɪŋ əm bɪhaɪn ɪz bɛlt, ðən juzɪŋ wʌn ə hɝ oʊn bleɪdz tə kʌɾ əɹ kloʊðz əweɪ. ɔlmoʊs bɪfɔɹ ʃi nu ɪt, ʃi wɑz neɪkəɾ ɪn ðə snoʊ, hɝ ɛlboʊz baʊn təɡɛðɝ bɪhaɪn əɹ bæk wɪð wʌn ə hɝ stɑkɪŋz, ði ʌðɝ taɪɾ əbaʊɾ əɹ nɛk fəɹ ə liʃ.

She fought, kicking, punching, even biting, but the fellow was as wide as Perrin and a head taller. He seemed as hard as Perrin, too, for all the impression she made on him. She could have wept with frustration at the humiliating ease with which he handled her, first rooting out all of her knives and tucking them behind his belt, then using one of her own blades to cut her clothes away. Almost before she knew it, she was naked in the snow, her elbows bound together behind her back with one of her stockings, the other tied about her neck for a leash.

ʃi hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs ɪksɛp tə fɑloʊ hɪm, ʃɪvɝɪŋ ən stʌmbəlɪŋ θɹu ðə snoʊ. hɝ skɪn pɛbəld wɪð ðə koʊld. laɪt, haʊ ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ θɔt ðɪs deɪ ɛniθɪŋ lɛs ðən aɪsi? laɪt, ɪf oʊnli sʌmwʌn hæd mænədʒ tə ɪskeɪp wɪð ðə nuz ə mæsimə! tə kæɹi wɝɾ ə hɝ kæptʃɝ tə pɛɹɪn, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ʃi kəɾ ɪskeɪp sʌmhaʊ. ði ʌðɝ wɑz mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt.

She had no choice except to follow him, shivering and stumbling through the snow. Her skin pebbled with the cold. Light, how she had ever thought this day anything less than icy? Light, if only someone had managed to escape with the news of Masema! To carry word of her capture to Perrin, of course, but she could escape somehow. The other was more important.

ðə fɝs bɑɾi ʃi sɔ wɑz pɛɹɪlin, spɹɔld ɑn ɪz bæk wɪð ɪz sɔɹɾ ɪn wʌn aʊtfləŋ hæn ən blʌɾ ɔl oʊvɝ ɪz faɪn koʊt wɪð ðə sæɾən-stʃɹaɪpt slivz. ðəɹ wɝ plɛnti ʌv kɔɹpsəz æftɝ, wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz ɪn ðɛɹ ɹɛd bɹɛstpleɪts, æliændɝz soʊlʒɝz ɪn ðɛɹ dɑɹk ɡɹin hɛlməts, wʌn ə ðə hɔkɝz, ðə hʊɾɪd dʌkhɔk flæpɪŋ veɪnli əɡɛns ðə dʒɛsəz stɪl ɡɹɪpt ɪn ðə dɛd mænz fɪst. ʃi hɛld ɑn tə hoʊp, ðoʊ.

The first body she saw was Parelean, sprawled on his back with his sword in one outflung hand and blood all over his fine coat with the satin-striped sleeves. There were plenty of corpses after, Winged Guards in their red breastplates, Alliandre's soldiers in their dark green helmets, one of the hawkers, the hooded duckhawk flapping vainly against the jesses still gripped in the dead man's fist. She held on to hope, though.

ðə fɝst ʌðɝ pɹɪznɝz ʃi sɔ, nilɪŋ əmʌŋ səm il, mɛn ən meɪɾənz wɪð ðɛɹ veɪlz hæŋɪŋ daʊn ðɛɹ tʃɛsts, wɝ beɪn ən kiæd, itʃ neɪkəd, ənbaʊn hænz ɑn əɹ niz. blʌd ɹæn daʊn əkɹɔs beɪnz feɪs ən mæɾɪd əɹ fleɪm-ɹɛd hɛɹ. kiædz lɛf tʃik wɑz pɝpəl ən swoʊlən, ən əɹ ɡɹeɪ aɪz lʊk slaɪtli ɡleɪzd. ðeɪ nɛl ðɛɹ, stʃɹeɪt-bækt, ɪmpæsɪv, ən ʌnəʃeɪmd, bʌɾ əz ðə bɪɡ ilmən pʊʃt əɹ ɹʌfli tə hɝ niz bɪsaɪd ðɛm, ðeɪ ɹaʊz ðɛmsɛlvz.

The first other prisoners she saw, kneeling among some Aiel, men and Maidens with their veils hanging down their chests, were Bain and Chiad, each naked, unbound hands on her knees. Blood ran down across Bain's face and matted her flame-red hair. Chiad's left cheek was purple and swollen, and her gray eyes looked slightly glazed. They knelt there, straight-backed, impassive, and unashamed, but as the big Aielman pushed her roughly to her knees beside them, they roused themselves.

"ðɪs ɪz nɑt ɹaɪt, ʃeɪɾoʊ," kiæd mʌmbəld æŋɡɹəli.

"This is not right, Shaido," Chiad mumbled angrily.

"ʃi dʌz nɑt fɑloʊ dʒiɾoʊ," beɪn bɑɹkt. "ju kænɑt meɪk əɹ ɡeɪʃeɪn."

"She does not follow ji'e'toh," Bain barked. "You cannot make her gai'shain."

"ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn wɪl bi kwaɪət," ə ɡɹeɪɪŋ meɪɾən sɛɾ æbsənli. beɪn ən kiæd ɡeɪv feɪl ɹɪɡɹɛtfəl lʊks, ðən sɛɾəld bæk tə ðɛɹ kɑm weɪɾɪŋ. hʌɾəlɪŋ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə haɪɾ əɹ neɪkədnəs əɡɛnst əɹ niz, feɪl dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ tə wip əɹ læf. ðə tu wɪmən ʃi wʊɾə tʃoʊzən tə hɛlp əɹ ɪskeɪp fɹəm ɛniwɛɹ, ən niðɝ wəd ɹeɪz ə hæn tə tʃɹaɪ kəz ə dʒiɾoʊ.

"The gai'shain will be quiet," a graying Maiden said absently. Bain and Chiad gave Faile regretful looks, then settled back to their calm waiting. Huddling, trying to hide her nakedness against her knees, Faile did not know whether to weep or laugh. The two women she would have chosen to help her escape from anywhere, and neither would raise a hand to try because of ji'e'toh.

"aɪ seɪ əɡɛn, ɛfɑlɪn," ðə mæn u hæd kæptʃɝɾ əɹ mʌɾɝd, "ðɪs ɪz fulɪʃnəs. wi tʃɹævəl əɾ ə kɹɔl ɪn ðɪs . . . snoʊ." hi sɛd ðə wɝɾ ɔkwɝdli. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ tu mɛni ɑɹmd mɛn, hɪɹ. wi ʃəd bi muvɪŋ ist, nɑt teɪkɪŋ mɔɹ ɡeɪʃeɪn tə sloʊ əs fɝðɝ."

"I say again, Efalin," the man who had captured her muttered, "this is foolishness. We travel at a crawl in this . . . snow." He said the word awkwardly. "There are too many armed men, here. We should be moving east, not taking more gai'shain to slow us further."

"sɪvænə wɑns mɔɹ ɡeɪʃeɪn, ɹoʊlən," ðə ɡɹeɪɪŋ meɪɾən ɹɪplaɪd. ʃi fɹaʊnd, ðoʊ, ən əɹ hɑɹd ɡɹeɪ aɪz sim dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ fəɹ ə moʊmənt.

"Sevanna wants more gai'shain, Rolan," the graying Maiden replied. She frowned, though, and her hard gray eyes seemed disapproving for a moment.

ʃɪvɝɪŋ, feɪl blɪŋkt əz ðə neɪmz sæŋk ɪn. laɪt, bʌt ðə koʊld wɑz meɪkɪŋ əɹ wɪts sloʊ. sɪvænə. ʃeɪɾoʊ. ðeɪ wɝ ɪn kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ, əz fɑɹ fɹəm hɪɹ əz wɑz pɑsəbəl tə bi wɪθaʊt kɹɔsɪŋ ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld! klɪɹli ðeɪ wɝ nɑt, ðoʊ. ðət wɑz sʌmθɪŋ pɛɹɪn ʃəd noʊ, ənʌðɝ ɹizən fəɹ əɹ tə ɪskeɪp sun. ðəɹ sim lɪɾəl tʃæns ə ðæt, kɹaʊtʃɪŋ ðəɹ ɪn ðə snoʊ ən wʌndɝɪŋ wɪtʃ bɪts ə hɝ wɝ gɑnə fɹiz fɝst. ðə wil wɑz bælənsɪŋ əɹ əmjuzmən oʊvɝ bɹəleɪnz ʃɪvɝz wɪð ə vɛnʒəns. ʃi wɑz æktʃəli  lʊkɪŋ fɔɹwɝd tə ðə θɪk wʊlən ɹoʊbz ðət ɡeɪʃeɪn wɔɹ. hɝ kæptɝz meɪd noʊ muv tə dɪpɑɹt, ðoʊ. ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝ kæptɪvz tə bi bɹɔɾ ɪn.

Shivering, Faile blinked as the names sank in. Light, but the cold was making her wits slow. Sevanna. Shaido. They were in Kinslayer's Dagger, as far from here as was possible to be without crossing the Spine of the World! Clearly they were not, though. That was something Perrin should know, another reason for her to escape soon. There seemed little chance of that, crouching there in the snow and wondering which bits of her were going to freeze first. The Wheel was balancing her amusement over Berelain's shivers with a vengeance. She was actually looking forward to the thick woolen robes that gai'shain wore. Her captors made no move to depart, though. There were other captives to be brought in.

fɝst wɑz meɪaɪɡdɪn, stʃɹɪp bɛɹ ən baʊn əz feɪl wɑz, ən stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ ɛvɹi stɛp ə ðə weɪ. əntɪl ðə meɪɾən u wɑz pʊʃɪŋ əɹ əlɔŋ əbɹʌpli kɪkt əɹ fiɾ aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ hɝ. meɪaɪɡdɪn plʌŋk daʊn sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə snoʊ, ən əɹ aɪz pɑp soʊ waɪd ðət feɪl maɪɾ əv læft ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt fɛl sɑɹi fəɹ ðə wʊmən. æliændɝ keɪm nɛkst, bɛnt nɪɹli dʌbəl ɪn ən ɛfɝt tə ʃil hɝsɛlf, ən ðən ɹɛlə, hu sim hæf pɛɹəlaɪz baɪ hɝ nuɾɪti ən wɑz ɔlmoʊs biɪŋ dʒɹæɡd baɪ ə pɛɹ ə meɪɾənz. faɪnəli, ənʌðɝ tɔl ilmən əpɪɹd wɪð ə fjʊɹiəsli kɪkɪŋ lətʃəl tʌkt ʌndɝ wʌn ɑɹm laɪk ə pækədʒ.

First was Maighdin, stripped bare and bound as Faile was, and struggling every step of the way. Until the Maiden who was pushing her along abruptly kicked her feet out from under her. Maighdin plunked down sitting in the snow, and her eyes popped so wide that Faile might have laughed if she had not felt sorry for the woman. Alliandre came next, bent nearly double in an effort to shield herself, and then Arrela, who seemed half paralyzed by her nudity and was almost being dragged by a pair of Maidens. Finally, another tall Aielman appeared with a furiously kicking Lacile tucked under one arm like a package.

"ðə ɹɛst ɑɹ dɛɾ əɹ ɪskeɪpt," ðə mæn sɛd, dʒɹɑpɪŋ ðə smɔl kɛɹhinɪn wʊmən bɪsaɪd feɪl. "sɪvænə wɪl əv tə bi sæɾəsfaɪd, ɛfɑlɪn. ʃi pʊts tu mʌtʃ stɔɹ ɪn teɪkɪŋ pipəl u wɛɹ sɪlk."

"The rest are dead or escaped," the man said, dropping the small Cairhienin woman beside Faile. "Sevanna will have to be satisfied, Efalin. She puts too much store in taking people who wear silk."

feɪl dɪd nɑt stʃɹʌɡəl əɾ ɔl wən ʃi wɑz pɹɑɾɪd tə hɝ fiɾ ən sɛt tə leɪbɝɪŋ θɹu ðə snoʊ ət ðə hɛɾ ə ði ʌðɝ pɹɪznɝz. ʃi wɑz tu stʌn tə faɪt. pɛɹɪlin dɛd, ɹɛlə ən lətʃəl kæptɪv, ən æliændɝ, ən meɪaɪɡdɪn. laɪt, sʌmwʌn hæd tə wɔɹn pɛɹɪn əbaʊt mæsimə. sʌmwʌn. ɪt simd ə faɪnəl bloʊ. hɪɹ ʃi wɑz, ʃɪvɝɪŋ ən ɡɹɪɾɪŋ əɹ tiθ tə kip əm fɹəm tʃæɾɝɪŋ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ əɹ bɛs tə pɹitɛn ðət ʃi wɑz nɑt stɑɹk neɪkəɾ ən baʊnd, ɑn əɹ weɪ tə ən ənsɝɾən kæptɪvəɾi. ɔl ə ðæt, ən ʃi hæd tə hoʊp ðət ðət slɪŋkɪŋ kæt - ðət paʊɾɪŋ tʃɹʌl! - bɹəleɪn, hæd mænədʒ tə ɪskeɪp soʊ ʃi kəd ɹitʃ pɛɹɪn. əlɔŋsaɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls, ðət sim ðə wɝst ʌv ɔl.

Faile did not struggle at all when she was prodded to her feet and set to laboring through the snow at the head of the other prisoners. She was too stunned to fight. Parelean dead, Arrela and Lacile captive, and Alliandre, and Maighdin. Light, someone had to warn Perrin about Masema. Someone. It seemed a final blow. Here she was, shivering and gritting her teeth to keep them from chattering, trying her best to pretend that she was not stark naked and bound, on her way to an uncertain captivity. All of that, and she had to hope that that slinking cat - that pouting trull! - Berelain, had managed to escape so she could reach Perrin. Alongside everything else, that seemed the worst of all.

ɛɡwin wɔk deɪʃɝ əlɔŋ ðə kɑləm ʌv ɪnɪʃiəts, sɪstɝz ɑn ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz əmʌŋ ðə wæɡənz, æksɛptɪɾ ən nɑvəsɪz əfʊt dɪspaɪt ðə snoʊ. ðə sʌn wɑz bɹaɪɾ ɪn ə skaɪ wɪð fju klaʊdz, bʌt mɪs kɝl fɹəm əɹ ɡɛldɪŋz nɑstʃɹəlz. ʃɛɹiəm ən sɪuən ɹoʊɾ əɾ əɹ bæk, tɔkɪŋ kwaɪətli əbaʊɾ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən lɝn fɹəm sɪuənz aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz. ɛɡwin hæd θɔt ðə faɪɝ-hɛɹd wʊmən ən ɪfɪʃən kipɝ wʌns ʃi lɝn ðət ʃi wɑz nɑt ði æmɪɝlɪn, bʌt deɪ baɪ deɪ, ʃɛɹiəm sim tə ɡɹoʊ ɛvɝ mɔɹ əsɪdwəs əbaʊɾ əɹ duɾiz. tʃɛsə fɑloʊɾ ɑn əɹ tʌbi mɛɹ ɪn keɪs ði æmɪɝlɪn wɑntəɾ ɛniθɪŋ, ən ənlaɪk hɝ, ʃi wɑz mʌɾɝɪŋ əɡɛn əbaʊt mɛɹi ən sɛləm boʊθ ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ, ði ənɡɹeɪtfəl ɹɛtʃəz, livɪŋ əɹ tə də ðə wɝk ə θɹi. ðeɪ ɹoʊd sloʊli, ən ɛɡwin vɛɹi kɛɹfəli dɪd nɑt lʊk təwɔɹd ðə kɑləm.

Egwene walked Daishar along the column of initiates, sisters on their horses among the wagons, Accepted and novices afoot despite the snow. The sun was bright in a sky with few clouds, but mist curled from her gelding's nostrils. Sheriam and Siuan rode at her back, talking quietly about information learned from Siuan's eyes-and-ears. Egwene had thought the fire-haired woman an efficient Keeper once she learned that she was not the Amyrlin, but day by day, Sheriam seemed to grow ever more assiduous about her duties. Chesa followed on her tubby mare in case the Amyrlin wanted anything, and unlike her, she was muttering again about Meri and Selame both running away, the ungrateful wretches, leaving her to do the work of three. They rode slowly, and Egwene very carefully did not look toward the column.

ə mʌnθ ə ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ, ə mʌnθ ə ðə nɑvəs bʊk biɪŋ oʊpən tə ɔl, hæd bɹɔɾ ɪn stɑɹtlɪŋ nʌmbɝz, ə flʌɾ æŋkʃəs tə bɪkʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ, wɪmən ʌv ɛvɹi eɪdʒ səm fɹəm hʌnʒɹədz ə maɪlz əweɪ. ðəɹ wɝ naʊ twaɪs əz mɛni nɑvəsɪz wɪð ðə kɑləm əz bɪfɔɹ. ɔlmoʊst ə θaʊzənd! moʊs baɪ fɑɹ wəd nɛvɝ wɛɹ ðə ʃɔl, jɛt ðə nʌmbɝ ə ðɛm hæɾ ɛvɹiwʌn stɛɹɪŋ. səm maɪt kɑz maɪnɝ pɹɑbləmz, ən wʌn, ə ɡɹændmʌðɝ neɪmd ʃɛɝinə wɪð ə pətɛnʃəl əbʌv ivən ðəɾ ə nɪneɪiv, sɝɾənli hæɾ ɛvɹiwʌn stɑɹɾəld, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə mʌðɝ ən dɔɾɝ skwɑbəlɪŋ kəz ðə dɔɾɝ wəd bi ðə stʃɹɔŋɝ baɪ fɑɹ wʌn deɪ ðət ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əvɔɪd, əɹ noʊbəlwɪmən u wɝ bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə θɪŋk ðeɪ hæd meɪd ðə ɹɔŋ tʃɔɪs æskɪŋ tə bi tɛstəd, əɹ ivən ʃɛɝinəz dɪstɝbɪŋli dɝɛk lʊks. ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən oʊbeɪɾ ɛvɹi ɹul ən ʃoʊɾ ɛvɹi pɹɑpɝ ɹɪspɛkt, bʌt ʃi hæd ɹʌn əɹ lɑɹdʒ fæmli baɪ ðə ʃɪɹ fɔɹs ə hɝ pɹɛzəns, ən ivən səm ə ðə sɪstɝz stɛpt wɛɹəli ɝaʊn hɝ. wʌɾ ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt wɑnə si wɝ ðə jʌŋ wɪmən u hæd dʒɔɪn əm tu deɪz bɪfɔɹ. ðə tu sɪstɝz u bɹɔɾ əm hæd bɪn mɔɹ ðən stɑɹɾəld tə faɪn ɛɡwin əz æmɪɝlɪn, bʌt ðɛɹ tʃɑɹdʒəz kəd nɑt bɪliv ɪt, nɑɾ ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ, ðə meɪɝz dɔɾɝ fɹəm ɛmənz fild. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɔɹɾɝ ɛniwʌn ɛls pʌnɪʃt, bʌt ʃi wəɾ əv tə ɪf ʃi sɔ ənʌðɝ stɪk əɹ tʌŋ aʊɾ ət hɝ.

A month of recruiting, a month of the novice book being open to all, had brought in startling numbers, a flood anxious to become Aes Sedai, women of every age some from hundreds of miles away. There were now twice as many novices with the column as before. Almost a thousand! Most by far would never wear the shawl, yet the number of them had everyone staring. Some might cause minor problems, and one, a grandmother named Sharina with a potential above even that of Nynaeve, certainly had everyone startled, but it was not the sight of a mother and daughter squabbling because the daughter would be the stronger by far one day that she was trying to avoid, or noblewomen who were beginning to think they had made the wrong choice asking to be tested, or even Sharina's disturbingly direct looks. The gray-haired woman obeyed every rule and showed every proper respect, but she had run her large family by the sheer force of her presence, and even some of the sisters stepped warily around her. What Egwene did not want to see were the young women who had joined them two days before. The two sisters who brought them had been more than startled to find Egwene as Amyrlin, but their charges could not believe it, not Egwene al'Vere, the Mayor's daughter from Emond's Field. She did not want to order anyone else punished, but she would have to if she saw another stick her tongue out at her.

ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn hæɾ ɪz ɑɹmi ɪn ə waɪd kɑləm, tu, kævəlɹi ən fʊɾ ɔl ɝeɪɾ ən stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ aʊɾ ə saɪt θɹu ðə tʃɹiz. ðə peɪl sʌn ɡlɪntɪɾ ɔf bɹɛstpleɪts ən hɛlməts ən ðə pɔɪns ə paɪks. hɔɹsəz stæmp ðɛɹ hʊvz ɪn ðə snoʊ ɪmpeɪʃənli.

Gareth Bryne had his army in a wide column, too, cavalry and foot all arrayed and stretching out of sight through the trees. The pale sun glinted off breastplates and helmets and the points of pikes. Horses stamped their hooves in the snow impatiently.

bɹaɪn wɔkt ɪz stɝɾi beɪ tə miɾ əɹ bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹitʃt ðə sɪɾɝz weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, ɪn ə lɑɹdʒ klɪɹɪŋ əhɛɾ ə boʊθ kɑləmz. hi smaɪld əɾ əɹ θɹu ðə feɪs-bɑɹz ə hɪz hɛlmət. ə ɹiəʃʊɹɪŋ smaɪl, ʃi θɔt. "ə faɪn mɔɹnɪŋ fəɹ ɪt, mʌðɝ," hi sɛd. "hɪɹ."

Bryne walked his sturdy bay to meet her before she reached the Sitters waiting on their horses, in a large clearing ahead of both columns. He smiled at her through the face-bars of his helmet. A reassuring smile, she thought. "A fine morning for it, Mother," he said. "Here."

ʃi oʊnli nɑɾəd, ən i fɛl ɪn bɪhaɪn hɝ, bɪsaɪd sɪuən. hu dɪd nɑɾ ɪmiɾiətli bɪɡɪn spɪɾɪŋ ət hɪm. ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt sɝɾən ɪɡzækli wʌɾ əkɑmədeɪʃən sɪuən hæd ɹitʃt wɪð ðə mæn, bʌt ʃi sɛldəm ɡɹʌmbəld əbaʊɾ ɪm ɛnimɔɹ ɪn ɛɡwinz hɪɹɪŋ, ən nɛvɝ wən i wɑz pɹɛzənt. ɛɡwin wɑz ɡlæɾ i wɑz ðɛɹ, naʊ. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit kəd nɑt lɛɾ əɹ dʒɛnɝəl noʊ ʃi wɑntəɾ ɪz ɹiəʃʊɹəns, bʌt ʃi fɛl ðə niɾ ʌv ɪt ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ.

She only nodded, and he fell in behind her, beside Siuan. Who did not immediately begin spitting at him. Egwene was not certain exactly what accommodation Siuan had reached with the man, but she seldom grumbled about him anymore in Egwene's hearing, and never when he was present. Egwene was glad he was there, now. The Amyrlin Seat could not let her general know she wanted his reassurance, but she felt the need of it this morning.

ðə sɪɾɝz hæd ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ɪn ə laɪn ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə tʃɹiz, ən θɝtin mɔɹ sɪstɝz sæt ðɛɹ maʊns ə lɪɾəl weɪ ɔf, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə sɪɾɝz kɛɹfəli. ɹoʊmændə ən ləleɪn spɝd ðɛɹ ænəməlz fɔɹwɝɾ ɔlmoʊs təɡɛðɝ, ən ɛɡwin kəd hɑɹdli hɛlp saɪɪŋ əz ðeɪ əpɹoʊtʃt, kloʊks flɛɹɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðɛm, hʊvz spɹeɪɪŋ snoʊ əz ɪf ət ðə tʃɑɹdʒ. ðə hɔl oʊbeɪɾ əɹ kəz ɪt hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs. ɪn mæɾɝz kənsɝnɪŋ ðə wɔɹ əɡɛnst ɪleɪɾə, ðeɪ dɪd, bʌt laɪt, haʊ ðeɪ kəd kwɪbəl oʊvɝ wʌɾ əɹ dɪd nɑt kənsɝn ðə wɔɹ. wən ɪt dɪd nɑt, ɡɛɾɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðɛm wɑz laɪk pʊlɪŋ dʌks tiθ! ɪksɛp fəɹ ʃɛɝinə, ðeɪ maɪɾ əv faʊn ə weɪ tə pʊɾ ə stɑp tə æksɛptɪŋ wɪmən ʌv ɛni eɪdʒ. ivən ɹoʊmændə wɑz ɪmpɹɛs baɪ ʃɛɝinə.

The Sitters had their horses in a line at the edge of the trees, and thirteen more sisters sat their mounts a little way off, watching the Sitters carefully. Romanda and Lelaine spurred their animals forward almost together, and Egwene could hardly help sighing as they approached, cloaks flaring behind them, hooves spraying snow as if at the charge. The Hall obeyed her because it had no choice. In matters concerning the war against Elaida, they did, but Light, how they could quibble over what did or did not concern the war. When it did not, getting anything out of them was like pulling duck's teeth! Except for Sharina, they might have found a way to put a stop to accepting women of any age. Even Romanda was impressed by Sharina.

ðə pɛɹ ɹeɪn ɪn bɪfɔɹ hɝ, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəɾ oʊpən ðɛɹ maʊðz, ʃi spoʊk. "ɪts taɪm wi ɡɑɾ ɑn wɪð ɪt, dɔɾɝz, ən noʊ taɪm fəɹ weɪstɪŋ ɪn aɪɾəl tʃæɾɝ. pɹoʊsid." ɹoʊmændə snɪft, ðoʊ sɔfli, ən ləleɪn lʊkt əz ðoʊ ʃi wɑntəd tə.

The pair reined in before her, but before they could open their mouths, she spoke. "It's time we got on with it, daughters, and no time for wasting in idle chatter. Proceed." Romanda sniffed, though softly, and Lelaine looked as though she wanted to.

ðeɪ wil ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz əz wʌn, ðən ɡlɛɹɾ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ ə moʊmənt. ɪvɛns ðɪs pæs mʌnθ hæɾ oʊnli haɪɾənd ðɛɹ dɪslaɪk fəɹ itʃ ʌðɝ. ləleɪn tɔst əɹ hɛɾ æŋɡɹəli ɪn kənsɛʃən, ən ɹoʊmændə smaɪld, ə feɪn kɝvɪŋ ə hɝ lɪps. ɛɡwin ɔlmoʊst smaɪld, tu. ðət mjutʃəwəl ænəmɑsəɾi wɑz stɪl əɹ ɡɹeɪɾəst stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ðə hɔl.

They wheeled their horses as one, then glared at one another a moment. Events this past month had only heightened their dislike for each other. Lelaine tossed her head angrily in concession, and Romanda smiled, a faint curving of her lips. Egwene almost smiled, too. That mutual animosity was still her greatest strength in the Hall.

"ði æmɪɝlɪn sit kəmænz jə tə pɹəsid," ɹoʊmændə ənaʊnst, ɹeɪzɪŋ wʌn hænd ɡɹænli.

"The Amyrlin Seat commands you to proceed," Romanda announced, raising one hand grandly.

ðə laɪɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ spɹæŋ ʌp ɝaʊn ðə θɝtin sɪstɝz nɪɹ ðə sɪɾɝz, ɝaʊn ɔl ə ðɛm təɡɛðɝ, ən ə θɪk slæʃ ə sɪlvɝ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə klɪɹɪŋ, ɹoʊteɪɾɪŋ ɪndə ə ɡeɪtweɪ tɛn peɪsɪz tɔl ən ə hʌnʒɹəd waɪd. fɔlɪŋ snoʊ dʒɹɪftəd θɹu fɹəm ði ʌðɝ saɪd. ʃaʊɾəd ɔɹɾɝz ɹoʊz əmʌŋ ðə soʊlʒɝz, ən ðə fɝst ɑɹmɝd hɛvi kælvɝi ɹoʊd θɹu. ðə swɝlɪŋ snoʊ bɪɑn ðə ɡeɪtweɪ wɑz tu θɪk tə si fɑɹ, jɛɾ ɛɡwin ɪmædʒən ðət ʃi kəd meɪk aʊt ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ wɔlz ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf.

The light of saidar sprang up around the thirteen sisters near the Sitters, around all of them together, and a thick slash of silver appeared in the middle of the clearing, rotating into a gateway ten paces tall and a hundred wide. Falling snow drifted through from the other side. Shouted orders rose among the soldiers, and the first armored heavy calvary rode through. The swirling snow beyond the gateway was too thick to see far, yet Egwene imagined that she could make out the Shining Walls of Tar Valon, and the White Tower itself.

"ɪɾ əz bɪɡʌn, mʌðɝ," ʃɛɹiəm sɛd, saʊndɪŋ ɔlmoʊst sɝpɹaɪzd.

"It has begun, Mother," Sheriam said, sounding almost surprised.

"ɪɾ əz bɪɡʌn," ɛɡwin əɡɹid. ən ðə laɪt wɪlɪŋ, sun ɪleɪɾə wəd fɔl. ʃi wɑz səpoʊz tə weɪɾ əntɪl bɹaɪn sɛd səfɪʃən ə hɪz soʊlʒɝz wɝ θɹu, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt stɑp hɝsɛlf. dɪɡɪŋ əɹ hilz ɪndə deɪʃɝz flæŋks, ʃi ɹoʊd θɹu ɪndə ðə fɔlɪŋ snoʊ, ɑntu ðə pleɪn wɛɹ dʒɹæɡən-maʊn ɹɪɹd blæk ən smoʊkɪŋ əɡɛnst ə waɪt skaɪ.

"It has begun," Egwene agreed. And the Light willing, soon Elaida would fall. She was supposed to wait until Bryne said sufficient of his soldiers were through, but she could not stop herself. Digging her heels into Daishar's flanks, she rode through into the falling snow, onto the plain where Dragon-mount reared black and smoking against a white sky.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾiwʌn


CHAPTER 31

æftɝ


After

wɪntɝ wɪnz ən wɪntɝ snoʊz sloʊd ðə pæsədʒ ə tʃɹeɪɾ əkɹɔs lænz wɛɹ ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɛn ɪɾ əntɪl spɹɪŋ, ən fəɹ ɛvɹi θɹi pɪdʒənz sɛn baɪ mɝtʃəns, tu fɛl tə hɔks əɹ wɛðɝ, bʌt wɛɹ aɪs dɪd nɑt kʌvɝ ðə ɹɪvɝz, ʃɪps stɪl seɪld, ən ɹumɝ flu fæstɝ ðən laɪtnɪŋz. ə θaʊzən ɹumɝz, itʃ θɹoʊɪŋ ɔf ə θaʊzən sidz ðət spɹaʊɾəd ən ɡɹu ɪn snoʊ ən aɪs əz ɪn fɝɾəl sɔɪl.

Winter winds and winter snows slowed the passage of trade across lands where they did not end it until spring, and for every three pigeons sent by merchants, two fell to hawks or weather, but where ice did not cover the rivers, ships still sailed, and rumor flew faster than lightnings. A thousand rumors, each throwing off a thousand seeds that sprouted and grew in snow and ice as in fertile soil.

ət tɑɹ vəlɑn, səm stɔɹiz sɛd, ɡɹeɪɾ ɑɹmiz hæd klæʃt, ən ðə stʃɹits ɹæn wɪð blʌd, ən ɹɛbəl ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd stʌk ðə hɛɾ ʌv ɪleɪɾə ɹɔɪhən ɑn ə paɪk. noʊ; ɪleɪɾə hæd kloʊzd əɹ hænd, ən ðoʊz u sɝvaɪvd əmʌŋ ðə ɹɛbəlz ɡɹoʊvəld əɾ ɪleɪɾəz fit. ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ ɹɛbəlz, noʊ dɪvɪʒən ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ɪt wɑz ðə blæk taʊɝ ðət hæd bɪn bɹoʊkən, baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪzaɪnz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ paʊɝ, ən æʃəmən hʌntəɾ æʃəmən əkɹɔs ðə neɪʃənz. ðə waɪt taʊɝ hæd ʃæɾɝd ðə sʌn pæləs ɪn kɛɹhin, ən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn hɪmsɛlf wɑz baʊnd naʊ tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, hɝ pʌpəɾ ən əɹ tul. səm teɪlz sɛɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd bɪn baʊn tə hɪm, baʊn tə ði æʃəmən, jɛt fju bɪliv ðæt, ən ðoʊz fju wɝ ɹɪɾəkjuld.

At Tar Valon, some stories said, great armies had clashed, and the streets ran with blood, and rebel Aes Sedai had stuck the head of Elaida a'Roihan on a pike. No; Elaida had closed her hand, and those who survived among the rebels groveled at Elaida's feet. There had been no rebels, no division of the White Tower. It was the Black Tower that had been broken, by Aes Sedai designs and Aes Sedai power, and Asha'man hunted Asha'man across the nations. The White Tower had shattered the Sun Palace in Cairhien, and the Dragon Reborn himself was bound now to the Amyrlin Seat, her puppet and her tool. Some tales said Aes Sedai had been bound to him, bound to the Asha'man, yet few believed that, and those few were ridiculed.

ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɑɹmiz hæd ɹɪtɝn tə ɹikleɪm ɪz lɔŋ-dɛɾ ɛmpaɪɝ, ən ðə sintʃæn wɝ swipɪŋ ɔl bɪfɔɹ ðɛm, ivən tə dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn fɹəm ɔltɑɹə ɪn dɪfit. ðə sintʃæn hæd kʌm tə sɝv hɪm. noʊ; hi hæd kæs ðə sintʃæn ɪndə ðə si, dɪstʃɹɔɪɪŋ ðɛɹ ɑɹmi ʌɾɝli. ðeɪ hæd kæɹid ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əweɪ, tə nil bɪfɔɹ ðɛɹ ɛmpɹɛs. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɑz dɛd, ən ðəɹ wɑz əz mʌtʃ sɛləbɹeɪʃən əz mɔɹnɪŋ, əz mɛni tɪɹz əz kɹaɪz ə dʒɔɪ.

Artur Hawkwing's armies had returned to reclaim his long-dead empire, and the Seanchan were sweeping all before them, even to driving the Dragon Reborn from Altara in defeat. The Seanchan had come to serve him. No; he had cast the Seanchan into the sea, destroying their army utterly. They had carried the Dragon Reborn away, to kneel before their Empress. The Dragon Reborn was dead, and there was as much celebration as mourning, as many tears as cries of joy.

əkɹɔs ðə neɪʃənz ðə stɔɹiz spɹɛd laɪk spaɪɾɝwɛb leɪɾ əpɑn spaɪɾɝwɛb, ən mɛn ən wɪmən plæn ðə fjutʃɝ, bɪlivɪŋ ðeɪ nu tʃɹuθ. ðeɪ plænd, ən ðə pæɾɝn əbzɔɹb ðɛɹ plænz, wivɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə fjutʃɝ fɔɹtoʊld.

Across the nations the stories spread like spiderweb laid upon spiderweb, and men and women planned the future, believing they knew truth. They planned, and the Pattern absorbed their plans, weaving toward the future foretold.

ði ɛn ə ði eɪtθ bʊk ə ðə wil ə taɪm ɡlɔsɝi eɪ noʊɾ ɑn deɪts ɪn ðɪs ɡlɔsɝi. ðə toʊmən kæləndɝ (dɪvaɪz baɪ toʊmə dɝ ɑməd) wɑz ədɑptəɾ əpɹɑksəmətli tu sɛntʃɝiz æftɝ ðə dɛθ ə ðə læs meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɹəkɔɹɾɪŋ jɪɹz æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld (æb). soʊ mɛni ɹɛkɝdz wɝ dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz ðəɾ ət ðɛɹ ɛn ðəɹ wɑz ɑɹɡjəmən əbaʊt ði ɪɡzæk jɪɹ ʌndɝ ði oʊl sɪstəm. ə nu kæləndɝ, pɹəpoʊz baɪ tiəm ʌv ɡɑzɹ, sɛləbɹeɪɾəd fɹiɾəm fɹəm ðə tʃɹɑlɑk θɹɛɾ ən ɹəkɔɹɾəd itʃ jɪɹ əz ə fɹi jɪɹ (fi). ðə ɡɑzɝən kæləndɝ ɡeɪnd waɪɾ æksɛptəns wɪðɪn twɛnti jɪɹz æftɝ ðə wɔɹz' ɛnd. ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ətɛmptəd tə ɪstæblɪʃ ə nu kæləndɝ beɪst ɑn ðə faʊndɪŋ ə hɪz ɛmpaɪɝ (, fɹəm ðə faʊndɪŋ), bʌɾ oʊnli hɪstɔɹiənz naʊ ɹəfɝ tə ɪt. æftɝ ðə dɛθ ən dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ə ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, ə θɝd kæləndɝ wɑz dɪvaɪz baɪ ɝɛn dɪn dʒubaɪ sɔɹɪŋ ɡʌl, ə skɑlɝ ə ðə si foʊk, ən pɹɑməlɡeɪɾəd baɪ ðə pɑnɑɹtʃ fɛɹiɾ ə tæɹɑbən. ðə fɛɹid kæləndɝ, deɪɾɪŋ fɹəm ði ɑɹbɪtʃɹɛɹəli dɪsaɪɾɪd ɛn ə ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz ən ɹəkɔɹɾɪŋ jɪɹz ə ðə nu ɛɹə (nəbɹæskə), ɪz kɝənli ɪn jus.

The End of the Eighth Book of The Wheel of Time GLOSSARY A Note on Dates in This Glossary. The Toman Calendar (devised by Toma dur Ahmid) was adopted approximately two centuries after the death of the last male Aes Sedai, recording years After the Breaking of the World (AB). So many records were destroyed in the Trolloc Wars that at their end there was argument about the exact year under the old system. A new calendar, proposed by Tiam of Gazar, celebrated freedom from the Trolloc threat and recorded each year as a Free Year (FY). The Gazaran Calendar gained wide acceptance within twenty years after the Wars' end. Artur Hawkwing attempted to establish a new calendar based on the founding of his empire (FF, From the Founding), but only historians now refer to it. After the death and destruction of the War of the Hundred Years, a third calendar was devised by Uren din Jubai Soaring Gull, a scholar of the Sea Folk, and promulgated by the Panarch Farede of Tarabon. The Farede Calendar, dating from the arbitrarily decided end of the War of the Hundred Years and recording years of the New Era (NE), is currently in use.

ɑɹmmɪn: soʊlʒɝz u oʊ əlidʒəns əɹ fiəlti tə ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ lɔɹɾ əɹ leɪɾi.

armsmen: Soldiers who owe allegiance or fealty to a particular lord or lady.

æʃəmən: (wʌn) ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ɡɑɹɾiən" əɹ "ɡɑɹɾiənz," bʌɾ ɔlweɪz ə ɡɑɹɾiən ə dʒʌstəs ən tʃɹuθ. (tu) ðə neɪm ɡɪvən, boʊθ kəlɛktɪvli ən əz ə ɹæŋk, tə ðə mɛn u hæv kʌm tə ðə blæk taʊɝ, nɪɹ keɪɛmlɪn ɪn ændɝ, ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə lɝn tə tʃænəl. ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ kɑnsəntʃɹeɪts ɑn ðə weɪz ɪn wɪtʃ ðə wʌn paʊɝ kən bi juzd əz ə wɛpən, ən ɪn ənʌðɝ dɪpɑɹtʃɝ fɹəm ðə jusədʒəz ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, wʌns ðeɪ lɝn tə siz seɪɾɪn, ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə paʊɝ, ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹikwaɪɝd tə pɝfɔɹm ɔl tʃɔɹz ən leɪbɝz wɪð ðə paʊɝ. wən nuli ɛnɹoʊld, ə mæn ɪz tɝmd ə soʊlʒɝ; hi wɛɹz ə pleɪn blæk koʊt wɪð ə haɪ kɑlɝ, ɪn ði ændɔɝən fæʃən. biɪŋ ɹeɪz tə dɛɾəkeɪtəd bɹɪŋz ðə ɹaɪt tə wɛɹ ə sɪlvɝ pɪn, kɔl ðə sɔɹd, ɑn ðə kɑlɝ ə hɪz koʊt. pɹəmoʊʃən tə æʃəmən bɹɪŋz ðə ɹaɪt tə wɛɹ ə dʒɹæɡən pɪn, ɪn ɡoʊld ən ɹɛɾ ɪnæməl, ɑn ðə kɑlɝ ɑpəzət ðə sɔɹd. ɔlðoʊ mɛni wɪmən, ɪnkluɾɪŋ waɪvz, fli wən ðeɪ lɝn ðət ðɛɹ mɛn æktʃəli  kən tʃænəl, ə fɛɹ nʌmbɝ ə mɛn ət ðə blæk taʊɝ ɑɹ mɛɹid, ən ðeɪ juz ə vɝʒən ə ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑn tə kɹieɪɾ ə lɪŋk wɪð ðɛɹ waɪvz. ðɪs seɪm bɑnd, ɔltɝd tə kəmpɛl oʊbiɾiəns, hæz ɹisənli bɪn juz tə bɑn kæptʃɝɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ əz wɛl.

Asha'man: (1) In the Old Tongue, "Guardian" or "Guardians," but always a guardian of justice and truth. (2) The name given, both collectively and as a rank, to the men who have come to the Black Tower, near Caemlyn in Andor, in order to learn to channel. Their training concentrates on the ways in which the One Power can be used as a weapon, and in another departure from the usages of the White Tower, once they learn to seize saidin, the male half of the Power, they are required to perform all chores and labors with the Power. When newly enrolled, a man is termed a Soldier; he wears a plain black coat with a high collar, in the Andoran fashion. Being raised to Dedicated brings the right to wear a silver pin, called the Sword, on the collar of his coat. Promotion to Asha'man brings the right to wear a Dragon pin, in gold and red enamel, on the collar opposite the Sword. Although many women, including wives, flee when they learn that their men actually can channel, a fair number of men at the Black Tower are married, and they use a version of the Warder bond to create a link with their wives. This same bond, altered to compel obedience, has recently been used to bond captured Aes Sedai as well.

beɪlwɝ, sɛbæn: fɔɹmɝli peɪdʒɹən naɪlz sɛkɹətɛɹi, ɪn pʌblɪk, ən sikɹɪtli naɪlz spaɪmæstɝ. hi eɪɾəd mɔɹɡeɪsəz ɪskeɪp fɹəm ðə sintʃæn ɪn æmədɔɹ fəɹ ɪz oʊn ɹizənz, ən naʊ ɪz ɛmplɔɪɾ əz sɛkɹətɛɹi tə pɛɹɪn tæʃɪɹ eɪbɑɹə ən feɪl ni bæʃɪɹ teɪbɑɹə.

Balwer, Sebban: Formerly Pedron Niall's secretary, in public, and secretly Niall's spymaster. He aided Morgase's escape from the Seanchan in Amador for his own reasons, and now is employed as secretary to Perrin t'Bashere Aybara and Faile ni Bashere t'Aybara.

blʌd, ðə: tɝm juz baɪ ðə sintʃæn tə dɛzəɡneɪt ðə noʊbɪləɾi. wʌn kən bi ɹeɪz tə ðə blʌɾ əz wɛl əz bɔɹn tə ɪt.

Blood, the: Term used by the Seanchan to designate the nobility. One can be raised to the Blood as well as born to it.

tʃɑ feɪl: (wʌn) ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə fælkənz tælən." (tu) neɪm teɪkən baɪ ðə jʌŋ kɛɹhinɪn ən tɛɹənz, ətɛmptəd fɑloʊɝz ə dʒiɾoʊ, hu hæv swɔɹn fiəlti tə feɪl ni bæʃɪɹ teɪbɑɹə. ɪn sikɹət, ðeɪ ækt əz əɹ pɝsənəl skaʊts ən spaɪz.

Cha Faile: (1) In the Old Tongue, "the Falcon's Talon." (2) Name taken by the young Cairhienin and Tairens, attempted followers of ji'e'toh, who have sworn fealty to Faile ni Bashere t'Aybara. In secret, they act as her personal scouts and spies.

kəmpænjənz, ðə: ði ɪlit mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən ʌv ɪljən, kɝənli kəmændəd baɪ fɝs kæptən dɛmiɾɝ mɑɹkəlɪn. ðə kəmpænjənz pɹəvaɪɾ ə bɑɾiɡɑɹd fəɹ ðə kɪŋ ʌv ɪljən ən ɡɑɹd ki pɔɪns ɝaʊn ðə neɪʃən. ədɪʃənəli, ðə kəmpænjənz əv tʃɹədɪʃənəli bɪn juzd ɪn bæɾəl tə əsɔl ði ɛnəmiz stʃɹɔŋɡəs pəzɪʃənz, tə ɪksplɔɪt wiknəsəz, ænd, ɪf nɛsəsɛɹi, tə kʌvɝ ðə ɹitʃɹiɾ ə ðə kɪŋ. ənlaɪk moʊst ʌðɝ sətʃ ɪlit fɔɹmeɪʃənz, fɔɹənɝz (ɛksɛptɪŋ tɛɹənz, ɔltɑɹənz ən mʊɹændiənz) ɑɹ nɑɾ oʊnli wɛlkəm, ðeɪ kən ɹaɪz ivən tə ðə haɪəst ɹæŋk, əz kən kɑmənɝz, wɪtʃ ɔlsoʊ ɪz ənjuʒəwəl. ðə junəfɔɹm ə ðə kəmpænjənz kənsɪsts ʌv ə ɡɹin koʊt, ə bɹɛstpleɪt wɝkt wɪð ðə naɪn biz ʌv ɪljən, ən ə kɑnɪkəl hɛlmət wɪð ə feɪsɡɑɹɾ ə stil bɑɹz. ðə fɝs kæptən wɛɹz fɔɹ ɹɪŋz ʌv ɡoʊldən bɹeɪɾ ɑn ðə kʌfs ə hɪz koʊt, ən θɹi θɪn ɡoʊldən plumz ɑn ɪz hɛlmət. ðə sɛkən kæptən wɛɹz θɹi ɹɪŋz ʌv ɡoʊldən bɹeɪɾ ɑn itʃ kʌf, ən θɹi ɡoʊldən plumz tɪpt wɪð ɡɹin. lutɛnəns wɛɹ tu jɛloʊ ɹɪŋz ɑn ðɛɹ kʌfs, ən tu θɪn ɡɹin plumz, ʌndɝ-lutɛnəns wʌn jɛloʊ ɹɪŋ ən ə sɪŋɡəl ɡɹin plum. bænɝmɪn ɑɹ dɛzɪɡneɪɾɪd baɪ tu bɹoʊkən ɹɪŋz ə jɛloʊ ɑn ðə kʌfs ən ə sɪŋɡəl jɛloʊ plum, skwədmən baɪ ə sɪŋɡəl bɹoʊkən ɹɪŋ ə jɛloʊ.

Companions, the: The elite military formation of Illian, currently commanded by First Captain Demetre Marcolin. The Companions provide a bodyguard for the King of Illian and guard key points around the nation. Additionally, the Companions have traditionally been used in battle to assault the enemy's strongest positions, to exploit weaknesses, and, if necessary, to cover the retreat of the King. Unlike most other such elite formations, foreigners (excepting Tairens, Altarans and Murandians) are not only welcome, they can rise even to the highest rank, as can commoners, which also is unusual. The uniform of the Companions consists of a green coat, a breastplate worked with the Nine Bees of Illian, and a conical helmet with a faceguard of steel bars. The First Captain wears four rings of golden braid on the cuffs of his coat, and three thin golden plumes on his helmet. The Second Captain wears three rings of golden braid on each cuff, and three golden plumes tipped with green. Lieutenants wear two yellow rings on their cuffs, and two thin green plumes, under-lieutenants one yellow ring and a single green plume. Bannermen are designated by two broken rings of yellow on the cuffs and a single yellow plume, squadmen by a single broken ring of yellow.

kənsɑlədeɪʃən, ðə: wən ði ɑɹmiz sɛn baɪ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz sʌn luthɛɹ lændəɾ ɪn sintʃæn, ðeɪ dɪskʌvɝɾ ə ʃɪftɪŋ kwɪlt ə neɪʃənz ɔfən ət wɔɹ wɪð wʌn ənʌðɝ, wɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔfən ɹeɪnd. wɪθaʊɾ ɛni ɪkwɪvələn ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝk fəɹ ðɛɹ oʊn ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl paʊɝ, juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ. fɔɹmɪŋ smɔl ɡɹups, ðeɪ skimd əɡɛnst wʌn ənʌðɝ kɑnstənli. ɪn lɑɹdʒ pɑɹɾ ɪt wɑz ðɪs kɑnstən skimɪŋ fəɹ pɝsənəl ædvæntɪdʒ ən ðə ɹɪzʌltɪŋ wɔɹz əmʌŋ ðə mɪɹiəd neɪʃənz ðəɾ əlaʊd ði ɑɹmiz fɹəm ist ə ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən tə bɪɡɪn ðə kɑŋkwɛst ʌv ən ɪntaɪɝ kɑntənənt, ən fəɹ ðɛɹ dɪsɛndəns tə kəmpliɾ ɪt. ðɪs kɑŋkwɛst, dʊɹɪŋ wɪtʃ ðə dɪsɛndəns ə ði ɝɪdʒənəl ɑɹmiz bɪkeɪm sintʃæn əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ kɑŋkɝd sintʃæn, tʊk mɔɹ ðən naɪn hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz ən ɪz kɔl ðə kənsɑlədeɪʃən.

Consolidation, the: When the armies sent by Artur Hawkwing under his son Luthair landed in Seanchan, they discovered a shifting quilt of nations often at war with one another, where Aes Sedai often reigned. Without any equivalent of the White Tower, Aes Sedai worked for their own individual power, using the Power. Forming small groups, they schemed against one another constantly. In large part it was this constant scheming for personal advantage and the resulting wars among the myriad nations that allowed the armies from east of the Aryth Ocean to begin the conquest of an entire continent, and for their descendants to complete it. This conquest, during which the descendants of the original armies became Seanchan as much as they conquered Seanchan, took more than nine hundred years and is called the Consolidation.

kɔɝɪn: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə ɹɪtɝn." ðə neɪm ɡɪvən baɪ ðə sintʃæn boʊθ tə ðə fliɾ ə θaʊzənz ə ʃɪps ən tə ðə hʌnʒɹədz ə θaʊzənz ə soʊlʒɝz, kɹæfsmən ən ʌðɝz kæɹid baɪ ðoʊz ʃɪps, hu wɪl kʌm bɪhaɪn ðə fɔɹʌnɝz tə ɹikleɪm ðə lænz stoʊlən fɹəm ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz dɪsɛndəns. si ɔlsoʊ fɔɹʌnɝz.

Corenne: In the Old Tongue, "the Return." The name given by the Seanchan both to the fleet of thousands of ships and to the hundreds of thousands of soldiers, craftsmen and others carried by those ships, who will come behind the Forerunners to reclaim the lands stolen from Artur Hawkwing's descendants. See also Forerunners.

dɔɾɝz ə saɪləns, ðə: dʊɹɪŋ ðə hɪstɝi ʌv ðə waɪt taʊɝ (oʊvɝ θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz), vɛɹiəs wɪmən u hæv bɪn pʊɾ aʊɾ əv bɪn ənwɪlɪŋ tə æksɛp ðɛɹ feɪts ən əv tʃɹaɪd tə bæn təɡɛðɝ. sətʃ ɡɹups - moʊst ə ðɛm baɪ fɑɹ, ət list - hæv bɪn dɪspɝs baɪ ðə waɪt taʊɝ əz sun əz faʊn ən pʌnɪʃt səvɪɹli ən pʌblɪkli tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðət ðə lɛsən ɪz kæɹid tə ɛvɹiwʌn. ðə læst ɡɹup tə bi dɪspɝs kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz ðə dɔɾɝz ə saɪləns (sɛvənnaɪnfɔɹsɛvənnaɪneɪt ni). ðə dɔɾɝz kənsɪstəɾ ə tu æksɛptɪɾ u hæd bɪn pʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ ən twɛnti-θɹi wɪmən ðeɪ hæd ɡæðɝɾ ən tʃɹeɪnd. ɔl wɝ kæɹid bæk tə tɑɹ vəlɑn ən pʌnɪʃt, ən ðə twɛnti-θɹi wɝ ɛnɹoʊld ɪn ðə nɑvəs bʊk. oʊnli wʌn ə ðoʊz mænədʒ tə ɹitʃ ðə ʃɔl. si ɔlsoʊ kɪn, ðə.

Daughters of Silence, the: During the history of the White Tower (over three thousand years), various women who have been put out have been unwilling to accept their fates and have tried to band together. Such groups - most of them by far, at least - have been dispersed by the White Tower as soon as found and punished severely and publicly to make sure that the lesson is carried to everyone. The last group to be dispersed called themselves the Daughters of Silence (794798 NE). The Daughters consisted of two Accepted who had been put out of the Tower and twenty-three women they had gathered and trained. All were carried back to Tar Valon and punished, and the twenty-three were enrolled in the novice book. Only one of those managed to reach the shawl. See also Kin, the.

dækoʊvæl: (wʌn) ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "wʌn u ɪz oʊnd," əɹ "pɝsən u ɪz pɹɑpɝɾi." (tu) əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, ðə tɝm ɔfən juzd, əlɔŋ wɪð pɹɑpɝɾi, fəɹ sleɪvz. sleɪvɝi hæz ə lɔŋ ən ənjuʒəwəl hɪstɝi əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, wɪð sleɪvz hævɪŋ ði əbɪləɾi tə ɹaɪz tə pəzɪʃənz ʌv ɡɹeɪt paʊɝ ən oʊpən əθɔɹəɾi, ɪnkluɾɪŋ oʊvɝ ðoʊz u ɑɹ fɹi. si ɔlsoʊ sɔɪhɪn.

da'covale: (1) In the Old Tongue, "one who is owned," or "person who is property." (2) Among the Seanchan, the term often used, along with property, for slaves. Slavery has a long and unusual history among the Seanchan, with slaves having the ability to rise to positions of great power and open authority, including over those who are free. See also so'jhin.

dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz, ðə: ði ɪlit mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən ə ðə sintʃæn ɛmpaɪɝ, ɪnkluɾɪŋ boʊθ hjumənz ən oʊɡiɝ. ðə hjumən mɛmbɝz ə ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹɾ ɑɹ ɔl dækoʊvæl, bɔɹn əz pɹɑpɝɾi ən tʃoʊzən waɪl jʌŋ tə sɝv ði ɛmpɹɛs, huz pɝsənəl pɹɑpɝɾi ðeɪ ɑɹ. fənæɾɪkəli lɔɪəl ən fɪɹsli pɹaʊd, ðeɪ ɔfən dɪspleɪ ðə ɹeɪvənz tætuɾ ɑn ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ðə mɑɹk ʌv ə dækoʊvæl ə ði ɛmpɹɛs. ðə hɛlməts ən ɑɹmɝ ɑɹ lækɝɾ ɪn dɑɹk ɡɹin ən blʌd-ɹɛd, ðɛɹ ʃilz ɑɹ lækɝd blæk, ən ðɛɹ spɪɹz ən sɔɹdz kæɹi blæk tæsəlz. si ɔlsoʊ dækoʊvæl.

Deathwatch Guards, the: The elite military formation of the Seanchan Empire, including both humans and Ogier. The human members of the Deathwatch Guard are all da'covale, born as property and chosen while young to serve the Empress, whose personal property they are. Fanatically loyal and fiercely proud, they often display the ravens tattooed on their shoulders, the mark of a da'covale of the Empress. The helmets and armor are lacquered in dark green and blood-red, their shields are lacquered black, and their spears and swords carry black tassels. See also da'covale.

dɪfɛndɝz ə ðə stoʊn, ðə: ði ɪlit mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən ə tɛɹ. ðə kɝən kæptən ə ðə stoʊn (kəmændɝ ə ðə dɪfɛndɝz) ɪz ɹɑdʒɹəvɑɹ taɪhɛɹə. oʊnli tɛɹənz ɑɹ æksɛptɪɾ ɪndə ðə dɪfɛndɝz, ən ɔfəsɝz ɑɹ juʒəwəli ʌv noʊbəl bɝθ, ðoʊ ɔfən fɹəm maɪnɝ haʊsəz əɹ maɪnɝ bɹæntʃəz ə stʃɹɔŋ haʊzɪz. ðə dɪfɛndɝz ɑɹ tæsk tə hoʊl ðə ɡɹeɪt fɔɹtʃɹəs kɔl ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ, ɪn ðə sɪɾi ʌv tiɹ, tə dɪfɛn ðə sɪɾi, ən tə pɹəvaɪd pəlis sɝvəsəz ɪn pleɪs ʌv ɛni sɪɾi wɑtʃ əɹ ðə laɪk. ɪksɛpt ɪn taɪmz ʌv wɔɹ, ðɛɹ duɾiz sɛldəm teɪk əm fɑɹ fɹəm ðə sɪɾi. ðɛn, əz wɪð ʌðɝ ɪlit fɔɹmeɪʃənz, ðeɪ ɑɹ ðə kɔɹ ɝaʊnd wɪtʃ ði ɑɹmi ɪz fɔɹmd. ðə junəfɔɹm ə ðə dɪfɛndɝz kənsɪsts ʌv ə blæk koʊt wɪð pæɾəd slivz stʃɹaɪp blæk-ænd-ɡoʊld wɪð blæk kʌfs, ə bɝnɪʃt bɹɛstpleɪt, ən ə ɹɪm hɛlmət wɪð ə feɪsɡɑɹɾ ə stil bɑɹz. ðə kæptən ə ðə stoʊn wɛɹz θɹi ʃɔɹt waɪt plumz ɑn ɪz hɛlmət, ən ɑn ðə kʌfs ə hɪz koʊt θɹi ɪntɝtwaɪnd ɡoʊldən bɹeɪdz ɑn ə waɪt bænd. kæptənz wɛɹ tu waɪt plumz ən ə sɪŋɡəl laɪn ʌv ɡoʊldən bɹeɪɾ ɑn waɪt kʌfs, lutɛnəns wʌn waɪt plum ən ə sɪŋɡəl laɪn ə blæk bɹeɪɾ ɑn waɪt kʌfs ən ʌndɝ-lutɛnəns wʌn ʃɔɹt blæk plum ən pleɪn waɪt kʌfs. bænɝmɪn əv ɡoʊld-kʌlɝd kʌfs ɑn ðɛɹ koʊts, ən skwədmən əv kʌfs stʃɹaɪp blæk-ænd-ɡoʊld.

Defenders of the Stone, the: The elite military formation of Tear. The current Captain of the Stone (commander of the Defenders) is Rodrivar Tihera. Only Tairens are accepted into the Defenders, and officers are usually of noble birth, though often from minor Houses or minor branches of strong Houses. The Defenders are tasked to hold the great fortress called the Stone of Tear, in the city of Tear, to defend the city, and to provide police services in place of any City Watch or the like. Except in times of war, their duties seldom take them far from the city. Then, as with other elite formations, they are the core around which the army is formed. The uniform of the Defenders consists of a black coat with padded sleeves striped black-and-gold with black cuffs, a burnished breastplate, and a rimmed helmet with a faceguard of steel bars. The Captain of the Stone wears three short white plumes on his helmet, and on the cuffs of his coat three intertwined golden braids on a white band. Captains wear two white plumes and a single line of golden braid on white cuffs, lieutenants one white plume and a single line of black braid on white cuffs and under-lieutenants one short black plume and plain white cuffs. Bannermen have gold-colored cuffs on their coats, and squadmen have cuffs striped black-and-gold.

dɛlvɪŋ: (wʌn) ði əbɪləɾi tə juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ tə daɪəɡnoʊs fɪzɪkəl kəndɪʃən ən ɪlnəs. (tu) ði əbɪləɾi tə faɪn dəpɑzɪts ə mɛɾəl ɔɹz wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ðət ðɪs əz lɔŋ bɪn ə lɔst əbɪləɾi əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪ əkaʊn fəɹ ðə neɪm bɪkʌmɪŋ ətætʃt tə ənʌðɝ əbɪləɾi.

Delving: (1) The ability to use the One Power to diagnose physical condition and illness. (2) The ability to find deposits of metal ores with the One Power. That this has long been a lost ability among Aes Sedai may account for the name becoming attached to another ability.

dɝmɝæt-: (wʌn) ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "mæstɝ hænlɝ." (tu) əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, ðə sʌfɪks əplaɪd tə ɪndəkeɪɾ ə sinjɝ ən haɪli skɪl hænlɝ ʌv wʌn ə ði ɛɡzɑɾɪks, wʌn u tʃɹeɪnz ʌðɝz, əz ɪn dɝmɝətʃɹeɪkən. dɝmɝæt kən əv ə fɛɹli haɪ soʊʃəl stæɾəs, ðə haɪəst ʌv ɔl hɛl baɪ dɝsʌldəm, ðə tʃɹeɪnɝz ə sʌldəm, hu ɹæŋk wɪð fɛɹli haɪ mɪlətɛɹi ɔfəsɝz. si ɔlsoʊ mɔɝæt.

der'morat-: (1) In the Old Tongue, "master handler." (2) Among the Seanchan, the suffix applied to indicate a senior and highly skilled handler of one of the exotics, one who trains others, as in der'morat'raken. Der'morat can have a fairly high social status, the highest of all held by der'sul'dam, the trainers of sul'dam, who rank with fairly high military officers. See also morat.

feɪn, pdən: fɔɹmɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnd, naʊ mɔɹ ən wɝs ðən ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, ən ən ɛnəmi ʌv ðə fɔɹseɪkən əz mʌtʃ əz hiz ə ɹænd ælθɹ, hum i heɪts wɪð ə pæʃən. læst sin juzɪŋ ðə neɪm dʒɛɹɑl mɔɹɾɪθ, ædvaɪzɪŋ lɔɹd tɔɹæm ɹieɪɾən ɪn ɪz ɹɪbɛljən əɡɛns ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪn kɛɹhin.

Fain, Padan: Former Darkfriend, now more and worse than a Darkfriend, and an enemy of the Forsaken as much as he is of Rand al'Thor, whom he hates with a passion. Last seen using the name Jeraal Mordeth, advising Lord Toram Riatin in his rebellion against the Dragon Reborn in Cairhien.

fɪsts ə hɛvən, ðə: laɪtli ɑɹmd ən laɪtli ɑɹmɝd sintʃæn ɪnfəntʃɹi kæɹiɾ ɪndə bæɾəl ɑn ðə bæks ə ðə flaɪɪŋ kɹitʃɝz kɔl tɔɹeɪkən. ɔl ɑɹ smɔl mɛn, əɹ wɪmən, lɑɹdʒli kəz ə lɪməts əz tə haʊ mʌtʃ weɪɾ ə tɔɹeɪkən kən kæɹi fəɹ ɛni dɪstəns. kənsɪɾɝd tə bi əmʌŋ ðə tʌfəst soʊlʒɝz, ðeɪ ɑɹ juz pɹaɪmɛɹəli fəɹ ɹeɪdz, sɝpɹaɪz əsɔls ɑn pəzɪʃənz əɾ ən ɛnəmiz ɹɪɹ, ən wɛɹ spiɾ ɪn ɡɛɾɪŋ soʊlʒɝz ɪndə pleɪs ɪz ə ði ɛsəns.

Fists of Heaven, the: Lightly armed and lightly armored Seanchan infantry carried into battle on the backs of the flying creatures called to'raken. All are small men, or women, largely because of limits as to how much weight a to'raken can carry for any distance. Considered to be among the toughest soldiers, they are used primarily for raids, surprise assaults on positions at an enemy's rear, and where speed in getting soldiers into place is of the essence.

fɔɹʌnɝz, ðə: si heɪlin.

Forerunners, the: See Hailene.

fɔɹseɪkən, ðə: ðə neɪm ɡɪvən tə θɝtin paʊɝfəl ɛɛs sədaɪ, mɛn ən wɪmən boʊθ, hu wɛn oʊvɝ tə ðə ʃædoʊ dʊɹɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ən wɝ tʃɹæpt ɪn ðə silɪŋ ə ðə bɔɹ ɪndə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən. waɪl ɪts lɔŋ bɪn bɪliv ðət ðeɪ əloʊn əbændən ðə laɪt dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ, ɪn fækt ʌðɝz dɪɾ əz wɛl; ðiz θɝtin wɝ oʊnli ðə haɪəst ɹæŋkɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛm. ðə fɔɹseɪkən (hu kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz ðə tʃoʊzən) ɑɹ sʌmwʌt ɹədust ɪn nʌmbɝ sɪns ðɛɹ əweɪkənɪŋ ɪn ðə pɹɛzən deɪ. ðə noʊn sɝvaɪvɝz ɑɹ dɪmɑndɝd, sɛmɝhɪdʒ, ɡɹeɪndəl, mɛsænə, mɑɡiɾin, ən tu hu wɝ ɹiɪnkɑɹneɪɾɪd ɪn nu bɑɾiz ən ɡɪvən nu neɪmz, oʊsɑnɡɝ ən ɝæŋɡɝ. ɹisənli, ə mæn kɔlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf mɔɹaɪɾɪn əz əpɪɹd, ən meɪ bi jɛɾ ənʌðɝ ə ðə dɛd fɔɹseɪkən bɹɔt bæk fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪv baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ðə seɪm pɑsəbɪləɾi meɪ ɪɡzɪst ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə wʊmən kɔlɪŋ hɝsɛlf sɪndeɪn, bʌt sɪns ɝæŋɡɝ wɑz ə mæn bɹɔt bæk əz ə wʊmən, spɛkjəleɪʃən əz tə ði aɪdɛntɪɾiz ə mɔɹaɪɾɪn ən sɪndeɪn meɪ pɹuv fjuɾəl əntɪl mɔɹ ɪz lɝnd.

Forsaken, the: The name given to thirteen powerful Aes Sedai, men and women both, who went over to the Shadow during the Age of Legends and were trapped in the sealing of the Bore into the Dark One's prison. While it has long been believed that they alone abandoned the Light during the War of the Shadow, in fact others did as well; these thirteen were only the highest ranking among them. The Forsaken (who call themselves the Chosen) are somewhat reduced in number since their awakening in the present day. The known survivors are Demandred, Semirhage, Graendal, Mesaana, Moghedien, and two who were reincarnated in new bodies and given new names, Osan'gar and Aran'gar. Recently, a man calling himself Moridin has appeared, and may be yet another of the dead Forsaken brought back from the grave by the Dark One. The same possibility may exist regarding the woman calling herself Cyndane, but since Aran'gar was a man brought back as a woman, speculation as to the identities of Moridin and Cyndane may prove futile until more is learned.

heɪlin: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "fɔɹʌnɝz," əɹ "ðoʊz u kʌm bɪfɔɹ." ðə tɝm əplaɪd baɪ ðə sintʃæn tə ðə mæsɪv ɛkspədɪʃənɛɹi fɔɹs sɛn əkɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən tə skaʊɾ aʊt ðə lænz wɛɹ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ wʌns ɹuld. naʊ ʌndɝ ðə kəmæn ə ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ, ɪts nʌmbɝz swoʊlən baɪ ɹəkɹuts fɹəm kɑŋkɝd lænz, ðə heɪlin əz ɡɔn fɑɹ bɪɑn ɪts ɝɪdʒənəl ɡoʊlz.

Hailene: In the Old Tongue, "Forerunners," or "Those Who Come Before." The term applied by the Seanchan to the massive expeditionary force sent across the Aryth Ocean to scout out the lands where Artur Hawkwing once ruled. Now under the command of the High Lady Suroth, its numbers swollen by recruits from conquered lands, the Hailene has gone far beyond its original goals.

hænlən, dɑvd: eɪ dɑɹkfɹɛnd, fɔɹmɝli kəmændɝ ə ðə waɪt laɪənz ɪn sɝvəs tə ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɹɑvɪn waɪl i hɛl keɪɛmlɪn juzɪŋ ðə neɪm lɔɹd ɡeɪbɹəl. fɹəm ðɛɹ, hænlən tʊk ðə waɪt laɪənz tə kɛɹhin ʌndɝ ɔɹɾɝz tə fɝðɝ ðə ɹɪbɛljən əɡɛns ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ðə waɪt laɪənz wɝ dɪstʃɹɔɪd baɪ ə "bʌbəl ʌv ivəl," ən hænlən əz bɪn ɔɹɾɝd bæk tə keɪɛmlɪn fəɹ pɝpəsəz əz jɛɾ ənnoʊn.

Hanlon, Daved: A Darkfriend, formerly commander of the White Lions in service to the Forsaken Rahvin while he held Caemlyn using the name Lord Gaebril. From there, Hanlon took the White Lions to Cairhien under orders to further the rebellion against the Dragon Reborn. The White Lions were destroyed by a "bubble of evil," and Hanlon has been ordered back to Caemlyn for purposes as yet unknown.

ɪʃɑɹə: ðə fɝs kwin ʌv ændɝ (sɝkə fi naɪnnaɪnfɔɹwʌnzɪɹoʊɾuzɪɹoʊ). ət ðə dɛθ ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ, ɪʃɑɹə kənvɪnst əɹ hʌzbənd, wʌn ə hɔkwɪŋz fɔɹmoʊs dʒɛnɝəlz, tə ɹeɪz ðə sidʒ ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ən əkʌmpəni hɝ tə keɪɛmlɪn wɪð əz mɛni soʊlʒɝz əz i kəd bɹeɪk əweɪ fɹəm ði ɑɹmi. wɛɹ ʌðɝz tʃɹaɪd tə siz ðə hoʊl ə hɔkwɪŋz ɛmpaɪɝ ən feɪld, ɪʃɑɹə tʊk ə fɝm hoʊld ɑn ə smɔl pɑɹɾ ən səksiɾəd. tədeɪ, nɪɹli ɛvɹi noʊbəl haʊs ɪn ændɝ kənteɪnz səm ʌv ɪʃɑɹəz blʌd, ən ðə ɹaɪt tə kleɪm ðə laɪən θɹoʊn dɪpɛnz boʊθ ɑn dɝɛk dɪsɛn fɹəm əɹ ən ɑn ðə nʌmbɝ ə laɪnz ə kənɛkʃən tə hɝ ðət kən bi ɪstæblɪʃt.

Ishara: The first Queen of Andor (circa FY 9941020). At the death of Artur Hawkwing, Ishara convinced her husband, one of Hawkwing's foremost generals, to raise the siege of Tar Valon and accompany her to Caemlyn with as many soldiers as he could break away from the army. Where others tried to seize the whole of Hawkwing's empire and failed, Ishara took a firm hold on a small part and succeeded. Today, nearly every noble House in Andor contains some of Ishara's blood, and the right to claim the Lion Throne depends both on direct descent from her and on the number of lines of connection to her that can be established.

kɪn, ðə: ivən dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, mɔɹ ðən tu θaʊzən jɪɹz əɡoʊ (sɝkə wʌnzɪɹoʊzɪɹoʊzɪɹoʊwʌnθɹifaɪvzɪɹoʊ æb), ðə waɪt taʊɝ kəntɪnjud tə meɪnteɪn ɪts stændɝdz, pʊɾɪŋ aʊt wɪmən u feɪl tə mɛʒɝ ʌp. wʌn ɡɹup ə ðiz wɪmən, fɪɹɪŋ tə ɹɪtɝn hoʊm ɪn ðə mɪdst ə ðə wɔɹz, flɛd tə bɑɹɑʃtə (nɪɹ ðə pɹɛzənt-deɪ saɪɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ), əz fɑɹ fɹəm ðə faɪɾɪŋ əz wɑz pɑsəbəl tə ɡoʊ ət ðət taɪm. kɔlɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ðə kɪn, ən kɪnswɪmən, ðeɪ kɛpt ɪn haɪɾɪŋ ən ɔfɝɾ ə seɪf heɪvən fəɹ ʌðɝz u hæd bɪn pʊɾ aʊt. ɪn taɪm, ðɛɹ əpɹoʊtʃɪz tə wɪmən toʊl tə liv ðə taʊɝ lɛd tə kɑntæks wɪð ɹʌnəweɪz, ən waɪl ði ɪɡzækt ɹizənz meɪ nɛvɝ bi noʊn, ðə kɪn bɪɡæn tə æksɛpt ɹʌnəweɪz, əz wɛl. ðeɪ meɪd ɡɹeɪɾ ɛfɝts tə kip ðiz ɡɝlz fɹəm lɝnɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə kɪn əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd nɑt swup daʊn ən ɹiteɪk ðɛm. æftɝ ɔl, ɛvɹiwʌn nu ðət ɹʌnəweɪz wɝ ɔlweɪz kɑt sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ən ðə kɪn nu ðəɾ ənlɛs ðeɪ hɛl ðɛmsɛlvz sikɹət, ðeɪ ðɛmsɛlvz wəd bi pʌnɪʃt səvɪɹli.

Kin, the: Even during the Trolloc Wars, more than two thousand years ago (circa 10001350 AB), the White Tower continued to maintain its standards, putting out women who failed to measure up. One group of these women, fearing to return home in the midst of the wars, fled to Barashta (near the present-day site of Ebou Dar), as far from the fighting as was possible to go at that time. Calling themselves the Kin, and Kinswomen, they kept in hiding and offered a safe haven for others who had been put out. In time, their approaches to women told to leave the Tower led to contacts with runaways, and while the exact reasons may never be known, the Kin began to accept runaways, as well. They made great efforts to keep these girls from learning anything about the Kin until they were sure that Aes Sedai would not swoop down and retake them. After all, everyone knew that runaways were always caught sooner or later, and the Kin knew that unless they held themselves secret, they themselves would be punished severely.

ənnoʊn tə ðə kɪn, ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə taʊɝ wɝ əwɛɹ ə ðɛɹ ɛɡzɪstəns ɔlmoʊs fɹəm ðə vɛɹi fɝst, bʌt pɹɑsəkjuʃən ə ðə wɔɹz lɛf noʊ taɪm fəɹ dilɪŋ wɪð ðɛm. baɪ ði ɛn ə ðə wɔɹz, ðə taʊɝ ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɪt maɪt nɑt bi ɪn ðɛɹ bɛst ɪntʃɹəsts tə snʌf aʊt ðə kɪn. pɹaɪɝ tə ðət taɪm, ə mədʒɔɹəɾi ʌv ɹʌnəweɪz æktʃəli  hæd mænədʒ tə ɪskeɪp, wʌtɛvɝ ðə taʊɝz pɹɑpəɡændə, bʌt wʌns ðə kɪn bɪɡæn hɛlpɪŋ ðɛm, ðə taʊɝ nu ɪɡzækli wɛɹ ɛni ɹʌnəweɪ wɑz hɛɾɪŋ, ən ðeɪ bɪɡæn ɹəteɪkɪŋ naɪn aʊɾ ə tɛn. sɪns kɪnswɪmən muvd ɪn ən aʊɾ ə bɑɹɑʃtə (æn leɪɾɝ ɛbu dɑɹ) ɪn ən ɛfɝt tə haɪd ðɛɹ ɛɡzɪstəns ən ðɛɹ nʌmbɝz, nɛvɝ steɪɪŋ mɔɹ ðən tɛn jɪɹz lɛst sʌmwʌn noʊɾəs ðət ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ eɪdʒ əɾ ə nɔɹməl spid, ðə taʊɝ bɪliv ðeɪ wɝ fju, ən ðeɪ sɝɾənli wɝ kipɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz loʊ. ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə juz ðə kɪn əz ə tʃɹæp fəɹ ɹʌnəweɪz, ðə taʊɝ dɪsaɪɾɪd tə liv əm əloʊn, ənlaɪk ɛni ʌðɝ sɪməlɝ ɡɹup ɪn hɪstɝi, ən tə kip ðə vɛɹi ɛɡzɪstəns ə ðə kɪn ə sikɹət noʊn oʊnli tə fʊl ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Unknown to the Kin, Aes Sedai in the Tower were aware of their existence almost from the very first, but prosecution of the wars left no time for dealing with them. By the end of the wars, the Tower realized that it might not be in their best interests to snuff out the Kin. Prior to that time, a majority of runaways actually had managed to escape, whatever the Tower's propaganda, but once the Kin began helping them, the Tower knew exactly where any runaway was heading, and they began retaking nine out of ten. Since Kinswomen moved in and out of Barashta (and later Ebou Dar) in an effort to hide their existence and their numbers, never staying more than ten years lest someone notice that they did not age at a normal speed, the Tower believed they were few, and they certainly were keeping themselves low. In order to use the Kin as a trap for runaways, the Tower decided to leave them alone, unlike any other similar group in history, and to keep the very existence of the Kin a secret known only to full Aes Sedai.

ðə kɪn də nɑɾ əv lɔz, bʌt ɹæðɝ ɹulz beɪst ɪn pɑɹɾ ɑn ðə ɹulz fəɹ nɑvəsɪz ən æksɛptɪɾ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən ɪn pɑɹɾ ɑn ðə nəsɛsəɾi ʌv meɪnteɪnɪŋ sikɹəsi. əz maɪt bi ɪkspɛktəd ɡɪvən ði ɔɹədʒɪnz ə ðə kɪn, ðeɪ meɪnteɪn ðɛɹ ɹulz vɛɹi fɝmli ɑn ɔl ə ðɛɹ mɛmbɝz.

The Kin do not have laws, but rather rules based in part on the rules for novices and Accepted in the White Tower, and in part on the necessity of maintaining secrecy. As might be expected given the origins of the Kin, they maintain their rules very firmly on all of their members.

ɹisən oʊpən kɑntæks bɪtwin ɛɛs sədaɪ ən kɪnswɪmən, waɪl noʊn oʊnli tə ə hændfʊl ə sɪstɝz, hæv pɹədust ə nʌmbɝ ə ʃɑks, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðə fæks ðət ðəɹ ɑɹ twaɪs əz mɛni kɪnswɪmən əz ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðət səm ɑɹ mɔɹ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ hæz lɪv sɪns bɪfɔɹ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz. ði ɪfɛkt ə ðiz ɹɛvəleɪʃənz, boʊθ ɑn ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ɑn kɪnswɪmən, ɪz əz jɛɾ ə mæɾɝ fəɹ spɛkjəleɪʃən. si ɔlsoʊ dɔɾɝz ə saɪləns, ðə; nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl, ðə.

Recent open contacts between Aes Sedai and Kinswomen, while known only to a handful of sisters, have produced a number of shocks, including the facts that there are twice as many Kinswomen as Aes Sedai and that some are more than a hundred years older than any Aes Sedai has lived since before the Trolloc Wars. The effect of these revelations, both on Aes Sedai and on Kinswomen, is as yet a matter for speculation. See also Daughters of Silence, the; Knitting Circle, the.

nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl, ðə: ðə liɾɝz ə ðə kɪn. sɪns noʊ mɛmbɝ ə ðə kɪn əz ɛvɝ noʊn haʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɝeɪnʒ ðɛɹ oʊn haɪɝɑɹki - nɑlədʒ pæst ɑn oʊnli wən ən æksɛptɪɾ əz pæst əɹ tɛs fəɹ ðə ʃɔl - ðeɪ pʊt noʊ stɔɹ ɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ðə paʊɝ bʌt ɡɪv ɡɹeɪt weɪt tə eɪdʒ, wɪð ði oʊldɝ wʊmən ɔlweɪz stændɪŋ əbʌv ðə jʌŋɡɝ. ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl (ə taɪɾəl tʃoʊzən, laɪk ðə kɪn, kəz ɪts ɪnɑkjuəs) ðʌs kənsɪsts ə ðə θɝtin oʊldəs kɪnswɪmən ɹɛzəɾənt ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, wɪð ði oʊldəst ɡɪvən ðə taɪɾəl ʌv ɛldəst. baɪ ðə ɹulz, ɔl wɪl əv tə stɛp daʊn wən ɪts taɪm fəɹ əm tə muv ɑn, bʌt soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹɛzəɾənt ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ðeɪv səpɹim əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ ðə kɪn, tə ə dɪɡɹi ðəɾ ɛni æmɪɝlɪn sit wəɾ ɛnvi. si ɔlsoʊ kɪn, ðə.

Knitting Circle, the: The leaders of the Kin. Since no member of the Kin has ever known how Aes Sedai arrange their own hierarchy - knowledge passed on only when an Accepted has passed her test for the shawl - they put no store in strength in the Power but give great weight to age, with the older woman always standing above the younger. The Knitting Circle (a title chosen, like the Kin, because it is innocuous) thus consists of the thirteen oldest Kinswomen resident in Ebou Dar, with the oldest given the title of Eldest. By the rules, all will have to step down when it is time for them to move on, but so long as they are resident in Ebou Dar, they have supreme authority over the Kin, to a degree that any Amyrlin Seat would envy. See also Kin, the.

læns-kæptən: ɪn moʊs lænz, noʊbəlwɪmən də nɑt pɝsənəli lɛd ðɛɹ ɑɹmmɪn ɪndə bæɾəl ʌndɝ nɔɹməl sɝkəmstænsəz. ɪnstɛd, ðeɪ haɪɝ ə pɹəfɛʃənəl soʊlʒɝ, ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz ə kɑmənɝ, hu ɪz ɹispɑnsəbəl boʊθ fəɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ən liɾɪŋ ðɛɹ ɑɹmmɪn. dɪpɛndɪŋ ɑn ðə lænd, ðɪs mæn kən bi kɔld ə læns-kæptən, sɔɹd-kæptən, mæstɝ ə ðə hɔɹs, əɹ mæstɝ ə ðə lænsɪz. ɹumɝz ə kloʊsɝ ɹileɪʃənʃɪps ðən leɪɾi ən sɝvən ɔfən spɹɪŋ ʌp, pɝhæps ɪnɛvəɾəbli. səmtaɪmz ðeɪ ɑɹ tʃɹu.

Lance-Captain: In most lands, noblewomen do not personally lead their armsmen into battle under normal circumstances. Instead, they hire a professional soldier, almost always a commoner, who is responsible both for training and leading their armsmen. Depending on the land, this man can be called a Lance-Captain, Sword-Captain, Master of the Horse, or Master of the Lances. Rumors of closer relationships than Lady and servant often spring up, perhaps inevitably. Sometimes they are true.

lidʒən ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, ðə: ə lɑɹdʒ mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən, ɔl ɪnfəntʃɹi, ɡɪvɪŋ əlidʒəns tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, tʃɹeɪn baɪ dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ əlɔŋ laɪnz wɝkt aʊt baɪ hɪmsɛlf ən mæt kɔθən, laɪnz wɪtʃ dɪpɑɹt ʃɑɹpli fɹəm ðə juʒəwəl ɛmplɔɪmən ə fʊt. waɪl mɛni mɛn sɪmpli wɔk ɪn tə vɑləntɪɹ, lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝz ə ðə lidʒən ɑɹ skupt ʌp baɪ ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ pɑɹɾiz fɹəm ðə blæk taʊɝ, hu fɝst ɡæðɝ ɔl ə ðə mɛn ɪn ən ɛɹiə hu wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə fɑloʊ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən oʊnli æftɝ teɪkɪŋ əm θɹu ɡeɪtweɪz tə nɪɹ keɪɛmlɪn wɪnoʊ aʊt ðoʊz u kən bi tɔt tə tʃænəl. ðə ɹɪmeɪndɝ, baɪ fɑɹ ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ nʌmbɝ, ɑɹ sɛn tə bæʃɪɹz tʃɹeɪnɪŋ kæmps.

Legion of the Dragon, the: A large military formation, all infantry, giving allegiance to the Dragon Reborn, trained by Davram Bashere along lines worked out by himself and Mat Cauthon, lines which depart sharply from the usual employment of foot. While many men simply walk in to volunteer, large numbers of the Legion are scooped up by recruiting parties from the Black Tower, who first gather all of the men in an area who were willing to follow the Dragon Reborn, and only after taking them through gateways to near Caemlyn winnow out those who can be taught to channel. The remainder, by far the greater number, are sent to Bashere's training camps.

mɛɹəθdəmeɪn: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðoʊz u mʌs bi liʃt," ən ɔlsoʊ "wʌn u mʌs bi liʃt." ðə tɝm əplaɪd baɪ ðə sintʃæn tə ɛni wʊmən keɪpəbəl ə tʃænəlɪŋ u hæz nɑt bɪn kɑlɝɾ əz ə deɪmeɪn.

marath'damane: In the Old Tongue, "those who must be leashed," and also "one who must be leashed." The term applied by the Seanchan to any woman capable of channeling who has not been collared as a damane.

mæstɝ ə ðə lænsɪz: si læns-kæptən.

Master of the Lances: See Lance-Captain.

mæstɝ ə ðə hɔɹs: si læns-kæptən.

Master of the Horse: See Lance-Captain.

mɛɝeɪɾɪn: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə bɹʌðɝləs." ðə neɪm ədɑptəd, əz ə səsaɪəɾi, baɪ ðoʊz il u əbændən klæn ən sɛpt ən wɛn tə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ kəz ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ æksɛpt ɹænd ælθɹ, ə wɛtləndɝ, əz ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn, əɹ kəz ðeɪ ɹəfjuz tə æksɛpt ɪz ɹɛvəleɪʃənz kənsɝnɪŋ ðə hɪstɝi ən ɔɹədʒɪnz ə ði il. dɛzɝɾɪŋ klæn ən sɛp fəɹ ɛni ɹizən ɪz ənæθəmə əmʌŋ ði il, ðɛɹfɔɹ ðɛɹ oʊn wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz əmʌŋ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɝ ənwɪlɪŋ tə teɪk əm ɪn, ən ðeɪ fɔɹm ðɪs səsaɪəɾi, ðə bɹʌðɝləs.

Mera'din: In the Old Tongue, "the Brotherless." The name adopted, as a society, by those Aiel who abandoned clan and sept and went to the Shaido because they could not accept Rand al'Thor, a wetlander, as the Car'a'carn, or because they refused to accept his revelations concerning the history and origins of the Aiel. Deserting clan and sept for any reason is anathema among the Aiel, therefore their own warrior societies among the Shaido were unwilling to take them in, and they formed this society, the Brotherless.

mɔɝæt-: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "hænlɝ." əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, ɪts juz fəɹ ðoʊz u hændəl ɛɡzɑɾɪks, sətʃ əz mɔɹətʃɹeɪkən, ə ɹeɪkən hænlɝ əɹ ɹaɪɾɝ, ɔlsoʊ ɪnfɔɹməli kɔld ə flaɪɝ. si ɔlsoʊ dɝmɝæt.

morat-: In the Old Tongue, "handler." Among the Seanchan, it is used for those who handle exotics, such as morat'raken, a raken handler or rider, also informally called a flier. See also der'morat.

pɹɑfət, ðə: mɔɹ fɔɹməli, ðə pɹɑfəɾ ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. wʌns noʊn əz mæsimə dɑɡɝ, ə ʃaɪnɝən soʊlʒɝ, hi ʌndɝwɛn ə ɹɛvəleɪʃən ən dɪsaɪɾɪd ðəɾ i hæd bɪn kɔl tə spɹɛd ðə wɝɾ ə ðə dʒɹæɡənz ɹibɝθ. hi bɪlivz ðət nʌθɪŋ - nʌθɪŋ! - ɪz mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən æknɑlɪdʒɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əz ðə laɪt meɪd flɛʃ ən biɪŋ ɹɛɾi wən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn kɔlz, ən i ən ɪz fɑloʊɝz wɪl juz ɛni minz tə fɔɹs ʌðɝz tə sɪŋ ðə ɡlɔɹiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. fɔɹseɪkɪŋ ɛni neɪm bʌt "ðə pɹɑfət," hiz bɹɔt keɪɑs tə mʌtʃ ʌv ɡildən ən ɑmɑdɪʃiə, lɑɹdʒ pɑɹts ʌv wɪtʃ i kəntʃɹoʊlz.

Prophet, the: More formally, the Prophet of the Lord Dragon. Once known as Masema Dagar, a Shienaran soldier, he underwent a revelation and decided that he had been called to spread the word of the Dragon's Rebirth. He believes that nothing - nothing! - is more important than acknowledging the Dragon Reborn as the Light made flesh and being ready when the Dragon Reborn calls, and he and his followers will use any means to force others to sing the glories of the Dragon Reborn. Forsaking any name but "the Prophet," he has brought chaos to much of Ghealdan and Amadicia, large parts of which he controls.

ɹɪtɝn, ðə: si kɔɝɪn.

Return, the: See Corenne.

si foʊk haɪɝɑɹki: ði æθɑn maɪɹ, ðə si foʊk, ɑɹ ɹul baɪ ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ. ʃiz əsɪstəd baɪ ðə wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps, ən baɪ ðə mæstɝ ə ðə bleɪdz. bɪloʊ ðɪs kʌm ðə klæn weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz, itʃ əsɪstəd baɪ hɝ wɪndfɪndɝ ən əɹ sɔɹdmæstɝ. bɪloʊ hɝ ɑɹ ðə seɪlməstʃɹɛsəz (ʃɪp kæptənz) ʌv əɹ klæn, itʃ əsɪstəd baɪ hɝ wɪndfɪndɝ ən əɹ kɑɹɡəmæstɝ. ðə wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps əz əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ ɔl wɪndfɪndɝz tə klæn weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz, hu ɪn tɝn əv əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ ɔl ðə wɪndfɪndɝz ə hɝ klæn. laɪkwaɪz, ðə mæstɝ ə ðə bleɪdz əz əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ ɔl sɔɹdmæstɝz, ən ðeɪ ɪn tɝn oʊvɝ ðə kɑɹɡəmæstɝz ə ðɛɹ klænz. ɹæŋk ɪz nɑt hɝɛɾətɛɹi əmʌŋ ðə si foʊk. ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps ɪz tʃoʊzən, fəɹ laɪf, baɪ ðə fɝs twɛlv ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ, ðə twɛlv moʊst sinjɝ klæn weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz. ə klæn weɪvməstʃɹəs ɪz ɪlɛktəd baɪ ðə twɛlv sinjɝmoʊst seɪlməstʃɹɛsəz ə hɝ klæn, kɔl sɪmpli ðə fɝs twɛlv, ə tɝm wɪtʃ ɪz ɔlsoʊ juz tə dɛzəɡneɪt ðə sinjɝ seɪlməstʃɹɛsəz pɹɛzən ɛniwɛɹ. ʃi kən ɔlsoʊ bi ɹimuv baɪ ə voʊɾ ə ðoʊz seɪm fɝs twɛlv. ɪn fækt, ɛniwʌn ʌðɝ ðən ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps kən bi dɪmoʊɾɪd, ivən ɔl ðə weɪ daʊn tə dɛkhænd, fəɹ mælfizəns, kaʊɝɾəs əɹ ʌðɝ kɹaɪmz. ɔlsoʊ, ðə wɪndfɪndɝ tə ə weɪvməstʃɹəs əɹ mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪp u daɪz wɪl, ʌv nəsɛsəɾi, hæv tə sɝv ə loʊɝ ɹæŋkɪŋ wʊmən, ən əɹ oʊn ɹæŋk ðʌs dɪkɹisəz. ðə wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps əz əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ ɔl wɪndfɪndɝz, ən ðə wɪndfɪndɝ tə ə klæn weɪvməstʃɹəs əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ ɔl wɪndfɪndɝz ə hɝ klæn. laɪkwaɪz, ðə mæstɝ ə ðə bleɪdz əz əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ ɔl sɔɹdmæstɝz ən kɑɹɡəmæstɝz, ən ə sɔɹdmæstɝ oʊvɝ ðə kɑɹɡəmæstɝ ə hɪz klæn.

Sea Folk hierarchy: The Atha'an Miere, the Sea Folk, are ruled by the Mistress of the Ships to the Atha'an Miere. She is assisted by the Windfinder to the Mistress of the Ships, and by the Master of the Blades. Below this come the clan Wavemistresses, each assisted by her Windfinder and her Swordmaster. Below her are the Sailmistresses (ship captains) of her clan, each assisted by her Windfinder and her Cargomaster. The Windfinder to the Mistress of the Ships has authority over all Windfinders to clan Wavemistresses, who in turn have authority over all the Windfinders of her clan. Likewise, the Master of the Blades has authority over all Swordmasters, and they in turn over the Cargomasters of their clans. Rank is not hereditary among the Sea Folk. The Mistress of the Ships is chosen, for life, by the First Twelve of the Atha'an Miere, the twelve most senior clan Wavemistresses. A clan Wavemistress is elected by the twelve seniormost Sailmistresses of her clan, called simply the First Twelve, a term which is also used to designate the senior Sailmistresses present anywhere. She can also be removed by a vote of those same First Twelve. In fact, anyone other than the Mistress of the Ships can be demoted, even all the way down to deckhand, for malfeasance, cowardice or other crimes. Also, the Windfinder to a Wavemistress or Mistress of the Ship who dies will, of necessity, have to serve a lower ranking woman, and her own rank thus decreases. The Windfinder to the Mistress of the Ships has authority over all Windfinders, and the Windfinder to a clan Wavemistress authority over all Windfinders of her clan. Likewise, the Master of the Blades has authority over all Swordmasters and Cargomasters, and a Swordmaster over the Cargomaster of his clan.

siməsiv: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "loʊɝɾ aɪz," əɹ "daʊnkæst aɪz." əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, tə seɪ ðət wʌn əz "bɪkʌm siməsiv" minz ðət wʌn əz "lɔs feɪs." si ɔlsoʊ seɪaɪtɑɹ.

sei'mosiev: In the Old Tongue, "lowered eyes," or "downcast eyes." Among the Seanchan, to say that one has "become sei'mosiev" means that one has "lost face." See also sei'taer.

seɪaɪtɑɹ: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "stʃɹeɪɾ aɪz," əɹ "lɛvəl aɪz." əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, ɪt ɹəfɝz tə ɑnɝ əɹ feɪs, tə ði əbɪləɾi tə mit sʌmwʌnz aɪz. ɪts pɑsəbəl tə "bi" əɹ "hæv" seɪaɪtɑɹ, minɪŋ ðət wʌn əz ɑnɝ ən feɪs, ən ɔlsoʊ tə "ɡeɪn" əɹ "luz" seɪaɪtɑɹ. si ɔlsoʊ siməsiv.

sei'taer: In the Old Tongue, "straight eyes," or "level eyes." Among the Seanchan, it refers to honor or face, to the ability to meet someone's eyes. It is possible to "be" or "have" sei'taer, meaning that one has honor and face, and also to "gain" or "lose" sei'taer. See also sei'mosiev.

ʃɛn ən kɑlhɑɹ: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hænd." (wʌn) ə lɛdʒəndɛɹi ɡɹup ə hɪɹoʊz u hæd mɛni ɛksplɔɪts, faɪnəli daɪɪŋ ɪn ðə dɪfɛns ə meɪnɛðɝən wən ðət lænd wɑz dɪstʃɹɔɪd dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz. (tu) ə mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən pʊt təɡɛðɝ ɔlmoʊs baɪ æksəɾənt baɪ mæt kɔθən ən ɔɹɡənaɪzd əlɔŋ ðə laɪnz ə mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹsɪz dʊɹɪŋ wʌɾ ɪz kənsɪɾɝd ðə haɪɾ ə ðə mɪlətɛɹi ɑɹts, ðə deɪz ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ən ðə sɛntʃɝiz ɪmiɾiətli pɹisiɾɪŋ.

Shen an Calhar: In the Old Tongue, "the Band of the Red Hand." (1) A legendary group of heroes who had many exploits, finally dying in the defense of Manetheren when that land was destroyed during the Trolloc Wars. (2) A military formation put together almost by accident by Mat Cauthon and organized along the lines of military forces during what is considered the height of the military arts, the days of Artur Hawkwing and the centuries immediately preceding.

sɔɪhɪn: ðə kloʊsəs tʃɹænzleɪʃən fɹəm ði oʊl tʌŋ wəd bi "ə haɪɾ əmʌŋ loʊnəs," ðoʊ səm tʃɹænzleɪɾ ɪɾ əz minɪŋ "boʊθ skaɪ ən væli" əmʌŋ sɛvɹəl ʌðɝ pɑsəbɪləɾiz. sɔɪhɪn ɪz ðə tɝm əplaɪd baɪ ðə sintʃæn tə hɝɛɾətɛɹi ʌpɝ sɝvəns. ðeɪ ɑɹ dækoʊvæl, pɹɑpɝɾi, jɛɾ ɑkjəpaɪ pəzɪʃənz ə kənsɪɾɝəbəl əθɔɹəɾi ən ɔfən paʊɝ. ivən ðə blʌd stɛp kɛɹfəli ɝaʊn sɔɪhɪn ə ði ɪmpɪɹiəl fæmli, ən spik tə sɔɪhɪn ə ði ɛmpɹɛs hɝsɛlf əz tə ikwəlz. si ɔlsoʊ blʌd, ðə; dækoʊvæl.

so'jhin: The closest translation from the Old Tongue would be "a height among lowness," though some translate it as meaning "both sky and valley" among several other possibilities. So'jhin is the term applied by the Seanchan to hereditary upper servants. They are da'covale, property, yet occupy positions of considerable authority and often power. Even the Blood step carefully around so'jhin of the Imperial family, and speak to so'jhin of the Empress herself as to equals. See also Blood, the; da'covale.

sɔɹd-kæptən: si læns-kæptən.

Sword-Captain: See Lance-Captain.

waɪz wʊmən: ɑnɝɪfɪk juzd ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ fəɹ wɪmən feɪm fəɹ ðɛɹ ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl əbɪləɾiz ət hilɪŋ ɔlmoʊst ɛni ɪnʒɝi. eɪ waɪz wʊmən ɪz tʃɹədɪʃənəli mɑɹk baɪ ə ɹɛd bɛlt. waɪl səm əv noʊɾəd ðət mɛni, ɪndid moʊst, ɛbu dɑɹi waɪz wɪmən wɝ nɑɾ ivən fɹəm ɔltɑɹə, mʌtʃ lɛs ɛbu dɑɹ, wʌt wɑz nɑt noʊn əntɪl ɹisənli, ən stɪl ɪz noʊn oʊnli tə ə fju, ɪz ðəɾ ɔl waɪz wɪmən ɑɹ ɪn fækt kɪnswɪmən ən juz vɛɹiəs vɝʒənz ə hilɪŋ, ɡɪvɪŋ aʊɾ ɝbz ən poʊltəsəz oʊnli əz ə kʌvɝ. wɪð ðə flaɪɾ ə ðə kɪn fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ æftɝ ðə sintʃæn tʊk ðə sɪɾi, noʊ waɪz wɪmən ɹɪmeɪn ðɛɹ. si ɔlsoʊ kɪn, ðə.

Wise Woman: Honorific used in Ebou Dar for women famed for their incredible abilities at healing almost any injury. A Wise Woman is traditionally marked by a red belt. While some have noted that many, indeed most, Ebou Dari Wise Women were not even from Altara, much less Ebou Dar, what was not known until recently, and still is known only to a few, is that all Wise Women are in fact Kinswomen and use various versions of Healing, giving out herbs and poultices only as a cover. With the flight of the Kin from Ebou Dar after the Seanchan took the city, no Wise Women remain there. See also Kin, the.

əbaʊt ði ɔθɝ ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən wɑz bɔɹn ɪn naɪntinfɔɹɾieɪt ɪn tʃɑɹlstən, saʊθ kɛɹəlaɪnə. hi tɔt hɪmsɛlf tə ɹid wən i wɑz fɔɹ wɪð ði ɪnsɪdɛntəl eɪɾ ʌv ə twɛlv-jɪɹz-oʊldɝ bɹʌðɝ, ən wɑz tæklɪŋ mɑɹk tweɪn ən dʒulz vɝn baɪ faɪv. hi wɑz ə ɡɹædʒəwəɾ ə ðə sɪɾədɛl, ðə mɪlətɛɹi kɑlɪdʒ ə saʊθ kɛɹəlaɪnə, wɪð ə dɪɡɹi ɪn fɪzɪks. hi sɝv tu tʊɹz ɪn viɛtnɑm wɪð ðə juɛs. ɑɹmi; əmʌŋ ɪz dɛkɝeɪʃənz ɑɹ ðə dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃt flaɪɪŋ kɹɔs wɪð bɹɑnz oʊk lif klʌstɝ, ðə bɹɑnz stɑɹ wɪð "vi" ən bɹɑnz oʊk lif klʌstɝ, ən tu viɛtnɑmis ɡæləntʃɹi kɹɔsɪz wɪð pɑm. ə hɪstɝi bʌf, hi ɔlsoʊ ɹoʊt dæns ən θiəɾɝ kɹɪɾɪsɪzəm. hi ɛndʒɔɪd ði aʊtdɔɹ spɔɹts ə hʌntɪŋ, fɪʃɪŋ, ən seɪlɪŋ, ən ði ɪndɔɹ spɔɹts ə poʊkɝ, tʃɛs, pul, ən paɪp kəlɛktɪŋ. hi bɪɡæn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn naɪntinsɛvəntisɛvən ən kəntɪnjuɾ əntɪl ɪz dɛθ ɑn sɛptɛmbɝ sɪkstinθ, tuθaʊzənsɛvən.

About the Author Robert Jordan was born in 1948 in Charleston, South Carolina. He taught himself to read when he was four with the incidental aid of a twelve-years-older brother, and was tackling Mark Twain and Jules Verne by five. He was a graduate of The Citadel, The Military College of South Carolina, with a degree in physics. He served two tours in Vietnam with the U.S. Army; among his decorations are the Distinguished Flying Cross with bronze oak leaf cluster, the Bronze Star with "V" and bronze oak leaf cluster, and two Vietnamese Gallantry Crosses with Palm. A history buff, he also wrote dance and theater criticism. He enjoyed the outdoor sports of hunting, fishing, and sailing, and the indoor sports of poker, chess, pool, and pipe collecting. He began writing in 1977 and continued until his death on September 16, 2007.

